Google


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.
We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I


->  J  V


I


PAUSANIAS'S
DESCRIPTION    OF  GREECE


PAUSANIAS'S


)ESCRIPTION  OF  GREECE


TRANSLATED  WITH  A  COMMENTARY

BY

J.  G.  FRAZER

M.A.,   LL.D.  GLASGOW  ;  FELLOW  OP  TRINITY  COLLBGB,  CAMBRIDGE;
OP  THE  MIDDLE  TEMPLE,   BARRISTER-AT-LAW


IN  SIX  VOLUMES

VOL.  V
COMMENTARY  ON  BOOKS   IX.,  X.     ADDENDA


MACMILLAN    AND   CO.,    Limited

NEW  YORK :  THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY

1898


JV


t  "Mr*"


.J  -


J.  •.


CONTENTS


PAGB

Commentary  on  Book  IX,  Boeotia  .  .  .  i

,,  ,,       ,,       X.  Phocis  .213

Addenda       .......       473


ILLUSTRATIONS


PIG.

1.  Ground-Plan  of  Plataea

2.  Plan  of  Ruins  near  Dritsa  (the  Ancient  Heleon  ?)

3.  Artemis  (Coin  of  Tanagra)

4.  Dionysus  and  the  Triton  (Coin  of  Tanagra)

5.  Hermes  with  the  Ram  (Coin  of  Tanagra)

6.  Plan  of  Ruins  of  Gla  {GAa,  Goulas)  in  the  Copaic  Plain

7.  Plan  of  Palace  of  Gla  {GAa,  Goulas)  in  the  Copaic  Plain
8, 9.  Apollo  with  the  Graces  (Coins  of  Athens)

10.  Apollo  on  the  Omphalos  (Coin  of  Delphi)

1 1.  Temple  of  Apollo  with  Mystic  E  (Coin  of  Delphi)

12.  Temple  of  Apollo  (Coin  of  Delphi)

13.  Eriphyle?  (Bronze  Statuette)

14.  Man  carrying  Tree  (Coin  of  Magnesia)
1$.  Plan  of  Ruins  of  Lilaea  .

16.  Plan  of  Ruins  of  Charadra  (?)

17.  Athena  (Coin  of  Elatea)  .

18.  Plan  of  Ruins  of  Abae    .

19.  Plan  of  Gateway  at  Abae

20.  Artemis  (Coin  of  Anticyra)


PACB

9

64

74

83

87
121

124

174
316
340
f^.
380
401
412
416

435
437

438
456


PLATES


I.  Ancient  Thebes  (according  to  E.  Fabridus)
II.  The  Copaic  Lake  District  ....

III.  Delphi  before  the  French  Excavations  of  1892-97

IV.  Delphi  (the  Sacred  Precinct  showing  the  result  of  the

French  Excavations  1892-97)    ....
V.  Frieze  of  the  Siphnian  (?)  Treasury  at  Delphi
VI.  Polygnotus's  Picture  of  the  Capture  of  Troy  (restored  by
C.  Robert)         ......

VII.  Polygnotus's  Picture  of  the  Nether  World  (restored  by

C.  Robert)         ......

VIII.  Sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  at  Epidaurus     .
IX.  Sanctuary  of  Poseidon  in  Calauria

X.  Sanctuary  of  the  Mistress  at  Lycosura


To  face  page

32

if

110

»»

248

1)

258

>)

274

>>

360

f»

372

)t

570

1*

598

It

622

BOOK    NINTH


BOEOTIA

Special  works  on  Boeotia  were  written  in  antiquity  (i)  by  Hellanicus
(Schol.  on  Homer,  //.  ii.  494) ;  (2)  by  a  certain  Boeotian  named
Aristophanes,  to  whom  Plutarch  refers  {De  Herodoti  maltgnitate,  31)  ;
his  work  was  in  two  books  at  least  (Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v.  Xae/o(o-
v€ta) ;  (3)  by  Crates  an  Athenian ;  (4)  by  a  certain  Ctesiphon  in  three
books  at  least ;  Plutarch  refers  to  him  (JParallela^  12) ;  (5)  and  by  one
Paxamus  in  two  books  (Suidas,  s.v,  tld^afjLosy  See  Fragm.  his  tor,
Graecorum^  ed.  Miiller,  i.  p.  46  5qq,\  id,^  4.  pp.  337  sqq.^  370,  375,
472.

1.  I.  Boeotus a  son  of  Itonus  and  the  nymph  Melanippe.

The  father  of  Boeotus  was  generally  said  to  have  been  Poseidon
(Diodorus,  iv.  67,  xix.  53;  Schol.  on  Homer,//,  ii.  494;  Nicocrates
and  Euphorion,  cited  by  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v.  Bokotui  ;  Hyginus,
Fad.  157  and  186).  According  to  some  his  mother  was  not  Melanippe
but  Ame  (Diodorus,  iv.  67  ;  Schol.  on  Homer,  //.  ii.  494  ;  Nicocrates
and  Euphorion,  l.c).

1.  I.  the  greater  part  of  them  are  called  after  women.  This
may  perhaps  be  a  trace  of  the  prevalence  among  the  early  Boeotians
of  the  system  of  female  kinship,  i.e.  the  system  which  counts  kindred
through  the  mother  rather  than  through  the  father.  See  J.  F.  M*Lennan,
*  Kinship  in  ancient  Greece,'  in  his  Studies  in  ancient  history  (London,
1886),  especially  p.  228  sq.  Among  the  Pelew  Islanders,  who  have
female  kinship,  each  tribe  traces  its  descent  from  a  common  mother.
See  Kubary,  Die  sozialen  Einrichtungen  der  Pelauer^  pp.  35,  40;  /V/.,
'  Die  Religion  der  Pelauer,'  in  A.  Bastian's  Allerlei  aus  Volks-  und
Menschenkunde^  i.  p.  22  sqq.

1.  2.  everywhere  in  Ghreece  kingdoms were  established.

On  the  ancient  kings  of  Greece,  see  Thucydides,  i.  13.  i  ;  Aristotle,
Politics^  iii.  14.  11  sqq.  \  G.  Gilbert,  Griechische  StaatsalterthUmer^  2.
p.  265  sqq.

1.  3.  they  took  part  in  the  combat  at  Marathon.  See  Hero-
dotus, vi.  108.

1.  3.  they  dared  to  help  the  Athenians  to  man  the  ships.    See

Herodotus,  viii.  i.

VOL.  V  B


k


-7'


2  MOUNT  CITHAERON  bk.  ix.  bosotia

1.  8.  The  second  capture  of  Plataea  took  place  etc.  The  city
was  captured  by  the  Thebans  in  373  B.C  Cp.  Diodorus,  xv.  46,  who
however  places  the  capture  of  Plataea  in  374  ac,  in  the  archonship  of
Socratides.  The  archonship  of  Astius  has  been  mentioned  by  Pausanias
already  (vii.  25.  4).

1.  8.  the  restoration  of  the  Plataeans.    Cp.  iv.  27.  10.

2.  I.  On  Mount  Oithaeron  etc.  Pausanias  has  previously
described  the  route  from  Athens  to  Boeotia  as  far  as  Eleutherae,  a
small  fortified  town  on  the  southern  skirts  of  Mt.  Cithaeron,  just  on  the
right  of  what  is  still  the  highroad  from  Athens  to  Thebes  (see  i.  38.
8  sq.)  He  now  resumes  the  route  in  question  and  follows  it  into
Boeotia.  From  Eleutherae  the  road  winds  up  a  narrow  pass  among
the  fir-clad  slopes  of  Mt.  Cithaeron,  the  highest  peak  of  which  (4620
feet)  is  visible  from  time  to  time  on  our  left  (west).  The  mountain
takes  its  modem  name  of  ElcUids  (Fir-mountain)  from  the  forests  of  fir
which  cover  it ;  these  forests  are  the  haunts  of  wild  boars,  wolves,  foxes,
and  deer.  In  about  an  hour  from  Eleutherae  we  reach  the  summit  of
the  pass.  In  antiquity  the  Boeotians  called  this  pass  the  Pass  of  the
Three  Heads ;  the  Athenians  called  it  the  pass  of  the  Oak's  Heads.
At  the  entrance  to  the  pass  on  the  Boeotian  side  the  Persian  cavalry
cut  off  a  train  of  provisions  which  was  on  its  way  from  Peloponnese  to
the  Greek  camp  (Herodotus,  ix.  39).  And  from  the  road  to  Thebes
the  escaped  Plataeans,  looking  back  through  the  darkness  and  the
falling  snow,  could  see  by  the  moving  lights  behind  them  that  their
pursuers  were  making  their  way  towards  this  pass  over  Cithaeron,  in
the  belief  that  the  fugitives  would  take  the  nearest  road  to  Athens
(Thucydides,  iii.  24).  The  view  from  the  summit  of  the  pass  has  been
already  described  (vol.  2.  p.  516  sq,)  The  highroad  to  Thebes  keeps
on  to  Uie  right ;  but  a  path  to  the  left  (westward)  descends  the  northern
declivities  of  Cithaeron  to  Plataea.  The  time  from  the  summit  of  the
pass  to  Plataea  is  about  an  hour  and  a  quarter.

See  Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  p.  282 ;  Mure,  Journal^  2.  p.  I ;  L.  Ross,  Wander-
ungtriy  I.  p.  16 ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  pp.  533*  540 ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.
249;  Baedeker,'  p.  179  sq, ;  Guide-Joanne,  2.  p.  8.

The  lower  slopes  of  Mt  Cithaeron,  on  its  northern  side,  consist
"  partly  of  steep  swelling  banks,  covered  with  green  turf  of  a  richness
and  smoothness  such  as  I  scarcely  recollect  having  observed  in  any
other  district  of  rugged  Greece,  or  with  dense  masses  of  pine  forest ;
partly  of  rocky  dells,  fringed  with  brushwood  or  stunted  oaks.  Towards
its  summit  the  mountain,  which  was  covered  [12th  March  1838]  to
about  one-half  of  its  whole  height  with  snow,  becomes  bare  and  stony  "
(Murt^ /ouma/f  i.  p.  264).  Mure  points  out  how  well  the  scenery  of
Mt.  Cithaeron  still  answers  to  the  descriptions  of  it  in  Euripides's  play
of  the  Bacchcte  (v,  1043  sqq,\

2.  I.  Hysiae  and  Erythrae.  The  sites  of  these  two  towns  have
not  been  identified  with  certainty.  Pausanias,  proceeding  from
Eleutherae  over  Mt.  Cithaeron  to  Plataea,  says  that  Hysiae  and
Erythrae  lay  a  little  to  the  right  of  the  road.     The  present  highroad  to


CH.  II  HYSIAE  AND  ERYTHRAE  3

Thebes  crosses  Mt.  Cithaeron  by  the  pass  of  Eleutherae  and  descends
into  Boeotia  a  little  to  the  east  of  the  large  and  seemingly  prosperous
village  of  Kriekouki^  which  stands  on  the  lower  slope  of  the  mountain.
In  recent  years  a  branch  road  has  been  made  to  the  westward ;  it  quits
the  old  highroad  on  the  side  of  the  mountain  above  Kriekouki^  passes
through  that  village,  and  rejoins  the  old  road  about  i  \  miles  below  the
village.  It  thus  forms  a  loop  to  the  old  highroad,  and  though  it  is
more  circuitous  it  seems,  if  I  may  judge  from  the  signs  of  traffic  on  it,
to  be  preferred  by  drivers.  The  ancient  highroad  over  Cithaeron  to
Thebes  must  have  coincided  very  closely  with  the  line  of  the  present
road  in  the  actual  pass  ;  while  in  descending  the  northern  slope  of  the
mountain  it  may  have  followed  the  line  either  of  the  present  branch
road  through  Kriekouki  or,  more  probably,  of  the  old  and  more  direct
road  a  little  farther  to  the  east.  The  route  to  Plataea  diverges  to  the
left  (westward)  from  the  highroad  to  Thebes  at  a  point  close  to
Eleutherae,  and  crosses  over  Mt.  Cithaeron  by  another  pass  which
debouches  about  a  mile  to  the  west  of  the  main  pass  and  about  2
miles  to  the  east  of  Plataea.^

The  sites  of  Hysiae  and  Erythrae  must  accordingly  be  sought  some-
where to  the  right  of  this  route.  That  Erythrae  lay  to  the  east  of
Hysiae  we  learn  from  Herodotus,  who  tells  us  (ix.  15,  19,  and  25)  that
the  Persian  camp  extended  along  the  Asopus  from  Erythrae  past
Hysiae  to  the  land  of  Plataea,  and  that  the  Greeks,  who  had  encamped
opposite  Mardonius  at  Erythrae,  afterwards  marched  thence  through
the  skirts  of  Mt.  Cithaeron  past  Hysiae  to  the  territory  of  Plataea.
Erythrae  must  further  have  been  on  the  slope  of  Mt.  Cithaeron,  not  in
the  plain ;  for  Herodotus  says  that  when  the  Greek  army  was  at
Erythrae  it  did  not  go  down  into  the  plain  (ix.  1 9  sq.) ;  and  he  speaks
of  its  subsequent  change  of  position  as  a  descent  to  Plataea  (ix.  25).
Though  he  describes  the  Persian  camp  as  extending  from  Erythrae
past  Hysiae  to  Plataean  territory  he  probably  means  no  more  than
that  it  lay  in  the  plain  over  against  these  towns.  Thucydides  says
(iii.  24)  that  the  men  who  escaped  from  Plataea  when  it  was  besieged
by  the  Peloponnesians  first  followed  the  road  to  Thebes  for  6  or  7
furlongs,  then  turning  back  took  "the  road  which  leads  towards  the
mountains  to  Erythrae  and  Hysiae."  That  Erythrae  and  Hysiae  were
near  each  other  and  at  the  foot  of  Cithaeron  is  further  shown  by
references  made  to  them  by  Euripides  i^Bacchae^  751  sq,)  and  Strabo

^  In  this  account  of  the  route  from  Eleutherae  to  Plataea  I  follow  Mr.  G.  B.
Grundy  (  Topography  of  the  battle  of  Plataea,  pp.  6  and  10),  who  has  made  a  survey
of  the  battlefield,  but  I  do  so  with  some  misgivings.  For  (i)  Mr.  Grundy  has
admittedly  not  traversed  the  path  in  question  (Pass  No.  2,  as  he  calls  it).  (2)  He
says  (p.  45)  that  the  ]>ass  is  clearly  marked  on  the  Austrian  map.  But  on  that  map,
as  well  as  on  the  French  survey  map,  the  route  to  Plataea  diverges  not,  as  Mr.
Grundy  says,  close  to  Eleutherae,  on  the  southern  side  of  the  pass,  but  a  consider-
able way  to  the  north  of  Eleutherae,  apparently  on  the  northern  side  of  the  pass ;  in
fact  it  seems  to  leave  the  highroad  only  at  the  point  where  the  present  loop  road
to  Kriekouki  (described  above)  leaves  it.  and  to  coincide  with  the  loop  road  for  some
distance.  (3)  My  own  recollection  of  the  main  pass,  which  I  have  traversed  twice,
is  that  between  Eleutherae  and  the  top  of  the  pass  the  mountains  on  either  hand  are
steep  and  unbroken  by  any  other  pass  leading  westward  in  the  direction  of  Plataea.


4  HYSIAE  AND  ERYTHRAE  BK.  ix.  bobotia

(ix.  p.  404).  Leake  believed  that  he  had  found  the  site  of  Erythrae
near  Katzoula^  a  village  at  the  northern  foot  of  Cithaeron,  about  3
miles  east  oi  Kriekouki.  The  range  is  not  very  high  at  this  point,
and  there  is  verdure  among  the  rocks,  where  goats  and  sheep  feed.
At  the  foot  of  the  rocks,  to  the  eastward  of  the  village,  Leake  saw  some
foundations  of  ancient  Greek  walls,  together  with  a  church  containing
a  Doric  colunm  and  its  capital.  These  remains  he  believed  to  mark
the  site  of  Erythrae.  To  this  identification  it  is  objected  by  Mr.
Grundy  that  Pausanias  would  not  have  described  as  <*  a  little  to  the
right "  of  the  road  a  place  which  lay  about  3^  miles  fix>m  it,  and  that
the  Greeks  would  not  be  likely  to  take  up  a  position  so  far  to  the  east
of  the  pass,  thus  leaving  the  pass  open  to  the  enemy  and  having  their
own  backs  to  a  part  of  the  range  through  which  there  was  no  retreat
Accordingly  Mr.  Grundy  would  place  Erythrae  immediately  to  the  east
of  Kriekouki,  on  the  ridge  round  which  the  modem  highroad  to  Thebes,
descending  from  the  pass,  makes  a  loop,  the  older  branch  of  the  road
skirting  the  ridge  on  the  east  and  the  new  branch  skirting  it  on  the
west.  This  is,  according  to  Mr.  Grundy,  the  traditional  site  of
Erythrae,  and  there  are  "  signs  of  remains  of  ancient  buildings  "  on  the
spot  The  signs  he  mentions  are  an  ancient  well  and  a  heap  of  stones,
in  which  two  stones  were  found  bearing  inscriptions  which  relate  to  the
worship  of  Demeter  (see  below).  On  a  height  above  the  site  there  is,
he  tells  us,  an  ancient  fort,  but  he  does  not  describe  it  nor  attempt  to
determine  its  date,  only  saying  that  "though  we  may  possibly  infer
that  it  did  not  exist  at  the  time  of  the  battle,  it  is  very  likely  to  have
been  constructed  by  the  inhabitants  of  Erythrae  at  a  later  date  as  a
defence  for  their  end  of  the  pass."  Against  this  identification  of
Erythrae  it  must  be  observed  that  one  of  the  reasons  why  the  Greeks
quitted  Erythrae  was  the  want  of  a  good  supply  of  water  (Herodotus,
ix.  25);  yet  at  Kriekouki^  close  to  the  supposed  site  of  Erythrae,  there
are  plentiful  and  permanent  springs,  which  according  to  Leake  are  in
fact  the  principal  source  of  the  Asopus.  As  to  Hysiae,  Leake  would
place  it  to  the  east  of  Kriekoukiy  a  little  beyond  the  highroad  to
Thebes,  and  hence  apparently  to  the  east  of  the  site  which  Mr.  Grundy
identifies  as  that  of  Erythrae.  Here  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain  Leake
observed  "  a  great  quantity  of  loose  stones  in  the  fields,  together  with
some  ancient  walls,  and  the  mouth  of  a  well  or  cistern,  of  Hellenic
construction,  now  filled  up."  These  he  supposed  to  be  the  remains  of
Hysiae.  If  he  is  right  the  ancient  well  which  he  observed  may  have
been  the  sacred  well  mentioned  by  Pausanias  whose  water  was  drunk
as  a  means  of  divination.  Mr.  Grundy  conjectures  that  Hysiae  was  a
little  above  Kriekouki^  where  there  is  a  mound  "  with  a  more  or  less
circular  enclosure  on  the  top,  quite  close  to  the  great  bend  of  the  loop
road  above  the  village."  This  more  or  less  circular  enclosure,  he
thinks,  may  mark  the  site  of  the  foundations  of  an  ancient  fort  built  to
command  the  pass.  If  Mr.  Grundy  is  right  in  his  identifications,
Hysiae  was  situated  within  a  mile  of  Erythrae,  which  seems  im-
probable, though  it  might  be  paralleled  by  the  case  of  Abae  and
Hyampolis  in  Phocis.


/


CH.  II  SANCTUARY  OF  DEMETER  5

Be^de  a  well  a  little  to  the  east  of  Kriekouki  there  have  been  found,
as  we  have  seen,  two  stones  bearing  inscriptions  which  relate  to  the
worship  of  Demeter.  Both  inscriptions  seem  to  date  from  the  early
part  cf  the  fifth  century  B.C  One  of  them  records  a  dedication  to
Demeter ;  the  other  is  a  metrical  inscription  from  the  base  of  an  image
of  the  goddess  dedicated,  according  to  Prof.  Dittenberger,  by  a  certain
Kydadas  (not  Tisamenus,  as  the  inscription  is  generally  read),  perhaps  as
a  first-fruit  offering  (for  references,  see  below).  These  inscriptions  may
perhaps  have  come  from  the  sanctuary  of  Eleusinian  Demeter  beside
which,  at  the  battle  of  Plataea,  the  Spartan  division  under  king  Pausanias
took  up  their  final  position ;  it  was  about  lo  furlongs  from  the  Gar-
gaphian  spring,  at  a  place  Argiopius,  beside  a  river  called  Molois
(Herodotus,  ix.  57).  Here  they  were  attacked  by  the  Persians,  and  a
long  and  desperate  fight  took  place  just  beside  the  sanctuary  (/V/.,  ix.
62)  ;  but  though  the  Persians  were  defeated  and  many  of  them  fell  out-
side of  the  holy  ground,  we  are  told  that  not  a  man  of  them  entered  or
died  in  the  sacred  grove  (///.,  ix.  65).  The  sanctuary  was  on  the  slope
of  Mt  Cithaeron,  above  Plataea ;  for  when  the  Greeks  who  were  posted
at  the  sanctuary  of  Hera  near  Plataea  heard  of  the  Spartan  success,
a  body  of  them  marched  "  along  the  skirts  of  the  mountain  and  over
the  low  hills  by  the  way  that  led  straight  up  to  the  sanctuary  of
Demeter"  (/V/.,  ix.  69).  This  sanctuary  is  mentioned  also  by  Plutarch
in  his  description  of  the  battle  of  Plataea  ;  he  says  it  was  a  very  ancient
sanctuary  of  Eleusinian  Demeter  and  the  Maid  situated  at  the  foot  of
Mt  Cithaeron  near  Hysiae,  on  ground  very  favourable  for  infantry,
because  it  was  too  rugged  to  allow  cavalry  to  manoeuvre  on  it  (Aristides^
11).  It  is  possible  that  the  sanctuary  stood  where  the  inscriptions  were
found,  namely  beside  the  ancient  well  close  to  the  direct  road  to  Thebes,
a  little  to  the  east  of  Kriekouki,  But  inscribed  stones  are  so  easily  and
so  commonly  transported  from  their  original  place  that  the  occurrence
of  the  inscriptions  here  hardly  proves  more  than  that  the  sanctuary  was
somewhere  in  the  neighbourhood.  An  American  archaeologist  who
spent  some  time  at  Plataea,  Mr.  W.  I.  Hunt,  supposes  that  the  site  of
the  sanctuary  of  Demeter  is  marked  by  the  foundations  of  a  large
Byzantine  church  situated  on  high  ground  to  the  south-east  of  Plataea,
and  five  or  six  minutes'  walk  east  of  the  spring  called  Vergoutiani,
Here  have  been  found  some  ancient  Greek  tombstones,  inscriptions,
and  many  fragments  of  marble.  Behind  the  church  rises  a  wall  of
rock  which  is  visible  for  miles  in  the  valley,  and  which  Mr.  Hunt  con-
jectures to  be  the  place  called  Argiopius  (* bright  look')  by  Herodotus.
These  identifications  are  accepted  by  Mr.  Hauvette.  Against  them
it  might  be  urged  that  according  to  Plutarch  {Ix,)  the  sanctuary  of
Demeter  was  near  the  shrine  of  the  hero  Androcrates,  which  we  know
from  Thucydides  (iii.  24)  to  have  been  in  quite  a  different  situation,
namely  to  the  right  of  the  road  which  led  from  Plataea  to  Thebes,  and
not  more  than  6  or  7  furlongs  from  the  former  town.  But  no  weight
can  be  attached  to  this  statement  of  Plutarch,  since  it  would  lead  us  to
place  the  sanctuary  of  Demeter  somewhere  below  and  to  the  north  of
Plataea,  whereas  we  know  from  Herodotus  that  it  was  on  high  ground


THE  MAGIC  WELL  bk.  ix.  boeotia


above  that  city.  Mr.  Grundy  conjectures  that  the  site  of  the  sanctuary
of  Demeter  is  now  occupied  by  the  church  of  St.  Demetrius  or  Deme-
trion,  which  stands  rather  more  than  a  mile  to  the  north  of  Kriekouki,
He  thinks  that  in  the  name  of  the  saint  to  whom  the  church  is  dedi-
cated we  have  a  reminiscence  of  the  name  of  the  goddess,  and  that  the
brook  which  flows  beside  the  church  on  the  east  may  be  the  ancient
Molois.

See  Leake,  Travels  in  Northern  Greece^  2.  pp.  326-329,  333 ;  Bursian,  Geogr,
I.  p.  248 ;  W.  I.  Hunt,  in  Atnerican  Journal  of  Archaeologv^  6  (1890),  p.  467  sqq,  ;
A.  Hauvette,  *  Rapport  sur  une  mission  scientifique  en  Grece,*  NouvelUs  Archives
des  Missions  scienttfiqtus  et  liMraires,  2  (1892),  p.  365;  G.  B.  Grundy,  The
topography  of  the  battle  of  Plaiaea  (London,  1894),  pp.  5  sqq.y  iS  sq,,  32  sqq,,  45.
As  to  the  two  inscriptions  found  near  Kriekoukiy  see  C.  /.  G,  G,  S,  Nos.  1670,
1671 ;  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique^  3  (1879),  p.  134  sqq,  ;  Roehl,  /.  G,  A,
Nos.  143,  144 ;  Loewy,  Inschriften  griech,  Bildhauer^  No.  44 ;  Collitz,  G,  Z>.  /.
I.  Nos.  860,  861 ;  E.  S.  Roberts,  Greek  Epigraphy^  No.  223 ;  £.  Hoffmann,
Sylloge  epigrammatum  Graecorum^  No.  313.

2.  I.  people  divined  by  drinking  of  the  welL  So  the  priest  of
the  Clarian  Apollo  at  Colophon  drank  of  a  secret  spring  in  a  cave  before
he  uttered  oracles  in  verse ;  the  priest,  who  was  always  chosen  from
certain  families,  generally  of  Miletus,  was  supposed  to  shorten  his  life
by  drinking  of  this  water.  Germanicus  and  Agrippina  both  consulted
the  oracle  of  the  Clarian  Apollo.  See  Tacitus,  Annals^  ii.  54,  xii.  22  ;
Pliny,  Nat.  hist,  ii.  232.  Cp.  Paus.  vii.  3.  i  note.  The  oracular  spring
at  Colophon  was  said  to  have  originated  in  the  tears  which  the  pro-
phetess Manto  wept  over  the  destruction  of  Thebes,  her  native  city
(Schol.  on  Apollonius  Rhodius,  Argonaut,  i.  308).  It  would  indeed
appear  that  at  every  oracle  of  Apollo  the  priest  or  priestess  who  acted
as  his  mouthpiece  drank  of  a  sacred  spring  before  uttering  the  pro-
phetic words  (Lucian,  Bis  accusatus,  i).  At  Delphi  the  priestess  drank
of  the  spring  Cassotis  (Paus.  x.  24.  7).

2.  2.  the  coipse  of  Mardonios  disappeaxed  etc.  See  Herodotus,
'\"  '  ix.  84.

2.  3.  On  the  road  from  Megara.  This  implies  that  the  road  from
Megara  to  Plataea  was  different  from  the  road  which  led  over  Cithaeron
by  Eleutherae.  The  same  distinction  is  made  by  Xenophon,  who  says
that  king  Cleombrotus,  marching  with  a  Lacedaemonian  army  from
Peloponnese,  avoided  the  pass  of  Eleutherae,  which  was  guarded  by  a
force  of  Athenian  targeteers  under  Chabrias,  and  mounted  by  the  road
which  led  to  Plataea  (Hellenica^  v.  4.  14).  The  road  from  Megara
probably  descended  the  face  of  Cithaeron  obliquely  at  a  considerable
height,  and  would  pass  near  the  fountain  Vergoutiani  (Leake,  Northern
Greece^  2.  p.  334  ;  as  to  the  fountain  Vergoutiani,  see  the  next  note).
It  seems  to  have  crossed  the  mountain  by  a  pass  which  debouches
somewhat  less  than  a  mile  to  the  east  of  Plataea.  The  pass  is  hardly
used  at  the  present  day.  It  must  have  been  always  difficult,  if  not  quite
impracticable,  for  wheeled  vehicles,  but  quite  practicable  for  infantry.
The  spring  Vergoutiani  is  near  the  mouth  of  the  pass.  See  G.  B.
Grundy,  The  topography  of  the  battle  of  Plataea,  p.  7,  with  his  plan.


CH.  IX  ACTAEON—PENTHEUS  7

2.  3.  a  spring  on  the  right  etc.  On  the  rocky  slope  of  Mt.
Cithaeron,  about  twenty-five  minutes  to  the  south-east  of  Plataea,  there
is  a  copious  fountain  called  Vergauttani,  gushing  from  three  mouths  in
an  ancient  walL  Five  minutes  farther  on  and  higher  up  is  a  jutting
rock  which  now  serves  as  a  shelter  for  cattle,  in  the  midst  of  a  natural
theatre  of  rocks  at  the  head  of  a  green  slope  above  the  fountain.  The
place  is  at  the  end  of  the  pass  over  which  goes  the  footpath  to  Megara.
Hence  the  fountain  may  be  the  one  in  which  Actaeon  was  said  to  have
seen  Artemis  bathing  ;  and  the  rock  may  be  the  one  under  or  on  which
he  slept  when  wearied  with  the  chase.  Bursian,  however,  would
identify  Actaeon's  bed  with  a  small  cave  in  the  rock,  about  30  feet
deep,  krther  west,  above  the  village  of  Kokla.  See  Leake,  Northern
Greece^  2.  pp.  326,  333 ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  247  note  5  ;  Vischer,
Erinnerungen,  p.  549 ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  25  ;  G.  B.  Grundy,  The
topography  of  the  battle  of  Plataea^  p.  7.

2.  3.  the  goddess  threw  a  deer-skin  ronnd  Actaeon  etc.  On  a
metope  of  one  of  the  temples  at  Selinus  the  death  of  Actaeon  is  repre-
sented ;  the  hounds  are  leaping  upon  him,  and  over  his  back  is  thrown
a  deer-skin,  the  feet  hang  down  before  and  behind  him,  and  the  deer's
head  and  antlers  are  seen  behind  and  above  his  head.  See  Miiller-
Wieseler,  Denkmdlery  2.  pL  xvii.  184;  Roscher's  Lexikon^  i.  p.  215;
Lucy  M.  Mitchell,  Hist,  of  Ancient  Sculpture^  p.  423.  The  common
story  was  that  Artemis  turned  Actaeon  into  a  stag  (Apollodorus,  iii.  4.
4  ;  Hyginus,  Fab,  181  ;  Ovid,  Metam.  iii.  193  sqq,  ;  Nonnus,  Dtonys,
v.  316  sgg,)  Hence  in  a  snudl  marble  group  in  the  British  Museum
and  in  a  painting  at  Pompeii  the  transformation  is  indicated  by  deer's
horns  growing  from  Actaeon's  head.  See  M tiller- Wieseler,  Denkmdlery
2.  pL  xviL  183  a,  186;  Daremberg  et  Saglio,  Diet,  des  Antiquitis^  i.
p.  53.  However,  it  seems  that  in  the  marble  group  the  horns  are
modem,  and  the  head,  though  ancient,  does  not  belong  to  the  body
(Friederichs-Wolters,  GipsabgUsse^  No.  457  ;  cp.  Baumeister's  Denk-
mdler^  i.  p.  35  sq.)  Stesichorus,  if  Pausanias  has  reported  him  aright,
would  seem  to  have  mixed  up  two  distinct  legends,  one  ascribing
Actaeon's  death  to  the  wrath  of  Zeus  at  him  for  presuming  to  woo
Semele,  the  other  referring  it  to  Artemis's  displeasure  at  being  seen
bathing  by  him.  The  two  legends  are  treated  as  distinct  by  Apollo-
dorus (iii.  4.  4).  The  names  of  Actaeon's  dogs  are  given  in  some  verses
quoted  in  the  MSS.  of  Apollodorus  (at  the  end  of  bk.  iii.  ch.  4).  Bergk
has  tried  to  show  that  these  are  a  fragment  of  Stesichorus's  poem.  See
Westermann's  Mythographi  Graeciy  p.  83  ;  Apollodorus,  ed.  R.  Wagner,
p.  115  ;  Bergk,  in  Zeitschrift  fur  Alterthumswissenschaft^  8  (1850),  pp.
401-408.

2.  4.  On  what  iMirt  of  Oithaeron  Penthens met  his  doom*

According  to  a  legend  mentioned  by  Strabo  (ix.  p.  408)  Pentheus  was
caught  by  the  Bacchanals  at  Scolus,  as  to  which  see  below  ix.  4.  4.
Mr.  A.  G.  Bather  argues  that  the  legend  of  the  death  of  Pentheus  at
the  hands  of  the  infuriated  Bacchanals  is  a  reminiscence  of  a  custom  of
annually  slaying  the  human  representative  of  Dionysus  with  the  inten-
tion of  regenerating,  in  the  person  of  a  new  representative,  the  decaying


8  PLATAEA  bk.  ix.  boeotia

vitality  of  the  god  of  vegetation.  See  A.  G.  Bather,  •  The  problem  of
the  ^^cchsi^,^  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  14  (1894),  pp.  244-263.

2.  5.  Flataea.  The  ruins  of  Plataea  occupy  a  triangular  or  fan-
shaped  plateau  which  projects  northward  into  the  Boeotian  plain  from
the  foot  of  Mt.  Cithaeron.  The  base  of  the  triangle  is  turned  towards
the  plain  and  the  north,  while  the  apex  almost  touches  the  declivity  of
Mt  Cithaeron,  from  which  it  is  divided  by  a  shallow  ravine  some  150
yards  wide  at  the  narrowest  point  and  about  16  feet  deep.  The  plateau,
which  is  nearly  a  mile  long  from  north  to  south  by  rather  less  than
three-quarters  of  a  mile  wide  at  the  widest,  rises  little  above  the  level  of
the  surrounding  plain.  It  is  highest  at  its  southern  extremity,  from
which  it  slopes  at  first  rather  sharply  and  then  gently  to  the  north,
where  it  terminates  in  a  steep  but  short  descent  to  the  plain.  On  its
eastern  and  western  sides  it  is  bounded  by  the  beds  of  watercourses.
The  sides  of  the  plateau  are  rocky  and  precipitous  only  at  a  few  points,
as  at  the  south-western  end,  where  the  wall  runs  along  the  edge  of  a
rough  and  jagged  cliff  nearly  vertical  though  only  a  few  yards  high,  and
again  about  the  middle  of  the  west  side,  where  the  wall  overhangs  a
steep  rocky  cliff  from  10  to  26  feet  high.  But  as  a  rule  the  sides  slope
gently  down  to  the  plain  below  ;  and  although  the  slope  has  been
diminished  since  the  classical  age  by  the  washing  down  of  soil  from  the
surface  of  the  plateau,  it  was  probably  never  high  or  steep  enough  to
constitute  a  sufficient  natural  defence  without  the  aid  of  walls.  The
general  surface  of  the  plateau  is  not  broken  by  any  notable  depression
except  in  the  north-east  comer,  where  it  is  split  by  two  small  ravines  or
hollows,  formed  by  a  couple  of  tiny  brooks  running  north.  The  higher
part  of  the  plateau,  towards  the  south,  presents  for  the  most  part  a
rocky  uneven  surface,  which  does  not  admit  of  cultivation ;  but  the
lower  part,  towards  the  north,  which  is  also  the  larger,  is  covered  with
soil  to  a  considerable  depth  (about  10  feet  in  places)  and  is  cultivated
throughout,  except  where  the  foundations  of  ancient  or  mediaeval  build-
ings prevent  the  passage  of  the  plough.  In  many  places,  however,  the
soil  is  very  thin  and  the  rock  crops  up,  especially  towards  the  west  and
south.  The  rock  of  the  plateau  as  well  as  of  the  ridge  of  Mt.  Cithaeron
to  the  south  is  a  coarse  grey  marble,  which  corrodes  into  deep  holes
and  channels  when  it  is  exposed  to  the  weather.  Of  this  rock  all  the
existing  walls  of  the  ancient  city  are  built.  The  soil  is  a  clayey  lime
earth,  very  loose  when  dry,  but  exceedingly  clinging  and  sticky  when
wet ;  indeed  in  rainy  weather  the  mud  makes  the  surrounding  plain
almost  impassable,  sticking  to  the  traveller's  boots  in  great  clotted
masses  and  driving  him  to  walk  in  the  beds  of  running  streams  as  the
only  tolerable  pathways  through  the  slough.

The  ancient  walls  may  be  traced  all  round  the  edge  of  the  plateau ;
in  some  places  they  are  standing  to  a  considerable  height.  The
length  of  the  circuit  is  about  2  J  miles.  Inside  of  the  circuit-wall  are
two  cross-walls,  an  upper  and  a  lower.  The  upper  cross-wall  extends,
roughly  speaking,  from  east  to  west,  and  cuts  off  the  apex  of  the  triangle.
The  lower  cross -wall  cuts  off  the  north-west  comer  of  the  site,  and
appears  to  have  formed,  at  some  date,  an  acropolis.


CH.  II


PLATAEA


Five  different  styles  of  masonry  may  be  distinguished  in  the  existing
walls,  pointing  to  as  many  different  periods  of  construction.  ( i )  The
earliest  part  of  the  walls  is  built  of  well-jointed  polygonal  masonry,  the
blocks  being  of  fairly  uniform  size,  often  pentagonal  and  occasionally
hexagonal  in  shape.  The  pieces  of  wall  built  in  this  style  are  the  worst
preserved  of  all,  the  stones  being  much  corroded  and  weatherworn.
(2)  The  waUs  of  the  second  period  are  built  in  an  intermediate  style.


ll^alktr  &•  Bautaii  se.


FIG.    I.— GROUND- PLAN  OF  PLATAEA.


better  than  the  walls  of  the  first  period  but  not  so  well  built  as  the  walls
of  the  third  period ;  polygonal  blocks  hardly  occur  in  them  at  all.
(3)  The  walls  of  the  third  period  are  the  best  built  and  best  pre-
served. To  this  period  belong  the  upper  cross-wall  and  the  wall  at
the  north-east  comer.  The  blocks  are  large,  measuring  from  3  to  10
feet  in  length  by  3  feet  in  height  and  2  feet  in  thickness.  They  are
four-sided  and  are  laid  in  horizontal  courses,  with  the  edges  neatly  and
accurately  fitted.  The  vertical  joints  are  commonly  slanting,  not  per-
pendicular.    The  outer  surface  of  the  blocks  is  somewhat  rounded  or


10  PLATAEA  BK.  IX.  boeotia

bulging  (*  bull-nosed '),  and  is  cut  vertically  into  wide  and  rather  deep
grooves.  Altogether  the  workmanship  is  careful  and  excellent.  (4)
The  fourth  period  is  represented  by  the  lower  cross- wall  alone.  It  is
carelessly  built  of  materials  taken  from  earlier  buildings,  including
architectural  fragments  and  blocks  of  the  walls  of  the  second  and  third
period.  The  joints  are  loose,  and  little  trouble  has  been  taken  to  fit
the  stones  into  their  new  positions ;  blocks  taken  from  walls  of  the
third  period,  for  example,  have  their  grooved  side  turned  in  just  as
often  as  out  At  some  time  mortar  and  tiles  were  employed  to  fill  up
the  chinks ;  but  whether  this  was  done  when  the  wall  was  built  or
subsequently,  does  not  appear.  (5)  Latest  and  worst  of  all  are  some
fragments  and  stretches  of  Roman  or,  more  probably,  Byzantine  wall,
built  of  rubble  and  tiles  laid  in  mortar.  They  may  be  seen  here  and
there  on  the  north  and  west  sides.

The  walls  of  the  first  four  periods  are  very  uniformly  about  1 1  feet
thick.  The  outer  face  is  built  of  larger  blocks  and  in  a  rather  better
style  than  the  inner,  but  the  difference  is  not  great.  In  all  the  walls
the  space  between  the  outer  and  the  inner  face  was  filled  up  with
smaller  rough  stones  and  earth.  Their  height  and  the  way  in  which
they  were  finished  at  the  top  cannot  be  determined.  Ipr  many  places,
especially  at  the  north-west  and  south-west,  the  wall  nas  wholly  dis-
appeared, and  its  line  can  only  be  traced  by  the  smoothing  of  the
natural  rock  as  a  bed  in  which  to  lay  the  first  course  of  masonry.  All
the  walls  were  defended  at  intervals  by  projecting  towers,  of  which
there  are  many  remains.  Four  of  these  towers  are  round ;  all  the
rest  are  square.

The  walls  at  the  southern  end  of  the  site,  beyond  the  upper  cross-
wall,  belong  to  the  earliest  period.  From  the  greater  age  of  these  walls
and  the  height  of  this  part  of  the  site  above  the  rest  of  the  plateau  it
has  been  conjectured  that  the  southern  end  of  the  site,  forming  the  apex
of  the  triangle,  was  the  original  acropolis  or  even  the  original  city,
which  may  have  been  a  good  deal  smaller  than  the  later  city.  No
trace,  however,  has  been  found  of  an  old  wall  enclosing  this  part  of  the
site  on  the  north.  Such  a  wall  may  very  well  have  extended  east  and
west  nearly  on  the  line  of  the  existing  upper  cross-wall  and  may  have
been  taken  down  when  that  cross-wall  was  built.  After  the  construction
of  the  cross-wall  the  part  of  the  site  to  the  south,  enclosed  by  the  oldest
walls,  would  seem  to  have  been  left  outside  of  the  city  walls.  For  the
cross-wall,  strengthened  by  projecting  towers,  has  all  the  appearance  of
being  an  outer  wall ;  and  of  the  older  walls  to  the  south  of  it  not  much
is  left,  little  more  indeed  than  a  single  course.  At  the  extreme  southern
point  of  the  circuit  there  are  the  remains  of  a  square  tower,  measuring
1 8  feet  on  the  sides.  From  this  point  there  is  a  fine  view  over  the
whole  site  and  the  plain  of  the  Asopus  away  north  to  the  line  of  low
hills  beyond  which,  hidden  from  sight,  lies  Thebes.

By  for  the  best  preserved  as  well  as  best  built  portion  of  the  whole
circuit  is  the  upper  cross-wall.  Starting  from  the  west  wall  it  runs
south-east  for  445  yards  in  a  nearly  straight  line,  then  bends  round  at
an  angle  and  runs  north-east  to  join  the  eastern  circuit- wall.     It  is


CH.  II  PLATAEA  II

everywhere  1 1  feet  thick  ;  both  faces  are  carefully  finished,  and  the
intermediate  space  is  filled  with  earth  and  rubble.  The  height  of  the
existing  wall  varies  greatly ;  in  some  places  it  barely  appears  above
ground,  while  in  one  place  (the  third  tower  from  the  west)  it  is  standing
to  a  height  of  12  ft.  6  in.  Along  the  outer  or  southern  side  of  the  wall
are  remains  of  eight  quadrangular  towers  projecting  from  the  curtain
at  intervals  of  about  140  feet  from  each  other.  Each  tower  measures
about  22  feet  on  the  face  by  16^  feet  on  the  sides,  and  appears  to  have
been  built  solid,  the  interior  having  been  filled  up  wiUi  earth  and
rabble.  A  peculiarity  of  this  cross-wall  is  that  on  its  inner  side  there
are  several  platforms  or  thickenings,  each  about  33  feet  long  and  3  feet
thick.  These  were  probably  buttresses  to  strengthen  the  wall,  but  too
little  of  them  is  left  to  allow  us  to  be  positive  on  this  head.  Both  wall
and  towers  are  constructed  on  their  outer  and  inner  faces  of  very
massive  blocks,  three  courses  of  which  make  a  height  of  about  7  feet.
At  one  point  in  the  wall  I  counted  eight  courses  standing.  The  towers
form  an  integral  part  of  the  wall ;  they  were  obviously  built  at  the  same
time  and  continuously  with  it,  not  added  at  a  later  time.

The  lower  cross-wall,  which  cut  off  the  north-western  comer  of  the
site  so  as  to  form  an  inner  fortification,  has  seven  quadrangular  towers
projecting  from  its  outer  side.  They  measure  about  20  feet  on  the
face  by  1 8  feet  on  the  sides.  The  third  tower  from  the  west  is  standing
to  a  height  of  about  12  ft.  6  in.  Leake  and  Vischer  regarded  this
north-western  enclosure  as  an  acropolis  or  citadel.  Mr.  Grundy  holds
that  the  city  which  was  besieged  and  taken  by  the  Peloponnesian  army
in  429-427  B.C.  was  confined  to  this  north-western  comer  of  the  site.
He  argues  that  this  comer  is  strategically  the  strongest  part  of  the
whole  site  and  must  always  have  been  surrounded  by  a  fortification-
walL  The  slopes  on  the  north  and  west  are  still  steep,  in  places
precipitous,  and  may  have  been  much  steeper  in  antiquity;  and  the
foundation  of  a  wall  placed  upon  their  edge  would  be  from  60  to  90
feet  above  the  plain  at  their  base.  The  total  circumference  of  the
enclosure  is  1430  yards;  and  a  circuit-wall  of  this  extent,  aided  by
the  natural  strength  of  the  ground,  might  very  well  (Mr.  Grandy  thinks)
have  been  defended  by  480  men,  which  we  know  to  have  been  the
strength  of  the  garrison  (Thucydides,  ii.  78),  whereas  it  is  difficult  or
impossible  to  believe  that  so  small  a  garrison  could  have  success-
fully defended  a  circuit-wall  of  2^  miles  in  length,  which  is  approxi-
mately the  length  of  the  existing  circuit-wall  of  Plataea.  We  may
agree  with  Mr.  Grundy  in  thinking  that  the  city  which  the  400
Plataeans  and  80  Athenians  defended  for  two  years  against  the
enormously  superior  numbers  of  the  Peloponnesian  army  was  much
smaller  than  the  later  city  of  which  the  remains  cover  the  plateau ;
but  his  theory  that  this  earlier  city  coincided  with  the  fortified  enclosure
at  the  north-western  comer  of  the  site  is  not  home  out  by  architectural
evidence.  For,  as  we  have  seen,  the  cross- wall  which  cuts  off  this
comer  is  of  later  date  than  almost  all  the  rest  of  the  walls.  It  may
even  belong  to  the  Byzantine  period,  and  would  seem  to  have  been  con-
structed at  a  late  time  when  the  town  had  shmnk  to  these  narrow  limits.


12  PLATAEA  BK.  IX.  BOBOTIA

The  original  city  which  was  besieged  and  taken  by  the  Peloponnesians
may  have  occupied,  as  has  already  been  suggested,  the  southern  part  of
the  site,  the  walls  of  which  are  the  earliest  of  all.  To  this  view,  how-
ever, it  is  objected  by  Mr.  Grundy  that  a  town  of  this  area,  measuring
perhaps  from  three-quarters  of  a  mile  to  a  mile  in  circumference  and
unaided,  except  to  a  small  extent  on  the  west  side,  by  natural  defences,
could  not  have  been  held  by  480  men  against  a  large  army.  How-
ever that  may  be,  it  would  seem  that  at  some  time  subsequent  to  the
Peloponnesian  war  the  city  was  enlarged.  This  may  have  been  done
either  when  the  Plataeans  were  restored  after  the  peace  of  Antalcidas
in  387  B.C.  (Paus.  ix.  i.  4)  or  at  the  time  of  their  second  restoration
by  Philip  of  Macedon  in  338  B.C.  (Paus.  ix.  i.  8).  That  the  ancient
Plataea  did  not  comprise  the  whole  of  the  area  afterwards  occupied  by
the  city  is  moreover  made  probable  by  the  fact  that  in  479  B.C.,  at  the
time  of  the  battle  of  Plataea,  the  temple  of  Hera  was  in  front  of  the
city  (Herodotus,  ix.  52),  whereas  when  Pausanias  visited  Plataea  the
temple  appears  to  have  been  within  the  city.  It  is  true  that  the  old
temple  which  existed  at  the  time  of  the  Persian  war  was  destroyed
some  time  after  427  B.C.  by  the  Thebans,  who  built  a  new  temple  in  its
place  (Thucydides,  iii.  68) ;  but  probably  the  new  temple  occupied  the
site  of  the  old  one.  The  remains  of  a  large  temple,  which  was  probably
that  of  Hera,  were  discovered  a  few  years  ago  by  the  Americans  within
the  area  of  the  later  city  (see  below,  p.  17  sq,).

Inside  of  the  walls  of  Plataea,  or  rather  of  the  northern  portion  of  it
which  is  cut  off  by  the  upper  cross-wall,  lies  a  mass  of  ruins,  including
the  remains  of  a  number  of  Byzantine  churches,  some  of  which  were
excavated  by  members  of  the  American  School  of  Archaeology  in  1889
and  1890.  The  number  of  these  churches  (there  were  at  least  eight  of
them  within  the  walls)  proves  that  in  Byzantine  times  a  populous  town
must  have  existed  on  the  site.  Some  of  the  churches  contain  ancient
architectural  fragments  of  both  the  Greek  and  Roman  periods,  including
some  blocks  of  white  marble  with  the  *  ^%%  and  dart '  pattern  executed  in
good  style.  Most  of  these  fragments  (architraves,  capitals,  and  bases)
belong  to  the  Roman  age.  Two  springs,  one  immediately  to  the  west
of  the  walls  where  the  women  of  the  neighbouring  village  of  Kokla
wash  their  clothes,  the  other  some  250  yards  to  the  east  of  the  plateau,
have  walls  made  of  ancient  fragments  of  white  marble.  The  marble  of
all  the  architectural  pieces  found  on  the  site  resembles  Pentelic,  but
probably  came  from  a  nearer  quarry.  Within  the  northern  portion  of
the  site,  a  little  to  the  east  of  the  lower  cross-wall,  are  seven  or  eight
small  rectangular  holes  or  niches  cut  in  the  rock,  probably  for  the
reception  of  votive  or  other  tablets.  Just  outside  of  the  west  wall,  and-
close  to  the  spring,  are  some  half-dozen  sarcophaguses  perched  on  the
rocks ;  each  of  them  is  hewn  out  of  a  single  piece  of  the  common
coarse  grey  marble  of  which  the  rock  consists.  To  the  south  of  the
sarcophaguses  are  some  graves  in  the  shape  of  rectangular  pits  hewn
in  the  rock.  Amongst  the  inscriptions  found  by  the  American
archaeologists  on  the  site  were  a  long  fragment  of  the  Latin  preamble
to  Diocletian's  edict  On  prices^  a  fragment  of  the  Greek  text  of  the  same


CH.  II  PLATAEA  13

edict,  and  a  list  of  names  of  women  who  had  dedicated  various  offerings
(cups,  earrings,  rings,  torches,  cowheads,  a  girdle,  etc.)  to  some  deity
not  specified.  This  last  inscription  seems  to  belong  to  the  second
century  B.C.

A  little  to  the  south-west  of  Plataea,  on  the  lower  slope  of  Mt.
Cithaeron,  stands  the  modem  village  of  Kokla.

See  Dodwell,  T<mr,  i.  p.  474  sqq,  ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece,  2.  pp.  323  sqq.,
363  sqq.  ;  Mure,  JourmU,  I.  p.  260  sqq,  ;  Welcker,  Tagebuchy  2.  p.  24  sqq.  ;  L.
Ross,  vVanderungen,  I.  p.  16  sq.  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.  540  sqq.  ;  ^ursian,
Geogr.  I.  p.  243  sqq.  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  176  sqq. ;  Guide-Joanne,  2.  p.  25  ;  American
Journal  of  Archaeology,  5  (1889),  pp.  428-442;  id,,  6  (1890),  pp.  io8-iii,  215,
445-462;  id,,  7  (189 1),  pp.  54-64,  404-421 ;  G.  B.  Grundy,  The  topography  of
the  battle  of  Plataea,  pp.  53-72;  P.  Brandt,  Von  Athen  zum  Tenipethal
(Giitersloh,  1894),  pp.  19-22.     I  visited  Plataea  in  May  1890.

Plataea  is  chiefly  memorable  for  the  great  and  decisive  defeat  which
the  Greeks  inflicted  on  the  Persian  army  under  Mardonius  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  city  in  479  B.C.  (Herodotus,  ix.  14-75  ;  Diodorus,
xi.  29-32;  Plutarch, -<4rry//Vi5?j,  11- 19).  Herodotus's  detailed  account
of  the  battle  was  probably  derived  from  men  who  had  themselves
taken  part  in  the  fight ;  but  to  reconcile  his  description  with  the  natural
features  of  the  battlefield  is  not  easy,  and  the  attempts  to  do  so  have
resulted  in  considerable  divergences  of  opinion.  The  identification  of
some  of  the  most  important  spots  mentioned  by  Herodotus  is  still  very
uncertain.  This  is  particularly  the  case  with  the  sanctuary  of  Demeter
(see  above,  p.  5  sq.),  the  Gargaphian  spring  (Herodotus,  ix.  25,  49,  51,
52  ;  Paus.  ix.  4.  3),  and  the  so-called  Island  (Herodotus,  ix.  51).  From
Herodotus's  description  we  gather  that  the  Gargaphian  spring,  from
which  the  whole  Greek  army  drew  their  water,  was  situated  among  low
hills  at  a  distance  of  20  Greek  furlongs  (2^  miles)  from  the  sanctuary
of  Hera  which  stood  in  front  of  Plataea.  The  spring  is  tradition-
ally identified  with  a  group  of  springs  now  called  Apotripi  which  is
situated  about  i^  miles  to  the  north-east  of  Plataea,  beside  the  track
which  leads  from  Kriekouki  to  Pyrgos  and  Leuctra,  about  a  quarter  of
a  mile  before  it  enters  on  the  fiat  watershed  which  divides  the  basins
of  the  Asopus  and  Oeroe.  But  Leake  and  Mr.  Grundy  identify  it
with  another  group  of  springs  somewhat  to  the  east  of  Apotripi,  about
i§  miles  to  the  north-east  of  Plataea.  This  group  of  springs  apparently
yields  a  more  copious  supply  of  water  than  Apotripi,  It  helps  to  form
a  stream  which  flows  into  the  Asopus.  As  to  the  Island,  to  which  the
Greeks  when  hard  pressed  by  the  Persian  cavalry  had  thoughts  of
retreating,  we  learn  from  Herodotus  that  it  was  formed  by  a  stream
called  the  Oeroe,  the  water  of  which,  descending  from  Mt.  Cithaeron,
divided  in  two  and  then,  after  flowing  round  a  tract  of  ground  about
3  furlongs  wide,  reunited  again  in  a  single  stream.  The  island  so
formed,  Herodotus  tell  us,  lay  in  front  of  Plataea  at  a  distance  of
10  Greek  furlongs  (a  little  over  a  mile)  both  from  the  Asopus  and  the
Gargaphian  spring.  The  advantages  which  the  Greeks  expected  to
reap  from  taking  up  a  position  on  the  Island  were  that  they  would  be
better  supplied  with  water  and  be  less  exposed  to  the  attacks  of  the


14  PLATAEA  BK.  IX.  boeotia

formidable  and  enterprising  cavalry  of  the  enemy,  who  not  only  harassed
them  by  continual  charges  but  had  choked  up  the  Gargaphian  spring  on
which  the  Greeks  depended  for  their  supply  of  water  (Herodotus,  ix.
49-51).  At  the  present  day  there  is  no  such  island  as  Herodotus
describes  anywhere  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Plataea.  A  number  of
streams  flow  down  Cithaeron  to  the  east  of  Plataea,  and  turn  to  the
west,  where  they  unite  to  form  the  Oeroe  which  flows  into  the  Gulf  of
Corinth.  Probably  the  Island  was  the  strip  of  ground  between  two  of
these  streams,  above  their  junction.  Leake  and  Vischer  identified  as
the  Island  a  level  stretch  of  meadow-land  intersected  by  several  of  the
streams  in  question  and  situated  about  a  mile  to  the  north  of  Plataea.
To  this  identification  it  is  objected  by  Mr.  Grundy  (i)  that  even  in
winter  after  heavy  rains  the  streams  here  contain  very  little  water,
and  that  in  September,  when  the  battle  was  fought,  all  of  them  would
be  almost  certainly  dry  before  they  reached  this  part  of  the  plain ;  (2)
that  the  beds  of  the  streams  offer  no  serious  obstacles  to  cavalry,  which
could  indeed  cross  them  in  most  places  at  full  gallop ;  and  (3)  that  in
order  to  reach  the  supposed  haven  of  refuge  the  Greek  army,  already
shaken  by  the  attacks  of  the  Persian  cavalry,  would  have  had  to  cross  a
mile  of  open  ground,  where  that  cavalry  would  have  had  full  play  and
might  have  turned  the  Greek  march  into  a  total  rout.  Hence  Mr.
Grundy  would  place  the  Island  higher  up  the  courses  of  the  streams,
where  they  contain  more  water  and  where  their  deep  beds  would  afford
an  efficient  protection  against  cavalry.  Long  ridges  separate  the  deep
watercourses  which  descend  the  slope  of  Cithaeron  to  the  east  of
Plataea ;  and  one  of  them,  rendered  conspicuous  by  a  large  hillock
which  rises  on  it  and  serves  as  a  landmark,  is  identified  by  Mr.  Grundy
with  the  Island.  It  is  distant  somewhat  less  than  a  mile  to  the  east  of
Plataea,  and  is  enclosed  on  two  sides  by  the  deep  beds  of  streams  which
rise  near  each  other  on  the  mountain  and  meet  in  the  plain  below.  The
more  westerly  of  the  streams  is  fed  by  numerous  springs,  of  which  two
are  large  (one  of  them  is  the  spring  called  Vergoutiani,  see  above,
p.  7) ;  and  it  is  already  swollen  to  a  considerable  size  when  it  flows  past
the  hillock  on  the  ridge,  but  like  the  other  streams  which  here  descend
to  the  plain  its  volume  diminishes  the  farther  it  gets  into  the  flat  country.
Here,  then,  the  Greeks  would  have  had  a  sufficient  supply  of  water,
while  the  rugged  nature  of  the  ground  and  the  depth  and  steepness  of
the  coombs  on  either  side  would  have  rendered  them  quite  safe  from
the  dreaded  cavalry  of  the  enemy.  Mr.  Grundy's  theory  has  a  good
deal  to  recommend  it ;  but  on  the  other  hand  we  must  observe  (i)  that
the  streams  which  skirt  the  ridge  in  question  meet,  not  immediately
below  it,  but  far  away  in  the  plain,  so  that  the  resemblance  of  the  ridge
to  an  island  is  not  particularly  striking ;  and  (2)  that  the  distance  of
the  ridge  from  the  Asopus  is  twice  or  thrice  the  distance  (10  Greek
furlongs,  about  a  mile)  of  the  Island  from  that  river,  as  stated  by
Herodotus.  To  meet  this  last  difficulty  Mr.  Grundy  is  driven  to
suppose  that  Herodotus  was  here  speaking,  not  of  the  Asopus,  but
of  one  of  its  tributaries,  which  rises  about  10  Greek  furlongs  from  the
ridge  which  Mr.  Grundy  would  identify  as  the  Island.


CH.  II  GRAVES  AT  PLATAEA  15

As  to  the  topography  of  the  battlefield  see  Leake,  Northern  Greece,  2,  p.  335
W-  ;  J*  Spencer  Stanhope,  Topography  illustrative  of  the  hattle  of  PUUaea
(London,  1017);  Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.  547  sqq.  ;  W.  Irving  Hunt,  'Notes
on  the  battlefield  of  Plataia,'  American  Journal  of  Archaeology ^  6  (1890),  pp.  463-
475  ;  A.  Hauvette,  in  Nouvelles  Archives  des  Missions  scientifiques  et  littiraires,
2  (1892),  pp.  359-374 ;  G.  B.  Grundy,  The  topography  of  the  battle  of  Plataea
(London,  1894) ;  H.  Awdry,  in  AnnucU  of  the  British  School  at  Athens,  No.  I,
Session  1894-5,  pp.  90-98 ;  P.  Brandt,  Von  A  then  zum  Tempethcd^  p.  16  sqq.  The
credibility  of  lierodotus's  narrative  of  the  battle  has  been  examined  by  li.  Del-
brlick,  Die  Perserkriege  und  die  Burgunderkriege  (Berlin,  1887),  p.  108  sqq, ;  A.
Hanvette,  Hirodote  (Paris,  1894),  pp.  453-483 ;  F.  Rudolph,  Die  Schlacht  bei
Platda  und  deren  C/berlieferuf^  {Dresden,  1895).

2.  5.  the  graves  of  the  men  who  fought  against  the  Modes  etc.
A  little  to  the  south-east  of  Plataea,  close  to  the  line  by  which  the  road
from  Megara  probably  entered  the  city,  there  are  many  remains  of
tombs  cut  in  the  rock.  These  are  believed  by  Mr.  Grundy  to  be  the
graves  of  the  men  who  fell  in  the  battle  with  the  Persians  (The  topo-
graphy of  the  battle  of  Plataea^  p.  7  sq,)  The  view  is  in  itself  highly
improbable  and  is  implicitly  contradicted  by  the  evidence  both  of
Herodotus  and  Pausanias.  It  was  the  practice  of  the  Greeks,  as  it  is
of  the  modems,  to  bury  the  slain  in  one  or  more  large  trenches
{polyandria) ;  and  it  is  very  unlikely  that  on  this  occasion  they  so  far
departed  from  their  usual  practice  as  to  hew  a  separate  tomb  in  the
living  rock  for  each  man  that  fell.  Besides  we  have  the  positive
testimony  of  Herodotus  and  Pausanias  that  the  dead  were  buried  in  a
few  common  graves.  According  to  Pausanias  there  were  three  of  these
great  graves,  one  for  the  Athenians,  one  for  the  Lacedaemonians,  and
one  for  the  rest  of  the  Greeks.  According  to  Herodotus  (ix.  85)  the
Athenians,  Tegeans,  Megarians,  and  Phliasians  buried  their  dead  in
four  separate  graves,  all  the  dead  of  each  nation  being  laid  together  in
one  grave ;  but  the  Lacedaemonians  separated  their  dead  into  three
groups — the  young  Spartans  (irenes),  the  rest  of  the  Spartans,  and  the
Helots — and  buried  each  group  separately  in  one  grave.  Other  Greek
nations  who  had  taken  no  part  in  the  fighting  and  had  consequently  lost
no  men,  nevertheless  raised  sepulchral  mounds  on  the  battlefield,  but
these  were  mere  cenotaphs  designed  to  impose  upon  posterity.  The
so-called  grave  of  the  Aeginetans,  for  example,  was  made  ten  years  after
the  battle.

The  Plataeans  annually  sacrificed  to  the  Greeks  who  had  fallen  in  the
battle  and  were  buried  in  Plataean  earth.  These  sacrifices  were  still
offered  as  late  as  the  time  of  Plutarch,  who  has  described  them.  They
took  place  on  the  i6th  day  of  the  Attic  month  Maemacterion  (November-
December),  which  corresponded  to  the  Boeotian  month  Alalcomenius.
The  procession  started  at  dawn,  headed  by  a  trumpeter  sounding  the
charge.  After  him  came  waggons  laden  with  myrtle  and  garlands.  A
black  bull  was  led  in  procession,  and  young  men  carried  drink-offerings
of  wine  and  milk  in  pitchers,  also  jars  of  oil  and  perfume.  The  rear
was  brought  up  by  the  chief  magistrate  of  Plataea,  who  carried  a  water-
jar  in  procession  from  the  Record  Office  all  through  the  city  to  the
graves.  He  was  clad  in  purple  and  had  a  sword  at  his  side,  though  at
other  times  he  might  not  touch  iron  nor  wear  any  but  a  white  garment.


i6  ZEUS  OF  FREEDOM  bk.  ix.  boeotia

He  then  filled  his  pitcher  at  the  fountain,  and  with  his  own  hands
washed  the  tombstones  and  anointed  them  with  perfume.  Next  he
slaughtered  the  bull  over  a  blazing  pile,  and  after  praying  to  Zeus  and
Hermes  invited  the  brave  men  who  had  died  for  Greece  to  come  and
partake  of  the  banquet  and  the  blood.  Then  he  filled  a  bowl  with
wine,  poured  it  out,  and  said  <*  I  drink  to  the  men  who  died  for  the
freedom  of  Greece."  See  Plutarch,  AristideSy  2X.  Amongst  the
offerings  which  were  presented  to  the  heroic  dead  at  these  annual
sacrifices  were  clothes  and  the  ripe  fruits  of  the  earth  (Thucydides,
iii.  58).

2.  5.  an  altar  of  Zeus  of  FreedoiiL  After  the  battle  of  Plataea
the  Greeks  were  commanded  by  the  Delphic  oracle  to  set  up  an  altar
to  Zeus  the  god  of  Freedom ;  but  before  sacrificing  on  it  they  were
to  extinguish  all  the  fires  in  the  land,  because  they  had  been  polluted  by
the  presence  of  the  Persians,  and  to  fetch  a  pure  fire  from  *the  common
hearth '  at  Delphi.  So  the  Greek  commanders  went  from  place  to  place
seeing  that  all  the  fires  were  put  out ;  and  Euchidas,  a  Plataean,  quitting
Plataea  in  the  morning,  ran  to  Delphi,  took  fire  from  the  altar,  and  ran
back  with  it  to  Plataea,  which  he  reached  before  sunset.  He  had  just
strength  to  salute  his  fellow-townsmen  and  hand  over  the  fire,  when  he
dropped  down  and  died.  The  distance  which  he  had  traversed  in  the
day  was  (according  to  Plutarch)  1000  stades,  or  about  iii  miles.  (The
distance  between  Plataea  and  Delphi  in  a  straight  line  is  about  46  miles.
Allowing  for  the  bends  of  the  road,  the  distance  is  perhaps  not  less  than
the  500  stcules  or  55 J  miles  at  which  Plutarch  reckoned  it.)  Every
year,  on  the  anniversary  of  the  g^eat  battle,  the  Plataeans  sacrificed  to
Zeus  god  of  Freedom  in  presence  of  deputies  sent  from  every  part  of
Greece.  These  deputies  formed  a  representative  Council  or  Assembly,
and  had  the  right  of  decreeing  honorary  statues  to  men  who  had
deserved  well  of  Greece.  Such  statues,  as  we  learn  from  inscriptions,
were  decreed  to  the  emperor  Hadrian  and  to  Tiberius  Claudius  Atticus
Marathonius,  the  father  of  Herodes  Atticus ;  the  former  statue  was  set
up  at  Delphi.  See  Plutarch,  Aristides^  19-21  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge
Inscr,  Graec,  Nos.  282,  288  ;  C.  I,  G,  G,  S,  i.  No.  2509.  Amongst  the
ruins  of  Plataea  three  semicircular  bases  have  been  found,  which,  as  we
learn  from  the  inscriptions  on  them,  supported  tripods  dedicated  by  the
Boeotians  to  Zeus  god  of  Freedom.  The  inscriptions  date  from  the
second  half  of  the  third  century  B.C.  See  C  /.  G,  G.  S,  i.  Nos.  1672-
1674;  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUnique^  i  (1877),  p.  208  sq,\  id.^  13
(1889),  p.  5  sg,y  Nos.  viii-x  ;  Collitz,  G.  D,  I,  i.  No.  865.  At  Thebes
there  is  the  large  blue  marble  base  of  the  statue  of  a  certain  L.  Egnatius
Victor  Lollianus,  governor  of  Greece,  which  was  dedicated  to  Zeus  god
of  Freedom  and  to  the  Unanimity  of  the  Greeks  by  the  city  of  Plataea,
apparently  at  the  beginning  of  the  third  century  a.d.  (C  /.  G,  G,  S.  i.
No.  25x0).  The  Plataeans  seem  to  have  dated  public  documents  by  the
year  of  the  priest  of  Zeus  god  of  Freedom  (C.  /.  G.  G.  S.  i.  No.  1667).

2.  6.  games  called  the  Eleutheria.  These  games,  as  well  as  the
annual  meeting  of  the  deputies  at  Plataea  (see  the  preceding  note),  were
instituted  on  the  proposal  of  Aristides.     The  prizes  were  wreaths.     See


CH.  II  TEMPLE  OF  HERA  AT  PLATAEA  17

Plutarch,  Aristides^  2 1  ;  Strabo,  ix.  p.  4 1 2.  The  games  are  mentioned
in  inscriptions  (C.  /.  G,  G.  S,  i.  Nos.  49,  1856;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge
Inscr.  Graec,  No.  398  ;  Bulletin  de  Corresfi.  helUnique^  3  (1879),  p.  443;
Cawadias,  Fouilles  ep£pidaure^  i.  p.  78,  No.  240).  Great  crowds
seem  to  have  assembled  to  witness  them  ;  for  Dicaearchus,  or  the  writer
who  commonly  goes  by  his  name,  says  that  Plataea,  ordinarily  as  solitary
as  the  sea-shore,  was  indeed  a  city  at  the  time  of  the  Eleutheria
{DescripHo  Graectae,  i.  11).  When  the  Thebans  razed  the  city  to  the
ground,  they  built  a  large  inn  beside  the  temple  of  Hera,  probably  to
acconmiodate  the  visitors  who  flocked  to  the  games.  The  inn  seems  to
have  been  a  square,  200  feet  on  the  sides,  enclosing  a  courtyard,  round
which  the  rooms  were  ranged  in  two  stories  (Thucydides,  iii.  68).

2.  6.  The  trophy  etc.  The  Lacedaemonians  and  Athenians  each
set  up  a  trophy  of  their  own,  according  to  Plutarch  {Aristides^  20).
Mr.  W.  I.  Hunt  thinks  that  the  trophy  (or  trophies)  may  have  stood
near  the  ruined  Byzantine  church  south-east  of  Plataea  (see  above,
p.  5)  ;  the  distance  of  that  place  from  Plataea  is  about  the  1 5  furlongs
mentioned  by  Pausanias  (^American  Journal  of  Archaeology^  6  (1890),
p.  468  sq,')

2.  7-  I  have  already  mentioned  etc.     See  ix.  i.  3.

2.  7.  a  temple  of  Hera.  The  foundations  of  what  was  probably
the  temple  of  Hera  were  discovered  by  the  archaeologists  of  the
American  School  in  1891.  They  were  situated  on  a  small  terrace  about
the  middle  of  the  northern  division  of  Plataea,  to  the  south-east  of  the
later  cross-wall  which  encloses  the  north-western  comer  of  the  plateau.
The  main  axis  of  the  building  lies  E.  10"  S.  (magnetic).  Its  total  exterior
length  is  49.90  metres;  its  exterior  width  is  16.70  metres.  The  outer
wall  (2.55  metres  thick)  is  built  of  smoothly-cut  blocks  2.55  m.  long,
I.20  m.  wide,  and  0.40  high,  laid  without  clamps  or  mortar,  and  fitting
so  closely  that  on  the  upper  surface  it  is  difficult  to  detect  the  joints.
The  lowest  course  rests  on  the  rock,  a  very  shallow  trench  having  been
cut  for  its  reception.  The  greatest  number  of  courses  in  position  is  four,
namely  at  the  north-east  angle.  Of  the  south  wall  only  two  courses  are
left,  and  of  the  north  wall  only  one.  At  the  north-west  comer  was
found,  not  in  position,  part  of  an  upper  course  of  the  crepidoma^  showing
the  face  of  one  of  the  steps.

The  inner  walls  are  all  1.25  m.  thick,  except  one  cross- wall  which  is
1.30  m.  The  blocks  are  laid  in  altemate  courses  of  *  headers  and
stretchers,'  i,e.  transversely  and  longitudinally  in  altemate  courses,  and
are  closely  fitted  without  clamps  or  mortar.  Fragments  of  roof-tiles  are
scattered  about  the  terrace.  They  are  of  baked  clay,  covered  with  a  dull
yellowish-grey  glaze,  and  of  a  /S^  shape,  the  angle  being  very  obtuse.
The  temple  was  surrounded  by  a  colonnade  which  was  almost  certainly
of  the  Doric  order.  From  the  style  of  the  architecture  and  the  clamps
(which  are  of  the  HH  shape)  the  temple  seems  to  belong  to  the  fifth  or
perhaps  the  sixth  century  B.C.

It  is  probable  that  this  was  the  temple  of  Hera.  The  site  can  be
reconciled  with  the  descriptions  both  of  Herodotus  who  says  that  the
temple  was  in  front  of  the  city  (ix.  52),  and  of  Pausanias,  who  implies

VOL.  V  C


l8  TEMPLE  OF  HERA  AT  PLATAEA      BK.  ix.  boeotia

that  it  was  in  the  city.  For  we  have  seen  that  at  the  time  of  the  battle
of  Plataea  and  as  late  as  the  capture  of  the  city  by  the  Peloponnesians
in  427  B.C,  the  town  may  have  occupied  only  the  upper  (southern)
part  of  the  plateau,  so  that  the  temple,  standing  on  the  lower  (northern)
part  of  the  plateau,  would  be  in  front  of  the  town  ;  whereas  in  the  second
century  A.D.,  when  Pausanias  visited  Plataea,  the  temple  was,  and  had
for  centuries  been,  enclosed  within  the  newer  city  which  had  spread  over
the  northern  part  of  the  plateau.  Again,  the  importance  of  the  recently-
discovered  temple  is  shown  by  its  size,  which  is  larger  than  the  temple
at  Bassae  or  the  temple  of  Hera  at  Olympia.  As  Hera  was  the  chief
divinity  of  Plataea,  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  this  large  and  important
temple  was  sacred  to  her.  We  know  from  Thucydides  (iii.  68)  that  some
time,  apparently  about  a  year,  after  the  capture  of  Plataea  in  427  B.C.,
the  Thebans  razed  the  whole  city  to  the  ground  and  built  a  new  stone
temple  of  Hera  one  hundred  feet  long.  Mr.  Washington,  who  excavated
the  temple,  concludes  that  the  temple  discovered  by  him  is  the  one  built
by  the  Thebans  soon  after  427  B.C.  The  discovery  of  a  layer  of
blackened  earth  imder  the  temple  seems  to  show  that  a  former  temple
on  this  site  had  been  destroyed  by  fire.  See  H.  S.  Washington,  in
American  Journal  of  Archaeology y  7  (1891),  pp.  390-405.

2.  7-  Bhea  bringing  to  Gronns  the  stone  etc.  In  the  existing
monuments  of  ancient  art  this  subject  is  rarely  represented  ;  in  fact  only
two  such  representations  appear  to  be  certainly  known.  One  is  a  relief
on  a  four-sided  marble  altar  found  at  Albano,  now  on  the  Capitol  at
Rome.  Cronus  is  seen  seated  on  a  chair,  receiving  in  his  right  hand
the  pretended  babe  from  Rhea,  who  stands  in  front  of  him.  The  style
of  composition  is  simple  and  dignified ;  Overbeck  even  classed  the
relief  with  the  greatest  masterpieces  of  antiquity,  and  thought  that,
though  of  Roman  date,  it  must  be  a  copy  of  a  very  fine  work  of  art.
See  Miiller-Wieseler,  Denkmdler^  2.  pi.  Ixii.  No.  804  ;  Baumeister's
Denkmdler^  2.  p.  798,  fig.  862  ;  Overbeck,  Griech,  Kunstmythologiey  2.
p.  326.

The  other  monument  referred  to  is  a  red-figured  vase  of  Sicilian
workmanship.  On  it  Cronus  is  depicted  standing  wrapt  in  an  ample
mantle,  his  left  hand  resting  on  a  sceptre  surmounted  by  a  flower.
Opposite  him  is  Rhea,  clad  in  a  long  robe,  bringing  him  the  stone.
Behind  this  group,  on  the  spectator's  right,  are  two  young  girls,  probably
the  nymphs  Ida  and  Adrastia,  to  whose  care,  jointly  with  the  Curetes,
the  infant  Zeus  was  entrusted  (Apollodorus,  i.  i.  6).  See  J.  De  Witte,
*  Cronos  et  Rhea,'  Gazette  arch^ologique^  i  (1875),  PP«  3o-33»  with  pL
9.  The  same  subject  was  perhaps  represented  on  one  of  the  metopes
of  the  temple  of  Apollo  at  Bassae.     See  vol.  4.  p.  402  sq,

2.  7-  They  call  Hera  Full-grown.  Cp.  viii.  22.  2;  viii.  31.  9.
She  received  this  surname  at  Plataea  because  her  marriage  with  Zeus
was  said  to  have  been  consummated  on  Mount  Cithaeron  (Plutarch,
quoted  by  Eusebius,  Praepar,  Evang,  iii.  \,  S  sq,)  It  has  been  con-
jectured that  the  noble  colossal  statue  of  Hera  formerly  known  as  the
Barberini  Juno,  now  in  the  Rotunda  at  the  Vatican,  is  a  copy  of
the  Plataean  statue  of  Full-grown  Hera  by  Praxiteles.     The  statue


CH.  Ill  THE  DAEDALA  19


certainly  appears  to  be  a  reproduction  of  some  famous  masterpiece,  for
a  number  of  statues  of  the  same  type,  presumably  copies  of  one  original,
have  come  down  to  us.  See  Overbeck,  GrUch,  Kunstmythologie^  3.
pp.  54-58,  III  sq,\  Miiller-Wieseler,  Z?^«>&»ia/^r,  2.  pi.  iv.  No.  56;
Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  2.  p.  647  sq.  (fig.  715)  ;  Roscher's  Lexikon,
I.  p.  2115.  Prof.  W.  Klein  argues  that  the  Praxiteles  who  made  this
statue  was  not  the  great  Praxiteles  but  an  earlier  and  less  famous
namesake  {Archaeolog.  epigraph.  MittheiL  aus  Oesterreich^  4  (1880),
p.  8  sqq.)  Overbeck  inclined  to  the  same  view  {Gesch,  <L  griech.
PlasHky^  I.  p.  499),  and  so  does  Prof.  Collignon  (Hist  de  la  Sculpture
grecque^  2.  p.  179).     See  note  on  i.  2.  4,  vol.  2.  p.  49  sqq,

2.  7-  Oallimachiis.     See  i.  26.  6  note.

3.  I.  Hera,  enraged  at  Zeus  etc.  The  following  legend  is  told
also  by  Plutarch,  quoted  by  Eusebius  {Praepar,  Evang,  iii.  i  sq,)
According  to  Plutarch,  the  crafty  person  who  suggested  the  stratagem
to  Zeus  was  not  Cithaeron  but  Alalcomenes  ;  by  his  advice  a  fine  oak-
tree  was  cut  down,  shaped  and  dressed  as  a  bride,  and  named  Daedale.
The  rest  of  the  story  follows  as  in  Pausanias,  except  that  Hera  comes,
not  from  Euboea,  but  from  Cithaeron,  where  she  has  been  hiding.

3.  2.  a  festival  called  DaedaJa.  This  festival  seems  to  have  its
analogies  in  the  spring  and  midsummer  festivals  of  European  peasantry
in  modem  times.     See  The  Golden  Bought  i.  p.  100  sqq,

3.  2.  Daedalus,  son  of  Falamaon.  According  to  the  oldest  and
best-authenticated  tradition  the  famous  artist  Daedalus  was  a  son  of
Metion  (Pherecydes,  quoted  by  the  scholiast  on  Sophocles,  Oed,  Col,
472;  Plato,  lon^  p.  533  a;  Diodorus,  iv.  76).  According  to  another
tradition  Daedalus  was  the  son  of  Eupalamus,  the  son  of  Metion
(ApoUodorus,  iii.  15.  8  ;  Schol.  on  Plato,  Repub,  p.  529  d  ;  Suidas,  s.v,
Jl€pBiK09  Upov;  Servius  on  Virgil,  Aen.  vi.  14  ;  Hyginus, /<«^.  39,  244,
and  274).  Metion  the  father  or  grandfather  of  Daedalus  was  a  scion
of  the  royal  house  of  Athens,  being  a  son  of  Erechtheus,  according  to
Pherecydes  (Schol.  on  Sophocles,  Oed,  Col.  472),  or  of  Eupalamus  the
son  of  Erechtheus  (Diodorus,  iv.  76).  Pausanias  notices  elsewhere
(vii.  4.  5)  the  connexion  of  Daedalus  with  the  royal  house  of  the
Metionids.     See  J.  Topffer,  Attische  Genealogie^  P-  165  sqq.

3.  s-  the  Great  Daedala  is  held every  fifty-ninth  year  etc.

That  is,  fifty-eight  years  elapsed  between  two  successive  celebrations  of
the  Great  Daedala.  We  express  this  by  saying  that  the  festival  was
held  every  fifty-ninth  year ;  the  Greeks,  adding  to  the  intervening  fifty-
eight  years  the  two  years  in  which  the  festival  was  celebrated,  said  that
it  was  held  every  sixtieth  year.  The  first  exile  of  the  Plataeans  lasted
forty  years  (427-387  B.a) ;  the  second  exile  lasted  thirty-five  years
(373-338  B.C)  Hence  the  reason  assigned  by  Pausanias  for  the  inter-
val between  the  celebrations  of  the  Great  Daedala  cannot  be  the  true
one.  Doubtless,  as  K.  O.  Miiller  observed,  the  custom  of  celebrating
the  festival  at  these  intervals  was  much  more  ancient  than  the  exile  of
the  Plataeans,  and  probably  had  its  explanation  in  the  calendar  of  the
early  Boeotians  and  the  cycle  adopted  by  them  in  order  to  harmonise
the  solar  and  lunar  years.      See  K.  O.  Miiller,  Orchomenos  und  die


20  NYMPHS  OF  CITHAERON  bk.  ix.  boeotia

Minyer^^  p.  216  sqg.     The  calendar  of  the  Druids  had  a  cycle  of  thirty
years  (Pliny,  Nat,  hist,  xvi.  250).

3.  9.  a  cave  of  the  nymphs  of  Githaeron  etc.  Plutarch  thus
speaks  of  the  cave :  '<  On  one  peak  of  Githaeron  is  the  cave  of  the
Sphragitidian  nymphs,  &cing  the  north-west,  in  which,  as  they  say,
there  was  formerly  an  oracle,  and  many  of  the  natives  were  possessed,
whom  they  called  nympholepti  (*  seized  by  the  nymphs ') "  {Aristides^
11).  As  to  the  situation  of  the  cave,  Leake  says:  "Immediately
opposite  to  the  southern  angle  of  the  walls  of  Plataea  on  the  steep  rocky
rise  of  the  mountain,  which  is  here  separated  only  by  a  narrow  level
from  the  ancient  site,  is  a  cavern  30  feet  in  length,  10  feet  wide,  and  4
high.  Before  it  there  is  a  little  verdant  level,  surrounded  and  over-
hung by  rugged  rocks.  The  beauty  of  the  spot  would  tempt  one  to
believe  it  to  have  been  the  cavern  sacred  to  the  Nymphs  of  Githaeron,
called  the  Spragitides,  which  once  contained  an  oracle  of  the  Nymphs,
and  was  noted  for  Nympholepsy.  But  the  testimony  of  Plutarch  and
Pausanias  is  positive  in  placing  that  cavern  on  the  north-western  side  of
one  of  the  summits,  and  at  a  distance  of  only  1 5  stades  [furlongs]  below
it,  consequently  much  higher  in  the  mountain,  and  having  a  different
aspect."  Leake  adds  that  as  there  are  two  summits  of  Githaeron
equally  conspicuous,  it  is  not  easy  to  determine  on  which  we  ought  to
look  for  the  cavern,  though  the  balance  of  probability  inclines  towards
the  one  nearer  to  Plataea.  See  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  335.
Gaves  were  dedicated  to  the  nymphs,  but  especially  to  the  Naiads,  on
account  of  the  springs  which  bubbled  up  in  them  or  the  water  which
dripped  from  their  roofs  (Porphyry,  De  antro  nympharum^  6  and  8).
The  ancients  appear  to  have  explained  all  extraordinary  mental  states,
such  as  poetic  rapture,  prophetic  frenzy,  madness^  idiocy,  etc.,  by  sup-
posing that  the  person  affected  was  possessed  by  a  nymph  ;  hence  such
persons  were  said  to  be  *  seized  by  the  nymphs '  (vv/Lw^Xr/irTot).  Gp.
Plato,  Phaedrus^  p.  238  cd;  Pollux,  i.  19;  Hesychius,  s.v,  wfnf6-
krjTTTOL  The  same  belief  is  still  prevalent  in  Greece,  and  the  same
word  vi»ft<^A.i/7rTos  is  sometimes  used  to  express  it.  The  Nereids  (pro-
perly the  sea-nymphs,  but  now  extended  so  as  to  include  all  nymphs)
are  believed  to  be  very  mischievous  at  noon,  especially  a  siunmer  noon,
and  it  is  very  dangerous  at  that  hour  to  sleep  or  even  to  loiter  beside  a
well,  a  spring,  or  a  river,  in  the  shadow  of  trees  (especially  plane-trees,
poplars,  fig-trees,  nut-trees,  and  carob-trees),  at  mills,  or  at  cross-roads,
for  these  places  are  the  mid-day  haunts  of  the  Nereids,  and  a  man  who
lingers  there  may  be  struck  by  a  nymph,  the  consequence  of  which
would  be  some  mental  or  bodily  ailment,  generally  the  loss  of  reason,
but  sometimes  the  crippling  of  a  limb.  See  B.  Schmidt,  Das  Volks-
leben  der  Neu^echen^  P-  i  '9  s^q*  In  the  island  of  Siphnus  Mr.  Bent
visited  a  cave,  over  which  was  the  inscription  NYM^fiN  lEPON,
•  sanctuary  of  the  nymphs.'  Travellers  who  cross  a  certain  stream  near
this  cave,  especially  at  midnight  or  mid-day,  run  the  risk  of  being
possessed  by  the  nymphs,  "  and  to  cure  such  cases  it  is  customary  to
prepare  and  place  at  a  spot  where  three  roads  meet  (Tp«rr/xiTa),  or
hang  in  the  wells,  some  bread  wrapjHid  up  in  a  clean  napkin,  and  some


CH.  IV  THE  OEROE—SCOLUS  21

honey,  milk,  and  eggs,  to  appease  these  nymphs"  (J.  T.  Bent,  The
Cyclades^  p.  2tsq,  \  cp.  Lucy  M.  J.  Gamett,  The  Women  of  Turkey,  The
Christian  Wotnen^  p.  132  j^.)     Cp.  note  on  ii.  i.  8.

4.  I.  a  sanctuary  of  Athena  snmamed  Warlike.  According  to
Plutarch  {AristideSy  20)  eighty  talents  were  assigned  to  the  Plataeans
by  the  Greeks  as  their  share  in  the  booty  taken  at  the  battle  of  Plataea
(not  Marathon,  as  Pausanias  says),  and  with  these  eighty  talents  the
Plataeans  built  a  sanctuary  of  Athena,  set  up  an  image,  and  adorned  the
temple  with  paintings  which  were  in  excellent  preservation  down  to
Plutarch's  time.  The  circumstantiality  of  Plutarch's  account  of  the
dispute  which  ended  in  assigning  eighty  talents  to  the  Plataeans  makes
it  probable  that  he  was  better  informed  than  Pausanias  as  to  the  origin
of  the  sanctuary.

i.  I.  the  bronze  image  on  the  Acropolis.  See  i.  28.  2  with  the
note,  vol.  2.  p.  348  sqq.

i.  2.  the  other,  by  Onasias,  depicts  the  former  expedition  of
the  Argives  etc.  Compare  ix.  5.  11.  The  painter  Onasias  is  other-
wise unknown.     Cp.  Critical  Note  on  this  passage,  vol.  i.  p.  601.

i.  2.  Arimnestus,  who  commanded  the  Plataeans.  Cp.  Hero-
dotus, ix.  72  ;  Plutarch,  Aristides,  11.

i.  3.  a  sanctuary  of  Elensinian  Demeter.  This  can  hardly  have
been  the  sanctuary  beside  which  the  Spartans  were  hotly  engaged  with
the  Persians  at  the  battle  of  Plataea.     See  above,  p.  5  sq.

4.  3.  Leitus.  He  is  mentioned  as  one  of  the  Boeotian  leaders  by
Homer,  Iliads  ii.  494.

4.  3.  The  (^a^phian  fonntain.  See  above,  p.  13.  That  the
fountain  was  choked  up  by  the  Persian  cavalry  is  mentioned  by  Hero-
dotus (ix.  49).

4.  4.  a  river  Oeroe.  This  is  the  small  and  sluggish  stream,  now
the  Potami'LivctdostrOy  which,  formed  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Plataea
by  the  union  of  several  brooks  descending  from  Mt.  Cithaeron,  flows
due  west,  skirting  the  northern  foot  of  Mt.  Cithaeron,  and  falls  into  the
bay  of  Creusis.  See  Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  p.  244  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungeriy
p.  550;  Baedeker,^  pp.  176,  179;  Guide-Joanne ^  2.  p.  26.

4.  4.  Scolns.  This  place  is  mentioned  by  Homer  (//.  ii.  497)-  It
lay  to  the  east  of  Plataea,  for  the  Persian  army  under  Mardonius
ravaged  the  lands  of  Scolus  on  their  march  from  Tanagra  to  Plataea
(Herodotus,  ix.  15).  Strabo  tells  us  that  Scolus  was  a  village  in  the
Parasopia  or  valley  of  the  Asopus,  at  the  foot  of  Mt.  Cithaeron,  in  a
rugged  situation  ;  there  was  a  proverb  "  Go  not  to  Scolus  yourself  nor
follow  another  thither  "  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  408).  On  a  little  rocky  table-
height,  at  the  foot  of  a  spur  of  Mt.  Cithaeron  and  overlooking  the  valley
of  the  Asopus,  stands  a  branch  of  the  monastery  of  St.  Meletius.  Leake
and  H.  N.  Ulrichs  thought  that  this  position  answers  exactly  to  the
descriptions  of  Strabo  and  Pausanias.  It  is  a  few  minutes  to  the  west
of  the  large  Albanian  village  of  Darimari.  Near  the  plateau  is  a
spring,  the  source  of  a  brook  which  flows  north  to  join  the  Asopus  about
half  a  mile  away.  The  Asopus  dries  up  in  summer,  with  the  exception
of  a  few  deep  pools,  where  fish  abound.      Its  bed  is  overgrown  with


aa  CADMUS  IN  ILLYRIA  bk.  ix.  bobotia

reeds,  of  which  baskets  are  woven  (cp.  Paus.  v.  14.  3).  The  district
would  seem  to  have  been  famed  in  antiquity  for  its  grain-crops,  for
Demeter  at  Scolus  went  by  the  names  of  Megalartus  ('  she  of  the  large
wheaten  loaf')  and  Megalomazus  (*she  of  the  large  barley  cake').
See  Athenaeus,  iii.  p.  109  a  b,  x.  p.  416  b  c.  The  district  still  produces
excellent  wheat,  which  is  much  sought  after  on  account  of  its  fineness
and  white  colour.  As  a  frontier  post  in  a  narrow  part  of  the  valley
between  Mt.  Cithaeron  and  the  Asopus,  Scolus  was  fortified  by  the
Thebans  with  ditches  and  palisades ;  but  the  works  were  carried  by
Agesilaus  in  377  B.C.,  who  thus  entered  Boeotia  from  the  east  and
ravaged  the  country  up  to  the  walls  of  Thebes  (Xenophon,  Hellenica^  v.
4.  49  sqq, ;  /</.,  Agesilctus^  ii.  22).  See  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.
330  sq, ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen  in  Griechenlandy  2.  p.
73  sq,;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  248.  Mr.  Grundy  was  unable  to  find  any
remains  of  Scolus.  He  thinks  that  the  site  should  be  looked  for  on  the
Asopus  from  a  mile  to  a  mile  and  a  half  east  of  the  bridge  by  which  the
road  to  Thebes  crosses  the  river  {The  topography  of  the  battle  of  Plataea^
p.  \zsq,\

5.  I.  an  epithet  applied  to  Thebes is  Ogygian.  See  Aes-
chylus, Persians^  37  5q,\  Sophocles,  Oed,  Col,  1769  sq,\  ApoUonius
Rhodius,  Argonaut,  iii.  1178.

5.  3.  When  Oadmus  had  gone  away  to  dwell  among the

Encheleans.  The  Illyrian  tribe  of  Encheleans  (*  eel-men '),  being  hard
pressed  in  war  by  the  other  lUyrians,  were  warned  of  God  that  they
would  overcome  their  enemies  if  they  took  Cadmus  and  Harmonia  to
be  their  leaders.  They  did  so  :  the  prophecy  was  fulfilled ;  and  Cad-
mus reigned  over  the  Illyrians  till  he  and  Harmonia  were  changed  into
snakes  and  transported  by  Zeus  to  the  Elysian  fields.  The  chiefs  of
the  Encheleans  traced  their  descent  from  the  illustrious  pair,  whose
graves  were  pointed  out  in  Illyria  long  afterwards.  See  Apollodorus,
iii.  5.  4 ;  Strabo,  vii.  p.  326;  /</.,  i.  p.  46;  Stephanus  Byz.,  s,v,  hyppax^ov,
cp.  idf  s.v,  Bovdorf ;  Athenaeus,  xi.  p.  462  b ;  ApoUonius  Rhodius,
Argonaut,  iv.  516^^7.  But  Ovid  and  other  writers  seem  to  suppose
that  after  their  transformation  into  snakes  Cadmus  and  Harmonia  con-
tinued to  lead  a  peaceful  and  happy  life  in  Illyria,  and  this  is  the
version  of  the  legend  followed  by  Matthew  Arnold  in  the  lines :

Far,  far  from  here,
The  Adriatic  breaks  in  a  warm  bay
Among  the  green  Illyrian  hills  ;  and  there
The  sunshine  in  the  nappy  glens  is  fair,  etc

See  Ovid,  Metatn,  iv.  563-603 ;  Hyginus,  Fab.  6 ;  Nicander,  Ther,  607
sqq.  In  Illyria  two  rocks,  called  the  rocks  or  stones  of  Cadmus  and
Harmonia,  were  shown ;  it  was  said  that  when  misfortune  was  impend-
ing on  the  people,  these  two  rocks  shook  and  met  (Dionysius,  Orbis
description  390  sqq.  ;  Scylax,  Periplus^  24).  Perhaps  these  rocks  were
supposed  to  resemble  serpents ;  for  Nonnus  says  that  Cadmus  and
Harmonia  were  turned  into  stone  serpents  {Dionys.  xliv.  126-129 ;  id^
xlvi.  367-369).     The  legends  of  the  Phoenician  descent  of  Cadmus  and


CH.  V  LEGEND  OF  OEDIPUS  23

his  transformation  into  a  serpent  have  led  some  writers,  as  Movers  and
Baudissin,  to  regard  him  as  a  Phoenician  serpent-god.  See  Movers,
Die  Phoeniziery  i.  p.  513  sqq.  ;  Baudissin,  Studien  zur  semitischen
Religiansgeschkhte^  1.  pp.  272-275.

5.  5.  The  seanel  of  the  story,  how  Nycteus  died  etc.  See  ii.
6.  I  sqq,

5.  6.  named  it  Thebes,  because  of  their  relationship  to  Thebe.
Thebe,  daughter  of  the  Asopus  (Pans.  ii.  5.  2,  v.  22.  6),  was  the  wife  of
Zethus  (Apollodorus,  iii.  5.  6).

5.  7*  attested  by  Homer  in  the  Odyssey.     See  Od,  xi.  263  sqq.

5.  7-  Amphion built  the  wall  to  the  music  of  his  lyre.

See  ApoUonius  Rhodius,  Argonaut  i.  736  sqq, ;  Apollodorus,  iii.  5.5;
Horace,  Odts^  iii.  11.  2  ;  /^,  Ars  poctica^  394  sqq, ;  Propertius,  i.  9.  10.
Cp.  Paus.  ix.  17.  7.

5.  7-  he  added  three  new  strings  to the  lyre.     According

to  another  legend  Amphion  invented  the  lyre  (Pliny,  Nat  hist  vii.  204).

5.  8.  The  author  of  the  poem  on  Europa.  This  poem  is  ascribed
to  Eumelus  by  a  scholiast  on  Homer  {Iliad,  vi.  131,  ed.  Bekker).  But
Pausanias  thought  it  was  not  by  Eumelus.  See  iv.  4.  i.  Clement  of
Alexandria  seems  to  have  been  of  the  same  opinion,  for  in  quoting  a
couple  of  lines  from  the  poem,  he  simply  speaks  of  "  the  author  of  the
poem  Europia**  {Strom,  i.  24,  §  164,  p.  419,  ed.  Potter).  Cp.  Epic-
orum  Graecorum  fragmenta^  ed.  Kinkel,  p.  192  sq,

5.  9.  the  son  of  Zethus.     His  name  was  Neis  (ix.  8.  4).

5.  I  o.  While  Laius  sat  on  the  throne  etc.  The  legend  of  Oedipus,
here  told  in  outline  by  Pausanias,  clearly  resembles  a  popular  tale
current  in  Finland.  The  Finnish  story  is  as  follows :  Two  wise  men
spent  a  night  at  a  farmhouse.  Now  it  chanced  that  night  at  the  farm  that
a  ewe  dropt  a  lamb  and  the  farmer's  wife  gave  birth  to  a  boy  at  the  same
time.  The  wise  men  foretold  that  the  lamb  would  be  devoured  by  a
wolf,  and  that  the  boy  would  kill  his  father  and  marry  his  mother.
The  lamb  was  killed  and  was  about  to  be  served  up  at  table,  when  a
wolf  ate  it  all  up.  Seeing  how  the  first  prophecy  had  been  fulfilled,  the
father  proposed  to  kill  his  child ;  however,  at  the  mother's  entreaty  the
infant  was  tied  to  a  board  and  flung  into  the  sea,  but  not  before  he  had
received  a  cut  with  a  knife  on  his  breast.  The  board  with  the  babe  was
cast  ashore  and  found  by  an  abbot,  who  brought  up  the  boy.  When  he
grew  up,  the  lad  went  out  into  the  world  and  took  service  on  a  farm.
Here,  being  set  to  watch  a  field  of  turnips,  he  one  night  shot  the  farmer
himself,  who  had  come  to  fetch  an  apronful  of  turnips.  Some  time  after-
wards the  widow  married  the  servant-lad,  but  one  day  she  discovered  by
the  scar  on  his  breast  that  he  was  her  son.  Despair  seized  the  son,  but
a  monk  told  him  that  he  and  his  mother  would  be  forgiven  if  he  could
bring  water  out  of  a  rock  and  if  a  (black  ?)  sheep  should  turn  white.
Both  marvels  came  about,  so  his  sin  was  forgiven.  See  Gustave
Meyer's  introduction  to  E.  Schreck's  Finnisclie  Mdrchen  (Weimar,
1887),  ?•  XXV.  Some  of  the  features  of  the  Oedipus  legend  occur  in  a
Cyprian  tale.  A  certain  lord  has  a  daughter  named  Rose.  On  the
night  of  her  marriage  a  phantom  appears  to  the  bridegroom  and  warns


24  LEGEND  OF  OEDIPUS  bk.  ix.  boeotia

him  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  Rose,  as  she  is  fated  to  have  a  son  by
her  father  and  to  marry  her  own  son.  So  he  divorces  her.  To  escape
her  destiny  Rose  causes  her  father  to  be  murdered ;  but  an  apple-tree
grows  from  his  grave,  Rose  eats  of  the  apples,  and  becomes  pregnant.
When  her  child  is  bom,  she  stabs  it  in  the  breast,  puts  it  in  a  box,  and
flings  it  into  the  sea.  The  child  is  picked  up  by  a  ship,  and  when  he
has  grown  to  manhood,  he  comes  to  Rose's  country  and  marries  her.
One  day  she  recognises  him  by  the  scar  on  his  breast,  and  in  despair
flings  herself  from  a  high  place  and  dies.  See  L.  Constans,  La  Idgende
cPOedipc  itudiie  dans  rantiquiti^  au  moyen-dge  et  dans  les  temps  modtmes
(Paris,  1881),  p.  no  sq.  An  Albanian  story  combines  features  of  the
Oedipus  and  the  Perseus  legends.  A  certain  king,  who  had  two
daughters,  was  warned  that  he  would  be  killed  by  a  grandson  yet
unborn.  So  he  flung  into  the  sea  all  his  daughters'  children  as  fast  as
they  were  born.  However  the  third  man-child  was  washed  ashore  alive
and  found  by  herdsmen  who  brought  him  up.  When  he  was  twelve
years  old  it  happened  that  in  his  father's  kingdom  there  appeared  a
monster,  who  caused  all  the  water  to  dry  up,  and  it  was  foretold  that
the  monster  would  not  allow  the  water  to  flow  till  he  had  eaten  up  the
king's  daughter.  Hence  the  princess  was  exposed  to  the  monster,  but
rescued  by  the  king's  grandson,  who  killed  it  with  his  club.  So  the  lad
received  the  princess  to  wife,  and  at  the  marriage  he  accidentally  killed
the  king  by  throwing  his  club.  Thus  the  prophecy  was  fulfilled.  (It  is
not  said  whether  the  princess  whom  the  lad  marries  was  his  mother  or
his  aunt.)  See  J.  G.  v.  Hahn,  Griechische  und  albanesische  Mdrchen^
2.  p.  114  sq.  (No.  98).  In  the  Middle  Ages  Judas  Iscariot  became
the  hero  of  a  tale  very  like  that  of  Oedipus.  The  story  appears  in
*  The  Golden  Legend ' ;  it  is  doubtless  the  work  of  a  monk  or  clerk  who
had  read  the  Oedipus  legend.  See  L.  Constans,  op.  cit,  p.  95  sqq.  Cp.
Comparetti,  Edipo  e  la  mitologia  comparata  (Pisa,  1867),  p.  83  sqq.  On
the  Oedipus  legend  in  antiquity  see  (in  addition  to  the  works  of  Con-
stans and  Comparetti)  F.  W.  Schneidewin,  *  Die  Sage  von  Odipus,'
Abhandlungen  d.  konig.  Gesell.  d.  Wissenschaften  zu  Gottingen^  5
(1851  and  1852),  pp.  159-206;  E.  Bethe,  Tliebanische  Heldenlieder
(Leipzig,  1 891),  pp.  I  sqq.^  158  sqq.

5.  10.  Homer  says  in   the  Odyssey  etc.      See   Od.  xi.

271  sqq.

5.  II.  the  motlier  of  his  children  was  Eoryganea.  According  to
Pherecydes  (quoted  by  a  scholiast  on  Euripides,  Phoenissae^  53)  Oedipus
had  two  sons,  Phrastor  and  Laonytus,  by  his  mother  Jocasta  (or  Epicaste,
as  Homer  calls  her,  Od.  ix.  271)  ;  but  he  afterwards  married  Euryganea,
daughter  of  Periphas,  by  whom  he  had  two  daughters  Antigone  and
Ismene,  and  two  sons  Eteocles  and  Polynices.  Pisander  also  stated  that
after  Jocasta's  death  Oedipus  married  Eurygane  {sic\  by  whom  he  had
the  four  children  (Schol.  on  Euripides,  Phoenissae,  1 760).  The  common
legend,  however,  was  that  Antigone,  Ismene,  Eteocles  and  Polynices,
were  the  oflfspring  of  Oedipus  by  his  mother  Jocasta  (Euripides,
Phoenissae,  55  sqq. ;  Apollodorus,  iii.  5.  8  ;  Diodorus,  iv.  64  ;  Hyginus,
Fab.  67).


CH.  V  THE  FURIES  OF  OEDIPUS  25

5.  II.  the  poem  they  call  the  Oedipodia.  This  poem  is  said  to
have  been  composed  by  Cinaethon  (see  ii.  3.  9  note)  in  the  third  or
fourth  Olympiad.  But  the  author's  name  and  the  date  and  place  of  the
composition  of  the  poem  appear  to  be  very  uncertain.  See  L.  Constans,
Laligeruie  ePOedipCy  p  13;  E.  Bethe,  Thebanische  Heldenlieder^  pp.  i
sqq,^  191  sqq. ;  Epicorum  Grctecorum  fragfnenta^  ed.  Kinkel,  p.  8  sq,

5.  1 3.  at  Glisas Laodamas  killed  Aegialeus.    See  i.  44.

4  ;  ix.  8.  6 ;  ix.  9.  4  ;  ix.  19.  2.

5.  13.  Laodamas  set  out  for  Elyria  etc.  He  settled  among  the
Illyrian  tribe  of  Encheleans,  among  whom  Cadmus  and  Harmonia  had
settled  before.     See  §  3  ;  viii.  8.  6  ;  Herodotus,  v.  61.

5.  14.  When  the  host  of  Agamemnon  on  its  way  to  Troy  etc.
The  epitome  of  Apollodorus,  discovered  a  few  years  ago  in  the  Vatican,
thus  describes  these  events :  "  Agamemnon  was  the  leader  of  the  whole
host,  and  Achilles  was  the  admiral  at  the  age  of  fifteen.  Not  knowing
the  course  to  steer  for  Troy,  they  landed  in  Mysia  and  laid  it  waste,
thinking  it  was  Troy.  Telephus,  a  son  of  Hercules,  was  king  of  the
Mysians,  and  seeing  the  country  laid  waste  he  armed  the  Mysians,
chased  the  Greeks  to  their  ships,  and  slew  many,  and  amongst  them
Thersander  son  of  Polynices,  who  had  stood  his  ground.  But  when
Achilles  rushed  at  him,  Telephus  did  not  wait  for  him  but  fled  pursued
by  Achilles,  and  getting  entangled  in  a  vine-shoot  he  received  a  spear-
thrust  in  the  thigh.  Departing  from  Mysia,  the  Greeks  put  to  sea,  and
a  furious  storm  coming  on  they  were  parted  from  each  other  and  re-
turned to  their  own  countries.  By  reason  of  the  return  of  the  Greeks  it
is  said  that  the  war  lasted  twenty  years  ;  for  it  was  in  the  second  year
after  the  rape  of  Helen  that  the  Greeks  set  out  on  their  expedition  ;  and
after  their  return  from  Mysia  eight  years  elapsed  before  they  again
assembled  at  Argos  and  proceeded  to  Aulis"  {Epitoma  Vaticana  ex
Apollodori  Bibliothecay  ed.  R.  Wagner  (Leipsic,  1891),  p.  63  ;  Apollo-
dorus, ed.  R.  Wagner,  p.  193).  Dictys  Cretensis  also  says  (ii.  9)  that
eight  years  elapsed  between  the  first  and  the  second  expedition  of  the
Greeks  against  Troy.  He  describes  the  Mysian  campaign  in  detail
(ii.  1-7).  Cp.  Philostratus,  Heroica^  ii.  §  28  sqq.  ;  Schol.  on  Homer,  //.
i.  59,  ed.  Bekker.  The  combat  of  Telephus  with  Achilles  in  the  plain
of  Caicus  was  represented  by  Scopas  in  the  eastern  gable  of  the  temple
of  Athena  at  Tegea  (viii.  45.  7  note).     Cp.  i.  4.  6.

5.  14.  His  tomb consists  ofa  stone  etc.     For  other  examples

of  tombs  in  market-places  see  note  on  i.  43.  3.

5.  15.  Fenelens  was  killed  by  Eurypylns.  This  is  mentioned
also  by  Dictys  Cretensis  (iv.  17).  Homer  only  says  that  he  was
slightly  wounded  by  Pulydamas  (Jliady  xvii.  S97  sqq,)

5.  1 5.  The  Fnries  of  Laius  and  Oedipus.  There  was  a  sanctuary
of  the  Furies  of  Laius  and  Oedipus  at  Sparta.  It  was  founded  by  the
Acgid  tribe  in  obedience  to  an  oracle,  because  their  children  died  young.
The  remedy  was  effectual,  for  the  children  who  were  afterwards  born
survived.  See  Herodotus,  iv.  149.  When  the  Furies  are  thus  spoken
of  as  attaching  themselves  to  a  particular  person,  they  seem  to  be  the
avenging  spirits  who  fulfil  his  curses.     Cp.  viii.  34.  4  ;  Homer,  Iliady


V


26  HISTORY  OF  THEBES  bk.  ix.  boeotia

xxi.    412;    Sophocles,    Oedipus  Colon,    1299;    and   Stein's   note   on
Herodotus,  Lc.

6.  I.  They  were  defeated  by  the  Athenians  etc.  See  Herodotus,
vi.  107.

6.  I.  They  sustained  a  second  reverse  etc.  This  was  at  the  great
battle  of  Plataea  in  479  B.C.     See  Herodotus,  ix.  67.

6.  3.  a  victory  over  the  Athenians  at  Delinm.  This  battle  was
fought  in  424  B.C.     See  Thucydides,  iv.  93-101.

6.  4.  They  were  defeated  at  Oorinth  and  Ooronea.  These
defeats  took  place  in  394  B.C.  See  iii.  9.  1 3  ;  Xenophon,  Hellenica^  iv.
2.  9  sqq, ;  /V/.,  iv.  3.  10  sqq, ;  Plutarch,  Agesilaus^  18  sq,

6.  4.  the  Fhocian,  or Sacred  War.     See  x.  2  sq.

6.  5.  I  have  already  said  etc.     See  i.  25.  3.

6.  5.  the  Thebans  contrived  to  overpower  the  garrison  etc.
Pausanias  certainly  seems  to  imply  that  the  Thebans  succeeded  in
capturing  the  Macedonian  garrison  who  held  the  Cadmea.  Here,
however,  he  is  wrong,  for  we  learn  from  the  historians  that  the  Thebans
merely  besieged  the  garrison  in  the  Cadmea,  surrounding  it  with
palisades  and  ditches,  and  that  when  the  Macedonian  army  stormed  the
city  it  was  joined  by  the  garrison.  See  the  references  in  the  following
note.

6.  5.  God  foreshadowed  to  them  etc.  The  prodigies  which
were  said  to  have  preceded  and  announced  the  destruction  of  Thebes
by  Alexander  are  described  by  Diodorus  (xvii.  10)  and  Aelian  {Var.
hist  xii.  57).  They  tell  the  story  of  the  spiders'  webs  somewhat
differently  from  Pausanias.  According  to  Aelian,  a  spider  wove  its
web  over  the  face  of  the  image  of  Demeter.  According  to  Diodorus,
the  spider's  web  in  the  sanctuary  of  Demeter  was  as  large  as  a  cloak
and  resplendent  in  all  the  hues  of  the  rainbow.  Thebes  was  destroyed
by  Alexander  in  335  B.c.  (Arrian,  Anabasis^  i.  7  sq,  ;  Diodorus,  xvii.
8-14  ;  Plutarch,  Alexander^  11  ;  Justin,  xi.  2-4).

6.  6.  SuUa  engaged  them  in  the  war  etc.  On  the  siege  and  sack
of  Athens  by  Sulla,  see  i.  20.  4-7;  Plutarch,  Sulla,  12-14;  Appian,
Mttkrid.  30-39.

7.  I.  The  Thebans were  afterwards  restored  by  Oassander.

Cp.  iv.  27.  10 ;  vii.  6.  9  ;  ix.  3.  6.  Thebes  was  restored  in  the  summer
of  31 5  B.C.,  twenty  years  after  its  destruction  by  Alexander.  The  greater
part  of  the  walls  was  built  by  the  Athenians,  who  wore  garlands  on  their
heads  in  token  of  joy.  See  Diodorus,  xvii.  53  sq.\  Plutarch,  Praecept
gerend.  reipub.  xvii.  9  ;  Clinton,  Fcisti  Hellenici,  2.^  p.  1 86.  Some  years
afterwards  Thebes  revolted  from  Demetrius,  who  besieged  and  captured
it  (Plutarch,  Demetrius,  39,  40;  Diodorus,  frag.  xxi.  14).  Diodorus
says  that  Demetrius  "  having  destroyed  the  walls  by  siege  operations
carried  the  city  by  storm  "  (ttoXio/oki^  ra  reixi?  KoBik^v  t^v  ttoXiv  icarot
Kpdros  efXc).  From  this  statement  Prof,  von  Wilamowitz-Moellendorff
appears  to  infer  {Hermes,  26  (1891),  p.  203  sq,)  that  Demetrius  razed
the  whole  circuit  of  the  walls  to  the  ground.  But  as,  in  Diodorus's
narrative,  the  destruction  of  the  walls  precedes  the  storming  of  the
city,  it  would  seem  that  Demetrius  merely  made  a  breach  in  the  wall


CH.  VII  HISTOR  Y  OF  THEBES  27

with  siege-engines,  then  stormed  the  breach  and  captured  the  city.
But  no  sure  inference  can  be  based  on  this  passage  of  Diodorus,  as  it
is  not  merely  a  fragment  but  an  abridgment,  and  an  ungrammatical
abridgment  to  boot  Plutarch  mentions  the  huge  unwieldy  battering-
engine  employed  by  Demetrius,  but  he  does  not  say  that  Demetrius
razed  the  walls  to  the  groimd.

7.  2.  be  flimg  Olympias  to  the  inftiriated  Macedonians  etc.  Cp.
Diodorus,  xix.  51,  and  Justin,  xiv.  6,  who  implies  that  she  was  not
stoned  but  stabbed  to  death.     Cp.  Paus.  i.  11.  4.

7.  3.  Alexander  invoked  the  aid  of  Demetrins  etc.  See  Plu-
tarch, Demetrius^  36  ;  Diodorus,  xxi.  7.

7.  4.  when  Snlla  invaded  Boeotia  etc.  The  whole  of  Boeotia,  with
the  exception  of  Thespiae,  had  declared  for  Mithridates.  But  as  soon
as  Sdla  entered  the  country,  the  Boeotians,  with  a  few  exceptions,  shifted
over  to  the  side  of  the  Romans.  "  Even  the  great  city  of  Thebes,"
says  Appian,  "which  had  with  great  fickleness  chosen  to  side  with
Mithridates  instead  of  with  Rome,  went  over  to  Sulla  with  even  greater
celerity  and  without  striking  a  blow"  {Mithrid,  29  sq.)

7.  5.  he  took  away  half  their  territory  etc.  Cp.  Appian,  Mith-
rid,  54 ;  and  for  Sulla's  mode  of  raising  money  by  plundering  the
Greek  temples,  see  also  Plutarch,  Sulla^  12.  Sulla  sent  an  agent  to
the  Amphictyons  at  Delphi  with  a  request  that  they  would  be  so  good
as  to  let  him  have  the  treasures  of  the  god,  as  he  would  either  guard
them  better  or  make  good  what  he  spent.  When  the  message  was
brought  to  the  Amphictyons  in  council,  some  of  them  said  they  heard
the  twangling  of  a  lyre  in  the  sanctuary.  This  was  reported  to  Sulla
in  the  hope  of  working  on  his  superstitious  fears ;  but  the  Roman
general  wrote  in  reply  that  the  music  was  a  clear  proof  how  pleased  the
god  was  to  give  his  treasures,  so  they  might  send  them  without  scruple.

7.  6.  the  lower  city was  all  deserted  etc.     Cp.  viii.  33.  2.

Even  in  Strabo's  time,  about  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  before  Pausanias,
Thebes  was  not  so  large  as  a  respectable  village  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  403).
The  description  of  Thebes  by  Dio  Chrysostom,  who  died  about  the  time
Pausanias  was  bom,  agrees  with  that  of  Pausanias.  Dio  says  that  the
Cadmea  was  inhabited  but  the  rest  of  the  city  deserted ;  in  the  old
market-place  one  solitary  image  stood  among  the  ruins  {Or,  vii.  voL  i.
p.  136,  ed.  Dindorf).  It  is  interesting  to  compare  an  earlier  descrip-
tion of  Thebes  contained  in  a  geographical  work  which  is  commonly
ascribed  to  Dicaearchus,  the  contemporary  of  Aristotle,  but  which
seems  to  be  the  work  of  a  later  writer  named  Heraclides,  the  Critic,  who
wrote  between  260  and  230  B.c.  This  writer  says :  "Thence  (from  Plataea)
to  Thebes  the  distance  is  80  furlongs.  The  road  is  level  and  through  a
plain  the  whole  way.  The  city  stands  in  the  middle  of  Boeotia  with
a  circumference  of  70  furlongs.  It  is  altogether  flat,  its  shape  is  round,
the  soil  is  a  dark  loam.  In  spite  of  its  antiquity  the  streets  are  new,
because,  as  the  histories  tell  us,  the  city  has  been  thrice  razed  to  the
ground  on  account  of  the  overbearing  and  insolent  character  of  the
people.  It  is  excellent  for  the  breeding  of  horses,  it  is  all  well  watered,
green,  and  with  a  deep  soil,  and  it  has  more  gardens  than  any  other


a8  THEBES  IN  ANTIQUITY  bk.  ix.  boeotia

city  in  Greece.  From  the  Cadmea  water  is  brought  down  in  under-
ground channels,  which  were  made  of  old,  they  say,  by  Cadmus.  So
much  for  the  city.  The  inhabitants  are  high-spirited  and  wonderfully
sanguine.  They  are  bold,  insolent,  haughty,  ready  to  give  a  blow,
equally  indifferent  to  a  stranger  and  a  fellow-countryman,  despisers  of
all  right.  In  disputes  about  bargains  they  resort  not  to  arguments  but
to  audacity  and  blows,  transferring  to  legal  pleadings  the  violence  which
is  appropriate  to  the  contests  of  athletes.  Hence  their  lawsuits  last
thirty  years  at  the  least.  For  if  a  man  mentions  such  a  thing  (/>.
complains  of  the  law's  delays)  in  public  and  does  not  immediately  depart
from  Boeotia  but  remains  the  least  time  in  the  city,  he  is  very  soon  way-
laid and  assassinated  by  the  persons  who  have  no  wish  that  suits  should
be  concluded.  Murders  are  perpetrated  among  them  on  the  most
trivial  pretexts.  Such  are  the  men  as  a  whole,  though  among  them  are
to  be  found  scattered  some  worthy  men,  high-minded,  deserving  of  all
esteem.  Their  women,  in  respect  of  stature,  gait,  and  proportion,  are
the  comeliest  and  prettiest  women  in  Greece.     Sophocles  attests  it :

You  speak  to  me  of  seven-gated  Thebes,
Where  alone  mortal  women  give  birth  to  gods.

On  their  heads  they  wear  a  hood  which  covers  the  whole  face  as  with  a
mask,  for  only  the  eyes  peep  through,  all  the  other  parts  of  the  face  are
hidden  by  the  hood.  They  all  wear  white  dresses.  Their  hair  is
yellow  and  is  fastened  up  on  the  crown  of  the  head.  Their  shoes  are
plain,  not  high,  of  a  purple  colour  and  low,  but  laced  so  that  the  feet
are  seen  almost  bare.  The  manners  of  the  women  in  society  are  rather
Sicyonian  than  Boeotian.  Their  voice  is  pleasing,  but  that  of  the  men
is  harsh  and  deep.  The  city  is  one  of  the  best  places  to  pass  the
summer  in,  for  it  has  plenty  of  cool  water  and  gardens.  Besides  it
is  breezy  and  has  a  verdant  aspect.  It  has  fruit  also  and  abounds  in
summer  wares.  But  it  lacks  wood  and  is  one  of  the  worst  of  places  to
winter  in,  on  account  of  the  rivers  and  the  winds  ;  for  snow  falls  and
there  is  much  mud"  ([Dicaearchus,]  Descriptio  Graeciae^  i.  12-22,  in
Geographi  Graeci  Minores^  ed.  Miiller,  i.  p.  102  sqq.  ;  also  in  Frag,
Histor,  Graec,  ed.  Miiller,  2.  p.  258  sq,)  That  the  work  from  which
this  passage  is  extracted  was  written  by  one  Heraclides  the  Critic
appears  from  a  reference  to  it  by  ApoUonius  {Histor,  Mirab,  19  ;  cp.
[Dicaearchus,]  op.  cit,  ii.  5).  Cp.  Miiller's  remarks  in  Geogr,  Gr,  Min.
I.  p.  li.  sqq,y  and  in  Frag,  Hist.  Gr.  2.  p.  230  sqq. ;  E.  Fabricius,
Thebetiy  p.  13  ;  von  Wilamowitz-Moellendorff,  in  Hermes,  26  (1891),  p.
206.  To  complete  our  picture  of  ancient  Thebes,  as  it  is  painted  for
us  by  classical  writers,  it  must  be  added  that  there  was  a  dunghill  at
every  door.  At  least  so  says  the  comic  poet  Eubulus,  whose  verses
are  preserved  by  Athenaeus  (x.  p.  4 1 7  d).

8.  I.  the  ruins  of  Fotniae.  Potniae  would  seem  to  have  been  near
the  site  of  Tachi,  a  modem  village  standing  in  an  undulating  district
about  a  mile  to  the  south  of  Thebes.  The  brook  Dirce  which  flows
past  the  western  side  of  the  Cadmea  (the  modem  Thebes)  takes  its  rise
in  several  springs  near  Tachi.     The  main  source  is  called  Kephalarij


CH.  VIII  POTNIAE—DEMETER'S  PIGS  29

it  waters  the  surrounding  gardens  and  maize-fields.  A  smaller  spring
named  Pegadaki  rises  in  a  tract  of  marshy  meadows  and  is  easily
distinguished  by  a  tall  willow  that  grows  beside  it.  Many  ancient
blocks  lie  near  this  spring ;  the  large  basin  of  the  KephcUari  spring  and
another  water  basin  in  Tachi  are  built  of  ancient  blocks.  A  third
spring  flows  from  the  roof  of  a  small  grotto  and  is  thought  to  furnish
the  best  water  i  in  the  district.  It  is  called  the  Cadi's  Spring.  The
village  of  Tachi  is  not  on  the  direct  road  from  Plataea  to  Thebes,  but
is  seen  among  fields  a  little  to  the  left  of  the  road  as  you  approach
Thebes.

Sec  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Rtistn  und  Forschungen,  2.  p.  12  sq.  ;  Welcker,  Tagebtuh,
2.  p.  31  sq,  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  130 ;  Baedeker,'  p.  183  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.
p.  \l  sq»

8.  I.  they  throw  sucking  pigs  into the  halls.     Compare

Clement  of  Alexandria,  Protrept  ii.  §  17,  p.  14  sq,  ed.  Potter;  Lobeck,
Aglaophamus^  p.  827  sqq.  The  ceremony  is  described  in  detail  in  a
scholiiun  on  Lucian  {Dial,  Meretr,  ii.  i),  which  was  first  published  by
Prof.  E.  Rohde  {Rheinisches Museum^  N.  F.  25  (1870),  p.  548  sqq,)  From
this  scholium,  taken  in  connexion  with  the  present  passage  of  Pausanias
and  the  passage  of  Clement  of  Alexandria  referred  to  above,  we  learn
that  at  the  festival  of  the  Thesmophoria  it  was  customary  to  throw  pigs,
cakes  of  dough,  and  branches  of  pine-trees  into  "  the  chasms  of  Demeter
and  Proserpine,"  which  seem  to  have  been  sacred  vaults  or  caverns.
In  these  caverns  or  vaults  there  were  said  to  be  serpents,  which  guarded
the  caverns  and  consumed  most  of  the  fiesh  of  the  pigs  and  dough-cakes
that  were  thrown  in.  Afterwards — apparently  at  the  next  annual
festival — the  decayed  remains  of  the  pigs,  the  cakes,  and  the  pine-
branches  were  fetched  by  women  called  *  drawers,'  who  after  observing
rules  of  ceremonial  purity  for  three  days,  went  down  into  the  vaults,
and  frightening  away  the  serpents  by  clapping  their  hands  brought  up
the  remains  and  placed  them  on  the  altar.  Whoever  got  a  piece  of
the  decayed  flesh  and  cakes,  and  sowed  it  with  the  seed-corn  in  his
fields,  was  thought  to  be  sure  of  a  good  crop.  This  curious  rite  was
explained  by  the  following  tale.  At  the  moment  when  Pluto  carried  off
Proserpine,  a  swineherd  named  Eubuleus  was  herding  his  swine  on  the
spot,  and  his  herd  was  engulfed  in  the  chasm  down  which  Pluto  had
vanished  with  Proserpine.  Accordingly  at  the  Thesmophoria  pigs
were  annually  thrown  into  vaults  to  commemorate  the  disappearance
of  the  swine  of  Eubuleus.  Cp.  C.  Robert,  in  Hermes^  20  (1885),  p.
367  sqq,;  Andrew  Lang,  in  Nineteenth  Century ,  April  1887;  /V/.,
My  thy  ritual  J  and  religion^  2.  p.  268  sq,\  The  Golden  Boughy  2.  p.
44  sqq.  In  the  sanctuary  of  Demeter  and  the  Infernal  Deities  at
Cnidus  Sir  Charles  Newton  discovered  a  chamber  which  may  have  been
one  of  the  halls  {megara)  referred  to  by  Pausanias  and  the  scholiast
on  Lucian.  It  contained  bones  of  pigs  and  marble  effigies  of  pigs.
See  Sir  C.  T.  Newton,  Discoveries  at  HalicamassuSy  etc.,  2.  p.  383  sq, ;
idy  Travels  and  discoveries  in  the  Levant,  2,  p.  iSo  sq.

8.  I.  next  year  those  pigs  < appear >  at  Dodona.     If  we  accept


I


WELL  AT  POTNIAE  bk.  ix.  boeotia


an  emendation  which  Lobeck  proposed  {Aglaopkamus^  p.  831)  of  a
passage  in  Clement  of  Alexandria  {Protrept,  ii.  17,  p.  14,  ed.  Potter,
fuydpois  foJi^as  \oipov^  ijLtjSaXXoixrt  for  /xeyapi^ovres  \oipovs  cic^oA-
kova-i),  it  would  seem  that  the  pigs  were  thrown  alive  into  the  halls
or  vaults  (9negara\  and  Pausanias  apparently  says  that  the  pigs  were
supposed  to  reappear  alive  a  year  afterwards  at  Dodona.  See,  how-
ever, the  Critical  Note  on  this  passage,  vol.  i.  p.  602.  In  Yucatan
human  victims  were  thrown  alive  into  wells  in  the  belief  that  they  would
reappear  on  the  third  day  (Diego  de  Landa,  Relation  des  chases  de
Yucatan  (Paris,  1864),  p.  169).

8.  I.  DionTBUS  the  Gk>at-8hooter  etc.  On  the  goat  in  relation  to
Dionysus,  see  Fr.  Lcnormant,  in  Gazette  arcJUologique^  2  (1876),  p.  104
sq,  ;  The  Golden  Bought  i.  p.  326  sqq.  ;  ///.,  2.  p.  34  sqq.  With  the
tradition  that  a  goat  had  been  substituted  for  a  boy  in  the  sacrifices  at
this  temple  we  may  compare  an  Attic  tradition  that  to  stay  a  plague  or
a  famine  an  oracle  had  commanded  that  a  girl  should  be  sacrificed  by
her  father  to  the  Munychian  Artemis ;  accordingly  a  man  volunteered
to  sacrifice  his  daughter,  but  instead  he  sacrificed  a  goat  dressed  up  as
a  girl.  See  Eustathius  on  Homer,  Iliad^  ii.  732  (p.  331);  Apostolius,
vii.  I  o ;  Paroemiogr.  Graeci,  ed.  Leutsch  et  Schneidewin,  2.  p.  402.
On  substitutes  for  human  victims  among  the  ancient  Greeks  and
Italians,  see  Leist,  Graeco-Italische  Rechtsgeschichte^  p.  268  sqq,  Mr.
Bather  suggests  that  in  the  local  tradition  at  Potniae  of  the  murder  of
the  priest  of  Dionysus  and  the  subsequent  sacrifice  of  boys,  we  have  a
reminiscence  of  a  custom  of  annually  slaying  the  priest  of  Dionysus  as
a  representative  of  the  god  {Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  14  (1894),
p.  260).

8.  2.  the  mares that  drink  of  this  water  go  mad.    Aelian

says  that  the  horses  which  drank  of  the  Potnian  fountain  became  rabid,
adding  that  Potniae  was  a  place  near  Thebes ;  he  attributes  the  same
virtue  to  the  water  of  the  Cossinites  river  in  Thrace  \NcU,  anim.  xv.  25).
It  was  said  that  Glaucus,  driving  in  a  four-horse  car  on  his  way  to  take
part  in  a  chariot-race,  watered  his  mares  at  the  spring ;  hence  in  the
race  they  went  mad,  upset  the  chariot,  and  tore  him  to  pieces  with  their
teeth  (Philargyrius,  on  Virgil,  Georg,  iii.  267).  According  to  another
story  it  was  through  eating  the  grass  at  Potniae  that  the  mares  of
Glaucus  went  mad  and  rent  him  in  pieces  (Schol.  on  Euripides,  Orestes^
318  ;  Etynwl,  Magn.  s,v,  IIoTviaSes,  p.  685,  line  40  sqq.)  Cp.  Strabo,
viii.  p.  409-  According  to  Pliny  {NaL  hist.  xxv.  94)  the  grass  at  Potniae
had  the  same  maleficent  effect  on  asses  as  on  horses.  Ctesias  says
there  was  in  Ethiopia  a  certain  water,  red  as  vermilion,  of  which  all
persons  who  drank  went  out  of  their  mind  (Antigonus,  Histor.  Mirab.
145  (160);  Pliny,  Nat.  hist.  ii.  9).

8.  3.  here  the  earth  yawned  for  Amphiarans.  According  to
others,  the  catastrophe  happened  at  Harma  (see  ix.  19.  4  ;  i.  34.  2).
At  this  sanctuary  of  Amphiaraus  near  Thebes  oracles  were  given  in
dreams  to  inquirers  who  slept  within  the  precinct.  The  oracle  was
consulted  on  behalf  of  Croesus  king  of  Lydia,  who  dedicated  to  Amphi-
araus  a   golden   shield   and   a   golden   spear,   which    in  the  time  of


\


CH.  VIII  ORACLE  OF  AMPHIARAUS— THEBES  31

Herodotus  were  preserved  in  the  temple  of  Ismenian  Apollo  at  Thebes.
Mys,  an  agent  of  Mardonius,  paid  a  man  to  consult  the  oracle  of
Amphiaraus  at  Thebes  by  sleeping  within  the  sanctuary.  No  native
Theban  was  allowed  to  consult  the  oracle.  See  Herodotus,  i.  chs.  47,
49,  52,  viii.  134.  The  oracle  of  Amphiaraus  at  Oropus,  which  was  con-
siilted  in  the  same  way  (Paus.  i.  34.  5),  appears  to  have  been  transferred
to  that  place  from  the  neighbourhood  of  Thebes.  For  Strabo  expressly
says  (viii.  p.  404)  that  the  oracle  of  Amphiaraus  was  brought  to  Oropus
from  Cnopia,  in  the  territory  of  Thebes.  Pausanias  does  not  mention
Cnopia,  but  it  is  probably  the  place  described  by  him  between  Potniae
and  Thebes.  The  transference  of  the  oracle  to  Oropus  appears  to  have
taken  place  between  431  B.C.  and  414  B.c.  For,  in  the  first  place,
Herodotus,  who  wrote  soon  after  431  B.C.,  knew  of  only  one  oracle  of
Amphiaraus,  and  that  was  at  Thebes,  as  appears  plainly  from  his  words
(viii.  1 34).  On  the  other  hand,  in  his  lost  play  Amphiaraus^  exhibited
in  414  B.C.,  Aristophanes  appears  to  have  ridiculed  a  superstitious  man
who  consulted  the  oracle  of  Amphiaraus,  and  this  must  have  been  the
oracle  at  Oropus,  for  no  Athenian  could  have  consulted  an  oracle  at
Thebes  in  414  B.C.,  when  the  Peloponnesian  war  was  raging.  It  would
seem  then,  that  between  the  time  when  Herodotus  composed  his  eighth
book  and  the  time  when  Aristophanes  wrote  his  Amphiaraus^  i.e.  some
time  between  431  and  414  B.C.,  the  oracle  was  transferred  from  the
neighbourhood  of  Thebes  to  Oropus.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  inscrip-
tions found  at  the  sanctuary  of  Amphiaraus  near  Oropus ;  for  none  of
these  inscriptions  appears  to  be  older  than  the  beginning  of  the  fourth
century  B.C.  See  Preller,  in  Berichte  Uber  die  VerhatuU.  d,  kon.  sdchs.
GeselL  d.  Wissen.  2U  Leipzig^  Philolog.  histor.  Classe,  4  (1852),  p.  166
sqq. ;  von  Wilamowitz-Moellendorff,  in  Hermes^  21  (1886),  p.  104  sq,  ;
and  especially  W.  Dittenberger,  Observationes  de  sacris  Amphiarai
Thebanis  et  Oropiis  (Halle,  1888).

8.  4.  Thebes.  Thebes  stood  on  the  north  side  of  a  range  of  low
hills  v/hich  extends  from  the  foot  of  Mount  Helicon,  near  Thespiae,  on
the  west,  to  near  Tanagra  on  the  east,  separating  the  northern  from  the
southern  plain  of  Boeotia.  The  line  of  hills,  which  is  at  its  lowest
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Thebes,  is  intersected  by  the  channels  of
streams  which  flow  toward  the  northern  plain  but  mostly  dry  up  in
summer.  By  the  deep  beds  of  these  streams  the  ridge  is  divided  into
a  series  of  separate  heights  or  plateaus.  One  such  plateau  is  occupied
by  the  modem  town  of  Thebes  {Thivae)^  which  undoubtedly  stands  on
the  site  of  the  Cadmea  or  acropolis  of  ancient  Thebes.  On  its  western
side  the  plateau  is  bounded  by  the  valley  of  the  Plakiotissa  stream,  the
ancient  Dirce.  On  its  eastern  side  it  is  bounded  by  a  deep  winding
depression  or  gully  (the  *  hollow  way'  mentioned  by  Arrian,  Anabasis,
i.  8.  3),  through  which  water  flows  northward  after  rain.  The  plateau
slopes  gently  upward  from  north  to  south,  reaching  its  highest  point
(208  feet  above  the  level  of  the  northern  plain)  near  its  southern
extremity,  where  it  is  connected  by  a  saddle  with  the  somewhat
higher  heights  to  the  south.  Over  this  saddle  the  modem  road  from
Athens  now  enters  Thebes.     The  sloping  sides  of  the  Cadmea  are


32  THEBES  BK.  IX.  boeotia

nowhere  high  and  hardly  anywhere  precipitous,  unless  they  can  be
said  to  be  so  at  the  south-western  comer,  above  the  Dragon's  Cave
(see  note  on  ix.  lo.  5).  Some  remains  of  the  ancient  walls  of  the
Cadmea,  consisting  of  a  few  blocks,  were  visible  as  late  as  1890  at  the
northern  end  of  the  plateau,  a  little  north  of  a  conspicuous  mediaeval
tower;  but  on  my  last  visit  to  Thebes  in  1895  I  sought  for  them  in
vain.  The  remains  at  this  point  were  somewhat  more  extensive
when  Leake  visited  Thebes  in  1805.  He  says  :  "The  only  undoubted
relic  which  I  can  discover  of  the  walls  of  Hellenic  Thebes  now  forms
the  lowest  part  of  the  northern  tower,  just  above  the  plain.  [By  *  the
northern  tower'  Leake  means  the  square  mediaeval  tower,  which  is  a
conspicuous  feature  at  the  north  end  of  Thebes.  The  remaining  blocks
of  the  wall  which  I  saw  in  1890  were  quite  separate  from,  and  a  little  to
the  north  of,  this  tower.]  About  30  yards  of  the  ancient  work  are  still
traceable,  and  four  or  five  courses  are  visible,  if  courses  they  can  be
called,  the  masonry  of  which,  like  that  of  Tiryns,  is  formed  of  very
roughly-hewn  masses  of  stone,  originally  fitted  in  the  intervals  with
smaller  stones,  which  have  mostly  fallen  out.  This  wall  is  not  straight,
but  forms  a  curve.  Its  masonry,  its  curved  form,  but  above  all  its
thickness,  which  is  more  than  28  feet,  seem  to  prove  that  in  antiquity
it  may  vie  with  Mycenae,  or  even  with  that  of  the  "YipvvQiov  wXCvOevfia
[*  Tirynthian  brickwork '],  which  it  most  resembles  "  {Northern  Greece^
2.  p.  226).  In  1895  I  found  at  the  opposite  or  southern  end  of  the
Cadmea  a  small  piece  of  wall  3  feet  high  and  6  feet  long  which  may
have  been  part  of  the  fortification-wall.  It  is  on  the  edge  of  the  rock,
at  the  highest  part  of  the  hill,  a  little  to  the  east  of  the  point  where  the
road  from  Athens  enters  Thebes.  At  present  this  fragment  acts  as  a
supporting  wall  to  the  superincumbent  soil.

The  Cadmea  was  supplied  with  water  from  Mt.  Cithaeron  by  means  of
a  tunnel.  The  mouth  of  the  timnel,  a  few  feet  wide,  can  be  seen  in  the
low  hill  immediately  to  the  south  of  the  Cadmea.  From  this  point  the
water  was  conveyed,  in  Prankish  times,  across  the  intervening  saddle  to
the  Cadmea  by  means  of  an  aqueduct,  twenty  arches  of  which  are  still
standing  immediately  to  tJie  left  of  the  high-road  as  you  enter  Thebes  from
Athens.  Whether  in  antiquity  the  water  was  conveyed  across  the  saddle
in  an  aqueduct  or  in  underground  pipes,  we  cannot  tell.  The  modem
town  of  Thebes  consists  chiefly  of  two  long  streets  running  from  north
to  south,  intersected  by  shorter  cross-streets.  Viewed  from  any  side
the  town  presents  a  pleasing  aspect  owing  to  the  trees  with  which  it
abounds ;  some  of  the  streets  have  rows  of  trees  planted  on  each  side.
The  distant  views,  too,  from  the  town  are  superb ;  the  eye  ranges  over
a  magnificent  circle  of  mountains  of  fine  and  varied  outlines  which
bound  the  horizon  on  all  sides.  Conspicuous  among  them  are  Cithaeron
on  the  south.  Helicon  on  the  west,  the  massive  Pamassus  far  away  on
the  north-west,  the  mountain  of  the  Sphinx  more  to  the  north.  Mount
Ptous  due  north,  and  the  bare  rugged  Mount  Hypatus  on  the  north-east.

But  ancient  Thebes  seems  not  to  have  been  confined  to  the  low  hill
or  plateau  occupied  by  the  modem  town,  but  to  have  extended  over  the
neighbouring  hills  or  plateaus  both  to  the  east  and  to  the  west.     Its


CH.  VIII  THEBES  33

eastern  boundary  might  naturally  be  supposed  to  be  the  broad  and  deep
bed  of  the  Ismenus  or  river  of  Hagios  Joannes  {St,  John\  as  it  is  now
called ;  but  excavations  made  by  Mr.  Kalopais  in  1 892  appear  to  have
revealed  the  remains  of  fortification-walls  at  a  distance  of  from  300  to
350  metres  to  the  east  of  the  Ismenus.  The  remains  are  about  6  feet
high  and  10  feet  thick,  and  are  built  of  regularly-hewn  blocks  of  a  soft
whitish  conglomerate.  They  include  the  foundations  of  a  semicircular
tower  measuring  about  20  feet  in  diameter.  On  the  other  side  of  the
present  town,  to  the  west  of  the  Dirce,  a  sort  of  irregular  plateau  rises
to  a  considerable  height.  It  begins  from  the  bed  of  the  Dirce  and
slopes  up  westward  till  it  attains  at  the  south-west  comer  a  height  a
good  deal  greater  than  that  of  the  Cadmea.  On  the  south  and  west  it
ends  in  high  steep  edges,  being  bounded  on  these  sides  by  deep  fissures.
On  the  north  it  slopes  much  more  gradually  to  the  plain,  and  here  too
it  is  rent  by  deep  fissures  or  depressions.  This  plateau  would  seem  to
have  been  included  within  the  ancient  city.  The  evidence  for  think-
ing so  consists  of  (i)  the  ancient  potsherds  with  which  the  plateau,
especially  at  its  edges,  is  strewn,  and  (2)  some  scanty  remains  of
ancient  walls  at  its  western  end.

( I )  The  first  to  call  special  attention  to  the  potsherds  as  evidence
of  the  extent  of  the  ancient  city  was  Mr.   Fabricius.     He  was  struck
with  the  remains  of  what  he  regarded  as  fragments  of  roof-tiles  of  the
good  Greek  period,  well  fired  and  with  a  black  or  red  glaze  on  the  out-
side.    Tiles  of  this  sort  he  traced  along  the  southern  edge  of  the
plateau  for  a  distance  of  nearly  1 000  paces,  above  the  little  valley  which
joins  the  ygmty  of  the  Dirce  not  far  from  the  spring  of  Ares  {Paraportt),
The  ti^^fSied  him  to  the  south-west  comer  of  the  plateau,  where  it  is
CQ^eO]^  By  a  saddle  with  the  hills  lying  to  the  west.     From  this  point
lioAlPard  along  the  western  edge  of  the  plateau,  which  is  here  bounded
bf  «*small  valley  or  deep  fissure  parallel  to  the  bed  of  the  Dirce,  Mr.
•Fabricius  traced  the  remains  of  the  supposed  roof-tiles  for  a  distance  of
about  900  paces  till  they  disappeared  in  the  cultivated  ground.     The
existence  and  position  of  these  tiles  he  explains  by  supposing  that  the
ancient  city-walls  ran  along  the  southern  and  westem   edges  of  the
plateau  ;  that  they  were  built,   like  the  walls  of  some  other  ancient
cities  (see  vol.  4.  p.  205)  of  sun-dried  bricks  and  roofed  w^ith  tiles  of
baked  clay ;  and  that  when  the  walls  had  fallen  the  sun-dried  bricks
crumbled  away,  but  the  roof-tiles,  being  of  baked  earthenware,  remained
where  they  fell.     This  explanation  has  been  questioned  by  Prof,  von
Wilamowitz-MoellendorfF,   who  examined  the  site  in   1890  and  found
that  in  the  north-west  part  of  the  site  indicated  in  Mr.  Fabricius's  plan
the  tiles  extended,  not  in  a  narrow  line,  as  they  must  have  done  had
they  been  merely  the  remains  of  the  city- wall,  but  in  a  stripe  over  300
yards  broad.     He  also  found  tiles  of  the  same  sort  200  paces  to  the
south  of  the  Cadmea,  on  the  way  to  Tachi,     In  1895   ^  examined  the
westem  plateau  for  myself.     On  its  southern  and  westem  edges  I  found
a  great  many  fragments  of  thick  pottery,  but  none  which  I  could  identify
as  roof-tiles.     Many  of  the  potsherds  were  painted,  and  were  therefore
presumably  not  roof-tiles.      Moreover  I  observed  many  potsherds,  some

VOL.  V  D


34  THEBES  bk.  ix.  boeotia


of  them  thick,  quite  away  from  the  edge  of  the  plateau,  low  down  in  its
eastern  part,  towards  the  Dirce.  Thus  the  existence  of  these  potsherds,
though  it  shows  that  the  ancient  city  extended  over  the  plateau  to  the
west  of  the  Dirce,  does  not  enable  us  to  trace  with  any  certainty  the
line  of  the  walls.

(2)  The  evidence  of  the  potsherds  is  confirmed,  as  has  been  indi-
cated, by  some  scanty  remains  of  walls  at  the  western  edge  of  the
plateau.  Here  Mr.  Fabricius  found  many  large  squared  blocks  of  lime-
stone lying  amongst  the  vineyards  and  fields  for  a  distance  of  about  1 60
paces  on  both  sides  of  the  old  road  which  led  from  Thebes  to  Thespiae  and
Lebadea.  As  the  ground  is  here  soft,  a  wall  of  unbaked  clay  would  need
a  solid  foundation  or  socle  of  stone.  Further,  at  the  south-western
and  highest  point  of  the  plateau  some  peasants,  digging  between  1885
and  1888,  partially  exposed  a  foundation  constructed  of  massive  blocks
of  yellowish  limestone.  Mr.  Fabricius,  who  saw  the  foundation  in  1888,
conjectured  that  it  belonged  to  a  tower  which  may  have  flanked  a  gate-
way at  this  point.  This  foundation,  of  which,  according  to  Mr.  Kalopais,
very  little  was  left  in  1892,  seems  now  to  have  almost  or  wholly  dis-
appeared. At  least  in  1895  I  observed  on  the  edge  of  the  plateau,
just  beyond  the  hollow  in  which  Mr.  Fabricius  supposes  the  gate  to  have
stood,  nothing  but  a  block  or  two  (as  it  seemed)  of  a  soft  cnmibling
stone,  the  native  stone  of  the  plateau.  On  the  other  hand,  I  found  in
a  dip  on  the  western  edge  of  the  plateau,  at  some  distance  north  of  the
supposed  south-western  gate,  a  single  course  of  squared  blocks  of  pebble
conglomerate  running  north  and  south  for  1 5  feet.  This  line  of  stones,
which  had  apparently  been  exposed  by  a  recent  excavation,  may  be  a
remnant  of  the  western  wall  of  the  city.  Through  the  dip  in  which  the
remains  lie  a  road  may  very  well  have  come  up  from  the  deep  earthy
gully  or  valley  which  bounds  the  plateau  on  the  west.  It  is  here  that
Mr.  Fabricius  would  place  the  Neistan  gate  (see  below,  p.  37).  Some
30  yards  north  of  this  point  another  excavation  had  revealed  what
looked  to  me  like  a  few  hewn  blocks  of  the  soft  crumbling  stone  in  a
line  with  the  course  of  conglomerate  blocks.  A  little  farther  to  the
north  the  plateau  begins  to  descend  in  a  gentle  slope  to  the  plain.
From  the  point  where  the  slope  begins,  the  potsherds  cease  to  occur
with  the  same  frequency  as  before,  though  some  pieces  may  be  found
here  and  there.

Mr.  Fabricius  further  holds  that  the  line  of  the  ancient  walls  on  the
opposite  or  eastern  side  of  the  city  can  be  traced  by  the  fragments  of
roof-tiles  all  along  the  western  edge  of  the  Ismenus  ravine,  from  a  point
150  paces  north-east  of  the  church  of  St.  Luke  as  far  as  the  depression
through  which  the  modem  high-road  goes  to  Chalcis.  It  is  true  that  a
large  quantity  of  potsherds  lies  strewn  about  in  the  fields  on  the  west
bank  of  the  Ismenus,  but  the  fragments  are  by  no  means  confined  to  the
edge  of  the  ravine.  On  the  contrary,  so  far  as  my  observation  goes,  the
whole  ground  between  the  Ismenus  and  the  *  hollow  way '  which  bounds
the  present  town  on  the  east  is  thickly  strewn  with  potsherds,  more
thickly  indeed  than  the  western  plateau.  Thus  the  evidence  of  the  pottery
goes  to  show  that  the  ancient  city  certainly  extended  eastward  as  far  as


CH.  VIII  THEBES  35

the  Ismenus ;  but  it  does  not  prove  that  the  city-wall  on  this  side  ran
along  the  western  edge  of  the  Ismenus  ravine.  In  point  of  fact,  as  we
have  seen,  Mr.  Kalopais  seems  to  have  discovered  remains  of  the  city-
walls  at  some  distance  to  the  east  of  the  Ismenus.

As  estimated  by  Mr.  Fabricius,  the  circuit  of  ancient  Thebes
measured  between  7000  and  8000  metres,  or  from  4^  to  5  miles,  which
agrees  fairly  with  the  statement  of  the  geographer  Dionysius  that  the
circumference  of  the  city  was  43  Greek  furlongs  or  about  5  miles
{fieographi  Graeci  Minores^  ed.  Miiller,  i.  p.  241).  On  the  other  hand,
Dicaearchus  or  the  writer  who  passes  under  his  name  estimated  the  cir-
cimiference  of  Thebes  at  70  Greek  furlongs  or  about  8  miles.  See  note
on  ix.  7.  6.

That  the  earliest  city  did  not  occupy  the  whole  of  the  area  indicated
may  be  taken  as  certain.  Probably  it  was  at  first  confined  to  the
Cadmea,  from  which  it  would  naturally  expand  in  course  of  time  to  the
ravine  of  the  Ismenus  on  the  east  and  the  opener  valley  of  the  Dirce
on  the  west.  At  what  time  it  extended  its  borders  over  the  Dirce  to  the
western  plateau,  one  cannot  say  with  certainty ;  but  we  may  conjecture
that  the  extension  took  place  in  457  B.C.,  for  it  is  recorded  by  Diodorus
(xi.  81)  that  in  that  year  the  Lacedaemonians,  having  a  large  force  in
Boeotia,  enlarged  the  circuit  of  Thebes,  with  the  view  of  strengthening
it  and  rendering  it  more  of  a  counterpoise  to  the  power  of  Athens.
Certainly  the  extension  would  seem  to  have  taken  place  before  the  time
of  Euripides,  for  in  a  recently-discovered  fragment  of  Euripides's  play
Antiope  Hermes  is  made  to  speak  of  the  Dirce  as  flowing  through  the
city  {HermcUhena^  No.  17  (1891),  p.  47).

Sec  Wheler,yiwr«^,  p.  331  sqq. ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  218  sqq, ;
Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  p.  262  sq,  ;  Mure,  Journal^  I.  p.  252  sqq.  ;  Welcker,  lage-
bucky  2.  p.  26  sqq.  ;  Ulrichs,  Ret  sen  und  Forschungen^  2.  p.  3  sqq.  ;  Forchhammer,
Topograpkia  Thebarum  Heptapylarum  (Kiel,  1854) ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  p.
562  sqq.  ;  Borsian,  Geogr.  i.  p.  224  sqq,  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  180  sqq.  ;  Guide-Joanne ^
2.  p.  9  s^q.  ;  E.  Fabricius,  Theben  (Friburg  in  Baden,  1890),  p.  I  sqq. ;  von
Wifamowitz •  Moellendorff,  'Die  sieben  Thore  Thebens,*  Hermes,  26  (1891),
p.  191  sqq.;  Upcucrucd,  riji  ipxcuoXoyiK^s  'ETouplaSj  1 892,  pp.  41-46;  P.  Brandt,
Von  A  then  zum  7Vm/^Ma/ (GUtersloh,  1893),  pp.  23-31.

In  1 886-1 888  an  ancient  graveyard  was  discovered  and  partly
excavated  about  three-quarters  of  a  mile  (1200  metres)  west  of  the
present  town  of  Thebes,  on  both  sides  of  the  old  road  to  Lebadea.  In
the  graves  were  found  skeletons,  vases  of  local  Boeotian  manufacture,
vases  with  geometrical  decorations  in  the  *  Dipylum '  style,  numerous
bronze  clasps  of  various  forms,  bracelets,  necklaces,  and  needles,  iron
knives  and  spear-points,  gems  and  pastes.  The  vases  of  local  Boeotian
manufacture  seem  to  belong  to  the  seventh  century  B.C.  See  Boehlau,
^Bootische   Vasen,'  Jahrbuch  des  archdolog.  Instituts,  3  (1888),  pp.

325-364^

8.  4.  seven  gates.     Lists  of  the  famous  seven  gates  of  Thebes

are  given  by  Aeschylus  {Seven  against  Thebes^   375   sqq.)^   Euripides

(Phoemssae^  11 04  sqq.\  Statins  {Theb.  viii.  353  sqq.),  and  ApoUodorus

(iii.  6.  6.)     Compare  Nonnus,  LHonys.  v.  67  sqq.  ;  Hyginus,  Fab.  69.


^  .


36


SEVEN  GATES  OF  THEBES


BK.  IX.  BOEOTIA


There  is  some  discrepancy  as  to  the  names  of  several  gates,  as  will  be
seen  by  the  following  table.


Pausanias

Aeschylus

Euripides

ApoUodorus

Sutius

Electran

Proetidian

Homoloidian

Ogygian

Neistan

Hypsistan

Crenaean

Electran

Proetidian

Homoloidian

Seventh  gate

Neistan

Borraean

Gate  of  Athena  Onca

Electran

Proetidian

Homoloidian

Ogygian

Neistan

Seventh  gate

Crenaean

Electran

Proetidian

Homoloidian

Ogyg^ian

Oncaidian

Hypsistan

Crenidian

Electran

Proetidian

Homoloidian

Ogygian

Neitan

Hypsistan

Dircaean

Nonnus  (/.r.)  names  only  two  gates,  the  Electran  and  Oncaean.
Hyginus  (/.r.)  says  that  Amphion  named^the  seven  gates  after  his  seven
daughters,  who  were  Neaera,  Cleodoxe,  Astymone,  Astycratia,  Chias,
Ogygia,  and  Chloris.  The  only  three  gates  of  which  the  situations  can
be  approximately  determined  are  the  Electran,  Proetidian,  and  Neistan
or  Neitan.

(i)  The  Electran  gate,  Pausanias  says  (§7)  that  coming  from
Plataea  you  entered  Thebes  by  the  Electran  gate.  Hence  the  Electran
gate  must  be  the  one  which  Arrian  describes  as  leading  to  Eleutherae
and  Attica  {Anabasis^  i.  7.  9).  This  is  confirmed  by  Euripides ;  for
in  his  play  the  Bacchae  (v.  780  J^^.)  Pentheus  king  of  Thebes,  hearing
that  the  Bacchanals  are  at  Hysiae  and  Erythrae  on  Mount  Cithaeron,
orders  his  army  to  assemble  at  the  Electran  gate  in  order  to  march
against  them.  Again,  in  the  Suppliants  of  the  same  poet  (z'.  651  sqq^
the  messenger  watches  the  battle  between  the  Thebans  and  Athenians
from  a  tower  at  the  Electran  gate ;  which  seems  to  show  that  the  road
from  Athens,  by  which  Euripides  would  naturally  suppose  the
Athenians  to  have  approached  the  city,  entered  Thebes  by  the
Electran  gate.  Hence  the  Electran  gate  was  probably  at  the
entrance  to  the  *  hollow  way '  or  gully  at  the  south-eastern  foot  of  the
Cadmea.  The  road  from  Athens  used  to  enter  the  modem  town  at
this  point ;  but  the  new  road  is  carried  higher  up  on  an  embankment
a  little  to  the  west  of  the  old  road.  Leake,  however,  proposed  to  place
the  Electran  gate  about  a  mile  south  of  the  modem  town,  at  a  place
where  he  observed  some  remains  of  ancient  Greek  walls  and  an  oblong
quadrangular  well  or  pit  excavated  in  the  rock.

(2)  The  Proetidian  gate.  The  road  from  Thebes  to  Chalcis  led
through  the  Proetidian  gate  (see  ix.  18.  i).  Hence  the  gate  must  have
been  at  the  north-east  side  of  the  city,  perhaps  somewhere  on  the  left
bank  of  the  Ismenus.  This  is  confirmed  by  Aeschylus,  who  says  that
Tydeus  took  up  his  position  over  against  the  Proetidian  gate,  but  that
the  soothsayer  would  not  suffer  him  to  cross  the  Ismenus  {Seven  against
Thebes^  377  sq.)  The  gate  was  probably  situated  on  some  point  of  the
road  which  still  leads  to  Chalcis.  The  road  starts  from  the  north-eastern
extremity  of  Thebes,  and  making  a  great  bend  to  the  south  descends
into  the  gully  or  depression  already  referred  to ;  it  crosses  this  gully
on  a  bridge,  then  bending  away  round  to  the  north  again  ascends  the
eastem  side  of  the  gully,  crosses  the  ridge  and  plunging  into  the  valley


CH.  VIII  SEVEN  GATES  OF  THEBES  37

of  the  Ismenus,  crosses  it  and  then  leads  north-east  past  the  suburb
of  Ha^ii  Theodari,  Mr.  Fabricius  would  place  the  Proetidian  gate
at  the  point  where  the  road  crosses  the  ridge  between  the  gully  and  the
valley  of  the  Ismenus.  Prof,  von  Wilamowitz-Moellendorff  holds  that
the  great  bend  to  the  north  which  the  road  makes  in  order  to  ascend  the
eastern  side  of  the  gully  is  modem,  and  that  the  old  road,  after  crossing
the  bridge,  led  straight  east  up  the  steep  slope.  Such  a  road,  in  fact,
still  exists  and  can  be  used  even  by  vehicles.  This,  Prof,  von
Wilamowitz-Moellendorff  holds,  is  the  old  road  to  Chalcis,  and  he
would  place  the  Proetidian  gate  at  the  point  where  it  crosses  the  ridge
before  descending  into  the  valley  of  the  Ismenus.

(3)  The  Neistan  or  Neitan  gate.  Through  this  gate  went  the  road
to  the  sanctuary  of  the  Cabiri,  to  the  temple  of  Cabirian  Demeter,
and  to  Thespiae.  See  ix.  25.  4  s^.\  ix.  26.  6.  The  situation  of
the  sanctuary  of  the  Cabiri  is  now  known  to  have  been  due  west
of  Thebes  in  a  small  valley  formed  by  two  projecting  spurs  of  the
long  low  chain  which  divides  the  southern  from  the  northern  plain  of
Boeotia.  The  remains  of  the  temple  of  Cabirian  Demeter  lie  also
to  the  west  of  Thebes,  on  the  old  road  which  leads  along  the
northern  foot  of  the  ridge.  This  old  road  also  goes  to  Thespiae.
It  starts  from  the  spring  of  Paraporti  at  the  south-western  foot  of
the  Cadmea,  ascends  the  heights  to  the  west  of  the  Dirce,  and  then
descends  into  the  earthy  gully  or  fissure  which  Mr.  Fabricius  sup-
poses to  have  bounded  ancient  Thebes  on  the  west.  Mr.  Fabricius
would  place  the  Neistan  gate  at  the  point  where  this  old  road  cuts  the
line  of  limestone  blocks  which  he  regards  as  remnants  of  the  city-wall
(see  above,  p.  34).  However,  it  would  seem  that  the  Neistan  gate
must  have  been  on  the  eastern,  not,  as  Mr.  Fabricius  supposes,  on  the
western  side  of  the  Dirce.  See  note  on  ix.  25.  i.  The  modem  high-
road to  Thespiae  and  Lebadea  starts  from  the  northem  end  of  Thebes
and  descending  into  the  northem  plain  leads  westward  through  the
suburb  of  Pyri,  That  in  antiquity  the  road  took  the  direction  of  the
modem  high-road  is  improbable,  as  the  ground  must  have  been  swampy
in  winter.

The  situations  of  the  remaining  four  gates  cannot  be  identified  with
any  certainty.  Prof,  von  Wilamowitz-Moellendorff  has  argued  that  they
never  existed  and  were  merely  invented,  to  suit  the  exigencies  of  poetry,
by  the  author  of  the  ancient  epic  known  as  the  Thebaid  (see  ix.  9.  5).
His  reasons  are  that  (i)  though  Pausanias  enumerates  seven  gates,  in
his  actual  description  of  the  city  he  mentions  only  three  ;  (2)  it  is  unlikely
that  an  ancient  city  would  have  had  so  many  gates,  as  every  gate  is  a
source  of  weakness  to  the  defenders ;  (3)  there  are  only  three  natural
exits  from  Thebes,  namely  the  roads  to  Athens,  Chalcis,  and  Lebadea.
It  is  on  this  last  argument  that  Prof,  von  Wilamowitz-Moellendorff
seems  chiefly  to  rely,  but  little  weight  can  be  attached  to  it,  since  we
do  not  know  for  certain  the  extent  of  ground  covered  by  the  ancient
city  and  cannot  therefore  say  how  many  natural  exits  it  had.  And  even
if  we  admit  that,  as  seems  probable,  the  original  city  was  confined  to  the
Cadmea  and  its  slopes,  it  might  fairly  be  maintained  that  the  city  had


N


38  SEVEN  GATES  OF  THEBES  bk.  ix.  bokotia

at  least  one  more  natural  exit  than  Prof,  von  Wilamowitz-Moellendorff
allows,  namely  by  the  valley  of  the  Dirce  to  the  south-west  of  the  Cadmea.
To  me  this  exit  appears  as  natural  and  easy  as  the  one  to  Athens  from
the  south-east  of  the  Cadmea*  I  ndeed,  the  professor  himself  confesses  that
a  gate  at  this  point  is  quite  conceivable.  If  moreover  we  hold,  as
Prof,  von  Wilamowitz-Moellendorff  seems  to  do,  that  in  antiquity  the
road  to  Lebadea  and  Thespiae  led  westward  from  Thebes  across  the
valley  of  the  Dirce,  we  shall  have  to  admit  the  possibility  of  at  least
five  gates  to  the  Cadmea,  situated  on  the  north,  the  north-east,  the
south-east,  the  south-west,  and  the  west.

Pausanias  asserts  (§  4)  that  the  gates  remained  to  his  time.  Prof,
von  Wilamowitz-Moellendorff  argues  that  this  could  not  have  been  the
case,  as  the  walls  had  been  destroyed  by  Demetrius  in  290  B.c.  and
had  never  been  rebuilt.  But  whether  the  walls  were  actually  destroyed
by  Demetrius  or  not  is  very  doubtful.  See  note  on  ix.  7.  i.  If
the  walls  had  been  destroyed,  as  Prof,  von  Wilamowitz-Moellendorff
supposes,  they  must  have  been  restored  before  396  A.D.,  for  when
Alaric  marched  through  Boeotia  in  that  year  Thebes  was  the  only  place
which  escaped  his  ravages ;  the  city  was  so  strong  that  it  could  only
have  been  taken  by  a  regular  siege,  and  Alaric,  impatient  to  capture
Athens,  made  no  attempt  on  Thebes  (Zosimus,  v.  5).  However,
even  if  the  walls  were  standing  when  Pausanias  visited  Thebes,  the  gates
could  hardly  have  been  the  gates  of  the  prehistoric  city,  since  that  city
seems  to  have  occupied  a  much  smaller  area  than  the  later  city.  But
we  may  suppose  that,  whether  the  walls  were  standing  or  not,  the  local
guides  and  antiquaries  would  regularly  point  out  to  strangers  what
they  regarded  as  the  famous  seven  gates,  or  at  least  the  sites  of  them.
It  is  indeed  neither  impossible  nor  even  improbable  that  the  tradition
of  a  city-gate  should  survive  long  after  both  gate  and  walls  have
disappeared.  I  suppose  there  is  hardly  an  old  city  of  any  size  in
Europe  which  does  not  retain  in  the  names  of  some  of  its  streets  or
lanes  the  reminiscence  of  one  or  more  of  the  gates.  In  Edinburgh,  for
example,  there  is  the  West  Port ;  in  Glasgow  there  is  the  Gallowgate.
And  even  if  four  out  of  the  seven  gates  of  Thebes  had  never  existed,
except  in  the  imagination  of  poets,  the  sites  where  they  might  be
supposed  to  have  once  stood  would  probably  be  fixed  by  local  antiquaries
and  shown  to  the  curious.  Prof,  von  Wilamowitz-Moellendorff  refers  to
the  house  of  Desdemona  at  Venice  and  the  sarcophagus  of  Julia  at
Verona.  In  Carlisle  Sir  Walter  Scott  was  shown  the  cell  in  which
Fergus  Mac  Ivor  was  said  to  have  been  confined,  and  the  guide  was  very
indignant  when  Sir  Walter  smiled.

It  is  not  necessary  to  do  more  than  mention  the  view  broached  by
Nonnus  {Dtonys,  v.  64  sqq.)  and  since  revived  by  Movers  and
J.  Brandis,  that  the  seven  gates  of  Thebes  were  connected  with  the
worship  of  the  stars,  each  gate  being  dedicated  to  a  planet.

See  Leake,  Northern  Greece,  2.  p.  238  sqq. ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  J^eisen  und
Forschungetty  2.  p.  7  sqq.  ;  Bursian,  Geo^.  2.  p.  226  sq.  ;  Baedeker,*  p.  183  ;
Guidc'Joannt^  2.  p.  12  sq,  ;  E.  Fabricius,  Thcben,  p.  19  sqq,  ;  von  Wilamowitz-
Moellendorff,    *Die  siebcn  Thore  Thebens,'  Bermes,  26  (1891),  pp.    191-242;


CH.  IX  HOMOLOIAN  ZEUS  39

Movers,  Die  Phoenizier^  i.  p.  642  sq.  ;  J.  Brandis,  '  Die  Bedeutung  der  sieben
TTiore  Thebcns,'  Hertms,  2  (1867),  pp.  259-284  ;  K.  F.  Meyer,  *  Die  Sieben  vor
Theben  und  die  chaldiiische  Woche,  Zeitschrift  fur  Anthropologies  Ethnologie
und  Urgesckichte^  7  (1875),  PP-  105*137;  »^.i  o  (1876),  pp.  1-45,  264-311;
L.  Constans,  La  Ugende  efOedipe,  p.  69  sqq,

8.  5.  the  Homoloidiaii.  According  to  the  historian  Aristodemus
the  Homoloidian  gate  was  so  called  *'  because  it  was  near  the  Homo-
loian  hero "  (or  mountain  ?).  See  Schol.  on  Euripides,  Phoenissae
1 1 1 9  8ta  rb  TrXrjcrtov  ttvai  rov  *OfJLoX<aov  17/xtfos,  where  we  should
perhaps  read  opovs  for  rjfxaos  with  P.  Rabbow  :  see  Hermes^  26  (1891),
p.  215  sq,y  and  cp.  Stephanus  Byz.  5,v,  "OfJLoXrj,  C.  Miiller  reads
'0/iioAax>v,  omitting  rjpiaos  {Frag.  Hist,  Graec,  3.  p.  309).  Zeus  was
worshipped  under  the  title  Homoloian  in  Thebes  and  other  Boeotian
cities,  and  also  in  Thessaly ;  there  was  also  a  Homoloian  Demeter  at
Thebes  (Suidas  and  Photius,  Lexicon,  s.v,  *0/u)X^os  Zcv?).  A  small
column  has  been  found  at  Thebes  on  which  is  carved  a  dedication
to  Homoloian  Zeus.  The  inscription  is  archaic  ;  it  is  anterior  to  the
fourth  century,  and  may  belong  to  the  sixth.  See  C  /.  G,  G.  S,  i.  No.
2456;  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUniquey  3  (1879),  p.  I'^o  sqq,  ;  Roehl,
/.  G,  A.  No.  191  ;  Roberts,  Greek  Epigraphy,  No.  198  ;  Collitz,
G.  D,  I.  I.  No.  665.  An  inscription  containing  a  dedication  to  Homo-
loian Zeus  has  also  been  found  at  Hyettus.  Games  called  Homoloia
were  celebrated  at  Orchomenus  (C  /.  G»  G.  S.  i.  Nos.  3196,  3197);
and  in  Oropus,  Tanagra,  Orchomenus  and  Chaeronea,  as  well  as  in
several  Thessalian  cities,  one  of  the  months  was  called  Homoloian.  See
C./.  G.  G.  S.  I.  Nos.  246,  308,  510,  517,  3172,  3301,  3307,  3309,  3312,
33M,  3322,  3353,  3356,  3367,  3374  ;  Foucart,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp.
kelUnique,  3  (1879),  P-  ^32.  The  festival  called  Homoloia  was
described  by  the  historian  Aristodemus  (Schol.  on  Theocritus,  vii.  103).

8.  7-  Oapanens  wa4i  struck  by  a  thunderbolt  etc.     See

Euripides,  Phoenissae,  wji  sqq.  ;  Apollodorus,  iii.  6.  7.

9.  I.  this  war was  the  most  memorable.     The  war  of  the

Seven  against  Thebes,  the  subject  of  Aeschylus's  tragedy  of  that  name,
is  told  in  prose  by  Diodorus  (iv.  65)  and  Apollodorus  (iii.  6).

9.   I.  the  war  of  the  Eleusinians  etc.     See  i.  5.  2 ;  i.  36.  4 ;  i.

38.  3.

9.  T.  the  war  of  the  Thebans  against  the  Minyans.    See  ix.  yj.  2.

9.  3.  a  Oadmean  victory.  The  proverb  is  mentioned  by  Gregorius
Cyprius  (iii.  83),  Apostolius  (ix.  30),  and  in  the  lexicons  of  Suidas  and
Photius  {s.v.  Ka8fi€ia  viktj).

9.  4.  the  Epigoni  etc.  The  war  of  the  Epigoni  is  told  by  Apollo-
dorus (iii.  7.  2-4)  and  Diodorus  (iv.  66).  There  was  an  epic  poem  on
the  subject  called  the  Epigoni  which  some  ascribed  to  Homer
(Herodotus,  iv.  32  ;  Biographi  Graeci,  ed.  Westermann,  p.  42  sq.)
A  scholiast  on  Aristophanes  {Peace,  1270)  attributes  the  poem  to  a
certain  Antimachus.  Mr.  Bethe  argues  that  the  Epigoni  was  not  a
separate  poem,  but  merely  a  part  of  the  Thebaid  (as  to  which  see  §  5).
See  Bethe,  Thebanische  Heldenlieder,  p.  35  sqq.  Cp.  von  Wilamowitz-
Moellendorff,  Hotnerische  Untersuchungen,  p.  345,  note  26.


40  ISMENIAN  APOLLO  bk.  ix.  boeotia

9.  5.  the  ThelMudL     OallinuB  says  etc.     The  elegiac  poet

Callinus  seems  to  have  flourished  in  the  first  half  of  the  seventh  century
B.C.,  and  as  we  here  learn  from  Pausanias  that  the  Thebaid  was  known
to  Callinus  and  attributed  by  him  to  Homer,  its  date  can  hardly  be  later
than  the  eighth  century  B.C.  Mr.  Bethe  holds  that  it  was  composed
about  the  eighth  century  near  Clarus,  perhaps  at  Colophon.  See  Bethe,
Tkebanische  Heldenlieder^  p.  145  sqq.  This  early  epic  must  not  be
confounded  with  the  epic  of  the  same  name  by  Antimachus,  a  con-
temporary of  Plato.  The  former  was  sometimes  referred  to  as  the
Cyclic  Thebaid  to  distinguish  it  from  the  latter.  Cp.  Athenaeus,  xL  p.
465  e;  Schol.  on  Sophocles,  Oed.  Col.  1375.  The  fragments  of  both
the  Tkebaids  are  collected  by  Kinkel,  Eptcorum  Graecorum  Jrag7nenta^
pp.  9  sqq,,  275  sqq.

10.  I.  the  dragon  which  he  slew  at  the  fountain.  See  §  5  note.
Cadmus  is  said  to  have  served  Ares  eight  years  as  a  serf  by  way  of
punishment  for  killing  the  dragon  (Apollodorus,  iii.  4.  2  ;  Suidas  and
Photius,  Lexicon^  s.v,  KaSfjxla  vUrj).  The  legend  may  be  a  trace  of  an
old  custom  of  exacting  expiation  and  atonement  for  the  slaughter  of  a
sacred  animal.  See  note  on  ii.  7.  7.  It  is  remarkable  that  Apollodorus
in  relating  the  legend  explains  that  eight  of  our  years  were  in  those
days  reckoned  as  one  year.  This,  like  the  procession  of  the  Laurel-
bearing  (see  note  on  §  4),  points  to  the  use  of  a  calendar  based  on  an
eight-years  cycle.

10.  2.  a  hill called  Ismenian.     This  is  probably  the  low  hill

of  Hagios  Loukas  {Sf.  Luke),  which  rises  to  the  south-east  of  the  present
town  of  Thebes,  between  the  gully  or  *  hollow  way '  and  the  ravine  of
the  Ismenus.  The  hill  is  seen  a  little  way  to  the  right  (east)  across  a
green  valley  as  you  enter  Thebes  by  the  high-road  from  Athens.  A
church  of  St.  Luke,  surrounded  by  a  graveyard,  stands  on  the  top  of
the  low  hill,  and  probably  occupies  the  site  of  the  temple  of  Ismenian
Apollo.  Some  large  blocks  and  architectural  fragments  of  white  marble
which  lie  near  the  church,  as  well  as  some  large  blocks  of  limestone
which  have  been  dug  up  in  the  graveyard,  may  be  remains  of  the
temple.  Bursian,  however,  would  identify  the  Ismenian  hill  with  the
hill  farther  south,  at  the  eastern  foot  of  which  rises  the  spring  of  //agios
Joannes  {St.  John).  See  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen,  2.
p.  1 1  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  p.  229  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  184  ;  Guide-Joanne,  2.
p.  13;  Fabricius,  Theben,  p.  22.

In  the  Berlin  Museum  there  is  a  bronze  statuette  of  a  naked
bearded  man,  with  his  right  hand  raised;  on  his  left  thigh  is  the
following  inscription:  IlTcutcuv  Moo-tos  avc^cav  rot  ^la-firjvioij  "  Ptoion
and  Mastus  dedicated  (this  statuette)  to  the  Ismenian  (god)."  The
statuette  is  said  to  have  been  found  at  Chalcis,  but  the  inscription  is
Boeotian.  Probably  the  statuette  was  a  votive  offering  dedicated  in
the  temple  of  the  Ismenian  Apollo  at  Thebes.  See  C.  L  G.  G.  S.  No.
2455;  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  hcll^niqiie,  3  (1879),  p.  139  sq.\  Roehl,
/.  G.  A.  No.  129  ;  Roberts,  Greek  Epigraphy,  No.  202  ;  Collitz,  G.  D.  /.
I.  No.  1 132.  The  mode  of  divination  practised  at  the  temple  of
Ismenian  Apollo  was  by  observing  the  appearance  of  the  flame  and


CH.  X  THE  ISMENUS  41

the  ashes  at  the  bumt-ofTerings.  See  Sophocles,  Oed,  Rex^  21  (with
the  scholiast);  icL^  Antigone^  1005-1011;  Herodotus,  viii.  134.  The
same  mode  of  divination,  Herodotus  (/.r.)  tells  us,  was  practised  at
Olympia.  As  to  this  mode  of  divination  by  fire,  see  especially  a
scholiast  on  Euripides,  Phoenissae^  125 5-1 257.  Cp.  Bouch^-Leclerq,
Hisiaire  de  la  divination^  i.  p.  178  sqq, ;  ;V/.,  3.  p.  217  sqq,

10.  2.  the  river  Ismenus.  That  the  Ismenus  was  to  the  east  of
Thebes  appears  from  a  passage  in  Euripides  {Supplicants^  383  sq,\  in
which  Theseus  directs  his  herald  to  proceed  from  Eleusis  to  Thebes,
crossing  first  the  Asopus  and  then  the  Ismenus  on  his  way.  There  can
be  no  doubt  that  the  Ismenus  is  the  stream  now  called  the  river  of  Hagios
Joannes  (Si.  John\  which  flows  in  a  deep  bed  a  little  way  to  the  east  of
the  modem  Thebes.  Most  of  the  water  of  the  stream  is  at  present
diverted  into  a  mill-race  which  runs  on  the  eastern  bank,  aboye  the  bed
of  the  streanL

10.  2.  the  Athena  by  Scopas.  Several  ancient  statues  exist
which  represent  Athena  as  a  young  maiden,  "  a  kind  of  Joan  of  Arc,"
with  a  mantle  thrown  over  her  in  man's  fashion,  the  left  hand  resting  on
her  hip,  the  right  grasping  the  lance,  the  head  turned  to  the  side  and
slightly  upwards,  in  an  attitude  full  of  enthusiasm  and  fiery  courage
(Miiller-Wieseler,  Denkmdler^  2.  pi.  xxi.  No.  233  ;  Konigliche  Museen
su  Berlin:  Beschreibung  der  anliken  Skulpturen^  No.  Tl^  p.  37  sq,)
Prof.  Furtwangler  conjectures  that  these  statues  are  copies  of  Scopas's
statue  of  Athena  {Meisterwerke  d.  griech.  Plastiky  p.  527  sq,)

10.  2.  The  imac^e  is  of  the  same  size  as  the  one  at  Branchidae
etc     See  viii.  46.  3  note.

10.  3.  Manto's  seat.  In  an  ancient  vase-painting  two  women  are
depicted  seated  on  a  stone  bench  raised  on  two  steps.  One  of  them
holds  two  olive  twigs  in  her  hand ;  the  other  stretches  her  hand
towards  a  bearded  man,  clad  in  an  embroidered  robe  and  holding  in  his
right  hand  a  sceptre,  who  stands  on  the  spectator's  left.  On  the
spectator's  right  stands  a  youth  holding  a  bell-shaped  helmet  in  his
right  hand  and  two  darts  in  his  left.  Above  this  group  are  Hermes,
Athena,  and  Apollo,  the  first  standing,  the  two  latter  seated ;  all  three
are  looking  towards  a  tripod  on  the  spectator's  right.  Panofka  took  the
woman  with  the  olive  twigs  to  be  Manto  seated  on  her  stone  bench,
with  her  sister  Historis  (see  Paus.  ix.  11.  3),  who  is  pleading  for  her
with  Adrastus,  the  leader  of  the  Epigoni,  represented  by  the  bearded
man  on  the  left ;  the  young  man  on  the  right  is  Alcmaeon,  Manto's  lover
(A]X)llodorus,  iii.  7.  7) ;  the  Apollo  is  the  Ismenian  Apollo,  with  Hermes
and  Athena  who  shared  his  temple  on  the  Ismenian  hill.  See  Th.
Panofka,  *Der  Mantositz  am  Ismenion  zu  Theben,'  Archdologische
Zeilungy  1845,  PP*  49-59i  with  pi.  xxviii.  As  to  Manto,  see  vii.  3.
I  sq. ;  ix.  33.  2.

10.  4-  The  following  custom  is  still observed.    The  festival

of  the  Laurel-bearing  {Daphnephoria)  is  more  fully  described  by  Proclus
(quoted  by  Photius,  Bibliotheca^  p.  321,  ed.  Bekker).  He  says  :  "They
cover  a  staff  of  olive-wood  with  laurels  and  many-coloured  flowers,  and
on  the  top  of  the  staff"  is  fitted  a  bronze  globe,  and  from  it  they  suspend


42  THE  LAUREL-BEARING  BK.  ix.  boeotia


a.


smaller  globes.  To  the  middle  of  the  staff  they  attach  <a  globe  >
smaller  than  the  one  at  the  top,  and  purple  fillets ;  the  lowest  part  of
the  staff  they  swathe  in  a  saffron  pall.  The  globe  at  the  top  is  meant
to  signify  the  Sun,  with  which  they  connect  Apollo  ;  the  globe  beneath
it  signifies  the  moon,  and  the  small  globes,  which  are  fastened  on,
signify  the  stars.  The  fillets  symbolise  the  course  of  the  year,  and  they
make  365  of  them.  The  procession  of  the  Laurel-bearing  is  headed  by
a  boy,  whose  parents  are  both  alive.  His  nearest  kinsman  bears  the
wreathed  staff,  which  they  call  Kopo,  The  Laurel-bearer  himself
follows  grasping  the  laurel,  his  hair  streaming  down  ;  he  wears  a  golden
crown  and  is  clad  in  a  bright-hued  garment  that  reaches  to  his  feet,  and
he  is  shod  with  the  shoes  called  iphicratides,  A  choir  of  virgins  follows
him  holding  boughs  in  token  of  supplication  and  singing  hymns.  The
procession  of  the  Laurel-bearing  is  escorted  to  the  sanctuary  of  the
Ismenian  and  Galaxian  (Chalazian?)  Apollo."  Proclus  describes  the
Laurel -bearing  (^Daphnephorid)  as  a  Boeotian  festival,  and  from  an  in-
scription (C  /.  G,  No.  1595  ;  C.  L  G.  G,  S.  i.  No.  3407)  we  learn  that
at  Chaeronea  Apollo  was  worshipped  under  the  title  of  Laurel-bearer  (see
note  on  ix.  40.  5).  The  festival,  Proclus  tells  us,  took  place  every
eighth  or,  as  the  Greeks  expressed  it,  every  ninth  year ;  in  other  words,
seven  years  elapsed  between  two  successive  celebrations.  Thus  the
period  of  the  festival  was  the  same  as  that  of  the  Delphic  festival  at
which  a  boy,  whose  parents  were  both  alive,  fetched  the  laurel  from  the
sacred  laurel-tree  at  Tempe.  The  two  festivals  may  have  been  closely
alike.  The  Delphic  festival  was  explained  as  an  imitation  of  the
slaughter  of  the  Python  by  Apollo  and  the  subsequent  purification  of
the  god,  the  purification  having  apparently  consisted  in  a  year's  servi-
tude and  the  wearing  of  the  laurel.  The  resemblance  between  the  two
festivals  would  be  still  greater  if  we  supposed  that  the  Laurel-bearing  at
Thebes  commemorated  the  slaughter  of  the  dragon  by  Cadmus  and  the
subsequent  purification  of  the  slayer  by  servitude  and  the  wearing  of  the
laurel.  But  though  Cadmus  was  said  to  have  served  Ares  eight  years
for  slaying  the  dragon  (see  note  on  §  i),  there  seems  to  be  no  direct
evidence  to  connect  that  legend  with  the  festival  of  the  Laurel-bearing.
Still  the  eight  years  of  Cadmus's  servitude,  compared  with  the  octennial
period  of  the  festival,  seem  to  indicate  a  connexion  between  the  legend
and  the  festival.  The  traditional  origin  of  the  festival,  according  to
Proclus,  was  this.  The  Aeolians  of  Ame  abandoned  that  city  at
the  bidding  of  an  oracle  and  laid  siege  to  Thebes,  which  was  held
by  Pelasgians.  It  happened  that  both  sides  desired  to  celebrate  a
festival  of  Apollo  ;  so  they  made  a  truce  and  cut  laurels,  the  Aeolians
on  Mount  Helicon  and  the  Pelasgians  at  the  Black  River,  and  they
brought  these  laurels  to  Apollo.  But  Polematas,  the  Boeotian  leader,
dreamed  that  a  young  man  gave  him  a  suit  of  armour  and  commanded
that  they  should  offer  prayers  to  Apollo  every  ninth  (eighth)  year,  wear-
ing the  laurel.  Two  days  afterwards  Polematas  attacked  and  conquered
the  enemy ;  so  he  performed  in  person  the  ceremony  of  the  Laurel-
bearing,  and  the  custom  was  observed  from  that  time  forth.  The
description  and  explanation  which  Proclus  gives  of  the  Laurel-bearing  are


CH.  X  THE  DRAGON'S  SPRING  43

' ~ ■ s

repeated  verbally  by  a  scholiast  on  Clement  of  Alexandria  {Protrept.  i.  §
io>  P-  9>  cd.  Potter).

As  to  the  festival,  see  also  Bockh's  Pindar,  ExplicationeSi  p.  590 ;  K.  O.
Milller,  Orchomenos  und  die  Minyer^  p.  21$  sg.  ;  iV/.,  Dorier^  I.  pp.  236  sq,^  333  ;
Hermann,  Gottesdiemtliclu  Alterthiinur^  §  63,  28 ;  Schomann,  Griech.  Alter-
thUmerf  2.  p.  463  sq,  ;  C.  Botticher,  Baumkultus  der  HelUnetty  p.  386  sqq,  ;
Preller,  Griechische  Mythologie^^  i.  p.  288,  note  i.

The  procession  of  the  Laurel-bearing  is  the  subject  of  a  fine  painting
by  the  late  Lord  Leigh  ton.

10.  4-  to  dedicate  a  bronze  tripod  to  the  god.  Pindar  {Pyth,  xi.
8  sq.)  speaks  of  the  temple  of  Ismenian  Apollo  as  "a  treasury  of  golden
tripods,"  and  the  scholiast  on  that  passage  explains  the  allusion  by  say-
ing that  there  were  many  votive  tripods  in  the  temple.  Herodotus  saw
three  tripods  engraved  with  inscriptions  in  *  Cadmean  letters '  in  the
sanctuary  of  the  Ismenian  Apollo  at  Thebes.  One  of  them  was  the
tripod  dedicated  by  Amphitryo,  which  Pausanias  mentions ;  the  other
two  were  dedicated  by  Scaeus  and  Laodamus  respectively.  See  Hero-
dotus, v.  59-61.

10.  5.  the  fountain sacred  to  Ares a  dragon  to  gnard

the  spring.  Since  Pausanias  describes  this  fountain  as  situated
*'  higher  up  than  the  Ismenian  sanctuary/'  it  is  clear  that  he  identified
the  dragon-guarded  spring  of  Ares  with  the  spring  of  the  Ismenus.
This  copious  spring,  now  called  the  Kephalari  of  St.  John,  gushes  from
the  rock  and  fills  a  spacious  basin,  from  which  part  of  its  water  is  drawn
off  by  an  aqueduct  to  turn  some  mills.  This  spring  seems  to  have
been  called  Melia  by  the  ancients  (Schol.  on  Pindar,  Pyth,  xi.  5).
Euripides,  on  the  other  hand,  who  certainly  appears  to  speak  of  Thebes
firom  personal  knowledge,  identified  the  dragon-guarded  spring  of  Ares
with  what  is  now  called  the  Paraporti  spring  at  the  south-west  foot  of
the  Cadmea.  The  water  of  the  spring  flows  from  eight  spouts  into  a
long  tank  partly  constructed  of  marble  and  enclosed  by  low  walls  which
form  a  quadrangle  round  it.  Thence  the  water  finds  its  way  into  the
stream  of  the  Dirce  a  few  yards  below.  At  this  spring  the  Theban
women  may  be  seen  washing  clothes  at  most  hours  of  the  day.  A  few
feet  behind  the  spring  is  a  precipitous  rock  of  no  great  height  at  the
foot  of  the  Cadmea,  and  in  the  face  of  this  rock  there  is  a  shallow  cave
about  7  feet  high  by  3  broad  and  5  deep.  Now  Euripides  makes
Menoeceus  sacrifice  himself  for  his  country  by  cutting  his  throat  on  the
battlements  and  falling  into  the  den  of  the  dragon  which  had  guarded
the  water  of  the  Dirce  (Phoenissae^  931  sqq.^  1009  sqq.)  Thus,  accord-
ing to  Euripides,  the  shallow  cave  at  the  foot  of  the  Cadmea  must  be
the  dragon's  cave,  and  the  spring  of  Paraporti  close  by  must  be  the
dragon-guarded  spring  of  Ares.  Other  writers  mention  the  cave  or  den
of  the  dragon  (Philostratus,  Imagines^  i.  4  ;  Ovid,  Metam,  iii.  26  sqq,)
A  further  proof  that  Euripides  identified  the  spring  of  Ares  with  one  of
the  springs  that  form  the  Dirce  is  supplied  by  the  recently-discovered
fragments  of  his  play  the  Antiopej  for  in  it  Lycus  is  bidden  by  Hermes
to  fling  the  charred  bones  of  Dirce  into  the  spring  of  Ares,  in  order  that


44  SERPENTS  AND  WA  TER  bk.  ix.  boeotia

the  spring  may  henceforth  be  known  as  the  Dirce.  See  Hermathena^
No.  17  ( 1 891),  p.  47.  Though  the  water  of  the  Paraporti  spring  flows
into  the  Dirce,  it  should  be  remembered  that  the  real  sources  of  the
Dirce  are  about  a  mile  away  to  the  south.     See  above,  p.  28  sq.

See  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und Forschunoeriy  2.  pp.  4,  13-15 ;  Vischer,  Erinner-
ungen,  p.  562  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  225  sq,  note;  Baedeker,^  p.  183  sq,\  Guide'
Joanne^  2.  p.  12  ;  von  Wilamowitz-Moellendorff,  in  Hermes ,  26  (109 1 ),  pp.  198
sq.f  241  sq.

The  notion  that  water,  especially  the  water  of  a  spring,  is  guarded
by  a  dragon  or  serpent  has  been  held  by  many  peoples.  We  have
seen  that  the  water  of  Styx  was  supposed  to  be  guardeid  by  dragons  or
serpents  and  is  still  called  the  Dragon  Water  (note  on  viii.  1 7.  6).  In
Bechuanaland  there  is  a  species  of  large  water-snake,  which  the  Bechu-
anas  regard  as  sacred ;  they  think  that  if  one  of  these  snakes  be  killed
the  fountain  will  dry  up  (J.  Philip,  Researches  in  South  Africa  (London,
1828),  2.  p.  118).  The  Zulus  believe  in  a  fiery  serpent  which  comes  out
of  the  water  ;  it  runs  very  fast.  Some  men  once  waylaid  a  serpent  as  it
came  out  of  its  pool  and  killed  it ;  so  the  pool  dried  up.  See  Callaway,
Nursery  Tales^  Traditions^  and  Histories  of  the  Zulus^  p.  290.  The
Namaquas  think  that  in  every  fountain  there  lives  a  snake,  and  that  if
the  snake  leave  the  fountain  or  be  killed  the  fountain  will  dry  up  (Th.
Hahn,  Tsuni-Goam^  the  supreme  being  of  the  Khoi-Khoi^  pp.  53,  77),
The  Budduma,  who  inhabit  some  islands  in  Lake  Tchad,  have  the
greatest  veneration  for  a  fabulous  being  who  haunts  the  lake  in  the
shape  of  a  gigantic  serpent ;  in  great  emergencies  they  implore  his
advice  and  help  (G.  Nactigal,  Sahdrd  und  Silddn^  2.  p.  369).  In  a
lagoon  near  Gimbo-amburi  in  West  Africa,  a  prodigious  serpent  is  be-
lieved to  reside,  which  has  the  power  of  curing  mad  people.  A  madman
is  bound  hand  and  foot  by  his  friends  and  flung  into  the  lake ;  the
serpent  carries  him  off  to  the  bottom  of  the  lake,  and  after  twenty-four
hours  ^releases  him  alive  and  in  his  right  mind  (Labat,  Relation  historique
de  PEthiopie  occidentale^  i.  p.  348).  In  a  frightful  ravine  in  Algeria
there  is  a  spring  which  was  believed  to  have  been  once  guarded  by  a
serpent  ;  the  people  fancied  that  the  serpent  was  animated  by  the  soul
of  one  Sidi  Mohammed  and  had  the  power  of  healing  sore  eyes  (Certeux
et  Camoy,  LAlgMe  traditionnelle^  p.  129  j^.)  The  Australian  blacks
avoid  a  bubbling  spring,  because  they  think  that  the  bubbling  and
gurgling  of  the  water  are  caused  by  a  serpent  underground,  which  con-
tinually spews  up  the  water  (A.  Oldfield,  '  The  Aborigines  of  Australia,'
Transactions  of  the  Ethnological  Society  of  London^  N.S.  3  (1865),  P*
239).  The  Arabs  still  regard  medicinal  waters  as  inhabited  by  jinn^
usually  of  serpent  form  ;  the  legend  of  a  demon  in  serpent  form  is  still
told  of  the  sacred  fountain  of  Ephca  in  Palmyra  (W.  Robertson  Smith,
Religion  of  the  Semites^  ^.  168).  The  North  American  Indians  arc
said  to  believe  that  waters  are  guarded  by  a  serpent  (J.  G.  Miiller,
Gcschichte  der  atnerikanischen  Urreligionen^  p.  131).  They  tell  of  a
universal  flood  which  was  caused  by  the  hero  Menaboshu  shooting  the
King  of  the  Serpents,  who  dwelt  in  the  water  (Kohl,  Kitschi-Gami,  i.  p.


CH.  XI  SERPENTS  AND  WA  TER  45

321  sqq.)  In  India  serpents  are  especially  worshipped  at  sacred  pools
and  wells.  A  Hindoo  legend  relates  that  Bhima,  being  thrown  into  the
Ganges,  fell  into  the  kingdom  of  the  serpents,  who  gave  him  the  *•  water
of  strength '  to  drink  (M.  Wintemitz,  *  Der  Sarpabali,  ein  altindischer
Schlangencult,'  Miithcilungen  der  anthropolog.  Gesellschaft  in  Wien^
18  (1888),  p.  45  sq,)  Annamite  popular  tales  speak  of  spirits  of  the
water  who  have  the  shape  of  serpents,  but  sometimes  doff  their  serpent-
skins  and  appear  in  human  form  among  men.  If  meantime  their  serpent-
skins  are  stolen,  the  water-spirits  cannot  return  to  their  native  element.
See  Landes,  *Contes  et  Ldgendes  annamites,'  Nos.  29,  31,  88,  in
Cochinchine  Franqaise.  Excursions  et  Reconnaissances^  ix.  No.  22  (March-
April  1885),  pp.  384  sqq,^  387  sq.^  xi.  No.  25  (Jan.-Feb.  1886),  p.  114
sq.  In  an  Avar  story  a  spring  is  guarded  by  a  ten-headed  dragon,  who
allows  people  to  draw  water  one  day  in  the  year,  and  then  only  on  con-
dition that  he  receives  a  maiden  to  devour ;  the  hero  of  the  tale  kills
the  dragon  by  cutting  off  his  ten  heads  (A.  Schiefner,  Awarische  Texte
(St  Petersburg,  1873),  p.  21  j^.)  A  modem  Greek  tale  describes
how  a  spring  was  guarded  by  a  twelve-headed  serpent,  who  devoured
a  human  being  once  a  week  and  then  kindly  allowed  the  people  to
draw  water  at  the  spring  (J.  G.  von  Hahn,  Griechische  und  albanesische
Mdrchen^  No.  70,  vol.  2.  p.  55  sq.)

10.  6.  Tenems.  The  plain  which  stretches  to  the  north-west  of
Thebes  towards  the  Copaic  lake  was  called  the  Teneric  plain  after  this
Tenems.  See  ix.  26.  i  ;  Strabo,  ix.  p.  413  ;  Schol.  on  Pindar,  Pyih.
xi.  5.

10.  6.  it  was  called  Laden.  Sostratus,  quoted  by  the  pseudo-
Plutarch  {De  fluviis^  ii.  i),  says  that  the  Ismenus  was  formerly  called
Cadmus's  Foot  for  the  following  reason.  After  killing  the  dragon  which
guarded  the  spring,  Cadmus  found  that  the  water  was  tainted  by  the
monster's  gore,  so  he  went  about  the  country  looking  for  another  spring.
It  fell  out,  by  the  providence  of  Athena,  that  at  the  Corycaean  cave
Cadmus  plunged  his  right  foot  into  the  mud  ;  a  river  gurgled  up  through
the  mud,  and  the  hero  at  once  sacrificed  an  ox  and  named  the  river
*Cadmus*s  Foot.'  Afterwards  when  Ismenus,  son  of  Amphion  and
Niobe,  was  shot  by  Apollo,  he  flung  himself,  in  his  agony,  into  the
river,  which  was  henceforth  called  Ismenus.

11.  I.  AwffhimiATi  Troplioiiins.  The  epithet  Anchasian  is  perhaps
derived  from  Anchoe,  as  to  which  see  note  on  ix.  23.  7.  But  cp.
Critical  Note  on  this  passage,  vol.  i.  p.  602.

11.  2.  Panyasis.     See  x.  29.  9  note.

11.  2.  the  blow  of  the  stone  etc.  Cp.  Euripides,  Hercules  Furens,
1 00 1  sqq.

11.  3.  they  kept  Alcmena  from  bringing  forth.  According  to
Nicander  (quoted  by  Antoninus  Liberalis,  Transform,  29),  it  was  the
Fates  and  Ilithyia  who  thus  retarded  Alcmena's  delivery.  According
to  Ovid  {Metam.  ix.  295  sqq.\  it  was  Lucina  (Ilithyia)  alone ;  and  the  mode
in  which  she  retarded  the  birth  was  by  sitting  with  her  right  leg  crossed
over  her  left,  and  clasping  her  knees  with  her  hands,  the  fingers  of  each
hand  being  interlaced  with  those  of  the  other.     Pliny  tells  us  that  to  sit


46  CROSSED  LEGS  AND  CLASPED  HANDS    bk.  ix.  boeotia

with  interlaced  fingers  beside  a  pregnant  woman  or  beside  a  sick  person
while  remedies  were  being  applied,  was  equivalent  to  casting  a  harmful
spell  on  the  person,  and  he  refers  to  the  case  of  Alcmena,  The  spell,  he
says,  was  more  baleful,  first,  if  the  hands,  so  clasped,  were  placed  over
one  or  both  knees,  and  second,  if  one  leg  were  crossed  over  the  other.
Such  postures  were  supposed  to  impede  whatever  happened  to  be  going
on  ;  hence  in  ancient  Rome  at  councils  of  war,  at  meetings  of  magistrates,
at  sacrifices  and  prayers,  no  one  was  permitted  to  sit  with  crossed  legs
or  clasped  hands.  See  Pliny,  Nat,  hist,  xxviii.  59.  A  similai'  train  of
thought  has  given  rise  to  a  superstition,  current  both  in  Germany  and
among  the  Malays  of  Java,  Sumatra,  etc.,  that  a  woman's  delivery  is
retarded  if  there  is  anything  shut  or  locked  in  her  neighbourhood.
Hence  at  difficult  births  it  is  customary  to  unlock  and  open  the  doors,
boxes,  etc.  See  Wuttke,  Der  deutscke  Volksaberglaube^  §  574  ;  Tijd-
schrift  vor  indische  Taal-^  Land-  en  Volkenkunde^  26  (1880),  p.  310;
Van  Hasselt,  Volksbeschrijving  van  Midden-Sumatra^  p.  266  ;  J.  G.  F.
Riedel,  De  sluik-  en  kroesharige  Rassen  tusschen  Seiches  en  Papua^  pp.
135,  207,  325.  Cp.  Panzer,  Beitrag  sur  deutschen  Mythologies  2.  p.
336  sqq.  In  Oudh  to  sit  with  one  leg  over  another  is  thought  to  bring
bad  luck  {Panjab  Notes  and  Queries,  2  (October  1884),  p.  6,  No.
34).  Cp.  Brand,  Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  3.  p.  257  sq,
(Bohn's  ed.)

11.  3.  Historis,  daughter  of  Tiresias  etc.  The  stratagem  which
brought  Alcmena  relief  is  ascribed  by  Nicander  (quoted  by  Antoninus
Liberalis,  Transform.  29)  to  Galinthias,  daughter  of  Proetus,  and  by
Ovid  (Metam.  ix.  306  sqq.)  to  Galanthis,  one  of  Alcmena's  handmaids.
To  punish  her  for  having  deceived  the  goddesses,  Galinthias  or  Galanthis
was  turned  into  a  weasel ;  but  Hecate  pitied  her  misfortune  and  made
Galinthias,  in  weasel  form,  her  minister.  Hercules  too,  when  he  grew
up,  showed  his  gratitude  for  the  service  which  Galinthias  had  rendered
his  mother  by  founding  a  shrine  in  her  honour  beside  his  house,  and  by
offering  sacrifices  to  her.  These  sacrifices  were  afterwards  kept  up  by
the  Thebans  who  continued  regularly  to  sacrifice  to  Galinthias  before  the
festival  of  Hercules.  See  Nicander,  I.e.  Aelian  says  (^Nat.  anim.  xii.
5)  that  the  Thebans  worshipp^  the  weasel  because  a  weasel  had  been
the  nurse  of  Hercules  ;  or  because  when  Alcmena  was  in  hard  labour
a  weasel  ran  past  and  facilitated  her  delivery.

11.  3.  she  set  up  a  cry  of  joy.  This  was  probably  a  regular  signal
that  a  birth  had  taken  place.  In  Abyssinia  when  a  child  is  bom  **  the
women  fill  the  air  with  cries  of  exultation  ;  repeating  their  cry  twelve  times
if  the  infant  be  a  male,  and  three  times  if  a  female  "  (Mansfield  Parkyns,
Life  in  Abyssinia^  p.  251  sq.)  Among  the  Bogos,  an  Abyssinian  tribe,
when  a  man-child  is  bom  the  women  raise  a  cry  of  joy  five  times  ;  but
when  a  female  child  is  bom,  they  are  silent  (Munziger,  Sitten  und  Recht
der  Bogos,  p.  37).  Perhaps  the  same  distinction  was  drawn  by  the
ancient  Greeks ;  for  Nicander  tells  us  {I.e.)  that  the  wily  Galinthias
mshed  out  and  informed  the  Fates,  much  to  their  discomfiture,  that
Alcmena  had  just  been  delivered  of  a  boy.

11.  4.  a  sanctuary  of  Hercules.    That  this  sanctuary  was  outside


CH.  XI  SANCTUARY  OF  HERCULES  47

the  walls,  not  far  from  the  *  hollow  way '  or  gully,  appears  from  Arrian's
description  of  Alexander's  assault  on  Thebes  {Anabasis,  i.  8.  3-5).  It
may  have  occupied  the  site  of  the  ruined  church  of  St.  Nicholas  (Hagios
Nikolaos),  which  stands  a  little  to  the  south  of  modem  Thebes,  on  the
right  of  the  high-road  as  you  approach  from  Athens  (H.  N.  Ulrichs,
Reisen  und  Forschungen,  2.  p.  12  ;  E.  Fabricius,  Theben,  p.  22).  It  is
said  that  before  the  battle  of  Leuctra  Epaminondas  told  the  Thebans  to
pray  in  the  sanctuary  of  Hercules.  Instructions  had  been  given  to  the
priest  of  Hercules  that  he  was  to  open  the  temple  by  night,  take  down
and  burnish  the  rusty  old  votive  arms  and  set  them  beside  the  image,
and  then  steal  away  with  the  sacristans,  without  saying  a  word  to  any-
body. So  when  the  soldiers  with  their  officers  came  crowding  to  the
temple  and  saw  the  doors  open,  no  sacristans  about,  and  the  ancient
weapons  cleaned  and  shining  in  front  of  the  image,  they  cheered  lustily
and  were  filled  with  confidence,  thinking  that  Hercules  himself  was
going  to  lead  them  to  battle.  See  Polyaenus,  ii.  3.  8.  Cp.  Xenophon,
Hellenica^  vi.  4.  7  ;  Diodorus,  xv.  73  ;  Cicero,  De  divinatione,  i.   34.

§74.

11.  4.  Xenocritus  and  Enbius.      These   sculptors  seem  to  be

otherwise  unknown.

11.  4.  This  image Daedalus  himself  dedicated  etc.    Apollo-

doms  tells  (ii.  6.  3)  how  Hercules  found  and  buried  the  corpse  of  Icarus
on  the  island  of  Doliche  (afterwards  Icaria),  and  how  out  of  gratitude
Daedalus  made  a  statue  of  Hercules  and  set  it  up  at  Pisa.  One  night
Hercules,  mistaking  the  statue  for  a  living  man,  threw  a  stone  at  it  and
hit  it.

11.  4«  when  he  fled  from  Crete  in  small  craft  etc  This  is  a
dull  rationalistic  attempt  to  explain  the  legend  that  Daedalus  and  his
son  fled  from  Crete  through  the  air  on  wings  constructed  by  the  former,
and  that  as  Icarus  flew  too  near  the  sun,  the  heat  melted  the  wax  with
which  his  wings  were  fastened  on,  so  that  he  fell  into  the  sea  and  was
drowned*  See  Ovid,  Metam.  viii.  183  sqq.  ;  Hyginus,  Fab,  40  ;  Diodorus,
iv.  TT,  Diodorus  gives  the  rationalistic  version  of  the  story  also,  and
so  does  Palaephatus  {De  incredib.  13,  in  Westermann's  Mythographi
Graeciy  p.  280  sq.)  The  death  of  Icarus  is  the  subject  of  a  fine  wall-
painting  at  Po:npeii.  See  Baumeister's  Denkmdler,  Tafel  xxii.,  article
*  Malerci.'  A  modem  Greek  tale  narrates  how  a  Captain  Thirteen,
being  thrown  into  a  deep  hole  by  his  enemies,  found  a  dead  bird,  made
himself  wings  out  of  its  feathers,  and  flew  away.  But  it  came  on  to
rain,  the  clay  with  which  he  had  fastened  his  wings  was  wetted  and
softened,  and  the  captain  fell  into  the  sea,  where  a  sea-devil  clawed  him
with  a  thirteen-pronged  fork  and  turned  him  into  a  dolphin.  See  B.
Schmidt,  Griechische  Mdrchen,  Sagen  und  Volkslieder,  p.  92.  The
story  seems  a  reminiscence  of  the  tale  of  Icarus.

11.  5.  an  island,  then  nameless.  According  to  others  the  island
was  called  Doliche  (Mong')  before  it  was  called  Icaria  (Apollodorus,  ii.
6.  3  ;  Pliny,  Nat.  hist,  iv.  68).  According  to  others  its  old  name  was
Macris  or  Ichthyoessa  (Pliny,  /.r.)

11.  6.  by  Praxiteles.     Prof.  W.  Klein  supposes  that  this  Praxiteles


48  ATHENA  ONGA  bk.  ix.  boeotia

was  an  older  namesake  of  the  great  Praxiteles  (W.  Klein,  in  ArchaeoL
epigraph,  MittheiL  aus  Oesterreich^  4  (1880),  p.  15  sq.)  Overbeck
took  the  same  view  {Gesch,  d,  griech,  Plasiik^^  i.  p.  500),  and  Prof.
Collignon  inclines  to  it  {Hist,  de  la  Sculpture  grecque^  2.  p.  179  note).
As  to  this  supposed  earlier  Praxiteles,  see  note  on  i.  2.  4.

11.  6.  the  wrestling  with  Antaens.  The  wrestle  of  Hercules
with  Antaeus  is  the  subject  of  a  number  of  vase-paintings,  in  particular
of  one  by  Euphronius.  See  W.  Klein,  in  Archaologische  Zeitung^  36
(1878),  p.  66  sqq,  ;  /V/.,  Euphronios^  p.  116  sqq.  ;  Baumeister's  Denk-
mdler^  fig.  86,  p.  82  ;  Catalogue  of  Greek  and  Etruscan  Vases  in  the
British  Museum^  2.  Nos.  B  196,  B122,  B322,  B  596.

11.  6.  Thrasybolus set  ont  fSrom  Thebes.     Cp.  Xenophon,

Hellenica^  ii.  4.  2  ;  Diodorus,  xiv.  32  ;  Plutarch,  Lysander^  27  ;  ///.,
Pelopidas^  7.

11.  6.  Athena  and  Hercnles works  of  Alcamenes.     Prof.

Furtwangler  holds  that  the  Famese  Athena  at  Naples  is  a  copy  of  a
work  of  Alcamenes  {Meisterwerke  d.  griech,  Plastik^  p.  104  sqq,)

11.  7-  an  altar made  of  the  ashes  of  the  victims.    Cp.  v.

13.  8  note ;  V.  14.  8  ;  V.  14.  10  ;  v.  15.  9.

11.  7.  divination  by  means  of  voices.     Cp.  vii.  22.  2  sq,

12.  I .  departing  from  Delphi  by  the  road  which  leads  to  Fhocis.

The  Lacedaemonians  made  Delphi  independent  of  Phocis  ;  hence  Delphi
had  its  own  territory  marked  off  from  Phocis  by  definite  boundaries.
See  Strabo,  ix.  p.  423.  The  Delphians  did  not  like  to  be  called
Phocians  (Paus.  iv.  34.  11).  But  Pausanias  is  probably  guilty  of  an
anachronism  in  speaking  of  Delphi  as  if  it  were  distinct  from  Phocis
in  the  time  of  Cadmus.     Cp.  Critical  Note,  vol.  i.  p.  602  sq,

12.  I.  he  was  guided  on  his  jonmey  by  a  cow  etc.  The  Delphic
oracle  which  directed  Cadmus  to  follow  a  cow  and  to  build  his  city
wherever  the  cow  sank  exhausted,  is  quoted  at  length  by  a  scholiast  on
Euripides  {Phoenisscu^  638).  Cp.  Apollodorus,  iii.  4.  i  ;  Plutarch,
Sulla^  17  ;  Nonnus,  Dionys,  iv.  299  sqq.  As  to  similar  legends,  see
note  on  x.  6.  2.  In  the  white  moon-like  marks  on  the  cow  (which  are
mentioned  in  the  oracle  quoted  by  the  scholiast,  /.r.)  Prof,  von  Bau-
dissin  sees  a  symbol  of  the  Phoenician  moon-goddess  (Studien  zursemit.
Religionsgeschichte^  i.  p.  273).

12.  2.  Athena Onga.      From  Aeschylus  we  learn  that   the

image  of  Athena  Onga  (or  Onca,  as  the  name  was  generally  spelt)
stood  outside,  but  near  to  one  of  the  gates  (Seven  against  Thebes^  149,
488  sq.^  cp.  473  sq.y  ed.  Verrall).  And  from  Hesychius  {s,v,  "Oyicas
*kBr\vQ.i)  it  appears  that  the  gate  in  question  was  the  Ogygian  gate.
But  as  the  situation  of  that  gate  (if  it  ever  existed)  is  uncertain,  the
site  of  the  altar  and  image  of  Athena  Onga  is  equally  so.  There  is  said
to  have  been  a  village  Oncae  on  the  spot  (Schol.  on  Pindar,  Olmyp,  ii.
48;  Tzetzes,  Schol,  on  Lycophron^  ^225).  Cadmus  is  said  to  have
sacrificed  to  Athena  Onga  the  cow  which  had  guided  him  to  Thebes
(SchoL  on  Aeschylus,  Seven  against  Thebes^  473  (486,  ed.  Dindorf) ;
cp.  Apollodorus,  iii.  4.  i).  A  scholiast  on  Euripides  {Phoenissae^  1062)
says  that  Athena  helped  Cadmus  against  the  Sparti,  and  that  in  grati-


CH.  XII  ATHENA  ONGA  49

tude  he  founded  a  sanctuary  to  her,  under  the  Phoenician  surname  of
Onca.  Over  the  sanctuary,  according  to  the  scholiast,  was  carved  the
inscription :  "  This  is  the  temple  of  Athena  Onca,  which  Cadmus  once
founded  and  sacrificed  a  cow  when  he  built  the  city  of  Thebes."  On  the
left  bank  of  the  Dirce,  about  200  paces  south-west  of  the  Cadmea,  is  a
chapel  of  the  Holy  Trinity  {Hagia  Trias\  which  rests  on  ancient  founda-
tions built  of  squared  blocks.  It  has  been  conjectured  that  these  are
the  foundations  of  the  sanctuary  of  Athena  Onga.  See  H.  N.  Ulrichs,
Retsen  und  Forschungen^  2.  p.  15;  Fabricius,  Thebetiy  p.  28;  von
Wilamowitz-MoellendorfT,  in  Hermes^  26  (1891),  p.  217.  The  ancient
authorities  (Pausanias ;  Schol.  on  Pindar,  Olymp,  ii.  44  ;  Schol.  on
Aeschylus,  Lc, ;  Schol.  on  Euripides,  i,c, ;  Stephanus  Byz.  s,v,  'OyKatat)
are  agreed  that  the  name  Onga  or  Onca  is  Phoenician.  Relying  on
this  statement  of  the  ancients,  Movers  has  constructed  an  elaborate
theory  of  Athena  Onca,  which  is  not,  I  believe,  accepted  by  modem
Semitic  scholars.  See  Movers,  Die  Phoenizier^  i.  pp.  642-650.  Cp.
Selden,  DedisSyriis^  p.  294  sqq, ;  Preller,  Griech,  Mythologie^^  i.  p.  188.
Onca  is  perhaps  the  feminine  form  corresponding  to  Oncius  (masculine)
and  Onceum  (neuter),  which  Pausanias  has  mentioned  elsewhere  (viii.
25.  4  sqq.)  Prof.  W.  H.  Roscher  suggests  that  Onca  may  possibly  be
connected  with  oyicacr^ot,  *to  bray,  roar*  (Nektar  und Ambrosia^  ^^^  97).
A  Greek  vase-painting,  which  represents  a  man  in  a  pointed  cap  prepar-
ing to  sacrifice  a  bull  or  cow  to  a  rude  image,  has  been  interpreted  by
Mr.  Pervanoglu  as  a  picture  of  Cadmus  setting  up  the  image  of  Athena
Onca.  The  image  stands  on  a  heap  of  stones  and  is  equipped  with  a
plumed  helmet,  a  large  round  shield,  and  two  spears.  See  P.  Per-
vanoglu, <  Gotterdienst  der  Athena  Onka  zu  Theben  auf  einer  Vase
aus  Megara,'  Archdologische  Zeitung^  1S65,  pp.  68-70,  with  pi.
cxcix.  3.

12.  2.  the  Egyptian  name  of  Sals.  Sais,  in  Egyptian  Sa  or  ha
ent  Nety  *  the  city  of  Neith,'  was  the  capital  of  the  fifth  district  {nome)  of
Lower  Egypt.  The  goddess  Neith,  who  was  worshipped  here,  appears
on  the  monuments  as  a  deity  of  the  lower  world,  with  the  figure  of  a
woman,  green  face  and  hands,  and  the  crown  of  Lower  Egypt  on  her  head ;
generally  she  carries  a  bow  and  arrows  and  also  the  flower-tipt  sceptre.
In  mythology  she  is  the  mother  of  the  gods,  and  sometimes  she
nourishes  two  crocodiles.  The  Greeks  identified  her  with  Athena
(Herodotus,  ii.  59;  Plato,  Timaeus^  p.  21  e;  Hesychius,  s.v,  ^-qtO),
partly  perhaps  on  the  gp'ound  of  the  resemblance  between  the  names.
On  the  coins  of  the  Saitic  district  this  identification  is  carried  out  by
representing  the  goddess  with  an  owl  on  her  right  hand  and  a  spear  in
her  left.  See  Wiedemann  on  Herodotus,  ii.  62  ;  /W.,  Die  Religion  der
alien  Agypter^  P'  77  sq.  ;  Brugsch,  Religion  und  Mythologie  der  alien
^^gyPl^t  pp.  338-354  ;  Tiele,  History  of  the  Egyptian  Religion ^
p.  202  sqq.

12.  4*  Polydoms  adorned  this  log  with  bronze  etc.  It  has  been
suggested  that  before  the  art  of  casting  metal  was  discovered  it  may
have  been  customary  to  cover  wooden  images  with  plates  of  hammered
bronze,  and  that  the  image  here  described  by  Pausanias  was  perhaps

VOL.  V  E


50  LEUCTRA  bk.  ix.  boeotia

one  of  this  class  of  images  (A.  S.  Murray,  History  of  Greek  Sculpture^
I.  p.  75  sq.)     See  the  Critical  Note  on  this  passage,  vol.  i.  p.  603.

12.  4.  Dionysos  OadmoB.  With  this  title  compare  Hercules
Manticlus  (iv.  23.  10)  and  Hermes  Aepytus  (viii.  47.  4).  Cp.  Critical
Note,  voL  I.  p.  603.

12.  4.  the  sons  of  Praxiteles.  Cp.  i.  8.  4.  Their  names  were
Cephisodotus  and  Timarchus  ([Plutarch,]  Vit,  X,  Orat,  vii.  39,  p.  843  e).
Two  bases  of  statues  inscribed  with  the  joint  names  of  these  sculptors
have  been  found.  See  Loewy,  Inschriften  griech,  Bildhauer^  Nos.  108,
109,  and  the  note  on  i.  21.  i  ;  Overbeck,  Schriftqtiellen^  ^  1331-
1341  ;  A.  S.  Murray,  History  of  Greek  Sculpture^  2.  p.  328.  Cp.  note
on  viii.  30.  10.  They  appear  to  have  made  some  images  for  the
sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  in  Cos  (Herondas,  Mimiambi^  iv.  20  sqq.)

12.  5.  Pronomns.  Cp.  Athenaeus,  xiv.  p.  631  e,  who  laments  the
degeneration  of  music  caused  by  Pronomus's  invention  of  a  flute  on
which  it  was  possible  to  play  tunes  of  all  three  sorts,  Dorian,  Lydian,
and  Phrygian.     Cp.  Paus.  iv.  27.  7.

12.  6.  Epaminondas,  son  of  Polynmifl.     See  note  on  iv.  31.  10.

13.  2.  Epaminondas  was  sent  to  Sparta  on  an  embassy  etc.  Cp.
Plutarch,  Agesilaus^  27  sq,  Pausanias  is  mistaken  in  assigning  this
embassy  of  Epaminondas  to  the  period  when  the  peace  of  Antalcidas
was  being  negotiated  (387  B.C.)  Epaminondas  represented  Thebes  at
the  congress  held  at  Sparta  in  371  B.C.  for  the  purpose  of  concluding  a
general  peace.  It  was  on  this  occasion  that  he  made  his  sharp  retort
to  Agesilaus.     Cp.  Grote,  History  of  Greece^  9.  p.  387.

13.  3.  took  np  a  defensive  position  above  the  OepMsian  Lake
etc.  Just  before  the  battle  of  Leuctra  in  371  B.C.  there  was  a  Lacedae-
monian army  under  Cleombrotus  in  Phocis  (Xenophon,  Hellenicay  vi.  4.
2  sq.  ;  Plutarch,  Agesilaus^  28).  Hence,  in  order  to  prevent  the  enemy
from  entering  the  Boeotian  plain,  Epaminondas  marched  westward  and
took  up  a  position  at  Coronea  in  the  defile  between  Mt  Helicon  and
the  Copaic  or  Cephisian  lake.  Cp.  Diodorus,  xv.  52  ;  Xenophon,
Hellenicoj  vi.  4.  3.  Cleombrotus,  however,  gave  the  Boeotians  the
slip.  Instead  of  following  the  direct  road  which  leads  eastward  from
the  Cleft  Way  by  Lebadea  to  Coronea  and  the  Boeotian  plain,  he
struck  southward  through  the  mountains  to  Thisbe  and  thence  to  Creusis,
a  port  on  the  Gulf  of  Corinth,  captured  it,  and  then  marching  north-
eastward, probably  up  the  valley  of  the  Oeroe,  he  debouched  on  the
Boeotian  plain  and  encamped  at  Leuctra.  See  Xenophon,  Hellenica^
vi.  4.  3  sq.  ;  Diodorus,  xv.  53.  Leuctra  was  a  small  village  belonging
to  Thespiae  (Plutarch,  Atnat.  Narrat,  iii.  i)  and  stood  on  a  hill,  for
Xenophon  says  {Hellenica^  vi.  4.  4)  that  when  Cleombrotus  encamped
at  Leuctra  the  Boeotians  encamped  "  on  the  opposite  hill  at  no  great
distance  from  the  Lacedaemonians."

The  battlefield  is  a  level  alluvial  plain,  from  half  to  three-quarters  of
a  mile  wide,  bounded  by  a  line  of  low  hills  on  the  north  and  south.
Through  the  plain  flows  the  head  stream  of  the  Asopus,  which  is  here
no  more  than  a  small  brook.  The  plain  is  in  fact  merely  a  continuation
westward  of  the  great  level  plain  or  valley  of  the  Asopus.     At  present


h


CH.  xiii  LEUCTRA  51

it  is  treeless  and  covered  chiefly  with  corn-fields.  The  hills  on  the  north
side  of  the  plain,  where  the  Theban  army  was  posted,  are  low,  rounded,
gently -sloping  hills  which  at  the  present  day  are  ploughed  to  their
summits.  The  hills  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  plain,  where  the
Spartan  army  took  up  its  position,  are  higher  and  their  slope  to  the
plain  is  much  steeper.  The  track  to  Thebes  from  the  head  of  the
Corinthian  Gulf  by  which  the  Spartan  army  marched  to  Leuctra  comes
'^  down  the  slope  of  these  southern  hills,  crosses  the  plain,  and  ascends  the
northern  line  of  hills  through  a  small  valley  where  there  is  a  well,  the
sides  of  which  are  built  of  marble  blocks.  About  1 50  yards  or  so  after
passing  the  well  the  track  to  Thebes  is  cut  nearly  at  right  angles  by  the
track  from  Thespiae  to  Plataea.  On  the  upper  edge  of  the  southern
hills  there  now  stand  three  villages  close  together  which  collectively  go
by  the  name  of  Parapoungia,  Leuctra  must  have  been  in  this  neigh-
bourhood. It  seems  to  have  been  an  insignificant  place,  and  probably
was  never  surrounded  by  walls.
'\^.  The  ancient  fragments  (inscribed  tombstones,  shafts  of  columns,

^:^  'squared  blocks,  etc.)  which  are  to  be  seen  in  the  village  churches  of
!  Parapoungia  are  perhaps  vestiges  of  the  ancient  town.  On  the  northern
hill,  where  the  Thebans  were  encamped,  there  are  extensive  foundations  of
massive  polygonal  walls  above  the  copious  spring  of  Arkopodi  (*  bear's
foot ').  These  foundations  run  round  the  upper  edge  of  the  hill,  forming  a
square  of  about  500  metres.  The  fields  within  this  area  are  strewn  with
fragments  of  marble  blocks,  tiles,  and  vases.  At  the  spring  of  Arkopodi^
which  rises  at  the  southern  foot  of  the  hill,  there  are  some  large  blocks,
and  drums  of  columns.  These  ruins,  which  lie  exactly  opposite  the  most
easterly  of  the  three  villages  of  Parapoungia^  have  by  some  been
supposed  to  be  the  remains  of  Leuctra,  but  they  would  seem  rather  to
be  those  of  Eutresis,  a  town  mentioned  by  Homer  {Iliad,  ii.  502).  For
Eutresis  lay  beside  the  road  leading  from  Thespiae  to  Plataea,  and  its
walls  were  said  to  have  been  built  by  Amphion  and  Zethus,  who  dwelt
there  before  they  reigned  at  Thebes  (Stephanus  Byz.  s.v.  "Evrprja-is ;
Strabo,  ix.  p.  411).  Now  the  ruins  in  question  lie  close  to  the  track
from  Thespiae  to  Plataea,  and  the  massive  polygonal  walls  of  which  the
foundations  remain  might  well  be  regarded  as  the  work  of  the  mythical
Amphion  and  Zethus.

Cicero  tells  us  (De  inventioney  ii.  23)  that  the  Thebans  commemo-
rated their  victory  by  erecting  a  bronze  trophy,  contrary  to  Greek  usage,
which  forbade  the  erection  of  a  permanent  trophy  for  a  victory  won  by
Greeks  over  Greeks  (cp.  Plutarch,  Quaes/,  Pom.  37).  At  the  foot  of  the
hill  on  which  the  most  westerly  of  the  three  villages  Parapoungia  stands,
H.  N.  Ulrichs  discovered  in  1839  ^^  remains  of  a  large  monument,
which  may  have  been  the  Theban  trophy.  The  ruins  consist  of  a
square  base  supporting  a  portion  of  a  round  tower.  The  base  is  built  of
rough  blocks  of  conglomerate.  The  remains  of  the  tower  consist  of  large
blocks  of  a  whitish  limestone,  very  fine  and  hard.  Six  of  the  blocks  are
adorned  with  large  shields  over  3  feet  in  diameter,  carved  in  relief.
There  are  also  tri glyphs  and  metopes.  In  the  centre  is  a  large  altar,  of
the  ordinary  cubical  shape,  with  a  round  sinking  in  its  upper  surface.     It


52


LEUCTRA


BK.  IX.  BOEOTIA


is  supposed  that  the  monument,  when  entire,  formed  a  round  tower  3.46
metres  in  diameter,  of  the  Doric  style,  with  a  dome-shaped  roof ;  that
the  lower  part  of  the  roof  was  adorned  with  nine  shields  in  relief ;  and
that  under  the  cornice  of  the  roof  twelve  triglyphs  were  placed  round
the  tower.  The  tower  may  have  supported  the  bronze  trophy  of  which
Cicero  speaks.

See  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  485  sqq,  (who  takes  the  ruins  at  the
Arkopodi  spring  to  be  Leuctra,  and  supposes  the  battle  to  have  been  fought  in  the
valley  to  the  north  of  that  place) ;  L.  Ross,  IVanderungetty  i.  p.  18  sqq,  ;
H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen,  2.  pp.  102-113 ;  Welcker,  fageduci,  2.
p.  32  sq.  ;  Vischer,  ErinnerungeUy  p.  550  sqq. ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  240 ;
Baedeker,'  p.  175  x^ ;  Guide-Joanne,  2.  p.  26 ;  G.  B.  Grundy,  The  topography  of
the  battle  of  Plataea,  pp.  73-76.  As  to  the  battle  of  Leuctra,  see  Xenophon,
Hellenica,  vi.  4.  3-15  ;  Diodorus,  xv.  52-56 ;  Plutarch,  Pelopidas,  20-23.

Mr.  Grundy  is  clearly  wrong  in  supposing  that  the  Spartan  army
reached  Leuctra  from  Phocis  by  the  route  which  leads  from  Lebadea
along  the  northern  slopes  of  Helicon  to  the  valley  of  the  Muses.  No
army,  especially  an  army  with  cavalry,  could  make  its  way  along  this '
rugged  and  difficult  track  in  face  of  an  enemy  encamped  (as  the!
Thebans  were)  in  force  at  Coronea,  which  is  close  to  the  track.  Even
supposing  that  the  Spartans  had  accomplished  this  almost  impossible
feat,  why  should  they  afterwards  have  turned  out  of  their  way  to  go  by
Thisbe  to  Creusis  on  the  Gulf  of  Corinth  and  then  returned  on  their
steps  to  Leuctra  ?  This  marching  backwards  and  forwards  is  un-
intelligible on  the  hypothesis  that  the  Spartan  army  reached  Leuctra
from  Phocis  by  the  northern  side  of  Helicon.  The  narratives  of
Xenophon,  Diodorus,  and  Pausanias,  harmonising  with  the  natuxal
features  of  the  country,  oblige  us  to  suppose  that  Cleombrotus,  finding
the  route  along  the  north  side  of  Helicon  blocked  by  the  Theban  army
at  Coronea,  made  a  complete  circuit  of  Helicon,  passed  along  the
southern  side  of  the  mountain,  and  emerged  on  flat  gp-ound  at  Thisbe,
not  far  from  the  Gulf  of  Corinth.  Finding  himself  thus  in  the  south  of
Boeotia,  it  was  natural  that  he  should  wish  to  secure  the  port  of  Creusis
before  marching  northward  into  the  heart  of  the  country.  Having  done
so,  he  took  the  road  to  Thebes,  but  found  it  barred  by  the  Theban  army  .
at  Leuctra.

13.  4*  the  Spaxtan  kings used  to  be  followed  by  sheep


etc.  The  sacrifices  performed  by  a  Spartan  king  in  time  of  war
thus  described  by  Xenophon  or  whoever  wrote  the  treatise  The  Con-
stitution  of  JLacedaenion  :  "  First  of  all  the  king  and  his  staff  sacrifice  at
home  to  Zeus  the  Leader ;  and  if  the  sacrificial  omens  are  good,  the
Fire-bearer  takes  fire  from  the  altar  and  leads  the  way  to  the  frontier.
Here  again  the  king  sacrifices  to  Zeus  and  Athena,  Whenever  the
omens  attending  the  sacrifices  offered  to  these  two  deities  are  good,  he
crosses  the  frontier,  and  the  fire  taken  from  these  sacrifices  leads  the
way,  being  never  allowed  to  go  out,  and  victims  of  all  sorts  follow.
When  the  king  sacrifices  he  sets  about  the  work  in  the  morning  while  it
is  still  dark,  as  he  wishes  to  secure  God's  favour  before  (the  enemy  can
do  so)"  {Constitution  of  Lacedaemony  xiii.  2  sq,)     On  the  field  of  battle,


XIV


CERESSUS


53


rhen  the  troops  were  drawn  up  in  array  and  the  enemy  was  in  sight,  the
[ing  sacrificed  a  she-goat  to  the  Huntress  {Agrotera),  Then  he  ordered
flutes  to  strike  up  Castor's  tune,  every  man  put  a  garland  on  his  head,
the  whole  army  advanced  singing  a  marching  song  and  stepping  to
music  of  the  flutes  (Xenophon,  op,  cit,  xiii.  8  ;  /V/.,  Hellenica,  iv.  2.
io ;  Plutarch,  Lycurgus^  22).  But  the  first  sacrifice  offered  by  the  king
the  field  of  battle  was  to  the  Muses  (Plutarch,  Lycurgus^  21).  The
leaning  of  this  sacrifice  seems  obvious.  The  stirring  effects  of  martial
lusic  were  probably  explained  by  the  early  Greeks  as  due  to  the  direct
spiration  of  the  goddesses  of  music,  the  Muses.  Hence  sacrifices
rere  offered  to  them  and  their  favour  entreated  just  before  the  flutes
^truck  up  the  charge.  As  to  the  military  music  of  the  Greeks,  see
Starch,  De  musica,  26.  Athenaeus  says  (xiii.  p.  561)  that  the
:edaemonians  sacrificed  to  Love  before  an  engagement,  and  that  in
'rete  also  sacrifices  were  regularly  offered  before  a  battle  to  Love  by
le  handsomest  men  in  the  army  dressed  in  gay  attire.

13.  5.  the  wrath  of  the  daughters  of  Scedasus  etc.  Cp.
[enophon,  Heliemca,  vi.  4.  7  ;  Diodorus,  xv.  54 ;  Plutarch,  Pelopidas^
so-22 ;  id,y  Amai.  Narrat.  iii.

13.  6.  Xenocrates.     Cp.  iv.  32.  6  note.

13.  II.  The  victory was  the  most  famous  etc.     The  same

»timate  of  the  Theban  victory  at  Leuctra  is  expressed  by  Plutarch
IgesilauSy  29).

13.  1 2.  The  Thebans lost  forty-seven  men  etc.     Xenophon

lys  that  the  Lacedaemonians  had  nearly  1000  slain,  of  whom  400  were
Ipartans ;  he  does  not  mention  the  loss  on  the  Theban  side  {Hellenica^

4.  15).  Diodorus  says  (xv.  56)  that  the  Lacedaemonians  lost  not
is  than  4000,  and  the  Boeotians  about  300.  Plutarch  {Agesilaus^  28)
Its  the  loss  of  the  Lacedaemonians  at  1 000.  According  to  Dionysius
[alicamassensis  {Antiquity  Rom.  ii.  17)  the  Spartans  lost  1700.
fausanias's  estimate  of  the  loss  on  the  Boeotian  side  is,  as  Grote
smarks  (///>/.  of  Greece^  9.  p.  401),  preposterously  low.  The  Spartans,
led  soldiers  as  they  were,  must  have  sold  their  lives  more  dearly.

14.  I.  Epaminondas  ordered  the  rest  of  the  Peloponnesians  to
etc.     Pausanias's  statement  that  Epaminondas  dismissed  the

Uies  of  the  Lacedaemonians  but  kept  the  Lacedaemonians  themselves

risoners,  seems  inconsistent  with  the  narrative  of  Xenophon,  who  says

lat  the  beaten  army,  including  both  the  Lacedaemonians  and  their
lies,  retreated  by  a  difficult  road  and  met  the  fresh  levies,   which

[rchidamus   was   leading   to   their   assistance,   at   Aegosthena  in  the

[rritory  of  Megara  (Xenophon,  Hellenica^  vi.  4.  26).

14.  2.  Geressns.      The  site  of  this  place  is  uncertain.      H.   N.

[Irichs  inclined  to  place  it  at  Eremokastro^  a  modem  village  on  an
unence  close  to  Thespiae.     On  the  slope  towards  Thespiae  there  are

[few  large  stones,  which  U Irichs  thought  might  be  remains  of  the  walls

Ceressus.      But  the  eminence   on  which  Eremokastro  stands  can

lly  be  described  as  a  <  stronghold.'      It   is   low   and   nowhere,    I

ik,  in  the  least  precipitous.     Wheler  thought  that  Ceressus  may  have

n  near  Palaeo-Panagia^  a  village  about  2  miles  to  the  north-west


54  CERESSUS — PHOEBIA  bk.  ix.  boeotia

iiii .

of  Eremokastro,     Here  on  a  rocky  hill,  about  a  mile  to  the  north-west^
of  PcUaeo-Panagia^  stands  a  ruined  mediaeval  tower;  lower  down  ar^-"  -
some  remains  of  churches  and  houses.     This  rocky  hill  Wheler  took  XJi*  -,
be  the  site  of  Ceressus.     It  is  nearer  to  Thespiae  than  the  conspicuouf-  *'''
conical  hill  of  Ascra  and  is,  like  that  hill,  a  spur  of  Helicon.     See/jf\
Wheler,  Journey^  p.  476 ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  pp.  489  j^.,  49  JC^
sq*  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungetiy  2.  pp.  87,  92  ;  BursianU^^
Geogr,  I.  p.  238;  Baedeker,^  pp.  162-164.     Plutarch  tells  us  (Cam///f/,
19)  that  more  than  two  hundred  years  before  the  battle  of  Leuctra  th^j^
Boeotians  defeated  the  Thessalians  under  Lattamyas  at  Ceressus.     Thill
may  have  been  the  time  when  the  Thespians  took  refuge  in  Ceressus.

14.  6.  When  Ms  army  had  reached  Lechaenm  etc.    Accordin
to  Plutarch  {Pelopidas^  24)  the  Athenians  attacked  Epaminondas  no
at  Lechaeum,  but  at  Cenchreae  on  the   other   side  of  the  Isthmu
Xenophon  blames   Iphicrates  for  leaving  the  road  by  Cenchreae  u
guarded  {Hellenica^  vi.  5.  51).

14.  7.  Epaminondas advanced  to  the  Athenian  capitalf£^^

Neither  Xenophon  nor  Plutarch,  who  describe  the  return  of  the  Boeotian'  ^
army  from    Peloponnese,  makes  any  reference  to  this  advance  upoi^;
Athens.     Grote  thinks  it  unlikely  that  any  such  movement  was  made,;
and  he  attempts  to  interpret  the  statement  of  Pausanias  as  referring  no
to  Athens  but  to  Corinth.     But  the  words  of  Pausanias  can  have  n
other  meaning  than  that  Epaminondas  advanced  against  Athens  itsel
See  Xenophon,  Hellenica^  vi.  5.  52  ;  Plutarch,  Pelop,  24;  Grote,  His,
of  Greece^  9.  p.  456  sqq. ;   Thirl  wall.  Hist,  of  Greece^   5.  p.   140  sq.
Curtius,  Griech.  Gesch.^  3.  p.  323.

14.  7*  He  was  tried  for  his  life  etc     Cp.  Plutarch,  Pelopidas^  25
Grote,  Hist,  of  Greece y  9.  p.  457  sqq,

15.  I.  Pelopidas,  paying  a  visit  etc.     On  the  imprisonment
Pelopidas  by  Alexander,  tyrant  of  Pherae,  and  the  expedition  to  releas
him,  see  Diodorus,  xv.  71  ;  Plutarch,  Pelopidas^  27-29.

15.  3.  the  Thebans  expelled  the  Orchomenians  etc.     Accordin
to  Diodorus  (xv.  79)  the  Thebans  put  the  men  to  the  sword  and  sol
the  women  and  children  into  slavery.     There  is  a  discrepancy  betwee
Pausanias  and  Diodorus  as  to  the  date  of  this  foul  deed.     Diodoruf^i^
places  the  imprisonment  of  Pelopidas  by  Alexander  of  Pherae  in  3
B.C.  and  the  destruction  of  Orchomenus  in  364  B.C.;  whereas  Pausani
supposes  that  these  two  events  were  simultaneous.     Grote  {Hist.
Greece^  10.  p.  72)  follows  Diodorus ;  Thirl  wall  {Hist,  of  Greece,  5.  pS/>*
i^Z  sq.)  follows  Pausanias.  V|h,';"

15.  4.  defeated  the  Lacedaemonians  at  Lechaenm  etc.  SJ^^^lif
Xenophon,  Hellenica,  vii.  i.  15-17  ;  Diodorus,  xv.  68.  ^*  /  i

15.  4.  Phoebia.  This  town  is  mentioned  by  Stephanus  ByzantiiKt:/ '
{s.v.)  The  same  geographer  {s.v.  Bov<f>La)  mentions  a  village  Buphia  i|v?  ■/
the  territory  of  Sicyon,  which  is  probably  identical  with  Phoebia.  it  *'^r
Ross  identified  Phoebia  or  Buphia  with  some  ruins  of  an  ancient  Gre^'^);:
fortress  situated  on  a  height  which  projects  into  the  valley  of  the  Nemci^  -f.'-  j
river  on  the  west,  exactly  opposite  the  table-mountain  Apesas  {Phoukd^/yi}^
There  are  here  some  foundations  of  walls,  built  of  unhewn  blocks.   Leakbi  J   '


CH.  XVI  THE  THREE  APHRODITES  55

however,  preferred  to  identify  these  ruins  with  the  fortress  on  Mt.  Tri-
caranum  mentioned  by  Xenophon  {HelUnica^  vii.  2.  i).  See  L.  Ross,
Reisen^  p.  40 ;  Leake,  Pelop,  p.  401  ;  Schubart,  Methodologies  p.  92.

15.  5.  In  the  picture  of  the  cavalry  fight  at  Athens  etc.  See
L  3.  4  ;  viii.  1 1.  5  sq.

15.  6.  By  my  connsels  Sparta  was  shorn  of  her  glory.  This
line  is  translated  by  Cicero  {TuscuL  disput,  v.  17.  §  49).

16.  I.  Oalamis.     See  note  on  v.  25.  5.

16.  I.  the  observatory  of  Tiresias.  More  literally  "the  place
where  Tiresias  watched  for  omens"  (otct>vo<rico?r€tov  Tctpcortov).  It
seems  to  have  been  a  seat  on  which  the  blind  soothsayer  sat  and
listened  to  the  screams  of  birds  and  the  whir  of  their  wings  in  order  to
draw  omens  from  these  sounds.     See  Sophocles,  Antigone^  999- 1 004.

16.  2.  Xenophon,  an  Athenian.  This  sculptor  was  a  contemporary
of  the  elder  Cephisodotus.     See  viii.  30.  10  note.

16.  2.  the  image  of  Peace  with  Wealth  in  her  arms.  See  i.  8.
2  note.

16.  3.  wooden  images  of  Aphrodite  etc.  With  these  three  images
of  Aphrodite  compare  the  three  at  Megalopolis  (viii.  32.  i).  From  a
comparison  of  the  two  sets  of  images  Mr.  Berger  infers  that  the  name-
less Aphrodite  of  Megalopolis  must  be  the  same  with  the  Theban
Aphrodite  the  Averter.  He  would  also  identify  Aphrodite  the  Averter
with  the  Marine  Aphrodite  (Aphrodite  Pelagia)  mentioned  by  Artemi-
donis  {Onir,  ii.  37)  ;  but  his  reasons  seem  inconclusive.  Augustine
speaks  of  three  Aphrodites  (De  civit.  deiy  iv.  10),  but  hesitatingly  and
apparently  with  little  or  no  authority.  The  legend  that  the  three  images
of  Aphrodite  at  Thebes  were  made  out  of  the  figure-heads  of  Cadmus's
ships  seems,  in  Mr.  Berger's  opinion,  to  show  that  these  Aphrodites
were  Phoenician  deities.  We  know  from  Herodotus  (iii.  37)  that  the
Phoenicians  placed  images  called  Pataikoi  at  the  prows  of  their  ships  ;
and  these  images  were  probably  the  sailors'  gods.  Cp.  Suidas  and
Hesychius,  5,v.  Ilaraticot.  On  Phoenician  coins,  supposed  to  be  of
Aradus,  a  galley  is  represented  with  an  image,  probably  one  of  these
Pataikoi^  at  the  prow.  See  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  Part  dans
Pantiquit/,  3.  p.  419,  fig.  292.  As  to  the  supposed  Oriental  character  of
these  Theban  Aphrodites  see  Ph.  Berger,  in  Gazette  arMologique^  6
(1880),  p.  25  sqq.\  L.  R.  Famell,  The  Cults  of  the  Greek  States^  2.  p.
635.

16.  6.  Beside  the  Proetidian  gate a  theatre.    Through  the

Proetidian  gate  went  the  road  to  Chalcis  (see  ix.  18.  i).  On  the  hill  to
the  right  of  the  present  road  to  Chalcis  there  is  a  hollow,  surrounded  by
a  watercourse.  It  has  been  suggested  that  in  this  hollow  may  have
been  the  seats  of  the  ancient  theatre  (Baedeker's  Greece^  Engl.  Trans,
p.  173  sq,)     Excavations  might  decide  the  question.

16.  6.  once  a  year they  open  the  sanctuary.    Cp.  note  on

I  imi.  47.  5.

16.  7.  Alcmena was  turned  into  a  stone.    The  early  his-

orian  Pherecydes,  who  seems  to  have  recorded  many  curious  old  legends,
bus  tells  the  story  to  which  Pausanias  briefly  refers.      "  Meanwhile


56  ARTEMIS  OF  GOOD  FAME  bk.  ix.  bobotia

Alcmena  died  of  old  age  and  the  Heraclids  carried  her  out  to  burial.
They  dwelt  in  the  market-place  beside  the  Electran  gate,  where  Her-
cules had  dwelt  before  them.  But  Zeus  sent  Hermes  with  orders  to
steal  Alcmena  and  carry  her  away  to  the  Islands  of  the  Blest  and  there
to  give  her  to  Rhadamanthys  to  wife.  Hermes  complied  and  stole  away
Alcmena,  but  he  put  a  stone  into  the  coffin  in  her  stead.  So  the  Hera-
clids, finding  the  coffin  very  heavy  to  carry,  dumped  it  down  and  opened
it,  and  there  they  found  a  stone  instead  of  Alcmena.  They  took  it  out
and  set  it  in  the  grove  where  is  the  shrine  of  Alcmena  at  Thebes  "
(Pherecydes,  quoted  by  Antoninus  Liberalis,  Transform,  33).
16.  7-  that  of  the  Megarians.     See  i.  41.  i.

16.  7-  the  tombs  of  the  children  of  Amphion.  Artstodemus,
however,  denied  that  the  tombs  of  the  children  of  Amphion  and  Niobe
were  at  Thebes  (Schol.  on  Euripides,  Phoen,  159).

17.  I.  a  temple  of  Artemis  of  Qood  Fame.  Cp.  i.  14-  5  note.
Her  temple  was  in  the  market-place  at  Thebes  (Sophocles,  Oed.  Tyrann,
161)  ;  indeed  she  had  an  altar  and  an  image  in  every  market-place  in
Boeotia  and  Locris,  and  men  and  women  sacrificed  to  her  before  mar-
riage (Plutarch,  AristideSy  20).  The  runner  who  brought  the  sacred
fire  from  Delphi  to  Plataea  in  a  single  day  (see  note  on  ix.  2.  5)  was
buried  by  his  admiring  townsmen  in  the  sanctuary  of  Artemis  of  Good
Fame  (Plutarch,  I.e.)  On  the  goddess  and  her  image  by  Scopas,  see
L.  Ulrichs,  SkopaSy  ^.77  sqq.

As  the  temple  of  Artemis  of  Good  Fame  at  Thebes  was  near
the  Proetidian  gate  (see  ix.  16.  6  sq,)  and  in  the  market-place,  it
follows  that  the  market-place  was  in  the  north-eastern  quarter  of  the
city.  There  is  only  one  place  adapted  for  a  market-place  in  this  part
of  the  site,  namely  the  low  gp'ound  to  the  north-east  of  the  Cadmea,  at
the  point  where  the  gully,  which  bounds  the  Cadmea  on  the  east,  opens
out  into  a  tolerably  wide  and  level  stretch  of  ground.  Here  then  we
may  place,  with  fair  certainty,  the  ancient  market-place  of  Thebes.
Excavations  here  might  prove  fruitful.  The  market-place  was  surrounded
by  colonnades,  the  walls  of  which  were  covered  with  the  arms  taken
from  the  Athenians  at  the  battle  of  Delium.  Indeed  so  great  was  the
spoil  taken  by  the  Thebans  on  that  occasion  that  out  of  it  they  built  a
large  colonnade  in  the  market-place  and  adorned  it  with  bronze  statues.
See  Diodorus,  xii.  70.  5.  The  Theban  senate  was  sitting  in  the  great
colonnade  in  the  market-place  on  a  hot  summer  noon,  when  the  Spartans
stole  through  the  deserted  streets  and  seized  the  Cadmea  (Xenophon,
Hellenica^  v.  2.  29).  Again  it  was  in  the  market-place  that  the  Theban
patriots,  who  had  resolved  to  expel  the  Spartan  garrison  from  the  Cadmea,
mustered  in  driving  snow  and  sleet,  and  armed  themselves  for  the
attempt  with  the  weapons  which  lined  the  walls  of  the  colonnades  and
with  others  which  they  procured  from  the  shops  of  the  sword-cutlers  in
the  neighbourhood.  See  Xenophon,  Hellenica^  v.  4.  9 ;  Plutarch,  De
gento  SocratiSy  3o»  34*  It  is  said  that  after  the  destruction  of  Thebes
the  only  monument  among  all  the  ruins  which  the  dejected  Thebans
cared  to  search  out  and  restore  was  an  image  of  Hermes  bearing  an
inscription  which  attested  the  superiority  of  the  Thebans  to  all  the  rest


CH.  XVII  TOMB  OF  ZETHUS  AND  AMPHION  57

of  the  Greeks  in  playing  on  the  flute !  In  the  days  of  Dio  Chrysostom
this  image  still  stood  solitary  among  the  ruins  of  the  market-place.  See
Dio  Chrysostom,  Orat.  vii.  vol.  i.  p.  136,  ed.  Dindorf.  In  Pausanias*s
time,  as  doubtless  in  Dio  Chrysostom's,  the  new  market-place  was  on
the  Cadmea.     See  ix.  12.  3.

17.  2.  ErginOB.  Cp.  ix.  37.  i  sqq.  An  ancient  vase-painting,
which  has  been  variously  interpreted,  is  explained  by  Mr.  R.  Engelmann
to  be  a  representation  of  Hercules's  combat  with  Erginus.  See  Archdo-
logische  Zeitung^  33  (1876),  pp.  20-23  \  ^'^-j  37  ('879),  pp.  186-196.

17.  3.  Athena  snmamed  Girder.  From  an  inscription  (C  /.  G,
G.  S,  I.  No.  548)  we  learn  that  Athena  was  worshipped  under  this  title
(Ziocmfpia)  at  Tanagra  along  with  Zeus  the  Contriver  (cp.  Paus.  ii.  22.
2).     Both  titles  have  probably  reference  to  war.

17.  3.  Ghalcodon.  See  viii.  15.  6  ;  ix.  19.  3.  There  was  a  shrine
(vfpt^ov)  of  Chalcodon  at  Athens  (Plutarch,  Theseus ^  27).

17.  3.  Homer,  in  comiMuring  Agamemnon  to  Ares  etc.  See
Iliady  ii.  479.

17.  4-  The  common  tomb  of  Zethus  and  Amphion  is  a  small
monnd  of  earth.  This  tomb  was  on  the  north  side  of  Thebes,  near
the  gate  which  Aeschylus  calls  the  North  Gate  (Seven  against  Thebes^
515  sq,  ed.  Verrall).  It  was  outside  the  walls  (Euripides,  Phoenissae^
145  ;  jV/.,  Suppliants^  663).  Ancient  writers  mention  a  place  at  Thebes
called  the  Amphium  ('A/A<^tov  or  ''Afj.<f>i.ov),  which  is  perhaps  to  be
distinguished  from  the  tomb  of  Amphion  and  Zethus  (Xenophon,
Hellenica^  v.  4.  8  ;  Plutarch,  De  genio  Socratis^  4  ;  Arrian,  Anabasis^
i.  8.  6).  H.  N.  Ulrichs  and  Prof.  Fabricius  incline  to  identify  the
Amphium  with  the  hillock  to  the  north  of  the  Cadmea,  just  outside
the  present  town,  beyond  the  square  mediaeval  tower.  See  H.  N.
Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen^  2.  p.  17  ;  Fabricius,  TAeben,  pp.  19,
31.  The  hillock  is  too  large  to  answer  to  the  "small  mound  of  earth"
of  Pausanias ;  otherwise  I  should  have  proposed  to  identify  it  with  the
tomb  of  Amphion  and  Zethus.  Meerschaum  is  dug  in  the  hillock.
Cp.  Fiedler,  Reise^  i.  p.  93  sqq,  ;  Wheler,  yi7z/r«^,  p.  332.

17.  4-  The  people  of  Tithorea try  to  filch  some  of  the

earth  etc  One  of  the  laws  of  the  Twelve  Tables  at  Rome  forbade
people  to  spirit  away  the  crops  from  a  neighbour's  field  by  means  of
spells  and  incantations  (Pliny,  Nat,  hist,  xxviii.  17  sq.  \  Servius  on
Virgil,  EcL  viii.  99  ;  Augustine,  De  civit,  dei^  viii.  1 9 ;  Apuleius,  De
f^iagioy  47  ;  Bruns,  Fontes  juris  Romani  antiqui^^  p.  29).  Cp.  Tibullus,
i.  8.  19 ;  Virgil,  EcL  viii.  99.  Once  on  a  time  a  certain  C.  Furius
Cresimus,  whose  small  farm  produced  heavier  crops  than  the  largest
^rms  in  the  neighbourhood,  was  shrewdly  suspected  of  drawing  away
the  com  from  other  people's  fields  by  enchantment.  Being  brought
before  the  public  assembly  at  Rome  to  stand  his  trial  on  this  charge,
he  produced  in  the  sight  of  the  people  his  ploughshares,  his  mattocks,
his  sturdy  hinds,  his  sleek  oxen,  and  pointing  to  them  said,  "  These  are
my  enchantments,  gentlemen.  I  regret  that  it  is  not  in  my  power  to
lay  before  you  my  toils  and  moils  and  sweatings."  He  was  unanimously
acquitted.     See  Pliny,  Nat,  hist,  xviii.  41  sqq.     The  learned  Betzius,  a


58  GRA  VE  OF  DIRCE  BK.  ix.  boeotia

Carmelite  monk  who  lived  about  1500,  tells  us  how  a  certain  witch
walked  round  a  field  of  ripe  com  repeating  the  verse  *  Super  ctspidem^
etc.  ;  how  she  then  went  home  and  taking  a  pipe  or  tube  repeated  the
same  verse ;  and .  how  thereupon  the  whole  of  the  com  came  pouring
through  the  tube,  so  that  not  a  single  grain  was  left  on  the  field.  See
Delrius,  Disquisitiones  Magicae^  p.  400  ;  J.  W.  Wol^  Niederldndiscke
Sagen^  p.  371.  The  sun  enters  Taums  on  April  20th  (Ovid,  /^aJ/r,  iv.
715  sqq,)  We  may  perhaps  suppose  that  the  Tithoreans  chose  this
time  for  their  depredations  on  the  tomb  of  Amphion  and  Zethus
because  it  was  the  season  of  the  spring  sowing.  That  the  custom  of
stealing  earth  from  the  tomb  originated  in  the  oracle  quoted  by
Pausanias  is  unlikely.  More  probably  the  oracle  was  fabricated  to
explain  the  custom.

17.  6.  The  wife  of  Lycos suffered  etc.     The  legend  that

Dirce,  the  wife  of  Lycus,  was  bound  by  Amphion  and  Zethus  to  a  bull
which  dragged  her  to  death  is  familiar  to  every  one  through  the  gp'oup
of  *  the  Famese  Bull,*  executed  by  the  sculptors  ApoUonius  and  Tau-
riscus  (Pliny,  Nat,  hist  xxxvi.  34)  and  found  in  the  sixteenth  century  in
the  baths  of  Caracalla  at  Rome.  On  the  legend  and  the  various  repre-
sentations of  it  in  ancient  art,  see  Otto  Jahn,  *Antiope  und  Dirke,'
Archdologische Zeitungy  n  (1853),  pp.  65-105  ;  K.  Dilthey,  *Schleifung
dcr  Dirke,'  ib,  36  (1878),  pp.  43-54 ;  Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  pp.  107
^9"i  455  ^Q9*  A  curious  custom  was  observed  at  Thebes  with  regard
to  the  grave  of  Dirce.  The  general  of  the  cavalry  was  the  only  person
at  Thebes  who  knew  where  the  grave  was.  When  he  was  retiring  from
office,  he  took  his  successor  alone  and  showed  him  the  grave  by  night.
They  offered  certain  fireless  sacrifices,  and  then,  after  carefully  obliter-
ating all  traces  of  the  rites  which  they  had  performed,  they  separated
and  went  away  in  the  darkness.  See  Pluta.rch,  De  gem'o  Socra/is^  5.
Perhaps  the  grave  was  one  of  those  talismans  on  which  the  safety  of
states  was  sometimes  supposed  to  hang  and  the  existence  of  which
was  accordingly  kept  a  profound  secret.     See  note  on  viii.  47.  5.

17.  6.  Antiope  and  Phocus  share  the  same  grave.     See  x.  32. 1 1.

18.  I.  Melanippus.  The  tyrant  Clisthenes  instituted  a  worship  of
Melanippus  at  Sicyon,  assigning  him  a  shrine  or  precinct  in  the  Pry-
taneum  and  transferring  to  him  the  sacrifices  and  festivals  which  had
previously  been  celebrated  in  honour  of  his  foe,  the  Argive  Adrastus
(Herodotus,  v.  67).

18.  2.  a  line  of  the  Siad.  The  line  is  //.  xiv.  114.  But  the
ancient  critics  thought  the  line  spurious.  See  Verrairs  Introduction  to
Aeschylus,  Seven  against  ThebeSy  p.  xxv.  sq,

18.  3.  the  flame  and  the  smoke part  in  two.     Other  writers

mention  this  marvel.  See  Hyginus,  Fab,  68  and  71  ;  Philostratus,
Itnag,  ii.  29 ;  Statius,  Theb.  xii.  429  sqq, ;  Lucan,  i.  550  sqq,

18.  4-  a  smoke  ascends  of  itself  ont  of  the  grave.  On  the  hill  of
Vulcan  in  Sicily  there  were  altars  on  which,  when  a  sacrifice  was  to  be
offered,  vine-twigs  were  heaped ;  and  if  the  god  accepted  the  sacrifice,
the  twigs  were  said  to  catch  fire  of  themselves  without  any  light  being
put  to  them  (Solinus,  v.  23,  p.  58,  ed.  Mommsen^).      A  great  flame


CH.  XIX  TEUMESUS  59

was  said  to  burst  out  of  the  cave  of  Zeus  in  Crete  once  a  year
(Antoninus  Liberalis,  Transform,  19).  Cp.  Lobeck,  Aglaophamus^  p.
123,  n.  ii.,  who  refers  to  the  annual  new  fire  in  the  Church  of  the  Holy
Sepulchre  at  Jerusalem.  The  smoke  which  Pausanias  saw  curling  up
from  the  tomb  of  Pionis  was  doubtless  a  piece  of  priestly  legerdemain  of
the  same  sort

18.  5.  the  grave  of  Hector beside the  fountain  of

OediiniB.  According  to  Tzetzes  {SchoL  on  Lycophron^  ii94})  Greece
being  afflicted  with  a  plague,  the  oracle  commanded  the  Greeks  to  fetch
the  bones  of  Hector  from  Ophrynum  (Ophrynium)  in  the  Troad  and  to
deposit  them  honourably  in  a  Greek  city  which  had  taken  no  part  in
the  Trojan  war.  So  Hector's  remains  were  brought  to  Thebes  and
deposited  near  Oedipus's  fountain.  From  Pausanias's  description  we
infer  that  the  fountain  of  Oedipus  was  near  the  gate  through  which  the
road  to  Chalcis  ran.  The  fountain  is  doubtless  the  copious  spring  now
called  the  spring  of  St.  Theodore  {Hagios  Theodoros).  Its  clear  cool
water  gushes  out  of  twelve  spouts  under  the  hill  on  which  the  suburb  of
Hagii  Theodori  stands,  a  little  to  the  right  of  the  road  to  Chalcis.  The
water  crosses  the  road  and  flows  into  the  Ismenus  a  few  paces  lower
down.  Women  wash  clothes  at  it.  H.  N.  Ulrichs  thought  that  the
grave  of  Hector  might  be  one  of  the  mounds  a  little  farther  on,  to  the
left  of  the  road.  Sulla  built  an  altar  beside  the  spring  of  Oedipus  and
sacrificed  on  it  for  his  victory  over  Archelaus,  the  general  of  Mithridates
(Plutarch,  Sulla^  19).

See  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen,  2.  pp.  5,  19  sq, ;  Vischer,
Erinnerungen,  p.  562  sq,  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  230 ;  Baedeker,'  p.  184 ;  Guide-
foanne^  2.  p.  13 ;  Fabricius,  Theben,  pp.  9,  23.

19.  I.  Teumesns.  Starting  from  the  north-east  comer  of  Thebes
by  the  high-road  which  leads  to  Chalcis,  we  pass  on  the  right  the
suburb  of  Hagii  Theodori^  and  then  descend  into  a  wide  dreary,  treeless,
ill-cultivated  plain,  which  seems  to  have  been  known  to  the  ancients  as
the  Aonian  Plain  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  412  ;  Moschus,  iv.  36  sq.  ;  Statins,
Thcb.  xii.  192).  On  the  south  it  is  bounded  by  a  chain  of  hills  which
divides  it  from  the  valley  of  the  Asopus.  The  highest  summit  of  the
chain  is  now  called  Mt.  Soros.  About  5  miles  from  Thebes  a  low
rocky  hill,  small  but  conspicuous  frx)m  its  isolated  position  in  the  middle
of  the  plain,  rises  a  few  hundred  yards  to  the  left  of  the  road.  This
isolated  rocky  hill  is  now  called,  from  its  position  in  the  middle  of  the
plain,  Mesovouni  (* middle  hill').  It  is  the  Teumesus  of  the  ancients.
The  poet  Antimachus  described  Teumesus  as  "a  little  windy  hill"
(Strabo,  ix.  p.  409  ;  Aristotle,  Rhet.  iii.  6),  and  the  description  is  apt ;
for  the  isolated  situation  of  this  little  hill  in  the  middle  of  a  plain  en-
closed by  mountains  on  the  north  and  south  must  expose  it  to  the  full
force  of  the  winds  both  from  the  east  and  the  west.  Vestiges  of  ancient
buildings  have  been  observed  at  various  points  round  the  hill,  especially
on  the  eastern  slope ;  here,  therefore,  may  have  stood  the  village  or
little  town  of  Teumesus.  The  top  of  the  hill  is  of  some  extent  and
friirly  level,  but  so  studded  with  rocks  that  we  can  hardly  suppose  that


6o  TEUMESUS — GLISAS  bk.  ix.  bobotia

there  was  ever  an  ancient  settlement  of  any  size  on  it.  However,
towards  its  eastern  end  the  top  is  somewhat  smoother  and  here  I  picked
up  some  sherds  of  red  pottery  decorated  with  bands  of  incised  lines.
On  the  south  side  of  the  hill,  at  the  foot  of  the  rocks,  there  is  a
conspicuous  but  shallow  cave  in  which  the  Teumesian  fox  may  be
supposed  to  have  had  his  lair.  A  broad  stretch  of  level  plain  divides
the  hill  on  the  north  from  the  high  rugged  slopes  of  Mount  Hypatus.
The  plain  between  Teumesus  and  Thebes  is  almost  a  dead  flat  and  the
high-road  runs  across  it  in  a  straight  line.  Some  ancient  writers  speak
of  the  grassy  forest  glades  of  Teumesus  (Nonnus,  Dionys,  v.  59  sq, ;
Homer,  Hymn  to  Apollo^  224  ;  Statius,  Theb,  i.  485).  From  such  ex-
pressions, which  are  quite  inapplicable  to  the  utterly  bare  rocky  hill  of
Mesovouni,  we  may,  perhaps,  infer  that  the  ancients  extended  the  name
Teumesus  to  the  Soros  hills  on  the  south,  where  there  are  springs  and
grottoes,  with  here  and  there  some  patches  of  shrubs  and  trees.

See  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  245  sq. ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und
Forschungen^  2.  p.  23  sq,  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.  568 ;  Bursian,  Geogr.
I.  p.  224 ;  Baedeker,'  p.  188;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  14.

19.  I.  the  Tenmesian  fox.  This  ravening  beast  was  said  to  have
infested  the  lands  of  Thebes,  and  the  people  paid  him  blackmail  monthly
in  the  shape  of  a  boy.  To  rid  the  country  of  this  pest,  Amphitryo  went
to  Athens  and  persuaded  Cephalus,  husband  of  Procris,  to  come  and
hunt  the  fox  with  his  matchless  hound.  But  Zeus  turned  both  fox  and
hound  into  stones.  See  Apollodorus,  iii.  4.  6  sq,  ;  Suidas  and  Photius,
Lexicon^  s.v,  T€Vfj.7j(ria ;  Apostolius,  xvi.  42  ;  jFrag;  Hist,  Graec.  ed.
Miiller,  3.  p.  309  sq.  ;  cp.  Hyginus,  Astronomica^  35  ;  W.  Mannhardt,
Antike  Wold-  und  FeldkultCy  p.  57  sq,

19.  I.  the  Telchinians.  It  has  been  argued  by  Mr.  W.  Prellwitz
that  the  name  Telchinians  (TcAxtvcs)  means  'copper-smiths,'  being
connected  with  the  Greek  \q.\ko%^  the  Lithuanian  gelezis^  Old  Prussian
gelso^  etc.  See  his  article  on  the  subject  in  Bezzenberger's  Beitrdge  2ur
Kunde  der  Indogertnanischen  Sprachen^  15  (1889),  pp.  148-154.

19.  2.  Glisas.  Glisas  is  mentioned  by  Homer  (Iliady  ii.  504).  It
is  described  by  Strabo  (ix.  p.  412)  as  situated  on  Mt  Hypatus,  in  the
district  of  Thebes,  near  Teumesus.  Pausanias  found  it  in  ruins,  and
these  ruins  may  still  be  seen  above  the  village  of  Syrtzi  on  a  low  rocky
hill  called  Mt.  Tourleza  which  projects  from  the  foot  of  the  high  rugged
Mt.  Hypatus  (the  modem  Sagmatas)  into  the  Aonian  plain.  The  town
walls,  rudely  constructed  of  large  polygonal  blocks,  run  for  a  considerable
distance  along  the  slope  of  the  hill  above  the  village.  Within  their
circuit  and  higher  up  the  slope  is  a  church  of  the  Panagia  built  on
ancient  foundations  and  containing  various  fragments  of  antiquity,  in
particular  a  black  stone  inscribed  with  the  word  BYKATE  in  very
archaic  letters.  On  the  summit  of  the  hill  of  Tourleza  are  the  remains
of  the  acropolis,  the  wall  of  which  seems  to  have  been  about  8  feet
thick.  The  inner  portion  of  the  wall  is  built  of  small,  beautifully-fitting
polygonal  blocks;  the  outer  side  was  probably  constructed  of  larger
blocks,  but  it  is  at  present  buried  under  the  soil.     Some  foundations  of


CH.  XIX  GLISAS^MO  UNT  HYPA  TVS  6 1

buildings  may  also  be  seen  on  the  acropolis.  The  general  aspect  of
Glisas,  perched  on  a  rocky  hill  with  a  rugged  ravine  on  the  eastern  side
and  dominated  by  the  higher  rocky  slopes  of  Mt.  Hypatus,  is  not  unlike
that  of  Mycenae.

See  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  pp.  247,  250  (who  seems  to  take  the  ruins  now
called  Kastri  for  Glisas ;  see  below  §  4  note) ;  Welcker,  Tagehuhj  2.  p.  27  sq, ;
H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen^  2.  p.  27  sq,  ;  L.  Ross,  Wtmderungen,  1,
p.  106 ;  Borsian,  Gtogr,  i.  p.  216 ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  p.  568.

19.  2.  a  Binall  mound  sliaded  by  a  wild  wood  etc.  This  is
doubtless  the  tumulus  in  the  plain  in  front  of  the  village  of  Syrtzi,  It
is  composed  of  earth  and  small  stones  and  was  enclosed  by  a  wall  of
polygonal  stones,  of  which  many  large  blocks  are  still  standing  in  their
places.  The  tumulus  is  of  considerable  size,  and  rising  as  it  does  in
the  open  plain  strikes  the  eye  from  a  distance.  Pausanias  calls  it
small,  perhaps  by  comparison  with  the  great  tumulus  at  Marathon.  But
it  certainly  hix  siurpasses  in  size  the  barrows  commonly  erected  in  Greece
by  private  persons.  See  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen^  2.  p.
26 ;  Welcker,  Tagebuch^  2.  p.  28  ;  L.  Ross,  Wanderungen^  i.  p.  106
sq, ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  216.

19.  2.  the  tomb  of  Aegialeus  is  at  Pagae.     See  i.  44.  4.

19.  3.  Tiresias chopped  off  its  head  etc.     It  was  said  that

Tiresias,  seeing  two  snakes  coupling  on  Mt  Cithaeron  or  Mt  Cyllene,
killed  the  female  and  was  himself  consequently  transformed  into  a
woman.  Eight  years  afterwards  he  again  saw  two  snakes  coupling ;
this  time  he  killed  the  male,  and  was  changed  back  into  a  man.  See
Tzetzes,  SckoL  on  Lycophron^  683 ;  Eustathius,  on  Homer,  Odyssey^  p.
1665  ;  Ovid,  Metam,  iii.  324  sqq, ;  Hyginus,  Fab.  75  ;  Apollodorus,
iii.  6.  7.  (These  accounts  partly  differ  from  each  other  slightly,  partly
supplement  each  other.  I  have  given  above  what  would  seem  to  be
the  original  version  of  the  story.)  The  idea  that  it  is  unlucky  to  see
snakes  coupling  appears  to  be  widespread.  In  the  Himalayas  certain
religious  ceremonies  are  prescribed  when  a  person  sees  snakes  coupling
{Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal^  1884,  pt.  i.  p.  10 1  ;  the
nature  of  the  ceremonies  is  not  described).  In  Timorlaut,  an  island  in
the  East  Indies,  it  is  deemed  an  omen  of  great  misfortune  to  a  man  if
he  dreams  that  he  sees  snakes  coupling  (J.  G.  F.  Riedel,  Sluik-  en  kroes-
karige  rassen  tusschen  Selebes  en  Papua,  p.  285).

19.  3.  a  temple  of  Supreme  Zeus.  Mount  Hypatus  is  the  con-
spicuous mountain  now  called  Mt.  Sagmatas;  it  is  bold  and  rocky,  and
has  a  flat  summit  which  is  crowned  with  a  monastery  of  the  Transfigura-
tion, founded  by  Alexis  Comnenus.  The  church  of  the  monastery  con-
tains fine  mosaics,  and  stands  on  the  foundations  of  the  temple  of  Zeus.
Both  the  church  and  the  monastery,  as  well  as  two  neighbouring  chapels,
contain  many  considerable  fragments  of  antiquity  built  into  the  walls.
The  dome  of  the  church  is  supported  by  two  ancient  monolithic  columns,
with  their  bases  and  capitals.  From  the  summit  the  view  is  extensive
and  fine,  embracing  the  great  expanse  of  the  Copaic  plain  (a  lake  no
longer),  the  dark  blue  water  of  the  deep  lake  of  Hylica  environed  by


\


62  THE  BOEOTIAN  LAKES  bk.  ix.  boeotia

barren  and  rugged  mountains,  the  Euboean  sea,  and  on  the  horizon  the
peaks  of  Parnassus,  Helicon,  and  Cithaeron.

See  Leake,  Northern  Greece,  2.  p.  219;  H.  N.  Uhichs,  Reisen  und  Forsch-
ungettj  2.  p.  28  sq. ;  L.  Ross,  IVanderungen,  i.  p.  106 ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  I.  p.
216;  Guide- Jocmne,  2.  p.  14.

The  lake  of  Hylica  (JJkert)^  which  Pausanias  does  not  mention,  is
a  large  and  beautiful  sheet  of  blue  water  with  winding  bays  and  arms,
dominated  on  the  north  by  the  grey  precipitous  crags  of  Mount  Ptous.
I  was  told  that  the  lake  has  been  much  increased  in  depth  and  area
since  a  portion  of  the  water  of  the  Copaic  plain  has  been  drained  into  it.
From  the  lake  the  water  passes  by  a  tunnel  into  the  sister  lake  of
Paralimni  on  the  north-east,  from  which  again  it  passes  into  the  sea
near  Anthedon.  The  path  from  Acraephnium  {Karditsa)  to  Anthedon
keeps  along  the  slope  of  Mt.  Ptous  below  the  line  of  precipices  but
above  the  northern  shore  of  the  lake  of  Hylica.  Thence  it  ascends
steeply  a  rocky  ridge  and  then  descends  to  the  shore  of  the  lake  Para-
limniy  a  long  straight  sheet  of  water  of  uniform  breadth  and  without
bays  or  arms,  bounded  on  the  north  along  its  whole  length  by  an
unbroken  range  of  steep  barren  stony  hills.  The  path  runs  along  the
southern  bank  of  the  lake  where  the  ground  is  level  or  nearly  so  for
more  than  half  the  length  of  the  lake.  But  towards  its  eastern  end  the
hills  come  close  down  to  the  water  on  this  side  also.  It  is  strange  that
ancient  history  and  mythology  are  almost  wholly  silent  on  the  subject  of
these  two  lakes,  one  of  which  at  least  has  good  claims  to  beauty.  In
their  secluded  mountains  they  lay  remote  from  the  bustle  and  traffic  of
the  world,  from  the  caravans  of  commerce,  and  the  march  of  armies.

As  to  lake  Hylica,  see  Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.  568  sq,  ;  Wheler,  Journey,
p.  468  sq.  ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece,  2.  p.  315 ;  Fiedler,  Reise,  I.  p.  105.  I
followed  the  path  beside  the  two  lakes  from  Karditsa  to  Anthedon,  8th  November
1895.

19.  3.  the  Thermodon.  This  stream  was  mentioned  in  an  oracle
of  Bacis  recorded  by  Herodotus  (ix.  43),  who  tells  us  that  it  flowed
between  Tanagra  and  Glisas.  It  is  probably  the  stream  now  called  the
Catamites^  which  rises  west  of  Harma  (see  §  4  note),  is  fed  chiefly  by  the
rills  from  Mt.  Hypatus,  and  flows  westward  through  the  Aonian  plain
to  the  lake  of  Hylica.  See  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen^
2.  p.  25.

19.  3-  the  tomb  of  Ohalcodon.  Near,  the  hill  of  Mesovouni
(Teumesus),  on  either  side  of  the  road  to  Chalcis,  there  are  some
sepulchral  mounds  or  barrows.  One  of  these  may  be  the  tomb  of
Chalcodon.     See  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen^  2.  p.  23.

19.  4.  Haxma.  The  high-road  from  Thebes  to  Chalcis,  after  running
eastward  through  the  plain  for  a  distance  of  about  1 2  miles,  makes  a
bend  to  the  north  and  enters  a  pass  among  the  hills  which  bound  the
plain  on  the  north.  Just  where  the  road  bends  round,  a  hill  of  some
height  (perhaps  600  or  700  feet)  rises  on  the  right  or  east  side  of
the  road ;  its  wooded  or  bushy  sunmiit  is  crowned  with  the  remains  of


CH.  XIX  HARMA—HELEON  63

an  ancient  acropolis  which  seems  to  have  been  Harma.  The  walls
are  thin  and  built  of  rough  polygonal  blocks  which  are  generally  small.
The  north  wall,  however,  is  built  of  large  hewn  blocks,  and  so  is  an
ancient  foundation  within  the  circuit  of  the  walls.  Another  line  of  wall
descends  the  hill  into  the  pass,  and  ascends  the  hill  on  the  opposite
or  western  side  of  the  road.  This  wall,  crossing  the  pass  and  climbing
the  hills  on  each  side,  was  doubtless  a  fortification  built  to  defend  the
pass  either  against  Chalcis  or  against  Thebes.  A  khan  now  stands
beside  the  high-road  at  the  south-western  foot  of  the  hill  of  Harma.  The
ruins  of  Hanna  are  now  known  as  Kastri,  About  a  mile  or  so  to  the
west  of  it  a  good  many  graves  have  been  excavated  on  the  north  side  of
the  high-road.  At  this  point  I  noticed  also  a  few  ancient  squared  blocks
of  fair  size  close  together.  The  identification  of  the  ruins  on  the  hill  as
those  of  Harma  is  in  harmony  with  the  testimony  both  of  Pausanias  and
Strabo ;  for  Pausanias  implies  and  Strabo  directly  states  (ix.  p.  404)
that  Harma  was  on  the  road  which  led  from  Thebes  to  Chalcis.  Strabo
further  describes  Harma  as  a  deserted  village  in  the  district  of  Tanagra.
The  place,  as  Pausanias  and  Plutarch  {Parallela^  6)  tell  us,  was  said  to
have  received  its  name  of  Harma  ('chariot')  because  Amphiaraus,
fleeing  fkx)m  before  the  walls  of  Thebes,  was  here  swallowed  up  by  the
earth  in  his  chariot,  or,  according  to  others,  because  the  chariot  of
Adrastus  was  here  shivered  (Strabo,  /.r.)  According  to  Philochorus
(referred  to  by  Strabo,  Lc,\  Adrastus  himself  was  saved  by  the  people
of  Harma,  who  were  rewarded  for  this  good  deed  by  the  grateful  Argives
with  the  citizenship  of  Argos.  Harma  sent  its  contingent  of  warriors  to
the  siege  of  Troy  (Homer,  //.  ii.  499).

L.  Ross,  however,  identified  as  Harma  an  ancient  fortress  of  which
some  imposing  remains  are  to  be  seen  about  3  miles  south-west  of
the  acropolis  which  we  have  seen  grounds  for  supposing  to  be  Harma.
The  fortress  in  question  is  situated  on  a  rocky  plateau  about  ten  minutes'
walk  to  the  west  of  the  village  of  Dritsa  {Andritsa),  The  path  from
Thebes  to  Tanagra  runs  at  the  southern  foot  of  the  plateau,  close  to  the
ruins.  The  plateau,  which  may  average  50  or  60  feet  high,  is  of  some
extent  and  its  edges  are  steep  and  well  defined,  being  formed  for  the
most  part  of  a  line  of  rocks  which  on  the  west  and  south-west  sides
attain  to  the  height  of  respectable  cliffs.  At  the  highest  point  of  the
plateau,  close  to  its  western  end,  there  are  the  ruins  of  a  square  mediaeval
tower,  built,  in  the  usual  miserable  style,  of  irregular  blocks  and  bricks
stuffed  into  the  crevices.  From  the  tower  the  plateau  shelves  away  in  a
grassy  slope  to  the  edge  of  the  cliffs.  The  view  over  the  rolling  plain
in  the  direction  of  Thebes  is  closed  by  Parnassus  on  the  west.  Helicon
is  seen  on  the  south-west,  and  Mt.  Ptous  appears  beyond  the  nearer
Mt  Hypatus  on  the  north-west.

The  ancient  fortress  did  not  occupy  the  whole  of  this  plateau,  but
only  its  western  portion.  Hence  it  was  necessary  to  defend  it  on  the
east,  toward  the  rest  of  the  plateau,  by  a  massive  wall,  of  which  there
are  very  imposing  remains.  The  defence  on  this  side  was  facilitated
by  a  deep  indentation  or  bay,  with  rocky  edges,  on  the  south  side  of
the  plateau  at  this  point.     The  ancient  fortification-wall,  beginning  at


64  RUINS  OF  HELEON  bk.  ix.  bobotia

the  head  of  this  bay  or  indentation,  extends  northwards  in  a  curve  with
the  concave  side  turned  to  the  east.  Though  of  no  great  extent  the
wall  is  well  preserved,  and  is  one  of  the  finest  specimens  of  ancient
masonry  to  be  seen  in  Greece.  At  its  southern  end  it  begins  with  a
very  massive  square  tower,  23  feet  broad  and  8  feet  9  inches  deep.
The  lower  part  of  the  tower,  which  alone  is  well  preserved,  is  about  10


"*"      '<  -----  y^i^  'fnm'faiiaigra  to  fhibiii        "  <'

riG.    2.— PLAN  or   RUINS  NKAR  DRITSA  (THE  ANCIENT  HELEON  ?X

feet  high  and  is  beautifully  constructed  of  quadrangular  blocks,  some  of
them  of  inunense  size.  Two  of  the  blocks  measure  7  feet  6  inches  long
by  nearly  5  feet  high.  The  upper  part  of  the  tower  was  built  of  poly-
gonal masonry ;  for  a  fragment  of  it,  consisting  of  four  large  well-
jointed  polygonal  blocks,  is  preserved.  The  total  height  of  the  tower
as  it  stands  is  about  14  feet.  On  the  north  side  of  this  massive  tower
the  wall  begins  and  runs  in  a  long  curve.  It  is  magnificently  built  of
very  large,  carefully-smoothed,  and  accurately-jointed  polygonal  blocks
resting  on  a  socle  of  squared  blocks  laid  m  horizontal  courses.  Some
of  the  polygonal  blocks  are  over  6  feet  long  and  5  feet  high.  Of  the
socle  of  quadrangular  masonry  one,  two,  and  three  courses  are  visible
according  to  the  slope  of  the  ground,  but  probably  more  is  concealed
beneath  the  soil.  The  height  of  the  wall  above  ground  varies  fh)m  3
feet  6  inches  to  10  feet.  At  one  point,  where  there  is  only  a  single
polygonal  block  resting  on  a  single  course  of  quadrangular  masonry,
the  height  of  the  wall  is  nevertheless  7  feet  8  inches,  the  polygonal
block  alone  being  fully  6  feet  high.  At  its  north  end  the  wall  makes  a
slight  projection.  Here  there  seems  to  have  been  a  second  square
tower  about  2 1  feet  broad,  corresponding  to  the  tower  at  the  south  end
of  the  wall  and  flanking  a  gateway.  Beyond  the  gateway  to  the  north
there  are  some  slight  remains  of  a  wall  built  of  large  rough  stones  in  a
style  immeasurably  inferior  to  that  of  the  beautiful  polygonal  wall  to  the
south.  The  northern  face  of  the  plateau  is  a  steep  grassy  slope,  and
along  its  edge  are  more  remains  of  a  similar  rough  wall  of  grey  stones,
which  however  rise  but  little  above  the  ground.  Along  the  western
face  of  the  plateau  there  are  no  vestiges  of  fortification  ;  the  cliffs  here
seem  to  have  been  thought  a  sufficient  defence.  The  southern  side  of
the  plateau  is  also  defended  by  a  line  of  high  and  nearly  perpendicular
rocks,  but  they  are  not  so  high  as  the  cliffs  on  the  west,   and  here


CH.  XIX  HELEON—PHARAE  65

accordingly  may  be  seen  remains  of  a  mediaeval  fortification- wall,  built
of  small  stones  and  mortar,  running  along  the  very  edge  of  the  rocks.
From  the  south  side  of  the  plateau  a  line  of  large  rough  stones  running
north-east  in  the  direction  of  the  great  polygonal  tower  may  be  the
remains  of  a  fortification-wall  completing  the  circuit  Thus  the  massive
and  beautiful  wall  of  polygonal  masonry  exists  on  the  eastern  side  of
the  fortress  alone,  and  extends  along  only  about  a  third  of  that  side.
There  are  no  vestiges  of  a  similar  wall  at  any  other  point  of  the  circuit.
It  seems  as  if  the  people  of  the  little  town  had  begun  to  replace  their
old  rough  walls  by  a  magnificent  new  one,  but  were  prevented  by
poverty  or  some  other  cause  from  carrying  out  the  undertaking.  The
area  enclosed  by  the  walls  and  cliffs  is  not  large,  but  this  may  have
been  merely  the  acropolis.  It  contains  considerable  vestiges  of  buildings
in  the  form  of  rows  of  large  rough  stones.  These  buildings  were
probably  mediaeval  or  modem,  constructed  out  of  the  ruins  of  the
ancient  town.  At  the  south-western  foot  of  the  plateau,  where  the  cliffs
are  highest  and  steepest,  there  is  a  copious  spring  encased  by  masonry ;
and  near  it,  just  under  the  cliffs,  is  a  small  chapel.  The  water  of  the
spring  forms  a  brook  which  flows  northward  to  the  foot  of  Mount
Hypatus.

The  ancient  fortress  which  has  just  been  described  lies  about  2
miles  to  the  south  of  the  high-road  from  Thebes  to  Chalcis.  Hence  it
was  probably  not  Harma,  as  L.  Ross  supposed,  since  Harma  would
seem  to  have  been  close  to  that  road.  Leake  conjectured  that  the  ruins
might  be  those  of  Pharae,  one  of  the  four  villages  or  petty  towns  which
in  the  time  of  Strabo  belonged  to  Tanagra.  The  other  three  were
Heleon  (or  Eleon),  Harma,  and  Mycalessus  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  405).  H.  N.
Ulrichs,  however,  has  made  it  likely  that  the  ruins  in  question  are  those
of  Heleon  or  Eleon.  The  spring  at  the  south-western  foot  of  the  plateau
is  probably  the  ancient  Acidusa ;  the  brook  which  it  forms  is  probably
the  Glaucia  ;  and  the  stream  to  the  east  of  Dritsa  which  flows  in  a  broad
and  deep  bed  between  low  undulating  hills  to  join  the  Asopus  is  prob-
ably the  Scamander.  See  Plutarch,  Quaest.  Graec,  41.  Heleon  was
said  to  have  derived  its  name  from  a  marsh  (kelos\  which,  however,  in
the  days  of  Strabo  had  mostly  or  wholly  disappeared  (Strabo,  ix.  pp.
404,  406).  There  is  no  marsh  now  at  Dritsa^  but  the  stream  which
seems  to  have  been  the  Glaucia  disappears  in  the  fields  between  Dritsa
and  Harma,  and  during  the  winter  rains  forms  a  marsh  there.  Pharae,
the  fourth  of  the  small  towns  belonging  to  Tanagra,  may  very  well  be
the  ruined  acropolis  which  crowns  a  rugged  but  not  lofty  hill  about  half-
way between  Dritsa  and  Tanagra,  to  the  west  of  the  village  of  Vratsi,
The  walls,  over  7  feet  thick,  are  built  of  well-jointed  polygonal  blocks
and  enclose  a  space  about  70  paces  square.  Among  the  fir-trees  on  the
lower  slope  of  the  hill  are  some  large  foundations,  perhaps  remains  of
the  lower  town.

See  Leake,  Northern  Greece,  2.  p.  466  sqq.\  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  uttd
Forschungen,  2.  pp.  77-80;  L.  Ross,  fVanderungen,  i.  p.  107  sqq.\  Bursian,  in
Berichte  fiber  die  Verhandl,  d,  k,  sacks,  GeselL  d,  IVissen,  zu  Leipzig,  Philolog.
histor.  CI.  II  (1859),  pp.  115-118.     I  visited  the  ruins  at  Dritsa,  14th  November

VOL.  V  F


66  MYCALESSUS  bk.  ix.  boeotia

1895,  and  have  described  them  from  personal  observation.      The  ruins  of  Harma
I  have  seen  only  from  a  distance  and  oelow.

19.  4.  where  the  Thebans  say  it  vanished.     See  ix.  8.  3.

19.  4.  MycalessuB.  See  i.  23.  3.  Between  2  and  3  miles  beyond
Harma  on  the  road  to  Chalcis  a  broad  low  hill  or  sloping  platform
rises  on  the  left.  On  this  hill  there  are  ancient  remains  consisting  of
foundation-walls,  tiles,  blocks  of  stone,  etc.  These  are  probably  the
ruins  of  Mycalessus.  The  hill  or  platform  is  only  about  1 00  feet  above
the  plain  ;  but  behind  rises  a  higher  ridge,  on  which,  according  to
H.  N.  Ulrichs,  an  acropolis  may  be  clearly  traced.  But  according
to  Lieut,  (afterwards  Admiral)  Spratt  no  acropolis  or  ruin  is  to  be
seen  on  this  ridge.  The  view  to  the  east  is  cut  off  by  the  hills,  and  the
Euripus  is  not  visible.  A  view  of  the  Euripus  is  first  obtained  about  an
hour  farther  on  in  the  direction  of  Chalcis  ;  the  road  here  ascends  to  a
narrow  pass,  from  which  a  beautiful  prospect  is  obtained  of  the  narrow
strait  with  the  town  of  Chalcis  on  the  opposite  shore  and  the  mountains
of  Euboea  in  the  background.  Thus  Mycalessus  was,  as  Pausanias  says
(i.  23.  3),  an  inland  town,  and  the  inhabitants  little  dreamed  of  being
attacked  by  an  enemy  from  the  sea  (Thucydides,  vii.  29).  The  state-
ment of  Strabo  (ix.  p.  404)  that  Mycalessus  was  a  village  belonging  to
Tanagra  situated  beside  the  road  from  Thebes  to  Chalcis  accords  per-
fectly with  the  situation  of  the  ruins  just  described.  The  district  is  now
called  Rhitzona^  from  a  hamlet  of  that  name  lying  in  the  valley  about  a
mile  and  a  half  to  the  east  of  the  ruins.  The  valley  is  poorly  cultivated,
but  some  pine-trees,  scattered  singly  and  in  clumps,  serve  to  break  the
monotony  of  the  landscape.  The  pine-trees  in  the  district  of  Mycalessus
are  mentioned  by  Statius  {Theb,  viu  272).

The  channel  which  separates  Euboea  from  the  mainland  is  narrowest
at  Chalcis,  so  narrow  indeed  that  from  antiquity  it  has  been  generally
spanned  at  this  point  by  a  bridge.  This  narrowest  part  of  the  channel  was
the  Euripus  proper  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  403  ;  Dionysius,  Descripiio  Graeciae^
91).  Immediately  to  the  south  of  Chalcis  the  channel  expands  into  the
circular  bay  of  Vourko^  and  then  narrows  again  into  a  second  strait,  so
that  the  bay  of  Vourko  is  nearly  landlocked.  On  the  mainland  a  con-
spicuous hill  called  Megalo  Vouno  (*  big  hill ')  rises  steeply  from  the
southern  shore  of  the  bay  to  a  height  of  perhaps  800  or  900  feet.^  Its
sides  are  steep,  rugged,  and  rocky,  and  its  summit  is  encircled  not  far
from  the  top  by  the  considerable  remains  of  an  ancient  acropolis.  The
wall  exists,  though  in  ruins,  almost  all  round  the  hill  with  hardly  a  break
and  in  its  full  thickness,  which  is  about  7  ft.  6  in.  In  some  places
it  is  still  more  than  6  ft.  high.  It  consists  of  an  outer  and  an  inner
face  of  rude  irregular  polygonal  masonry  with  a  core  of  small  stones.
Even  in  the  outer  face  of  the  wall  the  blocks  are  not  large,  and  in  the
inner  face  they  are  as  a  rule  a  good  deal  smaller.  The  wall  is  best  pre-
served on  the  northern  side  of  the  hill,  where  it  extends  along  pretty
uniformly  at  a  height  of  4  and  5  feet.     Next  to  it  the  east  wall  is  best

1  I  estimate  the  height  partly  by  the  eye  and  partly  by  the  time  1  took  (44  minutes)
to  ascend  from  the  shore  to  the  summit.


CH.  XIX  HYRIA  67

preserved.  On  the  other  hand  the  western  and  southern  walls  are
mostly  in  ruins.  But  it  was  the  south  side  that  was  most  carefully  forti-
fied, as  may  be  seen  by  the  square  towers  which  here  project  from  the
curtain  at  short  intervals  of  20  yards  or  so,  whereas  on  the  other  sides
towers  hardly  occur  at  all  The  reason  for  this  specially  strong  fortifi-
cation on  the  south  is  that  on  this  side  the  hill  sends  out  a  long  ridge
descending  towards  the  bay  of  Aulis.  This  was  therefore  the  most
accessible  and  most  easily  assailable  side  of  the  fortress.  For  the  same
reason  the  two  chief  gates,  each  flanked  with  two  square  towers,  are  to
be  seen  on  the  south  side  of  the  hill.  One  of  these  gateways,  at  the
south-east  comer,  is  5  ft  8  in.  wide.  The  other  principal  gateway,
a  good  deal  to  the  west,  is  6  ft.  6  in.  wide.  The  tower  which  flanks
it  on  the  west  is  about  22  ft.  broad  on  the  face  and  projects  13  ft.
from  the  curtain.  The  masonry  of  this  tower  is  much  more  careful
than  that  of  the  walls  and  approaches  to  the  quadrangular  or  ashlar  in
style ;  the  blocks  are  hewn  and  better  fitted.  On  its  western  face  it  is
standing  to  a  height  of  from  4  to  nearly  7  feet.  The  tower  is  set  at  a
distance  of  about  9  feet  to  the  west  of  the  gateway.  The  tower  on  the
eastern  side  of  the  gateway  is  more  ruinous.  Two  of  the  other  towers
in  the  south  wall  have  each  a  passage  about  3  feet  wide  opening  into
them  through  the  thickness  of  the  wall.  Another  of  them,  about  20  feet
broad  and  projecting  18  feet  from  the  curtain,  is  built  of  large  hewn
blocks  laid  in  roughly  horizontal  courses.  In  the  eastern  wall  there  is
another  gateway,  5  ft.  8  in.  wide,  facing  north-east  toward  Chalcis,  and
beside  a  tower  at  the  north-western  comer  of  the  fortress  there  is  a
postern  3  feet  wide  opening  to  the  west.  The  number  of  towers  of
which  there  are  undoubted  remains  is  eight  or  nine.  On  the  inner  side
of  the  eastern  wall  there  are  remains  of  a  staircase  leading  down  from
the  top  of  the  wall.

Although  the  ground  enclosed  by  the  fortification-walls  is  rugged
with  rocks  and  at  present  overgrown  with  shmbs,  there  are  vestiges  of
human  habitation  on  it  in  the  shape  of  broken  stones  and  pottery ;  but
these  vestiges  may  be  modem.  Among  the  shmbs  with  which  the
ground  is  encumbered  are  holly-oaks  and  lentisks.

The  top  of  the  mountain  commands  grand  views  for  long  distances
both  up  and  down  the  Euripus  as  well  as  across  it  to  Euboea.  On  the
north-east,  across  the  strait,  the  leaf-like  promontory,  on  one  branch  of
which  Chalcis  stands,  is  seen  spread  out  below.  Chalcis  itself  is  in
full  view  not  much  more  than  a  mile  away.  To  the  south-east  we
descry  the  acropolis  of  Eretria.  On  the  south  is  seen  the  Bay  of  Aulis,
but  the  nearer  little  bay,  the  Little  Vathy^  is  hidden  by  a  protmding
spur  of  the  hill.  Beyond  Aulis  to  the  south  an  undulating  country
stretches  away  in  the  direction  of  Tanagra ;  and  beyond  it  again,  on  the
southern  horizon,  rise  the  slopes  of  Mount  Fames  in  Attica.  Low  hills
lie  to  the  south-west  in  the  direction  of  Thebes.  On  the  west  a  high  hill
bars  the  view ;  while  on  the  north-west  soars  the  high  pointed  Mount
Messapius.

From  the  south-east  comer  of  the  fortress  a  minous  wall  mns  south-
ward along  a  projecting  spur  or  ridge  of  the  hill.     This  wall  makes


68  HYRIA  OR  MYCALESSUS  f  bk.  ix.  boeotia

several  turns,  but  on  the  whole  it  keeps  a  southerly  direction  parallel  to
and  at  a  considerable  distance  above  the  straits.  Just  above  the
narrowest  part  of  the  straits  there  are  traces  of  a  gateway  blocked  with
fallen  stones.  Beyond  it  the  wall  is  better  preserved.  In  one  place  it
is  3  ft.  6  in.  high  and  7  ft.  6  in.  thick.  The  style  of  the  masonry
resembles  that  of  the  citadel.  The  wall  comes  to  an  abrupt  stop  on  the
side  of  the  ridge  not  very  far  beyond  the  gateway.  Its  existence  seems
to  show  that  the  fortress  on  the  top  of  the  hill  was  only  a  citadel  and
that  there  was  a  lower  town  on  the  slope  towards  the  straits.

It  seems  fairly  certain  that  this  ancient  town  on  the  Megalo  Vouno
must  have  been  Hyria,  a  place  coupled  by  Homer  (//.  ii.  496)  with
Aulis.  It  had  once  belonged  to  Thebes  but  in  the  days  of  Strabo  it  was
reckoned  to  Tanagra.  Strabo  tells  us  (ix.  p.  404)  that  Hyria  was  near
Aulis ;  and  Stephanus  Byzantius  says  {s,v,  ^YpCa)  that  it  was  on  the
Euripus.  These  statements  accord  perfectly  with  the  position  of  the
ruins  in  question,  for  the  hill  on  which  they  stand  rises  from  the  shore
of  the  Euripus,  and  at  its  south-eastern  foot  is  Aulis.  Yet  Col.  Leake
held  that  the  town  on  the  Megalo  Vouno  was  Mycalessus,  and  this  view
reappears  in  the  guide-books  of  Baedeker  and  the  Joanne,  It  is,  how-
ever, not  only  in  direct  contradiction  with  the  statements  of  Pausanias
and  Strabo,  who  say  that  Mycalessus  was  an  inland  town  on  the  road
from  Thebes  to  Chalcis,  but  is  wholly  irreconcilable  with  Thucydides's
account  of  the  military  operations  in  the  Peloponnesian  war,  when
Mycalessus  was  surprised  and  its  population  massacred  by  a  corps  of
Thracian  mercenaries.  Thucydides's  account  of  the  affair  is  briefly  this.
The  Athenians,  not  having  money  enough  to  pay  these  Thracian  mer-
cenaries, sent  them  home  by  sea  under  the  charge  of  an  Athenian  officer
Diitrephes.  He  was  ordered  to  sail  through  the  Euripus  and  to  do  the
enemy  as  much  harm  as  he  conveniently  could  by  the  way.  So  he  first
landed  in  the  territory  of  Tanagra  and  made  a  hasty  foray  ;  then  re-em-
barking he  sailed  along  the  Euripus  to  Chalcis  in  Euboea.  But  at
evening  he  crossed  the  strait,  landed  his  troops  in  Boeotian  territory
and  led  them  against  Mycalessus.  During  the  night  he  bivouacked
unseen  at  the  Hermaeum,  distant  about  16  furlongs  (nearly  2  miles)
from  Mycalessus,  and  at  daybreak  he  stormed  the  city.  The  inhabitants
were  completely  taken  by  surprise  ;  for,  says  Thucydides,  "  they  kept  no
watch  and  never  expected  that  any  one  would  come  so  far  up  from  the
sea  to  attack  them."  The  wall  was  weak,  and  in  some  places  ruinous,
and  the  gates  stood  open,  for  the  people  felt  quite  secure.  Everything
that  breathed  within  the  walls,  including  the  very  cattle  and  the  school-
children who  had  just  assembled  in  a  large  school,  was  put  to  the  sword
by  the  Thracians.  Word  of  this  great  disaster  reached  the  Thebans,
and  they  hastened  to  avenge  it.  Overtaking  the  Thracians  before  the
latter  had  got  far  from  the  town,  they  recaptured  the  booty  and  pursued
them  down  to  the  Euripus  and  the  sea,  where  their  transports  were
anchored.  In  the  process  of  embarkation  the  Thebans  slew  most  of  the
Thracians ;  for  the  crews  of  the  ships,  seeing  what  was  going  on
ashore,  moored  their  vessels  out  of  bowshot,  and  the  Thracians  for-
tunately could  not  swim.     During  the  actual  retreat  the  miscreants  had


CH.  XIX  HYRIA  OR  MYCALESSUS  t  69

lost  few ;  for  they  kept  in  close  order  and  from  time  to  time  halted  and
charged  the  Theban  cavalry,  who  hung  on  their  rear  till  the  infantry
could  come  up.  This  narrative  implies  that  Mycalessus  was  at  some
distance  (more  than  2  miles)  from  the  sea.  For  (i)  the  Thracians
marching  from  the  shore  of  the  Euripus  to  attack  Mycalessus  halted  for
the  night  at  the  Hermaeum,  which  was  still  about  2  miles  distant
from  the  town.  (2)  The  people  were  wholly  unprepared  for  an  attack
from  the  side  of  the  sea ;  they  ''  never  expected  that  any  one  would
come  so  far  up  from  the  sea  to  attack  them  "  ;  they  kept  no  watch  ;  their
gates  stood  open.  (3)  The  Thracians  had  to  retreat  some  considerable
distance  from  the  town  before  they  reached  the  sea,  and  they  did  so
in  good  order,  pressed  by  the  Theban  cavalry.  Evidently,  then,  the
ground  between  Mycalessus  and  the  sea  was  level  enough  to  allow
cavalry  to  act  on  it.

Now  i^  with  Col.  Leake,  we  identify  the  town  on  Megalo  Vouno
with  Mycalessus,  we  have  to  make  the  following  extraordinary  assump-
tions. We  most  suppose  that  the  Mycalessians  were  fully  aware  of  the
proximity  of  the  enemy ;  for  the  hill  of  Megalo  Vouno  rises  abruptly
from  the  shore  of  the  Euripus  and  commands  an  uninterrupted  view
both  up  and  down  it.  The  inhabitants  of  this  place  may  have  seen  the
enemy  landing  in  the  territory  of  Tanagra  and  pillaging  the  country  a
few  miles  to  the  south ;  and  they  must  certainly  have  seen  his  ships
sailing  past  their  town  in  broad  daylight  to  Chalcis,  which  is  in  full  view
of  the  sunmiit  of  the  hill  and  not  much  more  than  a  mile  away.  Is  it
credible  that  the  inhabitants  of  Mycalessus,  with  the  enemy's  ships
actually  under  their  eyes  about  a  mile  off,  should  have  so  little  dreamed
of  an  attack  that  they  posted  no  sentinels  and  left  all  their  gates  open,
and  that  even  the  children  were  repeating  their  lessons  as  usual  in
the  school  ?  Such  supine  carelessness  would  almost  have  deserved  the
fearful  fate  which  overtook  Mycalessus.  Again,  if  Mycalessus  were  the
town  on  Megalo  Vouno,  the  Thracians,  in  order  to  reach  the  sea  and
their  ships  after  sacking  the  town,  had  nothing  to  do  but  to  descend  the
steep  side  of  the  mountain  to  the  shore,  which  they  could  have  done
easily  in  half  an  hour.  Yet  there  was  time  for  word  of  the  massacre  to
be  carried  to  Thebes  (more  than  16  miles  distant  as  the  crow  flies)  and
for  the  Theban  forces  to  hurry  up  and  overtake  the  Thracians  before
the  latter  had  got  to  the  bottom  of  the  hill !  And  we  are  to  suppose
that  the  Theban  cavalry  pursued  the  enemy  down  the  steep,  rugged,
rocky  mountain-side,  while  the  Thracian  infantry  retreated  before  them
in  close  military  formation,  occasionally  halting  and  charging  the  cavalry
who  were  riding  down  the  break-neck  declivity  behind  them  !

On  the  other  hand,  if,  with  H.  N.  Ulrichs  and  Bursian,  we  identify
Mycalessus  with  the  ruins  near  Rhitzonay  Thucydides's  narrative  is  per-
fectly intelligible.  The  town  was  out  of  sight  of  the  sea  and  distant
fiilly  4  miles  from  the  nearest  salt  water.  From  Chalcis  the  distance  is
about  6  miles.  If  we  suppose  that  the  Thracians  landed  opposite
Chalcis,  they  would  approach  Mycalessus  by  the  high-road  which  ran,
and  still  runs,  from  Chalcis  to  Thebes.  They  landed  in  the  evening,
marched  about  4  miles  along  the  road,  and  halted  for  the  night  at  the


70  HYRIA  OR  MYCALESSUS  f  bk.  ix.  boeotia

Hermaeum,  2  miles  from  Mycalessus.  They  attacked  the  town  at
daybreak ;  word  reached  Thebes  (about  1 2  miles  distant  as  the  crow
flies)  a  few  hours  later ;  the  Theban  cavalry  came  galloping  to  the
scene  of  the  massacre  ;  overtook  the  retreating  Thracians  a  mile  or  two
along  the  road  to  Chalcis  ;  and  followed  them  all  the  way  to  the  shore,
but  without  making  much  impression  on  them,  as  the  Thracians  kept  in
close  order.  It  was  only  when  the  latter  at  last  reached  the  shore  and
attempted  to  get  on  board  their  ships  that  they  met  the  fate  they  so
richly  merited.

The  site  of  the  Hermaeum  mentioned  by  Thucydides  may  have
been  at  a  point  where  the  road  to  Chalcis  leads  through  a  natural  pass
(now  called  the  pass  of  Anephorites)  between  two  peaked  heights.
Here,  on  either  side  of  the  road,  may  be  seen  the  remains  of  a  thick
wall  of  loose  stones  running  at  right  angles  to  the  road  and  ascending
the  heights  both  to  the  left  and  to  the  right  of  it.  On  the  right  (east)
the  wall  may  be  traced  as  far  as  the  ruined  town  (probably  Hyria)  on
the  Megalo  Vouno,  This  wall,  part  of  which  was  hastily  repaired  in  the
Greek  War  of  Independence,  seems  to  have  been  intended  to  defend  the
frontier  of  the  Theban  territory  towards  Chalcis ;  and  as  Hermes  is
associated  with  boundaries  (cp.  ii.  38.  7,  viii.  34.  6,  viii.  35.  2)  he
might  very  well  have  a  sanctuary  (Hermaeum)  at  the  point  on  the  road
where  the  wall  marked  the  Theban  boundary.  The  distance  of  this
point  from  the  ruins  which,  with  H.  N.  Ulrichs  and  Bursian,  I  take  to
be  those  of  Mycalessus,  appears  to  correspond  tolerably  with  the
distance  (16  furlongs)  of  the  Hermaeum  from  Mycalessus.  The  Her-
maeum mentioned  by  Livy  (xxv.  50)  seems  to  have  been  a  different
place ;  it  was  on  the  shore  of  the  Euripus  and  there  was  a  regular
ferry  across  from  it  to  Euboea.  Leake  appears  to  have  involved
himself  in  topographical  difficulties  from  supposing  that  the  Hermaeum
of  Thucydides  and  the  Hermaeum  of  Livy  were  the  same  place.

Lieutenant  (afterwards  Admiral)  Spratt  was  of  opinion  that  the
ancient  road  from  Chalcis  to  Thebes  did  not,  like  the  present  road,
go  direct  by  the  pass  of  Anephorites^  but  kept  close  to  the  coast,
and  made  a  circuit  round  the  bay  of  Vourko  to  Aulis ;  for  he  found
the  ruts  of  chariot-wheels  very  distinct  all  round  the  bay  of  Vourko.
But  this  only  proves  that  there  was,  as  we  should  expect,  a  coast  road
from  Chalcis  to  Aulis,  Delium,  and  Oropus.  It  does  not  show  that  the
high-road  from  Chalcis  to  Thebes  did  not  follow  the  direct  and  natural
route  by  the  pass  of  Anephorites,

See  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  249 ;  Wordsworth,  Athens  and  Attica^  p.  4  sqq,  ;
Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  pp.  247  sq,^  251  iqq.^  264,  269  sq,  ;  Welcker,  Tage-
buch,  2.  p.  97  sqq,  (Welcker  took  the  ruins  on  Megalo  Vouno  to  be  those  of  Aulis) ;
H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  utid  Forschungen^  2.  p.  30  sqq,  ;  Spratt,  *  Remarks  on
Aulis,  Mycalessus,  and  some  parts  of  Luboea,*  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society
of  Literature^  Second  Series,  2  (1847),  p.  238  sqq,  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  I.  p.  217;
Baedeker,'  pp.  185,  189  sq,  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  14.  I  visited  the  ruins  on
Afegalo  Vouno,  12th  November  1895,  and  have  described  them  from  personal
observation.

19.  4.  because  the  cow  that  led  Oadmns lowed here.

Cp.  Etymolog,  Magnum ^  s,v,  MvKaXrjovo^^  p.  595.


CH.  XIX  STRAIT  OF  CHALCIS  ^\

19.  5.  In  the  direction  of  the  sea  from  Mycalessus  etc.  From
Mycalessus  Pausanias  appears  to  have  pursued  his  way  to  the  shore  of
the  Euripus,  opposite  Chalcis ;  this  we  may  infer  from  §  6,  where  he
appears  to  be  speaking  of  the  Euripus  proper,  />.  of  the  narrowest  part
of  the  channel  which  divides  Euboea  from  the  mainland.  He  therefore
continued  to  follow  the  line  of  the  high-road  from  Thebes  to  Chalcis.
Beyond  the  ruins  which  we  may  consider  to  be  those  of  Mycalessus,  the
road  rises  steeply  up  a  ridge  of  hills  connected  to  the  north  with  Mt.
Ktypa  (the  ancient  Messapius),  which  now  appears  on  the  left.  We
then  enter  the  pass  of  Anephorites  (see  above,  p.  70).  From  the  summit
of  the  pass,  now  called  Tambouria  (*  fortifications ')  tau  Krizioti  after
the  Greek  patriot  Kriziotis  who  fortified  the  pass  in  1829,  we  obtain  a
beautiful  view  of  the  blue  winding  waters  of  the  Euripus,  the  town  of
Chalcis  on  the  farther  side  of  the  strait,  and  the  mountains  of  Euboea
rising  behind.  The  road  now  descends  rapidly  into  the  maritime  plain
and  skirts  the  bay  of  Vaurko,  The  plain  consists  of  open  com  land,
without  trees,  and  is  intersected  by  low  rocks  of  white  marble,  covered
with  wild  thyme.  The  slopes  of  the  lofty  and  conspicuous  Mt.  Ktypa^
which  hem  the  plain  in  on  the  north-west,  are  also  very  rocky.  Skirt-
ing the  shore  of  the  bay  on  the  right,  we  pass  on  the  left  the  low  isolated
rocky  hill  of  Karctbaba  crowned  with  a  fort.  In  the  walls  of  this  fort
there  are  some  ancient  blocks  and  pieces  of  marble,  probably  brought
from  Chalcis ;  and  on  the  eastern  and  southern  slopes  of  the  hill  there
are  some  rows  of  oblong  sinkings  cut  in  the  rock,  perhaps  ancient
graves.  The  hill  of  Karababa  has  sometimes  been  wrongly  identified
with  the  ancient  Salganeus.  It  is  probably  the  ancient  Canethus,
which,  in  the  time  of  Alexander,  the  people  of  Chalcis  enclosed  within
the  fortifications  of  their  city  (Strabo,  x.  p.  447).  Immediately  after
passing  this  little  hill  we  reach  the  strait  and  bridge  of  Chalcis.  See
Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  247  sq,\  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und
Forschungen^  2.  p.  33  sq, ;  L.  Ross,  Wanderungen^  2.  p.  1 10  j^.  ;  Bursian,
in  Berichte  iiber  die  VerhandL  d,  kon,  sacks,  GeselL  d.  Wissen,  zu
Leipzig^  Philolog.  histor.  CI.  11  (1859),  pp.  1 19-12 1  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.
p.  14  sq.  When  I  visited  Chalcis  in  1895  there  was  no  bridge  across
the  strait,  the  old  bridge  had  been  taken  down  and  a  new  one  was  in
preparation.

It  was  no  part  of  the  plan  of  Pausanias  to  describe  Euboea ;
hence,  instead  of  passing  the  bridge  to  Chalcis,  he  turned  south  on  his
way  to  Aulis.  A  little  before  he  reached  that  port  he  came  to  the
sanctuary  of  Mycalessian  Demeter,  which  was  on  the  right  (here  the
south)  of  the  strait.  Hence  that  sanctuary  probably  stood  somewhere
on  the  shore  of  the  spacious  circular  bay  of  Vourko,  That  by  *the
right '  of  the  Euripus  Pausanias  here  meant  *  the  south  *  of  the  strait  is
clear  from  ix.  22.  5,  where  *the  left'  of  the  Euripus  undoubtedly  means
'  north  *  of  it.

H.  N.  Ulrichs  supposed  that  after  quitting  Mycalessus,  Pausanias,
instead  of  following  the  high-road  north-east  to  Chalcis,  turned  off  to  the
right  (east)  by  the  valley  of  Rhitzona  in  the  direction  of  Aulis.  About
half  an  hour  beyond  Rhitzona  there  is  a  ruined  church  on  the  left  of  the


72  AULIS  BK.  IX.  BOEOTIA

road,  into  which  some  ancient  squared  blocks  have  been  built.  Ulrichs
thought  that  this  might  be  the  site  of  the  sanctuary  of  Demeter.  See
his  Reisen  und  Forschungen^  2.  p.  38.  This  view,  it  appears  to  me,
is  decidedly  wrong.  Pausanias's  words  "at  this  point  the  Euripus
separates  Euboea  from  Boeotia  "  (§  6)  seem  clearly  to  refer  to  the  strait
of  Chalcis  and  to  imply  that  he  conceives  himself  standing  at  the  strait
and  facing  across  it  toward  Chalcis.  On  his  right  (to  the  south)  he
then  had  the  sanctuary  of  Demeter,  and  farther  on  in  the  same  direc-
tion (still  farther  south)  he  came  to  Aulis.  Pursuing  his  route  south-
ward he  afterwards  came  to  Delium  and  next  to  Tanagra.  Thus  the
sanctuary  of  Mycalessian  Demeter  was  north  of  Aulis,  not  south  of  it,
as  Ulrichs  supposed.

19.  6.  Aulis.  If  we  follow  for  3  or  4  miles  the  road  which  leads
from  the  strait  of  Chalcis  southward  along  the  Boeotian  coast,  we
come  to  a  small  winding  nearly  landlocked  bay  or  creek  at  the  south-
eastern foot  of  the  rugged  hill  of  Megalo  Vouno,  The  bay  is  sheltered
both  on  the  north  and  on  the  south  by  rocky  peninsulas,  of  which  the
southern  is  much  the  higher  and  attains  the  height  of  a  small  hill,
though  the  ground  which  joins  it  to  the  mainland  is  flat.  But  in  spite
of  the  perfect  shelter  which  it  affords,  the  bay  is  not  much  used  as  a
harbour,  since  its  entrance  is  difficult.  The  rocky  peninsula  which
protects  the  bay  on  the  south  divides  it  from  a  broader  and  straighter
bay,  which  has  a  wide  and  open  entrance  on  the  east  and  a  stretch  of
flat  land  and  flat  beach  at  its  inner  or  western  end.  The  smaller
northern  bay  is  now  called  the  Little  Vathy ;  the  larger  southern  bay  is
called  the  Great  Vathy,  The  latter  is  the  famous  Bay  of  Aulis  from
which  the  Greek  fleet  sailed  for  Troy.  It  was  called  by  the  ancients
the  Bathys  Limen  (*deep  harbour')  to  distinguish  it  from  the  smaller
bay  on  the  north  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  403  ;  Diodorus,  xix.  ^^\  and  the  modem
name  of  Vathy  is  doubtless  only  a  slightly  changed  form  of  the  ancient
name,  b  being  always  pronounced  as  v  by  the  modem  Greeks.  Strabo
clearly  distinguishes  between  the  two  bays  (ix.  p.  403)  and  says  that  the
smaller  would  hold  only  fifty  ships.  The  scenery  of  the  Bay  of  Aulis  is
somewhat  dull  and  tame.  Vegetation  is  conspicuously  absent,  and  the
hills  enclosing  the  bay  and  the  small  valley  that  runs  up  westward  from
its  head  are  low,  bare,  and  partly  rocky.  Through  the  mouth  of  the
bay,  however,  there  is  a  view  eastward  across  the  Euripus  to  the  moun-
tains of  Euboea.  The  small  town  of  Aulis  would  seem  to  have  been
situated  on  the  peninsula  which  divides  the  Bay  of  Aulis  (the  Great
Vathy)  on  the  south  from  the  Little  Vathy  on  the  north.  For  Strabo,
who  describes  Aulis  as  "  a  rocky  place  and  a  village  of  the  Tanagraeans,"
implies  that  it  stood  between  the  two  bays  (ix.  p.  403) ;  and  Statins
describes  it  as  situated  on  a  long  rocky  ridge  jutting  out  into  the  sea
{Achill  i.  447  sqq,)  In  point  of  fact  H.  N.  Ulrichs  observed  the
foundations  of  walls  and  of  buildings  on  the  low  isthmus  of  the  rocky
peninsula  which  divides  the  two  bays.  These  foundations  may  have
been  the  remains  of  Aulis.  They  seem  now  to  have  disappeared ;  at
least  in  1895  I  looked  for  them  in  vain,  and  some  shepherds  on  the
spot  informed  me  that  there  were  no  ancient  ruins  there.      The  epithet


CH.  XIX  AULIS  73

'rocky'   applied    by    Homer   to   Aulis    {liiadj   ii.   496)    is   eminently
suitable.

From  the  head  of  the  Bay  of  Aulis  a  small  valley,  sloping  gently
upwards,  runs  inland  between  hills  for  something  over  a  mile.  It  is
watered  by  a  brook  which  falls  into  the  bay.  About  a  mile  up  the  valley
from  the  shore  is  a  ruined  Byzantine  chapel  of  St.  Nicholas  {Hagios
Nikolao5\  which  is  su]f)posed  to  occupy  the  site  of  the  temple  of  Artemis,
mentioned  by  Pausanias,  where  Iphigenia  was  led  to  the  altar  to  be
sacrificed.  The  scene,  if  it  indeed  be  so,  of  this  famous  event  in  Greek
legend  was  somewhat  bleak  and  cheerless  as  I  saw  it  under  a  leaden  sky
on  a  dull  November  afternoon.  The  ruined  chapel,  with  its  fallen  dome
and  roofless  walls,  had  a  forlorn  air,  standing  solitary  in  a  bare  stony
ploughed  field  on  the  slope  of  the  low  hills  that  enclose  the  little  valley
on  the  south.  Similar  hills — low,  stony  and  treeless — with  higher  hills
rising  above  them  on  the  north  and  west,  shut  in  the  valley  on  all  sides
except  the  east,  where  appeared,  of  a  pale  blue-green  colour  under  the
chill  November  sky,  a  bit  of  the  bay  of  Aulis,  beyond  it  the  open
channel  of  the  Euripus,  and  still  farther  off,  bathed  in  a  gloomy  purple,
the  coast  and  mountains  of  Euboea.  Bare  ploughed  fields,  with  a  small
tree  dotted  here  and  there  among  them,  occupied  all  the  bottom  of  the
valley,  and  formed  the  foreground  of  the  melancholy  scene.  Yet  bare
fields,  stony  hills,  leaden  sky,  cold  steely  sea,  and  purple  mountains
glooming  in  the  distance,  seemed  a  fitting  framework  for  the  ruined  shrine,
with  its  memories  of  departed  glory.  Almost  the  only  patch  of  green
to  relieve  the  monotony  of  brown  earth  and  grey  rock  was  a  verdant
market  garden  some  forty  or  fifty  yards  to  the  west  of  the  chapel.
The  garden  is  watered  by  a  well,  not  by  a  spring,  and  the  gardener  told
my  dragoman  that  the  nearest  spring  was  distant  twenty  minutes'  walk
to  the  west.  Whether  this  spring,  which  I  did  not  visit,  is  the  one
beside  which  the  Greeks  sacrificed  "  under  a  beauteous  plane  whence
sparkling  water  flowed''  (Homer,  //.  ii.  305  sqq,\  it  might  be  hard  to
decide.  In  the  chapel  are  some  pieces  of  small  columns,  and  built  into
the  sides  of  the  inner  doorway  are  two  blocks  of  white  marble  which
seemed  to  me  to  be  ancient.  According  to  one  account  the  temple  of
Artemis  was  built  by  Agamemnon  (Dionysius,  Descriptio  Graeciae^  89
sq,) ;  according  to  another  it  was  much  older  than  the  Trojan  war
(Pliny,  Nat,  hist.  xvi.  217).  It  was  visited  by  L.  Aemilius  Paullus  in
167  B.C.,  as  we  learn  from  Livy  (xlv.  27),  who  describes  Aulis  as  a
harbour  distant  3  miles  from  Chalcis.  If  Livy  means  to  give  the  dis-
tance by  sea,  as  he  seems  to  do,  he  is  nearly  right ;  the  distance  by
land,  owing  to  the  great  sweep  of  the  Bay  of  Vourko^  is  nearer  4  miles
than  3.  The  inscribed  pedestal  of  a  statue  of  a  lady  named  Olyppiche,
daughter  of  Hagias,  who  had  been  priestess  of  Artemis  of  Aulis,  is  pre-
served in  the  museum  at  Skimatari  near  Tanagra  (C  /.  G,  G,  S.  i.
No.  565).

Sec  ^YitXet,  Journey  into  Greece,  p.  456;  Dodwell,  Toitr,  2.  p.  154;  Leake,
Northern  Greece,  2.  p.  262  sq,  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen,  2.  p.  38
sqq,  ;  L.  Ross,  IVanderungen,  2.  p.  106  sqq.  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.  677  sq, ;
Bursian,  Geogr,  I.  p.  218  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  189  ;  Guide-JoofitUy  2.  p.  3  sq,  I  visited
Aulis  1 2th  November  1895.


74  SACRIFICE  OF  IPHIGBNIA  bk.

19.  6.  one  of  the  Imaces  carries  torches.  This  image  is  repre-
sented cm  coins  of  Tani^ra  of  the  imperial  age  (Fig.  3).  On  these  coins
Artemis  is  figured  as  a  huntress  in  a  tetrastyle  temple,
with  a  spear  in  her  raised  right  hand  and  a  torch  in
her  left  1  on  each  side  of  the  temple  is  a  palm-tree
(see  §  8)  ;  and  below  is  a  ship  with  sailors.  On  one
'  of  the  coins  the  goddess  holds  a  torch  in  each  hand.
This  may  be  the  more  correct  copy  of  the  image.  Or
possibly  Pausanias  may  have  mistaken  the  spear  in
the  right  hand  of  the  goddess  for  a  second  torch.
(co°'  *'~*"""',  See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  on
Paus.  p.  113,  with  pi.  X  iii.-v.  As  Aulis  belonged  to
Tanagra  (see  §  8),  it  was  natural  that  the  temple  and  image  at  Aulis
should  appear  on  coins  of  Tanagra.

19.  6.  to  Bacrlflce  Iphigenia.  The  sacrifice  of  Iphigenia  is  repre-
sented on  a  mosaic  found  at  Ampurias  (the  ancient  Emporiae)  in  Cata-
lonia. Heydemann  held  that  this  mosaic  was  a  copy  of  the  famous
picture  of  Timanthes,  as  to  which  see  Pliny,  Nat.  hist.  xxxv.  73  ;
Cicero,  Orator,  xxii.  74  ;  Valerius  Maximus,  viii.  1 1 .  6.  On  the  mosaic
Iphigenia  is  being  led  to  the  altar  by  Ulysses ;  beside  Ulysses,  on  the
spectator's  right,  is  Calchas  with  the  knife  in  his  hand,  and  next  to  him
is  Menelaus  ;  on  the  other  side  of  the  altar  Agamemnon  is  covering  his
face  with  his  right  hand.  Other  figures  appear  in  the  background.  On
a  high  column  are  images  of  Artemis  and  Apollo ;  and  in  the  top  right-
hand  comer  Artemis  appears  holding  by  the  antlers  a  stag,  which  is  to
be  substituted  for  Iphigenia.  If  this  mosaic  is  a  copy  of  the  picture  by
Timanthes,  the  artist  has  introduced  an  important  variation  into  his  copy
by  representing  Agamemnon  with  his  head  unmufBed.  See  H.  Heyde-
mann, 'Das  Opfer  der  Iphigenia,'  Archiiologische  Zcitung,  2?  (1869),
pp.  7-10,  with  pi.  14.  On  representations  of  the  sacrifice  of  Iphigenia
in  ancient  art,  see  O.  Jahn,  Ankdologiscki  Bittrage,  p.  378  sqq. ;  A.  S.
Murray,  Handbook  0/  Greek  Archaeology,  p.  390.

19.   7.  the  pl&ne-tree  which  Homer  mentioiu.    See  Iliad, '».  307.

19.  7-  sacriflced male  and  female  ■.nJTnalii  indiBcrimJnatelr.

As  to  the  sex  of  the  victims  in  Greek  sacrifices,  see  P.  Stengel,  in
Fteckeisen's  JaArbUeher,  32  (1886),  pp.  324-331  ;  id.,  Griech.  Sairal-
allerthumer,  §  81,  p.   103  iq.

19.  7-  the  hronza  threshold  of  Agamemnon's  hut.  Homer
speaks  of  a  bronze  threshold  in  the  palace  of  Alcinous  {Od.  vii.  83  and
89)  and  in  Tartarus  (//.  viii.  i  5).  Cp.  Helbig,  Das  komtrische  Epos,*
p.  III.

19.  8.  In  front  of  the  sanctuary  grow  palm-trees.  The  temple
with  the  palms  growing  in  front  of  it  is  represented  on  coins  of  Tanagra.
Sce  above,  note  on  §  6.  There  was  a  grove  of  palm-trees  in  Chios,
beside  a  temple  of  Apollo  (Strabo,  xiv.  p.  64s).  Coins  of  Tenos,
Carystus  in  Euboea,  Siphnos,  los,  Delos,  and  the  Cretan  towns  Priansus
and  Hieropytna,  seem  to  show  that  palms  grew  in  these  islands  in
antiquity.  Cp.  note  on  viii.  48.  a.  Theophrastus  speaks  of  palms  in
Greece,  but  says  that  the  dates  did  not  ripen  (Hist,  plant,  ii.  2.  8,  iii.


CH.  XX  GREEK  PALMS— DELIUM  75

3.  5).  Varro  says  that  palms  produced  dates  in  Syria  but  not  in  Italy
(De  re  rust  ii.  i.  27).  Pliny  tells  us  that  the  palms  of  Judaea  were
famous ;  that  in  Italy  the  tree  grew  but  was  barren ;  and  that  on  the
coasts  of  Spain  the  palm  produced  dates,  which,  however,  did  not  ripen
properly  {Nat,  hist,  xiii.  26).  At  the  present  day  tall  palms  g^'ow  in  the
gardens  of  Chalcis,  a  few  miles  from  Aulis  ;  and  in  various  parts  of
Greece  and  the  Greek  islands  the  tree  attains  a  height  of  40  or  50
feet ;  but  it  is  only  in  the  hot,  sub-tropical  plain  oiKcUamata  in  Messenia
that  the  date  ripens,  and  even  there  it  is  of  an  inferior  quality.  Palms
now  grow  in  the  open  air  in  the  king's  garden  at  Athens,  but  nowhere
else  in  Attica.  See  Fiedler,  Reise^  i .  p.  511  sq,\  Hehn,  Kulturpflansen
und  Hausihiere^^  p.  216  sqq,  ;  Neumann  und  Partsch,  Physikalische
Geogr€tpkie  von  Griecheniand^  pp.  410-412  ;  VhWx^^soxiy  PeloponneSy  pp.
362,  374  (who  says  that  though  the  date-palm  grows  in  sheltered  spots
on  the  coast  of  Messenia,  the  dates  do  not  ripen).

19.  8.  Anlifl,  Mycalessns,  and  Harma,  belong  to  Tanagra.  So
too  says  Strabo  (ix.  pp.  403,  404).

20.  I.  Delimn.  The  site  of  Delium  was  probably  near  the  abandoned
village  of  Dilisty  situated  on  the  southern  side  of  a  small  maritime  plain
about  half-way  between  Aulis  and  Oropus.  The  plain  or  valley  is  about
a  mile  wide  at  the  water-side  and  narrows  from  thence  to  Diitsiy  which
lies  inland.  Low  hills,  mostly  overgrown  with  fir-woods,  enclose  the
valley  and  separate  it  from  the  valley  of  the  Asopus  and  the  district  of
Oropus  on  the  east.  In  the  plain,  close  to  the  beach,  is  a  well  of  good
water,  almost  choked  with  large  stones.  Some  large  squared  blocks
lie  near  the  well,  and  there  are  a  few  of  them  at  the  roofless  chapel  in
the  village.  The  way  from  the  valley  of  Dilisi  (Delium)  to  Oropus
skirts  the  shore  at  the  foot  of  the  hills,  which  are  overgrown  with  bushes
and  dwarf  firs  and  rent  by  many  deep  beds  of  torrents.  The  road  runs
so  dose  to  the  beach  that  when  the  surf  is  high  the  waves  wash  over  it
and  render  it  impassable.

There  was  a  sanctuary  of  Apollo  at  Delium  which  was  said  to  have
been  founded  from  Delos  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  403).  The  Athenians  seized
and  fortified  the  sanctuary  and  temple  in  424  B.C.,  and  drew  water  from
the  neighbouring  sacred  well  (Thucydides,  iv.  90  and  97  j^.)  The
sacred  well  is  probably  the  one  near  the  shore,  for  there  is  no  water  at
the  village  of  Dilisi,  The  temple  was  probably  near  the  well,  and  the
squared  blocks  mentioned  above  may  have  been  part  of  it.  In  a  ruined
chapel,  hidden  among  bushes  near  the  shore,  H.  N.  Ulrichs  saw  a  small
Doric  capital  and  other  ancient  fragments.  Livy  says  (xxxv.  51)  that
Delium  was  5  miles  from  Tanagra  and  less  than  4  miles  from  the
opposite  coast  of  Euboea.  These  measurements  agn"ee  very  well  with
the  situation  of  Dilisi,  On  the  other  hand,  Strabo's  statement  (ix.  p.
403)  that  Delium  was  30  furlongs  from  Aulis  does  not  apply  to  the
situation  of  Dilisi  at  all,  for  Dilisi  is  about  double  that  distance  from
Aulis.  Hence  some,  following  Strabo,  have  placed  Delium  at  Dramesi,
a  village  on  the  coast  about  4  miles  from  Aulis.  On  the  isolated  hill
beside  this  village  there  is  a  ruined  mediaeval  tower ;  and  large  stones
strewn  among  the  fields  on  the  slope  of  the  hill  seem  to  show  that  there


76  BATTLE  OF  DELIUM  bk.  ix.  boeotia

was  an  ancient  settlement  here.  But  the  strait  at  Dramesi  is  only
about  a  mile  and  a  half  broad,  which  does  not  answer  to  Liv/s  state-
ment of  the  width  of  the  channel  at  Delium.  And  in  other  respects
Dilisi  seems  to  answer  better  than  Dramesi  to  the  situation  of  Deliimi.
The  exact  scene  of  the  battle  in  which  the  Athenians  were
defeated  by  the  Boeotians  near  Delium  in  424  B.C.  is  uncertain.
The  Athenians  had  advanced  10  furlongs  from  Delium  on  their
way  homeward  when  they  were  attacked  by  the  Boeotians  (Thucy-
dides,  iv.  90  sqq.)  Two  roads  lead  from  Dilisi  to  Athens.  One  goes
eastward  by  the  shore  to  Oropus,  as  already  described.  The  other
strikes  inland  (southward)  up  the  little  valley  of  Dilisi  and  joins  the
road  from  Chalcis  and  Aulis  to  Athens  on  the  north  bank  of  the  Asopus,
between  the  modem  villages  of  Staniates  and  Sykamino;  it  then  goes  by
the  valley  of  Kakosialesi  over  the  pass  of  Decelea  (the  modem  Tatot)  to
Athens.  The  former  road  is  so  hemmed  in  between  the  hills  and  the
sea  that  there  is  not  room  for  a  pitched  battle,  such  as  Thucydides
describes,  between  two  armies  drawn  up  in  order  of  battle.  Moreover
it  is  more  circuitous  than  the  other  road.  Probably  therefore  the  battle
took  place  on  the  inland  road,  somewhat  over  a  mile  south  of  Delium.
H.  N.  Ulrichs  placed  the  scene  of  the  battle  in  the  narrow  plain  on  the
left  (north)  bank  of  the  Asopus,  east  of  the  hill  of  Staniates  with  its  high
mediaeval  tower.  It  was  over  this  hill,  Ulrichs  thinks,  that  the  Boeotians
marched  to  attack  the  Athenians  (Thucydides,  iv.  93).  The  plain  is
now  well  cultivated  and  dotted  with  tall  oak-trees.  On  the  other  (south)
side  of  the  river  mns  a  range  of  low  fir-clad  hills.  The  road  from  Dilisi
(Delium)  to  Athens  passes  over  this  plain,  and  after  crossing  the  Asopus
ascends  the  broad  valley  of  Kakosialesi^  and  so  on  to  Decelea  and
Athens.  But  the  plain  is  about  3  miles  from  Dilisi^  and  therefore
too  far  from  Delium  to  be  the  scene  of  the  battle.  Moreover  Thucydides
says  that  both  the  wings  of  both  the  armies  were  prevented  from  engaging
by  the  interposition  of  torrents  or  watercourses.  But  there  seem  to  be
no  such  obstacles  in  the  plain  where  Ulrichs  would  place  the  battle ;
indeed  he  quite  ignores  the  important  statement  of  Thucydides  as  to
the  watercourses.  On  the  whole  it  would  seem  that  the  battle  was
fought  in  the  broken  and  hilly  ground  about  a  mile  or  so  to  the  south  of
the  modem  Dilisi,

See  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  155 ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece,  2.  p.  449  sqq,  ;
H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungerty  2.  p.  47  sqq,  ;  Wordsworth,  Athens
and  Attica,  pp.  6-9 ;  L.  Ross,  IVdndemngen,  2,  p.  105 ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen,
p.  678 ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  218 ;  Baedeker,'  p.  186;  Guide-Joanne,  2,  p.  5  sq.
As  to  the  image  of  Apollo  at  Delium,  see  x.  28.  6  note.

20.  I.  The  people  of  Tanagra  etc.  The  ruins  of  Tanagra  are
to  be  seen  on  and  below  an  inconspicuous  hill  about  3  miles  south  of  the
village  of  Skimatari,  where  travellers  find  quarters  for  the  night,  for  there
is  no  village  on  the  site  of  the  ancient  city.  The  hill  of  Tanagra  is  low
and  forms  the  last  spur  of  the  range  of  Mount  Cerycius  {Soros)  on  the
east,  being  divided  from  that  chain  only  by  a  slight  hollow.  To  the  east
the  hill  descends  towards  the  plain,  at  first  as  a  narrow  gently-sloping


CH.  XX  TANAGRA  77

ridge,  and  afterwards  in  a  steeper  declivity.  The  slope  of  the  ridge  to
the  south  is  long  and  gradual  ;  the  slope  to  the  north  is  shorter  and
much  steeper.  Along  the  southern  side  of  the  hill,  at  no  great  distance,
the  Asopus  flows  eastward  in  a  sharply-marked  but  not  deep  bed,  and
to  the  east  of  the  hill  is  joined  by  a  small  stream,  the  Lari^  which  comes
from  the  north.  Thus  the  hill  of  Tanagra  stands  in  the  angle  formed  by
the  junction  of  the  two  streams.  The  view  from  the  top  of  the  hill  west-
ward is  shut  in  by  the  near  heights  of  Mount  Cerycius ;  on  the  other
three  sides  it  extends  over  rolling  and  rather  bare  plateaus  to  hills  or  moun-
tains in  the  distance.  Beyond  the  plateau  on  the  north  and  north-east
stretches  the  long  line  of  the  mountains  of  Euboea,  affording  a  glimpse
of  the  Euripus  at  their  feet  To  the  east,  in  the  direction  of  Oropus,  are
the  low  wooded  hills  through  which  the  Asopus  finds  its  way  to  the  sea.
In  this  direction  appears  the  village  of  StanicUes^  and  a  little  to  the  south
of  it  a  low  hill  crowned  by  a  high  conspicuous  tower.  The  plain  at  the
foot  of  these  wooded  hills  is  itself  wooded — a  contrast  to  the  bareness  of
the  rest  of  the  plain  nearer  Tanagra.  To  the  south-east  rise  the  high
slopes  of  Mount  Fames,  wooded  but  presenting  also  some  crags  of  grey
rock.  On  the  south,  beyond  the  rolling  and  nearly  treeless  plateau  of
reddish  earth  on  which  the  village  of  Uatani  is  in  sight,  appears  a  chain
of  lower  hills,  the  western  prolongation  of  Mount  Fames ;  while  to  the
south-west,  above  the  hills  from  which  the  Asopus  is  seen  to  issue.  Mount
Cithaeron  looms  large.

The  line  of  walls  of  the  ancient  city  can  be  traced  throughout  their
entire  extent.  Very  little  of  them,  indeed,  is  above  the  soil,  but  their
position  is  dearly  marked  by  a  raised  mound  which  runs  round  the  site
and  which  doubtless  conceals  portions  of  them,  as  well  as  by  many
separate  blocks  and  by  small  pieces  of  wall  occurring  here  and  there,
though  seldom  rising  above  the  level  of  the  ground.  Scanty  remains  of
a  few  square  towers,  flanking  the  line  of  wall,  are  also  to  be  seen,  and
the  sites  of  many  more  are  indicated  by  the  short  mounds  which  project
outwards  at  intervals  from  the  long  mound  that  represents  the  wall.  The
fortifications  start  from  a  tower  which  occupied  the  summit  of  the  hill
and  of  which  there  are  some  remains.  From  here  one  wall  descended
the  steeper  slope  of  the  hill  northwards  into  the  plain ;  the  other  wall
ran  eastward  along  the  top  of  the  ridge  to  its  eastern  end,  where  it
descended  north-eastward  into  the  plain  and  met  the  first-mentioned
wall,  which  after  making  a  bend  to  the  westward  turned  north  and  then
east.  Thus  the  city,  so  far  as  it  lay  within  the  walls,  occupied  the
summit  of  the  ridge  and  extended  into  the  plain  to  the  north  and  north-
east, but  not  to  the  south  of  the  hill.  The  existing  walls  are  built  partly
of  a  dark  hard  stone,  partly  of  a  soft  light-coloured  sandstone.  But  the
original  walls  would  seem  to  have  been  built  of  the  dark  hard  stone
only  ;  for  the  remains  which  are  built  of  this  material  are  thoroughly
ancient  and  Greek  in  style,  whereas  the  sandstone  portions  of  the  wall,
though  constructed  of  well-hewn  squared  blocks,  have  thin  bricks  and
small  stones  in  the  crevices.  Yet  the  masonry  of  these  sandstone  walls
seems  much  too  good  to  be  mediaeval.  Hence  we  may  conjecture  that
in  late  imperial  times,  when  Greece  began  to  be  overrun  with  barbarians.


78  TANAGRA  bk.  ix.  boeotia

the  ancient  walls,  which  may  well  have  fsdlen  into  decay  under  the  long
Roman  peace,  were  repaired  and  to  a  great  extent  rebuilt  with  the  light
sandstone.  The  best  preserved  pieces  of  wall  exposed  to  view  are  on
the  crest  of  the  ridge  a  few  yards  east  of  the  summit,  and  on  the  steep
northern  slope  of  the  hill  a  little  below  the  sunmiit  In  the  latter  place
the  wall  is  preserved  on  both  faces  for  a  short  way  and  for  a  varying
height  of  several  feet  It  is  5  ft.  10  in.  thick,  and  is  3  ft.  8  in.
high  in  two  places.  But  the  blocks  are  in  a  loose  tumbled  condition  ;
they  are  little  hewn  and  hardly  fitted  together  ;  in  short  the  masonry  is
rough.  The  other  piece  of  wall,  on  the  crest  of  the  ridge,  is  6  ft  8
in.  thick  and  4  ft.  9  in.  high.  Its  two  faces  are  built  of  squared
blocks  of  sandstone,  while  the  core  is  constructed  of  small  stones.  The
blocks  of  the  two  £aces  are  on  the  whole  well  cut,  especially  those  of
the  outer  or  southern  face  of  the  wall.  Higher  up  the  ridge  this  sand-
stone wall  is  three  courses  high  ;  bricks  and  small  stones  are  inserted
in  the  chinks.  Of  the  towers  the  best  preserved,  or  rather  the  least
destroyed,  stands  facing  south  at  the  eastern  end  of  the  ridge,  where  the
steeper  slope  begins.  Its  southern  foce  is  17  fL  6  in.  broad,  and
one  of  its  sides  is  at  present  1 7  feet  long,  but  may  perhaps  have  been
longer  originally.  The  tower  is  built  of  squared  blocks  of  the  daik  hard
stone.  One  and  two  courses  are  standing  to  a  height,  at  most,  ctf  3  ft
9  in.  Some  of  the  large  squared  blocks  of  the  tower  have  £dlen
down  beside  it ;  one  of  them  is  6  feet  long.  Of  the  tower  at  the  other
and  higher  end  of  the  ridge,  on  the  top  of  the  hill,  nothing  is  visible
in  position  except  a  single  course  of  blocks  of  the  dark  hard  stone
forming  an  angle  and  hardly  appearing  above  the  ground.  A  tower  in
the  north  wall,  down  in  the  plain,  measures  about  2  5  feet  on  its  northern
face ;  the  remains  consist  of  a  single  course  and  a  block  or  two  of  a
second  course,  all  of  the  dark  hard  stone.  Another  tower  at  an  angle
of  the  west  wall  has  one  and  two  courses  and  a  single  block  of  a  third
course  standing  on  its  southern  foce ;  its  greatest  height  is  4  fL  2
in.  The  distances  between  the  towers  are  not  uniform,  but  many
of  them  are  set  at  intcr>-als  of  about  30  yards  from  each  other.  It  is  to
be  remembered  that  the  sites  of  by  far  the  most  of  the  tOT»-ers  arc
marked  only  by  mounds,  so  that  their  positions  and  number  are  to
some  extent  matters  of  conjectiire.  In  making  the  circuit  of  the  ^-alls  I
counted  thirty-two  more  or  less  probable  to>a-ers.  According  to  Lolling  (in
Baedeker)  the  number  is  between  forty  and  fifty.  Of  gate^*ays  I  obsen-ed
no  certain  or  even  \-er>'  probable  traces ;  but  in  the  west  i*-all,  some
60  prices  south  of  its  northern  extremity,  an  unusually  large  mound
projecting  westward  may  possibly  mark  the  site  of  a  gateway  flanked
with  towers.  This  is  probably  the  north-west  gateway  noted  by  Lolling
(in  RaedckerV  who  further  distinguished  two  other  gatewa\-s,  one  on  the
north-east  and  one  on  the  south-east.

On  the  top  of  the  hill  of  Tonagra,  a  few  >*ards  to  the  east  of  and
below  the  actual  summit,  an?  the  rtnnains  of  a  large  church  about  1 30
feel  long  by  65  feet  wide,  which  werx*  exca\*;\ied  in  1  Sqo.  They  scarcely  rise
above  the  ground,  but  the  eastern  end  of  the  church,  including  the  apse,
can  be  distinguisheii.     The  church  is  supposed  to  occupy  the  site  of  the


CH.  XX  TAN  AGRA  79

temple  of  Dionysus  mentioned  by  Pausanias,  and  within  its  area  are
ancient  remains  which  are  ascribed  to  that  temple.  These  remains
consist  of  ( I )  a  row  of  foundation-stones  nmning  east  and  west  in  a  line
parallel  with  the  fortification-wall  for  a  length  of  about  9  paces  or  so  ;
the  material  is  the  same  dark  hard  stone  of  which  the  original  city- walls
were  built ;  (2)  four  drums  of  small  fluted  colunms  and  a  base  of  a
small  column.  Three  of  the  drums  are  built  into  the  later  fortification-
wall  of  sandstone  on  the  ridge,  within  the  precincts  of  the  ruined  church ;
the  other  drum  and  the  base  are  close  to  the  fortification-wall  but  not  built
into  it.  Both  the  base  and  the  drums  are  made  of  the  same  soft  light-
coloured  sandstone  of  which  the  later  fortification-walls  are  built ;  this
sandstone  is  quite  different  in  appearance  and  grit  from  the  dark  hard
stone  of  which  the  foundations  of  the  temple  and  the  original  walls  of
the  city  are  built  If  columns  and  foundations  belonged  to  the  same
building,  it  would  seem  that  while  the  foundations  were  constructed  of
the  dark  hard  stone,  the  upper  part  of  the  edifice,  or  at  all  events  the
columns,  were  of  the  light  sandstone.  The  entablature  may  perhaps
have  been  of  the  dark  stone,  for  outside  of  the  church  1  saw  a  block  of
a  cornice  of  that  material  with  dentils  cut  in  it.  The  columns  were  of
the  Ionic  order ;  for  the  flutes  are  blunt,  and  in  the  small  museum  at
SkimcUari  I  observed  two  Ionic  capitals  which  corresponded  in  material
and  dimensions  with  the  columns  at  Tanagra,  and  had  doubtless  been
brought  from  it  The  diameter  of  these  two  capitals,  without  the
volutes,  is  2 1  inches.  This  is  the  diameter  of  one  of  the  three  drums
built  into  the  fortification-wall  at  Tanagra,  and  also  of  the  column  which
sprang  from  the  existing  base.  The  base  itself  is  about  27  inches  in
diameter,  and  the  diameter  of  the  two  other  drums  built  into  the
fortification-wall  is  1 8  inches.  Within  the  area  of  the  church  on  the  hill
of  Tanagra  are  some  remains  of  a  plain  mosaic  pavement,  but  whether
this  pavement  belonged  to  the  temple  or  to  the  church  which  replaced
it  I  could  not  say.

Not  many  yards  to  the  north-east  of  the  church  is  the  site  of  the
theatre — a  great  semicircular  hollow  scooped  out  of  the  northern  side  of
the  ridge  and  facing  north-east  To  judge  from  the  size  of  the  hollow,
the  theatre  must  have  been  large.  A  trench  has  been  dug  through  the
middle  of  the  auditorium  and  continued  through  the  orchestra  ;  but  not
a  single  stone  of  the  theatre,  so  far  as  I  observed,  had  been  brought  to
light  by  it.  When  Leake  visited  Tanagra  at  the  beginning  of  the
century  a  part  of  the  masonry  which  supported  the  two  ends  of  the
auditorium  remained,  but  it  seems  to  have  since  disappeared.  Leake
estimated  the  diameter  of  the  theatre  at  between  300  and  400  feet.  On
a  terrace  below  the  temple,  to  the  north-east  of  it,  he  saw  "  the  well-
constructed  foundations  of  a  public  building,  formed  of  marble  of  a  very
dark  colour,  with  a  green  cast."  Lastly,  on  the  flat  ground  outside  the
north  wall  of  the  city  there  is  a  platform  covered  with  broken  pieces  of
the  light-coloured  sandstone  and  exhibiting  on  its  northern  edge  the
remains  of  a  foundation-wall  about  9  paces  long  built  for  the  most
part  of  squared  blocks  of  the  dark  hard  stone,  but  also  in  part  of  the
light  sandstone.     These  foundations  run  parallel  to  the  city-wall,  but


8o  TANAGRA  bk.  ix.  boeotia

their  distance  from  it  (about  20  yards  or  so)  is  too  great  to  allow  us  to
suppose  that  they  belonged  to  a  projecting  tower.  It  may  be  conjectured
that  a  temple,  afterwards  replaced  by  a  chapel,  occupied  this  platform,
and  that  the  foundations  belonged  to  it

The  situation  of  Tanagra  is  advantageous  and  pleasing.  A  rich
champaign  country  of  fertile  plains  and  low  wooded  hills  stretches  east-
ward to  the  Euboean  strait,  in  agreeable  contrast  to  the  bare  monoto-
nous plains  of  north-eastern  and  central  Boeotia.  The  valley  of  the
Asopus  between  Tanagra  and  the  sea  is  particularly  charming.  The
road  leads,  now  through  fields  of  maize  watered  by  runnels  and  dotted
with  olive-trees,  now  over  gently-swelling  heights  shaded  by  oaks  and
firs.  Between  the  villages  of  Stoftiates  (or  /mVt,  as  it  is  also  called)
and  Sykofnino  the  valley  contracts  into  a  narrow  dale,  henmied  in  on
either  side  by  hills  thickly  clothed  with  fir-woods.  At  Sykamino^  a
village  with  several  mediaeval  churches,  picturesquely  situated  at  the
foot  of  a  reddish  hill,  the  valley  expands  into  the  level  but  still  well-
wooded  plain  of  Oropus.

The  aspect  of  the  country  seems  to  have  changed  very  little  since
antiquity ;  for  that  lively  traveller  who  passes  under  the  name  of
Dicaearchus  describes  the  route  from  Oropus  to  Tanagra  as  leading
through  a  district  planted  with  olives  and  wooded,  adding  that  the
whole  road  \^*as  perfectly  safe  from  robbers.  This  last  remark  has
certainly  not  alwa>*s  been  true  of  the  road  in  modem  times.  As  late
as  the  year  1890  I  ^^-as  offered  a  military  escort  at  Oropus.  The  same
traveller  thus  describes  Tanagra,  as  it  was  in  the  third  century  B.C
'^The  city  stands  in  a  high  and  rugged  situation,  and  has  a  white
argillaceous  appearance.  The  houses  are  handsomely  adorned  with
porticoes  and  encaustic  paintings.  The  countr>'  does  not  abound  in
com,  but  its  wine  is  the  best  in  Boeotia.  The  people  are  blest  with
substance,  but  simple  in  their  way  of  life ;  they  are  all  farmers,  not
manufacturers.  They  are  strict  to  obser>c  justice,  honour,  and
hospitality.  They  give  freely  of  their  goods  to  their  needy  fellow-
townsmen  and  to  tramps  (toiV  oTci^os-Aai-j/rais  rwi*  dToSi^/ii/riJcciiK),
for  they  are  utter  strangers  to  meanness  and  cheeseparing.  It  is  the
safest  city  in  all  Boeotia  for  a  stranger  to  dwell  in ;  because  the  in-
dependent and  industrious  habits  of  the  people  beget  a  blunt,  down-
right contempt  for  roguer>\  For  in  this  city  I  obscn-ed  none  of  those
avaricious  propensities  which  are  generally  the  source  of  the  greatest
crimes.  For  where  men  hax-e  enough  to  li\-e  upon,  there  is  no  such
thing  as  a  craving  after  lucre,  .\mong  such  men,  therefore,  roguery
can  hardly  exist."  See  Dicaearchus  [rather  Heraclides],  Descriptio
GroictM^  i.  5  (/■V.i^".  //»/.  onirt".  ed.  Miiller,  2.  p.  256  ;  Giogr^  Graec,
Min.  ed.  Miillcr,  1.  p.  101  ^•.)  In  Strabo's  time  Tanagra  and  Thespiae
were  the  only  cities  of  any  sire  in  Boeotia :  the  rest,  he  says,  were
mere  mins  and  names  ^Strabo*  ix.  pp.  403,  410V

See  IXxlwelK  r.»w.  J.  i\  150:  Leake.  Xft'u^  O'^VwV,  2.  p.  454  s^ij.  ;
Ch.  \\^v^UH^Mrth,  Afk^s  amJ  .-(.'.-i-a,  pjv  10-10;  H.  N.  Ultichs,  S^fis^m  umi
Fc's.kmH^»s.  J,  l^  oSi^y. ;  NVelckcr.  .'^^v.^ai,  I,  j.  ^v  *»,v.*. :  U  Ross,  n'ondtr-
MHs^,  I,  |\  109  ^/.  ;  BurMJUi,  in  i^'*i, ^-v  te.Vr  m€  S  rrigrjcV.  j\  Cvw.  smMs.  Gestll.


CH.  XX  TANAGRA  8i

d,  IViss,  zu  Leipzig^  Philolog.  hist.  CI.  Ii  (1859),  p.  114;  id,^  Geogr.  v,  Grieck.
I.  p.  221  sq,  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  187  sq, ;  Guide-Joanne^  2,  p.  5  sq,  ;  TlpaicTiKii  Tijs
*A^€uo\oyncrjt  'Ercup/af,  1 090,  p.  33  sqq.  I  visited  Tanagra,  13th  November
1895,  and  have  described  the  situation  and  ruins  almost  wholly  from  personal
observation.

Of  recent  years  great  numbers  of  ancient  graves  have  been  excavated
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Tanagra.  These  graves  line  the  various  paths
leading  from  Tanagra  for  miles.  To  ride  along  one  of  these  paths
nowadays  with  the  open  and  empty  graves  gaping  on  either  hand  is
like  an  anticipation  of  the  Resurrection  Day.  Two  great  cemeteries
have  also  been  discovered.  One  of  them  is  on  the  low  ridge  to  the
east  of  Tanagra,  just  across  the  Lari  stream.  The  other,  called  the
necropolis  of  Bali,  is  in  the  plain  to  the  north-west  of  Tanagra.  One
particularly  fine  tomb,  which  had  been  excavated  not  long  before  my
visit  to  Tanagra  in  November  1895,  deserves  a  brief  notice.  It  is
situated  near  the  northern  foot  of  Mount  Cerycius,  about  half  an  hour's
ride  to  the  west  of  Tanagra.  A  staircase  leads  down  into  the  sepulchral
chamber  which  is  about  1 1  feet  square  and  is  vaulted  over  with  a
roof  constructed  on  the  true  principle  of  the  arch.  The  whole  tomb,
including  the  walls  and  roof  of  the  chamber  and  the  walls  of  the
staircase,  is  finely  constructed  of  the  most  regular  masonry,  the  blocks
being  large,  squared,  smoothed,  and  laid  in  horizontal  courses.  The
height  of  the  courses  is  uniformly  about  18  inches.  A  projecting
ledge  runs  all  round  under  the  spring  of  the  vault.  The  stone  door  of
the  tomb  is  preserved  in  the  museum  at  Skimatari,  It  is  a  double
folding  door,  and  across  it  are  wrought  in  relief  imitations  of  iron
bands  studded  with  large  nail-heads.  In  the  tomb  there  are  places
for  three  corpses,  one  at  the  back,  and  one  at  each  of  the  sides.

Of  the  objects  found  in  the  graves  at  Tanagra  the  most  famous  are
the  graceful  and  often  extremely  beautiful  statuettes  of  painted  terra-
cotta, which  have  been  discovered  in  immense  quantities  and  are  now
scattered  over  the  museums  of  Europe.  It  deserves  to  be  noted  that
these  pretty  statuettes  are  almost  always  found  broken  in  a  purposeful
manner,  the  head  being  generally  torn  off  and  lying  by  itself.  And
they  are  as  often  found  in  the  earth  over  and  beside  the  grave  as  in  the
grave  itself.  Hence  it  has  been  suggested  that  while  the  grave  was
being  filled  in,  the  friends  of  the  deceased  stood  beside  it  with  these
figures  in  their  hands,  which  they  first  broke  and  then  threw  down
into  the  hole ;  and  this  custom,  it  has  been  conjectured,  may  have
been  a  substitute  for  an  older  custom  of  sacrificing  human  victims  at
the  tomb,  the  breaking  of  the  images  taking  the  place  of  the  earlier
slaughter.

See  * kBr\vfUQv^  9  (1880),  p.  458  sqq,  ;  Xlpairrt/cd  rrfi  * kpxou.o\oyiKT}s  'EraiplaSy
1 88 1,  p.  13  sqq.  ;  id,,  1 882,  p.  63  sq.  ;  li/.,  1887,  p.  64;  AeXrlov  dpxanokoyiKdVy
1888,  pp.  34  jy.,  45  jy.,  56-62,  105-109,  125-131;  Baedeker,'  p.  i&S;  Gutde-
Joemne,  2.  p.  6  ;  A.  S.  Murray,  Handbook  of  Greek  Archaeology y  p.  310  sqq.  ;  P.
Gardner,  New  chapters  in  Greek  history,  p.  354  sq.  For  inscriptions  found  at
Tanagra,  see  C.  I.  G.  G.  S.  i.  pp.  158  sqq.,  653  sqq.;  C.  Robert,  in  Archdoiogische
Zeitung,  33  (1876),  pp.  148-160;  Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr.  Graec.^  Nos.  357*373;
Collitz,  G.  D.  /.  I.  Nos.  869-1129;  'E<t>rjfi€pls  apxatoKoyiKifi,  1883,  p.  isSsqq.    In

VOL.  V  G


$2  TAN  AGRA  bk.  ix.  boeotia

the  museum  at  Skimatari  in  November  1895  ^  copied  thirty  small  inscriptions
(mostly  names  on  tombstones)  which  the  custodian  told  me  had  not  yet  been
published.  None  of  them  was  of  any  importance.  One  of  them  was  6I0N
(*of  gods') ;  another  was  Ae[H]NA[H]2  (*  of  Athena*).  The  terra-cottas  are
noticed  in  the  Gazette  arctUologiqiu  for  the  years  1 876- 1880,  1883  ;  Bullet ifio
deir  Instttuto,  1874,  pp.  120-127.  Cp.  also  E.  Curtius,  *  Zwei  Giebelgnippen
aus  Tanagra/  Philolog.  w.  histor,  Abhandl,  d.  k,  Akad,  d.  fVissen,  zu  Berlin,
1878,  pp.  27-51  ;  £.  Fabricius,  *  Ein  bemaltes  Grab  aus  Tanagra/  Mittheil.  d.
arch.  Inst,  in  A  then,  10  (1885),  pp.  158-164  ;  Jamot,  *  Terres  cuites  archaiques  de
Tanagra,'  Bulletin  de  Corr.  hellhi.  14  (1890),  pp.  204-223  ;  CoL  Lane  Fox,  in
fottrnal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute,  6  (1877),  pp.  310-316.  On  an  archaic
sepulchral  relief  found  at  Tanagra  and  now  in  the  National  Museum  at  Athens,
which  represents  two  beardless  naked  men,  named  Citylus  and  Dermis,  standing
side  by  side  with  their  arms  round  each  other,  see  Mittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,
3  (1878),  p.  311  sqq.  ;  Gazette  arclUologique,  4  (1878),  p.  160  sqq.  ;  Friederichs-
Wolters,  Gipsabgiisse,  No.  44  ;  Cavvadias,  rXuirrA  rov  'E^i/cou  Momtc^ov,  No.  56 ;
Collignon,  Hist,  de  la  Sculpture  grecque,  i.  p.  193  sqq,

20.  I.  their  fonnder  was  Poexnander.  Before  the  time  of  Poeman-
der,  it  is  said,  the  people  of  the  land  lived  in  villages ;  he  built  the  city
and  called  it  Poemandria,  employing  as  his  architect  one  Polycrithus.
The  old  name  of  the  district,  we  are  told,  was  Poemandris,  literally  *  the
pastoral  land.'  Tzetzes  says  that  the  oxen  of  Tanagra  were  very  fine ;
but  this  may  be  merely  an  inference  from  the  name.  See  Plutarch,
Quaest.  Graec.  37  ;  Strabo,  ix.  p.  404  ;  Tzetzes,  SchoL  on  Lycophrtm^
326  ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v.  Tdvaypa  ;  Etymol.  Magn.^  s,v.  T€<l>vpay
p.  228  sq.  In  two  metrical  epitaphs  of  Roman  times,  found  at  Tanagra,
the  land  and  people  of  Tanagra  are  spoken  of  poetically  as  the  land  and
race  of  Poemander  (C.  /.  G,  G.  S.  i.  Nos.  580,  581  ;  Kaibel,  Epigram"
mata  Graeca,  No.  495).  Poemander's  head  appears  on  a  coin  of
Tanagra  (Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  A^um.  Comm.  on  Paus.  p.  113).

20.  2.  Graea.  In  the  line  of  Homer  quoted  by  Pausanias  (//.  ii.
498)  Graea  occurs  as  the  name  of  a  Boeotian  city.  Ancient  writers
differed  as  to  its  identification.  The  people  of  Tanagra,  as  we  learn
from  Pausanias,  identified  Graea  with  their  own  city.  Aristotle,  cited
by  Stephanus  Byzantius  {s.v.  'fipowros)  and  by  Eustathius  (on  Homer,
//.  ii.  498)  says  that  Graea  was  Oropus.  According  to  others  it  was  a
seaside  place  in  the  district  of  Oropus,  opposite  Eretria  (Stephanus
Byzantius,  I.e.)  According  to  Strabo  (ix.  p.  404)  Graea  was  the  place
near  Oropus  where  was  the  famous  sanctuar)'  of  Amphiaraus.  Thucy-
dides  says  (ii.  23)  that  in  431  RC.  the  Peloponnesian  invaders,  retreat-
ing from  Attica  into  Boeotia,  marched  past  Oropus  and  in  doing  so
laid  waste  **  what  is  called  the  Peraean  district  {-nyv  y^v  t^v  Ile/Miiic^v
KaXovyikvi]v)  which  is  in  the  possession  of  the  Oropians."  In  this  passage
of  Thucydides  some  scholars  would  read  VpaiK-{\v  for  IIc/xicx^v,  which
is  the  reading  of  the  MSS.  If  this  conjecture  is  correct,  it  follows
that  the  Graean  district  was  near  Oropus.  See  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen
und  Forschungcn^  2.  p.  61  sqq.  ;  U.  von  Wilamowitz-Mollendorff,  *Oropos
und  die  Graer,'  Hermes,  21  (1886),  pp.  91-115.

20.  3.  Orion.  Orion  seems  to  have  been  the  Greek  counterpart  of
the  Wild  Huntsman  of  northern  mythology.  See  Grimm,  Deutsche
Mythologies^  2.  p.  766  sqq.  ;    Simrock,   Deutsche  Mythologie^^  p.    196


cii.  xic  THE  TRITON  OF  TANAGRA  83

sqq,  ;  Kuhn,  Wistjaliscke  Sagen,  Gebrduche  und  Marchen,  2.  p.  6  sgg.  ;
Baring-Gould,  Iceland:  Us  Scenes  and  Sag'os,  p.  199  sgg.  He  is  very
seldom  represented  on  existing  monuments  of  ancient  art.  In  a
manuscript  of  the  Thtriaia  of  Nicander  there  is  a  painting  of  Orion
swinging  the  crooked  staff  called  a  lagoMon  ('hare -hitter"),  which
in  appearance  resembles  a  boomerang.  Under  his  feet  is  a  large
scor^Mon,  in  reference  to  the  story  that  Orion  was  killed  by  a  scorpion's
bite  (Nicander,  Tker.  13  sgq.  ;  Lucan,  Pkars.  ix,  833  sqg.)  See  Fr.
Lenormant,  in  Gazette  arch/ologigue,  i  (1875),  p.  125  j?.,  with  plate
32.

20.  3.  Konnt  Cerydiu.  If  we  take  literally  Pausanias's  statement
that  Mt.  Cerycius  was  in  Tacagra,  the  mountain  can  only  be  the  summit
of  the  hill  on  which  Tanagra  was  built.  But  more  probably  we  should
apply  the  name  to  the  chain  of  hills  which  extends  westward  from
Tanagra  and  of  which  the  hill  of  Tanagra  is  in  fact  the  termination.
See  Leake,  Noriktm  Greece,  1.  p.  459  sg.  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  tmd
Forsckuttgen,  2.  p.  70  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  1.  p.  222.

20.  3.  a  place  called  Folns.  Polus  (iroAo^)  in  Greek  often  signi-
fies the  firmament  or  celestial  sphere.  See  note  on  vi.  19.  8.  In  the
present  passage  Prot  E.  Maass  interprets  it  to  mean  '  a  rounded  hill.
top,'  comparing  Hesychius,  s.v.  irdXos,  who  says  that  the  word  some-
times meant  'a  rounded  top'  (ro'ira;  Kopii^Tfi  KiiicAofiS));).  On  Prof.
Maass's  view  the  story  whicK  connected  Atlas  with  this  place  near
Tanagra  arose  from  the  mistake  of  understanding  the  name  Polus
(toAik)  in  its  ordinary  sense  of  'the  celestial  sphere.'  See  E.  Maass,
Aratea  (Berlin,  1892),  p.  132  iq.

20.   3.  as  Homer  has  said  of  him  etc.     See  Odyssey,  \.  52-54.

20,  4-  the  image  ■ the  Triton.      On  three  coins  of  Tanagra

(Fig.   4)  of  the   lime   of  the   Antonines  and  Commodus,    the  youthful

Dionysus    is  represented    standing   under  a  roof,

which  is  supfwrted  by  two  male  statues  (Atlantes)

on  pillars;  the  god  wears  the  fawn-skin  and  boots,

and    he    holds    the  thyrsus    and    a    goblet   [kan-

tkaros) ;   below  is  a  Triton  swimming  to  the  left,

but  looking  back.      E.  Curtius  ai^ued  that  the

Dionysus   on    these    coins   was   a   copy   of    the

image  by  Calamis,   and  that  the  Triton  on  the

coins  was  a  copy  of  the  Triton  seen  by  Pausanias

in    the    same    temple,   which    was,    in    Curtius's  "g,^.,  (cotN  of't*n*'c;>"i

opinion,  a  work  of  art  separate  from  the  image

erf   Dionysus.       See  Archaologische  Zeitung,  41   (1883),    pp.    255-258.

But    Mr.    P.   Wolters  afterwards  showed    that   the  lypie  of  Dionysus

on    the    coins    is    certainly    not   earlier    than    the    time   of    Phidias,

and  cannot  represent  a  work  of  Calamis,  who    was  a  predecessor  of

Phidias,  and  whose  style  was  more  archaic  than   Chat  of  the  Dionysus

on  the  coins  (see  note  on  v.  25.  5).     Further,  as  Mr.  Wolters  points

out,  the  manner  in  which  Pausanias  speaks  of  the  Triton  seems  to  prove

that  it  was  not  an  image,  but  a  real  Triton  or  what  was  exhibited  as

such.      For  in  the  next  chapter  Pausanias  says  that  he  saw  another


84  THE  TRITON  OF  TAN  AGRA  bk.  ix.  boeotia

Triton  at  Rome,  describes  the  appearance  of  the  supposed  creature,
and  then  gives  a  list  of  other  strange  animals.  That  the  Triton  at
Tanagra  was  professedly  a  real  animal  embalmed  or  stuffed,  appears
from  a  statement  of  Demostratus,  reported  by  Aelian  {^Nat,  anim,  xiii.  21),
that  he  had  seen  at  Tanagra  an  embalmed  or  pickled  Triton  {Tapi,\ov
TpiTtova) ;  the  creature,  according  to  Demostratus,  resembled  the
pictures  and  images  of  Tritons  except  that  the  head  was  decayed  with
time  and  no  longer  distinct  or  recognisable ;  and  when  he  touched  it,
some  hard  rough  scales  fell  off.  A  Roman  senator,  in  the  presence  of
Demostratus,  took  a  piece  of  the  beast's  skin  and  burned  it  as  an
experiment ;  it  emitted  a  fetid  odour ;  but  the  spectators  could  not
decide  from  the  smell  whether  the  creature  was  a  sea  or  a  land  animal.
Frpm  Demostratus's  description  and  Pausanias's  story  (§  5)  it  would
seem  that  the  Triton  of  Tanagra  was  headless.  What  was  shown  as  a
Triton  may  have  been  either  a  real  sea-beast  of  some  sort  or  an  effigy
made  up  by  the  priests.  Had  it  been  merely  an  effigy,  it  would  prob-
ably have  been  complete,  since  it  is  just  as  easy  to  make  a  false  head
as  a  false  tail.  The  fact  that  the  creature  was  headless  seems  to
show  that  it  was  a  real  marine  animal  which  the  priests  palmed  off
upon  the  credulous  as  a  Triton.  As  the  popular  idea  of  a  Triton  was
a  fish  with  a  man's  head,  it  became  necessary,  before  exhibiting  a  real
fish  as  a  Triton,  to  cut  off  its  head  or  at  least  to  mangle  it  past  all
recognition,  and  then  to  invent  some  story  to  account  for  the  mutilation.
This  is  what  seems  to  have  been  done.  It  is  not  surprising,  however,
that  on  the  coins  of  the  city  the  creature  should  appear  with  its  head
complete.  The  people  of  Tanagra  were  doubtless  proud  of  their  Triton,
which  probably  drew  sightseers  from  afar ;  and  in  putting  him  on  their
coins  as  a  badge  of  their  city  they  naturally  represented  him,  not  in  the
mauled  and  mangled  condition  which  the  exigencies  of  natural  history
unfortunately  rendered  necessary,  but  in  all  his  glory,  with  a  human
head  and  a  fish's  tail.

Mr.  Wernicke  has  suggested  that  the  Triton  may  have  been  the  old
local  god  of  Tanagra,  who  was  afterwards  ousted  by  Dionysus,  and  that
the  change  of  worship  may  have  been  embodied  in  the  legend  that  the
younger  god  had  knocked  his  predecessor  on  the  head.  Amongst  the
terra-cotta  statuettes  of  Tanagra  there  is  one  representing  a  very  rude
idol  with  two  Tritons  painted  on  its  breast ;  the  Tritons  are  back  to
back,  they  have  human  heads  and  anns  and  the  tails  of  fishes,  and  their
attitude  is  not  unlike  that  of  the  Triton  on  the  coins.  Mr.  Wernicke
sees  in  this  statuette  evidence  of  an  ancient  worship  of  Triton  at
Tanagra.


PP

Imnooi-Diumcr  auu  ouiuiici,  xviim.  K.omm,  on  i-aus.  p.  1 14,  with  pi.  X  vii  viii  •
Kalkmann,  Pausanias  tier  Pericget,  p.  29  sq,  ;  K.  Wernicke,  '  Der  Triton  von
Tanagra,  Vfl>4r^r^  des  archiwlog.  Inst.  2  (1887),  pp.  114-I18;  J.  Escher,  Triton
mid  seine  Bekiimpfung  ditrch  HerakUs,  p.  40  sq. ;  F.  R.  Dressier,  Triton  uiui  die
Tritonen,  p.  14  ^q.  The  statuette  with  the  two  Tritons  on  its  breast  is  represented
in  Heuzey's  work,  Us  figunnes  antiques  de  terre  cuite  dtt  Mtist'e  du  Louvre,
pi.  17.  I.


CH.  XXI  THE  TRITONS  85

The  Triton  at  Tanagra  seems  to  have  been  monstrously  fat  and
bloated.  See  Athenaeus,  xii.  p.  551a  (where  Meineke  wrongly  printed
Kip-eiin^ead  of  ic^rct ;  cp.  KaibePs  edition);  Hesychius,  s,v,  l^avarffiaiiiiv
<f>vijv.  From  Hesychius  {/.c)  it  appears  that  Ephorus  fell  into  the  same
mistake  as  Meineke,  namely  that  of  supposing  the  k^/os  of  Tanagra  to
be  a  fat  man  of  that  name  instead  of  a  fat  fish.

20.  4-  went  down  to  the  sea  to  be  pnrified.  In  ceremonial  puri-
fications  a  special  cleansing  virtue  was  attributed  to  sea-water.  Persons
who  were  being  purified  for  homicide  washed  their  garments  in  twice
seven  waves  (Suidas,  s.v,  dirh  Sis  iirra  Kv/Aarwv).  In  Ceos  on  the  day
after  a  funeral  the  house  was  sprinkled  with  sea-water  (Roehl,  /.  G,  A.
No.  395,  1.  14  s^,  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec.  No.  468  ;  Cauer,
Delectus  Inscr.  Graec,'^  No.  5  30 :  the  reading  is,  however,  uncertain ;
Koehler  would  supply  6a\\\ouT]L  instead  of  ^aA[Acur»/]i).  In  Cos  the
priest  purified  himself  with  sea- water  (Paton  and  Hicks,  The  inscriptions
of  Cos,  No.  38 ;  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  9  (1888),  p.  329).  The
initiated  at  Eleusis  perhaps  bathed  in  the  sea  or  in  the  salt  pools  called
Rhiti.  See  Aug.  Mommsen,  Heortologie,  p.  248.  Instead  of  sea- water,
a  mixture  of  salt  and  water  was  sometimes  used  in  ceremonial  purifica-
tions (Theocritus,  xxiv.  96  sq.)     Cp.  Tzetzes,  SchoL  on  Lycophron,  135.

20.  4*  the  women  prayed  to  Dionysus  etc.  There  are  various
indications  of  a  mythological  connexion  between  Dionysus  and  the  sea
or  water  in  general  At  Smyrna  in  the  month  Anthesterion  a  ship  was
carried  in  procession  to  the  market-place,  the  priest  of  Dionysus  sitting
in  it  and  pretending  to  steer  it  (Philostratus,  Vit.  Sophist,  i.  25.  i  ;
Aristides,  Or.  xxii.  vol.  i.  p.  440,  ed.  Dindorf).  The  Argives  summoned
Dionysus  from  the  water  with  the  blast  of  trumpets.  See  ii.  37.  5  note.
When  his  train  of  Bacchanals  was  attacked  by  Lycurgus,  Dionysus  is
said  to  have  plunged  into  the  sea,  where  he  was  received  by  Thetis
(Homer,  //.  vi.  135  sq.)  On  a  gold  plate  found  in  Syria  the  young
Dionysus  is  represented  walking  on  the  waves  {Gazette  arch^ologiquc^  i
(1875),  pl-  2,  with  De  Witte's  remarks,  p.  5  sqq.)

21.  I.  The  appearance  of  the  Tritons  is  this  etc.  In  ancient
works  of  art  the  Tritons  are  generally  represented  with  the  heads,  arms,
and  upper  bodies  of  men,  but  with  the  tails  of  fishes  from  the  waist  down-
ward. See  K.  O.  Miiller,  Handbuch  der  Archaeologic  der  Kunst,^  §  402.
Pausanias  describes  them  with  nothing  human  but  the  nose.  The  pre-
tended specimens  which  he  saw  at  Tanagra  and  Rome  would  seem  to
have  differed  considerably  from  the  popular  idea  of  a  Triton.  The  con-
ception of  Triton  as  a  deity  half-fish  half-man  may  have  been  borrowed
by  the  Greeks  from  the  Semites.  The  goddess  Derceto  was  repre-
sented in  Phoenicia  as  a  woman  to  the  waist,  but  as  a  fish  from  the
waist  downward  (Lucian,  De  dea  Syria,  14) ;  and  Dagon,  the  Philistine
god,  seems  to  have  been  similarly  conceived  as  half-fish,  half-man.  See
Movers,  Die  Phoenizier,  i.  p.  589  sqq.  ;  Winer,  Biblisches  Realworter-
huch,  s.v.  *  Dagon.'  Cp.  Escher,  Triton,  p.  no  sqq.  ;  Dressier,  Triton
umi  die  Tritonen,  p.  1 5  sqq.  Near  Phigalia  in  Arcadia  there  was  a
curious  image  in  the  shape  of  a  mermaid  (Paus.  viii.  41.  6).

21.   2.  rhinoceroses.     The  rhinoceros  was  known  to  the  Assyrians,


86  RHINOCEROS — ELK  bk.  ix.  boeotia

for  on  the  obelisk  of  Salmanasar,  found  at  Nineveh,  it  is  represented  in
company  with  the  Indian  elephant  and  the  double-humped  camel  of
Bactria.  Its  union  on  this  monument  with  these  Asiatic  animal^  appears
to  show  that  the  Assyrians  derived  their  knowledge  of  the  rhinoceros
from  Asia  rather  than  from  Africa.  See  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de
Part  dans  rAntiquiti^  2.  pp.  564,  777,  note  5.  The  rhinoceros  seems
first  to  have  been  exhibited  in  Rome  by  Pompey  (Pliny,  Na/,  hist,  viii.
7 1 ).  From  the  name  *  Ethiopic  bull '  which  Pausanias  applies  to  the
animal  it  appears  that  he  is  describing  the  African  rhinoceros,  which
has,  as  he  says,  two  horns  on  its  snout.  The  species  known  as  the
Indian  rhinoceros,  now  found  in  Nepaul,  Butan,  and  Assam,  has  only
one  horn.  But  two-homed  species  are  also  found  in  various  parts  of
Eastern  Asia  (Assam,  Burma,  the  Malay  Peninsula,  Sumatra,  Java,  etc.)
See  Encyclopaedia  Britannica^  9th  ed.  article  '  Rhinoceros,'  vol.  20,
pp.  521  sqq,  Pliny  and  Aelian  describe  the  one-homed  Indian  rhino-
ceros, and  they  distinguish  it  from  the  Ethiopic  bull ;  their  descriptions
of  this  last  animal  are  fabulous  (Aelian,  Nat,  anim,  xvii.  44  sq,  ;  Pliny,
Nat.  hist,  viii.  71  and  74).

21.  3.  the  elk.  Cp.  v.  12.  i.  Caesar  described  the  elk  as  one  of
the  wild  animals  which  roamed  the  great  Hercynian  forest  of  Germany.
He  says  that  it  resembled  a  goat,  but  was  somewhat  larger ;  that  its
homs  were  short  and  that  it  had  no  joints  in  its  legs ;  hence  if  it  fell
down,  it  could  not  get  up  again.  So  it  slept  leaning  against  a  tree.  The
hunters  noted  the  trees  against  which  the  elk  was  in  the  habit  of  lean-
ing and  underaiined  or  cut  them  half  through ;  so  that  when  the  beast
leaned  against  one  of  these  trees,  the  tree  and  the  elk  fell  down  together
and  the  animal  was  captured !  See  Caesar,  Bell.  Gail,  vi.  27.  Pliny
affirms  {A\it.  hist,  viii.  39)  that  the  elk  was  like  a  heifer,  but  with  longer
ears  and  a  longer  neck ;  and  he  says  that  in  Scandinavia  there  was  an
animal  like  it  called  the  achiis,  about  which  he  tells  the  same  fable  that
Caesar  tells  about  the  elk.  Erasmus  Stella  describes  the  elk  as  exist-
ing in  Pmssia  in  the  early  part  of  the  sixteenth  century  (*  De  Bomssiae
antiquitatibus,'  in  Novus  Orbis  regionum  ac  insularum  veteribus
incognitarum  (Paris,  1532),  p.  507  [wrongly  numbered  497]  sq.^
The  elk  or  moose  deer  still  ranges  over  the  whole  of  Northern
Europe  and  Asia  as  far  south  as  East  Prussia,  the  Caucasus,  and  North
China.  It  was  once  common  in  the  forests  of  Germany  and  France,
and  is  still  found  in  some  parts  of  Norway  and  Sweden,  where  it  is
strictly  protected.  Pausanias's  description  of  the  appearance  and  habits
of  the  animal  is  not  so  ver>'  wide  of  the  mark.  For  the  elk  is  the  largest
of  all  the  deer  tribe  (Ceri'idae)^  and  is  **  a  shy  and  timorous  creature
fleeing  at  the  sight  of  man."  See  Encyclopaedia  Britannica^  9th  ed.
article  *  Deer,'  vol.  7.  p.  24.  The  Irish  elk  was  a  huge  creature,  with
enormous  branching  antlers.  A  fine  skeleton  of  one  of  them  is  pre-
ser\'ed  in  the  Natural  Histor>-  Museum  of  Queen's  College,  Cork.

21.  4-  Otesias mentions  a  beast called  martichoras.

The  word  martichoras  is  the  Persian  mard-khora^  'man-eater'  (Liddell
and  Scott,  Greek  Lexicon^  s.7;  /iapTi\o/5a^\  Ctesias's  description  of
this  fabulous  animal  is  reported  more  or  less  fully  by  Photius  {Biblio-


CH.  XXII  HERMES  THE  RAM-BEARER  87

theca^  p.  45  b  31  sqq.y  ed.  Bekker),  Aristotle  i^HisL  anim.  ii.  i,  p.  501  a  25
sqq,y  ed.  Bekker),  Aelian  {Nat.  anim,  iv.  21),  Pliny  {Nat,  hist.  viii.
75),  and  Philostratus  {Vit,  Apoilon,  iii.  45).  All  these  writers  treat
Ctesias's  statement  with  more  or  less  incredulity.  Aelian's  account  of  the
monster  is  the  fullest.     Cp.  Ctesias,  ed.  Bahr,  p.  280  sgq.

21.  6.  winged  snakes a  scorpion  that  had  wings.     Mega-

sthenes  stated  that  there  were  winged  snakes  and  winged  scorpions  in
India  (Strabo,  xv.  p.  703;  Aelian,  Nat,  anim.  xvi.  41).  Herodotus
mentions  a  story  that  every  year  in  the  spring  winged  snakes  came
flying  from  Arabia  to  Egypt,  but  were  met  in  a  certain  pass  by  ibises,
which  destroyed  them.  The  bones  of  the  serpents  were  shown  to
Herodotus  in  the  pass ;  the  place  was  in  Arabia,  opposite  the  city  of
Buto.  He  describes  the  wings  of  these  serpents  as  featherless  and
resembling  the  wings  of  bats.  See  Herodotus,  ii.  75  sq.^  with  the
notes  in  Rawlinson's  translation  and  Wiedemann's  edition.  Pammenes
stated  that  there  were  winged  scorpions  in  Egypt  (Aelian,  Nak  anim.  xvi.
41),  and  other  writers  speak  of  them  as  existing  in  other  parts  of  Africa.
See  Strabo,  xvii.  p.  830 ;  Pliny,  Nat,  hist,  xi.  89  ;  Lucian,  De  dips-
adibus^  3.

22.  I.  Hermes  the  Ram-bearer.  On  two  coins  of  Tanagra  (Fig.  5)
Hermes  is  represented  erect,  facing  the  spectator  and  carrying  a  ram  on
his  shoulders.     "  One  arm  of  the  god  passes  round  the

fore-feet  and  one  round  the  hind-feet  of  the  ram  ;  on  one
coin  the  hands  seem  to  meet  on  the  breast  as  in  the  well-
known  Athenian  statue  of  Hermes  carrying  a  bull  [see
below],  on  the  other  coin  one  hand  seems  to  be  higher
than  the  other.     The  pose  of  the  god  is  stiff  and  his  legs
rigid :  he  is  naked.     He  is  also  beardless,  but  whether
his  feet  are  winged,  the  scale  of  the  coin  makes  it  im-   ''^with'the^ram
possible  to  say"  (Imhoof - Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.      (coin  of  tan-
Comm.  on  Paus.  p.    116,  with  pi.    X  xi.  xii.)     See   also      agra).
Miiller -  Wieseler,    Denkmdler^    2.    pi.  xxix.    No.    324  a;
Roscher's   Lexikon^    i.    p.    2396;    Collignon,    Hist,   de    la    Sculpture
grecque^  i.  p.  399  sq.     There  can  be  little  doubt  that  this  Hermes  on
the  coins  reproduces  the  type  of  Calamis's  statue  of  Hermes  the  Ram-
bearer.

The  archaic  stiffness  of  the  Hermes  on  the  coins  agrees  very  well
with  what  we  know  of  the  style  of  this  early  master  (see  note  on
V.  25.  5).     Other  supposed  copies  of  Calamis's  statue  are  as  follows  : —

(i)  Two  terra-cotta  statuettes  of  Tanagra  which  represent  Hermes
carrying  a  ram  on  his  shoulders  ;  he  wears  the  conical  Boeotian  cap  on
his  head  and  a  garment  (the  chlamys)  thrown  over  his  shoulders  and
hanging  down  in  front  on  each  side.  See  Gazette  arMologique^  4
(1878),  p.  10 1.  But  the  Hermes  of  the  coins,  which  is  doubtless  the
most  faithful  copy  of  the  statue,  wears  neither  the  cap  nor  the  garment.

(2)  A  terra-cotta  statuette  from  Gela  in  Sicily,  now  in  the  British
Museum.  It  resembles  the  Hermes  of  the  coins,  except  that  it  has  the
chlamys  hanging  below  the  arms  on  each  side.  See  Guide  to  the  Second
Vase  Roomy  British  Museum^  pt.  ii.  (1878),  p.    18,  No.  144;  Gazette


88  HERMES  THE  RAM-BEARER         bk.  ix.  boeotia

arMologique^  4  (1878),  p.   163  ;  A.  S.  Murray,  Hist,  of  Greek  Sculp-
ture^  I.  p.  234.

(3)  A  small  marble  statue  in  the  Pembroke  Collection,  at  Wilton
House,  Salisbury.  It  represents  Hermes  standing  with  a  ram  on  his
shoulders  ;  he  holds  its  fore-feet  in  his  right  hand,  its  hind-feet  in  his  left.
This  statue  differs  from  the  coins  in  representing  Hermes  as  bearded
and  wearing  the  chlamys.  See  Miiller-Wieseler,  Denkmdler^  2.  pi.  xxix.
No.  324  ;  Overbeck,  Gesch,  d.  griech.  Plastik^^  i.  p.  278,  fig.  75.

(4)  A  relief  on  a  small  altar  in  Athens.  It  represents  Hermes  in
profile  with  a  ram  on  his  shoulders  and  holding  its  feet  in  his  hands.
It  differs  from  the  coins  in  representing  the  god  as  bearded  and  wearing
the  chlamys  over  his  left  arm.  Se,e  Annali  delP  Institufo,  41  (1869),
pp.  253-262,  with  Tav.  d'  agg.  I,  K  ;  Overbeck,  Gesch,  d,  griech,  Plastiky^
I.  p.  279,  Fig.  76  a;  Lucy  M.  Mitchell,  Hist,  0/  ancient  Sculpture,  p.
289  ;  Collignon,  Hist,  de  la  Sculpture  grccque,  i.  p.  400  sq.

It  seems  certain  that  Calamis  did  not  create  the  type  of  the  Ram-
bearing  Hermes ;  for  we  find  the  idea  of  a  god  or  man  bearing  an
animal  on  his  shoulders  embodied  in  works  of  art  which  are  probably
older  than  the  time  of  Calamis.

( 1 )  The  best  known  of  these  is  the  so-called  Calf-bearing  Hermes,
which  was  found  on  the  Acropolis  of  Athens.  This  is  a  statue  of
Hymettian  marble  representing  a  bearded  man  carrying  a  calf  on
his  shoulders ;  he  wears  a  tight-fitting  garment  (apparently  meant  to
resemble  soft  leather)  which  covers  his  upper  arms  and  his  sides.  The
style  of  the  statue  is  stiff  and  archaic  ;  the  inscription  seems  to  show
that  it  belongs  to  the  first  half  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  hence  that  it
is  about  a  century  older  than  the  time  of  Calamis.  See  A.  Conze,
*  Kalbtragender  W^rrm^,^  Arclidologische  Zcitung,  1864,  pp.  169-173,
with  pi.  clxxxvii.  ;  Overbeck,  Gesch.  d.  griech.  Plastik,^  i.  p.  187  j^.  ;
A.  S.  Murray,  Hist,  of  Greek  Sculpture,^  i.  p.  164  sq.  ;  Collignon,  Hist,
de  la  Sculpture  grecque,  i .  p.  215  sqq.

(2)  On  a  scarab,  supposed  to  be  of  Phoenician  manufacture,  the
god  Bes  is  represented  carrying  on  his  shoulders  a  lion.  See  Perrot  et
Chipiez,  Histoire  de  Part  dans  Vantiquit^,  3.  p.  422,  fig.  295.

(3)  A  Phoenician  statuette  made  of  calcareous  stone  represents  a
man  in  a  long  robe  carrying  an  animal  on  his  shoulders.  The  animal
seems  to  be  a  ram  or  sheep,  but  the  head  is  broken  off.  See  Perrot  et
Chipiez,  op.  cit.  3.  p.  433,  fig.  307  ;  cp.  fig.  308  ih,

(4)  A  statue  found  in  Cyprus  represents  a  man  carrying  a  ram  on
his  shoulders  ;  he  holds  its  feet  in  his  hands.  See  Perrot  et  Chipiez,
op.  cit.  3.  p.  589,  fig.  402.

(5)  An  ancient  statuette  of  Sardinia,  of  very  primitive  workmanship,
represents  a  man  holding  an  animal  (a  lamb  ?)  on  his  shoulders.  See
Perrot  et  Chipiez,  op.  cit.  4.  p.  89,  fig.  88.

(6)  An  archaic  bronze  statuette  of  Crete  represents  a  man  carry-
ing a  ram.  St^  Annali  delP  Instifufo,  42  (1880),  p.  213  sq.,  Tav.
d'  agg.  S.

(7)  Another  archaic  bronze  of  Crete  represents  two  men,  of  whom
one  carries  an  animal  on  his  shoulders.     Prof.  Milchhoeffer  thinks  the


CH.  XXII  HERMES  THE  RAM-BEARER  89

subject   is   the   contest   of  Apollo   and  Hercules.     See  Atinali  delP
Instiiuto^  l,c,  Tav.  d'  agg.  T.

(8)  On  the  so-called  Island  or  Mycenaean  gems  human  or  semi-
human  figures  are  not  uncommonly  represented  carrying  animals  on
their  shoulders.  See  A.  6.  Cook,  'Animal-worship  in  the  Mycenaean
z%^^  Jourrud  of  Hellenic  Studies^  14  (1894),  figs.  3,  9,  15,  19.

These  examples  show  that  the  type  of  the  god  carrying  an  animal
on  his  shoulders  was  older  than  Calamis,  and  that  it  may  have  been
of  Oriental,  perhaps  Phoenician,  origin.  The  custom  of  representing
a  deity  in  such  an  attitude  has  probably  its  roots  in  that  primitive
stage  of  religion  when  the  gods  were  animals  or  at  least  were
conceived  of  as  clothed  in  animal  forms.  The  advance  of  religious
thought  turns  the  old  beast  gods  into  human  gods ;  but  the  change
is  only  gradually  accomplished.  At  first  the  god  is  represented  as  half-
beast,  half-man ;  then  he  appears  as  almost  wholly  human,  retaining
only  one  or  two  bestial  features  such  as  a  pair  of  horns.  Lastly
he  is  depicted  in  purely  human  form.  But  the  tradition  of  his  old
animal  nature,  though  obscured  and  misunderstood,  still  survives ;  the
animal  out  of  which  he  gradually  emerged  is  now  regarded  as  sacred
to  him,  and  is  represented  in  conjunction  with  him  in  works  of  art,  in
which  sometimes  the  animal  stands  beside  the  god,  sometimes  the  god
carries  the  animal,  sometimes  the  animal  carries  the  god.  Hermes  and
the  ram,  for  example,  are  represented  in  all  these  various  fashions  in
ancient  art.  See  Miiller-Wieseler,  Denkmdler^  2.  pi.  xxix.  Nos.  320,  322-
324.  The  transition  from  the  ram-god  to  the  man-god  with  the  ram  is  well
marked  in  a  statuette  of  Baal-Ammon  which  portrays  the  god  seated  in
human  form,  but  with  the  horns  of  a  ram,  and  with  a  ram  on  each  side
of  him,  on  which  his  hands  are  placed.  See  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  op,  cit,
3.  p.  73,  fig.  25.  As  it  appears  to  have  been  a  widespread  custom  for
priests  or  worshippers  to  assume  the  garb  and  attributes  of  the  god  (cp.
notes  on  vii.  18.  12,  viii.  13.  i ),  we  cannot  be  sure  whether  the  figures
which  we  have  been  discussing  and  other  similar  ones  represent  a  god  or
a  man  (priest  or  worshipper).  But  if  the  explanation  here  given  of  the
origin  of  such  representations  is  correct,  the  difference  is  not  material  ;
for  even  if  these  figures  represent  men,  they  represent  them  in  the  garb
and  attitude  of  gods.  Thus  at  Tanagra,  to  go  back  to  the  point  from
which  we  started,  the  youth  who  annually  carried  a  ram  on  his  shoulders
round  the  walls  of  the  city,  did  so  as  a  representative  of  Hermes,  who
was  traditionally  said  to  have  done  the  same.

It  was  not  necessary  that  the  Ram-bearing  god  should  always  carry
the  ram  on  his  shoulders.  In  the  statue  at  Olympia  which  Onatas
executed  for  the  people  of  Pheneus  the  god  was  portrayed  carrying
the  ram  under  his  arm.  See  v.  27.  8.  We  possess  what  seems  to  be
a  loose  copy  of  Onatas's  statue  in  a  terra-cotta  statuette  of  Tanagra,
which  represents  Hermes  wearing  a  conical  cap  and  a  cloak,  and
carrying  a  lamb  on  his  left  arm.  See  Conze,  in  Annali  delP  Instituto^
30  (1858),  pp.  347-351,  Tav.  d'  agg.  O  ;  Roscher's  Lexikon^  i.  p.  2395.
On  the  vase  of  Sosias  Hermes  appears  holding  a  ram  in  his  arms.  See
Miiller-Wieseler,  Denkmdler^   i.  pi.   xlv.   No.   210.     At  the  Carnasian


90  TANAGRA  COCKS  bk.  ix.  boeotia

Grove  in  Messenia  there  was  a  statue  of  the  Ram-bearing  Hermes
(iv.  33.  4) ;  but  whether  the  ram  was  on  the  shoulders  or  under  the  arm
of  the  god,  we  do  not  know.

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  Christian  type  of  the  Good
Shepherd  was  copied  from,  or  at  least  suggested  by,  the  old  type  of
the  Ram-bearing  god.

See  E.  de  Chanot,  *  Les  divinit^  criophores,'  Gazette  archiologiquey  4  (1878),
pp.  100-104,  162  sq,^  with  Fr.  Lenormant's  remarks,  ib,  pp.  163-169 ;  Vejnries,
Les  figures  criophores  dans  Part  grec^  tart  greco-roniain  et  tart  ckritien  (Paris,
1884).  In  this  last  work  lists  are  given  of  all  the  ram-bearing  (or  rather  animal-
bearing)  figures  in  ancient  art  which  were  known  at  the  time  when  the  book  was
written.  Cp.  also  Stephani,  in  Compte-Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1869,  pp.  96-
100.  At  Rome  there  is  a  Greek  inscription  in  verse  referring  to  a  statue  of  a  man
carrying  a  ram  on  his  back  (Kaibel,  Epigrammata  Graeca,  No.  1 102 ;  Loewy,
Inschrtften  griech,  Bildhauer^  No.  441).  As  to  Hermes  and  the  ram,  see  also
ii.  3.  4  with  the  notes.

22.  2.  Hermes  the  Ohampion.  On  a  coin  of  Tanagra  of  Trajan's
time  Hermes  is  represented  standing  and  holding  in  his  right  hand  a
scraper  {strigiF)  and  in  his  left  a  caduceus  (?).  He  is  nude,  his  hair  is
long,  his  left  leg  is  advanced  and  bent.  The  type  may  represent  a  statue
of  the  fifth  century  B.c.  If  the  object  in  the  god's  right  hand  is  a
scraper  (which  is  doubtful),  the  figure  is  probably  a  copy  of  the  statue
of  Hermes  the  Champion.  See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.
Comm,  on  Paus.  p.  1 1  5  sq.^  with  pi.  X  xiii.

22.  2.  the  wild  strawberry-tree  etc.  On  coins  of  Tanagra  of  the
age  of  the  Antonines,  Hermes  appears  standing  naked,  his  feet  winged,
the  caduceus  in  his  left  hand  ;  beside  him  is  a  tree  on  which  sits  an
eagle ;  his  left  hand  rests  on  the  tree.  This  tree  is  probably  the  wild
strawberry-tree.  At  the  foot  of  it  is  a  carved  object,  perhaps  a  scraper.
The  figure  of  the  god  is  youthful  and  he  wears  short  hair,  but  his  pose
is  rather  stiff.  See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  on  Paus.
p.  1 1 5  j|^.,  with  pi.  X  xiv.-xvi.

22.  2.  at  Tanagra  the  dwelling-houses  are  in  one  place,  and  the
sanctuaries  are  in  another  place  etc.  The  separation  of  the  temples
from  the  dwellings  of  men  was  recommended  by  Socrates  {Memorabilia^
iii.  8.  10).     Compare  Aristotle,  Politics^  vii.  12.

22.  3.  the  poetical  victory  which  she  gained  over  Pindar.
According  to  Aelian  {Var.  hisi.  xiii.  25)  and  Suidas  {s.v.  Kopivva)
Corinna  vanquished  Pindar  five  times  in  poetical  contests.

22.  4-  There  are  two  kinds  of  cocks  at  Tanagra  etc.  This
passage  is  interesting  to  the  ornithologist  and  the  breeder  as  showing
that  in  Pausanias's  time  there  were  two  quite  distinct  breeds  of  poultry
at  Tanagra.  One  of  the  two  breeds — the  game-cocks — was  famous  in
antiquity.  See  Suidas,  s.w.  dXtKrpvova  dOXyjTyv  Tavay^tov  and
Tavay patoL  dXtKToplxTKoi ;  Pliny,  Nat.  hist.  x.  48  ;  Babrius,  v.  i  sq.  ;
Lucian,  Gallus,  4.  Varro  says  that  the  Tanagra  cocks  were  handsome
and  good  fighters,  but  somewhat  sterile  ;  so  he  did  not  particularly
advise  the  farmer  to  select  them  {De  re  rustica^  iii.  9.  6).  Columella  says
that  they  were  tall  birds  and  stubborn  fighters,  about  the  same  size  as
the  cocks  of  Rhodes  and  Media  ;  in  habits  they  did  not  differ  greatly


CH.  XXII  MOUNT  MESSAPIUS  91

from  the  Italian  breed  {De  re  rustica^  viii.  2.  4  and  13).  As  to  the
representations  of  cock-fights  in  ancient  art,  see  Jahn,  Archdologische
Beitrdge^  p.  437  sqq.  The  second  breed  of  Tanagra  cock  described
by  Pausanias  is  not,  so  far  as  I  know,  mentioned  by  any  other  ancient
writer.  With  its  raven  plumage  and  scarlet  comb  and  wattles  it  must
have  been  very  like  the  breed  now  called  Black  Spanish ;  so  Prof.
Alfred  Newton  tells  me.

The  domestic  cock  is  a  native  of  India,  and  seems  to  have  been
imported  into  Western  Asia  and  Europe  at  a  period  much  more  recent
than  is  commonly  supposed.  The  bird  does  not  appear  on  the  Egyptian
monuments  and  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Old  Testament  or  in  Homer.
In  Greek  literature  it  is  first  referred  to  by  Theognis  (z/.  864),  who
wrote  in  the  second  half  of  the  sixth  century  B.C  A  cock  is  sculptured
on  the  so-called  Harpy  Tomb  from  Lycia,  which  seems  to  date  fh)m
the  sixth  century  B.C. ;  and  on  a  frieze  which  was  built  into  the  wall  of
the  acropolis  of  Xanthus  in  Lycia  a  number  of  cocks  and  hens  are
represented  picking  up  food  or  fighting  (A.  H.  Smith,  Catalogue  of
Sculpture  in  the  British  Museum^  1.  Nos.  82,  94,  pp.  48,  56).  See
V.  Hehn,  Kulturpflansen  und  Hausihiere^^  p.  260  sqq, ;  P.  F.  Perdrizet,
*  Sur  I'introduction  en  Gr^ce  du  coq  et  des  combats  de  coqs,  k  propos
d'un  Mcythe  archaique  du  Mus^e  du  Louvre,'  Revue  archdologique^  3 me
S^rie,  21  (1893),  pp.  157-167.

22.  5.  totheleftoftheEuripus,  isMountMessapius.  Pausanias
now  returns  to  the  Euripus,  opposite  to  Chalcis,  and  pursues  his  way
westward  in  the  direction  of  Anthedon.  The  path  at  first  runs  for  about
4  miles  across  an  imdulating  plain  which  extends  from  the  foot  of
Mount  Messapius  (the  modem  Ktypa)  north-eastward  into  the  sea  in  the
form  of  a  broad  headland.  The  plain,  though  dry  and  treeless,  is  well
cultivated,  and  is  intersected  by  softly -swelling  downs.  Vineyards
occupy  a  part  of  its  surface,  but  most  of  it  is  in  com.  A  great  deal  of
the  land  had  been  recently  ploughed  when  I  traversed  it  early  in
November  1895,  and  in  some  places  the  young  com  had  already  begun
to  sprout,  its  fresh  vivid  green  contrasting  pleasantly  with  the  bare
brown  earth  of  most  of  the  plain.  On  the  west  the  plain  is  bounded  by
round -topped  hills  of  various  heights,  the  southem  spurs  of  Mount
Messapius,  which  towers  up  grandly  and  conspicuously  with  high,  steep,
bushy,  but  not  rocky  slopes  on  the  north-west.  On  the  south  a  massive
hill  (the  Megalo  VounOy  crowned  with  the  mins  of  Hyria,  see  above,
p.  66  sqq.)  seems  to  bound  the  plain  on  this  side,  but  between  it  and  the
plain  lies  the  circular,  nearly  landlocked  bay  of  Vourko.  To  the  east
of  this  hill  the  high-road  to  Thebes  is  seen  ascending  in  several  long  zig-
zags towards  a  dip  in  the  hills.  On  reaching  the  westem  side  of  the
plain,  just  at  the  point  where  Mount  Messapius  descends  in  one  long
steep  unbroken  slope  from  the  summit  to  the  shore,  we  come  to  an  isolated
flat-topped  hillock  rising  abruptly  like  a  redan  with  steep  uniform  sides
from  the  level  ground  beside  the  sea.  So  regular  indeed  is  the  outline
of  the  hillock  on  all  sides  that  its  slopes  would  seem  to  have  been
scarped  and  smoothed  by  art.  Its  flat  top,  which  may  be  90  yards  long
by  50  yards  broad,  is  now  a  com-field.     On  the  western  brow  of  the


92  SALGANEUS — ANTHEDON  bk.  ix.  boeotia


hillock,  the  sides  of  which  measure  about  50  yards  on  the  slope,  I  found
some  traces  of  a  wall  consisting  of  four  or  five  stones  in  a  row,  but
whether  the  wall  was  ancient  or  modem  seemed  dubious.  Still  £&inter
vestiges  of  a  wall  were  visible  on  the  south-western  face  of  the  hillock,
where  as  well  as  on  the  southern  slope  a  good  many  stones  are  strewn
about.  There  is  hardly  room  to  doubt  that  this  place  is  the  ancient
Salganeus,  which  we  know  was  situated  on  a  height  beside  the  shore,
between  Chalcis  and  Anthedon.  It  was  said  to  have  been  called  after
the  Boeotian  pilot  Salganeus  who  steered  the  Persian  fleet  into  the  strait
and  was  here  put  to  death  on  a  groundless  suspicion  of  treachery.  See
Strabo,  ix.  pp.  400,  403  ;  Dicaearchus,  Descriptio  Graeciae^  i.  26 ;
Livy,  XXXV.  ^o  sq,\  Diodorus,  xix.  TJ,

Immediately  beyond  this  point  the  plain  comes  abruptly  to  an  end
and  the  path  runs  along  the  steep  bushy  but  not  precipitous  slope  of
Mount  Messapius  at  some  height  above  the  sea,  which  on  a  bright  sun-
shiny day  is  of  a  beautiful  green  colour,  clear  as  crystal  and  dappled
with  patches  of  purple.  Thus  proceeding  along  the  steep  mountain-side
for  about  a  mile  we  find  ourselves  opposite  a  pretty  rocky  island,  wooded
with  pines,  which  lies  a  little  way  off  the  shore.  On  the  island  is  a  ruin
which,  so  far  as  I  could  judge  by  the  eye  from  the  shore,  seemed  to  be
mediaeval  or  modem.  Hereabouts,  too,  a  row  of  large  stones  may  be
seen  lying  at  the  bottom  of  the  clear  water,  but  they  appear  to
be  boulders  rather  than  hewn  stones.  Farther  on  a  high  cliff,  which
seen  from  the  east  reminds  one  of  the  Lorelei  Rock  on  the  Rhine,  rises
close  to  the  shore.  The  path  here  descends  and  runs  along  the  narrow
beach  at  the  foot  of  the  cliff,  from  which  a  very  copious  spring  of  water
rushes  into  the  sea.  This  high  cliff  is  probably  Glaucus's  Leap  (§  6).
On  the  morning  when  I  passed  it,  the  clear  sunlit  greenish-blue  water
at  its  foot  looked  very  inviting ;  one  could  fancy  the  sea-god  taking  his
plunge  into  its  cool  delicious  depths.  Beyond  the  cliff  the  path  again
runs  along  the  foot  of  the  long  slope,  covered  with  lentisk  and  holly-oak
bushes,  which  descends  from  the  high  bold  pointed  summit  of  Mount
Messapius  in  an  unbroken  sweep  to  the  sea.  As  we  advance,  however,
the  slope  becomes  more  gradual.  At  the  head  of  it,  just  under  the  high
steep  summit  of  the  mountain,  is  seen  the  village  of  Loukisia^  and  at  the
foot  of  it,  on  a  little  stretch  of  level  ground  beside  the  sea  about  a  mile
or  more  below  the  village,  we  come  to  the  ruins  of  Anthedon.  The
distance  from  Chalcis  is  about  8  miles.

See  Leake,  Noriher^i  Greece,  2.  pp.  266-272;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und
Forsckungetty  2.  pp.  34-36 ;  L.  Ross,  IVamfcrungen,  2.  pp.  126-131;  Bursian,
Geogr.  I.  p.  215.  I  traversed  this  route  in  the  reverse  direction,  8th  November
1895,  and  have  described  it  from  my  own  observation.  My  time  from  Anthedon
to  Chalcis  was  about  three  hours  or  a  little  more,  but  this  included  a  stop  at
Salganeus.

22.  5.  AnthedoiL  Anthedon  was  situated  on  nearly  level  ground
at  the  foot  of  the  long  gradual  slope  which  separates  the  high  pointed
summit  of  Mount  Messapius  from  the  sea.  Here  there  is  a  little  semi-
circular harbour  protected  by  the  remains  of  two  ancient  moles  ;  and
close  to  it  on  the  south-east  a  flat-topped  hillock,  some  100  feet  or  so


CH.  XXII  ANTHEDON  93

high,  rises  just  beside  the  shore.  This  hillock  would  seem  to  have  been
the  acropolis  of  Anthedon ;  for  on  its  steep  seaward  brow,  at  a  height
of  1 5  or  20  feet  above  the  beach,  the  remains  of  an  ancient  fortification-
wall  may  be  traced  for  some  little  way.  The  wall  is  built  of  ashlar
masonry,  the  blocks  being  squared  and  laid  in  horizontal  courses.  The
pieces  of  it  are  generally  three  or  four  courses  high.  Above  the  seaward
brow  of  the  hillock  is  a  terrace  some  20  or  30  yards  wide,  and  above
this  terrace  another  steep  but  short  slope  leads  up  to  the  flat  top  of  the
hillock.  Here  there  are  many  broken  stones  and  some  blocks  which,
though  a  good  deal  worn,  seem  to  have  been  hewn.

But  most  of  the  ancient  remains  of  Anthedon  are  to  be  seen  at  the
shallow  harbour.  At  its  eastern  side,  about  50  yards  to  the  west  of  the
acropolis,  are  the  remains  of  an  ancient  wall  running  out  northwards
into  the  ^'ater.  This  was  no  doubt  an  ancient  mole  which  enclosed  the
harbour  on  this  side.  At  the  opposite  or  north-western  side  of  the
harbour  are  the  more  massive  remains  of  another  mole  running  out  east-
ward into  the  water.  This  northern  mole,  which  defended  the  port
from  the  open  sea,  was  built  on  a  jutting  ledge  of  rocks.  The  masonry,
though  ruinous,  is  obviously  ancient  in  part ;  a  line  of  squared  founda-
tion stones  may  be  seen  under  water,  and  there  are  many  squared
ancient  blocks  above  water.  This  mole  was  probably  surmounted  in
antiquity  by  a  fortification-wall  forming  a  continuation  of  the  city-wall.
The  ends  of  the  two  moles  probably  approached  each  other  closely,
leaving  only  a  narrow  passage  between  them,  which  may  have  been
barred  in  times  of  danger  by  a  chain.  In  addition  to  the  ruined  moles
there  exist  beside  the  harbour  the  well-preserved  remains  of  an  ancient
quay  solidly  built  of  large  quadrangular  blocks  and  extending  along  the
edge  of  the  shallow  water  for  a  length  of  about  1 60  feet  with  an  average
breadth  of  9  or  10  feet.  The  quay,  which  is  still  used  by  fishing  boats,
is  standing  to  a  height  of  one  and  two  courses.  On  the  inner  edge  of
this  quay  a  considerable  number  of  foundation-walls,  in  good  preser\'a-
tion,  were  excavated  by  archaeologists  of  the  American  School  in  March
1889.  I^l^c  foundations,  which  are  well  built  of  large  squared  blocks,
extend  in  lines  parallel  to  and  at  right  angles  to  each  other,  as  if  they
had  supported  quadrangular  buildings,  but  the  nature  of  these  buildings
is  uncertain.  The  foundation-wall  next  the  shore  is  about  30  paces
long.  Another,  which  makes  a  right  angle  with  the  first,  is  7  paces
long  ;  and  a  third,  which  is  parallel  to  the  first,  is  9  paces  long.  I
measured  the  breadth  of  two  of  the  foundation-walls ;  one  was  4  ft.
4  in.  and  the  other  3  ft.  10  in.  thick.  A  few  feet  inland  from  the
foundations  lies  a  piece  of  a  curved  base,  and  a  few  yards  to  the  west
of  the  base  is  a  mosaic  pavement  in  black  and  white  stones,  which  are
arranged  in  patterns.  Fragments  of  common  red  pottery  are  strewn
about  the  harbour.

Ancient  foundations  are  further  to  be. seen  on  the  shore  immediately
to  the  west  of  the  harbour.  They  begin  some  20  yards  or  so  to  the
west  of  the  northern  mole  and  run  along  the  shore  for  about  28  paces,
with  a  breadth  of  about  i  o  feet.  A  few  blocks  of  an  upper  course  are
standing  on  them.      At  their  eastern    end    these  foundations  extend


94  ANTHEDON  bk.  ix.  bobotia

under  water.  Beyond  them  to  the  west  there  are  some  very
ruinous  remains  of  a  fortification-wall  closely  skirting  the  shore ;  two
and  three  courses  of  the  wall  are  standing.  The  vestiges  of  this
fortification- wall  extend  westward  as  far  as  the  remains  of  two  solid
foundation-walls,  which  meet  each  other  at  a  right  angle  on  the  shore.
The  masonry  of  this  angle  is  ashlar.  One  of  the  walls  composing
the  angle  is  9  paces,  the  other  8  paces  long.  This  angle  seems  to
have  been  the  point  at  which  the  fortification-wall,  after  running  west-
ward beside  the  shore,  turned  south  and  struck  inland.  The  place  may
be  perhaps  120  yards  west  of  the  breakwater.  I  did  not  see  any
remains  of  fortification-walls  inland,  but  Leake  observed  some,  "built
with  well-squared  stones,  of  the  most  regular  kind  of  masonry " ;  and
the  American  archaeologists  were  able  to  trace  the  course  of  the  city-
walls  all  round  the  site,  which  included  within  it  the  little  acropolis  hill.
According  to  Leake,  the  entire  circuit  of  the  city  seems  not  to  have  been
more  than  2000  yards.

On  a  hill  just  outside  the  city-walls  to  the  south-east,  between  them
and  the  dry  bed  of  a  stream,  the  Americans  excavated  the  foundations
of  what  they  took  to  be  a  very  small  temple,  with  some  irregularities  of
structure,  built  of  well-cut  blocks  of  the  local  stone.  The  foundations
measure  about  10.5  metres  in  leng^th  from  east  to  west  by  5  metres  in
breadth  from  north  to  south.  Near  them  was  found,  at  a  depth  of  less
than  a  foot  below  the  surface,  a  collection  of  over  twenty-five  bronze
implements  and  small  ornaments,  together  with  a  great  quantity  of  sheet
bronze  and  bronze  slag.  The  bronze  implements  include  axe-heads,
blades  of  knives,  a  drill,  a  chisel,  etc.  They  may  have  belonged  to  the
shop  of  a  maker  of  bronze  tools.  A  small  Doric  capital  and  a  long
unfluted  drum  of  a  column  were  also  brought  to  light  near  the  supposed
temple,  which  Mr.  Rolfe  conjectures  to  have  been  the  sanctuary  of
Dionysus  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  In  this  neighbourhood,  about  nine-
teen minutes'  ride  to  the  east  of  the  harbour,  I  saw  the  ruins  of  a
quadrangular  building  6  paces  long  by  4  paces  broad,  constructed  of
large  squared  blocks  set  up  on  their  narrow  ends  and  very  loosely  fitted
together,  the  chinks  being  filled  with  small  stones.  The  blocks,
which  are  about  3  ft.  6  in.  high,  may  be  ancient,  but  the  building  itself
is  not.  It  can  hardly  be  the  edifice  which  the  Americans  took  for  a
temple.

The  views  from  Anthedon  across  the  beautiful  Euripus  are  charming,
especially  at  sunset  when  the  opposite  mountains  of  Euboea  glow  with
delicate  pink  and  lilac  hues,  and  flakes  of  golden  and  rosy  clouds  are
reflected  in  the  mirror-like  surface  of  the  strait,  which,  apparently  land-
locked on  all  sides,  resembles  a  calm  lake.  The  effect  is  heightened
if  a  fishing-boat  happens  to  row  along  at  the  time,  and  a  snatch  of  song
is  wafted  from  it  across  the  water.

About  a  mile  to  the  west  of  Anthedon,  near  the  shore,  is  a  villa  built
by  the  French  Company  which  undertook  to  drain  the  Copaic  Lake.
The  house  suffered  in  the  recent  earthquakes  and  is  now  dismantled  and
deserted,  but  rough  lodgings  for  the  night  can  still  be  had  in  its  bare
empty  rooms,  where  the  cracks  in  the  walls  testify  silently  to  the  force


CH.  XXII  ANTHEDON—GLA  UCUS  95

of  the  earthquake.  About  a  mile  still  farther  to  the  west  is  the  channel
or  canal  by  which  the  waters  of  the  Copaic  plain  and  the  lakes  of  Ukeri
and  Paralimni  find  their  way  into  the  sea.  Not  many  yards  beyond
the  mouth  of  the  canal,  and  about  2  miles  west  of  Anthedon,  the  hills
project  into  the  sea,  forming  a  high  bold  cape,  round  the  edge  of  which
runs  a  line  of  rocks.

The  writer  who  goes  by  the  name  of  Dicaearchus  thus  describes
Anthedon  and  its  population  as  they  were  in  the  third  century  B.C.
*'  The  city  is  not  large  ;  it  is  situated  just  on  the  shore  of  the  Euboean
sea.  The  market-place  is  all  planted  with  trees  and  surrounded  by
double  colonnades.  It  is  well  supplied  with  wine  and  fish  ;  but  com  is
scarce,  for  the  district  is  rugged.  The  inhabitants  are  almost  all  fisher-
men, earning  their  livelihood  by  their  hooks,  by  the  purple-shell,  and  by
sponges.  They  grow  old  on  the  beach,  among  the  seaweed,  and  in  their
huts.  They  are  all  men  of  a  ruddy  countenance  and  spare  figure ;
their  nails  are  worn  away  by  reason  of  working  constantly  in  the  sea.
They  are  mostly  ferrymen  and  boat-builders.  Far  from  tilling  the  land,
they  do  not  even  own  it,  alleging  that  they  are  descendants  of  the  marine
Glaucus,  who  was  confessedly  a  fisherman"  (Dicaearchus,  Descriptio
Gnieciaey  i.  22  sq.^  in  Geogr.  Or,  Minores^  ed.  M  tiller,  i.  p.  104).

See  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  pp.  272-275  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reiscn  und
Forschungeny  2.  p.  36  sq,  ;  L.  Ross,  Wandcrungefi^  2.  p.  131  sq.  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,
I.  p.  214  sq,  ;  C.  D.  Buck,  F.  B.  Tarbell,  and  J.  C.  Rolfe,  in  American  Jotimal
of  Archaeology t  5  (1889),  pp.  78,  443-460;  id.^  6  (1890),  pp.  96-107;  AcXWw
iipx^^'fT-^^i  1889,  p.  5.  I  visited  Anthedon,  8th-9th  November  1895,  and  have
described  its  ruins  mostly  from  personal  observation.

22.  6.  Homer  and  Pindar  agree  in  saying  etc.  See  Homer,  Od,
xi.  305-320;  Pindar,  Pyth,  iv.  156  sqq,

22.  6.  Glaacns'  Leap.  This  was  probably  the  high  cliff  beside  the
sea  on  the  way  from  Anthedon  to  Chalcis  (see  above,  p.  92).  This
seems  to  have  been  L.  Ross's  opinion  {Wanderungen,  2.  p.  131).  Mr.
Rolfe  prefers  to  identify  it  with  the  steep  cliff  on  the  seaward  side  of
the  acropolis  of  Anthedon  {American  Journal  0/  Archaeology,  6  (1890),
p.  97).  But  that  cliff  is  nowhere  high  or  striking,  and  cannot  vie  in
picturesque  effect  with  the  one  on  the  way  to  Chalcis.

22.  7.  by  eating  of  a  certain  grass  he  was  turned  into  a  demon
of  the  sea.  One  story  ran  that  Glaucus  was  chasing  a  hare  on  Mt.
Oria  in  Aetolia.  The  hare  fainted,  and  Glaucus  caught  it  and  carried
it  to  a  spring.  Here  he  plucked  a  wisp  of  grass  which  grew  beside  the
spring  and  rubbed  the  hare  with  it  The  animal  at  once  revived ;
Glaucus  perceived  the  virtue  of  the  grass,  ate  of  it,  became  inspired,  and,
a  storm  coming  on,  flung  himself  into  the  sea.  The  taste  of  the  grass
was  also  said  to  have  made  him  inmiortal.  See  Athenaeus,  vii.  p.  296  sq.
The  common  story  was  that  Glaucus  discovered  the  marvellous  pro-
perties of  the  grass  by  seeing  that  the  fish  which  he  had  caught  and
laid  on  it  came  to  life  and  sprang  into  the  sea  (Ovid,  Metam,  xiii.  924
sqq,  ;  Servius  on  Virgil,  Georg.  i.  437  ;  Tzetzes,  Schol.  on  Lycophron,
754;  Schol.  on  Apollonius  Rhodius,  Argonaut,  i.  13 10).  In  yet
another  story  Glaucus  is  associated  with  a  life-giving  herb  in  another


96  GLAUCUS — lOLAUS  bk.  ix.  boeotia

way.  As  an  infant,  it  is  said,  he  was  chasing  a  fly,  and  in  doing  so  he
fell  into  a  jar  of  honey  and  was  drowned.  His  father  Minos  insisted
that  the  child  must  be  restored  to  life,  and  the  duty  of  doing  so  was  laid
upon  a  diviner  named  Polyidus.  The  poor  man  was  at  his  wits'  end  till
he  saw  a  dead  serpent  brought  to  life  by  another  serpent  which  had
laid  a  certain  herb  on  the  body  of  its  companion.  Polyidus  took
the  hint,  applied  the  same  herb  to  the  body  of  the  infant  Glaucus,  and
so  brought  him  back  to  life.  See  ApoUodorus,  iii.  3.  i  ;  Hyginus,
Fab,  136.  The  story  of  the  discovery  of  a  life-giving  herb  by
somebody  who  observes  how  a  serpent  restores  a  dead  serpent  to
life  by  means  of  it,  is  a  common  one.  In  antiquity  Tylo  was  said  to
have  been  thus  brought  to  life  (Pliny,  Nat,  hist.  xxv.  1 4)  ;  and  similar
incidents  occur  in  modem  popular  tales.  See  Grimm,  Kinder-  und
Hausmdrcherij  No.  16,  *  Die  drei  Schlangenblatter,' with  Grimm's  note  ;
J.  G.  V.  Hahn,  Griechische  und  albanesische  Mdrchen,  i.  p.  56 ;  id,,  2.
pp.  204,  260,  274  ;  Schleicher,  Utauische  Mdrcheny  pp.  57,  59  ;  E.
B^dier,  Les  Fabliaux  (Paris,  1893),  p.  83.  Cp.  E.  Rohde,  Der  griech-
ische Roman,  P-  '  2  5  sq.

22.  7.  Aeschylus  made  it  the  subject  of  a  play.  It  seems  that
Aeschylus  wrote  two  plays  on  the  subject  of  Glaucus,  one  a  tragedy,  the
other  a  satyric  drama.     See  G.  Hermann,  Opuscula,  2.  pp.  59-75.

23.  I.  like  the  stadiums  at  Olympia  and  ^idaurus.  See  vi.
20.  8  ;  ii.  27.  5.

23.  I.  a  shrine  of  the  hero  lolaus.  Having  described  eastern
and  north-eastern  Boeotia,  our  author  now  returns  to  Thebes  and  sets
off  from  it  in  a  northerly  direction.  In  this  and  the  following  chapter
he  describes  northern  Boeotia,  including  Larymna,  the  eastern,  part  of
the  Copaic  Lake,  and  the  mountains  that  bound  it  on  the  east.  He
quits  the  city  by  the  Proetidian  gate  (the  same  through  which  he  had
passed  on  the  way  to  Chalcis,  ix.  18.  i),  and  the  first  place  he  comes  to
is  a  gymnasium  of  lolaus.  As  to  the  worship  of  lolaus,  see  note  on
X.  17.  5.  Alexander  the  Great,  approaching  Thebes  from  Onchestus
(hence  from  the  north-west),  encamped  outside  the  city  at  the  precinct
of  lolaus.  Next  day  he  marched  round  the  city  and  took  up  a
position  opposite  the  gate  through  which  the  road  ran  to  Plataea  and
Attica.  See  Arrian,  Anabasis,  i.  7.  7  sqq.  Hence  it  follows  that  the
shrine  of  lolaus  was  somewhere  in  the  plain  to  the  north  of  Thebes.
From  Pausanias  it  appears  that  the  shrine  was  on  the  road  which  led
from  Thebes  to  Acraephnium  (see  §  5).  The  present  road  to  Acrae-
phnium  branches  off  from  the  road  to  Chalcis  at  the  fountain  of  Oedipus
(see  ix.  18.  5)  and  strikes  off  to  the  left  through  the  plain  in  a  northerly
direction.  If  we  assume  that  the  ancient  road  coincided  with  the
modem  road,  it  will  follow  that  the  shrine  of  lolaus  was  in  the  plain
to  the  north  of  the  fountain  of  Oedipus,  on  the  road  to  Karditsa
(Acraephnium).  Cp.  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungeti,  2.  p.
20 ;  Fabricius,  Theben,  p.  23.  The  Proetidian  gate,  outside  which
was  the  shrine  of  lolaus,  was  at  the  north-eastern  end  of  the  city.
See  note  on  ix.  8.  4.  Games  were  Celebrated  at  Thebes  in  honour  of
lolaus ;  the  prize  was  a  bronze  tripod.     See  Schol.  on  Pindar,  Olymp.


CH.  XXIII  PINDAR'S  DREAM  97

vii.  153  and  154,  and  xiii.  148  ;  id,  on  Pyth.  ix.  156 ;  cp.  id,  on  Nem.
iv.  32.     The  Boeotians  swore  by  lolaus  (Aristophanes,  Acham,  867).

23.  I.  lolaus  met  his  end  in  Sardinia  etc.  Cp.  i.  29.  5  ;  vii.  2.
2  note;  x.  17.  5  note.  A  scholiast  on  Pindar  {Nem,  iv.  32)  also  says
that  the  tomb  of  lolaus  was  in  Sicily.  But  according  to  Diodorus  (iv.
30.  3,  v.  15.  6)  lolaus,  after  colonising  Sardinia,  returned  to  Greece,
spending  some  time  in  Sicily  on  the  way.

23.  2.  the  youthfol  Flndar  was  once  Journeying  etc.  Another
version  of  this  story  was  that  as  an  infant  Pindar  had  been  exposed  and
that  bees  had  fed  him  with  honey  (Aelian,  Var,  hist,  xii.  45  ;  Dio
Chrysostom,  Or,  Ixiv.  vol.  2.  p.  213,  ed.  Dindorf;  Philostratus,  Imag.
ii.  12).  Another  story  was  that  the  incident  of  the  bees  happened  to
Pindar  as  he  slept  on  Mt.  Helicon,  weary  with  the  chase  (Eustathius,
in  Biographi  Graeci^  ed.  Westermann,  p.  93,  cp.  /V/.,  p.  97).  Similar
fables  were  told  of  Hesiod,  Plato,  Lucan,  and  others.  See  Robert -
Tomow,  De  apium  me  I  Usque  apud  veteres  significatione^  pp.  100  sq,y
114  sqq, ;  cp.  note  on  i.  32.  i,  vol.  2.  p.  425  sq,

23.  3.  give  to  Pindar  an  equal  share  of  all  the  first-fimits  etc.
It  is  said  that  at  the  sacrifices  offered  at  Delphi  the  priest  proclaimed
aloud,  "  Let  Pindar  come  to  the  banquet  of  the  god " ;  or  that  when
the  sacristan  was  about  to  close  the  temple  each  day,  he  made  a
similar  proclamation.  See  Biographi  Graeci,  ed.  Westermann,  pp.  92,
97,  99.  The  privilege  was  extended  to  Pindar's  descendants ;  for  in
Plutarch's  time  at  the  Delphic  festival  of  the  Theoxenia  a  share  was  still
set  apart  for  the  descendants  of  Pindar  and  they  were  invited  by  pro-
clamation to  partake  of  it  {De  sera  numinis  vindicta,  13).

23.  3.  As  he  slept  Proserpine  stood  by  him  etc.  According  to
others  it  was  Demeter  who  appeared  to  Pindar  in  a  dream  and  com-
plained that  she  alone  had  not  been  celebrated  by  him  ;  Pindar  accord-
ingly composed  a  hymn  in  her  honour  and  built  an  altar  to  Demeter
and  Proserpine  in  front  of  his  house.  See  Biographi  Graeci^  ed.  Wester-
mann, pp.  92,  97.  With  the  story  which  Pausanias  here  tells  of  Pindar's
last  hymn,  we  may  compare  the  story  (a  true  one)  of  the  composition  of
Mozart's  last  work,  the  Requiem.  Not  long  before  the  musician's  death
a  stranger  called  upon  him  and  asked  him  to  compose  a  Requiem.
Mozart  agreed  and  set  to  work  at  the  Requiem  under  a  fixed  impression
V  that  the  stranger  was  a  messenger  come  from  the  other  world  to  warn
him  of  his  approaching  death.  He  died  before  he  had  finished  the
work  and  it  was  afterwards  completed  by  his  friend  Siissmayer.  See
W.  Pole,  The  Story  of  Mozarfs  Requiem  (London,  1879).

23.  3.  Acraephnium.  The  ruins  of  Acraephnium  are  situated  on
a  conspicuous  hill  on  the  eastern  side  of  what  was  once  the  Copaic  Lake.
The  hill  is  connected  with  Mount  Ptous  on  the  east  by  a  long  rocky
ridge  called  Kriaria,  At  its  northern  foot  the  village  of  Karditsa  lies
in  a  trough  among  the  hills,  with  narrow  glens  opening  through  them
in  several  directions.  One  of  these  glens  leads  eastwards  and  upwards
to  Mount  Ptous  and  the  sanctuary  of  the  Ptoan  Apollo.  Another  track
leads  north-we^ward  and  downward  through  desolate  glens  with  rocky  and
bushy  sides  to  the  great  flat  expanse  of  the  Copaic  plain,  on  which  it

VOL.  V  H


,"


98  ACRAEPHNIUM  bk.  ix.  boeoiia

debouches  opposite  the  low  isolated  hill  (once  an  island)  of  Gla  or  Gha
with  its  mysterious  prehistoric  fortress  and  palace.     The  hill  of  Acrae-
phnium  is  steep  and  rocky,  but  much  less  so  on  the  northern  side  towards
Karditsa  than  on  the  southern  side,  where  it  falls  away  to  the  Athaman-
tine  plain  (ix.  24.  i ),  a  branch  which  the  great  Copaic  plain  sends  out
eastward  among  the  hills.     The  acropolis  of  Acraephnium  occupied  the
summit  of  the  steep  hill,  where  some  well-preserved  remains  of  the
fortification-wall  may  be  seen.     Ascending  the  hill  from  Karditsa  we
come  in  ten  minutes  to  a  ruined  fortification-wall  running  straight  up
the  slope  of  the  hill  in  a  direction  from  north  to  south.     It  is  built  of
large  squared  blocks  laid  in  horizontal  courses.     The  number  of  courses
preserved  varies  from  one  to  five.     In  some  places  it  is  7,  8,  and  9  feet
high.     Thus  the  wall   extends   at  varying  heights    but   in   an    almost
unbroken  line  to  the  top  of  the  hill.     There  are  no  towers  or  gates  in
it,  nor  is  it  possible  to  estimate  the  original  thickness  of  the  wall,  since
nowhere  are  the  two  faces  preserved  together.     At  the  summit,  which
is  at  the  north-east  end  of  the  hill,  the  wall  makes  an  angle  and  runs
in  a  straight  line  south-westward  along  the  top  of  the  hill,  which  is
broad  and  fiat,  but  with  a  gentle  inclination  to  the  south-west  and
west.     This  wall   on    the    top   of  the   hill,  though   partly  ruinous,  is
standing  for  the  most  part  to  a  height  varying  from  three  to  six  courses.
Where  six  courses  are  preserved,  the  height  of  the  wall  is  about  10
feet.     The  masonry  is  on  the  whole  quadrangular,  like  that  of  the  wall
on  the  northern  slope,  but  some  of  the  upright  joints  are  aslant,  not
perpendicular,  and  the  courses  in  some  places  are  not  quite  regular.
After  running  for  about  100   yards  south-westward  from  the  highest
point  of  the  hill,  the  wall  comes  to  a  stop,  but  its  line  may  be  traced
in  the  same  direction  for  about  60  yards  farther  by  means  of  a  mound
and  broken  stones.     But  beyond  this  I  could  find  no  certain  trace  of
it  in  any  direction.     As  there  are  no  projecting  towers,  it  is  not  quite
easy  to  decide  which  was  the  outer  and  which  the  inner  side  of  the
walls.     But  apparently  the  wall  on  the  northern  slope  of  the  hill  faced
west,  and  the  wall  on  the  top  of  the  hill  faced  north-west.     If  this  is
so,  it  follows  that  a  broad  fiat  expanse  on  the  summit  lay  outside  the
walls,  which  seems  strange.     Lolling  (in  Baedeker)  speaks  of  polygonal
walls  on  the  side  next  the  Copaic  plain,  but  I  did  not  observe  them.
The  walls   which  I  saw  and  have  described  belong  evidently  to  one
period,  and  that  the  best  period  of  Greek  masonry,  probably  the  fourth
century  B.C.     The  stone  of  which  they  are  built  seemed  to  me  to  be  a
hard  grey  limestone.

From  the  summit  of  the  hill  we  see  to  the  south-west  a  great  stretch
of  the  Copaic  plain  with  the  new  drainage  canal  crossing  it  in  a  straight
line  firom  Mount  Helicon.  The  canal  ends  in  the  Athamantian  plain,
to  the  south  of  the  hill  of  Acraephnium,  where  the  water  descends  into
a  chasm  {katavothra)  to  reappear  in  Lake  Ukeri  (Hylica),  which  with
all  its  blue  winding  bays  lies  stretched  out  below  us  on  the  south-
east. Due  eastward  the  eye  ranges  over  hills  beyond  hills  as  far  as
the  mountains  of  Attica.  On  the  north-east  Mount  Ptous  rises  con-
spicuous over  a  nearer  hill,  and  on  its  western  slope,  below  a  line  of


CH.  XXIII  ACRAEPHNIUM  99

grey  precipices,  may  be  seen  even  at  this  distance  the  excavations
which  mark  the  site  of  the  temple  of  Apollo.  To  the  west  the  high
mass  of  the  omnipresent  Parnassus  appears  on  the  horizon.

On  the  northern  slope  of  the  hill,  towards  Karditsay  Leake  and
H.  N.  Uhichs  observed  many  ancient  foundations,  extending  down  to  the
very  foot  of  the  hill.  These  probably  indicated  the  site  of  the  lower
city.  Here  too,  on  the  northern  slope,  a  little  above  the  village  of
KarditsUy  stands  a  church  of  St.  George  which  contains  many  ancient
inscriptions  as  well  as  columns  formed  of  pieces  of  ancient  shafts  with
handsome  Ionic  capitals.  These  shafts  and  capitals  perhaps  belonged
to  the  temple  of  Dionysus  mentioned  by  Pausanias,  which  may  have
stood  on  the  site  now  occupied  by  the  church.  Amongst  the  inscrip-
tions found  in  the  church  is  one  (C  /.  G,  G,  S.  i.  No.  2713)  containing
the  speech  in  which  Nero  proclaimed  the  independence  of  Greece.  See
vii.  17.  3  note.

To  the  west  of  Acraephnium  a  long  rocky  promontory  runs  out  into
the  flat  Copaic  plain  ;  the  natives  call  it  Vistrika;  its  extremity  is  called
Cape  PhUlio  on  the  French  map.  At  the  foot  of  the  cape  an  enormous
cube  of  rock,  which  has  perhaps  fallen  from  the  cliff,  bears  the  following
inscription  (C  /.  G,  G,  S.  i.  No.  2792);

"O/oia  K[(o]7nJa)[v
iroT   ' AKf}rj<f}i€laJ[s

6/0tTT[a]vTCOV    Bot(o[T(OV.


cc


Boundary  of  the  territory  of  Copae  toward  the  territory  of  Acrae-
phnium, as  laid  down  by  the  Boeotians."  This  seems  to  show  that
Copae  and  Acraephnium  had  both  claimed  the  Copaic  Lake  as  part  of
their  territory  and  that  the  Boeotian  confederacy  had  decided  in  isLVOur
of  Copae.

The  name  of  the  city  is  variously  given  by  ancient  writers  as  Acrae-
phia  (Herodotus,  viii.  135  ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  j.z/.  'AKpai<f>ia),  Acrae-
phiae  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  410),  Acraephium  (id.y  ix.  p.  413),  and  Acraephnium
(Pausanias).  From  inscriptions  we  learn  that  the  true  form  Was  Acrae-
phia  (C  /.  G.  G.  S,  i.  Nos.  2871,  4135),  or,  in  the  Boeotian  dialect,
Acrephia  (C  /.  G,  G.  S.  i.  No.  4136),  both  forms  being  the  neuter
plural.

See  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  54  s^. ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece,  2.  pp.  295-305 ;
H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen,  2.  p.  242  sqq.  ;  L.  Ross,  Wanderungen^
1.  p.  105 ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  I.  p.  213 ;  Baedeker,*  p.  191  ;  Guide-Joanne,  2.  p.  18.
I  spent  two  nights  at  Karditsa  (6th  and  7th  November  1895)  and  have  described
the  ruins  of  the  acropolis  from  personal  observation.  For  inscriptions  found  at
Acraephnium,  see  C.  /.  G.  G,  S.  !•  PP*  469  sqq.,  704;  Bulletin  de  Corr.  helUnique,
2(1878),  p.  507  sq.\  id,y  12  (1888),  pp.  305-315,  510-528  (Nero's  speech);  id.,
13  (1889),  p.  407  sq.  (boundary  inscription) ;  Mittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,  3
(1878),  p.  299  sq,  ;  id.,  9  (1884),  pp.  5- 14  ;  AcXtW  iLpx^ioKayiKhv,  1888,  pp.  192-
194  (Nero's  speech) ;  Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr.  Graec?  No.  374  sq. ;  Collitz,  G.  D,  /.
I.  No.  565  sqq. ;  Roehl,  /.  G.  A.  Nos.  151,  162,  218,  298.

23.  6.  About  fifteen  ftirlongs  to  the  right is  the  sanctuary

of  Ptoan  Apollo.     Herodotus  tells  us  (viii.  135)  that  the  sanctuary  of


100  PTOAN  APOLLO  bk.  ix.  boeotia

the  Ptoan  Apollo  belonged  to  Thebes  and  was  situated  "above  the
Copaic  Lake,  beside  a  mountain,  very  near  to  the  city  of  Acraephia."
Strabo  describes  it  (ix.  p.  413)  as  situated  "above  the  Teneric  plain
and  the  Copaic  Lake,  near  Acraephium,"  adding  that  the  oracle  and  the
mountain  had  belonged  to  Thebes.  The  remains  of  the  sanctuary  are
to  be  seen  in  a  little  mountain  valley  high  up  on  Mount  Ptous.  They
were  excavated  in  1885,  1886,  and  1891,  under  the  direction  of  Mr.
Holleaux,  of  the  French  School  of  Archaeology  at  Athens.  In  its  wider
sense  Mount  Ptous  is  the  range  or  mass  of  mountains  which  bounds  the
Copaic  plain  on  the  east  and  extends  thence  north  and  east  to  the
Euripus.  The  range  culminates  in  three  peaks  now  called  Palagia
(3280  feet),  Tsoukourieliy  and  Megalo  Vouno  (*  big  hill'),  which  enclose
between  them  a  small  upland  valley  resembling  a  deep  basin  or  trough.
On  three  sides  of  the  little  valley  the  mountains  rise  like  walls,  but  on
the  south  side  the  basin,  so  to  say,  is  broken  and  through  the  opening
an  uninterrupted  view  is  obtained  of  the  mountains  from  Parnassus
round  by  Helicon  to  Cithaeron.  To  the  south-west  is  seen  a  piece  of
the  Copaic  plain  with  the  modem  canal  running  across  it ;  and  on  the
south  Lake  Ltkeri  lies  like  a  Highland  loch  with  all  its  winding  bays
spread  out  below  us.  The  slopes  of  the  peaks  which  bound  the  little
valley  on  the  north  and  west  are  steep,  stony,  and  bushy.  The  peak
which  bounds  it  on  the  east  is  Mt.  Palagia^  the  true  summit  of  Mt
Ptous.  It  is  a  high,  sharp-pointed  mountain,  belted  about  half-way  up
with  precipices  of  grey  rock,  below  which  a  steep  slope  descends  into
the  valley.  On  this  slope  stood  the  sanctuary  of  Apollo,  the  buildings
which  composed  it  rising  in  terraces  one  above  the  other.

Six  terraces,  each  supported  by  a  wall  of  masonry,  may  be  distin-
guished. On  the  highest  of  them,  not  far  below  the  grey  crags  which
rise  like  a  pinnacle  above  the  sanctuary,  a  spring  issues  from  a  wall  of
modem  masonry.  On  the  terrace  next  below  stood  the  temple.  It  was
a  small  Doric  temple,  orientated  north-west  and  south-east,  and  measur-
ing 23.30  metres  on  the  sides  and  11.80  metres  at  the  ends.  Mr.
Holleaux  states  that  the  substmctions,  some  steps,  the  lower  course  of
some  walls,  and  a  small  part  of  the  pavement  are  still  in  their  places.
However,  when  I  visited  the  sanctuary  in  November  1895,  I  observed
nothing  of  the  temple  standing  but  the  foundations,  which  are  three  and
four  courses  or  6  feet  high ;  they  are  built  of  a  very  soft  white  cmmb-
ling  limestone.  The  supporting-wall  of  the  terrace  on  which  the  temple
stands  is  four  and  five  courses  (5  ft.  8  in.)  high ;  it  is  constmcted  of
small  squared  stones  laid  in  horizontal  courses.  If  we  descend  the  hill
by  the  mined  ramp  at  the  western  end  of  the  temple  we  come  to  an
artificial  cavem  hewn  in  the  mountain-side.  This  cavem  communicates
directly  by  an  earthenware  conduit  with  the  spring  on  the  highest
terrace.  It  is  a  plausible  conjecture  that  the  oracles  were  delivered
in  this  cavem  by  the  prophet,  who  had  previously  dmnk  the  water  of
the  spring,  just  as  the  prophet  of  the  Clarian  Apollo  drank  of  the  sacred
spring  in  the  cave  as  a  means  of  procuring  inspiration  (see  notes  on
vii.  3.  I  ;  ix.  2.  i).

On  the  third  terrace,  below  the  temple  to  the  south-west,  are  the


CH.  XXIII  PTOAN  APOLLO  loi

foundations  of  a  building  26  paces  long  by  6  paces  broad,  orientated
in  the  same  way  as  the  temple.  Its  foundations  are  constructed  of  a
hard  grey  stone.  The  upper  walls,  of  which  some  parts  exist,  were
seemingly  built  of  the  soft  white  limestone.  Here  there  are  two  drums
of  unfluted  columns,  30  inches  in  diameter,  and  a  drum  of  a  small
fluted  Doric  column.  The  terrace  is  about  13  paces  broad.  The
lower  courses  of  the  wall  which  supported  it  are  built  of  the  hard  grey
stone.

The  fourth  terrace  is  6  paces  broad.  The  lower  courses  of  its
supporting-wall  are  built  of  the  hard  grey  stone ;  the  upper  courses  (or
at  least  the  single  existing  upper  course)  of  the  soft  white  limestone.

The  fifth  terrace,  on  which  lie  two  inscribed  blocks,  is  supported  by
a  wall  in  the  shape  of  a  crescent ;  and  on  the  sixth  terrace,  immediately
in  front  of  the  crescent  -  shaped  wall,  is  a  curious  edifice.  It  is  a
narrow  building,  27  paces  long  by  3^  paces  broad,  and  comprises
seven  quadrangular  chambers,  each  9  feet  long  by  6  feet  wide.  But  the
most  remarkable  feature  of  the  edifice  is  that  all  these  chambers  are
subterranean,  being  constructed  of  high  walls  of  squared  masonry,  the
top  of  which  is  flush  with  the  surface  of  the  terrace.  These  chambers
have  neither  doors  nor  windows,  and  they  seem  to  have  been  roofed
over  with  large  slabs,  some  of  which  are  still  in  position.  In  the
southernmost  of  the  chambers  the  walls  are  nine  courses  high ;  one  of
the  blocks  seems  to  show  traces  of  red  paint.  Probably  these  chambers
were  cisterns ;  they  communicate  with  the  spring  on  the  highest  terrace.
The  crescent-shaped  wall  at  the  back  of  the  cisterns  is  standing  to  a
height  of  three  and  four  courses.  Whether  it  is  really  the  supporting-
wall  of  the  next  terrace  above  (the  fifth)  seems  doubtful.  Beside  the
cisterns  on  the  west  lies  a  small  drum  of  a  fluted  Doric  column
measuring  27  inches  in  diameter.  Also  there  is  a  base  30  inches  in
diameter.

Below  the  sixth  and  lowest  terrace  is  an  ancient  fountain  now  called
Perdiko-Vrysi  (* partridge-spring '),  which  gives  its  name  to  the  little
valley  in  which  the  sanctuary  is  situated.  The  water  trickles  through
a  stone  channel  into  a  small  round  stone  basin.  It  originally  issued
from  a  wall  of  masonry,  of  which  two  blocks  are  standing,  one  of  them
serving  also  to  form  the  basin  into  which  the  water  flows.  Other
squared  ancient  blocks  are  lying  about  the  little  fountain.  The  water
probably  comes  from  the  spring  on  the  highest  terrace ;  for  it  can  be
traced  flowing  down  the  steep  slope,  making  green  with  grass  the  bare
hill-side  over  which  it  flows.

A  short  way,  perhaps  100  yards  or  so,  to  the  south-west  of  the
sanctuary  and  lower  down  is  the  small  chapel  of  Hagia  Paraskeve  (St.
Friday),  which  has  been  lately  rebuilt.  The  hill-side  at  the  chapel  is
overgrown  with  bushes,  and  between  it  and  the  sanctuary  is  a  grove
of  fine  holly-oaks.  The  view  from  the  chapel  over  the  beautiful  Lake
Ukeri  and  away  to  the  mountains  of  southern  Boeotia  is  charming.
The  lake,  it  should  be  said,  is  not  visible  from  the  sanctuary.  Near
the  chapel  a  rocky  glen  descends  to  the  south-west.  Down  this  glen
the    path   leads   to  Karditsa  and  Acraephnium.       Descending  it,   we


102  PTOAN  APOLLO  bk.  ix.  bobotia

enjoy  beautiful  views  over  Lake  Likeri  framed  between  the  rocky  sides
of  the  glen  and  backed  by  distant  mountains.  Soon,  however,  the  path
turns  westward,  the  distant  prospect  of  lake  and  mountain  disappears,
and  we  follow  an  opener  and  tamer  glen,  which  leads  us  straight  by  a
gradual  and  easy  descent  between  low  rounded  bushy  hills  to  Karditsa.
The  time  from  the  sanctuary  to  Karditsa  is  about  half  an  hour.^

In  addition  to  the  ruined  buildings  of  the  sanctuary,  Mr.  Holleaux's
excavations  brought  to  light  a  number  of  inscriptions,  some  archaic
marble  statues,  bronze  statuettes,  small  bronze  animals  of  primitive
style,  bronze  reliefs,  and  many  fragments  of  early  Corinthian  pottery.
Particularly  interesting  are  the  thin  bronze  plates  adorned  with  reliefs,
for  they  serve  to  illustrate  the  early  history  of  decorative  art  in  Greece.
The  decorations  include  linear  and  vegetable  patterns,  real  and  fantastic
animals  (sphinxes,  griffins,  human-headed  birds)  and  human  figures
arranged  in  scenes,  for  example  Zeus  and  Typhon,  and  Prometheus  and
the  vulture.  Mr.  Holleaux  thinks  it  likely  that  these  bronze  reliefs
were  imported  from  Corinth,  since  the  style  of  their  decoration  resembles
that  of  the  early  Corinthian  pottery,  and  the  reliefs  were  discovered  in  a
layer  where  fragments  of  that  pottery  were  found  by  hundreds.  One  of  the
marble  statues  brought  to  light  by  Mr.  Holleaux  belongs  to  the  type  of  the
so-called  Apollo  of  Thera,  Orchomenus,  and  Tenea  (see  note  on  ii.  5.  4).
Another  interesting  discovery,  made  in  1891,  is  that  of  a  socle  and  base
of  an  offering  which  the  inscription  (HinnAPX02  ANEeE[KEN  HO
nEI2I2]TPAT0,  engraved  in  Attic  letters  of  the  sixth  century  B.C,
proves  to  have  been  dedicated  by  the  tyrant  Hipparchus,  son  of  Pisi-
stratus.  Mr.  Holleaux  conjectures  that  the  tyrant's  offering  may  have
consisted  of  an  image  of  Athena  in  the  style  of  the  archaic  female
statues  found  on  the  Acropolis  at  Athens  (see  vol.  2.  p.  346),  since  the
head  of  such  a  statue  was  found  by  him  in  the  sanctuary.

Inscriptions  show  that  games  called  Ptoia  were  celebrated  at  the
sanctuary  every  fourth  year.  They  appear  to  have  consisted  exclusively
of  musical  and  poetical  contests,  which  were  held  in  a  theatre.  The
site  of  the  theatre,  however,  has  not  been  found.  The  contests  were
preceded  or  accompanied  by  sacrifices  to  Apollo  and  other  gods,  and
by  processions,  national  dances  of  the  kind  called  surtos,  and  banquets.
See  C  /.  G.  G,  S,  i.  Nos.  2710,  2712,  4135,  4138,  4139,  4142,  4147,
4148;  Holleaux,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUnique^  14  (1890),  pp.
59-64.  From  one  of  these  inscriptions  {C.  /.  G,  G,  S.  i.  No.  4135  ;
Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique^  14  (1890),  p.  19  sqq,)  it  appears
that  the  games  were  instituted  some  time  between  178  and  146  B.C.  by
a  decree  of  the  Amphictyonic  Council,  which  enacted  that  the  sanctuary
of  the  Ptoan  Apollo,  within  the  limits  marked  by  the  boundary  stones,
should  be  an  asylum,  and  that  a  sacred  truce  should  begin  on  the  15  th
day  of  the  Boeotian  month  Hippodromius  or  the  Delpic  month  Apellaeus.
From  another  of  these  inscriptions,  found  in  the  church  of  St.  George
at  Karditsa^  we  learn  that  in  the  reign  of  Caligula  or  Nero  these  games,

*  According  to  the  writer  of  the  Guide-Joanne  the  time  is  an  hour  and  twenty
minutes.  On  this  I  can  only  say  that  I  left  the  sanctuary  at  4. 53  p.  m.  and  riding
leisurely  was  at  Karditsa  at  5.25  p.m.     The  distance  is  about  2  miles.


CH.  XXIII  PTOAN  APOLLO  103

after  having  been  in  abeyance  for  thirty  years,  were  revived  by  Epami-
nondas,  the  son  of  Epaminondas,  and  that  out  of  gratitude  for  this  and
other  benefits  the  people  of  Acraephnium  resolved  to  set  up  two
statues  of  Epaminondas,  one  in  the  sanctuary  of  the  Ptoan  Apollo  and
one  in  the  market-place  of  Acraephnium  (C  /.  G,  G,  S,  i.  No.  2712  ;
C  /.  G,  No.  1625;  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  pp.  297  sq,^  333).
Afterwards  on  the  proposal  of  this  same  Epaminondas  in  his  capacity  of
high  priest  of  the  Augustuses  and  of  Nero,  the  people  of  Acraephnium
testified  their  gratitude  to  Nero  for  his  liberation  of  Greece  by  resolving
to  dedicate  an  altar  to  him  under  the  title  of  Zeus  of  Freedom  beside
the  altar  of  Saviour  Zeus,  and  to  set  up  images  of  him  and  Augusta
Messalina  (?),  as  of  a  god  and  goddess,  in  the  temple  of  the  Ptoan
Apollo  {C.I,  G,  G.  S.  I.  No.  2713  ;  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  hellMique^  12
(1888),  p.  510  sqq,)

Pausanias  seems  to  imply  that  the  oracle  of  the  Ptoan  Apollo  became
dumb  after  the  destruction  of  Thebes  by  Alexander  the  Great  in  335  B.C.
Inscriptions,  however,  prove  that  the  oracle  was  again  in  use  soon  after
the  restoration  of  Thebes  by  Cassander  in  3 1 5  B.C.  (see  ix.  7.  i  note),
and  that  it  continued  to  be  consulted  down  to  the  middle  of  the  first
century  a.d.  Thus  an  inscription,  which  can  be  dated  with  tolerable
certainty  between  312  and  304  B.C.,  records  that  the  Boeotians  dedi-
cated a  tripod  to  the  Ptoan  Apollo  in  return  for  a  good  oracle  which  he
had  delivered  to  them  (C.  /.  G,  G,  S.  i.  No.  2724  ;  MittheiL  d,  arch,
Inst,  in  A  then,  3  (1878),  p.  86  sqq.  ;  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUnique^
13  (1889),  p.  2,  with  Holleaux's  comments,  p.  7  sqq. ;  Collitz,  G.  D.  I.
I.  No.  571);  and  oracles  of  the  god  are  expressly  mentioned  in
inscriptions  which  belong  to  the  latter  part  of  the  third  or  the  beginning
of  the  second  century  B.C.  (C  /.  G.  G.  S.  i.  Nos.  2724  c,  2724  d,  4156,
4157  ;  as  to  the  dates,  see  HoUeaux,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUniqtu^

13  (1889),  pp.  14  sq.^  226  sq.  ;  id,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUnique,

14  (1890),  p.  5).  Further,  it  is  mentioned  as  one  of  the  many  merits  of
Epaminondas  son  of  Epaminondas  in  the  reign  of  Caligula  or  Nero,  that
he  worked  the  oracle  (cirercAct  kox  to.  tou  dtov  /Aavrctd  C.  I  G.  G.  S,
I.  No.  2712),  which  perhaps  means  that  he  acted  as  prophet  or  mouth-
piece of  the  god.  For  we  know  from  Herodotus  (viii.  135)  that  the
oracles  were  delivered  by  the  mouth  of  a  prophet ;  and  the  prophet  of
the  god  is  mentioned  in  inscriptions  which  date  variously  from  the
fourth  century  B.C.  (C.  I.  G.  G.  S.  i.  No.  4155),  from  between  178  and
146  B.C.  (C.  /.  G.  G.  S.  I.  Nos.  4135,  4138,  4142;  see  Holleaux,  in
Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUnique,  14  (1890),  p.  27  sqq.\  and  from  the  first
century  B.C.  (C.  I  G.  G.  S.  i.  No.  4147  ;  see  Holleaux,  ib.,  p.  190).
By  the  end  of  the  first  century  of  our  era,  however,  the  oracle  would
seem  to  have  fallen  into  disuse  ;  for  Plutarch  tells  us  that  in  his  time  all
the  oracles  of  Boeotia,  except  the  oracle  of  Trophonius,  were  dumb  or
deserted ;  on  Mount  Ptous,  he  says,  you  might  search  long  without
finding  even  a  shepherd  tending  his  flock  {De  defectu  oraculorum,  5  and
8).  Even  at  the  beginning  of  our  era  Strabo  had  spoken  of  the  oracle
as  if  it  were  a  thing  of  the  past  (ix.  p.  413),  which  at  least  seems  to
show  that  by  his  time  it  was  no  longer  famous.


IC4  ROUTE  TO  LARYMNA  bk.  ix,  bokotia

See  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  279 ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und Forschungtn^
1,  p.  335  sqq, ;  Bursian,  Gtogr,  i.  p.  212  j^.  ;  Baedeker,' p.  191  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.
p.  \%sqq,  ;  MiitkeiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  A  then,  3  (1878),  pp.  86-94;  Bulletin  de
Ci^rtsp,  helUnique^  9  (1885),  pp.  474-481  \  id,,  10  (1886),  pp.  66-8o,  98-101,
190.199,  269-275;  id,  II  (1887),  pp.  1-5,  177200,  275287,  354-363;  id,  12
(1888),  pp.  380-404  ;  id,y  14  (1890),  pp.  I -64  (inscriptions),  181-203  (inscriptions),
602  sq, ;  td,,  15  (1891),  p.  661  sq,  ;  id,,  16  (1892),  pp.  347-369,  453-466 ;  Comptes
Renchis  de  TAcadhnie  dcs  Inscriptions,  4me  S^e,  20  (1892),  pp.  74  sq,^  91  sq,  ;
American  Journal  of  Archaeology,  8  (1893),  p.  2591^.  ;  Bouch^-Leclercq,  Hist,de
la  divination,  3.  pp.  214-217 ;  Hertzberg,  Gesch,  Griechenlands  unter  der  Herr-
schaft  der  Romer,  2.  p.  64.  I  visited  the  sanctuary,  6th  November  1895,  and
have  described  the  remains  chiefly  from  my  own  observation.

23.  6.  a  man  of  Enropus  named  liys  was  sent  by  Mar-
donius  etc.  See  Herodotus,  viii.  135.  There  were  two  towns  of  the
name  Europus,  one  in  Emathia  (Ptolemy,  iii.  12.  36;  Thucydides,  ii.
100;  Strabo,  vii.  p.  327;  Stephanus  Byz.  s.v,  EvpcuTros),  another  in
Media  (Strabo,  xi.  p.  524).  There  was  a  town  of  Caria  named
Euromus  (Strabo,  xiv.  p.  635  ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,%f.  EtI/xo/iios) ;
and  as  Mys  spoke  Carian,  it  has  been  supposed  that  Euromus,  not
Europus,  was  his  native  town.  But  Herodotus  as  well  as  Pausanias
calls  him  a  man  of  Europus,  though  the  reading  Evpcu/ua,  instead  of
Ei'/MDirca,  has  been  introduced  into  the  text  of  Herodotus  by  Holder.

23.  7*  Having  crossed  Monnt  Ptons  we  come  to Larymna.

To  reach  Larymna  from  the  sanctuary  of  Apollo  on  Mount  Ptous,  we
quit  the  trough  or  little  mountain-girdled  valley  in  which  the  remains  of
the  sanctuary  are  to  be  seen  and  ascend  the  ridge  which  bounds  it  on
the  north-west,  forming  a  saddle  between  Mount  Tsoukourieli  and
Mount  Affji^flo  lokmK  From  the  summit  of  the  ridge  or  saddle  we
Ittkr  u  last  look  iKickwanis  at  the  vale  of  Apollo  with  its  ruined  sanctuary
antl  ll)o  bcnutiful  I^kc  /.iJ^eri  beyond  and  below  it  to  the  south ;  then
turning;  nt>rth\vaiiU  w-e  descend  somewhat  steeply  a  narrow  glen  with
\\\^\\  hunhy  !«idr!»,  which  Ic.ids  us  straight  down  to  the  north-eastern
otJinrr  o!'  thr  jiirrtt  C\»|mlc  plain.  Or,  if  we  choose,  after  crossing  the
Hiuldlr  M\{\  drsimdiuK  through  the  glen  a  short  way  we  may  turn  to  the
U'ft  ttlunn  tl\r  noi  tltrii)  slope  of  the  Megalo  Vouno,  a  range  of  mountains
which,  rrestcsd  with  u  line  of  high  grey  cliffs,  extends  westward  from  the
vnlti  of  A|H)Uo  to  the  edge  of  the  Copaic  plain.  High  up  on  the
northern  slope  of  the  mountain  stands  the  small  village  of  KokkinOy
commanding  distant  prospects  of  the  mountains  of  Euboea  on  the  north
and  ParnaHitus  on  the  west.  The  village  is  reached  in  little  more  than
half  an  hour  from  the  sanctuary.  From  Kokkino  a  stony  but  not  very
steep  path  leads  downwards  between  low  hills  with  bushy  and  stony
slopes  to  the  north-eastern  extremity  of  the  Copaic  plain.  Across  this
comer  of  the  plain,  which  until  a  few  years  ago  was  a  marsh  or  even  a
lake  for  many  months  of  the  year,  but  is  now  under  cultivation,  we  ride
to  the  Great  Katavothra^  the  largest  of  the  natural  chasms  in  the  line
of  cliffs  through  which  the  water  of  the  Copaic  lake  found  its  way  to  the
sea.  It  is  a  great  cave  with  a  high-arched  roof  opening  in  the  face  of
a  cliff  of  creamy  white  limestone.  Unlike  most  of  the  other  chasms
or  emissories,  it  is  still  in  use  ;  the  river  Melas  (the  modem  Mavro-


CH.  XXIII  KATAVOTHRAS  AND  SHAFTS  105

potamos  or  Black  River),  after  traversing  all  the  northern  edge  of  the
Copaic  plain  in  a  canal-like  bed,  pours  its  water  in  a  steady  stream  into
the  cave  and  vanishes  in  the  depths.  A  little  way  inward  from  the
mouth  of  the  cave  there  is  an  opening  in  the  roof.  When  the  sunshiny
streams  down  through  it,  lighting  up  the  back  of  the  gloomy  cavern
with  its  hanging  rocky  roof  and  hurrying  river,  the  effect  is  very
picturesque ;  it  is  like  a  fairy  grotto,  and  we  could  almost  fancy  that  we
stood

"  Where  Alph,  the  sacred  river,  ran

Through  caverns  measureless  to  man

Down  to  a  sunless  sea."

But  alas!  the  women  who  may  be  seen  any  day  washing  their  dirty
linen  at  the  mouth  of  the  cave  break  the  spell.

All  this  north-eastern  part  of  the  Copaic  plain  is  bounded  by  a  line
of  cliffs  which  till  lately  were  washed  by  the  waters  of  the  lake.     At  the
Great  Kaiavothra  we  ascend  the  cliffs  and  follow  a  path  which  skirts
the  plain  running  not  far  from  the  edge  of  the  cliffs,  until  we  come  to
the  dip  in  the  hills  over  which  the  path  goes  to  Larymna.     Here  the
plain  is  bounded  on  the  north  only  by  a  low  ridge  which  rises  little
more  than  150  feet  above  the  level  of  the  plain.     At  its  foot,  not  many
yards  to  the  east  of  the  point  where  the  path  to  Larymna  ascends  the
ridge,  there  are  three  more  katavothras  close  together,  all  in  the  form
of  caverns  in  the  face  of  red  cliffs.     They  are  called  the  katavothras  of
Bynia,     The  central  one  is  the  finest.     It  is  a  natural  grotto  overhung
by  the  red  cliff;  we  can  walk  into  it  a  little  way  without  stooping.
None  of  these   three  chasms   is  now  in  use ;    the   two   western   are
purposely  blocked  with  stones,  and  tumbled  masses  of  rocks  lie  at  the
sides  of  the  third,  which  is  a  low  opening  at  the  foot  of  a  semicircle  of
reddish  rocks  some  30  to  50  feet  high.     The  path  now  turns  away  from
the  plain  and  ascends  the  ridge,  which  is  thickly  overgrown  with  lentisk
bushes.     A  few  yards  from  the  edge  of  the  plain  we  see  among  the
bushes  the  mouth  of  a  square  perpendicular  shaft  hewn  in  the  rock.     It
is  the  first  of  a  series  of  sixteen  similar  shafts  which  exist  near  the  path
at  intervals  varying  from  80  to  450  paces.     The  line  in  which  the  shafts
occur  is  not  straight,  but  follows  exactly  the  pass  or  depression  in  the
ridge.     All  the  shafts  are  square,  but  their  mouths  vary,  according  to
my  measurements,   from   4  ft.  6  in.  to  about  9  feet  across.^     Their
depth  is  said  to  vary,  according  to  the  height  of  the  ridge,  from  59  feet
to  207  feet.      Some  of  the  shafts  have  carefully-smoothed  sides  with
foot-holes   in  them  for  descending.     Heaps  of  red  stones  and  earth,
excavated  when  the  shafts  were  sunk,  mark  their  positions  among  the
bushes.     These  shafts  appear,  as  we  shall  see,  to  have  been  sunk  in
antiquity  as  a  preliminary  to  making  a  tunnel  through  which  to  conduct
the  water  of  the  Copaic  Lake  to  the  sea.

After  reaching  the  summit  of  the  ridge  we  begin  to  descend  gradually
to  the  north  between  the  bush-clad  slopes  of  low  hills,  still  passing  at
short  intervals  the  mouths  of  shafts  hidden  away  in  the  dense  shrubbery.

^  According  to  Mr.  Kambanis,  however,  the  sides  vary  from  1.60  to  2  metres.


io6  ROUTE  TO  LARYMNA  bk.  ix.  bokotia

Thus  we  descend  into  an  open  valley  enclosed  by  higher  hills,  with  the
high  blue  mountains  of  Euboea  appearing  at  its  northern  end.  The
bottom  of  the  valley  is  uncultivated  but  prettily  wooded  with  tall  lentisk
bushes  of  a  fresh  green  colour.  This  is  the  upper  valley  of  Larma  (a
corruption  of  Larymna).  In  the  valley,  about  ten  minutes'  walk  to  the
right  (east)  of  the  path,  and  not  far  from  the  last  shaft,  a  low  cliff  rises
to  a  height  of  about  30  feet  amid  rocks  and  bushes.  Its  face  is  seamed
and  rent  with  many  narrow  fissures,  through  which  the  water  of  the
Copaic  Lake,  after  its  subterranean  passage  from  one  or  more  of  the
katavothrasy  used  to  burst  in  a  copious  stream,  forming  first  a  deep
pool  and  then  a  broad  and  rapid  river,  which  the  ancients  called  the
Cephisus,  because  they  supposed  it  to  be  a  continuation  of  the  river  of
that  name  which  flowed  into  the  Copaic  Lake  from  the  west  (Strabo,  ix.
p.  406  sq.)  The  place  where  the  water  came  to  the  surface  again  was
named  Anchoe  by  the  ancients  (Strabo,  /.r.)  It  is  now  called  Kephalari
(*head  springs').  In  summer,  however,  when  the  lake  was  low,  no
water  trickled  through  the  rifted  rock,  and  the  bed  of  the  stream  was
consequently  dry.  Now  that  the  lake  has  been  drained,  the  water  has
ceased  to  flow  altogether ;  for  the  river  which  enters  the  Great  Kata-
vothra  comes  to  the  surface  again  not  here  but  beside  the  bay  of
Skraponeri,  About  a  mile  farther  on  two  rocky  hills  projecting  firom
the  mountains  on  either  side  close  the  valley  and  divide  it  from  the
lower  valley  or  small  maritime  plain  of  Larymna.  The  two  hills
approach  each  other  so  closely  that  only  a  narrow  gorge  of  grey  rocks
divides  them.  Through  this  gorge,  which  though  picturesque  is
neither  very  deep  nor  very  long,  the  river  from  the  Kephalari  springs
used  to  find  its  way  from  the  upper  to  the  lower  valley  of  Larymna.
Now  only  its  dry  stony  bed  enters  the  ravine.  But  in  the  gorge  a  little
lower  down  there  rises  a  copious  spring,  forming  at  once  a  stream  of
fair  size  which,  after  issuing  from  the  gorge,  turns  some  mills  in  the
valley  below  and  flows  into  the  sea  a  mile  or  so  to  the  south  of
Lower  Larymna.  The  spring  itself  is  not  visible,  so  far  as  I  observed.
But  the  water  lies  in  pools  and  flows  slowly  from  pool  to  pool,
whereas  the  bed  of  the  ravine  higher  up  is  totally  dry ;  at  least  it  was
so  in  November  1895,  when  I  passed  that  way.  In  the  pools  pretty
green  weeds  grow  thickly,  and  on  the  rocks  tortoises  may  be  seen
sunning  themselves  in  hot  weather,  ready  to  glide  into  the  cool  water  at
the  approach  of  an  intruder.  The  spring  in  the  gorge  is  clearly  inde-
pendent of  the  Copaic  Lake,  since  it  continues  to  flow  now  that  the  lake
has  been  drained.  Even  before  the  lake  was  drained,  the  natives
denied  that  this  spring  was  an  emissory  of  the  lake,  asserting  that
changes  in  the  level  of  the  lake  did  not  aflfect  the  volume  of  water  of
the  spring.

The  path  to  Larymna,  after  traversing  the  upper  valley,  crosses  the
dry  bed  of  the  stream  and  ascends  the  rocky  slope  of  the  hill  on  the
right  or  east  bank  of  the  gorge.  On  the  top  of  the  hill,  to  the  right,
are  the  scanty  ruins  of  Upper  Larymna  (see  below).  Below  us  to  the
left  is  the  ravine ;  the  path  keeps  along  the  slope  of  the  hill  at  some
distance  above  it     In  front  of  us  we  soon  see  an  olive-clad  plain  with  a


CH.  XXIII  LARYMNA  107

strip  of  blue  sea,  like  a  little  lake,  beyond  it,  the  high  mountains  of
Euboea  closing  the  view  on  the  north.  This  olive-clad  plain  is  the
lower  valley  or  small  maritime  plain  of  Larymna.  The  spot  where  we
descend  into  it  from  the  rocky  hill-side  is  a  pretty  one.  A  rushing
stream  bursts  from  the  gorge  beside  which  we  have  been  journeying
and  flows  seaward  between  banks  thickly  overgrown  with  reeds,
myrtles,  and  tall  oleanders.  Its  water  is  limpidly  clear  and  water-
plants  grow  in  it  A  church,  much  injured  by  the  earthquakes  of  1893,
stands  here,  and  farther  on  two  mills  are  turned  by  the  stream.  Fine
olive-trees  and  fig-trees  rise  among  the  fields  which  occupy  the  bottom
of  the  valley.  About  a  mile  from  the  mills  the  river  falls  into  the  sea.
Near  its  mouth  we  cross  it  on  a  bridge  with  five  arches,  and  ride  north-
wards for  a  mile  or  more  through  an  uncultivated  plain,  covered  with
rocks  and  bushes,  close  to  the  edge  of  the  sea.  On  our  way  we  pass  a
third  mill  driven  by  water  which  is  brought  to  it  in  an  artificial  channel
from  the  goige  at  the  head  of  the  valley.  Thus  we  reach  Kastriy  a
small  village  beside  the  sea  occupying  part  of  the  site  of  the  ancient
Larymna.  The  time  from  the  sanctuary  of  Apollo  to  Larymna  is  about
four  hours  or  rather  less.

Larymna  stood  in  a  little  maritime  plain  on  the  western  shore
of  a  sheltered  inlet  which  runs  up  into  the  land  from  the  Euripus
in  a  direction  from  north  to  south.  Mountains  rise  around  it  in  all
directions.  On  the  opposite  or  eastern  side  of  the  creek  a  high  bushy
hili  descends  to  the  water's  edge,  and  hills  rise  beyond  the  little  plain
to  the  west  and  south ;  those  on  the  south  are  partially  wooded  with
pines.  To  the  north,  beyond  the  Euripus,  are  seen  the  high  steep
mountains  oi  Kandili  in  Euboea  towering  like  a  great  wall  from  the
shore  of  the  strait.  The  site  of  Larymna  is  perfectly  level.  A  promon-
tory or  peninsula  of  some  breadth  sheltered  a  little  semicircular  bay  at
the  north  end  of  the  town.  This  harbour  appears  to  be  disused  at
present,  and  there  are  no  houses  beside  it.  The  village  of  Kastriy
within  the  line  of  the  ancient  walls,  is  a  little  ferther  to  the  south,  and
vessels  anchor  off  it.  The  walls  and  towers  of  the  ancient  city  can  be
traced  nearly  all  the  way  along  the  shore,  but  inland  they  have  almost
disappeared.  They  are  built  of  a  reddish  stone  in  the  most  regular
style  of  masonry,  the  blocks  being  accurately  squared  and  laid  in  hori-
zontal courses.  Clearly  they  belong  to  the  best  period  of  Greek  mili-
tary architecture  and  may  date  from  the  fifth  or  perhaps  rather  the
fourth  century  B.C.  The  number  of  courses  preserved  varies  from  one
to  seven ;  in  the  two  places  where  seven  courses  are  standing  the  height
is  about  10  feet  8  inches.  Along  the  sea-shore  beside  the  village,  and
again  along  the  shore  immediately  to  the  north  of  the  harbour,  the  wall
is  strengthened  at  intervals  of  about  10  feet  by  short  cross- walls  or
buttresses,  each  5  feet  long,  running  inwards  from  it  at  right  angles.
The  wall  along  the  shore  is  a  true  sea-wall,  its  foundations  being  actually
under  water.  The  whole  circuit  of  the  walls  was  about  a  mile.  Of  the
north  and  south  walls,  where  they  ran  inland  from  the  shore,  there  are
some  remains ;  the  south  wall,  in  particular,  is  preserved  to  a  height  of
one  and  two  courses,  with  a  block  or  two  of  a  third  course,  for  a  length


io8  LARYMNA  BK.  ix.  bobotia

of  50  yards  or  so  from  the  shore.     But  the  line  of  the  greater  part  of
the  north  and  the  whole  of  the  west  wall,  which  defended  the  city  on
the  side  of  the  plain,  is  traceable  only  by  mounds  and  some  blocks  of
masonry.     The  city  can  hardly  have  extended  farther  to  the  west,  for
the  native  rock  crops  up  in  the  plain  outside  the  line  of  the  west  wall.
Remains  of  seven  square  towers,  strengthening  the  wall,  may  be  seen  at
intervals  along  the  shore.     Two  of  them  defended  the  entrance  to  the
harbour.     Of  these  the  tower  on  the  eastern  shore  of  the  harbour-mouth
is  preserved  to  a  height  of  six  and  seven  courses ;  it  measures  24  feet
on  the  face  and  projects  1 8  feet  from  the  wall.     The  other  towers  as  a
rule  are  about  20  feet  broad  on  the  £&ce  and  project  7  feet  from  the
wall.     Inside  of  the  two  towers   which   defended   the   mouth  of  the
harbour  there  are  remains  of  two  ancient  moles  projecting  into  the  water
on  either  side  and  narrowing  the  entrance.     The  western  mole  is  the
better  preserved.     It  is  18  feet  broad  on  its  eastern  face,  and  is  stand-
ing to  a  height  of  two  and  three  courses  above  water,  while  one  or  two
foundation-courses  are  submerged.     Beyond  the  end  of  this  mole  a  line
of  squared  blocks,  sunk  at  the  level  of  the  bottom,  as  well  as  many
tumbled  blocks  also  under  water,  show  that  the  mole  formerly  extended
much  farther  than  at  present.     The  eastern  mole  measures  only  8  feet
broad  on  its  western  face.     Both  moles  are  solidly  built  of  squared
blocks.     Between  them,  in  the  middle  of  the  harbour-mouth,  are  the
remains  of  a  pier  or  tower,  built  in  the  same  style  and  rising  a  few  feet
above  the  water.     The  harbour  is  semicircular  in  shape  and  very  small,
with  a  shelving  beach  of  sand  and  gravel.     It  is  not  more  than  60  yards
long  from  north  to  south.     The  breadth  across  the  mouth,  inclusive  of
the  moles,  may  be  80  yards  or  so.     Along  the  greater  part  of  the  east
side  of  the  harbour,  at  a  distance  of  1 6  paces  or  so  from  the  water,  there
runs  a  wall  about  8  feet  high,  built  in  a  very  rude  style  of  polygonal
blocks  almost  unhewn  and  scarcely  fitted  together.     It  certainly  belongs
to  a  different  period  from  the  beautifully  and  regularly  constructed  walls
and  towers  which  elsewhere  line  the  shore.     Recently  a  German  archae-
ologist, Mr.  F.  Noack,  has  pointed  to  this  wall  as  evidence  of  a  prehis-
toric settlement  of  the  Minyans  at  Larymna ;  he  thinks  that  a  people
who  had  drained  the  basin  of  the  Copaic  Lake  must  have  constructed
fortresses  on  the  coast  to  defend  the  outflow  of  the  lake.     The  wall,
according  to  him,  is  4.50  metres  (14  feet  8  inches)  thick.     The  stones
of  which  it  is  built,  so  far  as  my  recollection  goes,  are  small,  certainly
not  to  be  compared  in  size  to  the  stones  of  which  the  walls  of  Tiryns
and  Mycenae  are  constructed.      I  took  the  wall  to   be  more  recent
than  the  rest  of  the  fortifications,  and  thought  that  it  belonged  to  a  later
repair,  of  which  there  are  traces  at  other  points  of  the  promontory  which
defends  the  harbour  on  the  east.     For  example,  on  the  eastern  shore  of
the  promontory  a  square  tower,  built  as  usual  of  fine  ashlar  masonry,  of
which  there  are  considerable  remains,  has  been  replaced  by  a  semi-
circular tower  of  polygonal  masonry  built  of  small  stones  with  gaping
joints.     These  polygonal  walls,  whatever  their  date,  differ  in  material
as  well  as  style  from  the  rest  of  the  fortifications,  being  built  of  a  whitish
stone,  whereas  all  the  other  walls  and  towers  are  built  of  a  reddish


ciL  xxiix  UPPER  LARYMNA  109

stone.  A  little  to  the  south  of  the  semicircular  tower  of  polygonal
masonry  there  are  remains  of  an  ancient  quay  or  breakwater  extending
into  the  sea  for  a  good  many  yards ;  it  is  built  of  squared  blocks  of  the
reddish  stone.  Within  the  circuit -wall  of  Larymna  there  are  some
remains  of  foundations  of  ancient  buildings ;  these  seem  to  have  been
more  numerous  and  distinct  in  Leake's  time  than  at  present.  According
to  him  the  promontory  on  the  east  side  of  the  harbour  was  cut  off  by
an  inner  cross-wall  and  served  as  an  acropolis.  Raikes,  who  travelled
early  in  the  nineteenth  century,  also  observes  that  "  across  the  neck  of
the  peninsula  a  second  wall  has  been  built,  but  from  the  rude  style  of  its
construction,  it  is  probably  the  work  of  a  later  time."  Outside  the  walls
to  the  south  a  salt  spring  called  Glyfonero  rises  a  few  paces  from  the
beach  and  forms  a  small  deep  pool.  The  natives  regard  it  as  a  sacred
water  on  account  of  its  cathartic  properties.  The  small  village  of
Kastriy  on  the  site  of  the  ancient  Larymna,  suffered  much  from  the
earthquakes  of  1893,  and  was  partially  deserted  when  I  visited  it  in

1895.

Pausanias  tells  us  that   Larymna  belonged  of  old  to  Locris,  and

Lycophron  {Cassandra,  1146)  mentions  it  among  the  Locrian  cities
which  sent  virgins  annually  to  Troy  to  atone  for  the  outrage  of  Cas-
sandra by  Ajax.  The  city  still  belonged  to  Locris  at  the  time  when  the
Periplus  which  is  attributed  to  Scylax  was  written,  namely  about  338-
335  RC.  (Scylax,  Periplus,  6).  But  by  230  B.C.  it  was  Boeotian  (Poly-
bius,  XX.  5.  7) ;  and  to  Boeotia  it  continued  to  belong  in  the  times  of
Sulla  (Plutarch,  Sulla,  26),  of  Strabo  (ix.  pp.  405,  406),  and  of
Pausanias.

On  the  other  hand  Upper  Larymna  belonged  to  Locris ;  but  the
Romans  annexed  it  to  Lower  Larymna  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  406).  The
scanty  remains  of  the  upper  town,  now  called  Bazarakt  (*  little  bazaar '),
are  situated,  as  has  been  mentioned  (p.  106),  on  one  oif  the  two  rocky
hills  which  divide  the  upper  from  the  lower  valley  of  Larymna.  The
path  from  Larymna  to  the  Copaic  plain  runs  along  the  lower  slope  of
the  hill,  above  the  gorge  that  separates  the  two  hills.  In  eight  minutes
we  ascend  from  the  path  to  the  top  of  the  hill.  The  distance  from
Larymna  is  about  2  miles.  The  hill  commands  the  defile  through
which  the  route  goes  from  the  upper  to  the  lower  valley,  and  from  its
top  there  are  good  views  north  and  south  over  both  of  them.  On  the
east  it  is  connected,  without  a  break,  with  higher  bushy  and  rocky  hills,
the  slopes  of  which  begin  to  ascend  not  many  yards  away.  On  the
west  the  hill  descends  somewhat  steeply  to  the  gorge ;  but  on  the  north
and  south  it  slopes  gradually  to  the  lower  and  upper  valleys  respectively.
Among  the  lentisk  bushes  with  which  the  hill  is  partly  overgrown  may
be  seen  traces  of  former  settlements  on  the  gradual  northern  and
southern  slopes,  especially  on  the  latter.  The  traces  consist  of  ruined
walls  and  broken  stones.  Farther  down,  at  the  south-western  foot  of
the  hill,  a  small  plateau,  strewn  with  broken  stones,  irregular  blocks,
and  pottery,  seems  also  to  have  been  included  within  the  ancient  town.
It  is  a  little  above  the  gorge  and  is  skirted  by  the  path  from  the  upper
to  the  lower  valley.     Just  below  the  path  there  are  some  remains  of  a


no  THE  COPAIC  LAKE  bk.  ix.  bobotia

rough  wall  running  parallel  to  the  gorge.  On  the  eastern  side  of  the
hill,  at  and  near  the  top,  a  fortification-wall  built  of  rather  small  stones
roughly  squared  may  be  traced  for  a  good  many  yards.  It  is  standing
to  a  height  of  one,  two,  and  three  courses.  There  are  also  some  small
ruins  of  an  ancient  fortification-wall  facing  north,  a  little  below  the
summit.

I  visited  Larymna  and  Upper  Larymna  and  traversed  the  route  from  Larymna
to  the  sanctuary  of  Apollo  on  Mount  Ptous,  5th  and  6th  November  1895,  and  the
foregoing  description  is  based  mainly  on  personal  observation.  See  Kaikes,  in
Walpoles  Memoirs  relating  to  Turkey^  (London,  1818),  pp.  302-304;  H.  N.
Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschutigen^  i.  pp.  222-231  ;  L.  Ross,  Wanderungen^  I.
p.  <^  sqq.  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  192;  Baedeker,'  p.  194  sq.  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.
p.  20  sq.  ;  M.  L.  Kambanis,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  kellMique,  17  (1893),
p.  322  sqq,  (as  to  the  shafts) ;  F.  Noack,  in  Mittkeilungen  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  A  then,
19  (1894),  p.  449  sq.  ;  A.  de  Ridder,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUni^ue,  18
(1894),  pp.  499-501  (inscriptions).

23.  7.  wild  boars  may  be  hunted  in  the  mountains.  In  the  first
half  of  this  century  there  were  still  wild  boars  in  the  wooded  mountains
which  surround  the  bay  of  Skroponeri^  a  little  to  the  south  of  Larynma
(H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen^  i.  p.  232).  The  boars  may
very  well  be  there  still.

24.  I.  the  Cephisian  or Copaic  Lake.     Within  the  last  few

years  the  famous  Copaic  Lake  has  been  completely  drained,  and  its
place  is  now  taken  by  a  vast  level  plain,  a  great  part  of  which  is  under
cultivation.  The  area  once  covered  by  the  swampy  lake  may  be
described  as  a  rectangle  8  miles  broad  from  north  to  south  by  1 5  miles
long  from  north-west  to  south-east,  with  bays  running  out  from  it  among
the  mountains  by  which  the  great  basin  is  surrounded  on  all  sides.
The  total  area  of  the  Copaic  basin  has  been  estimated  at  350  square
kilometres  (about  1 40  square  miles),  of  which,  however,  the  lake  at  its
fullest  occupied  only  230  to  250  square  kilometres  (about  90  square
miles).  Strabo  says  (ix.  p.  407)  that  the  circumference  of  the  lake  was
380  Greek  furlongs,  or  about  42  miles.  Like  the  basins  of  Pheneus
and  Stymphalus  in  Arcadia,  the  Copaic  basin  is  hemmed  in  so  closely
by  mountains  that  the  water  which  pours  down  into  it  cannot  escape
above  ground  and  has  been  forced  in  the  course  of  ages  to  hollow  out
for  itself  subterranean  passages  through  the  limestone  rock.  These
subterranean  passages  or  katavothras  exist  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains
on  the  north-eastern  and  eastern  sides  of  the  plain,  which  is  here
bounded  by  a  long  line  of  precipitous  limestone  cliffs  some  70  to  100
feet  high,  which,  now  advancing  now  retreating,  form  a  series  of  capes
and  bays  once  washed  by  the  waters  of  the  lake.  At  the  foot  of  these
cliffs  are  a  vast  number  of  fissures  in  the  rock  varying  in  size  from  tiny
rifts  to  caves  of  some  size.  The  largest  of  these  fissures  are  the  kata-
vothras,  of  which  twenty-five  are  marked  on  the  maps  of  the  Copaic
lake,  while  sixteen  of  them  have  separate  names.  In  reality,  however,
no  hard-and-fast  line  can  be  drawn  between  the  katavothras  and  the
smallest  clefts,  since  the  interval  between  the  two  is  bridged  by  inter-
mediate fissures  of  all  sizes  ;  and  the  katavothras  themselves  have  arisen


CH.  XXIV  THE  COPAIC  LAKE  in

only  by  the  gradual  widening  of  small  rents.  The  sur&ce  of  the  plain,
so  far  as  it  was  formerly  covered  by  the  lake,  is  nearly  level,  but  has  a
very  slight  general  slope  from  west  to  east,  and  a  very  slight  rise  in  the
middle,  which  caused  the  water  to  flow  towards  the  north,  east,  and
south.  The  height  of  the  plain  above  the  sea  averages  about  95  metres
(311  feet);  the  surface  of  the  lake,  when  it  was  full,  was  about  97
metres  (318  feet)  above  the  sea.  While  the  natural  emissories  by
which  the  water  of  the  lake  escaped  are  situated  on  its  northern  and
eastern  banks,  the  streams  which  fed  it  flowed  into  it,  without  exception,
from  the  west  and  south.  Of  these  tributary  streams  the  most  im-
portant are  the  Lophis  on  the  south,  the  Phalarus  on  the  south-west,
and  the  Hercyna,  Cephisus,  and  Melas  on  the  west.  The  last  (the
Melas)  is  the  only  one  which,  after  the  lake  has  been  drained,  continues
to  flow  across  the  whole  width  of  the  plain  in  a  deep  bed  of  its  own.
Taking  its  rise  in  copious  perennial  springs  in  the  bay  of  Tzamali^
immediately  to  the  north  of  Orchomenus  it  flows  along  the  northern
margin  of  the  plain,  skirting  the  foot  of  the  hills  till  it  comes  opposite  to
Stroviki^  which  was  till  lately  an  island  in  the  lake,  about  2  miles
south- west  of  Copae  (the  modem  Topolta),  Here  a  branch  of  the  river
turns  to  the  left,  and  flowing  through  the  strait  between  the  island  and
the  mainland  vanishes  into  a  small  chasm,  now  half  choked  up,  at  the
foot  of  the  hill.  The  main  stream,  however,  flows  outside  of  the  island,
and  crossing  in  a  straight  line  the  wide  bay  of  Topolta  falls  into  the  Great
Kaian'othra  at  the  extreme  north-eastern  comer  of  the  plain,  to  which
even  in  the  height  of  summer  it  brings  a  considerable  body  of  water.
None  of  the  other  rivers  which  poured  their  waters  into  the  lake  had,
like  the  Melas,  scooped  out  for  itself  in  the  bed  of  the  lake  a  deep
channel  in  which  it  flowed  winter  and  summer.  All  the  rest,  even  the
Cephisus,  merely  lost  themselves  in  the  swamp.  Yet  the  ancients,
though  they  clearly  distinguished  the  Melas  at  its  origin  from  the
Cephisus  (see  note  on  ix.  38.  6),  appear  to  have  given  the  name  of
Cephisus  to  the  lower  course  of  the  Melas ;  for  Strabo  says  (ix.  p.  405)
that  the  stream  which  flowed  into  the  sea  at  Larymna  was  the  Cephisus,
and  the  name  Cephisian  instead  of  Copaic  which  was  sometimes
applied  to  the  lake  (Homer,  //.  ix.  709  ;  Pindar,  Pyth,  xii.  46)  seems
to  imply  that  the  river  which  traversed  it  from  end  to  end  was  the
Cephisus  and  not  the  Melas.  The  mistake,  however,  was  a  natural  and
excusable  one.  For  of  all  the  streams  which  entered  the  lake  the
Cephisus  had  by  far  the  longest  course,  whereas  the  Melas  only  rose  on
the  margin  of  the  swamp,  and  its  course  was  for  the  greater  part  of  the
year  concealed  under  the  smooth  surface  of  the  mere.

Like  other  lakes  which  are  drained  not  by  rivers  but  by  natural  sub-
terranean passages  in  the  limestone  mountains  which  surround  them,  the
level  of  the  Copaic  lake  varied  greatly  from  time  to  time.  Such  varia-
tions depend  upon  two  different  sets  of  causes,  first  the  varying  capacity
of  the  emissories,  and  second  the  varying  amount  of  water  poured  into
the  lake.

In  the  first  place,  not  only  are  the  emissories  subject  to  a  gradual
and  regular  process  of  change,  their  passages  being  slowly  clogged  and


112  THE  COPAIC  LAKE  bk.  ix.  boeotia

their  mouths  choked  up  by  the  alluvial  deposits  which  in  the  course  of
ages  raise  the  bed  of  the  l^e  ;  but  they  are  also  exposed  to  sudden  and
incalculable  changes,  wrought  by  earthquakes,  landslips,  floating  logs
and  so  on,  which  may  in  a  few  minutes  either  widen  the  passages  or
block  them  up  altogether.  In  the  second  place,  while  these  changes,
whether  gradual  or  sudden,  affect  the  outflow  of  the  water,  others  not  less
marked  influence  its  inflow.  For  the  rainfall,  on  which  the  inflow
ultimately  depends,  varies  not  only  with  the  year  but  with  the  season.
In  the  subtropical  climate  of  the  Mediterranean  rain  hardly  £dls  in
summer,  and  as  a  consequence  the  streams  in  that  season  either  flow
with  diminished  volume  or  dry  up  entirely.  All  these  various  causes
combine  to  produce  secular  and  periodic  as  well  as  irregular  and  unfore-
seen variations  in  the  level  of  lakes  like  the  Copaic  mere.  In  no  lake,
perhaps,  have  the  annual  changes  been  more  regular  and  marked  than  in
the  Copaic ;  for  while  in  winter  it  was  a  reedy  mere,  the  haunt  of  thou-
sands of  wild  fowl,  in  summer  it  was  a  moreaor  less  marshy  plain  where
cattle  browsed  and  crops  were  sown  and  reaped.  So  well  recognised
were  these  vicissitudes  of  the  seasons  that  places  on  the  bank  of  the  lake
such  as  Orchomenus,  Lebadea,  and  Copae  had  summer  roads  and  winter
roads  by  which  they  communicated  with  each  other,  the  winter  roads
following  the  sides  of  the  hills,  while  the  summer  roads  struck  across  the
plain.  With  the  setting  in  of  the  heavy  autumn  rains  in  November  the
lake  began  to  rise  and  reached  its  greatest  depth  in  February  or  March,
by  which  time  the  mouths  of  the  emissories  were  completely  submerged
and  betrayed  their  existence  only  by  swirls  on  the  surface  of  the  mere.
Yet  even  then  the  lake  presented  to  the  eye  anything  but  an  unbroken
sheet  of  water.  Viewed  from  a  height  such  as  the  acropolis  of  Orcho-
menus it  appeared  as  an  immense  fen,  of  a  vivid  green  colour,  stretching
away  for  miles  and  miles,  overgrown  with  sedge,  reeds,  and  canes,
through  which  the  river  Cephisus  or  Melas  might  be  seen  sluggishly
oozing,  while  here  and  there  a  gleam  of  sunlit  water,  especially  towards
the  north-east  comer  of  the  mere,  directed  the  eye  to  what  looked
like  ponds  in  the  vast  green  swamp.  Bare  grey  mountains  rising  on  the
north  and  east,  and  the  beautiful  wooded  slopes  of  Helicon  on  the  south,
bounded  the  fen.  In  spring  the  water  began  to  sink.  Isolated  brown
patches,  where  no  reeds  grew,  were  the  first  to  show  as  islands  in  the
mere ;  and  as  the  season  advanced  they  expanded  more  and  more  till
they  met.  By  the  middle  of  summer  great  stretcljes,  especially  in  the
middle  and  at  the  edges,  were  bare.  In  the  higher  parts  the  fat  alluvial
soil  left  by  the  retiring  waters  was  sown  by  the  peasants  and  produced
crops  of  com,  rice,  and  cotton  ;  while  the  lower  parts,  overgrown  by  rank
grass  and  weeds,  were  grazed  by  herds  of  cattle  and  swine.  In  the
deepest  places  of  all  the  water  often  stagnated  the  whole  summer,  though
there  were  years  when  it  retreated  even  from  these,  leaving  behind  it
only  a  bog  or  perhaps  a  stretch  of  white  clayey  soil,  perfectly  dry,  which
the  summer  heat  seamed  with  a  network  of  minute  cracks  and  fissures.
By  the  end  of  August  the  greater  part  of  the  basin  was  generally  dr>%
though  the  water  did  not  reach  its  lowest  point  till  October.  At  that
time  what  had  lately  been  a  fen  was  only  a  great  brown  expanse,  broken


CH.  XXIV  THE  COPAIC  LAKE  113

here  and  there  by  a  patch  of  green  marsh,  where  reeds  and  other  water-
plants  grew.     In  November  the  lake  began  to  fill  again  fast.

Such  was  the  ordinary  annual  cycle  of  changes  in  the  Copaic  Lake
in  modem  times,  and  we  have  no  reason  to  suppose  that  it  was  essentially
different  in  antiquity.  But  at  all  times  the  water  of  the  lake  has  been
liable  to  be  raised  above  or  depressed  below  its  customary  level  by
unusually  heavy  or  scanty  rainfall  in  winter  or  by  the  accidental  clogging
or  opening  of  the  chasms.  As  we  read  in  ancient  authors  of  drowned
cities  on  the  margin  of  the  lake  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  407  ;  Paus.  ix.  24.  2),
so  a  modem  traveller  tells  of  villagers  forced  to  flee  before  the  rising
flood,  and  of  vineyards  and  corn-fields  seen  under  water.

Of  the  places  at  which  the  water  of  the  lake,  after  vanishing  into  the
chasms,  comes  or  used  to  come  to  the  surface  again,  three  at  least  can
be  identified  with  tolerable  certainty.  One  of  them,  as  we  have  seen
(p.  106),  is  the  ancient  Anchoe,  the  modem  Kephalari^  in  the  upper
valley  of  Larymna.  The  spring  which,  before  the  lake  was  drained,
used  to  issue  from  the  rifted  rock  was  the  outflow  of  the  water  that  fell
into  the  chasms  called  Bynia  (as  to  which  see  above,  p.  105).  Second,
the  river  Melas,  which  still  flows  into  the  Great  Katcevothra  at  the  north-
eastern extremity  of  the  Copaic  plain,  issues  again  some  4  miles  away
at  the  great  springs  beside  the  bay  of  Skroponeri,  The  way  from  the
kaicevoihra  to  the  springs  leads  eastward  over  a  ridge  of  the  moun-
tains, and  then  down  a  narrow  glen  to  the  head  of  the  bay.  High
mountains  clothed  with  low  woods  and  dense  shmbbery,  where  wild
boars  used  to  have  their  lair,  rise  on  all  sides  firom  the  shores  of  this
deep,  still,  fjord-like  inlet  of  the  sea ;  and  at  their  foot,  in  the  inmost
comer  of  the  bay,  nine  copious  springs  gush  from  the  jagged  limestone
rocks  and  pour  into  the  sea,  which  is  so  near  that  its  waves  wash  over
the  springs  and  communicate  a  brackish  taste  to  their  water,  or  rather  to
all  of  them  except  the  smallest  and  most  northerly  which  rises  among
bushes  somewhat  farther  from  the  shore.  The  largest  of  the  springs
issues  from  many  rifts  in  the  face  of  a  perpendicular  cliff  and  falls  into
a  basin  which  used  to  be  enclosed  by  a  wall.  The  third  natural  outlet
of  the  Copaic  Lake  was  apparently  through  a  subterranean  channel
conmiunicating  with  the  lakes  ZJkeri  and  ParaJimni ;  for  the  level  of  the
water  in  these  two  lakes  was  observed  to  vary  with  the  level  of  the  water
in  the  Copaic  Lake.  Before  the  Copaic  Lake  was  drained.  Lake  Ukeri
stood  generally  at  a  height  of  45  metres,  and  Lake  Paralimni  2X  a  height
of  35  metres  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  or  52  and  62  metres  respectively
lower  than  the  winter  level  of  the  Copaic  Lake.  Lastly,  it  has  sometimes
been  held  that  the  branch  of  the  Melas  which  falls  into  a  chasm  at
Stroviki  (see  above,  p.  in)  reappears  in  the  copious  salt  springs  called
Armyro  at  Opus.  Here,  ten  minutes  to  the  south  of  the  long  south  wall
of  the  ancient  city,  a  narrow  pass  runs  between  steep  rocks  and  the  sea.
The  springs  issue  from  the  rocks  in  such  volume  and  with  such  force
that  they  at  once  tum  three  mills.  In  support  of  the  view  that  these
springs  are  an  outflow  of  the  Copaic  Lake,  it  has  been  observed  that  at
the  bottom  of  an  old  well  in  Pavlo^  a  village  to  the  north  of  Stroviki,  the
water  is  seen  to  flow  firom  south  to  north.    The  geologist  Mr.  Philippson,

VOL.  V  I


114  '^^^  COPAIC  LAKE  BK.  ix.  boeotia

however,  thinks  that  the  stratification  of  the  rocks  through  which,  on  this
supposition,  the  water  would  have  to  pass  is  against  the  hypothesis.

The  plan  of  draining  the  Copaic  Lake,  which  has  been  successfully
accomplished  within  the  last  few  years,  was  conceived  and  apparently
executed  at  a  very  remote  time  in  antiquity.  Strabo  reports  a  tradition
(ix.  p.  415)  that  the  whole  basin  of  the  lake  had  at  one  time  been  drained
and  cultivated  by  the  people  of  Orchomenus,  and  this  tradition  has  been
strikingly  confirmed  by  the  recent  discovery  of  a  complete  and  very
ancient  system  of  drainage  works  in  the  bed  of  the  lake.  The  discovery
was  made  by  the  engineers  charged  with  the  execution  of  the  modem
drainage  works.  As  described  by  them,  the  ancient  works  were  com-
posed of  an  ingenious  combination  of  dykes  and  canals,  which  com-
pletely encircled  the  lake  and,  receiving  the  waters  of  the  streams  which
flowed  into  it  on  the  west  and  south,  conducted  them  to  the  chasms  on
the  east  and  north-east  banks.  Where  the  canal  skirted  closely  the
precipitous  rocky  shore  of  th^  lake  a  single  dyke  or  embankment  sufficed,
the  water  being  led  between  the  dyke  and  the  shore.  But  where  the
canal  had  to  cross  a  bay,  or  where  the  bank  of  the  lake  was  not  high  and
steep  enough  to  serve  as  one  side  of  the  canal,  two  parallel  dykes  were
constructed  and  the  water  flowed  between  them.  The  remains  of  these
ancient  drainage  works  in  the  bed  of  the  lake  are  of  two  sorts.  In  the
first  place  we  see  them  as  low  broad  mounds,  about  5  feet  high  and  50
to  60  yards  wide,  stretching  for  long  distances  across  the  plain,  either  in
an  unbroken  line  or  with  occasional  gaps.  Sometimes  it  is  a  single
mound  tnat  we  see,  sometimes  two  parallel  mounds  at  a  short  distance
from  each  other.  And  between  the  two  parallel  mounds  or  beside  the
single  one  a  long  shallow  depression  marks  the  line  of  the  ancient  canal.
These  long  low  broad  mounds  are  clearly  the  remains  of  the  dykes  which
formerly  enclosed  the  canals,  and  which  have  been  gradually  reduced  to
their  present  level  by  the  ceaseless  wash  of  the  waters  in  the  course  of
ages.  In  the  second  place,  the  line  of  the  ancient  canals  may  be  traced
by  the  walls  built  of  great  polygonal  blocks  which  in  many  places  support
and  case  the  inner  side  of  the  dykes.  In  some  places  these  walls  are
well  preserved,  but  in  others  nothing  of  them  remains  but  a  conspicuous
line  of  white  stones  running  for  miles  through  the  otherwise  stoneless
plain.

There  were  three  of  these  ancient  canals.  One  skirted  the  left  or
north  bank  of  the  lake,  another  skirted  the  right  or  south  bank,  and  a
third  ran  out  into  the  middle  of  it.

(i)  The  first  of  these,  the  northern  canal,  began  on  the  west  bank  of
the  lake,  at  the  modem  village  of  Karya^  in  the  shape  of  a  single  dyke,
which  extending  north-eastward  dammed  up  the  water  of  the  Cephisus
and  conducted  it  to  join  the  Melas  at  a  point  between  Pyrgo  and
Sirainki,  No  attempt  seems  to  have  been  made  to  drain  the  marsh  in
the  bay  of  Tzamali^  where  the  Melas  rises.  The  water  of  the  united
rivers  was  then  conducted  along  the  north  bank  of  the  lake  behind  the
island  of  Stroviki  and  the  peninsula  of  Copae  {Topolia\  in  a  canal
formed  by  the  clifTs  on  one  side  and  a  strong  dyke  on  the  other.  From
Copae  the  canal,  now  enclosed  by  an  artificial  dyke  on  both  sides,  stmck


CH.  XXIV  THE  COPAIC  LAKE  115

north  -  eastward  across  the  great  bay  of  Topolia  to  the  rocky  cape  at
Pyrgos  H,  Marina^  where  it  was  joined  by  the  southern  canal.  From  this
point  the  united  waters  were  led  eastward  in  a  single  canal  for  about  2
miles  and  then  dispersed  among  several  branches  which  conveyed  them
separately  to  the  various  chasms.  Of  these  chasms  at  the  north-eastern
comer  of  the  lake  the  most  important  are  those  which  go  by  the  name
of  SjnUa  (or  Varia\  Bynia^  and  the  Great  Katavothra,  The  branch
canal  which  led  into  the  Spitia  chasm  is  especially  well  preserved.  It  is
to  be  observed  that  the  Melas  river,  which  no  doubt  originally  flowed  in
the  great  northern  canal  from  near  Orchomenus  to  the  north-eastern
comer  of  the  lake,  now  parts  company  with  the  canal  at  the  former  island
of  Stroviki  and  thenceforward  flows  to  the  Great  Katavothra  in  a  deep
bed  of  its  own.

(2)  The  central  canal  received  the  waters  of  the  Hercyna  river,  which
were  led  to  it  by  means  of  two  dykes  converging  on  the  mouth  of  the
canal  like  the  sticks  of  a  fan.  For  a  length  of  4^  miles  this  canal,
formed  by  two  embankments  without  masonry,  has  been  traced  running
out  into  the  middle  of  the  plain.  But  the  embankments  gradually
diminish  in  height  till  they  wholly  disappear  in  an  impenetrable  jungle
of  reeds  near  a  large  barrow  or  timiulus  surmounted  by  a  block  of  marble.
Beyond  this  point  no  vestige  of  the  canal  has  been  found.  The  French
engineers  who  drained  the  lake  think  it  likely  that  the  canal  was  con-
tinued right  across  the  plain  and  joined  the  southern  canal  on  the
eastern  side  of  the  lake  near  Karditsa,  But  to  this  it  is  objected  by
Mr.  Philippson  that  it  would  have  been  a  needless  expenditure  of  labour
to  construct  a  canal  for  the  waters  of  the  Hercyna  across  the  whole
breadth  of  the  plain,  and  that  too  the  highest  part  of  the  plain,  when  it
would  have  been  easy  to  turn  the  water  of  that  stream  into  the  southern
canal,  thus  making  one  canal  do  instead  of  two.  He  therefore  plausibly
suggests  that  the  water  of  the  central  canal,  after  being  conducted  to  the
middle  and  highest  part  of  the  plain,  was  thence  dispersed  in  a  multitude
of  tiny  rills  and  channels  for  the  purpose  of  watering  the  fields.

(3)  The  southern  canal  was  intended  to  collect  the  waters  of  the
streams  which  flowed  into  the  lake  from  the  south,  the  chief  of  these
streams  being  the  Phalarus  and  Lophis.  It  begins  at  the  mouth  of  the
Phalarus,  beside  the  village  of  Mamoura^  and  runs  eastward  till  it  is
joined  by  a  branch  canal  from  the  south.  Both  these  canals,  curiously
enough,  are  embanked  only  on  the  right  side.  Soon  after  their  junction
the  canal  disappears  in  a  deep  natural  depression  which  extends  along
the  southern  side  of  the  plain  and  comprises  the  marsh  of  Haliartus.  To
the  east  of  Maulki  the  canal  begins  again  close  to  the  bank,  where  it
probably  received  the  waters  of  the  Lophis  (river  of  Moulki),  Mr.
Kambanis,  the  French  engineer,  thinks  that  the  canal  was  originally
continuous  all  along  the  southern  side  of  the  plain,  and  that  the  missing
central  portion  of  it  has  been  destroyed.  Mr.  Philippson,  on  the  other
hand,  conjectures  that  the  western  portion  of  the  canal  ended  in  the
marsh  of  Haliartus,  where  the  water  may  have  been  either  suffered  to
evaporate  or  dispersed  in  rills  to  irrigate  the  fields.  However  that  may
be,  the  portion  of  the  canal  which  begins  to  the  east  of  Moulki  skirts  the


ii6  THE  COPAIC  LAKE  bk.  ix.  bobotia

eastern  side  of  the  plain,  closely  following  the  contour  of  the  line  of  cliffs
which  once  formed  the  shore  of  the  lake,  and  which  here  acted  as  one
bank  of  the  canal.  Where,  however,  the  canal  crossed  a  bay,  as  for
example  the  bay  of  Karditsa^  it  was  of  course  banked  up  artificially  on
both  sides.  In  the  cliffs  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  plain  there  are  many
chasms  {liatavoihras\  and  to  most  of  the  more  important  of  these
chasms  a  branch-canal  led  from  the  main  canal,  the  intention  of  the
ancient  engineers  clearly  being  to  diminish  as  £ar  as  possible  the  volume
of  water  which  finally  reached  the  great  chasms  in  the  north-eastern
comer  of  the  plain.  The  junction  of  the  southern  with  the  northern
canal  took  place,  as  we  have  seen,  at  the  rocky  headland  of  Pyrgos  H,
Marina,  A  little  before  their  junction  the  river  Melas  is  crossed  by  a
Turkish  bridge  with  five  arches,  beyond  which  may  be  seen  the  ruins  of
a  large  ancient  bridge.

When  the  system  of  drainage  by  canals  which  has  just  been
described  was  in  full  operation  the  basin  of  the  Copaic  Lake  must  have
been  nearly  dry.  But  as  we  have  no  ground  to  suppose  that  in  the
historical  period  of  antiquity  the  lake  was  ever  drained,  it  would  seem
that  we  must  refer  these  ancient  drainage  works  to  the  prehistoric  ages.
Now  Strabo,  as  we  have  seen,  has  preserved  a  tradition  that  the  bed  of
the  lake  was  at  one  time  drained  and  cultivated  by  the  people  of  Orcho-
menus.  We  shall  therefore  hardly  err  in  ascribing  to  the  Minyans  of
Orchomenus — the  Dutchmen  of  antiquity — the  extensive  system  of  dykes
and  canals  by  which  the  vast  plain  was  reclaimed  from  the  waters  and  con-
verted into  waving  corn-fields  and  smiling  vineyards,  which  poured  wealth
into  the  coffers  of  the  burghers.  This  was  the  golden  age  of  Orchomenus,
when  its  riches  vied  with  the  treasures  of  Delphi  and  the  wealth  of
Egyptian  Thebes  (Paus.  i.  9.  3  ;  viii.  33.  2  ;  ix.  38.  8).

The  principle  adopted  by  the  Minyans  in  draining  the  lake  was  to
make  use  of  the  natural  emissories,  to  which  they  led  the  water  in
canals.  This  plan  appears  to  have  been  carefully  thought  out  and  com-
pletely executed.  But  we  have  evidence  that  another  plan,  based  on  a
different  principle,  was  conceived  and  attempted  in  antiquity  but  never
carried  to  completion.  This  plan  was  to  open  artificial  emissories  for
the  water  at  the  lowest  points  in  the  hills  by  which  the  basin  of  the  lake
is  surrounded.  Remains  of  works  undertaken  for  the  purpose  of  con-
structing these  emissories  are  to  be  seen  at  two  places  :  one  is  the  low
ridge  at  the  north-eastern  end  of  the  plain  over  which  the  path  goes  to
Larymna ;  the  other  is  the  ridge  at  the  head  of  the  bay  of  Karditsa
which  divides  the  Copaic  plain  from  Lake  Ukeri,  The  former  works
have  been  already  partially  described  (p.  105).  They  consist  of  sixteen
square  shafts  sunk  in  the  rock  to  a  depth  varying  from  18  to  63  metres
(59  to  207  feet)  according  to  the  height  of  the  ridge,  the  summit  of
which  is  only  147  metres  (482  feet)  above  the  sea.  The  distances
between  the  shafts  vary  considerably,  but  the  average  distance  between
each  pair  is  about  100  yards.  Until  lately  two  explanations  were  com-
monly given  of  the  existence  of  these  shafts.  One  was  that  they  were
meant  to  give  access  at  various  points  to  the  katavothras  or  natural
subterranean  emissories  of  the  lake,  in  order  that  when  these  became


CH.  XXIV  THE  COPAIC  LAKE  117

choked  workmen  might  descend  and  clear  them.      The  other  explana-
tion was  that  the  shafts  were  sunk  as  a  preliminary  to  the  construction
of  a  tunnel  which  was  to  pierce  the  ridge  and  convey  the  waters  of  the
lake  into  the  Upper  VaUey  of  Larymna,  from  which  they  would  then
flow  above  ground  into  the  sea.     That  the  latter  explanation  is  the  true
one  has  been  conclusively  proved  by  the  investigations  of  the  French
engineers  in  1856  and  again  in  1882,  who  found  short  portions  of  the
tunnel  between  the  shafts  actually  made.     The  tunnel  is  carefully  cut  in
the  rock  and  has  an  arched  roof.     Its  breadth  varies  from  1.45  to  1.60
metres,  and  its  height  from   1.65  to  1.75  metres.     The  length  to  which
the  various  portions  of  the  tunnel  have  been  carried  varies  considerably.
Thus  the  piece  which  begins  at  the  sixth  shaft  and  extends  in  the  direc-
tion of  the  seventh  shaft  is  only  3  metres  long  ;  whereas  the  correspond-
ing section  which  begins  at  the  seventh  shaft  and  extends  in  the  direction
of  the  sixth  shaft  is  32  metres  long.     The  first  section  of  the  tunnel,
from  the  Copaic  Lake  to  the  second  shaft,  seems  to  have  been  com-
pleted.      It  has,  indeed,  been  cleared  only  for  a  length  of  36  metres,
the  water  which  burst  into  the  tunnel  having  prevented  further  explora-
tion ;  but  the  existence  of  water  at  the  same  level,  as  well  as  of  shells
and  remains  of  marsh  plants,  etc.,  in  the  first  two  shafts,  seems  to  prove
that  they  communicate  with  each  other  and  with  the  marsh.      The
mouth  of  this  first  section  of  the  tunnel  is  in  what  used  to  be  the  bottom
of  the  lake,  in  front  of  the  katavothra  of  Bynia^  at  a  height  of  92  metres
above  the  sea.     The  whole  tunnel,  if  completed,  would  have  been  2400
metres  (about   i^  miles)  long;  and  of  this  total  length  it  is  estimated
that  about  a  third  is  made.     It  is  remarkable  that  in  some  of  the  shafts
there  are  remains  of  two  tunnels  at  different  levels,  one  above  the  other,
of  which  the  upper  tunnel  is  carried  to  a  less  distance  in  both  directions
than  the  lower.     In  the  sixteenth  shaft  the  upper  tunnel  is  3  metres
above  the  lower ;  in  the  thirteenth  shaft,  on  the  other  hand,  the  interval
between  the  two  tunnels  is  only  2.15   metres,  which  shows  that  the
timnels  tend  to  converge.      Now  if  straight  lines  be  drawn  through  the
various  sections  of  the  lower  tunnel  and  prolonged,  they  will  be  found
to  end  at  the  mouth  of  the  tunnel  in  the  Copaic  Lake.      From  these
facts  we  conclude  that  after  the  tunnel  had  been  begun  the  engineers
thought  its  slope  insufficient,  abandoned  it,  and  began  a  second  tunnel
which  they  intended  to  carry  at  a  lower  level  and  with  a  slightly  steeper
slope  than  the  first.      But  the  work  was  never  finished,  and  the  lower
tunnel  consequently  remained,  like  the  upper,  incomplete.      The  slope
of  the  lower  tunnel  downwards  from  the  Copaic  Lake  to  the  Upper
Valley  of  Larymna  is  i .  i  metres  in  every  1 00  metres.

The  other  place  at  which  remains  exist  of  ancient  works  begun  with
the  intention  of  constructing  an  artificial  emissory  for  the  lake  is  the
ridge  which  divides  the  Copaic  plain  from  Lake  Ukeri,  Here,  at  the
head  of  what  used  to  be  the  Bay  of  Karditsa  but  is  now  a  branch  of  the
Copaic  plain,  there  are  the  beginnings  of  an  ancient  canal,  50  feet
broad,  hewn  in  the  rock,  which  if  completed  would  have  attained  a
depth  of  90  metres  (295  feet)  under  the  summit  of  the  ridge  which  it
was  designed  to  pierce.     Further,  in  a  line  with  this  rock-hewn  canal.


ii8  THE  COPAIC  LAKE  bk.  ix.  boeotia

there  may  be  seen  in  the  plain  a  row  of  shafts  resembling  those  beside
the  path  to  Larymna  except  that  their  mouths  are  oblong  instead  of
square  and  that  they  widen  out  below  like  cisterns.  The  position  of
some  of  these  shafts  is  marked  only  by  small  hollows  and  surrounding
mounds,  at  equal  intervals ;  but  a  few  of  them  are  still  open.  Clearly
this  ancient  canal,  begun  but  never  finished,  was  intended  to  convey  the
waters  of  the  Copaic  Lake  or  a  part  of  them  into  Lake  Ukeri  and  thence
into  Lake  Paralimni  and  so  to  the  sea.  Hence  on  the  ridge  which
separates  Lake  Ukeri  from  Paralimni  and  again  on  the  ridge  which
divides  Lake  Paralimni  from  the  sea  there  are  vestiges  of  ancient  works
begun  with  the  intention  of  cutting  canals  to  facilitate  the  drainage  of
the  lakes.

The  attempts  to  open  artificial  emissories  for  the  Copaic  Lake  to
which  the  shafts,  tunnels,  and  canals  just  described  bear  testimony  are
mentioned  by  no  ancient  writer ;  hence  their  authors  and  date  must  be
matters  of  conjecture.  Leake  assigned  them  to  the  Minyans  of  Orcho-
menus ;  but  the  opinion  more  commonly  held  is  that  they  were  made
by  an  engineer.  Crates  of  Chalcis,  in  the  age  of  Alexander  the  Great.
Strabo  tells  us  (ix.  p.  407)  that,  the  chasms  having  become  dogged.
Crates  set  about  clearing  them,  but  was  obliged  to  desist  in  consequence
of  the  quarrels  of  the  Boeotians,  although,  as  he  informed  Alexander  in
a  letter,  he  had  already  recovered  much  land  from  the  water.  Further,
Stephanus  Byzantius  mentions  incidentally  (s.v,  'A^vai)  that  Crates
dug  trenches  or  canals  through  the  lake.  Thus  it  appears  that  in  the
time  of  Alexander  an  effort  was  made  to  drain  the  lake  by  clearing  the
chasms  and  conducting  the  water  to  them  in  canals,  but  that  the  attempt
had  to  be  abandoned.  Nothing  is  said,  however,  of  an  attempt  to  pro-
vide artificial  emissories  in  the  shape  of  tunnels  and  canals  for  the  escape
of  the  water.  Such  an  attempt,  as  has  been  already  pointed  out,
proceeds  upon  a  very  different  principle  from  that  which  guided  the
operations  of  the  Minyans  and,  so  far  as  we  know,  of  Crates  also.
Hence  Mr.  Philippson  inclines  to  attribute  it  to  one  of  the  Roman
emperors,  such  as  Nero  or  Hadrian,  who  meditated  and  partially
executed  large  and  costly  schemes  for  the  improvement  of  Greece  by
the  construction  of  roads,  aqueducts,  and  other  public  works.  In  the
Great  Katavothra  there  are  two  walls,  one  on  each  side,  built  of  small
irregular  stones  without  mortar  and  extending  up  to  the  i-oof  of  the  cave.
These  are  sometimes  ascribed  to  Crates,  but  they  seemed  to  me  modem,
and  this  too  is  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Kambanis,  who  states  that  in  none  of
the  chasms  are  any  certain  traces  to  be  discerned  of  the  works  executed
by  Crates.

In  Roman  times  it  would  seem  that,  the  ancient  canals  of  the
Minyans  having  long  ceased  to  drain  the  water  of  the  lake,  their  embank-
ments-served merely  as  dams  to  keep  it  from  flooding  the  level  ground
in  the  neighbourhood.  For  we  learn  from  an  inscription,  already  men-
tioned {C.  /.  (7.  G,  S,  I.  No.  2712),  that  in  the  first  century  A.D.  a
wealthy  citizen  of  Acraephnium,  Epaminondas  son  of  Epaminondas,
repaired  at  a  cost  of  6000  denarii  and  for  a  length  of  1 2  Greek  furlongs
( I  \  miles)  a  great  dam  which  protected  the  territory  of  Acraephnium  but


CH.  XXIV  THE  COPAIC  LAKE  119

which  had  ^len  into  disrepair.  The  great  dam  referred  to  can  hardly
have  been  anything  but  the  right  bank  of  the  Minyan  canal  (the  canal
of  the  right  or  southern  bank)  which  crossed  the  mouth  of  the  bay  of
Acraephnium  {Karditsa) ;  for  so  long  as  this  embankment  existed  to  its
full  height  it  probably  protected  the  bay  from  the  inroad  of  the  water  and
converted  it  into  a  plain,  which  the  people  of  Acraephnium  doubtless
turned  to  account  as  arable  or  pasture  land.  In  modem  times  the
embankments  of  the  old  Minyan  canals  have  served  as  causeways
through  the  swamp;  and  for  this  purpose  they  seem  to  have  been
repaired  by  the  Franks  in  the  Middle  Ages.

The  work  of  draining  the  lake  was  begun  by  a  French  company  in
1883  and  taken  over  by  an  English  company  in  1889.  By  1894  the
work  was  practically  finished.  In  1890  I  had  seen  the  great  green
swamp  from  the  slopes  of  Helicon,  but  when  I  visited  the  district  again
in  November  1895  ^^^  place  of  the  swamp  was  taken  by  a  vast  plain
across  which  we  rode  freely.  Some  of  it  lay  waste,  and  flocks  of  sheep
browsed  on  the  grass.  But  much  of  it  was  occupied  by  fields  of  cotton
and  maize,  and  a  good  deal  of  it  had  been  recently  ploughed.  The  plan
of  the  modem  drainage  works  is  briefly  this.  Two  canals,  an  inner  and
an  outer,  are  carried  along  the  western,  southern,  and  south-eastem
sides  of  the  plain.  The  outer  canal,  which  for  a  great  part  of  its  length
lies  outside  die  limits  of  the  old  lake,  begins  on  the  right  bank  of  the
Cephisus  some  2  or  3  miles  to  the  west  of  Skripou  (Orchomenus),  and
receives  the  waters  of  all  the  considerable  streams  which  formerly  flowed
into  the  lake  except  the  Melas.  The  inner  canal,  which  mns  roughly
parallel  to  the  outer,  is  designed  to  collect  the  rain-water  which  falls  in
the  basin  once  occupied  by  the  lake.  These  canals  convey  the  water
to  the  bay  or  plain  of  Karditsa  (Acraephnium),  whence  it  is  conducted
by  canals  and  tunnels  first  into  Lake  Ukeri^  then  into  Lake  Paralimni^
and  thence  into  the  sea  about  2  miles  or  so  to  the  west  of  Anthedon.
Originally  it  was  intended  to  constmct  a  northern  canal  in  the  Copaic
basin  which  should  have  received  the  water  of  the  Melas  and  conducted
it  to  meet  the  waters  of  the  other  two  canals  in  the  plain  of  Karditsa,
This  project,  however,  was  wisely  given  up  and  the  Melas  allowed  to
flow,  as  before,  in  its  natural  bed  to  the  Great  Kaiavothra  at  the  north-
eastern comer  of  the  Copaic  plain.  Only  in  its  mid  course  through
the  plain  the  river  was  banked  up ;  in  its  lower  course  the  bed  is  so
deep  that  no  embankment  was  needed.

The  ancients  believed  that  the  waters  of  the  lake  rose  higher  than
usual  every  eighth  year ;  and  sometimes  if  the  rains  were  very  heavy
the  lake  continued  at  this  higher  level  for  two  years  or  more ;  it  stood
high  for  several  years  before  the  battle  of  Chaeronea  (Theophrastus,
Hist,  plant,  iv.  11.  2  sq,  ;  Pliny,  Nat,  hist,  xvi.  169).  The  Boeotian
winters  were  thought  to  be  less  severe  than  usual  when  the  lake  was
high  (Theophrastus,  Catis,  plant,  v.  12.  3).  Reeds  grew  thickest  in
the  marsh  between  the  Cephisus  and  the  Melas — a  place  which  went
by  the  name  of  Pelecania  (Theophrastus,  Hist,  plant,  iv.  11.  8);  but
the  finest  were  those  which  grew  at  a  place  called  Oxeia  Kampe  (*  sharp
turn*)  at  the  mouth  of  the  Cephisus  (Theophrastus,  l.c)      There  were


120  FORTRESS  OF  GLA  bk.  ix.  bobotia

said  to  be  floating  islands  in  the  lake  (Theophrastus,  Hist,  plant  iv.
ID.  2  ;  Pliny,  Nat.  hist.  xvi.  i68).  The  fable  was  probably  told  of  the
islands  in  the  bay  of  Tsamali,  to  the  north  of  Orchomenus,  whose  banks
overhung  and  quaked  under  the  tread,  as  do  the  banks  of  the  river
Melas  in  some  places.

See  Wheler,  Journey  y  p.  465  sqq.  ;  Walpole's  Memoirs  relating  to  Tut  key  ^
(London,  1818),  pp.  303-307  ;  Dodwell,  Tour,  i.  pp.  233-242 ;  Leake,  Northern
Greece,  2.  pp.  158,  280  sqq.,  308-3 1 7  ;  P.  W.  Forchhammer,  Hellenika  (Berlin,
1837),  pp.  159-186;  K.  O.  MUller,  Orchomenos  und  die  Afinyer^  p.  45  sqq.\
Mure,  Jounial,  I.  p.  226  sq. ;  Fiedler,  Reise,  I.  pp.  100-131  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,
Reisen  und  Forschungen,  I.  pp.  19 1 -246  ;  L.  Ross,  Wanderungett,  I.  pp.  25,  99-
103 ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungeny  pp.  569-576 ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  \,  pp.  195-199 ;
Baedeker,'  pp.  191  x^.,  193  sq,  ;  Guide- Jofuine,  2.  pp.  18,  20;  Neumann  und
Partsch,  Physikalische  Geographie  von  Grieckenlatid,  pp.  244-247  ;  M.  L.  Kam-
banis,  *  Le  dessechement  du  lac  Copals  par  les  anciens,'  Bulletin  de  Corresf,
helUnique,  16  (1892),  pp.  1 21- 137  ;  ;V/.,  ib.  17(1893),  pp.  322-342;  E.  Curtius,
*Die  Deichbauten  der  Minyer,*  Gesammelte  Abhafidhmgen,  2.  pp.  266-280;  A.
Philippson,  '  Der  Kopais-See  in  Griechenland  und  seine  Umgebung,*  Zeitschrift
der  Gesellschaft  fur  Erdkunde  zu  Berlin,  29  (1894),  pp.  1-90.

Pausanias  makes  no  mention  of  a  very  ancient  and  very  remarkable
fortress  of  which  the  well-preserved  remains  are  to  be  seen  to  this  day
on  a  low  rocky  tableland  of  some  extent  which  rises  abruptly  on  all  sides
from  the  dead  flat  of  the  Copaic  plain.      The  tableland,  till  lately  an
island  in  the  lake,  is  known  variously  as  G/iay  Gou/as,  and  G/a.       It  is
distant  some  2  miles  or  so  to  the  south-east  of  Copae  ( Topolia)  and
something  under  a  mile  from  the  nearest  point  of  the  line  of  cliffs  which
once  formed  the  shore  of  the  lake.     Seen  from  any  point  of  the  plain,
the  low  flat  hill  or  plateau,  with  the  long  grey  line  of  fortification-wall
stretching  along  its  brow,  is  a  conspicuous  object.     Its  shape  roughly
resembles  that  of  a  pear  with  the  point  turned  to  the  east ;  its  circum-
ference is  about  3  kilometres  or  2  miles.     On  all  sides  the  edges  of  the
plateau  fall  away  steeply,  especially  on  the  north,  where  it  reaches  its
highest  point.     Here  the  plateau  may  be  about  200  feet  high,  and  here
it  descends  from  its  highest  point  at  one  drop  to  the  plain.     Above
these  imposing  precipices  and  close  to  their  edge  is  built  the  great
prehistoric  palace  of  which  the  remains  were  excavated  by  a  French
archaeologist,  Mr.  A.  de  Ridder,  in  June  1 893.     From  here  the  plateau
sinks  gradually  to  half  the  height  on  the  west  and  south.      On  the  east
it  descends  still  lower,  till  at  the  north  gate,  to  the  east  of  the  palace,
it  is  only  about  40  feet  above  the  plain.     A  natural  ramp  leads  up  to
the  most  easterly  point  of  the  tableland.      All  round  the  outer  edge  of
the  plateau  runs  an  immensely  thick  fortification-wall,  which,   though
ruinous,  is  nowhere  interrupted  and  is  still  standing  for  long  stretches
to  a  height  of  three  and  four  courses  (4  to  8  feet)  on  the  outside.     In
places  it  is   10  feet  high  or  more.      Its  average  thickness  is  17  to  19
feet      Viewed  from  the  inside  the  wall  generally  presents  the  appear-
ance only  of  a  great  heap  of  fallen  stones  following  for  hundreds  of
yards  the  edge  of  the  plateau.       It  is  built  of  solid  masonry  throughout,
and  does  not,  like  so  many  of  the  later  fortification-walls  of  Greece,
consist  merely  of  an  outer  and  an  inner  face  of  masonry  with  a  core  of
rubble  between.     But  the  style  of  masonry  is  rude.      The  blocks  are  of


FOKTRESS  OF  GLA
very  vatying   sizes  and    arc  very  roughly  fitted    together,  the  chinks


being  filled  with  smali  s
roughly  squared,  their  o
on  the  whole  they  are  laid  ii
are  so  numerous  (hat  by  si
rule.      Many  of  the   !


t  with  mortar.  Still  the  blocks  are
:r  surfaces  arc  to  some  extent  smoothed,  and
n  horiiontai  courses,  though  the  exceptions
e  they  might  be  thought  to  constitute  the
ire  very  large,  some  of  them  measuring  6
5  by  3  feet  deep  and  3  feel  thick.  One  stone  which  I  measured
at  the  southern  gate  was  7  ft  8  in.  long.  The  style  of  masonry  of  the
walls  is  so  thoroughly  homc^eneous  that  we  cannot  doubt  that  they
were  all  built  at  the  same  period,  probably  within  the  space  of  a  few


years.  A  remarkable  feature  of  their  constniction  is  that  they  are
built,  not  in  a  curved  line,  but  in  a  series  of  retreating  angles,  these
angles  occurring  at  intervals  which  vary  from  about  10  to  40  feet,  but
which  in  genera)  measure  about  30  feet.  The  effect  of  this  is  to  give
to  the  outline  of  the  walls,  an  the  inner  as  well  as  on  the  outer  side,  an
appearance  resembling  the  edge  of  a  saw  or  the  steps  of  a  staircase.
llie  depth  of  these  backsets  of  the  wall  varies  from  about  4  inches  to
about  2  feet ;  commonly  they  measure  10,  12,  or  i5  inches.  And  it  is
to  be  observed  that  the  walls  are  built  in  this  peculiar  style  not  merely
where  the  edge  of  the  plateau  is  curved,  bat  even  where  it  is  straight.
This  method  of  construction  appears  to  have  been  characteristic  of  the
Mycenaean  age,  for  it  occurs  in  the  fort iti cation- walls  of  the  citadel  of
Troy  (W,  DOrpfeld,   Troja  i8pj,  p.  41  sq.;  i<i.,  in  Mittkeil.  d.  arch.


5     ,     .i^'

w 'J22  FORTRESS  OF  GLA  bk.  ix.  bobotia


>


\


K


Inst,  in  Athen^  19  (1894),  p.  383  sq,\  in  portions  of  the  walls  of  Tiryns

and  Mycenae,  and  in  the  walls  of  the  Mycenaean   fortress  recently

excavated  by  English  archaeologists  in  Melos,  as  well  as  in  the  walls  of

Samia  (Samicum)  in  Elis,  which  probably  belong  to  a  somewhat  later

period.      The  original  intention  of  building  walls  in  this  manner  was

perhaps  to  compel  an  assailant  to  expose  his  flank  to  the  defenders  of

the  wall ;  but  since  the  backsets  are  often  far  too  short  to  answer  this

purpose,  and  since  moreover  they  occur  on  the  inner  as  well  as  on  the

/^^'    outer  sides  of  fortification-walls,  and  even  in  the  walls  of  ordinary  build-

»/      ings  at  Troy,  it  is  clear  that,  whatever  may  have  been  its  purpose

originally,  this  mode  of  construction  had  become  thoroughly  conven-

V  }         tional  and  had  ceased  to  serve  any  practical  end.

There  are  no  towers  on  the  walls  except  at  the  gates.  Of  these
gates  there  are  four,  one  on  the  north,  one  on  the  west,  one  on  the
south,  and  one  on  the  south-east.  The  northern  and  the  southern  seem
to  have  been  the  principal  gates.

The  northern  gate,  situated  about  300  yards  to  the  east  of  the
palace  at  a  point  where  the  slope  to  the  plain  is  low  and  gentle,  is  a
simple  opening  in  the  wall,  18  feet  wide,  flanked  on  each  side  by  two
towers  of  solid  masonry.  These  towers  are  about  19  feet  broad  on  the
face  and  about  23  feet  deep  from  front  to  back  ;  they  project  only  about
2  feet  from  the  curtain.  The  tower  on  the  east  side  is  the  better
preserved ;  seven  courses  are  stancUng  to  a  height  of  about  1 1  feet
The  masonry  of  the  towers  is  more  massive  and  regular  than  that  of  the
walls  ;  the  blocks  are  larger,  more  carefully  squared,  smoothed  on  their
^'  V-  outer  surfaces,  and  laid  in  horizontal  courses.  Inside  of  the  gateway
-^  there  was  a  court  about  20  feet  deep  by  28  feet  broad,  enclosed  by  slighter
walls.  On  the  inner  side  of  the  court,  facing  the  outer  gateway,  was  a
second  gateway  about  1 3  feet  wide.

The  southern  gate  is  flanked  by  towers  which  project  obliquely  (not,
like  those  of  the  north  gate,  perpendicularly)  from  the  line  of  wall.
The  opening  of  the  gateway  is  1 7  feet  wide.  The  tower  which  flanks  it
on  the  west  projects  about  16  feet  from  the  line  of  wall,  while  the  tower
on  the  east  projects  about  1 3  feet  farther  beyond  the  face  of  the  western
tower,  thus  forming  a  sort  of  bastion,  which  must  have  commanded  the
right  or  unshielded  side  of  an  enemy  attacking  the  gate.  The  western
tower  is  1 8  feet  broad  on  the  face,  and  is  standing  to  a  height  of  six
courses  or  1 2  feet.  The  eastern  tower  is  more  ruinous.  Both  are  built
of  rough  but  massive  and  solid  masonry  ;  the  blocks  are  rudely  squared
and  smoothed  on  the  outside,  and  the  chinks  are  filled  with  small
stones.  The  depth  of  the  eastern  tower  from  front  to  back  is  about  62
feet,  and  the  depth  of  the  western  tower  about  49  feet.  These  figures
thus  represent  the  respective  lengths  of  the  two  sides  of  the  passage
which  all  who  entered  by  this  gate  had  to  traverse.  The  southern
gateway  was  naturally  as  well  as  artificially  much  stronger  than  the
northern  gateway.  For  whereas  the  latter  is  only  about  40  feet  above
the  plain,  at  the  head  of  a  gentle  slope,  the  southern  gateway  stands  on
rocks  at  a  height  of  about  1 30  feet  above  the  plain,  and  can  be  reached
from  below  only  by  a  steep  and  narrow  path.


CH.  XXIV  PALACE  OF  GLA  123

The  western  ^teway  is  much  smaller  than  either  of  the  preceding,
its  opening  being  only  about  7  feet  wide.  On  the  north  it  is  flanked
by  a  tower  which  projects  5  ft.  5  in.  from  the  curtain.  The  gateway
seems  to  have  led  into  a  court  about  1 7  feet  square.  The  south-eastern
gateway  is  double ;  that  is,  it  consists  of  two  openings,  each  about  1 6
feet  wide,  side  by  side  in  the  wall.  The  flanking  towers,  about  23  feet
deep,  no  longer  rise  above  the  line  of  the  wall.  From  the  length  to
which  the  lines  of  fallen  stones  run  inward  from  the  gate  it  may  perhaps
be  inferred  that  this  gate  also,  like  the  northern  and  western  gates,
opened  into  a  court.

Such  are  in  brief  the  remains  of  the  prehistoric  fortress  of  Gha^
GoulaSy  or  Gla,  Although  it  is  built  on  the  whole  of  much  less  massive
stones  than  Tiryns,  and  has  not  the  grand  situation  of  Mycenae,  it  far
surpasses  both  of  them  together  in  size ;  and  if  we  consider  the  immense
length  (about  2  miles)  of  the  walls,  their  massiveness,  and  the  excel-
lence of  their  preservation,  we  shall  be  inclined  to  pronounce  it  the  most
imposing  of  all  existing  ancient  fortresses  in  Greece.

Within  the  circuit  of  this  great  fortress  the  ruins  of  an  ancient  palace
were  laid  bare  by  the  excavations  of  Mr.  A.  de  Ridder  in  1893.  As
has  already  been  indicated,  the  palace  occupies  the  most  northerly  and
highest  ground  of  the  whole  tableland.  Its  north  wall  rests  directly
throughout  its  whole  length  on  the  fortification-wall,  which  here  runs
along  the  brow  of  high  precipices.  The  inner  walls,  built  of  irregularly-
shaped  stones  of  various  sizes,  with  small  stones  and  mortar  in  the
interstices,  are  everywhere  standing  to  a  height  varying  from  1 8  inches
to  2  and  3  feet,  so  that  the  plan  of  the  palace  is  completely  revealed.
It  consisted  of  two  long  wings,  one  on  the  north  and  one  on  the  east,
which  met  each  other  at  right  angles.  The  northern  wing  ends  on  the
west  in  a  large  tower  of  a  roughly  quadrangular  shape  ;  the  eastern  wing
ended  on  the  south  in  a  much  smaller  quadrangular  tower.  Inclusive
of  these  two  towers,  the  north  wing  is  80.20  metres  (about  263  feet)
long  with  an  average  breadth  of  about  14.55  metres  (about  48  feet);
and  the  east  wing  is  72.65  metres  (about  239  feet)  with  an  average
breadth  of  12.25  metres  (about  40  feet).  Each  wing  comprises  a  series
of  chambers  on  its  outer  side,  while  its  inner  side  is  occupied  for  the
greater  part  by  two  broad  passages  or  corridors  running  beside  and
parallel  to  each  other.  But  towards  the  western  end  of  the  north  wing
and  the  southern  end  of  the  east  wing  there  is  only  one  such  corridor.
Where  two  corridors  exist,  the  chambers  of  course  open  off  the  inner
corridor.  Some  of  the  chambers  communicate  with  each  other,  forming
suites.  They  are  of  very  various  sizes.  The  largest  of  all,  towards
the  west  end  of  the  north  wing,  is  about  11.75  metres  long  (39  feet)
by  7  metres  (23  feet)  wide.  Next  to  it  in  size  is  a  room  near  the
southern  end  of  the  east  wing,  which  is  9.40  metres  (30  ft.  10  in.)  long
by  6.55  metres  (21  ft.  5  in.)  wide.^  Both  these  chambers  or  halls
open   through  anterooms.       The  partition -walls,  which,  as  has  been

^  These  are  Mr.  de  Ridder's  measurements.  My  measurements  were — largest
dsamber,  length  36  feet,  breadth  21  feet ;  second  chamber,  length  33  feet,  breadth
about  21  feet.


>*4


PALACE  OF  GLA


:.  IX.  BOKOTIA


already  mentioned,  are  built  of  irregularly-shaped  stones  of  various  siies

with  small  stones  and  mortar  in  the  crevices,  average  3  ft.  3  in,
thick  ;  but  some  of  them  are  4  ft.  J  in.  thick.  They  seem  to  have
been  covered  with  a  thick  coating  of  stucco,  which  is  preserved  in  many
places,  especially  in  the  eastern  wing.  In  one  room  and  a  vestibule
there  are  some  remains  of  frescoes  painted  on  the  stucco.  Chambers
and  corridors  were  alike  piaved  with  concrete,  of  which  also  there  are
considerable  remains,  especially  in  the  east  wing.     The  concrete  is  com-


posed of  lime-mortar  mixed  here  and  there  with  pebbles  ;  it  rests  on  a
bed  of  small  stones.  Only  in  one  room  are  there  faint  traces  of  a
painted  decoration  on  the  pavement ;  and  only  in  one  room,  or  rather
vestibule,  in  the  north  wing  is  there  a.  stone  pavement,  which  in  this
case  consists  of  eighteen  large  slabs  of  bluish  limestone.  Many  of  the
thresholds  of  the  chambers  arc  preserved  ;  they  are  formed  of  immense
slabs  of  stone  carefully  smoothed.  One  of  these  slabs  which  I  measured
was  about  10  feet  long  by  6  feet  wide  ;  another  was  9  feet  long  ;  another
8  ft,  6  in.  The  threshold  of  the  large  hall  in  the  north  wing  consists
of  three  great  slabs,  each  about  7  feet  long  and  4  ft.  3  in.  wide.
The  long  corridors  which  run  along  the  whole  length  of  both  wings  vary


CH.  XXIV  PALACE  OF  GLA  125

in  width  from  about  6  feet  to  about  6  ft.  7  in.  What  the  object  of
the  outer  corridor  may  have  been  is  not  clear.  The  entrance  to  the
palace  is  through  this  outer  corridor,  about  the  middle  of  the  north
wing.

With  regard  to  the  outer  walls  of  the  palace,  the  north  wall  rests,  as
has  been  said,  on  the  circuit-wall  of  the  fortress,  from  which  it  is  indis-
tinguishable. At  the  north- eastern  comer  of  the  palace  the  fortification-
wall  is  preserved  to  a  height  of  seven  courses  or  about  1 2  feet ;  it  forms  a
sort  of  bastion  about  34  feet  broad  on  the  north  face  and  projecting
about  3  feet  from  the  line  of  wall.  The  outer  wall  of  the  east  wing  of
the  palace,  though  it  lies  within  the  circuit-wall  of  the  fortress,  is  itself  a
fortification -wall  built  of  enormous  blocks ;  one  block  is  2  ft.  6  in.
high,  4  ft.  2  in.  broad  (deep),  and  over  7  feet  long.  The  ground  here
falls  away,  so  that  this  outer  wall  is  much  higher  than  the  inner  walls  of
the  palace.  At  the  south-east  comer  of  the  palace  the  outer  wall  is
standing  to  a  height  of  over  6  feet.  The  extemal  walls  of  the  palace
on  the  inner  side,  that  is  the  south  wall  of  the  north  wing  and  the  west
wall  of  the  east  wing,  are  built  in  a  style  intermediate  between  that  of
the  outer  fortification -walls  and  the  inner  partition -walls.  They  are
constructed  of  smaller  blocks  than  the  outer  fortification-walls,  bonded
with  mortar,  and  are  from  5  to  7  feet  thick.

Amongst  the  objects  discovered  by  Mr.  de  Ridder  in  the  palace  are
four  bronze  hinges.  They  were  found  near  the  stone  thresholds  of  some
of  the  doorways  in  the  east  wing.  These  are  the  only  objects  of  bronze
which  have  as  yet  come  to  light  at  Gla.     Further,  there  were  found  in  I  .   i.

the  palace  a  number  of  plates  of  lead,  which  would  seem  to  have  been
used  to  fasten  wooden  doorposts  to  the  walls  ;  also  fragments  of  stucco
ornaments  in  the  shape  of  small  engaged  columns,  fluted,  about  3  inches
in  diameter,  which  were  attached  to  the  walls  of  the  rooms,  three  at
least  of  them  having  been  found  so  attached.  The  fragments  of  pottery
discovered  are  few  and  insignificant.  The  vessels  of  which  they  formed
part  are  of  two  sorts,  cups  and  bowls.  Though  the  forms  are  rude,  they
have  all,  with  one  exception,  been  made  on  the  wheel.  The  quality
of  the  ware  is  poor ;  the  clay  is  not  homogeneous  and  is  mixed  with
splinters  of  stone.     Only  four  fragments  have  been  found  coated  with  a  ;  .  .

glaze  {couverU)  on  the  outside  ;  the  colour  of  the  glaze  in  one  case  is       ^^         -
black,  in  the  others  yellow  of  various  shades  from  orange  to  tawny.    The
inner  side  of  one  piece  is  coated  with  a  dark  brown  glaze.     Only  two
painted  sherds,  belonging  to  different  vessels,  have  been  found ;    the
decoration  consists  of  broad  transverse  bands  of  reddish  brown  or  violet,.  '
on  a  ground  of  creamy  yellow.

But  the  palace  is  not^lHe^  only  ancient  building  of  which  there  are
ruins.  Remains  of  walls  may  be  traced  which  seem  to  have  formed
part  of  a  great  fortified  enclosure  or  inner  fortress  stretching  nearly
across  the  middle  of  the  plateau  from  north  to  south.  Beginning  at  the
northern  edge  of  the  plateau  and  including  within  it  the  palace,  this
inner  fortress  (if  it  was  such)  extended  southward  for  a  length  of  about
300  yards,  with  a  breadth  of  about  140  yards.  From  the  wall  which
dosed  this  fortress  on  the  souths  two  walls,  each  83  yards  long,  ran


w


126  FORTRESS  OF  GLA  bk.  ix.  boeotia

southward  to  the  great  southern  gateway,  enclosing  between  them  a
passage  about  2 1  feet  wide.  The  effect  of  this  was  that  the  plateau  was
roughly  divided  in  two  by  a  fortified  enclosure  running  right  across  it
from  north  to  south,  so  that  no  one  could  pass  from  its  eastern  to  its
western  half  without  traversing  this  enclosure.  We  may  suppose  that
within  the  enclosure  lay  the  dwellings  of  the  servants  and  retainers  of
the  princely  family  who  inhabited  the  palace.  At  all  events  there  are
remains  of  edifices  within  it.  'Of  these  the  principal  are  two  quad-
rangular buildings  lying  east  and  west  of  each  other,*  close  to  the
southern  wall  of  the  enclosure.  Each  of  them  is  about  150  feet  long  by
60  feet  broad,  and  is  divided  by  an  inner  wall  into  two  long  rectangles.
From  each  of  these  quadrangular  buildings  a  pair  of  long  walls  extends
northward  for  a  distance  of  about  140  yards  ;  the  interval  between  the
walls  of  each  pair  is  about  26  feet,  and  the  distance  of  the  two  pairs
from  each  other  is  about  260  feet.  Mr.  de  Ridder  thinks  that  these
four  long  walls,  thus  arranged  in  pairs,  were  ramparts.  They  ended  on
the  north  in  a  great  cross-wall  which  traversed  the  enclosure  from  east
to  west,  parallel  to  the  south  wall.  Abutting  on  this  cross- wall,  between
it  and  the  northern  end  of  the  eastern  pair  of  long  walls,  are  the  remains
of  a  third  quadrangular  building  divided  by  a  partition-wall  into  two
equal  rectangles.  A  gateway,  flanked  with  two  pillars,  gave  access
through  the  cross-wall  to  the  northern  part  of  the  fortified  enclosure.

All  the  walls  which  have  just  been  described  (except  of  course  the
partition -walls)  are  built  in  the  same  style  as  the  outer  walls  of  the
palace,  but  in  general  of  smaller  and  more  irregular  stones  bonded
simply  with  clay  mortar  and  without  any  trace  of  a  coating  of  stucco.
Only  in  a  few  places,  for  example  in  parts  of  the  walls  of  the  rectangular
buildings,  are  to  be  seen  large  blocks  carefully  fitted  together  in  the
style  of  the  eastern  outer  wall  of  the  palace.  Within  the  fortified
enclosure  Mr.  de  Ridder  found  what  he  conjectures  to  have  been  a
primitive  cistern,  constructed  of  great  rough  blocks  arranged  in  a  circle,
of  which  the  diameter  is  about  7  feet.  But  as  he  admits  that  even  if
thickly  coated  with  clay  (of  which  there  is  no  trace)  this  rude  structure
could  not  have  held  water,  we  may  doubt  whether  it  was  a  cistern  after
all.  Further,  he  discovered  within  the  enclosure  sherds  of  coarse  pottery
and  some  plates  of  lead  and  fragments  of  stucco  ornaments  like  those
found  in  the  palace.  The  potsherds,  though  more  numerous  than  those
discovered  in  the  palace,  are  still  far  from  abundant.  With  very  few
exceptions  they  are  unglazed  ;  the  colour  varies,  according  to  the  clay,
from  whitish  and  greenish  yellow  to  deep  gamboge  yellow  and  brick
red.  The  glaze  {couverte\  where  it  exists,  is  of  a  rather  deep  yellow,
sometimes  almost  brown.  A  single  fragment  is  painted  ;  it  is  the  foot
of  a  cup  striped  with  bands  of  warm  brown.  Few  as  these  objects  are,
their  resemblance  to  those  found  in  the  palace  goes,  together  with  the
similar  structure  of  the  walls,  to  prove  that  the  fortified  enclosure  which
has  just  been  described  is  contemporary  with  the  palace.  But  the  few-
ness of  the  objects  seems  to  indicate  that  the  population  of  the  place
was  small  and  that  it  was  not  resident  for  long.

Further,  the  extreme  eastern  comer  of  the  plateau  would  seem  to


CH<  XXIV  FORTRESS  OF  GLA  127

have  been  cut  ofT  from  the  rest  of  the  plateau  by  a  cross-wall  so  as  to
form  a  fortress  by  itself  The  cross-wall,  which  is  very  ruinous,  ends
at  the  south-east  gateway.  Within  the  space  which  it  encloses,  to  the
east,  are  some  traces  of  a  long  quackangular  edifice  ending  on  the
north  in  a  semicircular  apse.  ^Lastly  may  be  mentioned  two  ruins  in
the  western  part  of  the  plateau,  to  the  west  of  the  great  fortified
enclosure.  One  of  them,  near  the  northern  edge  of  the  plateau,  is  a
long  narrow  building,  of  which  the  western  end  is  still  standing  to  a
height  of  two  courses. .  The  other,  near  the  south-western  comer  of  the
plateau,  seems  to  have  been  a  large  quadrangular  enclosure^

When  and  by  whom  was  this  great  fortress  with  its  stately  palace
built?  To  these  questions  neither  history  nor  legend  supplies  any
answer.  That  the  fortress  belongs  to  the  prehistoric  ages  is  certain.
Its  massive  walls  differ  wholly  in  the  style  of  their  masonry  from  the
fortifications  both  of  classical  antiquity  and  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and
on  the  other  hand  they  resemble  the  prehistoric  walls  of  Tiryns  and
Mycenae.  In  like  manner  the  palace  resembles  in  its  technical  con-
struction, though  not  in  its  disposition,  the  palaces  of  Tiryns  and
Mycenae.  In  all  three  we  see  the  same  partition-walls  meanly  built  of
irregularly-shaped  stones  of  various  sizes  bonded  with  mortar  and  coated
on  the  outside  with  stucco  ;  the  same  floors  of  concrete  ;  the  same  stone
thresholds.  Burnt  bricks  seem  to  have  been  as  little  used  at  Gla  as  at
Mycenae  and  Tiryns ;  at  least  I  observed  none  in  the  palace  or  on  the
plateau,  and  none  are  mentioned  by  Mr.  de  Ridder,  who  excavated  the
palace.  Hence  we  may  confidently  assign  the  ruins  of  Gla  to  the
Mycenaean  period.  Yet  there  are  differences  between  them  and  the
ruins  of  Tiryns  and  Mycenae  which  deserve  to  be  noted.  Jn  the  first
place  the  gateways  of  the  fortress  are  mere  openings  in  the  line  of  wall ;
they  are  not,  like  the  gateways  of  Tiryns  and  Mycenae,  artfully  placed
in  a  recess  of  the  walls  so  as  to  oblige  all  who  approached  the  gates  to
traverse  a  narrow  passage  where,  if  they  came  with  hostile  intentions,
they  could  easily  be  knocked  over  by  the  garrison.  The  idea  of  such
an  arrangement  appears,  indeed,  but  only  in  germ,  in  the  great  south
gate  of  GUiy  where  one  of  the  flanking  towers  projects  considerably
beyond  the  other.  Hence  military  engineering  would  seem  to  have
been  at  a  less  advanced  stage  in  Gla  than  in  Tiryns  and  Mycenae.
Again,  the  palace  at  Gla^  while  it  resembles  the  Tirynthian  and
Mycenaean  palaces  in  its  method  of  construction,  differs  widely  not
only  from  them  but  from  all  other  known  palaces  of  that  period  in  its
general  plan,  which  is  that  of  two  long  wings  meeting  at  right  angles.
J(Ioreover,  the  style  of  the  scanty  remains  of  pottery  hitherto  found  at
Gla  is  not  distinctive  enough  to  allow  us  to  say  positively  that  it  is
Mycenaean,  though  on  the  other  hand  there  is  nothing  in  it  to  contra-
dict that  view.  On  the  whole,  we  may  provisionally  conclude  that  the
fortress  and  palace  of  Gla  were  built  in  the  Mycenaean  period  by  a
people  akin  in  civilisation,  if  not  in  race,  to  the  peoples  of  Tiryns  and
Mycenae.  Such  a  people  were  the  Minyans  of  the  neighbouring
Orchomenus,  who  appear,  as  we  saw,  to  have  constructed  the  great  pre-
historic works  by  which  the  Copaic  Lake  was  drained.     Probably,  then,


128  FORTRESS  OF  GLA  bk.  ix.  bobotia

the  fortress  of  Gla  was  a  creation  of  the  Minyans  or  of  a  branch  of  that
people.  It  seems  to  have  been  erected  at  a  blow  and  to  have  perished
at  a  blow ;  for  everything  in  it  bears  the  imprint  of  a  single  period  and
of  a  single  plan,  there  is  not  a  trace  on  the  plateau  of  an  earlier  or  of
a  later  settlement  The  scantiness  of  the  remains  of  pottery,  and  the
seemingly  total  absence  of  all  other  objects  of  daily  life,  indicate  that  it
was  inhabited  only  for  a  short  period ;  and  the  traces  of  fire  in  the
palace  point  to  the  conclusion  that  its  end  was  sudden  and  violent.
From  that  day  to  this  the  island,  now  a  plateau  stranded  in  the  great
plain,  seems  never  to  have  been  inhabited  again.

Not  only  the  history  but  the  very  name  of  the  ancient  settlement  on
Gla  is  unknown.  Various  attempts  have  been  made  to  identify  it  with
ancient  cities  whose  names  have  come  down  to  us,  but  without  success
Forchhammer  thought  that  it  might  be  the  Boeotian  Midea  (Homer,
//.  ii.  507) ;  Dodwell,  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  and  Bursian  suggested  that  it
might  be  the  original  city  of  Copae,  from  which  the  inhabitants  after-
wards removed  to  the  peninsula  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  lake ;  Leake
conjectured  that  it  may  have  been  a  town  or  fortress  named  Athaman-
tium.  Recently  Mr.  F.  Noack  has  argued  that  the  place  is  the  Boeotian
Ame  mentioned  by  Homer  (//.  ii.  507)  and  Lycophron  (Cassandra^
644).  In  historical  times  some  people  thought  that  the  Homeric  Ame
was  Acraephnium  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  413)  or  Chaeronea  (Paus.  ix.  40.  5  ;
Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v,  Xatpcuvcta)  ;  others  said  that  it  had  been
swallowed  up  by  the  lake  (Strabo,  /.r.)  If  this  last  tradition  is  correct,
the  ruins  on  Gla  cannot  be  those  of  Ame,  since  they  stand  too  high  to
have  ever  been  flooded  by  the  lake  even  when  it  was  fullest.

Though  Mr.  Noack  can  hardly  be  held  to  have  proved  his  case,  he
has  done  good  service  in  calling  attention  to  a  number  of  smaller
ancient  fortresses  which  lie  like  outworks  of  Gla  on  the  edge  of  the
Copaic  Lake  or  among  the  mountains  which  bound  it  on  the  east.  A
brief  mention  of  some  of  them  may  not  be  out  of  place.

( I )  We  have  seen  that  in  the  cliffs  which  bound  the  Copaic  plain,  a
little  to  the  west  of  the  path  that  leads  from  it  to  Larymna,  there  is  a
chasm  or  katavothra  called  Spitia  or  Varia  to  which  an  ancient  canal,
still  in  preservation,  used  to  conduct  some  of  the  water  of  the  lake.
Immediately  to  the  west  of  this  chasm  two  rocky  hillocks,  once  pro-
montories in  the  lake,  jut  out  into  the  plain.  The  westem  hillock  is  the
larger  and  higher ;  the  eastern  bears  a  ruined  chapel  of  St.  John.
Both  of  them  are  surmounted  by  the  remains  of  an  ancient  fortress,
though  the  grey  old  walls,  of  which  in  general  only  a  single  course  is
preserved,  are  at  first  not  easily  distinguished  from  the  grey  rocks.
The  ruins  on  the  eastem  hillock  are  the  more  considerable  ;  they  are
those  of  a  fortress  larger  than  Tiryns  and  apparently  belonging  to  the
same  period,  for  the  walls  are  built  in  the  Mycenaean  style  and  many
remains  of  Mycenaean  pottery  are  strewn  about,  especially  on  the
eastem  side  of  the  hillock.  The  walls,  however,  are  much  less  massive
than  those  of  most  fortresses  of  the  Mycenaean  age.  At  the  point  on
the  west'  side  where  they  are  best  preserved  they  are  2.50  metres  (8  ft.
6  in.)   thick.     Within  the  fortification  -  walls  are  some  foundations  of


CH.  XXIV  ANCIENT  FORTRESSES  129

buildings,  the  purpose  of  which  is  difficult  to  determine.  The  summit
of  the  western  hillock  is  surrounded  by  a  short  circuit-wall,  from  which
another  wall  runs  down  the  slope  northward.  The  walls  are  of  the
same  thickness  as  those  on  the  eastern  hillock  and  apparently  belong  to
the  same  period.  Within  the  circuit-walls  are  the  tumbled  and  scattered
ruins  of  a  large  building.  No  potsherds  have  been  found  on  this
hillock.  The  two  sister  fortresses  just  described  may  well  have  been
built  by  the  Minyans  of  Orchomenus  or  of  Gla  to  command  and  protect
the  outflow  of  the  lake  at  the  neighbouring  chasm.

(2)  On  the  rocky  hill  called  Pyrgos  H,  Marina^  some  500  feet
high,  which  projects  like  a  promontory  into  the  Copaic  plain  about  2
miles  to  the  north-east  of  Gia^  close  to  the  meeting-place  of  the  two
ancient  canals  which  drained  the  lake  (see  above,  p.  116),  are  the
remains  of  another  fortress  of  the  Mycenaean  age.  The  walls  are  very
ruinous,  but  on  the  south-east  side  portions  are  still  standing  to  a  height
of  about  7  feet  They  appear  to  have  consisted  of  two  parts — an  inner
perpendicular  wall  built  of  moderately  large  and  almost  unhewn  stones
piled  upon  each  other,  and  an  outer  sloping  or  battering  wall  built  of
smaller  unwrought  stones  heaped  up  in  front  of  the  perpendicular  wall.
The  use  of  sloping  or  battering  walls  in  fortification  seems  to  have  been
characteristic  of  the  early  Mycenaean  period,  since  it  occurs  in  those
walls  of  the  citadel  of  Troy  which  are  assigned  to  the  Mycenaean  age
(W.  Dorpfeld,  Troja  18 gj,  p.  42  sg,)  But  it  was  by  no  means
universally  employed  even  then,  since  no  such  walls  have  been  found  at
Tiryns,  Mycenae,  or  Gia,  In  the  historical  age  of  Greece  fortification-
walls  seem  hardly  ever  to  have  been  built  in  this  manner,  though  part
of  the  wall  of  the  Acropolis  at  Athens,  which  is  attributed  to  Cimon,
batters  slightly  (see  vol.  2.  p.  355).  Amongst  the  ruined  walls  at
Pyrgos  H.  Marina  lie  many  fragments  of  Mycenaean  pottery,  including
pieces  with  brown  or  reddish  stripes  on  a  yellow  lustrous  glaze  of  fine
quality.  One  fragment  has  circular  lines  painted  in  a  dull  pigment  on
a  smooth  polished  ground  of  a  yellowish-grey  colour ;  another  shows
red  wave-lines  and  dots  on  a  reddish  ground.

(3)  On  the  highest  point  of  Mount  Ptous,  above  the  monastery  of
H.  Pelagia^  from  which  it  can  be  reached  in  twenty  minutes,  are  the
scanty  ruins  of  a  semicircular  fortification-wall  built  in  a  rough  style.
The  two  ends  of  the  wall  abut  on  the  precipices  which  fall  away  towards
the  monastery.  The  opening  of  a  gate  which  faced  southward  can  be
traced.  Opposite  this  fort,  on  the  rocky  north-eastern  summit  of  Mount
Tsikourieli^  stands  the  lowest  part  of  a  round  tower,  about  23  feet  in
diameter,  built  in  the  oldest  style  of  polygonal  masonry.  These  two
forts  were  doubtless  watch-towers  belonging  to  one  or  other  of  the
ancient  cities  which  lay  down  in  the  valleys  or  on  the  edge  of  the  great
lake.  From  their  lofty  situation,  commanding  together  views  over  the
whole  of  northern  and  western  Boeotia,  together  with  the  lakes  of  Ukeri
and  Paralimniy  they  were  well  adapted  to  survey  the  country  far  and
wide  and  to  signal  the  approach  of  danger  to  watchers  in  the  lowlands.

(4)  At  the  east  end  of  the  long  ridge  of  Mount  Megalo  Vouno,  which
extends  westward  from  the  vale  of  Apollo  {Perdiko-  Vryst)  to  the  Copaic

VOL.  V  K


130  ATHAMANTIAN  PLAIN  bk.  ix.  boeotia

plain,  are  the  remains  of  a  small  fort  erected  on  the  edge  of  the  cliffs
which  here  descend  on  the  north.  The  wall,  built  in  a  rough  polygonal
style  and  now  almost  completely  destroyed,  ran  inward  from  and  parallel
to  the  edge  of  the  cliffs,  enclosing  a  space  about  loo  yards  long  by
20  yards  wide.  Within  the  space  thus  enclosed,  at  its  south-eastern
end,  are  the  ruins  of  a  small  round  tower  fairly  built  of  polygonal
masonry.     The  place  may  be  reached  in  about  an  hour  from  Karditsa,

(5)  At  the  east  end  of  Lake  Paralimni  rises  a  flat-topped  hill
crowned  with  a  conspicuous  mediaeval  tower,  which  is  partly  built  of
ancient  materials.  Round  the  edge  of  the  hill  are  the  remains  of  an
ancient  circuit-wall  On  the  east  side  pieces  of  the  wall,  built  oi  very
regular  polygonal  masonry,  are  standing  to  a  height  of  about  6  feet ;  and
between  them  are  traces  of  a  still  older  wall  which  battered.

(6)  At  the  western  end  of  Lake  Paralimni  are  the  ruins  of  a  small
ancient  fort  standing  at  the  east  end  of  a  line  of  hills  which  here
advance  from  the  south  to  the  edge  of  the  lake.  Nearly  opposite  it,  on
the  northern  bank  of  the  lake,  are  the  extensive  ruins  of  a  very  ancient
city,  consisting  of  the  remains  of  walls  and  the  foundations  of  houses.
Though  partly  obscured  by  the  walls  of  modem  sheep-folds  which  have
been  built  on  them,  these  ruins  seem  to  belong  to  the  Mycenaean  age.
The  walls  are  built  of  great  blocks,  very  little  hewn,  which  are  piled
loosely  on  each  other  with  small  stones  cranmied  into  the  interstices.
The  houses  are  mostly  small  and  rectangular,  with  a  narrow  door  in  one
of  the  long  sides.  On  a  steep  rocky  spur  of  the  mountain  just  above  ,
the  ruins  may  be  seen  the  remains  of  a  very  ancient  fort,  the  dilapidated
x^-alls  of  which  appear  to  have  been  originally  about  23  feet  thick.

See  Dodwell,  Toury  2.  p.  56 ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  pp.  295,  306  sq,  ;
P.  \V.  Forchhammer,  HellenikcL,  pp.  179-181 ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und
Forschungtn^  I.  pp.  216*218 ;  L.  Ross,  Wanderungen^  i.  p.  105 ;  Vischer,  Erin-
nerungen^  pp.  581-583  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  212  ;  Baedeker,' p.  192  sq,  ;  Guide-
Joanne,  2.  p.  20 ;  F.  Noack,  *  Ame,  Mittheilungen  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Aihen,  19
(1894),  pp.  40J-485;  A  de  Ridder,  *Foiulles  de  Gha,'  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  hel-
IMique,  18  (1894),  pp.  271-310;  id^  *  Ame,'  ib,  pp.  446-452.  I  visited  the  ruins
of  Gla,  7th  November  1895,  ^^^d  have  described  them  partly  firom  personal
obser\'ation.

24.  I.  the  Athamantian  itUdn.  Pausanias  tells  us  that  the
Athamantian  plain  lay  on  the  straight  road  from  Acraephnium  to  the
Copaic  Lake.  It  is  therefore  probably  the  branch  of  the  Copaic
plain  which  lies  immediately  to  the  south  of  the  hill  of  Acraephnium
between  it  and  the  foot  of  the  northern  spurs  of  Mount  Phaga  (the
Sphinx  Mountain).  For  in  the  first  place  the  nearest  road  from
Acraephnium  to  the  Copaic  Lake  must,  at  least  when  the  lake  was  full,
hax'e  lain  across  this  plain  ;  and  in  the  second  place  we  know  from  an
inscription  which  has  already  been  referred  to  (C  /.  G,  G,S,  i.  Na  2712)
that  in  the  later  times  of  antiquity,  about  a  century  before  Pausanias's
day,  this  plain  ift*as  indeed  a  plain,  being  protected  from  the  encroach-
ments of  the  lake  by  one  of  the  great  dykes  of  the  Minyans  which  a
patriotic  citizen  of  Acraephnium  had  put  in  repair.  Leake,  howe\^r,
identified  the  Athamantian  plain  with  that  portion  of  the  Copaic  basin


CH.  XXIV  A  THAMANTIAN  PLAIN— COPAE  131

which  lies  to  the  north-west  of  Acraephnium  and  in  which  is  situated  the
rocky  plateau  (lately  an  island)  of  Glc^  This  view  has  been  accepted  and
defended  by  recent  writers,  including  Messrs.  Kambanis,  de  Ridder,  and
Noack,  but  it  is  open  to  two  serious  objections.  First,  this  part  of  the
Copaic  basin  is  distant  from  Acraephnium  half  an  hour's  ride  through
a  hilly  country,  whereas  the  part  of  it  which  we  have  seen  reasons  for
identifying  with  the  Athamantian  plain  lies  immediately  at  the  foot  of
the  hill  of  Acraephnium.  Second,  Uie  section  of  the  Copaic  basin  about
Gla  was  probably  in  antiquity,  as  it  was  till  recently,  not  a  plain  at  all
but  a  part  of  the  lake  or  marsh,  at  least  for  a  great  part  of  the  year.
Forchhanuner  says  that  Gla  was  surrounded  by  water  even  in  the  driest
seasons ;  and  Dodwell,  Leake  himself,  Ross,  and  Vischer  all  found  it
an  island.  Ulrichs  says  that  it  was  an  island  in  winter  and  in  high
floods.  For  these  reasons  it  seems  better  to  adhere  to  the  opinion  of
Ulrichs  and  Bursian  that  the  Athamantian  plain  was  that  branch  of  the
Copaic  basin  which  lies  immediately  to  the  south  of  Acraephnium.

See  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  pp.  295,  306  sq,  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  ReUen  und
Forschungen^  I.  p.  244  sq,  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  213 ;  Kambanis,  in  Bulletin  de
Corresp,  helUnique,  1 6  (1892),  p.  129  sq,^  note ;  de  Ridder,  ib.  18  (1894),  p.  271
note  ;  F.  Noack,  in  MUtheil.  a.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  19  (1894),  p.  470  sqq,

24.  I.  Oopae.  The  site  of  Copae,  now  occupied  by  the  village  of
Topolia  or  Topolias,  is  a  low  hill,  which  rises  in  perfect  isolation,  like
»an  island,  from  the  Copaic  plain  at  a  short  distance  from  the  line  of
cliffs  that  till  lately  formed  the  bank  of  the  lake.  Modem  travellers,
who  visited  the  place  before  the  lake  was  drained,  describe  it  as  a
peninsula  joined  to  the  mainland  only  by  a  narrow  isthmus.  However,
when  I  was  at  Topolia  in  1895  I  was  told  that  till  about  five  years
before  the  little  hill  had  been  an  island  accessible  only  by  boat.  The
hill  may  be  a  third  of  a  mile  long  from  east  to  west  and  150  feet  or  so
high  above  the  plain.  On  the  east,  north-east,  and  north-west  it  is
defended  by  lines  of  high  rocks,  which  on  the  north-east  attain  the
height  of  considerable  cliffs.  Elsewhere  the  slope  of  the  hill,  though
abrupt,  is  not  steep  enough  to  be  difficult.  At  its  northern  foot  there
stretches  a  strip  of  level  ground  some  50  to  100  yards  wide  which
stands  a  few  feet  above  the  level  of  the  plain  and  was  protected  on  its
northern  edge,  towards  the  lake,  by  a  wall  The  line  of  this  wall  can
still  be  traced  for  some  distance  by  a  long  row  of  blocks  at  the  level  of
the  ground  as  well  as  by  many  isolated  stones ;  in  one  place,  immedi-
ately to  the  east  of  the  causeway  which  used  to  connect  the  island  with
the  shore,  the  wall,  built  of  rough  and  rather  small  stones,  is  preserved
to  a  height  of  two  courses  for  a  length  of  six  paces.  This  stretch  of
level  ground,  now  deserted  (for  the  viUage  of  Topolia  stands  on  the  hill),
was  probably  occupied  by  the  lower  city  of  Copae.  It  is  joined  to  what
used  to  be  the  shore  by  a  causeway,  some  100  yards  or  so  long,  roughly
paved  with  large  cobbles  in  the  Turkish  fashion  and  raised  a  few  feet
only  above  the  level  of  the  surrounding  plain.  Some  large  blocks,
which  may  be  ancient,  support  the  causeway,  and  a  few  more  such
blocks  lie  about  it      On  the  northern  slope  of  the  hill,  a  few  yards  to


132  COPAE  BK.  IX.  BOBOTIA

the  west  of  the  point  where  the  line  of  cliffs  begins,  I  found  a  piece  of
rough  polygonal  wall  some  30  paces  long  and  7  feet  high  at  most
The  stones  are  rather  small  and  but  little  hewn ;  the  masonry  is  bad ;
one  block  is  about  4  feet  long.  Farther  to  the  west,  not  many  feet
above  the  plain,  some  more  blocks  of  the  ancient  wall  are  standing.  A
good  many  ancient  inscriptions  are  built  into  the  walls  of  the  numerous
chapels  of  TapoUa;  and  on  what  was  formerly  the  mainland,  across  the
isthmus,  ancient  tombstones  have  been  found,  making  it  probable  that
the  necropolis  of  Copae  was  here.  Strabo  tells  us  (ix.  p.  406)  that
Copae  was  once  in  danger  of  being  swallowed  up  by  the  rising  waters
of  the  lake,  when  a  chasm  suddenly  opened  near  the  town  into  which
the  water  ran  away.  The  chasm  or  kaiavothra  may  be  seen  at  the
foot  of  the  line  of  cliffs  to  the  west  of  the  causeway ;  a  small  branch  of
the  Melas  river  still  flows  into  it.

See  Leake,  Northern  Greece,  2.  p.  306  sq,  ;  Forchhammer,  Hellenika^  p.  179  ;
H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen,  i.  p.  198  sqq.  ;  Fiedler,  Reise,  I.  p.  127  ;
Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.  580;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  212 ;  Baedeker,'  p.  196  j^.
For  the  inscriptions  of  Copae,  see  C  /.  G,  G.  S,  i.  Nos.  2780-2807.  I  vbited
Copae  in  November  1895  and  have  described  the  place  and  its  remains  from  my
own  observation,  except  as  regards  the  inscriptions,  the  tombstones,  and  the
katavothra.  That  a  branch  of  the  Melas  still  flows  into  the  katavothra  is  men-
tioned by  Mr.  Philippson  {Zeitschrifi  der  Gesellschaft  fiir  Erdkunde  zu  Berlin^
29  (1894),  pp.  40,  46  sq,)

24.  I.  This  town  is  mentioned  by  Homer.     See  Iliads  ii.  502.

24.  I.  sanctuaries  of  Demeter  etc.  An  inscription,  built  into  a
church  of  the  Virgin  {Panagia)  at  Topolia  (Copae),  mentions  Demeter
with  the  title  of  Tauropolus — a  title  commonly  bestowed  on  Artemis
rather  than  Demeter  (C.  /.  G.  G.  S.  i.  No.  2703,  Aa/AaT/5a[s]  Tat'poTroXw).

24.  2.  Athens  and  Eleusis.  The  Boeotian  towns  of  these  names
were  situated  beside  the  river  Triton  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  407).  Cp.  Stephanus
Byzantius,  s,v.  'Adrjvai.,  K.  O.  Miiller  supposed  that  the  Cecrops  who
had  a  shrine  at  Haliartus  (ix.  33.  i)  was  the  legendary  founder  of  the
Boeotian  Athens,  just  as  another  Cecrops  was  commonly  thought  to
have  been  the  first  king  of  Athens,  and  a  third  Cecrops  to  have  founded
the  town  of  Athens  in  Euboea ;  though  the  genealogical  connexion  of
the  founders  of  the  Boeotian  and  Euboean  Athens  with  the  Athenian
Cecrops  was  (according  to  K.  O.  Miiller)  an  Athenian  figment.  See
K.  O.  Miiller,  Orchomenos^  p.  116  j^. ;  and  note  on  i.  5.  3.  As  to  the
river  Triton,  see  ix.  33.  7  note.

24.  2.  the  eels.  The  eels  of  the  Copaic  Lake  were  famous  in
antiquity  (Aristophanes,  Achamians,  880  sqq.  ;  cp.  /V/.,  Lysistrata,
35  sq,\  Pollux,  vi.  63).  The  largest  of  the  Copaic  eels  were  sacrificed
by  the  Boeotians  to  the  gods,  being  crowned  with  garlands  and  sprinkled
with  meal  like  regular  sacrificial  victims  (Agatharchides,  referred  to
by  Athenaeus,  vii.  p.  297  d ;  cp.  /V/.,  p.  300  c).  In  the  nineteenth
century,  before  the  lake  was  drained,  great  numbers  of  eels  were  still
caught  in  it,  especially  near  the  bridge  over  the  Melas,  beside  the  rocky
promontory  of  Pyrgos  Hagia  Marina,  They  were  said  to  be  large,
white,  of  delicate  flavour,  and  easily  digested.     In  the  early  part  of  the


CH.  XXIV  HYETTUS—CYRTONES—CORSEA  133


century  they  used  to  be  salted,  pickled,  and  sent  as  delicacies  to  various
parts  of  Greece.  The  people  of  Topolia  (Copae)  caught  large  quantities
of  them,  especially  near  the  chasm  {katavothra).

See  Dodwell,  T^iir,  i.  p.  237;  Leake,  Northern  Greece,  2,  pp.  157,  281;
H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen,  i.  p.  200;  Fiedler,  Reise,  i.  p.  103;
Vischer,  Eritmerungen,  p.  580;  Baedeker,'  p.  193  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  21.

24.  3.  Hyettns.  The  site  of  Hyettus  has  been  determined  by
inscriptions.  The  ruins  are  at  a  place  now  called  Dendra^  about  6
miles  to  the  north-west  of  Copae  ( Topolia)  and  rather  more  than  that
to  the  west  of  the  village  of  Martini.  Excavations  have  laid  bare  the
polygonal  wall  of  the  acropolis  for  a  distance  of  84  yards.  At  the  foot
of  the  acropolis  a  small  chapel  of  St.  Nicholas  is  built  almost  entirely
of  ancient  materials.  From  two  of  the  inscriptions  found  on  the  site
{C,  I.  G.  G.  S,  I.  Nos.  2833  and  2834)  we  learn  that  statues  of  the
emperors  Septimius  Severus  and  Caracalla  were  set  up  by  the  city  of
Hyettus.  From  another  inscription  (C.  /.  G.  G.  S.  i.  No.  2808)  it
appears  that  Aesculapius  was  worshipped  here  under  the  title  of  Saviour
and  that  his  worship  was  cared  for  by  a  Sacred  Senate  or  Council  of
Elders.

See  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUnique,  2  (1878),  pp.  492-507 ;  Baedeker,'  p.  195  ;
Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr.  Graec.^  Nos.  302-306 ;  Collitz,  G,  D,  I,  i.  Nos.  527-551  ;
C  /.  (7.  G.  S,  I.  Nos.  2808-2847.

24.  3.  The  traditions abont  Hyettus and  Olmus  etc.

See  ix.  36.  6  sqg.

24.  3.  he  is  represented by  an  onwronght  stone.     Cp.  vii.

22.  4  note.

24.  4.  Oyrtones on  a  lofty  mountain.     As  the  only  high

mountain  in  this  part  of  Boeotia  is  Mt.  Chlotno  (3546  feet),  to  the  north
of  the  north-western  extremity  of  the  Copaic  Lake,  Leake  conjectured
that  Cyrtones  was  near  the  summit  of  that  mountain,  on  its  eastern  side
(Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  184).  To  the  south-east  of  the  village  of
Martini^  on  a  rocky  hill  about  60  feet  high,  there  are  extensive  remains
of  a  fortified  to\ni.  L.  Ross  conjectured  that  this  might  be  Cyrtones
or  Corsea  {Wanderungen^  i.  p.  98  sq,^  Accordingly  Koutorga  (Revue
arch^ologique^  N.  S.  2  (i860),  p.  394  sq.)  and  Bursian  (Geogr.  i.
p.  212)  identified  the  ruins  with  Cyrtones.  But  since  they  wrote,  the
site  of  Hyettus  has  been  identified ;  and  as  Hyettus  is  more  than  6
miles  from  Martini^  either  the  ruins  at  Martini  are  not  those  of
Cyrtones,  or  Pausanias  is  wrong  in  saying  that  Cyrtones  was  20  fur-
longs from  Hyettus.

24.  5.  Corsea.  Between  Martini  and  Proskyna^  not  far  from  the
latter  village,  are  the  remains  of  an  ancient  city,  which  Leake  thought
might  be  Corsea  (Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  287  ;  cp.  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.
57).  Others  place  Corsea  at  Mellenitsa^  a  village  a  little  to  the  south
of  Halae  (see  below)  (Koutorga,  in  Revue  archhlogique^  N.  S.  2  (i860),
p.  394  sq, ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  192  sq,)\  others  at  Cheliadou,  6  miles
from  Hyettus  and  4^  miles  from  Halae  (Baedeker,^  p.  195).     Corsea  is


134  CORSIAE — HALAE  bk.  ix.  bobotia

not  to  be  confounded  with  the  Corsiae  mentioned  by  Demosthenes  (De
falsa  legaHofUy  p.  385),  Scylax  {Peripius^  38),  Theopompus  (referred
to  by  Harpocration,  s,v,  KofxriaC\  and  Diodorus  (xvi.  58).  Cp.  Suidas,
s.v,  KofxriaL  For  Corsiae,  the  site  of  which  has  been  determined  by
inscriptions  (C.  /.  G,  G,  S,  i.  Nos.  2383,  2385,  2387,  2388)  was  in
south-west  Boeotia,  near  the  bay  of  SarandL  At  the  head  of  the  bay  is
a  small  level,  enclosed  by  lofty  and  luxuriantly-wooded  mountains,  the
southern  spurs  of  Mt.  Helicon.  In  this  beautiful  retreat,  just  under  the
wooded  steeps  of  Mt  Palaeo-  Vouna^  stands  the  large  monastery  of  St.
Taxiarches  (the  archangel  Michael).  On  a  projection  of  the  mountain
which  advances  into  the  plain  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour's  walk  below
the  monastery  and  a  mile  from  the  sea-shore,  are  the  remains  of  Corsiae
or  Chorsiae,  for  the  latter  form  of  the  name  is  supported  by  the  inscrip-
tions. A  flat  summit  forms  the  acropolis,  of  which  the  walls  can  still  be
traced.  The  western  side  of  the  acropolis  terminates  in  a  precipice ;
on  the  eastern  slope  stood  the  lower  town,  of  which  the  walls  can  also
be  traced.  Within  the  enclosure  are  remains  of  terrace-walls  ;  and  to
the  south,  towards  the  harbour,  is  a  narrow  ruined  gate.  The  whole
place  is  barely  a  mile  round.  It  is  about  5^  miles  to  the  west  of  Thisbe
(ix.  32.  4  note).  See  X^ts^sA^  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  514  sqq,  (who
mistook  the  ruins  of  Corsiae  for  those  of  Tipha,  see  ix.  32.  4)  ;  Bursian,
Geogr,  I.  p.  243;  Baedeker, 5  p.  171  ;  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUn,  8
(1884),  p.  408  sq.

24.  5.  the  PlataniuB.  This  is  probably  the  large  stream  now
called  Rheveniko  which  enters  the  bay  of  Hagios  Joannes  Theologos  a
few  miles  to  the  west  of  the  ruins  of  Halae.  See  Koutorga,  in  Revue
archdologique^  N.S.  2  (i860),  p.  392  sq,  \  cp.  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.
57  ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  287  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  p.  192.

24.  5.  Halae.  Traces  of  the  acropolis  and  harbour  of  this  town
are  to  be  seen  close  to  the  sea,  on  the  south-east  side  of  a  bay  called
the  bay  of  Hagios  Joannes  Theologos  from  a  church  of  that  name  which
stands  a  little  to  the  south-west  of  the  ruins.  These  ruins  are  situated
on  a  terrace  a  few  feet  high  ;  they  form  an  elongated  parallelogram,  of
which  the  south-east  side  is  washed  by  the  sea.  This  terrace  seems  to
have  been  the  acropolis.  The  walls  are  well  preserved  on  the  south  and
west ;  there  are  two  round  towers  and  one  square  one.  Two  stone
jetties  project  into  the  sea  enclosing  a  small  port.  See  especially  Kou-
torga, in  Revue  archiologique  N.S.  2  (i860),  pp.  390-394;  also  Leake,
Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  288  ;  L.  Ross,  Wanderungcn^  i.  p.  98  ;  Bursian,
Geogr.  I.  p.  192  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  195.  Halae  was  destroyed  by  Sulla,
but  the  remnant  of  the  population  afterwards  returned  to  it  (Plutarch,
Sulla^  26).  In  the  time  of  Strabo  (ix.  p.  425)  as  well  as  of  Pausanias
it  was  the  frontier  town  of  Boeotia  in  this  direction.

25.  I.  Close  to  the  Neistan  gate  of  Thebes  etc.  After  describing
the  city  of  Thebes,  Pausanias  described  the  road  which,  starting  from  the
Proetidian  gate,  led  north-eastward  to  Chalcis,  etc.  (ix.  18.  i-ix.  22.  7).
Then  he  returned  to  Thebes  and  described  the  road  leading  northward
to  Acraephnium,  etc.  (ix.  23.  i-ix.  24.  5).  He  now  returns  to
Thebes  and  follows  the  road  which  leads  from  the  Neistan  gate  west-


CH.  XXV  PINDAR'S  HOUSE  135

ward  to  the  sanctuary  of  the  Cabiri,  Onchestus,  and  Thespiae  (ix.  25.
i-ix.  26.  8).  As  Pausanias,  following  this  route,  crossed  the  Dirce
after  he  had  quitted  the  Neistan  gate  (§  3),  it  appears  that  the  Neistan
gate  was  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Dirce,  not  on  the  western  side  as
Mr.  Fabricius  supposes  (see  note  on  ix.  8.  4).  Further,  it  is  clear  that
Pindar's  house  (§3)  must  have  been  outside  the  walls,  not  inside  them,
as  Mr.  Fabricius  supposes  ( Theben^  P*  25  sq,)  For  after  having  completed
his  description  of  the  city  of  Thebes  in  the  seventeenth  chapter  of  the
book  it  is  very  unlikely  that  Pausanias  would  now  return  to  the  interior
of  the  city  to  mention  Pindar's  house,  etc.  His  method  with  regard  to
Thebes  and  the  roads  leading  from  it  is  exactly  analogous  to  his  method
of  describing  Megalopolis  and  the  roads  leading  from  it  After  he  had
described  the  city  of  Megalopolis  he  described  separately  each  of  the
roads  which  led  from  it     See  viii.  30-44.

25.   I.  MenceceuB slew  h^mgAlf  etc.     According  to  Euripides

(P/ioemss£u^  911  sqq,)  and  ApoUodorus  (iii.  6.  7)  it  was  the  soothsayer
Tiresias,  not  the  Delphic  oracle,  who  declared  that  Thebes  could  only
be  saved  by  the  voluntary  death  of  Menoeceus.

25.  I.  there  grows  a  pomegranate-tree.     See  note  on  ii.  17.  4.

25.  2.  Hera  was  beguiled  etc.     Cp.  Diodonis,  iv.  9.

25.  3.  Pindar's  house  etc.  Pindar's  house  would  seem  to  have
been  outside  the  walls  of  Thebes,  to  the  west  of  the  Dirce.  See  note
on  §  I.  In  the  life  of  Pindar  by  Thomas  Magister  it  is  said  that  the
poet  '*  dwelt  in  Thebes,  having  a  house  near  the  sanctuary  of  Rhea,  the
Mother  of  the  Gods  "  {Biographi  Graeciy  ed.  Westermann,  p.  99).  The
scholiasts  on  Pindar,  Pyth.  iii.  137-139,  mention  that  the  poet  dedicated
a  sanctuary  of  Rhea  and  Pan  beside  his  house.  It  is  said  that  when
Alexander  the  Great  destroyed  Thebes,  he  spared  Pindar's  house.  The
poet's  biographers  tell  a  story  of  a  similar  forbearance  exercised  by  the
Lacedaemonians  on  an  occasion  when  they  are  said  to  have  burned  the
rest  of  Thebes.  See  Biogr,  Graeci,  ed.  Westermann,  pp.  93,  99,  102  ;
Arrian,  Anabcisis^  i.  9.  10  ;  Dio  Chrysostom,  Or.  ii.  vol.  i.  p.  27,  ed.
Dindorf;  cp.  Plutarch,  Alexander^  11  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und
Forschungetiy  2.  p.  21.

25.  4.  Hercules cut  off  the  noses  of  the  heralds  etc    The

story,  according  to  ApoUodorus  (ii.  4.  11),  was  this.  In  the  precinct  of
Poseidon  at  Onchestus,  Perieres  the  charioteer  of  Menoeceus  had  struck
with  a  stone  and  mortally  wounded  Clymenus,  king  of  the  Minyans  of
Orchomenus.  The  dying  Clymenus  charged  his  son  Erginus  to  avenge
his  death.  So  Erginus  marched  against  Thebes  and  compelled  the
Thebans  to  agree  that  they  would  pay  him  a  tribute  of  100  oxen  every
twenty  years.  Meeting  the  heralds  of  Orchomenus  on  their  way  to
demand  the  tribute,  Hercules  cut  off  their  ears,  noses,  and  hands,  tied
the  severed  members  about  the  necks  of  the  mutilated  men,  and  mock-
ingly bade  them  take  back  this  tribute  to  their  king.

25.  5.  a  grove  of  Cabirian  Demeter.  Pausanias  is  now  follow-
ing the  road  which  led  from  Thebes  westward  to  Onchestus.  About  3
miles  to  the  west  of  Thebes,  at  the  northern  foot  of  the  line  of  low  hills
which,  running  east  and  west  forms  the  southern  boundary  of  the  plain.


136  SANCTUARY  OF  THE  CABIRI        bk.  ix.  boeotia

there  is  a  conspicuous  eikonostasion  or  oratory  of  St.  Nicholas ;  it  is
dearly  the  remnant  of  a  Christian  chapel  and  rests  upon  ancient  founda-
tions. This  is  supposed  to  be  the  site  of  the  grove  of  Cabirian  Demeter.
Its  distances  from  Thebes  and  from  the  sanctuary  of  the  Cabiri  (the  site
of  which  has  been  ascertained,  see  below)  agree  feirly  with  the  distances
given  by  Pausanias.  See  Mittheil,  d,  arch,  Inst  in  Athen^  13  (1888),
p.  84  sq,

25.  5.  the  sanctuary  of  the  OabirL  The  sanctuary  of  the  Cabiri
was  discovered  and  partially  excavated  by  German  archaeologists  in
the  winter  of  1 887-1 888.  It  is  situated  about  4  miles  to  the  west  of
Thebes,  in  a  small  valley  of  the  low  range  of  hills  which  bounds  the
Teneric  plain  on  the  south.  The  neighbourhood  is  now  called  Dharcu
To  reach  the  spot  from  Thebes  we  take  the  carriage-road  which  goes  to
Lebadea.  The  road  descends  northward  into  the  plain,  then  turns  to
the  west,  passes  through  the  suburb  of  Pyri^  and  skirts  the  northern  foot
of  the  low  chain  of  hills  which  extends  westward  fi'om  Thebes  all  the  way
to  Mount  Helicon.  Across  the  treeless  plain  on  the  north-west  rises  a
group  of  bare  low  rounded  hills,  of  which  the  somewhat  higher  summit
on  the  west  (Mount  Phaga)  is  the  Mountain  of  the  Sphinx.  After  about
half  an  hour's  drive  the  road  to  Thespiae  diverges  to  the  left  (southward)
from  the  road  to  Lebadea  and  enters  a  long  valley  which  runs  south-
westward  through  the  hills  that  bound  the  plain  on  the  south.  In  the
next  valley  to  the  west  of  that  through  which  the  carriage-road  goes
to  Thespiae  is  the  sanctuary  of  the  Cabiri.  It  is  a  small  valley  or  hollow
in  the  hills  opening  northward  on  the  Teneric  plain  and  traversed  by
the  bed  of  a  brook  which  is  generally  dry  and  choked  with  bro^^-n
thistles.  The  hills  on  either  side  are  low,  bare,  and  treeless.  To  the
north  you  look  down  the  little  valley  and  across  the  Teneric  plain  to  the
group  of  low  rounded  hills  already  mentioned.  The  spot  is  quiet,
solitary,  and  sequestered.

The  sanctuary  lies  on  the  right  or  east  bank  of  the  brook.  It  has
not  been  completely  excavated ;  a  number  of  trenches  have  been  dug
exposing  isolated  pieces  of  u*all.  These  ^*alls  are  constructed  of
squared  blocks  laid  in  horizontal  courses,  and  are  standing  to  a  height
of  from  two  to  four  courses  (6  feet).  The  stone  is  a  soft  crumbling
sandstone  which  you  can  pull  to  pieces  uith  your  hands.  The  greatest
length  of  the  sanctuary  from  north  to  south  is  40  paces ;  its  greatest
breadth  from  east  to  xa-est  is  23  paces.  But  beyond  the  sanctuar>'  to
the  south  there  is  a  quadrangular  pit,  the  sides  of  which  are  lined  with
masonry  three  courses  high.  A  good  many  coarse  thick  potsherds  lie
beside  it  as  if  they  had  been  excavated  here.  I  was  unable  to  make
out  the  plan  of  the  sanctuar>',  which  appeared  to  me  quite  unlike  that
of  an  ordinary  Greek  temple.  Instead  of  a  single  large  shrine  there
seems  to  ha\»e  been  a  number  of  small  rooms.  The  German  archaeolo-
gists, howe\*er,  who  exca\*ated  the  sanctuar>%  succeeded  in  making  out
the  plan  of  the  temple.     Their  account  of  it  is  as  follo^^^-s.

The  remains  of  the  temple  date  from  three  different  periods — the
Greek  period,  the  Maccilonion  period,  and  the  Roman  period.

( I )  The  remains  of  the  itrcek  temple  are  \-er\-  scant)* :  they  consist


CH.  XXV  SANCTUARY  OF  THE  CABIRI  137


only  of  a  polygonal  wall  forming  a  curve  in  what  was  afterwards  the
cella.  This  curved  wall  may  have  been  part  of  the  apse  of  the  earliest
temple  ;  for  the  excavations  at  Samothrace  have  shown  that  an  apse  was
not  unknown  in  temples  of  the  Cabin.  From  the  style  of  the  wall  it
may  date  from  the  sixth  or  fifth  century  B.c.

(2)  Of  the  second  temple,  built  apparently  in  Macedonian  times  in
the  fourth  century  B.C.,  enough  remains  to  enable  us  to  recognise  the
plan.  The  temple  stood  east  and  west,  and  consisted  of  a  small  fore-
temple  (pronaos\  a  {ore-ce/Ioy  a  ce//af  and  a  back-chamber  (ppistho-
domos).  This  back-chamber  was  entered,  not  from  the  cella^  but  through
two  doors,  one  in  each  of  the  side  walls.  It  appears  never  to  have  been
roofed,  and  it  contained  two  sacrificial  pits  lined  with  slabs  of  stone.
These  pits  are  side  by  side ;  each  is  about  2.10  metres  long,  1.50  metre
deep,  and  .90  metre  wide.  The  plan  of  this  temple  is  unique.  Other
temples  have  been  found  with  a  ior^-cella  as  well  as  a  cella  j  but  no
other  temple  is  known  to  possess  both  a  ior^-cella  and  a  special
sacrificial  chamber.  From  what  Pausanias  says  below  (§  10)  we  may
perhaps  infer  that  the  old  temple  was  burnt  during  Alexander's  invasion
in  335  B.C  and  rebuilt  shortly  afterwards.

(3)  The  temple  was  rebuilt  in  the  Roman  period,  but  the  plan  of
the  previous  temple  was  retained,  except  that  the  iox^cella  was  now
merged  in  the  cella.  Part  of  the  pedestal  which  supported  the  statue
of  the  god  in  the  cella  is  still  in  its  place.  From  the  length  of  the
pedestal  it  would  seem  that  the  god  was  represented  reclining  on  a
couch,  as  he  is  depicted  on  vases  found  in  the  sanctuary.

The  temple  was  of  the  Doric  order ;  it  was  prostylos  tetrastylos^  i.e.
it  had  four  columns  on  the  east  front,  but  no  columns  at  the  sides.

Thousands  of  painted  potsherds  and  terra-cotta  figures  were  found
in  the  course  of  the  excavations.  Almost  half  of  the  potsherds  are  of
local  Boeotian  manufacture.  The  figures  on  these  Boeotian  vases  are
painted  dark  on  a  light  ground  ;  they  are  mostly  drawn  in  a  style  of  broad
humour  or  caricature.  On  one  potsherd  the  Cabir  (in  the  singular,
KABIP02)  is  represented  reclining,  with  a  goblet  in  his  outstretched
right  hand  ;  in  front  of  him  stands  a  boy  (Trais),  his  son,  with  a  jug  in
his  right  hand,  with  which  he  is  about  to  draw  wine  from  a  large  vessel.
The  terra-cotta  figures  represent  men,  bulls,  swine,  rams,  he-goats,  and
lions.  Numerous  votive  offerings  of  bronze  and  lead  were  also  found  ;
hundreds  of  them  represent  bulls ;  a  few  represent  he-goats.  The
bronze  figures  are  of  good  workmanship  and  may  date  from  the  first  half
of  the  fifth  century  B.c.  Many  of  them  bear  votive  inscriptions  ;  these
dedications  are  generally  to  the  Cabir  (always  in  the  singular)  or  to  his
son  or  to  both  together  (r<^  Ka^Si/x^  Kai  r<j)  TratSi  rov  Ka/Sipov ;  see
HermeSy  25(1 890),  p.  4).  There  were  also  found  a  number  of  objects
of  a  peculiar  shape,  some  made  of  terra-cotta,  others  of  bronze.  They
appear  to  be  humming-tops  (oTpopiXoi) ;  for  they  are  shaped  like  tops
and  an  inscription  found  at  the  sanctuary  (C.  /.  G.  G.  S,  i.  No.  2420)
mentions  that  a  certain  woman  named  Ocythoa  dedicated  four  dice,  a
humming-top,  a  whip,  and  a  torch,  all  of  silver  and  weighing  five
drachms.      Dice  and  a  humming-top  were  among  the  playthings  by


138  SANCTUARY  OF  THE  CABJRI        bk.  ix.  bobotia

which  the  Titans  beguiled  the  youthful  Dionysus  (Clement  of  Alescandria,
Protrept  1 7  sq,^  p.  1 5,  ed.  Potter).

See  Mittheil,  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athene  12  (1887),  pp.  269-271  ;  id,^  13  (1888),
pp.  81-99.  Ill  sq,f  412-428;  AeXWoi'  d/}xatoXo7(ir^',  1888,  pp.  I4-17,  62  sq.  %
Baedeker,^  p.  170;  Guide -Joanne,  2.  p.  15.  I  visited  the  sanctuary,  loth
November  1895,  and  have  described  it  partly  from  personal  observation.

The  Louvre  possesses  a  small  bronze  figure  of  a  bull  bearing  the
inscription :  Aair(i)vS[as]  dvWrjKe  rtai  UpQi  Ka^eiptai.  "  Daetondas
dedicated  (this  bull)  to  the  sacred  Cabir"  (P.  Girard,  *Un  noaveau
bronze  du  Kabirion,'  Revue  archdologique^  3me  S^rie,  18  (1891),  pp.
158-162,  with  pi.  XX.;  Classical  Review^  6  (1892),  p.  185).  This
bronze  bull,  which  was  acquired  only  recently  by  the  Louvre,  no  doubt
came  from  the  sanctuary  of  the  Cabiri  near  Thebes,  for  in  that  sanctuary
three  other  bronze  bulls  dedicated  by  Daetondas  to  the  Cabir  have  been
discovered  (C.  /.  G,  G,  S.  i.  Nos.  2457,  3575,  3576).  As  to  the
worship  of  the  Cabiri  in  Boeotia,  see  O.  Kern,  <  Die  boiotischen  Kabiren,'
Hermes^  25  (1890),  pp.  1-16.  Mr.  Kern  thinks  that  the  Boeotian
worship  of  the  Cabiri  was  derived  from  Athens ;  he  relies  partly  on  a
statement  of  Pausanias  (iv.  i.  7).  Cp.  H.  B.  Walters,  in  Journal  oj
Hellenic  Studies^  13  (1892-3),  pp.  84-87.

26.  I.  a  plain  called  after  a  Boothsayer  Tenerus.  Cp.  note  on
ix.  10.  6.  The  plain  is  monotonous  and  destitute  of  trees  and  houses.
It  is  bordered  on  the  south  by  a  line  of  gently-sloping  heights,  and  on
the  north  by  the  rugged  sides  of  Mt.  Phaga,  The  soil  is  fertile,  and
in  summer  the  whole  plain  as  far  as  Thebes,  as  well  as  the  long  slopes
of  the  hills  on  the  south,  are  for  the  most  part  one  continuous  corn-field,
without  a  single  fence.  See  Leake,  Norl/iem  Greece^  2.  p.  215  sq.  ',
Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  P*  5^1  sq,

26.  I.  a  great  sanctuary  of  Hercules.  Half  an  hour  to  the  west
of  the  sanctuary  of  the  Cabiri,  at  the  point  where  the  southern  chain
of  hills  advances  farthest  into  the  plain,  there  are  some  foundations,
built  of  squared  blocks  of  limestone.  Fragments  of  vases,  tiles,  and
terra-cottas  lie  scattered  round  about  in  the  fields.  These  may  be  the
remains  of  the  sanctuary  of  Hercules.  See  Mittheil,  d,  arch.  Inst,  in
Athen^  13  (1888),  p.  85  sq,

26.  2.  the  mountain  fh)m  which  they  say  the  Sphinx  etc.  This
is  the  rocky  mountain  now  called  Phaga  ( 1 860  feet  high),  which  rises,
bare,  rugged,  and  grey,  from  the  Teneric  plain,  at  the  south-eastern
comer  of  what  used  to  be  the  Copaic  Lake.  The  Boeotian  name  of  the
moimtain  seems  to  have  been  Phicium  {^Ikiov  or  4>ik€iov),  from  Phix
(^ij),  the  Boeotian  form  of  Sphinx.  See  Apollodorus,  iii.  5.  8  ;  Hesiod,
Shield  oJ Hercules,  33  ;  id,  Theog,  326 ;  Tzetzes,  SchoL  on  Lycophron,
1465;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v,  ^ikciov;  Leake,  Northern  Greece,  2.
p.  215  ;  L.  Ross,  Wanderungen,  i.  p.  25  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.
561  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  231  ;  Mittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,  13
(1888),  p.  86.

The  riddle  of  the  Sphinx  u'as  :  What  is  that  which  on  earth  is  two-
footed,  three-footed,  and  four-footed,  and  which  is  weakest  when  it  has


CH.  XXVI  THE  SPHINX— ONCHESTUS  139

most  feet  ?  Answer — A  man,  for  in  infancy  he  crawls  on  all  fours  and
in  old  age  he  supports  his  steps  with  a  staff.  This  riddle,  with  the
answer,  is  prefixed  to  the  MSS.  of  Sophocles's  Oedipus  Tyrannus^  and
is  quoted  or  referred  to  by  ancient  ^Titers  and  scholiasts.  See  Poetae
Scemci  Graeci^  ed.  Dindoif,  p.  33  ;  Athenaeus,  x.  p.  456  b;  Schol.  on
Euripides,  PAoenissae^  argum.  (vol.  i.  p.  243  sq.  ed.  £.  Schwartz)  and
on  V.  50 ;  Tzetzes,  Schol .  on  Lycophron^  7 ;  Anthologia  Palatina^  xiv.
64  ;  Apollodonis,  iii.  5.  8  ;  Plutarch,  De  amore^  iii.  5,  vol.  5,  p.  45,
ed.  Diibner.  The  riddle  is  said  to  be  current,  in  a  slightly  different
form,  among  the  Mongols  of  the  Selenga.  "  Question — Uglo  durbo^
edur  dunda  khoyir^  udesi  gurbaf  Morning,  four;  noon,  two  ;  evening,
three.  Answer — A  man"  (Latham,  Descriptive  Ethnology ^  i.  p.  325).
A  Gascon  story  tells  how  a  great  beast  with  a  human  head  dwelt  in  a
cave  full  of  gold,  of  which  it  promised  the  half  to  him  who  could  read
three  riddles.  Those  who  could  not  read  them  were  devoured  by  the
monster.  At  last  a  poor  young  man,  anxious  to  win  the  gold  that  he
might  marry  his  lady  love,  answers  the  questions,  slays  the  monster,
and  carries  off  the  gold.  One  of  the  riddles  propounded  by  the  monster
was  this :  <<  At  sunrise  it  creeps,  like  the  serpents  and  worms.  At  noon
it  walks  on  two  legs  like  the  birds.  At  sunset  it  goes  away  on  three
legs."     See  Blad^,  Contes  populaires  de  la  Gascogne^  i.  pp.  3-14.

26.  3.  the  oracle  that  had  been  given  to  Oadinus  etc.     See  note
on  ix.  12.  I.

26.  3.  the  Delphic  oracle  referred  only  to  Epicaste  etc     See

ix.  5.  10.

26.  5.  the  mine  of  a  city  Onchestns.  Two  great  plains  of
Boeotia — the  Theban  and  the  Copaic — are  separated  by  a  low  ridge
which  connects  the  Sphinx  Mountain  {Phagd)  with  the  roots  of  Helicon.
On  the  summit  of  this  ridge,  and  on  the  south  side  of  the  road,  there  is
a  small  piece  of  ancient  Greek  wall,  consisting  of  only  two  or  three
stones  in  their  places.  The  direction  of  the  foundation  is  oblique  to  the
road.  On  the  height  on  either  side  are  many  stones  in  the  ploughed
land,  indications  of  an  ancient  site,  which  archaeologists  are  agreed  is
that  of  Onchestus.  See  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  213  sqq, ;  L.
Ross,  Wanderungen,  i.  p.  25  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.  561  ;  Bursian,
Geogr.  I.  p.  231  sq,\  Baedeker,^  p.  170;  Guide  Joanne^  2.  p.  15.
Strabo  tells  us  (ix.  p.  412)  that  Onchestus  stood  in  a  bare  situation  on  a
height,  beside  the  Copaic  lake  and  the  Teneric  plain :  he  says  that  the
Amphictyonic  assembly  used  to  meet  there.  In  the  Macedonian  period
the  diet  of  the  Boeotian  confederacy  appears  to  have  assembled  at
Onchestus,  probably  in  the  sanctuary  of  Poseidon  (see  below) ;  for  in-
scriptions of  Megara  and  Aegosthena,  engraved  at  times  when  these
towns  belonged  to  the  Boeotian  confederacy,  are  dated  by  "  the  archon
at  Onchestus,''  by  which  is  meant  the  federal  archon  of  Boeotia
(C.  /.  G.  G,  S,  I.  Nos.  27,  28,  209-212,  214-218,  220-222).  See  Foucart,
in  Bulletin  de,  Corr,  helUnique^  4  (1880),  p.  83  sq,  ;  G.  Gilbert,  Griech.
Staatsalterthiimer^  2.  p.  53  ;  Dittenberger,  on  C.  /.  G.  G.  S,  1.  No.  27.

26.  5.  a  temple  and  iinage  of  Onchestian  Poseidon  etc.     Homer
speaks  of  "Sacred  Onchestus,  Poseidon's  beauteous  grove"  (/Had,  ii.


140  THESPIAE  bk.  ix.  bobotia

506).  The  grove  was  bare  and  treeless  at  the  beginning  of  our  era
(Strabo,  ix.  p.  412).  A  mode  of  divination  by  means  of  horses  and
chariots  seems  to  have  been  practised  at  Onchestus.  The  horses  were
left  to  their  own  guidance,  and  if  they  drew  the  chariot  to  the  grove  of
Poseidon,  it  was  a  good  omen.  See  Homer,  Hymn  to  the  Pythian
Apollo^  52-60,  with  Baumeister's  note ;  Bouchd-Leclercq,  Histoire  de  la
divination^  2.  p.  367  sq,  A  coin  of  Haliartus  exhibits,  on  the
reverse,  Poseidon  ad^'ancing  towards  the  right  and  striking  with  his
trident ;  on  the  obverse  is  the  Boeotian  shield  with  a  trident  on  it.
These  types  refer  to  the  worship  of  Poseidon  at  Onchestus.  See  Head,
Coins  of  Boeotia,  p.  46  ;  iV/.,  Historia  numorum^  p.  293.

26.  6.  Thespiae.  The  name  of  this  city  occurs  in  the  singular  form
Thespia  (Homer,  //.  ii.  498 ;  Dionysius,  Descriptio  Graeciaey  100 ;
Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v,  Bejir^ua.),  but  the  plural  form  Thespiae  is
much  more  commonly  employed  by  ancient  writers.  Pausanias  himself
is  not  consistent  in  this  respect ;  in  the  present  passage  he  uses  the
singular  form  (which  in  the  translation,  for  the  sake  of  uniformity,  I
have  turned  into  the  plural),  but  below  (ix.  27.  4)  he  employs  the
plural.  The  city  lay  in  a  plain  at  the  southern  foot  of  the  long
range  of  low  hills  which  extends  from  Mount  Helicon  eastward  to
Thebes  and  Tanagra.  The  site  is  distant  about  3  miles  firom  the
eastern  foot  of  Mount  Helicon.  Overlooking  it  from  the  north  are  the  two
villages  of  Eremokastro  and  Kaskaveii,  situated  on  two  twin  summits  of
the  low  range  and  separated  from  each  other  only  by  the  bed  of  a  stream
which  flows  to  join  the  Thespius  (now  the  Kanavari)  in  the  plain
below.  The  Thespius,  rising  near  Thespiae,  flows  for  a  short  way  in
the  plain  at  the  foot  of  the  low  chain  of  hills,  then  finds  its  way  through
them  in  a  long  narrow  valley  to  the  Theban  plain,  which  it  crosses
north-eastward  to  fall  into  Lake  Hylica  {Liken),  The  modem  carriage-
road  from  Thebes  to  Thespiae,  quitting  the  Teneric  or  Theban  plain  a
little  to  the  east  of  the  sanctuary  of  the  Cabiri,  follows  the  valley  of
the  Thespius  through  the  hills.  The  hills  which  enclose  the  valley  are
low,  bare,  and  rounded ;  the  scenery  is  tame  and  monotonous.  As  we
approach  Thespiae  the  valley  opens  out  into  a  plain,  and  Helicon
appears  towering  up  at  no  great  distance  to  the  south-west,  with  the
Valley  of  the  Muses  nestling  among  its  northern  slopes.  To  the  right
of  the  Valley  of  the  Muses,  and  forming  a  spur  of  Helicon,  rises  the
conical  hill  of  Ascra  crowned  with  its  solitary  tower.  From  Thebes  to
Thespiae  by  the  carriage-road  is  a  drive  of  an  hour  and  a  half.

The  ruins  of  Thespiae,  situated  in  the  plain  on  the  right  or  southern
bank  of  the  stream,  are  very  insignificant  The  only  remains  of  military
architecture  which  survived  to  modem  times  ^\-as  an  oval  enclosure,
scarcely  half  a  mile  in  circumference,  built  of  very  solid  masonry  of  a
regular  kind.  The  masonry  formed  only  a  socle  ;  the  upper  part  of  the
wall  was  perhaps  built  of  unbumt  bricks.  This  fortified  enclosure  was
demolished  in  1890  and  1891  by  two  French  archaeologists,  Messrs.
Jamot  and  de  Ridder,  for  the  sake  of  the  inscriptions  and  other
remains  of  antiquity  which  were  built  into  it.  They  found  about  350
inscriptions  together  vriih  some  pieces  of  sculpture,  and  in  the  interior


CH.  XXVI  THESPIAE  141

of  the  enclosure  the  foundations  of  a  temple  which  from  an  inscription
found  in  its  place  appears  to  have  been  the  temple  of  the  Muses  men-
tioned by  Pausanias  (ix.  27.  5).  Down  to  the  beginning  of  the  nine-
teenth century  all  the  adjacent  ground  to  the  south-east,  like  the  interior
of  the  fortress,  was  strewn  with  ancient  foundations,  squared  stones,  and
other  remains.  The  place  used  to  be  called  Ltuka  (pronounced  Lefka)
from  a  village  of  that  name,  which  no  longer  exists.  Here  Leake  saw
five  or  six  ruined  churches  containing  remains  of  ceilings,  architraves,
columns,  and  plain  quadrangular  blocks,  all  of  white  marble ;  and  he
reports  that  similar  relics  existed  in  all  the  surrounding  villages  and
solitary  churches.  Archaeologists  have  made  short  work  of  most  or
all  of  these  churches  at  Thespiae ;  but  it  is  possible  that  in  some  of
the  more  secluded  districts  a  few  may  survive.  When  I  revisited
Thespiae  in  November  1895  I  found  a  good  many  traces  of  recent
excavations  among  the  fields  on  the  southern  side  of  the  high-road  and
distant  from  it  perhaps  100  to  300  yards.  Among  these  traces  were
hewn  stones,  large  blocks  of  pedestals  with  marks  of  the  attachment
of  statues  on  their  tops,  a  small  piece  of  an  unfluted  column,  etc.

In  1882  the  Greek  archaeologist  Mr.  Stamatakes  discovered  remains
of  a  large  stone  lion  about  1200  yards  to  the  east  of  Thespiae,  on  the
right  bank  of  the  Thespius  {Kanavari)^  beside  the  path  which  leads
from  Eremokastro  to  Kokla  (Plataea).  The  lion  resembles  the  one
at  Chaeronea,  but  is  much  smaller,  measuring  about  3  metres  (10  feet)
from  the  tail  to  the  neck.  Unlike  the  lion  of  Chaeronea,  which  is
hollow,  the  lion  of  Thespiae  is  solid ;  the  material  is  a  soft  whitish  stone
which  is  quarried  on  Mount  Karanta^  between  Thespiae  and  Creusis.
Only  the  body  and  the  right  hind-leg  of  the  statue  are  preserved.  The
animal  was  seated  looking  to  the  north  with  his  tail  between  his  legs.
Further  excavations  brought  to  light  the  scattered  blocks  of  the  pedestal
and  proved  that  the  lion,  raised  on  a  pedestal,  had  occupied  the  middle
of  the  north  wall  of  an  enclosure  32  metres  (105  feet)  long  by  24  metres
(79  feet)  wide,  within  which  were  buried  the  ashes  of  many  men.  Only
the  northern  and  eastern  walls  of  the  enclosure  were  found ;  it  is
possible  that  they  served  to  support  a  tumulus  which  may  have  been
raised  over  the  dead.  Within  the  enclosure  at  a  depth  of  about  2  feet
below  the  surface  was  found  a  layer  of  broken  pottery,  terra-cotta
statuettes,  and  scrapers,  some  of  iron,  some  of  bronze.  Below  this
layer,  which  was  about  1 8  inches  thick,  was  found  another  layer,  from
I  to  3  inches  thick,  composed  of  ashes  and  charcoal,  together  with
bones,  pottery,  terra-cotta  statuettes,  bronze  and  iron  scrapers,  and  iron
nails,  all  broken  and  all  showing  marks  of  having  been  burnt.  Further,
there  were  found,  about  8  feet  to  the  north  of  the  lion,  nine  tablets  of
dark  limestone  in  a  row,  inscribed  with  the  names  of  loi  men.  There
can  be  no  doubt  that  these  are  the  names  of  men  who  fell  in  some
battle  and  whose  remains  were  interred  here,  with  the  stone  lion
set  over  their  grave  as  a  symbol  of  valour.  As  the  inscriptions  appear
to  belong  to  the  second  h^f  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.,  it  is  probable  that
we  have  here  the  remains  of  the  men  who  fell  in  the  battle  of  Tanagra
(424  B.C.),  for  we  know  from  Thucydides  (iv.  96  and   133)  that  the


142  THESPIAE  BK.  IX.  BOEOTIA

Thespian  losses  in  that  battle  were  very  heavy.  Mr.  Stamatakes
formerly  conjectured  that  the  grave  contained  the  ashes  of  the  Thespians
who  fell  at  Plataea  in  479  B.C. ;  but  the  character  of  the  letters  of  the
inscription  seems  to  exclude  so  early  a  date.  See  P.  Stamatakes,  in
IIpaicrtKa  r^s  * Kpyp.io\oyitn\%  'Eraipias,  1882,  pp.  67-74;  ^>  ui
'E<ti7jfi.€pU  dpxdi'OkoyiKyjj  1883,  p.  191  sgg. ;  A.  Kirchhofi^  Siudien  sur
Geschichte  des  griechischen  AlphabetSy^  p.  140  sq. ;  C.  I.  G,  G,  S.  i.  No.
1888  ;  CoUitz,  G,  D.  I,  i.  No.  791  a-h.

Among  the  deities  whose  worship  at  Thespiae  is  attested  by
inscriptions  though  not  mentioned  by  Pausanias  are  the  Bull  God,  the
Dioscuri,  Hermes,  Artemis,  Demeter,  the  Great  Mother,  Gracious  Zeus,
the  Good  Demon,  Themis,  Aesculapius,  and  Isis  (C  /.  G,  G.  S.  i.  Nos.
1787,  1792,  1793,  1809,  1810,  1811,  1812,  1814,  1815,  1816,  1824,
1867,  1869,  187 1,  1872).  Further,  the  inscribed  bases  of  many  statues
of  Roman  emperors,  from  Julius  Caesar  to  Valentinianus  and  Valens,
have  been  found  at  or  near  Thespiae  (C  /.  G.  G.  S.  i.  Nos.  1 835-1845,
1848,  1849).  T^^s  goes  to  show  that  down  to  late  imperial  times
Thespiae  subsisted  as  a  town  of  some  size.  At  the  beginning  of  our
era  Thespiae  and  Tanagra  are  said  to  have  been  the  only  considerable
cities  left  in  Boeotia  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  403).  At  an  earlier  time  the
Thespians  had  the  reputation  of  being  poor  and  proud.  They  looked
down  on  men  who  got  their  living  by  handicraft  or  by  fsirming ;  hence
most  of  them  were  needy  and  owed  large  sums  to  the  Thebans  (Hera-
clides  Ponticus,  De  rebus  publicis^  43).  They  are  said,  too,  to  have
been  contentious  and  quarrelsome  (Dicaearchus,  DescripHo  Graeciae^  i.
25,  in  Geographi  Graeci  Minares^  ed.  Miiller,  i.  p.  104).

On  Thespiae  and  its  remains  see  Wheler,  Jourtuy^  p.  470  (who  mistook  the
ruins  for  those  of  Thisbe) ;  Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  p.  252  sqq,  ;  Leake,  Northern
Greece^  2.  p.  478  sqq,  ;  Welckcr,  Tagebuch^  2.  p.  33  sq.  ;  vischer,  Erinnemngen,
p.  553  sq,  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  237  sqq.  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  173  J^.  ;  Guide-Joanne^
2.  p.  28  sa.  ;  Mittheil.  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  3  (1878),  pp.  311*313  ;  Bulletin  de
Corresp.  nelUnique^  8  (1884)/ pp.  409-416  (inscriptions);  id.^  9  (loiSS),  pp.  403-
423  (inscriptions);  f</.,  15  (1891),  p.  659  sq.  (excavations  of  Messrs.  Jamot  and
de  Ridder);  id.y  18  (1894),  pp.  201-215  (sarcophagus  of  the  Greek  period  with
reliefs  representing  some  of  the  labours  of  Hercules) ;  id.^  19  (1895),  pp.  321-385
(inscriptions).  I  visited  Thespiae  in  1890  and  1895.  On  the  latter  occasion  I
copied  a  few  inscriptions  which  seemed  to  have  been  brought  to  light  by  recent
excavations  and  have  not,  so  far  as  I  know,  been  hitherto  published.  Thus  on
the  site  of  a  chapel,  to  the  south  of  the  high-road,  I  found  a  pedestal  3  ft.  5  in.
high  and  23  inches  wide,  bearing  the  following  inscription  of  the  Roman  age  :

T.  4>Xaot'>(oy  4>(Xe(yov
\Ah»  M6r5aira  4>Xaou-
In,  *A/>xAa,  i)  kvX  Tei/io-
(^a,  rh»  knxT^  dp-

povXijs  Kai  Si^fiov.

This  Titus  Flavius  Mondon,  son  of  Philinus.  and  his  wife  Archeb  or  Timoxena,
arc  both  known  from  other  inscriptions  found  at  Thespiae.  See  C.  I.  G.  G.  S.  i.
Nos.  1830  (with  Dittenbcrger*s  note),  1S67,  2520,  2521.  On  another  stone  at  the
same  place  I  copied  the  following  inscription  :

Eni
AP2IN0H.


CH.  XXVI  A  FOLK-TALE  143

26.  6.  Thespius,  a  descendant  of  ErechtheuB.  Cp.  Diodorus,  iv.  29.

26.  7  once  upon  a  time a  dragon  was  ravaging  the  city

etc  The  following  story  belongs  to  a  widely-diffused  group  of  folk-tales
which  tell  how  a  monster  is  appeased  by  the  periodic  sacrifice  of  a
human  victim,  till  a  champion  appears,  who  slays  the  monster  and
rescues  the  destined  victim.  The  common  form  of  the  story  is  this.
A  certain  country  is  infested  by  a  many-headed  serpent,  dragon,  or  other
monster,  which  would  destroy  the  whole  people  if  a  human  victim
(generally  a  virgin)  were  not  delivered  up  to  it  annually,  weekly,  or
daily.  Many  victims  have  perished,  and  at  last  it  has  fallen  to  the  lot
of  Uie  king's  own  daughter  to  be  the  victim.  She  is  exposed  to  the
monster ;  but  the  hero  of  the  tale,  generally  a  young  man  of  humble
birth,  interposes  in  her  behalf,  slays  the  monster,  and  receives  as  his
reward  the  hand  of  the  princess.  This  is  the  general  scheme  of  the
story,  but  in  the  various  versions  of  it  there  are  many  differences  of
detail     To  this  group  of  stories  belong  the  following  tales  :

(i)  The  story  of  Euthymus  and  the  Hero.     Paus.  vi.  6.  7  sqq,

(2)  The  story  of  Cleostratus  and  Menestratus  here  told  by  Pau-
sanias.

"    (3)  The  story  of  Perseus  and  Andromeda.     Apollodorus,  ii.  4.  3.
Ovid,  Metam,  iv.  669  sqq.

(4)  The  story  of  Hercules  and   Hesione.     Apollodorus,   ii.    5.  9.
Diodorus,  iv.  42.

(5)  The  story  of  Sybaris.     Antoninus  Liberalis,  8.     See  note  on
X.  8.  8.

All  these  five  are  ancient  Greek  versions  of  the  tale.

(6)  A  modem  Greek  version.     Hahn,  Griechische  und  albanesische
Mdrchen^  No.  70,  vol.  2.  p.  55  sqq,

(7)  Another  modem   Greek  version.      Legrand,   Contes  populaires
grecs^  p.  169  sqq,

(8)  An  Albanian  version.     Hahn,  op.  cit.  No.  98,  vol.  2.  p.  114  sq.

(9)  A  Wallachian  version.     Schott,  Walachische  Maerchen^  No.  10,
p.  140  sqq.

(10)  An  Italian  version.     Basile,  Pentamerone^  First  day.  Seventh
tale,  vol.  I.  p.  97  sqq,  (Liebrecht's  German  trans.)

(11)  A  modem  Italian  version.     Crane,  Popular  Italian  Tales ^  No.
6,  p.  31  sqq.

{12)  A  Corsican  version.     Ortoli,  Contes  populaires  de  la  Corse,  No.
18,  p.  123  sqq.

(13)  A  Sicilian  version.     Gonzenbach,  Sicilianische  Mdrchen,  No.
40,  vol.  I.  p.  274  sqq.

(14)  A   Breton  version.     S^illot,  Contes  populaires  de  la  Haute-
Bretagne,  No.  11,  p.  79  sqq,

(15)  A  French  version  from  Lorraine.     Cosquin,  Contes  populaires
de  Lorraine,  No.  5,  vol.  i.  p.  61  sqq.

(16)  A  Gaelic  version.     J.  F.  Campbell,  Popular  Tales  of  the  West
Highlcmds,  No.  4,  vol.  i.  p.  ^^  sqq.

(17)  A    Norse   version.     Dasent,  Popular  Tales  from  the  Norse,
<  Shortshanks,'  p.  131  sqq.


144  A  FOLK-TALE  BK.  IX.  bobotia

(i8)  A  Swedish  version.  Cavallius  und  Stephens,  Schwedische  Volks-
sagen  und  Mdrchen^  No.  4,  p.  62  sqq,  (Oberleitoer's  German  trans.)

(19)  A  Danish  version.  Grundtvig,  Ddnische  Volksmdrchen^  First
series  (Leipzig,  1878),  p.  285  sqq,  (Leo's  German  trans.)

(20),  (21),  (22),  (23)  Four  German  versions.  Grimm,  Household
Tales^  No.  60 ;  Kuhn  und  Schwartz,  Norddeutsche  Sagen^  Mdrchen  und
Gebrduche^  p.  340  sqq. ;  J.  W.  Wolf,  Deutsche  Hausmdrchen^  p.  372
sqq, ;  Philo  vom  Walde,  Schlesien  in  Sage  und  Brauch^  p.  8 1  sqq,

(24),  (25)  Two  Tyrolese  versions.  Zingerle,  Kinder  und  Haus-
ntdrcJien  aus  Tirol^  No.  24,  p.  126  sqq,  ;  Schnelier,  Mdrchen  und  Sagen
aus  Wdlschtirol^  No.  39,  p.  116  sq,

(26)  A  Transylvanian  version.  Haltrich,  Deutsche  Volksmarchen
aus  dent  Sachsenlande  in  Siebenbiirgen^^  No.  25  (No.  24  of  the  first  ed.),
p.  103  sqq,

(27),  (28),  (29)  Three  Lithuanian  versions.  Schleicher,  IMauische
Marchen^  Sprichworte^  Rdtsel  und  Lieder^  p.  57  sqq, ;  Leskien  und
Brugman,  Litauische  Volkslieder  und  Mdrchen^  Nos.  14,  16,  pp.  404
sqq,^  407  sqq,

(30)  An  Avar  version.  Schiefher,  Awarische  Texte^  No.  2,  p.
21  sqq,

(31)  A  Kurdish  version.  Prym  und  Socin,  Kurdische  Sammlung^
Erste  Abtheilung,  No.  10,  p.  38  sqq,  (German  trans.)

(32)  A  Berber  version.     Basset,  Contes populaires  Berbh'es^  No.  35,

P-  73  ^9'  (cp.  p.  178  sqq,)

(33)  A  Kabyl  version.  Riviere,  Contes  populaires  de  la  Kabylie^  p.
195  sq,

(34)  A  Senegambian  version.  B^renger-F^raud,  Contes  populaires
de  la  S^ndgambie^  p.  185  sqq, ;  /V/.,  Les  peup lades  de  la  Sfyt/gambie^  p.
169  sqq,

(35)  A  Burmese  version.  Ad.  Bastian,  Die  Volker  des  oestlichen
Asien^  i.  p.  102  sq,

(36)  An  Annamite  version.  Landes,  *  Contes  et  l^endes  annam-
ites,'  No.  4,  in  Cochinchine  Franqaise,  Excursions  et  Reconnaissances^
viii.  No.  20  (Nov.  Decemb.  1884),  p.  302  sq,

(37)  A  Chinese  version.  Dennys,  The  Folk-lore  oj  China^  p.  1 10  sq.
(In  this  ^'ersion  the  dragon,  after  devouring  nine  maidens,  one  each
year,  is  slain  by  the  tenth.)

(38)  A  Japanese  version.  Brauns,  /apamsche  Mdrchen  und  Sagen^
p.  1 1 2  sqq,

(39)»  (4o)>  (41)  Three  Basque  versions.  Webster,  Bcuque  legends,
pp.  22-38.

In  a  considerable  number  of  these  tales  (the  Sicilian,  Gaelic,  Swedish,
Kabyl,  Senegambian,  and  the  ancient  Greek  stories  of  Andromeda
and  Hesione)  the  monster,  who  is  sometimes  described  as  a  serpent,
lives  in  >\*ater,  either  the  sea,  a  lake,  or  a  fountain.  In  other  versions
(the  two  modem  Greek,  the  Albanian,  A\-ar,  Kurdish,  and  Berber)  the
monster,  who  in  these  cases  is  generally  a  serpent,  takes  possession
of  the  springs  of  >»*ater  and  only  allows  the  water  to  flow  or  the  people
to  make  use  of  it  on  condition  of  receiving  a  human  victim.     This


CH.  XXVII  WORSHIP  OF  LOVE  145

reminds  us  of  the  widespread  belief  that  water,  especially  the  water  of
a  spring,  is  guarded  by  a  serpent  or  dragon.  See  note  on  ix.  10.  5.  It
is  possible  that  in  these  stories  there  is  a  reminiscence  of  a  custom  of
periodically  sacrificing  human  victims  to  water-spirits.  Sacrifices  are
annually  offered  to  the  gods  of  the  river  Prah  on  the  Gold  Coast  of
Africa ;  formerly  the  victims  were  two  human  beings,  a  man  and  a
woman  (A.  B.  Ellis,  The  Tski-sfieaking  Peoples  of  the  Gold  Coast^  p.
64  sq, )  The  princes  of  Kaepang,  a  state  in  the  East  Indian  island  of
Timor,  deemed  themselves  descended  from  crocodiles;  and  on  the
coronation  of  a  new  prince  a  solemn  offering  was  presented  to  the
crocodiles  in  presence  of  the  people.  The  offerings  consisted  of  a  pig
with  red  bristles  and  a  young  girl  prettily  dressed  and  decked  with
flowers.  She  was  placed  on  the  river-bank ;  and  the  crocodiles  were
invoked.  One  of  the  beasts  soon  appeared  and  dragged  the  damsel
do^n  into  the  water,  where  it  was  thought  that  he  married  her.  But  if
she  proved  not  to  be  a  maid,  he  brought  her  back.  See  Wilken,  *  Het
animisme,'  De  Indische  Gids,  June  1884,  p.  994  ;  Ad.  Bastian,  Inda-
nesien^  2.  p.  8.  In  the  same  district  girls  were  sometimes  dedicated  at
birth  to  the  crocodiles  and  then,  with  certain  ceremonies,  brought  up
to  be  married  in  time  to  priests  (Bastian,  op,  cit.  2.  p.  11).  It  is  said
that  the  coast  of  Bum,  another  East  Indian  island,  was  once  ravaged
by  a  holy  crocodile,  at  whose  request  the  king's  daughter  was  tied  to  a
post.  The  crocodile  then  dragged  her  down  into  the  water,  and  from
their  union  all  crocodiles  are  descended  (Bastian,  op,  cit,  i.  p.  134).
The  type  of  folk-tale  with  which  this  note  deals  has  been  elaborately
examined  by  Mr.  E.  S.  Hartland  (The  Legend  of  Perseus^  3  vols.
London,  1894- 1896).

26.  8.  The  image  of  Dionysns.  The  worship  of  Dionysus  at
Thespiae  is  attested  by  inscriptions  (C  /.  G.  G.  S,  i.  Nos.  1786,  1794,
1867,  1869;  Collitz,  G,  D,  I,  I.  Nos.  797,  816;  Roehl,  /.  G,  A,  No.
284;  E.  S.  Roberts,  Greek  Epigraphy^  No.  2  ion;  Kaibel,  EpigrammcUa
Graeca^  No.  757  a,  Praef.  p.  xvi.)

27.  I.  the  Thespians  hononr  Loye  the  most.  To  explain  the
Thespian  worship  of  Love  it  was  said  that  a  youth  Narcissus  had  slain
himself  in  a  love  affair  at  Thespiae ;  that  the  flower  of  that  name  had
sprung  from  his  blood  ;  and  that  ever  after  the  Thespians  had  worshipped
Love  and  sacrificed  to  him  both  publicly  and  privately  (Conon,  Narra-
tionesy  24).  The  excavations  of  Messrs.  Jamot  and  de  Ridder  at
Thespiae  in  1 89 1  brought  to  light  a  series  of  marble  statues  of  Love,  of
the  Roman  period,  representing  him  as  an  infant,  sometimes  completely
naked,  sometimes  with  a  mantle  on  his  left  arm,  sometimes  holding  a
goose,  now  standing,  now  seated,  now  crouching  on  his  hams  in  an
attitude  of  which  Phoenician  and  Cypriote  terra-cotta  statuettes  offer
many  examples  (^Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUniqtu^  15  ( 1 89 1 ),  p.  660).  An
inscription  of  Roman  date,  found  at  Vaiay  near  Thespiae,  records  that  a
certain  Philinus,  son  of  Mondon  and  Archela,  "  dedicated  the  image  of
Love  and  repaired  the  sanctuary  and  the  doors  of  the  fore-temple  at  his
own  expense"  {C.  I.  G,  G,  S,  i.  No.  1830;  L.  Stephani,  Reise  durch
einige  Gegenden  des  nordlichen  Griechenlandes^  p.  75).     The  emperor

VOL.  V  L


146  WORSHIP  OF  LOVE  bk.  ix.  boeotia

Hadrian,  having  killed  a  she-bear  with  his  own  hand,  commemorated  his
success  by  dedicating  an  offering  to  Love  at  Thespiae,  accompanying  the
offering  with  some  verses,  apparently  of  his  own  composition,  which  have
been  found  engraved  on  a  block  of  white  marble  between  the  villages  of
Dombrena  and  Eremokastro  {C.  L  G.  G,  S,  i.  No.  1828  ;  Kaibel,
Epigrammata  GraecOy  No.  811).  As  to  the  Greek  worship  of  Love  see
E.  Gerhard,  in  Abhandlungen  of  the  Berlin  Academy  for  1848,  Philolog.
histor.  CI.  pp.  261-298  (reprinted  in  his  Gesammelte  Akademische
Abhandlungen^  2.  pp.  58-93);  cp.  Jacob  Grimm,  in  id,  for  185 1,  pp.
141-156.

27.  I.  an  unwrought  stone.  See  note  on  vii.  22.  4.  Another
primitive  idol  at  Thespiae  was  a  branch  which  was  worshipped  as  an
image  of  Hera  in  her  capacity  as  goddess  of  marriage  (Amobius,
Adversus  Nationes^  vi.  11  coluisse  .  .  .  ramum  pro  Cinxia  Thespios ;
as  to  Cinxia  see  Festus,  p.  63,  ed.  Miiller).

27.  I.  His  worship  is  equally  observed  by  the  people  of  Pariom.
There  was  an  image  of  Love  by  Praxiteles  at  Parium  (Pliny,  Nat,  hist.
xxxvi.  22).  It  is  represented  on  the  coins  of  that  city  from  the  time  of
Antoninus  Pius  downward,  from  which  we  learn  that  the  god  was  por-
trayed as  a  naked  winged  boy,  with  his  right  hand  stretched  out  down-
wards before  him,  his  left  hand  planted  on  his  side,  and  his  head  turned
to  the  left.  The  Princess  of  Wales  possesses  a  Greek  statuette  of  Love,
which  Pro£  Percy  Gardner  considers  to  be  a  copy  of  the  statue  by
Praxiteles  at  Parium.  See  Journal  0/  Hellenic  Studies^  4  (1883),  pp.
266-274;  cp.  Furtwangler,  in  Roscher's  Lexikon^  i.  p.  1358  sgq,\
Overbeck,  Gesch,  d.  griech,  Plasttk^^  2.  p.  50;  Head,  Historia  Numorum^

p.  459.

27.  I.  a  colony  from  Erythrae  etc.  According  to  Strabo  (xiii.  p.
588)  Parium  was  founded  by  the  Milesians,  Erythraeans,  and  Parians.
Coins  and  inscriptions  show  that  the  town  became  a  Roman  colony  in
the  time  of  Augustus  (Smith's  DicL  of  Greek  and  Rom,  Gcog,^  s,v.
*  Parium  ' ;  Head,  Historia  Numorufn^  p.  459).

27.  2.  Ohaos  first  came  into  being  etc.     See  Hesiod,  Theogony,

116  sqq,

27.  3.  Praxiteles made  one  of  Pentelic  marble.     As  to  this

famous  image  of  Love  by  Praxiteles,  see  i.  20.  i  sq.  According  to
Strabo  (ix.  p.  410)  it  was  not  Phryne  but  Glycera  who  received  the
statue  as  a  present  from  her  lover  Praxiteles  and  dedicated  it  at  Thespiae.
But  the  general  voice  of  antiquity  supported  the  claim  of  Phryne
(Athenaeus,  xiii.  p.  591  a ;  AnthoL  Palat,  vi.  260,  xvi.  203-206).  The
image  was  still  at  Thespiae  in  the  time  of  Cicero,  who  says  (In  Vcrr.
iv.  2  and  60)  that  it  was  the  only  thing  which  drew  strangers  to  the
town.  In  Pliny's  time  the  statue  stood  in  the  Schools  of  Octa>'ia  at
Rome  (Pliny,  Nat,  hist,  xxxvi.  22).  The  type  of  the  image  is  not
known  ;  and  among  the  numerous  statues  of  Love  (Eros)  which  have
come  down  to  us,  none  is  recognised  with  any  certainty  as  a  copy  of  the
Thespian  statue.  Prof.  Furtwangler,  however,  conjectures  that  we  have
replicas  of  the  image  in  seven  life-sized  statues  and  four  statuettes  of
Love,  all  copies  more  or  less  exact  of  a  common  original,  which  seems


CH.  XXVII  LOVE  AND  APHRODITE  147

to  have  represented  the  winged  god  with  down-turned  head,  his  left  hand
grasping  a  large  bow,  the  end  of  which  rested  on  the  ground,  while  his
right  hand  hung  at  his  side  either  empty  or  perhaps  holding  an  arrow.
Pro£  Furtwangler  thinks  that  the  original  was  an  early  work  of  Praxi-
teles, executed  about  370-360  B.C.,  and  betraying  the  influence  of
Polyclitus.

See  Bninn,  Gesch.  d,  grieck,  Kunstler^  i.  p.  341 ;  Overbeck,  SchriftquelUn^
Nos.  1 249- 1 26 1  ;  /V/.,  Gcsch,  d,  griech,  Plastik^  2.  p.  49  sq,  ;  Friederichs,  Praxi-
teUSf  pp.  20-24 ;  Stark,  '  Ueber  die  Erosbildungen  des  Praxiteles/  Pericyte  iiber
die  verhandl,  d,  kim  sacks,  Gesell,  d.  Wissen,  zu  Leipzig^  Philolog.  histor.  CI.  18
(1866),  pp.  155-172;  P.  Wolters,  *Die  Eroten  des  Praxiteles,*  Archdologische
Zeiiung,  43  (1885),  PP-  81-98  ;  P.  Gardner,  *  A  statuette  of  Eros,'  Jmmal  of
Hellenic  Studies,  4  (1883),  pp.  266-274 ;  C.  Robert,  Archaeologische  Maerchen,  pp.
160-178;  Baomeister's  Denknidler,  p.  1401  5q,\  Furtwangler,  in  Roscher's
Lexikon,  I.  p.  1360  sq,  ;  /V/.,  Meisterwerke  d,  griech,  Plastik,  pp.  540-546.

The  inscribed  base  of  a  statue  of  a  certain  Thrasymachus  by  Praxi-
teles was  found  at  Lefka  on  the  site  of  Thespiae,  and  is  now  in^  the
museum  at  Eremokastro.  See  C,  /.  G.  G,  S,  i.  No.  1831  ;  Dodwell,
TauTy  2.  p.  513;  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  pi.  xvii.  No.  77  ;  Cauer,
Delectus  Inscr,  Grace?  No.  345  ;  Collitz,  Cr.  Z>.  /.  i.  No.  855  ;  Loewy,
Inschriften  griech,  Bildhauer^  No.  76.

27.  4.  Gains wa4i  despatched  etc.     As  to  Caligula's  death,

see  Suetonius,  Caligula^  56  and  58.

27.  4.  a  copy,  by  the  Athenian  Menodoms.  Pliny  (Nat,  hist,
xxxiv.  91)  mentions  a  Menodoms  in  a  list  of  sculptors  who  made  figures
of  athletes,  armed  men,  hunters,  and  sacrificers.  "  But  as  Pliny's  list  of
artists  seems  to  break  off  in  the  Augustan  age,  the  Menodoms  of
Pausanias  could  be  the  same  with  the  Menodoms  of  Pliny  only  on  the
supposition  that  in  Caligula's  time  the  Thespians  had  replaced  the  lost
statue  by  a  previously-existing  copy  "  (Brunn,  Gesch,  d,  griech,  Kiinstler^
I.  p.  556).

27.  5.  an  Aphrodite.  Prof.  Furtwangler  conjectures  that  the
statue  of  Aphrodite  known  as  the  Venus  of  Aries,  now  in  the  Louvre,
may  be  a  copy  of  Praxiteles's  statue  of  Aphrodite  at  Thespiae.  The
right  arm  and  the  left  hand  of  the  statue  are  restored  ;  but  the  goddess
seems  to  have  been  represented  looking  at  herself  in  a  mirror  which  she
held  in  her  left  hand,  while  with  her  right  hand  she  arranged  her  hair.
The  lower  half  of  the  body  only  is  draped.  A  replica  of  the  statue,
though  only  a  torso,  was  found  near  the  choregic  monument  of  Lysicrates
at  Athens.  See  Miiller-Wieseler,  Denkmdler^  2.  pi.  xxv.  No.  271  ;
Bernoulli,  Aphrodite^  p.  1 80  sqq, ;  Friederichs- Wolters,  Gipsabgiisse,  No.
1456  ;  Furtwangler,  Meisterwerke  d,  griech,  PlasUk^  pp.  546-549.

27.  5.  an  Aphrodite  and  a  statne  of  Phryne.  If  we  may  tmst
Alciphron,  the  statue  of  Phryne  stood  between  the  images  of  Aphrodite
and  Love  {Epistolae^  Frag^.  3.  p.  157  sq,^  ed.  Seiler).  Cp.  Plutarch,
AnuUarius^  ix.  10.

27.  5.  a  small  temple  of  the  Mnses.  We  have  seen  (p.  140  sq,)
that  in  1890  Mr.  Jamot  discovered  the  foundations  of  this  temple  in
the  middle  of  the  old  fortified  enclosure  at  Thespiae.     The  temple  is


148  MOUNT  HELICON  bk.  ix.  boeotia

identified  by  an  inscribed  base  found  in  its  original  position.  See
Bulletin  de  Carresp,  helUnique^  15  (1891),  p.  659.

27.  6.  a  sanctuary  of  Hercnles.  Near  Leuctra  an  altar  was  found
with  an  inscription  setting  forth  that  it  had  been  dedicated  to  Hercules
by  a  certain  Philinus  in  consequence  of  a  dream  (C  /.  G,  G.  S.  i.  No.
1829).

27.  6.  A  virgin  acts  as  his  priestess  till  her  death.  Chastity
seems  to  have  been  often  required  of  the  ministers  of  Hercules.  Cp.
vii.  24.  4  note.  In  Phocis  there  was  a  sanctuary  of  Hercules  the
Woman-hater.  The  man  who  acted  as  his  priest  had  to  remain  chaste
during  his  year  of  office ;  hence  elderly  men  were  generally  appointed.
See  Plutarch,  De  Pythiae  oraculis^  20.

27.  6.  the  fifty  daughters  of  Thestius.  Cp.  iii.  19.  5.  The
father  of  these  damsels  is  called  Thestius  also  by  Herodorus,  cited  by
Athenaeus  (xiii.  p.  556 f);  but  he  is  called  Thespius  by  Diodorus  (iv.  29).
ApoUodorus  in  one  passage  (ii.  4.  9)  calls  him  Thestius,  but  elsewhere
(ii.  7.  6  and  8)  Thespius.  According  to  ApoUodorus  (ii.  4.  10)
Hercules's  intercourse  with  the  daughters  of  Thestius  took  place  in  fifty
nights  ;  according  to  Herodorus  {Lc.)  in  seven.  The  names  of  Hercules's
sons  by  the  daughters  of  Thestius  are  given  by  ApoUodorus  (ii.  7.  8).
There  were  statues  of  the  Thespiades  or  daughters  of  Thespius  (Thestius)
at  Rome  near  the  temple  of  Felicitas  (Pliny,  Nat  hist  xxxvi.  39).
On  two  statuettes,  which  it  has  been  proposed  to  refer  to  the  story  of
Hercules  and  the  daughters  of  Thestius,  see  Gazette  arch^ologique^  3
(1877),  pp.  168-171,  with  pi.  26 ;  /V/.,  4  (1878),  p.  14  sq.  The  first  of
the  two  stories  here  told  by  Pausanias  implies  that  Hercules's  sons  by  the
daughters  of  Thestius  were  49  in  number ;  the  second  story  (§  7)  implies
that  they  were  52.  On  the  other  hand  Diodorus  (iv.  29)  and  ApoUo-
dorus (ii.  7.  6)  give  the  number  as  50.

27.  8.  sanctuaries  at  Erythrae and  at  Tyre  etc.    As  to  the

sanctuary  of  Hercules  at  Erythrae,  see  vii.  5.  5  sqq.  As  to  the  sanctuaries
of  Hercules  (Melcart)  at  Tyre,  see  Herodotus,  ii.  44  with  Wiedemann's
notes.  Cp.  Movers,  Die  Phoenizier^  i.  p.  385  sqq, ;  PreUer,  Griech.
Mythologies  2.  p.  167  sqq,

27.  8.  the  sanctuary  of  Mycalessian  Demeter  etc.  See  ix.
19.  5.

28.  I.  Helicon.  Mt  Helicon,  in  the  wider  sense,  comprised  the
group  of  mountains  which  stretches  from  the  Copaic  plain  on  the  north
to  the  Corinthian  gulf  on  the  south,  and  from  the  neighbourhood  of
Thespiae  on  the  east  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Parnassus  on  the  west.
In  its  narrower  sense  the  name  Helicon  seems  to  have  designated  the
peak  now  called  Zagara  (5019  feet).  The  highest  peak  of  the  group  is
Palaeo-Vouna  (5738  feet),  to  the  south-west  of  Zagara^  but  not  visible
from  Thespiae.  The  outlines  of  Helicon  are  beautiful  and  the  mountain
is  stiU  well  wooded,  at  least  on  its  northern  slopes.  Between  Coronea
and  Ascra  I  passed  through  a  considerable  extent  of  thick  oak  coppice.
The  higher  slopes  are  wooded  with  firs.  See  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und
Forschungen^  2.  p.  83  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  P-  5  5  5  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,
I.  p.  194  sq, ;  Baedeker,*  p.  170  sq.     The  woods  of  Helicon,  to  which


CH.  XXIX  ASCRA  149

Pausanias  refers,  seem  to  have  been  famous  in  antiquity.  Cp.  Horace,
OdeSy  i.  12.  5  ;  /V/.,  Epist,  ii.  i.  218 ;  Solinus,  vii.  22  ;  Ovid,  Metam,  v.
265.

28.  I.  tlie  wild  strawberry  bashes.  Clarke  observed  the  straw-
berry bush  at  the  monastery  of  St.  Nicholas  on  Helicon  {Travels^  4.  p.
98),  and  Leake  found  it  growing  on  a  southern  spur  of  Mt  Helicon,  to
the  west  of  the  monastery  of  St.  Taxiarches.  As  to  the  fruit  he  says  :
"  At  the  best,  however,  they  may  be  compared  to  a  very  insipid  straw-
berry, and  are  admissible  only  to  the  table  at  a  season  when  no  other
fruit  is  to  be  had"  {Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  516  j^.)  The  arbutus  or
strawberry  bush  is  conmion  in  Greece  and  grows  to  some  height.  The
fruit,  which  ripens  in  autumn,  resembles  in  appearance  a  small  straw-
berry.    I  found  it  not  unpalatable.

28.  I.  the  herbs  and  roots  that  grow  on  the  monntain  etc.
Helicon  was  fiunous  for  its  herbs,  especially  for  its  black  hellebore
(Pliny,  Nat  hist  xxv.  49).  Hellebore,  called  by  the  modem  Greeks
skarphiy  still  grows  commonly  on  Palaeo-  Vouna^  the  highest  mountain
of  the  Helicon  group.  The  peasants  of  Palaeo-Vouna  apply  it  exter-
nally to  sores  and  ulcers.  See  H.N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen^
2.  p.  100.

28.  I.  a  Libyan  of  the  race  of  the  Psyllians.  The  Psyllians,  a
tribe  of  Northern  Africa,  on  the  shore  of  the  Greater  Syrtis,  were  supposed
to  possess  the  power  of  alleviating  by  their  touch  or  by  suction  persons
who  had  been  bitten  by  serpents.  A  similar  power  was  claimed  by,  or
ascribed  to,  the  Marsians  in  Italy  and  the  people  called  Ophiogenes
('  serpent-bom ')  in  Cyprus  and  at  Parium  on  the  Hellespont.  See  Pliny,
Nat,  hist,  xxviii.  30  ;  Strabo,  xiii.  p.  588.  It  is  said  that  Octavius  made
use  of  these  Psyllians  in  an  attempt  to  restore  Cleopatra  to  life  (Dio
Cassius,  li.  14).  The  Psyllians  are  related  to  have  exposed  their  new-
bom  children  to  serpents  to  see  whether  the  children  were  legitimate  or
not ;  if  the  children  were  legitimate,  the  serpents  did  them  no  harm
(Varro,  in  Priscian,  x.  32,  vol.  i.  p.  524,  ed.  Keil ;  Pliny,  Nat,  hist,  vii.
14  ;  Dio  Cassius,  Lc)

28.  3.  The  balsam-trees.  As  to  the  balsam,  see  Pliny,  Nat,  hist,
xii.  Ill  sqq.     According  to  Pliny  it  was  found  only  in  Judaea.

29.  I.  Hegesinns in  his  Atthis.  This  poem  is  not  men-
tioned by  any  other  ancient  writer.  Cp.  Welcker,  Der  epische  Cyclus^
I.  p.  320.

29.  2.  Gallipns  of  Oorinth.  This  writer  is  mentioned  again  by
Pausanias  (ix.  38.  10).     Nothing  more  is  known  of  him.

29.  2.  Ascra.  The  scanty  ruins  of  Ascra  occupy  the  summit  of  a
high  conical  hill,  forming  part  of  Mt.  Helicon,  though  separated  from
the  main  mass  of  that  mountain  on  the  south  and  west  by  the  Valley  of
the  Muses.  The  hill  is  stony  and  rugged  ;  its  sides  are  here  and  there
overgrown  with  low  bushes.  Strabo  has  correctly  described  the  situa-
tion of  Ascra.  He  says  (ix.  p.  409) :  "  In  the  territory  of  Thespiae,
towards  Mt.  Helicon,  is  Ascra,  the  fatherland  of  Hesiod ;  it  is  on  the
right  of  Helicon,  situated  on  a  high  and  mgged  place,  distant  about
40  furlongs  from  Thespiae."     The  solitary  tower  mentioned  by  Pau-


ISO  ASCRA  BK.  IX.  BOEOTIA

sanias  still  crowns  the  summit  of  the  hilL  It  is  a  large  structure,
about  1 1  paces  square,  built  of  squared  blocks,  well  jointed  and  laid  in
horizontal  courses,  of  which  thirteen  are  preserved.  The  conical  hill  of
Ascra,  surmounted  by  its  tower,  is  a  very  conspicuous  object  from  a
distance,  and  is  in  fact  one  of  the  landmarks  of  Central  Boeotia.  The
whole  hill  is  now  known  as  Pyrgaki  or  •  turret.*  There  are  some  vestiges
of  the  walls  which  enclosed  the  summit  of  the  hill,  forming  a  small
acrppolis.  Hesiod  described  Ascra  as  '^a  wretched  village,  bad  in
winter,  disagreeable  in  summer,  good  at  no  time"  {Works  and  DtxySy
639  sq.)  Cp.  Plutarch,  Comment,  in  Hes,  35.  The  disagreeableness
of  Ascra  as  a  residence  ''  may  have  been  caused  by  the  confined  circuit
of  its  walls,  the  abruptness  of  the  hill,  and  the  proximity  of  the  great
summits  of  Helicon,  rendering  the  winter  long  and  severe,  and  in
summer  excluding  the  refreshing  breezes  of  the  west  Ascra,  however,
is  surrounded  by  beautiful  scenery,  with  delightful  summer-retreats,  and
with  fertile  plains,  enjoying  a  mild  climate  during  the  winter ;  and  it
was  less,  perhaps,  upon  its  intrinsic  defects,  than  upon  a  comparison  of
it  with  the  delightful  Asiatic  Aeolis,  from  whence  his  family  came,  that
Hesiod  founded  his  condemnation  of  Ascra  ^  (Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.
p.  491  sq.)  However,  the  summit  of  the  hill  is  exposed  to  every  wind
that  blows,  and  in  winter  the  whole  neighbourhood  as  far  as  Thespiae
and  even  farther  is  said  to  be  often  buried  under  deep  snow  for  weeks
together.  See  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen^  2.  p.  94  sq,  \
Welcker,  Tagebuch^  2.  pp.  34-37;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  p.  555;
Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  p.  237  ;  A.  Conze,  in  PMlologus^  19  (1863),  p.  181  ;
Baedeker,^  p.  171  j^.  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  130.

29.  2.  the  Muses  were  three  in  nmnber.  This  was  the  view  of
Ephorus  and  Varro  (Amobius,  Adversus  Nationes^  iii.  37  ;  Servius,  on
Virgil,  £'r/.  vii.  21).  Cp.  Diodorus,  iv.  7.  2;  Comutus,  De  natura
deorum  14,  p.  15,  ed.  C.  Lang;  Kalkmann,  Pausanias  der  Perieget^  p.
258  ;  E.  Maass,  Aratea^  p.  211  sqq.  On  the  Muses  see  Fr.  Roediger,
*Die  Musen,  eine  mythologische  Abhandlung,'  in  Fleckeisen^s  Jahrbiicher^
Supplem.  8  (1875-1876),  pp.  251-290.  On  the  representation  of  the
Muses  in  ancient  art  see  Oscar  Bie,  Die  Musen  in  der  antiken  Kunst
(Berlin,  1887).

29.  4*    Mixnnermiis  says   that   the   elder   Muses   are

daughters  of  Sky.  According  to  a  scholiast  on  Pindar  {Nem,  iii.  1 6),
Mimnermus,  Alcman,  and  Aristarchus  held  that  the  Muse  (singular)
was  a  daughter  of  Sky.  Mnaseas  said  that  the  Muses  were  daughters
of  Earth  and  Sky  (Amobius,  Adversus  Nationes^  iii.  37).  Cp.  Diodo-
rus, iv.  7.  I  ;  Comutus,  De  natura  deorum  14,  p.  18,  ed.  C.  Lang;
Kalkmann,  Pausanias  der  Perieget^  p.  258  sq.\  E.  Maass,  Aratea^  p.
212  sq.

29.  5-  the  grove  of  the  Muses.  The  grove  of  the  Muses  lay  at
the  northern  foot  of  Mount  Helicon  in  a  valley  which  is  traversed  by  a
stream  (probably  the  ancient  Termesus)  flowing  from  west  to  east.
Towards  its  western  end  the  valley  contracts,  being  hemmed  in  between
the  steep  lofty  and  wooded  slopes  of  Helicon  on  the  south  and  another
rugged  but  less  lofty  mountain  on  the  north.     The  saddle  which  joins


CH.  XXIX  GROVE  OF  THE  MUSES  151

the  two  mountains  bounds  the  Valley  of  the  Muses  on  the  west.  A
fine  view  of  the  valley  is  to  be  had  from  a  ruined  mediaeval  tower
which  surmounts  a  rocky  hill  of  no  great  height  on  the  northern  side
of  the  vale  about  midway  between  Ascra  and  the  village  oi  PcUaea-
PanagiOn  Across  the  valley  to  the  south  rise  the  steep  slopes  of
Helicon,  rocky  below  and  wooded  with  pines  above.  In  a  glen  at  the
foot  of  these  great  declivities  are  seen  the  trees  that  hide  the  secluded
monastery  of  St.  Nicholas,  below  which  dark  myrtle-bushes  extend  far
down  the  slope.  At  the  head  of  the  valley  in  the  west  the  serrated  top
of  Helicon  {Zagara)  is  seen  foreshortened,  and  a  little  on  this  side
of  the  highest  point  appears  the  monastery  of  Zagara^  delightfully
situated  on  a  woody  slope  that  falls  away  into  the  sequestered  valley
where  stand  the  two  villages  also  called  Zagara.  To  the  left  of  the
summit  the  snowy  top  of  Parnassus  just  shows  itself  in  the  distance.
In  the  nearer  foreground,  on  the  hither  side  of  the  valley,  the  conical
hill  of  Ascra,  crowned  with  its  ruined  tower,  stands  out  boldly.  Vine-
yards cover  the  gently-swelling  hills  on  the  northern  side  of  the  vale,
and  down  the  middle  of  it  the  brook  Archontitza  (probably  the  ancient
Termesus  or  Permessus),  fed  by  many  springs,  flows  through  fields  of
maize  and  com.

In  this  sheltered  valley,  hidden  among  fine  trees,  are  or  were  till
lately  the  ruins  of  several  churches  containing  remains  of  antiquity.
One  of  them  —  the  church  of  the  Holy  Trinity  {Hagia  Triada)  —
occupied  the  site  of  the  temple  of  the  Muses.  The  place  is  on  the
south  side  of  the  Termesus,  about  an  hour's  walk  to  the  west  of  the
village  of  Palaeo-Panagia.  The  platform  {crepidomd)  on  which  the
temple  rested  was  excavated  by  Mr.  Stamatakes  for  the  Greek  Archaeo-
logical Society  in  1882.  It  is  built  of  large  and  well-smoothed  blocks
of  stone.  Further  excavations  were  begun  by  Mr.  P.  Jamot  of  the
French  School  in  October  1888  and  were  continued  by  him  in  1889
and  1890.  He  has  not  yet  (December  1896)  published  the  full  results
of  his  researches.

The  temple  occupied  exactly  the  site  of  the  ruined  church,  which  had
to  be  entirely  removed  in  the  course  of  the  excavations.  It  measured
12.50  metres  in  length  by  6.50  metres  in  breadth,  and  had  four  Ionic
columns  at  each  of  the  narrow  ends,  but  no  columns  at  the  sides.  Thus
it  resembled  the  temple  of  Victory  on  the  Acropolis  at  Athens.  Ap-
parently it  lacked  both  a  fore-temple  {pronaos)  and  a  back-chamber  {opts-
ihodomos).  The  entrance  was  from  the  west.  The  pavement  consisted
of  slabs  of  white  marble.  In  Roman  times  the  temple  was  rebuilt  and
widened,  so  as  to  form  a  square  of  12.50  metres  on  each  side.  Facing
the  west  end  of  the  temple  was  an  Ionic  colonnade  100  metres  long,
beside  which  many  bronze  objects  were  found.  Amongst  the  numerous
inscriptions  discovered  on  the  site  are  two  dedications  of  statues  erected
by  the  Thespians  to  Sulla  and  Agrippa.  Considerable  remains  have
also  been  found  of  a  very  large  pedestal  which  had  clearly  supported
statues  of  the  nine  Muses  dedicated  by  the  people  of  Thespiae.  The
name  of  each  Muse  was  inscribed  separately  with  an  elegiac  distich
in  the   Ionic  dialect  beneath  it ;   the  verses  were  composed  by  a  man


152  GROVE  OF  THE  MUSES  bk.  ix.  boeotia

named  Honestus.  Remains,  more  or  less  complete,  of  eight  of  these
inscriptions  have  been  found.  See  C,  /.  G,  G,  S,  i.  Nos.  1 796-1 805.
Other  inscriptions  record  the  dedication  of  land  to  the  Heliconian  Muses
by  Philetaenis  of  Pergamus,  son  of  Attalus  I.  (C.  /.  G.  G,  S.  i.  Nos.
1 788- 1 790).

About  five  (or  fifteen)  minutes  higher  up  are  the  remains  of  a
theatre,  which  were  first  obser\'ed  by  Mr.  Stamatakes  in  1882.  The
stage  has  since  been  excavated  by  Mr.  Jamot  The  theatre  occupied
a  conspicuous  situation,  and  the  spectators  must  have  enjoyed  a
splendid  view  over  a  great  part  of  Boeotia.  The  orchestra  is  reported
to  have  been  circular.  The  stage  was  18.10  metres  Mnde,  and  was
adorned  with  fourteen  half-columns  of  the  Doric  order,  which  are  still  in
their  places.  (According  to  another  account,  there  were  only  thirteen
of  these  half-columns,  and  only  seven  of  them  have  been  found.)  The
diameter  of  the  columns  is  0.30  metre  (about  i  foot) ;  their  height
(exclusive  of  the  capital)  is  2.06  metres  (6  ft.  7  in.) ;  the  distance
between  them  is  0.88  metre  (about  2  ft.  8  in.)

Amphion  of  Thespiae  wrote  a  work,  in  at  least  two  books,  on  the
sanctuary  of  the  Muses  on  Mt.  Helicon  (Athenaeus,  xiv.  p.  629  a).
The  sanctuary  is  said  to  have  been  visited  by  Apollonius  of  Tyana
(Philostratus,  Vi'/,  Apollon,  iv.  24).

See  Wheler,  y<?wr»^  ittto  Greece^  p.  476;  E.  D.  Clarke,  Travels ,  4.  pp.  91-
106 ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  pp.  488-500 ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und
Forschungen^  2.  pp.  88-97  »  Welcker,  Tagebuch,  2.  p.  37  sq,  ;  Vischer,  Erinner-
ungetit  p.  554  sq.  ;  Conze  and  Michaclis,  va  Annali dell  InstitutOt  y^  (1861),  p.  86
sqq, ;  Conze,  in  Philologus^  19  (1863),  p.  180  sqq.  ;  Stamatakes,  in  Wpoxrvah.  ttJi
* k^fuoKaniiKTfi'^fufHa.'i  for  1882,  p.  66  j^.  ;  AcXWov  d/>xa(oXo>(/c6i',  4  (1888),  pp.
182  sq,^  204  j^. ;  iV/.,  5  (1889),  p.  107  ;  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUnique^  3  (1879),  PP-
442-448;  iV/.,  14  (1890),  pp.  546-551  ;  idy  15  (1891),  pp.  381-403;  Journal  of
Hellenic  Studies,  10  (1889),  p.  273  ;  American  Journal  of  Archtuology^  5  (18S9),
p.  106  ;  Revue  archifologique^  3rd  series,  14  (1889),  p.  109  ;  MittheiL  d.  arch,  Inst,
tn  Athen,  14  (1889),  p.  328;  Berliner  philologische  Wochenschrift^  9  (1889),  p.
74;  Baedeker,*  p.  172;  Guidejoanne,  2.  p.  30;  cp.  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und
Forschungen,  2.  p.  96.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  in  the  eight  years  which  have
elapsed  since  his  excavations  Mr.  Jamot  has  not  found  leisure  to  publish  an
account,  however  brief,  of  the  temple  and  theatre.  I  did  not  visit  the  site,  and
the  second-hand  reports  of  the  excavations  which  are  alone  accessible  to  me  are
exceedingly  meagre  and  to  some  extent  discrepant.

29.  5.  the  spring  Aganippe.  The  middle  of  the  Valley  of  the
Muses  between  the  village  of  Palaeo-Panagia  and  Ascra  (Pyrgaki)  is
watered  by  a  torrent  now  called  the  Archontitza  which  is  probably  the
Termesus  or  Permessus  of  the  ancients  (see  below).  From  the  left
bank  of  the  torrent,  midway  between  Palaeo-Panagia  and  Pyrgaki,  there
issues  a  fine  perennial  source  of  water ;  many  squared  blocks  lie  around
it.  Leake  thought  that  this  source  might  be  Aganippe.  More  prob-
ably, however,  Aganippe  is  to  be  identified  with  a  very  picturesque
spring  of  clear  water  which  bubbles  from  the  rock  under  shady  trees
near  the  deserted  monastery  of  St.  Nicholas.  The  monastery,  which  is
sometimes  inhabited  by  a  solitary  monk,  stands  in  a  beautiful  theatre-
shaped  dale,  close  under  the  towering  heights  of  Helicon  (Mt.  Zagara),
A  grove  of  pine,  walnut,  plane,  olive,  and  fig-trees,  mixed  with  myrtle.


^en


CH.  XXIX  AGANIPPE — TERMESUS  153

bay  and  oleander,  surrounds  the  monastery ;  and  a  constant  verdure  is
maintained  here  in  summer  by  the  abundant  water  of  the  spring,  which
flows  down  the  valley  northward  to  join  the  Termesus.  The  situation  of
the  spring  accords  well  with  Pausanias's  description,  from  which  we
gather  that  Aganippe  was  not  on  the  direct  road  from  Thespiae  to  the
grove  of  the  Muses,  but  at  a  little  distance  to  the  left,  that  is  (in  this
case)  to  the  south  of  the  road.  The  spring  is  often  mentioned  by
Roman  writers  (Virgil,  EcL  x.  1 2  ;  Ovid,  Metam,  v.  311  sq,\  Juvenal,
vii.  6 ;  Pliny,  Nat,  hist,  iv.  25  ;  Solinus,  vii.  22).

See  E.  D.  Clarke,  Travels y  4.  pp.  ^T  sq,,  105 ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece y  2.
P-  493  ^9' ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  ForschungeUy  2,  p.  SS  sqq, ;  Vischer,
Erinnerungeriy  p.  554 ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  239 ;  Conze  and  Michaelis,  in
Annali  delV  Instituto,  33  (1861),  p.  88  sq,  ;  Conze,  in  PhilologuSy  19  (1863),  p.
182  sqq,  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  172 ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  30.

29.  5.  the  Termesus.  The  Termesus  or  Permessus,  as  it  is  called
by  Strabo  and  in  some  MSS.  of  Hesiod,  is  mentioned  by  Hesiod  as  a
stream  or  river  of  Helicon  {Theog,  5).  Strabo  tells  us  (ix.  p.  407)  that
it  flowed  from  Helicon  into  the  Copaic  Lake  near  Haliartus.  Hence
Leake  and  Bursian  identified  it  with  the  considerable  stream  which
flows  from  Helicon  about  half  an  hour  to  the  east  of  Haliartus.  But
Callimachus  (cited  by  Servius,  on  Virgil,  Ed.  x.  12)  says  that  the
Permessus  had  its  source  in  the  spring  Aganippe,  from  which  it  is
natural  to  infer  that  the  Permessus  or  Termesus  is  the  stream  Archon-
titza  which  flows  eastward  through  the  Valley  of  the  Muses  and
receives  the  water  of  Aganippe  (the  spring  of  St.  Nicholas)  from  the
south.  Farther  to  the  east  this  stream  passes  the  village  of  Neochori
on  the  right  (south),  and  flows  for  three  miles  in  the  direction  of
Plataea,  Then  it  takes  a  sudden  turn  to  the  south-west,  and  dividing
the  roots  of  Mt.  Karombili  from  those  of  Helicon  follows  a  nearly
westerly  course  till  it  is  lost  in  the  plain  of  Thisbe,  near  Dombrena,
Thus  the  stream  flows  round  three  sides  of  Mount  Helicon,  the  north,
the  east,  and  the  south,  which  tallies  well  with  Pausanias's  statement
that  the  Termesus  flowed  round  Helicon.  Moreover,  the  fable  that
Aganippe  was  a  daughter  of  Termesus  points  to  the  Termesus  being
the  stream  into  which  Aganippe  flowed  rather  than  a  stream  with
which  the  spring  Aganippe  has  no  connexion.

Sec  Wheler,  Journey  into  Greece^  p.  476 ;  E.  D.  Clarke,  Travels^  4.  p.  loi  ;
Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  496  sqq,  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen^
2,  p.  92  sq.  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  p.  233 ;  Conze  and  Michaelis,  in  Annali  deW
Instituto,  33  (1861),  p.  89;  Conze,  in  Philologus,  19  (1863),  p.  183.

29.  5.  Enpheme the  Moses'  nnrse.     She  is  mentioned  as

the  Muses'  nurse  also  by  Eratosthenes  {Catasterismiy  28)  and  Hyginus
(Astronomica,  27).

29.  7.    Linus   Maneros.      See   Brugsch,   Adomsklage  und

Linoslied;  Buchsenschutz,  in  Philologus,  8  (1853),  pp.  577-589;  W.
Mannhardt,  Mythologische  Forschungen^  p.  i  sqq,  ;  The  Golden  Bought
I.  p.  363  sqq,

29.  7.  ttie  song  of  Linns.     See  Iliad^  xviii.  569  sqq.


154  PORTRAITS  OF  POETS  bk.  ix.  boeotia

29.  9.  Linns was  a  teacher  of  mtisic.     In  a  vase-painting

Linus  is  represented  teaching  Iphicles,  the  half-brother  of  Hercules,  to
play  on  the  lyre,  while  behind  Iphicles  stands  Hercules,  with  a  some-
what disdainful  expression,  holding  an  arrow  in  his  right  hand.  Behind
Hercules  stands  a  wizen-feced  person  with  a  lyre,  whom  Mr.  Helbig
explains  to  be  an  eunuch  instigating  Hercules  to  murder  Linus.  See  W.
Helbig,  *  II  mito  di  Lino  su  vaso  Ceretano,'  Anncdi  delP  InsHtuto^  43
(1871),  pp.  86-96,  tav.  d'agg.  F.

30.  I.  images  of  all  the  Muses.  The  bronze  images  of  the
Muses  were  carried  off  from  Helicon  by  Constantine  and  placed  in  his
palace  at  Constantinople  (Sozomenus,  Hist  Eccles,  ii.  5  ;  Eusebius,
ViL  Constantiniy  iii.  54  ;  Nicephorus  Callistus,  Eccles,  Hist  viiL  33).

30.  I.  Oephisodotus.     See  note  on  viii.  30.  10.

30.  I.  Strongylion.     See  note  on  i.  23.  8.

30.  I.  a  bronze  Apollo  fighting  with  Hermes  for  the  lyre.  In
the  course  of  his  excavations  at  the  sanctuary  of  the  Muses,  Mr.  Jamot
discovered  a  very  fine  bronze  arm,  a  little  larger  than  life-size,  two
bronze  feet,  and  other  fragments  of  bronze.  Mr.  Jamot  argues  that
these  are  fragments  of  the  group  described  by  Pausanias  ;  the  arm,
according  to  him,  is  that  of  Apollo,  whom  he  supposes  to  have  been
represented  sitting  with  a  lyre  on  his  knees.  But  the  fragments  are
too  scanty  to  enable  us  to  decide  the  question.  See  P.  Jamot,  in
Bulletin  de  Corresp.  kel Unique^  15  (1891),  pp.  381-401.  The  fight
between  Apollo  and  Hermes  for  the  possession  of  the  lyre  seems  not
to  be  mentioned  by  any  other  ancient  writer ;  but  in  a  vase-painting
Apollo  is  represented  fleeing  with  the  lyre,  while  Hermes  holds  him
by  the  arm.  See  Panofka,  in  Annali  delV  Instituto^  2  (1830),  p.  191  ;
Jamot,  op.  cit,  p.  400 ;  Overbeck,  Griechische  Kunstmythologie^  4.  p.
419  sq,

30.  2.  Pindar's  poem  on  him.  Plutarch  also  tells  us  {De  musica^
8)  that  Pindar  mentioned  Sacadas.

30.  3.  Hesiod,  too,  is  seated  etc.  On  supposed  portraits  of  Hesiod
in  existing  monuments  of  ancient  art,  see  Panofka,  in  Archctologische
Zeitungj  8  (1856),  p.  253  sq.  The  poet  is  mentioned  in  a  metrical
inscription  found  on  the  site  of  the  Grove  of  the  Muses  {Bulletin  de
Corresp,  hellinique^  14  (1890),  pp.  546-551  ;  C.  /.  G,  G,  S,  i.  No.
4240).  Another  inscription,  found  at  Vaia,  near  Thespiae,  proves  that
a  society  for  the  worship  of  the  Muses  of  Hesiod  owned  land  on  or  near
Mount  Helicon  {C, /.  G,  G.  S,  i.  No.  1785).

30.  3.  he  sang  with  a  laurel  wand  in  his  hand.  See  Hesiod,
Theog,  30.    Cp.  Panofka,  in  Archctologische  Zeitung^  8  (i  856),  p.  254  i*^.

30.  4*  Orphens,  the  Thracian.  On  the  relation  of  Orpheus  to
the  Thracians,  see  A.  Riese,  *  Orpheus  und  die  mythischen  Thraker,'
Fkckeiseris  Jahrbiichery  23  (1877),  PP-  225-240.  On  Orpheus  gener-
ally, see  Gerhard,  *  Orpheus  und  die  Orphiker,'  Abhandlungen  of  the
Berlin  Academy,  1861,  Phil.  hist.  Abth.,  pp.  9-95  ;  E.  Maass,  Orpheus
(Miinchen,  1895).  ^^  the  popular  songs  of  the  modem  Bulgarians
there  is  said  to  flgure  a  musician  named  Orfen,  who  sings  and  plays  so
sweetly  that  the  birds  and  ravenous  beasts  come  from  the  mountains  to


CH.  XXX  LEGENDS  OF  ORPHEUS  155

hear  him.  Hence  it  has  been  conjectured  that  this  Orfen  is  Orpheus,
and  it  is  held  by  some  that  the  present  Bulgarian  inhabitants  of  the
Rhodope  mountains  are  descendants  of  the  ancient  Thracians,  who,
though  they  have  been  affected  by  Slavonic  influence,  have  preserved
the  poetical  traditions,  mythology,  and  religious  customs  of  their  ances-
tors. See  Geitler,  *Die  Sage  von  Orpheus-Orfen  der  Rhodope-Bul-
garen,'  Mittheilungen  der  anthropolog,  Gesell,  in  Wien^  10  (1881),
pp.  165-196.

30.  4.  beasts listening  to  his  song.     A  list  of  the  existing

works  of  ancient  art  (marbles,  gems,  coins,  mosaics,  etc.),  which  have  for
their  subject  the  beasts  listening  to  Orpheus,  is  given  by  Stephani  in  the
Compte- Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1881,  p.  98  sqq.  None  of  these
works  of  art  seems  to  date  from  before  the  beginning  of  our  era,

30.  4-  lie  went  alive  to  hell  to  beg  his  wife  from  the  nether
gods  etc.  A  story  like  that  of  Orpheus  and  Eurydice  was  told  by  the
Huron  Indians  of  North  America  to  one  of  the  Jesuit  fathers.  An
Indian  lost  a  beloved  sister  by  death  and  went  to  the  village  of  souls  to
seek  for  and  bring  her  back.  He  succeeded  in  securing  her  soul  in  one
gourd  and  her  brain  in  another,  and  was  told  that  to  bring  his  sister  to
life  he  must  go  to  the  graveyard,  take  up  her  body,  and  carry  it  to  his
hut ;  here  he  was  to  assemble  his  friends  for  a  festival  and  in  their
presence  to  carry  his  sister's  body  round  the  hut,  holding  in  his  hands
the  two  gourds.  As  soon  as  he  had  done  this,  his  sister  would  come  to
life,  provided  that  all  the  guests  kept  their  eyes  fixed  on  the  ground  and
did  not  look  at  what  he  was  doing.  The  man  did  as  he  was  bid ;  he
had  almost  carried  the  corpse  round  the  hut  and  he  already  felt  it
beginning  to  move,  when  one  of  the  guests,  out  of  curiosity,  looked  up
at  him.  Immediately  his  sister's  soul  fled,  and  he  had  to  carry  back
her  mouldering  body  to  the  grave.  See  Relations  des  Jisuites^  1636,
p.  105  sq,  (Canadian  reprint);  Lafltau,  Maeurs  des  sauvages  anUri-
quains^  I.  p.  402  sqq,\  H.  de  Charencey,  Le  folklore  dans  les  deux
Mondes  (Paris,  1894),  p.  286  sqq.  In  various  islands  of  the  Pacific
(the  Pclew  Islands,  Hawaii,  and  Mangaia)  stories  are  told  of  a  husband
who  went  to  the  land  of  the  dead  to  fetch  back  his  wife  to  the  world  of
the  living.  See  A.  Bastian,  Allerlei  aus  Volks-  und  Menschenkunde^
I .  pp.  8,  1 1 1  sq.  ;  Gills,  Myths  and  Songs  of  the  South  Pacific^  p.  22 1  sqq,

30.  5.  the  Thracian  women  plotted  his  death  etc.  The  murder
of  Orpheus  is  the  subject  of  vase-paintings.  See  Annali  delV  Instituto^
I  (1829),  pp.  265-269;  /V/.,  43  (1871),  pp.  126-130.  The  Thracian
women  are  said  to  have  been  tattooed  by  their  husbands  for  their  cruelty
to  Orpheus  (Phanocles,  quoted  by  Stobaeus,  Florilegiuniy  vol.  2.  p.  387,
ed.  Meineke) ;  and  in  some  vase  -  paintings  of  the  death  of  Orpheus
the  Thracian  women  are  represented  with  tattoo-marks  on  their  arms
{Monumenti  Ineditiy  i.  pi.  5  ;  Annali  delV  Instituto^  43  (1871),  p.  127).
On  tattooing  among  the  ancients,  see  Bahr  on  Herodotus,  v.  6  ;  Martins,
Zur  Ethnographie  Amerikds,  p.  55  note  ;  Lafltau,  Mosurs  des  sauvages
amMquains^  2.  p.  38  sqq.

30.  6.  Aomum  in  Thesprotis an  oracle  of  the  dead.      See

notes  on  i.  17.  5  (vol.  2.  p.  161)  and  iii.  17.  9.


156  THE  MUSAEA  bk.  ix.  boeotia

31.  I.  Arsinoe carried  by  a  bronze  ostrich.     Eight  pairs

of  ostriches  figured  in  the  grand  procession  which  Arsinoe's  husband
Ptolemy  Philadelphus  exhibited  at  Alexandria  (Athenaeus,  v.  p.  200  f).
Catullus  (Ixvi.  54)  speaks  of  Arsinoe's  "winged  horse,"  which  may
perhaps  be  a  poetical  expression  for  an  ostrich.

31.  2.  a  deer  suckling  the  inflEUit  Telepbns.  See  viii.  54.  6.
The  subject  is  represented  on  coins,  gems,  etc.  (O.  Jahn,  Archaologische
AufsatzBy  p.  160  sqq. ;  Baumeister's  Denkfndler,  p.  1724).

31.  3.  Of  the  tripods  that  stand  on  Helicon  etc.  A  mutilated
inscription,  found  in  the  sanctuary  of  the  Muses  on  Mount  Helicon,
seems  to  have  recorded  the  dedication  of  a  tripod  to  the  Heliconian
Muses  by  the  Boeotians  {C,  I.  G,  G,  S.  i.  No.  1795).

31.  3.  which  Hesiod  is  said  to  have  received  at  Ohalds  etc.
Hesiod  himself  tells  how  he  won  the  tripod  at  Chalcis  and  dedicated
it  to  the  Muses  of  Helicon  {Works  and  Days^  650-659).  But  the
passage  is  thought  by  some  to  be  spurious.

31.  3.  games,  called  the  Musaea.  The  games  held  on  Mount
Helicon  in  honour  of  the  Muses  are  seldom  mentioned  by  ancient
writers.  A  certain  Nicocrates  wrote  a  work  in  at  least  two  books  on  the
subject  (Schol.  on  Homer,  //.  xiii.  21).  Plutarch  tells  us  that  they  were
held  every  fourth  year  {Atnatorius^  i);  and  a  certain  Amphion  of
Thespiae,  who  published  a  work  in  at  least  two  books  on  the  sanctuary
of  the  Muses  on  Helicon,  recorded  that  solemn  dances  used  to  be  held
in  the  sanctuary,  perhaps  as  part  of  the  games  (Athenaeus,  xiv.  p.  629  a).
On  the  other  hand,  inscriptions  found  on  Mount  Helicon  and  at  Thespiae
throw  a  good  deal  more  light  on  the  history  and  character  of  the  games.
From  them  we  learn  that  about  the  middle  of  the  third  century  B.C.  the
games  were  reorganised  and  placed  on  a  new  footing ;  the  date  of  their
original  institution  is  unknown.  They  were  held  (as  Plutarch  also  tells  us)
every  fourth  year,  and  the  prizes  awarded  were  crowns,  not  money.  The
ceremonies  began  with  a  solemn  sacrifice  offered  to  the  Muses  by  the
Thespians  and  the  delegates  of  the  societies  of  artists.  In  the  third
century  B.C.,  at  the  time  of  their  reorganisation,  the  games  were  held
in  the  name  of  the  city  of  Thespiae  and  of  the  Boeotian  confederacy
jointly,  and  they  consisted  exclusively  of  musical  and  poetical  contests.
But  about  the  middle  of  the  second  century  B.C.  a  fresh  reform  of  the
games  took  place  ;  dramatic  contests  were  added  to  the  list  of  competi-
tions, and  the  games  were  now  held  in  the  name  of  Thespiae  alone,  the
Boeotian  confederacy  having  ceased  to  exist.  The  old  competitions  had
been  in  epic  poetry,  flute -playing,  lyre -playing,  and  singing  to  the
accompaniment  of  the  lyre  and  flute,  to  which  the  recitation  of  poetry
(rhapsody)  had  been  subsequently  added.  The  contests  added  in  the
second  century  b.c.  comprised  trumpet-playing  ;  heraldry ;  the  composi-
tion of  processional  hymns,  satyric  dramas,  tragedies  and  comedies  ;
and  the  acting  of  plays,  both  tragic  and  comic,  both  old  and  new.  The
reform  thus  instituted  appears  to  have  lasted  at  least  a  century,  that  is,
to  the  middle  of  the  first  century  B.C.  But  from  that  date  until  the
second  half  of  the  second  century  a.d.  the  inscriptions  fail  us.  Whether
this  is  merely  an  accident,  or  whether  the  games  actually  fell  into  abey-


CH.  XXXI  THE  EROTIDIA  157

ance  for  a  time,  we  cannot  say.  Certainly  they  seem  to  have  been
celebrated  in  Plutarch's  lifetime,  and  inscriptions  show  that  in  the
second  half  of  the  second  century  A.D.,  when  Pausanias  wrote,  they  were
in  a  very  flourishing  condition.  Among  the  new  competitions  men-
tioned in  inscriptions  of  that  period  are  the  composition  of  panegyrics
and  poems  on  the  emperor  and  on  the  Muses,  and  flute-playing  as  an
accompaniment  of  choirs  or  dances.  The  games  continued  to  be
held  as  late  certainly  as  the  first  half  of  the  third  century  A.D.,  for
an  inscription  of  that  date  (C  /.  G,  G,  S,  i.  No.  1776;  C.  I,  G,  No.
1586)  gives  a  list  of  the  victors  in  the  games,  but  the  number  of  com-
petitions by  that  time  was  woefully  diminished.  The  composition  of
poetry,  in  particular,  whether  epic,  dramatic,  or  lyric,  seems  to  have
disappeared  from  the  list.

See  P.  Jamot,  in  '  Les  jeux  en  Thonneur  des  Muses,'  Bulletin  de  Corresp.
helUnique,  19  (1895),  PP*  321-366.  Cp.  Reisch,  De  musicis  Graecorum  certa-
minibus^  pp.  57,  icJS,  120  sq, ;  C  /.  G.  G.  S.  I.  Nos.  1735,  1760,  1774,  1775,
1776,  1819.

31.  3.  games  in  honour  of  Love.      These  games  were  called
Erotidia  or  Erotica  and  were  held  by  the  Thespians  every  fourth  year.
See  Athenaeus,  xiii.  p.   561  e  ;  Plutarch,  Amatorius^  i.     As  Pausanias
mentions  them  in  connexion  with  the  games  in  honour  of  the  Muses  which
were  held  in  the  sanctuary  of  the  Muses  on  Helicon,  we  might  infer
that  the  games  in  honour  of  Love  were  also  celebrated  in  that  sanctuary  ;
but  from  Plutarch  {Amatorius^  ii.  1-4)  we  gather  that  they  were  held  in
Thespiae ;  for  he  tells  how  certain  persons,  who  had  come  to  Thespiae
to  be  present  at  the  festival,  were  bored  by  a  musical  competition  and
retreated  from  the  city  to  the  stillness  and  seclusion  of  the  grove  of  the
Muses  on  Helicon.      The  games  in  honour  of  Love  are  mentioned  in  a
few  inscriptions  (C.  /.  G,  G,  S.   i.  Nos.  48,   1857,  2517,  2518),  from
one  of  which  we  gather  that  they  included  boxing.     This  confirms  the
statement  of  Pausanias  that  the  games  included  athletic  as  well  as
musical  competitions.     Hence  the  inscriptions  containing  lists  of  victors
in  athletic  and  equestrian  contests  which  have  been  found  in  or  near
Thespiae  (C.  /.  G.  G.  5.  i.  Nos.  1764,  1765,  1766,  1769,  1770,  1772  ;
Bulletin  de  Corresp,  hellinique^  19  (1895),  P-  3^9  sq.)  probably  refer  to
the  games  in  honour  of  Love,  since  the  games  in  honour  of  the  Muses
did  not  include  athletic  and  equestrian  competitions.     The  inscriptions
in  question  mention  the  customary  athletic  contests — running,  wrestling,
boxing,  the  pancratium,  the  pentathlum,  the  torch-race,  etc.,  as  well  as
horse-races  and  chariot-races.     They  are  all,  however,  fragmentary,  so
that  we  cannot  make  up  from  them  a  complete  list  of  the  various  con-
tests in  the  Erotidia.     In  only  one  of  them  (C. /.  G,  G.  S.  i.  No.  1772)
is  there  mention  of  a  poetical  contest ;  but  this  certainly  does  not  justify
Mr.  Jamot  in  endeavouring  to  explain  away  Pausanias's  statement  that
the  Erotidia  included  musical  as  well  as  athletic  competitions,  especially
as    Pausanias's   statement   is  confirmed  by  the  evidence  of  Plutarch
(Amatorius,   ii.   4).      See  P.  Jamot,  *  Les  jeux  en  Phonneur  d'Eros,'
Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique^  19  (1895),  pp.  366-374.


158  HIPPOCRENE  bk.  ix.  boeotia

31.  3.  the  Horse's  Fonnt  (Hippocrene).  To  reach  the  far-
famed  Hippocrene  (*  the  Horse's  Fount ')  from  the  sanctuary  of  the
Muses  we  ascend  the  steep  eastern  side  of  Mt.  Helicon  (Zagara\  over
moss-grown  rocks,  through  a  thick  forest  of  tall  firs.  After  a  toilsome
ascent  of  about  two  hours  we  emerge  from  the  wood  upon  a  tiny  open
glade  of  circular  shape,  covered  with  loose  stones  and  overgrown  with
grass  and  ferns.  All  around  rises  the  dark  fir-wood.  Here,  in  the
glade,  is  Hippocrene,  now  called  Kryopegadi  or  'cold  spring.'  It  is  a
well  with  a  triangular  opening,  enclosed  by  ancient  masonry.  The
clear,  ice-cold  water  stands  at  a  depth  of  about  10  feet  below  the
coping  of  the  well.  But  it  is  possible  to  climb  down  to  the  water  by
means  of  foot-holes  cut  in  the  side,  or  by  holding  on  to  the  sturdy  ivy,
which,  growing  from  a  rock  in  the  water,  mantles  the  sides  of  the  well.
The  coldness  and  clearness  of  the  water  of  this  perennial  spring  are
famous  in  the  neighbourhood,  especially  among  the  herdsmen,  who  love
to  fill  their  skin-bottles  at  it.

A  hundred  paces  or  so  higher  up,  to  the  east,  is  the  summit  of  Mt.
Helicon  {Zagara),  Exactly  on  the  summit  surrounded  by  fir-trees,
which  interrupt  the  wide  prospect  on  all  sides,  is  a  little  roofless  chapel
of  St.  Elias.  The  walls,  constructed  of  small,  well-jointed  polygonal
stones,  probably  enclosed  the  altar  of  Zeus  mentioned  by  Hesiod
{Theog.  4).

See  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschuftgettj  2.  pp.  97-99 ;  Welcker,  Ta^e-
buch,  2.  p.  38  sa,  ;  Vischer,  Erimternngen^  p.  556  sq»  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  239
sq,  ;  Baedeker,*  p.  172  sq, ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  30.

31.  4*  a  leaden  tablet on  which  are  engraved  the  Works.

For  another  example  of  books  written  on  sheets  of  metal,  see  iv.  26.  8.
A  good  many  inscribed  rolls  of  lead  have  been  found  in  tombs  in
Cyprus ;  but  for  the  most  part  they  contain  either  monetary  accounts
or  else  curses  levelled  at  some  enemy.  See  J.  H.  Middleton,  lilumi-
noted  manuscripts  in  classical  and  mediaeval  times^  p.  2  sq.

31.  5.  the  poem  on  women,  the  poem  called  the  Qreat  Eoeae.
See  i.  3.  I,  ii.  2.  3,  with  the  notes.

31.  5.  the  poem  on  the  soothsayer  Melampns.  It  was  called
Melampodia  and  consisted  of  at  least  three  books.  See  Athenaeus,  xi.
p.  498  a,  xiii.  p.  608  e ;  Tzetzes,  SchoL  on  Lycophron^  682,  683  ;  Epic-
orum  Graecorum  fragmenta^  ed.  Kinkel,  p.  151  sqq.

31.  5.  the  Precepts  of  Ohiron.  A  scholiast  on  Pindar  {Pyth,  vi.
19)  quotes  three  lines  from  this  poem,  which  he  says  was  by  some
attributed  to  Hesiod.  According  to  Quintilian  {Inst,  Or,  i.  i.  15),  the
grammarian  Aristophanes  was  the  first  to  deny  that  The  Precepts  was
by  Hesiod.  Cp,  Epicorum  Graecorum  fragmenta^  ed.  Kinkel,  pp.
148-150.

31.  5*  the  descent  of  Theseus  and  Pirithous  to  helL  For  a
list  of  the  ancient  monuments  on  which  this  subject  is  represented  see
E.  Petersen,  va  Archdologische  Zeitung^  35  (1877),  pp.  1 19-123.  Cp.
X.  29.  9.

31.  6.  Opposite  accounts  are  also  given  of  Hesiod's  death.    The


CH.  XXXI  DONACON— NARCISSUS'  SPRING  159

legends  as  to  the  death  of  Hesiod  are  examined  by  Mr.  O.  Friedel,
*  Die  Sage  vom  Tode  Hesiods,'  Fleckeiser^s  Jahrbucher^  Supplem.  10

(1878-1879),  PP-  235.278.

31.  7.  a  amall  river,  the  Olmins.  This  stream  is  mentioned  by
Hesiod  {Theog,  6).  Strabo  says  (ix.  p.  407)  that  it  was  a  tributary  of
the  Permessus,  which  according  to  him  flowed  into  the  Copaic  Lake  (see
ix.  29.  5  note).  Leake,  however,  preferred  to  suppose  that  the  Olmius
is  the  stream  now  called  the  Archontitza,  which  rises  in  the  Valley  of
the  Muses,  receives  the  water  of  Aganippe,  and,  skirting  the  eastern
and  southern  foot  of  Helicon,  ^ws  to  the  plain  of  Dombrena  (Thisbe).
Pausanias  was  apparently  ignorant  of  the  situation  of  the  Olmius,  for
in  saying  that  it  was  on  the  very  top  of  Mount  Helicon  he  seems,  as
Leake  pointed  out,  to  have  simply  misunderstood  the  passage  of
Hesiod  in  which  the  stream  is  mentioned.  See  Leake,  Northern  Greece^
2.  pp.  212  j^.,  496-499.  Cp.  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forsckungen^
2.  p.  93 ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  p.  233.

31.  7*  Donacon and  Narcissus*  spring  etc     In  the

valley  which  bounds  Mt  Helicon  on  the  south-east  and  separates  it  from
Mt.  KorombiU  is  the  hamlet  of  Tateza.  On  the  opposite  side  of  the
rivulet  which  flows  by  the  village  stands  a  ruined  church,  built  of
ancient  fragments.  Five  minutes  higher  up  the  stream  an  abundant
spring  of  clear  water  gushes  from  the  ground ;  it  is  surrounded  by  a
modem  enclosure,  of  which  the  materials  are  ancient  squared  blocks.
In  the  corn-fields  above  may  be  seen  many  remains  of  former  dwell-
ings. Leake  thought  that  this  might  be  the  site  of  Donacon,  and
that  the  fountain  might  be  Narcissus's  spring.  See  Leake,  Northern
Greece^  2.  p.  500  sq.  ;  Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  p.  257;  Bursian,  Geogr.  i.
p.  242.

The  story  of  Narcissus  is  told  somewhat  differently  by  Ovid  {Metam.
iii.  339-510)  and  Conon  {Narrationes^  24),  who,  however,  both  agree
that  Narcissus  fell  in  love  with  his  own  image  reflected  in  the  water  of
a  spring.  According  to  Ovid,  the  youth  gradually  faded  away  and  was
changed  into  the  flower  narcissus ;  according  to  Conon,  he  slew  himself,
and  the  flower  sprang  from  his  blood.  Of  the  three  versions  of  the  tale
that  of  Ovid  is  probably  nearest  to  the  original,  which  seems  to  be
based  on  the  widespread  superstition  that  the  soul  or  life  is  in  the
reflection  or  shadow,  and  hence  that  it  is  dangerous  for  a  man  to
see  himself  reflected  in  water,  because  his  soul,  being  present  in  the
reflection,  may  be  carried  off  by  the  monsters  or  spirits  of  the  water.
This  is  perhaps  the  explanation  of  the  Pythagorean  maxim  that  a  man
should  not  look  at  his  face  in  water  {Fragmenta  Philosoph.  Graec,  ed.
Mullach,  I.  p.  510),  and  of  the  Greek  superstition  that  to  dream  of
seeing  oneself  so  reflected  was  an  omen  of  death  (Artemidorus,  Onirocr.
ii.  7).     See  The  Golden  Bough^  i.  pp.  144-148.

In  a  metrical  inscription,  found  at  Thespiae,  which  records  an
offering  presented  to  Love  by  the  emperor  Hadrian  for  success  in
killing  a  bear.  Love  is  addressed  as  "the  archer  son  of  clear- voiced
Cypris,  dwelling  in  Heliconian  Thespiae,  beside  Narcissus's  flowery
garden"  (C  /.  G.  G.  S.  1.  No.  1828  ;    Kaibel,  Epigrammata  Graeca^


i6o  CREUSIS — THISBE  bk.  ix.  bosotia

No.  8ii  ;  see  above,  p.  145  sq.)     The  killing  of  the  bear  by  Hadrian
is  mentioned  by  his  biographer  Spartianus  {Hadrianus^  20).

31.  9.  The  flower  nardssiis  etc.  On  the  banks  of  a  stream  on
Mt.  Helicon  Wheler  observed  (April  1676)  the  narcissus  in  great
profusion  ''and  so  proliferous,  that  I  had  not  before  seen  any  the
like ;  having  seven,  eight,  nine,  sometimes  ten  flowers  upon  the  same
stalk,  and  very  fragrant "  {Journey^  p.  479).  Cp.  Chandler,  Travels  in
Greece^  P-  258  sq,  (who  repeats  Wheler's  statement).

32.  I.  CSreiuds.  Creusis  stood  on  the  shore  of  the  deep  bay  of
Uvadostro^  which  is  bounded  on  the  west  by  the  fine,  but  barren  and
rocky  mountain  chain  of  Korombili  (2950  feet).  The  ruins  of  Creusis
are  close  to  the  foot  of  the  mountains.  Walls  and  towers  and  a  gate,
10  feet  wide,  but  without  flanking  towers,  may  still  be  clearly  traced.
The  Oeroe  flows  into  the  head  of  the  bay.  See  Baedeker,*  p.  1 79 ;
cp.  Wheler,  y<w//7K?y,  p.  472  sq,  ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  502  sqq,\
Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  241.  When  the  Lacedaemonians  twice  retired
from  the  territory  of  Thespiae  to  the  Isthmus  by  Aegosthena,  they
marched  by  Creusis :  on  one  of  these  occasions  they  experienced  the
force  of  the  hurricanes  of  which  Pausanias  here  speaks  (Xenophon,
Hellenica,  v.  4.  17  sq,^  vi.  4.  25  sq, ;  see  note  on  i.  44.  5,  'Aegosthena').
The  place  is  called  Creusa  (K/xowa)  by  Strabo  (ix.  p.  405),  Ptolemy
(iii.  14.  5),  and  Livy  (xliv.  i.  4).

32.  2.  Thisbe.  The  ruins  of  Thisbe  are  to  be  seen  partly  on  a
plateau,  partly  on  a  low  rocky  hill,  which  rise  from  a  wide  open  valley
or  plain  on  the  southern  side  of  Mount  Helicon.  The  village  of  Kakosi
is  surrounded  by  the  ruins,  lying  as  it  does  in  the  little  hollow  between
the  plateau  and  the  hill ;  and  ten  minutes'  walk  to  the  east  of  it  is  the
village  of  Dombrenay  which  is  connected  with  Thespiae  and  Thebes  by
a  carriage-road.  If  we  approach  Thisbe  from  Thespiae  by  this  road,
our  route  lies  for  some  distance  between  low  hills  which  shut  out  the
view  on  either  side.  Then  the  valley  opens  out  and  we  enter  on  a  long
gradual  descent  which  continues  all  the  way  to  Dombrena^  a  distance
of  a  good  many  miles.  The  bottom  of  the  valley,  which  is  fairly  wide,
is  mostly  in  com,  though  in  one  place  the  road  passes  through  groves
of  olives.  On  the  west  rise  the  steep,  high,  rather  bare  slopes  of  Helicon,
while  at  a  greater  distance  to  the  east  appears  Mt.  Korombili,  After-
wards the  valley  contracts  again  into  a  pass  between  stony  mountains.
When  the  pass  ends  we  see  stretched  out  before  us  the  spacious  basin-
like valley  of  Thisbe  surrounded  by  low  bare  rounded  hills  on  all  sides
except  on  the  north-west,  where  the  rugged  slopes  of  Mount  Helicon
tower  to  a  great  height  Thisbe  lay  on  the  northern  side  of  the  valley,
close  under  the  great  slopes  of  Helicon,  from  which  the  north  wind
sometimes  sweeps  down  with  great  violence.  The  bottom  of  the  valley
is  for  the  most  part  a  dead  flat  covered  with  corn-fields  ;  but  towards  the
east  and  south-east  there  are  olive-groves,  and  in  its  north-western  part,
to  the  south  of  Thisbe,  there  are  both  olive-groves  and  vineyards.

The  most  considerable  ruins  of  Thisbe  occupy  the  north-western
comer  of  a  plateau,  of  some  extent  but  no  great  height,  which  is
defended  on  the  west,  north,  and  east  by  a  line  of  precipitous  rocks  but


CH.  XXXII  THISBE  i6i

melts  gradually  away  into  the  plain  by  a  gentle  slope  on  the  south.  The
village  of  Kakosi  lies  at  the  northern  foot  of  the  plateau,  in  the  hollow
between  it  and  the  rocky  hill  on  which  other  remains  of  the  ancient  city
are  to  be  seen.  But  that  Thisbe  comprised  not  only  the  hill  and  the
comer  of  the  plateau  but  also  the  intermediate  hollow  now  occupied  by
Kakosiy  is  proved  by  the  remains  of  finely-constructed  fortification-walls
which  are  to  be  seen  in  various  parts  of  the  village.  The  villagers
distinguish  the  ruins  on  the  hill  from  the  ruins  on  the  plateau,  calling
the  former  PaJaeo-Kasfro  (*  old  castle ')  and  the  latter  Neo-Kastro  (*new
castle') ;  and  the  distinction  is  well  founded,  for  the  fortifications  on  the
hill  are  built  in  a  wholly  different  style  from  those  on  the  plateau  and
seem  to  be  much  more  primitive.  But  as  the  ruins  on  the  plateau  are
much  more  extensive  and  much  better  preserved,  I  will  describe  them
first.

They  consist,  roughly  speaking,  of  two  fortification -walls,  which,
meeting  each  other  at  a  right  angle,  defended  the  north-western  comer
of  the  plateau  on  the  east  and  south,  that  is,  on  the  sides  where  the
fortress  was  not  protected  by  the  low  cliffs  that  bound  the  plateau  on
the  north  and  west.  The  greatest  length  of  the  fortress  thus  formed
is  from  east  to  west,  or  rather  from  north-east  to  south-west.  The
eastern  wall  is  about  50  yards,  and  the  southem  wall  about  300  yards
long.  The  southem  wall  is  strengthened  by  seven  towers,  each  about
21  feet  square  and  projecting  about  9  ft.  8  in.  from  the  curtain  at
intervals  which  vary  from  33  to  49  paces.  Walls  and  towers  are
comparatively  well  preserved  and  afford  an  excellent  example  of  a
Greek  fortification  of  the  best  period  and  the  most  regular  masonry,
being  massively  built  of  large  blocks,  well  squared  and  fitted  together,
and  laid  in  accurately  horizontal  courses.  The  walls  are  about  7  ft.
6  in.  thick  and  are  standing  on  both  faces  for  long  stretches  to  a  height
of  three  and  four  courses  or  from  6  to  8  feet.  The  tower  at  the  south-
eastem  angle  is  standing  to  a  much  greater  height,  but  only  the  five  or
six  lower  courses,  to  a  height  of  about  1 2  feet,  are  ancient.  One  block
in  the  eastem  wall  is  6  feet  long.  The  southern  wall,  which  between
the  two  last  towers  on  the  west  is  traceable  only  in  isolated  pieces
appearing  just  above  the  ground,  stops  a  few  feet  short  of  the  western
edge  of  the  plateau,  above  the  line  of  rocks ;  and  from  this  point  a
short  wall,  only  about  1 8  feet  long,  ran  north  to  the  edge  of  the  low
precipices  which  bound  the  plateau  on  that  side.  The  great  difference
in  length  between  the  western  and  the  eastern  walls  of  the  fortress  (the
western  measuring  about  6  yards  while  the  eastem  measures  about  50
yards)  is  explained  by  the  trend  of  the  northern  rim  of  the  plateau  from
north-east  to  south-west.  Along  this  northem  edge  of  the  plateau  I
found  no  traces  of  a  fortification-wall.  The  cliffs  were  probably  deemed
a  sufficient  defence  here ;  and  besides  the  ground  at  the  foot  of  them,
now  occupied  by  the  village  of  Kakosi^  was  included  within  the  city-
walls.  For,  as  we  have  seen,  isolated  pieces  of  fortification-walls  are  to
be  found  here  and  there  in  the  village  towards  its  eastem  and  westem
end ;  and  we  cannot  doubt  that  these  are  remains  of  walls  which  united
the  fortress  on  the  plateau  to  the  fortress  on  the  hill,  thus  completing

VOL.  V  M


l62  THISBE  BK.  IX.  BOEOTIA

the  circuit.  They  are  built  of  the  same  fine  ashlar  masonry  as  the  walls
on  the  plateau  and  clearly  belong  to  the  same  period.  One  of  these
fragments  of  walls,  two  courses  high  and  about  8  paces  long,  exists
outside  the  village  between  the  northern  foot  of  the  plateau  and  the
eastern  end  of  the  hill.  Lower  down  and  farther  to  the  west  a  larger
piece  of  the  wall  may  be  seen  among  the  houses  of  the  village ;  it  is
standing  to  a  height  of  6  feet  and  runs  for  about  20  yards  westward
towards  the  eastern  foot  of  the  hill.  Other  fragments  of  walls  are
dispersed  among  the  houses  at  the  opposite  or  western  end  of  the
village  between  the  plateau  on  the  south  and  the  hill  on  the  north.
One  piece,  running  in  a  southerly  direction,  is  9  feet  long  and  three
courses  high.  Another  piece,  near  a  well  the  mouth  of  which  is
enclosed  by  ancient  blocks,  consists  of  two  sides  of  a  square  tower,
which  are  preserved  to  a  height  of  two  to  four  courses  (8  ft.  4  in.)
A  little  to  the  south  of  it  another  piece  of  wall,  about  10  feet  thick  but
not  rising  above  the  ground,  runs  in  a  southerly  direction  as  if  to
connect  the  tower  with  the  western  end  of  the  plateau.

The  hill  so  often  mentioned  is  a  rocky  height  with  steep  but  not
lofty  sides  which  rises  immediately  to  the  north  of  Kakosi  and  extends
westward  as  a  ridge  for  a  little  way  till  it  ends  in  a  rocky  glen  that
runs  up  into  the  recesses  of  Mount  Helicon.  On  the  top  of  the  hill,  to
the  north-west  of  the  village,  there  are  considerable  remains  of  fortifica-
tions built  in  a  totally  different  style  from  the  walls  on  the  plateau.  In
contrast  to  the  fine  ashlar  masonry  of  the  latter,  the  walls  on  the  hill
are  rudely  built  of  smaller  stones,  sometimes  polygonal  in  shape,  which
are  not  accurately  fitted  together.  It  is  quite  possible  that,  as  the
natives  think,  these  walls  are  older  than  the  ashlar  walls  on  the  plateau.
Lower  down  the  hill  and  nearer  the  village  are  some  remains  of
mediaeval  or  Byzantine  walls  built  of  small  stones  and  mortar.  At  the
south-western  foot  of  the  hill  may  be  seen  many  tombs  cut  like  shallow
caves  in  the  rock,  and  there  are  many  similar  tombs  with  arched  roofs
at  the  foot  of  the  low  cliffs  which  bound  the  plateau  on  the  west.
Several  of  these  tombs  have  niches  for  three  corpses,  and  I  noticed  one
that  had  five  such  niches.

In  the  plain  some  50  to  80  yards  south  of  the  plateau  there  are
ruins  of  an  ancient  building  in  a  field.  They  consist  of  a  row  of  square
bases  placed  at  inter\'als  of  about  6  feet.  The  row  extends  east  and
west  and  is  31  paces  long.  Another  row,  of  which  there  are  some
remains,  seems  to  have  extended  parallel  to  the  first  at  a  distance  of  a
few  feet  to  the  north  of  it.  These  rows  of  bases  may  perhaps  be  the
ruins  of  a  colonnade.

Homer  describes  Thisbe  as  abounding  in  pigeons  {Hiad^  ii.  502),
and  the  description  is  still  applicable,  for  immense  numbers  of  wild
pigeons  are  said  to  build  their  nests  in  the  neighbouring  precipices.
Strabo  remarked  (ix.  p.  411)  that  the  rocky  harbour  of  Thisbe  was  full
of  pigeons.  This  harbour,  distant  about  3  miles  from  Thisbe,  is  now
called  Vathy.  It  is  a  beautiful  little  bay  enclosed  by  wooded  hills.  Its
shore  is  very  rocky  and  abounds  in  wild  pigeons,  as  in  the  days  of
Strabo.     The  same  geographer  has  correctly  described  the  situation  of


CH.  xxxii  THISBE  163

Thisbe  itself.  He  says  :  "It  is  situated  a  little  above  the  sea,  border-
ing on  Thespiae  and  Coronea,  and  lying,  like  them,  at  the  foot  of
Helicon,  but  on  the  southern  side"  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  411).  Further,  he
tells  us  that  in  his  time  the  town  was  called,  not  Thisbe,  but  Thisbae ;
and  herein  he  is  confirmed  by  Pliny  {Nat.  hist,  iv.  25),  Polybius  (xxvii.
5.  3,  where  for  Brj^as  we  must  read  Boreas),  Livy  (xlii.  46.  7  and  xlii.
63.  12,  in  both  of  which  passages  we  must  read  Thisbas  for  Thebas\
and  an  inscription  found  near  Kakosi  {C.  L  G.  G,  S.  i.  No.  2225  ;
Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec,  No.  226 ;  Hicks,  Greek  historical
Inscr,  No.  195).  Ptolemy,  on  the  other  hand,  uses  the  form  Thisbe
(iii.  14.  19);  and  Stephanus  Byzantius  {s.v,  Qur/Srj)  notices  both  forms.

A  good  many  inscriptions  have  been  found  at  Thisbe,  chiefly  in  the
village  of  Kakosi  which  occupies  part  of  the  ancient  site.  From  some
of  them  we  learn  that  Artemis  was  worshipped  at  Thisbe  under  the
titles  of  Ilithyia,  Saviour,  and  Huntress  {Agrotera),  See  C  /.  G.  G,  S,
I.  Nos.  2228,  2232,  2234,  3564  ;  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique^  8
(1884),  pp.  401-404.  Otiiers  testify  to  the  worship  of  Athena,  Aescu-
lapius, Health,  Dionysus,  Hermes,  Hercules,  and  Apollo  (C  /.  G.  G.  ^.
I.  Nos.  2230,  2231,  2233,  2235,  3564).  Two  are  from  the  bases  of
statues  of  Trajan  and  Caracalla  (C  /.  G.  G.  S,  i.  Nos.  2236,  2239)  ;
and  two  more,  which  are  unfortunately  mutilated,  set  forth  the  condi-
tions on  which  public  lands  were  let  out  for  the  planting  of  trees  and
vineyards  (C.  L  G,  G.  S.  i.  Nos.  2226,  2227).  From  other  inscrip-
tions we  infer  that  Thisbe  was  a  free  city  with  magistrates  of  its  own
and  was  not,  as  had  been  formerly  supposed,  dependent  on  Thespiae
(C  /.  G,  G.  S.  I.  Nos.  2223,  2234;  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique^  8
(1884),  p.  405  sq,)  Another  inscription  contains  a  clumsy  Greek  trans-
lation of  two  decrees  of  the  Roman  Senate  passed  in  the  year  1 70  B.C.
and  relating  to  the  affairs  of  Thisbe  at  the  time  of  the  war  with  Perseus.
See  C.  I.  G.  G,  S.  i.  No.  2225  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Grace.
No.  226  ;  Hicks,  Greek  his  tor.  Inscr.  No.  195  ;  Mitthcil.  d.  arch.  Inst,
in  A  then,  4  (1879),  PP*  235-249;  C.  T.  Newton,  Essays  on  Art  and
Archaeology,  p.  128  sq.  Lastly,  an  inscription  found  at  the  village  of
//agios  Demetrios,  an  hour  and  a  half  distant  from  Skripou  (Orcho-
menus),  contains  two  letters  of  the  emperor  Antoninus  Pius  to  the
people  of  Thisbe  and  Coronea  concerning  a  dispute  between  them  as  to
certain  lands.  The  emperor's  letters  are  of  the  date  155  A.D.  See
C.  I.  G.  G.  S.  I.  No.  2870;  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  hel Unique,  5  (1881),
pp.  452-461.

The  plain  of  Thisbe  is  so  completely  surrounded  by  hills  that  there
is  no  issue  for  the  river  which  rises  in  the  Valley  of  the  Muses  near
Ascra  and  after  skirting  the  southern  base  of  Helicon  ends  here.
Hence  a  part  of  the  plain  is  marshy.  The  dyke  or  causeway  described
by  Pausanias  still  exists.  It  runs  southward  over  the  plain  in  the
direction  of  the  harbour,  and  serves  for  a  road  across  the  marsh.  The
foundations,  which  are  of  solid  masonry,  may  be  traced  nearly  half-way
across  the  plain  on  the  side  opposite  to  Kakosi.  The  river  flows  from
east  to  west  through  two  openings  in  the  dyke,  converting  the  western
and  lower  part  of  the  plain  into  a  permanent  marsh.     If  the  openings


i64  TIPHA — HALIARTUS  BK.  IX.  bobotia

in  the  dyke  were  closed  in  winter  or  spring  the  eastern  part  of  the  plain
would  be  flooded  and  the  lower  western  part  would  be  left  fit  for
cultivation  in  summer.

See  Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  pp.  257-259 ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  pp.  501-513  ;
Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  242  sq.  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  170  sq.  ;  Guide'Joanne,  2.  p.  27  ;
Atnerican  Journal  of  Archaeology^  6.  p.  112  sq,  I  visited  the  ruins  of  Thisbe,
1 6th  and  17th  November  1895,  and  have  described  them  entirely  from  my  own
notes.  But  the  remains  of  the  dyke  or  causeway,  as  well  as  the  marshy  state  of
part  of  the  plain,  are  described  on  Leake's  authority.  I  saw  no  marsh  anywhere
in  the  plain,  nor  any  remains  of  a  causeway,  though  the  road  striking  across  the
plain  southward  from  Kakosi  certainly  exists  at  the  present  day.  But  I  was  only
on  the  northern  side  of  the  plain,  and  from  Leake's  description  it  would  seem  that
the  remains  of  the  dyke  and  the  marsh  are  on  the  opposite  or  southern  side.  For
the  inscriptions  of  Thisbe  see  C.  /.  G,  G,  S.  i.  Nos.  2223-2368,  3563-3574;
Collitz,  G,  Z>.  /.  I.  Nos.  743-764 ;  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUnique^  8  (1884),  pp.
399-407  ;  tit  18  (1894),  p.  533  sq,

32.  4.  Tipha.  About  6  miles  to  the  south-east  of  Thisbe  is  the
port  of  Aliki^  a  well-sheltered  bay  opening  to  the  west  and  facing  the
port  of  Vathy^  which  opens  to  the  east.  On  the  crest  of  a  ridge  on  the
northern  side  of  the  harbour  are  the  remains  of  an  ancient  Greek
fortress,  including  a  tower,  of  which  the  upper  part  has  fallen  in.
Further  there  are  remains  of  a  wall  along  the  crest  of  a  ledge  of  rock
on  the  eastern  side  of  the  harbour.  A  space  at  the  foot  of  the  heights
was  also  enclosed  within  the  ancient  walls,  and  on  the  shore  is  a  marshy
flat,  containing  pools  from  which  salt  is  obtained  by  evaporation,  whence
the  name  Aliki,  It  is  commonly  supposed  that  this  fortified  port  is
the  ancient  Tipha.  But  there  is  a  serious  objection  to  this  view.  Aliki
is  on  the  coast  between  Creusis  (to  the  east)  and  Vaihyy  the  port  of
Thisbe  (to  the  west).  If  then  Aliki  is  Tipha,  we  must  suppose  that
Pausanias  first  passed  it  on  his  way  westward  from  Creusis  to  the  port
of  Thisbe,  and  then,  after  describing  Thisbe,  retraced  his  course  east-
ward to  Tipha.  This  seems  improbable.  From  Pausanias's  description
we  should  certainly  expect  Tipha  to  be  to  the  west  of  the  port  of  Thisbe
(port  Vathy).  Leake  saw  this,  and  proposed  to  identify  the  ruins  at
the  monastery  of  St.  Taxiarches  with  Tipha.  But  the  ruins  at  that
monastery,  as  we  saw  above  (ix.  24,  5  note),  are  those  of  Corsiae.  See
Leake,  Northern  Gretce,  2.  pp.  502-505,  514-516  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  p.
241  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  171  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2,  p.  27.  Thucydides  (iv.  76),
Scylax  {PcripluSy  38),  Ptolemy  (iii.  14.  5)  and  Stephanus  Byzantius
{s,v.  '^i<f>ai)  call  the  place  Siphae  ;  and  the  last  writer  mentions  also
a  form  Siphe.

32.  4.  Tiphys pilot  of  the  Argo.     Cp.  Stephanus  Byzantius,

s.v,  *A<f>6pfiiov.

32.  5.  Haliartos.  Haliartus  was  situated  on  the  southern  shore
of  the  Copaic  Lake.  Occupying  the  space  between  the  lake  and  the
northern  spurs  of  Mt.  Helicon,  it  barred  the  pass  from  western  into
central  Boeotia.  Hence  the  military  importance  of  the  place.  The
ruins  lie  on  a  low  rocky  hill,  which  rises  gradually  from  the  plain  on  the
south  till  it  terminates  on  the  side  of  what  used  to  be  the  lake  in  preci-
pitous bluffs,  about  50  feet  high,  which  overhung  the  water,  or  rather


CH.  XXXII  HALIARTUS  165

the  morass.  The  northern  and  highest  end  of  the  hill  was  the  acropolis.
It  has  the  form  of  an  irregular  quadrangle,  three  of  its  sides  being
precipitous,  jagged,  and  indented,  while  the  remaining  side  slopes  gently
to  the  south.  Considerable  remains  of  the  wall  of  the  acropolis  exist,
especially  on  the  edge  above  the  old  bed  of  the  lake,  where  six  or  seven
courses  are  standing  in  some  places.  The  style  of  the  masonry  is  partly
quadrangular,  but  mostly  polygonal.  The  lower  town  stood  chiefly  on
the  gentle  slope  of  the  hill  to  the  south  of  the  acropolis.  Few  fragments
of  the  town-walls  remain,  except  a  considerable  piece,  constructed  of
carefully  squared  stones,  on  the  brow  of  the  hill  near  the  south-eastern
tower  of  the  acropolis.  Some  foundation-walls  may  be  traced  in  the
interior,  and  the  whole  slope  of  the  hill  is  covered  more  or  less  with
ruins.  The  extent  of  the  town  is  probably  marked  by  two  streams
which  flow  into  the  lake,  one  on  the  eastern,  the  other  on  the  western
side  of  the  hill.  One  of  these  streams  is  perhaps  the  Lophis  (see  ix.
29.  5  note).  Or  the  Lophis  may  be  the  much  larger  stream  which
comes  down  from  the  valley  of  Zagara  in  Helicon  and  flows  a  mile  or
so  to  the  east  of  Haliartus.  This  larger  stream  has  sometimes  been
identified  with  the  Termesus  or  Permessus  (see  ix.  29.  5  note).  The
village  of  Mazi  lies  at  the  foot  of  a  peaked  hill,  about  a  mile  to  the  south  of
Haliartus,  which  is  now  known  as  Mitilene  or  the  Palaeo-Kastro  of  MazL
In  the  cliffs  of  the  hill  of  Haliartus  there  are  several  sepulchral  crypts  ;
and  at  the  northern  foot  of  the  cliffs  is  a  copious  spring  of  water  flowing
into  the  marsh.  This  spring  is  probably  the  fountain  of  Cissusa,  in
which  the  infant  Dionysus  is  said  to  have  been  washed  by  his  nurses  as
soon  as  he  was  bom  (Plutarch,  Lysander^  28).  A  few  hundred  paces  to
the  west  of  Haliartus  is  a  barrow,  where  there  are  several  sarcophaguses
and  ancient  foundations  near  some  sources  of  water.  The  barrow  may
perhaps  be  the  grave  of  Rhadamanthys  or  of  Alcmena,  both  of  which
were  shown  near  Haliartus  (Plutarch,  /.r.)  It  cannot  be  the  tomb  of
Lysander,  for  Plutarch  informs  us  that  Lysander  was  buried  in  the  terri-
tory of  Panopeus  in  Phocis,  and  that  his  tomb  was  to  be  seen  on  the
road  from  Chaeronea  to  Delphi  (Plutarch,  Lysander^  29).  Pausanias,
indeed,  tells  us  (§  5  and  ix.  33.  i)  that  the  tomb  of  Lysander  was  in
Haliartus,  and  it  is  quite  possible  that  a  tomb  may  have  been  shown
him  in  Haliartus  as  the  grave  of  Lysander.  But  Plutarch,  who  lived  at
Chaeronea  only  a  few  miles  from  Panopeus,  can  hardly  have  been
mistaken  as  to  the  fact  that  the  grave  of  Lysander  was  pointed  out  near
Panopeus.  From  Plutarch  (^De  genio  Socraiis^  5-7)  we  leam  that  the
so-called  grave  of  Alcmena  at  Haliartus  was  excavated  during  the
Spartan  occupation  of  the  Cadmea  at  Thebes  (383-379  B.C.)  In  the
grave  were  found  a  small  bronze  bracelet,  two  earthenware  jars  con-
taining "petrified  earth,"  and  a  bronze  tablet  inscribed  with  many
curious  characters,  which  were  supposed  to  be  Egyptian.  A  copy  of
the  tablet  was  sent  to  the  Egyptian  prophet  Chonouphis  at  Memphis,
who,  after  studying  the  characters  for  three  days  with  the  help  of  his
ancient  books,  declared  that  the  characters  were  Egyptian  writing  of  the
age  of  King  Proteus,  which  writing  had  been  learned  by  Hercules ;  and
that  the  tablet  contained  the  advice  of  Hercules  to  the  Greeks  that  they


i66  HALIARTUS  bk.  ix.  boeotia

should  live  at  peace  and  settle  their  differences  by  argument  rather  than
by  arms.  As  Wiedemann  observes  (on  Herodotus,  ii.  43),  the  grave
was  probably  a  prehistoric  one,  and  the  interpretation  of  the  characters
as  Egyptian  a  mere  fancy  or  rather  a  hoax.

In  the  war  of  the  Romans  with  Perseus  king  of  Macedonia  the
Haliartians  sided  \\'ith  Macedonia  (Polybius,  xxvii.  i  and  5).  Hence
their  city  was  besieged  by  the  Romans  and,  in  spite  of  a  valiant  defence,
was  captured  and  razed  to  the  ground,  and  their  territory  bestowed  upon
Athens  in  171  B.C.  (Polybius,  xxx.  18  and  18  a,  ed.  Dindorf;  Livy,
Ixii.  56  and  63;  Strabo,  ix.  p.  411).  Strabo  asserts  that  in  his  time
the  city  existed  no  longer,  never  having  recovered  after  its  destruction
by  the  Romans.  But  in  this  he  appears  to  have  been  mistaken  ;  for  an
inscription  of  Haliartus  which  is  certainly  later  than  the  annexation  of  the
city  to  Athens  (since  it  is  dated  by  the  Athenian  archon)  and  earlier  than
the  time  of  Strabo,  records  a  testimonial  voted  by  a  Club  of  Huntsmen
to  their  treasurer  for  the  upright  way  in  which  he  had  discharged  his
duties  (C.  /.  G,  G.  S.  i.  No.  2850).  This  seems  to  show  that  the  city
had  in  some  measure  revived  between  the  Macedonian  war  and  the
time  of  Strabo.  From  the  same  inscription  we  learn  that  Artemis  was
worshipped  at  Haliartus,  since  the  vote  of  thanks  to  the  treasurer  was
moved  by  the  priest  of  Artemis.

See  Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  p.  248  sag,  ;  LfCake,  Northern  Greece,  2.  p.  206  sqg,  ;
Mure,  Journal,  I.  p.  251  sq,  ;  Welcker,  Tagebuch,  2.  p.  40  sqq,  ;  L.  Ross,
Wanderungen,  I.  p.  26;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.  558  sqq,  \  Bursian,  Geogr.
I.  p.  232  sq,  ;  Baedeker,*  P-  169 ;  GuicU-Joanm,  2.  p.  15  sq.

In  Haliartus  our  author  saw  some  roofless  temples,  which  he  believed
had  been  burnt  by  the  Persians  (ix.  33.  3  ;  x.  35.  3) ;  but  it  is  more
probable  that  they  perished  in  the  Roman  sack.  It  is  curious,  on  the
one  hand  that  Pausanias  betrays  no  knowledge  of  the  destruction  of
Haliartus  by  the  Romans,  and  on  the  other  hand  that  he  is  the  only
ancient  author  who  records  the  destruction  of  the  city  by  the  Persians.
Herodotus  has  given  us  a  list  of  the  Phocian  and  Boeotian  cities  which
were  sacked  by  the  Persians  for  opposing  them  (Herodotus,  viii.  33
and  50),  but  in  that  list  Haliartus  does  not  appear.  Nor  does  the
name  of  the  Haliartians  occur  in  the  roll  of  the  Greek  army  which
fought  the  Persians  at  Plataea  (see  note  on  x.  13.  9  *a  bronze  serpent'),
though  we  should  have  expected  to  find  it  there  if  the  Haliartians  really
sided  against  the  Persians  as  Pausanias  says  they  did.  On  these
grounds  Mr.  Monceaux  holds  that  the  city  was  not  destroyed  by  the
Persians  at  all,  and  that  the  statement  that  they  did  destroy  it  is  due
merely  to  a  gross  mistake  of  Pausanias,  who  having  read  somewhere
that  the  city  was  burned  in  "the  Persic  war" — an  expression  which
Polybius  uses  (iii.  3.  8  ;  iii.  5.  4  ;  iii.  32.  8)  to  designate  the  war  of  the
Romans  with  Perseus  king  of  Macedonia — supposed  that  this  meant
the  war  of  the  Greeks  with  the  Persians.  See  M.  Monceaux,  *  Pau-
sanias et  la  destruction  d'Haliarte  par  les  ^txs^s^  Journal  de  Phihlo^^ie,
N.  S.  19  (1895),  pp.  109-115.  Mr.  Monceaux  may  be  right;  if  he  is
so,  Pausanias  has  here  blundered  most  egregiously.


en.  xxxiii  TILPHUSIUS—TILPHUSA  167

32.  8.  Antolycns,  the  pancratiast  etc.  See  i.  18.  3;  Plutarch,
Lysandtr^  15.  Plutarch  calls  Autolycus's  adversary  Callibius,  not
Eteocles.  It  was  in  honour  of  Autolycus  that  Callias  gave  the  banquet
described  by  Xenophon  in  his  Convivium.

32.  10.  warned  by  an  oracle  that  avarice  alone  etc  The  oracle
is  quoted  by  Zenobius  (ii.  24),  Diogenianus  (ii.  36),  a  scholiast  on
Aristophanes  {Peace,  622),  and  Suidas  {s,v,  6iei/xt)vo^evoi).  Cp.  Cicero,
De  officiis,  ii.  22.  TT.  According  to  Plutarch  {Instit,  Lacon,  42)  the
oracle  was  given  to  the  Spartan  kings  Alcamenes  and  Theopompus.

32.  10.  Judging  by  l^e  Persian  law.  The  Persian  law  or  custom
to  which  Pausanias  refers  would  seem  to  have  been  one  which  forbade
or  discouraged  the  accumulation  of  wealth.

33.  I.  a  shrine  of  the  hero  Oecrops.     See  note  on  ix.  24.  2.

33.  I.  Mount  Tilphusius  and  the  spring  called  Tilphusa.  To
the  west  of  Haliartus  stretches  a  plain  some  4  miles  long,  bounded  on
the  south  by  the  steep  wooded  slopes  of  Helicon  and  melting  on  the
north  into  the  vast  expanse  of  the  Copaic  plain.  When  the  Copaic
basin  was  occupied  by  a  swampy  lake,  the  plain  to  the  west  of  Haliartus
was  bounded  on  the  north  by  its  waters  and  had  a  breadth  of  only
about  a  mile.  In  the  west  the  plain  is  terminated  by  a  projecting  spur
of  Mount  Helicon  which  advances  to  within  a  few  hundred  paces  of
what  used  to  be  the  margin  of  the  lake.  The  spur  ends  in  a  very  steep
rocky  slope  and  goes  by  the  name  oi  Petra  (*rock').  It  is  the  ancient
Mount  Tilphusius.  At  its  foot  issues  a  copious  spring — the  ancient
Tilphusa — which  formerly,  by  swelling  the  neighbouring  marsh,  caused
it  to  encroach  so  far  on  this  part  of  the  plain  that  there  was  just  room
enough  between  the  lake  and  the  hill  for  the  high-road  from  Thebes  to
Lebadea.  The  place  was  thus  a  pass  of  some  strength,  and  used  to  be
a  favourite  post  for  robbers.  The  top  of  Mount  Tilphusius  commands
an  extensive  view  of  the  great  Copaic  plain  with  the  surrounding  heights
from  near  Thebes  westward  to  Parnassus.  On  the  summit,  just  above
the  spring,  are  remains  of  a  small  ancient  tower  or  fortress,  consisting
of  a  wall  of  polygonal  masonry,  together  with  the  foundations  of  a
triangular  castle  of  later  date.  L.  Ross  thought  that  the  polygonal
wall  was  a  remnant  of  the  sanctuary  of  Tilphusian  Apollo  mentioned  by
Strabo  (ix.  p.  411).  But  Strabo  seems  to  say  that  the  sanctuary  was
beside  the  spring  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain.  He  calls  the  spring
Tilphossa  and  the  mountain  Tilphossius.  Demosthenes,  who  calls  the
mountain  Tilphosaeus,  seems  to  imply  that  there  was  a  fortress  on  it
{De falsa  legationc,  pp.  385,  387).     Cp.  Diodorus,  iv.  67,  xix.  53.

See  Leake,  Northern  GreecCy  2.  pp.  136  sr/.,  142,  205;  Mure,  y<?wr>/tf/,  I.
p.  249  j^. ;  Welcker,  Tagebuch^  2.  p.  42 ;  L.  Ross,  Wanderungen^  i.  pp.  29-31  ;
Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  p.  560;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  234;  Baedeker,^  p.  169;
GtiicU'Joanney  2.  p.  16.  The  identification  of  Petra  with  Mt.  Tilphusius  has  been
questioned  by  Messrs.  Conze  and  Michaclis,  but  on  insufficient  grounds.  They
conjecture  that  Alalcomenae  (see  l)elow,  §  5)  was  situated  at  the  foot  of  Petra,
See  AnftalideW  Institute,  33  (1861),  pp.  84-86;  Phihlogus,  19  (1863),  p.  180.

In  the  Homeric  hymn  to  Apollo  there  is  a  curious  legend  that  when
Apollo  was  going  up  and  down  the  earth  seeking  for  a  place  to  found


i68  TILPHUSA — ALALCOMENAE         bk.  ix.  boeotia

an  oracle  he  came  to  the  spring  Tilphusa  (Telphusa  or  Delphusa,  as  the
name  appears  in  the  MSS.),  and  being  pleased  with  the  spot  resolved
to  build  a  temple  there.  But  the  wily  Tilphusa,  the  nymph  of  the
spring,  unwilling  to  cede  the  place  of  honour  to  the  god,  dissuaded
him  from  his  purpose,  telling  him  that  he  would  be  disturbed  by  the
noise  of  the  horses  and  by  the  mules  being  watered  at  the  spring.  She
told  him  that  he  had  better  go  and  build  a  temple  at  Crisa,  in  a  glen
of  Parnassus,  where  he  would  not  be  troubled  by  the  rattling  of  chariots
and  the  trampling  of  galloping  horses.  The  god  did  as  she  told  him,
but  afterwards  finding  she  had  deceived  him,  he  pushed  a  crag  on  the
top  of  the  spring  and  hid  the  stream  that  flowed  from  it.  Also  he  made
an  altar  for  himself  in  a  shady  grove  near  the  spring,  and  at  this  altar
men  prayed  to  the  Tilphusian  god,  who  had  defiled  the  flowing  water  of
Tilphusa.  See  the  Hymn  to  Apollo^  244-276,  375-387.  The  crag
which  Apollo  is  said  to  have  pushed  on  the  top  of  the  spring  is  no  doubt
Mount  Tilphusius.

33.  2.  his  daughter  Manto  etc.     See  vii.  3.  i  sq.

33.  2.  the  number  of  the  years  which  he  is  recorded  to  have
lived.  Tiresias  was  said  to  have  lived  either  seven  or  nine  generations
(Tzetzes,  SchoL  on  Lycophron^  682).

33.  2.  he  was  changed  from  a  woman  into  a  man.  See  note  on
ix.  19.  3.

33.  2.  Homer  in  the  Odyssey  represents  him  etc.     See  Od.  x.

493  ^9^'

33.  3.  the  goddesses,  whom  they  call  Praxidicae.     Cp.  iii.  22.  2.

Photius  {Lexicon^  s.v»  Upa^iSUrj)  and  Suidas  (s.v,  Upa^iSUrj)  say :
**  Praxidice  is  a  goddess,  whose  image  consisted  of  a  head  merely.
Mnaseas  in  his  work  on  Europe  says  that  Soter  (* saviour')  and  his
sister  Praxidice  had  a  son  Ctesius  and  two  daughters  Homonoea
(* unanimity')  and  Arete  (* virtue'),  and  that  the  daughters  were  called
Praxidicae  after  their  mother.  But  Dionysius  in  his  work  on  Founda-
tions says  that  Ogyges  had  three  daughters  Alalcomenia,  Thelxinoea,
and  Aulis,  who  were  afterwards  named  Praxidicae."  Hesychius  says
(s.7f.  Upa^iSiKt]) :  "  They  say  she  was  a  kind  of  demon  who  completed
or  put  the  finishing  touch  to  what  was  said  (tcAos  iirLTLOtia-av  rois  tc
X.€yofjL€vois)»  Wherefore  her  images  were  heads,  and  so  were  her
victims."  The  Argofuiuiica  attributed  to  Orpheus  mentions  (?'.  31)
"orgies  of  Praxidice"  ;  and  in  an  Orphic  hymn  (xxix.  5)  Proserpine  is
addressed  as  Praxidice.  In  some  verses  of  Panyasis  (quoted  by
Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v.  TpcfiiXi])  Praxidice  is  called  an  Ogygian
nymph  who  was  married  to  Tremilus  "  beside  the  silvery  eddying  river
Sibrus,  and  she  had  baneful  sons  Tlous,  Xanthus,  Pinarus,  and  Cragus,
who  in  his  might  plundered  all  the  fields."  Cp.  Muller,  Orchomenos^^
p.  122  sq.

33.  3-  temples  without  roofs.      Pausanias  supposed  that

they  had  been  burnt  by  the  Persians.     See  x.  35.  2,  and  above,  p.  166.

33.  4.  a  river  Lophis.     See  note  on  ix.  32.  5.

33.  5-  Alalcomenae a  temple  of  Athena.     Immediately  to

the  west  of  Petra  (Mount  Tilphusius)  the  plain  expands,  and  here  we


CH.  XXXIV  ITONIAN  A  THEN  A  169

come  to  the  ruins  of  a  church  built  of  ancient  blocks,  which  may  occupy
the  site  of  the  temple  of  Athena.  Leake  identified  as  the  ruins  of  the
temple  some  polygonal  foundations  on  a  rocky  end  of  the  hill-slope
£arther  to  the  west,  between  the  ruined  church  and  the  village  of
Soulinariy  which  stands  on  the  heights  to  the  south  of  the  high-road.
See  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  135  sq.;  Bursian,  Geogr.  i.
p.  234  sq,  Athena  of  Alalcomenae  is  mentioned  by  Homer  (//.  iv.  8).
Strabo  says  (ix.  p.  413)  that  Athena  of  Alalcomenae  was  so  much
revered  that  the  town,  though  small  and  situated  in  a  plain,  was  always
respected  in  war  and  continued  inviolate.

33.  6.  after  perpetrating  these  frantic  ontrages  etc.  Pausanias
has  here  imitated  a  phrase  of  Herodotus  (iii.  33  and  37).

33.  6.  he  was  overtaken  by  the  most  loathsome  of  diseases.
Cp.  i.  20.  7.

33.  7.  the  Triton.  Leake  thought  that  this  was  the  stream  near
the  village  oi  Soulinari  {Northern  Greece,  2.  p.  135  sq,)  The  Boeotian
towns  of  Athens  and  Eleusis  were  situated  on  the  banks  of  the  Triton
(ix.  24.  2  note).  As  to  the  mythical  relation  of  Athena  to  the  Triton,
see  K.  O.  Miiller,  *  Pallas- Athene,'  §§  40,  41  {Kieine  deutsche  Schriften,
2.  pp.  187-190);  Escher,  Triton  und  seine  Bekdmpfung  durch  Herakles,
p.  36  sqq. ;  L.  R.  Farnell,  The  Cults  of  the  Greek  States,  i.  pp.  265-270.
Cp.  Paus.  viii.  26.  6.

34.  I.  the  sanctuary  of  Itonian  Athena.  Cp.  iii.  9.  13.  Strabo
tells  us  (ix.  p.  411)  that  when  the  Boeotians,  expelled  from  Ame  in
Thessaly  sixty  years  after  the  Trojan  war  (Thucydides  i.  12),  invaded
Boeotia,  they  seized  Coronea  and  founded  the  sanctuary  of  Itonian
Athena  in  the  plain  before  the  city  and  called  the  river  which  flowed
past  it  the  Cuarius.  Here,  says  Strabo,  they  held  the  Pan-Boeotian
festival,  and  along  with  the  image  of  Athena  there  was  set  up  an  image
of  Hades  for  a  certain  mystic  reason,  which  Strabo  does  not  explain.
The  temple  of  Itonian  Athena  seems  to  have  been  on  the  site  of  the
modem  village  of  Mamoura,  which  lies  in  the  plain,  about  2  miles  to
the  north-east  of  Coronea ;  for  at  Mamoura  have  been  found  some
inscriptions  containing  decrees  of  the  Boeotian  confederacy  (C  /.  G.  G,  S.
I.  Nos.  2859-2869).  One  of  the  inscriptions  found  here  gives  a  list
of  the  victors  in  the  games  held  at  the  Pan- Boeotian  festival.  See
C.  /.  G,  G.  S,  I.  No.  2871  ;  Foucart,  in  Bulletin  de  Corr,  helUn,  9
(1885),  p.  427  sqq.  From  this  inscription  we  learn  that  the  horse-races
started  from  an  image  of  Ares.  Hence  Mr.  Foucart  proposes,  rather
unnecessarily,  to  alter  the  name  of  Hades  into  that  of  Ares  in  the
passage  of  Strabo  cited  above.  In  the  time  of  the  Antonines  the
Boeotian  confederacy  nominated  a  high  -  priestess  of  Itonian  Athena
{Bulletin  de  Corr.  helUn,  4  (1880),  p.  15  note).  The  tombstone  of  a
high-priestess  of  Itonian  Athena  was  found  near  Chaeronea  (C.  /.  G,  G,  S,
I.  No.  3426).  During  the  celebration  of  the  Pan-Boeotian  festival  a
truce  of  God  was  observed  (Polybius,  iv.  3,  ix.  34  ;  cp.  Plutarch,  A  mat,
Narr.  4).  Mr.  Latischew  argues  that  the  festival  was  held  in  the  tenth
month  of  the  Boeotian  year,  nearly  corresponding  to  our  October ;  he
thinks  that  the  name  of  this  month  was  Pan-Boeotian.     See  B.  Lati-


I70  CO  RONE  A  bk.  ix.  boeotia

schew,  *  Die  Festzeit  der  Pamboiotien,'  MittheiL  d.  arch,  Inst,  inAthen^
7  (1882),  pp.  31-39.  In  the  first  century  a.d.  the  Boeotian  confederacy
decreed  that  a  portrait  of  Epaminondas  of  Acraephnium  (see  above,  pp.
102  sq,^  \iZ  sq.)  should  be  dedicated  in  the  sanctuary  of  Itonian  Athena
(C.  /.  G,  G.  S,  I.  No.  271 1  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen^
I.  p.  251  j^. ;  Keil,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Boeot,  p.  118).  There  was  a
sanctuary  of  Itonian  Athena  at  I  tonus  in  Thessaly,  between  Pherae  and
Larissa  (i.  13.  2  ;  cp.  x.  i.  10) ;  as  to  the  site,  see  N.  I.  Giannopoulos,
in  Bulletin  de  Corr,  hclUnique^  16  (1892),  pp.  473-478.  From  the
Thessalian  sanctuary  the  Boeotian  sanctuary  was  perhaps  derived.

34.  2.  a  woman  places  fire  every  day  on  the  altar  etc.  We
may  compare  the  way  in  which  the  perpetual  fire  was  tended  by  the
nuns  of  St.  Bridget  at  Kildare  in  Ireland.  There  were  nineteen  nuns,
and  each  of  them  had  the  care  of  the  fire  for  a  single  night  in  turn  ;  but
on  the  evening  before  the  twentieth  night,  the  last  nun,  after  heaping
wood  on  the  fire,  used  to  say,  "  Bridget,  take  charge  of  your  own  fire ;
for  this  night  belongs  to  you."  She  then  left  the  fire,  and  in  the  morn-
ing it  was  still  burning  and  the  usual  quantity  of  fuel  had  been  used.
See  Giraldus  Cambrensis,  Topography  of  Ireland^  xxxiv.  sq,  St.  Bridget's
church  at  Kildare  is  still  standing ;  it  may  be  seen  from  the  railway,
with  a  well-preserved  round  tower  beside  it.

34.  3.  Goronea.  The  inconsiderable  ruins  of  Coronea  are  near  the
village  of  St,  George  {Hagios  Georgios)  in  a  valley  on  the  northern  side
of  Mount  Helicon,  about  7  miles  south-east  of  Lebadea.  A  two-peaked
height  at  the  entrance  of  the  valley  formed  the  acropolis  ;  it  is  watered
on  either  side  by  a  rivulet,  and  stretches  southward  toward  Helicon  in
a  direction  parallel  to  the  adjacent  mountains,  thus  dividing  the  valley
into  two  branches.  The  summit  of  the  acropolis  is  about  200  paces
long  by  150  broad.  A  fine  piece  of  polygonal  wall  remains  on  the
eastern,  and  another  on  the  southern  side.  On  the  southern  verge  of
the  acropolis  are  the  remains  of  a  Roman  edifice  of  brick,  which  the
peasants  suppose  to  have  been  a  bath  ;  hence  they  call  the  place  Loutro
(*  bath ').  At  the  bottom  of  the  hill,  on  the  south-eastern  side,  is  a  piece
of  the  town-wall.  Potsherds  may  be  seen  in  the  fields  on  all  sides,
especially  toward  the  south-east,  where  most  of  the  town  seems  to  have
lain.  There  are  several  springs  of  water  on  this  side  of  the  hill,  and
many  pieces  of  ancient  squared  stones  in  two  ruined  churches.  Between
the  eastern  side  of  the  citadel  and  a  ruined  mediaeval  tower  of  late
Greek  or  Frankish  construction  there  is  a  hollow  depression  about  150
paces  wide,  which  may  have  been  the  site  of  the  theatre.  Strabo  says
(ix.  p.  411)  that  Coronea  was  situated  on  a  height  near  Helicon.

See  Wheler,  Journey ^  p.  477  ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  132  sqq.  ;  Wal-
pole's  Memoirs  relating  to  l^urkey^  p.  342  ;  Welcker,  Tagcbneh^  2.  p.  42  ;  L.
Ross,  Wanderungen^  i.  p.  32  sq.  \  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  235  ;  Baedeker,*  p.  168;
Guide-Joanne i  2.  p.  31.

From  inscriptions  found  near  Coronea  we  gather  that  among  the
deities  worshipped  there  were  Scrapis,  I  sis,  Anubis,  Hercules,  Palaemon,
the  Dioscuri,  and   Lawgiver  Demeter  (C  /.  G,  G.  S,    i.    Nos.    2872,


CH.  XXXIV  SIRENS^AfOUNT  LIBETHRIUS  171

2874,  2875,  2876).     As  to  the  letters  of  Antoninus  Pius  to  the  peoples
of  Coronea  and  Thisbe,  see  above,  p.  163.

34.  3.  an  altar  of  the  Winds.     Cp.  ii.  1 2.  i  note.

34.  3.  Sirens.  On  the  Sirens  in  ancient  mythology  and  art,  see
Stephani,  in  Comfife-Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1866,  p.  9  sqq,  ;  id.  for
1870-71,  p.  143  sqq. ;  J.  F.  Cerquand,  *  Les  Sirenes,'  in  Revue  archdo-
iogique^  N.  S.  10  (1864),  pp.  282-303;  H.  Schrader,  Die  Sirenen
(Berlin,  1868)  ;  Miss  J.  E.  Harrison,  Myths  of  the  Odyssey^  p.  146  sqq,  ;
Langbehn,  FlUgelgestalten^  P«  57  5<i<i'\  R«  Unger,  *  Zur  Sirenensage,'
Philologus^  46  (1888),  pp.  770-775.

In  an  article  in  the  Indian  Antiquary ^  10  (1881),  p.  291  sq,^  Mr.
W.  E.  A.  Axon  points  out  "some  hitherto  imnoticed  analogies  to  the
classical  myth  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  early  art  and  literature  of
the  Buddhists.  Thus,  in  many  of  the  paintings  at  Boro  Boedoer,  in
Java,  we  have  the  figures  of  the  bird-women.  In  plate  civ.  of  the  great
work  of  Wilsen,  Brumond,  and  Leemens  we  have  what  the  authors
style  two  of  these  *  celestial  gandharvis,  beings  half-women,  half-birds,*
whose  music  has  attracted  the  attention  of  a  princely  traveller  and  his
suite."  Mr.  Axon  also  refers  to  an  Indian  story,  translated  from  Pili
into  Chinese,  about  500  merchants  who  were  shipwrecked  on  a  shore
inhabited  by  Rakshasis  or  demons,  who  lived  on  human  flesh,  but  who
changed  themselves  into  lovely  women  that  they  might  enjoy  the
company  of  the  merchants  for  a  time  and  then  devour  them.  The
merchants,  however,  discover  the  mangled  remains  of  previous  victims
and  make  their  escape,  regardless  of  the  plaintive  and  alluring  cries  of  the
Rakshasis.  But  in  this  story  there  seems  to  be  no  mention  of  the  song  of
the  demon-women,  nor  of  their  half-bird  shape  ;  so  the  story  is  scarcely
a  parallel  to  the  myth  of  the  Sirens.  There  is  a  Slavonic  story  which
offers  some  points  of  analogy  to  the  myth  in  question.  Three  sisters
set  out,  one  after  the  other,  to  find  the  Water  of  Life.  Nobody  knows
where  the  Water  of  Life  is  except  a  fiery  bird  that  perches  on  a  singing
tree  in  a  king's  garden  far,  far  away.  The  trees  in  that  garden  sing
and  play  so  sweetly  that  every  one  who  hears  them  stops  to  listen  and
is  at  once  turned  into  stone.  In  the  quest  after  the  Water  of  Life
two  out  of  three  sisters  are  turned  to  stone ;  but  the  third  sister,
warned  by  their  fate,  stops  her  ears  with  dough  or  wax  and  so  walks
safe  through  the  enchanted  garden,  and  catches  the  bird.  See
imigrodzki.  Die  Mutter  bei  den  Volkern  des  arischen  Stamines^
p.  14  sqq.  On  the  Oxus  there  is  a  water-fairy,  a  lovely  lady  with  many
feet,  who  wields  over  the  boatmen  of  the  river  the  same  fatal  charm
that  the  Lorelei  wields  over  the  boatmen  of  the  Rhine.  See  H.
Vambery,  Das  Tiirkenvolk^  p.  368.

34.  4.  Monnt  Libethrios.  Pausanias's  statement  that  Mt.  Libe-
thrius  was  40  furlongs  from  Coronea  is  not  enough  to  enable  us  to
identify  the  mountain.  Leake  and  the  French  surveyors,  followed  by
Lolling  (in  Baedeker)  and  the  writer  of  the  Guide- Joanne^  identify
Libethrius  with  the  ridge  on  which  is  situated  the  village  of  Koutou-
moula^  picturesquely  nestling  among  fruit-trees.  The  ridge  forms  part
of  Helicon,  from  the  main  mass  of  which  it  is  separated  on  the  south


172  MOUNT  LAPHYSTIUS  bk.  ix.  boeotia

by  an  upland  wooded  valley.  In  this  valley  is  the  village  of  Zagara.
L.  Ross  identified  Libethrius  with  Mt.  Palaeo-Vouna,  the  highest  peak
of  the  Helicon  group ;  Bursian  identified  it  with  Mt.  Megali  Lautza  to
the  north-west  of  Mt.  Pataeo-Vouna,  See  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.
p.  141  ;  L.  Ross,  Wanderungen^  i.  p.  33  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  236  ;
Baedeker,^  p.  171  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  31.  There  was  a  cave  of  the
Libethrian  nymphs,  said  to  have  been  consecrated  by  Thracian  settlers
in  Boeotia  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  410,  xi.  p.  471).

34.  S-  Mount  Laphystins.  This  is  supposed  to  be  the  steep
mountain  of  Granitsa  (2940  feet  high),  which  is  practically  a  western
continuation  of  Mt.  Helicon,  though  separated  from  it  by  a  pass  that
leads  from  the  village  of  St,  George  to  Uvadia,  The  mountain  advances
north-eastward  into  the  plain,  to  the  west  of  Coronea,  exactly  opposite
(south-west  of)  the  hill  of  Orchomenus.  It  is  composed  of  a  reddish
stone  ;  the  summit  has  the  appearance  of  a  crater ;  and  at  its  northern
foot  there  are  warm  springs.  Hence  it  has  been  supposed  that  the
mountain  is  of  volcanic  origin.  See  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  140
sq, ;  L.  Ross,  Wanderungen^  i.  p.  33 ;  Bursian,  Geogr  i.  p.  235  ;
Baedeker,^  p.  170;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  16.  On  Mt.  Laphystius  the
murdered  Laius  and  his  herald  are  said  to  have  been  buried  by  Epicaste
(Nicolaus  Damascenus,  Frag,  1 5,  in  Fragni,  Histor,  Graec,  ed.  Miiller,

3.  P-  367).

34.  5.  when  Athamas  was  abont  to  sacrifice  Phrixns  etc.  The
legend  of  Athamas  and  Phrixus  was  localised  also  at  Halus  or  Alus  in
Thessaly,  which  was  said  to  have  been  founded  by  Athamas  (Strabo,  ix.
P'  433)>  aJ^d  where  there  was  a  sanctuary  of  Laphystian  Zeus.  Both  at
Halus  and  on  Mt.  Laphystius  in  Boeotia  human  sacrifices  seem  to  have
formed  part  of  the  worship  of  Laphystian  Zeus,  and  the  victims  appear
to  have  been  the  eldest  sons  of  the  royal  and  priestly  family  which,  in
both  places,  traced  their  descent  from  Athamas.  At  Halus  down  to  the
time  of  Xerxes  the  eldest  son  of  the  family  was  forbidden  to  enter  the
town-hall ;  if  he  was  found  there,  he  was  decked  with  garlands,  led  out
in  procession  and  sacrificed.  Hence  many  of  the  family,  fearing  to  incur
this  doom,  fled  into  foreign  lands.  See  Herodotus,  vii.  197  (with  Stein*s
notes).  Indeed  the  practice  of  sacrificing,  at  least  occasionally,  certain
members  of  the  family  seems  to  have  lasted  into  the  fourth  century  B.C.,
for  the  author  of  the  Minos  (commonly  ascribed  to  Plato)  speaks  of  it
(p.  3 1 5  b  c)  as  if  it  were  still  observed  in  his  time  ;  he  compares  it  to
the  Carthaginian  custom  of  parents  sacrificing  their  own  children  to  Baal
(Cronus).  Athamas  himself,  according  to  one  form  of  the  legend,  was
about  to  be  sacrificed  as  a  scapegoat  for  the  whole  land,  when  he  was
rescued.  This  legend  was  the  theme  of  a  tragedy  by  Sophocles.  See
Herodotus,  I.e.  ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Clouds^  257.  At  a  later  time,
perhaps,  the  custom  was  mitigated  into  a  rule  that  a  member  of  the  ro>'al
and  priestly  family  should  sacrifice  a  ram  to  Laphystian  Zeus  in  the
town-hall.  See  Schol.  on  Apollonius  Rhodius,  ^^^//aw/.  ii.  653.  But
the  original  custom  would  seem  to  have  been  that  the  priestly  or  divine
king  was  put  to  death  after  a  set  time,  because  his  death  was  deemed
necessary  for  the  welfare  of  his  people.     See  Grote,  Hist,  of  Greece^  i.


CH.  XXXV  THE  GRACES  173

p.  123  sqq.  ;  K.  O.  Miiller,  Orchomenos^  P-  156  ^Qq*  \  Preller,  Griechische
Mythologies  2.  p.  310  j^.     Cp.  The  Golden  Bought  i.  p.  213  sqq,

34.  5.  a  river  Fhalams.  This  was  perhaps  the  river  of  St  George^
which  flows  past  the  western  side  of  Coronea.  Plutarch  calls  the  stream
the  Philarus,  and  tells  us  that  it  had  a  tributary  called  the  Isomantus,
which  joined  it  near  Coronea  {Lysander^  29).  Leake  thought  that  the
Isomantus  might  be  the  rivulet  of  Steveniko  which  joins  that  of  St,  George
a  little  above  the  ancient  site.  See  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2,  p.  140
sq,  ;  Baedeker,*  p.  169 ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  16.

34.  6.  Over  against  Mount  Laphystios  is  Orchomenns.  Orcho-
menus,  as  we  have  seen  (note  on  §  5  *  Mount  Laphystius '),  lies  north-east
of  and  opposite  to  Mount  Laphystius,  the  wide  plain  watered  by  the
Cephisus  lying  between  them.  Pausanias  supposes  himself  standing  on
Mt.  Laphystius  and  looking  across  the  plain  to  Orchomenus,  which  lies
at  the  eastern  end  of  the  chain  of  hills  that  here  bounds  the  plain  on  the
north.  The  Greek  word  here  translated  *  over  against '  is  irepav.  Prof.
Ad.  Michaelis,  who  has  carefully  examined  Pausanias's  use  of  this  preposi-
tion {Afittheil,  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  A  then,  2  (1877),  pp.  1-4),  observes  on  the
present  passage  that  **  in  all  such  expressions  Pausanias  is  extraordinarily
exact  and  vivid,  not  indeed  for  the  mere  reader,  but  for  those  who  have
the  scenes  before  their  eyes."

34.  7.  Cknronus.  An  inscription  found  at  the  village  of  Soulinari
records  that  a  certain  Heras  Castricius,  son  of  Aulus,  dedicated  a  temple
to  Coronius,  who  is  doubtless  no  other  than  Coronus,  the  supposed
founder  of  Coronea  (C  /.  G,  G,  S,  i.  No.  2873).

34.  10.  Olmones.     See  ix.  24.  3.

35.  I.  Eteocles  was  the  first  person  who  sacrificed  to  the
Graces.  Cp.  Strabo,  ix.  p.  414  ;  Schol.  on  Pindar,  01,  xiv.  i.  Theo-
critus addresses  the  Graces  as  "  Eteoclean  goddesses  who  love  Minyan
Orchomenus"  (xvi.  104  j^.)  From  inscriptions  we  learn  that  musical
and  poetical  contests  were  held  at  Orchomenus  in  honour  of  the  Graces  ;
the  contests,  which  were  called  Charitesia,  included  trumpet-playing,
flute-playing,  lyre-playing,  heraldry,  recitation,  epic  poetry,  tragedy,
comedy,  the  satyric  drama,  acting,  etc.  See  Clarke,  Travels,  4.  p.  156
sqq, ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece,  2.  p.  631  sq, ;  C.  I,  G,  Nos.  1583,  1584  ;
Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr,  Graec?'  No.  301  ;  Collitz,  G,  D,  I,  i.  No.  503  ;
C,  I,  G,  G,  S,  I.  Nos.  3 195-3197.  On  the  worship  of  the  Graces  at
Orchomenus,  see  K.  O.  Miiller,  Orchomenos,^  P-  172  sqq.  According  to
Professor  Max  Miiller,  the  Greek  name  of  the  Graces  {Charites)  is
etymologically  identical  with  the  Sanscrit  Haritas,  the  name  applied  by
Vedic  poets  to  the  horses  of  the  sun,  and  both  the  Greek  and  the
Sanscrit  names  are  derived  from  a  root  GHAR  meaning  'bright.'  See
F.  Max  Miiller,  Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Language f  2,  pp.  404-413,
418-420  ;  id,,  Selected  Essays,  i.  p.  438  sqq,  Cp.  J.  F.  Cerquand,  *  Les
Charites,'  Reime  arcUologique,  N.S.  6  (1862),  pp.  325-340;  id,,  7  (1863),
pp.  52-64;  H.  Usener,  Gottemamen  (Bonn,  1896),  p.  131  sqq.

35.   I .  The  Lacedaemonians say  that  there  are  two  Graces.

Cp.   iii.   18.   6  and    10.      Prof.   Studniczka  conjectures  that   the   two
Lacedaemonian  Graces  are  represented  on  a  vase  of  Melos,  where  two


174  THE  GRACES  AND  SEASONS         bk.  ix.  bobotia

goddesses,  along  with  a  god  (Apollo)  playing  the  lyre,  are  depicted
driving  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  four  winged  steeds.  See  Fr.  Studniczka,
Kyrtne,  pp.  34,  i6i,  with  fig.  26,

35.  -i.  the  AtheniMifl  alw>  hare  worshipped two  Oracea.

Prof.  C.  Robert  has  argued  that  the  Athenians  always  recognised  three
Graces  ;  that  their  names  were  Thallo,  Auxo,  and  Carpo  (cp.  Pollux,  viii.
106)  ;  that  Hegemone,  which  Fausanias  gives  as  the  name  of  one  of  the
Graces,  was  an  epithet  of  Hecate,  who  was  worshipped  with  the  three
Graces  at  Ihe  entrance  to  the  Acropolis  ;  and  that  Fausanias  was  misled
by  CaJlipus  of  Corinth,  whose  book  on  the  history  of  Orchomentis  he  had
read  (see  ix.  29.  3  ;  ix.  38.  10).  See  Prof.  Robert's  paper,  '  De  Gratiis
Aiticis,'  in  Commentationes  pkilologicas  in  honorem  Th.  Momtnsem,  pp.
1 42- 1 50.  As  to  the  worth  or  worthlessness  of  this  paper  see  H.  Usencr,
Gotternamen,  p.  131  note  24.

35.  2.  the  other  Season  Is  worshipped by  the  Athenians.

Pausanias  seems  to  imply  that  the  Athenians  worshipped  only  ttt-o
Seasons.  Only  two  were  represented  on  the  throne  of  Apollo  at
Amyclae  (iii.  18.  10).  Fhilochorus,  cited  by  Athenaeus  (xiv.  p.  656a),
tells  us  that  the  Athenians  sacrificed  boiled,  not  roast,  meat  to  the
Seasons,  begging  them  to  avert  torrid  heals  and  droughts,  but  to  foster
vegetation  by  due  warmth  and  seasonable  rains.  In  front  of  one  of  the
temples  in  Egypt  there  were  two  colossal  statues  ;  Ihe  people  called  one
of  them  Winter  and  the  other  Summer ;  they  worshipped  and  treated
well  the  statue  of  Summer ;  but  they  ill-treated  the  Statue  of  Winter
(Herodotus,  ii.  121).  The  Canadian  Indians  personified  the  seasons  as
two  living  beings,  one  of  whom  brought  back  the  spring  and  summer,
while  the  other  brought  back  winter  (Relations  des  J^suiUs,  1634,  p.  13
sq.,  of  the  Canadian  reprint).

35.  3.  Angelion  and  Tectaens in  tnalrlne  the  image  of

ApoUo  for  the  Dellans  etc  Angelion  nnd  Tectaeus  were  early
sculptors,  pupils  of  the  old  masters  Scyllis  and  Dipoenus.  See  ii.  33.  5.
Their  image  of  Apollo  is  described  more  fully  by  Plutarch  {De  musica,
1 4).  He  says  that  the  god  had  a  bow  in  his  right  hand  and  the  Graces
in  his  left  ;  one  of  the  Graces  held  a  lyre,  another  flutes,  and  the  one  in
the  middle  held  a  shepherd's  pipe  to  her  lips.  But  from  Macrobius  (.So/.
i.  17.  13)  and  a  scholiast  on
Pindar  (01.  xiv.  1 6)  it  would  seem
that  the  god  held  the  Graces  in
his  right  hand  and  the  bow  in
his  left.  This  is  confirmed  by
Athenian  coins.  For  we  know
that  there  was  an  image  of  the
Dclian  Apollo  at  Athens  (Bek-
kcr's  Am-ctioia,  p.  299.  8  tq.  ;
_  cp.  Athenaeus,  x.  p.  424  f) ;  and

"(cows'op'athbks). "'  '"""''°       on  Athenian  coins  Apollo  appears
holding  the  Graces   in   his  right
hand  and  a  bow  in  his  left  (Figs,  8  and  9).     There  can   be  httle
doubt  that  this  ApoUo  on  the  coins  is  a  copy  of  the  image  of  the  Delian


CH.  XXXV  THE  GRACES  175

Apollo  at  Athens,  and  that  the  latter  was  a  copy  of  the  image  by
Angelion  and  Tectaeus  at  Delos.  Thus  the  coins  in  question  enable  us
to  judge  of  the  attitude  and  general  style  of  the  image  at  Delos.  The
god,  it  appears,  was  portrayed  standing  naked,  with  his  feet  close
together,  in  a  stiff  archaic  posture.  On  his  head  he  wore  a  tall  cap.  In
his  right  hand  he  held  the  three  Graces  on  a  sort  of  stand  with  a  handle
to  it ;  in  his  left  hand  he  grasped  the  bow.  On  some  of  the  coins  a
griffin  is  represented  rearing  against  the  god  on  each  side.

Among  the  inscriptions  which  were  found  by  the  French  in  the
sanctuary  of  Apollo  at  Delos  and  which  contain  lists  of  the  god's
property,  there  is  one  that  mentions  a  golden  crown  weighing  604
staters,  with  which  *  the  image  *  was  crowned,  and  three  other  golden
crowns,  weighing  3 1  staters,  with  which  the  Graces  were  crowned ;  all
four  crowns  were  dedicated  by  queen  Stratonice,  daughter  of  Demetrius.
Another  inscription  speaks  of  two  bars  or  ingots  of  gold  which  were
detached  from  the  image  of  Apollo  {xvfjua.  \p\Hrovv  airci  * AiroWmvos  tov
dydkfxaTOs).  Hence  Mr.  Homolle  infers  that  the  statue  of  Apollo  by
Angelion  and  Tectaeus  was  made  either  of  gold  and  ivory  or  of  wood
plated  with  gold.  See  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique,  6  (1882),  p.  128
sq,  Overbeck  preferred,  with  justice,  the  view  that  this  archaic  Apollo
was  of  wood  plated  with  gold  to  the  alternative  view  that  it  was  of  gold
and  ivory.

A  scholiast  on  Pindar  {01.  xiv.  16)  states  that  at  Delphi  there  was
an  image  of  Apollo  holding  the  Graces  on  his  right  hand.  If  this  is  true,
the  image  may  have  been  a  copy  of  the  one  by  Angelion  and  Tectaeus.
Caligula  used  sometimes  to  dress  himself  up  in  the  style  of  this  famous
Apollo,  holding  a  bow  and  arrows  in  his  left  hand  and  the  Graces  on  his
outstretched  right  hand  (Philo  Judaeus,  De  virtutibus  et  legaiione  ad
CaiufHy  vol.  2.  p.  559,  ed.  1742).  Apollo  at  Delos,  as  well  as  at
Miletus,  bore  the  surname  of  Ulius  (OvAtos),  which  seems  to  have  meant
*  healing*  (Strabo,  xiv.  p.  635  ;  Curtius,  Griech.  Etymologie,^  p.  371  ;
Preller,  Griech,  Mythol,^  i.  p.  278).

See  K.  O.  MUller,  Archiiologie  der  Kunst,  §  86 ;  Beule,  Alonnaies  ifAthettes^
p.  364  sqq,  (Beul^,  following  De  Witte,  interprets  the  figure  on  the  Athenian  coins
UTongly  as  the  Colian  Aphrodite  with  the  Genetyllides ;  see  Paus.  i.  i.  5) ;
Wieseler,  Der  Apollo  Stroganojf  uttd  der  Apollo  vom  Belvedere^  p.  78  sqq.  ;  O.
}sAkT\f  De  anttquissimis  Afinervae  simulacris  Atticis,  p.  9  note  27;  MUller- Wieseler,
Denkmdler^  2.  pi.  xi.  No.  126 ;  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  on
Fans.  p.  144,  with  pi.  CC  xi.-xiv.  ;  Overljeck,  Gesch.  d.  griech.  Plastiky*  i.  p.  88
sq. ;  id.,  Griech.  Kunsimythologie,  4.  pp.  17-21  ;  Collignon,  Hist,  de  la  Sculpture
grecque,  l.  p.  224  sq.

35.  3.  at  Athens three  Graces.    See  below,  §  7  and  i.  23.  8

note.

35.  4.  Homer says  that  one  was  the  wife  of  Hephaestus.

See  Iliad,  xviii.  382  sq.

35.  4.  He  sasrs,  too,  that  <Sleep>  was  a  lover  etc.  See  Iliad,  xiv.
270-276.

35.  5.  Hesiod  in  the  Theogony says  that  the  Graces  etc.

See  Hesiod,  Tkeog.  907  sqq.


THE  GRACES  bk.  ix.  bobotia

;  Who  first  represented  the  Graces  naked  etc.  The  practice
anting  the  Graces  naked  appears  not  to  be  older  than  the  third

.afy  B.C.,  but  thenceforward  it  prevailed  almost  exclusively.  We
possess  examples  of  the  older  type  of  the  Graces  in  several  reliefs  and  on
some  coins  of  Athens  ;  the  goddesses  are  here  represented  in  long  robes
which  reach  to  their  feet.  See  Furtwangler,  in  Roscher's  Lexikon^  i.
p.  879  sqq.  ;  Baumeister's  Denkfftdler^  p.  375  sqq. ;  Miiller-Wicscler,
Denkfndler^  i.  pi.  xi.  No.  43.  To  the  list  which  Pausanias  here  gives
of  the  clothed  Graces,  may  be  added  the  images  of  them  which  he  saw
at  Elis  (vi.  24.  6).

35.  6.  at  Smyrna^  in  the  sanctuary  of  the  Nemeses.  See  vii.  5.
2  sq.^  with  the  note.

35.  6.  Bupalus.     See  iv.  30.  6  note.

35.  7.  Pythagoras  of  Paros.  Nothing  more  is  known  of  this
painter.  Some  have  proposed  to  identify  him  with  the  sculptor
Pythagoras  of  Samos,  because  Pythagoras  of  Samos  is  said  to  have
begun  as  a  painter  (Pliny,  Nat,  hist  xxxiii.  60  ;  Brunn,  Gesck.  d,  griech,
Kiinstler^  i.  p.  116).  As  to  the  sculptor  Pythagoras  of  Samos,  see  note
on  vi.  6.  4.

35.  7.  Socrates wrought  images  of  the  Graces  etc     See

i.  22.  8  note.

36.  2.  made  a  raid  on  the  sanctuary  at  Delphi     Cp.  x.  7.  i.
36.  3.  the  lines  in  the  Iliad.     See  //.  xiii.  301  sq,

36.  3.  the  Ephyrians  of  Thesprotis.  Ephyra  in  Thesprotis
(Thucydides,  i.  36)  was  in  later  times  called  Cichyrus  (Strabo,  vii.  p.
324).     See  note  on  i.  17.  5,  *  Cichyrus.'

36.  5.  the  treasury  of  Minyas.     See  below  ix.  38.  2  note.

36.  6.  the  village  of  Hyettus.     See  ix.  24.  3  note.

36.  8.  Ghloris,  daughter  of  Amphion.  See  Homer,  Od,  xi.  281
sqq.  ;  and  cp.  ii.  21.  9  note.

37.  2.  the  Thebans  were  freed  from  the  tribute  etc  Cp.  ix.  1 7.
2  ;  ix.  25.  4  with  the  note  ;  Diodorus,  iv.  10;  Apollodorus,  ii.  4.  1 1  ;
Strabo,  ix.  p.  414.  Diodorus  and  Apollodorus  say  that  Erginus  was
slain  by  Hercules.

37.  5.  Trophonius  and  Agamedes  built  the  temple  at

Delphi.     Cp.  X.  5.  13  note.

37.  5.  Hyrieus.  Hyria,  the  town  over  which  Hyrieus  ruled,  was
near  the  Euripus  and  Aulis  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  404  ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,
s,v,  *Y/)ta).

37.  5.  In  the  treasury  they  contrived  that  one  of  the  stones
could  be  removed  etc.  The  story  which  follows  is  a  folk-tale,  of  which
there  are  many  versions  in  many  lands.  A  number  of  these  versions
have  been  collected  and  compared  by  various  writers,  especially  by
Dunlop  and  Liebrecht  {GesMchte  der  Prosadichtungetty  pp.  263-265),
R.  Kohler  {Orient  und  Occident^  2  (1864),  pp.  303-313),  A.  Schiefiier
{Bulletin  de  PAcad/mie  impdriale  des  Sciences  de  Saini-P^tersbourg^  14
(1870),  pp.  299-316),  and  Mr.  W.  A.  Clouston  {Popular  Tales  and
Fictions^  2.  pp.  1 15-165).

(i)  The  best  known  version  is  the  ancient  Egyptian  one  told  by


CH.  XXXVII  THE  CLEVER  THIEF  177

Herodotus  (ii.  121),  which  runs  thus.  King  Rhampsinitus  had  a
treasury  of  stone  built  for  himself;  but  the  knavish  builder  contrived
that  a  certain  stone  in  the  wall  could  be  taken  out  at  any  time  by  one
or  two  men.  On  his  death-bed  the  builder  tells  the  secret  to  his  two
sons,  who  soon  avail  themselves  of  the  secret  entry  into  the  treasury
to  rob  the  king.  Seeing  his  treasures  steadily  dwindling,  the  king  sets
traps  about  his  coffers  ;  and  on  the  next  visit  of  the  brothers  to  the
treasury  one  of  them  is  caught  fast.  To  prevent  recognition,  the  other
thief  cuts  off  his  brother's  head  and  escapes  with  it,  taking  care  to
replace  the  stone  behind  him.  Next  day  the  king  is  astonished  to  find
the  headless  trunk  of  a  thief  caught  in  his  treasury,  but  the  walls
apparently  intact.  Determined  to  discover  the  thief's  accomplice,  he
causes  the  headless  body  to  be  himg  up  on  the  outside  of  his  palace,
guarded  by  soldiers  who  have  orders  to  apprehend  and  take  to  the  king
any  person  whom  they  may  see  lamenting  over  the  body.  Meantime
the  mother  of  the  two  thieves  is  inconsolable  for  the  death  of  one  of  her
sons,  and  threatens  the  other  that  if  he  does  not  rescue  his  brother's
body  she  will  make  a  clean  breast  to  the  king.  The  brother  accord-
ingly contrives  adroitly  to  intoxicate  the  guards,  and  after  shaving  the
right  cheeks  of  all  the  guards  by  way  of  mockery,  he  carries  off  the
corpse.  The  king  is  now  more  anxious  than  ever  to  discover  the  clever
thief.  So  he  orders  his  daughter  to  grant  her  favours  to  any  man  who
will  first  confess  to  her  the  most  wicked  and  daring  deed  of  his  life.  The
thief  visits  the  princess,  having  first  provided  himself  with  the  severed
hand  of  a  fresh  corpse.  He  confesses  his  crime  to  her,  and  she  attempts
to  seize  him,  but  he  leaves  the  hand  of  the  corpse  in  her  grasp  and
makes  his  escape.  The  king,  in  an  ecstasy  of  admiration  at  the  daring
and  address  of  the  thief,  proclaims  that  if  the  thief  will  present  himself
and  confess,  he  will  receive  a  free  pardon  and  a  great  reward.  The
thief  accordingly  presents  himself  to  Rhampsinitus  and  receives  the  king's
daughter  in  marriage.

(2)  A  Greek  version  of  the  story,  differing  from  the  one  here  related
by  Pausanias,  was  told  by  the  historian  Charax,  quoted  by  a  scholiast
on  Aristophanes  {Clouds^  508).  According  to  this  version,  Agamedes,
prince  of  Stymphalus,  had  two  sons,  Trophonius  and  Cercyon,  by  his
wife  Epicaste.  Trophonius  was  bom  out  of  wedlock,  but  Cercyon  was
legitimate.  Now  Agamedes  and  Trophonius  were  famed  for  their  skill ;
they  built  the  temple  of  Apollo  at  Delphi,  and  they  made  a  golden
treasury  for  King  Augeas  at  Elis.  But  they  took  care  to  leave  a  secret
entrance  into  the  treasury,  by  means  of  which  they  and  Cercyon  used  to
enter  and  rob  the  king.  Augeas  was  at  a  loss  what  to  make  of  it,  but
by  the  advice  of  Daedalus,  who  was  staying  with  him,  he  set  traps  about
his  coffers.  Agamedes  was  accordingly  caught  in  one  of  them,  but
Trophonius,  to  prevent  recognition,  cut  off  his  father's  head  and  escaped
with  Cercyon  to  Orchomenus.  Hither  they  were  pursued  by  the
messengers  of  Augeas  ;  so  Cercyon  fled  to  Athens  and  Trophonius  to
Lebadea,  where  he  made  for  himself  an  underground  chamber  in  which
he  lived.

Among  the  other  versions  of  the  story  are —

VOL.  V  N


178  THE  CLEVER  THIEF  bk.  ix.  bobotia

(3)  A  modem  Egyptian  (Arabic)  version.  See  Th.  Noldeke,  *  Zu
den  agyptischen  Marchen,'  Zeitschrift  d.  deutsch,  morgenldnd,  GeselL  42
(1888),  pp.  68-72.

(4)  A  modem  Greek  version.  See  Legrand,  Contes  papuUures
grecs^  *  Voleur  par* nature,'  pp.  205-216.

(5)  A  version  in  The  Seven  Wise  Masters  (the  third  example  of  the
empress).  See  also  Kohler,  op,  cit.  p.  311  sq, ;  Clouston,  op,  cit,  pp.
118-121.

(6)  An  Italian  version  in  the  Novelle  of  Ser  Giovanni,  written
towards  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  century.  See  Dunlop-Liebrecht,  op,
cit,  p.  263  sq. ;  Kohler,  op,  cit,  p.  307  sq, ;  Clouston,  op,  cit,  p.  121.

(7)  A  Sicilian  version.  See  Pitrd,  Fiabe,  Novelle  e  Racconti popolari
Sicilianiy  No.  160  *Lu  muraturi  e  s6  figghiu*  (vol.  3.  pp.  210-219);
Crane,  Italian  popular  tales^  *The  mason  and  his  son,'  pp.  163-167.

(8)  An  old  French  version,  Lhistoire  du  Chevalier  Berinus,  Sec
Dunlop-Liebrecht,  op,  cit,  p.  264  ;  Kohler,  op,  cit,  p.  310  j^. ;  Clouston,
op,  cit,  p.  126  sqq,

(9)  A  version  in  the  French  poem  Dolopathos,  See  Kohler  op,
cit,  p.  305  sq,

(10)  A  Breton  version.     See  Clouston,  p.  129  sqq,

(i  i)  A  Dutch  version.     See  Kohler,  p.  306  sq, ;  Clouston,  p.  137  sq,

(12)  A  Danish  version.     See  Kohler,  p.  312  ;  Clouston,  p.  139.

( 1 3)  A  German  version.  See  J.  W.  Wolf,  Deutsche  Hausmdrchen^
*  Vom  Rauberhauptmann  Hans  Kuhstock,'  pp.  397-403.

(14)  Another  German  version  cited  by  Kdhler,  p.  312.

(15)  A  Tyrolese  version.  See  Kohler,  p.  309  sq,\  Clouston,  p.
1 38  sq,

(16)  A  Gaelic  version.  See  J.  F.  Campbell,  Popular  tales  of  the
West  Highlands^  No.  xvii.  d  *The  tale   of  the  Shifty  Lad'   (vol.    i.

PP-  330-349).

(17)  A  Russian  version.     See  Schiefner,  op.  cit,  p.  312  sqq,

(18)  Another  Russian  version.     See  M^lusine,  1878,  p.  136  jy.

(19)  A  Tibetan  version.  See  Schiefner,  op,  cit.  p.  301  sqq,  \  id.j
Tibetan  tales  derived  from  Indian  sources^  No.  4  *The  Clever  Thief,*

PP-  37-43.

(20)  A  Tartar  version.     See  W.  Radloff,  Proben  der  Volkslitteratur

der  tUrkischen  Stdmme  SUd-Sibiriens,  4.  pp.  193-201,  *Der  Dieb.'

(21)  A  Cinghalese  version.     See  Clouston,  p.  157  sq,

(22)  A  Syrian  version.  See  Prym  und  Socin,  Syrische  Sagen  und
Maerchen^  No.  42,  pp.  170-173.

(23)  A  Kabyl  version.  See  J.  Riviere,  Contes  populaires  de  la
Kabylie  du  Djurdjura^  No.  3  *  Les  deux  fr^res,'  pp.  13-19.

(24)  A  Georgian  version.  See  M.  VVardrop,  Georgian  Folk  Tales
(London,  1894),  p.  88  sqq,  *The  Two  Thieves.'

The  following  tales  have  also  been  compared,  with  more  or  less
justice,  to  the  story  we  are  considering :

(25)  A  story  in  the  Kathd  Sarit  Sdgara^  a  Sanscrit  collection  of
tales.  See  E.  B.  Cowell,  \n  foumal  of  Philology^  i  (1868),  pp.  67-70;
The  Kathd  Sarit  Sdgara^  translated  by  C.  H.  Tawney,  2.  p.  93  sqq.


CH.  XXXVII  THE  CLEVER  THIEF  179

*  Story  of  the  two  thieves,  Ghata  and  Karpara ' ;  Schiefner,  in  Bulletin
de  VAcaditnie^  etc,  (cited  above),  p.  306  sqq.

(26)  An  Albanian  story.  See  Dozon,  Contes  albanais^  No.  15  *  Les
trois  fr^res  et  les  trois  soeurs,'  pp.  1 21-126.

(27)  A  Bengalee  story.  See  Ldl  Behari  Day,  Folk-tales  of  Bengal,
No.  1 1  *  The  adventures  of  two  thieves  and  of  their  sons,'  pp.  1 60-1 81.

(28)  A  Kalmuck  story  in  the  Siddhi-Kur  collection.  See  Jiilg,
KalmUckische  Mdrchen^  No.  12,  pp.  58-60.

Of  these  four  last  stories,  the  Sanscrit  and  the  Albanian  ones  are
almost  certainly  versions,  much  distorted,  of  the  talc  under  considera-
tion ;  but  the  Bengalee  and  Kalmuck  stories  appear  to  me  to  have  little
or  nothing  to  do  with  it  With  regard  to  the  other  versions,  though  the
variations  between  them  are  considerable,  the  general  scheme  of  the
story  is  the  same,  and  even  in  details  there  are  many  striking  coin-
cidences. The  thieves  are  sometimes  two  brothers,  sometimes  father
and  son,  sometimes  uncle  and  nephew ;  sometimes  they  are  not  related
to  each  other  at  all.  Generally  they  are  simply  thieves  who  break  a
way  for  themselves  into  the  king's  treasury ;  but  in  Nos.  (6)  and  (7),
and  apparently  also  in  No.  (14)  the  thieves  are  the  builder  of  the
treasury  and  his  son.  In  No.  (8)  the  thieves  are  father  and  son,  and
the  father  learns  the  secret  of  the  movable  stone  from  the  son  of  the
builder  of  the  treasury.  The  incident  of  the  dead  man's  hand,  which
occurs  in  the  ancient  Egyptian  version,  seems  to  be  found  in  only  two  of
the  other  versions  (I  speak  with  hesitation,  for  in  the  works  cited  above
some  of  the  stories  are  given  in  a  very  abridged  form),  namely  the
modem  Greek  (No.  4)  and  the  Tartar  version  (No.  20).  The  same
incident  occurs  in  another  Tartar  story  of  a  different  type  (Radloff,  op.
cit.  3.  p.  338).  Again,  in  the  modem  Greek  version,  as  in  the  ancient
Egyptian  one,  the  thief  shaves  off  half  the  beard  of  each  of  the  guards.
But  in  the  Kabyl  and  Tartar  versions  it  is  the  thief  who  is  half  shaved,
either  by  the  guards  (in  the  Kabyl  tale)  or  by  the  princess  (in  the  Tartar
tale)  as  a  mark  by  which  to  recognise  him.  In  one  of  the  Russian
versions  (No.  18)  the  thief  is  shaved  by  the  guards  and  shaves  them  in
return.  In  most  of  the  tales,  as  in  the  ancient  Egyptian  version  of  it,
the  surviving  thief  marries  the  princess.  But  a  comparison  of  all  the
versions  shows  that  the  old  Egyptian  story,  as  told  by  Herodotus,  is  not
the  original  from  which  all  the  rest  are  derived.  On  the  contrary,  it
seems  clear  that  Herodotus  has  given  us  a  much  abridged  version,
which  we  are  able  partly  to  fill  up  by  a  comparison  with  the  other  ver-
sions. Thus  in  Herodotus  it  is  said  that  King  Rhampsinitus  com-
manded his  guards  to  observe  and  apprehend  any  person  who  should
weep  over  the  headless  corpse  of  the  robber.  Nothing  comes  of  this
command  in  Herodotus's  version  of  the  tale.  But  in  many  of  the  other
versions  the  mother  of  the  thief  is  represented  as  weeping  over  her  dead
son  and  as  only  saved  from  detection  by  the  cunning  and  presence  of
mind  of  her  other  son.  Here  then,  we  may  be  pretty  sure,  there  is  a
gap  in  the  story  as  told  by  Herodotus.

37.  7*  the  pit  of  Agamedes.     See  ix.  39.  6.

37.  7-  AscalaphuB  and  lalmenus.     See  Homer,  Uiad,  ii.  511  sqq.


i8o  ORCHOMENUS  bk.  ix.  boeotia

37.  8.  shared  with  the  sons  of  Oodrus  in  the  expedition  etc.
See  vii.  2.  i  sqq,

37.  8.  They  were  driven  from  their  homes  by  the  Thebans.

See  ix.  15.  3  note.

38.  I.  Orchomenus.  Orchomenus,  one  of  the  oldest  and  most
famous  cities  in  Greece,  occupied  the  eastern  extremity  of  a  sharply-
marked  chain  of  hills,  now  known  as  Dourdouvana — the  Mount  Acontium
('javelin*)  of  the  ancients — which  extends  east  and  west  for  about  6
miles,  bounding  the  broad  level  plain  of  the  Cephisus  on  the  north.
Beginning  nearly  opposite  to  Chaeronea,  which  lies  at  the  foot  of  the
hills  on  the  southern  side  of  the  plain,  the  ridge  rises  gradually  to  a
considerable  height,  runs  eastward  at  this  level  for  some  miles,  and  then
slopes  down  into  the  Copaic  plain.  From  beginning  to  end  it  is  the
stoniest,  barest,  barrenest,  and  most  forbidding  chain  of  hills  that  can
well  be  conceived ;  looking  up  at  it  you  wonder  if  the  foot  of  man  has
ever  trodden  these  rugged  and  pathless  solitudes.  Close  to  the  southern
base  of  these  desolate  hills  the  Cephisus — a  fairly  broad  and  deep
stream  of  tm*bid  whitish  water — flows  between  low  banks  fringed  with
tall  willows  ;  ducks  disport  themselves  on  its  surface,  and  pigs  wallow  in
the  mire  on  its  banks.  According  as  the  weather  has  been  dry  or  rainy,
the  current  is  sluggish  or  rapid.  Riding  beside  it  under  the  willows
on  a  grey  November  day  you  might  fancy  yourself  on  the  banks  of  an
English  Ouse  or  Avon,  if  the  cotton  fields  by  the  river-side  and  the
towering  ridge  of  naked  rock  beyond  did  not  remind  you  that  you  are
in  a  foreign  land.

At  its  eastern  end  the  ridge  descends  in  a  long  and  gentle  slope,
expanding  fan-like  as  it  descends,  to  the  Copaic  plain.  This  long  slope
was  the  site  of  Orchomenus.  The  position  is  one  of  great  natural
strength.  On  the  south  and  north  it  is  protected  by  the  steep  and
rugged  sides  of  the  ridge  which  form,  as  it  were,  a  first  line  of  defence.
At  the  foot  of  these  declivities  the  waters  of  the  Cephisus  on  the  south
and  of  the  Melas  on  the  north  constitute  a  second  line  of  defence  ;
while  on  the  east,  where  the  descent  to  the  plain  is  gradual,  the  site  was
till  lately  rendered  secure  by  the  great  Copaic  swamp  which  advanced
to  within  a  few  hundred  yards  of  the  end  of  the  slope.  The  ancient
walls,  of  which  considerable  remains  exist,  started  from  the  broad
eastern  foot  of  the  hill,  and  followed  its  northern  and  southern  brows
upwards,  converging  more  and  more  as  they  rose  till  at  the  up[>er  end
of  the  slope  they  were  within  about  30  yards  of  each  other.  Here  at
the  head  of  the  slope  the  walls  end  at  the  foot  of  a  cliff  which  rises  like
a  wall  to  a  considerable  height  Its  small  summit,  reached  by  a  long,
steep,  and  narrow  staircase  hewn  out  of  the  rock,  was  the  ancient
acropolis.  Yet  this  cliff,  which  presents  such  an  imposing  appearance
on  the  east,  is  separated  on  the  west  only  by  a  shallow  depression  of  a
few  feet  from  the  long  rugged  ridge  of  the  hills.  This,  therefore,  was
the  weak  point  in  the  circuit ;  and  art  had  to  be  called  in  to  supply  the
want  of  a  natural  defence.  Accordingly  the  little  citadel,  protected  by
precipices  on  the  east  and  north,  was  fortified  on  the  west  and  south  by
immense  walls  of  massive  masonry,  the  remains  of  which  are  amongst


CH.  XXXVIII  ORCHOMENUS  i8i

the  finest  specimens  of  ancient  Greek  fortification  in  existence.  The
fortress  thus  formed  is  very  small,  measuring  on  the  inside  only  about
30  paces  from  north  to  south  by  22  paces  from  east  to  west  In  fact,
with  its  walls,  which  are  still  standing  to  a  height  of  more  than  30  feet,
it  more  resembles  a  castle  than  an  acropolis  of  the  ordinary  Greek  type.
But  the  magnificent  masonry  of  the  walls  leaves  no  room  to  doubt  that
it  is  a  Greek  fortress  of  the  very  best  period,  probably  of  the  fourth
century  B.C. — the  golden  age  of  Greek  military  engineering.  The  two
walls  meet  at  a  right  angle  at  the  south-west  comer  of  the  citadel.  The
southern  wall  is  preserved  almost  throughout  its  whole  length  (about  22
or  23  paces),  though  not  to  its  full  height.  The  western  wall,  on  the
other  hand,  runs  only  for  about  1 2  paces,  stopping  considerably  short
of  the  northern  edge  of  the  cliff.  Probably  it  was  continued  originally
to  the  edge  of  the  cliff,  for  here  in  a  line  with  it  is  a  piece  of  wall  from
two  to  four  courses  high  and  about  14  feet  long  from  east  to  west,
which  was  perhaps  the  termination  of  the  western  wall  in  this  direction.
The  western  wall  is  standing  on  its  inner  or  eastern  face  to  a  height  of
twenty-two  courses.  The  courses,  so  far  as  they  can  be  measured  by  a
person  standing  on  the  ground,  are  uniformly  1 8  inches  high ;  hence
the  present  height  of  the  wall  may  be  fairly  estimated  at  33  feet.  It  is
beautifully  built  of  squared  blocks  of  fairly  uniform  size  laid  in  horizontal
courses.  On  its  eastern  side,  towards  what  may  be  called  the  courtyard
of  the  castle,  the  faces  of  the  blocks  are  not  carefully  smoothed  but  left
rather  rough.  On  its  other  or  western  side  the  wall  is  so  rough — the
blocks  protruding  at  different  lengths  from  its  face — that  it  is  quite  clear
that  the  existing  wall  was  in  fact  only  one  face  of  the  original  wall.
There  must  have  been  another  wall  of  the  same  thickness  and  height
some  feet  to  the  west  of  the  existing  wall,  and  the  space  between  them
was  no  doubt  either  filled  with  rubble  or  occupied  by  chambers.  Thus
the  rough  western  face  of  the  existing  wall  was  not,  as  has  been  sup-
posed, the  outer  but  the  inner  face  of  the  wall.  That  this  must  have
been  so  is  manifest  also  from  the  dimensions  of  the  wall.  Its  average
thickness  at  present  is  about  18  inches,  for  that  is  the  average  thick-
ness of  each  block  and  there  is  only  one  block  in  the  thickness  of  the
wall.  But  it  is  clear  that  1 8  inches  is  far  too  little  for  the  total  thick-
ness of  a  fortification-wall  33  feet  high  or  more.

The  south  wall  of  the  citadel,  on  the  other  hand,  is  preserved  in  its
full  thickness.  In  other  words,  both  its  faces  are  standing.  Each  of
these  faces  is  a  wall  built  in  the  same  style  and  in  courses  of  the  same
dimensions  as  the  western  wall.  The  space  between  them  measures  6
feet  across  ;  and  as  the  thickness  of  each  face,  being  equivalent  to  the
thickness  of  a  single  block,  is  1 8  inches,  the  total  thickness  of  the  wall
is  9  feet.  The  space  between  the  faces  is  not  filled  with  rubble,  but  is
occupied  by  a  series  of  quadrangular  compartments  separated  from  each
other  by  little  cross-walls.  These  compartments  measure  about  19  feet
long  by  6  feet  wide.  They  seem  not  to  have  communicated  with  each
other.  The  southern  wall  is  built,  as  I  have  said,  in  exactly  the  same
style  as  the  western  wall.  Its  two  outer  faces  are  smoothed  to  just  the
same  extent  as  the  eastern  face  of  the  western  wall ;  and  its  two  inner


i82  ORCHOMENUS  bk.  ix.  bobotia

feces,  in  the  quadrangular  compartments,  are  left  quite  rough,  just  like
the  western  face  of  the  western  wall.  On  its  southern  side  the  wall  is
standing  to  a  height  of  nineteen  courses  (about  28  feet)  ;  on  its  northern
side,  where  it  stands  on  a  higher  level,  the  number  of  courses  preserved
varies  from  twelve  to  thirteen.

On  the  inner  or  northern  side  of  this  great  hollow  southern  wall  and
parallel  to  it  is  another  wail  which  may  be  called  the  inner  south  wall.
The  distance  between  the  two  walls  is  6  feet.  At  its  eastern  end  only
one  and  two  courses  of  this  inner  south  wall  are  standing ;  but  where  it
abuts  on  the  western  wall  it  is  seventeen  courses  (about  25  feet)  high.
The  purpose  of  this  inner  south  wall  is  not  clear.  Possibly  it  may  have
supported  a  staircase  leading  up  to  the  ramparts.  The  space  between
it  and  the  outer  south  wall  can  hardly  have  been  filled  with  masonry  or
even  occupied  by  compartments  like  those  in  the  thickness  of  the  outer
south  wall ;  for  the  northern  face  of  the  latter  wall  is  sufficiently  smoothed
to  indicate  that  it  was  meant  to  be  seen,  not  to  be  hidden  by  a  core  of
rubble  or  concealed  in  the  thickness  of  a  double  wall.

So  much  for  the  fortifications,  still  standing,  which  enclose  the  castle
courtyard  on  the  south  and  west.  Whether  there  were  also  walls  on
the  eastern  and  northern  sides,  along  the  edge  of  the  precipices,  is  not
clear ;  but  several  blocks,  apparently  of  a  fortification-wall,  are  lying  on
the  north  side.

Outside  of  the  existing  western  wall  of  the  citadel  the  ground  is  at
present  a  good  many  feet  higher  than  in  the  castle  courtyard.  At  this
higher  level  the  ground  continues  for  a  few  yards  and  then  descends
into  the  slight  hollow  which  divides  the  acropolis  from  the  long  stony
ridge  of  Mount  Acontium.  Thus  the  highest  point  of  the  acropolis  is
outside  of  the  existing  fortification-walls.  But  some  slight  remains  of
four  walls  starting  from  the  western  wall  and  running  westward  at  right
angles  to  it  suffice  to  prove  that  this  highest  point  of  the  whole  ancient
site  was  occupied  by  a  massive  fortification  of  some  sort.  This  is
confirmed  by  the  extreme  roughness  and  inequality,  already  noticed,  of
the  west  face  of  the  western  wall — a  roughness  which  is  only  explicable
on  the  hypothesis  that  there  was  a  similar  wall  to  the  west  of  it  which
concealed  the  roughness  and  inequality  of  the  protuberant  blocks.

On  Mount  Acontium,  not  many  yards  to  the  west  of  the  acropolis,
are  vestiges  of  a  wall  running  across  the  crest  of  the  mountain  from
north  to  south.  The  wall  is  about  5  ft.  6  in.  thick,  and  is  standing  to
a  height  of  one  course  in  some  places  ;  in  others  its  line  is  marked  only
by  a  heap  of  stones.  After  extending  north  and  south  for  some  way  it
makes  an  angle  and  runs  eastward,  disappearing  close  to  the  edge  of  the
rocks  a  little  to  the  south-west  of  the  acropolis.  This  wall  was  clearly
an  outwork  designed  to  protect  the  citadel  against  an  attack  from  the
west.

We  now  quit  the  citadel  to  examine  the  remains  of  the  lower  city,
which,  as  we  have  seen,  occupied  the  long  eastern  slope  of  the  hill  from
the  foot  of  the  castle  rock  to  the  plain.  That  slope  expands  as  it
descends,  so  that  the  shape  of  the  city  was  that  of  a  long  narrow  triangle
with  the  acropolis  at  its  apex  and  its  base  on  the  plain.     To  reach  the


CH.  XXXVIII  ORCHOMENUS  183

lower  city  from  the  acropolis  we  descend  the  staircase  in  the  cliff.  It  is
long  and  very  steep.  At  first  it  goes  down  straight  eastward  between
walls  of  rock  on  either  hand.  Many  of  the  steps  are  ruinous  and  care
has  to  be  taken  in  descending.  Some  shrubs  have  rooted  themselves
among  the  rock-hewn  steps.  After  a  steep  descent  of  fifty  steps  the
staircase  makes  a  sharp  turn  and  then  descends  for  forty-four  steps  more
in  a  south-easterly  direction.^  In  this  part  the  staircase  has  the  cliff  on
the  right  as  you  descend,  but  is  open  on  the  left  On  reaching  the
bottom  you  find  yourself  within  the  ruined  walls  of  the  lower  city.  Of
both  these  walls,  which  ran  along  the  northern  and  southern  edges  of
the  hill  respectively,  there  are  very  considerable  remains,  the  northern
wall  standing  for  a  length  of  300  yards  or  so  and  the  southern  wall  for
a  still  greater  distance.  Starting  from  the  foot  of  the  acropolis  rock,
they  at  first  run  parallel  to  each  other  for  some  way  at  a  distance  of
30  yards  or  so,  after  which  they  diverge  more  and  more  as  they  follow
the  gentle  slope  of  the  hill  downwards.  The  style  of  masonry  is  not
quite  the  same  in  the  two  walls.  In  both  it  is  rough  and  massive ;  but
whereas  in  the  north  wall  the  blocks  are  polygonal  and  are  not  laid  in
courses,  in  the  south  wall  they  are  approximately  quadrangular  and  some
attempt  has  been  made  to  lay  them  in  regular  courses.  In  both  it  is
only  the  outer  face  which  is  constructed  of  large  blocks  ;  on  the  inside
both  walls  more  nearly  resemble  stone  dykes  than  fortification -walls,
being  built  of  small  stones  which  are  hardly  hewn  or  fitted  together.
The  northern  wall  is  6  feet  thick  and  is  preserved  unbroken  to  a  height
of  a  good  many  feet  for  a  considerable  distance.  Near  its  eastern  end
it  runs  for  some  yards  at  a  height  of  1 1  or  12  feet  Five  square  towers
project  at  intervals  from  its  outer  side  ;  they  measure  about  2 1  feet  on
the  face  and  project  about  4  ft.  6  in.  from  the  curtain.  The  most
easterly  of  these  towers  is  partially  preserved  to  a  height  of  9  feet.  On
the  western  side  of  the  fourth  tower,  counting  from  the  east,  is  a  small
gateway  about  3  feet  wide.

The  southern  wall  varies  in  thickness  ft'om  about  5  to  about  6  feet.
Two  to  six  courses  of  it  are  standing  ;  the  height  in  many  places  is  from
8  to  I  o  feet ;  in  one  place  at  least  it  is  1 1  or  1 2  feet  Like  the  northern
wall  it  was  strengthened  with  square  projecting  towers,  of  which  seven
are  partly  preserved,  with  some  doubtful  traces  of  an  eighth.  These
towers  are  from  19  to  24  feet  broad,  and  project  from  4  ft.  5  in.  to  8
feet  from  the  curtain.  Their  height  corresponds  generally  with  that  of
the  wall,  the  number  of  their  courses  varying  from  two  to  six,  and  their
greatest  heights  from  7  ft  6  in.  to  10,  11,  or  12  feet  They  are  built
of  large  massive  blocks,  which  are  on  the  whole  squared.  In  the  wall
a  few  yards  below  the  acropolis  is  a  gateway  5  ft.  9  in.  wide ;  a  block
of  the  lintel  is  still  in  its  place.  A  good  deal  lower  down  the  hill,  still
in  the  south  wall,  there  is  another  small  gateway,  only  3  ft.  9  in.  wide.
About  150  yards  or  so  below  the  acropolis  the  wall  makes  an  entering
angle  to  the  north  and  is  then  continued  eastward  on  the  new  line  for

1  These  numbers  (fifty  and  forty-four)  are  given  by  Leake  and  repeated  by
Schlienumn.  According  to  Lolling  (Baedeker)  the  numbers  are  forty -three  and  forty-
five.     I  did  not  count  the  steps.


i84  ORCHOMENUS  bk.  ix.  boeotia

perhaps  loo  yards.  But  beyond  the  entering  angle  the  wall  is  prolonged
on  its  original  or  outer  line  for  20  yards  or  so  and  ends  in  a  tower,  from
which  a  cross-wall  ran  obliquely  to  join  the  new  inner  line  of  wall.  The
effect  of  this  is  to  form  an  irregular  quadrilateral  of  this  shape  : —


xfoww  \^  ~y~


8


The  space  thus  enclosed  by  walls  would  seem  to  have  been  an  outwork
of  some  sort,  but  what  the  purpose  of  it  may  have  been  is  not  clear.  I
saw  nothing  in  the  conformation  of  the  ground  which  called  for  it.
Apparently  there  was  no  gateway  here,  for  the  wall  a  b\%  closed.

Both  the  walls  which  have  been  described,  the  northern  and  the
southern,  disappear  entirely  some  way  before  they  reach  the  foot  of  the  hill,
though  the  southern  is  prolonged  a  good  deal  farther  than  the  northern.
The  long  gently-sloping  hill-side  enclosed  by  the  walls  falls  into  two
sections,  which  may  be  approximately  equal.  The  upper  section,  which
begins  at  the  citadel  and  has  the  shape  of  an  elongated  triangle,  is  a
good  deal  the  steeper  of  the  two  and  its  surface  is  covered  by  rugged
rocks.  Clearly,  therefore,  it  cannot  have  been  inhabited.  The  lower
section,  of  a  quadrilateral  shape,  is  much  less  steep ;  its  surface  is  mostly
a  smooth  and  gentle  slope  of  earth,  though  the  rock  also  crops  up  here
and  there.  The  line  between  the  two  sections  is  a  sharp  one,  being
marked  both  by  the  sudden  cessation  of  the  rocks  which  cover  the  upper
slope,  and  by  the  equally  abrupt  change  in  the  inclination  of  the  slope.
The  two  slopes,  in  fact,  make  a  well-marked  angle  with  each  other.
The  lower  section,  with  its  gentle  slope  and  smooth  surface  of  earth,  was
no  doubt  the  site  of  the  ancient  city.  Recent  excavations  have  brought
to  light  ancient  foundations  on  it,  and  probably  many  more  remains  are
hidden  under  the  soil.  We  can  hardly  doubt  that  on  the  east,  just  above
the  plain,  it  was  defended  by  a  wall  which  united  the  northern  and
southern  walls  at  their  eastern  extremities.  But  of  this  eastern  wall  I
could  find  no  remains.  On  the  other  hand,  about  30  yards  or  so  below
the  line  of  rocks  where  the  upper  slope  ends,  I  observed  remains  of  a
wall  running  across  the  slope  from  north  to  south  or  rather  from  north-
west to  south-east.  No  piece  of  the  wall  is  standing  ;  its  line  is  traceable
merely  by  a  row  of  rather  large  rugged  blocks,  and  even  these  traces
extend  across  only  a  part  of  the  slope.  Whether  the  wall  originally
extended  right  across  the  slope,  thus  uniting  the  northern  and  southern
walls,  does  not  appear.  Leake  estimated  the  circumference  of  Orcho-
menus  at  about  2  miles.

On  the  lower  slope  of  the  hill,  about  70  yards  perhaps  from  the
point  where  the  steeper  rocky  slope  ends,  a  French  archaeologist,  Mr.
A.  de  Ridder,  excavated  in  October  1893  the  foundations  of  a  building
which,  from  the  inscriptions  found  near  it,  appears  to  have  been  a  temple
of  Aesculapius.     The  temple  apparently  measured  about  2 1  paces  from


CH.  XXXVIII  ORCHOMENUS  185


east  to  west  by  1 2  paces  from  north  to  south  ;  at  least  the  outer  founda-
tions of  the  building  are  preserved,  with  some  gaps,  to  the  extent
indicated.  They  are  roughly  built ;  one  and  two  courses  of  them  are
visible.  The  temple  seems  to  have  been  constructed  of  a  dark  grey
marble  ;  for  some  blocks  of  this  stone,  belonging  to  a  higher  course  than
the  foundations,  are  in  position  on  the  top  of  the  northern  and  western
foundation-walls,  and  other  squared  blocks  of  the  same  marble  are  lying
about.  Some  pieces  of  the  rough  foundations  are  also  standing  in  the
interior  of  the  building.  Part  of  one  of  the  steps  of  the  temple,  built  of
the  dark  marble,  is  in  position  at  the  western  end,  and  on  it  lies  a  block
of  the  stylobate  (?),  which  is  also  of  the  same  material.  Among  the
inscriptions  which  enable  us  to  identify  the  building  as  a  temple  of
Aesculapius  is  one  which  records  a  dedication  to  Aesculapius  by  a
certain  Pythodorus,  son  of  Theocydes.  Two  other  inscriptions  record
the  dedication  of  slaves  to  Aesculapius ;  one  of  them  mentions  an
offering  dedicated  "  in  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius,"  while  the  other
makes  mention  of  the  priest  of  Aesculapius.  This  temple  of  Aesculapius,
discovered  by  Mr.  de  Ridder,  is  no  doubt  the  one  mentioned  in  two
inscriptions  of  Orchomenus  which  seem  to  date  from  about  250  B.C.  and
contain  the  names  of  persons  who  contributed  to  the  building  or  repair
of  the  temple  (C.  /.  G,  G.  S.  i.  Nos.  3 191,  3192).  This  makes  it
all  the  more  curious  that  Mr.  de  Ridder  should  interpret  the  foundations
as  those,  not  of  a  temple,  but  of  two  colonnades,  an  eastern  and  a
western,  of  which  the  eastern  was  built,  according  to  him,  about  600
B.C.  and  dedicated  to  some  deity  unknown.  His  reason  for  dating  the
building,  or  rather  the  eastern  half  of  it,  so  early  is  that  all  round  about
it,  and  especially  at  the  north-east  comer,  he  found  a  great  many  archaic
objects  of  bronze  which  he  would  assigpi  to  the  seventh  or  to  the
beginning  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.  These  objects  include  many  diadems
engraved  with  spirals,  volutes,  dentils,  and  lozenges,  or  stamped  with
rosettes  and  other  patterns ;  a  spiral  ring ;  pear-shaped  pendants  ;  and
a  series  of  plates  decorated  with  reliefs.  The  reliefs  on  these  bronze
plates  represent  birds  flying,  sphinxes,  a  centaur,  a  griffin,  a  yoke  of
horses,  etc.,  arranged  in  horizontal  bands  which  are  broken  up  into  com-
partments by  vertical  bands  of  spirals,  maeanders,  and  other  decorative
ornaments ;  in  some  of  the  compartments  there  is  a  single  animal,  in
others  a  pair  of  animals  facing  each  other.  On  the  same  site  Mr.  de
Ridder  discovered  potsherds  of  the  various  early  types  known  to
archaeologists  as  Mycenaean,  proto- Boeotian,  and  proto- Corinthian.
Among  the  Mycenaean  potsherds  is  a  fragment  of  a  stirrup-vase  (see
vol.  3.  p.  112  sq.^  In  and  about  the  temple  Mr.  de  Ridder  ftirther  laid
bare  a  number  of  later  tombs  hastily  constructed  of  materials  taken  from
the  temple.

About  50  yards  farther  up  the  hill  than  the  temple  of  Aesculapius,
close  to  where  the  steeper  slope  and  with  it  the  rocks  begin,  I  observed
two  more  foundation-walls  which  had  apparently  been  laid  bare  by  a
recent  excavation.  One  of  the  walls  is  1 5  paces  long  from  east  to  west,
the  other  7  paces  long  from  north  to  south.  The  latter  wall  meets  the
former  at  its  west  end,  making  a  right  angle.     But  the  building  clearly


x86  ORCHOMENUS  bk.  ix.  bobotia

measured  originally  about  1 2  paces  from  north  to  south.     Part  of  the
north  foundation-wall  is  preserved.

At  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  long  slope,  outside  the  circuit  of  the
ancient  walls,  is  the  great  beehive  tomb  which  Pausanias  calls  the
Treasury  of  Minyas  (see  §  2  note).  Not  far  from  it,  on  the  level  ground
at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  but  a  few  feet  above  the  village  of  Skripou^  stands
the  monastery  of  *  the  Falling  asleep  of  the  Mother  of  God  *  {Koimesis
tes  Theotokou),  The  church  of  the  monastery,  a  domed  building  with
three  aisles,  is  very  spacious  and  lofty.  It  is  one  of  the  oldest  churches
in  Greece,  having  been  built  by  Leo  the  Protospatharius  in  the  year  872
A.D.,  as  we  learn  from  an  inscription  in  the  outer  wall.  Fragments  of
ancient  buildings  have  been  employed  in  the  construction  of  the  church
and  of  part  of  the  monastery.  Many  dnmis  of  columns,  for  example,
are  built  into  the  walls  of  the  church,  and  others  are  lying  about.
Hence  it  becomes  probable  that  the  monastery  occupies  the  site  of  some
ancient  edifice,  and  this  edifice  would  seem  to  have  been  the  sanctuary
of  the  Graces  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  For  four  inscriptions  relating
to  the  worship  of  the  Graces  have  been  found  in  the  church.  Three  of
these  inscriptions  contain  lists  of  victors  in  the  musical  and  poetical
contests  which  were  held  in  honour  of  the  Graces  (C.  /.  G,  G,  S,  i.  Nos.
3195-3 197).  The  fourth  inscription  records  the  dedication  of  a  tripod
to  the  Graces  by  the  Boeotian  confederacy  (C  /.  G,  G,  S,  i.  No.  3207  ;
C  /.  G,  No.  1593)  ;  it  is  engraved  on  one  of  two  blocks  of  a  round
pedestal  which  no  doubt  supported  the  votive  tripod.  This  pedestal  still
stands  in  the  court  of  the  monastery.  The  archaic  statue  known  as  the
Apollo  of  Orchomenus  was  found  at  the  monastery  (see  vol.  3.  p.  40).
From  other  inscriptions  discovered  at  Orchomenus  we  learn  that  among
the  deities  worshipped  there  were  Gracious  {Meiiichios)  Zeus,  Full-grown
{Teleia)  Hera,  Demeter,  Artemis  with  the  title  of  Ilithyia,  the  Mother  of
the  Gods,  Dionysus,  Hermes,  Serapis,  Isis,  and  Anubis  (C  /.  G.  G.  S.
I.  Nos.  3169,  3198-3204,  3210-3220).  One  fragmentary  inscription,
which  seems  to  have  contained  a  dedication,  mentions  together  the
names  of  Hermes  and  Minyas  (C  /.  G.  G.  S.  i.  No.  3218);  from
which  we  may  perhaps  infer  that  Minyas  received  divine  honours  at
Orchomenus.  From  coins  and  inscriptions  it  would  seem  that  the  forms
Erchomenus  and  Erchomenian  were  more  commonly  employed  than
Orchomenus  and  Orchomenian.  See  Head,  Historia  numorum,  P-  293
sq, ;    C,  /.  G.  G.  S,  i.  Index,  p.  764,  s.v.  *Epxofi€v6s;).

See  Clarke,  Travels^  4.  p.  \y^  sqq,  ;  Walpole's  Memoirs  relating  to  Turkey^
(London,  1818),  p.  341  sq,  ;  Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  p.  226  sqq.  ;  Leake,  Northern
Greece,  2.  p.  144  sqq,  ;  MurCy /ountaJ,  I.  p.  221  sqq.  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und
Forschungeny  i.  p.  lyS  sqq.  ;  Fiedler,  Reise,  i.  p.  129;  Welcker,  Tagebttcky  i.  p.
39  sq.  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  p.  583  sqq.  ;  Conze  and  Michaelis,  in  Annali
delt  InstitutOy  33  (1861),  p.  79  sqq,  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  I.  p.  209  sqq, ;  H.  Schlie-
mann,  OrchonunoSy  Bericht  fiber  meim  Ausgrabungen  im  bootiscken  Orchometws
(Leipzig,  1881);  id.y  'Exploration  of  the  Boeotian  Orchomenus,' y^/ryw/ ^j/"
Hellenic  Studies,  2  (1881),  pp.  122-163  (^his  article  is  a  translation  of  the  preceding
work) ;  J.  P.  Mahaffy,  Rambles  attd  Studies y^  p.  221  sqq,  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  199  x^^. ;
Guide-JoannCy  2.  p.  22  sqq,  ;  P.  Brandt,  Von  Athen  zum  Tempethaly  p.  37  sqq.  ;
A.  de  Ridder,  *Fouilles  d'Orchom^ne,'  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helliniquey  19
(i^95)>  PP*  137-224.      I  was  at  Orchomenus,  ist  and  2nd  November  1895,  ^^^^


CH.  XXXVIII  ORCHOMENUS  187

have  described  the  situation  and  ruins  from  personal  observation,  except  that  I
have  borrowed  from  Leake  the  number  of  steps  in  the  staircase  leading  up  to  the
acropolis.  Mr.  de  Ridder's  account  of  the  building  which  he  excavated  and  which
I  have  called  the  temple  of  Aesculapius  appears  to  me  partly  so  obscure  and  partly
so  improbable  that  I  nave  put  it  aside  and  substituted  for  it  my  own  imperfect
notes,  made  on  the  spot.

With  regard  to  the  name  of  the  range  of  hills  at  the  end  of
which  Orchomenus  lies,  the  whole  chain  from  Orchomenus  westward
to  the  defile  of  Parapotamii,  where  the  Cephisus  makes  its  way  from
Phocis  into  Boeotia,  seems  to  have  been  called  Acontiimi  (Strabo,  ix.  p.
416);  but  the  eastern  extremity  of  it,  on  which  Orchomenus  stood,  was
known  as  Hyphanteum  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  424).  One  part  of  the  chain,
probably  the  western,  was  distinguished  from  Acontium  and  called
Hedylium  or  Hadylium  (Plutarch,  Sulla^  16  sq,\  though  the  name
Hedylium  was  sometimes  applied  to  the  whole  range  from  Orchomenus
to  Parapotamii  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  424).  Cp.  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.
99  sq.  There  is  indeed  a  well-marked  natural  division  between  the  two
parts  of  the  range.  The  eastern  is  the  higher,  more  striking,  and  more
desolate  of  the  two.

38.  I.  sanctuary  of  the  Graces.     This  sanctuary,  as  we

have  seen  (p.  186),  probably  occupied  the  site  of  the  monastery  of  the
Koimesis  tes  Theotokou  at  Skripou  (Orchomenus).      Cp.  note  on  ix.

35-  I-

38.  I.  They  worship  the  natural  stones  most.    That  is,  the  most

revered  images  of  the  Graces  were  unhewn  stones.     Cp.  vii.  22.  4  note.

38.  I.  a  fountain  at  Orchomenus  etc.     This  is  probably  the

Acidalian  fountain  in  which  the  Graces  were  said  to  bathe  (Servius,  on

Virgil,  Aen,  i.   720 ;  cp.  Suidas,  s.v,  'AKiBaXia ;    Etymolog,  Magnum^

s.v.  'AKiSaXirj,  p.  48).     It  may  very  well  be  the  spring  which  rises  at

the  northern  ifoot  of  the  hill  of  Orchomenus,  at  a  point  where  the  rocky

slope  is  still  low  and  gradual.     There  are  traces  of  a  flight  of  steps  in

the  rock  leading  down  to  it.     The  water  now  issues  from  three  spouts  in

a  modem  wall  which  bears  the  inscription  : —

AKYAAAIA  (sic)
KPHNH

1893

The  water  of  the  spring  forms  a  small  pool,  and  immediately  joins
the  little  reedy  marsh  made  at  the  northern  foot  of  the  hill  by  the  Melas
which  here  flows  along  eastward  from  sources  farther  to  the  west.  The
course  of  the  stream  is  fringed  with  willows.  Cp.  H.  N.  Ulrichs,
Rnsen  und  Forsckungen,  i.  p.  183  ;  Schliemann,  m  Journal  0/ Hellenic
Studies^  2  (1881),  p.  156  ;  Baedeker,3p.  200  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  24.  In
the  court  of  the  monastery  of  the  Koimesis  tes  Theotokou  at  Orchomenus
there  is  an  ancient  well  which  has  sometimes  been  taken  for  the
Acidalian  fountain  (Clarke,  Travels^  4.  p.  155;  Mahaffy,  Rambles  and
Studies,^  p.  223;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  23).  But  the  spring  answers
better  to  Pausanias's  description  than  the  well.

38.  2.  The  treasury  of  Minyas.     This  was  a  building  of  the  same


i88  TOMB  AT  ORCHOMENUS  bk.  ix.  bobotia

plan  and  nearly  the  same  dimensions  as  the  so-called  Treasury  of
Atreus  at  Mycenae  (see  vol.  3.  p.  124  sqq.)  It  was  doubtless  not  a
treasury  (a  treasury  would  never  have  been  built  outside  the  walls  of  the
city),  but  the  tomb  of  one  or  more  of  the  old  kings  of  Orchomenus.  The
ruins  of  it  may  be  seen  a  little  to  the  west  of  the  monastery,  imbedded
in  the  short  but  steep  declivity  which  forms  the  last  step  down  to  the
plain  of  the  long  gently-sloping  site  of  Orchomenus.  Like  the  similar
structures  of  which  so  many  have  been  found  in  Greece,  the  so-called
Treasury  of  Minyas  comprised  a  spacious  domed  chamber  of  circular
shape  (the  beehive  tomb)  approached  by  a  broad  straight  passage
i^drotnos)  leading  horizontally  through  the  hill-side ;  and,  like  the
Treasury  of  Atreus  at  Mycenae,  it  had  in  addition  a  square  inner  chamber
opening  off  the  larger  domed  chamber.  The  entrance  to  the  tomb  was
known  to  and  described  by  travellers  from  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth
century  onwards,  but  it  was  not  till  1880  that  the  interior,  which  had
long  been  blocked  with  fallen  stones  and  rubbish,  was  excavated  by
Schlicmann.  In  1886  the  same  indefatigable  explorer,  accompanied  by
Dr.  Dorpfeld,  returned  to  the  spot  and  made  some  fresh  excavations.
Before  his  time,  in  1862,  an  enterprising  mayor  of  the  village,  Mr.
Gadakes,  had  pulled  down  the  whole  of  the  walls  of  the  dromos  in  order
to  procure  building  materials  for  a  new  church,  although,  as  Schliemann
observes,  the  village  already  possessed  two  churches,  each  of  them  large
enough  to  hold  the  whole  population  not  only  of  Skripou  but  of  the
neighbouring  village  of  Petromagoula,

Of  the  walls  which  had  lined  the  passage  {dromos)  leading  to  the
tomb  a  single  stone  had  escaped  the  ravages  of  Mr.  Gadakes,  and  from
this  it  is  inferred  that  the  passage  was  18  feet  wide.  The  gateway
with  a  block  of  the  lintel  is  preserved.  The  walls  on  each  side  of  it  are
standing  to  a  height  of  twelve  courses.  The  opening  of  the  gateway,
which  is  18  ft.  4 J  in.  high,  narrows  somewhat  from  bottom  to  top.  On
the  level  of  the  ground   it   is  9  ft.   |  in.  wide ;  at  the  top  it  is  8  ft.

2  J  in.  wide.  The  length  of  the  corridor  from  the  doon\'ay  into  the
circular  chamber  is  17  ft.  8  in.  A  portion  of  the  threshold  remains,
consisting  of  two  superposed  slabs,  which  are  well  polished  and  measure
9  ft.  1^  in.  in  length  by  3  ft.  ^  in.  in  breadth.  In  the  upj>er  slab  there
are  some  curiously-shaped  grooves  and  sockets  which  prove  that  there
were  double-folding  doors.  The  block  of  the  lintel  which  remains  in  its
place  over  the  inner  part  of  the  corridor  leading  from  the  doorway
into  the  tomb  is  a  huge  block  about  1 5  ft  long  by  7  ft.  6  in.  broad  and

3  ft.  3  in.  deep.i  But  as  the  outline  of  the  block  is  irregular  at  the
ends  and  sides  it  is  not  possible  to  give  its  dimensions  exactly.  On  its
inner  side  the  stone  is  curved  horizontally  so  as  to  follow  the  curve  of
the  circular  chamber,  and  vertically  so  as  to  follow  the  curve  of  the

^  These  are  my  measurements.  According  to  Dodwell,  the  length  of  the  lintel  is
15  ft.  4  in.  ;  according  to  Leake,  i6  feet ;  according  to  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  18  feet ;  and
according  to  Baedeker,  6  metres  or  18  ft.  8  in.  If  we  could  trust  these  measure-
ments, the  stone  must  have  been  steadily  growing  since  the  beginning  of  the  century.
Schliemann's  measurements  are  as  follows  :  length,  16  ft.  8  in.  ;  breadth,  7  ft.  5  in.  ;
depth,  3  ft.  2}  in.


mam


CH.  XXXVIII  TOMB  AT  ORCHOMENUS  189

dome.  The  tomb,  including  the  lintel,  is  built  of  the  same  dark  grey
marble  as  the  temple  of  Aesculapius  (see  above,  p.  184  j^.)  The  colour
inclines  to  a  steely  blue-black,  but  by  exposure  to  the  air  this  marble
takes  a  creamy  yellow  colour,  which  is  at  present  the  general  colour  of
the  walls  of  the  tomb.  Hence  Col.  Leake  described  the  marble  as  white.
It  is  only  indeed  where  the  stones  are  broken  that  the  dark  grey
colour  appears.  The  roof  of  the  inner  chamber,  however,  was  con-
structed of  a  totally  different  sort  of  stone  (see  below).

The  diameter  of  the  circular  chamber  is  46  ft.  10  in.  from  south-
west to  north-east  and  from  west  to  east,  but  46  ft.  i^  in.  from
north  to  south.  The  chamber  is  therefore  smaller  by  3  feet  and  some
inches  than  the  corresponding  chamber  in  the  Treasury  of  Atreus  at
Mycenae,  which  is  50  feet  in  diameter.  The  upper  part  of  the  dome  of
the  circular  chamber  is  gone,  but  the  walls  are  still  standing  to  a  height,
in  general,  of  eight  courses ;  at  the  doorway  there  are  twelve  courses
standing.  The  masonry  is  quite  regular ;  the  blocks  are  quadrangular
and  laid  in  horizontal  courses  ;  they  are  smoothed  on  their  outer  surfaces
and  accurately  fitted  together.  In  appearance  this  most  ancient  wall  is
as  fresh  as  if  it  had  been  built  yesterday.  The  blocks  of  the  two  lowest
courses  are  in  general  larger  than  the  blocks  of  the  upper  courses ;
some  of  them  are  over  5  feet  in  length.  From  the  fifth  course  upward
almost  every  stone  has  a  hole  in  it  with  the  remains  of  a  bronze  nail.
These  nails  appear  to  have  been  used  to  fasten  circular  bronze  plates,
probably  shaped  like  rosettes,  to  the  wall ;  for  round  the  holes  may  be
traced  circular  grooves  cut  in  the  stone,  and  some  fragments  of  bronze
plates  were  found  in  the  tomb  by  Schliemann.  The  holes  in  each
course  of  masonry  are  arranged  so  that  a  perpendicular  line  drawn
through  each  hole  would  pass  at  equal  distances  between  the  two  holes
in  the  course  above.  Among  the  marble  slabs  found  by  Schliemann  in
the  tomb  is  one  which  from  its  peculiarly-curved  shape  and  general
appearance  he  judged  to  be  the  keystone  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  It
is  pierced  with  a  hole  nearly  3  inches  in  diameter.

Nearly  in  the  middle  of  the  circular  chamber,  but  somewhat  nearer
the  north  side,  is  a  marble  pedestal  about   19  feet  long  with  two  short

returns  at  each  end,  in  this  shape   (j  J .     It  supported  several

marble  statues,  of  which  some  fragments  have  been  found.  The  style
both  of  the  sculptures  and  of  the  mouldings  of  the  pedestal  proves  that
this  monument  is  not  earlier  than  the  Macedonian  period.  In  front  of
the  base  there  seems  to  have  been  a  table  or  sarcophagus.  Schliemann
conjectured  that  the  monument  was  raised  over  the  bones  of  Hesiod,
which,  as  Pausanias  tells  us  immediately,  were  brought  back  from  Nau-
pactus  to  Orchomenus.  But  Pausanias  speaks  as  if  the  grave  of  Hesiod
were  quite  distinct  from  this  beehive  tomb,  which  he  calls  the  Treasury
of  Minyas ;  and  we  are  expressly  told  that  the  poet's  remains  were
deposited  in  the  middle  of  the  market-place  (Proclus,  Vita  Hesiodi^  4,
in  Biographi  Graeci^  ed.  Westermann,  p.  49) — a  spot  which  the  Greeks
often  assigned  as  a  last  resting-place  to  the  ashes  of  their  most  illustrious
dead  (see  vol.  2.  p.  533).


I90  TOMB  AT  ORCHOMENUS  bk.  ix.  bobotia

In  the  eastern  side  of  the  circular  chamber  a  doorway  6  ft.  lo  in.^
high  leads  into  the  smaller  quadrangular  chamber.  Like  the  great
doorway  of  the  circular  chamber,  this  smaller  doorway  narrows  some-
what from  bottom  to  top.  Below  its  width  is  3  ft.  11  in. ;  above  its
width  is  3  ft.  8  in.  In  the  wall  of  the  circular  chamber  immediately
above  and  on  either  side  of  this  doorway  is  a  triple  row  of  holes,  in
most  of  which  are  the  remains  of  bronze  nails.  This  proves  that  the
entrance  to  the  side-chamber  was  even  more  elaborately  adorned  with
bronze  plates  than  the  rest  of  the  great  domed  chamber.  The  corridor
leading  from  the  doorway  into  the  side-chamber  is  9  ft  4  in.  long  and

7  ft.  2  in.  high.  The  threshold  of  the  doorway  is  formed  by  a  stone
I  ft.  3i  in.  broad,  on  the  upper  surface  of  which  are  three  quadrangular
grooves  on  either  side.  The  sides  of  the  corridor  are  preserved  to  their
full  height ;  the  number  of  courses  in  the  wall  on  each  side  is  four.  The
side-chamber  into  which  the  corridor  leads  is  hewn  out  of  the  native
calcareous  rock.  It  seems  to  have  been  sunk  from  above  like  a  shaft,
not  excavated  from  the  domed  chamber ;  for  the  hewn  face  of  the  rock
rises  vertically  several  feet  above  the  line  of  the  roof  of  the  chamber.
All  four  sides  of  the  chamber  thus  hewn  out  of  the  rock  were  lined  with
walls  built  of  small  rough  stones  bonded  with  clay  and  averaging  about
4  ft.  6  in.  in  thickness.  Measured  within  these  walls,  the  chamber  was
12  ft.  7  J  in.  long  from  east  to  west  and  9  ft.  3^  in.  wide  from  north  to
south.  The  floor  consists  of  the  smoothed  and  levelled  rock ;  it  is  on
the  same  level  as  the  floor  of  the  domed  chamber.     At  a  height  of

8  feet  above  the  floor  the  chamber  was  roofed  with  four  slabs  of  pale
greenish  schist,  which  were  laid  across  it  in  the  direction  from  north
to  south.  The  lower  sides  of  these  slabs,  forming  the  ceiling  of  the
chamber,  were  delicately  carved  in  low  relief  with  a  beautiftd  pattern
composed  of  rosettes,  spirals,  and  a  sort  of  palmette.  An  outer  border
of  rosettes  enclosed  rows  of  spirals  intertwined  with  palmettes ;  within
these  again  there  was  a  double  border  of  spirals,  which  again  enclosed
rows  of  spirals  intertwined  with  palmettes.  It  has  been  suggested  that
this  elaborate  design  was  copied  from  a  carpet  pattern.  The  walls  of
the  chamber  appear  to  have  been  lined  with  marble  slabs  carved  with
the  same  pattern ;  above  and  below  ran  a  border  of  rosettes,  and  the
intermediate  space  was  filled  with  spirals  and  palmettes.  Schliemann
found  some  remains  of  this  marble  lining  of  the  walls  still  in  position.
But  the  magnificent  roof  had  fallen  in  before  he  excavated  the  tomb.
From  the  information  given  him  by  the  villagers  it  would  seem  that  the
roof  remained  in  its  place  till  1870,  when  it  gave  way  with  a  loud  crash,
and  the  earth  which  it  had  supported  having  fallen  in  at  the  same  time
a  deep  hole  in  the  ground  was  formed.  When  I  visited  the  tomb  in
1895  the  side-chamber  was  choked  with  a  mass  of  broken  stones  and
some  very  large  slabs.  The  walls  which  once  lined  the  sides  of  the
chamber  had  either  fallen  in  or  were  buried  under  rubbish.  Some  of
the  slabs  of  the  roof,  exhibiting  the  pattern  which  has  been  described,
lay  in  the  beehive  chamber.     Altogether  the  place  presented  a  neglected

^  This  is  my  measurement     According  to  Schliemann  the  height  of  the  door  is
6  ft.  3 J  in.  high  (Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  a  (1881),  p.  144.


CH.  XXXVIII  TOMB  AT  ORCHOMENUS  191

and  forlorn  appearance.  It  was  perfectly  open ;  no  precautions  were
taken  to  protect  the  tomb  from  the  depredations  of  the  villagers  and  of
unscrupulous  travellers.

The  close  resemblance  of  the  great  beehive  tomb  at  Orchomenus
to  the  beehive  tombs  at  Mycenae,  and  especially  to  the  so-called  Trea-
sury of  Atreus,  points  to  the  conclusion  that  the  ancient  peoples  who
inhabited  these  cities  and  built  these  tombs  were  akin  to  each  other  in
the  type  of  their  civilisation  at  least,  if  not  in  blood.  This  conclusion,
drawn  from  the  general  plan  and  construction  of  the  tombs,  is  con-
firmed by  the  decorative  pattern  carved  on  the  roof  and  walls  of  the
inner  chamber  in  the  Orchomenian  tomb,  since  that  pattern,  in  its
combination  of  rosettes  and  spirals,  is  thoroughly  Mycenaean  in  character.
Additional  confirmation  is  derived  from  the  resemblance  of  the  archaic
pottery  found  at  Orchomenus  to  that  found  at  Mycenae  as  well  as  at
other  places  where  the  Mycenaean  type  of  civilisation  prevailed.  Of
this  Orchomenian  pottery  Schliemann  says  :  "  It  is  very  remarkable  that
at  Orchomenus  painted  pottery,  with  spirals  and  other  Mycenian  orna-
mentation, also  cows  with  two  long  horns  and  the  same  variegated
colours  as  at  Mycenae,  as  well  as  goblets  of  the  very  same  form  and
colour  as  at  Mycenae,  are  generally  only  found  down  to  a  depth  of
about  6  feet  below  the  surface  of  the  ground,  and  that  at  a  greater
depth,  monochrome,  black,  red,  or  yellow,  hand-made  or  wheel-made
pottery  is  found  almost  exclusively,  analogous  to  some  of  that  collected
by  me  in  the  royal  sepulchres  at  Mycenae.  Very  frequent  here  are  the
large  hand-made  black  goblets  or  bowls,  with  a  hollow  foot  and  hori-
zontal flutings  in  the  middle,  which  I  also  found  at  Mycenae ;  also
fragments  of  vases  having  a  perpendicular  excrescence  with  a  vertical
perforation  for  suspension  on  either  side  ;  also  fragments  of  vases  having
on  each  side  a  horizontal  excrescence  with  a  vertical  hole.  But  most
fragments  belong  to  vases  having  on  each  side  excrescences  with  a
horizontal  tubular  hole  for  suspension.''  Fragments  of  glazed  or  lustrous
pottery,  resembling  the  glazed  Mycenaean  ware,  were  also  found  by
Schliemann  in  the  tomb  as  well  as  in  the  lowest  strata  of  the  shafts  and
trenches  which  he  dug  somewhat  higher  up  the  hill  to  the  north-west,
not  &r  from  the  Acidalian  spring.  Rude  designs  of  curious  form  are
painted  on  some  of  the  glazed  potsherds.

As  to  the  beehive  tomb  of  Orchomenus  see  (in  addition  to  the  works  on  Orcho-
menus referred  to  above,  p.  186)  Verkandlungen  der  Berliner  Gesellschaft  fUr
Anthropologie  und  UrgeschichtCy  for  1886,  pp.  376-379  (published  with  the  Berlin
Zeitschrift  fUr  Ethnologic) ;  C.  Schuchhardt,  Schliemann^ s  Ausgrabungen?  pp.
352-359 ;  Ch.  Belgcr,  Beitrdge  zur  Kenniniss  der  griechischen  Kuppelgrdber,  pp.
34-37  ;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  tart  dans  Vantiquitiy  6.  pp.  439-447.  I
visited  the  tomb,  2nd  and  3rd  November  1895,  ^^^  ^^^^  described  it  partly  from
personal  observation.

38.  3.  graves  of  Minyas  and  Hesiod.  These  are  not  to  be  looked
for  in  the  Treasury  of  Minyas  (the  great  beehive  tomb),  though  some
writers  have  supposed  that  this  is  what  Pausanias  meant  (see  above,  p.
189).  Moreover,  as  we  have  seen  {ib,\  the  bones  of  Hesiod  are  said  to
have  been  laid  in  the  market-place  of  Orchomenus.    This  statement,  if  we


192  THE  RIVER  MELAS  bk.  ix.  boeotia

accept  it,  seems  fatal  to  the  other  identifications  of  the  tomb  of  Hesiod
which  have  been  suggested ;  for  whereas  the  market-place  must  have
been  within  the  walls  of  the  city,  the  suggested  sites  all  lie  outside  of
them.  Thus  H.  N.  Ulrichs  found  in  the  plain  about  five  minutes  to  the
north  of  the  monastery,  on  the  right  of  the  path,  the  remains  of  what  he
conjectured  to  have  been  a  heroon  or  chapel  dedicated  to  the  worship  of
Hesiod  as  a  hero.  The  building  had  apparently  been  22  feet  long  by
1 1  feet  broad,  but  only  about  a  third  of  it  was  standing ;  amongst  the
blocks  Ulrichs  saw  a  piece  of  a  cornice  of  bluish  marble  decorated  with
a  simple  Greek  pattern.  See  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen^
I.  p.  193  J7.  Two  conical  hillocks  have  also  been  pointed  to  as  possibly
marking  the  graves  of  Hesiod  and  Minyas.  The  natives  call  them
Magoula.  At  present  they  are  planted  with  vines  and  exactly  resemble
the  so-called  heroic  tombs  of  the  Troad.  One  of  them  is  near  Skripou;
the  other  is  farther  to  the  west,  near  the  village  of  Rhotnaiko,  See
Schliemann,  m  Journal  of  Hellenic  StudieSy  2  (1881),  pp.  130,  156;
Dodwell,  Tour  J  i.  p.  232  ;  Clarke,  Travels^  4.  p.  150  sq,

38.  3.  they  recovered  the  bones  of  Hesiod  etc  Cp.  Aristotle,
Fragfnenta,  ed.  V.  Rose  (Leipzig,  1886),  No.  565,  p.  346  sqg. ;
Biographi  Graeci^  ed.  Westermann,  pp.  42,  49.

38.  3.  a  crow  would  show  them  the  spot  etc.  Cp.  Lucian,  De
tnorte  Peregrini^  41.

38.  4.  Ascra  with  the  many  corn-fields.  The  bottom  of  the
pleasant  valley  of  Ascra  or  Valley  of  the  Muses  is  still  mainly  corn-
land,  though  sheep  may  also  be  seen  browsing  in  it.

38.  5.  a  bronze  likeness  of  the  spectre  etc.  On  a  coin  of  Orcho-
menus  the  chained  image  of  the  spectre  (an  ordinary  human  being  in
appearance)  is  represented  on  one  side ;  on  the  other  side  of  the  coin
is  Artemis  kneeling,  armed  with  a  bow.  See  Daremberg  et  Saglio,
Diet,  des  Antiquitis^  s.v,  *  Actaeon,*  vol.  i.  p.  53.

38.  6.  a  temple  of  Hercnles the  springs  of  the  river  Melas.

The  river  Melas,  now  known  by  the  equivalent  name  of  Mavro^otamos
(* black  river'),  is  formed  by  the  union  of  several  streams  which  take
their  rise  in  copious  springs  not  far  from  Orchomenus.  These  springs
issue  at  various  points  of  that  branch  of  the  Copaic  plain  which  lies
immediately  to  the  north  of  the  hill  of  Orchomenus  and  which,  when  the
Copaic  Lake  existed,  was  known  as  the  Bay  of  Tzamcdi,  At  the  present
time,  though  the  lake  has  been  drained,  this  part  of  the  plain  remains
still  to  a  great  extent  a  marsh  overgrown  with  thickets  of  reeds  and  does
not  dry  up  even  in  summer ;  for  the  springs  which  feed  the  marsh  are
not  only  abundant  but  perennial.  One  of  these  springs  is  the  Acidalian
fountain,  already  described  (p.  187),  which  rises  at  the  northern  foot  of
the  hill  of  Orchomenus,  not  far  from  the  monastery.  Another  important
spring,  now  called  Petakas^  rises  farther  north,  in  the  direction  of  the
village  of  Tzamali ;  and  a  third,  known  as  Polygyra  or  Polyra,  comes
to  the  surface  under  a  rock  at  the  north-west  comer  of  the  bay,  near  the
site  of  the  ancient  Aspledon.  The  strong  stream  formed  by  this  last
spring  is  called,  like  the  spring  itself,  Polygyra  up  to  the  point  where  it
joins  the  other  stream  coming  from  the  Acidalian  and  Petakas  springs.


CH.  xxxviix  THE  RIVER  MELAS  193

The  river  fonned  by  the  union  of  these  streams  has  derived  its  name
both  in  ancient  and  modem  times  from  the  dark  colour  of  its  deep  clear
water,  in  contrast  to  the  light-coloured  and  muddy  water  of  the  neigh-
bouring Cephisus.  This  dark  colour  is  said  to  be  due  to  the  absence
of  all  solid  particles  which  could  reflect  the  light.  The  river  flows  in  a
deep  bed  fringed  with  tall  reeds.  Some  of  the  ground  about  its  sources
is  a  reedy  swamp.  The  ancients,  as  we  have  seen  (p.  1 1 1 ),  confused
the  lower  part  of  the  course  of  the  Melas  with  the  Cephisus,  though  in
reality  the  Cephisus  used  to  lose  itself  in  the  swamp,  whereas  the  Melas
has  from  time  immemorial  flowed  in  a  sharply-marked  bed  of  its  own
from  the  western  to  the  eastern  end  of  the  Copaic  basin,  disappearing
finally  into  the  great  chasm  or  katauothra  at  the  north-eastern  comer  of
the  plain.  This  mistake  was  made  even  by  Plutarch,  the  best  informed
of  the  ancient  writers  who  have  touched  on  the  Melas.  It  was  to  be
expected  that  he  should  know  it  well,  since  he  lived  at  Chaeronea,  only
a  few  miles  from  the  river.  He  says  :  "Of  all  the  Boeotian  plains  the
largest  and  fairest  is  that  of  Orchomenus.  It  stretches  away,  flat  and
treeless,  to  the  marshes  in  which  the  river  Melas  is  swallowed  up.  That
river  rises  under  the  city  of  Orchomenus  and  is  the  only  Greek  river
which  is  navigable  at  its  sources.  It  swells  at  the  summer  solstice,  like
the  Nile,  and  bears  plants  like  those  of  the  Nile,  only  they  are  stunted
and  have  no  fruit.  The  river,  however,  does  not  flow  far.  Most  of  it
immediately  vanishes  in  stagnant  and  swampy  meres ;  but  a  small  part
of  its  water  joins  the  Cephisus,  and  at  the  meeting  of  the  rivers  the  reeds
which  are  used  for  flutes  grow  most  plentifully  in  the  mere  "  ( Plutarch,
Sulla^  20).  Compare  /V/.,  Pelofndas^  16;  Strabo,  ix.  pp.  407,  415;
Theophrastus,  De  causis  plant,  v.  5.  2.  According  to  Theophrastus
{Hist,  plant,  iv.  11.  8  sq,)  the  reeds  used  for  making  flutes  grew  most
plentifully  between  the  Melas  and  the  Cephisus  rivers,  the  best  of  all
being  those  which  grew  in  certain  deep  pools  called  Pots  {Chutrot)  in
this  part  of  the  marsh ;  whereas  at  the  actual  junction  of  the  rivers,
though  the  marsh  was  deep  and  the  bottom  rich  and  slimy,  the  reeds
were  scarce  and  of  indifferent  quality.

See  Leake,  Northern  Greece ,  2.  pp.  154-157;  Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  p.  234;
Forchhammer,  Hellenikay  p.  174  j^.  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen,
I.  pp.  183,  191  sq.  ;  A.  Philippson,  m  Zeitschrift  d,  GeselL  f.  Erdkuttde  tu  Berlin^
29(1894),  pp.  39.42.

In  1893  Mr.  de  Ridder  found  what  he  believed  to  be  the  temple  of
Hercules  which  Pausanias  tells  us  was  situated  at  the  source  of  the
Melas.  The  spot  is  at  the  northern  foot  of  the  hill  of  Orchomenus
about  three-quarters  of  a  mile  west  of  the  Acidalian  spring,  between  the
hill  on  the  south  and  a  marsh  on  the  north.  The  marsh  is  formed  by  a
spring  which  is  the  most  westerly  of  the  sources  of  the  Melas.  Its
water  is  enclosed  by  a  wall  which  only  allows  it  to  escape  in  a  north-
easterly direction.  On  the  hill-side  above  the  marsh  are  to  be  seen  a
number  of  steps,  platforms,  and  pedestals,  all  hewn  out  of  the  rock  at
different  levels.  In  clearing  away  the  soil  to  the  level  of  the  rock  Mr.
de  Ridder  discovered  a  few  Mycenaean  potsherds,  including  a  piece  of

VOL.  V  O


194  '^HE  CHASMS  BLOCKED  BK.  ix.  boeotia

a  stirrup-vase  of  advanced  style  (see  vol.  3.  p.  112  sq^^  also  potsherds  of
the  styles  known  as  proto-Boeotian,  proto-Corinthian,  and  Corinthian,
bronze  plates  decorated  with  reliefs  like  those  which  he  found  at  the
temple  of  Aesculapius  in  Orchomenus  (above,  p.  185),  and  a  few  archaic
terra-cottas.  No  potsherds  of  the  classical  period  were  found,  except
two  fragments  of  black-figured  vases.  These  remains  undoubtedly  prove
that  an  ancient  sanctuary  existed  here,  but  there  is  nothing  to  show  that
it  was  a  sanctuary  of  Hercules.  Certainly  the  temple  of  Hercules  men-
tioned by  Pausanias  has  not  been  found ;  for  the  term  naos  ('temple')
employed  by  Pausanias  could  not  possibly  apply,  as  Mr.  de  Ridder  sup-
poses, to  a  collection  of  bases  and  votive  offerings.  See  A.  de  Ridder,
*Fouilles  d'Orchom^ne,*  Bulletin  dc  Corresp.  hellcnique^  19  (1895),
pp.  150-155,  169  sqq,  Schliemann  conjectured  that  the  temple  of
Hercules  may  have  stood  some  200  or  300  yards  to  the  west  of  the
Acidalian  spring  near  a  vertical  cavern  about  60  feet  deep,  from  the  foot
of  which  bubbles  forth  one  of  the  sources  of  the  Melas.  The  rocks
about  the  upper  end  of  the  cavern  are  artificially  cut,  apparently  for  the
foundations  of  a  building.  But  as  the  place  is  immediately  below  the
walls  of  Orchomenus  it  does  not  answer  to  Pausanias's  description  of
the  situation  of  the  temple.  See  Schliemann,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic
Studies  J  2  (1881),  p.  1^2  sq.'y  cp.  A.  de  Ridder,  op.cit.  pp.  150,  154.

38.  7.  the  river  Oephisns  was  diverted  by  Hercules  into  the  iilain
etc.  Polyaenus  relates  that  Hercules  in  his  war  with  the  Minyans  of
Orchomenus  (see  Paus.  ix.  17.  2  ;  ix.  24.  5  ;  ix.  37.  2  sq,)  blocked  up
with  huge  stones  the  chasm  through  which  the  river  flowed  into  the  sea.
This  he  did  in  order  to  flood  the  plain  and  so  render  useless  the  cavalry
of  the  Minyans,  in  which  their  strength  lay.  But  after  his  victory  he
cleared  away  the  obstacles  and  the  river  returned  to  its  old  bed.  See
Polyaenus,  i.  3.  5  ;  cp.  Diodorus,  iv.  18.  7.  The  legend  seems  to
show  that  at  an  early  period  the  chasms  on  the  north-east  side  of  the
Copaic  basin  sufficed  to  receive  and  discharge  all  the  water  of  the  lake  ;
but  that  afterwards  they  were  blocked  more  or  less  completely  and
consequently  the  adjoining  plain  became  a  marsh.  This  blocking  of
the  chasms  may  have  been  brought  about  by  natural  causes  such  as
earthquakes  or  landslips  ;  for  which  the  agency  of  Hercules  may  be  only
a  mythical  expression.  Strabo  tells  us  (ix.  p.  406)  that  the  chasms
{katavothras)  were  sometimes  blocked  and  sometimes  opened  by  earth-
quakes, and  that  according  as  they  were  shut  or  open  the  neighbouring
ground  was  a  lake  or  a  plain.  Cp.  M.  L.  Kambanis,  in  Bulletin  de
Corresp.  helUnique,  16  (1892),  p.  136  j^.  But  it  is  also  possible  that
the  obstruction  of  the  chasms  was  the  work  of  enemies,  who  took  this
very  effectual  means  of  damaging  their  rivals.  The  tradition  which
attributed  the  blocking  of  the  emissory  to  the  Theban  Hercules  points
in  fact,  as  E.  Curtius  held  {Gesammelte  Abhandlungeny  i.  p.  280),  to
the  view  that  the  obstruction  of  the  chasm  and  the  consequent  flooding
of  the  plain  were  the  work  of  the  Thebans  in  a  war  with  their  hated
rivals,  the  Minyans.  Now  it  is  worth  observing  that  one  of  the  principal
katavothras  or  chasms  by  which  the  water  of  the  lake  escaped,  the
katavothra  of  Spitia  or  Varia^  a  little  to  the  west  of  the  pass  which


CH.  XXXVIII  ASPLEDON  195

leads  from  the  Copaic  plain  to  Larymna  on  the  Euripus,  is  blocked  with
great  masses  of  fallen  rocks,  and  that  one  of  the  most  important  of  the
ancient  canals  made  by  the  Minyans  is  conducted  directly  to  the  mouth
of  this  particular  katavothra.  See  A.  Philippson,  in  Zettsckrtft  der
Gesellschaft  fur  Erdkunde  zu  Berlin^  29  (1894),  pp.  48,  57  sq.  Cp.  F.
Noack,  in  Mitthtilungen  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Atken^  19  (1894),  p.  413  sgq.
Two  of  the  three  chasms  (katavothras)  of  Bynia,  close  to  the  point
where  the  path  to  Larymna  quits  the  Copaic  plain,  are  also  blocked
artificially  with  stones,  as  I  observed  on  my  visit  to  them.  But  whether
this  obstruction  is  ancient  or  modem  I  could  not  say.

38.  7.  Homer says.     See  Iliads  v.  709.

38.  8.  This  is  proved  by  Homer  etc.     See  Iliads  ix.  381.

38.  9.  Aspledon.  According  to  Strabo  (ix.  p.  415)  Aspledon  was
20  furlongs  from  Orchomenus,  from  which  it  was  separated  by  the  river
Melas.  He  tells  us  that  the  place  was  sometimes  called  Spledon,  and
that  the  name  of  the  town  and  district  was  afterwards  changed  to
Eudielus,  perhaps  from  its  western  exposure  (EvScieAos  —  c/c  tov
^ccXivov  KXifjuoLToi).  Leake  thought  that  Aspledon  may  have  been  at
Tzamaliy  a  hamlet  on  the  edge  of  what  used  to  be  the  Copaic  mere,  to
the  north-west  of  Orchomenus.  But  Tzamali  has  an  eastern  exposure,
and  water  is  plentiful  there,  whereas  Pausanias  tells  us  that  Aspledon  was
abandoned  by  its  inhabitants  on  account  of  the  want  of  water.  Forch-
hammer  and  Lolling  (Baedeker)  were  perhaps  right  in  identifying  with
Aspledon  the  ruins  now  known  as  Avriokastro  or  *  Castle  of  the  Hebrews,'
which  are  to  be  seen  on  an  isolated  hill  of  whitish  earth  that  rises  con-
spicuously among  darker  heights  on  the  northern  edge  of  the  great  plain
some  2  or  3  miles  to  the  west  of  Tegyra  {Xeropyrgo^  see  below).  The
ruins  of  the  circuit-wall,  about  600  paces  in  extent,  may  still  be  traced,
and  the  foundations  of  houses  appear  above  the  soil.  The  spot  has  a
southern  aspect,  is  sheltered  from  the  north  by  the  lofty  Mount  ChlomOy
and  receives  the  evening  sunshine  long  after  the  shadows  have  fallen  on
the  places  on  the  opposite  or  southern  side  of  the  plain.  Dodwell  con-
jectured that  Aspledon  might  be  at  Xeropyrgo  or  Pyrgo,  a  village  on  an
isolated  round  hill  surmounted  by  a  very  tall  square  tower  of  the  Middle
Ages,  3  miles  east-north-east  of  Orchomenus,  from  which  it  used  to  be
divided  by  the  Copaic  Lake  and  is  still  divided  by  the  deep  waters  of
the  Melas.  However,  Xeropyrgo  answers  better  to  Plutarch's  descrip-
tion of  Tegyra,  which  was  near  Orchomenus,  but  divided  from  it  by
the  marsh  caused  by  the  Melas  river,  so  that  the  one  place  could  be
reached  from  the  other  only  by  making  a  long  circuit  at  the  foot  of
the  hills.  At  Tegyra,  a  little  above  the  marshes,  there  was  a  temple
of  the  Tegyraean  Apollo  with  an  oracle,  which  had  been  in  high
repute  down  to  the  Persian  war  but  had  come  to  an  end  not  long  before
Plutarch's  time.  Apollo  was  said  to  have  been  bom  there ;  the  neigh-
bouring hill  was  called  Delos ;  and  behind  the  temple  rose  two  copious
springs  of  sweet  and  cold  water.  One  of  the  springs  was  called  Phoenix
(* palm-tree ')  and  the  other  Elaea  (* olive-tree'),  and  Latona  was  said  to
have  given  birth  to  Apollo  between  them.  See  Plutarch,  Pelopidas^  16  ;
idy  De  defect  Orac,  5  and  8  ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v.  Teyvpa.     Into


196  LEBADEA  bk.  ix.  bobotia

the  tower  at  Xeropyrgo  are  built  some  large  polygonal  blocks.  Remains
of  the  ancient  walls  from  which  these  blocks  were  probably  taken  may
be  seen  between  the  tower  and  the  marsh ;  one  of  the  pieces  of  wall  is
20  feet  long  by  7  or  8  feet  thick.

See  Dodwell,  Tour^  I.  p.  233  ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece ^  2,  pp.  159  J^.,  162  s^. ;
Forchhammer,  Hellenika^  p.  177 ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen^  i.
p.  196  sq,  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  I.  p.  211 ;  Schliemann,  \xi  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^
2  (1881),  p.  161 ;  Baedeker,'  p.  197.

38.  9.  the  verses  of  Chersias.  This  poet  seems  to  have  been
a  contemporary  and  acquaintance  of  Periander,  tyrant  of  Corinth.
Plutarch  introduces  him  into  his  Banquet  of  the  Seven  Sages  (chapters
13,  14,  and  21).  Cp.  Eficorum  Graecorum  fragmenta^  ed.  Kinkel,
p.  207  sq,

39.  I.  Lebadea.  The  modem  town  of  Lebadea  {Livadia)  retains  the
ancient  name  slightly  altered.  It  stands  very  picturesquely  at  the  mouth
of  a  wild  gorge  in  the  mountains,  facing  northward  across  the  plain.  The
white  houses  with  their  red  roofs  and  wooden  balconies  climb  the  hill-sides
on  both  banks  of  the  Hercyna,  a  clear  and  copious  stream,  which  issues
from  the  gorge  and  rushes  noisily  through  the  streets  in  a  rocky  bed,
turning  some  mills  and  spanned  by  several  bridges.  At  the  back  of  the
town  a  steep  rocky  hill,  crowned  with  the  ruins  of  a  great  mediaeval
castle,  descends  in  sheer  and  lofty  precipices  into  the  gorge  on  the  left
bank  of  the  stream.  The  houses  extend  down  into  the  plain,  scattered
among  gardens  and  clumps  of  trees  which  give  the  town,  as  seen  from
below,  an  agreeable  aspect.  The  mountains  at  the  foot  of  which
Lebadea  lies  are  the  northern  spurs  of  Mount  Helicon  ;  the  high  conical
summit  to  the  east  is  the  ancient  Mount  Laphystius,  now  the  mountain
of  Granitsa,  The  plain  that  lies  spread  out  below  the  town  on  the
north  melts  eastward  into  the  great  Copaic  plain  ;  on  the  north  it  is
divided  by  a  chain  of  low  hills  from  the  parallel  plain  of  Chaeronea.

The  greater  part  of  the  water  of  the  Hercyna  rises  in  the  profound
gorge  immediately  behind  the  town.  Here,  at  the  foot  of  the  great
precipice  which  is  surmounted  by  the  ruins  of  the  castle,  a  cold  spring
called  Kryo  (*cold')  issues  from  the  rocks  and  is  conducted  into  a
small  well-house.  Some  niches  for  holding  votive  offerings  are  cut
in  the  face  of  the  cliff  above  it.  The  largest  of  these  cuttings  is  a
chamber  about  1 2  feet  square  and  9  feet  high,  he^Mi  out  of  the  rock
about  6  feet  above  the  ground.  The  roof  is  slightly  vaulted  ;  just  under
it  the  remains  of  painted  ornaments  were  still  visible  at  the  beginning
of  the  nineteenth  century.  Right  and  left,  in  the  sides  of  the  chamber,
are  benches  cut  in  the  rock.  In  this  cool  retreat  the  Turkish  governor
of  Lebadea  used  to  smoke  his  pipe  in  the  heat  of  the  day.  Below  the
chamber,  a  little  to  the  left  of  it,  a  narrow  opening  leads  20  or  30  feet
into  the  rock,  ending  in  a  hole  at  the  bottom  of  which  water  lies.  On
the  opposite  side  of  the  ravine,  a  few  j)aces  off,  near  some  plane-trees,
several  springs  of  clear  but  lukewarm  water  rush  turbulently  from  the
ground,  and,  united  with  the  water  of  the  Kryo^  form  the  Hercyna.
They  turn  a  cotton-mill  close  to  the  spot  where  they  rise.      That  some


Wmmm'''^m'''mmmmm^mmmm^pmmmmmmmmi^^Km


CH.  XXXIX  LEBADEA  197

of  these  springs  are  the  waters  of  Memory  and  Forgetfiilness  of  which
all  who  would  consult  Trophonius  had  to  drink  before  descending  into
the  oracular  pit  (§  7  sq,\  is  highly  probable ;  but  we  have  no  means  of
identifying  these  mystic  waters.  An  alteration  in  the  flow  of  one  of  the
springs  (the  Kryo)  is  known  to  have  occurred  within  the  nineteenth
century ;  and  many  such  changes  may  have  taken  place  since  antiquity.
The  general  features  of  the  spot,  however,  have  probably  changed  but
little,  and  they  are  well  fitted  to  impress  the  imagination.  The  many
springs  gurgling  strongly  from  the  ground,  the  verdant  plane-trees,  the
cavemed  rocks,  the  great  precipices  soaring  on  three  sides  of  us  and
overhung  on  the  west  by  the  ruins  of  the  mediaeval  castle,  make  up  a
scene  which  once  seen  is  not  easily  forgotten.  But  the  ravine  of  which
this  is  after  all  only  the  mouth  does  not  end  here.  Its  deep,  narrow,
stony  bed,  sometimes  dry,  sometimes  traversed  by  a  raging  torrent,
winds  far  into  the  heart  of  the  mountains,  shut  in  on  either  hand  like  a
cafion  by  tremendous  crags.  If  you  follow  it  upwards  for  some  miles,
the  country  begins  to  open  up  and  you  find  yourself  in  bleak  and  desolate
highlands.  A  profound  silence  reigns,  broken  only  by  the  cry  of  a  •
water-ouzel  beside  the  torrent  or  the  screaming  of  hawks  far  up  the  cliffs.

In  Turkish  times  Livadia  was  the  capital  of  the  province  and  a
place  of  considerable  importance.  It  is  still  a  lively,  cheerful  town
^vith  a  busy  bazaar  and  a  population  of  5000.  The  extensive  wool  trade
of  the  Copaic  basin  and  the  valley  of  the  Cephisus  has  its  centre  here.
As  might  have  been  expected,  the  materials  of  the  ancient  city  have
long  ago  been  employed  to  build  or  repair  the  modem  town.  Some
large  squared  blocks,  taken  from  an  ancient  edifice,  are  built  into  the
walls  of  the  castle,  which  in  its  turn  suffered  severely  from  the  great
earthquake  of  April  1894.  The  old  city  probably  stood  on  the  eastern
bank  of  the  Hercyna ;  for  Pausanias  tells  us  that  the  river  separated
the  city  from  the  grove  of  Trophonius  (§  2),  and  there  is  reason  to
believe  that  the  grove  was  on  the  western  side  of  the  river  (see  note  on
§  4  *  a  temple  of  King  Zeus  *).  It  would  seem  not  to  have  occupied
the  site  of  the  modem  town,  but  to  have  stood  about  ten  minutes  farther
to  the  north,  on  an  isolated  hill  called  Trypaeolithari^  which  rises  from
the  plain  and  round  which  the  Hercyna  flows  in  two  branches.  On  this
hill  there  are  foundations  and  other  traces  of  an  ancient  city.  The
French  surveyors  and  L.  Ross  placed  ancient  Lebadea  here,  and  this
situation  certainly  answers  better  to  Pausanias's  description  of  the  city
as  built  on  low  ground.

Amongst  the  deities  who  are  known  from  inscriptions  to  have  been
worshipped  at  Lebadea  are  Dionysus,  Hermes,  Artemis,  Pan,  and  the
Nymphs  (C.  /.  G.  G,  S.  i.  Nos.  3092-3095,  3098,  3100).  One  inscription
records  a  dedication  to  the  Gentle  Artemises  (in  the  plural)  (C  /.  G,  G,  S.
I.  No.  3101).  But  the  great  deity  of  the  place  was  Trophonius  or  Zeus
Trophonius,  as  he  was  also  called  (C.  /.  G,  G,  S.  i.  Nos.  3077,  3090,
3098).

SeeVfhelcTf/oumeyf  p.  326  s^^,;  Clarke,  Travels,  4.  p.  117  s^a.;  Walpole*s
Memoirs  relating  to  Turkey^  {hoiAon,  1818),  p.  340  j^. ;  Dodwell,  Tour,  i.  p.  21 1
sqq.'y  Leake,  Northern  Greece,  2.  p.   118  sqq.;  Murty journal,  I.  p.  22g  sqq,  ;


198  LEBADEA — HERCYNA  bk.  ix.  boeotia

Welcker,  Tagehachy  2.  p.  42  sqq,  ;  H.  N.  Ulricbs,  Reisen  und  Forschungeny  i.
p.  164  sqq,  ;  Fiedler,  Reise^  I.  p.  130  j^. ;  L.  Ross,  Wanderungen^  I*  P*  33  -^^^^  »
Stephani,  Reise^  p.  66  x/^.  ;  Vischer,  Erinrurungen,  p.  588  sqq, ;  Bursian,  6t«^.
I.  p.  2q6  sqq.  ;  Mabany,  Rambles  attd  StudieSy\^,  215  x^y.  ;  H.  Belle,  7 rots
Aftft^es  en  Grkty  pp.  143-165  ;  Schliemann,  xn  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  2
(1881),  p.  128  x^.  ;  /V/.,  OrchomefioSf  p.  ^  sqq.  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  167  sq.  \  Guide-
Joanne,  2.  p.  16  sq.\  P.  Brandt,  Von  Atheti  zum  Tempethaly  p.  36  sq,  I  visited
Lebadea  in  May  1890.

39.   I.  TliiB  city  was  named  Midea.      Thus   Pausanias

identifies  Lebadea  with  the  Homeric  Midea  {Iliad^  ii.  507),  which,
according  to  others,  was  engulfed  by  the  Copaic  Lake  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  413).
Perhaps  the  identification  rested  on  no  better  basis  than  the  patriotic
pride  of  the  burghers  of  Lebadea,  who  could  not  bear  to  think  that
their  native  town  was  not  mentioned  by  Homer,  Cp.  H.  N.  Ulrichs,
Reisen  und Forschungeriy  i.  p.  \T\  sq.\  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  209.

39.  I.  Lebadus.  There  was  a  tradition  that  Lebadus  (or  Lebeadus,
as  Plutarch  calls  him)  was  one  of  the  two  sons  of  Lycaon  who  did  not
share  in  their  father's  impious  deed  (see  viii.  2.  3),  but  fled  to  Boeotia ;
hence  the  people  of  Lebadea  enjoyed  the  rights  of  Arcadian  citizenship.
See  Plutarch,  Quaest.  Graec.  39.

39.  2.  Hercyna had  a  goose  in  her  arms.  An  ancient  vase-
painting  represents  Hercyna  or  Proserpine  playing  with  a  goose  in
presence  of  Zeus  (Stephani,  in  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1863,
p.  94).  Cp.  note  on  x.  32.  16.  Welcker  saw  many  geese  in  Lebadea  ;  he
observed  them  at  one  other  place  in  Boeotia,  but  nowhere  else  in  Greece
{Tagebuckt  2.  p.  43).

39.  3.  a  temple  of  Hercyna  on  the  bank  of  the  river.  Accord-
ing to  a  tradition  mentioned  by  Tzetzes  {SchoL  on  Lycophron^  I53)>
Hercyna  was  a  daughter  of  Trophonius  who  founded  a  temple  of
Demeter  at  Lebadea  and  called  the  goddess  Hercyna  after  herself.
Livy  tells  us  (xlv.  27)  that  when  Aemilius  Paulus  visited  Lebadea  "he
sacrificed  to  Zeus  and  Hercyna,  whose  temple  is  there."  There  was  a
festival  of  Demeter  called  Hercynia  (Hesychius,  s.v,  'Ep/cvvia).  The
maidens  who  carried  the  sacred  baskets  in  the  procession  of  King
Zeus  at  Lebadea  had  previously  to  bathe  in  the  spring  Hercyna,  which
was  no  doubt  one  of  the  sources  of  the  Hercyna  river,  in  the  deep  gorge
at  the  back  of  the  town  (see  note  on  §  i)  (Plutarch,  Amaior.  Narrat.  i).

39.  3.  serpents  are  as  sacred  to  Trophonius  as  to  Aesculapius.
See  note  on  §  11,  *  barley-cakes.'

39.  3.  ^cesilaus.  He  was  said  to  be  one  of  the  captains  who  led
the  Boeotians  to  Troy  (Homer,  Iliady  ii.  495).

39.  4-  a  temple  and  ima^^e  of  Trophonius.  On  the  left  bank  of
the  Hercyna  at  Uvadia,  near  a  high  Turkish  bridge  over  the  river,  there
is  a  church  of  the  Virgin  {Panagia).  Partly  built  into  the  walls  of  the
church,  partly  lying  around,  Ulrichs  found  granite  columns,  squared
blocks,  and  architectural  fragments.  Here  too  were  found  two  inscrip-
tions, one  a  votive  inscription  in  honour  of  Trophonius,  the  other  a  list
of  moneys  contributed  by  various  people  to  the  treasury  of  Trophonius.
Hence  Ulrichs  inferred  that  this  was  the  site  of  the  temple  of  Trophonius
{Reisen  und  Forsckungen,  i.  p.  167).    For  the  inscriptions,  see  C  /.  G.


mmm


CH.  XXXIX  TROPHONIUS—KING  ZEUS  199

G.  5.  I.  Nos.  3055,  3087  ;  C  /.  G,  Nos.  1571,  1588.  Mr.  J.  Schmidt,
however,  suggests  that  the  site  of  the  temple  of  Trophonius  is  rather  to
be  looked  for  at  the  chapel  of  St.  Anna  and  St.  Constantine,  on  the
eastern  slope  of  the  castle-hill,  not  far  below  the  walls  of  the  fortress.
Into  the  wall  of  this  chapel,  over  one  of  the  windows,  is  built  one  of  the
inscriptions  containing  a  dedication  to  King  Zeus  and  Trophonius  (see
below,  note  on  *a  temple  of  King  Zeus*).  The  chapel  stands  on  an
artificial  terrace,  large  enough  to  support  a  considerable  temple.  The
terrace  is  covered  with  masses  of  stones,  among  which  are  fragments  of
marble  columns,  Ionic  capitals,  etc.  See  Mittheil.  des  arch.  Inst,  in
Athen^  5  (1880),  pp.  138-140.

39.  4-  an  iina^  of  Rainy  Zens.  Lcbadea,  lying  at  the  foot  of  the
massive  Helicon,  is  a  rainy  place  (Welcker,  Tagebuck,  2.  p.  50).  Mure
was  detained  here  for  four  days  and  five  nights,  during  which  the  rain
poured  incessantiy  "  with  the  exception  of  about  an  hour  on  the  afternoon
of  the  third  day,  when  the  steady  rain  gave  place  to  a  sort  of  drizzle  or
Scotch  mist "  {yiurt.  Journal ^  i.  p.  237).  When  Fiedler  was  at  Lebadea,
the  rain  fell  in  sheets  for  three  days  (Fiedler,  Rcise^  i.  p.  130).

39.  4.  a  temple  of  King  Zeus.  The  remains  of  this  temple  were
to  be  seen,  down  to  nearly  the  middle  of  the  present  century,  on  Mt.  St.
Rlias^  about  half  an  hour  to  the  west  of  Uvadia.  The  mountain  is
connected,  on  its  eastern  side,  by  a  ridge  with  the  castle-hill  of  Uvadia.
L.  Ross  found  the  remains  of  the  floor  and  of  the  ceila  walls  constructed
of  massive  blocks.  The  ruins,  like  those  of  so  many  other  temples
in  Greece,  have  since  been  mostly  used  to  build  a  church  on  the  same
site.  See  L.  Ross,  Wanderungen^  i.  p.  38  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und
Forschungen,  i.  p.  168;  Welcker,  Tagebuch^  2.  p.  50;  L.  Stephani,
ReisCy  p.  68  ;  Rheinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  42  (1887),  p.  54  ;  Baedeker,^
p.  168;  Guide-Joanne^  1.  p.  17.  A  long  inscription  relating  to  the
contract  for  the  construction  of  the  temple  of  King  Zeus  was  discovered
at  Lebadea  and  published  for  the  first  time  in  1876.  See  C.  /.  G.  G.  S.
I.  No.  3073  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Graec.  No.  353  ;  Choisy,
Etudes  ipigraphiques  sur  P architecture  grecque^  p.  173  sqq.  The
Boeotians  commemorated  their  victory  over  the  Spartans  at  Leuctra  by
periodically  celebrating  games  in  honour  of  King  Zeus  at  Lebadea
(Diodorus,  xv.  63).  These  games,  called  the  Basileia  or  Royal  Games,
are  mentioned  in  an  inscription  found  at  Lebadea  (C.  /.  G,  G.  S.  i.  No.
3091  ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  130  ;  Keil,  Sylloge  I nscript.  Boeot.
p.  71,  No.  xi ;  Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr.  Graec?  No.  323  ;  Collitz,  G.  D.
I.  I.  No.  422),  and  in  other  Boeotian  inscriptions  (Kaibel,  Epigram-
fnata  Graeca,  No.  492  ;  C  /.  G.  G.  S.  i.  Nos.  552,  171 1,  2487,  2532,
4247).  From  another  inscription  containing  a  dedication  to  Queen  Hera
{C.  I.  G.  G.  S.  I.  No.  3097  ;  see  below)  we  may  gather  that  the  games
were  held  every  fourth  year  (see  Leake,  Northern  Greece,  2.  p.  129  sq.).
Another  inscription  found  at  Lebadea  records  a  dedication  to  King  Zeus
and  the  city  of  Lebadea  (C  /.  G.  G.  S.  i.  No.  3097  ;  Keil,  Sylloge
Inscr.  Boeot,  p.  106,  No.  xxv.  c).  Several  inscriptions  have  been  found
at  Lebadea  containing  dedications  of  slaves  to  King  Zeus  and  Trophonius
(C  /.  G.  G.  S.  I.  Nos.  3080,  3081,  3083 ;  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUnique,


200  ORACLE  OF  TROPHONIUS  bk.  ix.  boeotia

4  (1880),  p.  96  sq, ;  Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr,  Graec,^  Nos.  325,  328,  329  ;
Collitz,  G,  D,  I.  I.  Nos.  425,  429,  430).  In  these  inscriptions  Zeus  is
distinguished  from  Trophonius,  but  in  others  the  two  divinities  are  con-
founded. Thus  we  hear  of  a  dedication  to  Zeus  Trophonius  (C  /.  G.  G,  S.
I.  No.  3090;  Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr.  GraecJ^  No.  327  ;  Collitz,  G,  D,I.  i.
No.  423),  the  priest  of  Zeus  Trophonius  (C  /.  G.  G,  S,  i.  No.  3077),
and  an  oracle  of  Zeus  Trophonius  (C  /.  G.  G.  S.  i.  No.  3098  ;  L.
Stephani,  Relsey  p.  71  ;  Keil,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Boeoi,  p.  79,  No.  xvi.)
Strabo  also  speaks  (ix.  p.  414)  of  the  oracle  of  Zeus  Trophonius  at
Lebadea ;  and  the  temple  of  Jupiter  (Zeus)  Trophonius  at  Lebadea  is
mentioned  by  Livy  (xlv.  27).  Hence  it  would  seem  that  Trophonius,
the  old  local  god  of  Lebadea,  was  to  some  extent  identified  with  Zeus  ;
but  this  identification  was  probably  late.  Games  called  Trophonia  were
held  at  Lebadea  in  honour  of  Trophonius  (Schol.  on  Pindar,  Olymp.  vii.
154 ;  Pollux,  i.  37).  They  are  mentioned  in  two  inscriptions  found  at
Megara  (C.  /.  G.  G.  S.  i.  Nos.  47,  49 ;  C.  I  G.  No.  1068).  It  has
been  supposed  that  these  Trophonia  were  the  same  as  the  Royal  Games
mentioned  above ;  but  this  seems  doubtful.  Queen  Hera,  as  well  as
King  Zeus,  was  worshipped  at  Lebadea,  as  we  learn  from  an  inscription
found  at  Lebadea  which  contains  a  dedication  to  Queen  Hera  and
the  city  of  Lebadea  (C  /.  G.  G.  S.  i.  No.  3097  ;  Wheler,  Journey,  p.
327  ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  130;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und
Forschungen,  i.  p.  176  ;  C.  /.  6^.  No.  1603).

39.  5.  As  to  the  oracle,  the  procedure  is  as  follows.  Dicaearchus
wrote  a  work,  in  at  least  two  books,  on  the  manner  of  consulting  the
oracle  of  Trophonius  (Athenaeus,  xiii.  p.  594  ef,  xiv.  p.  641  ef).
Plutarch  also  wrote  a  book  on  the  same  subject,  perhaps  as  a  counter-
blast to  the  work  of  Dicaearchus,  which,  to  judge  from  a  specimen  pre-
served by  Athenaeus  (xiii.  p.  594 ef),  would  seem  to  have  been  of  a
sneering  and  sceptical  tone.  See  K.  O.  Miiller,  Orchomenos,^  p.  147.
Of  the  extant  accounts  of  the  way  of  consulting  the  oracle,  the  one  here
given  by  Pausanias,  from  his  own  experience,  is  the  fullest  It  should
be  compared  with  the  accounts  given  by  Strabo  (ix.  p.  414),  Plutarch
{De  gento  SocratiSy  21  sg,\  Philostratus  {Vit.  Apollon.  viii.  19),  Lucian
{Dial.  Afort.  iii.  2  ;  cp.  Menififius,  22),  Maximus  Tyrius  {Dissert,  xiv.
2),  a  scholiast  on  Aristophanes  {Clouds,  508),  and  Suidas  {s.if.  Tpo<f>u}v[ov
Kara  yyjs  Tralyvia).  A  mutilated  inscription  found  at  Lebadea  records  a
decree  of  the  people  of  Lebadea  that  whoever  consulted  the  oracle  should
pay  a  silver  coin  into  the  treasury  and  offer  ten  cakes  of  the  value  of  a
drachm  apiece  {€.  I.  G.  G.  S.  i.  No.  3055  ;  Collitz,  G.  D.  I.  i.  No.  413,
pp.  1 56  sqq.y  393).  The  same  inscription  gives  a  list  of  the  persons  who
paid  their  money  and  inquired  of  the  oracle  ;  among  them  was  Amyntas,
son  of  Perdiccas,  king  of  Macedonia.  On  the  oracle  of  Trophonius  in
general,  see  K.  O.  Miiller,  Orchomenos?  pp.  143-155  ;  Bouch^-Leclercq,
Histoire  de  la  divination  dans  V antiquity,  3.  pp.  321-332.

39.  5.  the  Good  Demon  and  €k>od  Fortune.  On  the  Capitol  at
Rome  there  were  statues  of  these  two  deities  by  Praxiteles  (Pliny,  Nat.
hist,  xxxvi.  23).  According  to  Menander  (quoted  by  Clement  of
Alexandria,  Strom,  v.  131,  p.  727,  ed.   Potter)  every  man  is  attended


m


CH.  XXXIX  ORACLE  OF  TROPHONIUS  201

from  birth  by  a  demon  who  acts  as  his  guide  and  good  genius  in  life.
We  hear  of  a  man  being  bidden  by  Apollo  to  honour  and  propitiate  his
own  Good  Demon  (Ancient  Greek  Inscriptions  in  the  British  Museum^
Part  iv.  No.  896).  Similarly  the  Romans  believed  that  each  man  has  a
guardian  spirit  or  genius  who  accompanies  him  from  the  womb  to  the
grave,  never  quitting  him  for  an  instant ;  all  through  life  a  Roman
sacrificed  to  his  guardian  spirit  once  a  year  (Censorinus,  De  die  nataliy
3).  On  the  Good  Demon,  cp.  Stephani,  in  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Peters-
burg) for  1859,  P*  '  ^°  ^Q9'  J  E.  Rohde,  Psyche^  p.  232  sq,^  note  2.

39.  5.  observes  mles  of  purity.  He  had  probably  to  eat  certain
foods,  to  abstain  from  others,  to  remain  chaste,  and  (as  Pausanias  implies)
to  bathe  regularly.  Before  entering  the  sanctuary  of  the  Tyrant  Men  (a
deity  worshipped  chiefly  in  Asia  Minor)  the  worshipper  had  to  abstain
from  garlic,  pork,  and  women  ;  and  he  had  to  wash  his  head  on  the  day
when  (but  before)  he  entered  the  sanctuary.  A  woman  might  not  enter
the  sanctuary  for  seven  days  after  menstruation  ;  and  on  the  day  when
(but  before)  she  entered  it  she  had  to  wash  her  head.  A  person  who
had  been  in  contact  with  a  corpse  might  not  enter  the  sanctuary  of  the
Tyrant  Men  for  ten  days  afterwards.  See  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,
Graec.  No.  379 ;  Foucart,  Des  associations  religieuses  ches  les  GrecSy
pp.  119  sqq.^  219  sqq.  On  similar  rules,  see  Lobeck,  Aglaophamus^  p.
188  sqq, ;  W.  M.  Ramsay,  The  cities  and  bishoprics  of  Phrygia^  i.  p.
136  sq.^  with  the  inscriptions,  p.  149  sqq,

39.  5.  the  children  of  Trophonins.  The  writer  of  the  treatise  De
facie  in  orbe  lunae^  attributed  to  Plutarch,  mentions  (c.  30)  "the
Trophoniads  at  Udora  in  Boeotia"  among  the  kindlier  demons  who
busied  themselves  with  oracles  and  orgiastic  rites ;  he  classes  them  with
the  Idaean  Dactyls  of  Crete  and  the  Corybantes  of  Phrygia.  These
Trophoniads  may  be  the  children  of  Trophonius  mentioned  by  Pausanias.
Cp.  K.  O.  Miiller,  Orchomenos^  p.  148.

39.  6.  they  sacrifice  over  a  pit,  calling  upon  A^amedes.  The
pit  was  no  doubt  the  pit  of  Agamedes,  down  which  Trophonius  was  said
to  have  vanished  (ix.  37.  7).  As  to  the  sacrifice  of  a  black  ram  to  the
dead,  see  notes  on  iv.  32.  3  ;  v.  13.  2.  Whereas  sacrifices  were  offered
to  Agamedes  as  to  a  dead  man  or  hero  (as  we  learn  from  this  passage),
Trophonius  is  said  to  have  received  the  sacrifices  usually  offered  to  the
gods  (Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Clouds^  508).  Lucian  speaks  of  Tro-
phonius as  compounded  of  a  man  and  a  god  {Dial,  Mort.  iii.  2).  H.  N.
Ulrichs  thought  that  the  pit  of  Agamedes  might  be  the  hole  which  runs
into  the  rock  for  a  distance  of  2  5  to  30  feet  at  the  foot  of  the  castle-hill,
close  to  the  springs  of  the  Hercyna  (see  above,  p.  196).  The  passage
descends  slightly,  and  is  just  wide  enough  to  allow  a  man  to  creep  along
it  (H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen^  i.  p.  167).  Cp.  Clarke,
Travels^  4.  p.  132  sq,  ;  L.  Ross,  Wanderungen^  i.  p.  37  ;  Vischer,
Erinnerungen^  p.  589  sq.  To  this  Bursian  with  justice  objects  that  the
sacrificial  pit  was  probably  a  perpendicular  hole  or  cleft  in  the  ground,
not  a  horizontal  subterranean  passage  (Geogr,  i.  p.  208  n.  2).  The  view
put  forward  by  Ulrichs,  that  the  square  chamber  cut  in  the  rock  close
to  this  passage  was  the  building  sacred  to  the  Good  Demon  and  Good


202  ORACLE  OF  TROPHONIUS  bk.  ix.  boeotia

Fortune,  in  which  persons  consulting  the  oracle  resided  for  several  days,
is  rightly  rejected  by  Bursian.

39.  8.  the  Water  of  FoTgetfolness the  Water  of  Memory.

These  two  springs  are  mentioned  by  Pliny  {Nat.  hist  xxxi.  15),  who
says  that  they  were  in  the  sanctuary  of  Trophonius,  near  the  river
Hercyna.  In  an  Orphic  poem  inscribed  on  a  gold  tablet,  which  was
found  at  Petelia  in  southern  Italy,  the  soul  of  a  deceased  person  is
warned  against  drinking  of  a  certain  fountain  beside  a  cypress-tree  in  the
infernal  world.  This  fountain  is  doubtless  the  Water  of  Forgetfiilness,
for  the  soul  is  directed  to  proceed  till  it  finds  another  fountain  of  cold
water  flowing  from  Memory's  lake.  Guards  stand  before  the  fountain,
but  the  soul  is  to  accost  them,  saying :  "  I  am  a  child  of  earth  and  of  the
starry  sky  ;  but  a  heavenly  stock  is  mine.  Ye  know  it  yourselves.  But
I  am  parched  and  perishing  for  thirst.  Give  me  quickly  the  cold  water
that  flows  from  Memory's  lake."  See  C,  /.  G,  No.  5772  ;  Kaibel,
Epigrammata  Graeca^  No.  1037  ;  Comparetti,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic
Studies^  3  (1882),  pp.  1 10- 1 1 8.

39.  8.  the  image  which  they  say  Daedalus  made.  This  was  an
image  of  Trophonius.  See  ix.  40.  3.  The  sculptor  Euthycrates,  a  son
and  pupil  of  Lysippus,  made  an  image  of  Trophonius  for  the  oracle  ;  his
style  was  austere  rather  than  graceful  (Pliny,  Na^.  hist,  xxxi  v.  66).

39.  8.  clad  in  a  linen  tunic  girt  with  ribands.  According  to
Philostratus  {Vit.  Apollon.  viii.  19),  persons  who  consulted  the  oracle  of
Trophonius  were  dressed  in  white.  According  to  Maximus  Tyrius
(Dissert,  xiv.  2),  they  were  clothed  in  a  garment  of  fine  linen  which
reached  to  their  feet,  and  over  it  they  wore  a  red  cloak.  Lucian  merely
observes  that  they  were  arrayed  in  fine  linen  {Dial.  Mort,  iii.  2).  A
scholiast  on  Aristophanes  (Clouds^  508)  and  Suidas  (^.7/.  Tfxxfxavlov  Kara
yrjs  iraiyvca)  say  that  they  were  dressed  in  a  sacred  costume  or  a
costume  meet  for  a  god.

39.  8.  shod  with  boots  of  the  country.  In  the  procession  at  the
Andanian  Mysteries  (see  iv.  i.  5  sg^.)  the  Sacred  Women  were  not
allowed  to  wear  shoes,  except  shoes  made  of  felt  or  of  the  skins  of
victims  which  had  been  sacrificed  (Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Graec.
No.  388,  line  23  sq.)  At  Rome  the  shoes  of  the  Flaminica  had  to  be
made  of  the  leather  of  a  beast  which  had  been  killed  or  sacrificed  ;  it
was  sacrilege  if  her  shoes  were  made  from  the  hide  of  an  animal  that
had  died  a  natural  death  (Festus,  s.v.  *  Mortuae  pecudis,'  p.  191  A  ed.
Miiller;  Servius,  on  Virgil,  Aen.  iv.  518).  In  certain  late  Syrian  rites
boys  were  initiated  by  a  sacrifice  in  which  their  feet  were  shod  in  slippers
made  out  of  the  hide  of  the  victim  (W.  Robertson  Smith,  Religion  of  the
Semites^  p.  438).  No  shoes  at  all  were  allowed  to  be  carried  into  the
sanctuary  of  Alectro  at  lalysus  in  Rhodes  (Dittenberger,  op.  cit.  No.
357),  and  in  Crete  every  one  had  to  enter  the  temple  of  Britomartis
barefoot  (Solinus,  xi.  8,  ed.  Mommsen).  At  the  solemn  annual  cere-
mony of  making  the  new  fire,  observed  among  the  Creek  Indians  of  the
United  States,  the  officiating  priest,  instead  of  going  barefoot,  wore  a
new  pair  of  buckskin  moccasins,  made  by  himself  and  stitched  with  the
sinews  of  the  same  animal ;  these  shoes  he  never  wore  except  on  this


CH.  XXXIX  ORACLE  OF  TROPHONIUS  203

solemn  occasion ;  they  were  afterwards  laid  up  in  the  holy  place  and
left  there  (Adair,  History  of  the  Atpurican  Indians ^  p.  82  sq,)  Shoes
and  clothes  become  taboo  by  contact  with  the  holy  place  and  cannot
afterwards  be  used  in  ordinary  life.  Hence,  for  the  convenience  of
worshippers  who  cannot  afford  to  keep  a  special  suit  for  sacred  occa-
sions, a  stock  of  old  but  holy  clothes  and  shoes  is  kept  at  popular  shrines
and  lent  to  pilgrims,  who,  arrayed  in  them,  pay  their  devotions  at  the
shrine  and  then  return  the  borrowed  costume  to  the  priests.  See  the
remarks  of  W.  Robertson  Smith  on  this  subject,  op,  ciL  p.  452  sq,

39.  9.  The  oracle  is  above  the  grove  on  the  monntain  etc.
Philostratus  describes  the  situation  of  the  oracle  much  in  the  same  way.
He  says :  "  The  aperture  at  Lebadea  is  dedicated  to  Trophonius,  son
of  Apollo,  and  is  entered  only  by  those  who  go  for  the  sake  of  oracles.
It  is. to  be  seen,  not  in  the  sanctuary,  but  a  little  above  the  sanctuary  on
a  hill.  It  is  enclosed  all  round  by  iron  spikes."  The  narrowness  of
the  hole  through  which  the  person  had  to  squeeze  himself  into  the
oracular  cave  is  vouched  for  also  by  Lucian  {Dial.  Mort,  iii.  2  ;  id.
Menippus^  22),  Maximus  Tyrius  {Dissert,  xiv.  2),  Suidas  {s.v.  TfHxfxavlov
Kara  yrjs  Tra/yvta)  and  a  scholiast  on  Aristophanes  (C/ouds,  508).  L.
Stephani  believed  that  he  had  discovered  the  actual  shaft  described  by
Pausanias  down  which  the  faithful  descended  by  a  ladder  into  the  Holy
of  Holies.  The  spot  is  in  a  little  ruined  chapel  within  the  mediaeval
castle  on  the  simmiit  of  the  high  rocky  hill  behind  Lebadea.  The
chapel  is  on  the  brink  of  the  precipice,  perpendicularly  above  the  rock
cuttings  at  the  bottom  of  the  cliff  (see  above,  p.  196).  In  the  floor  of
the  chapel  Stephani  found  two  square  openings,  down  which  he  looked
into  a  great  hole  hewn  in  the  rock,  regularly  lined  with  masonry  and
pillars.  This  deep  hole,  Stephani  thought,  was  the  shaft  described  by
Pausanias  {Reise^  p.  67  sq.)  To  me  the  hole,  which  appears  to  be
opener  than  when  Stephani  saw  it,  seemed  not  to  answer  to  Pausanias's
description  in  the  least.  It  is  most  probably  a  cistern.  Stephani  him-
self saw  water  in  the  bottom  of  it.

39.  9.  a  basement.  The  Greek  word  is  Kprprl^.  Pausanias  uses  it
elsewhere  (vi.  25.  i  ;  viii.  4.  9  ;  viii.  11.  4  ;  viii.  16.  3).

39.  10.  The  shape  of  this  stmcture  is  like  that  of  a  pot  for
halting  bread  in.  "  Pausanias  probably  means  to  liken  it  to  those
domical  earthen  ovens  which  are  still  used  in  the  East  for  baking  bread.
Kilns  of  this  sort  were  also  used  for  firing  pottery  "  (J.  H.  Middleton,  in
Jourrud  of  Hellenic  Studies,  9  (1888),  p.  313,  who  thought  that  the
oracular  chasm  was  a  vaulted  chamber  shaped  like  the  beehive  tombs  of
Orchomenus,  Mycenae,  etc.)  Ovens  of  this  shape,  resembling  the  half
of  an  enormous  t^%y  are  often  to  be  seen  outside  the  cottages  of  the
peasants  in  Greece.

39.  II.  holding  in  his  hands  barley-cakes  kneaded  with  honey.
These  honey-cakes  were  sops  to  be  thrown  to  the  serpents  which  were
said  to  haunt  the  oracular  cavern.  There  was  a  legend  that  the  man  who
first  descended  into  the  cave  found  there  two  serpents,  which  he  appeased
with  honey-cakes  ;  and  that  so  the  custom  originated.  It  is  even  said
that  the  oracles  were  delivered  by  the  serpent  or  serpents  in  the  cave.


204  ORACLE  OF  TROPHONIUS  bk.  ix.  boeotia

See  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Clouds^  508  ;  Suidas,  s.w.  fiekirovvra  and
Tfxxjxaviov  Kara  yyjs  iratyvia;  Philostratus,  Vt'/,  Apollon,  viii.  19.  Cp.
Lucian,  Dial,  Mort  iii.  2  ;  Hesychius,  s,v,  fiayiSes ;  Pollux,  vi.  76.
Serpents,  as  we  have  seen  (§  3),  were  sacred  to  Trophonius.  Cp.  note
on  §  1 3  *  the  power  of  laughter '  etc.  Barley-cakes  kneaded  with  honey
were  offered  at  Olympia  to  Sosipolis,  who  was  also  associated  in
legend  with  a  serpent  (Paus.  vi.  20.  2  and  5) ;  and  honey-cakes  were
the  food  of  the  serpent  which  represented  Erechtheus  on  the  Acropolis
at  Athens  (Herodotus,  viii.  41  ;  cp.  above,  vol.  2.  p.  169).

39.  II.  to  one  it  is  given  to  see,  and  to  another  to  hear.  Plu-
tarch gives  a  long  description  of  the  wonderful  sights  and  sounds  said  to
have  been  seen  and  heard  by  Timarchus  in  the  cave  of  Trophonius.
His  experiences  began  with  a  feeling  that  his  head  had  split  with  a
loud  crack  and  that  his  soul  had  passed  out  through  the  sutures.  See
Plutarch,  De  genio  Socratis,  2 1  sg,

39.  II.  They  return  through  the  same  aperture.  Plutarch  says
that  Timarchus,  after  spending  a  day  and  two  nights  in  the  oracular  cave,
found  himself  lying  beside  the  entrance,  where  he  had  first  laid  himself
down  {De genio  Socratis,  21  sg.)  According  to  Suidas  {s.v.  Tpo<fHoviov
Kara  yrjs  Tratyvia)  and  a  scholiast  on  Aristophanes  (Clouds^  5o8)>  many
persons,  after  consulting  the  oracle,  were  sent  up  through  the  same
opening  on  the  same  day,  but  some  were  detained  several  days.
Another  scholiast  on  the  same  passage  of  Aristophanes  says  that  after
visiting  the  oracle  they  were  cast  up  through  a  different  opening.
Philostratus  absurdly  relates  that  most  of  them  came  up  about  the
frontiers  of  Boeotia,  but  that  some  reappeared  beyond  Locris  and
Phocis  {ViL  Apollon.  viii.  19).

39.  13.  the  power  of  laughter  will  come  back  to  him.  It  was
commonly  said  that  persons  who  had  visited  the  oracle  of  Trophonius
never  laughed  again,  the  cause  alleged  being  the  fright  which  the
serpents  in  the  cave  had  given  them.  Hence  of  a  glum  and  solemn
person  it  used  to  be  said,  **  He  has  been  at  the  oracle  of  Trophonius."
See  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Clouds^  508  ;  Plutarch,  Proverb,  5 1  ;  Suidas,
s,v,  Ets  TfKxfxDvlov  fi€fxdvT€VTai  ;  Proverb,  e.  cod.  Bodl.  368  ;  Zenobius,
iii.  61  ;  Diogenianus,  i.  8;  Gregorius  Cyprius,  ii.  24.  Athenaeus  tells
a  story  of  one  Parmeniscus  of  Metapontum  who  lost  the  power  of
laughter  by  \nsiting  the  cave  of  Trophonius,  and  recovered  it  at  the  sight
of  the  uncouth  wooden  image  of  Latona  in  her  sanctuary  at  Delos.  He
had  gone  thither  with  highly-wrought  expectations,  and  the  sight  of  the
reality  proved  too  much  even  for  his  gravity.  See  Athenaeus,  xiv.  p.
6 1 4  a  b.

39.  14*  The  shield  of  Aristomenes  etc.     See  iv.  16.  5-7.

40.  2.  saw  a  swarm  of  bees  etc.  Cp.  SchoL  on  Aristophanes,
Clouds^  508  ;  and  note  on  x.  5.  9.

40.  3-  the  image  of  Hercules  at  Thebes.     See  ix.  11.  4.

40.  3*  the  image  of  Trophonius  at  Lebadea.     See  ix.  39.  8.

40.  3-  a  Britomartis  at  Olus.  ''The  Cretans  worship  Diana
most  religiously,  calling  her  Britomartis,  which  in  our  tongue  means
Sweet  Maid.      No  one  may  enter   her   temple  save  barefoot      Her


CH.  XL  ARIADNE'S  DANCE— CHAERONEA  205

temple    boasts    the    handiwork   of    Daedalus"    (Solinus,    xi.    8,    ed.
Mommsen).

40.  3.  At  Cnosus  there  is  also  Ariadne's  Dance  etc.  See  Homer,
Iliad^  xviii.  590  sqq.  Cp.  Paus.  viii.  16.  3  ;  Overbeck,  Schrifiquellen^
^110-115.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  labyrinthine  device  which
appears  on  coins  of  Cnosus  (Head,  Historia  Numorum^  pp.  389-399)
reproduces  the  figure  of  Ariadne's  Dance,  the  complex  and  involved
lines  of  the  device  representing  the  mazy  lines  in  which  the  dancers
moved.  At  Delos  there  was  danced  a  dance  called  the  Crane  Dance,
in  which  the  movements  of  the  dancers  were  supposed  to  imitate  the
turnings  and  windings  of  the  labyrinth ;  it  would  seem  to  have  been
performed  by  two  bands  of  dancers,  each  of  which  followed  its  leader  in
single  file  (Plutarch,  Theseus,  21  ;  Pollux,  iv.  10 1).  From  a  sketch
incised  on  a  vase  found  at  Tragliatella  it  appears  that  in  the  Roman
game  called  Troy,  which  consisted  of  certain  evolutions  performed  by
boys  on  horseback  (Plutarch,  Cato,  3  ;  Dio  Cassius,  xliii.  23  ;  Tacitus,
Ann.  xi.  11),  the  riders  moved  in  lines  which  made  up  exactly  the  same
figure.  Further,  the  same  figure  is  represented  on  the  floor  of  old
churches,  where  it  is  called  *  the  road  of  Jerusalem '  {chemtn  dejdrusalem\
and  processions  move  along  it.  Moreover,  the  same  labyrinthine  figure
occurs  commonly  in  the  north  of  Europe,  particularly  Norway,  Sweden,
Denmark,  Finnland,  and  the  south  coast  of  Russian  Lappland ;  in  these
countries  it  is  marked  out  by  raised  lines  of  turf  or  rows  of  stones,  and
is  used  by  children  in  certain  games.  See  W.  Meyer,  in  Sitzungsberichte
der  philosophy  philolog,  u.  histor,  Classe  d.  k.  b.  Akad,  d,  Wissenschaften
zu  MUncheny  1882,  vol.  2.  pp.  267-300;  Otto  Benndorf,  *Ueberdas
Alter  der  Trojaspieles,*  in  W.  ReichePs  Ueber  Homerische  Waffen  (Wien,

1894),  pp.  133-139-

40.  4-  those  which  were  brought  from  Omphace  to  Qela.  See
viii.  46.  2.

40.  5.  Ohaeronea.  The  ruins  of  Chaeronea  lie  between  4  and  5
miles  to  the  north-west  of  Uvadia.  To  reach  them  from  the  latter
place  we  descend  into  the  plain,  cross  it  northward,  and  then  ascend
by  a  pass  the  low  bare  stony  hills  that  divide  the  plain  of  Lebadea  from
that  of  Chaeronea.  On  reaching  the  plain  of  Chaeronea  we  hold  on
westward  for  about  twenty  minutes,  skirting  the  northern  foot  of  the
hills  till  we  reach  Kapraena,  the  hamlet  which  occupies  a  part  of  the
site  of  Chaeronea.  It  consists  of  only  a  few  houses,  but  some  trees
growing  about  it  give  the  tiny  village  a  pleasing  appearance.  About
five  minutes  before  reaching  Kapraena  we  pass  the  shattered  remains
of  the  colossal  stone  lion  which  marks  the  grave  of  the  Thebans  who
fell  in  the  battle  of  Chaeronea  (see  below,  p.  209  sq.)  The  time  fi-om
Lebadea  to  Chaeronea  is  about  an  hour  and  three-quarters.

The  plain  of  Chaeronea — one  of  the  largest  plains  in  Greece —
stretches  in  an  unbroken  sweep  from  the  foot  of  Mount  Parnassus  east-
ward to  what  used  to  be  the  Copaic  Lake.  Its  length  from  east  to
west  is  about  twelve  miles,  and  its  breadth  from  north  to  south  about
two.  The  plain  is  a  dead  flat,  covered  with  fields  of  cotton  and  maize,
and  enclosed  by  bare  stony  barren  hills  both  on  the  north  and  on  the


2o6  CHAERONEA  bk.  ix.  boeotia

south.  Seen  on  a  bright  summer  day,  with  the  mountains  beyond  the
Copaic  plain  appearing  blue  in  the  distance  and  Parnassus  towering
grandly  on  the  west,  the  scene  is  beautiful  enough ;  but  on  a  grey
November  morning,  with  the  mists  down  on  the  distant  mountains,  it
wears  a  cheerless  aspect  that  well  becomes  a  battlefield  where  a  nation's
freedom  was  lost.

The  city  of  Chaeronea  lay  on  the  southern  side  of  the  plain,  at  the
foot  of  the  hills  which  bound  it  on  the  south.  A  sharp  rocky  summit,
rising  very  steeply  behind  the  town  on  the  south,  formed  the  acropolis.
Its  ancient  name  was  Petrachus  (ix.  41.  6).  The  hill  has  two  peaks,
separated  by  a  short  dip  or  saddle ;  but  as  they  lie  north  and  south
of  each  other,  the  southern  peak,  which  is  the  higher,  is  not  visible
when  you  stand  in  the  plain  at  the  northern  foot  of  the  hilL  On
the  east  the  hill  descends  steeply  and  in  places  precipitously  to  a
small  valley  or  glen  which  here  runs  up  into  the  hills.  At  the
northern  end  of  this  little  valley  are  most  of  the  houses  of  the  village  of
Kapraena^  and  from  it  the  two  rocky  peaks  of  the  acropolis,  with  the
saddle  between  them,  are  plainly  visible.  To  the  west  the  hill  slopes
away  in  a  long  ridge  towards  Panopeus.  On  the  north  it  falls  very
steeply  to  the  plain,  its  face  on  this  side  being  composed  of  a  broken
mass  of  rugged  grey  rocks,  to  clamber  up  or  down  which  requires  some
effort  and  attention.  Exactly  at  the  foot  of  this  rugged  declivity  is  the
small  ancient  theatre,  hewn  out  of  the  rock  (see  below,  p.  207).  The
walls  which  enclosed  the  acropolis  begin  on  a  jutting  rocky  pinnacle
above  the  theatre,  but  a  good  deal  higher  up.  From  this  point  the  wall
runs  very  steeply  up  the  hill  in  a  south-westerly  direction  to  the  more
northerly  of  the  two  peaks ;  then  it  makes  a  short  bend  to  the  west,
and  finally  extends  upward  in  a  south-easterly  direction  to  the  southern
and  higher  peak,  where  it  ends  in  a  square  tower  close  to  the  glen.
This  was  the  western  wall  of  the  fortress.  The  existing  remains  of  it
are  very  considerable,  and  form  an  admirable  specimen  of  a  Greek
fortification  of  the  best  period.  The  wall,  from  6  feet  to  6  ft.  5  in.
thick,  is  solidly  and  strongly  built  throughout  in  the  most  regular  style
of  masonry  ;  the  blocks  are  squared,  fairly  uniform  in  size,  laid  in
horizontal  courses,  and  closely  fitted  together  without  any  admixture  of
small  stones  or  mortar.  The  material  is  the  grey  rock  of  which  the
hill  is  composed.  In  general  three  to  five  courses  are  preserved,  the
height  of  the  wall  varying  from  6  to  1 1  feet ;  but  in  some  places  eight  to
ten  courses  are  standing  for  a  good  many  yards  together,  particularly  in
the  dip  between  the  two  peaks.  Near  the  northern  peak,  where  ten
courses  are  standing,  the  height  is  about  14  feet.  In  the  dip  between
the  peaks  the  wall  for  a  length  of  50  yards  or  so  batters,  i,e.  slopes
inward,  at  a  considerable  angle,  which,  however,  is  not  constant
throughout.  The  cause  of  this  inward  slope  may  simply  be  that  the
wall  has  fallen  in ;  but  if  that  is  the  case  it  is  remarkable  that  all  the
courses  and  joints  should  remain  (as  they  do  remain)  intact.  In  some
places,  as  on  the  pinnacle  above  the  theatre  and  on  the  northern  peak,
the  wall  makes  an  angle,  but  the  only  tower  is  that  on  the  southern
peak.     This  tower  is  quadrangular,  measuring  31  feet  by  23  feet  on


CH.  XL  CHAERONEA  207

the  sides.  On  the  west,  south,  and  east  it  is  preserved  to  a  height  of
one,  two,  and  three  courses  above  the  ground ;  but  on  the  south  side
an  excavation  has  been  made  revealing  six  courses.  Near  this  tower  the
wall  shows  traces  of  having  been  repaired  in  mediaeval  times.

So  much  for  the  western  wall  of  the  acropolis,  which  towards  its
southern  end,  at  the  summit  of  the  hill,  approaches  very  closely  to  the
precipitous  slopes  that  descend  eastward  into  the  glen.  The  eastern
wall  of  the  fortress  seems  to  have  started  a  little  below  the  northern
peak  and  to  have  gradually  descended  the  steep  hill-side  above  the  glen
in  a  direction  from  north  to  south  till  it  met  another  wall  which  came
down  much  more  steeply  from  the  southern  peak.  But  this  eastern
wall  is  much  less  well  preserved  than  the  western.

The  small  theatre,  hewn  out  of  the  rock  at  the  northern  foot  of  the
acropolis  hill,  faces  northward  across  the  plain.  The  tiers  of  seats  are
narrow,  and  rise  steeply  above  each  other.  They  are  divided  horizontally
into  three  blocks  or  sets.  The  lowest  block  contains  only  two  tiers.
Above  these  a  broad  passage  runs  round  the  theatre,  and  above  it
again  rise  ten  tiers  of  seats  without  a  break.  At  the  back  of  this
second  block  of  seats  the  rock  is  scarped  perpendicularly  to  a  height
of  4  ft.  5  in.,  and  above  the  scarp  there  are  four  more  tiers  of  seats
extending  all  round  the  theatre,  with  a  small  part  of  a  fifth  tier  at  the
eastern  end.  These  upper  seats  are  15  inches  high  and  2  ft.  i  in.
broad.  There  is  no  hollow  such  as  we  usually  find  in  Greek  theatres
at  the  back  of  each  seat  for  the  feet  of  the  spectators  sitting  in  the  row
above.  Above  the  highest  tier  of  seats  a  passage,  3  ft.  6  in.  wide,  has
been  cut  out  of  the  rock  all  round  the  theatre.  In  the  face  of  the
perpendicular  rock -cutting  which  forms  the  back  of  this  passage  a
few  letters  of  an  ancient  inscription  may  be  discerned.  They  are  at
the  middle  point  of  the  passage  and  very  large,  measuring  seven,  ten
and  eleven  inches  high,  but  so  faint  and  worn  that  it  is  difficult  to
determine  what  they  are.  At  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century
the  inscription  was  still  legible  and  ran  as  follows : —

'AttoXAwvos
'Apra/xtSos

*0f  Laurel-bearing  Apollo,  of  Artemis  who  saves  in  travail'  (C.I. G.  G. S.
I.  No.  3407),  from  which  we  infer  that  the  theatre  was  dedicated  to
these  two  deities.  There  are  no  remains  of  a  stage  or  of  stage-
buildings.

Below  the  theatre  is  a  spring,  the  water  of  which  forms  a  small
brook  flowing  towards  the  Cephisus,  though  it  only  reaches  that  river
after  heavy  rain.  Near  the  spring  is  a  fountain  picturesquely  built
of  ancient  blocks  and  architectural  fragments.  The  brook  is  the
ancient  Haemon.  On  its  banks  stood  a  sanctuary  of  Hercules,  beside
which  the  Greek  army  encamped  before  the  battle  of  Chaeronea  (Plu-
tarch, Demosthenes,  19).     In  the  church  of  the  Panagia  (the  Virgin)  in


2o8  CHAERONEA  bk.  ix.  boeotia

the  village  there  are  preserved  a  good  many  remains  of  antiquity,
including  inscriptions  built  into  the  walls  and  a  chsur  of  white  marble
popularly  known  as  Plutarch's  Chair.  A  bust  of  Plutarch  seems  to
have  been  set  up  by  a  certain  Philinus  at  Chaeronea,  for  the  stone
pillar  which  was  surmounted  by  a  portrait  head  of  the  historian  has
been  found  bearing  the  following  inscription :  ^iXcivos  nXouTa/);(ov
Tov  €v[€]/>y€T?/v  ^€015  [d]v€^7yK€v.  *  PhiUnus  dedicated  to  the  gods
(this  portrait  of)  Plutarch  the  benefactor'  (C.  /.  G.  G,  S,  i.  No.  3422).
Other  inscriptions  attest  the  worship  at  Chaeronea  of  Dionysus,  Hercules,
and  Artemis  (C  /.  G.  G,  S,  i.  Nos.  3409,  3416,  3430).  In  later  times
the  worship  of  Serapis  would  seem  to  have  been  very  popular  here,
for  we  possess  a  large  number  of  inscriptions,  found  at  Chaeronea,
which  record  the  dedication  of  slaves  to  that  deity  (C,  L  G.  G.  S,  i.
Nos.  3301-3305,  3307,  3309,  3310,  3312-3315,  3317-3333,  3348-
3367,  3371,  3374,  3376,  3377,  3387,  3399).  Other  inscriptions,
much  less  numerous,  record  the  dedication  of  slaves  to  Artemis  Ilithyia
(C.  /.  G,  G.  S.  I.  Nos.  3386,  3391,  3412  ;  cp.  Nos.  3385,  3410) ;  while
two  inscriptions  attest  similar  dedications  to  the  Mother  of  the  Gods
and  to  the  Great  Mother  (C  /.  G,  G,  S,  i.  Nos.  3378,  3379).  Isis
and  Anubis  were  also  revered  (C.  /.  G.  G.  S.  i.  Nos.  3347,  3375,  3380) ;
and  near  Kapraena  was  found  the  epitaph  of  a  lady,  Flavia  Lanica,
who  had  been  priestess  for  life  of  Isis,  of  Itonian  Athena,  and  of  an
abstraction  called  the  Unanimity  of  the  Greeks  (C.  /.  G,  G,  S,  i.  No.
3426).     The  epitaph  seems  to  belong  to  the  third  century  a.d.

See  Clarke,  Travels ^  4.  p.  138  sg^.  ;  Walpole's  Memoirs  relating  to  Turkey^
(London,  1818),  p.  342  ;  Dodwell,  Totir^  i.  p.  219  sqq,  ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece,
2.  pp.  112-117;  IL  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen,  I.  pp.  158-163  ;  Mure,
Journal^  I.  pp.  212-221  ;  Welcker,  Tagebtuh,  2.  pp.  52-56 ;  L.  Ross,  Wander-
ungeny  l.  p.  40  sq,  ;  Vischer,  Erinnentngen,  p.  590  sqq,  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  p.
205  sq. ;  Mahaffy,  Rambles  and  Sludies,  pp.  227-235  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  165  sq.  ;
Guide-Joanne,  2.  p.  32.  I  visited  Chaeronea  17th  May  1890  and  again  1st  and
2nd  November  1 895.  I  have  described  the  theatre,  and  what  I  have  called  the
western  wall  of  the  acropolis,  from  my  own  notes.  But  on  both  occasions  I
missed  the  eastern  wall  of  the  acropolis  on  the  slope  towards  the  glen,  and  I
only  learned  of  its  existence  from  a  photograph  which  I  afterwards  bought  at
Athens.  In  the  photograph  the  line  of  wall  is  clearly  seen  descending  the  slope
of  the  hill  obliquely  from  the  northern  peak.  The  wall  seems  to  be  preserved  to
a  height  of  a  good  many  courses  for  some  distance,  and  apparently  there  is  a  gate-
way in  it  above  the  village,  at  the  head  of  what  looks  like  an  artificial  passage
made  by  clearing  away  the  rocks  which  stud  this  part  of  the  slope.  The  entrance
to  the  acropolis  was  doubtless  on  this  side.  The  photograph  also  shows,  though
less  clearly,  part  of  the  line  of  wall  descending  from  the  southern  peak  to  join  the
other  wall  low  down  on  the  hill-side.

For  inscriptions  of  Chaeronea  see  C,  I.  G.,  No.  1595  sqq.  ;  Preller,  in  Berichte
Uber  die  Verhandl.  d.  kbnig.  siichs.  Gesell.  d.  IVissen.  zu  Leipzig,  Philolog.  histor.
CI.,  6  (1854),  pp.  195-202;  Conze  and  Michaelis,  in  Annali  dell'  Instituto.  33
(1861),  pp.  76-79;  B.  Latischew,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  hellMique,  8  (1884),
Pp-  53-67 ;  CoUitz,  G.  D,  I.  I.  Nos.  374-406.  All  the  Chaeronean  inscriptions
hitherto  published  are  now  collected  in  the  C.  /.  G.  G.  S,  vol.  i.,  edited  by  W.
Dittenberger.

40.  5.  Arne.  The  Boeotian  town  of  Arne  is  mentioned  by  Homer
(///W,  ii.  507).  According  to  some,  the  Boeotian  Arne  had  been
swallowed  up  in  the  Copaic  Lake  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  413).     Mr.  F.  Noack


CH.  XL  THE  LION  OF  CHAERONEA  209

proposes  to  identify  the  Boeotian  Ame  with  the  great  prehistoric  fortress
on  the  rocky  plateau  of  Gla  at  the  eastern  end  of  the  Copaic  Lake  (above,
p.  128).  The  Thessalian  Ame  would  seem  to  have  been  one  of  the
original  seats  of  the  Boeotians,  who,  after  their  expulsion  from  Thessaly,
settled  in  Boeotia  and  founded  there  a  new  Ame.  There  is  probably
little  or  no  foundation  for  the  identification  of  this  latter  Ame  with
Chaeronea.  See  Thucydides,  i.  12;  K.  O.  Miiller,  OrchomenoSy^  p.
384  sqq,

40.  5.  Ghaeron a  son  of  Apollo  by  Thero.     This  genealogy

was  given  by  Hellanicus,  in  the  second  book  of  his  work  on  the
Priestesses  of  Hera,  as  we  learn  from  Stephanus  Byzantius  (j.2/.  Xai-
pioveia).  The  name  of  Chaeron's  mother  was  Thuro,  according  to
Plutarch  (Sui/oy  1 7).

40.  6.  he  spoke  of  the  river  Egypt.  See  Odyssey,  iv.  477,  581;
xiv.  258.

40.  7*  two  trophies  which  the  Bomans  nnder  Snlla  set  up  etc.
Plutarch  has  described  more  exactly  the  situation  of  these  trophies.
One  was  in  the  plain,  at  the  point  where  Archelaus,  the  general  of  the
Asiatic  army,  was  posted,  and  where  his  army  broke  and  fled.  On  this
trophy  Sulla  caused  figures  of  Mars,  Victory,  and  Venus  to  be  carved.
The  other  trophy  was  placed  on  the  top  of  Mount  Thurius,  where  a
body  of  the  enemy  had  been  surprised.  On  this  trophy  Sulla  carved  in
Greek  letters  the  names  of  Homoloichus  and  Anaxidamus,  who  had
acted  as  guides  to  the  Romans.  Mount  Thurius  appears  to  be  the
highest  point  of  the  range  of  hills  behind  Chaeronea,  of  which  the
acropolis  of  Chaeronea  is  a  northem  spur  or  projection.  Sulla's  victory
over  Archelaus  was  won  in  the  spring  of  86  B.C.

See  Plutarch,  Sul/a,  17-19;  Appian,  MithriJ,  41-45;  Leake,  Northem
Greece^  2.  pp.  I93-20I  ;  Mommsen,  History  of  Rome  (ed.  1868),  3.  p.  318  sq,  ;
Hertzberg,  Geschichte  Griechenlands  unter  der  Herrschaft  der  Romer,  I.  p.  373
sq.  ;  Tb.  Reinach,  Mithridate  Eupator,  p.  167  sqq.

40.  8.  Caranns.  He  was  said  to  have  been  a  Heraclid  who
collected  a  force  in  Argos  and  Peloponnese,  invaded  Macedonia,  carved
out  a  kingdom  for  himself,  and  became  the  founder  of  the  Macedonian
dynasty.  See  Suidas,  s.v,  Kapavos ;  Diodorus,  frag.,  vii.  1 6  ;  Justin,
vii.  I.

40.  10.  a  lion  is  placed  on  it.  The  fragments  of  this  colossal
lion  are  to  be  seen  a  few  minutes'  walk  to  the  east  of  Chaeronea,  close
to  the  foot  of  the  hills  which  bound  the  plain  on  the  south.  They  were
discovered  by  a  party  of  English  travellers  (G.  L.  Taylor,  Edward
Crcsy,  etc)  on  the  3rd  of  June  18 18.  At  the  time  of  the  discovery
they  were  almost  wholly  buried  in  the  earth.  The  tomb  was  excavated
by  the  Greek  Archaeological  Society  in  1879.  It  consists  of  a  large
quadrangular  space  sunk  in  the  ground  to  the  depth  of  a  few  feet,  and
measuring  about  26  paces  from  east  to  west  by  16  paces  from  north  to
south.  The  sides  of  the  enclosure  are  lined  with  masonry,  several
courses  high,  which  banks  up  the  soil  so  as  to  keep  clear  the  enclosed
space.     Several  buttresses  project  into  the  enclosure,  and  on  the  north

VOL.  V  P


210  THE  LION  OF  CHAERONEA  bk.  ix.  bobotia

side  there  is  a  sort  of  large  quadrangular  pedestal  or  platform,  built  of
masonry,  and  measuring  apparently  1 8  ft.  by  12  ft,  which  also  projects
into  the  enclosure.  In  this  enclosure  254  skeletons  were  found  laid  in
seven  rows ;  and  it  was  ascertained  by  excavation  that  there  was  no  deeper
layer  of  bodies.  This  strongly  confirms  the  statement  of  Pausanias  that
the  tomb  contained  only  the  Theban  dead.  For  the  Greek  loss  in  the
battle  amounted  to  far  more  than  254  ;  the  Athenians  alone  had  not  less
than  1000  slain  (Diodorus,  xvi.  85  ;  Paus.  vii.  10.  5  ;  Grote,  History
of  Greece^  11.  p.  306).  The  statement  of  Strabo  (ix.  p.  414)  that  the
tomb  contained  '  the  men  who  fell  in  the  battle '  is  therefore  mislead-
ing. With  the  skeletons  in  the  tomb  were  found  some  iron  scrapers,  a
good  many  bone  buttons  (the  object  of  which  is  unknown),  and  some
small  earthenware  pots.  On  my  second  visit  to  the  tomb  I  learned  that
before  the  excavations  it  had  been  covered  by  a  mound  on  which  the
lion  lay,  and  that  when  the  mound  was  cleared  away  the  skeletons
appeared  packed  'like  sardines'  in  the  enclosure,  with  the  marks  of
their  wounds  still  visible  on  them.  The  fragments  of  the  lion  now  lie
outside  of  the  enclosure  on  the  south.  The  great  head,  6  ft.  long  and
5  ft.  high,  lies  looking  up  at  the  sky.  It  is  well  preserved,  and  so  are
two  of  the  huge  paws.  One  of  the  legs,  I  was  told,  is  wanting.  The
lion  was  hollow,  as  may  be  seen  by  the  existing  fragments.  The  stone
of  which  it  is  made  is  a  grey  marble.

See  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  LitercUurt^  Second  Series,  8  (1866),
pp.  i-ii  ;  'bAyixt,  lournaly  I.  p.  2181^^.  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und Forsckungen^
I.  p.  159  sq,  ;  Welcker,  Tagebuch^  2.  p.  55  sq.  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.  590;
Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  p.  206;  Baedeker,*  p.  166;  Guide-foanne^  2.  p.  32;  Il/xirrurd
T^s  'ApxcMoXoytif^  'Ercu/>^as  for  1 880,  p.  16  sqq,  ;  P.  Brandt,  Von  Athen  zum
Tempethal^  p.  47  sq.  I  visited  the  spot  in  May  1890  and  again  in  November
1895,  and  have  described  the  lion  and  the  tomb,  as  they  exist  at  present,  from  my
own  notes.  The  full  report  of  the  excavation  of  the  tomb  is  contained,  I  think,  in
the  •A^vcuoy,  vol.  8  (1879),  pp.  486-506,  and  vol.  9  (1880),  p.  157  sq.  I  inspected
this  journal  at  Athens,  but  it  is  not  accessible  to  me  in  Cambridge.

A  colossal  stone  lion  also  surmounted  the  grave  of  the  Thespians
who  fell  at  the  battle  of  Tanagra  (see  above,  p.  141  j^.)  In  the  island
of  Ceos  another  colossal  stone  lion  reposes  on  the  hill-side  "  under  the
shadow  of  two  olive-trees,  looking  down  on  one  of  the  most  magnificent
views  in  Greece."  See  J.  T.  Bent,  The  Cyclades^  P-  453  ;  II/jaKTiica  t^s
'A/Dxa^^ytfc^s 'Erai/Dtas  for  1880,  p.  20.  The  custom  of  placing  stone
lions  on  tombs  was  by  some  people  derived  from  Hercules,  who,  having
lost  one  of  his  fingers  by  a  bite  of  the  Nemean  lion,  buried  the  finger  at
Lacedaemon  and  placed  a  stone  lion  over  it  (Ptolemaeus,  Nov.  Hist,  ii.,
in  Mythographi  Graeci^  ed.  Westermann,  p.  1 84).

40.  II.  the  sceptre  which  Homer  says  etc.  See  Iliad^  ii.  loi  sqq,
40.  II.  This  sceptre  they  worship,  naming  it  a  spear.  Justin
tells  us  (xliii.  3.  3)  that  in  the  time  of  Romulus  "  kings  had,  instead  of
a  diadem,  the  spears  which  the  Greeks  call  sceptres.  For  from  the
very  beginning  the  ancients  worshipped  spears  as  immortal  images,
in  memory  whereof  spears  are  still  added  to  the  images  of  the  gods."
Aeschylus   says  (Seven  against    Thebes^  516  sq,)  that  Parthenopaeus


CH.  XL  SPEARS  WORSHIPPED  211

swore  by  his  spear,  which  he  trusted  in  and  revered  more  than  a  god.
Caeneus  is  related  to  have  planted  his  spear  in  the  middle  of  the
market-place  and  forced  people  to  treat  it  as  a  god.  He  himself
sacrificed  and  prayed  to  it  instead  of  to  the  gods,  and  he  obliged  passers-
by  to  swear  by  it  also.  See  Schol.  on  Homer,  //.  i.  264  ;  Schol.  on
Apollonius  Rhodius,  i.  57.  Achilles  swore  by  the  herald's  staff  (Homer,
Iltad^  i.  234  sgq.)  In  concluding  a  treaty  the  Romans  took  a  sceptre
and  a  flint  from  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Feretrius ;  they  swore  by  the
sceptre  and  *  struck  (concluded)  the  treaty'  with  the  flint  (Festus,  s,v.
'Feretrius  Jupiter,'  p.  92,  ed.  Miiller;  cp.  A.  W.  Verrall's  note  on
Aeschylus,  Lc)  The  Romans  worshipped  a  spear  as  the  image  of  Mars
and  kept  it  in  the  Regia  (Varro,  cited  by  Clement  of  Alexandria,
Protrept,  iv.  46,  p.  41,  ed.  Potter;  Plutarch,  Romulus,  29;  Arnobius,
vi.  II).  The  Scythians  revered  an  iron  sword  and  offered  annual
sacrifices  of  sheep  and  horses  to  it  (Herodotus,  iv.  62),  and  a  naked
sword  stuck  in  the  ground  is  said  to  have  been  worshipped  as  an  image
of  the  war -god  by  the  Alans  (Ammianus  Marcellinus,  xxxi.  12.  23).
Philo,  quoted  by  Eusebius  (Praepar.  Evang,  i.  9.  23  j^.),  says  that  men
used  to  worship  the  great  benefactors  of  the  race  under  the  form  of
pillars  and  rods,  which  they  consecrated  and  held  festivals  in  their
honour.  See  C.  Botticher,  Der  Baumkultus  der  Hellenen,  pp.  232-240.
The  Gonds  of  India  worship  an  iron  spear-head  called  Pharsa  Pen,
and  a  hero  named  Bhima,  *'  represented  by  his  mythical  club,  either
in  stone  or  wood"  (Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute,  25  (1895),
p.  1 70).  In  Samoa  "  the  war-clubs  of  renowned  warriors,  Anceva,  were
regarded  with  much  superstitious  veneration  by  the  different  members
of  their  families.  Before  a  battle,  various  rites  and  ceremonies  were
observed  towards  the  war -clubs,  which  were  considered  essential  to
their  owners'  success  in  combat.  I  have  often  seen  battered  and  blood-
stained war-clubs  treasured  up  and  reverenced  as  articles  of  the  highest
value  by  natives  who  resisted  for  a  long  time  all  attempts  to  purchase
them,  even  at  a  high  price,  as  they  considered  that  in  parting  with  them
all  hopes  of  success  in  battle  went  with  the  club"  (J.  B.  Stair,  in
Journal  of  the  Polynesian  Society,  No.  17,  March  1896,  p.  40).  A
Samoan  war -god  named  Tufi  was  represented  by  a  coco -nut -tree
spear  10  ft.  long.  When  the  people  met  for  worship,  the  spear  was
set  up  and  offerings  were  laid  before  it.  It  was  also  taken  in  the
war -fleet  as  a  sign  that  the  god  went  with  them.  See  G.  Turner,
Samoa  (London,  1884),  p.  61.  In  the  Arorae  or  Hurd  Islands,  South
Pacific,  the  people  had  sacred  stocks  or  small  pillars  of  wood,  4  or  5  ft.
high,  as  the  representatives  of  their  household  gods,  and  on  these
they  poured  oil,  and  laid  before  them  offerings  of  coco-nuts  and  fish
{id.  p.  294  sq^  In  Aneitum,  New  Hebrides,  South  Pacific,  there
^as^  to  be  a  sacred  staff,  made  of  iron-wood,  rather  longer  and  thicker
than  an  ordinary  walking-stick.  It  had  been  kept  for  ages  in  the  family
of  medicine-men,  and  was  regarded  as  the  representative  of  the  god.
When  the  priest  was  sent  for  to  see  a  sick  person,  he  took  the  stick
with  him,  and  leaning  on  it  harangued  the  patient,  whose  eyes  always
brightened  at  the  sight  of  the  stick  {id,  p.  327  j^.)     In  ancient  Mexico


212  NECKLACE  OF  ERIPHYLE  bk.  ix.  bokotia

when  a  merchant  went  on  his  travels  he  always  took  with  him  a  smooth
black  stick,  the  image  of  the  god  Yacatecutli,  which  protected  him  from
all  perils  by  the  way.  The  merchants  generally  travelled  in  companies,
each  man  with  his  sacred  stick.  When  they  halted  at  a  house  for  the
night,  they  tied  all  their  sticks  together,  worshipped  them,  and  drawing
blood  from  their  ears,  tongue,  legs,  or  arms,  offered  it  to  the  bundle  of
sticks.  They  also  burned  a  sort  of  incense  before  the  sticks.  See
Clavigero,  History  of  Mexico^  i.  p.  388  sq.  (trans,  by  CuUen)  ;  Sahagun,
Histoire  gdnirale  des  choses  de  la  Nouvelle  Espagne^  traduite  par  Jour-
danet  et  Simeon,  pp.  38  j^.,  296  ^^.

41.  I.  TheodoruB  and  BhoecuB.     See  viii.  14.  8  note.

41.  2.  the  chest  which  EuxTpylus  brought  etc.     See  vii.  19.  6  sqq,

41.  2.  The  necklace  was  dedicated  at  Delphi  etc.  See  viii.  24.
8-10.

41.  2.  it  was  carried  off  by  the  Phocian  tyrants.  According  to
Phylarchus,  quoted  by  Parthenius  {Narr,  Amai,  25),  the  wife  of  Aristo,
chief  of  the  Oetaeans,  conceived  a  great  desire  to  possess  the  necklace
of  Eriphyle,  which  was  preserved  in  the  sanctuary  of  Forethought
Athena  (see  Paus.  x.  8.  6).  Accordingly  her  lover  Phayllus,  one  of  the
generals  in  the  Sacred  War,  sacked  Delphi  and  carried  off  the  necklace,
which  he  presented  to  his  leman.  She  wore  it  for  a  time ;  but  one  of
her  sons,  in  a  fit  of  madness,  set  fire  to  the  house,  and  she  perished  in
the  flames.  The  story  is  also  told,  with  slight  variations,  by  Diodorus
(xvi.  64)  and  Plutarch  {De  sera  numinis  vindtctOy  8).  Ephorus  or  his
son  Demophilus,  quoted  by  Athenaeus  (vi.  p.  232  sq.\  says  that  the
necklace  was  bestowed  by  one  of  the  Phocian  leaders  (Onomarchus,
Phayllus,  or  Phalaecus)  upon  his  wife,  a  proud  and  sullen  woman,  who
at  last  plotted  her  husband's  death.

41.  3.  Homer says  that  the  necklace was  made  of

gold.  The  line  quoted  by  Pausanias  is  Odyssey ^  xi.  327.  Hyginus
(Fab.  73)  describes  the  necklace  as  made  of  gold  and  precious  stones.
Mr.  W.  Schwartz  has  essayed  to  show  that  the  necklace  of  Eriphyle
or  Harmonia  was  the  rainbow  ('  Das  Halsband  der  Harmonia  und  die
Krone  der  Ariadne,'  Fleckeiserfs  JahrbUcher^  29  (1883),  pp.  115-127).

41.  4.  in  the  speech  of  Eumaeus he  sa3rs.     See  Homer,

Od,  XV.  459  sq,

41.  4.  he  has  represented  Eurymachus  etc  See  Homer,  Od,
xviii.  295  sq,

41.  6.  a  crag  called  Petrachus.  This  was  the  steep  and  rocky
acropolis  of  Chaeronea.  See  above,  p.  206.  The  name  of  the  bill  is
mentioned  also  by  Plutarch  {Sulla^  17).

41.  6.  here  Oronns  was  beguiled  etc.  The  people  of  Methydrium
in  Arcadia  claimed  that  the  scene  of  the  famous  trick  played  on  Cronus
by  his  wife  was  on  Mount  Thaumasius,  near  their  to\vn.     See  viii.  36.  3.

41.  7*  they  distil  nngnents  from the  iris.     The  unguent

distilled  from  the  Illyrian  iris  was  very  famous,  ranking  next  after  the
unguent  distilled  from  tnalobathrum  (Pliny,  Nai.  hist  xiii.  14).


BOOK    TENTH


PHOCIS

1.  I.  Fhocns,  son  of  Omytion.     Cp.  ii.  4.  3  ;  ii.  29.  3.

1.  I.  Fhocns,  son  of  Aeacns.     Cp.  ii.  29.  2  and  9 ;  x.  33.  12.

1.  2.  the  Hypocnemidian  Locrians.  See  the  Critical  Note  on  this
passage,  vol.  i.  p.  607.  The  commoner  form  of  the  adjective  in  classical
writers  is  Epicnemidian.

1.  3.  They  took  part  in  the  Trojan  war.  See  Homer,  //.  ii.  517.
526.

1.  3.  they  waged  war  with  the  Thessalians.  The  war  seems  to
have  taken  place  not  very  long  before  Xerxes's  invasion.  Our  other
authorities  for  these  early  wars  of  the  Thessalians  and  Phocians  are
Herodotus  (viii.  27  sgr.)^  Plutarch  (De  mulierum  virtuiibusy  ii.),  and
Polyaenus  (vi.  18).  As  to  the  war,  see  H.  Hitzig,  *  Zu  Herodotos  und
Pausanias,'  Fleckeiser^s  Jahrbucher^  20  (1874),  pp.  123-127.

1.  3.  at  Hyampolis  they  buried  earthen  water-pots  etc.

Cp.  Herodotus,  viii.  28  ;  Polyaenus,  vi.  18.  2.  As  to  Hyampolis,  see
X  35.  5  sq.

1.  6.  they  gathered  together  their  women  and  children  etc.
The  only  other  ancient  writer  who  has  recorded  the  desperate  resolve
of  the  Phocians  and  their  decisive  victory  is  Plutarch  (^De  mulierum
virtutibusy  2).  According  to  him  the  Phocian  commander  who  persuaded
his  countrymen  to  this  step  was  Daiphantus,  the  son  of  Bathyllius
(cp.  below,  §  8).  Plutarch  says  that  the  Phocian  women,  and  even  the
children,  were  consulted,  and  assented  to  the  resolution.  Cp.  note  on
X.  35.  5.

1.  7.  *  Phocian  despair.'  Cp.  Plutarch,  l.c, ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,
s.v.  4>a)Kts.

1.  10.  Itonian  Athena.  She  had  a  sanctuary  in  Thessaly  (i.  13.  2)
as  well  as  in  Boeotia  (ix.  34.  i).

1.  10.  the  Phocians  sent  yotiye  offerings  etc.  In  the  ruined
chapel  of  the  Panagia  at  Elatea,  Mr.  P.  Paris  found  a  large  inscribed
marble  pedestal  which  he  conjectures  may  have  supported  some  of  the
statues  which  the  Phocians  dedicated  to  the  gods  for  the  great  deliver-


214  PHOCIAN  WARS  bk.  X.  PHOCis

ance  here  described  by  Pausanias.  The  inscription  on  the  pedestal  runs
thus  :  "  To  Poseidon  of  the  sea,  lord  of  horses,  son  of  Chronus  {sic\  the
city  vowed  and  dedicated  these  (statues  of)  saviour  demigods  on  behalf
of  their  forefathers  and  of  themselves  and  of  the  land  and  of  their  chil-
dren and  of  their  wives."  The  style  of  the  letters  of  the  inscription,
however,  is  not  archaic ;  Mr.  Paris  conjectures  that  the  old  dedication
may  have  been  re-engraved  at  a  later  time,  as  was  certainly  done  some-
times. See  P.  Paris,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique,  lo  (1886),  p.  367
sqq, ;  td.y  Elaide^  pp.  10  sqq.y  223.

1.  II.  flye  hundred  picked  Phocians  etc.  Cp.  Herodotus,  viii.
27  ;  Polyaenus,  vi.  18.  Herodotus  says  that  the  number  of  the  Phocians
was  600,  that  they  slew  4000  Thessalians  and  took  their  shields,  half  of
which  they  dedicated  at  Delphi  and  half  at  Abae  ;  while  out  of  the  tithe
of  the  spoil  they  made  the  colossal  statues  that  stood  round  about  the
tripod  in  front  of  the  temple  at  Delphi,  and  they  dedicated  a  number
of  similar  statues  at  Abae.  He  also  tells  us  that  this  defeat  of  the
Thessalians  was  the  last  which  they  suffered  at  the  hands  of  the  Phocians
before  the  invasion  of  Xerxes  (480  B.C.),  and  that  it  took  place  not  many
years  before  that  event.

2.  I.  the  Phocians  were  compelled  to  side  with  the  Persian
king.  Cp.  Herodotus,  ix.  17.  But  before  the  Persians  had  actually
entered  Greece  by  the  pass  of  Thermopylae,  the  Phocians  refused  to
join  them,  and  indeed  guarded  one  of  the  passes  against  them.  See
Herodotus,  vii.  203,  2 1 7  sq.^  viii.  30.  And  even  after  the  Persians  were
masters  of  a  great  part  of  central  Greece,  some  of  the  Phocians  remained
loyal  to  the  Greek  cause,  and  took  refiige  among  the  heights  of  Mt.
Parnassus,  from  which  they  made  descents  and  harassed  the  Persian
army  (Herodotus,  ix.  31).

2.  I.  it  came  to  pass  that  they  were  fined  by  the  Amphictyons.
According  to  Diodorus  (xvi.  23)  the  fine  was  inflicted  on  the  Phocians
for  having  cultivated  part  of  the  sacred  Cirrhaean  land  (cp.  Paus.  x.  1 5.
i);  according  to  Justin  (viii.  i)  the  Thebans  accused  the  Phocians  of
having  laid  waste  Boeotia ;  and  lastly,  according  to  Duris,  cited  by
Athenaeus  (xiii.  p.  560  b),  the  cause  of  the  war  was  that  the  Phocians
had  carried  off  a  Theban  woman  named  Theano.

2.  2.  Philomelas,  son  of  Theotimus  etc.  With  what  follows,  cp.
Diodorus,  xvi.  23  sq.  According  to  Diodorus,  the  Sacred  War  began  in
the  archonship  of  Callistratus  at  Athens,  i,e,  in  355  B.c  But  according
to  Pausanias  (§  3)  the  seizure  of  Delphi  by  the  Phocians,  and  with  it  the
beginning  of  the  war,  took  place  in  the  archonship  of  Agathocles,  />.  in
357  B.C.

2.  3.  Proms  of  Gyrene.  This  Olympic  victor  is  called  Porus  by
Diodorus  (xvi.  2)  and  Eusebius  (Chronic,  vol.  i.  p.  206,  ed.  Schone),  both
of  whom  agree  with  Pausanias  as  to  his  native  country  and  the  date  of
his  victory.

2.  4.  They  fought  for  ten  years.  Duris,  cited  by  Athenaeus  (xiii.
p.  560),  also  says  that  the  war  lasted  ten  years.  According  to  Pausanias,
it  began  in  357  B.C.  and  ended  in  348  B.C.  (see  §  3,  and  x.  3.  i).
Diodorus  states  (xvi.  23  and  59)  that  the  war  began  in  355  B.c  and


CH.  IV  PHOCIAN  WARS  215

ended  in  346  B.c. ;  in  two  passages  (xvi.  14  and  59)  he  says  it  lasted
ten  years  ;  in  one  passage  (xvi.  23)  he  says  it  lasted  nine  years.  If  we
reckon  the  first  and  the  last  years  as  complete  years  (though  the  war
probably  continued  only  during  a  portion  of  them),  the  war  lasted  ten
years ;  if  we  reckon  the  first  and  the  last  years  as  half-years,  it  lasted
nine  years.  The  Greeks  reckoned  by  ordinal  numbers  in  a  way
different  from  ours,  for  they  included  both  terms  of  the  series.

2.  4.  the  Phodans  were  rented  etc.  The  defeat  and  death  of
Philomelus  are  similarly  related  by  Diodorus  (jcvi.  31),  according  to
whom  the  event  took  place  in  354  B.C.

2.  5.  OnomarchuB was  shot  down  by  his  own  men  etc.

According  to  Diodorus  (xvi.  35  and  61)  Onomarchus  was  crucified  by
the  victorious  Philip  in  353  B.C

2.  6.  he  was  attacked  by  a  wasting  sickness.  Cp.  Diodorus,
xvi.  38  and  61.

2.  7-  his  son  Fhalaecns being  accused  of  embezzling  etc.

According  to  Diodorus  (xvi.  38)  Phalaecus  was  the  son  of  Onomarchus,
not  of  Phaylus.  As  to  the  deposition  and  subsequent  fortunes  of
Phalaecus,  see  Diodorus,  xvi.  56,  59,  61-63.  That  historian  tells  us
that  some  siege  engines  which  Phalaecus  was  bringing  against  the
walls  of  Cydonia  were  set  on  fire  by  lightning,  and  that  Phalaecus,  in
attempting  to  extinguish  the  flames,  was  burnt  to  death  with  many
of  his  men.  The  same  writer  mentions  another  tradition  that  Phalaecus
was  assassinated  by  a  soldier  whom  he  had  offended.

3.  I.  ip  the  ninth  year  Philip  put  an  end  to the

Sacred  War.  See  note  on  x.  2.  4 ;  and  as  to  the  conclusion  of  the
Sacred  War  see  Diodorus,  xvi.  59  sq.

3.  I.  Polycles  of  Gyrene  won  the  foot-race.  His  victory  fell  in
348  B.C.  Cp.  Diodorus,  xvi.  53  ;  Eusebius,  Chronic,  vol.  i.  p.  206,  ed.
Schone.

3.  2.  Erochns,  Gharadra  bnmed  down  by Xerxes.

Cp.  Herodotus,  viii.  33.  The  town  of  Erochus  was  apparently  rebuilt
after  its  second  destruction  at  the  close  of  the  Sacred  War;  for
it  is  mentioned  in  a  Phocian  inscription  which  seems  posterior  to  the
Sacred  War.  See  Bulletin,  de  Corresp,  hellinique^  11  (1887),  p.  324
sq,  ;  P.  Paris,  ElaUCy  p.  248.

3.  2.  their  inhabitants  dispersed  in  villages.  Each  village  was
to  contain  not  more  than  fifty  houses,  and  the  villages  were  to  be  distant
not  less  than  a  furlong  from  each  other  (Diodorus,  xvi.  60).

3.  3.  the  general  assembly  of  Greece,  i.e,  the  Amphictyonic
assembly  or  council.  The  Phocians  had  had  two  votes  in  that  council,
and  these  votes  were  now  transferred  to  Macedonia  (Diodorus,  xvi.  60).
See  G.  Gilbert,  Griechische  Staatsalterthiitnery  2.  p.  408  sqq.  It  would
seem  that  the  Macedonian  members  of  the  council  were  nominated
by  the  king ;  for  in  a  list  of  members  of  the  council,  which  has  been
found  inscribed  on  a  stone  at  Delphi,  the  Macedonian  representatives  are
referred  to  as  the  members  "  sent  by  King  Perseus."  See  Bulletin  de
Corresp,  helUmque^  7  (1883),  pp.  428,  432  sq,

4.  I.  It  is  twenty  ftirlongs  from  Ohaeronea  to  Panopens.    This


2i6  PANOPEUS  BK.  X.  PHOCis

estimate  of  the  distance  between  Chaeronea  and  Panopeus  is  roughly
correct  For  20  Greek  furlongs  are  equal  to  about  2^  miles,  and  to
ride  at  a  foot  pace  from  the  one  place  to  the  other  takes  about  three-
quarters  of  an  hour.

Panopeus  is  the  first  place  in  Phocis  that  you  come  to  as  you  go
westward  from  Chaeronea.  The  frontier  between  Boeotia  and  Phocis  is
not  here  marked  by  any  natural  boundary.  The  great  plain  of  Chaeronea
stretches  westward  into  Phocis  without  a  break,  and  Panopeus  like
Chaeronea  stood  on  the  edge  of  the  range  of  low  hills  which  bound  the
plain  on  the  south.  But  while  Chaeronea,  with  the  exception  of  its
acropolis,  lay  at  the  foot  of  the  hills,  Panopeus  occupied  the  somewhat
long  and  narrow  summit  of  a  hill  which  stands  out  from  the  range,  with
which,  however,  it  is  connected  on  the  south,  about  its  middle  point,  by
a  short  neck  or  ridge.  This  ridge  makes  a  bend  westward  so  as  to  form
a  sort  of  elbow,  within  which,  bounded  by  the  hill  of  Panopeus  on  the  north
and  the  main  mass  of  the  hills  on  the  south,  is  a  shallow  glen.  This  glen,
which  deepens  from  the  ridge  onward,  makes  in  its  turn  a  bend  north-
ward, and  thus  bounds  the  hill  of  Panopeus  on  the  west.  It  is  probably
the  ravine  mentioned  by  Pausanias,  where  he  saw  the  primaeval  clay  out
of  which  mankind  was  moulded  by  Prometheus  (see  below,  §  4  note).
At  its  eastern  end  the  hill  of  Panopeus  descends  into  a  narrow  valley
through  which  a  path  leads  southward  from  the  plain  of  Chaeronea  to
that  of  Lebadea.  Thus  the  hill  is  nearly  isolated  on  all  sides  except  on
the  south,  where  it  is  joined  to  the  other  hills  by  the  ridge  already  men-
tioned. Its  greatest  length  is  from  east  to  west,  and  its  height  above
the  plain  may  be  about  600  feet  or  so.  The  poor  village  of  Hagios  Vlasis
lies  at  the  northern  foot  of  the  hill,  and  it  takes  10  minutes  to  ascend
the  steep  hill-side  from  the  village  to  the  crest  of  rocks  which  runs  along
the  brow  of  the  hill.  For  the  long  narrow  summit  of  the  hill  is  nearly
encircled  by  two  lines  of  precipitous  grey  rocks,  which,  after  extending
along  the  northern  and  southern  brows  of  the  hill,  meet  in  a  sharp  point
at  its  eastern  end.  On  the  southern  face  of  the  hill  the  well-preserved
walls  and  towers  of  the  ancient  city  are  built  along  the  upper  edge  of
this  crest  of  rocks.  On  the  northern  face  of  the  hill,  on  the  other  hand,
the  rocks  are  in  general  so  high  and  precipitous  that  they  ser\'ed  as  a
sufficient  defence,  and  accordingly  here  we  find  remains  of  fortifications
only  in  the  gaps  between  the  rocks.  But  on  the  west  the  two  lines  of
rocks  did  not  meet,  and  hence  it  was  necessary  to  defend  this  open  face
of  the  hill  by  a  fortification-wall.  The  remains  of  this  western  wall,  like
those  of  the  southern  wall,  are  very  considerable,  and  are  constructed
in  a  better  and  more  regular  style.  This  completes  the  circuit.  Its
greatest  length  from  east  to  west  may  be  400  yards  or  so.  It  is
defended  on  the  western  and  southern  sides  by  quadrangular  towers  (six
in  all),  which  project  at  irregular  intervals  from  the  curtain.

The  masonry  of  the  greater  part  of  the  western  wall  and  of  the
north  wall,  so  far  as  it  exists  in  the  gaps  between  the  rocks,  is  of  the
regular  quadrangular  sort,  solid  and  good ;  the  blocks  are  squared  and
laid  in  horizontal  courses.  On  the  north  side  of  the  hill,  towards  its
western  end,  the  pieces  of  wall  between  the  rocks  are  in  some  places


CH.  IV  PA  NOPE  US  217

from  6  to  over  9  feet  high  ;  the  number  of  courses  preserved  varies  from
two  to  six.  Where  it  abuts  on  a  line  of  high  precipitous  grey  rocks,
near  the  north-west  comer  of  the  circuit,  this  north  wall  is  8  ft.  6  in.
thick.  Along  the  greater  part  of  the  northern  brow  of  the  hill,  as  I  have
said,  the  crest  of  rocks  is  so  high  and  precipitous  that  fortifications  were
needless  ;  but  at  a  point  where  this  line  of  crags  sends  out  a  rocky  spur
down  hill  towards  the  village,  there  are  some  remains  of  a  massive  wall
on  the  top  of  the  rocks.

On  the  western  face  of  the  hill,  the  wall,  which  is  but  short,  is  well
preserved.  It  is  here  10  feet  thick.  Both  faces  are  standing,  though
not  to  equal  heights.  From  five  to  nine  courses  are  preserved,  and  the
height  varies  from  10  to  12  or  13  feet,  though  there  are  a  few  gaps
where  the  wall  is  ruinous.  About  23  paces  from  its  northern  end  there
is  a  gateway,  10  ft.  8  in.  wide,  and  about  19  ft.  8  in.  deep,  flanked  by
two  bastions.  The  bastion  on  the  north  side  of  the  gateway  projects
16  ft.  6  in.  from  the  curtain,  and  is  9  feet  wide  on  its  western  face.
Farther  to  the  south  is  a  square  tower,  partly  ruinous,  but  1 3  or  1 4  feet
high  at  its  south-west  angle,  where  nine  courses  are  preserved.  At  the
south-western  angle,  perched  on  the  rocks  which  form  the  beginning  of
the  rocky  crest  that  runs  along  the  southern  brow  of  the  hill,  is  another
tower  built  of  good  ashlar  masonry;  it  measures  about  19  feet  by  24
feet  on  the  sides  ;  three  to  five  courses  of  masonry  are  standing.

In  respect  of  preservation  the  south  wall  with  its  flanking  towers
deserves  to  rank  with  the  best  in  Greece.  But  the  style  tf  masonry  on
the  whole  is  not  good  nor  regular,  certainly  not  so  good  and  regular  as
that  of  the  western  wall.  The  blocks  of  which  it  is  built  are  not  so
uniform  in  size  nor,  as  a  rule,  so  large,  though  there  are  some  very  large
blocks  amongst  them  here  and  there.  Generally  the  blocks  are  not  so  high,
thus  making  narrower  (lower)  courses,  and  these  courses  are  not  always
horizontal.  But  for  long  stretches  together  the  wall  is  from  12  to  16
or  1 8  feet  high,  the  number  of  courses  preserved  varying  from  four  to
eleven  or  even  thirteen.  The  average  height  in  these  places  is  about
1 4  feet,  and  the  average  number  of  courses  about  eight.  The  thickness
of  the  wall  varies  from  7  feet  to  1 3  ft.  4  in.  Four  square  towers  project
from  the  curtain,  without  counting  the  tower  at  the  south-west  angle.
Of  these  towers  the  third  from  the  east  is  the  best  preserved.  It  is
22  ft.  6  in.  broad  on  the  face,  projects  1 1  feet  from  the  curtain,  and  is
preserved  to  its  full  original  height  (which  I  estimated  at  30  feet),  for  a
parapet  runs  almost  all  round  its  top.  The  number  of  courses  in  this
fine  tower  is  twelve  and  thirteen.  The  next  tower  to  the  east  projects
1 1  feet  from  the  curtain  and  is  standing  to  a  height  of  about  1 5  feet
with  seven  courses  of  masonry.  The  south  wall  ends  on  the  east  in
another  quadrangular  tower,  which  measures  23  feet  by  16  feet  on  the
sides  ;  it  has  six  and  seven  courses  standing.  As  usual,  the  towers  are
built  in  a  more  massive  and  careful  style  than  the  adjoining  portions  of
the  wall ;  the  blocks  are  better  squared,  and  the  courses  more  strictly
horizontal.  This  does  not  prove,  as  Dodwell  fancied,  that  the  towers
are  later  than  the  wall ;  for  it  was  the  regular  practice  of  Greek  military
engineers  (as  the  remains  of  Greek  fortifications  attest)  to  build  the


2i8  PANOPEUS  BK.  X.  PHOcis

towers  with  an  unusual  degree  of  solidity,  doubtless  to  compensate  for
their  greater  liability  to  suffer  from  the  assaults  of  siege  artillery.

In  the  southern  wall,  nearly  above  the  ridge  which  connects  the  hill
of  Panopeus  with  the  other  hills  to  the  south,  there  is  a  second  gateway,
lo  ft.  5  in.  wide,  undefended  by  flanking  towers,  though  the  wall  makes
a  slight  projection  on  the  right  (east)  side  as  you  enter.  The  gateway
faces  south-east.  Remains  of  the  two  door-jambs  are  to  be  seen  in  it.  It
is  here  that  the  wall  is  13  ft.  4  in.  thick.

The  space  enclosed  by  these  fortification-walls  and  by  the  rocky
crests  shows  but  few  signs  of  habitation.  On  the  highest  point  of  the
hill,  among  some  holly-oaks,  are  the  scanty  tumble-down  ruins  of  a
mediaeval  tower,  built  in  the  usual  way  of  small  stones  with  bricks  and
mortar  in  the  chinks.  A  little  lower  down,  and  farther  to  the  east,  is
a  small  chapel  with  remains  of  faded  paintings  on  the  walls.  Scattered
about  the  hill,  especially  round  the  chapel,  is  a  good  deal  of  broken
pottery.  A  fine  grove  of  beautiful  holly-oaks  now  shades  part  of  the
simunit,  growing  on  a  grassy  slope  amid  low  plants  and  shrubs.  It  is
pleasant  in  the  heat  of  the  day  to  rest  in  the  shade  of  these  trees,  to
smell  the  wild  thyme  which  grows  abundantly  on  the  hill,  and  to  enjoy
the  distant  prospects.  To  the  north,  across  the  broad  Chaeronean  plain,
we  look  straight  into  the  defile  through  which  the  Cephisus  flows  from
Phocis  into  Boeotia ;  at  the  northern  end  of  the  defile  the  low  hill  is  visible
on  which  are  the  scanty  ruins  of  Parapotamii.  To  the  west,  Parnassus
lifts  his  mighty  head  at  no  great  distance  from  us,  his  middle  slopes
darkened  by  pine>forests  that  look  like  the  shadows  of  clouds  resting  on
the  mountain-side.

On  the  northern  side  of  the  hill  there  are  traces  of  two  walls  extend-
ing down  the  steep  slope  to  the  plain,  in  the  direction  of  Hagios  Vlasis,
One  of  them,  of  which  a  few  massive  blocks  are  still  in  position,  ran
down  the  hill-side  obliquely  in  a  north-westerly  direction,  starting  from
near  the  eastern  end  of  the  summit.  The  other  wall,  of  which  there  are
more  remains,  started  from  the  crest  of  rocks  near  the  western  end  of  the
summit  and  ran  straight  down  the  hill  in  a  due  northerly  direction.
These  two  walls  probably  met  at  the  foot  of  the  hill  so  as  to  complete
the  fortified  enclosure  on  the  hill-side.  At  the  beginning  of  the  nine-
teenth century  the  two  walls  would  seem  to  have  been  in  much  better
preservation  than  at  present,  for  Leake  says  that  they  "inclose  the
northern  face  of  the  hill,  forming  an  angle,  somewhat  greater  than  a
right  angle,  at  the  south-west  [north-west  ?].  They  included  a  small  portion
of  the  plain  at  the  north-western  end  of  the  site.  Here  the  walls  are  built
in  lines  nearly  straight,  and  were  flanked  with  towers  at  the  usual  intervals."
The  proximity  of  the  village  of  Hagios  Vlasts  has  probably  proved
fatal  to  these  walls,  the  villagers  having  used  them  as  a  quarry.  As  late
as  1 890,  when  I  visited  Panopeus  for  the  first  time,  the  long  wall  which
descended  the  hill  obliquely  was,  if  I  remember  rightly,  in  much  better
preservation  than  when  I  returned  to  the  spot  in  1S95.  Even  the
fortifications  of  the  summit,  in  spite  of  their  greater  distance  from  the
village,  would  seem  not  to  have  escaped  the  hand  of  the  spoiler,  that
is,  of  the  village  mason  ;  for  Dodwell  says  of  the  towers  that  "  some  of


mm


CH.  IV  PANOPEUS  219

them  are  extremely  perfect,  and  contain  doors  and  windows  of  the
usual  form,  diminishing  towards  the  top."  At  present  there  is  only
one  tower  in  nearly  perfect  condition.

I  visited  Panopeus  in  May  1890  and  again  on  ist  November  1895,  ^^^  have
described  the  present  state  of  the  ruins  entirely  from  my  own  observation.  See
further,  Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  pp.  207-210 ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  pp.  106-112  ;
H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen,  i.  p.  151  sqq,  ;  Mure,  Journal^  i.  p.
209  sq. ;  Welcker,  Tagebuchy  2.  p.  56  sqq. ;  L.  Ross,  iVancUrungen^  I .  p.  42 ;
Vischer,  Erinnerungeny  p.  599 ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  168 ;  Baedeker,'  p.  165 ;
Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  33.  The  time  from  Chaeronea  to  Panopeus,  according  to
Leake  and  Baedeker,  is  35  minutes ;  according  to  the  Guide-Joanne  it  is  45  minutes.
I  took  47  minutes.

4.  I.  the  Phocian  parliament.     See  x.  5.  i  sq.

4.  I.  Phlegyans  who  fled  to  Phods.     See  ix.  36.  3.

4.  2.  he  speaks  of  the  city  of  the  Panopeans  etc.  See  Homer,
Od,  xi.  581.

4.  2.  he  says  that  Schedius,  son  of  Iphitus  etc.  See  Homer,
//.  xvii.  306  sqq.

4.  3.  the  women  whom  the  Athenians  call  Thyiads.  As  to  the
Thyiads,  see  Panofka,  *  Dionysos  und  die  Thyiadcn,'  Philog.  histor.
Abhandlungen  of  the  Berlin  Academy,  1852,  pp.  341-390;  A.  Rapp,
*  Die  Manade  im  griechischen  Cultus,  in  der  Kunst  und  Poesie,'
Rheinisches  Museuniy^.Y,  27(1872),  pp.  1-22,  562-611.  The  road
which  the  Thyiads  took  from  Athens  by  Panopeus  to  Delphi  was  the
same  along  which  the  Athenians  periodically  sent  their  offerings  to
Delphi.  The  offerings  seem  to  have  been  conveyed  by  a  sort  of  sacred
caravan,  called  the  Pythias.  There  was  a  tradition  that  Apollo  followed
the  same  road  when  he  journeyed  from  Athens  to  Delphi,  reclaiming
mankind  from  savagery  to  civilisation.  See  Strabo,  ix.  p.  422  sq,  \  cp.
Aug.  Mommsen,  Delphica^  P*  3 '  5  ^9'  These  facts  seem  to  show  that
the  road  from  Athens  to  Delphi  by  Panopeus  was  a  sacred  way.  See
K.  O.  Miiller,  Dorier^  i.  p.  241  sqq.  (i.  p.  267  sqq,y  English  trans.);
E.  Curtius,  Gesammelte  Abhandlungen^  i.  p.  35  sqq,

4.  4*  a  small  building  of  imhnmt  brick.     See  note  on  ii.  27.  6.

4.  4*  At  the  edge  of  the  ravine  lie  two  stones  etc.  The  ravine
to  which  Pausanias  refers  is  probably  the  shallow  glen,  with  sloping,
bushy  and  rocky  sides,  which  bounds  the  hill  of  Panopeus  on  the  west
and  partly  on  the  south.  When  I  visited  it,  the  glen  was  absolutely
dry.  The  soil  in  the  bottom  is  a  reddish  crumbling  earth.  Probably  it
was  out  of  this  earth  that  Prometheus  was  said  to  have  made  mankind.
But  I  could  see  no  large  detached  lumps  of  it,  and  I  could  detect  no  odour
emitted  by  the  earth.  But  in  the  ravine  on  the  eastern  side  of  Panopeus,
Col.  Leake  observed  some  large  masses  of  stone  which  appeared  to
have  fallen  from  the  hill.  He  thought  they  might  answer  to  the
stones  described  by  Pausanias,  though  he  did  not  detect  the  smell  of
human  flesh  about  them  which  Pausanias  recognised  {Northern  Greece^
2.  p.  Ill  sq.)  Gell,  however,  quoted  by  Siebelis  on  this  passage,  says
that  in  the  brook  here  "  is  found  a  species  of  stone  very  different  from
the  limestone  of  the  country,  and  which  on  rubbing  emits  an  odour."


220  THE  MAKING  OF  MAN  bk.  x.  phocis

4.  4-  the  clay  ont  of  which  the  whole  race  of  man  was  moulded
by  Prometheus.     Prometheus  was  said  to  have  fashioned  men  out  of
earth  kneaded  with  water  (ApoUodorus,  i.   7.   i).     One  story  ran  that
when  mankind  had  been  destroyed  by  the  great  flood  in  the  days  of
Deucalion,  Zeus  ordered  Prometheus  and  Athena  to  mould  images  out
of  clay,  to  breathe  the  winds  into  them  and  make  them  live  (Etymolog,
Magnum^  s.v,  'I#covtov,  p.  471,  i  sqq,)     According  to  some,  Prometheus
fashioned  the  animals  as  well  as  man,  giving  to  each  kind  of  beast  its
own  nature  (Philemon,  quoted  by  Stobaeus,  Florilegium^  ii.  27).     Cp.
L.  Preller,  Ausgewdhite  Aufsdtse,  p.  2 1 1  sqq.  The  legend  that  the  human
race  was  created  by  a  god  or  hero  who  moulded  the  first  men  out  of  clay
or  earth  and  breathed  life  into  them,  is  found  in  many  lands.    The  story
is  obviously  the  creation  of  a  savage  philosophy.     The  best  known  form
of  the  myth  is  the  Hebrew  one,  recorded  in  Genesis.     A  similar  version
is  told  by  the  Australian  blacks.     They  say  that  Pund-jel,  the  creator,
cut  three  large  sheets  of  bark  with  his  big  knife.     On  one  of  these  he
placed  some  clay,  and  worked  it  up  with  his  knife  into  a  proper  con-
sistence.    He  then  laid  a  portion  of  the  clay  on  one  of  the  other  pieces
of  bark,  and  shaped  it  into  a  human  form  ;  first  he  made  the  feet,  then
the  legs,  then  the  trunk,  the  arms,  and  the  head.     Thus  he  made  a  clay
man  on  each  of  the  two  pieces  of  bark ;  and  being  well  pleased  with
them  he  danced  round  them  for  joy.     Next  he  took  stringy  bark  fix)m  the
Eucalyptus  tree,  made  hair  of  it,  and  stuck  it  on  the  heads  of  his  clay
men.     Then  he  surveyed  them  critically,  was  pleased  with  his  work,
and  danced  round  them  again  for  joy.     He  then  lay  down  on  them,
blew  his  breath  hard  into  their  mouths,  their  noses,  and  their  navels  ;
and  presently  they  stirred,  spoke,  and  got  up.     See  Brough  Smyth,
Aborigines  of  Victoria^  i.  p.  424.     The  Maoris  of  New  Zealand  say  that
Tiki  made  man  after  his  o\vn  image.     He  took  red  clay,  kneaded  it
with  his  own  blood,  fashioned  it  into  human  form,  and  gave  the  image
breath  (R.  Taylor,  New  Zealand^  p.  117;  cp.  Shortland,  Maori  religion
and  mythology^  p.    21  sq.)      In  Tahiti   it  was  said  that  Taaroa,  the
creator,  made  man  out  of  red   earth.     One  day  he  caused  the  man
to  fall  asleep,  and  while  the  man  slept,  the  creator  took  out  one  of  his
bones  {ivt)  and  made  a  woman  of  it,  whom  he  gave  to  the  man  as  his
wife  (Ellis,  Polynesian  Researches^  i.  p.  1 10).     The  story  of  the  creation
of  woman  out  of  a  rib  of  the  first  man  seems  to  have  been  current  in
New  Zealand  also   (J.    L.    Nicholas,   Narrative  of  a    Voyage  to  New
Zealand^  p.  59).     In  Bowditch  Island,  South  Pacific,  the  first  man  was
produced  out  of  a  stone.     After  a  while  he  bethought  him  of  making  a
woman.     So  he  collected  some  earth  and  moulded  a  woman  out  of  it —
head,  body,  arms,  and  legs.     Then  he  took  a  rib  out  of  his  left  side,
thrust  it  into  the  earthen  figure,  and  she  started  up  a  live  woman.     He
called  her  Ivi  (Eevee)  or  *  rib,'  and  took  her  to  wife,  and  the  whole  human
race  sprang  from  this  first  pair.     See  G.  Turner,  Samoa^  p.  267  sq.    The
wide  diffusion  of  this  story  in  Polynesia  makes  it  doubtful  whether  it
is  merely  a  repetition  of  the  Biblical  story,  learned  from  Europeans.
In  Nui,  or  Netherland  Island,  South  Pacific,  the  god  Aulialia  fashioned
earthen  models  of  a  man  and  woman,  raised  them  up,  and  made  them


CH.  IV  THE  MAKING  OF  MAN  221

live  (Turner,  op,  cit.  p.  300).  In  the  Pelew  Islands  there  is  a  legend
that  the  first  men  were  made  out  of  clay  kneaded  with  the  blood  of
various  animals,  and  that  the  characters  of  these  first  men  and  of  their
descendants  were  determined  by  the  characters  of  the  animals  whose
blood  had  been  kneaded  with  the  primordial  clay  (Kubary,  *  Die  Religion
der  Pelauer,*  in  Bastian's  A  Her  lei  aus  Volks-  und  Menschenkunde^  i.  pp.
3,  56).  Among  the  Alfoers  of  Celebes  a  legend  of  the  creation  of  man
and  woman  out  of  earth  is  current,  but  it  must  be  of  Christian  origin,
since  the  name  of  the  man  was  Adam  and  the  name  of  the  woman  £wa
(Graafland,  De  Minahassa^  i.  p.  97).  Some  of  the  wild  tribes  of  Borneo
tell  bow  in  the  beginning  two  great  birds  tried  to  make  man.  For  this
purpose  they  first  made  trees ;  but  by  this  means  they  could  not  suc-
ceed. Then  they  tried  to  form  him  out  of  the  rocks ;  but  they  only
succeeded  in  making  statues.  Then  they  took  earth,  mixed  it  with
water,  moulded  it  into  the  form  of  a  man,  infused  into  his  veins  the  red
gum  of  the  kumpang-tree,  and  he  lived.  See  Transactions  of  the  Ethno-
logical Society  of  London^  N.  S.  2  (1863),  p.  27 ;  H.  Ling  Roth,  The  natives
of  Sarawak^  i.  p.  299.  The  Kumis  of  south-eastern  India  say  that  God
made  the  world  and  the  trees  and  the  creeping  things  first,  and  then  set
about  making  man.  He  made  a  clay  man  and  a  clay  woman  ;  but  at
night,  while  God  slept,  a  great  snake  came  and  ate  them  up.  This  hap-
pened twice  or  thrice,  and  God  was  in  despair,  till  at  last  he  got  up  very
early  one  morning  and  made  a  clay  dog  and  put  life  into  it ;  then  he  made
the  clay  man  and  the  clay  woman  once  more,  and  set  the  dog  to  watch
over  them,  and  that  night  when  the  snake  came  as  usual  to  eat  them
up,  the  dog  barked  and  frightened  it  away.  See  Lewin,  Wild  Races  of
South-Eastem  India^  p.  224  sq.  The  Kasyas  of  Assam  tell  the  same
story  (A.  Bastian,  Vblkerstiimme  am  Brahmaputra^  p.  8).  The  Innuit
(Eskimo)  of  Point  Barrow,  Alaska,  tell  of  a  time  when  there  was  no
man  in  the  land,  till  a  spirit  named  d  s^  lu,  who  resided  at  Point  Barrow,
made  a  clay  man,  set  him  up  on  the  shore  to  dry,  breathed  into  him
and  gave  him  life  and  sent  him  out  into  the  world  {Report  of  the  Inter-
national Expedition  to  Point  Barrow^  Alaska  (Washington,  1885),  p.
47).  According  to  a  Melanesian  legend,  told  in  Mota,  one  of  the
Banks  Islands,  the  hero  Qat  made  men  of  clay,  the  red  clay  from  the
marshy  river-side  at  Vanua  Lava.  At  first  he  made  men  and  pigs  just
alike,  but  his  brothers  remonstrated  with  him,  so  he  beat  down  the  pigs
to  go  on  all  fours  and  made  men  walk  upright.  Qat  made  the  first
woman  out  of  supple  twigs,  and  when  she  smiled  he  knew  she  was  a
living  woman  (R.  H.  Codrington,  The  Melanesians^  p.  158).  The
myth  of  Prometheus  has  recently  been  discussed  by  Dr.  K.  Bapp  {Pro^ne-
iheus,  Ein  Beitrag  zur  griechischen  Mythologies  Oldenburg,  1896).

4.  5.  the  tomb  of  Tityus.  Strabo  mentions  (ix.  p.  422)  that
Tityus,  a  violent  and  lawless  man,  was  put  down  by  Apollo  on  his  way
from  Athens  to  Delphi.  Cp.  Paus.  iii.  18.  15;  x.  11.  i.  At  the  foot
of  the  hills  near  Panopeus,  on  the  south  side  of  the  road.  Mure  observed
several  large  natural  hillocks  of  a  round  form ;  he  thought  one  of  them
may  have  been  the  supposed  tomb  of  Tityus  (Journal^  i .  p.  211).

4.  5.  the  yerse  of  the  Odyssey.     See  Od,  xi.  577.


222  DAULIS  BK.  X.  PHOCIS

4.  6.  he  sailed  away  from  the  island  with  the  rest  of  the  mnlti-
tude.  The  Phoenician  city  of  Cadiz  was  built  on  the  western  end  of
the  island,  and  at  the  eastern  end  of  the  island  there  was  a  very
ancient,  wealthy,  and  famous  sanctuary  of  Hercules  (Melcart).  See
Strabo,  iii.  p.  1 68  sqq,  ;  Mela,  iii.  46,  ed.  Parthey ;  Silius  Italicus,  iii.
1 3  sqq. ;  Diodorus,  v.  20  ;  Philostratus,  Vit,  ApoUotu  v.  4  sqq, ;  Appian,
Hispanicoy  65,  ed.  Mendelssohn.  In  the  present  passage  Pausanias
seems  to  refer  to  a  custom  which  obliged  all  foreigners  to  quit  the  island
of  Cadiz  at  certain  seasons,  possibly  during  the  festival  of  Hercules
(Melcart).  The  monster  whom  Cleon  declares  he  saw  burning  on  the
shore  may  perhaps  have  been  an  effigy  of  Hercules  (Melcart),  such  as
was  periodically  burned  on  a  pyre  at  Tarsus  in  Cilicia,  a  city  which
recognised  Hercules  as  its  founder  (Dio  Chrysostom,  Or,  xxxiii.  voL  2.
p.  16,  ed.  Dindorf).  At  the  White  Island  in  the  Black  Sea  sailors  were
allowed  to  land  and  pay  their  devotions  at  the  sanctuary  of  Achilles,  to
whom  the  island  was  sacred,  but  they  had  to  embark  before  sunset,  lest
they  should  disturb  Achilles  and  Helen  at  their  nightly  revels  (Philo-
stratus, Heroica^  xx.  35).

4.  7.  Abont  seven  fturlongs  from  Fanopeus  is  Danlis.  This
estimate  of  the  distance  of  Daulis  from  Panopeus  is  much  under  the  mark.
The  actual  distance  is  about  4  miles  (36  Greek  furlongs).  I  took  i
hour  24  minutes  to  ride  at  a  foot  pace  from  Davlia  (Daulis)  to  Hagios
Vlasis  (Panopeus).

The  situation  of  ancient  Daulis  is  exceedingly  beautifuL  It  occu-
pied the  broad  but  somewhat  uneven  summit  of  a  fine  massive  hill
which  rises  abruptly  from  the  glens  at  the  eastern  foot  of  Parnassus.
Everywhere  the  sides  of  the  hill — which  in  the  grandeur  of  its  outlines
deserves  almost  to  rank  as  a  mountain — are  high  and  steep,  except  at  a
single  point  on  the  west  where  a  narrow  ridge  connects  it  with  the  main
mass  of  Parnassus.  On  the  south  the  hill  falls  away  in  sheer  and  lofty
precipices  of  grey  rock  into  a  deep  romantic  glen,  the  sides  of  which,
where  they  are  not  precipitous,  are  mantled  with  dark  green  shrubbery.
Beyond  the  ridge  to  the  west  soar  the  immense  grey  precipitous  slopes
of  Parnassus,  mottled  here  and  there  with  dark  pines.  High  up  on  its
side  is  seen  a  white  monastery  at  the  mouth  of  a  dark  gorge,  through
which  a  path  ascends  to  the  summit.  In  the  hollow  between  the  hill  of
Daulis  and  these  great  slopes,  a  mill  nestles  picturesquely  among  trees ;
the  water  is  led  to  it  in  a  mill-race.  Northward  the  ruined  walls  of
Daulis,  here  thickly  overgrown  with  ivy  and  holly-oak,  look  across  a
deep  dell  to  the  pretty  village  of  Davlia^  embowered  among  trees  and
gardens  on  the  opposite  hill-side.  The  descent  to  the  valley  on  this  side
is  steep  and  bushy,  but  not  precipitous,  except  where  a  line  of  rocks
runs  obliquely  up  it  on  the  north-west.  Here  and  there  in  the  valley
the  last  slopes  of  the  hill  are  terraced  and  planted  with  vines.  At  the
eastern  foot  of  the  hill  begins  the  great  plain — ^the  scene  of  so  many
famous  battles — which  stretches  away  for  miles  past  the  ruins  of  Pano-
peus and  Chaeronea  until  at  Orchomenus  it  melts  into  the  still  vaster
expanse  of  the  Copaic  plain.  To  the  south-east,  beyond  an  intervening
range  of  low  hills,  appears  the  sharp  outline  of  Helicon.     In  this  direc-


CH.  IV  DAULIS  22S

tion,  at  the  southern  end  of  the  narrow  valley  which  divides  these  low
hills  from  the  mighty  steeps  of  Parnassus,  is  the  famous  Cleft  Way,
where  Oedipus  is  said  to  have  done  the  dark  deed  that  was  the
beginning  of  all  his  woes.  Altogether  few  places  in  Greece  surpass
Daulis  in  romantic  beauty  of  situation  and  wealth  of  historical  and
legendary  memories  which  the  landscape,  both  near  and  far,  is  fitted  to
evoke.  Standing  on  the  brow  of  its  precipices  we  feel  that  this
mountain  fastness,  frowning  on  the  rich  champaign  country  below,  was
well  fitted  to  be  the  hold  of  a  wild  wicked  lord  like  Tereus,  of  whose
bad  deeds  the  peasants  might  tell  tales  of  horror  to  their  children's
children.  But  now  all  is  very  peaceful  and  solitary  in  DauHs,  for  the
tide  of  life  has  long  rolled  away  from  it.  Parnassus  still  looks  down
on  it  as  of  old ;  but  ivy  mantles  the  ruins,  the  wild  thyme  smells  sweet
on  the  hill,  and  the  tinkle  of  goat-bells  comes  up  sweetly  from  the  glen.
Only  the  shadow  of  ancient  crime  and  sorrow  rests  on  the  fair
landscape.

The  only  entrance  to  Daulis  was  on  the  west.  Here  the  narrow
ridge  which  connects  the  hill  with  Parnassus  leads  up  to  a  gateway  at
the  extreme  north-western  comer  of  the  site.  This  gateway,  about  lo
ft.  7  in.  wide,  is  flanked  on  the  north  by  the  remains  of  an  ancient
quadrangular  tower  built  on  a  high  precipitous  rock.  Both  on  the
outer  or  northern  and  the  inner  or  southern  face  of  the  tower  several
courses  of  masonry  are  preserved ;  on  its  western  front,  above  the
high  rock,  the  tower  is  12  feet  high.  On  the  south  the  gateway  is
flanked  by  a  ruined  mediaeval  tower  built  of  small  stones  with  bricks
and  mortar  in  the  crevices.  The  tower  is  standing  to  a  height  of  a
good  many  feet ;  one  of  its  comers  is  rounded.

On  passing  through  the  gateway  we  find  ourselves  on  the  spacious
summit  of  the  hill.  It  is,  on  the  whole,  of  a  tabular  form,  though  the
surface  is  somewhat  broken  and  uneven.  The  central  and  highest  point
is  crowned  by  the  ruins  of  a  mediaeval  tower,  which  seems  to  have  been
round  and  of  no  great  size ;  and  at  the  north-eastem  comer  there  are
considerable  remains  of  a  mediaeval  church  meanly  built  of  small  stones,
bricks,  and  mortar.  Nearly  all  round  the  steep  and  sometimes  preci-
pitous edges  of  the  simimit  may  be  traced  the  ancient  fortification-walls,
which  in  some  places,  especially  on  the  western  and  eastem  sides,  are
well  preserved.  They  are  flanked  at  irregular  intervals  by  square
towers,  of  which  thirteen  more  or  less  minous  can  be  made  out  The
style  of  masonry  of  the  ancient  walls,  which  evidently  belong  to  the
good  Greek  period,  is  partly  polygonal  and  partly  quadrangular.  The
towers  on  the  whole  are  built  in  the  quadrangular  or  ashlar  style,  the
blocks  being  squared  and  laid  in  horizontal  courses ;  but  in  the  walls
pieces  of  quadrangular  and  of  tme  polygonal,  well-jointed  masonry  occur
side  by  side.  In  a  few  places,  especially  at  the  north-west  comer,  the
walls  are  mantled  with  ivy  and  holly-oak  bushes  which  have  rooted  them-
selves in  the  crevices.  The  stone  of  which  they  are  built  is  of  a  grey
colour.  Here  and  there  the  old  walls  have  been  repaired  in  the  Middle
Ages  with  the  usual  small  stones,  bricks,  and  mortar,  which  always
look  so  poor  beside  the  solid  and  beautiful  masonry  of  ancient  Greece.


224  DAULIS  BK.  X.  PHOCIS

On  the  western  face  of  the  hill  the  ancient  wall,  with  its  towers,  is
carried  along  the  edge,  partly  of  precipitous  rocks,  partly  of  a  steep
slope  overgrown  with  bushes ;  and  on  this  side  it  is  preserved  in  an
almost  unbroken  line,  though  not  to  its  full  height.  Three  to  seven
courses  of  masonry  are  standing ;  the  average  height  of  the  wall  is  8
or  9  feet,  but  where  seven  courses  are  preserved  it  is  12  feet  high  or
more.  The  number  of  towers  on  the  western  face  of  the  hill,  exclusive
of  those  which  flank  the  gateway,  is  three.  They  measure  about  2 1  feet
on  the  face,  project  from  4  ft.  6  in.  to  5  ft.  2  in.  from  the  curtain,  and
are  standing  to  a  height  of  7  to  9  feet,  the  number  of  courses  varying
from  three  to  six.

On  the  southern  side  of  the  hill  the  wall  is  not  nearly  so  well  pre-
served. There  are  stretches  where  it  is  ruinous,  and  others  again  where
it  is  from  5  to  8  feet  high.  At  one  point  on  this  side  the  hill  sends  out
a  rocky,  needle-like  spur,  overgrown  with  prickly  holly-oak  bushes,  which
falls  away  in  high  sheer  precipices  of  grey  rock  into  the  deep  glen
below.  This  rocky  spur  lies  outside  the  line  of  the  fortifications,  but
immediately  above  it  the  wall  is  preserved  to  the  height  of  7  or  8  feet
for  many  yards.  Here  the  masonry  partakes  more  of  the  ashlar  and
less  of  the  polygonal  style  than  in  most  of  the  rest  of  the  wall ;  three
and  four  courses  are  standing.  Only  one  tower  can  now  be  distinguished
on  the  southern  brow  of  the  hill.  It  is  about  120  yards  to  the  east  of
the  tower  at  the  south-west  comer,  measures  20  ft.  3  in.  on  the  face,
and  projects  4  ft.  5  in.  from  the  curtain.  Six  to  eight  courses  of  masonry
are  preserved,  giving  the  tower  a  height  at  most  of  10  feet.  The
masonry  is  partly  polygonal  and  partly  quadrangular.

At  its  south-eastern  comer  the  hill  ends  in  an  immense  perpendicular
cliff  of  grey  rock,  on  the  edge  of  which  the  fortification-wall  naturally
ceases.  But  farther  to  the  north,  on  the  eastem  face  of  the  hill,  the
wall  reappears.  Here  there  is  a  piece  as  much  as  15  feet  high,  but
the  masonry  is  rough  and  irregular.  On  this  eastem  side  of  the  hill
the  slope  to  the  plain,  though  steep  and  high,  is  for  the  most  part  not
precipitous  except  at  its  southern  end  ;  and  hence  a  fortification-wall  was
needed,  the  remains  of  which,  more  or  less  ruinous,  may  be  traced  along
most  of  the  eastem  brow.  In  places  the  wall  is  still  from  6  to  over  10
feet  high ;  the  number  of  courses  preserved  varies  from  one  to  seven.
It  is  on  this  and  the  northem  side  of  the  hill  that  the  wall  has  been
repaired  in  mediaeval  times.  Remains  of  six  quadrangular  towers  can
still  be  made  out  on  the  eastem  face  of  the  hill.  They  are  about  20  feet
broad,  and  project  about  9  feet  from  the  curtain.  With  the  exception
of  two  which  are  very  ruinous,  they  are  standing  in  part  to  a  height  of
8  to  I  o  feet,  with  from  five  to  seven  courses  of  masonry  preserved.

On  the  northem  brow  of  the  hill,  which  looks  across  to  the  village
of  Davlia^  the  wall  is  very  ruinous,  but  at  intervals  there  are  short
pieces  from  6  to  i  o  feet  high.  Their  style  varies  greatly :  in  one  place
the  masonry  is  of  the  fine  well-jointed  polygonal  sort ;  in  another
it  approaches  the  ashlar.  At  the  western  end,  adjoining  the  tower
which  flanks  the  gateway,  the  wall  seems  to  be  about  10  or  12  feet
high,  with  six  to  eight  courses  of  masonry;  but  it  is  here  so  thickly


CH,  IV  DAULIS  22$

overgrown  with  ivy  and  holly-oak  bushes  that  to  examine  it  is  not  easy.
Two  towers  can  be  discerned  flanking  the  wall  on  the  north  side  of  the
hill,  without  counting  the  one  which  flanks  the  gateway.  They  project
about  5  feet  from  the  curtain.  One  of  them,  built  of  very  large  blocks
in  a  style  which  is  almost  ashlar,  is  standing  to  a  height  of  7  feet,
with  three  courses  of  masonry.  The  other  tower  has  been  repaired  in
the  Middle  Ages,  and  little  of  the  ancient  masonry  remains.

I  visited  Daulis,  31st  October  1895,  ^"^  ^^^  described  the  situation  and  ruins
from  my  own  observation.  See  also  Pouqueville,  Voyage  de  la  Griccy  4.  p.  134  sq. ;
Dodwell,  Taur^  i.  pp.  200-206;  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  pp.  97-106;  Mure,
Journal,  I.  p.  205  sq.  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen^  I.  p.  148  sqq, ;
Welcker,  Tagebtuh^  2.  p.  58  sqq.  ;  L.  Ross,  Wanderungen^  I.  p.  43 ;  Vischer,
ErinnerungeHf  p.  600 ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  p.  168  sq, ;  Baedeker,'  p.  164  sq, ;
Guide-Joanney  2.  p.  33.  For  the  inscriptions  of  Daulis,  some  of  which  serve  to
identify  the  site,  see  C  /.  G,  G,  S.  3.  Nos.  61-73.

Daulis  was  burnt  by  the  Persians  (Herodotus,  viii.  35),  and  razed  to
the  ground  by  Philip  of  Macedon  after  the  Sacred  War  (Paus.  x.  3.  i).
It  must  have  been  afterwards  rebuilt,  for  the  walls  defied  all  the  attempts
of  the  Romans  under  Flamininus  to  batter  or  escalade  them.  It  was
only  by  luring  the  garrison  into  a  sally  that  the  Romans  were  able  to
effect  an  entrance  by  the  gate,  no  doubt  the  same  gate  which  may  still
be  seen  at  the  north-western  comer  of  the  hill.  See  Livy,  xxxii.  18.
In  the  later  times  of  antiquity  the  place  was  called  Daulia  (Strabo,  ix.
p.  423},  which  is  still  the  name  of  the  village  close  to  the  ancient  site.

4.  7'  they  are  still  reputed  the  tallest  and  strongest  in  Phods.
The  people  of  Dcevlia  are  still  a  fine  race,  distinguished  by  their  vigour
from  the  inhabitants  of  the  fever-stricken  plains  in  the  neighbourhood  of
the  Copaic  marsh  (L.  Ross,  WaneUrungen^  i.  p.  43).

4.  7*  woody  or  shaggy  places were  called  danla.     Strabo

(ix.  p.  423)  gives  the  same  derivation  of  the  name  Daulis.  The
etymology  seems  to  be  correct.  The  Greek  words  dcisus  (8ao-vs)  and
daulos  appear  to  be  etymologically  identical  with  each  other  and  with
the  Latin  densus  (G.  Curtius,  Griech,  Etymologic^  p.  233).  Cp.
EiymoL  Magnum^  s,vv,  AavAo?  and  AavXt9,  p.  250 ;  Suidas  and
Hesychius,  s,v,  SavAov  (SaOXov).

4.  7.  Aeschylus  called  the  beard  of  Glaucns  etc.  The  verse  of
Aeschylus  here  referred  to  by  Pausanias  is  preserved  in  the  Etynuh
logicum  Magnum^  s.v,  AavAt9,  p.  250.  As  to  Aeschylus's  play  on
Glaucus  of  Anthedon,  see  ix.  22.  7  note.

4.  8.  the  women dished  np  to  Terens  his  own  boy  etc.

As  to  the  legend  of  Tereus,  Procne,  and  Philomela,  see  i.  41.  Z  sq.

4.  8.  The  hoopoe  into  which Terens  was  changed.   Another

l^end  was  that  Tereus  had  been  transformed  into  a  hawk  (Hyginus,
Pad,  45)  ;  and  in  an  ingenious  paper  Mr.  £.  Oder  has  made  it  probable
that  this  was  the  original  version  of  the  story.  The  first  mention  of  the
transformation  of  Tereus  into  a  hoopoe  occurs  in  a  poetical  fragment
quoted  by  Aristotle  {Hist.  anim.  ix.  49,  p.  633  a,  Berlin  ed.),  who  refers
it  to  Aeschylus.  Probably,  however,  it  is  an  extract  from  Sophocles's
play  of  Tereus  (Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Birds^  281).     In  this  fragment

VOL.  V  Q


226  TEREUS  AND  PHILOMELA  bk.  x.  phocis

the  poet  says  that  the  bird  changes  from  a  hoopoe  into  a  hawk ;  in
spring  it  is  a  hawk,  but  in  autumn  a  hoopoe.  This  belief,  which  was
doubtless  a  popular  superstition  (cp.  Aristotle  Lc.  and  Hist,  ariim,  ix.  15.
p.  616,  Berlin  ed.),  explains  the  change  in  the  legend  about  Tereus.
Originally  the  legend  ran  that  he  was  transformed  into  a  hawk.  This
appears  from  the  verses  of  Aeschylus  in  which  (SuppL  60  sqq.)  he
speaks  of  "  the  unhappy  spouse  of  Tereus,  the  hawk-chased  nightingale."
And  this  legend  fits  die  nature  of  the  birds  better ;  for  the  hoopoe,  in
spite  of  its  bellicose  aspect,  is  not  a  fierce  bird  which  chases  the  nightin-
gale (Procne)  and  the  swallow  (Philomela).  This  is  a  calumny  of  the
mythologists  (Conon,  Narrat,  31).  In  reality  the  hoopoe  is  a  shy  and
timid  bird  which  is  scared  even  by  a  swallow  flitting  past.  But  the
popular  superstition  which  identified  the  hawk  with  the  hoopoe,  readily
led  to  the  substitution  of  the  latter  for  the  former  in  the  legend  of
Tereus.  This  substitution  must  have  been  comparatively  late,  and  may
have  been  first  made  by  Sophocles  in  his  play  of  Tereus^  if,  as  Mr.
Oder  tries  to  show,  the  hoopoe  was  a  rare  and  unfamiliar  bird  in  Greece
in  the  fifth  century  B.C.  See  Eugen  Oder,  *Der  Wiedehopf  in  der
griechischen  %^,%<ty  Rheinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  43  (1888),  pp.  540-556.

4.  9.  in  this  country a  swallow  wonld  not  even  build  its

nest  on  the  roof  of  a  house.  Similarly,  swallows  were  said  not  to  fly
under  the  roofs  of  houses  in  the  Thracian  town  of  Bizya  on  accoimt  of
Tereus's  crime.  They  were  also  said  to  avoid  the  houses  of  Thebes,
because  the  city  had  been  taken  so  often.  See  Pliny,  Nat.  hist.  x.  70.
At  the  present  day  in  Greece,  as  the  houses  of  the  peasants  are  for  the
most  part  unceiled  and  have  no  glass  in  the  windows,  the  swallows  fly
freely  in  and  out  the  rooms,  and  even  build  their  nests  on  the  rafters  over
the  heads  of  the  occupants.  They  are  not  molested,  as  the  people
think  it  lucky  to  have  swallows  about  the  house.     Cp.  Classical  Review y

5  (1891)1  P-  I  ^99-

4.  9.  even  in  her  bird-form  Philomela  has  a  dread  of  Tereus.

This,  taken  in  connexion  with  the  preceding  sentences,  shows  that
Pausanias  follows  the  legend  which  turned  Philomela  into  a  swallow  (and
Procne  into  a  nightingale).  This  was  the  regular  Greek  tradition.  See
Aristotle,  Rhetoric^  iii.  3.  4 ;  Conon,  Narrat.  3 1  ;  Apollodoms,  iii.
14.  8;  Mythographi  Graeci^  ed.  Westermann,  p.  383;  Eustathius  on
Homer,  Od.  xix.  518,  p.  1875.  Eustathius  says  that  the  note  of  the
swallow  is  harsh  and  unpleasing  because  Philomela's  tongue  was  cut  out
by  Tereus  lest  she  should  reveal  his  crime,  whereas  the  nightingale
begins  her  song  with  the  name  of  Itys,  the  son  whom  his  mother
Procne  had  killed  and  ser\'ed  up  at  table  to  his  father  Tereus.  The
Latin  writers,  however,  made  Philomela  the  nightingale  and  Procne
the  swallow.  See  Virgil,  Georg,  iv.  1 5  and  511;  Servius,  on  Virgil,
EcL  x.  78  ;  Hyginus,  Fab.  45.  English  poetry  has  followed  the  Latin
tradition  in  making  Philomela  the  nightingale,  as  in  Milton's  //
Penseroso :

"  'Less  Philomel  will  deign  a  song,
In  her  sweetest,  saddest  plight '  :

or  in  Sir  H.  Wotton's  lines  to  Elizabeth  of  Bohemia :


CH.  IV  OFFERINGS  AT  GRAVES  227

**  What's  your  praise
When  Philomel  her  voice  doth  raise  ?  "

The  Greeks  called  the  nightingale  *  the  bird  of  Daulis '  (Thucydides,  ii.
29)  or  *the  Daulian  crow'  (Etymolog,  Magnum^  s.v,  AavAts,  p.  250).
It  seems  that  the  nightingale  can  still  be  heard  warbling  in  the  thickets
that  clothe  the  banks  of  the  Platania  river  not  far  from  Daulis,  and
that  in  sunmier  swallows  dart  about  in  the  simshine  as  if  they  feared
Tereus  no  longer  (H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisenund  Forschungen^  i.  p.  148  j^.).

4.  9.  a  sanctuary  of  Athena.  This  sanctuary  probably  occupied
the  site  of  the  ruined  mediaeval  church  of  St.  Theodore  which  stands
on  the  acropolis  of  Daulis,  near  its  north-eastern  comer  (see  above,  p.
223) ;  for  built  into  a  wall  of  this  church  was  found  a  wordy  inscription
recording  the  liberation  of  slaves  by  dedicating  them  to  Athena  Polias
(C  /.  G,  G.  S.  3.  No.  66).  Another  inscription  found  at  Daulis  proves
that  documents  were  sometimes  dated  by  the  priestess  of  Athena
(C  /.  G,  G,  S.  3.  No.  65).  Serapis  and  Saviour  Artemis  were  also
worshipped  at  Daulis  (C  /.  G,  G,  S,  3.  Nos.  66,  67) ;  the  worship  of
Serapis  was  cared  for  by  a  priest,  with  whom  copies  of  documents
recording  the  manumission  of  slaves  were,  occasionally  at  least,
deposited  {td.  No.  66).

4.  10.  a  Bbrine  of  the  hero-founder.  A  mile  or  so  to  the  south  of
Daulis  the  road  to  the  ,  Cleft  Way  and  Delphi  passes  near  a  large
tumulus,  flat  at  the  top,  with  some  fragments  of  tiles  and  pottery  lying
about  it.  Dodwell  thought  that  this  tumulus  might  be  the  shrine  of  the
hero  Xanthippus  (Tour^  i.  p.  201  sg.).  An  inscription  found  among  the
vineyards  at  the  northern  foot  of  the  hill  of  Daulis  provides  that  the
road  to  the  shrine  of  the  founder -hero  shall  be  two  reeds  broad,
probably  about  15  feet.  See  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  pp.  100-103  ;
H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen^  i.  pp.  150,  156;  C  /.  G,
No.  1732  ;  C  /.  G,  G,  S.  3.  No.  61.

4.  10.  the  Phocians  bring  victims,  and  the  blood  they  pour
through  a  hole  into  the  grave  etc.  The  custom  of  offering  blood  at
the  grave  of  the  dead  or  of  heroes  is  often  referred  to  in  ancient  litera-
ture. Cp.  iv.  31.  3;  V.  13.  2.  At  the  festival  of  the  Eleutheria  at
Plataea  the  heroic  dead  were  invited  to  partake  of  the  banquet  and  the
blood  (Plutarch,  Aristides^  21  ;  see  note  on  ix.  2.  5).  Euripides  refers
to  the  custom  repeatedly.  Thus  in  the  Heraclidae  (v.  1040  sg.)  he
makes  Eurystheus  say :  "  But  suffer  them  not  to  let  libations  or  blood
trickle  into  my  grave."  Cp.  td.,  Troiades^  381  5q.\  ElectrOy  90  sqq,
Conmionly  a  hole  seems  to  have  been  dug,  into  which  the  libations  of
blood  or  of  wine,  etc.,  were  poured  (Lucian,  Charon^  22  ;  and  for  the
many  other  passages  in  which  this  custom  is  mentioned,  see  Stephani
in  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1865,  pp.  6-8).  But  the  present
passage  of  Pausanias  is  the  only  one,  so  far  as  I  know,  in  ancient  litera-
ture which  distinctly  speaks  of  a  hole  carried  right  through  into  the  grave,
so  that  the  libations  poured  down  it  could  reach  the  bones  or  ashes  of  the
dead.  The  hole,  too,  seems  to  have  been,  not  a  temporary  one  made
for  the  occasion,  but  a  permanent  one.      This  is  implied  by  the  expres-


228  OFFERINGS  AT  GRAVES  bk.  x.  phocis

sion  used  by  Pausanias  (om^,  not  Podpo^  or  opvyfw.) ;  and  it  is  what
we  should  expect,  since  the  offerings  appear  to  have  been  made  daily.
Such  a  permanent  opening  into  the  grave,  to  be  used  for  passing  offer-
ings in,  has  been  found  in  the  great  barrow  on  the  peninsula  of  Taman
in  the  south  of  Russia.  This  large  artificial  mound  or  barrow  is  called
by  the  peasants  the  Great  Blisnitza,  and  is  near  the  village  of  Steble-
jevka.  It  was  the  common  burial-place  of  a  rich  and  powerful  Greek
family  settled  here  in  the  fourth  century  B.C.  Excavations  made  in  the
barrow  in  1864  brought  to  light  two  sepulchral  chambers  and  a  funnel-
shaped  aperture  shut  with  a  stone  and  leading  down  to  a  place  enclosed
with  tiles,  on  which  it  appears  that  a  meal  had  been  offered  to  the  dead.
The  funnel-shaped  aperture  is  dearly  such  a  hole  as  Pausanias  here
speaks  of,  made  for  the  purpose  of  conveying  libations  into  the  tomb.
See  Stephani  in  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1865,  p.  5  j^.  A
very  similar  arrangement  has  recently  been  discovered  in  two  Roman
cemeteries  near  Carthage.  The  tombs,  of  which  there  are  a  great
many,  are  built  of  masonry  and  are  of  a  square  shape,  about  5  feet  high
by  2  or  3  feet  broad.  Each  tomb  encloses  one  or  more  urns  containing
calcined  bones.  Each  urn  is  covered  with  a  saucer  {patera)^  in  the
middle  of  which  there  is  a  hole ;  and  this  hole  communicates  with  the
exterior  of  the  tomb  by  means  of  an  earthenware  tube  placed  either
upright  so  as  to  come  out  at  the  top  of  the  tomb,  or  slanting  so  as  to
come  out  at  one  of  the  sides.  Thus  libations  poured  into  the  tube  ran
down  into  the  urn,  and  after  wetting  the  bones  of  the  dead  escaped
by  a  hole  into  a  lower  cavity  of  the  tomb.  In  this  lower  cavity  (which,
however,  does  not  exist  in  all  the  tombs)  are  found  coins,  lamps,
pottery,  etc.,  deposited  with  the  ashes  and  charred  wood  of  the  pyre.
Thus  each  tomb  was  at  the  same  time  an  altar  on  which  sacrifices  were
offered  to  the  dead.  See  A.  L.  Delattre,  *Fouilles  d*un  cimeti^re
romain  k  Carthage  en  1888,'  Revue  orchMogique^  3me  S^rie,  12
(1888),  p.  151  sqq.  At  Mycenae  the  fimnel-shaped  aperture  in  the
round  altar  which  was  found  over  one  of  the  graves  was  probably  used
for  the  purpose  of  pouring  blood  down  into  the  grave  (Schuchhardt,
SchliemantCs  Ausgrabungen^  p.  186;  Tsountas,  Mvic^vai,  pp.  107,
115  ;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  Part  dans  Vantiquit^^  6.  p.  323;
cp.  note  on  ii,  16.  5,  vol.  3.  p.  107).  These  facts  bring  vividly  before
us  the  belief  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans  that  the  souls  of  the  dead  still
lived  and  retained  their  bodily  appetites  in  the  tomb.  The  same  primi-
tive belief  has  led  to  similar  practices  in  many  parts  of  the  world.  The
custom  of  laying  food  on  or  near  the  grave  for  the  use  of  the  dead  is
too  familiar  to  call  for  illustration  ;  but  it  may  be  worth  while  to  give
examples  of  the  practice  of  actually  conveying  food  into  the  grave
through  an  opening  or  tube,  as  the  people  of  Daulis  poured  the  blood
into  the  grave  of  their  hero.  On  the  funeral  day  of  a  king  of  Gingiro
in  Africa  "  they  kill  many  cows  close  to  the  grave,  so  that  the  blood  may
run  in  and  touch  the  dead  body ;  and  from  that  time  forward,  till  the
next  king  dies,  they  kill  a  cow  there  every  day,  and  make  the  blood  run
in,  the  profit  whereof  belongs  to  their  priests,  or  sorcerers,  for  they  shed
the  blood,  but  eat  the  flesh  "  (The  Travels  of  the  Jesuits  in  Ethiopia.


CH.  IV  OFFERINGS  AT  GRA  VES  229

Collected  and  historically  digested  by  F.  Balthazer  Tellez,  of  the  Society
of  Jesus  ;  and  now  first  translated  into  English  (London,  17 10),  p.  198).
This  African  custom  is  almost  identical  with  the  Greek  one  described
by  Pausanias.  Again,  in  the  Kingdom  of  Congo,  when  a  king  was
buried,  a  tube  was  passed  from  the  outside  into  the  mouth  of  the  corpse,
and  down  this  tube  food  and  drink  were  poured  every  month  (Labat,
Relation  kistorique  de  pAtkiopie  Occidentale,  i.  p.  391).  In  Timannee,
West  Africa,  the  bodies  of  kings  or  chiefs  are  deposited  in  charnel-houses
which  are  never  opened ;  "  but  small  apertures  are  left  in  the  walls,
through  which  cooked  provisions  and  palm  wine  are  occasionally  intro-
duced, the  Timannese  being  impressed  with  an  idea  that  they  are
actually  necessary  for,  and  consumed  by,  the  dead"  (A.  G.  Laing,
Travels  in  the  Timannee^  Kooranko^  and  Soolima  countries  in  Western
Africa^  p.  %y\  In  Old  Calabar,  "when  they  buried  their  dead,  the
relatives,  before  the  earth  is  filled  into  the  grave,  place  a  tube,  formed
of  bamboo,  or  pithy  wood  with  the  pith  extracted,  and  sufficiently  long
to  protrude  from  the  earth  heaped  up  over  the  body,  into  the  mouth  of
the  deceased ;  and  down  this  they  pour,  from  time  to  time,  palm  wine,
water,  palm  oil,  etc." ;  this  is  called  *  feeding  the  dead '  (A.  B.  Ellis,
The  Land  of  Fetish^  p.  134  ;  cp.  T.  J.  Hutchinson,  Impressions  of  Western
Africa^  p.  148  j^.).  In  Bonny  the  dead  are  buried  in  the  house;  a
funnel-like  opening  leads  down  to  the  grave ;  and  it  is  said  that  the
negro  never  leaves  his  house  without  pouring  a  libation  down  the  funnel
(A.  Bastian,  Der  Mensch  in  der  Geschichte^  2.  p.  335).  Some  of  the
ancient  Peruvians  buried  their  dead  in  tombs  and  placed  vases  round
the  corpses ;  holes  in  the  wall  led  from  the  outside  into  these  vases,  and
through  these  holes  the  Indians  poured  liquor  on  the  festivals  held  in
honour  of  the  dead  {JThe  Travels  of  Cieza  de  Leon^  translated  by  C.  R.
Markham,  p.  228  note  3).  Another  Spanish  writer  describes  how  the
Peruvians  poured  a  liquor  called  chica  through  a  tube  into  the  mouth  of
the  dead  man  as  he  lay  in  the  grave  (Zarate,  Histoire  de  la  Decouverte
et  de  la  Conquite  du  Perou  (Paris,  17 16),  i.  p.  66).  The  Indians  of  the
West  Indies  left  openings  in  the  tombs  through  which  they  poured  maize
and  wine  for  the  consumption  of  the  ghost  (Hakluyt,  Historie  of  the  West
Indies  J  Decade  vii.  ch.  10).  In  Java  when  an  inhabitant  of  Teng'ger  is
buried  and  the  grave  is  being  filled  in,  a  hollow  bamboo  is  placed
upright  over  the  body ;  and  down  this  bamboo  the  relations,  for  seven
successive  days,  pour  daily  a  vessel  of  pure  water ;  they  also  lay  beside
the  bamboo  two  dishes,  which  they  daily  replenish  with  food  (RafQes,
History  of  fanja^  i.  p.  331,  ed.  18 17).  Among  the  Duphla  of  North-
Eastem  India  the  dead  are  buried  near  the  house,  and  the  relations  daily
supply  them  with  food  and  drink  through  a  bamboo  which  is  let  down
into  the  grave  (A.  Bastian,  Vdlkerstdtnme  am  Brahmaputra^  P«  1 7  ;  id,^
in  Verhandlungen  der  Berliner  GeselL  f  Anthropologies  188 1,  p.  160,
appended  to  the  Zeitschrift  fur  Ethnologie),  The  Daores,  a  Tartar
people,  bury  their  dead  in  shallow  graves  and  leave  an  opening  at  the
bead  of  the  corpse ;  and  for  some  weeks  after  the  burial  the  nearest
relations  come  daily  and  pour  food  down  this  opening  into  the  mouth  of
the  corpse,  using  for  the  purpose  a  spoon  which  is  only  employed  on


230  ASCENT  OF  PARNASSUS  bk,  x.  phocis

these  occasions  (Ides,  *  Voyage  de  Mouscou  k  la  Chine,'  in  Voyages  au
Nord^  8.  p.  1 02,  Amsterdam,  1727).  At  the  festival  of  Jubuich,  in
November,  the  Chuvash  of  Eastern  Russia  take  a  sacrificial  meal  at  the
graves  of  their  relations.  A  hole  is  made  at  the  head  of  the  grave  and
a  wooden  pillar  is  set  up  in  it.  But  before  the  pillar  is  set  up,  each
person  present  throws  a  piece  of  flesh  and  pours  some  liquor  into  the
hole.  Then  they  consume  the  rest  of  the  food  and  make  merry.  See
Pallas,  Reise  durch  verschiedene  Provinsen  des  russischen  Reiches,  i.
p.  92.  The  natives  of  Fakaofu,  or  Bowditch  Island  (South  Pacific)
buried  their  dead  under  a  heap  of  coral  shingle,  with  a  vertical  slab  of
stone  at  the  head.  For  five  nights  after  the  burial  the  relations  came
to  the  grave,  removed  the  stone  at  the  head,  and  poured  in  cocoanut
oil  (J.  J.  Lister,  *  Notes  on  the  natives  of  Fakaofu  (Bowditch  Island),'
Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute^  21  ( 1 89 1 ),  p.  55).

5.  I.  There  is  a  way  np  througli  Daulis  to  the  top  of  Pamassns.
From  the  village  of  Davlia  a  path  leads  up  wooded  and  not  excessively
steep  slopes  to  the  large  monastery  of  Jerusalem,  loftily  and  romantic-
ally situated  on  the  edge  of  a  torrent,  in  the  midst  of  a  grand  forest  of
ancient  firs.  The  monastery  is  reached  in  about  two  hours  from  Davlia,
A  steep  and  rocky  path  now  winds  up  the  bed  of  a  deep  gully,  the  lofty
sides  of  which  are  crowned  with  woods.  Looking  back  down  the  ravine
we  catch  charming  views  over  the  plains  of  Lebadea  and  Chaeronea.
We  next  ascend  steep  fir-clad  slopes  and  reach  the  upper  part  of  the
mountain,  which  is  barren  and  covered  with  blocks  of  stone.  Through
these  we  thread  our  way  (path  there  is  none)  to  the  tableland  which  lies
below  the  two  highest  peaks.  Of  these  peaks  the  eastern  (now  called
Lykeri)  is  the  higher  (8070  ft.).  On  the  tableland  are  two  wretched
shelters,  roughly  built  of  stones.  They  are  called  respectively  Strounka
tou  Lasdrou  and  Strounka Kalogh^riki  (* monk's  yard').  The  latter  is
nearer  the  summit,  from  which  it  is  distant  an  hour.  The  total  time
from  Davlia  to  the  summit  of  Parnassus  may  be  about  eight  hours.

See  Clarke,  Travels^  4.  p.  211  sqq.  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forsckungen^
I.  p.  151 ;  L.  Ross,  WandentngeUf  2.  p.  193  sq, ;  Baedeker,*  p.  162  sq,  ;  Guide-
Joanne^  2.  p.  44  sq,

5.  I.  the  Phocictun.  Pausanias  now  proceeds  southward  from
Daulis,  skirting  the  eastern  foot  of  Mount  Parnassus.  The  path  leads
along  the  left  bank  of  the  Platania  river,  which  flows  north  to  join  the
Cephisus  in  the  plain  of  Chaeronea.  Its  banks  are  shaded  by  plane-
trees,  which  give  the  stream  its  name.  Near  the  ruined  village  of
Bardana  are  some  ancient  foundations  and  fragments,  half  overgrown
with  bushes.  These  are  supposed  to  mark  the  site  of  the  Phocicum  or
Phocian  parliament-house  described  by  Pausanias.  See  Dodwell,  Tour^
I.  p.  201  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen^  i.  p.  148  ;  Bursian,
Geogr.  I.  pp.  159,  169;  Baedeker,3  p.  165;  Guide-Joanne,  2.  p.  33.
From  Pausanias's  description  of  the  Phocian  parliament-house  we  may
conjecture  that  it  closely  resembled  the  Thersilium  at  Megalopolis  (see
vol.  4.  p.  338  sqq.).  His  description  further  suggests  that  the  part  of
Thersilium  which  corresponds  to  the  stage  of  a  theatre  was  occupied,  at


CH.  V  THE  CLEFT  WA  Y  231

least  in  part,  by  images  of  gods.  As  to  the  Phocian  confederacy
and  its  parliament,  see  G.  Gilbert,  Griechische  StacUsalterthiimer^  2.
p.  33  sq.  Some  details  as  to  the  officers  etc.  of  the  confederacy
are  ascertained  from  inscriptions  found  at  Elatea.  Certain  federal
officials  bore  the  title  of  aristeres  {dpurnjptsy  See  P.  Paris,  J^iaUe^
pp.  61  sgq,,  212.

5.  3.  ^6  Oleft  Way.  About  5  miles  to  the  south-west  of  Daulis
the  road,  after  skirting  the  eastern'  foot  of  the  mighty  mass  of  Mount
Parnassus,  turns  sharply  to  the  west  and  begins  to  ascend  through  the
long,  narrow,  and  profoimd  valley  which  leads  to  Delphi.  Just  at  the
point  where  the  road  turns  westward  and  before  it  begins  the  long
ascent  it  is  joined  from  the  south-east  by  the  direct  road  from  Lebadea
and  Thebes.  The  meeting  of  the  three  roads — the  road  from  Daulis,
the  road  from  Delphi,  and  the  road  from  Thebes — is  the  Cleft  Way  or
Triple  Road,  the  scene  of  the  legendary  murder  of  Laius  by  Oedipus.
It  is  now  known  as  the  Cross  Road  of  Megas  {Stavrodromt  tou  Mega\
after  the  gallant  Johannes  Megas,  who  met  his  death  here  in  July  1856,
while  exterminating  a  band  of  brigands  with  a  small  troop  of  soldiers.
His  monument,  on  a  rock  at  the  meeting  of  the  roads,  bears  a  few
verses  in  modem  Greek.  Apart  from  any  legendary  associations  the
scene  is  one  of  the  wildest  and  grandest  in  Greece,  recalling  in  its
general  features,  though  on  a  vastly  greater  scale,  the  mouth  of
Glencoe.  On  both  sides  of  the  valley  the  mountains  tower  abruptly  in
huge  precipices ;  the  cliffs  of  Parnassus  on  the  northern  side  of  the
valley  are  truly  sublime.  Not  a  trace  of  human  habitation  is  to  be
seen.  All  is  desolation  and  silence.  A  more  fitting  spot  could  hardly
be  found  for  the  scene  of  a  memorable  tragedy.

It  has  sometimes  been  supposed  that  the  Cleft  Way  was  not  at  the
Cross  Road  of  Megas,  but  several  miles  farther  to  the  east.  In  this
direction  the  direct  path  from  Delphi  to  Lebadea  traverses  a  defile
called  the  Stene  or  Narrow  Way,  enclosed  by  high  rocky  hills.  At  the
eastern  end  of  the  defile,  where  we  pass  out  into  an  open  valley,  a  road
to  Daulis  and  Panopeus  diverges  to  the  north.  Here  then,  where  three
roads  meet — the  road  from  Delphi,  the  road  from  Thebes,  and  the  road
from  Daulis — the  Cleft  Way  of  the  ancients  has  sometimes  been  placed.
But  the  spot  does  not  answer  to  Pausanias's  description  of  it.  In  the
first  place,  it  is  not  on  the  direct  road  from  Daulis  to  Delphi ;  a
traveller  fi-om  Daulis  to  Delphi  who  wished  to  go  by  the  defile  in
question  (the  Stene)  would  have  to  make  a  detour  of  several  miles  to
the  east.  But  Pausanias  here  implies  and  elsewhere  (x.  35.  8)
expressly  asserts  that  the  Cleft  Way  was  on  the  direct  road  from
Daulis  to  Delphi.  In  the  second  place,  Pausanias  tells  us  that  from
the  Cleft  Way  onward  the  road  to  Delphi  began  to  ascend  steeply
(§  5).  This  is  perfectly  true  if  we  place  the  Clefl  Way  at  the  Cross
Road  of  Megas,  but  it  is  not  true  if  we  place  it  at  the  eastern  end  of
the  Stene  pass ;  for  after  traversing  that  pass  we  have  still  to  cross  a
plain  of  some  extent  before  we  reach  the  Cross  Road  of  Megas,  where
the  real  ascent  to  Delphi  begins.  The  scenery  at  the  eastern  end  of
the  Stene  defile  is  wild  and  picturesque ;  the  mountain  on  the  south  in


232  ROAD  TO  DELPHI  bk.  x.  phocis

particular  is  high  and  rocky.  But  in  grandeur  it  cannot  compare  with
the  scenery  at  the  Cross  Road  of  Megas,  the  true  Cleft  Way  of  the
ancients.

Sophocles  {Oed,  Tyr,  733)  and  Euripides  {Phoen.  38)  call  the  spot
the  Cleft  Way.  But  Sophocles  speaks  of  it  also  as  the  Triple  Road
{Oed,  Tyr,  730,  1398  sq,).  When  Oedipus  and  Laius  met,  Oedipus
was  on  his  way  from  Delphi  to  Thebes,  and  Laius  was  on  his  way  from
Thebes  to  Delphi.     Cp.  Apollodorus,  iii.  5.  7.

See  Wheler,  Journey ^  p.  320  ;  Chandler,  Travels  in  Greece,  p.  259  sq, ;  Clarke,
Travels y  4.  p.  173  sq.  ;  Dodwell,  Tour,  i.  p.  197  sq,  ;  Lieake,  Northern  Greece ^
2.  p.  105  sq,  ;  MuTc,  Journal,  I.  p.  202  sqq, ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  For-
schungen,  i.  p.  147  ;  F.  G.  Welcker,  Tagebuch,  2.  p.  60  j^.  ;  L.  Ross,  fVander-
ungen,  i.  p.  47 ;  W.  Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p  603 ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  169 ;
Guide-Joanne,  2.  p.  33  sq,  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  154  (in  the  first  edition  Lolling  seems


a,  ;  J
Way


to  have  placed  the  Cleft  Way  in  the  Stem).

5.  4*  nnliewn  stones  are  heaped  upon  them.  See  viiL  13.  3
note.

5.  4*  Damasistratns,  king  of  Plataea,  found  the  bodies  etc  This
is  mentioned  also  by  Apollodorus  (iii.  5.  8).  Cp.  Bethe,  Thebanische
HelderUieder^  p.  169.

5.  5.  From  this  point  the  high  road  to  Delphi  grows  steeper  etc
From  the  Cleft  Way  {Stavrodromi  tou  Mega)  the  road  to  Delphi  ascends
westward  through  a  deep  valley  enclosed  both  on  the  north  and  on  the
south  by  the  immensely  high,  steep,  and  rocky  slopes  of  Mt.  Parnassus
on  the  north  and  Mt.  Cirphis  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  418),  now  called  Xero-
Voum  (*  dry  hill '),  on  the  south.  The  slopes  of  the  latter  mountain  are  in
places  covered  with  fir- woods.  In  an  hour  we  reach  the  summit  of  the
pass,  from  which  the  valley,  still  enclosed  by  high  precipitous  slopes,
descends  towards  Delphi.  This  is  the  water-shed,  and  here  are  the
springs  of  one  branch  of  the  Plistus,  which  flows  westward  in  a  deep
ravine  through  the  valley.  A  road  leads  down  beside  the  bed  of  the  river
and  on  to  Salona  (Amphissa).  But  instead  of  following  it  the  traveller
to  Delphi  turns  to  the  right  and  ascends  for  another  hour  by  a  steep
winding  path  to  the  modem  village  of  ArackovcL,  situated  on  the  slope
of  Parnassus,  about  2000  feet  above  the  sea.  The  steep  sides  of  the
mountain  are  here  planted  with  vineyards  to  a  great  height,  terraces
being  built  in  places  to  support  the  vines.  At  the  point  where  the
road  to  Arachoi*a  crosses  the  bed  of  the  Plistus  there  are  considerable
remains  of  an  ancient  Greek  fortress  on  a  height  or  plateau  to  the  right
and  also  beside  the  stream.  The  walls  are  partly  built  of  polygonal
blocks,  partly  of  roughly  squared  stones  laid  in  horizontal  courses.
Within  the  walls  are  a  good  many  remains  overgrown  with  bushes.
The  ruins  may  be  those  of  Aeolidae,  a  to^^n  which  was  burnt  by  the
Persians  and  appears  to  have  been  situated  between  Daulis  and  Delphi
(Herodotus,  viii.  35).  Or  perhaps  the  place  may  be  the  Homeric
Cyparissus.  See  note  on  x.  36.  5.  The  situation  of  Arachcrva^  a  large
and  prosperous  village  or  rather  town  of  over  3000  inhabitants,  is
extremely  picturesque.  The  houses,  interspersed  with  trees,  rise  in
terraces  afao\*e  each  other  on  the  side  of  the  hill,  the  top  of  which  is


CH.  V  ARACHOVA  233

crowned  with  the  church  of  St.  George,  the  chief  church  of  the  village.
Above  the  village  soar  the  abrupt  rocky  slopes  of  Parnassus.  The  men
of  Arachova  are  tall,  slim,  and  athletic  ;  the  women  are  famed  for  their
beauty.  The  high  bracing  air  makes  them  a  healthy,  long-lived  race.
They  speak  a  comparatively  pure  dialect  of  Greek,  and  are  noted  for
their  independent  spirit  and  the  strength  of  their  family  ties.  In
summer  they  cultivate  their  vineyards  on  the  declivities  of  Parnassus,
or  till  their  fields  and  herd  their  sheep  in  the  upland  dales.  Their
wines  have  a  great  reputation ;  and  the  women  make  party-coloured
woollen  rugs,  which  are  sold  far  and  wide.  In  winter  the  severity
of  the  climate  keeps  them  much  indoors,  and  this  is  the  season  for
many  social  gatherings  and  merry-makings,  in  which  dancing  and
singing  play  a  great  part.  The  village  perhaps  occupies  the  site  of  the
ancient  Anemoria  ('the  windy  town'),  so  called  from  the  storms  which
came  sweeping  down  from  the  outlying  precipices  of  Parnassus.  These
precipices  near  the  town  were  called  '  the  Look-out  Place ' ;  from  the  top
of  them  Apollo  is  said  to  have  spied  and  shot  the  dragon  at  Delphi.
*  The  Lookrout  Place '  may  be  the  cliffs  now  called  Petrites^  which  rise
at  the  back  oi  Arachova,  When  Delphi  was  made  independent  of  Phocis,
Anemoria  became  the  boimdary  between  the  territory  of  Delphi  and  that
of  Phocis.  This  would  agree  well  with  the  site  of  Arachova^  which,
standing  on  the  crest  that  forms  the  water-shed  between  the  eastern
and  western  slopes  of  the  valley,  is  a  natural  frontier.  As  to  Anemoria
and  the  'Look-out'  see  Strabo,  ix.  p.  423  ;  Homer,  //.  ii.  521  with  the
scholiast;  Schol.  on  Euripides,  Phoen.  233  ;  Tzetzes,  Schol,  on Lycophron^
1073.

From  Arachova  the  road  descends  gradually  westward  to  Delphi,
skirting  the  precipitous  slopes  of  Mt.  Parnassus  on  the  right  and
keeping  tolerably  high  above  the  deep  glen  of  the  Plistus  on  the  left.
The  valley  is  clothed  with  olive-trees  and  the  slopes  with  vineyards.  In
an  hour  and  three-quarters  from  Arachova  we  reach  Delphi,  situated  on
the  northern  side  of  the  valley  at  the  foot  of  the  great  precipices  of
Mt  Parnassus,  but  yet  high  above  the  bed  of  the  Plistus,  which  winds
along  far  below  in  the  depths  of  the  valley.  The  time  from  the  Cleft
Way  to  Delphi  is  about  four  hours.

See  V»nit\tXtJ<nimey,  p.  399  sq,  ;  E.  D.  Clarke,  Travels,  4.  p.  174  sq,  ;  Dod-
wcU,  Taur^  i.  p.  195  sqq,  ;  Thiersch,  in  Abhandlungen  der philos.  philohg,  Ciasse
d,  km,  bayer,  Akad.  d,  Wissen,  (Munich),  3  (1840),  p.  4  sqq,  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,
Reisen  und  Forschungetty  i.  pp.  129  j^^.,  145  sqq,  ;  iHyxx^,  Journal,  I.  p.  199  sqq, ;
F.  G.  Welcker,  Tagehtuh,  2.  p.  61  sq,  ;  L.  Ross,  Wanderungen,  i.  p.  47  sq,  ;
W.  Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.  603  sqq,  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  169  x^.  ;  P.  Foucart,
M^moire  sur  Us  ruines  et  thistoire  ds  Delphes,  p.  i  sq,  ;  J.  P.  Mahaffy,  Rambles
and  Studies y  p.  236  sqq,  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  163  sq, ;  Guide- Joanne ^  2.  p.  34  sq,

Mt.  Cirphis,  the  bare  precipitous  mountain  which  bounds  on  the
south  the  long  valley  that  extends  from  the  Cleft  Way  on  the  east  to
Delphi  on  the  west,  is  not  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  We  learn  the  name
of  the  mountain  from  Strabo,  who  describes  it  accurately  (ix.  p.  418)  as
"a  steep  mountain  lying  in  front  of  Delphi  to  the  south,  but  separated
firom  it  by  a  glen  through  which  flows  the  river  Plistus."  Cp.  Antoninus
Liberalis,  Transform.  8.


234  THE  DELPHIC  ORACLE  bk,  x.  phocis

The  sacred  precinct  at  Delphi,  together  with  the  theatre  and
stadium,  have  been  fully  excavated  by  French  archaeologists  at  the
ejcpense  of  the  French  Government  in  the  years  1892- 1897.  The
excavations,  begun  in  October  1892,  have  been  directed  by  Mr.  Th.
Homolle,  and  he  has  been  assisted  by  Messrs.  Couve,  Bourguet,
Perdrizet,  Millet,  and  Jouguet,  members  of  the  French  school,  Mr.
Quellenec,  engineer,  Mr.  Couvert,  overseer  of  the  works,  Mr.  Toumaire,
architect,  and  Mr.  Blot,  draftsman  {Comptes  Rendus  de  VAcatUmie  des
Inscriptions^  22(1 894),  p.  580  sq. ).  The  work  is  not  yet  (November  1 897)
finished,  for  it  is  in  contemplation  to  excavate  also  the  ground  on  the
eastern  side  of  the  Castalian  gorge,  where  the  gymnasium  and  the
temple  of  Forethought  Athena  lay.  Only  preliminary  reports  of  these
important  excavations  have  hitherto  been  published.  On  some  points
I  have  been  able  to  supplement  them,  first,  by  notes  of  a  visit  which  I
paid  to  Delphi  in  October  1895,  when  I  had  the  privilege  of  being
conducted  by  Mr.  Homolle  himself  over  the  scene  of  his  labours  and
triumphs,  and,  second,  by  notes  furnished  to  me  by  Mr.  Cecil  Smith,
formerly  Director  of  the  British  School  at  Athens,  who  was  so  good  as
to  pay  a  visit  to  Delphi  on  my  behalf  in  the  summer  of  1897.  On  that
occasion  he  had  the  advantage  of  Mr.  Perdrizet's  courteous  guidance
and  assistance.

5.  5.  the  oracle  of  Apollo.  On  the  Delphic  oracle  see  L.  Preller's
article  *  Delphi '  in  Paul/s  Reai-Encyclopadie  d.  class,  Alterthumswiss,  ;
/V/.,  'Delphica,'  Aufsdtze^  pp.  224-256;  P.  Foucart,  Mimoire  sur  Us
mines  et  Pkistoire  de  Deiphes  (Paris,  1865) ;  Aug.  Mommsen,  Delphika
(Leipzig,  1878);  A.  Bouch^-Leclercq,  Histoire  de  la  divination  dans
Vantiquit^^  3.  pp.  39-207.  On  the  literature  relating  to  Delphi  published
between  1880  and  1885,  see  Aug.  Mommsen  in  Bursiar^s  Jahresberichiy
48  (1886),  pp.  315-325.  A  list  of  ancient  and  modem  writers  on
Delphi  is  given  by  Mr.  Bouche-Leclercq  (pp,  cit.  p.  39  sqq.).  As  to  the
authorities  for  the  topography  of  Delphi,  see  note  on  x.  8.  6.

5.  5.  in  the  most  ancient  times  the  prade  was  an  oracle  of
Earth.  So  Aeschylus  {EumenideSy  i  j^.)  spealcT  of  tarth  ais  the
goddess  who  first  gave  oracles  at  Delphi.  Cp.  Plutarch,  De  Pythiae
oraculisy  17.  In  one  of  the  hymns  to  Apollo  recently  found  by  the
French  at  Delphi  allusion  is  made  to  Earth  and  Themis  as  having
been  peacefully  dispossessed  by  Apollo  when  he  came  to  Delphi  firom
Tempe  (Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique^  17  (1893),  P-  566).  Since
the  prophetic  influence  was  supposed  to  emanate  from  a  chasm  in  the
ground  (see  note  on  §  7),  it  was  natural  to  regard  the  Elarth  goddess
as  the  source  of  it,  as  Diodorus  remarks  (xvi.  26).  Cp.  Plutarch,  De
de/ectu  oraculorum^  43.  According  to  a  scholiast  on  Pindar  {Pytlu
Argum.)  Night  was  the  first  to  give  oracles  at  Delphi.  The  auUior  of
the  Homeric  hymn  to  Apollo  makes  no  mention  of  any  oracle  of  Earth,
Themis,  or  Poseidon  at  Delphi  before  Apollo  made  it  the  seat  of  his
oracle.  According  to  that  poet  Apollo  built  a  temple  at  Delphi  with
the  help  of  Trophonius  and  Agamedes ;  then  he  went  to  sea,  and
changing  himself  into  a  dolphin  met  a  ship  from  Cnosus  in  Crete  and
led  it  to  the   Gulf  of  Crisa.      (In  the  Mediterranean  dolphins  may


CH.  V  APOLLO  AND  THE  LAUREL  23s

still  be  seen  playing  for  hours  at  the  cut-water  of  steamers  going  at
full  speed.)  Here  the  mariners  landed  and  Apollo  made  them  his
priests  in  the  temple  of  Delphi ;  and  they  built  an  altar  to  him  on  the
seashore  and  prayed  to  him  as  Dolphin  Apollo,  because  they  had  first
seen  him  rushing  through  the  clear  water  in  the  form  of  a  dolphin.  See
the  Hymn  to  Apollo^  103  ;  Tzetzes,  SchoL  on  Lycophron^  208.  Some
good  scholars,  as  K.  O.  Miiller,  L.  Preller,  and  Mr.  Bouchd-Leclercq,
have  held  that  this  tradition  of  the  foundation  of  the  Delphic
oracle  by  Cretan  settlers  is  historically  correct.  See  K.  O.  Miiller,
Dorians^  i.  p.  238  sqq, ;  L.  Vxf^tx^  AusgewdhJte  Aufsdtze^  p.  226  sqq,  ;
A.  Bouch^-Leclercq,  Histoire  de  la  divination^  3.  p.  59  sqq, ;  Th.
Schreiber,  Apollon  Pythoktonosy  p.  39  sqq.  Their  view  receives  some
support  from  the  circumstance  that  a  sanctuary  of  the  Delphinian
Apollo  existed  at  Cnosus  in  Crete,  the  city  from  which  the  Delphinian
Apollo  was  said  to  have  procured  the  priests  for  his  temple  at  Delphi.
See  C,  /.  G,  No.  2554,  line  95  sqq,

5.  5.  appointed  Daphnis to  be  her  prophetess.     Daphnis  is

only  another  form  of  Daphne  (<  laurel ').  The  legend  ran  that  Daphne
was  a  daughter  of  the  Earth  goddess  by  the  river  Ladon  or  Peneus ;
that  in  order  to  escape  the  importunities  of  her  lover  Apollo  she  prayed
to  her  mother  Earth ;  and  that  Earth  received  her  daughter  into  a
chasm,  and  caused  a  laurel  to  grow  on  the  spot  in  her  stead  (Palae-
phatus,  De  Incredib,  50;  Servius  on  Virgil,  Aen,  ii.  513  and  iii.  91  ;
Tzetzes,  SchoL  on  Lycophron^  6).  We  may  suppose  that  the  chasm  into
which  Daphne  was  said  to  have  disappeared  was  no  other  than  the  oracular
fissure  at  Delphi ;  for  we  read  that  a  laurel  stood  beside  the  prophetic
cavern  before  Apollo  took  possession  of  it  (Euripides,  Iphig,  in  Tauris^
1245  sqq,)  or  stood  beside  the  tripod  and  was  shaken  by  the  priestess
when  she  delivered  the  oracles  (Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Plutus^
213).  This  laurel  was  doubtless  held  to  be  the  very  tree  which  grew
in  place  of  Daphne.  The  legend  which  thus  associates  the  laurel  with
the  Delphic  oracle  even  before  Apollo  became  the  god  of  the  oracle,  is
interesting,  since  it  shows  how  intimate  was  the  connexion  of  the
laurel  with  the  oracle.  It  would  seem  that  at  all  oracular  seats
of  Apollo  his  priestess  regularly  chewed  the  laurel  and  drank  of
a  sacred  spring  before  she  delivered  her  prophecies  in  the  name  of
the  god  (Lucian,  Bis  accusatus^  i  ;  Tzetzes,  Schol,  on  Lycophron^  6).
Further  she  fumigated  herself  with  laurel  before  descending  into  the
oracular  cave  (Plutarch,  De  EI  apud  Deiphos,  2  ;  id,  De  Pythiae
oraculis,  6).  Perhaps  the  fumes  of  the  burning  laurel  contributed  to
throw  her  into  that  convulsive  and  delirious  agitation  which  the  ancients
regarded  as  a  sign  of  divine  inspiration.  Among  the  tribes  of  the
Hindoo  Koosh,  near  Gilgit,  the  Dainyals  or  diviners,  who  are  generally
women,  work  themselves  up  into  a  prophetic  frenzy  by  inhaling  the
pungent  fumes  of  burning  cedar-twigs,  the  cedar  being  the  sacred  tree
of  these  people.  The  spirit  of  divination  is  supposed  by  them  to  lie
dormant  in  winter  and  to  be  strong  in  proportion  to  the  heat  of  the
weather.  The  graphic  description,  given  by  an  eye-witness,  of  the
frantic  behaviour  of  these  women  under  the  influence  of  the  cedar-fumes


236  THE  DELPHIC  ORACLE  bk.  x.  phocis

may  very  well  be  compared  with  Lucan's  description  of  the  prophetic
frenzy  of  the  Delphic  priestess  (Pharsalia^  v.  161  sqq,\  See  Major  J.
Biddulph's  Tribes  of  the  Hindoo  Koosk,  pp.  96-98.  Pliny  mentions,  on
the  authority  of  Democritus,  various  plants  which  were  used  in  potions
to  produce  prophetic  visions  by  the  Magi  and  other  Asiatics  {Nat.  hist,
xxiv.  160,  164).  Many  examples  of  the  use  of  drugs  for  similar
purposes  are  cited  by  Dr.  E.  B.  Tylor  {Primitive  Culture^  2,  p.
416  sgq,),

5.  6.  a  certain  Ghreek  poem  called  Emnolpia.  This  is  no  doubt
the  poem  which  Suidas  (s.v.  Movtratos)  calls  Advice  to  his  son
Eumoipus  and  attributes  to  Musaeus.

5.  6.  Pjrrcon.  At  Delphi  there  were  priests  called  pyrkooi  (arvp-
Kooi)  who  divined  by  means  of  omens  drawn  from  burnt  sacrifice
(Hesychius,  s,v.  TrvpKooi),  They  may  have  been  priests  of  Poseidon,
who  had  an  altar  at  Delphi  (x.  24.  4),  and  may  have  traced  their
descent  from  the  mythical  Pyrcon.

5.  6.  Earth  resigned  her  share  to  Themis.  Aeschylus  also  says
that  Themis  succeeded  her  mother  Earth  in  the  control  of  the  oracle
{Eumenidesj  2  sqq,).  According  to  Euripides  {Iphig,  in  Tour,  1259
sqq,)  Apollo  dismissed  Themis  and  took  her  place  at  the  oracle;  but
Earth,  to  avenge  the  wrong  done  her  daughter,  sent  dreams  which
disturbed  and  confused  the  persons  who  consulted  the  oracle,  till  Zeus,
at  the  entreaty  of  Apollo,  compelled  her  to  desist.  Some  thought
that  Apollo  and  Themis  had  founded  the  oracle  jointly  (Strabo,  ix.
p.  422).  According  to  Aeschylus  {EumenideSy  4  sqq,)  Themis  was
succeeded  by  Phoebe,  who  presented  the  oracle,  as  a  birthday  gift,  to
Apollo.

5.  6.  Apollo  gave  Poseidon  the  island  of  Calanria  etc.  Cp.  ii.
33.  2.

5.  7'  shepherds  feeding  their  flocks  lit  npon  the  oracle  etc.
The  story  of  the  discovery  of  the  Delphic  oracle,  as  told  by  Diodorus
(xvi.  26),  is  this.  On  the  spot  afterwards  occupied  by  the  inmost
shrine  {adytum)  of  the  sanctuary  there  was  a  chasm  in  the  ground.
A  flock  of  goats  was  browsing  near  the  chasm,  and  each  goat
as  it  approached  the  chasm  began  to  skip  and  utter  unwonted
sounds.  The  goatherd,  observing  this  with  surprise,  went  up  to
the  hole,  was  affected  in  the  same  way  as  his  goats,  and  began  to
prophesy.  The  fame  of  this  was  spread  abroad,  many  people  came  to
the  chasm  and  fell  into  prophetic  ecstasy.  So  the  place  was  deemed
an  oracle  of  Earth.  At  last  when  many  persons,  in  Uie  height  of  their
frenzy,  had  leaped  into  the  hole  and  disappeared,  the  neighbours
resolved  to  appoint  one  woman  to  the  office  of  prophetess,  and  in  order
that  she  might  receive  the  prophetic  influence  and  give  the  oracles  in
safety,  they  devised  a  three-legged  machine  or  tripod,  which  she
mounted  when  she  was  about  to  prophesy.  The  oracular  chasm  is
described  by  Strabo  (ix.  p.  4 1 9)  as  follows  :  "  They  say  that  the  oracle
is  a  perpendicular  cavern,  not  very  broad  at  the  mouth,  and  that  an
inspiring  air  is  wafted  up  from  it,  and  that  over  the  mouUi  of  it  stands
a  high  tripod,  which  the  Pythian  priestess  mounts  and  receiving  the  air


CH.  V  VICTIMS  SHIVERING  zyi

utters  the  oracles,  some  in  verse  and  some  in  prose,  and  the  prose
oracles  are  put  into  verse  by  poets  employed  in  the  service  of  the
sanctuary."  Justin  describes  the  situation  of  the  oracular  cavern  as
follows  (xxiv.  6.  6  sqq,) :  "The  temple  of  Apollo  stands  on  a  cliff  which
overhangs  on  all  sides.  .  .  .  The  middle  of  the  cliff  recedes  in  the
shape  of  a  theatre,  .  .  .  and  in  this  recess,  about  half-way  up  the
mountain,  is  a  small  plateau.  In  this  plateau  there  is  a  deep  hole  in
the  groimd,  which  emits  the  oracles  {quod  in  aracula  patef).  From  the
hole  a  cold  air  is  forcibly  expelled  upwards,  which  turns  the  minds  of
the  prophetesses  to  madness  and  filling  them  with  the  god  compels
them  to  give  answers  to  enquirers."  According  to  Plutarch  {De  defectu
oraculorum^  42  and  46)  the  name  of  the  man  who  first  discovered  the
inspiring  influence  of  the  cavern  by  falling  into  it  was  Coretas.  Some
have  taken  the  name  Coretas  to  be  etymologically  connected  with
Curetes  and  Crete  and  hence  have  regarded  it  as  a  confirmation  of  the
legend  that  the  Delphic  oracle  was  of  Cretan  origin.

Before  the  priestess  descended  into  the  cavern,  omens  were  taken
from  goats.  Cold  water  was  poured  on  the  goat's  head,  and  if  the
animal  shivered  and  shook  in  all  its  limbs,  the  omen  was  good,  the  goat
was  sacrificed,  and  the  priestess  descended  into  the  cave.  But  if  the
goat,  when  drenched  with  the  water,  stood  motionless  or  only  shook  its
head,  the  omen  was  unfavourable,  and  the  priestess  did  not  go  down.
The  origin  of  this  custom  was  explained  by  the  story  that  the  inspiring
influences  which  emanated  from  the  cave  had  first  been  experienced  by
goats.  See  Plutarch,  De  defectu  oraculorum^  46,  49,  and  5 1  ;  Diodorus,
xvi.  26.  Many  peoples  besides  the  Greeks  have  treated  the  shivering
of  the  victim  as  a  token  that  the  sacrifice  is  accepted  by  the  deity.  Thus
at  harvest-time  the  Bawarias  of  India  sacrifice  a  goat  to  their  goddess.
They  tether  its  hind  legs  to  a  peg,  and  pour  water  on  its  nose.  If  the
goat  shivers,  the  goddess  accepts  it ;  if  it  does  not,  the  animal  is  rejected
and  the  operation  is  repeated  on  another.  See  Panjab  Notes  and
Queries,  3  (1886),  No.  721.  The  Devil-worshippers  of  Southern  India
sacrifice  a  black  victim,  generally  a  goat,  to  Kali.  A  pot  of  water  is
dashed  on  its  head  ;  if  the  creature  shakes  itself,  it  is  acceptable  to
Kali  and  is  sacrificed  {Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Society  of
Bombay y  i  (1886),  p.  103).  When  the  Chuvash  of  Eastern  Russia
offer  a  sacrifice,  they  pour  a  vessel  of  cold  water  over  the  victim.  If
it  shakes  itself,  they  sacrifice  it ;  if  it  does  not,  they  drench  it  a  second
and  a  third  time.  Then,  if  it  still  stands  motionless,  they  put  it  aside  and
take  another  victim.  See  Pallas,  Reise  durch  verschiedene  Provinzen
des  russischen  ReichSy  i.  p.  91  ;  Vambery,  Das  TUrkenvolky  p.  485.
When  the  heathen  Harranians  sacrificed  a  victim  they  poured  wine  on
it ;  if  it  shook  itself,  they  said  :  "  This  is  a  well-pleasing  sacrifice  "  ;  but
if  it  did  not  shake  itself,  they  said,  "  God  is  angry,  he  does  not  accept
this  vow  "  (Chwolsohn,  Die  Ssabier  und  der  Ssabismus,  2.  p.  37).  For
more  examples  of  the  custom  in  Russia,  the  Hindoo  Koosh,  India,  and
Tonquin,  see  Erman,  Archiv  fur  wissenschaftliche  Kunde  vonRussland,
I-  P-  377  ;  J.  Biddulph,  Tribes  of  the  Hindoo  Koosh,  p.  131  ;  S.  Mateer,
The  Land  oj  Charity,  p.  216 ;  id^  Native  Life  in  Travancore,  p.  94  ;


238  THE  DELPHIC  ORACLE  bk.  x.  phocis

Sir  A.  C.  Lyall,  Asiatic  Studies^  P>  14 ;  Lettres  idifianUs  et  curieusesy
16.  p.  230  sq.  The  shivering  of  the  victim  was  probably  thought  to
indicate  that  the  god  had  entered  into  it,  just  as  convulsive  shudderings
of  his  prophets  are  regarded  as  a  token  of  inspiration.  When  the
Fijians  were  about  to  go  to  battle  or  engage  in  any  other  important
enterprise,  they  desired  the  priest  "  to  let  the  spirit  enter  into  him  forth-
with, making  him,  at  the  same  time,  a  present.  The  priest  speedily
begins  to  shake  and  shiver,  and  ere  long  communicates  the  will  of  the
god,  which  always  tallies  with  the  wishes  of  the  chief.  It  sometimes
happens  that  the  priest  fails  in  exciting  himself  to  convulsive  action  ;
but  this,  among  a  people  so  wrapt  in  superstition,  can  always  be
ingeniously  accounted  for :  the  most  usual  mode  of  excusing  the  iJEiilure
is  to  say  that  Kalou  is  dissatisfied  with  the  offering  "  (Wilkes,  NarreUive
of  the  United  States  Exploring  Expedition^  3.  p.  89).

5.  7.  Phexnonoe  was  the  first  prophetess  of  the  god  etc.  Cp.
Strabo,  ix.  p.  419;  Stobaeus,  Florilegium^  xxi.  26;  Clement  of  Alexandria,
Strom,  i.  21.  107,  p.  383  ed.  Potter.  According  to  some,  Phemonoe
was  a  daughter  of  Apollo  (Pliny,  Nat,  hist,  x.  7) ;  according  to  others,
she  was  a  daughter  of  Delphus  (Schol.  on  Euripides,  Orestes^  1094).
Lucan  {Pharsal.  v.  126  and  187)  gives  the  name  of  Phemonoe  to  the
Delphic  priestess  in  the  first  century  B.C.

5.  7.  first  sang  in  hexameters.  The  oracles  were  not  always  in
hexameters  ;  for  example,  Herodotus  (i.  174)  quotes  an  oracle  of  two  lines
in  iambic  metre.  But  though  the  metre  of  the  verses  varied,  their  quality
did  not ;  it  was  always  vile.  Hence  it  became  a  subject  of  anxious
enquiry  with  the  faithful  how  Apollo,  the  god  of  the  Muses,  could
possibly  have  inspired  such  trash.  Even  in  his  best  days  he  did  not
always  rise  to  verse,  and  in  Plutarch's  time  the  god  appears  to  have
given  up  the  attempt  in  despair  and  to  have  generally  confined  himself
to  plain,  if  not  lucid,  prose.  "  But  even  now,"  adds  Plutarch,  "  people
sometimes  rush  out  of  the  sanctuary  with  an  oracle  in  verse,"  and  he
quotes  one  of  these  poetical  effusions.  See  Plutarch,  De  Pythiae  oraculis^
5-7,  17-20.

5.  7.  who  came  from  the  land  of  the  Hjrperboreans.  In  one  of
his  poems  Alcaeus  described  how,  when  Apollo  was  bom,  2^us  sent
him  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  swans  to  Delphi,  there  to  give  laws  to  the
Greeks.  But  Apollo,  instead  of  going  to  Delphi,  caused  the  swans  to
fly  to  the  land  of  the  Hyperboreans.  The  Delphians  meantime  com-
posed a  paean  and  ranging  choruses  of  young  men  about  the  tripod
called  upon  the  god  to  come  back  from  the  far  north.  But  Apollo
staid  a  "whole  year  among  the  Hyperboreans,  giving  them  laws.  Then
he  flew  back  on  his  swan-drawn  chariot  to  Delphi,  which  he  reached  at
midsummer.  See  Himerius,  Orat,  xiv.  10  j^.;  and  on  the  relation  of
Apollo  and  Delphi  to  the  Hyperboreans,  see  K.  O.  Miiller,  Dorians ,
I.  p.  294  sqq.)  L.  Preller,  Griech,  Mythologie^^  i.  p.  242  sqq.  \  A.
Bouch^-Leclercq,  Histoirc  de  la  divination^  3.  p.  70  sqq,

5.  8.  only  women  as  the  mouth-pieces  of  the  oracle.  According
to  Diodorus  (xvi.  26)  virgins  were  at  first  chosen  to  act  as  priestesses
to  Apollo  at  Delphi ;  but  after  the  violation  of  one  of  them  the  Delphians


CH.  V  TEMPLES  A  T  DELPHI  239

decreed  that  for  the  future  the  oracles  should  be  pronounced,  not  by  a
virgin,  but  by  a  woman  over  fifty  years  of  age,  attired  as  a  virgin.  In
Plutarch's  time,  however,  the  Pythian  priestess  was  always  a  maiden.
See  Plutarch,  De  Pythiae  oraculis^  22  ;  /V/.,  De  defectu  oraculorum^  46
and  51.  In  the  palmy  days  of  Greece  two  Pythian  priestesses  were
constantly  employed,  taking  it  in  turns  to  deliver  the  oracles,  and  a
third  was  always  ready  in  case  of  accidents.  But  in  Plutarch's  time
so  few  people  came  to  consult  the  oracle  that  one  priestess  sufficed.
See  Plutarch,  De  defectu  oraculorum^  8.

5.  9.  the  second  temple  was  made  by  bees  out  of  wax  and
feathers.  Apollo  "once  inhabited  a  simple  hut,  and  a  small  shanty
was  fashioned  for  him,  to  which  bees  are  said  to  have  contributed
their  wax  and  birds  their  feathers"  (Philostratus,  Vit,  Apoll.  vi.  10.
4).  The  temple  of  feathers  is  mentioned  also  by  Strabo  (ix.  p.  421)
and  Stobaeus  {Florilegium^  xxi.  26),  and  it  is  referred  to  in  an  ancient
Delphic  oracle  quoted  by  Plutarch  (De  Pythiae  oraculis^  17,  "Bring
together  feathers,  ye  birds,  and  wax,  ye  bees ").  In  this  connexion,  it
is  to  be  remembered  that  the  Delphic  priestesses  were  called  Bees.  See
note  on  viii.  13.  i.  In  the  Homeric  hymn  to  Hermes  (v,  552  sqq,)
mention  is  made  of  three  prophetic  nymphs  called  Thriae  who  dwelt  on
Parnassus  and  from  whom  Apollo  in  his  youth  had  learned  the  art  of
soothsaying.  These  nymphs  fed  on  honeycomb.  After  eating  honey
they  spoke  the  truth  ;  but  if  deprived  of  it,  they  spoke  lies.  (As  to  the
divining  pebbles  called  thriae^  see  note  on  vii.  25.  10.)  The  oracle  of
Trophonius  was  said  to  have  been  discovered  through  a  swarm  of  bees
(see  ix.  40.  2).  These  facts  seem  to  show  that  the  Greeks  associated
prophetic  powers  with  bees.  Cp.  Lobeck,  Aglaqphamus,  P*  8 1 5  sqq. ;
W.  Robert-Tomow,  De  apium  mellisque  apudveteres  significatione  (Berlin,
i893)»  P«   169  sqq, ;  A.  B.  Cook,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,   15

(1895),  P-  7.

5.  1 1,  the  third  temple made  of  bronze.    The  bronze  temple

is  mentioned  also  by  Stobaeus  (Florilegiuniy  xxi.  26).

5.  II.  Acrisins  made  a  bronze  chamber  for  his  daughter.  See
ii.  23.  7  note.

5.   II.  Athena  of  the  Bronze  House.     See  iii.  17.  2.

5.   II.  the  Forum  at  Bome has  a  roof  of  bronze.     See  v.

12.  6.

5.  1 2.  charmers  all  of  gold.  The  exact  nature  of  these  golden
charmers  or  songstresses  is  uncertain.  See  Boeckh's  Pindar,  Frag.  25.
Prof.  Furtwangler  has  suggested  that  they  may  have  been  statues  placed
on  the  apexes  of  the  gables.  See  his  article  on  such  decorations* (<i>C'r(t7-
terict)  in  Archdologische  Zeitung,  40  (1882),  pp.  321-364.

5.  13.  The  fourth  temple  was  built  by  Trophonius  and  Aga-
medes.  Cp.  ix.  37.  5  ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Clouds,  508.  The
author  of  the  Homeric  hymn  to  the  Pythian  Apollo  {v,  116- sqq.)
describes  how  Apollo  himself  laid  the  foundations  broad  and  long,  and
how  upon  them  Trophonius  and  Agamedes,  the  sons  of  Erginus,  set  a
stone  threshold,  while  countless  tribes  of  men  reared  a  temple  of  polished
stone  to  be  famous  for  ever.     It  is  said  that  after  building  the  temple


240  AUGURIES  FROM  BIRDS  bk.  x,  phocis

Trophonius  and  Agamedes  asked  Apollo  for  a  reward.  The  god
promised  to  give  them  it  in  seven  days,  bidding  them  in  the  meantime
to  feast  and  make  merry.  They  did  so,  and  on  the  seventh  night  they
fell  asleep  and  woke  no  more  (Plutarch,  ConsoL  ad  ApolL  14).  Cicero
tells  the  same  story,  except  that  he  says  they  died  after  three  days
{TuscuL  i.  47.  114).

5.  13.  The  present  temple  was  built  etc.  As  to  the  history  and
remains  of  this  temple,  see  below,  note  on  x.  19.  4.

6.  I.  the  Parnassian  glen.  Pindar  {Pyfh,  vi.  9)  speaks  of  Delphi
as  **  Apollo's  dell."  Cp.  SchoL  on  Pindar,  Lc, ;  Schol.  on  Homer,
//.  ii.  519.

6.  I.  auguries  from  the  flight  of  birds.     A  fragmentary  inscrip-
tion found  at  Ephesus  gives  some  details  as  to  the  omens  drawn  from
the  flight  of  birds.     The  omens  varied  according  as  the  bird  was  flying
from  right  to  left  or  from  left  to  right,  and  as  it  raised  or  concealed  one
of  its  wings.     See  C  /.  C  No.  2953  ;  Roehl,  /.  G.  A,  No.  499;  P.
Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr,  Graec,^  478  ;    E.  S.  Roberts,  Greek  Epigraphy^
No.    144.      Cp.    A.   Bouchd-Leclercq,    Histoire  de   la  divination^    i.
p.  127  sqq.     Auguries  have  been  drawn  from  the  flight  and  cries  of
birds  by  many  peoples,  by  none  perhaps  more  systematically  than  by
the  Dysiks.     "  The  Dyak  has  his  sacred  birds,  whose  flight  or  calls  are
supposed  to  bring  him  direction  from  the  unseen  powers.     The  law  and
observance  of  omens  occupy,  probably,  a  greater  share  of  his  thoughts
than  any  other  part  of  his  religion  or  superstition  ;  and  1  cannot  imagine
that  any  tribe  in  any  age  ever  lived  in  more  absolute  subservience  to
augury  than  do  the  Dyaks.     The  system,  as  carried  out  by  them,  is
most  elaborate  and  complicated,  involving  uncertainties  innumerable  to
all  who  are  not  fully  experienced  in  the  science,  and  the  younger  men
have  constantly  to  ask  the  elder  ones  how  to  act  in  unexpected  coinci-
dences of  various  and  apparently  contradictory  omens.  .  .  .  The  birds
thus  *used,'  as  Dyaks  say,  are  not  many.  .  .  .  Most  are,  I  believe,
beautiful  in  plumage ;  all  are  small,  and,  like  most  tropical  birds,  have
nothing  that  can  be  called  song ;  but  their  calls  are  sometimes  shrill
and  piercing.  .  .  .  But  in  practice,  the  system  goes  beyond  birds,  and
embraces  "  the  deer,  mouse-deer,  gazelle,  armadillo,  various  insects,  the
lizard,  bat,  python,  and  cobra.     **  All  these  may  be  omens  in  various
ways   and   circumstances,  and  therefore,  in  this  connexion,  they  are
designated  burong  (birds),  and  to  augur  from  any  of  them  is  beburong.
But  these  other  creatures  are  subordinate  to  the  birds,  which  are  the
foundation  upon  which  the  superstructure  of  good  luck  is  to  be  raised ;
and  from  which  alone  augury  is  sought  at  the  beginning  of  any  important
undertaking "  (J.  Perham,  *  Sea  Dyak  Religion,'  Journal  of  the  Straits
Branch  of  the  Royal  Asiatic   Society^    No.    10    (December    1882),
p.  228  sq,).     Although   Pausanias  here  says  that  the  mythical  hero
Pamasus  was  believed  to  have  discovered  the  art  of  divining  by  the
flight  of  birds,  there  seems  to  be  no  evidence  that  this  mode  of  divination
was  practised  at  Delphi.     C.  Boetticher,  indeed,  tried  to  show  that  it
was  so  practised,  but  he  failed  to  produce  any  adequate  evidence,  as  his
adversary  F.  Wieseler  easily  proved.     See  C.  Boetticher,  *  L*  omeoscopia


CH.  VI  LYCOREA  241

nella  mantica  di  Delfo,'  Annali  deW  Instituto^  33  (1861),  pp.  243-257  ;
F.  Wieseler,  ib,  pp.  356-365.

6.  2.  Lycorea.  Cp.  Strabo,  ix.  p.  418.  Pausanias  derives  the
name  from  lukos^  *a  wolf/  and  druesthcUy  *to  howl.'  The  Delphians
are  said  to  have  been  sometimes  called  Lycoreans  (Schol.  on  Apollonius,
iL  7 1 1 ).  The  highest  peak  of  Parnassus  is  still  named  Liakoura  or  Lykeri^
doubtless  forms  of  the  old  name  (Leake,  N,  Greece^  2.  p.  579  ;  Baedeker,^
p.  162  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  43).  H.  N.  Ulrichs  thought  that  Lycorea
may  have  stood  on  a  height  to  the  west  of  the  Corycian  cave,  where
some  remains  of  ancient  Greek  walls  exist  {Reisen  und  Forschungen^  i .
p.  120;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  179  sq,),  Leake  (/.r.)  held  that  ruins  of
the  ancient  city  are  to  be  seen  at  the  village  of  Liakouri,  Many  stories
have  come  down  to  us  of  animals  that  guided  people  to  a  new  home.
See  iii.  22.  12  ;  iii.  23.  7  ;  iv.  34.  8  ;  viii.  8.  4  ;  ix.  12.  i  ;  ix.  19.  4.
We  have  seen  (note  on  x.  5.  5)  that  Apollo  in  the  form  of  a  dolphin
was  traditionally  said  to  have  guided  the  Cretan  mariners  to  the  Crisaean
Gulf.  The  site  of  Ephesus  is  said  to  have  been  indicated  by  a  fish
and  a  wild  boar  (Athenaeus,  viii.  p.  36 1  c  d).  Argilus  in  Thrace  was
founded,  in  obedience  to  an  oracle,  on  the  spot  where  a  mouse  had
appeared,  and  the  town  was  called  Argilus,  that  being  the  Thracian
word  for  a  mouse  (Heraclides  Ponticus,  De  rebus  publicis^  42,  Frag,
Hist,  Graec,  ed.  Miiller,  2.  p.  224).  Battus,  the  founder  of  Cyrene,
was  guided  by  a  crow  (Callimachus,  Hymn  to  Apollo^  65  sqq»),  Ilus
founded  Ilium  on  the  spot  where  a  speckled  cow  lay  down  (Apollodorus,
iii.  12.  3).  Lycia  is  said  to  have  been  named  after  the  wolves  which
guided  Latona  to  the  country  (Antoninus  Liberalis,  Transform,  25).  The
Muses  in  the  form  of  bees  led  the  Athenian  colonists  to  Ionia  (Philostratus,
Imagines^  ii.  8.  5).  The  sites  of  Cumae  and  Naples  were  indicated  by
doves  (Velleius  Paterculus,  i.  4.  i  ;  Statius,  Sylv,  iii.  5.  78  sq,).  The
Piceni  were  named  after  a  woodpecker  (picus)  which  had  led  their
forefathers  from  the  land  of  the  Sabines  to  Picenum  (Strabo,  v.  p.
240).  A  bull  guided  the  Sanmites  to  Samnium  (Strabo,  v.  p.  250).
The  Irpini  were  led  to  their  country  by  a  wolf,  and  they  took  their
name  from  the  beast,  irpus  being  the  Samnite  word  for  a  wolf  (Festus,
s.v,  *  Irpini,'  p.  106  ed.  Miiller).  In  Germany  stories  are  told  of  the
sites  of  towns  or  churches  having  been  pointed  out  by  animals  (F.  Panzer,
Beitrag  zu  deutschen  Mythologie^  2,  p.  405  sqq.  ;  K.  Simrock,  Deutsche
Mythologies  p.  533).  The  Aztecs  seem  to  have  had  a  legend  that  they
were  led  to  Mexico  by  a  hunmiing-bird.  See  J.  G.  Miiller,  Gesch,  der
Amerikanischen  Urreligionen^  p.  594  sq, ;  H.  H.  Bancroft,  Native  races
of  the  Pacific  States^  3.  p.  304  sqq, ;  Andrew  Lang,  Myth^  Ritual  and
Religion^  2.  p.  69  sqq,

6.  3.  Gelaeno.  A  scholiast  on  Euripides  (Orestes^  1094)  calls  her
Melaenis.

6.  4.  Castalios,  an  aboriginaL  A  scholiast  on  Euripides  {Orestes^
1094)  represents  Castalius  as  a  son  of  Delphus  and  Castalia.  Another
story  ran  that  Castalius  was  a  Cretan  who  set  out  to  found  a  colony  and
was  led  to  the  Crisaean  gulf  by  Apollo  in  the  shape  of  or  riding  on  a
dolphin   (Tzetzes,    Schol,  on  Lycophron^    208 ;    Etymolog.  Magn,  s.v,

VOL.  V  R


243  DIONYSUS  AT  DELPHI  bk.  x.  phocis

A€A<^tvios).  A  similar  story  is  told  by  Servius  (on  Virgil,  Aen,  iii.  332),
except  that  he  calls  the  Cretan  colonist  Icadius.  See  L.  Preller,
Ausgewdhlte  Aufsdtse^  p.  229  sq.

6.  4.  Thyia.  She  had  a  precinct  at  Delphi.  At  the  approach  of  the
Persian  host  under  Xerxes  the  Delphians  were  bidden  by  the  oracle  to
sacrifice  to  the  winds.  So  they  built  an  altar  to  the  winds  in  the  pre-
cinct .of  Thyia  and  sacrificed  to  them.  Herodotus  calls  Thyia  a  daughter
ofCephisus.     See  Herodotus,  vii.  178.

6.  4.  Thyiads.  Cp.  x.  4.  3  ;  x.  32.  7.  The  worship  of  Dionysus
had  a  great  hold  on  Delphi ;  indeed  Plutarch  says  that  Delphi  belonged
as  much  to  Dionysus  as  to  Apollo.  During  three  winter  months  the
Delphians  invoked  Dionysus  instead  of  Apollo,  and  sa,ng  the  dithyramb
(the  song  of  Dionysus)  instead  of  the  paean  (the  song  of  Apollo).  See
Plutarch,  De  EI  apud  Deiphos,  9.  On  a  Greek  vase  found  at  Kertsch  in
i860  Apollo  and  Dionysus  are  depicted  shaking  hands  in  front  of  a
palm-tree ;  the  scene  is  supposed  to  represent  the  meeting  of  the  two
gods  at  Delphi.  See  L.  Stephani,  in  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)
for  1 861,  p.  53  sqq,\  L.  Weniger,  *  Apollo  und  Dionysos  zu  Delphi,'
Archaologische  Zeitungy  24  (1866),  pp.  185-195,  with  pi.  ccxi.  Accord-
ing to  a  scholiast  on  Pindar  {Pyth,  Argum.  p.  297  ed.  Boeckh)
Dionysus  was  the  first  to  give  oracles  from  the  tripod.  As  to  the  rela-
tions of  Apollo  and  Dionysus  at  Delphi,  see  also  £.  Gerhard,  <  Bacch-
ischer  Apollo,*  Archaologische  Zeitung^  23  ( 1 865),  pp.  97- 1 1  o,  with  plates
ccii.,  ccciii. ;  F.  Robiou,  *  Apollon  dans  les  myst^res,*  Gazette  arch/oio-
gique^  6  (1880),  pp.  1 17-134  ;  A.  Bouch^-Leclercq,  Histoire  de  la  divina-
Hotly  3.  p.  85  sqq,  ;  Aug.  Monmisen,  Delphika^  p.  112  sqq,

6.  4*  Delphus.  According  to  Tzetzes  {Schol.  on  Lycophron^  208)
Delphus  was  a  son  of  Poseidon  by  Melantho,  daughter  of  Deucalion.
Aeschylus  represents  Delphus  as  reigning  at  Delphi  when  Apollo  first
came  thither  from  Delos  {EumenideSy  1 6).

6.  5.  as  Homer  has  done  in  the  list  of  the  Phocians.  See  Homer,
//.  ii.  5 1 9.  Pausanias  himself  regularly  uses  the  name  Pytho  instead  of
Delphi  when  he  refers  to  the  Pythian  games  held  at  Delphi.  See  Index,
s,v,  Pytho.

6.  5.  he  whom  Apollo  shot  with  his  arrows.  The  slaughter  of
the  Python  by  Apollo  is  celebrated  in  two  of  the  hymns  to  Apollo  which
were  recently  discovered  by  the  French  at  Delphi :  in  one  of  them  the
monster  is  described  as  a  son  of  Earth,  in  the  other  as  a  dragon  or
serpent  that  guarded  the  prophetic  tripod.  See  Bulletin  de  Corresp,
helUnique,  17  (1893),  P-  574  ;  id,,  18  (1894),  p.  352.

6.  5.  Homer  represented  the  isLEUid  of  the  Sirens  etc.  See
Homer,  Od,  xii.  45  sq.  The  story  of  Ulysses  and  the  Sirens  is  the
subject  of  a  Pompeian  wall-painting,  now  in  the  British  Museum,  and  of
paintings  on  at  least  two  ancient  vases,  of  which  one  is  in  the  British
Museum  and  the  other  in  the  National  Museum  at  Athens.  See  Miss
J.  E.  Harrison,  Myths  of  the  Odyssey y  p.  146  sqq,  ;  Miss  E.  SelJers,  in
Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  13  (1892-3),  pp.  2-6.

6.  6.  a  dragon  set  by  Earth  to  guard  the  oracle.  On  the  Python
as  the  guardian  of  the  oracle  before  the  advent  of  Apollo,  compare


CH.  VII  PERSIAN  ATTACK  ON  DELPHI  243

Apollodorus,  i.  4.  i  ;  Euripides,  Iphig,  in  Taur.  1245  sqq. ;  Schol.  on
Homer,  //.  ii.  519;  Schol.  on  Pindar,  Pyth,  Argum. ;  Aelian,  Var,
hist,  iiL  I  ;  Hyginus,  Fab,  140.  As  to  the  legend  of  Apollo  and  the
dragon,  of  which  no  satisfactory  explanation  has  yet  been  given,  see  the
monograph  of  Mr.  Th.  Schreiber,  Apollon  Pythoktonos  (Leipzig,  1879).

7.  I.  it  was  attempted  by  the  Phlegyan  race.  See  ix.  36.  2  ;  x.
34.  2.

7.  I.  Pyirhos,  son  of  Achilles.  Various  explanations  were  given
of  the  motives  which  brought  Neoptolemus  (Pyrrhus)  to  Delphi.  One
was  that  he  came  to  plunder  the  oracle  in  order  to  provide  himself  with
funds  for  an  attack  on  Peloponnese ;  another  was  that  he  intended  to
take  vengeance  on  Apollo  for  the  death  of  his  father  Achilles.  See
Schol.  on  Pindar,  Nem,  vii.  58  ;  Schol.  on  Euripides,  Orestes^  1655,  and
Andromache^  51  and  53  ;  Apollodorus,  ed.  R.  Wagner,  p.  218.

7.  I.  by  a  division  of  the  anny  of  Xerxes.  The  attack  of  the
Persians  on  Delphi  is  described  by  Herodotus  (viii.  35-39).  On  the
approach  of  the  enemy  up  the  long  defile  from  the  Cleft  Way,  the
Delphians  sent  their  women  and  children  away  across  the  Gulf  of
Corinth,  and  abandoning  the  city  betook  themselves  to  the  heights  of
Parnassus  or  to  Amphissa  in  Locris.  Only  sixty  men  and  the  prophet
remained  in  the  town.  But  when  the  Persians  approached  Delphi  and
had  reached  the  sanctuary  of  Fore-temple  Athena  (see  note  on  x.  8.  6),
the  thunder  rolled,  lightning  flashed  and  struck  them,  and  two  clifis
broke  away  from  Parnassus  and  came  crashing  into  their  midst,  laying
many  of  them  low.  War-cries  too  were  heard  from  the  sanctuary  of
Athena.  At  these  sights  and  sounds  fear  fell  upon  the  barbarians,  they
turned  and  fled,  and  the  Delphians  descending  from  the  heights  of
Parnassus  smote  them  with  the  edge  of  the  sword.  The  great  stones
which  had  fallen  from  Parnassus  were  still  to  be  seen  lying  in  the
sanctuary  of  Athena  in  Herodotus's  time.  Compare  Diodorus,  xi.  14;
Justin,  ii.  12.  8  sq,  Plutarch  says  {Numa^  9)  that  the  Persians  burnt
the  temple  of  Apollo.  Ctesias  mentions  two  expeditions  of  the  Persians
against  Delphi  (in  Photius,  Bibliotheca^  p.  39  ed  Bekker).  Mr.
Wecklein  has  attempted  to  show  that  the  whole  story  of  the  Persian
attack  on  Delphi  was  a  fiction  of  the  Delphian  priests.  He  makes
much  of  a  supposed  contradiction  between  Herodotus's  narrative  (in
viii.  35-39)  and  the  declaration  of  Mardonius  (Herodotus,  ix.  42)  that
the  Persians  would  not  attack  Delphi,  because  an  oracle  had  predicted
that  if  they  plundered  the  sanctuary  they  would  all  perish.  The  sup-
posed contradiction  does  not  exist.  The  failure  of  their  attempt  on
Delphi  may  very  well  have  excited  the  superstitious  fears  of  the  Persians
and  have  induced  them  to  disseminate  a  prediction  of  this  kind  as  an
excuse  for  not  repeating  the  attempt  They  had  not  actually  plundered
the  sanctuary,  though  they  had  made  a  very  fair  attempt  to  do  so.
Their  consciences  were  therefore  clear :  they  did  not  need  to  dread  the
penalty  denounced  in  the  oracle,  and  therefore  had  nothing  to  lose  by
bruiting  it  abroad.  See  Wecklein,  in  Sitzungsberichte  d.  philos.  philolog,
u,  histar,  CL  d,  k,  b,  Akad,  d,  Wissen,  (Munich),  1876,  pp.  263-269;
H.  Pom  tow,  *Die  Perserexpedition  nach  Delphoi,'  Fleckei^efis  Jahr-


244  THE  PYTHIAN  FESTIVAL  bk.  x.  phocis

bUchery  30  (1884),  pp.  227-263;  G.  Busolt,  Griechische  Geschich/c,
2.*  p.  688  sqg, ;  A.  Hauvette,  Hirodote  (Paris,  1894),  p.  384  sqq,

7.  I.  Nero robbed  Apollo  of  five  hundred  bronze  statues.

Cp.  X.  19.  2  ;  Die  Chrysostom,  Or,  xxxi.  vol.  i.  p.  394  ed.  Dindorf.
The  emperor  also  tried  to  stop  up  the  prophetic  chasm,  into  which  he
threw  the  bodies  of  some  men  whom  he  had  caused  to  be  murdered
(Dio  Cassius,  bciii.  14;  Lucian,  Nero^  10).  But  even  after  his  spolia-
tion a  vast  number  of  works  of  art  remained  at  Delphi,  including  not
less  than  73,000  statues,  if  we  may  trust  our  texts  of  Pliny  i^Nat,  hisL
xxxiv.  36).  The  number  is,  however,  probably  a  mistake  of  the  author
or  his  copyists.

7.  2.  the  most  ancient  contest was  the  singing  of  a  hymn

etc  The  common  legend  seems  to  have  been  that  the  Pythian  games
were  instituted  by  Apollo  as  a  funeral  celebration  for  the  Python  which
he  had  slain.  See  Clement  of  Alexandria,  Protrept  i.  i.  p.  2,  and  ii.
34,  p.  29  ed.  Potter ;  Aristotle,  Pepiosy  Frag.  (Frag.  Hist  Graec.  2.
p.  189,  No.  282  ed  Miiller) ;  John  of  Antioch,  Frag.  i.  20  (Frag,  Hist.
Graec.  4.  p.  539  ed.  Miiller) ;  lamblichus,  De  Pythagor.  vit.  x.  52  ;
SchoL  on  Pindar,  Pyth.  Argum.  ;  Hyginus,  Fab.  1 40 ;  Ovid,  Met.  i.
445  ^^i'  Augustine  tells  a  different  story.  He  says  {^De  civ.  dei^
xviii.  12)  that  Danaus  had  invaded  the  land  of  Delphi  and  burnt
Apollo's  temple.  Apollo,  angry  with  the  Delphians  for  not  defending
his  temple,  afflicted  the  country  with  barrenness ;  and  to  appease  him
musical  games  were  instituted  in  his  honour.  According  to  Ovid  {l.c.\
the  games  from  their  institution  included  boxing,  running,  and  chariot-
races  ;  but  herein  he  differs  from  Strabo,  Pausanias,  and  the  scholiast  on
Pindar,  whose  united  testimony  is  to  be  preferred.  At  first  the  only  con-
test was  the  singing  of  a  hymn  to  Apollo  to  the  accompaniment  of  the  lyre.
This  is  stated  by  Strabo  (ix.  p.  421),  and  is  confirmed  by  Pausanias
who  mentions  the  hymn  to  Apollo  and  says  (§  3)  that  Hesiod  was
excluded  from  the  competition  because  he  could  not  play  on  the  lyre.
Cp.  SchoL  on  Pindar,  Pyth,  Argum.  In  early  times  the  management
of  the  games  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Delphians  (Strabo,  Ix^.  But  in
01.  48.  3  (586  B.C.),  at  the  conclusion  of  the  Crisaean  war,  the  conduct
of  the  games  was  undertaken  by  the  Amphictyonic  Council,  who  added
to  the  number  of  the  musical  contests  and  introduced  athletic  com-
petitions for  the  first  time  (Strabo,  l.c, ;  Pausanias,  below  §  4  J^.  ;
Schol.  on  Pindar,  Pyth,  Argunu  p.  298  ed.  Boeckh).  In  the  second
Pythiad  (Ol.  49.  3  =  582  B.C.)  prizes  consisting  of  wreaths  were
substituted  for  the  old  prizes  in  money  or  valuables  (Pausanias,  below
§  5  ;  Mantior  Parium,  1.  53  sq,)  Hence  some  ancient  authorities
dated  the  series  of  Pythiads  from  the  second  Pythiad  in  582  B.C.  But
this  was  a  mistake.  The  succession  of  the  Pythiads  should  be  reckoned
from  the  celebration  in  586  RC  See  Boeckh,  Explicationes  ad  Pin-
darum^  p.  207  sq,\  Clinton,  Fasti  Helleniciy  p.  228.  In  the  earliest
times  the  Pythian  festival  was  celebrated  every  eighth  year  (Schol.  on
Pindar,  l,c, ;  Censorinus,  De  die  natali^  1 8  ;  A.  Mommsen,  Delphika^
p.  153  sq^.  But  from  586  ac.  onwards  the  festival  was  held  every
fourth  year,  the  year  in   which  it  fell  being  the  third  year  of  each


CH.  VII  THE  PYTHIAN  FESTIVAL  245

Olympiad.  An  annual  Pythian  festival  seems  also  to  have  been  held
(C.  /.  G,  No.  1688.  44;  A.  Mommsen,  Delphika^  p.  151  j^.);  but  it
was  doubtless  of  minor  importance.  Inscriptions  prove  that  the  great
Pythian  festival,  held  every  fourth  year,  was  celebrated  in  BoukatioSy
the  second  month  of  the  Delphic  year,  corresponding  to  the  Attic
month  Metageitmon.  The  day  of  the  month  on  which  the  festival
began  is  not  mentioned  by  ancient  writers  or  in  inscriptions ;  but  we
may  infer  that  it  began  on  the  seventh  day  of  the  month,  because  that
was  the  day  on  which  Apollo  was  said  to  have  celebrated  it  (Schol.  on
Pindar,  Pyth.  Argum.  p.  297  ed.  Boeckh).  This  is  confirmed  by  the
fact  that  the  number  seven  was  sacred  to  Apollo  (Plutarch,  De  EI  apud
DelphoSy  i7\id^  Quaest,  Conviv.  ix.  3.  i)  ;  the  seventh  day  of  the  month
was  holy  because  Apollo  had  been  bom  on  it  (Hesiod,  Works  and  DaySy
771  sg,),  Cp.  A.  Mommsen,  Delphika^  p.  176  sq.  Hence,  as  the  Delphic
year  bqgan  at  the  summer  solstice,  and  the  Pythian  festival  began  on  the
seventh  day  of  the  second  month,  the  time  of  its  celebration  must  have
been  about  the  middle  of  August.  See  KirchhofT,  *  Ueber  die  Zeit  der
pythischen  Festfeier,'  Monatsberichte  der  konig.  preuss,  Akad.  d,  Wissen,
su  Berlin^  1864,  PP*  129-135;  A.  Mommsen,  Delpkika^  p.  154  sqq.
For  the  inscriptions  which  show  that  the  Pythian  games  were  celebrated
in  the  month  Boukaiios^  see  C,  I.  G.  No.  1688  ;  W.  Froehner,  In-
scriptions grecques  du  Louvre^  No.  32  ;  Wescher  et  Foucart,  Inscriptions
recuHllies  d  DelpheSy  No.  410.  On  the  Pythian  festival  in  general  see
A.  Monmisen,  Delphika^  pp.  149-214.  Fragments  of  three  of  the
hynms  composed  in  honour  of  Apollo  and  intended  to  be  sung  at  his
festival  have  been  found  in  recent  years  by  the  French  at  Delphi ;  all
three  are  engraved  on  stone,  and  two  of  them  are  accompanied  by
musical  notation.  The  poetical  merit  of  these  compositions  is  not  great
Two  of  them  allude  to  the  Gallic  invasion  and  were  therefore  written
not  earlier  than  279  B.C.,  the  year  of  the  inroad ;  indeed  one  of  these
two  belongs  to  the  Roman  period,  for  it  winds  up  with  a  prayer  for  the
prosperity  of  the  Roman  empire.  See  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helleniqucy
^7  (1893),  PP-  561-610;  id,y  i8  (1894),  pp.  345-389;  O.  Crusius,  Die
delpkischen  Hymnen^  supplement  to  Philologus^  vol.  53  (1894).

7.  2.  Chrsrsothemis  of  Crete  sang.  <*  Chrysothemis  the  Cretan
was  the  first  who,  attired  in  a  splendid  garb  and  with  the  lyre  in  his
hands  to  imitate  Apollo,  sang  the  (Pythian)  air.  He  won  applause  and
hence  the  manner  of  the  contest  is  still  kept  up  "  (Proclus,  in  Photius,
BibliothecOy  p.  320  ed.  Bekker).

7.  2.  Garmanor  who  is  said  to  have  imrified  Apollo.  See  ii.
7.  7  note.

7.  4.  Sacadas.  He  was  said  to  have  been  the  first  who  played  the
*  Pythian  tune'  on  the  flute  at  Delphi.  See  ii.  22.  8.  This  tune  is
described  by  Pollux  (iv.  84)  and  Strabo  (ix.  p.  421  sq.).  The  melody,
intended  to  represent  musically  Apollo's  combat  with  the  dragon,  was  a
solo  on  the  flute,  but  now  and  then  the  trumpets  and  fifes  struck  in.
First  Apollo  was  heard  preparing  for  the  fight  and  choosing  his  ground.
Then  followed  the  challenge  to  the  dragon,  then  the  battle,  indicated  by
an  iambic  measure.     Here  probably  the  music  imitated  the  twanging  of


246  THE  PYTHIAN  FESTIVAL  bk.  x.  phocis

the  silver  bow  and  the  swish  of  the  arrows  as  they  sped  to  their  mark.
It  is  expressly  said  that  the  gnashing  of  the  monster's  teeth  was  heard,
as  he  ground  them  together  in  his  agony.  Here  the  trumpets  came
in,  not  in  long-drawn  winding  bouts,  but  in  short  single  blasts,  one
perhaps  for  each  arrow-shot,  every  flourish  marking  a  hit.  The  shrill
wailing  notes  of  the  fifes  mimicked  the  dragon's  dying  screams.  Then
the  flute  broke  into  a  light,  lilting  air,  beating  time  to  the  triumphal
measure  trodden  by  the  victorious  god.  Cp.  Boeckh,  De  tnetris  Pindaric
p.  182  n.  16;  A.  Mommsen,  DelphikOy  p.  193  sq.\  Th.  Schrcibcr,
Apollon  PythoktonoSy  pp.  17-32  ;  H.  Guhrauer,  *Der  pythische  Nomos,'
Fleckeisetis  J(ihrbuchery  Supplem.  8  (187 5- 18 76),  pp.  309-35  r ;  K.  v.  Jan,
*Der  pythische  Nomos  und  die  Syrinx,*  Philologus^  38  (1879),  PP-
378-384.  Mr.  V.  Jan  argues  that  the  imitation  of  the  dragon's  screams
was  produced,  not  by  a  separate  accompaniment  on  the  fifes,  but  by  an
instrument  or  mechanical  contrivance  of  some  sort  attached  to  the  flute
itself.  He  refers  especially  to  Plutarch,  De  musica^  21  :  "Telephanes
the  Megarian  was  such  a  foe  to  the  fifes  that  he  never  even  allowed  the
flute-players  to  place  them  on  the  flutes  ;  and  for  this  reason  especially
he  abstained  from  the  Pythian  contest."  As  to  the  musician  Sacadas
and  the  Pythian  tune,  see  £.  Hiller,  *  Sakadas  der  Aulet,'  Rheimsches
Museum^  N.  F.  31  (1876),  pp.  76-88.

7.  5.  foot-races  for  boys.  The  order  of  the  contests  at  Delphi
differed  from  that  at  Olympia.  At  Delphi  the  contests  of  boys
alternated  with  the  contests  of  men ;  thus  the  wrestling  -  matches  of
the  boys  were  followed  by  the  wrestling- matches  of  the  men ;  the
boxing-matches  of  the  boys  were  followed  by  the  boxing-matches  of  the
men ;  and  so  on  with  the  other  kinds  of  contests.  But  at  Olympia  all
the  contests  of  the  boys  took  place  first,  and  were  then  followed  by  all
the  contests  of  the  men.  See  Plutarch,  Quaest,  Coninv,  ii.  5.  i.  The
Delphic  order  seems  the  better.  For  the  same  boys  or  men  often
competed  in  more  than  one  kind  of  contest ;  and  the  Delphic  plan
allowed  them  a  rest  between  each  contest.

7.  7-  the  victory  of  Dajnaxetus  of  Heraea.  Cp.  v.  8.  10,  vi.
10.  4,  viii.  26.  2.

7.  8.  in  the  sixty-ninth  Pythiad ^  the  winner  was  Ptolemy,

the  Macedonian.  As  the  sixty-ninth  Pythiad  fell  in  310  B.c,  this
Ptolemy  was  Ptolemy  I.,  the  son  of  Lagus.  He  called  himself  a
Macedonian  in  an  inscription  on  a  statue  at  Olympia  (vi.  3.  i).

7.  8.  the  prize  for  a  Pythian  victory  is  a  laurel  wreath.  Cp.
viii.  48.  2.  The  laurel  boughs  which  furnished  the  victors*  wreaths
were  brought  from  the  sacred  laurel  in  Tempe  by  a  boy  who  per-
sonated Apollo.  See  SchoL  on  Pindar,  Pyth,  Argum.  p.  298  ed.
Boeckh;  and  note  on  ii.  7.  7.  Aelian  also  says  {Var,  hist  iii.  i)  that
the  prize  wreaths  in  the  Pythian  games  were  made  from  the  laurel-tree
at  Tempe.

8.  I.  the  council  of  the  Ghreeks  etc.  On  the  constitution  and
history  of  the  Amphictyonic  Council,  on  which  fresh  light  has  been
thrown  by  inscriptions,  see  Aeschines,  De  falsa  legatione^  116;  Harpo-
cration,  s.v.  'Afw^iKTvovcs ;    Strabo,  ijf.  p.  420 ;  Wescher  et  Foucart,


CH.  VIII  THE  AMPHICTYONIC  LEAGUE  247

Mimoire  sur  Us  mines  et  Vhistoire  de  Delphes^  P-  1 5  7  -f^^*  ;  P-  Foucart,
*  Ddcrets  des  Amphictions  de  Delphes/  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  hellinique^
7  (1883),  PP«  409-439 ;  A.  BoucW-Leclercq,  Histoire  de  la  divination^
3.  p.  104  sqq, ;  G.  Gilbert,  Griechische  Staatsalterthiimer^  2.  p.  407  sqq.
For  inscriptions  containing  decrees  of  the  Amphictyonic  Council,  see
Curtius,  Anecdota  Deiphica^  pp.  75-79  (Nos.  40-45);  Wescher- Foucart,
Inscriptions  grecques  recueillies  d  DelpheSy  Nos.  1-6 ;  P.  Foucart,  in
Bulletin  de  Corresp.  hellhiique^  Lc. ;  W.  Froehner,  Inscriptions  grecques
du  Louvre^  No.  32.

8.  2.  the  following  Greek  tribes.  According  to  Aeschines  {De
falsa  legationey  1 16)  and  Theopompus  (cited  by  Harpocration,  s,v,
'AfiKf>iKTvov€si)  the  peoples  who  had  a  share  in  the  Amphictyonic
Council  were  twelve.  As  enumerated  by  Aeschines  they  were  the
Thessalians,  Boeotians,  Dorians,  lonians,  Perraebians,  Magnesians,
Locrians,  Oetaeans,  Phthiotians,  Maliensians,  and  Phocians  (eleven
only  —  the  name  of  the  Dolopians  has  perhaps  dropped  out).  As
enumerated  by  Theopompus  the  peoples  were  the  lonians,  Dorians,
Perraebians,  Boeotians,  Magnesians,  Achaeans,  Phthiotians,  Melians,
Dolopians,  Aenianians,  Delphians,  and  Phocians.  Strabo  (ix.  p.  420)
also  says  that  the  peoples  were  twelve  in  number.  According  to
Aeschines  (l.c)  each  people  had  two  votes  in  the  Council.  An  inscrip-
tion found  in  recent  years  by  the  French  at  Delphi  and  dating  from
some  time  between  346  and  336  B.C.,  gives  a  complete  list — the  earliest
authentic  list  we  possess — of  the  Amphictyons  {Bulletin  de  Corresp,
helUnique^  17  (1893),  p.  617).  Unfortunately  this  important  document
has  not  yet  been  published.  Another  inscription  found  by  the  French
at  Delphi,  but  not  yet  published  by  them,  records  an  answer  of  Hadrian's
to  a  question  of  the  Delphians  touching  the  Amphictyonic  Council.
The  emperor  decrees  that  the  votes  which  the  Thessalians  possess
above  the  other  peoples  of  the  League  shall  be  divided  ''among  the
Athenians,  the  Lacedaemonians,  and  the  other  cities,  in  order  that  the
Council  may  be  common  to  all  the  Greeks."  See  Comptes  Rendus  cU
PAccuUmie  des  Inscriptions  et  de  Belles-lettres^  24  (1896),  p.  88.

8.  2.  the  liacedonians  contrived  to  join  the  League,  whereas

the  Fhodan  nation were  struck  out  etc.     Cp.  x.  3.  3  note.

Inscriptions  found  by  the  French  at  Delphi  show  that  at  the  conclusion
of  the  Sacred  War  in  346  B.C.  the  Phocians  were  further  excluded  from
the  conmiission  charged  with  the  restoration  of  the  temple  of  Apollo,
and  that  their  place  was  taken  by  representatives  of  Macedonia,  one  of
whom  was  no  less  than  King  Philip  himself.  Further,  the  inscriptions
prove  that  the  statues  of  the  Phocian  generals  Philomelus  and  Onomar-
chus  were  ejected  from  the  sanctuary  and  their  pedestals  thrown  down,
and  they  mention  the  payment  of  instalments  of  the  fine  which  had
been  inflicted  on  the  Phocians  for  their  sacrilege.  See  Bulletin  de
Corresp,  helUnique^  17  (1893),  p.  617;  /V/.,  18  (1894),  p.  181.  Cp.
note  on  X.  15.  7.

8.  3.  the  will  of  the  emperor  Augustus  that  Nicopolis  etc  Cp.
G.  F.  Hertzberg,  Geschichte  Griechenlands  unter  der  Herrschaft  der
Romer^  i.  p.  510  sqq, ;  Th.  Mbmmsen,  Rbmische  Geschichte ^  5.  p.  232.


248  SITUATION  OF  DELPHI  bk.  x.  phocis

8.  6.  On  entering  the  city  etc  The  situation  of  Delphi  is  accu-
rately described  by  Strabo  (ix.  p.  418).  He  says  :  "On  the  south  side
of  Parnassus  is  Delphi,  a  rocky  place  in  the  form  of  a  theatre,  with  the
oracle  and  the  city  at  the  top.  The  circumference  of  the  city  is  16
furlongs.  Higher  up  than  the  city  is  situated  Lycorea,  the  place  where
the  Delphians  were  formerly  settled,  above  the  sanctuary ;  but  now  they
dwell  about  the  Castalian  spring.  In  front  of  the  city,  to  the  south,  lies
Mount  Cirphis,  a  precipitous  mountain,  separated  from  Delphi  by  a  dale
through  which  flows  the  Plistus  river."  For  Justin's  description,  see
note  on  X.  5.  7.  The  site  of  Delphi,  till  lately  occupied  by  the  modem
village  of  Kastri^  is  in  the  highest  degree  striking  and  impressive.  The
city  lay  at  the  southern  foot  of  the  tremendous  cliffs  of  Parnassus,  which
form  a  sheer  wall  of  rock,  about  800  feet  high,  running  from  north-west
to  south-east,  and  then  bending  round  at  an  obtuse  angle  towards  the
south.  These  cliffs  were  known  in  antiquity  as  the  Phaedriades  or
*  shining '  rocks.  Over  these  frightful  precipices  Philomelus  drove  some
of  the  defeated  Locrians  (Diodorus,  xvi.  28  ;  cp.  Suidas,  s.v,  AMroriros).
Just  at  the  angle  where  this  vast  wall  of  rock  bends  round  towards  the
south  it  is  rent  from  top  to  bottom  by  a  deep  and  gloomy  gorge,  some
20  feet  wide,  in  which  there  is  a  fine  echo.  Facing  each  other  across
this  narrow  chasm  rise  two  stupendous  cliffs,  whose  peaked  summits
tower  considerably  above  the  rest  of  the  line  of  cliffs.  They  are  nearly
perpendicular  in  front,  and  perfectly  so  where  they  fall  sheer  down  into
the  gorge.  The  eastern  of  the  two  cliffs  was  called  Hyampia  in
antiquity ;  from  its  top  Aesop  is  said  to  have  been  hurled  by  the
Delphians  (Herodotus,  viii.  39 ;  Plutarch,  De  sera  numinis  inndicta^
12;  cp.  Suidas,  s.v,  AMrowrbs).  The  eastern  cliff  is  now  called  Phlem-
boukosy  the  western  Rhodini.  It  has  been  suggested,  though  perhaps
without  sufficient  reason,  that  when  the  later  writers  of  antiquity,
especially  the  Roman  poets,  speak  of  the  two  summits  of  Parnassus,
they  are  really  referring  to  these  two  cliffs.  In  point  of  fact  the
cliffs  are  far  indeed  from  being  near  the  summit  of  Parnassus  ;  but  seen
from  Delphi  they  completely  hide  the  higher  slopes  of  the  mountain.
Cp.  Lucian,  Charon^  5  ;  Lucan,  v.  72  ;  Ovid,  Met.  i.  316  sq.y  ii.  221  ;
Statins,  Theb.  vii.  346;  Nonnus,  Dionys.  xiii.  131.  In  winter  or  wet
weather  a  torrent  comes  foaming  down  the  gorge  in  a  cascade  about
200  feet  high,  bringing  down  the  water  from  the  higher  slopes  of  the
mountain.  At  the  mouth  of  the  gorge,  under  the  eastern  cliff,  is  the
rock-cut  basin  of  the  perennial  Castalian  spring  (see  §  9  note),  a  few
paces  above  the  highroad.  The  water  from  the  spring  joins  the  stream
from  the  gorge,  which,  after  passing  over  the  highroad,  plunges,  in  a
fall  about  100  feet  high,  into  a  deep  rocky  lyn  or  glen,  which  it  has
scooped  out  for  itself  in  the  steep  side  of  the  mountain.  Down  this
glen  the  stream  descends  to  join  the  Plistus,  which  flows  along  the  bottom
of  the  Delphic  valley  from  east  to  west,  at  a  great  depth  below  the  town.
From  the  cliffs  at  the  back  of  Delphi  the  ground  slopes  away  so  steeply
to  the  bed  of  the  Plistus  that  it  is  only  by  means  of  a  succession  of
artificial  terraces,  rising  in  tiers  above  each  other,  that  the  soil  can  be
cultivated  and  made  fit  for  habitation.     There  are  about  thirty  of  these


If   1882-1887.


Slan£ii\£i  Ga^'-EtlabfLcndai.


CH.  VIII  SITUATION  OF  DELPHI  249

terraces,  supported  by  stone  walls,  mostly  of  polygonal  masonry.  The
sanctuary  of  Apollo  occupies  only  the  five  or  six  highest  terraces  at  the
foot  of  the  cliffs,  on  the  western  side  of  the  Castalian  gorge.  So  high
does  it  stand  above  the  bottom  of  the  valley  that  twenty  minutes  are
needed  to  descend  the  steep  terraced  slope  to  the  bed  of  the  Plistus.
Com  is  grown  on  the  terraces  below  the  sanctuary ;  and  the  slopes  oh
the  eastern  side  of  the  Castalian  gorge  are  wooded  with  fine  olive  and
mulberry  trees.  Across  the  valley,  on  the  southern  side  of  the  Plistus,
rise  the  bare  precipitous  cliffs  of  Mount  Cirphis,  capped  with  fir-woods.
From  the  western  end  of  the  precipices  which  rise  at  the  back  of
Delphi  a  high  rocky  ridge  projects  southward  toward  the  bed  of  the
Plistus.  This  ridge  closes  the  valley  of  Delphi  on  the  west,  shutting  out
all  view  of  the  Crisaean  plain  and  the  gulf  of  Corinth,  though  a  glimpse
of  the  waters  of  the  gulf  is  obtained  from  the  stadium,  the  highest  part
of  Delphi  (see  x.  32.  i  note).  Thus,  enclosed  by  a  rocky  ridge  on  the
west,  by  the  tremendous  precipices  of  the  Phaedriades  on  the  north
and  east,  and  faced  on  the  south,  across  the  valley  of  the  Plistus  by  the
lower  but  still  precipitous  sides  of  Mount  Cirphis,  Delphi  lay  in  a
secluded  mountain  valley ;  and  rising  on  terraces  in  a  semicircular
shape,  it  resembled  an  immense  theatre,  to  which  it  has  justly  been
compared  by  ancient  and  modem  writers.  The  whole  scene  is  one  of
stem  and  awful  majesty,  well  fitted  to  be  the  seat  of  a  great  religious
capital.  In  respect  of  natural  scenery  no  contrast  could  well  be  more
striking  than  that  between  the  two  great  religious  capitals  of  ancient
Greece,  Delphi  and  Olympia — Delphi  clinging  to  the  rugged  side  of
barren  mountains,  with  frowning  precipices  above  and  a  profound  glen
below ;  Olympia  stretched  out  on  the  level  margin  of  a  river  that  winds
in  stately  curves  among  the  comfields  and  vineyards  of  a  smiling  valley
set  between  soft  wooded  hills.

See  Wheler,  Journey ^  p.  313  sqq.  ;  R.  Chandler,  p.  260  sqq.  ;  E.  D.  Clarke,
Travels f  4.  p.  177  sqq.  ;  Dodwell,  Tour^  I.  p.  162  sqq. ;  Leake,  N".  Greece,  2.  p.
551  sqq.  ;  Mure,yj7«riftf/,  i.  p.  i%$sq^.  ;  H.  N.  Ulricns,  Reisen  und  Forschungen,
I.  p.  25  sqq.  ;  Thiersch,  *  Ueber  die  Topographic  von  Delphi,'  Abhandlungen
der  philosoph.  philolog.  Classe  d,  kbn,  bayer.  Akad.  d.  Wissen.  (Munich),  3  (1840),
p.  3  sqq.  ;  F.  G.  Welcker,  Tagebuchy  2.  p.  62  sqq.  ;  L.  Ross,  Wanderuttgen,  I.
p.  64  sqq.  ;  W.  Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.  600  sqq.  ;  C.  Bursian,  Geogr,  I.
p.  170  sqq.  ;  P.  Foucart,  Mimoire  sur  les  ruines  et  thistoire  de  Delphes^  p.  I.  sqq.  ;
J.  P.  MahafTy,  Rambles  and  Studies,  p.  244  sqq. :  H.  Belle,  Trots  Annies  en
Grice,  p.  182  sqq.  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  156  sqq.  ;  duide-Joanne,  2.  p.  35  sqq,  ;  H.
Pomtow,  Beitrdge  zur  Topographie  von  Delphi,  p.  67  sqq.  ;  Tn.  Homolle,  in
Comptes  Rendus  de  tAcadimie  des  Inscriptions,  22  (1894),  p.  582  sq. ;  Ch.  Belger,
in  Berliner  philohg.  Wochenschrift,  14  (1894),  p.  8605^.  ;  P.  G.  Kastriotes,  01
AeX^o^  (Athens,  1894),  p.  13  sqq.  —

Pausanias  entered  Delphi  from  the  east,  and  by  comparing  his  descrip-
tion with  the  existing  remains  we  see  that  the  ancient  road,  at  least  in
its  last  part,  must  have  been  nearly  or  quite  the  same  with  the  present
road  from  Arachova  to  Delphi.  See  note  on  x.  5.  5.  About  a  mile  and
a  half  from  the  Delphic  sanctuary,  on  the  left  side  of  the  road  as  you  come
from  Arachova^  there  is  a  square  structure  called  by  the  natives  Pyrgo
(* tower').     It  is  about  7  paces  square,  and  is  built  of  large  squared


250  DELPHIC  CEMETERY  bk.  x,  phocis

blocks  laid  in  horizontal  courses  without  mortar.  The  walls  are  standing
to  a  height  of  9  or  10  feet  On  the  south  side  there  is  a  doorway  about
6  feet  high  and  2  ft.  6  in.  wide,  but  narrowing  somewhat  towards  the
top.  The  holes  for  the  door  are  still  visible.  The  lintel  is  formed  by
a  single  stone,  between  6  and  7  feet  long.  Leake,  Bursian,  and  Mr.
Foucart  regarded  this  square  building  as  a  watch-tower ;  on  the  other
hand,  Thiersch,  Mr.  Haussoullier,  and  Mr.  Pomtow  have  held  it  to  be
a  tomb ;  and  this  is  the  more  probable  view.  A  few  paces  from  the
building  is  a  broken  sarcophagus  of  stone,  which  may  once  have  stood
within  the  tomb.

Beyond  this  tomb  or  tower  the  road  passes  through  one  of  the
ancient  cemeteries  of  Delphi.  The  Greek  statesman  and  patriot  Capo
d' I  stria  caused  excavations  to  be  made  here  in  the  early  part  of  the
nineteenth  century.  Some  sepulchral  chambers  were  found,  two  or
three  of  them  of  considerable  size.  The  sloping  ground  to  the  left  of
the  road  is  strewn  with  ancient  remains,  consisting  of  sarcophaguses  and
their  lids,  sepulchres  hewn  in  the  rock  with  steps  leading  down  to
them,  fragments  of  sepulchral  reliefs  and  statues,  etc.  Of  the  sarco-
phaguses the  best  known  is  one  of  white  marble  adorned  with  fine  reliefs
of  Roman  date ;  on  the  front  Meleager  is  represented  handing  the  head
of  the  Calydonian  boar  to  Atalante.  A  tombstone  inscribed  with  the
name  of  Apellius,  son  of  Demon,  a  Massiliot,  was  found  near  the  high-
road, between  the  Pyrgo  and  the  Logari  (see  below)  in  1894.  The
inscription,  carved  in  archaic  letters  on  a  block  of  limestone,  seems  to
date  from  the  second  half  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.  See  P.  Perdrizet,
*  Delphes  et  Marseille,'  Revue  des  Universitis  du  Midi^  vol.  3.  No.  2
(Avril-Juin,  1897),  pp.  129-132.  The  cemetery  extended  far  down  the
slope  to  the  steep  banks  of  the  Plistus.  Excavations  here  might  prove
fruitful.  In  the  rocks  which  overhang  the  road  on  the  right  there  are
many  sepulchral  niches.  From  the  square  tomb,  described  above,  the
cemetery  extends  for  about  three-quarters  of  a  mile  to  what  is  now  called
the  Logari,  This  is  the  likeness  of  a  great  double  door,  barred  and
studded  with  nails,  chiselled  in  the  smooth  face  of  a  rock  which  has
fallen  from  the  cliffs  above.  The  rock  is  split  down  the  middle,  and  a
wild  fig-tree  grows  out  of  the  fissure.  H.  N.  Ulrichs  conjectured  that
the  door  represented  the  Gate  of  Hell,  and  this  conjecture  has  been
adopted  by  later  travellers.  It  may  have  marked  the  entrance  to  the
necropolis.  The  rock  stands  close  to  the  road,  on  the  upper  or  right-
hand  side  as  you  approach  Delphi.  At  this  point  two  roads  from  Delphi
diverge.  The  higher  road  leads  to  Arachova^  running  along  the  foot  of
the  cliffs  of  Parnassus.  This  is  the  road  by  which  Pausanias  appears
to  have  entered  Delphi.  The  lower  road  descends  south-east  through
the  terraced  slopes,  once  the  cemetery  of  Delphi,  now  planted  with
com  and  olive-trees,  to  the  mills  and  vineyards  of  Kastri,  This  is  the
ancient  road  to  Ambrosus,  by  the  pass  of  Dhesphtna  over  Mount  Cirphis.
In  the  foot  of  the  cliffs,  near  the  Logari^  many  small  niches  are  carved
for  the  reception  of  votive-offerings.

S€C  Leake,  N.  Gruce^  2.  p.  552  sy. ;  Thiersch,  ^.  «V.  p.  7 ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,
Reisen  und  Forschungen^  I.  pp.  41,  44  sq,  ;  Mure,  jcuma/,  i.  p.  192  sq,  ;  F.  G.


CH.  VIII  FORETHOUGHT  ATHENA  251

Welcker,  Tagebtuhy  2.  p.  64  s^.  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  p.  171  ;  P.  Foucart,
M/moire^  pp.  3,  9  sq, ;  Baedeker,'  p.  158 ;  H.  Pomtow,  Beitrdge  zur  Topographic
von  Delphi^  p.  70  sq.  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  35 ;  P.  G.  Kastriotes,  01  AeX^oI,  p.
45  so,  A  drawing  of  the  Logari  is  given  by  Le  Bas  (Voyage  arcfUologiqtUy
Itineraire,  pL  40),  and  a  photograph  of  it  by  Mr.  H.  Pomtow  {Beitrage  zur
Topographie  von  Delphi^  pL  x.  No.  27),

8.  6.  a  row  of  temples  etc  On  its  eastern  side  the  city  of  Delphi
appears  to  have  begun  about  the  point  where  the  Logari  now  stands
(see  preceding  note).  Entering  the  city  here  Pausanias  saw  a  row  of  four
temples.  They  stood  on  a  terrace  to  the  left  of  the  road.  Considerable
remains  of  the  long  wall  which  supported  the  terrace  may  be  seen
among  the  corn-land  and  olive-woods  which  slope  away  on  the  left  side
of  the  road  The  place  is  now  called  Mantiaria,  The  masonry  is
polygonal  and  of  fine  style.  Some  excavations  were  made  on  the
terrace  in  1838  by  the  German  architect  Laurent.  He  discovered  the
foundations  of  all  the  four  temples  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  They
stood  in  the  following  order  (beginning  at  the  east  or  towards  Arachova) :

( 1 )  foundations  of  a  small  temple,  without  any  architectural  fragments  ;

(2)  foundations  of  a  large  temple,  also  without  architectural  fragments  ;

(3)  foundations  and  architectural  remains  of  a  smaller  Doric  temple ;

(4)  foundations  and  remains  of  a  round  Doric  temple,  with  fragments
of  columns,  architraves,  and  triglyphs  of  very  fine  work.  Laurent
thought  that  this  round  building  was  the  temple  of  Forethought  Athena.
A  colossal  marble  foot  came  to  light,  which,  to  judge  from  the  sandal
and  the  fragment  of  drapery,  appeared  to  have  belonged  to  a  standing
image  of  Athena,  perhaps  the  image  of  the  goddess  which  stood  in  the
temple ;  for  the  larger  image  in  the  fore-temple,  an  offering  of  the
people  of  Massilia,  was  of  bronze  ^  7).  All  these  foundations,
together  with  the  pieces  of  columns  and  other  architectural  fragments
noticed  by  travellers  in  the  first  half  of  this  century,  have  now  dis-
appeared, buried  perhaps  beneath  the  soil  of  the  corn-fields  and  olive-
woods.  On  either  side  of  the  east  door  of  the  monastery  of  the
Panagia  are  still  to  be  seen  two  fine  Doric  triglyphs  built  into  the  wall.
They  may  have  been  brought  from  the  neighbouring  temple  of  Fore-
thought Athena.

See  Thiersch,  op,  cit,  pp.  8,  10  sqq,  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen^
pp.  41,  45,  263  sq. ;  F.  G.  Welcker,  Tagebuch^  2.  p.  64 ;  C.   Bursian,  Geogr,

1.  p.  171 ;  P.  Foucart,  Mimoire^  p.  10  sqq.  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  158 ;  Guide-Joanne^

2.  p.  37  ;  H.  Pomtow,  Beitrdge  zur  Topographie  von  Delphi,  p.  71  ^9*

The  temple  of  Forethought  Athena  is  described  by  Demosthenes  or
a  writer  who  passes  under  his  name  {Or.  xxv.  p.  780)  as  very  large  and
beautiful  and  situated  just  at  the  entrance  of  the  sanctuary.  Instead  of
Forethought  Athena  (Athena  Pronota)  the  goddess  of  the  sanctuary  was
sometimes  called  Fore-temple  Athena  (Athena  Proncdd)  by  ancient
writers,  as  by  Herodotus  (i.  92,  viii.  37  and  39),  Plutarch  {Praecept.
gerend.  reipub.  xxxii.  16),  and  Aristonous  of  Corinth  in  one  of  his
hymns  to  Apollo  which  has  been  found  by  the  French  at  Delphi
(Bulletin  de  Corresp.  hellinique^  17  (1893),  P-  5^6).  The  surname
Pronaia  (Mn  the  fore-temple')  was  explained  by  the  position  of  the


252  FORETHOUGHT  ATHENA  bk.  x.  phocis

temple  not  far  from  the  entrance  to  the  great  temple  of  Apollo.  See
Photius,  Lexicon^  s,v,  Ilpovaui  'AOrjva ;  Harpocration,  s,v.  Upovaia  ;
Suidas,  s.v,  Upovoia  'AOrjva ;  EtymoL  Magnum^  p.  700.  i  sqq,  ;
Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^  pp.  293  and  299.  Aeschylus  {Eumenides^
21)  calls  the  goddess  Fore-temple  Pallas  (Pallas  Pronaia),  Bursian
is  perhaps  right  in  supposing  that  Pronaia  (*  fore-temple ')  was  the
original  epithet  of  the  goddess,  which,  by  an  ethical  interpretation,  was
afterwards  changed  into  Pronoia  (Aforethought').  But  the  copyists
seem  sometimes  to  have  confused  the  two  adjectives.  The  form
Pronoia  ('forethought*)  is  used  by  Aeschines  (Contra  Ctesiph,  108,
no,  III,  and  121  ed.  Franke),  Aristides  {Orat.  in  Minerv.  voL  i.
p.  21  ed.  Dindorf),  and  Julian  (Or,  iv.  p.  149  ed.  Spanheim,  p.  193  ed.
Hertlein).  Comutus  says  generally,  "  Temples  of  Forethought  Athena
(Athena  Pronoia)  are  founded  "  {De  not,  deor,  1 8).  Macrobius  mentions
one  such  temple  in  the  island  of  Delos  (Saturn,  i.  17.  55);  and  there
was  another  at  Prasiae  in  Attica,  said  to  have  been  founded  by  Diomede
(Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca,  p.  299).  On  the  other  hand  the  epithet
Pronaioi  (plural)  was  applied  to  Athena  and  Hermes  at  Thebes,  because
their  images  stood  at  the  entrance  into  the  sanctuary  of  the  Ismenian
Apollo  (Paus.  ix.  10.  2).  And  that  Pronaia  (* fore-temple'),  not  Pronaia
(*  forethought '),  was  the  official  title  of  the  goddess  at  Delphi  is  proved
by  inscriptions  found  there.  See  E.  Curtius,  Anecdota  DelpMca^  Inscr.
43  and  45,  p.  77  ^^. ;  W.  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec.  No.  186 ;
Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUniquey  6  (1882),  p.  459.  Cp.  K.  O.  Miiller,
*  Pallas- Athene,'  §  44,  Kleine  Schrifteny  2.  p.  195  sqq, ;  F.  G.  Welcker,
Griechiscke  Gbtterlehre^  2.  p.  306 ;  L.  Preller,  Griech.  Mytkologie^^
I.  p.  195  ;  A.  Mommsen,  Delphika,  P-  ^43  ^79-

The  necklace  of  Eriphyle  or  of  Helen  is  said  to  have  been  pre-
served in  this  sanctuary.  See  note  on  viii.  24.  10.  As  to  the  repulse
of  the  Persians  at  the  sanctuary,  see  note  on  x.  7.  i.  We  learn  from
Vitruvius  (vii.  praef  12)  that  Theodorus  the  Phocaean  wrote  a  work
on  *  the  Round  Building  at  Delphi '  (^De  Tholo  qui  est  Delphis),  The
round  building  discovered  by  Laurent  may  have  been  the  subject  of
Theodorus's  book,  whether  it  was  the  temple  of  Athena  or  not.

8.  6.  Massilia  is  a  colony  of  Phocaea.  See  Aristotle,  quoted  by
Athenaeus,  xiii.  p.  576a;  Strabo,  iv.  p.  179;  Justin,  xliii.  3.  4  sqq.
The  story  of  the  emigration  of  the  Phocaeans  from  their  old  Asiatic
home  is  told  by  Herodotus  (i.  162  sqq.\  but  he  does  not  mention  their
settlement  at  Massilia.  As  to  the  naval  victory  over  the  Carthaginians,
see  Thucydides,  i.  1 3,  from  whom  we  gather  that  the  victory  was  gained
not,  as  Pausanias  supposed,  by  the  main  body  of  the  Phocaeans  who
fled  from  Harpagus,  but  by  the  Phocaean  emigrants  who  founded
Massilia  in  600  B.C.,  many  years  before  the  conquest  of  Phocaea  by  the
Persians  (Harpocration,  s.v.  Maxra-ikio,  citing  the  authority  of  Aristotle ;
Scymnius  Chius,  Ordis  description  v,  206  sqq.y  citing  the  authority  of
Timaeus).

8.  7-  The  golden  shield  given  by  Oroesos  etc  Herodotus  tells  us
(I  92)  that  the  shield,  which  was  of  large  size,  still  existed  in  his  time
in  the  temple  of  Athena  at  Delphi.


CH.  VIII  G  YMNASIUM  A  T  DELPHI  253

— ~^p—

8.  7-  a  precinct  of  the  hero  Phs^^iras.  The  precinct  was  beside
the  road,  above  the  sanctuary  of  Pbre-temple  (Forethought)  Athena
(Herodotus,  vlii.  39).  Cp.  Thiersch,  op,  cii.  p.  13  sq.  It  is  said  that
the  two  heroes  Phylacus  and  Autonous  appeared  in  bodily  form,  but
taller  than  mortal  men,  during  the  attack  of  the  Persians  on  Delphi,  and
were  seen  pursuing  the  terrified  foe,  smiting  and  slaying.  Autonous
had  a  precinct  not  far  from  that  of  his  brother  hero,  near  the  Castalian
spring,  at  the  foot  of  the  cliff  called  Hyampia  (now  Phlemboukos),  See
Herodotus,  viii.  38  sq,  ;  cp.  Paus.  x.  23.  2.  Inscriptions  found  by  the
French  prove  that  the  number  of  heroes  worshipped  at  Delphi  was
unusually  large.

8.  8.  the  gynmasium.  On  the  left  of  the  highroad  as  you  approach
the  sanctuary  of  Apollo  from  Arachova^  a  little  before  you  come  to  the
Castalian  gorge,  is  the  monastery  of  the  Panagia,  a  branch  or  £arm
{ffieioche)  of  the  large  monastery  of  Jerusalem  near  Daulis  (see  note  on
X.  5.  i).  It  stands  in  a  shady  garden,  surroimded  by  olive  and  mul-
berry-trees. The  ground  slopes  away  to  the  deep  glen  down  which  the
torrent  from  the  Castalian  gorge  finds  its  way  to  the  Plistus.  A  massive
wall  of  very  fine  Greek  masonry  supports  the  terrace  upon  which  the
monastery  stands.  It  probably  formed  part  of  the  gymnasium.  A  well-
preserved  angle  of  the  wall  may  be  seen  a  little  to  the  south  of  the
chapel.  Each  of  the  walls  that  form  the  angle  is  about  1 2  paces  long ;
one  of  them  has  ten  and  the  other  five  courses  standing.  The  masonry
is  of  the  most  regular  sort,  the  blocks  being  squared  and  laid  in
horizontal  courses.  Still  farther  to  the  south  I  observed  another  piece
of  wall  about  10  paces  long  built  in  the  same  style,  with  two  and  three
courses  standing.  The  stone  of  which  these  remains  are  built  is  of  a
reddish  colour.  On  the  opposite  side  of  the  monastery,  towards  the
Castalian  glen,  are  the  ruins  of  a  large  structure  of  pentagonal  form.
One  wall  is  standing  to  a  height  of  about  6  feet  above  the  ground ;  it
is  built  in  regular  courses  of  good  masonry.  Another  of  the  walls  is
partly  concealed  by  the  buildings  of  the  monastery  and  is  not  so  well
preserved.  The  other  three  walls  were  merely  supporting  walls,  and  are
not  so  carefully  built.  The  platform  which  they  support  is  now  covered
with  olive-trees.  Mr.  Foucart  believes  that  this  was  the  bath-room  of
the  gymnasium.  In  the  court  of  the  chapel  and  in  some  of  the  surround-
ing buildings  there  are  traces  of  a  mosaic  pavement,  showing  the  level
of  the  ancient  floor.  The  chapel  contains  some  triglyphs,  unfluted
columns  with  Doric  capitals,  two  broken  reliefs  of  fine  workmanship,
etc.     A  great  festival  is  held  at  the  monastery  on  the  1 5  th  of  August.

See  Dodwell,  Tour,  i.  p.  183 ;  Leake,  N,  Greece^  2.  pp.  553,  562 ;  Thiersch,
9p, '  cit.  pp.  8,  II  sqq,  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen^  I.  pp.  41,  46;
F.  G.  Welcker,  Tagelmch^  2.  p.  63  sq.  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  172  ;  P.  Foucart,
AUnwirty  p.  16  sqq,  ;  H.  Pomtow,  Beitrdgt  zur  Topographii  von  Delphi^  p.  72 ;
P.  G.  Kastriotes,  01  AiE\<t>ol,  p.  44.

In  regard  to  the  gynmasium  I  have  received  from  Mr.  Cecil  Smith
the  following  note  (July  1897) : — "This  is  to  be  excavated  shortly.  At
present  there  is  visible  a  strong  supporting  wall  of  rectangular  well-faced


2$4  ^^^       SYBARIS  BK.  X.  PHOCis

local  stone ;  and  resting  on  ti^^  open  space  at  the  back  of  which  is  a
water  conduit,  consisting  of  a  lH^face  of  the  same  kind  of  masonry,  in
which  are  a  series  of  circular  smooth  depressions,  sunk  at  regular
intervals  to  a  number  which  amounted  perhaps  originally  to  nine.
Each  depression  is  .19  m.  in  diameter,  and  has  evidently  been  intended
for  the  attachment  of  a  lion's  head  or  other  ornamental  spout ;  in  the
upper  part  is  the  hole  through  which  the  pipe  carrying  water,  probably
from  Castalia,  has  passed.  From  centre  to  centre  the  distance  between
these  depressions  is  1.75  m.  It  seems  in  fact  to  have  been  a  kind  of
Enneacrunus."

8.  8.  when  Ulsrsses  was  hunting  etc.     The  boar-hunt  on

Mt.  Parnassus  and  the  woimding  of  Ulysses  by  the  boar  are  described
by  Homer  {Od.  xix.  428-466).

8.  8.  descending  not  more than  three  Airlongs,  you  come

to  a  river  etc.  To  reach  the  bed  of  the  Plistus  from  the  point  of  the
road  which  Pausanias  has  reached,  we  turn  aside  to  left  fh)m  the
gymnasium  (now  the  monastery  of  the  Panag^a)  and  descend  the  deep
glen  down  which  the  water  from  the  Castalian  spring  flows  to  join  the
Plistus.  The  direct  distance  is  somewhat  over  four  furlongs,  but  the
descent  is  so  steep  and  fatiguing  that  it  occupies  about  twenty  minutes.
Among  the  olive-trees  in  the  glen,  a  little  below  the  monastery,  lie  some
large  masses  of  the  reddish-grey  rock  of  which  the  neighbouring  cliffs
are  composed.  It  is  possible  that  these  are  the  rocks  which  came
hurtling  down  from  Parnassus  on  the  Persians  and  were  still  to  be  seen
in  Herodotus's  time  in  the  sanctuary  of  Fore-temple  Athena  (Herodotus,
viii.  37  and  39).  In  the  bottom  of  the  glen,  not  far  from  the  point
where  the  stream  joins  the  Plistus,  there  is  a  deep  well-like  hole  in  the
rock,  full  of  water.  It  is  the  exit  of  an  underground  channel  by  which
the  waters  that  form  a  lake  on  the  high  tableland  above  Delphi  find  an
exit  In  winter  the  water  rushes  with  great  violence  from  this  hole,
which  is  called  by  the  natives  Zaleska,  Mr.  Foucart  thought  this
might  be  the  ancient  spring  of  Sybaris.  The  cave  of  Sybaris  or  Lamia
is  a  large  cavern  hidden  away  in  a  wild  and  deep  ravine  on  the  side
of  Mt  Cirphis,  beyond  the  Plistus.  A  narrow  path,  not  easily  found,
leads  up  to  it  The  cavern  is  now  called  Krypsana^  or  sometimes
Asketario  (*  hermitage ')  from  a  hermit  who  is  said  to  have  lived  in  it.
Many  families  from  Kastri  took  refuge  in  the  cave  during  the  War  of
Independence.  The  old  legend  ran  that  a  huge  female  monster  called
Lamia  or  Sybaris  dwelt  in  the  cave  and  ravaged  the  country  all  round.
To  appease  her  the  Delphians,  at  the  bidding  of  the  orade,  resolved
to  expose  a  boy  at  the  cavern.  But  a  champion  named  Eurybatus
appeared  who  rushed  into  the  monster's  den,  caught  her  up  in  his  arms,
and  staggering  to  the  mouth  of  the  cave,  heaved  her  over  the  brink.
Down  she  rolled,  bumping  over  the  stones,  and  where  she  knocked  her
head  against  the  rock  a  spring  of  water  gushed  out  and  the  natives
called  it  Sybaris.  From  this  Sybaris  the  famous  city  founded  in
Southern  Italy  by  the  Locrians  is  said  to  have  received  its  name.  See
Nicander,  quoted  by  Antoninus  Liberalis,  Transform,  8.  The  laige
cave  of  Sybaris  (now  Krypsand)  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  much


CH.  VIII  CASTALY     ^^r  ass


smaller  cave  which  may  be  seen  from  ^^Kin  in  the  steep  side  of  Mt.
Cirphis  across  the  valley  to  the  soutk^pthis  latter  cave  is  only  about
40  feet  deep ;  it  is  now  called  the  cave  of  Jerusalem  and  contains  a
rustic  Greek  chapeL  A  rough  and  difficult  path  leads  up  to  it  over
rocks  and  through  bushes.

See  Dodwell,  Taur^  i.  p.  1S4  sqq,  ;  Thiersch,  op.  Hi,  p.  12  sq,  ;  H.  N.
Uhichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungeut  I.  pp.  26  j^.,  ^,  47 ;  P.  Foucart,  M^maire,
p.  19  sq,

8.  9.  the  water  of  Oastaly.  Proceeding  onwards  from  the
monastery  of  the  Panagia,  the  site  of  the  ancient  gymnasium,  we  come
in  a  few  minutes  to  the  immense  gorge  or  fissure  in  the  cliffs  already
described  (see  note  on  §  3).  It  is  on  the  right-hand  side  of  the  road.
Here,  at  the  mouth  of  the  gorge  and  just  at  the  side  of  the  road,  the
water  of  the  Castalian  spring  gushes  by  several  mouths  out  of  a  wall,
probably  built  by  the  Turks.  Near  the  fountain  stand  two  plane-trees
of  moderate  size.  They  are  not  gigantic,  as  a  well-known  guide-book
affirms,  nor  are  they  fifty  years  old  ;  for  when  Vischer  visited  Delphi  in
1853  they  did  not  exist,  an  older  plane-tree,  which  used  to  grow  here,
having  been  cut  down  some  time  before  his  visit  Ascending  from  the
fountain  a  few  paces  towards  the  gorge  we  come  to  a  large  quadrangular
water-basin,  deeply  hewn  in  the  rock  at  the  foot  of  the  eastern  cliff,  the
ancient  Hyampia,  which  rises  in  a  perpendicular  wall  above  it  The
basin  is  36  feet  long  by  about  10  feet  wide.  Five  steps  hewn  in  the
rock  and  extending  along  the  whole  length  of  its  longer  side,  lead  down
into  it  This  pool  of  clear,  cold  water,  lying  deep  in  its  rock-cut  basin
at  the  foot  of  the  sheer  cliff,  is  the  true  Castaly.  It  is  constantly  fed  by
subterranean  sources  and  a  small  stream  flows  out  of  the  basin  into  the
bed  of  the  adjoining  torrent.  The  water,  as  Pausanias  says,  is  sweet
to  drink ;  the  natives  of  the  village  consider  it  lighter,  more  agreeable
and  wholesome  than  the  water  of  Cassotis  (see  x.  24.  7  note).  Just
above  the  pool  a  tiny  chapel  of  St  John  has  been  hewn  out  of  the  face
of  the  rock ;  it  contains  a  drum  of  an  ancient  column  and  two  holy
pictures  with  a  lamp  burning  before  each  of  them.  To  the  left  of  the
little  chapel  are  three  semicircular  niches,  also  cut  in  the  face  of  the
cliff,  one  of  them  large  with  a  smaller  niche  on  either  side.  They  prob-
ably contained  images.  Higher  up  in  the  rock  are  some  small  square
cuttings.  Just  below  the  niches  an  open  channel,  about  4  feet  deep
and  2  wide,  has  been  hewn  in  the  rock ;  it  runs  along  the  whole
length  of  the  pool  on  the  side  opposite  the  steps,  and  is  tunnelled  into
the  rock  at  either  end.  The  channel  probably  served  to  carry  off  the
superfluous  water,  when  the  water  in  the  pool  rose  above  a  certain
level  But  it  no  longer  serves  its  original  purpose ;  for  the  villagers,
who  use  the  basin  chiefly  for  washing  clothes,  have  cut  an  opening
through  the  upper  steps,  so  that  the  depth  of  water  in  the  basin  can
never  be  so  great  as  it  used  to  be.  The  water  of  the  spring  is  con-
veyed to  the  Turkish  fountain  beside  the  road.  Leake  thought  that  the
little  chapel  of  St.  John  hewn  in  the  rock  above  the  pool  might  be  the
precinct  of  the  hero  Autonous,  which  was  near  the  Castalian  spring,  at


256  ^  CASTAL  Y  BK.  X.  PHOCis


the  foot  of  the  cliff  Hyampisn^Ierodotus,  viii.  39).  M.  Foucart  prefers
to  suppose  that  the  precinct  stcM  on  a  small  platform  between  the  pool
and  the  road.  Bursian  thought  he  recognised  a  piece  of  the  wall
which  had  enclosed  the  precinct.

The  situation  of  the  Castalian  pool  at  the  mouth  of  the  tremendous
gorge  and  overhung  by  prodigious  cliffs  is  highly  striking  and  romantic.
Seen  by  moonlight  it  is  still  more  weird  and  impressive.

See  Wheler,  Awrw^,  pp.  314,  315  ;  R.  Chandler,  Travels  in  Greece,  p.  268  ;
E.  D.  Clarke,  Travels ,  4.  p.  1S4  sgq,  ;  Dodwell,  Tour,  i.  p.  171  sqg.  ;  Leake,
AT.  Greece,  2.  p.  555  sgg,  ;  Thiersch,  o/.  cit,  p.  9  sq,  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und
Forschungen,  I.  pp.  40,  47  sqq,  ;  Mure,  Journal,  i.  p.  186  j^.  ;  F.  G.  Welcker,
Tagebuch,  2.  p.  63 ;  W.  Viscner,  Erinnerungen,  p.  610 ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.
172 ;  P.  Foucart,  Mimoire,  p.  20  sqq,  ;  J.  P.  MahafTy,  Rambles  and  Studies,  p.
249  sq, ;  Guide-Joanne,  2.  p.  37  sq,  ;  P.  G.  Kastriotes,  01  AeX^of,  p.  40  sqq,
A  good  drawing  of  the  CasUUian  pool  is  mven  by  Le  Bas  ( Voyage  arcniologique,
Itin^raire,  pi.  37)  and  a  very  bad  one  by  Clarke  (/.^.).

Baedeker,  strangely  enough,  makes  no  mention  of  the  pool,  re-
marking that  "in  our  time  earthquakes  have  rendered  the  whole
neighbourhood  of  Castaly  quite  unrecognisable."  The  pool  certainly
existed  as  I  have  described  it  in  May  1 890,  after  Baedeker's  guide  was
written.  I  did  not  perceive  the  huge  block  of  rock  which  Prof.
Mahaffy  saw  lying  in  the  pool  and  "  covering  the  old  work,  as  well  as
several  votive  niches  cut  into  the  rocky  wall."  But  when  I  revisited
the  spot  in  October  1895  ^  found  the  sacred  pool  nearly  dry  and
choked  with  stones  and  gravel  which  had  been  swept  down  by  the
torrent  from  the  gorge.  Mr.  Cecil  Smith  informs  me  that  the  French
archaeologists  intend  to  examine  the  site  thoroughly  before  long.

It  would  seem  that  the  attendants  of  Apollo  bathed  or  at  least
washed  their  hair  in  the  water  of  the  Castalian  spring  before  they
entered  the  temple  (Euripides,  lon^  94  sqq, ;  /V/.,  Phoen,  222  sq.).
Visitors,  too,  perhaps  sprinkled  themselves  with  the  Castalian  water
before  they  approached  the  temple  (Heliodorus,  Aethtopica^  ii.  26).
The  water  of  Castaly  was  also  used  to  wash  the  temple  of  Apollo
(Euripides,  loriy  144  sqq.).  Chandler  suggested  that  the  Pythian
priestess  bathed  in  the  Castalian  pool,  and  the  idea  has  been  taken
up  by  some  later  travellers,  but  it  is  not  supported  by  any  ancient
authority.  The  idea  that  the  water  of  the  spring  conferred  prophetic
power  appears  only  in  late  classical  writers.  See  Ovid,  AmoreSy  i.  15.
35  sq,\  Lucian,  Jupiter  Tragoedus^  30 ;  Nonnus,  Dionys,  iv.  309  sq, ;
Suidas,  s,v,  KcurraAta ;  H.  N.  IJlnchs,  Reisen  und  ForscAungen,  i.  p.
58.  Hadrian  is  said  to  have  choked  up  the  spring  with  a  mass  of  rock,
because  he  had  learned  his  imperial  destiny  from  its  prophetic  water
and  feared  that  others  might  consult  it  for  a  similar  purpose :  Julian
intended  to  clear  away  the  obstruction  (Ammianus  Marcellinus,  xxii.
12.  8).

8.  9.  Panyasis.  He  is  said  to  have  been  a  cousin  or  a  maternal
uncle  of  the  historian  Herodotus.  His  epic  Heraclea  on  the  exploits
of  Hercules  was  in  fourteen  books.  See  Suidas,  s,v,  IlavvoKris;  W.
Christ,  Gesch,  d,  griech,  Utteratur^  p.  82  sq.     The  fragments  of  his


CH.  IX  THE  CITY  OF  DELPHI  257

poetry  are  collected  by  G.  Kinkel  {Epicorum  Graecorum  fragmeniOy
p.  254  5qq\  F.  P.  Funcke  {De  Panyasidis  Halicamassensis  vita  ac
poesiy  Bonn,  1837),  and  Fr.  Diibner  (in  the  Didot  edition  of  Hesiod,
etc.).

8.  10.  the  Lilaeans throw  cakes  into  the  spring  of

the  Cephisns  etc  With  this  we  may  compare  the  custom  of  throwing
cakes  into  the  sea  at  Aegium  in  order  to  transmit  them  to  the  spring
of  Arethusa  at  Syracuse  (vii.  24.  3).  Cp.  note  on  v.  7.  2.  As  to  the
source  of  the  Cephisus  at  Lilaea,  see  x.  33.  5  note.  The  idea  that
cakes  thrown  into  the  springs  of  the  Cephisus  could  reappear  in  the
Castalian  spring  is  absurd,  since,  as  Leake  observes  {Northern  Greece^
2.  p.  85  note  2),  the  Castalian  spring  is  in  a  much  higher  situation
than  the  source  of  the  Cephisus.

9.  I.  The  city  of  Delphi  stands  wholly  on  a  slope  etc.  Leaving
the  Castalian  spring  already  described  and  the  great  gorge  on  his
right,  Pausanias  now  proceeds  westward  towards  the  sacred  close  of
Apollo.  It  would  seem  that  the  city  proper  of  Delphi  was  situated
wholly  on  the  western  side  of  the  Castalian  ravine,  and  that  the  part  of
Delphi  to  the  east  of  the  ravine  (described  by  Pausanias  ch.  8,  ^6-10)
was  a  suburb  which  included  only  temples  and  the  gymnasium.  This
is  inferred  from  the  nature  of  the  ground ;  for  on  the  left  side  of  the
road  the  ground  slopes  so  rapidly  to  the  glen  that  there  could  hardly
have  been  room  for  more  than  the  row  of  temples  described  by  him  ;
and  on  the  right  side  of  the  road  the  very  narrow  strip  of  ground  rises
steeply  to  the  foot  of  the  cliffs.  The  ancient  road  must  have  crossed
the  Castalian  ravine  at  the  point  where  the  highroad  from  Arachova
still  crosses  it,  between  the  great  gorge  or  fissure  in  the  cliffs  on  the
right  and  the  deep  glen  on  the  left.  The  ravine  is  here  filled  up  by  a
mass  of  rocks  and  earth  brought  down  by  the  earthquake  of  1870,  so
that  the  water  from  the  gorge  or  upper  part  of  the  ravine  flows  over  the
road  into  the  glen  or  lower  part  of  the  ravine  on  the  left  of  the  road.
There  used  to  be  a  bridge  here.

Of  the  city  of  Delphi,  situated  on  the  western  side  of  the
Castalian  ravine,  the  upper  terraces  were  occupied  by  the  sabered  close
of  Apollo,  the  theatre,  and,  highest  of  all,  the  stadium :  "the  lower
terraces,  where  the  ground  slopes  more  steeply,  supported  the  houses.
The  line  between  the  upper  and  lower,  or  the  sacred  and  profane,
quarters  of  the  city  is  roughly  marked  by  the  modem  highroad  to
Chryso,  Our  author's  attention  is  given  wholly  to  the  upper  or  sacred
quarter  of  the  city ;  he  mentions  not  a  single  building  in  the  lower
quarter.  However,  in  this  lower  quarter  the  terraces  may  still  be  seen
on  which  rested,  as  on  a  great  staircase,  the  streets  and  dwellings  of
the  ancient  city.  On  one  terrace,  below  the  chapel  of  St.  George,  the
rock  has  been  cut  vertically  and  levelled  to  support  houses.  In  modem
times  the  upper  or  sacred  quarter  of  the  city  was  occupied  by  the
village  of  Kastri  down  to  1892  when  it  was  cleared  away  in  order  to
allow  the  site  to  be  excavated  by  the  French.  To  this  upper  portion
of  the  site,  which  has  now  been  completely  excavated,  our  attention  will
be  exclusively  directed.

VOL.  V  S


258  DELPHIC  SANCTUARY  bk.  x.  phocis

About  350  yards  west  of  the  Castalian  gorge  there  begins  an  ancient
Greek  wall  which  in  modem  times  has  been  known  as  the  Helknico.  It
extends  roughly  east  and  west,  parallel  to  and  a  little  above  the  modem
highroad  from  Delphi  to  Chryso,  This  was  the  southem  enclosing  wall
of  the  sacred  precinct  of  Apollo.  It  is  built  of  large  squared  blocks,
and  towards  its  eastem  end  is  preserved  to  a  height  of  about  10  feet
for  a  distance  of  about  100  yards.  About  90  yards  west  of  the  point
where  this  continuous  stretch  of  wall  terminates,  another  piece  of  it
extends  in  nearly  the  same  direction  for  about  25  yards  more.  These
remains  were  visible  before  the  French  excavations ;  and  Mr.  Homolle
and  his  colleagues  have  proved  that  the  enclosing  wall  exists  almost  in
its  full  extent,  constructed  in  some  places  of  squared  blocks  laid  in  neat
horizontal  courses,  in  others  of  polygonal  blocks  put  together  in  the
Cyclopean  style  {Comptes  Rendus  de  VAcacUmie  des  Inscriptions^  22
(1894),  p.  583).  But  whereas  the  southem  wall  ox  Hellenico  extends
in  a  somewhat  irregular  or  broken  line,  the  walls  which  bound  the
precinct  on  the  east  and  west  mn.up  the  steep  hillside  in  nearly  straight
lines.  The  main  entrance  to  the  precinct  was  in  the  east  wall,  about
1 3  yards  from  its  southem  extremity.  The  discovery  of  this  entrance,
together  with  the  proof  that  Pausanias  began  his  tour  here,  is  due
to  Mr.  H.  Pomtow,  who  has  made  a  patient  and  exact  study  of  the
topography  and  history  of  Delphi.  Excavations  directed  by  him  in
1887  at  the  point  indicated  brought  to  light  some  well-preserved
remains  of  an  ancient  stone  staircase  leading  up  to  an  opening  in  the
eastem  wall  of  the  precinct.  On  these  steps  Mr.  Pomtow  found  the
inscribed  base  of  the  Tegean  offering  which  Pausanias  mentions
immediately  after  entering  the  sacred  close  (see  §  5  note).  This
discovery  furnished  the  clue  to  Pausanias's  tour  through  the  sanctuary
and  taken  in  connexion  with  the  order  in  which  he  mentions
those  buildings  of  which  the  positions  were  ascertained,  such  as  the
Colonnade  of  the  Athenians  (x.  11.  6),  the  temple  of  Apollo  (x.  19.  4),
the  theatre  (x.  32.  i),  and  the  stadium  {ib.\  gave  reason  to  believe  that
at  Delphi  he  followed  his  usual  plan  of  describing  the  various  monu-
ments in  strictly  topographical  order.  This  belief  has  been  amply
confirmed  by  the  French  excavations,  which  have  laid  bare  monument
after  monument  on  either  side  of  the  road  in  the  exact  succession  in
which  Pausanias  mentions  them.  Amongst  these  may  be  mentioned
particularly  the  offerings  of  the  Lacedaemonians  (x.  9.  7),  the  statues
of  the  Epigoni  (x.  10.  4),  the  statues  of  the  Argive  kings  (x.  10.  5),  and
the  treasuries  of  the  Sicyonians  (x.  11.  i),  the  Siphnians  (x.  11.  2),  the
Thebans  (x.  11.  5),  and  the  Athenians  (Jb,),  The  road  which  he
followed  has  also  been  excavated  in  its  full  extent  from  the  entrance  at
the  south-eastern  comer  of  the  precinct  up  to  the  temple  of  Apollo.
This  road,  which  for  the  sake  of  convenience  we  may,  with  modem
writers,  call  the  Sacred  Way,  although  there  seems  to  be  no  ancient
authority  for  such  a  designation,  was  paved  throughout  with  stone,  and
a  great  part  of  the  pavement  is  preserved.  Grooves  are  cut  in  the
pavement  to  prevent  the  feet  from  slipping.  The  direction  in  which  the
Sacred  Way  runs  from  the  entrance  up  to  the  temple  of  Apollo  has


DELPHIC  SANCTUARY


3S9


wtly,  to  a  great  S  reversed.  First  it  ran  west-
^^ht  or  DOrth  by  the  offerings  of  the  Lace-
^  sUtues  of  the  Argive  kings  (x.  lo.  5),  on
\  of  the  Epigoni  (x.  10.  4)  and  the
uiians  (x.  u.  i,  3).  Then  ascend-
')  and  then  to  the  cast  it
s(x.  ■■.5)
HomoUe


258  DELPHIC  SANCTUARY  bk.  x.  phocis

About  350  yards  west  of  the  Castalian  gorge  there  begins  an  ancient
Greek  wall  which  in  modem  times  has  been  known  as  the  Hellenico,  It
extends  roughly  east  and  west,  parallel  to  and  a  little  above  the  modem
highroad  from  Delphi  to  Chryso,  This  was  the  southern  enclosing  wall
of  the  sacred  precinct  of  Apollo.  It  is  built  of  large  squared  blocks,
and  towards  its  eastern  end  is  preserved  to  a  height  of  about  10  feet
for  a  distance  of  about  100  yards.  About  90  yards  west  of  the  point
where  this  continuous  stretch  of  wall  terminates,  another  piece  of  it
extends  in  nearly  the  same  direction  for  about  25  yards  more.  These
remains  were  visible  before  the  French  excavations ;  and  Mr.  Homolle
and  his  colleagues  have  proved  that  the  enclosing  wall  exists  almost  in
its  full  extent,  constructed  in  some  places  of  squared  blocks  laid  in  neat
horizontal  courses,  in  others  of  polygonal  blocks  put  together  in  the
Cyclopean  style  {Comptes  Rendus  de  VAcaddmie  des  Inscriptions^  22
(1894),  p.  583).  But  whereas  the  southem  wall  or  Hellenico  extends
in  a  somewhat  irregular  or  broken  line,  the  walls  which  bound  the
precinct  on  the  east  and  west  run. up  the  steep  hillside  in  nearly  straight
lines.  The  main  entrance  to  the  precinct  was  in  the  east  wall,  about
1 3  yards  from  its  southem  extremity.  The  discovery  of  this  entrance,
together  with  the  proof  that  Pausanias  began  his  tour  here,  is  due
to  Mr.  H.  Pomtow,  who  has  made  a  patient  and  exact  study  of  the
topography  and  history  of  Delphi.  Excavations  directed  by  him  in
1887  at  the  point  indicated  brought  to  light  some  well-preserved
remains  of  an  ancient  stone  staircase  leading  up  to  an  opening  in  the
eastern  wall  of  the  precinct.  On  these  steps  Mr.  Pomtow  found  the
inscribed  base  of  the  Tegean  offering  which  Pausanias  mentions
immediately  after  entering  the  sacred  close  (see  §  5  note).  This
discovery  fiimished  the  clue  to  Pausanias's  tour  through  the  sanctuary
and  taken  in  connexion  with  the  order  in  which  he  mentions
those  buildings  of  which  the  positions  were  ascertained,  such  as  the
Colonnade  of  the  Athenians  (x.  11.  6),  the  temple  of  Apollo  (x.  19.  4),
the  theatre  (x.  32.  i),  and  the  stadium  {ib.),  gave  reason  to  believe  that
at  Delphi  he  followed  his  usual  plan  of  describing  the  various  monu-
ments in  strictly  topographical  order.  This  belief  has  been  amply
confirmed  by  the  French  excavations,  which  have  laid  bare  monument
after  monument  on  either  side  of  the  road  in  the  exact  succession  in
which  Pausanias  mentions  them.  Amongst  these  may  be  mentioned
particularly  the  offerings  of  the  Lacedaemonians  (x.  9.  7),  the  statues
of  the  Epigoni  (x.  10.  4),  the  statues  of  the  Argive  kings  (x.  10.  5),  and
the  treasuries  of  the  Sicyonians  (x.  11.  i),  the  Siphnians  (x.  11.  2),  the
Thebans  (x.  11.  5),  and  the  Athenians  {ib.).  The  road  which  he
followed  has  also  been  excavated  in  its  full  extent  from  the  entrance  at
the  south-eastern  comer  of  the  precinct  up  to  the  temple  of  Apollo.
This  road,  which  for  the  sake  of  convenience  we  may,  with  modem
writers,  call  the  Sacred  Way,  although  there  seems  to  be  no  ancient
authority  for  such  a  designation,  was  paved  throughout  with  stone,  and
a  great  part  of  the  pavement  is  preserved.  Grooves  are  cut  in  the
pavement  to  prevent  the  feet  from  slipping.  The  direction  in  which  the
Sacred  Way  mns  from  the  entrance  up  to  the  temple  of  Apollo  has


/
I


1


258


DELPHIC  SANCTUARY


BK.  X.


f


About  350  yards  west  of  the  Castalian  gorge  the^
Greek  wall  which  in  modem  times  has  been  V-^
extends  roughly  east  and  west,  parallel  to  ;»-
highroad  from  Delphi  to  Chryso,     This  ''
of  the  sacred  precinct  of  Apollo.    ^^*
and  towards  its  eastern  end  is  ^'
for  a  distance
where
ext<


CH.  IX  DELPHIC  SANCTUARY  259

been  compared,  not  inaptly,  to  a  great  S  reversed.  First  it  ran  west-
ward, bordered  on  the  right  or  north  by  the  offerings  of  the  Lace-
daemonians (x.  9.  7)  and  the  statues  of  the  Argive  kings  (x.  10.  5),  on
the  left  or  south  by  the  statues  of  the  Epigoni  (x.  10.  4)  and  the
treasuries  of  the  Sicyonians  and  Siphnians  (x.  11.  i,  2).  Then  ascend-
ing and  making  a  great  bend  first  to  the  north  and  then  to  the  east  it
passed  on  the  left  the  treasuries  of  the  Thebans  and  Athenians  (x.  11.  5)
and  reached  a  comparatively  level  and  open  space  which  Mr.  HomoUe
believes  to  have  been  the  so-called  Threshing-floor  (oAcos)  where  the
drama  of  the  slaughter  of  the  Python  by  Apollo  was  solemnly  enacted
once  every  eight  years  (Plutarch,  De  dcfectu  oraculorum^  15  ;  see  note
on  ii.  7.  7,  vol.  3.  p.  53  sq,).  The  stone  benches  and  seats  by  which
the  space  is  surrounded  confirm  the  view  that  a  spectacle  of  some  sort
was  here  exhibited ;  and  its  circular  form  might  very  well  suggest  the
comparison  with  a  threshing-floor  of  the  sort  which  may  still  be  seen
everywhere  in  Greece.  This  open  space  is  bounded  on  the  north  by
the  Colonnade  of  the  Athenians  (x.  1 1 .  6  note),  at  the  back  of  which
rises  the  long  inscription-covered  wall  of  polygonal  masonry  which  has
been  so  long  familiar  to  visitors  to  Delphi.  The  Sacred  Way  runs  east-
ward past  the  front  of  the  Athenian  Colonnade.  At  the  eastern  end  of
the  polygonal  wall  it  makes  its  second  lap,  first  ascending  the  short
steep  slope  northward  and  then  curving  round  westward  to  the  eastern
front  of  the  temple  of  Apollo,  which  stood  on  the  terrace  supported  by
the  polygonal  wall.  A  staircase,  however,  furnishing  a  more  direct
access  from  the  lower  part  of  the  precinct  to  the  temple  of  Apollo,
enabled  people  to  avoid  the  detours  of  the  Sacred  Way.  Along  the
north  side  of  the  temple  and  close  to  it  the  Sacred  Way  then  led  west-
ward, making  a  complete  circuit  of  the  northern  and  western  sides  of
the  temple.  We  see  then  how  accurately  Plutarch  has  expressed
himself  in  saying :  "  We  went  round  the  temple  and  sat  down  on  its
southern  steps"  {De  Pythiae  oraculis^  17).  From  the  eastern  end  of
the  temple  a  fine  staircase,  in  good  preservation,  leads  up  to  the  spring
Cassotis,  the  Lesche  or  Club-room,  and  the  theatre.  It  was  by  this
staircase  doubtless  that  Pausanias  himself  ascended  after  quitting  the
temple  of  Apollo  (x.  24.  6).  Finally,  leaving  the  theatre  he  mounted
to  the  stadium  (x.  32.  i),  which  occupies  in  fact,  as  we  should  expect
from  his  description,  the  highest  point  of  Delphi.  Above  it  rise  the
imposing  cliffs  of  Parnassus,  and,  true  to  the  topographical  order,  our
author  next  ascends  them  on  his  way  to  the  lonely  Corycian  cave,
situated  high  on  the  upper  pine-clad  slopes  of  the  mountain  (x.  32.  2).

But  in  addition  to  the  Sacred  Way  which  wound  up  through  the
precinct  in  a  general  direction  from  south  to  north,  the  French  excava-
tions hcive  laid  bare  several  passages  or  roads  running  horizontally
through  the  precinct  from  east  to  west.  These  passages,  of  the
existence  of  which  I  was  informed  by  Mr.  Homolle  on  the  spot,  are  no
doubt  "  the  passages  at  short  intervals  through  the  precinct "  to  which
Pausanias  refers  (x.  9.  i).  From  Mr.  Cecil  Smith  I  learn  that  besides
the  main  entrance  near  the  south-east  comer  two  gates  have  been
discovered  in  the  western  wall  and  two  posterns  in  the  eastern  wall


26o  DELPHIC  SANCTUARY  bk.  x.  phocis

of  the  precinct ;  the  posterns  are  higher  up  the  slope  than  the  main
entrance.

See  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  558  sqq.  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und
Forschungen,  I.  pp.  38  sq.^  59  sqq,  ;  P.  Foucart,  Mimoire  stir  Us  mines  et
Vhistoire  de  Delphes^  p.  23  sqq,  ;  H.  Pomtow,  Beitrdge  zur  Topographie  von
Delphi y  p.  50  sqq.  ;  tV/.,  in  Archdologischer  Anzeiger^  1894,  pp.  5,  lo  sq.  ;
Th.  HomoUe,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique^  17  (1893)1  PP*  613,  619  sq.  ;
iV/.,  ^t///.  <i<;  Corr.  helUn.  18  (1894),  p.  183  sqq.  ;  iV.,  in  Comptes  Rendus  de
PAcad^mie  des  Inscriptixfns^  22  (1894),  pp.  304  sq.^  583  sqq,  ;  Ch.  Belger,  in
Berliner  philologische  Wochenschrift,  30th  June  1894,  p.  861  sq, ;  P.  Kastriotes,
02  AeX^f,  p.  46  J^^.

9.  2.  the  athletes  and  musieal  competitors.  A  score  or  more  of
inscriptions  relating  to  these  men,  whose  statues  Pausanias  passes
by  so  disdainfully,  have  been  found  at  Delphi.  Some  record  the
offerings  which  they  dedicated  for  their  success ;  but  most  register
decrees  passed  in  their  honour  by  the  admiring  Delphians,  who  voted
them  laurel  wreaths,  seats  of  honour  at  the  games,  and  other  privileges.
See  Wescher  -  Foucart,  Inscriptions  recua'llies  d  Deiphes^  No.  469;
Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUnique^  6  (1882),  p.  217  5q.\  L.  Couve,
'Inscriptions  de  Delphes,'  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  hellhtique^  18  (1894),
pp.  70-100.  One  of  the  bards  whom  the  Delphians  honoured
was  Aristonous  of  Corinth,  author  of  the  hymn  to  Apollo  which
the  French  found  at  Delphi  {Bulletin  de  Corresp.  hellhtique^  17  (1893),
p.  565).  In  some  cases  the  native  cities  of  the  victorious  musicians
erected  statues  at  Delphi  in  their  honour  (C  /.  G.  Nos.  17 19,
1720).  From  one  inscription  we  learn  that  a  Samian  flute-player,
Satyrus  the  son  of  Eumenes,  having  gained  the  prize  for  flute-play-
ing without  a  contest,  testified  his  gratitude  by  performing  a  choral
hymn  called  Dionysus  in  the  stadium,  and  playing  an  air  for  the  lyre
from  the  Bacchae  of  Euripides  {Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUniquCy  17
(1893),  p.  84  sq.).  The  statues  of  the  Pythian  victors  seem  to  have
stood  outside  of  the  sacred  precinct ;  for  it  is  only  after  mentioning
them  that  Pausanias  enters  the  close  (§  3).  At  Olympia,  on  the  other
hand,  the  statues  of  the  athletes  stood  within  the  Altis  or  sacred  close.
See  vi.  i  sqq.  Amongst  the  inscriptions  found  by  the  French  at
Delphi  is  one  that  contains  the  rules  to  be  observed  by  runners  in
training.  They  were  not  allowed  to  drink  new  wine,  and  if  any  one
broke  the  rule  he  had  to  pour  libations  of  that  wine  to  the  god  and  to
pay  a  fine,  half  of  which  went  to  the  god  and  half  to  the  informer
{Berliner  philolog.  Wochenschrift^  27th  June  1896,  p.  831;  Journal
oj  Hellenic  Studies^  16  (1896),  p.  343;  Chronique  des  Arts,  1896,
p.  194).

9.  3*  a  bronze  bull  dedicated  by  the  Oorcyraeans.    Cp.

V.  27.  9  sq.  The  inscribed  pedestal  which  supported  this  bull  was
found  by  the  French  near  the  great  altar  to  the  east  of  the  temple  of
Apollo,  more  than  100  yards  distant  from  its  original  position  (Th.
Homolle,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUnique^  18  (1894),  p.  186;  /V/.,  in
Comptes  Rendus  de  VAcacUmie  des  Inscriptions^  22  (1894),  p.  204;
Ch.  Belger,  in  Berliner  philolog.  Wochenschrift^  30th  June  1894,  p.  861 ;


CH.  IX  ARCADIAN  OFFERINGS  261

H.  Pomtow,  in  Archdologischer  Anseiger^  1895,  P-  ^^  The  inscrip-
tion on  the  pedestal,  Mr.  Cecil  Smith  informs  me,  is  in  letters  of
the  beginning  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  It  includes  the  name  of  the
sculptor  Theopropus.  No  other  signature  of  this  artist  is  known  to  be
extant.  With  regard  to  the  form  of  the  Corcyraean  offering  it  may  be
remarked  that  on  coins  of  Corcyra  a  cow  is  represented  suckling  a  calf.
See  P.  Gardner,  Types  of  Greek  Coins^  p.  39  J"^*

9.  3.  a  countless  shoal  of  tuimies.  It  was  a  custom  with
Greek  fishermen,  when  they  had  a  great  haul  of  tunnies,  to  sacrifice
to  Poseidon  the  first  tunny  caught  (Antigonus  of  Carystus,  cited  by
Athenaeus,  vii.  pp.  297  e,  302  b).  On  the  tunny  fishery  in  antiquity,
see  P.  Rhode,  Thynnorum  captura  quanti  fuerit  aptid  veteres  momcnii
(Leipsic,  1890).  Cp.  W.  Ridgeway,  Tlie  origin  of  metallic  currency
and  weight  standards ^  p.  3 1 5  sqq,

9.  5.  offerings  of  the  Tegeans  etc.  On  the  steps  at  the  south-east
entrance  into  the  sacred  close  Mr.  Pomtow  discovered  in  May  1887  one
of  the  bases  that  supported  the  statues  which  Pausanias  calls  the
offerings  of  the  Tegeans.  The  base  is  of  black  limestone  and  measures
about  I  ft.  high,  4  ft.  3  in.  long,  and  3  ft.  broad.  In  addition  to  two
inscriptions  which  have  been  carved  on  it  at  a  later  date,  the  base  bears
a  metrical  inscription  in  fi^t^  couplets  recording  the  dedication  of  the
statues  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  The  inscription  is  in  good  Greek
letters  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  It  is  slightly  mutilated.  Restoring
a  few  missing  words,  we  may  translate  it  as  follows :  "  Lord  Pythian
Apollo,  the  aboriginal  people  of  sacred  Arcadia  gave  to  thee  these
images  as  first-fruits,  to  wit  Victory,  and  Callisto  daughter  of  Lycaon,
with  whom  Zeus  once  had  intercourse  and  begot  Areas,  a  youth  of
sacred  lineage.  And  from  Areas  sprang  Elatus  and  Aphidas  and
Azan,  all  of  whom  the  nymph  Erato  brought  forth  in  Arcadia.  But
Laodamia,  daughter  of  Amyclas,  gave  birth  to  Triphylus,  and  Erasus
was  a  son  of  Amilo  daughter  of  Gongylus.  The  Arcadians,  descended
from  these  ancestors,  after  laying  waste  Lacedaemon,  set  up  in  thy
honour  a  monument  to  posterity."  It  seems  clear  from  this  inscription
that  the  statues  were  dedicated,  not  by  the  Tegeans,  but  by  the
Arcadians  in  general.  The  success  which  it  commemorated  was  prob-
ably the  devastation  of  Laconia  by  the  Arcadians  either  separately  or
in  company  with  the  Thebans  under  Epaminondas  in  the  winter  of
370-369  B.C.  or  the  spring  of  369  B.C.  Mr.  Pomtow  thinks  that  the
event  commemorated  was  probably  the  defeat  of  the  Lacedaemonians
under  Ischolaus  at  Oeum  in  the  district  of  Sciris,  which  took  place  in
369  B.C.  See  Xenophon,  Hellenica^  vi.  5.25;  Diodorus,  xv.  64.  3  sq, ;
and  note  on  viii.  45.  i.  Hence  Pausanias  is  wrong  in  describing  the
statues  as  votive  offerings  of  the  Tegeans,  and  in  supposing  (§  6)  that
the  event  commemorated  was  the  defeat  and  capture  of  the  Lacedae-
monians by  the  Tegeans  in  Tegean  territory  (see  viii.  48.  5  note).  The
expression  in  the  inscription  "after  laying  waste  Lacedaemon"  could
hardly  be  used  to  describe  a  Tegean  victory  in  a  purely  defensive  war.
Besides  two  of  the  sculptors  who  made  the  statues  in  question  are
known  to  have  been  at  work  at  the  end  of  the  fifth  or  in  the  early  part


262  ARCADIAN  OFFERINGS  bk.  x.  phoci

of  the  fourth  century  B.c.  (see  notes  on  §  6),  whereas  the  Tegean
victory  to  which  Pausanias  refers  took  place  long  before,  though  its
exact  date  is  not  known.  Hence,  as  Pausanias's  only  authority  for  the
account  he  gives  of  the  statues  appears  to  have  been  the  inscription
on  the  base,  it  follows  that  he  seriously  misinterpreted  it.  That  he
misunderstood  the  inscription  is  clear  from  his  making  Erasus  a  son  of
Triphylus ;  whereas  the  meaning  of  the  inscription  is  that  Erasus  was
a  son  of  Areas  by  Amilo  daughter  of  Gongylus.  See  H.  Pomtow,
Beitrdge  zur  Topographic  von  Delphi^  p.  54  sq.^  with  pL'  xiv.  No.  39  ;
id,y  *Ein  arkadisches  Weihgeschenk  zu  Delphi,'  Mittheilungen  des
arch,  Inst  in  Athcn^  14  (1889),  PP*  15-40.  K.  O.  Miiller  pointed  out
{Kieine  Schriftcn^  2.  p.  372  note  2)  that  the  offering  was  probably
made  at  a  time  when  Triphylia  belonged  to  Arcadia,  since  one  of
the  statues  represented  Triphylus,  the  eponymous  hero  of  Triphylia.
Now  Triphylia  belonged  to  Elis  down  to  399  B.C.,  when  the  Eleans
were  compelled  by  the  Lacedaemonians  to  set  it  free  (Xenophon,
Hcllenica^  iii.  2.  30 ;  cp.  Diodorus,  xiv.  34 ;  Paus.  iii.  8.  5) ;  and  from
Diodorus  (xv.  ^^)  we  learn  that  in  365  B.C.  Triphylia  belonged  to
Arcadia,  but  how  long  this  connexion  had  lasted  we  do  not  know ;
perhaps  it  may  have  been  established  in  399  B.C.  as  soon  as  the  tie
which  bound  Triphylia  to  Elis  was  severed.  In  any  case  the  appear-
ance of  the  statue  of  Triphylus  among  those  of  the  Arcadian  heroes
points  to  the  offering  having  been  made  at  some  time  between  399  and
365  B.C.,  and  this  indication  tallies  perfectly  with  the  supposition  that
the  statues  were  dedicated  as  a  trophy  of  the  success  achieved  by  the
Arcadians  in  369  B.C.  See  H.  Brunn,  Geschichtc  der  griech,  KUnstlcr^
I.  p.  283  sq.

Most  of  the  other  inscribed  bases  of  these  Arcadian  offerings  have
been  found  by  the  French  at  Delphi,  but  have  not  yet  (November  1897)
been  published.  They  were,  however,  shown  to  me  by  Mr.  HomoUe,  who
pointed  out  the  names  of  the  two  sculptors  Samolas  and  Antiphanes
mentioned  by  Pausanias  (§  6),  and  the  name  of  Azan,  one  of  the  heroes
whose  statue  was  made  by  Samolas.  From  the  character  of  the  letters
the  inscriptions  seem  to  belong  to  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  century
B.C.  An  article  on  the  so-called  Tegean  offerings  at  Delphi  by
G.  Rathgeber  (*Ueber  das  Weihgeschenk  der  Tegeater  zu  Delphoi,'
Archdologischc  Zcitung^  14  (1856),  pp.  244-252)  has  been  superseded
by  the  discovery  of  the  bases  with  their  inscriptions.

9.  6.  Daedalus  of  Sicyon.  This  sculptor  is  known  to  have  been
at  work  about  400-397  b.C.  See  note  on  vi.  2.  8.  The  discovery  of
the  inscribed  base  of  the  Arcadian  statues  proves  that  he  must  have
been  at  work  as  late  as  369  B.C.     See  the  preceding  note.

9.  6.  Antiphanes  of  Argos.  He  was  a  pupil  of  Periclytus,  who
studied  under  the  elder  Polyclitus  of  Argos  (Paus.  v.  17.  4).  His  name
has  been  found  carved  on  the  base  of  the  Arcadian  offerings  here
described  by  Pausanias  (see  above,  note  on  §  5).  As  these  offerings  are
proved  by  the  inscription  to  have  been  made  not  earlier  than  369  ac,
Antiphanes  must  have  been  at  work  in  or  after  that  year.  With  this
date  it  agrees  very  well  that  Antiphanes  is  known  from  an  inscription


CH.  IX  LACEDAEMONIAN  OFFERINGS  263

recently  found  at  Delphi  to  have  made  one  or  more  of  the  statues  which
the  Argives  set  up  to  commemorate  the  share  they  took  in  founding
Messene  in  369  B.C.  (Paus.  x.  10.  5  note).  On  the  other  hand  the
sculptor  would  seem  to  have  been  at  work  a  good  deal  earlier  than
369  B.C.,  since  he  made  the  statues  of  the  Dioscuri  which  formed  part
of  the  great  trophy  dedicated  by  the  Lacedaemonians  for  the  victory  of
Aegospotami  in  405  B.C.  (below,  §  8).  He  also  made  the  bronze  statue
of  the  Wooden  Horse  which  the  Argives  set  up  at  Delphi,  probably  for
a  victory  won  in  414  B.C.  (below,  §  12  note).  Thus  the  artistic  career
of  Antiphanes  apparently  extended  over  a  period  of  not  much  less
than  fifty  years,  from  about  414  B.C.  to  about  369  or  368  ac.  See
H.  Brunn,  Gesch,  d.  grieck,  Kiinstler^  i.  pp.  283-285  ;  J.  Overbeck,
Gesch.  d.  grieck,  Plastik^^  i.  p.  530  sq. ;  M.  Collignon,  Histoire  de  la
Sculpture  grecquCy  2.  p.  164  sq.  An  inscription  found  on  the  Acropolis
at  Athens  and  dating  from  407  B.C.  proves  that  a  certain  Antiphanes
carved  some  of  the  figures  (a  chariot  and  horses  and  a  young  man)  in
the  fneze  of  the  Erechtheum.  See  C  LA,  i.  Nos.  323,  324;  H.
Brunn,  Gesch,  d,  grieck,  Kiinstler^  i.  p.  248  sq, ;  Loewy,  Inschriften
grUchischer  Bildhauer^  Nos.  526,  527.  But  as  this  Antiphanes  is
expressly  said  in  the  inscription  to  have  belonged  to  the  Attic  township
of  Ceramicus,  he  is  most  probably  to  be  distinguished  from  the  Argive
sculptor  of  the  same  name.

9.  7*  offerings  of  the  Lacedaemonians.  These  offerings  most
probably  occupied,  as  Mr.  Homolle  supposes,  a  spacious  quadrangular
chamber  some  2  5  metres  long,  which  stood  on  the  right-hand  or  north
side  of  the  Sacred  Way  close  to  the  main  entrance.  The  remains  of
this  chamber,  excavated  by  the  French,  comprise  the  lower  parts  of  the
long  back  wall  and  the  two  short  side  walls,  built  of  blocks  of  conglo-
merate laid  in  regular  courses.  The  back  wall  was  faced  with  stucco
which  was  probably  painted.  Towards  the  Sacred  Way  the  chamber
was  open,  and  here  a  socle  or  pedestal,  which  seems  to  have  been  built
in  several  steps  or  tiers,  skirts  the  road  and  partially  fills  the  chamber.
We  may  suppose  that  the  many  statues  of  gods,  admirals,  and  generals
which  formed  the  proud  trophy  of  the  Lacedaemonians  stood  like
soldiers  in  stiff  formal  rows  at  different  heights  on  the  steps  of  the
pedestal,  scowling  at  the  Athenian  trophy  (x.  10.  i)  which  probably
faced  them  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  road.  Many  fragments  of  the
pedestals  of  these  statues,  with  some  of  the  dedicatory  inscriptions,  have
been  found  by  the  French.  On  one  of  the  pedestals  is  carved  an
epigram  in  which  Lysander  boasts  that  he  has  destroyed  the  power
of  the  people  of  Cecrops  (KcK/ooTriSa  Svvafiiv).  It  has  not  yet
been  published  but  is  said  to  be  one  of  the  finest  Greek  epigrams
that  have  come  down  to  us.  The  side  wall  of  the  monument  on
the  east  reaches  almost  to  the  boundary  wall  of  the  sacred  precinct.
Hence  we  must  suppose  that  the  other  monuments  mentioned  by
Pausanias  on  entering  the  sanctuary  (the  Corcyraean  bull,  the  offerings
of  the  Tegeans,  the  Wooden  Horse,  and  the  Athenian  trophy  of  the
battle  of  Marathon)  were  on  the  opposite  or  southern  side  of  the  Sacred
Way,  between  the  boundary  wall  of  the  precinct  and  the  semicircular


264  LACEDAEMONIAN  OFFERINGS         BK.  x.  phocis

monument  which  contained  the  statues  of  the  Epigoni  (x.  lo.  4  note).
SeeThi  Homolle,  in  BulUHn  de  Corresp,  hellMque^  18  (1894),  p.  186  ;
H.  Pomtow,  in  Archaologischer  Anseiger^  1 894,  p.  7.

The  Lacedaemonian  trophy  at  Delphi  is  repeatedly  referred  to  by
Plutarch.  He  says  {Lyscmder^  18)  that  from  the  spoils  of  the  battle
Lysander  set  up  bronze  statues  of  himself  and  of  all  the  admirals,
together  with  golden  stars  of  the  Dioscuri ;  and  elsewhere  {De  Pythiae
oraculiSy  2)  he  tells  us  that  in  his  time  these  old  bronze  statues  of  the
admirals  were  covered  with  a  beautiful  blue  patina,  the  growth  of  ages,
so  that  people  spoke  of  them  as  being  true  blue  salts.  Cicero  specially
mentions  the  statue  of  Lysander  at  Delphi  (De  divituUione^  i.  34.  75).
The  reason  for  dedicating  golden  stars  of  the  Dioscuri  would  seem  to
have  been  that  Castor  and  Pollux  were  said  to  have  appeared  on  the
side  of  the  Lacedaemonians  at  the  battle  of  Aegospotami  (Cicero,  /.r.),
just  as  they  appeared  on  the  Roman  side  at  the  battle  of  Lake  Regillus
(Cicero,  De  natura  deoruniy  ii.  i.  3 ;  Dionysius  Halicamassensis,
Antiguit,  Rom,  vi.  13;  Plutasch,  AeMilius  PauluSy  25).  It  is  related
that  after  the  battle  of  Leuctra,  which  gave  the  death-blow  to  Spartan
prestige  and  power,  the  golden  stars  disappeared  from  Delphi  and  were
never  seen  again,  as  if  in  token  that  the  star  of  Sparta's  fortunes  had
set  (Plutarch,  Lysander^  18;  Cicero,  De  divitiatione^  i.  34.  75).  The
dedication  of  the  stars  in  memory  of  the  appearance  of  the  Dioscuri  is
an  interesting  confirmation  of  the  view  that  the  twins  Castor  and  Pollux
were  the  Morning  and  Evening  Star,  the  equivalents  of  the  Sanscrit
A^vins.  See  H.  Oldenberg,  Die  Religion  des  Veda  (Berlin,  1894),
pp.  50,  207  sqq.  ;  A.  A.  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology  (Strasburg,  1897),
p.  49  sqq.  It  is  notable  that  in  Roman  history  the  appearances  of  the
Dioscuri  as  messengers  of  victory  seem  always  to  have  taken  place  .in
the  same  season  of  the  year,  namely  at  the  summer  solstice  or  the  first
full  moon  after  it.  See  A.  Mommsen,  *  Die  Dioskuren,*  PhilologuSy  1 1
(1856),  pp.  706-744;  L.  Preller,  Romische  Mythologies  2.  p.  302.
The  date  of  the  battle  of  Aegospotami  is  uncertain,  but  it  seems  to  have
fellen  in  summer  (Clinton,  Fasti  Helleniciy  2.^  p.  327  sqq,).

9.  7.  Agias.  See  iii.  11.  5  and  Critical  Note  on  this  passage,  vol.
I.  p.  608.

9.  8.  Theocosmns  the  Megarian.  He  was  a  contemporary  of
Phidias  (i.  40.  4).  His  son  Callicles  made  the  statue  of  Diagoras  at
Olympia  (vi.  7.  2).

9.  8.  Pison,  a  native  of  Calauria.     See  vi.  3.  5  note.

9.  8.  Dameas  and  Athenodoms.  They  were  pupils  of  Polyclitus
(Pliny,  Nat,  hist,  xxxiv.  50).  An  inscription  found  at  Olympia  bears  the
name  of  an  Achaean  sculptor  Athenodoms  ;  but  this  Athenodoms
must  have  been  considerably  older  than  the  Athenodoms  here  mentioned
by  Pausanias.  See  Dittenberger  und  Purgold,  Die  Inschriften  von
Olympia^  No.  630 ;  Loewy,  Inschriften  griech,  Bildhauer^  No.  30 ;  cp.
W.  Klein,  in  Archaeolog,  epigraph,  Mittheilungen  aus  Oesterreich,  7
(1883),  p.  63.

9.  10.  AlypoB  of  Sicyon.     Cp.  vi.  i.  3  note;  vi.  8.  5.

9.   10.  Patrocles.     He  was  the  father  of  the  sculptor  Daedalus  of


CH.  X  TROPHY  OF  MARATHON  265

•

Sicyon.  See  vi.  3.  4  ;  and  the  note  on  vi.  2.  8.  Pliny  {Nat  hist,
xxxiv.  50  and  90)  ranks  him  among  the  sculptors  who  flourished  in  Ol.
95  (400-397  B.C),  and  also  among  those  who  distinguished  themselves
by  their  statues  of  athletes,  armed  men,  hunters,  and  sacrificers.  As  the
son  of  Patrocles  was  a  Sicyon ian,  we  may  infer  that  Patrocles  himself
was  so  too.  Hence  he  is  probably  a  different  person  from  the  Patrocles
of  Crotona  who  made  a  box-wood  image  of  Apollo  with  a  gilt  head  in  the
treasury  of  the  Sicyonians  at  Olympia  (Paus.  vi.  19.  6).  Cp.  H.  Brunn,
Gesch,  d,  griech,  Kunstlery  i.  p.  277  sq,

9.   10.  Canachus.     See  note  on  vi.  13.  7.

9.  II.  they  were  betrayed  by  their  generals  etc.  Cp.  iv.  17.  3.
Suspicion  fell  especially  on  Adimantus  because  he  was  the  only  Athenian
prisoner  whose  life  Lysander  spared  (Xenophon,  Hellenica^  ii.  i.  32  ;
Lysias,  Or,  xiv.  38).  He  was  afterwards  impeached  by  his  colleague
Conon  (Demosthenes,  Or,  xix.  191,  p.  401),  but  on  what  grounds
'we  do  not  know.  Thirlwall  has  shown  good  grounds  for  questioning
the  alleged  treason  of  Adimantus  {History  of  Greece^  ch.  30,  vol.  4.
p.  142  sq,),

9.  12.  The  combat  for  Thsnrea.     Pausanias   clearly

supposed  that  the  battle  with  the  Lacedaemonians  which  the  Argives
commemorated  by  dedicating  a  statue  of  the  Wooden  Horse  was  no
other  than  the  famous  one  of  548  B.c.  See  ii.  38.  5,  and  the  note  on
ii.  20.  7.  But  Antiphanes,  the  artist  who  made  the  statue,  lived
probably  at  the  end  of  the  fifth  and  certainly  in  the  first  half  of  the
fourth  century  B.C.  (see  note  on  §  6  of  this  chapter) ;  and  it  seems  very
unlikely  that  the  Argives  should  have  commemorated  a  victory  some
hundred  and  fifty  years  or  more  after  it  had  been  won.  Now  we  know
from  Thucydides  (vi.  95)  that  in  414  B.C.  the  Argives  made  a  raid  into
Thyreatis  and  carried  off  booty  from  the  Lacedaemonians  to  the  value
of  not  less  than  five-and-twenty  talents.  Most  probably,  therefore,  as
H.  Brunn  pointed  out  {Gesch,  d,  griech.  Kiinstler^  i.  p.  283),  the
Wooden  Horse  at  Delphi  was  made  out  of  the  proceeds  of  the  booty
carried  off  in  the  raid  of  4 1 4  B.C.

10.  I.  on  the  pedestal is  an  inscription  etc.     This  express

mention  of  the  pedestal  and  inscription  seems  to  indicate  that  at  the
time  of  Pausanias's  visit  the  statues  themselves  were  gone.  The
pedestal  has  not  been  found  by  the  French  excavators,  but  there  can  be
little  doubt  that  it  stood  on  the  south  side  of  the  Sacred  Way,  near  the
main  entrance  of  the  sanctuary.  See  H.  Pomtow,  in  Archdologischer
Anzeigery  1895,  P-  8-  However,  in  the  place  where  the  trophy  of
Marathon  probably  stood  the  French  discovered  a  large  base  of  a  tripod
with  an  inscription  dating  apparently  from  the  middle  of  the  fourth
century  B.C.  and  stating  that  the  tripod  was  dedicated  by  ten  Athenian
deputies  who  had  been  sent  to  celebrate  the  Delphic  worship.  Among
the  names  of  the  deputies  are  those  of  some  well-known  orators.  Tliis
votive  tripod  no  doubt  stood  beside  the  Athenian  trophy  of  Marathon
mentioned  by  Pausanias.

10.  I.  These  gave  names  to  tribes  at  Athens.     See  i.  5.     It  is
remarkable  that  according  to  Pausanias  only  seven  out  of  the  ten  heroes


266  TROPHY  OF  MARATHON  bk.  x.  phocis

who  gave  their  names  to  the  Athenian  tribes  were  represented  in  this
national  Athenian  trophy  at  Delphi.  Why  were  there  no  statues  of
the  remaining  heroes,  Ajax,  Hippothoon,  and  Oeneus  ?  Their  omission
becomes  all  the  more  remarkable  when  we  observe  that,  as  Pausanias
tells  us,  the  statues  of  Antigonus,  Demetrius,  and  Ptolemy  were  subse-
quently added  to  the  trophy ;  for  these  three  men  gave  dieir  names  to
three  Athenian  tribes  which  were  instituted  in  later  times  (i.  5.  5  note).
The  intention  plainly  seems  to  have  been  to  represent  in  this  national
trophy  all  the  eponymous  heroes  of  the  Athenian  tribes.  If  this  was  so,
we  must  conclude,  with  £.  Curtius,  that  statues  of  Ajax,  Hippothoon,
and  Oeneus  formed  part  of  the  trophy  originally,  and  that  either  they
had  been  carried  off  before  the  time  of  Pausanias,  or  the  mention  of
them  has  dropped  out  of  his  text.  See  £.  Curtius,  Gesammelie  Abkand-
lungen^  2.  p.  365  sq.  As  there  is  some  ground  for  thinking  that  all  the
statues  had  disappeared,  while  the  pedestal  with  its  inscription  certainly
remained  in  the  time  of  Pausanias  (see  the  preceding  note),  the  more
probable  view  would  seem  to  be  that  the  mention  of  the  statues  of  Ajax,
Hippothoon,  and  Oeneus  has  been  omitted  through  the  carelessness  of  a
scribe.

10.  I.  PhylenB.  Nothing  is  known  of  this  Phyleus.  £.  Curtius
plausibly  conjectured  (Gesammelte  Abhandlungen^  2.  p.  366)  that  the
statue  in  question  was  really  that  of  Philaeus,  who  first  put  the  Athenians
in  possession  of  Salamis  and  gave  his  name  to  an  Attic  township
(Paus.  i.  35.  2  ;  Plutarch,  Soloriy  10).  A  statue  of  Philaeus  would
be  peculiarly  appropriate  in  a  monument  which  commemorated  the
victory  won  by  Miltiades,  since  Miltiades  was  a  descendant  of  Philaeus
(Herodotus,  vi.  35),  and  a  portrait  statue  of  him  formed  part  of  the
trophy.     Cp.  Critical  Note,  vol.  i.  p.  608.

10.  2.  The  statues were  made  by  Phidia4S(.     Pausanias  tells

us  that  these  statues  by  Phidias  were  made  from  a  tithe  of  the  spoils
taken  at  the  battle  of  Marathon.  But  at  the  date  of  the  battle  of
Marathon  (490  B.c.)  Phidias  could  hardly  have  been  more  than  ten
years  old,  if  so  much,  and  it  seems  unlikely  that  the  dedication  of  votive
offerings  from  the  spoils  should  have  been  deferred  for  many  years  after
the  battle.  The  number,  too,  of  votive  offerings  which  are  said  to
have  been  dedicated  out  of  the  tithe  of  the  spoils  taken  at  the  battle
of  Marathon  is  suspiciously  large.  See  i.  14.  5  ;  i.  28.  2  ;  ix.  4.  i  ;
X.  II.  5  ;  X.  19.  3.  It  would  seem  that  the  Greeks,  especially  the
Athenians,  sometimes  spoke  of  Marathon  when  they  really  referred  to
the  Persian  wars  in  general ;  hence,  as  the  statues  in  question  are
ascribed  to  Phidias,  who  was  bom  about  500  B.C.,  it  has  been  con-
jectured that  they  were  dedicated  out  of  the  spoils  taken  at  the  battle  of
Plataea  (479  B.c.)  or  the  Eurymedon  (465  B.C.).  See  K.  O.  Miiller,
*  De  Phidiae  vita  et  operibus,*  Kunstarchcuologiscke  Werke,  2.  p.
14  sqq,\  H.  Brunn,  Gesch.  der  griech,  KunstUr^  i.  p.  162  5qq,\  M.
Collignon,  Histaire  de  la  Sculpture  grecque^  i.  p.  520  sq.  But  the
definite  statement  of  the  inscription  on  the  pedestal  that  the  statues
were  made  out  of  the  spoils  taken  at  Marathon  is  not  to  be  lightly  set
aside.     Prof.  Furtwangler,  therefore,  prefers  to  believe  that  the  trophy


CH.  X  ARGIVE  OFFERINGS  267

actually  commemorated  the  battle  of  Marathon  and  was  dedicated  not
long  after  it,  but  that  Pausanias  is  mistaken  in  ascribing  the  work  to
Phidias  {Meisterwerke  d.  griech,  PlasHk^  pp.  55-57).

10.  2.  Ptolemy  the  Egyptian.  This  was  Ptolemy  II.,  Phil-
adelphus,  who  aided  the  Athenians  in  their  war  with  Antigonus.  See
L  I.  I  ;  i.  7.  3  ;  iii.  6.  4  sqq.  In  the  chapel  of  St.  Elias  at  Delphi  an
inscription  has  been  found  which  may  perhaps  have  been  engraved  on  the
base  of  a  statue  of  the  Ptolemy  here  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  But  the
statue  to  which  the  inscription  refers  seems  to  have  been  set  up  by
the  Phocians  and  Locrians  in  gratitude  to  Ptolemy  for  helping  to  free
their  country  from  Cassander's  garrisons.  See  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen
und  Forschungen^  i.  pp.  36,  43  ;  G.  Kaibel,  EpigramnuUa  Graeca^
No.  849.

10.  3.  the  descendants  of  Froetns.  From  Pausanias  ii.  18.  4  sq.
and  a  scholiast  on  Euripides,  Phoentssae^  1 80  we  learn  that  the  relation-
ship of  Capaneus  and  Eteoclus  to  Proetus  was  as  follows  : —

Proetus
Megapenthes

Argus  or  Argeus

I
Anaxagoras


Alector  Hipponous

Capaneus


Iphb
Eteoclus


According  to  this  table  Capaneus  was  the  cousin,  though  Pausanias
speaks  of  him  (ii.  18.  5)  as  the  brother,  of  Iphis.  Hence  in  that
passage  Clavier  has  proposed  to  alter  oScXt^O  (*  brother  *)  into  avc^^iov
(*  cousin  *).

10.  3.  Adrastns'  sistei^  Her  name  was  Mythidice,  according  to
Hyginus  {Fab.  70).

10.  3.  Baton,  the   charioteer   and   kinmnan   of  Amphiarans.

Cp.  ii.  23.  2  ;  V.  17.  8.

10.  3.  Aiitherses.  This  may  be  the  Alitherses,  son  of  Ancaeus
and  Samia,  whom  Pausanias  mentions  elsewhere  (vii.  4.  i).

10.  4.  works  of  Hypatodoros  and  Aristogiton  from  the

spoils  of  the  victory at  Oenoe.     The  victory  of  the  Argives  and

Athenians  over  the  Lacedaemonians  was  commemorated  also  by  one  of
the  pictures  in  the  Painted  Colonnade  at  Athens  (i.  15.  i).  The  battle
seems  to  have  been  fought  and  the  monuments  commemorative  of  it
to  have  been  set  up  between  463  and  458  B.C.  See  vol.  i.  p.  137  sq.
From  the  inscription  there  referred  to  (C.  /.  G.  No.  25  ;  Roehl,  /.  G.  A,
No.  165  ;  Loewy,  Inschriften  griech,  Bildhauer^  No.  10 1  ;  etc)  we
learn  that  Hypatodorus  and  Aristogiton  were  Thebans.  Hypatodorus
made  the  image  of  Athena  at  Aliphera  (viii.  26.  7  note).  If  the
Sostratus  who  helped  him  in  making  the  image  (Polybius,  iv.  78)  was
the  nephew  of  Pythagoras  of  Rhegium  mentioned  by  Pliny  (Nat,  hist.


268  ARGIVE  OFFERINGS  bk,  x.  phocis


xxxiy.  "60),  this  would  be  a  confirmation  of  the  date  which,  following
Prbf.  C.  Robert,  I  have  assigned  to  the  battle  of  Oenoe  and  hence  to
the  sculptors  Hypatodorus  and  Aristogiton  ;  for  Pythagoras  of  Rhegium
appears  to  have  lived  and  worked  in  the  early  part  of  the  fifth  century
B.C.  See  note  on  vi.  6.  4,  vol.  4.  p.  22.  Other  writers,  however,
whose  opinion  is  entitled  to  respect,  would  assign  a  much  later  date  to
the  battle  and  hence  to  the  sculptors.  See  H.  Brunn,  Gesch,  d.
griechische  Kunstler^  i.  p.  293  sqq. ;  J.  Overbeck,  Gesch,  cL  griech,
Plastiky^  2.  p.  179  sq. ;  M.  CoUignon,  Histoire  cU  la  Sculpture  grecque^
2.  p.  355  sq.

10.  4'  the  statues  of  the  Epigoni  These  statues  occupied  a
semicircular  moniunent  on  the  southern  side  of  the  Sacred  Way.  This
monument,  measuring  about  9  metres  (29  ft.  6  in.)  in  diameter  and
built  of  squared  blocks  of  grey  limestone,  was  discovered  and  partially
excavated  by  Mr.  Pomtow.  Its  remains,  so  far  as  they  exist,  have
since  been  fully  laid  bare  by  the  French.  Though  it  bears  no
inscription,  the  monument  can  be  identified  with  certainty  by  means
of  Pausanias's  statement  that  the  statues  of  the  Epigoni  were  opposite
the  statues  of  the  Argive  kings ;  for  these  statues  of  the  kings  are
known  from  inscriptions  (see  note  on  §  5)  to  have  occupied  another
semicircular  monument  which  stands  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  Sacred
Way,  exactly  facing  the  monument  in  question.  See  Th.  HomoUe,  in
Bulletin  de  Corresp,  hellhiique^  18  (1894),  p.  186  ;  H.  Pomtow,
Beitrdge  zur  Topographte  von  Delphi,  P*  5^  sq,  ;  /V/.,  in  Archdologischer
Anseiger,  1895,  PP-  7>  8.  Statues  of  the  Epigoni — the  chiefs  who
captured  Thebes — were  also  set  up  at  Argos  (ii.  20.  5).

10.  4.  Alcmaeon  waa  preferred  to  Amphilochus  on  the

ground  of  his  age.  Alcmaeon  and  Amphilochus  were  brothers,  sons
of  Amphiaraus  (Homer,  Od.  xv.  248).  From  Pausanias's  statement
we  gather  that  of  the  two  brothers  only  Alcmaeon,  the  elder,  was
represented  among  the  Epigoni  at  Delphi.  Both  brothers  were  repre-
sented in  the  corresponding  group  of  statues  at  Argos  (ii.  20.  5),  from
which,  on  the  other  hand,  Euryalus  apparently  was  absent.  In  the  list
of  the  Epigoni  given  by  Apollodorus  (iii.  7.  2)  both  Amphilochus  and
Euryalus  are  included.  A  scholiast  on  Homer  (//.  iv.  404)  gives  a  list
of  nine  Epigi)ni  ;  it  includes  Amphilochus  but  excludes  Euryalus.
Neither  Amphilochus  nor  Euryalus  appears  in  Hyginus's  list  of  the
Epigoni  {Fab,  71),  which  is,  however,  imperfect.

10.  5.  other  statues,  dedicated  by  the  Argives.  The  structure
which  supported  these  statues  was  discovered  and  excavated  by  the
French  in  May  1 894.  It  is  a  semicircular  edifice  situated  on  the  north
side  of  the  Sacred  Way,  not  differing  much  in  size  from  the  correspond-
ing semicircular  monument  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  road  (see  note
on  §  4).  The  substructure  on  which  it  rests  rises  to  a  height  of  more
than  a  metre  (3  ft  3.  in.)  above  the  level  of  the  Sacred  Way.  At  the
back,  towards  the  upper  slope  of  the  hill,  it  is  enclosed  by  a  high  semi-
circular wall  built  of  regular  masonry.  At  the  foot  of  this  wall,  on  the
inner  side,  runs  a  low  step,  which  supports  a  course  of  slabs  cut  in  the
shape  of  arcs  of  a  circle.     On  these  slabs  are  cut  the  names  of  the


CH.  X  TARENTINE  OFFERINGS  269

Argive  kings  and  heroes,  Abas,  Acrisius,  Lynceus,  Perseus,  and
Hercules.  Each  inscription  occupied  two  slabs.  In  the  middle  of
the  semicircle,  occupying  a  second  line,  is  the  signature  of  the  sculptor,
Antiphanes  of  Argos  ('AvriKfxivrjs  tiroiria-tv  "Apytios).  Curiously
enough,  while  the  name  of  the  sculptor  reads  in  the  usual  way  from
left  to  right,  all  the  names  of  the  kings  and  heroes  read  in  the  ancient
fashion  from  right  to  left.  This  was  probably  done  to  give  a  more
venerable  air  of  antiquity  to  the  statues  of  these  ancient  personages.
The  discovery  of  this  monimient  ftunishes  a  clue  to  the  topography  of
the  sacred  precinct.  Adjoining  the  monimient  on  the  east  is  the  long
chamber  in  which  stood  the  offerings  of  the  Lacedaemonians  (x.  9.  7).
See  Th.  Homolle,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  hellMquCy  18  (1894),
p.  186;  H.  Pomtow,  in  Archdologischer  Anzeiger^  1895,  p.  6  x^.

10.  6.  offerings  of  the  Tarentiiies.  On  the  right  hand  or  north
side  of  the  Sacred  Way,  opposite  the  Treasury  of  the  Sicyonians  (see
X.  II.  I  note),  there  is  a  great  supporting -wall  built  of  polygonal
masonry  and  bearing  in  large  letters  the  inscription  AEKATAN
(* tithe')*  Mr.  Homolle  conjectures  that  it  may  have  formed  part
of  the  Tarentine  monument  {Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUnique^  18
(1894),  p.  187 ;  Comfites  Rendus  de  PAcad^mie  des  Inscriptions^
22  (1894X  p.  584).  On  the  other  hand  Mr.  Pomtow  prefers  to
suppose  that  the  Tarentine  offerings  stood  on  the  southern  side
of  the  Sacred  Way,  close  to  the  Treasury  of  the  Sicyonians  {Archd-
ologiscker  Anzeiger^  1895,  p.  9).  His  ground  for  thinking  so  is
that  Pausanias  describes  the  Sicyonian  treasury  as  near  the  offering
of  the  Tarentines  (x.  11.  i)i  which  he  would  hardly  have  done  if  they
had  been  on  opposite  sides  of  the  road.  Mr.  Cecil  Smith  informs
me  that  on  the  left  or  southern  side  of  the  Sacred  Way  a  large  slab  has
been  found  bearing  some  letters  (2AEK)  of  what  may  very  well  have
been  part  of  the  dedicatory  inscription  of  the  Tarentine  offering.
The  letters  of  the  inscription  are  simple  and  large  (about  .14  metre
high),  closely  resembling  the  Melian  letters  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.

10.  6.  Agelades.     See  note  on  iv.  33.  2.

10.  6.  Tarentnm  is  a  Lacedaemonian  colony  etc.  Tarentum  was
founded  in  704  B.C.  by  a  body  of  Spartans  called  Partheniae  (*sons  of
virgins '),  because  they  were  bom  out  of  wedlock ;  thA  leader  was
Phalanthus  (Jerome,  on  Ol.  18,  in  Eusebius,  Chronic,  vol.  2.  p.  85  ed.
Schoene ;  Antiochus  and  Ephorus,  in  Strabo,  vi.  pp.  278-280  ;  Servius,
on  Virgil,  Aen.  iii.  551;  Justin,  iii.  4 ;  Scymnus  Chius,  Orbis  description
330  sqq,).  The  tradition  as  to  the  foundation  of  Tarentum  has  been
discussed  by  Mr.  J.  Geffcken  (*  Die  Griindung  von  Tarentum,'  Fleckeisetis
JahrbOcher^  39  (1893),  PP-  177-192).

10.  7.  and  loused  him.  This  is  a  service  which  savages  very
conmionly  render  each  other.  See  Pallas,  Reise  durch  verschtedene
Provinzen  des  Russischen  Reichs^  3.  p.  45 ;  Marsden,  History  of
SumatrcL^  p.  298;  RafHes,  History  of  Java^  i.  p.  354  (ed.  1817);
O.  C.  Stone,  A  Few  Months  in  New  Guinea^  p.  106  sq,  ;  Lewin,  Wild
Tribes  of  South-Eastern  India^  p.  140  ;  J.  G.  Bourke,  Snake  Dance  of  the
Moguls  oj  Arizona f  p.  29  ;  G.  M.  Sproat,  Scenes  and  Studies  of  Savage


270  SICYONIAN  TREASURY  bk.  x.  phocis

I^fi^  P*  97  ^0^^ »  L*  Lloyd,  Peasant  Life  in  Sweden^  p.  94.  In  fairy
tales  the  same  operation  is  performed  by  princesses  on  the  heads  of
kings,  ogres,  etc.  See  Dozon,  Conies  Albanats^  P*  27  ;  Gonzenbach,
Sicilianische  Mdrchen^  i.  p.  145  ;  Hahn,  Griechische  und  Alba$ustscke
Mdrchen^  2.  p.  55  ;  RadlofT,  Proben  der  Volkslitteratur  der  turkischen
Stdmme  Siid-SibirienSy  i.  p.  425  ;  Landes,  'Contes  et  L^endes  anna-
mites,'  No.  53  ii.  No.  59  i.  No.  1 1 1,  Cochinchine  Franqaise:  Excursions
et  ReconnaissanceSy  x.  No.  23,  pp.  46,  52,  xi.  No.  25,  p.  154.

11.  I.  a  treasury  of  the  Sicyonians.  On  the  left  or  south  side  of
the  Sacred  Way,  opposite  the  wall  which  Mr.  Homolle  supposes  to
have  supported  the  offerings  of  the  Tarentines  (see  x.  10.  6  note)  the
French  excavations  laid  bare  the  remains  of  what  was  apparently  the
Sicyonian  treasury.  It  was  built  of  Sicyonian  tufa  in  the  form  of  a
Doric  temple  in  antis^  with  the  entrance  on  the  east  side.  The  number
of  columns  between  the  antae  of  the  facade  was  two ;  in  other  words,
the  building  was  distyle.  The  style  of  the  architecture  is  very  early
Doric.  Apparently  the  original  treasury  was  circular,  for  the  existing
foundations,  which  are  deep  and  go  down  to  the  virgin  soil,  comprise
pieces  of  a  circular  architrave,  fluted  Doric  columns,  and  other  remains
of  an  earlier  building,  with  the  initials  of  the  stone-masons.  The  blocks
of  the  architrave  have  the  same  loop-formed  groove  for  convenience  in
raising  them  to  their  places  that  has  been  observed  in  the  corresponding
blocks  of  the  temple  in  Aegina.  From  the  style  of  these  remains  it
would  seem  that  the  first  treasury  dated  from  the  seventh  century  B.C.
Probably  its  destruction  was  brought  about  by  the  agency  of  the  spring
which  filters  through  from  above :  to  this  day  the  wall  above  is  very
damp  from  the  same  cause.  The  second  treasury  seems  not  to  have
been  very  much  later  in  date  than  its  predecessor ;  Mr.  Homolle  would
assign  it  to  the  first  half  of  the  sixth  century  B.c.  (see  below).

In  and  about  the  treasury  were  foimd  a  number  of  sculptured  slabs
of  tufa,  which  doubtless  adorned  the  treasury  in  the  form  either  of
metopes,  as  Mr.  Homolle  supposes,  or  of  a  frieze,  as  Prof  Furtwangler
prefers  to  think.  Whether  they  belonged  to  the  first  or  to  the  second
treasury  is  uncertain,  but  there  are  some  grounds  for  believing  that  they
belonged  to  the  first.  For  they  were  found  at  a  greater  depth  than  most
of  the  remains  of  the  later  treasury ;  and  they  are  too  well  preserved
to  allow  us  to  suppose  that  they  were  long  exposed  to  the  weather,  as
they  must  have  been  if  they  had  belonged  to  the  second  treasury.  It
is,  however,  to  the  second  treasury  apparently  that  Mr.  Homolle  would
assign  them.

Inscriptions  slightly  scratched  on  the  stones  and  painted  in  black
enable  us  to  identify  the  scenes  represented  in  relief  on  the  slabs.
These  inscriptions  seem  to  have  been  repeated  twice  over,  being  painted
both  on  the  backgroimd  of  the  reliefs  and  on  the  moulding  above  them.
As  indicated  by  the  inscriptions  the  scenes  represented  are :  ( i )  the
bull  carrying  off  Europa ;  (2)  the  ram  carrying  Helle;  (3)  the
Calydonian  boar ;  (4)  the  cattle-lifting  raid  of  Castor,  Pollux,  and  Idas
in  Arcadia  (Apollodorus,  iii.  1 1 .  2  ;  Tzetzes,  Schol,  on  Lycophron^  5 1 1 ) ;
(5)  the  Argo  with  its  crew  of  warriors,  in  the  midst  of  whom  Orpheus


CH.  XI  SICYONIAN  TREASURY  271

is  singing,  while  to  the  right  and  left  of  the  ship  appear  Castor  and
Pollux  on  horseback.  The  figures,  painted  in  red,  brown,  and  black,
stand  out  from  the  yellow  background  of  the  stone,  which  is  left  un-
painted,  like  the  figures  on  a  Corinthian  vase.  Of  the  scenes  the  best
rendered  is  the  raid  of  the  Dioscuri  and  Idas.  We  see  the  three  sturdy
youths,  with  long  locks  hanging  down  their  breast  and  back,  marching
in  single  file ;  each  carries  a  couple  of  spears  on  his  left  shoulder,  while
in  his  right  hand,  which  hangs  by  his  side,  he  grasps  a  curious  object
which  has  been  interpreted  as  a  spear  or  pole  held  horizontally.
Between  the  men  and  in  front  of  the  foremost  of  them  stalk,  three  by
three,  the  cattle  which  are  being  driven  ofE  The  object  which  each  of
the  raiders  holds  in  his  right  hand  seems  to  be  intended  as  a  barrier
to  keep  the  cattle  in  their  places ;  of  the  nine  animals  the  three  next  the
spectator  are  butting  with  lowered  heads  against  the  object,  whatever  it
is.  The  heads  of  the  kine  are  truthfully  rendered,  but  the  figures  of  the
men  are  somewhat  heavy  and  thick-set,  and  the  drapery  is  stiff.  In  the
other  scenes  the  archaic  clumsiness  and  lifelessness  of  the  figures  are
still  more  obvious ;  this  is  especially  true  of  the  figures  of  Orpheus  and
another  minstrel  who  are  represented  playing  on  lyres  to  the  Argonauts.
Mr.  HomoUe  compares  these  archaic  sculptures  with  the  well-known
metopes  of  Selinus  and  assigns  them  to  the  first  half  of  the  sixth
century  B.C  He  conjectures  that  the  treasury  may  have  been  begun  in
the  last  years  of  the  reign  of  Clisthenes  at  Sicyon  (580-570  B.c) ;  it
cannot,  he  thinks,  be  later  than  560  ac.

See  Th.  Homolle,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique^  18  (1894),  p.  187  sq, ;
id.^  in  Comptes  Rendus  de  VAcadimie  des  Inscriptions ^  22  (1894),  pp.  339  sq.^
355  ^^*  >  id.i\Ti  Gatette  des  Beaux  Arts^  D^embre  1894,  p.  446  sq.y  and  Avril
.1095,  p.  324  sq,^  with  the  illustration  on  p.  323  ;  M.  Coll^on,  in  Comptes  Rendus
de  VAcacUtnie  des  Inscriptions^  22  (1894),  p.  ^07  sq,  ;  A.  Furtwangler,  in  Berliner
philology  IVochenschrift,  29th  September  1894,  p.  1275  sq. ;  H.  Pomtow,  in
Archdclogischer  Anzeiger^  1895,  p.  9.

In  the  Treasury  of  the  Sicyonians  was  preserved  a  "  golden  book  "
dedicated  by  an  Erythraean  poetess  named  Aristomache,  who  had  won
a  prize  for  poetry  at  the  Isthmian  games.  This  fact  was  recorded  by
the  antiquary  Polemo,  who  wrote  a  work  On  the  treasures  {or  treasuries)
of  Delphi  (Plutarch,  Qjuaest,  Conviv,  v.  2.  9  sg,).  This  "golden  book'*
was  perhaps  a  copy  of  Aristomache's  poems  written  in  letters  of  gold.
Similarly  a  copy  of  Pindar's  seventh  Olympian  ode  was  written  in
golden  letters  and  dedicated  in  the  sanctuary  of  Athena  at  Lindas  in
Rhodes  (SchoL  on  Pindar,  01,  viii.  Introd.).     Cp.  Polemo,  ed.  Preller,

p.  55  ^g-

11.  I.  an  image  of  Triopas,  founder  of  Onidns.  He  was  said  to
be  a  son  of  the  Sun  and  to  have  been  driven  from  Thessaly  for  cutting
down  a  sacred  grove  of  Demeter  and  using  the  timber  to  build  himself
a  palace  with.  He  fied  to  Caria  and  there  occupied  ft  cape  which  took
the  name  of  Triopiimi  from  him.  See  Diodorus,  v.  57  and  61.  The
cape  was  included  within  the  city  of  Cnidus  (Herodotus,  i.  174).  Cp.
C.  T.  Newton,  History  of  discoveries  at  Halicamassus^  Cnidus^  and
Branchidae^  2,  p.  423  sgg.     According  to  Herodotus  (/.r.),  Cnidus  was


272  SJPHNIAN  TREASURY  bk.  x.  phocis

a  Lacedaemonian  colony.  No  trace  of  the  images  dedicated  by  the
Cnidians  has  been  found.  They  may  have  stood,  as  Mr.  Homolle
conjectures,  between  the  treasury  of  the  Sicyonians  and  the  treasury  of
the  Siphnians ;  at  least  this  position  would  agree  very  well  with  the
order  of  Pausanias's  description.

11.  I.  Apollo  and  Artemis  shooting  arrows  at  Tityos.  Cp.  iii.
1 8.  15  note.

11.  2.  The  Siphnians  also  made  a  treasury.  On  the  south  side
of  the  Sacred  Way,  a  few  paces  to  the  west  of  the  Sicyonian  treasury,
there  rises,  like  a  bastion,  a  high  quadrangular  structure  which  rests
towards  the  south  on  the  Hellenico  or  boundary  wall  of  the  sacred
precinct  and  towards  the  north  on  the  Sacred  Way.  It  is  built  of  tu£&
cut  in  blocks  of  which  some  are  quadrangular  and  some  poIygonaL
The  lower  courses  of  the  masonry  are  unwrought,  showing  that  they
were  originally  hidden  either  by  the  ground,  which  here  slopes  upward
rapidly,  or  by  steps.  On  this  tower-like  foundation,  which  rises  above
the  level  both  of  the  Sacred  Way  and  of  the  boundary  wall,  rested  an
edifice  in  the  shape  of  an  Ionic  temple  in  antis  with  its  front  to  the
west  The  number  of  columns  between  the  antae  of  the  front  was  two ;
in  other  words,  the  building  was  distyle.  It  is  constructed  of  marble
of  various  sorts,  chiefly  Parian  or  Naxian,  and  seems  to  date  from  the
latter  part  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.  From  its  shape  we  may  safely
infer  that  the  building  was  a  treasury.  Its  length  from  east  to  west
was  8.90  metres  ;  its  breadth  from  north  to  south  6.35  metres.  Access
to  it  from  the  west  was  afforded  by  a  platform  supported  on  a  wall  of
polygonal  masonry  and  reached  from  the  Sacred  Way  by  steps.  As
this  treasury  adjoins  that  of  the  Sicyonians,  and  Pausanias  mentions
the  Siphnian  treasury  immediately  aifter  the  Sicyonian,  archaeologists
are  generally  agreed  in  regarding  the  edifice  in  question  as  the
Siphnian  treasury.  The  identification  is  further  supported  by  the
remark  of  Herodotus  (iii.  57)  that  the  Siphnian  treasury  was  amongst
the  wealthiest  at  Delphi ;  for  the  delicacy  and  richness  of  its  architec-
tural and  sculptural  decoration  give  evidence  of  an  unstinted  expenditure
of  money.  The  building  is  indeed  more  lavishly  decorated  than  any
other  found  at  Delphi.  Remains  of  the  architectural  ornaments  have
been  discovered  on  all  sides  in  the  sacred  precinct,  but  entire  pieces
only  about  the  treasury  itself,  distributed  round  its  four  sides  just  as
they  fell.  Their  exquisite  finish  is  remarkable,  and  was  heightened  by
a  wealth  of  bright  colours  (red,  blue,  and  green),  of  which  vivid  traces
exist.  "  All  the  decorative  details  of  this  building,"  says  Prof.  E.  A
Gardner,  "  the  carved  mouldings,  cornices,  etc.,  are  cut  with  a  depth,
clearness,  and  delicacy  that  can  be  matched  nowhere,  except  perhaps  in
the  Erechtheum.  It  is  simply  a  revelation  of  what  decorative  carving
can  attain  to."  A  characteristic  feature  is  the  gigantic  ovolo  moulding,
forming  half  of  a  sphere  of  which  the  diameter  is  .56  metre.  The
general  style  is  the  old  Ionic.  The  whole  of  the  entablature  was  of
Parian  marble.  Round  the  four  outer  sides  of  the  building  ran  a
sculptured  frieze  of  Parian  marble,  .64  metre  high,  which  has  been
discovered  almost  entire ;  and  one  of  the  gables,  doubtless  the  western.


CH.  XI  SIPHNIAN  TREASURY  rji

was  adorned  with  figures  carved  partly  in  relief  and  partly  in  the  round,
which  have  also  come  to  light  The  discovery  of  this  beautiful  treasury
with  its  remarkable  sculptures  has  been  one  of  the  chief  results  of  the
French  excavations  at  Delphi.  Inscriptions  slightly  scratched  beside
the  figures  and  originally  rendered  conspicuous  by  red  paint,  which  has
now  almost  disappeared,  enable  us  to  identify  the  scenes  represented  on
the  frieze.

( 1 )  On  the  west  side  is  figured  the  apotheosis  of  Hercules.  Athena,
about  to  lead  the  hero  to  heaven,  is  mounting  her  car,  which  is
drawn  by  winged  horses.  The  heads  of  the  fiery  steeds  are  held  by
Hermes,  recognisable  by  his  herald's  staff  and  his  winged  sandals.
Behind  the  goddess  stands  Hercules,  his  earthly  labours  over,  ready  to
mount  the  car  that  will  bear  him  to  his  heavenly  rest.  Behind  him
Hebe  appears  descending  from  another  car,  the  horses  of  which  are
held  by  a  figure  who  corresponds  to  Hermes  at  the  other  end.  Hermes,
the  winged  horse  Pegasus,  Athena,  Hercules,  Hebe,  and  a  bird  as
emblem  of  Victory  have  their  names  inscribed  beside  them.

(2)  On  the  south  side  the  scene  is  the  chariot-race  of  Pelops  and
Oenomaus.  In  the  chariot  with  Pelops  is  Hippodamia.  The  piece  of
the  frieze  which  represents  the  chariot  of  Oenomaus  and  the  altar  of
Zeus  had  been  found  before  the  French  excavations.  It  is  described
and  figured  by  Conze  and  Michaelis  {Annali  delV  Institute^  33  (1861),
p.  64  with  Tav.  d'  agg.  6),  and  a  photograph  of  it  is  given  by  Mr.
Pomtow  {Beitrdge  sur  Topographic  von  Delphi,  pi.  xii.  No.  32).
Horses  and  horsemen  also  form  parts  of  the  southern  frieze.  The
inscribed  names,  so  far  as  they  exist,  are  Myrtilus,  Pelops,  Hippo-
damia, and  Oenomaus.  The  altar  bears  the  inscription :  Zavh^
'OXvfiTriov  (*  of  Olympian  Zeus ').

(3)  On  the  east  side  the  scene  is  the  combat  over  the  body  of
Sarpedon  (Homer,  //.  xvi.  530  sgg,)  and  an  assembly  of  the  gods
watching  the  fight.  The  dead  chief  lies  on  the  ground,  and  four
warriors,  armed  with  shields,  helmets,  and  breastplates,  are  fighting
over  him,  two  on  each  side.  This  central  group  is  flanked  on  either
hand  by  a  chariot  drawn  by  four  horses,  which  are  held  by  a  groom.
One  of  the  combatants  is  Patroclus  clad  in  the  armour  of  Achilles,
whose  name  may  be  read  on  the  shield.  The  others  are  Menelaus,
Hector,  and  Aeneas,  all  identified  by  inscriptions.  To  the  left
of  this  scene  of  combat  are  represented  the  deities  seated  and
gazing  at  the  fight.  All  are  identified  by  inscriptions.  The  gods
of  the  Greeks  sit  together  on  the  right ;  they  are  Nemesis,  Hera,
Athena,  Thetis  and  Zeus.  The  gods  of  the  Trojans  (^civ  tos  Tpo€tav
voXtaos)  sit  together  on  the  left ;  they  are  Apollo,  Artemis,  Aphrodite,
and  Ares.  Thetis  is  laying  her  hand  on  the  knee  of  Zeus  with  a
gesture  of  supplication.  Artemis  is  touching  the  chin  of  her  brother
Apollo  to  attract  his  attention.  Ares,  who  sits  apart,  wears  his  armour
and  seems  ready  to  rush  into  the  fray.

(4)  The  scene  on  the  north  side  is  the  battle  between  the  gods  and
the  giants.  So  far  as  they  have  been  deciphered,  the  names  inscribed,
taken  from  right  to  left,  are  as  follows :  Aeolus,  Hercules,  Cybele  the

VOL.  V  T


274  SIPHNIAN  TREASURY  bk.  x.  phocis

Great  Mother,  Alcyoneus,  Apollo,  Artemis,  Dionysus,  Ephialtes,
Palleneus,  Hera,  Athena,  Enceladus,  Hephaestus,  and  Ares.  This  is
artistically  the  finest  and  happily  also  the  best  preserved  of  all  the
scenes  of  the  frieze.  Among  the  groups  in  it  ^Q  following  may  be
noted.  At  the  extreme  right  is  Aeolus,  the  god  of  the  winds,  with
flowing  locks  and  pointed  beard ;  he  holds  one  hand  open  over  a  large
jar,  while  with  the  other  he  seems  to  be  shutting  up  a  half  empty  wind-
bag. According  to  another  interpretation,  Aeolus  is  bending  over  two
wind-bags,  squeezing  one  of  them. with  his  left  hand  and  opening  the
mouth  of  the  bag  with  his  right.  Further  to  the  left  js  Hercules,  with
the  lion's  skin  knotted  round  his  neck  and  stretched  out  like  a  buckler
on  his  right  arm ;  he  is  drawing  his  bow  to  shoot  a  giant  who  threatens
him  with  a  spear.  In  front  of  this  latter  group  and  partly  conoeajing
it  is-  Cybele  mounted  on  a  car  drawn  by  galloping  lions,  one  of  which
has  fJEistened  its  claws  and  teeth  in  a  giant.  Still  further  to  the  left  are
seen  Apollo  and  Artemis,  side  by  side,  shooting  arrows  at  a  pair  of
giants.  Beside  them  marches  Dionysus,  armed  with  sword  and  shield
and  wearing  a  helmet  of  which  the  crest  has  the  form  of  a  wine  goblet.
Further  to  the  left  is  Hera  vigorously  spearing  a  prostrate  giant,  who
seeks  in  vain  to  protect  himself  from  the  deadly  thrust  by  holding  up
his  shield.  Close  to  Hera  is.  seen  Athena  marching  calmly  forward
and  appearing  to  overthrow  her  adversaries,  whom  she  meets  shield  to
shield,  without  an  effort ;  one  of  her  foes  has  sunk  on  his  knee,  the
other  still  stands.  Still  further  to  the  left  Hephaestus,  recognisable  by
his  pointed  cap  as  well  as  by  the  inscription,  is  fighting  a  pair  of  giants,
one  of  whom  wields  a  spear  while  the  othec  brandishes  a  huge  stone.
In  the  extreme  left-hand  corner  Ares  is  also  engaged  with  two  giants.
All  the  giants  are  represented  in  purely  human  form  as  armed  men.
Their  helmets  are  adorned  with  various  animals  or  parts  of  animals,
such  as  the  horns  of  oxen  and  goats,  a  horse's  head  with  wings,  and  a
serpent.

Like  the  architectural  ornaments  of  the  treasury  the  sculptured
frieze  was  painted  in  bright  colours,  red,  blue,  and  green,  which  were
sometimes  laid  on  whole  surfaces,  as  in  the  case  of  hair  and  drapery,
and  sometimes  employed  to  bring  out  details,  such  as  the  harness  of
horses^  the  hem  of  robes,  and  the  straps  of  shields,  or  again  to  supply
the  want  of  carving,'  as  in  the  reins  of  horses.  Further,  the  effects  of
carving  .and  painting  were  heightened  and  completed  by  bronze  spear-
heads .and  arrow-heads,  bronze  wheels  and  railings  of  chariots,  and
bronze  harnesses,  wbich  were  fastened  to  the  marble.

The  sculptures  in  the  gable  represented  the  contest  between
Hercules  and  Apollo  for  possession  of  the  tripod.  In  the  middle
of.  the  gable  stands  Athena,  laying  her  hands  on  both  adversaries
as  if- to  part  them.  Behind  Apollo  is  Latona,  who  seeks  to  pacify
\\£X  son;  and  behind  her  again  is  another  female  figure,  perhaps
Artemis.  Behind  Hercules  are  also  two  female  figures,  and  beyond
them'  are  two  horses,  representing  probably  the  chariot  in  which
Hercules  has  come.  The  horses  are  matched  by  another  pair  of  horses
at  the  other  end  of  the  gable.     A  remarkable  feature  of  these  sculptures


CH.  XI  SIPHNIAN  TREASURY  275

in  the  gable  is  that  while  the  lower  parts  of  the  figures  are  carved  in
relief,  the  upper  parts  are  carved  in  the  round  and  stand  clean  out
from  the  background,  which  is  hollowed  deeply  away  so  that  the  figures
appear  sharply  outlined  against  a  black  shadow.

The  style  and  composition  of  these  sculptures  in  the  gable  are  very
defective,  far  inferior  to  those  of  the  frieze.  The  figures  are  squat,  the
outlines  hard  and  angular,  the  modelling  flat,  the  muscles  exaggerated,
and  the  attitudes  stiff  and  awkward ;  the  composition,  tolerable  in
the  centre,  falls  off  lamentably  towards  the  two  ends,  where  the  figures
decrease  successively  in  size  with  the  regularity  of  organ-pipes.  The
artist  was  clearly  a  different  person  from  the  sculptor  or  sculptors  who
made  the  frieze.  But  in  the  frieze  itself  marked  differences  both  of
composition  and  of  style  point  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  executed  by
two  artists  of  different  degrees  of  ability.  In  the  scenes  on  the  western
and  southern  sides  (the  apotheosis  of  Hercules  and  the  chariot-race  of
Pelops  and  Oenomaus)  the  figures  are  merely  placed  side  by  side ;  in
the  scenes  on  the  eastern  and  northern  sides  (the  combat  for  the  body
of  Sarpedon  and  the  battle  of  the  gods  and  giants)  they  are  dramatically
grouped  together.  In  the  sculptures  on  the  western  and  southern  sides,
again,  the  figures  share,  though  in  a  less  degree,  some  of  the  defects
which  characterise  the  sculptures  in  the  gable ;  we  note  a  similar
heaviness  and  squatness  in  the  figures,  a  similar  hardness  of  outline,
lack  of  modelling,  flatness  of  relief,  and  rudeness  in  the  rendering  of
the  muscles.  In  the  eastern  and  northern  sculptures,  on  the  other
hand,  the  surfaces  and  outlines  are  more  rounded,  the  flesh  and  muscles
more  supple,  the  drapery  more  flowing,  the  movements  freer.  Yet  with
all  this  the  differences  are  not  so  great  as  to  indicate  that  the  artist
who  made  the  western  and  southern  friezes  belonged  to  a  different
school  from  the  artist  who  made  the  eastern  and  northern  friezes  or
that  he  lived  at  a  different  time.  With  regard  to  the  date  of  the
sculptures,  archaeologists  are  agreed  in  referring  them  to  the  latter  part
of  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  but  they  differ  as  to  the  school  to  which  the
sculptors  belonged,  Mr.  Th.  Homolle  advocating  the  claims  of  the
Argive,  Prof.  Collignon  of  the  Ionian,  and  Prof.  Furtwangler  of  the
Parian  school.  In  favour  of  his  view  Mr.  Homolle  appeals  to  an
inscription,  unfortunately  mutilated  and  in  part  nearly  illegible,  on  the
shield  of  one  of  the  giants  in  the  northern  frieze.  The  inscription,
which  recorded  the  name  of  the  artist,  is  restored  by  Mr.  Homolle  as
follows  :

'A[jay€r]o[9  0/oao'i'/z.T;]8>;9  KaAto/SMro  (?)  €/i*  €TroUu

"  Thrasymedes,  son  of  Caliorisus  (?),  an  Argive,  made  me."  But  this
restoration,  as  Mr.  Homolle  recognises,  is  very  doubtful.  The  proof  to
which  he  chiefly  pins  his  faith  is  the  letter  /,  which  has  the  characteristic
Argive  shape  (h).

More  recently  the  discovery  of  the  figure  of  a  lion  among  the
sculptured  decoration  of  the  building  has  suggested  to  Mr.  Homolle  the
theory  that  the  treasury  is  that  of  the  Cnidians  mentioned  by  Pausanias
below  (x.  II.  5),  and  not  that  of  the  Siphnians,  since  a  lion  was  an


276  SIPHNIAN  TREASURY  BK.  x.  phocis

emblem  of  Cnidus,  as  we  see  by  the  coins  of  that  city  (B.  V.  Head,
Historia  numorunty  p.  524  sg.).  This  theory,  Mr.  Homolle  thinks,
harmonises  better  with  the  Ionic  style  of  the  architecture,  the  presence  of
the  Argive  lambda  (h)  in  the  artist's  signature,  and  the  subjects  of  the
sculptured  decorations.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  to  be  observed  that
Pausanias  does  not  mention  the  Cnidian  treasury  until  after  the  Theban
and  the  Athenian  treasuries,  both  of  which  are  known  to  be  further  up
the  Sacred  Way  than  the  treasury  in  question.  If  Mr.  Homolle  is  right,
we  must  suppose  that  Pausanias  departed  entirely  from  the  topogra-
phical order  in  mentioning  the  Cnidian  immediately  after  the  Sicyonian
treasury  and  before  the  treasuries  of  the  Thebans  and  Athenians.
Considering  the  constantly  accumulating  evidence  that  Pausanias  in
general  adhered  strictly  to  the  topographical  order  in  his  descriptions,
we  are  hardly  justified  by  the  facts  shown  in  assuming  that  he  here
departed  from  it

See  Th.  Homolle,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  hellhtique,  18  (1S94),  pp.  188-194,
and  ib,  19  (1895),  pp.  534-537 ;  id,^  in  Comptes  Rendu s  de  tActuUmie  des
Inscriptions,  22(1894),  pp.  208-210,  339  sq,,  355-358,  589-591,  and  ib,,  23  (1895),
p.  392  sq,  ;  t^/.,  in  Gazette  des  Beaux  Arts,  D^cembre  1894,  p.  448,  and  ib,  Avrii
^895*  PP*  325-331  ;  M.  CoUignon,  in  Comptes  Rendus  de  FAcadhnie  des  Inscrip-
tions, 22  (1^94),  pp.  308-312;  Ch.  Belger,  in  Berliner  philohg.  Wochenschrift,
30th  June  1894,  p.  862  sq,  ;  A.  Furtwangler,  in  Berliner  philohg.  Wochenschrift,
30th  September  1894,  pp.  1276-1278 ;  H.  Pomtow,  in  Archdohgischer  Anzeiger,
1895,  P*  9  ^9'  >  ^*  ^'  Gardner,  mjourtuil  of  Hellenic  Studies,  14  (1894),  p.  228,
and  ib,  15  (1895),  p.  207  sq,;  P.  Hart  wig,  'Sur  un  Canthare  de  TAcropole
d'Ath^nes,*  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique,  20  (1896),  pp.  364-373.  In  this  last
article  Mr.  Hartwig  points  out  some  resemblances  between  the  battle  of  the  gods
and  giants  on  the  frieze  and  a  similar  scene  on  the  fragments  of  a  black- figured
vase  found  on  the  Acropolis  of  Athens.  On  one  of  the  framnents  of  the  vase  are
seen  two  wind-bags,  one  full,  the  other  half  empty,  with  me  remains  of  a  man,
who  is  doubtless  Aeolus,  standing  beside  them.  Mr.  Hartwig  would  date  the  vase
about  560  B.C.

Herodotus,  like  Pausanias,  says  that  the  Siphnians  dedicated  the
treasury  at  Delphi  with  a  tithe  of  the  produce  of  their  mines,  but  he
mentions  silver  as  well  as  gold  mines,  and  he  says  nothing  as  to  the
destruction  of  either  by  the  sea,  which  may  have  taken  place  after  his
time  (Herodotus,  iii.  57).  Some  of  the  ancient  mines  of  Siphnus  are
still  to  be  seen  near  the  little  red-roofed  chapel  of  St.  Saviour  {Hagia
Sosii)  which  stands  on  a  bare  rocky  headland  jutting  out  into  the  sea  at
the  north-eastern  end  of  the  island.  See  K.  G.  Fiedler,  Reise,  2.
p.  1 36  sqq.  One  of  these  mines  is  a  great  labyrinth  of  passages,  the
sides  of  which  sparkle  as  with  silver.  Many  tools,  including  pointed
and  cone-shaped  axes,  have  been  found  in  it,  and  there  are  many  niches
in  the  walls  where  the  miners  probably  set  their  lamps.  In  the  sea-clifi
outside  of  the  mine  certain  hollows  exist  which  the  people  call  furnaces,
and  in  these  it  would  seem  that  the  ore  was  smelted  by  the  admixture  of
other  substances,  such  as  iron  and  volcanic  stones.  Heaps  of  slag  lie
about  the  hollows,  and  traces  of  slag  may  be  seen  also  in  calm  weather
at  the  bottom  of  the  sea  a  little  way  off  the  shore.  "  This,"  wrote  the
late  J.  T.  Bent,  "  proves  beyond  a  doubt  that  either  the  land  must  have
subsided,  or  the  sea  encroached,  since  the  time  when  the  furnaces  were


CH.  XI  LIPARAEAN  OFFERINGS  277

used,  and  corroborates  the  substance  of  the  legend  as  told  by  Pausanias."
Sec  J.  T.  Bent,  *  On  the  gold  and  silver  mines  of  Siphnos,'  Journal  of
Hellenic  Studies^  6  (1885),  pp.  195-198.

Beside  the  Siphnian  treasury  have  been  found  the  remains  of  four
figures  of  Caryatids.  They  are  of  colossal  size  and  represent  young  and
graceful  women  each  clad  in  a  long  tunic  and  robe  and  wearing  a  head-
dress of  the  sort  called  polos,  in  which  a  tiny  column  was  fastened.
Apparently  they  supported  a  stand  of  some  sort.  From  their  archaic
style  they  seem  to  date  from  the  end  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  and  hence
to  be  contemporary  with  the  Siphnian  treasury  near  which  their  remains
were  found.  Whether  they  belonged  to  the  treasury  or  not,  is  uncertain.
Mr.  Homolle  inclines  to  believe  that  they  did  not.  They  recall  the
archaic  female  statues  found  on  the  Acropolis  at  Athens  (vol.  2.  p.  346),
and  might  have  served  as  the  prototype  of  the  Caryatids  of  the  Erech-
theunL  See  Th.  Homolle,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUnique,  18  (1894),
p.  194  sq.  ;  id,,  in  Comptes  Rendus  de  VAccuUmie  des  Inscriptions,  22
(1894),  pp.  206-208,  585.

11.  3.  The  Idparaeaiis  also  dedicated  statues  for  a  naval  victory
etc.  Cp.  X.  16.  7.  Diodorus  tells  us  (v.  9)  that  the  inhabitants  of  the
small  Upari  islands,  to  the  north  of  Sicily,  being  harassed  by  Etruscan
pirates,  built  a  fleet,  and  while  some  of  them  tilled  the  islands,  the  rest
scoured  the  sea  in  search  of  the  rovers,  whom  they  defeated  in  many
actions,  and  from  the  spoils  they  often  sent  tithe-offerings  to  Delphi.
Cp.  Strabo,  vi.  p.  275.  On  some  antiquities  from  the  island  of  Lipara,
see  Mr.  A.  S.  Murray,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  7  (1886),
pp.  51-56.

11.  3.  These  Liparaeans  were  colonists  from  Cnidus  etc.  That
the  Liparaeans  were  colonists  from  Cnidus  is  mentioned  also  by  Thucy-
dides  (iii.  88)  and  Strabo  (vi.  p.  275).  Cp.  Scymnus  Chius,  Orbis
descriptio,  262  sq.  Diodorus  tells  us  (v.  9)  that  the  emigrants  set  out
from  Cnidus  with  Pentathlus  for  their  leader  in  01.  50  (580  B.C),  but
that  Pentathlus  fell  in  battle  in  Sicily,  and  that  the  settlement  in  Lipara
was  made  under  the  leadership  of  three  kinsmen  of  his,  Gorgus,  Thestor,
and  Epithersides.

11.  3.  Antiochns  the  Syracnsan.  He  was  the  oldest  of  the  Greek
historians  of  Sicily.  His  history,  divided  into  nine  books,  began  with
the  reign  of  Cocalus,  king  of  the  Sicanians,  and  ended  with  the  year
424  B.C.  See  Diodorus,  xii.  71.  It  is  thought  that  Thucydides,  in
his  account  of  Sicily,  drew  upon  Antiochus's  work.  The  fragments  of
Antiochus  are  collected  by  C.  Miiller  in  his  Fragmenta  historicorum
Graecorum,  vol.  i.  pp.  181 -184,  cp.  ib.  p.  xlv.  Cp.  G.  Busolt,
Grieckische  Geschichte,  1.2  p.  366  sq,  ;  Th.  Reinach,  in  Revue  des
£tudes  grecques,  3  ( 1 890),  p.  90  sqq,

11.  3.  the  Islands  of  Aeolus.  The  Homeric  isle  of  Aeolus  was  a
fabulous  floating  island,  with  a  wall  of  brass  running  all  round  the  edge
of  the  sheer  cliffs.  See  Homer,  Od,  x.  i  sqq,,  on  which  passage
Mr.  Merry  has  suggested  that  the  description  may  be  based  on
the  stories  of  some  Phoenician  sailors  who,  sailing  northward  in
the   Atlantic,   had  fallen  in  with  an  iceberg  and  seen  its  tall  sides


278  KINGS  OF  THE  WINDS  bk.  x.  phocis

glittering  like  burnished  brass  in  the  sun.  Homer  {Od,  x.  19  sqq.)
makes  Aeolus,  as  King  of  the  Winds,  give  Ulysses  the  winds  shut  up  in
a  leather  bag.  In  Virgil  (Aen,  i.  52  sqq.)  we  read  that  Aeolus  keeps
the  winds  chained  up  in  a  vast  cave.  It  is  said  that  in  Lithuanian
mythology  Perdoytus  the  wind-god  keeps  the  winds  in  a  leather  sack  ;
when  they  escape  he  catches  them,  beats  them,  and  shuts  them  up
again.  See  E.  Veckenstedt,  Die  Mytken,  Sagen^  und  Legenden  der
Zamatten  {Litauer\  i.  p.  153.  (But  the  statements  made  in  this  book
are  to  be  received  with  great  caution  :  see  Folklore^  2  (1891),  pp.
100  sqq.^  483  sq.).  On  the  Slave  Coast  of  Africa  Wuo,  the  spirit  of
the  Harmattan  wind,  "  is  believed  to  be  shut  up  in  a  cave  under  the
charge  of  a  keeper  named  Wuo-hunto,  who  at  certain  seasons  opens  the
door  and  lets  out  Wuo  to  annoy  mankind  "  (A.  B.  Ellis,  The  Ewe-speak-
ing Peoples  of  the  Slave  Coasty  p.  76).  In  the  temple  of  the  Winds  at
Pekin  there  is  the  image  of  a  man  with  a  sack  on  his  back  in  which  are
the  winds  (A.  Bastian,  Die  Vblker  des  oestlichen  Asien^  6.  p.  33).  The
Maoris  think  that  Mawe  holds  the  winds  in  his  hands  or  keeps  them
shut  up  in  caves.  The  only  wind  he  cannot  catch  is  the  West  wind,
which  blows  almost  constantly.  When  any  of  the  other  winds  is
blowing,  the  Maoris  think  that  Mawe's  enemies  have  rolled  away  the
stone  from  the  mouth  of  the  cave,  or  that  Mawe  has  let  them  loose  to
punish  mankind  or  to  ride  on  their  wings  in  chase  of  the  West  wind.
See  W.  Yate,  Account  of  New  Zealand^  p.  144.  The  Motumotu  in  New
Guinea  think  that  a  sorcerer  keeps  each  of  the  winds  shut  up  in  a
bamboo,  which  he  opens  at  pleasure  (J.  Chalmers,  Pioneering  in  New
Guinea^  p.  177).  In  the  island  of  Huapine,  in  the  Pacific,  the  people
used  to  believe  that  the  winds  were  confined  in  two  caves,  one  where
the  sun  rises,  and  the  other  where  he  sets,  and  that  according  to  the
season  the  East  wind  or  the  West  wind  was  let  loose  to  blow  over  sea
and  land  (Tyermann  and  Bennet,  Voyages  and  Travels  in  tJie  South  Sea
Islands,  etc.,  p.  291).  The  people  of  Mangaia,  South  Pacific,  suppose
that  the  god  Raka  received  the  winds  hidden  in  a  great  basket.  Raka's
children  are  the  winds  and  storms  which  distress  the  world.  To  each
child  is  allotted  a  hole  on  the  verge  of  the  horizon,  through  which  he
blows  at  pleasure.  See  W.  W.  Gill,  Myths  and  Songs  of  the  South
Pacific,  p.  5.  In  the  Maldive  Islands  there  are  places  sacred  to  the
King  of  the  Winds,  where  those  who  have  escaped  shipwreck  offer  little
ships  filled  with  perfumes,  gums,  and  flowers.  The  perfumes  are  set  on
fire  and  the  boats  set  sailing  over  the  sea.  See  Pyrard,  Voyages  to  the
East  Indies,  etc.,  translated  by  Albert  Gray  (Hakluyt  Society,  1887),  i.
p.  175  sqq.

11.  4>  the  islands  they  till.      Here  Pausanias  may  have

drawn  on  Thucydides  (iii.  88),  who  says  the  same  thing  in  words  not
very  different.  Diodorus  tells  us  (v.  9)  that  at  first  all  the  lands  in  the
Aeolian  {Lipari)  Islands  were  held  in  conmion,  and  the  people  lived  in
public  messes.  Afterwards  the  lands  in  the  island  of  Lipara,  which
contained  the  capital,  were  divided  amongst  individuals,  while  the  other
islands  were  cultivated  in  common.  Lastly  the  people  adopted  the
system  of  distributing  the  lands  in  all  the  islands  by  lot  among  private


CH.  XI  ATHENIAN  TREASURY  279

owners,  who  held  them  for  twenty  years,  after  which  a  fresh  distribution
by  lot  took  place.  This  is  probably  one  of  the  earliest  recorded
examples  of  the  periodic  redistribution  of  all  the  lands  of  a  state  among  the
citizens.  For  examples  of  similar  customs  see  Laveleye,  De  la  proprUti  et
de  ses  formes  primitives^  ed.  3.  He  says  (p.  100)  that  among  the  Yoloffs
of  Afirica  **  the  land  belongs  to  the  villages  in  common.  Every  year
the  chief  of  the  village,  assisted  by  a  council  of  elders,  makes  a  redistri-
bution of  the  lands  to  be  tilled,  calculating  the  lots  according  to  the
needs  of  each  family.  This  is  exactly  the  same  custom  as  in  Java
and  Russia."  Diodorus's  account  of  the  Liparaean  islands  was  almost
certainly  borrowed  from  Timaeus,  who  in  turn  seems  to  have  copied
from  Antiochus  the  Syracusan  (see  §  3  note).  There  is  therefore
nothing  to  show  that  the  land  system  described  by  Diodorus  lasted  later
than  the  time  of  Timaeus,  whose  history  stopped  at  Ol.  129(1 64- 1 6 1  B.C. ).
See  Poly  bins,  i.  5.  i.  Mr.  Theodore  Reinach  has  made  it  highly
probable  that  in  the  days  of  their  independence  the  Liparaean  islanders
were  an  organised  community  of  pirates,  one  half  the  men  tilling  the
fields  while  the  other  half  scoured  the  seas.  The  system  would
certainly  be  put  down  by  the  Romans  when  they  conquered  the  islands
in  2  5 1  B.C.  See  Th.  Reinach,  *  Lc  coUectivisme  des  Grecs  de  Lipari,'
Revue  des  Etudes  grecques,  3  (1890),  pp.  86-96 ;  J.  GefTcken,  Timaios*
Geographie  des  Westens  (Berlin,  1892),  p.  62  sqq.  For  evidence  of
Liparaean  piracy,  Mr.  Reinach  refers  to  Livy  (v.  28),  who,  after
mentioning  the  capture  of  Roman  envoys  by  Liparaean  corsairs,  adds  :
*Mt  was  the  custom  of  that  state  to  divide  the  booty  which  had  been
earned  by  public  piracy."

11.  4*  In  Strongyle  fire  may  be  seen  rising  up  out  of  the  earth.
Strongyle  and  Hiera  were  active  volcanoes  in  the  time  of  Strabo  (vi.
p.  275  sq»)  and  Diodorus  (v.  7).  Cp.  Thucydides,  iii.  88  ;  Scymnus
Chius,  Orbis description  257  sqq, ;  Pliny,  Nat,  hist,  iii.  93  sq. ;  Mela,  ii.  120.
The  volcanic  fires  of  Strongyle  (now  called  Stromboli)  are  not  yet  extinct.
I  have  passed  the  island  several  times  and  twice  saw  a  light  cloud  of
smoke  hanging  over  the  summit.

11.  4.  baths  beside  the  sea  etc.  The  hot  springs  of  Lipara  were
famous  ;  they  possessed  a  medicinal  virtue.  Hence  patients  from  Sicily
resorted  to  them  in  large  numbers,  and  marvellous  cures  are  said  to
have  been  effected.     See  Diodorus,  v.  10  ;  cp.  Pliny,  Nat,  hist,  xxxi.  61.

11.  5.  the  treasury  of  the  Athenians.  The  remains  of  this
treasury  were  excavated  by  the  French  in  1893  and  1894.  The  build-
ing, about  10  metres  (32  ft  10  in.)  long  ^om  east  to  west  by  6
metres  (19  ft.  8  in.)  broad  from  north  to  south,  occupied  a  terrace
higher  up  than  the  Sicyonian  and  Siphnian  treasuries,  on  the  north  side
of  the  Sacred  Way,  which  at  this  point  has  already  taken  its  first  upward
bend  and  is  now  running  eastward  and  northward  towards  the  eastern
front  of  the  temple  of  Apollo.  Apparently  the  edifice  was  overthrown
by  an  earthquake  and  crushed  by  the  weight  of  materials  which  rolled
down  on  it  from  the  temple  above  ;  drums  of  huge  colunms  still  encumber
its  ruins.  But  the  foundations  exist,  and  the  architectural  members  and
sculptured  decorations  have  been  found  almost  entire.     Some  of  the


28o  ATHENIAN  TREASURY  bk.  x.  phocis

architectural  pieces  retain  vivid  traces  of  colour.  The  plan  of  the
treasury  was  that  of  a  small  Doric  temple  in  antis  opening  from  the
east ;  the  number  of  columns  between  the  antae  was  two.  With  the
exception  of  a  single  step,  which  is  made  of  reddish  limestone,  the  whole
edifice  is  constructed  of  Pentelic  or  Parian  marble  ^  in  the  most  exact  and
exquisite  style  of  architecture.  In  shape  the  capitals  resemble  those  of  the
temple  of  Athena  in  Aegina  and  the  temple  of  Zeus  at  Olympia.  On  the
north  the  treasury  is  protected  by  a  supporting-wall  built  of  polygonal  and
quadrangular  blocks  in  alternate  courses.  In  front  there  is  a  small  court
with  inscriptions  cut  on  its  supporting- walls.  Of  the  identity  of  the  build-
ing there  can  be  no  doubt,  for  engraved  on  the  walls  are  Athenian  decrees
in  which  mention  is  made  of  the  *  treasury  of  the  city '  and  *  house  of  the
Athenians.'  Moreover,  remains  of  the  dedicatory  inscription  can  still
be  read  on  one  of  the  steps,  including  the  words  A0ENAI  .  .  .
MAPA0  (*  Athenians  ....  Marathon ').  This  inscription,  mutilated
as  it  is,  suffices  to  confirm  Pausanias's  statement  that  the  treasury  was
built  out  of  the  spoils  of  the  battle  of  Marathon.  Moreover,  the  walls
of  the  building  as  high  up  as  the  architraves  were  covered  with  in-
scriptions, mostly  Attic  or  relating  to  Athenians.  By  comparing  the
inscriptions  it  has  been  found  possible  to  determine  the  order  of  the
courses  of  masonry ;  in  this  way  the  ant<u  have  been  restored  from  top
to  bottom  and  will  give  the  height  of  the  edifice.  Among  the  in-
scriptions engraved  on  the  walls  are  decrees  in  honour  of  Athenians
and  others,  passed  by  the  Athenian  people,  by  the  Tetrapolis  of
Marathon  (see  vol.  2.  p.  431),  and  by  the  Delphians ;  a  record  of  a
law-suit  between  the  Athenian  Society  of  Dramatic  Artists  (T€x»'*Tat)  and
the  corporation  of  Thebes ;  lists  of  Athenians  sent  in  various  official
capacities  to  the  celebration  of  the  Pythian  games ;  and  one  of  the
hymns  to  Apollo  with  musical  notation  (see  note  on  x.  7.  2).  Further,
the  supporting-wall  at  the  back  of  the  treasury  is  also  covered  with
inscriptions  recording  decrees  of  public  friendship  and  the  liberation  of
slaves.  Lastly,  tall  slabs  of  white  marble  have  been  found  on  the
terrace  bearing  inscriptions  on  their  four  faces.  The  two  remaining
hymns  to  Apollo  are  engraved  on  two  of  these  slabs.

A  frieze  of  triglyphs  and  sculptured  metopes  extended  round  all  four
sides  of  the  building.  The  metopes,  thirty  in  number,  have  been  found
almost  entire.  They  are  made  of  fine  white  Parian  marble,  while  the
triglyphs  are  made  of  an  inferior  bluish  variety  of  the  same  marble.
Six  metopes  adorned  each  of  the  narrow  ends  of  the  treasury,  and  nine
metopes  each  of  the  long  sides.  Inscriptions  slightly  scratched  on  the
background  of  the  reliefs  enable  us  to  determine  the  scenes  represented.
These  comprise  the  battle  of  the  gods  and  giants  and  the  exploits  of
Hercules  and  Theseus.  The  battle  of  the  gods  and  giants  occupied  the
six  metopes  of  the  east  front ;  the  deeds  of  Hercules  filled  the  six
western  and  the  nine  northern  metopes ;  while  the  nine  southern
metopes  app>ear  to  have  illustrated  the  exploits  of  Theseus.  From  the
inscriptions  we  learn  that  among  the  gods  and  their  adversaries  who

*  Mr.  Homolle  says  Peotelic,  Prof.  FiirtwMngler  says  Parian.


CH.  XI  ATHENIAN  TREASURY  281

figure  in  the  six  eastern  metopes  are  Hercules  and  Alcyoneus,  Athena
and  Enceladus,  Hera  and  Porphyrion,  Apollo  and  Ephialtes.  The
deeds  of  Theseus  represented  in  the  southern  metopes  comprise  his
combats  with  Periphetes,  Sciron,  Cercyon,  the  Amazons,  the  Minotaur,
the  bull  of  Marathon,  and  perhaps  the  robber  Sinis.  In  one  metope  we
see  the  meeting  of  Theseus  and  Athena.  The  two  stand  facing  each
other :  Theseus,  clad  very  lightly,  holds  up  his  right  hand  with  a  gesture
of  supplication  or  respect  Among  the  deeds  of  Hercules  which  the
sculptor  has  chosen  to  illustrate  arc  the  hero's  adventures  with  the
Nemean  lion,  Pholus,  Cycnus,  Hippolyte  (?),  Antaeus,  and  Geryom
The  affair  of  Geryon  filled  no  less  than  five  metopes,  in  which  we  see
three  groups  of  kine,  the  dog  Orthrus  on  his  back  between  the  legs  of
Hercules,  and  Geryon  himself  represented  as  a  triple-bodied  monster,
one  of  whose  bodies  succumbs  while  the  other  two  continue  the  fight.
In  regard  to  the  style  of  these  sculptures  Mr.  Homolle  tells  us  that  they
combine  something  of  archaic  austerity  with  Attic  grace  and  elegance,
presenting  many  analogies  to  the  later  black-figured  vases  and  still
more  to  the  fine  red-figured  vases  of  the  severe  style,  especially  to
works  of  Euphronius.  Of  the  treasury  as  a  whole,  with  its  sculptured
decoration,  he  says :  "I  hope  that  I  do  not  exaggerate  in  describing  it
as  a  masterpiece  of  archaic  art.  I  know  no  monument,  among  the
works  of  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  century,  of  which  the  execution  is
more  sharp,  delicate  and  elegant.  The  sculptures  have  the  same
qualities  of  grace  and  precision.  Their  archaic  seventy  is  tempered  by
a  softness  of  modelling  rare  in  works  of  this  date,  and  by  a  certain
richness  that  both  surprises  and  charms  us."  He  would  date  the
treasury  between  490  and  480  B.c.

See  Th.  Homolle,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  Jullinique^  17  (1893),  PP«  217  sq.^
612  sq»y  and  ib.  18  (1894),  pp.  169-172,  182  sq.  ;  fV/.,  in  Comptes  Rendtis  de
rAcademie  des  Insert ptiottSf  22  (1894),  pp.  339,  357  sq,^  587-589;  id.,  in  Gazette
des  Beaux-Arts,  D^embre  1894,  p.  449  sq.,  and  ib.  Avril  1895,  pp.  208-216 ;
id,,  in  American  Journal  of  Archaeology,  9  (1894),  p.  121 ;  M.  Collignon,  in
Comptes  Reftdus  de  VAcaddmie  des  Inscriptions,  22  (1894),  pp.  305-307,  313;
A.  Furtwangler,  in  Berliner  philolo^.  Wochenschrift,  29th  September  1894,
pp.  I278-I2&>;  H.  Pom  tow,  in  Archdologischer  Anzeiger,  1894,  pp.  183-185,
and  ib.  1895,  P*  ^^  ^^'

From  Mr.  Cecil  Smith  I  learn  that  on  a  terrace  immediately
adjoining  the  Athenian  treasury  the  following  inscription  is  carved
in  large  letters :  'A^T/vaioi  raTroXAovi  oKporivia  (sic)  re?  Mapa-
OQvos.  '  The  Athenians  (dedicated)  first-fruits  of  Marathon  to  Apollo.'
The  inscription  is  cut  in  would-be  archaic  style,  but  seems  really  to
date  from  the  third  century  B.C.  "The  problem,"  adds  Mr.  Smith,
**  is  unsolved."

11.  5.  The  Theban  treasury.  The  remains  of  this  building,
identified  by  inscriptions  engraved  on  its  walls,  were  excavated  by  the
French  in  1893.  It  stood  on  the  western  side  of  the  Sacred  Way  at
the  point  where  that  road,  after  running  westward  from  the  main
entrance,  turns  at  a  right  angle  northward  and  begins  to  ascend  the
slope.     The  treasury,  which  is  considerably  smaller  than  that  of  the


282  VARIOUS  TREASURIES  bk.  x.  phocis

Athenians,  is  built  of  fine  blue  limestone  in  the  shape  of  a  Doric
temple.  The  foundations  are  constructed  of  blocks  of  tufa  which
have  been  taken  from  an  earlier  edifice,  apparently  the  same  build-
ing which  furnished  the  foundations  of  the  Sicyonian  treasury  (see
above,  note  on  §  i).  Inscribed  on  the  walls  are  decrees  in  favour  of
various  Boeotian  and  especially  Theban  persons  ;  the  longest  inscription
refers  to  the  regulation  of  boundaries  between  two  Boeotian  cities.  See
Th.  Homolle,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique^  i8  (1894),  p.  184 ;  /V/.,
in  Comptes  Rendus  de  PAcad^mie  des  Inscriptions^  22  (1894),  p.  203  sq.  ;
H.  Pomtow,  \n  Archdologischer  Anzeigery  1895,  p.  10.

11.  5.  the  Gnidians  btdlt  their  treasury.  On  the  eastern  side  of
the  Sacred  Way,  exactly  opposite  the  Theban  treasury,  the  remains  of
a  quadrangular  building  of  some  size  were  laid  bare  by  the  French
excavations.  The  building  stands  at  the  point  where  the  Sacred  Way,
after  running  from  east  to  west,  makes  a  sharp  turn  northward.  Thus
the  road  skirts  the  building  on  two  sides,  namely  its  long  southern  and
its  short  western  side.  Mr.  H.  Pomtow  conjectures  that  this  building
may  have  been  the  Cnidian  treasury.  Mr.  Homolle,  who  does  not
attempt  to  identify  the  edifice  in  question,  now  believes  that  the  building
which  has  been  described  as  the  Siphnian  treasury  is  really  the  treasury
of  the  Cnidians  (see  above,  note  on  §  2).  See  Th.  Homolle,  in  Bulletin
de  Corresp,  Aell/nigue,  18  (1894),  p.  183  j^.  ;  zV/.,  in  Comptes  Rendus
de  VAcaddmie  des  Inscriptions^  23  (1895),  p.  39^  sq,  \  H.  Pomtow,  in
Archdologischer  Anzeiger^  1895,  P*  ^^*

11.  5.  they  sent  a  bronze  he-goat  to  Apollo.  On  the  relation  of
Apollo  to  goats,  see  L.  Stephani,  in  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for
1869,  p.  100  sq.  Goats  were  sometimes  sacrificed  to  Apollo  (Homer,
//.  i.  315  sq.\  At  Delos  the  god  had  an  altar  composed  entirely  of
goats'  horns  (Callimachus,  Hymn  to  Apollo^  60  sqq,  ;  Plutarch,  Theseus^
21  ;  ///.,  De  sollertia  animalium^  35).  In  Naxos  he  was  worshipped
under  the  title  of  Apollo  Tragius,  that  is,  *  Apollo  of  the  he-goats'.
(Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v.  Tpayaia).

11.  5.  The  Potidaeans  and  the  Syracnsans  have  also

treasuries.  Remains  of  these  buildings  have  been  identified  on  the
western  side  of  the  Sacred  Way,  between  the  Theban  and  Athenian
treasuries,  the  treasury  of  the  Syracusans  being  next  to  the  Sacred  Way
and  the  treasury  of  the  Potidaeans  behind  it  (Th.  Homolle,  in  Comptes
Rendus  de  VAcaddmie  des  Inscriptions^  22  (1894),  p.  584).  Mr.  Cecil
Smith  writes  to  me  that  the  Syracusan  treasury  perhaps  stood  at  the
back  of  the  Athenian,  for  here  in  1895  ^^  found  a  large  block  of  tufa
inscribed  with  some  letters  (PAKI221I12)  which  may  have  been  part  of  the
name  Syracusans.
f^  11.  6.  The  Athenians  also  built  a  colonnade  etc.  Considerable
remains  of  this  colonnade  were  discovered  and  excavated  by  Mr.  B.
Haussoullier  in  1880.  The  building  stands  on  the  north  side  of  the
Sacred  Way,  higher  up  than  the  Treasury  of  the  Athenians,  inmiediately
in  front  of  the  eastern  part  of  the  long  polygonal  wall  that  supports  the
terrace  of  the  temple  of  Apollo.  It  is  parallel  to  the  polygonal  wall
which  seems  to  have  formed  the  back-wall  of  the   colonnade.     The


CH.  XI  ATHENIAN  COLONNADE  283

depth  of  the  colonnade,  measured  from  the  polygonal  wall  to  the
outer  edge  of  the  stylobate,  is  about  3.70  metres  (12  ft.  i^  in.).
Its  length,  so  far  as  it  was  excavated  by  Mr.  Haussoullier,  is  24.07
metres  (78  ft.  11^  in.);  but  Mr.  Haussoullier  was  unable  to  dis-
engage the  eastern  end  of  the  building.  The  base  of  the  most
westerly  column  was  found  in  its  original  position.  It  is  0.225  metre
high,  0.59  metre  in  diameter  below,  and  0.432  in  diameter  above.  Two
other  bases  and  two  shafts  of  columns  have  been  found  and  have  been
set  up,  the  original  positions  of  the  columns  being  clearly  indicated  by
circular  marks  on  the  stylobate.  The  columns  are  of  the  Ionic  order
with  sixteen  blunt  flutings  of  the  usual  sort.  The  shafts  are  monoliths
measuring  2.85  metres  (about  9  ft.  4  in.)  in  height.  One  of  them  was
found  broken  in  two,  but  the  pieces  have  been  clamped  together.  The
distance  between  the  columns,  measured  from  centre  to  centre,  is  3.57
metres  (about  11  ft  8^  in.).  Seven  columns  stood  originally  in  front  of
the  excavated  portion  of  the  colonnade,  and  there  was  probably  one
more  at  the  eastern  end.  Thus  the  colonnade  seems  to  have  had  eight
columns  in  front  and  to  have  been  about  100  feet  long.  It  stood  on  a
three-stepped  base.  These  three  steps  begin  about  the  second  colunm,
counted  from  the  west,  and  extend  to  the  seventh  column.  Beyond
this  point  eastward  the  two  lower  steps  appear  not  to  have  reached;
for  here  the  pavement  of  the  Sacred  Way  skirts  the  colonnade  at  such
a  level  that  only  the  highest  step  of  the  colonnade  rises  above  it.  Of
the  capitals  of  the  columns,  the  epistyle,  and  the  roof  nothing  has  been
found.  From  the  position  and  size  of  the  columns  it  has  been  inferred
that  the  roof  was  of  wood.  With  regard  to  the  materials  of  the  existing
remains,  the  stylobate  and  steps  are  of  grey  limestone  ;  the  bases  of  the
columns  are  of  Parian  marble ;  and  the  shafts  of  the  columns  are  of
Pentelic  marble.  On  the  perpendicular  face  of  the  highest  step  is  cut
in  large  letters  the  inscription  :

'AOrivatoi  dv€^€crav  T^i'  crroav  koi  to,
Ho7rA[a  K]ai  raKporkpia  HcAovrcs  rov  7ro[A,€/ii6]i'.

"  The  Athenians  dedicated  the  colonnade  and  the  arms  and  the  figure-
heads which  they  took  from  their  enemies.''

The  floor  of  the  colonnade  is  paved  at  the  back  by  a  row  of  blocks
of  stone  which  runs  at  the  foot  of  the  polygonal  wall  along  the  whole
length  of  the  colonnade  on  a  level  with  the  stylobate.  The  breadth  of
the  stones,  measured  from  the  polygonal  wall  to  their  outer  edge,  is
1.34  metres  (about  4  ft.  4^  in.).  Mr.  Haussoullier  regarded  this  row  of
stones  as  part  of  the  original  pavement  of  the  colonnade,  and  supposed
that  there  had  been  a  second  row  of  slabs  between  the  existing  row  and
the  stylobate.  Mr.  Koldewey  with  greater  probability  argues  that  this
row  of  blocks  formed  the  foundation  of  a  base  or  p>edestal  which  ran
along  the  whole  length  of  the  colonnade,  abutting  on  the  back  wall.
In  proof  of  this  he  points  out,  first,  that  the  blocks  are  about  a  foot
thick,  which  is  too  thick  for  a  mere  pavement,  and,  second,  that  on  the
back  wall  at  the  height  of  90  centimetres  (about  3  feet)  above  the


284  A  THENIAN  COLONNADE  bk.  x.  phocis

stylobate  there  are  traces  which  seem  to  show  that  a  structure  of  some
sort  abutted  on  it.  For  at  this  height  the  wall  has  been  smoothed  in
a  horizontal  line,  as  if  to  facilitate  the  exact  joining  of  a  row  of  stones  ;
whereas  below  this  line  there  are  irregularities  in  the  surface  of  the  wall,
which  would  have  been  concealed  by  a  long  pedestal  such  as  Mr.
Koldewey  supposes  to  have  extended  along  the  back  of  the  colonnade.
On  this  pedestal  probably  stood,  as  Mr.  Koldewey  suggests,  the  shields
and  figure-heads  of  ships  mentioned  in  the  inscription  and  by  Pausanias.
It  is  no  objection  to  Mr.  Koldewe/s  view  that  a  number  of  inscriptions,
all  much  later  than  the  colonnade,  are  carved  on  the  polygonal  wall  at
the  back  of  the  colonnade.  For  the  lowest  of  the  inscriptions  is  93
centimetres  above  the  level  of  the  stylobate ;  hence  it  is  higher  than  the
supposed  pedestal  and  could  have  been  carved  on  the  wall  even  though
the  pedestal  abutted  on  the  wall  below.  Pausanias  tells  us  that  the
inscription  enumerated  the  states  from  the  spoils  of  which  the  colonnade
was  set  up.  The  inscription  he  refers  to,  which  was  clearly  not  the  one
that  has  been  found  carved  on  the  step  of  the  colonnade,  may  have
been  cut  on  the  front  of  the  pedestal.

As  to  the  date  and  occasion  of  dedicating  the  colonnade,  Pausanias
tells  us  that  it  was  erected  with  the  produce  of  spoils  taken  by  the
Athenians  in  the  Peloponnesian  war  (431-404  B.C.),  and  he  connects
it  specially  with  the  naval  victory  won  in  the  year  429  B.C.  by  the
Athenian  fleet  under  Phormio  over  the  Peloponnesians  in  the  Gulf  of
Corinth  (Thucydides,  ii.  83  sq,).  This  opinion  he  apparently  based  on
the  inscription  which  enumerated  the  peoples  from  whom  the  spoils
were  taken,  and  we  need  not  doubt  that  he  saw  the  inscription  and  has
given  us  the  list  of  peoples  correctly,  though  the  inscription  is  now  lost
and  we  consequently  cannot  verify  his  statement.  Now,  since  all  the
peoples  mentioned  in  the  list  were  ranged  against  Athens  in  the  Pelopon-
nesian war,  and  since  moreover  the  inscription  mentioned  the  name  of
Phormio  and  the  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving  offered  at  Cape  Rhium,  on
which  we  know  from  Thucydides  that  the  Athenians  erected  a  trophy
after  the  victory  of  429  B.C.,  it  becomes  highly  probable  that  Pausanias
was  right  in  inferring  that  the  trophies  to  which  the  inscription  referred
were  a  first-fruit  of  Phormio*s  naval  victory.  But  was  he  equally  right
in  affirming  that  the  colonnade  itself,  as  well  as  these  trophies,  was
dedicated  from  the  spoils  of  the  Peloponnesian  war  ?  This  has  been
doubted  or  denied,  and  on  good  grounds.  For  the  existing  inscription
which  records  the  dedication  of  the  colonnade  appears  to  be  consider-
ably older  than  429  B.C.  This  is  inferred  from  the  shape  of  the  letters,
particularly  from  the  occurrence  of  the  three-stroke  signia  (J)  and  the
crossed  theta  (0)  instead  of  the  four-stroke  stgtna  (^)  and  the  dotted
tketa  (0),  for  the  three-stroke  sigma  seems  to  have  fallen  into  disuse
about  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  and  the  crossed  theta  some-
what earlier.  Hence  Mr.  Haussoullier  conjectured  that  the  colonnade
was  erected  to  commemorate  the  naval  victories  won  by  the  Athenians
over  the  Corinthians,  Epidaurians,  and  Aeginetans  in  or  about  the  years
460-458  B.C.  See  Thucydides,  i.  105  ;  Diodorus,  xi.  78.  His  view  is
shared  by  Mr.   E.   L.   Hicks  and  Prof.   W.  Dittenberger.     Prof.  U.


CH.  XI  ATHENIAN  COLONNADE  285

Kohler,  on  epigraphical  grounds,  would  date  the  inscription  and  con-
sequently the  colonnade  still  earlier.  He  thinks  that  the  success
commemorated  by  the  colonnade  was  the  naval  victory  won  by  the
Athenians  over  the  Aeginetans  shortly  before  or  after  the  battle  of
Marathon  (490  B.C.).  See  Herodotus,  vi.  92.  Mr.  Roehl  would  date
the  inscription  still  earlier,  namely  in  the  time  of  Pisistratus  in  the  sixth
century  B.C.

If  with  Messrs.  Haussoullier,  Hicks,  Dittenberger,  and  K5hler,  we
assume  that  the  inscription  in  question  and  consequently  the  colonnade
belong  to  the  first  half  of  the  fifth  century  B.C,  it  will  follow  that  the
colonnade  contained  naval  trophies  of  at  least  two  separate  wars,  namely,
(i)  the  war  with  the  Aeginetans  about  490  B.C.  or  the  war  with
the  Corinthians,  Epidaurians,  and  Aeginetans  about  459  B.C.,  and  (2)
the  Peloponnesian  war,  particularly  the  victory  of  Phormio  in  429  RC.
The  trophies  referred  to  in  the  dedicatory  inscription,  which  is  still  to
be  seen  on  the  upper  step  of  the  colonnade,  were  the  first  of  these
trophies ;  the  trophies  referred  to  in  the  inscription  which  was  seen  by
Pausanias  but  is  now  lost,  were  the  second  trophies.  Pausanias  must
certainly  have  seen  the  existing,  as  well  as  the  lost,  inscription ;  but
he  failed  to  notice  the  discrepancy  in  the  style  of  the  two  inscriptions,
and  as  both  recorded  the  dedication  of  naval  trophies,  he  not  unnaturally
inferred  that  the  success  commemorated  by  both  was  the  same,  namely
Phormio's  victory  of  429  B.c.  This  led  him  into  dating  the  erection
of  the  colonnade  in  or  soon  after  that  year  (429  B.C.),  which,  on  the
hypothesis  of  the  scholars  mentioned  above,  is  too  late  by  about  thirty
or  sixty  years,  or  even  more.

Against  this  hypothesis  the  following  considerations  may  be  urged  :
(i)  Arguments  based  on  the  style  of  the  letters  of  an  inscription  are
after  all  uncertain  and  are  liable  to  be  upset  by  the  discovery  of  new
inscriptions.  Various  circumstances  may  have  caused  an  old-fashioned
style  of  letter  to  be  kept  up  by  certain  masons  or  in  certain  places  after
it  had  been  generally  abandoned.  (2)  The  architectural  style  of  the
colonnade  belongs,  as  I  was  informed  by  my  friend  the  late  J.  H.
Middleton,  rather  to  the  second  than  to  the  first  half  of  the  fifth
century  B.C.  (3)  Though  possible,  it  is  not  very  probable  that  the
colonnade  contained  two  duplicate  sets  of  naval  trophies  (figure-heads
and  shields)  won  in  totally  different  wars.

If  the  argument  from  the  architectural  style  of  the  colonnade  is
allowed  to  outweigh  the  argument  from  the  style  of  the  inscription,  it
will  follow  that  Pausanias  was  right  in  dating  the  erection  of  the
colonnade  in  429  B.C.  or  soon  after  it,  and  in  referring  all  the  trophies
to  the  Peloponnesian  war.  But  whether  the  epigraphical  or  the
architectural  evidence  is  more  to  be  trusted,  I  am  not  competent  to
decide.

See  B.  Haussoullier,  '  Fouilles  k  Delphes,'  Bulletin  cU  Corresp,  helUnique^
5  (1881),  pp.  1-25 ;  R.  Koldewey,  *Die  llalle  der  Athencr  zu  Delphi,'  Mitthei-
lungen  des  archaologischen  Instituts  in  AtAen,  9  (1884),  pp.  264-270 ;  id.,  14  (1889),
pp.  205-208 ;  H.  Pomtow,  Beitrdge  zur  Topographic  von  Delphi ,  pp.  42-45,  56-
63 ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  39  sq.  ;  tJ.  Kohler, '  Die  Halle  der  Athener  in  Delphi,'
Rheinisches  Museum ^  N.  F.  46  (1891),  pp.  1-8;  E.  L.  Hicks,  Greek  Historical


286  THE  SIBYVS  ROCK  bk,  x.  phocis

Inscriptions^  No.  20 ;  W.  Dittenberger,  Syllogt  Inscr,  Graec.  No.  4 ;  Roehl,
/.  G.  A.  No.  3a,  p.  169;  H.  Pomtow,  *Zur  Datirung  der  Halle  der  Athener
zu  E)5lphi,'  Rheinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  49  (1894),  pp.  %11'(}1%


zu  D^


12.  I.  a  rock  rising  above  the  ground  etc  Plutarch  mentions
the  rock  at  Delphi  on  which  the  first  Sibyl  was  said  to  have  sat  and  he
tells  us  that  it  was  opposite  the  Council  House  {De  Pyihiae  oraoiliSy  9).
If  Pausanias  here  follows  a  strictly  topographical  order,  we  should
expect  to  find  the  Sibyl's  rock  and  the  remains  of  the  Council  House
near  the  eastern  end  of  the  polygonal  wall  which  supported  the  temple
of  Apollo,  since  the  Colonnade  of  the  Athenians,  which  he  has  just
mentioned,  ran  along  in  front  of  the  eastern  part  of  that  wall.  But  the
whole  of  the  ground  here  has  been  cleared,  and  the  monuments  with
which  it  is  crowded  leave  no  room  for  such  a  rock  as  Pausanias  describes.
Accordingly  the  rock  and  the  Council  House  must  be  looked  for  else-
where. Now  between  the  Treasury  of  the  Athenians  and  the  Colonnade
of  the  Athenians,  to  the  north  of  the  Sacred  Way,  there  is  a  patch  of
ground  encumbered  by  rocks,  of  which  the  highest  rises  in  a  conspicuous
mass  just  beside  the  road.  Clearly  these  rocks  have  not  fallen  from
the  cliffs  above  in  recent  times ;  they  have  been  there  from  antiquity.
Their  surface  has  been  worked  with  tools,  and  they  seem  to  have  stood
in  a  sort  of  precinct  enclosed  by  a  wall  of  which  vestiges  have  been
found.  The  high  conspicuous  rock  already  mentioned  is  rent  by  a
rather  deep  fissure,  and  its  top  is  accessible  by  steps  hewn  in  the  rock
itself.  This  was  probably  the  rock  on  which  the  oldest  Sibyl  sat  and
prophesied.  It  is  referred  to  as  *  the  rock '  (d  rrerpa)  in  an  inscription
found  in  the  neighbourhood.  We  may  suppose  that  this  patch  of  rocky
ground  was  the  sanctuary  of  Earth  and  the  Muses  mentioned  by
Plutarch  (J)e  Pythiae  oraculis^  17).  Its  situation  answers  perfectly  to
his  description,  since  it  lies  immediately  to  the  south  of  the  temple  of
Apollo.  Plutarch  says  that  he  and  his  friends  went  round  the  temple
of  Apollo  and  "sat  down  on  the  southern  steps  looking  towards  the
sanctuary  of  Earth  and  the  water."  He  proceeds  to  explain  "the
water"  by  saying  that  a  spring  here  came  to  the  surface  and  that  its
water  used  to  furnish  libations  in  a  sanctuary  of  the  Muses  situated
beside  the  spring.  Now  just  here  there  is  a  hole  in  the  polygonal  wall
communicating  with  a  conduit  which  passed  under  the  temple.  This,
we  may  assume,  was  "  the  water  "  mentioned  by  Plutarch.  The  oracles
of  Earth  (Paus.  x.  5.  5)  were  no  doubt  believed  to  have  been  delivered
in  the  sanctuary  of  tlie  goddess,  perhaps  to  have  been  pronounced  by
the  goddess  or  her  priestess  on  the  Sibyl's  Rock.  >^The  view  that  the
sanctuary  and  oracle  of  Earth  lay  between  the  polygonal  wall  and  the
Sacred  Way  is  confirmed,  as  Mr.  Homolle  points  out,  by  the  presence
of  a  colossal  figure  of  a  sphinx  which  occupied  the  summit  of  a  tall
colunm  in  this  neighbourhood,  for  the  sphinx  was  a  creature  associated
with  prophecy.  The  shattered  remains  of  the  column  and  sphinx  were
seen  and  described  by  Mr.  Foucart  more  than  thirty  years  ago
{Mimotre  sur  les  mines  et  PJUstoire  de  Deiphes^  pp.  90-93  ;  cp.  J.  H.
Middleton,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  9  (1888),  p.  321  sq.\  but
it  was  reserved  for  Mr.  Foucart's  compatriots  a  few  years  ago  to  put


CH.  xn  THE  NAXIAN  COLUMN  287

together  the  fragments  and  prove  that  the  image  of  the  sphinx,  made  of
white  marble  and  represented  sitting  with  extended  wings,  smiling  a
grave  mysterious  smile,  occupied  an  enormous  Ionic  capital  on  the  top
of  a  column  7  or  8  metres  (23  or  ?6  feet)  high,  the  image  itself  being
more  than  2  metres  (6  ft.  6  in.)  high.  Curiously  enough  this  column,
crowned  with  an  Ionic  capital,  has  no  less  than  forty-four  sharp-edged
flutes  of  the  Doric  sort  On  it  is  an  inscription  recording  certain
privileges  of  consulting  the  oracle  accorded  to  the  Naxians  by  the
Delphians  (P.  Foucart,  MSmoire^  p.  90 ;  Wescher-Foucart,  Inscriptions
recueillies  d.  Delphes,  No.  466  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec»  No.
328  ;  Ch.  Michel,  Recueil  (^Inscriptions grecques,  No.  257),  from  which
it  has  been  commonly  inferred  that  the  sphinx  and  the  column  were
dedicated  by  the  Naxians.  But  this  inference,  though  probable,  is  by  no
means  necessary;  for  the  inscription  is  much  later  than  the  sphinx,  being
not  earlier  than  the  end  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.,  while  the  image  of
the  sphinx  is  archaic.

SecTh.  Homolle,in  Bulletin dc  Corresp,  helUniquCy  17  (1893),  PP'6i3, 619;  id.^
in  Comptes  Rendusde  V Academic  des  Inscriptions^  zi  (1894),  pp.  585,  58(6;  id,^  in
Gazette  des  Beaux- Arts ^  D^cembre  1894,  p.  447  ;  H.  Pomtow,  in  Archdologischer
Anzeigery  1 894,  p.  185.

In  this  neighbourhood  above  the  Treasury  of  the  Athenians  are
the  remains  of  a  building  constructed  of  tufa  which  Mr.  Homolle
conjectures  to  have  been  the  Council  House  mentioned  by  Plutarch
{De  Pythiae  oraculis,  9).  The  building,  Mr.  Cecil  Smith  tells  me,
ap|>ears  to  have  had  no  columns.  See  Th.  Homolle,  in  Bulletin  de
Corresp.  helUnique^  18  (1894),  p.  184.

Above  the  sanctuary  of  Earth,  on  the  left  of  the  Sacred  Way,  two
triangular  blocks  of  marble  were  found  with  an  inscription  referring  to
the  Messenians.  It  would  seem  that  these  and  similar  blocks  of
marble  discovered  at  Delphi  formed  part  of  a  tall  triangular  pedestal
dedicated  by  the  Messenians  and  Naupactians.  The  pedestal  may
have  supported  a  colossal  statue  of  Victory  like  the  one  which  the  same
peoples  set  up  on  a  similar  pedestal  at  Olympia  (Paus.  v.  26.  i  note).
See  Th.  Homolle,  in  Comptes  Rendus  de  VAcacUmie  des  Inscriptions^  22
(1894),  p.  585  sq.\  H.  Pomtow,  *Die  dreiseitige  Basis  der  Messenier
und  Naupaktier  zu   Delphi,'  Fleckeisen^s  JcJirbUclier^   42   (1896),   pp.

505-536,  577-639,  754-769.

The  oracle  of  Earth  was  said  to  have  been  guarded  by  the  dragon
Python,  whom  Apollo  slew  (Paus.  x.  6.  6).  Hence  Mr.  Homolle
conjectures  that  the  dragon  had  his  den  in  the  rifted  rock,  which  formed
the  SibyPs  seat,  and  that  the  sacred  drama  of  the  dragon's  slaughter
was  periodically  enacted  in  the  adjoining  open  space  in  front  of  the
Colonnade  of  the  Athenians  {Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique^  17  (1893),
p.  619  j^. ;  Comptes  Rendus  de  V Academic  des  Inscriptions^  22  (1894),
p.  585).  This  conjecture,  as  we  have  seen  (above,  p.  259),  is  confirmed
by  the  circular  shape  of  the  space,  resembling  a  threshing-floor,  and  by
the  stone  benches  by  which  it  is  surrounded.  Some  of  these  benches
were  excavated  and  described  by  Mr.  Haussoullier  in  1880  {Bulletin
de  Corresp,  helUnique^  5  (1881),  pp.  3-5).


288    ^  THE  SIBYLS  bk.  x.  phocis


12.   I.  Herophile,  snmamed  Sibyl  etc     In  the  following  passage
Pausanias  enumerates  four  Sibyls :   ( i )   the  oldest  Sibyl,  who  seems,
according  to  him,  to  have  been  the  Libyan  Sibyl,  but  the  passage  is
defective ;  (2)  Herophile  of  Marpessus  or  Erythrae ;  (3)  the  Cumaean
Sibyl ;  (4)  the  Judaean  Sibyl.     Elsewhere,  when  he  has  occasion   to
refer  to  the  Sibylline  oracles,  he  speaks  as  if  there  had  been  only  one
Sibyl.     See  ii.   7.    i  ;  vii.   8.  8 ;  x.   9.    \\  sq.     Hence  it   seems   not
improbable  that  the  whole  of  his  present  disquisition  on  the  Sibyls  was
copied  by  him  from  some  other  author.     Prof.  E.  Maass  has  argued
ingeniously  that  Pausanias's  authority  was  Alexander  Polyhistor ;  but  as
Polyhistor  is  not  positively  known  to  have  written  a  work  on  the  Sibyls,
the  professor's  view  is  hardly  more  than  a  plausible  conjecture.     See  E.
Maass,  De  Sibyllarum  Indicibus  (Berlin,   1879).     At  first  the  Greeks
seem  to  have  known  of  only  one  Sibyl  (Heraclitus,  cited  by  Plutarch,
De   Pythiae  oraculisj   6;    Aristophanes,  Peace j    1095,    11 16;    Plato,
Phaedrus^  p.    244  b).      The   first  writer  who  is  known  to  have  dis-
tinguished several  Sibyls  is  Heraclides  Ponticus  in  his  book  On  oracles^
in  which  he  appears  to  have  enumerated  at   least  three,  namely  the
Phrygian,  the  Erythraean,  and  the  Hellespontine.      See  Clement  of
Alexandria,  Strom,  i.   21.    108,   p.   384  ed.   Potter;  Schol.  on  Plato,
PhaedruSy  p.  244  b ;  Lactantius,  Divin,  Inst  i.  6.     Later  writers  dis-
tinguished many  more ;    Varro  for  example  gave  a   list  of  ten.     See
Lactantius,  Lc, ;  Oracula  Sibyllina^  Prologue ;  Isidore,  Origin,  viii.  8  ;
Suidas,  5.V.    ^C/Svkka ;    Aelian,    Vdr.  hist.  xii.  35;    Schol.  on   Plato,
PhaedruSj  p.  244  b.     Prof.  Maass  (pp.  cit.  p.  ^d  sqq.)  holds  that  two
only  of  the  Greek  Sibyls  were  historical,  namely  Herophile  of  Erythrae,
and  Phyto  of  Samos ;  the  former,  he  thinks,  lived  in  the  eighth  century
B.C.,  the  latter  somewhat  later.     As  to  Phyto  the  Samian  Sibyl,  whom
Eratosthenes  is  said  to  have  found  mentioned  in  the  ancient  annals  of
Samos,    see  Lactantius   I.e. ;    Oracula  Sibyllina^  Prologue ;   Schol.  on
Plato,  PhaedruSy   p.    244b;   Aelian,  Var.  hist.  xii.   35;    Suidas,    s.v.
'2ipvkka  ;  Augustine,  De  civ.  dei,  xviii.  24  ;  Isidore,  Orig.  viii.  8.     As
to  the  Sibyls,  see  also  R.  H.  Klausen,  Aeneas  und  die  Penaten,  i .  pp.
203-312  ;  A.  Bouchd-Leclercq,  Histoire  de  la  divincUion^  2.   pp.  133-
214.     On  the  Sibylline  books,  see   Ewald,   *  Ueber  die  Entstehung,
Inhalt    und   Werth    der   sibyllinischen    Biicher,'   Abhandlungen  d,    k.
Gesell.  d.    Wissen.  zu  Gottingeny  Histor.  phil.  CI.  8  (185 8-1 8 59),  pp.
43-152.

12.  I.  The  earlier  Sibyl  etc.  The  mention  of  the  nationality  ot
this  earlier  Sibyl  seems  to  have  dropped  out  of  Pausanias's  text.  See
Critical  Note,  vol.  i.  p.  608.  She  was  probably  the  Libyan  Sibyl.  For
(i)  Pausanias  says  that  she  was  called  Sibyl  by  the  Libyans;  and  (2)
her  mother's  name,  according  to  Pausanias,  was  Lamia.  Now  Lamia
was  a  mythical  queen  of  Libya  (Diodorus,  xx.  41);  and  Euripides
mentioned  the  Libyan  Sibyl  in  the  prologue  to  his  play  Lamia.  See
Lactantius,  Divin,  Inst.  i.  6  ;  Oracula  Sibyllinay  Prologue ;  Schol.  on
Plato,  PhaedruSy  p.  244  b ;  E.  Maass,  De  Sibyllarum  IndicibuSy  p.  6
sqq.  ;  R.  H.  Klausen,  Aefteas  und  die  Penaten,  i.  p.  207  ;  A.  Bouch^-
Leclercq,  Histoire  de  la  divination y  2.  p.  190  sqq.


CH.  XII  THE  SIBYLS  289

12.  2.  she  calls  herself Artemis.    Cp.  Suidas,  s,v,  ^ipvXka.

12.  2.  his  daughter.  According  to  some,  the  Sibyl  was  a  daughter
of  Apollo  and  Lamia  (Suidas,  s.v,  Se^vXAa).

12.  3.  my  fjfttherland  was  red  Marpessns.  The  lists  of  the
Sibyls  mention  a  Hellespontine  Sibyl,  a  native  of  Marpessus.  Accord-
ing to  Heraclides  Ponticus  she  was  a  contemporary  of  Solon  and  Cyrus.
See  Lactantius,  Divin,  Inst  i.  6 ;  Suidas,  5,v,  ^i^vkka ;  Oracula
Sibyllina^  Prologue ;  Schol.  on  Plato,  PhaedruSy  p.  244  b ;  Isidore,
Orig,  viii.  8.  But  the  Hellespontine  Sibyl  was  never  so  famous  as  the
Erythraean  Sibyl ;  and  from  the  present  passage  of  Pausanias  it  would
seem  that  the  people  of  Marpessus  or  their  literary  partisans  endeavoured
to  appropriate  the  more  famous  Erythraean  Sibyl  by  showing  that  her
epithet  *  Erythraean '  was  derived,  not  from  the  rival  town  of  Erythrae,
but  from  the  red  {erythre)  soil  of  Marpessus.  Prof.  E.  Maass  has
ingeniously  suggested  that  the  last  of  the  four  verses  here  quoted  by
Pausanias  was  forged  in  support  of  the  claim  of  Marpessus  against
Erythrae  by  the  unscnipulous  writer  Demetrius  of  Scepsis,  who  seems
to  have  distorted  more  than  one  Greek  tradition  for  the  purpose  of
glorifying  his  native  Troad.  If  we  omit  the  last  of  the  four  verses,  the
statement  as  to  the  birth-place  of  the  Sibyl  will  run  thus  :

"  By  my  mother's  side  I  am  Ida-bom,  but  my  fatherland  was  Erythre,"

where  Erythre  is  equivalent  to  Erythrae.  And  this  was  the  way  in
which  the  p>eople  of  Erythrae  actually  quoted  the  passage,  omitting
the  last  verse  (see  below  §  7).  If  Prof.  Maass's  theory  is  correct  (and
it  is  certainly  plausible)  Polyhistor  copied  from  Demetrius  of  Scepsis,
and  Pausanias  copied  from  Polyhistor.  See  E.  Maass,  De  Sibyllarum
Indicibusy  p.  22  sqq.  As  to  Demetrius  of  Scepsis,  see  R.  Gaede,  Demetrii
Scefsii  quae  supersunt  (Greisswald,  1880)  ;  K.  Tiimpel,  in  PhilologuSj  49
(1890),  p.  91  sqq.  On  the  other  hand  Mr.  Bouch^-Leclercq  thinks  that
the  claim  of  Marpessus  to  be  the  home  of  the  Sibyl  was  better  founded
than  that  of  Erythrae  (Histoire  de  la  divination^  2.  pp.  153  sqq,^
170  sqq,"),

12.  5.  the  temple  of  Sminthian  Apollo.  As  to  the  sanctuary  of
Sminthian  Apollo,  see  Strabo,  xiii.  pp.  604  sqq.y  612.  The  remains  of
the  temple  were  discovered  by  Captain  (afterwards  Admiral)  Spratt  in
1853,  and  the  site  was  excavated  by  Mr.  W.  Pullan  for  the  Dilettanti
Society  in  1866.  The  ruins  are  situated  near  the  sea-shore,  12  geogra-
phical miles  south  of  the  ruins  of  Alexandria  Troas,  and  4  geographical
miles  north-east  of  Cape  Lectum.  The  temple  was  of  the  Ionic  order
with  eight  columns  at  the  ends  and  fourteen  at  the  sides.  It  seems  to
have  been  built  in  a  period  of  good,  but  not  of  the  finest  art.  See
Antiquities  of  lonia^  Part  the  Fourth  (London,  1881),  pp.  40-48,  with
plates  xxvi.-xxx.  ;  Captain  Spratt,  *  On  the  site  of  the  temple  of  Apollo
Smintheus,'  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Literature^  Second
Series,  5  (1856),  pp.  236-242.  Sminthian  Apollo  is  equivalent  to
Mouse- Apollo,  sminthos  being  one  form  of  the  Greek  word  for  *  mouse.*
Tame  mice  were  kept  and  fed  in  the  sanctuary  of  Sminthian  Apollo ;
white  mice  lived  under  the  altar.     There  was  an  image  of  a  mouse

VOL.  V  U


290  SMINTHIAN  APOLLO  bk.  x,  phcx:is

beside  the  tripod ;  and  the  foot  of  the  status  of  the  god  rested  on  a
mouse.  See  Strabo,  xiii.  pp.  604  sq,j  612  sq, ;  Aelian,  Nat  an,  xii.  5  ;
Clement  of  Alexandria,  Protrept  ii.  39,  p.  34  ed.  Potter ;  J.  de  Witte,
*Apollon  Sminthien/  Revue  Numismatique,  N.  S.  3  (1858),  pp.  1-5 1.
At  a  place  called  JJsgyar  near  Alexandria  Troas  a  small  bronze  mouse
has  been  found ;  it  was  probably  a  votive  offering  to  the  Sminthian
Apollo  (Sir  C.  Newton,  Travels  and  Discoveries  in  the  Levant,  i.  p.  1 30).
On  a  Carthaginian  monument  two  mice  are  represented,  one  on  each
side  of  a  human  hand ;  Mr.  Berger  thought  it  might  be  a  votive  offer-
ing to  Tanit  {Gazette  arc/Uologique,  3  (1877),  PP«  25,  75).  Mr.  Andrew
Lang  holds  that  the  mouse  in  the  worship  of  Sminthian  Apollo  is  a
survival  of  a  mouse-totem  (Custom  and  My  thy  p.  103  sqq,).  It  is
perhaps  more  probable  that  the  worship  of  the  mouse,  or  rather
of  a  few  selected  mice,  esp>ecially  white  mice,  was  intended  to  pro-
pitiate the  mice  in  general  and  induce  them  not  to  ravage  the  corn-
fields. This  view  is  more  in  consonance  with  the  classical  traditions
(Aelian,  Hist,  an,  xii.  5  ;  Polemo,  cited  by  a  scholiast  on  Homer,  //.
i.  39 ;  Eustathius  on  Homer,  l,c,  p.  34),  and  is  supported  by  modem
analogies  {The  Golden  Bough,  2,  p.  129  sqq,).  As  to  the  destruc-
tive ravages  of  mice,  see  Aristotle,  //ist,  a«.  vi.  37,  p.  580  b  15  sqq, ;
Aelian,  I/ist.  an,  xvii.  41.  In  the  spring  of  1892  a  plague  of  field
mice  threatened  to  destroy  the  whole  harvest  in  Thessaly.  See  Mr.  W.
Warde  Fowler,  in  The  Classical  Review,  6  (1892),  p.  413,  who  takes
the  same  view  of  Sminthian  Apollo  as  the  present  writer.  Compare
note  on  V.  14.  i  ;  H.  Usener,  Gottemanien,  pp.  260-263  ;  A.  Lang,
Modem  Mythology  (London,  1897),  p.  81  sq,  Apollonius  of  Tyana  is
said  to  have  rid  Antioch  of  scorpions  by  making  a  bronze  image  of
a  scorpion  and  burying  it  under  a  small  pillar  in  the  middle  of  the  city
(Malala,  Chronographia,  p.  264  ed.  Dindorf).

12.  5.  Hecuba's  dream.  Hecuba,  when  she  was  pregnant  with
Paris,  dreamed  she  had  brought  forth  a  fiery  torch  which  burned  the
city.  The  soothsayers,  being  consulted,  foretold  that  the  child  would
prove  the  ruin  of  his  country.  See  Apollodorus,  iii.  12.  5  ;  Schol.  on
Euripides,  Andromache,  293;  Cicero,  De  divinatione,  i.  21.  42;
Hyginus,  Fab.  91.

12.  5.  This  Sibyl  dwelt  most  of  her  life  in  Samos.  Samos
appears  to  have  had  a  Sibyl  of  its  own.     See  note  on  §  i.

12.  5.  she  also  came to  Delphi.     Delphi,   like   Samos,   is

said  to  have  had  a  Sibyl  of  its  own.  See  E.  Maass,  De  Sibyllarum
Indicibus,  p.  9  sq,  ;  A.  Bouch^-Leclercq,  Histoire  de  la  divination,  2.
p.  179  sqq.

12.  6.  her  tomb  is  in  the  grove  of  the  Sminthian  god.  Accord-
ing to  Stephanus  Byzantius  {s.v,  Vkprfi%)  the  Sibyl's  grave  was  in  the
sanctuary  of  the  Gergithian  Apollo,  at  Gergis  or  Gergithium,  a  city  in
the  Troad  near  Marpessus,  the  Sibyl's  birth-place.  Compare  Oracula
Sibyllina,  Prologue ;  Lactantius,  Divin,  Inst,  i.  6 ;  Schol.  on  Plato,
Phaedrus,  p.  244  b.

12.    7*    The  Erythraeans urge  their  claim  to  Herophile.

Herophile  the  Sibyl  is  called  an  Erythraean  by  Plutarch  {De  Pythiae


CH.  XII  SIBYL  OF  ERYTHRAE  291


oraculiSj  14)  and  Clement  of  Alexandria  {Strom,  i.  21.  108,  p.  384  ed.
Potter).  The  Erythraean  Sibyl  was  the  most  famous  of  all  the  Sibyls  ;
hence  when  the  temple  of  Jupiter  on  the  Capitol  at  Rome  was  restored
after  its  destruction  by  fire  in  83  ac,  ambassadors  were  despatched  to
Erythrae,  who  brought  back  about  a  thousand  Sibylline  verses  (Lactan-
tius,  Difuin,  Inst  i.  6).

12.  7.  a  cave  in  it.  At  Lythri^  the  wretched  village  which  stands
among  the  ruins  of  the  ancient  Erythrae,  the  cave  of  the  Erythraean
Sibyl  was  discovered  in  the  summer  of  1 89 1.  The  place  is  at  the  eastern
foot  of  the  high  mountain  which  formed  the  acropolis  of  Erythrae.
The  cave  is  close  to  the  road,  on  the  left-hand  side  as  you  approach
the  village  from  the  south.  An  ancient  aqueduct,  now  dry,  leads  from
the  back  of  the  cavern.  That  this  is  really  the  Sibyl's  cave  appears  from
inscriptions  found  in  it.  Amongst  them  is  one :  'Aya^t  '^Xn  ipc),
[2)/)SvX]Aa  vvfufiris  koI  QeoStopov  [*E]pvOpauL.  "  With  good  luck.  The
Erythraean  Siby^  daughter  of  a  nymph  and  Theodorus.''  This  confirms
Pausanias's  statement  that  the  Erythraean  Sibyl  was  said  to  be  a
daughter  of  a  shepherd  Theodorus  by  a  nymph.  The  same  genealogy
is  given  in  a  metrical  inscription  found  in  the  cave,  of  which  the  following
is  a  translation :  "I  am  the  oracular  Sibyl,  the  minister  of  Phoebus,
eldest  daughter  of  a  Naiad  nymph.  My  native  land  is  Erythrae
alone  and  no  other,  and  Theodorus  was  my  mortal  sire.  Cissotas
was  my  birth-place,  in  which  I  uttered  oracles  to  mankind  as  soon
as  I  had  issued  from  the  womb.  And  seated  on  this  rock  I  sang
to  mortal  men  prophecies  of  events  which  were  yet  to  come.  And
living  thrice  three  hundred  years  as  an  unwedded  maid,  I  travelled
over  all  the  earth  ;  and  here  again  beside  this  dear  rock  I  now  sit
delighting  in  the  kindly  waters.  And  I  rejoice  that  the  time  has  now
come  true  to  me  in  which  I  said  that  Erythrae  would  flourish  again,
and  would  enjoy  all  good  government  and  wealth  and  virtue,  when  a
new  Erythrus  should  have  come  to  his  dear  native  land."  Here
Cissotas  seems  to  have  been  some  place,  perhaps  a  brook,  in  the
territory  of  Erythrae.  The  emphasis  laid  on  the  statement  that
Erythrae  alone  was  the  birth-place  of  the  Sibyl,  clearly  alludes  to  the
rival  claims  set  up  by  other  places,  such  as  Marpessus.  The  "new
Erythrus**  {t.e.  the  new  founder  of  Erythrae,  see  vii.  3.  7)  is  probably
the  emperor  Lucius  Aurelius  Verus,  who  seems  to  have  visited  Eleutherae.
For  an  inscription  found  in  the  cave  commemorates  the  dedication
of  the  spring  of  water  to  Marcus  Aurelius  Antoninus  and  Lucius
Aurelius  Verus ;  and  Verus  is  known  to  have  visited  the  famous
maritime  cities  of  Asia  Minor  (Capitolinus,  Verus^  vi.  9).  See  K.
Buresch,  *  Die  sibyllinische  Quellgrotte  in  Erythrae,'  Mittheilungen  des
arch,  Instituts  in  Athen^  ly  (1892),  pp.  16-36;  Bulletin  de  Corresp,
hell^nique^  15  (1891),  p.  682  sq,

12.  8.  the  historian  Hyperochus  of  Cumae.  A  history  of  Cumae
passed  under  the  name  of  Hyperochus,  but  some  doubt  was  entertained
as  to  its  authorship  (Athenaeus,  xiii.  p.  528  d).  Cp.  Festus,  p.  266  ed.
Miiller ;  Frag,  hist.  Grate,  4.  p.  434  sq,  ed.  Miiller.

12.  8.  Demo.    The  name  of  the  Sibyl  of  Cumae  is  variously  given  as


292  SIBYL  OF  CUAIAE  bk.  x.  phocis

Amalthea,  Demophile,  Herophile,  and  Taraxandra.  See  Varro,  cited  by
Lactantius,  Divin,  Inst.  i.  6 ;  Oracula  Sibyllina^  Prologue ;  Schol.  on  Plato,
Phaedrus^  p.  244  b.  Virgil  (Aen,  vi.  36)  calls  her  Deiphobe,  daughter
of  Glaucus.  She  seems  to  have  been  commonly  identified  with  Hero-
phile, the  Sibyl  of  Erythrae  or  Marpessus.  See  A.  Bouch6-Leclercq,
Histoire  de  la  divination^  2.  p.  184.

12.  8.  The  Onmaeans  have  no  oracle  of  hers  to  produce.  After
enumerating  the  ten  Sibyls,  Varro  (cited  by  Lactantius,  Divin.  Inst,  i.
6)  says  :  "  The  verses  of  all  these  Sibyls  are  preserved  and  are  handed
about,  except  those  of  the  Cumaean  Sibyl ;  for  her  books  are  con-
cealed by  the  Romans  and  may  not  be  inspected  by  any  one  except
the  Fifteen  Men."  The  author  of  the  Exhortation  to  the  GreekSy
which  passes  under  the  name  of  Justin  Martyr,  professes  to  have  visited
the  Sibyl's  cave  at  Cumae  and  to  have  been  told  by  his  guides  that
the  oracles  used  to  be  taken  down  from  the  Sibyl's  lips  by  uneducated
persons  and  that  this  was  the  reason  why  some  of  the  oracles  were
unmetrical.  See  Justin  Martyr,  Cohort,  ad  Graecos^  37.  p.  34  c  d
(ed.  1742).  Hence  Prof.  Maass  has  inferred  that,  in  spite  of  the  state-
ments of  Varro  and  Pausanias,  oracles  of  the  Sibyl  must  have  been
current  (De  Sibyllarum  Indicibus,  p.  11).

12.  8.  a  small  stone  urn  in  a  sanctuary  of  Apollo  etc     The

author  of  the  Exhortation  to  the  Greeks  was  shown  at  Cumae  a  bronze

bottle  in  which  the  remains  of  the  Sibyl  were  said  to  be  preserved

(Justin  Martyr,  Cohort,  ad  Graecos^  37.  p.  34  c,  ed.  1742).     Trimalchio

in  Petronius  {Sat,  48)  says  :  "  At  Cumae  I  saw  with  my  own  eyes  the

Sibyl  hanging  in  a  jar,  and  when  the  children  said  to  her,  *  Sibyl,  what

do  you  wish  ? '  she  used  to  answer,  *  I  wish  to  die.' "     Ampelius  tells  us

(Liber  Memorialise  viii.  16)  that  the  Sibyl  was  said  to  be  shut  up  in  an

iron  cage  which  hung  from  a  pillar  in  an  ancient  temple  of  Hercules  at

Argyrus.     Cp.   H.  Diels,  Sibyl linische  B lattery  p.   57  note  i.      It  has

been  pointed  out  by  Dr.  M.  R.  James  (Classical  RevieWy  6  (1892),

p.  74)  that  parallels  to  the  story  of  the  Sibyl's  wish  are  to  be  found  in

German  folk-tales.     One  of  these  tales  runs  as  follows  :  **  Once  upon  a

time  there  was  a  erirl  in  London  who  wished  to  live  for  ever,  so  they

say  :

London,  London  is  a  fine  town.

A  maiden  prayed  to  live  for  ever.

And  still  she  lives  and  hangs  in  a  basket  in  a  church,  and  every  St.
John's  Day  about  noon  she  eats  a  roll  of  bread"  (Kuhn  und  Schwartz,
Norddeutsc/te  Sageny  Mdrchen  und  Gebrduchey  p.  70,  No.  72.  i).
Another  story  of  the  same  collection  (p.  70  sq,)  tells  of  a  lady  who
resided  at  Danzig  and  was  so  rich  and  so  blest  with  all  that  life  can
give  that  she  wished  to  live  always.  So  when  she  came  to  her  latter
end,  she  did  not  really  die  but  only  looked  like  dead,  and  very  soon
they  found  her  in  a  hollow  of  a  pillar  in  the  church,  half  standing  and
half  sitting,  motionless.  She  stirred  never  a  limb,  but  they  saw  quite
plainly  that  she  was  alive,  and  she  sits  there  do^^Ti  to  this  blessed  day.
Every  New  Year's  Day  the  sacristan  comes  and  puts  a  morsel  of  the
holy  bread  in  her  mouth,  and  that  is  all  she  has  to  live  on.     Long,  long


CH.  XIII  JUDAEAN  SIBYL  293

has  she  rued  her  fatal  wish  who  set  this  transient  life  above  the  eternal
joys  of  heaven.  A  third  story  in  the  same  collection  (p.  71)  tells  of  a
noble  damsel  who  cherished  the  same  foolish  wish  for  immortality.  So
they  put  her  in  a  basket  and  hung  her  up  in  a  church,  and  there  she
hangs  and  never  dies,  though  many,  many  a  year  has  come  and  gone
since  they  put  her  there.  But  every  year  on  a  certain  day  they  give  her
a  roll  and  she  eats  it  and  cries  out  "  For  ever !  for  ever !  for  ever ! "
And  when  she  has  so  cried  she  falls  silent  again  till  the  same  time  next
year,  and  so  it  will  go  on  for  ever  and  for  ever.  A  fourth  story,  taken
down  near  Oldenburg  in  Holstein,  tells  of  a  jolly  dame  that  ate  and
drank  and  lived  right  merrily  and  had  all  that  heart  could  desire,  and
she  wished  to  live  always.  For  the  first  hundred  years  all  went  well,
but  after  that  she  began  to  shrink  and  shrivel  up  till  at  last  she  could
neither  walk  nor  stand  nor  eat  nor  drink.  But  die  she  could  not  At
first  they  fed  her  as  if  she  were  a  little  child,  but  when  she  grew  smaller
and  smaller  they  put  her  in  a  glass  bottle  and  hung  her  up  in  the
church.  And  there  she  still  hangs,  in  the  church  of  St.  Mary  at
Liibeck.  She  is  as  small  as  a  mouse,  but  once  a  year  she  stirs.  See
K.  MiillenhofT,  Sagen^  Mdrchen  und  Lieder^  p.  158  sq,^  No.  217.

12.  9.  a  prophetess Sabbe.     The  name  of  the  Judaean  Sibyl

is  also  given  as  Sambethe.  Others  regarded  her  as  a  Chaldaean  or
Persian  Sibyl  It  is  said  that  she  was  the  wife  of  one  of  the  sons  of
Noah,  entered  with  him  into  the  ark,  and  predicted  the  building  of  the
tower  of  Babel.  She  was  mentioned  by  Nicanor,  author  of  a  life  of
Alexander.  See  Schol.  on  Plato,  Phaedrus^  p.  244  b ;  Suidas,  5,v,
^i^vkXa ;  Oracula  Sibyllina^  Prologue.  Her  father,  according  to  the
author  of  the  Exhortation  to  the  Greeks^  was  Berosus,  the  Chaldaean
historian  (Justin  Martyr,  Cohort,  ad  Graecos,  37.  p.  33  d,  ed.  1742).
See  E.  Maass,  De  Sibyllarum  Indicibus^  P«  1 3  ^99'  \  A.  Bouch^-Leclercq,
Histoire  de  la  divination^  2.  p.  192  sqq,

12.  10.  Fhaennis.  Cp.  x.  15.  2;  A.  Bouch^-Leclercq,  Histoire
de  la  divination^  2.  p.  183.  Pausanias  here  tells  us  that  Phaennis
was  bom  when  Antiochus  Soter  came  to  the  throne  after  the  capture
of  Demetrius  Poliorcetes.  Demetrius  was  captured  by  Seleucus  in
286  RC,  and  when  Seleucus  was  murdered  in  281  or  280  B.C.,  his  son
Antiochus  succeeded  him.  See  Plutarch,  Demetrius^  49  sq,  ;  Appian,
Syriac.  62  sq,  ;  Thirlwall,  Hist,  of  Greece,  8.  pp.  42,  51.  Hence
Phaennis  would  appear  to  have  been  bom  in  281  or  280  B.C  The
capture  of  Demetrius  by  Seleucus  has  been  mentioned  by  Pausanias
before  (i.  10.  2).

12.  10.  the  Peleae  ('doves')  at  Dodona.     See  vii.  21.  2  note.

12.  10.  Phemonoe.     See  x.  5.  7  ;  x.  6.  7.

12.  10.  mother  Earth.  The  conception  of  Earth  as  the  great
Mother  occurs  in  many  mythologies.  See  E.  B.  Tylor,  Primitive
Culture,^  I.  p.  326  sqq,

12.  II.  Eaclus  Musaens  Lycos  Bacis.      See

Index   s,vv,   and   A.    Bouchd-Leclercq,   Histoire  de  la  divinatioUy   2.
p.  102  sqq,

13.  I.  a  bison  or  Paeonian  bulL     The  bison  {Bison  bonasms)  is


294  THE  BISON  bk.  x.  phocis

described  by  Oppian  (Cyneg.  ii.  159-175),  who  derives  the  name  from
Bistonis,  a  district  in  Thrace,  where  the  animal  was  found.  Pliny
(Nat,  hist,  viii.  38)  rightly  distinguishes  the  bison  from  the  urusy  an  extinct
species  of  ox  akin  to  the  wild  cattle  which  are  still  preserved  at  Chilling-
ham  in  Northumberland.  Caesar  {BelL  GcUL\\,  28)  describes  the  urus
but  not  the  bison.  Formerly  the  bison  ranged  over  Europe,  as  is  proved
by  its  fossil  remains  which  have  been  found  both  on  the  Continent  and  in
England  along  with  bones  of  the  extinct  mammoth  and  rhinoceros.  It
is  described  by  early  writers  in  modem  times.  Erasmus  Stella  says  that
in  his  time  the  animal  was  very  scarce  in  Prussia  ('  De  Borussiae  Anti-
quitatibus,*  in  Novus  Orbis  regionum  acinsularum  veteribus  incogmtarutn
(Paris,  1532),  p.  507,  wrongly  numbered  497).  Another  early  writer,
Raphael  Volaterranus,  describes  the  mode  of  catching  the  bison
practised  by  the  Lithuanians.  He  says  :  "  They  hunt  bears  and  bisons,
which  nearly  resemble  wild  cattle.  To  avoid  the  danger  of  the  chase
they  observe  this  method.  They  enclose  a  haunt  of  the  bisons  with  a
fence,  leaving  only  one  opening  which  leads  to  the  bottom  of  a  valley.
This  opening  is  purposely  made  greasy  and  slippery,  and  the  beasts  slip
down  it  to  the  bottom  of  the  valley.  There,  after  being  weakened  and
tamed  by  hunger  for  several  days,  they  are  easily  caught "  {Commentarii
Urbani  {<t6.,  1603),  p.  250).  Thus  the  method  of  <:atching  the  bisons
described  by  Pausanias  seems  to  have  been  practised  in  Lithuania  as
late  as  the  sixteenth  century  (an  edition  of  Volaterranus's  work  was
published  in  1559),  unless  we  suppose  that  Volaterranus  simply  copied
from  Pausanias.  On  the  urus  and  bison,  see  also  Olaus  Magnus,  xviii.
35  j^.  A  few  hundred  bisons  are  still  preserved  in  the  forests  of
Lithuania,  but  they  are  gradually  dying  out.  A  good  many  years  ago
they  numbered  1000,  but  in  1872  they  had  diminished  to  528.  They
are  protected  by  the  Czar;  none  of  them  may  be  killed  without  a
written  permission  from  him,  signed  with  his  own  hand.  See  Encyclo-
paedia Briiannica^  9th  ed.  s,v.  *  Bison,'  vol.  3.  p.  792  ;  Elton,  Origins
of  English  History y  P*  5^  sqq.  (first  ed.).

13.  I.  Dropion,  king  of  the  Paeonians,  son  of  Leon.  Part  of  a
pedestal  which  had  supported  a  statue  of  this  king  was  found  in  1877  by
the  Germans  to  the  north-east  of  the  temple  of  Zeus  at  Olympia,  The
stone  is  a  block  of  yellow  sandstone  and  bears  the  following  inscription  in

large  letters :  pa     i    '        a  '

**  [ZXpcoJrriftiva  A^oitos

j8a]criA€a  Waioviav

\k\oX  KTumjv  TO  KOivhv

tQv  Uaioviov  dveOijKelyl

KOI  evvoias  Tijs  cts  avrovs.

"  <This  statue  of>  Dropion,  son  of  Leon,  king  of  the  Paeonians,  and
their  founder,  was  dedicated  by  the  community  of  the  Paeonians  on
account  of  his  virtue  and  kindness  to  them."  See  Dittenberger  und
Purgold,  Die  Inschriften  von  Olympia^  No.  303  ;  ArchdologiscJte  Zeitung^
35  {}^n\  P'  38,  No.  37.  Dropion  is  known  only  from  this  inscription
and  the  present  passage  of  Pausanias.


CH.  XIII  APOLLO  AND  THE  DEER  295

13.  4*  offerings  of  the  Phocians.  The  inscription  on  offerings
which  the  Phocians  dedicated  out  of  spoil  taken  from  the  Thessalians  is
mentioned  by  Plutarch  {De  Pythiae  oraculis^  15).     Cp.  below,  §  6.

13.  4*  whose  territory  marches  with  their  own.  The  district
of  Malis,  which  intervened  between  Phocis  and  Thessaly  proper,  was
reckoned  to  the  latter.     See  Strabo,  ix.  p.  429.

13.  5.  the  statue  of  Apollo  grasping  the  deer.  On  some  ancient
gems  Apollo  is  represented  standing  with  a  bow  in  his  left  hand  and
grasping  in  his  right  the  fore-feet  of  a  stag  which  is  rearing  beside  him.
This  may  have  been  the  pose  of  the  statue  here  mentioned  by  Pausanias.
See  Miiller-Wieseler,  DenkmdUry  i.  pi.  xv.  No.  61  ;  Cecil  Smith,  in
Proceedings  of  the  Society  of  Antiquaries  of  London^  Second  Series,
II  (1885-1887),  pp.  251-255.  But  on  five  ancient  vases  Hercules
is  depicted  carrying  off  a  deer  or  stag,  while  Apollo  seeks  to  hinder
him  by  grasping  the  animal's  hind  feet.  On  two  of  these  vases  we
see  Hercules  carrying  off  the  deer  or  stag  in  his  arms,  and  brandishing
his  club  against  Apollo,  who  has  laid  hold  of  the  deer  by  its  feet :
Athena  and  Artemis  are  interposing  to  assist  or  separate  the  combatants.
The  combat  between  Apollo  and  Hercules  for  the  stag  is  represented
also  in  relief  on  a  bronze  Etruscan  helmet  found  at  Vulci ;  but  here  the
stag  appears  lying  on  the  ground,  while  Apollo  and  Hercules  are
fighting  over  it,  the  former  shooting  an  arrow,  the  latter  brandishing
his  club.  Perhaps  these  scenes  refer  to  the  story  mentioned  by
Apollodorus  (ii.  5.  3)  t^^t  when  Hercules  was  carrying  the  Cerynitian
deer  on  his  shoulders  to  Mycenae,  he  met  Artemis  and  Apollo,  the
former  of  whom  took  the  deer  from  him  and  reproached  him  for  slaying
her  sacred  animal.  But  from  the  resemblance  of  the  scenes  to  those  in
which  the  struggle  between  Hercules  and  Apollo  for  the  possession  of
the  Delphic  tripod  is  depicted  (see  below,  §  7  note),  it  is  perhaps  more
probable  that  they  refer  to  a  parallel  Delphic  legend  of  an  attempt  made
by  Hercules  to  carry  off  a  stag  or  deer  belonging  to  Apollo,  although
no  such  Delphic  legend  is  mentioned  in  ancient  books.  See  O.  Jahn,
Archdologische  Beitrdge^  p.  224  sqq, ;  F.  G.  Welcker,  Alte  Denkmdler^
3.  p.  269  sqq,^  note  2 ;  Overbeck,  Griechische  Kunstmythologie^
Besonderer  Theil,  3.  pp.  415-418.

13.  5.  The  (Greeks  of  Gyrene dedicated  the  chariot  etc.    At

the  head  of  the  Sacred  Way,  to  the  east  of  the  temple  of  Apollo,  two
life-size  figures  of  horses  have  been  found  by  the  French.  They  are
archaic  in  style,  and  the  marks  of  harness  prove  that  they  were  attached
to  a  chariot.  Mr.  Homolle  conjectures  that  they  may  have  formed  part
of  one  of  two  Cyrenian  offerings  mentioned  by  Pausanias  (here  and  x.
1 5.  6).  In  this  neighbourhood,  also,  there  have  come  to  light  a  number
of  fragments  of  columns  carved  like  stalks  of  silphium.  They  may,  as
Mr.  Homolle  suggests,  have  belonged  to  a  treasury  dedicated  by  the
Cyrenians.  See  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUnique^  18  (1894),  p.  180;
Comptes  Rendus  de  VAccuUmie  des  Beaux-Arts^  22  (1894),  p.  303  sq,

13.  5.  The  Dorians  of  Oorinth  also  built  a  treasury.  The
remains  of  this  treasury,  Mr.  Cecil  Smith  tells  me,  have  been  found  on
the  right  of  the  Sacred  Way,  to  the  north-east  of  the  great  altar  (see  x.


296  DELPHIC  TREASURIES  bk.  x.  phocis

14.  7  note),  near  the  bases  which  supported  statues  of  the  sons  of  Dino-
menes  (see  below).  The  treasury  was  built  by  Cypselus,  tyrant  of
Corinth,  but  after  the  tyranny  had  been  put  down  the  Corinthians  asked
and  obtained  leave  to  erase  the  name  of  Cypselus  from  the  dedicatory
inscription  and  to  substitute  that  of  Corinth  (Herodotus,  i.  14  ;  Plutarch,
Septem  Sapient.  Conviv,  21  ;  id,^  De  Pythiae  oraculis^  13).  In  the
time  of  Herodotus  the  treasury  contained  the  following  votive  offerings  :
(i)  six  golden  bowls  weighing  thirty  talents,  dedicated  by  Gyges,
king  of  Lydia  (Herodotus,  i.  14);  (2)  the  royal  chair  of  Midas,
king  of  Phrygia,  in  which  he  used  to  sit  judging  the  people ;  it
was  dedicated  by  king  Midas  himself  (Herodotus,  i.  14)  ;  (3)  a
lion  of  fine  gold,  weighing  six  and  a  half  talents,  dedicated  by
Croesus,  king  of  Lydia ;  it  stood  originally  in  the  temple  of  Apollo
and  had  weighed  ten  talents,  but  in  the  fire  which  destroyed  the  temple
the  lion's  weight  was  reduced  by  three  and  a  half  talents  (Herodotus,  i.
50)  ;  (4)  four  silver  jars,  also  dedicated  by  Croesus  (Herodotus,  i.  51)  ;
(5)  a  fine  censer,  dedicated  by  Euelthon,  tyrant  of  Salamis  (Herodotus,
iv.  162).  The  golden  lion  dedicated  by  Croesus  may  have  been  the
one  which  Phayllus  melted  down  and  minted  to  pay  his  troops
(Diodorus,  xvi.  56).  In  Plutarch's  time  the  solitary  offering  left  in  this
once  resplendent  treasury  was  a  bronze  palm-tree  with  frogs  and  water-
snakes  worked  in  relief  at  the  root  (Plutarch,  De  Pythiae  oracuiis,  12).

Besides  the  treasuries  mentioned  by  Pausanias  we  know  from  ancient
writers  that  others  existed  at  Delphi,  (i)  There  was  a  treasury  of  the
Acanthians  which  bore  the  inscription  B/Doo-iSa?  koX  'AkolvOiol  a?r'
*AOrjvaUav  "(Dedicated  by)  Brasidas  and  the  Acanthians  (out  of
spoils  taken)  from  the  Athenians."  Inside  the  treasury,  beside  the
door,  stood  a  stone  statue  of  Lysander,  representing  him  with  long  hair
and  flowing  beard.  Some  people,  misled  by  the  inscription  on  the
building,  mistook  this  statue  for  a  portrait  of  Brasidas.  See  Plutarch,
Lysander,  i  ;  id.,  De  Pythiae  oraculis,  14  and  15.  This  treasury  must
have  stood  towards  the  east  end  of  the  temple  of  Apollo ;  for  near  it
the  guide  pointed  out  to  Plutarch  the  place  where  the  iron  spits,
dedicated  by  the  harlot  Rhodopis  as  a  tithe  of  her  earnings,  were
formerly  to  be  seen  (Plutarch,  De  Pythiae  oraculis,  1 4),  and  we  know
from  Herodotus  (ii.  135)  that  these  spits  were  heaped  up  opposite  the
temple,  behind  the  altar  of  the  Chians  (see  note  on  x.  14.  7).  (2)  The
Clazomenians  had  a  treasury  which  in  the  time  of  Herodotus  con-
tained a  golden  bowl  weighing  eight  and  a  half  talents  and  twelve
minae.  The  bowl  was  an  offering  of  Croesus  and  had  stood  originally
in  the  temple  of  Apollo,  on  the  right-hand  side  as  you  entered,  but
when  the  temple  was  burnt  the  bowl  was  removed  to  the  Clazomenian
treasury.  See  Herodotus,  i.  51.  (3  and  4)  Treasuries  dedicated  by
Gyges  and  Croesus  and  bearing  their  names  inscribed  on  them  are
mentioned  by  Strabo  (ix.  p.  421).  (5)  The  Massiliots  had  a  treasury
in  which  the  Romans  dedicated  a  golden  bowl  as  a  trophy  of  the
conquest  of  Veii  (Diodorus,  xiv.  93).  (6)  There  was  a  treasury
dedicated  by  the  people  of  Spina,  a  Greek  city  on  the  Adriatic  (Strabo,
V.    p.    214,    ix.    p.    421  ;    Pliny,   Nat,   hist.   iii.    120).      The   Delphic


CH.  XIII  FIGHT  FOR  THE  TRIPOD  297

ofTerings  of  the  people  of  Spina  are  said  to  have  been  very  splendid
(Dionysius  Halicamassensis,  Antiquit,  Rom,  i.  18).  It  seems  that
their  treasury  contained  two  stone  statues  of  boys  which  were  mentioned
by  the  antiquary  Polemo  (Athenaeus,  xiii.  p.  606  a  b,  where  the
reading  27rivaT(3v  is  a  correction  of  Meineke's,  the  MSS.  reading
9riva#c<i>v ;  Polemo,  ed.  Preller,  Frag.  28).  (7)  Lastly,  the  wealthy  and
luxurious  Sybarites  had,  as  might  have  been  expected,  a  treasury  at
Delphi  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  421).

It  may  be  conjectured  that  some  of  the  treasuries  which  Pausanias  fails
to  mention  may  have  stood  in  the  western  part  of  the  sacred  precinct,
between  the  Treasury  of  the  Athenians  and  the  boundary-wall ;  for  this
part  of  the  sanctuary  would  seem  to  have  been  left  unvisited,  or  at
least  undescribed,  by  our  author.

13.  6.  bronze  images  dedicated  by  the  Phocians  etc.    Seex.  1. 10.

13.  6.  The  Phliasians  a  bronze  Zeus  an  image  of

Aegina.  Images  of  Zeus  and  Aegina  were  dedicated  by  the  Phliasians
also  at  Olympia  (v.  22.  6).  The  offerings  were  appropriate,  since
Aegina  was  said  to  be  a  daughter  of  Asopus,  the  river  which  flowed
beside  Phlius,  and  to  have  been  carried  off  from  Phlius  by  Zeus.  See
ii.  5.  I  sq,y  ii.  29.  2  ;  Diodorus,  iv.  72.

13.  7*  Hercnles  and  Apollo,  both  grasping  the  tripod  etc.  The
same  subject  was  represented  in  relief  at  Lycosura  (viii.  37.  i)  and  in
the  gable  of  the  Siphnian  treasury  at  Delphi  (above,  p.  274  j^.).  The
attempt  of  Hercules  to  carry  off  the  Delphic  tripod  is  often  mentioned
by  ancient  writers  and  is  the  subject  of  many  surviving  works  of  ancient
art,  especially  vase-paintings.  The  legend,  according  to  Apollodorus,
was  this.  Hercules  in  a  fit  of  madness  had  murdered  Iphitus  by
hurling  him  from  the  walls  of  Tiryns.  As  a  punishment  he  was
afflicted  with  a  grievous  illness  and  went  to  Delphi  to  enquire  how  he
might  be  healed.  The  priestess  refusing  to  answer  him,  Hercules
attempted  to  rifle  the  temple,  and  carrying  off  the  tripod  he  set  up  an
oracle  of  his  own.  Apollo  fought  him,  but  Zeus  parted  the  combatants
by  throwing  a  thunderbolt  between  them.  Then  Hercules  was  told  by
the  oracle  that  if  he  would  be  healed,  he  must  first  be  sold  into  slavery
for  three  years  and  pay  compensation  to  Eurytus,  the  father  of  the
murdered  Iphitus.  See  Apollodorus,  ii.  6.  2.  Cp.  Schol.  on  Pindar,
OL  ix.  43  ;  Hyginus,  Fab,  32  ;  Servius  on  Virgil,  Aen.  viii.  300  ;  Cicero,
De  not.  deor,  iii.  16.  42  ;  Plutarch,  De  EI  apud  DelphoSy  6 ;  id,y  De
sera  numinis  vindicia^  12.  The  myth  has  been  variously  interpreted.
Panofka  saw  in  it  two  solar  deities  quarrelling  about  the  fire.  £.
Curtius  explained  it  as  a  reminiscence  of  a  conflict  at  Delphi  between
the  Semitic  religion  (represented  by  Hercules)  and  the  Greek  relig^ion
(represented  by  Apollo).  Stephani  regarded  it  as  a  popular  reminis-
cence of  a  refusal  on  the  part  of  the  Delphic  oracle  to  give  answers  to
the  worshippers  of  Hercules.  He  enumerates  no  less  than  89  existing
works  of  ancient  art  on  which  the  subject  of  the  contest  is  depicted.
They  include  58  black-figured  vases;  18  red-figured  vases;  8  marble
reliefs ;  3  terra-cottas ;  and  2  engraved  gems.  Overbeck  has  added
somewhat  to  the  list.     On  most  of  these  works  Hercules  is  represented


298  FIGHT  FOR  THE  TRIPOD  bk.  x.  phocis

carrying  off  the  tripod  and  looking  back  at  Apollo  who  hastens  after  him
and  seeks  to  wrest  the  tripod  from  him.  But  on  some  six  or  seven  of
the  works  enumerated,  as  in  the  group  of  statuary  here  described  by
Pausanias,  Apollo  and  Hercules  stand  on  either  side  of  the  tripod,  each
of  them  striving  to  pull  it  to  himself.  Further  on  many  of  the  works
eniunerated,  as  in  the  two  Delphic  groups,  Apollo  and  Hercules  are
associated  with  other  deities ;  most  commonly  Hercules  is  accompanied
by  Athena  and  Apollo  by  Artemis.

See  Panofka,  '  L*enl^vement  du  tr^pied,'  Amiali  delV  Institute,  2  (1830),  pp.
203-209 ;  F.  G.  Welcker,  Alte  DenkmdUr,  2.  pp.  296-301,  Taf.  xiv.  27,  28,  29 ;
id,,  3.  pp.  268-285;  Archaologische  Zeitung,  16  (1858),  Taf.  cxi.  ;  £.  Curtius,
'Herakles  der  Dreifiisstrager,'  Archaologische  Zeitung,  2$  (1867),  pp.  105- no,
with  Taf.  ccxxvii.  ;  tV/.,  Gesammelte  Abhctndlungen,  2.  pp.  215-234;  Stephauii,  in
Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1868,  p.  31  sqq,,  with  Atlas,  Taf.  1.  f^-  4 ;
Klein,  in  Amiali  dell*  Instituto,  sy^9&i),  p.  77  sqq,  ;  MUller-Wieseler,  penk-
mdler,  L  pi.  xi.  No.  41  ;  Baumeister's  Denkmaler,  i.  p.  463  sq, ;  S.  Reinach,
Peintures  de  Vases  antiques,  Millingen,  30 ;  Roscher's  Lexikan,  I.  p.  2232  sq. ;
L.  Preller,  Griechische  Mythologies  2.  pp.  162-164;  Overbeck,  Griechiscke
Kunstmythologie^  Besonderer  Theil,  3.  pp.  391-415.

The  scenes  in  which  Hercules  appears  striving  to  carry  off  the
tripod  while  Apollo  attempts  forcibly  to  hinder  him,  are  to  be  dis-
tinguished from  the  scenes  in  which  Hercules  appears  carrying  off  tlie
tripod  peaceably  without  any  opposition  on  the  part  of  Apollo.  See,
e,g,y  the  relief  figured  in  \Velcker*s  Alte  Denkmdler^  2.  Ta£  xv.  27,
where  Hercules  bears  away  the  tripod  while  Apollo  sits  calmly  with  his
lyre  on  his  knee  looking  after  him.  Curtius  and  Stephani  (ILcc.)  think
that  such  scenes  refer  to  a  custom  of  setting  up  a  tripod  in  every  town
founded  with  the  sanction  of  Delphi.  See  Paus.  i.  43.  8 ;  iii.  21.8;
and  viii.  15.  5  compared  with  Plutarch,  De  sera  numinis  vindidcL^  12.

13.  7-  when  Tellias  the  Elean  led  them  etc.     See  x.  i.  8-1 1.

13.  7.  Chionis.  Vitruvius  mentions  (iii.  Praef.  2)  a  Corinthian
sculptor  Chion,  who  is  perhaps  the  same  with  the  Chionis  of  Pausanias.

13.  8.  So  Hercnles  of  Tiryns  is  a  different  person  etc  The
saying  "This  is  a  different  Hercules"  was  proverbial  and  variously
explained.  See  Zenobius,  v.  48  ;  Diogenianus,  i.  63  ;  Apostolius,  ii.
40;  Plutarch,  Theseus^  29;  Aelian,  Var,  hist,  xii.  22;  Schol.  on
Lucian,  Quomodo  hist,  conscrib.  34  ;  Ptolemaeus  Hephaest.,  in  Photius,
Bibliotheca^  p.  151  a  35  sqq,^  ed.  Bekker;  Eustathius  on  Homer,  Iliad^
V.  638,  p.  589.  41  sqq,',  [Aristotle,]  Ethic,  Magn,  ii.  15,  p.  1213a
12  sq,,  ed.  Bekker;  [«V/.,]  Ethic.  Eudein,  vii.  12,  p.  1245  a  30,  ed.
Bekker.     Cp.  note  on  x.  17.  2.

13.  8.  the  Egyptian  Hercnles.  There  was  a  sanctuary  of
Hercules  at  Heracleum,  a  town  in  the  Delta  of  the  Nile.  It  poss^sed
the  right  of  asylum ;  if  a  runaway  slave  took  refuge  in  it  and  allowed
himself  to  be  tattooed  or  branded  with  certain  sacred  marks,  he  might
not  be  touched.  See  Herodotus,  ii.  113;  Strabo,  xvii.  pp.  788,  801.
The  native  Egyptian  name  of  Heracleum  was  Karba^  and  the  chief
temple  was  dedicated  to  Ammon.  But  the  Egyptian  moniunents  seem
to  throw  no  light  on  the  question  who  the  god  at  Heracleum  {Kcurba)
was  whom  the  Greeks  identified  with  Hercules.     Prof.  Sayce  thought


CH.  XIII  THE  PLATAEAN  TROPHY  299

he  was  the  Tyrian  Hercules,  that  is  Mel  cart  But  this  is  positively  denied
by  Prof.  Wiedemann.  See  the  notes  of  Sayce  and  Wiedemann  on
Herodotus,  I.e.  Cicero  mentions  an  Egyptian  Hercules,  bom  of  the
Nile  {De  natura  deoruniy  iii.  16.  42).  According  to  the  EtymoL
Magnum  (s.v.  Xtui/c?,  p.  816.  28  sg.)  the  native  Egyptian  name  for
Hercules  was  Ch6n ;  according  to  Hesychius  (s.v,  Tiyvtov)  it  was
Gignon  or  Gigon.  See  Parthey,  in  his  edition  of  Plutarch's  /sis  and
Osiris,  p.  210  sq.  Diodorus  (i.  74)  relates  a  Libyan  tradition  that  there
were  three  heroes  called  Hercules,  of  whom  the  most  ancient  was  the
Egyptian :  he  conquered  a  great  part  of  the  world  and  set  up  the
Pillar  of  Hercules  on  the  African  shore  ;  whereas  the  Pillar  of  Hercules
on  the  Spanish  shore  (Gibraltar)  was  set  up  by  the  Greek  Hercules  (the
son  of  Zeus  and  Alcmena),  who  was  the  youngest  of  the  three.

13.  9*  a  golden  tripod  resting  on  a  bronze  serpent  etc.  A  base
which  is  believed  to  have  supported  this  famous  trophy  has  been  found
by  the  French  at  the  highest  part  of  the  Sacred  Way,  to  the  east  of  the
temple  of  Apollo.  It  is  next  above  the  pedestal  of  Gelo  (see  below,
p.  310).  The  bronze  serpent  on  which  the  tripod  rested  is  still  to  be
seen  in  the  Almeidan,  the  ancient  Hippodrome,  at  Constantinople,
whither  it  was  transferred  by  Constantine.  The  monument  consists
really,  not  of  a  single  bronze  serpent,  but  of  three  such  serpents  so
skilfully  intertwined  that  their  bodies  appear  as  a  single  spiral  column,
and  a  very  attentive  examination  is  necessary  to  convince  an  observer
that  there  are  actually  three  serpents,  not  one.  Hence  ancient  writers
(Herodotus  and  Pausanias)  and  some  modem  travellers  have  fallen  into
the  very  natural  mistake  of  speaking  of  it  as  a  single  serpent.  The
history  of  the  monument  seems  to  have  been  as  follows.

After  the  battle  of  Plataea  and  the  capture  of  the  Persian  camp
orders  were  issued  by  Pausanias,  the  general  of  the  Greek  army,  that
no  man  should  presume  to  appropriate  any  part  of  the  booty  but  that
the  whole  of  it  should  be  brought  together  into  one  common  heap.  So
an  immense  quantity  of  gold  and  silver  plate  and  omaments  was
collected  from  the  Persian  camp  and  the  bodies  of  the  slain.  Out  of
this  booty  tithes  were  first  of  all  set  apart  for  the  Delphic  Apollo,  the
Olympic  Zeus,  and  the  Isthmian  Poseidon.  Out  of  the  tithe  reserved
for  the  Delphic  Apollo  was  made  what  Herodotus  describes  as  "the
golden  tripod  that  stands  close  to  the  altar,  resting  on  the  three-headed
serpent."  Out  of  the  tithe  reserved  for  the  Olympic  Zeus  was  made  a
bronze  statue  of  Zeus  1 2  ells  high.  Out  of  the  tithe  reserved  for  the
Isthmian  Poseidon  was  made  a  bronze  statue  of  Poseidon  7  ells  high.
The  rest  of  the  booty  was  divided  as  prize-money  among  the  Greeks.
See  Herodotus,  ix.  80  ^^. ;  and  as  to  the  bronze  statue  of  Zeus  at
Olympia,  see  Paus.  v.  23.  i  sq.  Thus  it  appears  that  both  the  golden
tripod  at  Delphi  and  the  bronze  Zeus  at  Olympia  were  trophies,  not  of
the  Persian  war  in  general,  but  of  the  battle  oif  Plataea  in  particular,
and  Pausanias  is  perfectly  right  in  so  describing  them.

On  the  golden  tripod,  or  more  probably  on  the  stone  pedestal  which
supported  both  it  and  the  serpent-column,  the  Spartan  general  Pausanias
caused  an  epigram  to  be  inscribed  to  the  following  effect :


300  THE  PLA  TAEAN  TROPHY  bk.  x.  phocis

"  Pausanias,  as  general  of  the  Greeks,  after  he  had  destroyed  the
army  of  the  Medes,  dedicated  this  monument  to  Phoebus."

This  arrogant  inscription,  composed  by  the  poet  Simonides,  roused
the  indignation  of  the  Greeks ;  the  Plataeans  complained  to  the  Amphic-
tyonic  Council,  and  the  Lacedaemonians  were  compelled  to  erase  the
inscription.  Instead  of  it  they  inscribed  upon  the  serpent-column  a  list
of  the  Greek  states  which  had  helped  to  vanquish  the  Persians.  This
inscription  still  exists  on  the  serpent-column ;  it  is  not  a  dedicatory
inscription,  but  merely  enumerates  the  names  of  the  states  which  had
fought  either  at  Plataea  or  at  Salamis.  Thus  with  the  new  inscription  the
monument  somewhat  changed  its  character.  Instead  of  being,  as  at
first,  a  trophy  of  the  battle  of  Plataea  alone,  it  was  now  a  trophy  of  the
Persian  war  in  general  The  reasons  for  inscribing  the  list  of  states  on
the  bronze  serpents  rather  than  on  the  stone  pedestal  may  have  been

( 1 )  that  the  pedestal  was  too  low  to  receive  the  long  inscription ;  and

(2)  a  wish  to  place  the  national  character  of  the  monument  beyond  the
reach  of  any  future  tampering  by  making  the  inscription  inseparable
from  the  monument.  But  it  was  necessary  that  the  monument  should
have  a  dedicatory  inscription  also.  Hence  in  place  of  the  erased
inscription  of  Pausanias  the  Greeks  engraved,  probably  upon  the  stone
pedestal,  a  metrical  inscription  to  the  following  effect :

"The  saviours  of  spacious  Greece  dedicated  this  (tripod),
Having  rescued  tne  cities  from  hateful  slavery."

See  Thucydides,  i.  132,  iii.  57  ;  Herodotus,  viii.  82  ;  [Demosthenes,]
Contra  Neaer,  p.  1378  ;  Diodorus,  xi.  33  ;  Cornelius  Nepos,  Pausanias^
I  ;  Plutarch,  De  Herodoti  maligniiate^  42  ;  Pausanias,  iii.  8.  2  ;
Aristides,  Or,  xlvi.  vol.  2.  p.  234  ed.  Dindorf,  with  the  scholiast  (vol.
3.  p.  569  ed.  Dindorf) ;  Suidas,  s,v,  Ilaixrai/ias.  Diodorus  is  the
only  writer  who  mentions  the  new  dedicatory  inscription ;  but  there  is
no  reason  to  question  his  evidence.  Nepos,  indeed,  says  that  on
erasing  Pausanias's  dedicatory  inscription  the  Lacedaemonians  eng^ved
in  its  stead  the  list  of  states  and  nothing  more.  But  this  latter  state-
ment is  probably  a  mere  inference  from  the  silence  of  Thucydides,  who
mentions  the  list  of  states,  but  not  the  new  dedicatory  inscription.  It
is  highly  improbable  that  this  important  monument  should  have  been
allowed  to  stand  without  a  dedicatory  inscription  at  all.  And  that  both
the  first  and  the  second  dedicatory  inscriptions  were  engraved,  not  on  the
monument  itself,  but  on  the  stone  pedestal,  is  made  almost  certain  by
the  nearly  invariable  practice  of  the  Greeks  in  such  matters.

In  the  Sacred  War  the  Phocians,  as  Pausanias  here  informs  us,
carried  off  the  golden  tripod,  leaving  the  serpent-column ;  or,  to  give
Pausanias's  statement  more  exactly,  they  carried  off  all  the  golden  part
of  the  monument,  but  all  the  bronze  part  of  it  was  still  to  be  seen  in  his
time,  that  is,  in  the  second  half  of  the  second  century  A.D.  This
statement  of  Pausanias  suggests  that  only  a  part  of  the  tripod  may  have
been  of  solid  gold  and  the  remainder  of  gilt  bronze.  The  cauldron  or
basin  was  probably  of  solid  gold ;  the  three  legs  which  supported  it


CH.  xiH  THE  PLATAEAN  TROPHY  301

may  have  been  of  gilt  bronze.  This  view  is  borne  out  by  the  statements
of  later,  especially  Byzantine,  writers,  who  continued  to  describe  the
trophy  as  a  tripod  long  after  the  time  of  Pausanias.  But  this  they
could  hardly  have  done  if  all  that  remained  was  the  serpent-column
which  had  once  supported  the  tripod.

Constantine  carried  off  the  serpent-column  and  whatever  remained
of  the  tripod  to  Constantinople  and  placed  the  monument  in  the
Hippodrome.  See  Schol.  on  Thucydides,  i.  132;  Eusebius,  Vit
Constaniini^  iii.  54;  Socrates, -^/V/.  Eccles,  i.  16;  Zosimus,  ii.  31;
Sozomenus,  Hist,  Eccles,  ii.  5  ;  Nicephorus  Callistus,  Eccles,  Hist  viii.
33.  (The  mention  of  "the  famous  statue  of  Pan"  by  Sozomenus  and
Nicephorus  Callistus  seems  to  be  due  to  a  false  reading  in  the  former
writer.  Instead  of  ot  kv  /\€\<l>ois  rpiwo8€s  koI  6  Uav  6  /9oc6/x€vo$  ov
Ilatxravftas  ktA.,  we  should  probably  read  ot  h  AcA<^t$  rpiiroSes  icat
6  TO  'jrav  l3o(ofJL€Vos  [scil,  rpiirovsi]  ov  TLavcravias  kt\.).

From  the  year  1422  down  to  the  present  time  the  serpent-colunm
at  Constantinople  has  been  seen  and  described  by  many  writers.  It  is
represented  in  an  extant  Turkish  miniature  painting  of  about  1 520-1 530,
and  we  possess  another  drawing  of  it  dating  from  1578.  Peter  Gyllius,
a  French  traveller  of  the  sixteenth  century,  in  his  accurate  work  De
Constantinopoleos  Topographia  (ii.  13),  has  described  the  serpent-
column  as  composed  of  three  serpents  twined  together,  with  their  three
heads  projecting  from  the  top  of  the  column  in  three  separate  directions.
He  was  acquainted  with  the  true  history  of  the  monument.  Not  so  the
English  traveller  Wheler,  who  visited  Constantinople  in  1675.  He  saw
and  described  the  column  as  "cast  in  the  form  of  three  serpents
wreathed  together  until  the  top,  where  their  three  heads  part,  and  bend
outwards,  in  a  triangular  form  " ;  but  of  the  history  of  the  column  he
was  ignorant.  He  gave  a  drawing  of  the  colimm,  showing  the  three
heads  of  the  serpents  intact.  See  his  Journey  into  Greece  (London,
1682),  p.  185.  Not  many  years  after  Whelefs  visit  the  three  heads  of
the  serpents  seem  to  have  been  broken  off.  Toumefort,  who  was  at
Constantinople  in  1701,  says:  "The  bronze  column  of  three  serpents
is  not  better  known.  It  is  about  1 5  feet  high,  formed  by  three  serpents
coiled  together  like  a  roll  of  tobacco  ;  their  contours  lessen  imperceptibly
from  the  base  up  to  the  necks  of  the  serpents ;  and  their  heads,
diverging  to  the  three  sides  like  a  tripod,  formed  a  sort  of  capital.
They  say  that  Sultan  Murat  broke  the  head  of  one  of  these  serpents.
The  column  was  thrown  down  and  the  heads  of  the  two  others  were
broken  in  1700  after  the  peace  of  Karlowitz.  What  has  become  of
them  is  not  known ;  but  the  rest  has  been  set  up  again  and  stands
between  the  obelisks,  at  equal  distances  from  them"  {Relation  d^un
Voyage  du  Levant^  Amsterdam,  17 18,  Lettre  xii.  vol.  2.  p.  9).
Similarly  ChishuU,  writing  17th  April  1701,  says:  "The  second  pillar
is  of  wreathed  brass,  not  above  12  feet  high,  lately  terminated  at  the
top  with  figures  of  three  serpents  rising  from  the  pillar,  and  with  their
necks  and  heads  forming  a  beautiful  triangle.  But  this  monimient  was
rudely  broken  from  the  top  of  the  pillar  by  some  attendants  of  the  late
Polish  ambassador,  whose    lodgings  were   appointed   in   this   cirque.


302  THE  PLATAEAN  TROPHY  bk.  x.  phocis

opposite  to  the  said  pillar"  {Travels  in  Turkey^  London,  1747,  p.
40  sg.).  However  Lady  Mary  Montagu  appears  to  have  seen  the
column  with  the  three  serpent-heads  intact  as  late  as  1 7 1 8,  for  writing
from  Constantinople  on  the  i  oth  of  April  in  that  year  she  says  :  "  This
was  the  hippodrome  in  the  reign  of  the  Greek  emperors.  In  the  midst
of  it  is  a  brazen  column  of  three  serpents  twisted  together  with  their
mouths  gaping.  'Tis  impossible  to  learn  why  so  odd  a  pillar  was
erected.  The  Greeks  can  tell  nothing  but  fabulous  legends,  when  they
are  asked  the  meaning  of  it,  and  there  is  no  sign  of  its  having  ever  had
any  inscription"  {Letters^  3rd  ed.  1861,  vol.  i.  p.  356).

Towards  the  end  of  1855  Mr.  (afterwards  Sir)  C.  T.  Newton
excavated  the  base  of  the  serpent-colunm.  The  soil  had  accmnulated
over  it  to  the  height  of  rather  more  than  6  feet.  He  found  that  the
colunm  rested  on  a  rough-hewn  stone  plinth  of  the  Byzantine  period.
A  few  feet  from  the  plinth,  at  the  depth  of  8  feet  below  the  surface,  was
an  ancient  aqueduct  formed  of  cylindrical  earthen  pipes ;  and  close  to
the  aqueduct  was  a  foundation  of  tiles,  apparently  the  remains  of  a
small  tank.  Hence  Sir  C.  T.  Newton  inferred  that  the  column  had  been
placed  in  the  centre  of  the  tank  and  had  been  used  as  a  fountain.  This
conjecture  was  afterwards  confirmed  by  the  discovery  of  a  piece  of
leaden  pipe,  bearing  a  Byzantine  inscription,  inside  the  hollow  serpent-
column.  The  plinth,  too,  on  which  the  column  stands,  is  hollow,
doubtless  to  allow  the  passage  of  the  water.

Since  the  excavations  of  Sir  C.  T.  Newton  in  1855  the  column  has
been  carefully  examined  and  delineated.  As  it  stands,  the  bodies  of
the  serpents  form  twenty-nine  coils,  one  above  the  other,  and  the  total
height  of  the  column  is  5.34  metres  (about  17  ft.  6  in.).  The  heads
and  tails  of  the  serpents  are  wanting.  But  in  1848  the  architect
Fossati,  in  the  course  of  an  excavation  made  near  the  mosque  of  St.
Sophia,  found  the  upper  part  of  one  of  the  heads,  from  which  it  appears
that  the  mouth  of  the  serpent  must  have  been  wide  open.  The  serpent-
column  appears  to  have  been  cast  in  a  single  piece ;  the  most  minute
examination  has  failed  to  detect  any  joining  in  the  metal.  Nowhere  on
the  surface  of  the  bronze  is  there  any  trace  of  scales ;  the  bodies  of  the
serpents  are  smooth.

Early  in  1856  a  German  and  an  Austrian  scholar,  Dr.  Otto  Frick
and  Dr.  Dethier,  removed  the  thick  earthy  coating  with  which  the
lower  part  of  the  column  was  encrusted  and  discovered  the  inscription,
which  they  published  separately.  It  has  since  been  re-examined  by
Prof  Ernst  Fabricius.  The  dialect  and  alphabet  of  the  inscription  are
Laconian.  It  does  not  run  all  round  the  column,  but  is  confined  to  a
narrow  perpendicular  strip  on  one  side  of  the  colunm,  beginning  on  the
third  coil  from  the  bottom  and  ending  on  the  thirteenth.  The  lower
part  of  the  inscription,  which  was  buried  in  the  ground,  is  well
preserved ;  but  the  upper  part,  on  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  coils,  is
hardly  legible.  For  here  the  surface  of  the  bronze  is  not  only  worn
and  oxydised,  but  scarred  and  dinted  with  deep  sabre -cuts.  As
deciphered  and  restored  by  Prof.  Fabricius  the  inscription  runs  thus :


CH.  XIII


THE  PLA  TAB  AN  TROPHY


303


[T]o[lS€  TOV]

7rdA{€]fiov  [c]

7roA{€]/A[€]oi'


[A]aic


KopivOtot.


€S]a[t]fiov[toi]
v[a]r[o]i


Mvicav^s
20  Kctbi
MaXtoi

25  XoXkiS^s

Fa\€ioi
TloT€i8aiaTai


Try€a[Tai]

AcvicoSioi

Aiyivarat

30

FavaKTopi^i
KvOvioi

10  yityaprjs
'EnriSavpioi

'Ep\OfJL€VLOt

'AfiTTpaKixara
Acir/xarai

Tpo^ai'tofc
15  *Epp,u>vrjs

Tip-vvOioi
Ukarairjs

The  following  fought  in  the  war :

Mycenaeans

Lacedaemonians

20

Ceans

5  Athenians

Melians

Corinthians

Tenians

Tegeans

Naxians

Sicyonians

Eretrians

Aeginetans

25

Chalcidians

10  Megarians

Styrians

Epidaurians

Eleans

Orchomenians

Potidaeans

Phliasians

Leucadians

Troezenians

30

Anactorians

15   Hermionians

Cythnians
Siphnians

Tirynthians

Ambraciots

Plataeans

Lepreans."

Thespians

304  THE  PLATA E AN  TROPHY  bk.  x.  phocis

The  names  of  the  states  occur  in  groups  of  three,  one  group  of  three  on
each  coil,  except  that  on  the  last  coil  there  are  only  two  names,  and  that
on  the  fourth  and  the  seventh  coils  from  the  ground  there  are  four  names.
The  fourth  names  on  the  two  latter  coils  are  those  of  the  Siphnians  and
Tenians ;  they  are  much  worse  engraved  than  the  other  names  in  the
list  and  were  probably  added  at  a  later  time.  This,  so  far  as  the
Tenians  are  concerned,  is  confirmed  by  the  express  statement  of
Herodotus  (viii.  82)  that  the  name  of  the  Tenians  was  carved  on  the
monument  because,  though  the  Tenians  sided  with  the  Persians,  a
Tenian  ship  had  brought  important  tidings  to  the  Greeks  on  the  eve  of
the  battle  of  Salamis.  We  may  hence,  perhaps,  infer,  that  the  name
of  the  Tenians  was  at  first  excluded  from  the  list  because  they  had
sided  with  the  enemy,  but  was  afterwards  added  as  a  special  favour  in
consideration  of  the  service  rendered  to  the  Greek  cause  by  the  single
Tenian  ship.

We  may  compare  the  list  of  states  on  the  serpent-column  with  (i)
the  list  carved  on  the  corresponding  trophy  at  Olympia,  as  reported  by
Pausanias  (v.  23.  i  sq,) ;  and  (2)  the  list  given  by  Herodotus  (ix.
28-30  and  77)  of  the  Greek  states  that  fought  at  Plataea.  In  the
following  table  (p.  305)  the  names  printed  in  italics  in  the  first  column
do  not  occur  in  the  second  column ;  the  names  printed  in  italics  in  the
second  column  do  not  occur  in  the  third  column  ;  and  the  names  printed
in  italics  in  the  third  column  occur  in  neither  of  the  other  columns.

The  number  (31)  of  names  on  the  serpent -column  is  precisely  the
number  of  Greek  states  which,  according  to  Plutarch  ( ThemisiocleSy  20),
fought  against  the  Persians  in  the  course  of  the  war.  The  names  in
the  third  of  the  following  columns  are  arranged  in  the  order  of  battle
in  which  the  Greeks  stood  at  Plataea,  except  that  the  Mantineans  and
Eleans  arrived  too  late  to  take  part  in  the  engagement  (Herodotus,
ix.  77).

( 1 )  If  we  compare  the  third  column  with  the  other  two,  we  see  that
six  peoples  (Ceans,  Melians,  Tenians,  Naxians,  Cythnians,  and  Siph-
nians) who  took  no  part  in  the  battle  of  Plataea  were  nevertheless
commemorated  on  one  or  other  of  the  trophies,  five  out  of  the  six  being
commemorated  on  both.  Why  was  this  ?  The  answer  doubtless  is
that  all  six  peoples  either  fought  on  the  Greek  side  at  the  battle  of
Salamis  or  at  least  rendered  important  service  to  the  Greek  cause  on
that  occasion  (Herodotus,  viii.  46  and  82) ;  and  that  the  two  trophies,
though  erected  out  of  the  booty  taken  at  Plataea  only,  were  afterwards
treated  as  monuments  of  the  Greek  triumphs  over  the  Persians  both  at
Salamis  and  Plataea  (cp.  [Demosthenes,]  Contra  Neaer.  p.  1378);
hence  states  which  had  been  represented  by  contingents  at  either  of
these  battles  were  deemed  entitled  to  have  their  names  engraved  on  the
trophies.

(2)  If  we  compare  the  two  first  columns  with  each  other,  we  see
that  the  lists  on  the  Delphic  and  Olympic  trophies  do  not  coincide.  All
the  twenty-seven  names  on  the  Olympic  trophy  occur  on  the  Delphic
trophy,  but  the  order  is  somewhat  different,  and  on  the  Delphic  trophy
there  are  four  names  (Thespians,  Eretrians,  Leucadians,  and  Siphnians)


CII.  XIII


THE  PL  AT AE  AN  TROPHY


30s


which,  if  Pausanias's  list  is  correct,  did  not  appear  on  the  Olympic
trophy.     How  are  these  discrepancies  to  be  explained  ?     Some  scholars


I.  Serpent-column.

II.  Statue  of  Zeus  at
Olvmpia  (Pausanias,  v.  33).

Greeks  who  fought  at

Plataea  (Herodotus,  ix.

28-30  and  77X

I  Lacedaemonians

Lacedaemonians

Lacedaemonians

2  Athenians

Athenians

Tegeans

3  Corinthians

Corinthians

Corinthians

4  Tegeans

Sicyonians

Potidaeans

5  Siqronians

Aeginetans

Orchomenians

6  Aeginetans

Megarians

Sicyonians

7  Megarians

Epidaurians

Epidaurians

8  Epidaurians

Tegeans

Troezenians

9  Orchomenians

Orchomenians

Lepreans

10  Phliasians

Phliasians

Mycenaeans

II  Troezenians

Troezenians

Tirynthians

12  Hermionians

Hermionians

Phliasians

13  Tirynthians

Tirynthians

Hermionians

14  Plataeans

Plataeans

Eretrians

15   Thespians

Mycenaeans

Styrians

16  Mycenaeans

Ceans

Chalcidians

17  Ceans

Melians

Ambraciots

18  Melians

Ambraciots

Leucadians

19  Tenians

Tenians

Anactorians

20  Naxians

Lepreans

Palaeans

21  Eretrians

Naxians

Aeginetans

22  Chalcidians

Cythnians

Megarians

23  Styrians

St3nrians

Plataeans

24  Eleans

Eleans

Athenians

25  Potidaeans

Potidaeans

Thespians

26  Lcucadians

Anactorians

Mantineans

27  Anactorians

Chalcidians

Eleans

28  Cythnians

29  Siphnians

30  Ambraciots

31  Lepreans

have  supposed  that  the  lists  on  the  two  monuments  must  have  been
identical,  and  that  the  deficiencies  and  variations  of  order  in  the
Olympic  list,  as  reported  by  Pausanias,  are  simply  due  to  the  indolence
or  carelessness  of  the  person  who  took  down  the  Olympic  inscription,
whether  that  person  was  Pausanias  himself  or  some  other  antiquary
whom  he  may  have  copied.  This  is  the  view  of  Prof,  von  Wilamowitz-
Moellendorff  and  Mr.  Kalkmann.  See  Hennes^  12  (1877),  p.  345,
n.  29 ;  A.  Kalkmann,  Pausanias  der  Perieget^  p.  76  sq.  But  it  should
be  remembered  that  though  the  two  trophies  were  made  at  the  same
time,  the  lists  of  states  may  have  been  engraved  on  them  at  different
times  and  by  different  authorities.  We  know  as  a  fact  that  the  list  of
states  was  not  originally  engraved  on  the  Delphic  trophy  but  was  added
at  a  later  time  in  consequence  of  the  accidental  circimistance  of  the
vanity  and  presumption  of  the  Spartan  general  Pausanias.  If,  then,
the   Delphic  trophy  was  originally  set  up  without    any  such    list,  the

VOL.  V  X


3o6  THE  PLATAEAN  TROPHY  bk.  x.  phocis

probability  is  that  the  Olympic  trophy  was  so  too.  When  and  by
whom  the  list  was  placed  on  the  Olympic  trophy,  we  do  not  know.  It
may  have  been  added  by  the  Lacedaemonians  at  the  same  time  that
they  added  the  corresponding  list  to  the  Delphic  trophy.  But  the
writers  who  mention  the  latter  addition  say  nothing  about  the  former.
Therefore  knowing  not  when  or  by  what  authority  the  list  of  states  was
engraved  on  the  Olympic  trophy,  we  are  not  in  a  position  to  explain
the  discrepancies  between  that  list  and  the  list  on  the  Delphic  trophy.

Prof.  Adolf  Bauer  has  proposed  to  explain  the  discrepancies  between
the  two  lists  by  supposing  that  only  those  states  are  mentioned  on
either  trophy  which  not  only  fought  at  Salamis  or  Plataea  but  con-
tributed to  defray  the  cost  of  the  particular  trophy.  Thus  he  supposes
that  the  reason  why  the  names  of  the  Thespians,  Eretrians,  Leucadians,
and  Siphnians  occurred  on  the  Delphic  but  not  on  the  Olympic  trophy
was  simply  that  these  states  had  contributed  to  the  former  trophy  but
not  to  the  latter.  But  Herodotus  tells  us  that  the  cost  of  the  two
trophies  was  defrayed,  not  by  subscriptions  from  the  various  states,
but  out  of  the  booty  taken  at  Plataea  before  that  booty  was  divided
among  the  states.  There  is  absolutely  no  reason  to  question
Herodotus*s  account.  Prof.  Bauer's  view  contradicts  that  account  and
must  therefore  be  rejected.

It  remains  to  say  a  few  words  as  to  the  two  rival  theories  of  the  way
in  which  the  serpent-column  supported  the  golden  tripod.  ( i )  On  the
one  hand  it  has  been  supposed  that  each  of  the  three  feet  of  the  tripod
rested  on  one  of  the  three  serpents'  heads  which  projected  from  the
top  of  the  column.  This  is  the  view  of  Messrs.  Dethier  and  Mordtmann.
(2)  On  the  other  hand  it  has  been  argued  that  the  legs  of  the  tripod
rested  on  the  stone  pedestal  and  that  the  serpent-column  stood  in  the
middle  of  them  supporting,  not  the  tripod  as  a  whole,  but  only  the
cauldron  or  basin,  in  such  a  way  that  one  of  the  serpent's  heads  pro-
jected between  each  pair  of  the  tripod's  legs.  This  is  the  view  advocated
by  Wieseler,  Dr.  P.  Wolters,  and  especially  by  Prof.  Ernst  Fabricius.
That  tripods  sometimes  had  these  central  props  in  addition  to  their  three
legs,  we  know  from  the  representations  of  them  on  vases  and  from  small
models  of  tripods  found  at  Olympia.  But  there  are  serious  objections  to
supposing  that  the  serpent-column  was  nothing  more  than  such  a  central
prop  under  the  middle  of  the  cauldron.  For  on  this  view  the  golden
tripod  must  have  been  of  enormous  size.  Prof.  Fabricius  estimates  that
it  was  about  8  metres  (26  ft.  3  in.)  high  and  that  the  diameter  of  the
cauldron  was  not  quite  3  metres  (3  ft.  3  in.).  A  tripod  of  solid  gold  of
such  dimensions  is  out  of  the  question.  This  is  practically  admitted  by
Prof.  Fabricius,  who  supposes  that  only  parts  of  the  tripod,  such  as  the
cauldron,  the  rings,  and  various  ornaments,  were  of  massive  gold,  while
the  rest,  especially  the  legs,  may  have  been  of  gilt  bronze.  But,  quite
apart  from  the  question  of  the  value  of  the  material,  a  tripod  of  such  an
enormously  exaggerated  size  seems  little  in  keeping  with  the  simple  and
austere  character  of  Greek  art  in  the  early  part  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.
It  is  true  that  in  the  description  of  the  famous  procession  at  Alexandria
in  the  reign  of  Ptolemy  Philadelphus  we  read  of  golden  Delphic  tripods


CH.  XIII  THE  PLATAEAN  TROPHY  307

4,  6,  and  even  30  cubits  high  (Athenaeus,  v.  p.  202  b  c) ;  but  the  pomp
and  lavish  display  of  an  eastern  court  are  no  standards  whereby  to  judge
of  the  heroic  age  of  Greece.  Therefore  unless  it  can  be  shown  that  the
Greeks  of  the  first  half  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  were  accustomed  to  make
votive  tripods  of  a  size  even  approximating  to  the  supposed  size  of  the
tripod  in  question,  it  seems  safer  to  adopt  the  first  of  the  two  theories  as
to  the  relation  of  the  serpent-column  to  the  golden  tripod.  On  this
hypothesis  the  tripod  may  have  been  some  6  or  7  feet  high  and  from
2  to  3  feet  across.  Adopting  this  view  of  the  size  of  the  tripod,  we  are
still  at  liberty  to  suppose  that  only  parts  of  it  (particularly  the  cauldron)
were  of  solid  gold,  and  that  the  rest  of  it  was  of  gilt  bronze.  This  would
harmonise  both  with  the  language  of  Pausanias,  who  perhaps  implies
that  more  than  the  mere  serpent-column  survived  to  his  day,  and  with
the  language  of  the  Byzantine  writers,  who  certainly  speak  as  if  the
tripod,  and  not  merely  the  serpent-column,  had  been  transferred  by
Constantine  to  Constantinople.

See  Gibbon,  Decline  and  Folly  ch.  xvii.  ;  C.  T.  Newton,  Travels  and  Dis-
coveries in  the  Levafit,  2.  pp.  25-35  ;  Frick  and  Curtius,  *  Ueber  die  Ausgrabung
der  Schlangensaule  auf  dem  Hippodrom  zu  QonstzxiiinoipeXy  Mtmaisberichie  d.  kim,
preuss.  Akad.  d.  Wissen.  zu  Berlin y  13.  Marz  1856,  pp.  162- 181  ;  E.  Curtius,
*  Ueber  die  Weihgeschenke  der  Griechen  nach  den  Perserkriegen  und  insbesondere
Uber  das  plataiscne  Weihgeschenk  in  Delphi,'  Ncuhrichten  von  der  kon,  Gesell.  d,
IVissen.  zu  Gottingeny  23rd  December  1861,  No.  21.  pp.  361-390;  id,,  Gesam-
tnelte  Abhandlungen,  2.  pp.  369-374 ;  L.  Ross,  *  Inschriften  der  dreikopfigen
ehernen  Schlange  aus  Delphi  in  Konstantinopel,'  Fleckeisen^s  JahrbUchery  2
(1856),  pp.  265-268;  O.  Frick,  'Das  plataeische  Weihgeschenk  zu  Konstantinopel,*
Fltckeisev^s  /ahrbiicker,  Supplem.  3  (1857- 1860),  pp.  487-555  ;  Schubart,  in
Fleckeisen^s  Jahrhiichery  7  (1 861),  pp.  474-481;  Frick,  *Die  Echtheit  des
plataischen  Weihgeschenks  zu  Konstantinopel,*  ib.  8  (1862),  pp.  441-466 ;  Fr.
Wieseler,  'Zur  sogenannten  Schlangensaule  in  Konstantinopel,'  ib.  10  (1864),
pp.  242-259;  Schubart,  ib,  ii  (1865),  pp.  490-498  ;  id.,  *  Ueber  das  delphische
Weihgeschenk  zum  plataischen  Sieg,'  Archdologische  Zeiiungy  20  (1862),  pp.  245-
248  ;  Gottling,  *  Ueber  die  Basis  des  plataischen  Weihgeschenkes  in  Delphi,'
Gesammelte  Abhandlungen,  2,  pp.  71-77  ;  P.  Foucart,  AUmoire  sur  Us  ruines  et
Vhisioire  de  Delphes,  pp.  36-45  ;  P.  A.  Dethier  and  A.  D.  Mordtmann,  in  Denk-
schriften  d,  k.  Akademie  d.  Wissenschafien,  Philosoph.  histor.  Classe,  13  (Wien,
1864),  pp.  3-48  ;  Rawlinson's  Herodotus,  4.  pp.  467-473 ;  E.  Fabricius,  *  Das
plataische  Weihgeschenk  in  Delphi,'  Jahrbuck  des  archdoU  Inst.  1  (1886),  pp.
1 76- 191  ;  Ad.  Bauer,  *  Die  Inschriften  auf  der  Schlangensaule  und  auf  der
Basis  der  Zeusstatue  in  Olympia,*  Wiener  Studien,  9  (1887),  pp.  223-228;
Rcihl,  /.  G.  A.  No.  70 ;  E.  L.  Hicks,  Greek  Historical  Inscriptions,  No.  12  ;  W.
Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Grace.  No.  I  ;  E.  S.  Roberts,  Greek  Epigraphy,  No.
259  ;  A.  Kirchhoff,  Studien  zur  Gesch.  dergriech.  Alphabets,*  1^,  153;  Friederichs-
Wolters,  Gipsabgiisse,  No.  227.

13.  10.  not  far  from  Phalanthns  is  a  dolphin  etc.  On  coins  of
Tarentum  there  commonly  occurs  the  device  of  a  man  riding  on  a
dolphin.  See  B.  V.  Head,  Coins  of  the  Ancients,  Plate  7,  Nos.  4-7,
Plate  15,  No.  4,  Plate  24,  Nos.  6-10,  Plate  45,  No.  15  sq.  \  id.,
Historia  Numorum,  p.  44  sqq.  According  to  Aristotle,  cited  by  Pollux
(ix.  80),  the  man  so  represented  on  the  coins  was  Taras ;  but  from
the  present  passage  of  Pausanias  it  would  seem  rather  that  he  was
Phalanthus.  Modem  numismatists  have  followed  Aristotle,  overlooking
the  present  passage  of  Pausanias.     The  first,  apparently,  to  correct  this


3o8  DOUBLE-HEADED  AXES  bk.  x.  phocis

mistake  was  Prof.  Studniczka  (Ajr^fw^  (Leipsic,  1890),  p.  175  sqq.\  who
further  argues  that  Phalanthus,  the  supposed  founder  of  Tarentum,  was
not,  as  is  generally  supposed,  an  historical  personage,  but  a  form  of
Poseidon  worshipped  in  Achaia  and  Arcadia  before  the  Dorian  invasion.
Cp.  X.  10.  6  sqq,

14.  I.  The  axes  etc.  According  to  Plutarch  {De  Pythiae  oraculis^
12)  the  people  of  Tenedos  dedicated  an  axe,  because  at  a  place
Asterium  in  Tenedos  there  were  crabs,  the  shells  of  which  bore  a  mark
like  an  axe.  The  Greek  proverb  about  an  axe  of  Tenedos,  to  which
Pausanias  refers  below  (§  3),  was  variously  explained.  According  to
Aristotle,  the  proverb  arose  because  a  certain  king  of  Tenedos  had  laid
down  a  law  that  adulterers  should  be  slain  with  an  axe ;  the  king's  own
son,  being  convicted  of  adultery,  was  executed  according  to  the  law ;
hence  on  coins  of  Tenedos  an  axe  was  stamped  on  one  side  and  a  double
head  (male  and  female)  on  the  other.  See  Stephanus  Byzantius,  5,v,
TfvcSos ;  Suidas  and  Photius,  Lexicotiy  s,ifv,  Tci/cSios  ui/^pcoiros  and
Tci^cStos  ^vv7Jyo/jos ;  Conon,  Narrationes,  28  ;  Hesychius,  s,v.  Tcvc^tov
PiXos  ;  Heraclides  Ponticus,  De  rebus  publicise  vii.  {Frag,  Histor,
Graec,  ed.  Miiller,  2.  p.  213  sq,)\  Diogenianus,  iv.  94  and  viii.  58;
Apostolius,  xvi.  25  and  26;  Zenobius,  vi.  9;  Eustathius,  Comment,  in
Dionysli  Perieg.  537.  The  story  of  Tennes,  as  it  is  narrated  here  by
Pausanias,  is  told  also,  though  without  mention  of  the  axe,  by  Diodonis
(v.  83),  by  Tzetzes  {Sc/iol.  on  Lycophron^  232-3),  by  Eustathius  and  a
Scholiast  on  Homer  (//.  ii.  38),  and  by  Apollodorus  (p.  195  sq,  ed.  R.
Wagner,  Epitoma  Vaticana  ex  ApoUodori  BibliotJieca^  ed.  R.  Wagner
(Leipsic,  1891),  p.  64  sq.).  As  to  coins  of  Tenedos  with  the  double  axe
on  one  side  and  the  double  head  (male  and  female)  on  the  other,  see
B.  V.  Head,  Historia  Numonim^  p.  476  sq.  ;  /V/.,  Coins  of  the  Ancients^
plate  2  No.  19,  plate  18  Nos.  20  sq.^  plate  49  No.  13.  My  friend
Prof.  Ridgeway  holds  that  the  reason  why  the  double  axe  was  put  on  the
coins  of  Tenedos  may  have  been  that  axes  were  specially  manufactured
in  Tenedos  and  formed  the  unit  of  barter  there  before  the  introduction
of  coined  money,  just  as  axes,  or  small  models  of  them,  still  ser\'e
as  currency  in  some  parts  of  Africa  (W.  Ridgeway,  The  origin  of
metallic  currency  and  weight  standards^  P-  3^7  •^^•)*  ^^  ^"^  ^^  ^^
tombs  on  the  citadel  of  Mycenae  Dr.  Schliemann  found  two  small
double-headed  axes  of  thin  gold  plate  (Schliemann,  Mycenae^  p.  252).
In  1878  similar  golden  axes  were  found  near  Aidin  in  Lydia  {Bulletin
de  Corresp.  hellMque,  3  (1879),  p.  129  sq,,  with  plates,  iv.  v.).  On  a
so-called  Hittite  relief  at  lasili-ICaia,  what  appears  to  be  a  religious
procession  is  represented,  and  one  figure,  standing  erect  on  a  lion  and
wearing  a  high  conical  cap,  carries  a  double-headed  axe  (Perrot  et
Chipiez,  Histoire  de  Part  dans  P antiquity,  4.  p.  637,  fig.  313  ;  Revue
archifologique,  3rd  Sen  6  (1885),  p.  300).  The  Labrandean  Zeus  of
Caria  is  represented  on  coins  carrying  a  double-headed  axe  (B.  V.  Head,
Coins  of  the  Ancients,  iii.  A.  33-35).  This  deity  seems  to  have  taken
his  surname  from  the  axe,  for  labrus  is  said  to  be  the  Lydian  word
for  an  axe  (Plutarch,  Quaest.  Graec.  45  ;  L.  Preller,  Griechische  Mytho-
logic, ^  I.  p.  141).     On  reliefs  found  at  Khodja-Tach,  on  the  borders  of


CH.  XIV  THE  GREAT  ALTAR  309

Pisidia  and  Phrygia,  the  double-headed  axe  appears  in  the  hand  of  the
'saviour  god'  (^cos  <rwfa>v),  who  is  represented  on  horseback  {Bulletin
de  Corresp.  helUniqtie^  4  (1880),  p.  294).  According  to  L.  Stephani,
the  double-headed  axe  appears  very  often  on  vase-paintings  as  the
symbol  of  Dionysus  or  one  of  his  train.  He  thinks  that  on  coins
of  Tenedos  the  double-headed  axe,  which  is  generally  accompanied
by  a  cluster  of  grapes,  is  a  symbol  of  the  worship  of  Dionysus,  and  he
explains  the  double  head  on  the  same  coins  as  having  originally
represented  the  bearded  and  beardless  Dionysus.  See  Stephani,  in
Compte-Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1863,  pp.  128-134.  A  double-
headed  axe  of  bronze  has  been  found  by  the  French  at  Delphi  {^Berliner
pkilolog.  Wochenschrifty  15th  August  1896,  p.  1086).

14.  2.  this  Oaletor  was  killed  by  AJax  etc.      See  Homer,  //.  ii.

419  sqq.

14.  4.  Tennes  was  slain  by  Achilles  etc.  Tennes  was  worshipped
at  Tenedos,  and  because  he  had  been  slain  by  Achilles  it  was  unlawful
to  mention  the  name  of  Achilles  in  his  sanctuary.  Flute-players  were
also  forbidden  to  enter  it,  a  prohibition  which  was  explained  by  another
legend.     See  Diodorus,  v.  83  ;  Plutarch,  Quaest,  Grace,  28.

14.  5.  a  bronze  Zens  at  Olympia.     See  v.  23.  i  sg,

14.  5.  an  Apollo  from  the  spoils  of  the  sea-fights  etc.

Herodotus  tells  us  (viii.  121)  that  out  of  the  spoils  of  the  battle  of
Salamis  the  Greeks  dedicated  at  Delphi  a  statue  1 2  ells  (ligh,  holding
in  its  hand  the  figure-head  of  a  ship.  This  may  have  been  the  statue
which  Pausanias  calls  an  Apollo.  It  stood  near  a  golden  statue  of
Alexander,  king  of  Macedonia.

14.  6.  The  expeditions  of  the  barbarians foretold  in  the

oracles  of  Bacis.  Oracles  of  Bacis  referring  to  the  Persian  invasion
of  Greece  are  quoted  or  referred  to  by  Herodotus  (viii.  20,  yy^  96,
ix.  43).

14.  7.  the  great  altar.  Herodotus  mentions  (ii.  135)  an  altar  of
the  Chians  opposite  the  temple  at  Delphi.  This  altar  of  the  Chians  has
been  found  by  the  French  in  the  situation  described  by  Herodotus.  It
is  on  the  left-hand  side  of  the  Sacred  Way,  opposite  to  and  on  a  level
with  the  eastern  front  of  the  temple  of  Apollo.  The  base,  a  high  tower-
like structure  of  native  limestone,  is  surmounted  by  a  course  faced  with
black  marble.  On  this  rested  the  altar  proper,  constructed  of  white,
perhaps  Parian,  marble.  A  pavement,  of  which  part  has  been  removed
and  part  has  sunk  into  the  ground,  united  the  altar  to  the  temple.  The
cornice,  now  lying  on  the  ground,  bears  the  inscription  XIOI  AIIOAAflNI
TON  BflMON  *  The  Chians  (dedicated)  the  altar  to  Apollo.'  On  the
side  of  the  altar  is  carved  another  inscription  :

AEA4>0IEAflKAN
XIOISnPOMANT
EIHN

•*  The  Delphians  gave  the  Chians  the  right  of  consulting  the  oracle  on
behalf  of  others."    (On  the  true  meaning  of  7r/x)/iaKT€4a,  which  is  usually


310  OFFERINGS  OF  GELO  bk.  x.  phocis

translated  "  the  right  of  consulting  the  oracle  before  others,"  see  Th.
Homolle,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUniquey  19  (1895),  p.  60  ^^.)  Thus
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  altar  is  the  one  mentioned  by  Herodotus.
And  from  its  position,  size,  and  the  order  of  Pausanias's  description  it
would  seem  to  have  been  also  the  great  altar  of  the  god.  However,  no
ashes,  bones,  small  votive  offerings,  or  bronze  utensils  have  been  found  in
its  neighbourhood.  On  the  other  hand  at  the  western  end  of  the  temple
a  deposit  of  pottery  and  bronzes  has  been  found  in  a  layer  of  dark  hard
soil  sometimes  mingled  with  bones  and  ashes.  Among  the  bronzes  are
pieces  of  tripods,  bowls,  and  statuettes,  a  lion  of  the  Assyrian  type,  two
small  horses,  two  birds  with  human  faces,  and  three  heads  of  grif&ns.
The  pottery,  mostly  broken,  comprises  sherds  of  the  three  styles  known
as  geometrical,  proto-Corinthian,  and  Corinthian ;  they  were  found  in
separate  clearly-marked  layers,  one  above  the  other.  A  few  pieces  of
late  Mycenaean  ware  have  also  come  to  light  among  them.  This  dis-
covery proves  either  that  an  altar  existed  here  or  at  all  events  that
the  refuse  of  an  altar  was  systematically  deposited  here.  See  Th.
Homolle,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUmque,  17  (1893),  P*  6i4>  ^^^  '^•
18  (1894),  pp.  179,  180  sq.  ;  id.,  in  Comptes  Rendus  de  PAcad^mie  dcs
Inscriptions,  22  (1894),  p.  204  sq,\  id.,  in  Gazette  des  Beaux- Arts,
D^cembre  1894,  p.  442  sq.  The  altar  is  mentioned  without  qualification
in  several  Delphic  inscriptions  which  declare  that  the  ceremony  of
the  dedication  of  slaves  to  Apollo  took  place  "between  the  temple
and  the  altar."  See  Wescher-Foucart,  Inscriptions  recueillies  d  Delphes,
Nos.  345,  346,  376,  407.  Cp.  H.  Pomtow,  Beitrdge  zur  Topographic
von  Delphi,  p.  38  sq.  ;  id.,  in  Archdologischer  Anzeiger,  1894,  p.  186
and  ib.  1895,  p.  5  sq.

The  level  space  or  esplanade  to  the  east  of  the  temple,  near  the
great  altar,  was  the  most  conspicuous  in  the  whole  precinct,  and  from
the  long  list  of  votive  offerings  enumerated  by  Pausanias  in  this  part  of
his  tour  we  might  infer  that  here  the  monuments  stood  thickest.  This
inference  is  confirmed  by  the  excavations,  which  have  revealed  a  con-
tinuous line  of  pedestals  bordering  this  part  of  the  Sacred  Way.  Here
may  be  seen  the  base,  inscribed  with  a  fine  Latin  dedication,  which
supported  the  trophies  of  Aemilius  Paulus.  From  Livy  (xlv.  27)  we
know  that  the  Roman  conqueror,  on  his  visit  to  Delphi,  gave  orders  that
these  memorials  of  his  victory  should  be  set  up  on  the  very  spot  which
his  adversary  Perseus  had  chosen  as  the  site  of  a  trophy  he  was  never
destined  to  erect.  Just  above  the  Sacred  Way,  at  the  point  where  it
turns  westward,  stands  a  huge  pedestal  in  the  form  of  a  column  inscribed
with  a  dedication  by  Gelo,  son  of  Dinomenes,  tyrant  of  Syracuse.  His
offering,  which  consisted  of  a  golden  tripod  and  a  golden  statue  of
Victory,  was  dedicated  as  a  memorial  of  his  great  victory  over  the  Cartha-
ginians at  Himera  in  480  B.C.  See  Diodorus,  xi.  26  ;  Athenaeus,  vi.  p.
231  f.  From  the  inscription  we  learn  that  the  artist  was  Bion,  son  of
Diodorus,  a  Milesian.  This  artist  was  mentioned  by  Polemo  (Diogenes
Laertius,  iv.  7.  58),  perhaps  in  his  work  on  Delphi.  To  the  right  of  the
pedestal  is  another  which  from  a  frag^mentary  inscription  carved  on  it
appears  to  have  supported  another  offering  either  of  Gelo  or  of  one  of


CH.  XIV  OFFERINGS  OF  DAOCHUS  311

his  brothers.  A' third  pedestal,  exactly  alike,  lies  on  the  ground  broken  ;
it  bears  no  inscription.  Lastly,  a  fourth  pedestal  of  the  same  sort  has
been  found  below  the  Sacred  Way.  Hence  it  is  believed  that  all  the
four  sons  of  Dinomenes,  namely  Gelo,  Hiero,  Thrasybulus,  and  Polyzelus
(Diodorus,  xi.  48  and  67)  dedicated  offerings  at  Delphi  to  commemorate
the  victory  of  Himera.  See  Th.  Homolle,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp,
AelUmquey  18  (1894),  p.  179  sq,  ;  iV/.,  in  Comptes  Rendus  de  PAcaddmie
des  Inscriptions^  22  (1894),  p.  586.

Next  above  the  pedestal  of  Gelo  is  a  base  on  which,  as  we  have
seen  (pi.  299),  the  Plataean  trophy  is  believed  to  have  rested.  It
would  certainly  be  highly  appropriate  that  the  monuments  of  two  great
victories  won  in  successive  years  over  the  barbarians  of  the  West  and  of
the  East  should  stand  side  by  side  at  the  religious  capital  of  Greece.
Behind  the  pedestal  of  Gelo  a  long  pedestal  supported  nine  statues  set
up  in  honour  of  the  Thessalian  tyrant  Daochus,  his  ancestors,  and  his
sons.  Seven  of  the  inscriptions  on  the  pedestal  and  most  of  the  statues
are  preserved.  Five  of  the  inscriptions  are  in  verse.  They  set  forth
the  exploits  and  laud  the  merits  of  each  of  the  personages  represented,
mentioning  benefits  conferred  on  Thessaly  and  athletic  victories  won  at
Olympia,  the  Isthmus,  Nemea,  and  Delphi.  The  statues  were  found  fallen
at  the  foot  of  the  pedestal.  Most  of  the  persons  are  represented  wrapt
in  the  heavy  Thessalian  mantle  ;  but  one,  an  athlete,  is  nude.  His  spare
hardy  figure,  small  head,  short  hair,  and  upturned  gaze  are  in  the  style
of  Lysippus.  See  Th.  Homolle,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUniquey
19  (1895),  P*  534;  <^M  i^  Gazette  des  Beaux-Arts^  D^cembre  1894,
p.  452  ;  V Illustration^  No.  2702  (8  D^cembre  1894),  p.  481.  Daochus
enjoys  a  less  enviable  immortality  in  the  pages  of  Demosthenes  (Or.
xviii.  p.  324),  where  he  heads  a  long  list  of  scoundrels  who  had  truckled
to  Philip  and  betrayed  and  ruined  their  country.  He  was  one  of  the
envoys  sent  by  Philip  to  Thebes  immediately  before  the  battle  of
Chaeronea  to  counteract  the  influence  of  the  Athenian  embassy  headed
by  Demosthenes.  But  he  was  no  match  for  the  Athenian  orator,  whose
resistless  eloquence  swept  his  hearers  away  as  on  a  torrent.  See
Plutarch,  Demosthenes^  18.

Several  of  the  bases  in  this  neighbourhood,  as  I  am  informed  by
Mr.  Cecil  Smith,  supported  chariots.  An  inscription  on  one  of  them
mentions  a  bronze-gilt  chariot  dedicated  by  Rhodes.  The  boundary-
wall  of  the  sacred  precinct  on  the  east  is  here  cut  into  by  some
extensive  baths  of  the  Roman  period,  above  which  is  a  large  tank  built
of  bricks  with  engaged  brick  columns.  To  the  west  of  the  baths  is  a
large  square  building  of  Roman  times,  but  its  purpose  is  unknown.

14.  7.  a  bronze  wolf  etc.  The  story  that  the  Delphians  revered  the
wolf  for  having  guided  them  to  some  stolen  treasures  of  the  god  was  told
by  Polemo  (Aelian,  Nat,  an,  xii.  40).  Another  reason  assigned  for  the
dedication  of  the  bronze  wolf  was  that  Apollo  delighted  in  wolves
because  his  mother  Latona  had  assumed  the  form  of  a  she-wolf  when
she  bore  him  (Aelian,  Nat.  an,  x.  26).  When  the  Lacedaemonians
received  from  the  Delphians  the  right  of  consulting  the  oracle  on  behalf
of  others  as  well  as  of  themselves  (irpo/iaKrcta,  see  above,  p.  309  sq,\  they


312  STATUE  OF  PHRYNE  bk.  x.  piiocis

engraved  the  decree  on  the  forehead  of  this  bronze  wolf.  Afterwards
Pericles  obtained  from  the  Delphians  a  similar  right  for  the  Athenians
and  engraved  the  decree  on  the  wolfs  right  side.  See  Plutarch,
PerideSy  21.  The  dedication  of  a  bronze  wolf  to  Apollo  points  to  that
mythical  connexion  between  the  god  and  the  animal  of  which  we  have
many  proofs.  See  notes  on  i.  1 9.  3  *  The  Lyceimi '  and  ii.  9.  7  *  Wolfish
Apollo.'

15.  I.  The  gilded  statae  of  Fhryne  etc  The  statue  stood  on
a  lofty  column  of  Pentelic  marble  between  the  statues  of  two  kings,
Archidamus,  king  of  Sparta,  and  Philip,  king  of  Macedonia.  It  bore
the  inscription  "Phryne  of  Thespiae,  daughter  of  Epicles."  See
Athenaeus,  xiii.  p.  591  b;  Aelian,  ix.  32  ;  [Dio  Chrysostom,]  Or,  xxxvii.
vol.  2.  p.  301  ed.  Dindorf.  Compare  Plutarch,  De  Pytkiae  araculis^
15  ;  /V/.,  AmcUoriuSy  ix.  10;  /V/.,  De  Alex,  s.  inrt,  s.  fort.  Or.  ii.  3;
Tatian,  Or,  ad  Graecos^  33.  p.  132  ed.  Otto.  Most  of  the  ancient
writers  who  mention  the  statue  speak  of  it  as  golden,  not  gilded.  In
one  passage,  however,  Plutarch  agrees  with  Pausanias  in  describing  it
as  gilded  {AmatoriuSy  ix.  10).  According  to  Pausanias  the  statue  was
dedicated  by  Phryne  herself ;  but  according  to  Aelian  and  Athenaeus  it
was  dedicated  by  her  admirers  and  neighbours  (ot  ircpticrtovcs  Athenaeus,
I,c,),  Phryne  is  said  to  have  dedicated  at  Delphi  a  golden  statue
of  Aphrodite  (Diogenes  Laertius,  vi.  2.  60).  But  this  is  perhaps  a
mistaken  reference  to  the  gilt  statue  of  Phryne  herself,  who  may  have
been  represented  in  the  style  and  with  the  attributes  of  Aphrodite.
Prof.  Furtwangler  conjectures  that  the  statue  known  as  the  Aphrodite  of
Ostia,  now  in  the  British  Museum,  may  be  a  copy  of  Praxiteles's  statue
of  Phryne  at  Delphi.  The  whole  of  the  left  arm  and  the  right  arm
from  the  elbow  are  restored  ;  but  the  goddess  or  woman  seems  to  have
been  represented  as  engaged  at  her  toilet,  probably  holding  a  mirror  in
her  right  hand  and  some  article  of  toilet  in  her  raised  left  hand.  The
lower  half  only  of  the  figure  is  draped.  See  Bernoulli,  Aphrodite^  pp.
178-180;  Friederichs-Wolters,  Gipsabgiisse^  No.  1470;  A.  Furtwangler,
Meisterwerke  d,  griech,  Plasttk,  pp.  549-55 1.  As  to  the  statue  of  Phryne
by  Praxiteles  at  Thespiae,  see  ix.  27.  5.

15.  I.  a  victory  whicli  they  won  over  the  Athenians.  In
445  B.C.  the  Megarians  revolted  from  Athens  and  cut  to  pieces  the
Athenian  garrison  with  the  exception  of  some  who  made  their  escape  to
Nisaea  (Thucydides,  i.  114).  This  was  the  success  commemorated  by
the  statue  of  Apollo  at  Delphi ;  the  god  was  represented  holding  a
spear  (Plutarch,  De  Pytkiae  oraculis^  16).

15.  I.  when  they  imposed  a  fine  on  the  Phocians  etc  Cp.  x.  2.
I  note,  and  note  on  x.  8.  2.

15.  2.  an  image  of  Artemis,  one  of  Athena,  and  two  of  Apollo.
Overbeck  conjectured  that  the  Artemis  of  Versailles,  the  Athena  of  the
Capitol,  and  the  Apollo  Belvedere  are  copies  of  three  of  these  statues.
See  note  on  x.  23.  i.

15.  2.  the  Oeltic  host  would  cross  from  Europe  into  Asia  etc.
See  i.  4.  5  sq.y  i.  8.  i,  x.  23.  14.

15.  3.  Attains described  in  an  oracle  as  bull-homed.    The


CH.  XVI  ALYATTES'  BOWL  313

oracle  is  quoted  by  Suidas  {s,v,  'ArraAos).  It  predicts  that  Attalus
and  his  children's  children  will  attain  to  royal  dignity.

15.  4*  The  bronze  ]>alm-tree  and  the  gilt  image  of  Athena  etc.
Plutarch  describes  the  image  of  Athena  as  golden  and  as  mounted  on
the  bronze  palm-tree  {Nia'aSy  13).  He  agrees  with  Pausanias  in  saying
that  the  image  and  palm-tree  were  dedicated  out  of  the  spoils  of  the
Persian  war,  and  that  on  the  eve  of  the  Sicilian  disaster  crows  pecked
off  the  golden  fruit  of  the  palm  {Nidas^  i^\  De  Pythiae  oraculis^  8).
Cp.  Schubart,  in  Archdologische  Zeitung^  20  (1862),  pp.  233-235.

15.  5.  Olitodemus.  The  fragments  of  his  works  are  collected  by
C.  Miiller  {Fragfn,  hist,  Grace,  i.  pp.  359-365).  In  the  texts  of
classical  writers  his  name  often  appears  as  Clidemus  (C.  Miiller,  op.  cit.
p.  Ixxxii.).

15.  6.  The  Oyrenians  dedicated  etc.     Cp.  x.  13.  5  note.

15.  6.  it  was  Battos  who  led  them to  Libya.  See  Hero-
dotus, iv.  155-158.

15.  7-  Battos was  cured  of  his  stammer  etc.     A  somewhat

different  version  of  the  story  is  told  by  Justin  (xiii.  7).

15.  7*  the  fine  paid  by  the  Phocians  for  their  sacrilege.  At  the
close  of  the  Sacred  War  in  346  B.C.  the  Phocians  were  condemned  to
pay  a  fine  of  sixty  talents  yearly  until  they  had  restored  the  value  of  all
the  sacred  treasures  which  they  had  carried  off  from  the  sanctuary
(Diodorus,  xvi.  60).  Inscriptions  have  been  found  at  the  temple  of
Cranaean  Athena  near  Elatea  and  at  Delphi  which  prove  that  this
sentence  was  in  part  at  least  carried  out,  for  they  record  the  payment
of  instalments  of  the  fine  by  the  Phocians.  One  instalment,  apparently
for  half  a  year,  is  thirty  talents ;  another,  the  eleventh,  is  ten  talents.
See  P.  Paris,  in  Bulletin  dc  Corresf.  hellMque^  11  (1887),  p.  321  sqq. ;
C,  I,  G,  G.  S.  3.  Nos.  110-112  ;  Th.  Homolle,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp,
helUnique^  18  (1894),  p.  181.

16.  I.  the  offerings  sent  by  the  kings  of  Lydia.  These  com-
prised treasuries  dedicated  by  Gyges  and  Croesus  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  421),
six  golden  bowls  and  many  silver  objects  dedicated  by  Gyges  (Hero-
dotus, i.  14),  and  a  hundred  and  seventeen  ingots  of  gold,  a  golden
lion,  two  large  bowls,  one  of  gold  and  one  of  silver,  four  silver  jars,  two
lustral  vessels,  one  of  gold  and  one  of  silver,  a  golden  figure  of  a  woman,
many  round  vessels  of  silver,  and  his  wife's  necklace  and  girdles,  all
dedicated  by  Croesus  (Herodotus,  i.  50  sq,).  To  these  must  be  added
the  golden  shield  dedicated  by  Croesus  in  the  temple  of  Forethought
Athena  (Herodotus,  i.  92  ;  Paus.  x.  8.  7)  and  the  offerings  of  Alyattes
(see  next  note).

16.  I.  the  iron  stand  of  Alsrattes'  bowl  etc.  Alyattes  king  of
Lydia  dedicated  at  Delphi  a  large  silver  bowl  on  a  stand  of  welded  iron
as  a  thank-offering  for  recovery  from  an  illness.  Herodotus  (i.  25)
describes  it  as  "  worth  seeing  above  all  the  votive  offerings  at  DelphL"
Animals  and  plants  were  wrought  in  relief  on  the  iron  stand  (Athenaeus,
v.  p.  210  c).  Plutarch  speaks  of  **  the  famous  stand  and  base  of  the
bowl"  and  says  that  it  was  made  of  iron  softened  in  the  fire  and
tempered  with  water  (De  dcfectu  oraculorum^  47).     Herodotus  states


314  WELDING  OF  IRON  bk.  x.  phocis

{l.c)  that  Glaucus  the  Chian,  the  maker  of  this  bowl  and  stand,  was  the
first  man  to  invent  the  welding  (koAAt^is)  of  iron.  The  statement  was
often  repeated  by  later  writers,  some  of  whom  speak  of  the  artist  as
a  Samian.  See  Hesychius,  s.v.  VXavKov  rkxvq ;  Suidas,  s,v,  yXav^
tirraTai ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v,  Aiddkrj ;  Schol.  on  Plato,  Phaedo^  p.
io8  d  ;  Proverbia  e  Cod,  Coislin,  80  {Paroemiographi  Graeci^^d,  Gaisford,
p.  128);  Overbeck,  Schriftquellen^  §§  263-272.  As  to  Glaucus,  see
H.  Brunn,  Gesch,  d,  grieck.  Kiitistlery  i.  p.  29  j^.,  and  as  to  the  process
which  he  is  said  to  have  invented,  see  E.  Curtius,  in  Archdologisc/te
Zeitung^  34  (1876),  p.  37  5q.\  A.  Michaelis,  ib,  p.  156  sq,\  cp.  G.
Semper,  Der  Stil^  p.  489  sq.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  process  said  to  have  been
invented  by  Glaucus  was  the  welding  and  not  the  soldering  of  iron ;
for  till  a  few  years  ago  no  method  of  soldering  iron  was  known.
Welding  is  the  uniting  of  two  separate  pieces  of  metal  into  a  single
piece  wkhout  the  intervention  of  a  third  metal.  In  order  to  weld  two
pieces  of  metal  together,  it  is  necessary  that  the  surfaces  which  are
to  be  united  should  be  heated  white  hot.  But  when  iron  is  heated
white  hot,  a  process  of  oxidation  takes  place  on  its  surface,  and  the
oxide  thus  developed  on  the  surfaces  of  two  pieces  of  white-hot  iron  pre-
vents them  from  uniting.  This  constitutes  the  difficulty  of  welding  iron.
To  get  rid  of  the  oxide,  sand  is  sprinkled  on  the  two  hot  surfaces,  which
are  then  hammered  together.  The  sand  unites  with  the  oxide  and
forms  a  fluid  which  in  the  process  of  hammering  is  expelled  from
between  the  two  surfaces,  leaving  them  free  to  unite.  Soldering  on  the
other  hand  is  the  joining  of  two  pieces  of  metal  by  the  interposition  of  a
third  metal  of  a  different  sort,  which  serves  as  a  bond  or  link  between
them.  The  metal  which  is  thus  to  act  as  a  bond  between  two  others
must  possess  the  property  of  melting  at  a  lower  temperature  than  either
of  them ;  hence  an  alloy  of  one  or  both  metals  (if  the  metals  are  of
different  sorts)  is  generally  employed  for  the  purpose,  since  the  melting
temperature  of  an  alloy  is  usually  lower  than  that  of  either  of  the  metals
of  which  it  is  composed.  But  no  metal  or  alloy  suitable  for  soldering
iron  was  known  till  a  few  years  ago ;  hence  down  to  that  time  iron  was
never  soldered.  It  is  now  found  that  two  pieces  of  galvanised  iron
(iron  coated  with  tin)  can  be  soldered  together,  the  tin  on  the  surface
of  the  two  pieces  of  iron  melting  and  acting  as  the  bond  between  them.
But  galvanised  iron  was  unknown  to  the  ancients ;  hence  the  soldering
of  iron  was  equally  unknown  to  them. — For  the  substance  of  this  note
on  the  processes  of  welding  and  soldering  I  am  indebted  to  the  kindness
of  my  lamented  friend,  J.  H.  Middleton.

16.  3.  What  the  Delphians  call  the  Navel  etc.  It  is  said  that
Zeus,  wishing  to  ^certain  the  exact  centre  of  the  earth,  caused  two
eagles  to  fly  simultaneously  at  equal  speed  from  the  eastern  and  western
ends  of  the  earth.  The  eagles  met  at  Delphi,  which  was  consequently
regarded  as  the  centre  of  the  earth,  and  in  memory  of  the  way  in  which
the  supposed  fact  was  said  to  have  been  ascertained,  two  golden  eagles
were  set  up  beside  the  Navel  {omphalos\  which,  as  we  learn  from
Pausanias,  was  a  block  of  white  marble  believed  to  mark  the  exact


CH.  XVI  7 HE  NAVEL-STONE  315

centre  of  the  earth.  Hence  Pindar  speaks  of  the  Pythian  priestess  as
"  seated  beside  the  golden  eagles  of  Zeus  "  (Pindar,  Pyth,  iv.  6).  These
golden  eagles  were  carried  off  by  the  Phocians  in  the  Sacred  War.
See  Schol.  on  Pindar,  Pyth,  iv.  6;  Strabo,  ix.  p.  419  x^. ;  Plutarch,
De  defectu  oraailorum^  i  ;  Schol.  on  Sophocles,  Oedipus  Rex^  480  ;
Schol.  on  Euripides,  Orestes^  331.  According  to  some,  the  birds
employed  by  Zeus  on  this  occasion  were  swans  (Plutarch,  Lc)  or  crows
(Strabo,  Lc),  It  is  said  that  a  figure  of  the  eagle  was  worked  in  mosaic
on  the  floor  of  the  temple  beside  the  Navel-stone.  See  Schol.  on  Lucian,
De  scdtationey  38.  (In  this  passage  the  reading  of  the  MSS.  is  aicr^v
{sic)  ytypawrai.  The  readings  aiVeovs  or  aicro)  yeypdffiSai  are  con-
jectures proposed  by  Ulrichs  and  Wieseler  respectively.)  It  has  been
supposed  that  this  figure  of  an  eagle  in  mosaic  was  made  as  a  substitute
for  the  golden  eagles  carried  off  by  the  Phocians  ;  but  this  is  merely  a
conjecture.  Euripedes  {lon^  224)  describes  the  Navel-stone  as  clothed
>vith  fillets  and  with  figures  of  Gorgons  on  either  side  of  it.  These
Gorgons  are  probably  the  figures  which  were  more  commonly  described
as  eagles  ;  the  figures  were  perhaps  rude  and  archaic  and  might  be
variously  interpreted.  Some  people,  as  we  have  seen,  thought  that  the
birds  were  swans  or  crows.  After  telling  the  legend  of  the  two  eagles
meeting  at  Delphi,  Strabo  says  (/.r.) :  "And  they  show  in  the  temple  a
certain  Navel,  decked  with  fillets,  and  upon  it  the  images  of  the  myth."
From  this  we  should  infer  that  the  eagles  (or  Gorgons)  were  still  to  be
seen  beside  the  Navel-stone  in  Strabo's  time.  But  we  are  expressly
told  that  the  golden  eagles  had  been  carried  off  in  the  Sacred  War,  that
is,  about  three  hundred  years  before  Strabo's  time.  From  this  and  the
silence  of  Pausanias  as  to  the  eagles,  we  may  perhaps  infer  that  the  birds
were  no  longer  to  be  seen  in  Strabo's  time,  and  that  his  account  of
the  Navel-stone  was  based,  not  on  personal  observation,  but  on  old
books  which  described  the  stone  as  it  had  been  before  the  Sacred  War.
Strabo's  account  of  Greece  is  notoriously  defective  and  erroneous  ;  he
appears  to  have  seen  very  little  of  the  country  and  to  desLcribc  it  mostly
at  second  or  third  hand.

The    Navel-stone   {omphalos)    is   very   frequently   represented    on

existing  monuments  of  ancient  art,  especially  on  vases  and  coins,  and

from  these  we  can  form  a  pretty  accurate  conception  of  its  size  and

appearance.

f  It  appears  especially  often   in  vase-paintings   of  Orestes,  pursued

/     by  the  Furies,  taking  sanctuary  at  the  sacred  stone.     Generally  it  is

/      represented  of  a  conical  shape,  like  a  half-egg,  resting  on  a  quadrangular

/       pedestal ;  but  sometimes  it  is  figured  as  nearly  like  a  whole  t%%^  with

one  of  the  points  cut  off  to  enable  it  to  stand  upright  on  its  pedestal.

Sometimes  it  is  draped  with  fillets  hanging  straigh#down ;  sometimes

it  is  covered  with  a  sort  of  net-work.     In  some  cases  the  fillets  are

ordinary  ribbons  ;  in  others  they  are  strings  of  what  look  like  small

eggs.     From  these  representations  we  should  judge  the  Navel-stone  to

liave  been  from  2  to  5  feet  in  height  and  somewhat  less  across.

See  S.  Reinach,  Peintures  de  Vases  Antipies,  Millin,  ii.  68  ;  MUller- Wieseler,
Denkmdler^  ii.  pi.  xiii.  No.    148;    Compte- Rendu  (St.    Petersburg)  for  i860,


3i6  THE  NAVEL-STONE  bk.  X.  piiocis

Atlu,  pi.  ii.  ;  id.,  for  lS6l,  Atlas,  pL  iv.  ;  id.,  for  1S63,  Atlas,  pi.  vL  5  ;  Arckaa-
Itfiichi  ZtHung,  18  (l86z),  pis.  cixivii.,  cixxdii. ;  id.,  35  (1877),  pi.  4,  No.  t ;


murndster's  DtnimHUr,  x.  pp.  1009,  iiio,  1117,  iiiS[tig.  1215,  130;
1315);  C,  Bdlticher,  Dtr  Omphalos  dts  Ztus  lu  Delphi,  pi.  ;  Th.  Scl
BUdtratlai,  pi.  iii.  la  ;  Journal  of  Htlltnii  Studits,  g  (iSBS),  p.  396  iff.  ;
Annali  del  Institute  40  (186S),  Tav.  d'  Bgg,  E  ;  ed.  (Jerhard,  Gesommtlle
AihandluHgin,  Abbildungen,  jj.  Ix.  Nos.  I,  3.

The  stone  is  represetited  in  relief,  togetbcr  with  a  iripod  and  a  lyre,

on  a  monument  found  at  Thespiac  in  1891,  which  is  inscribed  with  a

decree  in  honour  of  some  arbitrators  who  were  sent

•  from  Delphi  to  Thespiae  {Bulletin  de  Corresp.  kelUn-
iqui,   15   (1891),   p.  659).      On  a  coin  struck  by  the
Amphictyonic    Council    in    the    fourth    century    B.C.,
Apollo    is    represented    seated  on    the    Navel-stone,
which    is   adorned   with  hanging   strings  of    egg-like
objects  (Fig.  10).      See   Imhoof-BIumer  and  Gardner,
Num.  Comm.  on  Pausamat,  p.  122,  pi.  Y  vii.     But
(he  real  shape  and  size  of  the  Navel-stone  are  best
"*^TMH~*oMPHAuis  S"^""   ^f    *™''   marWc   omphedoi   recently   found    at
(coiNOfDRLnii},    Delphi  (see  below)  and  by  another  which  was  found
f''^  at  Athens  some  years  ago.     This  last  is  shaped  like

I  a  truncated  cone,  and  on  its  flat  top  are  traces  of  the  feet  of  a
/  statue.  Its  sides  are  ornamented  in  relief  with  strings  of  egg-like
/  objects  passing  diagonally  round  the  stone  and  linked  together  by  short
l-4iorizontal  bands.  See  Come,  Reitrage  zur  Gesehiehte  iter  griech.
Plasfik,  pi.  v.;  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  i  (1880),  pi.  v.;  id,
9  {1888),  p.  2g8  sq.  Representations  of  the  Navel-stone  with  the
eagles  on  or  beside  it  are  very  rare.  On  an  electrum  coin  of  Cyiicus
the  eagles  appear  clinging  to  the  Navel-stone,  one  on  each  side  of  it.
See  Numismatic  Chronicle,  3rd  Series,  7  (1887),  pi.  1,  No.  23.  On  a
fine  marble  relief  found  at  Sparta  in  1SS5,  the  Navel-stone  is  represented
resting  on  a  step-base  ;  on  either  side  of  it  is  an  eagle.  Apollo  stands
by  with  a  lyre,  holding  a  bowl  into  which  Artemis  or  Victory  is  pouring
wine.  See  Mittheilungen  d.  arch.  Insf.  in  At/ten,  12  (1887),  pi.  xii.
p,  378  sgq.  A  bron;e  coin  of  Megara,  struck  in  the  reign  of  Geta,
represents  Apollo  with  his  lyre  standing  beside  the  Navel-slone,  on  the
top  of  which  are  perched  the  two  eagles.  See  Imhoof-BIumer  and
Gardner,  Num.  Comm.   on  I'aus.  p.  6,  pi.  A  ix.

With  regard  to  the  position  of  the  Navel-stone,  it  seems,  originally
at  least,  to  have  stood  within  the  temple  of  Apollo.  For  in  the
Eumenides  of  Aeschylus  (i'.  39  sqq.)  the  Pythian  priestess  describes
how,  going  to  the  inmost  shrine  of  the  temple,  she  saw  Orestes  seated
on  or  at  the  Navel-stone.  Again,  in  the  Ion  of  Euripides  (j'.  223  sqq.),
the  Chorus  of  women,  standing  outside  the  temple,  asks  Ion  if  it  is
true  that  the  temple  occupies  the  "  mid  navel  of  the  earth."  Ion  replies
that  it  does,  and  he  describes  the  Navel-stone  (see  above) ;  the  women
answer  that  his  description  tallies  with  common  report.  Ion  also  tells
ihem  that  they  may  not  enter  the  temple  except  after  offering  sacrifice.
So  they  decide  not  to  enter  it,  but  to  satisfy  their  curiosity  with  what  can


CH.  XVI  THE  NAVEL-STONE  317

be  seen  outside.  This  passage  clearly  implies  that  the  Navel-stone
stood  within  the  temple  and  could  not  be  seen  from  outside.  Again,
an  inscription  which  refers  to  the  restoration  of  the  temple  in  the
fourth  century  B.C.  defines  the  fagade  of  the  cella  as  **the  facade  in
front  of  the  Navel-stone"  (^r/wxrrao-is  d  ir/ab  tou  6fi(f}d\.ov)f  making
it  nearly  certain  that  in  the  fourth  century  the  Navel-stone  was
still  in  the  temple.  This  is  confirmed  by  mention  made  in  the  same
inscription  (or  in  another  relating  to  the  same  subject)  of  "  work  about
the  Navel-stone  "  (tpyov  to  ircpi  rov  6fJL(f>aX.ov)y  which  was  entrusted  to
a  certain  Sion  ;  for  the  name  of  this  contractor  occurs  on  stones  which
were  found  within  the  temple.  See  Th.  Homolle,  in  Comptes  Rendus  de
FAcadimie  des  Inscriptions^  23  (1895),  p.  335.  Moreover,  Strabo
expressly  says  (ix.  p.  420)  that  the  Navel-stone  was  in  the  temple.
Again,  Varro  {De  lingua  Latina^  vii.  17)  describes  it  as  in  the
temple,  at  the  side ;  and  a  scholiast  on  Lucian  {De  saltationcy  38)  says
that  it  stood  on  the  floor  of  the  temple.

In  opposition  to  these  authorities  Pausanias  appears  to  describe  the
Navel-stone  as  outside  the  temple.  For  following,  so  far  as  we  can
judge,  a  strictly  topographical  order  (see  note  on  x.  9.  i),  he  does  not
begin  his  description  of  the  temple  till  x.  1 9.  4,  and  he  finishes  it  (after
a  long  digression  on  the  Gallic  war)  in  x.  24.  6.  He  appears  to  place
the  Navel-stone  somewhere  outside  the  eastern  end  of  the  temple,  not
far  from  the  great  altar  which  he  mentioned  above  (x.  14.  7).  If  he  is
right,  the  Navel-stone  would  seem  to  have  been  moved  from  the  inside
to  the  outside  of  the  temple  at  some  date  between  the  first  century  B.C.
(when  Varro  and  Strabo  wrote)  and  his  own  time.  Dr.  Verrall  in  his
edition  of  the  Ion  of  Euripides  (p.  xlvi.  sq,)  has  suggested  that  the  altar
of  Poseidon  described  by  Pausanias  in  the  fore-temple  (see  x.  24.  4)
was  really  the  Navel-stone,  and  that  the  two  Fates  which  stood  near  it
were  in  fact  identical  with  the  two  eagles  or  Gorgons.  He  thinks  that
the  figures  were  very  archaic  and  rude,  and  that  **  little  could  really  be
decided,  but  that  they  were  meant  for  creatures  of  some  kind  and
seemed  to  have  wings."  To  this  view  it  may  be  objected  that  the
original  figures,  whether  eagles  or  Gorgons,  were  certainly  carried  off
by  the  Phocians  in  the  Sacred  War,  and  that  if  they  were  afterwards
replaced  by  new  ones,  these  later  substitutes  would  probably  not  be
copies  of  the  archaic  originals,  but  would  represent  two  unmistakeable
eagles  or  Gorgons.  But  we  are  not  told  that  the  missing  figures  ever
were  replaced,  unless  the  eagle  inlaid  in  mosaic  in  the  pavement  is  to
be  regarded  as  a  substitute  for  them.  And  even  if  we  grant  that  the
original  winged  figures  were  afterwards  replaced  by  accurate  copies,
these  winged  figures,  however  rude,  could  hardly  have  been  mistaken
for  Fates,  since  the  Fates  were  never,  so  far  as  I  know,  represented
with  wings.  On  the  whole,  considering  the  strictness  with  which
Pausanias  at  Delphi  as  elsewhere  adheres  to  the  topographical  order  in
bis  descriptions,  it  seems  safer  to  conclude  with  Dissen  (on  Pindar,
Pytk.  iv.  6)  and  K.  O.  Miiller  (in  his  edition  of  the  Eumenides^  p.  loi)
that  in  the  time  of  Pausanias  the  stone  stood  outside  of  the  temple.
Perhaps  it  was  turned  out  of  the  temple  by  Nero,  who  wrought  havoc


3i8  CONICAL  STONES  bk.  x.  phocis

at  Delphi  (see  x.  7.  i  note  and  below,  p.  332).  In  fact,  a  marble  Navel-
stone  {pmpkalo5\  decorated  with  fillets,  has  been  found  by  the  French
at  Delphi  just  in  the  place  where,  from  Pausanias's  description,  we
should  expect  to  find  it,  that  is  near  the  great  altar  (Bulletin  de  Corresfi.
helUnique^  1 8  (1894),  p.  1 80).  Whether  it  is  really  the  famous  omphctios
or  not,  we  cannot  say.  Another  omfhalos,  not  decorated  with  fillets,
was  found  by  the  French  at  Delphi,  as  1  learn  from  Mr.  Cecil  Smith.

Various  attempts  have  been  made  to  explain  the  Navel-stone  in
ancient  and  modem  times.  Some  of  the  ancients  thought  that  it
was  the  grave  of  the  Python  or  of  Dionysus.  See  Varro,  De
lingua  Latina^  vii.  17;  Hesychius,  s,v,  To^lov  povvos;  Tatian,  Or,
adversus  GraecoSy  8.  Cp.  Plutarch,  his  et  Osiris^  35  ;  Joannes  Malala,
Chronogr.  ii.  p.  45  ed.  Dindorf.  Modem  scholars  have  suggested  that
the  Navel-stone  was  a  fetish  of  the  Earth  goddess  (so  H.  N.  Ulrichs),
or  a  symbol  of  Hestia,  goddess  of  the  hearth  (so  Wieseler),  or  a  symbol
of  the  Pelasgic  Zeus  (so  Mr.  Bouch^-Leclercq),  etc.

See  on  the  whole  subject  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forsckungeity  1.  p.  77
sqq.  \  P.  Foucart,  MimoirCy  pp.  71-73;  Fr.  Wieseler,  *Intomo  all*  omfalo
\)t\^co,*  Annali deiV Iftsiituio^  29  (1857),  pp.  160- 180;  ii/.,  Gvttingische gelehrte
Anseigen,  i860,  vol.  I.  Nos.  17-20,  pp.  161-196;  C.  ^^oeiiicYitr^  Der  Omphalos  des
Zeus  zu  Delphi  (Berlin,  1859) ;  A.  Bouch^-Lcclercq,  Hist,  de  la  divination,  3.
p.  78  sqq,  ;  J.  H.  Middleton,  mjourttal  of  Hellenic  Studies ,  9(1888),  pp.  294-
302.

Conical  or  pyramidal  stones  were  revered  in  many  other  parts  of  the
ancient  world.

(i)  At  Megara  there  was  a  pyramidal  stone  known  as  Apollo
Carinus  (I  44.  2).

(2)  At  Sicyon  the  image  of  Gracious  Zeus  had  the  shape  of  a
pyramid  (ii.  9.  6).

(3)  Apollo  as  the  Street  God  was  commonly  represented  as  a  conical
pillar  (note  on  i.  31.  6).

(4)  At  Emesa  in  Phoenicia  people  revered  a  large  black  conical  stone
as  an  image  of  the  Sun-god,  who  was  called  in  the  Phoenician  tongue
Eleagabalus.  The  stone  was  enshrined  in  a  magnificent  temple.  On
a  coin  of  Emesa  it  is  represented  standing  inside  of  the  temple  and
enclosed  by  a  balustrade,  on  which  an  eagle  is  perched  right  in  front  of
the  sacred  stone.  See  Herodian,  v.  3.  4  sq, ;  Donaldson,  Architectura
Numismatica^  No.  xix.  ;  P.  Gardner,  Types  of  Greek  CoinSy  pi.  xv.  No.
I .  On  another  coin  of  Emesa  the  conical  stone  appears  in  the  temple,
but  without  the  balustrade  and  eagle.  See  Ed.  Gerhard,  Gesammelte
Abhandlungen,  Abbildungen,  lix.  No.  5  ;  Baumeister's  Denkmaler^
p.  603,  No.  649.

(5)  The  image  of  Aphrodite  in  her  temple  at  Paphos  in  Cypms  was
a  conical  white  stone  (Tacitus,  Hisl.  ii.  3  ;  Philostratus,  Vit,  Apollon,
iii.  58  ;  Servius,  on  Virgil,  Aen,  i.  720).  This  stone  is  represented  on
coins  of  Caracalla.  See  Donaldson,  op,  cit.  No.  xxxi.  ;  Gerhard,  op.  cit.
Abbild.  lix.  No.  11.

(6)  On  a  coin  of  Byblus  in  Phoenicia,  struck  in  the  reign  of
Macrinus,  a  temple  is  depicted  containing  a  conical  stone  enclosed  by  a


CH.  XVI  CONICAL  STONES  319

balustrade.  The  temple  may  be  that  of  Adonis,  to  whom  the  city  was
sacred  (Strabo,  xvi.  p.  755).  See  Donaldson,  <?^.  cit.  No.  xxx.  Conical
stones,  which  seem  to  have  been  idols,  have  been  found  in  Phoenician
temples  in  Cyprus  and  Malta  (Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Hisioire  de  Part  dans
rantiquiid^  3.  pp.  273,  298  j^.,  304  sq. ;  cp.  Cesnola,  Cyprus^  pp.  188
sq,^  213  sq,),

(7)  In  a  vase-painting  a  conical  stone,  draped  in  a  sort  of  net-work,
like  the  Navel-stone  at  Delphi,  seems  to  be  represented  as  sacred  to  the
Thymbraean  Apollo.     See  Gerhard,  op.  cit.  Abbild.  lix.  i.

(8)  The  Artemis  of  Perge  in  Asia  Minor  (Strabo,  xiv.  p.  667)  is
represented  on  coins  as  a  conical  stone,  but  on  some  coins  the  cone
approximates  to  a  human  image  by  the  addition  of  a  head  etc.  See
Gerhard,  op.  cit.  Abbild.  lix.  Nos.  2,  3,  4,  and  20 ;  Baumeister's
Denkmdler^  p.  603,  figs.  645-648.

(9)  The  image  of  Ammon  seems  to  have  been  a  conical  stone
adorned  with  jewels  (Curtius  Rufus,  iv.  7.  31).

(10)  On  a  rock-cut  relief  at  Pterium  in  Asia  Minor  a  priest  is
represented  standing  on  what  seems  to  resemble  the  Navel-stone  at
Delphi,  being  a  truncated  cone  covered  with  scales  like  those  of  a  fir-
cone. See  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  Part  dans  Pantiquit^^  4.  pi.
viii.  and  p.  639  ;  Revue  archkologique^  3me  S^rie,  6  (1885),  p.  300.

(11)  Some  Babylonian  cylinders  exhibit  a  god  seated  on  an  object
that  closely  resembles  the  Greek  Navel-stone.  See  Revue  archdologique^
3me  S^rie,  26  (1895),  PP-  3oo,  3oi>  302,  304,  306,  figs.  3,  4,  5.

Conical  stones  have  been  revered  by  rude  peoples  in  various  parts
of  the  world,  as  by  the  Natchez  of  Louisiana  (Lafitau,  Mceurs  des
sauvages  afn^riquainsy  i.  p.  147  sq.\  the  Fijians  (Th.  Williams,  Fiji
and  the  Fijians,  i.  p.  220  sq.),  and  the  inhabitants  of  Tinian,  one  of  the
Ladrone  Islands  (W.  W.  Gill,  Myths  and  Songs  of  the  South  Pacific,
p.  32  sq.).     As  to  the  worship  of  stones  see  also  \'ii.  25.  4  note.

Lastly,  we  may  note  other  cases  of  stones  or  places  which  have
borne  the  name  of  Navel.  Thus  in  Rome  there  was  a  place  called  the
Navel  of  Rome  {Umbilicus  Romae).  It  has  been  identified  with  a
cylindrical  structure  of  concrete,  faced  with  brick  and  lined  with  thin
slabs  of  marble,  which  exists  near  the  Rostra  in  the  Forum.  See  J.  H.
Middleton,  *The  Rostra  and  Graecostasis,  with  the  Umbilicus  Romae
and  the  Miliarium  Aureum,'  Archaeologia,  vol.  19  ;  id..  The  Remains  of
Ancient  Rome,  i.  p.  263  j^.  In  the  county  of  Meath  in  Ireland  there
was  a  stone  called  the  Navel  of  Ireland ;  it  is  said  to  have  been  a  place
of  Pagan  worship  (Giraldus  Cambrensis,  Topography  of  Ireland,
Distinct,  iii.  c.  4 ;  J.  Rhys,  Celtic  Heathendom,  Hibbert  Lectures  for
1886,  p.  192  sq.).  At  Phlius  there  was  a  spot  called  the  Navel  because
it  was  thought  to  be  the  centre  of  Peloponnese  (Paus.  ii.  13.  7).  In
Crete  a  place  bore  the  same  name  because  here  the  Navel-string  was
said  to  have  fallen  from  the  infant  Zeus  (Diodorus,  v.  70.  4).  The
Minahasa  of  Celebes  tell  of  an  old  man  who  came  to  the  Navel  of  the
earth  and  found  there  a  great  stone  (N.  Graafiand,  De  Minahcusa,  i.
p.  149).  In  the  island  of  Ceram  there  is  a  sacred  place  called  the
Navel  of  the  island ;  curiously  enough  it  is,  as  Delphi  was,  the  seat  of


320  SARDINIA  bk.  x.  phocis

an  oracle  (Van  Hoevell,  Ambon  en  de  Oeliasers^  p.  155).  Cuzco,  the
ancient  capital  of  Peru,  means  in  the  Inca  language  Navel  (Garcilasso
de  la  Vega,  Royal  Commentaries  of  the  Yncas,  First  Part,  bk.  i.  ch.  1 8,
vol.  I.  p.  72  sq.^  Markham's  trans.).

16.  4.  Hermione mairied  Orestes  etc.     Cp.  i.  33.  8.

16.  4*  Eurydamus,  an  Aetolian  general.     Cp.  vi.  16.  i.

16.  5.  a  city  £l3niis.  The  site  of  this  city,  identified  by  means  of
inscriptions,  is  occupied  by  the  village  of  Rkodovani^  situated  an  hour
and  a  half  north-east  of  Temenia  and  two  hours  from  the  sea.  In  the
village  and  on  the  neighbouring  hill  are  some  traces  of  the  ancient  city.
See  L.  Thenon,  in  Revue  arMologigue,  N.  S.  14  (1866),  pp.  396-403.
On  coins  of  Elyrus  a  wild  goat  is  an  almost  constant  type.  Sometimes
the  animal  is  standing  in  front  of  a  tree  and  raising  his  fore-foot  against
it ;  sometimes  only  its  head  appears.  See  Eckhel,  Doctrina  Numorum^
2.  p.  312  ;  B.  V.  Head,  Historia  Numorum^  p.  393.

16.  5.  Apollo in  the  house  of  Oarmanor.     See  ii.  7.  7,  ii.

30-  3.

16.  7.  snccess  achieved  by  the  Liparaeans  etc.     See  x.   11.  3

note.

17.  I.  Ichnnsa.  As  to  this  name  for  Sardinia  see  [Aristotle,]  De
mirab,  auscult.  100  (104);  Pliny,  Nat,  hist,  iii.  85;  Solinus,  iv.  i;
Isidore,  Origines,  xiv.  6.  39;  Silius  Italicus,  xii.  356  sqq.  ;  Stephanus
Byzantius,  s.v,  Sa/jfiw.

17.  I.  Its  length  is  one  thousand  etc.  According  to  Strabo
(v.  p.  224)  Sardinia  was  220  Roman  miles  long  by  98  broad.  Accord-
ing to  Pliny  {Nat,  hist.  iii.  84)  the  eastern  coast  of  Sardinia  measured
188  miles,  its  western  coast  17$,  its  southern  coast  77  miles,  and  its
northern  coast  125.  In  point  of  fact  the  greatest  length  of  the  island
is  over  160  geographical  miles  and  its  greatest  breadth  is  77  miles
(Smith's  Diet,  of  Greek  and  Roman  Geog,  s.v.  *  Sardinia ').

17.  2.  Libyans:  their  leader  was  Sardus  etc.  The  African
origin  of  the  Sardinians  is  referred  to  by  Cicero ;  he  calls  Africa  "  the
parent  of  Sardinia,"  and  says  that  the  Sardinians  were  settled  in  the
island,  or  rather  banished  to  it,  by  the  Carthaginians.  See  Cicero,  pro
ScaurOy  xix.  42  and  4$.  That  Sardus,  son  of  Hercules,  led  a  great  host
from  Libya  to  Sardinia,  occupied  the  island,  and  called  it  after  his  name,
is  stated  also  by  Isidore  {Origines^  xiv.  6.  39).  Cp.  Silius  Italicus,  xii.
359  ^9'  'i  Solinus,  iv.  i.  The  head  of  Sardus  with  the  inscription
SARD  PATER  (* Father  Sardus')  occurs  on  Sardinian  coins.  See
Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  Pari  dans  P antiquity,  4.  p.  20  sq.  ;
Maltzan,  Reise  auf  der  Inset  Sardinien^  p.  114.  There  was  a  place
called  the  Sanctuary  of  Father  Sardus  on  the  coast  of  Sardinia
(Ptolemy,  Geogr.  iii.  3.  p.  375  ed.  Muller).  Egyptian  monuments
inform  us  that  from  the  time  of  Ramses  II.  onward  the  kings  of
Egypt  retained  in  their  pay  a  large  body  of  foreign  mercenaries  called
Shardana.  These  are  said  to  have  been  originally  prisoners  taken  by
Ramses  II.,  and  in  inscriptions  they  are  often  designated  as  "people  of
the  sea."  As  depicted  on  the  monuments  they  are  easily  distinguished
by  the  type  of  their  features  and  the  style  of  their  equipment :  they


CH.  XVII  SARDINIA  321

carry  round  shields,  long  pointed  swords,  and  a  peculiar  helmet  adorned
with  a  crescent  and  ball.  In  the  reign  of  Merenptah  (Minephtah),  son
of  Ramses  II.,  the  Shardana  and  other  *<  people  of  the  sea"  joined  the
Libyans  in  invading  Egypt  from  the  west,  but  the  united  host  was
defeated  with  great  slaughter.  It  has  been  supposed  by  Mr.  £.  de
Roug^  and  other  scholars,  including  W.  Max  Miiller,  that  the  Shardana
were  the  Sardinians.  Professor  Maspero's  view  is  that  the  Shardana
were  originally  settled  in  the  west  of  Asia  Minor,  and  that  after  the
failure  of  the  attack  on  Egypt  in  the  reign  of  Merenptah  (Minephtah)
they  moved  westward  and  settled  in  Sardinia.  Professor  Wiedemann,
on  the  other  hand,  holds  that  the  Shardana  were 'a  Libyan  tribe  inhabit-
ing the  north  coast  of  Africa  not  £ar  from  Egypt,  and  he  denies  their
connexion  with  Sardinia.  But  that  they  were  a  sea-faring  people,  not
merely  coast-dwellers,  is  placed  beyond  doubt  by  an  Egyptian  wall-
painting,  which  represents  them  sailing  in  ships  with  high  curved  prows
and  poops  and  attacking  the  Egyptians,  who  are  in  ships  of  a  different
type.

See  EL  de  Roug6,  '  Sur  les  attaques  dirig^  contre  TEgypte  par  les  peuples
de  la  Mediterranee,  Reime  archifologipUf  N.  S.  16  (1867),  pp.  35-4St  81-103;
G.  Ebers,  in  Annaii  deW  JnsL  dt  Corr.  Arch,  55  (1883),  p.  121  sqq,  ;
A.  Wiedemann,  Agyptiscke  Geschichte,  pp.  473-476 ;  Ed.  Meyer,  Gesch,  des
AlterthumSy  I.  §  234;  iV/.,  Gesch.  des  cdten  Aegyptens,  pp.  285  sq,^  304  sqq.  ;
Brugsch,  *Troy  and  Egypt,'  Appendix  ix.  to  Schliemanns  Ilios^  pp.  745-751 ;
Maspero,  Histoire  ancunnef^  pp.  219,  253  sqq.^  270;  F.  Robiou,  in  Gautie
arch.^ologiqu€y  7  (1881-1882),  pp.  132-144;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoin  de  tart
dans  VanUquiti^  4.  p.  14  sqq,  ;  W.  Max  Miiller,  Asun  und  Eurofa  nach
altdgypHschen  Denkmdlem  (Leipzig,  1893),  P*  37 '  ^99'  !  U.  Kohler,  in  Sitzungs^
berichte  d.  k,  preuss,  Akad,  d.  Wissenscha/ten  zu  Berlin,  11.  Marz  1897,  p.  269.
As  to  the  painting  of  the  sea-fight  between  the  "people  of  the  sea'*  and  the
Egyptians,  see  P.  Gardner,  New  chapters  in  Greek  history,  p.  74  sq.

Some  light  is  thrown  on  the  aboriginal  tribes  of  Sardinia  by  the  rude
bronze  statuettes  which  have  been  found  in  considerable  numbers  in
Sardinia.  These  statuettes,  according  to  Mr.  G.  Perrot,  are  of  native
workmanship  executed  under  Phoenician  influence.  They  represent
warriors,  shepherds,  hunters,  etc.,  in  a  great  variety  of  costume  and
equipment.  Mr.  Perrot  suggests  that  the  Sardinians  who  had  served
abroad  as  mercenaries  in  the  Carthaginian  armies  and  had  returned
home,  dedicated  statuettes  of  themselves  as  thank-offerings  in  their  native
sanctuaries,  and  that  the  custom  was  imitated  by  their  compatriots.
He  thinks  that  this  native  art  may  have  lasted  about  three  centuries,
from  the  middle  of  the  sixth  century  B.c.  down  to  the  Roman  conquest.
See  G.  Perrot,  *Trois  figurines  Sardes,*  Gazette  arch^ologique,  10  (1885X
pp.  177-183,  with  pi.  24;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  Part  dans
Fantiguiti',  4.  p.  64  sqq.  On  the  legends  as  to  the  various  early  settle-
ments in  Sardinia,  see  Movers,  Die  Phoenizier,  ii.  2.  pp.  556-578.

17.  2.  Maceris  whom  the  Egyptians  and  Libyans  snmame
Hercules.  The  name  Maceris  is  etymologically  equivalent  to  Melcarth
(*  king  of  the  city '),  the  Tyrian  god  whom  the  Greeks  identified  with
Hercules.  The  legend  that  Hercules  led  a  motley  host  composed  of
many  races  into  the  west  of  Europe  (Sallust,  Jugurtha,  1 8  ;    Diodorus,

VOL.  V  Y


322  SARDINIA  BK.  X.  phocis

i V.  1 8  sqq,)  is  believed  by  Movers  to  refer  to  the  Tyrian  colonies  settled
in  the  western  basin  of  the  Mediterranean,  which  were  composed  of  men
of  various  races  and  worshipped  the  old  Tyrian  god  Melcarth  (Hercules).
In  like  manner  he  explains  the  legend  which  made  Sardus  a  son  of
Maceris  (Melcarth).  See  Movers,  Die  Phoenizier^  i.  p.  417  sqq.^  and
il  2.  pp.  109  sqq,^  556  sqq,\  Olshausen,  in  Rkeimsches  Museuniy  N.  F.
8  (1853),  p.  328  sqq, ;  cp.  E.  Curtius,  Gesammelte  Abhandlungen^  2.
p.  225.

17.  2.  they  lived  dispersed in  hnts  and  caves.     Strabo  (v.

p.  225)  mentions  four  highland  clans  in  Sardinia  who  dwelt  in  caves,
namely  the  Parati,  Sossinati,  Balari,  and  Aconites ;  they  scarcely  tilled
the  ground  but  lived  by  rapine.  According  to  Diodorus  (iv.  30.  5,  v.
1 5.  4)  the  lolaean  tribe,  driven  into  the  mountains  by  the  Carthaginians,
made  for  themselves  underground  abodes  and  bred  cattle,  living  on  the
flesh,  milk,  and  cheese.

17.  3.  Aristaeus  and  his  company.  It  is  said  that  before  the
time  of  Aristaeus  the  African  and  Spanish  settlers  in  Sardinia  had
formed  two  separate  communities,  but  he  united  them  and  founded  the
city  of  Caralis  {Cagliari)  (Solinus,  iv.  i  sq,\  Aristaeus  is  reported  to
have  been  the  first  who  planted  and  cultivated  Sardinia ;  before  his
arrival  the  island  was  a  savage  wilderness  (Diodorus,  iv.  82.  4).  The
reason  assigned  by  Pausanias  for  Aristaeus's  emigration,  namely,  his
sorrow  at  the  death  of  Actaeon,  is  mentioned  also  by  Silius  Italicus
(xii.  365  sqq,).  Compare  Servius  on  Virgil,  Georg,  i.  14  ;  Sallust,  Hist,
Frag,  ii.  7  ed.  Kritz ;  and  on  the  legend  of  Aristaeus's  colonisation  of
Sardinia  see  Movers,  Die  Phoenizier^  ii.  2.  pp.  563-565.

17.  5.  Norax.  According  to  Solinus  (iv.  i)  Norax  was  a  son  of
Mercury  and  migrated  to  Sardinia  from  Tartessus  in  Spain.

17.  5.  an  army  from  Thespiae under lolans  etc.  Com-
pare vii.  2.  2  note.  Amongst  the  colonists  whom  lolaus  is  said  to  have  led
to  Sardinia  were  forty  of  the  sons  whom  Hercules  had  by  the  daughters
of  Thestius.  See  ApoUodorus,  ii.  7.  6 ;  Diodorus,  iv.  29  sq,^  v.  15;
Strabo,  v.  p.  225  ;  cp.  Silius  Italicus,  xii.  363  sq.  ;  Solinus,  iv.  2  ;
Paus.  ix.  23.  I,  ix.  27.  6  sq.  According  to  Strabo  (/.r.)  the  lolaean
tribe  went  also  by  the  name  of  Diagesbians  (Aiayi/o-^Sets).  There  is  a
statuette  of  lolaus  which  is  said  to  have  been  found  at  Olbia,  the  city
founded  by  him.  See  Maltzan,  Reise  aufder  Insel  Sardinien^  pp.  115,
388.  But  from  the  woodcut  given  by  Maltzan  I  should  judge  the
statuette  to  be  a  forgery.  It  represents  lolaus  in  Greek  armour,  with
crested  helmet,  cuirass,  and  greaves,  and  holding  a  spear  in  rest.  The
genuine  antiquities  found  in  Sardinia  are  mostly  Phoenician  ;  traces
of  Greek  influence  are  few.  See  below,  note  on  §  9.  That  Olbia
was  founded  by  lolaus  is  stated  also  by  Solinus  (i.  61,  p.  18  sq.  ed.
Mommsen).

17.  5.  Ogryle,  either  in  memory  of  one  of  their  townships  etc.
According  to  Stephanus  Byzantius  {s.v,  'KypavX-q)  this  Sardinian  town
was  called  Agryle  after  the  Attic  township  of  the  same  name.  What-
ever may  have  been  the  name  of  the  Sardinian  town,  the  name  of  the
Attic  township  was  certainly  Agryle  (or  Agraule),  not  Ogryle,  as  Pau-


CH.  XVII  SARDINIA  323

sanias  gives  it.  This  township  belonged  to  the  Erechthean  tribe  and
lay  near  the  Panathenaic  stadium.  See  Stephanus  Byzantius,  Lc. ;
Harpocration,  s,w,  'Ay/ovAiy  and  "A/jSi/ttos;  Hesychius,  s,v,  'Aypyk-q  ;
Suidas,  s.v,  'AypvXrjOev ;  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^  p.  332.  30  sq, ;
Plutarch,  X,  Orator,  vit  i.  27  ;  ///.,  Alcibiades^  22  ;  id.^  ThemistocleSy
23;  C,  /.  G,  No.  160.  2,  No.  293.  11-14;  C.  /.  A,  ii.  No.  114.  4;
Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec,  No.  333.  3  and  36;  id,<,  No.  351.
147.  Cp.  Leake,  Topography  of  Athens,^  i.  p.  281  sq,  ;  /V/.,  2.  p.  183  ;
A.  Milchhoefer,  Karten  von  Aitika^  Erlduiemder  Text^  2.  p.  23 ;  P.
Kastromenos,  Die  Demen  von  Attika^  P*  3'  •^^•

17.  5.  lolauB  is  worsliipped  by  the  inhabitants.  lolaus  was
said  to  be  buried  in  Sardinia  (see  ix.  23.  i  note),  and  the  lolaeans
"added  a  temple  to  his  sepulchre,"  according  to  Solinus  (i.  61,  p.  19
ed.  Mommsen).  Those  who  sacrificed  to  lolaus  in  Sardinia  called  him
Father  lolaus  (Diodorus,  iv.  30).  In  Sicily  also  lolaus  had  sacred
precincts  set  apart  for  him  and  was  worshipped  with  heroic  honours.
At  Agyrium,  in  particular,  he  had  a  precinct  in  which  sacrifices  were
annually  offered  to  him  down  to  the  time  of  the  historian  Diodorus.
The  people  of  the  city  used  to  let  their  hair  grow  long  in  his  honour
until  they  had  propitiated  him  with  splendid  sacrifices.  It  was  believed
that  the  children  of  persons  who  omitted  to  offer  the  customary  sacrifices
would  be  struck  dumb  but  would  recover  their  voices  on  fulfilling  the
religious  obligation.  See  Diodorus,  iv.-  24  and  30.  lolaus  was  also
worshipped  at  Athens  and  Thebes  (Paus.  i.  19.  3  ;  ix.  23.  i).  He
appears  among  the  gods  jointly  invoked  by  the  Carthaginians  and
Macedonians  in  concluding  a  treaty  (Polybius,  vii.  9.  2).  According  to
Fr.  Lenormant  he  is  properly  a  Carthaginian  or  Phoenician  deity,  his
Semitic  name  being  lol.  See  Fr.  Lenormant,  in  Gazette  arcfUologique^
2  (1876),  p.  126  sqq,     Cp.  Movers,  Die  Phoenizier^  i.  pp.  536-538.

17.  6.  When  Ilium  was  taken  etc.  Cp.  Silius  Italicus,  xii.  361
sq.  The  Ilians,  who  inhabited  the  rugged  mountain -fastnesses  of
Sardinia  (see  §  7),  are  said  by  Mela  (ii.  123  ed.  Parthey)  to  have  been
the  most  ancient  people  in  the  island.  Pliny  reckons  them  amongst
the  most  famous  of  the  Sardinian  tribes  {Nat.  hist,  iii.  85).  The
legend  which  traced  their  origin  to  the  settlement  of  Trojan  (Ilian)
fugitives  in  Sardinia,  had  probably  no  foundation  but  the  similarity  of
the  names.  In  181  B.C.  the  Ilians  rebelled  against  Rome,  but  were
defeated  in  several  engagements  (Livy,  xl.  19  and  34).  In  178  B.C.
they  again  took  the  field,  aided  by  the  Balari,  and  laid  waste  the  open
country.  But  the  Romans  under  Tiberius  Sempronius  Gracchus  worsted
them  with  great  slaughter  in  many  battles  and  put  down  the  insurrec-
tion.    See  Livy,  xli.  7,  12,  and  17.

17.  8.  Corsicans.  This  tribe  inhabited,  as  we  should  have  ex-
pected, the  most  northerly  part  of  Sardinia  (Ptolemy,  iii.  3.  6,  p.  382
ed.  M  tiller).     They  are  mentioned  by  Pliny  (AW.  hist.  iii.  85).

17.  9-  the  Carthaginians snbdued  the  whole  popnlation  of

Sardinia  etc.  Compare  Polybius,  i.  10.  5  ;  Diodorus,  iv.  29.  6,  v.  15.  4
•f^-»  V.  35.  5.  Many  Phoenician  tombs  have  been  discovered  in  various
parts  of  Sardinia,  as  at  Caralis,  Sulci,  and  Tharros.     The  necropolis  at


324  SARDINIA  bk.  x.  phocis

Tharros  in  particular  has  furnished  an  immense  quantity  of  Phoenician
antiquities.  The  tombs  are  hewn  in  the  rock  and  are  reached  either
by  staircases  or  perpendicular  shafts.  Among  the  common  types  of
terra-cotta  statuettes  found  in  them  are  a  naked  goddess  pressing  her
hands  to  her  breasts,  a  draped  goddess  seated  in  a  large  chair,  and  a
goddess  or  priestess  standing  and  pressing  the  sacred  dove  to  her
breast.  Hundreds  of  scarabs  have  also  been  found  ;  many  of  them  are
Egyptian  in  style,  though  of  Phoenician  manufacture.  Some  of  these
objects  may  have  been  imported  by  Phoenician  and  Carthaginian
traders ;  but  there  are  good  grounds  for  believing  that  many  of  them
were  manufactured  in  Sardinia  by  the  Phoenician  or  Carthaginian
settlers.  The  result  of  excavations  made  within  the  last  half  century  in
Sardinia  is  to  show  that  the  island,  while  scarcely  affected  at  all  by
Greek  civilisation,  was  thoroughly  penetrated  by  Semitic  influences :  it
became  and  remained  more  purely  Phoenician  than  Cyprus  itself

See  Maltzan,  Reise  auf  der  Insel  Sardinieny  pp.  207-240  ;  C.  M.  Mansell,  in
Gazette  archiologiqtu^  3  (1877),  pp.  74-76;  fV/.,  4  (1878),  pp.  $0-53;  G.  Ebers,
'Antichit^  Sarde  e  loro  provenienra/  Annali  delt  Inst,  di  Corr.  Arch,  55
(1883),  pp.  76-132;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  Vart  dans  tantiquiti^  3.  pp.
230-239,  449-453*  654-660;  R.  Tennant,  Sardiniay  p.  51  sq,

17.  9.  OaraJis  and  SulcL  These  were  the  oldest  cities  in  Sardinia,
according  to  Mela  (ii.  §  123  ed.  Parthey).  Strabo  singles  them  out
(v.  p.  224)  as  the  most  important  in  the  island.  Solinus  says  (iv.  2,
p.  50  sq,  ed.  Mommsen)  that  Caralis  was  founded  by  Aristaeus.  The
ancient  remains  at  Caralis  (Cagliari)  include  a  remarkable  amphitheatre
hewn  in  the  rock  and  calculated  to  hold  20,000  spectators :  there  are
also  Carthaginian  or  Phoenician  and  Roman  burying -grounds.  See
Maltzan,  Reise  auf  der  Insel  Sardinien^  p.  65  sqq,  ;  R.  Tennant,
Sardinia^  ?•  52  sq.     As  to  Sulci,  see  Maltzan,  op.  cit.  pp.  179-193.

17.  9.  BalarL  This  tribe  is  mentioned  also  by  Pliny  (AW.  /list,
iii.  85)  and  Strabo  (v.  p.  225).  Cp.  note  on  §  2  *they  lived  dispersed'
etc.

17.  10.  The  northern  side  of  the  island  etc.  Cp.  Silius  Italicus,
xii.  372  sq.  Seen  from  the  deck  of  a  steamer  passing  through  the
straits  of  Bonifacio,  the  northern  coast  of  Sardinia  looks  bleak,  wild,
and  desolate.  The  sea  is  studded  with  ugly  and  jagged  rocks,  over
which  the  waves  break  in  foam.

17.  II.  The  air  here  is  generally  close  and  sickly  etc.  The  un-
healthiness  of  the  Sardinian  climate  is  often  alluded  to  by  ancient
writers.  See  Strabo,  v.  p.  225  ;  Cicero,  ad  Qjuintum  fratrem^  ii.  3.  7  ;
Mela,  ii.  123  ed.  Parthey;  Martial,  iv.  60.  6;  Tacitus,  ^«/7.  ii.  85;
Silius  Italicus,  xii.  371.  The  causes  assigned  by  Pausanias  for  the
unhealthiness  of  the  climate  appear  to  be  the  true  ones.  "  There  are
a  great  many  extensive  lagoons,  especially  at  the  heads  of  the  bays.
Some  of  them  are  connected  with  the  sea  by  openings ;  others  are  fed
by  the  infiltration  of  sea  water.  Moreover,  salt  marshes  are  found  far
from  the  sea  and  at  a  height  above  the  sea  of  76  metres  (250  feet).  In
summer  these  marshes  dry  up,  leaving  the  ground  covered  with  a  white


CH.  XVII  SARDINIA  325

crystalline  crust ;  but  in  the  rainy  season  they  fill  up  again.  Probably
they  once  formed  part  of  the  sea,  which  has  retired  and  left  them  ;  their
saltness  indicates  their  origin.  Now  experience  shows  that  the  evapora-
tion of  salt  and  brackish  water,  when  stagnant  and  mixed  with  deca3ang
sea-weed,  breeds  the  most  dangerous  fever-germs ;  the  Tuscans  of  the
Maremma  make  it  their  first  object  to  prevent  the  infusion  of  salt  into
fresh  water.  From  these  lagoons  and  morasses  the  mist  rises  so  thick
that  it  is  impossible  to  see  beyond  the  length  of  your  arm,  and  this
happens  in  the  middle  of  summer  as  well  as  in  the  rainy  season.  If
there  happen  to  be  many  such  mists  at  the  time  when  the  com  is
sprouting,  it  is  all  over  with  the  harvest.  The  wholesome  north  wind,
which  might  have  dispersed  the  noisome  exhalations,  is  checked  by  the
high  mountains.  .  .  .  The  wind  from  the  sea  drives  the  miasma  over
the  treeless  flats  and  the  swampy  river-valleys  far  into  the  land.  The
intemperie^  as  the  pestilential  air  is  here  called,  rises  to  a  height  unheard
of  in  Italy  and  dominates  coast-land  and  plains,  including  at  least  a
fourth  of  the  whole  area,  especially  the  fertile  belts  of  cultivated  land.
In  the  mining  district  of  the  south-west  the  works  are  at  a  standstill
from  the  middle  of  June  to  the  end  of  October"  (H.  Nissen,  ItcUische
Ijindeskunde^  P-  357  -^^O-  As  to  the  sirocco,  Mr.  Tennant  says  that
"  the  S.E.  or  *  scirocco '  blows  direct  from  the  eastern  coast  of  Africa,
leaving  its  withering  effects  along  its  whole  course.  It  is  this  wind
which  raises  temperature  to  a  suffocating  heat,  and  at  the  same  time
carries  with  it  a  treacherous  humidity,  which  it  attracts  in  traversing  the
long  marshy  plains,  and  which  is  even  more  dreaded  than  its  scorching
aridity"  {Sardinia^  p.  33).

17.  1 2.  Snakes will  not  live  in  the  island,  nor  will  wolves.

The  absence  of  serpents  and  wolves  from  Sardinia  was  remarked  also
by  Isidore  {Origines^  xiv.  6.  40) ;  the  absence  of  serpents  was  noticed
by  Silius  Italicus  (xii.  370)  and  Solinus  (iv.  3).  The  island  is  still  free
from  both  serpents  and  wolves  (H.  Nissen,  Italische  Landeskunde^
p.  360).  It  is  said  that  serpents  did  not  exist  in  the  island  of  Pharus,
off  Egypt  (Aelian,  Nat,  an.  ix.  21),  and  that  the  soil  of  Crete  was  fatal
to  them  not  only  in  the  island  itself  but  even  when  carried  abroad
(Aelian,  op,  cit.  v.  2  ;  cp.  Pliny,  Nat,  hist.  viii.  227  sq.^  who  says  that
there  were  no  wolves,  bears,  nor  any  noxious  animal  in  Crete).  Similar
fables  were  told  of  the  soil  of  the  Balearic  islands,  the  islands  of  Ebusus,
Thanet,  etc.  (Pliny,  Nat.  hist.  iii.  78,  xxxv.  202  ;  Solinus,  xxii.  8,  xxiii.  1 1,
xxix.  8  ;  Mela,  ii.  126  ;  Vitruvius,  viii.  4.  24),  and  of  Ireland  (Solinus,
xxii.  3  ;  Bede,  Hist.  Eccles.  i.  1.8);  some  Christian  writers  related  how
St.  Patrick  had  cleared  Ireland  of  all  noxious  creatures  (Giraldus  Cam-
brensis,  Topography  of  Ireland^  i.  23).  Similarly  it  is  said  that  hares  died
as  soon  as  they  landed  in  Ithaca  (Pliny,  Nat,  hist,  viii.  226),  and  that
dogs  did  not  enter  the  island  of  Sygaros  or  roamed  about  the  shore  till
they  perished  {ib.  vi.  155).  To  this  day  the  soil  of  some  of  the  Orkney
and  Shetland  islands  is  popularly  supposed  to  be  fatal  to  mice ;  hence
people  take  earth  from  these  islands  to  distant  places  for  the  purpose  of
extirpating  vermin  (Ch.  Rogers,  Social  Ufe  in  Scotland^  3.  p.  222).  We
arc  told  that  cats  cannot  exist  in  the  island  of  Vaila  (Brand,  *  Description


326  SARDINIA  bk.  x.  phocis

of  Orkney,  Zetland,'  etc.,  in  Pinkerton*s  Voyages  and  Travels^  3.  p.  787).
It  is  said  that  in  Quedam,  one  of  the  Hebrides,  mice  do  not  live,  and
that  if  imported  they  soon  die  (Martin,  *  Description  of  the  Western
Islands  of  Scotland,'  in  Pinkerton's  Voyages  and  Travels^  3.  p.  591).

17.   12.  The  rams  etc     This  is  the  animal  now  known  as  the
moufflon  {CaproTns  musimon).     It  is  confined  to  Sardinia,  Corsica,  and
the  islands  of  the  Greek  archipelago.    Strabo  says  (v.  p.  225)  :  "  Here  (in
Sardinia)  live  the  rams  with  goats'  hair  instead  of  wool ;  they  are  called
mousmomSy  and  cuirasses  are  made  out  of  their  hides."     Cp.  Aelian,
Nat.  an,  xvi.  34.     According  to  Pliny  {Nat,  hist,  viil  199)  the  moufflon
was  found  chiefly  in  Corsica  but  also  in  Spain.      The  animal  ''has
more  the  appearance-'.of  a  wild  sheep  than  of  any  other  animal,  though
it  possesses  many  points  of  resemblance  to  the  deer,  and  yet,  in  its
anatomical  formation,  it  presents  many  points  of  difference  from  both.
The  head,  horns  and  body  are  like  those  of  the  sheep,  but  the  head  is
more  broad  and  square,  the  horns  are  thicker,  rougher,  larger,  and
more  voluted,  and,  Uiough  standing  higher  than  the  sheep,  the  body  is
thinner  and  longer.     Its  cry  too  closely  resembles  the  bleating  of  a
sheep.     On  the  other  hand,  the  texture  of  its  coat,  instead  of  being
woolly,  is  like  that  of  the  deer,  the  hair  being  short  and  bristly,  of  a
dull  brown  colour,  and  white  towards  the  lower  parts  of  the  body.     The
tail,  legs  and  hoof  resemble  those  of  the  deer,  but  it  has  not  the  same
long  black  stripe  down  the  back,  nor  does  it  shed  its  horns  in  the  spring
like  the  deer  tribe.     For  its  size,  the  Moufflon  is  the  strongest  and  most
active  of  animals"  (R.  Tennant,  Sardinia,  p.  194).     Cp.  Maltzan,  Reise
auf  der  Insel  Sardinien,  p.  519  J^.,  who  says  that  the  female  moufflon
is  almost  always  hornless.

17.  13.  This  fatal  herb  resembles  celery  etc  The  Sardonic
smile  is  first  mentioned  by  Homer  (Od,  xx.  300  sq,),  Cp.  Plato,  Rep.  i.
p.  337  a;  Cicero,  ad  Fam.  vii.  25.  i.  The  Sardinian  plant  which  was
said  to  produce  a  convulsive  laughter  terminating  in  death  is  described
by  Solinus  (iv.  4)  as  growing  plentifully  in  the  water  of  springs.  Other
writers,  like  Pausanias,  compare  it  to  celery  (o-eAtvov).  See  Suidas,
s,v,  (rapBdvLos  ycXws ;  Hesychius,  s.v,  ^apSovios  ycA-ws ;  Eustathius  and
a  scholiast  on  Homer,  /.r.  ;  Isidore,  Origines,  xiv.  6.  40 ;  Servius,  on
Virgil,  EcL  vii.  41.  The  plant  in  question  may  perhaps  have  been  a
kind  of  ranunculus,  which  the  Greeks  called  batrachion  or  selinon  agrion
(*  wild  celery ').  Dioscordides  says  {De  ?nat.  med,  ii.  206)  that  a  species
of  this  plant,  with  a  more  downy  surface,  a  longer  stalk,  and  more
serrated  leaves  than  usual  grew  in  great  abundance  in  Sardinia,  and  he
describes  it  as  excessively  bitter.  He  says  that  a  plaster  composed  of
the  leaves,  flowers,  and  stalks  of  the  batrachion  produced  ulcers.
According  to  Conington  (on  Virgil,  Eel.  vii.  41),  the  plant  is  known  in
England  as  the  celery-leaved  crowfoot.  Various  fanciful  explanations  of
the  expression  "  a  Sardonic  laugh  "  are  given  by  Suidas,  Hesychius,  and
Eustathius  (JLcc.),

18.  I.  dedicated  by  an  Athenian,  Callias,  son  of  Lysimachides,
from  spoils  etc.  Callias  the  Torchbearer,  an  Athenian,  gained  great
riches  in  the  Persian  war  and  was  nicknamed  '  the  pit  of  wealth.'     See


CH.  XIX  STATUE  OF  GORGIAS  327

Plutarch,  ArisHdes^  5  and  2  5  ;  tV/.,  De  cupicL  divit,  8  ;  Schol.  on  Aristo-
phanes, Clouds^  64  ;  Suidas  and  Photius,  Lexicon^  s,v,  XaKK($7rAovrov ;
Hesychius,  s.v,  XaicicoTrXouros ;  Apostolius,  x.  43  ;  and  note  on  i.  23.  2.
But  Callias,  <  the  pit  of  wealth,'  appears  to  have  been  Callias  the  son  of
Hipponicus,  who  was  sent  on  an  embassy  to  the  Persian  court  (Herodotus,
vii.  151).  Hence  he  must  be  distinguished  from  Callias  the  son  of
Lysimachides,  whose  votive  offering  Pausanias  saw  at  Delphi.  See
Aeschines  Socraticus,  DiaL  ii.  9  ;  Boeckh,  Die  Staatsaushaliung  der
Athener^  i.  p.  566  sq.

18.  6.  the  hydra  and  Hercules  are  of  iron.  Pausanias  has  already
mentioned  (iv.  31.  10}  an  iron  statue  of  Epaminondas  at  Messene.  In
the  city  of  Rhodes  there  was  an  iron  statue  of  Hercules,  made  by  Alcon
(Pliny,  Nat,  hist,  xxxiii.  141).

18.  7-  The  Fhodans  of  Elatea  sent  a  bronze  lion  etc.  Cp.  i.
26.  3  ;  x.  34.  3.

18.  7*  the  flrst-frnits  of  the  sea-flght  with  the  Oarthaginians.
Cp.  X.  8.  6  note.

18.  7*  an  image  of  an  armed  woman,  no  donbt  representing
Aetolia.  On  federal  coins  of  Aetolia,  dating  from  after  the  repulse  of
the  Gauls,  Aetolia  is  represented  as  a  woman  armed  with  sword  and
spear,  sitting  on  a  pile  of  Gaulish  and  Macedonian  shields,  her  feet
resting  on  a  Gaulish  trumpet.  This  may  be  a  copy  of  the  trophy  which
the  Aetolians  set  up  at  Delphi  to  commemorate  their  triumph  over  the
Gauls.  See  P.  Gardner,  Types  of  Greek  Cains^  p.  202,  with  pL  xii.  40 ;
B.  V.  Head,  Historia  Numorum^  p.  283  sq.  On  personifications  of
countries  and  cities  in  ancient  art,  see  P.  Gardner,  *  Countries  and  cities
in  ancient  2J\^  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  9  (1888),  pp.  47-81.  Cp.
note  on  i.  i.  3,  vol.  2.  p.  27  sq,

18.  7-  chastised  the  Ganls  for  their  cruelty  etc    See  x.  22.  3-7.

18.  7-  a  gilt  statue of  Gorgias.     Cp.  Hermippus,  in  Athe-

naeus,  xL  p.  505  d;  Cicero,  de  Oratore^  iii.  32.  129;  Pliny,  NtU,  hist,
xxxiii.  83;  Valerius  Maximus,  viii.  15.  12.  Ext  2;  Philostratus,  Vit,
Soph,  i.  9.  2  ;  [Dio  Chrysostom,]  Or,  xxxvii.  vol.  2.  p.  301  ed.  Dindorf.
All  these  writers  differ  from  Pausanias  in  asserting  that  the  statue  was
of  gold,  not  merely  gilt ;  Cicero  expressly  denies  that  it  was  gilt  On
the  other  hand  Hermippus  and  Pliny  agree  with  Pausanias  that  the
statue  was  dedicated  by  Gorgias  himself,  while  Cicero  and  Valerius
Maximus  affirm  that  it  was  dedicated  by  all  Greece.  At  Olympia  there
was  a  statue  of  Gorgias  dedicated  by  a  grand-nephew.  The  inscription
of  that  statue  has  been  discovered ;  it  mentions  the  Delphic  statue  of
Gorgias  in  terms  which  favour  the  view  that  the  Delphic  statue  was
dedicated  by  the  orator  himself.  See  vi.  17.  7  note.  According  to
Pliny  (JjC,\  the  statue  of  Gorgias  at  Delphi  was  dedicated  about  OL  70
(500-497  B.a).

19.  I.  Scyllis  of  Scione.  See  Herodotus  viii.  8,  who  calls  him
Scyllias.  The  sea-god  Glaucus  fell  in  love  with  Hydne,  daughter  of
Scyllis,  according  to  Aeschrion  the  Samian  (cited  by  Athenaeus,  vii.
p.  296  e).  There  is  an  epigram  by  ApoUonidas  on  this  famous  diver
{Anthol.  Palat,  ix.  296).  Both  Aeschrion  and  ApoUonidas  call  him  Scyllus.


328  TEMPLE  OF  APOLLO  bk.  x.  phocis

19.  3.  Some  fiBhermen  at  Methynma  etc.  With  what  follows  com>
pare  Eusebius,  Praepar,  Evang,  v.  36,  who  quotes  the  oracle  to  which
Pausanias  refers.  In  an  inscription  found  at  Methymna  in  1882,  mention
is  made  of  a  custom  of  *'  carrying  round  the  image "  at  the  festival  of
Dionysus  (ev  tois  Aiowo-toort  irfki  rwi  tw  dyaXyxaros  ir€pi<l>opasy  See
S.  Reinach,  *  Inscription  de  Methymna,'  Bulletin  de  Carresp,  helUnique^  7
(1883),  pp.  37-41.  The  image  referred  to  in  the  inscription  is  probably
the  olive-wood  image  of  Dionysus  Phallen.  As  to  the  epithet  Phallen,
see  Lobeck,  Aglaophamus^  pp.  1 08  5-1 088  ;  L.  Preller,  Grieck.  Mytko-
logie^^  I.  p.  712,  note  4.

19.  4*  The  sculptiires  in  the  gables  etc  Pausanias,  following
up  the  Sacred  Way  from  the  main  entrance  of  the  precinct,  has  now
reached  the  temple  of  Apollo.  The  scanty  remains  of  the  temple  have
been  fully  excavated  by  the  French ;  but  before  describing  these
remains  it  will  be  well  to  consider  what  light  is  thrown  on  the  history
of  the  building  by  ancient  writers  and  inscriptions.  Pausanias  himself
has  sketched  the  history  of  the  temple  from  the  earliest  times  (x.  5.
9-13),  but  his  sketch  requires  to  be  supplemented  and  perhaps  corrected
from  other  sources.

The  old  temple  was  burnt  down  in  Ol.  57.  4  (549/8  B.C.)  according
to  Jerome  (in  Eusebius,  Chronic,  vol.  2.  p.  97  ed.  Schone),  in  Ol.  58.  i
(548/7  B.C.)  according  to  Pausanias  (x.  5.  13),  or  in  Ol.  58.  2  (547/6
B.C.)  according  to  the  Armenian  version  of  Eusebius  {Chronic,  vol.  2.
p.  96  ed.  Schone).  We  may  take  it  therefore  as  certain  that  the
catastrophe  happened  in  548  or  547  B.C.  Herodotus,  without  mention-
ing the  date,  tells  us  that  the  temple  was  accidentally  destroyed  by  fire
(i.  50,  ii.  180).  The  Amphictyons  contracted  to  have  a  new  temple
built  for  300  talents,  of  which  the  people  of  Delphi  were  to  contribute
a  fourth.  To  defray  this  expense  emissaries  went  the  round  of  the
cities  soliciting  subscriptions.  From  the  Greeks  resident  in  Egypt
they  received  twenty  minae^  and  Amasis  king  of  Egypt  gave  a  thousand
talents  of  alum.  As  Amasis  died  in  526  B.C.,  the  envoys  must  have
visited  Egypt  not  later  than  that  year.  See  Herodotus,  ii.  180.  The
contract  was  undertaken  by  the  noble  Athenian  family  of  the  Alcmae-
onids,  then  in  exile  and  eager  to  secure  their  restoration  to  Athens
together  with  the  downfall  of  the  tyrants,  the  sons  of  Pisistratus,  by
whom  they  had  been  banished.  Hence  to  propitiate  the  god,  or  rather
the  priestly  officials  who  worked  the  oracle,  they  rebuilt  the  temple  in
a  more  splendid  style  than  had  been  stipulated  in  the  contract,  by  con-
structing the  fagade  of  Parian  marble  instead  of  common  stone.  This
they  were  able  to  do  out  of  the  wealth  which  they  had  inherited  from
a  long  line  of  distinguished  ancestors.  Such  is  the  account  which
Herodotus  gives  (v.  62)  of  this  transaction.  Other  writers,  however,
place  the  action  of  the  Alcmaeonids  in  a  less  favourable  light.  They
tell  us  that,  far  from  expending  their  private  fortune  on  rebuilding  the
temple,  the  Alcmaeonids  as  a  last  resort  undertook  the  contract  for  the
purpose  of  providing  themselves  with  funds  to  be  used  in  their  machina-
tions against  the  sons  of  Pisistratus  (Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens^
19;  Philochorus,  cited  by  a  scholiast  on  Pindar,  Pyth,  vii.  9;  Schol.


V.


I


cH.  XIX  TEMPLE  OF  APOLLO  329

on  Demosthenes,  Or,  xxi.  p.  561.  16,  vol.  9.  p.  623  ed.  Dindorf).  The
rhetorician  Themistius  (Or.  iv.  p.  53  a,  p.  63  ed.  Dindorf)  merely  says
that  the  Alcmaeonids  undertook  the  contract,  without  mentioning  their
motives  or  the  means  by  which  they  executed  it.  Pausanias  (x.  5.  13)
and  Strabo  (ix.  p.  421)  do  not  refer  to  the  Alcmaeonids  at  all  in  this
connexion,  simply  stating  that  the  temple  of  their  day  was  built  by
the  Amphictyons.  To  this  Pausanias  adds  that  the  expenses  were  de-
frayed out  of  the  sacred  treasures  and  that  the  architect  was  Spintharus
of  Corinth.  That  the  temple  was  built  and  in  a  style  of  some  magni-
ficence by  the  Alcmaeonids  is  expressly  said  by  Pindar  in  an  ode
(Pyth,  vii.  10  sqq.)  of  which  the  date  has  been  a  good  deal  discussed.
The  latest  writer  on  the  subject,  Mr.  H.  Pomtow,  concludes  that  the
Pythian  victory  of  Megacles  which  the  ode  commemorates  was  won  in
486  B.C  {Rheinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  51  (1896),  pp.  577-588).  The
temple  must  have  been  finished,  however,  a  good  many  years  earlier,
probably  before  510  D.C.,  the  date  of  the  banishment  of  the  tyrant
Hippias  and  the  restoration  of  the  Alcmaeonids.  From  the  description
in  the  Ion  of  Euripides  (2/7/.  1 84-2 1 8)  we  gather  that  the  two  facades  of
the  temple,  the  eastern  and  western,  were  adorned  with  sculptures,  and
that  among  the  scenes  represented  were  the  following  :  ( i )  Hercules
slaying  the  Lemaean  Hydra,  while  his  comrade  lolaus  stood  beside
him  holding  up  a  torch ;  (2)  Bellerophon  mounted  on  Pegasus  and
slaying  the  Chimaera ;  (3)  Pallas  Athena  shaking  her  Gorgon  shield
against  the  giant  Enceladus ;  (4)  Zeus  hurling  a  thunderbolt  at  the
giant  Mimas  ;  and  (5)  Dionysus  laying  low  another  of  the  giant  brood
with  an  ivy- wand.  Now  none  of  these  scenes  answers  to  Pausanias's
description  of  the  sculptures  in  the  gables.  Hence  it  has  been  inferred
that  they  occupied,  not  the  gables,  but  the  metopes  under  the  gables  at
the  eastern  and  western  ends  of  the  temple.

In  the  early  part  of  the  fourth  century  B.c.  the  temple  seems  to  have
been  destroyed  by  earthquake  or  fire,  and  its  reconstruction  apparently
was  still  proceeding  in  the  second  half  of  that  century.  A  Delphic
inscription,  which  from  the  character  of  the  letters  Professor  Kohler
would  assign  to  the  early  part  of  the  fourth  century,  mentions  that  a
certain  Agatho,  son  of  Ncoteles,  and  his  brothers  brought  forward
a  proposal  in  favour  of  the  Thurians  at  the  time  when  the  temple
was  thrown  down  or  burnt  (KareAi'^iy  or  KaT€Kav6rjy  the  reading  is
uncertain).  See  Mittheilungen  d.  arch,  Inst  in  Athen^  5  (1880),  p.  202
sqq.  ;  Rheinischfs  Museum^  N.  F.  51  (1896),  p.  35'  ^99'  The  cata-
strophe would  seem  to  have  happened  not  later  than  371  B.C.,  for  at  the
peace  congress  held  in  that  year  at  Sparta  it  was  proposed  by  Prothous
that  the  states  should  be  invited  "  to  contribute  what  they  pleased  to  the
temple  of  Apollo  "  (Xenophon,  Hellemca,  vi.  4.  2).  That  the  object  to
which  the  contributions  were  to  be  applied  was  the  rebuilding  of  the
temple  is  made  probable  by  an  Attic  inscription  dating  from  369/8
B.C.,  which  mentions  a  letter  sent  by  Dionysius,  tyrant  of  Syracuse,  to
the  Athenians  about  "the  building  of  the  temple  and  the  peace"
(C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  5 1  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Grace,  No.  72).  The
reference  here  to  "  the  peace  "  is  most  probably  to  the  negotiations  for


330  TEMPLE  OF  APOLLO  bk.  x.  phocis

a  general  peace  which  were  held  at  Delphi  in  368  B.C.  (Xenophon,
Hellenica^  vii.  i.  27 ;  Diodorus,  xv.  70),  the  very  year  in  which
Dionysius  apparently  wrote.  If  that  is  so,  the  temple  referred  to  can
hardly  be  any  other  than  the  temple  of  Apollo  at  Delphi.  How  the
temple  had  been  destroyed  on  this  occasion  is  uncertain.  A  scholiast
on  Aristides  (p.  740  ed.  Dindorf)  asserts  that  the  Phocians  burnt  it.
They  can  hardly  have  done  so  at  the  time  that  they  were  in  possession
of  the  sanctuary  during  the  Sacred  War,  for  that  war  did  not  begin
till  355  B.C.,  and  the  evidence  just  adduced  goes  to  show  that  the
destruction  of  the  temple  happened  not  later  than  371  B.C.  More-
over if  to  the  sacrilege  of  plundering  the  temple  they  had  added  the
further  enormity  of  setting  it  on  fire,  this  would  hardly  have  been  passed
over  in  silence  by  the  ancient  writers  who  record  the  sacrilege.  Either,
therefore,  the  scholiast  on  Aristides  is  wrong  or  he  refers  to  some
earlier  misdeed  of  the  Phocians  about  which  we  have  no  further  infor-
mation. But  whatever  the  cause  and  date  of  the  destruction  may  have
been,  we  possess  in  inscriptions  lately  found  at  Delphi  abundant  evi-
dence as  to  the  date  and  even  the  details  of  its  restoration.  These
inscriptions,  dated  by  the  archons  of  Delphi  and  extending  over  a  period
of  about  twenty  years  from  353  B.C.  onward,  contain  the  accounts  of  an
international  commission  charged  with  the  reconstruction  of  the  temple
and  bearing  the  title  of  *  temple-makers  *  (vaoTrotot).  The  commis-
sioners, chosen  from  among  the  peoples  who  belonged  to  the  Amphic-
tyonic  League,  superintended  the  quarrying,  transport,  hewing,  and
placing  of  the  stones  in  position,  and  acted  besides  as  paymasters.
Under  their  orders  and  paid  by  them  were  the  workmen,  contractors,
and  architect.  The  stones  came  from  Corinth  and  Sicyon,  from  which
we  may  infer  that  the  material  was  tufa,  and  were  brought  by  sea  to
Cirrha,  where  they  were  slung  in  a  crane  and  lowered  on  to  the  quay.
The  use  to  which  the  blocks  thus  brought  were  put  gives  us  an  idea  of
the  nature  and  extent  of  the  work.  They  were  distributed  between  the
outer  colonnade,  the  fore-temple  [prodoffios),  the  back-chamber  {ppistho-
domo5\  and  the  cella.  We  hear  further  of  the  great  doorway,  the  doors,
six  architraves,  fourteen  triglyphs,  gargoyles  in  the  shape  of  lions*
heads,  and  finally  of  roof-tiles  of  the  Corinthian  sort.  Even  the  cost
of  mending  the  crane  and  giving  it  a  coat  of  pitch  is  set  down  in  these
minute  accounts.  The  name  of  the  architect,  who  is  repeatedly  men-
tioned, was  Xenodorus.  The  authority  which  disbursed  the  moneys  to
the  commissioners  is  variously  described  in  the  inscriptions  as  "  the  city
of  the  Delphians  "  and  "  the  Council."  Clearly  the  works  referred  to
in  these  inscriptions  were  no  ordinary  repairs.  They  would  seem  to
have  amounted  to  something  like  rebuilding  the  temple  from  roof  to
pavement.  The  period  over  which  the  accounts  extend,  beginning  in
353/2  B.C.  and  continuing  with  one  or  more  breaks  to  328/7  B.C.,
shows  that  the  work  proceeded  but  slowly.  Indeed  there  is  some
ground  for  thinking  that  it  dragged  on  for  more  than  a  century,
since  a  Delphic  inscription,  which  Mr.  H.  Pomtow  would  date
about  230  B.C.,  makes  mention  of  the  care  with  which  "Agatho,
the    architect    of   the    temple,  and    after    him    his    son  Agasicrates,


CH.  XIX  TEMPLE  OF  APOLLO  331

and  now  Agathocles,  has  superintended  the  works  commanded  by
the  god  and  by  the  Amphictyons"  (Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.
Graec,  No.  206 ;  H.  Pomtow,  in  Rheinisckes  Museum^  N.  F.  51  (1896),
p.  354  <^^^*)*  ^  ^o  ^^  inscriptions  which  contain  the  accounts  of  the
commission  of  *  temple-makers '  see  Th.  HomoUe,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp.
helliniquey  18  (1894),  p.  181  ;  id,y  in  Comptes  Rendus  de  VAcadimie  des
Inscriptions^  23  (1895),  pp.  334-336 ;  H.  Weil,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp.
helUnique^  19  (189$),  p.  394  sq,  ;  P.  Foucart,  in  Comptes  Rendus  de
rAccuUmie  des  Inscriptions^  23  (1895),  P-  '93  J  E.  Bourguet,  *  Inscrip-
tions de  Delphes,'  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  kelUnique^  20  (1896),  pp.
197-241.

But  though  the  last  touches  may  not  have  been  given  to  the  temple
for  a  century  or  more  from  the  time  when  it  was  begun,  the  building
must  have  been  completed  as  far  as  the  architrave  by  the  year  340/339
B.C.,  for  in  that  year  the  people  of  Amphissa  proposed  in  the  Amphic-
tyonic  Council  that  the  Athenians  should  be  fined  fifty  talents  *<  for
setting  up  golden  shields  on  the  new  temple  before  its  consecration,''
and  for  engraving  on  them  an  inscription  which  set  forth  that  the  shields
had  been  taken  by  the  Athenians  from  the  Medes  and  Thebans  when
these  peoples  fought  against  the  Greeks  (Aeschines,  contra  Ctesiph.
115  sq,).  The  shields  were  no  doubt  hung  on  the  architrave,  where
they  remained  down  to  the  time  of  Pausanias,  as  he  tells  us  in  the
present  passage.  Additional  proof  that  the  temple  was  still  unfinished
about  this  time  is  furnished  by  the  paean  to  Dionysus  which  was  found
a  few  years  ago  at  Delphi.  For  in  this  hymn,  which  seems  to  date
from  about  338  B.C.,  the  poet,  after  telling  us  that  *'  the  god  bids  the
Amphictyons  complete  the  work  with  all  speed,"  indulges  in  a  beatific
vision  of  the  time  when  a  happy  generation  shall  behold  the  temple
of  Phoebus  all  glittering  with  gold,  eternal  and  undefiled.  See  H.
Weil,  *  Un  pean  delphique  k  Dionysos,'  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique^

19  (1895).  pp.  393-418.

The  temple  thus  slowly  brought  to  completion  appears  to  have  been
destroyed  or  at  least  injured  by  fire  during  an  irruption  of  northern  bar-
barians in  84  or  83  B.C.  Jerome  says  that  in  Ol.  174.  i  (84  B.C.)  the
temple  at  Delphi  was  burnt  by  Thracians  for  the  third  time  (Eusebius,
Chronic,  vol.  2.  p.  133  ed.  Schone).  Appian  tells  us  that  in  88  B.C.  the
Illyrian  tribes  of  the  Scordiscians,  Maedes,  and  Dardanians  overran
Greece  and  plundered  the  Delphic  sanctuary  (Illyr,  5,  reading  T/^ia-
jcocruxrrdv  with  H.  VomXo^ {Rheinisckes  Museum,  N.F.  51  (1896),  p.  370)
for  rptoKoarrov).  Again,  Plutarch  informs  us  that  at  the  time  of  the
Mithridatic  and  Social  wars  the  temple  at  Delphi  was  burnt  by  the
Maedes  and  that  with  the  destruction  of  the  altar  the  sacred  and
perpetual  fire  went  out  {Numa,  9,  reading  vwo  Mat&Dv  Trtpl  rol  'hHiBpiZi-
aruca  k.t,\,  with  H.  Pomtow  (op,  at,  p.  365)  instead  of  wro  Mt/^cdv,
v€pl  S€  Ttt  MiSptSuLTiK^  K.T.A.).  Mr.  H.  Pomtow  has  shown  grounds
for  rejecting  the  date  (88  B.C.)  assigned  to  this  event  by  Appian  and
for  holding  that  the  inroad  of  the  Maedes  and  the  destruction  of  the
temple  took  place  in  the  first  half  of  83  ac  Some  attempt  was  prob-
ably soon  made  to  repair  or  rebuild  the  burnt   temple,  but  nearly  a


332  TEMPLE  OF  APOLLO  bk.  x.  phocis

century,  it  would  seem,  elapsed  before  the  edifice  was  once  more  com-
pletely rebuilt.  A  scholiast  on  Aeschines  {contra  Ctesiph.  ii6,  p.  335
ed  Schultz)  tells  us  that  the  temple  **  remained  for  a  long  time  un-
finished, till  Nero,  the  Roman  emperor,  completed  it  on  his  visit  to
Delphi."  This  scholiast,  it  is  true,  believed  that  the  temple  thus  com-
pleted by  Nero  was  the  one  which  had  been  built  or  at  least  begun  by  the
Amphictyons  in  the  sixth  century  B.C.  Of  the  two  subsequent  cata-
strophes in  the  fourth  and  first  centuries  B.C  he  appears  to  have  been
ignorant ;  but  this  hardly  invalidates  his  testimony  as  to  the  completion
of  the  temple  by  Nero.  That  testimony  is  confirmed  by  a  scholiast  on
Aristides  (vol.  3.  p.  340  ed.  Dindorf),  who  says  that  the  seat  of  the
oracle  at  Delphi  was  burnt  by  the  Phocians,  but  that  the  emperor  Nero
on  a  visit  to  Delphi  built  it  on  a  larger  and  more  magnificent  scale  than
before.  Afterwards,  however,  the  scholiast  goes  on,  the  flighty  emperor
pulled  it  down  again  because  his  tender  conscience  took  dire  offence
at  an  oracular  response  which  seemed  to  reflect  on  his  moral  character.
This  story  of  the  wilful  destruction  of  the  temple  by  the  injured  emperor
is  to  some  extent  borne  out  by  a  fragmentary  Latin  inscription  recently
found  at  Delphi.  The  inscription,  which  is  cut  in  large  fine  letters  and
seems  to  have  been  set  up  at  the  head  of  the  Sacred  Way,  mentions
that  the  emperor  Domitian  repaired  (refecit)  the  temple  at  his  own
expense  in  84  A.D.  (IMP.  VII.  COS.  X.).  See  Comptes  Rendus  de
PAcaddmie  des  Inscriptions^  24  (1896),  p.  87;  Bulletin  de  Corresp.
helUniquey  20  (1896),  p.  717.

So  much  for  the  history  of  the  temple,  as  far  as  it  can  be  traced  by
the  help  of  literature  and  inscriptions.  We  have  now  to  consider  the
existing  remains  of  the  building,  and  to  see  whether  they  tally  with  the
literary  and  epigraphic  evidence.

The  temple  rested  on  a  great  terrace  which  was  and  is  supported  on
the  west,  south,  and  east  by  the  remarkable  wall  of  polygonal  masonry
to  which  reference  has  been  repeatedly  made.  This  wall,  one  of  the
most  beautiful  specimens  of  Greek  masonry  in  existence,  is  preserved
on  the  long  south  side  of  the  terrace  in  an  unbroken  stretch  of  about
250  feet.  Its  height  varies  with  the  slope  of  the  ground.  In  part  it  is
10  ft.  6  in.  high,  without  reckoning  the  coping,  which  consists  of  three
courses  of  ashlar  masonry,  the  stones  in  each  course  being  about  18
inches  high  and  from  4  to  5  feet  long.  These  top  courses  of  rectan-
gular blocks  have  been  removed  in  many  places.  The  average  height
of  the  wall,  when  perfect,  was  nearly  1 5  feet.  Some  of  the  polygonal
blocks  of  which  the  wall,  exclusive  of  the  coping,  is  composed  measure
as  much  as  7  feet  across,  and  the  joints  of  all  of  them  are  worked  and
fitted  with  absolute  accuracy  without  the  use  of  mortar,  while  their
exposed  faces  are  dressed  to  a  perfectly  smooth  surface.  **  But  the
extraordinary  point  about  the  masonry  is  that  many  of  the  joints  follow
a  curved  instead  of  a  straight  line,  involving  a  most  exceptional  amount
both  of  skill  and  careful  patience  on  the  part  of  the  Delphian  masons,
who  have  made  the  various  curves  fit  each  other  with  perfect  accuracy.
Some  of  the  beds,  which  range  in  a  horizontal  direction,  form  very  com-
plex undulating  lines.    The  very  smooth  dressing  of  the  face  of  the  wall


CH.  XIX  TEMPLE  OF  APOLLO  333

stops  at  the  old  ground  line,  and  the  part  below  this,  which  was  hidden
from  sight,  is  left  rough,  in  a  way  which  shows  that  the  wall-face  was
brought  to  its  present  smooth  surface  after  the  separate  blocks  were  in
their  places.  Possibly  the  extreme  smoothness  of  the  wall  was  not
thought  necessary  till  it  began  to  be  used  for  inscriptions,  which  now
cover  most  of  its  surface "  (J.  H.  Middleton).  A  small  piece  of  the
polygonal  wall  which  supported  the  short  eastern  end  of  the  terrace  was
laid  bare  by  Mr.  Wescher  in  1862.  The  style  of  its  masonry  resembles
that  of  the  long  southern  wall  just  described  and,  like  the  latter,  it  is
covered  with  inscriptions.  Doubtless  the  remains  of  these  remarkable
terrace-walls  have  now  been  completely  excavated  on  all  three  sides
(east,  south,  and  west)  by  the  French,  though  no  report  of  the  excava-
tion has,  so  far  as  I  know,  been  published.  The  inscriptions,  cut  in
small  letters  and  closely  packed  together,  with  which  the  walls  are
covered,  amount  to  more  than  seven  hundred.  A  few  of  them  record
honours  and  privileges  accorded  by  the  city  of  Delphi  to  various  persons,
and  one  of  them  contains  a  long  list  of  the  honorary  citizens  or  public
friends  {proxenot)  of  Delphi  (Wescher-Foucart,  Inscriptions  recueillies  d,
Delphes^  No.  18  ;  W.  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Jnscr,  Graec.  No.  198).
But  the  vast  majority  of  them  merely  register,  with  tiresome  iteration
of  established  legal  phraseology,  the  emancipation  of  slaves  under
the  form  of  a  sale  to  the  Pythian  Apollo.  A  melancholy  interest
attaches  to  these  inscriptions,  for  it  was  in  copying  them  under  a  burn-
ing July  sun  that  the  great  scholar  K.  O.  Miiller  received  the  stroke
which  carried  him  off  at  the  early  age  of  forty-three  (August  ist,  1840).
It  has  been  remarked  as  a  curious  coincidence  that  the  scholar  who
denied  Apollo  to  be  the  sun-god  should  have  been  killed  by  sun-stroke
at  Apollo's  temple.  The  story  of  his  last  few  days  has  been  told  by
his  companion  and  friend  E.  Curtius  {Alterthum  und  Gegenwart^  2.^  p.
247  sg^.).

Of  the  temple  itself  nothing  is  now  standing  except  the  foundations
and  some  portions  of  the  pavement  at  the  eastern  and  western  ends.
It  was  an  edifice  about  60  metres  (197  feet)  long  by  25  metres  (72  feet)
broad,  lying  nearly  north-east  and  south-west,  and  raised  on  vast  sub-
structions at  a  height  considerably  above  the  coping  of  the  polygonal
retaining-wall.  The  foundations  form  two  rectangles,  enclosed  one
within  the  other.  The  outer  rectangle  supported  the  external  colonnade  ;
the  inner  supported  the  walls  of  the  c^/ia  and  the  colimms  of  the
fore- temple  (^prodonios)  and  back-chamber  {ppisthodomos).  Two  other
foundations  within  the  inner  rectangle  and  parallel  to  its  long  sides,
probably  supported  rows  of  columns  on  either  side  of  the  cella.

The  outer  foundation,  on  which  rested  the  external  colonnade  of  the
temple,  is  well  preserved  on  the  eastern  and  southern  sides.  Here  it  is
uniformly  constructed  of  great  blocks  of  the  native  conglomerate  or
breccia,  roughly  squared  and  dressed  only  on  the  beds.  The  workman-
ship is  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.  About  10  metres  from  the  south-west
angle,  however,  the  material  and  workmanship  of  the  foundations  change
completely.  Here  and  along  the  whole  of  the  west  side  it  is  only  the
two  or  three  lowest  courses  that  are  built  of  the  native  breccia :  above


334  TEMPLE  OF  APOLLO  bk.  x.  phocis

that  the  breccia  is  replaced  by  fine  white  marble  cut  in  admirably
worked  quadrangular  blocks,  which  retain  traces  of  red  paint  Amongst
them  are  pieces  of  large  mutules  with  some  of  the  guHae  still  projecting
from  them.  The  dimensions  of  these  mutules  correspond  with  those
of  the  temple.  If  put  together,  they  would  measure  at  least  20  metres
(65  ft.  7  in.)  in  length.

The  inner  foundations  are  built  of  blocks  of  tufa,  well  worked.  Like
the  outer  foundations  they  are  well  preser\'ed  on  the  east  and  south,  but
on  the  west  we  find  the  same  irregularity  and  a  similar  mixture  of
different  materials,  marble  and  tufa.  Blocks  of  marble  occur  even  in
the  lowest  course,  and  amongst  them  is  a  sculptured  triglyph  which  has
been  sawn  and  of  which  the  dimensions  correspond  to  those  of  the
temple.  On  this  triglyph  a  torso  in  high  relief  may  be  distinguished
against  a  red  background.  Further  it  deserves  to  be  noted  that  at  the
south-west  comer  the  inner  foundations  are  connected  with  and  as  it
were  buttressed  against  the  outer  foundations  by  a  cross-wall  which  has
obviously  been  added  at  some  later  time.  This  cross-wall,  clearly  built
to  support  and  strengthen  the  two  sets  of  foundations  which  it  bonds
together,  has  been  subsequently  crushed  between  its  two  neighbours  and
cracked  from  top  to  bottom  by  an  earthquake,  the  traces  of  which  are
manifest  on  the  whole  western  half  of  the  temple.  Not  only  has  the
pavement,  constructed  of  enormous  square  blocks  of  bluish  limestone,
been  thrown  down  and  its  supports  dislocated  or  broken,  but  the
whole  building  has  been  shifted  bodily  backward  so  that  the  western
line  of  foundations  is  twisted  for  a  length  of  about  20  metres  (65  ft.
7  in.).

From  these  facts  we  conclude  that  (i)  a  temple  built  in  the  sixth
century  B.C.  was  afterwards  shaken  by  an  earthquake  which  left  some
parts  of  the  foundations  standing,  but  overthrew  other  parts,  especially
at  the  south-west  angle,  down  to  the  bed  rock;  and  (2)  the  marble
portions  of  the  temple  were  so  much  damaged  that  instead  of  being
replaced  in  their  old  positions  when  the  temple  was  rebuilt  they  were
employed  in  repairing  the  ruined  foundations.  The  temple  thus  over-
thrown can  have  been  no  other  than  the  one  constructed  by  the
Alcmaeonids  in  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  and  the  blocks  of  white  marble
built  into  the  later  foundations  must  have  come  from  the  facade  of
Parian  marble  with  which,  as  Herodotus  tells,  these  munificent  nobles
adorned  the  temple.  To  judge  from  the  state  of  the  foundations,  the
edifice  suffered  unequally  in  its  different  parts.  At  the  eastern  end  it
was  only  the  upper  structure  that  came  down  ;  at  the  western  end  the
whole  building  went,  foundations  and  all.

Of  the  upper  portions  of  the  temple,  above  the  foundations,  there
remain  in  position  some  of  the  steps  and  two  pieces  of  the  pavement,
amounting  to  about  50  square  metres,  at  the  two  ends  of  the  building.
Further  there  have  been  found,  besides  many  drums  of  Doric  columns
lying  in  rows  as  they  fell,  some  pieces  of  Doric  capitals,  a  few  fragments
of  triglyphs  and  metopes,  many  broken  gargoyles  of  marble  in  the  shape
of  lions*  heads,  and  many  pieces  of  marble  Ionic  columns,  including
drums,  bases  and  capitals.     These  Ionic  columns,  of  which  the  remains


CH.  XIX  TEMPLE  OF  APOLLO  335

are  dispersed  all  over  the  sanctuary,  are  smaller  than  the  Doric  columns
and  in  their  fully-developed  type  recall  those  of  the  Erechtheum  or  of
the  temple  at  Priene.  The  Doric  columns  and  the  triglyphs  and  metopes
are  made  of  tufa.  Of  the  drums  the  late  J.  H.  Middleton  says  :  *<  In
1875  I  ^^  ^^^  to  ^^^  ^^^  to  measure  thirty-two  drums  of  Doric
colunms  made  of  the  rough  siliceous  limestone  from  the  quarries  of
Mount  Parnassus,  and  still  in  part  retaining  their  coating  of  very  hard
fine  stucco,  made  of  lime  and  powdered  white  marble,  which  appears
always  to  have  been  used  by  the  Greeks  to  coat  temples  which  were  not
built  of  real  marble.  This  beautiful  substance  is  quite  unlike  anything
which  we  now  call  stucco.  It  was  as  hard  and  durable  as  real  marble,
and  took  by  polishing  the  same  delicate  ivory-like  surface  as  that  of  the
best  Pentelic  marble.  Moreover  it  had  the  advantage  over  real  marble
in  affording  a  slightly  absorbent  ground  for  coloured  decoration.  These
column-drums  naturally  varied  in  size  owing  to  the  diminution  of  the
shaft ;  the  largest  measured  (including  the  stucco)  close  upon  5  ft.  9  in.
in  diameter,  thus  giving  the  size  of  the  column  at  the  bottom.  The  top
diameter,  4  ft.  'i\  in.,  is  given  by  the  neckings  of  the  capitals,  of  which
a  few  examples  are  still  to  be  seen."  The  shafts  of  these  columns  are
somewhat  slender  and  diminish  regularly  upwards  without  exhibiting
that  swelling  {entasis)  in  the  middle  which  is  a  mark  of  antiquity.
The  echinus  of  the  capitals  is  nearly  straight,  and  the  abacus  has  neither
the  thickness  nor  the  prominence  which  we  find  in  capitals  of  the  sixth
ceiTtury  B.c  The  shape  of  the  capitals  and  the  triglyphs,  the  dimensions
of  the  metopes,  and  the  height  of  the  architrave  recall  the  correspond-
ing details  in  the  temple  of  Athena  Alea  at  Tegea,  which  was  built  in
the  fourth  century  B.C.,  somewhere  about  390  B.c.  (vol.  4.  p.  425).
The  date  thus  suggested  for  the  temple  is  confirmed  by  the  masons'
marks  carved  on  many  blocks  of  tufa,  for  these  marks  consist  of  letters
and  names  written  in  the  alphabet  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  Altogether
the  evidence  both  architectural  and  palaeographical  points,  in  the
opinion  of  Mr.  HomoUe,  to  the  conclusion  that  the  temple  built  by  the
Alcnmeonids  in  the  sixth  century  was  destroyed  by  an  earthquake  and
rebuilt  in  the  fourth  century  B.C.  We  have  already  seen  that  the
evidence  of  ancient  writers  and  inscriptions  leads  independently  to  the
same  conclusion,  which  may  accordingly  be  regarded  as  established.  A
notable  agreement  between  these  two  distinct  lines  of  proof — the  archi-
tectural and  the  epigraphical — has  been  justly  emphasised  by  Mr.
Homolle.  Amongst  the  contractors  mentioned  in  the  accounts  of  the
commission  who  were  charged  with  the  restoration  of  the  temple  there
are  three,  to  wit  Daius,  Pancrates,  and  Sion,  whose  names  have  been
found  engraved  on  blocks  of  tufa  belonging  to  the  temple.  Amongst
these  Sion,  as  we  learn  from  the  accounts  of  the  commissioners,  was
charged  with  the  execution  of  some  work  about  the  Navel-stone
{omphalos)  which  stood,  as  we  have  seen  (p.  316  j^.),  in  the  cella  ;  and  it
is  precisely  in  the  ce//a  that  the  stones  bearing  the  name  of  Sion  have
been  found.  As  rebuilt  in  the  fourth  century  B.C.  the  temple  rested  on  I
a  basement  of  three  high  steps  and  was  surrounded  by  a  Doric  colonnade.  I
It  had  a  fore-temple  {prodomos)  and  a  back-chamber  {pfnsthodomos)  at  its  '


336  TEAfPLE  OF  APOLLO  bk.  x.  phocis

eastern  and  western  ends  respectively.  The  number  of  columns  on
each  of  the  two  facades  was  probably  six.  The  niunber  of  the  columns
on  the  long  sides  is  uncertain  ;  J.  H.  Middleton  estimated  it  at  fifteen.
The  interior  of  the  celia  seems  to  have  been  flanked  on  either  hand  by
a  row  of  those  Ionic  columns  of  which  so  many  remains  have  been
found.  The  adytum  or  oracular  cavity  in  the  temple  has  not  been  dis-
covered. Perhaps  it  was  destroyed  by  one  of  the  many  earthquakes
which  have  visited  Delphi.  On  the  other  hand  beneath  the  floor  of  the
temple  there  has  been  revealed  a  network  of  passages  and  cells,  more
than  6  feet  high,  their  walls  built  of  great  stones  from  4  feet  to  6  feet
long.  But  these  subterranean  corridors  and  chambers  appear  to  have
served  no  other  purpose  than  the  purely  structural  one  of  economising
labour  and  materials.  As  it  would  have  been  impracticable,  or  at  least
exceedingly  laborious  and  expensive,  to  construct  a  platform  of  solid
masonry  large  enough  to  support  an  ediflce  which  covered  more  than
1200  square  metres,  the  architect  contented  himself  with  resting  the
temple  on  a  series  of  piers  linked  to  each  other  by  stone  walls.  No
vestige  of  a  staircase  leading  down  to  these  vaults  has  come  to  light,
nor  has  any  trace  of  human  occupation  been  discovered  in  them.  With
the  exception  of  some  coarse  pottery,  the  only  objects  foimd  in  them
have  been  some  insignificant  bronze  fragments  and  a  couple  of  sherds  of
Mycenaean  ware.

It  remains  to  compare  Pausanias's  account  of  the  temple  with  the
existing  remains  of  the  building  and  with  what  we  have  learned  of  its
history  from  other  sources.

After  giving  the  history  of  the  temple  down  to  its  destruction  by  fire
in  548  B.C.,  Pausanias  proceeds  thus  (x.  5.  13):  "  The  present  temple  "
(more  literally  "  the  temple  of  our  time  ")  "  was  built  for  the  god  by  the
Amphictyons  out  of  the  sacred  treasures :  the  architect  was  Spintharus
of  Corinth."  Now  we  have  seen  that  after  its  destruction  in  548  B.C.
the  temple  was  rebuilt  twice  at  least,  perhaps  four  times,  namely  in  the
sixth  and  fourth  centuries  B.c,  and  perhaps  by  Nero  and  Domitian
in  the  first  century  a.d.  Clearly,  therefore,  Pausanias  has  omitted  to
mention  one,  two,  or  even  three  of  the  restorations  which  took  place
after  548  B.C.  Which  of  the  temples  is  he  describing  1  It  is  commonly
supposed  that  he  is  describing  the  temple  built  by  the  Alcmaeonids  in
the  sixth  century  B.C.,  but  that  this  is  so  is  by  no  means  certain.  For
in  the  first  place  it  is  to  be  observed  that  he  makes  no  mention  of  the
Alcmaeonids  and  of  the  fagade  of  Parian  marble  with  which  they
enriched  the  temple — omissions  all  the  more  remarkable  in  a  wTiter  like
Pausanias  who  knew  Herodotus  so  well  and  followed  him  so  closely.
In  the  second  place,  his  account  in  the  present  passage  (x.  19.  4)  of  the
sculptured  decoration  of  the  temple  differs  so  entirely  from  the  account
which  Euripides  gives  of  it  in  the  fifth  century  B.C.  that  it  is  quite  plain
the  two  writers  are  describing  two  totally  distinct  sets  of  sculpture.
The  difference  may  be  explained  by  supposing,  as  is  usually  done,
that  the  two  sets  of  sculpture  occupied  different  places  in  the  same
temple,  but  it  may  also  be  explained  by  supposing  that  they  belonged
to  two  different  temples.     In  the  third  place,  Pausanias  mentions  the


CH.  XIX  TEMPLE  OF  APOLLO  337

golden  shields  on  the  architrave,  which  the  Athenians  dedicated  from
the  spoils  of  Marathon,  and  also  the  Gallic  shields  dedicated  by  the
Aetolians  which  hung  at  the  back  (west)  and  the  left-hand  side  of  the
temple.  Now  we  have  seen  (p.  331)  evidence  that  the  golden  shields
commemorative  of  the  victories  in  the  Persian  war  were  set  up  by  the
Athenians  in  the  new  temple  which  was  built  in  the  fourth  century  B.C. ;
and  that  the  shields  taken  by  the  Aetolians  from  the  Gauls  in  279  B.C.
must  have  been  hung  in  that  temple  is  of  course  certain.  Moreover,
Pausanias's  statement  as  to  the  Gallic  shields  has  been  confirmed  by
the  recent  excavations,  for  on  a  metope  found  at  the  south-west  angle  of
the  temple  there  remains  the  mark  of  a  long  shield,  more  than  3  feet
high,  recalling  the  shape  of  the  Gallic  bucklers  (Bulletin  de  Corresp,
helUnique^  18  (1894),  p.  176).

Thus  far  the  evidence  goes  to  show  that  the  temple  described  by
Pausanias  was  the  one  which  was  built  in  the  fourth  century  B.C.  But
there  are  difficulties  in  the  way  of  accepting  this  view.  For  in  the
first  place  the  architect,  according  to  Pausanias,  was  Spintharus  of
Corinth,  whereas  in  the  inscriptions  relating  to  the  restoration  of  the
temple  in  the  fourth  century  B.C.  the  architect  named  repeatedly  is
Xenodorus.  This  difficulty,  however,  is  not  insuperable,  for  the  first
document  in  which  the  name  of  the  architect  Xenodorus  occurs  is  dated
in  the  archonship  of  Nicon  (349/8  B.C.),  and  the  destruction  of  the
temple  seems  to  have  taken  place  not  later  than  371  B.C.  It  is  there-
fore quite  possible  that  the  temple  may  have  been  planned  by  Spintharus
and  partly  constructed  under  his  superintendence,  and  that  dying  before
its  completion  he  was  succeeded  in  the  work  by  Xenodorus.  We  have
seen  that  other  architects  were  at  work  on  the  temple  at  a  later  time,
the  sons  succeeding  the  father  in  the  office ;  and  Pausanias  himself  tells
us  that  the  building  of  the  temple  lasted  so  long  that  the  original
sculptor  died  before  it  was  finished,  and  his  work  had  to  be  completed
by  another.  Of  the  date  of  the  architect  Spintharus  nothing  positive  is
known.  He  seems  to  be  mentioned  by  no  other  ancient  writer  except
Pausanias.^

A  more  serious  difficulty  is  created,  at  least  at  first  sight,  by
Pausanias's  statement  that  the  sculptures  in  the  gables  were  begun  by
an  Athenian  artist  Praxias,  a  pupil  of  Calamis.  Of  this  Praxias  nothing
more  is  known  ;  but  since  Calamis  appears  to  have  been  at  work  in  the
first  half  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  (see  note  on  v.  25.  5),  it  is  natural  to
suppose  that  his  pupil  Praxias  flourished  in  the  second  half  of  that
century.  It  is  difficult  to  reconcile  this  date  either  with  the  view  that
the  temple  on  which  Praxias  worked  was  the  one  built  by  the  Alcmaeonids
in  the  sixth  century  B.C.  or  with  the  view  that  the  temple  in  question
was  the  one  repaired  or  rebuilt  in  the  fourth  century  B.C.  If  it  was  the
temple  built  in  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  why  were  the  gable  sculptures
begun  so  long  afterwards  ?     For  observe  that  they  were  only  begun  by

^  By  an  oversight  Mr.  H.  Ponitow  affirms  that  Spintharus  is  named  by  Herodotus
as  the  architect  of  the  temple  built  by  the  Alcmaeonids  in  the  sixth  century  B.C.
{Rhiinisches  Museum,  X.  F.  51  (1896),  p.  333.  cp.  p.  345).  Herodotus  neither
mentions  Spintharus  nor  alludes  to  any  architect  at  all.

VOL.  V  Z


338  TEMPLE  OF  APOLLO  bk.  x.  phocis

Praxias ;  the  temple,  if  we  may  trust  Pausanias,  was  not  finished  for
some  time  afterwards.  Yet  Pindar  writing  in  the  early  years  of  the  fifth
century  B.C.  speaks  as  if  the  temple  had  been  finished,  and  that  too  in
splendid  style,  by  the  Alcmaeonids  some  time  before  he  wrote.  It  is
difficult,  therefore,  to  believe  that  the  temple  for  which  Praxias  worked
was  the  temple  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.

Can  it  have  been  the  temple  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  ?  Here  we
are  reminded  first,  of  the  statement  of  Pausanias  (i.  3.  5)  that  Calamis,
the  master  of  Praxias,  made  an  image  of  Apollo  at  the  dose  of  the  great
plague  which  devastated  Athens  in  the  Peloponnesian  war  (427  B.C.),
and,  second,  of  the  opinion  of  Prof.  U.  Kohler  that  the  inscription  which
mentions  the  destruction  of  the  Delphic  temple  dates  from  the  early
years  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  If  we  can  accept  this  statement  of
Pausanias  and  this  opinion  of  Prof.  Kohler,  the  difficulty  created  by  the
mention  of  Praxias  as  the  sculptor  of  the  temple  vanishes  at  once.
The  destruction  of  the  temple  may  have  occurred  at  the  beginning  of
the  fourth  century  or  even  at  the  end  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.,  for  there
is  nothing  whatever  in  the  words  of  the  inscription  (circi  6  vabs
K-aTfcAJi'^T/  or  KaT[€Ka]v^>/)  to  prevent  us  from  supposing  that  the
catastrophe  happened  some  years  before  the  inscription  was  engraved.
If  then  the  temple  was  destroyed  at  the  end  of  the  fifth  century  or  the
beginning  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.,  and  its  restoration  was  taken  in
hand  soon  afterwards,  nobody  need  boggle  at  the  statement  that  the
sculptures  were  begun  by  an  artist  whose  master  had  been  at  work
in  427  B.C.  On  this  view  the  temple  described  by  Pausanias  is  the
temple  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.,  and  his  statement  that  its  con-
struction lasted  some  time  is  amply  confirmed,  not  only  by  the  poetical
aspirations  of  the  author  of  the  paean  to  Dionysus,  but  by  the  more
precise,  if  prosaic,  accounts  of  the  building  commissioners,  which  prove
that  the  work  dragged  on  over  many  years  and  was  not  finished  by
about  330  B.C.  or  even  later.

To  this,  however,  it  may  be  objected  that  the  gable  sculptures,  at
which  Praxias  worked,  cannot  have  been  made  or  at  least  placed  in
position  until  the  temple  was  nearly  finished  ;  and  that  the  triglyphs,
which  must  have  been  in  position  before  the  gables,  were  not  all  ready
before  351/0  B.C.,  if  even  then  (see  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helldniquc^  20
(1896),  p.  199,  cp.  pp.  198,  237).  Now  a  pupil  of  Calamis  cannot
possibly,  it  may  be  urged,  have  been  at  work  after  350  B.C.  Admitting
the  force  of  this  objection,  we  are  still  free  to  suppose  that  the  gable
sculptures  may  have  been  begun  long  before  they  were  placed  in  position.
Or — ^another  possibility — may  Pausanias  have  simply  erred  in  describing
the  Athenian  Praxias  as  a  pupil  of  Calamis  ?  From  an  inscription
found  at  Oropus  (C  /.  (7.  G,  S.  i.  No.  430  ;  Loeuy,  Inschriften  grieck,
Bildhauer^  No.  127a)  we  hear  of  an  Athenian  sculptor  Praxias,  son  of
Lysimachus,  who  made  a  statue  of  a  certain  Charias  son  of  Neoptolemus
shortly  before  338  B.C. — precisely  the  time  when  the  new  temple  is
known  to  have  been  approaching  completion,  since  the  golden  shields
had   been   hung  by  the  Athenians   on   the  architrave   not   later  than

339  B.C.   (Aeschines,  contra  Ctesiph.  116).     We  are  tempted,  accord-


cu.  XIX  TEMPLE  OF  APOLLO  339

'"gJy>  to  conjecture  that  this  Praxias,  son  of  Lysimachus,  who  is  known
also  to  have  executed  an  image  of  Aphrodite  at  Athens  (Loew>%  op.  cit.
No.  127),  was  no  other  than  the  Praxias  who  about  the  same  time  made
some  of  the  sculptures  for  the  new  temple  of  Apollo  at  Delphi,  and  that
Pausanias  may  have  mistaken  him  for  another  sculptor  of  the  same
name  who  was  in  fact  a  pupil  of  Calamis.  Whatever  may  be  thought
of  this  suggestion,  the  view  that  the  temple  described  by  Pausanias  as
existing  in  his  own  time  was  the  temple  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  seems
open  to  fewer  objections  than  the  view  that  it  was  the  temple  built
by  the  Alcmaeonids  in  the  sixth  century  B.C.

Of  the  subsequent  destruction  of  the  temple  in  84  or  83  B.C.  and  its
restoration  by  Nero  and  perhaps  Domitian,  Pausanias  says  nothing.
It  is  possible  that  the  destruction  was  only  partial,  and  that  the  repairs
carried  out  by  the  emperors  did  not  alter  the  essential  character  of
the  building  and  were  therefore  not  deemed  worthy  of  notice  by
Pausanias.  The  supposition  is  confirmed  by  the  lack,  apparently
total,  among  the  existing  ruins  of  any  sign  that  the  temple  was  ever
rebuilt  in  Roman  times.

On  the  temple,   its  ruins  and  its  history,  see  H.   N.   Ulrich's  Reisen  und
Forschungen,    i.    p.    71   stjq,  ;  L.   Preller,   in    Pauly's   Real-Encyclopddu^  s,v,
*  Delphi,*  2.  p.  916  sqq.  ;    C.  Wescher,  in  Bulietitto  delP  Instituto  di  C<frri5p,
Archeol.  yj  (1865),  pp.  97-101  ;  P.  Foucart,  Mt'moire  sur  Us  mines  ei  Phistoire
dc  Deipfust  p.  55  sqi/.  ;  id,,  in  Comptes  Rendus  de  TAcadimie  des  Inscriptions y
23  (1895),  PP'  189-194 ;  C.  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  175  sqq,  ;  J.  H.  Middleton,  *The
temple  of  Apollo  at  D^ii^hi,' JounuU  0/  Hellenic  Sttidies,  9  (1888),  pp.  282-322;
Th.  Homolle,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUnique,  18  (1894),  pp.  175-178;  iV/.,  in
Comptes  Rendus  de  tAccuUmie  des  Inscriptions ,  22  (1894),  p.  586  so,,  and  ib,  23
(1895),    PP*    328-341  ;    M.    CoUignon,   in    Comptes  Rendus  de  lAcadSmie  des
Inscriptions^  22  (1894),  p.  302  sq,  ;  Penrose,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique^
20  (1^6),  pp.  383-385  (on  the  orientation  of  the  temple) ;  H.  Pomtow,  Beitrdge
ztir  Topographie  von  Delphi,  p.  24  sqq.  ;  iV.,  in  Arckdologischer  Anzeiger,  1 895,
pp.  2-5  ;  id.y  *  Die  drei  Brande  des  Tempels  zu  Delphi,    Rheinisihes  Museum,
N.  F.  51  (1896),  pp.  329-380;  »V/.,  *Die  Th'atigkeit  der  Alkmeoniden  in  Delphi,'
Rheinisches  Museum,  N.  F.  52(1897),   pp.    105-125;   id.,  in  Berliner  philolog.
Wochetisckrift,  i6th  January  1897,  pp.  92-95.     As  to  the  inscriptions  relating  to  the
restoration  of  the  temple  in  the  fourth  century  B.C.  see  above,  p.  331.     For  the
inscriptions  on  the  polygonal  wall  see  C.  Wescher  et   P.  Foucart,  Inscriptions
recueillies  d  Delplus  (Paris,  1863) ;    B.  Haussoullier,  *  Inscriptions  de  Delphes :
Inscriptions  gravees  sur  le  mur  pelasgique,'  Bulletin  de   Corresp.  helUnique,  3
(1881),  pp.  397-434  ;  Couve  et  Bourguet,  *  Inscriptions  inedites  du  mur  polygonal
de  Etelphes,'  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  kelUnique,  17  (1893),  pp.  343-396;   CoTlitz's
G.  D.  I.  vol.  2.  Heft  iii.  Nos.   1684-2300.     For  other  inscriptions  of  Delphi,  see
E.  Curtius,  Anecdota  Delphica  (Berlin,  1843),  P'  56  J^.  ;  Transactions  of  the  Royal
Society    of  Literature,   Second    Series,    2   (1847),   pp.  4-12;   B.    Haussoullier,
*  Inscriptions  de  Delphes,'  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUnique,  5  (188 1),  pp.  157-178,
372-390;  ib.  6  (1882),  pp.  213-240,  445-466;  ib.  7  (1883),  PP-  189-203,  409-439  ;
J.  Schmidt,  in  Hermes,   15  (1880),  pp.  275-288;    'E^iy/iiepis  dpxatoXo7tin),   1883,
pp.  161- 166  ;  L.  Couve,  *  Inscriptions  de  Delphes,*  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUnique,
18    (1894),    pp.    70-100,    226-270;    Th.    Homolle,   *  Inscriptions  de   Delphes.
R^lements  de  la  phratrie  des  Ao/§wi3ot,'  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUnique,  19  (1895),
pp.  5-69  ;  P.  Perdrizet,  *  Inscriptions  de  Delphes,'  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUnique,
20  (1896),  pp.  466-496.

The  temple  of  Apollo  is  represented  on  the  reverses  of  several
bronze  coins  of  Hadrian  and  Faustina  the  Elder.     On  all  of  them  the


J40  TEMPLE  OF  APOLLO  bk.  X.  PHOCis

subject  is  ireated  in  the  usual  conventional  style  of  the  die-engraver :
details  are  omitted  to  suit  the  exigencies  of  space  or  added  out  of  regard
to  popular  repute  rather  than  to  truth.  Thus  on  a  coin  of  Hadrian  the
facade  appears  with  only  four  columns  instead  of  six,  the  two  central
columns  being  sacrificed  to  make  room  for  a  large

#   mystic  E  ;    in   the  gable   there  seem    to   be  several
figures,  but  they  are  too  small  to  be  distinguished.     A
coin  of  Faustina  the  Elder  (Fig.    1 1 )   represents  the
fagade  with  six  columns,  the  correct  number,  and  the
mystic  E  in  the  central  opening  between  them  ;  in  the
gable  can  perhaps  be  made  out  a  standing  figure  with
fifi.    11.  —  TiMPLK   hand   raised    between   two   crouching   animals.      Two
D»  APOLLO  WITH   coins  present  us  with  one  of  the  flanks  of  the  temple
HvsTic  z  (coin  ji^j  (jjg  facade  seen  in  persjjective  :  on  both  of  them
the  number  of  columns  on  the  flank  is  six,  and  a  figure
of  Apollo  appears  standing  between  the  columns  of  the  facade.     In  one
of  these  representations  (Fig.   12)  Apollo  is  portiayed  as  naked  with
his   left  elbow    resting  on   a   pillar,   his  right  hand
advanced,  and  the  Navel  ■  stone  {omphalos)  or  an
altar  at  his  feet.     See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,
Num.    Comm.  on    Paus.    p.    119  sq.,  with    pi.   X    1
xxti.-xxv. ;  J.  H.  Middleton,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic  \
Studies,  9  (iSSg),  p.  290.

In  the  time  of  Herodotus  a  great  silver  mixing-
bowl,  dedicated  by  Croesus,  stood  in  a  comer  of
the  fore-temple.  It  was  wrought  by  Theodorus  the  fig.  u.  —  ihhple  op-
Samian,  and  the  Delphians  mixed  wine  in  it  at  afollo  (coin  of
the  festival  of  the  Theophany.  See  Herodotus,  "blfhO.
i.  51  ;  and  as  to  the  festival  of  the  Theophany,  see  A.  Mommsen,
Delphiia,  p.  380  sgg.  In  the  same  comer  of  the  fore-temple,  close
to  the  silver  mixing-bowl,  stood  a  bronze  mast  with  three  golden
Stars  attached  to  it.  The  Aeginetans  had  dedicated  it  as  a  thank-
offering  for  the  victory  of  Salamis.  See  Herodotus,  viii.  123.  Pliny
tells  us  {Nat.  hist.  xxxv.  13S)  that  the  temple  contained  paintings  by
a  certain  Aristoclidcs ;  but  nothing  more  is  known  of  the  painter  or
his  pictures.

With  regard  to  the  sculptures  in  the  gables  described  by  Pausanias,
it  seems  probable  that  the  figures  of  Artemis,  Latona,  Apollo,  and  the
Muses  occupied  the  front  or  eastern  gable,  while  the  figures  of  Uionysiw
and  the  Thyiads  filled  the  back  or  western  gable.  The  Setting  Sun  is
commonly  supposed  to  have  been  in  the  eastern  gabie,  but  Welcker's
view  that  it  was  in  the  western  gable  is  perhaps  to  be  preferred.  .\
Sunset  would  be  more  appropriate  in  the  western  than  in  the  eastern
gable.  In  the  representation  of  Apollo  at  one  end  of  the  temple  and
Dionysus  at  the  other  we  see  a  fresh  proof  of  the  intimate  relation
in  which  these  two  gods  stood  to  each  oiher'at  Delphi.  See  note  on
X.  6.  4.  Of  the  sculptures  which  occupied  the  gables  not  a  fragment  has
been  found  by  the  French  excavators  {Comptes  Rendus  de  FAcad^mie  des
Inseriplions,  23  (1895),  p.  328).


CH.  XIX  GALLIC  INVASION  341

See  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  ttnd  Forschungen^  i.  p.  72  ;  F.  G.  Welcker,  *  Die
\'orstellungen  der  Giebelfelder  und  Metopen  an  dem  Tempel  zu  Delphi,*
KJuinischis  Museum^  N.  F.  I  (1842),  pp.  1-28;  iV.,  Antike  DenkmiUer^  i.  pp.
15 1- 178  ;  P.  Foucart,  Mdmoire  sur  Us  ruines  et  thistoire  de  Delphes^  p.  62  sqq.  ;
J.  H.  Middleton,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  9(1888),  p.  2%i  sq,

19.  4*  golden  shields dedicated  by  the  Athenians  etc.    See

above,  p.  331.  The  inscription  on  these  shields  or  perhaps  on  the
architrave  ran  thus  :  ^*  The  Athenians  <  dedicated  these  shields  out  of
spoil  taken  >  from  the  Medes  and  Thebans  when  they  (the  Medes  and
Thebans)  fought  against  the  Greeks"  (Aeschines,  contra  Ctesiph,  116).
There  used  to  be  a  tradition  at  Kastri^  the  village  which  occupied  the
site  of  Delphi,  that  in  the  time  of  the  Turks  excavations  were  made  near
the  ruins  of  the  temple  and  that  some  ancient  shields  and  hehnets  were
found.  These  may  possibly  have  been  votive  armour  formerly  dedicated
in  the  temple.  See  P.  Foucart,  Mhnoire  sur  les  mines  et  Phistoire  de
Delphes^  p.  61.

19.  4.  the  Persian  bucklers.  These  were  made  of  wicker-work.
See  Herodotus,  vii.  61,  ix.  61.

19.  5.  the  invasion  of  Greece  by  the  Gauls.  The  sight  of  the
Gallic  shields  hung  on  the  temple  induces  Pausanias  to  narrate  the
invasion  of  Greece  by  the  Gauls  in  279  B.C.  This  narrative,  which
runs  to  the  end  of  chapter  twenty-three,  forms  a  long  digression  in
the  middle  of  his  account  of  the  temple.  As  he  himself  observes,  he
had  already  treated  of  the  same  subject,  but  more  briefly,  in  his  first
book  (i.  3.  5-i.  4.  4).  The  story  of  the  inroad  and  final  repulse  of  the
Gauls  is  told  at  length  also  by  Justin  (xxiv.  4-8)  and  concisely  in  the
fragments  of  Diodorus  (xxii.  9).  With  regard  to  the  historical  sources
on  which  these  writers  drew,  it  has  been  argued  by  Prof.  C.  Wachsmuth
that  all  three  —  Pausanias,  Justin  or  rather  Trogus  (whom  Justin
abridged),  and  Diodorus — derived  their  accounts  from  Timaeus,  who,  if
we  may  trust  his  own  assertion  (reported  by  Polybius,  xii.  28  a),  had
made  such  laborious  inquiries  into  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  Celts
as  well  as  of  the  Ligurians  and  Iberians  that  if  he  were  to  tell  of  them
all  nobody  would  believe  him.  See  C.  Wachsmuth,  *  Die  Niederlage
der  Kelten  vor  Delphi,'  in  SybePs  Historische  Zeitschrift^  10  (1863),  pp.
I -1 8.  On  the  other  hand  Droysen  held  that  while  Justin  (Trogus)  used
Timaeus,  the  authority  followed  by  Diodorus  and  Pausanias  was
Hieronymus  of  Cardia  (J.  G.  Droysen,  Geschichte  des  Hellcnismus^  ii.  2.
p.  342,  note  4  ;  as  to  Hieronymus  of  Cardia  see  Paus.  i.  9.  8,  i.  13.  9).
Mr.  Ch.  Miiller  suggests  that  the  authority  used  by  all  three  writers  may
have  been  Menodotus  of  Perinthus  or  Agatharchides  of  Cnidus  (Frag,
hist,  Grace,  ed.  Miiller,  4.  p.  640).  Livy  (xxxviii.  48.  2)  represents
Manlius  as  saying  in  187  B.C.  that  the  Gauls  had  spoiled  Delphi,  and
Prof.  Wachsmuth  {op,  cit,  p.  5)  maintains  that  in  spite  of  the  legend  of
their  disastrous  repulse  the  northern  barbarians  did  sack  and  pillage  the
sanctuary.  This,  however,  is  disputed  by  Mr.  L.  Contzen  {Die  Wander-
ungen  der  Kelten^  p.  204  sq,),  A  short  memoir  on  the  Gallic  invasion
has  been  written  by  General  A.  Jochmus,  who  served  in  Greece  {Journal
of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society  (London),  27  (1857),  pp.    12-16).


342  GALLIC  INVASION  bk.  x.  phocis

He  observes  (p.   15)  that   Pausanias  "is  as  clear  and  precise  in  his
narrative  as  can  be  desired."

The  repulse  of  the  Gauls  is  alluded  to  in  two  of  the  hymns  to  Apollo
which  have  recently  been  discovered  at  Delphi  {Bulletin  de  Corresp.
helUniquc^  17  (1893),  p.  574  ;  /V.,  18  (1894),  p.  355).  The  subject  was
wrought  in  relief  on  one  of  the  ivory  doors  of  the  temple  of  Apollo  on
the  Palatine  (Propertius,  iii.  23.  13).  A  curious  bas-relief  found  near  the
temple  of  Apollo  at  Delphi  represents  a  battle  between  Greek  cavalry
and  barbarians  whose  long  shields  prove  them  to  be  Gauls.  See  H.  N.
Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungetiy  i.  p.  38 ;  E.  Curtius,  Anecdota
Delphica^  p.  97,  with  pi.  iii.  5  and  6 ;  Conze  e  Michaelis,  in  AnnaJi
delP  Instituto  di  Corr.  Arclieol.  33  (1861),  p.  65  sq.  ;  Th.  Homolle,  in
Gazette  des  Beaux-arts^  Ddcembre  1894,  p.  452.

19.  7-  Brennug  and  AcichoriuB.  Diodorus  (xxii.  9.  2  sq,)  calls
the  latter  Cichorius  and  says  that  on  the  death  of  Brennus  he  succeeded
to  the  command  of  the  Gallic  army.  Mr.  L.  Contzen  holds  that
Brennus  and  Acichorius  were  one  and  the  same  person,  Brennus  being
merely  a  Celtic  title  and  Acichorius  being  the  chiefs  real  name.  The
name  Brennus  has  sometimes  been  explained  as  a  Celtic  word  mean-
ing '  king ' ;  cp.  Cymric  brennin  *  king.'  However  the  derivation  of
Brennus  from  brennin  is  denied  by  Mr.  Contzen.  See  L.  Contzen,  Die
Wanderungen  der  Kelten^  p.  1 10  note  i,  p.  190  note  2.

19.  7.  Bolgius.  He  is  called  Belgius  by  Justin  (xxiv.  5.  i  ;  ib.
6.  I).

19.  7-  engaged  in  conflict  with  Ptolemy.     Cp.  i.  16.  2  note.

19.  9.  one  hundred  and  fifty-two  thousand  foot  etc.  According
to  Justin  (xxiv.  6.  i ),  when  the  army  of  Brennus  entered  Macedonia  it
numbered  150,000  foot  and  15,000  horse.  Diodorus  says  (xxii.  9.  i)
that  Brennus  entered  Macedonia  at  the  head  of  150,000  infantr)%
10,000  cavalry,  a  crowd  of  sutlers,  and  a  baggage- train  of  2000
waggons.

19.  10.  the  servants.  These  are  spoken  of  as  slaves  lower  down.
Caesar  says  {Bellum  GalHcum^  vi.  15)  that  the  Gallic  knights  had  large
numbers  of  dependants  called  ambacti.  Diodorus  tells  us  (v.  29)  that
the  Gauls  were  attended  by  poor  freemen  who  served  their  masters  as
charioteers  and  comrades  in  war.  Posidonius,  quoted  by  Athenaeus
(v.  p.  246  c  d)  says:  "The  Celts  even  in  war  carry  about  with  them
comrades  whom  they  call  parasites."  But  it  does  not  appear  that  these
*  parasites '  were  fighting  men  ;  their  business  was  to  praise  their  masters
to  all  and  sundry.

19.  II.  the  Persian  corps known  as  the  Immortals.     See

vi.  5.  7  note.

19.  II.  This  organisation  they  called  trimarcisia  etc  The  word
trifnarcisia  is  compounded  of  the  Celtic  trl  (Welsh  /r£,  Irish  tri)  *  three '
and  marcisia  derived  from  marc  (Irish,  Gaelic,  Breton  marc^  Welsh
march)  *a  horse.'  In  Welsh  we  still  find  trimarch  *of  three  horses,'
and  trimarchwys  *  men  driving  three  horses.'  Marc  or  march  seems  to
occur  in  all  Celtic  languages  in  the  sense  of  *  a  horse,'  especially  *  a  war-
horse.'     In  Gaelic  we  have  marc  *a  steed,'  marcaiche  *a  cavalier,'  Glen-


CH.  XXII  GALLIC  INVASION  343

mark  or  Glen-markie  *a  glen  where  horses  were  sent  to  pasture  in
summer.'  The  Old  High  German  marcUi^  whence  fnara/i-scalc  ('horse-
servant'),  ftiardchal^  marshal^  is  thought  to  be  borrowed  from  Celtic.
No  doubt  the  word  often  occurs  in  names  of  men  and  places ;  eg,
Marquardt  is  mark-ward  (* horse-keeper').  See  L.  Contzen,  Die
Wofiderungen  der  Keltetiy  p.  80  note  4,  and  the  note  on  the  present
passage  in  Schubart  and  Walz's  edition  of  Pausanias.  These  editors
quote  passages  from  old  German  poetry  in  which  the  word  fiuirc  or
march  occurs  in  the  sense  of  a  war-horse.  Mr.  R.  A.  Neil  of  Pembroke
College  has  kindly  furnished  me  with  some  of  the  facts  mentioned
in  this  note.

20.  I.  the  numbers  that  mustered  at  Thermopylae  to  meet  King
Xerxes.    The  numbers  which  follow  are  taken  from  Herodotus  (vii.  202).

20.  2.  The  numbers  of  the  Locrians  etc.  See  Herodotus,  vii.
203.

20.  2.  the  number  of  Athenians  who  marched  to  Marathon
etc.  Elsewhere  (iv.  25.  5)  Pausanias  had  said  that  the  Athenian  force
at  Marathon  numbered  under  10,000.  'According  to  Cornelius  Nepos
{Miltiades^  5 ),  the  Athenian  army  at  Marathon  mustered  9000  and  they
were  aided  by  1 000  Plataeans.  Plutarch  also  {Paraiiela^  i )  puts  the
Athenians  at  9000.  Justin  says  (ii.  9.  9)  that  there  were  10,000
Athenians  and  1000  Plataeans.  Rawlinson  argues  that  the  9000
Athenians  included  only  the  heavy-armed  infantry  and  that  there  must
have  been  besides  a  considerable  force  of  light  infantry,  which  he  would
put  at  8000.  But  this  contradicts  the  express  statement  of  Pausanias  in
the  present  passage  that  the  Athenian  force,  inclusive  of  boys,  old  men,
and  slaves,  did  not  number  more  than  9000.  See  Rawlinson's  Hero-
dotus^ 3.  p.  518  J^.

20.  4.  The  Aetolians  were  led  by  Polyarchus  etc.  Another  of
the  Aetolian  generals  was  named  Eurydamus ;  a  statue  of  him  stood
at  Delphi.     See  vi.  16.  i  ;  x.  16.  4.

20.  5.  Oallippus.     Cp.  i.  3.  5  ;  i.  4*  2.

21.  I.  if  indeed  the  Oelts  possess  an  art  of  divination.  The
Celts  practised  divination  by  means  of  human  sacrifices  ;  the  victim  was
stabbed  in  the  back  and  omens  were  drawn  from  his  convulsions
(Strabo,  iv.  p.  198).  Cp.  Aelian,  Var.  hist.  i.  31  ;  L.  Contzen,  Die
Wanderungen  der  Kelten^  pp.  87,  89.  Justin  mentions  (xxvi.  2.  2)  that,
before  engaging  in  battle  with  Antigonus,  king  of  Macedonia,  the  Gauls
slew  victims  and  drew  omens  from  their  entrails.

21.  6.  the  colonnade  of  Zeus  of  Freedom.  See  i.  3.  2  sq.  The
shield  of  Olympiodorus  was  also  dedicated  to  Zeus  of  Freedom  and  prob-
ably hung  in  the  same  colonnade.     See  i.  26.  2.

22.  3.  Gallium.  This  is  the  modem  Carpenitsa^  according  to
General  Jochmus,  who  remarks  that  the  place  "  was  always  regarded  as
a  first-rate  strategical  point  in  the  Turkish  and  Venetian  wars  "  (Journal
of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society  (London),  27  (1857),  p.  13).

22.  6.  the  Patreans came  to  the  aid  of  the  Aetolians.    See

vii.  18.  6.

22.  7.  Homer's  account  of  the  Cyclops.      The  story  of


344  THE  CYCLOPS  bk.  x.  phocis


Ulysses  and  the  Cyclops  (Homer,  Od,  ix.  166-542)  is  a  folk-ule,  of
which  versions  are  current  in  many  lands.  Grimm  has  collected
Servian,  Roumanian,  Esthonian,  Finnish,  Russian,  German,  and  other
versions  of  the  story.  See  W.  Grimm,  *  Die  Sage  von  Polyphem,*
Philolog,  und  histor.  Abhandlungen  d.  kon,  Akad,  d,  Wissen.  su  Berlin^
1857,  pp.  1-30.  A  summary  of  Grimm's  memoir  is  given  by  Mr.  W.  W.
Merry  in  Appendix  II.  to  his  larger  edition  of  the  Odyssey^  bks.  i.-xii.
To  the  versions  collected  by  Grimm  may  be  added  a  Basque  version
(Webster,  Basque  Legends^  p.  4  sq,\  two  Lapp  versions  (Poestion,  Lapp-
Idndische  Mdrchen,  Nos.  29,  35,  pp.  122  sqq.  152  sqq,\  a  Lithuanian
version  {Zeitschrift  fiir  Volkskunde,  i  (1889),  pp.  87-89),  a  Gascon
version  (Bladd,  Conies  papulaires  de  la  Gascogne^  i.  pp.  32-42),  a
Syrian  version  (Prym  und  Socin,  Syrische  Sagen  und  Maerchen^  No.  32,
p.  115),  and  a  Celtic  version  (J.  F.  Campbell,  Popular  Tales  of  the  West
Highlands^  No.  v.  vol.  i.  p.  in  sqq,  ;  J.  Jacobs,  Celtic  Fairy  Tales,
p.  41  sqq.).  The  Servian  story,  cited  by  Grimm  from  Karadschitsch's
Volksmdrchen  der  Serben  (No.  38),  is  also  given  in  F.  S.  Krauss's  Sagen
und  Mdrchen  der  Siidslaven  (vol.  i.  No.  35,  pp.  170-173).

The  adventure  of  Ulysses  with  the  Cyclops  is  illustrated  by  some
vase-paintings  and  other  monuments  of  ancient  art.  As  a  rule  the
artists  who  executed  these  works  have  endued  the  Cyclops  with  the  usual
number  of  eyes,  not,  like  Homer,  with  one  only.  However,  the  British
Museum  possesses  a  bronze  head  of  the  monster  with  a  single  eye  set  in
the  middle  of  his  forehead  (see  the  frontispiece  to  Butcher  and  Lang*s
translation  of  the  Odyssey) ;  and  he  is  similarly  depicted  on  the  wall  of
a  tomb  at  Cometo  in  Etruria.  Occasionally  an  artist  has  given  the
Cyclops  three  eyes,  one  in  the  middle  of  his  brow,  and  two  in  the
usual  places.  It  is  thus  that  he  figures  in  a  marble  group  on  the
Capitol  at  Rome  (W.  Helbig,  Fiihrer  durch  die  offentlichen  Sammlungcn
klassischer  Alterthiimer  in  Rom,  i.  No.  406),  and  there  is  a  marble
head  of  him  with  three  eyes  in  the  Museum  at  Lyons.  See  E.  Saglio,
*  Polypheme,' (7^2^//^  ArMologique,  12  (1887),  pp.  1-7,  with  pi.  i  ;
Miss  J.  E.  Harrison,  Myths  of  the  Odyssey ,  p.  i  sqq,  ;  A.  Schneider,
Der  troisc/ie  Sagenkreis,  pp.  53-65.

22.  8.  by  this  latter  path Hydaxnes,  the  Mede  etc.     See

Herodotus,  vii.  213-21 8,  who  describes  the  path.     Cp.  Leake,  Northern
Greece^  2.  p.  53  sqq.

22.  9.  Pindar sasrs  that  every  num  etc.     See  Pindar,  Nem.  i.

82  sqq.

22.  10.  a  detachment  of  forty  thousand  men.  According  to  Justin
(xxiv.  7.  9)  the  force  with  which  Brennus  attacked  Delphi  numbered
65,000  men,  while  the  Delphians  and  their  allies  had  only  4000.

23.  I.  the  god  bade  them  have  no  fear  etc.  So  when  the
Persians  were  advancing  against  Delphi,  and  the  inhabitants  in  great
fear  inquired  of  the  god  whether  they  should  bury  the  sacred  treasures
or  carry  them  away  to  another  land,  Apollo  bade  them  move  nothing,
because  he  was  able  to  guard  his  own  (Herodotus,  viii.  36).  The
oracle  vouchsafed  to  the  Delphians  by  Apollo  on  the  approach  of  the
Gauls  is  said  to  have  been  this :  '*  I  and  the  white  maidens  will  care  for


CH.  XXIII  APOLLO  BELVEDERE  345

these  matters."  The  "  white  maidens  "  were  generally  supposed  to  be
Artemis  and  Athena,  who  were  said  to  have  appeared  in  person  along
with  Apollo  fighting  on  the  side  of  the  Greeks.  VVhy  the  goddesses
were  called  **  white "  is  doubtful ;  Cicero  seems  to  refer  the  epithet
to  the  snow-storm  which  contributed  to  the  overthrow  of  the  Gauls.
See  Diodorus,  xxii.  9.  5  ;  Suidas,  s,v,  c/ioi  /jL€\rj(r€i  ravra  koI  k€VKats
Kopais ;  Parocmiogr.  Graeciy  ed.  Leutsch  et  Schneidewin,  Appendix,
ii.  55  ;  Cicero,  De  divinationey  i.  37.  81  ;  Justin,  xxiv.  8.  5  sq.

It  has  been  suggested  that  the  famous  statue  in  the  Vatican  known  as
the  Apollo  Belvedere  represents  the  god  in  the  act  of  repelling  the  Gauls
from  Delphi  by  shaking  the  aegis  at  them.  The  left  hand  was  missing
when  the  statue  was  found  near  the  Grotta  Ferrata  (not,  as  commonly
said,  at  Antium,  Porto  (T  Anzo)  about  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century  ;
and  the  artist  who  restored  it,  Giovanni  Montorsoli,  a  pupil  of  Michael
Angelo,  placed  the  stump  of  a  bow  in  the  god's  left  hand.  But  in  1 860
L.  Stephani  published  a  small  bronze  statue  of  Apollo  known  as  the
Stroganoff  Apollo,  which  resembles  the  Apollo  Belvedere  so  exactly
that  the  two  statues  must  be  regarded  as  copies  of  the  same  original.
(The  Apollo  Belvedere  is  not  an  original,  but  a  copy  executed  in  Roman
times  and  apparently,  though  this  has  been  disputed,  in  Carrara  marble.)
The  left  hand  of  the  Stroganoff  Apolk)  is  preserved  and  is  grasping  a
fragment  of  what  some  authorities  maintain  to  have  been  an  aegis.  If
they  are  right,  and  if  the  Stroganoff  Apollo  is  a  genuine  antique,  it
becomes  probable  that  the  missing  left  hand  of  the  Apollo  Belvedere
also  held  the  aegis.  The  conception  of  the  statue  may,  in  that  case,
have  been  suggested  by  a  passage  in  Homer  (//.  xv.  229  sqq,,  306  sqq.)
where  Apollo  is  said  to  have  turned  the  Greeks  to  flight  by  shaking  the
aegis  at  them.  But  if,  as  other  authorities  assert  with  equal  confidence,
the  Stroganoff  Apollo  does  not  hold  the  aegis,  or  if  Prof  Furtwangler  is
right  in  declaring  the  Stroganoff  Apollo  to  be  a  modem  forgery,  the
Apollo  Belvedere  might  perhaps  more  naturally  and  appropriately  be
restored  with  a  bow  in  his  left  hand,  his  attitude  being  that  of  an  archer
who  has  just  shot  an  arrow  and  is  watching  it  in  its  flight.  In  which-
ever way  restored,  whether  with  the  aegis  or  with  the  bow,  the  attitude
of  the  god  and  his  stem,  intent  gaze  would  harmonise  excellently  with
the  view  that  he  is  portrayed  in  the  act  of  repelling  the  Gauls  from
Delphi.  The  style  of  the  statue  would  also  agree  with  the  supposition
that  it  was  made  in  279  RC.  (the  date  of  the  Gallic  inroad)  or  soon
after.  For,  on  the  one  hand,  it  lacks  the  austere  simplicity  of  Greek
art  of  the  fifth  century  RC. ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  passion  con-
veyed by  the  look  and  attitude,  the  refined  elegance  rather  than  grandeur
of  form,  and  the  general  picturesque,  not  to  say  theatrical  pose  of  the
statue  are  all  characteristics  hardly  to  be  found  in  Greek  statuary  before
the  days  of  Praxiteles,  Scopas,  and  Lysippus.  Hence  the  view,  first  pro-
pounded by  Preller  and  afterwards  accepted  by  many  archaeologists
(Welcker,  Otto  Jahn,  Overbeck,  etc),  that  the  original  of  the  Apollo
Belvedere  was  made  to  commemorate  the  repulse  of  the  Gauls  from
Delphi  is  ingenious  and  plausible,  but  from  the  nature  of  the  case  can
hardly  amount  to  more  than  a  conjecture.     We  know  from  Pausanias


346  APOLLO  BELVEDERE  bk.  x.  phocis

(x.  15.  2)  that  the  Aetolians  dedicated  at  Delphi  two  statues  of  Apollo,

together  with  statues  of  Artemis  and  Athena,  in  memory  of  their  triumph

over  the  Gauls.     Overbeck  conjectured  that  the  original  of  the  Apollo

Belvedere  was  actually  one  of  these  two  statues,  and  that  it  formed  a

group  with  the  statues  of  Artemis  and  Athena,  the  three  deities  being

represented  as  they  were  supposed  to  have  appeared  in  the  act  of  driving

back  the  Gauls  from  Delphi.      He  thinks  that  we  possess  copies  of

these  statues  of  Artemis  and  Athena  in  the  Artemis  of  Versailles  and

the  Athena  of  the  Capitol  Museum  at  Rome.     On  the  other  hand  Mr.

Fr.  Winter  considers  that  on  grounds  of  style  the  original  of  the  Apollo

Belvedere  must  be  dated  somewhat  earlier  than  279  B.C.,  and  he  assigns

it  to  Leochares,  a  younger  contemporary  of  Praxiteles  and  Scopas  in

the  fourth  century  B.C.  (see  i.  i.  3  note).     Professors  Furtwangler  and

Collignon  agree  wth  Mr.  Winter  in  ascribing  the  original  to  Leochares.

The  former  even  traces  the  conception  of  the  statue  back  to  a  supposed

statue  of  the  supposed  elder  Praxiteles,  which  again  he  identifies  with

the  real  statue  of  Locust  Apollo  on  the  Acropolis  at  Athens  (i.  24.  8).

One  of  the  links  in  his  chain  of  argument  is  furnished  by  a  head  of

Apollo  on  coins  of  Amphipolis  which  Prof   Furtwangler  believes  to

resemble  the  head  of  the  Apollo  Belvedere  (P.  Gardner,  Types  of  Greek

Coins^  pi.  vii.  11;  B.  V.  Head,  Coins  of  the  Ancients^  pi.  21,  Nos.  7,  8).

The  resemblance,  if  it  exists,  is  not  striking.     Dr.  H.  Freericks  thinks

that  the  original  of  the  Apollo  Belvedere  may  have  been  the  statue  of

Apollo  by   Leochares  at  Athens  (i.   3.   4  note).     The  view  that  the

original  of  the  Apollo  Belvedere  was  a  work  of  Leochares  is  rejected  by

Overbeck  and  Prof.  E.  A.  Gardner.

See  L.  Stephani,  ApoUon  Boiidromios  (St.  Petersburg,  i860);  /V/.,  in  Bulletin
de  VAcadi^mii  Imp^tiale  dcs  Sciences  de  St.  PJtersbourgy  4  (1862),  pp.  55-62  ;  id.^
in  Conipte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1863,  pp.  86-88 ;  Fr.  Wieseler,  Der  ApoUon
Stroganoff  und  der  Apollon  vom  Belvedere  {(joWxxi^zvi,  1861);  id,y  *  Epilog  iiber
den  Apollon  Stroganoff  und  den  Apollon  vom  Belvedere,'  Philologus^  21  (1864^
pp.  246-283;  C.  Wachsmuth,  in  Sybel's  Historische  Zeitschrifty  10  (1863),
p.  II  sqq,  ;  E.  Gerhard,  *  Zum  belvederischen  Apoll,'  Archdologische  Zeitun.;^
19  (1861),  Anzeiger,  pp.  209* -21 3*  ;  R.  Kekul^,  ib.  pp.  2i3*-220*;  Welcker,
'Der  vaticanische  Apoll,*  Archdologische  Zeitung,  20  (1862),  pp.  331-333;
Th.  Pyl,  *  Zum  Vaticanischen  Apoll,'  ib,  Anzeiger,  pp.  35l*-357*  ;  Otto
Jahn,  *  Der  Apollo  von  Belvedere,'  Archdologische  Z^itung,  21  (1S63),  pp.
66-69  ;  K.  K[ekule],  '  Sovra.  due  scoperte  archeologiche  riseuardanti  1'  Apollo
di  Belvedere,'  Annali  delV  Inst,  di  Corr.  Archeol,  39  (1867),  pp.  124-140 ;
Overbeck,  in  Berichte  iiber  die  Verhandl.  d.  k.  sdchs,  Gesell.  d,  JVissen. ,  Philolog.
histor.  Classe,  19  (1867),  pp.  121 -1 50;  /</.,  in  Berichte  iiber  die  VerheutdU  d,  ?.
sdchs.  Gesell.  d.  IMpzigy  Philolog.  hist.  CI.  45  (1893),  PP*  34-40J  i<^"t  Gesch.  d.
griech.  Pldstik*  2.  pp.  368-382;  id.y  Griechische  Kunstmythologie^  Besonderer
Theil,  3.  p.  248  sqq.  ;  A.  Furtwangler,  *Zum  Apollo  vom  Belvedere,*  Archiio-
logisch e  Zeitung,  ^o  {1SS2),  pp.  247-254;  G.  Kieritzky,  *Der  Apollo  Stroganoff,*
Archdologische  Zeitung^  41  ( 1 883),  pp.  27-38;  Friederichs-Wolters,  GipsabgUsse^
No.  1523  ;  A.  S.  Murray,  History  of  Greek  Sculpture^  2.  p.  371  sqq.  ;  Mrs.  Mitchell,
History  of  Ancient  Sculpture^  pp.  621-627  ;  A.  Gercke,  'Apollon  der  Galliersieger,'
Jahrbtuh  d.  archdol.  Instituts,  2  (1887),  pp.  260-264  ;  Fr.  Winter,  *  Der  Apollo
von  Belvedere,'  ib.  7  (1892),  pp.  164-177  ;  A.  Furtwangler,  Meisienverhe  d.
griech.  Plastik,  pp.  659-671  ;  H.  Freericks,  Der  Apollo  von  Belvedere  (Paderborn,
1894)  ;  M.  Collignon,  Histoire  de  la  Sculpture  grecque^  2.  p.  314  sqq.  ;  E.  A
Gardner,  Handbook  of  Greek  Sculpture^  p.  477  sq.


CH.  xxiii  GODS  IN  BATTLE  347

23.  2.  Then,  too,  appeared  to  them  the  phantoms  of  the  heroes

etc.  Cp.  i.  4.  4  ;  X.  8.  7  note.  Apollo,  Artemis,  and  Athena  are  also
said  to  have  appeared  in  person  fighting  for  the  Greeks  against  the
Gauls  (see  the  preceding  note).  The  heroes  Theseus  and  Echetlus
were  seen  fighting  on  the  Greek  side  at  the  battle  of  Marathon  (Plutarch,
Theseus y  35  ;  Paus.  i.  32.  5).  At  the  battle  of  Salami s  phantoms  of
armed  men  were  perceived  stretching  their  hands  out  from  Aegina  to  pro-
tect the  Greek  ships  ;  they  were  believed  to  be  the  Aeacids,  who  had  been
prayed  to  for  help  before  the  battle  (Plutarch,  ThemisiocUs^  15).  The
spirit  of  Aristomenes  was  said  to  have  fought  on  the  Theban  side  at
Leuctra  (Paus.  iv.  32. 4).  The  Mantineans  fancied  they  saw  Poseidon  fight-
ing on  their  side  against  the  Lacedaemonians  (viii.  10.  8).  In  a  battle
between  the  people  of  Crotona  and  the  people  of  Locri,  two  unknown
youths,  of  wondrous  stature,  in  strange  armour,  clad  in  scarlet  and
riding  white  horses,  were  seen  fighting  on  the  wings  of  the  Locrian
army ;  after  the  battle  they  disappeared  (Justin,  xx.  3.  8).  These
two  youths  were  probably  regarded  as  Castor  and  Pollux,  whose  reported
appearance  at  the  battle  of  the  Lake  Regillus,  charging  with  lances  in
rest  at  the  head  of  the  Roman  cavalry,  is  well  known  (Dionysius
Halicamassensis,  Antiquit,  Rom,  vi.  13  ;  Cicero,  De  nat.  deoruifiy  ii.  2,
iii.  5).  It  is  said  that  when  Alaric  approached  Athens  he  beheld  Athena
in  full  armour  patrolling  the  walls,  and  Achilles  guarding  them  with  the
same  fiery  valour  with  which  he  had  avenged  the  death  of  Patroclus ;
terrified  by  the  vision  Alaric  gave  up  all  thought  of  attacking  the  city
(Zosimus,  V.  6).  Similarly  in  the  battles  between  the  Spaniards  and  the
Indians  of  Mexico  it  is  affirmed  by  grave  historians  that  St.  James,  the
patron  Saint  of  Spain,  was  seen  charging  on  his  milk-white  steed  at  the
head  of  the  Christian  chivalry.  In  one  of  these  battles  a  lady  robed  in
white,  supposed  to  be  the  Virgin,  was  visible  by  the  side  of  St.  James,
throwing  dust  in  the  eyes  of  the  infidels.  The  stout  old  chronicler  Bemal
Diaz,  who  fought  in  these  wars,  confesses  that  for  his  sins  he  was  not
found  worthy  to  behold  the  glorious  Apostle.  See  Prescott,  History  of
the  Conquest  of  Mexico^  bk.  ii.  ch.  4,  bk.  v.  chs.  2  and  4  ;  Bemal  Diaz,
Histoire  de  la  Conqu^te  de  la  Nouvelle-Espagne^  ch.  34,  vol.  I.  p.  138
sq,  (French  translation).  For  these  Spanish  parallels  I  am  indebted
to  my  late  friend  W.  Robertson  Smith.  Niebuhr  had  previously  made
exactly  the  same  comparison  (^Lectures  on  Ancient  History^  3.  p.  243).

23.  12.  he  put  an  end  to  himself  by  drinking  neat  wine.
According  to  Diodorus  (xxii.  9.  2)  Brennus  despatched  himself  with
his  sword,  after  swilling  a  great  quantity  of  neat  wine.  Justin  says
(xxiv.  8.  II)  that  unable  to  bear  the  pain  of  his  wounds  Brennus  put
an  end  to  himself  with  a  dagger.  Prof  Hitzig  thinks  that  Pausanias
means  to  say  that  Brennus  put  an  end  to  himself,  not  by,  but  after
drinking  neat  wine ;  and  it  is  true  that  his  words,  taken  literally,  will
bear  this  interpretation.  But  the  parallels  which  Prof  Hitzig  quotes
(vii.  13.  8  ;  vii.  16.  6)  are  strongly  in  favour  of  the  view  that  Pausanias
regarded  the  wine  as  the  actual  cause  of  death.  See  Hitzig,  Weitere
Beitrdge  sur  Texteskiitik  des  Pausanias,  p.  5  ;  and  the  Critical  Note  on
this  passage,  vol.  i.  p.  610.


348  DELPHIC  MAXIMS  BK.  x.  phocis

23.  1 3.  not  a  man  of  them  returned  home.  The  same  statement  is
made  by  Diodorus  (xxii.  8.  1 1)  and  Justin  (xxiv.  8.  16).  But  it  appears
to  be  an  exaggeration.  Pausanias  himself  says  elsewhere  (i.  4.  5)  that
most  of  the  defeated  Gauls  crossed  over  to  Asia,  and  in  other  ancient
writers  we  find  mention  repeatedly  made  of  a  remnant  of  the  Gallic
host  who  had  marched  under  Brennus  against  Delphi.  See  Polybius,
iv.  46  ;  Athenaeus,  vi.  p.  234  b ;  Justin,  xxxii.  3.  6 ;  C.  Wachsmuth,
in  SybePs  Historisclu  Zeitschrift^  10  (1863),  p.  5  sqq, ;  L.  Contzen,  Die
Wanderungen  der  Kelten^  p.  203  sqq,  ;  Droysen,  Gesch,  des  Hellenismus^
ii.  2.  p.  351  sq.  From  inscriptions  we  learn  that  the  Aetolians  com-
memorated their  victory  over  the  Gauls  by  instituting  games  called
Soteria  in  honour  of  Saviour  {Sdtir)  Zeus  and  the  Pythian  Apollo.  The
games  were  held  every  fourth  year  and  included  musical,  vocal,  poetical,
and  dramatic,  as  well  as  athletic  and  equestrian  contests.  Four  lists  of
victors  in  the  games  are  preserved  in  inscriptions  engraved  on  the  great
polygonal  wall  at  Delphi.  See  VVescher-Foucart,  Inscriptions  recueillies
dDeipheSy  Nos.  3,  4,  5,  6,  13  ;  B.  Haussoullier,  *  Inscriptions  de  Delphes,*
Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique^  5  (i  881),  pp.  300-316;  E.  L.  Hicks,
Greek  histor.  Inscriptions^  No.  161  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Grace.
Nos.  149,  150;  C.  Wachsmuth,  in  SybePs  Histotische  Zeitschrift^  10
('863),  p.  9  sq.  From  an  inscription  found  at  Tegea  we  learn  that  a
player  won  prizes  at  the  Soterian  festival  for  acting  in  the  Hercules  Furens
of  Euripides  and  a  play  of  Archestratus  {Bulletin  de  Corresfi.  helUnique^
17  (1893),  p.  15  ;  cp.  note  on  viii.  49.  i).

24.  I.  there  are  inscribed  useful  maximB  for  the  conduct  of  life
etc.  Plato  says  {Protagoras^  p.  343  a  b)  that  the  Seven  Sages  met
together  and  dedicated  to  Apollo  in  his  temple  at  Delphi  the  sayings
"Know  thyself"  and  "Nothing  in  excess."  Elsewhere  {Charrnides,
p.  165  a)  Plato  mentions  a  third  saying  which  was  also  to  be  seen  in
the  temple  at  Delphi,  "  Go  surety  and  ruin  is  at  hand."  All  three
sayings  are  attributed  to  Chilon  alone  by  Diodorus  (Fr.  ix.  9)  and  Pliny
{Nat,  hist.  vii.  119).  The  number  of  maxims  inscribed  in  the  temple
is  uncertain,  but  the  three  already  mentioned  were  the  most  famous.
According  to  Plutarch  {De  garrulitate^  17),  these  three  sayings  were
engraved  in  the  sanctuary  by  the  authority  of  the  Amphictyonic  Council.
Pliny  says  {I.e.)  that  they  were  written  in  letters  of  gold.  The  exact
place  which  they  occupied  in  the  temple  is  uncertain.  Pausanias  here
tells  us  that  they  were  in  the  fore-temple.  Macrobius  says  in  one  place
{Somn.  Sap.  i.  9.  2)  that  the  maxim  "  Know  thyself"  was  engraved  on
the  front  of  the  temple  ;  in  another  place  {Sat.  i.  6.  6)  that  it  was
engraved  on  the  door-post  of  the  temple.  According  to  Diodorus
(Fr.  ix.  9.  I  ed.  Dindorf),  the  three  maxims  were  carved  on  a  pillar ;
and  Varro  {Sat,  Menip.  320  ed.  Biicheler)  says  the  same  of  one  of
them  ("  Nothing  in  excess  ").  A  manuscript  in  the  Laurentian  library  at
Florence  contains  a  collection  of  ninety-two  proverbs  headed  "  Maxims  of
the  Seven  Sages  which  were  found  carved  on  the  pillar  at  Delphi "  (cri
Tou  cv  AcAc^oi?  Kiovoi).  According  to  a  scholiast  on  Plato  {Phaedrus,
229  e),  the  maxim  "  Know  thyself"  was  carved  on  the  gateway  of  the
Delphic  sanctuary  ;  and  Plato  {Charmides,  pp.  164  e-165  a)  and  Plutarch


CH.  XXIV  DELPHIC  MAXIMS  349

{De  EI  apud  Delphos^  17)  speak  of  it  as  addressed  by  the  god  to  all
who  entered  or  approached  his  temple.  Porphyry  seems  to  imply  that
I  a  person  entering  the  temple  passed  the  saying  "  Know  thyself"  before
he  came  to  the  vessels  with  holy  water.  See  Porphyry,  quoted  by
Stobaeus,  Florileg,  xxi.  26.  Putting  all  these  various  indications  together
we  may  perhaps  infer  that  the  maxims  were  engraved  on  one  of  the  two
columns  at  the  entrance  into  the  fore-temple.  On  the  whole  subject
of  these  maxims,  see  G6ttling,  *  Die  delphischen  Spriiche,'  Gesammeite
Abhandlungen^  i.  pp.  221-250  ;  F.  Schultz,  *  Die  Spriiche  der  delphischen
Saule,'  Philologus^  24  (1866),  pp.  193-226.  In  the  temple  there  were
also  to  be  seen  a  wooden  letter  £,  said  to  have  been  dedicated  by  the
Sages,  a  golden  E  dedicated  by  the  Empress  Livia,  and  a  bronze
E  dedicated  by  the  Athenians  (Plutarch,  De  EI  apud  DeiphoSy  3).
Plutarch  wrote  a  treatise  {De  EI  apud  Deiphos)  to  explain  the  mystic
letter.  The  explanations  he  puts  forward  are  more  or  less  fanciful.  On
some  coins  of  Roman  date  a  large  E  appears  between  the  central
columns  of  the  fagade  of  the  Delphic  temple.     See  above,  p.  340.

24.   I.  These  were Thales  of  Miletus  etc.     Cp.  i.  23.   i.

The  ancients  were  not  agreed  as  to  the  names  of  the  Seven  Sages.
The  list  here  given  by  Pausanias  is  identical  with  the  one  given  by
Demetrius  Phalereus  (Stobaeus,  Florileg,  iii.  79)  and  Plutarch  {De  EI
apud  Deiphos,  3),  though  in  the  latter  passage  it  is  said  that  the
tyrants  Cleobulus  and  Periandcr  had  foisted  themselves  unfairly  into
the  list.  The  list  given  by  Clement  of  Alexandria  {Strom,  i.  14.  59,
p.  350  ed.  Potter)  agrees  with  that  of  Pausanias,  but  he  says  that  in
place  of  Periander  some  people  substituted  Anacharsis  the  Scythian,
and  others  Epimenides  the  Cretan.  For  other  lists  see  Diogenes
Laertius,  i.  i.  41  sq.  The  only  four  Sages  who  appear  in  all  the  lists
are  Thales,  Bias,  Pittacus,  and  Solon.  See  Zeller,  Philosophte  der
Griechen,  i.**  p.  97  sqq.

24.  I.  the  seventh  place  is  assigned  by  Plato  etc.  See  Plato,
Protagoras,  p.  343  a.

24.  I.  Chenae.  Opinions  differed  as  to  whether  Chenae  was  on
Mt.  Oeta  or  in  Laconia  (Diogenes  Laertius,  i.  9.  10).  Stephanus
Byzantius,  who  calls  it  Chen,  says  (s.v.  X^v)  that  it  was  a  to^^'n  in
Laconia.

24.  2.  a  likeness  of  Homer  in  bronze  on  a  monument.  A  pedestal
which  supported  a  bronze  statue  of  Homer  has  been  found  at  Pergamus.
On  it  are  inscribed  three  sets  of  execrable  verses  which  mention  the
various  cities  that  claimed  to  be  the  poet^s  birth-place.  See  Frankel,
Inschriften  von  Pergamon,  i.  No.  203.

24.  2.  the  oracle  which  is  said  to  have  been  given  to  him.  The
following  oracle  is  quoted  also  by  Stephanus  Byzantius  (s,v,  "Jos).
Some  of  the  lines  of  the  oracle  are  quoted  in  the  Life  of  Homer
attributed  to  Plutarch  (§  4),  in  which,  however,  they  are  divided  and
assigned  to  two  separate  oracles.

24.  2.  beware  of  the  riddle  of  yonng  children.  It  is  said
that,  being  in  the  island  of  los.  Homer  asked  some  boys  returning
from  fishing  whether  they  had  caught  anything.      They  gave  him  an


350  HEARTH  OF  APOLLO  bk.  x.  phocis

ambiguous  answer,  which  he  could  not  understand  and  he  cither  died
of  vexation  or  soon  afterwards  mortally  injured  himself  by  a  fall.  See
[Plutarch,]  Ufe  of  Horner^  4  ;  Proclus,  Life  of  Homer  \  Hotiuriet  Hesiodi
certamen,  19;  cp.  [Herodotus,]  Life  of  Horner^  35  sq,  {Biographi
Graeci^  ed.  Westermann,  pp.  19,  23,  25  sq.^  45).

24.  3.  wetted  witii  the  spray.  The  Greek  is  8t€/>os.  But
according  to  Trendelenburg  (on  Aristotle,  De  anima^  ii.  11.  6)  Stcpos  is
especially  used  of  the  liquid  air.     He  compares  Aristophanes,  Clouds^

336  (338).

24.  3.  express  no  views  of  my  own  as  to  the age  of  Homer.

Cp.  ix.  30.  3.

24.  4-  In  the  temple  there  is  an  altar  of  Poseidon.  Pausanias
now  describes  the  contents  of  the  cella  or  central  chamber  of  the  temple.
It  seems  to  have  had  an  opening  (Jiypaeihmm)  in  the  roof;  for  when
the  Gauls  were  approaching  Delphi;  the  priests,  it  is  said,  declared  that
they  had  seen  Apollo  leaping  down  into  the  temple  through  the  opening
in  the  roof  (Justin,  xxiv.  8.  4).  Dr.  Verrall  has  suggested  that  what
Pausanias  here  calls  the  altar  of  Poseidon  was  really  the  Navel-stone
{omphalos).  See  note  on  x.  16.  3,  above,  p.  317.  As  to  the  old  oracle
of  Poseidon  at  Delphi,  see  x.  5.  6.

24.  4.  images  of  two  Fates.  It  is  odd  that  there  should  have
been  images  of  only  two  Fates,  since  the  Greeks  universally  believed
the  Fates  to  be  three  in  number.  Plutarch  remarks  on  the  anomaly
{De  EI  apud  Delphosy  2).  Dr.  Verrall  would  get  over  the  difficulty  by
supposing  that  the  two  so-called  images  of  Fates  were  really  the  eagles
or  Gorgons  which  stood  beside  the  Navel-stone  {omphalos).  See  note
on  X.  16.  3,  above,  p.  317.

24.  4.  Zeus,  Guide  of  Fate.     Cp.  v.  15.  5  note.

24.  4-  the  hearth  on  which  the  priest  of  Apollo  slew  Neopto-
lemus.  As  to  the  death  of  Neoptolemus  or  Pyrrhus  see  i.  13.  9,  ii.  29.
9,  iv.  17.4;  and  as  to  his  motives  for  coming  to  Delphi  see  x.  7.  i
note.  According  to  some  he  set  the  temple  on  fire  and  was  slain  by  a
Delphian  named  Machaereus,  son  of  Daetas,  who  may  have  been  the
priest  of  Apollo  mentioned  by  Pausanias  (Apollodorus,  ed.  R.  Wagner,
p.  218;  /V/.,  Epiloma  Vaticana^  ed.  R.  Wagner,  p.  72;  Strabo,  ix.  p.
421  ;  Schol.  on  Pindar,  Nem.  vii.  62  ;  Eustathius,  on  Homer,  Od.  iv.
3,  p.  1479.  13).  According  to  others,  it  was  Orestes  who  killed  him
out  of  revenge  because  Neoptolemus  had  robbed  him  of  his  bride
Hermione  (Apollodorus,  I.e. ;  Virgil,  Aen.  iii.  330  sqq,  :  Hyginus,  Fab.
123;  Velleius  Paterculus,  i.  i.  3;  Heliodorus,  ii.  34).  Euripides  has
described  at  some  length  how  Neoptolemus  was  slain  at  the  altar  by
the  Delphians  at  the  instigation  of  Orestes  {Andromache^  108 5-1 165).
J.  TopfFer  suggested  that  in  the  legend  of  the  death  of  Neoptolemus,
slain  at  Apollo's  altar,  we  have  a  reminiscence  of  a  human  sacrifice  such
as  was  offered  at  Apollo's  festival  of  the  Thargelia  (J.  Topffer,  Beitrdge
zur  Allerlumswissenschaft  (Berlin,  1897),  p.  132).  The  assassina-
tion of  Neoptolemus  at  Delphi  is  the  subject  of  a  painting  on  a  red-
figured  vase  found  at  Ruvo  in  Apulia.  The  hero,  wounded  and
bleeding,  half  kneels  on  a  bench  beside  the  Navel-stone  {omphalos)^  on


CH.  XXIV  HEARTH  OF  APOLLO


351


the  other  side  of  which  Orestes  flees  with  a  drawn  sword  in  his  hand.
Immediately  beyond  Orestes  is  a  palm-tree,  and  above  him  sits  Apollo,
bow  in  hand,  looking  towards  Neoptolemus.  In  the  back-ground  we
sec  the  temple,  a  Doric  edifice  with  folding  doors  which  stand  open,
and  near  it  a  large  tripod  on  a  pedestal.  The  figures  of  Neoptolemus,
Orestes,  and  Apollo  are  identified  by  inscriptions.  See  G.  F.  latta,
*  L'  assassinio  di  Neottolemo,'  Annali  delV  InsL  di  Corrisp.  ArcheoL
40  (1868),  pp.  235.248,  with  tav.  d'  agg.  E;  Baumeister's  Denkmdler,
2.  p.  1009,  fig.  1 21 5  ;  J.  Vogel,  Scen^n  Euripideischer  Tragodien  in
gricchischen  Vasengemdlden  (Leipzig,  1886),  p.  36  sqq.

The  hearth  of  Apollo  at  Delphi  was  famous  and  is  often  mentioned
by  ancient  writers  (Aeschylus,  Choeph.  1038 ;  id.^  Eumenides^  282  ;
Sophocles,  Oedipus  Rex^  965  ;  Euripides,  lon^  462  ;  /V/.,  SuppiiceSy
1200;  /V/.,  Andromache^  1240;  Diodorus,  xvi.  56;  Aelian,  Var,  hist.
vi.  9).  On  this  hearth  probably  burned  the  perpetual  fire  which  was
fed  only  with  pine- wood  and  tended  by  women  who  had  been  married,
and  which,  if  it  ever  went  out,  had  to  be  rekindled  from  the  sun  by
means  of  burning-glasses  (Plutarch,  De  EI  apud  Delphos,  2  ;  /V/.,  Numa^
9).  For  Plutarch  tells  us  that  when  the  temple  was  burnt  by  the
Maedes  in  the  Mithridatic  war  the  perpetual  fire  went  out  (Numa^  9 ;
see  above,  p.  331),  which  seems  to  imply  that  the  perpetual  fire  was  in
the  temple,  and  if  it  was  in  the  temple  it  could  hardly  have  been  any-
where but  on  the  hearth.  Again,  Orestes,  haunted  by  the  Furies  at
Argos,  declares  that  he  will  go  as  a  suppliant  to  "  that  which  is  set  at
the  mid-navel "  {fi&r6fi<l>vXov  tSpvfia)  and  to  "  the  light  of  the  fire  that  is
called  undying"  (Aeschylus,  Choeph,  1036  sq,).  This  is  most  naturally
interpreted  to  mean  that  the  perpetual  fire  was  beside  the  Navel-stone
{pmphalos\  which  as  we  have  seen  (p.  316  sq,")  stood  in  the  temple  at
the  time  when  Aeschylus  wrote.  Indeed  from  the  Eumenides  {v.  40  sqq,
compared  with  v,  280  sqq,)  it  is  clear  that  Aeschylus  believed  the  Navel-
stone  to  be  beside  the  god*s  hearth.  Elsewhere  (note  on  viii.  53.  9)  I
have  assumed  that  the  fire  of  pinewood  burned  in  the  Prytaneum.  And
that  a  perpetual  fire  was  in  fact  maintained  in  the  Prytaneum  at  Delphi
we  have  ground  for  believing,  since  pure  fire  was  brought  to  Plataea
from  "the  common  hearth"  at  Delphi  (Plutarch,  Aristides^  20),  and
"  the  common  hearth  "  is  known  from  a  Delphic  inscription  to  have
been  in  the  Prytaneum  (H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Ret  sen  und  Forschungen^  i.
p.  67  note  20 ;  H.  Pomtow,  Reitrage  zur  Topographie  von  Delphi^
p.  66).  There  may  very  well  have  been  two  perpetual  fires  at  Delphi,
one  in  the  Prytaneum  and  one  in  the  temple,  just  as  at  Athens  there
was  one  in  the  Prytaneum  and  another — the  ever  burning  lamp — in  the
Erechtheum  (see  vol.  2.  pp.  171,  341).

From  Pausanias's  description  we  infer  that  the  hearth  stood  in  the  cella
of  the  temple  but  not  in  the  adytum  or  Holy  of  Holies  ;  for  it  is  only  after
speaking  of  the  hearth  that  our  author  proceeds  to  mention  the  inmost
shrine  in  which  stood  the  golden  statue  of  Apollo.  J.  H.  Middleton,
however,  preferred  to  suppose  that  both  hearth  and  Navel-stone  were
in  this  inner  shrine  {adytum).  His  view  is  to  some  extent  favoured  by
the  statement  that  the  sacrilegious   Phocians  dug  for  treasure  in  the


352  IMAGE  OF  APOLLO  BK.  x.  phocis

temple  "  about  the  hearth  and  the  tripod "  (Diodorus,  xvi.  56  ;  Aelian,
Var,  hist  vi.  9) ;  for  this  seems  to  imply  that  the  hearth  was  beside
the  tripod,  and  the  tripod  was  certainly  in  the  inner  shrine  or  adytum.
See  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen^  i.  pp.  ^^  sqq.y  90  sqq, ;
P.  Foucart,  M^tnoire  sur  les  mines  et  P/tisioire  de  DelpheSy  p.  70  sqq,  ;
J.  H.  Middleton,  va  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  9  (1888),  p.  294  sqq,

24.  5.  the  inmost  part  of  the  temple.  At  the  western  end  of  the
cella  a  door  seems  to  have  led  into  the  inmost  shrine  or  adytum.  The
golden  statue  of  Apollo  which  stood,  as  Pausanias  tells  us,  in  this  inner
shrine,  must  have  been  set  up  after  the  Sacred  War  in  the  fourth
century  B.C.,  else  the  Phocians  would  probably  have  put  it  in  the
melting  pot.  Philochorus,  who  lived  at  the  end  of  the  fourth  and
beginning  of  the  third  century  B.C.,  mentioned  the  golden  statue  (quoted
by  Joannes  Malala,  Chronogr,  ii.  p.  45  ed.  Dindorf;  Frag,  hist,  GraeCy
ed.  Miiller,  i.  p.  387),  from  which  we  may  infer  that  it  was  made  some-
where between  346  B.c  (the  end  of  the  Sacred  War)  and  261  B.C.  (the
date  of  Philochorus's  death).  Beside  it,  according  to  Philochorus,  was
the  grave  of  Dionysus  with  this  inscription  :  "  Here  lies  Dionysus  dead,
the  son  of  Semele."  Cp.  Plutarch,  Isis  et  OsiriSy  35  ;  Tatian,  Or,  ad
GraecoSj  8.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  statue  should  have  survived  the
sack  of  the  temple  by  the  barbarous  Maedes  in  83  B.C  (see  above,  p.
331).  Perhaps  they  carried  it  off,  and  a  new  one  was  afterwards  set
up  in  its  place.  Delphic  coins  of  Imperial  date,  from  the  reign  of
Hadrian  onward,  exhibit  as  a  type  a  figure  of  Apollo  which  may  be
a  copy  of  the  golden  statue  in  the  inner  shrine.  Sometimes  the  statue
appears  by  itself,  sometimes  it  is  represented  standing  between  the
columns  of  the  facade  of  the  temple  ;  in  all  cases  the  type  seems  to  be
a  copy  of  one  and  the  same  original,  though  the  details  and  attributes
vary  somewhat  in  the  different  copies.  On  three  of  the  coins  the  god
is  portrayed  standing  naked,  his  left  elbow  resting  on  a  pillar,  his  right
hand  advanced.  On  another  coin,  of  the  reign  of  Hadrian,  Apollo
stands  naked,  his  left  hand  raised,  his  right  hand  lowered  and  grasping
a  branch  :  behind  him  is  a  tripod  on  a  base :  at  his  feet  is  a  river-god,
doubtless  the  Plistus,  the  stream  that  flows  in  its  deep  glen  far  below
Apollo's  temple.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  image  of  the  god  in
the  temple  held  a  lyre,  because  when  Sulla  sent  an  emissary  to  *  borrow '
some  of  the  sacred  treasures,  the  t wangling  of  a  lyre  was  reported  to
be  heard  in  the  inner  shrine  (Plutarch,  ^ulia^  12);  and,  again,  the
Athenians  dedicated  to  Apollo  a  golden  plectrum^  with  which  the  god
of  music  might  reasonably  be  supposed  to  play  on  his  golden  l)Te
(Plutarch,  De  Pythiae  oraculis,  16).  In  fact  a  coin  of  Hadrian  is  re-
ported to  represent  Apollo  standing  naked,  his  right  foot  supported  on
a  square  base,  and  holding  a  lyre  in  his  right  hand,  which  rests  on  his
knee,  while  in  his  raised  left  hand  he  holds  a  branch  of  laurel.  But
it  is  doubtful  whether  the  coin  has  been  accurately  described.  Sec
Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  on  Paus,  pp.  119-121,
with  pi.  X  xxii.-xxvi.,  Y  i.

In  or  rather  under  the  inmost  shrine  of  the  temple  was  the  *  place
of  the  oracle '  (/lavTctov  or  xpyjo-r-jpiov).     That  the  seat  of  the  oracle


CH.  XXIV  THE  ORACULAR  CHASM  353

was  below  the  level  of  the  temple  seems  proved  by  the  passages  in
which  the  priestess  is  spoken  of  as  '*  going  down  "  to  consult  the  oracle
(Plutarch,  De  Pythiae  oracuiis,  6,  22,  28  ;  /V/.,  De  defectu  oraculorum^
51  ;  Valerius  Maximus,  i.  8.  10;  cp.  Plutarch,  Timoleon^  8).  In  the
<  place  of  the  oracle '  there  was  a  deep  natural  cleft  or  fissure  in  the
ground,  from  which  issued  the  exhalations  that  were  believed  to  fill  the
priestess  with  the  spirit  of  prophecy.  In  giving  the  oracular  responses
she  sat  on  a  tripod  placed  immediately  over  the  mouth  of  the  Assure.
See  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Plutus^  39 ;  and  note  on  x.  5.  7.  This
oracular  chasm  was  the  adytum  proper  (Plutarch,  De  Pythiae  oraculis^
6).  We  have  already  seen  reason  to  believe  that  the  inner  shrine  which
the  Greeks  called  an  adytum  (aSvrov),  was  generally  if  not  always
subterranean  (vol.  3.  p.  15).  At  Delphi  it  would  seem  to  have  been
vaulted  over  with  masonry,  perhaps  in  the  shape  and  style  of  the  bee-
hive tombs ;  for  Stephanus  Byzantius  (5,v.  AcA.^i)  says  that  the
adytum  was  built  of  stone  by  Agamedes  and  Trophonius,  the  same
mythical  builders  to  whom  the  construction  of  the  beehive  tomb  at
Orchomenus  was  apparently  attributed.  See  Paus.  ix.  37.  5,  com-
pared with  ix.  38.  2.  How  this  subterranean  chamber  was  reached
from  the  temple,  we  do  not  know.  A  staircase  may  have  led  down  to
it ;  or  perhaps,  as  in  the  oracular  pit  of  Trophonius  at  Lebadea,  which
was  possibly  also  built  in  the  style  of  the  beehive  tombs,  the  only  mode
of  access  may  have  been  by  a  ladder  placed  when  it  was  required.  We
have  already  seen  (p.  336)  that  the  recent  French  excavations  have
failed  to  discover  any  trace  of  the  oracular  chasm.

See  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen,  i.  pp.  79  sqq,^  94  sqg,  ;  P.
Foucart,  Mimoire  sur  Us  rttines  et  Phistoire  de  DelpheSy  p.  73  sqq^  ;  J.  H.
Middleton,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  9  (1888),  p.  293  sqq.  As  to  the  Delphic
tripod,  see  K.  O.  MUller,  *  De  tripode  E)elphico,*  Kunstarcndologische  Werke,  I.
pp.  46-59;  Fr.  Wieseler,  'Ueber  den  delphischen  Dreifuss,'  Abhandlungen  der
k,  GtselL  d,  IVissen.  zu  Gottingen^  15  (1870),  pp.  221-318.

24.  6.  the  grave  of  Neoptolemus  etc.  Cp.  Strabo,  ix.  p.  421.
According  to  a  scholiast  on  Pindar  (Nem.  vii.  62),  Neoptolemus  was  at
first  buned  under  the  threshold  of  the  temple,  but  Menelaus  afterwards
removed  his  remains  to  another  part  of  the  sacred  precinct.  If  the
account  of  the  romance  writer  Heliodorus  can  be  trusted,  the  Aenianes
of  Thessaly  sent  a  grand  procession  and  costly  sacrifices  to  Delphi
every  fourth  year  in  honour  of  Neoptolemus.  The  festival  took  place
at  the  same  time  as  the  Pythian  games.  Heliodorus  has  described
the  procession  and  sacrifices.  The  victims  included  a  hundred  black
oxen  and  a  multitude  of  lambs  and  goats.  Two  bands  of  Thessalian
maidens  marched  in  the  procession  carrying  baskets  of  flowers,  fruits,
cakes,  and  incense ;  one  of  the  bands  sang,  while  the  other  danced  to
their  singing.  A  troop  of  Thessalian  cavalry,  in  showy  uniforms,
mounted  on  gallant  steeds  splendidly  caparisoned,  brought  up  the  rear.
Thrice  the  procession  wound  round  the  tomb.  Then  the  victims  were
slaughtered  and  the  customary  parts  laid  on  a  huge  altar  which  was
heaped  with  faggots.  Libations  followed,  and  then  fire  was  applied  to
the  altar.     The  procession  thereafter  broke  up,  and  the  Thessalians

VOT*.  V  2  A


354  GREASED  STONES  bk.  x.  phocis

betook  themselves  to  feasting  and  revelry.  See  Heliodonis,  ii.  34-
iii.  6.  Cp.  A.  Mommsen,  Delphika^  p.  225  sqq.  The  tomb  of  Neop-
tolemus  must  have  stood  somewhat  to  the  north  of  the  temple,  for
PausaniaSy  quitting  the  temple  by  the  eastern  door,  turned  to  the  left  to
go  to  the  tomb.  In  this  position,  higher  up  the  hill  than  the  temple,
and  a  little  to  the  east  of  north,  H.  N.  Ulrichs  in  1838  found  the
remains  of  an  ancient  wall,  adorned  with  mouldings.  This  he  supposed
to  have  formed  part  of  the  wall  which  enclosed  the  tomb  of  Neoptolemos.
It  seems  to  have  disappeared  since  Ulrichs's  time.  See  H.  N.  Ulrichs,
Reisen  und  Forsckungen^  i.  pp.  39,  104  ;  P.  Foucart,  M^nwire^  P-  98  sq, ;
H.  Pomtow,  Beiirdge  zur  Topographie  von  Delphi^  p.  40.

24.  6.  On  this  stone  they  pour  oil  every  day  etc  In  the
Characters  of  Theophrastus,  the  Superstitious  Man  pours  oil  on  the
smooth  stones  at  the  cross-roads,  and  goes  down  on  his  knees  and
worships  them.  Lucian  (Alexander^  30)  mentions  a  Roman  named
Rutillianus  who,  whenever  he  saw  an  anointed  or  crowned  stone,  used
to  fall  on  his  knees  before  it,  worship  it,  and  remain  standing  beside  it
in  prayer  for  a  long  time.  "  If  ever,"  says  Amobius  {adversus  NcUianeSy
i.  39)  "  I  spied  an  anointed  stone,  greasy  with  oil,  I  used  to  adore  it  as
if  there  were  some  indwelling  virtue  in  it."  The  custom  of  anointing
sacred  stones  is  referred  to  by  Apuleius  (Florida^  i.  i)  and  Minucius
Felix  {Ociavius^  3).  It  has  prevailed  in  many  parts  of  the  world.  On
the  spot  where  Jacob  had  dreamed  his  dream,  he  set  up  a  stone,
poured  oil  on  it,  and  called  the  place  Bethel  or  *the  house  of  God'
(Genesis,  i.  39).  The  Wdrdlis,  a  tribe  who  inhabit  the  jungles  of
Northern  Konkan,  in  the  Bombay  Presidency,  worship  Wdghia,  the  lord
of  tigers,  in  the  form  of  a  shapeless  stone  smeared  with  red  lead  and
clarified  butter.  They  give  him  chickens  and  goats,  break  cocoa-nuts
on  his  head,  and  pour  oil  on  him ;  and  he  preserves  them  from  tigers,
gives  them  good  crops,  and  keeps  disease  from  them  {Journal  of  the
Royal  Asiatic  Society  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland^  7  (1843),  p.  20).
At  Poona  there  is  a  sacred  stone  which  is  coloured  red  and  oiled
(Asiatic  Researches,  7.  p.  394  sg,  8vo  ed.).  In  the  Key  Islands,  East
Indies,  every  householder  keeps  a  black  stone  at  the  head  of  his  sleep-
ing-place ;  and  when  he  goes  out  to  war  or  on  a  voyage  or  on  business,
he  anoints  the  stone  with  oil  to  secure  success  (J.  G.  F.  Riedel,  De
sluik'  en  kroesharige  Rassen  ttisschen  Selebes  en  Papua,  p.  223).  In
Madagascar  many  stones  are  anointed  with  fat  or  oil  by  their  worshippers,
who  sometimes  sprinkle  them  with  the  blood  of  a  victim.  Women  in
particular  who  desire  to  have  children  anoint  certain  stones,  promising
that  if  their  prayers  are  answered  they  will  come  back  and  anoint  the
stone  again  (J.  Sibree,  The  Great  African  Island,  p.  305  ;  The  Antana-
narivo Annual  and  Madagascar  Magazine,  No.  2.  p.  164;  id..  No.  4.
p.  404  sq,\  At  a  certain  spot  which  is  particularly  difficult  for  cattle  in
a  mountain-pass  in  East  Africa,  every  man  of  the  Wakamba  tribe  stops
and  anoints  a  particular  rock  with  butter  or  fat  {Zeitschrift  fiir  Ethno-
logie,  10(1878),  p.  384).

The  sacred  stone  at  Delphi  was  not  only  anointed  but  also  wTapt  in
wool  at  festivals.    The  original  intention  of  the  wrapping  was  probably  to


CH.  XXIV  THE  SPRING  CASSOTIS  355

keep  the  divine  stone  warm.  Similarly  in  one  of  the  Samoan  islands  a
smooth  stone,  regarded  as  the  abode  of  a  god  named  Turia,  was  covered
with  branches  to  keep  it  warm,  and  these  branches  were  carefully
renewed  whenever  special  prayers  were  offered  to  the  stone  (G.  Turner,
Samooj  p.  62).  So  in  Bowditch  Island,  South  Pacific,  the  chief  god
was  embodied  in  a  stone  which  was  carefully  wrapt  in  fine  mats ;  once
a  year  the  decayed  mats  were  stript  off  and  thrown  away.  In  sickness,
offerings  of  fine  mats  were  taken  and  rolled  round  the  stone,  till  it
became  busked  up  to  a  prodigious  size  (Turner,  op.  ciL  p.  268).

Perhaps  the  sacred  stone  at  Delphi  may  have  been  meteoric.
Among  the  ancient  Greek  objects  found  in  the  south  of  Russia  and  now
preserved  at  St.  Petersburg  there  is  a  rough,  uncut,  unpolished  stone
set  in  a  gold  ring ;  the  stone  is  said  by  an  expert  to  have  all  the  appear-
ance of  being  meteoric,  and  was  probably  supposed  to  possess  magic
properties.  See  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1876,  p.  iii.
With  regard  to  superstitions  as  to  *  thunder-stones,'  see  J.  Grinmi,
DeutscJie  Mythologie^^  i.  p.  149;  E.  T.  Dalton,  Ethnology  of  Bengal^
p.  115.     As  to  the  worship  of  stones,  see  note  on  vii.  22.  4.

24.  6.  this  stone  was  given  to  Oronns  instead  of  the  child  etc.
Cp.  viii.  8.  2;  viii.  36.  3;  ix.  2.  7  note;  ix.  41.  6;  Hesiod,  Theog.
468  sqq,

24.  7.  the  spring  Oassotis.  A  little  higher  up  the  hill  than  the
temple,  and  a  few  feet  to  the  east  of  the  theatre,  a  rivulet  of  clear  cool
water  issues  from  a  small  underground  channel  lined  with  masonry.  It
flows  undiminished  all  through  the  summer.  This  is  doubtless  Cassotis.
The  spot  does  not  now,  it  is  true,  answer  to  Pausanias's  description.
But  immediately  above  it  there  are  remains  of  an  ancient  wall,  and
immediately  above  that  again  a  rock  projects  from  the  soil.  Mr.
Homolle  was  good  enough  to  communicate  to  me  his  conjecture  that
the  spring  originally  issued  from  under  the  rock,  behind  the  wall,  and
that  its  course  has  been  changed  by  one  of  the  earthquakes  which  are
so  common  at  Delphi.  Against  this,  however,  it  has  to  be  said  that
excavations  made  above  the  fountain  in  i860  brought  to  light  an
ancient  conduit,  forming  perhaps  a  part  of  the  channel  from  which  the
water  issues.  This  tends  to  show  that  the  water  does  not  rise  on  the
spot  but  is  brought  to  it  from  higher  up  the  hill.  Possibly  it  comes
from  the  spring  now  called  Kema,  a  copious  source  which  gushes  from
the  foot  of  a  high  overhanging  rock  above  the  sacred  precinct,  a  little
to  the  east  of  the  stadium.  Dodwell  and  Leake  identified  this  upper
spring  with  Cassotis,  but  in  this  they  seem  to  have  erred,  for  Cassotis
was  within,  whereas  Kema  is  without,  the  sacred  precinct.  Kerna  may
be,  as  H.  N.  Ulrichs  thought,  the  fountain  Delphusa  mentioned  by
Stephanus  Byzantius  {s,v.  AcAc^i).  That  Kema  was  outside  of  the
sanctuary  is  proved  by  an  ancient  grave  hewn  in  the  rock  fh)m  which
the  water  issues ;  for  we  may  be  sure  that  no  burial  was  permitted
within  the  sacred  precinct.  The  tomb  of  the  hero  Neoptolemus,  of
course,  stood  on  a  different  footing.  Before  the  removal  of  the  village
of  Kastri  from  its  old  site  in  1892,  a  church  of  St.  Nicholas  used  to
stand  in  front  of  the  fountain  Cassotis,  which  watered  the  small  garden


356  PAINTINGS  OF  POLYGNOTUS  BK.  x.  phocis

attached  to  the  church.  Down  to  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century
a  solitary  laurel — the  only  one  left  in  the  valley  of  Delphi — grew  in
the  garden;  it  was  blighted  in  the  winter  of  1852-53.  Perhaps  the
garden  occupied  part  of  the  site  of  Apollo's  grove,  which  niay  have
extended  down  the  hill  to  the  temple.  Cp.  Pindar,  Nem.  vii.  65  ;
Euripides,  /<?«,  76  and  116;  Lucan,  Pharsalia^  v.  156.  No  other
ancient  writer  besides  Pausanias  mentions  Cassotis  by  name  ;  but  the
author  of  the  Homeric  Hymn  to  Apollo  {v,  300  sq.)  perhaps  refers  to
it  as  "  the  fair-flowing  fountain  "  beside  which  Apollo  slew  the  dragon.
However  there  are  grounds  for  thinking  that  the  fountain  beside  which
Apollo  slew  the  dragon  was  lower  down  the  hill,  below  the  temple  of
Apollo  (see  above,  pp.  286,  287).

See  Dodwell,  Tour,  i.  p.  174 ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece,  2.  p.  555  ;  Mure,
foumal,  I.  p.  195  ;  Thiersch,  *  Ueber  die  Topographie  von  "D^Vahi,*  Abheutdlungen
d,  philos, philolog.  Classed,  k'on.  bayer.  Akad.  d,  Wissen,  (Munich),  3  (1840),  p.  18  ;
£.  Curtius,  Anecdota  Delphica,  p.  3  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungm,  1,
pp.  39, 105  sqq.,  109  ;  W.  Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.  610 ;  P.  Foucart,  M^ntoire  sur
les  mines  et  rhisioire  de  Delphes,  p.  10 1  sq, ;  Guide-Joanne,  2.  p.  41 ;  Baedeker,'
p.  160  sq, ;  H.  Pomtow,  Beitrdge  zur  Topographie  von  Delphi,  p.  41  sq,

24.  7.  the  water inspires  the  women in  the  shrine  of

the  god.  The  water  of  the  Cassotis  seems  to  have  been  conducted  by
a  subterranean  channel  into  the  oracular  chasm  below  the  temple,  where
the  prophetess  drank  of  it  before  she  uttered  the  oracles.  In  the  course
of  the  French  excavations  an  aqueduct  or  conduit  has  been  found
extending  under  the  foundations  of  the  temple  {Bulletin  de  Corresp,
helUnique^  17  (1893),  p.  614).  Lucian  tells  us  that  at  all  the  oracular
seats  of  Apollo  his  priestess  drank  of  the  sacred  stream  and  chewed
the  laurel  before  she  prophesied  {Bis  accusatus^  i).     Cp.  ix.  2.  i  note.

25.  I.  a  building  with  paintings  by  Polygnotns.  Plutarch  has
laid  the  scene  of  one  of  his  dialogues  (De  defectu  oraculorum)  in  this
building.  He  says  (ch.  6)  :  "  Advancing  from  the  temple  we  reached
the  doors  of  the  Cnidian  club-house.  So  we  entered  and  saw  the
friends  of  whom  we  were  in  search  seated  and  awaiting  us."  Pliny
mentions  the  paintings  of  Polygnotus  at  Delphi,  but  seems  to  suppose
that  they  were  in  a  temple  {Nat,  hist.  xxxv.  59).  Of  the  two  series  of
paintings  in  the  club-house,  the  one  which  represented  Troy  after  its
capture  seems  to  have  been  especially  famous :  it  is  mentioned  by
Philostratus  ( Vit,  Apollon,  vi.  11.  64)  and  by  a  scholiast  on  Plato
(Gorgias,  p.  448  b).  Lucian  refers  to  the  graceful  eyebrows  and  rosy
cheeks  of  Cassandra  in  this  picture  {Imagines,  7).  In  the  time  of
Pausanias  the  pictures  were  already  between  four  and  five  hundred  years
old,  and  they  seem  to  have  survived  for  at  least  two  centuries  more,
for  they  are  mentioned  with  admiration  by  the  rhetorician  Themistius,
who  lived  in  the  fourth  century  of  our  era  {Or,  xxxiv.  11).

The  scanty  remains  of  the  club-house  {Lesche)  which  contained  these
famous  paintings  were  excavated  by  the  French  in  recent  years.
Although  the  building  was  completely  excavated  in  1895,  when  I
visited  it  under  Mr.  Homolle's  guidance,  no  account  of  it,  so  far  as
I  know,  has  up  to  the  present  time  (November  1897)  been  published  by


I.  XXV  PAINTINGS  OF  POLYGNOTUS  357

e  French  archaeologists.     Little  more  than  a  bare  mention  of  the

scovery   has    appeared  in   the    learned   journals    (Athenaeum^    7th

•cember  1895,  p.  800;  Archdologisclur  Anseiger^  1896,  p.  73).     To

^  great  regret,  therefore,  I  can  offer  the  reader  only  a  few  jottings  on

s  interesting  monument.     They  are  taken  partly  from  my  own  journal,

rtly  from  the  notes  furnished  to  me  by  Mr.  Cecil  Smith.

TheLesche  is  situated,  in  accordance  with  the  description  of  Pausanias,

her  up  the  hill  than  the  spring  Cassotis,  a  few  steps  to  the  east  of  the

atre.     It  was  built  on  a  terrace,  which  is  supported  on  the  south  by

igh  retaining- wall.     A  marble  slab  in  this  wall  bears  an  inscription :

KNIAmN0AAM02

TOANAAAMALA.

AnOAAfiNI

le  Cnidian  people  (dedicated)  the  supporting-wall  to  Apollo."  From
style  of  the  letters  the  inscription  seems  to  date  from  the  third
ury  B.C.  On  the  terrace  supported  by  this  wall  stood  the  Lesche,  a
wruiiding  of  no  great  size,  with  its  long  axis  lying  east  and  west.  At  the
time  of  my  last  visit  to  Delphi  (October  1895)  Mr.  Homolle  explained
to  me  that  he  believed  the  Lesche  to  have  been  a  quadrangular  and
oblong  building  with  a  door  in  each  of  the  two  short  sides.  The
paintings,  in  his  opinion,  probably  occupied  the  two  short  walls  as  well
as  the  long  north  and  south  walls.  Now,  however,  as  I  learn  from  Mr.
Cecil  Smith,  the  building  is  believed  to  have  been  a  colonnade  open  on
three  sides,  with  columns  in  front  and  the  paintings  of  Polygnotus
occupying  only  the  long  back  wall.  Considerable  remains  of  this  back
wall  exist ;  and  in  my  journal  I  find  it  noted  that  a  small  piece  of  the
south  wall  and,  to  the  best  of  my  recollection  (I  was  not  allowed  to
make  notes  on  the  spot),  a  piece  of  the  east  wall  also  are  preserved.  But
if  the  building  was  a  colonnade  open  on  three  sides,  it  can  hardly  have
had  walls  on  the  south  and  east.  Towards  the  eastern  end  of  the
building,  there  are  four  foundations  of  columns  placed  so  as  to  form  a
square  (: :).  This  perhaps  points  to  the  existence  of  a  double  row  of
columns  running  along  the  whole  length  of  the  building.  On  the  face
of  the  back  wall,  close  to  the  ground,  are  some  remains  of  stucco
painted  with  a  bright  blue  pigment.  This  is  all  that  remains  of  the
paintings  of  Polygnotus.  Behind  the  wall  and  separated  from  it  by  a
channel  about  1 8  inches  wide  rises  a  retaining-wall  which  supported  an
upper  terrace.  The  interval  between  the  back-wall  of  the  Lesche  and
the  terrace-wall  behind  it  was  no  doubt  left  on  purpose  to  prevent  the
damp  from  percolating  through  and  injuring  the  pictures.  Apparently
the  pavement  of  the  Lesche  was,  like  the  lower  part  of  the  back  wall,
coloured  blue.

For  our  knowledge  of  the  paintings  we  are  indebted  to  the  minute
account  of  them  given  by  Pausanias  (x.  25-31).  So  full  and  precise  is
his  description  that  not  a  few  attempts  have  been  made  in  modem  times  to
reconstruct  the  pictures  from  it.  The  first  of  these  attempts  was  made
by  the  Comte  de  Caylus  in  1757,  and  the  latest  by  Dr.  Paul  Weizsacker


358  PAINTINGS  OF  POLYGNOTUS  bk.  x.  phocis

in  1895.  Amongst  the  others  may  be  mentioned  those  by  the  brothers
Riepenhausen  in  1805  and  again  in  1826,  of  Mr.  W.  Watkiss  Lloyd
in  1851,  of  Prof.  O.  Benndorf  in  1887,  and  of  Prof.  C.  Robert  in
1892  and  1893,  who  has  accompanied  his  reconstructions  with  elaborate
commentaries.  Of  these  various  restorations  the  most  artistically
beautiful  are  those  which  were  drawn  by  Mr.  Hermann  Schenck  for
Prof.  Robert  They  are  here  reproduced  (pi.  vi.  vii.).  Some  exceptions
may  be  taken  to  them  in  detail,  but  on  the  whole  they  probably  give  a
fairly  correct  idea  of  the  composition  and  general  effect  of  the  pictures.

The  arrangement  of  some  of  the  figures  above  others,  for  which
we  have  the  authority  of  Pausanias,  is  probably  to  be  explained,  with
Lessing  (Laokoon^  xix.)  and  Messrs.  Weizsacker  and  Schreiber,  simply
by  the  artist's  ignorance  of  the  laws  of  perspective  rather  than,  with  Prof.
Robert,  by  supposing  the  figures  to  be  placed  one  above  the  other  on
sloping  ground.  Some  have  held  that  the  figures  were  disposed  in
regular  horizontal  bands,  one  above  the  other,  but  a  better  artistic  effect
is  certainly  produced  by  grouping  them  freely  at  various  levels,  as  both
Prof.  Robert  and  Dr.  Weizsacker  have  done.  This  arrangement  is
supported  by  the  analogy  of  many  ancient  vase-paintings,  which  taken
along  with  Pausanias's  description  supply  the  most  trustworthy  materials
for  a  reconstruction  of  the  paintings  in  the  Lesche.  Probably  many
ancient  vase-painters  were  influenced  directly  or  indirectly  by  the
pictures  of  Polygnotus,  and  it  is  quite  possible  that  in  some  extant  vase-
paintings  we  possess  imitations,  more  or  less  free,  of  certain  masterpieces
of  the  great  painter.  We  have  seen  indubitable  evidence  that  a  famous
work  of  art  like  the  Chest  of  Cypselus  at  Olympia  sometimes  furnished
subjects  to  the  vase-painter  (vol.  4.  pp.  608  sqq.^  613)  ;  and  if  the  Chest
of  Cypselus,  why  not  the  still  more  celebrated  works  of  Polygnotus  ?

Much  difference  of  opinion  has  prevailed  as  to  the  shape  of  the
Lesche  and  the  disposition  of  the  paintings  on  its  walls.  From
Pausanias  we  learn  that  the  pictures  fell  into  two  great  sets,  one  represent-
^ing  Troy  after  its  capture,  the  other  Ulysses  in  hell :  the  first  was  on  the
spectator's  right  as  he  entered  the  building,  the  second  was  on  his  left
(Paus.  x.  25.  2,  X.  28.  i).  Hence  it  may  fairly  be  inferred  either  that
the  two  sets  of  pictures  were  on  opposite  walls  of  a  quadrangular
building,  or  that  they  were  on  the  same  wall  but  divided  from  each
other  by  a  doorway.  In  the  former  case  the  paintings  probably  occupied
the  two  long  sides  of  the  building,  while  the  doorway  was  in  one  of  the
two  short  sides.  In  the  latter  case  the  building  was  probably  in  the
form  of  a  colonnade  with  one  or  three  sides  open  and  the  door^'ay  in
the  middle  of  the  back  wall.  On  the  whole,  archaeologists  who  have
discussed  the  problem  have  declared  themselves,  with  some  minor
differences  of  opinion  as  to  details,  in  favour  of  one  or  other  of  these
two  solutions.  The  Riepenhausens,  Letronne,  Otto  Jahn,  Ch.  Lenormant,
and  Prof.  C.  Robert  decided  for  the  quadrangular  building  with  the
pictures  on  the  opposite  walls :  Ruhl,  Schubart,  Prof.  Michaelis,  Mr.
P.  Girard,  Dr.  Weizsacker,  and  Dr.  Th.  Schreiber  decided  for  the
colonnade  with  both  pictures  on  the  back  wall.  The  recent  excavation
of  the  ruined  Lesche  would  seem  to  show  that  the  latter  were  right.     But


CH.  XXV  PAINTINGS  OF  POLYGNOTUS  359

pending  an  exact  and  authoritative  description  of  the  remains  that  have
been  found  it  might  still  be  premature  to  award  judgment  in  this  long
debate.  We  have  seen  that  as  late  as  1895,  ^^^^^  ^^  excavation  of  the
Lesche,  Mr.  HomoUe  was  inclined  to  favour  the  quadrangular  building.

When  we  learn  the  exact  shape  and  dimensions  of  the  Lesche,  we
shall  be  able  by  comparing  them  with  Pausanias's  description  to  estimate
approximately  the  scale  of  the  figures  in  the  paintings  and  so  to  decide
the  question,  which  has  lately  been  discussed  by  Prof.  Robert  and  Dr.
Schone,  whether  they  were  life-size  or  not.  That  they  were  life-size  is
denied  by  Dr.  Schone  and  affirmed  by  Prof.  Robert  {Die  Marathon-
schlacht  in  der  Poikile^  p.  82  sqq,\  who  bases  his  opinion  chiefly  on  an
ambiguous  passage  of  Aelian  ( Var,  hist.  iv.  3)  which  may  perhaps  be
translated  thus  :  **  Polygnotus  painted  large  figures  and  earned  his  prizes
by  life-size  pictures  "  (ey/oa<^  rot  fjL€ydka  koi  Iv  rots  rcActois  ct/jyafcro  ra
a^A^).  This  translation  of  the  adjective  rcAcM)^  Prof.  Robert  defends
by  comparing  the  expression  cikiov  ypairn]  tcAcmi  which  occurs  in  two
inscriptions  (C.  /.  G,  Nos.  3068,  3085)  and  the  expression  irtva^  rcXcio^
y€y pafifjL€vos  which  occurs  in  the  Lives  of  the  Ten  Orators  (p.  843  e)
attributed  to  Plutarch.  However  this  verbal  question  may  be  settled,
the  scale  of  the  pictures  in  the  Lesche  will  be  determined  within  certain
limits  as  soon  as  the  measurements  of  the  building  are  made  public.
Speaking  from  impression  (I  was  not  allowed  to  take  measurements)  I
should  say  that  the  building  is  too  small  to  allow  us  to  suppose  that  the
figures  were  life-size.^

The  further  question  discussed  by  Prof.  Robert  and  Dr.  Schone
whether  Polygnotus  painted  directly  on  a  marble  wall  or  on  stucco  has
been  definitely  decided  in  favour  of  Dr.  Schone  and  stucco  by  the
remains  of  blue-painted  stucco  on  the  wall  of  the  Lesche.  It  is  due  to
Pro£  Robert  to  add  that  in  deference  to  the  objections  urged  by  his
adversary  he  afterwards  inclined  with  some  hesitation  to  discard  marble
for  stucco  (/?/>  Marathonschlacht  in  der  Poikile^  p.  104).

With  regard  to  the  date  of  the  paintings  it  has  been  commonly
supposed  that  they  must  have  been  executed  before  467  B.C.,  since  the
couplet  attached  to  the  pictures  (Paus.  x.  27.  4  note)  is  ascribed  to
Simonides,  who  died  in  that  year.  This  argument  would  have  to  be
abandoned  if  with  Prof.  Robert  and  Prof.  Hauvette  {De  l^ authenticity
des  ^pigrammes  de  Simonide  (Paris,  1896),  p.  138)  we  believed  the
verses  not  to  be  by  Simonides.  But  the  reasons  for  this  scepticism
seem  wholly  insufficient  to  counterweigh  the  express  testimony  not  only
of  Pausanias  but  of  the  compiler  of  the  Palatine  Anthology  (ix.  700)
as  to  the  authorship  of  the  epigram.  It  seems  safer  therefore  to
acquiesce  in  that  testimony  and  to  believe  accordingly  that  one  or  both
the  pictures  in  the  Lesche  were  painted  in  the  lifetime  of  Simonides.
Prof.  Robert  believes  that  a  surer  clue  to  the  date  of  the  paintings  is

^  Since  writing  as  above  I  have  obtained,  through  Mr.  Homolle's  courtesy,  a  copy
of  part  of  the  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique  for  1896  in  which  (pp.  633-639)  the
remains  of  the  Lesche  are  described  and  discussed.  The  description  reached  me
too  late  to  allow  me  to  modify  the  text  in  accordance  with  it,  the  volume  having  been
already  set  up  in  pages.     But  see  below,  p.  635  sq.


36o  PAINTINGS  OF  POLYGNOTUS  bk.  x.  phocis

furnished  by  observing  that  of  the  four  Theban  ladies  whom,  according
to  Homer  {fid,  xi.  260-280),  Ulysses  saw  in  hell,  only  one  was  depicted
in  the  lower  world  by  Polygnotus  (x.  29.  7).  The  omission  of  the
other  three  was  intended,  Prof.  Robert  thinks,  as  a  deliberate  slight  to
the  Thebans,  and  the  picture  must  accordingly  have  been  painted
between  458  and  447  B.C.,  when  the  Phocians,  the  bitter  enemies  of
Thebes,  were  in  possession  of  Delphi.  Without  going  so  far  as  to
reverse  the  argument  and  affirm  that  the  omission  of  the  ladies  from  the
picture  of  hell  may  have  been  meant  as  a  delicate  compliment  to
Thebes,  I  find  Prof.  Robert's  reasoning  in  the  highest  degree  improbable.
If  three  of  the  four  women  were  left  out  for  the  reason  supposed,  why
was  the  fourth  inserted  ?  If  the  painter  put  her  in  before  the  Phocians
had  time  to  stop  him,  surely  it  would  have  been  easy  for  them  to  take
her  out  again  with  the  help  of  a  brush  and  a  little  paint  or  whitewash.
But  to  discuss  such  possibilities  is  ftitile.


See  F.  S.  C.  Koenig,  De  Patisaniae  fide  et  auctoritaU  (Berlin,  1832),  p.  46


gnotischen  Gemalde  in  dcr  Leschezu  Delphi,-  Philolcg,  und  histor,  Abhandlungen
(L  km,  Akad,  d,  Wissm,  zu  Berlin^  1847,  PP«  81-151  ;  J.  Overbeck,  'Antepi-


ClassiccU  Antiquities^  i  (i 851),  pp.  44-77,  103- 1 30;  ib,  *  On  the  plan  and  dis-
position of  the  Greek  Lesche,'  by  the  Editor,  pp.  78-86 ;  L.  Ruhl  und  J.  H.  C.
Schubart,  '  Glossen  zur  Beschreibung  des  Polygnotischen  Gemaldes  in  der  Lesche
zu  Delphi  bei  Pausanias,'  Zeitschrift  fiir  die  Alterthumswissenschaft,  13  (1855),
Nos.  49-52;  ib.  14  (1856),  Nos.  38-42;  C.  Bursian,  in  Fleckeisen  s  Jahrbucker^  2
(1856),  p.  517  ^qq*  ;  Ch.  Lenormant,  Af^moire  sur  les  peintures  que  Polygnote  azfait
execut/es  dans  la  Lesche  de  Delphes  (Bruxelles,  1 864)  ;  H.  BlUmnef,  *  Die  Poly-
gnotischen Gemalde  in  der  Lesche  zu  Delphi,'  Rheinisches  Museum^  N.F.  26
(187 1 ),  pp.  354-369  ;  J.  H.  C.  Schubart,  in  FleckeisefCs  Jahrbiicher,  18  (1872),
pp.  173-178;  W.  Gebhardt,  *  Die  polygnotischen  Leschebilder,'  Fleckeiseti' s
JahrbUcher^  19  (1873),  PP'  815-820;  Miss  J.  E.  Harrison,  Myths  of  the  Odyssey ^
pp.  1 1 8- 1 34;  Wiener  Vorlegebliiiter  fiir  KunstHbungen^  1888  (Wien,  1889),
Tafeln  x.,  xi.,  xii.  ;  A.  S.  Murray,  Handbook  of  Greek  Archaeology^  p.  361  sqq,  ;
P.  Girard,  La  peinture  antique,  pp.  1 57- 165  ;  C.  Robert,  Die  Nekyia  des  Polygtwt,
Hallisches  Winckelmannsprogramm  (Halle  a/S,  1892);  fV/.,  Die  Iliupersis  des
Polygnot^  Hallisches  Winckelmannsprogramm  (Halle  a/S,  1893) ;  id.,  Lh'e
Marathonschlcuht  in  der  Poikile  und  IVeitcres  fiber  Polygnot^  Hallisches  Winckel-
mannsprogramm (Halle  a/S,  1895)  J  ^-  ^chone,  *  Zu  Polygnots  delphischen
Bildem,'/a^r^t\4  d.  arch.  Inst.  8  (1893),  pp.  187-217;  Th.  Schreiber,  'Die
Nekyia  des  Polygnot  in  Delphi,'  Festschrift  fiir  J.  Ozferbeck  (Leipzig,  1893),
pp.  184-206;  id.,  *Die  Wandbilder  des  Polygnot  in  der  Halle  der  Knidier  zu
Delphi,'  Abhandlungen  der  philolog,  histor.  Classe  der  kimig.  sdchs.  Gesell.  der
IVissenschaften,  17  (1897),  No.  6,  pp.  1-178;  P.  Weizsacker,  Polygnofs  Gemalde
in  der  Lesche  der  Knidier  in  Delphi  (Stuttgart,  1895).

The  restorations  of  the  pictures  by  the  Comte  de  Caylus,  W.  K.  F.  Siebelis,
the  Riepenhausens,  F.  G.  Welcker,  W.  Watkiss  Lloyd,  and  W.  Gebhardt  are
republished  in  a  convenient  form  in  the  Wiener  Vorlegebldtter  fiir  Kunstiibungen,
1888  (cited  above),  which  also  contains  a  reconstruction  drawn  by  L.  Michalek
for  Prof.  O.  Benndorf.

25.  I.  the  passage  where  Melantho    rails  at  Ulysses.      See
Homer,  Od.  xviii.  329  sq.


5?


~3S


I


I


CH.  XXV  PAINTINGS  OF  POLYGNOTUS  361

25.  2.  Hium  after  its  captnre.  As  to  representations  of  the  sack
of  Troy  in  existing  works  of  ancient  art,  especially  vase-paintings,  see
H.  Heydemann,  Iliupersis  auf  einer  TrinkschcUe  des  Brygos  (Berlin,
1866);  C.  Robert,  Bild  und  ZJedy  p.  59  sqq,;  A.  Schneider,  Der
troische  Sagenkreis  in  der  dltesten  griechischen  Kunsty  p.  168  sqq, ;
W.  Klein,  Euphronios^  P*  '59  ^QQ-  \  Baumeister's /?^«^»f<iV^r,  s.v,  *  Iliu-
persis.' Among  the  most  notable  of  such  representations  is  a  frag-
mentary marble  relief,  known  as  the  Tabula  Iliaca,  which  is  preserved  in
the  Capitoline  Museum  at  Rome.  It  seems  to  date  from  about  the  first
century  A.D.,  and  represents  a  great  variety  of  scenes  from  the  Trojan
legends.  It  professes  to  be  based  on  the  Iliad  of  Homer,  the  S<ick  of
Ilium  of  Stesichorus,  the  Aethiopis  of  Arctinus,  and  the  Little  Iliad  of
Lesches.  From  fragments  of  similar  reliefs  which  have  been  discovered
we  may  infer  that  tablets  of  this  sort,  illustrating  the  legends  of  the
siege  of  Troy,  were  manufactured  wholesale,  probably  for  use  in  schools.
These  reliefs  have  been  published  with  an  elaborate  commentary  by
Otto  Jahn  and  Ad.  Michaelis.  See  their  work  Griechische  Bilder-
chroniken  (Bonn,  1873);  Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  p.  716  sqq,\  A.
Briining,  *  Uber  die  bildlichen  Vorlagen  der  ilischen  Tafeln,*  Jahrbuch
d.  archdolog,  InstitutSy  9  (1894),  pp.  136-165.  With  regard  to  the
poetical  sources  from  which  Polygnotus  may  be  supposed  to  have  drawn
some  at  least  of  the  scenes  in  his  great  tableau,  Mr.  F.  Noack  has
argued  at  length  that  the  painter  borrowed  everything  except  some
names  from  the  epic  known  as  the  Ldttle  Iliad^  particularly  from  that
part  of  it  which  Pausanias  cites  (x.  25.  5  note)  under  the  title  of  The
Sack  ef  Ilium  and  attributes  to  Lesches.  See  F.  Noack,  Iliupersis :
de  Euripidis  et  Polygnoti  quae  ad  Trcjae  excidium  spectant  fabulis
(Gissae,  1890),  pp.  45-74.  Prof.  C.  Robert,  while  he  admits  that
Polygnotus  drew  on  this  poem,  holds  that  the  painter's  chief  poetical
authority  was  the  epic  poem  of  the  same  title  {The  Sack  of  Ilium)
which  Proclus  ascribes  to  Arctinus  {Epicorum  Graecorum  fragmenta^
ed.  Kinkel,  p.  49).  See  C.  Robert,  Die  Iliupersis  des  Polygnot^
pp.  74-80.

25.  2.  Homer  represents  Nestor saying that  Fhrontis

etc.     See  Od.  iii.  276  sqq,

25.  3.  Echoeax.  His  name  means  'holding  the  tiller.'  Hence
Prof.  C.  Robert  conjectures  that  the  name  really  applied  to  a  figure
seated  at  the  helm  in  the  ship,  and  not  to  the  man  going  down  the
gangway  {Die  Iliupersis  des  Polygnoty  p.  56  sq,).

25.  3.  Menelaus'  hnt.  The  Greek  word  here  translated  <  hut '
(o-KT/ioJ)  may  also  mean  *  tent' ;  and  though  the  dwellings  of  the  Homeric
warriors  were  perhaps  huts  rather  than  tents,  Polygnotus  may  have  pre-
ferred to  represent  them,  in  accordance  with  the  usage  of  his  own  time,
as  tents.  On  red-figured  vases  and  in  Pompeian  paintings  the  abodes
of  the  Homeric  heroes  in  the  field  are  regularly  represented  as  pavilions
supported   on    round   poles   (C.    Robert,  Die  Iliupersis  des  Polygnot^

P-  39).

25.  3.  the  only  figure  whose  name  Polygnotus  has  taken  from
the  Odyssey.     The  name  of  Amphialus  also  occurs   in  the  Odyssey


362  PAINTINGS  OF  POLYGNOTUS  bk.  x.  phocis

(viii.  114,  128),  though  not  as  the  name  of  one  of  Menelaus's
companions.

25.  4.  Briseifl Diomeda Iphis.       These   were   female

slaves  of  Achilles  (Homer,  //.  i.  184,  ix.  664  sqq,).  After  his  death
they  may  have  passed  into  the  possession  of  his  son  Neoptolemus.  Cp.
C.  Robert,  Die  Iliupersis  des  Polygnot^  P-  57'

25.  4.  Helen  herself  is  seated  etc.  Prof.  C.  Robert  compares  a
scene  on  a  fine  Attic  vase  now  in  the  Hermitage  Museum  at  St.  Peters-
burg. It  represents  the  wooing  of  Helen  by  Paris.  The  Grecian
beauty  appears  seated  among  her  maidens  while  Paris,  in  Phryg^n
costume,  approaches  and  greets  her.  See  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Peters-
burg) for  1 86 1,  Atlas,  pi.  V  i,  with  Stephanies  remarks,  p.  115  sqq.
The  scene  of  course  differs  from  that  depicted  in  Polygnotus's  picture
but  possibly  there  are  traces  of  that  picture  in  the  attitude  of  Helen  and
her  handmaids.  Prof  Robert  inclines,  however,  to  think  that  the  vase-
painter  stood  directly  under  the  influence  of  Zeuxis  rather  than  of
Polygnotus.     See  C.  Robert,  Die  Iliupersis  des  Polygnot^  pp.  34-36.

25.  4-  Enrybates Ulysses'  herald,  thonc^  he  had  no  beard.

In  the  Odyssey  (xix.  244  sqq,)  Homer  describes  Eurybates,  the  herald
of  Ulysses,  as  older  than  his  master  and  with  a  great  shock  of  hair  on
his  head.  Hence  the  surprise  of  Pausanias  that  in  the  picture  Eurybates
appeared  as  youthful  and  beardless.  Eurybates  is  mentioned  as  the
herald  of  Ulysses  in  the  Iliad  also  (ii.  184).  But  Agamemnon  had  a
herald  of  the  same  name  (//.  i.  320) ;  and  it  is  probable  that  he  rather
than  the  herald  of  Ulysses  was  represented  by  Polygnotus,  since  we
know  from  Pausanias  himself  (below  §  8)  that  Eurybates  was  sent  by
Agamemnon,  not  by  Ulysses,  to  Helen.

25.  4.  different  from  the  names  in  the  Iliad  etc.  See  Iliad^  iii.
143  sq.^  where  Helen's  handmaidens  are  called  Aethra  and  Clymene.
As  to  Aethra,  see  §  8  note ;  as  to  Clymene  see  note  on  x.  26.  i.

25.  5.  a  man in  an  attitude  of  profonnd  dejection  etc.     It

is  said  that  after  Paris's  death,  the  soothsayer  Helenus  and  his  brother
Deiphobus  quarrelled  for  the  hand  of  Helen.  Deiphobus  was  successful,
and  Helenus,  mortified  at  his  failure,  withdrew  from  Troy  to  Mt.  Ida.
Here  he  was  captured  by  the  (Greeks  and  was  induced  or  compelled  to
reveal  to  them  the  means  by  which  Troy  could  be  taken.  See  Apollo-
dorus,  ed.  R.  Wagner,  p.  206  ;  Conon,  Narrationes^  34 ;  Servius  on
V\i%\\  Aen,  ii.  166;  Sophocles,  Philocteies^  604  sqq,\  Quintus  Smyr-
naeus,  Posthomericay  x.  344  sqq.  ;  Dio  Chrysostom,  Or.  lix.  vol.  2.  p.
187  ed.  Dindorf  Hence  Polygnotus  appropriately  depicted  Helenus
seated  in  the  midst  of  the  ruin  of  his  native  city  overwhelmed  with
grief  and  remorse.  The  story  of  the  capture  and  prophecy  of  Helenus
was  told  by  Lesches  in  the  Little  Iliad^  from  which  Sophocles  may
have  borrowed  it  {Epicorum  Graecorum  fragnienta^  ed.  Kinkel,  p.  36).

25.  5.  Lescheos  of  Pyrrha in  his  poem,  The  Sack  of  Ilium.

This  poem  is  repeatedly  referred  to  by  Pausanias  in  the  sequel  (^  6,  8,
9  ;  x.  26.  I,  4,  8  ;  X.  27.  i,  2).  It  is  commonly  supposed  that  the
Sack  of  Ilium  which  Pausanias  attributes  to  Lesches  was  not  a  separate
poem  but  merely  a  part  of  the  Little  Iliad  (D.  B.  Monro,  in  Journal  of


CH.  XXV  PAINTINGS  OF  POLYGSOTUS  363

Hellenic  Studies^  4  (1883),  p.  317  ^^.  ;  Fr.  Noack,  Iliupersis^  P«  45  -r^- ;
as  to  the  Little  Iliad  see  note  on  x.  26.  2).     That  the  Little  lUad
included  a  description  of  the  sack  of  Troy  is  proved  by  the  testimony  of
Aristotle  {Poetics^  23,  p.  1459  b4  sqq,\  though  Proclus  in  his  summary
of  the  poem  makes  it  end  with  the  introduction  of  the  Wooden  Horse
into  Troy  {Epicorum  Graecorum  fragmenta^  ed.   Kinkel,  p.  37).       But
against  the  identification  of  the  Sack  of  Ilium  by  Lesches  with  part  of
the  Little  Iliad  it  must  be  observed  that  Pausanias  certainly  seems  to
have  regarded  the  two  poems  as  distinct ;  for  whereas  he  assigns  the
former  poem  to  Lesches,  he  apparently  considered  that  the  author  of
the  Little  Iliad  was  unknown  (iii.  26.  9 ;  x.  26.  2).     That  Pausanias
distinguished  between  the  two  poems  has  been  recognised  by  Prof,
von    Wilamowitz  -  MoUendorff  (//i;/w^w^-A^  Uniersuchungen^    p.    342).
Prof.  C.  Robert's  attempt  to  prove  that  Pausanias  regarded  the  Sack  of
Ilium  by  Lesches  as  part  of  the  Little  Iliad  is  unconvincing  (*  Homer-
ische  Becher,'  ^otes  Programm  zum  Winckelmannsfeste,  Berlin  1890,
p.  64  sqq,).     The  name  of  the   poet  whom    Pausanias   always   calls
Lescheos    appears    as    Lesches  on  the   Taimla    Iliaca    (Baumeister's
Denkmdler,  pi.  xiii.)  and  on  an  ancient  vase  (C.  Robert,  '  Homerische
Becher,'    p.  33).      The  form  Lesches  is  conmionly   regarded  as   the
correct  one,  but  the  form  Lescheos  is  defended  by  Mr.   O.    Inunisch
(*  Lescheos- Lesches,'  Rheinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  48  (1893),  pp.    290-
298),  whose    view  is,    however,  combatted    by  Mr.   W.   Schmid  {id,
pp.  626-628)  and  rejected  by  Prof.  C.  Robert  {Die  Iliupersis  des  Poly-
gnot,  p.  74  note  13).

25.  7.  Demophon,  one  of  the  sons  of  Thesens.  His  mother  was
Phaedra  (ApoUodorus,  ed.  R.  Wagner,  p.  179  sq,)  or,  according  to
Pindar,  Antiope  (Plutarch,  Theseus^  28).

25.  7.  Theseus  had  also  a  son  Melanipims  etc.  Pausanias  implies,
though  he  does  not  say  directly,  that  Melanippus  was  depicted  along
with  Demophon  meditating  the  rescue  of  his  grandmother  Aethra.  The
descendants  of  Melanippus,  named  loxids,  are  said  to  have  revered
asparagus  because  their  ancestress  Periguna,  daughter  of  Sinis,  took
refuge  in  a  bed  of  asparagus  from  the  pursuit  of  Theseus  (Plutarch,
Theseus^  8).

25.  8.  As  to  Aethra,  Lescheos  says  etc.  It  is  said  that  Aethra,
the  mother  of  Theseus,  having  been  captured  by  the  Dioscuri  at  Aphidna
(Paus.  V.  19.  3  note),  was  given  by  them  as  a  handmaid  to  Helen  whom
she  followed  to  Troy  (Homer,  //.  iii.  143  sq,  ;  Dio  Chrysostom,  Or,  xl
vol.  I.  p.  184  ed.  Dindorf).  The  story  of  her  release  from  captivity  after
the  taking  of  Troy  seems  to  have  been  told  in  somewhat  different  forms.
One  version,  here  given  by  Pausanias  on  the  authority  of  Lesches,
appears  to  have  been  followed  by  the  poet  Lysimachus  (Schol.  on  Euri-
pides, Troades^  3 1 )  and  Dionysius,  author  of  the  prose  Cycle  (Schol.  on
Euripides,  Hecuba,  123;  Frag,  Hist,  Grace,  ed.  Miiller,  4.  p.  653).
The  other  version  was  that  during  the  sack  of  Troy  her  two  grandsons
Demophon  and  Acamas,  the  sons  of  Theseus,  found  and  rescued  Aethra
without,  apparently,  having  to  beg  for  her  release  from  Helen  and  the
Greek  leaders.     This  latter  version  was  seemingly  followed  by  Arctinus


364  PAINTINGS  OF  POLYGNOTUS  bk.  x.  phocis

in  his  Sack  of  Ilium  {Epicorum  Graecorum  fragmenUt,  ed.  Kinkel,  p.
50),  Quintus  Smymaeus  (Posthomerica^  xiii.  496-543),  and  Apollodorus
(p.  211  ed.  Wagner).  It  would  appear  to  have  been  also  adopted  by
Stesichorus  ;  at  least  in  the  Tabula  Iliaca  (see  note  on  §  2),  which  in
so  far  as  it  represents  the  capture  of  Troy  is  professedly  based  on
Stesichorus's  poem  the  Sack  of  Iliuniy  we  see  Aethra  within  the  walls
of  Troy  being  hurried  away  by  her  two  grandsons  amid  scenes  of
slaughter  and  flight.  The  same  version  of  the  story  is  depicted  on  red-
6gured  vases,  of  which  one  is  in  the  British  Museum  {Catalogue  of
Greek  and  Etruscan  Vases  in  the  British  Museum^  vol.  3,  Vases  of
the  finest  period^  by  Cecil  H.  Smith,  No.  458,  p.  281).  Sec  H.
Heydemann,  Iliupersis^  p.  2 1  sq, ;  A.  Michaelis,  in  Annali  delP  Inst,
di  Corrisp,  ArcheoL  52  (1880),  pp.  32-40  ;  O.  Jahn,  Griechische  Bilder-
chroniken,  p.  34  ;  Baumeister's  Denktndlery  fig.  775,  Tafel  xiii.,  ^%,
795,  Tafel  xiv.,  pp.  743,  748  ;  M tiller- Wieseler,  Denkmdler^  i.  pi.  xliii.
No.  202  ;  C.  Robert,  Bild  und  Uedy  pp.  72  sq,^  75  sq,

25.  9.  this  child,  says  Lescheos,  was  killed  etc.  The  verses  in
which  Lesches  describes  the  murder  of  the  infant  Astyanax,  son  of
Hector  and  Andromache,  by  Neoptolemus  are  preserved  by  Tzetres
{SchoL  on  Lycophron^  1263;  Epicorum  Graecorum  fragmenta^  ed.
Kinkel,  p.  46).  Their  substance  is  correctly  given  by  Pausanias.  Ac-
cording to  another  version  of  the  legend  the  murderer  of  the  child  was
not  Neoptolemus  but  Ulysses.  This  latter  is  the  version  followed  by
Arctinus  in  his  poem  the  Sack  of  Troy  {Epicorum  Graecorum  frag-
menta^  ed.  Kinkel,  p.  50),  by  Tryphiodorus  {Excidium  Iliiy  644-646),
and  by  Tzetzes  (Posthomerica^  734)-  Euripides  represents  the  death
of  Astyanax  as  resolved  upon  by  the  Greeks  in  solemn  conclave,  the  chief
advocate  of  the  deed  being  Ulysses  (Troades^  704  sqq.).  According  to
Seneca  {Troades^  1088  sqq.)  Ulysses  was  deputed  to  execute  the  doom,
but  the  child  anticipated  his  fate  by  leaping  from  a  tower.  Quintus
Smymaeus  {Posthoffierica,  xiii.  251  sq.\  Apollodorus  (p.  212  ed.
Wagner),  and  Hyginus  {Fab.  109)  merely  say  that  the  child  was  hurled
from  the  walls  by  the  Greeks ;  they  do  not  name  the  murderer.  In
the  vase  -  paintings  Neoptolemus  is  depicted  seizing  Astyanax  by  the
leg  and  preparing  to  dash  him  to  pieces  against  the  altar  at  which  the
bo/s  grandfather,  Priam,  has  taken  refuge.  See  H.  Heydemann,
Iliupersis,  pi.  i.  ;  C.  Robert,  Bild  und  Lied,  p.  59  ;  Baumeister's  Denk-
mdler,  p.  745  ;  Catalogue  of  the  Greek  and  Etruscan  Vases  in  the
British  Museum,  vol.  2,  Black  figured  Vases,  by  H.  B.  Walters,  p.  135,
No.  B  205.  Cp.  F.  Noack,  Iliupersis :  de  Euripidis  et  Polygnoti  quae
ad  Trojae  excidium  spectant  fabulis,  pp.  29-36.

25.  9.  Homer  sasrs  that  she  left  Troy  etc.  See  Iliad,  xiii.
1 70  sqq.

25.  10.  her  hair  braided  after  the  maimer  of  maidens.  See
note  on  i.  19.  i.

25.  10.  Poets  tell  how  Polsrxena  was  slain  on  Achilles'  tomb.
Among  the  poets  who  described  the  sacrifice  of  Polyxena  at  the  grave
of  Achilles  were  Arctinus  {Epicorum  Graecorum  fragmenta,  ed.  Kinkel,
p.  50)  and  Euripides  (Hecuba,  109-582).


CH.  XXVI  PAINTINGS  OF  POLYGNOTUS  365

25.    10.   at  Athens I  have  seen  pictures  etc.     See  i.

22.  6.

25.  II.  a  horse  about  to  roll  on  the  ground.     Prof.  C.

Robert  conjectures  that  we  are  to  suppose  this  horse  to  have  been
ridden  by  Elasus  and  Astynous,  two  of  the  victims  of  Neoptolemus
(see  below  x.  26.  4),  and  to  have  fallen  under  their  weight,  thus
allowing  their  relentless  pursuer  to  overtake  and  dispatch  them.  He
thinks  that  the  same  subject  is  represented,  at  a  somewhat  earlier  stage,
on  two  of  the  northern  metopes  of  the  Parthenon.  On  one  of  the
metopes  (No.  29)  we  see  two  figures  riding  a  horse  which  seems  about
to  fall,  while  on  the  metope  next  to  it  (No.  28)  appears  a  young  warrior
rushing  along.  If  Prof.  C.  Robert  is  right,  the  scene  on  the  former
metope  (No.  29)  represents  the  flight  of  Elasus  and  Astynous,  and  the
scene  on  the  latter  metope  (No.  28)  their  pursuit  by  Neoptolemus.  See
C.  Robert,  Die  Iliupersis  des  Polygnot^  pp.  59-61  ;  id,^  Die  Marathon-
schlacht  in  der  Poikile^  p.  124.  Against  this  view  of  Prof.  Robert's,
which  is  accepted  by  Mr.  P.  Weizsacker  {Polygnots  Gemdide^  p.  26  sq,)^
it  must  be  said  that  the  horse  in  the  picture,  to  judge  by  Pausanias's
description,  had  not  fallen  but  only  seemed  about  to  do  so ;  it  is,  there-
fore, a  necessary  part  of  Prof.  Robert's  theory  that  Pausanias  mistook
the  attitude  of  the  beast.  A  horse  rolling  on  the  ground  is  depicted
on  a  black-figured  vase  (MiitheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Ronty  4  (1889),  pi.  7  ;
the  vase  is  B  364  in  the  British  Museum)  and  is  engraved  on  a
number  of  ancient  gems.  See  O.  Rossbach,  in  Aus  der  Anomia  (Berlin,
1890),  pp.  195-200.  The  painter  Pauson  is  said  to  have  painted  a
horse  in  this  posture  (Lucian,  Demosthenis  encomium^  24  ;  Aelian,  Var,
hist,  xiv.  1 5  ;  Plutarch,  De  Pythiae  oraculis^  5).

26.  I.  Clymene.  In  the  Ilicul  (iii.  144)  Clymene  is  one  of  the
two  handmaids  of  Helen,  the  other  being  Aethra.  It  is  quite  possible
that  in  the  picture  she  may  have  been  represented  as  a  Greek  slave
waiting  on  Helen,  and  that  Pausanias  made  a  mistake  in  classing  her
with  the  captive  Trojan  women.  See  F.  Noack,  Iliupersis^  P-  56  sq,  ;
C.  Robert,  Die  Iliupersis  des  Polygnot,  p.  43  sq.

26.  I.  Stesichoms,  in  his  Sack  of  TUnin,  The  representation  of
the  sack  of  Ilium  on  the  Tabula  Iliaca  professes  to  be  based  on  this
poem  of  Stesichorus.  See  O.  Jahn,  Griechische  Bilderchraniken^  p.
32  sqq.  Prof.  Ad.  Michaelis  has  arg^ued  that  part  of  an  abstract  of
this  poem  is  contained  in  the  fragments  of  Proclus's  work  in  the  Epic
Cycle.  See  Michaelis,  in  Jahn's  Griech,  Bilderchroniken^  P«  95  ^99- ;
id,,  in  HerfneSy  14  (1879),  pp.  481-498.

26.  I.  in  the  Betnms.  We  must  distinguish  this  poem  of
Stesichorus  from  the  epic  of  the  same  name  which  was  ascribed  to
Agias  (or  Hagias)  of  Troezen.  See  note  on  x.  28.  7.  Cp.  Poeiae  Lyrici
Graeciy  ed.  Bergk,*  3.  p.  983.

26.  I.  Touching  Orensa,  they  say  that  the  Mother  of  the  Qods
etc.  Virgil  makes  Creusa  say  (Aen,  ii.  785  sqq,)  that  she  will  not  be
carried  captive  into  Greece,  because  the  Mother  of  the  Gods  detains
her  in  Asia.  Mr.  D.  B.  Monro  thinks  that  the  story  of  Creusa  was
told  in  Arctinus's  poem  the  Sack  of  Ilium  (which  is  to  be  distinguished


366  CYPRIA — LITTLE  ILIAD  bk.  x.  phocis

from  the  two  poems  of  the  same  name  by  Stesichorus  and  Lesches).
^t,^  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  5  (1884),  p.  30  sq,

26.  I.  the  epic  called  the  Oypria.  The  poem  called  the  Cypria
or  Cypriaca^  an  epic  in  eleven  books,  was  variously  ascribed  to
Stasinus  of  Cyprus,  Hegesinus  of  Salamis,  Hegesias,  and  Homer
(Photius,  Bibliotheca^  p.  319  ed.  Bekker;  Athenaeus,  xvL  p.  682  de).
Herodotus  explicitly  denied  (ii.  1 1 7)  that  the  poem  was  by  Homer ;
and  Aristotle  did  so  implicitly  (Poetics ^  23,  p.  1459).  The  subject  of
the  poem  was  the  origin  and  progress  of  the  Trojan  war  down  to  the
point  where  the  subject  is  taken  up  in  the  Iliad,  See  Epicorum  Grae-
corum  fragmenta^  ed.  Kinkel,  p.  1 5  sqq,  ;  F.  G.  Welcker,  Der  epische
CycluSy  I.  p.  300  sqq,  ;  ///.,  2.  p.  85  sqq, ;  D.  B.  Monro,  \n  Journal  of
Hellenic  Studies^  5  (1884),  p.  2  sqq,\  W.  Christ,  Gesch,  d.  griech,
UttercUury  p.  59  sq,  "The  Cypria  was  considered  one  of  the  grandest
epics  of  antiquity,  scarcely  inferior  to  the  Iliad  and  the  Odyssey,  .  .  .
It  would  appear  that  the  poem  of  Stasinus  [the  Cypria"]  was  more
popular,  had  greater  influence  over  the  poets  and  painters  of  Greece,
than  the  poems  of  Homer.  At  least,  in  the  poems  and  plays  which  have
come  down  to  us  the  subject  is  oftener  taken  from  the  Cypria  than  the
Iliad,  In  the  case  of  Greek  painted  vases,  whereas  representations
taken  from  the  Iliad  are  rare,  we  find  very  frequent  paintings  of  the
incidents  of  the  Cypria,  such  as  the  Judgment  of  Paris,  the  marriage  of
Peleus  and  Thetis,  or  the  surprise  of  Troilus  and  Polyxena  by  Achilles
at  the  well"  (P.  Gardner,  New  Chapters  in  Greek  History ^  p.  \6osq,),

26.  2.  the  Little  Iliad.  Here  and  in  iii.  26.  9  Pausanias  refers  to
the  Little  Iliad  in  a  way  which  seems  to  imply  that  he  thought  the  author
unknown.  It  was  ascribed  to  Lesches  by  Proclus  {Epicorum  Graecorum
fragmenta^  ed.  Kinkel,  p.  36),  a  scholiast  on  Aristophanes  {Lysistrata^
155),  a  vase  painter  (C.  Robert,  *  Homerische  Becher,'  50/^j  Programm
zum  Winckelmannsfestey  Berlin,  1890,  p.  30  sqq,\  and  the  sculptor  of
the  Tabula  Ilicua,  Proclus  (Lc.)  calls  Lesches  a  native  of  Mytilene  in
Lesbos ;  but  a  scholiast  on  Aristophanes  {l.c)  and  the  sculptor  of  the
Tabula  Iliaca  agree  with  Pausanias  (x.  25.  5)  in  calling  Lesches  a
native  of  Pyrrha  in  Lesbos.  Others  attributed  the  Little  Iliad  to
Thestorides  of  Phocaea ;  others,  including  the  historian  Hellanicus,  to
Cinaethon  the  Lacedaemonian  (see  ii.  3.  9  note) ;  others  to  Diodorus
of  Erythrae.  See  Schol.  on  Euripides,  Troades^  822.  Prof.  C.  Robert
has  argued  that  the  claim  of  Lesches  to  the  authorship  of  the  poem
is  invalidated  by  the  evidence  of  Hellanicus,  who,  being  himself  a
Lesbian,  would  have  certainly  attributed  the  poem  to  a  fellow-country-
man if  there  had  been  any  plausible  ground  for  doing  so.  Prof.  Robert
concludes  that  Lesches  is  a  literary  myth  concocted  in  the  fourth
century  B.C.  by  local  Lesbian  patriotism  as  a  counterblast  to  the  Ionic
legend  which  claimed  the  poem  for  Thestorides  of  Phocaea.  See  C.
Robert,  Bild  und  Lied,  p.  225  sqq,\  cp.  id,^  *  Homerische  Becher,'
p.  64  sqq,  Aristotle,  like  Pausanias,  refers  to  "  the  author  of  the
Little  Iliad"  in  a  way  which  seems  to  indicate  that  the  author's
name  was  unknown  to  him  {Poetics,  23,  p.  1459,  Berlin  ed.).  Accord-
ing to  Proclus's  abstract  of  the  Little  Iliad,  the   poem  was   in   four


CH.  XXVI  PAINTINGS  OF  POL  YGNOTUS  367

books,  and  related  the  events  of  the  Trojan  war  from  the  award  of
the  arms  of  Achilles  down  to  the  introduction  of  the  Wooden  Horse
into  Troy.  But  in  its  original  form  the  poem  must  have  carried  the
history  of  the  war  down  to  the  sack  of  Troy  and  the  departure  of  the
Greeks.  See  Aristotle,  Lc, ;  Epicorum  Graecorum  fragmenicLi  ed.
Kinkel,  p.  36  sqq, ;  F.  G.  Welcker,  Der  epische  Cyclus^  i.  p.  267  sqg, ;
«V/.,  2.  p.  237  sqq,  ;  D.  B.  Monro,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  4
(1883),  p.  317  sq.;  id,^  5  (1884),  p.  18  sqq,\  W.  Christ,  Gesch,  d.
griech,  Lilteratur^  p.  61  sq,

26.  2.  Polypoetes,  son  of  Piritlioas.  He  is  repeatedly  mentioned
by  Homer  (//.  ii.  740,  xii.  129,  182).

26.  3.  Ajaz takingan  oath  with  regard  to  the  outrage  on

Oassandra.  Presumably  he  swore  that  he  had  not  been  guilty  of  the
outrage.  This  explanation,  however,  is  too  simple  for  Prof.  C.  Robert,
who  conjectures  {Die  Jliupersis  des  Polygnot^  ?•  63  sq,)  that  Ajax  was
swearing  to  atone  for  his  sacrilege  by  sending  two  maidens  periodically
to  Athena  at  Troy.  For  we  are  told  that  in  expiation  of  the  guilt  of  the
Locrian  Ajax  the  cities  of  Locris  used  to  send  annually  to  Athena  at
Troy  two  maidens  whom  the  Trojans  slew,  and  burning  their  bodies  on
the  wood  of  certain  trees  which  bore  no  fruit  threw  the  ashes  into  the
sea.  If  the  maidens  managed  to  escape,  however,  they  took  refuge  in
the  sanctuary  of  Athena,  which  they  thenceforward  swept  and  washed,
never  quitting  it  except  at  night,  and  always  going  barefooted,  shorn,
and  clad  in  a  single  garment.  Probably  the  custom  of  sacrificing  the
maidens  was  sooner  or  later  mitigated  by  allowing  them  regularly  to
escape  to  the  sanctuary,  though  for  form's  sake  a  show  of  pursuing
them  was  kept  up.  The  custom  is  said  to  have  been  observed  for  a
thousand  years  down  to  the  Phocian  war  in  the  fourth  century  B.C
See  Strabo,  xiii.  p.  600  sq,  ;  Plutarch,  De  sera  numinis  wndicta^  1 2 ;
and  especially  Lycophron,  Cassandra^  1141  j^^.,  with  the  scholia  of
Tzetzes,  who  refers  to  the  historian  Timaeus  (Frag.  Hist  Graec,  ed.
Miiller,  vol.  i.  p.  297,  No.  66)  as  his  authority.  The  trial  of  Ajax
before  the  Greek  leaders  for  his  outrage  on  Cassandra  was  depicted  by
Polygnotus  also  in  the  Painted  Colonnade  at  Athens  (Paus.  i.  15.  2).

26.  3.  Cassandra  herself  is  seated  etc.  Lucian  especially  refers
to  the  beauty  of  Cassandra's  eyebrows  and  her  rosy  cheeks  in  this
painting  (Imagines y  7).

26.  3.  she  overturned  the  wooden  image  etc.  This  scene  was
described  by  Arctinus  in  his  epic  the  Sack  of  Iliuniy  and  was  carved  on
the  Chest  of  Cypselus  at  Olympia.     See  v.  19.  5  note.

26.  3.  the  prodigy  which  appeared  etc  When  the  Greeks  were
sacrificing  at  Aulis  before  they  set  sail  for  Troy,  a  serpent  issued  from
under  the  altar  and  devoured  a  sparrow  and  eight  young  ones  which
were  perched  on  a  neighbouring  plane-tree.  Having  done  so  the
serpent  was  turned  to  stone.  The  seer  Calchas  interpreted  the  prodigy
to  mean  that  the  war  would  last  nine  years  and  that  Troy  would  be
captured  in  the  tenth.     See  Homer,  //.  ii.  303-330.

26.  4.  In  a  straight  line  with  the  horse  etc.  This  seems  to
mean  that  the  following  group  (Neoptolemus  slaying  Elasus)  was  on


368  PAINTINGS  OF  POL  YGNOTUS  bk.  x.  phocis

the  same  line  with  and  next  to  the  group  of  Nestor  and  the  horse  (see
X.  25.  II).  The  groups  which  Pausanias  has  described  in  the  inter-
mediate passage  (the  captive  Trojan  women,  Epeus  throwing  down  the
walls  of  Troy,  Polypoetes,  Acamas,  Ulysses,  Ajax,  etc.). were  on  the
upper  line.  Nestor  and  the  horse  were  on  the  lower  line,  and  next  to
them  also  on  the  lower  line  was  Neoptolemus  in  the  act  of  slaying
Elasus.  The  Greek  expression  which  I  have  translated  "  in  a  straight
line  with"  is  xar^  fvBv  rov  vmrow  The  same  expression  is  used  by
Pausanias  elsewhere.  Thus  in  v.  11.  3  r^  fi€v  ^;  icar*  tvBv  t^9
IxTo^v  Kavovi^  **  the  bar  which  is  in  a  straight  line  with  {i,e,  faces)  the
entrance."  Again  in  vii.  23,  \o  kv  ^  oiKTJfiaTi  KartvOv  rrj^  etroSov
"in  a  chamber  in  a  straight  line  with  (/.^.  facing)  the  entrance."  The
expression  has  been  misunderstood  in  different  ways  by  Welcker  and
Prof.  C.  Robert.  See  F.  G.  Welcker,  *  Die  Composition  der  polygno-
tischen  Gemalde,'  p.  loi  ;  O.  Jahn,  in  Kieler  philologische  StuiUen
(Kiel,  1 84 1),  p.  93  sq,  ;  Overbeck,  in  Rheinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  7
(1850),  p.  444  ;  Schubart,  in  ZHtschrift  fur  die  Alterthumsvdssenschaft^
13  (1855),  p.  409  sqq.  ;  Ch.  Lenormant,  Af /moire  sur  les  peintures^  etc.,
p.  54  sq, ;  C.  Robert,  Die  Iliupursis  dcs  Poiygnot^  p.  49.

26.  4.  Elasns Astsrnons.    In  the  Iliad  (v.  144  and  xvi.  696)

a   Trojan  named  Elasus  and  another  named  Astynous  are  slain  by
Patroclus  and  Diomede  respectively.

26.  4.  The  son  of  Adiilles  is  always  named  Neoptolemns  by
Homer.     See  lUad^  xix.  327,  Od,  xi.  506.

26.  4*  because  Achilles  began  to  make  war  at  an  early  a^.
The  name  Neoptolemus  (*  young  warrior ')  is  explained  more  naturally
by  Eustathius  (on  Homer,  //.  xix.  327,  p.  11 87)  as  referring  to  the
martial  youth  of  Neoptolemus  himself.  A  scholiast  on  Homer  (//.  xix.
326)  seems  to  take  the  same  view.  See  Critical  Note  on  this  passage,
vol.  I.  p.  610.  However,  Pausanias's  view  of  the  origin  of  the  name
is  supported  by  the  parallel  case  of  Gorgophone,  who  was  so  called
because  her  &ther  Perseus  had  slain  the  Gorgon  (ii.  21.  7).

26.  5.  on  the  altar  is  a  bronze  corselet.  Prof.  C.  Robert  suggests
that  we  are  to  suppose  this  corselet  to  have  been  brought  by  Laodice,
daughter  of  Priam  (//.  vi.  252),  to  her  father  at  the  altar  where  he  had
taken  refuge,  and  that  before  Priam  could  put  it  on  he  was  murdered  by
Neoptolemus  {Die  Iliupersis  des  Polygnoty  p.  64).  Virgil  has  described
the  aged  king  arming  his  feeble  body  {Aen,  ii.  509  sqq.).  In  Poly-
gnotus's  picture  Laodice  was  portrayed  standing  beside  the  altar
(below,  §  7).  Prof.  Robert's  explanation  of  the  corselet  on  the  altar
is  accepted  by  Mr.  F.  Noack  (Iliupersis^  p.  64  sq,),

26.  5.  They  consisted  of  two  bronze  pieces  called  gnala.  See
Homer,  Iliad^  v.  99,  189,  xiii.  507,  587,  xv.  530,  xvii.  314.  As  to
coats  of  mail  in  the  Homeric  age,  see  Buchholz,  Die  honurischen
Realieriy  2.  i.  p.  370  sqq, ;  W.  Leaf,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  4
(1883),  p.  73  -y^^- ;  W.  Helbig,  Das  homerische  Epos  aus  den  Denk-
fndlem  erlduteri^  p.  286  sqq, ;  Baumeister's  Denkntdler,  p.  2018  sq,  ;
A.  Bauer,  *  Die  Kriegsaltertumer,'  in  I  wan  Miiller's  Handbuch  der  klass,
Altertumswissenschafty   4.  p.  235  sq,      Mr.  W.  Reichel  has  adduced


CH.  XXVI  PAINTINGS  OF  POLYGNOTUS  369

arguments  to  prove  that  in  the  Homeric,  as  apparently  in  the  Mycenaean
age,  coats  of  mail  were  unknown,  the  want  of  them  being  supplied  by
the  large  heavy  shield  which  covered  nearly  the  whole  body  of  the
warrior,  and  that  wherever  the  mention  of  a  cuirass  or  coat  of  mail  occurs
in  Homer  the  verse  is  a  late  interpolation.  See  W.  Reichel,  Ueber
hofnerische  Waffen^  pp.  79-1 1 1.  His  views  are  accepted  by  Dr.  Walter
'LtsS  {Classical  Review y  9  (1895),  P-  55  -^^O-

26.  6.  Homer  represents  Phorcys  etc.     See  Iliady  xvii.  312  sqq,
26.  6.  a  painting  by  Galliphon  the  Samian  etc     This  was  doubt-
less Calliphon's  picture  of  the  battle  at  the  ships,  which  Pausanias  has
already  mentioned  (v.  19.  2).     Cp.  H.  Brunn,  Gesch,  d,  griech,  KUnstler^
2.  p.  56.

26.  7-  I  do  not  find  Laodice in  the  list  of  captive  Trojan

women.  According  to  one  story,  Laodice  was  swallowed  up  by  the
earth  at  the  sack  of  Troy  (Quintus  Smymaeus,  Posthomerica^  xiii.
544  sqq. ;  Tryphiodorus,  Excidium  Ilii^  660  sqq. ;  Tzetzes,  Posl-
homericay  736  ;  /V/.,  SchoL  on  LycophroUy  497  ;  Apollodorus,  ed.  R.
Wagner,  p.  212;  Epitoma  Vaticana  ex  Apdlodori  Bibliothecay  ed.  R.
Wagner,  pp.  69,  247  sqq,),  Polygnotus  depicted  her  also  among  the
captive  Trojan  women  in  the  Painted  Colonnade  at  Athens.  See  note
on  i.  15.  2.

26.  7-  Homer  in  the  Iliad  describes  etc.     See  Iliad^  iii.  205  sqq,
26.  7-  Laodice  was  the  wife  of Helicaon.     See  Homer,  //.

iii.   122  sqq,

26.  8.  The  tale  which  Euphorion tells  ahont  Laodice.    The

story  was  that  Laodice  fell  in  love  with  Acamas,  son  of  Theseus,  and
bore  him  a  son  named  Munitus,  who  was  afterwards  killed  by  a  snake
while  he  was  out  hunting.  This  tale  is  told  by  Tzetzes,  who  has  pre-
ser\'ed  some  of  Euphorion*s  verses  on  the  subject  {SchoL  on  Lycophroti^
495),  and  it  is  told  in  greater  detail  by  Parthenius  {Narrat,  Atnat,  16).
According  to  a  different  version  of  the  legend  the  name  of  the  child
was  Munychus  and  his  father  was  Demophon,  another  of  the  sons  of
Theseus  (Plutarch,  Tlieseusy  34).

26.  9.  a  bronze  wash-basin  on  a  stone  stand.  In  Greece  at  the
present  day  many  fluted  pedestals  of  stone,  about  2  feet  high,  may  be
found,  especially  in  or  about  the  churches.  They  have  sometimes  Ionic,
but  more  commonly  Doric  capitals,  mouldings,  and  flutings.  The
common  shape  is  illustrated  by  the  annexed  cut.

"  The  use  of  these  pedestals,"  says  Leake,  "  I  con-
ceive to  have  been,  that  of  supporting  large  basins  for
holding  lustral  or  sacrificial  water,  and  many  of  them
may  have  become  baptismal  fonts  after  the  conversion
of  Greece.  That  the  ancient  basins  are  never  entire
is  easily  accounted  for,  their  form  being  so  much  more
liable  to  fracture  than  that  of  the  pedestal,  which
has  the  solidity  of  the  column  increased  by  its  shorter
dimensions ;  it  is  probable  also  that  the  basin  was
often  of  metal,  and  therefore  tempting  to  the  plunderer.
The  pedestals  thus  deprived  of  their  lustral  vases  now  often  serve  to

VOL.  V  2  B


370  PAINTINGS  OF  POLYGNOTUS  bk.  x.  phocis

support  the  holy  table  or  altar  of  the  church."  The  reason  why  these
pedestals  are  now  so  commonly  found  in  Greek  churches  may  be,  as
Leake  suggested,  that  the  ancient  temples  to  which  they  belonged  were
converted  into  churches  on  the  establishment  of  Christianity.  In  the
Museum  at  Sparta  I  remarked  a  number  of  such  stands  with  the  top
or  capital  complete.  (In  the  similar  pedestals  at  Athens  the  top  is  often
wanting.)  In  these  tops  there  is  a  square  hole,  obviously  intended  for
fastening  something,  probably  a  water -basin,  as  Leake  conjectured.
Indeed  one  of  the  pedestals  at  Sparta  actually  supports  a  sort  of  orna-
mental font,  which  is  clearly  of  the  same  workmanship  as  the  pedestal.
This  confirms  Leake's  conjecture  as  to  the  use  of  these  stands.  Leake
may  be  also  right  in  suggesting  that  the  stone  stand  supporting  the  wash-
basin in  Polygnotus's  picture  may  have  been  a  pedestal  of  this  sort.  See
Leake,  Morea^  i.  p.  498  sq, ;  /</.,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  302  sq,  Pau-
sanias  calls  the  stand  vir(xrra'n/s  and  virooTaroi'.  The  latter  form  of  the
name  is  the  one  given  by  Pollux  (x.  10.  46  ;  x.  22.  79).  In  an  Attic  in-
scription recording  the  sacred  treasures  of  Athena  and  the  other  gods
mention  is  made  of  a  golden  {mwrrarov  {C,  I.  A,  ii.  No.  652  ;
Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec,  No.  366.  44) ;  and  in  the  double
Sigean  inscription  the  pedestal  which  supported  the  bowl  is  called
vTroKfyqrripiov  (Ionic)  and  orUrraTOv  (Attic)  (C  /.  G,  No.  8  ;  Roehl,
/.  G,  A,  No.  492 ;  Loewy,  Inschriften  griech,  Bildhauer^  No.  4 ;
E.  S.  Roberts,  Greek  Epigraphy^  No.  42).

26.  9.  Medusa.  This  daughter  of  Priam  is  mentioned  also  by
ApoUodorus  (iii.  12.  5)  and  Hyginus  {Fab,  90).  Mr.  F.  Noack  conjec-
tures that  her  name,  as  written  by  Polygnotus  beside  her  figure,  was  not
Medusa  but  Melusa  {Iliupersis^  p.  73).  The  conjecture,  which  seems
to  have  nothing  to  recommend  it,  is  rejected  by  Prof.  C.  Robert  {Die
Iliupersis  des  Polygnot^  p.  65).

26.  9.  the  ode  of  the  HimerareaJi  poet.  The  Himeraean  poet  is
Stesichorus.     His  *ode'  is  probably  the  Sack  of  Ilium,     See  §  i.

26.  9.  an  old  woman.  Prof.  C.  Robert  suggests  that  this  may
have  been  Hecuba  {Die  Iliupersis  des  Polygnot^  P*  65  sq.\  and  the
suggestion  is  approved  by  Mr.  F.  Noack  {Iliupersis^  p.  68  sq.),

27.  I.  Eioneos.  He  is  mentioned  by  Homer  as  the  father  of
Rhesus  (//.  X.  435).

27.  I.  Coroebus,  sonof  Mygdon.  Coroebus  is  not  mentioned  by
Homer,  but  Virgil  tells  how  he  came  to  Troy  for  love  of  Cassandra  and
how  at  the  capture  of  the  city  he  perished  in  the  attempt  to  rescue  her
{Aen.  ii.  341  sqq,y  407  sq,),  Quintus  Smymaeus  says  that  Coroebus  was
slain  by  Diomede  before  he  could  enjoy  the  marriage  for  the  sake  of
which  he  had  come  to  Troy  {Posthomericay  xiii.  1 68  sqq, ).  Mygdon,  the
father  of  Coroebus,  is  mentioned  by  Homer  (//.  iii,  186).

27.  I.  Stectorinm.  The  remains  of  Stcctorium  are  near  lUe  Mesjid
in  the  valley  of  Sandykli,  Among  the  ruins  is  a  small  theatre.  Pro-
fessor W.  M.  Ramsay  identified  the  site  by  means  of  an  inscription  in
1 89 1.  He  had  previously  supposed  the  ruins  to  be  those  of  Eucarpia.
See  W.  M.  Ramsay,  \n  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  8  (1887),  p.  476  ;
id,y  Historical  Geography  of  Asia  Minor,  p.   139;  id,,  in  A t/ienaeunty


CH.  XXVII  PAINTINGS  OF  POLYGNOTUS  371

15th  August  1 89 1,  p.  234  ;  American  JourtuU  of  Archaeology^  7  (1891),
p.  505.

27.  I.  poets  have  been  wont  to  give  to  the  Phrygians  the
name  of  liygdones.  In  a  passage  of  the  Argonauiica  of  Apollonius
Rhodius  (ii.  787)  the  name  of  Mygdones  was  by  some  ancient  authon-
ties  read  in  place  of  Phrygians,  according  to  a  scholiast  on  the  passage.
Moschus  speaks  of  a  Mygdonian  flute  (i.  97  sq,\  meaning  a  Phrygian
flute.  On  the  borders  of  Phrygia  there  was  a  tribe  called  Mygdones
and  a  district  Mygdonia  or  Mygdonis  (Strabo,  xii.  pp.  550,  564,  575,
576 ;  Pliny,  Nat.  hist.  v.  145  ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v.  Mi76ovta).

27.  2.  Priam was  dragged  from  the  altar  etc.    Another

version  of  the  legend  was  that  Priam  was  actually  slain  on  the  altar  by
Neoptolemus.  This  was  the  version  followed  by  Arctinus  in  the  Sack
of  Iliuniy  if  we  may  trust  the  brief  abstract  of  the  poem  by  Proclus
{^Epicorum  Graecorum  fragmenta^  ed.  Kinkel,  p.  49).  Stesichorus  in
his  poem  the  Scuk  of  Ilium  seems  to  have  adopted  the  same  version  ;
for  in  the  Tabula  Iliaca^  which  in  this  part  is  professedly  based  on
Stesichorus's  poem,  Priam  is  seen  seated  on  an  altar  in  the  middle  of
the  courtyard  of  his  palace,  while  Neoptolemus  seizes  him  by  the  head
with  his  left  hand  and  prepares  to  stab  him.  See  O.  Jahn,  Bilderchroniken^
pL  i. ;  Baumeister's  Denkmdter^  pi.  xiii.  fig.  775.  Later  writers  seem
to  have  followed  Arctinus  and  Stesichorus  in  representing  Priam  as
slain  at  the  altar.  See  Euripides,  Troades^  16  sq.^  481  sqq. ;  iV/.,
Hecuba^  23  sq.\  Quintus  Smymaeus,  xiii.  220  sqq.  \  Tryphiodorus,
Excidium  Iliiy  634  sq.  ;  Tzetzes,  Posthomerica,  732  sq. ;  Virgil,  Aen.  ii.
550  sqq.  ;  Dictys  Cretensis,  v.  12  ;  ApoUodorus,  p.  211  ed.  R.  Wagner;
Epitoma  Vaticana  ex  Apollodori  Bibliotheca^  ed.  R.  Wagner,  pp.  69,
236  sq.  ;  Pausanias,  iv.  17.  4  (cp.  ii.  24.  3).  The  death  of  Priam  is
the  subject  of  vase-paintings,  and  in  all  cases  the  painters  appear  to
have  followed  Arctinus  and  Stesichorus  rather  than  Lesches.  See  H.
Heydemann,  Iliupersis,  pp.  1 5  sq.^  34 ;  A.  Michaelis,  in  Annali  delP
Inst,  di  Corr.  Arch.  52  (1880),  p.  40  sqq. ;  A.  Schneider,  Der  troische
Sagenkreis^  p.  169  sqq.  ;  Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  p.  745  ;  E.  A.
Gardner,  in  foumal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  14  (1894),  pp.  170-177,  with
pi.  ix. ;  Catalogue  of  Greek  and  Etruscan  Vases  in  the  British  Museum^
vol.  2  (London,  1893),  Nos.  B  205,  B  241  ;  /V/.,  vol.  4  (London,  1896),
No.  F  278.

27.  2.  Agenor  was  butchered  by  Neoptolemus.    This  is

mentioned  also  by  Quintus  Smymaeus  (Posthomerica^  xiii.  216  sq.).

27.  3.  Sinon,  a  comrade  of  Ulysses.  He  was  a  cousin  of  Ulysses,
according  to  Tzetzes  {Schol.  on  Lycophron^  344)»

27.  3.  The  house  of  Antenor with  a  leopard's  skin  hung

over  the  entrance  etc  In  his  play  of  the  Locrian  Ajax  Sophocles
mentioned  that  at  the  sack  of  Troy  a  leopard's  skin  was  hung  up  before
Antenor' s  door  as  a  sign  that  his  house  was  to  be  respected.  See
Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Birds^  933 ;  Pollux,  vii.  70 ;  Strabo,  xiii.
p.  608  ;  Eustathius,  on  Homer,  //.  iii.  207,  p.  405  ;  Sophocles,  Frag.
16,  ed.  Dindorf.  The  same  story  is  told  by  Tzetzes  (Posthomerica^
741-743).     Antenor  and  his  sons  are  said  to  have  escaped  to  Thrace


372  PAINTINGS  OF  POLYGNOTUS  bk.  x.  phocis

and  thence  to  Venetia  (Strabo,  Lc, ;  Eustathius,  Lc),  Hence  Polygnotus
painted  the  family  preparing  to  set  out  on  the  journey.

27.  3.  Theaao.  She  was  the  wife  of  Antenor  (Homer,  //.  vi.
298  sq.),

27.  3.  Qlancos Enrymachos.    Apollodoms  mentions  (p.  2 1 1

ed.  R.  Wagner)  that  when  Troy  was  sacked  Glaucus  son  of  Aiitenor
took  refuge  in  his  father's  house,  where  he  was  recognised  and  protected
by  Ulysses  and  Menelaus.  According  to  Tzetzes  {Schoi.  on  Lycophron^
874)  the  two  sons  of  Antenor,  whom  he  calls  Glaucus  and  Erymanthus,
sailed  from  Troy  with  Menelaus,  and  being  shipwrecked  at  Cyrene  in
Crete  took  up  their  abode  there.  Homer  mentions  three  sons  of
Antenor,  namely  Polybus,  Agenor,  and  Acamas  (//.  xi.  59  sq.).  Virgil
gives  the  names  of  the  three  as  Glaucus,  Medon,  and  Thersilochus
{Aen,  vi.  483  sq,\  borrowing  them  from  a  passage  of  Homer  (//.  xvii.
216),  where,  however,  nothing  is  said  to  show  that  the  three  men  so
called  were  sons  of  Antenor.

27.  4-  Servants  are  putting gear  upon  an  ass.     Hesychius

in  a  gloss  {s,v,  IIoAvyvwTov  rov  ^oyypa^v  01^09)  describes  a  picture  by
Polygnotus  of  an  ass  represented  facing  the  spectator  and  bearing  on  his
back  a  load  of  myrtle  and  a  sutler.  This  picture,  which  would  seem  to
have  been  famous,  may  very  well  have  been  the  one  at  Delphi  here
described  by  Pausanias.  It  is  true  that  at  the  end  of  the  gloss  Hesy-
chius says,  "It  is  preserved  in  the  Anaceum" ;  but  he  seems  to  be  here
referring  to  Polygnotus's  picture  of  the  hare  which  was  certainly  in  the
Anaceum  at  Athens  (see  vol.  2.  p.  166),  and  which  Hesychius  mentions
in  the  present  passage  immediately  before  the  words  "  It  is  preserved  in
the  Anaceum,"  though  the  full  description  of  it  has  fallen  out.  Prof.  C.
Robert  ingeniously  suggests  that  the  myrtle  boughs  with  which  the  ass
was  loaded  pointed  to  Antenor's  intention  of  going  forth  to  seek  a  new
home  in  a  foreign  land,  myrtle  boughs  having  been  apparently  carried
by  colonists  (Aristophanes,  Birdsy  43,  with  the  scholiast's  note).  See  C.
Robert,  Die  IHupersis  des  Polygnot^  P-  54  sq,

27.  4.  a  couplet  of  Simonides  etc.  This  epigram  occurs  in  the
Palatine  Anthology  (ix.  700).  It  is  quoted,  but  without  mention  of  the
author's  name,  by  Plutarch  {De  dejectu  oraculorum,  47)  and  a  scholiast
on  Plato  {Gorgias,  p.  448  b),  and  it  is  clearly  alluded  to  by  Philostratus
( Vit.  Apollon.  vi.  11).  The  words  which  contain  the  names  of  the
artist  and  his  father  are  cited,  with  the  change  of  a  word,  by  Photius
(^Lexicon,  s.v,  Sacrios  Trats  'AyAoo<^vTos)  and  Hesychius  {Lexicon^  s.v.
Sdorios  Trai?  *AyAao</>(uvTos).  These  numerous  references  show  that  the
couplet  was  celebrated,  though  its  poetical  merit  is  of  the  slightest.
That  it  was  composed  by  Simonides  is  denied  on  insufficient  grounds  by
Prof.  C.  Robert  {Die  Nekyia  des  Polygnot^  p.  76 ;  id^  Die  Marathon-
schlacht  in  der  PoikiUy  p.  70  sq,)  and  Prof.  Hauvette  {De  Pauthenticitd
des  dpigramines  de  Simonid^ {l^dius,  1896),  p.  137  sq.).  The  genuine-
ness of  the  verses  is  rightly  maintained  by  Prof.  Milchhofer  {Jahrbuch
des  archdolog.  Instituts^  9  (1894),  p.  72  note  36).  Cp.  Bergk's  Poetac
Lyrici  Graeci^  3.'  p.  1 178.

28.  I.  The  descent  of  Ulysses  to  hell  etc.     On  the  literary


1


.  ^


ri


y


CH.  XXVIII  PAWTmCS  OF  POLYGNOTUS  373

authorities  followed  by  Polygnotus  in  his  delineation  of  the  nether
world,  see  F.  Diimmler,  *  Die  Quellen  zu  Polygnot*s  Nekyia,'  Rfteinisches
Museum^  N.  F.  45  (1890),  pp.  178-202;  C.  Robert,  Die  Nekyia  des
Polygnoty  p.  74  sqq.  Prof.  Diimmler  holds  that  Polygnotus  followed
the  epic  poem  called  The  Returns ;  Prof.  Robert  holds  that  he  did  not.
As  the  poem  in  question  has  perished,  it  is  obvious  that  either  opinion
may  be  maintained  with  equal  confidence  and  absence  of  conflicting
evidence.  A  brief  abstract  of  The  Returns  has  been  preserved  by
Proclus  (Epicorum  Graecorum  Jragnienta^  ed.  Kinkel,  p.  52  sq,\  but
there  is  no  mention  in  it  of  a  descent  to  hell.  On  the  other  hand  Prof.
Robert  accepts  the  view  of  Pausanias  (below,  §  2)  that  Polygnotus  knew
and  used  the  Minyad  in  addition  to  the  Odyssey.  With  regard  to  copies
of  Polygnotus's  picture  on  existing  vases.  Prof.  Robert  tells  us  that  none
has  yet  been  found,  but  he  is  of  opinion  that  some  of  the  particular
groups  of  the  famous  painting  have  been  freely  adapted  by  vase-painters
to  form  new  scenes  \op,  cit,  p.  53).  Scenes  of  the  under  world  are
depicted  on  about  a  dozen  existing  vases  of  Lower  Italy.  See  A.  Winkler,
Die  Darstellung der  Unterwelt  auf  unteritcUischen  ^^^;f  (Breslau,  1888);
E.  Kuhnert,  *  Unteritalische  Nekyien,'  Jahrbuch  d  archdolog,  Instituts^  8
(1893),  pp.  104-113.

28.  2.  the  poem  called  the  Minyad.  This  poem  was  attributed
to  Prodicus  of  Phocaea.  See  iv.  33.  7.  F.  G.  Welcker  conjectured
that  it  was  identical  >vith  the  Phocaeis^  a  poem  which  Homer  was  said
to  have  composed  at  Phocaea  ([Herodotus,]  Vita  Homeric  16,  in  Bio-
graphi  Graeciy  ed.  Westermann,  p.  8).  See  Epicorum  Graecorum
fragnientay  ed.  Kinkel,  p.  2 1 5  sqq, ;  F.  G.  Welcker,  Der  epische  Cyclus^
I.  p.  248  sqq,  ;  «V/.,  2.  p.  422  sqq, ;  W.  Christ,  Gesch,  d,  griech,
Utteratur^  p.  64.

28.  2.  Ferryman,  Oharon.  The  belief  in  Charon  still  survives
among  the  modem  Greeks.  They  call  him  Charos  and  regard  him  as
a  personification  of  Death,  who  with  his  own  hand  snatches  the  souls
of  the  dying  from  their  bodies  and  conveys  them  to  the  nether  world.
But  the  conception  of  him  as  a  ferryman  who  transports  the  souls  of
the  departed  across  the  river  of  Death  is  also  occasionally  to  be  met
with.     See  B.  Schmidt,  Das  Volksleben  der  Neugriechen^  p.  222  sqq,

28.  3.  Tellis  Oleoboea.     It  has  been  supposed  that  these

two  personages  were  chosen  by  Polygnotus  on  account  of  their  con-
nexion with  Thasos  in  order  to  indicate  the  Thasian  origin  of  the  painter
himself  (C.  Robert,  Die  Nekyia  des  Polygnoty  p.  81  ;  R.  Schone,  in
Jahrbuch  d,  arch.  Inst,  8  (1893),  P-  200  note  23;  P.  Weizsacker,
Polygnots  Gemdldey  p.  15).  The  connexion  of  Cleoboea  with  Thasos
is  mentioned  by  Pausanias  himself.  But  what  had  Tellis  to  do  with
Thasos  ?  Nothing  whatever,  so  far  as  we  know.  His  son  Telesicles,
the  father  of  Archilochus,  did  indeed  migrate  from  Paros  to  Thasos
(Eusebius,  Praepar,  Evang,  vi.  7.  6  ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v,  Gocro-os);
but  that  can  hardly  be  regarded  as  establishing  a  Thasian  connexion  for
Tellis  himself.  Mr.  Dieterich  may  be  right  in  supposing  that  the
identification  of  the  Tellis  of  the  picture  with  the  grandfather  of  Archi-
lochus may  have  been  nothing  but  a  guess  of  the  ciceroni,  and  that  the


374  PAINTINGS  OF  POLYGNOTUS  bk.  x.  phocis

painter  may  have  chosen  the  name  merely  with  a  punning  reference  to
the  mysteries  (telos)  which  his  companion  in  the  infernal  bark  had
brought  to  Thasos  (A.  Dieterich,  Nekyia :  Beitrdge  zur  Erkldrung  der
neuentdeckten  Petrusapokalypse^  Leipzig,  1893,  p.  69).

28.  3.  a  box  Budh  as  they  make  for  Demeter.  The  <  box '  was
probably  the  mystic  cista^  which  seems  to  have  been  a  basket  rather
than  a  box.     See  viii.  25.  7  note.

28.  4-  the Pious  Folk  at  Oatana.     These  Pious  Folk  were

generally  said  to  have  been  two  brothers,  Amphinomus  and  Anapias  (or
Anapius).  The  spot  where  the  torrent  of  lava  surrounded  them  and
their  parents  without  scathing  them  was  called  the  Place  (or  Field)
of  the  Pious,  and  stone  statues  of  the  brothers  were  erected  there.  See
Conon,  NarrationeSy  43  ;  Lycurgus,  contra  LeocrcUenty  xxiii.  95  sq.\
[Aristotle,]  De  Mundo^  p.  400  Berlin  ed. ;  [Aristotle,]  De  mirab.
Auscultate  154  (165),  p.  56  ed.  Westermann ;  Seneca,  De  beneficiis^
iii*  37»  vi.  36;  Solinus,  v.  15;  Strabo,  vi.  p.  269;  Valerius  Maximus,
v.  4.  Ext.  4  ;  Silius  Italicus,  xiv.  196  sq, ;  Philostratus,  Vit,  Apollomi^
V.  17.  The  Syracusans  claimed  the  pious  brothers  for  Syracuse  and
called  them  Emantias  and  Crito  (Solinus,  Lc),  In  his  list  of  people
distinguished  for  piety  Hyginus  says  (JFab,  254)  that  at  the  first
eruption  of  Etna  Damon  saved  his  mother  from  the  fire  and  Phintias
saved  his  father.  In  a  Greek  metrical  inscription  found  at  Catana,
the  city  is  called  "the  famous  town  of  the  Pious"  (Eurc^eoiv  icAin-bv
aoTv)  (G.  Kaibel,  Epigrammata  Graeca^  No.  887).
^  28.  5.  The  woman  who  is  chastising  him  is  skilled  in  drngs

•<       V    etc.     How  was  her  skill  in  drugs  indicated  in  the  picture?     Was  she
depicted  administering  a  dose  to  the  miscreant  ?     And  did  the  wry
If  face  he  pulled  betray  his  internal  anguish  ?     This  is  the  view  of  Prof.

E.  Rohde  {Psyche^  p.  291),  Mr.  R.  Schone  {Jahrbuch  d,  arch.  Insiituts^
8  (1893),  p.  201  note  25),  and  Mr.  A.  Dieterich  {Nekyia^  p.  68
note  2).  Prof.  C.  Robert,  on  the  other  hand,  suggests  {Die  Nekyia
des  Pofygnoty  p.  60)  that  the  woman  was  not  an  apothecary  or  poisoner
at  all  but  a  goddess  of  vengeance  who  was  represented  belabouring  the
sinner  with  a  club  which  Pausanias  mistook  for  a  pestle,  remembering
the  figures  of  women  with  pestles  on  the  chest  of  Cypselus  (v.  18.  2).
This  seems  improbable,  and  we  shall  do  better  to  adhere  to  the  more
natural  view  that  she  was  offering  a  poisoned  cup  to  the  sacrilegious  man.
Mr.  Dieterich  (/.r.)  has  well  pointed  out  that  such  a  punishment  seems
to  have  been  regularly  inflicted  in  hell  by  Tisiphone  (Valerius  Flaccus,  ii.
194  sq.y

28.  6.  when  they  captured  the  sanctnary  of  Olsrmpian  Zens  at
Syracnse.  It  does  not  appear  from  Thucydides  that  the  Athenians  ever
captured  this  sanctuary,  which  stood  in  a  suburb  of  Syracuse.  The  Syra-
cusans put  a  garrison  into  it  to  protect  the  treasures  which  it  contained,
but  the  Athenians  did  not  approach  it.  See  Thucydides,  vi.  70  sq.^  vii.
4  and  37.  Plutarch  says  (Nicias^  16)  that  although  the  Athenians  were
eager  to  gjain  possession  of  the  sanctuary  on  account  of  the  many  votive
offerings  of  gold  and  silver  which  were  stored  in  it,  the  pious  general
Nicias  purposely  hung  back  and  allowed  the  enemy  to  throw  a  garrison


CH.  XXIX  PAINTINGS  OF  POLYGNOTUS  375

into  it  unmolested,  for  fear  his  soldiers  might  plunder  the  treasures  and
the  blame  of  the  sacrilege  might  rest  on  himself.  On  the  other  hand,
Diodorus  relates  (xiii.  6)  that  the  Athenians  succeeded  in  seizing  and
fortifying  the  sanctuary  and  repelled  an  attack  of  the  Syracusans.

28.  6.  the  words  he  spoke  to  the  Delians.  When  the  inhabitants
of  Delos  fled  at  the  approach  of  the  Persian  fleet,  the  Persian  com-
mander Datis  sent  a  herald  after  them  with  a  message  inviting  the
**  sacred  men  "  to  return  and  assuring  them  that  no  harm  would  be  done
to  them  or  to  their  sacred  island,  the  birthplace  of  Apollo  and  Artemis
(Herodotus,  vi.  97).

28.  6.  finding  an  image  of  Apollo  in  a  Phoenician  ship  etc.
According  to  Herodotus  (vi.  irS),  who  is  doubtless  Pausanias's
authority  for  the  anecdote,  Datis  himself  conveyed  the  image  to  Delos
and  charged  the  inhabitants  to  restore  it  to  Delium.  The  Delians
neglected  to  obey  this  injunction,  but  twenty  years  afterwards  the
Thebans,  in  compliance  with  an  oracle,  had  the  image  brought  back  to
its  original  home.

28.  7.  Enrynomos.  This  demon  appears  to  be  mentioned  by  no
other  ancient  writer.  Prof.  C.  Robert  regards  him  as  a  personification
of  death,  pointing  out  that  his  name,  which  signifies  *>vide- ruling,'
would  on  this  hypothesis  be  appropriate  (Die  Nekyia  des  Polygnoty
p.  61  ;  Die  Marathonschlacht  in  der  Poikile^  pp.  11 7- 119).  Mr.  A.
Dieterich  prefers  to  consider  him  as  a  personification  of  the  grave  in
which  the  dead  are  laid  and  which,  as  it  were,  consumes  their  bodies,
leaving  only  the  bones  {Nekyia^  P-  47  sq,),

28.  7.  The  Betnms speak  of  hell  etc.    In  Proclus's  abstract

of  the  epic  called  The  Returns  there  is  no  mention  of  a  descent  to  hell.
See  Epicorum  Graecorum  fragmenta^  ed.  Kinkel,  p.  52  sq.  Hence  Mr.
D.  B.  Monro  has  conjectured  {Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  4  (1873),
p.  319)  that  the  editor  or  editors  who  redacted  the  Epic  Cycle  left  out
this  episode,  because  a  similar  one  had  been  already  described  in  the
eleventh  book  of  the  Odyssey.

28.  8.  Auge  went  to  the  court  of  Teuthras  in  Mysia  etc.  Cp.
viii.  47.  4,  viii.  48.  7  ;  and  see  the  note  on  i.  4.  6  *  the  band  which  crossed
to  Asia  with  Telephus.'  Prof  C.  Robert  conjectures  that  it  was  Leda
and  not  Auge  whom  Polygnotus  here  painted  in  the  under  world,  and
that  the  mistake  of  Pausanias  or  of  his  authority  originated  in  misreading
the  name  attached  to  the  figure,  the  name  A  HAH  being  easily  confused
with  AYFH.  He  points  out  that  in  the  Odyssey,  which  Polygnotus
may  have  followed,  Auge  is  not  mentioned  among  the  famous  dames
seen  by  Ulysses  in  the  lower  world,  but  that  on  the  other  hand  Leda  is
so  mentioned  and  is  moreover  coupled  with  Iphimedea  {Od,  xi.  208,
305),  just  as  the  figure  in  question  in  Polygnotus's  picture  is  coupled.
See  C.  Robert,  Die  Nekyia  des  Polygnot,  p.  75.  The  conjecture  is
ingenious  and  not  improbable.  Even  if  it  be  accepted,  however,  it
would  involve  no  change  in  the  text  of  Pausanias,  as  the  mistake,  if  it
be  one,  was  obviously  made  by  Pausanias  himself  and  not  by  a  copyist.
As  to  Iphimedea  cp.  ix.  22.  6.

29.  T.  the  comrades  of  Ulysses,  bringing  sacrificial  victims.


376  ROPE  OF  INDOLENCE  bk.  x.  phocis

Dr.  R.  Schone  conjectures  that  they  were  really  represented  carrying  away
the  carcasses  of  the  slaughtered  rams  in  order  to  skin  and  sacrifice  them
to  Pluto  and  Proserpine,  as  they  are  ordered  by  Ulysses  in  the  Odyssey
(xi.  44  sqq.)  to  do.  He  points  out  that  in  Polygnotus's  picture  Ulysses
was  supposed  to  have  already  slaughtered  the  rams,  since  he  was
depicted  holding  his  sword  over  the  trench  in  which  their  blood  had
flowed  (x.  29.  8).  See  R.  Schone,  in  Jahrbuch  d,  arch.  InsL  8  (1893),
p.  200.  To  this  Prof.  C.  Robert  replies  that  in  the  Odyssey  there  is
nothing  said  about  carrying  away  the  victims  and  that  it  is  much  more
probable  that  they  were  to  be  offered  to  the  infernal  deities  on  the  spot
\Die  Marathonschlachi  in  dcr  PoikiU^  p.  120  sq,\

29.   I.  Indolence plaiting  a  rope  etc.     This  punishment  of

Indolence  in  hell  seems  to  have  been  a  familiar  topic  with  the  ancients
and  to  have  been  often  depicted  in  art.  We  know  of  two  paintings
of  it  by  distinguished  artists,  the  one  by  Polygnotus  which  Pausanias
here  describes,  the  other  by  Nicophanes,  a  pupil  of  the  Sicyonian
painter  Pausias  (Pliny,  Nat,  hist,  xxxv.  137;  H.  Brunn,  Gesch,  d,
griech,  KUnstler^  2.  p.  155).  Plutarch  refers  to  "the  picture  of  the
rope-twister  in  hell  who  allows  a  browsing  ass  to  consume  what  he
is  plaiting'  {De  tranquillitate  animi^  14).  Cratinus,  in  one  of  his
comedies,  also  referred  to  "  the  man  plaiting  a  rope  in  hell  and  the  ass
eating  what  he  plaits "  (Photius,  Lexicon^  s,v,  ovov  iroKai ;  Suidas,  s.v.
ovov  iroKai),  Propertius  speaks  of  the  subject  (v.  3.  21  sq.)  as  if  it
were  proverbial.  The  story  is  illustrated  by  at  least  six  existing
monuments  of  ancient  art,  namely :

(i)  A  round  marble  well-head,  sometimes  described  as  an  altar,
formerly  in  the  Museo  Pio-Clementino,  now  in  the  Vatican.  Here
Indolence  is  represented  in  relief  seated  on  a  knoll  and  plaiting  his
rope,  while  at  his  back  the  other  end  of  the  rope  is  being  eaten  by  an
ass.  Beside  him  the  Danaids  are  also  represented  in  relief  pouring
water  into  a  great  jar.  See  Visconti,  Afus/e  Pie-Clementin^  vol.  4.
pi.  xxxvi.  and  pi.  xxxvi.*  (both  plates  illustrate  the  same  monument,  but
the  second  gives  a  more  careful  and  accurate  rendering  of  Indolence
and  the  ass),  with  Visconti's  remarks,  p.  264  sqq,  ;  Berichte  iiber  die
Verhandl,  d.  k.  siichs,  Gesell.  d.  Wissenschaftcn  zti  Leipzig^  Philolog.
histor.  CI.  8  (1856),  pi.  iii.  A ;  J.  J.  Bachofen,  Versuch  iiber  die  Grdber-
symbolik  der  Alien  (Basel,  1859),  pi.  ii.  ;  Baumeister's  DenkinHler^
p.  1925,  fig.  2041  ;  W.  Helbig,  Fiihrer  durch  die  offentlichen  Samtn-
lungen  klassiscfier  Alterthiimer  in  Rom^  i.  p.  278  sq.^  No.  372  (179).

(2)  A  stucco  relief  in  a  Columbarium  of  the  Vigna  Campana  near
the  Porta  Latina  at  Rome.  Here  Indolence  is  represented  as  an  old
bearded  man  kneeling  and  plaiting  his  rope,  while  the  ass  quietly  eats
the  other  end  of  the  rope  full  in  front  of  him.  See  Berichte  (I.e.),
pi.  iii.  E  ;  J.  J.  Bachofen,  op.  cit.  pi.  i.  ;  Miiller-Wieseler,  Denkmdler,
2.  pi.  Ixix.  No.  867.

(3)  A  wall-painting  in  a  Columbarium  of  the  Villa  Pamfili  at  Rome.
Here  Indolence  appears  sitting  idly  on  a  stone,  holding  in  his  right
hand  the  end  of  a  rope,  which  an  ass,  lying  on  the  ground  in  front
of  him,  is  eating.     The  buildings  and  trees  in  the  background  prove


CH.  XXIX  ROPE  OF  INDOLENCE  377

that  the  scene  is  not  laid  in  the  lower  world.  See  Abhandlungen  d.
phiiosaph,  philolog,  CL  d,  k,  bayer.  Afcad,  d,  Wissenschaften^  8  (1858),
pL  iii.  8,  with  the  remarks  of  O.  Jahn,  pp.  245-249 ;  J.  J.  Bachofen,
op,  cit,  pi.  ii.

(4)  A  painting  found  in  a  tomb  at  Ostia,  now  in  the  Lateran
Museum  at  Rome.  Here  Indolence  is  depicted  sitting  and  plaiting  his
rope,  while  the  ass  is  eating  the  other  end  of  it  behind  his  back.  The
scene  is  laid  in  the  lower  world.  We  see  the  figures  of  Pluto,  Orpheus,
and  Eurydice,  all  with  their  names  attached,  and  the  gate  of  hell
guarded  by  Cerberus  and  a  doorkeeper.  The  painting,  executed  in  an
exceedingly  dull  prosaic  style,  is  believed  to  date  from  the  first  century
of  our  era.  See  Monumenti  Inediti^  8  (1864-1868),  pi.  xxviii.  i  ;  C.  L.
Visconti,  in  Annali  delP  Instituio^  38  (1866),  pp.  292-307  ;  W.  Helbig,
op,  cit,  vol.  I.  p.  540,  No.  696  (1064).

(5)  A  painting  on  a  vase  {lekythos)  found  in  a  grave  on  Monte
Saraceno  near  Ravanusa.  The  picture  treats  the  stories  of  the  nether
world  in  a  spirit  of  caricature.  Male  and  female  figures,  representing
probably  the  uninitiated  (see  below,  x.  3 1 .  9  note),  are  depicted  carrying
water  in  pitchers  on  their  heads  to  pour  it  into  a  large  jar,  and
Indolence  is  seated  gazing  before  him  at  some  lines  which  are  supposed
to  stand  for  his  rope.  Behind  him  is  the  ass  falling  on  its  nose,  while
one  of  the  male  water-carriers  pulls  it  by  the  tail.  See  Archdologische
Zeitung^  28  (187 1),  pi.  31.  22,  with  the  remarks  of  H.  Heydemann,
p.  42  sq,

(6)  A  drawing  in  the  Codex  Pighianus  (fol.  47)  preserved  in  Berlin.
The  drawing  exhibits  in  five  separate  compartments  five  scenes  of  the
lower  world,  namely,  Ixion  stretched  on  his  wheel,  Hercules  fetching  up
Cerberus,  the  Danaids  engaged  in  pouring  water  into  a  large  broken
jar,  Sisyphus  heaving  his  rock  up  hill,  and  Indolence  and  the  ass.  In
this  last  scene  Indolence  appears  as  a  beardless  man  clad  in  a  shirt  and
trousers,  seated  on  a  four-legged  stool  and  plaiting  a  rope,  of  which  the
other  end  is  being  eaten  by  an  ass.  The  drawing  may  be,  as  O.  Jahn
supposed,  a  copy  of  reliefs  on  a  Roman  sarcophagus.  See  Berichie
{l,c,\  pi.  ii.  with  the  remarks  of  O.  Jahn,  p.  267  sqq,  ;  Abhandlungen
(/,c,),  pi.  vii.  21  ;  Bachofen,  op,  cit.  pi.  iii.  2.

Diodorus  reports  (i.  97)  that  at  Acanthus  in  Egypt  certain  ceremonies
were  observed  which  bore  some  resemblance  to  the  stones  of  the
Danaids  and  Indolence  in  hell.  Every  day  three  hundred  and  sixty
priests  brought  water  from  the  Nile  and  poured  it  into  a  jar  which  had
a  hole  in  it ;  and  at  a  certain  festival  one  man  twisted  an  end  of  a  long
rope,  while  many  men  at  his  back  untwisted  it  just  as  fast.  This  latter
ceremony  Diodorus  expressly  compares  to  the  Greek  story  of  Indolence
and  his  rope.

The  story  of  Indolence  further  occurs,  with  a  slight  variation,  in  the
Buddhist  collection  of  stories  known  as  the  Jatakas,  **  *  A  man  was
weaving  rope,  sir,  and  as  he  wove,  he  threw  it  down  at  his  feet.  Under
his  bench  lay  a  hungry  she-jackal,  which  kept  eating  the  rope  as  he
wove,  but  without  the  man  knowing  it.  This  is  what  I  saw.  This  was
my  seventh  dream.     What  shall  come  of  it  ? '     *  This  dream  too  shall


378  ROPE  OF  INDOLENCE  bk.  3C  phocis

not  have  its  fulfilment  till  the  future.  For  in  days  to  come,  women
shall  lust  after  men  and  strong  drink  and  finery  and  gadding  abroad
and  after  the  joys  of  this  world.  In  their  wickedness  and  profligacy
these  women  shall  drink  strong  drink  with  their  paramours ;  they  shall
flaunt  in  garlands  and  perfumes  and  unguents ;  and  heedless  of  even
the  most  pressing  of  their  household  duties,  they  shall  keep  watching
for  their  paramours,  even  at  crevices  high  up  in  the  outer  wall ;  aye,
they  shall  pound  up  the  very  seed-corn  that  should  be  sown  on  the
morrow  so  as  to  provide  good  cheer; — in  all  these  ways  shall  they
plunder  the  store  won  by  the  hard  work  of  their  husbands  in  field  and
byre,  devouring  the  poor  men's  substance  even  as  the  hungry  jackal  ate
up  the  rope  of  the  rope-maker  as  he  wove  it ' "  ( The  Jataka  or  stories  of
the  Buddhc^s  fonner  births^  voL  i.  translated  by  R.  Chalmers  (Cam-
bridge, 1895),  ^^-  i>  ^o-  n^  P-  1^9)*  '^hc  parallelism  of  this  Indian
tale  to  the  Greek  one  was  first  pointed  out,  so  far  as  I  know,  by  Mr.  A.
Griinwedel  {Original-Mittheilungen  aus  der  ethnologischen  Abtheilung
der  kbnigL  Museen  su  Berlin^  i  (1885),  P-  42)*  It  was  afterwards
indicated  independently  by  Mr.  W.  H.  D.  Rouse  {Folklore^  i  (1890),
p.  409).

The  fable  of  the  rope-weaver  and  the  ass  or  jackal  seems  a
sufficiently  obvious  apologue  of  misdirected  and  therefore  fruitless
labour.  This  explanation,  which  lies  to  hand,  is  not  however  profound
enough  to  satisfy  most  of  the  scholars  who  have  touched  upon  the
subject  They  have  accordingly  propounded  interpretations  of  varying
degrees  of  improbability  and  even  absurdity.  The  tale  has  been  treated
as  a  symbolical  expression  of  the  creative  forces  of  primitive  nature,  as
an  allegory  of  the  sea  devouring  the  ships  of  the  Phoenicians,  as  a  folk-
tale of  a  man  who  gathered  sticks  in  a  wood,  as  a  high  moral  allegory
of  the  weakness  of  the  will,  and  as  a  veiled  description  of  a  bucket
being  let  down  into  a  well.

See  J.  J.  Bachofen,  op,  cit.  pp.  301-412 ;  P.  Cassel,  Aus  Littratur  und
Symbolih  (Leipzig,  1884),  pp.  290-309;  E.  Rohde,  Psyckty  p.  2905^.  ;  U.  von
Wilamowitz-M Ollendorff,  Homerische  Unterstuhungen^  p.  202 ;  C.  Robert,  Die
Nekyia  des  Polygnct,  p.  62  sq,  ;  A.  B.  Cooke,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^
14(1894),  p.  9^sqq,

29.  2.  The  same  name is  also  given  to  a  certain  bird  etc

The  species  of  heron  which  the  Greeks  nicknamed  Indolence  (oknos)  is  the
bittern.  Its  ordinary  Greek  name  was  asterias,  Aristotle  distinguished
three  kinds  of  herons,  of  which  the  bittern  {asterias  or  oknos)  was  one.
He  says  that  the  ancestors  of  the  bittern  were  fabled  to  have  been  slaves
and  that  in  accordance  with  its  name  {oknos  <  indolence ')  the  bird  was
the  laziest  of  the  heron  tribe.  See  Aristotle,  Hist,  anim.  ix.  i.  p.  609  b
21  sgg,^  ix.  18.  p.  617  a  5  sqg,  Cp.  Callimachus,  quoted  by  a  scholiast
on  Homer,  //.  x.  274,  p.  296  ed.  Bekker;  Pliny,  Nat,  hist,  x.  164.
Aelian  assures  us  that  in  Egypt,  where  the  bittern  {asterias)  was
tamed,  the  bird  understood  human  speech  and  felt  hurt  if  any  one
called  it  *  slave'  or  *  indolence'  {oknos)  {Nat,  anim,  v.  36).  Antoninus
Liberalis  {Transform,  7)  tells  a  fable  of  the  transformation  of  a  man
named  Antonous  into  a  bittern  {oknos).     That  the  heron  was  a  bird  of


CH.  XXIX  PAINTINGS  OF  POL  YGNOTUS  379

omen  we  learn  from  a  passage  in  Homer  (//.  x.  274  sqqJ)^  where  Athena
sends  a  heron  to  Ulysses  and  Diomede,  as  they  are  about  to  set  forth  on
their  perilous  adventure  by  night ;  they  hear  the  bird  screaming  on  their
right  in  the  darkness  and  greet  it  as  a  good  omen.  Pliny  tells  us  {Not.
hist  xi.  140)  that  a  species  of  heron  called  leucon  (Greek  Xcvicos,
English  *  egret ')  was  of  very  good  omen  if  seen  flying  south  or  north.  The
heron  is  said  to  have  been  sacred  to  Hera  (Hesychius,  s.v,  wicrateros).
See  J.  J.  Bachofen,  Versuch  iiber  die  Grdbersymbolik  der  Alten^  p.
354  ^99'  >  L.  Stephani,  in  Compte-Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1865,
p.  125  sqq.

29.  3.  he  appears  as  a  dim  and  mangled  spectre.  The  Greek
words  are  dfivSphv  koi  ov8k  oXoKXrjpov  ctScoAov.  Professors  Benndorf
and  C.  Robert  suppose  this  to  mean  merely  that  the  figure  of  Tityus
was  partially  hidden  by  a  line  indicating  a  rise  in  the  ground  (O.  Benn-
dorf, in  'E^rjfupU  dpxaiokoyiKrj,  1887,  p.  127  sq, ;  C.  Robert,  Die
Nekyia  des  Polygnot^  p.  63),  and  this  view  has  been  accepted  by  Mr.
P.  Girard  {Lapeinture antique^  P-  I75  ^7')'  But  the  words  of  Pausanias
are  more  naturally  interpreted  to  mean  that  the  body  of  Tityus  was
represented  as  partially  consumed  by  the  vultures  that  had  been  preying
on  his  vitals  (Homer,  Od,  xi.  578  sq,).  And  on  this  interpretation  the
figure  of  the  sinner  has  a  tragic  significance  which  is  wholly  wanting  on
the  other.

29.  3.  Phaedra  who  is  in  a  swing  etc.  Otto  Jahn  con-
jectured that  this  euphemistic  way  of  hinting  at  Phaedra's  suicide  may
have  been  suggested  by  the  Swinging  Festival,  which  was  commonly
said  to  have  been  instituted  as  an  expiation  for  the  death  of  Erigone
who  had  hung  herself  from  grief  at  the  murder  of  her  father  Icarius
(Hyginus,  Fab,  130).    See  O.  Jahn,  Archdologische  Beitrage^  p.  324  sqq,

29.  4-  Dionysus first  led  an  army  against  India.     On  the

warlike  character  and  exploits  of  Dionysus,  particularly  his  expedition
to  India,  and  the  works  of  ancient  art  illustrative  of  it,  see  L.  Stephani,
in  Compte-Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1867,  pp.  161  sqq,y  182  sqq, ;
Graef,  De  Bacchi  expeditione  Indica  fnonumeniis  expressa  (Berlin,  1886).

29.  5.  tales  told  of  Dionysus by Egyptians.      By

Dionysus  is  here  meant  Osiris,  whom  the  Greeks  identified  with
Dionysus.  See  Herodotus,  ii.  42,  144;  Plutarch,  Isis  and  Osiris^  13,
34  sq,  ;  Diodorus,  i.  13,  25,  96,  iv.  i.

29.  5.  Thyia.  See  x.  6.  4.  There  was  a  precinct  dedicated  to
her  at  Delphi,  and  here  the  Delphians  set  up  an  altar  to  the  winds  on
the  eve  of  the  Persian  invasion  (Herodotus,  vii.  178).

29.  5.  Ohloris  was  the  wife  of  Neleus.     Cp.  ix.  36.  8.

29.  6.  Procris was  slain  by  her  husband.     Cp.  i.  37.  6.

29.  7.  Megara.  Dr.  Th.  Schreiber  conjectures  that  this  Megara
was  not,  as  Pausanias  supposed,  the  wife  of  Hercules,  but  the  mother
of  Ixion  {Anthol,  Palat.  iii.   12)  {Festschrift  fiir  Johannes  Overbeck^

p.  194).

29.  7-  the  daughter  of  Salmoneus.  Her  name  was  Tyro.  See
Homer,  Od,  xi.  235  sq,

29.  7-  in  the  folds  of  the  tunic  she  is  grasping  the  famous


38o  PAiNTINGS  OF  POLYGNOTVS  bk.  x.  phocis

neoklace.  As  to  the  necklace  of  Eriphyle  see  v.  17.  7,  v.  24,  8,  ix.
41.  z  sgg.^  with  the  notes.  The  attitude  in  which  the  painter  portrayed
Eriphyle  is  perhaps  illustrated  by  a  gracefii]  broiue
statuette  found  at  Corinth  which  represents  a  woman
standing  and  holding  her  hands  on  her  breast  concealed
under  a  flap  of  her  tunic  ;  the  fingers  are  pushing  up  the
flap  from  underneath  and  touching  the  neck  (Fig.  ■  3).  See
J.  Six,  '  Die  Eriphyle  des  Polygnot,'  Mittkeilungen  des
archdolog.  Imlituls  in  Aihert,  19  (1894),  pp.  335-339-
As  Mr.  Six,  who  was  the  first  to  compare  the  attitude  of
the  statuette  with  that  of  Eriphyle  in  the  picture,  has  well
observed,  it  is  indifTerent  whether  we  suppose  Eriphyle
to  have  actually  grasped  the  necklace  under  her  robe  or
merely  to  have  been  unable  to  take  away  her  hand  from
the  place  where  the  fatal  bauble,  which  had  cost  her  and
hers  so  dear,  had  once  rested.  In  the  latter  case  the
pathetic  significance  of  the  figure  would  be  even  deepened.
However  that  may  be,  the  indication  of  the  whole  tragic
story  by  a  mere  gesture  is  worthy  of  a  great  artist  and,  '
""■  '^,'~'*''  as  Mr.  Six  again  remarks  with  justice,  comes  near  the
s"*"„"^'"'  manner  and  spirit  of  Dante.  Prof.  Robert  has  done
well  to  accept  Mr.  Six's  view  and  to  abandon  the  rash
conjecture  by  which  he  had  corrupted  the  text  of  Pausanias  {Die
Marathomchlacht  in  der  Poikile,  p.  121  jy.).  For  Prof.  Robert's  now
abandoned  conjecture  see  vol.  i.  p.  61 1.

29.  8.  TJlyases  is  crouching  and  bolding  Ma  aword  over  the  trench
etc.  The  interview  of  Ulysses  with  Tiresias  in  the  lower  world  (sec
Homer,  Od.  xi.  90  sgq.)  is  the  subject  of  (i)  a  fine  wall-painting  in  a
Roman  house  on  the  Esquiline  ;  (2)  a  marble  relief  now  in  the  Louvre  ;
(3)  a  vase-painting;  (4)  an  engraving  on  an  Etruscan  mirror.  See
Miss  J.  E.  Harrison,  Myths  of  the  Odyssey,  p.  99  sqq. ;  Baumeister's
DenkmdUr,  figures  939,  12J4,  1255.  The  vase-painting  in  question
{Monuntenti  Inediti,  vol.  4  {1844-1848),  pi.  xix.)  represents  Ulysses,
almost  naked,  seated  on  a  heap  of  rough  stones  ;  in  his  right  hand  he
holds  his  drawn  sword,  in  the  left  the  scabbard.  Under  his  feet  is  the
slaughtered  ram,  and  close  to  the  ram's  head  appears  the  &ce  of  the
aged  Tiresias,  emerging  from  the  ground,  which  conceals  the  rest  of  his
body.

29.  S.  a  m&t,  such  u  is  commonly  worn  by  Bailors.  The  fisher-
men in  Theocritus  (xxi.  13)  sleep  with  "  a  small  mat,  their  clothes,  and
their  caps  "  under  their  heads ;  but  it  does  not  seem  certain  that  this
mat  was  a  garment.

29.  9-  Theseus  and  Firithons  seated  on  chairs  etc.  In  the
recently- discovered  Epitome  of  Apollodurus  it  is  said  that  when  Theseus
arrived  in  hell  with  his  friend  Pirithous  to  carry  off  Proserpine,  he  was
outwitted ;  for  in  the  expectation  of  receiving  friendly  presents  they  sat
down  on  the  chair  of  Forgetfulness  (Lethe),  to  which  they  grew  and
were  held  fast  by  coils  of  serpents.  See  Epiloina  Valicana  ex  Apollo-
dart  bibliotheea,  ed.    R.  Wagner,  pp.    58,    155  sq.\   Apollodonis,  ed.


CH.  XXX  DAUGHTERS  OF  PANDA REOS  381

R.  Wagner,  p.  182.  The  editor,  Mr.  Wagner,  conjectures  that  Apollo-
dorus's  authority  was  Panyasis ;  for  Panyasis,  as  we  learn  from  Pausanias,
represented  Theseus  and  Pirithous  growing  to  the  rock  on  which  they
sat.  Cp.  Suidas,  s.ik  Xunroi,  "The  chair  of  Forgetfulness "  is  not
expressly  mentioned  by  any  other  ancient  writer,  but  there  seems  to  be
an  allusion  to  it  in  Horace,  where  he  says  {OdeSy  iv.  27  sq,)  that  Theseus
was  not  able  to  free  his  dear  Pirithous  from  the  "  Lethaean  bonds "
{vincula  Lethaea).  With  the  "chair  of  Forgetfulness  "  we  may  compare
the  chair  in  which  Hephaestus  caused  Hera  to  be  held  fast  by  invisible
bonds  (see  i.  20.  3),  and  the  chair  in  which  the  smith  in  the  folk-tale
holds  fast  Death  or  the  Devil  See  note  on  ii.  5.  i.  The  story  of
Theseus  and  Pirithous  in  hell  is  the  subject  of  a  painting  in  an  Etruscan
tomb  at  Tarquinii,  and  is  illustrated  by  vase-paintings  and  other  monu-
ments of  ancient  art.  See  E.  Petersen,  *  Theseus  und  Peirithoos  im
H  ades,'  A  rchdologische  Zeitung,  35  (1877),  pp.  1 1 9- 1 2  3 .

29.  10.  Ulysses  is  represented  saying  etc.  See  Homer,  O^j^O^,
xi.  631  sq.  But  the  second  of  these  lines,  in  which  Theseus  and
Pirithous  are  mentioned,  was  said  by  Hereas  of  Megara  to  have  been
interpolated  by  Pisistratus  to  please  the  Athenians.  See  Plutarch,
Theseus^  20.

29.  10.  For  never  saw  I  yet  etc.  The  lines  are  from  Iliad^
i.  262  sqq.  But  here  again  the  line  (265)  in  which  Theseus  is  mentioned
is  thought  by  some  modem  critics  to  have  been  interpolated  by  a  patriotic
Athenian  from  the  pseudo-Hesiodean  Shield  of  Hercules^  v.  182.  Other
scholars  reverse  this  theory  and  suppose  that  the  author  of  the  Shield
of  Hercules  borrowed  the  line  from  the  Iliad.  This  latter  is  the  view
of  Professor  von  Wilamowitz-Moellendorf  {Hotnerische  Untersuchungen^
p.  260)  and  J.  Topffer  {Aus  der  Anomia^  p.  31).

30.  I.  the  daughters  of  Pandareos  etc.  See  Homer,  Od,  xx.
66-78.  According  to  an  account  preserved  by  Eustathius  (on  Homer,
Od,  xix.  518,  p.  1875)  ^^^  ^  scholiast  on  Homer  {Od,  xx.  66,  vol.  2.
p.  688  ed.  Dindorf)  the  damsels  were  three  in  number  and  their  names
Merope,  Cleothera  and  Aedon.  The  story  of  their  father's  guilt  and  of
their  ohti  tragic  fate  is  told  by  Eustathius  (/.r.  and  on  Od,  xx.  66,  p.
1883),  the  scholiast  on  Homer  {lx.\  a.  scholiast  on  Pindar  (Olymp,  i.
97),  and,  with  some  variations,  by  Antoninus  Liberalis  (Transform,  36).
It  ran  thus.  Zeus  had  a  golden  dog  which  guarded  his  sanctuary  in
Crete.  Pandareos  of  Miletus  stole  the  dog,  but  fearing  to  take  it  home
with  him  entrusted  it  for  safe  keeping  to  Tantalus,  who  dwelt  on  Mount
Sipylus.  When  Zeus  sent  Hermes  to  reclaim  the  stolen  animal,  Tantalus
swore  a  great  oath  he  knew  nothing  about  it.  But  Hermes  found  ^ the
dog  in  the  house,  and  Zeus  punished  the  perjured  Tantalus  by  burying
him  under  Mount  Sipylus.  Hearing  of  the  fate  of  his  accomplice,
Pandareos  fled  with  his  wife  and  maiden  daughters  to  Athens,  and
thence  to  Sicily.  But  Zeus  saw  him  and  killed  both  him  and  his  wife.
As  for  the  orphan  daughters,  the  angry  god  set  the  Harpies  on  them,
who  snatched  them  up  and  delivered  them  over  to  the  Furies  to  be
their  slaves.  "  Moreover,"  adds  the  scholiast  on  Homer,  "  Zeus  in-
flicted on  them  a  disease,  which  is  called  *dog."'     This  *dog'  disease,


(


382  ANIMAL'POSSESSION  bk.  x.  phocis

as  Dr.  W.  H.  Roscher  has  lately  pointed  out  in  a  learned  and  instructive
paper,  was  probably  a  form  of  insanity  which  seems  to  have  prevailed
among  many  races  and  the  essence  of  which  consists  in  the  patient
imagining  himself  to  be  an  animal  and  behaving  as  such.  This  sort
of  madness  was  known  to  the  ancients  as  the  cynanthropic  ('dog-man')
or  lycanthropic  ('wolf- man')  disease,  and  is  thus  described  in  the
medical  treatise  On  Melancholy  which  is  printed  among  the  works
of  Galen  (vol.  19.  p.  719  ed.  Kiihn).  "  Persons  afflicted  with  the
cynanthropic  or  lycanthropic  disease  go  out  by  night  in  the  month  of
February,  imitating  wolves  or  dogs  in  all  respects,  and  till  break  of  day
they  pass  most  of  their  time  in  grubbing  among  the  graves."  The
writer  then  describes  the  symptoms  of  the  disease — the  pale  face  and
hollow  eyes,  the  dry  tongue,  parched  mouth,  and  ulcered  legs  of  the
patients.  A  similar  form  of  insanity  occurs  among  the  inhabitants  of
the  Garrow  Hills  in  Bengal.  It  has  been  described  as  follows  by  a
writer  of  last  century  who  was  sent  on  a  mission  to  the  hills :  ''  Among
the  Garrows,  a  madness  exists,  which  they  call  transformation  into  a
tiger,  from  a  person  who  is  afflicted  with  this  malady  walking  about  like
that  animal,  shunning  all  society.  It  is  said,  that,  on  their  being  first
seized  with  this  complaint,  they  tear  their  hair,  and  rings  from  their  ears,
with  such  force  as  to  break  the  lobe.  It  is  supposed  to  be  occasioned
by  a  medicine  applied  to  the  forehead :  but  I  endeavoured  to  procure
some  of  the  medicine  thus  used,  without  effect :  I  imagine  it  rather  to
be  created  by  frequent  intoxications,  as  the  malady  goes  off  in  the  course
of  a  week  or  a  fortnight :  during  the  time  the  person  is  in  this  state,  it
is  with  the  utmost  difficulty  he  is  made  to  eat  or  drink.  I  questioned  a
man,  who  had  thus  been  afflicted,  as  to  the  manner  of  his  being  seized,
and  he  told  me  he  only  felt  a  giddiness  without  any  pain,  and  that  after-
wards he  did  not  know  what  happened  to  him  "  (J.  Eliot,  in  Asiatick
Researches^  voL  3.  p.  34  of  the  octavo  edition).  At  the  present  day  a
type  of  madness  of  the  same  sort  is  very  common  in  Japan.  The
patient  is  popularly  believed  to  be  possessed  by  an  animal,  most  com-
monly by  a  fox,  and  behaves  ''  as  much  like  the  animal  itself — be  it
badger,  fox,  or  what  not — as  it  is  possible  for  a  human  being  to  do."
Sometimes  the  sufferer  takes  to  the  woods  and  hills,  where  he  lives  on
berries  and  what  he  can  find,  all  the  while  running  or  crawling  about  on
all  fours.  So  generally  are  foxes  feared  for  their  power  of  p)ossessing
human  beings  that  shrines  and  temples  in  their  honour  exist  in  nearly
every  part  of  the  country,  and  opposite  their  holes  images  of  foxes  in
clay  or  stone  are  set  up  and  receive  propitiatory  offerings  of  the  food  in
which  the  creature  is  known  to  delight.  This  form  of  insanity,  which  is
accompanied  by  ''strange  and  apparently  unaccountable  swellings  in
different  parts  of  the  body,  or  various  forms  of  nervous  disease,"  attacks
women  chiefly,  indeed  almost  exclusively.  Exorcism  of  the  fox-spirit  is
practised  largely  at  celebrated  shrines,  and  in  some  places  there  are
hospitals  devoted  entirely  to  this  purpose.  See  VV.  Weston,  Moun-
taineering and  Exploration  in  the  Japanese  Alps  (London,  1896),  pp.
308-316.  From  facts  like  these  Dr.  Roscher  would  explain  other
ancient  legends  and  religious  practices,  such  as  the  story  of  the  mad-


CH.  XXX  ANIMAL-POSSESSION  383

ness  of  the   daughters  of  Proetus   who  fancied  they  were  cows  and
roamed  the  woods  bellowing  (Virgil,  Eel,  vi.  48,  with  the  note  of  Servius),
and  the  behaviour  of  the  Bacchanals,  who  clothed  themselves  in  the
skins  of  beasts,  tore  live  animals  to  pieces  and  devoured  the  flesh  raw
as  if  they  were  themselves  wild  beasts,  and  fondled  and  suckled  wolf-
cubs,  fawns,  and  young  panthers  as  if  they  were  their  own  offspring
(see  Roscher's  Lexikan^   i.  p.   1037  sqq,^  2.  p.  2250  sq,).     It  would
seem  to  have  been  especially  women  who  were  liable  to  such  attacks  of
insanity  in  antiquity,  just  as  at  the  present  day  it  is  women  who  are
chiefly  subject  to  the  fox-madness  in  Japan.     Dr.  Roscher  makes  the
pregnant  suggestion  that  delusions  of  this  sort  are  closely  connected
with  the  religious  beliefs  of  the  patients,  who  seem  peculiarly  liable  to
fancy   themselves   transformed   into   that   particular   animal   which  is
especially  associated  vrith  the  deity  they  worship.     Thus  the  cow-mad-
ness of  the  daughters  of  Proteus,  who  were  Argives,  may  have  taken  its
special  form  through  the  association  of  cows  with  the  worship  of  the
Argive   Hera;   and  the  dog-madness  of  the  daughters  of  Pandareos
would  seem  to  have  been  in  some  way  connected  with  a  worship  of  the
dog,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  legend  of  the  theft  of  the  sacred  dog  by
their  father  Pandareos.     Dr.  Roscher  conjectures  that  the  bear-dances
of  the  young  Attic  maidens  (see  above,  vol  4.  p.  224)  may  perhaps
have  originated  in  a  similar  epidemic  of  insanity  among  girls  under
puberty.     For  the  girls  who  acted  as  bears  might  not  be  more  than  ten
years  old  (Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  LysistrcUa^  645);  and  the  symptoms
of  hysteria,  of  which  such  illusions  are  apparently  a  special  form,  often
manifest  themselves  before  puberty  is  reached.      If  he  is  right,  the
questions  would  still  have  to  be  asked.  Why  are  certain  animals  specially
associated  with  the  worship  of  certain  deities  ?  and  are  the  illusions  we
have  been  considering  merely  the  effects  of  such  religious  associations  ?
may  they  not  have  been  in  some  cases  the  cause  ?    The  prosecution  of
these  enquiries  may  possibly  throw  some  light  on  the  origin  of  totemism
or  the  primitive  system  of  belief  that  the  men  and  women  of  a  particular
kin  are  the  brothers  and  sisters  of  animals  or  plants  of  a  particular  sort.
In  any  case  Dr.  Roscher  can  hardly  fail  to  be  right  in  connecting  closely
the  belief  in  were-wolves  and  similar   superstitions  vrith  the  type  of
insanity  under  consideration.     See  his  essay  *  Das  von  der  Kynanthropie
handelnde  Fragment  des  Marcellus  von  Side '  in  the  Abhandlungen  der
plUlolog,  histor,  Classe  der  k,  sacks,  GeselL  der  Wissenschaftefiy  vol.  17
(1896),  No.  3  (pp.  3-92).

80.  2.  Miletus  in  Orete.  This  town  is  mentioned  by  Homer  (//.
ii.  647).  It  is  said  to  have  been  the  mother-city  of  Miletus  in  Ionia
(Strabo,  xii.  p.  573,  xiv.  p.  634).

80.  2.  he  was  an  accomplice  in  Twat^us'  theft  etc.  The  refer-
ence is  to  the  theft  of  the  golden  dog,  as  townich  see  above,  note  on
§  I  *  the  daughters  of  Pandareos.'

30.  3.  Antilochos,  with his  face  and  head  resting  on  both  his

hands.  He  had  brought  to  Achilles  the  evil  tidings  of  Patroclus's  death
and  had  wept  as  he  delivered  his  message.  See  Homer,  //.  xvii.  694
sqq,y  xviii.  16  sqq.     Prof.  C.  Robert  thinks  that  Pausanias's  description


384  PAINTINGS  OF  POLYGNOTUS  BK.  x.  phocis

(rb  8c  irftocnaTTOv  koI  t^v  ic€<^X^v  earl  rats  \tpa-lv  dfA<fiOT€pats  €\i»}v
loTtv)  means  no  more  than  that  Antilochus  rested  his  chin  on  one  hand
and  supported  that  hand  with  the  other  {Die  Nekyia  des  Polygnot^  p,
65).  This  interpretation,  which  would  empty  the  posture  of  Aiitilochus
of  meaning,  can  hardly  be  reconciled  with  the  words  of  Pausanias.
This  is  only  one  of  several  cases  in  which  Professor  Robert  would  strip
the  figures  of  all  the  character  and  pathos  with  which  the  genius  of  the
great  painter  had  invested  them  and  thereby  reduce  them  from  the
tragic  to  the  commonplace.  Compare  his  remarks  on  the  figures  of
Tityus  (x.  29.  3),  Eriphyle  (x.  29.  7),  Hector  (x.  31.  5),  and  Orpheus
(x.  30.  6).

30.  4*  Phocns croBsed  from  Aegina  etc.   Cp.  ii.  29.  2  sq,^  9,

X.    I.    I.

30.  5.  Maera.  She  is  mentioned  by  Homer,  Od.  xi.  326.
According  to  Eustathius  (on  Od,  xi.  325)  Maera  was  one  of  the  maidens
who  attended  on  Artemis  ;  but  she  had  an  intrigue  with  Zeus  and  was
therefore  slain  by  Artemis.  "  But  others,"  adds  Eustathius,  "  say  that
Maera  died  a  maid."  From  the  present  passage  of  Pausanias  we  learn
that  among  the  "  others  "  who  held  the  latter  view  was  the  author  of  the
epic  called  The  Returns,

30.  6.  Orpheus  seated  as  it  were  on  a  sort  of  hill  .  .  .  The
aspect  of  Orpheus  is  Greek.  On  existing  monuments  of  ancient  art
Orpheus  is  generally  represented  in  full  Thracian  attire,  or  at  all  events
clad  in  a  gay  minstrel's  robe  with  a  tiara  on  his  head.  He  seldom  appears
in  ordinary  Greek  costume.  See  O.  Jahn,  in  Kieler  philologische  Studien
(Kiel,  1 84 1 ),  p.  1 1 2 ;  E.  Gerhard,  Ueber  Orpheus  unddie  Orphzker  (BcrMnj
1 861),  pp.  35  sgq.,  89  sgq,  Philostratus  Junior  {Ifnagines,  7)  describes
a  picture  of  Orpheus  wearing  a  glittering  tiara  on  his  head,  and  Calli-
stratus  {Descript.  7)  mentions  a  statue  of  Orpheus  in  the  grove  of  the
Muses  on  Mount  Helicon  which  represented  him  with  a  spangled  tiara
on  his  head  and  girt  with  a  golden  belt  under  his  breast.  But  on  the
other  hand  on  all  Attic  vases  of  the  first  two-thirds  of  the  fifth  century
B.C.  the  bard  appears,  as  in  the  contemporary  painting  of  Polygnotus,
clad  in  Greek  costume,  without  any  indication  of  his  Thracian  descent
(A.  Furtwangler,  in  Funfzigstes  Programm  zum  Winckelmannsfeste
(Berlin,  1890),  p.  156  sq,\  Thus  on  a  fine  vase  found  at  Gela  but  now
at  Berlin  he  is  depicted  sitting  on  a  knoll,  singing  and  playing  on  the
lyre ;  his  costume  consists  merely  of  a  loose  mantle  which  covers  the
lower  part  of  his  body,  but  the  four  men  who  stand  listening  wear  the  full
Thracian  attire,  namely  caps  of  foxskin  and  long-striped  mantles  hanging
from  the  shoulders.  See  Funfzigstes  Programm  zum  Winckelmannsfeste
(Berlin,  1890),  Tafel  ii.,  with  the  obser\'ations  of  Pro£  A.  Furtwangler,
p.  154  sqq.  Prof.  C.  Robert  holds  that  in  style  and  date  this  vase-
painting  comes  nearest  to  Polygnotus's  picture  of  Orpheus.  He  further
compares  a  Neapolitan  vase  of  somewhat  later  date  on  which  Orpheus,
similarly  attired,  is  depicted  playing  on  the  lyre  amid  a  group  of
listening  Thracians  (Raoul-Rochette,  Monuments  in^dits  d'antiquiti
figur^e  (Paris,  1833),  pi.  xiii.),  and  a  red-figured  Boeotian  vase  which
presents  us  with  a  like  scene  except  that  both  the  minstrel  and  his


CH.  XXX  PAINTINGS  OF  POLYGNOTUS  385

listeners  wear  the  Phrygian  costume  (Dumont  et  Chaplain,  Cdramiques
(U  la  Grlce  propre^  i.  pi.  xiv.).    See  C.  Robert,  Die  Nekyia  des  Polygnot^

pp.  53-55.

80.  6.  he  touches  some  willow-branches.  Why  Orpheus  should
be  depicted  touching  the  branches  of  a  willow -tree  is  not  clear.
Pausanias  has  himself  rightly  pointed  out  that  willows  grew  in  the  grove
of  Proserpine,  but  that  does  not  suffice  to  explain  the  gesture  of  Orpheus
in  the  picture.  Mr.  J.  Six  ingeniously  suggests  {Mittheilungen  d,  arch,
Inst  19  (1894),  p.  338  sq,)  that  when  Orpheus  went  to  hell  to  fetch  the
soul  of  his  lost  Eurydice  he  may  have  carried  in  his  hand  a  willow-
branch,  just  as  Aeneas  carried  the  Golden  Bough,  to  serve  as  a  passport
or  *  open  Sesame '  to  unlock  the  gates  of  Death  to  a  living  man,  and  that
in  memory  of  this  former  deed  the  painter  may  have  depicted  the  bard
touching  Uie  willow.  Virgil  tells  how  at  sight  of  the  Golden  Bough,  "  not
seen  for  long,"  the  surly  Charon  turned  his  crazy  bark  to  shore  and
received  Aeneas  on  board  i^Aen,  vi.  406  sqq,),  Mr.  Six  suggests  that
here  the  words  "  not  seen  for  long "  refer  to  the  time  when  Orpheus,
like  Aeneas,  had  passed  the  ferry  with  the  Golden  Bough  in  his  hand.
If  he  is  right,  Polygnotus  took  a  different  view  of  the  Golden  Bough
from  Virgil,  who  certainly  regarded  it  as  a  glorified  mistletoe  {Aen,
vi.  201  sqq,).  Prof.  C.  Robert  accepts  Mr.  Six's  explanation  {^Die
Maraihonschlacht  in  der  Poikile^  p.  122).  Formerly  he  held  that
Pausanias  had  misinterpreted  the  gesture  of  Orpheus  {Die  Nekyia
des  Polygnot^  p.  32).  The  bard,  on  Prof.  Robert's  earlier  view,
was  depicted  merely  holding  the  lyre  with  one  hand  and  playing
on  it  with  the  other,  and  a  branch  of  the  vrillow  under  which  he  sat
drooped  down  and  touched  the  hand  that  held  the  plectrum.  This
view,  which  Prof.  Robert  has  wisely  abandoned,  is  open  to  several
objections.  It  substitutes  a  commonplace  gesture,  which  Pausanias
could  hardly  have  so  grossly  mistaken,  for  a  remarkable  one  which,
however  it  is  to  be  explained,  had  clearly  struck  Pausanias  as  un-
usual and  significant.  Again,  if  Orpheus  had  been  depicted  playing,
would  not  some  one  have  been  represented  listening  ?  But  so  far  as
appears  from  Pausanias's  description  not  a  soul  was  paying  any  heed  to
the  magic  strains  of  the  great  minstrel.  It  seems  better,  therefore,  to
suppose  that,  like  Thamyris,  he  sat  sad  and  silent,  dreaming  of  life  in
the  bright  world,  of  love  and  music.

30.  6.  the  grove  of  Proserpine  etc.     See  Homer,  Od,  x.  509  sq,

30.  8.  Schedins,  who  led  the  Phocians  to  Troy.  See  x.  4.  2,  x.
36.  10  ;  Homer,  //.  ii.  517,  xvii.  306  sqq.  The  grass  vrith  which  in  the
picture  Schedius  was  crowned  may  have  been  the  special  kind  which
grew  on  Parnassus  (Dioscorides,  De  materia  medica^  iv.  32  ;  Pliny,  Nat.
hist,  iv.  178  sq,).  Such  a  crown  would  be  very  appropriate  to  the
Phocian  leader.

30.  8.  Thamyris  with  his  sightless  eyes  etc.  Cp.  iv.  33.  3,  7,
ix.  30.  2.

30.  9.  Marsyas  seated  on  a  rock  etc.  On  a  vase  found  in  Crete
and  now  at  Athens  Marsyas  is  depicted  sitting  under  a  tree  and  playing
the  double  flute  in  presence  of  Artemis,  Athena,  and  Apollo  ('£<^/A€pi9

VOL.  V  2  c


386  PAINTINGS  OF  POLYGNOTUS  bk.  x.  phocis

apxo.i,o\xiyi,K'f\^  1886,  pi.  i).  Prof.  C.  Robert  holds  that  this  vase-
painting  reflects  the  style  of  Polygnotus  (Die  Nekyia  des  Polygnot^
p.  56).

81.  I.  airniBJng  themselves  with  dice.  Prof.  C.  Robert  con-
jectures i^Die  Nekyia  des  Polygnot^  P-  57  note  37)  that  Euripides  may
have  had  this  group  in  his  mind  in  describing  the  two  Ajaxes  and
Protesilaus  playing  at  draughts  {Ipkigenia  in  Aulis^  192  sqq,).  The
subject  of  warriors  playing  at  dice  is  depicted  on  vases,  but  apparently
all  such  vase-paintings  are  older  than  the  time  of  Polygnotus  and  cannot
therefore  be  copies  of  the  group  here  described  by  Pausanias  (C.
Robert,  Lc).

81.  I.  The  coxiiplexion  of  the  latter  Ajftz  is  like  that  of  a
castaway  etc.  The  Locrian  Ajax  was  said  to  have  been  shipwrecked
and  drowned  on  his  return  from  Troy  (Homer,  Od,  iv.  499  sqg.).
Hence  every  year  the  Locrians  used  to  lade  a  ship  with  costly  sacrifices,
hoist  a  black  sail  on  the  mast,  set  the  ship  on  fire,  and  then  let  the
burning  bark  drift  away  across  the  sea,  that  it  might  convey  the  offerings
to  the  ghost  of  the  drowned  hero  (Tzetzes,  Scholia  on  Lycophron^  365).

81.  2.  Ulysses  advised  the  Gfreeks  to  stone  him  etc.  Arctinus  in
his  poem  the  Sack  of  Ilium  described  how  the  indignant  Greeks  were
eager  to  stone  Ajax  and  how  he  escaped  their  fiiry  by  flying  to  the  altar
of  Athena.  See  Proclus,  in  Epicorum  Graecorum  fragmenta^  ed.  Kinkel,
p.  49  sq.     As  to  stoning  as  a  mode  of  execution,  see  note  on  iv.  22.  7.

81.  3.  Homer  says  that  the  Fnry  hearkened  to  the  curses  of
Althaea  etc.  See  Ilicul^  ix.  565  sqq,  Meleager's  death  is  mentioned
by  Homer  elsewhere  (//.  ii.  642).

81.  4.  The  legend  of  the  fire-brand  etc.  See  Aeschylus,  Chocpk,
604  sqq,\  Apollodorus,  i.  8.  2  sq,  ;  Hyginus,  Fab,  171  and  174;
Diodorus,  iv.  34.  6  ;  Antoninus  Liberalis,  Trans/ortn.  2  ;  Ovid,  Met.  viii.
445  sqq.  The  legend  of  Meleager,  including  the  story  of  his  death,  is
illustrated  by  reliefs  on  Roman  sarcophaguses  and  other  monuments  of
ancient  art.  See  R.  Kekul^,  De  fabula  Meleagrca^  P*  35  sqq.  ;  F.  Matz,
*  Sarcofaghi  di  Meleagro,'  Annali  delP  Inst,  di  Corr,  Archeol,  41  (1869),
pp.  76-103;  G.  Korte,  ib.  53  (1881),  pp.  1 68-181  ;  Th.  Hartmann,
Meleager  in  dergriechisch-romischen  Kunst  (Wohlau,  1 889) ;  Baumeister*s
Denkmdler,  p.  914  sqq.  According  to  another  version  of  the  story
Meleager's  life  depended,  not  on  a  fire-brand,  but  on  a  twig  of  olive  which
his  mother  swallowed  in  her  pregnancy  and  which  afterwards  she  gave
birth  to  along  with  the  child,  and  it  was  the  burning  of  this  olive  twig
which  caused  Meleager's  death.  See  Tzetzes,  Schol,  on  Lycophron^  492  ;
Malala,  Chronogr.  vi.  p.  165  sq.^  ed.  Dindorf ;  G.  Knaack,  *  Zur  Meleager-
sage,'  Rheinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  49  (1894),  pp.  310-313,  476-478.
For  parallels  to  the  story  of  Meleager  see  The  Golden  Bough,  2.  p.
296  sqq.

31.  5.  Hector  seated :  his  hands  are  clasped  round  his  left  knee.
In  vase-paintings  some  figures  are  depicted  in  this  attitude  (Raoul-
Rochette,  Monutnents  inddits  d" antiquity figur^e  (Paris,  1833),  pi.  xxxi.
A ;  Baumeister's  Denkmdler,  p.  860,  fig.  940 ;  P.  Girard,  Lxi  peinture
antique,  p.  I73»  ^Z*  93>  P-  i74,  fig.  94),  and  one  of  the  seated  gods.


CH.  XXXI  MEMNOirS  GRA  VE  387

perhaps  Ares,  is  so  represented  in  the  Parthenon  frieze  (E.  Petersen,
Die  Kunst  des  Pheidiasy  p.  350  j^.  ;  A.  H.  Smith,  Catalogue  of  Greek
Sculpture  in  the  British  Museum^  r.  p.  155  sq.).  Prof.  C.  Robert
holds  that  Pausanias  was  wrong  in  interpreting  the  attitude  as  indicative
of  sorrow  (^Die  Nekyia  des  Poiygnot,  p.  68),  and  it  may  be  admitted  that
to  nurse  one's  leg  is  not  necessarily  a  mark  of  deep  grief.  But  the
sorrow  which  Pausanias  detected  may  have  been  expressed  by  Hector's
face  rather  than  by  his  legs.  He  had  reason  enough  to  be  sad.  Cp.
R.  Schone,  m  Jahrbuch  d,  arch.  Inst.  8  (1893),  pp.  214-316.

81.  6.  on  certain  days  these  birds  go  to  Memnon's  grave.
Aelian  describes  the  birds  of  Memnon  as  black  in  colour  and  like  hawks
in  shape ;  they  were  not  carnivorous  but  fed  on  seeds  only.  They
inhabited  the  districts  of  Parium  and  Cyzicus  on  the  Propontis ;  but
every  year,  at  the  beginning  of  autumn,  they  flew  in  flocks  to  the
tomb  of  Memnon  in  the  Troad.  Here  they  took  sides  and  fought  till
half  of  them  were  killed  ;  whereupon  the  rest  flew  back  to  the  place  from
which  they  had  come.  See  Aelian,  Nat.  anim.  v.  i.  According  to
some  authorities  the  birds  came  from  Ethiopia  to  Memnon's  tomb  in  the
Troad ;  and  Cremutius  aflirmed  that  the  birds  fought  in  like  manner  at
Memnon's  palace  in  Ethiopia  (Pliny,  Nat.  hist.  x.  74).  Some  said  that
the  birds  were  originally  Memnon's  comrades  who  had  bewailed  his  death
so  bitterly  that  the  gods  in  pity  had  turned  them  into  birds  (Servius
on  Virgil,  Aen.  i.  751).  According  to  Ovid  {Met.  xiii.  600  sqq.)  the
volumes  of  black  smoke  rising  from  Memnon's  pyre  were  changed,  by
the  will  of  Jupiter,  into  birds,  which  afterwards  behaved  in  the  way
described  above.  Near  Memnon's  grave  in  the  Troad  there  was  a
village  called  Memnon's  village.  The  river  Aesepus  was  not  far  off
(Strabo,  xiii.  p.  587).  According  to  Simonides  in  his  poem  Memnon
the  grave  of  Memnon  was  at  Paltus  in  Syria  (Strabo,  xv.  p.  728).
The  name  Memnon  is  said  to  be  the  Semitic  Naaman^  *  darling.'
W.  Robertson  Smith  identified  Memnon  with  Adonis.  He  says  :  "  The
characteristic  feature  in  the  ritual  of  Adonis  is  that  the  god  was  wor-
shipped first  as  dead  and  then  as  again  alive,  and  accordingly  his  tomb
was  shown  at  various  places  of  his  worship  in  connexion  with  temples  of
Astarte.  Adonis  (Mord')  is  a  mere  title,  and  essentially  the  same  wor-
ship is  associated  with  other  names,  especially  with  that  of  the  eastern
Memnon,  a  figure  quite  indistinguishable  from  Adonis,  whose  tombs
(Memnonia)  were  shown  in  various  parts  of  the  East."  See  W.
Robertson  Smith,  *Ctesias  and  the  Semiramis  legend,'  English  Historical
Review^  2  (1887),  p.  307.

31.  7*  he  came  to  Ilium  from  Snsa  in  Persia.     Cp.  i.  42.

3  ;  iv.  31.  5  note.

31.  7-  The  Phrygians  still  show  the  road  etc.  This  was
probably  not  the  *  Royal  Road'  to  Susa  (Herodotus,  v.  52  sq.)^  for
that  road  was  very  circuitous,  whereas  Memnon's  road,  according  to
Pausanias,  took  short  cuts.  Prof.  W.  M.  Ramsay,  whom  I  consulted
as  to  the  present  passage,  wrote  to  me  (20th  September  1892):  "I
have  not  a  Pausanias  by  me ;  but  the  sentence  seems  to  imply  a
diflerent  road  from  the  Royal  Road,  forking  at  Leonton  Kephalai  from


388  THE  WATER-CARRIERS  bk.  x.  phocis

it  and  going  down  the  Rhyndacus.  I  had  vainly  sought  for  some
evidence  of  this  path  having  been  in  use  in  early  time ;  and  I  hope
you  have  supplied  it."  In  my  letter  to  Prof.  Ramsay  I  suggested  that
Memnon's  road  was  possibly  so  called  on  account  of  certain  sepulchral
mounds  by  which  it  may  have  been  lined  at  intervals  and  which  might
have  been  known  as  the  graves  of  Memnon  (see  note  on  §  6).  In  his
reply  Prof  Ramsay  says :  "  The  Royal  Road  was  certainly  marked  by
a  series  of  large  tumuli,  several  of  which  to  my  knowledge  retain  traces
of  old  religious  feeling  attaching  to  them."  In  a  subsequent  letter,
Prof  Ramsay  mentions  that  one  of  these  large  tumuli  contains  a
*  Hittite '  inscription,  which  he  published  in  the  Mitiheil,  d.  arch,  Inst,
in  A  then  some  years  ago.

31.  8.  Paris is  clapping  his  hands.     Prof  C.  Robert  {Die

Nekyia  des  Polygnot,  p.  56)  compares  a  vase-painting  in  which  a
Bacchanal  is  represented  dancing  and  clapping  her  hands  (Dumont  et
Chaplain,  Les  ciramiques  de  la  Grlce  propre,  pi.  xvii.).

31.  9.  The  women are  carrying  water  in  broken  pitchers

etc.  These  women,  described  by  the  legend  as  being  of  the  number  of
the  uninitiated,  were  most  probably  carrying  the  water  to  pour  it  into
the  wine-jar  mentioned  below.  That  jar,  though  Pausanias  does  not
say  so,  may  be  supposed  to  have  been  represented  as  broken,  so  that
the  task  of  attempting  to  fill  it  with  water  would  be  endless.  *•  To  pour
water  into  a  broken  jar "  was  an  ancient  proverb  (Xenophon,  Oeconomi-
cusy  vii.  40 ;  Aristotle,  Oeconomicus^  i.  6  ;  Lucretius,  iii.  936  sq,  ;
Plautus,  Pseudolus,  Act  i.  Scene  iii.  1 50).  Plato  refers  to  the  uninitiated
in  hell  carrying  water  in  a  sieve  to  a  broken  jar  (Gargias^  p.  493  b).  It
has  been  suggested  that  the  reason  for  assigning  this  peculiar  punish-
ment to  the  uninitiated  in  hell  is  illustrated  by  the  ancient  Greek
custom  of  placing  a  pitcher  of  a  special  sort  called  *  bath-bearer '  (loutro-
phoros)  on  the  grave  of  an  unmarried  person  (Demosthenes,  xliv.  1 8  and
30,  pp.  1086,  1089).  Some  of  the  ancient  interpreters,  who  wrote
after  the  custom  had  fallen  into  disuse,  supposed  that  the  *  bath-bearers '
placed  on  the  tombs  of  the  unmarried  were  figures  of  boys  or  girls
carrying  such  pitchers  (Harpocration  and  Suidas,  s.v.  XovTpo<f>6f>os ;
Pollux,  viii.  66) ;  but  archaeological  discoveries  have  confirmed  the
view  of  Eustathius  (on  Homer,  //.  xxiii.  141,  p.  1293)  that  it  was  the
pitcher  itself,  or  at  all  events  a  representation  of  it  carved  in  relief,
which  was  thus  used  to  mark  the  graves  of  maids  and  bachelors.  In
shape  these  pitchers,  of  which  some  have  been  found,  were  tall  and
slender,  with  a  high  neck  and  high  handles  on  either  side.  See  A
Milchhofer,  in  Mittheilungen  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  5  (1880),  pp.  174-
177;  A.  Herzog,  *  Lutrophoros,'  Archdologische  Zeitung^  40  (1882),
pp.  131-144  ;  P.  Wolters,  *Rotfigurige  Lutrophoros,'  Mittheilungen  d,
arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  16  (1891),  pp.  371-405,  and  ib.  18  (1893),  P-  66
sq.  The  intention  was,  according  to  Eustathius  (/.r.),  to  intimate  that
the  person  on  whose  grave  one  of  these  pitchers  stood  had  never
enjoyed  the  bath  which  a  Greek  bride  and  bridegroom  took  on  their
wedding  day,  and  for  which  the  water  was  fetched  from  a  special  spring
by  a  boy  who  was  a  near  kinsman  (Harpocration  and  Suidas,  s,v.  A.ov-


CH.  XXXI  THE  UNMARRIED  DEAD  389

rpoiJMpos ;  Photius,  Lexicon^  sro,  Xovrpd ;  Pollux,  iii.  43,  who  is  prob-
ably wrong  in  saying  that  the  water  was  fetched  by  a  girl).     Now  since
marriage  was  regarded  and  spoken  of  as  an  initiation  (Pollux,  iii.  38),  it
is  p)ossibIe  that  persons  who  died  unmarried  were  believed  to  be  sub-
jected to  the  same  penalty  in  the  nether  world  as  those  who  had  never
been  initiated  in  the  Eleusinian  or  other  great  religious  mysteries,  and
that  their  penalty  was  to  fetch  water  for  ever  for  that  bath  which,  having
failed  to  take  in  the  upper  world,  they  could  never  more  take  in  a  world
where  there  is  neither  marrying  nor  giving  in  marriage.     Similarly  we
may  suppose  that  candidates  for  initiation  in  the  great  mysteries  had
always  to  take  a  bath,   as  they  had  in  the  case  of  the   Eleusinian
mysteries  (Hesychius,  j.?/.  aAaSe  /ivcrrai ;  Polyaenus,  iii.   11.  2;  G.  F.
Schomann,  Griechische  AUerthuuier?  2.  p.  387),  and  that  their  punish-
ment in  the  lower  world  was  in  like  manner  a  vain  attempt,  prolonged
for  ever,  to  enjoy  the  sacred  privilege  which  they  had  missed  in  life.
It  is  possible  that  the  original  reason  why  the  Danaids  were  believed  to
be  condemned  to  this  punishment  in  hell  was  not  so  much  that  they
murdered,  as  that  they  did  not  marry,  the  sons  of  Aeg^ptus.     According
to  one  tradition,  indeed,  they  afterwards  married  other  husbands  (Paus.
iii.    12.  2);  but  according  to  another  legend  they  were  murdered  by
Lynceus,  apparently  before  marriage    (Schol.    on    Euripides,   Hecuba^
886).     They  may,  therefore,  have  been  chosen  as  types  of  unmarried
women,  and  their  punishment  need  not  have  been  peculiar  to  them  but
may  have  been  the  one  supposed  to  await  all  unmarried  persons  in  the
nether   world.      Further,   if  this   explanation    of  their   punishment   is
correct,  it  may  very  well  be  that  some  of  the  water-pouring  figures  in
existing  monuments  of  ancient  art,  which  have  been  interpreted  as  the
Danaids,  really  represent  unmarried  or  uninitiated  women  in  general,
not   the   Danaids  in   particular.      This  view  is  confirmed  by  a  vase-
painting,  already  referred  to  (note  on  x.  29.  1),  which  represents  male
as  well  as  female  figures  bringing  water  in  pitchers  and  pouring  it  into  a
large  jar  {Archdolo^ische  Zeitung^  28  (1871),  pi.  31.  22).     This  scene,
which  is  proved  to  be  laid  in  hell  by  the  presence  of  Indolence  and  his
ass,  probably  represents  the  punishment  of  the  uninitiated  or  unmarried.
The  explanation  here  given  of  the  punishment  in  question  is  substantially
the  one  which  has  been  put  forward  or  accepted  by  Prof.  E.  Rohde  {Psyche^
p.   292  note  I),  Mr.  E.  Kuhnert  {Jahrbuch  des  archdolog.  Instituts^  8
(1893),  pp.    109- 1 II),   and  Mr.  A.   Dieterich  {Nekyia:  Beitrdge  zur
Erkldrung  der  neuentdeckten  Petrusapokalypse  (Leipzig,   1893),  P«   7o
note  I ).     It  may  be  suggested  that  originally  the  custom  of  placing  a
water-pitcher  on  the  grave  of  unmarried  persons  had  a  more  kindly
significance  than  that  of  hinting  at  the  weary  task  to  which  they  wer**
doomed  to  all  eternity.     It  may  have  been  meant  to  help  them  to  obtain
in  another  world  the  happiness  they  had  missed  in  this.     In  fact,  it  may
have  been  part  of  a  ceremony  designed  to  provide  the  dead  maiden  or
bachelor  with  a  spouse  in  the  spirit  land.     Such  ceremonies  have  been
observed  in  various  parts  of  the  world  by  peoples  who,  like  the  Greeks,
esteemed  it  a  great  misfortune  to  die  unmarried.     Thus  Marco  Polo
reports  that  among  the  Tartars  "  if  any  man  have  a  daughter  who  dies


390  MARRIAGE  OF  THE  DEAD  bk.  x.  phocis

before  marriage,  and  another  man  have  had  a  son  also  die  before
marriage,  the  parents  of  the  two  arrange  a  grand  wedding  between  the
dead  lad  and  lass.  And  marry  them  they  do,  making  a  regular  con-
tract !  And  when  the  contract  papers  are  made  out  they  put  them  in
the  fire,  in  order  (as  they  will  have  it)  that  the  parties  in  the  other
world  may  know  the  fact,  and  so  look  on  each  other  as  man  and  wife.
And  the  parents  thenceforward  consider  themselves  sib  to  each  other
just  as  if  their  children  had  lived  and  married.  Whatever  may  be
agreed  on  between  the  parties  as  dowry,  those  who  have  to  pay  it  cause
to  be  painted  on  pieces  of  paper  and  then  put  these  in  the  fire,  saying
that  in  that  way  the  dead  person  will  get  all  the  real  articles  in  the
other  world"  (Marco  Polo,  translated  by  Col.  H.  Yule,  2nd  ed.,  i.  p.
259  sq,").  The  same  custom  is  also  vouched  for  the  Tartars  by  Alex-
ander Guagninus  (*  De  religione  Muscovitanun  omniumque  Ruthenorum,'
printed  in  De  Russorum,  Muscovitarum  et  Tartarorum  religione^  sacri-
ficiis^  nuptiarum^  funerum  ritu  (Spirae  libera  civitate,  1582),  p.  253).
Similarly  in  China  at  the  present  day  the  spirits  of  boys  who  died  in
infancy  are,  after  a  proper  interval,  formally  married  to  the  spirits  of
g^rls  who  have  been  cut  off  at  a  like  early  age ;  the  ceremony  is  per-
formed over  two  paper  effigies  representing  the  bride  and  bridegroom,
which  are  afterwards  burned,  together  with  a  liberal  supply  of  paper
clothes,  paper  money,  paper  man-servants  and  maid-servants,  etc.,  for
the  use  of  the  newly-wedded  couple  in  the  spirit  land  (J.  H.  Gray,
Chinay  i.  pp.  216-218  ;  cp.  S.  Kidd,  China^  P»  i79  sq,).  Amongst  the
Ingush  of  the  Caucasus  when  a  man's  son  dies  another  man  whose
daughter  is  dead  will  go  to  him  and  say,  "  Your  son  may  need  a  wife
in  the  other  world,  I  will  give  him  my  daughter.  Pay  me  the  price  of
the  bride."  Such  an  obliging  offer  is  never  refused,  though  the  price
of  a  bride  is  sometimes  as  much  as  thirty  cows.  See  J.  von  Klaproth,
Reise  in  den  Kaukasus  und  nach  Georgien^  i.  p.  616  sq.  \  Potocki,
Voyage  dans  les  steps  d^ Astrakhan  et  du  Caucase  (Paris,  1829),  i.  p.
127  (who,  however,  merely  copies  Klaproth).  The  old  Slavonians  "so
severely  pitied  the  lot  of  the  unmarried  dead,  that,  before  committing
their  bodies  to  the  grave,  they  were  in  the  habit  of  finding  them
partners  for  eternity.  The  fact  that,  among  some  Slavonian  peoples,  if
a  man  died  a  bachelor  a  wife  was  allotted  to  him  after  his  death,  rests
on  the  authority  of  several  witnesses,  and  in  a  modified  form  the  prac-
tice has  been  retained  in  some  places  up  to  the  present  day.  In  Little
Russia,  for  instance,  a  dead  maiden  is  dressed  in  nuptial  attire,  and
friends  come  to  her  fimeral  as  to  a  wedding,  and  a  similar  custom  is
observed  on  the  death  of  a  lad.  In  Podolia,  also,  a  young  girPs  funeral
is  conducted  after  the  fashion  of  a  wedding,  a  youth  being  chosen  as
the  bridegroom  who  attends  her  to  the  grave,  with  the  nuptial  kerchief
twined  around  his  arm.  From  that  time  her  family  consider  him  their
relative,  and  the  rest  of  the  community  look  upon  him  as  a  widower.
In  some  parts  of  Servia  when  a  lad  dies,  a  girl  dressed  as  a  bride
follows  him  to  the  tomb,  carrying  two  crowns  ;  one  of  these  is  thrown
to  the  corpse,  and  the  other  she  keeps,  at  least  for  a  time  "  (W.  R.  S.
Ralston,  Songs  of  the  Russian  People^  p.  309  sq.).     Similar  practices


CH.  XXXI  MARRIAGE  OF  THE  DEAD  391

appear  to  have  prevailed  in  Germany  in  the  Middle  Ages,  for  the
Wiirzburg  Synods  of  1329  and  1330  forbade  the  priests  to  bless  the
survivor  of  a  betrothed  pair  beside  the  dead  body  of  the  other  (G.
Lammert,  Volksmedizin  und  medizinischer  Aberglaube  in  Bayem
(Wiirzburg,  1869),  p.  153).  This  blessing  of  the  living  beside  the  dead
may  possibly  have  been  the  relic  of  a  more  barbarous  and  realistic
marriage  ceremony  such  as  is  still,  or  was  till  lately,  celebrated  between
the  living  and  the  dead  in  the  caste  known  as  nambaury  in  Travancore
(J.  A.  Dubois,  McBurs^  Institutions^  et  CMmanies  des  peuples  de  Plnde^
I.  p.  4  sq,).  Amongst  the  Romans  it  was  customary,  when  a  number
of  corpses  were  being  burned  together,  to  place  one  woman's  body  with
every  ten  bodies  of  men  (Plutarch,  Quaest.  Comnv,  iii.  4.  2  ;  Macrobius,
Saturn,  vii.  7.  5).  It  is  possible  that  this  custom  originated  in  the
feeling  that  it  was  necessary  to  provide  dead  men  with  female  com-
panions in  the  other  world  The  notion  that  it  is  highly  improper  to
appear  in  the  spirit-land  without  a  wife  or  a  female  companion  of  some
sort  is  deeply  impressed  on  the  Fijian  mind.  At  a  certain  place  on  the
road  to  the  Fijian  hell  *<  there  lies  in  wait  a  terrible  god,  called  Nang-
ganangga,  who  is  utterly  implacable  towards  the  ghosts  of  the  unmarried.
He  is  especially  ruthless  towards  bachelors,  among  whom  he  persists  in
classing  all  male  ghosts  who  come  to  him  unaccompanied  by  their  wives.
Turning  a  deaf  ear  to  their  protestations,  he  seizes  them,  lifts  them  above
his  head,  and  breaks  them  in  two  by  dashing  them  down  on  a  projecting
rock.  Hence  it  is  absolutely  necessary  for  a  man  to  have  at  least  one
of  his  wives,  or,  at  all  events,  a  female  ghost  of  some  sort  following  him  '*
(Lorimer  Fison,  in  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute^  10  (1881),
p.  1 39).  Hence  in  Fiji  a  woman  was  always  killed  and  buried  with  a
dead  man,  and  the  Roman  custom  just  mentioned  may  have  been
originally  similar.  Women  who  died  before  their  husbands  in  Fiji,  on
the  other  hand,  were  not  obliged  to  produce  their  husbands'  ghosts
before  being  admitted  to  the  spirit  land ;  it  was  enough  if  they
showed  a  certificate  of  marriage  in  the  shape  of  their  husband's  beard,
which  the  widower  was  careful  to  place  under  his  wife's  left  arm  in
committing  her  to  the  grave  (Fison,  ib.),

31.  10.  as  the  price  of  Pero's  hand Nelens  demanded  etc.

See  Homer,  Od.  xi.  287  sqq,

31.  10.  Oallisto  has  a  bearskin  for  a  mat.      See  note  on  viii.
3.  6.

31.  10.  the  statement  of  the  Arcadians  that  Nomia  etc.    See

viii.  38.  II.

31.  10.  The  poets  say  that  the  nymphs  live  a  great  many  years

etc  See  the  Homeric  Hymn  to  Aphrodite^  257  sqq. ;  Hesiod,  quoted
by  Plutarch,  De  de/ectu  oraculorum^  11.  According  to  Hesiod,  a  crow
lives  nine  times  as  long  as  a  man,  a  deer  four  times  as  long  as  a  crow,
a  raven  three  times  as  long  as  a  deer,  a  phoenix  nine  times  as  long  as  a
raven,  and  a  nymph  ten  times  as  long  as  a  phoenix.

31.  10.  Sisyphus struggling  to  shore  the  stoni  etc.    See

Homer,  Od  xi.  593  sqq.  Sisyphus  and  his  stone  are  depicted  on  vases
and  form  the  subject  of  a  wall-painting  found  on  the  Esquiline  hill  at


392  THE  STONE  OF  TANTALUS  bk.  x.  phocis

Rome.  See  Miillcr-Wieseler,  Denkmdler^  i.  pi.  Ivi,  No.  275  a;  id.y
2.  pi.  Ixviii.  No.  861  ;  icL^  2.  pi.  Ixix.  No.  866;  Miss  J.  E.  Harrison,
Myths  of  the  Odyssey^  pp.  116  sq,^  135,  pi.  vii.  and  33;  Baumeister's
Denkmdler,  pp.  1923  sq,^  1928,  1929,  1930,  figures  2040,  2042  a,
2042  B.

31.  12.  Tantalus  suffering  all  the  torments  that  Homer  has
described.     See  Od,  xi.  582  sqq,

81.  12.  the  stone  hung  over  him  etc.  This  punishment  of
Tantalus,  which  is  not  mentioned  by  Homer,  was  alluded  to  by  the
poets  Alcaeus,  Alcman,  and  Archilochus.  The  couple  of  lines  in  which
Archilochus  referred  to  the  stone  of  Tantalus  have  been  preserved.  See
Schol.  on  Pindar,  Olymp,  i.  97  ;  Plutarch,  Praecept,  gerend,  reipub.  6 ;
Poetae  Lyrici  Graeciy  ed.  Bergk,  2.^  p.  696.  The  s^uthor  of  the  epic
The  Return  of  the  Atridae^  which  was  probably  identical  with  the  epic
commonly  known  as  The  Returns  (Nostot),  also  mentioned  this  punish-
ment (Athenaeus,  vii.  p.  281  be ;  Epicorum  Graecorum  fragmenta^  ed.
Kinkel,  p.  56),  and  in  the  extant  works  of  classical  writers  it  is  often
referred  to.  See  Pindar,  Olymp,  i.  89  sqq,^  Isihm,  vii.  [viii.]  20  sq.  ;  Euri-
pides, Orestes^  5  sq, ;  Plato,  Cratylus^  p.  395  d;  Hyperides,  Frag.  176,
p.  1 02  ed.  Blass  ;  Antipater,  in  Anthologia  Pcdatina^  Appendix  Planudee^
iv.  No.  131  ;  Apollodorus,  ed.  R.  Wagner,  p.  182;  Epitoma  VcUicana
ex  Apollodori  bibliotheca^  ed.  R.  Wagner,  p.  58  ;  Plutarch,  De  super-
stitione^  11;  Philostratus,  Vit,  Apollon,  iii.  25;  Apostolius,  Cent,  vii.
60,  xvi.  9  ;  Mythographi  Graeci^  ed.  Westermann,  Appendix,  p.  386,
No.  73  ;  Lucretius,  iii.  980  sq,  ;  Cicero,  TuscuL  iv.  16.  36,  De  Finibus^
i.  18.  60;  Hyginus,  Fab.  82.  In  the  original  version  of  the  story  it
would  seem  that  Tantalus  endured  this  torment  not  in  hell  but  in
heaven,  where  he  had  been  admitted  to  the  table  of  the  gods.  Zeus
promised  to  give  him  whatever  he  desired,  and  Tantalus  asked  to  live
for  ever,  like  the  gods.  Angry  at  his  presumption  Zeus  kept  his
promise  by  granting  him  the  wished-for  immortality,  but  hung  a  great
stone,  like  the  sword  of  Damocles,  over  his  head,  the  fear  of  which
prevented  Tantalus  from  enjoying  the  heavenly  banquet  which  was  for
ever  spread  out  before  his  eyes.  This  was  apparently  the  form  which
the  story  took  in  TIte  Return  of  the  Atridae^  if  we  may  judge  from
the  abstract  of  it  given  by  Athenaeus.  See  F.  G.  Welcker,  *  Alcmanis
fragmentum  de  Tantalo,'  Rheinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  10  (1856),  pp.
242-254;  D.  Comparetti,  *  Die  Strafe  des  Tantalus  bei  Pindar,*
Philologus^  32  (1873),  PP-  227-251  ;  J.  E.  Hyl^n,  De  Tantalo  (IJpsal^
1896),  pp.  51  sqq.,  77  sqq.  Cp.  K.  Schwenk,  in  Rheinisches  Museum^
N.  F.  II  (1857),  p.  451  sq.

82.  I.  Abutting  on  the  sacred  close  is  a  theatre.  The  statement
of  Pausanias  that  the  theatre  abutted  on  the  sacred  precinct  is  exact
It  stood  in  fact  outside  of  the  precinct  on  the  north-west,  occupying  an
angle  formed  by  the  wall  of  the  precinct  which  bounds  the  theatre  on
two  sides,  the  south  and  east  When  the  early  traveller  Cyriacus  of
Ancona  visited  Delphi  in  the  fifteenth  century,  he  counted  thirty-three
rows  of  seats  in  the  theatre,  built  of  large  stones.  After  his  time,  how-
ever, the  building  was  gradually  buried  under  the  soil  which  slipped


CH.  XXXII  THE  DELPHIC  THEATRE  393

down  from  the  steep  ground  above,  so  that  towards  the  end  of  the
nineteenth  century  very  little  of  it  appeared  above  ground  The  south-
east corner,  however,  together  with  pieces  of  the  southern  and  eastern
walls  and  a  good  piece  of  the  north  wall,  supported  by  two  buttresses,
were  visible.  On  the  south  wall,  which  was  standing  to  a  height  of
about  9  feet,  inscriptions  might  be  read  like  those  on  the  polygonal
terrace-wall  of  the  temple,  with  which  they  are  approximately  con-
temporary ;  they  record  the  manumission  of  slaves.  Chandler  saw  these
inscriptions  in  the  eighteenth  century  {Travels  in  Greece^  p.  267).
Now,  however,  the  whole  theatre  has  been  excavated  by  the  French
and  turns  out  to  be,  contrary  to  expectation,  one  of  the  best  preserved
in  Greece.  The  foundations  of  the  stage,  the  orchestra  with  its  stone
pavement,  and  the  seats  of  the  spectators  almost  or  quite  to  the  top  of
the  theatre,  together  with  the  supporting-walls  of  the  auditorium  at  both
sides,  are  all  preserved.  The  material  of  which  the  edifice  is  constructed
is  the  common  stone  of  Parnassus.  Thirty-three  tiers  of  seats  exist,
divided  into  seven  wedge-shaped  blocks  by  staircases  radiating  from  the
orchestra.  The  diazoma  or  horizontal  passage  dividing  the  tiers  of  seats
into  an  upper  and  a  lower  section,  is  paved  with  stone  and  is  well  pre-
served. There  are  no  chairs  in  the  front  row,  next  to  the  orchestra ;
the  seats  there  are  just  like  those  in  the  rest  of  the  theatre,  except  that
they  are  covered  with  inscriptions  recording  the  manumission  of  slaves.
The  passage  {parados)  leading  into  the  orchestra  from  the  west  is
blocked  with  a  large  marble  pedestal^  on  the  north  side  of  which  an
inscription,  now  upside  down,  mentions  that  the  offering,  whatever  it
was,  had  been  dedicated  by  the  Cnidians.  We  may  conjecture  that
the  offering  was  no  other  than  the  image  of  Dionysus  mentioned  by
Pausanias.  The  front  of  the  stage  was  adorned  with  sculptured  reliefs
in  white  marble  about  .80  metre  (2  ft.  7  J  in.)  high,  of  which  considerable
remains  have  been  found.  They  represent  the  labours  of  Hercules.
We  see  the  hero  shooting  arrows  at  the  Stymphalian  birds,  rescuing
Hesione  from  the  sea-monster,  fighting  the  Centaurs,  and  contending
with  the  giant  Antaeus  and  with  King  Diomede  and  his  man-eating
steeds.  It  is  supposed  that  these  sculptured  decorations  were  added  by
Attalus,  king  of  Pergamus,  and  that  the  subject  of  the  reliefs  was
chosen  with  reference  to  the  legendary  connexion  of  Pergamus  with
Hercules  through  Telephus,  the  son  of  the  hero  by  Auge.  The  remains
of  the  stage-buildings,  Mr.  Homolle  informed  me,  throw  no  fresh  light
on  the  vexed  question  of  the  use  of  a  raised  stage  in  Greek  theatres.
The  earliest  inscription  which  mentions  the  theatre  dates  from  about
150  B.C.,  and  to  this  period  approximately  the  building  may  be  assigned.
It  faces  south-east  across  the  deep  glen  of  the  Plistus :  the  view  from
it  is  fine.

See  Athettaeumy  29th  June  1897,  p.  846  ;  Berliner  philolog.  Wochenschrift^
13th  July  1895,  P'  928;  iV/.,  27th  February  1897,  p.  287;  Archdologischer
Anzeiger,  1896,  p.  73.  For  notices  of  the  theatre  before  its  complete  excavation
see  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen^  I.  p.  108 ;  F.  G.  Welcker,  Tagebuch^
2.  p.  67  sq. ;  P.  Foucart,  Mimoire  sur  les  mines  et  Vhistoire  de  Delpkes,^.  103  so, ;
Baedeker,'  p.  160 ;  Guide-Joanne ,  2.  p.  41  ;  H.  Pomtow,  Beitrdge  zur  Topographie
von  Delphi^  p.  40  sq.


394  THE  DELPHIC  STADIUM  bk.  x.  phcx:is

32.  I.  a  stadium  in  the  highest  part  of  the  city.  In  accordance
with  this  statement  of  Pausanias  the  stadium  occupies  a  commanding
situation  in  the  very  highest  part  of  Delphi,  to  the  north-west  of  the
sacred  precinct.  Standing  on  its  southern  edge  you  look,  as  it  seems,
almost  perpendicularly  down  on  the  ruins  of  the  sanctuary  and  the  deep
glen  of  the  Plistus,  across  which  rise,  in  full  view,  the  high  rocky
mountains  that  stretch  thence  southward  to  the  sea.  On  the  other
three  sides,  west,  north,  and  east,  the  stadium  is  bounded  by  steep
ascending  slopes  of  rugged  rocks  and  the  soaring  precipices  of  Parnassus.
A  more  striking  scene  for  the  celebration  of  national  games  could  hardly
be  imagined.

The  narrow  shelf  of  flat  ground  which  thus  breaks  the  slope  of  the
mountain  and  was  chosen  as  the  site  of  the  stadium  extends  east  and
west  or,  to  be  more  exact,  north-east  and  south-west  for  a  length  of
about  630  feet.  In  breadth  as  well  as  length  the  stadium  includes
every  foot  of  flat  ground  that  was  to  be  had.  On  its  southern  or  rather
south-eastern  side  it  is  supported  on  the  abrupt  slope  by  a  massive  and
well-preserved  wall  of  ancient  polygonal  masonry,  which  is  still  in  some
places  from  9  to  1 2  feet  high  with  from  ^\^  to  seven  courses  of  stones.
Some  of  these  stones  are  large :  one  of  them  measures  1 3  feet  long.
The  antiquity  of  the  wall  is  attested  by  an  inscription,  carved  on  it  in
letters  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  which  forbids  the  bringing  of  new  wine
into  the  sanctuary  of  Eudromus.  The  interior  of  the  stadium  was
entirely  excavated  by  the  French  in  1896,  and  was  found  to  be  in
almost  perfect  preservation  from  end  to  end.  Like  the  southern
supporting-wall  it  is  built  of  the  reddish  local  stone.  There  are  twelve
tiers  of  seats,  and  at  regular  intervals  of  14  metres  a  flight  of  twenty-
four  steps,  forming  a  gangway,  leads  up  through  them.  The  seats
resemble  those  in  Greek  theatres.     The  front  of  each  is  hollowed  out

somewhat  below,  and  on  the  upper  surface,^  towards  the
back,  there  is  a  sinking  to  receive  the  feet  of  the  person
who  sat  in  the  tier  above.  A  good  many  of  the  seats
were  lying  detached  on  the  southern  edge  of  the  stadium
before  the  French  excavations.  In  the  middle  of  the
lowest  tier  of  seats  on  the  north  side  there  is  a  seat  of  honour  for  the
presidents  of  the  games.  It  consists  of  a  long  bench  with  projecting
ends.  At  the  eastern  end  of  the  race-course  a  few  seats  are  hewn  in
the  side  of  a  massive  rock,  which  here  bounds  the  stadium  at  the  foot
of  the  tall  cliffs  of  Parnassus.  From  these  seats  we  catch  a  glimpse  of
the  Gulf  of  Crisa  away  to  the  south-west.

Of  the  Pentelic  marble  with  which,  according  to  Pausanias,  Herodes
Atticus  refaced  the  stadium,  not  a  scrap  has  been  discovered  by  the
French.  There  is  no  need,  however,  on  that  ground  to  question  the
accuracy  of  Pausanias's  statement ;  for  his  testimony  is  confirmed  by
that  of  his  contemporary  Philostratus,  who  in  his  well-informed  life  of
Herodes  Atticus  tells  us  that  the  wealthy  sophist  dedicated  the  stadium
at  Pytho  (Delphi)  to  the  Pythian  Apollo  {Vit  Sophist  ii.  i.  9).
Philostratus  does  not  indeed  mention  the  facing  of  Pentelic  marble,  but
that  a  radical  reconstruction  was  carried  out  may  safely  be  inferred  from


CH.  XXXII  THE  DELPHIC  STADIUM  395

the  fact  that  Herodes  Atticus  dedicated  the  stadium  afresh  to  Apollo.
A  man  of  his  vast  wealth  and  princely  munificence  would  certainly  not
have  had  the  effrontery  to  offer  the  old  stadium  to  the  god  unless  he
had  first  beautified  it  in  some  such  way  as  Pausanias  indicates.  He
had  similarly  adorned  the  stadium  at  Athens  (Paus.  i.  19.  6).  More-
over, the  marble  seats  existed  apparently  in  good  preservation  down  to
the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century,  and  some  of  them  were  still  to  be
seen  towards  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century.  In  the  fifteenth
century  Cyriacus  of  Ancona  described  "  the  hippodrome  600  feet  long,
richly  adorned  with  marble  steps  {omatissimum  gradibus  mamioreis\
in  the  high  citadel  of  the  city,  at  the  foot  of  most  lofty  rocks  "  (quoted
by  P.  Foucart,  Mimoire^  p.  105).  In  the  seventeenth  century  Wheler,
who  describes  the  situation  of  the  stadium  correctly,  says :  "  Some  of
the  degrees  yet  remain  of  white  marble"  (Journey^  p.  315).  The
accuracy  and  good  faith  of  these  two  early  travellers  in  Greece  have
never,  I  believe,  been  questioned.  The  fidelity  of  Cyriacus  has  been
recently  confirmed  at  Delphi  itself  by  the  excavation  of  the  theatre,  in
which  the  number  of  tiers  of  seats  discovered  (thirty-three)  tallies  exactly
with  the  description  of  Cyriacus.  We  may  therefore  safely  conclude
that  the  marble  seats  were  to  be  seen  for  at  least  twelve  centuries  after
the  time  of  Pausanias.  They  have  probably  gone  the  way  of  so  many
other  ancient  marbles  in  Greece,  into  the  lime-kiln.

See  VfhtXtx^  Journey  into  Greece^  p.  315 ;  E.  D.  Clarke,  Travels ^^  P*  190;  Dod-
well,  Tour^  i.  p.  i8iJ^. ;  Leake,  Northern  Gteece,  2.  p.  577 ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  /Arisen
und  Forschungen,  I.  p.  37 ;  'M^Mit^  Journal j  I.  p.  187  sq,  ;  Thiersch,  *  Ueber  die
Topographie  von  Delphi,*  Abhandfungen  d,  philos,  philolog,  Classe  d,  kirn,  bayer,
Akad.  d,  Wissen,  (Munich),  3  (1840),  pp.  18  j^.,  51  ;  F.  G.  Welcker,  Tagebuch^
2.  p.  68  sq. ;  C.  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  178 ;  P.  Foucart,  Mimoire  sur  les  mines
et  Vhistoire  de  Delphes,  p.  104  so,  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  41  ;  Berliner  philolog.
Wochenschrift^  15th  August  1890,  p.  1086  sq,  ;  /ournal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  16
(1896),  p.  343.  For  the  account  of  the  excavation  of  the  stadium  I  am  indebted
to  the  notes  of  Mr.  Cecil  Smith.

Pausanias  has  now  concluded  his  description  of  Delphi.  Here  may
be  the  most  convenient  place  to  notice  some  ancient  remains  of  which
he  says  nothing.

To  the  south-west  of  Delphi,  on  the  slope  of  the  ridge  which  bounds
the  valley  on  the  west,  is  the  small  chapel  of  St.  Elias.  It  lies  to
the  south  of  the  stadium  and  a  good  deal  lower  down  the  hill.  The
chapel  stands  upon  a  quadrangular  platform  51.2  metres  (about  167
feet)  long  by  37  metres  (about  123  feet)  wide,  the  supporting-walls  of
which  on  the  eastern  and  northern  sides  are  partly  composed  of  ancient
masonry.  On  the  west  the  platform  is  bounded  by  a  terrace-wall  of
polygonal  masonry  about  58  paces  long  and  10  feet  high,  which
supports  the  higher  ground  above,  and  with  it  the  old  road  to  Chryso
(Crisa)  and  Itaea,  The  modem  road  is  now  carried  a  good  deal  lower
down  the  hill  than  the  chapel  of  St.  Elias.  Of  the  wall  which  supports
the  platform  on  the  east  a  considerable  piece,  about  2 1  paces  long,  is
ancient.  It  is  built  in  a  massive  style  and  is  strengthened  by  five
buttresses  which  project  2  ft   3  in.     The  stones  on   the  whole  are


396  PYLAEA  bk.  x.  procis

squared  and  laid  in  horizontal  courses,  but  a  tendency  to  the  polygonal
style  may  be  observed  in  some  places.  For  a  short  distance  the  wall
is  standing  to  a  height  of  about  13  or  14  feet  with  nine  courses  of
masonry.  One  of  the  buttresses  has  ten  courses,  but  its  top  is  flush
with  the  top  of  the  wall.  This  ancient  wall  also  extends  roimd  the
north-east  comer  and  partly  supports  the  platform  on  the  north  side.
The  material  of  which  these  walls  are  built  is  the  reddish  stone  of  the
district.  On  the  quadrangular  platform  supported  by  them,  outside  of
the  chapel,  is  a  piece  of  an  ancient  mosaic  pavement  consisting  of  red,
white,  black,  and  blue  stones  set  in  an  ornamental  pattern.  At  the
beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century  Clarke  foimd  two  very  large  archi-
traves of  Parian  marble  in  the  chapel  of  St.  Elias,  and  many  years
afterwards  Mr.  Foucart  found,  a  few  feet  below  the  platform,  some
fragments  of  Doric  columns  of  Pentelic  marble,  which  from  the  width
(.25  metre)  of  their  flutes  may  have  measured  about  5  metres  (16  ft.
5  in.)  in  circumference.

These  architectural  remains  have  now  disappeared,  having  been
broken  up  to  be  used  in  repairing  the  chapeL  It  is  supposed  that  the
ancient  building,  to  which  they  belonged  and  which  doubtless  occupied
the  quadrangular  platform,  was  the  Pylaea  or  place  of  assembly  of  the
Amphictyonic  Council.  Commonly  the  name  Pylaea  designates  one  of
the  two  annual  meetings  of  the  Amphictyonic  Council,  but  that  it  also
designated  the  place  of  assembly  appears  from  one  of  the  inscriptions
engraved  on  the  polygonal  wall  at  Delphi,  which  speaks  of  the  services
rendered  by  a  certain  man  Hermias  "both  at  Pylaea  and  at  Delphi."
See  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helltfnique,  7  (1883),  p.  417  sqq,  Plutarch  says
{De  Pythiae  oraculisy  29)  that  in  his  time  Pylaea  renewed  its  youth  along
with  Delphi  and  had  been  more  adorned  with  "sanctuaries  and  places
of  assembly  and  waters  "  than  it  had  been  for  a  thousand  years  before.
From  this  passage  of  Plutarch  it  has  sometimes  been  inferred  that  a
new  suburb  sprang  up  here  in  Hadrian^s  time ;  but  Plutarch  makes  no
mention  of  houses  ;  he  speaks  only  of  public  buildings,  sacred  and  civil.
That  the  place  of  assembly  of  the  Amphictyonic  Council  at  Delphi  must
have  been  situated  near  the  chapel  of  St.  Elias  is  shown  by  a  passage  of
Aeschines  {contra  Ctes.  11 5-1 24),  in  which  he  says  that  the  Cirrhaean
plain  lay  spread  beneath  and  in  full  view  of  the  meeting-place  of  the
Amphictyonic  Council.  The  orator  himself,  he  tells  us,  was  one  of  the
Athenian  representatives  at  a  meeting  of  the  Council.  Addressing  it  he
pointed  to  the  smiling  and  p>eaceful  plain  stretched  at  their  feet,  with  its
olive -groves  and  corn-fields,  its  cottages  and  potteries,  and  in  the
distance  the  shining  waters  of  the  gulf,  with  the  port-town  visible  beside  it.
"  You  see,"  he  cried,  "  yonder  plain  tilled  by  the  men  of  Amphissa  and
the  potteries  and  cottages  they  have  built.  You  see  with  your  eyes  the
fortifications  of  the  cursed  and  execrated  port.  You  know  for  yourselves
that  these  men  levy  tolls  and  take  money  from  the  sacred  harbour."
He  then  reminded  his  hearers  of  the  oath  sworn  by  their  ancestors  that
this  fair  plain  should  lie  a  wilderness  for  ever.  His  words  were  received
with  a  tumult  of  applause,  and  next  day  at  dawn  the  men  of  Delphi,
armed  with  shovels  and  mattocks,  marched  down  into  the  plain,  razed


CH.  XXXII  PYLAEA  397

the  fortifications  of  the  port  to  the  ground,  and  gave  the  houses  to  the
flames.  It  is  refreshing  to  know  that  on  their  way  back  they  were
hotly  pursued  by  the  Amphissaeans  in  arms  and  had  to  run  for  their
lives.  This  was  the  beginning  of  the  chain  of  events  which  in  a  few
months  more  brought  Philip  at  the  head  of  a  Macedonian  army  into
Greece  and  ended  in  the  overthrow  of  Greek  freedom  at  Chaeronea.

The  view  described  by  the  orator,  whose  ill-omened  eloquence
brought  all  these  miseries  and  disasters  in  its  train,  is  to  be  obtained,
not  from  the  platform  on  which  the  chapel  of  St.  Elias  stands,  but  from
a  point  a  little  way  to  the  south-west  of  it,  where  the  traveller  coming
from  Delphi  reaches  the  end  of  the  high  ridge  that  shuts  in  the  valley  of
Delphi  on  the  west.  Here  as  he  turns  the  comer  the  whole  Crisaean
plain,  now  covered  with  luxuriant  olive-woods,  comes  suddenly  into
sight.  The  scene  is  again  as  rich  and  peaceful  as  it  was  before
Aeschines  raised  his  voice,  like  the  scream  of  some  foul  bird  snuffing
the  carrion  afar  off,  and  turned  it  into  a  desert.  We  may  suppose
either  that  in  his  time  the  Amphictyonic  Council  met  at  this  point,  or,
what  is  far  likelier,  that  the  orator's  description  of  that  da/s  doings  is
more  graphic  than  correct.

An  interesting  inscription  on  an  upright  hewn  stone  which  may  still
be  seen  beside  the  chapel  of  St.  Elias  confirms  the  view  that  here  the
Amphictyonic  Council  met.  The  inscription,  which  was  found  within
the  enclosure  in  1877,  records  that  the  Delphians  and  Chaeroneans,  in
compliance  with  a  decree  of  the  Amphictyonic  Council,  set  up  a  portrait
of  Plutarch.  From  the  style  of  the  pedestal  on  which  the  inscription  is
cut  we  see  that  the  portrait  must  have  been  a  bust.  As  Plutarch  was
manager  {]eKnukryn)%)  of  the  Amphictyonic  Council  in  the  reign  of
Hadrian  (see  C,  L  G,  No.  1713  ;  H.  Pomtow,  Beitrdge  zur  Topographic
von  Delphi^  p.  77  sq,\  it  is  natural  enough  that  a  portrait  of  this
excellent  man  and  admirable  writer,  erected  by  order  of  the  Council,
should  have  been  placed  in  or  near  the  place  where  the  Council  held
their  meetings.

Between  the  chapel  of  St.  Elias  and  the  site  of  the  old  village  of
Kastri^  now  destroyed,  is  another  platform  supported  by  substructions.
It  is  on  the  slope  of  the  hill,  lower  down  than  the  old  road  to  Chryso
but  higher  than  the  new  road.  The  supporting-wall  of  the  terrace,  built
of  ashlar  masonry,  is  34.5  metres  (113  feet)  long  and  4  to  5  metres
(about  13  to  16  feet)  high ;  it  is  strengthened  by  twelve  buttresses
which  project  about  12  feet.  Buttresses  were  not  used  in  Greek  archi-
tecture before  the  time  of  the  Roman  empire.  Hence  this  platform
may  have  supported  one  of  the  new  sanctuaries  with  which  this  part  of
Delphi  seems  to  have  been  adorned  in  Plutarch's  age  (Plutarch,  De
Pythiae  oraculis^  29).

Between  this  platform  and  the  chapel  of  St.  Elias,  just  above  the  old
road  which  leads  to  Chryso^  is  a  large  sepulchral  chamber  hewn  in  the
rock,  with  a  high  doorway  and  arched  roof.  On  the  three  sides  of  the
chamber  are  three  niches  for  sarcophaguses,  also  hewn  in  the  rock.
There  were  paintings  on  the  walls  above  each  grave ;  above  the  middle
gn^ve  a  red  and  green  parrot  with  a  long  tail  could  still  be  plainly  made


398  IVALLS  OF  DELPHI  bk.  x.  phocis

out  in  the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth  century.  A  few  yards  to  the  east
of  this  sepulchral  chamber  a  semicircular  recess  is  hewn  in  the  rock,
with  a  rock-cut  bench  running  all  round  it.  The  spot  commands  a
wide  prospect  over  the  valley  of  Delphi  and  the  course  of  the  Plistus,
away  to  the  mountains  beyond  which  lay  the  ancient  Ambrosus.

See  Whcler,  Journey^  p.  314  sq, ;  Chandler,  Travels  in  Greece^  p.  266  sq,  ;
Clarke,  Travels j  4.  p.  191  sq,  ;  Dodwell,  Tour^  I.  p.  i^  sq,;  Leake,  Northern
Greece^  2.  p.  566  sq,  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und Forschungen^  I.  pp.  25,  36,  no;
Fiedler,  Reise^  i.  p.  143 ;  F.  G.  Welcker,  Tagebuck,  2.  p.  69  sq, ;  W.  Vischer,
Erinmrungent  p.  610 ;  C.  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  178  sq,  ;  P.  Foucart,  Mimoire
sur  les  ruines  et  thistoire  de  Delphes^  p.  107  sqq,  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  161  ;  Guide-
Joanne^  2.  p.  41  sq. ;  H.  Pomtow,  Beitrdge  sur  Topographie  von  Delphi^  p.  73  sqq.
A  view,  a  plan,  and  a  section  of  the  sepulchral  chamber  are  given  hy  Le  Bas,
Voyage  arch^ologique,  Itin^raire,  pi.  39.  See  also  H.  Pomtow,  op,  cit,  pL  xL
No.  31.

On  the  ridge  which  shuts  in  the  valley  of  Delphi  on  the  west,
foimdations  of  well-built  Greek  walls,  flanked  with  towers,  may  be
traced  at  intervals  along  the  crest  of  the  ridge  as  far  as  the  lofty  preci-
pices which  rise  to  the  north  of  Delphi  and  which  were  themselves  a
sufficient  protection  on  that  side.  The  wall  and  towers  are  standing  in
some  places  to  a  height  of  several  courses.  These  were  evidently  the
western  walls  of  Delphi,  and  may  have  been  built  by  Philomelus  in  355
B.C.  when  he  seized  Delphi  in  the  Sacred  War,  for  we  are  told  that  he
built  a  fortification- wall  round  the  sanctuary  (Diodorus,  xvi.  25).  Before
his  time  Delphi  seems  to  have  been  an  open  town,  and  the  fortifications
erected  by  him  appear  to  have  soon  fallen  into  decay ;  for  Justin,
describing  the  attack  of  the  Gauls  on  Delphi  in  278  B.C.,  expressly
affirms  (xxiv.  6.  7)  that  the  town  was  defended  not  by  walls  but  by
precipices,  not  by  art  but  by  nature.  Further,  an  expression  used  by
Livy  (xlii.  15.  5)  in  narrating  the  attempted  assassination  of  King
Eumenes  near  Delphi  in  172  B.C.  seems  to  imply  that  Delphi  was  then
unwalled.

Outside  these  walls,  on  the  western  side,  are  many  graves  hewn
in  the  rock ;  and  on  the  crest  of  the  ridge,  about  midway  between
the  old  road  to  Chryso  and  the  foot  of  the  high  cliffs  at  the  back  of
Delphi,  is  a  conspicuous  tumulus  which  (if  I  am  not  mistaken)  is  popu-
larly identified  as  the  tomb  of  Philomelus.

The  view  from  the  crest  of  the  ridge  is  magnificent.  It  embraces
on  the  one  side  the  profound  valley  of  Delphi  as  far  east  as  Arachova^
on  the  other  side  the  Crisaean  plain  with  its  olive-groves,  bounded  on
the  west  by  the  lofty  mountains  of  Locris,  wooded  with  dark  pines,  and
on  the  south  by  the  Gulf  of  Corinth  with  the  distant  mountains  of  Pelo-
ponnese  rising  beyond  it.  ,

See  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  565  sqq.  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  uftd
Forschuftgen^  I.  p.  1 17;  P.  Foucart,  Mimoire  stir  les  mines  et  Thistoire  de
Delphes^  p.  no;  Baedeker,' p.  156;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  41.  On  the  western
necropolis  of  Delphi,  see  H.  Pomtow,  Beitrdge  sur  Topographie  von  Delphi^
p.  72  sqq.

Lastly  it  may  be  mentioned  that  the  French  excavations  have
brought  to  light  a  beehive  tomb  cut  in  the  rock  and  approached  by  a


CH.  XXXII  THE  COR  YCIAN  CA  VE  399

short  passage  (dronws).  In  the  tomb  were  found  a  dagger,  knife,  razor,  and
brooch,  all  of  bronze,  and  some  Mycenaean  pottery  of  the  lustrous  sort
decorated  in  the  usual  fashion  with  lines  and  circles  or  complicated
patterns  that  mark  a  transition  towards  the  purely  geometrical  style  of
ornamentation.  The  finest  of  the  vases  found  is  a  stirrup-vase  (see  vol  3.
p.  112)  adorned  with  two  large  octopuses,  splendidly  drawn  and  accom-
panied by  geometrical  patterns.  These  discoveries,  as  Mr.  Homolle
says,  remind  us  of  the  legend  which  connects  the  foundation  of  the
Delphic  sanctuary  with  Crete,  the  country  where  Mycenaean  remains
abound.  See  Th.  Homolle,  Gazette  des  Beaux-Arts,  D^cembre  1894,
p.  442;  id,,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique,  18  (1894),  p.  195  sq,
Mycenaean  tombs,  Mr.  Cecil  Smith  informs  me,  have  been  discovered
immediately  below  the  middle  point  of  the  south  wall  of  the  sacred
precinct,  and  two  more  on  the  site  of  the  present  Museum.  All  aroimd
the  temple  and  altar  the  soil  is  reported  to  be  full  of  Mycenaean
remains,  including  pieces  of  amber.

32.  2.  The  ascent  to  the  Oorycian  cave  etc.  Two,  or  rather
three,  paths  lead  from  Delphi  up  the  slopes  of  Parnassus  to  the  Cory-
cian  cave,  but  they  meet  on  the  spacious  table-land  above  the  cliffs
which  rise  at  the  back  of  the  town.  Two  of  the  paths  start  from  above
the  stadium.  One  of  them,  known  as  the  Evil  Staircase  (kok^  o-icaXa},
ascends  steeply  in  a  series  of  zigzags  cut  in  the  rock,  often  in  the  form
of  steps,  of  which  there  are  over  a  thousand.  This  very  steep  and
nigged  path  is  obviously  exceedingly  ancient.  The  other  of  these  two
paths  keeps  more  to  the  west  and  is  somewhat  longer.  The  third  way
(which  I  have  not  seen  mentioned  in  any  book)  is  to  keep  along  the
road  to  Chryso  past  the  chapel  of  St.  Elias,  and,  after  rounding  the  foot
of  the  ridge  which  is  crowned  with  the  fortifications  of  Philomelus,  to
turn  off  the  road  to  the  right  by  a  path  which  strikes  northwards  up  the
face  of  the  mountain.  Gradually  ascending  we  reach,  in  an  hour  or
more,  the  summit  of  the  range  of  heights  which  bounds  Delphi  on  the
north.  This  range  of  heights  is,  as  it  were,  a  gigantic  step  in  the  grand
Parnassian  staircase.  On  reaching  the  summit  of  the  heights  we  see
stretching  before  us  northward  and  eastward  an  extensive  tableland,
more  than  3000  ft.  above  the  level  of  the  sea  ;  at  the  farther  end  of  it
rise,  massive  and  grand,  the  upper  slopes  of  Parnassus.  The  first  part
of  the  tableland  is  broken  with  shallow  ravines  and  wooded,  sometimes
sparsely,  sometimes  thickly,  with  firs.  The  farther  or  eastern  half  of  the
plateau  (called  Uvadi)  is  more  level ;  it  is  treeless  and,  so  far  as  I
observed,  uncultivated,  being  merely  covered  with  rather  scanty  grass.
Of  the  well-tilled  fields  of  wheat,  barley,  and  oats  mentioned  by  some
travellers  1  saw  nothing ;  but  it  was  the  middle  of  May  when  I  was
there,  and  the  harvest  on  these  high  uplands  is  not  till  the  middle  of
August.  On  the  east  this  tableland  is  bounded  by  the  upper  slopes
of  Parnassus.  On  the  north  it  is  terminated  by  a  line  of  lower  hills.
The  most  westerly  of  these  hills  are  thickly  wooded  with  firs.  On  the
face  of  the  most  easterly  of  them  (the  hill  next  to  the  real  slopes  of
Parnassus,  but  separated  from  them  by  a  valley)  is  the  Corycian  cave
situated  about  500  feet  or  so  above  the  plateau.     The  path  up  to  it,  if


40O  THE  CORYCIAN  CAVE  bk.  x.  phocis

path  it  can  be  called,  is  steep,  rough,  and  fatiguing.  Horses  or  mules
can  be  brought  from  Delphi  as  far  as  the  foot  of  this  last  slope,  but  there
they  must  be  left.  Pausanias  might  well  say  that  "  the  ascent  to  the
Corycian  cave  is  easier  for  a  well-girt  man  than  for  mules  and  horses."
It  is  in  fact  impossible  for  mules  and  horses.  The  bronze  image  of
Dionysus,  which  Pausanias  mentions,  probably  stood  at  the  point  where
the  path  begins  to  ascend  from  the  tableland  to  the  cave ;  for  the
distance  of  60  furlongs  agrees  fairly  well  with  the  distance  from  Delphi
to  the  point  in  question.

The  cave  is  called  by  the  peasants  Sarantavli  or  *  forty-chambered.'
At  the  mouth  of  it,  on  the  right  as  you  enter,  is  a  rough  stone,  on  which
is  cut  a  dedication  to  Pan  and  the  Nymphs  by  one  Eustratus,  an
Ambrysian.  (Ulrichs  and  Vischer  are  mistaken  in  saying  that  the
inscription  had  disappeared.  I  copied  it  at  the  mouth  of  the  cave,
15th  May  1890.)  On  the  upper  surface  of  the  same  stone  is  an
inscription,  partly  illegible,  in  which  mention  is  made  of  the  Nymphs,
of  Pan,  and  of  the  Thyiads.  These  inscriptions  confirm  Pausanias's
statement  (§  7)  that  the  cavern  was  sacred  to  Pan  and  the  Nymphs.
The  natives  of  Arackova  still  think  that  the  cave  is  a  favourite  haunt  of
the  Nereids  (B.  Schmidt,  Das  Volksleben  der  Neugriechefiy  p.  103).
The  great  chamber  of  the  grotto  is  upwards  of  200  feet  in  length  and
may  be  (as  Leake  thought)  about  40  feet  high  in  the  middle,  though  the
average  height  is  probably  about  20  feet.  Water,  dripping  from  the  roof,
has  formed  stalagmites  rising  from  the  floor  (as  Pausanias  correctly
observes,  §  7),  while  stalactites  hang  from  the  roof  and  sides.  The
upper  end  of  the  cave  is  rugged,  irregular,  and  very  dark.  Here  on
the  right  a  narrow  opening  leads  into  a  second  chamber,  which
extends  for  about  100  feet  inward  and  turns  round  nearly  at  a  right
angle  to  the  direction  of  the  outer  cavern.  The  rocks  in  this
inner  cavern  are  smooth,  clammy,  and  slippery.  Caution  is  needed
in  clambering  over  them.  It  is  also  totally  dark,  and  without  a
light  it  would  be  impossible  to  find  one's  way  except  by  groping.
The  effect  as  you  look  out  from  the  interior  of  the  gloomy  cavern
through  the  grove  of  stalactites  and  stalagmites  to  the  green  grass
and  the  sunlight  at  the  mouth  of  the  cave  is  highly  picturesque ;  it
is  like  a  fairy  grotto.  From  the  mouth  of  the  cave  we  look  down  on
the  tableland  already  described.  In  the  distance,  to  the  south-west,  a  long
stretch  of  the  Gulf  of  Corinth  is  visible  with  the  Peloponnesian  mountains
beyond  it.  On  the  other  side,  to  the  east,  rises  the  great  cone  of  Par-
nassus, its  lower  spurs  clothed  with  dark  fir-woods,  its  upper  slopes  bare.

See  Wheler,  Joitnuy,  p.  316  sqq,  ;  Cell,  Itinerary  of  Greece  (London,  1819),
pp.  190-192;  Leake,  Northern  Greece ^  2.  p.  578  sqij,  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und
Forsckungen,  I.  p.  117  sqq,  ;  Welcker,  Tagcbuch^  2.  p.  76  sqq.  ;  Vischer,  Erinner-
ungen^  p.  611  sqq,  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  179  ;  Foucart,  Mimoire  sur  les  ruims
et  Vhistoire  de  DelpJus^  p.  112  sqq, ;  Baedeker,^  p.  161  j^.  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.
43  sq,  \  P.  G.  Kastriotes,  01  AeX^of,  pp.  69-72.  For  the  inscriptions  at  the  mouth
of  the  cave,  see  H.  G.  Lolling,  in  Mittheil.  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  3  (1878),  p.
154  ;  CoUitz,  G,  D,  I  2,  No.  1536.  When  the  Persians  advanced  against  Delphi,
some  of  the  inhabitants  took  refuge  in  the  Corycian  cave  (Herodotus,  viii.
36).  There  was  another  famous  Corycian  cave  in  CiUcia.  See  Pindar,  Pyth,  i.  32  ;
Strabo,  xiv.  p.  670  sq, ;  American  Journal  of  Archaeology^  6  (1890),  p.  354.


CH,  xxxu  SACRED  MEN  401

32.  2.  as  I  pointed  ont  a  litUe  above.     See  x.  6.  3.

32.  3-  The  Phrrglaiis  who  dwell  by  the  rlTei  Feacalas  eic.    Cp.

vjii.  4.  3.

32.  4.  Themisoninm.  The  site  of  Thetnisonium  is  at  Kara  Eyuk
Uasar  in  the  valley  now  called  Kara  Eyuk  Ova.  Coins  show  that
the  chief  deity  of  Themisonium  was  AYKa/3o!  SllZflN,  '  the  saving
Lycabas."  See  W,  M,  Ramsay,  in  American  Journal  of  ArcAaeology,  3
{1887),  p.  363  ;  id..  Historical  Geography  0/ Asia  Minor,  pp.  101,  13S  ;
id..  The  Cities  and  Bishopries  of  Pkrygia,  i.  p.  252  sq.

32.  6.  Hen  sacred  to  the  god  leap  down  predplcea.  Similarly
at  the  sanctuary  and  during  the  festival  of  Apollo  in  Leucadia  a  criminal
was  made  to  leap  from  the  top  of  a  high  cliff  into  the  sea.  His  fall  was
lightened  by  bundles  of  feathers  and  even  by  birds  attached  to  his  person.
Small  boats,  too,  were  waiting  below  to  pick  him  up  as  he  rose  to  the
surface  after  his  plunge  and  10  convey  him  beyond  the  boundaries.  He
was  regarded  as  a  scapegoat  who  carried  away  the  sins  of  the  people.
See  Strabo,  x.  p.  452.  According  to  one  of  our  authorities.  It  was  the
priests  who  thus  cast  themselves  from  the  cliff  into  the  sea  (Photius,
Lexicon,  s.v.  Acvkuti);,  where  the  MS.  reading  liptli  has  been  conjectur-
ally  altered  ioio  tpatrraC).  The  men  sacred  to  Apollo  of  whom  Pausanias
here  speaks  may  very  well  have  been  scapegoats  who,  if  they  survived
the  leap,  might  be  regarded  as  consecrated  to  the  god  for  the  rest  of
their  liv-es.  This  suggestion  is  due  to  the  late  J.  Tdpffer,  who  rightly
refers  in  this  connexion  to  the  Athenian  custom  of  stoning  to  death  two
human  scapegoats  at  the  Thargelian  festival  of  Apollo  (Harpocration,
s.v.  ^jop/iOKos).  See  J.  Topffer,  Bettrdge  xur  griechisckm  Al/erfums-
a/m^nj-cA^^  (Berlin,  1897),  pp.  130-133.

32.  6.  tear  exceedingly  lofty  trees  from  their  roots  etc.  C.
Botticher  conjectured  that,  as  the  men  were  inspired  by  Apollo,  the  trees
which  they  tore  up  may  have  been  laurels  {Baum-
kultus  der  Hellenen,  p.  391).  Probably,  how-
ever, the  god  was  not  a  genuine  Greek  Apollo,
but  a  native  Asiatic  deity,  and  there  is  nothing
in  Pausanias's  words  to  limit  the  trees  to  laurels.
The  custom  described  by  Pausanias  is  represented  1
on  some  coins  of  Magnesia  of  imperial  date,  o
the  reverse  of  which  appears  a  man  canyinj;
an  uprooted  tree  (Fig.  14).  See  F.  B.  Baker,
in  Numismatic  Chronicle,  Third  Series,  12
(1892),  p.  89  sqg.  Mr,  Baker  asks  whether
the  custom  may  not  be  a  relic  of  very  ancient    tbbb  (coin  or  maghuiaX

32.  7.  it  is  sacred  to  the  Ooryciau  nrmphs,  and  especially  to
Pan.  See  note  on  §  2.  The  nymphs  of  the  Corycian  cave  arc
mentioned  also  by  Aeschylus  {Eumenides,  22  sq.),  Sophocles  {Antigone,
I  128),  and  Strabo  (ix.  p.  417).

32.  7-  to  reach  the  peaks  of  Famassns.  The  ascent  of  Ml
Parnassus  from  Delphi  takes  about  eight  hours.  The  route  as  far  as  the
Corycian  cave  has  been  already  described  (note  on  §  2).     To  reach  the

VOL.  V  2D


402  ASCENT  OF  PARNASSUS  BK.  x.  phocis

summit  of  the  mountain  from  the  Corycian  cave  we  must  descend  the
steep  hill-side  by  the  way  we  came,  then  cross  the  eastern  part  of  the
bare  treeless  tableland  Livadi  to  the  Kalyvia  of  Arachava.  This  is  a
collection  of  neat  and  trim  cottages  or  chalets  at  the  eastern  end  of  the
tableland,  just  at  the  foot  of  the  upper  slopes  of  Parnassus.  The  village
is  inhabited  only  in  summer,  when  the  people  of  Arackava  come  hither
to  tend  the  herds  of  cattle  that  browse  on  these  upland  pastures  or  to
reap  the  harvest,  which  is  two  months  later  here  than  in  the  valleys
below.  Numerous  flocks  of  sheep  and  goats  roam  the  mountain-slopes;
the  tinkle  of  their  bells  may  be  heard  far  off.  Passing  the  village  we
ascend  a  narrow  wooded  glen.  All  cultivation  now  ceases.  The  firs,
though  often  tall,  mostly  grow  crooked.  Higher  up  they  become  scarce.
The  route  now  leads  over  sharp  rocks  and  stones,  varied  here  and  there
with  small  tracts  of  pasture  and  the  hovels  of  cow-keepers  rudely  con-
structed of  rough  stones  and  fir-branches.  Above  us  rise  conspicuous  the
two  peaks  of  Parnassus,  known  respectively  as  Gerontovrachos  (*the  old
man's  rock  *)  on  the  west  and  Lykeri  to  the  north-east.  Lykeri {Zojo  feet)
is  the  higher  summit,  but  only  by  about  78  feet.  On  the  northern  and
eastern  sides  of  Gerontovrachos  large  patches  of  snow  remain  all  through
the  summer.  The  somewhat  deep  valley  which  lies  between  the  two
peaks  is  covered  with  loose  stones  and  boulders,  and  is  known  as  the
Devil's  Threshing-floor.  In  this  valley  or  plateau  are  two  wretched
shelters,  roughly  built  of  stone,  in  which  travellers,  who  wish  to  see  the
sunrise  from  the  summit,  sometimes  pass  the  night.  In  clear  weather
the  view  from  the  summit  includes  Euboea  and  the  northern  Sporades  on
the  east,  and  extends  from  Mt.  Athos  and  Mt.  Olympus  on  the  north  to
Mt.  Cyllene  {Ziria)  and  the  Aroanian  mountains  {CMmos)  in  Arcadia
on  the  south.  To  the  west  the  prospect  is  limited  by  the  lofty  moun-
tains of  Locris  and  Aetolia,  the  highest  summits  of  which  out-top
Parnassus  itself.

See  Clarke,  Travels ^  4.  p.  203  sqq. ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungcn^  i.
p.  120  j^^. ;  L.  Ross,  Wanderungetiy  I.  p.  55  sqq.  ;  /t/.,  2.  p.  191  sqq, ;  W.  Vischer,
Erinnerungcn^  p.  613  sqq,  ;  P.  Foucart,  M^moire  sur  Us  mines  tt  Vhistoire  de
DelpheSy  p.  116  sqq.\  Baedeker,^  p.  162  sq.\  Guide-Joanne y  2.  p.  44  J^.  For
the  ascent  from  Daulis,  see  x.  5.  I  note.

32.  7*  the  Thyiad  women  rave  on  them  etc.  Cp.  x.  4.  3  note ;
Catullus,  Ixiv.  390  sq,  Plutarch  mentions  an  occasion  when  the  Thyiad
women  were  caught  in  a  snow-storm  on  Parnassus,  and  the  clothes  of  the
men  who  went  to  their  rescue  were  frozen  so  hard  that  when  stretched
out  they  broke  in  pieces  {De  primo  frigore^  18).

32.  8.  Tithorea.  The  site  of  Tithorea,  first  identified  by  Clarke  in
1 80 1,  is  occupied  by  the  modern  village  of  Velitsa^  which  stands  ver>'
picturesquely  among  trees  on  the  north-eastern  slopes  of  Parnassus,  over-
looking the  broad  valley  of  the  Cephisus.  About  two-thirds  of  the  village
are  enclosed  within  the  ancient  ivy-mantled  walls,  which  rank  with  those
of  Messene  and  Eleutherae  as  among  the  finest  existing  specimens  of
Greek  fortifications.  At  the  back  of  the  village  to  the  south  rises  a  huge
mountainous  cliff  of  grey  rock,  its  ledges  tufted  with  pines.     Between


CH.  XXXII  TITHOREA  403

the  foot  of  this  great  cliff  and  the  village  there  intervenes  a  very  steep
slope,  mostly  overgrown  with  holly-oak  bushes.  On  the  east  the  village
as  well  as  the  site  of  the  ancient  city  is  bounded  by  a  very  deep  rocky
ravine,  which  winds  southward  into  the  heart  of  the  mountains.  At  the
bottom  of  the  ravine  a  torrent  flows  from  Parnassus  over  a  broad  gravelly
bed  to  join  the  Cephisus  in  the  plain  below.  This  torrent,  now  called
Kakorevma  or  Evil  stream,  is  the  ancient  Cachales.  In  the  time  of
Pausanias,  the  townspeople,  he  tells  us,  had  to  fetch  their  water  in
buckets  from  the  depths  of  the  lyn.  Nowadays  a  portion  of  the  water
of  the  stream  is  diverted  higher  up  the  glen  and  brought  in  a  conduit  to
the  village,  where  it  turns  two  mills  and  waters  the  gardens  and  orchards.
As  Tithorea  was  thus  naturally  defended  on  two  sides,  namely  by  the
great  cliff  on  the  south  and  by  the  deep  ravine  on  the  east,  it  needed
walls  on  two  sides  only,  the  west  and  the  north.  These  walls,  starting
from  the  foot  of  the  cliff,  first  descend  the  steep  slope  in  a  straight  line
above  the  village,  then  follow  the  gentler  slope  within  the  village,  still  in
a  direction  due  north,  till  they  turn  round  at  an  obtuse  angle  and  run
eastward  to  the  brink  of  the  ravine.  Here  they  stop.  Along  the  edge
of  the  ravine  a  number  of  ancient  blocks  may  be  observed,  but  whether
they  are  the  remains  of  an  ancient  fortification  wall  is  not  clear.  Perhaps
the  deep  precipitous  side  of  the  ravine  may  have  been  considered  a
sufficient  defence  by  itself  The  walls  so  far  as  they  exist  are  finely  and
solidly  built  of  regular  ashlar  masonry,  and  are  flanked  by  massive
square  towers  constructed  in  the  same  style.  Walls  and  towers  are  best
preserved  in  the  lower  ground  among  the  houses  and  gardens  of  the
village,  but  on  the  steep  slope  above  the  village  the  remains  are  also
considerable.  At  the  highest  point  of  the  site,  just  under  the  perpen-
dicular cliff,  which  has  possibly  been  here  cut  artificially  so  as  to  form  a
smooth  wall  of  rock,  a  piece  of  the  wall  is  standing  to  a  height  of  perhaps
1 2  feet ;  eleven  courses  are  preserved.  It  seems  to  have  been  part  of  a
square  tower,  for  it  comprises  two  fragments  of  walls  meeting  at  a  right
angle.  From  this  point  the  line  of  the  ancient  wall  may  be  traced
running  straight  down  the  slope.  For  the  most  part  it  is  ruinous,  but  in
one  place  it  is  preserv^ed  to  its  full  height  for  some  20  or  30  yards,  with
the  coping-stones  running  along  its  top.  It  here  descends  the  slope  in  a
series  of  long  slanting  steps,  thus  : —


The  number  of  courses  preserved  in  this  part  of  the  wall  is  from  seven  to
ten.  Higher  up  the  slope  another  piece  of  the  wall  is  standing  to  a  still
greater  height,  the  number  of  courses  being  about  fourteen ;  and  be-
tween these  two  pieces  is  a  well-preserved  rectanguiar  tower  resting  on  a
high  basement  of  natural  rock.    This  tower,  built  of  fine  massive  squared


404  TITHOREA  bk.  x.  phocis

blocks  laid  in  horizontal  courses,  of  which  eight  are  standing,  measures  in
the  inside  1 4  ft.  8  in.  by  8  ft.  5  in.  The  door  leading  into  it  from  the
top  of  the  wall  is  preserved  almost  entire ;  it  is  5  ft.  7  in.  high  by  2  ft
1 1  in.  wide.  In  the  walls  of  the  tower  are  two  windows  and  a  piece  of
a  third.  Lower  down  the  hill  the  wall  is  much  more  ruinous,  but  in  one
place  it  has  still  seven  courses  standing,  and  in  another  place  it  is  about
7  ft.  8  in.  thick,  though  whether  this  was  its  full  original  thickness  is
doubtful.  The  investigation  of  the  ruined  fortifications  on  this  slope,  it
may  be  observed,  is  a  matter  of  some  difficulty,  for  the  slope  is  not  only
very  steep  but  overgrown  with  prickly  shrubs  and  cumbered  with  huge
fallen  blocks.  The  antiquary  who  picks  his  way  painfully  among  these
obstacles  is  mortified  by  the  contrast  between  his  own  slow  progress
and  that  of  the  village  urchins  who  accompany  him ;  for  they  climb  and
skip  like  goats  on  the  top  of  the  walls,  now  appearing  suddenly  on  the
highest  pinnacles  and  then  again  leaping  from  stone  to  stone  with
wonderful  confidence  and  agility.

The  remains  of  the  walls  in  the  village,  on  the  other  hand,  can  be
examined  without  discomfort,  and  they  better  repay  study.  Here  on  the
north  and  north-west  the  wall,  flanked  by  square  towers,  is  standing  in
an  unbroken  line  for  a  considerable  distance.  It  is  from  about  8  to
about  20  feet  high,  with  courses  varying  in  number  from  four  to  eight.
The  towers,  of  which  there  are  seven,  measure  from  20  to  22  feet  on  the
face  and  project  from  i  o  ft.  7  in.  to  1 2  feet  from  the  line  of  wall.  The
blocks  of  which  the  towers  are  built  are  especially  massive.  One  fine
tower,  the  best  preserved  of  all,  is  standing  to  a  height  of  perhaps  27
feet,  with  fourteen  courses.  It  is  at  the  west  end  of  the  north  wall,  with
which  it  makes  an  acute  angle.  Two  doors,  each  about  6  feet  high  and
3  feet  wide,  lead  into  it  from  the  top  of  the  wall,  one  on  each  side.  In
the  interior  the  tower  is  about  1 8  ft.  8  in.  square.  Its  walls  are  pierced
at  the  top  with  windows,  two  on  the  north  side,  and  one  on  the  east ;
one  of  the  two  northern  windows  is  entire.  Three  courses  lower  down
than  the  windows  there  are  loopholes  in  all  the  walls  of  the  tower,  one
in  the  eastern  and  southern  walls,  two  in  the  northern  and  western.
Beyond  the  last  tower  to  the  south  may  be  seen  a  gate  about  9  feet  wide
in  the  wall,  but  whether  it  is  ancient  seems  doubtful.  In  the  north  wall
there  is  a  gap  beside  the  most  easterly  of  the  towers,  and  the  natives  say
that  there  was  a  gate  here  formerly.  As  a  whole,  the  masonry  of  the
walls  and  towers  is  splendid,  massive,  and  almost  quite  regular,  without
being  absolutely  so.  The  beauty  of  these  venerable  walls  is  much
enhanced  by  the  thick  green  veil  of  ivy  and  other  creepers  which  clothes
their  sides  and  droops  in  graceful  festoons  from  their  summits.  Such  a
mantle  of  clinging  verdure  is  very  rare  in  Greece,  where  the  ancient
temples  and  fortresses,  unlike  the  i\y-clad  abbeys  and  castles  of  Eng-
land, remain  for  the  most  part  to  this  day  as  bare  as  when  they
were  built,  without  even  a  patch  of  moss  to  soften  their  hard  outlines
and  to  tell  of  the  lapse  of  ages.

Distant  views  complete  the  charm  of  Tithorea.  From  its  ivied  walls,
rising  among  the  gardens  and  houses  of  the  village,  we  look  up  at  the
huge  grey  crag  that  hides  the  higher  slopes  of  Parnassus,  or  down  the


<:ii.  XXXII  TITHOREA  405

long  gradual  declivity  to  the  wide  valley  of  the  Cephisus  and  across  it  to
the  hills,  somewhat  low  and  tame,  at  whose  foot  lie  the  scanty  ruins  of
Elatea.

The  site  of  Tithorea  is  identified  by  inscriptions  which  are  still  to  be
seen  at  Velitsa,  Thus  a  stone  built  into  the  apse  of  the  church  of  the
Panagia  Theotokos  (*  the  Most  Holy  Mother  of  God  *),  which  stands  in  the
highest  part  of  the  village,  bears  an  inscription  (C.  /.  G,  No.  1733;
C,  I.  G,  G,  S,  3.  No.  200)  recording  that  the  city  of  Tithorea  set  up  a
statue  of  the  emperor  Nerva  in  his  fourth  consulship,  i.e.  in  the  year  98  a.d.
Lower  down  in  the  village,  opposite  a  small  chapel  of  St.  John  and  distant
from  it  some  60  yards  or  so,  there  is  a  quadrangular  base  with  mouldings,
which  serves  to  support  the  balcony  of  a  house.  The  original  inscription
on  this  base  records  that  a  certain  Gnosiphus  and  his  wife  Epixena
dedicated  a  statue  of  their  son  Theonidas  to  Serapis,  Isis,  and  Anubis  ;
but  besides  this  original  inscription  there  are  carved  on  the  pedestal  a
number  of  later  inscriptions,  most  of  them  dated  by  the  archon  of  Tithorea,
which  attest  the  sale  of  slaves  to  Serapis  {C.I.  G.  G.  S.  3.  Nos.  187-194  ;
Collitz,  G.  D.  1.  2.  Nos.  1554,  1555).  The  sale  of  a  slave  to  a  god  was  a
form  by  which  he  recovered  his  freedom.  Possessing  no  civil  rights  he
could  not  legally  purchase  his  own  freedom  ;  but  he  paid  the  price  and  a
god  was  made  the  nominal  purchaser.  From  these  inscriptions  we  infer
that  there  was  a  sanctuary  of  Serapis  at  Tithorea  and  that  the  inscribed
pedestal  was  set  up  in  it.  In  the  inscriptions  the  name  of  the  city  appears
sometimes  as  Tithorea  and  sometimes  as  Tithora,  The  form  Tithora  is
used  by  Plutarch  (5i///a,  15  ;  Atnatorius^  ii.  2).  Herodotus  (viii.  32),  like
Pausanias,  uses  the  form  Tithorea.

The  other  remains  of  antiquity  at  Tithorea  are  very  scanty.  Outside
the  church  of  the  Panagia  Theotokos  lie  a  number  of  ancient  blocks,
some  of  them  bearing  a  few  letters  of  inscriptions.  Some  ancient  blocks
are  also  to  be  seen  at  the  chapel  of  St.  Elias  which  stands  above  the
village,  near  the  foot  of  the  cliff.  I  also  observed  two  pieces  of  small
columns  at  the  chapel  of  St.  John  and  the  house  of  the  mayor.

See  Clarke,  Travels^  4.  p.  215  sqq.  ;  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  137  sqq,  ;  Cell,
Itinerary  of  Greece  (London,  18 19),  p.  214  ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  76
sqq.  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  tind  ForschungeHy  2.  p.  114  sqq.  ;  W.  Vischer,
Erinnerungetty  p.  624  sqq.  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  p.  166  j^.  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  202  ;
Guide-Joanne,  2.  p.  48.  According  to  Ulrichs,  the  walls  are  about  19  feet  thick
with  a  core  of  rubble.  I  was  at  Velitsa  (Tithorea),  26th  and  27th  October  1895,
and  have  described  the  situation  and  ruins  from  my  own  observation.

As  to  the  date  of  the  existing  walls  of  Tithorea,  opinions  have
differed  ;  but  their  fine  style  leaves  little  room  to  doubt  that  they  belong
to  the  best  period  of  Greek  military  architecture,  namely  to  the  fourth
century  B.C.  Ulrichs  may  be  right  in  thinking  that  they  cannot  be  earlier
than  the  second  Sacred  War  (355-346  B.C.),  since  at  the  end  of  that
war  the  cities  of  Phocis  were  razed  to  the  ground  (Paus.  x.  3.  i).  But
his  ground  for  dating  them  not  earlier  than  the  end  of  the  third
century  B.c.  does  not  hold  good.  It  is  that  the  towers  contain  loop-
holes, and  that  loopholes  were  invented  by  Archimedes  at  the  siege  of


4o6  TITHOREA  BK.  x.  phocis


Syracuse  in  214  B.C.  (Polybius,  viii.  7.  6;  Livy,  xxiv.  34.  9).  Ulrichs
seems  to  have  forgotten  that  there  are  loopholes  in  the  towers  of  Messene,
which  were  built  about  a  century  and  a  half  before  the  supposed  invention
of  loopholes  by  Archimedes.  Moreover  neither  Polybius  nor  Livy,  to
whose  evidence  Ulrichs  appeals,  expressly  asserts  that  Archimedes
invented  loopholes  ;  all  they  say  is  that  he  caused  them  to  be  made  in  the
walls  of  Syracuse.  Probably,  then,  the  existing  fortifications  of  Tithorea
were  built  in  the  second  half  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.,  between  the
end  of  the  Sacred  War  and  the  battle  of  Chaeronea,  that  is,  between
346  B.C.  and  338  B.C.  See  Pausanias,  x,  3.  3.  Leake's  view  that  they
were  built  in  the  early  days  of  the  Roman  empire  is  preposterous.
Under  the/^jr  Romana  of  that  age,  not  yet  disturbed  by  the  rumours  of
barbarian  invasions,  a  town  of  Phocis  had  as  little  reason  to  surround
itself  with  massive  walls  and  towers  as  an  English  town  in  Surrey  or
Hertfordshire  at  the  present  day ;  and  even  if  the  burghers  had  been
willing  to  lay  out  their  money  to  so  little  purpose,  it  is  in  the  last  degree
unlikely  that  they  would  have  been  suffered  to  do  so  by  the  Romans,
who  would  certainly  have  regarded  the  rising  fortifications  as  a  menace
to  their  authority  and  would  have  treated  then  accordingly.  Would  we
allow  a  petty  prince  in  India  to  fortify  his  capital  and  mount  Krupp
cannon  on  the  walls  ?

32.  8.  Tithorea  is  distant eighty  ftirlongs  from  Delphi  etc.

Pausanias  has  underestimated  the  distance,  which,  as  the  crow  flies,  is
about  12  English  miles.  Leake  suggested  that  the  two  roads  from
Tithorea  to  Delphi  perhaps  coincided  as  far  as  the  upper  end  of  the
ravine  of  the  Cachales,  after  which  the  carriage-road,  diverging  to  the
left,  may  have  crossed  the  tableland  oi  Livadi  and  then,  below  Arachova^
joined  the  highroad  which  led  from  the  Cleft  Way  to  Delphi ;  while
the  direct  route  from  Tithorea,  keeping  on  to  the  right,  may  have  joined
that  from  Lilaea  just  above  the  cliffs  of  Delphi,  where  the  remains
of  the  ancient  way  still  exist.  He  thought  it  possible  that  the  carriage-
road  might  still  be  traced  by  the  marks  of  the  wheels  in  the  rocks.  In
Leake's  time  there  was  no  road  in  common  use  from  Velitsa  (Tithorea)
across  the  mountain  either  to  Arac/wva  or  Delphi ;  the  inhabitants  of
Velitsa  penetrated  no  farther  than  a  woody  slope  at  a  little  distance
where  they  cut  firewood.     See  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  81  sq.

32.  9.  Herodotiis'  account  of  them  is  etc.  Herodotus  says  (viii.
32)  that  when  the  Persians  invaded  Phocis,  they  did  not  catch  the
inhabitants,  "for  some  of  the  Phocians  ascended  to  the  summits  of
Parnassus.  Now  there  is  a  peak  of  Parnassus  fitted  to  receive  a  multitude.
It  is  over  against  the  city  of  Neon  and  its  name  is  Tithorea.  To  this
the  Phocians  conveyed  their  property  and  ascended  to  it  themselves."
Some  have  supposed  that  this  "  peak  of  Parnassus,"  to  which  Herodotus
gave  the  name  of  Tithorea,  was  the  site  which  at  a  later  time  was
occupied  by  the  city  of  Tithorea  (the  modern  Velitsa),  This  was
Plutarch's  view,  for  he  expressly  says  that  the  city  of  Tithorea  was  the
place  in  which  the  Phocians  had  taken  refuge  at  the  approach  of  Xerxes.
If  this  view  is  correct,  the  city  of  Neon  must  have  occupied  a  site  different
from  and  lower  down  than  Tithorea  (  Velitsa).     Now  three  or  four  miles


CH.  xxxii  TITHOREA  407

to  the  north  of  VelitscL,  in  the  plain  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Cephisus,
there  exist  the  remains  of  an  ancient  city  of  considerable  size.  The
walls  formed  an  irregular  quadrangle.  In  many  places  the  foundation
or  socle  of  large  squared  blocks  is  to  be  seen,  and  the  remains  of
towers,  some  square,  some  round,  may  also  be  recognised.  Inside  the
circuit  of  the  walls  are  many  foundations  of  various  sizes,  and  the  ground
is  littered  with  potsherds.  H.  N.  Ulrichs  conjectured  that  these  ruins,
which  are  now  called  Palaia  Pheva  (*  Old  Thebes ')  by  the  natives,  are
the  remains  of  Neon.  That  Neon  was  distinct  from  Tithorea  and
continued  to  subsist  even  after  Tithorea  was  built  seems  to  be  indicated
by  the  statement  of  Pausanias  (x.  2.  4)  that  a  battle  was  fought  at  Neon
in  the  Sacred  War  of  355-346  B.C.  Yet  on  the  other  hand  it  has
sometimes  been  held,  as  by  Pausanias  himself,  that  Neon  and  Tithorea
were  identical,  Neon  being  the  earlier,  Tithorea  the  later  name  of  the
town.  On  this  view  the  peak  to  which  Herodotus  gave  the  name  of
Tithorea  must  have  been  one  of  the  higher  summits  of  Parnassus.  See
Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  79  j^.  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Riisen  unci
Forschungen^  2.  p.  116  sqq, ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  166.

32.  I  o.  A  generation  before  me  the  fortune  of  Tithorea  declined.
In  Plutarch's  time,  about  a  generation  before  Pausanias,  Tithorea  was  a
considerable  town,  for  he  says  that  in  the  Mithridatic  war  it  "  was  not
so  great  a  city  as  it  is  now,  but  merely  a  fortress  surrounded  by
precipices  "  {Sulla^  1 5).  Ancient  foundations  of  considerable  size  are  said
to  be  seen  outside  the  walls  of  Tithorea,  proving  that  in  the  days  of  its
prosperity  the  town  had  spread  beyond  the  walls.  Plutarch  seems  to
allude  to  this  in  the  passage  just  cited.  See  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen
und Forschungen^  2.  p.  \\^  sq.

32.  10.  the  structure  of  a  theatre.  Outside  the  walls  of  Tithorea,
towards  the  plain,  Vischer  observed  many  seats  lying  about,  which  he
took  to  be  those  of  the  theatre  {Erinnerungen^  p.  625).

32.  10.  a  somewhat  ancient  market-place.  Clarke  thought  that
he  had  discovered  this  market-place.  He  describes  it  (Travels^  4.  p.
220)  as  "a  square  structure,  built  in  the  Cyclopean  style,  with  large
masses  of  stone ;  but  laid  together  with  great  evenness  and  regularity,
although  without  any  cement ;  the  work  being  not  so  antient  as  the
architecture  of  Argos,  of  Tiryns,  or  of  Mycenae."

32.  10.  In  my  account  of  Thebes  I  showed  etc.     See  ix.  17.  5  sq.

32.  12.  dwellings  for  the  suppliants.    Cp.  ii.  11.6;  ii.  27.  2  note.

32.  12.  to  sacrifice  to  the  god  all  animals  except  goats.  Cp.
ii.  26.  9  note.  Goats  were  not  sacrificed  to  I  sis  at  her  great  shrine
near  Tithorea  (below,  §  1 6).  An  inscription  on  a  votive-relief  found  in
Thasos  and  now  in  the  Louvre  forbids  the  sacrifice  of  goats  to  the
Graces  (Roehl,  L  G,  A,  No.  379 ;  Roberts,  Greek  Epigraphy ^  No.  22).

32.  13.  shrine  of  Isis.  The  worship  of  I  sis,  Serapis,  and  Anubis
at  Tithorea  is  attested  by  a  dedicatory  inscription  found  at  Vclitsa  (the
ancient  Tithorea).  See  above,  p.  405  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und
Forschungen^  2.  p.  121.  Further  evidence  of  the  worship  of  Serapis  at
Tithorea  is  furnished  by  the  inscriptions  on  the  same  stone  recording
the  manumission  of  slaves  under  the  form  of  a  sale  of  them  to  Serapis


4o8  WORSHIP  OF  ISIS  bk.  x.  phocis

(above,  p.  405).  On  the  worship  of  Isis  outside  of  Egypt*  see  G.
Lafaye,  Histoire  du  culte  des ^  divimth  d*Alexandrie  SSrapiSy  Isis^
Harpocrate  et  Anubis  hors  de  lEgypte  (Paris,  1884).

32.  13.  the  nether  gocU  in  the  cities  on  the  Maeander  etc
Strabo  has  described  the  procedure  observed  at  a  sanctuary  of  Pluto
near  the  city  of  Acharaca,  between  Tralles  and  Nysa,  in  the  valley  of
the  Maeander.  There  was  a  sacred  grove  here,  with  a  temple  of  Pluto
and  Proserpine ;  and  above  the  grove  was  a  certain  cave  called  the
Charonium  or  place  of  Charon.  Sick  people  lodged  in  the  village  near
the  cave  and  were  treated  by  the  priests,  who  professed  to  be  guided  in
their  treatment  by  revelations  vouchsafed  to  them  in  dreams  while  they
slept  in  the  cave.  Sometimes  the  priests  brought  the  patients  to  the
cave  and  kept  them  there  for  several  days  without  food.  Sometimes  the
mode  of  cure  was  revealed  to  the  patient  himself  in  a  dream,  but  he  was
always  guided  by  the  advice  of  the  priests.  No  other  persons  were
allowed  to  enter  the  cave.  See  Strabo,  xiv.  p.  649  sq,  ;  Bouch^
Leclercq,  Histoire  de  la  divination  dans  V antiquity y  2.  p.  372  sqq.  As
to  Pausanias's  use  of  the  preposition  ittc/o  in  the  present  passage,  see
£.  Reitz,  De  praefiositionis  \nr\p  apud  Pausaniam  periegetam  usu  locali^
p.  36  sqq,  Mr.  Reitz  understands  it  to  refer  to  the  situation  of  the
cities  perched  on  heights  above  the  river.  But  it  seems  to  mean  no
more  than  what  we  express  by  *on,*  ue.  near.  A  city  beside  a  river
is  naturally  also  above  it.

32.  1 4.  festivals  are  held one  in  spring  and  one  in  aatnnin.

Cp.  Lafaye,  op.  cit,  p.  129.

32.  16.  The  richer  people  sacrifice  deer.     The  head  and

antlers  of  a  stag  are  car\'ed  on  what  seems  to  have  been  an  altar  of
Serapis  at  Chaeronea.  See  Preller,  in  Berichte  iiber  die  Verhandl.  d,
k,  sacks.  Gesell.  d.  Wissen.  zu  Leipzig^  6  (1854),  p.  197.  Deer  were
sacrificed  to  Artemis  at  Patrae  (Paus.  vii.  18.  12),  and  in  the  month
Elaphebolion,  doubtless  at  the  festival  of  the  Elaphebolia,  deer  were
sacrificed  to  her  in  her  character  of  Deer-hitter  {Elaphebolos)  (Bekkers
Anecdota  Graeca,  i.  p.  249).  At  the  Elaphebolia  cakes  called  *deers'
were  made,  probably  in  the  shape  of  deer  (Athenaeus,  xiv.  p.  646  e).
In  graphic  representations  of  the  Attic  calendar,  carved  in  relief  on
marble,  Artemis  is  portrayed  drawing  a  stag  to  herself;  this  no  doubt
stands  for  her  festival  of  Elaphebolia  (* deer-hitting')  in  the  month
Elaphebolion.  See  Le  Bas,  Voyage  arMologique^  Mon.  fig.,  21  ;
Friederichs-Wolters,  Gipsabgiisse^  No.  1909;  Daremberg  et  Saglio,
Dictionnaire  des  antiquith^  i.  p.  824.

32.  16.  the  poorer  folk  sacrifice  geese.  In  an  illustrated  manu-
script of  the  calendar  of  Philocalus,  under  the  month  November,  Isis  is
depicted  with  a  goose  at  her  feet.  The  MS.  is  in  the  Imperial  Library
at  Vienna.  See  Lafaye,  op.  at.  p.  267.  Amongst  the  victims  which  it
was  lawful  in  general  to  sacrifice,  the  goose  is  mentioned  (Suidas,  s.inf.
povs  f^Sofios  and  Ova-ov ;  Diogenianus,  iii.  50).  Martial  speaks
(ix.  31.  5  sq.)  of  the  sacrifice  of  a  goose  to  Mars.  Sacred  geese  were
sometimes  bred  in  temples  and  to  kill  one  of  them  seems  to  have  been
a  heinous  offence  (Artemidorus,  Onirocr.  iv.  83;  Petronius,  Sat.  136  sq.  ;


CH.  xxxii  /S/S  AND  OSIRIS  409

Plutarch,  CamilluSy  27).  One  of  the  first  duties  of  the  Roman  Censors
when  they  entered  on  office  was  to  give  out  a  contract  for  supplying  the
food  of  the  sacred  geese  (Pliny,  Nat,  hist,  x.  5 1  ;  Plutarch,  Quaest.  Rom.
98).  The  goose  was  used  in  divination  (Schol.  on  Aristophanes,
Birds y  521  ;  Petronius,  Sat,  137).  On  geese  in  ancient  literature  and
art  see  Stephani  in  Compte-Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1863,  p.  17  sqq,\
O.  Keller,  Thiere  des  classischen  AiterthumSy  pp.  286-303.

32.  16.  wrap  the  victims  in  bandages  of  linen  etc.  The
Eg^tian  method  of  swathing  mummies  in  linen  bandages  is  described
by  Herodotus  (ii.  86).  As  to  the  kind  of  fine  linen  {bussos)  here  men-
tioned by  Pausanias,  see  v.  5.  2  note.

32.  17-  bum  the  booths and  depart  in  haste.     Similarly

at  the  Delphic  festival  of  Crowning,  certain  persons  set  fire  to  a  shed  and
fled  away  without  looking  behind  them  (Plutarch,  De  defectu  oracularutn^
1 5  :  see  note  on  ii.  7.  7).  As  for  the  custom  of  erecting  temporary  huts
or  booths  in  a  sacred  precinct,  see  note  on  i.  18.  i,  vol.  2.  p.  165  sq.

32.  18.  she  is  mourning  for  Osiris  etc.  The  Egyptian  legend
of  the  death  of  Osiris  is  told  by  Plutarch  {^Isis  and  Osiris^  13  sqq,),
Pausanias  here  says  that  the  mourning  of  Isis  for  Osiris  was  supposed
to  take  place  when  the  Nile  began  to  rise.  But  according  to  Plutarch
{op,  cit,  39)  the  ceremony  of  mourning  for  Osiris  took  place  when  the
waters  of  the  Nile  were  sinking  and  lasted  four  days,  beginning  on  the
1 7th  of  the  month  Athyr.  According  to  Bnigsch  the  mourning  for
Osiris  lasted  from  the  8th  to  the  12th  of  November.  See  Brugsch,
Religion  und  Mythologie  der  alien  Aegypter^  p.  616  sqq.  The  annual
lamentations  for  the  dead  Osiris  are  described  by  Firmicus  Matemus
{De  errore projanarum  religionum^  ii.  3).  Specimens  of  Eg^tian  hymns
in  which  Isis  is  represented  mourning  for  Osiris  have  been  discovered.
See  Brugsch,  op,  cit,  p.  631  sqq,  ;  Records  of  the  Past,  2.  p.  119  sqq,

32.  18.  it  is  the  tears  of  Isis  that  cause  the  river  to  rise.
Similarly  it  was  said  by  the  Pythagoreans  that  the  sea  was  the  tear  of
Cronus  (Plutarch,  Isis  and  Osiris,  32).

32.   18.  a  true  saying  of  Homer's  etc.     See  Iliad,  xx.  131.

32.  19.  The  olive -oil  of  Tithorea  etc.  According  to  Clarke
{Travels,  4.  p.  218)  the  olives  of  Tithorea  still  maintained  their  reputa-
tion at  the  beginning  of  the  present  century  and  were  sent  as  acceptable
presents  to  the  Turkish  Pashas  and  other  grandees.  Dodwell,  however,
who  visited  Tithorea  a  few  years  after  Clarke,  saw  no  olive-trees  in  the
immediate  neighbourhood  of  Tithorea  ( Tour  in  Greece,  2.  p.  1 39).  The
cultivation  of  the  olive  is  represented  in  ancient  vase-paintings.  Sec
Baumeister's  Denkmdler,  p.  1046  sq, ;  and  on  the  ancient  methods
of  manufacturing  oil  from  the  olives,  see  Bliimner,  Technologie,  i.
p.  328  sqq,

32.  1 9.  the  Iberian  oil  etc.  The  olive-oil  of  Turdetania  (the  south-
western part  of  Andalusia)  was  of  very  fine  quality,  and  it  was  exported
in  large  quantities  (Strabo,  iii.  p.  144).  According  to  Pliny  {Nat,  hist,
XV.  8)  the  olive-oil  of  Baetica  (Andalusia)  and  Histria  ranked  next  after
that  of  Italy,  which,  Pliny  says,  was  the  finest  in  the  world.  Martial
speaks  of  the  oil  of  Cordova  as  equal  both  to  the  oil  of  Istiia  and  to  the


4IO  RIDE  ACROSS  PARNASSUS  bk.  x.  phocis

best  Italian  oil  {Epigr,  xii.  63.  i  sq.).  Cp.  V.  Hehn,  KulturpJUmzen
und  Hausthiere,^  p.  94  sq,  Istria,  which  Pausanias  calls  an  island,  is
a  peninsula.

33.  I.  Ledon.  Leake  conjectured  that  this  might  be  identical
with  the  city  of  the  Pedienses  mentioned  by  Herodotus  (viii.  33).  He
thought  the  ruins  now  called  Old  Thebes  (see  note  on  x.  32.  9)  may  be
those  of  Ledon  or  the  city  of  the  Pedienses.  See  Leake,  Northern
Greece y  2.  p.  %g  sq.

33.  2.  the  flckleness  of  Histiaens  etc.     See  Herodotus,  v.  11,  23

sq-,  35-

33.  2.  the  impiety  of  Philomelus  etc.  Philomelus  was  a  native
of  Ledon.     See  x.  2.  2.

33.  3.  Lilaea  is  a  winter  dasr's  Journey  from  Delphi  etc.  The
well-preserved  ruins  of  Lilaea  are  situated  near  the  source  of  the  Cephisus,
at  the  north-western  foot  of  Parnassus.  The  route  from  Delphi  leads
across  and  down  Parnassus,  as  Pausanias  correctly  says.  I  followed
this  route,  and  my  notes  of  it  may  supplement  our  author's  too  concise
description.  We  left  the  new  village  of  Delphi,  which  stands  a  little  to
the  south-west  of  the  ancient  sanctuary,  shortly  after  eight  o'clock,  and  at
once  struck  up  the  mountain-side  at  the  back  of  the  village.  The  path
for  a  good  way  is  the  same  as  that  to  the  Corycian  cave.  It  climbs  the
bare  rocky  face  of  the  mountain  in  a  series  of  zigzags,  from  which  as
we  rose  higher  and  higher  a  wide  prospect  opened  up  behind  us  to  the
Gulf  of  Corinth  and  the  distant  mountains  of  Peloponnese.  On  reaching
the  top  of  this  long  and  steep  decli\nty  we  found  ourselves  on  the  edge
of  an  expanse  of  comparatively  level,  though  broken,  ground,  sparsely
wooded  with  pines,  beyond  which  rose  the  upper  slopes  of  Parnassus,
its  summit  lightly  capped  with  snow.  The  high  plateau  on  which  we
now  stood  is  bounded  on  the  north  by  an  outlying  spur  of  Parnassus,
clothed  with  pine-forest,  in  the  southern  face  of  which  is  the  Corycian
cave.  Instead  of  crossing  the  tableland  in  the  direction  of  the  cave,  we
skirted  its  south-western  comer,  keeping  the  wooded  mountain  on  our
right.  The  path  continued  to  wind  for  hours  along  grey  rocky  slopes
where  pines  grew  more  or  less  thickly.  On  either  hand  rose  sombre
mountains  of  the  same  general  character — grey  and  rocky  with  patches
of  pine-forest  on  their  sides.  Now  and  then  a  little  moss  relieved  with
its  verdure  the  barrenness  of  the  rocks,  and  a  stony  glade  through  which
we  passed  was  speckled  with  pale  purple  crocuses.  On  these  heights  the
air  felt  chilly,  for  the  season  was  late  October,  and  a  little  snow — the  first
of  autumn — had  fallen  in  the  night,  just  touching  with  white  the  peaks  of
Parnassus  and  the  high  Locrian  mountains  in  the  west.  The  morning
had  been  bright  when  we  left  Delphi,  but  as  the  day  wore  on  the  sky
became  overcast,  its  cold  and  lowering  aspect  harmonising  well  with
the  wild  and  desolate  scenery  through  which  we  rode.  The  jingling  of
the  mule-bells  and  the  cries  of  the  muleteers  were  almost  the  only  sounds
that  broke  the  silence,  though  once  in  the  forest  to  the  right  we  heard
the  clapper-like  note  of  a  pelican,  and  once  in  an  open  glade  we  passed
some  woodmen  hewing  pine-logs.  In  time,  the  path  beginning  to  de-
scend, the  rocks  gave  place  to  earthy  slopes ;  a  little  pale  thin  grass


CH.  XXXIII  LILAEA  411

and  some  withered  ferns  grew  in  the  glades  ;  the  sun  shone  out  between
the  clouds,  and  as  we  descended  into  the  warmer  lowlands  it  seemed  as
if  we  were  pursuing  the  departing  summer.  In  about  four  hours  from
Delphi  high  purple  mountains,  sunlit  and  flecked  with  cloud-shadows,
appeared  in  the  north  through  and  above  the  pine-forest.  Farther  down
the  forest  grew  thin  and  then  disappeared  from  the  stony  bottom  of  the
valley,  though  the  upper  slopes  of  the  mountains  on  either  side  were
still  wrapt  in  their  dark  mantle  of  pines.  It  was  near  one  o'clock  when
we  reached  Ano-Agoriani^  a  village  nestling  among  trees  in  a  hollow  of
the  mountains  and  traversed  by  a  murmuring  brook.  After  a  halt  of
about  an  hour  we  quitted  Ano-Agoriani  and  descended  into  the  deep
bed  of  the  stream  below  the  village ;  then  ascending  steeply  its  western
bank  we  pursued  our  way  along  the  rocky  mountain-side  high  above  the
glen.  In  three-quarters  of  an  hour  we  came  in  sight  of  the  broad  valley
of  the  Cephisus  lying  stretched  below  us  and  backed  by  mountains  on
the  north.  By  steep  rocky  winding  paths  we  now  descended  into  the
valley  and  at  a  quarter  to  four  reached  Kato-AgorianL  The  village
stands  just  at  the  foot  of  Parnassus.  About  a  mile  to  the  east  the
grey  ruined  walls  and  towers  of  Lilaea  climb  a  steep  and  rugged  hill-
side— the  last  fall  of  Parnassus  to  the  plain.  The  situation  of  the
place  at  the  northern  foot  of  the  mountain  is  such  that  it  can  receive
very  little  sun  at  any  time  of  the  year,  which,  though  an  advantage  in
the  torrid  heat  of  a  Greek  summer,  must  render  the  winter  climate
severe.  As  we  rode  downwards  to  Kato-Agoriani  the  sun  set  behind
the  mountains  at  our  back  soon  after  three  o'clock,  but  it  was  not  till
nearly  two  hours  afterwards  that  his  light  faded  from  the  hills  on
the  opposite  or  northern  side  of  the  valley.  This  may  illustrate  the
remarks  of  Pausanias  as  to  the  climate  of  Lilaea.

Little  now  remains  of  Lilaea  except  the  fortifications  of  the  acropolis,
but  these  are  well  preserved  (Fig.  15).  Their  situation  is  striking  and
peculiar.  The  last  slope  of  Parnassus  to  the  valley  of  the  Cephisus  here
consists  of  a  steep  hill-side  studded  with  nigged  rocks,  overgrown  with
prickly  shrubs,  and  terminated  on  the  east  by  a  deep  glen,  into  which
the  hill  descends  abruptly  in  sheer  and  lofty  precipices.  The  walls,
flanked  with  square  towers,  ascend  the  steep  rocky  bushy  slope  of  the
hill  at  a  short  distance  to  the  west  of  these  precipices,  which  they
gradually  approach,  till  only  a  narrow  strip  of  shelving  rocky  ground
is  left  between  them  and  the  brink  of  the  cliffs.  This  strip  may  be  from
20  to  50  yards  wide  in  some  places,  but  in  others  it  is  only  broad  enough
to  allow  of  a  passage  between  the  walls  and  the  crags.  Indeed  at  one
place  the  precipitous  slope  (here  not  actually  a  precipice)  begins  at  the
very  foot  of  the  wall.  Towards  the  summit  the  wall  makes  an  angle
westward  for  a  few  yards,  thus  leaving  a  somewhat  wider,  but  still  very
small  space  between  it  and  the  precipices  on  the  east.  This  narrow
area,  enclosed  by  massive  walls  on  three  sides  and  by  precipices  on  the
remaining  side,  was  the  citadel  proper ;  and  the  walls  and  towers  on  the
hill-side  below,  which  from  their  massiveness  and  height  would  seem
to  have  been  erected  at  an  enormous  expenditure  of  labour,  if  not  of
money,  were  apparently  intended  merely  to  connect  the  tiny  citadel  with


412


LILAEA


BK.  X.  PHOCIS


the  town  in  the  plain ;  for  the  hill-side  itself,  hemmed  in  between  the
wall  and  the  precipices,  is  too  steep  and  rugged  to  allow  us  to  suppose
that  any  part  of  the  towTi  was  built  on  it.


Spring
ana  Mil r


Higher    Hills


Ridg9


Slope  Of  hill
descending  from


south    to   the


plain  on  north


s


Plain


FIG.    15. — PLAN   OF   RUINS  OF  LILAEA.


Walls  and  towers  are  finely  and  solidly  built  of  squared  blocks  laid
in  horizontal  courses.  The  masonry  is  nearly  but  not  quite  regular ;
the  blocks  of  the  lower  courses  are  especially  massive.  The  fortifica-
tions begin  at  the  foot  of  the  hill  with  a  Avell-preser\'ed  square  tower
which  is  standing  to  a  height  (as  I  estimated  it)  of  27  feet,  with  twelve
courses  of  masonry.  It  is  20  feet  broad  on  its  western  face  and  projects
12  feet  from  the  curtain.  In  the  top  of  the  tower,  on  its  western  side,
is  a  square  window,  and  a  little  lower  down  is  a  loophole  for  arrows.
Above  the  tower  the  wall  ascends  the  steep  bushy  slope  of  the  hill.  In
some  places  it  is  ruinous,  consisting  chiefly  of  a  jumble  of  huge  fallen
blocks  among  the  prickly  holly-oak  bushes.  But  to  a  great  extent  it
still  has  from  two  to  ten  courses  standing,  and  is  preser^'ed  on  both
faces,  its  thickness  being  about  9  feet.  Where  four  courses  are  stand-
ing the  height  is  about  9  feet ;  where  nine  or  ten  courses  are  preserved,
the  height  is  about   18  or  19  feet.     On  the  steepest  part  of  the  slope


c».  XXXIII  LILAEA  413

the  wall  rises  in  steps,  and  here  it  is  preserved  to  its  full  height  (about
1 8  feet,  with  nine  or  ten  courses)  ;  for  it  is  surmounted  by  a  course  of
coping-stones  composed  of  flat  projecting  slabs.  Two  square  towers
are  standing  on  the  slope  of  the  hill.  One  of  them  is  22  ft.  8  in.  broad
and  projects  i  o  ft.  8  in.  from  the  curtain ;  at  its  north-west  angle  it  is
still  about  24  feet  high  with  twelve  courses  of  masonry.  The  other
tower,  lower  down  the  hill,  is  only  1 4  feet  broad  and  about  1 2  feet  high,
with  eight  courses.  The  little  citadel  on  the  summit  of  the  hill  measures
about  100  yards  long  on  its  western  and  70  yards  on  its  southern  side.
Two  to  eight  courses  of  the  walls  are  standing.  The  masonry  is
splendid ;  the  blocks  are  huge  and  solid  and  laid  in  horizontal  courses.
Two  square  towers  project  from  the  southern  wall,  one  at  its  western
angle,  the  other  at  its  eastern  end,  just  above  the  precipices  which
bound  the  citadel  on  this  side.  The  western  tower  is  at  least  40  feet
high,  but  the  upper  part  is  mediaeval  or  modem,  being  miserably  con-
structed of  small  stones  and  mortar.  However  about  six  courses  of
masonry  on  one  side  and  nine  or  ten  courses  on  another  seem  to  be
ancient.  This  tall  and  conspicuous  tower  is  about  14  paces  broad  and
projects  12  ft.  7  in.  from  the  curtain.  The  eastern  tower  is  square,
like  all  the  others ;  it  projects  13  ft.  8  in.  from  the  curtain  and  has
seven  courses  standing  on  one  of  its  sides.  Outside  of  the  citadel  to
the  south  there  is  a  piece  of  level  ground  between  the  wall  and  the
precipices,  which  here  curve  westward.  Why  the  engineer  did  not
include  this  flat  ground  within  the  citadel  and  carry  the  fortifications
(if  fortifications  were  needed)  along  the  brink  of  the  precipices,  is  not
evident  To  the  south  the  hill  of  Lilaea  is  dominated  by  much  higher
mountains,  the  outlying  masses  of  Parnassus.

DoA\'n  the  eastern  side  of  the  broad  and  deep  glen  that  bounds  the
hill  on  the  east  there  flows  a  stream  to  join  the  Cephisus ;  and  on  the
western  side  of  the  glen,  just  at  the  foot  of  the  immense  perpendicular
crag  which  is  crowned  by  the  fortifications  of  the  citadel,  a  small  spring
rises  amid  luxuriant  vegetation.  Beside  the  spring  is  a  mill,  now
disused,  to  which  the  water  is  led  in  a  channel  from  higher  up  the  glen.

The  town  of  Lilaea  seems  to  have  stood  on  the  flat  ground  at  the
foot  of  the  steep  hill  which  formed  the  acropolis,  for  scanty  remains  of
its  walls  may  be  seen  at  various  points  in  the  plain  and  the  glen.  Thus,
for  example,  from  the  tall  well-preserved  tower  at  the  foot  of  the  hill
slight  but  indubitable  traces  of  a  wall  may  be  discerned  extending  north-
ward into  the  plain ;  and  in  the  glen  about  100  yards  down  from  the
mill  I  saw  remains  of  a  wall  coming  down,  in  an  easterly  direction,  from
the  acropolis.  On  the  slope  of  the  hill,  below  the  precipitous  rocks,
the  wall  is  preserved  for  several  yards,  with  two  and  three  courses  of
masonry,  and  there  are  some  traces  of  it  in  the  glen  further  to  the  north,
at  the  foot  of  the  hill.  Lastly,  in  the  flat  ground  at  the  mouth  of  the
glen,  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  to  the  north-east  of  the  hill,  a  few  isolated
remains  of  walls  may  be  seen :  two  courses  are  standing,  and  other
squared  blocks  are  lying  about.

I  visited  Lilaea  from  KoUo-Agoriani^  23rd-25th  October  1895,  and  have  de-
scribed its  situation  and  ruins  from  my  own  observation.      See  also  Dodwell,


414  SOURCE  OF  CEPHISUS  bk.  x.  phocis

Tour  J  2.  p.  133 ;  GeH,  Itinerary  of  Greece  (London,  1 819),  p.  207  ;  Leake,
Northern  Greece^  2.  pp.  71  J^.,  84  sqq.^  581 ;  Welcker,  Tagebueh,  2.  p.  79  sgg.  ;
Bursian,  Geogr,  I.  p.  161 ;  Lolling,  mAfittkeil.  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  9  (iSi84),
p.  311  j^.  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  162 ;  Guide- Joa$ine^  2.  p.  44.

33.  5.  The  river  has  its  source  here  etc.  The  copious  springs
which  the  ancients  regarded  as  the  source  of  the  Cephisus  rise  at  the
northern  base  of  Parnassus,  about  a  mile  or  so  to  the  east  of  Lilaea.
Here  at  the  foot  of  a  rocky  hill  a  terrace,  about  ten  paces  broad,  is
supported  by  a  wall  of  polygonal  masonry  6  to  9  feet  high  and  100
yards  long  or  more.  On  the  top  of  this  polygonal  wall,  towards  its
eastern  end,  there  rests  a  stretch  of  ashlar  masonry,  two  courses  high,
which  also  served  to  support  the  terrace  on  this  side.  A  small  ancient
building,  probably  a  temple  of  the  river  Cephisus,  must  have  stood  on
the  terrace,  near  its  eastern  end ;  for  here  two  fragments  of  small
unfluted  columns,  and  a  small  piece  of  wall,  consisting  of  four  or  fi\t
blocks,  are  standing,  and  many  large  squared  blocks  are  lying  about
The  diameter  of  the  columns  is  1 3  inches ;  their  height  is  5  ft.  3  in.
and  4  ft.  5  in.  respectively.  Immediately  below  the  terrace,  a  few  feet
from  the  polygonal  wall,  a  very  copious  spring  of  clear  water  wells  forth,
forming  a  large  pool  at  the  foot  of  the  wall  not  many  yards  to  the
west.  Tall  grass  and  other  plants  grow  in  abundance  beside  the  stream
just  opposite  the  spring,  and  accompany  its  course  through  the  plain,
where  some  willows  grow  on  its  banks.  Beside  the  spring,  lower  down
than  the  polygonal  wall,  are  some  remains  of  other  walls,  and  many
ancient  squared  blocks  lie  tumbled  about.  One  small  hewn  stone,  with
its  top  shaped  like  a  gable  or  pediment,  lying  close  to  the  water,  bears
the  following  inscription  :

aBNO*ANHS
SENOAOPA
ANAPI2K0N
K]A*I2ni

The  stone  is  broken  at  the  bottom  left  hand  corner,  and  a  letter  has
clearly  been  lost.  The  missing  letter  was  no  doubt  K.  Thus  the
inscription  records  a  dedication  to  the  river  Cephisus  by  three  persons,
Xenophanes,  Xenodora,  and  Andriscon,  and  proves  that  the  spring  is
indeed  the  one  which  the  ancients  regarded  as  the  source  of  the  river.
Further,  it  shows  that  the  Cephisus  was  worshipped  here,  and  it  makes
it  probable  that  the  building  on  the  terrace  above  the  spring  was  a
temple  of  the  river  god.  The  inscription  seems  to  have  been  entire
when  Lolling  copied  it  (C  /.  G,  G,  S.  3.  No.  232).

About  1 50  yards  or  so  to  the  east  of  the  spring  is  a  building  which
from  the  crosses  carved  over  the  doorways  would  seem  to  have  been
used  as  a  chapel,  though  in  plan  it  differs  wholly  from  the  common  type
of  Greek  church.  There  is  no  apse ;  the  door  is  in  the  north  wall
instead  of  at  the  east  end  ;  and  in  the  interior  there  is  a  cross- wall
pierced  with  three  doorways,  each  of  which  has  a  large  stone  lintel  and
stone  doorposts.  The  masonry  of  the  building  is  so  good  and  so
regular  that  at  first  I  took  it  for  ancient ;  but  in  the  foundations  there
are  some  bits  of  bricks.


CH.  XXXIII  SOURCE  OF  CEPHISUS  415


It  was  about  half-past  eight  in  the  morning  when  I  visited  the  spring,
and  the  water  then  welled  up  with  a  gentle  murmuring  sound  very  unlike
the  bellowing  of  a  bull,  to  which  Pausanias  compares  the  noise  made  by
it  at  mid-day.  It  is  true  I  heard  a  rushing  roaring  sound,  but  it  was  only
the  sough  of  wind  in  the  willows.

Ancient  writers  from  Homer  onward  seem  to  be  unanimous  in
regarding  as  the  source  of  the  Cephisus  this  spring  near  Lilaea.  See
Homer,  //.  ii.  523  ;  /V^,  Hymn  to  Apollo^  240  sq, ;  Strabo,  ix.  pp.  407,
424  ;  Pliny,  Nat.  hist.  iv.  8  ;  Statius,  Theb.  vii.  348  sq.  ;  Pans.  ix.  24.
I.  Yet  it  is  not  the  highest  source  of  the  river.  A  considerable  stream
of  turbid  water  comes  down  the  valley  from  the  west,  flows  through  the
middle  of  the  plain  in  a  broad  gravelly  bed,  and  is  joined  by  the  stream
formed  by  the  spring  which  has  just  been  described.  Moreover  the
stream  which  comes  down  the  glen  on  the  eastern  side  of  Lilaea  and
joins  the  Cephisus  must  also  take  its  rise  much  further  up  among  the
mountains  than  the  supposed  source  of  the  river.  It  may  also  be
mentioned  that  about  a  mile  or  less  to  the  west  of  Kato-Agoriani^  and
hence  about  two  miles  to  the  west  of  Lilaea,  another  spring  issues  from
the  foot  of  the  rocky  hills  which  bound  the  flat  valley  of  the  Cephisus
on  the  south.  The  water  is  clear  and  forms  at  once  a  fair-sized  stream,
which  is  directed  in  a  long  straight  canal,  edged  with  poplars,  in  a
northerly  or  north-easterly  direction  across  the  plain,  probably  to  join
the  Cephisus.

I  visited  the  springs  24th  and  25th  October  1895,  ^^^  ^^^^  described  them
from  personal  observation.  See  also  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  133  ;  Leake,  Northern
Greece,  2.  pp.  70  sq.,  84  sq.  ;  Welcker,  Tagehuch^  2.  p.  81  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  p.  161.

33.  5.  owing  to  Mount  Pamassns  its  winters  are  not  corre-
spondingly mild.  See  above,  p.  4 1 1 .  The  upper  valley  of  the  Cephisus,
in  which  lay  Lilaea,  Tithorea,  and  Elatea,  is  bounded  on  the  south  by
the  great  mountain-mass  of  Parnassus,  and  on  the  north  by  the  mountains
of  Locris.  The  inhabitants  "  complain  of  the  intensity  and  duration  of
the  winter  cold.  These  lofty  summits  continually  attract  and  break  the
clouds  by  which  they  are  assailed  with  long  and  violent  showers  of  rain
and  snow"  (Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  137).  Velitsa  (the  ancient  Tithorea),
lying  right  under  the  northern  declivities  of  Parnassus,  is  in  shadow  in
winter  even  before  one  o'clock  (Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  119).
Another  proof  of  the  absence  of  sunshine  in  this  district  is  that  the  vintage
is  later  here  than  in  Peloponnese.  When  I  was  at  Lilaea  towards  the
end  of  October,  the  vines  were  still  laden  with  purple  clusters,  which  the
peasants  were  engaged  in  gathering  and  crushing ;  whereas  in  Pelopon-
nese, which  I  had  quitted  a  few  days  before,  the  vintage  was  mostly  over.
The  manner  of  pressing  the  grapes,  it  may  be  obser\'ed,  differs  in  different
parts  of  Greece.  In  some  places,  as  at  Phlius,  the  grapes  are  trodden
with  the  feet ;  in  other  places,  as  at  Clitor  in  Arcadia  and  Lilaea  in
Phocis,  they  are  crushed  with  wooden  clubs  or  beetles  in  tubs.

33.  6.  Oharadra,  perched  on  a  high  crag.  The  ruins  which  may
with  some  probability  be  identified  as  those  of  Charadra,  occupy  the
slopes  and  summit  of  a  steep  rocky  hill,  perhaps  400  feet  high,  which


4x6


CHARADRA


BK.  X.  PHOCIS


projects  slightly  into  the  plain  from  the  northern  foot  of  Parnassus.  On
the  west  the  hill  slopes  very  steeply  to  a  glen,  down  which  a  brook,
coming  from  a  gully  in  the  mountains  further  to  the  south,  flows  north-
ward to  join  the  Kanianitis  or  Kaienitzay  a  tributary  of  the  Cephisus.
This  brook  is  probably  the  Charadrus,  mentioned  by  Pausanias  ;  it
was  dry  when  I  visited  the  place  in  October,  which  so  for  confirms
Pausanias's  remark  as  to  the  lack  of  water  at  Charadra.  The  very
steep  rocky  slope  of  the  hill  towards  the  glen  on  the  west  would  seem  to
be  the  "  high  crag  "  of  which  our  author  speaks.  On  the  south  the  hill
descends  gradually  to  the  glen,  which  here  makes  a  sort  of  bend  as  if  it
would  encircle  the  hill.  In  this  bend  lies  the  village  of  Meuiolates,
The  high  rugged  mountains  to  the  south  and  south-west,  beyond  the
village  of  Mariolates,  are  wooded  with  pines  on  their  upper  slopes.  On
the  east  the  hill  of  Charadra  is  connected  with  higher  rocky  hills  by  a
short  ridge  or  saddle.  On  the  north  it  slopes  steeply  to  the  wide  level
expanse  of  the  Cephisian  plain,  through  which  the  Kanianitis  flop's
eastward  in  a  broad  gravelly  bed  to  join  the  Cephisus.  The  place  is
about  3  miles  north-west  of  Lilaea,  which  is  somewhat  in  excess  of  the
distance  (20  Greek  furlongs,  about  2^  miles)  which  Pausanias  mentions.
The  fortification-walls  of  Charadra,  of  which  there  are  considerable
remains,  seem  to  have  been  disposed  as  follows.     On  the  northern  side


#«


FIG.    16.-- PLAN  OF  RUINS  OF   CHARADRA  (?).


of  the  hill  they  ascended  the  slope  obliquely  from  north-west  to  south-
east, starting  probably  from  the  plain  (though  here  they  no  longer  exist  •
and  reaching  the  highest  point  of  the  enclosure  at  the  eastern  summit  of
the  hill.  Here  the  wall,  now  preserved  in  an  unbroken  line  though  not
to  any  great  height,  turns  southward,  and  runs  in  a  straight  line  for  some
70  yards  or  so,  till  at  the  south-eastern  angle  it  turns  westward  and,
gradually  descending,  extends  as  far  as  the  glen  which  bounds  the  hill
on  the  west.  On  this  southern  side  of  the  hill  the  wall  with  its  flanking
towers  is  better  preserved  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  circuit.  On  the
western  side  of  the  hill  the  wall  ran  along  the  edge  of  the  glen,  then
descended  the  slope  northward  into  the  plain,  where  the  last  traces  of  it


CH.  xxxm  CHARADRA  417

may  be  seen  at  a  rocky  pinnacle,  partly  overgrown  with  holly-oak  bushes,
at  no  great  height  above  the  glen.  But  of  this  western  wall  only  a  few
isolated  pieces  are  standing.

Such  was  apparently  the  circuit  of  Charadra,  which  thus  embraced
not  only  the  summit  but  a  great  part  of  the  northern  slope  of  the  hill.
Within  the  circuit,  however,  a  fortification-wall,  which  is  partially  pre-
served, ran  along  the  northern  brow  of  the  hill,  thus  forming,  with  the
other  walls  on  the  east,  south,  and  west,  an  upper  fortress  or  citadel  of
a  roughly  quadrangular  shape.  The  whole  fortified  enclosure,  however,
is  but  small.  The  citadel  may  measure  perhaps  1 50  yards  from  east  to
west  by  70  yards  from  north  to  south.

The  masonry  of  the  walls  and  towers  is  on  the  whole  of  the  regular
ashlar  sort ;  the  blocks  are  large,  squared,  and  laid  in  horizontal  courses.
From  two  to  six  courses  are  preserved ;  the  height  in  many  places  is
from  8  to  10  or  11  feet.  For  example  the  southern  wall  is  preserved
unbroken  for  a  length  of  nearly  100  yards  and  a  height  of  8  or  10  feet,
with  six  courses  of  massive  ashlar  masonry ;  and  the  eastern  wall,  built
in  the  same  style,  is  preserved  throughout  its  whole  length  (about  70
yards)  to  a  height  of  two  and  three  courses.  Four  square  towers  project
from  these  two  walls,  namely  two  towers  from  the  south  wall,  one  tower
from  the  east  wall,  and  one  tower  from  the  angle  between  the  two  walls.
With  the  exception  of  the  most  westerly,  which  is  ruinous,  each  of  these
towers  is  21  or  22  feet  broad,  and  projects  about  11  feet  fh>m  the
curtain.  One  of  the  towers  on  the  south  wall  is  11  or  12  feet  high,
with  five  courses  of  masonry.  The  tower  at  the  angle  is  4  ft.  5  in.  high
with  two  courses.  The  remains  of  the  wall  which  ascends  the  northern
slope  obliquely  from  the  north-west  are  not  continuous,  but  there
are  isolated  pieces  about  10  feet  high  with  from  three  to  six  courses
of  masonry.  Remains  of  two  square  towers  may  be  seen  projecting  from
it.  On  this  northern  slope  the  rugged  rocks  which  jut  from  the  hill-side
clearly  formed  part  of  the  line  of  the  fortifications,  for  the  wall  abuts  against
them  in  some  places.  The  inner  wall  of  the  citadel,  along  the  northern
brow  of  the  hill,  is  partly  built  on  the  top  of  rocks.  It  runs  unbroken
for  a  length  of  about  60  paces,  except  that  about  14  paces  from  its
western  end  there  is  a  gateway  1 1  feet  wide,  undefended  by  towers.  To
the  west  of  this  gateway  the  citadel-wall  is  about  6  feet  high ;  to  the
east  of  it  the  wall  has  five  courses  of  masonry,  and  its  height,  inclusive  of
the  rock  on  which  it  rests,  is  over  1 2  feet.  The  masonry  of  this  eastern
part  of  the  citadel-wall  is  not  so  good  as  that  of  the  circuit-wall ;  the
blocks  are  smaller  and  rather  irregular,  and  holly-oak  bushes,  growing
out  of  it,  have  loosened  the  joints.  In  the  circuit-wall  there  are  some
traces  of  gateways,  one  in  the  south  wall  beside  the  ruined  tower,  the
other  at  the  north-western  comer  beside  the  rocky  pinnacle  to  which
reference  has  already  been  made.  This  latter  gateway  seems  to  have
opened  westward  to  the  glen,  the  descent  to  which  at  this  point  of  the
slope  is  neither  high  nor  steep.  On  the  summit  of  the  hill  a  little
chapel  rudely  built  of  small  stones  stands  beside  a  holly-oak.  It  con-
tains no  ancient  blocks,  so  far  as  I  saw.

Leake  was  of  opinion  that  the  ruins  which  have  been  described  were

VOL.  V  2  E


4i8  VALLEY  OF  CEPHISVS  BK.  x.  phocis

not  in  Phocis  but  in  Doris,  and  he  would  identify  them  as  those  of
Boeum,  one  of  the  small  towns  of  the  Dorian  Tetrapolis  (Thucydides,  i.
107  ;  Strabo,  x.  p.  476 ;  Scymnus  Chius,  Orbis  description  593  ;  Dio-
dorus,  iv.  67,  xi.  79  ;  Ptolemy,  iii.  14.  14,  ed.  Miiller;  Pliny,  Nat.  hist,
iv.  28).  He  argues  that  since  LiLaea  was  sometimes  regarded,  for
example  by  Ptolemy  {i.c),  as  a  Dorian  town,  though  in  general  it  was
held  to  belong  to  Phocis,  it  must  have  been  on  the  frontier ;  and  that
consequently  the  ruins  at  Mariolates^  being  about  3  miles  to  the  north-
west of  Lilaea,  must  certainly  have  been  in  Doris.  He  would  place
Charadra  at  Souvala,  a  village  at  the  head  of  a  long  slope,  where  he
remarked  some  remains  of  a  small  fortified  town.  There  are  two
villages  of  Souvala^  an  upper  and  a  lower  {^Ano  SottvcUa  and  Koto
Souvala).  Leake  seems  to  have  referred  to  the  upper  village,  which  is
distant  about  2^  miles  to  the  south-east  of  Lilaea.  The  lower  village  is
on  the  edge  of  the  plain,  in  sight  of  Lilaea  and  distant  from  it  only
about  a  mile  to  the  north-east

See  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  132 ;  Leake,  Northerti  Greece,  2.  pp.  70,  72,  85-94 ;
W.  Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.  622 ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  I.  p.  161  j^.  ;  H.  G.  Lolling,
in  MittheiL  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,  9  (1884),  pp.  312  j^.,  317.  I  visited f the  ruins
at  Marioiates,  24th  October  1895,  ^^^  ^^^  described  tnem  from  personal  observa-
tion.

33.  7-  The  valley  of  the  Oepbisns  is  decidedly  the  best  land  in
Phocis  etc.  The  upper  valley  of  the  Cephisus,  between  the  northern
slopes  of  Parnassus  and  the  southern  slopes  of  the  Locrian  mountains,
is  still  fertile  and  well  tilled ;  in  some  places  it  is  one  continuous  corn-
field, in  which  the  ripe  wheat  stands  as  high  as  a  man  and  yields  a  return
of  eight  to  one.  Numerous  large  villages  lie  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains.
See  Leake,  Northern  Greece,  2.  pp.  73,  74  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.
622.  Theophrastus  remarked  on  the  quantity  of  flour  yielded  by  the
wheat  grown  about  Elatea  {Hist,  plant,  viii.  8.  2).  When  I  passed
through  the  valley  of  the  Cephisus  in  Phocis  at  the  end  of  October,  the
wheat  had  long  been  reaped  and  the  fields  lay  either  in  stubble  or  had
lately  been  ploughed.  Even  the  Indian  com,  which  is  an  autumn  crop,
had  been  got  in  ;  but  the  cotton  was  still  in  some  of  the  fields.  The
soil  is  so  fertile  that  it  yields  two  crops  in  the  year,  namely  wheat  in
early  summer  and  maize  or  cotton  in  autumn.  In  the  upper  part  of  the
valley,  near  Lilaea,  there  are  vineyards  and  some  tobacco.  In  the  lower
part  of  the  valley,  from  Dadi  (Amphiclea)  eastward  there  are  no  vine-
yards and  the  peasants  have  to  buy  their  wine.  The  bottom  of  the
valley  is  for  the  most  part  a  dead  flat,  several  miles  wide.  The  Cephisus
traverses  it  in  a  shallow  bed  ;  its  water  is  turbid  and  of  a  whitish  colour.

33.  7-  the  verse  etc.     See  Homer,  //.  iii.  522.

33.  7*  a  city  named  Parapotamii.  After  flowing  south-east  for
more  than  20  miles  through  a  broad  and  spacious  valley  bounded  by  the
massive  Parnassus  on  the  south  and  a  range  of  rather  low,  bushy,
uninteresting  hills  on  the  north,  the  Cephisus  turns  sharply  to  the  south
and  flows  through  a  narrow  valley  or  defile  into  the  wide  plain  of
Chaeronea.  The  defile,  which  thus  forms  a  pass  from  Phocis  into
Boeotia,  is  now  called  the  Stena  (*  Narrows ').     It  may  be  about  a  mile


CH.  xxxiii  PARAPOTAMII  419

and  a  half  long  and  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  wide  at  the  narrowest
point,  which  is  at  the  northern  end  of  the  defile ;  but  south  of  this
point  it  expands  to  a  width  of  perhaps  three-quarters  of  a  mile.  The
flat  and  fertile  land  in  the  defile  yields  wheat  in  early  summer  and  cotton
in  autumn.  The  Cephisus,  turbid  as  usual,  flows  through  it  in  a  muddy
bed  which  is  neither  wide  nor  deep.  On  both  sides  the  defile  is  bounded
by  low  rocky  hills.  The  hills  on  the  west,  which  are  a  good  deal  the
higher,  form  the  last  spur  sent  out  by  Parnassus  to  the  east.  The  hills
on  the  eastern  side  of  the  defile  are  the  termination  of  a  low  chain
which  extends  eastward  for  some  miles,  bounding  the  plain  of  Chaeronea
on  the  north  and  connected  with  the  higher  range  of  Mount  Acontiimi
(the  modem  Dourdottvana\  which  ends  on  the  east  at  Orchomenus.
Parapotamii  occupied  the  flat  summit  of  the  low  hill  that  overhangs  the
narrowest  part  of  the  defile  of  the  Cephisus  on  the  east.  The  hill,
which  is  connected  by  a  ridge  with  the  similar  low  stony  hills  to  the  east,
is  probably  not  more  than  150  or  200  feet  high  at  the  most.  Yet  it
is  well  fitted  to  be  the  site  of  a  city ;  for  the  summit  is  level  and  of
some  extent,  and  the  rocky  sides,  though  nowhere  very  steep  or  high,
afford  a  natural  defence.  The  situation,  too,  is  strategically  important,
commanding  as  it  does  one  of  the  chief  passes  from  Phocis  into  Boeotia
and  overlooking  the  two  great  plains  of  Elatea  and  Chaeronea.  Neverthe-
less Parapotamii  would  seem  always  to  have  been  an  insignificant  place.
The  want  of  a  strong  acropolis  may  partly  account  for  this.  The  city
had  ceased  to  exist  in  the  first  century  B.C. ;  but  Sulla,  with  the  intuition
of  a  general,  occupied  the  deserted  hill  before  he  gave  battle  to  the
Mithridatic  army  in  the  neighbouring  plain  of  Chaeronea  (Plutarch,
SuUa^  16).  Two  centuries  later,  if  we  may  trust  Pausanias,  the  very
site  of  Parapotamii  was  forgotten.  Yet  the  line  of  the  ancient  walls  can
still  be  traced  nearly  all  round  the  edge  of  the  summit,  and  considerable
stretches  of  the  wall  are  standing  to  the  height  of  a  few  feet  (5  or  6  feet
at  most),  though  for  long  distances  together  the  line  is  marked  only  by
broken  stones.  The  wall,  where  it  remains,  is  built  of  small  rough
polygonal  stones  in  a  very  poor  style ;  indeed  it  is  amongst  the  worst
specimens  of  ancient  masonry  that  I  obser\'ed  in  Greece.  I  walked  all
round  the  site,  but  observed  no  traces  of  flanking  towers.  On  the
north-east  side  of  the  hill  there  are  vestiges  of  a  gateway  opening  to  the
north-west.  The  level  top  of  the  hill  is  now  under  cultivation.  Pottery
is  strewn  about  it.  On  the  slope  at  the  north-western  comer  the  rocks
seem  to  have  been  cleared  away  in  order  to  afford  an  easy  access  from
the  plain  to  the  summit  of  the  hilL

That  the  scanty  ruins  which  have  just  been  described  are  those  of
Parapotamii  is  quite  certain,  for  their  situation  answers  exactly  to  the
description  of  Theopompus  (quoted  by  Strabo,  ix.  p.  424),  who  says  that
Parapotamii  stood  on  a  hill  of  moderate  height  at  a  pass  leading  from
Boeotia  into  Phocis,  between  Parnassus  and  Mount  Hedylium,  and  that
the  Cephisus  flowed  through  the  pass,  which  was  only  5  furlongs  wide.
Mount  Hedylium  is  the  chain  of  low  hills  which  extends  eastward  from
the  defile.     See  above,  p.  187.

About  a  mile  or  so  to  the  east  of  Parapotamii  is  the  village  of  Belesi


420  AMPHICLEA  bk.  x.  phocis


lying  at  the  northern  foot  of  Mount  Hedylium.     Fair  quarters  for  the
night  may  be  obtained  in  the  village.

I  visited  Parapotamii  from  BeUst\  31st  October  1895,  and  have  described  the
ruins  as  I  saw  them.  See  also  Gell,  Ititurary  of  Greece  (London,  1819),  p.  219
so. ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  pp.  95  s^^.,  191,  195,  200  s^.  ;  Vischer,
Erinrurungenf  "D,  626  sq, ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  I.  p.  164;  Baedeker,'  p.  202;  Guide-
Joanne,  2.  p.  40.  .

33.  8.  Likewise  Herodotus,  enumerating  the  cities  etc.  See
Herodotus,  viii.  33.

33.  9.  The  distance  to  Amphiclea  firom  Lilaea  is  sixty  furlongs.
The  path  from  Lilaea  to  Amphiclea  follows  the  edge  of  the  wide  valley
of  the  Cephisus,  skirting  the  foot  of  the  outlying  slopes  of  Parnassus  the
whole  way.  At  first  it  runs  north-eastward  for  about  3  miles,  and  then,
bending  round  a  protruding  spur  of  the  hills,  runs  south-eastward  for
about  2^  miles  more.  At  the  point  where  the  route  bends  round,  the
Cephisus  approaches  it  closely,  flowing  near  the  foot  of  the  hills  among
trees  and  spanned  by  two  stone  bridges.  One  of  the  bridges  is  new ;
the  other  is  old,  high-arched,  and  picturesquely  shaded  with  trees.
The  modem  carriage-road  from  Lamia  to  Athens  crosses  the  river
from  north  to  south  by  the  new  bridge,  and  w^e  follow  it,  as  far  as
Dadi^  still  skirting  the  foot  of  the  hills,  beyond  which  to  the  south
rise  high  pine-clad  mountains.  The  hills  on  the  opposite  or  northern
side  of  the  great  valley  are  low,  tame,  and  overgrown  with  bushes.
Some  way  before  Dadi  we  pass  through  the  Kalyvia  of  Dadi^  which
in  this  case  is  not  a  village  inhabited  by  the  people  of  Dadi  in  winter,
but  merely  a  collection  of  granaries  and  storehouses,  where  the  country
produce  is  laid  up  before  it  is  conveyed  to  Dadi  to  be  consumed.

Dadi  itself  is  a  town  of  a  thriving  well-to-do  appearance,  built  at  the
foot  of  the  out-lying  spurs  of  Parnassus,  the  higher  slopes  of  which,
however,  are  not  visible.  For  the  most  part  the  houses  rise  above  each
other  on  the  hill-side,  but  some  of  them  are  built  on  the  plateau  below,
from  which  again  the  ground  slopes  away  gradually  to  the  valley  of  the
Cephisus.  Immediately  to  the  west  of  the  modern  town  rises  a  low  hill
or  eminence  on  which  are  the  scanty  ruins  of  Amphiclea.  The  hill,  or
rather  plateau,  slopes  away  gradually  to  the  valley  of  the  Cephisus  on
the  north ;  on  the  east  it  descends,  also  gradually,  to  the  lower  plateau
on  which  stand  some  of  the  houses  of  Dadi;  on  the  south  it  is
divided  by  a  hollow  from  the  hills  which  rise  steeply  on  this  side,  their
summits  wooded  with  pines ;  and  on  the  west  it  is  connected  by  a  ridge
with  the  higher  eminences,  which  are  themselves  but  the  last  spurs  sent
down  by  Parnassus  to  the  valley  of  the  Cephisus.  The  hill  or  plateau
of  Amphiclea  reaches  its  highest  point  (which  after  all  is  but  low)  at  the
south-west,  where  stands  a  ruined  mediaeval  tower.  On  its  northern
and  eastern  sides  the  plateau  ends  in  a  gentle  slope  some  1 5  feet  or  so
high.  Nearly  all  round  the  plateau,  which  is  of  a  roughly  triangular
shape  with  the  base  turned  to  the  east,  the  line  of  the  ancient  walls
may  be  traced.  For  the  most  part  the  remains  are  very  scanty,  con-
sisting only  of  one  or  two  courses  of  masonry.     On  the  southern  side.


CH.  xxxiii  AMPHICLEA  421

however,  they  are  somewhat  better  preserved  than  elsewhere.  Here
the  wall  has  from  one  to  five  courses  of  masonry  standing  for  many
yards  together.  One  piece  is  54  paces  long  and  another  is  27  paces
long.  Where  three  to  five  courses  are  preserved  the  wall  is  from  5
ft.  5  in.  to  7  feet  high.  The  masonry  is  on  the  w^hole  ashlar,  but  not
very  good  or  regular.  A  square  tower,  20  feet  broad  and  built  of
large  squared  blocks  laid  in  horizontal  courses,  projects  9  feet  from  the
curtain.  On  its  southern  face  the  tower  is  9  feet  high,  with  ^y^  courses
of  masonry ;  on  its  eastern  side  four  courses  are  standing.  Further  to
the  west  there  are  some  slight  remains  of  another  square  tower ;  and  an
angle  of  a  third  tower,  with  one  and  two  courses  of  masonry,  may  be
seen  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  plateau.  The  ruined  mediaeval  tower
which  stands  within  the  circuit  of  the  walls  on  the  highest  part  of  the
plateau  is  built  of  stones  and  mortar  in  the  usual  indifferent  style ;  but
in  the  lower  courses  are  some  large  blocks  which  were  probably  taken
from  the  ancient  walls.  A  few  steps  to  the  west  of  this  tower  is  a
small  chapel ;  and  to  the  east  of  the  tower  is  a  church  standing  in  an
area  of  some  extent  enclosed  by  walls.  The  southern  wall  of  this
enclosure  is  built  upon  the  ancient  fortification-wall.  In  the  church
there  is  an  inscription  (C  /.  G,  No.  1738  ;  C  /.  G.  G,  S,  3.  No.  218)
which  serves  to  identify  the  ruins  as  those  of  Amphiclea.  The  inscrip-
tion records  that  a  statue  of  Marcus  Ulpius  Damasippus,  high-priest  of
Dionysus,  was  set  up  by  his  wife,  Quintilia  Plutarcha,  in  the  sacred
precinct  of  the  god.  The  name  of  Amphiclea  does  not  indeed  occur
in  the  inscription  ;  but  we  may  conjecture  that  the  church  occupies  the
site  of  the  shrine  of  Dionysus,  and  that  Marcus  Ulpius  Damasippus
was  one  of  the  inspired  priests,  mentioned  by  Pausanias  (§  11),  who
delivered  oracles  in  the  name  of  the  god.  From  a  comparison  with
an  inscription  of  Anticyra  in  which  the  name  of  this  Damasippus  occurs
(C  /.  G.  G,  S,  3.  No.  8)  it  appears  that  his  statue  at  Amphiclea  was
set  up  in  the  reign  of  Septimius  Severus  or  of  Caracalla.

I  visited  the  ruins  of  Amphiclea,  26th  October  1895,  and  have  described  them
from  persona]  observation,  except  that  I  did  not  see  the  inscription  referred  to
above.  See  also  Clarke,  Travels ^  4.  p.  227  sq,  ;  Dodwell,  Toiir^  2.  p.  134 ;  Leake,
Northern  Greece y  2.  p.  73  sqq,  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungefit  pp.  621,  625  ;  Bursian,
Geogr,  I.  p.  162;  Baedeker,^ p.  163.

33.  9.  HerodotOB called  it  Amphicaea.     See  Herodotus,  viii.

33.  The  form  Amphicaea  is  mentioned  also  by  Stephanus  Byzantius
(j.v.  'AfjL<l>lKaia).

33.  9.  The  natives  tell  the  following  tale  etc.  The  following
story  is  substantially  identical  with  the  legend  told  of  Beth  Gellert  in
Wales.  Prince  Llewellyn,  it  is  said,  had  a  favourite  hound  named
Gellert.  One  day  on  coming  home  he  went  into  the  nursery  where
he  had  left  his  infant  son.  Here  he  met  the  hound  dripping  with
blood  and  wagging  his  tail.  But  the  cradle  was  overturned  and  no
child  was  to  be  seen.  Hastily  concluding  that  the  dog  had  devoured
his  son,  he  drew  his  sword  and  slew  the  dog.  Then  lifting  up  the
cradle  he  found  the  child  alive  under  it  and  the  body  of  a  dead  wolf.


422  THE  FAITHFUL  DOG  bk.  x.  phocis

Then  he  perceived  that  his  faithful  dog  had  saved  his  child's  life  by  kill-
ing the  wolf.  In  great  grief  he  buried  the  dog,  and  the  place  is  still  known
as  Beth  Gellert  or  *  Gellert*s  Grave.*  The  Hon.  W.  R.  Spencer,  who  put
this  story  into  verse  in  1800,  asserted  that  the  tale  was  traditionary  in  a
village  at  the  foot  of  Snowdon.  But  Mr.  Joseph  Jacobs  has  shown  that
no  trace  of  the  tradition  can  be  found  in  connexion  with  Beth  Gellert
before  Spencer's  time.  The  story  occurs  in  the  Sanscrit  collection  of
tales  called  the  Panchatantra^  bk.  v.  Tale  2,  where,  however,  the  faith-
ful animal  is  an  ichneumon  and  the  hostile  animal  a  serpent  The
Panchatantra  is  supposed  to  have  been  written  not  later  than  the  fifth
century  A.D.  Another  version,  in  which  the  foithful  animal  is  a
mongoose  and  the  noxious  creature  is  a  serpent,  occurs  in  a  Chinese
Buddhist  work  called  the  Vinaya  PitakcL,  dating  from  412  A.D.  This
Chinese  book  was  translated  from  an  Indian  original,  which  was
supposed  to  date  from  the  time  of  Asoka's  Council  (say  230  B.C.).  See
Dr.  S.  Beal,  in  Academy^  4th  November  1882,  No.  548,  p.  331.  In
the  Middle  Ages  the  story  was  diffused  over  Europe  and  the  west  of
Asia  in  the  collections  of  tales  known  as  the  Fables  of  Bidpaiy  the  Book
of  Sindibady  The  Seven  Sages^  and  the  Gesta  Rofnanorum.  In  most  or
all  of  these  European  and  West  Asiatic  versions  the  faithful  animal  is  a
dog  and  the  hostile  animal  a  serpent.

See  Benfey,  Pantschatanira^  I.  p.  479  sgg, ;  id.,  2.  p.  326  sq, ;  Dasent,  Popular
Tales  from  the  Norse,  p.  xxvii.  j^^.  ;  Dunlop,  Geschichte  der  Prosadicktungen,  iiber-
tragcn  von  F.  Licbrecht,  p.  198 ;  Baring- Gould,  Curious  Myths  of  the  Middle
Ages,  p.  134  sqq.  ;  The  Gentleman* s  Magazine  Library,  edited  by  G.  L.  Gomme,
English  Traditional  Lore,  p.  99  ;  Sindbitn  oder  die  Sieben  IVeisen  Meister,  syrisch
und  deutsch  von  F.  Baethgen,  p.  26  ;  W.  A.  Clouston,  Popular  Tales  and  Fictions,
2.  pp.  i66-i86  ;  Joseph  Jacobs,  Celtic  Fairy  Tales,  pp.  192  sqq.,  259  sqq.

The  Greek  version  of  the  story,  given  in  the  present  chapter  by
Pausanias,  is  older  than  the  Chinese  and  Sanscrit  versions  by  more
than  two  centuries,  and  is  in  fact  the  oldest  of  all  the  extant  versions.
Yet  it  appears  to  have  been  overlooked  by  all  the  scholars  who  treated
of  the  subject  from  Dunlop  and  Benfey  down  to  Messrs.  Clouston  and
Jacobs.  The  first  to  point  to  it  in  print  was  Mr.  E.  S.  Hartland,  in
Folklore^  3  (1892),  p.  127  sqq.  To  the  versions  already  indicated  1
may  add  (i)  a  Malay  version,  in  which  the  faithful  animal  is  a  tame
bear  and  the  hostile  creature  is  a  tiger ;  see  fournal  of  the  Straits
Branch  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  No.  7  (June  1881),  p.  23  ;  and
(2)  a  Sinhalese  version,  in  which  the  faithful  animal  is  a  mongoose
and  the  hostile  animal  is  a  cobra ;  see  Panjab  Notes  and  Queries,  3
(1886),  p.  148,  No.  619.

33.  II.  He  communicates  cures in  dreams.     Cp.  notes  on

ii.  27.  3;  X.  32.  13.  The  Sacred  Speeches  {Upol  \6yoi)  of  the
rhetorician  Aristides  contain  many  examples  of  remedies  prescribed  by
the  gods  in  dreams.

33.  12.  Tithronium.  In  the  plain,  about  an  hour's  ride  to  the
north  of  Dadi,  on  the  further  side  of  the  Cephisus,  are  the  remains  of
an  ancient  city  now  known  as  Moulki.  They  are  immediately  below
the  ruined  village  of  Vertzana,  and  occupy  an  oblong  elevation  beside


CH.  XXXIII  TITHRONIUM—DRYMAEA  423

the  river  of  Demitsa^  which,  descending  from  a  village  of  that  name
situated  among  the  hills  on  the  northern  side  of  the  valley  of  the
Cephisus,  runs  in  a  clear  and  rapid  stream  at  the  foot  of  some  low
but  precipitous  rocks.  The  town  was  defended  on  three  sides  by  the
steep  rocky  banks  of  the  river.  The  walls  are  much  dilapidated,  but
seem  to  have  been  built  in  the  quadrangular  style.  Here  Dodwell
found  a  fine  circular  foundation  regularly  constructed  of  large  blocks,
with  some  fragments  of  Doric  columns  2  ft  3  in.  in  diameter.  The  ruins
were  identified  by  Leake  as  those  of  Tithronium,  and  this  identification
has  since  been  confirmed  by  the  discovery  at  this  place  of  two  inscrip-
tions.  One  of  them  records  decrees  of  the  citizens  of  Tithronium  in
honour  of  two  men  who  had  deserved  well  of  the  city  (C  /.  G,  G,  S,
3.  Nos.  222,  223;  Collitz,  G,  D,  L  2.  No.  1552).  This  inscription,
carved  on  a  block  of  blue  marble,  is  now  built  into  a  house  at  Dadi,
The  other  inscription,  carved  on  a  block  of  limestone,  records  that
the  city  of  Tithronium  set  up  a  statue  of  the  emperor  Caracalla
(C.  /.  G,  G,  5.  3.  No.  224).  Tithronium  was  burnt  by  the  Persians,  as
we  learn  from  Herodotus  (viii.  33),  who  names  it  Tethronium.  In  the
inscriptions  the  place  is  called  *'  the  city  of  the  Teithronians  "  (17  iroXiS
Twv  Tei^/xtfV(o>v).  See  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  136;  Gell,  Itinerary  of
Greece  (London,  18 19),  p.  211  ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  pp.  76,  86
sq,  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  p.  162;  M.  Beaudouin,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp.
helUnique^  5  ( 1 88 1 ),  pp.  440-444  (the  inscriptions).

33.  12.  Drymaea.  The  ruins  of  Drymaea  lie  on  the  southern  face
of  a  hill,  neither  high  nor  steep,  which  projects  somewhat  into  the  plain
from  the  chain  of  hills  that  bounds  the  broad  valley  of  the  Cephisus
on  the  north.  The  place  is  about  a  mile  to  the  south-west  of  the
village  of  Glounista  and  about  5  miles  to  the  north-west  of  Dadi
(Amphiclea).  The  fortification-wall,  flanked  with  square  towers,  is
remarkably  well  preserved.  It  ascends  the  western  side  of  the  hill,
runs  for  a  short  distance  along  the  summit  on  the  north,  and  then
descends  to  the  plain  on  the  east.  In  the  whole  of  this  circuit,  with
exceptions  not  worth  noticing,  the  wall  has  from  one  to  eight  courses
of  masonry  standing.  But  it  is  best  preserved  on  the  west,  especially
towards  the  foot  of  the  hill,  where  it  is  often  from  6  to  1 2  or  1 4  feet
high,  with  from  three  to  eight  courses  of  masonry.  The  masonry  is
on  the  whole  ashlar,  the  blocks  being  squared  and  laid  in  horizontal
courses,  though  the  style  is  not  perfectly  regular.  Many  of  the
blocks  are  very  large.  One  in  the  eastern  wall  is  4  feet  high  and
more  than  10  feet  long.  Sixteen  square  towers  project  from  the
circuit-wall ;  some  of  them  are  ruinous,  but  three  on  the  west  side
and  one  on  the  east  are  about  27  feet  high,  with  from  thirteen  to
fifteen  courses  of  masonry.  They  are  from  21  to  23  it.  6  in.  broad
and  project  about  9  feet  from  the  curtain.  One  of  the  towers  in
the  north  wall  has  been  built  or  repaired  in  mediaeval  or  modem
times ;  and  at  one  point  at  least  the  north  wall  itself  has  obviously
been  repaired  at  a  later  time,  the  core  consisting  of  small  stones  and
mortar.  The  material  of  which  the  ancient  fortifications  are  built  is  a
pebble  conglomerate  (breccia),  which  by  exposure  to  the  air  assumes


424  DRYMAEA  bk.  x.  phocis

a  grey  uniform  appearance  like  that  of  limestone,  for  which  I  at  first
mistook  it

So  much  for  the  remains  of  the  circuit-wall  on  the  hill.  Whether
the  circuit  was  completed  by  a  southern  wall  running  along  the  foot  of
the  hill  and  joining  the  eastern  and  western  walls,  may  be  doubted.
There  are  at  present  few  or  no  traces  of  such  a  wall,  although  towards
the  western  end  some  blocks  lie  in  a  row  at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  and
many  more  squared  blocks  are  lying  about.  It  is  possible,  however,
that  no  wall  existed  here,  and  that  the  eastern  and  western  walls,  after
descending  the  hill,  were  prolonged  into  the  plain  and  joined  by  a  south
wall  there,  not  at  the  foot  of  the  hilL  Certainly  the  town  seems  to  have
extended  into  the  plain,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  mass  of  common  red
pottery  strewn  about  the  level  ground  as  well  as  from  some  scattered
hewn  blocks.  For  example,  on  a  sort  of  platform  a  little  way  from  the
southern  foot  of  the  hill  I  observed  some  blocks  standing  at  intervals  as
if  they  had  formed  part  of  a  building,  possibly  of  a  temple.

The  upper  part  of  the  hill  was  cut  off  from  the  lower  and  converted
into  a  citadel  by  an  inner  wall,  flanked  with  towers,  which  extends
across  the  slope  from  east  to  west,  abutting  on  the  circuit-wall  at  both
ends.  This  inner  wall,  of  which  there  are  considerable  remains,  is
clearly  ancient,  though  it  has  been  repaired  in  mediaeval  or  modem
times.  Some  of  the  original  masonry  is  very  fine,  the  blocks  being
large  and  massive.  Two,  three,  and  four  courses  are  standing,  and  in
one  place  at  least  the  wall  is  over  6  feet  high.  Three  towers,  more  or
less  ruinous,  project  from  the  wall.  Their  dimensions  seem  to  have
corresponded  to  those  of  the  towers  in  the  circuit- wall.  The  best  pre-
served of  the  three  is  22  ft  8  in.  wide,  projects  about  9  feet  from  the  curtain,
and  has  four  courses  of  masonry  standing.  Another  has  three  courses
standing  and  projects  about  9  feet  from  the  wall.  Common  red  potter)'
lies  strewn  about  the  citadel  as  well  as  the  ground  at  the  foot  of  the  hill.

That  the  ruins  which  have  just  been  described  are  those  of  Drymaea
is  made  nearly  certain  by  an  inscription  built  into  the  church  of  S\.
John  in  the  neighbouring  village  of  Glounista  (C.  /.  G,  G.  S.  3.  Nos.
226-230).  The  inscription,  carved  on  a  block  of  bluish  marble,  refers
to  money  which  the  people  of  Drymaea  borrowed  from  the  Oetaeans
and  which  they  seem  to  have  had  some  difficulty  in  repaying.  By  a
comparison  with  Delphic  inscriptions  the  document  may  be  dated  shortly
after  170  B.c.  Another  inscription  at  the  same  church  records  a
dedication  to  Aesculapius  by  a  certain  Damocrates,  son  of  Calliteles
(C  /.  G,  G,  5.  3.  No.  231).

Drymaea  was  one  of  the  Phocian  cities  which  were  burnt  by  the
Persians  (Herodotus,  viii.  '^'^) ;  it  is  called  Drymus  by  Herodotus  {I.e.),

See  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  135  sg.  ;  Leake,  Northerti  Greece,  2.  pp.  73,  87  sg.  ;
Bursian,  Geo^.  i.  p.  162.  I  visited  Drymaea,  25th  October  1895,  and  have
described  the  ruins  from  personal  observation.  But  I  did  not  see  the  inscription
at  Glounisia,  It  is  published  by  M.  Beaudouin,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUnique^
5  (1881),  pp.  I37-I45»  and  by  Fr.  Bechtel,  in  Collitz's  G.  D.  I.  2.  No.  1529.

33.  12.  eighty  furlongs.  See  Critical  Note  on  this  passage,  vol.
I.  p.  612.


CH.  XXXI V  EL  ATE  A  425

33.  12.  Naabolenses.      This  name  (Nav/8oXet$)  seems  not  to  be
mentioned  by  any  other  ancient  writer.

34.  I.  Elatea.     The  scattered  and  insignificant  ruins  of  Elatea  lie
about  a  mile  and  a  half  or  two  miles  to  the  north-east  of  Drachmam,  a
large  village  near  the  foot  of  the  hills  which  bound  the  valley  of  the
Cephisus  on  the  north.     The  site  of  Elatea,  now  a  bare  hill-side,  is
substantially  the  lower  slope  of  these  hills,  which  are  low  and  naked,
with  a  crest  of  rocks  running  along  their  brows.      But  towards  its
eastern  end  the  highest  part  of  the  site  is  separated  by  a  hollow,  perhaps
1 00  feet  deep,  from  the  upper  slope  of  the  hills,  so  that  it  forms  a  little
flat-topped   hill  or  plateau  by  itself  on   the  hill-side.     This  low  flat-
topped  eminence  (for  it  hardly  deserves  to  be  called  a  hill)  seems  to
have  been  the  ancient  acropolis.     It  is  defended  on  all  sides  by  slopes,
of  which  those  to  the  north  (down  into  the  hollow  already  mentioned)
and  to  the  east  are  the  steepest.     The  slope  to  the  south  is  longer
but  more  gradual.     The  line  of  the  ancient  fortiflcation-wall  may  be
traced,   chiefly  by  isolated   blocks,  along   the  northern   brow   of  the
plateau,  which  faces  across  the  hollow  to  the  higher  rock-crested  hills
on  the  north.     On  this  brow,  towards  its  western  end,  a  piece  of  the
wall  is  standing  for  a  length  of  about  20  yards  or  so,  with  two  courses
of  stones  ;  it  is  6  feet  high  at  the  most.     The  masonry  is  of  the  rough
polygonal  sort,  almost  indeed  Cyclopean.     The  blocks  are  hardly  hewn,
and  some  of  them  are  large  ;  one  which  I  measured  is  more  than  6  feet
long  by  3  feet  high.     On  the  northern  edge  of  the  plateau  a  small  knoll,
partly  perhaps  artificial,  forms   the   summit  of  the  ^ole  site.     The
remains  of  a  quadrangular  building,  probably  a  tower,  may  be  observed
on  this  knoll ;  the  building  seems  to  have  measured  about  8  paces  from
east  to  west  by  perhaps  20  paces  from  north  to  south.     On  the  west
side  the  foundations  are  visible,  two  courses  high.     The  masonry,  like
the   stone,   is    rough.      Some  blocks   of  the  wall,  not  merely  of  the
foundations,  are  in  position  on  the  eastern  side.     From  this  square
tower,  if  tower  it  was,  a  line  of  wall  may  be  traced  running  south  for  a
few  yards,  then  turning  eastward  so  as  to  meet  the  steep  slope  of  the
plateau  on  that  side.     The  small  enclosure  so  formed  may  have  been
an  inner  fortress  or  keep  within  the  acropolis.     At  its  south-western
comer  there  are  some  vestiges  of  a  square  projecting  tower.     On  the
south  face  of  the  plateau  and  a  little  way  below  its  crest,  outside  of  the
keep,  there  are  more  remains  of  the  fortification-wall  built  in  the  same
rude  almost  Cyclopean  style  as  on  the  northern  brow  of  the  plateau.
The  remains  extend  for  some  yards,  and  consist  of  one  and  two  courses
to  the  west,  with  some  isolated  blocks  further  to  the  east.

Below  this  insignificant  acropolis  the  ground  descends  southwards
to  the  plain  in  a  long  and  gentle  slope.  This  was  the  site  of  the  lower
city,  a  few  scanty  remains  of  which  may  be  seen  scattered  at  various
points.  Some  of  them  have  been  brought  to  light  by  excavations.  On
the  east  the  site  is  bounded  by  a  glen,  neither  deep  nor  picturesque,  up
which  the  path  goes  to  the  temple  of  Cranaean  Athena  (see  below,  p.  431).
Near  the  entrance  to  the  glen,  a  little  to  the  east  of  the  acropolis,  was
the  site  of  the  village  of  I^fta,     The  village  has  long  been  deserted ;


426  ELATE  A  BK.  X.  PHOCis

all  that  remains  of  it  are  some  trifling  vestiges  of  houses  and  a
quantity  of  broken  stones  and  pottery  littering  the  earthy  slope  of
the  hills.  Part  of  the  site  was  being  ploughed  and  sown  when  I
visited  it.  The  plough  was  drawn  by  two  slow -paced  oxen,  and
behind  it  walked  the  sower  scattering  the  seed  broadcast  from  a  bag.
Later  in  the  day,  on  my  return  from  the  temple,  a  flock  of  goats  was
dispersed  about  the  site  of  the  deserted  village,  seeking  what  nourish-
ment they  could  find  on  the  stony  ground.  Some  slight  remains  of
antiquity  in  this  neighbourhood  seem  to  show  that  Elatea  extended
thus  far  to  the  east.  A  chapel  of  St.  George  is  still  standing  here,  and
built  into  its  walls  are  some  squared  blocks,  which  may  perhaps  be
ancient.  Outside  of  the  chapel  lies  a  piece  of  a  column,  and  a  little
higher  up  the  hill-side  I  observed  another  piece  of  a  small  unfluted
column,  1 7  inches  in  diameter.  The  chapel  perhaps  occupies  the  site  of
the  temple  of  Aesculapius  mentioned  by  Pausanias  (§  6),  for  built  into
one  of  the  jambs  of  the  doorway  is  a  long  inscription  relating  to  the
dedication  of  slaves  to  Aesculapius  (C  /.  G,  G,  5.  3.  Nos.  120-127;
CoUitz,  G,  D,  I.  2.  No.  1532).  A  little  lower  down  than  the  chapel
there  are  some  squared  blocks  on  a  knoll.

A  good  way  to  the  south-west  of  the  chapel  of  St.  George  another
chapel,  dedicated  to  St.  Athanasius  or  to  St.  Theodore,^  rises  solitary
from  the  bare  hill-side.  This  chapel,  distant  thirty-five  minutes*  walk  to
the  north-east  of  Drachtnani^  seems  to  occupy  approximately  the  middle
of  the  site  of  Elatea.  Some  remains  of  antiquity,  including  large  hewn
blocks,  a  piece  ^of  a  column  6  ft.  7  in.  long,  and  several  fragnnents  of
small  columns,  lie  outside  of  the  chapel.  Here,  too,  a  head  of  a  serpent
made  of  red  terra-cotta,  was  found  by  Mr.  P.  Paris ;  it  probably  repre-
sented one  of  the  sacred  serpents  of  Aesculapius  and  was  dedicated  in
his  temple.  On  the  hill-side  for  a  great  way  round  about  the  chapel
isolated  blocks  may  be  seen  protruding  at  irregular  intervals  from  the
soil ;  and  the  ground  is  littered  with  broken  stones.  Here  and  there  in
the  wide  area  some  slight  excavations  have  been  made,  perhaps  by  Mr.
P.  Paris,  who  spent  some  time  here  and  has  written  a  monograph  on
Elatea  ;  but  the  results  of  these  excavations  seem  to  have  been  exceed-
ingly scanty.  About  150  yards  or  so  to  the  north-east  of  the  chapel  of
St.  Athanasius  the  diggings  have  laid  bare  a  foundation- wall  27  paces
long,  running  east  and  west ;  one  and  two  courses  of  the  wall  are  stand-
ing. A  few  yards  further  up  the  hill  some  blocks  of  a  wall  are  in
position  ;  and  still  further  up  are  traces  of  a  foundation- wall  extending,
with  gaps,  for  26  paces  from  east  to  west.  These  may  be  the  remains
of  a  temple.  Apparently  a  chapel  of  the  Panagia  stood  formerly  on  or
near  this  spot,  and  here  Mr.  Paris  found  a  mutilated  inscription  which
seems  to  have  recorded  a  dediccition  to  Aesculapius  and  Health
(C.  I.  G,  G,  S.  3.  No.  136).  This,  taken  with  the  remains  of  the
foundation-wall,  raises  a  presumption  that  the  temple  of  Aesculapius
was  here  rather  than  on  the  site  of  the  chapel  of  St.  George  at  Lefta.

*  According  to  Mr.  P.  Paris  the  chapel  is  dedicated  to  St.  Theodore.  But  St.
Athanasius  was  the  name  given  to  me  on  the  spot  in  1895.  The  chapel  may  perhaps
have  changed  its  patron  saint  between  Mr.  Paris's  visit  and  mine.


CH.  XXXIV  ELATE  A  ^ri

A  few  hundred  yards  to  the  west  of  the  chapel  of  St.  Athanasius
a  number  of  ancient  hewn  blocks  are  scattered  about,  some  of
them  in  their  original  positions ;  amongst  them  is  a  worn  capital
of  a  column,  3  ft.  3  in.  in  diameter.  From  the  curve  of  several
of  the  blocks  it  would  seem  that  a  circular  or  semicircular  building
stood  here.  It  was  here  perhaps  that  Mr.  Paris  excavated  a  large
semicircular  wall  built  of  eight  parallel  courses  of  common  stone,  the
blocks  being  large  and  accurately  jointed.  The  convex  side  of  the  wall
was  turned  to  the  hill,  the  concave  side  to  the  plain  ;  and  in  front  of
the  wall  were  three  drums  of  fluted  columns  laid  end  to  end  so  as  to
form  a  chord  of  the  semicircle.  Mr.  Paris  conjectures  that  the  semi-
circular building  was  one  of  a  series  of  exedras  or  monumental  seats
which  may  have  lined  the  road  up  to  the  acropolis.  With  the  excep-
tion of  the  few  blocks  I  have  mentioned  I  did  not  see  the  building
described  by  Mr.  Paris  ;  its  remains  may  now  be  usefully  employed  in
the  neighbouring  village  of  Drachmani.  About  half  a  mile  or  so  to  the
south-west  of  the  chapel  of  St.  Athanasius  another  excavation  has  laid
bare  a  number  of  squared  ancient  blocks  and  some  trifling  vestiges  of
foundation-walls.  A  small  quadrangular  building  may  have  stood  here.
A  little  to  the  west  of  these  remains  five  or  six  massive  blocks  of  a
foundation-wall  are  exposed,  forming  a  line  which  runs  from  south-east
to  north-west.  Besides  the  chapel  of  St.  Athanasius  almost  the  only
object  which  now  breaks  the  monotony  of  the  bleak  hill-side  is  a
group  of  large  rocks,  in  which  a  fig-tree  has  rooted  itself,  about  half-
way between  the  chapel  and  the  acropolis.  The  distance  between  the
chapel  and  the  acropolis  may  be  about  half  a  mile.  Towards  the  south-
eastern end  of  the  site  the  path  which  leads  from  Drachmani  to  the
temple  of  Cranaean  Athena  runs  for  some  way  along  the  edge  of  a
plateau  raised  only  a  few  feet  above  the  plain.  The  slope  is  so  regular
that  it  must  be  artificial.  The  city-wall  may  have  been  built  along  its
upper  edge.

From  the  acropolis  of  Elatea  there  is  a  grand  view  across  the  broad
valley  to  Parnassus  and  the  still  higher  mountains  of  Locris  extending
in  an  unbroken  line  from  the  south  far  away  into  the  west.  On  the
south-east  the  outlying  masses  of  Helicon  are  seen  rising  over  the
nearer  hills.  Here  too  is  visible  the  gap  in  the  hills  through  which  the
Cephisus  flows  from  Phocis  into  Boeotia,  and  through  which  Philip  of
Macedon,  after  capturing  Elatea,  marched  to  meet  the  Greeks  at
Chaeronea.  The  battlefield  is  just  beyond  these  low  hills.  It  is  a
mistake,  however,  to  suppose  that  the  chief  pass  from  Thermopylae  and
Northern  Greece  ends  at  Elatea.  On  the  contrary  the  hills  rise  steeply
behind  the  site  of  the  ancient  city ;  a  mere  footpath  leads  up  the  small
glen  on  the  eastern  side  of  Elatea,  and  the  glen  is  far  too  narrow  and
rugged  ever  to  have  been  a  military  highway.  The  real  pass,  by  which
the  carriage-road  now  goes  to  Aialanii  and  Thermopylae,  is  through  a
natural  opening  in  the  hills  about  4  miles  to  the  east  of  Elatea.  It
was  probably  by  this  pass  that  Philip  marched  into  Phocis.  If  so,  after
debouching  on  the  valley  of  the  Cephisus  he  must  have  made  a  detour
of  4  miles   to   the  west   to  seize  Elatea,  before  pursuing  his  march


428  EL  ATE  A  bk.  x.  phocis

southward  into  Boeotia.  Strabo,  indeed,  says  (ix.  p.  418)  that  Elatea
was  strategically  the  most  important  city  in  Phocis  "  because  it  stands
on  the  pass,  and  he  who  possesses  Elatea  commands  the  entrances  into
Phocis  and  Boeotia."  But  Strabo  knew  little  or  nothing  of  the  interior
of  Greece  at  first  hand.  He  probably  had  in  his  mind  Demosthenes's
famous  picture  of  the  consternation  that  spread  like  wildfire  through
Athens  one  evening  when  a  courier  came  in  with  news  that  Philip  had
seized  Elatea  {De  corona^  p.  284  sq,\  The  alarm  was  fully  justified,  for
the  capture  of  Elatea  meant  that  Philip  had  gained  a  footing  in  Greece
and  that  no  serious  natural  obstacle  now  barred  his  road  to  Athens.
But  Demosthenes  does  not  say  that  Elatea  was  at  the  mouth  of  the
pass ;  and  even  if  he  had  said  so,  it  would  not  have  been  true.

See  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  139  j^^.  ;  Gell,  Itimrary  of  Greece  (London,  1819),
p.  216  sq.  ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece y  2.  p.  82  sq, ;  Pouqueville,  Voyage  de  la
Grece,  4.  p.  146  sq, ;  L.  Stephani,  Reise,  p.  61  sq,  ;  Vischer,  Eriftnerungen^
p.  626;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  163;  Baedeker,'  p.  203;  Guidejoanne^  2.
p.  48  sq.  ;  P.  Paris,  Elatie  (Paris,  1892).  The  iDScriptions  of  Elatea  have
been  published  by  Mr.  Paris  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique^  10  (1886),
pp.  356-385,  as  well  as  in  his  monograph.  I  was  at  Drachmani  27th-29th
October  1895,  ^^^  visited  Elatea  on  the  28th.  I  have  described  the  situation  and
ruins  as  I  saw  them,  except  that  I  did  not  see  the  inscription  in  the  chapel  of  St.
George  at  Lefta,  Mr.  Paris  is  mistaken  in  affirming  (p.  46)  that  of  the  walls
of  the  acropolis  only  two  stones  are  left.  By  a  curious  inadvertence  he  has
shifted  round  the  pomts  of  the  compass  by  90'',  so  that  in  his  plans  as  well  as
in  the  text  the  north  is  called  the  east,  the  west  figures  as  the  north,  and  so
mutatis  mutatidis  all  round  the  compass.

Inscriptions  attest  the  worship  of  the  Dioscuri,  Poseidon,  Zeus  the
AVerter,  and  Apollo  at  Elatea  {C.  I,  G.  G,  S,  3.  Nos.  129,  130,  134,
135);  and  from  the  same  source  we  learn  that  the  Elateans  set  up  a
statue  of  Faustus  Cornelius  Sulla,  son  of  the  dictator,  and  statues  of  the
emperors  Hadrian  and  Caracalla  (C  /.  G.  G.  S.  3.  Nos.  143,  144,  145).
The  necropolis  of  Elatea  lies  on  the  slope  of  the  hills  to  the  north-west,
beyond  the  bed  of  a  torrent  which  bounds  the  site  on  the  west.  The
graves,  consisting  of  rectangular  holes  cut  in  the  rock,  had  been  already
opened  and  plundered  by  the  peasants  before  Mr.  Paris  examined  them.
See  his  work,  £/a//e,  p.  47  sq.

In  the  ruined  chapel  of  the  Panagia  Mr.  Paris  found  a  large  block
of  grey  marble  bearing  a  late  Greek  inscription  to  the  following  effect :
"  This  is  the  stone  from  Cana  of  Galilee  where  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ
made  the  water  into  wine."  This  stone  has  been  transferred  to  Athens,
where  it  is  preserved  in  the  small  Metropolitan  church.  See  Ch.
Diehl,  *  La  pierre  de  Cana,'  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUnique^  9  (1885),
pp.  28-42  ;  P.  Paris,  £lat^e^  pp.  299-312.

34.  I.  next  to  Delphi,  tiie  largest  city  in  Phocis.  According  to
Strabo  (ix.  pp.  407,  417  sq.^  424)  Elatea  was  the  largest  city  in  Phocis,
larger  than  Delphi.  The  relative  sizes  of  the  two  cities  may  have
altered  between  the  time  of  Strabo  and  the  time  of  Pausanias.  Harpo-
cration,  Suidas,  and  Stephanus  Byzantius  {^s,v.  'EAarcia)  also  speak  of
Elatea  as  the  largest  city  in  Phocis.

34.   I.  the  distance  by  road  is  one  hundred  and  eighty  ftirlongs.


CH.  XXXIV  THE  COSTOBOCS  429

There  seems  to  be  a  mistake  here,  for  the  direct  distance  between  Elatea
and  the  ruins  of  Amphiclea  at  Dadi  is  only  about  1 1  miles.  The  jour-
ney occupies  about  three  hours  and  forty  minutes  (Dodwell,  Tourj  2.
p.  140).  Otherwise  Pausanias's  description  of  the  situation  of  Elatea
relatively  to  Amphiclea  is  quite  correct  Amphiclea  lies  due  west  of
Elatea  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  great
Cephisian  valley,  and  the  ground  between  them  is  level,  till  it  begins  to
slope  gently  up  as  you  approach  Elatea.  Cp.  Leake,  Northern  Greece^
2.  p.  82.

34.  I.  the  birds  that  chiefly  frequent  its  banks  are  the  bustards.
Leake  observed  immense  numbers  of  bustards  in  the  plains  of  Boeotia
{Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  419).

34.  2.  The  Elateans  succeeded  in  repulsing  Cassander.  Cp.  i.
26.  3,  X.  18.  7  ;  Droysen,  Geschichte  des  Hellenismus^  ii.  2.  p.  241.

34.  2.  contrived  to  baffle  Tazilus.     Cp.  §§  4  and  6,  and  i.  20.  6.

34.  2.  they  were  Arcadians  originally  etc.     Cp.  vii.  1 5.  s  ;  viii.

4.  4  ;  viii.  48.  8.     As  to  the  expedition  of  the  Phlegyans  against  Delphi,
see  also  ix.  36.  2.

34.  3.  Elatea burned  by  the  Medes.     Cp.  Herodotus,  viii.  33.

34.  3.  Philip,  son  of  Demetrius,  terrified  the  populace  etc.  In
207  B.C.,  during  his  war  with  the  Romans,  Philip,  king  of  Macedonia,
occupied  Elatea.     See  Livy,  xxviii.  7.

34.  4.  Titus,  the  Roman  general  etc.  The  siege  and  capture  of
Elatea  in  198  B.C.  by  the  Romans  under  Titus  Quintius  Flamininus  is
described  by  Livy  (xxxii.  18,  19,  and  24).

34.  5.  The  robber  horde  of  the  Costobocs,  who  overran  Chreece
in  my  time  etc.  According  to  Ptolemy  (iii.  8.  3)  the  Costobocs
inhabited  the  north-western  part  of  Dacia.     But  in  another  passage  (iii.

5.  8)  he  reckons  them  among  the  tribes  inhabiting  Sarmatia  to  the  east
of  the  Vistula.  There  may  have  been  two  tribes  of  this  name,  or
Ptolemy  may  have  embodied  two  discrepant  reports  of  one  and  the
same  tribe.  Pliny  {Nat,  hist,  vi.  1 9)  includes  the  Costobocs  among  the
Sarmatian  tribes  in  the  valley  of  the  Tanais  (the  Don),  The  seat  of  the
tribe  is  vaguely  described  by  Ammianus  Marcellinus  (xxii.  8.  42).  That
their  territory  was  outside  the  Roman  province  of  Dacia  is  clear  from  a
passage  in  Dio  Cassius  (Ixxi.  12),  who  says  that  the  Astingi  attempted
to  settle  in  Dacia ;  but  failing  in  their  intention  they  entrusted  their
wives  and  children  to  the  safekeeping  of  Clement,  the  Roman  governor
of  Dacia,  and  turned  their  arms  against  the  Costobocs,  purposing  to
take  possession  of  their  land ;  they  conquered  the  Costobocs,  but  even
after  the  conquest  they  continued  (says  Dio)  to  molest  Dacia  as  much  as
before.  We  may  perhaps  infer  that  the  land  of  the  Costobocs  was  to
the  north  of  Dacia,  possibly  in  northern  Hungary.  Cp.  K.  Miillenhoff,
Deutsche  Altertumskunde^  2.  p.  83  sqq.  The  raid  of  the  Costobocs  into
Greece  is  recorded  by  no  ancient  writer  except  Pausanias,  but  it  seems
to  be  referred  to  in  a  Latin  inscription  found  at  Rome,  which  mentions
that  a  certain  Julianus  had  commanded  a  troop  in  Greece,  Macedonia,
and  Spain  against  the  Costobocs  and  the  rebel  Moors,  and  also  in  the
time  of  the  German  and  Sarmatian  war.     See  Archdolog,  epigraph.


430  THE  COSTOBOCS  bk.  x.  phocis

MUtheilungen  aus  Oesterreich-Ungam^  13(1 890),  p.  1 89.  (The  invasion
of  Spain  by  the  Moors  in  the  reign  of  Marcus  Antoninus  is  mentioned
by  Capitolinus,  Marcus  AntomnuSy  21  ;  cp.  Spartianus,  SeveruSy  2.)
The  date  of  the  inroad  cannot  be  fixed  precisely.  It  must  have  been
after  161  A.D.,  for  in  that  year  Mnesibulus,  the  Greek  general  who  fell
in  the  battle  with  the  barbarians,  won  an  Olympic  victory  (see  Pausanias
below).  We  learn  from  Capitolinus  (^Marcus  Antoninus^  22)  that  the
Costobocs  sided  with  the  great  confederacy  of  German  and  Sarmatian
tribes  which  made  war  on  the  Roman  empire  in  the  reign  of  Marcus
Antoninus.  Hence  we  may  suppose  that  the  marauding  expedition  of  the
Costobocs  took  place  in  the  course  of  that  war,  that  is,  probably,  some-
where between  166  and  180  a.d.  (see  note  on  viii.  43.  6).  It  has  been
suggested  with  some  probability  that  the  immediate  occasion  of  the
incursion  was  the  attack  of  the  Astingi  (see  above) ;  the  Costobocs,  it
has  been  supposed,  being  worsted  in  battle  and  dispossessed  of  their
lands,  invaded  Greece  in  the  hope  of  winning  a  new  home  for  themselves
there.  The  attack  of  the  Astingi,  as  we  learn  from  Dio,  took  place
when  a  certain  Clement  was  governor  of  Dacia  ;  and  from  an  inscription
found  at  Iglitza  (see  Archdolog.  epigraph,  MUtheilungen  cais  Oesterreich-
Ungamy  1 1  ( 1 887), p.  30  j^.) and  a  passage  in  Capitolinus {PertinaXy  2)  Mr.
Heberdey  has  argued  that  Clement  was  governor  of  Dacia  170-175  A.D.
He  supposes  that  the  incursion  of  the  Costobocs  into  Greece  took  place
about  176  A.D.     But  his  arguments  are  not  convincing.

The  name  of  the  tribe  is  spelt  differently  by  our  authorities.  In
Pausanias  and  Capitolinus  {Marcus  Antoninus^  22)  the  name  appears  as
Costobocs  (KocTTw^wKot  or  Koa-rta/SiaKOiy  Cosfoboct) ;  in  Dio  Cassius
(Ixxi.  12)  as  KoaTovP(i}KOL  or  Koo-Tov/Jw/cot ;  in  Ptolemy  (iii.  5.  9  ;  iii.
8.  3)  as  KouTTo/StoKOL ;  in  Pliny  {JVat.  hist.  vi.  19)  as  Cotobacchi;  in
Ammianus  Marcellinus  (xxii.  8.  42)  as  Costobocae;  in  the  inscription
found  at  Rome  (see  above)  as  Castabocac ;  while  in  another  Latin
inscription  (quoted  by  Miiller  on  Ptolemy,  iii.  5.  9)  the  adjectival  form
Coistobocensis  occurs.

See  Ilertzberg,  Geschichte  Griechenlands  unter  der  Herrschaft  der  R'dmer^  2.  p.
372;  H.  Schiller,  Gesch.  der  romischen  Kaiserzeity  I.  pp.  631,  644;  W.  Gurlitt,
Ueber  Pausanias y  p.  61  sq.  ;  Bencker,  in  Fleckeisen  sjahrbucher,  36(1890),  p.  375  ;
P.  Paris,  in  BulUtiti  de  Corrcsp.  hdUniquCy  1 1  (1^7),  p.  342  sqq,  ;  iV/.,  Elatife,
p.  20  sq.  ;  R.  Heberdey,  '  Der  Einfall  der  Kostober  in  Griechenland,'  Archdolog,
epigraph.  MUtheilungen  aus  Oesterreich- Ungam^  13  (1890),  pp.  186-191.

34.  5.  Mnesibulus.  At  the  temple  of  Cranaean  Athena  near
Elatea  Mr.  P.  Paris  found  a  tablet  of  grey  marble  bearing  a  mutilated
inscription  which  may  perhaps  be  thus  restored :

Mvacrt^ov[Aov

Mvacrt/?ou[Aou

8ts  7r€/Dto[8ovA

Kov  d/3tcrr[ov  *EA-

X\i]ViaVy  \y\^v  Tj  /SovXrj  Kal  6  Srjfios  'EXaT€0)v].

"<The  Council  and  People  of  Elatea  dedicated  this  statue  of>
Mnasibulus,    son   of  the   Mnasibulus  who  was   twice  victorious   at   all


CH.  XXXIV  CRANAEAN  ATHENA  431

the  great  games  and  was  the  bravest  of  the  Greeks."  The  Mnasibulus
whose  statue  seems  to  be  referred  to  in  this  inscription  was  most
probably  a  son  of  the  Greek  captain  who  fell  in  the  battle  with  the
Costobocs.  See  P.  Paris,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique^  11  (1887),
p.  342  sqq,  ;  /V/.,  £laUe^  pp.  21,  241  sq.  \  C.  /.  G,  G,  S,  3.  No.  146.

34.  5.  the  doable  race  with  the  shield.     See  note  on  vi.  10.  4.

34.  6.  a  temple  of  Aesculapins.  Some  remains  of  the  foundations
of  this  temple  have  perhaps  been  found  at  Elatea,  a  little  to  the  north  of
the  chapel  of  St.  Athanasius.  Or  the  temple  may  have  stood  in  or  near
the  site  now  occupied  by  the  chapel  of  St.  George  at  Lefta,  See  above,
p.  426.  The  inscription  relating  to  the  sale  of  slaves  to  Aesculapius,
which  is  built  into  the  chapel  of  St.  George,  makes  mention  of  the
priest  of  Aesculapius  (P.  Paris,  Elatde^  p.  226,  Inscr.  31-34,  line  21  ;
C  /.  (x.  G,  S.  3.  Nos.  121,  125).

34.  6.  Timocles  and  Timarchides.     See  note  on  vi.  4.  5.

34.  7'  a  sanctuary  of  Granaean  Athena.  The  remains  of  the
sanctuary  and  temple  of  Athena  are  situated  on  the  summit  of  a  rocky
hill  about  two  miles  north-east  of  Elatea  in  a  straight  line.  From
Drachfnani  they  are  distant  about  three  and  a  half  miles  ;  but  on  account
of  the  ruggedness  and  steepness  of  the  route  the  time  taken  from  the
village  to  the  temple  is  about  one  hour  and  forty  minutes.  Proceeding
in  a  north-easterly  direction  we  cross  the  last  slopes  of  the  hills,  skirting
the  southern  and  eastern  sides  of  the  site  of  Elatea  and  passing  the  site  of
the  deserted  village  of  Lefta,  We  then  enter  the  glen  which  penetrates
the  hills  to  the  north-east  of  Elatea.  The  glen  is,  in  its  lowest  reach  at
least,  neither  deep  nor  particularly  picturesque.  The  hills  on  both  sides
are  clothed  with  the  low  dark  green  bushes  which  are  so  common  on
Greek  mountains.  Ascending  the  western  side  of  the  glen  a  little  way,
we  cross  the  bed  of  the  stream  and  strike  up  a  little  side  glen  which
comes  down  from  the  east.  The  crossing  of  the  brook,  at  the  meeting
of  the  glens,  is  a  pretty  spot  enough,  with  its  flowing  water,  its  rocks,
and  its  planes  growing  as  bushes  in  the  bed  of  the  stream.  Through
the  opening  of  the  glen,  too,  there  is  a  distant  prospect  of  Parnassus.
After  crossing  the  stream  and  ascending  the  little  side  glen  for  a  short
way  we  begin  to  ascend  the  hill-side  to  the  left  or  north ;  and  a  path,
rather  steeper  than  Pausanias's  description  of  it  would  lead  us  to  expect,
winding  up  the  bushy  slope  brings  us  to  the  small  level  summit  of  the
hill,  which  is  occupied  by  the  sanctuary  of  Athena.  As  we  rise  above  the
glen,  distant  views  of  the  mountains  of  Boeotia  on  the  south-east  open  up
behind  us.

The  situation  of  the  temple,  like  that  of  so  many  ancient  temples  in
Greece,  is  remarkably  fine.  Immediately  to  the  south,  across  the  broad
valley  of  the  Cephisus,  rises  the  towering  many-peaked  Parnassus.  To
the  south-east,  beyond  the  Cephisus,  the  low  hills  of  Boeotia  are  seen,
range  behind  range,  backed  by  Helicon,  blue  and  distant,  on  the  south.
Tame  hills,  overgrown  with  bushes,  rise  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
temple  on  the  north  and  east,  shutting  out  the  views  in  these  directions.
A  deep  glen,  winding  into  them,  skirts  the  temple-hill  on  the  north  and
west.     It  is  the  glen  that  we  ascended  from  Elatea  till  we  quitted  it  to


432  CRANAEAN  A  THEN  A  bk.  x.  phocis


follow  the  shallower  glen  into  which  the  temple-hill  slopes  away  on  the
south.  Into  this  deep  glen  the  hill  descends  in  very  steep  rocky
declivities  on  the  north  and  west.  In  the  latter  direction  the  summit  of
the  hill  runs  out  into  a  sharp  rocky  point  or  ridge,  overgrown  with
bushes,  which  overhangs  the  ravine.

The  top  of  the  hill  was  probably  levelled  artificially  to  furnish  a  site
for  the  temple.  At  all  events  a  platform,  natural  or  artificial,  is  sup-
ported by  a  wall  of  which  there  are  considerable  remains  on  the  south
and  east  and  scantier  remains  towards  the  east  end  of  the  north  side.
On  the  south  and  east  the  wall  is  preserved  for  a  good  many  yards,
perhaps  20  yards  in  each  direction ;  the  two  sections  of  it  meet  at  the
south-east  angle.  Here  eight  courses  of  masonry  are  standing,  and  the
height  of  the  wall  is  10  or  11  feet.  The  blocks  are  not  large,  and  the
masonry  is  rough  ;  in  style  it  is  intermediate  between  the  ashlar  and  the
polygonal.  Holly-oak  bushes  grow  out  of  the  crevices  of  the  eastern
wall.  On  the  north  side  of  the  platform,  towards  its  eastern  end,  the
supporting-wall  is  about  6  feet  high,  with  five  courses.

The  temple  was  built  close  to  the  northern  edge  of  the  hill.  Its
remains,  which  were  seen  by  Dodwell  in  1805,  were  excavated  under
the  direction  of  Mr.  P.  Paris,  of  the  French  Archaeological  School,  in
1883  and  1884.  Though  somewhat  scanty  they  suffice  to  prove  that
the  temple  was  orientated  east  and  west  and  surrounded  by  a  Doric
colonnade.  The  lowest  course  of  a  wall  which  bounded  the  temple  on
the  north  is  preserved  for  a  length  of  2  5  paces.  The  wall  is  4  ft.  7  in.
thick,  and  is  built  of  squared  blocks  of  grey  limestone  on  each  face,  the
core  being  formed  of  small  stones.  On  the  outer  or  northern  face  this
wall  is  2  ft.  2  in.  high  and  rests  on  a  foundation-wall,  of  which  two
courses,  mostly  built  of  blocks  of  a  yellowish  stone,  quite  different  from
the  grey  limestone  of  the  upper  wall,  are  visible  on  the  outside.  On  its
inner  side  this  north  wall  is  in  contact  along  its  whole  length  with  the
stylobate  of  the  temple,  above  which  it  rises  i  ft.  4  in.  Eight  broken
drums  of  columns  are  standing  in  position  on  the  stylobate  within  an
inch  or  so  of  the  north  wall.  Only  five  of  these  drums  were  found  by
Mr.  Paris  in  their  original  positions  ;  the  other  three  were  set  up  by  him
where  they  now  stand.  Stylobate  and  columns  are  made  of  the  same
yellowish  friable  stone  as  the  foundations.  The  grey  limestone  of  which
the  north  wall  is  built  is  native  to  the  hill,  where  it  crops  up  all  round
the  temple.  The  columns  are  of  the  Doric  order  with  twenty  flutes.  Their
diameter  at  the  height  to  which  they  are  standing  is  about  2  ft.  7  in.
The  interval  between  them,  measured  between  the  exteriors  of  the
columns,  is  4  fl.  5J  in.  Close  to  the  dnuns  are  lying  two  broken  Doric
capitals  of  the  same  material,  with  four  rings  round  the  neck ;  their
diameter  is  about  3  feet.  The  platform  of  masonry  on  which  the  temple
rested  is  preserved  in  its  full  breadth  (about  14  paces)  at  the  west  end.
Mr.  Paris  thinks  it  probable  that  the  temple  had  six  colunms  on  the  two
facades  and  thirteen  columns  at  the  sides,  the  columns  at  the  corners
being  counted  twice;  and  he  calculates  that  it  was  27.5  metres  (90  ft.
2  in.)  long  by  1 1.5  metres  (37  ft.  8  in.)  broad.  Of  the  upper  part  of  the
temple  the  only  architectural  fragments  found  by  Mr.  Paris  were  several


CH.  XXXIV  CRANAEAN  ATHENA  433

Doric  capitals,  pieces  of  mutules  with  gtittae^  and  a  piece  of  a  triglyph.
The  capitals  belong  to  two  different  types,  in  one  of  which  the  echinus  is
straight  and  in  the  other  curved.  The  geison  or  projecting  cornice  seems
to  have  been  adorned  both  at  the  sides  and  at  the  gable-ends  of  the
temple  with  bands  of  painted  terra-cotta,  from  which  heads  of  lions,  also
made  of  terra-cotta,  projected  at  intervals  as  gargoyles.  Fragments  of
these  terra-cottas,  as  well  as  ante-fixes  of  terra-cotta  adorned  with
palmettes,  were  discovered  by  Mr.  Paris.  The  lion-heads  are  executed
in  good  style.  This  use  of  painted  plaques  of  terra-cotta  to  cover  the
outer  cornices  of  a  building  occurs,  as  we  have  seen  (vol.  4.  p.  70  sq)^  in
the  Treasury  of  Gela  at  Olympia,  and  it  seems  to  have  been  commonly
employed  in  the  temples  of  Sicily  and  Magna  Graecia.  The  temple  of
Cranaean  Athena  must  further  have  been  roofed  with  tiles  of  terra-cotta,
for  fragments  of  such  tiles  were  found  by  Mr.  Paris  in  thousands.  This
extensive  employment  of  terra-cotta  is  held  to  be  a  mark  of  antiquity  ;  for
the  custom  of  casing  cornices  with  plaques  of  terra-cotta  seems  to  date
from  a  time  when  buildings  were  constructed  of  wood,  and  when  conse-
quently it  was  necessary  to  protect  their  most  exposed  parts  from  the
weather.  In  later  times,  when  temples  were  built  of  stone,  such  a  casing
was  superfluous  and  ceased  to  be  employed,  and  roof-tiles  were  then  made
of  marble  instead  of  terra-cotta.  In  dimensions  as  well  as  in  the  number
of  its  external  columns  the  temple  of  Cranaean  Athena  closely  resembles
the  so-called  Theseum  at  Athens  (vol.  2.  p.  150  sqq.)\  but  Mr.  Paris
thinks  that  its  proportions  were  somewhat  heavier  than  those  of  the
Theseum,  from  which  he  infers  that  the  temple  of  Athena  is  the  older  of
the  two.  Many  votive  offerings,  most  of  them  broken,  were  discovered
by  Mr.  Paris  in  the  course  of  his  excavations.  They  comprise  terra-cotta
statuettes  of  women  and  animals,  potsherds,  a  small  bronze  horse,  a
small  bronze  dolphin,  a  bronze  duck,  a  bronze  swan,  bronze  pins  and
brooches,  etc.  Amongst  the  inscriptions  found  on  the  site  are  some
which  serve  to  identify  the  ruins.  Thus  one  mutilated  inscription  records
that  Lyseas  (?)  and  Prima  dedicated  to  Cranaean  Athena  a  statue  of
their  son  Onesiphorus,  who  had  been  priest  of  the  goddes  (C.  /.  G,  G,  S,
3.  No.  139).  Another  inscription,  relating  to  the  liberation  of  a  slave,
contains  a  provision  that  the  deed  shall  be  recorded  in  the  sanctuary
of  Cranaean  Athena  (C  /.  G.  G,  S,  3.  No.  109).  A  third  inscription,
recording  a  decree  of  the  Phocian  confederacy,  mentions  that  three
copies  of  the  decree  were  to  be  engraved  on  stone  or  metal  and  set
up,  one  *'  in  the  sanctuary  of  Athena  at  Cranae,"  another  in  the  market-
place of  Elatea,  and  the  third  at  Delphi  (C  /.  G.  G,  S.  3.  No.  97).
This  last  inscription  seems  to  prove  that  the  epithet  Cranaean  applied
to  Athena  was  derived  from  the  name  of  the  place  where  her  sanctuary
was  situated.  Further,  the  name  of  the  place  (Cranae)  appears  to  mean
no  more  than  <  springs,'  and  may  be  derived  from  a  clear  and  copious
spring  which  rises  near  the  summit  of  the  hill.  Another  inscription
found  at  the  sanctuary  contains  a  treaty  of  alliance  between  the
Phocians  and  Boeotians  which  seems  to  have  been  entered  into  about
the  beginning  of  the  second  century  B.C.  (C  /.  G.  G.  S,  3.  No.  98).
The  representatives  of  either  side  were  to  swear  by  King  Zeus,  Queen

VOL.  V  2  F


434  C RAN  ARAN  ATHENA  bk.  x.  phocis

Hera,  Poseidon,  and  Athena,  and  all  gods  and  goddesses  to  observe
the  terms  of  the  treaty.

The  entrance  to  the  sacred  precinct  seems,  as  we  should  have
expected  from  the  nature  of  the  ground,  to  have  been  from  the  south-
west. Here  close  to  the  levelled  summit  of  the  hill  is  a  piece  of  well-
jointed  polygonal  masonry,  5  feet  high.  It  is  probably  part  of  a  wall
which  once  lined  the  approach  to  the  sacred  precinct  from  the  south.
Towards  the  west  end  of  the  summit,  where  the  hill  runs  out  into  the
rocky  ridge  already  mentioned,  there  are  some  ruinous  remains  of  waUs
and  a  quantity  of  broken  stones.  Fragments  of  thick  red  pottery  are
plentifully  strewed  about  the  site  to  the  east,  south,  and  west  of  the
temple.  Some  of  the  potsherds  bear  traces  of  pigments,  red,  brown,  and
yellow  ;  and  some  of  them  clearly  belonged  to  large  round-mouthed  jars
(see  below,  note  on  §  8).

On  the  slope  of  the  hill  to  the  south  of  the  temple  and  only  some  20
feet  or  so  lower  than  it  there  is  a  terrace,  along  the  eastern  face  of  which
traces  of  a  wall  may  be  perceived.  Many  broken  stones  are  strewn
about  here,  and  beside  the  path  is  a  piece  of  wall  two  courses  high.
Much  further  down  the  slope  of  the  hill  stand  the  ruins  of  a  small  chapel.

See  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  141  sq, ;  Gell,  Itinerary  of  Greece  (LoDdon,  1 8 19),
p.  217  sq,\  Lolling,  in  MittheiL  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  3  (1878),  p.  19;
Baedeker,'  p.  203 ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  49  ;  P.  Paris,  in  Bulletin  de  Corrap,
helUnique,\\  (1887),  pp.  39-63,  318-346,  405*444;  ^-»  **•  12  (1888),  pp.  37-
63 ;  id,  y  Elatc'Cf  p.  73  sqq.  In  describing  the  sanctuary  Mr.  Paris  has  again
mistaken  the  points  of  the  compass.  What  he  calls  north  is  west ;  what  he
calls  east  is  south  ;  and  so  with  the  rest.  But  he  seems  not  quite  consistent  in  his
mistake.  I  visited  the  temple  28th  October  1895,  ^md  have  described  the  situa-
tion and  remains  mainly  from  my  own  observation.

34.  7-  colonnades  with  dwellings  opening  off  thenu  In  the  pre-
cinct of  the  temple  Mr.  Paris  found  a  fragmentary  inscription  (C  /.  G,  G,  S.
3.  No.  137)  relating  to  the  repair  of  one  of  these  colonnades.  See
P.  Paris,  £lathy  pp.  90,  240.  Inside  the  wall  of  the  precinct  and  abut-
ting on  it  H.  G.  Lolling  observed  the  remains  of  a  series  of  chambers
side  by  side,  like  the  cells  in  the  cloisters  of  a  monastery.  He  thought
that  these  were  the  ruins  of  the  dwellings  which,  as  we  here  learn  from
Pausanias,  were  set  apart  for  the  ministers  of  the  goddess.  But  they
seem  to  have  been  mediaeval.  See  H.  G.  Lolling,  in  MittheiL  d.  arch,
Inst,  in  A  then  ^  3  (1878),  p.  19  ;  P.  Paris,  Mlatde^  p.  81  sq,

34.  8.  They  choose  the  priest  from  among  boys  etc.  Among  the
inscriptions  found  by  Mr.  Paris  in  the  precinct  of  Cranaean  Athena  is
one  already  referred  to  (C  /.  G,  G.  S.  3.  No.  139),  which  records  that
a  statue  of  one  of  these  boy-priests  had  been  dedicated  by  his  parents
to  the  goddess.  The  inscription,  which  is  of  Roman  date,  is  somewhat
mutilated,  but  the  priest's  name  seems  to  have  been  Onesiphorus,  and
those  of  his  parents  Lyseas  and  Prima.  It  is  carved  on  a  large
block  of  grey  limestone,  3  feet  long  by  2  ft.  6  in.  high,  which,  set  up
on  its  narrow  edge,  still  stands  at  the  eastern  end  of  the  temple.
See  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  hclh'nique^  11  (1887),  P-  3 18;  P.  Paris,
£lat^e^  pp.  180  sq.^  241.     As  to  the  rule  that  the  priest  must  be  under


CH.  XXXIV  CRANAEAN  ATHENA  435

the  age  of  puberty,  see  note  on  vii.  24.  4  ;  and  for  another  instance  of
a  boy-priest  of  Athena,  see  viii.  47.  3.

34.  8.  bathes  in  tubs  after  the  ancient  &shion«  In  the  precinct
of  Cranaean  Athena  Mr.  Paris  found  a  number  of  fragments  of  large
earthenware  jars  or  basins,  which  he  conjectures  may  have  been  the
baths  used  by  the  boy-priests.  On  the  handle  of  one  of  the  fragments
is  the  inscription  ASANAS  lEPOS  '  sacred  to  Athena,'  and  pieces  of
the  same  inscription  have  been  found  on  other  fragments.  See  P.  Paris,
in  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUnique^  12  (1888),  p.  39  j^^.  ;  /V/.,  Alatie^
p.  181  sqq,  ;  C.  /.  G.  G,  S,  3.  Nos.  149-159.  In  Homer  {Od,  iv.  128)
we  hear  of  silver  bathing-tubs  {da-dfiLvSoi,  the  word  here  used  by
Pausanias) ;  and  in  another  passage  (Od,  iv.  48)  Homer  speaks  of
"  well  polished  bathing-tubs,"  from  which  we  might  infer  that  the  tubs
were  of  metal.  But  Mr.  Helbig  thinks  that  they  may  have  been  of
earthenware.  See  W.  Helbig,  Das  homerische  Epos  aus  den  Denkmdlem
erldutert^  p.  123  j^.  A  piece  of  an  earthenware  bath-tub  was  found  in
the  palace  at  Tiryns  (see  vol.  3.  p.  225).

34.  8.  The  image  is  another  work  of  the  sons  of  Polycles  etc.
On  coins  of  Elatea  of  the  third  or  second  century  B.C.  Athena  is
represented  armed  ;  on  one  coin  she  is  portrayed  stand-
ing, on  another  (Fig.  17)  she  is  charging  to  the  right
with  spear  advanced  and  the  shield  on  her  left  arm  ;  her
skirt  flutters  behind  her.  The  latter  may  have  been  the
attitude  of  the  statue  here  described  by  Pausanias.  The
coin  is  perhaps  older  than  the  statue  (see  note  on  vi.  4.
5,  vol.  4.  p.  12  sqq.) ;  but  if  so,  the  sons  of  Polycles  may  _

have  modelled  the  statue  on  a  traditional  type  of  Athena  (coin 'of  elatbaX
current  at  Elatea.  See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num,
Comm,  on  Pans,  p.  124,  pi.  Y  xv.  xvi. ;  Head,  Historia  Numorum^  p.  290 ;
Muller-Wieseler,  Denkmdler^  2.  pi.  xx.  No.  214b.  Among  the  ruins  of
the  sanctuary  of  Cranaean  Athena  Mr.  Paris  found  a  few  fragments  of  a
statue  larger  than  life-size.  Three  of  them,  being  put  together,  represent
the  folds  of  a  woman's  skirt  streaming  backwards  on  the  wind  or  in
rapid  motion.  The  piece  of  the  robe  extends  from  below  the  knees  to
the  ground  and  is  about  3  feet  high.  From  the  colossal  size  of  the
statue  to  which  these  fragments  must  have  belonged,  and  from  their
agreement  with  the  charging  Athena  on  the  coin,  Mr.  Paris  is  probably
right  in  concluding  that  we  have  here  a  portion  of  the  temple-statue
described  by  Pausanias.  See  P.  Paris,  £lat^e,  p.  1 2 1  sqq,  I  observed
some  of  the  fragments  of  the  marble  drapery  on  my  visit  to  the  temple
in  October  1895.  One  block,  about  3  ft.  4  in.  in  diameter  but  split  in
two,  represents  the  lowest  part  of  the  drapery,  where  it  touches  the
ground.  The  folds  are  deeply  cut  and  undercut ;  one  of  them  is  1 3
inches  deep.  In  another  block,  measuring  23  inches  in  height  by  about
2  feet  in  breadth,  there  is  a  fold  9  inches  deep.  The  marble  is  white
and  of  a  large  grain,  resembling  Parian  rather  than  Pentelic.  The
pieces  are  clearly  being  smashed,  as  appears  from  the  number  and  the
fresh  and  glistering  appearance  of  the  marble  splinters  lying  about.

The  -sons  of  Polycles,  the  sculptors  who  made  the  statue,  were


436  ABAE  BK.  x.  PHOCis

Timocles  and  Timarchides,  the  same  artists  who  made  the  statue  of
Aesculapius  for  the  neighbouring  city  of  Elatea.  At  the  sanctuary  of
Cranaean  Athena  Mr.  Paris  found  a  marble  block  (apparently  part
of  the  base  of  a  statue)  inscribed  with  the  name  of  Polydes  son  of
Tim<archides>.  The  Polycles  of  this  inscription  was  probably  a  son  of
the  Timarchides  who,  jointly  with  his  brother  Timocles,  made  the  statue
of  Cranaean  Athena.  See  P.  Paris,  £,laiie^  p.  125  sqq,  ;  Loewy,  In-
schrifUn  g9  tech,  Bildhauer,  p.  393,  No.  241a ;  C  /.  G.  G,  S,  3.  No.  141  ;
and  the  note  on  vi.  4.  5  already  referred  to.

34.  8.  the  reliefs  on  the  shield  of  the  Virgin  etc.  See  i.  17.  2
note.

35.  I.  Abae.  From  Elatea  Pausanias  proceeds  eastward  to  Abae,
which  stood  in  a  side  valley  opening  into  the  great  valley  of  the  Cephisus
on  the  eastern  side  of  the  latter,  a  little  way  to  the  north  of  the  narrow
defile  through  which  the  Cephisus  passes  from  Phocis  into  Boeotia.  The
distance  from  Elatea  is  about  9  miles  in  a  bee-line ;  but  on  account  of
the  detour  to  the  south  which  it  is  necessary  to  make,  the  journey  between
the  two  places  occupies  about  three  and  a  half  hours.  From  Dreuhmam
(near  Elatea)  the  route  goes  south-eastward  across  the  dead  flat  of  the
Cephisian  plain.  In  about  i  hour  and  20  minutes  we  cross  the  high-
road to  Atalanti  and  Thermopylae,  which  runs  in  a  straight  line  north-
eastward, rising  up  to  a  dip  in  the  hills.  Beyond  the  line  of  this
highroad  to  the  east  the  plain  contracts  greatly ;  low  bare  rounded  hills
rise  on  either  hand,  to  the  north  and  south,  at  no  g^eat  interval.  Here
the  route  passes  close  to  a  village  where  there  are  some  large  threshing-
floors,  and  almost  immediately  beyond  the  village  it  crosses  a  river  ^  by
a  bridge  from  the  right  to  the  left  bank.  The  water  of  the  river  is
clear ;  water-plants  grow  in  it,  and  some  of  it  is  diverted  to  turn  a  mill,
which  we  pass  a  few  minutes  after  crossing  the  bridge.  After  this  the
path  leads  along  a  stony  hillside  in  an  easterly  direction.  A  small  ruined
chapel  is  passed  in  about  two  and  a  half  hours  from  Drachmani.  We  then
enter  on  the  tolerably  wide  and  open  valley  of  Hyampolis,  up  which  our
route  leads  in  a  north-easterly  direction.  The  ruins  of  Abae  occupy
the  summit  of  a  sharp-pointed  hill  that  rises  on  the  eastern  side  of  the
valley,  from  which,  however,  it  is  divided  by  a  lower  hog-backed  hill.
The  remains  of  Hyampolis  lie  in  the  valley  at  a  distance  of  only  about
a  mile  to  the  north-west  of  Abae.

The  hill  of  Abae  is  a  nearly  isolated  rocky  hill  rising  in  a  sharp
point  to  a  height  of  perhaps  800  feet  above  the  valley.  The  top  is
small  and  rocky,  and  grey  rugged  rocks  crop  up  all  over  the  steep  sides
of  the  hill.  So  steep  and  in  part  precipitous  is  the  hill  on  the  east  that
fortifications  seem  to  have  been  omitted  on  this  side.  On  the  other
hand  it  is  defended,  not  very  far  below  its  summit,  by  two  fortification-
walls,  one  above  the  other,  on  the  western  and  southern  sides.     The

'  At  the  time  I  took  this  river  to  be  the  Cephisus,  but  probably  it  was  a  tributary
of  that  river,  flowing  into  it  from  the  north.  Had  it  been  the  Cephisus,  we  must
have  previously  crossed  it  from  the  left  to  the  right  bank,  and  I  have  no  note  or
recollection  of  having  done  so.  The  river  was  probably  the  one  called  Kitteta  on  the
French  map.


ABAE


437


narrow  northern  face  of  the  hill  has  no  wall  running  alon|;  it,  but
a  wal)  ascends  the  slope  on  this  side  meeting  the  lower  of  the  two
circuit-walls  (if  they  may  be  called  so)  at  the  north-western  comer
of  the  hill.  From  the  point  where  these  two  walls  meet,  the  upper
circuit-wall  begins,  rises  up  the  hill  in  a  southerly  direction,  runs  along
its  western  face  a  little  way  betow  the  summit,  then  bends  round  at  an
angle  and  descends  in  a  south-easterly  direction  to  the  south-east  side  of
the  hill,  where  it  stops  on  the  edge  of  precipices  that  render  fortification
needless.  The  lower  circuit-wall,  from  the  point  where  the  upper
circuit-wall  diverges  from  it  at  the  north-western  comer  of  the  hill,
follows  in  general  the  same  directions  as  the  upper  wall,  running  along
first  the  western  and  then  the  southern  face  of  the  hill,  and  ending  at
the  south-east  comer,  above  the  same  line  of  precipices  though  a  little
lower  down  than  the  upper
wall.  The  accompanying
rough  sketch  plan  (fig  1 8)
will  explain  the  positions  of
the  walls.  But  it  should  be
understood  that  the  summit
of  the  hill  enclosed  by  the
walls  is  not  a  tableland  On
the  contrary  it  descends  in
unbroken  slopes  on  all  sides
from  the  very  small  top  so
that  the  fortification  walls  are
built  along  the  slopes  of  the
hill,  not  along  the  edges  of
a  plateau.  The  walls  are  on
the  whole  ruinous,  but  many
isolated  pieces  ire  standing
to    heights   varying    from    5

to  over  9  feet.    The  masonry  ''"^-  ">■— 'i-*n  by  m-i«s  of  a

is  of  the  fine  polygonal  sort.

The  blocks,  many  of  which  are  of  great  siie,  are  hewn  i:
variety  of  shapes,  fitted  neatly  together,  and  smoothed  on
faces.  So  large  are  they  that  in  some  places  two  of  them  suffice  to  give
the  wall  a  height  of  6  feet  and  more.  On  the  whole  the  lower  wall  is
buih  of  larger  blocks  than  the  upper  and  is  better  preserved  ;  for
whereas  the  upper  wall  is  nowhere  (1  think)  more  than  6  feet  high,  the
lower  is  often  from  7  to  9  feet  high.  Contrary  to  the  usual  practice,
the  walls  seem  not  to  have  been  flanked  with  towers  except  at  the
southern  gateway.  But  on  the  other  hand  the  outer  wall  makes  several
salient  angles  which  project  from  3  feet  to  4  &■  3  '"■  from  the  curtain.
The  wall  which  descends  the  northern  slope  of  the  hill  towards  a  pro-
jecting rocky  spur  is  very  ruinous  ;  great  masses  of  tumbled  blocks  and
broken  stones  lie  along  its  face.  In  general  it  is  standing  to  a  height
of  only  one  or  two  blocks  (the  masonry  being  strictly  polygonal  we  can
hardly  speak  of  courses) ;  hut  in  a  good  many  places  it  is  preserved  for
short  stretches  to  a  greater  height.     Still  more  ruinous  is  a  wall  which


)  a  great


438


ABAE


BK.  X.  PHOCIS


descends  the  hill  from  the  lower  circtiit-wall  in  a  north-westerly  direction.
It  is  traceable  for  a  short  way,  but  only  in  the  form  of  a  heap  of  broken
stones,  except  just  at  the  point  where  it  starts  from  the  circuit-wall.  Here,
though  composed  of  only  two  blocks,  it  is  8  feet  high ;  one  of  the  blocks
is  over  5  feet  high.

The  main  approach  to  Abae  was  evidently  from  the  south,  for
here  the  hill  is  connected  by  a  saddle  with  lower  bills,  so  that
the  ascent  to  it  on  this  side  was  easiest  and  most  gradual.  Here,
accordingly,  in  the  outer  circuit-wall,  close  to  the  south-eastern  comer
of  the  fortified  enclosure,  we  find  the  principal  gateway,  which,  though
partly  buried  under  the  soil,  is  still  in  very  good  preservation.  The
gateway  faces  south,  and  only  a  short  piece  of  wall  intervenes  between


^•^— /fi/f.fi/n.— -►

FIG.    19.— PLAN  OP  GATEWAY  AT  ABAB.

it  and  the  precipices  which  here  bound  the  hill  on  the  east.  The
present  width  of  the  gateway  at  the  level  of  the  ground  is  9  ft  10  in.,
but  the  opening  is  narrowed  towards  the  top  by  stones  which  project  on
each  side.  The  lintel  is  still  in  its  place  over  the  gateway.  It  is  a
single  block  of  stone  8  feet  long,  3  ft.  8  in.  wide,  and  about  i  ft  7  in.
high.  Owing  to  the  accumulation  of  soil  the  clear  height  of  the  gateway
is  only  about  5  feet,  but  the  wall  at  its  side  is  about  9  feet  high.  The
gateway  is  set  back  from  the  line  of  the  circuit- wall  and  is  flanked
on  each  side  by  a  tower.  These  towers,  however,  are  not  at  equal
distances  from  the  gate,  the  eastern  tower  being  much  nearer  to  it  than
the  western.  The  distance  between  the  towers  is  about  27  feet.  The
western  tower,  which  is  much  the  better  preserved  of  the  two,  is
18  ft.  8  in.  broad  on  its  face  and  9  feet  high.  On  its  western  side  it
projects  3  feet  from  the  wall,  which  is  here  about  9  feet  high.  The
blocks  of  which  it  is  built  are  polygonal,  of  immense  size,  and  well  fitted
together.  There  is  also  a  small  gateway  about  5  feet  wide,  unflanked
with  towers,  in  the  western  outer  wall,  and  nearly  opposite  to  it  is  a
doorway  about  3  ft.  6  in.  wide  in  the  inner  (upper)  wall.  Within  the
walls  at  the  south-eastern  comer  of  the  hill  there  is  some  broken  pottery.

The  small  rocky  peak  of  the  hill  commands  fine  views  of  Pamassus
on  the  west.  Helicon  on  the  south,  and  the  more  distant  mountains  of
Boeotia  to  the  east.  To  the  north-west  is  seen  the  acropolis  of
Hyampolis  lying  low  down  in  the  valley,  about  a  mile  or  so  away.

At  the  northem  foot  of  the  neighbour  hill  of  Abae  on  the  west  many
tombs  seem  to  have  been  excavated  in  recent  times.  Here  then  was  the
necropolis  of  Abae,  or  perhaps  of  Hyampolis.

I  visited  Abae  from  Belesi  30th  October  1895,  ^^^  have  described  the  situa-
tion and  remains  from  personal  observation.     See  also  Gell,  Itinerary  of  Greece


CH.  XXXV  ABAE  459

(London,  1819),  p.  225  sq,  ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece,  2.  p.  163  sqq, ;  Vischer,
Ennnerungen,  p.  627  sq,  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  165  sq,  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  201  sq.  ;
Guide  Joanne^  2.  p.  48;  V.  W.  Yorke,  \ii  Jourtud  of  Hellenic  Studies y  16  (1896),
pp.  294-296.     According  to  Mr.  Yorke  the  height  of  the  hill  is  about  500  feet.

The  route  from  Orchomenus  to  Abae,  which  Pausanias  mentions,
was  traversed  by  Col.  Leake,  who  thus  describes  it :  "  This  forenoon,
having  quitted  the  monastery  of  Skripou^  I  cross  the  north-eastern  angle
of  the  ancient  city,  and  at  10.58  begin  to  pass  by  a  narrow  paved  road,
between  the  foot  of  the  upper  cliffs  which  formed  the  northern  boundary
of  the  city  and  the  summit  of  the  lower,  which  immediately  overhang
the  principal  source  of  the  Melas,  or  that  which  joins  the  Cephissus.
.  .  .  At  1 1.9,  we  quit  the  lower  range  of  cliffs,  the  higher  still  over-
hanging the  road,  and  soon  afterwards  begin  to  descend  the  rugged  side
of  the  mountain,  by  a  most  perilous  path.  At  11.33,  having  arrived  at
the  foot  of  the  hill,  we  enter  a  plain  on  the  north-eastern  side  of  Mount
Acontium,  bounded  eastward  by  the  marshes  of  the  Melas,  and  pursue
the  borders  of  the  marsh  to  Tzafnali,  a  small  collection  of  huts  on  the
brink,  where  we  arrive  at  11.45.  .  .  .  At  Tsamali  \\t  quit  the  Topolia
road  and  turn  to  the  left  to  the  head  of  the  plain  ;  at  11.55  leave  to  the
right  that  which  conducts  to  the  places  lying  between  the  northern  shore
of  the  Cephissis  [Copaic  Lake]  and  the  Euboic  frith,  and  at  12. 11,
arriving  at  the  western  extremity  of  the  plain  of  Aspledon,  ascend  some
rugged  hills  which  connect  Mount  Acontium  with  the  peak  now  called
C/ilomo.  At  12.35,  at  ^^^  head  of  the  ascent,  we  enter  upon  a  plain
which,  interrupted  by  some  small  heights,  reaches  to  the  northern  side
of  Mount  Acontium,  and  is  connected  in  the  opposite  direction  with  a
hollow  which  slopes  to  Choubavo,  Belisst\  and  the  S/efia  of  the  Cephissus.
At  12.45  ^'C  h^l^  til^  ^-24  ^^  ^  fountain  to  dine;  and  after  a  rugged
descent,  arrive  at  1.40  at  Exarcho^  a  village  of  thirty  houses,  in  a  spot
where  two  narrow  valleys  meet,  which  rise  from  hence  towards  two
summits  of  the  ridge  of  Chlofno,  The  northern  is  the  largest,  and  is  in
great  part  cultivated"  {Northern  Greece^  2.  pp.  161-163).  A  little  to
the  west  of  Exarcho  and  in  full  view  of  the  village  rises  the  hill  of  Abae.
As  to  the  route  from  Orchomenus  to  Abae,  see  also  Baedeker,*  p.  201
sq. ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  48.  An  inscription  built  into  the  outer  wall
of  the  church  of  St.  George  at  Exarcho  records  that  a  certain  Crino-
laus,  **  having  been  priest,  dedicated  the  portal,  the  colonnades,  and  the
houses  to  Serapis,  Isis,  and  Anubis  as  a  thank-offering"  {Bulletin  de
Corresp.  helUnique^  5  (1881),  p.  449  sq,\  Collitz,  G.  IX  /.  2.  No.  1535  ;
C  /.  G.  G.  S,  3.  No.  89).  The  inscription  seems  to  have  been  brought
from  Hyampolis.     Cp.  below,  p.  445.

35.  I .  they  came  to  Phocis  from  Argos.  According  to  Aristotle,
cited  by  Strabo  (x.  p.  445),  Abae  was  at  one  time  occupied  by  Thracians,
who  thence  colonised  Euboea.

35.  I.  an  oracle  of  Apollo.  The  oracle  of  Apollo  at  Abae,  accord-
ing to  Stephanus  Byzantius  (j.?/.  "A^at),  was  older  than  that  at  Delphi.
It  was  consulted  by  Croesus  (Herodotus,  i.  46),  Mardonius  {id.  viii.  134),
and  by  the  Thebans  before  the  battle  of  Leuctra  (Paus.  iv.  32.  5).  It
is  mentioned  by  Sophocles  {Oedipus  Rex,  900).


440  ABAE  BK.  X.  PHOCis

35.  2.  the  army  of  Xerxes  burned  down  the  very  sanctiury.

Herodotus  tells  us  that  when  the  sanctuary  was  burnt  down  by  the
Persians  it  was  wealthy  and  full  of  treasures  and  votive  offerings,  which
the  Persians  carried  off.  See  Herodotus,  viii.  33  ;  Plutarch,  De  maligm-
tate  Herodotiy  35.  Amongst  the  offerings  were  large  statues  dedicated
by  the  Phocians  for  a  victory  over  the  Thessalians  (Herodotus,  viii.  27 ;
cp.  Paus.  X.  I.  10).

35.  2.  The  Greeks resolved   not   to   restore  the  burnt

sanctuaries.  According  to  Lycurgus  {c,  Leocr,  31)  and  Diodorus  (xi.
29)  the  Greeks  before  the  battle  of  Plataea  took  a  solemn  oath  that  they
would  not  rebuild  any  of  the  temples  which  had  been  burnt  or  thrown
down  by  the  Persians,  but  would  leave  them  to  be  a  perpetual  memorial
of  the  impiety  of  the  barbarians.  Cicero  also  refers  to  this  resolution
{De  re  publica^  iii.  9).  But  Herodotus  makes  no  mention  of  it ;  and
I  Socrates  cannot  have  known  of  it  or  he  would  hardly  have  ignored  it
in  praising  the  lonians  for  making  a  similar  vow  {JDr.  iv.  156).  More-
over Pericles's  proposal  to  restore  all  the  temples  burnt  by  the  Persians
(Plutarch,  Pericles^  17)  seems  inconsistent  with  the  supposition  of  any
such  oath  or  resolution.  Probably  therefore  the  story  of  the  oath  is  a
figment  of  some  rhetorician  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  See  F.  Koepp,
*  Die  Herstellung  der  Tempel  nach  den  Perserkriegen,'  Jakrbuck  d,
archdolog.  Institute^  5  (1890),  pp.  268-278.

35.  2.  the  temples  in  the  land  of  Haliartns.  See  ix.  -^i'h-  3>  ^^h
the  note  on  p.  166.

35.  2.  the  temple  of  Hera the  temple  of  Demeter.     See

i.  I.  4  and  5.

35.  3.  in  the  Phocian  war  a  band  of  defeated  Phocians  etc.  In
347  B.C.  during  the  Phocian  or  Sacred  War  the  Phocians  were  fortifying
a  post  near  Abac.  But  when  the  Boeotians  marched  against  them
they  dispersed  among  the  neighbouring  cities  with  the  exception  of
five  hundred  men  who  took  refuge  in  the  temple  of  Apollo.  A  great
quantity  of  straw  was  lying  about  the  temple  and  some  fire  which  the
fugitives  had  left  in  their  huts  caught  the  straw.  It  blazed  up  and  con-
sumed the  temple  and  the  fugitives  in  it.     See  Diodorus,  xvi.  58.

35.  3.  the  sanctuary stood  down  to  my  time  the  most

tumble-down  building  etc.  The  very  scanty  ruins  of  the  two  temples  of
Apollo  mentioned  by  Pausanias  are  situated  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile
or  so  to  the  north-west  of  the  hill  of  Abac.  We  have  seen  (p.  436)
that  the  sharp-peaked  hill  of  Abae  is  divided  from  the  valley  of  Hyam-
polis  on  the  west  by  a  lower  hog-backed  hill.  From  the  northern  foot
of  this  lower  hill  a  hillock  protrudes  northward.  The  remains  of
the  two  temples  are  to  be  seen  on  the  top  of  the  hillock.  They  were
excavated  by  Mr.  Bather  and  Mr.  Yorke,  members  of  the  British  School
of  Archaeology,  in  1894.  The  excavations  proved  that  the  temples  stood
within  a  small  precinct  enclosed  by  a  wall  of  polygonal  masonry  which
runs  round  the  upper  slope  of  the  hillock.  The  precinct  thus  formed
seems  to  have  been  roughly  oval  in  shape,  and  to  have  measured  at  most
about  80  yards  from  north  to  south  by  about  60  yards  from  east  to  west.
From  the  primitive  style  of  its  masonry  the  polygonal  wall  is  judged  to


CH.  XXXV  ABAE  441

be  the  original  one  which  enclosed  the  old  temple.  Its  line  is  broken  by
gateways,  one  on  the  west  and  one  at  the  south-east.  A  third  gate  was
apparently  constructed  in  later  times  a  little  to  the  south  of  the  western  gate.

The  remains  of  the  old  temple  lie  towards  the  southern  end  of  the
precinct.  Foundations  of  three  sides  only  are  preserved ;  the  western
foundations  have  disappeared.  The  temple  was  turned  nearly  east  and
west.  Its  breadth  is  18  feet :  its  length  from  east  to  west,  so  far  as  the
foundations  are  preserved,  is  about  30  feet.  Two  courses  of  the  founda-
tion remain  :  the  blocks  of  the  upper  course  measure  uniformly  3  ft.  7  in.
by  I  ft.  5  in.  Above  these  in  the  north  wall  the  English  archaeolo-
gists found  one  block  of  the  first  course  of  the  temple  proper  in  its
original  position  :  it  measured  3  feet  by  4  ft.  i  in.  When  I  visited  the
temple  in  1895  ^^^  block  had  seemingly  been  removed  :  at  least  I  have
no  note  or  recollection  of  seeing  anything  but  foundations  in  position.
The  insignificant  ruins  of  the  smaller  temple  lie  about  18  yards  north
of  the  old  temple.  All  that  remains  of  it  is  one  course  of  foundations
forming  three  sides  of  a  rectangle  and  composed  of  four  blocks  on  the
west  side,  two  on  the  north  side,  and  two  on  the  south.  This,  we  may
suppose,  was  the  temple  dedicated  by  Hadrian.

Much  more  abundant  are  the  remains  of  a  colonnade  which  occupied
a  great  part  of  the  western  side  of  the  precinct,  extending  north  and
south  for  a  length  of  about  1 10  feet  with  a  depth  of  24  feet.  Of  the
external  foundation -walls  the  western  is  visible  to  a  height  of  three
and  four  courses.  It  is  built  of  long  blocks  laid  in  horizontal  courses
and  is  supported  at  intervals  of  about  20  feet  by  buttresses  to  prevent
it  from  slipping  down  the  side  of  the  hillock.  Where  four  courses
of  this  wall  are  visible  the  height  is  about  6  feet.  The  northern  wall
is  three  courses  high,  and  the  southern  wall  four  courses,  but  the
latter  wall  is  partly  hidden  under  the  soil.  The  eastern  wall  is  also
preserved  throughout  its  entire  length,  but  only  its  upper  surface  is
visible.  It  consists  for  the  most  part,  according  to  Mr.  Yorke's  report,
of  a  single  course.  On  the  top  of  the  western  foundation-wall  are
standing  considerable  portions  (12  blocks)  of  the  first  course  of  the
upper  wall,  that  is  of  the  back-wall  of  the  colonnade.  Down  the  middle
of  the  colonnade,  throughout  its  whole  length  fi-om  north  to  south,  there
runs  a  row  of  quadrangular  foundations  or  bases,  which  doubtless
supported  columns.  These  bases  are  at  present  eight  in  number,  and
apparently  there  never  were  more  of  them.  The  inter\'al  between  each
pair  of  them  is  8  ft.  8  in.  Some  fragments  of  stone  columns  were  found
near  the  colonnade,  and  the  points  of  a  gabled  roof  of  stone  were  dis-
covered at  each  comer  of  the  building.  We  may  suppose  that  the
colonnade  opened  eastward  on  the  sacred  precinct  and  that  its  roof
rested  on  two  rows  of  columns,  one  down  the  middle  of  the  building  and
the  other  along  its  eastern  front.  Ante-fixes  of  terra-cotta  and  a  lion's
head,  also  of  terra-cotta,  which  had  served  as  a  gargoyle,  were  found  in
and  near  the  colonnade  to  which  they  seem  to  have  belonged.  From
their  fine  style  Mr.  Yorke  infers  that  the  colonnade  was  built  in  the  fourth
century  B.C.  The  stone  of  which  it  is  constructed  seemed  to  me  to  be
a  rough  conglomerate  of  pebbles.     According  to  Mr.  Yorke,  however.


442  ABAE — HYAAfPOLIS  bk.  x.  phocis

the  temples  and  colonnade  are  all  built  of  *<  a  light  coloured  poros  stone
weathering  almost  white."

Within  the  precinct  the  English  excavators  found  some  pieces  of
bronze  bowls  ornamented  with  delicate  repouss^  work,  "apparently
Greek  developments  from  Phoenician  work,"  also  fragments  of  thin
bronze  plates  decorated  with  elaborate  floral  designs  in  the  same  style,
and  a  few  remains  of  Roman  bronze  work.  All  are  sadly  mutilated.
The  bowls  and  plates  may  have  been  votive  offerings  dating  from  a
period  before  the  destruction  of  the  temple  by  the  Persians.  The
inscriptions  found  in  the  precinct  are  few,  fragmentary,  and  insignificant
One  seems  to  refer  to  the  restoration  of  an  offering  to  a  deity,  either
Apollo  or  Artemis  ;  another  contains  the  name  of  the  Athenian  sculptor
Eubulides,  son  of  Euchir,  whom  Pausanias  mentions  (i.  2.  5  note).

See  V.  W.  Yorkc,  va  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  16  (1896),  pp.  297-302,  304-
308.  I  visited  the  sanctuary  of  Apollo  30th  October  1895,  ana  have  described
the  remains  partly  from  my  notes.  Some  of  the  foundation-walls  were  visible
above  ground  before  the  English  excavations.  See  Leake,  Northern  Greece,  2.  p.
165 ;  W.  Vischer,  Erinnertingeny  p.  628 ;  Baedeker,'  p.  202 ;  Guide-Joanne,  2.
p.  48.

A  letter  of  Philip,  king  of  Macedonia,  was  found  inscribed  on  a  block
of  white  marble  at  the  now  deserted  village  of  Vogdani^  a  little  to  the
west  of  Abae.  The  people  of  Abae  had  sent  envoys  to  King  Philip
begging  that  the  sacred  land  of  the  sanctuary  should  remain  free  from
imposts  as  formerly  ;  and  in  this  letter  Philip  grants  their  petition.  The
Philip  of  this  inscription  seems  to  be  Philip  V.,  and  his  letter  may  have
been  written  between  207  and  195  B.C.  The  inscription  is  now  pre-
served in  the  church  of  St.  George  at  KcUapodi^  a  village  about  4  miles
north-west  of  Abae.  See  Bulletin  dc  Corresp.  helUnique,  6  (1882),  pp.
1 71-176;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Graec.  No.  ig2  ;  C.  /.  G.  G.  S.
3.  No.  78  ;  Ch.  Michel,  Recueil  d* Inscriptions  grecques.  No.  42.

35.  5.  Hyampolis.  Hyampolis  stood,  as  }*ausanias  tells  us,  on  the
direct  route  from  Orchomenus  to  Opus.  Between  these  two  latter
places  is  interposed  a  chain  of  hills,  the  highest  summit  of  which —
now  called  Mount  Chlomo — is  a  mountain  of  imposing  appearance.  To
avoid  this  natural  barrier  the  ancient  highroad  appears  to  have  made  a
considerable  detour,  following  the  easy  valleys  to  the  west  of  Mount  Chlomo
instead  of  taking  a  direct  course  over  the  mountain.  Hence  it  traversed
the  site  of  the  modem  village  of  ExarchOy  and  leaving  the  hill  of  Abae
and  the  temple  of  Apollo  on  the  left  turned  northward  up  the  valley  of
Hyampolis,  into  which  the  valley  of  Exarcho  opens  at  right  angles  at
its  western  end.  The  valley  of  Hyampolis  extends  north  and  south  and
is  enclosed  on  both  sides  by  bare  rocky  hills  of  no  great  height.  A
stream  traverses  it  flowing  from  north  to  south.  In  the  middle  of  the
valley,  about  half  a  mile  or  so  to  the  north-west  of  the  temple  of  Apollo,
rises  a  sort  of  natural  redan  or  tableland,  defended  on  all  sides  by  slopes
about  1 00  feet  high.  On  the  west  side  the  slope  is  steep  and  rocky ;
on  the  other  sides  it  is  neither  rocky  nor  very  steep.  Ancient  squared
blocks,  some  fallen,  some  standing  in  position,  dot  the  surface  of  the
tableland,  which  is  now  overgrown  with  thin  pale  stubbly  grass  and  the


CH.  XXXV  HYAMPOLIS  443

dry  yellow-brown  thistles  so  characteristic  of  Greece.  Some  excavations
were  made  on  the  tableland  by  Messrs.  A.  G.  Bather  and  V.  W.  Yorke,
members  of  the  British  School  at  Athens,  in  1894.  The  high  pointed
hill  of  Abae  is  in  full  view  a  little  way  to  the  south-east,  and  to  the  south-
west Parnassus  rises  grandly  in  the  distance.

This  natural  redan  seems  to  have  been  the  acropolis  of  Hyampolis  ;
for  considerable  remains  of  fortification-walls,  flanked  with  a  few  square
towers,  exist  on  its  western  and  eastern  sides,  but  the  place  seems  too
small  to  have  contained  the  whole  city.  The  fortifications  are  built  of
ashlar  masonry  in  a  very  fine  and  regular  style.  The  blocks,  which  arc
massive  and  of  a  fairly  uniform  though  not  excessive  size,  are  squared  and
laid  in  horizontal  courses ;  but  here  and  there  the  joints  in  the  courses
are  oblique.  The  stone  seems  to  be  a  grey  limestone.  On  the  western
face  of  the  tableland  the  wall  is  preserved  m  an  unbroken  line  nearly
from  end  to  end.  It  descends  the  steep  rocky  slope  obliquely  in  a
direction  from  south-east  to  north-west ;  its  length  is  some  1 50  yards
or  so.  From  three  to  six  courses  of  masonry  are  preserved  ;  the  height
of  the  wall  is  from  5  to  9  feet.  About  the  middle  of  the  wall  a  square
tower,  22  feet  broad  on  the  face,  projects  9  feet  from  the  curtain.  It
is  standing  to  a  height  of  about  1 1  feet,  with  six  courses  of  masonry.
In  the  wall  a  few  feet  to  the  south  of  this  tower  is  a  gateway  about  6  ft.
6  in.  wide ;  the  side-wall  of  the  passage,  on  the  south,  is  9  feet  long.
On  the  northern  edge  of  the  tableland  only  a  few  small  isolated  and
insignificant  remains  of  the  fortification- wall  exist.  Among  them  are
the  ruins  of  a  square  tower ;  its  northern  face  is  preserved  to  a  height
of  three  and  four  courses,  and  a  piece  of  its  eastern  side  is  standing.
On  the  eastern  face  of  the  tableland,  towards  its  northern  end,  the  wall
is  again  fairly  preserved,  though  not  so  continuously  as  on  the  west.
From  two  to  six  courses  of  masonry  are  standing,  and  the  height  of  the
wall  in  some  places  is  from  6  to  9  feet  A  square  tower  is  preserved  to
a  height  of  about  1 1  feet,  with  six  courses  of  masonry.  It  is  21  ft.  9  in.
broad,  and  projects  10  ft.  9  in.  from  the  wall.

On  the  southern  face  of  the  tableland,  a  little  below  its  edge,  are
some  massive  blocks  of  squared  masonry.  More  remains  of  a  building
may  be  seen  a  little  way  further  up ;  and  still  further  to  the  north,  on
the  summit  of  the  tableland,  some  slight  excavations  have  laid  bare  a
rough  foundation- wall  and  some  large  architectural  blocks.  One  broken
block  of  dark  marble  bears  a  few  letters  of  an  inscription  which,  from
the  ornamental  shape  of  the  letters,  would  seem  to  have  been  late.
Another  excavation  has  laid  bare  a  tomb  or  cistern  sunk  in  the  rock.
The  tomb  or  cistern  is  9  ft.  8  in.  long  by  3  ft.  7  in.  wide  and  may
be  about  6  feet  deep.  Its  upper  edge  is  lined  with  masonry.  Mr.
V.  W.  Yorke,  who  is  probably  right  in  regarding  the  structure  as  a
cistern  rather  than  a  tomb,  suggests  that  it  may  be  the  one  well
of  Hyampolis  mentioned  by  Pausanias  (§  6).  Two  blocks  of  dark
marble  in  this  neighbourhood  have  clearly  belonged  to  a  circular
or  semicircular  building.  On  the  eastern  side  of  the  plateau,  close
to  its  edge,  is  a  small  ruined  chapel  containing  some  pieces  of  small
columns  and  a  broken  block  of  a  cornice  (?)  on  which  is  engraved  an


444  HYAMPOUS  bk.  x.  phocis


inscription  relating  to  the  festival  of  Artemis  (see  below,  note  on  §  7).
Potsherds  are  strewn  about  the  sur^ce  of  the  tableland.

To  the  south  of  the  tableland  which  seems  to  have  been  the  acropolis
a  lower  plateau,  strewn  with  stones,  extends  southward  for  about  a  mile.
It  ends  in  a  ledge  of  rocks  which  here  runs  across  the  valley  from  east  to
west,  forming  a  natural  terrace-wall  to  the  plateau.  Part  of  this  plateau
may  perhaps  have  been  the  site  of  the  lower  city  of  Hyampolis.  On  it
I  saw,  a  little  to  the  south  of  the  acropolis,  an  ancient  tombstone  which
seemed  to  have  been  recently  excavated.  It  was  a  slab  of  dark  marble
about  5  feet  long  and  i  ft.  1 1  in.  broad  at  the  broadest ;  the  bottom
was  broken  off.  A  finely-carved  floral  device,  about  3  feet  high,  one  of
the  finest  I  have  ever  seen,  adorned  the  upper  part  of  the  stone,  and
below  it  was  engraved  the  following  inscription :

EniNIKAZIQI
*IAOMHAIAAI
EENIXOI
nOATSBNOI,

from  which  we  learn  that  the  stone  marked  the  grave  of  four  men,
Nicasius,  Philomelidas,  Xenichus,  and  Polyxenus.

From  the  ledge  of  rocks  which  bounds  the  plateau  on  the  south,
near  a  ruined  chapel,  a  spring  of  beautifully  clear  water  gushes  forth.
Some  ancient  blocks  lie  tumbled  about  the  spring,  and  a  tall  poplar
tree  grows  opposite  it.  The  day  was  very  hot  when  I  passed  it  on  my
way  to  and  from  the  ruins  of  Hyampolis ;  but  the  leaves  of  the  poplar
rustled  in  the  breeze,  and  the  water  flowed  from  under  the  rocks  with  a
soothing  murmur.  Parnassus  loomed  dim  in  the  distance  through  a
haze  of  heat.  On  my  return  from  the  ruins  I  found  a  shepherd  boy  at
the  spring  who  offered  to  share  his  bread  with  me.  This  picturesque
spot,  on  which  a  poet  of  the  Anthology  might  have  written  an  epigram,
is  perhaps  the  site  of  the  temple  of  Artemis  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  It
is  now  known  as  Smixi.     See  i^  7  note.

The  situation  of  Hyampolis,  at  the  entrance  of  one  of  the  main
passes  from  Phocis  to  Locris  and  northern  Greece,  was  strategically
important.  It  was  in  this  pass  that  the  Phocians  once  met  and  defeated
the  invading  Thessalian  cavalry  (x.  1.3;  Herodotus,  viii.  28).  Jason
of  Pherae  captured  a  suburb  of  the  city  on  his  march  from  Phocis  to
Heraclea  in  371  B.C.  (Xenophon,  Hcllenica^  vi.  4.  27).  In  the  Sacred
War  the  Boeotians  defeated  the  Phocians  at  Hyampolis  in  347  B.C.
(Diodorus,  xvi.  56).  The  city  was  captured  by  the  Romans  under
Flamininus  in  198  B.C.  (Livy,  xxxii.  18).

I  visited  Hyampolis  firom  Drachmani  29th  October  1895,  ^^^  ^^^^  described
the  ruins  from  personal  observation.  Tlie  inscription  on  the  tombstone  has
not,  so  far  as  I  know,  been  published  before.  See  also  Gell,  Itinerary  of  Greece
(London,  1819),  p.  223  sq,  ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  167  soq,  ;  Vischer,
Erinnerungen^  p.  628  sq. ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  164  sq,  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  202  ;
Guide- Joanne^  2.  p.  48;  V.  W.  Yorke,  xn  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  16(1896),
pp.  291,  293  j^.,  ZOlsq.

35.  5.  the  Hyantians  of  Thebes,  who  fled  thither  etc.     See


CH.  XXXV  HYAMPOLIS  445

ix.  5.  I.     As  to  the  Hyantians,  see  K.  O.  Miiller,  Orchomenos  und  die
Minyer^'  p.  124.

35.  6.  The  city  was  burnt  down  by  King  Xerxes.  Cp.  Hero-
dotus, viii.  33.

35.  6.  The  Emperor  Hadrian  built  a  colonnade.  Outside  of  the
acropolis  of  Hyampolis,  on  its  southern  side,  Messrs.  Bather  and  Yorke
dug  some  trenches  in  1 894.  They  came  upon  the  remains  of  a  building,
which  they  took  to  be  a  colonnade  of  the  Roman  period.  As,  however,
the  building  seemed  to  be  of  considerable  extent  and  lay  at  some  depth
beneath  the  surface,  they  did  not  clear  it  completely.  It  may  be,  as
they  conjecture,  the  colonnade  built  by  Hadrian.  In  the  neighbourhood
of  this  building  the  English  archaeologists  observed  on  the  slope  of  the
acropolis  some  faint  remains  which  they  thought  might  possibly  be  those
of  the  theatre  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  See  V.  W.  Yorke,  in  Journal  oj
Hellenic  Studies^  16(1 896),  p.  303  sq.

35.  7-  They  worship  chiefly  Artemis  etc.  The  temple  of  Artemis
perhaps  stood  at  the  picturesque  spot  called  Smixi  a  short  way  to  the
south  of  the  ruins  of  Hyampolis  (see  above,  p.  444),  for  here  two
inscriptions  relating  to  the  worship  of  Artemis  have  been  found.  One
of  them  records  a  dedication  to  Artemis  by  a  certain  Demetrius,  son  of
Thraso  (C.  /.  G,  G.  S,  3.  No.  88 ;  Bulletin  de  Corresp. helUnigue,  5(1881),
p.  449) :  the  other,  found  built  into  the  wall  of  a  ruined  chapel,  relates
to  sacred  lands  of  Artemis  and  Apollo,  but  it  is  too  mutilated  to  be  fully
intelligible  (C.  /.  G,  G,  5".  3.  No.  87  ;  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique^
18(1 894),  p.  59  sqq, ).  A  great  festival  of  Artemis  called  the  Elaphebolia
was  periodically  celebrated  at  Hyampolis  down  to  Plutarch's  time.
It  was  supposed  to  commemorate  a  victory  won  by  the  Phocians  over
the  Thessalians.  See  Plutarch,  De  mulierum  virtutibus^  2  ;  ///.,  Quaest.
Conviv.  iv.  i.  i.  The  victory  commemorated  by  the  festival  has  been
described  by  Pausanias  (x.  i.  6  sqq.).  An  inscription  which  may  be
seen  in  a  ruined  chapel  on  the  acropolis  of  Hyampolis,  close  to  its  eastern
edge,  mentions  that  a  certain  man,  whose  name  is  lost,  had  introduced,
alone  and  unaided,  the  Great  Caesarian  games  and  the  Great  Elaphebo-
lian  and  Laphrian  games  (C  /.  G,  G,  S.  3.  No.  90  ;  Journal  of  Hellenic
Studies^  16  (1896),  p.  309).  The  Great  Caesarian  games  were  probably
held  in  honour  of  Julius  Caesar  or  Augustus,  for  had  they  been  held  in
honour  of  a  later  emperor  his  name  would  probably  have  been  added.
Hence  it  would  seem  that  the  Elaphebolian  festival  was  instituted  in  the
reign  either  of  Julius  Caesar  or  of  Augustus.  The  inscription,  which  I
copied  on  the  spot,  is  carved  on  a  block  of  stone,  apparently  grey  lime-
stone, 3  ft.  2  in.  long  by  1 3  inches  high,  but  broken  off  at  the  right
hand  side.  Under  the  inscription  is  a  moulding,  which  perhaps  indicates
that  the  block  formed  part  of  a  cornice.  Inscriptions  fUrther  prove  that
the  Egyptian  deities  Serapis,  Isis,  and  Anubis  were  worshipped  at
Hyampolis  (C  /.  G,  G.  S.  3.  Nos.  86,  89,  92).  One  of  these  documents
(No.  89)  records  the  dedication  of  a  portal,  colonnades,  and  chambers  to
the  Egyptian  deities  by  a  certain  Crinolaus  who  had  been  their  priest.
Another  of  them  (No.  86)  ranks  the  Emperor  Trajan  with  the  Egyptian
divinities  as  a  witness  to  a  deed  of  manumission.


446  STIRIS  BK.  X.  PHOCis

35.  7-  whatever  cattle  they  pronounce  sacred  to  Artemis.    As

to  the  relation  of  Artemis  to  cattle,  see  Preller,  Griech,  MytkologUy^
I.  p.  302  ;  Schreiber,  in  Roscher's  Lexikon^  i.  p.  565  sq. ;  L.  R.
Famell,  The  Cults  of  the  Greek  States,  2.  p.  449  sgq,

35.  8.  Stiris.  The  mins  of  Stiris,  identified  by  inscriptions,  are
situated  on  the  summit  of  a  rocky  hill  now  called  Paiea  CkortLt  about
2  miles  south-east  of  the  monastery  of  St.  Luke.  To  reach  Stiris  from
the  Cleft  Way  on  the  highroad  to  Delphi  (see  x.  5.  3  note)  we  turn
southward  and  follow  a  quiet  open  valley  enclosed  by  the  outlying
masses  of  Parnassus  on  the  west  and  of  Helicon  on  the  east.  Leaving
the  village  of  Distotno  (the  ancient  Ambrosus)  on  the  right  we  turn
to  the  south-east  and  continue  to  follow  the  valley,  which  is  still  open
and  planted  with  vines  and  afterwards  with  com.  We  now  see  the
village  of  Stiri  on  the  right,  standing  on  the  northern  slope  of  a  bare
rocky  hill  of  oblong  shape.  Here  the  valley  contracts  into  a  somewhat
narrow  defile  between  the  long  hill  of  Stiri  on  the  right  and  another
considerably  higher  hill,  also  bare  and  rocky,  on  the  left  Through  the
bottom  of  the  defile  runs  a  water-course  which,  when  I  saw  it  in  May
1 890,  was  quite  dry.  At  the  southern  end  of  the  defile  the  valley  opens
out  again,  and  at  this  point  there  is  a  well  with  some  plane-trees  growing
beside  it.  The  track  now  ascends  a  little,  and  winding  round  the
northern  side  of  a  hill  prettily  overgrown  with  bushes,  brings  us  to  the
monastery  of  St.  Luke,  with  its  famous  Byzantine  churches.  The
monastery  is  pleasantly  situated  on  the  south  -  eastern  face  of  the
bushy  hill  already  mentioned.  It  looks  eastward  over  a  spacious
circular  valley  or  basin,  beyond  which  rise  the  lofty  rugged  slopes
of  Mt.  Helicon.  The  valley  is  not  more  than  2  or  3  miles  across,
but  its  surface  is  agreeably  diversified  with  pastures,  corn-fields,  olive-
trees,  and  copses  of  holly-oak.  Into  this  valley  we  descend  and  cross-
ing it  in  a  south-easterly  direction  we  come  in  about  half-an-hour  more
to  the  tabular  hill  of  Palea  Chora,  rising  from  the  valley  and  crowned
with  the  ruins  of  Stiris.  The  time  from  the  Cleft  Way  is  about  three
hours.  A  torrent  descending  from  near  the  village  of  Zeriki,  flows
westward  along  the  northern  foot  of  the  hill  of  Palea  Cfiora  and  is  joined
at  the  south-western  end  of  the  hill  by  another  torrent  which  comes  down
from  the  village  of  Kyriaki,  Both  these  streams  are  dry  in  summer.
The  sides  of  the  hill  are  rocky  and  precipitous,  especially  on  the  north
and  east.  The  summit,  which  is  a  good  deal  lower  than  that  of  the
hill  on  which  the  monastery  of  St.  Luke  stands,  lies  north-east  and
south  -  west ;  it  is  between  700  and  800  yards  long,  but  not  more
than  100  yards  broad  at  the  widest.  A  wall  of  loose  construction,
approaching  the  Cyclopean  in  style,  but  built  with  much  smaller  stones,
encircles  it.  No  citadel  can  be  traced,  but  the  surface  of  the  rock
within  the  walls  has  been  excavated  in  many  places  for  dwellings,  and
there  are  two  or  three  ancient  cisterns  near  a  ruined  church  of  St.
Nicholas,  where  some  ancient  remains,  including  pieces  of  columns
and  other  architectural  fragments,  may  also  be  seen.  Here,  too,
some  inscriptions  have  been  found.  Several  record  the  enfranchisement
of  slaves  by  dedicating  them  to  Aesculapius.     One  of  them,  dated  in


CH.  XXXV  STIRIS  447

the  fourth  month  of  the  year,  when  Philo  son  of  Philocrates  was  archon
at   Stiris,   mentions  the  dedication   of  the  slaves   "to  Aesculapius  at
Stiris"  (C  /  6\  G.  S,  3.  No.  39);  a  second  declares  that  the  enfran-
chised slaves  are  placed  under  the   safe-keeping   of  *'the  gods  and
Aesculapius  and  the  citizens  and  the  Phocians"  (C.  /.  G,  G,  S,  3.  No.  34);
a  third  mentions  Aesculapius  and  the  Stirians  repeatedly  (C  /.  G,  G,  S,
3.  No.  35) ;  and  a  fourth,  which  also  speaks  of  Aesculapius  again  and
again,  is  dated  by  the  archon  at  Stiris   (C  /.  G,  G.  S.   3.   No.   36).
Hence  we  infer  that  the  ruins  on  the  hill  are  those  of  Stiris,  and  we
may  conjecture  that  the  church  of  St.  Nicholas  occupies  the  site  of
a  temple  of  Aesculapius.      All  the  inscriptions  recording  the  manu-
mission of  slaves  seem  to  date  from  the  third  century  or  the  first  half  of
the  second  century  B.C.      Another  inscription  found  among  the  ruins
confirms  the  identification  of  the  site  as  that  of  Stiris  and  throws  some
light  on  the  history  of  the  town  (C  /.  G.  G.  S,  3.  No.  32).     It  records
a  treaty  of  union  between  the  city  of  Stiris  and  the  city  of  Medeon
on  the   basis   of  entire  equality  both  in   civil   and   religious  affairs ;
Stiris   was  to  be  the  seat  of  government  and    to   give  its  name  to
the  united  state ;  but  the  old  religious  worships  were  to  continue  to
be  celebrated  both  at  Medeon  and  at  Stiris ;  a  copy  of  the  treaty  of
union  was  to  be  engraved  on  stone  and  set  up  in  the  sanctuary  of
Athena,  and  another  copy  was  to  be  sealed  and  deposited  w^ith  a  private
person.     The  date  of  this  union  of  Stiris  and  Medeon  must  have  been
later   than    181    B.C.,    for   in   two    Delphic   inscriptions   of   that   year
(Wescher-Foucart,  Inscriptions  recueillies  d  Delphcs^  Nos.   392,  436)
mention   is  made  of  citizens  of  Medeon,  which  would  not  have  been
done  after  Medeon  had  been  absorbed  in  Stiris.     Thus  from  the  inscrip-
tions it  appears  that  Stiris  existed  at  Palea  Chora  as  late  at  least  as  the
first  half  of  the  second  century  B.C.     This  disposes  of  the  theory,  started
by  L.  Ross  and  accepted  by  Vischer  and  Bursian,  that  after  its  destruc-
tion at  the  close  of  the  Sacred  War  (Paus.  x.  3.  2)  the  city  was  rebuilt,
not  on  the  old  site,  but  about  2  miles  away  to  the  north-west,  on  the  site
of  the  monastery  of  St.  Luke,  where  some  foundations  and  remains  of
ancient  walls,  partly  built  in  regular  courses,  are  to  be  seen  both  on  the
summit  of  the  hill  above  the  monastery  and  on  the  slope  of  the  hill  a
little  below  it.     An  angle  of  an  ancient  wall  is  standing  to  the  north-east
of  the  monastery,  which  is  itself  in  great  part  built  of  large  old  square
blocks.     On  Ross's  hypothesis  these  are  the  remains  of  the  Stiris  which
Pausanias  saw  and  described.       But,  as   Leake  pointed  out,  the  site
does  not  answer  to  his  description.     For  there  is  a  copious  fountain  of
beautiful  water  in  the  courtyard  of  the  monastery ;  whereas  according
to  Pausanias  there  was  no  drinking-water  to  be  had  at  Stiris  and  the
inhabitants  were  obliged  to  go  down  4  furlongs  to  draw  water  at  a
spring.     The  ancient  remains  at  St.  Luke's  may  possibly  be  those  of
Medeon ;    for   since   Stiris  and   Medeon  united  and  formed  a  single
state,   the   two   cities    were   probably   neighbours.       Into   the    wall  of
the  church  of   St.    Luke   is   built   an    inscription  which  records  that
Xenocrates  and    Eumaridas   dedicated   to   the   gods  Augustuses  (the
Roman  emperors)  and   to  the  city  a  fountain  with   steps,  a  covered


448  ST//^/S  BK.  X.  PHOCis

building,  and  a  conduit  of  water  (C  /.  G,  G,  S.  3.  No.  47).  Hence
if,  as  I  have  conjectured,  Medeon  occupied  the  site  of  the  monastery  of
St.  Luke,  it  must  have  continued  to  exist  as  a  town  long  after  its
political  union  with  Stiris.  In  Pausanias's  time  it  was  in  ruins  (see
below,  X.  36.  6).  But  Medeon  was  perhaps  on  the  bay  of  Aspra  Spitia,
See  note  on  x.  36.  6.  Other  inscriptions  at  St.  Luke's  monastery  record
the  manumission  of  slaves  and  dedications  to  Aesculapius  (C.  /.  G,  G.  S.  3.
Nos.  41,  42,  43) :  one  of  them  (No.  42)  is  dated  by  the  archon  at  Stiris.
Built  into  a  wall  of  the  monastery  is  the  inscribed  pedestal  of  a  statue
of  Julia  Domna,  wife  of  Septimius  Severus,  which  was  set  up  by  the  city
of  Stiris  (C.  /.  G.  G.  S,  3.  No.  48).

The  monastery  of  St.  Luke  was  founded  about  960  A.D.  The  great
church  of  St.  Luke,  the  finest  Byzantine  church  in  Greece,  is  built  in
the  form  of  a  Greek  cross,  with  a  vestibule  and  three  doors  at  the
western  end,  a  dome  in  the  centre,  and  galleries  at  the  sides  supported
by  columns.  The  roof  and  walls  are  still  lined  with  many  fine  mosaics,
though  many  have  been  destroyed.  Under  the  church  is  a  crypt  which
is  used  as  a  church  of  St.  Barbara.  Adjoining  the  church  of  St.  Luke
and  entered  from  it  is  another  much  smaller  church  of  the  Mother  of
God  ( Theotokos)  ;  it  has  not,  so  far  as  I  observed,  any  mosaics  except
on  the  floor.  The  monastery  is  rather  cleaner  and  better  kept  than
most  Greek  monasteries.  From  a  balcony  overlooking  the  abbofs
garden  there  is  a  pleasant  view  across  the  v^ley  to  Mt.  Helicon.

See  Wheler,  Journey^  p.  320  sqq,  ;  Chandler,  Travels  in  Greece^  p.  247  iqq,  ;
Cell,  Itinerary  of  Greece  (London,  1 8 19),  p.  175  sq,  ;  Leake,  Norikem  Greece^  2.
p.  528  sqq.  ;  Pouqueville,  Voyage  de  la  Grhe^  4.  p.  126  sqq.  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.
183  sq,  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  164  ;  Guide-Toanm^  2.  p.  28.  For  the  inscriptions  found
at  Stiris  {Palea  Chora)  and  St.  Lukes  monastery  see  C,  I.  G  Nos.  1724b,  1730;
Bulletin  de  Corresp.  hclUnique,  5  (1881),  pp.  42-54,  446-449;  Cauer,  Delectus
Inscr.  Graec.^  Nos.  221,  223,  224 ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Grace .  Nos.  294,
445  ;  Collitz,  G  D.  /.  2.  Nos.  1 539- 1 551.  They  are  now  all  collected  by  Prof.
W.  Dittenberger  in  C  /.  G.  G.  S,  3.  Nos.  32-57.  I  spent  a  night  at  the  monastery
of  St.  Luke  (i6th  May  1890),  but  did  not  visit  the  rums  of  Stiris.  My  friend  Mr.
R.  W.  Schultz,  who  spent  some  time  at  the  monastery  of  St.  Luke  in  1890,  has
kindly  furnished  me  with  notes  on  the  ancient  remains  there  and  at  Palea  CAora.
They  confirm  Leake*s  evidence.

35.  8.  Peteos,  son  of  Omens.  Cp.  ii.  25.  6.  Peteos  was  the
father  of  Menestheus,  who  led  the  Athenian  contingent  to  Troy  (Homer,
//.  ii.  552,  .xiii.  690).

35.  8.  the  township  of  Stiria.  Stiria  was  a  township  belong-
ing to  the  Attic  tribe  of  Pandionis  (Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v,  ^T€tpia ;
Hesychius,  s,v.  ^reiputs ;  Harpocration,  s.v,  Srctpicus).  Strabo
mentions  Stiria  (ix.  p.  399)  between  Prasiae  and  Brauron.  It  was
situated  on  the  northern  part  of  the  Porto  Raphti^  a  bay  on  the
eastern  coast  of  Attica,  south  of  Marathon.  See  vol.  2.  p.  404  ;
Lolling,  in  MittheiL  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  4  (1879),  P-  360  ;  Milch-
hofer,  Karten  von  Aitika,  Erldutcnider  Text,  Heft  iii.-vi.  p.  9  ;  Leake,
Topography  of  Athens,  2.  p.  71  ;  Kastromenos,  Die  Demen  von  Attika,
p.  56  sq.  Some  rock-cut  tombs  of  the  prehistoric  period,  containing
Mycenaean  pottery,  clay  idols,  and  perforated  stone  whorls  or  buttons,


CH.  XXXVI  AMBROSUS  449

have  been  excavated  here  recently  by  Mr.  B.  Staes ;  they  are  situated
in  the  slope  of  the  hill  opposite  the  church  of  St.  Spyridion  {*E<f>7)fi€pls
dp)(aioX.oyLKrj,  1 895,  pp.  199-202).

35.  9.  a  spring  about  four  furlongs  down  from  the  town.     To

the  south-west  of  Stiris  (Pa/ea  CAora)  there  is  a  spring,  which  according
to  Leake  is  the  only  spring  in  the  valley  of  Stiris,  except  the  one  within
the  walls  of  St.  Luke's  monastery.  It  is  not  more  than  a  furlong  and  a
half  from  the  ancient  site,  and  instead  of  being  in  a  hollow  among  rocks
it  rises  to  the  surface  of  the  cultivated  part  of  the  valley.  So  it  does
not  answer  to  Pausanias's  description.  See  Leake^  Northern  Greece^  2.
p.  530;  cp.  Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.  602  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  1.  p.  184
note.  But  Mr.  R.  W.  Schultz  informs  me  that  about  half  a  mile  or  less
to  the  north  of  Pcdea  Chora  there  is  a  spring  in  the  valley,  the  water
of  which  turns  an  adjoining  mill.  This  may  be  the  spring  to  which
Pausanias  refers.

35.   10.  made  of  unbumt  brick.     Cp.  note  on  x.  4.  4.

35.  10.  with  ribbons  tied  to  it.  Cp.  viii.  31.  8,  and  vi.  20.  19
note.

36.  I.  Ambrosns.  The  site  of  Ambrosus,  identified  by  inscrip-
tions, is  at  the  large  modem  village  of  Distomo^  about  3  miles  south
of  the  Cleft  Way.  The  distance  from  Stiris  {Palea  Chora)  is  about
8  miles,  which  agrees  fairly  with  the  60  furlongs  at  which  Pausanias
estimates  it.  His  description  of  the  scenery  by  the  way  (a  plain  planted
with  vineyards  and  enclosed  on  either  hand  by  mountains)  is  still
applicable  to  a  good  part  of  the  route,  particularly  between  the  modern
village  of  Stiri  and  Distomo,  though  towards  Sttri  com  takes  the  place
of  vines.  Disiomo  is  situated  at  the  point  where  the  valley,  after
extending  due  south  from  the  Cleft  Way,  bends  away  in  a  south-easterly
direction  towards  Stiris.  The  village  stands  at  the  eastern  foot  of  Mt.
Cirphis,  which  is  the  southem  continuation  of  the  great  Parnassian
group  of  mountains.  The  houses  are  partly  built  with  fragments  of
large  blocks  of  dark  stone,  extracted  from  the  ruins  of  the  ancient
Ambrosus.  The  acropolis  occupied  a  round  hill  a  few  hundred  feet  to
the  north  of  the  village.  Here  some  scanty  foundations  of  the  wall  may
be  seen ;  at  one  point  Vischer  made  out  traces  of  the  double  wall
described  by  Pausanias  (§  3).  The  church  of  St.  Elias  on  the  hill
probably  occupies  the  site  of  a  temple,  as  it  is  built  almost  wholly
of  ancient  blocks,  with  several  architectural  fragments  of  marble  and
some  mutilated  inscriptions.  The  town  stood  in  the  plain  ;  Dodwell  saw
a  few  remains  of  the  ancient  walls  built  of  regular  masonry.  In  the
cliffs  which  enclose  the  valley  there  are  some  large  sepulchral  chambers
hewn  in  the  rock,  with  semicircular  niches  above  them.  Ambrosus,  in
spite  of  its  strong  walls,  was  captured  by  the  Romans  under  Flamininus
in  198  B.C  (Livy,  xxxii.  18).

See  Wheler,  Journey,  p.  321  ;  Chandler,  Travels  in  Greece,  p.  246  sq,  ;
Dodwell,  Tour,  i.  p.  198  sq,  ;  Pouqueville,  Voyage  de  la  Grke,  4.  p.  124  sq,  ;
Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.  600  sq, ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  I.  p.  183 ;  Baedeker,*
p.  164 ;  Guide-Joanne,  2.  p.  34.

The  name  of  the  city  is  spelt  differently  both  by  ancient  writers
VOL.  V  2  G


450  AMBROSUS  bk.  x.  phocis

and  in  inscriptions.  The  MSS.  of  Pausanias  here  and  elsewhere  (iv.
31.  5,  ix.'  13.  3,  X.  3.  2)  do  not  agree  in  the  spelling;  but  the  best
authenticated  forms  are  Ambrosus,  Ambrossus,  Ambrdsus,  and  Ambrdssus
( "KfiPpwros,  " hixPpwro'oS'i  "K^Ppoa-oSy  and  'A/iPpoaxros)*  Sec  the  note
on  this  passage  in  Schubart  and  Walz's  critical  edition  of  Pausanias.
At  all  events  we  may  feci  sure  that  Pausanias  spelt  the  second  syllable
of  the  name  with  an  o ;  and  this  form  in  o  (Ambrdssus  or  Ambrdssus)
is  supported  by  inscriptions  of  the  second  and  third  centuries  a.d.
(C.  /.  G.  G.  S.  3.  Nos.  12,  17,  1 8).  On  the  other  hand  Polybius  (iv.
25.  2),  Strabo  (ix.  p.  423),  and  Livy  (xxxii.  18)  spell  it  Ambrysus,  and
the  kindred  form  Ambryssus  is  supported  by  inscriptions  of  the  second
century  B.C.  (C  /.  G.  G,  S.  3.  Nos.  i,  10,  11).  These  facts  seem  to
show  that  sometime  about  the  beginning  of  our  era  the  name  of  the
city  was  changed  from  Ambr>'sus  or  Ambryssus  to  Ambrosus  or
Ambrossus,  and  that  therefore  Pausanias  in  using  the  form  Ambrosus
or  Ambrossus  conformed  to  the  custom  of  his  day  and  was  not  cop>nng
from  older  writers  who  had  employed  the  earlier  form  Ambr>'sus  or
Ambryssus.  This  observation  has  been  made  by  Prof.  Dittenberger  (on
C.  /.  G.  G.  S,  3.  No.  18).

Some  of  the  inscriptions  found  at  Distomo  prove  that  Apollo,
Demeter,  the  Maid  (Proserpine),  and  Athena  were  worshipped  at
Ambrosus  (C  /.  G.  G,  S,  3.  Nos.  13,  14,  15;  C,  L  G,  Nos.  1726,  1727 ;
Collitz,  G.  D.  /.  2.  Nos.  1 5 1 7,  1 5 1 8).  Another  records  the  dedication
of  a  colonnade  and  portal  to  Serapis,  I  sis,  and  Anubis  (C.  /.  (7.  G,  S.  3.
No.  16;  Collitz,  G,  Z>.  /.  2.  No.  1519).  From  another  (C.  /.  G.  G.  S,
3.  No.  12;  Bulletin  dc  Corrcsp.  helUniquc^  5  (1881),  p.  439  sq^,  we
learn  that  a  certain  Aurelius  Parmenides  founded  competitive  games
at  Ambrosus  which  were  held  every  third  year  and  comprised  foot-
races and  wrestling-matches  for  men  and  boys,  chariot-races,  contests
in  trumpet- playing  and  heraldry,  etc.  Other  inscriptions  show  that
statues  of  the  emperors  Trajan,  Commodus,  and  Alexander  Severn  s
were  set  up  at  Ambrosus  (C  /.  G.  G.  S.  3.  Nos.  17,  18,  19).

36.   I.  the  shrub  which  the  lonians name  kokkos.     The

shrub  described  by  Pausanias  is  the  Qucrcus  cocci/era^  a  small  species  of
the  evergreen  holly-oak.  Sibthorp,  travelling  from  Distomo  (Ambrosus)
to  the  monastery  of  St.  Luke,  observed  that  "  the  Quercus  cocci/era
abounds  throughout  the  whole  of  this  tract  of  country ;  one  of  our
guides  brought  me  a  coccus  adhering  to  a  small  branch  of  the  tree,
which,  squeezed  between  my  fingers,  gave  out  a  most  beautiful  scarlet
dye.  The  coccus  generally  deposits  itself  on  the  leaves  and  branches  of
the  oak,  seldom  on  its  fruit,  as  Pausanias  affirms  "  (R.  Walpole,  Memoirs
relating  to  Turkey ^"^  London,  1 8 1 8,  p.  69).  Dioscorides,  like  Pausanias,
calls  the  shrub  kokkos^  though  he  gives  the  same  name  kokkos  to  the  so-
called  kermesberries  which  adhere  to  the  shrub  and  from  which  the
scarlet  dye  is  expressed.  He  adds  that  the  kermesberr>',  in  shape  like
a  small  snail,  is  produced  on  oaks  in  Cilicia  and  that  the  women  there
gathered  it,  scraping  off  the  berry  with  their  nails.  See  Dioscorides,
Dc  materia  medica^  iv.  48.  On  the  other  hand  Theophrastus  (^Hist.
Plant,  iii.  7.  3)  calls  the  shrub  by  its  generic  name  of  prinos  (holly-oak,


CH.  XXX VI  THE  KERAfESBERRY  451

ilex) ;  and  so  does  Simonides  in  a  line  quoted  by  Plutarch  {TheseuSy  17).
In  modem  Greek  the  holly-oak  is  called  prinari  or,  more  vulgarly,
pimari  or  poumari^  and  the  kermesberries  are  called  pn'nokokkia.
The  hollyoak  is  one  of  the  commonest  plants  in  Greece,  and  is  found
of  all  sizes  from  a  stunted  shrub  up  to  a  tree  30  feet  high.  The  leaf  is
small,  dark-green,  and  glossy,  with  fine,  but  hard  and  sharp  prickles
round  the  edge  ;  in  short  it  closely  resembles  the  leaf  of  the  holly,  except
that  it  is  much  smaller.  The  plant  is  very  hardy  and  thrives  in  chinks
and  crannies  of  the  barest  limestone  mountains  where  no  other  green
thing  would  grow.  Hence,  while  it  is  found  on  rocky  hillsides  all  over
Greece  and  the  Greek  islands  up  to  a  height  of  about  3000  feet,  it  is
especially  characteristic  of  the  barren  mountains  and  stony  declivities  of
eastern  Peloponnese.  Here  you  may  travel  for  miles  without  seeing
another  tree  or  shrub.  Nothing  is  more  monotonous  than  the  sight  of
these  round  stunted  bushes  with  their  dark-green  foliage  sprouting  at  long
intervals  from  the  rocky  ground.  So  tough  and  matted  are  the  boughs,
so  dense  and  stiff  the  leaves  of  these  shrubs  that  you  can  stand  on  one
of  them,  as  on  a  hard  cushion,  without  sinking  into  it.  The  ancients
seem  generally  to  have  regarded  the  kermesberry  as  really  a  berry  (cp.
Simonides,  cited  above;  Pliny,  Nat,  hist.  ix.  141).  In  point  of  fact  it
is  an  insect  of  the  same  kind  as  that  which  produces  cochineal,  gall,  etc.
Pausanias,  as  we  see  from  the  present  passage,  was  aware  that  the  dye
was  made  from  an  insect ;  but  it  is  not  clear  whether  he  knew  that  the
kermesberry  was  itself  the  insect.  Dioscorides,  by  comparing  the
kermesberry  to  a  snail  and  speaking  of  it  as  adhering  to  the  shrub,
appears  to  have  been  acquainted  with  its  true  character.  Isidore
expressly  says  that  the  kermesberry  is  an  insect  {Origines^  xix.  28.  i).
The  name  ^enngsbtrry  and  our  English  word  crimson  are  derived  from
the  Arabic  name  of  the  insect  (ei  kennes).  The  insects  are  still
collected  for  purposes  of  commerce  on  Mt.  Parnassus  and  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Mantinea.

See  Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  p.  201  ;  Leake,  Morea^  i.  p.  249  sqq,  ;  «V/.,  Northern
GreecCy  2.  p.  534  sq,  ;  Fiedler,  Reise^  I.  p.  520  sq,  ;  H.  BlUmner,  Technologic,  i.
pp.  240-242 :  Neumann  und  Partsch,  Physikalische  Geographic  von  Griechenland,
p.  380  sq.  ;  A.  Philippson,  Pcloponncs^  p.  534.

36.  I .  which  the  Galatians call  in  their  natiye  tongue  hus.

The  Galatians  retained  their  native  Celtic  speech  as  late  as  the  fourth
century  A.D.,  for  Jerome  says  that  in  his  day  their  language  hardly
differed  from  that  of  the  Treveri,  a  Celtic  tribe  on  the  Moselle  whose
name  is  preserved  in  Treves  (Jerome,  Commentar,  in  Epist.  ad  Galat,
bk.  ii.  praef.).  I  am  informed  that  the  word  hus  has  left  no  trace  in
any  Celtic  language.  Leake  thought  it  identical  with  the  French  haux
*  holly '  {Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  535  note).  But  it  appears  that  koux  is  of
Teutonic  origin.  See  Diez,  Etymologisches  Worterbuch  der  romaniscken
Sprachen^^  p.  617  ;  Brachet,  Etymological  Dictionary  of  the  French
Language y  s,v,  *houx.'

36.  3.  a  double  wall  etc.  Pausanias  has  already  mentioned  the
walls  of  Ambrosus  as  amongst  the  finest  specimens  of  Greek  fortifica-
tion.    See  iv.  31.  5.


452  ANTIC  YR A  bk.  x.  phocis

36.  5.  a  sanctuary  of  Dictyxmaean  Artemis.  Built  into  a  wall
at  the  village  of  Aspra  Spitia^  near  the  site  of  Anticyra,  is  an  inscrip-
tion recording  a  decree  of  the  Council  and  People  of  Anticyra  in
honour  of  a  certain  Euporia  who  had  been  priestess  of  Artemis  Dictynna
(C  /.  G.  G.  5.  3.  No.  5).  We  can  hardly  doubt  that  this  Artemis
Dictynna  is  the  Dictynnaean  Artemis  of  Pausanias,  though  from  his
account  it  would  seem  that  the  sanctuary  belonged  to  Ambrosus  rather
than  to  Anticyra.  Apparently  the  sanctuary  lay  about  the  border  of
the  two  territories  and  may,  as  Prof.  Dittenberger  in  his  comment  on
the  inscription  suggests,  have  belonged  now  to  the  one  petty  state  and
now  to  the  other.

36.  5.  Anticyra.  From  Ambrosus  {Distotno)  a  narrow  defile  by
the  side  of  a  water-course  leads  due  south  to  the  head  of  the  spacious
bay  of  Aspra  Spitia^  a  distance  of  about  4  miles.  The  bay  is  sur-
rounded by  steep,  barren  ridges  "  which  exhibit  an  appearance  almost
as  dismal  as  any  part  of  Dalmatia,  or  Albania."  Proceeding  south-
westward  along  the  shore  of  the  bay  for  a  mile  and  a  half  or  so  we
enter  a  small  cultivated  plain  and  slope.  On  a  hill  to  the  right  is  the
hamlet  of  Aspra  Spiiia  (*  The  White  Houses ').  About  a  mile  to  the
south  of  the  hamlet  a  high,  rocky,  indeed  mountainous,  peninsula  called
Kephali  projects  eastward  into  the  bay.  It  is  about  3  miles  in  circum-
ference and  is  connected  with  the  mainland  by  a  flat  isthmus,  which  is
planted  with  com  and  olives.  At  the  head  of  the  bay,  about  half  a
mile  north  of  the  isthmus,  Leake  discovered,  among  olive  plantations,
foundations  enough  to  indicate  an  ancient  site ;  and  from  inscriptions
found  at  the  village  of  Aspra  Spiiia  (C.  I.  G.  G.  S,  3.  Nos.  i,  2,  3,  5,
6,  7)  it  appears  that  the  site  is  that  of  Anticyra.  Two  of  the  inscriptions
(Nos.  6  and  7)  prove  that  the  people  of  Anticyra  set  up  statues  of
Commodus  and  Julia  Domna.  In  digging  a  well  at  Palatia^  the  site  of
Anticyra,  a  proprietor  lately  came  on  some  remains  of  ancient  Greek
walls  built  of  tufa  and  a  tombstone  bearing  a  metrical  inscription  of
the  third  century  B.c.  in  memory  of  a  certain  Aristarchus  who  had
fallen  in  battle  {Bulletin  de  Corresp.  fiellMque,  19  (1895),  p.  391  sq.  ;
C  /.  G.  G.  S.  3.  No.  1064).

See  Wheler,  Journey ^  p.  480  sq.  ;  Chandler,  Travels  in  Greece^  p.  245  sq.  ;
Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  pp.  524,  539  sqq.  ;  Cell,  Itinerary  of  Greece  {hondon,
1819),  p.  174;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  182;  Baedeker,*  p.  164.

36.  5.  Csrparissus  etc.  Cyparissus  is  mentioned  by  Homer  in  his
list  of  the  Phocian  towns  which  sent  contingents  to  the  Trojan  war
(Iliad^  ii.  519).

36.  5.  Anticyreus.  It  is  said  that  after  his  madness  Hercules  was
dosed  with  hellebore  by  Anticyreus  (Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v,  'AvriKipa).

36.  6.  the  ruins  of  Medeon.  The  site  of  Medeon  is  uncertain.
That  Medeon  was  near  Stiris  may  be  inferred  from  the  treaty  of  union
concluded  between  the  two  towns  (see  note  on  x.  35.  8).  Hence  I
have  suggested  above  that  the  ancient  remains  at  St.  Luke's  monastery
may  be  those  of  Medeon.  On  the  other  hand,  Pausanias's  statement
that  Anticyra  was  over  against  the  ruins  of  Medeon  would  lead  us  to


CH.  XXXVI  MEDEON  453

look  for  the  latter  place  on  the  shore  of  the  bay  of  Aspra  Spitia  oppo-
site to  Anticyra.  Now  on  the  eastern  shore  of  the  bay,  opposite  to
Anticyra,  there  is  a  little  valley  watered  by  the  stream  which  comes
down  from  Stiris  {Palea  chora) ;  the  valley  opens  out  on  a  beach,  and
at  the  northern  end  of  this  beach  there  is  a  rocky  headland  crowiied
with  some  ruins  of  an  ancient  Greek  fortress.  The  wall  of  the  fortress
is  well  preserved  on  the  north  side  of  the  hill,  where  in  some  places  it  is
still  standing  to  more  than  half  its  original  height.  On  the  other  sides
it  has  almost  wholly  disappeared ;  but  within  the  enclosure  there  are
some  terrace  walls,  especially  one  fine  specimen  of  polygonal  masonry.
On  the  roadside,  at  the  foot  of  the  headland,  may  be  seen  a  heap  of
ruins  near  the  shore,  consisting  of  some  ancient  blocks  in  their  original
positions,  covered  with  the  remains  of  a  church.  The  summit  of  the
headland  commands  a  good  view  over  the  gulf  of  Aspra  Spitia  with  the
cultivated  lands  fringing  it  and  the  bold  rocky  peninsula  of  Kephali
jutting  out  from  the  opposite  shore  of  the  bay.  The  headland  with
its  ruins,  as  well  as  an  anchorage  for  boats  within  the  cape,  are  called
Sidero-Kafchio,  The  ruins  may  perhaps  be  those  of  Medeon.  See
Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  537  sq.  The  statement  of  Strabo
(ix.  p.  410)  that  Medeon  was  on  the  Crisaean  gulf,  160  furlongs  from
Boeotia,  seems  irreconcilable  with  Pausanias's  statement  that  the  ruins
of  Medeon  were  opposite  Anticyra ;  and  if  Medeon  had  been  so  far
from  Stiris,  it  is  hardly  likely  that  the  two  towns  would  have  united  as
we  know  they  did.  On  the  strength  of  Strabo's  statement,  however,
Leake  conjectured  that  Medeon  might  be  near  Desphina^  a  village
situated  on  the  western  slope  of  a  high  rocky  hill  between  the  gulf
of  Anticyra  and  the  Crisaean  gulf,  but  nearer  the  latter ;  it  is  about
6  miles  east  of  Cirrha.  There  are  many  ancient  catacombs  hewn  in  the
rock  near  the  village.     See  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  546  sqq.

36.  6.  I  mentioned  that  .  .  .  committed  sacrilege.  The  Greek
text  is  defective,  but  the  reference  seems  to  be  to  x.  3.  2,  where  Medeon
is  mentioned  among  the  cities  which  were  razed  to  the  ground  for  the
sacrilegious  seizure  of  Delphi.

36.  6.  Otilins,  the  Roman.     See  vii.  7.  8  note.

36.  7.  The  mountains  above  Anticyra  are  very  rocky.  This
description  is  perfectly  just ;  the  mountains  here  are  barren  and  rocky
(Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  545  sq,\

36.  7.  hellebore  grows  in  great  abundance  etc.  According  to
Dioscorides  {De  materia  medica,  iv.  148  and  149)  the  best  hellebore,
both  of  the  black  and  the  white  sort,  grew  at  Anticyra.  Cp.  Alciphron,
iii.  2.  Dioscorides  agrees  with  Pausanias  in  saying  that  the  white
hellebore  acted  as  an  emetic  and  the  black  as  a  purge.  Theophrastus
states  {Hist,  plant,  ix.  10)  that  the  best  black  hellebore  grew  on  Mt.
Helicon  and  the  best  white  sort  on  Mt.  Oeta.  Cp.  Pliny,  A^at.  hist.
XXV.  49.  Hellebore  is  still  common  on  Palaeo  Vouna^  one  of  the  chief
peaks  of  Helicon  (H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  and  Forschungcn^  2.  p.  100).
According  to  some  the  only  difference  in  the  appearance  of  the  two
sorts  of  hellebore  was  that  the  root  of  the  one  was  white  and  the  root
of  the  other  black  ;  but  others  said  that  the  leaves  also  differed  in  shape.


454  HELLEBORE  BK.  x.  PHOCis

Dioscorides  and  Pliny  give  long  lists  of  the  ailments,  bodily  and  mental,
which  were  supposed  to  be  cured  by  hellebore.  The  black  sort  was
sometimes  called  Melampodium,  because  the  seer  Melampus  healed  the
daughters  of  Proetus  of  their  madness  by  dosing  them  with  it.  It  was
also  sprinkled  on  houses  and  cattle  as  a  mode  of  purification,  the
sprinkling  being  accompanied  by  the  recitation  of  a  spell.  Special
precautions  were  used  in  gathering  the  black  hellebore.  The  bold
adventurer  who  proposed  to  cut  it  drew  a  circle  round  the  plant  with  a
sword,  then  faced  eastward  and  prayed  that  the  gods  would  favour  the
enterprise.  He  also  watched  the  flight  of  an  eagle ;  for  if  the  eagle
flew  near  him  or  saw  him  cutting  the  hellebore,  he  would  die  within  the
year.  Having  observed  all  these  necessary  precautions  he  proceeded  to
cut  the  hellebore  as  fast  as  he  possibly  could,  for  the  plant  g^ve  out  an
exhalation  which  produced  a  splitting  headache.  Hence  before  he
addressed  himself  to  the  dangerous  task  he  fortified  himself  by  eatmg
garlic  and  drinking  wine.  See  on  the  whole  subject  Dioscorides  and
Theophrastus,  ILcc,  ;  Pliny,  Nat.  hist.  xxv.  47-61.  Strabo  says  (ix.
p.  418)  that  sick  people  resorted  to  Anticyra  for  the  hellebore  cure,
not  because  the  best  hellebore  grew  there,  but  because  the  medicine
was  best  prepared  by  the  druggists  of  Anticyra,  who  mixed  the  finest
Oetaean  hellebore  with  a  sesame-like  plant  which  grew  in  Phocis.  Cp.
Dioscorides,  De  materia  medica^  iv.  150  (152).  We  read  of  a  Roman
nobleman  in  the  reign  of  Caligula  who  staid  at  Anticyra  for  the  sake
of  his  health  (Suetonius,  Caligtday  29).  Black  hellebore  {Helleborm
orientalis^  Modern  Greek  skarphS)  still  grows  to  the  south  of  Parnassus
and  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Anticyra,  according  to  Fiedler  (Reise^  i.
p.  780).  Sibthorp,  however,  found  no  trace  of  the  black  or  white  helle-
bore at  Aspra  Spi/ia,  the  ancient  Anticyra.  He  says  :  "  The  immediate
environs  of  Asprospiti  present  a  dry  sun-burnt  soil.  The  hellebores
were  probably  brought  from  the  higher  and  colder  regions  of  Parnassus,
or  cultivated  by  the  physicians  of  Anticyra  in  gardens "  (quoted  in
Wal pole's  Memoirs  relating  to  Turkey y^  London,  18 18,  p.  70).

In  antiquity  Greek  women  wore  certain  gold  ornaments  called
*  hellebores.'  See  Aristophanes,  Frag.  309;  Pollux,  v.  10 1,  vii.  196;
Hesychius,  s.v.  iX^kc^opos.  The  exact  nature  of  these  ornaments  was
made  plain  some  years  ago  by  the  discovery,  in  the  south  of  Russia,  of
four  small  gold  plates  of  ancient  Greek  manufacture.  The  blossom  of
the  hellebore  is  represented  on  them,  and  there  are  holes  in  the  plates
for  fastening  them  to  the  dress.  See  L.  Stephani,  in  Compte  Rendu
(St.  Petersburg)  for  1874,  pp.  90-92.

36.  9.  the  only  Olympiad  which  is  omitted  in  the  Elean  register.
Pausanias  has  already  told  us  that  in  the  8th,  34th,  and  io8th  01>Tiipiads
the  Olympic  games  had  been  celebrated,  not  by  the  Eleans  themselves,
but  by  intruders  ;  and  that  hence  the  Eleans  regarded  these  Olympiads
as  invalid  and  did  not  enter  them  in  the  register.  See  vi.  4.  2  ;  vi.  8.
3  ;  vi.  22.  2.  The  case  of  the  21  ith  Olympiad  was  different.  It  had
been  presumably  celebrated  by  the  Eleans  themselves  and  its  validity
does  not  appear  to  have  been  contested  ;  but  it  was  either  not  entered  in
the  register  at  all,  or  after  being  entered  it  was  struck  out.     The  reason


CH.  XXXVII  ANTICYRA  455

for  its  omission  is  supplied  by  Julius  Africanus,  who  tells  us  that  the
celebration  of  the  211th  Olympiad,  which  should  have  fallen  in  65  A.D.,
was  deferred  two  years  by  Nero's  desire  to  allow  him  to  be  present,  and
that  when  the  festival  was  celebrated  two  years  after  its  proper  time  (in
67  A.D.  instead  of  in  65  A.D.),  Nero  was  awarded  prizes  in  no  less  than
six  competitions,  including  the  ten-horse  chariot-race,  though  he  had
fallen  out  of  the  chariot  and  did  not  finish  the  race  (Suetonius,  Nero^  24  ;
Dio  Cassius,  Ixiii.  14).  Probably,  therefore,  the  Eleans,  ashamed  of
having  truckled  to  the  tyrant,  struck  the  211th  Olympiad  out  of  the
register  after  Nero's  death,  which  happened  only  about  a  year  after  the
celebration  of  the  Olympic  games.  For  a  similar  reason  the  Eleans  may
have  refused  to  allow  the  statues  of  victors  in  the  21  ith  Olympiad  to  be
set  up  at  Olympia ;  hence  the  statue  of  Xenodamus  was  erected  in  his
native  town  of  Anticyra.  Pausanias  saw  it  there  with  its  inscription,
and  not  finding  the  name  of  Xenodamus  in  the  list  of  Olympic  victors,
he  inferred  that  if  the  inscription  were  correct,  the  Olympic  victory  of
Xenodamus  must  have  been  won  at  the  only  Olympiad  which  had  been
erased  from  the  register.  See  Schubart,  in  Fleckeiser^ s  Jahrbiicher^  29
(1883),  p.  472  sq,\  H.  Brunn,  in  Fleckeisefi s  Jahrbiicher^  30  (1884),
p.  24.  Thus  the  objection  taken  by  G.  Hirschfeld  {Archdologische
Zeitung^  40  (1882),  p.  no)  to  the  present  passage  of  Pausanias,  as
inconsistent  with  vi.  22.  3,  falls  to  the  ground.

36.  10.  the  sons  of  Iphitos.  Schedius  and  Epistrophus,  the  sons
of  Iphitus,  led  the  Phocian  contingent  in  the  Trojan  war.  Schedius  was
slain  by  Hector.  See  Homer,  //.  ii.  517  sq,^  xvii.  306  sqq.  According
to  some,  the  grave  of  Schedius  was  at  Daphnus  in  Locris  (Strabo,  ix.
p.  425).     As  to  Schedius,  cp.  x.  4.  2  ;  x.  30.  8.

37.  I.  a  sanctuary  of  Artemis.  Following  Pausanias's  directions
H.  G.  Lolling  discovered  in  1888  what  he  believed  to  be  the  remains  of
the  sanctuary  of  Artemis.  They  are  situated  at  the  northern  foot  of  the
high  rocky  peninsula  of  Kephali^  five  minutes  distant  from  the  innermost
comer  of  the  bay  of  Aspra  Spiiia^  and  ^\t,  minutes  from  the  level  beach
and  the  boundary  of  the  ancient  Anticyra.  The  remains  are  well  known
in  the  neighbourhood  under  the  name  of  Palatia.  The  sanctuary  stood
at  the  foot  of  a  high  cliff,  with  one  of  its  narrow  ends  abutting  on  the
face  of  the  rock.  Here  the  face  of  the  cliff  is  cut  in  the  form  of  a
gable,  and  beneath  this  rock-hewn  gable  are  a  few  votive  niches  also
cut  in  the  rock,  with  a  larger  square  one  which  probably  contained  an
image  of  the  goddess.  From  near  the  two  ends  of  the  gable  the  founda-
tions of  two  walls  extend  outwards  at  right  angles  to  the  face  of  the  cliff.
Only  a  few  blocks  of  these  foundations  remain.  Farther  out  from  the
cliff  and  parallel  to  it  are  the  remains  of  two  other  walls.  The  sanc-
tuary was  thus  of  quadrangular  shape.  The  rock-cut  gable  is  remark-
able ;  Lolling,  who  knew  Greece  so  well,  remembered  no  parallel  to  it  in
Greece,  though  similar  rock-cuttings  are  common  enough  in  Asia  Minor.
Hence  he  conjectured  that  the  sanctuary  was  primarily  intended  for  the
use  of  foreign  seamen.  That  it  was  the  sanctuary  of  Artemis  is  made
probable  by  a  mutilated  inscription  (C.  /.  G,  G,  S,  3.  No.  4)  which
Lolling  found  built  into  the  steps  of  a  house  in  Aspra  Spitta.     The


4S6  ANTICYRA—BULIS  bk.  X.  phocis

inscription,  which  seems  to  be  of  Roman  date,  contains  the  name  of
Artemis,  and  is  cut  on  a  piece  of  grey  limestone  brought  from  the  ruined
sanctuary.  See  H.  G.  Lolling,  in  Miitheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Atken,  14
(i88g),  pp.  229-232.

37.  I-  a  work  of  PraxiteleB.  She  has  a  torcli  in  hsr  right  haitd
etc.  On  a  bronie  coin  of  AnticjTa,  of  which  only
two  specimens  are  known,  Artemis  is  represented
advancing  towards  the  right,  with  a  torch  in  her  left
hand,  a  bow  in  her  right,  and  a  dog  at  her  feet
(Fig.  20).  This  is  probably  a  free  copy  of  the
statue  by  Praxiteles  which  Pausanias  here  describes.
See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  tm
Paus.  p.  124  sg.,  with  pi.  Y  xvii.  ;  A.  Michaelis,  in
PIC.  ao.— ABTBuis  Archdologische  Zeitung,  34  (1876),  p.  J  67  sq.  ;  and
(coin  or  anticvba).  against  him  L.  Stephant,  in  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Peters-
burg) for  1875,  pp.  140-142.
37.  2.  Bnlia.  The  remains  of  Bulls  are  to  be  seen  at  the  port
now  called  Zalitsa,  about  7  miles  east  of  the  bay  of  Anlicyra  [Aspra
Spitia).  The  distances  from  Thisbe  and  Anticyra  by  land  are  about
10  miles  and  12  miles  respectively,  which  agree  fairly  with  the  80
furlongs  and  too  furlongs  at  which  Pausanias  estimates  them.  His
description  of  the  site  of  Bulis  is  also  accurate.  The  ruins  occupy
the  summit  of  a  rocky  height,  which  slopes  on  one  side  towards  the  small
harbour.  The  slope  is  cultivated,  and  between  the  foot  of  it  and  the  sea
there  is  a  level  stretch  of  land  about  two-thirds  of  a  mile  broad.  On  the
other  side  the  hill  of  IJuhs  is  defended  by  an  immense  cliff  which  descends
into  the  bed  of  a  torrent.  Across  ihis  ravine  rise  the  precipitous  slopes
of  Mt.  Helicon,  consisting  of  perpendicular  while  cliffs  broken  here  and
there  by  narrow  terraces  on  which  pine-lrees  grow.  The  ancient  name
of  the  torrent,  as  we  learn  from  Pausanias,  was  Heracleus.  The  ruins
of  Bulis  include  some  handsome  pieces  of  wall  of  the  third  order.  See
Whcler,  Journey,  p,  324  sq.  ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece,  2.  p.  518  sq.  :
Hursian,  Geogr.  I .  p.  1 3  5  j?.  The  pott  of  Bulls  Is  perhaps  the  harbour
which  Strabo  (ix.  p.  423)  calls  Mychus.

37.  2.  BO  impassable  and  nigged  are  the  mountains  betveen
Anticyra  and  Balis.  Colonel  Leake  journeyed  westward  from  Bulis
in  the  direction  of  Anticyra,  following  the  side  of  the  rocky  mountain  by
a  road  which  overhung  the  sea.  He  found  the  hills  covered  with  wild
olive,  ilex,  holly-oak,  and  juniper  of  a  large  growth.  "As  we  proceed,  the
hills  become  very  steep,  and  terminate  precipitously  in  the  sea,  affording
only  an  extremely  rugged  and  difficult  path  along  the  side  of  them  :  it
was  no  better  in  the  time  of  the  Roman  empire,  for  Pausanias  doubted
whether  there  was  any  road  at  all  from  Anticyra  to  Bulis  "  (Northern
Greece,  2.  p.  523).  However,  as  Leake  pointed  out,  before  the  battle
of  Lcucira  the  Lacedaemonian  army  under  Clcombrotus  marched  along
this  rugged  and  mountainous  coast  in  order  to  evade  the  Theban  army
which  had  occupied  the  ordinary  pass  leading  from  Phocis  into  Boeotia.
See  Xenophon,  He/lenica,  \\.  4,  3  ;  Diodorus,  xv.  53  ;  and  the  note  on
ix.   13.  3.


CH.  XXXVII  CIRKHA  457

37.  3.  fishers  of  the  shell-fish  which  yields  the  purple  dye.     The

murex  still  exists  in  the  sea  on  this  coast,  though  it  is  no  longer  fished
for  (Leake,  Nortliern  Greece^  2.  p.  520).     Cp.  note  on  iii.  21.  6.

37.  4.  Cirrha,  the  port  of  DelphL  Cirrha  was  situated  beside  the
sea  about  a  mile  to  the  east  of  liea^  the  modem  port  of  Delphi.  The
site,  now  partly  occupied  by  the  miserable  decaying  village  of  Magoula^
is  desolate  and  forbidding.  The  shore,  devoid  of  any  natural  harbour,
is  nothing  but  an  open  beach  exposed  to  the  full  fury  of  the  south  wind.
At  the  back  of  the  village,  beyond  a  great  bare  field  strewn  with  pottery
and  some  broken  or  weathered  stones,  rise  high  bleak  mountains,  with
steep  and  absolutely  naked  sides.  Indeed  the  hills  all  round  the  plain
of  Cirrha  are  exceedingly  bare  and  dismal ;  nothing  green  seems  to
grow  on  them.  If  any  remains  of  Cirrha  now  exist  above  ground  they
are  very  few  and  insignificant.  I  sought  for  them  without  finding  a
single  stone  which  I  could  recognise  with  certainty  as  ancient.  In  the
desolate  field  at  the  back  of  the  village  I  saw  what  looked  like  three
square  bases  of  columns  in  a  row ;  also  a  single  course  of  a  wall
extending  for  about  28  yards,  but  so  buried  in  the  ground  that  only  the
worn  edges  of  the  stones  were  visible.  But  this  wall  appeared  to  me
not  to  be  ancient.  In  the  village  there  is  a  tower  beside  the  sea,
7  paces  square  and  standing  to  a  height  of  a  good  many  feet.  It  seems
to  be  solid.  In  its  seaward  face  there  are  some  large  blocks,  but  I
doubt  if  any  of  them  is  ancient.  The  tower  itself  is  certainly  mediaeval,
as  appears  from  the  bad  and  irregular  masonry  and  the  bricks  and
mortar  stuffed  into  the  crevices.  From  Mr.  Cecil  Smith  I  learn  that  at
Hagios  Nikolaos  there  are  still  considerable  traces  of  a  mole  in  the  sea.

The  remains  of  Cirrha  .seem  to  have  been  much  more  extensive
in  1837  when  H.  N.  Ulrichs  visited  the  site.  In  the  midst  of  the
scattered  ruins  the  walls  of  an  ancient  fortress  could  still  be  traced
in  their  entire  circuit,  for  in  most  places  they  stood  several  feet  above
the  ground.  They  formed  a  rectangle  575  feet  long  by  425  feet  broad,
and  were  built  of  carefully  jointed  polygonal  blocks.  Ulrichs  at  first
supposed  that  this  fortified  enclosure  was  the  citadel ;  but  afterwards  he
held,  with  more  probability,  that  it  was  the  emporium  or  mart ;  for  on
the  inside  of  it  a  colonnade  ran  all  round  the  walls  ;  most  of  the
squared  stones  on  which  the  pillars  had  rested  were  still  to  be  seen  in
their  places.  This  colonnade  probably  contained  the  warehouses  and
shops  of  the  merchants.  From  the  south  side  of  this  mart  two  walls,
each  300  paces  long,  ran  down  to  the  sea  ;  the  westerly  of  the  two  walls
ended  in  an  ancient  wharf  or  mole  extending  some  distance  into  the
water.  On  the  mole,  near  a  chapel,  were  the  ruins  of  a  mediaeval
tower  built  of  large  quadrangular  ancient  blocks  cemented  with  mortar.
Beside  the  tower  there  is  a  small  turbid  spring.  In  the  chapel  Ulrichs
found  only  a  small  Ionic  capital  of  common  stone.

The  distance  of  Cirrha  from  Delphi  is  about  five  and  a  half  miles,
but  the  windings  of  the  road  between  Chryso  (Crisa)  and  Delphi  add
to  the  length  of  the  route.  From  the  time  he  took  to  go  from  Delphi
to  Cirrha,  Leake  estimated  that  the  60  furlongs  at  which  Pausanias
puts  the  distance  must  be  very  near  the  truth,  certainly  much  more


458  CIRRHA  bk.  x.  phocis

so  than  the  80  furlongs  of  Strabp  (ix.  p.  418),  or  the  30  furlongs  of
Harpocration  {s,v.  Kippatov  TrcStov).

See  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  584  sq,  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und
Forschungetty  i.  p.  7  j^.,  and  2.  p.  207  sq.  ;  f^/.,  in  Abhandl.  d.  pkilos,  pkilclog.
CI,  d.  k.  bayer,  Akad.  d.  IVissen,  3.  i.  (1840),  p.  78  sq,  ;  Welcker,  lagebuck,
2.  p.  73  sq,  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  181  sq,\  Guide-Joanne ^  2.  p.  42.  I  visited
Cirrha  from  Itea  21st  October  1895.

37.  4.  a  hippodrome.  An  inscription  containing  a  decree  of
the  Amphictyonic  Council  makes  mention  of  'the  racecourse  and  the
fountain  in  the  plain*  (C.  /.  G,  No.  1688,  line  36;  Froehner,  Les  In-
scriptions grecques  du  Louvre,  No.  32  ;  Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr,  Graec^
No.  204).  The  fountain  here  mentioned  is  probably  the  spring  of  fine
water  which  rises  not  far  from  the  shore  at  Itea  in  a  basin  built  of  large
ancient  blocks.  Hence  the  hippodrome  would  seem  to  have  been  near
the  site  of  Itea,  The  only  other  spring  of  sweet  water  in  the  whole
plain  as  far  north  as  Chryso  (Crisa)  is  the  scanty  spring  of  turbid  water
at  Cirrha  (see  preceding  note).  In  Pindar's  time  the  stadium  (the
course  for  the  foot-races)  seems  also  to  have  been  in  the  Cirrhaean
plain,  probably  near  the  hippodrome.  See  Pindar,  Pyth.  x.  23,  xi.  20
sqq.,  73  ^QQ*  Afterwards  the  stadium  was  removed  to  Delphi,  where
Pausanias  saw  it.  See  x.  32.  i  note.  Pindar  often  refers  to  the
athletic  contests  at  Cirrha.  See,  besides  the  passages  quoted  above,
Pindar,  Pyth,  iii.  132,  vii.  14,  viii.  26.  Later  classical  writers,  mis-
understanding these  references,  use  *  Cirrha  *  and  *  Cirrhaean  *  as
equivalent  to  *  Delphi'  and  *  Delphic'  (Lucan,  v.  95  ;  Statius,  Sytv.  iii.
I.  141  ;  /V/.,  Thcb.  iii.  106,  611  ;  Seneca,  Oedipus,  269;  Juvenal,  vii.
64,  xiii.  79;  Nonnus,  Dionys,  iv.  318,;  Clement  of  Alexandria,
Protrept,  ii.  11.  p.  10,  ed.  Potter).  See  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  For-
schungcn,  i.  pp.  7,  10,  14  ;  id.,  in  Abhandl.  d.  p/iilos.  philolog.  CI.  d.
k,  bayer,  Akad.  d.  IViss.  3.  i.  (1840),  pp.  79,  81,  89  sq.  Leake  thought
that  the  hippodrome  may  have  been  situated  in  a  small  retired  level
called  Komara  immediately  below  Chryso  and  enclosed  between  two
projections  of  its  hill.  The  spot  is  just  at  the  entrance  to  the  glen  of
the  Plistus.     See  Leake,  Northern  Greece,  2.  p.  595.

37.  4-  Taxaxippus.     See  vi.  20.  1 5  note.

37.  5.  The  plain  all  the  way  from  Girrha  is  bare  etc.  From  the
head  of  the  Crisaean  gulf  (now  the  bay  of  Salona)  a  level  plain  stretches
northward  into  the  heart  of  the  mountains  for  a  distance  of  about
1 1  miles.  About  a  mile  and  a  half  from  the  sea  the  plain  is  narrowed
by  two  projecting  mountain-spurs  which  advance  toward  each  other,  one
from  the  east  and  one  from  the  west.  The  eastern  spur  is  called
Myttikas,  the  western  Goutas.  At  the  foot  of  the  former  lies  the  village
of  Xeropegado.  Beyond  these  projecting  spurs  the  plain  again  expands.
Thus,  although  it  is  really  continuous,  the  plain  may  conveniently  be
regarded  as  divided  into  two  parts,  a  southern  and  a  northern,  the
division  between  them  being  marked  by  the  mountain-spurs  which  ad-
vance from  either  side  into  the  plain.  Of  these  two  parts  the  southern
is  the  Cirrhaean  plain.  It  is  much  the  smaller  of  the  two  and  differs  in
character  from  the  other.     For  whereas  the  northern  plain  is  fertile  and


CH.  XXXVII  CRISA  459

well  wooded  with  luxuriant  olive -groves,  the  Cirrhaean  plain  is  still
almost  as  treeless  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Pausanias.  Some  com,
cotton,  and  vines  grow  on  it ;  but  it  is  mostly  covered  with  grass  and
rushes,  on  which  numerous  herds  of  cattle  browse.  After  the  destruc-
tion of  Cirrha  in  Solon's  time  the  Cirrhaean  plain  was  consecrated
to  Apollo  and  set  apart  to  lie  untilled  and  ungrazed  for  ever.  See
Demosthenes,  de  Corona^  P-  277  sqq, ;  Aeschines,  contra  Ctesiph,  107
sqq,  ;  Diodorus,  xvi.  23  ;  Polyaenus,  iii.  5  ;  Dio  Cassius,  Ixiii.  14.  By
mistake  Isocrates  (Or,  xiv.  31,  p.  302)  calls  the  plain  the  Crisaean
plain.  He  implies  that  it  was  lawful  to  feed  sheep  on  it ;  whereas
in  the  decrees  of  the  Amphictyonic  Council,  quoted  by  Demosthenes
{i.e. ),  one  of  the  articles  of  accusation  against  the  Amphissaeans  is  that
they  had  put  cattle  to  graze  on  the  sacred  land.  But  the  genuineness
of  these  decrees  is  very  dubious.  In  a  genuine  decree  of  the  Amphic-
tyonic Council  about  the  sacred  land  (C  /.  G.  No.  1688,  see  note  on
§  4)  no  mention  is  made  of  a  prohibition  to  graze  cattle  on  it.

The  northern  and  much  larger  part  of  the  plain  is  the  Crisaean  plain
proper,  though  the  name  Crisaean  was  perhaps  sometimes  extended  so
as  to  include  the  whole  plain  from  the  sea  northwards  to  Amphissa
{Saiona).  See  Herodotus,  viii.  32 ;  Strabo,  ix.  pp.  4 1 8,  427 ;  Callimachus,
Hymn  to  Deios,  178.  The  Crisaean  plain  proper  is  a  wide  expanse  of
perfectly  flat  and  very  fertile  land,  covered  with  luxuriant  olive-groves,
vineyards,  and  corn-fields,  and  hemmed  in  by  lofty  mountains.  The
olive-woods  in  particular  are  among  the  finest  in  Greece  as  well  for  the
stately  growth  of  the  trees  as  for  the  excellence  and  abundance  of  the
olives.  In  early  summer  the  greyish-green  of  their  foliage  sets  off  the
red  blossoms  of  the  pomegranates  and  oleanders  that  grow  in  moist  spots.
The  mountain-wall  that  bounds  the  Crisaean  plain  on  the  east  is  broken,
at  a  point  about  2^  miles  from  the  sea,  by  the  profound  glen  of  the
IMistus  river,  which  after  flowing  westward  between  Mt.  Parnassus  on
the  north  and  Mt  Cirphis  on  the  south,  enters  the  Crisaean  plain,  where
it  turns  southward  and  traversing  the  plain  falls  into  the  sea  a  little  to
the  west  of  the  site  of  Cirrha.

At  the  mouth  of  the  glen,  where  it  opens  on  the  Crisaean  plain,  are
the  remains  of  the  very  ancient  city  of  Crisa,  which  gave  its  name  to  the
plain.  They  occupy  the  extremity  of  a  long  rocky  spur  which  projects
southward  from  Parnassus  and  overhangs  the  northern  bank  of  the
Plistus  in  great  precipices.  The  modem  village  of  Chryso^  which  may
derive  its  name  from  the  ancient  city,  stands  on  the  mountain-side  at  the
point  where  the  rocky  spur  begins  to  project  from  it.  The  surface  of
the  spur  is  a  sort  of  rocky  uneven  plateau.  On  two  sides,  the  north  and
the  west,  it  was  enclosed  by  massive  but  rough  walls  of  Cyclopean
masonry,  of  which  there  are  considerable  remains.  On  the  other  two
sides,  the  east  and  the  south,  the  sheer  and  lofty  precipices  descending
to  the  deep  glen  of  the  Plistus  rendered  all  fortification  needless,  and
it  does  not  appear  that  walls  were  ever  built  along  their  brink.  The
north  wall  may  be  traced  mnning  across  the  whole  neck  of  the  spur  from
east  to  west.  A  fortification-wall  was  here  absolutely  necessary,  since  the
ground,  being  nearly  level,  affords  no  natural  defence  ;  there  is  merely  a


46o  CRISA  BK.  X.  PHOCis

slight  dip  between  the  ancient  city  and  the  site  of  the  modem  Chryso,
In  general  only  one  course  of  the  north  wall  is  standing,  but  close  to  its
eastern  end  two  courses  are  preserved,  giving  the  wall  a  height  of  over
6  feet.  The  masonry  is  of  the  true  Cyclopean  order ;  the  blocks  arc
all  very  rough,  being  almost  unhewn,  and  some  of  them  are  very  large.
One  stone  is  over  9  feet  long  by  5  feet  high  ;  another  is  7  ft.  6  in.
high.  The  western  wall  follows  the  edge  of  the  plateau  above  a  slope
which,  though  steep,  is  not  precipitous.  It  is  traceable  throughout  and
is  much  better  preserved  than  the  northern  wall,  the  number  of  courses
varying  from  two  to  six.  In  some  places  it  is  from  5  feet  to  12  feet
high.  Both  faces  of  the  wall  are  preserved  for  a  considerable  distance ;
the  thickness,  where  I  measured  it,  was  13  or  14  feet.  The  size  of  the
blocks  varies  ;  some  are  large,  others  comparatively  small.  In  one  place
two  blocks  give  a  height  of  5  ft.  7  in.,  and  one  of  the  two  is  more  than
5  feet  long.  Near  the  southern  extremity  of  the  plateau  is  a  chapel  of  the
Forty  Saints,  which  according  to  Bursian  is  built  almost  entirely  of  large
ancient  blocks.  Within  the  area  of  the  ancient  city,  to  the  north  of
the  chapel  of  the  Forty  Saints,  there  formerly  stood  a  very  ancient  altar
with  two  round  holes  for  burnt-sacrifices  on  its  upper  surface.  It  was  a
double  altar  consecrated  to  the  service  of  two  divinities,  as  we  learn
from  an  ancient  boustrophedon  inscription  (see  v.  17.  6  note)  which  is
engraved  on  two  of  the  sides  and,  being  translated,  runs  as  follows :
"In  order  that  he  might  have  imperishable  renown,  Aristus  set  up  this
altar  and  sacrificed  oxen  to  Hera  and  victims  to  Athena,  goddess  of
property"  (C.  /.  C7.  No.  i  ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Ret  sen  und  Forschungen^  i.
pp.  21  sqq.y  31  ;  Roehl,  /.  G.  A,  No.  314  ;  Collitz,  G.  D,  /.  2.  No.  i  537).

The  bottom  of  the  deep  glen  of  the  Plistus,  below  the  ruins  of  Crisa,
is  covered  with  olive-groves,  except  in  the  gravelly  bed  of  the  stream.
On  the  opposite  or  south  side  of  the  glen  the  mountains  rise  in  ver\-
steep  but  not  quite  perpendicular  rocky  slopes.  Ancient  Delphi  is  not
visible  from  Crisa,  being  hidden  in  a  recess  of  the  mountain  to  the  east,
but  the  modern  village  is  in  full  view.  To  the  west  there  is  a  fine
prospect  over  the  Crisaean  plain  covered  with  olive-groves  ;  and  to  the
north-west  Salona  (Amphissa)  is  clearly  visible  at  the  foot  of  the  dark
high  mountains  of  Locris.

The  situation  of  Crisa  is  accurately  described  in  the  Homeric  h\'mn
to  Apollo,  where  it  is  said  that  it  stands  on  a  height  looking  westward,
above  a  deep  and  rugged  glen,  at  the  foot  of  the  steep  rocks  of  the
snowy  Parnassus.  See  the  Hymn  to  Apollo^  269,  282  sqq.^  438.  If
we  took  the  evidence  of  this  hymn  literally  we  should  have  to  suppose
that  Crisa  was  older  than  Delphi ;  for  in  narrating  the  origin  of  Delphi
the  writer  speaks  of  Crisa  as  if  it  existed  before  the  Cretan  settlers
founded  the  sanctuary  at  Delphi  {v.  445  sqq.  \  cp.  note  on  x.  5.  5).  At
all  events  Delphi  was  probably  in  its  origin  not  a  town  at  all  but  merely  a
sanctuary  dependent  on  Crisa,  which,  situated  at  the  mouth  of  the  glen
of  the  Plistus,  completely  commanded  the  approach  to  it  from  the  sea.
The  road  to  Delphi  from  the  modem  port  Itea  still  passes  through  the
village  of  Chryso^  from  which  it  winds  up  the  steep  rocky  slope  in  a  north-
easterly direction  to  the  ancient  sanctuary.     Hence  when  the  fame  of


CH.  XXXVII  CRISA  461

Delphi  attracted  crowds  of  worshippers,  the  Crisaeans,  by  commanding
the  road  to  it,  were  able  to  levy  toll  on  the  pilgrims,  a  practice  which,
by  exciting  the  indignation  of  the  Amphictyonic  Council,  was  the  occa-
sion of  the  First  Sacred  War,  which  ended  in  the  destruction  of  Crisa
and  its  port  Cirrha.  See  Strabo,  ix.  p.  418  sq.  \  Schol.  on  Pindar,
Pyth,  i.  Introd.  Cirrha  was  afterwards  rebuilt  (Aeschines,  c,  Ctes,
113;  Polybius,  V.  27 ;  Livy,  xlii.  15  ;  Dionysius,  Descriptio  Graeciae^  73),
and  still  existed  as  the  port  of  Delphi  in  Pausanias's  time.  But  Crisa
never  rose  from  its  ruins,  and  its  very  existence  was  sometimes  forgotten.
Thus  Pausanias,  as  we  see  from  the  present  passage,  regarded  Crisa
merely  as  the  Homeric  name  for  Cirrha,  and  a  scholiast  on  Pindar
{Pyih.  i.  p.  300,  ed.  Boeckh)  thought  it  was  an  old  name  for  Delphi.
See  also  EtymoL  Magn,^  s,v,  Kpura,  p.  515.  Strabo  knew  that  Crisa
was  a  different  place  from  Cirrha,  but  he  wrongly  placed  Crisa  on  the
coast  between  Cirrha  and  Anticyra  (Strabo,  ix.  pp.  416,  418).

See  especially  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungetty  i.  pp.  7-34;  /</.,
•  Uebcr  die  Stadte  Crissa  und  Cirrha,*  Abhandlungen  der  philos.  philolog,  CI,  d,  k,
bayer,  Akad,  d.  Wissen.  3.  i.  (1840),  pp.  75-98.  Compare  DodweU,  Tour^  i.
pp.  149  sq.j  1 58- 16 1 ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  pp.  583-587 ;  Pouqueville,
Voyage  de  la  Grke^  4.  p.  105  sqq,  ;  Welckcr,  Tagebuchy  2.  p.  70  sqq, ;  L.  Ross,
Wanderungeny  I.  pp.  (i%sqq.^  7i^q*  »  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  p.  6iT  sqq,  ;  Bursian,
Geogr.  I.  p.  180  sq, ;  Sandys,  An  Easter  Vacation  in  Greece^  p.  69  sqq, ;  Baedeker,'
p.  156;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  42  j£.  I  have  twice  traversed  the  plains  of  Cirrha
and  Crisa,  in  1890  and  1895.  On  the  latter  occasion  (21st  October)  I  visited  the
ruins  of  Crisa,  and  have  described  the  situation  and  ruins  from  personal  observation.
Dodwell  and  Leake  rightly  distinguished  Crisa  from  Cirrha,  placing  the  hitter  on
the  coast  and  the  former  at  Chryso,  But  other  modem  scholars  confused  the  two,
till  the  researches  of  Ulrichs  finally  settled  the  question.  On  the  history  of  Crisa
and  Cirrha,  see  especially  Preller,  *  Krisa  una  sein  Verhaltniss  zu  Kirrha  und
Delphi,*  Berichte  iiber  die  Verhandl,  d,  k,  sacks,  Gesell,  d,  Wissen,  zu  Leipzig^  6
(1854),  pp.  1 19-140  (reprinted  in  Preller's  Ausgewdhlte  Aufsdtze^  pp.  224-244).

37.  5.  Homer caJils  the  city  by  its  original  name  of  Orisa.

Crisa  is  mentioned  by  Homer  (//.  ii.  520;  Hymn  to  Apollo^  269,  282,
43 1}  43^>  445)-  ^^^  Pausanias  is  mistaken  in  supposing  that  Crisa
was  identical  with  Cirrha.     See  the  preceding  note.

37.  6.  the  Amphictyons  resolved  to  make  war  on  the  Oir-
rhaeans  etc.  On  the  first  Sacred  War  see  the  works  of  H.  N.  Ulrichs
and  Preller  referred  to  in  the  note  on  §  5.  The  ancient  authorities  for
the  war  are  Aeschines,  c,  Ctes,  107-112;  Schol.  on  Pindar,  Pyth,
Introd.,  and  onid.^Nem,  ix.  2  ;  Athenaeus,  xiii.  p.  56obc;  Polyaenus,
iii.  5,  vi.  13;  Fronto,  Strateg,  iii.  7.  6;  Plutarch,  Solon^  11  ;  Suidas,
s.v,  ^Aoiv  (Suidas  copies  Pausanias).  The  participation  of  Clisthenes
in  the  war  is  mentioned  by  Polyaenus,  Fronto,  and  the  Schol.  on
Pindar,  Nem,  ix.  2.  The  participation  of  Solon  in  it  is  mentioned  by
Aeschines,  Plutarch,  and  Suidas.

37.  6.  Ye  shall  not  take  and  cast  down  etc.  This  oracle  is
quoted  by  Aeschines  {c.  Ctes.  112)  and  Suidas  {s.v,  ^Aoiv),  and  the
substance  of  it  is  given  by  Polyaenus  (iii.  5).

37.  7.  He  devised  yet  another  stratagem  against  the  Oirrhaeans
etc.  The  following  stratagem  is  described  also  by  Polyaenus  (iii.  5),
Fronto  {Strat,  iii.  7.  6),  and  Suidas  {s.v,  2oA.a)v).     Fronto  attributes  it


462  OZOLIAN  LOCRIANS  BK.  x.  PHOCis

to  Clisthenes.  Polyaenus  in  one  passage  (iii.  5)  ascribes  it  to  Clis-
thenes,  in  another  (vi.  13)  to  Eurylochus.  Suidas,  who  copies  Pausanias
almost  literally,  refers  it  to  Solon.

About  a  quarter  of  an  hour  to  the  east  of  Cirrha  a  small  but  rapid
stream  of  salt  water  flows  into  the  sea.  It  rises  at  the  foot  of  Mt.
Cirphis,  which  here  bounds  the  plain  on  the  east.  The  salt-spring  fills
a  large  basin  and  formerly  turned  a  mill.  Near  it  is  a  small  chapel  of
St.  John.  A  draught  of  the  water  acts  as  a  strong  purge,  and  the
water  is  so  used  by  people  in  the  neighbourhood.  It  is  possible,  as
H.  N.  Ulrichs  suggested,  that  at  the  siege  of  Cirrha  the  besiegers
turned  the  water  of  this  stream  into  the  canal  which  flowed  through  the
city,  and  that  thus  they  may  have  produced  the  effects  which  the
ancient  writers  ascribe  to  an  infusion  of  hellebore.  See  H.  N.  Ulrichs,
in  AbhandL  d.  philos.  philolog.  CI.  d.  k,  bayer.  Akad.  d,  IVissen.  3.  i.
(1840),  p.  79  ;  ///.,  Reisen  und  Forschungen^  i.  p.  9.

38.  I .  the  Ozolian  Locrians.  The  Ozolian  Locrians  were  also  called
the  Hesperian  (Western)  Locrians,  to  distinguish  them  from  the  Opuntian
and  Epicnemidian  or  Hypocnemidian  Locrians,  and  the  crest  engraved
on  their  public  seal  was  the  Evening  Star  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  416).  Accord-
ing to  Aristotle  the  Western  Locrians  were  of  the  stock  of  the  Leleges.
See  Strabo,  vii.  p.  322 ;  Dionysius,  Descriptio  Graeciae^  70 sg. ;  cp.  Pliny,
Nal.  hist,  iv.  27.  Plutarch,  like  Pausanias,  has  collected  various  explana-
tions of  the  epithet  Ozolian,  which  he  seems  to  take  in  the  sense  of
*  stinking '  or  *  smelling '  (from  ozein  *  to  stink,'  *  smell ').  Some  suppose,
he  says,  that  the  Locrians  were  called  Ozolian  because  the  carcase  of
Nessus  or  of  the  dragon  Python  had  been  washed  ashore  in  their  country
and  had  rotted  there.  Others  thought  it  was  because  the  Locrians  stank
through  wearing  sheep-skins  and  goat-skins  and  living  among  flocks  of
goats.  Others  said  that  the  land  was  a  land  of  many  flowers  and  took
its  name  from  their  perfume.  This  last  was  the  explanation  naturally
adopted  by  a  patriotic  native  poet,  Archytas  of  Amphissa.  See  Plutarch,
Quaest.  Grace,  15.  According  to  a  scholiast  on  Homer  (//.  ii.  527)
the  name  Ozolian  was  derived  either  from  the  untanned  and  stinking
goat  -  skins  worn  by  the  people,  or  from  a  river  Ozon,  which  was  so
called  because  its  water  stank  with  the  carcase  of  the  centaur  Nessus
slain  by  Hercules.  Cp.  Eustathius  on  Homer,  //.  ii.  529,  p.  276.  9
sqq.  ;  Etymol.  Magnum^  s.v.  BSoAo?,  p.  192  ;  Servius,  on  Virgil,  Aen.
iii.  399.  Dodwell  thought  that  the  name  might  have  been  gi\*en
to  the  country  on  account  of  a  kind  of  spurge  or  euphorbia  with  a
yellow  flower  and  a  white  caustic  juice  in  its  stem  ;  the  modem  Greeks
think  that  the  plant  causes  bad  air,  and  it  certainly,  says  Dodwell,  gives
a  peculiar  sour  smell  to  the  whole  country  when  it  is  in  bloom.  The
modem  Greek  name  of  the  plant  is  galaxidi^  and  this  is  now  the
name  of  a  town  in  Locris,  the  ancient  Ocanthea.  Dodwell  identified
the  plant  with  the  Tithymalus  characias  of  Dioscorides  {De  mat.  ined.  iv.
162).     See  Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  p.  131.

38.  I.  When  Orestheus,  son  of  Deucalion,  reigned  in  the  land
etc.  The  following  story  is  told  by  Hecataeus  in  a  fragment  preser%ed
by  Athenaeus  (ii.  p.  35  b).      Another  story,  which  seems  to  be  con-


CH.  XXXVIII  AMPHISSA  463

nected  with  it,  is  related  by  Plutarch  {Quaesi.  Graec,  15).  He  asks
"  What  is  the  wooden  dog  in  the  land  of  the  Locrians  ?"  and  he  answers
the  question  thus.  "  Physcius  son  of  Amphictyon  had  a  son  Locrus,
who  had  a  son  Opus  by  Cabya.  But  Locrus  quarrelled  with  his  son
and  taking  many  of  the  citizens  with  him  he  enquired  of  the  god  whether
he  should  found  a  colony.  As  the  god  bade  him  found  a  city  wherever
he  should  chance  to  be  bitten  by  a  wooden  dog,  he  crossed  over  to  the
other  sea  and  in  doing  so  he  trod  on  a  dog-thorn.  Being  maimed  by
the  hurt  he  tarried  there  some  days,  in  the  course  of  which  he  perceived
that  the  place  was  indeed  the  promised  land,  and  he  built  cities."

38.  4.  d^Jnphissa.  The  site  of  the  ancient  Amphissa  is  occupied
by  the  modem  Salona^  a  thriving  town  of  over  5000  inhabitants.  It
lies  very  picturesquely  at  the  north-western  extremity  of  the  Crisaean
plain,  shaded  by  trees  and  straggling  among  gardens  on  the  first  gentle
slopes  of  the  lofty  Locrian  mountains,  about  half  an  hour  distant  from
the  western  foot  of  Parnassus.  The  houses,  though  mostly  built  of
mud,  are  trim  and  of  a  fair  size.  Immediately  above  the  town  an  abrupt
rocky  hill  rises  grandly,  crowned  with  the  ruins  of  a  mediaeval  castle,
which  was  once  the  seat  of  the  Frankish  counts  of  Salona.  The  ruins  are
very  extensive.  The  castle  was  built  on  the  remains  of  the  walls  of  the
ancient  acropolis,  or  perhaps  of  the  ancient  city  itself ;  for  it  is  doubtful
whether  Amphissa  extended  into  the  plain.  Colonel  Leake  thought
that  the  keep  of  the  castle  occupies  the  site  of  the  ancient  acropolis,  and
that  the  extensive  outer  walls  nearly  follow  the  line  of  the  ancient  city-
walls.  Below  and  among  the  Frankish  walls  may  be  seen  large  pieces
of  old  Greek  masonry  built  partly  in  the  quadrangular  and  partly  in  the
polygonal  style.  Remains  of  two  ancient  Greek  towers  are  standing  on
the  northern  slope  of  the  hill,  perched  on  the  summit  of  a  rocky  brow
which  here  overhangs  the  houses  of  the  modem  town.  In  the  castle-
walls  two  ancient  gateways  arc  still  in  perfect  preservation.  One  of
them  is  constructed  of  three  immense  blocks  of  stone.  There  is  also
a  cistem,  the  lower  part  of  which  is  ancient  Greek  masonry ;  the
upper  part  is  mediaeval.  At  the  foot  of  the  castle-rock  a  fine  Turkish
fountain  may  be  seen  ;  the  water  comes  spouting  out  in  clear  rills  from
many  mouths  under  a  horse -shoe  arch,  and  forms  one  of  the  chief
sources  of  the  river  of  Salona^  which  flows  southward  through  luxuriant
vineyards  and  olive -groves  to  join  the  Plistus.  But  the  water  of  the
river  is  diverted  to  irrigate  the  plain,  and  it  is  only  after  heavy  rains
that  any  of  it  reaches  the  Plistus.  That  Salona  occupies  the  site  of
Amphissa  is  proved  by  two  Greek  inscriptions  recording  the  sale  of
slaves  to  Aesculapius  at  Amphissa  (C.  /.  G,  G.  S.  3.  Nos.  318,  1066  ;
Collitz,  G,  D.  /.  2.  No.  1474  ;  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique^  5  (1881),
p.  451  sq.  ;  id.^  19  (1895),  p.  385  sq.\  and  by  a  late  Latin  inscription,
discovered  by  Wheler,  which  can  still  be  seen  at  the  church  of  the
Transfiguration  {Metamorphosis).  This  solitary  church  stands  on  the
mountain-side  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  above  the  town,  and  is  reached
by  a  steep  and  stony  path.  The  inscription  (C  /.  L,  iii.  i.  No.  568)
contains  a  letter  of  the  proconsul  Decimus  Secundinus  to  the  people
of  Amphissa,  in  which  he  desires  that  the  aqueduct  be  cleaned  and  the


464  AMPHISSA  BK.  X.  PHCx:is

water  turned  into  the  old  cisterns.  From  the  parapet  in  front  of  the
church  there  is  a  good  view  over  the  plain  of  Amphissa  with  its  olive-
woods,  traversed  by  white  roads,  and  hemmed  in  on  all  sides  by  lofty
mountains.

The  smiling  verdure  of  Amphissa  and  its  neighbourhood  forms  a
striking  contrast  to  the  stem,  arid,  and  rocky  scenery  of  Delphi,  which
is  only  ten  miles  off.  (Pausanias  puts  the  distance  at  120  furlongs,  but
he  is  wrong.  Aeschines,  c,  Ctes.  123,  estimates  the  distance  at  60
furlongs,  which  is  equally  wide  of  the  mark  but  on  the  other  side.)
At  Amphissa,  indeed,  we  are  on  the  borders  of  almost  Swiss  scener)-.
For  the  fir-clad  and  torrent-rent  mountains  of  Locris  and  Doris  which
rise  to  the  north-west  are  the  loftiest  in  the  present  kingdom  of  Greece
Two  of  the  peaks  are  over  8000  feet  high.  A  fine  specimen  of
this  Alpine  scenery  may  be  obtained  by  following  the  mule-path  which
leads  north  from  Amphissa  over  the  mountains  to  the  village  of  Gravia
in  the  ancient  canton  of  Doris.  With  the  exception  of  the  village  of
Topoliay  which  we  leave  on  the  right,  and  here  and  there  a  small  farm
far  up  on  the  mountain-side,  not  a  human  dwelling  is  to  be  seen.  At
first  the  path  ascends  the  western  declivities  of  Parnassus.  Looking
down  to  the  left  we  see  below  us  a  narrow  dale,  where  in  early
summer  the  course  of  the  stream,  now  nearly  dried  up,  is  marked  by  the
red  oleander-blossoms.  Beyond  the  dale  Mt.  Kiona  rears  its  snowy
head,  the  loftiest  mountain  in  Greece ;  and  behind  it  the  long  and
almost  equally  lofty  ridge  of  Vardousia  is  seen  stretching  north  and
south.  The  finest  point  on  the  route  is  at  a  clear  spring  which  bubbles
up  at  the  top  of  the  pass,  just  where  the  road  surmounts  the  ridge  that
joins  Parnassus  to  the  mountains  of  Locris.  Hitherto  we  have  been
ascending  from  the  south  ;  from  this  point  the  road  begins  to  descend
to  the  north.  The  valley  now  contracts.  The  snowy  peaks  in  the  west
disappear,  but  their  lower  spurs  fonn,  with  the  western  declivities  of
Parnassus,  a  narrow  pass,  down  which  a  brook  babbles  over  rocks  and
stones,  its  banks  overhung  with  plane-trees.  Pines  and  oaks  of  various
kinds  contrast  pleasantly  with  the  steep  cliffs  and  bushy  slopes  ;  and
now  and  then  we  come  to  a  little  grassy  glade  or  a  patch  of  com.  **  It
is,"  says  the  Swiss  traveller  Vischer,  whose  description  of  the  road  I
have  borrowed,  "almost  a  Swiss  region,  and  I  might  have  fancied
myself  transported  to  my  native  land,  if  the  holly-oaks  and  oriental
plane-trees  had  not  reminded  me  that  I  was  in  the  south."  Thus
descending  by  a  steep  and  rugged  path  we  reach  the  village  of  Gravia
at  the  northem  end  of  the  pass,  in  five  or  six  hours  from  Amphissa,

See  \Mieler,y<w</7/^,  p.  310  sqq,  ;  Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  p.  146  sqq,  (with  a  view
of  Salona)  ;  Pouqueville,  Voyage  de  la  GrkCy  4.  p.  99  sqq,  (Pouqueville  copies
without  acknowledgment  from  Dodwell) ;  Leake,  Northem  Greece^  2.  p.  588  sqq.  ;
L.  Ross,  Wanderuttgeny  I.  p.  70 ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungefty  p.  619  sq,  ;  Bursian,
Geogr,  I.  p.  150  sq.\  H.  Belle,  Trots  amides  en  Grke,  p.  190  j^^.;  Baedeker,'  p.  155  ;
Guide-Joanne,  2.  p.  45  sq.  ;  G.  Deschamps,  La  Grke  daujourd^kui,  p.  253  sqq.
The  worship  of  Aesculapius  at  Amphissa,  which  is  not  mentioned  by  Pausanias,  is
attested  by  an  inscription  found  at  Delphi  {Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique^  17
(1893),  P-  361)  as  well  as  by  the  inscriptions  found  at  Amphissa  itself  to  which
reference  has  been  made  above.


CH.  XXXVIII  MYONIA  465

38.  4-  when  the  Roman  Emperor  tnmed  the  Aetolians  etc    Cp.

V.  23.  3  ;  vii.  18.  8.

38.  5.  tombs  of  Amphissa  and  Andraemon.  According  to
Aristotle  (quoted  by  Harpocration  s.v,  "AfA^fiUJxra)  Andraemon  was  the
founder  of  Amphissa.

38.  5.  the  image  was  brought  by  Thoas  from  nium.  Thoas,  son
of  Andraemon,  was  the  captain  of  the  Aetolian  contingent  at  the  Trojan
war  (Homer,  //.  ii.  638).

38.  6.  Bhoecns Theodoms.     See  viii.  14.  8  note.

38.  6.  a  stone  wall  above  the  altar.  The  Greek  word  here
translated  'wall'  is  OpiyKos.  In  all  other  passages  of  Pausanias  the
word  appears  to  mean  an  enclosing  wall,  a  breastwork,  parapet,
balustrade.  See  i.  42.  8;  ii.  15.  3;  ii.  35.  10;  v.  13.  i  ;  vi.  20.  7;
vi.  25.  I  ;  viii.  31.  5  ;  viii.  37.  10.  In  three  passages  (v.  13.  i  ;
viii.  31.  5  ;  viii.  37.  10)  the  OpiyKos  encloses  a  grove  or  at  all  events
a  place  planted  with  trees.  Hence  it  would  seem  that  in  the
present  passage  we  must  understand  the  word  in  the  same  sense.  Sir
Charles  Newton  interpreted  it  *  cornice,'  a  meaning  which  it  often
bears  in  classical  writers  (see  Liddell  and  Scott's  Lexicon ;  also
Hesychius,  Suidas,  Photius  {Lexicon^  and  EtymoL  Magnum^  s,v,
OpiyKos) ;  and  he  conjectured  that  the  fragments  of  a  frieze  found  by
Mr.  Wood  in  the  lowest  stratum  of  his  excavations  at  Ephesus  were
the  remains  of  the  very  OpiyKos  here  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  But
Mr.  A.  S.  Murray  believes  that  the  fragments  in  question  belonged  to
the  cornice  of  the  older  temple.  See  Sir  Ch.  Newton,  Essays  on
Art  and  Archaeology^  p.  80  sq,  ;  A.  S.  Murray,  *  Remains  of  archaic
temple  of  Artemis  at  'E^Yi^sns^*  JourmU  of  Hellenic  Studies^  10  (1889),
p.  I  sqq.

38.  6.  the  Ephesians  call  it  Night.  Sir  Charles  Newton  suggested
that  this  statue  may  have  represented  Latona  (Leto),  the  mother  of
Artemis  {Essays  on  Art  and  Archaeology^  pp.  74,  81).

38.  7-  mysteries  of  the  Boy  Lords  etc.  Cp.  Lobeck,  Aglao-
phctmus^  p.  1233  j^.

38.  8.  Myonia.  The  slope  of  the  hills  which  bound  the  plain  of
Amphissa  on  the  west  is  cro\vned  by  a  rocky  brow.  Above  the  line  of
rocks  there  is  a  plain  of  considerable  extent  reaching  to  the  great  steeps
of  the  snowy  fir-clad  peak  now  commonly  called  Mt.  Elato.  In  the
middle  of  this  high  plain  stands  the  village  of  Hagia  Efthymia  (or
Thymia\  near  which  are  the  well-preserved  walls  and  towers  of  an
ancient  city,  probably  Myonia.  The  place  is  about  three  and  a  half
miles  south-west  of  Amphissa,  which  agrees  fairly  with  the  30  furlongs
of  Pausanias.  The  circuit  of  the  walls  may  be  about  a  mile  and  a  half.
In  style  the  masonry  is  nearly  regular,  and  the  blocks  are  ornamented
with  parallel  perpendicular  lines  cut  in  them.  The  towers  are  square  and
are  distributed  all  round  the  walls  at  equal  intervals ;  the  steps  up  to
many  of  them  remain.  None  of  the  gates  is  entire.  Like  Mantinea
and  Megalopolis,  the  town  seems  to  have  had  no  acropolis.  There  are
hardly  any  vestiges  within  the  walls,  nothing  but  some  heaps  of  small
stones  and  tiles.     From  Ha^ia  Efthymia  a  road  leads  south  to  GaUixidi

VOL.  V  2  H


466  OEANTHEA  BK.  x.  PHOCis

(Oeanthea)  through  a  barren,  treeless,  rocky  country,  bounded  by  bare
hills.     The  distance  is  about  7  miles.

See  Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  p.  144  sqq, ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  p.  592
so,  ;  Pouqueville,  Voytim  de  la  Grice^  4.  p.  98 ;  Bursian,  Gecgr,  i.  p.  151  sg. ;
Deschanips,  La  Grke  ^aujourcChuiy  p.  259  sq,  Stephanus  Byamtins  (x.v.  M^Wv)
calls  the  town  Myon,  though  in  another  passage  (j.v.  VLvmia.)  he  calls  it  Myonia.
Cp.  the  Critical  Note  on  vL  19.  5,  voL  i.  p.  5S9.  The  territory  of  Myonia
marched  with  that  of  Amphissa.  See  Thucvdides,  iii  loi.  Bursian  thought
{Geogr.  I.  p.  149)  that  the  ruins  at  Hagia  Eftkytnia  might  be  those  of  Phaestum
(Pliny,  Nat,  hist,  iv.  7)  or  Physcus  (Stephanus  Byz.,  s,v,  ^t6vKOi ;  Plutarch,
Quaest,  Graec,  15).

38.  8.  dedicated  the  shield  to  Zens  at  Olympia.    See  vi.  19. 4^.

38.  8.  the  Qracions  Qods.  These  would  seem  to  have  beco
nether  gods,  since  the  sacrifices  to  them  were  offered  at  night  Cp.  E.
Rohde,  Psyche^  p.  249  n.  i  ;  Hermann,  Gottesdiensiliche  Alterthiimer?
§23.  18.

38.  8.  to  consmne  the  flesh  on  the  spot  before  the  sun  xisea
Cp.  note  on  ii.  27.  i.

38.  9.  Oeanthea.  The  site  of  Oeanthea  is  probably  occupied  by
Galaxidi^  a  small  town  with  some  ship-building  yards  on  the  westen
shore  of  the  Crisaean  gulf.  Polybius  says  (iv.  57)  that  Oeanthea  was
opposite  to  Aegira  in  Achaia.  This  exactly  answers  to  the  situation  ci
Gaiaxidi  which  is  due  north  of  Aegira,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  gulf
of  Corinth.  Gaiaxidi  stands  on  a  low  rocky  promontory  forming  two
harbours,  of  which  the  southern  is  the  deeper  and  snugger,  being
sheltered  by  a  projecting  cape  and  by  two  rocky  islands  off  the  coast
On  the  shore  there  are  some  remains  of  an  ancient  mole.  Pieces
of  fortification-walls,  built  partly  in  the  polygonal,  partly  in  the  quad-
rangular style,  may  be  seen  here  and  there  among  the  houses.  A
sepulchral  inscription,  of  no  importance,  is  built  into  one  of  the
churches.  But  the  chief  part  of  the  ancient  city  seems  to  have  occu-
pied the  peninsula  which  runs  out  a  few  hundred  yards  to  the  east  of
the  modem  town.  Here  there  are  some  large  hewn  blocks,  and  the
rock  has  been  cut  and  levelled  for  the  foundations  of  houses.  Across
the  Crisaean  gulf  Mt.  Parnassus  towers  majestically.  The  eye  can
distinguish  the  lofty  cliffs  above  Delphi  and  the  great  rent  or  fissure,  at
the  foot  of  which  is  the  Castalian  spring.

See  Chandler,  Travels  in  Greece^  p.  273 ;  Dodwell,  Tour,  i.  p.  130  sqq. ;
Leake,  Northern  Greece ^  2.  p.  593  saq. ;  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reistn  ttnd  Forschungen^
I.  p.  5  ;  Fiedler,  J^eisey  I.  p.  146  ;  L.  Ross,  IVanderungen,  I.  p.  73  sq.  ;  Bursian,
Geogr.  I.  p.  149 ;  Baedeker,'  p.  34  ;  Guide-Joanne ,  2.  p.  63  sq.

Some  interesting  light  is  thrown  on  the  barbarous  condition  of  the
Locrians  by  an  inscription  on  a  bronze  tablet  which  was  found  at
Oeanthea  {Gaiaxidi).  The  inscription  contains  a  treaty  between
Oeanthea  and  Chaleum,  another  sea-port  of  Locris.  By  the  terms  of
the  treaty  it  is  provided  that  neither  of  the  petty  states  shall  molest
foreign  merchants  who  visit  the  other's  port ;  but  the  citizens  of  both
states  are  free  to  commit  piracy  anywhere  except  within  their  own  or
their  ally's  harbours.     The  two  towns  would  seem  in  fact  to  have  been


CH.  xxxviii  NAUPACTUS  467

pirate  communities,  like  the  Aeolian  islands  in  antiquity  (see  note  on  x.
II.  3)  or  Algiers  in  modem  times.  The  date  of  the  inscription  is  prob-
ably not  earlier  than  431  B.C.  It  confirms  what  we  know  from  the
historians  that  the  western  Greek  states  outside  of  Peloponnese  lagged
behind  the  rest  of  Greece  in  civilisation.  In  the  days  of  Thucydides
the  Ozolian  Locrians,  Aetolians,  and  Acamanians  were  all  pirates  and
prided  themselves  on  their  profession ;  and  the  men  went  about  armed
even  in  time  of  peace  (Thucydides,  i.  5).

See  A.  R.  Rangab^,  Antiauitis  helUniqtus^  No.  356  b,  vol.  2.  pp.  2-9 ;  A.
Kirchhoff,  in  Philologus^  13  (1858),  pp.  1-14 ;  id,^  Studien  zur  Gesch,  des  grieck,
AipkabetSf*  p.  144  sqq,  ;  Roehl,  /.  G,  A,  Na  322 ;  Cauer,  DtUctus  Imcr,  Graec.^
No.  230  ;  Hicks,  Gruk  Historical  Inscriptions,  No.  31 ;  Roberts,  Greek  Epigraphy^
No.  232,  with  the  commentary  on  p.  354  sqq,  ;  Collitz,  G,  D,  I,  2.  No.  1479 ;
C.  T.  Newton,  Essays  on  Art  and  Archaeology ^  p.  107  sq, ;  Ed.  Meyer,  Forschungen
zur  alten  Geschichte^  i.  pp.  307-318 ;  R.  Meistcr,  *  Rechtsvertrag  zwischen
Chaleion  und  Oianthea,'  Berichte  Uber  die  Verhandlungen  d,  k,  sacks,  GeselL  d.
PVissen.,  Philolog.  histor.  Classe,  1896,  pp.  19-43  »  ^h.  Michel,  Recueil  d* Inscrip-
tions grecqueSf  No.  3  ;  CI.  G.  G.  S,  3.  No.  333.

38.  10.  Naupacttis.  The  fortress  and  town  of  Naupactus(.^i$^a/&/^j
or  Epaktos^  in  Italian  Lepanio)  occupy  the  south-eastern  and  southern
slopes  of  a  hill  beside  the  sea.  The  hill  is  a  spur  of  the  lofty  summit
now  called  Mount  Rigani^  and  reaches  down  in  the  shape  of  a  steep
pyramid  almost  to  the  sea- shore,  separating  two  spacious  maritime
plains,  one  on  the  east,  the  other  on  the  west  of  the  town.
Mount  Rigani  towers  immediately  at  the  back  of  the  hill.  The
place  was  fortified  in  the  manner  generally  adopted  by  the  Greeks  in
similar  situations ;  that  is  to  say,  it  occupies  a  triangular  slope  with  a
citadel  at  the  apex  and  one  or  more  cross-walls  on  the  slope,  dividing  it
into  lesser  enclosures.  At  Naupactus  there  are  no  fewer  than  five  of
these  enclosures  between  the  siunmit  and  the  sea,  with  gates  of  com-
munication from  one  to  the  other,  and  a  side  gate  on  the  west,  leading
out  of  the  fortress  from  the  second  enclosure  on  the  descent.  The
walls  are  of  Venetian  construction,  but  it  is  not  unlikely  that  they
follow  exactly  the  line  of  the  ancient  walls ;  for  in  many  places  they
stand  upon  ancient  Greek  foundations,  and  even  retain  large  pieces  of
the  old  masonry  amidst  the  modem  work.  The  present  town  occupies
only  the  lowest  enclosure,  the  houses  being  clustered  round  the  small
circular  port.  It  has  a  mean  and  decayed  appearance ;  the  streets  are
encumbered  with  the  ruins  of  mosques  and  Turkish  houses.  The  port
is  sanded  up  and  is  too  shallow  to  admit  even  the  larger  boats  which  ply
on  the  gulf.  Two  turrets  flank  the  narrow  entrance  into  it.  However,
the  general  aspect  of  the  place,  with  its  old  battlemented  Venetian  walls
climbing  the  steep  hill-side  above  the  town,  is  highly  picturesque.  The
plain  to  the  east  of  the  town  is  wooded  and  verdant,  being  watered  by
the  river  of  Momo  and  some  smaller  brooks.  In  general  it  is  well
cultivated,  but  near  the  shore  the  marshes  render  it  unhealthy.  At
the  foot  of  the  hills  it  wears  a  more  desolate  aspect,  the  ground  here
being  strewn  with  boulders  that  have  been  swept  down  by  the  torrents.
The  plain  on  the  westem  side  of  Naupactus  is  about  a  mile  wide  near
the  town  ;  olives  and  com-fields,  varied  here  and  there  with  vineyards,


468  NAUPACTUS  bk.  x.  phocis

cover  it.  There  was  a  sanctuary  of  Apollo  at  Naupactus  close  to  the
harbour  (Thucydides,  ii.  91).  Inscriptions  found  at  Naupactus  show
that  Dionysus  was  worshipped  here  and  that  slaves  were  freed  by  being
formally  sold  to  him  (C  /.  G,  G,  5.  3.  Nos.  372-378).

See  Chandler,  Travels  in  Greece^  p.  274  sq,  ;  Dodwell,  Totir,  i.  p.  128  i^. ;
Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2,  p.  606  sqq.  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  1^6  sqq,  ;  Baedeker,'
p.  33 ;  Guide-Joanne,  2.  p.  65  ;  K.  Weil,  in  Mittheil,  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Atkm.  4
(1879),  p.  22  ;  W.  J.  Woodhouse,  Aetolia  (Oxford,  1897),  p.  309  sqq,

38.  10.  the  Dorians bnilt  here  the  yessels  etc.      The  name

Naupactus  means  *  ship-built,'  which  was  explained  by  the  legend  here
mentioned  by  Pausanias.  Cp.  Strabo,  ix.  p.  426  sq,\  Etymolog.  Mag-
num^ s.v,  NawraKTOs,  p.  598.

38.  10.  Tlie  history  of  Naupactus — ^how  the  Athenians  etc

See  iv.  24.  7  ;  iv.  26.  i  sq.

38.  II.  the  Locrians  assembled  once  more  in  NauiMurtas.  On
a  bronze  tablet  found  at  Oeanthea  {Galaxidi)  there  is  an  inscription
relating  to  a  colony  of  the  Hypocnemidian  (Epicnemidian)  or  Opuntian
Locrians  who  had  settled  or  were  about  to  settle  at  Naupactus.  W.
Vischer  and  Mr.  £.  L.  Hicks  suppose  that  the  occasion  of  the  colony
was  the  one  here  mentioned  by  Pausanias,  and  that  accordingly  the
inscription  dates  from  about  403  B.C.  Mr.  R.  Meister  seems  to
incline  to  the  same  view.  But  epigraphists  in  general  (A.  Kirchhoflf,
H.  Roehl,  E.  Curtius,  E.  S.  Roberts,  F.  Bechtel,  W.  Dittenbergcr,
and  the  editors  of  the  Recueil  des  Inscriptions  juridiques  grecques)
judge  from  certain  palaeographical  peculiarities  that  the  inscription
dates  from  the  early  part  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  E.  Curtius
suggested  that  the  colony  was  planted  at  the  instigation  of  Corinth
at  the  time  when  Megara  had  formed  an  alliance  with  Athens.  By
this  alliance  Athens  obtained  a  port  (Pegae)  on  the  Corinthian  gulf,
and  the  Corinthians,  jealous  of  this  encroachment  of  Athenian  influence
on  waters  which  they  regarded  as  a  preserve  of  their  own,  induced  the
Locrians  to  settle  a  garrison-colony  at  Naupactus,  which  might  act  as
a  check  on  the  Athenian  naval  power  in  these  waters.  Hence  the
Athenians  attacked  and  captured  Naupactus.  See  Thucydides,  i.  103.
Such  is  Curtius's  theory.  He  dates  the  capture  of  Naupactus  by  the
Athenians  in  458  B.C.  Whatever  date  we  may  assign  to  the  inscription
in  question,  it  supplies  some  valuable  information  on  the  subject  of
Greek  colonial  law,  for  it  details  the  precise  legal  relations  which
should  exist  between  the  colonists  and  the  mother-country.  Briefly
the  conditions  are  these :  "  the  colonists  shall  not  separate  politically
from  the  Hypocnemidian  Locrians ;  at  Naupactus  they  shall  pay  taxes
only  as  citizens  of  Western  Locris  ;  if  they  return  of  their  own  accord
to  the  mother-country  they  shall  pay  an  entrance-fee  for  enrolment,  the
entrance-fee,  however,  not  being  required  in  the  case  of  one  who  has  left
an  adult  son  or  a  brother  in  his  place  at  Naupactus.  Persons  who  have
remained  in  the  mother-country  may  inherit  the  property  of  kinsmen
who  have  died  at  Naupactus,  and  vice-versa  "  (Roberts).

See  W.  Vischer,  *Lokrische  Inschrift  von  Naupaktos  aus  der  Sammlung
V^Qod^iOM^ti  Rheinisches  Museum,  N.F.  26(1871),  pp.  39-96;  E.  L.  Hicks,  Greek


CH.  XXXVIII  NAUPACTUS  469

Historical  Inscriptions^  No.  63 ;  P.  Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr,  Graec,^  No.  229 ;  Roehl,
I,  G,A,  No.  321 ;  E.  S.  Roberts,  Greek  Epigraphy ,  No.  231,  with  the  commentary
on  pp.  241  sg,f  346  sqq,  ;  A.  Kirchhofi^  Studien  zur  Geschichte  des  griech.
Alphabets,*  p.  146;  E.  Curtius,  in  Hemus,  10  (1876),  p.  237  sqq,  ;  iV/.,  Griech.
Geschichte f^  2.  p.  172  sq, ;  Ed.  Meyer,  Forschungen  zur  alien  Geschichte,  i.  pp.
291-307  ;  Collitz,  G.  D,  I,  2.  No.  1478 ;  R.  Dareste,  B.  Haussoullier,  Th.  Reiniu:!h,
Recueil  des  Inscriptions  juridiqu€s  grecques.  No.  xi.  pp.  180-192 ;  R.  Meister,  *  Das
Colonialrecht  von  Naupaktos,'  Berichte  iibtr  die  Verhandl,  d,  kon,  sdchs.  GeseU,
d,  Wissen,  zu  Leipzig,  Philolog.  histor.  Classe,  47  (1895),  PP*  ^72-334;  Ch.
Michel,  Recueil  d Inscriptions  grecques.  No.  285 ;  C  /.  G,  G,  S.  3.  No.  334.

38.  II.  the  Nanpactia.  Cp.  ii.  3.  9;  iv.  2.  i.  Prof.  Aug.  Pick
thinks  that  the  Milesian  to  whom  the  authorship  of  the  NaupacHa  was
sometimes  ascribed  may  have  been  Cercops  of  Miletus,  the  contempo-
rary and  rival  of  Hesiod.  See  Athenaeus,  xi.  p.  503  d,  xiii.  p.  557a;
Diogenes  Laertius,  ii.  5.  46.  Prof  Fick  suggests  that  Cercops  may
have  revised  and  edited  the  NaupacHa^  just  as,  according  to  Prof.
Fick's  conjecture,  he  edited  the  poems  of  Hesiod  after  doing  them
into  quasi- Ionic.  See  Fick,  Hesiods  Gedichte  in  threr  ursprUngiichen
Fassung  und  Sprachform  wiederhergestellt^  P*  ^5  J  ^^^  Clcusiccd  Re-
view, 2  (1888),  p.  197.  The  fragments  of  the  Nauptutia  are  collected
in  KinkePs  Epicorum  Graecorum  Fragmenta,  p.  198  sqq,

38.  II.  Oharon,  son  of  Pythes.  According  to  Suidas  {s.v,  Xa/xuv
Aafi\l/aKriv6s)  the  name  of  this  early  Greek  historian's  father  was
Pythocles.  As  to  Charon's  life  and  works  see  jFrag.  Hist,  Graec,  ed.
Miiller,  i.  pp.  xvi.  sqq,^  32  sqq,

38.  1 2.  a  temple  of  Poseidon  beside  the  sea.  There  is  no  trace
of  this  temple  at  Naupactus.  Mr.  W.  J.  Woodhouse  conjectures  that  it
stood,  not  in  Naupactus,  but  on  the  promontory  of  Antirrhium,  which
runs  out  into  the  gulf  five  or  six  miles  to  the  south-west  of  the  town.
In  confirmation  of  this  view  he  points  out  that  there  was  a  sanctuary  of
Poseidon  on  Rhium,  the  cape  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  narrows  (see
vol.  4.  p.  157);  that  Scylax  mentions  a  sanctuary  in  Aetolia  at  the
entrance  to  the  gulf  of  Corinth,  westward  from  Naupactus  (Periplus^  35)  ;
that  a  great  festival,  accompanied  by  sacrifice,  was  regularly  held  on
the  cape  down  to  Plutarch's  time  (Plutarch,  Sept,  Sapient,  Conviv,  19);
and  that  the  Athenians  under  Phormio,  after  defeating  the  Peloponnesian
fleet  in  the  straits,  "  sailed  away  to  Molycreum,  and,  having  set  up  a
trophy  on  Rhium  and  dedicated  a  ship  to  Poseidon,  returned  to
Naupactus"  (Thucydides,  ii.  84).  In  this  passage  of  Thucydides  the
mention  of  the  Aetolian  Molycreum  seems  to  show  that  the  Rhium
referred  to  was  the  cape  on  the  Aetolian,  not  the  cape  on  the  Achaean
shore.  Plutarch,  also,  in  the  passage  cited  above,  gives  the  name  of
Rhium  to  the  Aetolian  cape.  The  evidence  adduced  by  Mr.  Woodhouse
certainly  makes  it  probable  that  a  sanctuary  of  Poseidon  existed  on  Cape
Antirrhium  ;  but  it  can  hardly  have  been  the  temple  here  mentioned  by
Pausanias,  which,  to  judge  from  his  language,  must  surely  have  been
at  Naupactus  itself.  At  Antirrhium  there  are  remains  of  a  dismantled
Turkish  fort.  A  lighthouse  is  built  on  the  wall  next  the  sea.  See  W.  J.
Woodhouse,  Aetolia,  pp.  312,  323.

38.  12.  Artemis represented  in  the  act  of  hurling  a  dart.


470  NAUPACTUS  BK.  X.  phocis

Mr.  Woodhouse  regards  this  type  of  Artemis  as  a  warrior-goddess  armed
with  the  national  Aetolian  weapon,  with  regard  to  which  he  compares
Euripides,  Phoenissae^  ^Z9  ^Q-»  ^'^S  '^^^•>  Pollux,  i.  149.  He  suggests
that  the  type  may  have  been  adopted  as  a  national  emblem  after  the
repulse  of  the  Gauls,  in  which  the  Aetolians  with  their  javelins  played  a
part  (cp.  Paus.  x.  22.  6).  See  W.  J.  Woodhouse,  Aetolia^  pp.  320-323.
But  I  see  no  reason  why  Artemis  hurling  a  dart  should  have  been  a
warrior  rather  than  a  huntress.

38.  12.  a  grotto.  In  the  limestone  hills  to  the  north-east  of
Naupactus  there  are  many  caverns  and  grottos ;  but  the  grotto  of
Aphrodite  has  not  yet  been  identified  (Mittheil,  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Aiken,
4  (1S79))  P-  23  note).  Mr.  Woodhouse  thinks  that  a  small  rocky
eminence,  to  the  east  of  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  (as  to  which  see
the  next  note)  and  separated  from  it  only  by  a  marshy  pool,  is  well
adapted  to  be  the  site  of  Aphrodite's  shrine.  A  modem  church  of  St
George  stands  on  the  hill,  but  no  ancient  remains  are  visible.  The
suburb  in  the  plain  below  goes  by  the  name  of  Aphrodite,  but  the
appellation  may  very  well  be  modem.  Many  remains  of  late  date,  such
as  small  columns,  bases,  and  cisterns,  are  to  be  met  with  here.  Mr.
Woodhouse  conjectures  that  this  was  the  unwalled  suburb  captured  by
the  united  Peloponnesian  and  Aetolian  army  under  Eurylochus  in
426  B.C.  (Thucydides,  iii.  102).     See  W.  J.  Woodhouse,  Aetolia^  p.  316.

38.  13.  The  sanctuary  of  Aesculapias.  About  a  quarter  of  an
hour  to  the  east  of  Naupactus  a  rocky  spur  advances  towards  the  road
from  the  chain  of  low  hills  which  runs  parallel  to  the  road  on  the  north.
At  the  foot  of  the  rock  a  copious  spring,  overshadowed  by  three  spread-
ing plane-trees,  gushes  from  a  Turkish  fountain.  The  water  of  this
spring  is  deemed  the  best  and  most  abundant  in  the  neighbourhood
and  is  still  conducted  to  Naupactus,  as  it  appears  to  have  been  con-
ducted in  antiquity.  In  the  rock  immediately  over  the  spring,  at  a
height  of  about  40  feet  above  the  road,  but  hidden  from  it  by  the  thick
leafage  of  the  plane-trees,  is  a  terrace  about  50  feet  long  and  30  feet
wide.  The  wall  of  rock  at  the  back  of  the  terrace  is  about  12  feet
high  and  was  once  covered  from  end  to  end,  to  a  height  of  2  feel,
with  inscriptions,  of  which  the  time-worn  and  weathered  remains  suffice
to  show  that  here  was  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius.  The  sanctuary  was
already  in  ruins  when  Pausanias  saw  it.  Some  inscriptions  recording
the  enfranchisement  of  slaves  by  means  of  a  formal  sale  to  Aesculapius
have  been  dug  up  on  the  terrace.

See  R.  Weil,  *  Die  Asklepieion  von  Naupaktos,'  Mittheil,  d,  arch.  Inst,  in
Athept,  4  (1879),  pp.  22-29;  ^V.  J.  Woodhouse,  *  Aetolian  inscriptions, *yi7«rw£2/^
Hellenic  Studies^  13  (1892-3),  p.  ^I'^si/i/. ;  id.^  Aetolian  pp.  313-316;  C.  /.  G.  G.  S.
3.  Nos.  357-371.

There  was  another  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  in  the  ravine  now  called
Old  Skala  about  two  hours'  walk  to  the  north-east  of  Naupactus.  It  is
a  wild  secluded  spot  in  the  heart  of  the  hills  ;  few  but  the  shepherds
ever  penetrate  to  it.  A  very  difficult  path  leads  up  the  ravine  to
a  moderately  level  and  open  space  on  the  mountain-side  half-way  up
the  glen.     The  place  is  called  Longa.     From  here  by  clambering  down


CH.  XXXVIII  AESCULAPIUS  IN  THE  SPRINGS  471

into  the  ravine  we  reach  the  ruins  of  the  temple,  romantically
sittiated  on  the  very  brink  of  the  foaming  torrent,  on  the  farther
side  of  which  the  lofty  bank  rises  almost  perpendicularly.  A  column
which  has  been  tumbled  down  by  the  peasants  into  the  bed  of  the  stream
is  inscribed  with  legal  deeds  recording  the  emancipation  of  slaves  by
means  of  a  nominal  sale  to  '*  Aesculapius  in  the  springs  "  (rdt  'AcricXairtot
iv  /cpovvois),  from  which  we  learn  that  <' Aesculapius  in  the  springs  "  was
the  god  of  the  temple.  Other  fallen  columns,  also  inscribed,  are  said
to  be  buried  under  a  landslip  on  the  site  oif  the  temple.  The  title
'*  in  the  springs ''  is  appropriate,  for  the  spot  is  not  far  from  the  head  of
the  gorge,  where  the  torrent  takes  its  rise.  Moreover,  another  spring
rises  on  the  level  ground  above  the  temple,  and  there  is  a  tiny  spring
also  in  the  steep  bank  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  torrent.  See  W.  J.
Woodhouse,  Aetolia^  p.  331  sqq, ;  /V/.,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^
13  (1892-93),  p.  341  sqq,;  C.  I.  G,  G,  S,  3.  Nos.  379-387-

38.  13.  the  poetess  Anyte.  She  was  the  authoress  of  some
graceful  epigrams  preserved  in  the  Greek  Anthology.  Three  of  them
are  translated  in  Mr.  MackaiPs  Selecl  Epigrams /rom  the  Greek  Anthology
(Nos.  ii.  36;  vi.  14,  24).  Tatian  says  (Or.  ad  Graecos^  xxxiii.  p.  130,
ed.  Otto)  that  her  statue  was  made  by  Euthycrates  and  Cephisodotus.
As  Euthycrates  was  a  son  of  Lysippus  (Pliny,  Nat,  hist,  xxxiv.  66),  his
colleague  Cephisodotus  must  have  been  the  younger  sculptor  of  that
name  (see  note  on  viii.  30.  10).  The  younger  Cephisodotus  flourished
about  296  B.C.  This,  therefore,  must  be  approximately  the  date  of  the
poetess  Anyte  and  hence  of  the  foundation  of  the  sanctuary  of  Aescu-
lapius at  Naupactus.

38.  13.  two  thousand  golden  staters.  The  golden  stater  weighed
1 30  grains  and  was  worth  about  twenty-three  shillings.  See  Prof.  P.
Gardner,  in  Smith's  Diet,  of  Gr.  and  Rom.  Antiquities^^  article  *  Stater.*
Hence  the  sum  paid  to  Anyte  by  Phalysius  was  equal  to  about  ;£i9oo.
Prof.  Ridgeway  has  shown  that  the  golden  stater  was  the  equivalent  of
the  old  unit  of  barter,  the  ox.  See  his  work.  The  Origin  of  Metallic
Currency  and  Weight  Standards  (Cambridge,  1892),  pp.  i  sqq.^  304  sqq.


ADDENDA


VOL.  I

P.  561.  In  Paus.  i.  i.  5  we  should  probably  insert  ci  before  Kada
Afyoixriv  with  SW,  Dindorf,  and  R.  FSrster  {Rheinisckes  Museum^  N.  F.
38  (1883),  p.  423).

P.  562.  In  Paus.  i.  2.  5  A.  Milchhofer  proposes  to  read'A^vas
ayaXfui  Ilaiavias  instead  of  'Adrfvas  ayaA/ui  Ilatcovtas  {Arckaologiscke
Siudien  H,  Brunn  dargebracht^  Berlin,  1893,  p.  45).  In  the  same
sentence  he  prefers  the  reading  'Airc^XAcovos  to  the  reading  'AirdXAoiv.
G.  Loeschcke  has  suggested  that  instead  of  'AttoXAcdv  or  'Airc^AAcovos
we  should  read  'AttoAAcoviSos  (J.  Topffer,  Attische  Genealogie,  p.  204
note  i).

P.  562  line  26  from  foot,  KaAo^s.  For  KaAa8);s  we  should  prob-
ably read  Ila/ca^as  with  S.  N.  Dragoumes  (Mittheilungen  d,  arch,  Inst,
in  Atkeny  21  (1896),  p.  30.     See  below,  p.  482.

P.  562.  In  Paus.  i.  12.  4,  \p€ias  is  an  emendation  proposed  by
Emperius  {Opuscula^  p.  341).  The  MSS.  read  X€ipa%  which  Hitzig
now  replaces  in  the  text.     Cp.  Schubart,  Methodologie^  P*  92.

P.  563,  note  on  i.  18.  6.  C.  Wachsmuth  proposed  to  remove  the
words  as  *hBr\yoXoi  icaAovo'iv  dwoiKovi  7roAct9  from  the  position  which
they  occupy  in  the  MSS.  and  to  place  them  two  lines  lower  down  after  mrb
yap  iroAccos  €Kcum;s  (Dx'e  Stadi  A  then  im  Alterthum^  i.  p.  690  note  3).
This  ingenious  and  convincing  emendation,  approved  by  W.  Gurlitt
{Ueber  Pausanias,  p.  327),  is  rightly  accepted  by  Hitzig  in  his  recension
of  the  text.

P.  563  note  on  i.  18.  9.  Read  with  Hitzig  in  his  edition  c/carov
ci<rt  icu>v€9  ^pvyiov  XiSov,  veTroCrjvrai  5c  /cat  rats  OToats  Kara  ra  avra
ol  Tot\oi,  Kol  oiKtjfiara  €in'av6d  cotiv  6p6<fxf  T€  cTrtYpwry — irp6^  8i
dydXfjuuri  K€KO(rfJ.7jfJueva  /cat  ypa<f>ai^'  KaraKCtrat  6c  icat  C9  avrct  pLpXia,
TTiis  is  closer  to  the  MSS.  and  altogether  better.  Schubart,  while  he
corrected  the  passage  in  one  place  (curl  for  ctKo<ri),  corrupted  it  by  his
conjectures  in  many.

P.  563,  note  on  i.  19.  i.  Hitzig  in  his  edition  is  probably  right  in
accepting  Dindorfs  conjecture  7rap7Jy€  for  vapifjv,  and  retaining  the  rest


474  CRITICAL  NOTES  addenda

of  the  sentence  as  it  stands  in  the  MSS.     The  opo^o^  mentioned  in  the
text  may  have  been  reeds  for  thatching  the  roof  (Pollux,  x.  170).

P.  569,  note  on  ii.  i.  4  kv  '£7rtSav/M^  r^  icp^  The  adjective
i€/k[  here  applied  to  Epidaurus  is  defended  by  inscriptions  found  in  the
Epidaurian  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius.  See  P.  Cawadias,  Famlles
tP^pidaure^  vol.  i.  p.  68,  Inscr.  No.  106  line  9  cv  'EiriSavp^jp  tj^  icp^
Inscr.  No.  1 06  line  12  rjj  Up^  'E7riSav/M^  line  1 6  cv  'EirtSavpt^  tq  Up^
and  p.  106  Inscr.  No.  260  line  3  rj  te/dd 'EirtSavptcov  ttoXi^.

P.  573,  note  on  ii.  32.  6.  The  emendation  8ia/3dvros  for  ScajSas
has  been  independently  suggested  by  S.  Wide  (De  sacris  Troesemorum^
Hermionensium^  Efiidauriorum^  p.  74).

P.  577.  In  Paus.  iii.  22.  2,  S.  Wide  would  read  9c/iiSos  for  6eri3o9
{op,  ciL  p.  37).

P.  585.  In  Paus.  v.  15.  3  it  has  been  proposed  by  Hitzig  {Zur
Pausaniasfragey  p.  72)  to  read  tov  AccovtSatov  wepav  <7rpoi€vaiy
/xcXXoKTt  instead  of  tov  AccovtSatov  w€pav  /acAXovti.  The  change  would
certainly  be  an  improvement,  for  the  phrase  tov  AccuvtSa/bv  ir€pav  in
the  sense  of  "  to  pass  beyond  a  place  "  seems  inadmissible.  It  is  not
defended  by  Sophocles,  Oed.  Tyr.  673  sq,  orroy  Ovpx>v  ircpocrj/s,  as  to
which  see  J  ebb's  note.

P.  588.  In  Paus.  vi.  4.  5  von  Wilamowitz-Mollendorff  proposed  to
read  'Epea-iov  for  *E<f)€criov  {Hertnes^  11  (1876),  p.  294).  The  con-
jecture is  approved  by  W.  Gurlitt  {^Ueber  Pausaniasy  pp.  361,  415).

P.  611.  In  Paus.  X.  29.  7  C.  Robert  has  now  withdrawn  his
proposed  alteration  of  the  words  8ia  pkv  tov  \vriiivo%  k.t.X.  He  would
now  leave  the  text  as  it  stands  except  that  with  Buttmann  he  would
insert  cvtos  before  the  words  cv  rots  Koikovi  tiKojorti^  twv  \€ip!av.  See
C.  Robert,  Die  Marathonschlacht  in  der  Poikile  (Halle  a,  S.,  1895),  P-
121  sq.  This  insertion  of  cvtos  is  a  simple  and  easy  emendation,  and
is  to  be  preferred  to  the  insertion  of  t^  Irkp^},  after  twv  x€t/>wv,  which  I
had  provisionally  adopted.  The  translation  should  accordingly  run  :
"  You  may  guess  that  within  her  tunic  she  is  grasping  the  famous  neck-
lace in  the  hollows  of  her  hands."


VOL.  II

P.  I  line  8  from  foot,  SaniunL  A  visit  paid  by  me  to  Sunium
(28th  November  1895)  gave  me  an  opportunity  of  correcting  and
supplementing  on  some  points  the  description  given  in  the  text.  The
remains  of  the  fortifications  are  now  but  scanty.  They  exist  in  a  very
dilapidated  state  on  the  east  and  north  sides  of  the  cape ;  they  are  best
preserved  on  the  north  side.  On  the  south  and  west  sides  hardly  a
trace  of  them  is  to  be  found.  The  material  is  mostly  a  light  brown
stone,  which  seemed  to  me  to  be  sandstone ;  but  some  pieces  of  the
fortifications,  especially  the  towers,  are  built  of  the  native  rock  of  the  cape.
This  is  a  crystalline  rock  which  takes  a  yellow  coating  by  exposure  to
the  weather.     It  is  only  where  pieces  are  chipped  off  that  its  crystalline


VOL.  II  SUNIUM— PIRAEUS  475


structure  is  exposed.  No  part  of  the  existing  fortification-walls  is  built
of  white  marble  as  stated  in  the  text.  The  number  of  courses  of
masonry  preserved  varies  from  one  to  six.  The  greatest  height  to
which  any  piece  of  wall  or  tower  is  preserved  is  between  8  and  9  feet.
The  thickness  of  the  wall,  where  both  faces  are  standing,  is  10  feet
2  inches,  according  to  my  measurement  Towards  its  eastern  end  the
north  wall  is  built  regularly  of  squared  blocks  of  the  light  brown  stone
laid  in  horizontal  courses ;  but  farther  to  the  west  the  wall  with  its
towers  is  constructed  of  the  yellow-coated  crystalline  rock  in  a  very
irregular  and  miserable  style,  the  stones  being  small  and  hardly  hewn
or  fitted  together.  Still  farther  to  the  west  there  are  some  remains  of
the  better  built  wall  of  light  brown  sandstone.  These  marked  differ-
ences in  style  between  portions  of  the  north  wall  seem  to  indicate  that
at  some  later  time  the  original  fortifications  were  hastily  and  rudely
repaired.

The  terrace  to  the  north  of  the  temple  is  supported  on  the  north  and
west  by  two  walls,  of  which  the  northern  is  40  paces  long  and  the
western  37  paces.  Both  these  supporting  walls  are  built  of  quadrangular
blocks  of  white  marble  laid  in  horizontal  courses ;  the  blocks  are
unusually  low  in  proportion  to  their  length.  At  the  north-west  comer
the  wall  is  twelve  courses  or  about  1 3  feet  high.  On  the  terrace  there
are  remains  of  two  walls  meeting  at  a  right  angle ;  one  of  them  runs
along  the  western  side  of  the  terrace  within  a  foot  or  so  of  the  edge ;
the  other,  of  which  one  and  two  courses  are  preserved,  runs  east  and  west
at  a  distance  of  10  paces  from  the  northern  edge  of  the  terrace.  Both
walls  are  built  of  the  light  brown  sandstone  referred  to  above.  They  may
be  the  remains  of  a  sanctuary  of  Poseidon,  who  is  known  to  have  been
worshipped  at  Sunium.  How  the  terrace,  situated  as  it  is,  could  have
supported  a  propylaeum  or  portal  leading  into  the  sacred  precinct,  as  has
sometimes  been  supposed,  it  is  difficult  to  see.

Of  the  sculptured  slabs  of  marble  said  to  lie  in  front  of  the  temple
I  found  only  one  that  bore  undoubted  remains  of  reliefs.  The  others
have  perhaps  been  removed.

After  the  battle  of  Salamis  the  Greeks  dedicated  a  captured  Phoe-
nician ship  at  Sunium  (Herodotus,  viii.  121).

P.  4  line  26  from  foot,  LanriimL  As  to  the  working  of  the
silver  mines  of  Laurium  in  antiquity,  see  J.  J.  Binder,  Laurion:  die
attischen  Bergwerke  im  Alterthum  (Laibach,  1895).  The  work  is
illustrated  with  plates  and  with  a  map  of  the  district  which  shows  the
positions  of  the  ancient  mines.

P.  8  line  22  from  foot,  the  fortiflcation-wall  etc.  The  fortifica-
tion-wall which  skirted  the  shore  of  Piraeus  is  especially  well
preserved  at  two  places,  one  on  the  eastern  and  the  other  on  the
western  side  of  the  peninsula.  On  the  eastern  side,  a  little  to  the
south  of  the  harbour  of  Zea,  the  wall  is  preserved  beside  the  road  for
a  length  of  about  100  paces  at  a  distance  of  about  40  yards  from  the
sea.  Its  height  varies  from  one  to  five  courses  of  masonry,  but  the
average  is  nearer  five  than  one.  In  this  stretch  of  wall  there  is  a  square
projecting  tower  standing  to  a  height  of  from  two  to  five  courses.     It  is


476  PIRAEUS  addenda

6.25  metres  broad  and  projects  4.75  metres  from  the  curtain.  The
masonry  both  of  the  wall  and  of  the  tower  is  of  the  regular  ashlar  sort
The  other  place  where  the  wall  is  in  good  preservation  is  a  little  bay  on
the  western  side  of  the  peninsula,  near  its  southern  extremity.  The  bay
opens  southwards,  and  the  wall  is  preserved  almost  all  round  it  to  a
height  of  from  two  to  five  courses.  Two  square  towers  project  from
it.  The  masonry  is  again  of  the  fine  ashlar  sort.  But  the  thickness  of
the  wall  does  not  appear,  nor  is  it  possible  to  say  whether  it  was  here
built  of  solid  masonry  or  had  a  core  of  rubble.  However,  at  one  point
on  the  south  side  of  the  peninsula  the  wall  seems  to  have  consisted  of
an  outer  and  inner  facing  of  ashlar  masonry  with  a  core  of  rubble
between  ;  and  from  the  quantity  of  small  broken  stones  lying  about  the
line  of  wall  round  the  edge  of  the  peninsula,  I  incline  to  think  that  the
wall  which  skirted  the  shore  had  everywhere  a  core  of  rubble.

P.  10  line  18  sq.  from  top.  The  principal  gate  etc  The
remains  of  the  principal  gateway  of  Piraeus,  briefly  described  in
the  text,  are  to  be  seen  about  six  minutes'  walk  to  the  east  of  the
Piraeus  railway-station.  The  gateway,  which  faces  north,  is  about
20  paces  wide,  and  is  flanked  by  two  square  towers  resting  on  oval
bases.  Of  these  towers  the  eastern  is  the  better  preserved.  It  is  8
paces  broad  and  projects  9  paces  from  the  curtain.  The  oval  base  on
which  it  rests  is  exposed  on  one  side  to  a  height  of  four  courses,  and  the
tower  itself  is  standing  to  a  height  of  three  courses.  The  height  of  the
seven  courses  together  is  3  metres  (9  ft.  10  in.).  The  masonry  is  of
the  fine  ashlar  kind,  the  blocks  being  squared  and  laid  in  exactly
horizontal  courses.  Adjoining  this  gateway  on  the  west  the  wall,  built
in  the  same  style,  is  preserved  to  a  height  of  three  and  four  courses  for  a
length  of  about  18  paces.  As  it  stands,  the  wall  is  4.33  metres  thick,
but  it  may  have  been  thicker  originally.

Some  40  yards  to  the  east  of  the  gateway  is  another  piece  of  the
fortification-wall  with  a  round  tower  built  as  before  of  fine  ashlar  masonry.
This  tower,  which  in  shape  is  more  than  a  semicircle,  is  12  paces  in
diameter  and  is  standing  to  a  height  of  five  courses.  The  wall  adjoining
the  tower  on  the  east  has  four  courses  standing  for  a  length  of  1 8  or  19
paces  ;  it  is  5.60  metres  thick,  and  this  seems  to  have  been  its  full
thickness  at  this  point.  It  appears  to  be  built  of  solid  masonry  without
any  core  of  rubble.  About  44  paces  east  of  the  round  tower  is  a  second
round  tower,  beyond  which  the  wall  is  5.30  metres  thick,  built  of  solid
masonry  without  any  core  of  rubble.  Not  more  than  two  courses  of  it,
however,  are  here  preserved.  From  the  last-mentioned  tower  the  wall
extends  up  hill  eastward  for  35  paces  to  a  second  gateway,  through
which  the  road  between  the  Long  Walls  is  believed  to  have  gone.  This
gate,  as  stated  in  the  text,  is  double.  An  outer  gate,  about  6  paces
wide,  led  into  a  court  1 9  paces  square,  at  the  farther  end  of  which  there
was  an  inner  gate.  The  outer  gate  was  probably  flanked  with  a  round
tower  on  each  side,  but  only  the  tower  on  the  west  side  now  exists  or  at
least  is  visible ;  it  has  from  one  to  three  courses  of  masonry  standing.
The  walls  of  the  court  are  three  courses  high.  On  the  west  side  of  the
court  the  wall  is  7  metres  (23  feet)  thick;  the  masonry  here  is  again


VOL.  II  PIRAEUS  477

solid,  without  any  core  of  rubble.  From  the  gateway  the  wail  strikes
up  hill  in  a  north-easterly  direction,  but  is  concealed  almost  immediately
by  modem  walls.

P.  27  line  8  from  top,  Btatoes  of  Zeus  and  the  People.  A  statue
representing  the  People  of  Elis  was  set  up  by  the  people  of  Lacedaemon,
as  we  learn  from  an  inscription  found  at  Olympia.  The  inscription
seems  to  date  from  the  Imperial  age.  See  Dittenberger  und  Purgold,
Die  Inschriften  von  Olympia^  No.  316.

P.  32  line  25  sq,  from  foot,  two  ancient  theatres.  As  to  these
two  theatres,  see  W.  Dorpfeld  in  Das  griechische  Theater  (Athens  and
Leipsic,  1896),  p.  97  sqq.  Of  the  theatre  on  the  hill  of  Munychia
nothing  is  known  but  the  situation ;  the  remains  are  buried  under  the
soil.  Some  of  the  walls  were  excavated  in  1880,  but  afterwards  covered
up.  The  other  theatre,  which  lies  a  little  to  the  west  of  the  harbour  of
Zea,  closely  resembles  in  its  plan  the  Dionysiac  theatre  at  Athens  as
built  by  Lycurgus.  The  form  of  the  auditorium  is  that  of  a  semicircle
with  the  wings  prolonged  in  straight  lines.  Fourteen  staircases  divided
the  seats  into  thirteen  wedge-shaped  blocks.  A  semicircular  passage
and  open  gutter  separate  the  lowest  row  of  seats  from  the  orchestra.
The  orchestra  forms  a  complete  circle,  the  diameter  of  which,  measured
within  the  gutter,  is  16.34  metres.  Its  floor  is  the  native  rock.  From
the  foundations  of  the  stage-buildings  which  remain  we  gather  that  the
stage  was  about  18  metres  long  exclusive  of  two  square  wings  which
projected  2.61  metres  from  it,  one  at  either  end,  and  that  its  front  was
adorned  with  fourteen  Doric  columns.  Between  the  two  middle  coltunns
there  would  seem  to  have  been  a  door;  at  least  the  space  between
these  columns  (2.12  metres)  is  wider  than  the  space  (1.39  metres)
between  the  other  columns.  The  depth  of  the  stage,  between  the
wings,  was  probably  about  3  metres.^  The  fronts  of  the  wings  were
adorned  with  five  columns  apiece.  At  the  back  of  the  stage  extended  a
hall  about  34  metres  long  by  nearly  5  metres  wide.  This  was  no
doubt  the  green-room.  The  stage-buildings  show  no  sign  of  having  been
altered  in  Roman  times.

P.  32  line  26  from  foot,  Before  we  quit  the  peninsula  of  Piraeus
etc  Here  may  be  mentioned  the  recent  discovery  of  the  Serangeum  at
Piraeus.  The  Serangeum  is  mentioned  by  Isaeus  {Or.  vi.  33)  and
Alciphron  (Epist,  iii.  43)  as  a  place  in  which  there  was  a  bath,  and
from  the  Greek  lexicographers  (Harpocration,  Photius,  Suidas,  s.v,  Siypay-
yiov)  we  learn  that  it  was  in  Piraeus.  Harpocration  says  it  was
mentioned  by  Lysias  and  Aristophanes ;  and  Photius  informs  us  that
it  was  founded  by  a  certain  Serangus,  and  contained  the  shrine  of  a
hero.  The  name,  which  signifies  '  place  of  caverns,'  recalls  Strabo's
description  of  the  hill  of  Munychia  (ix.  p.  395)  as  <'  in  great  part  hollow

1  Its  depth,  as  measured  by  me  (z6th  December  1895)  from  the  front  of  the
stylobate,  is  3.73  metres,  but  to  this  we  must  add  something  for  the  projection  of
the  cornice.  The  distance  of  the  stylobate  from  the  back  wall  of  the  stage  is,  accord-
ing to  Dr.  Ddrpfdd,  3.17  metres,  but  in  this  measurement  the  breadth  of  the
stylobate  is  naturally  not  included.  The  measurement  of  the  projection  of  the  wings
(a.6z  metres)  which  is  given  in  the  text  is  taken  fh>m  my  own  notes.


478  MUNYCHIA—COUAS  addknda

and  tunnelled,  naturally  adapted  for  dwellings,  and  entered  by  a  narrow
mouth.''  Following  these  indications  Mr.  J.  Dragatsis  lately  discovered
the  Serangeum.  The  entrance  is  beside  tlie  sea,  at  the  eastern  foot  of
the  hill  of  Munychia,  near  the  modem  sea-baths  of  Faraskeuas.  Here
Mr.  Dragatsis  found  a  subterranean  chamber,  which  bad  clearly  been
used  as  a  bath,  with  openings  from  it  through  the  clif&  in  several
directions.  On  the  right  of  the  bath-room  is  an  artificial  cavity  with  a
double  row  of  niches.  In  the  upper  row  of  niches  the  bathers  may
have  deposited  their  clothes,  in  the  lower  the  vessels  used  in  the  bath.
The  floor  of  the  bath-room  is  a  mosaic  of  black  and  white  stones
arranged  to  represent  several  scenes.  Most  of  these  have  been  at  some
time  or  other  demolished,  but  enough  remains  to  allow  us  to  make  out  a
woman  moving  to  the  left  followed  by  two  dogs,  also  a  beardless  3roung
man  driving  a  four-horse  car  with  a  dolphin  swimming  below  it  The
driver  of  the  car  may  be  Serangus,  the  hero  who  gave  his  name  to  the
place.  The  discovery  of  a  stone  bearing  an  inscription  *H/>^ov  o/>o$
'  boundary  of  the  hero's  shrine '  confirms  the  statement  of  Photius  that
there  was  a  shrine  of  the  hero  in  the  Serangeum ;  and  the  marble  tablets
adorned  with  snakes  in  relief  which  have  been  found  on  the  site  were
probably  dedicated  to  him,  since  we  know  that  the  supernatural  beings
whom  the  Greeks  called  heroes  were  commonly  associated  with  snakes
(Plutarch,  CUomenes,  39  ;  Photius,  Lexicon^  s.v.  ijpws  iroticiXos ;  E.
Rohde,  Psyche^  p.  223  note  5).  See  the  letter  of  Mr.  S.  P.  Lambros,  in
Athenaeum^  20th  March  1897,  p.  385  sq.

P.  35  line  10  from  foot,  Oape  Colias.  The  view,  adopted  in  the
text,  that  Cape  Colias  is  the  modem  Cape  Cosmos^  has  recently  been
again  defended  by  Mr.  P.  Kastromenos  (*E<^/x€/3ts  o.p^}.o\oyi.Ky)y  1897,
pp.  93-96).  In  support  of  it  he  points  out  that  fine  pottery  was  made
from  Colian  clay  (Athenaeus,  xi.  p.  482  b),  and  that  the  day  at  Cape
Cosmos  is  of  excellent  quality,  whereas  at  Trispyrgi^  which  some  writers
identify  with  Cape  Colias,  the  soil  is  sandy  and  not  adapted  for  the
manufacture  of  pottery.

P.  44  line  24  from  top,  Between  the  Dipyluzn  etc.  The  outer
wall  between  the  Dipylum  and  the  Sacred  Gate  is  19  ft.  8  in.  distant
from  the  inner  wall.  Three  courses  of  it  are  preserved  on  the  outer
face,  and  one  and  two  courses  on  the  inner  face.  The  large  blocks
placed  on  the  socle  of  the  inner  wall  are  squared  and  of  different  kinds
of  stone  (conglomerate,  etc.) ;  they  are  not  of  the  blue  limestone  of
which  the  socle  is  built.

P.  45  line  7,  sixteen  courses.  The  highest  part  of  this  wall,  so  far
as  I  could  see,  is  only  ten  courses  high  (about  1 3  feet).

P.  49  line  18  sq,  *  giant-pillars '  or  ^serpent-pillars.'  As  to  these
monuments  see  the  monograph  of  Dr.  G.  A.  Miiller,  Die  Rdtcrgruppe
auf  den  romisch-germanischen  Giganien  -  Sdulen  (Strassburg  i/E.  und
Biihl,  1894).  They  are  found  on  both  slopes  of  the  Vosges  mountains,
in  the  districts  of  Saar  and  Meurthe  as  far  as  the  Moselle  in  Luxemburg,
the  Palatine,  and  the  lower  valleys  of  the  Neckar  and  Main.  Some  of
them  are  inscribed  with  the  date  and  a  dedication  to  Jupiter  or  to
Jupiter  and  Juno.    One  well-preserved  specimen,  found  at  Schierstein  in


VOL.  II  ATHENS  479

1889,  is  dated  the  28th  February  of  the  year  221  A.D.  Another,  found
at  Heddemheim,  bears  the  date  241  A.D.  All  of  the  monuments  seem
to  belong  to  the  third  century  A.D.  Thus  Mr.  Kdm's  interpretation  of
them  as  copies  of  a  statue  of  Caligula  vanquishing  the  Ocean  becomes
improbable.  Dr.  G.  A.  Miiller  would  explain  them  as  memorials,
erected  on  various  occasions,  of  victories  won  by  the  Romans  over  the
barbarians  of  Germany,  the  struggle  being  represented  in  the  mythical
form  of  a  god  trampling  a  giant  under  foot.  The  figure  of  the  rider  is
believed  by  Dr.  Miiller  to  stand  variously  for  Jupiter,  Neptune,  or  a
Roman  emperor.

P.  52  line  21  from  foot,  the  sculptor  Enbolides.  The  inscribed
base  of  another  statue  by  this  Athenian  sculptor,  Eubulides  son  of
Euchir,  was  found  by  Messrs.  Bather  and  Yorke  at  Hyampolis  in  1 894.
See  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studiesy  16  (1896),  p.  307,  No.  3.  For  the
family  tree  of  the  artist,  see  Loewy,  Inschriften  griech,  Bildhauer^  p.
166.

P.  5  5  line  7  from  top,  the  Oeramicns.  Pausanias's  description  of  the
market-place  of  Athens  is  examined  in  a  special  dissertation  by  Mr.  O.  B.
Fallis  {Pausanias  auf  der  Agora  von  Athen^  Mtinchen,  1895).  He
accepts  Dr.  D6rpfeld*s  conjecture  that  the  Pnyx  was  "  the  old  market-
place "  mentioned  by  Apollodorus  (Harpocration,  s,v,  JldvSrjfios  'A<f>po-
SiTT)),  and  he  follows  Dr.  Dorpfeld  also  in  his  identification  of  the
Enneacrunus.

P.  56,  the  rest  of  the  building  is  of  common  stone.  But  on  the
inner  side  of  the  back  wall  of  the  colonnade  there  is  a  socle  of  grey
marble  built  in  two  courses,  a  low  one  and  a  high  one.

P.  57  line  17  from  top,  the  Bosral  Colonnade.  Excavations
conducted  by  the  German  Archaeological  Institute  in  1895-97,
laid  bare  some  remains  of  a  building  which  Dr.  Dorpfeld  thinks  may
have  been  the  Royal  Colonnade.  The  remains  are  situated  on  the  west
side  of  the  modem  Poseidon  Street,  at  the  eastern  foot  of  the  hill  on
which  the  so-called  Theseum  stands.  This  is,  as  I  have  pointed  out  in
the  text,  exactly  the  place  where  we  should  expect  to  find  the  Royal
Colonnade.  However  the  building  which  has  been  brought  to  light
has  not  the  usual  shape  of  a  Greek  colonnade.  It  was  a  chamber
about  9  metres  square  with  a  ^ade  opening  to  the  east  between  six
columns.  There  was  one  door  in  the  middle  of  the  fagade  and  another
in  the  north  wall.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  assigns  the  building  to  the  beginning
of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  at  latest.  To  the  south  of  and  in  a  line  with
it  are  the  remains  of  a  similar  edifice  of  later  date  which  appears  to
have  occupied  the  site  of  an  older  building.  See  W.  Dorpfeld,  in
Mittheilungen  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Atken^  21  (1896),  pp.  107-109,  and  ib,
22  (1897),  p.  225.

P.  63  line  22  sqg,  from  top,  the  kings  firom  Mdanthus  to  Clidicus
etc.  The  list  of  the  Athenian  kings  has  been  discussed,  with  charac-
teristic insight  and  sobriety,  by  the  late  J.  Topffer  (*Die  Liste  der
athenische  Konige,*  Hermes,  31  (1896),  pp.  105-123;  reprinted  in
the  writer's  Beitrdge  zur  griech,  Altertumswissenschaft  (Berlin,  1897),
pp.  275-292),   who  refutes  the   objections  raised   by  Professor  von


4So  ATHENS  addenda

Wilamowitz-Moellendorff  {Aristoteles  und  Athen^    2.  p.    134)  to  the
authenticity  of  the  list  of  the  Medontid  kings.

P.  66  line  3  from  foot,  the  regular  ascent  from  the  market-place
to  the  Acropolis  etc  A  passage  in  one  of  the  letters  ascribed  to
Diogenes  (No.  30)  shows  that  in  antiquity,  as  at  the  present  day,  two
separate  roads  led  up  to  the  Acropolis  from  the  low  ground  at  the
northern  foot  of  the  Areopagus,  **  one  of  them  short,  steep,  and  difficult,
the  other  long,  smooth,  and  easy."  The  former  no  doubt  coincided  or
nearly  so  with  the  steep  footpath  which  still  ascends  on  the  east  side  of
the  Areopagus,  near  the  cave  of  the  Eumenides.  The  latter  is  the
broad  road  enclosed  by  walls  of  polygonal  masonry  of  which  a  con-
siderable part  has  been  laid  bare  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  excavations.  In
the  text  I  have  assumed  that  this  broad  and  easy  road  is  the  one  of
which  Arrian  was  thinking  when  he  spoke  of  the  ascent  to  the  Acro-
polis, and  that  consequently  the  Metroum  and  the  statues  of  the
tyrannicides  stood  on  the  western  side  of  the  Areopagus.  But  it  is
quite  possible  that  Arrian  was  referring  to  the  steep  footpath,  not  to
the  broad  road,  and  consequently  that  the  statues  of  the  tyrannicides
and  perhaps  the  Metroum  too  were  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Areopagus.
This  latter  is  the  view  preferred  by  Professor  C.  Wachsmuth  on  the
ground  that  the  statues  of  the  tyrannicides  were,  according  to  Arrian
{AnabasiSy  iii.  16.  8),  not  far  from  the  altar  of  the  Eudanemi,  and  that
this  altar,  on  account  of  the  connexion  of  the  Eudanemi  with  Eleusis
(J.  TSpffer,  Attische  Genealogie^  p.  112),  probably  stood  near  the  cave
of  the  Eumenides  (C.  Wachsmuth,  '  Neue  Beitrage  zur  Topographic  von
Athen,*  Abhandlungen  d,  philolog.  histor,  Ciasse  d,  k.  sacks,  GeselL  d.
Wissen,  18  (1897),  No.  i.  p.  30  sq,),

P.  70  line  17  from  top,  Connsellor  Zens.  Zeus  was  worshipped
under  the  same  title  at  Aegae,  as  we  learn  from  an  inscription  (R.
Bohn,  Altertumer  von  Aegae^  p.  34) ;  and  Counsellor  Zeus  appears  as
a  legend  on  coins  of  Mytilene  of  imperial  date  (B.  V.  Head,  Historia
numoruniy  p.  488).

P.  71  line  12  from  top,  the  Olotted  Sea.  Since  this  note  was
written  I  see  that  the  explanation  of  the  Clotted  Sea  to  which  I  have
given  the  preference  is  accepted  also  by  Sir  John  Lubbock  {Prehistoric
Times^  p.  69).  He  says :  "  Round  the  island  of  Thule  Pytheas  saw
a  substance  which  was  neither  earth,  air,  nor  water,  but  a  substance
resembling  medusae  or  jelly-fishes  (tti'cv/aovi  daXanxrii^  coiicds),  which
could  neither  be  passed  on  foot  nor  in  ships.  This  passage,  which
has  completely  puzzled  southern  commentators,  is  justly  regarded  by
Professor  Nilsson  as  a  striking  evidence  of  Pytheas's  veracity.  For
when  the  Northern  Ocean  freezes,  this  does  not  happen  as  in  our  ponds
or  lakes,  but  small,  separate  plates  of  ice  are  formed,  and  as  soon  as
this  process  commences,  the  fishermen  hurry  to  the  shore,  lest  they
should  be  caught  in  the  ice,  which  for  some  time  is  too  thick  to  permit
the  passage  of  a  boat,  yet  too  weak  to  support  the  weight  of  a  man.  A
very  similar  description  is  given  by  Captain  Lyon.  *We  came,'  he
says,  *  amongst  young  ice,  in  that  state  called  sludge,  which  resembles
in  appearance  and  consistency  a  feir  better  thing — lemon  ice.     From


VOL.  II  ATHENS  481

this  we  came  to  small  round  plates,  of  about  a  foot  in  diameter,  which
have  the  appearance  of  the  scales  of  gigantic  fishes.'  Richardson  also
particularly  mentions  the  '  circular  plates  of  ice,  six  or  eight  inches  in
diameter.'  These  discs  of  ice  tossed  about  by  the  waves  suggested  to
Professor  Nilsson  himself,  when  he  first  saw  them,  the  idea  of  a  crowd  of
medusae,  and  if  we  imagine  a  southerner  who  had  never  before  witnessed
such  a  phenomenon,  and  who  on  his  return  home  wished  to  describe  it
to  his  fellow-countrymen,  it  would  have  been  difficult  to  find  an  apter  or
more  ingenious  simile."

P.  72  line  21  from  top,  Celts Qanls.     Some  modem  writers

have  attempted  to  distinguish  the  Gauls  from  the  Celts.  Thus  Mr.  H.
SchaafThausen  would  confine  the  name  Celts  to  the  peaceful  settled
inhabitants  of  Southern  Gaul,  while  he  would  give  the  name  of  Gauls  to
the  warlike  tribes  of  the  north  and  to  the  roving  bands  who  invaded
Greece  and  finally  settled  in  Asia  Minor.  He  points  out  that  the
distinction  has  the  support  of  Diodorus  (v.  32),  according  to  whom  the
Celts  were  the  people  inland  from  Marseilles,  about  the  Alps,  and  on
the  hither  side  of  the  Pyrenees,  while  the  Gauls  inhabited  the  lands
beyond  that  region  towards  the  south,^  beside  the  ocean  and  the
Hercynian  mountains  as  far  as  Scythia.  See  H.  Schaaffhausen,  '  Die
Kelten,'  in  Festschrift  zum  funfaigjiihrigen  Jubildum  des  Vereins  von
Alterthumsfreunden  im  Rheinlande  am  i  October  1891,  p.  65  sqq,

P.  73  line  9  from  top,  Pergamus Tenthiunia.  The  distinc-
tion between  Pergamus  and  Teuthrania  is  rightly  maintained  by  Mr.  £.
Thramer  {Pergantos^  p.  207  sqq.\

P.  75  line  8  sqq.  from  top.  The  Pergamene  inscriptions  recording
the  victories  over  the  Gauls  are  published  by  Frankel  {Inschrifien  von
Pergamon^  i.  Nos.  20-24).  As  to  these  inscriptions  and  the  history  of
the  wars  of  the  kings  of  Pergamus  with  the  Gauls  see  also  £.  Thramer,
Pergamos^  pp.  230-232,  246-263;  H.  Gabler,  Erythrae  (Berlin,  1892),
p.  39  sqq,\  M.  Frankel,  *Das  grosse  Siegesdenkmal  Attalos  I.,'
PhilologuSy  54  (1895),  pp.  I- 10;  Kopp,  in  Berliner philolog,  Wochen-
schrift^  24  August  1895,  p.  11 15  sqq,^  and  in  Archdologischer  Anzeiger^
1895,  p.  123  sqq,  Mr.  Thramer  would  place  the  great  victory  of
Attalus  I.  over  the  Gauls  at  the  beginning  of  the  king's  reign,  namely
in  240  B.C.  or  at  latest  in  239  B.C.  Mr.  Frankel  holds  that  the  war
with  the  Gauls  was  not  victoriously  concluded  until  228  B.C.

P.  75  line  9  from  foot,  two  different  stories  of  the  coming  of
Telephns  to  Asia  etc.  As  to  these  two  different  legends  see  £.
Thramer,  Pergamos^  pp.  369-406.  Perhaps,  as  Mr,  Thramer  supposes,
Euripides  may  have  borrowed  his  version  of  the  tale  from  Hecataeus ;
for  Pausanias  (viii.  4.  9,  cp.  viii.  47.  4)  cites  Hecataeus  as  his  authority
in  relating  that  form  of  the  legend  which  we  know  from  Strabo  (xiii.
p.  615)  to  have  been  adopted  by  Euripides.  The  smaller  frieze  found
at  Pergamus  which  illustrates  the  career  of  Telephus  from  his  infancy
upwards  (Die  Ergebnisse  der  Ausgrabungen  zu  Pergamon^  Vorlaufiger
Bericht,   Berlin   1880,  pp.  65-69)  has  been    carefully  discussed   and

^  e^f  rd  TfAt  v&rop  ptitovra.     For  ¥irroif  we  should  perhaps  read  Apxrw  here,  as
Diodorus  seems  to  place  the  Gauls  to  the  north,  not  to  the  south,  of  the  Celts.

VOL.  V  2  I


482  ATHENS  addenda

explained  by  Prof.  C.  Robert  ('  Beitrage  zur  Erklaning  des  peiigame-
nischen  Telephos-frieses,'  Jahrlmch  des  archdolog.  Instituts^  2  (1887),  pp.
244-259;  id.f  3  (1888),  pp.  45-65,  87-105).  The  scene  on  the  frieze
representing  the  making  of  the  chest  in  which  Auge  is  to  be  committed
to  the  sea  is  well  reproduced  in  Collignon's  Histoire  de  la  Sculpture
grecgue^  vol.  2.  p.  528,  Fig.  274.

P.  75  line  13  from  foot,  the  CabirL  The  worship  of  the  Cabin  at
Pergamus  is  referred  to  in  an  oracle  of  which  a  copy,  engraved  on  stone,
was  found  at  Pergamus  ( C  /.  G.  No.  3 5  38  ;  Kaibel,  Epigrammata  Graeca,
No.  1035).  The  inscription  seems  to  date  from  the  reign  of  Antoninus
Pius  and  hence  to  be  contemporary  with  Pausanias.  Mr.  Thramer
argues  that  the  divinities  at  Pergamus  whom  Pausanias  and  Aristides
call  Cabiri  were  really  Corybantes,  attendants  of  the  great  Asiatic
goddess,  and  that  the  identification  of  them  with  the  Cabiri  was  a  late
fancy  of  the  mythologists.     See  E.  Thramer,  Pergamos^  pp.  263-270.

P.  90  line  3  from  top,  a  statue  of  Demosthenes.  A  pedestal  found
in  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  at  Athens  bears  the  name  of  Demo-
sthenes (C  /.  A,  iii.  I.  No.  944  a,  p.  508).  The  inscription  is  of  the
Roman  period,  but  the  person  represented  was  probably  the  great
orator.

P.  92  line  1 4  from  top,  Calades.  Mr.  S.  N.  Dragoumes  proposes  to
ubstitutethe  name  of  the  famous  musician  Sacadas  for  that  of  the  unknown
Calades  in  the  text  of  Pausanias.  The  change  is  easy  (SAKAAAS  for
EAAAAHS)  and  the  emendation  probable.  That  a  statue  of  Sacadas
should  be  placed  near  statues  of  Apollo  and  Pindar  would  be  eminently
appropriate,  since  Sacadas  was  believed  to  have  won  the  esteem  of
Apollo  by  his  music  (Paus.  ii.  22.  8  sq.)  and  was  celebrated  in  a  poem
by  Pindar  (Paus.  ix.  30.  2  ;  Plutarch,  De  musica^  8).  See  S.  N.
Dragoumes,  in  Mittheilungen  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  21  (1896),  pp.
27-32.

P.  96  line  lo  sqq.  from  top.  As  to  the  statues  of  Harmodius  and
Aristogiton,  particularly  the  copy  of  them  on  the  Scaramanga  vase,  see
further  Overbeck  in  Berichte  iiber  die  Verhandlungen  d.  k,  sacks.  Gesell.
d,  Wissen,  zu  Leipzig^  Philolog.  histor.  CI.,  44  (1892),  pp.  34-38.

P.  100  line  4  from  top,  Ptolemy,  surnamed  Philometor.  This  was
not  Ptolemy  VI.,  surnamed  Philometor,  but  Ptolemy  VIII.,  surnamed
Soter  II.  and  Philometor,  who  reigned,  with  a  long  break,  from  117  B.C.
to  81  B.C.  See  Justin,  xxxix.  3-5.  An  inscription  found  at  Athens
(C,  I,  A,  ii.  I.  No.  464)  records  a  decree  for  the  erection  of  a  bronze
statue  in  his  honour.  The  statue  may  have  been  the  one  seen  by
Pausanias.  Compare  W.  Gurlitt,  Ueber  Pausanicts,  P-  257  jf.  In  the
same  chapter  (i.  9.  4)  Pausanias  mentions  a  statue  of  Alexander  the
Great,  and  an  inscription  from  the  pedestal  of  a  statue  in  Alexander's
honour  has  been  found  at  Athens  (C  /.  A,  iii.  i.  No.  945).  The
inscription  belongs  to  the  Roman  period.

P.  104  line  13  from  top,  Pergamus.  The  story  of  Pergamus  who
was  said  to  have  given  his  name  to  the  city  is  told  somewhat  differently
by  Servius  (on  Virgil,  EcL  vi.  72),  according  to  whom  Pergamus,  a  son
of  Neoptolemus  and  Andromache,  came  from  Epirus  to  Asia  at  the


VOL.  II  ENNEACRUNUS  483

invitation  of  Grynus,  son  of  Eurypylus,  to  aid  that  prince  in  his  wars  with
his  neighbours.  In  gratitude  for  his  help  Grynus  founded  a  new  city  and
named  it  Pergamus  after  his  defender.  Mr.  Thramer  shows  grounds
for  thinking  that  the  story  of  the  coining  of  Pergamus  from  Epirus
to  Asia  was  a  fiction  posterior  to  the  age  of  Alexander  the  Great.  See
E.  Thramer,  PergamoSy  p.  241  sqq.

P.  107  line  16  sq.  from  top,  dwarf  tribes  in  various  parts  of
Eqnatorial  Africa.  The  reports,  ancient  and  niodem,  of  the  existence
of  dwarf  tribes  in  Africa  have  been  examined  again  in  recent  years
by  Professor  O.  Lenz  of  Prague  (*  Historisches  iiber  die  sogenannten
Zwergvolker,*  Verhandlungen  der  ^2sten  Versamtnlung  deutscher  PhiUh
logen  (Leipzig,  1894),  pp.  525-535).  He  concludes  that  there  are  still
remnants  in  Africa  of  a  race  of  men  totally  different  from  the  negroes  of
the  Sudan,  the  Bantu  tribes,  and  the  Hottentots,  living  as  hunters  or
fishers,  and  characterised  by  low  stature,  primitive  manners,  and  the
possession  of  a  language  different  from  that  of  their  neighbours  ;  further
that  this  dwarf  race  was  formerly  more  widely  diffused  than  at  present,
and  that  its  existence,  especially  about  the  sources  of  the  Nile,  was
known  to  the  Mediterranean  peoples  in  the  remotest  antiquity.

P.  II 2  line  1 5  from  foot,  a  fountain  called  Enneacmnns.  Since
this  note  was  written  the  excavations  conducted  by  Dr.  D5rpfeld
between  the  Pnjrx  and  the  Areopagus  with  the  view  of  discovering  the
Enneacrunus  and  other  ancient  structures  mentioned  by  Pausanias  have
been  continued,  and  detailed  accounts  of  the  work  have  been  published
by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  and  his  colleagues  {MittheUungen  d,  arch,  Inst,  in
Atheny  19(1894),  pp.  248-282,  496-509  ;  /V/.,  20  (1895),  pp.  161-206;
idy  21  (1896),  pp.  103-107,  265-332).  Dr.  Ddrpfeld  believes,  as  we
have  seen,  that  he  has  discovered  the  Enneacrunus  or  Callirrhoe.  What
he  identifies  as  such  is  a  small  square  chamber  hewn  out  of  the  rock  at
the  eastern  foot  of  the  Pnyx  hill  and  communicating  with  a  smaller
round  basin,  also  cut  out  of  the  rock,  a  few  feet  lower  down.  In  the
back  wall  of  the  square  chamber  there  is  a  niche  from  which  water
sometimes  issues  in  winter.  This,  according  to  Dr.  Dorpfeld,  is  the
spring  Callirrhoe.  In  early  Roman  times  the  square  chamber  seems  to
have  been  deepened  by  nearly  5  feet,  and  at  a  later  time  a  large  Roman
house  was  built  in  front  both  of  the  square  chamber  and  the  round  basin,
blocking  them  up  and  cutting  them  off  from  the  ancient  road  which  ran
at  the  foot  of  the  hill.  In  the  walls  of  this  house  were  found  some  hewn
blocks  of  stone  which  Dr.  Dorpfeld  conceives  to  have  formed  part  of  the
casing  of  masonry  with  which  Pisistratus  or  his  sons  enclosed  the  spring
Callirrhoe.  One  of  the  blocks  shows  a  channel  for  water  with  two
mouths ;  into  another  a  lion's  head  has  been  let  in,  apparently  to  serve
as  a  spout.  Some  yards  to  the  south  is  a  large  quadrangular  cistern,
hewn  out  of  the  rock.  Originally  small,  it  seems  to  have  been  greatly
enlarged  and  deepened  in  Roman  times.  In  this  large  cistern  the  great
subterranean  aqueduct,  of  which  some  account  has  been  given  (vol.  2.  p.
1 1 4),  comes  to  an  end.  The  aqueduct  has  now  been  traced  along  the
southern  side  of  the  Acropolis  as  far  east  as  the  Dionysiac  theatre.  It
consists  of  a  tunnel  hewn  in  the  rock  and  measuring  about  1.40  metres


484  ENNEACRUNUS  addenda

in  height  by  .65  metre  in  width,  though  in  some  places  the  dimensions
are  greater.  A  remarkable  feature  is  that  above  it  is  a  second  similar
tunnel,  which  communicates  at  certain  places  with  the  lower  tonneL
The  olDJect  of  this  upper  tunnel  is  unknown.^  At  intervals  of  30  to  40
metres  both  tunnels  are  connected  with  the  sur£Eu:e  of  the  ground  by
perpendicular  shafts ;  one  of  these  shafts  is  no  less  than  1 2  metres
(nearly  40  feet)  deep.  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  theory  is  that  this  aqueduct  was
constructed  by  Pisistratus  for  the  purpose  of  reinforcing  the  supply  of
water  of  the  spring  Callirrhoe  when  that  proved  insufficient  for  the
growing  wants  of  Athens.

Reasons  for  refusing  to  accept  this  theory  have  already  been  given
in  the  text.  Further  consideration  and  more  evidence  appear  to  me
greatly  to  strengthen  these  reasons,  which  have  now  been  stated  with
much  force  by  Mr.  Ch.  Belger  (Berliner  philolog,  Wockensckrift^  14
(1894),  pp.  91-94;  ib,  15  (1895),  PP-  829-832,  859-864;  ib,  16
(1896),  pp.  157-160,  188  sq.y  508-510,  540-544;  Archdologischer
Ameigery  1895,  pp.  110-116;  ib,  1896,  pp.  22  j^.,  40-45),  Prof
J.  M.  Stahl  {RheitUsches  Museum^  N.  F.  50  (1895),  PP«  566-575  ;  ib,  51
(1896),  pp.  306-311),  Prof.  MilchhSfer  {Philologus,  55  (1896X  pp.
170-179),  and  Prof.  C.  Wachsmuth  (*Neue  Beitrage  zur  Topographic
von  Athen,'  Abhandlungen  d,  philolog,  histor,  CI,  d,  k,  sacks,  GtseU,
d,  Wissenschaften^  18  (1897},  No.  i.  pp.  1-32).  Dr.  Ddrpfeld  has
attempted  to  reply  to  the  two  first  of  these  scholars,  but  his  replies
are  ineffective  {Berliner  philolog,  Wochenschrift^  16  (1896X  pp.  123-
128  ;  Archdologischer  Ametger^  1896,  pp.  19-21  ;  Rheinisches  Museum^
N.  F.  51  (1896),  pp.  127-137).  His  theory  has  however  been  accepted
by  Mr.  E.  Bodensteiner  ('  Enneakrunos  und  Lenaion,'  Blatter  fiir  das
Gymnasial'Schulwesen^  31  (1895),  pp.  209-226)  and  Prof.  J.  B.  Bury
{Athenaeum^  22nd  February  1896,  p.  257).  Apart  from  the  chain  of
testimony  of  other  ancient  writers  which  seems  to  link  the  Enneacrunus
or  Callirrhoe  indissolubly  to  the  Ilissus  and  the  south-eastern  quarter  of
Athens,  the  considerations  that  tell  conclusively  against  Dr.  Dorpfeld
are  two,  namely,  first  the  evidence  of  Thucydides,  and  second  the
nature  of  the  remains  themselves.

(i)  In  describing  the  extent  of  Athens  as  it  was  before  the  time
of  Theseus,  Thucydides  says  (ii.  15)  that  the  city  in  those  days  com-
prised only  the  Acropolis  and  the  part  below  it  mainly  to  the  south  (ro
wr*  avn)v  w/o^s  vdrov  fidkurra  T€TfKififi€vov).  To  prove  that  the  ancient
city  included  the  Acropolis,  Thucydides  points  to  the  sanctuaries  of
the  gods  on  the  Acropolis  and  to  the  &ct  that  in  his  own  time  the
Acropolis  was  still  known  specially  as  *the  city.'  To  prove  that
the  ancient  city,  so  far  as  it  exceeded  the  limits  of  the  Acropolis,  lay
chiefly  to  the  south  of  it,  Thucydides  points  to  the  sanctuaries  in  that
quarter   of  the   city,    namely  the   sanctuary   of  Olympian   Zeus,  the

1  On  the  analogy  of  the  ancient  drainage-works  of  the  Copaic  Lake  in  which
remains  of  two  tunnels,  one  above  the  other,  have  also  been  observed  (see  above,
p.  117),  I  would  suggest  that  the  upper  tunnel  was  constructed  first  and  that  at  a
later  time,  when  this  tunnel  did  not  answer  its  purpose,  either  from  not  being  deep
enough  or  not  having  a  sufficient  slope,  the  lower  tunnel  was  constructed  to  replace  it


VOL.  II  ENNEACRUNUS  485

Pythium,  the  sanctuary  of  Earth,  the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  in  the
Marshes,  and  further  to  the  fountain  of  Enneacrunus.  He  explains
that  in  his  time  the  fountain  was  called  Enneacrunus  (*  with  nine  jets '),
because  the  tyrants  (Pisistratus  or  his  sons)  had  converted  it  into  that
form,  but  that  of  old,  when  the  springs  were  open,  the  fountain  was
named  Callirrhoe  ('fair-flowing').  His  reason  for  referring  to  it  as
evidence  of  the  extent  of  the  ancient  city  was  that  down  to  his  own  day
the  water  of  that  spring  was  still  used  at  marriages  and  other  sacred
ceremonies,  from  which  he  infers  that  it  must  have  been  similarly  used
for  the  most  important  purposes  by  the  Athenians  in  days  of  old.

The  passage,  thus  interpreted  in  its  simple  and  natural  sense,  is  clear
and  logical.  Thucydides  first  makes  two  statements  as  to  the  extent
of  the  ancient  city,  and  then  supports  these  two  statements  by  two
separate  sets  of  proofs.  If  the  Enneacrunus  and  the  sanctuaries  men-
tioned by  him  as  outside  of  the  Acropolis  were  not  situated  to  the  south
of  it,  then  Thucydides's  statement  that  the  ancient  city,  so  far  as  it
exceeded  the  limits  of  the  Acropolis,  extended  chiefly  to  the  south,  is  left
unsupported  by  any  evidence,  and  the  reference  to  the  Enneacrunus  and
the  sanctuaries  outside  of  the  Acropolis  has  no  bearing  whatever  on  the
matter  in  hand.  Yet  Dr.  Dorpfeld  holds  that  the  Enneacrunus  and  the
sanctuaries  in  question  lay,  without  a  single  exception,  either  to  the  west
or  the  north  of  the  Acropolis.  If  he  is  right,  we  must  conclude  that  in
order  to  prove  that  ancient  Athens  extended  to  the  south  of  the  Acro-
polis, the  historian  appealed  to  structures  all  of  which  were  situated  to
the  west  or  north  of  it.  If  this  is  not  to  stultify  Thucydides  I  cannot
imagine  what  would  suffice  to  do  so.

(2)  The  remains  of  ancient  water-works  brought  to  light  by  Dr.
Dorpfeld  at  the  northern  foot  of  the  Pnyx  hill  are  appealed  to  by  him
as  conclusive  evidence  that  he  has  found  the  Enneacrunus.  To  me
they  seem  to  prove  precisely  the  reverse.  What  has  he  found  ?  A
perennial  spring  sufficient  to  form  a  fountain  with  nine  jets  such  as  we
know  the  Enneacrunus  to  have  been  ?  Not  at  all.  He  has  found,
according  to  his  own  account  (Archdologischer  Anzeiger^  1896,  p.  41),
a  cistern  hewn  in  the  rock  from  the  back  wall  of  which  water
occasionally  issues  in  winter.  And  this  was  the  town-well  {Stadt-
brunnen)  from  which,  according  to  his  own  account,  all  the  Athenians
in  the  early  days  of  Athens  drew  their  water !  How  could  they  have
drawn  it  in  summer  when  there  was  none  to  draw  ?  Even  in  winter  the
flow  would  seem  to  be  exceedingly  rare  and  scanty.  I  have  visited  the
scene  of  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  excavations  repeatedly  in  winter  without  ever,  to
the  best  of  my  recollection,  observing  a  driblet  of  flowing  water.  Mr.
Ch.  Belger,  who  enjoyed  the  advantage  of  Dr.  D6rpfeld's  own  guidance,
saw  some  water  standing  down  below  in  a  round  basin,  but  none  flow-
ing. All  that  Dr.  Dorpfeld  himself  claims  to  have  discovered  are
"several  natural  veins  of  water,"  every  one  of  them,  apparently,  sub-
terranean. But  a  natural  vein  of  water  which  oozes  scantily  and  inter-
mittently in  winter  can  never  have  formed  the  *  fair-flowing '  spring
Callirrhoe  and  the  nine-mouthed  fountain  of  Enneacrunus.  Such  a
spring  in  fact  does  not  exist  anywhere  at  the  present  day  in  the  hollow


486  ENNEACRUNUS  addenda

between  the  Pnjrx  and  the  Areopagus,  and  that  no  such  spring  existed
there  in  antiquity  is  abundantly  demonstrated  by  the  deep  wells,  over
I  GO  in  number,  with  which  the  ground  is  studded,  as  well  as  by  the
great  aqueduct  which  brought  water  to  this  dry  and  rocky  district
Where  there  is  a  good  spring  on  the  sur&ce,  men  do  not  honeycomb
the  rock  with  deep  wells  to  find  water,  nor  do  they  laboriously  bring  it
in  aqueducts  from  distant  sources.  The  existence  here  of  an  aqueduct,
to  which  Dr.  Ddrpfeld  ventures  to  appeal  as  evidence  in  his  favour,  tells
in  fact  most  strongly  against  him.  Even  if  we  grant,  what  has  not  been
made  out,  that  the  aqueduct  was  constructed  by  Pisistratus,  this  would
not  prove  that  it  had  any  connexion  with  the  Enneacrunus.  For  in
describing  the  change  made  by  Pisistratus  at  the  spring  neither  Thucy-
dides  nor  Pausanias  says  a  word  about  an  aqueduct ;  all  they  give  us  to
understand  is  that  the  springs,  which  before  were  open,  were  enclosed
with  masonry  by  the  tyrant  and  that  the  water  thenceforth  issued
through  nine  spouts.  Finally,  the  square  rock-cut  chamber  which  Dr.
Ddrpfeld  identifies  with  Callirrhoe  would  seem  to  have  been  only  one  of
many  similar  rock-cut  cisterns  of  which  a  whole  series,  connected  with
each  other  by  passages,  has  recently  been  laid  bare  by  the  German
excavations  a  little  further  to  the  south  {MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^
21  (1896),  p.  104).  In  them  we  see  a  system  of  water-works  which
Dr.  D6rpfeld  is  probably  right  in  referring  to  an  earlier  age  than  that  of
Pisistratus.  Had  they  only  come  to  light  sooner,  it  would  hardly  have
occurred  to  anybody  to  identify  the  neighbouring  cistern  as  the  Ennea-
crunus, and  thus  the  study  of  Athenian  topography  would  have  been
spared  another  weary  and  barren  controversy.

Some  excavations  were  made  in  the  bed  of  the  Ilissus,  on  the
traditional  site  of  the  Enneacrunus,  by  the  Greek  Archaeological
Society  in  1 893.  At  the  foot  of  the  ledge  of  rock  which  here  extends
across  the  bed  of  the  stream  were  discovered  two  large  artificial  basins
or  reservoirs  hewn  out  of  the  rock  but  choked  with  masses  of  heavy
stones.  When  these  stones  were  removed  water  gurgled  up  from  the
ground  in  such  volume  that  the  workmen  had  great  difficulty  in  divert-
ing it.  The  more  northerly  of  the  basins  is  21  metres  long  by  11
metres  wide  and  from  4.80  to  5.80  metres  deep ;  the  southern  is  18.60
metres  long  and  6.10  metres  deep.  In  Byzantine  times  the  northern
basin  was  roofed  over  with  a  barrel  vault,  of  which  traces  remain.  Be-
sides these  reservoirs  there  were  found  several  channels  cut  in  the  bed
of  the  river  for  the  purpose,  apparently,  of  conveying  the  water  of  the
springs,  first,  to  a  large  aqueduct  a  little  lower  down,  and,  next,  by
means  of  the  aqueduct,  to  the  Piraeus.  A  long  wall,  badly  built,  was
also  discovered  stretching  partially  across  the  bed  of  the  river  a  few
yards  below  the  northern  reservoir.  It  may  have  been  a  weir  or  dam,
but  whether  it  is  ancient  or  not  seems  doubtful.  Mr.  Ch.  Belger
suggests  that  what  Pisistratus  did  was  to  build  a  wall  across  the  bed
of  the  stream  in  front  of  the  springs  so  as  to  dam  up  the  water  and
then  to  let  it  issue  from  the  wall  in  nine  spouts  {Archdologiscker
Anzeiger^  1895,  p.  113;  /V/.,  1896,  p.  43).  On  the  right  bank  of  the
stream,  not  many  yards  from  the  northern  basin,  the  same  excavations


VOL.  II  CALURRHOE  487

laid  bare  a  piece  of  the  city  wall,  evidently  of  the  Roman  period,  for  it
is  built  in  a  very  solid  style  of  all  sorts  of  stones  bonded  with  mortar.
It  appears  to  have  been  &ced  with  large  stones,  which  have,  however,
been  removed.  The  sides  of  a  square  tower  projecting  from  the  wall
are  also  preserved.  Just  within  this  fragment  of  the  city  wall  the
excavations  revealed  the  remains  of  a  small  temple  of  Roman  date,
which  had  afterwards  been  converted  into  a  church.  The  foundations
of  the  temple  are  built  of  small  stones  and  mortar ;  the  upper  part  is
constructed  of  stones  taken  from  older  buildings.  The  careless  style
of  the  masonry  marks  the  period  of  the  decline.  As  to  the  plan  of
the  temple,  it  apparently  comprised  a  cella  with  a  portico  at  each  end,
the  whole  being  surrounded  by  a  colonnade.  To  judge  from  some  small
fragments  of  a  Doric  geison,  the  temple  seems  to  have  been  built  in
the  Doric  style.  The  deity  to  whom  it  was  dedicated  is  unknown.
See  A.  N.  Skias,  in  IIpaicTiKa  r^s  'A/o;(aioXoy<ic^9  'Erai/oias,  1893,  PP*
II  I- 1 36  ;  /V/.,  in 'E^Y^/ACpis  ap\aioXoyiKriy  1893,  p.  103  sq,

P.  116  line  8  from  top,  the  spring  forms  a  pool  etc.  When  I
revisited  the  Callirrhoe  spring  in  the  bed  of  the  Ilissus,  23rd  November
1895,  there  was  only  a  little  water  trickling  from  the  foot  of  the  rocks,
not  nearly  enough  to  supply  drinking-water  or  to  wash  clothes.  In  the
bed  of  the  stream  there  lay  some  large  marble  blocks,  including  two
pieces  of  fluted  columns  about  2  feet  in  diameter.

P.  118,  note  on  i.  14.  2.    the  Egyptians dispute  the  claims

of  the  Phrygians.  This  is  a  reminiscence  of  Herodotus  (ii.  2),  who
tells  how  an  experiment  made  by  Psammetichus,  king  of  Egypt,  to
determine  which  was  the  most  ancient  nation  resulted  in  favour  of  the
Phrygians.

P.  121  line  4  from  top,  he  entered  a  cave  and  slept  etc.  Many
more  examples  of  the  Epimenides  or  Rip  van  Winkle  type  of  story  are
collected  by  Mr.  E.  S.  Hartland  {The  Science  of  Fairy  Tales^  p.  166
sqq.y  One  of  the  most  striking  comes  from  China  (N.  B.  Dennys,  The
Folk-lore  of  China^  p.  98).  It  relates  how  a  certain  Wang  Chih,  wander-
ing on  the  mountains  in  search  of  firewood,  entered  a  cave  in  which  some
old  men  were  seated  intent  on  a  game  of  chess.  He  laid  down  his  axe
and  watched  them  playing.  Presently  one  of  them  handed  him  some-
thing like  a  date-stone,  telling  him  to  put  it  into  his  mouth.  No  sooner  had
he  tasted  it  than  he  became  oblivious  of  hunger  and  thirst  After  some
time  one  of  the  players  said,  *Mt  is  long  since  you  came  here,  you
should  go  home  now,"  whereupon  Wang  Chih  attempted  to  pick  up  his
axe,  but  found  that  its  handle  had  mouldered  into  dust.  On  reaching  his
home  he  learned  that  hundreds  of  years  had  rolled  away  since  he  left  it
to  go  to  the  mountains,  and  that  no  vestige  or  memory  of  his  kinsfolk
remained.  A  similar  tale  is  told  in  Japan  of  a  woodman  who  going  into
the  mountains  to  cut  wood  followed  a  fox  into  a  bamboo  thicket  Here
on  a  green  lawn,  where  the  sunbeams  fell  dimly  through  the  matted
leaves  of  the  bamboos,  he  beheld  two  damsels  of  wondrous  beauty
playing  chess.  Absorbed  in  watching  them  he  did  not  mark  the  flight
of  time.  At  last  he  turned  to  go,  but  lo  and  behold  a  long  white  beard
covered  his  breast,  his  knees  were  stiff  and  weak  with  age,  and  the


488  A  THENS  addenda

handle  of  his  axe,  with  which  he  would  fain  have  supported  his  tottering
steps,  crumbled  into  dust  under  his  hand.  Slowly  and  painfully  he  crept
back  to  his  native  village.  But  there  he  knew  no  one,  and  no  one  knew
him  ;  for  since  he  went  out  to  hew  wood  on  the  mountains  seven  genera-
tions of  men  had  come  and  gone.  This  Japanese  version  of  the  tale  is
reported  by  D.  Brauns  {Japanische  Mdrchen  und  Sageny  pp.  366-368).
The  Indians  of  the  north-west  coast  of  America  tell  a  story  in  which
an  incident  of  the  same  sort  occurs.  A  fisherman  who  has  harpooned
a  seal  is  drawn  by  it  far  away  out  to  sea  and  goes  through  many
adventures.  Amongst  other  things  he  marries  a  wife  and  stays  with
his  father-in-law,  as  it  seems  to  him,  for  four  days,  but  in  truth  for  four
years.  On  his  return  home  he  is  surprised  to  find  the  house  very  dirty
and  no  one  in  front  of  the  door,  where  he  had  left  his  father.  Entering
he  perceives  his  father,  now  grown  very  old,  sitting  by  the  fire,  and  the
old  man  at  first  fails  to  recognise  his  son,  who,  he  says,  had  gone  away
long  ago  to  hunt  a  seal  and  had  never  returned.  This  tale  is  reported
by  Fr.  Boas  {Indianische  Sagen  von  der  Nord  -  Pacifiscken  Kiiste
AtnerikaSy  Berlin,  1895,  pp.  191-193).

P.  132  line  20  sq.  from  foot.  The  Painted  Coloimade  etc.  A  con-
jectural reconstruction  of  the  picture  of  the  battle  of  Marathon  in  the
Painted  Colonnade  has  been  made  by  Prof.  C.  Robert  with  the  help
of  an  artist,  Mr.  H.  Schenck  {Die  Maraihonschlacht  in  der  Poikiley  und
•weiteres  iiber  Polygnoty  Halle  a.  S.,  1895).  ^^  ^^*s  work  Professor
Robert  touches  also  upon  the  other  pictures  in  the  Painted  Colonnade
and  upon  the  paintings  of  Polygnotus  in  general.  He  supposes  that  the
Painted  Colonnade  comprised  a  central  hall  with  two  wings  projecting
from  it  at  right  angles,  and  that  the  pictures  of  the  battles  of  Oenoe  and
Marathon  occupied  the  back  walls  of  the  two  wings,  while  the  pictures
of  the  battle  with  the  Amazons  and  the  capture  of  Troy  occupied  the
back  wall  of  the  central  hall,  the  battle  with  the  Amazons  being  to  the
right  and  the  capture  of  Troy  to  the  left,  viewed  from  the  standpoint  of
the  spectator.  He  accepts  the  view,  advocated  by  O.  Jahn  and  H.
Brunn,  that  the  picture  of  the  battle  of  Marathon  was  painted  by  Micon
and  Panaenus  conjointly,  though  he  holds  that  Micon  had  probably  the
greater  share  in  it.  All  the  pictures  in  the  Colonnade,  according  to
Prof.  Robert,  were  painted  between  460  and  457  B.C.  Mr.  P.  Girard
is  of  opinion  that  the  picture  of  the  battle  of  Marathon  in  the  Painted
Colonnade  is  imitated  in  one  of  the  sculptured  friezes  at  Gjolbaschi  in
Lycia  which  represents  the  battle  between  the  Greeks  and  Trojans  in
the  plain.  See  O.  Benndorf  und  G.  Niemann,  Das  Heroon  von
Gjolbaschi'Trysa  (Vienna,  1889),  pp.  1 15-123  ;  P.  Girard,  La  Peinfure
antique^  p.  185  sq,

P.  137  line  2  from  foot,  The  battle  of  Oenoe.  The  date  of  the
battle  of  Oenoe  has  recently  been  discussed  by  Prof.  Busolt  {Gricchiscke
GescJiichtCy  3.  p.  323  sqq.).  He  seems  inclined  to  accept  the  earlier
date  assigned  to  it  by  Prof.  C.  Robert.

P.   139  line  6  from  top,  Theseos  fighting  the  Amazons.

This  picture  by  Micon  appears  to  have  been  reproduced  more  or  less
freely  by  the  vase-painters  of  his  time.     For  on  the  black-figured  vases


VOL.  II  ATHENS  489

of  an  earlier  period  which  represent  battles  with  the  Amazons  the
adversaries  of  the  Amazons  are  Hercules  and  Achilles,  not  Theseus,  and
the  women  are  generally  depicted  fighting  on  foot ;  a  combat  between
a  mounted  Amazon  and  a  Greek  hero  on  one  of  these  earlier  vases  is
rare.  Whereas  on  red-figured  vases  which  from  their  style  may  be
contemporary  with  or  later  than  Micon,  the  fighting  Amazons  are  gener-
ally portrayed  on  horseback,  as  they  were  in  Micon's  picture,  and  it  is
on  vases  of  this  sort  that  Theseus  first  appears  as  their  adversary.  See
A.  Kliigmann,  Die  Amazonen  in  der  cUtiscken  LitercUur  und  Kunst
(Stuttgart,  1875),  P'  46  sqq. ;  C.  Robert,  Die  Marathonschlacht  in  der
PoikiUy  p.  1 3.  Micon's  picture  would  seem  even  to  have  influenced  the
sculpture  of  a  later  time,  if  not  indeed  to  have  been  freely  translated  into
stone ;  for  one  of  the  friezes  at  Gjolbaschi  in  Lycia  which  represents  a
battle  with  the  Amazons  "  appears  as  if  pieced  together,  like  a  mosaic,
out  of  red-figured  vase-paintings  of  the  severe  and  beautiful  style  which
depict  single  combats  of  Theseus  and  other  Attic  heroes  with  mounted
Amazons  and  which,  as  Kliigmann  has  shown,  are  derived  from  M  icon's
wall-painting  in  the  Painted  Colonnade  "  (O.  Benndorf  und  G.  Niemann,
Das  Heroon  von  Gjolbaschi-Trysoy  Vienna,  1889,  p.  138).  Cp.  P.  Girard,
La  Peinture  antique^  p.  186.

P.  141  line  22  from  foot,  EchetlnB.  In  the  picture  Echetlus  was
no  doubt  represented  wielding  a  ploughshare,  since  it  was  with  a  plough-
share that  according  to  tradition  he  had  slaughtered  the  Persians.
Now  on  a  series  of  Etruscan  urns  a  combatant  appears  armed  with  a
ploughshare.  Winckelmann  interpreted  him  as  Echetlus,  and  this
interpretation  is  accepted  by  Prof.  C.  Robert  {JDie  Maratkonschlackt  in
€kr  Poikile^  P-  32  sqq,\  who  further  agrees  with  the  late  J.  TopfTer  in
thinking  that  the  hero  Echetlus  with  his  plough  was  akin  to  another
Attic  hero,  Buzyges  (J.  TopfTer,  AtHsche  Genealogies  p.  140,  note  i).
The  names  of  both  point  to  a  close  connexion  with  agriculture,  Buzyges
meaning  <  yoker  of  oxen '  and  Echetlus  *  he  of  the  plough-handle.'

P.  141  line  24  from  foot,  Butes.  Prof.  C.  Robert  would  assign^  the
figure  of  Butes  to  the  picture  of  the  battle  with  the  Amazons  rather  than
to  the  picture  of  the  battle  of  Marathon  {Die  Maratkonschlackt  in  der
Poikile^  p.  13  J^.).

P.  1 50  line  23  sq,  from  foot,  The  intercoltuimiation  etc.  According
to  my  measurements  the  intercolumniation  is  4  ft.  9  in.  between  the
comer  columns  at  the  sides,  and  5  ft.  4  in.  between  the  other  columns
at  the  sides.

P.  1 5 1  line  4  from  foot,  The  scnlptnres  of  the  gables  etc.  The
traces  left  by  the  sculptures  in  the  gables  of  the  so-called  Theseum  have
been  examined  by  Prof.  B.  Sauer.  According  to  him,  the  traces  are  so
many  and  so  clear  that  the  composition  of  the  groups  in  both  gables  can
be  determined.  The  subject  represented  in  the  eastern  gable  was  the
birth  of  Erichthonius.  Athena,  surrounded  by  the  serpent-bodied
Cecrops  and  his  three  daughters  Pandrosus,  Herse,  and  Aglaurus,  seems
to  have  been  portrayed  in  the  act  of  receiving  the  infant  Erichthonius
from  the  giantess  Earth.  In  the  middle  of  the  western  gable  Hephaestus
appeared  kneeling  before  Thetis  and  Eurynome  in  the  sea-cave  (Homer,


490  ATHENS  addkmda

//.  xviiL  393  sqq,\  while  in  the  comers  the  chariots  of  the  Sun  and
Moon  were  represented,  the  one  rising  from,  the  other  sinkiiig  into  the
sea.  If  Prof.  Sauer  is  right  in  thus  interpreting  the  marks  in  the
gables,  his  investigations  strongly  confirm  the  view  taken  in  the  text
(vol.  2.  p.  155)  that  the  temple  was  dedicated  to  Hephaestus,  the  fiuher
of  Erichthonius.  Or  the  temple  may,  as  Prof  Sauer  suggests,  have  been
dedicated  to  Hephaestus  and  Athena  jointly,  though  in  conunon  speech
it  passed  as  the  temple  of  Hephaestus  only.  See  B.  Sauer,  in
Archaologiscker  Anseiger^  1897,  p.  84.

P.  156  line  23  from  foot,  the  pictnres  in  the  TheBeom.  Prof  C.
Robert  thinks  that  both  the  battle-pieces  in  the  Theseum  were  painted
by  Polygnotus,  not  by  Micon  {Die  Marathonschlacht  in  der  Poikile^  pi
46  sq,).  He  holds  (p.  50  sqq,)  that  the  picture  of  the  battle  of  the
Centaurs  and  Lapiths,  particularly  the  group  representing  Theseus  and
the  dead  Centaur,  is  partly  reproduced  both  in  an  existing  vase-painting
now  at  Berlin  (£.  Curtius,  Gesammelte  Abhandlungen^  2.  pL  viL)  and
in  the  sculptures  of  the  western  gable  of  the  temple  of  Zeus  at  Olympia.
Prof  O.  Benndorf  considers  that  the  same  picture  influenced  the  sculptor
who  carved  the  same  subject  on  one  of  the  friezes  at  Gjdlbaschi  in  Lycia
(O.  Benndorf  und  G.  Niemann,  Das  Heroon  von  GjoldcuM-Trys^
p.  186).

P.  157  line  18,  When  Minos  brought  Theseus  etc.  The  vase-
paintings  which  represent  Theseus's  visit  to  Amphitrite  at  the  bottom  of
the  sea  have  been  again  discussed  by  Mr.  G.  Ghirardini  (Rendkimd
della  Recde  Accademia  dei  Uncei,  Serie  Quinta,  vol.  4  (1895),  PP-  ^^
100).  On  the  vase  found  at  Truvo  Theseus  holds  some  object  in  his
left  hand.  What  the  object  is,  does  not  appear ;  it  is  certainly  not  a
ring.  Mr.  Petersen  suggested  that  it  may  be  a  little  jewel-box  or  casket
containing  the  ring  which  Minos  had  thrown  into  the  sea ;  but  that
Theseus  should  have  found  such  a  little  box  in  the  depths  of  the  sea
and  brought  the  ring  back  in  it,  as  from  a  jeweller's  shop,  is  an  idea
which  is  hardly  likely  to  have  occurred  to  the  artist.  The  notion,
though  it  has  found  favour  with  Prof  C.  Robert  {Die  Marathonschlacht
in  der  Poikile^  p.  51),  is  justly  scouted  by  Mr.  Ghirardini,  who  also,
very  properly,  rejects  as  baseless  the  theory  of  Prof  Robert,  that  the
picture  on  the  vase  found  at  Girgenti  is  a  copy  of  the  one  in  the
Theseum.  We  have  absolutely  no  description  of  the  painting  in  the
Theseum  ;  Pausanias  only  tells  the  legend  without  describing  the  picture,
and  he  expressly  informs  us  that  even  in  his  time  the  picture  was  so
obscure,  partly  from  the  effects  of  time,  partly  because  the  artist  had
not  painted  the  whole  story,  that  it  was  not  easy  to  understand  it  Yet
Prof  Robert  professes  not  only  to  recognise  a  copy  of  this  lost  picture
but  even  to  trace  its  artistic  antecedents  {Die  Marathonschlacht  in  der
Poikile,  pp.  50-52).

The  story  of  Theseus's  quarrel  with  Minos  and  his  plunge  into  the
sea  to  fetch  up  the  king's  ring  is  told  at  some  length  by  Bacchylides
in  a  recently  -  discovered  poem,  which  through  the  kindness  of  Dr.
J.  E.  Sandys  I  have  been  permitted  to  see  in  proof  So  closely
does  the  poet's  version  of  the  legend  agree  with  the  prose  version  of


VOL.  II  ATHENS  491

Hyginus  {Astronomic€^  ii.  5)  that  it  can  hardly  but  have  been  known  to
Hyginus  either  directly  or  indirectly.  But  whereas  Hyginus  apparently
lays  the  scene  of  the  story  in  Crete,  Bacchylides  lays  it  on  board  the  ship
that  was  bearing  Theseus  and  his  youthful  comrades  to  their  doom.
Minos  himself,  according  to  the  poet,  was  on  board  the  vessel  and
ordered  it  to  proceed  at  full  speed  as  soon  as  Theseus  had  disappeared
beneath  the  brine.  No  doubt  the  wicked  king  thought  he  had  thus  rid
himself  of  the  troublesome  stripling  who  dared  to  oppose  his  lawless
wishes.     But  fate,  says  the  poet,  ordained  it  otherwise.

P.  166  line  9  sq.y  tlie  marriage  of  the  Dioscuri  to  the  dau^^ters
of  Leudpinui.  The  rape  of  the  daughters  of  Leucippus  by  the
Dioscuri  is  represented  in  great  detail  and  in  a  lively  style  on  one
of  the  sculptured  friezes  at  Gjolbaschi  in  Lycia ;  and  some  archaeologists,
such  as  Professors  O.  Benndorf,  C.  Robert,  and  M.  Collignon,  are  of
opinion  that  the  scene  on  the  frieze  is  a  copy,  more  or  less  close,  of  the
picture  by  Polygnotus  here  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  In  the  centre  of  the
scene  is  a  temple,  from  the  door  of  which  two  men  are  rushing.  To
the  right  of  the  temple,  in  the  upper  band  of  the  frieze,  men  are  prepar-
ing to  skin  a  ram  and  an  ox  which  have  just  been  slaughtered.  A  great
kettle  and  other  vessels  for  cooking  show  that  a  feast  is  being  made
ready.  In  the  lower  band  of  the  frieze  an  old  man,  no  doubt  Leucippus,
is  praying,  women  are  talking,  and  two  of  them  make  gestures  of  dismay
and  sorrow.  On  the  other  side  of  the  temple  the  Dioscuri  are  carrying
off  the  two  brides,  each  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  four  horses,  while  the  two
sons  of  Aphareus  pursue  them  on  horseback  accompanied  by  a  number
of  armed  retainers  on  foot.  The  relation  of  this  last  scene  to  the  two
former  seems  plain.  Friends  and  relations  have  assembled  to  celebrate
the  wedding  of  the  sons  of  Aphareus  to  the  daughters  of  Leucippus ;  the
usual  sacrifices  have  been  offered  in  the  temple  and  the  preparations  for
the  banquet  are  in  full  swing,  when  word  comes  that  the  brides  have  just
been  carried  off  by  Castor  and  Pollux  ;  hence  the  despair  of  the  old
£aither  and  the  dismay  of  the  women.  Thus  the  sculptor's  rendering  of
the  legend  agrees  with  the  tradition  that  the  Dioscuri  had  been  invited  to
the  wedding  and  had  there  and  then  ravished  away  the  brides  (Schol.  on
Homer,  //.  iii.  243  ed.  Bekker;  Schol.  on  Pindar,  Nenu  x.  112).  If
the  conjecture  is  well  founded  that  in  these  reliefs  of  Gjolbaschi  we
possess  a  copy  or  imitation  of  the  picture  of  Polygnotus,  it  will  follow
that  Pausanias  was  wrong  in  describing  the  subject  of  the  picture  as  the
marriage  of  the  Dioscuri  to  the  daughters  of  Leucippus ;  the  subject
was  really  the  marriage  of  the  sons  of  Aphareus  to  these  damsels
and  its  sudden  interruption  in  consequence  of  the  abduction  of  the
brides.  In  none  of  the  vase-paintings  which  illustrate  the  rape  of  the
maidens  is  any  indication  given  of  the  preparations  for  their  marriage
to  the  sons  of  Aphareus.  See  O.  Benndorf  und  G.  Niemann,  Das
Hereon  von  Gjblbaschi'Trysa^  pp.  159-168;  J.  Overbeck,  Geschichte
des  griech,  Plastik^^  2.  p.  207  sq, ;  M.  Collignon,  Hist,  de  la  Sculpture
grecque^  2.  p.  210;  C.  Robert,  Die  Marathonschlctcht  in  der  Poikile^
p.  53  sqq,

P.  166  line  18  sq,  from  foot,  a  rft^^t'^g  lyy  Micon  of  those  who


492


ATHENS


ADDKifDA


sailed  with  Jason  etc.  Prof.  Benndorf  accepts  the  view,  to  which  in
the  text  I  have  given  the  preference,  that  the  subject  of  the  picture  was
the  funeral  games  held  by  Acastus  in  honour  of  his  Either  Pelias  (Das
Heroon  von  Gjolbaschi'Trysay  p.  i66  sq,).  On  the  other  hand  Prof.
Robert  still  defends  his  theory  that  in  the  picture  the  Argonauts  were
represented  before,  instead  of  after,  their  voyage  to  Colchis  {Die
Marathanschlacht  in  der  Poikile^  pp.  61-63).

P.  168  line  23  from  foot,  Athena  init  Erichthonins  in  a  eheit  etc.
An  interesting  illustration  of  this  story  was  procured  for  the  Louvre  in
1880.  It  is  a  statue  of  Athena  standing  and  carrying  on  her  left  ann  a
box  or  basket,  from  which  a  serpent  has  protruded  his  head.  The
serpent  is  no  doubt  the  youthful  Erichthonius.  See  P.  Jamot,  ^  Minerve
k  la  Ciste,*  Monuments  Grecs^  vol.  2.  Nos.  21-22  (1893- 1894),  PP-  l7-39t
with  pL  1 2.

P.  175  line  10  from  top,  The  Serapenm at  Alexandria.   Some

remains  of  this  great  sanctuary  have  recently  been  excavated  by  Dr.  Botti,
Director  of  the  Alexandrian  Museum  {American  JourneU  of  Arckaeolcgyy
II  (1896),  p.  67  sq,y

P.  180  line  8  sq.  from  top,  buttresses  on  the  south  side.  The
platform  of  the  Olympieum  is  strengthened  with  buttresses  on  the  east
as  well  as  on  the  south  side.

P.  185  line  19  from  foot,  a  vast  structure  of  Roman  date  etc
On  the  eastern  side  of  the  great  quadrangle  which  formed  the
gymnasium  or  library  of  Hadrian  there  remain  in  position  four  bases
of  columns  at  the  southern  end  of  the  colonnade.  The  bases  are  of
white  marble.  Each  is  quadrangular,  but  supports  a  round  base  on
which  the  column  rested  directly.  On  the  most  southerly  of  the  bases
a  piece  of  the  shaft  of  the  column  is  still  standing ;  it  is  of  green  and
white  marble  and  is  unfluted.  A  portion  of  the  back  wall  of  this
eastern  colonnade,  forming  the  outer  wall  of  the  whole  building  on  the

east,  is  still  standing  in  Aeolus
Street.  It  is  about  30  paces  long
and  is  well  built  of  ashlar  masonry.
Five  buttresses  project  on  its  outer
side.

Of  the  building  which  occupied
the  centre  of  the  spacious  quad-
rangle enough  remains  (contrary  to
what  I  have  said  in  the  text)  to
enable  us  to  make  out  the  general
plan  in  a  rough  way.  It  appears  to
have  comprised  a  square  op>en  court
measuring  about  19  or  20  paces  on
the  sides  and  enclosed  on  each  side
by  a  semicircular  colonnade  (see  the
annexed  cut).  The  cloisters  surrounding  this  central  court  seem  to  ha\'e
been  paved  throughout  with  mosaics  arranged  in  an  ornamental  pattern.
Of  the  semicircular  colonnades  on  the  north  and  south  sides  of  the  court,
the  foimdations,  stylobates,  and  portions  ofthe  mosaic  pavement  remain,


VOL.  II  ATHENS  493

and  in  the  north  colonnade  there  is  further  a  base  of  a  column  in
position  on  the  stylobate.  Stylobates  and  base  are  of  white  marble.
Of  the  semicircular  colonnade  on  the  west  side  the  foundations  and  parts
of  the  mosaic  pavement  are  left,  but  the  stylobate  is  gone.  On  the
east  side,  where  the  fourth  semicircular  colonnade  should  be,  there  is
the  apse  of  a  Christian  church,  which  may  have  absorbed  part  of  the
colonnade.  The  diameter  of  each  semicircular  colonnade,  on  the  inner
side,  is  about  8  paces.  Further,  at  the  north-east  comer  of  this
small  cloistered  court  there  are  standing  two  short  pieces  of  walls
meeting  at  a  right  angle ;  one  of  them  faces  south,  the  other  east  Both
are  built  of  well-cut  and  well-jointed  rectangular  blocks  of  white  marble
laid  in  regular  horizontal  courses.  The  foundations,  built  of  common
stone  in  the  same  style  as  the  marble  walls,  are  exposed  to  a  depth  of
several  courses.  Walls  and  foundations  together  are  standing  to  a
height  of  ten  courses.  In  the  piece  of  wall  which  faces  south  there  is
an  arched  doorway,  which  seems  to  have  led  from  the  eastern  side  of  the
northern  semicircular  colonnade  into  the  central  court.  On  the  south
side  of  the  court,  in  front  of  the  semicircular  colonnade,  there  is  a  marble
stylobate  and  on  it  stand  three  columns  and  an  anta  of  white  marble,
all  supporting  their  architraves.  These  columns  and  anta  appear  to
have  belonged  to  the  Christian  church.

P.  i86  line  19  from  top,  Facing  this  anta,  a  little  to  the  nortli  of
it,  is  a  Jamb  of  IJie  door.  This  is  not  exact.  The  jamb  does  not  face
the  antOy  being  a  little  to  the  east  as  well  as  to  the  north  of  it.  The
inscription  referred  to  in  the  text  is  on  the  south  face  of  the  jamb  and
high  up.

P.  186  line  20  sq,  from  foot,  a  market-place  of  Roman  date.
Only  the  south-eastern  comer  of  the  Roman  market-place  had  been
excavated  when  I  was  in  Athens  last  (December  1895).  The  gateway
is  at  a  lower  level  than  the  neighbouring  Tower  of  the  Winds ;  steps
lead  down  to  it,  and  from  the  gateway  again  four  or  five  more  steps  lead
down  into  the  court  of  the  market-place,  which  is  at  a  still  lower  level.
The  width  of  the  gateway  is  10  paces.  Portions  of  all  the  columns  both
outer  and  inner  of  the  gateway  are  standing ;  the  pieces  of  the  two
columns  on  the  inner  side  of  the  gateway  are  about  4  metres  (13  feet)
high.  The  two  antae  of  the  outer  colonnade  of  the  gateway,  together
with  large  pieces  of  the  side  walls,  are  also  standing.

P.  193  line  I,  Oynosarges.  The  view  that  Cynosarges  lay  on  the
south-eastem  side  of  Lycabettus,  on  or  near  the  site  now  occupied  by
the  Monastery  of  the  Angels,  has  been  disputed  by  Dr.  Ddrpfeld,  who
would  look  for  it  to  the  south  of  the  Ilissus,  near  the  Church  of  H.
Marina,  Accordingly  excavations  have  been  made  by  the  British  School
under  the  direction  of  Mr.  Cecil  Smith  at  a  place  on  the  south  bank
of  the  river,  due  south  of  the  Olympieum,  where  the  ground  falls  away
perpendicularly  from  a  small  plateau.  The  excavations  on  the  plateau  have
revealed  the  foundations,  built  of  small  stones,  of  a  large  building  which
seems  to  date  from  the  sixth  century  ac  and  which  from  its  plan  may
possibly  have  been  a  gynmasium.  But  no  inscriptions  have  yet  been
found  which  identify  it  as  Cynosarges.     Both  within  and  without  the


494  ATHENS  addbnda

building  many  tombs  were  discovered ;    but  it  was  observed  by  the
excavators  that  the  tombs  inside  of  the  building  were  all  either  eariier
than  the  sixth  or  later  than  the  fourth  century  B.C.     Mr.  Cecil  Smith
draws  from  this  observation  an  argument  in  fovour  of  the  view  that  the
edifice  was  the  gynmasium  of  Cynosarges,  since  that  gymnasium  appears
from  the  law  of  Solon  touching  theft  to  have  been  in  existence  at  the
beginning  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.  and  was  destroyed  by  Philip  V.,  king
of  Macedonia,  in  200  B.C.  (see  vol.  2.  p.  194).     But  if  any  of  the  tombs
within  the  building  date  from  the  third  century  B.C,  the  edifice  can
hardly  be  Cynosarges.     Amongst  the  objects  found  in  the  necropolis  is
a  series  of  vases  decorated  in  the  geometrical  style.     In  an  adjoining
field  the  English  archaeologists  discovered  remains  of  a  large  Roman
building,    apparently   a   colonnade    enclosing    an    oblong   space  and
measuring  no  less  than  230  feet  on  the  side.     Mr.  Cecil  Smith  con-
jectures that  it  may  have  been  built  by  Hadrian  to  replace  the  dd
gymnasium  of  Cynosarges  which  had  been  destroyed.     See  AmiHcM
Journal  of  Archaeology,  11  (1896),  p.  227  ;  Classical  RevieWy  10(1896),
p.   222  ;  Archdologischer  Anzeigery  1 1  (1896),  p.  73  ;  Berliner phiU>log,
Wochenschrifty  20th  February  1897,  p.  255  j^. ;  MittheiL  d,  arch.  InsL
in  Athen,  21  (1896),  p.  463  sq, ;  Cecil  Smith,  in  JourmU  of  Hellenic
Studies^  16  (1896),  p.   337  J^. ;  /V/.,  in  Annual  of  the  Btitish  Schooled
Athens^  No.  2,  Session  1895-96,  pp.  23-25.

P.  203  line  24  sq,  from  foot,  a  temple  of  Huntress  Artemis.  Dr.
Dorpfeld  would  identify  with  this  temple  the  remains  of  a  small  hot
elegant  temple  of  the  Ionic  order  which,  converted  into  a  church  of
the  Virgin  of  the  Rock  {Panagia  eis  ten  Petran\  existed  down  to
the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century.  It  stood  on  the  southern  bank
of  the  Ilissus,  about  a  hundred  yards  above  Callirrhoe.  The  temple,
built  entirely  of  white  marble,  rested  on  three  steps  and  measured
about  42  feet  long  by  17  feet  wide.  A  portico,  supported  by  four
Ionic  columns,  adorned  either  end  of  the  building.  Some  shattered
remains  of  the  foundations  were  excavated  by  Mr.  Skias  for  the
Greek  Archaeological  Society  in  1897.  See  Stuart  and  Revett,  The
Antiquities  of  Athens^  vol.  i  (London,  1762),  pp.  7-1 1,  with  plates
i.-viii.  ;  W.  Dorpfeld,  in  Mittheilungen  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  22
(1897),  p.  227  sq.

P.  205  line  21  from  foot,  a  stadinm.  Excavations  made  in  the
stadium  in  1895  proved  that  the  long  sides  of  the  stadium  were  not
straight  but  curved.  A  part  of  the  passage  {diasoma)  which  divided
the  seats  horizontally  into  an  upper  and  a  lower  block  was  found  well
preserved.  See  Mittheilungen  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,  20  (1895),  p.
374  ;  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  16  (1896),  p.  338.

P.  206  line  6  sq.  from  foot,  the  hills  wMch  bound  the  stadium
etc.  On  the  hill  which  bounds  the  stadium  on  the  north-east  1
found  (23rd  November  1895)  only  some  foundations  built  of  small
stones  and  mortar,  together  with  a  single  block  of  white  marble.  On
the  higher  hill  which  bounds  the  stadium  on  the  south-west  I  observed
some  large  ancient  squared  blocks,  also  remains  of  a  wall  or  foundations
built  of  small  stones  and  mortar.


VOL.  II  ATHENS  495

■  ■

P.  207  line  6  from  foot,  cunred  marble  panels.  At  the  top
of  each  of  these  panels  a  pair  of  small  tripods  is  sculptured  in  low
relief.

P.  209  line  23  from  top,  statnes  thus  placed  under  tripods.  It
is  possible  that  some  of  the  images  which  Pausanias  mentions  as  being
placed  under  or  enclosed  by  tripods  were  not  separate  works  of  art  but
served  as  supporters  to  the  basin  or  kettle,  which  was  the  essential
part  of  a  tripod.  Prof.  Percy  Gardner  has  collected  instances  of  basins
thus  supported  by  sculptured  figures  (Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  16
(1896),  pp.  275-280).  Amongst  them  is  a  limestone  tripod  at  Oxford,
the  three  legs  of  which  are  carved  in  the  likeness  of  three  women
standing  on  lions.  A  fragment  of  a  similar  tripod  was  found  by  the
Germans  at  Olympia  (G.  Treu,  in  Ofymfia:  Ergebnisse^  Textband  3.
pp.  26-29).  At  Delphi  more  recently  the  French  have  found  three
graceful  figures  of  girls  dancing  round  a  trunk  of  a  tree  which  may
have  supported  a  tripod  {Bulletin  de  Corresp,  hell^nique^  18  (1894),  p.
180  ;  Gazette  des  Beaux  Arts^  December  1894,  p.  450,  with  illustration
facing  p.  452).  In  the  Louvre  there  is  a  terra-cotta  bowl  of  Etruscan
style  supported  by  four  figures  of  women  (£.  Pottier,  Catalogue  des
Vases  Antiques  de  terre  cuite  du  Louvre^  i.  p.  168,  No.  396).  And
Herodotus  describes  (iv.  152)  a  great  bronze  bowl  resting  on  three
kneeling  giants  which  the  Samians  dedicated  to  Hera.

P.  210  line  9  sq,  from  foot,  the  statue  of  a  boy  Satyr  holding
out  a  cup.  The  Dresden  Museum  possesses  the  cast  of  a  statue  of  a
youthful  satyr,  bequeathed  to  the  Museum  by  Raphael  Mengs,  which
Mr.  P.  Bienkowski  holds  to  be  a  copy  of  the  statue  here  mentioned
by  Pausanias ;  the  original,  he  considers,  was  by  one  of  the  sons  of
Praxiteles  {Reime  arch^ologique^  3me  S^rie,  26  (1895),  pp.  281-285).
The  theory  appears  to  me  arbitrary  and  unproved.

P.  2 1 5  line  1 4  from  top,  the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  in  the  Marshes.
Dr.  Dorpfeld  has  now  fully  described  the  enclosure  excavated  by  him
which  he  believes  to  have  been  the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  in  the
Marshes  {Mittheilungen  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  20(1895),  pp.  161-206,
368-370).  It  lies  in  the  trough  between  the  Pnyx,  the  Areopagus,  and
the  Acropolis,  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  ancient  road  which  led  from
the  market-place  to  the  Acropolis.  The  modem  carriage-road  runs  a
little  to  the  west  of  it.  The  enclosure  formed  a  triangle,  bounded  on
all  three  sides  by  ancient  streets.  Its  greatest  length  was  about  45
metres,  its  greatest  breadth  about  25  metres,  and  its  area  comprised
about  560  square  metres.  The  boundary- wall  was  almost  everywhere
a  supporting-wall  as  well,  because  the  interior  of  the  enclosure  lay
for  the  most  part  below  the  level  of  the  surrounding  streets.  The
difference  in  level  was  originally  as  much  as  2  metres  (6  ft.  7  in.),
and  later  it  increased,  as  the  streets  gradually  rose.  The  wall  is
built  throughout  of  polygonal  blocks  of  blue  limestone,  but  the  style  of
masonry  varies  in  different  places.  In  some  places  the  lower  part  is
built  of  large  blocks  well  fitted  together,  and  the  upper  part  of  small
stones  ;  in  another  place  the  lowest  course  consists  of  nearly  rectangular
blocks ;  while  in  the  rest  of  the  wall  large  and  small  stones,  cut  in


496  ATHENS  addenda

polygons,  occur  side  by  side,  giving  the  masonry  an  air  of  great
antiquity.  These  differences  in  style  seem  to  show  that  the  wall  was
repaired  at  various  periods.  No  gateway  has  been  found ;  probably
the  entrance  was  at  the  south  end  of  the  east  side,  where  there  is  now
a  gap  in  the  wall.

About  the  middle  of  the  precinct  are  the  remains  of  a  platform  of
masonry  which  seems  to  have  been  originally  3.10  metres  square,  and
to  have  supported  an  altar  or  sacrificial  table  resting  on  four  legs.  The
holes  for  three  of  the  legs  are  preserved.  A  quadrangular  groov-e
.49  metre  long,  .13  metre  wide,  and  .08  metre  deep  is  sunk  in  the
platform  near  its  western  edge ;  and  a  similar  groove,  which  is  only
partially  preserved,  seems  to  have  extended  in  a  line  with  it  to  the
south.

In  the  north- western  part  of  the  precinct  is  a  wine-press  of  the  son
which  may  still  be  seen  in  many  parts  of  Greece.  It  forms  an  irregular
quadrangle  about  4.70  metres  long  and  2.80  metres  wide.  The  floor,
constructed  of  pebbles  and  lime-mortar,  slopes  towards  the  south-east
comer,  where  a  hole  in  the  bottom  of  the  wsdl  allowed  the  juice  of  the
grapes,  as  they  were  trodden  on  the  floor,  to  pour  into  a  round  earthen-
ware vessel  sunk  in  the  ground  immediately  in  front  of  the  hole.  This
wine-receiver  is  still  in  its  place ;  it  is  .50  metre  wide  and  holds  about
55  litres.  Adjoining  the  wine-press  on  the  east  is  another  but  more
ruinous  apartment  with  a  similar  floor  and  a  vessel  sunk  in  it  Probably
it  too  was  used  in  making  the  wine,  but  whether  it- was  a  wine-press  is
uncertain.  With  regard  to  the  date  of  the  wine-press,  Dr.  Dor^^d
would  assign  it  to  the  fourth  century  ac.  on  the  strength  of  a  boundary
inscription  found  in  a  Club-room  {Lesche)  on  the  opposite  side  of  the
ancient  street ;  for  the  front  wall  of  the  Club-room  is  built  in  the  same
style  as  the  walls  of  the  wine-press.  But  some  remains  of  another
floor  below  the  existing  one  seem  to  show  that  there  had  been  a  still
older  wine-press  on  the  same  site.  And  at  a  later  time  yet  another
wine-press  was  constructed  above  the  two  older  ones.  It  occupied  only
about  a  third  of  the  area  of  its  predecessor  and  had  a  floor  made  of
lime  and  pebbles  with  a  slope  to  the  east.

In  the  southern  part  of  the  precinct  were  found  the  remains  of  a
small  temple,  which  seems  to  have  consisted  of  a  square  chamber  with
a  fore-temple  {pronaos)  or  portico  facing  southward.  The  length  of  the
building  is  only  5.40  metres  and  its  breadth  3.96  metres.  The  walls,
so  far  as  they  exist,  are  built  of  polygonal  blocks  of  limestone
in  a  very  archaic  style.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  regards  the  building  as  more
ancient  than  the  older  temple  of  Eleutherian  Dionysus  near  the
Dionysiac  theatre ;  he  would  assign  it  to  the  sixth  or  seventh  century
B.C.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  little  temple  appears  to  have  been  cut
off"  from  the  northern  and  larger  part  of  the  precinct  by  a  wall  extending
across  the  precinct  from  east  to  west.  However  in  this  partition-wall,
immediately  to  the  west  of  the  temple,  is  a  doorway  which  gave  access
from  the  southern  to  the  northern  part  of  the  enclosure.

Many  potsherds  decorated  in  the  early  geometrical  style,  together
with  many  of  the  later  black-figured  and  red-figured  sorts,  were  found


VOL.  II  ATHENS  497

within  the  precinct  On  the  strength  of  the  former  and  of  the  style
of  the  enclosing  wall  Dr.  Dorpfeld  believes  that  the  precinct  is  older,
perhaps  by  several  centuries,  than  the  sixth  century  B.C.

At  some  time,  which  cannot  be  precisely  determined,  the  precinct
was  abandoned  and  left  to  utter  decay,  for  by  the  end  of  the  Greek  or
the  beginning  of  the  Roman  period  it  was  already  buried  deep  under
the  soil.  This  is  proved  by  the  remains  of  later  buildings  which  were
found  at  a  height  of  about  2  metres  or  more  above  the  ancient  precinct.
These  buildings  belong  to  two  different  periods,  first,  the  late  Greek  or
early  Roman,  and,  second,  the  late  Roman.  Of  the  former  the  remains
are  scanty ;  they  consist  only  of  foundations  built  of  small  stones  bonded
with  clay,  not  mortar.  So  far  as  can  be  made  out  from  these  founda-
tions the  new  building  seems  to  have  consisted  of  a  hall  extending  cast
and  west  with  a  series  of  rooms  attached  to  it  on  the  north  and  perhaps
also  on  the  south.  It  occupied  the  eastern  part  of  the  ancient  precinct ;
when  it  was  built  the  old  temple,  altar,  and  wine-press  had  already
disappeared  under  the  soil.  At  a  still  later  time  another  building  was
erected  on  the  same  site.  A  long  and  well-preserved  inscription,  which
seems  to  date  from  about  the  middle  of  the  third  century  A.D.  {MittheiL
d.  arch.  Inst  in  A  then  y  19  (1894),  pp.  248-282;  £.  Maass,  Orpheus^
p.  16  sqq.)  proves  that  this  latest  building  was  called  the  Baccheumand
was  the  club-house  of  a  religious  society  called  the  lobacchians.  The
building  itself,  however,  is  older  than  the  inscription ;  Dr.  Ddrpfeld
considers  that  it  is  probably  earlier  than  the  third  century  A.D.  It  was
larger  than  its  predecessor  and  extended  across  the  ancient  street
which  had  formerly  bounded  the  precinct  on  the  east.  The  main  part
of  the  edifice  consisted  of  a  great  hall  18.80  metres  long  and  11.25
metres  wide,  with  a  quadrangular  apse  at  the  east  end.  Two  rows  of
columns  divided  the  hall  into  a  broad  central  nave  and  two  narrow  side-
aisles.  There  were  four  columns  in  each  row.  The  foundations  and
bases  of  most  of  the  columns  are  preserved.  Further,  in  the  eastern
part  of  the  hall  two  curved  rows  of  smaller  columns,  making  together
the  shape  of  a  horseshoe,  led  up  to  the  door  of  the  apse.  In  the
middle  of  the  apse  was  found  standing  a  round  altar  adorned  with  ox-
heads  and  garlands  carved  in  relief;  and  behind  it,  lying  on  the  ground,
was  a  quadrangular  altar,  on  three  sides  of  which  are  carved  scenes
relating  to  the  worship  of  Dionysus,  including  the  sacrifice  of  a  goat
and  of  another  animal  which  looks  like  a  boar.  On  the  fourth  side  of
this  latter  altar  is  an  inscription  which  shows  that  the  altar  was  dedi-
cated to  **  the  Child-rearing  Goddess  beside  Artemis."  This  inscription
seems  to  be  older  than  the  sculptured  scenes  and  to  have  been  hastily
scratched  out  when  they  were  carved.  Artemis  appears  to  have  been
worshipped  in  a  small  chamber  which  opened  off  the  apse  on  the  north,
for  in  this  chamber  were  found  a  statue  and  a  statuette  of  Artemis  and
a  small  square  altar  bearing  the  inscription  APTEMIA02  EPEIGOY
(*  of  Artemis  the  Day-labourer  *).

Dr.  Dorpfeld  is  of  opinion  that  the  old  precinct  with  its  altar,
temple,  and  wine-press  was  the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  in  the  Marshes.
His  grounds  for  thinking  so  are  mainly  the  existence,  first,  of  the  wine-

VOL.  V  2  K


498  ATHENS  addenda

press  in  a  comer  of  the  precinct  and,  second,  of  the  club-house  of  the
lobacchic  society  built  over  the  ancient  precinct     These  £icts  seem  to
him  to  prove  that  the  precinct  had  been  sacred  to  Dionysus ;  and  from
a  passage  of  Thucydides  (ii.  15),  to  which  reference  has  already  been
made,  he  concludes  that  the  precinct  must  have  been  the  sanctuary  of
Dionysus  in  the  Marshes.     For  Thucydides  plainly  implies  that  that
sanctuary  was  in  the  same  quarter  of  the  city  as  the  spring  called
Enneacrunus  or  Callirrhoe,  and  as  Dr.  Dorpfeld  identifies   Callirrhoe
with  a  vein  of  water  which  in  winter  occasionally  issues  from  the  rock
not  far  from  the  precinct,  he  concludes  that  the  precinct  in  question
must  have  been  the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  in  the  Marshes.     He  believes
that  in  one  of  the  grooves  beside  the  altar  may  have  been  set  the
inscribed  tablet  which  Demosthenes,  or  a  writer  who  passes  under  his
name,  tells  us  stood  beside  the  altar  in  the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  in
the  Marshes  ([Demosthenes,]  Or.  lix.  pp.  1370,  1371).    Further,  he  till
lately  identified  the  precinct  in  question  with  the  Lenaeum,  which  he
held  to  be  the  same  as  the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  in  the  Marshes,  and
he  laid  great  weight  on  the  wine-press  discovered  by  him  as  evidence
that  the  precinct  in  which  it  was  found  could  be  no  other  than  the
Lenaeum,  since  the  very  name  Lenaeum  means  '  place  of  the  wine-press.'
The  attempt  to  identify  the  precinct  in  question  with  the  Lenaeum  be
has  now  given  up,  and  to  the  reasons  he  gives  for  abandoning  it
{MittheiL  tL  arch.  Inst.  20  (1895),  PP*  368-370)  might  be  added  a
still  better  one,  which  he  omits  to  mention.     That  reason  is  that  the
Lenaean  festival  is  known  from  an  inscription  of  192/3  A.D.  (C.  I.  A.
iii.  No.  1 1 60)  to  have  been  held  at  a  time  when  the  club-house  of  the
lobacchians,  discovered  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld,  was  already  in  existence  and
when,  therefore,  the  precinct  which  Dr.   Dorpfeld  formerly   identified
with  the  Lenaeum  was  buried  deep  under  ground.     But  the  Lenaean
festival  can  only  have  been  held  in  the  Lenaeum,  and  if  it  continued  to
be  held  after  the  precinct  in  question  was  not  only  deserted  but  hidden
out  of  sight  under  the  soil,  that  is  a  conclusive  proof  that  the  buried
precinct  cannot  have  been  the  Lenaeum.     However,  though  he  can  no
longer  maintain  that  the  precinct  is  the  Lenaeum,  Dr.  Dorpfeld  clings
to  the  belief  that  it  is  the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  in  the  Marshes.     On
this  theory  I  would  make  the  following  observations :

(i)  It  directly  contradicts  the  evidence  of  Thucydides  (ii.  15),  who
places  the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  in  the  Marshes,  along  with  the
Olympieum,  the  Pythium,  the  sanctuary  of  Earth,  and  the  Ennea-
crunus, to  the  south  of  the  Acropolis.  I  have  already  pointed  out
(p.  484  sq.)  that  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  interpretation  of  this  much-contested  but
really  clear  and  straightforward  passage  of  Thucydides  stultifies  the
argument  of  the  historian  and  must  therefore  be  rejected.

(2)  It  is  in  the  highest  degree  improbable  that  by  the  beginning  of
the  Roman  period  the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  in  the  Marshes,  one  of
the  oldest  and  most  famous  shrines  in  Athens,  should  have  been  so
long  abandoned  that  it  already  lay  buried  about  6  feet  or  more  under
the  earth.

(3)  A  more  inappropriate  designation  than  *  the  Marshes '  for  this


VOL.  II  ATHENS  499

high,  arid,  and  rocky  district  it  would  he  hard  to  find.  It  is  certainly
anything  but  a  marsh  at  the  present  day,  and  if  proof  be  wanted  that
there  was  no  marsh  here  in  antiquity  we  have  it  to  hand  in  the  great
rock-hewn  aqueduct  and  the  deep  wells,  over  a  hundred  in  number,
with  which  the  rocky  ground  has  here  been  honeycombed  in  the  search
for  water.  Do  men  dig  wells  in  a  marsh  or  bring  water  in  an  aqueduct
to  a  swamp  ?

(4)  In  so  ancient  and  celebrated  a  sanctuary  as  that  "of  Dionysus  in
the  Marshes  inscriptions  relating  to  the  god  and  his  worship  probably
abounded.  But  none  such  has  come  to  light  in  the  enclosure  which
Dr.  Dorpfeld  so  confidently  identifies  with  that  renowned  shrine.

(5)  The  existence  of  the  wine -press  in  the  enclosure  does  not
prove,  though  it  raises  a  presumption,  that  the  sanctuary  was  dedicated
to  Dionysus.  Still  less  does  it  prove  or  even  raise  a  presumption  that
the  sanctuary  is  the  particular  one  of  Dionysus  in  the  Marshes.  It  is
at  least  worth  remembering  that  ancient  houses,  thickly  packed  together,
have  been  revealed  by  Dr.  D5rpfeld's  excavations  close  to  the  sacred
enclosure  in  question.  It  is  just  possible,  I  do  not  say  probable,  that
the  wine-press  may  have  belonged  to  one  of  them.  At  the  present  day
the  Greek  peasant  sometimes  presses  the  grapes  at  home,  not  in  the
vineyard.  At  H.  Georgios^  near  Phlius,  the  centre  of  a  great  wine-
growing district,  I  saw  my  host  treading  the  purple  clusters  in  a  tub
under  his  own  roof.

On  these  grounds  I  agree  with  Mr.  Ch.  Belger  {Archdologischer
AmeigeTy  1896,  p.  44  sq.\  Prof.  J.  M.  Stahl  {Rheinisches  Museum^
N.  F.  50  (1895),  p.  572),  Prof.  A.  Milchhofer  (Philologus,  55  (1896),
p.  170  5qq,\  and  Prof.  C.  Wachsmuth  (*Neue  Beitrage  rur  Topographie
von  Athen,'  Abhandlungen  d,  philolog,  histor,  CL  d,  k.  sacks,  GeselL  d,
Wissenschafieny  18  (1897),  No.  i.  pp.  33-56)  in  rejecting  Dr.  D6rpfeld*s
proposed  identification  and  in  continuing  to  look  for  the  sanctuary  of
Dionysus  in  the  Marshes  where  Thucydides  placed  it,  namely  to  the
south  of  the  Acropolis.

This  is  perhaps  the  most  convenient  place  to  mention  that  some
35  yards  or  so  to  the  south  of  the  precinct  which  has  been  under
discussion,  beside  the  ancient  street  that  leads  in  the  direction  of  the
Acropolis,  Dr.  Dorpfeld  has  excavated  another  precinct  which  from
inscriptions  found  in  it  appears  to  have  been  originally  dedicated  to  a
divinity  of  healing  named  Amynus.  The  precinct  is  in  the  shape  of
an  irregular  quadrangle,  about  1 9  metres  long  by  1 3  metres  wide.  Its
enclosing  walls  are  built  of  polygonal  blocks  of  blue  limestone,  well  cut
and  carefully  fitted  together.  Within  the  enclosure  the  excavations
revealed  a  well,  with  a  great  stone  which  had  once  covered  its  mouth,
the  bases  of  votive  ofierings,  and  some  scanty  foundations  of  a  very
small  building,  perhaps  a  chapel  of  Amynus.  Inscriptions  found  in
the  precinct,  and  dating  apparently  from  the  fourth  century  B.C,  prove
that  Aesculapius  was  here  worshipped  along  with  Amynus,  and  that
associated  with  these  two  divinities  was  a  third,  to  wit  Dexion.  This
Dexion  was  no  other  than  the  deified  poet  Sophocles  (Etymolog,
Magnum^   p.    256,   s.v,   Ac^oav).     One  of  the  inscriptions,  however.


50O  ATHENS  addenda

mentions  a  sanctuary  of  Dexion  distinct  from  the  common  sanctuary  of
Amynus  and  Aesculapius.  Some  pieces  of  sculpture  were  also  found
in  the  sanctuary.  They  appear  to  have  been  offerings  presented  by
patients  who  had  been  healed  of  their  ailments,  and  who  conmiemorated
their  cure  by  dedicating  in  the  sanctuary  sculptured  likenesses  of  their
diseased  parts  or  scenes  representing  the  adoration  of  the  deity  by
his  grateful  worshippers.  Amongst  these  pieces  of  sculpture  are
representations  of  fingers,  a  pair  of  ears,  the  male  organs  of  generation,
and  a  woman's  breast  with  a  dedication  to  Aesculapius,  all  carved  in
marble.  Another  curious  relief  represents  a  bearded  man  in  a  long  robe
standing  behind  a  colossal  leg,  which  he  grasps  with  both  arms.  The
leg  is  cut  off  sharply  at  the  knee  and  a  swollen  vein  is  indicated  extend-
ing down  to  the  ankle.  The  patient  who  dedicated  this  piece  probably
suffered  from  a  varicose  vein  ;  the  man  who  is  represented  grasping  the
leg  may  be  the  patient  himself  or  his  physician  in  the  act  of  presenting
his  thank-ofifering  to  the  god.  On  two  plates  of  marble  a  serpent  is
seen  rearing  itself  in  coils  ;  it  is  doubtless  the  sacred  snake  of  the  heal-
ing god,  whether  Aesculapius  or  Amynus.  Another  relief  represents  a
goddess,  probably  Health,  standing  beside  a  wreathed  altar  and  receiv-
ing the  adoration  of  a  train  of  two  men,  two  women,  and  a  child,  all  of
whom  are,  as  usual,  portrayed  as  diminutive  in  comparison  with  the
divinity.  Another  relief  of  small  size  and  careless  workmanship
represents  the  healing  god  or  hero  in  an  attitude  which  is  characteristic
of  Aesculapius ;  he  stands  with  crossed  legs  leaning  on  his  staff  which
is  planted  under  his  left  armpit ;  his  right  hand  rests  on  his  hip,  his  breast
is  bare.  Approaching  him  are  a  man  and  a  woman  with  raised  right
hands  in  an  attitude  of  prayer.  Amongst  the  potsherds  found  in  the
sanctuary  were  some  decorated  in  the  geometrical  style,  one  of  the
early  kind  called  Proto-Corinthian,  and  two  of  the  Attic  black-figured
sort.  All  the  later  styles  of  Attic  pottery  are  also  represented  among
the  fragments.  See  A.  Korte,  in  Mittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Atken^  i8
(1893),  pp.  231-256,  and  ib.  21  (1896),  pp.  287-332.

P.  2 1 5  line  1 7  from  foot,  two  temples,  etc.  The  remains  of  these
two  temples  are  fully  described  and  illustrated  with  plans  by  Dr.  Dorp-
feld  in  his  recent  work  on  the  Greek  theatre  (W.  Dorpfeld  und  E.
Reisch,  Das  griechische  Theater ^  p.  1 1  sqq.\  from  which  I  extract  the
following  particulars.

Of  the  older  and  smaller  temple  nothing  is  standing  but  the  founda-
tions and  socle  of  a  part  of  the  north  wall,  very  short  pieces  of  two
other  walls  projecting  southward  from  it,  and  a  piece  of  a  step  extending
round  the  north-west  angle.  The  length  of  the  north  wall,  so  far  as  it
is  preserved,  is  about  9  metres  (30  feet).  The  two  walls  which  project
southward  from  it  enclosed  between  them  a  chamber  about  6.50  metres
long  from  east  to  west,  which  was  probably  the  cella  of  the  temple.  In
front  of  the  temple  we^e  found  some  architectural  fragments  (fluted
dnrnis  of  columns,  pieces  of  triglyphs,  half  the  capital  of  an  anta^  and  a
piece  of  a  pediment)  which  seem  to  have  belonged  to  it.  From  their
dimensions  and  other  indications  Dr.  Dorpfeld  conjectures  that  the  temple
was  about  13  metres  long  from  east  to  west  by  8   metres  broad  from


VOL.  II  ATHENS  501

north  to  south,  and  that  it  had  on  the  east  a  portico  {pronaos)  4  metres
deep,  the  gable  of  which  was  supported  on  two  columns  between  antae.
With  regard  to  materials,  the  foundations  are  built  of  the  hard  bluish
limestone  of  the  Acropolis,  while  the  socle  of  the  wall  is  built  of  another
lighter  coloured  limestone,  also  very  hard,  which  is  quarried  at  ICttra  at
the  foot  of  Hymettus.  The  upper  part  of  the  temple,  to  judge  by  the
architectural  fragments  which  have  been  found,  was  constructed  of
Piraeic  limestone.  These  three  materials  appear  to  have  been  em-
ployed together  at  Athens  only  in  buildings  which  date  from  before  the
Persian  sack ;  hence  Dr.  Dorpfeld  infers  that  the  temple  is  not  later
than  the  sixth  century  B.C  This  date,  he  thinks,  is  confirmed  by  the
style  of  masonry  and  by  the  shapes  of  the  clamps  employed  (  r^  suid

The  existing  north  wall  of  this  small  temple  abuts  at  an  angle  upon
the  foundations  of  what  seems  to  have  been  a  colonnade  opening  to  the
south  and  about  32  metres  long  from  east  to  west.  Besides  the  founda-
tions of  the  colonnade,  there  remain  a  few  stones  belonging  to  the  front
steps  and  some  tall  slabs  which  formed  part  of  the  walls.  The  materials
of  which  these  remains  consist  are  breccia,  the  bluish  Hymettian  marble,
and  Piraeic  limestone.  The  simultaneous  employment  of  these  three
sorts  of  stones  characterises  Athenian  buildings  which  date  from  the
fourth  to  the  second  century  B.C.  From  this  and  from  the  shape  of  the
clamps  employed  (  HH)  Dr.  Dorpfeld  concludes  that  the  colonnade  was
built  in  the  fourth  century  B.C  At  the  western  end  of  its  south  front
the  foundations  have  been  cut  away  at  an  angle  in  order  to  spare  the
old  temple  of  Dionysus.

The  later  temple  is  believed  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  to  have  had  at  its
eastern  end  a  portico  (pronaos)  with  four  columns  in  front  and  two  on
the  sides,  the  comer  columns  being  counted  twice.  But  as  nothing  of
the  temple  remains  but  the  foundations  this  conjectural  restoration  is,
he  admits,  uncertain.  He  would  assign  the  temple  to  the  beginning
of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  rather  than  to  the  end  of  the  fifth,  but  thinks
it  possible  that,  as  Prof.  Reisch  formerly  conjectured  {Griechische
Weihgeschenke^  p.  100),  it  may  be  "the  temple  surmounted  by  choregic
tripods  "  which  Nicias  dedicated  in  the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  (Plutarch,
NiciaSy  3).  In  that  case  the  temple  could  not  be  more  recent  than
415  B.C.,  the  date  of  Nicias's  death.

A  few  yards  to  the  south-east  of  this  temple  are  foundations  of  what
was  probably  an  altar.  They  form  a  rectangle  11.50  metres  long  by
3.30  metres  wide,  and  are  built  of  breccia,  like  the  foundations  of  the
later  temple  with  which  they  may  be  contemporary.

P.  216  line  5  from  foot,  Dionysns  bringing  Hephaestus  up  to
heaven.  This  subject  is  depicted  on  a  black-figured  Corinthian  vase  of
the  sixth  century  B.C  See  G.  Loeschcke,  *  Korinthische  Vase  mit  der
Riickfiihrung  des   Hephaistos,'  MittheiL  d,  arch,   Inst   in  Athen^    19

(1894),  pp.  510-525.

P.  222,  line  8  from  top,  the  theatre  at  Athens.  The  remains  of
the  Dionysiac  theatre  at  Athens  are  now  fully  described  and  the  history
of  the  building  set  forth  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  {Das  griechische  Theater:


502  DIONYSIAC  THEATRE  addenda

Beitrdge  zur  Geschichte  des  Dionysos-Theaters  in  A  then  und  under er
grieckischer  Theater^  von  W.  Dorpfeld  und  E.  Reisch,  Athens  and
Leipsic,  1896,  p.  24  sqq,).  His  views  on  the  history  of  the  building
remain,  with  a  few  unimportant  modifications,  substantially  as  they  are
stated  in  the  text.  For  a  full  and  dear  statement  of  the  detailed
architectiual  evidence  on  which  these  views  are  based  the  reader  must
consult  the  book  itself;  all  that  I  can  do  here  is,  following  Dr.
Dorpfeld,  to  correct  and  supplement  on  a  few  points  the  account  given
in  the  second  voltune  of  this  work.

The  supporting-walls  of  the  auditorium  are,  as  we  have  seen  (voL  2.
p.  224),  two  in  number,  an  outer  and  an  inner,  which  are  connected  with
each  other  by  short  cross-walls.  These  walls  are  well  preserved  on  the
west  side  of  the  theatre.  The  inner  wall  is  built  of  squared  blocks  of
pebble -conglomerate  (breccia)  and  is  about  1.60  metres  (5  ft.  3  in.)
thick.  The  cross-walls,  which  are  also  built  of  breccia,  are  placed  at
equal  intervals  of  about  7  metres  (23  feet),  and  have  a  thickness  of  1.35
metres  (4  ft.  5  in.).  The  outer  wall,  about  1.35  metres  thick,  is  cased
with  quadrangular  blocks  of  Piraeic  limestone  of  uniform  size,  while  its
core  is  composed  of  quadrangular  blocks  of  breccia.  The  hollow  spaces
between  the  cross-walls  were  filled  with  earth.

The  auditorium  was  probably  divided  horizontally  by  two  passages
{dtazomaia\  not  merely  by  one,  as  is  stated  in  the  text  It  is  true  that
traces  of  only  one  passage  (the  upper)  are  left,  but  the  space  between  it
and  the  orchestra  is  so  great  that  we  are  driven,  in  Dr.  Dorpfeld's
opinion,  to  assume  the  former  existence  of  a  lower  passage.  The  upper
passage  was  made  very  wide  because  it  had  to  serve  at  the  same  time
as  a  public  road  leading  to  the  Acropolis  from  the  eastern  part  of  the
city.  On  the  slope  above  this  upper  passage  there  seem  to  have  been
fourteen  tiers  of  seats.  The  cuttings  in  the  rock  which  may  still  be
seen  at  the  top  of  the  theatre  were  not  the  seats  themselves,  but  merely
the  beds  on  which  the  seats  made  of  Piraeic  limestone  were  placed.
Different  opinions  have  been  expressed  as  to  the  date  of  the  marble
chairs  which  form  the  lowest  tier  of  seats.  Vischer  assigned  them  to
the  age  of  Lycurgus  in  the  fourth  century  B.C. ;  Messrs.  Ziller  and
Julius  would  place  them  at  the  beginning  of  the  imperial  age.  On
technical  and  artistic  grounds  Dr.  Dorpfeld  confirms  decidedly  the
opinion  of  the  judicious  Vischer.  The  masonry  is  so  perfect  and  the
style  of  the  reliefs  so  excellent  that  he  has  no  hesitation  in  referring  both
to  the  fourth  century  B.C.  Of  the  number  of  persons  who  could  be
seated  in  the  theatre  Dr.  Dorpfeld  forms  a  much  lower  estimate  than
the  one  given  in  the  text  (vol.  2.  p.  224).  He  thinks  that  there  may  have
been  seventy-eight  tiers  of  seats,  and  that  the  total  number  of  spectators
whom  the  theatre  could  contain  may  have  been  about  14,000,  or  at
most  17,000.

The  dimensions  of  the  orchestra,  as  it  was  constructed  by  Lycurgus
in  the  fourth  century  B.C.,  have  been  wrongly  stated  in  modem  books,
because  the  diameter  has  been  measured  from  the  marble  parapet  which
now  runs  round  the  inner  side  of  the  broad  water-channel  or  gutter.  But
this  parapet  was  made  in  the  Roman  age  at  a  time  when  the  gutter  was


VOL.  II  DIONYSIAC  THEATRE  503

paved  over  and  when  accordingly  the  size  of  the  orchestra  was  increased
by  the  breadth  of  the  gutter.  In  the  time  of  Lycurgus,  on  the  other
hand,  the  gutter  was  open  and  therefore  formed  no  part  of  the  orchestra,
since  we  cannot  suppose  that  the  chorus  danced  in  the  gutter.  Deduct-
ing, therefore,  the  breadth  of  the  gutter,  we  find  that  the  diameter  of  the
orchestra  was  19.61  metres,  and  hence  that  its  radius  was  9.805  metres
or  exactly  30  Greek  feet,  if  that  foot  be  reckoned  at  .327  metre  (see
vol.  3.  p.  497  sq,).  Many  dimensions  of  the  Dionysiac  theatre,  when
reckoned  in  feet  of  this  sort,  can  be  stated  in  round  numbers ;  from
which  Dr.  Dorpfeld  concludes  that  this  foot  was  the  standard  used  in
building  the  theatre.  The  existing  marble  pavement  of  the  orchestra
is  believed  by  Dr.  D5rpfeld  to  have  been  laid  down  when  the  theatre
was  partially  remodelled  in  the  reign  of  Nero.  To  the  same  date  he
now  assigns  the  covering  of  the  gutter  with  marble  slabs  and  the
erection  of  the  marble  parapet  or  balustrade  which  divides  the  front  row
of  seats  from  the  orchestra.  Excavations  made  in  the  winter  of  1894-95
revealed  the  existence  of  a  circular  well  and  of  several  passages  hewn
out  of  the  rock  below  the  level  of  the  orchestra,  but  there  is  nothing  to
show  that  they  had  any  connexion  with  the  theatre.  The  well  must
have  been  filled  up  long  before  the  theatre  was  built,  for  amongst  the
nibbish  with  which  it  was  choked  were  found  potsherds  of  the  Mycenaean
style  and  several  vases  with  geometrical  decorations,  not  to  mention
some  pieces  of  the  antlers  of  deer.  The  passages,  the  directions  of
which  are  not  symmetrical  with  the  axis  of  the  theatre  or  with  each
other,  must  have  been  made  at  a  later  date  than  the  well,  for  all  the
potsherds  discovered  in  them  belong  to  the  fifth  or  fourth  century  B.C.

Of  the  labyrinth  of  ruined  walls  which  make  up  the  existing  remains
of  the  stage^buildings,  Dr.  Dorpfeld  assigns  the  earliest  to  the  age  of
Lycurgus.  In  doing  so  he  relies  for  evidence  on  the  style  of  the  work-
manship and  on  the  nature  of  the  materials  of  which  the  oldest  walls  are
built  For  the  foundations  are  of  breccia  ;  above  them  is  laid  a  course
of  Piraeic  limestone ;  and  the  upper  part  of  the  edifice,  so  far  as  it
remains,  is  built  of  blue  Hymettian  and  white  Pentelic  marble.  Now
since,  as  we  have  seen  (p.  501),  the  simultaneous  use  of  breccia,  Piraeic
limestone,  and  blue  Hymettian  marble  is  characteristic  of  Athenian
buildings  which  date  from  the  fourth  to  the  second  century  B.C.,  and
since  further  the  excellence  of  the  masonry  points  to  the  best  period  of
Greek  architecture,  we  can  hardly  doubt  that  the  stage-buildings  in
question  formed  part  of  the  new  theatre  which  Lycurgus  built  or  at  least
completed  in  the  fourth  century  B.C.  Of  any  older  stage-building  there
remains  no  trace.  If  any  such  building  existed  in  the  fifth  century  B.C.,
it  has  wholly  disappeared.  The  general  plan  of  the  stage-buildings
erected  by  Lycurgus  has  already  been  described  (vol.  2.  p.  226).  From
various  technical  indications  Dr.  Dorpfeld  infers  that  the  front  both  of
the  central  body  of  the  stage-building  and  of  its  two  projecting  wings
was  adorned  with  a  row  of  Doric  columns.  In  fact  remains  of  columns
and  an  architrave  which  seem  to  have  originally  decorated  the  front  of
one  of  the  wings  were  discovered  in  the  excavations  of  1 895.  The  height
of  this  row  of  columns,  with  their  architrave,  triglyph  frieze,  and  cornice,  is


504  DIONYSIAC  THEATRE  addenda

calculated  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  to  have  been  about  4  metres  (13  feet).  This,
then,  may  be  taken  to  be  approximately  the  height  of  the  stage-buildings
erected  by  Lycurgus.  The  depth  from  front  to  back  of  the  long  hall
which  formed  the  central  and  main  part  of  the  stage-buildings  is  6.45
metres,  measured  on  the  inside.  The  roof  of  this  hall  would  therefore
furnish  a  stage  of  ample  width,  and  its  height  would  but  slighdy  exceed
the  maximum  height  (12  feet)  allowed  by  Vitruvius  (v.  7.  2)  for  the
height  of  a  Greek  stage.  Dr.  Dorpfeld,  however,  holds  that  down  to
the  time  of  Nero  the  players  acted  not  on  but  in  front  of  the  stage-
building,  the  columned  front  of  which,  in  his  view,  formed  a  background
representing  the  exterior  of  a  palace,  a  house,  a  temple  or  what  not
An  argument  in  favour  of  the  tracUtional  view  that  the  actors  ap-
peared on  rather  than  in  front  of  the  stage-building  may  perhaps  be
drawn  from  an  explanation  which  Dr.  D5rpfeld  himself  has  given  of  a
certain  arrangement  in  the  interior  of  the  stage-building.  The  back  wall
of  the  long  hall  is  strengthened  on  the  inner  side  by  a  low  wall  of
breccia,  in  the  top  of  which  at  regular  intervals  of  about  2.60  metres
large  square  holes  measuring  .35  to  .40  metre  are  sunk.  These  holes,
it  is  to  be  observed,  do  not  occur  along  the  whole  of  the  back  wall,  but
only  along  that  portion  of  it  which  faces  the  orchestra.  Dr.  Ddrpfeld
considers  it  indubitable  that  strong  wooden  posts  were  fixed  upright  in
these  holes,  and  he  conjectures  that  they  supported  a  wooden  upper
storey  which  in  some  plays  may  have  represented  the  upper  storey  (k  a
house,  in  others  the  home  of  the  gods  in  Olympus,  and  so  on,  while  in
other  plays  it  need  not  have  been  used  at  all.  This  is  quite  possible  ;
but  it  is  also  possible  that  the  framework  which  rested  on  these  posts
and  which  rose  above  the  roof  of  the  stage-buildings  formed  the  regular,
not  the  occasional,  background  of  every  play,  that  in  short  it  always
supported  the  scenery,  and  that  the  actors  regularly  appeared  in  front  of
it  on  the  roof  of  the  hall  or,  in  other  words,  on  the  stage.

The  first  important  modification  of  the  stage-buildings  of  Lycurgus  is
now  conjecturally  assigned  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  to  the  first  century  B.C  He
suggests  that  when  Athens  was  captured  by  Sulla  in  the  year  86  B.C.
the  theatre  may  have  suffered  as  the  adjoining  Music  Hall  certainly  did
(Paus.  i.  20.  4),  and  that  the  remodelling  of  the  stage-buildings  may
have  been  carried  out  when  the  theatre  was  repaired  after  the  sack.  The
change  consisted  in  cutting  off  the  front  part  of  both  wings  and  erecting
a  line  of  columns  in  the  central  space  between  the  wings.  The  stylobate
which  supported  this  line  of  columns  still  exists ;  it  is  parallel  to  the  line
of  the  stage-building  of  Lycurgus  and  at  a  distance  of  about  1.25  metres
from  it  The  foundations  are  built  of  rubble  and  squared  blocks,  bonded
together  with  lime-mortar.  Slabs  of  bluish  marble  laid  on  the  top  of  the
foundations  formed  the  stylobate  proper ;  circular  marks  on  the  marble
still  show  where  the  columns  stood.  The  style  of  masonry  is  indifferent  :
the  foundations  are  carelessly  built :  the  upper  surface  of  the  slabs  is  not
smoothed,  and  their  edges  do  not  fit  closely.  Altogether  the  workman-
ship is  far  inferior  to  that  of  the  walls  which  may  be  ascribed  to  the  age
of  Lycurgus.  Of  the  columns  themselves  nothing  remains,  but  from  their
diameter  (.  5 1  metre),  as  shown  by  the  marks  on  the  stylobate  and  from


I  DIONYSIAC  THEATRE  505

indications,  Dr.  Dorpfeld  concludes  that  their  height  was  the  same

t  of  the  columns  which  adorned  the  front  of  the  older  stage-building.

pace  between  the  two  central  columns  was  wider  than  the  space

en  any  other  pair  of  columns,  and  was  closed  with  a  double  folding

as  appears  from  the  holes  in  the  threshold  for  the  bolts  and  sockets ;

«re  are  some  traces  of  a  smaller  side  door  in  the  intercolumniation

tiately  to  the  west  of  the  central  one.    All  the  other  spaces  between

lumns  were  probably  closed  with  moveable  painted  panels,  whether

ot  wood  or  stone,  as  in  the  theatre  at  Oropus  (vol.  2.  p.  469) ;  the

absence  of  any  marks  of  walls  on  the  stylobate  proves  that  the  intervals

between  the  columns  were  not  filled  up  with  masonry.     This  line  of

columns  formed,  on  the  traditional  view,  the  front  of  the  new  stage,  which

was  thus  advanced  somewhat  nearer  to  the  audience  than  the  old  stage

(if  stage  it  was)  in  the  theatre  of  Lycurgus.     The  depth  of  the  new

stage  or,  in  other  words,  of  the  platform  supported  by  the  new  line  of

colunms  in  front  of  the  old  stage-building,  is  estimated  by  Dr.  D5rpfeld

at  2.80  metres  (9  ft.  ^\  in.) ;  but  since  it  was  continuous  with,  and  at

the  same  level  as,  the  old  stage,  there  seems  no  reason  why  it  should

not  have  included  as  much  of  the  latter  as  might  seem  desirable.

In  the  reign  of  Nero  both  the  stage-buildings  and  the  orchestra  were
thoroughly  remodelled.  Abundant  evidence  of  this  reconstruction  is
furnished  by  existing  walls,  marble  pavement,  architectural  members,
and  sculptures,  and  its  date  is  fixed  by  an  inscription,  found  in  the
theatre,  which  records  a  dedication  to  Eleutherian  Dionysus  and  Nero
by  some  person  whose  name  is  lost  (C.  /.  A,  iii.  No.  1 58).  The  inscription
is  carved  on  an  architrave  which,  supported  on  Corinthian  pillars,  seems
to  have  been  placed  against  the  back  wall  of  the  stage.  A  whole  shaft
of  one  of  these  pillars,  together  with  several  fragments  of  other  shafts,
bases,  and  capitals,  came  to  light  in  the  course  of  the  excavations.  The
chief  changes  made  at  this  time  were  the  construction  of  a  low  broad
Roman  stage  advancing  far  into  the  orchestra,  the  laying  down  of  a
marble  pavement  in  the  orchestra,  and  the  separation  of  the  auditorium
from  the  orchestra  by  a  marble  parapet  or  balustrade.  The  front  line
of  the  new  stage  is  now  believed  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  to  have  coincided  with
the  front  line  of  the  still  later  stage  of  Phaedrus,  except  that  it  was  not
prolonged  on  either  side  till  it  met  the  seats  of  the  spectators.  Thus
the  communication  between  the  parodoi  and  the  auditorium  was  main-
tained. The  reliefs  which  still  adorn  the  front  of  the  later  stage  of
Phaedrus  were  probably  made  for  Nero's  stage.  Judging  from  what
would  seem  to  have  been  their  original  height  (for  the  slabs  have  been
barbarously  cut  down  to  fit  them  into  the  later  stage).  Dr.  D5rpfeld
infers  that  Nero's  stage  was  1.46  metres  high.  Probably  it  was  con-
nected with  the  orchestra  by  one  or  more  short  staircases.

The  still  later  stage  of  Phaedrus  appears  to  date  from  the  third  or
perhaps  even  the  fourth  century  a.d.  What  the  reasons  for  rebuilding
the  stage  at  this  time  may  have  been  we  do  not  know ;  but  Dr.  Dorp-
feld inclines  to  think  that  the  change  may  have  been  due  partly  to  the
disrepair  into  which  the  front  of  Nero's  stage  had  fallen  and  partly  to
a  desire  to  convert  the  orchestra  into  a  water-basin  in  which  naval


5o6  ATHENS  addenda

combats  might  be  exhibited  for  the  amusement  of  the  populace.  Evidence
of  this  latter  motive  he  finds  in  the  strong  back  walls  with  which  at  this
time  the  front  of  the  stage  and  the  marble  parapet  of  the  orchestra  were
strengthened,  for  the  effect  of  this  must  have  been  to  render  both  these
structures  water-tight.  Moreover,  pieces  of  earthenware  pipes  which  seem
to  have  led  the  water  into  and  out  of  the  orchestra  have  been  found
in  the  theatre.

P.  227  line  8  from  foot,  gtatnes  of  tragic  and  comic  poets.
Inscriptions  of  the  Roman  period  prove  that  statues  of  the  poets
Philemon,  Thespis,  Timostratus,  and  Dionysius  stood  in  the  theatre  at
Athens  (C  /.  A,  iii.  i.  Nos.  948,  949,  950,  951).

P.  227  line  7  from  foot,  Afltydamas,  a  writer  of  volumiiunu
tragedies  etc.  A  block  of  Hymettian  marble  which  appears  to  have
formed  part  of  the  pedestal  of  Astydamas's  statue  has  been  found  in  the
theatre  of  Dionysus.  It  is  inscribed  with  the  first  four  letters  of  his
name  (A^TY)  and  seems  to  have  stood  on  the  edge  of  the  orchestra,
at  the  lower  end  of  the  wall  which  supports  the  western  wing  of  the
auditorium.  Here  it  has  now  been  set  up  again.  See  C  L  A,  ii.  Na
1363  ;  Dorpfeld  und  Reisch,  Das  griecMsche  Theater^  P-  71  sq.  Other
inscriptions  attest  the  popularity  of  this  prolific  playwright  (C.  /.  A,  iL
Nos.  973,  977).  Cp.  U.  Kohler,  in  Mittheilungen  d,  arch,  Inst,  in
AtheHy  3  (1878),  p.  112  sqq,

P.  228  line  18  sq,  from  foot,  a  fine  seated  statue  of  Menander  in
the  Vatican.  Some  archaeologists,  however,  deny  that  this  statue  (as
to  which  see  W.  Helbig,  Fuhrer  durch  die  offentlichen  Sammlungen
klassischer  Alterthiimer  in  Rom,  No.  199)  represents  Menander.
Amongst  those  who  doubt  or  deny  its  connexion  with  Menander  are
G.  Schdixi  {Transactiofts  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Literature,  Second  Series,
4  (1853),  p.  388),  Prof.  Furtwangler  {Meisterwerke  d.  griech,  Plastik,
p.  532  note  2),  and  Prof.  Studniczka  (in  Berliner  philolog.  Wochen-
schrift,  14th  December  1895,  P-  1627).  The  last-mentioned  scholar
considers  that  we  possess  the  poet's  portrait  in  a  series  of  heads  which
have  been  enumerated  by  Prof.  Bernoulli  and  regarded  by  him,  with
considerable  hesitation,  as  perhaps  portraits  of  Pompey  {Romische
Ikonographie,  i.  p.  123  sq,,  with  pi.  viii.).  The  most  beautiful  replicas,
according  to  Prof.  Studniczka,  are  in  the  Museum  at  Cometo  and  the
Gymnasium  at  Corfu.

P.  236  line  12  from  top,  constructed  of  polygonal  masonry.  The
masonry  is  partly  quadrangular,  and  the  four  bases  which  stand  round
about  the  mouth  of  the  shaft  are  round,  not  square,  as  stated  in  the  text

P.  237  line  8  sq,  from  foot,  the  bringing  of  the  god  from  Pelo*
ponnese  to  Athens.  The  date  when  the  worship  of  Aesculapius
was  introduced  into  Athens  has  been  examined  by  Mr.  A.  Korte  {Mit-
theilungen d.  arch.  Inst,  in  A  then,  18  (1893),  PP-  246-250;  ib.  21
(1896),  pp.  313-332).  If  he  is  right  in  restoring  Ast>'philus  as  the
name  of  the  archon  in  the  inscription  {C.  I,  A,  ii.  No.  1649)  which
records  the  introduction  of  the  worship,  Aesculapius  first  came  to
Athens,  or  at  all  events  his  sanctuary  was  founded,  in  420  B.C.  This
date  is  accepted  by  Prof.  Usener  {Gottemanien,  p.  148).


VOL.  11  ATHENS  507

P.  237  line  9  sq.  from  top,  the  square  sluift  of  an  ancient  welL
According  to  my  measurements  this  shaft  is  8  ft.  9  in.  wide  by  8  fl.  2  in.
deep.     The  western  side  of  the  shaft  has  been  built  up  again.

P.  241  line  28  from  foot,  The  Mnsic  Hall  of  Herodes  Atticos.  In
the  Music  Hall  of  Herodes  Atticus  the  number  of  staircases  dividing
the  seats  is  six,  of  which  two  are  at  the  ends.  The  two  wings  of  the
stage-buildings  are  standing  to  a  height  of  four  stories,  as  is  shown  by
the  arched  windows  in  the  walls.  At  the  west  end  of  the  western
parodos  is  a  niche  in  which  the  statue  of  a  man  in  Roman  costume  is
still  standing.

P.  251  at  top,  the  two  side  gateways.  The  clear  width  of  these
gateways,  according  to  my  measurement,  is  4  ft.  i^  in.,  without  the  stone
door-jambs.  The  lower  courses  of  the  walls  which  flank  the  gateways
are  of  black  Eleusinian  stone,  not  of  white  Pentelic  marble  like  the  rest
of  the  Propylaea.

P.  252  line  21  sq,y  the  rnts  in  which  the  wheels  ran  can  still
be  seen  in  the  rock.  I  was  not  able  to  verify  this  statement.  But  on
some  of  the  slabs  which  pave  the  central  part  of  the  passage,  as  well  as
on  the  rocks  inside  of  the  Propylaea,  there  are  rows  of  parallel  cross
grooves,  which  may  have  been  meant  to  keep  the  wheels  of  the  chariots
and  the  feet  of  the  horses  from  slipping.

P.  253  line  9  from  top,  the  third  colnmn,  with  which  it  is  joined
by  an  architrave.  This  column,  the  westernmost  of  the  three,  is  now
wanting  and  with  it  the  architrave.  But  the  circle  which  marks  the
place  of  the  colunm  can  still  be  clearly  seen  on  the  stylobate.

P.  254  line  26  sqq,^  The  remains  consist  of  a  wall  abont  20  feet
long  and  a  few  feet  high,  with  a  short  wall  Joining  it  at  right
angles  and  terminated  by  a  marble  anta.  The  longer  of  these  two
walls  is  about  5  ft.  10  in.  high.  The  short  wall,  including  the  antOy  is
7  feet  long,  measured  on  the  south-west  front,  and  is  about  1 1  ft.  5  in.
high.

P.  257  line  21  sq,  from  foot,  a  temple  of  Wingless  Victory.  Some
light  has  now  been  thrown  on  the  question  of  the  date  of  this  temple  by
an  inscription  which  Mr.  Cawadias  found  in  1897  while  excavating
the  north  slope  of  the  Acropolis,  below  the  cave  of  Apollo.  The
inscription,  which  contains  the  three-stroke  sigma  (^),  seems  to  date
from  the  middle  of  the  fiflh  century  B.C.  It  refers  to  a  sanctuary  which
was  to  be  provided  with  a  new  door  and  to  a  stone  temple  and  altar
which  were  to  be  built  in  the  sanctuary  by  Callicrates,  one  of  the  archi-
tects of  the  Parthenon  (Plutarch,  Pericles^  13).  Mr.  Cawadias  and  Dr.
Dorpfeld  agree  in  thinking  that  the  temple  referred  to  can  be  no  other
than  that  of  the  Wingless  Victory  or  rather  of  Victory  Athena.  If  they
are  right,  the  inscription  finally  disposes  of  Prof.  Furtwangler's  theory  as
to  the  date  of  the  temple,  against  which  I  have  already  argued  on  other
grounds  (vol.  2.  p.  260).  See  Mittheilungen  d,  arch,  Inst  in  A  then ^  22
(1897),  p.  226  sq,

P.  262  line  2  sq,  from  foot,  how  many  of  the  pictures were  by

Polygnotns.     Amongst  those  who  deny  that  any  of  the  pictures  in  this
gallery  were  by  Polygnotus  are  G.  Hermann  {(^sculoy  5.  p.  227),  Prof.


5o8  A  THENS  addenda

C.  Robert  (Bildund  Ued^  p.  182  note  31  ;  Die  Iliupersis  des  Polygnot^
p.  25  sq,  ;  Die  Marathonschlacht  in  der  Poikile^  p.  66  note  27),  and
apparently  Prof.  Milchhofer  {Jahrbuch  d,  arch.  Inst  9  (1894),  p.  72
note  36).  They  hold  that  the  pictiures  which  Pausanias  in  this  passage
ascribes  to  Polygnotus  were  not  in  the  gallery  at  the  Propylaea  but
elsewhere.  The  other  and  more  probable  view  that  two  at  least  and
perhaps  more  of  the  pictures  in  the  gallery  at  the  Propylaea  were  by
Polygnotus  is  accepted  by  Mr.  P.  Girard  {La  Peinture  eaUique^  p.
167  sqq,),

P.  266  line  3  sq.  from  top,  Achilles in  tlie  comiMUiy  of  tlie

xnaJdens  at  Scyros.  Prof.  C.  Robert  professes  to  recognise  a  copy  of
Polygnotus's  painting  of  this  subject  (Archdologischer  Anzeiger^  1 889,
p.  151  ;  Die  Nekyia  des  Polygnot^  P*  37  ^Q'  J  ^^^  Marathonschlacht  in
der  Poikile,  p.  66  sq.).  The  supposed  copy  is  a  relief,  executed  in  fine
Greek  style,  on  a  gold  plate  which  was  found  in  a  grave  near  Nicopol,
in  the  south  of  Russia.  Stephani  explained  the  reliefs  differently  as
illustrating  the  Attic  version  of  the  story  of  Alope.  See  CompU  Rendu
(St.  Petersburg)  for  1864,  pp.  142- 171,  with  the  Atlas,  pi.  iv.  The
subject  of  Polygnotus's  picture  (Achilles  in  the  company  of  the  maidens
at  Scyros)  is  represented  in  relief  in  very  fair  style  on  a  sarcophagus  at
San  Fruttuoso  to  which  Prof,  von  Duhn  has  called  attention  {Archdoh-
gischer  Anzeiger^  1895,  P*  ^59  '^^•)'

P.  270  line  9  from  foot,  a  sixth  relief representiiig  the

Graces.  There  are  remains  of  colour  on  this  relief,  as  I  was  able  to
observe  for  myself  in  the  museum  on  the  Acropolis.  The  hair  of
Hermes  and  two  of  the  Graces  is  red  ;  the  hair  of  the  first  of  the  Graces
is  yellow ;  the  dress  of  the  second  Grace  is  yellow ;  the  background  is
green.  Cp.  P.  Kastriotes,  KaraAoyos  tov  Movo-eiov  rrjs  'AKpcwroAcws
(Athens,  1895),  No.  702.

P.  27 1  line  2 1  from  top,  the  figure  of  Hermes  etc.  In  the  Acropolis
Museum  at  Athens  there  is  preserved  a  fine  relief  representing  the  legs
of  a  man,  life-size,  striding  to  the  spectator's  right.  This  relief  of  which
the  upper  part  is  lost,  was  found  in  the  Propylaea,  and  is  by  some
regarded  as  a  fragment  of  the  figure  of  Hermes  of  the  Portal  mentioned
by  Pausanias.  See  P.  Kastriotes,  Kardkoyos  rov  Moi«(r€tou  rrjs  *Ak/)o-
TToAccus,  No.  1334.

P.  280  line  20  sq.  from  foot,  Four  holes  on  the  top  of  the  block.
I  could  not  perceive  more  than  one  or  at  the  most  two  holes.  The
comers  of  the  upper  surface  of  the  block  are  all  broken  away.

P.  285  line  15  sqq.,  wooden  statues  etc.  Wooden  statues  were
also  made  by  Damophon  (Paus.  viii.  31.  6).

P.  289  line  12  from  foot,  Athena striking  Blarsyas.     Prof.

C.  Sittl  has  essayed  to  show  {Parerga  zur  alien  Kunsigeschtchte,  pp.
25-29)  that  the  existing  monuments  representing  the  group  of  Athena
and  Marsyas  belong  to  two  different  types  and  may  be  traced  back  to
two  distinct  originals.  In  one  type,  represented  by  the  vase-painting,
Marsyas  is  portrayed  as  having  dropped  the  flutes  on  which  he  has  been
playing  and  as  recoiling  in  alarm  at  the  sudden  appearance  of  Athena.
This  is  the  earlier  type,  and  its  original  was  the  group  here  described


VOL.  II  ATHENS  509

by  Pausanias,  which  Prof.  Sittl  conjectures  to  have  been  dedicated  in
the  early  part  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  by  the  tragic  poet  Pratinas  as  a
memorial  of  a  poetical  victory  and  a  mark  of  his  contempt  for  flutes
and  flute-players  (cp.  Athenaeus,  xiv.  p.  617  b-e).  In  the  other  type,
represented  by  the  coins  and  the  relief,  Athena  is  portrayed  as  throwing
away  the  flutes  and  Marsyas  as  stealing  up  to  them  with  an  air  of  sur-
prise. This  was  the  later  type,  and  its  original  was  the  work  of  Myron
mentioned  by  Pliny  {Nat,  hist,  xxxiv.  57).  With  regard  to  the  marble
statue  in  the  Lateran  and  the  bronze  statuette  in  the  British  Museum,
Prof.  Sittl  denies  that  either  of  them  is  a  copy  of  Myron's  work  or  has
anything  to  do  with  any  group  of  Athena  and  Marsyas ;  the  Lateran
statue,  according  to  him,  is  nothing  but  a  dancing  Satyr,  the  London
statuette  is  merely  a  Satyr  scratching  his  head  in  a  thoughtful  attitude.
But  the  distinctions  drawn  by  Prof.  Sittl  appear  to  me  unfounded,  and  I
prefer  to  believe  that  all  the  monuments  he  discusses  may  be  traced
back  to  one  original  work  of  Myron,  namely  the  group  here  described
by  Pausanias.

P.  298  line  19  from  top.  The  temple  was  snrroiinded  by  a  colon-
nade etc.  A  well-preserved  piece  of  what  seems  to  have  been  the
floor  of  the  colonnade  is  to  be  seen  at  the  south-east  comer ;  the  blocks
are  polygonal  and  fairly  well  fitted  together.

P.  298  line  17  from  foot,  Built  into  the  northern  wall  of  the
Acropolis  etc.  These  architectural  fragments  are  built  into  the  Acro-
polis wall  to  the  east  of  the  Erechtheum.  Into  the  wall  to  the  north  of
the  Erechtheum  there  are  built  some  large  marble  drums  and  capitals.

P.  299  line  10  from  top,  an  inscription  etc.  Beside  the  inscription
is  a  cutting  in  the  rock,  19  inches  by  17  inches,  to  receive  the  image.

P.  303  line  14  sqq,  fix)m  top,  They  set  barley  etc.  The  sacrifice
of  the  bouphonia  has  recently  been  discussed  by  Mr.  H.  von  Prott,  who
would  explain  it  as  a  substitute  for  human  sacrifice  {Rheimsches  Museum^
N.  F.  52  (1897),  pp.  187-204).  Mr.  P.  Stengel  disputes  his  conclusion
and  maintains  that  the  sacrifice  was  originally  bloodless  {tb.  pp.  399-41 1).
Both  writers  confess  themselves  unable  to  conceive  of  a  remote  age  in
which  the  slaughter  of  a  beast  was  regarded  as  a  capital  oflence.  They
seem  to  be  quite  unaware  that  down  to  the  present  day  pastoral  tribes
in  Africa  regard  their  cattle  as  sacred,  and  that  among  the  Caflres  even
to  defile  the  cattle-pen  is  an  oflence  which  is  punished  with  death  (H.
Lichtenstein,  Reisen  im  siidlichen  Africa^  i.  p.  479).  Some  of  the  facts
illustrative  of  the  sanctity  of  cattle  among  pastoral  tribes  in  ancient  and
modem  times  have  been  put  together  by  W.  Robertson  Smith  {Religion
of  the  Semites^  p.  296  sqq,).  To  discuss  the  traces  of  savagery  in
ancient  Greece  without  some  knowledge  of  savage  life  and  modes  of
thought  is  perfectly  futile.

P.  304  line  1 5  from  top,  the  Parthenon.  The  technical  construc-
tion of  the  Parthenon  has  been  studied  by  a  French  architect,  Mr.  L.
Magne  (Le  Parthenon  :  Etudes  faites  au  cours  de  deux  missions  en  Grkce^
Paris,  1895).  '^^  temple  suffered  considerably  from  the  earthquake
of  April  1894,  but  the  necessary  repairs  have  been  carried  out  in  accord-
ance with  the  advice  of  the  distinguished  German  architect,  Mr.  Joseph


Sio  THR  PARTHENON  addenda

•
Durm.  See  Mittheilungen  d,  arch,  Inst  in  Athen^  19  (1894),  pp.  529-
531  ;  *E<f>rjfi€pls  dpxatokoyiKrjj  1 895,  pp.  1-50  ;  UpOKTiK^  rrjs  *Ap\aio-
AoyiK^s  *Erai/oia$,  1 895,  pp.  12-15,  194-200;  Archdologischer  Anzeiger^
1895,  pp.  100-102  ;  American  Journal  of  Archaeology^  10  (1895),  pp.
532-537.  An  interesting  discovery  has  been  made  by  Mr.  £.  Andrews
of  the  American  School  at  Athens.  He  has  proved  that  an  inscription
was  fastened  by  nails  to  the  eastern  architrave  of  the  temple,  and  by
carefully  examining  the  prints  of  the  nails  he  has  been  able  to  decipher
the  inscription.  As  read  by  him,  it  records  that  the  Council  of  the
Areopagus,  the  Council  of  the  Six  Hundred,  and  the  Athenian  people
conferred  some  honour,  not  specified,  on  the  most  high  and  mighty
emperor  Nero,  in  the  eighth  generalship  of  Titus  Claudius  Novius,  son
of  Philinus.  The  reference  to  the  eighth  generalship  of  Novius  proves
that  the  date  of  the  inscription  is  61  A.D.  The  honour  conferred  on
the  emperor  may  perhaps  have  consisted  in  the  erection  of  a  statue  of
him  in  front  of  the  temple.  See  Berliner  philologische  Wochenschrift^
28th  March  1896,  p.  414  5q.\  Classical  Review^  10  (1896),  p.  222;
Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  16  (1896),  p.  339.

The  discussion  of  the  sculptured  decoration  of  the  Parthenon
shows  no  sig^  of  abating.  The  metopes  are  the  subject  of  papers
by  Mr.  W.  Malmberg  CEiftrj/ifpU  dpxaiokoyucrf,  1894,  pp.  213-226)
and  Mr.  E.  Pemice  (*Uber  die  mittleren  Metopen  der  Siidseite  des
Vaxthenon,^  Jahrduch  d,  arch.  Inst,  10  (1895),  PP-  93"'03)>  ^^o  argues
that  the  subjects  of  the  nine  central  metopes  on  the  south  side  are  all
drawn  from  the  legendary  history  of  Erichthonius.  The  head  of  a
Lapith  belonging  to  one  of  the  metopes,  but  now  in  the  Louvre,  is  the
subject  of  an  article  by  Mr.  A.  Heron  de  Villefosse  which  should  have
been  mentioned  in  the  text  {Monuments  Grecs,  vol.  2.  Nos.  11-13  (1882-
1884),  pp.  1-12);  the  head  of  a  Centaur,  now  at  Wurzburg,  which
seems  to  have  belonged  to  another  of  the  metopes,  has  been  identified
and  discussed  by  Prof.  Michaelis  {Jahrbuch  d,  arch,  Inst.  11  (1896),
pp.  300-304)  and  Prof.  G.  Treu  (ib,  12  (1897),  p.  loi  sq.),  Overbeck
maintained  that  the  figure  commonly  called  the  Victory  of  the  Parthenon
is  really  Iris  and  belongs  to  the  eastern  gable  {Berichte  iiberdie  Verhand-
lungcn  d.  k,  sdchs.  GeselL  d,  Wisscn.  zu  Leipzig^  Philolog.  histor.  Classe,
44  (1892),  pp.  24-30).  Professor  Furtwangler  and  Miss  Harrison  have
discussed  the  interpretation  of  certain  figures  in  the  gables  together  with
the  much-debated  question  whether  the  cloth  which  a  boy  in  the  middle
of  the  eastern  frieze  holds  in  his  hands  is  the  robe  of  Athena  or  a  carpet
Prof.  Furtwangler  defends  the  older  view  that  it  is  the  robe ;  Miss
Harrison  advocates  the  theory,  first  proposed  by  E.  Curtius,  that  it  is  a
carpet.  See  Classical  Review^  9  (1895),  PP-  85-92,  272-276,  427  sq.\
Berliner  philolog.  Wochenschrifty  15  (1895),  pp.  1 277-1 280,  1308-
13 12.  Mr.  A.  H.  Smith  has  shown  {Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  14
(1894),  pp.  264-266)  that  certain  reduced  copies  in  terra-cotta  of  the
Parthenon  frieze  which  Prof.  Furtwangler  {Meisterwerke  d.  griech.
Plastik^  p.  743  .y^.)  had  assigned  to  the  age  of  Augustus  are  most  prob-
ably modem  forgeries.  Still  more  recently  Prof.  Furtwangler  announced
{Intermezzi  (Leipsic  and  Berlin,   1896),  pp.   15-32)  that  he  had  dis-


VOL.  II  THE  PARTHENON  511

covered  in  Paris  the  original  statue  of  Athena  by  Phidias  which  occupied
the  centre  of  the  eastern  gable  of  the  Parthenon.     The  statue  had
hitherto  been  known  among  archaeologists  as  the  Torso  Medici,  and  had
been  by  Prof.  Furtwangler  himself  formerly  regarded  as  a  copy  of  the
great  bronze  Athena  of  the  Acropolis.     The  joy  of  archaeologists  at  the
professor's  discovery  appears  to  be  seasoned  with  a  due  proportion  of
salt  (Miss  £.  Sellers,  in  Classical  Review^  10  (1896),  p.  444  sq. ;  Fr.
Hauser,   in  Berliner  philolog,    Wochenschrift^   17  (1897),  p.  49 ;    B.
Sauer,  in  Wochenschrift  fUr  klassische  Philologie^  21st  April  1897,  pp.
455-457).     Mr.   Kalkmann  has  pointed  out  that  we  have  no  ancient
authority  for  assigning  any  part  of  the  sculptured  decoration  of  the
Parthenon  —  frieze,  metopes,  or  pediments  —  to  the  hand  of  Phidias
{Archdologischer  Anzeigcr^    1896,  pp.  98-100).     A  restoration  of  the
^gures  of  the  western  gable  has  been  attempted  by  Mr.  K.  Schwerzek
{Erlduterungen  zu  der  Reconstruction  des  Westgiebels  des  Parthenon^
Wien,  1 896) ;  but  his  restoration  has  been  severely  criticised  by  Prof.
Furtwangler  (^Berliner  philolog.  Wochenschrift^   12th  December   1896,
pp.  1 592-1 595).     A  less  unfavourable  opinion  of  it  has  been  expressed
by  Prof.  B.  2i2M^x  {Wochenschrift  fUr  klassische  Philologie^  20th  January
1897,  pp.  89-94).     The  restoration  and  interpretation  of  the  sculptures
of  both  gables  have  been  discussed  at  some  length  by  Prof.  Wizemann
(Die   Giebelgruppen   des  Parthenon^    Stuttgart,    1895).       A   fragment
which  perhaps  belonged  to  the  western  gable  is  discussed  by  Mr.  W.
Malmberg  (*  Zum  Westgiebel  des  Parthenon,*  fcthrbuch  des  Archdolog,
InstitutSy  12  (1897),  pp.  92-96).     A  brief  notice  of  some  pieces  of  the
Parthenon  sculptures  which  are  now  in  the  Louvre  is  given  by  Mr.
Ph.  E.  Legrand  {Revue  archMogique^  3me  S^rie,  26  (1895),  PP«  237-
239).

P.  304  line  23  sq,  from  top,  the  entablature.  Very  large  portions
of  the  entablature  both  on  the  north  and  the  south  side  of  the
Parthenon  are  preserved  in  their  places,  but  the  central  parts  of  it  on
both  these  sides  are  gone.

P.  304  line  25  sq,  from  top,  the  western  wall  of  the  cella.  More
strictly  speaking,  it  is  the  back  wall  of  the  western  portico  (opisthodomos)
of  which  considerable  portions  are  preserved.

P.  304  line  28  from  top,  a  vast  substmction.  Parts  of  the  outer
walls  of  this  great  substruction  are  exposed  to  view  in  two  deep  pits  near
the  south-western  comer  of  the  Parthenon.  In  the  more  easterly  of  the
pits  a  narrow  winding  staircase  leads  down  through  the  wall,  which  is
built  partly  of  polygonal  and  partly  of  ashlar  masonry.  In  the  other
pit  the  wall,  so  fsLT  as  it  is  exposed,  is  built  of  ashlar  masonry  only.

P.  305  line  14  sq.  from  top,  metopes,  of  which  forty-one  still
remain  etc.  The  westernmost  metope  on  the  south  side  of  the
Parthenon  is  in  its  place  and  well  preserved.  It  represents  a  Centaur
with  his  left  arm  round  the  neck  of  a  Lapith  and  his  right  arm  raised  to
strike.

P.  312  line  II  sqq,  from  top,  the  imai^e  itself  etc  To  the  copies
of  Phidias's  statue  of  Virg^in  Athena  enumerated  in  the  text  should
perhaps  be  added  a  mutilated  marble  head  of  a  helmeted  goddess  which


512  ATHENS  ADDENDA

was  found  at  Cologne  in  1882.  See  G.  Loeschcke,  '  Kopf  der  Athena
Parthenos  des  Pheidias/  Festschrift  sum  fiinfidgjdhrigen  Jubilaum  des
Vereins  von  Alterthumsfreunden  im  Rhdnlande  (Bonn,  i89i),pp.  1-16.
A  small  copy  of  the  statue,  wanting  the  head  and  arms,  has  been
discovered  in  the  course  of  the  German  excavations  between  the  Pnyx
and  Areopagus  ;  it  agrees  with  the  Varvakion  statuette  {Mittheilungen  d,
arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  21  (1896),  p.  284).  Another  copy,  superior  in  style
to  the  Varvakion  statuette,  has  lately  come  to  light  at  Patras:  Uie
head  and  arms  are  missing,  and  so  is  part  of  the  shield,  on  the
remains  of  which,  nevertheless,  the  batde  of  the  Greeks  and  Amazons
can  be  ^\stingyi\s\i^^{Chronique  des  Arts,  1896,  p.  358  ;  Archdologischer
AmeigeTy  1896,  p.  212;  ib,  1897,  p.  63).  The  dimensions  of  the
original  statue  have  been  discussed  by  Miss  A  L.  Perry  {American
Journal  of  Archaeology^  11  (1896),  pp.  335-34^>  with  note  by  Mr.  A
Emerson,  pp.  346-349).

P.  320  line  10  sqq,  from  foot,  a  temple  of  Bome  and  Angnstiu  etc.
The  remains  of  the  columns  and  architrave  of  this  temple  are  still  to  be
seen  lying  in  front  of  the  Parthenon.  The  columns  measure  2  feet  in
diameter  at  the  base.

P.  321  line  3  from  top,  LocuBt  Apollo.  In  South  Mirzapur,  b
India,  when  a  flight  of  locusts  comes,  the  people  catch  one,  decorate  his
head  with  a  spot  of  red  lead,  salaam  to  him,  and  let  him  go,  when  he  is
supposed  immediately  to  depart  with  his  fellows  (W.  Crooke,  Introduction
to  the  Popular  Religion  and  Folklore  of  Northern  India,  p.  380).  In
this  worship  of  an  individual  locust  for  the  purpose  of  propitiating  and
averting  the  rest  we  may  have  in  germ  the  worship  of  a  deity  like
Locust  Apollo.  See  the  note  on  v.  14.  i  (vol.  3.  p.  558  sq.).  In
Japan  a  man  who  is  supposed  to  be  possessed  by  the  ruler  of  crows
hops  about  like  a  crow  and  goes  through  various  odd  evolutions  for  the
purpose  of  averting  crows  from  the  fields.  The  ceremony  takes  place
once  a  year  on  a  mountain  called  Futagani  San  in  the  province  of
Mimasaka.  See  W.  Weston,  Mountaineering  and  Exploration  in  the
Japanese  Alps  (London,  1896),  pp.  304-306.  Here  we  have  something
like  an  approach  to  a  propitiation  of  a  Crow  God.

P.  322  line  25  from  foot,  Dinomenes.  Tatian,  a  contemporary  of
Pausanias,  mentions  that  he  saw  at  Rome  a  statue  by  a  sculptor
Dinomenes  representing  the  Paeonian  queen  Besantis  who  had  given
birth  to  a  black  child  {Oratio  ad  Graecos,  33»  P-  132  ed.  Otto).  The
statue  may  have  stood  in  the  theatre  of  Pompey,  where  another  of  the
statues  referred  to  by  Tatian,  that  of  Eutychis  by  Periclymenus,  is
known  to  have  stood  (Tatian,  op.  cif,  34,  p.  134  ed.  Otto  ;  Pliny,  Nat.
hist.  vii.  34).  But  the  statue  of  Besantis  by  Dinomenes  at  Rome  cannot
have  been  identical  with  the  statue  of  lo  by  Dinomenes  at  Athens,  as
Prof.  G.  Loeschcke  has  suggested  {Observationes  Archaeologicae,  p.  10
sq.).  The  sculptor,  however,  who  made  the  one  statue  may  very  well
have  made  the  other,  and  he  may  have  been  identical  with  the  sculptor
of  the  first  century  B.C.  (C  /.  A.  ii.  No.  1648)  rather  than  with  the
sculptor  of  the  same  name  who  flourished  at  the  beginning  of  the
third  century  B.C.  (Pliny,  Nat.  hist,  xxxiv.  50).     See  E.  Loewy,  Unter-


VOL.  II  ATHENS  513

suchungen  sur  griech.  Kunstlergeschichie^  pp.  34-36  ;  W.  Gurlitt,  Ueber
PausaniaSy  p.  267  sq.

P.  322  line  18  from  foot,  figures dedicated  by  Attains.    Of

these  figures  the  group  which  represented  the  battle  of  the  Athenians
with  the  Amazons  is  the  subject  of  a  recent  monograph  by  Mr.  G.  Habich
{Die  Amcusonengruppe  des  attalischen  Weihgeschenks^  Berlin,  1 896).

P.  325  line  2  from  foot,  Panactnm.  The  identification  of  Panactum
suggested  by  the  French  surveyors  is  accepted  by  Prof.  Milchhdfer.
The  ruined  fort  is  situated  above  the  south-west  edge  of  the  plain  of
SkourtcLy  about  500  feet  higher  up  than  the  villages  of  Kako-Nistiri  and
KavasalcL  Portions  of  the  circuit-wall  and  of  a  tower  together  with
some  other  foundations  are  still  to  be  seen.  One  piece  of  wall,  better
preserved  than  the  rest,  is  constructed  partly  of  large  squared  blocks,
partly  of  polygonal  blocks  with  small  stones  in  the  interstices.  See
A.  Milchhofer,  in  Karten  von  AttikcLy  Erlduternder  Text,  Heft  vii.-viii.,
p.  15.  An  inscription,  found  at  Eleusis  and  dating  apparently  from
the  end  of  the  fourth  or  the  beginning  of  the  third  century  B.C.,
mentions  Panactum  along  with  Eleusis  and  Phyle  as  places  which  were
garrisoned  and  the  walls  of  which  had  been  recently  repaired  {*E<l>rffjxpls
dpxaioXoyiKrjy  1 884,  p.  135  sgg,).  Another  inscription  of  about  the
same  date  mentions  the  garrisons  of  these  three  places  (C  /.  A.  ii.
No.  1 2 17).

P.  329  line  1 3  from  foot,  a  seated  image  of  Athena  by  Endoens.
The  date  of  the  sculptor  Endoeus  has  been  examined  by  Mr.  H.  Lechat
(J^evue  des  Etudes  grecques,  5  (1892),  pp.  385-402;  id.,  6  (1893),
pp.  22-32).  He  argues  that  the  statue  by  this  sculptor  which  Pausanias
saw  on  the  Acropolis  must  have  been  made  after  the  Persian  invasion
of  480-479  B.C,  since  if  it  had  been  set  up  earlier  it  must  have  perished
in  the  sack  of  Athens.  Hence,  while  admitting  that  the  inscriptions
prove  Endoeus  to  have  been  at  work  in  the  last  quarter  of  the  sixth
century  B.C.,  Mr.  Lechat  holds  that  the  sculptor  must  have  survived  and
exercised  his  profession  till  about  475  B.C.  He  rejects  the  statement  of
Pausanias  that  Endoeus  was  a  pupil  of  Daedalus.  With  regard  to  the
seated  image  of  Athena  which  has  been  conjecturally  identified  with  the
one  mentioned  by  Pausanias,  Mr.  Lechat  considers  that  it  is  not  earlier
than  the  last  quarter  of  the  sixth  century  ac.  and  that  it  may  belong  to
the  fifth  century  B.C.  Whether  it  is  by  Endoeus  or  not,  he  would  leave
an  open  question.

P.  329  line  6  from  foot,  the  sculptor's  name  is  carved  etc.  This
inscription  is  now  published  in  C  /.  A.  iv.  p.  179,  No.  373^.

P.  332  line  5  from  top,  a  ground  of  dark  Elensinian  marble.
Three  blocks  of  this  dark  marble  are  still  above  the  epistyle  at  the
eastern  end  of  the  temple.

P.  332  line  7  from  top,  six  Ionic  columns.  Three  of  these  columns
are  adorned  with  patterns  in  relief  both  on  the  base  and  on  the  neck
below  the  capital :  on  the  base  the  pattern  is  composed  of  interlaced
lines ;  on  the  neck  it  is  composed  of  the  <  tQ%  and  dart '  above  and
palmettes  below.  This  richness  of  decoration  is  very  unusual,  if  not
unique,  in  Greek  architecture.

VOL.  V  2  L


514  A  THENS  ADDENDA

p.  332  line  14  sq,  from  top,  four  engaged  Ionic  colnnms.  The
bases  of  three  of  these  columns  and  a  small  part  of  the  fourth  column,
with  its  base,  are  still  standing  on  the  top  of  the  walL

P.  332  line  23,  a  flight  of  steps  led  up  to  the  door.  Rather  the
staircase  led  down  to  the  door.  For  while  the  Caryatid  portico  is  at
the  higher,  the  door  is  at  the  lower  level  of  the  temple.  Hence  inside
of  the  portico  a  staircase,  of  which  a  few  steps  only  remain,  led  down  to
the  door.  A  great  part  of  the  coffered  ceiling  of  tlie  Caryatid  porch  is
preserved  in  its  place,  and  so  is  about  a  third  of  the  coffered  ceiling
of  the  north-western  porch  of  the  Erechtheum.  In  the  Caryatid  porch
the  dark  colour  of  the  terra-cotta  Caryatid  easily  distinguishes  her  from
her  marble  sisters.

P.  346  line  1 5,  The  statues  are  life-size  etc  This  is  true  only  d
three  or  four  of  them.  The  statues  in  fact  vary  greatly  in  size  ;  some
are  much  less  than  life.  Only  three  or  four  of  them,  if  any,  can  possibly
have  been  Caryatids.

P.  348  line  1 8  from  foot,  a  bronze  image  of  Athena  etc  Mr.  S.
Reinach  believes  that  we  possess  an  exact  copy  of  this  colossal  statue
(the  Athena  Pramachos)  in  a  bronze  statuette  which  was  found  at
Coblenz  and  is  now  in  the  Boston  Museum.  He  further  holds  that  a
bronze  statuette  recently  found  at  Tchan,  near  the  Dardanelles,  reproduces
the  type  of  the  colossal  bronze  statue  which  is  described  by  Nicetas  and
which  was  preserved  at  Constantinople  down  to  the  beginning  of  the
thirteenth  century  a.d.  See  Comptes  Rendus  de  PAcad^mie  des  Inscrip-
tions et  des  Belles- LettreSy  4me  S^rie,  23  (1895),  p.  3I3;  American
Journal  of  Archaeology ^  11  (1896),  p.  133.  As  to  the  statue  de-
scribed by  Nicetas,  see  vol.  2.  p.  350.

P.  352  line  22  from  foot,  a  bronze  chariot.  The  position  of  the
bronze  chariot  on  the  Acropolis  has  been  discussed  by  Mr.  Hauvettc
(Hirodote^  P-  47  •^^^•)-  ^^  thinks  that  the  restoration  of  the  chariot,
after  its  overthrow  or  destruction  by  the  Persians,  may  have  taken
place  on  the  occasion  of  the  Athenian  victory  at  Oenophyta  in  456  B.C.,
and  that  the  chariot  was  then  set  up  in  front  of  the  old  entrance  to  the
Acropolis,  where  Herodotus  saw  it ;  but  that  afterwards,  when  the  grand
portal  of  Mnesicles  was  built,  the  chariot  was  removed  and  placed  inside
the  Acropolis,  where  Pausanias  saw  it.

P.  354  line  15  sq,  from  top,  copies  of  the  Lemnian  Athena  etc.
Prof.  Furtwangler's  identification  of  the  two  Dresden  torsoes  and  the
Bologna  head  as  copies  of  the  Lemnian  Athena  of  Phidias  has  been
rejected  by  Mr.  P.  Jamot  on  weighty  grounds,  of  which  the  following
are  the  chief: —

(i)  The  Bologna  head  is  too  small  for  the  body  on  which  Prof.
Furtwangler  has  set  it.

(2)  The  style  and  technique  of  the  head  are  entirely  different  fix>m
those  of  the  body,  the  crisp,  sharp,  delicate  chiselling  of  the  head  con-
trasting strongly  with  the  broad,  solid,  grandiose  treatment  of  the  body ;
the  head  is  most  probably,  as  Prof.  Furtwangler  holds,  a  copy  of  a
bronze  original,  the  treatment  of  the  body  is  entirely  appropriate  to
marble.


VOL.  II  ATHENS  515

(3)  There  is  nothing  in  the  Bologna  head  to  recall  the  style  of
Phidias ;  on  the  contrary,  with  its  high  skull,  its  narrow  face  tapering
downwards  to  a  point,  its  delicate  features,  thin  nose,  thin  tightly-shut
lips,  and  dainty  chin  it  is  the  direct  antithesis  of  the  square  massive
heads  with  broad  cheeks,  thick  noses,  thick  parted  lips,  strong  jowls,  and
heavy  chins,  which  on  the  strength  of  the  Parthenon  sculptures  and  the
copies  of  the  Virgin  Athena  we  are  justified  in  regarding  as  character-
istic of  the  art  of  Phidias.

(4)  The  Lemnian  Athena  is  mentioned  by  only  two  ancient  authors,
Pausanias  and  Lucian,  neither  of  whom  says  anything  about  the  pose  of
the  statue ;  hence  any  attempt  to  identify  existing  statues  as  copies  of
it  are  necessary  futile.

Mr.  Jamot  concludes  that  the  Bologna  head  does  not  belong  to
either  of  the  Dresden  bodies ;  that  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  Phidias  or
his  school ;  and  that  we  cannot  possibly  identify  copies  of  a  statue  of
which  we  possess  no  description.  In  all  these  conclusions  I  agree  with
Mr.  Jamot  Prof.  Furtwangler,  while  he  attempts  to  defend  the  hybrid
which  he  calls  the  Lemnian  Athena,  admits  the  apparent  disproportion
and  the  discrepancy  of  style  between  the  head  and  the  body,  but  boldly
asserts  that  these  are  intentional  and  characteristic  of  the  goddess  and
of  the  art  of  the  period.  With  Mr.  Jamot  I  fail  to  understand  how  a
glaring  discord  between  the  head  and  body  of  a  statue  can  be  thought  a
characteristic  beauty,  above  all  in  a  statue  which  ancient  critics  regarded
as  the  most  beautiful  work  of  their  greatest  master.  See  P.  Jamot,  in
Monuments  GrecSy  vol.  2.  Nos.  21-22  (i 893-1 894),  pp.  23-35  5  ^^'j
'  L' Athena  Lemnia  de  Phidias,*  Revue arch/oiogique^  3me  S^rie,  27  ( 1 895),
pp.  1-5  ;  A.  Furtwangler,  in  Classical  Review,  9  (1895),  pp.  269-272  ;
H.  Lechat,  in  Reime  des  Atudes  grecqueSy  9  (1896),  pp.  260-262.
Prof.  Furtwangler  has  pointed  to  some  engraved  gems  which  he  con-
siders as  copies  of  the  Lemnian  Athena  {Revue  archdologique,  3me  S^rie,
28  (1896),  pp.  1-6).  One  of  them,  now  become  a  comer-stone  of  his
theory,  he  formerly  damned  as  a  forgery.  He  would  further  identify  as
a  copy  of  the  Lemnian  Athena  a  figure  of  the  goddess  carved  in  relief
on  a  tablet  of  Pentelic  marble,  which  was  found  in  the  sanctuary  of
Aesculapius  at  Epidaurus.  Athena  is  here  represented  standing  with
her  helmet  in  her  raised  right  hand.  Facing  her  is  a  man  leaning  on
a  staff  and  apparently  touching  Athena's  helmet  with  his  right  hand.
Prof.  Furtwangler  would  interpret  him  as  Hephaestus  giving  the  helmet
to  Athena.  See  A.  Furtwangler,  *  Zur  Athena  Lemnia,'  Sitzungsberichte
d.  philosoph,  philolog.  und  d,  histor,  Classe  d,  k,  bayer,  AkcuL  d  IVissen-
schafien  zu  MUnchcn,  1897,  pp.  289-292.

P.  355  line  24  sqq,  from  foot,  a  mnch  older  fortification-wall  etc.
A  well-preserved  piece  of  the  Pelasgic  wall  is  to  be  seen  at  the  east  end  of
the  Acropolis,  on  the  north  side  of  the  building  called  the  Small  Museum.
It  is  built  of  the  native  red  and  blue  limestone  of  the  Acropolis  and  is
from  12  to  13  feet  thick.  In  the  piece  of  the  Pelasgic  wall  at  the  south-
west comer  of  the  Acropolis  there  is  a  block  6  feet  long.

P.  356  line  I  sqq,.  Two  groups  of  these  fonndations  etc  The
westem  of  the  two  groups  of  Pelasgic  remains  referred  to  in  the  text  is


5i6  CA  VE  OF  APOLLO  addenda

1 8  paces  long  from  east  to  west  by  5  paces  broad  from  north  to  soutL
The  outer  walls,  which  in  one  place  are  standing  to  a  height  of  7  feet,  are
built  of  large  rough  blocks  in  the  Cyclopean  style ;  the  inner  walls  are
constructed  of  smaller  stones.  Enclosed  by  walls  of  large  rough  stones
about  3  feet  thick  is  a  small  apartment  or  cell  measuring  about  6  feet
square  on  the  inside.

P.  359  line  6  sqq,  from  foot,  the  staircase  is  arched  etc  Only
part  of  the  staircase  leading  down  to  the  Clepsydra  spring  is  arched
over  ;  the  greater  part  of  it  is  open.

P.  360  line  1 5  from  foot,  a  sanctuary  of  Apollo  in  a  cave.  The
Greek  Archaeological  Society  proposes  to  excavate  completely  the  whole
of  the  northern  and  western  sides  of  the  Acropolis.  Excavations,
directed  by  Mr.  Cawadias,  were  begun  towards  the  close  of  1896  at  the
north-west  comer  of  the  Acropolis,  and  have  been  continued  during
the  spring  and  summer  of  1897.  Amongst  other  results  attained  they
have  proved  once  for  all  that  the  cave  of  Apollo  was,  as  I  have
maintained  in  the  text,  the  shallow  high-arched  cave,  situated  a  Uttle  to
the  east  of  the  Clepsydra  spring,  of  which  the  walls  are  studded  with  niches
for  votive  offerings.  For  in  front  of  this  cave  Mr.  Cawadias  found  no
less  than  twenty-five  marble  tablets  or  fragments  of  tablets  carved  with
wreaths  of  myrtle  or  laurel  and  inscribed  with  dedications  to  *■  Apollo
under  the  High  Rocks '  ('A7rdA.A.<ovi  \mh  Maic/oais)  or  to  *  Apollo  under
the  Heights*  ('ATrdAAcovt  vTr'^Aicpats).  The  inscriptions  belong  to  the
Roman  age.  From  them  and  from  three  similar  inscriptions  which  had
been  found  before  (C  /.  A,  iii.  i.  Nos.  91,  92  ;  Mittheilungen  d,  arch.
InsHtuts  in  Athen^  3  (1878),  p.  144)  we  gather  that  the  nine  archons
and  their  secretary  stood  in  some  special  relation  to  the  Apollo  who  was
worshipped  in  the  cave,  for  eleven  at  least  out  of  the  twenty-eight  tablets
seem  to  have  been  dedicated  by  one  or  more  of  the  archons  or  by  their
secretary.  Mr.  Cawadias  may  be  right  in  supposing  that  at  the  end  of
their  term  of  office  the  archons  regularly  dedicated  tablets  to  Apollo  at
the  cave  in  token  that  they  had  kept  the  oath  which  they  swore  when
they  entered  on  office  (see  vol.  2.  p.  57  sq.\  He  thinks  that  the  oath
which  they  took  on  the  Acropolis  (Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens^  55)
may  have  been  taken  at  an  altar  in  front  of  the  cave  of  Apollo,  for  here,
immediately  in  front  of  the  cave,  Mr.  Cawadias  discovered  a  quadran-
gular sinking  in  the  rock  (2.45  metres  long  by  2  metres  wide),  in  which
an  altar  probably  stood.  It  may  have  been  one  of  the  altars  mentioned
by  Euripides  (lon^  937)-  These  discoveries  prove  that  the  cave  of
Apollo  was  not,  as  has  been  sometimes  supposed,  the  shallow  cave  a
little  further  to  the  west,  close  to  the  Clepsydra  spring.  In  this  latter
cave  there  are  no  niches  for  votive  offerings,  so  far  as  I  could  perceive
(and  herein  my  observation  is  confirmed  by  that  of  Mr.  Cawadias);
there  are  only  some  natural  rifts  in  the  rocky  sides  of  the  cave.  The
statement  in  the  text  (vol.  2.  p.  361)  must  accordingly  be  corrected  ;  it
was  made  at  second  hand  before  I  had  visited  the  cave.

Three  or  four  yards  to  the  east  of  the  cave  of  Apollo,  in  front  of  the
companion  cave  mentioned  in  the  text  (vol.  2.  p.  361),  Mr.  Cawadias
found  a  round    hole    in  the  rock  of  somewhat  irregular  shape,  about


VOL.  II  CAVE  OF  PAN  517

2  metres  wide  and  from  2  to  2^  metres  deep.  He  conjectures  that  it  may
be  the  cleft,  said  to  have  been  made  by  Poseidon's  trident,  down  which
Erechtheus  vanished  (Euripides,  loHy  281  sq.).  Just  beside  this  hole,  on
the  east,  the  excavations  revealed  the  low  entrance  to  another  cave  which
runs  into  the  rock  in  two  different  branches,  each  about  10  metres
long.  This  cave,  which  has  three  separate  mouths,  all  of  them  low,  is
identified  by  Mr.  Cawadias  with  the  cave  of  Pan.  In  favour  of  this
view  it  may  be  said  that  the  dark  recesses  of  such  a  cave  would  be
a  more  suitable  place  for  a  secret  meeting  like  that  of  Cinesias  and
Myrrhina  (Aristophanes,  Lysistrata^  911  sqq.)  than  any  of  the  other
three  caves  further  to  the  west,  all  of  which  are  too  shallow  and  open  to
afford  concealment.  I  am,  therefore,  disposed  to  accept  Mr.  Cavvadias's
identification  and  to  withdraw  the  view  adopted  in  the  text  that  the  cave
of  Apollo  was  also  the  cave  of  Pan.  Mr.  Cawadias  further  conjectures
that,  according  to  the  original  legend  at  least,  the  meeting  of  Apollo  and
Creusa  also  took  place  in  the  newly-discovered  cave,  that  the  worship  of
Apollo  thence  extended  over  the  neighbouring  caves,  and  that  it  was  not
until  the  time  of  the  Persian  wars  that  the  dark  winding  cave  was
transferred  from  Apollo  to  the  new-comer  Pan.

A  little  to  the  east  of  the  cave  of  Pan,  as  we  may  now  call  it,  the
recent  excavations  laid  bare  a  staircase  hewn  in  the  rock  and  ascending
in  an  easterly  direction  to  the  wall  of  the  Acropolis.  Seventeen  steps  are
preserved ;  the  rest  have  been  destroyed  at  some  period  to  make  room
for  a  building.  The  staircase  leads  to  a  postern  (now  built  up)  in  the
wall  of  the  Acropolis.  Inside  the  postern  a  staircase  of  twenty-two  steps,
discovered  in  1885,  leads  up  to  the  plateau  of  the  Acropolis  some  50
metres  to  the  west  of  the  Erechtheum.  This  entrance  to  the  Acropolis
was  either  kept  secret  or  had  fallen  into  disuse  before  the  time  of
Pausanias,  who  knew  of  no  entrance  except  the  regular  one  by  the
grand  portal  (i.  22.  4).  Probably  the  postern  was  "the  hole  at  the
cave  of  Pan,"  through  which  Lysistrata  caught  one  of  the  women
endeavouring  to  steal  out  of  the  Acropolis  (Aristophanes,  Lysistrata^
270  sq.).

Still  further  to  the  east  Mr.  Cawadias  has  found  a  narrow  under-
ground passage,  about  33  metres  long,  running  eastward  to  the  cavern
or  hollow  in  the  rock  which  has  sometimes  been  identified  with  the
sanctuary  of  Aglaurus  (see  vol.  2.  p.  167).  The  cavern  is  about  4
metres  high  and  has  an  opening  of  about  8^  metres  across.  A  short
branch  of  the  underground  passage,  near  the  cavern,  communicates  by
means  of  a  staircase  with  a  fissure  in  the  rock,  through  which  you  can
pass  under  the  fortification-wall  into  the  Acropolis.  Entering  by  this
fissure  and  ascending  by  a  short  staircase  to  the  plateau  of  the  Acropolis
you  find  yourself  to  the  north-west  of  the  Erechtheum,  within  the
precinct  of  the  Arrephoroi  (Paus.  i.  27.  3).  Thus  the  underground
passage  discovered  by  Mr.  Cawadias  may  perhaps  have  been  the  one
by  which  the  Arrephoroi  descended  on  their  secret  mission.  The
existing  staircase  in  the  passage  is  of  Prankish  or  Turkish  origin,  the
steps  being  constructed  of  marble  slabs,  bricks,  and  mortar.  Between
the  upper  nine  and  the  lower  five  steps  there  is  an  empty  space  of


Si8  ATHENS  addenda

6^  metres  enclosed  on  either  side  by  the  sheer  rock.  This  g^ap  in  the
staircase  was  probably  bridged  over  by  means  of  a  hanging  ladder.  Id
antiquity  all  the  steps  of  the  staircase  seem  to  have  been  of  wood ;  the
holes  in  which  the  ends  of  the  steps  were  inserted  can  still  be  seen  in
the  rock.

In  the  cavern  to  which  the  undergrotmd  passage  leads  and  which,
as  we  have  seen,  has  sometimes  been  identified  as  the  sanctuary  of
Aglaurus,  Mr.  Cawadias  found  undoubted  traces  of  religious  worship.
A  niche  for  the  reception  of  a  votive  offering  is  cut  in  the  wall  of  the
cavern,  and  among  the  rubbish  which  littered  the  floor  was  discovered  a
quadrangular  marble  pedestal,  which  to  judge  from  the  hollow  on  its
upper  surface  may  have  supported  a  statue  half  the  size  of  life.  Relics
of  earlier  ages  came  to  light  lower  down.  They  include  pieces  of  black-
figured  vases,  fragments  of  a  bronze  kettle,  and  a  headless  clay  statuette
of  a  seated  woman  of  archaic  style.

See  P.  Cawadias,  in  Comptes  Rendus  de  t AccuUmU  des  Inscriptions^  25  (1897),
pp.  Il6-Il8  ;  id,^  in  IXpairrtird  rifi  'A/>xaioXo7tic^  *Erai/>tof ,  1896  (published  1897),
pp.  17-19;  id,^  in 'Eipnjfjxpls  d/}xatoXo7iic^,  1897,  pp.  I -32,  87-92,  with  plates  1-4.
Cfompare  Ch.  Belger,  in  Berliner  philologiscke  Wochenschrift^  nth  September
1897,  pp.  1147-1151 ;  ib,  25th  September  1897,  pp.  1212-1214;  ib,  2nd  October
1897,  pp.  1 244- 1 246.

P.  362  line  2  from  foot,  the  other  sides  slope  gently  to  the  iiUiiL
This  is  misleading.  The  upper  part  of  the  Areopagus  is  composed  of  a
mass  of  bare  rock  which  on  the  south  and  south-west,  as  well  as  on  the
north-east,  ends  in  a  line  of  low  precipices.  Below  this  line  of  precipices
the  hill  slopes  gently  down  into  the  hollow  which  divides  it  from  the
Museum  and  Pnyx  hills.

P.  363  line  2  sq,  from  top,  remains  of  rock-hewn  seats.  These
are  correctly  described  by  Wordsworth  {Athens  and  Attica^^  p.  62) : —
"  Immediately  above  the  steps,  on  the  level  of  the  hill,  is  a  bench  of  stone
excavated  in  the  limestone  rock,  forming  three  sides  of  a  quadrangle,
like  a  triclinium  :  it  faces  south."

P.  363  line  14  sqq.  from  top,  Curtius  supposes  that  the  writer  of
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  etc.  Curtius's  interpretation  of  Acts  xvii.
19  is  rejected  on  good  grounds  by  the  Rev.  A.  F.  Findlay,  who  main-
tains the  traditional  and  more  probable  view  that  St  Paul  preached  on
the  Areopagus  Hill,  not  before  the  Council  of  the  Areopagus  in  the
market-place  {Annual  0/  tJu  British  School  at  Alliens^  No.  i  (Session
1894-5),  pp.  78-89).

P.  366  line  20  from  foot,  a  talisman  which  secured  the  safety  of
the  state.  With  the  motives  which  led  the  Athenians  to  keep  the  grave
of  Oedipus  a  state  secret,  we  may  compare  the  motives  which  induce  the
negroes  of  Calabar  to  preserve  in  secret  places  the  heads  of  deceased  chiefs.
"  The  heads  of  important  chiefs  in  the  Calabar  districts  are  usually  cut
off  from  the  body  on  burial  and  kept  secretly  for  fear  the  head,  and
thereby  the  spirit,  of  the  dead  chief,  should  be  stolen  from  the  town.  If
it  were  stolen  it  would  be  not  only  a  great  advantage  to  its  new  possessor,
but  a  great  danger  to  the  chiefs  old  town,  because  he  would  know  all
the  peculiar  ju-ju  [charms,  talismans]  relating  to  it.     For  each  town  has


VOL.11  ATHENS  519

a  peculiar  one,  kept  exceedingly  secret,  in  addition  to  the  general
ju-jus,  and  this  secret  one  would  then  be  in  the  hands  of  the  new
owners  of  the  spirit.  It  is  for  similar  reasons  that  brave  General
MacCarth/s  head  was  treasured  by  the  Ashantees,  and  so  on  "  (Mary
H.  Kingsley,  Travels  in  West  Africa^  London  1897,  p.  449  j^.).

P.  373  line  7  sqq.  Prof.  Mllchhftfer  has  plausibly  identified
PbreattTS  etc  Prof.  Milchhdfer's  grounds  for  placing  Phreattys
on  the  shore  at  the  eastern  side  of  the  entrance  to  Zea  rather  than,  with
H.  N.  Ulrichs,  on  the  shore  a  little  to  the  south-west  of  the  entrance  to
Zea,  scarcely  hold  good.  The  oval  holes  which  he  describes  certainly
exist  in  the  rock  just  where  he  says ;  but  similar  holes  are  to  be
seen  in  much  greater  numbers  at  the  spot  which  Ulrichs  identified  as
Phreattys.  At  the  latter  place  I  counted  about  thirty  of  these  rock-hewn
basins  on  the  shore  between  the  entrance  to  Zea  and  the  spring
Tzirloneri,  Most  of  them  are  oval  in  shape,  but  some  are  circular.
The  women  wash  clothes  in  them.  One  of  the  oval  basins  which  I
measured  was  i  metre  long,  .46  metre  wide,  and  about  .60  metre  deep.
A  circular  basin,  measured  by  me,  was  more  than  a  metre  in  diameter
and  about  half  a  metre  deep.  Just  at  the  place  in  the  shore  where  these
basins  occur  the  rock  has  been  hewn  away  to  form  two  roughly  quad-
rangular compartments  opening  off  each  other  with  a  rude  bench  or  step
running  nearly  all  round  them.  This  reminds  us  of  the  somewhat
similar  rock-hewn  bench  on  the  sunmiit  of  the  Areopagus  (see  above,
p.  5 1 8).  Was  this  bench  beside  the  sea  the  place  where  the  court  of
Phreattys  sat  in  judgment  ?  At  the  place  which  Prof  Milchhdfer  would
identify  as  Phreattys  I  saw  only  nine  or  ten  of  the  little  oval  basins  in
the  rock  beside  the  sea.

P.  374  line  I,  the  Pythinm  etc.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  still  maintains  his
proposed  identification  of  the  Pythium  mentioned  by  Thucydides  (ii.  15)
with  the  cave  of  Apollo  on  the  north  side  of  the  Acropolis  {Mittheil,  d,
arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  20  (1895),  p.  198  sq.).  The  reasons  for  rejecting
this  identification  appear  to  me  to  be  conclusive.

(I)  The  passage  of  Thucydides  in  question  (ii.  15)  suffices  by  itself
to  prove  that  the  Pythium,  along  with  the  Olympieum,  the  sanctuary  of
Earth,  and  the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  in  the  Marshes,  lay  to  the  south  of
the  Acropolis.  But  on  this  head  I  have  already  said  enough  (p.  484  sq,).
■  (2)  This  is  not  the  only  reference  to  the  Pythium  in  Thucydides.
Elsewhere  (vi.  54)  he  mentions  an  altar  dedicated  by  Pisistratus,  son  of
Hippias,  in  the  Pythium.  The  situation  of  the  Pythium  referred  to  in
this  latter  passage  is  known  and  is  not  disputed  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld.  It
was  to  the  south-east  of  the  Acropolis,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Ilissus,
near  the  Olympieum  and  the  spring  Callirrhoe  (see  vol.  2.  p.  189).  Now
if  Dr.  Dorpfeld  is  right,  Thucydides  in  two  different  passages  refers  to
two  different  Pythiums  without  giving  a  hint  that  they  were  distinct  and
lay  in  opposite  quarters  of  Athens,  and  that  too  though  in  one  of  the
passages  (ii.  15)  the  gist  of  the  argument  turns  entirely  on  a  knowledge
of  the  exact  situation  of  the  sanctuaries  referred  to.  Can  we  suppose
Thucydides  to  have  been  guilty  of  such  gross  and  culpable  ambiguity  ?
The  supposition  is  incredible.


520  ATHENS  addenda

(3)  The  cave  of  Apollo  on  the  north  side  of  the  Acropolis  was
merely  a  cave,  not  a  building.  It  is  hardly  likely,  therefore,  that  its
existence  should  have  been  pointed  to  by  Thucydides  as  evidence  of  the
extent  of  the  ancient  city.  Does  the  cave  of  Pan  on  Hymettus  or  the
Corycian  cave  on  Parnassus  prove  the  existence  of  an  ancient  city  in
these  places  ?

(4)  Strabo  mentions  (ix.  p.  404)  that  there  was  a  sacrificial  hearth
of  Lightning  Zeus  on  the  city-wall  (€v  ry  Tct'x**)  between  the  Pythium
and  the  Olympieum.  This  reference  creates  a  double  difficulty  for  Dr.
Dorpfeld;  for,  first,  there  is  no  city-wall  and,  second,  there  is  no
Olympieum  in  the  neighbourhood  where,  if  he  is  right,  they  should  both
be,  that  is,  near  the  cave  of  Apollo  on  the  north  side  of  the  Acropolis.
These  difficulties,  however,  which  might  have  given  pause  to  any  one
else,  are  met  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  very  simply  by  assuming  both  the  desired
edifices  in  the  desired  situations.  In  the  first  place  the  city-wall  referred
to  by  Strabo  was,  he  thinks,  the  city-wall  not  of  Strabo's  but  of  Cecrops's
time,  in  other  words  the  Pelargicum.  This  far-fetched  explanation
might  perhaps  have  been  allowed  to  pass  if  the  Pelargicum  had  existed
as  a  fortress  in  Strabo's  time.  But  that  it  had  ceased  to  exist  as  a
fortress  at  least  400  years  before  Strabo's  time  has  been  conclusively
demonstrated  by  Prof  J.  Williams  White  ('£^/x€/ot$  ap)(pjjo\oykKT\y  1 894,
p.  25  sqq,  \  see  above,  voL  2.  p.  357).  That  demonstration,  though  it
demolishes  a  theory  of  his  own,  is  not  mentioned  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld.  On
the  other  hand  the  real  city-wall  of  Strabo's  time  ran,  just  where  we  should
expect  to  find  it  from  his  description,  between  the  real  Pythium  and  the
real  Olympieum  to  the  south-east  of  the  Acropolis.  A  piece  of  it,  be-
longing to  the  Roman  age,  was  excavated  a  few  years  ago  by  the  Greek
Archaeological  Society  some  60  or  70  yards  to  the  south  of  the  Olympieum
(II/jaKTtKa  T^s  *Ap;(atoAoytK^s  *ETat/3ta9,  1893,  P-  ^33»  see  above,  p.
486  5q.\  In  the  second  place,  the  Olympieum  to  which  Strabo  refers  and
which  Dr.  Dorpfeld  places  on  the  northern  slope  of  the  Acropolis  can  be
no  other  than  the  famous  Olympieum  to  the  south-east  of  the  Acropolis,
since  Strabo  says  (ix.  p.  396)  that  the  king  who  dedicated  it  left  it  half
finished — a  remark  which  can  only  apply  to  the  great  temple  of  Olympian
Zeus  begun  by  Pisistratus,  continued  by  king  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  and
not  finished  till  the  time  of  Hadrian,  long  after  Strabo's  death.  Strabo
clearly  knew  of  only  one  Olympieum,  and  that  lay  to  the  south-east  of
the  Acropolis.  As  to  the  supposed  Olympieum  on  the  north  side  of  the
Acropolis,  it  will  be  time  enough  to  consider  it  when  it  emerges  from
the  soil  under  which,  according  to  Dr.  Dorpfeld,  it  still  lies  buried.

(5)  Finally,  the  recent  excavations  made  at  the  cave  by  Mr.
Cavvadias  for  the  Greek  Archaeological  Society  have  brought  to  light
a  number  of  inscribed  marble  tablets  which  prove  that  Apollo  was  here
worshipped  under  the  title  of  *  Under  the  Heights  *  or  *  Under  the  High
Rocks,'  but  none  which  mentions  him  under  the  name  of  Pythian  (sec
above,  p.  5 1 6).  This  tells  very  strongly  against  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  theory
that  the  cave  was  the  Pythium.

Both  the  Dorpfeldian  Pythium  and  the  Dorpfeldian  Olympieum
are  rejected  by  Prof.  C.  Wachsmuth  (*Neue  Beitrage  zur  Topographic


VOL.  II  ATHENS  521

von  Athen,'  Abhandlungen  d.  philolog,  kistor,  CL  d.  k,  sacks,  GeselL
d.  Wissenschaften^  18  (1897),  No.  i.  pp.  49-51).

P.  376  line  1 5  sqq.  from  foot,  Two  of  the  blocks  of  this  wall  etc.
One  of  these  two  enormous  stones  is  no  less  than  18  feet  long,  8  feet
high,  and  4  feet  thick.  In  the  upper  terrace,  on  which  these  two  great
blocks  stand,  there  are  several  rows  of  seats  cut  in  the  rock,  one  above
the  other,  on  either  side  of  the  speaker's  platform  (defna).  Can  these
rock-hewn  seats,  facing  north  over  the  area  of  the  Pnyx,  have  been  the
seats  of  the  Presidents  (prutaneis)  ?  From  the  upper  terrace  a  short
flight  of  three  steps  leads  up  through  the  scarped  rock  to  the  top  of  the
Pnyx  hill.  On  the  southern  brow  of  the  hill,  towards  its  western  end,
a  piece  of  the  ancient  city- wall  is  preserved  for  a  length  of  16  paces.
From  one  to  three  courses  of  masonry  are  standing.  The  thickness  of
the  wall  seems  to  have  been  1 1  feet.  It  is  built  of  squared  blocks  of
conglomerate  (breccia)  laid  in  horizontal  courses.

P.  379  line  26  from  foot,  an  enclosure  sacred  to  Artemis.  In
1 896  excavations  were  made  by  the  Greek  Archaeological  Society  in  the
hope  of  discovering  the  ancient  road  which  led  firom  the  Dipylum  to  the
Academy.  About  200  yards  north-west  of  the  Dipylum  a  broad  paved
street  running  northward  was  laid  bare,  and  beside  it  were  found  the
remains  of  a  Greek  building  which  may  perhaps  have  been  the  sanctuary
of  Fairest  Artemis  mentioned  by  Pausanias,  since  that  sanctuary  is
mentioned  in  an  inscription  found  on  the  spot  {Mittheil,  d  arch,  Inst
in  Athen^  21  (1896),  p.  463;  Athenaeum^  9th  January  1897,  p.  55  ;
UpaKTiKo.  rri^*Kpxaixi\.^^Tai.pia^^  1 896  (pub.  1 897),  pp.  20-22).

P.  393  line  6  from  top,  a  new  and  holy  fire  was  fetched  i^m  the
altar  at  Delphi  etc.  Two  inscriptions  engraved  on  the  walls  of  the
Treasury  of  the  Athenians  at  Delphi  seem  to  show  that  on  stated
occasions  a  holy  new  fire  was  brought,  along  with  a  sacred  tripod,  on  a
waggon  from  Delphi  to  Athens.  Perhaps,  as  £.  Curtius  conjectured,  the
occasion  of  fetching  the  new  fire  was  the  expiatory  festival  of  the  Thar-
gelia.  See  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique^  18  (1894),  pp.  87-93;  E.
Curtius,  in  Archdologischer  Anzeiger^  1895,  p.  '^ot)  sq.

P.  396  line  10  from  foot.  The  small  townships  of  Attica.  Mr.
Gurlitt  suggests  that  in  this  passage  (i.  31)  Pausanias  describes  the  small
townships  of  Attica  in  the  order  in  which  they  lay  on  the  main  roads  that
radiated  from  Athens.  Thus  Alimus,  Zoster,  Prospalta,  Anagyrus,  and
Cephale,  according  to  Mr.  Gurlitt,  lay  on  the  west  coast  of  Attica  and
were  reached  by  the  road  that  started  from  the  Itonian  gate  (see  vol.  2.
P-  37)  or  from  a  gate  in  the  south  wall  of  Athens  :  Prasiae,  Lamptrae,
and  Potami  were  reached  by  a  road  that  started  from  the  gate  of
Diochares,  near  the  Lyceum  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  397) ;  and  Achamae  was
reached  by  the  road  that  led  from  the  Achamian  gate  (Hesychius,  s,v,
^KyapviKoX  irvXat).  See  W.  Gurlitt,  Ueber  Pausanias^  pp.  285-287,
336-338.  The  theory  is  ingenious  and  accords  well  with  Pausanias's
method  elsewhere  of  describing  the  roads  that  radiate  from  a  capital
city,  as  for  example  Mantinea,  Megalopolis,  and  Thebes.  Yet,  as  Mr.
R.  Hcberdey  has  pointed  out  {Die  Reisen  des  Pausanias  in  Griecken-
landf  p.  98),  there  are  difficulties  in  the  way  of  accepting  it.     For  why


SM  PRASIAE—THORICUS  addenda

should  Lamptrae  be  interpolated  between  Prasiae  and  Potami  ?  Prospalta
between  Zoster  and  Anagyrus  ?  Myrrhinus  between  Phlya  and  Athmonia  ?
It  is  to  be  remembered,  however,  that  the  sites  of  some  of  these  town-
ships have  not  been  identified  with  certainty,  and  that  the  apparent
want  of  topographical  order  in  Pausanias's  description  may  be  due  merely
to  our  ignorance.  Mr.  Heberdey  thinks  that  the  townships  in  question
are  grouped  together  according  to  the  deities  worshipped  in  them  or  the
objects  of  interest  they  contained.  Thus  he  holds  that  the  link  between
Prasiae,  Lamptrae,  and  Potami  was  their  famous  graves ;  that  the  link
between  Phlya,  Myrrhinus,  and  Athmonia  was  the  worship  of  Artemis ;
and  that  the  link  between  the  townships  mentioned  in  §  i  was  their
worship  of  Demeter,  the  Mother  of  the  Gods  etc

P.  402  line  12  from  top,  Oephale.  Another  sepulchral  inscription
recording  the  name  of  a  woman  of  Cephale  has  lately  been  found  at
Keratea;  on  the  same  stone  is  carved  the  name  of  a  woman  of  Lamp-
trae (MittheiL  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  At/ten^  21  (1896),  p.  465).

P.  404  line  5  from  foot,  The  prehistoric  necropolis  of  Prasiae  etc
A  few  more  details  as  to  the  excavation  of  this  necropolis  are  given
by  Mr.  B.  Staes  {lipaKTiKo.  t^s  *Apx<i*oA.oyiic^s*ETaiptas,  1894,  p.  21).
The  tombs  excavated,  twenty-two  in  number,  resemble  those  at  Mycenae,
Nauplia,  and  Epidaurus,  being  chambers  cut  in  the  rock  and  approached
by  sloping  passages  (dromot)  or,  in  some  cases,  by  staircases.  The
largest  of  the  sepulchral  chambers  is  4  metres  square  by  2^  metres  high.
In  almost  all  of  the  tombs  several  persons  were  interred ;  in  one  of
them  the  number  of  bodies  was  ten.  Of  the  vases  found,  numbering
about  two  hundred,  two-thirds  are  perfect  and  in  good  preservation.
Amongst  the  other  objects  discovered  are  five  bronze  razors  or  knives,
one  gold  ring,  and  one  silver  ring.  Another  prehistoric  necropolis  of
the  Mycenaean  period  has  been  discovered  and  partially  excavated  by
Mr.  Staes  at  a  place  called  Ugori^  about  half-way  between  the  bay
of  Prasiae  {Porto  Raphtt)  and  the  village  of  Markopoido,  Here,
owing  to  the  nature  of  the  ground,  which  is  nearly  level,  the  tombs
are  sunk  beneath  the  surface  and  approached  by  staircases.  Ten
were  excavated  by  Mr.  Staes ;  the  largest  measures  about  3  metres
square  by  1.80  metres  high.  All  contained  more  than  one  body.
Amongst  the  objects  found  in  them,  besides  Mycenaean  pottery,  were  a
bronze  razor,  a  bronze  brooch  for  the  hair,  a  piece  of  a  ring  made  of
silver  but  alloyed  with  another  metal,  perhaps  iron,  and  a  number  of
leaden  wires  which,  from  the  place  in  which  one  of  them  was  found,
seem  to  have  been  attached  to  the  ears  and  passed  round  the  chin  of
the  dead,  in  order  to  prevent  the  lower  jaw  from  falling.  Near  the
necropolis  Mr.  Staes  observed  some  truces  of  a  later  settlement  which
he  conjectures  may  have  been  Cytherus,  one  of  the  twelve  ancient  towns
of  Attica  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  397  ;  Stephanus  Hyzantius,  s.v.  KvOrfpos).  See
B.  Staes,  in 'E</)7;/xc/ots  dp\atoX.oyLKrj,  1895,  PP-  202-210.

P.  408  line  3  sgg,  from  top,  Thoricus  etc.  I  visited  Thoricus  27th
November  1895,  and  can  supplement  the  description  in  the  text  on
some  points.  The  two  fortification-walls  which  cross  the  peninsula  of
St.  Nicholas  are  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  apart.     The  more  easterly  of


VOL.  II  THORICUS  523

the  two  is  distant  about  half  a  mile  from  the  foot  of  Mt  Velatottri,
A  small  chapel  of  St.  Stephen  (not  St  Nicholas)  stands  on  the  summit
of  the  promontory  at  the  point  where  the  easterly  wall  crosses  it.  This
east  wall,  which  is  much  better  preserved  on  the  northern  than  on  the
southern  side  of  the  promontory,  is  built  of  large  rough  unhewn  blocks
not  fitted  together,  or  rather  its  two  outer  £^ces  are  so  built ;  the  core
was  probably  filled  with  smaller  stones.  The  thickness  of  the  wall  is
about  8  feet ;  one  and  two  courses  are  preserved  to  a  height  of  5  feet
On  the  north  side  of  the  isthmus,  below  the  chapel,  a  square  tower
projects  eastward  (not  westward,  as  stated  in  the  text)  from  the  wall.
It  is  over  17  feet  broad,  projects  10  ft.  6  in.  from  the  curtain,  and  is
standing  to  a  height  of  from  3  ft  9  in.  to  5  ft.  6  in.  There  are
doubtful  traces  of  two  other  towers  projecting  eastward  firom  this  wall.
The  westerly  wall  seems  to  have  been  built  in  the  same  style  and  to
the  same  thickness  as  the  eastern  wall,  but  though  its  line  is  clearly
traceable,  very  little  of  the  wall  is  left  Vestiges  of  one  or  perhaps
two  square  towers  projecting  westward  from  it  may  be  seen  on  the
northern  side  of  the  promontory.

The  tower  at  the  south-western  foot  of  Mt.  Velaiouri  measures  2 1
feet  square  and  is  built  of  ashlar,  but  not  very  regular  masonry.  Six  to
nine  courses  are  preserved ;  where  nine  courses  are  standing  the  height
is  about  1 2  feet.  Adjoining  the  tower  on  the  east  is  a  piece  of  wall  1 3
paces  long,  built  of  large  blocks,  of  which,  however,  only  one  course  is
standing.

With  regard  to  the  theatre  of  Thoricus,  the  distance  between  the
outer  back-wall  of  the  auditorium  and  the  inner  wall,  built  of  thin  slabs,
is  only  10  paces  or  about  half  the  distance  stated  in  the  text  (p.  409).
The  back-wall  of  the  auditorium  is  preserved  in  places  to  a  height  of
from  7  to  9  feet  At  its  eastern  end  the  auditorium  rests  partly  on  the
rock  which  has  been  he^n  perpendicularly  so  as  to  present  the  appear-
ance of  a  supporting  wall.  In  the  upper  part  of  the  theatre  I  saw  no
remains  of  seats  anywhere.  The  walls  of  the  little  temple  of  Dionysus,
which  seems  to  have  comprised  a  cella  and  fore-temple  {pronaos)  but
no  back-chamber  {opisthodomos)  or  peristyle,  are  now  not  more  than

2  ft.  4  in.,  and  i  ft.  8  in.  high  on  the  north  and  west  sides  respectively.
The  inner  cross-wall,  dividing  the  cella  from  the  fore-temple,  is  about

3  feet  high.  Dr.  Dorpfeld*s  brief  description  of  the  theatre  {Das
griechische  Theater^  pp.  1 09-1 11)  adds  little  or  nothing  to  our  know-
ledge of  it.

As  to  the  two  beehive  tombs  discovered  at  Thoricus  within  recent
years  (see  vol.  3.  p.  138)  a  few  more  particulars,  taken  firom  my  journal,
may  be  given  here.  Of  the  tomb  on  the  saddle  between  Mt.  Velatouri
and  its  sister  hill  to  the  north  the  dromos  or  horizontal  approach  is
about  1 1  paces  long  and  7  feet  wide,  but  its  sides  are  only  partially
cleared.  At  a  distance  of  3  or  4  paces  from  its  outer  end  the  passage
was  closed  by  a  cross-wall,  which  is  still  about  3  feet  high.  The
doorway  leading  from  the  passage  {drofnos)  into  the  beehive  chamber,
so  far  as  it  is  cleared,  is  4  ft  4  in.  wide,  6  feet  high,  and  10  feet
long  (deep).     One  of  the  stones  of  the  lintel  is  about  6  ft.  7  in.  long


524  THORICUS  addenda

by  3  feet  broad.  My  measurements  of  the  elliptical  beehive  chamber
agree  fairly  with  those  in  the  text  The  masonry  of  the  tomb  through-
out is  wretched,  the  walls  being  built  of  small  irregular  stones  bonded
with  mortar.

The  other  beehive  tomb  is  on  the  eastern  slope  of  Mt  VelaUmri^
exactly  opposite  the  promontory  of  St.  Nicholas,  about  a  third  of  the
way  down  the  slope.  It  opens  to  the  north.  The  dromos  or  horizontal
approach  is  about  26  feet  long  and  9  ft.  6  in.  wide.  Its  side- walls  are
well  preserved ;  the  outer  end  of  the  passage  is  walled  up.  The  door-
way of  the  tomb,  which  is  also  well  preserved,  is  5  ft.  8  in.  wide  at  the
bottom,  between  i  o  and  1 1  feet  high,  and  about  1 1  feet  long ;  it
narrows  upward.  The  lintel,  formed  of  three  large  slabs,  is  in  its  place.
The  beehive  chamber  is  as  usual  circular ;  its  diameter  is  29  ft.  7  in. ;
the  walls  are  standing  to  a  height  of  about  16  feet,  but  the  upper  part
of  the  dome  is  gone.  As  has  been  mentioned  in  the  text,  three  graves
are  dug  in  the  floor  of  the  tomb,  and  two  small  quadrangular  walled
compartments  are  constructed  on  opposite  sides  of  the  beehive  chamber
in  such  a  way  that  the  wall  of  the  chamber  forms  one  side  of  each  of
these  little  compartments.  One  of  the  compartments  partly  covers  one
of  the  graves ;  it  is  8  ft.  4  in.  long  on  the  front  by  3  ft.  6  in.  on  the
sides ;  its  wall  is  standing  to  a  height  of  4  ft.  5  in.  The  masonry  of
this  beehive  tomb  with  its  dromos  resembles  that  of  the  other  beehive
tomb  at  Thoricus ;  the  walls  are  built  of  small  stones  and  mortar,  but
the  general  effect  is  more  imposing.  Although  the  tomb  had  been
rifled  before  its  discovery  by  Messrs.  Staes  and  Mayer,  enough  remained
to  prove  that  it  had  been  the  burial-place  of  a  wealthy  and  probably
princely  house.  For  among  the  objects  found  by  the  excavators  were
a  few  terra-cotta  vases  of  good  Mycenaean  style,  the  lid  of  a  gold  box,
the  disc  of  a  bronze  mirror,  the  half  of  a  round  box  containing  a  spiral
ornament  of  ivory,  a  rosette  of  glass-paste,  and  some  stone  arrow-heads
(B.  Staes,  in  'E</»y/x€/3ts  d/JxatoXoytKTy,  1895,  p.  225).

P.  410  line  10  sgq,,  "an  entire  city  has  been  fonnd  at  Thoricns "
etc.  The  discovery  announced  in  these  grandiloquent  terms  by  the
American  reporter  reduces  itself,  on  examination,  to  very  moderate  pro-
portions. On  the  conical  summit  of  the  hill  of  Thoricus  {Velaiouri)
excavations  conducted  in  1893  ^o^  tbe  Greek  Archaeological  Society  by
Mr.  B.  Staes  revealed  the  existence  of  a  very  small  Mycenaean  settle-
ment, and  beneath  it  the  vestiges  of  a  still  earlier  and  smaller  settle-
ment. Owing  to  the  nature  of  the  ground,  which  slopes  away  steeply
on  all  sides  from  the  conical  summit,  the  construction  of  even  a  palace
of  the  ordinary  Mycenaean  type  was  here  impracticable.  In  point  of
fact  the  length  of  the  settlement  is  just  20  metres,  and  its  breadth  12
metres,  while  the  breadth  of  the  older  settlement  is  only  8  metres.  The
remains  consist  of  a  number  of  underground  chambers  enclosed  by  a
triple  wall  which  had  been  rebuilt  or  repaired  at  various  times.  That
the  rooms  were  subterranean,  or  at  all  events  were  not  used  as  dwellings,
seems  proved  by  the  absence  of  doors  and  windows  in  the  walls.  Some
of  them  are  paved  with  stones  and  may  have  been  used  as  store-rooms  ;
others  can  only  have  served  as  foundations  on  which  to  raise  an  upper


VOL.  II  THORICUS  525

storey,  for  in  the  middle  of  some  of  them,  occupying  a  great  part  of  the
space,  were  found  lying  huge  stones,  which  must  certainly  have  been
removed  if  the  rooms  had  ever  been  occupied  as  dwellings  or  store-
houses.    The  stone  floors  of  the  other  rooms  would  seem  to  date  from
the  later  or  Mycenaean  settlement,  for  beneath  them  are  the  graves  of
the  older  inhabitants.     These  graves  consist  for  the  most  part  of  round
holes  excavated  in  the  rock  to  a  depth  of  .50-.  80  metre  and  contain-
ing each  a  single  large  jar  in  which  were  deposited  the  bones  of  the
dead  and  some  rude  hand-made  pottery.     Only  two  of  the  graves  are
oblong,  and  in  these  nothing  at  all  was  found.     The  practice  of  burying
the  dead   in  large  jars   prevailed,  as  we  shall   see  (below,  p.   560),
amongst  the  early  inhabitants  of  Aphidna,  but  there  is  this  difference
between  the  modes  of  burial  at  the  two  places,  that  whereas  at  Aphidna
the  graves  were  away  from  the  dwellings  and  were  covered  over  with  a
barrow,  at  Thoricus  they  were  dug  in  the  floors  of  the  houses.     Again,
the  custom  of  raising  the  dwelling-rooms  to  a  considerable  height  above
the  ground  and  leaving  the  ground-floor  either  unused  or  occupied  only
as  store-rooms  is  known  to  have  been  practised  at  Mycenae  (see  vol.  3.
pp.  121  sq.y  159  J^.).     At  Thoricus  the  walls  of  the  Mycenaean  period,
built  of  small  rough  stones  bonded  with  clay,  are  easily  distinguished  by
their  style  from  the  earlier  walls,  which  are  carelessly  built  of  larger
stones.     The  objects  found  within  the  houses  consist  ahnost  wholly  of
pottery ;  nothing  of  metal  was  discovered.     The  pottery  of  the  older
settlement,  found  in  the  lowest  strata  of  the  excavations,  is  of  various
sorts.     First,  a  great  deal  of  it  is  rude  hand-made  ware  of  a  coarse
gritty  clay,  like  the  pottery  placed  with  the  dead  in  the  jars.     Second,
much  of  it  consists  of  black  potsherds  decorated  with  incised  lines  which
have  been  filled  with  white  paint.     Third,  some  of  the  potsherds  exhibit
white  lines  painted,  not  incised,  on  a  black  or  reddish  ground.     The
pottery  of  the  Mycenaean  period  which  was  found  in  the  upper  strata  of
the  excavations  is  of  the  common  lustrous  sort.     Fragments  of  black-
figured  vases  also  came  to  light,  proving  that  the  summit  of  the  hill
continued  to  be  occupied  in  the  historical  Greek  period.     Both  the
older  settlements  appear,  from  traces  of  conflagration  and  wilful  destruc-
tion, to  have  come  to  a  violent  end  at  the  hand  of  enemies.     See  6.
Staes,  in  ri/oaKrtKa  t^s  'A/5;(aM)A,oytK^s 'Eraipeas,  1893,  p.  1 5  sq. ;  itL^
in 'K<f>r)fi€pLS  apxaioXxyyiKrif  1895,  pp>  221-234.

P.  410  line  16  sq.  from  top,  the  remains  of  a  colonnade  etc.
This  building  was  re-excavated  by  Mr.  Staes  in  1893.  His  account
of  it  confirms  the  one  given  in  the  text,  but  goes  to  show  that  the
building  was  a  temple  or  sanctuary  and  not  a  mere  colonnade.  For,
first,  at  the  eastern  entrance  there  stand  two  pedestals,  one  on  either
hand,  of  which  one  bears  a  mutilated  dedicatory  inscription ;  second,
the  fragment  of  an  archaic  female  statue,  like  those  found  on  the
Acropolis  of  Athens,  was  discovered  near  one  of  the  pedestals,  on  which
it  seems  originally  to  have  stood ;  and,  third,  there  came  to  light  in
this  neighbourhood  some  time  ago  an  inscription  (H0P02  TEMEN0Y2
TOIN  6E0IN,  < boundary  of  the  precinct  of  the  two  deities')  which
makes  it  probable  that  the  edifice  was  a  sanctuary  of  Demeter  and


526  LIPSYDRIUM—PAEONIDAE  addenda


Proserpine.  Yet  the  arrangement  of  the  building  is  not  like  that  of
an  ordinary  Greek  temple,  for  its  greatest  length  lies  north  and  south
or,  more  strictly,  north-east  and  south-west,  and  it  has  an  entrance
in  the  middle  of  the  long  east  side.  Whether  it  had  also  a  door  or
doors  at  one  or  both  the  narrow  ends,  does  not  appear.  The  edifice
seems  to  date  from  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  century  ac  See  B.
Staes,  in  XI/oaicTiKa  t^s  'Apxa^o^oyiic^? 'Erflu/otas,  1893,  p.  16  sq,^  with
pL  B.

P.  414  line  4  from  foot,  Amarynthos  in  Euboea.  The  site  of  the
great  sanctuary  of  Amarysian  Artemis  in  Euboea  has  not  yet  been
determined,  but  from  a  number  of  inscriptions  found  near  the  village
of  Vathia  to  the  east  of  Eretria  it  seems  probable  that,  as  I  have
indicated  in  the  text,  the  sanctuary  was  in  that  neighbourhood.  The
exact  spot  may  be  marked  by  the  ancient  ruins  now  called  Pakteockora^
situated  beside  the  sea  at  the  eastern  end  of  the  plain  of  VathicL,  It  is
true  that  the  distance  of  the  place  from  Eretria  is  much  more  than  the
seven  furlongs  mentioned  by  Strabo,  but  the  geographer  or  one  of  bis
copyists  may  easily  have  made  a  slip  in  the  number.  See  D.  S.  Staoro-
poullos,  \n  Yt^r\\upi%  dpxauokoyiKrj,  1895,  pp.  155-162.  Following  the
indication  of  Strabo  the  Americans  made  some  excavations  at  Kotrmd^
distant  a  little  more  than  seven  furlongs  to  the  east  of  Eretria  ;  but  they
discovered  no  trace  of  the  sanctuary  {American  Journal  of  Archaeohgyy
10(1895),  pp.  335-337).

P.  417  hne  3  sqq,^  the  ancient  townsliip  Paeonidae  etc  The
exact  situation  of  Paeonidae  or  Paeonia  is  still  uncertain,  but  a  consider-
able step  towards  determining  it  has  been  made  by  Prof.  Milchhdfer^s
identification  of  Lipsydrium,  the  place  which  the  Alcmaeonids  fortified
"above  Paeonia"  (Herodotus,  v.  62;  cp.  Aristotle,  Constitution  of
AthenSy  19).  On  the  summit  of  one  of  the  spurs  of  Mount  Pames
named  Karagoufolcsa^  which  rises  four  kilometres  (2i  miles)  to  the
north  of  the  village  of  Menidiy  is  an  ancient  fort  some  126  paces  long
from  east  to  west  by  65  paces  broad.  The  walls,  from  3  to  4  paces
thick,  are  somewhat  roughly  built,  but  every  advantage  has  been  taken
of  the  nature  of  the  ground  to  strengthen  them.  Fragments  of  glazed
tiles,  both  flat  and  curved,  litter  the  ground.  The  hill  or  rather  moun-
tain is  about  2000  feet  high  and  commands  a  wide  view  not  only  over
the  Athenian  plain  but  also  through  the  gap  between  Pentelicus  and
Hymettus  into  the  country  to  the  east.  This  ancient  fortress,  dis-
covered by  Prof.  Milchhofer,  is  probably  Lipsydrium.  It  may  very
well,  as  its  modem  discoverer  supposes,  be  much  older  than  the  time
of  the  Alcmaeonids.  The  site  of  Lipsydrium  being  determined,  we
must  look  for  Paeonidae  somewhere  in  the  plain  at  the  foot  of  the
mountain.  Now  at  the  south-eastern  foot  of  the  mountain  near  a
chapel  of  the  Panagia  there  are  some  ancient  remains  consisting  of
large  hewn  blocks  and  foundations.  These,  Prof.  Milchhofer  thinks,
may  mark  the  site  of  Paeonidae.  The  district  is  now  called  Gaitana.
Much  more  extensive  remains  of  an  ancient  settlement,  consisting
of  walls  and  pottery,  are  to  be  seen  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains
about  a  mile  to  the  north-east,  near  a  church  of  St.   Geprge.     The


VOL.  II  PHYLE— MARATHON  527

district  is  now  called  Bilesa,  See  A.  Milchbofer,  in  Karten  von  Attik€iy
Erldutemder  Text^  Heft  vii.-viii.  p.  7.

P.  42 1  line  9  from  top,  the  fortress  of  Fhyle.  As  to  Phyle  and
its  neighbourhood  see  Kaupert,  in  Archdologischer  Anzeiger^  1892,
p.  10  sq,  ;  A.  Milchhofer,  in  Karten  von  Attika^  Erldutemder  Text^
Heft  vii.-viii.  p.  8  sq.  The  walls  of  the  fortress  are  3  metres  (about  10
feet)  thick  and  are  preserved  on  three  sides,  though  in  a  more  or  less
ruinous  state,  for  a  total  length  of  150  metres.  On  the  west,  where
the  crag  falls  away  very  precipitously,  the  wall  has  disappeared.  On
the  south  side  an  ancient  gateway  or  rather  doorway  is  flanked  by  a
square  tower  which  projects  from  the  curtain  5  metres  further  to  the
west.  Two  other  square  towers  project  from  the  wall,  one  on  the
northern  and  the  other  on  the  southern  side  of  the  fortress.  The  interior
of  the  stronghold  forms  an  oval  about  1 00  metres  long  from  north-west
to  south-east,  with  a  mean  breadth  of  30  metres.  An  Attic  inscription
of  the  end  of  the  fourth  or  beginning  of  the  third  century  B.C.  proves
that  at  that  time  Phyle  was  garrisoned  and  that  its  walls  had  recently
been  repaired  ( '£<^7;/i€/o(9  ap\aiokoyiKri^  1884,  p.  135  sqq,).  From  the
same  inscription  we  learn  that  sacrifices  were  offered  to  Artemis  at
Phyle.  Another  inscription,  found  like  the  preceding  at  Eleusis  and
dating  apparently  from  the  end  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.,  records  a
dedication  to  Demeter  and  the  Maid  by  the  garrisons  of  Eleusis,
Panactum,  and  Phyle  (C  /.  A.  ii.  No.  1217;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge
Ifiscr,  Graec,  No.  121  ;  l.oewy ^  Insckri/ten  griech.  Bildhauer^  No.  104).

P.  431  line  16  from  top,  Maratlion.  The  battle  of  Marathon  con-
tinues to  be  fought  over  again  by  scholars  with  as  much  vigour  as  ever.
See  A.  Hauvette,  H^rodote  (Paris,  1894),  pp.  236-265  ;  G.  Busolt,
Griechische  Geschichte^  2.2  pp.  578-593  ;  R.  W.  Macan,  Herodotus^
the  Fourth^  Fifths  and  Sixth  Books ^  vol.  2.  pp.  149-248  ;  W.  Schilling,
'Die  Schlacht  bei  Marathon,'  Philohgus^  54  (1895),  PP-  253-273;
J.  B.  Bury,  *The  battle  of  Marathon,'  Classical  Review^  10  (1896),  pp.
95-98.  Of  these  writers  Messrs.  Macan  and  Schilling  have  independ-
ently propounded  theories  which  to  a  certain  extent  coincide  with  each
other  and  offer  a  reasonable  solution  of  some  of  the  difficulties  connected
with  Herodotus's  narrative.  Both  of  them  conjecture  that  the  delay
of  several  days  between  the  landing  of  the  Persians  and  the  battle
was  due  to  the  unwillingness  of  the  Persians  to  attack  the  Greeks  in
their  strong  position  and  the  resolve  of  the  Greeks  not  to  abandon
that  position  and  meet  their  adversaries  in  the  plain.  Both  of  them
suppose  that  the  Persians,  despairing  at  last  of  luring  the  Greeks  into
the  open,  resolved  to  give  them  the  go-by  and  move  on  Athens,  and
that  it  was  while  they  were  engaged  in  making  this  movement  that  the
Greeks  saw  their  opportunity  and  delivered  their  attack.  But  while
Mr.  Macan  thinks  that  the  Persians  resolved  to  march  on  Athens  by
the  highroad  to  the  south  of  Pentelicus  and  that  their  column  was
attacked  on  the  march  as  it  was  defiling  southward  past  the  Greek
position,  Mr.  Schilling  supposes  that  they  had  resolved  to  go  by  sea,
that  the  greater  part  of  their  army,  including  the  cavalry,  had  already
embarked,  and  that  there  remained  on  shore  only  a  strong  corps  of


528  BATTLE  OF  MARATHON  addenda

picked  troops,  which  had  faced  the  Greeks  and  held  them  in  check  till
the  rest  of  the  troops  were  on  board.  It  was  when  this  rear-guard  of
say  20,000  men  had  begun  to  follow  their  comrades  to  the  shore  that,
on  Mr.  Schilling's  theory,  the  Greeks  charged  them,  running  across  the
intervening  mile  of  ground  to  overtake  the  retreating  enemy  before  he
could  reach  his  ships.  There  is  much  in  this  theory  to  conmiend  it
It  explains  the  long  delay  of  the  battle,  the  hurriedness  of  the  Greek
attack  when  it  came  at  last,  the  absence  of  the  Persian  cavalry  in  the
action,  the  comparatively  small  losses  of  the  Persians,  and  the  escape  of
a  great  part  of  the  army  and  nearly  the  whole  of  the  fleet.  On  the
other  hand,  Mr.  Macan's  theory,  so  far  as  it  differs  from  that  of  Mr.
Schilling,  labours  under  two  serious  difficulties.  Where  was  the
Persian  cavalry?  and  how  did  the  vast  army,  fleeing  in  confusion
from  the  Greek  swords,  contrive  to  embark  and  escape  ?  To  get  over
the  former  difficulty,  Mr.  Macan  supposes  that  the  cavalry  was  to  be
sent  round  by  sea  and  had  already  embarked.  But  if  the  in&ntry  i^-as
to  march  on  Athens,  why  not  the  cavalry?  The  country  between
Marathon  and  Athens  on  the  route  assumed  by  Mr.  Macan  presents
no  obstacle  to  the  movement  of  cavalry,  whose  services  would  have
been  invaluable  in  reconnoitring,  foraging,  and  repelling  light  bands  of
the  enemy  which  might  otherwise  have  harassed  the  huge  unwieldy
column  of  infantry  on  the  march.  Why  Prof.  Bury  should  say  that  on
the  march  to  Athens  the  cavalry  would  have  been  a  useless  encum-
brance, I  am  quite  unable  to  understand.  The  second  difficulty — the
embarkation  of  nearly  the  whole  of  the  defeated  army  and  the  escape
of  the  whole  armada  except  seven  ships — is  not  met  by  Mr.  Macan  at
all.  On  the  whole,  Mr.  Schilling's  theory  may  perhaps  be  regarded
as  the  most  plausible  that  has  yet  been  suggested.

Here  I  wish  to  put  on  record  a  conjecture  of  my  late  lamented
friend,  W.  Robertson  Smith,  which,  if  it  were  accepted,  would  solve  two
of  the  problems  connected  with  the  battle.  He  suggested  in  conversa-
tion that  the  weather  may  never  have  allowed  the  Persians  to  land  their
cavalry  at  all.  This  would  explain  not  only  the  absence  of  the  cavalry
from  the  battle,  but  the  long  delay  which  preceded  the  action — the
Persians  were  waiting  for  the  sea  to  moderate  and  allow  them  to  land
the  horses.  My  friend  thought  that  the  disembarkation  of  cavalry  is
a  difficult  operation  and  can  only  be  effected  in  calm  weather.  This
opinion,  however,  was  not  confirmed  by  an  officer  of  experience  whom  I
consulted  through  a  friend.  According  to  him,  it  is  easy  to  land
cavalry  even  in  rough  weather,  for  the  horses  have  merely  to  be  driven
into  the  water  and  allowed  to  swim  ashore ;  all  that  is  needed  is  a  good
beach  where  the  animals  can  take  the  ground.  Such  a  beach  there  is
at  Marathon.

Here,  too,  I  desire  to  correct  a  mistake  of  my  own.  In  the  text
(vol.  2.  p.  442)  I  have  spoken  of  Athens  as  if  it  were  an  un walled  town
at  the  time  of  the  battle  of  Marathon.  I  did  this,  not  in  reliance  on  the
opinion  of  Professor  von  Wilamowitz-Moellendorff  (^Aus  Kydatken^  p.  97
sqqJ)  and  Dr  Dorpfeld  (in  Miss  Harrison's  Ancient  Athens^  P-  21)  that
it  was  so,  but  merely  because  I  overlooked  the  testimony  ojf  Herodotus


VOL.  II  BRAURON—RHAMNUS  529

(ix.  13)  and  Thucydides  (i.  89)  that  it  was  not.  On  a  question  of  the
state  of  Athens  in  the  fifth  century  B.C.  I  decidedly  prefer  the  evidence
of  Herodotus  and  Thucydides  to  that  of  Dr.  Dorpfeld  and  Professor  von
Wilamowitz-Moellendorff.

P.  434  line  13  sqq.  from  foot,  a  laxge  slab  of  Pentelic  marble
etc.  This  inscribed  slab  lies  beside  a  well,  close  to  a  church  of  St.
Constantine  on  the  east  side  of  the  highroad.  The  place  may  be  about
a  mile  and  a  half  to  the  south  of  the  plain  of  Marathon.

P.  436  line  10  sqq.  from  foot,  the  chorcli  of  St.  Gkorge  etc.  The
situation  of  the  church  and  monastery  at  Vrana^  on  the  side  of  a  mountain
and  the  edge  of  a  glen,  appeared  to  me  too  small  and  confined  to  allow
us  to  suppose,  with  Bursian,  that  here  was  the  precinct  of  Hercules
within  which  the  Greek  army  encamped  before  the  battle  of  Marathon.

P.  437  line  10  sqq,  from  foot.  The  remains  of  two  life-size
statues  etc.  On  visiting  the  ruined  gateway,  23rd  November  1895,
I  found  the  remains  of  the  statues  referred  to  in  the  text  One  of  the
fragments,  lying  on  its  side,  is  the  lower  half  of  a  marble  statue  of  a  man
or  woman  seated  in  a  chair  and  wearing  a  garment  which  reaches  almost
to  the  feet :  carved  in  relief  on  the  side  of  the  chair  which  is  upper-
most is  a  griffin ;  the  wings  and  leg  of  the  creature  are  still  distinct
Near  it  I  found  a  piece  of  another,  or  perhaps  of  the  same,  statue ;
from  the  breast  it  would  seem  to  have  represented  a  woman.  Close
to  it,  lastly,  I  observed  what  appeared  to  be  a  piece  of  yet  another  statue,
not  made  of  marble ;  it  apparently  represented  the  head  and  bust  of  a
woman  clad  in  a  garment  of  which  the  folds  could  be  traced.

P.  445  line  25  from  foot,  BranroXL  Some  prehistoric  tombs  of  the
Mycenaean  period  have  been  discovered  and  excavated  by  Mr.  B.  Staes
in  recent  years  at  the  Bay  of  Vraona  (Brauron).  They  are  cut  in  the
slope  of  the  hill  which  faces  westward  towards  the  isolated  rocky  hillock
at  the  foot  of  which  stands  the  ruined  chapel  of  St  George.  Owing  to
the  crumbling  nature  of  the  rock  most  of  the  tombs  are  now  ruinous ;
only  three  were  found  in  tolerable  preservation.  They  are  small,
measuring  only  about  2  metres  square  and  2^  metres  high.  The  short
narrow  passages  leading  into  them  were  blocked  with  unhewn  stones.
Each  tomb  seems  to  have  contained  more  than  one  dead  body.  A  few
vases  of  the  later  Mycenaean  period,  including  a  stirrup-jar  (see  vol.  3.
p.  112),  were  found  entire  in  the  graves,  together  with  fragments  of  two
other  stirrup-jars  and  eight  small  perforated  stones  which  Mr.  Staes
regards  as  buttons.  See  B.  Staes,  in  'E<f}rjfjL€pU  apxaioXoyiKi/j,  1895,
pp.  196-199.

P.  448  line  25  sqq.  from  foot,  Bhamnns  etc.  I  visited  Rhamnus
1 8th  December  1895,  ^"^  found  that  the  description  of  the  hill  and
fortress  of  Rhamnus  given  in  the  text  needs  to  be  corrected  in  a  few
points.  The  most  accessible  side  of  the  hill  is  the  south-eastern,  not
the  south-western.  It  is  on  the  south-eastern  side  that  the  gradual  slope
connects  the  hill  with  the  glen.  On  the  south-western  side,  on  the
other  hand,  the  hill  ends  in  high  and  precipitous  rocks  which  would
seem  to  have  rendered  fortification  superfluous.  Here,  too,  at  its  south-
west (not  north-west)  comer  the  hill  attains  its  greatest  height     Further,

VOL.  V  2  M


530  RHAMNUS  addenda

it  is  on  the  south  and  the  east  (not  south-west)  sides  that  the  fortification
walls  are  standing  to  a  considerable  height  The  masonry  of  the  eastern
wall  is  not  nearly  so  careful  and  good  as  that  of  the  southern  wall ;  the
courses  are  irregular,  some  of  the  blocks  are  polygonal  instead  of  squared,
and  there  are  small  stones  in  the  interstices.  However,  a  square  tower
which  projects  from  the  eastern  wall  is  built  of  regular  ashlar  masonry,
like  the  southern  wall ;  four  and  five  courses  are  preserved,  giving  a  height
of  3  metres  (about  i  o  feet).  The  number  of  towers  in  the  circuit-wall
is  five,  of  which  three  are  in  the  south  wall,  one  at  the  south-east  angle,
and  one  in  the  eastern  wall.  The  material  of  walls  and  towers  is  marUe,
but  outwardly  at  least  it  is  grey  rather  than  white.  The  gateway  described
in  the  text  is  about  3.45  metres  wide.  With  regard  to  the  outwoik
mentioned  in  the  text  (vol.  2.  p.  450,  near  top),  it  consists  of  a  broad
and  massive  but  now  ruined  wall  which  descends  from  the  top  of  the
hill  to  within  a  few  feet  of  the  water's  edge,  where  it  rests  upon  rocks.
It  is  at  the  north-western,  not  the  north-eastern  comer  of  the  hill,
and  was  clearly  designed  to  prevent  an  enemy  from  making  his  way
from  the  west  along  the  sea-side  of  the  fortress.

Of  the  keep  which  occupied  the  highest  part  of  the  hill,  at  its  south-
west  comer,  the  walls  may  be  traced  on  two  sides,  the  east  and
north.  The  eastern  wall,  irregularly  built  of  polygonal  blocks  of  various
sizes,  is  about  2  metres  (6  ft.  6  in.)  high  at  the  most  As  it  does
not  rise  above  the  surface  of  the  soil  on  its  inner  side,  where  the  ground
is  higher,  the  wall  has  more  the  appearance  of  a  terrace-wall  than  a
fortification-wall.  However,  at  its  northern  end  there  are  remains  of  a
square  tower.  On  the  north  side  of  the  keep  the  wall  is  traceable  for  a
short  distance,  but  there  is  little  of  it  above  ground.  On  the  south
and  west  sides  the  steep  slopes  and  precipitous  rocks  appear  to  have
been  deemed  a  sufficient  defence.  At  least  I  looked  in  v^ain  for
any  certain  indications  of  walls  on  these  sides.  Within  the  keep  I
observed  the  lower  parts  of  the  walls  of  a  quadrangular  building  con-
structed of  small  stones  ;  a  few  large  stones  are  also  lying  about
Amongst  the  mins  outside  of  the  keep  and  lower  down  the  hill  may  be
mentioned  a  round  building  4  paces  in  diameter  on  the  inside ;  the
walls,  built  of  small  irregular  stones,  are  about  1.60  metres  high.  A
doorway  in  this  round  building  opens  towards  the  gate  of  the  fortress.
The  four  chairs  of  white  marble  mentioned  in  the  text  (vol.  2.  p.  450)
are  still  to  be  seen  at  Rhamnus,  on  the  side  of  the  hill  some  20  yards
or  so  below  the  wall  of  the  keep.  Three  of  them  stand  in  a  row  on
a  long  low  base  of  white  marble  ;  the  fourth  is  lying  on  the  ground  near
them.

P.  45 1  line  1 1  from  top,  vestiges  of  the  ancient  buildings,  which
Pausanias  mentions.  In  the  little  stretch  of  level  ground  at  the
eastern  foot  of  the  fortress,  between  the  sea  and  the  hills  I  found  the
remains  of  a  building  of  white  marble,  which  seems  to  have  comprised
a  quadrangular  chamber  about  three  and  a  half  paces  square  on  the
inside,  an  antechamber,  and  a  porch.  In  the  square  chamber  there  are
remains  of  a  plain  mosaic  pavement.  The  walls,  so  far  as  they  exist,
are  well  built  and  tolerably  thick.


VOL.  II  RHAMNUS—OROPUS  531

P.  451  line  14  from  top,  the  terrace.  The  terrace  on  which  the
temples  of  Nemesis  and  Themis  stand  is  supported  by  walls  on  the
north  and  east  sides.  The  terrace-wall  on  the  north  is  from  six  courses
(2.50  metres)  to  nine  courses  (3.30  metres)  high.  It  is  built  of  marble;
about  half  of  it  is  of  a  grey  colour,  while  the  other  half  is  of  a  yellowish
hue  ;  yet  the  marble  is  apparently  the  same.  Both  colours  may  be  due
to  weathering.  The  wall  is  well  and  carefully  built  in  horizontal
courses,  but  the  joints  are  not  vertical.  With  regard  to  the  temple  of
Nemesis,  the  white  marble  pavement  of  most  of  the  south  colonnade,  and
large  parts  of  the  pavement  of  the  east  colonnade  and  of  the  fore-temple
{pronaos)  are  preserved.  Remains  of  only  six  (not  seven)  columns  of  the
south  colonnade  are  now  standing  in  their  places ;  they  consist  in  each
case  of  a  single  drum  which  is  unfluted  except  for  an  inch  or  so  at  the
bottom.  The  small  temple  of  Themis  is  raised,  like  the  temple  of
Nemesis,  on  three  steps.  It  was  not  surrounded  by  a  colonnade  or
peristyle.  The  walls  are  not  now  standing  to  quite  the  height  mentioned
in  the  text.  The  north  wall  is  1.90  metres  high  and  the  south  wall
1.40  metres  at  most ;  the  west  wall  is  not  quite  so  high  as  either.  Of
all  three  walls  the  outer  face  is  constructed  of  fine  well-jointed  polygonal
masonry ;  the  inner  face  is  built  of  much  smaller  stones  and  in  an
inferior  style.  The  wall  dividing  the  portico  or  pronaos  from  the  cella
is  also  standing  to  a  height  of  some  feet  Further,  the  stylobate  of
the  pronaos  is  preserved ;  but  the  inner  foundations  and  pavement  are
gone,  or  at  least  do  not  appear.  The  marble  of  which  the  temple  of
Themis  is  built  is  grey  rather  than  white  on  the  outside ;  but  this  may
perhaps  be  an  effect  of  weathering.

P.  455  line  10  sqq.^  the  sanctuary  is  on  a  lofty  and  very  steep
height  etc.  I  ascended  the  steep,  rocky,  bushy  height  which  bounds
on  the  west  the  little  glen  through  which  the  path  leads  down  from  the
temple  of  Nemesis  to  the  fortress  of  Rhamnus.  Here  I  expected  to
find  the  sanctuary  of  Amphiaraus  ;  but  though  I  traversed  the  crest  of
the  rocky  ridge  from  its  northern  end,  opposite  the  fortress,  to  its
southern  end  at  the  temple,  I  found  no  trace  of  a  sanctuary ;  the  whole
crest  seemed  to  be  in  a  state  of  nature.

P.  460  line  1 5  from  top,  the  sources  of  the  Nile  etc.  The  opinion
that  the  Nile  had  its  source  in  Mount  Atlas,  not  far  from  the  Atlantic,
was  held  by  Juba,  king  of  Libya  (Pliny,  Nat,  hist  v.  51),  Vitruvius
(viii.  2.  6  sq,\  and  Dio  Cassius  (Ixxv.  13).  Vitruvius  mentions  the
existence  of  crocodiles  in  the  rivers  of  Western  Africa  as  a  confirmation
of  this  view.

P.  469  line  1 5  from  top,  a  small  theatre.  As  to  the  theatre  at
Oropussee  W.  Dorpfeld,  in  Das  griechische  Theater  {M^tns  and  Leipsic,
1896),  pp.  100-109.  He  thinks  that  the  ordinary  seats  for  spectators
must  have  been  of  wood,  since  no  traces  of  stone  seats,  except  the  five
marble  chairs,  have  been  found.  There  is  neither  a  gutter  round  the
orchestra  nor  a  semicircular  passage  dividing  it  from  the  auditorium.
The  columns  which  adorned  the  front  of  the  stage  and  which
were  still  standing  when  I  visited  Oropus  in  1890  have  since  been
barbarously   thrown  down  and  broken.     The  entablature  which  they


S30  RHAMNUS  ao'

it  is  on  ihe  south  and  the  east  (not  south-west)  sides  that  the  '  -'-'Sl^

walls  are  standing  to  a  considerable  height.      The  masonry'  ^^^

wall  is  not  nearly  so  careful  and  good  as  that  of  the  soir  «I  ^

courses  are  irregular,  some  of  the  blocks  are  polygonal  i'    '  rf  th

and  there  are  small  stones  in  the  interstices.      Howe-  ji  thfOiT^

which  projects  from  the  eastern  wall  is  built  of  regi  j  teenu  K'

like  the  southern  wall ;  four  and  five  courses  are  pre
of  3  metres  (about  lo  feet).  The  number  of  to<
is  five,  of  which  three  are  in  the  south  wall,  oor  ,  with  the  itagt

and  one  in  the  eastern  wall.     The  material  of'  jked  ap  and  sip-

but  outwardly  at  least  it  is  grey  rather  than  whi  ,e-buildiags.     At  tk

in  the  text  is  about  3.45  metres  wide.     V  «■!!  surmounted  byi

mentioned  in  the  text  (vol.  2.  p.  450,  nea'  .ption  (C  /.  C.  G.  S.  i.
and  massive  but  now  ruined  wall  which  .cene  and  doorways"  to

hill  to  within  a  few  feet  of  the  water's  c  jich  Dr.  Ddrpfisld  bdioa
Ii  is  at  the  north-western,  not  the  ■  if  it  would  be  hard  to  find,
and  was  clearly  designed  to  prevent  jrpfeld  infers  that  there  ms  a
from  the  west  along  the  sea-side  of  t'      itage,  and  he  conjectures  that

Of  the  keep  which  occupied  thr  .  iriiereby  deities  and  other  super-
west  comer,  the  walls  may  be  ,  m  if  flying,  into  the  view  of  the
north.  The  eastern  wall,  iiregu'  ^  which  relate  to  the  reconstructiDii
sizes,  is  about  3  metres  (6  &  ^S.  i.  Nos.  433,  423  a,  pp.  147,  74;]
not  rise  above  the  surface  ^  th  ^  Gut  century  B.C.,  which  may  accoid-
is  higher,  the  wall  has  more  '^en  the  changes  recorded  by  them  were
fortification-wall.     However  /^

square  tower.  On  the  nor  '  j,  Jbot,  "■'»™'"  On  the  topography  and
short  distance,  but  there  ,'  =*  A.  MilchhSfer,  in  Karten  von  Attito,
and  west  sides  the  steer^ij^;  viii.  pp.  26-37.  He  inclines  to  think  that
been  deemed  a  sufBc^^^eaJunis,  to  which  Sirabo  refers  (ix.  p.  393),
any  certain  iiidi cat ior/y.i^ conjectured  in  the  text  (vol.  a.  p.  47B),  by  the
observed  the  lower  p^,''^ell  observed  in  the  south-western  part  of  the
struaed  of  small  VV^are  had  been  made  independently  by  J.  Topffer
Amongst  the  njinF^yV^([)orpat,  1S86),  p.  it;  Beilriigc  zur  gritch.
mentioned  a  roi  /."VTfBerlin,  1897),  p.  9).  The  place  is  on  the
walls,  built  of  F  y^^^ /^aHaiia,  so  called  from  an  island  Kanakiani
doorway  in  th'  tff'Lrind  renders  it  very  snug.  From  the  head  of  the
The  four  chf  ^J/JJj^  inland.  A  stream  flows  down  the  valley,  and
are  stiU  to  '  ^5^*^'^  ^  spring  of  good  water.  Some  vestiges  of
or  so  belo'  /^i'^A''  ™'*  '*''  chariot- wheels  in  the  rock  and  an
a  long  lov  /l*^.''!-  NO'  728)  in  honour  of  a  man  who  had  set  up
them.  /^^'^^^  ^'  ^'^  "^^^  expense  and  had  been  their  first  high-

P.  i'  /^^  ^^^  '"  '  ^? '  by  K.  B.  Stark  and  E.  Curtius.  See
Pansa-f  ir^^iimgriediisc-htn  Orient,^  pp.  359  J?.,  406  ;  E.  Curtius,
easier  ff^uij^'^'"''"  ''  ^'  ^5"  '^  **  ''''^*''  "^'^^  "*"  Salamis  lay
rema  •J^'Tg^  n^i'^^  '^""''^  '"'°  *^^  ^'^^  of  'he  bay  may  be,  as   Prof,

a  q^      .^Ik  i^jectuf*-'^'  '^^'^  ancient  Bocanis  or  Bocaha.
'""       fl   fi***''^*''''""".'',!  ^^"^  Cychrean  Hill  with  the  hill  of  J/^™«A>
J-        H  *%£«f'  •!7«!'^'^""^  ^^  y'"^-  Milchhiifer,  who  prefers  to  regarf  the
»  «_^  p.  4?*^  o"  '"'^  ■"".  i>«  as  prehistoric,  but  as  identical  with


VOL.  II  RHAMNUS—OROPUS  531

P.  451  line  14  from  top,  the  terrace.  The  terrace  on  which  the
temples  of  Nemesis  and  Themis  stand  is  supported  by  walls  on  the
north  and  east  sides.  The  terrace-wall  on  the  north  is  from  six  courses
(2.50  metres)  to  nine  courses  (3.30  metres)  high.  It  is  built  of  marble;
about  half  of  it  is  of  a  grey  colour,  while  the  other  half  is  of  a  yellowish
hue  ;  yet  the  marble  is  apparently  the  same.  Both  colours  may  be  due
to  weathering.  The  wall  is  well  and  carefully  built  in  horizontal
courses,  but  the  joints  are  not  vertical.  With  regard  to  the  temple  of
Nemesis,  the  white  marble  pavement  of  most  of  the  south  colonnade,  and
large  parts  of  the  pavement  of  the  east  colonnade  and  of  the  fore-temple
{pronaos)  are  preserved.  Remains  of  only  six  (not  seven)  columns  of  the
south  colonnade  are  now  standing  in  their  places  ;  they  consist  in  each
case  of  a  single  drum  which  is  unfluted  except  for  an  inch  or  so  at  the
bottom.  The  small  temple  of  Themis  is  raised,  like  the  temple  of
Nemesis,  on  three  steps.  It  was  not  surrounded  by  a  colonnade  or
peristyle.  The  walls  are  not  now  standing  to  quite  the  height  mentioned
in  the  text.  The  north  wall  is  1.90  metres  high  and  the  south  wall
1.40  metres  at  most ;  the  west  wall  is  not  quite  so  high  as  either.  Of
all  three  walls  the  outer  face  is  constructed  of  fine  well-jointed  polygonal
masonry ;  the  inner  face  is  built  of  much  smaller  stones  and  in  an
inferior  style.  The  wall  dividing  the  portico  or  pronaos  from  the  cella
is  also  standing  to  a  height  of  some  feet  Further,  the  stylobate  of
the  pronaos  is  preserved ;  but  the  inner  foundations  and  pavement  are
gone,  or  at  least  do  not  appear.  The  marble  of  which  the  temple  of
Themis  is  built  is  grey  rather  than  white  on  the  outside ;  but  this  may
perhaps  be  an  effect  of  weathering.

P.  455  line  10  sqq.,  the  sanctuary  is  on  a  lofty  and  very  steep
height  etc.  I  ascended  the  steep,  rocky,  bushy  height  which  bounds
on  the  west  the  little  glen  through  which  die  path  leads  down  from  the
temple  of  Nemesis  to  the  fortress  of  Rhamnus.  Here  I  expected  to
find  the  sanctuary  of  Amphiaraus  ;  but  though  I  traversed  the  crest  of
the  rocky  ridge  from  its  northern  end,  opposite  the  fortress,  to  its
southern  end  at  the  temple,  I  found  no  trace  of  a  sanctuary ;  the  whole
crest  seemed  to  be  in  a  state  of  nature.

P.  460  line  1 5  from  top,  the  sources  of  the  Nile  etc.  The  opinion
that  the  Nile  had  its  source  in  Mount  Atlas,  not  far  from  the  Atlantic,
was  held  by  Juba,  king  of  Libya  (Pliny,  Nat.  hist,  v.  51),  Vitruvius
(viii.  2.  6  sq.)y  and  Dio  Cassius  (Ixxv.  13).  Vitruvius  mentions  the
existence  of  crocodiles  in  the  rivers  of  Western  Africa  as  a  confirmation
of  this  view.

P.  469  line  1 5  from  top,  a  small  theatre.  As  to  the  theatre  at
Oropussee  W.  Dorpfeld,  in  Das  griechische  T^A^o/^r  (Athens  and  Leipsic,
1896),  pp.  100-109.  He  thinks  that  the  ordinary  seats  for  spectators
must  have  been  of  wood,  since  no  traces  of  stone  seats,  except  the  five
marble  chairs,  have  been  found.  There  is  neither  a  gutter  round  the
orchestra  nor  a  semicircular  passage  dividing  it  from  the  auditorium.
The  columns  which  adorned  the  front  of  the  stage  and  which
were  still  standing  when  I  visited  Oropus  in  1890  have  since  been
barbarously   thrown  down  and  broken.     The  entablature  which  they


532  OROPUS — SALAMIS  addenda

supported,  consisting  of  an  architrave,  a  triglyph  frieze,  and  a  cornice
(geison),  has  been  found.  Like  the  columns,  it  is  of  white  marble.  At
the  back  of  the  triglyphs  and  cornice  are  holes  and  cuttings  intended  to
receive  the  ends  of  the  wooden  floor  of  the  stage.  The  height  of  the
stage  is  estimated  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  (who  consistently  with  his  theory
denies  that  it  was  a  stage  at  all)  at  2.51  metres.  Its  depth  seems  to
have  been  about  2  metres.  No  vestige  of  a  staircase  connecting  the
stage  with  the  orchestra  has  come  to  light,  but  on  the  other  hand  both
the  parodoi  slope  upward  from  the  orchestra  to  a  level  with  the  stage.
This  slope  is  artificial,  the  ground  having  been  banked  up  and  sup-
ported by  walls  at  the  back  and  sides  of  the  stage-buildings.  At  the
back  of  the  stage,  there  seems  to  have  been  a  wall  surmounted  by  a
Doric  entablature  on  which  is  carved  the  inscription  (C.  /.  G,  G.  S.  i.
No.  423)  recording  the  dedication  of  "  the  scene  and  doorways "  to
Amphiaraus.  At  least  this  is  the  position  which  Dr.  Dorpfeld  believes
the  inscription  to  have  occupied,  and  a  better  it  would  be  hard  to  find.
From  various  technical  indications  Dr.  Dorpfeld  infers  that  there  was  a
wide  opening  in  the  back  wall  of  the  stage,  and  he  conjectures  that
machinery  may  have  been  placed  in  it  whereby  deities  and  other  super-
natural beings  were  swung  forward,  as  if  flying,  into  the  view  of  the
spectators.  Both  of  the  inscriptions  which  relate  to  the  reconstruction
of  the  stage-buildings  (C.  /.  G.  G.  S.  i.  Nos.  423,  423  a^  pp.  147,  745)
seem  to  belong  to  the  second  or  first  century  B.C.,  which  may  accord-
ingly be  taken  to  be  the  date  when  the  changes  recorded  by  them  were
effected.

P.  477  line  16  sqq.  from  foot,  Salamis.  On  the  topography  and
ancient  remains  of  Salamis,  see  A.  Milchhofer,  in  Karien  von  Attika^
Erldutemder  Texty  Heft  vii.  viii.  pp.  26-37.  He  inclines  to  think  that
the  site  of  the  older  city  of  Salamis,  to  which  Strabo  refers  (ix.  p.  393),
may  be  marked,  as  I  have  conjectured  in  the  text  (vol.  2.  p.  478),  by  the
ancient  remains  which  Dodwell  observed  in  the  south-western  part  of  the
island.  The  same  conjecture  had  been  made  independently  by  J.  Topffer
{Quaestiones  Pisistrateae  (Dorpat,  1886),  p.  11  ;  Beiirdge  zur  griech.
Altertumswissenschaft  (Berlin,  1897),  p.  9).  The  place  is  on  the
shore  of  the  Bay  of  Kanakia^  so  called  from  an  island  Kanakiarti
which  lies  off"  the  bay  and  renders  it  very  snug.  From  the  head  of  the
bay  a  valley  stretches  inland.  A  stream  flows  down  the  valley,  and
near  the  shore  there  is  a  spring  of  good  water.  Some  vestiges  of
antiquity,  including  the  ruts  of  chariot-wheels  in  the  rock  and  an
inscription  (C.  /.  A.  iii.  No.  728)  in  honour  of  a  man  who  had  set  up
images  of  the  emperors  at  his  own  expense  and  had  been  their  first  high-
priest,  were  observed  here  in  1871  by  K.  B.  Stark  and  E.  Curtius.  Sec
K.  B.  Stark,  Nach  dem griechischen  Orient^  pp.  359  j^.,  406  ;  E.  Curtius,
Alterthum  und  Gegenwart^  2.  p.  95.  If  the  older  city  of  Salamis  lay
here,  the  stream  which  flows  into  the  head  of  the  bay  may  be,  as  Prof.
Milchhofer  conjectures,  the  ancient  Bocarus  or  Bocalia.

Lolling's  identification  of  the  Cychrean  Hill  with  the  hill  oi  Magoula
(vol.  2.  p.  479)  is  rejected  by  Prof  Milchhofer,  who  prefers  to  regard  the
remarkable  tumulus  on  the  hill,  not  as  prehistoric,  but  as  identical  with


VOL.  II  SAL  AM  IS  533

the  *  tomb  of  many  men '  which  appears  from  an  inscription  (E<fnjfupU
apX^i^oXoyiKiy,  1 884,  p.  1 79  line  33)  to  have  existed  in  Salamis  near
the  trophy  set  up  for  the  victory  over  the  Persians.  If  Prof.  Milch-
hofer  is  right,  we  may  conjecture  that  the  men  buried  in  the  tumulus
were  the  Greeks  who  fell  in  the  great  sea-fight  Excavations  might
decide  the  question  whether  the  tumulus  is  prehistoric  or  not  From
the  southern  side  of  the  hill  of  Magoula  a  wall  ascends  the  back  of
the  promontory,  then  turns  westward  and  nms  along  the  ridge  to  near
the  village  of  Ambelakt,  The  purpose  of  this  wall,  as  Prof.  Milchhofer
conjectures,  was  probably  to  protect  the  town  and  harbour  of  Salamis
on  the  south.

Further,  Lolling's  identification  of  Cape  Sciradium  (vol.  2.  p.  479)
is  rejected  by  Prof.  Milchhofer,  who  thinks  that  Sciradium  may  have
been  either  the  southern  extremity  of  the  island,  now  called  Cape
KolonnaeSy  or  the  headland  now  called  Pn'konia,  at  the  south-west
extremity  of  the  island,  to  the  south  of  the  island  of  Kanakiani.

P.  483  line  10  sq.  from  foot.  The  battle  of  Salamis  etc.  The
problems  connected  with  the  battle  continue  to  excite  discussion.  See,
besides  the  writers  cited  in  the  text,  J.  Topffer,  Quaestiones  Pisis-
trateae  (Dorpat,  1886),  p.  15  sqq,  {Bdtrage  sur  griech,  Alteriums-
wissenschaft^  p.  1 1  sqq,^\  A.  Hauvette,  H^rodote  (Paris,  1894),  pp.  400-
424  ;  A.  Milchhofer,  in  Karten  von  AttifcOy  ErlduiemcUr  Text^  Heft
vii.  viii.  p.  29  sqq.  An  interesting  memorial  of  the  great  battle  has
lately  come  to  light  at  Ambelakt ^  the  site  of  the  historical  city  of
Salamis.  It  consists  of  an  inscription  containing  two  lines  of  the
metrical  epitaph  on  the  Corinthians  who  fell  in  the  battle ;  the  in-
scription is  in  the  Doric  dialect  and  alphabet,  and  seems  to  date
from  the  first  half  of  the  fifth  century  B.C  The  slab  of  white  marble
on  which  it  is  engraved  was  found  in  digging  the  foundations  of  a
house  beside  the  large  church  of  the  Panagia,  on  the  north  side  of
the  public  square.  Many  ancient  tombstones  have  been  found  and
are  still  being  found  almost  daily  by  the  inhabitants  in  this  neighbour-
hood, proving  that  here  was  the  graveyard  of  Salamis.  This  tallies
with  the  statement  of  Plutarch  {De  Herodoti  malignitate^  39)  that
the  Athenians  allowed  the  Corinthians,  for  their  bravery,  to  be  buried
beside  the  city  of  Salamis.  In  the  same  passage  Plutarch  quotes  the
epitaph  in  full,  but  without  mentioning  the  author.  The  pseudo-Dio
Chrysostom  also  quotes  the  epitaph  in  full  and  ascribes  it  to  Simonides
{Or,  xxxvii.  Corinthiaca^  vol.  2.  p.  298  ed.  Dindorf).  The  attribution
of  the  epitaph  to  Simonides  has  recently  been  questioned  by  Prof.
Hauvette  {De  P authenticity  des  ^pigrammes  de  Simonide  (Paris,  1896),
p.  77  sq,\  but  it  is  confirmed  by  the  discovery  of  the  original  inscription,
which  seems  to  have  been  at  least  contemporary  with  the  poet  For
the  inscription  see  S.  N.  Dragoumes,  in  Mittheilungen  des  arch,  Inst,  in
Athen^  22  (1897),  pp.  52-58.

P.  486  line  I,  monastery  of  DaphnL  The  Byzantine  church  of
Daphni  has  suffered  severely  from  earthquakes  since  the  description  in
the  text  was  printed.  I  found  it  much  dilapidated  on  my  last  visit
(Christmas  Eve,  1895).


534  ERINEUS—ELEUSIS  addenda

P.  486  line  8  from  top,  left  bank  of  a  dry  water-conne.  The
ancient  road  is  on  the  right,  not  the  left,  bank  of  the  water-course,

P.  487  line  16  5q,y  where  the  road  to  Elentherae  branches  off
across  the  plain.  It  is  the  road  to  the  village  oiKalyvia  that  branches
off  here,  not  the  road  to  Eleutherae.  The  point  where  the  roads  fork
seemed  to  me  more  than  half  a  mile  from  the  salt  pools  of  the  Rhiti.

P.  498  line  1 7  from  top,  These  fonndation-walls,  nearly  30  feet
thick  etc.  This  is  quite  a  mistake.  To  judge  by  the  eye,  the  walls  arc
only  6  or  8  feet  thick  ;  indeed  the  east  wall  is  only  about  5  feet  thick.

P.  502  line  6  from  top,  a  place  which  they  call  Erinens.  About
a  mile  and  a  half  to  the  north  of  Eleusis  an  isolated  hill  rises  from  the
plain  to  a  height  of  some  250  feet.  It  extends  in  the  form  of  a  ridge
for  three-quarters  of  a  mile  or  so  from  south-west  to  north-east.  The
Eleusinian  Cephisus  skirts  the  foot  of  the  hill  closely  on  the  north
and  west.  The  present  name  of  this  isolated  hill  is  ZoumeJuusiki  or
Magoulesa;  at  the  beginning  of  the  century  it  seems  to  have  been
known  as  Magoula^  2l  name  now  transferred  to  a  large  modem  village
at  the  foot  of  the  hills  about  a  mile  to  the  north-west.  Magoula  is  an
Albanian  word  signifying  *  a  hill  in  a  plain.'  Prof.  Milchhofer  conjec-
tures that  the  hill  of  Zaumakasikt  or  Magoulesa  may  be  the  ancient
Erineus.  On  its  south-western  summit  are  the  ruins  of  an  ancient
tower,  and  at  the  south-eastern  foot  of  this  summit  some  traces  of
ancient  foundations  may  be  seen.  Leake,  who  overestimated  the  dis-
tance of  these  remains  from  Eleusis,  thought  that  they  might  mark  the
site  of  Thria,  which  gave  its  name  to  the  Thriasian  Plain  (Stephanus
Byzantius,  j.-z/.  6/3ia  ;  Leake,  Topography  of  Athens,^  2.  p.  150).  But
Thria  seems  to  have  occupied  the  site  of  Kalyvia^  a  large  village  in
the  plain  three  miles  to  the  north-east  of  Eleusis,  for  this  is  the  only
place  outside  of  Athens  where  inscriptions  relating  to  Thria  and  the
Thriasians  have  been  found  {MittheiL  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  A  then,  12
(1887),  p.  326,  Nos.  467,  478).  See  A.  Milchhofer,  in  Karten  von
Attikay  Erlduternder  Text,  Heft  vii.  viii.  pp.  22  sq.,  24.

P.  503  line  I,  Eleusis.  The  exploration  of  the  sacred  precinct  at
Eleusis  was  continued  in  1895  and  1896  under  the  direction  of
Messrs.  Philios  and  A.  N.  Skias,  but  since  the  discovery  of  the
Callichorum  well  nothing  of  importance  has  come  to  light.  Most  of
the  excavations  have  been  made  in  the  southern  part  of  the  precinct ;
in  particular  the  remains  of  the  building  commonly  held  to  be  the
Council  House  have  been  carefully  examined  and  described  in  detail.
See  II/saKTiKa  T^s  ^hpyaiQ\oyiKr^%  'Erat/atas,  1 893,  p.  II  sq.  \  ih,
1894,  pp.  14-17;  ib,  1895,  PP-  159-^93  (where  the  results  of  the
excavations  of  1896  are  also  embodied);  ib.  1896,  pp.  26-28.  A
popular  account  of  Eleusis  and  its  remains  has  been  written  by  the
most  competent  authority  on  the  subject,  Mr.  D.  Philios  {£leusisy  ses
my  stores  y  ses  rui'nes  et  son  Mus^e,  Athens,  1896).  The  inscriptions
discovered  have  been  published  by  Mr.  D.  Philios  {Bulletin  de  Corresp.
helUnique,  19  (1895),  pp.  113-136,  265-267)  and  Mr.  A.  N.  Skias
(E4yrifi€pls  dpxaioX,oyLKrij  1 894,  pp.  1 89-2 1 2  ;  ib,  1895,  PP-  83-124  ;  i^
1896,  pp.  23-56;  ib.  1897,  pp.  33-66).    Perhaps  the  most  interesting  of


VOL.  II  ELEUSIS  535

these  is  a  mutilated  metrical  inscription  on  a  cylindrical  base  of  Pentelic
marble  which  was  found  on  the  Processional  Road  between  the  grand
portal  and  the  Hall  of  Initiation.  From  this  inscription  we  learn  that
the  pedestal  supported  the  statue  of  a  priest  of  the  mysteries  who  had
**  saved  the  mysteries  for  his  country  by  repelling  the  lawless  Sarmatians  "
and  had  initiated  Antoninus.  It  is  a  plausible  conjecture  that  the  Sarma-
tians here  mentioned  were  the  tribe  of  Costobocs  who  invaded  Greece  in
the  reign  of  Marcus  Antoninus,  and  who  may  have  penetrated  as  far  as
Eleusis.  See  Pausanias,  x.  34.  5  with  the  note.  Mr.  D.  Philios  suggests
that  these  barbarians  may  have  sacked  and  partially  destroyed  the  sacred
precinct  and  that  this  may  be  the  reason  why,  as  the  existing  remains
prove,  the  great  Hall  of  Initiation  was  entirely  rebuilt  in  the  Roman
period.  The  rhetorician  Aristides,  a  contemporary  of  Pausanias,  refers
in  vague  and  extravagant  terms  to  certain  impious  people  who  had
seemingly  in  his  own  lifetime,  profaned  the  mysteries  and  fired  the
precinct  {jOr,  xix.  vol.  i.  p.  421  sqq.^  ed.  Dindorf).  These  impious
people  may  have  been  no  other  than  the  Costobocs.  See  D.  Philios,
in  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUnique^  19  (1895),  pp.  11 9- 128;  /V/.,  in
MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst  inAthen^  21  (1896),  pp.  242-245.  Amongst  the
sculptures  found  at  Eleusis  in  recent  years  are  two  votive  reliefs,  prob-
ably copies  of  images  of  Demeter,  Proserpine,  and  Triptolemus  which
stood  in  the  sacred  precinct.  One  of  these  reliefs,  executed  in  a  rude
archaic  style,  is  described  below  (p.  536  5q,\  The  other,  carved  in  the
graceful  but  dignified  style  of  the  fourth  century  B.C,  represents  Tripto-
lemus seated  between  the  standing  figures  of  Demeter  and  Proserpine,
while  a  group  of  four  small  figures,  doubtless  portraits  of  the  persons
who  dedicated  the  relief  are  approaching  the  deities.  A  winged  dragon
is  rearing  its  head  beside  Triptolemus,  who  seems  to  be  sitting  on  a
throne  rather  than  in  a  car.  See  D.  Philios,  in  MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,
in  Athen^  20  (1895),  PP»  245-266;  O.  Rubensohn,  in  Archdologischer
Anseigcr,  1896,  pp.  100-102.  Two  statuettes  found  at  Eleusis  are
described  by  Prof.  Furtwangler  {MittheiL  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  20
(1895),  PP-  357-359) ;  one  of  them  represents  Proserpine  seated  on  the
lap  of  Demeter.  Lastly,  Mr.  Skias  has  discovered  at  Eleusis  a  number
of  graves  containing  many  early  vases  decorated  in  the  geometrical
style  ;  some  of  the  vases  are  very  large.  One  grave,  in  which  a  woman
was  found  buried  in  a  sitting  posture,  contained  no  less  than  sixty-eight
vases  of  various  sorts  and  a  quantity  of  feminine  ornaments,  including
finely-made  earrings  of  gold  with  amber  beads,  bronze  and  iron  brooches,
bronze  armlets,  rings  of  silver,  bronze,  and  iron,  besides  three  Egyptian
scarabs  and  a  statuette  of  Isis  {MittheiL  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  20
(1895),  p.  374;  Classical  Review^  9  (1895),  p.  428  ;  American  Journal
of  Archaeology^  10  (1895),  P-  550-  The  woman  may  have  been
a  priestess,  and  if  so  the  discovery  of  the  Egyptian  objects  in  her
grave  lends  some  countenance  to  the  theory,  in  itself  improbable,  of
Mr.  P.  Foucart  that  the  Eleusinian  mysteries  were  derived  from  Egypt
{Recherche s  sur  Porigine  et  la   nature  des  my  stores  d*  Eleusis,  Paris,

1895).

P.  503  line  12  sqq,,  the  SQiiare  Fraakiah  tower  which  occupies


536  ELEUSIS  addenda

the  most  westerly  and  the  highest  point  of  the  ridge.  In  point  of
fact  the  ridge  extends  some  way  to  the  west  of  the  tower  and  rises  to  a
greater  height  in  that  direction,  but  there  is  a  dip  in  it  immediately  to
the  west  of  the  tower.  Excavations  at  the  tower  have  revealed  the
remains  of  a  good  many  meanly-built  walls,  apparently  mediaeval.

P.  503  line  25  sqq.  from  foot,  The  town  of  Eleosis  etc  The  traces
of  the  lower  town  of  Eleusis  in  the  plain  beside  the  sea  have  now
almost  wholly  vanished  (A.  Milchhofer,  in  Karten  von  Aftiket^  Erlau-
temder  Text,  Heft  vii.  viii.  p.  25).

P.  504  line  3  sqq,  from  foot,  the  middle  of  the  three  towers.  Of
this  tower  no  less  than  twenty-three  courses  of  masonry  are  preserved,
but  most  of  them  are  below  the  present  level  of  the  ground.  The
fortification-wall  on  the  south  side  of  the  sacred  precinct  is  standing  to  a
height  of  thirteen  courses  of  masonry  above  ground.

P.  505  line  19  sqq,  from  foot,  there  are  a  number  of  holes  throng
which  the  water  ponred  into  a  corresponding  number  of  small
basins.  Rather,  there  is  a  hole  in  each  little  basin  through  which  the
water  drained  into  a  channel  or  gutter  which  runs  in  front  of  all  the
basins.

P.  505  line  15  sqq,  from  foot,  an  ancient  well  etc.  The  Calli-
Chorum  well  is  at  the  eastern  foot  of  the  steps  leading  up  to  the  Great
Propylaea.     Its  mouth  is  circular  and  is  enclosed  by  masonry.

P.  506  line  I,  a  colossal  medallion  of  white  marble.  Mr.  Philios
thinks  that  this  medallion,  which  is  much  mutilated,  may  perhaps
represent  the  emperor  Antoninus  Pius,  and  that  hence  the  Great
Propylaea  may  have  been  built  by  him  {E/cusis,  p.  59).

P.  507  line  8  from  foot,  the  marble  head  of  a  beardless  young
man  etc.  Mr.  D.  Philios  holds  that  this  head  neither  represents
Eubuleus  nor  is  by  the  hand  of  Praxiteles  ;  it  is  more  probably,  he
thinks,  a  portrait  of  one  of  the  successors  of  Alexander,  perhaps  of
Demetrius  Poliorcetes  {Mittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  A  then,  20  (1895),
p.  263  sqq.),  I  agree  with  Mr.  Philios  and  Prof.  E.  A.  Gardner  {Hand-
book of  Greek  Sculpture,  p.  487  note  i)  in  seeing  no  resemblance
whatever  between  this  head  and  that  of  the  Hennes  of  Praxiteles,  and
in  regarding  as  little  more  than  an  arbitrary  conjecture  the  opinion
that  it  represents  Eubuleus.

P.  508  line  21  sq.  from  top,  the  bases  of  all  these  columns  except
one  are  still  to  be  seen  in  their  places.  The  bases  of  several  columns
of  the  most  southerly  row  but  one  are  now  missing  or  covered  up.

P.  508  line  8  sqq.  from  foot,  a  spacious  portico  etc.  The  pave-
ment of  the  portico  of  Philo,  constructed  of  square  blocks  of  black
Eleusinian  stone,  is  preserved  almost  entire.

P.  5 1 1  line  3  from  top,  a  building.  Mr.  D.  Philios  conjectures  that
this  may  have  been  the  second  of  the  two  treasuries,  rebuilt  in  Roman
times  {Eleusis,  p.  63).

P.  513  line  22  from  top,  the  images  of  Demeter  and  Proserpine
etc.  Another  votive  tablet  has  recently  been  found  at  Eleusis  which
represents  Demeter  and  Proserpine  very  nearly  in  the  attitudes  described
in  the  text.     Demeter,  portrayed  as  a  matron  in  flowing  robes,  is  seated


VOL.  II  ELEUSISSLEUTHERAE  537

to  the  spectator's  left  on  a  chair  without  back  or  arms,  her  feet  resting
on  a  stool ;  she  wears  a  crown  from  beneath  which  her  long  hair  falls
loosely  down  her  back  ;  in  her  raised  left  hand  she  grasps  a  long  sceptre
and  in  her  extended  right  hand  she  holds  three  ears  of  com.  Before
her  stands  the  maiden  Proserpine,  a  more  youthful  but  still  squat  and
dumpy  figure,  wearing  her  hair  bound  up  in  a  turban  and  holding  a
torch  in  either  hand.  The  relief  is  executed  in  an  archaic  style  which
points  to  the  early  part  of  the  fifth  century  B.C  It  may  very  well  be,  as
Mr.  Philios  thinks,  a  copy  of  the  images  set  up  immediately  after  the
Persian  sack  of  Eleusis.  The  chief  difference  between  it  and  the  other
votive  reliefs,  in  which  Mr.  O.  Kern  with  great  probability  recognises
copies  of  the  images,  is  that  in  this  particular  relief  Demeter  is  seated
on  a  chair,  whereas  in  the  others  she  is  seated  on  the  cylindrical  cista  or
sacred  basket.  The  latter  was  probably,  as  Mr.  Kern  supposes,  the  way
in  which  the  goddess  was  represented  in  the  original  statue.  The  dis-
covery of  this  tablet  confirms  beyond  the  reach  of  question  the  view
taken  in  the  text  (vol.  2.  p.  118)  that  in  the  great  Eleusinian  relief  the
goddess  to  the  spectator's  left  with  the  long  flowing  hair  and  the  sceptre
in  the  left  hand  is  Demeter,  while  the  goddess  to  the  spectator's  right
with  her  hair  bound  up  in  a  knot  and  a  torch  in  her  hand  is  Proserpine.
Prof.  Furtwangler  had  confidently  asserted  {Meisterwerke  d,  griech,
Plastiky  p.  39  note  4)  that  the  goddess  with  the  flowing  hair  must  be
Proserpine ;  but  this  view  is  abundantly  refuted  by  Mr.  Philios  in  his
discussion  of  the  recently-found  relief.  See  D.  Philios,  in  MitikeiL
d,  arch,  Inst,  in  At/ten^  20  (1895),  pp.  245-255,  with  pi.  v.

P.  516  line  8  sq,^  a  police-baxrack  etc.  The  police-barrack  is
beyond,  that  is,  nearer  to  the  ruins  of  Eleutherae  than,  the  khan  oi  Kasa,

P.  516  line  14  from  top.  The  mins  of  Eleutherae.  In  November
1895  I  revisited  the  ruins  of  Eleutherae  and  was  able  to  make  more
accurate  measurements  of  the  fortifications  than  on  my  former  visit
In  the  north  wall,  which  is  by  far  the  best  preserved,  there  are  remains
of  eight  square  towers.  The  two  towers  which  stand  on  lower  ground
at  the  eastern  and  western  ends  of  the  \*'all  are  ruinous,  but  the  inter-
mediate six  are  preser\'ed  to  heights  varj'ing  from  twelve  to  fourteen
courses  on  the  outer  (northern)  side  and  from  six  to  ten  courses  on  the
inner  (south)  side.  The  ground  falls  away  here  from  south  to  north,  so
that  on  the  inner  side  of  the  wall  it  is  considerably  higher  than  on  the
outer.  I  was  able  to  measure  three  of  the  towers  to  their  full  height  on
the  inner  side  of  the  wall.  Their  heights  were  1 5  fl.  5  in.  (with  nine
courses  of  masonry),  1 5  ft.  i  in.  (with  ten  courses  of  smaller  stones),  and
14  ft.  6  in.  (with  eight  courses).  The  heights  of  the  other  three  towers
on  the  inner  side  of  the  wall  I  estimated  at  from  1 3  to  15  feet.  On  the
outer  side  of  the  wall  I  was  unable  to  measure  the  full  heights  of  the
towers  but  I  estimated  them  at  from  22  to  25  feet,  the  number  of  courses
preserved  varying  from  twelve  to  fourteen.  Contrary  to  the  geneAl
usage  of  Greek  fortifications  the  towers  project  inward  from  the  wall  as
well  as  outward.  On  the  outside  the  projection  varies  from  8  ft.  6  in.
to  9  ft.  6  in. ;  on  the  inside  it  is  uniformly  3  ft.  6  in.  Five  of  the
towers  are  entered  from  the  ramparts  by  a  pair  of  doors,  one  on  each


538  ELRUTHERAE^OENOE  addenda

side  of  the  tower ;  and  two  towers  have  besides  a  third  door  on  their
inner  (southern)  face  at  the  level  of  the  ground.  Another  tower  (the
second  from  the  west)  has  only  a  door  at  the  level  of  the  ground,  but
none  opening  off  the  ramparts.  These  doorways  in  the  towers  are
mostly  3  feet  wide  and  6  feet  high.  With  regard  to  the  north  wall  itself
between  the  towers,  it  is  standing  in  general  to  a  height  of  from  9  to  1 5
feet  on  the  outside,  with  from  five  to  ten  courses  of  masonry  preserved.
On  the  inner  side  the  number  of  courses  varies  from  four  to  seven.
Where  six  courses  are  standing  the  height  is  about  lo  feet  The
thickness  of  the  wall  varies  from  6  ft  4  in.  to  7  ft.  2  in.  Three  stair-
cases, more  or  less  ruinous,  lead  down  from  the  wall  on  its  inner  side.
Further  it  should  be  noted  that  the  north  wall  is  pierced  with  two  door-
ways. One  of  these  doorways  is  4  ft.  5  in.  wide ;  the  other  is  4  feet
wide  and  9  feet  high  and  has  its  lintel  preserved.

About  8  paces  south  of  this  fine  fortification-wall,  but  wholly
unconnected  with  it,  are  the  remains  of  the  "oblong  rectangular
edifice"  mentioned  in  the  text  (vol.  2.  p.  516).  It  seems  to  have  been
a  sort  of  inner  fort  or  keep.  The  wall,  4  feet  thick,  is  built  of  massive
well-jointed  polygonal  masonry  and  may  be  traced  all  round  the  building
whidi  is  1 9  paces  long  from  north  to  south  by  1 2  paces  broad  from  east
to  west     At  the  north-west  angle  the  wall  is  about  6  feet  high.

P.  517  line  8  sqq,  from  foot,  the  rains may  be  those  of

Oenoe  etc.  The  identification  of  the  ruins  at  Myoupoli  as  those  of  the
ancient  Oenoe  is  regarded  by  Prof.  Milchhofer  as  certain.  The  ground
here,  bounded  by  beds  of  streams  on  the  east  and  south,  but  opener
to  the  west,  rises  to  a  moderate  elevation.  A  fortification-wall,  carried
in  a  series  of  straight  lines,  surrounds  what  seems  to  have  been
the  citadel.  Seven  minutes  suffice  to  walk  round  it.  The  towers  on
the  north  side  are  best  preserved,  especially  one  towards  the  north-
east comer  which  has  eleven  or  twelve  courses  of  large  blocks  of
conglomerate  standing.  In  this  north  wall  there  are  two  gates.
Traces  of  houses  and  other  remains  of  foundations  may  be  seen
especially  in  the  south  and  south-west.  Many  potsherds  lie  strewn
about.  That  the  communications  of  the  place  were  protected  by  out-
lying forts  is  proved  by  the  isolated  remains  of  towers  and  foundations
in  the  neighbourhood,  notably  to  the  north  and  north-east.  See  A
Milchhofer,  in  Karten  von  Attika^  Erlduternder  Text,  Heft  vii.  viii.  p.
1 6  sq.  One  of  these  outposts  of  Oenoe  stands  in  the  little  plain  to  the
south  of  Eleutherae,  about  twenty  minutes'  drive  (between  2  and  3
miles)  south-east  of  the  khan  of  Kasa.  Here  some  50  yards  or  so
to  the  east  of  the  highroad  which  connects  Athens  with  Thebes  arc
considerable  remains  of  an  ancient  tower  built  of  regular  ashlar
masonry.  Originally  the  tower  must  have  been  about  30  feet  square,
but  only  the  north-eastern  angle  of  it  is  well  preserved.  In  the  north
wall  no  less  than  thirty-one  courses  of  masonry,  with  a  block  of  the  thirty-
second,  are  standing.  As  the  courses  average  from  17  to  21  inches
high,  the  height  of  the  tower  at  present  is  probably  about  50  feet
There  are  five  loop-holes  in  the  northern  and  one  in  the  eastern  walL

P.  525  line  24  from  foot,  Solon  stirred  them  up  by  his  versaB


VOL.  II  AEGOSTHENA  539

etc  The  difficulties  raised  by  the  traditional  accounts  of  the  Athenian
conquest  of  Salamis  have  been  discussed  by  J.  Topffer  {QuaesHones
Pisistra/eae,  p.  i  sqq, ;  Beitrdge  zur  Altertumswissenschaft^  p.  i  sqq,).
See  also  G.  Busolt,  Griechische  Geschickte^  2.2  p.  217  sqq.

P.  532  line  22  from  top,  like  the  Egyptian  wooden  images.  On
the  strength  of  certain  Egyptian  and  Phoenician  statuettes  Mr.  £.
Pottier  argues  that  Greek  sculpture  was  influenced  by  Egyptian  models
at  some  period  not  earlier  than  the  second  half  of  the  seventh  century
B.C.  He  supposes  that  Greek  artists  residing  in  Egypt  produced  small
models  of  Egyptian  statues,  and  that  these  copies  found  their  way  to
Greece  in  the  way  of  commerce.  The  influence,  in  his  opinion,  is
betrayed  chiefly  in  the  advance  of  the  left  leg  of  archaic  male  statues
like  the  so-called  Apollos  of  Tenea,  Orchomenus,  etc.,  and  with  this  he
would  connect  the  tradition  that  Daedalus  was  the  first  to  make  statues
with  their  feet  apart.  See  E.  Pottier,  *  Note  sur  le  style  ^gyptisant
dans  la  plastique  grecque,'  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  hellhiique^  18  (1894),
pp.  408-415.

P.  533  line  9  from  top,  graves  in  the  city.  To  the  examples  of
burial  in  the  market-place  which  are  cited  in  the  text  a  few  more  may
be  added.  The  tomb  of  the  herald  Talthybius  was  shown  in  the
market-place  of  Aegium  (Paus.  iii.  12.  7,  vii.  24.  i).  Oxylus  was
buried  in  the  market-place  at  Elis  (Paus.  vi.  24.  9).  And  the  bones  of
Hesiod  are  said  to  have  been  laid,  long  after  his  death,  in  the, middle  of
the  market-place  of  Orchomenus  (Proclus,  Vita  Hesiodi^  4,  in  Biograpki
Graeci,  ed.  Westermann,  p.  49).

P.  543  line  I  sq,^  Aegosthena.  A  few  years  ago  Aegosthena  was
visited  by  some  members  of  the  British  School  at  Athens.  The  results
of  their  researches  have  recently  been  reported  by  Mr.  E.  F.  Benson
{Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  15  (1895),  PP*  314-324).  From  his  de-
scription and  plans  I  gather  the  following  particulars.

The  walls  seem  to  have  formed  a  rough  quadrangle  about  600
yards  long  from  east  to  west  by  200  yards  wide  from  north  to  south.
Beginning  on  high  ground  at  the  east  they  extended  westward  and  down-
ward to  the  sea.  The  most  easterly  and  highest  part  of  the  site,
naturally  defended  on  three  sides  by  steep  and  in  some  places  almost
precipitous  slopes,  was  cut  off  from  the  rest  of  the  town  by  an  inner
cross-wall  to  form  an  acropolis.  The  walls  are  well  preserved  on  the
east  and  north,  but  the  south  wall  has  almost  wholly  disapi)eared.  On
this  southern  side  a  river,  descending  from  the  hills  in  a  steep  bed
enclosed  by  high  rocks,  flows  along  the  whole  length  of  the  town,  and
on  its  southern  bank  some  traces  of  a  fortification-wall  have  been
observed,  consisting  of  a  long  line  of  stones  and  hewn  blocks  now
overgrown  with  bushes  and  resembling  the  "  long  lines  of  fallen  walls
which  mark  ruined  Norman  or  mediaeval  castles  in  England."  This
line  of  stones,  therefore,  which  may  be  traced  down  to  the  sea,  is
probably  a  remnant  of  the  south  wall,  which  would  seem  to  have  crossed
over  from  the  north  to  the  south  bank  of  the  river  at  a  point  some  170
yards  or  so  west  of  the  great  tower  which  occupies  the  south-eastern
angle  of  the  fortified  enclosure.     Whether  there  was  ever  a  west  wall


540  AEGOSTHENA  addenda

along  the  shore  of  the  gulf  has  been  doubted.  Mr.  Benson  thinks  that
there  was  not ;  but  many  hewn  blocks  lie  along  the  shore,  and  it  seems
highly  improbable  that  one  whole  side  of  the  town  would  have  been
left  open  and  undefended.  The  examples  of  Piraeus  and  Larymna
would  be  enough  to  prove,  if  proof  were  needed,  that  the  Greeks  are
not  likely  to  have  overlooked  the  necessity  of  defending  their  cities  on
the  side  of  the  sea  as  well  as  of  the  land.  With  regard  to  Aegosthena
in  particular,  did  this  obscure  little  town  ever  possess  a  command  of  the
sea  so  complete  that  it  could  afford  to  neglect  the  chance  of  an  attack
from  the  side  of  the  sea  by  such  naval  powers  as  Athens  and  Corinth  ?
If  Athens,  the  mistress  of  the  sea,  defended  her  shore  line  with  massi\-e
walls,  must  not  Aegosthena  have  done  so  too  ?

Walls  and  towers  of  the  acropolis  and  of  the  lower  town  are  built  in
the  same  style.  The  towers  are  constructed  of  strictly  ashlar  masonry ;
the  blocks,  which  average  a  metre  in  length  by  half  a  metre  in  height
and  breadth,  are  squared  and  laid  in  horizontal  courses.  On  the  other
hand,  the  lower  courses  of  the  curtain  are  constructed  in  great  part  of
well-jointed  polygonal  masonry.  The  materials  employed  are  a  hard
limestone  of  the  district  and  a  less  durable  conglomerate  rock.

Best  preserved  and  most  imposing  of  all  is  the  eastern  wall  of  the
acropolis.  This  fine  wall  stands  almost  complete  and  unbroken,
crowning  a  steep  rocky  slope  which  descends  into  the  valley.  Four
square  towers  project  from  it  at  intervals  of  about  50  metres.  The
only  means  of  egress  on  this  side  is  a  small  postern  between  the  two
central  towers.  The  tower  at  the  south-eastern  angle  is  probably,  as
Mr.  Benson  says,  the  finest  existing  specimen  of  a  Greek  fortification.
It  rises,  according  to  him,  \\\  metres  (37  ft.  9  in.)  above  the  top  of
the  adjoining  wall,  and  is  complete  on  three  sides  from  top  to  bottom ;
on  the  south  side  it  is  finished  on  the  top  by  a  fiat  gable,  but  the
corresponding  gable  on  the  north  side  is  gone.  Internally  the  tower  is
built  solid  from  the  ground  up  to  a  height  of  10  feet  above  the  top  of
the  wall.  At  this  level  a  narrow  doorway  gives  access  to  the  interior
which  consists  of  a  chamber  8  metres  square  and  lighted  by  two  very
narrow  oblong  windows.  The  height  of  the  door  above  the  wall
suggests  that  it  was  reached  by  a  ladder  which  could  be  drawn  up  in
case  of  necessity.  Thus  even  if  the  acropolis  were  carried  by  an
enemy,  a  few  of  the  garrison  could  still  defend  themselves  in  this  tower.
At  present  there  is  but  one  room  in  the  tower,  but  if  we  may  judge
from  the  analogy  of  the  tower  at  the  north-east  angle,  this  south-eastern
tower  probably  contained  originally  two  chambers,  one  above  the  other.

The  tower  at  the  north-eastern  angle  of  the  acropolis,  to  which
reference  has  just  been  made,  is  built  up  solid  with  rubble  to  a  level
with  the  top  of  the  wall,  from  which  it  was  entered  by  a  door.  The
upper  part  of  the  tower  has  fallen,  but  eight  courses  up  a  complete  row
of  holes  for  roof  beams  may  be  seen  on  one  side,  and  on  the  adjacent
sides  there  are  larger  holes  for  the  main  rafters.  Though  the  tower  now
rises  only  a  few  courses  above  these  holes,  it  is  clear  that  originally  it
contained  two  stories.  The  tower  at  the  north-west  angle  of  the  acropolis
is  also  built  up  solid  to  a  level  with  the  top  of  the  wall,  and  there  is  some


VOL.  II  AEGOSTHENA  541

slight  evidence  to  show  that  the  tower  at  the  south-west  angle,  which
has  almost  disappeared,  was  built  similarly.  On  the  other  hand  all  the
intermediate  towers  seem  to  have  been  hollow  down  to  the  ground ;
at  least  this  is  the  case  with  the  two  intermediate  towers  on  the  eastern
and  one  intermediate  tower  on  the  southern  side  of  the  acropolis.  The
motive  for  building  the  towers  at  the  angles  in  a  more  solid  style  than
the  intermediate  towers  was  doubtless  to  compensate  them  for  their
greater  liability  to  suffer  from  the  siege  operations  of  an  enemy.  It  is
to  be  observed  that  contrary  to  the  usual  rule  the  towers  of  Aegosthena
project  inwards  as  well  as  outwards  from  the  wall.  In  this  they  resemble
the  towers  of  Eleutherae  (vol.  2.  p.  516  and  above,  p.  537).

The  eastern  wall  of  the  acropolis  is  8  feet  high  on  the  inside  at  its
southern  end ;  outside  and  inside  it  is  faced  with  large  hewn  blocks,  the
interior  being  filled  up  solid  with  rubble.  Between  the  great  tower  at
the  south-east  angle  and  the  next  tower  to  the  north  the  wall  is
preserved  almost  entire  on  its  outer  face,  but  the  inner  facing  of
masonry  and  the  core  of  rubble  have  mostly  disappeared.  The  original
north  wall  of  the  acropolis  extends  unbroken  throughout  its  whole
length,  rising  in  some  places  to  a  height  of  7  metres  (23  feet)  ;  nowhere
is  it  less  than  4  metres  (13  feet)  high.  The  west  wall,  on  the  other
hand,  has  been  almost  entirely  rebuilt,  probably  at  a  late  date,  for  the
purpose  of  banking  up  the  ground.

The  north  wall  of  the  lower  city,  starting  from  the  north-west  angle
of  the  acropolis,  extends  down  to  the  sea.  It  is  defended  throughout
its  whole  length  by  square  towers  built  like  those  of  the  acropolis  and
placed  at  intervals  of  about  60  metres.  Only  three  of  these  towers  are
now  complete  up  to  or  above  the  first  storey.  In  this  north  wall  there
were  at  least  two  gates.  One  of  them  is  placed  in  a  retreating  angle  and
defended  on  the  left,  as  you  approach  it,  by  a  projecting  tower.  Mr.
Benson  conjectures  that  there  was  a  third  gate  just  below  the  north-west
angle  of  the  acropolis.

On  the  south  side  of  the  acropolis,  but  outside  the  line  of  its
existing  fortifications,  there  is  a  cave  in  the  rock,  the  entrance  to  which
is  faced  with  large  blocks  of  masonry.  The  peasants  say  that  it  is  the
entrance  to  a  subterranean  passage  which  leads  up  into  the  acropolis,
ending  at  the  great  south-eastern  tower.  This  passage,  if  it  exists,  is
now  filled  up  with  earth.  The  English  archaeologists  dug  into  it  for  a
considerable  distance  without  coming  to  an  end  of  the  cave.  They
found  that  it  sloped  upwards,  which  confirms  the  statement  of  the
peasants.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  cave  was  sacred  and  con-
nected with  the  worship  of  Melampus.  But  of  this  there  is  no  evidence,
and  the  existence  of  a  similar  cave  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  acropolis,
just  outside  of  the  great  tower,  favours  the  view  that  they  were  secret
sally-ports  for  the  garrison.  Close  to  the  southern  cave  is  an  isolated
piece  of  wall  built  of  large  polygonal  stones  in  a  style  which  can  hardly
be  more  recent  than  the  early  part  of  the  sixth  century  B.C  It  runs
along  the  edge  of  a  steep  rock  for  9  metres,  and  probably  formed  part
of  a  circuit-wall  much  more  ancient  than  the  existing  fortifications,
which  may  belong  to  the  fifth  or  fourth  century  B.C.


SA2  THE  PRE'PERSIAN  TEMPLE  addenda

Some  excavations  were  made  by  the  English  archaeologists  in  four
cemeteries  which  lie  just  outside  the  town,  two  on  the  north  side  and  two
on  the  south.  They  found  a  few  small  clay  idols  of  the  rudest  sort  and
a  whole  series  of  little  seated  figures  made  of  terra-cotta,  which  serves
to  illustrate  the  development  of  the  Greek  type  of  the  seated  goddess.
Mixed  up  with  these  were  potsherds  of  all  styles  from  the  early  Dipylum
(see  vol.  3.  p.  230)  down  to  the  red-figured  style.  Amongst  the  later
remains  found  by  the  English  at  Aegosthena  were  a  few  unimportant
inscriptions  of  imperial  date  and  the  base  of  a  bust  of  Hadrian  who  in
the  inscription  is  called  *  founder.'  A  statue  of  the  same  emperor  was
set  up  by  the  people  of  Aegosthena,  as  we  learn  from  an  inscription
recently  published  by  Mr.  de  Ridder,  who  has  edited  along  with  it  a
few  other  small  inscriptions  found  on  the  spot  (Bulletin  de  Corresp.
helUniquey  18  (1894),  pp.  497-499).

P.  549  line  19  from  top,  faneral  games.  In  Futuna  or  Home
Island  the  funerals  were  followed  by  a  grand  feast,  to  which  succeeded
dances  and  pugilistic  encounters  {Journal  of  the  Polynesian  Society^
vol.  I.  No.  I  (April,  1892),  p.  39).

P.  553.  The  Pre -Persian  temple.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  has  recently
reiterated  his  opinion  that  this  temple  was  rebuilt  after  the  Persian  war
and  continued  to  exist  down  to  the  time  of  Pausanias  at  least  He  now
accepts  Miss  Harrison's  theory  that  the  temple  of  Athena  Polias  de-
scribed by  Pausanias  (i.  26.  6-i.  27.  i)  was  not,  as  he  had  hitherto
believed,  the  Erechtheum  but  the  Pre-Persian  temple,  and  he  holds
that  the  ancient  image  of  Athena  Polias  always  stood  in  the  Pre-Persian
temple  and  never  in  the  Erechtheum.  This  latter  opinion  seems  to
contradict  the  well-known  official  inscription  (C  /.  A,  i.  No.  322)  in
which  the  Erechtheum  is  described  as  "  the  temple  on  the  Acropolis
in  which  is  the  ancient  image  "  (tou  vcw  tqv  kv  ttoAcc,  kv  <J5  rh  ap^atov
ayaA/ia).  Dr.  Dorpfeld  would  interpret  this  phrase  to  mean  "the
temple  in  which  the  ancient  image  is  to  be  placed  hereafter."  He
admits  that  the  Erechtheum  was  built  to  receive  the  ancient  image  of
Athena  Polias  as  well  as  to  house  the  cult  of  Erechtheus,  but  he  does
not  attempt  to  explain  why  the  intention  of  placing  the  image  in  it  was
never  carried  out.  See  his  paper  *  Der  alte  Athena-tempel  auf  der
Akropolis,'  Mittheilungen  des  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  22  (1897),  pp.
159-178.

In  my  paper  on  this  question  I  maintained,  in  opposition  to  Dr.
Dorpfeld,  that  Athena  Polias  was  always  the  goddess  of  the  Erechtheum
alone  (vol.  2.  pp.  570-580).  But  my  friend  Mr.  W.  Wyse  points  out
to  me  that  in  C.  I.  A.  i.  No.  273  Athena  Polias  is  almost  certainly  the
goddess  to  whom  the  great  bulk  of  the  sacred  moneys  belongs,  and  that
presumably  therefore  she  is  the  goddess  of  the  Parthenon.  Further,
from  a  comparison  of  this  and  other  inscriptions  (as  C  /.  A.  i.  Nos.
188,  189,  C.  /.  A.  ii.  Nos.  661,  699)  Mr.  Wyse  infers  that  in  inscrip-
tions the  goddess  of  the  Parthenon  was  generally  spoken  of  simply  as
Athena  or  *the  goddess,'  and  that  the  title  Polias  was  only  added
when  it  was  desirable  to  distinguish  her  from  another  Athena,  especially
from  Victory  Athena.     No  distinction,  in    Mr.    Wyse's   opinion,    was


VOL.  II  THE  PRE'PERSIAN  TEMPLE  543

drawn  between  the  Athena  of  the  Erechtheum  and  the  Athena  of  the
Parthenon  :  the  goddess  of  the  two  temples  was  one  and  the  same,
who  might  be  spoken  of  either  as  Athena  simply  or  as  Athena  Polias.
If  Mr.  Wyse  is  right — and  without  feeling  sure  I  incline  to  agree  with
him — it  will  follow  almost  necessarily  that  not  only  the  Parthenon  but
its  predecessor  the  Pre-Persian  temple  could  be  properly  described  as
the  temple  of  Athena  Polias,  and  consequently  there  is  nothing  in  the
language  of  Pausanias  and  Strabo  (ix.  p.  396)  to  preclude  the  supposi-
tion that,  as  Dr.  D5rpfeld  now  holds,  the  temple  of  Athena  Polias
described  by  both  of  them  was  the  Pre-Persian  temple.  But  even  if  this
were  certain,  I  should  continue  to  believe,  on  the  strength  of  the  other
arguments,  that  the  Pre-Persian  temple  was  never  rebuilt  after  its
destruction  in  480  B.C.,  and  that  the  temple  described  by  Pausanias  and
Strabo  was  the  Erechtheum.  At  the  same  time,  I  should  then,  as
always,  hold  myself  ready  to  abandon  this  belief  and  accept  Dr.
D6rpfeld*s  theory  unreservedly  if  he  could  produce  fresh  and  convincing
evidence  in  support  of  it.  This,  so  far  as  I  can  judge,  he  has  not  done
in  his  last  paper  on  the  subject.

P.  554  note  2,  one  of  the  gables  of  the  temple  was  adorned  with
sculptures  etc.  The  fragments  of  the  sculptures  which  occupied  one
of  the  gables  of  the  Pre-Persian  temple  have  now  been  carefully  put
together  by  Mr.  H.  Schrader.  As  Prof.  Studnizcka  was  the  first  to  per-
ceive {Mittheilungen  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  11  (1886),  pp.  185-199),
the  composition  represented  Athena  in  the  battle  of  the  gods  and  giants.
In  the  centre  appeared  Athena  bending  over  a  fallen  giant.  On  either
side  of  this  central  group  a  male  human  figure,  probably  a  god,  seems
to  have  been  represented  striding  against  a  foe ;  and  in  each  of  the
comers  of  the  gable  was  a  giant  creeping  on  the  ground.  Two  figures
appear  to  have  been  lost.  All  three  giants  are  portrayed  in  full  human
form  and  naked.  The  material  of  which  the  sculptures  are  made  is
a  coarse-grained  marble.  Numerous  traces  of  colours,  especially  blue
and  red,  may  be  detected  on  the  figures,  the  nude  parts  of  which  seem,
however,  to  have  been  left  unpainted  with  the  exception  of  the  lips  and
eyes.  The  robes  of  Athena  are  arranged  and  coloured  in  a  manner
closely  resembling  that  of  the  drapery  of  the  well-known  archaic  figures
of  women  which  were  found  on  the  Acropolis  some  years  ago.  See  H.
Schrader,  *  Die  Gigantomachie  aus  dem  Giebel  des  alten  Athenatempels
auf  der  Akropolis,' J////A«7«/i^«j  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  22  (1897),
pp.  59-112.

P.  573  note  3,  Athena  Polias.  An  Athena  Polias  was  worshipped
also  at  Daulis  (C  /.  G,  G,  S,  3.  No.  65).

P.  576  note  II.  The  priestess  of  Athena  Polias  is  also  mentioned
in  an  inscription  recently  found  at  Eleusis  {*E<fn}fi€pU  dpxaioXoyiKrj,
1895,  p.  109,  Inscr.  No.  23).


544  ISTHMUS  OF  CORINTH  addenda


VOL.    Ill

P.  5  line  21  sqq,  from  foot,  an  ancient  fortiflcation-wall  etc
In  December  1895   I  traced  for  some  hundreds  of  yards  to  the  west
of  the  sanctuary  of  Poseidon  the  ancient  fortification-wall  which  here
crosses   the    Isthmus  of  Corinth,   but   I  did  not  observe  any  of  the
square  projecting  towers  mentioned  in  the  text.      The  wall  is  here
standing  in  places  to  a  height  of  one  and  two  courses,  but  in  general  its
line  is  marked  chiefly  by  a  mass  of  blocks  which  have  tumbled  down
the  slope.     Where  the  wall  exists,  the  style  of  masonry  is  ashlar,  the
blocks   being   squared   and    laid   in   horizontal    courses.       From   the
regularity  of  the  masonry  I  judged  the  wall,  at  the  place  where  I  first
traced  it,  to  be  of  the  good  Greek  period,  though  with  signs  of  Byzantine
or  mediaeval  repairs.     Thus  about  120  yards  or  so  to  the  west  of  the
sanctuary  the  wall  makes  a  bend  to  the  south  in  order  to  cross  a  small
ravine  or  shallow  glen,  and  here  in  the  ravine  there  is  a  fragment  of  the
ashlar  wall  with  a  piece  of  brick  wall  on  the  top  of  it,  this  upper  bit  of
wall  being  built  of  flat  bricks  and  mortar  in  the  usual  late  Roman  or
Byzantine  style  of  which  there  are  many  remains  in  Greece.  "  In  the
same  little  ravine,  a  short  way  further  to  the  west,  the  ashlar  wall  is
preserved  to  a  height  of  about  ten  courses ;  but  some  of  the  blocks  of
which  it  is  composed  have  apparently  been  taken  from  older  buildings ;
the  lowest  block  in  the  wall,  for  example,  has  a  moulding,  and  in  the
two  blocks  of  the  course  above  it  there  are  holes  as  if  for  the  attach-
ment of  some  objects.     Again,  to  the  east  of  the  sanctuary  of  Poseidon
the  fortification -wall    is   standing   in  the   hollow  bed  of  a  torrent  to
a  height  of  nine  courses.     Here   it  is  built  of  squared  blocks  laid  in
horizontal  courses  ;  but  the  blocks  are  not  closely  fitted  together,  and
the  small  stones,  bricks,   and  mortar  which  occur  in  the  joints  both
perpendicular  and  horizontal  even  of  the  lowest  courses  prove  that  in
its  present  form  at  least  the  wall  was  built  in  late  Roman  or  B>'zantine
times.

P.  9  line  19  sqq.  from  foot,  the  Isthmian  sanctuary  etc.  The
three  gates  of  the  Isthmian  sanctuary,  excavated  by  Mr.  Monceaux,
are  still  plainly  to  be  seen.  The  gate  towards  the  eastern  end  of  the
north  wall  is  well  preserved.  On  its  outer  side  it  is  flanked  on
either  hand  by  the  remains  of  a  round  tower  resting  on  a  square  base-
ment of  masonry  twq  courses  high.  The  foot  of  the  round  tower  on
the  west  is  adorned  with  a  projecting  moulding  which  runs  all  round
it.  From  between  these  towers  a  passage  about  6  paces  long  leads
up  to  the  gate  proper.  The  walls  of  the  passage  are  still  standing  to
a  height  of  six  and  seven  courses ;  like  the  towers,  they  are  built  of
perfectly  regular  ashlar  masonry,  the  blocks  being  exactly  squared  and
laid  in  horizontal  courses.  Towards  its  outer  end  each  of  the
side  -  walls  of  the  passage  is  adorned  with  two  pilasters ;  and  there
are  considerable  remains  of  a  pavement  of  white  marble.     Two  great


VOL.  Ill  CORINTH  545

square  holes  are  visible  on  each  side  of  the  gateway ;  perhaps  the
bolts  were  shot  into  them,  though  they  seem  almost  too  large  to  have
served  that  purpose.  On  the  whole  the  gateway,  fortified  though  it  is,
has  all  the  appearance  of  having  been  built  rather  for  show  than  for
strength,  and  I  am  disposed  to  agree  with  Mr.  Monceaux  in  referring
it  to  the  age  of  Augustus.  The  southern  gateway,  which  has  been
blocked  up  by  a  later  wall,  is  a  simple  opening  flanked  on  the  east  by
a  ruined  round  tower.  The  wall  at  this  point  is  about  3.70  metres
thick  and  is  standing  to  a  height  of  four  courses.  The  style  of  the
masonry  here  and  wherever  the  wall  exists  is  of  the  regular  ashlar  sort,
resembling  that  of  the  north-east  gateway.  Hence  Mr.  Monceaux  is
probably  right  in  assigning  the  whole  existing  fortifications  of  the
sanctuary  to  the  Augustan  age.  On  the  eastern  side  of  the  sanctuary
three  square  towers  project  from  the  curtain.  The  western  wall  would
seem  to  have  been  also  strengthened  with  towers,  the  positions  of  which,
however,  are  at  present  marked  only  by  projecting  mounds.

P.  14  line  23  from  foot,  many  dmins  of  Ionic  colmnns.  I  found
these  drums  still  lying  at  the  north-east  gate  of  the  Isthmian  sanctuary,
1 2th  December  1895.  I  measured  the  diameter  of  several  and  found  it
to  be  .83  metre.  At  least  two  bases  of  Ionic  (or  Corinthian)  columns
are  lying  in  the  same  place.  The  diameter  of  the  column  which  rested
on  one  of  these  bases  is  .81  metre.

P.  20  line  9  from  top,  GorintlL  In  1896  excavations  made  at
Corinth  by  the  American  School  under  the  direction  of  Prof.  Richardson
led  to  the  discovery  of  the  theatre.  Its  remains,  consisting  of  founda-
tions of  seats  and  portions  of  flights  of  steps  worn  by  feet,  are  situated
on  the  edge  of  the  plateau  about  a  hundred  rods  to  the  west  of  the  old
temple.  The  theatre  seems  to  have  been  rebuilt  in  Roman  times.  At
the  top  of  the  auditorium  were  found  a  number  of  archaic  statuettes
of  terra-cotta  representing  men,  women,  and  many  animals,  especially
horses.  The  statuettes  of  women  are  more  numerous  than  those  of
men,  and  some  of  them  are  said  to  exhibit  a  type  of  Aphrodite.  All
these  figurines  are  probably  votive-offerings  from  some  temple  in  the
neighbourhood.  Thirty-five  fragments  of  Ionic  columns,  from  5  to  8
feet  long,  came  to  light  not  very  far  from  the  theatre.  Further  the
Americans  excavated  the  remains  of  what  is  supposed  to  have  been  a
colonnade  of  the  Greek  period,  about  1 00  feet  long,  several  houses,  and
a  short  piece  of  a  well-paved  street.  See  Athenaeum^  27th  June  1896,
p.  850  ;  /V/.,  2nd  January  1897,  p.  24;  A uterican  Journal  0/  Archaeology^
1 1  (1896),  p.  371  sq,]  Journal  0/ Hellenic  Studies^  16  (1896),  p.  340;
Berliner  philolog.  Wochenschrifi^  13th  February  1897,  p.  222.

P.  24  line  23  sqq,  from  top,  a  marble  staircase  etc.  The  staircase
which  now  leads  from  "  the  bath  of  Aphrodite  "  to  the  top  of  the  rocky
terrace  is  of  common  stone,  not  marble.  The  reddish-brown,  ochre-
like deposit  left  by  the  water  on  the  rocks  and  on  the  ground  under  the
overhanging  ledge  is  conspicuous.

P.  29  line  9  sqq,  from  foot,  On  tliis  side  the  Acro-Oorinth  is
connected  by  a  saddle  with  a  lower,  bnt  still  mgged  and  rocky,
height  etc.     This  is  a  mistake.     The  lower  height  referred  to  in  the

VOL.  V  2  N


546  CORINTH— SICYON  addenda

text  is  included  within  the  fortifications  of  the  Acro-Corinth,  of  which
it  forms  in  fact  the  western  and  lower  summit.  The  ascent  is  not
between  it  and  the  higher  eastern  summit,  but  to  the  west  of  the  western
and  lower  summit  The  Acro-Corinth  is  practically  an  isolated  mountain
of  rock.

In  the  third  and  highest  of  the  triple  line  of  fortifications  which
guards  the  approach  to  the  Acro-Corinth  on  the  west  there  are  consider-
able remains  of  ancient  Greek  masonry.  This  third  wall  extends  in
the  form  of  a  great  crescent  on  either  side  of  the  gate,  and  the  ancient
masonry  is  visible  in  three  places,  namely  at  the  extremities  of  the
crescent  and  in  the  tower  which  flanks  the  gateway  on  the  right  or
south  side.  At  the  extremities,  especially  the  southern  extremity,  of  the
crescent  the  Greek  walls  are  standing  to  a  height  of  many  courses ;  and
the  front  of  the  tower  which  flanks  the  gateway  consists  chiefly  of
ancient  masonry,  eighteen  or  nineteen  courses  of  it  being  preserved
In  all  these  places  the  style  of  masonry  is  ashlar ;  the  blocks  are
squared  and  laid  in  horizontal  courses.  The  difference  between  it  and
the  Venetian  masonry  above  it  is  obvious  to  the  least  practised  eye.

P.  44  line  1 5  sqq,  from  top,  The  ancient  walls  ran  all  roiind  tiie
tableland  etc.  On  the  western  edge  of  the  acropolis  of  Sicyon,  above
the  glen  of  the  Helisson,  I  foimd  (15th  October  1895)  here  and  there
remains  of  the  fortification-wall  sufficient  to  prove  that  it  orig^inally  ran
all  along  this  western  face  of  the  acropolis.  The  remains  are  slight,
generally  consisting  of  a  single  course  of  blocks  extending  for  a  few  feet
or  yards,  but  in  several  places  the  wall  is  standing  to  a  height  of  two  or
three  courses  for  a  short  distance.  The  blocks  are  squared  and  laid  in
horizontal  courses.  In  one  place  two  parallel  rows  of  blocks,  being
probably  parts  of  the  outer  and  inner  faces  of  the  wall,  are  preserved.
To  judge  from  the  distance  of  these  rows  from  each  other  the  wall  was
about  9  feet  thick.  At  the  south-west  end  of  the  plateau  which  formed
the  acropolis,  above  the  glen  of  the  Helisson,  there  seems  to  have  been
a  gate.  At  least  there  is  here  a  hollow  leading  down  southward  to  the
narrow  ridge  which  connects  the  plateau  with  the  hills  ;  and  on  its  west
side  this  passage  is  lined  with  an  ancient  wall  two  courses  high.  Here
it  may  be  observed  that  the  ridge  which  connects  the  plateau  with  the
hills  on  the  south  is  a  mere  knife-edge ;  a  footpath  occupies  its  whole
width,  and  on  each  side  of  it  the  ground  slopes  away  steeply  to  end  in
precipices  on  the  eastern  side.  Moreover  the  ridge  is  far  below  the
level  of  the  plateau,  so  that  on  the  whole  its  existence  hardly,  if  at  all,
impaired  the  strategical  strength  of  Sicyon's  position.  On  the  eastern
edge  of  the  acropolis,  above  the  glen  of  the  Asopus,  I  found  no  vestige
of  a  wall  and  no  sign  that  a  wall  had  ever  existed.  The  reason  is
obvious.  The  tremendous  white  precipices  on  this  side  rendered
fortification  needless ;  whereas  on  the  western  edge  of  the  plateau
the  slope  to  the  glen  of  the  Helisson,  though  long  and  steep,  is  not
precipitous  and  might  have  been  scaled  by  an  enemy.

The  northern  and  lower  plateau  on  which  stood  the  city,  as  dis-
tinguished from  the  acropolis,  of  Sicyon,  appears  to  have  been
surrounded  on  its  outer  edge  by  a  fortification-wall,  for  I  found  some


VOL.  Ill  SICYON  547

remains  of  it,  mostly  insignificant,  on  the  western,  northern,  and
eastern  edges  of  the  plateau.  Of  these  remains  the  most  considerable
are  to  be  seen  in  a  deep  natural  cleft  or  fissure  in  the  edge  of  the
plateau  immediately  to  the  west  of  the  village  of  Veisiliko.  This  fissure
may  be  about  300  yards  long.  In  the  bottom  of  it  are  some  small
gardens  with  trees,  and  a  road  leads  up  it  to  the  village.  At  the  upper
end  of  the  fissure  may  be  seen  some  massive  pieces  of  ancient  Greek
masonry,  perhaps  the  ruins  of  a  gate.  First  there  is  a  wall,  some  20
feet  or  so  long,  running  across  the  upper  end  of  the  fissure  and  abutting
on  the  native  rock  at  each  end.  It  is  built  of  large  squared  blocks  laid
in  regular  horizontal  courses,  of  which  seven  are  preserved.  A  few
yards  lower  down  the  fissure  is  a  piece  of  a  similar  wall  about  1 1  paces
long,  extending  at  right  angles  to  the  former  wall  and  standing  in  part
to  a  height  of  seven  courses.  Still  lower  down  the  fissure  I  observed
a  few  other  remains  of  antiquity,  such  as  squared  blocks,  a  couple  of
drums  of  columns,  fragments  of  houses  built  of  thin  flat  bricks  and
mortar,  two  Roman  graves  cut  out  of  the  rock  and  lined  with  brickwork,
and  so  on.  Further  to  the  north,  in  the  line  of  the  fissure,  is  an  ancient
burying-ground  where,  as  I  was  informed,  human  bones  have  been  found
together  with  pottery  and  jewellery.

At  the  house  of  Constantine  Barilos,  in  the  village  of  VasilikOy  I
copied  the  following  inscription.  It  is  carved  on  a  block  of  marble  30
inches  long  and  about  6  or  7  inches  high,  which  is  built  into  a  wall
outside  of  the  house.  The  letters  are  well  cut  and  rather  more  than  an
inch  high.


BAZIAEA4>lAinnONBi
0OINIAZTEIZ     IKPAl


The  block  is  broken  off  on  two  sides,  namely  below  and  to  the  right.
Apparently  it  formed  part  of  a  pedestal  of  Philip,  one  of  the  Macedonian
kings  of  that  name.

P.  44  line  3  sqq,  from  foot,  the  reinains  of  a  large  bnilding  of
Bomail  date  etc.  These  remains,  situated  200  paces  north  of  the
theatre,  cover  a  considerable  area.  One  piece  measures  about  41  paces
from  north  to  south,  terminating  in  the  latter  direction  in  a  semicircular
apse.  The  walls,  built  of  thin  bricks  laid  flat  with  mortar  between
them,  are  3  ft.  2  in.  thick  and  are  standing  to  a  height  of  from  8
to  12  feet  at  least.  The  bricks  are  not  a  mere  facing  but  go  right
through  the  wall,  as  may  be  seen  where  the  walls  are  broken.  In  the
interior  of  the  building  is  a  doorway  with  a  brick  arch  over  it.

P.  49  line  14  from  top,  the  theatre.  As  to  the  theatre  at  Sicyon,
seeW.  Dorpfeld,  in  Das  griechische  77/<'<i/5fr  (Athens  and  Leipsic,  1896),
pp.  1 17-120.  From  that  work  and  from  my  own  notes  made  on  the
spot  (15th  and  i6th  October  1895)  I  may  here  briefly  supplement  and
correct  the  description  given  in  the  text     The  number  of  staircases


548  SICYON  ADDENDA

dividing  the  lower  part  of  the  auditorium  is  sixteen,  not  fourteen,  as  I
have  stated.  The  front  row  of  seats  consists  of  a  series  of  stone  benches
with  backs,  and  with  arms  at  the  ends  of  each  bench.  There  are  not
separate  armchairs,  nor  are  the  seats  in  each  bench  divided  from  each
other  by  arms.  Six  such  benches  exist,  though  one  of  them  is  broken.
They  are  made  of  a  common  stone,  not  of  marble.

The  lower  parts  of  most  of  the  existing  walls  of  the  stage-buildings
are  hewn  out  of  the  rock,  and  therefore  may  be  presumed  to  have
remained  unaltered  since  the  time  they  were  first  made.  Two  ramps  or
inclined  planes  lead  up  to  the  stage,  one  at  each  end ;  they  are  also
hewn  out  of  the  rock,  and  from  the  height  to  which  they  lead  up  (firom
3  to  3.50  metres)  we  may  safely  infer  the  height  of  the  stage.  Thus
the  height  of  the  stage  must  have  conformed  to  the  rule  laid  down  by
Vitruvius  (v.  7.  2)  for  the  height  of  Greek  stages  in  general.  The
existing  front  wall  of  the  stage  is  built  of  opus  incertum  (small  stones
mixed  with  brick  and  mortar)  and  is  therefore  of  Roman  date.  But
along  its  front  extends  a  step  formed  of  a  row  of  marble  blocks  each
about  I  foot  high  and  i  ft  10  in.  thick.  This  marble  step  probably
supported  the  columned  front  of  a  stage  which  was  taken  down  when
the  Roman  stage  was  built  The  depth  of  the  stage,  from  the  front
of  the  marble  step  to  the  back  wall,  was  about  10  ft  6  in.,  according
to  my  measurement.  Immediately  at  the  back  of  the  marble  step  and
under  the  wall  of  opus  incertum  is  a  row  of  blocks  of  common  stone,
which  from  the  square  cuttings  in  them  seem  to  have  supported  a
wooden  framework  consisting  of  strong  posts  connected  with  each  other
by  planks.  This  wooden  framework  was  perhaps  the  front  of  the  oldest
stage.  Behind  the  stage  lie  the  foundations  of  a  long  quadrangular
structure  divided  by  walls  into  several  apartments,  which  probably
served  as  green-rooms,  store-rooms,  etc.  Two  ramps  cut  out  of  the
rock  led  up  to  the  roof  of  this  quadrangular  structure,  one  from  each
end ;  they  are  side  by  side  with,  but  behind,  the  two  ramps  which,  as
we  have  seen,  led  up  to  the  stage.

In  the  middle  of  the  stage  a  staircase,  five  steps  of  which  are  preserved,
leads  down  into  an  underground  passage  which  extends  into  ^e  middle
of  the  orchestra  at  right  angles  to  the  stage.  The  passage  is  about
2  ft  3  in.  wide  and  5  ft  5  in.  high.  Its  sides  are  lined  with  ashlar
masonry.  At  the  middle  of  the  orchestra  it  was  apparently  met  by  a
branch  of  the  drain  which  runs  round  the  orchestra.  This  branch  of  the
drain  is  in  a  straight  line  with  the  underground  passage,  of  which  it
forms  in  fact  a  continuation.  At  its  other  end  the  passage  is  pro-
longed under  the  stage  and  the  apartments  at  the  back  of  the  stage  to  a
point  outside  of  the  theatre  altogether.  In  this  prolongation  beyond  the
staircase  which  leads  down  to  it  from  the  stage,  the  sides  of  the  passage
are  merely  hewn  out  of  the  rock,  not  lined  with  masonry,  so  far  as  I
observed.  This  difference  of  construction  points  to  the  conclusion  that,
while  the  whole  passage  served  as  a  drain,  the  part  of  it  between  the
stage  and  the  middle  of  the  orchestra  was  also  used  to  allow  actors  to
make  their  way  unseen  from  the  stage  to  the  middle  of  the  orchestra.

The  exact  date  of  the  theatre  is  unknown,  but  from  the  number  of


VOL.  Ill  PHLIUS  549

times  it  has  obviously  been  rebuilt  Dr.  Dorpfeld  inclines  to  attribute  the
oldest  part  of  it,  including  the  wooden  stage,  to  the  fourth  or  third
century  B.C.  The  stone  stage  of  which  the  front  rested  on  the  marble
step  may,  he  thinks,  have  belonged  to  the  second  or  first  century  B.C
It  is  hardly  necessary  to  add  that  here  as  elsewhere  he  denies  the
existence  of  a  raised  stage  before  the  Roman  period.  What  I  have
called  the  stage  he  regards  as  the  ornamental  background  in  front  of
which  the  players  acted.  As  to  this  theory  see  vol.  3.  p.  254  and
below,  p.  582  sqq,

P.  56  line  15  from  foot.  Two  vaalted  passages  etc.  I  observed
only  one  of  these  passages,  that  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  auditorium,
at  a  considerable  height  above  the  level  of  the  orchestra.  It  is  a
vaulted  tunnel,  about  1 8  paces  long  ;  the  roof,  built  on  the  true  principle
of  the  arch,  is  formed  of  massive  squared  blocks  placed  in  straight  rows.

P.  77  line  23  sqq,  from  foot,  the  acropolis  of  Phlins  etc  The
hill  of  Phlius  projects  boldly  and  abruptly,  like  a  great  tongue,  west-
wards into  the  flat  ground  from  the  chain  of  hills  that  bounds  the
plain  on  the  east.  Its  height  may  be  from  300  to  400  feet,  and  its
length  from  east  to  west  half  a  mile.  The  slopes  both  to  the  north
and  south  are  steep,  but  towards  the  west  the  hill  descends  in  three
great  steps  or  terraces,  of  which  the  uppermost  is  much  the  longest  and
broadest.  The  rock  of  which  the  hill  is  composed  is  a  rough  con-
glomerate of  pebbles  (breccia).  At  the  western  end  of  the  hill  the  rock
crops  up  in  great  masses  which  at  a  distance  may  easily  be  mistaken
for  fortifications.  The  surface  of  the  broad  uppermost  terrace,  now
overgrown  with  the  brown,  prickly,  dried -up  plants  so  common  in
Greece,  is  separated  by  a  hollow  from  the  higher  hills  on  the  east
Along  the  western  crest  of  this  hollow  a  fragment  of  the  ancient  walls
of  Phlius  may  be  traced ;  it  consists  merely  of  one  or  two  courses  of
masonry  half-buried  in  the  ground  and  extending  in  a  line  for  a  dozen
paces.  On  the  second  terrace  stands  a  modem  white-washed  building
which  is  constructed  to  a  considerable  extent  of  large  ancient  squared
stones.  Other  ancient  blocks  are  also  lying  about  the  terrace.  On  the
third  or  lowest  terrace  there  are  some  ruins  of  a  quadrangular  building
which  may  be  ancient.  But  the  most  considerable  of  the  scanty  remains
of  antiquity  at  Phlius  are  to  be  seen  at  the  south-western  foot  of  the  hill,
a  few  paces  to  the  east  of  the  road  from  H.  Georgios.  Here  are
preserved  three  walls  of  solid  masonry  supporting  a  sort  of  quadrangular
platform  on  which  no  doubt  some  ancient  building,  perhaps  a  temple,
was  erected.  The  eastern  supporting-wall  is  27  paces  long,  the  southern
31,  and  the  western  17.  The  west  wall  consists  of  two  courses  of
massive  blocks  of  the  native  breccia,  each  block  being  about  4  ft.  6  in.
long  by  I  ft.  6  in.  high.  The  east  wall  is  standing  to  a  greater  height,
but  of  the  south  wall  only  the  extremities  are  visible,  the  rest  being
buried  under  the  soil.

Here  I  may  print  two  inscriptions  which  I  copied  on  my  way  from
Phlius  to  Stymphalus,  29th  September  1895  ;  so  far  as  I  am  aware
they  have  not  been  published  before.  They  are  engraved  on  two  square
marble  columns  about  5  feet  high,  terminating  in  busts,  which  I  found,


550  NEMEA  addenda

one  standing  and  the  other  lying,  a  few  hundred  yards  east  of  the
hamlet  of  Petre^  at  the  point  where  a  stream,  fringed  with  reeds  and
poplars,  crosses  the  path.  The  head  of  the  fsdlen  bust  is  lost,  but  part
of  the  folded  vesture  on  the  breast  is  preserved,  and  under  it,  all  in  one
line,  is  the  inscription

M0P*HN2EK0YNAIAAE2MEMHTP02EI20PA2

*'  In  me  you  behold  the  form  of  mother  Secimdilla."  The  head  of  the
standing  bust  is  preserved ;  the  £ace  indeed  is  much  mutilated,  but  the
curly  locks  at  the  back  of  the  head  remain.  On  the  front  of  the  square
column  are  traces  of  the  male  genital  organs.  The  inscription,  carved
in  a  single  line  under  the  bust,  is  nonsensical,  as  taken  down  by  me ;
but  I  give  my  copy,  such  as  it  is,  on  the  chance  that  some  one  may  be
able  to  correct  it  either  by  conjecture  or  by  comparison  with  the  stone :

K(?)0n2M02ET(or  V  ?)TAPT02HrOYMAr(or  H  ?)ENOY  =  (?)

The  two  columnar  busts  are  of  the  same  size,  material,  and  style.

P.  90  line  27  sqq,^  a  temple  of  Nemean  Zeus  etc  The  echinus
of  the  columns  of  the  temple  at  Nemea  is  very  flat,  which  points  to
a  late  rather  than  an  early  date  for  the  temple.  Of  the  walls  of  the
cella  the  lowest  course  is  partly  preserved  for  a  length  of  about  18
paces.  It  consisted  originally  of  two  rows  of  immense  slabs  set  on
their  narrow  edges  and  placed  back  to  back,  so  that  two  such  slabs
formed  the  thickness  of  the  wall.  The  lowest  courses  of  the  north
and  west  walls  of  the  cella  were  similarly  constructed,  as  may  be  seen
by  the  scanty  remains.  One  of  the  two  existing  slabs  of  the  west
wall  is  about  9  feet  long,  4  ft.  9  in.  high,  and  i  ft.  6  in.  thick.  The
floor  of  the  temple,  of  which  a  considerable  part  is  preserved,  is  con-
structed of  massive  squared  blocks  of  stone  (not  marble).  At  the  east
end  of  the  temple  may  be  seen  remains  of  the  three  steps  on  which  the
building  was  raised.  The  foundations  are  well  preserved  at  the  north-
east comer.  Opposite  the  temple,  at  its  eastern  end,  is  a  square  plat-
form of  stone  at  a  lower  level  than  the  steps  on  which  the  temple  stood.
It  may  perhaps  have  supported  an  altar.  About  150  yards  or  so  to  the
south  of  the  temple  considerable  remains  of  an  ancient  building  exist  I
was  told  that  it  had  been  a  tomb  which  was  converted  into  a  Byzantine
church.  Among  the  remains  are  small  drums  of  columns  with  flat-
edged  flutes.  The  modem  village  of  Herakleia^  with  its  houses  built  of
sun-dried  brick  or  mud,  stands  only  a  few  hundred  yards  to  the  south-
west of  the  ruined  temple.

P.  94  line  1 1  sqq,  from  top.  The  spring Adrastea  etc.    Water

was  again  flowing  from  the  Turkish  fountain  identified  as  Adrastea  when
I  saw  it,  28th  September  1895.  The  water  issues  from  a  wall  of  the
usual  sort  and  falls  into  a  trough.  Beside  the  fountain  is  a  pond,  and
beside  the  pond  grow  fig-trees  and  poplars.  The  spot  is  a  pleasant  one.
The  three  solitary  columns  of  the  temple  of  Zeus  are  conspicuous  in  the
valley  not  far  to  the  west.


VOL.  Ill  MYCENAE  551

P.  96  line  1 8  sqq,  from  top,  the  Inaclliui  etc.  I  crossed  the  Inachus
at  different  points  on  the  loth  and  12th  December  1895,  and  on  both
occasions  its  bed  was  quite  dry.

P.  98  line  14  from  foot,  Mycenae.  Excavations  continue  to  be
made  year  by  year  at  Mycenae  by  Mr.  Tsountas  for  the  Greek  Archaeo-
logical Society.  In  1895  the  whole  eastern  half  of  the  acropolis  was
excavated,  with  the  result  that  considerable  remains  of  houses  of  the
Mycenaean  period  were  here  brought  to  light.  (For  some  particulars
as  to  these  houses,  see  below,  p.  557.)  On  the  western  slope  of  the
acropolis  in  the  same  year  pieces  of  two  ancient  roads  leading  up  to  the
palace  were  discovered ;  one  of  them — the  principal  road — is  preserved
for  a  length  of  many  yards  and  rests  on  a  high  supporting-wall  built  of
large  stones.  Three  fragments  of  sculptured  reliefs  were  found  within
the  acropolis  ;  they  are  believed  to  have  belonged  to  the  metopes  of  the
temple  which  was  built  on  the  ruins  of  the  palace  in  the  sixth  century
B.C.  One  of  the  fragments  exhibits  the  head  and  breast  of  a  woman  in
fine  archaic  style  and  good  preservation.  Further,  in  a  room  of  an
ancient  house  on  the  acropolis  there  was  found  a  hoard  of  3786  ancient
silver  coins,  mostly  of  Corinth,  Phlius,  and  Argos ;  they  seem  to  have
been  deposited  in  their  hiding-place  in  the  third  century  B.C.  Outside
the  acropolis  the  excavations  of  the  same  year  revealed  fifteen  more
tombs  hewn  in  the  rock.  Amongst  the  objects  found  in  these  tombs
were  eight  bronze  swords,  two  axes,  a  spear-head,  two  alabaster  vessels,
a  narrow  fillet  of  twisted  gold,  golden  plates  making  a  belt,  fifty-nine
small  golden  ornaments  which  seem  to  have  been  attached  to  a  head-
dress, many  other  small  golden  ornaments  of  various  shapes,  gold
beads  of  necklaces,  fourteen  engraved  gems,  two  mock  gems  of
glass -paste,  six  gold  rings  finely  engraved,  a  silver  cup  with  gilt
handle  and  gilt  brim,  two  bronze  vessels,  and  four  stone  vessels  of
which  one  is  prettily  adorned  with  sculptured  reliefs.  Most  of  the
devices  engraved  on  the  gems  represent  animals.  See  Chr.  Tsountas,
in  II/oaKTtica  t^s  * Kp^io\oyi.Ky\%  'Erai/Dias,  1895,  pp.  23-25  ;  A.
Lampropoulos,  ib,  pp.  25-27  ;  2V/.,  in  'E<firffi€pU  dpxatoXoyiKij,  1896,
pp.  137-200.  Amongst  the  objects  discovered  outside  of  the  acropolis
special  mention  may  be  made  of  a  tombstone  which  was  found,  not  in
its  original  position,  serving  with  other  stones  to  wall  up  a  grave  which
was  hewn  in  the  side  of  a  circular  sepulchral  chamber.  The  material  is
sandstone,  on  which  are  painted  in  a  variety  of  colours  three  horizontal
bands  of  figures  set  in  ornamental  borders.  In  the  lowest  band  is  a
procession  of  four  deer  and  a  hedgehog;  in  the  middle  band  five
warriors  march  in  single  file,  each  carrying  a  shield  and  brandishing  a
spear  in  his  raised  right  hand ;  of  the  highest  band  only  a  fragment
remains,  but  it  seems  to  have  contained  one  or  perhaps  two  figures  clad
in  long  robes  and  seated  on  chairs.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  five
warriors  resemble  almost  exactly  in  attitude,  equipment,  and  style  the
fighting  warriors  depicted  on  the  well-known  vase  fotmd  by  Schliemann
at  Mycenae  (see  C.  Schuchhardt,  Schliemant^s  AusgrcU>ungen^  p.  326
sq.^  with  fig.  301  ;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  Pari  dans  PantiquiU^
^'  P*  935)  ^8*  497)*     '^^  discovery  of  this  tombstone  accordingly


552  MYCENAE  addenda

refutes  the  theory  lately  broached  by  Mr.  E.  Pottier  that  the  vase  in
question,  to  which  archaeologists  have  appealed  as  furnishing  evidence
of  the  equipment  of  warriors  in  the  Mycenaean  age,  has  nothing  to  do
with  the  Mycenaean  age  or  style  but  belongs  to  the  class  of  Attic  vases
of  the  seventh  century  B.C.  (E.  Pottier,  *  Observations  sur  la  c6ramique
myc^ienne,'  Revue  arch^ologique^  3me  S^rie,  28  (1896),  pp.  17-23).
See  Chr.  Tsountas,  in  *E<f>rjfjL€pls  apxatoAoyiic^,  1896,  pp.  1-22,  with
pi.  I  ;  S.  Reinach,  *  Une  peinture  myc^nienne,'  Revue  orMologique^  8
(1897),  pp.  19-26.  The  excavations  of  1896  at  Mycenae  revealed  the
existence  of  seven  more  tombs  hewn  out  of  the  rock  in  the  shape  of
chambers.  Further,  another  beehive  tomb,  built  of  hewn  blocks  of
stone  and  well  preserved,  was  excavated.  In  the  floor  of  the  beehive
chamber,  which  measures  about  8  metres  in  diameter,  there  are  three
quadrangular  graves,  which  were  covered  with  large  slabs  of  stone.
These  graves  had  been  plundered  long  ago,  perhaps,  as  Mr.  Tsountas
thinks,  by  decayed  and  poverty-stricken  members  of  the  old  family  to
whom  the  tomb  belonged.  However,  on  the  floor  of  the  beehive
chamber  were  found  some  tablets  of  glass- paste  adorned  with  relief
which  represent  animal-headed  figures  standing  on  either  side  of  a
tripod  or  altar  and  carrying  vessels  in  their  hands.  This  is  the  first
time  that  figures  of  this  sort,  so  common  on  gems,  have  been  found  on
ornaments  made  of  glass-paste.  Further,  on  the  western  side  of  the
acropolis,  beside  the  so-called  polygonal  tower,  where  the  depth  of  soil
is  greater  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  citadel,  there  were  laid  bare
many  remains  of  houses.  In  one  of  them  was  found  a  woman's  head,
made  of  limestone,  about  .  1 7  metre  high.  The  hair,  eyes,  ears,  and
mouth  of  the  head  are  coloured,  and  on  the  neck  is  painted  a  necklace
of  red  and  blue  beads.  Moreover,  the  face  is  adorned  with  four  painted
rosettes,  one  on  the  brow,  one  on  the  chin,  and  one  on  each  cheek.
This  seems  to  show  that  in  the  Mycenaean  age  the  faces  of  the  women
were  tattooed.  See  Chr.  Tsountas,  in  YlpaKriKo.  -n}?  *Kp\aiokoyiKrj^
'Eratptas,   1896  (pub.  1897),  pp.  29-31.

From  other  parts  of  the  Greek  world  evidence  of  the  wide  diffusion
of  the  Mycenaean  civilisation  continues  to  pour  in.  Many  more  remains
of  Mycenaean  settlements  and  art  have  been  discovered  by  Messrs.
L.  Mariani,  A.  J.  Evans,  J.  L.  Myres,  and  others  in  Crete.  See  L.
Mariani,  *  Archaeological  Researches  in  Crete,'  Academy^  No.  1 191,  2nd
March  1895,  P-  198;  A.  J.  Evans  and  J.  L.  Myres,  *A  Mycenaean
military  road  in  Crete,'  Academy^  No.  1204,  ist  June  1895,  p.  469  sg.
(reprinted  in  American  Journal  0/  Archaeology^  10  (1896),  pp.  399-403);
Athenaeum,  22nd  June  1 895,  p.  8 1 2  Ji^.  ;  Revue  archdologique,  3me  Serie,
27  (1895),  PP-  353-359;  A.  J.  Evans,  *  Explorations  in  Eastern  Crete.'
Academy,  Nos.  1258,  1259,  1261,  1263,  1264  (June  13,  21,  July  4,  18,
1896)  (reprinted  in  American  JoumcU  of  Archaeology,  11  (1896),  pp.
449-467).  Excavations  made  for  the  Trustees  of  the  British  Museum
in  1895  ^^^  1896  have  led  to  the  discovery  of  two  burying-grounds
of  the  Mycenaean  period  at  Curium  and  Salamis  in  Cyprus  {American
Journal  of  Archaeology,  11  (1896),  pp.  1 39-141,  422-424;  Athencuum,
No.  3585,  I  ith  July  1896,  p.  74;  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  16  (1896),


VOL.  Ill  MYCENAE  553

p.  341).  On  the  north-eastern  coast  of  Melos  excavations  made  by  the
British  School  in  May  1 896  revealed  the  remains  of  a  prehistoric  fortress
or  palace,  the  plan  of  which  in  some  respects  resembles  that  of  the  palace
at  Tiryns.  The  walls  are  standing  in  places  to  a  height  of  several  yards,
and  in  the  soil  vast  quantities  of  Mycenaean  pottery  of  all  stages  were
found ;  in  the  lower  strata  are  traces  of  prehistoric  pottery  and  a  com-
plete layer  of  flint  implements.  See  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  16
(1896),  p.  356.  In  northern  Greece  three  more  beehive  tombs  have
been  discovered,  two  in  Thessaly  at  the  village  of  Marmargiane,  north-
east of  Larisa,  and  one  near  the  village  of  Goura  in  Phthiotis.  All  three
are  built  of  stone,  not  hewn  out  of  the  rock.  The  one  near  Goura,
which  by  the  exertions  of  the  peasants  has  now  been  converted  into  a
lime-kiln,  contained  bones,  painted  vases,  various  ornaments  of  gold  and
silver,  and  rings.  In  the  two  Thessalian  tombs  the  ornaments  found  were
insignificant,  but  much  pottery  came  to  light  of  a  sort  which  apparently
cannot  be  classed  with  Mycenaean  ware.  The  shapes  of  some  of  the
vases  resemble  those  of  the  early  pottery  found  in  the  Cyclades.  Most
are  unpainted,  but  some  exhibit  elaborate  geometrical  patterns  painted
with  lustrous  colours.  See  Mittheilungen  <L  arch,  InsL  in  Athen,  21
(1896),  p.  247.  In  the  island  of  Salamis,  near  the  modem  arsenal,
excavations  directed  by  Mr.  P.  Cavvadias  in  1893  laid  bare  more  than
a  hundred  prehistoric  graves  arranged  in  seven  parallel  lines.  Each
grave  consisted  of  an  oblong  hole  so  small  that  the  corpse  must  have
been  doubled  up  in  it.  In  the  graves  were  found  some  common  pottery
together  with  rings,  brooches,  and  spindles  of  bronze.  The  only  objects
of  gold  discovered  were  three  small  spirals  of  gold  wire,  which  had  clearly
been  used  to  curl  the  hair  of  the  dead,  since  two  of  them  were  found  on
either  side  of  a  skull.  Two  of  the  graves  consisted  of  round  holes  in
which  were  deposited  urns  containing  ashes  and  bones.  This  fact  seems
to  indicate  that  the  necropolis  was  constructed  at  a  time  when  the  custom
of  burying  the  dead,  which  prevailed  in  the  Mycenaean  age,  was  giving
way  to  a  custom  of  burning  them.  See  P.  Cavvadias,  Catalogue  des
Musses  d^Athlnes  (Athens,  1895),  p.  25  j^.  In  Caria  the  researches  of
Messrs.  W.  R.  Paton  and  J.  L.  Myres  go  to  prove  that  that  country,
far  from  being,  as  Prof.  Kohler  supposed,  the  centre  from  which  the
Mycenaean  civilisation  spread  over  the  coasts  of  the  Aegean,  felt  the
influence  of  that  civilisation  only  towards  the  close  of  the  Mycenaean
age  {Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  16  (1896),  p.  265).

The  problems  suggested  by  the  Mycenaean  remains  in  Greece  and
elsewhere  continue  to  exercise  archaeologists.  Some  of  them  have  beten
discussed  afresh  by  Prof.  U.  Kohler  (*  Ueber  Probleme  der  griechischen
Vorzeit,'  Sitzungsberic/ite  d.  k.  fireuss,  Akad.  d,  IVissen.  zu  Berlin,  1 1 .
Marz  1897,  pp.  258-274).  An  attempt  has  been  made  by  Mr.  H.
Kluge  to  decipher  the  inscriptions  ;  he  essays  to  show  that  their  language
is  Greek  (H.  Kluge,  Die  Schrift  der  Mykenier,  Cothen,  1897).  His
reading  of  the  inscriptions  is  not  accepted  by  Mr.  Fr.  Koepp  (  Wochen-
schrift  fiir  classische  Philologie,  16  June  1897,  pp.  675-678).  Mr.  Ch.
Belger  has  discussed  the  construction  of  the  double  circle  of  slabs
which  encloses  the  royal  graves  on  the  acropolis  of  Mycenae,  rejecting


554  MYCENAE  addenda

the  theory  of  Mr.  Chr.  Tsountas  that  the  circle  served  to  support
a  barrow  heaped  over  the  graves  (Ch.  Belger,  '  Mykenische  Studien  I.,
Erbauung  und  Zerstdnmg  des  mykenischen  Plattenringes,'  JakrbucA
d,  archdolog,  Instituts^  lo  (1895),  pp.  1 14-127).  Mr.  Tsountas  has
defended  his  theory  and  has  further  adduced  evidence  to  show  that
at  some  time  after  its  foundation  the  citadel  of  Mycenae  was  extended
both  to  the  east  and  to  the  west,  the  western  extension  comprising
within  it  the  royal  graves  which  down  to  that  time  had  been  outside  of
the  acropolis  ('Zu  einigen  mykenischen  Streitfragen,' yoArs^t^^  4L  arch,
Inst  10  (1895),  pp.  145-147).  Controversy  still  rages  round  the
question  of  the  people  who  created  the  Mycenaean  civilisation.  In  an
essay  read  before  the  French  Academy  of  Inscriptions  Mr.  W.  Helbig
has  argued  that  the  so-called  Mycenaean  art  is  nothing  but  Phoenician
art  of  the  second  millennium  B.C.  Following  in  the  footsteps  of  Mr.  £.
Pottier  he  points  out  that  the  monuments  of  Mycenaean  art  which  must
have  been  executed  on  the  spot  where  they  were  found,  such  as  the  Gate
of  the  Lions,  the  sculptured  tombstones,  and  the  fresco  of  the  palace  at
Tiryns,  are  far  inferior  in  style  and  execution  to  the  portable  objects,
such  as  the  inlaid  daggers,  the  ivory  handles,  the  golden  seals,  the
golden  vases  found  at  VaphiOy  etc  ;  and  from  this  difference  in  work-
manship he  infers  that  the  two  sets  of  objects  were  made  by  two  different
peoples,  the  former  by  the  native  workmen  on  the  spot,  the  latter  by
Phoenician  craftsmen  working  either  in  Phoenicia  or  in  Greece.  Amongst
the  products  of  Phoenician  industry  he  apparently  includes  the  pottery.
See  W.  Helbig,  *  Sur  la  question  mycdnienne,'  Mhnoires  de  rAcadhnie
des  Inscriptions  ct  Belles-lettres y  vol.  35.  pp.  291-373.  An  abstract
of  the  paper  and  of  the  discussion  to  which  it  gave  rise  is  printed  in  the
Comfites  Rendus  de  PAcad.  des  Inscriptions  et  Belles-lettres,  4me  S^rie,
23  (1895),  PP-  237-240,  242  sq.y  244-250,  in  B Ami  des  Monuments^  9
(1895),  pp.  174,  176,  189-196,  and  in  the  American  Journal  of
Archaeology,  10  (1895),  pp.  554-557.  Mr.  Helbig's  theory  has  been
adversely  criticised  by  Mr.  J.  L.  My  res  (Classical  Review,  10  (1896),
pp.  350-357).  On  the  other  hand  it  has  been  on  the  whole  accepted  by
Mr.  H.  V.  Fritze  {Berlifter  philolog.  Wochenschrift,  27th  March  1897,
pp.  399-404).  A  theory  very  like  that  of  Mr.  Helbig  is  maintained
by  Mr.  E.  Pottier.  The  only  difference  of  moment  between  their  views
would  seem  to  be  that  Mr.  Pottier  admits  that  the  characteristic
Mycenaean  pottery  was  made  by  the  natives  of  the  Aegean  coasts,
while  Mr.  Helbig  maintains  that  it  was  made  and  imported  by  the
Phoenicians.  See  E.  Pottier,  *  Uorf^vrerie  myc^nienne,'  Revue  des
Etudes  grecques,  7  (1894),  pp.  1 17-132;  id.,  Catalogue  des  Vasfs
antiques  de  terre  cuite  du  Mush  du  Louvre,  Premiere  Partie  (Paris,
1896),  pp.  1 8 1-2 10.  Mr.  Helbig  finds  a  confirmation,  as  he  thinks,  of
his  theory  in  a  painting  which  was  discovered  a  few  years  ago  in  a
tomb  at  Thebes  in  Egypt.  It  represents  a  f^eet  putting  in  to  shore
and  the  mariners  landing  and  trafficking  with  the  natives.  Accord-
ing to  Mr.  Helbig  the  natives  are  Egyptians,  the  foreign  mariners
are  Phoenicians,  and  among  the  wares  which  they  are  unlading  is
pottery  of  the  so-called  Mycenaean  type.     See  G.  Daressy,  *  Une  flotille


VOL.  Ill  MYCENAE  m

ph^idcnne,'  Revue  arch^ologiquey  3me  S^rie,  27  (1895),  pp.  286-292  ;
W.  Helbig,  <£in  agyptisches  Grabmal  und  die  mykenische  Frage,'
Sitsungsberichte  d,  philosophy  philolog,  und  d,  histor,  Classe  d,  k.  b.
Akad,  d,  Wissen,  zu  MUnchen^  1896,  pp.  539-582.  More  recently
the  claims  of  the  long-discredited  Pelasgians  to  have  been  the  creators
of  the  Mycenaean  civilisation  have  been  strongly  urged  by  Professor
W.  Ridgeway  {Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  16  (1896),  pp.  77-119)  and
Prof.  O.  Montelius  {Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute  of  Great
Britain  a$id  Ireland^  26  (1897),  pp.  254-266).  Under  a  nominal
agreement,  however,  the  views  of  these  two  scholars  conceal  a  fundar
mental  difference,  Prof.  Montelius  maintaining  that  the  Pelasgians,
whom  he  identifies  with  the  Tyrrhenians  and  Etruscans,  were  a  foreign
people  who  migrated  from  Asia  Minor  to  Greece  and  thence  to  Italy,
while  Prof.  Ridgeway  argues  that  the  Pelasgians  were  a  Greek  stock  and
spoke  a  Greek  language.  The  arguments  adduced  by  Prof.  Ridgeway
against  the  view  that  Mycenaean  art  was  a  creation  of  the  Achaeans
are  powerful,  and  his  own  theory  is  perhaps  the  one  which  best
explains  all  the  facts.  It  has  been  accepted  on  the  whole  by  Mr.  S.
Reinach  {L Anthropologies  8  (1897),  p.  25  sq,\  but  more  evidence  is
required  before  the  theory  can  be  regarded  as  established,  and  I  under-
stand from  my  friend  that  such  evidence  is  forthcoming.

On  the  strength  of  an  examination  of  Egyptian  chronology  Mr.  C.
Torr  {Memphis  and  Mycenae^  Cambridge,  1896)  concludes  that  there  is
no  sufficient  evidence  for  the  early  date  (from  about  1 600  B.C.  to  about
1 100  ac.)  now  generally  assigned  to  the  golden  age  of  Mycenae.  But
his  views  have  not  met  with  acceptance.  See  Ed.  Meyer,  in  Uterar-
isches  Centralblatt^  5th  December  1896,  p.  1756  sq,  \  J.  L.  Myres,  in
Classical  Review^  10  (1896),  pp.  447-452.  On  the  other  hsmd  the
generally-received  date  of  the  Mycenaean  civilisation  has  been  confirmed
by  objects  of  Egyptian  manufacture  found  in  the  Mycenaean  necropolis
at  Enkomiy  near  Salamis  in  Cyprus.  For  in  the  opinion  of  an  expert
these  objects  belong  to  the  fourteenth  and  thirteenth  centuries  ac  See
Mr.  Flinders  Petrie,  *  Fresh  Mycenaean  dating,'  Athenaeum,  No.  3626,
24th  April  1897,  p.  550  sq.

A  zoologist,  Mr.  Fr.  Houssay,  believes  that  on  the  pottery  of  Mycenae
he  has  found  the  birth  or  at  all  events  the  infancy  of  the  famous  myth
of  the  barnacle  goose ;  but  his  belief  is  apparently  not  shared  by
others.  See  Fr.  Houssay,  *  Les  theories  de  la  gen^se  k  Myc^ne  et  le
sens  zoologiques  de  certains  symboles  du  culte  d' Aphrodite,'  ReTme
arch/ologique,  3me  Sdrie,  26  (1895),  pp.  '-27  ;  E.  Potticr,  *  Observations
sur  la  cdramique  myc^nienne,  ib.  28  (1896),  pp.  23-32.  As  to  the
mediaeval  and  modem  myth  of  the  barnacle  goose,  see  F.  Max  Miiller,
Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Language,^  2.  pp.  585-604.  Still  more
recently  Mr.  Houssay  has  published  further  researches  into  the  mythical
conceptions  which  the  Mycenaean  people  may  possibly  have  entertained
of  plants  and  animals  {*•  Nouvelles  recherches  sur  la  faune  et  la  flore  des
vases  peints  de  I'dpoque  mycdnienne,'  Revue  arch/ologique,  3me  Sdrie,
30  (1897),  pp.  81-105).  A  Greek  scholar  has  essayed  to  prove  that  the
beehive  tombs  at  Mycenae  are  often  alluded  to  by  the  Greek  tragedians


556  MYCENAE  addenda

(S.  N.  Dragoumes,  ^oX  kv  Mvici/vais  Brp-avpoi^*  Mittheilungen  d,  arch,
Inst  in  Athen^  20  (1895),  PP-  127-160,  371  sq,).

The  general  results  of  recent  researches  in  Mycenaean  art  and
civilisation  have  been  summarised  by  Mr.  J.  L.  Myres  (*  Prehistoric  man
in  the  eastern  Mediterranean,'  Science  Progress^  5  (1896),  pp.  335*359);
and  Mr.  Tsountas's  valuable  work  on  this  subject,  to  which  many
references  are  made  in  the  text,  has  been  translated,  adapted,  and
enriched  with  additional  matter  and  fresh  illustrations  by  Pro£  J.  I.
Manatt  (Chr.  Tsountas  and  J.  Irving  Manatt,  The  Mycemuan  Age^
London,  1897).

So  much  for  recent  publications.

I  revisited  Mycenae  i  ith  and  12th  December  1895,  and  made  some
notes  which  may  serve  to  supplement  and  occasionally  correct  the  descrip-
tion in  the  text.

In  regard  to  the  walls  and  gates  of  the  citadel  it  seems  not  to  have
been  sufficiently  observed  that  the  differences  in  the  styles  of  masonry
generally  coincide  with  differences  of  material ;  for  while  the  Cyclopean
walls  are  for  the  most  part  built  of  dark  limestone,  the  two  gateways
and  the  walls  lining  the  approaches  to  them  are  constructed,  not  only
in  a  totally  different  style  (namely  in  the  ashlar  or  quadrangular
instead  of  the  Cyclopean  style),  but  also  of  a  totally  different  material,
namely  of  breccia  instead  of  limestone.  These  differences  of  style  and
material  seem  to  point  to  the  conclusion  that  the  existing  gateways  were
built  at  a  later  time  than  the  walls  and  possibly  by  a  different  people.
In  this  connexion  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  two  great  beehive  tombs
known  as  the  Treasury  of  Atreus  and  the  Tomb  of  Clytaemnestra  are
built  in  the  same  style  and  of  the  same  material  as  the  gates  of  the
citadel.  This  confirms  the  view  that  the  beehive  tombs  belong  to  the
later  rather  than  to  the  earlier  period  of  Mycenaean  history.  In  regard
to  the  pieces  of  well-jointed  polygonal  masonry  which  occur  in  the
walls  of  the  citadel,  Dr.  Adler  is  probably  right  in  considering  that  they
are  much  later  repairs  and  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  true  Cyclopean
constructions.  The  so-called  tower  on  the  south-west  is  entirely  built
of  closely-jointed  polygonal  blocks  of  breccia ;  the  faces  of  the  blocks
are  partially  smoothed.  It  is  not  really  a  tower,  but  merely  a  part  of
the  wall,  above  the  level  of  which  it  does  not  rise,  though  its  height
may  be  about  30  feet.  The  piece  of  polygonal  wall  at  the  north-east
comer  of  the  citadel,  referred  to  in  the  text  (vol  3.  p.  100),  is  very  small ;
it  is  interposed  in  the  midst  of  the  true  Cyclopean  wall.  A  little  to  the
east  of  it  are  a  few  blocks  of  regular  quadrangular  masonry  resting  on  the
top  of  the  Cyclopean  wall.  It  should  be  observed  that  the  builders  of
the  Cyclopean  walls,  though  as  a  rule  they  employed  the  dark  limestone,
seem  not  to  have  wholly  rejected  the  use  of  breccia ;  at  least  on  the
north-east  side  of  the  citadel  I  observed  a  large  block  of  breccia  in  the
lowest  part  of  the  wall,  which  is  here  high  and  built  of  the  dark  lime-
stone.

At  the  extreme  east  end  of  the  citadel,  facing  across  a  ridge  of
rocks  which  runs  eastward  into  the  glen,  there  is  a  small  Cyclopean
doorway  through  the  wall,  which  is  here  about  7  paces   thick.     The


VOL.  Ill  MYCENAE  557

doorway,  which  is  about  10  feet  or  so  below  the  top  of  the  wall,  is  about
I  metre  wide  and  2  metres  high  up  to  the  spring  of  the  pointed  vault.
It  seemed,  when  I  saw  it  in  December  1895,  to  have  been  only  recently
excavated.

P.  103  line  18  sqq.  from  foot,  The  postem  gate  etc.  The  postern
gate  opens  to  the  east.  In  both  the  great  blocks  of  breccia  which  form
the  doorposts  there  are  square  holes  for  the  reception  of  the  bolts,  and
in  the  third  great  block  of  breccia  which  forms  the  lintel  there  are  two
round  holes  for  the  sockets  or  pivots  of  the  door.  Inside  of  the  gate,  in
the  wall  on  the  left-hand  side  as  you  enter,  there  is  a  small  chamber  or
rather  hole  for  the  porter,  as  at  the  Lions*  Gate.

P.  104  line  12  sqq.y  an  opening  in  the  circle  etc.  This  opening
is  a  regular  passage  about  4  paces  long,  paved  with  three  great  slabs
and  flanked  on  each  side  by  a  wall  which  is  composed  of  three  tall
upright  slabs  like  those  of  which  the  circle  itself  is  built.  Each  of  these
upright  slabs  is  1.40  metre  high.  The  existence  of  this  carefully-built
passage  into  the  circle  seems  a  strong  argument  against  Mr.  Tsountas's
view  that  the  space  within  the  circle  was  filled  with  a  tumulus.  All  the
graves  within  the  circle  are  now  exposed  to  view  in  pits  at  a  considerable
depth  below  the  level  of  the  ground.  They  are  all  quadrangular  and  are
lined  to  a  height  of  some  feet  with  walls  built  of  small  unhewn  stones.

P.  120  line  19  sqq,  from  top,  the  great  circular  hearth  etc  The
piece  of  this  hearth  is  now  covered  up.  Of  the  women's  apartments
in  the  palace  hardly  any  remains  exist.

P.  121  line  23  sqq,  from  top,  a  complex  of  buildings  etc.  All  the
south-west  part  of  the  acropolis  of  Mycenae  is  crowded  with  the  walls  of
rooms  and  passages  built  of  smallish  unhewn  stones  bonded  with  clay  or
mortar  (I  think  clay).  In  one  of  these  rooms,  a  little  to  the  south-east  of
the  so-called  tower,  I  found  a  large  block  of  breccia  nearly  square,  with
raised  edges  and  a  round  basin-like  hole  at  one  end ;  it  is  clearly  the
floor  of  a  bath.

Recent  excavations  have  shown  that  the  whole  of  the  eastern  and
north-eastern  part  of  the  acropolis  was  similarly  closely  packed  with
a  labyrinth  of  rooms  all  connected  with  each  other  and  all  built  of
small  irregular  stones  bonded  with  mortar  or  clay.  No  account  of
this  multitude  of  apartments  has  yet,  so  far  as  I  know,  been  published
(see  above,  p.  551).  Some  of  the  rooms  have  stone  thresholds  and
there  is  stucco  on  many  of  the  walls.  In  some  rooms  near  the  glen
the  walls  are  very  thick.  These  buildings  have  been  constructed,  in
part  at  least,  on  an  earlier  edifice ;  for  in  them  at  one  place,  running
in  an  oblique  line,  is  a  row  of  not  less  than  four  round  bases  of  columns
standing  at  short  intervals  of  5  feet  or  so.  Two  of  the  bases  are  in
one  room  and  two  more  in  an  adjoining  room.

P.  123  line  20  from  top,  was  carried  along  the  western  slope  of
the  ridge  etc.  Here  on  the  western  brow,  a  good  deal  south  of  the
conspicuous  white- washed  chapel  of  the  Panagia  which  stands  on  the
crest  of  the  ridge,  I  found  a  well-preserved  piece  of  the  Cyclopean  wall
of  the  lower  city.  It  is  about  39  paces  long,  1.70  metres  high  at  the
highest,  and  is   built  of  rough,  not  very  large  stones  which  are  not


558  MYCENAE  addenda

fitted  together.  North  of  the  Panagia  chapel  is  another  small  piece  of
the  city-wall  on  the  western  brow  of  the  ridge ;  one  course  of  stones  is
standing  here  for  a  few  yards.

P.  124  line  12  sqq,  from  foot,  The  passage  or  dbromos  etc.  Some
of  the  stones  in  the  walls  of  the  passage  or  dromos  are  inmiense.  One
that  I  measured  was  3.34  metres  long.  Another  is  4  paces  long ;
another  (the  custodian  told  me)  is  6.30  metres  long.  The  material  of
which  the  walls  of  the  dromos^  like  the  walls  of  the  beehive  chamber,  are
constructed  is  a  hard  conglomerate  or  breccia.

P.  1 27  line  8  sqq.  from  top,  the  Tomb  of  OlytaenmeBtra  etc  The
so-called  Tomb  of  Clytaemnestra,  like  the  Treasury  of  Atreus,  is  built
of  squared  blocks  of  breccia  laid  in  horizontal  courses.  But  the
blocks  both  of  the  drotnos  and  of  the  beehive  chamber  are  much
smaller  than  those  in  the  Treasury  of  Atreus.  The  two  bases  of  half-
columns  referred  to  in  the  text  are  still  standing,  one  on  either  side  of
the  doorway  of  the  tomb.  Both  bases  are  made  of  a  hard  blue  stone
thickly  veined  with  red.  The  one  on  the  left-hand  side  of  the  doorway
still  supports  the  half-column  mentioned  in  the  text  This  half-column
is  semicircular,  and  the  flutes  are  slightly  indicated ;  the  stone  seemed
to  me  a  greenish-white  marble.  The  triangular  space  over  the  doorway
is  not  completely  blocked  up,  as  stated  in  the  text :  on  the  contrary  it  is
quite  open.

P.  128  line  16  sqq.  from  top,  six  other  smaller  tombs  etc.  On
my  last  visit  to  Mycenae  (nth  and  12th  December  1895)  I  visited  all
the  beehive  tombs,  eight  in  number,  which  had  then  been  excavated.  A
few  notes  on  the  six  smaller  tombs,  which  have  as  yet  been  described
in  print  either  slightly  or  not  at  all,  may  not  be  out  of  place.

( 1 )  The  beehive  tomb  between  the  so-called  Tomb  of  Clytaemnestra
and  the  wall  of  the  acropolis  had  not  yet  been  fully  excavated  at  the
time  of  my  visit.  The  lintel  of  the  doorway  is  formed  of  three  large
blocks.     The  tomb  faces  south.

(2)  The  beehive  tomb  situated  a  little  to  the  north  of  the  Lions'
Gate  has  been  briefly  described  in  the  text  (vol.  3.  p.  128).  The  sides
of  the  doorway,  which  is  5  paces  long,  are  built  of  breccia  ;  but  the
facade  of  the  doorway  and  the  walls  of  the  dromos  and  beehive  chamber
are  built  of  quite  a  different  stone,  perhaps  a  limestone,  which  on  the
outside  at  least  is  of  a  light  brown  or  yellowish  colour.  This  tomb
faces  north.

(3)  Some  little  way,  perhaps  200  yards,  to  the  west  of  and  below
the  chapel  of  the  Panagia  is  a  beehive  tomb  facing  south.  The  dromos^
which  is  not  lined  with  masonry,  is  about  14  paces  long,  and  6  paces
wide.  The  doorway,  built  of  rough  masonry,  is  about  5  paces  deep  and
is  closed  at  its  inner  end  by  the  remains  of  a  wall  of  large  rough  stones.
Five  large  blocks  form  the  lintel,  which  is  in  its  place.  The  beehive
chamber  is  of  the  usual  shape.  It  is  large,  but  is  built  of  small
irregular  stones.

(4)  At  a  considerable  distance,  perhaps  half  or  three-quarters  of  a
mile,  to  the  north-west  of  the  chapel  of  the  Panagia  is  a  beehive  tomb
facing  west     The  dromos  is  2  paces  wide,  but  has  not  yet  been  fully


VOL.  Ill  MYCENAE  559

excavated.  It  is  hewn  out  of  the  rock ;  the  sides  are  not  lined  with
masonry.  The  doorway,  3  paces  deep,  is  built  of  rough  stones
bonded  with  clay.  Three  large  slabs  form  the  lintel,  which  is  in  its
place.  The  beehive  chamber  is  circular  and  measures  8  paces  in
diameter.  Its  walls  are  standing  to  a  height  of  about  10  feet  or  so,  but
the  upper  part  of  the  vault  is  gone.  The  masonry  of  the  chamber
resembles  that  of  the  doorway.

(5)  A  short  way  to  the  north  of  the  preceding  tomb  is  another
beehive  tomb  facing  west.  The  dromos  is  1 1  paces  long  by  3  paces
wide ;  its  walls  are  built  of  squared  blocks  laid  in  regular  courses,
with  mortar  in  the  joints.  The  material  is  a  brownish  limestone  (?),
the  same  stone  of  which  beehive  tomb  No.  2  is  mostly  built.  The
doorway  is  2  paces  wide,  3^  paces  deep,  and  perhaps  13  feet  high.
It  is  built  in  the  same  style  as  the  walls  of  the  dromos.  The  lintel
is  formed  of  three  large  slabs.  The  beehive  chamber  measures
1 1  paces  in  diameter.  Its  walls  are  built  of  small  squared  blocks  of
the  brownish  stone  but  in  a  style  inferior  to  that  of  the  dromos.  The
lowest  course  is  formed  of  larger  blocks  than  the  others.  A  grave  is
cut  in  the  rocky  floor.

(6)  On  the  west  side  of  the  ridge,  just  below  the  chapel  of  the
Panagia,  is  a  beehive  tomb  facing  west ;  it  is  near,  but  a  little  to  the
east  ofi  beehive  tomb  No.  3.  The  dropnos  is  14  paces  long  by  3  paces
wide ;  its  walls  are  roughly  built  of  small,  rather  irregular  blocks  laid
in  approximately  horizontal  courses.  The  doorway,  including  both  the
facade  and  the  passage,  is  built  of  good  ashlar  masonry,  the  material
being  the  same  brownish  stone  which  is  employed  in  tombs  Nos.  2  and
5.  The  passage  of  the  doorway  is  2  paces  wide,  3  paces  long,  and
perhaps  about  12  feet  high.  Two  large  slabs  form  the  lintel.  The
beehive  chamber  is  8  paces  in  diameter  and  is  built,  like  the  walls  of
the  dromos^  in  rather  poor  style.  There  is  clay  or  mortar  in  the  joints
of  all  the  walls.     The  upper  part  of  the  dome  is  gone.

Of  the  nine  beehive  tombs  at  Mycenae  three,  including  the  Tomb
of  Clytaemnestra,  face  south ;  three  face  west ;  one  faces  north  ;  and
one  (the  Treasury  of  Atreus)  faces  east.  The  direction  in  which  the
ninth  faces  (above,  p.  5S2)  is  not  stated.  Seemingly  there  was  no  fixed
rule  as  to  the  direction  in  which  the  tombs  should  face.

P.  129  line  7  sgq,  from  foot,  The  seventy  and  odd  tombs  etc.
I  examined  between  twenty  and  thirty  of  these  rock-cut  tombs,  and
found  that  the  length  of  the  dromos  or  passage  leading  through  the  rock
to  the  tomb  varied  from  6  to  29  paces,  and  its  width  from  i^  to  2\
paces.  The  estimate  of  the  size  of  the  sepulchral  chambers  given  in  the
text  appears  to  me,  judging  from  the  tombs  I  visited,  to  be  under  the
mark.  I  found  the  chambers  to  measure  variously  from  3  to  8  paces
across.  A  number  of  them  are  circular.  The  general  disposition  of
these  rock-cut  tombs,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  chambers  are  sometimes
quadrangular  with  gable-like  roofs,  resembles  that  of  the  built  beehive
tombs  very  closely.  We  can  hardly  doubt  but  that  both  sets  of  tombs
are  the  works  of  the  same  people  and  the  same  period.

P.  138  line  15  sqq.  from  foot,  a  beehive  tomb at  Thoricns


56o  NAUPUA—APHIDNA  addenda

etc.     For  some  more  particulars  as  to  the  two  beehive  tombs  found  at
Thoricus,  see  above,  p.  523  sq,

P.  141  line  2  sq,  from  foot,  some  prehistoric  tombs  etc.  These
tombs  are  to  be  seen  in  rows  on  a  hill-side,  now  occupied  by  an  olive-
grove,  a  little  to  the  east  of  Pronia^  which  is  a  suburb  of  Nauplia.  The
hill  is  an  eastern  continuation  of  the  lofty  Palamidiy  the  fortifications  of
which  are  seen  rising  a  little  to  the  south- wesL  I  visited  a  number  of
these  tombs,  9th  December  1895.  They  are  roughly  and  carelessly
constructed.  The  largest  of  the  sepulchral  chambers,  so  far  as  I
observed,  measures  6  paces  by  5  paces  ;  the  dromos  or  descending
passage  to  it  is  22  paces  long.

P.  144  line  15  sq,  from  foot,  a  baxrow  at  Aphidna  etc.  Prof
Wide's  discoveries  at  Aphidna  have  now  been  fully  described  by  himself
In  August  1894  he  found  some  potsherds  of  Mycenaean  style  on  the
eastern  slope  of  the  hill  of  Aphidna.  In  October  and  November  of  the
same  year  he  and  his  countryman  Mr.  Kjellberg  excavated  a  large
tumulus  situated  on  the  south  side  of  the  Charadra  river,  about  25
minutes'  walk  distant  from  the  top  of  the  hill  of  Aphidna.  Within  the
tumulus  they  found  thirteen  ancient  graves,  of  which  some  had  been
already  plundered.  The  graves  were  of  various  sorts.  Some  were
pit-graves,  others  were  built  of  great  stones  or  slabs,  and  others,  six  in
number,  consisted  of  great  jars  of  coarse  brownish-red  clay.  One  of
these  jars  contained,  besides  the  bones  of  the  dead,  six  gold  rings,  one
silver  ring,  and  a  number  of  earthenware  pots,  most  of  them  made  of
grey  clay.  The  contents  of  the  graves  seem  to  show  that  the  people
buried  here  were  in  the  bronze  period  ;  for  gold,  silver,  and  bronze  were
found  in  the  graves,  together  with  knives  and  arrow-heads  of  flint  and
beads  of  transparent  stone,  but  no  iron  nor  any  weapons  of  metal.  The
pottery  discovered  is  of  four  sorts  : —

(i)  Large  bowls  of  coarse,  brownish -red  clay  decorated  with
geometrical  patterns  painted  in  dull  colours  on  a  yellowish -white
ground  :  some  of  these  bowls  are  wheel-made,  others  hand-made.

(2)  Undecorated  vases  of  various  sizes  made  of  a  coarse  brownish-
red  clay.

(3)  Vessels  of  grey  clay  decorated  occasionally  with  shallow  horizontal
grooves.     This  is  the  type  of  which  most  specimens  were  found.

(4)  Vessels  of  a  reddish-grey  clay  imperfectly  fired,  painted  black
and  polished  before  they  were  fired.  The  few  specimens  of  this  sort
are  covered  with  incised  geometrical  patterns.

The  pottery  resembles  certain  primitive  wares  found  in  the  Greek
islands.  The  large  vessels  decorated  with  geometrical  patterns  painted  in
dull  colours  on  a  pale  ground  resemble  vessels  found  in  Aegina  and  other
islands,  as  well  as  on  the  mainland  at  Thoricus  and  on  the  Acropolis
of  Athens.  Vases  of  grey  clay  like  those  of  Aphidna  have  been  found  in
the  prehistoric  settlements  at  Troy,  in  the  islands  (especially  Cyprus),
and  at  Thoricus.  The  incised  geometrical  patterns  have  also  their
analogues  in  the  pottery  found  in  the  prehistoric  settlements  of  Troy  and
the  older  burying-grounds  of  the  islands,  especially  Cyprus.  Pro£  Wide
inclines  to  hold  that  in  the  pottery  of  Aphidna  we  see  an  intermediate


VOL.  Ill  THE  HERAEUM  561

stage  between  the  oldest  pottery  with  geometrical  patterns  and  the  later
fully-developed  pottery  with  geometrical  patterns  which  is  known  as
Dipylum  ware ;  and  he  conjectures  that  the  custom  of  adorning  pottery
with  geometrical  patterns  was  not,  as  is  conmionly  supposed,  introduced
into  Greece  by  the  Dorian  conquerors  at  the  close  of  the  Mycenaean
period,  but  had  been  practised  by  the  aboriginal  inhabitants  of  Greece
before  the  beginning  of  the  Mycenaean  era  and  was  only  temporarily
thrown  into  the  shade  by  the  new-fashioned  Mycenaean  ware  which  he
supposes  to  have  been  imported  from  the  east.  He  points  out  that  the
finest  type  of  geometrically-decorated  pottery — the  Dipylum  ware — is
found  in  Attica,  where  the  Dorians  never  were.  As  no  fragments  of
Mycenaean  pottery  were  found  in  the  tumulus  at  Aphidna,  Prof.  Wide
supposes  that  the  i>eople  buried  in  it  lived  either  before,  or  at  latest  in
the  early  part  o^  the  Mycenaean  period.  See  S.  Wide,  *  Aphidna  in
Nordattika,'  MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  21  (1896),  pp.  385-409.

P.  161  line  9.  For  north-west  read  north-east.  The  passage
leading  from  the  acropolis  to  the  cistern  passes  under  the  wall  a  little
to  the  east  of  the  postern  gate  but  a  little  to  the  west  of  the  Cyclopean
doorway  already  described  (p.  556  sq,),

P.  165  line  6  from  top,  the  Heraenm.  Brief  reports  of  the  last
excavations  made  by  the  Americans  at  the  Heraeum  are  now  published
{American  Journal  of  Archaeology^  10  (1895),  PP-  238  sq,y  413  sq,y
543-547  ;  Fourteenth  Annual  Report  of  the  American  School  of  Classical
Studies  at  Athens^  1894-95,  pp.  37-48),  but  the  substance  of  these
reports  has  already,  thanks  to  the  kindness  of  Prof  Waldstein,  been
embodied  in  the  third  volume  of  this  work.  More  of  the  inscriptions
have  also  been  edited  {American  Journal  of  Archaeology^  1 1  (1896),  pp.
42-61);  one  of  them  (No.  12),  which  seems  to  date  from  a  time  not
later  than  500  B.C.,  contains  the  earliest  known  mention  of  the  four
Doric  tribes.  I  visited  the  Heraeum  loth  December  1895,  and  made
a  few  notes,  some  of  which  are  given  below.

P.  167  line  4  from  top,  a  piece  of  an  ancient  wall  etc  This
piece  of  wall,  17  paces  long,  runs  east  and  west  parallel  to  the
southern  face  of  the  terrace,  from  the  ^d%t  of  which  it  is  distant  13
paces.     It  is  .45  metre  high.

P.  167  line  7  from  top,  portions  of  a  pavement  etc.  The  pave-
ment is  preserved  almost  entire  on  the  south  side  of  the  terrace,  and
large  portions  of  it  exist  both  at  the  eastern  and  western  ends  of  the
terrace.

P.  174.  Above  the  eastern  portion  of  the  North  Colonnade  I
observed  three  quadrangular  chambers  with  walls  built  of  fine  ashlai
masonry ;  they  are  in  a  line  with  the  dwellings  of  the  priestesses,  but
farther  to  the  east  and  a  little  lower  down.  In  the  easternmost  and
largest  of  the  chambers  there  are  three  square  bases  of  columns,  made
of  white  limestone,  in  a  row ;  a  drum  of  a  column  stands  on  one  of
them.  In  the  middle  of  the  central  chamber  there  is  also  a  base  of  a
colimin.

P.  174  line  23  from  top,  another  Oyclopean  walL  A  good  many
yards  to  the  east  of  this  small  piece  of  Cyclopean  wall  there  is  another

VOL.  V  20


562  THE  HERAEUM  addenda

piece  of  wall,  fonning  a  right  angle,  which  served  to  support,  at  a  slightly
lower  level,  an  extension  of  the  upper  terrace  to  the  east.  On  its
eastern  face  the  wall,  which  is  constructed  almost  entirely  of  large
squared  blocks  laid  in  horizontal  courses,  is  12  paces  long  and  about
2.50  metres  high.

P.  174  line  14  from  foot,  supported  on  tlie  east  and  sonth  \sf
strong  walls.  These  walls  are  built  of  great  squared  blocks  of  con-
glomerate laid  in  horizontal  courses.  At  the  south-east  angle  eight
courses  of  masonry  are  preserved,  giving  a  height  of  about  5  metres
(16  ft  5  in.).

P.  175  line  10  sq,  from  top,  remains  of  what  seem  to  have  been
tables  or  coaches  extending  along  the  walls.  I  foimd  these  remains
in  the  central  chamber  only.  They  consist  of  blocks  of  stone  .70  metre
high  fitted  into  the  wall  and  projecting  .42  metre  from  it  The  interval
between  the  blocks  is  1.24  metres.  On  the  top  of  each  block  are  four
square  holes,  for  the  purpose  perhaps  of  attaching  a  seat  or  table.
Further,  in  the  most  westerly  of  the  three  chambers  there  are  square
cuttings  in  the  wall  in  which  similar  blocks  were  probably  inserted.

P.  1 75  line  1 1  sqq.  from  top,  The  entrance  to  the  bnilding  was  in
the  north  wall  of  tiie  most  westerly  of  the  three  chambers.  Rather
it  was  in  the  north  wall  at  the  end  of  a  passage  between  the  central  and
the  western  chamber.

P.  1 75  line  13  sq,  from  top,  with  some  drams  of  colonms  etc  1
saw  only  one  such  drum  in  its  place,  namely  at  the  north-east  comer  of
the  colonnade ;  and  there  is  only  one  place,  so  far  as  I  could  see,  in
which  the  wall  of  the  West  Building  is  standing  to  a  height  of  several
courses.

P.  175  line  22  sq.  from  top,  the  rains  of  an  early  stractare.  The
edifice  is  composed  of  two  long  rows  of  quadrangular  halls  and  chambers
side  by  side ;  its  greatest  length  is  from  east  to  west  The  walls  arc
roughly  built.

P.  175  line  12  sq.  from  foot,  on  foar  or  Ave  there  are  still
standing  drams  of  flated  Doric  colamns.  The  number  of  bases  on
which  drums  are  standing  is  four,  not  fi\^.  The  diameter  of  the  drxuns
is  .83  metre.  The  number  of  fallen  drums  of  the  easternmost  column
is  four,  not  three,  as  stated  in  the  text,  and  they  lie  behind,  not  in  front
of,  the  base  of  the  column.

P.  176  line  18  sq.y  another  colonnade  which  extended  eastwards
for  a  considerable  distance.  The  square  bases  of  the  eight  columns
(there  were  no  more)  of  this  colonnade  have  been  found  in  a  row.  Each
base  is  about  .90  metre  square.  The  interval  between  them  is  about
4  paces.

P.  183  line  14  from  top,  the  marriage  of  Zens  and  Hera.  A
fragment  of  the  early  Greek  prose  writer  Pherecydes  on  this  subject  has
recently  been  discovered  in  a  papyrus.  The  passage  had  been  already
known  in  part  from  Clement  of  Alexandria  {Strom,  vi.  pp.  741,  767  ed.
Potter).  See  Grenfell  and  Hunt,  New  classical  fragments  and  other
Greek  and  Latin  papyri  (Oxford,  1897),  P-  23  ;  H.  Weil,  *  Un  nouveau
fragment  de  Phdr^cyde  de  Syros,'  Revue  des  Etudes grecques^  10  (1897),


VOL.  Ill  ARGOS  563

pp.  1-9;  H.  Diels,  *Zur  Pentemychos  des  Pherekydes,'  Sitzungsberichte
der  k,  preuss,  Akad,  d,  IVtssen,  su  Berlin^  25th  February  1897,  pp.  144-
156.  I  hope  to  discuss  the  fragment  elsewhere.  Meantime  I  will
merely  point  out  that  the  clue  to  explain  the  "  winged  oak  "  which  has
so  much  exercised  scholars  is  probably  furnished  by  the  images  of
oak-wood  dressed  as  brides  at  the  Boeotian  festival  of  the  Daedala
(Pausanias,  ix.  3).

P.  193  line  19  from  top,  Cleobis  and  Biton.  We  know  from
Herodotus  (i.  31)  that  statues  of  these  two  robust  and  pious  youths  were
dedicated  at  Delphi ;  and  there,  between  the  Treasury  of  the  Athenians
and  the  Treasury  of  the  Siphnians,  the  recent  French  excavations  have
brought  to  light  a  pair  of  twin  statues  which  Mr.  Homolle,  who  at  first
took  them  for  images  of  Apollo,  would  now  identify  as  the  portraits  of
Cleobis  and  Biton.  They  represent  two  square-built,  broad-shouldered
muscular  men  with  great  heads,  bull  necks,  and  brawny  arms  glued  to
their  sides.  The  faces,  with  their  great  goggle  staring  eyes,  are
dull,  heavy,  and  expressionless,  relieved,  however,  by  a  touch  of  good
humour.  The  hair  is  bound  by  a  ribbon,  below  which  it  escapes  in
six  or  seven  curls  that  hang  down  on  the  shoulders.  From  the  stiff
archaic  style  of  the  figures  Mr.  HomoUe  would  date  them  about  580
B.C.  They  belong  to  the  Argive  school  of  sculpture.  A  few  letters
(  .  .  .  fjL€&ris)  of  the  name  of  the  Argive  sculptor  may  still  be  read  on
one  of  them.  See  Th.  Homolle,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUniqtu^  1 8
( 1 894),  p.  1 84  sq, ;  id^  in  Gazette  des  Beaux-Arts^  D^cembre  1 894,  pp.
444-446,  and  ib.  Avril  1895,  PP-  321-324.

P.  195  line  22  sq.  from  top,  a  wall  built  of  great  polygonal
blocks.  The  ancient  polygonal  masonry  of  this  wall  is  preserved  at
the  two  ends,  but  the  intermediate  portion  is  to  a  great  extent  modem
or  at  least  much  later ;  some  very  large  blocks,  however,  of  the  original
wall  remain  imder  these  later  repairs.  In  the  places  where  the  ancient
wall  is  well  preserved  it  is  built  of  large,  well-cut,  and  well-jointed  poly-
gonal blocks.  The  height  of  the  wall  is  about  3.40  metres.  At  the
north  and  south  ends  it  makes  a  short  return  westward  to  support  the
terrace  in  these  directions.  On  the  last  block  at  the  north  end  of  the
front  wall  are  carved  a  relief  and  an  inscription,  both  much  defaced.
A  few  yards  to  the  south  is  another  inscription  cut  on  the  face  of  the
wall.     I  was  able  to  distinguish  the  following  letters

AftNTA
Y2[I]0

but  the  letters  in  the  second  line  are  doubtful.  The  semicircular  niche
or  seat  cut  in  the  rock  at  the  back  of  the  terrace  is  2.17  metres  wide.
It  occupies  the  innermost  point  of  a  quadrangular  recess,  some  12  paces
deep  and  8  paces  wide  at  the  narrowest,  which  has  been  cut  out  of
the  rock  at  the  back  of  the  terrace.  On  the  top  of  the  rock-walls
both  at  the  sides  and  back  of  the  recess  stand  walls  built  of  small  stones
and  mortar,  and  faced  on  the  outside  with  thin  bricks  laid  fiat.  This
terrace  with  the  rock-hewn  recess  and  semicircular  niche  at  its  back  is
distant  some  150  yards  or  so  to  the  north  of  the  theatre.


564  SPRINGS  OF  ERASINUS  addenda

P.  195  line  6  from  foot,  a  theatre  etc  On  revisiting  the  theatre  of
Argos,  loth  December  1895,  I  found  that  a  trench  dug  from  the  middle
of  the  auditorium  across  die  orchestra  had  revealed  short  portions  of
other  rows  of  seats,  also  cut  out  of  the  rock,  below  the  tiers  of  seats
which  were  visible  before.  The  excavations  have  also  laid  bare  pieces
of  several  lines  of  stage-buildings,  the  foundations  being  constructed  of
small  stones  and  the  upper  walls  (so  far  as  they  exist)  of  squared  blocks
of  white  limestone.  Three  steps,  also  made  of  white  limestone,  lead
down  from  the  back  of  one  of  the  lines  of  stage-buildings.  But  of  a  sub-
terranean passage  leading  from  the  stage  to  the  orchestra  I  saw  nothing.

At  the  south-eastern  comer  of  the  theatre  are  the  remains  of  a
quadrangular  building  with  an  apse  at  the  west  end.  As  it  stands,  the
building  is  about  20  yards  long  from  east  to  west  by  1 3  yards  broad
from  north  to  south.  The  walls  are  faced  with  thin  bricks  laid  flat,  but
the  core  is  of  small  stones  and  mortar.  The  north  wall  is  standing  to
a  height  of  many  feet,  perhaps  40  or  50 ;  in  its  upper  part  it  shows
the  spring  of  a  vault,  proving  that  the  building  had  a  vaulted  roo£

P.  210  line  13  sqq,  from  foot,  the  water  of  the  Brasiniifl  etc
I  visited  the  springs  of  the  Erasinus,  8th  December  1895,  and  found
that  the  description  of  the  spot  given  in  the  text,  though  in  genexal
accurate  enough,  needs  to  be  corrected  on  some  points.  The  modem
highroad  from  Argos  to  Lema  does  not  go  near  the  springs,  but
passes  at  a  considerable  distance,  perhaps  a  mile  and  a  half,  to  the
east  of  them.  To  reach  the  springs  we  turn  off  from  the  highroad
and  proceed  westward  through  a  beautiful  avenue  of  fine  silver  poplars,
plane-trees,  and  oleanders.  The  spring,  issuing  from  under  rocks
at  the  foot  of  the  high  rugged  mountain,  forms  at  once  a  large  and
clear  but  shallow  pool  in  which  water-plants  of  a  vivid  green  grow
thickly.  The  pool  is  dammed  up  by  a  wall  pierced  by  a  number  of
arches  through  which  the  water  issues  to  form  two  streams  flowing  in
different  directions.  A  fine  plane-tree  grows  beside  the  pool,  and  the
streams  lower  down  are  shaded  by  trees.  Just  above  the  spring  there
are  two  caves,  a  large  one  and  a  small  one,  side  by  side.  A  staircase
leads  up  to  them.  The  small  cave  to  the  right  has  been  converted
into  a  little  chapel  of  the  Panagia.  The  large  cave  to  the  left  has
two  mouths.  One  of  them  is  beside  the  mouth  of  the  small  cave;
indeed  the  two  mouths  are  closed  by  one  and  the  same  wall,  and
the  entrances  to  the  caves  are  through  two  doors  side  by  side  in
the  wall.  The  other  mouth  of  the  large  cave  opens  a  few  feet
further  to  the  left.  This  large  cave  has  several  branches.  The
main  cave  runs  straight  into  the  mountain;  it  is  long,  and  with  its
high-arched  roof,  encrusted  with  stalactites,  resembles  the  nave  of  a
Gothic  cathedral.  A  few  feet  inward  from  the  mouth  of  the  cave  a
branch  strikes  off  to  the  left  at  right  angles  to  the  main  cave.  It  is
shorter  than  the  main  cave,  but  has,  like  it,  a  high-arched  roof.  Near
its  end,  on  the  left  side,  there  is  a  low,  narrow,  pitch-dark  opening.  With
a  light  I  crept  into  it  and  saw  that  at  its  further  extremity  there  was
a  crevice  some  18  inches  or  so  high  descending  apparently  into  the
bowels  of  the  mountain.     Further,  on  the  right-hand  side  of  this  branch-


VOL.  Ill  PYRAMID  OF  CENCHREAE  565

cave  there  opens  another  and  longer  branch  which  runs  parallel  to  the
main  cave  and  communicates  with  it  at  its  inner  end.  At  this  inner
end  there  is  a  window-like  opening  to  the  upper  air  through  which  a
little  daylight  penetrates  into  the  dark  cave,  spreading  a  dim  twilight
around.  Outside  of  the  cave,  in  front  of  its  mouth,  is  built  a  sort  of
summer-house  or  covered  shed,  with  white-washed  walls  and  pillars  and
seats  round  it.  The  spot,  I  was  told,  is  a  favourite  one  for  holiday-
makers  from  Argos  in  summer.

P.  213  line  I  sqq.y  the  Pyramid  of  Cenchreae  etc.     I  visited  the

Pyramid  of  Cenchreae  8th  December  1895  ;  ^uid  as  my  notes  partly

supplement  the  descriptions  given  of  this  interesting  and  mysterious

building   by  previous  writers,    I   will  venture   to   reproduce  them    in

full.     A  bridle-path  leads  westward  from  the  springs  of  the  Erasinus

to  the  pyramid  in  about   half  an   hour.      The   building  occupies  a

knoll  to  the  left  (south)  of  the  bridle-path ;  but  another  bridle-path

runs   on    the    other    side    of    it,   still    further   to    the    south.      The

two  paths  probably  meet  in  the  valley  higher  up.     The   pyramid   is

square,  and  its  sides  face  north,  west,  south,   and  east.     It   rests   in

part  on  the  native  rock  of  the  knoll,  which  thus  forms  a  basement

a  few  feet  high,  especially  on  the  south  side.     Where  this  natural

basement  is  wanting,  its  place  is  supplied  by  a  base  of  masonry  from

.60  metre  to   1.65  metres  high,  according  to  the  inequalities  of  the

ground.     The  sides  of  this  base  of  masonry  are  perpendicular,  whereas

the  sides  of  the  pyramid,  of  course,  slope  inward.     As  it  stands,  the

north  face  of  the  pyramid  is  exactly  1 2  metres  long,  but  some  blocks

have  fallen  at  the  western  comer ;  perhaps  the  original  length  of  the

north  face  was  12.50  metres.    The  east  face  of  the  pyramid,  at  the  level

of  the  ground,  is  about  14  metres  long.     At  its  south-east  comer  the

pyramid  is  standing  to  a  height  of  about  3.20  metres.     On  the  southern

face  the  wall  is  about  4  metres  high,  and  on  the  east  and  north  sides

the  walls  are  standing  to  about  the  same  absolute  height,  though,  as  the

soil  is  here  higher,  the  height  of  the  walls  above  the  grotmd  is  not  so

great.     On  the  west  face  the  wall  is  more  ruinous.     All  these  outer

walls  are  built  of  large  well-cut  blocks  of  a  dark  hard  stone.     On  the

east  and  south  sides  the  blocks  are  mostly  quadrangular ;  but  on  the

west  and  north  sides  there  are  many  polygonal  blocks.     In  many  of  the

joints  there  is  mortar,  which  seemed  to  me  original.     Probably  there

was  mortar  in  all  the  joints  at  first,  though  it  has  now  disappeared

from  many.     At  the  south-east  comer  of  the  pyramid  a  right  angle  is,

as  it  were,  cut  out,  and  in  this  right  angle,  facing  east,  is  a   doorway

1.20  metres  wide  surmounted  by  a  pointed  arch,  which  is  formed  by  the

convergence  of  the  stones  on  both  sides.     On  the  right-hand  side  of  the

doorway  there  are  visible  in  the  wall  the  two  square  holes  in  which  the

bolts  of  the  door  were  shot.     From  this  doorway  a  passage  of  the  same

breadth  leads  to  the  opposite  (west)  wall  of  the  pyramid.     At  the  end

of  this  passage  is  a  doorway  on  the  right  leading  into  a  chamber.     In

this  inner  doorway  the  large  lower  blocks  of  the  stone  doorposts  are

preserved  on  both  sides ;  in  the  right-hand  doorpost  are  two  square

holes  in  which  the  bolts  were  shot     The  stone  threshold  of  the  doorway


566  PYRAMID  OP  CENCHREAE  addenda

is  also  preserved,  but  the  lintel  is  gone.  The  chamber  into  which  this
doorway  opens  is  7  metres  square.  In  it  there  are  remains  of  partition-
walls  dividing  the  chamber  into  four  apartments,  one  laige  apartment
occupying  all  the  southern  part  of  the  chamber,  and  three  small  apart-
ments in  a  row  occupying  the  smaller  northern  portion  of  it  But  these
partition-walls  are  perhaps  modem.  The  inner  walls  of  the  chamber
seemed  to  me  to  show  traces  of  much  later,  if  not  modem  repairs ;  in
particular  the  mortar  looks  fresh  and  brown,  quite  different  from  the
grey  old  mortar  of  the  outer  walls.  The  small  apartment  in  the  north-
east comer  appears  to  have  been  used  in  Roman  or  mediaeval  times  as  a
cistern ;  for  its  walls  up  to  a  height  of  .70  metre  are  lined  with  a  casing
of  small  stones,  bricks,  and  mortar,  the  whole  being  coated  with  stucco,
of  which  there  are  remains  in  one  of  the  angles.  Moreover,  just  above
this  casing  there  is  a  square  hole  cut  through  the  north  wall  of  the
pyramid ;  a  water-pipe  may  have  been  passed  through  this  hole  to  feed
the  cistern.  In  the  large  apartment  I  found  lying  some  remains  of  an
object  which  may  serve  to  throw  some  light  on  the  purpose  of  the
pyramid.  The  remains  consist,  first,  of  two  semicircular  blocks  of
breccia  which  together  formed  a  sort  of  shallow  basin  i  metre  in
diameter.  In  the  centre  of  the  basin  is  a  circular  elevation  which  is  at
present  only  about  5  centimetres  high.  But  its  top  is  rough  and  uneven
as  if  a  piece  had  been  broken  off;  and  beside  the  broken  basin  1  found,
secondly,  a  small  circular  slab  or  disc  of  breccia  of  the  same  diameter
(.35  metre)  as  the  circular  elevation  in  the  basin.  It  may  be  conjectured
that  this  circular  elevation  in  the  basin  was  a  pedestal  and  supported  a
votive  offering  ;  for  in  shape  the  basin  resembles  some  inscribed  stands
for  votive  offerings  which  have  been  found  in  the  sanctuary  of
Aesculapius  at  Epidaurus  (below,  p.  571  sq,\  If  this  conjecture
should  prove  right,  it  would  go  to  show  that  the  pyramid  served  a
religious  purpose,  that  in  fact  it  was  consecrated  to  the  worship  of  some
divinity  or  deceased  person  or  persons.  In  the  latter  case  the  pyramid
may  very  well  have  been,  as  Ross  and  Clark  suggested,  one  of  the
common  tombs  {polua?idria)  mentioned  by  Pausanias.

P.  219  line  7  sq.  from  top,  Around  the  lower  citadel  etc  I
estimated  the  height  of  the  wall  of  the  lower  citadel  at  30  feet  on  the
west,  18  to  20  feet  on  the  north,  and  23  feet  at  the  northern  end  of  the
east  side.     On  the  east  side  the  wall  is  ruinous  in  some  places.

P.  221  line  9,  a  long  narrow  staircase.  This  staircase  is  7  feet
wide,  so  it  is  hardly  fair  to  call  it  narrow.

P.  224  line  3  from  top,  the  round  stone  bases  still  remain  in
their  places.  Only  three  of  them  were  visible  when  I  revisited  Tiryns,
7th  December  1895  ;  and  the  circular  hearth  itself,  enclosed  by  the
pillars,  had  also  disappeared  or  been  covered  up.

P.  224  line  15  from  foot,  its  foundation  shows  a  rectangle  etc.
These  foundations,  or  rather  lower  parts  of  walls,  are  built  in  a  very  poor
style  exactly  resembling  that  of  the  walls  of  the  palace  ;  the  stones  are
small,  rough,  and  irregular.  It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  they  are  the
walls  of  a  temple.

P.  231   line   II  sqq,  from  top,  Midea  etc.     I  visited  the  mins  of


YOU  III  MIDEA  567

Midea  7th  December  1895,  ^^^  ™y  notes  of  them  may  supplement
and  perhaps  correct  the  description  in  the  text  The  ruins  are
situated  on  a  high  pointed  rocky  hill  which  rises  abruptly  from  the
eastern  side  of  the  plain  of  Argos,  about  a  mile  to  die  south-east
of  the  village  of  Dendra,  The  hill,  which  may  be  about  800  feet
high,  is  rocky  and  precipitous  on  the  west  and  south,  but  descends
to  the  north  in  a  long  gradual  slope  or  series  of  terraces.  At  its
northern  foot,  about  half  a  mile  from  Dendra^  is  the  little  chapel  of  St
Thomas  perched  upon  some  rocks.  The  sununit  of  the  mountain  is  a
narrow  rocky  ridge,  highest  on  the  west,  from  which  it  gradually  descends
eastwards,  expanding  as  it  descends.  At  first,  on  the  west,  it  is  only
about  12  paces  broad  and  is  so  covered  with  rugged  rocks  that  clearly
no  building  ever  occupied  it  Further  to  the  east  there  are  some  small
level  platforms  where  the  rock  seems  to  have  been  cleared  away  and
smoothed  to  make  room  for  buildings.  Still  further  to  the  east  the  ridge
ends  in  a  terrace  about  60  paces  long  from  north  to  south  by  1 1  paces
wide  from  east  to  west  This  terrace,  probably  in  part  artificial,  is
supported  on  the  east  by  a  wall  of  Cyclopean  masonry  22  feet  thick,
built  of  huge  polygonal  almost  unhewn  stones  which  are  roughly
dressed  on  their  outer  surface  and  have  small  stones  inserted  in  their
interstices.  The  height  of  the  wall,  so  far  as  I  could  estimate  it,  varies
from  9  to  18  feet.  Beyond  and  below  the  terrace  to  the  north  the
Cyclopean  wall  continues  to  run  as  a  fortification-wall  in  a  north-west-
northerly  direction.  It  is  here  preserved  on  both  fsices.  The  thickness
is  the  same  as  before  (22  feet).  On  its  inner  face  the  wall  is  from
5  to  7  feet  high ;  on  its  outer  face  it  is  from  13  to  18  and  20  feet
high  in  places.  After  running  northward  in  this  direction  for  100
yards  or  so  the  wall  turns  to  the  west,  and  is  carried  in  this  direc-
tion across  the  northern  slope  of  the  hill.  Here  it  again  serves  as  a
support  to  a  terrace ;  its  height  varies  from  5  to  1 2  feet.  In  some
places  the  old  wall  has  tumbled  down  hill  and  been  replaced  by  a  low
wall  of  small  stones.  This  wall  of  small  stones  is  clearly  a  modem
terrace-wall  built  to  support  the  soil,  which  at  present  grows  com.
Towards  its  western  end  the  wall  is  quite  minous — a  mere  mass  of
tumbled  stones.  On  the  western  face  of  the  hill  a  piece  of  the  Cyclopean
wall  may  be  seen  which  is  1 1  paces  long  and  about  1 2  feet  high.  Like
the  wall  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  hill  it  is  built  of  great  stones
which  are  roughly  hewn  on  their  outer  face  and  have  small  stones  inserted
in  their  interstices.  From  this  point  the  line  of  wall  is  again  traceable
running  up  hill  in  a  south-easterly  direction  for  100  yards  or  so  till  it
ends  at  the  rocks  which  on  the  western  face  of  the  hiU,  at  its  southem
and  highest  point,  render  fortification  needless.  On  its  inner  face  this
wall,  towards  its  termination  at  the  rocks,  is  from  3  to  5  feet  high ;  on
its  outer  face  it  is  merely  a  heap  of  fallen  stones.  Thus  the  forti-
fications of  Midea,  so  far  as  I  observed  them,  formed  three  sides  of  a
quadrangle  on  the  northern  slope  of  the  hill,  the  fourth  side  of  the  quad-
rangle being  occupied  by  the  crest  of  rocks  on  the  southem  summit
of  the  hill.  My  observations,  in  short,  entirely  confirm  the  sketch-plan
of  the  fortress  published  by  Messrs.  Conze  and  Michaelis  (Annali  delP


568  MIDEA—KASARMI  addenda

InsHtutOy  33  (1861),  Tav.  d'  agg.  F.  i).  If  there  were,  as  has  been
asserted,  four  separate  lines  of  defence,  one  above  the  other,  I  certainly
did  not  see  them.  I  did  indeed  observe,  lower  down  the  northern
slope,  a  line  of  wall  encircling  the  hill  about  two-thirds  of  the  way  up
it.  But  this  wall  was  clearly  modem,  being  nothing  but  a  heap  of
rough  stones  piled  one  on  the  top  of  the  other  without  any  attempt  at
fitting  them  together.  Within  the  ancient  fortification-walls  and  again
lower  down  on  the  northern  slope  of  the  hill  there  is  a  considerable
quantity  of  potsherds  strewed  about,  some  of  which  are  painted  in  the
Mycenaean  style.

P.  232  line  18  sqq,  from  foot,  one  of  the  best-preserred  fortreBses
etc.  I  visited  the  two  ancient  fortresses  now  called  Kasarmi  and
Kastraki^  6th  December  1896,  and  will  describe  them  from  my  notes.

The  small  fortress  of  Kasarmi  is  situated  about  ten  minutes'  walk
north,  but  in  full  view  of,  the  road  which  leads  from  Nauplia  to  Ugouno
and  the  Epidaurian  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius.  Its  distance  from  Nauplia
byroad  is  13  kilometres  (8^  miles).  The  place  is  a  small  hill,  defended
by  high  rocky  precipices  on  the  west  and  by  lower  precipitous  rocks  on
the  north ;  its  top  measures  only  about  70  yards  from  north  to  south  by
50  yards  from  east  to  west.  Round  this  little  top  run  the  remains  of  the
ancient  walls,  built  of  massive  and  well -jointed  polygonal  masonry.
On  the  eastern  side  of  the  hill  the  wall  is  preserved  unbroken  to  a  height
varying  from  6  to  18  feet,  but  most  of  it  is  nearer  18  than  6  feet  high.
The  height  of  the  southern  wall  is  from  6  to  1 2  feet,  but  there  are  two
gaps  in  it.  On  the  north  and  west  the  wall,  being  built  on  the  top  of
precipitous  rocks,  is  low;  indeed  it  seems  to  have  been  discontinued
above  the  highest  precipices  on  the  west.  The  thickness  of  the  wall,  at
least  at  the  north-east  comer  where  I  measured  it,  is  6  feet.  Three
round  towers  project  from  the  south-westem,  the  south-eastern,  and  the
north-eastem  angles  of  the  fortress.  The  tower  at  the  south-east  angle
is  about  1 8  feet  high,  but  only  the  first  three  or  four  courses  of  it  are
built  of  the  ancient  polygonal  masonry  ;  all  the  upper  part  is  mediaeval,
being  constmcted  of  small  stones,  bricks,  and  mortar.  The  tower  at  the
north-east  angle  is  standing  in  part  to  a  height  of  1 2  feet,  but  it  is  partially
minous  and  a  square  mediaeval  tower  has  been  built  on  the  top  of  it
From  this  tower  a  staircase,  of  which  eight  steps  are  preserved,  descended
northward  along  the  top  of  the  wall  (the  tower  stands  a  few  feet  south  of
the  north-east  angle  of  the  fortress).  The  tower  at  the  south-west  angle,
built  of  massive  polygonal  masonry,  is  standing  in  part  to  a  height  of

8  feet.  In  the  eastern  wall,  near  its  northem  end,  there  is  a  doorway
roofed  over  by  the  wall  and  at  present  blocked  up  at  its  inner  end.  The
top  of  the  doorway  is  now  only  4  feet  above  the  ground,  its  lower  part
having  been  filled  up  by  the  soil.  The  "  stmcture  somewhat  in  the  style
of  the  covered  galleries  at  Tiryns,"  of  which  mention  is  made  in  the  text,
may  be  seen  inside  of  the  fortress  and  close  to  its  eastern  wall.  It  is
obviously  neither  more  nor  less  than  a  cistem,  and  the  comparison  of  it
to  the  covered  galleries  at  Tiryns  is  absurd.     It  is  8  paces  long  and

9  feet  wide ;  its  present  depth  is  4  ft.  6  in.,  but  it  is  partly  filled  up  with
earth  so  that  its  full  depth  does  not  appear.     The  sides,  coated  with


:,  thus :

ridthof       TVA

paces.    //  \\


VOL.  Ill  KASTRAKI  569

stucco  of  which  some  pieces  still  adhere  to  the  stones,  converge  as  if  to
meet  overhead.     No  doubt  the  cistern  was  originally  vaulted  over.

Here  may  be  mentioned  an  ancient  bridge,  apparently  of  the
Mycenaean  age,  which  spans  the  bed  of  a  small  stream  about  a  quarter
of  a  mile  to  the  west  of  KasartnL  The  bridge,  distant  only  some  20  or
30  yards  from  the  carriage-road,  is  built  of  huge  rough  almost  unhewn
blocks.  Three  courses  of  these  great  stones  on  each  side  constitute  the
arch  ;  they  project  inwards  one  above  the  other  and  are  united  at  the  top
by  roughly  triangular  blocks  which  formed  the  keystone,  thus  :
The  clear  height  of  the  bridge  is  about  6  feet.  The  width
the  bridge,  measured  along  the  bed  of  the  stream,  is  6
This  gives  the  breadth  of  the  ancient  road  which  the  bridge
supported.

The  small  quadrangular  fortress  of  Kastraki  in  size  and  disposition
closely  resembles  that  of  Kasarmi,  Its  situation  is  correctly  described
in  the  text  (vol.  3.  p.  233).  It  occupies  the  summit  of  a  small  rocky
hill  some  three-quarters  of  a  mile  or  so  to  the  north  of  the  carriage-road
from  Nauplia  to  Ugourio,  Just  below  the  hill  on  the  north,  in  the
hollow  between  it  and  the  towering  rocky  pinnacle  of  Mount  Arachnaeus,
runs  the  road  from  Ugourio  to  Argos.  The  summit  of  the  hill,  now
overgrown  with  lentisk  bushes,  is  but  small,  measuring  only  some  60  or
70  yards  square.  High  precipitous  rocks  on  a  great  part  of  the  north
and  west  faces  of  the  hill  rendered  fortification  in  these  directions  almost
needless,  and  accordingly  the  traces  of  walls  here  are  comparatively  few.
But  on  the  south  and  east  the  walls  are  well  preserved.  They  are  some-
what rudely  built  of  blocks  of  various  shapes  and  sizes  which  are  only
roughly  fitted  together,  the  crevices  being  filled  with  small  stones.  The
south  wall  is  7  feet  thick  and,  though  partly  ruinous,  is  standing  to  a
height  of  18  or  20  feet  for  a  distance  of  about  20  yards.  The  east  wall
is  also  partly  ruinous,  but  a  considerable  piece  of  it  is  preserved  to  a
height  of  16  feet.  Four  towers  project  from  the  four  angles  of  the  fort-
ress. The  two  towers  at  the  north-western  and  south-western  angles  are
round ;  the  two  at  the  north-eastern  and  south-eastern  angles  are  square.
The  height  of  the  tower  at  the  south-west  angle,  like  that  of  the  wall
which  adjoins  it  on  the  east,  is  about  20  feet.  This  tower  is  built  of
polygonal  masonry  in  a  better  and  more  careful  style  than  the  wall.  The
tower  at  the  north-western  angle,  perched  on  the  top  of  high  precipitous
rocks,  is  built  of  massive  blocks.  In  the  southern  wall  of  the  fortress,
facing  south-west,  is  the  principal  gate.  Great  pains  have  obviously
been  taken  to  render  it  impregnable.  It  is  placed  in  a  sort  of  recess,
the  sides  of  which  are  flanked  on  the  right  by  a  round  tower  and  on  the
left  by  the  wall  of  the  fortress.  The  gateway,  about  7  ft.  8  in.  wide,
leads  into  a  quadrangular  court  about  7  paces  long,  and  at  the  inner  end
of  this  court  there  is  a  second  gateway  facing  the  first  and  of  the  same
width.  The  stone  doorposts  of  this  inner  gateway  are  preserved  ;  there
is  a  square  hole  on  the  inner  face  of  each,  as  a  picturesque  and  obliging
shepherd  was  good  enough  to  point  out  to  me.  The  tower  which  flanks
the  outer  gateway  is  built  of  large  rough  stones :  the  outer  faces  of  the
stones  are  rudely  cut  into  polygons,  smoothed,  and  fitted  together.     In


570  EPIDA  UR  US  addenda

the  west  wall  of  the  fortress  there  is  a  small  postern  with  remains  of
steps  leading  down  from  it  through  the  rocks.

P.  233  line  21  sq.  from  top,  a  chapel  of  St.  Marina  etc  The
chapel,  which  seems  to  be  Byzantine,  stands  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile
to  the  north  of  the  carriage-road,  just  at  the  foot  of  the  rocky  slope
of  Mount  Arachnaeus,  which  here  attains  its  highest  point.  Faded
paintings  adorn  the  walls.  The  dome  is  supported  by  four  columns,  all
of  which  contain  remains  of  ancient  Ionic  columns.  In  one  of  the
columns  there  is  a  complete  shaft  of  an  Ionic  column  measuring  about
18  inches  in  diameter.  In  the  other  three  columns  there  are  three
Ionic  capitals,  and  one  of  the  columns  has  besides  the  drum  of  an
Ionic  column.  Some  200  or  300  yards  to  the  east  of  the  church,  in  a
bare  stony  field  at  the  foot  of  the  rocky  sloi>e  of  Mount  Arachnaeus,  1
found  the  remains  of  the  ancient  pyramid  mentioned  in  the  text.  It  is
square  and  measures  14  paces  on  each  side.  Only  the  lower  part
remains  to  a  height  of  about  6  feet  at  most  It  is  built  of  large  massive
blocks  of  a  dark  hard  limestone — ^the  native  rock  which  crops  up  all
over  the  adjoining  slope  of  Mount  Arachnaeus.  The  blocks,  which  are
mostly  polygonal,  are  well  fitted  together  and  their  faces  are  smoothed.
In  several  places,  esi>ecially  at  the  angles,  the  inward  slope  of  the  sides
is  clearly  seen.  At  one  angle  the  wall,  slanting  inward,  measures  6  feet
from  the  ground  to  the  top,  though  it  is  composed  of  two  blocks  only.
One  of  these  blocks  is  5  feet  long.  Another,  on  a  different  side  of  the
pyramid,  is  about  5  feet  long  and  3  feet  high.  I  did  not  observe  any
trace  of  a  door  or  window  in  the  pyramid.

P.  234  line  9  from  foot,  one  of  the  goats  etc.  A  bronze  coin  of
Epidaurus  now  in  the  Cabinet  des  Medailles  at  Paris  exhibits  the
suckling  of  the  infant  Aesculapius  by  the  goat  and  the  discovery  of  goat
and  infant  by  the  goatherd.  ^  It  is  figured  in  the  work  of  Messrs.  A.
Defrasse  and  H.  Lechat,  Epidaure :  Restauration  et  description  des
principaux  monuments  du  Sanctuaire  it AscUpios^  p.  25.

P.  235  line  1 3  from  foot,  Lebene  in  Crete.     A  number  of  inscriptions
from  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  at  Lebene  have  been  found  in  recent
years,  almost  all  of  them  at  the  village  of  Miamou  in  Crete.     Some  of
them  record  cures,  others  dedications,  while  others  again  relate  to  the
administration  of  the  sanctuary  and  other  subjects.     See  J.  Baunack,
in  Philologus^  48  (1889),  pp.  401-404  ;  F.  Halbherr,  in  Musco  Itcdiano
di  antichitd.   classica^   3   (1890),  pp.    719-734,    Inscriptions    170-182;
J.  Zingerle,  *  Heilinschrift  von  Lebena,'  Mittheilungen  d,  arch,  Inst,  in
Atheny  2 1  (1896),  pp.  67-92.     The  fame  of  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius
at  Lebene  is  attested  by  Philostratus  who  says  that  people  flocked  to  it
from  all  quarters  of  Crete  just  as  people  flocked  from  all  parts  of  Asia
to  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  at  Pergamus  ;  and  he  adds  that  many
Libyans  crossed  over  to  it  from  Africa  (Vit,  Apollon,  iv.  34).

P.  236  line  3  from  top,  The  sacred  grove  of  Aescnlapins  etc
Some  of  the  principal  buildings  in  the  Epidaurian  sanctuary  of  Aescula-
pius have  been  conjecturally  restored  by  Mr.  A.  Defrasse  in  a  hand-
somely-illustrated work  to  which  Mr.  H.  Lechat  has  contributed  an
explanatory  text  (fipidaure :  Restauration  et  description  des  principaux


VOL.  Ill  EPIDAURUS  571

monuments  du  Sanctuaire  tPAscl^os^  Paris,  1895).  The  book  has
been  criticised  by  Mr.  Ch.  Chipiez  {Reime  arckiologique^  3me  S^rie,  28
(1896),  pp.  38-59,  380-382),  to  whom  Mr.  Lechat  has  replied  {ib,  pp.
369-379}.  To  the  inscriptions  found  in  the  sacred  precinct  and  published
by  Mr.  Cawadias  in  his  work  Fouilles  dPApidaure^  vol.  i  (Athens,  1893},
thirty-two  additional  inscriptions  have  been  added  by  Mr.  Chr.  Blinken-
berg,  who  has  also  corrected  and  added  to  the  copies  of  the  inscrip-
tions already  published  by  Mr.  Cawadias.  See  Chr.  Blinkenberg,  <  Les
Inscriptions  d'^pidaure,'  Nordisk  Tidsskrift  for  Filologi^  Tredie  Raekke,

3  (1895),  pp.  153-178.

I  revisited  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  near  Epidaurus,  4th-6th
December  1895,  and  found  that  the  continued  excavations  of  the  Greek
Archaeological  Society  had  laid  bare  many  buildings  which  at  the  time
of  my  former  visit  ( 1 890)  were  still  buried  under  the  soil  and  which  on
the  plan  published  by  Mr.  Cawadias  and  reproduced  in  the  third  volume
of  this  work  are  represented  either  in  outline  merely  or  not  at  all.  That
plan,  indeed,  and  the  descriptions  hitherto  published  convey  no  idea  of
the  extent  of  the  sanctuary,  which,  if  we  reckon  it  from  the  theatre  to
the  great  northern  portal  in  the  one  direction  and  to  the  western  ex-
tremity of  the  stadium  in  the  other,  far  exceeds  in  size  both  the  Olympic
and  the  Delphic  sanctuaries.  In  default  of  an  authoritative  plan  and
description  I  venture  to  supplement  the  account  given  in  my  third
volume  by  reproducing  the  substance  of  my  notes  and  illustrating  them
by  a  sketch -plan  (pL  viil)  in  which  I  have  embodied  the  results  of
my  own  rough  measurements  and  of  some  information  courteously  com-
municated to  me  by  Mr.  Koromantsos,  the  superintendent  of  the  works.
Mr.  Koromantsos  was  good  enough  to  accompany  me  over  the  scene  of
the  excavations  and  to  correct  some  misapprehensions  into  which,  before
entrusting  myself  to  his  guidance,  I  had  fallen.  I  gladly  avail  myself
of  this  opportunity  of  thanking  him  for  his  kindness  and  patience.

Opposite  the  theatre  and  distant  from  it  some  150  yards  or  so
to  the  north-west,  there  has  been  excavated  a  very  large  building  of
which  mention  has  already  been  made  (vol.  3.  p.  255).  The  edifice,
which  does  not  appear  on  the  sketch -plan,  is  of  a  square  shape
and  measures  88  paces  on  each  side.  It  is  enclosed  by  walls  of
polygonal  masonry  3  ft.  4  in.  thick  and  at  present  2  feet  high.  There
are  two  entrances  in  the  north  wall  and  two  in  the  south ;  the  latter,
each  about  12  feet  wide,  would  seem  to  have  been  the  principal
entrances.  Internally  the  building  is  divided  into  four  quadrangular
sections  each  consisting  of  a  central  court  surrounded  by  a  colonnade
with  eighteen  chambers  opening  off  the  colonnade,  namely  five  chambers
on  each  of  two  sides  and  four  chambers  on  each  of  the  two  others.
The  total  number  of  chambers  was  thus  seventy-two.  A  great  many  of
the  stone  thresholds  of  the  rooms  are  preserved.  On  the  walls  of  one
chamber  I  observed  a  thick  coat  of  stucco.  In  the  building  may  be
seen  some  architectural  fragments,  including  geisa  with  their  mutules
and  guitaey  and  pieces  of  small  fluted  Doric  columns  ;  one  drum  which
I  measured  was  19  inches  in  diameter.  Other  objects  of  interest
lying  about   in  the  building  are  some  stands  for  votive  offerings   in


572  EPIDAURUS  addenda

the  shape  of  shallow  stone  basins  resting  on  cylindrical,  pillar-like
pedestals.  Pedestal  and  basin  together  are  hewn  out  of  a  single  block
of  stone  and  are  about  2  ft.  6  in.  high  ;  the  diameter  of  the  basin  is  also
about  2  ft.  6  in.  At  first  I  took  these  stands  to  be  wash-basins,  but
afterwards  in  the  sanctuary  proper  of  Aesculapius  I  found  similar  stands
with  inscriptions  of  which  one  at  least  is  dedicatory.  The  large  build-
ing which  has  just  been  described  is  believed  to  be  a  gymnasium;
for  it  is  known  from  an  inscription  that  there  were  two  gymnasiums,
and  one  of  them  has  been  found  near  the  stadium.  Accordingly  we
may  provisionally  call  this  large  building  opposite  the  theatre  the  East
Gymnasium.

The  other  gynmasium,  which  for  the  sake  of  distinction  we  may  call
the  West  Gymnasium,  lies  about  100  yards  south  of  the  temple  of  Aescula-
pius and  about  the  same  distance  to  the  east  of  the  stadium.  It  has
been  already  briefly  described  (vol.  3.  p.  238),  but  a  few  more  particulars,
extracted  from  my  journal,  may  here  be  given.  The  building  is  in  the
form  of  a  great  quadrangle,  measuring  83  paces  from  north  to  south  by
75  or  76  paces  from  east  to  west.  Its  walls,  both  outer  and  inner,  are
beautifully  built  of  solid  masonry  without  any  core  of  rubble.  They  are
2  ft.  3  in.  thick,  and  are  standing  to  a  uniform  height  of  2  ft  6  in.  ;  the
top  of  the  wall  is  accurately  levelled.  Only  one  course  is  standing.
The  blocks  are  from  3  to  over  6  feet  long ;  on  the  outer  side  they  bulge
and  are  only  roughly  hewn.  One  block  is  6  ft  10  in.  long.  On  the
east  side  of  the  building  is  an  entrance  about  12^  feet  wide.  Internally
the  gymnasium  seems  to  have  consisted  of  a  great  open  central  court
enclosed  on  each  side  by  a  single  row  of  quadrangular  apartments ;
but  at  the  time  of  my  visit  (December  1895)  the  south  side  of  the
gymnasium,  with  the  exception  of  the  outer  wall,  had  not  yet  been
excavated.  In  some  of  the  rooms  the  stone  thresholds  of  the  doorways
are  preserved.  The  chambers  on  the  north  side  are  much  shallower
than  those  on  the  east  and  west  sides,  because  a  deep  colonnade  ran  on
the  inner  side  of  them  from  east  to  west.  In  this  colonnade  the  athletes
may  have  taken  exercise  in  rainy  weather.

The  greater  part  of  the  central  court  of  the  gymnasium  is  now
occupied  by  the  ruins  of  an  Odeum  or  Music  Hall,  of  which  a  brief
notice  has  already  been  given  (vol.  3.  p.  238).  The  auditorium,  the
stage,  and  the  walls  of  the  stage-buildings  to  a  certain  height  are  pre-
served. They  are  built  of  thin  fiat  bricks.  The  auditorium,  which  faces
west,  is  2 1  paces  broad.  1  counted  eight  or  nine  tiers  of  seats,  but  as
they  are  ruinous  it  is  not  easy  to  be  sure  of  their  number.  A  single
passage  leads  up  through  the  auditorium.  The  stage  is  nearly  1 8  feet
deep  from  front  to  back.  Three  staircases  lead  up  to  it,  one  at  the
middle  and  two  at  the  sides.  In  the  front  of  the  stage  are  also  two
semicircular  niches,  one  on  each  side  of  the  central  staircase.  The
front  wall  of  the  stage  is  standing  to  a  height  of  25  inches,  which
must  have  been  very  nearly  its  full  height,  as  is  proved  by  the  level  of
the  two  doorways  which  open  on  the  stage,  one  at  each  end.  The  back-
wall  of  the  stage  is  standing  in  part  to  a  height  of  6  feet ;  it  is  pierced
with  three  doorways  giving  access  to  a  long  hall  or  series  of  rooms  at


VOL.  Ill  EPIDAURUS  573

the  back  of  the  stage.  Thus  the  number  of  doors  opening  on  the
stage  was  five.  The  two  at  the  ends  lead  into  two  quadrangular
rooms,  which  communicate  with  the  long  hall  at  the  back  of  the  stage.
Both  parodoi  are  preserved.  At  the  back  of  the  auditorium  there  is  a
set  of  six  chambers  arranged  in  a  row  from  north  to  south ;  in  three  of
them  there  are  doors  at  the  back  (east  side)  leading  out  of  the  Music  Hall.
These  chambers  give  access  to  a  curved  passage  at  the  back  of,  and
parallel  to,  the  seats  of  the  auditorium.  At  either  end  of  the  passage
are  remains  of  a  staircase  leading  up  to  the  seats.

Of  the  grand  portal  or  propylaeum  which  leads  into  the  gymnasium
from  the  north  a  great  part  of  the  pavement  is  preserved ;  it  is  con-
structed of  great  slabs  of  stone  4  ft.  8  in.  square.  A  ramp,  which
is  also  well  preserved,  leads  up  to  it  from  the  north.

The  large  building  marked  G  on  the  plan  in  the  third  volume  (p.
237)  has  now  been  fully  excavated.  It  lies  immediately  to  the  north-
east of  the  great  portal  of  the  West  Gymnasium  and  to  the  south-east  of
the  temple  of  Artemis.  In  form  the  edifice  is  a  quadrangle  measuring
37  paces  from  north  to  south  by  31  paces  from  east  to  west.  The
outer  face  of  its  west  wall  is  built  of  large  slabs  of  stone  2  ft.  7  in.
high  in  a  style  which  at  first  sight  resembles  that  of  the  finely-built  walls
of  the  West  Gymnasium.  But  a  closer  inspection  of  them  seemed  to
me  to  show  that  the  blocks  had  been  brought  from  elsewhere,  many  of
them  perhaps  from  the  West  Gynmasium  at  the  time  when  it  was  partly
demolished  to  make  room  for  the  Music  Hall.  The  inner  face  of  this
west  wall  is  mostly  built  of  small  stones  and  mortar,  and  so  are  all  the
inner  walls  of  the  building.  The  outer  walls  on  the  north  and  east,  as
well  as  the  west  wall,  are  well  preserved  to  the  height  of  a  few  feet,  but
they  are  evidently  constructed  for  the  most  part  out  of  materials  taken
from  older  and  better  buildings.  In  the  west  wall  is  the  chief  entrance,
which  leads  into  a  square  central  court  with  four  square  bases  arranged
at  the  angles.  The  northern  part  of  the  building,  opening  off  this
central  court,  was  perhaps  a  covered  colonnade;  many  pieces  of
columns,  21  inches  in  diameter,  are  standing  in  it  The  other  three
sides  of  the  central  court — west,  east,  and  south — are  lined  with  a  series
of  small  chambers  ;  on  the  south  side  this  row  of  small  chambers  is  two
deep,  and  one  of  the  rooms  is  circular.  In  the  southern  wall  there  is  a
small  entrance,  from  which  a  passage  leads  between  the  little  chambers
to  the  central  court.  This  building  is  believed  to  be  the  Colonnade  of
Cotys  mentioned  by  Pausanias.     See  vol.  3.  p.  257.    •

The  quadrangular  building  marked  £  on  the  plan,  immediately  to
the  north  of  the  temple  of  Artemis  (vol.  3.  p.  237),  has  now  been
fully  excavated.  Its  arrangement,  so  far  as  revealed  by  the  foundations,
is  indicated  on  the  accompanying  plan.  All  its  walls,  both  inner  and
outer,  are  well  built  of  ashlar  masonry ;  the  building  seems  to  belong  to
the  good  Greek  period.  Its  west  front  appears  to  have  been  a  portico  or
colonnade.  A  small  room  about  10  feet  square,  opening  off  the  north
end  of  the  portico,  contains  a  pavement  of  stone  with  a  gutter  running
all  round  it.  This  gutter  is  supposed,  as  we  have  seen  (vol.  3.  p.  236),
to  have  been  meant  to  receive  the  blood  of  victims  sacrificed  in  the


574  EPIDAURUS  addenda

chamber.     At  the  entrance  of  the  chamber  on  the  west  is  a  stone  stq>
or  small  basement  on  which  the  sacrificing  priest  may  have  stood.

About  I  GO  yards  to  the  north-east  of  this  building  some  Roman
baths  have  been  excavated  in  recent  years.     To  distinguish  them  from
the  Baths  of  Antoninus  which  face  them  on  the  west  we  may  call  them
the  East  Baths.     The  remains,  which  are  extensive,  prove  these  East
Baths   to   have  been  constructed   in  a  style  of  considerable  magnifi-
cence, therein  presenting  a  contrast  to  the  Baths  of  Antoninus  which
are  meanly  built.     They  measure  about  41  paces  from  north  to  south
by  30  paces  from  east  to  west.      But  it  is  possible  they  may  have
extended  fiirther  to  the  south  and  east,  as  the  ground  in  these  direc-
tions has  not  been  excavated ;   at  least  it  was  not  excavated  at  the
time  of  my  last  visit     The  inner  walls  are  mostly  built  of  flat  brides,
small  stones,  and  mortar.      One  long  hall  is  elaborately  paved  with
marbles  of  various  colours  and  a  mosaic  of  pebbles.      In  it  lie  two
small   columns  of  a  green  stone  speckled  with  pieces   of  quartz;   it
seemed  to  me  to  be  verde  anticOy  the  ancient  lapis  LacecUiefnomus  (as  to
which  see  vol.  3.  p.  374).     Two  more  columns  of  the  same  sort  lie  in  a
small  room  adjoining  the  hall  on  the  south-west.     Some  of  the  rooms
had  hypocaust  floors  supported  on  little  pillars  made  of  flat  circular
bncks.     In  one  of  the  rooms  part  of  the  floor  still  stands  supported  on
these  little  pillars,  which  are  about  1 8  inches  high  and  contain  seven  or
eight  flat  bricks  apiece.     The  floor  of  this  room  is  of  concrete,  and  in
it  at  one  side,  next  to  the  wall,  is  a  row  of  square  holes  to  let  the  hot
air  rise  into  the  chamber  from  the  fire  below.     One  room,  projecting
outward  at  the  east  side  of  the  building,  seems  to  have  been  a  swimming
bath  ;  there  are  neither  doors  nor  windows  in  the  walls,  so  far  as  they
are  standing,  but  on  the  other  hand  there  are  remains  of  a  staircase
leading  down  into  the  bath.     A  small  room  in  another  part  of  the
building  contains  two  little  semicircular  baths,  each  with  a  step  or  scat
on  which  the  bather  probably  sat.     The  front  wall,  that  is  the  west  wall,
of  the  East  Baths  is  continued  southwards  for  a  distance  of  77  paces,
mostly  in  a  very  poor  style  of  masonry.     Whether  this   continuation
formed  part  of  the  baths  or  not  I  could  not  determine,  but  probably  it
did  not     About  27  paces  southward  along  this  wall  and  on  the  east
side  of  it  is  a  large  vaulted  cistern.     Further,  not  many  yards  to  the
south-west  of  the  East  Baths  a  staircase  of  some  twenty  steps  leads
down  to  a  subterranean  aqueduct,  about   3  ft.  6  in.  high,  hewn  out
of  the  rock.    Mr.  Koromantsos  informed  me  that  the  aqueduct  is  carried
further  to  the  west  than  to  the  east.

Abutting  upon  the  west  side  of  the  East  Baths  are  the  remains  of
a  great  cloistered  court,  which,  to  distinguish  it  from  a  similar  court
immediately  to  the  north,  I  have  called  the  South  Cloisters.  It  seems
to  have  comprised  a  great  open  court  surrounded  by  colonnades  or
cloisters.  At  present  the  remains  of  the  court  with  its  cloisters  extend
east  and  west  for  a  length  of  about  74  paces,  but  at  its  eastern  end  a
small  piece  has  been  cut  off  by  the  East  Baths,  which  proves  that  the
East  Baths  are  of  later  date  than  the  South  Cloisters.  The  eastern  side
of  the  South  Cloisters  is  preserved  for  a  length  of  28  paces  from  north


VOL.  Ill  EPIDAURUS  575

to  south,  but  here  it  is  broken  off  by  the  wall  of  a  later  building.  Thus
all  that  is  left  is  the  northern  colonnade  and  part  of  the  eastern.  The
northern  colonnade  is  7  paces  deep  to  the  back  or  north  wall.  The
lowest  drums  of  all  the  inner  row  of  columns,  ten  in  number,  are  stand-
ing in  their  places.  They  are  fluted  and  of  the  Doric  order  and
measure  about  3  feet  high  by  22  inches  in  diameter.  On  the  front  or
south  side  of  this  north  colonnade  the  stylobate  is  preserved,  but  no
remains  of  columns  are  standing  on  it.  Along  the  front  of  the  stylo-
bate,  in  the  open  court,  are  large  remains  of  a  pavement  of  cobbles.
The  pavement  is  3  ft.  6  in.  wide,  and  beyond  it,  parallel  to  the
front  of  the  colonnade,  is  a  stone  gutter  or  water-channel  16  inches
wide,  with  elliptical  expansions  at  regular  intervals  of  9  paces.  In
the  eastern  colonnade  of  the  South  Cloisters  only  one  drum  of  the
inner  row  of  columns  is  standing ;  it  resembles  the  drums  in  the  north
colonnade.

Immediately  to  the  north  of  the  South  Cloisters  is  another  great
cloistered  court  which  may  be  called  the  North  Cloisters.  One  and  the
same  wall  served  as  the  south  wall  of  the  North  Cloisters  and  the  north
wall  of  the  South  Cloisters.  The  North  Cloisters  seems  to  have
measured  62  paces  from  east  to  west  by  25  paces  from  north  to  south
and  to  have  comprised  a  series  of  chambers  surrounding  a  cloistered
court.  Remains  of  the  chambers  can  be  seen  on  several  sides,  and
on  the  north  and  south  sides  are  foundation-walls  that  supported  the
colonnades  in  front.  On  its  south  side  the  building  is  traversed  by  a
water-channel  which  comes  from  the  East  Baths  and  runs  westward  to
a  cistern.  It  would  seem  that  the  North  Cloisters  was  built  later  than,
and  occupies  part  of  the  ground  originally  covered  by,  the  South
Cloisters ;  for  the  west  wall  of  the  South  Cloisters  is  continued  north-
ward for  34  paces  past  the  end  of  the  North  Cloisters.

A  little  to  the  north  of  the  North  Cloisters  are  the  remains  of  a
wall  which  seems  to  have  bounded  the  sacred  precinct  on  this  side.  The
chief  approach  to  the  sanctuary  was  from  the  north,  for  here  the  road
from  Epidaurus  entered  it.  A  piece  of  the  road,  enclosed  by  walls,  may
be  seen  about  100  yards  north  of  the  boundary  wall.  The  breadth  of
the  road  is  17  paces.  Here,  on  the  road,  exactly  100  paces  north  of
the  boundary  wall,  are  the  foundations  and  pavement  of  a  grand  portal
measuring  20  paces  long  from  north  to  south  by  1 5  paces  broad  from
east  to  west.  The  pavement,  composed  of  blocks  of  limestone  each
3  ft.  8  in.  square,  is  preserved  almost  entire.  Two  ramps  lead  up  to
it,  one  from  the  north,  the  other  from  the  south.  The  southern  ramp,
like  the  pavement  of  the  portal,  remains  almost  entire.  At  and  near
the  portal,  especially  on  its  north  side,  I  saw  lying  remains  of  Ionic
colunms,  including  many  drums,  two  bases,  and  one  capital.  I  measured
two  of  the  drums  ;  one  was  26  and  the  other  29  inches  in  diameter.  The
diameter  of  the  column  at  the  neck,  under  the  capital,  was  2  feet  On
the  east  side  of  the  road,  just  on  the  inner  or  south  side  of  the  great  portal,
are  three  stone  basins,  each  about  i  ft.  9  in.  deep,  built  into  the  ground.
They  may  have  contained  holy  water  with  which  persons  entering  or
departing  from  the  sacred  precinct  were  expected  to  sprinkle  themselves.


576  EPIDAURUS  addenda

Further,  on  the  west  side  of  the  road  and  about  20  paces  south  of  the
portal,  is  a  deep  circular  well,  the  sides  and  mouth  of  which  are  enclosed
by  ancient  masonry.  On  the  other  or  outer  side  of  the  portal  the
ancient  road  is  traceable  running  northwards  in  the  direction  of  Epi-
daurus ;  pieces  of  the  walls  which  enclosed  it  may  be  seen  on  both
sides.  Many  large  squared  blocks  of  ancient  buildings  stand  on  a  knoll
about  120  yards  north  of  the  portal,  but  they  seem  to  have  been
brought  thither  from  the  sanctuary  in  mediaeval  or  modem  times.

If  we  now  retrace  our  steps  southward  and  re-enter  the  sacred
precinct  we  perceive  on  the  right,  some  30  yards  or  so  to  the  south-
west of  the  entrance,  the  foundations  of  a  temple,  which  is  believed  to
have  been  the  temple  of  Aphrodite  mentioned  by  Pausanias  (see  voL  3.
p.  256).     These  foundations,  distant  about  91  paces  north  of  the  temple
of  Aesculapius,  are  built  of  a  friable  red  stone  and  measure  1 4  paces
east  and  west  by  8  paces  north  and  south.     Though  nothing  is  left  but
the   foundations   the   temple   appears   to  have  consisted  simply  of  a
cella  and  fore-temple  {promios\  without  a  back-chamber  {ppistkodomos).
About  50  yards  or  so  to  the  west  of  the  temple  of  Aphrodite,  if  such
it  was,  is  a  very  large  cistern,  50  metres  long  from  east  to  west  by  15
metres  broad  from  north  to  south.     The  walls  are  of  masonry  and  are
preserved  to  some  height.     A  stone  water-channel  leads  into  it  from  the
east.     This  great  cistern  is  of  the  Greek,  not  the  Roman,  period.

To  the  south  of  the  temple  of  Aphrodite,  abutting  on  the  eastern
end  of  the  East  Colonnade,  is  a  large  building  supposed  to  be  the  Baths
of  Antoninus  (see  vol.  3.  pp.  238,  257).  It  seems  to  extend  for  about
55  paces  from  north  to  south  by  26  paces  from  east  to  west,  and  con-
tains a  great  many  small  quadrangular  rooms  and  at  least  one  round
chamber,  which  is  4  paces  in  diameter.  In  one  of  the  rooms  there
are  two  baths  with  steps  leading  down  into  them.  Another  room
contains  a  mosaic  pavement  of  common  white  stones,  not  arranged  in
aoattem.

t Some  1 00  yards  or  so  to  the  west  of  the  portal  of  the  West  Gym-

I       nasium  is  the  stadium,  which  was  being  excavated  during  my  last  visit
I       Considerable  portions,  including  a  number  of  tiers  of  seats  both  on  the
I       north  and  the  south  sides,  and  the  two  ends  of  the  race-course  proper,
/       had  already  been  laid  bare  (compare  vol.   3.  p.   257).     The  course
extends  east  and  west  or,  to  be  more  accurate,  east-north-east  and  west-
south-west  ;  the  semicircular  end  was  at  the  east.     The  seats  are  made
some  of  white,  and  others  of  reddish  limestone.     On  the   south   side
remains  of  about  ten  tiers  of  seats,  rising  above  each  other  on  the
slope  of  the  embankment,  have  been  exposed  to  view ;  but   of  these
only  the  three  or  four  lowest  tiers  are  well  preserved.     On  the  north
side  the  seats  are  more  ruinous,  but  remains  of  about  twenty  tiers  have
been  laid  bare.     Some  of  the  seats  on  the  south  side  of  die  stadium
bear  inscriptions,  of  which  some  are  dedicatory  while  others  record  only
the  name  of  the  person  to  whom  the  seat  belonged.     On  one  of  the
seats  of  the  front  row  I  read  the  following  fragmentary  inscription  : —

0       A22122AA2KAAnmL


VOL.  Ill  EPIDAURUS  577

On  the  north  side  of  the  stadium,  about  57  paces  west  of  the
eastern  end  of  the  course,  there  is  a  vaulted  passage  leading  through
the  embankment.  The  passage  is  45  paces  long,  5  fL  9  in.  wide,
and  was  roofed  with  a  semicircular  vault  which  is  preserved  for  a
length  of  about  15  paces.  Walls  and  vault  of  the  passage  are
built  of  squared  blocks  of  stone  laid  in  horizontal  courses  ;  the  material
is  a  stone  of  a  light  brown  colour.  The  seats  at  the  semicircular  end
of  the  stadium  had  not  yet  been  excavated  at  the  time  of  my  visit,  or
rather  trial  trenches  seemed  to  show  that  the  seats  had  disappeared.

The  race-course  proper,  enclosed  by  embankments  on  three  sides —
the  north,  east,  and  south — has  the  form  of  a  long  rectangle.  Round
the  race-course,  at  a  distance  of  2  fL  10  in.  from  the  seats,  runs  a  stone
border  1 1  inches  wide  with  a  gutter  or  water-channel  in  the  middle  of
it.  At  intervals  of  30  paces  the  channel  opens  into  oblong  basins
placed  on  the  inner  side  of  the  stone  border ;  these  basins  are  3  ft.  8  in.
long.  This  channel  with  its  basins  perhaps  held  drinking-water  for  the
use  of  the  athletes.  At  the  semicircular  end  of  the  stadium  the  stone
border  forms  a  rectangle,  not  a  semicircle,  and  at  a  distance  of  1 5  paces
from  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  course  there  is  what  I  took  to  be  the
Apheteria  or  starting-point,  though  Mr.  Koromantsos  regarded  it  as  the
goal.  It  consists  of  a  stone  sill  or  row  of  slabs,  each  19  inches  wide,
running  across  the  course  from  side  to  side  at  right  angles  to  the  length
of  the  course.  In  these  slabs  are  cut  pairs  of  lines  parallel  to  each
other  and  to  the  line  of  slabs.  Each  line  is  4  ft.  2  in.  long  and  is
distant  4  inches  from  its  companion  parallel  line.  These  pairs  of  parallel
lines  are  separated  by  intervals  of  1 4  inches ;  in  each  interval  there  is  a
square  hole,  in  which  no  doubt  a  post  was  fixed.  There  are  eleven  of
these  pairs  of  parallel  lines  in  the  breadth  of  the  stadium,  thus  : —


o


At  each  end  of  the  starting-point,  as  1  shall  call  it  for  the  sake  of  con-
venience, next  to  the  stone  border  there  is  standing  a  piece  of  an
unfiuted  column  on  a  square  base.  Thus  the  arrangement  of  the
starting-point  resembles  almost  exactly  that  of  the  starting-point  in  the
stadium  at  Olympia  (vol.  4.  p.  80).  We  may  suppose  that  each  runner,
before  the  start,  stood  on  the  stone  sill  with  his  toes  or  heels  at  the
pairs  of  parallel  lines,  perhaps  with  the  heel  of  one  foot  at  the  front
line  and  the  toes  of  the  other  foot  at  the  back  line.

This  would  seem  to  have  been  the  simple  original  arrangement  of
the  starting-point  But  the  existing  remains  suggest  that  at  some  later
time  this  original  manner  of  starting  the  races  was  modified,  if  not
abandoned.  For  immediately  in  front  of  the  stone  sill,  with  its  pairs  ol
parallel  lines,  are  foundations  of  seven  half-columns  with  remains  of  the
half-columns  standing  on  all  the  bases.  One  of  the  half-columns,  about
5  feet  high,  comprises  a  base,  a  fluted  section  or  half-drum,  and  an
Ionic  capital.  But  an  examination  of  the  other  half-colunms  proves
that  this  particular  one,  though  surmounted  by  its  capital,  is  not
complete.     Each  of  the  half- columns  would  seem  to  have  originally

VOL.  V  2  P


578  EPIDAURUS  addenda

comprised  a  base  about  7  inches  high,  a  lower  unfluted  section  or  half-
drum  3  ft  9  in.  high,  an  upper  fluted  section  or  half-drum  3  feet  high,
and  an  Ionic  capital  about  8  inches  high.  Thus  if  each  half- column
had  only  one  unfluted  and  one  fluted  section  (though  it  may  quite  well
have  had  more),  its  original  height  was  8  feet.  What  the  use  of  these
half-columns  may  have  been,  it  is  difficult  to  see.  They  are  placed  at
intervals  against,  that  is  abutting  upon,  the  stone  sill  in  front,  but  they
are  not  arranged  symmetrically  with  reference  to  the  pairs  of  parallel
lines  cut  in  the  sill.  Thus  one  half- column  will  be  found  standing
opposite  one  of  the  intervals  between  the  pairs  of  parallel  lines,  while
another  stands  opposite  a  pair  of  the  lines  themselves,  and  so  on ;  from
which  we  seem  forced  to  conclude  that  when  these  half-colunms  were
set  up  the  pairs  of  parallel  lines  in  the  stone  sill  had  ceased  to  be  used
in  starting  the  runners.  Nor  are  these  half-columns  the  only  complica-
tion introduced  at  a  later  time.  In  front  of  the  stone  sill  and  abutting
upon  it,  at  a  distance  of  5  feet  from  the  northern  edge  of  the  race-course,
is  set  a  block  of  stone  which  projects  2  feet  from  the  sill  into  the  race-
course. The  stone  is  6  inches  high  and,  I  think,  3  ft.  8  in.  wide ;  at
least  this  is  the  width  of  a  corresponding  stone  at  the  west  end  of  the
race-course  (see  below).  The  centre  of  the  block  is  hollowed  out  in  a
line  parallel  with  the  axis  of  the  race-course ;  the  width  of  this  hollow
is  20  inches.  On  the  other  or  south  side  of  the  stadium,  at  a  distance
of  about  6  feet  from  the  edge  of  the  race-course,  a  similar  block  of  stone,
hollowed  out  in  the  middle,  is  set  against  the  front  of  the  stone  silL  It
has  been  suggested  that  there  was  formerly  a  row  of  these  blocks  placed
in  front  of  the  stone  sill  right  across  the  race-course,  and  that  each
runner  before  starting  took  his  stand  on  one  of  them  with  his  feet  in  the
hollow  of  the  stone.  If  this  was  so,  it  would  seem  that  this  manner  of
placing  the  runners  was  substituted  at  some  later  time  for  the  earlier
practice  of  placing  them  on  the  stone  sill  with  their  toes  and  heels  to
the  parallel  lines.

To  complete  the  description  of  the  east  end  of  the  stadium  it  is
necessary  to  mention  that  on  the  outer  or  eastern  side  of  the  stone  sill
and  at  its  two  ends  are  two  pedestals,  one  on  the  north  and  one  on  the
south  side  of  the  race-course.  Each  pedestal  abuts  on  the  base  of  the
column  which  terminates  the  stone  sill.  The  southern  pedestal  is
square  and  is  uninscribed.  The  northern  pedestal  is  cylindrical  and
bears  an  inscription  which  has  been  published  (npaicTi#ca  t^  'Apxai-
okoyiKTJs^ETaipias,  1894,  p.  1 3).      It  runs  as  follows: —

XAPMANTIAA-        AAA
EniAAYPI02AI        \AI2NI
ASKAAnmiANEOHKEN
ePA2YMHAH2EnOIH2EN.

From  this  inscription  we  learn  that  the  pedestal  supported  a  statue
made  by  Thrasymedes  and  dedicated  to  Apollo  and  Aesculapius  by
Charmantidas,  an  Epidaurian.  From  the  style  of  the  letters  the  inscrip-
tion is  believed  to  date  from  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  century  B.C


vox-  III  EPIDAURUS  579

This  helps  us  to  date  the  sculptor  Thrasymedes,  who  is  most  probably
the  artist  mentioned  by  Pausanias  (ii.  27.  2,  note)  as  having  made  the
image  of  Aesculapius.

Lastly,  we  must  notice  that  on  the  south  side  of  the  race-course,
1 6  inches  west  of  the  base  of  the  column  which  terminates  the  stone
sill  on  this  side,  there  begins  a  row  of  four  blocks  which  stand  together
abutting  on  the  stone  border  of  the  race-course  throughout  their  whole
united  length,  which  is  1 5  feet  The  height  of  the  blocks  is  1 7  inches
and  their  breadth  16  inches.  Mr.  Koromantsos  regards  these  blocks  as
the  seats  of  the  umpires.  If  he  is  right,  then  what  I  have  called  the
starting-point  was  more  probably  the  goal.

From  what  I  have  called  the  starting-point  westward  to  the  extremity
of  the  stone  border  which  ran  along  the  whole  length  of  the  race-course
I  measured  199  paces.  Three  paces  short  of  the  western  end  of  the
stone  border  is  a  square  base  at  each  side  of  the  stadium ;  and  on  the
base  on  the  north  side  stands  a  piece  of  an  unfiuted  column,  like  the
columns  at  the  two  ends  of  the  starting-point.  The  line  between  these
two  bases  at  the  western  end  of  the  stadium  was,  if  I  am  right,  the
goal.  According  to  Mr.  Koromantsos  it  was  the  starting-point.  On
the  eastern  or  inner  side  of  the  base  on  the  north  side  of  the  race-course
there  is  a  hole  or  horizontal  slit  4  inches  long.  Into  this  hole  some-
thing was  doubtless  fastened,  but  what  it  was  is  not  known.  There  is
no  stone  sill  with  pairs  of  parallel  lines  at  the  western  end  of  the
stadium  ;  but  on  the  other  hand  there  is  a  block  of  stone  hollowed
out  in  the  middle,  like  the  two  which  stand  against  the  stone  sill  at
the  eastern  end  of  the  race-course.  This  block  stands  on  the  line
which  I  regard  as  the  goal  and  it  is  distant  5  ft  4  in.  from  the  northern
edge  of  the  race-course,  that  is  from  the  stone  water-channel  whick-
bounds  the  course.

At  intervals  of  100  Greek  feet  along  both  sides  of  the  race-course
were  set  small  quadrangular  stones  to  mark  the  distance.  As  the
race-course  was  600  Greek  feet  long,  there  were  originally  five  of
these  stones  on  each  side  of  the  course.  The  five  on  the  north  side
are  still  standing  in  their  places,  but  on  the  south  side  only  three
remain.  They  all  stand  just  inside  the  stone  border  which  runs
round  the  course.  Each  stone  measures  11  inches  by  8^  inches  on
the  sides,  and  stands  14  inches  above  the  ground.  I  paced  all  the
intervals  between  these  stones.  In  four  cases  (namely,  one  on  the
north  side  and  all  three  on  the  south  side)  I  estimated  the  interval  at
33  paces ;  in  one  case  at  32  paces  8  inches ;  in  another  at  32  paces  ;
in  another  at  a  trifle  over  32  paces ;  in  another  at  31  paces  4  inches ;
and  in  another  at  between  32  and  33  paces.  Beyond  the  third  of
these  stone  posts,  counting  from  the  east,  the  water-channel  which  forms
the  border  of  the  race-course  is  not  preserved  on  the  south  side.

An  inscription  found  in  1 896  at  a  distance  of  about  a  quarter  of
an  hour  from  the  stadium  proves  that  there  was  also  a  hippodrome
attached  to  the  sanctuary  (npcucrticcl  t^s  * Kpyp.ioko'^KKr^^  *£rac/[>ui$,  1 896
(pub.  1897),  p.  32).

P.  236  line  13  sq.  from  top,  The  snrroanding  moontaiiui,  thongli


580  EPIDAURUS  ADDENDA

grey  and  barren,  with  nndnlating  nniform  oatlines  etc  This  de-
scription of  the  mountains  which  enclose  the  sacred  valley  is  hardly
correct  Mount  Arachnaeus  in  the  north-west  is  indeed  grey  and  barren,
but  its  outline  is  hard  and  it  rises  into  sharp  points.  The  hills  on  the
eastern  and  southern  sides  of  the  valley  are  of  softer  outline  and  green
with  bushes,  thus  contrasting  with  the  naked  rock  of  Mount  Arachnaeus.

P.  242  line  4  sqq,  from  foot,  Thrasymedes  etc  As  to  the  base  in-
scribed with  the  name  of  the  sculptor  Thrasymedes  see  above,  p.  578  sq.

P.  244  line  4  sq.  from  top,  A  staircase  of  nineteen  steps  etc  The
number  of  steps  in  this  staircase  is  fourteen,  as  stated  in  my  notes  of
1890,  not  nineteen,  as  Mr.  Cawadias  has,  by  an  oversight,  twice  stated
in  print.     I  was  able  to  verify  my  original  note  on  this  point  in  1895.

P.  244  line  22  sq,  from  top.  One  of  these  benches  is  still  to  be
seen  etc  This  bench,  which  is  lying,  not  standing,  is  20  inches  high
and  19  inches  broad.

P.  244  line  23  sqq,  from  top.  The  upper  storey  of  the  western
colonnade  etc  This  account  of  the  upper  storey  of  the  western  colon-
nade must  be  based  on  a  conjectural  restoration,  since  only  remains  of
the  lower  storey  are  now  standing.

P.  244  line  34  sq,y  the  stones  in  which  these  tablets  were  &stened
can  still  be  seen  against  the  northern  half  of  the  east  walL  Two
blocks  of  stone  with  holes  for  the  insertion  of  tablets  were  also  observed
by  me  in  the  southern  half  of  the  colonnade  and  at  its  eastern  end,  in
fact  close  to  the  blocks  described  in  the  text

P.  245  line  9  from  top,  the  Botnnda.  It  has  been  suggested  by
Mr.  H.  Lechat  that  the  Rotunda  in  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  was
built  to  enclose  a  sacred  well,  the  water  of  which  flowed  through  the
concentric  passages  of  the  subterranean  vault  till  it  reached  the  circular
shaft  in  the  middle,  where  alone  it  could  be  drawn  up.  He  supposes
that  the  mouth  of  this  central  shaft  or  well  was  open  at  the  level  of  the
floor,  and  in  confirmation  of  this  view  he  observes  that  no  circular  flag,
such  as  would  have  been  required  to  close  it,  has  been  found  among  the
remains  of  the  pavement  (P.  Cawadias,  Font  lies  d'Epidaurc,  p.  14).
Mr.  Lechat  has  further  conjectured,  with  all  due  reserve,  that  the
Rotunda  and  the  "  water-basin  worth  seeing  for  its  roof  and  decorations  "
which  Pausanias  speaks  of  (ii.  27.  5)  may  have  been  one  and  the  same
building,  the  mention  of  them  as  two  different  edifices  being  a  blunder  of
Pausanias's.  This  explanation  of  the  Rotunda  as  a  sacred  well-house  is
rejected  by  Mr.  Chipiez.  See  A.  Defrasse  et  H.  Lechat,  in  Bulletin
de  Corresp,  helUnique^  14  (1890),  pp.  631-638;  /V/.,  Epidaure:
Restauration  et  description  des  principaux  monuments  du  Sanctuaire
dAscUpios^  pp.  100-105  J  H.  Lechat,  in  Revue  arch^ologique^  3me
Sdrie,  28  (1896),  pp.  371-378;  Ch.  Chipiez,  in  Revue  arck/ologique^
3me  Serie,  28  (1896),  pp.  44-53,  380-382.  Excavations  made  in  1896
to  the  west  of  the  long  double  colonnade  brought  to  light  the  foundations
of  a  quadrangular  edifice ;  and  still  further  to  the  west  a  portion  of  a
curious  oblong  and  very  narrow  structure,  resembling  a  well,  was  exca-
vated. Possibly,  as  has  been  suggested,  the  latter  was  the  water-basin
mentioned  by  Pausanias.     Further  researches,  however,  are  needed  to


VOL.  Ill  EPIDAURUS  S8i

settle  the  question.  See  n/HZKrtKa  r^s  ^Kp)(^viikfrft,K!\%  'EraipMis,
1896  (pub.  1897),  p.  32.

P.  247  line  17,  a  long  inscription  etc.  This  inscription  has  been
discussed  at  great  length  by  Prof.  B.  Keil  ('  Die  Rechnungen  tiber  den
epidaurischen  Tholosbau,'  Mitiheilungen  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  20
(1895),  pp.  2 1- 1 15,  405-450).  I  have  not  read  his  lucubrations;  but
from  a  reference  to  them  by  Dr.  Ddrpfeld  (Das  griechische  Theater^
p.  130)  I  gather  that  Prof.  Keil  believes  the  Rotunda  to  have  been
begun  in  the  early  part  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  and  to  have  been  still
unfinished  by  about  the  year  330  B.c.  Dr.  Ddrpfeld  apparently  accepts
this  conclusion,  and  holds  that  the  parts  of  the  building  not  mentioned
in  the  inscription,  especially  the  beautiful  Corinthian  columns  of  the
interior  with  their  architrave,  the  fine  pavement  of  black  and  white
stones,  the  rich  marble  ceiling,  and  the  fioral  cornice  with  its  gargoyles
in  the  shape  of  lions*  heads,  were  executed  after  330  B.C.  {J)as  griechische
Theater^  p.  130  sq.),

P.  251  line  5  from  foot,  a  theatre  etc  As  to  the  theatre  of
Epidaurus  see  W.  Ddrpfeld,  in  Das  griechische  Theater  (Athens  and
Leipsic,  1896),  pp.  120-133.  '^^^  diameter  of  the  orchestra  within  the
stone  circle  is  not  24.32  metres,  as  stated  in  the  text,  but  19.54
(2  X  9.77}  metres,  according  to  Dr.  Ddrpfeld ;  if  the  stone  circle  be
included,  the  diameter  is  20.30  (2  x  10.15)  metres.  The  ring  enclosing
the  orchestra  is  .38  metre  wide  and  is  formed  of  slabs  of  hard  white
limestone.  The  paved  passage  or  gutter  which  runs  half  round  the
orchestra,  dividing  it  from  the  seats  of  the  spectators,  is  6  ft.  10  in.
wide,  according  to  my  measurement  The  other  passage  {eUcuioma)^
which  divides  the  seats  of  the  spectators  horizontally  into  an  upper  and
a  lower  block,  is  6  ft  3  in.  wide,  according  to  my  measurement ;  the
wall  at  the  back,  that  is  on  the  upper  side,  of  this  passage  is  3  ft.  9  in.
high.

The  length  of  the  stage,  exclusive  of  the  wings,  was  22.60  metres.
Its  front  was  adorned  with  twelve  half-columns  and  two  quarter-columns,
all  of  the  Ionic  order.  At  each  end  of  the  stage  a  wing,  2.57  metres
broad,  projects  for  a  length  of  i  metre.  The  front  of  each  wing  was
adorned  with  two  three-quarter  columns,  also  of  the  Ionic  order.  None
of  the  columns  is  now  standing,  but  remains  of  them  and  of  the
entablature  which  they  supported  were  found  in  sufiicient  number  to
enable  us  to  reconstruct  on  paper  the  front  of  the  stage  with  its  wings.
The  entablature  consisted  of,  first,  an  architrave  divided,  as  is  usual  with
Ionic  architraves,  into  three  horizontal  sections,  second,  a  plain  frieze,
and,  third,  a  row  of  dentils.  The  height  of  the  stage,  according  to  Dr.
Dorpfeld's  calculations,  was  3.53  metres,  and  its  depth  from  front  to
back  3.20  metres.  Some  holes  in  the  upper  surface  of  the  blocks  which
formed  its  outer  edge  seem  to  indicate  that  a  metal  railing  extended
along  the  front  of  the  stage  to  prevent  the  actors  from  falling  into  the
orchestra.  A  steep  ramp  gave  access  to  the  stage  at  either  end.  The
entrance  to  each  ramp,  at  its  lower  end,  was  through  a  stately  doorway
flanked  with  Corinthian  columns  on  which  rested  a  triple  architrave  and
a  graceful  frieze,  surmounted  by  dentils.    A  single  door  in  the  front  wall


583  EPIDAURUS  addenda

of  the  stage,  between  the  two  central  half-columns,  gave  access  to  the
rooms  under  and  behind  the  stage.  Besides  this  central  door  there  was
in  the  front  wall  of  each  of  the  wings  a  door  in  which  perhaps  one  of  the
theatrical  machines  called  periaktoi  (Pollux,  iv.  126)  may  have  been
placed.

Side  by  side  with  each  of  the  doorways  leading  to  the  ramps  was  a
larger  doorway  which  gave  access  to  the  parados  and  was  flailed,  like
the  smaller  doorways,  by  Corinthian  columns  supporting  an  el^ant
entablature.  Few  stones  of  these  doorways  were  found  in  their  original
places  when  the  theatre  was  excavated,  but  almost  all  the  missing
architectural  members  came  to  light  not  far  o£^  so  that  a  reconstructioa
of  the  doorways  was  possible.

With  regard  to  the  date  of  the  theatre,  Dr.  D6rpfeld  believes  that
the  key  is  furnished  by  a  comparison  of  the  Corinthian  architecture  of
the  doorways  with  the  Corinthian  architecture  of  the  Rotunda  in  the
adjoining  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius.  Pausanias  tells  us  that  Rotunda
and  theatre  were  built  by  the  same  architect,  Polyclitus,  and  this  state-
ment is  confirmed  by  the  resemblance  between  the  Corinthian  architec-
ture of  the  two  buildings.  But  on  various  grounds  Dr.  D6rpfeld  b  of
opinion  that  the  beautiful  Corinthian  columns  and  the  delicately-moulded
cornice,  with  its  projecting  lion-heads,  of  the  Rotunda  cannot  be  earlier
and  may  be  several  decades  later  than  the  end  of  the  fourth  century  B.C ;
and  that  therefore  the  theatre  also  was  built  either  at  the  end  of  the
fourth  or  in  the  early  part  of  the  third  century  B.C  Hence  he  concludes
that  the  Polyclitus  who  built  both  theatre  and  Rotunda  can  have  been
neither  the  elder  nor  the  younger  sculptor  of  that  name,  but  a  third
Polyclitus  later  than  them  both,  the  same  to  whom  on  epigraphical
grounds  Prof.  Dittenberger  would  assign  a  statue  of  which  the  inscribed
base  is  preserved  in  the  church  of  St.  George  at  Thebes  (C  /.  G,  G.  S.
I.  No.  2532).  With  regard  to  the  stage,  Dr.  Dorpfeld  adduces  some
grounds  for  holding  that  the  columned  front  described  above  was  not
contemporary  with  the  theatre  but  was  added  at  a  later  period.  His
grounds,  which  seem  very  slight,  are,  first,  that  the  stylobate  of  the
stage-front  is  .12  metre  higher  than  the  stone  circle  enclosing  the
orchestra,  which  seems,  in  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  opinion,  to  show  that  when
the  existing  stage-front  was  built  the  original  surface  of  the  orchestra  was
already  underground ;  and,  second,  that  the  two  narrow  rooms,  one  at
each  end  of  the  long  hall  behind  the  stage,  are  only  explicable  on  the
hypothesis  that  they  originally  extended  further  towards  the  orchestra  in
the  form  of  wings  (paraskenicC)  broader  than  the  existing  wings,  which
again,  if  the  hypothesis  is  correct,  would  prove  that  the  original  stage-
front  had  been  at  some  time  modified  so  as  to  give  it  the  form  which  at
present  it  exhibits.  This  modification,  if  it  was  such,  must  have  been
the  last  change  made ;  for  of  a  reconstruction  of  the  theatre  or  stage-
buildings  in  Roman  times  there  is,  according  to  Dr.  D6rpfeld,  no  trace.

P.  254  line  16  from  top.  Dr.  Ddrpfeld  has  propounded  a  theory
etc  Dr.  D5rpfeld  has  now  stated  fully  his  grounds  for  holding  that
in  theatres  of  the  Greek,  as  distinguished  from  the  Roman,  type  there
never  was  a  raised  stage  at  all  and  that  down  to  the  latest  times  the


VOL.  Ill  THE  GREEK  STAGE  583

players  regularly  acted  on  the  level  of  the  orchestra.  But  in  the
elaborate  work  which  he  has  published  in  conjunction  with  Prof.  Reisch
and  which  is  mainly  devoted  to  establishing  this  thesis  {Das  griechische
Theater:  Beitrdge  zur  Geschichie  des  Dionysos-theaters  in  Atheriy  Athens
and  Leipzig,  1 896)  I  cannot  perceive  that  he  has  adduced  any  fresh
arguments  of  weight  in  favour  of  his  theory  or  that  he  has  invalidated
a  single  one  of  the  many  arg^uments  which  tell  against  it  On  the
contrary  I  gather  from  his  book  new  reasons  for  adhering  to  the  tradi-
tional view.     Amongst  these  reasons  are  the  following  : —

( 1 )  In  several  existing  Greek  theatres,  as  in  those  of  Epidaurus,
Sicyon,  and  Oropus,  the  raised  platform  {proskenion)  which  Dr.  Dorpfeld
refuses  to  recognise  as  a  stage  communicates  with  the  level  of  the
ground  at  either  end  by  means  of  a  ramp  or  inclined  plane.  If  these
ramps  were  not  meant  to  afford  the  players  access  to  the  raised  platform,
in  other  words,  to  the  stage,  what  were  they  there  for  ?  Dr.  Dorpfeld
suggests  that  in  the  theatre  at  Epidaurus  the  ramps  may  have  served
"for  hauling  up  machines  and  other  similar  objects."  But,  as  he  him-
self points  out,  the  entrance  to  each  of  these  ramps  from  the  level  ot
the  ground  was  through  a  stately  doorway  flanked  with  Corinthian
colunms  and  surmounted  by  an  elegant  entablature.  Is  it  likely  that
the  Greeks  would  thus  have  graced  a  passage  which  served  for  nothing
but  hauling  "  machinery  and  other  similar  objects  "  up  and  down  ?

(2)  Dr.  Dorpfeld  holds  that  the  front  wall  of  what  I  call  the  stage
and  he  calls  the  proskenion  was  the  background  before  which  the
players  acted.  But  he  admits  that  in  this  wall,  as  we  find  it  in  extant
Greek  theatres,  there  was  usually  but  one  door ;  and  that  in  certain
Greek  theatres,  as  those  of  Megalopolis  and  Piraeus,  there  is  no  trace
of  a  door  at  all  in  the  wall.  How  then  can  this  wall  have  been  the
background  of  the  play  when  we  know  that  in  the  background  of  Greek
theatres  there  were  regularly  three  doors  at  least  (Pollux,  iv.  125  sq,)  ?

(3)  The  fundamental  ground  on  which  Dr.  Dorpfeld  refuses  to
recognise  the  proskenion  as  a  stage  is  that  it  was  too  high  and  narrow  to
allow  the  players  to  act  on  it  freely  and  safely.  Falls  from  such  a  stage,
he  would  say,  must  have  been  frequent  and  painful.  And  so  in  fact
they  were.  Lucian  tells  us  (Gallus^  26)  that  tragic  actors,  while  playing  for
example  the  part  of  Cecrops  or  Sisyphus  or  Telephus,  often  took  a  step  in
empty  air  (K€vcfifiaTrj(ras)  on  the  middle  of  the  stage  and  fell  down,  to  the
amusement  of  the  audience,  smashing  their  masks  and  kingly  crowns,
breaking  their  real  heads,  and  displaying  their  bare  legs  and  the  sorry
clouts  which  they  wore  under  their  gorgeous  robes.  The  expression
"  taking  a  step  on  emptiness  "  clearly  implies  that  the  players  in  such
cases  stepped  over  the  edge  of  the  stage,  and  the  description  of  the
disastrous  consequences  of  their  fall  proves  that  they  fell  from  a  height
The  passage  furnishes  conclusive  evidence  that  down  to  Lucian's  time
the  players  in  Greek  theatres  regularly  acted  on  a  high  stage.

(4)  Dr.  Dorpfeld  asserts  (p.  351)  that  no  single  notice  of  an  ancient
author  tells  against  his  theory  that  actors  and  chorus  performed  together
in  the  orchestra.  He  is  mistaken.  Pollux  says  (iv.  123)  that  the  stage
{skene)  was  reserved  for  the  actors  and  the  orchestra  for  the  chorus.


S84  THE  GREEK  STAGE  addenda

Phrynichus  says  {EcL  p.  163  ed.  Lobeck)  that  the  place  where  the
comedians  and  tragedians  performed  was  called  the  stage  {logeion\  and
that  the  place  where  the  flute-players  and  choruses  performed  was  called
the  orchestra.  Opinions  may  differ  as  to  the  nature  and  position  of  the
structure  which  Pollux  and  Phrynichus  here  designate  respectively  as
Skene  and  logeion;  but  if  these  two  passages  do  not  imply  that  actors
and  chorus  acted  in  different  places,  words  have  no  meaning.  It  is
curious  that  the  passage  of  Pollux  should  have  been  here  overlooked  by
Dr.  D5rpfeld,  since  he  had  actually  quoted  it  only  a  few  pages  before.

The  special  arguments  against  Dr.  Dorpfdd's  theory  which  are
furnished  by  the  theatre  at  Epidaurus  have  been  stated  very  cogently
by  Mr.  H.  Lechat  {ipidaure  :  RestauraHon  et  description  des  principaux
Monuments  du  Sanctucdre  d^AscUpioSy  pp.  214-228).

Fresh  and  powerful  arguments,  based  chiefly  on  the  remains  of  the
theatre  at  Delos  and  of  similar  theatres  in  Asia,  have  recently  been
urged  against  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  views  by  Mr.  J.  Chamonard  {Bulletin
de  Corresp,  helUnique^  20  (1896),  pp.  291-312).  He  justly  empha-
sises the  extreme  improbability  of  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  hypothesis  that  the
Roman  theatre  was  not  so  much  developed  as  created  at  a  single
blow  out  of  the  Greek  theatre  by  the  excavation  of  one-half  of  the
orchestra,  the  other  half  being  left  as  a  stage  for  the  actors  to
perform  upon.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  that  anybody  in  real  life
should  have  conceived  the  idea  of  obtaining  a  stage  by  such  a  round-
about, awkward,  and  escpensive  proceeding;  for  it  is  to  be  remem-
bered that  the  floor  of  the  orchestra  was  often  the  natural  rock,
which  would  have  to  be  laboriously  cut  away  in  order  to  create  a  stage
in  this  fashion.  An  hypothesis  so  far-fetched  would  need  the  support
of  the  strongest  and  most  indubitable  historical  evidence  if  it  were  to
win  acceptance.  Yet  Dr.  Dorpfeld  has  no  historical  evidence  at  all  to
adduce  in  its  favour ;  he  expects  it  to  carry  conviction  simply  by  the
strength  of  its  own  intrinsic  probability !  And  it  is  on  this  hypothesis,
grossly  improbable  in  itself  and  unsupported  by  any  evidence  what-
ever, that  he  relies  as  a  conclusive  proof  of  his  general  theory  of  the
absence  of  a  stage  in  Greek  theatres  {Das  griechische  Theater^  p.  362).
But  the  hypothesis  of  the  sudden  creation  of  the  Roman  out  of  the
Greek  theatre  is  more  than  improbable ;  it  is,  as  Mr.  Chamonard  has
well  shown,  irreconcileable  with  the  existence  of  theatres  of  a  type  inter-
mediate between  the  Greek  and  the  Roman  type.  Such  theatres  are
to  be  found  in  Asia,  notably  at  Termessus,  and  their  existence  raises  a
strong  presumption  that  the  low  broad  stage  of  the  Roman  theatres
was  developed  gradually  and  naturally,  through  a  series  of  intermediate
stages,  out  of  the  high  narrow  stage  of  the  Greek  theatre.

P.  2  5  7  line  2  sq,  from  foot,  Oynortium Maleatian  Ai»ollo

etc.  In  December  1895  I  visited  the  scanty  remains  which  have  been
identified  as  those  of  the  sanctuary  of  Maleatian  Apollo.  Accompanied
by  a  guide  I  started  from  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  and  ascended
the  hill  which  rises  to  the  north-east  of  the  theatre.  The  path  lay  through-
out among  olive-groves  over  brown  earth  which  had  been  in  com.  In
thirteen  minutes  from  leaving  the  theatre  we  reached  a  terrace  or  platform


VOL.  Ill  CYNORTIUM—EPIDAURUS  585

on  the  hillside  fkcing  northward,  on  which  I  found,  besides  remains  of
ancient  Greek  walls,  a  large  well-preserved  cistern  of  Roman  date,  prob-
ably the  cistern  which,  as  we  learn  from  Pausanias  (ii.  27.  7),  was
constructed  by  Antoninus.  The  structure  is  ^^\  paces  long  and  7  paces
broad.  It  had  a  roof  consisting  of  two  arched  vaults  supported  down
the  middle  by  a  row  of  pillars,  of  which  four  are  standing,  together  with
a  large  part  of  the  roof.  Of  these  pillars  the  lower  part  of  two  is  com-
posed of  a  drum  of  an  ancient  fluted  column.  The  better  preserved  drum
is  about  2 1  inches  in  diameter ;  its  flutes  are  worn,  and  the  column  is
partly  covered  with  a  thick  layer  of  stucco.  The  sides  of  the  cistern
are  also  coated  with  stucco.  Of  ruins  which  seemed  to  belong  to  the
good  Greek  period  I  noted  five  blocks  forming  an  angle  of  a  wall  quite
close  to  the  cistern.  The  blocks  are  squared  and  laid  in  a  horizontal
course.  Here,  too,  are  a  number  of  squared  ancient  blocks  lying
together  under  a  fig-tree.  Further  off  on  the  terrace,  to  the  north-west,
an  edge  of  a  wall  is  visible  for  some  yards  running  east  and  west,  and  a
little  further  to  the  west  are  some  slight  vestiges  of  walls.  To  the  north-
east of  these  vestiges  there  are  remains  of  a  wall  running  along  the
northern  edge  of  the  terrace  for  a  distance  of  14  paces.  Beside  it
are  some  large  hewn  blocks,  which  have  formed  part  of  a  circular  or
semicircular  pedestal  Just  below  this  point,  on  the  steep  northern
slope  of  the  terrace,  lie  some  squared  blocks  that  probably  have  been
brought  or  have  rolled  down  from  the  terrace  above.  The  terrace  itself,
distant  from  the  theatre  about  a  mile  or  rather  less  to  the  north-east,  is
now  stony  comland ;  some  olive-trees  grow  on  it.  It  commands  a  fine
view  over  the  whole  of  the  sacred  valley.

Descending  from  the  terrace  westward  we  came  in  a  few  minutes  to
another  large  cistern,  about  35  paces  long  by  12  paces  broad.  The
walls,  built  of  solid  ashlar  masonry  and  coated  with  stucco,  are  standing
to  a  height  of  20  feet  and  more.  Four  short  cross-walls,  built  in  the  same
style,  project  into  the  cistern  on  each  side ;  they  obviously  supported  an
arched  roof,  for  the  spring  of  the  arch  is  visible  on  most  of  them.  This
cistern  probably  belongs  to  the  Greek,  not  to  the  Roman,  period ;  no
bricks  are  visible  in  it  Immediately  above  the  cistern,  to  the  east,  are
remains  of  an  aqueduct  or  water-channel  built  of  stone.  It  is  5  feet
wide  and  is  preserved  for  about  38  paces  through  the  olive-grove.  To
judge  by  its  direction  it  probably  served  to  unite  the  upper  with  the
lower  cistern.

In  1896  some  excavations  made  by  the  Greek  Archaeological
Society  at  the  sanctuary  of  Maleatian  Apollo  brought  to  light  remains  of
buildings,  sculptures,  and  inscriptions  recording  dedications  to  Apollo.
See  IIpaicTtKa  t^s  'ApxatoAoyiK^s 'Eratpias,  i8q6  (pub.  1897),  p.  32.

P.  259  line  4  from  foot,  the  city  of  Epidaurus.  I  visited  the
ruins  of  the  city  of  Epidaurus  3rd  and  4th  December  1895,  and  the
notes  I  made  on  the  spot  may  supplement  and  correct  the  account
given  in  the  text.  As  the  route  by  which  I  reached  the  ancient  city,
namely  by  following  the  mountainous  coast  from  Troezen,  is  seldom
taken  by  travellers,  and  I  observed  by  the  way  some  small  remains  of
antiquity,  I  will  begin  by  describing  it.


586  TROEZRN  TO  EPIDAURVS  ADDSinu

We  left  the  ruins  of  Troezen  at  half-past  twelve  in  the  afternoon,
and  rode  northward  across  the  broad  flat  nedc  of  land  which  connects
the  mountainous  peninsula  of  Methana  with  the  mainland.  At  i.2o  we
reached  the  shore  of  the  lagoon  which  is  formed  at  the  head  of  the  Bay
of  Methana  by  the  Potami  river,  the  Golden  Stream  of  Pansanias  (iL  31.
10).  After  making  a  detour  round  the  lagoon  we  came,  at  1.30,  to  the
beach  at  the  point  where  the  stream  flows  out  of  the  lagoon  into  die
sea.  Thence  we  rode  for  some  way  along  the  beach,  then  over  t
rocky  point,  after  which  the  path  kept  inland  a  little  from  the  sea.  Bat
all  through  our  jotimey  from  Troezen  to  Kaio-Phanari  the  moontaiBS
rose  at  no  great  distance  from  us  on  the  left.  By  half-past  two  we  woe
opposite  LesicL^  a  hamlet  at  the  foot  of  a  high  rocky  mountain,  with  a
glen  on  its  eastern  side,  down  which  comes  a  stream.  But  the  bed  of
the  stream,  when  we  crossed  it,  was  dry.  Below  the  hamlet  in  the
plain  are  olives.  At  3.53  we  came  to  a  ruined  mediaeval  €x  modem
tower  perched  on  an  eminence  to  our  right,  between  us  and  the  sea.
Near  it  stands  a  small  chapel  beside  a  fine  carob-tree.  The  moontains
now  advanced  to  the  water's  edge,  and  our  path  led  along  their  boshy
and  rocky  slopes,  winding  rotmd  bays  and  headlands  at  a  considerable
height  above  the  sea.  Here  we  enjoyed  fine  views  across  the  spadous
bay  to  the  high,  mountainous,  and  rugged  peninsula  of  Methana,  vdudi
wears  a  sombre  aspect  due  perhaps  to  the  dark  colour  of  its  volcanic  rodo.
Further  on  the  path,  though  never  fax  from  the  sea,  trended  inland  and
we  passed  over  a  great  deal  of  stony  ground  mostly  planted  with  olives.
At  many  places  along  our  route  in  the  course  of  the  day  the  peasants
were  at  work  gathering  the  olives  from  the  trees.  Another  fieature  in
the  day's  ride  was  the  great  number  of  carob-trees  we  passed,  some  of
them  very  fine  trees,  with  dark  smooth  glossy  leaves.  Finally  the  path
ascended  a  steep  rocky  slope  and  brought  us  at  half-past  four  to  the
village  of  Kato-Phanari^  very  picturesquely  situated  high  on  the  side  of
a  mountain,  which  a  short  way  above  the  village  rises  up  in  rugged
precipices  of  grey  rock.  Twilight  was  coming  on,  but  enough  of  day-
light remained  to  allow  me  to  appreciate  the  beauty  of  the  prospect
from  the  loftily  situated  village  across  the  sea  to  the  islands,  the  ^gh
conspicuous  peninsula  of  Methana,  and  the  long  line  of  headlands
stretching  away  towards  Epidaurus,  all  bathed  in  the  warm  though  £^
fading  light  of  a  w^inter  evening.

Next  morning  we  left  Kaio-Phanari  soon  after  eight  o'clock.  The
path  rose  steeply  up  the  mountain-side  in  \new  of  the  sea.  In  a  httle
less  than  an  hour  we  reached  Ano-Phanart,  a  village  o\'erlooking  the
sea,  situated  far  up  the  side  of  a  lofty  rocky  mountain  which  feces  south-
ward to  the  still  higher  precipitous  mountain  on  whose  seaward  face,
below  the  precipices,  stands  the  lower  village  of  Kaia-Pkanari.  On  this
latter  mountain,  or  rather  on  the  summit  of  the  range  to  which  it
belongs,  called  Mount  Ortholithion^  certain  ceremonies  are  said  to  have
been  performed,  time  out  of  mind,  by  the  peasants  in  seasons  of
drought  and  pestilence  (A  Meliarakes,  T€faypa<fUa  rov  voftov  *A/>yo-
AcSo9,  p.  211).  At  Ano-Phanari  I  heard  of  remains  of  an  ancient
fortress  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  set  off  with  a  guide  to  \'isit  them.


VOL.  Ill  TROEZEN  TO  EPIDAURUS  587

A  walk  of  a  few  minutes  in  a  north-easterly  direction  brought  us  to  the
top  of  the  mountain,  where  the  remains  are  to  be  seen.  The  situation
is  a  remarkably  fine  one.  Precipices  descending  towards  the  sea
encircle  the  summit  on  the  north  and  north-east,  and  the  views  across
the  Saronic  Gulf  to  Aegina,  Salamis,  and  Megara  are  magnificent.
Some  mediaeval  remains,  comprising  walls  and  two  or  more  ruined
chapels,  are  to  be  seen  on  the  sununit,  and  on  its  southern  side,  towards
the  village,  there  is  a  ruined  fortification-wall  built  of  large  irregular
blocks.  This  wall  seemed  to  me  to  be  ancient  At  its  western  end,
nearest  to  the  village,  there  are  remains  of  a  square  tower  projecting
from  the  wall  and  built  in  a  similar  style.  At  the  other  or  eastern  end
of  the  wall  there  is  an  entrance  to  the  sunmiit  between  the  rocks,  and
here  may  be  seen  the  ruins  of  an  ancient  gateway,  1 2  feet  wide,  with
steps  made  of  large  blocks.  On  the  right  side  of  the  gateway  as  you
enter  there  is  a  small  piece  of  ancient  wall  built  of  tolerably  large  stones
laid  in  horizontal  courses,  but  with  slanting  joints.  Three  courses  are
standing.  At  the  back  of  this  fragment  of  ancient  wall  there  are
remains  of  a  small  square  mediaeval  tower  with  thin  walls.  Thus  the
ancient  fortress  which  occupied  this  commanding  situation  appears  to
have  been  repaired  and  inhabited  in  the  Middle  Ages.  What  the  name
of  the  place  was  in  antiquity  we  do  not  know.

The  villagers  called  my  attention  to  several  holes  in  the  rocks  be-
tween the  fortress  and  the  village  from  which  streams  of  warm  air  issue.
The  air  from  one  of  the  holes  was  hot  enough  to  warm  me,  though  the
morning  was  cold.  In  this  particular  hole,  too,  I  could  hear  a  rumbling
sound  as  of  water  boiling  or  wind  blowing  underground.

We  left  Ana-Phanari  about  ten  o'clock  and  descended  westward,
out  of  sight  of  the  sea,  into  a  small  trough -like  plain  or  valley
surrounded  on  all  sides  by  rocky  and  barren  mountains.  Here  I  was
overtaken  by  a  schoolmaster  from  KcUo-Phatutri^  an  elderly  but  active
priest  who  kept  us  company  for  some  way.  He  guided  me  to  a  piece
of  an  unfluted  column  3  feet  high  and  1 9  inches  in  diameter,  standing
apparently  in  its  original  position  on  flat  open  ground  in  the  valley.
Many  broken  stones,  as  of  some  ruined  building,  lie  near  the  column,
and  some  50  yards  or  so  to  the  south-west  of  it  is  a  well  lined
with  masonry,  which  seemed  to  me  ancient.  A  few  yards  west  of  the
well  is  a  small  ruined  chapel  which  the  schoolmaster  thought  was
dedicated  to  St.  Nicholas.  From  the  little  plain  we  now  ascended  the
mountains  northward  by  a  steep  rocky  path.  In  an  hour  and  a  half
from  quitting  the  village  my  companion  showed  me  the  remains  of  a
small  round  structure  a  few  paces  to  the  right  of  the  path.  Two  large
blocks,  apparently  ancient,  are  hewn  in  the  curves  of  a  circle ;  one  of
them  formed  part  of  a  pavement  with  a  raised  border  on  the  outer  edge.
Within  the  circle,  though  not  in  its  centre,  is  a  stone  basin  sunk  in  the
ground  and  half  covered  with  a  large  stone.

Thence  we  continued  to  ascend  the  mountains  by  a  rough  path
that  led  into  a  narrow  upland  valley  running  north  and  south  and
enclosed  by  hills,  the  sides  of  which  were  shaggy  with  bushes  of
various  sorts.     This  dale  we  traversed  from  end  to  end.     Through  a


588  CITY  OF  EPIDAURUS  addenda

narrow  opening  or  gorge  in  the  mountains  on  its  eastern  side  we
obtained  a  striking  glimpse  of  part  of  the  promontory  of  Methana,
mostly  in  shadow,  but  with  gleams  of  sunshine  resting  on  it  here  and
there.  At  the  northern  end  of  the  valley,  ascending  a  ridge,  we  saw
stretched  out  below  us  at  some  depth  a  wide  open  valley  of  roughly
circular  shape.  Our  path,  which  was  again  very  rugged,  did  not
descend  into  the  valley,  but  skirted  its  eastern  side,  keeping  up  on  the
mountain,  till  it  turned  eastward  through  a  gap  in  the  hills.  On  passiog
through  the  gap  a  view  of  the  sea  with  all  its  coasts  and  islands
shining  in  the  sun  (for  after  a  dull  morning  the  day  had  brightened)
suddenly  burst  upon  us.  Salamis  was  conspicuous  to  the  north,  and
to  the  east  of  it  appeared  Mount  Pentelicus  with  the  marble  quarries
visible  even  at  that  distance  as  white  patches  on  its  side.  Far  below
us  lay  Epidaurus,  its  little  peninsula  stretching  out  into  the  blue  bay.
We  were  at  a  great  height  above  the  sea,  but  now  gradually  descended
to  it  in  the  direction  of  Epidaurus  by  a  steep  rugged  path  running
obliquely  down  the  bushy  side  of  the  mountain.  Thus  we  came  at
last  into  a  little  maritime  plain,  traversed  it  from  south  to  north,
and  passing  some  lemon-groves  reached  the  modem  village  oi  Palaea
Epidauros  or  Old  Epidaurus  about  half-past  two.  The  village  stands
on  the  shore  at  the  head  of  a  deep  narrow  sheltered  inlet  formed  by  the
peninsula  of  ancient  Epidaurus  on  the  south  and  a  higher  promontory,
wooded  with  low  green  pines,  on  the  north.  Beside  the  village  a
little  headland  runs  out  into  the  water ;  it  is  crowned  with  a  white-
washed chapel  of  St  Nicholas,  which  stands  in  a  large  wailed
enclosure  with  two  cypress-trees  growing  in  front  of  it.  The  church
seems  to  occupy  the  site  of  the  sanctuary  of  Hera  mentioned  by
Pausanias.

From  the  village  I  was  rowed  across  to  the  peninsula  where  are
the  ruins  of  Epidaurus.  The  site  of  the  ancient  city  is  remarkably
beautiful.  The  peninsula,  now  mostly  overgrown  with  brushwood  and
shrubs,  commands  fine  views  both  seaward  and  landward.  Aegina
and  the  high  rugged  mountain-mass  of  Methana  are  seen  to  especial
advantage.  The  coast,  too,  southward  in  the  direction  of  Troeien  is
very  bold  and  grand,  the  mountains  rising  here  abruptly  to  a  great
height  from  the  sea.  At  the  head  of  the  bay,  on  the  other  hand,  the
hills,  clothed  with  pines,  are  lower,  and  between  them  appears  the
mouth  of  the  valley  up  which  the  path  leads  through  thickly  wooded
glens  to  the  sacred  grove  of  Aesculapius.

The  ancient  fortification-wall  is  best  preserved  on  the  southern  side
of  the  peninsula.  Beginning  at  the  south-western  comer  above  a  line
of  perpendicular  cliffs  of  no  great  height,  the  wall  may  be  traced  east-
ward for  several  hundreds  of  yards,  keeping  above  and  at  some  distance
from  the  sea  even  after  the  cliffs  have  come  to  an  end,  which  they  very
soon  do.  The  wall,  though  ruinous  in  places,  is  preserved  in  others  to
a  height  varying  from  5  to  1 1  feet.  The  style  of  masonry  is  somewhat
rough ;  the  stones,  which  are  large,  are  cut  in  polygons  and  fitted
together  but  not  very  closely.  The  thickness  of  the  wall  seems  to  ha\'C
been  about  5  ft.  6  in.     Remains  of  a  single  square  tower,  about  5  feet


VOL.  Ill  CITY  OF  EPIDAURUS  589

high,  project  from  it.  Towards  the  eastern  end  of  the  peninsula  the
line  of  wall  is  traceable  in  great  part  only  by  scattered  blocks.  A
ruined  mediaeval  wall,  built  of  small  stones,  bricks,  and  mortar,  also
exists  above  the  precipices  at  the  south-west  comer  of  the  peninsula,
and  is  continued  for  some  distance  along  its  western  face,  overlooking
the  flat  isthmus  which  joins  the  peninsula  to  the  mainland.

The  northern  shore  of  the  peninsula  is  in  a  manner  the  converse  of
the  southern,  for  while,  towards  the  west,  it  is  flat,  towards  the  east  it
descends  to  the  sea  in  cliffs,  which,  however,  are  not  very  high.  Just
above  the  level  stretch  of  ground  which  skirts  the  western  part  of  the
shore  I  found  a  small  piece  of  fortification-wall,  about  4  feet  high,  built
in  the  polygonal  style ;  and  further  east,  at  the  point  where  the  low  sea-
clifTs  begin,  I  came  upon  a  ruinous  piece  of  a  similar  wall  extending
down  the  slope  to  the  brink  of  the  precipices,  but  not  running  along
their  edge.  On  the  level  part  of  the  northern  shore  there  are  some
remains  of  a  building  constructed  of  flat  bricks  and  mortar ;  and  broken
stones  and  pottery  are  here  scattered  about.

The  peninsula  rises  into  two  summits,  an  eastern  and  a  western,  of
which  the  eastern  is  the  higher.  Both  summits  would  seem  to  have
been  enclosed  by  separate  fortification- walls.  On  the  southern  side  of
the  western  peak  a  piece  of  this  inner  fortification-wall  is  preserved  for  a
length  of  about  65  paces.  It  is  built  of  squared  blocks  of  dark  stone
laid  in  horizontal  courses,  of  which  from  two  to  six  are  standing.  But
flat  bricks  and  small  stones  interposed  between  the  courses  seem  to
show  that  the  wall  was  repaired,  if  not  built,  in  the  Middle  Ages.  West-
ward, towards  the  isthmus,  this  wall  is  continued  for  a  little  way  by
another  wall  which  is  undoubtedly  mediaeval  or  modem,  being  con-
structed of  small  stones,  bricks,  and  mortar.  The  traces  of  fortiflcation-
walls  enclosing  the  eastem  summit  are  slight  and  doubtful.  The  rocks
a  little  to  the  east  of  its  top  have  been  cut  and  smoothed  into  a  sort  of
platform  where  a  temple  may  have  stood.  Beside  this  platform  I  found
two  or  three  pieces  of  what  at  first  I  took  to  be  columns,  but  which
more  probably  were  pieces  of  basin-like  stands  for  offerings  such  as  I
afterwards  observed  in  the  sanctuary  cf  Aesculapius.  A  ruined  church
occupies  the  top  of  the  westem  summit.  Lower  down,  at  the  western
foot  of  the  peninsula,  where  the  isthmus  begins,  there  are  remains  of  a
building  faced  with  bricks,  but  with  small  stones  and  mortar  forming
the  core  of  the  walls.  Beside  it  I  found  the  lower  half  of  a  white  marble
statue  representing  a  man  in  Roman  costume.  Further,  on  the  southern
side  of  the  westem  peak,  not  far  from  the  top,  but  a  little  lower  down
than  the  repaired  fortification  -  wall,  there  lies  a  block  bearing  the
following  inscription  in  letters  which  are  widely  spaced  out :

r        0        P        A

N(orM)         0        A(?)        e        E         N         H         S

HAE^ANHSA.

Outside  of  a  peasant's  house  on  the  isthmus  I  was  shown  some
remains  of  antiquity,  including  a  torso  of  a  statue  over  life-size  clad


590  CITY  OF  EPIDAURUS  addenda

apparently  in  a  cuirass ;  a  drum  of  a  fluted  Doric  column  2  feet  in
diameter ;  another  drum  of  a  fluted  Doric  colunm  about  2  ft.  10  in.  in
diameter ;  and  a  number  of  squared  blocks  of  stone.  Here,  too,  I
copied  a  couple  of  inscriptions.  One,  which  from  the  fonns  of  the
letters  I  thought  might  be  of  the  fifth  or  fourth  century  B.C.,  is  carved
on  a  round  pedestal     It  runs  thus :

nYGEASTIMAINETOS
TO»POYPOIAYKEIQI

The  other  inscription  is  carved  on  a  slab  of  stone  measuring  30
inches  by  26  inches  and  10  inches  thick,  which  lay  on  the  top  of  the
round  pedestal  Only  the  last  part  of  the  original  inscription  remains,
the  upper  part  of  the  stone  having  been  broken  away.  Engraved  in
well-cut  letters  it  runs  as  follows :

oiEniAAYPIOIANAOEN
I2TOY2T12N2EBAm2NArQ
NA2AHNAPIAMYPIAKAITHnOAEIAPAXMA2
nENTAKI2XEIAIA2    APETH2ENEKA

This  inscription  seems  to  show  that  games  were  celebrated  at
Epidaurus  in  honour  of  the  Roman  emperors.

Further,  on  the  isthmus,  but  at  some  little  distance  from  the
peasant's  cottage,  I  was  shown  a  life-size  torso  of  a  woman  in  Roman
costume  reclining  on  a  couch  ;  it  seemed  to  be  the  top  of  a  sarcophagus.
Near  it  lay  a  large  slab,  the  whole  of  which,  below  the  gable-shaped  top^
was  covered  with  a  long  inscription,  a  good  deal  defaced.  Appaitndf
the  inscription  records  the  names  of  the  men  who  perished  in  a  certain  war.
I  copied  a  few  fragments  of  it  as  follows.  It  begins  with  the  words
OIAEAnEGANON  (then  defaced  or  obscure  letters)  IIOYIS.  Then
many  lines  lower  down  I  read  KI^P12NA2,  and  then,  after  an  interval
of  a  line

API2T0KPATHSeE0

2eENEIAA2AI2TA

*IAimAA2EYKPAT

then  some  lines  lower  down

2122IKPATH2A

A  few  sculptured  tombstones  of  no  particular  merit  are  preserved  in
a  shed  in  the  village  of  Palaca  Epidauros.  On  one  of  them  is  carved  in
relief  the  figure  of  a  soldier  standing  and  holding  his  horse,  with  a  boy
attendant  beside  him.     Above  these  figures  is  cut  the  inscription :

TIMOKAH         XAIPE

The  style  of  the  relief  proves  it  to  be  of  Roman  date.  Another
tombstone  exhibits  within  an  arch  the  figure  of  a  woman  holding  up  a
torch  in  each  hand.     Above  her  is  the  inscription

EYAPETA        XAIPE


VOL.  Ill  AEGINA  591

The  prehistoric  tombs  mentioned  in  the  text  (vol.  3.  p.  261)  are
situated  on  the  mainland  just  opposite  the  isthmus  of  the  peninsula.  A
narrow  descending  passage,  like  the  drotnos  of  a  beehive  tomb,  leads
down  to  one  of  them  ;  it  ends  in  a  low  narrow  doorway ;  the  whole  is
hewn  out  of  the  rock.

P.  263  line  24  from  foot,  a  temple  of  Aphrodite.  In  1894  some
remains  of  very  early  buildings  were  excavated  by  Mr.  Staes  beside  the
temple  of  Aphrodite  in  Aegina.  Trenches  dug  to  the  west  and  south  of
the  temple  revealed  the  existence  of  ancient  walls  extending  under  the
foundations  of  the  temple.  To  the  east  of  the  temple,  at  a  distance  of  a
few  yards,  Mr.  Staes  laid  bare  the  remains  of  a  dwelling  which  he  would
refer  to  the  seventh  century  B.C.  It  consists  of  three  quadrangular  rooms
commimicating  with  each  other  by  small  doors.  The  walls,  up  to  a  height
of  about  3  feet,  are  built  of  wrought  polygonal  stones,  while  the  upper
part  was  of  unbumt  bricks,  of  which  there  are  many  remains.  Many
potsherds  decorated  in  the  geometrical  style  known  as  proto-Corinthian
were  found  in  the  dwelling,  and  serve  to  date  it  Near  this  building,
and  perhaps  contemporary  with  it,  Mr.  Staes  discovered  a  pit  about
6  feet  long  and  3  feet  wide,  in  which  were  deposited  a  number  of
objects,  apparently  old  votive  offerings  which  had  been  thrown  away  as
worthless.  Amongst  these  objects  may  be  mentioned  fragments  of
many  vases  of  various  shapes,  eleven  Egyptian  scarabs,  fragments  of
idols  and  of  vessels  made  of  Egyptian  porcelain,  two  clay  tablets  of
peculiar  shape  adorned  with  geometrical  patterns  in  the  so-called
Dipylum  style,  and  lastly  a  terra-cotta  tablet  bearing  in  relief  the  figure
of  a  goddess  who  stands  clad  in  a  striped  petticoat  and  holding  her
hands  to  her  breasts.  The  style  of  the  relief  is  very  rude  and  archaic.
That  the  pit  in  which  these  votive  offerings  were  found  is  older  than  the
neighbouring  temple  and  hence  than  the  fifth  century  B.c.  is  proved
by  its  position  under  the  bed  of  cement  or  concrete  above  which  the
temple  and  sacred  precinct  were  constructed.  At  a  still  lower  depth,
Mr.  Staes  discovered  the  remains  of  a  large  and  complex  building
which  he  at  first  assigned  to  the  Mycenaean  period,  but  which  he  now
dates  still  earlier.  It  is  composed  of  a  number  of  small  quadrangular
rooms,  apparently  dwelling-houses,  built  in  the  same  style  as  the
houses  on  the  acropolis  of  Mycenae.  The  walls,  constructed  of  small
stones  and  clay,  are  thinly  coated  with  cement ;  the  floors  are  paved  with
small  polygonal  stones.  The  doors  are  low  and  narrow  with  sides  that
converge  upward.  Bones  of  animals  and  birds  were  found  in  the
rooms.  Graves  of  three  different  sorts  exist  in  these  dwellings  :  some  are
oblong  and  sunk  beneath  the  fioor ;  others  are  round  and  built  upon  the
floor ;  while  others  are  niches  let  into  the  walls.  In  the  round  graves,
of  which  the  diameter  seems  to  have  been  only  about  1 8  inches,  the
bones  of  the  dead  may  have  been  deposited  in  jars,  as  at  Thoricus  and
Aphidna  (see  above,  pp.  525,  560).  The  niches  in  the  walls  seem  to
have  been  properly  graves  of  infants,  though  bones  of  adults  were  also
found  in  them.  The  practice  of  burying  the  dead,  in  the  house
prevailed,  as  we  have  seen  (above,  p.  525),  at  Thoricus ;  it  is  said  to
have  been  the  regular  custom  in  early  Greece  (Plato,  Minos^  P-  3^5  <!)•


59*  AEGINA—SPHETTUS  addenda

Another  proof  of  the  great  age  of  the  building  discovered  by  Mr.  Staes
is  furnished  by  the  shape  and  style  of  the  pottery  found  in  it,  which
closely  resembles  the  so-called  Msland'  pottery  found  in  Cyprus,
Rhodes,  Thera,  and  Amorgus,  as  well  as  on  the  Acropolis  of  Athens,
in  the  lowest  strata  at  Thoricus,  and  in  the  tumulus  at  Aphidna.  On
the  other  hand  no  certain  trace  of  Mycenaean  art  came  to  light  in  the
course  of  the  excavations.  See  B.  Staes,  in  II/oaKTiica  1^9  ^ApxatoXo-
yiKtp  ^EratpuiSi  1 894,  pp.  17-19;  *E<f>rjfupU  apxawXcyyuctj^  1 895,  pp.
235-264.

P.  265  line  8  from  top,  a  sanctuary  of  Aphaea.  Some  excavations
were  made  here  by  Mr.  Staes  in  1894,  but  without  result  The  walls  of
the  sacred  enclosure,  which  alone  remain,  are  built  of  massive  polygonal
blocks  on  the  west,  but  of  square  blocks  on  the  south,  where  the  ancient
wall  has  clearly  been  repaired.  See  B.  Staes,  in  Ilpcucrtxa  r^
'A/};(aioA.oytic^$ 'Eraiptas,  1894,  p.  20.

P.  266  line  10  from  top,  Anxesia  and  Damia.     An  Epidaunan
inscription,   copied    by   Mr.    Chr.    Blinkenberg    at   the    sanctuary  of
Aesculapius,  records  a  dedication  by  Lucius,  priest  of  Aesculapius,  to
Mnia  and  Ausesia ;  and  in  another  inscription,  copied  by  Mr.  Blinken-
berg at  the  same  place  but  unfortunately  mutilated,  mention  is  made  of
Mnia  and  Azosia.     Both  inscriptions  are  of  Roman  date.     We  can
hardly  doubt  that  Mnia  and  Ausesia  or  Azosia  are  only  altered  forms  of
Damia  and  Auxesia.     See  Chr.  Blinkenberg,  in  Nordisk  Tidsskriftfar
Filologi^  Tredie  Raekke,  3  (1895),  P-  ^^^6  sq.^  Inscriptions  18  aod
19.     The  etymologies  of  the  two  names  have  been  discussed  by  Mr.
O.  A.  Danielssohn.     He  argues  that  the  form  Mnia  is  derived  from
Damia  through  an  intermediate  Dmia  (comparing  Hesychius,  s.v,  ^ia\
and  that  the  root  is  dam  in  the  sense  of  *  build.'     The  name  Auxesia,
Azesia,  or  Azosia  is  derived  by  him  from  a  root  ai's  in  the  sense  of
*grow,'   *  thrive.'     See  O.  A.  Danielssohn,  *  Damia- Amaia  und  Azesia-
Auxesia,'  in  Eranos :  Acta  philologica  Suecana^  i  (Upsala,  1896),  pp.
76-85.     Prof.  B.  Keil  would  derive  the  name  Azosia  or  Azesia  from  a
root  ses^  *  boil,'  *  seethe '  {Mittheilungen  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  20  ( 1 895),
p.  422  sq.),

y.  2y2  line  15  from  foot,  Sphettus.  Mr.  B.  Staes  is  of  opinion
that  the  Attic  township  of  Sphettus  occupied  the  eminence  on  which  the
modern  village  of  Markopoulo  now  stands.  There  are  many  traces  of
ancient  dwellings  here,  especially  near  the  railway-station,  but  that  these
are  the  remains  of  Sphettus  has  not  been  proved.  About  a  mile  and  a
quarter  to  the  south-east  of  Markopoulo^  at  a  place  now  called  Kopresa^
Mr.  Staes  discovered  and  partially  excavated  a  prehistoric  necropolis  of
the  Mycenaean  period.  The  tombs,  which  closely  resemble  those  of
Mycenae  and  Nauplia,  are  cut  out  of  the  rock  and  reached  either  by
very  narrow  descending  passages  or,  in  most  cases,  by  staircases.  The
passages  are  relatively  long,  sometimes  as  long  as  10  metres,  but  not
more  than  3  metres  deep  ;  the  staircases  are  shorter  but  deeper,  often  as
much  as  5  metres  deep.  In  two  of  the  passages  a  niche  is  cut  in  the
right-hand  side  of  the  passage,  just  outside  the  entrance  to  the  sepulchral
chamber.     Each  of  these  niches  was  walled  up  and  contained  a  single


vou  III  TROEZEN  593

body.  The  entrances  to  the  sepulchral  chambers  were  carefully  built  up
from  top  to  bottom.  The  chambers  are  mostly  square.  The  largest,
which  contained  ten  bodies,  is  4  metres  square  and  i\  metres  high  ;  the
smallest,  which  contained  three  bodies,  is  about  2  metres  square  and
2  metres  high.  In  the  two-and-twenty  tombs  here  excavated  by  Mr.
Sta/es  about  200  vases  were  discovered.  They  belong  to  the  later
Mycenaean  period,  exhibiting  the  characteristic  lustrous  glaze  and  a
decoration  composed  chiefly  of  lines  and  spirals  but  sometimes  of  plants
and  shells.  Among  them  are  many  specimens  of  the  stirrup-jar  (see  vol
3.  p.  112)  and  the  wine-pourer  {pinochoe).  Other  objects  found  were  five
bronze  razors,  a  bronze  chisel,  a  gold  ring,  a  silver  ring,  and  a  quantity
of  stone  buttons  (whorls).  See  B.  Staes,  in  'E<f>'qfupis  apxaiokoyiKi]^
1895,  pp.  210-221.

P.  273  line  2  from  top,  Troezen.  I  visited  the  ruins  of  Troezen
I  St  and  2nd  December  1895,  ^^^  ^^^  ^^^^  supplement  from  my
notes  the  description  given  in  the  text

The  scattered  and  insignificant  ruins  lie  at  and  near  the  foot  of  the
mountains  that  bound  the  plain  on  the  west.  Amongst  them  the  most
conspicuous  is  a  high  quadrangular  tower  standing  at  the  eastern
foot  of  the  steep  and  rugged  hill  which  seems  to  have  formed  the
acropolis.  This  tower  is  about  13  paces  square.  Its  lower  part,
to  a  height  of  over  20  feet,  is  ancient,  being  built  of  squared  stones
laid  in  horizontal  courses,  of  which  seventeen  are  preserved.  Its
upper  part,  which  may  be  fi-om  12  to  20  feet  high,  is  mediaeval,  being
constructed  of  small  stones  and  mortar.  The  tower  stands  close  to  the
mouth  of  the  deep  ravine  which,  bounding  the  acropolis  hill  on  the  north,
winds  away  into  the  heart  of  the  mountains  and  is  spanned  a  little  way
up  by  the  DeviFs  Bridge  (see  below).  Some  blocks  of  the  ancient
fortification-wall  abut  on  the  north  side  of  the  tower,  and  another  small
piece  of  the  wall,  built  of  large  roughly  squared  blocks  in  two  courses,
may  be  seen  a  few  yards  to  the  south  of  it.  Further,  some  30  yards
or  so  to  the  south  of  the  tower,  nearer  to  the  village  of  Damala^  are  the
ruins  of  another  square  tower,  built  in  a  wholly  different  style,  its  walls
consisting  of  a  core  of  small  stones  faced  outside  and  inside  with  bricks.

The  hill  which  is  believed  to  have  been  the  acropolis  of  Troezen  is
not  isolated,  but  forms  part  of  the  range  which  bounds  the  plain  on  the
west.  On  the  north  it  descends  abruptly  in  high  rocky  precipices  into
the  ravine  in  which  is  the  Devil's  Bridge.  Olive-groves  extend  up  a
great  part  of  the  steep  southern  slope,  but  beyond  them  the  hill  rises
in  the  form  of  a  crag  or  pinnacle  of  rock,  some  200  feet  or  so  high,
the  small  top  of  which  is  bounded  by  precipices  on  three  sides.  The
view  from  this  airy  summit  is  extensive  and  fine ;  it  comprises  a  great
part  of  the  Attic  coast,  but  Sunium  seemed  to  me  to  be  hidden  by  the
island  of  Calauria ;  and  as  for  Parnassus,  which  is  said  to  be  visible  in
clear  weather  far  to  the  north-west,  I  saw  nothing  of  it,  the  clouds
hanging  low  over  the  mountains  in  that  direction.  Of  ancient  remains
on  the  acropolis  I  did  not  discover  a  single  stone ;  but  on  the  eastern
side  of  the  rocky  pinnacle  into  which  the  hill  runs  up,  I  found,  near  the
top,  considerable  remains  of  a  vaulted  mediaeval  cistern,  and  lower  down

VOL.  V  2  Q


594  TROEZEN  addenda

on  a  small  level  space,  which  but  for  the  crag  above  it  might  be  r^^arded
as  the  top  of  the  hill,  there  are  some  pieces  of  mediaeval  fortifications
built  of  small  stones,  bricks,  and  mortar,  also  ruins  of  rudely-constructed
dwellings.  Still  lower  down  on  the  eastern  slope  of  the  hill  are  two  small
ruined  chapels  which  may  perhaps  occupy  the  sites  of  ancient  temples.

The  DeviPs  Bridge  in  the  ravine  on  the  northern  side  of  the  acropolis
hill  has  been  already  described  (vol.  3.  p.  273).  A  walk  of  ten  minutes
up  the  glen  takes  us  to  it  from  the  high  tower  at  the  foot  of  the  acropolis.
We  follow  a  path  which  leads  along  the  southern  side  of  the  glen,  high
above  the  stream.  At  the  narrowest  point  of  the  ravine,  where  its  sides
are  formed  of  lofty  and  perpendicular  walls  of  rock,  the  path  crosses  the
abyss  by  a  bridge  consisting  of  a  single  small  arch.  This  is  the  DeWFs
Bridge.  High  beetling  crags  rise  above  it ;  one  of  the  rocky  sides  of  the
lyn  beneath  it  is  mantled  thick  with  ferns  and  ivy ;  and  trees  droop  over
the  stream  which  murmurs  in  the  depths  below.  A  snudl  aqueduct,
formed  of  a  groove  cut  in  a  long  single  block  of  stone  crosses  the  bridge
side  by  side  with  the  path.  A  good  deal  of  water  flowed  in  the  ravine
at  the  bridge  when  I  saw  it,  but  some  of  it  was  diverted  to  turn  two  mills
lower  down,  and  lower  still,  in  the  plain,  I  found  the  bed  of  the  stream
quite  dry.  Most  of  its  water  was  probably  used  to  feed  the  luxuriant
lemon-groves  which  line  the  banks  of  the  stream  at  the  point  where  it
issues  from  the  glen.  This  brook  or  mountain  torrent,  now  called  the
Potami  or  Kremastos^  is  probably  the  Golden  Stream  of  Pausanias.

About  a  quarter  of  a  mile  east  of  the  mouth  of  the  ra\ine,  in  the
direction  of  the  sea,  are  some  ruins  of  brick  buildings  which  may  be
Roman.  They  form  two  blocks  side  by  side.  One  block  is  composed
of  thick  walls  built  entirely  of  flat  bricks  ;  the  walls  are  standing  to  a
considerable  height,  and  there  are  arched  recesses  in  them.  The  walls  of
the  other  block  are  not  so  thick  and  their  core  is  made  of  small  stones.

Another  and  much  more  considerable  group  of  ruins,  some  of  which
were  excavated  by  Mr.  Legrand,  a  French  archaeologist,  a  few  years  ago,
is  to  be  seen  some  ten  minutes'  walk  to  the  north  of  the  point  at  which
the  Potami  issues  from  the  glen.  The  most  conspicuous  of  them  is  the
ruined  mediaeval  building  known  as  Palaeo-Episkopi  (vol.  3.  p.  273).
It  stands  on  a  mound ;  the  walls,  built  of  small  stones,  flat  bricks,  and
mortar,  contain  some  fragments  of  antiquity,  comprising  a  few  inscriptions
which  have  been  already  published.

About  100  yards  or  so  to  the  south  of  Palaeo-Episkopi  are  the
remains  of  the  large  building  excavated  by  Mr.  Legrand,  of  which  some
account  has  been  given  in  the  text  (vol.  3.  p.  274).  The  well-buih
walls,  which  are  2  ft.  10  in.  thick  and  nowhere  more  than  2  ft.  6  in.
high,  are  faced  outside  and  inside  with  squared  slabs  of  blue  limestone
set  up  on  their  narrow  edges.  So  far  as  it  is  excavated  the  building
consists  of  a  long  hall  extending  north  and  south,  with  two  wings  pro-
jecting eastward  from  its  two  ends.  The  great  hall,  31  paces  long  by  10
paces  wide,  is  entered  from  the  east  by  two  doorways,  each  6  feet  wide,
the  thresholds  of  which  are  preserved.  All  round  the  hall  there  are
arranged,  in  a  somewhat  peculiar  way,  a  number  of  blocks,  each  ^^-ith  a
quadrangular  groove  cut  in  its  upper  surface.     Many  of  these  blocks  are


VOL.  Ill


TROEZEN


595


preserved  entire  in  their  places.  Each  of  them  measures  3 1  inches  long,
1 1  inches  broad,  and  1 2  inches  high.  The  grooves  are  each  4  inches
wide  and  3  inches  deep ;  they  are  open  at  one  end  of  the  stone,  but
closed  at  the  other.  The  disposition  of  the  blocks  round  the  sides  of  the
hall  seems  to  have  been  this : —


n~rrrnFtJi


3     c


3     c


3       C


The  intervals  marked  b  b  b  are  larger  than  those  marked  a  a.  Of  the
blocks  marked  c  c  c  only  fragments  remain,  not  enough  to  show  with
certainty  whether  they  were  grooved  like  the  others  or  not ;  but  I  think
that  they  were  not  so  grooved.  Lying  about  within  the  building  are  some
thin  broken  slabs  of  white  marble,  which  seem  to  have  measured  3  feet
long  by  1 4  J  inches  wide.  They  may  have  rested  on  the  grooved  blocks
and  so  served  as  seats.  Further,  there  runs  down  the  whole  length  of
the  hall  a  row  of  square  hearths  (?)  equidistant  from  each  other.  There
are  four  of  these  hearths.  Each  is  about  4  feet  square,  and  is  built  of
four  blocks  enclosing  an  empty  space.  This  row  of  hearths,  if  hearths
they  be,  is  nearer  the  west  than  the  east  wall  of  the  hall.  Corresponding
to  them  are  two  hearths  nearer  the  east  than  the  west  wall,  one  at  each
end  of  the  halL  The  floor  of  the  hall  seems  to  have  been  covered  with
a  mosaic  pavement,  of  which  a  small  piece  is  left.  In  the  projecting
wings  at  each  end  there  were  a  number  of  chambers,  which  appear  to
have  been  similarly  fitted  up  with  grooved  blocks  arranged  all  round  the
walls  ;  at  least  this  was  the  case  with  the  chambers  of  the  south  wing,  in
which  remains  of  similar  grooved  blocks  are  to  be  seen.  The  two  doors
in  the  east  wall  of  the  hall  open  into  a  quadrangular  court  which  was
enclosed  on  three  sides  by  the  hall  and  its  wings.  Excavations  in  the
court  have  laid  bare  the  remains  of  four  broad  stone  gutters  or  water-
channels  forming  a  large  rectangle.     Each  channel  is  about  4  fl.  6  in.


Gutter

North
Winff

South
Win^

fl

Gutter

D                                           a

Great    Hall

a             a             □              D

>:-•♦■


wide,  and  consists  of  a  shallow  depression  in  the  stone.     It  is  possible
that  the  building  was  originally  a  quadrangle  enclosing  this  court,  though


596  TROEZEN  addenda

only  three  sides  of  the  quadrangle  have  at  present  been  excavated  ;  for
at  a  distance  of  8^  paces  to  the  east  of  the  eastern  water-channel  a  small
excavation  has  revealed  some  remains  of  what  seems  to  have  been  an
outer  wall  built  in  the  same  style  as  the  other  walls.  Perhaps  the
edifice  was  a  bathing  establishment  with  the  baths  in  a  central  court,
while  all  round  the  court  were  halls  and  rooms  in  which  the  bathers
dressed  and  lounged.  The  plan  of  the  building,  so  far  as  it  has  been
excavated,  is  illustrated  by  the  annexed  cut  (p.  595).

The  remains  of  the  temple  discovered  by  Mr.  Legrand  (sec  vol  3.
p.  274)  are  situated  36  paces  south-west  of  the  large  building  just
described.  Only  the  foundations  are  now  standing,  but  they  are  well
built  and  well  preserved.  They  are  constructed  of  squared  blocks  laid
in  horizontal  courses  and  measure  22  paces  in  length  by  1 1  paces  in
breadth.  At  a  comer  where  their  full  height  has  been  exposed  by  an
excavation  three  courses  of  masonry  are  preserved.  I  was  told  that  a
large  drum  of  a  fluted  Doric  column  which  I  saw  near  the  stadium  had
been  transported  thither  from  the  site  of  the  temple.  The  drum  is
3  ft.  9  in.  in  diameter ;  the  number  of  its  flutes  is  twenty.  At  present
no  architectural  fragments  are  to  be  seen  at  the  temple.

The  stadium  occupied  a  hollow  between  Palaeo-Episkopi  and  the
Poiami  river,  but  much  nearer  to  the  former  than  to  the  latter.  About
70  yards  or  so  to  the  south  of  it  stands  a  house,  the  property  of  a
retired  naval  officer  who  was  good  enough  to  show  me  over  the  group
of  ruins  which  I  have  been  describing.  They  are  all  on  his  land  and
within  a  few  minutes'  walk  of  his  house.  The  race-course  is  now
occupied  by  a  lemon-grove,  where  the  yellow  fruit  hung  ripe  at  the
time  of  my  visit.  At  the  hollow  semicircular  end,  which  opens  east-
ward, there  are  remains  of  a  curved  wall  built  of  large  polygonal  stones.
This  wall  probably  divided  the  seats  of  the  spectators  from  the  race-
course. A  few  yards  to  the  west  of  it  a  spring  rises  among  rocks.  Its
water  flows  into  a  modem  cistem  in  front  of  the  polygonal  wall.  Can
this  spring  be  the  Hippocrene  mentioned  by  Pausanias  (ii.  31.  9)?
More  probably  it  was  the  spring  of  Hercules  which  rose  in  front  of  the
house  of  Hippolytus  (Paus.  ii.  32.  4) ;  for  the  house  of  Hippolytus  may
be  supposed  to  have  been  near  his  stadium.

Lastly,  I  observed  in  its  original  position  one  of  the  three  remark-
able columns  which  Gell  describes  and  which  he  conjectured  might  have
belonged  to  the  very  ancient  sanctuary  of  Thearian  Apollo  mentioned
by  Pausanias.  The  column  stands  by  itself  at  a  spot  between  the
Poiami  river  and  the  stadium,  some  1 50  yards  or  so  to  the  north-east
of  the  mouth  of  the  ravine.  We  came  to  it  in  twenty  minutes  after
passing  the  village  of  Damala.  It  is  a  monolith  of  rather  dark  brown-
ish colour,  eight-sided,  and  9  feet  high.  The  ground  at  the  foot  of  it
has  been  excavated

P.  285  line  24  sqq,  from  foot,  a  holy  sanctuary  of  Poseidon  etc.
Since  the  description  in  the  text  was  printed  I  have  visited  the  sanctuary
of  Poseidon  in  Calauria  (30th  November  1895)  ^i^^  the  Swedish  archae-
ologists who  excavated  it  have  published  their  report  (Mittheil.  d.  arck,
Inst,  in  Athen^  20  (1895),  pp.  267-326),  accompanying  it  with  plans  of


VOL.  Ill  CALAURIA  597

which  one  is  here  reproduced  (pi.  ix.).     The  following  description  is
based  partly  on  their  report  and  partly  on  my  own  notes.

The  sanctuary  is  situated  very  picturesquely  on  a  saddle  between
the  two  highest  peaks  of  the  island,  both  of  which  are  covered  with  pine-
woods.  A  walk  of  about  an  hour  takes  us  to  it  from  Poros^  the  modem
capital  of  the  island.  The  path  at  first  skirts  the  southern  shore  of  the
island  for  a  short  way,  then  turns  and  ascends  in  a  north-westerly
direction  through  the  pine-forest.  From  the  sanctuary,  which  stands
at  a  height  of  about  600  feet  above  the  sea,  beautiful  and  wide  prospects
open  between  the  wooded  hills  both  to  the  north  and  the  south.  We
look  down  on  the  sea  with  its  multitudinous  bays,  creeks,  promontories,
and  islands  stretched  out  before  us  and  framed  as  in  a  picture  between
the  pine-clad  hills  on  either  hand.  A  fitter  home  could  hardly  have
been  found  for  the  sea-god  whose  favourite  tree — the  pine — still  mantles
the  greater  part  of  the  island.

The  temple  of  Poseidon  stood  within  a  separate  precinct  at  the
north-eastern  end  of  the  sanctuary,  away  fix)m  the  other  buildings.  The
precinct  forms  a  rectangle  55.5  metres  long  by  27.6  metres  wide,  and  is
enclosed  by  walls  of  hard  blue  limestone,  about  3  ft.  6  in.  thick,  which
are  preserved  all  round  to  an  average  height  of  about  2  feet.  These
walls  are  meanly  built  of  small  irregular  stones,  like  Scotch  dykes.  The
north  wall  and  part  of  the  east  wall  rest  on  a  four-stepped  base.  There
are  two  openings  in  the  walls  of  the  precinct,  one  on  the  east  and  the
other  on  the  south.  The  eastern  gateway,  situated  in  the  axis  of  the
temple,  was  the  principal  entrance.  Of  the  temple  itself  the  remains
are  exceedingly  scanty,  consisting  almost  entirely  of  a  few  small  pieces
of  pavement  or  foundations  built  of  small  stones  in  a  very  indifierent
style.  From  the  remains,  however,  such  as  they  are.  Prof.  Wide  judges
that  the  temple  was  surrounded  by  a  Doric  colonnade  with  six  columns
at  each  of  the  narrow  ends  and  twelve  columns  on  each  of  the  long
sides.  A  small  Doric  capital,  2  ft.  3  in.  in  diameter,  lies  on  the  ground
on  the  site  of  the  temple,  and  near  it  is  a  fragment  of  a  similar  capital.
According  to  Prof.  Wide,  the  foundations  of  the  colonnade  were  built  of
soft  limestone,  and  the  walls  of  the  temple  of  hard  blue  limestone.  The
cornice  {sima)  was  of  marble  with  palmettes  painted  on  it.  The  clamps,
which  were  of  iron,  had  a  Z  shape  and  were  run  with  lead.  From  the
shape  of  the  clamps  and  other  small  indications  Prof.  Wide  concludes
that  the  temple  was  built  in  the  sixth  century  B.C.

To  the  south-west  of  the  temple  there  lies  a  group  of  buildings
forming  three  sides  of  a  large  quadrangle.  It  comprises  three  colonnades,
a  large  irregularly-shaped  building  with  a  portico  or  colonnade  in  front
and  four  rooms  behind,  and  lastly  a  smaller  building  on  the  south-west
side,  in  which  was  probably  the  portal  leading  into  the  quadrangle.
Of  this  group  of  buildings  the  colonnade  at  the  north-eastern  comer
(marked  East  Colonnade  on  the  plan)  is  the  best  preserved.  It  is  about
22  paces  distant  from  the  sacred  enclosure  of  the  temple.  This
colonnade  faced  south  or,  to  be  more  exact,  south-east,  and  measured
30. 1 5  metres  in  length  by  1 1  metres  in  depth.  Preserved  almost  in
their  entire  length  are  the  stylobate  in  front  and  the  lower  parts  of  the


598  CALAURIA  addknda

three  outer  walls  on  the  east,  north,  and  west  The  stylobate  is
beautifully  constructed  of  large  square  slabs  of  trachyte  measuring
uniformly  6  ft.  6  in.  long,  about  3  feet  wide,  and  about  10  inches  higL
It  rests  upon  a  lower  course  similarly  constructed  of  large  squared  sl^
and  that  again  rests  on  a  foundation-course  built  in  a  commoner  style.
Some  of  the  blocks  of  the  stylobate  are  wanting  at  the  west  end.  The
outer  walls  of  the  colonnade  on  the  east,  north,  and  west  are  3  feet
thick  and  are  standing  throughout  to  a  height  of  from  2  to  3  feel
Each  wall  consists  of  a  core  of  small  stones  faced  on  the  outside  and
inside  with  polygonal  blocks  of  blue  limestone  which  are  well  cut  and
well  fitted  together.  The  faces  of  the  blocks  are  smoothed.  The
masonry  is  excellent  Two  rows  of  columns  ran  along  the  entire
length  of  the  colonnade,  an  outer  row  on  the  south  front,  and  an
inner  row  parallel  to  it  down  the  middle  of  the  building.  The  outer
row  consisted  of  sixteen  Doric  columns,  the  inner  row  of  four  Ionic
columns.  A  drum  of  one  of  the  Doric  columns  made  of  tufa  and
measuring  about  28  inches  in  diameter  is  still  in  position,  and  a  Doric
capital  also  made  of  tu£a  and  measuring  about  33  inches  in  diameter
lies  not  far  off.  The  four  Ionic  columns  of  the  inner  row  rested  on  four
separate  foundations,  which  are  still  preserved.  A  base  of  one  of  the
colunms,  made  of  tufo  and  about  2  ft.  10  in.  in  diameter,  is  standing  on
one  of  the  foundations.  To  judge  from  the  fine  style  of  its  masonry
this  colonnade  must  belong  to  the  best  period  of  Greek  architecture,
probably  to  the  fifth  or  fourth  century  B.C  Prof.  Wide  assigns  it  to  the
fifth  century.

In  a  line  with  this  colonnade  to  the  west  and  divided  from  it  only
by  a  passage  about  1 1  feet  wide,  are  the  remains,  far  less  complete,  of
another  colonnade  which  is  marked  as  the  Middle  Coloimadc  on  the
plan.  It  was  about  33  paces  long,  and  apparently  of  the  same  depth
( 1 1  paces)  as  the  East  Colonnade.  Like  the  East  Colonnade,  too,  it
was  enclosed  on  the  east,  north,  and  west  by  walls  faced  outside  and
inside  with  polygonal  blocks  of  blue  limestone.  These  walls  are  partly
preserved  on  the  north  and  west ;  on  the  east  side  foundations  alone
remain.  Of  the  colonnade  proper  nothing  is  left  but  two  square
foundations  of  columns  of  the  inner  row.

Opposite  to  the  East  Colonnade  and  distant  from  it  about  33  paces
to  the  south,  or  rather  south-east,  is  another  colonnade  which  on  the
plan  I  have  called  the  South  Colonnade.  Its  length  from  east  to  west
is  34.30  metres  and  its  depth  11.80  metres;  the  north  foundation-wall,
ouilt  of  squared  blocks,  is  preserved  throughout.  The  colonnade  opens
to  the  north  or  rather  north-west.^  It  had  two  rows  of  columns,  an
outer  and  an  inner.  The  square  foundations  of  the  five  coliunns  which
composed  the  inner  row  are  preserved.  On  one  of  them  is  standing
the  base  of  an  Ionic  column  made  of  tufa  and  measuring  about  3  feet
in  diameter.  A  fine  Ionic  capital  belonging  to  this  row  of  columns  is
also  preserved,  and  some  pieces  of  a  geison,  with  mutules  and  guttata
made  of  tufa,  are  lying  in  the  colonnade.     The  style  of  masonry  of  this

*  I  make  this  statement  on  the  authority  of  Prof.  Wide's  plan.     According  to  my
notes,  the  colonnade  opens  to  the  south.


If


;    J


VOL.  Ill  CALAURIA  599

colonnade  is  fair,  but  not  so  fine  as  that  of  the  East  Colonnade.  On  a
large  block  which  lies  in  it  I  observed  the  mason's  marks  IIV.  A  few
feet  to  the  north  of  the  Ionic  base  there  is  a  slab  of  white  marble
measuring  34  inches  by  32  inches  and  about  1 1  inches  high,  which
from  its  mouldings  and  the  marks  of  attachment  on  its  upper  surface
evidently  formed  the  top  of  the  pedestal  of  a  statue.

Immediately  to  the  west  of  the  South  Colonnade  is  a  building  of
some  size  (marked  D  on  the  plan)  which  has  the  form  of  a  rectangle
with  a  large  comer  cut  off.  Its  northern  front  is  31.35  metres  and
its  eastern  (or  rather  north-eastern)  wall  31.7  metres  long,  while  the
length  of  its  short  western  (or  rather  south-western)  wall  is  only  13.25
metres.  The  back  wall,  which  was  perhaps  at  the  same  time  the
boundary-wall  of  the  sanctuary,  is  preserved  to  a  considerable  extent
on  the  south  and  south-west.  It  is  built  of  quadrangular  blocks  of  blue
limestone  laid  in  horizontal  courses  of  which  from  two  to  four  are
standing.  The  building  comprised  a  portico  or  colonnade  on  the  north,
four  inner  rooms,  and  apparently  an  open  court  of  irregular  shape
between  these  rooms  and  the  outer  wall.  The  back  walls  of  the  rooms
are  built  of  rough  polygonal  stones.

The  western  or  rather  south-western  side  of  the  great  quadrangle
round  which  the  edifices  just  described  were  grouped  was  closed  by  a
building  (marked  E  on  the  plan)  which  seems  to  have  included  a  portal
leading  into  the  quadrangle,  a  colonnade  opening  in  the  same  direction,
and  two  or  three  rooms  lying  at  the  back  of  the  colonnade.

To  the  south-west  of  this  group  of  buildings,  and  at  a  short  distance
from  them,  are  the  foundations  of  what  seems  to  have  been  a  long
colonnade  with  projecting  wings.  On  the  plan  the  building  is  marked
as  the  West  Colonnade.  It  faced  south-east,  and  its  total  length,
including  the  wings,  is  48.4  metres.  Of  the  back  wall  almost  nothing  is
left,  but  the  foundations  of  an  inner  row  of  columns  are  preserved,  and
from  the  thickness  of  the  front  wall  we  may  infer  that  it  supported  an
outer  row  of  columns.  Best  preserved  are  the  foundations  and  stylobate
of  the  north-eastern  wing.  In  front  of  this  wing  stand  three  foundations
which  probably  supported  statues.  Close  to  it  lies  also  a  quadrangular
pedestal  of  dark  marble  ^  which  from  an  inscription  carved  on  it  appears
to  have  borne  the  statue  of  a  certain  Agasicles,  son  of  Sosiphanes.  From
the  style  of  letters  of  the  inscription  I  judged  it  might  belong  to  the
second  or  first  century  B.C.  Following  a  suggestion  of  Dr.  Ddrpfeld's,
Prof.  Wide  conjectures  that  this  colonnade  with  the  projecting  wings
was  a  Council  House.  The  grounds  for  thinking  that  it  was  so  are,  first,
that  it  resembles  a  building  at  Mantinea  which  on  independent  grounds
is  conjectured  to  have  been  a  Council  House  (see  vol.  4.  p.  216) ;  and,
second,  that  an  inscription  found  by  the  Swedish  archaeologists  at  the
sanctuary  of  Poseidon  makes  mention  of  *■*•  the  statues  at  the  Council
House."  This  inscription  proves  that  there  was  a  Council  House  at  the
sanctuary  and  that  statues  stood  at  or  near  it,  which  accords  very  well
with  the  presence  of  foundations  for  statues  in  front  of  the  colonnade  in
question.

*  Prof.  Wide  says  white  limestone.     I  follow  my  notes.


6oo  CALAURIA  addenda

About  29  paces  to  the  south-west  of  the  West  Colonnade  are  founda-
tions and  walls  of  a  quadrangular  edifice  (marked  G  on  the  plan)  which  I
conjecture  to  have  been  the  dwellings  of  priests  and  officials.  It  appears
to  have  consisted  of  an  open  court  about  12  metres  square  surrounded  by
rooms.  The  building,  whatever  it  was,  stands  on  higher  ground  than  the
rest  of  the  sanctuary,  just  at  the  beginning  of  the  slope  of  the  pine<lad
hill  which  bounds  the  sanctuary  on  the  west  Indeed  the  rooms  abut
on  the  rocks  on  the  top  of  which  the  pine-wood  begins,  and  from  them
charming  views  are  to  be  had  over  the  forest  to  the  sea,  which  with  its
capes  and  islands  is  visible  both  on  the  north  and  the  south.  The  entrance
to  the  building  is  from  the  east.  To  the  left  of  the  entrance  is  a  square
chamber  with  a  well-preserved  floor  of  concrete  ;  a  great  part  of  the  first
course  of  the  walls  of  this  room  is  also  standing.  On  the  opposite  or
western  side  of  the  court  are  two  rooms,  the  walls  of  which  are  standing
to  a  height  of  several  feet.  The  foundations  are  built  of  squared  blocks
of  limestone,  but  in  the  upper  part  of  the  walls  bricks  occur,  which
seems  to  show  that  the  building  was  repaired  in  late,  perhaps  Roman
times ;  but  from  the  style  of  some  ante-fixes  of  terra-cotta  found  on  the
spot  Prof.  Wide  seems  inclined  to  date  the  original  building  in  the  third
century  B.C.  The  door  of  the  larger  of  the  western  rooms  opened  be-
tween two  Ionic  half-columns  ;  the  base  of  one  of  these  half-columns  still
exists.  Stone  benches  seem  to  have  run  round  the  walls  of  this  larger
room,  and  a  statuette  of  Aesculapius,  with  a  dedicatory  inscription  of
Roman  date,  was  found  in  it.  Hence  Prof.  Wide  conjectures  that  the
room  may  have  been  the  meeting-place  of  a  religious  society ;  he  com-
pares a  similar  room  in  the  sanctuary  of  Zeus  the  Hurler  near  Megara
(see  vol.  2.  p.  550).  Rooms  with  stone  benches  running  round  the
walls  have  been  found  also  at  the  Heraeum  (vol.  3.  p.  175)  and  Olympia
(vol.  4.  p.  88).  Stone  benches  also  lined  the  walls  of  the  long  colonnade
in  the  sanctuary  of  Amphiaraus  (vol.  2.  p.  468).  In  the  building  which
I  conjecture  to  have  been  the  priests'  dwelling  I  observed  some  frag-
ments of  thick  red  pottery,  a  piece  of  a  small  fluted  column  of  tufa,  and
two  small  quadrangular  bases.

The  objects  found  in  the  sanctuary  by  Messrs.  Wide  and  Kjellberg
were  few  and  on  the  whole  unimportant.  Most  of  them  were  discovered
in  the  earth  which  had  been  heaped  up  in  order  to  obtain  a  level
area  for  the  precinct  enclosing  the  temple  of  Poseidon.  Amongst
the  objects  here  brought  to  light  were  sherds  of  the  various  early
kinds  of  pottery  known  as  Mycenaean,  geometrical,  proto- Corinthian,
and  Corinthian.  As  nothing  more  recent  than  Corinthian  pottery  was
found  in  this  rubbish-heap.  Prof.  Wide  infers  that  the  precinct  may
have  been  constructed  in  the  sixth  century  B.C.  But  the  discovery  of
Mycenaean  potsherds  on  the  spot  goes  to  show,  as  he  rightly  observes,
that  a  sanctuary  of  some  sort  existed  here  at  a  much  remoter  era.
Amongst  the  inscriptions  found  is  one  which  mentions  Amphictyoncs
and  Sacred  Secretaries  {hieromnamones).  The  significance  of  this
inscription,  which  is  overlooked  by  the  editors,  has  been  pointed  out
by  Professor  von  Wilamowitz  -  Moellendorff  (*  Die  Amphiktionie  von
Kalaurea,'  Nachrichten  von  der  konigL  sacks.  GeselL  cUr  Wissenschaften^


VOL.  Ill  ASINE  6oi

Philolog.  historische  Klasse,  1896,  Heft  2.  pp.  158-170).  It  proves
that  at  the  time  when  the  inscription  was  carved,  perhaps  in  the  third
century  B.C,  the  league  of  which  Strabo  speaks  (viii.  p.  374)  still
existed.     See  vol.  3.  p.  286.

A  walk  of  about  half  an  hour  down  from  the  sanctuary  in  a  north-
easterly direction  brings  us  to  the  Bay  of  Vajonia^  where  some  remains
of  ancient  docks  or  ship-sheds  may  still  be  seen.  This,  therefore,  was
the  port  of  the  ancient  sanctuary.  A  road  led  from  it  by  a  gentle  ascent
up  the  northern  declivity  of  the  mountain  to  the  shrine,  ending  between
the  West  Colonnade  and  the  edifice  which  I  conjecture  to  have  been  the
abode  of  the  priests.  The  harbour  may  have  sheltered  the  vessels  of
the  seven  cities  which  made  up  the  league  of  Calauria.

P.  299  line  3  sqq,  from  top,  Asine  etc.  I  visited  Asine  from
Nauplia  9th  December  1895,  and  will  describe  the  ancient  remains
from  my  notes.

The  ruins  of  Asine  occupy  a  peninsula  or  headland  which  rises  into  a
rocky  pinnacle  on  its  northern  or  landward  side,  just  above  the  isthmus
which  unites  it  to  the  land.  The  bay  into  which  the  headland  projects
is  spacious  and  possesses  a  fine  shelving  beach  of  sand  and  pebbles.  A
level  maritime  plain,  occupied  by  cornfields  and  olives,  borders  on  the
bay  to  the  east  and  north-east  of  the  peninsula.  On  the  other  hand  the
peninsula  itself  is  for  the  most  part  a  mass  of  rugged  rocks  which  on  the
east  and  west  descend  in  precipices  into  the  sea.  But  at  the  north-
western foot  of  the  cape,  below  a  line  of  high  precipitous  rocks,  there  is
a  stretch  of  comparatively  level  ground ;  and  again  on  the  eastern  side
of  the  peninsula,  above  the  rocks,  there  are  some  terraces  of  earth.  On
these  more  level  parts  the  ancient  town  probably  stood,  but  it  can  never
have  been  a  large  one.  In  regard  to  its  defences,  the  peninsula  is  pro-
tected on  the  east  and  west  by  sea-cliffs  which  might  seem  to  render
fortifications  unnecessary ;  and  on  the  west  side  there  appears  in  fact  to
have  been  no  wall  except  in  a  narrow  opening  between  the  cliffs  through
which  a  steep  slope  leads  down  to  the  water's  edge.  At  its  southern
extremity,  on  the  other  hand,  towards  the  open  sea  the  promontory  slopes
more  gradually  and  a  rugged  path  here  leads  down  through  the  rocks  to
the  water.  On  this  side,  accordingly,  a  fortification- wall,  of  which  there
are  remains,  crossed  the  peninsula  from  west  to  east  at  the  head  of  the
slope,  and  it  was  continued  round  the  angle  on  the  east  side,  where  there
are  also  remains  of  it.  It  may  very  well  have  been  continued  all  along
the  eastern  face  of  the  peninsula,  above  the  sea-cliffs,  though  beyond  a
certain  point  it  has  now  disappeared.  On  the  landward  or  northern  side
of  the  headland  there  is  also  a  line  of  high  rocks  which  contributes  to
the  natural  strength  of  the  place,  and  this  natural  defence  was  further
strengthened  by  a  fortification-wall  running  along  the  top  of  the  rocks.
The  points  at  which  Asine  was  most  easily  accessible  and  therefore
weakest  were  at  the  north-eastern  and  north-western  foot  of  the  rocky
peninsula,  above  the  shore  of  the  bay.  Both  these  places  were  accord-
ingly protected  by  fortifications,  of  which  remains  exist.

The  fortifications  of  Asine  seem  clearly  to  belong  to  three  different
periods,  the  Mycenaean,  the  Greek,  and  the  Venetian,      (i)  Of  the


602  ASINB  ADDENDA

Mycenaean  walls  the  remains  are  but  scanty.  To  affirm,  as  Schliemann
did,  that  they  are  better  preserved  than  the  walls  of  Tiryns  is  a  most
monstrous  exaggeration.  Such  as  they  are,  they  are  best  seen  in  the
wall  which  crosses  the  peninsula  from  east  to  west  on  its  southern
or  seaward  side.  Parts  of  this  wall  are  built  in  true  Cyclopean  or
Mycenaean  £aishion  of  great  blocks  of  stone  hardly  fitted  together ;  one
block  is  2  metres  long  and  i  metre  high,  another  is  2  metres  long  and
1.85  metres  high.  Further,  at  the  eastern  end  of  the  waU,  where  it  has
turned  the  angle  and  begun  to  follow  the  eastern  face  of  the  peninsula,
there  is  a  square  projecting  tower  built  of  true  Cyclopean  masonry.  It
measures  13  paces  on  the  front  and  10  paces  on  the  sides  and  supports
a  terrace  of  earth,  above  the  surface  of  which  the  walls  of  the  tower  do
not  rise.  The  front  wall  of  the  tower,  supporting  the  terrace,  is  about
3  metres  high ;  it  is  built  of  large  rough  blocks  scarcely  hewn  on  the
outside  and  only  rudely  fitted  together.  Within  the  tower,  that  is  on  the
small  terrace  supported  by  it,  there  are  remains  of  Cyclopean  walls  and
a  cavity  in  the  ground  which  seems  to  have  been  a  cistern.  But  even
the  southern  wall  of  Asine,  though  in  part  Mycenaean  or  Cyclopean  in
style,  is  by  no  means  exclusively  so.  Beginning  on  the  western  edge
of  the  peninsula  with  a  small  square  tower  built  of  large  roughly-
hewn  quadrangular  blocks,  it  is  preserved  unbroken  for  about  30  paces
eastward.  Both  faces  of  the  wall  are  standing.  It  is  1.80  metres
thick,  and  is  standing  to  a  height  varying  from  i  metre  to  about  2.70
metres.  The  stones  of  which  it  is  composed  are  of  various  sizes,
roughly  cut  in  polygons  and  fitted  together ;  but  the  masonry,  though
rough,  seems  too  regular  to  be  called  Cyclopean  or  Mycenaean  except
for  a  few  yards  at  the  west  end.  The  same  rough  polygonal,  but  not
Cyclopean,  masonry  appears  again  in  a  projecting  angle  of  the  wall  on
the  south-eastern  face  of  the  peninsula,  close  to  the  Cyclopean  tower
already  described.  The  wall,  where  it  makes  this  projecting  angle,  is
3.50  metres  high.  The  other  two  places  where  remains  of  Mycenaean
or  Cyclopean  masonry  may  be  seen  are  in  the  gap  between  the  cliffs
on  the  western  side  of  the  peninsula  and  again  in  the  fortification-wall  at
the  north-western  foot  of  the  peninsula.  In  the  former  place — the  gap
between  the  cliffs — there  are  remains  of  a  roughly-built  wall  of  ill-fitting
blocks  some  few  yards  long  and  6  or  7  feet  high.  In  the  latter  place —
the  fortification- wall  at  the  north-western  foot  of  the  peninsula — there  is
a  piece  of  a  similar  rough  wall  under  a  wall  of  a  totally  different  kind,
namely  a  wall  of  well-jointed  polygonal  masonry  which  certainly  belongs
to  the  good  Greek  period.  Both  these  pieces  of  rough  walls  are  prob-
ably, though  not  certainly,  Mycenaean.  That  there  was  a  Mycenaean
settlement  at  Asine  is  proved  by  the  abundant  remains  of  painted
Mycenaean  pottery  on  the  peninsula,  especially  on  its  south-western
side.  I  picked  up  and  brought  away  a  good  many  small  sherds  which
seemed  to  me  Mycenaean.

(2)  Of  the  fortifications  belonging  to  the  Greek  or  classical  age  there
are  massive  remains  at  the  north-eastern  foot  of  the  peninsula,  facing
eastward  across  the  sandy  beach  of  the  bay.  The  remains  consist  of  a
wall  built  of  well-cut  and  well-jointed  polygonal  blocks  and  strengthened


VOL,  III  ASINE—LERNA  603

with  two  square  projecting  towers,  which  are  built  to  some  extent  in  the
same  style  though  with  a  strong  tendency  to  quadrangular  blocks  and
horizontal  courses.  The  wall  is  standing  to  a  height  of  from  4.50
metres  to  5  metres.  The  more  easterly  of  the  towers  is  9  metres  broad
and  projects  7  metres  from  the  wall.  Its  height  maybe  about  8.50
metres ;  fourteen  courses  of  masonry,  each  apparently  averaging  about
.60  or  .70  metre,  are  preserved.  Though  the  tower  is  square,  its
comers  are  rounded.  The  other  tower  of  the  Greek  period,  further
west,  is  partly  ruinous,  but  its  northern  face  is  standing  to  a  height  of
about  4  metres.  Its  style  of  masonry  is  intermediate  beti^'een  the  poly-
gonal and  rectangular.  Still  further  to  the  west  are  more  remains  of
the  historical  Greek  period.  One  is  a  piece  of  a  square  tower  well  built
in  horizontal  courses,  of  which  four  are  preserved,  giving  a  height  of
2.30  metres.  This  tower  stands  on  flat  ground  at  the  northern  foot
of  the  rocky  peninsula.  Beside  it  are  some  mediaeval  ruins  and  a
little  to  the  west  of  it  is  a  chapel  of  the  Panagia.  Another  remnant
of  the  historical  Greek  period  is  a  square  tower  of  polygonal
masonry  built  tolerably  high  up  on  the  rocky  northern  face  of  the
peninsula,  immediately  above  the  battlemented  Venetian  wall  which  is
a  conspicuous  feature  of  Asine  on  this  side.  The  tower  in  question  is
about  5  metres  square  and  several  metres  high.  On  the  west  it  abuts
on  high  precipitous  rocks.  The  last  piece  of  fortification  belonging  to
the  classical  Greek  age  which  we  have  to  notice  is  a  wall  at  the  north-
western foot  of  the  peninsula,  just  above  the  beach  and  facing  west
across  the  bay.  This  wall,  about  30  paces  long,  consists  at  its  southern
end  of  well-jointed  polygonal  masonry  built  on  the  top  of  a  rough  wall
which  is  probably  Mycenaean  (see  above).  Here  the  wall  is  between
2  and  3  metres  high.  At  its  northern  end  only  one  course  of  the  poly-
gonal wall  is  visible  above  ground.

(3)  A  mediaeval  wall,  battlemented  in  part  and  built  of  small  stones,
bricks,  and  mortar,  runs  along  the  crest  of  some  of  the  high  rocks  on
the  northern  and  north-eastern  face  of  the  peninsula.  To  some  extent
it  stands  on  the  top  of  portions  of  the  ancient  Greek  wall  built  of  poly-
gonal masonry  which  has  been  already  described.  This  battlemented
wall  is  no  doubt  a  work  of  the  Venetians.

Within  the  fortification-wall  at  the  north-eastern  foot  of  the  peninsula
there  is  a  short  piece  of  wall  built  of  good  ashlar  masonry  which  may
have  formed  part  of  the  inner  side  of  a  gateway.  The  place  would  be
appropriate  for  a  gateway,  as  the  peninsula  is  easily  accessible  on  this
side.

P.  300  line  22  sqq,  from  top,  a  mountain  which  they  call  Pontinos
etc.  I  visited  Lema  8th  December  1895,  and  the  notes  I  made  on  the
spot  may  help  to  give  the  reader  a  clearer  idea  of  the  situation  of  the
marsh  and  of  the  Pontinus  and  Amymone  streams.

At  the  southern  end  of  the  great  Argolic  plain  Mount  Pontinus
advances  abruptly  eastward  to  within  a  few  hundred  yards  of  the  sea.
South  of  it  the  hills  again  retire,  leaving  another  small  maritime  plain
between  their  base  and  the  beach.  The  pass  between  the  foot  of
Mount  Pontinus  and  the  sea  may  be  about  half  a  mile  long  from  north  to


6o4  LERNA  addenda

south  by  300  yards  wide.  Within  this  narrow  space  are  comprised  the
two  ancient  streams  the  Pontinus  and  the  Amymone,  the  Lemaean
marsh,  and  the  modem  village  of  Lerna.  The  two  streams  rise  at  the
foot  of  the  mountain  but  at  opposite  ends  of  the  pass,  the  Pontinus  at
the  northern  and  the  Amymone  at  the  southern  end.  Most  of  the
Lemaean  marsh  lies  between  them,  but  much  nearer  to  the  Amymcme.
Indeed  the  Amymone,  in  its  short  course,  flows  through  the  marsh,  which
it  partly  feeds  ;  whereas  the  Pontinus  is  clear  away  from  it  to  the  north.
The  modem  village  of  Lerna,  a  station  on  the  railway  line  from  Argos
to  Tripolitsa^  lies  a  quarter  of  a  mile  or  so  to  the  south  of  the  Pontinus,
immediately  to  the  north  and  east  of  the  marsh.

Mount  Pontinus  which  rises  above  the  village  is  a  hill  of  no  great
height,  but  of  broad  massive  outline.  On  its  crest  are  seen  from  below
against  the  sky  the  walls  and  towers  of  a  mediaeval  castle  crowning  the
summit.  The  slope  of  the  hill  towards  Lema  is  on  the  whole  even  and
uniform  and  tufted  with  low  plants,  but  toward  the  south-east  it  is
broken  by  some  high  lines  of  rocks.  The  carriage-road  from  Argos
skirts  the  foot  of  the  hill  and  traverses  the  village.  Beside  the  road
rise  the  springs  both  of  the  Pontinus  brook  and  the  Amymone ;  and
between  the  road  and  the  sea  is  the  Lemaean  marsh.  In  approaching
Lema  from  Argos  and  entering  the  pass  between  Mount  Pontinus
and  the  sea  we  first  come  to  the  msh-fringed  spring  of  the  Pontinus  on
the  left  side  of  the  road.  The  stream  is  a  mere  brook  of  clear  water
bordered  by  rushes  and  tall  grasses  and  almost  choked  with  green
water-plants.  A  great  part  of  the  water  is  diverted  at  the  spring  to
turn  a  mill  which  stands  on  the  shore  some  30  or  40  yards  north  of
the  mouth  of  the  stream.  The  whole  course  of  the  brook  from  its
source  to  the  sea  is  probably  not  more  than  200  or  300  yards.

After  passing  the  source  of  the  Pontinus  and  traversing  in  a  few
minutes  the  village  of  Lema  we  come  to  the  springs  of  the  Amymone,
which  rise  beside  the  road  at  the  southern  end  of  the  village,  a  few  yards
to  the  north  of  a  white-washed  chapel  of  St.  John.  The  springs  are
copious  and  issue  from  under  rocks,  forming  at  once  a  shallow  pool  of
beautifully  clear  water,  from  which  the  stream  flows  towards  the  sea  in  a
bed  fringed  with  reeds.  Great  beds  of  reeds,  marking  the  site  of  the
Lemaean  marsh,  grow  also  beside  the  pool  and  in  the  narrow  stretch  of
flat  swampy  ground  between  it  and  the  sea.  A  fig-tree  has  rooted
itself  among  the  rocks  from  which  the  springs  flow,  and  a  few  yards
further  off  to  the  south  are  a  mulberry-tree  and  a  silver  poplar.  Some
eighty  yards  or  so  to  the  north-east  of  the  springs  but  completely  hidden
by  a  screen  of  trees  is  the  Alcyonian  Lake  described  by  Pausanias.
It  is  a  pool  of  still,  dark,  glassy  water  surrounded  by  great  reeds
and  grasses  and  tall  white  poplars  with  silvery  stems.  Though  distant
only  about  thirty  yards  from  the  highroad  and  the  village  the  spot  is  as
wild  and  lonely  as  if  it  lay  in  the  depths  of  some  pathless  forest  of  the
New  World.  I  sought  it  for  some  time  in  vain,  and  when  at  last  I
came  upon  it,  in  the  waning  light  of  a  winter  aftemoon,  everything
seemed  to  enhance  the  natural  horror  of  the  scene.  The  sky  was  dark
save  for  one  gleam  of  sunlit  cloud  which  was  reflected  in  the  black  water


VOL.  in  LERNA--THYREATIS  605

of  the  pool.  The  wind  sighed  among  the  reeds  and  rustled  the  thin  leaves
of  the  poplars.  Altogether  I  could  well  imagine  that  superstitions  might
gather  about  this  lonely  pool  in  the  marsh.  Of  such  a  spot  in  England
tales  of  unhappy  love,  of  murder  and  suicide  would  be  told.  To  the
Greeks  of  old  it  seemed  one  of  the  ways  to  hell.  The  man  who  drove
me  from  Argos  said,  like  Pausanias,  that  the  pool  had  never  been
fathomed  and  was  bottomless.

In  its  short  course  to  the  sea  the  Amymone  assumes  the  proportions
of  a  broad  full  stream,  in  fact  of  a  small  river  not  unlike  the  Cam  at
Granchester.  But  the  greater  part  of  its  water  comes,  I  think,  not  from
the  springs  beside  the  road,  but  from  the  Alcyonian  Lake,  in  which
there  seem  to  be  deep  subterranean  springs.  Close  to  the  sea  the
stream,  after  flowing  through  the  reedy  marsh,  expands  into  a  millpond,
fringed  with  grass,  white  poplars  and  other  trees,  which  is  divided  from
the  beach  only  by  an  embankment  and  a  stone  dyke.  Part  of  the
water  of  the  pond  turns  a  mill  beside  the  shore ;  the  rest  is  diverted
into  a  canal,  shaded  by  trees  and  bordered  by  rushes  and  water-grasses,
which  skirts  the  beach  for  a  short  way  southward  and  then  allows  the
pent-up  water  to  escape  with  an  impetuous  flow^  into  the  sea.  The
narrow  beach  is  of  fine  sand,  firm  under  the  tread.  Beyond  the  out-
flow of  the  canal  the  stone  dyke  is  continued  for  a  little  way  further
south  along  the  shore  and  is  then  joined  by  a  wall  which  strikes  down
eastward  from  near  the  highroad  to  the  sea.  About  20  yards  further
south  there  is  a  parallel  wall  which,  however,  stops  short  a  few  yards
before  it  reaches  the  shore.  The  object  of  these  parallel  walls  was
doubtless  to  confine  the  Lemaean  marsh  on  the  south  and  to  prevent  it
from  inundating  the  cornfields  and  olive-groves  of  the  neighbouring  plain.

P.  305  line  1 1  from  foot,  what  is  called  Anigraea  etc.  On  the
difficult  question  of  the  topography  of  Thyreatis  see  R.  Heberdey,  Die
Reisen  des  Pausanias  in  Gtiechenland^  P*  5^  -f^^-  In  agreement  with
Lolling  he  would  identify  the  ruins  called  Helleniko  as  those  of  Thyrea,
the  capital  of  the  district.  He  observes  that  Thyrea  is  not  mentioned
and  hence  was  probably  not  visited  by  Pausanias,  who  seems  on  enter-
ing the  Thyrean  plain  from  the  north  by  the  Anigraean  pass  to  have
immediately  turned  inland  up  the  valley  of  the  Tanus  and  ascended  it
till  he  reached  the  Laconian  frontier  on  the  crest  of  Mount  Pamon,
about  3  miles  or  so  beyond  the  modem  village  of  H,  Petros,  Mr.
Heberdey  supposes  that  all  the  three  villages  mentioned  by  Pausanias,
namely  Athene,  Neris,  and  Eva,  were  on  this  route.  Athene  he
would  place  at  Loukou^  Neris  at  Oraeo-Kastro^  and  Eva  at  H,  Petros,

P.  308  line  1 7  from  top,  the  monastery  of  Loukon.  Four  large
marble  columns  have  lately  been  found  at  the  spring  near  the  monastery
{Mittheilungen  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  A  then,  21  (1896),  p.  466).

P.  315  line  5  from  top,  took  sanctuary  etc.  Sanctuaries  for
criminals  existed  also  among  the  Califomian  Indians  (Boscana,  *■  Chinig-
chinich,'  appended  to  [A.  Robinson's]  Life  in  California  (New  York,
1846),  p.  262)  ;  and  sanctuaries  taking  the  form  of  cities  of  refuge  are
found  among  the  Kafirs  of  the  Hindu  Kush  (Sir  George  S.  Robertson,
The  Kafirs  of  the  Hindu  Kush  (London,  1896),  p.  441)  and  in  some


6o6  DECELEA  addenda

parts  of  West  Africa  (Miss  Mary  H.  Kingsley,  Travels  in  West  Africa^
(London,  1897),  p.  466).  In  regard  to  the  West  African  towns  of  this
class  Miss  Kingsley  was  good  enough  to  give  me  in  conversation  some
details  which  do  not  appear  in  her  book.  The  Jews  also  had  their
cities  of  refuge  (Numbers  xxxv.  6,  Deuteronomy  iv.  41-43,  xix.  i-io,
Joshua  XX.).  In  the  light  of  these  instances  it  becomes  probable  that
the  tradition  as  to  the  origin  of  Rome  was  well  founded.  To  this  sub-
ject I  hope  to  return  elsewhere.

P.  317  line  II  sqq.^  Decelea  etc.  The  township  of  Decelea  seems,
according  to  Prof  Milchhofer,  to  have  had  its  centre  in  the  hollow
between  the  King's  park  at  Tatoi  and  the  hill  which  bounds  the  hollow
on  the  south.  Traces  of  walls  and  large  single  blocks  of  limestone
may  be  seen  extending  from  the  new  inn  to  the  royal  stables.  The
inscription  referred  to  in  the  text  was  found  near  the  stables.  On  the
hill  which  closes  the  hollow  towards  the  south  is  a  ruined  fortress  which
Prof  Milchhofer  believes  to  be  the  one  erected  by  the  Lacedae-
monians in  4 1 3  B.C.  The  wall  still  encircles  the  hill  about  half-way  up
except  on  the  south-east  side,  where  it  seems  to  have  approached
the  summit  It  forms  an  ellipse  about  800  metres  in  circumference.
Only  the  lower  courses  remain,  and  of  them  nothing  but  the  outer
surface  is  visible,  the  wall  serving  as  a  support  to  the  soil  above.  The
blocks  are  of  moderate  size  and  not  all  of  them  are  squared.  See  A
Milchhofer,  in  Karten  von  Attika^  Erldutemder  Text^  Heft  vii.  viii.
p.  2  sq,

P.  330  line  13  from  foot,  those  who  sail  to  India.     To  the
literature  dealing  with  the  subject  of  Greek  intercourse  with  India  may
be  added  an  article  by  Mr.   S.  L^vi,  *  La  Gr^ce  et  Tlnde  d'apr^  les
documents  indiens,'  published  in  the  Revue  des  Etudes  grecquesy  4  (1891),
pp.  24-45.

P.  340  line  2  from  top,  Lycorgiis.  The  historical  existence  of  the
Spartan  legislator  Lycurgus  is  defended  with  characteristic  good  sense
and  insight  by  J.  Topffer  {Beiirdge  zur  griechischen  Altertumswissen-
schaft  (Berlin,  1897),  pp.  347-362).  It  should  never  have  been  called
in  question.

P.  340  line  8  from  foot,  Artemis  Anaeitis.  Mention  is  made  of
Artemis  Anaeitis  (or  Anaitis)  in  Lydian  inscriptions.  See  Moixrcioi^  icai
PiPXioOrjKrj  r^9  EuayycXiKT/s  ]SxoAr}9  (Smyrna,  1880),  pp.  127,  164;
Revue  arcA/o/ogique,  3 me  Sdrie,  6  (1885),  p.  105.

P.  348  line  3  from  top,  Death.  The  Greek  conception  of  death  as
embodied  in  literature  and  art  is  the  subject  of  a  recent  monograph  by
Mr.  A  de  Ridder  {De  Vidde  de  la  mort  en  Grlce  d  lUpoque  classique^
Paris,  1897).

P.  359  line  14  sq.  from  foot,  little  leaden  figures  etc.  On  these
votive  offerings  see  P.  Perdrizet,  *  Offrandes  archaiques  du  Menelaion
et  de  I'Amyclaion,'  Revue  archdologique^  3me  S^rie,  30  (1897),  pp.  8-
19,  where  many  of  them  are  figured.  Among  the  tiny  statuettes  are
several  of  winged  goddesses,  and  one  of  a  goddess  (probably  Artemis)
shooting  an  arrow  from  a  bow.  Two  represent  lions.  Some  of  the
figures  are  now  at  Munich,  others  at  Athens.     A  few  objects  of  the


VOL.  Ill  MESSENE  607

same  sort  were  found  by  Mr.  Tsountas  in  the  sanctuary  of  Apollo  at
Amydae.

P.  365  line  19  from  foot,  Hellenes Hellas.    The  history  of  the

names  Hellas  and  Hellenes  has  been  examined  by  Prof.  J.  B.  Bury
(Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  15  (1895),  pp.  217-238).  He  attempts
to  show  how  the  name  Hellas,  from  designating  originally  a  small
territory  in  the  south  of  Thessaly,  came  in  time  to  stand  for  the
whole  of  Greece.  According  to  him,  there  was  an  intermediate  stage
when  the  name  was  applied  to  the  district  in  the  north  of  Peloponnese
afterwards  known  as  Achaia.  This,  he  holds,  is  the  application  which
the  name  has  in  Odyssey,  xv.  80,  where  Menelaus  proposes  to  conduct
Telemachus  ''through  Hellas  and  mid  Argos."  The  name  Hellenes,
on  Prof  Bur/s  theory,  did  not  come  into  use  as  a  general  name  for  all
the  Greeks  until  the  seventh  century  B.C.

P.  389  line  15  from  top,  a  wide-spread  custom  of  throwing
offerings  into  volcanoes  etc.  The  Indians  of  Nicaragua  used  to  throw
maidens  into  the  volcano  of  Masaya,  "  thinking  by  their  lives  to  appease
the  fire,  that  it  might  not  destroy  the  country"  (Herrera,  General
History  of  Americay  translated  by  Capt.  John  Stevens,  vol.  3.  p.  341).

P.  398  line  24  from  foot,  the  dolphin  at  Poroselene.  In  the  reign
of  Augustus  there  is  said  to  have  been  a  dolphin  which  carried  a  boy
on  its  back  daily  to  and  from  school  between  Baiae  and  Puteoli  (Pliny,
Nat,  hist  ix.  25  ;  Solinus,  xii.  7  sq.  ed.  Th.  Mommsen).  Poroselene,
or  Pordoselene  as  it  seems  to  have  been  more  properly  called,  was
an  island  between  Lesbos  and  the  mainland  (Strabo,  xiii.  p.  618  j^.  ;
Scylax,  Periplusy  97).  On  the  question  of  the  credibility  of  the  story
here  told  by  Pausanias  see  the  Introduction.

P.  420.  The  statement  of  Pausanias  (iv.  2J,  11)  as  to  the  per-
sistence of  the  Doric  dialect  in  Messenia  down  to  a  late  time  is  con-
firmed by  inscriptions  (Dittenberger  und  Purgold,  Die  Inschriften  von
Olymfna,  p.  502,  note  on  No.  399).

P.  429  line  12  from  foot,  Messene.  Excavations  made  by  the
Greek  Archaeological  Society  in  1895  ^^i^  ^^^^  ^  great  part  of  the
ancient  market-place,  including  a  stately  building  with  colonnades  and
portals.  A  fountain,  supposed  to  be  the  ancient  Arsinoe  mentioned  by
Pausanias  (iv.  31.  6),  was  also  found:  one  of  the  marble  walls  with  a
spout  is  preserved,  and  in  the  interior  is  a  piece  of  a  marble  conduit  or
aqueduct.  Amongst  the  inscriptions  discovered  is  one  that  describes
the  boundaries  of  Messene.  Another  mentions  a  certain  Marcus  who
had  built  the  four  colonnades  of  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius ;  and
another  speaks  of  a  man  Aristeus  who  had  been  sent  as  an  ambassador
of  Greece  to  Nero.  See  Mittheilungen  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  A  then,  20
(1895),  p.  375;  Athenaeum,  21st  December  1895,  p.  879;  Berliner
philolog.  Wochenschrift,  6th  January  1896,  p.  735  sq, ;  American  Journal
of  Archaeology,  11  (1896),  p.  244;  Classical  Review,  10  (1896),  p.  76.

P.  435  line  15  sqq,  from  top,  the  victims black  btdls  etc.

A  wealthy  man  of  Elatea  provided  in  his  will,  which  is  partially  preserved
in  an  inscription,  that  a  bull  should  be  periodically  sacrificed  and  games
held  at  his  tomb  (C.  /.  G,  G,  S.  3.  No.  128).


6o8  PYLUS  AND  SPHACTERIA  addenda

P.  456  line  1 7  from  top,  Coryphasinin Pylns.     Fresh  light  has

been  thrown   on   the  topography  of  Pylus  or  Coryphasium  and  the
neighbouring  island  of  Sphacteria,  as  well  as  on  Thucydides's  nariati^'e
of  the  military  operations   there  in  425   ac,  by  the   researches  of
Messrs.  G.  B.  Grundy  and  R.  M.  Burrows,  who  in   1895   by  a  some-
what curious  coincidence  examined   both   sites   independently  at  an
interval  of   a  week   or   two.       Mr.    Grundy  made   a   survey  of  the
ground   which   he  has   published   along   with   a   paper   in   which  he
propounds  certain  novel  theories  as  to  the  battles  and  Thucydides's
account  of  them  (Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,   16  (1896),   pp.  1-54,
with  plates  ii.  and  iii.).     The  results  of  Mr.  Burrows's  researches  axe
set  forth  in  the  same  journal  (vol.  16  (1896),  pp.   55-76)  in  an  able
article,   which  may  be  regarded  as  the  most   important    contribution
yet  made  towards  the  elucidation  of  Thucydides's  narrative.      Both
writers  confirm  in  the  most  positive  manner  two  of  the  conclusions
which,  without  having  visited  the  site,  I  had  adopted  in  the  text.     The
first   of  these   conclusions   is,  that   Arnold's  well-known  proposal  to
identify  Palaeo-Kastro  with  Sphacteria  and  the  hill  of  Hagio  Nikdo
with  Pylus  is  absolutely  refuted  by  a  study  of  the  ground,  which  proves
beyond  question  or  cavil  that  the  island  still  called   Sphagia  is  the
ancient  Sphacteria  and  that  Palaeo-Kastro  is  the  Pylus  or  Coryphasium
of  Thucydides  and  Pausanias.     The  second  conclusion  in  which  Mr.
Grundy  and  Mr.  Burrows  agree  unhesitatingly  is  that  the  lagoon  of
Osman  Aga  at  the  eastern  foot  of  Palaeo-Kastro  is  not,  as  Leake  and
others  have  supposed,  a  modem  encroachment  of  the  sea  upon  what  in
antiquity  was  a  level  stretch  of  sand,  but  that  on  the  contrary  it  is  an
old  arm  of  the  sea  which  has  been  converted  into  a   lagoon  by  the
gradual  growth  of  sandbars  both  on  the  north  and  the  south,  and  which
is  now  in  process  of  being  silted  up.     Both  writers  are  of  opinion  that
the  lagoon  existed  as  a  navigable  sheet  of  water  in  the  time  of  Thucy-
dides and  communicated  with  the  bay  of  Narvarino  on  the  south  by  a
channel  which  was  also  navigable  for  ancient  ships.     They  only  differ
as  to  the  probable  width  of  the  channel,  Mr.  Grundy  assuming  that  it
was  narrow  and  Mr.   Burrows  that   it  was  wide.     The  latter  view  is
made  the  more  probable  by  Thucydides's  silence  as  to  the  existence  of
the  lagoon.     For  if  the  passage  was  wide,  the  lagoon  would  be  practi-
cally a  part  of  the  bay  of  Navarino  and  so  would  not  call  for  any  special
mention ;    whereas  if  the  passage  was  narrow  the  lagoon  would  ha\*c
formed   a   separate    harbour,    and   thus   there  would  have  been   two
harbours  instead  of  one,  whereas  Thucydides  speaks  throughout  of  one
only.     Mr.  Grundy  is  indeed  driven  by  his  theory  to  suppose  that  there
were  two  harbours  and  that  Thucydides  confused  them ;  but  there  is
no  need  to  impute  any  mistake  of  this  sort  to  the  historian  if  we  only
assume  with  Mr.  Burrows  that  the  opening  was  a  wide  one.

Making  use  of  the  papers  of  Messrs.  Grundy  and  Burrows  I  propose
now  to  correct  on  certain  points  and  to  supplement  the  account  of  Pylus
and  Sphacteria  given  in  the  text  The  summit  of  Pylus  is  450  feet
high,  not  720  feet,  as  I  have  stated.  Almost  the  whole  of  its  eastern
side,  towards  the  lagoon,  is  a  sheer  and  inaccessible  precipice ;  only  at


VOL.  Ill  PYLUS  609

the  northern  and  southern  ends,  above  the  bay  of  Voidokoilia  and  the
Sikia  channel  respectively,  does  the  line  of  cliffs  descend  and  merge
into  a  more  or  less  steep  slope.  These  two  places  therefore  are  the
points  on  the  landward  side  which  would  need  to  be  fortified  by  any
force  holding  Pylus.  Mr.  Burrows  has  made  it  highly  probable  that
the  Athenian  wall  which  the  Spartans  purposed  to  batter  down  with
siege  engines  (Thucydides,  iv.  13)  ran  along  the  top  of  the  low  slope  at
the  southern  end  of  the  line  of  cliffs.  For  the  terms  in  which  Thucy-
dides mentions  this  purpose  seem  to  show  that  the  point  of  assault  was
not  accessible  to  the  Spartans  from  the  land  but  could  only  be  reached
by  disembarking  both  engines  and  men  from  the  fleet.  Now  if,  as  seems
probable,  at  the  time  of  the  siege  the  lagoon  communicated  with  the
Bay  of  Narvarino  by  a  broad  channel  and  its  waters  washed  the  foot  of
the  eastern  cliffs  of  Pylus  for  the  greater  part  of  their  length,  the  sandy
slope  at  the  southern  end  of  the  cliffs  could  only  have  been  reached  by
the  Spartans  from  their  ships.  It  was  probably  on  this  sandy  slope  that
Demosthenes  beached  his  ships  under  the  fortification  which  he  had
erected  on  the  top  of  the  slope  (Thucydides,  iv.  9),  and  it  was  here  that
the  Spartans  intended  to  plant  their  battering-rams.  If  they  had  in-
tended to  batter  the  Athenian  fortifications  at  the  northern  end  of  the
cliffs  they  could  have  done  so  without  landing  men  from  the  fleet,  since
that  end  of  the  cliffs  was  connected,  as  at  present,  with  the  mainland
by  a  level  stretch  of  sand  of  which  the  Spartans  were  in  undisputed
possession.

With  regard  to  the  Athenian  fortifications  at  the  northern  end  of
Pylus,  Mr.  Burrows  has  shown  good  grounds  for  believing  that  they  did
not  include  the  northern  extremity  of  the  promontory  as  far  as  the  Bay
of  Voidokoilia  but  followed  a  steep  and  nearly  continuous  line  of  cliffs
which  crosses  the  northern  slope  of  the  hill  from  east  to  west  The
cave  of  Nestor  is  below  the  eastern  end  of  this  line  of  cliffs.  At  their
other  or  western  end,  about  100  yards  or  so  from  the  sea,  these  cliffs
fall  away  and  there  is  a  level  space  by  which  an  enemy  could  pass
through  to  the  south.  Here  accordingly  was  probably  the  Athenian
fortification  which  the  Spartan  army  vainly  assaulted  (Thucydides,  iv.
9,  11-13),  and  here  Mr.  Burrows  found  extensive  remains  of  a  wall
which  in  its  style  answers  well  to  Thucydides's  description  (iv.  4)  of  the
fortifications  hastily  run  up  by  the  Athenians,  being  built  of  unhewn
stones  of  no  great  size  piled  together  without  mortar.  The  advantages
to  the  small  Athenian  garrison  of  choosing  this  line  of  defence  instead
of  embracing  the  northern  end  of  the  promontory  within  their  fortifica-
tions were  great.  It  saved  them  from  building  several  hundred  yards
of  wall,  which  in  the  short  time  at  their  disposal  they  could  hardly  have
accomplished ;  and  they  had  now  to  defend  the  base  instead  of  two
sides  of  a  triangle,  while  even  of  this  base  half,  at  least,  would  require
no  wall  at  all,  and  a  quarter  more  would  require  only  a  slight  one.

The  place  where  the  Spartans,  led  by  Brasidas,  attempted  to  land
and  to  carry  the  Athenian  fortifications  by  storm  is  quite  unmistakeable
and  answers  to  Thucydides's  description  (iv.  9,  11)  exactly.  It  is  at
the  south-west  end  of  the  promontory,  facing  towards  the  open  sea.

VOL.  V  2  R


6io  PYLUS—SPHACTERIA  addenda

Here  the  shore  is  studded  for  several  hundreds  of  yards  with  masses
of  detached  and  jagged  rocks,  on  which  it  is  no  wonder  that  the
Spartan  pilots  feared  to  break  their  ships  in  the  attempt  to  effect  a
landing.  Yet  bad  as  the  landing-place  is,  it  was  the  best  to  be  had,
for  further  to  the  north  the  sea-coast  of  Pylus  consists  of  a  line  of
inaccessible  cliffs  where  no  ship  could  put  in.  At  the  point  where
Brasidas  and  the  Spartans  essayed  to  force  a  landing,  the  Athenian
fortification-wall  must  have  run  inland  from  the  rugged  rocks  which
here  stud  the  shore ;  for  over  these  rocks  no  wall  could  have  been  built
And  inland  from  these  rocks  in  fact  Mr.  Burrows  came  across  founda-
tions of  an  ancient  Greek  fortification-wall  which,  however,  firom  the
regular  style  of  its  masonry  cannot  have  formed  part  of  the  works  so
hastily  thrown  up  by  the  Athenians,  though  it  probably  follows  the  same
line.  Indeed  there  are  a  few  rough  pieces  in  it  which  may  possibly  date
from  the  Athenian  occupation.  It  was  on  the  rocky  shore  outside  of
this  wall  that  Demosthenes,  the  Athenian  commander,  drew  up  his  men
to  repel  the  Spartan  landing  (Thucydides,  iv.  9).

On  the  north-east  side  of  Pylus,  near  the  spit  of  sand  which  divides
the  lagoon  from  the  Bay  of  Voidokailta,  Mr.  Burrows  found  traces  of
massive  Cyclopean  walls  and  what  appeared  to  him  to  be  a  gateway  of
the  same  age  as  Tiryns  and  Mycenae.  The  existence  of  these  remains,
if  Mr.  Burrows's  opinion  as  to  their  date  is  correct,  confirms  the  view
that  the  Homeric  Pylus  was  at  PaUuo-Kastro,

The  Sikia  channel,  which  divides  Pylus  (PcUaeo-KcLstro)  on  the
north  from  Sphacteria  on  the  south,  is  only  132  yards  wide  at  the
narrowest  point.  Towards  the  sea  it  is  deep,  but  at  its  eastern  end,
where  the  channel  widens  a  little,  it  is  so  shallow  as  to  be  easily  ford-
able,  there  being  only  about  2  feet  of  water.  This  ford  is  perhaps
250  yards  across  from  shore  to  shore,  with  a  breadth  of  about  40  or  50
yards.  On  each  side  of  it  the  water  deepens  very  rapidly.  There  is  a
tradition  that  the  ford  was  created  by  the  Turks  who,  after  the  battle  of
Lepanto,  blocked  up  the  channel  with  stones  and  sunken  ships  in  order
to  protect  their  ships  which  had  taken  refuge  in  the  bay.  Mr.  Grundy,
however,  is  of  opinion  that  a  bar  is  gradually  forming  across  the  channel
like  those  which  now  enclose  the  lagoon  on  the  north  and  south.

The  island  of  Sphacteria  would  seem  to  have  scarcely  changed  since
antiquity.  The  depth  of  water  close  to  the  shore  on  all  sides  forbids
us  to  suppose  that  its  outline  can  have  been  much  altered  by  the  action
of  the  sea.  Its  length  is  i\  miles  ;  its  breadth  varies  from  one-third  to
half  a  mile.  The  northern  end  of  the  island  consists  of  a  short  ridge
running  east  and  west  with  a  dip  in  the  middle  and  reaching  its  highest
point  at  the  eastern  extremity.  This  summit,  now  known  as  Mount
Elias^  is  also  the  highest  point  of  the  whole  island.  Its  height  is  about
500  feet.  From  the  summit  the  ground  falls  away  in  steep  but  climb-
able  slopes  on  the  north,  west,  and  south.  On  the  east  the  peak
descends  in  a  cliff  some  80  feet  high  into  a  small  hollow,  on  the  further
edge  of  which  the  ground  rises  again  into  a  jagged  but  lower  peak,  then
drops  sheer  into  the  sea  in  a  perpendicular  cliff  several  hundreds  of  feet
high.     The  hollow  between  the  upper  and  lower  peak  is  about  50  yards


VOL.  Ill  SPHACTERIA  6ii

wide  by  loo  yards  long  from  north  to  south.  It  is  accessible  from  the
north  by  an  easy  slope,  and  from  the  south  by  a  steep  and  difficult
gully,  like  an  Alpine  *  chimney,'  between  perpendicular  sea-cliffs  on
either  hand.  Mr.  Burrows  is  probably  right  in  supposing  that  by  this
steep  gully  the  Messenians  clambered  up  into  the  hollow  and  took  the
Spartans  in  the  rear  (Thucydides,  iv.  36).  The  northern  and  lower
end  of  the  hollow  must  certainly  have  been  defended  by  the  Spartans.
Here  indeed  Mr.  Burrows  discovered,  almost  hidden  under  a  thick
growth  of  brushwood,  a  line  of  fortification  stretching  right  across  the
hollow  from  the  edge  of  the  cliffs.  It  was,  we  may  well  suppose,  while
the  Athenians  were  attacking  and  the  Spartans  defending  this  wall  that
the  Messenians,  emerging  from  the  gully,  suddenly  appeared  on  the
sky-line — in  mid-air,  as  Thucydides  puts  it — above  and  behind  the
Spartans,  the  sight  of  them  at  once  infusing  fresh  courage  into  the
assailants  and  striking  with  dismay  the  defenders  who,  thus  taken
simultaneously  in  front  and  rear,  soon  laid  down  their  arms.  There  are,
it  is  true,  distinct  traces  of  another  wall  running  across  the  south  end  of
the  hollow,  a  few  feet  from  the  top  of  the  gully;  but  this  wall  the
Spartans,  trusting  to  the  natural  strength  of  the  position,  may  very  well
have  left  undefended.  As  the  gully  descends  steeply  to  the  water's
edge  between  cliffs  which  apparently  afford  no  foothold  to  a  climber,  we
must  suppose  that  the  Messenians  reached  the  foot  of  it  by  boat,  though
this  is  not  mentioned  by  Thucydides.

On  the  other  sides  of  the  summit,  namely  on  the  north-west,  west,
and  south-west,  Mr.  Burrows  found  the  remains  of  the  **  ancient  fort
made  of  rough  stones"  which  Thucydides  mentions  (iv.  31).  It
begins  both  on  the  south-west  and  north-west  in  a  curved  line,  following
the  shape  of  the  hill  some  yards  below  the  top,  but  on  the  long  western
side  its  line  is  broken  by  four  projecting  rectangular  bastions.  The
stones  of  which  it  is  built  are  large  and  rough  and  are  not  bonded
together  with  bricks  or  mortar.  Two  and  three  courses  of  these  stones
are  preserved  at  various  points,  but  some  of  the  best  preserved  pieces
are  hidden  under  a  thick  undergrowth  of  wild  olive,  wild  strawberry,  and
other  trees.  In  one  place  the  wall  is  still  3  ft  6  in.  high.  Part  of  it
was  observed  and  described  by  Schliemann  {Mittheilungen  d.  arch.  Inst,
in  Athen^  14  (1889),  p.  133).  But  he  overlooked  the  wall  in  the  hollow
on  the  north-eastern  side  of  the  peak  which  formed  a  necessary  part  of
the  fort.

The  southern  end  of  Sphacteria  is,  roughly  speaking,  a  plateau
about  150  feet  above  sea-level  with  a  coast-line  which  consists  for  the
most  part  of  perpendicular  cliffs  from  100  to  150  feet  high.  On  the
northern  edge  of  the  plateau  the  ground  rises  into  two  hills  each  about
300  feet  high.  Between  these  hills  on  the  south  and  Mount  Elias  on
the  north  there  intervenes  about  a  mile  of  comparatively  level  but  still
very  rugged  and  difficult  ground.  Along  its  eastern  edge  runs  a  ridge
which  connects  the  two  higher  extremities  of  the  island.  On  the  east
this  ridge  falls  down  into  the  sea  in  precipices  from  100  to  300  feet
high ;  on  the  west  it  slopes  steeply  to  the  stretch  of  low-lying  ground
beside  the  open  sea.     The  coast  of  this  low  ground  is  itself  low  but


6ia  SPHACTERIA  aodcnba

rocky ;  in  calm  weather  landing  is  possible  on  it.  On  the  eastern  side
of  the  island,  towards  the  Bay  of  NctvarinOy  the  long  line  of  lofty  pre^
ci pices  forbids  a  landing  except  at  three  or  four  points,  the  best  of
which  is  at  the  chapel  of  the  Panagia,  near  the  middle  of  the  island.
A  gap  in  the  cliffs  here  gives  access  to  the  rest  of  the  island.  Bnt
owing  to  the  height  of  the  cliffs  this  and  all  the  other  landings  on  the
eastern  side  of  Sphacteria  are  out  of  sight  of  any  one  stationed  either
on  the  central  plain  or  even  on  the  northern  peak.  Hence  it  was  easy
enough  for  the  Athenians  to  land,  a  little  before  dawn,  without  attract-
ing the  attention  of  the  Spartan  sentries  (Thucydides,  iv.  31).  The
island  is  uninhabited  and  almost  wholly  uncultivated.  Its  rocky  surface
is  overgrown  with  low  scrub,  and  trees  are  scattered  about  it  singly  or
in  clumps,  especially  on  the  flat  ground.  The  only  spring  is  just  where
Thucydides  says  (iv.  31)  it  was,  in  the  middle  and  level  part  of  the
island.  It  was  here  that  the  main  body  of  the  Spartans  was  posted,
and  it  was  from  here  that,  fighting  hard,  they  were  driven  slowly  over
the  rugged  ground  northward  to  Mount  Eiias^  beset  by  the  enemy  both
from  the  ridge  and  from  the  shore  and]  blinded  by  the  dust  which  rose
in  clouds  under  their  feet  as  they  trampled  over  the  recently-bumt  scrub
(Thuc>'dides,  iv.  31-35).

We  ha\*c  seen  (\*ol.   3.   p.   460)  that  Thucydides   greatly  under-
estimated the  width  of  the  two  entrances  to  the  Bay  of  Aiavarino.     Of
this  mistake  Mr.  Burrows  has  suggested  an  explanation  which  has  the
n\erit  of  being  simple  and  on  the  fisice  of  it  not  improbable.      He
$up|H>ses   that  when  the  Athenian    fleet  sailed  into   the  bay  by  both
entrances  simultaneously   (Thuc\'dides,   iv.    14),   one   squadron  passed
thrv^u^h  the  nam>\v  northern  channel  in  a  column  of  two  shfps  abreast,
while  the  other  s^-juadrv^n  entered  by  the  broad  southern  chancel  in  a
\.vUimn  of  eiijht  ships  abreast :  and  that  these  numbers  were  aftenrards
communicatcvl    by  one    of  the  admirals  or  captains    in  cocnmand  to
rhucYvlides,  who  consequently  fell   into  the  not  unnamial  mistake  01
estimatin*:  the  width  of  the  t\\*o  channels  by  the  number  of  the  ships
that  enterevl  them  abreas:.     The  intention  which  Thucvxiides  anrfccies
tv>  the  S^vinans  of  bUvkin^  up  the  two  entrances  with  their  ships  my
be»  as  Mr.   l^urrv^n-s;  sum^ises*  nothing  more  than  a  lame  excuse  afrcr-
warvls  ofitrrevi   by  the  Spartans  for  the  fatal    blunder    they   mace   n
^arr,s\>niu^  S^>hacter.x     It  :s  indeed  almost  incredible  that  the  Spartans.
with  the  shijxs  at  their  comnvar.d,  shouki  e\-er  ha\-e  seriously  conten:pta»i
the  |x\sj>ibiI:tY  vVf  blocking:  the  soctbens  channel  ^aboa:  three-q:iarters  c£
a  rai*e  >\  ide>  against  the  Athen:ar.  ceec     Finally.  d»  mistake  as  to  i<
letuth  ojf  Sphacteria  which  ocv^urs   In  our  texts  of  Tbacrdices   zut
perhaj>s  S?  explained  nxxs:  simply^  as  >[r.  Burrvws^  cocectcres.,  by  ±e
mistake  v^f  a  cv>pv-st  wbo  by  ocrn-r^   the  tir?:  A  \IC'  cf  AATI  '25
cvKi>ertevi   *5  turioc^:^  -cto  15.     In  rem:  of  act  the  islizad  is  aibcc
^4  v»reei:  turloc^^  Ioc^»  anc  *f  w^  allow  x?c  the  nrs  and  ccmTss  of  is

Mr.  Burrv^^'S  s  vtew:?  hji>re  Sxn  criticisevi  oc  the  v&ove  aiirerseij.
S  Mr.  Or^iTsiv  \^VjLSSft.:A*  A.-^-t.-s-.  ::•  :5oc\  rex  5*t-i"a  :  ii*  r:
v::?>:*\  rev  i%%>:x>:\  bcs  I  canncc  s<re  thi:  his  cciectiucs  carrr  wesii


VOL.  Ill  OLYAfPIA  613

The  reply  made  by  Mr.  Burrows  to  the  first  set  of  these  objections  is
powerful  and  on  the  whole  convincing  {Classical  Review^  11  (1897),
pp.  I- 10).  Mr.  Grundy's  own  theories  as  to  the  operations  at  Pylus
it  is  hardly  necessary  to  discuss :  the  most  original  of  them  has  already
been  retracted  by  its  author.

P.  458  line  24,  a  caye.  In  June  1896  Mr.  Laurent  of  the  French
School  of  Archaeology  dug  up  a  nimiber  of  painted  potsherds  in  the
cave  of  Nestor  at  Pylus.  These  sherds  form  a  series  dating  from  the
earliest  period  down  to  Roman  times.  Many  of  them  are  frag-
ments of  large  vases  {craterts)  of  late  Mycenaean  style ;  the  decoration,
laid  on  with  lustrous  paint,  consists  of  broad  black  horizontal  bands
on  a  pale  yellow  ground ;  the  inside  is  coated  with  a  black  glaze.
A  handle  of  a  large  vase,  adorned  with  broad  black-brown  stripes  and
pierced  with  a  hole  for  suspension,  is  assigned  by  Mr.  Tsountas  to  an
age  earlier  than  the  Mycenaean.  Some  fragments  exhibit  patterns  of
the  geometrical  sort.  See  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  hellinique^  20  (1896),
pp.  388-390.  The  discovery  of  Mycenaean  pottery  here  furnishes
another  ground  for  holding  that  the  Homeric  Pylus  was  at  Coryphasium
(JPalaeo-Kastro).

P.  523  line  I,  the  labours  of  Hercules.  The  reliefs  representing
the  labours  of  Hercules  in  the  metopes  of  the  temple  of  Zeus  are  now
published  in  Olympia:  Ergebmsse^  Tafelband  3.  plates  xxxv.-xlv.,  and
discussed  by  Prof.  G.  Treu,  ib,^  Textband  3.  pp.  1 38-1 81.

P.  536  line  24  from  foot,  paintings  by  Panaenus.  Prof.  £.  A.
Gardner's  proposed  arrangement  of  the  paintings  of  Panaenus  on  the
barriers  of  the  throne  of  Zeus  has  been  accepted  by  Prof.  C.  Robert  (Die
Marathonschlacht  in  der  PoikiU  (Halle  a.  S.,  1895),  p.  83).  On  the
other  hand  Mr.  Murray's  arrangement  has  been  accepted  by  Mr.
Trendelenberg,  who  bases  on  it  a  somewhat  fanciful  and  improbable
theory  of  the  meaning  of  the  pictures,  in  igpiorance,  apparently,  of  the
better  arrangement  advocated  by  Prof.i  E.  A.  Gardner.  See  Archdo
logischer  AnseigeTy  1897,  pp.  25-29.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  still  adheres  to  Mr.
Murray's  view,  and  proposes  to  defend  it  by  translating  the  words  of
Pausanias,  wrcX^ctv  iVS  rhv  dpovoVf  *  to  go  close  up  to  the  throne,'  a
translation  which  is  simply  impossible.  The  words  can  mean  nothing
but  *to  go  under  the  throne.'  See  Mittheilungen  d,  arch,  InsL  in
Athen^  22  (1897),  p.  231  sq,

P.  543  line  9  from  top,  The  footstool  etc.  It  has  been  suggested
by  Mr.  Kliigmann  (Die  Amasonen  in  der  attischen  Uteratur  und  Kunsty
p.  62)  that  the  remark  which  Pausanias  makes  as  to  the  battle  of
Theseus  with  the  Amazons  ("  This  battle  was  the  first  deed  of  valour
done  by  the  Athenians  against  foreign  foes ")  may  have  been  taken
from  an  Attic  metrical  inscription  carved  on  the  fi-ont  of  the  footstool.
One  of  the  words  here  employed  by  Pausanias  (dvSpaydOrjfui)  seems  to
occur  nowhere  else  in  his  work,  and  another  (ofu^^vAot)  only  once
(iv.  3.  2).     Both  words  are  Attic.

P.  545  line  17  from  foot,  the  things  which  project  from  an
elephant's  mouth.  The  question  whether  an  elephant's  tusks  are
teeth  or  horns  seems  to  have  exercised  the  ancients  a  good  deal.     It  is


6l4  OL  YMPIA  ADDENDA

discussed  at  some  length  by  Oppian  {Cyneget,  ii.  489-514)  and  Philo-
stratus  {Vit  Apollon,  ii.  13),  Oppian  arguing  in  favour  of  horns  and
Philostratus  of  teeth.  Juba,  the  learned  king  of  Libya,  held  that  tbey
were  horns  (Pliny,  Nat,  hist.  viii.  7  ;  Philostratus,  /.^.),  but  his  opinion
was  rejected  by  Pliny  (J.c.)  as  well  as  by  Philostratus.  The  controversy
is  alluded  to  by  Aelian  {Nat.  anitn.  iv.  31).  Cp.  A.  Kalkmann,  Pau-
sanias  der  Perieget^  P-  32.

P.  556  line  7  from  top,  the  altar  of  (Mympian  Zeus.  The  only
remains  of  this  altar  found  by  the  German  excavators  were  ninety-eight
rough  stones  of  the  foundation,  distributed  in  seven  groups  half-way
between  the  north-eastern  angle  of  the  temple  of  Zeus  and  the  south-
western angle  of  the  Metroum.  Thus  for  our  knowledge  of  the  plan  of
the  altar  we  are  still  dependent  almost  entirely  on  Pausanias's  descrip-
tion. Dr.  Adler  believes  that  the  altar  of  ashes  was  conical  in  shape
and  rested  on  a  circular  platform  built  of  stone,  the  protkusis^  to  which
two  ramps  also  built  of  stone  led  up  from  opposite  sides.  From  the
platform  {J^rothusis)  he  supposes  that  two  winding  ramps  led  up  fix>m
opposite  sides  to  the  summit  of  the  altar,  on  which  the  thighs  of  the
victims  were  burned.  The  dimensions  of  the  two  stages  of  the  altar,  as
given  in  our  texts  of  Pausanias,  must,  Dr.  Adler  thinks,  be  wrong ;  the
circumference  of  the  first  stage  or  prothtisis  was  probably  225  feet  (not
125  feet)  and  the  circumference  of  the  second  stage  132  feet  (not  32
feet) ;  and  the  text  of  Pausanias  should  be  altered  accordingly.  The
second  of  these  changes,  as  he  points  out,  can  be  easily  made  by  altering
the  superfluous  and  meaningless  Ikoxttov  into  cicarov.  See  Fr.  Adler,
in  Olympia:  Ergebnisse^  Textband  2.  pp.  210-214.

P.  561  line  8  from  foot.  Thunderbolt  Zeus.  Dedications  to
Thundering  Zeus  have  lately  been  found  at  Nacolea  in  Phrygia  {Bulletin
de  Corresp.  helhhiique^  20  (1896),  p.  107  sq.).

P.  565  line  6  from  top,  Zeus  the  Descender.  Another  inscription
which  marked  the  site  of  a  sanctuary  of  Zeus  the  Descender  (At5[«
KaTat]j8ttTo(v)  aj8[aTov]  tcpov)  has  been  found  near  the  sanctuary  of
Aesculapius  at  Athens  {Revue  de  Philologie^  N.  S.  19  (1895),  P-  ^29;
Revue  archMogique,  3me  S^rie,  27  (1895),  p.  234).  The  sanctuary
no  doubt  enclosed  a  spot  which  had  been  struck  by  lightning.  Two
conspicuous  rocks  in  Melos  are  inscribed  with  the  name  of  Zeus  the
Descender  {Journal  0/  Hellenic  Studies,  17  (1897),  p.  8  sg.^  Nos.
21,  22).

P.  593  line  15  from  foot,  purified  themselves  with  a  pig.  In  an
inscription  found  at  Eleusis  mention  is  made  of  two  pigs  which  were
used  to  purify  the  sanctuary  (*E<^7;/Ac/3ts  apxaioXoyiKi]^  1883,  p.  1 19  sq.,
line  49  sq.).

P.  595  line  24  from  foot,  Hermes  bearing  the  infant  Dionysus.
The  statue  of  Hermes  by  Praxiteles  has  now  been  described  and
discussed  by  Prof.  G.  Treu  {Olympia:  Ergebnisse,  Textband  3.  pp.
194-206).  With  regard  to  the  objects  which  Hermes  held  in  his  hands,
Prof.  Treu  comes  to  the  conclusion,  in  which  archaeologists  seem
disposed  to  acquiesce,  that  he  grasped  a  herald's  staff  in  his  left  hand
and  a  bunch  of  grapes  in  his  right.     Miss  E.  Sellers  thinks  that  the


VOL.  Ill  OLYMPIA  615

statue  was  not  by  Praxiteles,  but  by  Cephisodotus  who  is  said  by  Pliny
(Nat.  hist,  xxxiv.  87)  to  have  made  a  statue  of  Hermes  nursing  the
infi^nt  Dionysus  (*  L'Hermes  d'Olympie,'  Gazette  des  Beaux-ArtSy  August

1897,  pp.  1 19-139).

P.  621  line  18  from  top,  Metromn.  An  inscription  on  an  archi-
trave of  the  Metroum  proves  that  the  temple  was  dedicated  by  the
Eleans  to  the  worship  of  Augustus,  "the  saviour  of  the  Greeks  and
of  the  whole  world"  {Die  Inschriften  von  Olympia^  No.  366).  The
colossal  torso  of  a  statue  which  was  found  lying  on  the  southern  edge
of  the  stylobate  of  the  Metroum  is  now  interpreted  by  Prof.  G.  Treu  as
a  portrait  of  Augustus  represented  in  the  character  of  Zeus,  and  from
its  dimensions  compared  with  those  of  the  temple  he  judges  that  the
statue  was  made  on  purpose  to  be  set  up  in  the  temple  as  the  image  to
which  the  homage  of  worshippers  was  to  be  addressed.  The  torso  is  of
Pentelic  marble  and  is  the  largest  in  scale  of  all  the  sculptures  found  at
Olympia.  See  G.  Treu,  in  Olympia:  Ergebnissey  Textband  3.  pp.
232-235  ;  /V/.,  in  Archciologischer  Anzeiger^  1896,  p.  97.  Prof.  Treu  has
also  described  and  discussed  the  three  other  statues  of  Roman  emperors
which  seem  to  have  stood  in  the  Metroum  {Olympia:  Ergebtdssey
Textband  3.  pp.  243-248,  with  Tafelband  3.  plate  Ix.  1-3  and  plate
Ixi.  I.  2).  All  three  are  of  Pentelic  marble  and  in  standing  postures.
The  one  which  portrays  Claudius  in  the  garb  and  attitude  of  Zeus  bears
an  inscription  which  proves  that  it  was  made  by  two  Athenian  sculptors,
Philathenaeus  and  Hegias  {Die  Inschriften  von  Olympia^  No.  642).
The  statue  of  Titus  represents  the  emperor  clad  in  a  cuirass  on  which
are  carved  in  high  relief  two  Nereids  seated  on  sea-horses  with  a
dolphin  under  each  horse.  The  statue  of  the  third  emperor  is  headless,
but  the  evidence  goes  to  show  that  it  represents  Domitian.  He  wears
a  cuirass  adorned  with  the  figures  of  two  goddesses  of  Victory  arranging
a  trophy.  Prof.  Treu  is  further  of  opinion  that  three  statues  of  women
found  at  Olympia  represent  three  ladies  of  the  Roman  imperial  families
and  that  they  stood  on  one  side  of  the  cella  of  the  Metroum  facing  the
statues  of  Claudius,  Titus,  and  Domitian,  with  which  they  agree  closely
in  size,  material,  style,  and  technique.  He  supposes  that  one  of  them
represents  the  empress  Domitia,  another  the  younger  Agrippina,  and
the  third  Julia,  daughter  of  Titus.  Only  one  of  the  three — that  which
Prof.  Treu  takes  to  represent  the  younger  Agrippina — retains  its  head  ;
an  inscription  on  this  statue  proves  that  it  was  made  by  an  Athenian
sculptor  Dionysius,  son  of  ApoUonius  {Die  Inschriften  von  Olympiay
No.  646).  See  Olympia:  Ergebnisse^  Textband  3.  pp.  255-258,  with
Tafelband  3.  pi.  Ixiii.  1-3.

P.  643  line  13,  the  ixnai^e  of  Victory  etc.  The  statue  of  Victory
by  Paeonius  has  now  been  described  and  discussed  by  Prof.  G.  Treu
{Olympia:  Ergebnisse^  Textband  3.  pp.  182-194).  His  view  of  the
date  and  historical  events  which  led  to  the  erection  of  the  statue  agrees
with  the  conclusions  which  I  have  adopted  in  the  text.


6l6  OLYMPIA  ADDENDA


VOL.  IV

p.  17  line  8  sq,  from  foot,  represented  on  the  pedestal  of
statue.  The  reliefs  on  the  pedestal  of  the  statue  of  Pulydamas  have
now  been  described  and  discussed  by  Prof.  G.  Treu  (Olympia  :  Er^
nisse^  Textband  3.  pp.  209-212).  In  the  second  of  the  scenes  described
in  the  text  it  would  seem  that  Pulydamas  is  seated  rather  than  standing  on
the  carcase  of  the  lion  :  his  left  hand  rests  on  one  of  the  lion's  fore-paws,
and  his  right  hand  is  placed  on  one  of  the  beast's  hind-legs.  The  third
scene,  where  Pulydamas  appears  in  presence  of  King  Darius  Ochus,  is
believed  by  Prof.  Treu  to  represent  the  combat  of  the  athlete  with  one
of  the  *  Immortals.'  The  monument  seems  to  have  stood  in  front  of
the  north-east  comer  of  the  temple  of  Zeus  at  the  point  where  the  East
Terrace  wall  bends  in  a  north-westerly  direction  round  the  pedestal  of
the  Eretrian  bull  As  the  statue  of  Pulydamas  was  by  Lysippus  it
must  have  been  made  long  after  the  athlete's  Olympian  victory,  which
was  won  in  408  B.C.

P.  39  line  9  from  foot,  a  bronze  statoe.  This  statue  has  now  been
fully  described  and  discussed  by  Mr.  Th.  Homolle  {Comptes  Rendus  di
VAcaddmie  des  Inscriptions^  4me  S^rie,  24  (1896),  pp.  362-384).  The
inscription  on  the  base  shows  that  it  was  dedicated  by  a  certain  Poly-
zalus,  who  was  most  probably  the  brother  of  the  Syracusan  tyrants  Gelo
and  Hiero.  But  the  mutilated  state  of  the  inscription  leaves  it  uncertain
whom  the  statue  represents.  Mr.  Homolle  now  inclines  to  believe  that
it  represents  Gelo,  and  was  set  up  to  commemorate  a  Pythian  victory
won  by  him.  Mr.  Croiset,  while  admitting  that  the  statue  was  dedi-
cated by  Polyzalus,  brother  of  Gelo  and  Hiero,  maintains  that  the
name  neither  of  Gelo  nor  of  Hiero  occurs  in  the  inscription,  and  that
the  person  commemorated  is  more  probably  Polyzalus  himself  {CompUs
Rendus  de  PAcad/ntie  des  Inscriptions,  4me  S^rie,  24  (1896),  pp.  214-

216).  ^^L

P.  48.  **The  boys'  race  JjH^e  horse- course"  mentioned  by
Pausanias  (vi.  16.  4)  was  a  race  run  on  foot,  not  on  horseback.  See
Plato,  Laws,  viii.  p.  833  b;  Pollux,  iii.  147;  A.  Boeckh,  Kleine
Schriften,  6.  p.  393  sq,  ;  id.,  on  C.  /.  G.  No.  1 5 1 5  ;  J.  H.  Krause,  Die
Gymnastik  und  Agonistik  der  Hellenen^  i.  p.  348  sq.  note  13.

P.  56  line  23  from  foot,  the  treasuries.  The  Olympic  treasuries  are
the  subject  of  an  essay  by  E.  Curtius  (*  Die  Schatzhauser  Von  Olympia,'
Sitzungsberichte  of  the  Berlin  Academy,  5th  March  1896,  pp.  239-251).

P.  73  line  1 1  from  foot,  the  marble  statues.  The  remains  of  the
statues  which  adorned  the  Exedra  of  H erodes  Atticus  at  Olympia  are
now  described  and  their  arrangement  examined  by  Prof.  G.  Treu
{Olympia:  Ergebnisse,  Textband  3.  pp.  260-278).  Amongst  the  remains
found  in  the  lower  tank  is  a  piece  of  a  large  male  statue,  naked,  supposed
by  Prof.  Treu  to  have  belonged  to  a  statue  of  a  deity  which  may  have
stood  in  one  of  the  two  rotundas  at  either  end  of  the  lower  tank.     He


VOL.  IV  OLYMPIA  617

conjectures  that  an  image  of  Zeus  occupied  the  eastern,  and  an  image  of
Hera  the  western,  rotunda  (p.  270).

P.  82  line  24  from  foot.  The  Olympic  hippodrome  etc.  Some
details  as  to  the  dimensions  of  the  Olympic  hippodrome  are  given  in
a  Greek  parchment  manuscript  (No.  i),  which  is  preserved  in  the  Old
Seraglio  at  Constantinople.  The  whole  length  of  the  course,  from  the
starting-point  to  the  turning-post  and  back  again,  was  8  Olympic  furlongs
{stadesy  Of  the  two  sides  of  the  hippodrome,  which  are  known  from
Pausanias  to  have  been  of  imequal  length,  one,  probably  the  shorter,
was  3  furlongs  and  i  pletkron  long.  The  breadth  of  the  hippodrome
at  the  starting-point  was  i  furlong  and  4  piethra.  Further,  we  learn
from  the  manuscript  that  not  the  whole  of  the  course  but  only  a  portion
of  it  6  furlongs  long  was  traversed  in  the  races.  Chariots  drawn  by
pairs  of  foals  had  to  make  three  rounds :  chariots  drawn  by  pairs  of
full-grown  horses  had  to  make  eight  rounds,  and  so  had  chariots  drawn
by  four  foals :  chariots  drawn  by  four  full-grown  horses  had  to  make
twelve  rounds.  See  R.  Sch5ne,  in  Archdologischer  Anzeiger^  1897,
p.  77  sq, ;  /<e/.,  '  Neue  Angaben  iiber  den  Hippodrom  zu  Olympia,' yii^ir-
buch  des  archaoiog,  Instituts^  12  (1897),  pp.  150-160.  Pindar  clearly
indicates  that  the  chariots  had  to  round  the  turning-post  twelve  times
(Olymp,  iii.  59  sq,\  cp.  Oiymp,  ii.  92,  vi.  126,  Pyth,  v.  45).  The
scholiasts  on  Pindar  {Olymp,  iii.  59  and  Pyth,  v.  39)  state  that  chariots
drawn  by  (four)  full-grown  horses  had  to  traverse  the  course  twelve
times,  and  that  chariots  drawn  by  (four)  foals  had  to  traverse  ii  eight
times.  These  statements,  therefore,  agree  so  far  with  the  statemSits  in
the  Constantinople  manuscript.  Cp.  £.  Pollack,  Hippodrondcay  p.  103
sq.  On  the  Olympic  hippodrome  and  the  mode  of  starting  the  chariots
in  it  see  the  article  by  A.  Martin,  in  Daremberg  and  Saglio's  DicHotiJudre
des  AntiquitiSy  s,v,  *  Hippodromos,'  vol.  3.  p.  196  sqq,

P.  96  line  2 1  from  foot,  the  Argiye  Fhidon.  The  date  of  Phidon
has  been  further  discussed  by  Mr.  Evelyn  Abbott  (Excursus  VI.  to  his
edition  of  the  fifth  and  sixth  books  of  Herodotus,  pp.  319-325)  and  Mr.
R.  Macan  (note  on  Herodotus,  vi.  127).  The  former  inclines  to  accept
the  eighth  Olympiad  (748  B.C.)  onJi|^uthority  of  Pausanias;  the  latter
would  prefer  the  twenty-eighth  01)^P§d  (666  B.C.),  altering  the  text  of
Pausanias  accordingly.

P.  1 1 9  line  2  from  top,  the  oracle  of  Claras.  Some  verses  pur-
porting to  be  oracular  responses  of  the  Clarian  Apollo  are  preserved
(Anthologia  Pakdina^  Appendix  Nova,  ch.  vi.  Nos.  134-139,  p.  490  ed.
Cougny).

P.  125  line  12  from  foot,  one  at  Branchidae.  The  ruins  of  the
temple  of  Apollo  at  Branchidae  are  now  being  completely  excavated  by
the  French.  Inscriptions  found  on  the  spot  show  that  the  temple  was
rebuilt  in  the  second  century  B.C  :  the  work  was  going  actively  forward
about  the  middle  of  the  century,  but  to  judge  by  the  existing  remains
was  never  finished.  The  temple,  unlike  most  Greek  temples,  rested  on
seven  high  steps,  which,  opposite  the  five  central  intercolumniations  on
the  long  sides,  were  divided  each  into  two,  thus  forming  a  stately  stair-
case of  thirteen  steps.     The  most  remarkable  feature  of  the  architectural


6l8  OLENUS  ADDENDA

remains,  however,  is  that  the  great  Ionic  capitals  of  the  columns  arc
each  adorned  with  two  colossal  heads  of  deities  and  a  head  of  a  bull
See  B.  Haussoullier,  in  Comptes  Rendus  de  PAcaeUmie  des  Inscriptions^
25  (1897),  p.  32  sq,  ;  Archdologischer  Anzeiger^  1897,  pp.  63-65.

P.  128  line  3  from  top,  Hercules on  his  raft.     This  subject

is  represented  on  two  engraved  gems  which  are  now  in  the  Berlin
Museum.  On  one  of  them  Hercules  is  seated  on  an  upturned  jar ;  on
the  other  he  is  kneeling  and  seems  to  be  setting  a  sail.  See  A.  Furt-
wangler,  Konigliche  Museen  zu  Berlin  :  Beschreibung  der  gesckmtUnen
Steine^  Nos.  231,  232,  p.  25.

P.  1 40  line  1 3  from  foot,  Pinui Olenus.    The  old  view  that  the

ruins  at  Kato-Achaia  are  those  of  Olenus,  not  of  Dyme,  is  maintained
by  Mr.  R.  Heberdey  {Die  Reisen  des  Pausanias^  p.  77,  note  74),  chiefly
on  the  strength  of  a  passage  of  Herodotus  (i.  145),  who  says  that  Olenus
was  beside  the  Pirns,  which  he  describes  as  a  "  great  river."  This
description,  Mr.  Heberdey  holds,  can  only  apply  to  the  Kantnitsa  river
beside  Kaio-Achaia^  and  hence  the  ruins  at  KcUo-Achaia  must  be  those
of  Olenus.  The  argument  is  a  strong  one,  and  if  we  identify  the
Kamniisa  with  the  Pirus  we  must  inevitably,  it  would  seem,  accept  the
view  that  Kato-Achaia  is  on  the  site  of  Olenus.  But  on  the  other  hand
the  concordant  evidence  of  Pausanias,  Strabo,  and  the  Tabula  Peutingeria
as  to  the  distance  of  Dyme  from  Patrae  goes  to  show  that  the  ruins  at
Kato-Achaia  are  those  of  Dyme,  and  this  conclusion  is  confirmed,  as  we
have  seen  (vol.  4.  p.  1 36)  by  an  inscription.  Where  the  evidence  is  so
conflicting  it  is  best  perhaps  to  leave  the  question  open.

P.  146  line  19  from  top,  the  people  bring  the  edible  kinds  of
birds  etc.  With  Pausanias's  description  of  the  holocaust  offered  to
Artemis  at  Patrae  we  may  compare  Herrera's  description  of  a  sacrifice
offered  by  the  Tlascallans  to  a  hunter  god.  He  says  :  "  One  of  those
goddesses  they  worshipped,  had  a  son,  who  was  a  great  sportsman,
whom  the  Tlascallans  took  for  their  god,  and  because  that  province  is
very  full  of  game,  they  kept  a  solemn  festival  in  honour  of  him,  sounding
an  horn  at  the  dawn  of  the  day,  when  they  all  assembled,  with  their
bows,  arrows,  nets,  and  other  implements  for  hunting.  They  carried
their  idol  in  procession,  a  multitude  of  people  followed  to  an  high  moun-
tain, on  the  top  whereof  was  an  arbour,  and  in  the  midst  of  it  an  altar
well  adorned,  on  which  they  placed  the  idol,  attended  all  the  way  with
much  noise  of  horns,  cornets,  pipes,  and  drums.  When  come  to  the
place,  they  encompassed  all  the  side  of  that  mountain,  and  setting  fire  to
it  on  every  side,  abundance  of  deer,  hares,  and  other  creatures  came  out,
flying  from  the  fire  towards  the  top ;  the  hunters  pursued  them  with
great  cries,  sounding  their  instruments,  till  they  had  drove  them  before
the  idol,  where  they  hemmed  them  in  so  close,  that  leaping  to  make
their  escape,  some  tumbled  down,  others  fell  upon  the  people,  and  others
upon  the  altar,  which  rendered  the  sport  very  agreeable  "  {General  History
of  America^  translated  by  Capt.  John  Stevens,  vol.  3.  p.  206  sq.).  The
wild  animals  in  this  Tlascallan  sacrifice,  however,  were  slain,  not  burnt,
and  their  flesh  was  consumed  by  the  people.

P.   151  line  1 3  from  top,  an  infallible  mode  of  divination  etc.


VOL.  IV  MANTINEA  619

The  practice  of  this  mode  of  divination  at  the  sanctuary  of  Demeter
indicates  that  in  one  of  her  aspects  Demeter  was  regarded  as  a  goddess
of  healing.  There  is  some  more,  though  scanty,  evidence  to  the  same
effect  See  O.  Rubensohn,  'Demeter  als  Heilgottheit,'  MittheiL  d,
arch.  Inst  in  Athen^  20  (1895),  PP*  360-367.

P.  180  line  8  sq,^  Pisistratus  collected  the  scattered  yerses  of
Homer.  The  tradition  that  Pisistratus  collected  and  edited  the  Homeric
poems  has  recently  been  examined  and  rejected  by  Mr.  M.  Valeton  (*De
carminum  Homericorum  rccensione  Pisistratea,'  Mnemosyne^  N.  S.  24
(1896),  pp.  405-426).

P.  201  line  20  from  foot,  the  ruins  of  Mantinea.  The  inscriptions
found  by  the  French  excavators  at  Mantinea  have  now  been  published,
after  a  long  delay,  by  Mr.  G.  Foug^res  {Bulletin  de  Corresfi.  hellinique^
20  (1896),  pp.  1 19-166).  In  several  of  them  (Nos.  i,  2,  17)  the  city
is  called  Antigonea  or  the  city  of  the  Antigonians,  as  to  which  title  see
Paus.  viii.  8.  1 1  with  the  note.  One  inscription  (No.  9)  is  from  the  base
of  a  statue  of  King  Antigonus  after  whom  the  city  took  the  name  of
Antigonea.  The  inscription  referring  to  the  reconstructions  carried  out
in  the  market-place  by  Euphrosynus  and  his  wife  Epigone  (No.  2  ;  see
voL  4.  p.  214  sq.)  seems  to  date  from  the  last  years  of  the  first  century
A.D.  The  inscription  recording  the  name  of  Zeus  Eubuleus,  which  I
have  published  from  a  copy  of  my  own  (vol.  4.  p.  209),  is  now  published
as  No.  8  (p.  138)  by  Mr.  Foug^res.  It  is  engraved  in  large  letters  on
a  cube  of  limestone.  Mr.  Foug^res  regards  Zeus  Eubuleus  as  identical
with  Pluto.  One  inscription  (No.  12)  is  dated  by  the  year  in  which
Philopoemen  was  general  of  the  Achaeans  for  the  fourth  time.  Another
(No.  13)  appears  to  be  a  fragment  of  the  inscription  engraved  on  the
very  portrait  of  Polybius  which  Pausanias  mentions  (viii.  9.  2).  The
name  of  Podares  occurs  in  another  inscription  (No.  1 7) ;  Pausanias
knew  of  two  Mantineans  of  that  name  (viii.  9.  9  sq,).  The  inscription
recording  the  construction  of  a  colonnade  and  halls  "for  the  city  of
Mantinea  and  for  the  native  god  Antinous"  (vol  4.  p.  213)  is  published
by  Mr.  Foug^res  as  No.  18  (p.  152).  It  is  engraved  on  a  marble
architrave  3  metres  long,  .30  metre  high,  and  .72  metre  thick.  The
last  words  of  the  inscription  (84a  rhv  KXrjpovofjLov  "  on  account  of  the
heir")  are  understood  by  Mr.  Foug^res  to  mean  that  Euryclcs  died
before  the  colonnade  was  built,  and  that  the  work  of  building  it  was
carried  out  by  his  heir.  The  name  of  the  "god  Antinous"  occurs  also  in
a  metrical  epigraph  published  by  Mr.  Fougferes  (No.  31,  p.  163).  Lastly
may  be  mentioned  two  small  pyramids  engraved  with  the  name  of
Artemis  (Nos.  15,  26,  pp.  149,  158)  and  apparently  representing  the
goddess.  One  of  them  (No.  26),  made  of  terra-cotta,  was  dedicated  by
a  certain  woman  Phoebe ;  the  other,  found  not  at  Mantinea  but  in  a
small  sanctuary  of  Artemis  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Parthenius  (see  vol.  4.
p.  446),  was  dedicated  by  a  man  named  Cnimas.  With  these  pyramidal
images  we  may  compare  the  pyramidal  images  of  Apollo  and  Zeus
mentioned  by  Pausanias  (i.  44.  2  ;  ii.  9.  6).

P.  206  line  18  sq,  from  top,  the  Mnses  and  Marsyas  etc.    The
arrangement  of  the  reliefs  which  were  found  by  the  French  at  Mantinea


620  SICILY— LIBYSSA  addenda

has  been  discussed  by  Prof.  P.  Gardner  (*The  Mantinean  basis,'
Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  i6  (1896),  pp.  280-284).  He  at  first
argued  that  there  never  was  a  fourth  slab,  and  that  the  three  existing
slabs  were  arranged  in  a  row  on  the  front  of  the  pedestal,  the  slab
with  Apollo  and  Marsyas  occupying  the  middle  place.  But  he  has
since  withdrawn  this  opinion  and  accepted  Dr.  Amelung's  view  that
there  were  originally  four  slabs,  of  which  two  were  placed  on  the  finont
of  the  pedestal  and  one  on  each  of  the  two  sides,  the  slab  with  Marsyas
and  Apollo  occupying  the  right-hand,  half  of  the  front  of  the  pedestal,
while  the  missing  slab  with  the  three  remaining  Muses  occupied  the
other  or  left-hand  half  of  the  front  {Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  1 7
(1897),  p.  120  sg,).  On  this  view  the  back  of  the  pedestal  was
unadorned  with  sculpture.  Dr.  Amelung's  arrangement  is  to  be  pre-
ferred to  the  one  adopted  by  me  in  the  text,  according  to  which  the
four  slabs  were  placed  one  on  each  of  the  four  sides  of  the  pedestal  It
has  the  great  advantage  of  giving  a  pedestal  of  sufficient  dimensions
(2.70  metres  by  1.43  metres)  to  support  a  group  of  three  life-size  figures.
P.  219  line  2  from  foot,  this  Sicily  is  a  small  hill  not  fjur  from
Athens.  The  identification  of  this  Sicily  with  the  little  rocky  hill
which  lies  to  the  south  of  the  Museum  hill,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the
Ilissus,  seems  to  have  been  first  proposed  by  H.  G.  Lolling  in  a  paper
published  in  1874  and  recently  reprinted  {Mittkeilungen  cL  arch,  Inst,
in  Athen^  21  (1896),  pp.  339-346).  The  road  to  the  ancient  Phalerum
(the  modem  St,  George)  runs  on  the  south-eastern  side  of  the  hill,
following  approximately  the  line  of  the  ancient  Long  Wall  which
connected  Phalerum  with  Athens.  Seen  from  this  road,  according  to
Lolling,  the  hill  appears  to  be  divided  into  three  parts,  each  of  which
reaches  its  highest  point  on  the  side  next  to  the  road.  These  three
elevations  give  to  the  hill,  as  seen  from  the  Acropolis,  the  triangular
shape  of  the  island  of  Sicily.  On  the  side  next  to  the  sea,  which  is
partially  cultivated,  the  hill  slopes  gradually  to  the  plain.  Lolling  con-
jectured that  the  oracle  which  bade  the  Athenians  occupy  Sicily  may
have  been  given  at  the  time  when  the  wall  to  Phalerum  had  fallen  into
decay,  and  when  accordingly  it  became  desirable  to  strengthen  the
fortifications  of  Athens  on  this  side.  The  hill  of  Sicily  and  the
ambiguous  oracle  relating  to  it  are  mentioned  by  Dio  Chrysostom  {Or,
xvii.  vol.  I.  p.  277  ed.  Dindorf).

P.  2 1 9  line  5  sg,  from  foot,  the  grave  of  Hannibal  was  at  Libyssa.
The  recent  researches  of  Mr.  O.  Schwab  have  made  it  probable  that
Libyssa  was  at  or  near  the  modem  Z>/7,  a  place  beside  the  sea  on  the
railway  which  runs  from  Ismid  (Nicomedia)  to  Kadikoi  (Chalcedon).
Here  a  river,  the  Dil  Dere,  breaks  through  a  chain  of  hills  and  flows
into  the  sea,  traversing  an  alluvial  and  in  part  marshy  delta  with  a  sandy
shore,  which  may  be  the  "  sandy  place  beside  the  sea "  described  by
Plutarch  {Flamininus^  20).  On  either  side  of  the  little  delta  the  rocks
and  cliffs  advance  to  the  water's  edge,  leaving  no  room  for  a  settlement.
The  distance  of  Dil  from  Ismid  is  about  36  kilometres  (23  miles),
which  agrees  very  well  with  the  distance  of  Libyssa  from  Nicomedia,
namely  2  2  Roman  miles  according  to  one  ancient  itinerary  or  2  5  Roman


VOL.  IV  LIBYSSA  621

miles  according  to  another.  If  this  identification  of  Dil  with  Libyssa  is
right,  the  river  Dil  Dere  is  the  ancient  Libyssus  mentioned  by  Appian
{Syr,  11),  who  also  speaks  of  the  plain  formed  by  the  river.  In  fact
there  is  a  stretch  of  fertile  and  well-cultivated  comland  in  the  valley  of
the  LHl  Dere  a  little  way  inland  from  the  sea,  and  here  on  the  right
bank  of  the  stream,  where  the  western  chain  of  hills  descends  in  terraces
into  the  valley,  there  is  a  rocky  plateau  covered  with  a  thin  layer  of  soil
and  strewed  with  potsherds.  Mr.  Schwab  conjectures  that  this  may  be
the  site  of  Libyssa,  which  Plutarch  (/.r.)  describes  as  a  large  village.
Libyssa  cannot,  as  some  have  supposed,  have  occupied  the  site  of
Gebtze^  a  place  47  kilometres  (30  miles)  from  Istnid  (Nicomedia)  and
standing  on  high  ground  about  5  miles  from  the  sea  ;  for  the  situation
of  Gebize  does  not  at  all  answer  to  that  of  Libyssa,  as  described  by  the
ancients.  There  are,  however,  some  fragments  of  Greek  architecture
and  inscriptions  at  GebiMe^  and  about  twenty  minutes'  walk  to  the  south-
east of  the  village  is  a  barrow  which  legend  designates  as  the  grave  of
Hannibal.  The  barrow  is  of  elliptical  form,  and  is  shaded  by  two  tall
cypresses  which  are  conspicuous  near  and  far.  The  commanding
situation  of  this  tumulus,  from  which  there  are  wide  views  over  the
whole  plateau  and  the  Gulf  of  Ismid^  seems  certainly  to  mark  it  out  as
the  tomb  of  some  distinguished  man.  See  O.  Schwab,  in  Berliner
philolog,  IVochensckrifty  26th  December  1896,  pp.  166 1- 1663.

P.  223  line  18  from  foot,  Essenes.  To  the  examples  given  in  the
text  of  priests  or  other  religious  functionaries  who  bore  the  names  of
animals  as  an  official  title,  a  few  more  may  be  added.  The  priestesses
of  Demeter  in  Laconia  were  called  *  fillies '  (TrcDXoi,  C.  I.  G,  No.  1449).
The  officials  whose  duty  it  was  to  eject  unruly  members  from  the  club-
house of  an  lobacchic  society  at  Athens  went  by  the  name  of  Horses
(iTrTrot,  see  the  inscription  in  Mittheilungen  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  19
(1894),  p.  260  sq,^  line  140  sqq.)\  they  were  appointed  by  the  priests.
The  men  who  were  initiated  in  the  mysteries  of  Mithras  were  called
Lions,  the  women  Lionesses,  and  the  attendants  Crows  (Porphyry,  De
abstinentia^  iv.  16).

P.  228  line  25  sq,  from  foot,  to  draw  down  curses  etc.  The
modem  Greek  custom  of  cursing  an  enemy  by  throwing  stones  has  been
described  also  by  PouqueviUe  ( Voyage  de  la  Grhe^  2me  Edition,  4.  p.
386).  He  says:  "To  accomplish  the  imprecation,  the  name  of  curse
\anathemci\  is  given  to  some  spot  of  ground  which  the  person  curses  by
throwing  at  it  the  stone  of  reprobation.  All  the  bystanders  do  the
same,  and  afterwards  passers-by  never  fail  to  add  their  mite,  so  that  a
heap  of  stones  soon  rises  on  the  accursed  spot.  The  consequence
of  this  excommunication  is  that  the  enemy  of  the  people  becomes  a
vricolacas  or  wandering  ghost  after  his  death  ;  his  body  cannot  decay  in
the  grave,  and  his  children  are  afflicted  with  ailments.'*

P.  237  line  17  from  top,  Bhoecus.  In  the  precinct  of  Aphrodite  at
Naucratis  there  was  found  a  vase  inscribed  with  a  dedication  to  the
goddess  by  a  certain  Rhoecus,  who  is  supposed  to  be  no  other  than  the
early  Greek  sculptor  of  that  name.  The  inscription  is  in  Ionic  letters
of  the   sixth  century  B.C.      See  £.  A.   Gardner,  Naukraiis^   Part  ii.


622  MEGALOPOLIS  addenda

pp.  41,  59,  65,  with  pi.  xxi.  No.  778  ;  /V/.,  Handbook  of  Greek  Scuipturty
p.  loi  ;  M.  Collignon,  Histoire  de  la  Sculpture  grecque^  i.  p.  158  j^.  If
this  identification  is  right,  it  would  seem  that  Rhoecus  studied  in  Egypt,
as  his  son  or  colleague  Theodorus  is  expressly  said  to  have  done
(Diodorus,  i.  98).  The  discovery  in  Egypt  of  this  vase  inscribed  with
the  sculptor's  name  countenances  the  view  that  Rhoecus  and  Theodonis
did  not  invent,  but  merely  borrowed  from  Egypt,  the  art  of  casting
bronze  statues,  an  art  in  which  the  Egyptians  attained  a  high  d^ree  of
skill.  See  M.  Collignon,  l.c, ;  A.  S.  Murray,  History  of  Greek  Sculpture^
I.  p.  76  sq,

P.  330  line  15  from  foot,  a  theatre  etc.  As  to  the  theatre  at
Megalopolis,  see  W.  Dorpfeld,  in  Das  griechische  Theater^  pp.  133-143.
Amongst  the  reasons  which  he  gives  for  dating  the  Thersilium  before
the  theatre  are  the  difference  in  the  materials  and  the  difference  in  the
form  of  clamps  used  in  the  two  buildings.  For  whereas  the  Thersilium
is  built  of  hard  limestone  and  tufa,  the  theatre  is  built  of  hard  limestone
and  breccia,  and  these  two  last  materials,  according  to  Dr.  Dorpfeld,
occur  in  the  later  buildings  at  Megalopolis,  for  example  in  the  colonnade
of  Philip  and  in  the  columns  which  were  added  in  the  Thersilium  at  a
later  time.  Again,  while  in  the  Thersilium  the  iron  damps  are  of  the
older  l-H  pattern,  those  of  the  theatre  have  the  later  swallow-tailed
shape.  The  existence  of  the  long  low  foundation-wall  in  the  skcmotheka
is  explained  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  in  the  same  way  as  by  Mr.  Schultz  (see
above,  vol.  4.  p.  337  sq.\  and  on  this  explanation  of  it  he  justly  lays
weight  as  a  strong  argument  in  favour  of  his  view  that  when  the  theatre
was  built  there  was  no  raised  stage.  For  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the
foundation- wall  is  on  a  level  with  the  lowest  step  of  the  portico  of  the
Thersilium,  in  other  words  on  a  level  with  the  floor  of  the  orchestra.
Hence  if  the  wall  in  question  supported,  as  seems  possible,  the  move-
able scenery  which  could  be  run  in  front  of  the  portico  when  it  was
wanted,  it  follows  that  the  scenery  also,  when  it  was  in  position  in  front
of  the  portico,  rested  on  the  floor  of  the  orchestra,  and  that  accordingly
the  players,  appearing  in  front  of  it,  must  have  been  in  the  orchestra,  not
on  a  raised  stage.  It  would  of  course  be  no  answer  to  this  to  say  that
the  orchestra  was  not  originally  at  this  level,  but  was  reduced  to  it  at  a
later  period  ;  for  that  would  only  go  to  show  that  the  theatre  continued
to  lack  a  raised  stage  for  some  time  after  it  was  built.  In  sa>nng  (vol.  4.
?•  346)  that  after  a  permanent  stone  stage  was  built  in  front  of  the
portico  the  moveable  scenery  may  have  been  run  on  to  it  from  the
skanothekoy  I  overlooked  the  difference  of  level  between  the  stage  and
the  skanotheka.  For  this  difference  seems  to  preclude  the  view  sug-
gested in  the  text.

P.  367  line  1 3  from  foot,  the  sanctuary  of  the  Mistress.  A  full
account  of  the  excavation  of  the  sanctuary,  so  far  as  it  was  carried  down
to  the  end  of  1895,  has  now  been  published  by  Mr  B.  Leonardos,  the
archaeologist  who  directed  the  work  (IIpa/crtKa  t^s  'Apxa^oXoy  110/9
Eratptas,  1896  (pub.  1897),  pp.  93-126).  His  plan  of  the  sanctuary
is  here  reproduced  (pi.  x.).  One  of  the  results  of  the  excavation  is
to  confirm   Pausanias's  description.       He  says  (viii.    37.    i   sq,)   that


li


VOL.  IV  LYCOSURA  623

on  entering  the  sacred  precinct  you  had  on  the  right  a  colonnade,
and  that  in  front  of  the  temple  stood  three  altars.  Remains  of  all
these  have  been  found  in  the  situations  described  by  Pausanias.  The
sacred  precinct,  which  occupied  a  terrace  on  the  northern  slope  of  the
hillock  called  Terze^  was  enclosed  on  the  north  by  a  boundary- wall
strengthened  by  buttresses.  The  only  entrance  to  the  precinct  was  from
the  east,  to  the  south  of  the  ruined  chapel  of  St.  Athanasius,  which
does  not  stand  on  the  top  of  the  hill,  as  stated  in  the  text  (vol.  4.  p.  367).
The  colonnade  mentioned  by  Pausanias  is  situated  on  the  north  side  of
the  precinct,  hence  on  the  right  as  you  entered.  Measured  on  the  inside,
its  length  from  east  to  west  is  64  metres,  its  depth  from  north  to  south
5.82  metres.  At  the  back  it  was  connected  by  short  cross-walls  with
the  boundary- wall  of  the  precinct.  It  opened  to  the  south,  and  here
the  fagade  was  supported  by  Doric  columns  made  of  the  native  stone.
Some  of  these  columns  have  been  found.  They  are  unfluted,  but  fluted
half-columns  of  the  Doric  order  have  also  come  to  light.  At  the  west
end  of  the  colonnade  is  a  chamber  about  3.80  metres  square,  measured
on  the  inside.  The  walls  of  the  chamber,  so  far  as  they  exist,  are  built
of  squared  blocks  set  upright,  two  of  these  blocks  making  the  thickness
of  the  wall.  In  this  chamber  an  archaic  bronze  statuette  was  found  :  it
represents  a  woman,  perhaps  Athena,  wearing  a  sort  of  helmet  and  clad
in  a  tunic  which  reaches  to  her  feet^  A  little  to  the  south  of  the  colon-
nade are  the  remains  of  the  three  altars  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  They
stand  in  a  row  from  east  to  west.  The  most  easterly  is  faced  on  the
outside  with  marble  fragments  brought  from  some  other  structure.  The
middle  one  is  built  more  regularly  of  large  blocks  of  the  native  lime-
stone ;  two  courses  are  preserved.  Of  the  western  altar  only  three
stones  remain.  From  the  order  in  which  Pausanias  mentions  the  altars
we  may  infer  that  the  eastern  was  the  altar  of  Demeter,  the  middle  one
the  altar  of  the  Mistress,  and  the  western  the  altar  of  the  Great  Mother.
The  temple  of  the  Mistress  stood  towards  the  western  end  of  the
precinct,  immediately  to  the  south  of  the  west  end  of  the  colonnade.
Its  remains  have  now  been  accurately  described  by  Mr.  Leonardos.
The  length  of  the  edifice  from  east  to  west,  including  the  three  steps  at
the  east  end,  was  21.35  metres;  the  breadth  at  the  east  end,  including
the  steps,  was  12.31  metres ;  the  breadth  at  the  west  end,  where  there
are  no  steps,  was  1 1 . 1 5  metres.  The  foundations,  the  lower  part  of  the
walls,  the  pavement  of  the  fore-temple  {pronaos)^  and  the  great  pedestal
which  supported  the  images  are  all  made  of  the  native  limestone,  which
is  of  a  grey  colour  streaked  with  red.  The  upper  part  of  the  walls,
above  a  socle  of  squared  stones,  is  composed  of  large,  thick,  imperfectly
fired  bricks  bonded  together,  apparently,  with  mortar.  The  eastern
fa9ade,  including  the  six  Doric  columns  which  supported  it,  was  of  white
marble  from  Doliana,  The  western  gable  was  of  the  same  material.
Only  the  eastern  facade  was  adorned  with  columns.  The  lower  drums  ^
of  the  two  most  southerly  of  the  colunms  are  still  standing  in  their  places.

^  In  the  text  (vol.  4.  p.  368)  it  is  said  that  the  bases  of  these  columns  are
standing.  This  is,  of  course,  a  mistake.  Being  of  the  Doric  order  the  columns  had
no  bases.


624  L  YCOSURA  addenda

They  have  twenty  flutes.  One  block  of  the  architrave  and  five  fragments
of  the  frieze  of  triglyphs  and  metopes  have  been  found.  The  style  of
these  architectural  members  and  of  the  lions'  heads  which  served  as
water-spouts  is  not  of  the  best.  In  the  interior  of  the  cella  the  walls
were  coated  with  stucco,  some  of  which  at  least  was  painted.  The
eastern  part  of  the  cella^  paved  with  a  design  in  mosaic  (see  vol  4.  p.
368),  was  divided  from  the  western  and  smaller  part,  in  which  stood
the  images,  by  a  barrier  running  across  the  floor  from  side  to  side.
Remains  of  this  barrier,  consisting  of  narrow  quadrangular  stones  widi
sockets  for  the  attachment  of  a  railing  or  balustrade,  may  still  be  seen.
Almost  the  whole  of  the  floor  to  the  west  of  this  barrier  is  occupied
by  the  great  pedestal  that  supported  the  four  images  mentioned  by
Pausanias  of  which  so  many  fragments  have  been  found  (vol  4.  p.
372  sqq,).  The  shape  of  the  pedestal  is  well  adapted  to  its  purpose,  fbr
in  the  middle  there  is  a  quadrangular  projection,  on  which  the  two
seated  figures  of  the  Mistress  and  Demeter  were  doubtless  placed,  while
the  two  standing  figures  of  Artemis  and  Anytus  may  be  supposed  to
have  occupied  the  two  retiring  wings  of  the  pedestal.  The  sides
of  the  pedestal  are  constructed  of  four  courses  of  quadrangular  blocks.
The  lowest  course  is  plain ;  the  second  and  fourth  are  adorned  with
mouldings :  the  third  is  composed  of  plain  blocks  set  upright  A
remarkable  and  very  unusual  feature  of  the  cella  remains  to  be  noticed.
About  the  middle  of  the  south  wall  there  is  a  doorway  which  leads  by
three  descending  steps  to  an  open  passage  1.65  metre  wide  which  runs
round  the  temple.  This  doorway,  which  seems  to  be  contemporary  with
the  wall,  is  probably  the  one  referred  to  by  Pausanias  when  he  says  :
**  On  the  right  as  you  leave  the  temple  there  is  a  mirror  fitted  into  the
wall."

From  an  inscription  carved  on  the  southern  anta  of  the  temple  we
learn  that  in  the  Imperial  age  the  building  was  repaired  by  a  certain
Xenarchus,  son  of  Onasicrates,  and  that  in  gratitude  for  his  services  the
people  of  Megalopolis  and  the  Roman  merchants  resident  there  resolved
to  set  up  statues  and  portraits  of  Xenarchus,  his  wife  Nicippa,  and  their
children  in  the  sanctuary  of  the  Mistress.  The  same  inscription  refers
to  a  temple  of  the  Roman  Emperors  {Sebastot)  which  Xenarchus  built,
and  to  a  temple  of  the  Maid  {Kore)  which  he  repaired.  See  'E<^/i£/w9
ap^aioXoyiKYj^  1896  (pub.  1 897),  p.  217  sqq.y  No.  1 7.  A  pedestal
inscribed  with  a  dedication  by  the  same  Xenarchus  was  found  in  the
cella  of  the  temple  (E<l>i]fi€pls  apxaiokoyiKi^y  1S96,  p.  235,  No.  26).
Another  inscription,  found  higher  up  the  hill,  refers  to  a  repair  of  **  the
temple "  and  "  the  fore-temple "  by  a  certain  woman  Democratea  (?),
daughter  of  Agias  or  Ag^adas  ;  but  whether  the  temple  in  question  is
that  of  the  Mistress  or  not,  we  cannot  say  (E<f>r)fjL€pU  apxatokoyncfj,
1896,  p.  236,  No.  27).  The  dedication  by  Epagathus  mentioned  in
the  text  (vol.  4.  p.  370)  appears  to  have  been  to  the  Mistresses,  not
to  the  Mistress  ('E<^t;/a€/)4s  dpxai'OkoyiKTJ,  1896,  p.  238,  No.  28).
Pausanias  elsewhere  (v.  1 5.  4  and  i  o)  speaks  of  the  Mistresses,  mean-
ing thereby  Demeter  and  Proserpine.

On  the  ridge  of  the  hillock  above  the  temple,  towards  the  western


VOL.  IV  L  YCOSURA  625

end,  there  is  a  well-built  ancient  cistern  and  beside  it  a  piece  of  wall  of
polygonal  masonry.  Lower  down  than  the  cistern  are  some  remains  of
walls  built  of  large  carefully-he\vn  stones.  Some  excavations  made  here
in  1895  brought  to  light  three  archaic  statuettes  made  of  thin  sheets  of
bronze,  a  piece  of  a  small  clay  idol  wearing  a  helmet,  another  piece  of
a  clay  idol  with  a  ram's  head,  and  broken  tiles  of  terra-cotta  inscribed
with  the  name  of  the  Mistress.  The  bronze  statuettes  represent  men
stretching  out  their  hands  in  supplication.  Lower  down  the  hill  than
the  cistern,  moreover,  was  discovered  a  building  ( 1 1  metres  by  8  metres),
the  walls  of  which,  preserved  to  a  height  of  about  1.50  metres,  are  built
of  large  squared  blocks  of  limestone.  Two  fallen  columns  were  found
lying  within  the  edifice.  See  II/oaKTtKa  1^5  * Kpya.io\oyiKr\%  *£ra(/oias,
1896  (pub.  1897),  pp.  1 2 1- 1 24.

P.  378  line  5  sq,  from  top,  the  date  of  these  sculptures  and  of
the  artist  Damophon.  On  the  vexed  question  of  the  date  of  Damophon
and  of  the  Lycosura  sculptures.  Prof.  E.  A.  Gardner  adheres  to  the
old  view  that  Damophon  belonged  to  the  fourth  century  B.C.  "He
may  best  be  understood  if  we  regard  him  as  a  man  who  lived  in
the  fourth  century,  but  apart  from  the  general  stream  of  its  artistic
tendencies,  feeling  deeply  the  influence  of  the  high  ideals  of  the  age
of  Phidias,  but  of  sufficient  originality  to  introduce  into  his  art  some
innovations  as  yet  unknown  to  his  contemporaries,  though  they
anticipate  the  custom  of  the  Hellenistic  age"  (E.  A.  Gardner,
Handbook  of  Greek  Sculpture^  p.  403).  Prof.  Percy  Gardner  takes
the  same  view,  rightly  observing  that  "  the  historical  probabilities  that
Damophon  worked  in  the  time  of  the  foundation  of  Megalopolis  and  the
restoration  of  Messene  by  Epaminondas  are  so  overpowering,  that  we
must  very  closely  scrutinize  any  archaeological  evidence  on  the  other
side"  {Classical  Review^  11  (1897),  p.  71).  On  the  other  hand  Prof.
Collignon,  arguing  from  the  style  of  the  Lycosura  sculptures  and  especi-
ally from  that  of  the  drapery  with  its  elaborate  reliefs,  holds  that
Damophon  cannot  have  belonged  to  the  fourth  century  ac.  but  may
have  been  at  work  about  the  beginning  of  the  second  century  B.C.
(Htstoire  de  la  Sculpture  grecque^  2.  pp.  627-630).

P.  402  line  16  from  top.  The  twelve  fragments  of  the  metopes
etc.  The  remains  of  the  triglyphs  and  metopes  at  Phigalia  (Bassae)  have
lately  been  examined  afresh  by  Mr.  H.  Dragendorff,  and  his  examination
of  them  has  made  it  quite  certain  that  only  the  metopes  of  the  fore-temple
and  back-chamber  were  sculptured,  while  all  the  outer  metopes  of  the
temple  were  plain.  This  correction  of  Prof  B.  Sauer's  view  that  the
outer  metopes  of  the  temple  were  sculptured  is  published  by  Prof.
Sauer  himself  with  commendable  candour.  See  his  article  '  Nachtrag-
liches  zu  den  Metopen  von  Phigalia,'  Mittheilungen  d.  arch.  Inst,  in
Athen,  21  (1896),  pp.  333-338.

P.  437  line  26  sqq.  from  foot,  a  series  of  reliefiB  etc.  The  Perga-
mene  relief  representing  the  suckling  of  Telephus  by  the  lioness  (?)  is
figured  in  Overbeck's  Geschichte  des  griech,  Plastik^  (2.  p.  284,
Fig.  201  b)  and  CoUignon's  Histoire  de  la  Sculpture  grecque  (2.  p.
529,  Fig.  275).

VOL.  V  2  S


626  PLATAEA  addenda

P.  439  line  22  sq,  from  top,  the  base  of  a  statue  bearing  the
name  of  AgAlft^ftg.  This  inscription  is  now  published  as  No.  631
of  Die  Inschriften  von  Olympia^  edited  by  W.  Dittenberger  and  K.
Purgold.  Commenting  on  the  inscription  Prof.  Dittenbeiiger  expresses
his  opinion  that  two  sculptors  are  mentioned  in  it,  namely  Atotus
and  Argeiadas,  son  of  Hagelaidas,  and  that  the  epithet  ro/xyctov
attached  to  the  name  of  Hagelaidas  is  a  personal  name  (Argius),  not  a
national  designation  (Argive).  A  sculptor  of  the  name  of  Aigius  is
mentioned  by  Pliny  {Nat,  hist,  xxxiv.  50),  but  as  he  was  a  pupil  of
Polyclitus  he  cannot  be  the  same  with  the  Hagelaidas  Argius  of  the
inscription,  who  to  judge  from  the  character  of  the  letters  would  seem  to
have  flourished  at  the  beginning  of  the  fifUi,  if  not  at  the  end  of  the
sixth  century  B.C.  Prof.  Dittenberger  rejects  the  view  that  Argeiadas
was  the  slave  of  Hagelaidas.


VOL.  V

P.  2 1  line  4  from  top,  a  sanctuary  of  Athena.  The  painting  by
Polygnotus  in  this  temple  represented,  as  Pausanias  tells  us,  the  slaying
of  die  wooers  by  Ulysses.  The  same  subject  is  carved  in  relief  on  one
of  the  friezes  at  Gj51baschi  in  Lycia,  and  archaeologists  incline  to  believe
that  the  sculptor  of  the  frieze  was  influenced  in  his  treatment  of  the  theme
by  the  picture  of  Polygnotus.  The  sculptor  has  represented  a  long  pillared
hall  in  which  the  suitors,  fourteen  in  number,  are  seen  reclining,  as  at  a
banquet,  on  eight  couches.  At  one  end  of  the  hall  stands  Ulysses  with
his  bow  bent,  drawing  an  arrow  to  the  head ;  at  his  side  Telemachus
is  advancing  with  drawn  sword.  Some  of  the  suitors  are  already
struck ;  others  hold  up  tables,  a  bed,  or  their  garments  to  ward  off  the
fatal  arrows.  A  youthful  cupbearer  is  escaping  by  the  door  behind
Ulysses.  In  another  scene  the  sculptor  shows  Penelope  in  her  chamber.
Euryclea  is  presenting  to  her  the  faithful  handmaids  ;  while  at  the  other
end  of  the  room  Ulysses,  with  a  torch  in  his  left  hand  and  a  sword  in
his  right,  strides  away  grimly  to  take  vengeance  on  the  faithless  abigails.
The  scene  of  the  slaughter  of  the  suitors  is  also  depicted  on  a  \'ase  of
the  fifth  century  B.C.  found  at  Cometo  and  now  in  the  Berlin  Museum
(Monumenti  Inediti^  10  (1878),  pi.  53  ;  H.  Heydemann,  in  Annali  dilP
Instittito^  50  (1878),  pp.  222-22$  ;  P.  Girard,  La  Peintnre  antiquty
figs.  87,  88,  pp.  164,  165).  On  one  side  of  the  vase  Ulysses  appears
bending  his  bow ;  behind  him  stand  two  women  watching.  On  the
other  side  of  the  vase  are  painted  three  of  the  suitors,  one  of  them
kneeling  on  a  couch  and  hit  by  an  arrow  in  the  back,  another  sitting
up  on  the  same  couch  and  vainly  trying  to  screen  himself  ^^nth  his
uplifted  mantle,  while  the  third  crouches  on  the  ground  behind  a  table
which  he  is  holding  up  as  a  shield.  The  resemblance  between  the  vase-
painting  and  the  frieze  is  so  close  that  both  are  probably  copies  of  a
common  original.  That  original  may  very  well  have  been  the  picture
by  Polygnotus  in  the  temple  of  Athena  at  Plataea.     See  O.  Benndorf


VOL,  V  PLA  TAEA—CRE  US  IS  627

und  G.  Niemann,  Das  Heroon  von  Gjotbaschi-Trysa  (Vienna,  1889),
pp.  96-105  ;  J.  Overbeck,  Geschichte  d,  griech,  Plastik^^  2.  p.  203  sq. ;
M.  Collignon,  Histoire  de  la  Sculpture  grecque^  2.  pp.  206-208 ;  P.  Girard,
La  Peinture  antique^  p.  165  5q,\  C.  Robert,  Die  Marathonschlacht  in
der  Paikile^  pp.  63-65.

P.  21  line  16  sq,  from  top,  the  other,  by  Onasias,  depicts  the
former  expedition  of  the  Argives  etc.  The  same  subject,  namely  the
attack  on  Thebes  by  the  Seven  Champions,  is  sculptured  in  relief  on
one  of  the  friezes  at  Gjolbaschi  in  Lycia,  and  archaeologists  think  that
the  sculptor  may  have  imitated  to  some  extent  the  picture  of  Onasias  in
the  temple  of  Athena  at  Plataea.  This  conjecture  is  all  the  more
probable  since,  as  we  have  just  seen,  there  are  independent  grounds  for
believing  that  a  picture  by  Polygnotus  in  the  same  temple  was  copied
more  or  less  closely  on  another  of  the  friezes  in  the  same  building  at
Gjolbaschi.  The  sculptor  has  placed  the  combat  between  Eteocles  and
Polynices,  or  rather  the  preparation  for  it,  in  the  centre  of  the  scene.
At  either  side  is  a  chariot  drawn  by  four  horses  :  the  one  to  the  left  is
that  of  Adrastus,  who  is  fleeing ;  the  one  to  the  right,  sinking  into  the
ground,  is  that  of  Amphiaraus.  The  city  of  Thebes  is  represented  by  a
tower  at  the  foot  of  which  a  trumpeter  is  blowing  his  trumpet,  while
Capaneus  is  tumbling  from  a  ladder  which  he  has  planted  against  the
wall.  See  O.  Benndorf  und  G.  Niemann,  Das  Heroon  von  Gjolbaschi-
Trysa^  pp.  187-200 ;  J.  Overbeck,  Gesch,  d.  gritcK  Plastik^^  2.  p.  201
sqq, ;  M.  Collignon,  Histoire  de  la  Sculpture  grecque^  2.  p.  209 ;  C.
Robert,  Die  Marathonschlacht  in  der  Poikile^  pp.  30  j^.,  65.

P.  138  line  13  from  foot,  the  Sphinx.  The  Sphinx  as  she  appears
in  Greek  art  and  legend  is  the  subject  of  a  monograph  by  Mr.  J.  Ilberg
(/>/>  Sphinx  in  der  griechischen  Kunst  und  Sage^  Leipzig,  1 896).

P.  160  line  9  from  top,  Creosis.  Fragments  of  a  bronze  statue  of
Poseidon,  somewhat  less  than  life-size,  were  lately  fished  up  from  the
sea  near  the  village  of  H.  Vasilios^  which  corresponds  to  the  ancient
Creusis.  The  god  is  represented  naked  and  bearded,  standing  with
the  right  foot  in  advance :  in  his  left  hand,  which  is  raised,  he  seems  to
have  grasped  the  trident.  On  the  bronze  socle  is  an  inscription  in  the
Boeotian  dialect,  'Sacred  to  Poseidon'  (ra>  IlorctSaovos  lapd?).  See
Comptes  Rendus  de  VAcadinUe  des Inscriptions^  25  (1897),  pp.  173-175  ;
Mittheilungen  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  22  (1897),  p.  229.

P.  199  line  19  from  top,  a  temple  of  King  Zeus.  Another  long
fragment  of  the  inscription  relating  to  the  building  of  this  temple  was
found  in  1891.  See  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  hdllenique^  20  (1896),  pp.
318-335.  Another  small  fragment  has  been  published  by  Mr.  A.
Wilhelm  {Mittheilungen  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  22  (1897),  pp.  179-182).

P.  202  line  3  from  top,  the  Water  of  Forgetftilness the  Water

of  Memory.  A  few  years  ago  there  was  found  in  a  tomb  at  Eleuthema
in  Crete  a  thin  gold  plate  on  which  is  inscribed  an  abridgipent  in  three
lines  of  the  Orphic  poem  mentioned  in  the  text  (A.  Joubin,  <  Inscription
cr^toise  relative  k  I'Orphisme,*  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  helUnique^  17
(1896),  pp.  1 21-124).  Hence  Mr.  Foucart  conjectures  with  some
probability  that  in  the  Petilia  and  Eleuthema  inscriptions  we  have


i
V


628  DELPHI  ADDENDA

extracts  from  or  abridgments  of  a  ritual  poem,  which  contained  full
directions  for  the  guidance  of  the  soul  on  its  arrival  in  the  other  world,
and  of  which  copies  or  extracts  were  commonly  deposited  with  the  dead
in  the  grave,  just  as  for  a  similar  purpose  the  Egyptians  placed  copies
of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  in  the  tombs  (P.  Foucart,  Recherckes  sur
rorigine  et  la  fuUure  des  my  stores  djkleusis  (Paris,  1895),  P-  66  sqq.).

P.  205  line  I,  the  handiwork  of  Daedalus.  Prof.  Waldstein  has
suggested  that  the  archaic  image  of  a  goddess  discovered  by  Mr.
Homolle  at  Delos  and  now  in  the  National  Museum  at  Athens  (TL
HomoUe,  De  atiHquissimis  Dianae  simuiacris  Deliads^  pL  i. ;  P.
Cawadias,  FAvTrra  rov  'E^viKOv  Mourceoi;,  No.  i  ;  M.  Collignon,
Histoire  de  la  Sculpture  grecque^  i.  p.  120  sq,  \  J.  Overbeck,  GeschichU
der  griech.  Plastik^^  i.  p.  95  j^.)  is  a  close  imitation  or  copy  of  the
wooden  image  of  Aphrodite  which,  as  we  learn  from  the  present
passage  of  Pausanias  (ix.  40.  3  5q,\  was  preserved  in  Delos  and  passed
for  a  work  of  Daedalus.  At  all  events  archaeologists  seem  to  agree  that
this  very  archaic  marble  image  is  a  copy  of  a  wooden  image.  Prof
Waldstein  further  contends  for  the  historical  existence  of  a  very  early
Greek  sculptor  named  Daedalus.  See  his  article  '  D^ale  et  1' Artemis
de  D^os,'  Yd  Revue  arclUologiquey  Nouvelle  S^rie,  42  (1881),  pp.
321-330.

P.  268  line  1 1  from  foot,  other  statues  dedicated  by  the  Azgives.
In  a  number  of  the  Bulletin  de  Correspondance  helUnique  for  1896,
which  has  been  delayed  in  the  press  and  of  which  through  the  courtesy
of  Mr.  Homolle  I  have  just  received  (December  1897)  an  extract
(pp.  $81-732),  Mr.  Homolle  describes  and  discusses  in  detail  several  o{
the  buildings  and  sculptures  discovered  by  him  at  Delphi  of  which  some
account  has  already  been  given  in  this  volume.  1  propose  here  to
supplement  and  correct  that  account  on  some  points  by  the  help  of  Mr.
Homolle's  latest  papers  on  the  subject.

I.  The  ArgiTe  offerings  {Bull,  de  Corresp.  helUnique^  20  (1896),
pp.  605-608).  The  Argive  kings  and  heroes  whose  statues  graced  the
semicircular  monument  on  the  north  side  of  the  Sacred  Way  were,
according  to  Mr.  Homolle's  reading  of  the  inscriptions,  as  follows :
Lynceus,  Abas,  Acrisius,  Danae,  Perseus,  Alectryon,  Alcmena,  and
Hercules.  The  inscriptions  are  all  carved  in  fine  letters  of  the  fourth
century  B.C.,  although  by  an  affectation  of  antiquity  they  read  from
right  to  left.

I I.  The  Sicyonian  treasury  {Bull,  de  Corresp,  hellMque^  20(1 896),
pp.  657-675).  The  building  measures  8.43  metres  by  6.35  metres.
The  style  of  architecture  is  early  Doric  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  as
shown  by  the  breadth  of  the  capitals  with  their  shallow  rounded  echinus.
The  columns  have  only  sixteen  flutes.  Mr.  Homolle  now  inclines  to
hold  that  the  sculptured  metopes  belonged  to  the  original  structure
of  which  the  architectural  fragments  compose  in  large  measure  the
foundations  of  the  later  treasury.  From  a  comparison  of  them  with  the
sculptured  metopes  of  the  temples  at  Selinus,  he  infers  that  they  date
from  the  decade  570-560  B.C.,  being  a  little  later  in  style  than  the
metopes  of  temple  C  and  much  earlier  than  those  of  temple  F  at  Selinus.


VOL.  V  DELPHI  629

This,  therefore,  in  Mr.  Homolle's  judgment,  is  the  date  of  the  foundation
of  the  Sicyonian  treasury.

III.  The  Siphnian  or  Onidian  treasury  {Bull,  de  Corresf.
helUnique^  20  (1896),  pp.  581-602).  The  dimensions  of  this  building,
as  given  by  Mr.  HomoUe,  are  8.90  metres  by  6.28  metres.  A  broken
drum  of  bluish  marble  found  at  the  west  front  of  the  treasury  seems  to
have  belonged  to  the  facade.  It  is  of  the  Ionic  order,  but  the  number
of  flutes  is  only  sixteen  and  they  have  sharp  edges.  Part  of  the
dedicatory  inscription  has  been  found  carved  on  four  fragments  of  slabs,
which  perhaps  formed  part  of  a  step.  The  letters  are  archaic.  The
inscription  runs  thus :

rhv  Orjaravphv  t6v8€  koI  rdy^ak^fAaTa

"  The  treasury  and  the  images."  Mr.  HomoUe  has  now  adduced  further
evidence  to  show  that  the  treasury  was  dedicated  by  the  Cnidians,  not
by  the  Siphnians,  as  archaeologists  have  generally  assumed.  The  facts
on  which  he  relies  as  evidence  are  : — ( i )  the  occurrence  in  the  dedicatory
inscription  of  symbols  for  the  long  and  short  o  (O  and  C  =:  cj  and  o),
which  are  found  only  at  Melos  and  Cnidus  ;  (2)  five  decrees  in  honour
of  Cnidians  which  are  carved  on  one  of  the  anlae  of  the  portico.
Further,  he  points  out  that  Pausanias,  immediately  after  speaking  of  the
Sicyonian  treasury,  which  adjoins  the  building  in  question  on  the  east,
mentions  images  dedicated  by  the  Cnidians  which  stood  (according  to
our  texts  of  Pausanias)  "beside  the  treasury  of  the  Sicyonians  "  (irapa  rhv
'EiKViavitav  drfcravpov),  Mr.  HomoUe  suggests  that  our  texts  of  Pausanias
are  here  corrupt,  and  that  we  should  either  omit  the  words  "of  the
Sicyonians  "  or  alter  "  Sicyonians  "  into  "  Cnidians  "  (KvtSuov),  In  the
former  case  Pausanias  would  say  that  the  images  dedicated  by  the
Cnidians  "stand  beside  the  treasury"  (namely,  of  the  Cnidians).  From
the  allusion  which  Pausanias  afterwards  makes  to  the  Cnidian  treasury
(x.  II.  5),  we  gather  that  it  was  richly  ornamented,  and  the  sculptured
decoration  of  the  treasury  hitherto  commonly  known  as  the  Siphnian
would  justify  such  an  allusion.  Moreover,  the  dedicatory  inscription
makes  mention  of  images  as  well  as  of  a  treasury,  and  this  would  answer
perfectly  to  Pausanias's  description  of  the  images  set  up  by  the  Cnidians
"  beside  the  treasury."  These  grounds  are  strong,  and  on  the  whole
the  balance  of  evidence  inclines  decidedly  in  favour  of  Mr.  HomoUe's
conclusion  that  the  treasury  in  question  belonged  to  the  Cnidians,  not
to  the  Siphnians.

Mr.  HomoUe  has  now  modified  on  several  points  his  interpretation
of  the  sculptured  friezes  of  the  treasury.  The  frieze  on  the  southern
wall,  he  thinks,  represents  the  rape  of  the  daughters  of  Leucippus  by  the
Dioscuri  rather  than  the  chariot-race  between  Pelops  and  Oenomaus.
Three  chariots  appear  at  least  in  the  scene ;  one  of  them  may  be  sup-
posed to  convey  the  father  of  the  damsels  or  one  of  the  bridegrooms
hastening  after  the  ravishers.  The  horsemen  may  belong  to  the  parties
both  of  the  pursuers  and  the  pursued.  The  subject  of  the  eastern
frieze,  Mr.  HomoUe  now  believes,  is  taken  from  the  seventeenth  book
of  the  Iliaiiy  which  has  for  its  theme  the  doughty  deeds  of  Menelaus.


630


DELPHI


ADDENDA


In  the  frieze  Menelaus  occupies  the  chief  place ;  opposite  him  are
Hector  and  Aeneas  {Iliad,  xvii.  72  sqq.^  322  sqq,)  and  behind  him  is
Meriones  {Iliad^  xvii.  259,  669),  whose  name  is  just  l^ble.  The  dead
man  on  the  ground  over  whom  the  combat  rages  is  probably  Euphorbos
(lliady  xvii.  59  sq.\  not  Sarpedon.  The  name  of  Achilles  cannot,  Mr.
Homolle  tells  us,  be  detected  on  the  shield  of  one  of  the  combatants,  as
he  formerly  fancied  that  it  might.  Arguing  from  the  style  of  the  archi-
tecture, of  the  sculptures,  and  of  the  dedicatory  inscription  Mr.  Homolle
concludes  that  the  treasury  was  built  between  540  or  530  B.C  and
500  B.C.  The  subjects  of  the  sculptures  confirm,  in  Mr.  Homolle's
opinion,  the  view  that  the  treasury  was  dedicated  by  the  Cnidians ;  for
Cnidus.was  a  colony  of  Lacedaemon  (Herodotus,  i.  174),  and  the
subjects  of  the  sculptures  are,  with  a  small  admixture  of  Oriental
elements,  mainly  taken  from  Dorian  and  especially  Lacedaemonian
legends.  Hercules  was  the  great  Dorian  hero;  the  Dioscuri  belong
especially  to  Lacedaemon ;  and  it  was  at  Lacedaemon  that  Menelaus
reigned.  In  the  battle  of  the  gods  and  giants,  which  forms  the  subject
of  the  frieze  on  the  north  wall,  two  figures  are  unusual  and  therefore
perhaps  specially  significant  One  of  them  is  the  Asiatic  goddess
Cybele ;  the  other  is  Aeolus  in  the  act  of  letting  loose  the  winds.  Of
these  two,  Cybele  would  not  be  out  of  place  in  an  offering  of  an  Asiatic
city ;  Aeolus  would  be  peculiarly  appropriate  in  an  offering  of  Cnidus,
since  Lipara,  the  isle  of  Aeolus,  was  a  Cnidian  colony  (Thucydides,  iil
88;  Pausanias,  x.  11.  3  note),  and  according  to  one  legend  Aeolus,
son  of  Hellen,  was  through  his  daughter  Canace  the  grandfather  of  the
Cnidian  hero  Triopas  (Apollodorus,  i.  7.  3,  4).

IV.  The  Athenian  treasury  {Bull,  dc  Corresp,  kelUm'que,  20  (1896),
pp.  608-617).  A  dedicatory  inscription  has  been  found  in  fragments,
most  of  them  lying  among  the  ruins  of  the  treasury.  As  restored  by
Mr.  Homolle  the  inscription  runs  thus  :


ov  aK[po6]i\'ia  ris  ^lapa$[o]vi


'AOevalot.  T[6]t  *A7rdAA,ov[i  dirh  Mc^

fj[dxiS


"The  Athenians  (dedicated)  to  Apollo  first-fruits  of  the  battle  at
Marathon  (taken)  from  the  Medes."  The  letters,  though  they  feign  to
be  archaic,  are  really  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.,  which  seems  to  prove
that  the  inscription  is  not  the  original  one  but  only  a  copy  of  it  made
a  century  or  so  afterwards.  The  stones  on  which  it  is  car\'ed  appear  to
have  belonged  to  a  socle  or  base  which  stood  on  the  terrace  immediately
adjoining  the  treasury  on  the  south.  The  upper  surface  of  the  base  is
studded  with  holes,  apparently  for  the  attachment  of  bronze  objects.
Doubtless  these  objects  were  the  offerings  referred  to  as  first-fruits  in  the
inscription.  From  the  position  which  the  base  occupied,  parallel  to  but
distinct  from  the  treasury,  Mr.  Homolle  infers  that  it  was  set  up  after
the  treasury  was  finished.

V.  The  Athenian  colonnade  (Bull,  de  Corresp,  helUmquey  20
(1896),  p.  615  sq.).  Mr.  Homolle  holds  that  the  dedicatory  inscription
of   this  colonnade  (see  above,   p.    283)  clearly  dates  from  the  sixth


VOL.  V  DELPHI  631

century  B.C.  He  conjectures  that  the  colonnade  may  have  been  built
to  commemorate  the  victories  of  506  B.C.,  when  the  Athenians  drove
Cleomenes  from  the  plain  of  Eleusis,  defeated  the  Boeotians,  and
captured  Chalcis  in  Euboea  (Herodotus,  v.  74-77).

VI.  The  great  altar  (^BulL  de  Corresp,  hellMque,  20  (1896),  pp.
617-633).  The  rectangular  base  on  which  the  altar  rested  measures
8.50  metres  by  2.20  metres.  It  is  built  on  the  top  of  the  polygonal
terrace-wall  and  faces  both  towards  the  Sacred  Way  and  towards  the
esplanade  in  front  of  the  eastern  facade  of  the  temple.  At  this  point
the  ground  slopes  so  steeply  that  the  altar,  which  is  3  metres  (9  ft.
10  in.)  above  the  Sacred  Way,  is  just  on  a  level  with  the  esplanade.
The  dedicatory  inscription  (see  above,  p.  309)  is  carved  in  fine  letters
of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  on  a  long  cornice  of  white  marble  which  was
found,  broken  in  two  pieces,  lying  on  the  pavement  of  the  Sacred  Way
not  far  from  the  altar.  The  other  inscription,  recording  the  privilege
granted  to  the  Chians  by  the  Delphians  (see  above,  p.  309),  is  carved
in  large  carefully-cut  letters  on  the  third  step  of  the  base.  It  seems
not  to  be  earlier  than  the  third  century  B.C.  Other  inscriptions  allow
us  to  trace  the  history  of  the  altar  down  to  the  middle  of  the  second
century  B.C.  One  of  them  records  a  decree  of  the  Amphictyons  in
honour  of  Leochides  a  Chian  who  had  been  sent  from  Chios  in  an
official  capacity  and  had  seen  to  the  altar  and  other  offerings  of  the
Chians  at  Delphi.  Another  inscription  proves  that  a  statue  of  King
Eumenes  was  set  up  by  the  Delphians  beside  the  altar.  The  ground
in  the  neighbourhood  between  the  Sacred  Way  and  the  eastern  wall
of  the  sanctuary  has  proved  to  be  crowded  with  and  almost  composed
of  ashes  and  the  remains  of  votive  offerings  in  bronze  and  terra-cotta.
The  fragments  belonging  to  the  sixth  century  B.C.  and  those  of  the  still
earlier  styles  known  to  archaeologists  as  Corinthian,  proto-Corinthian,
geometric,  and  Mycenaean,  occur  here  in  regular  layers,  one  below  the
other,  the  most  ancient  of  all  resting  on  the  virgin  soil.  This  proves
that  the  great  altar,  built  probably  in  the  early  part  of  the  fifth  century
B.C.,  occupied  a  place  which  had  been  the  scene  of  worship  and  sacrifice
from  a  remote  age.

VII.  The  temple  of  Apollo  {BulL  de  Corresp.  heUMquey  20  (1896),
pp.  641-654,  677-701,  702-732).  Remains  of  the  temple  built  by  the
Alcmaeonids  in  the  sixth  century  B.C.  have  been  found  by  Mr.  Homolle
and  his  colleagues,  some  in  the  substructions  of  the  later  temple,  some
employed  as  building  materials  in  other  parts  of  the  sanctuary,  and
others  again  in  embankments  which  seem  to  have  been  thrown  up  in
the  fourth  century  B.C.  Amongst  them  are  drums  of  Doric  columns
made  of  tufa  and  coated  with  a  fine  white  stucco.  A  single  tolerably
preserved  capital  has  come  to  light.  It  is  made  of  tufa  in  the  style  of
the  sixth  century,  with  high  abacus  and  broad  rounded  echinus^  like  the
capitals  of  the  old  temple  at  Corinth.  Other  fragments  found  are
pieces  of  architraves,  some  of  white  Parian  marble,  some  of  tu^ ;  a
triglyph  and  fragments  of  a  cornice,  all  of  white  Parian  marble ;  two
gargoyles  in  the  shape  of  lions'  heads ;  and  a  single  fi^gment  of  the
tympanum.     The  temple  was  roofed  with  large  marble  tiles  of  the  usual


6yz  DELPHI  addenda

two  kinds,  namely  flat  tiles  with  raised  edges,  and  gable-shaped  tiles
which  were  placed  so  as  to  cover  the  juxtaposed  edges  of  each  pair
of  flat  tiles.  From  the  dimensions  of  the  architectural  fragments
Mr.  HomoUe  calculates  that  the  temple  was  about  58  metres  long  by
23  metres  broad,  which  is  nearly  the  size  of  the  later  temple.

Further,  the  French  archaeologists  have  discovered  a  number  of
archaic  sculptures  which  appear  almost  certainly  to  have  occupied  the
gables  of  the  temple  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.  They  were  found  in  front
of  the  eastern  facade  of  the  temple  on  and  under  the  pavement  of  the
Sacred  Way,  most  of  them  to  the  north-east,  near  the  pedestal  of  the
offerings  of  Gelo.  Along  with  them  were  dug  up  vast  quantities  of
broken  bronzes  and  pottery,  mostly  archaic,  much  of  the  pottery  being
decorated  in  the  geometrical  style  ;  and  sometimes  these  remains  were
embedded  in  a  thick  layer  of  ashes.  Apparently  the  sculptures  had  been
used  with  other  worn-out  old  materials  to  form  embankments  for  the
support  of  terraces,  probably  about  the  middle  of  the  fourth  century  B.C
The  figures,  which  are  larger  than  life,  fall  into  two  sets,  one  made  of
marble,  the  other  of  tufa.  Some  are  in  the  round,  others  in  high  relief
Those  in  the  round  are  only  roughly  worked  at  the  back,  showing  that
they  were  meant  to  be  seen  only  in  front.  Tenons  and  mortises  at  the
bade  of  some  of  the  figures  indicate  still  more  clearly  that  they  were
destined  to  be  set  up  against  a  wall.  Both  sets  of  figures  are  executed
in  the  artistic  style  characteristic  of  the  end  of  the  sixth  century  B.c,  in
which  severity  is  tempered  by  an  effort  after  elegance.  The  women  are
draped  in  ample  finely-folded  Ionian  garments  ;  the  nude  bodies  of  the
men  are  rendered  in  a  dry  hard  conventional  manner.  There  is  a  lean-
ness combined  with  precision  about  the  heads  of  the  horses  ;  the  manes
are  indicated  by  zigzags  or  undulations.

The  unity  of  style  which  pervades  these  sculptures,  the  place  where
they  were  found,  and  the  similarity  of  the  purpose  to  which  they  were
obviously  meant  to  be  applied  combine  to  make  it  highly  probable  that
they  occupied  the  two  gables  of  the  temple  of  Apollo  which  was  built
by  the  Alcmaeonids  in  the  sixth  century  B.C.  and  destroyed,  apparently
by  an  earthquake,  in  the  fourth  century  B.C.  It  is  to  be  obser\'ed  that,
while  all  are  badly  broken,  their  surfaces  with  the  colours  are  well  pre-
served. They  seem  to  have  been  smashed  by  a  fall  and  afterwards  to
have  lain  underground,  where  they  have  been  protected  from  the  action
of  the  atmosphere  and  weather.

The  marble  figures  comprise  three  women  standing  erect  and
motionless  in  the  attitude  and  wearing  the  costume  of  the  archaic
female  statues  of  the  Acropolis  ;  a  man  also  standing  erect  and  motion-
less ;  the  front  parts  of  three  horses  (one  of  them  with  the  head  pre-
served), all  facing  the  spectator  and  bending  the  neck  to  the  right  or
left ;  and  lastly  the  head  of  a  bearded  man.  The  tufa  figures  comprise
a  draped  woman  walking  swiftly  to  the  left ;  a  draped  man  also  walking
to  the  left ;  a  man  supporting  himself  with  hands  and  knees  on  the
ground  ;  the  torso  of  a  naked  man  turning  his  back  to  the  spectator ;  and
the  head,  breast,  and  front  legs  of  a  horse.  To  these  must  be  added  frag-
ments of  limbs  of  men  and  animals  and  pieces  of  drapery.     Traces  of


VOL,  V  DELPHI  633

colours  (red,  blue,  green,  yellow)  abound  on  the  drapery,  flesh,  and  hair
of  the  tufa  figures ;  they  are  much  fewer  and  fainter  on  the  marble  figures.

While  they  resemble  each  other  in  artistic  style,  the  two  sets  of
sculptures  present  an  absolute  contrast  in  respect  of  composition,  the
marble  figures  being  simply  set  beside  each  other  in  all  the  motionless
rigidity  of  soldiers  standing  "eyes  front"  on  parade,  while  the  tufa
figures  are  in  violent  action,  some  turning  their  faces,  others  their  backs,
others  their  profile  to  the  spectator,  all  seemingly  combined  by  unity
of  action  into  an  artistic  group.  A  similar  contrast  between  immobility
and  isolation  on  the  one  hand  and  a  fierce  tustle  on  the  other  is  pre-
sented by  the  figures  of  the  two  gables  of  the  great  temple  at  Olympia
(vol.  3.  p.  504  sqq,).  What  were  the  scenes  represented  by  these
sculptures  of  the  old  Delphic  temple  we  cannot  say.  One  thing  is  clear.
They  are  not  the  sculptures  described  by  Pausanias  (x.  19.  4),  since
the  latter  were  executed  or  rather  begun  by  a  pupil  of  Calamis,  a
master  who,  as  we  have  seen  (p.  338),  was  at  work  as  late  as  427  B.C.,
whereas  the  sculptures  in  question  are  manifestly  works  of  the  sixth
century  B.C.  The  discovery  of  these  archaic  sculptures  may  therefore
be  regarded  as  establishing  the  view  which  on  other  grounds  I  have
adopted  above  (p.  336  sqq.^  and  vol.  i.  p.  xciii.  sq,\  namely  that  the
temple  built  by  Spintharus  and  described  by  Pausanias  was  the  temple
not  of  the  sixth  but  of  the  fourth  century  ac.

The  inscription  which  has  hitherto  been  held  to  mention  the
destruction  of  the  temple  in  the  fourth  century  B.C.  {Rheinisches
Museum^  N.  F.  51  (1896),  p.  351  sqq,  ;  above,  p.  329)  is  now  inter-
preted otherwise  by  Mr.  Homolle.  Arguing  from  the  style  of  the  letters
and  from  the  names  of  the  persons  mentioned  he  would  date  the  inscrip-
tion about  325  B.C.,  and  he  proposes  to  restore  the  mutilated  word  so  as
to  make  the  reference  be  to  the  completion  instead  of  to  the  destruction
of  the  temple  (KaT[>;i']v^i;  instead  of  KaT[€A.]v^i;).  If  he  is  right,  the
inscription  proves  that  the  temple,  after  its  destruction  at  the  end  of  the
fifth  or  beginning  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.,  was  completely  rebuilt  by
about  325  B.C.  But  I  cannot  feel  that  his  restoration  of  the  mutilated
word  is  satisfactory.  This  use  of  the  verb  Ka.TQ.vvtiv  in  the  sense  of  "  to
complete  a  material  object"  such  as  a  building  appears  to  be  unex-
ampled in  Greek  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.,  and  until  Mr.  Homolle  can
adduce  instances  of  its  employment  in  this  sense  by  writers  or  in  inscrip-
tions of  the  best  period  I  shall  prefer  to  restore  Ko.'i\iX\vQit\  and  to  regard
the  inscription  as  containing  a  mention  of  the  destruction  of  the  temple.
With  regard  to  the  cause  of  the  destruction  Mr.  Homolle  has  made  it
clear  that  this  can  only  have  been  an  earthquake,  not  a  conflagration.
The  ashes  lie  nowhere  in  such  thick  and  extensive  layers  as  to  suggest  a
total  destruction  of  the  temple  by  fire.  Moreover  the  remains  of  the  old
temple,  far  from  being  scorched  and  blackened,  are  not  even  smirched
by  smoke  or  flames ;  smashed  as  they  are  they  preserve  their  colours  in
comparative  freshness ;  the  delicate  surface  of  the  marble  is  intact.

AH  the  existing  foundations  are  now  referred  by  Mr.  Homolle  to  the
temple  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  The  differences  of  construction
and  material  between  the  eastern  and  western  foundations — the  regu-


634  DELPHI  addenda

larity  and  homogeneity  of  the  eastern  and  the  irregularity  and  hetero-
geneity of  the  western  —  are   explained  by  him    on    the    supposidon
that  while  the  new  temple  was  building  a  fresh  shock  of  eaxthqaake
occurred  which  threw  down  the  western  part  of  the  edifice  to  its  fomda-
tion,  and  that  the  damage  thus  done  was  hastily  repaired  with  the  first
materials  to  hand.     As  to  the  date  of  the  destruction  of  the  old  temple
Mr.  Homolle  points  out  that  it  must  have  happened  between  the  year
415  B.C.  (when  Euripides  in  the  Ion  describes  the  temple  as  if  it  were
intact)  and  the  year  37 1  B.C  (when  the  congress  took  place  at  Sparta
in  which  it  was  proposed  to  invite  contributions  towards  the  restoration
of  the  temple ;  see  above,  p.  329).     He  conjectures  that  the  earthquake
may  have  been  the  same  which  destroyed  Helice  and  Bura  in  the  winter
of  373-2  B.C.  (see  vol.  4.  p.  165,  note  on  viL  24.  6),  but  he  admits  it  to  be
strange  that  ancient  writers,  in  speaking  of  that  earthquake  and  the  havoc
it  wrought,  should  have  said  nothing  about  the  destruction  of  the  temple
at  Delphi  if  that  event  had  really  been  brought  about  by  the  same  cause.

From  the  dated  accounts  of  the  conmiission  charged  with  the  restora-
tion of  the  temple  (see  above,  p.  330  sq,)  it  appears  that  the  work  was
begun  in  the  spring  of  361  B.C. ;  at  least  the  conunission  seems  to  have
met  then  for  the  first  time.  The  interval  between  the  destruction  of
the  building,  whenever  that  took  place,  and  the  beginning  of  the
restoration  may  have  been  employed  in  collecting  fimds.  Inscriptions
found  by  the  French  at  Delphi  record  the  contributions  made  by  states
and  individuals  towards  the  pious  work  These  contributions  seem
to  have  been  made  in  two  different  forms  or  on  two  different  scales.
Individuals  and  some  states,  such  as  Apollonia,  Megalopolis,  Messene,
Naxos,  and  Naucratis  in  Egypt,  offered  first-fruits.  The  offering  of
Apollonia  consisted  of  a  tithe  of  the  harvest,  to  wit,  3000  medimnoi  of
barley.  An  Athenian  actor  Theodorus  and  a  physician  Xenotimus  sent
a  tithe  of  their  earnings.  States  that  offered  on  a  different  scale,
which  Mr.  Homolle  thinks  may  have  been  a  twelfth,  were  Megara,
Troezen,  Epidaurus,  Lacedaemon,  Corinth,  the  Thessalians  of  Matro-
polis,  the  Magnesians,  the  Hesperian  Locrians,  and  the  Phocians  of
Tithronium.  Of  the  private  persons  whose  names  appear  in  the  lists  of
subscribers  most  are  natives  of  Peloponnese ;  but  some  stray  subscrip-
tions dribbled  in  from  Attica,  Boeotia,  Northern  Greece,  the  islands,
Africa,  and  Sicily.  The  total  receipts  for  the  year  355  B.C  amounted
to  about  19,000  Delphic  drachms.  One  inscription  shows  that  col-
lectors went  about  from  house  to  house  to  stimulate  the  liberality  of  the
faithful,  and  the  fruit  of  their  labours  in  the  mission  field  appears  in
a  list  of  persons  who  had,  in  the  popular  phrase,  "come  forward,''
most  of  them  with  the  modest  sum  of  one  Attic  drachm  or  eightpencc-
halfpenny.  The  work  seems,  if  Mr.  Homolle  interprets  the  inscriptions
aright,  to  have  been  completed  by  330  or  329  B.C.

The  vicissitudes  of  the  temple  in  the  first  century  B.C  and  the  first
century  A.D.,  as  to  which  some  rather  vague  and  uncertain  information
has  reached  us  (see  above,  p.  331  sq.)^  are  believed  by  Mr.  Homolle
not  to  have  affected  the  main  structure  of  the  temple,  which  appears,  so
far  as  the  existing  remains  allow  us  to  judge,  to  have  remained  sub-


VOL.  V  DELPHI  635

stantially  in  the  time  of  Pausanias  as  it  had  been  built  in  the  fourth
century  B.C.  We  have,  therefore,  every  reason  to  believe  that  Pausanias,
in  describing  the  temple  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.,  described  it  from
personal  observation  exactly  as  it  existed  in  his  own  time.  It  is  true
that  the  sculptures  which  he  saw  and  described  in  the  gables  have  not
been  found  by  the  French ;  but  their  disappearance  after  his  visit  to
Delphi  is  a  circimistance  for  which  he  can  hardly  be  held  responsible.

An  inscription  of  the  early  part  of  the  third  century  A.D.  speaks  of
some  repairs  executed  by  the  governor  Cn.  Claudius  Leonticus.  This
is  the  last  mention  of  the  Delphic  temple  in  the  inscriptions  which  have
hitherto  come  to  light.  Apparently  the  temple,  unlike  so  many  other
ancient  shrines,  was  never  converted  into  a  Christian  church.  The
final  destruction  of  the  building  seems  to  have  been  caused  by  a
terrible  shock  of  earthquake,  which  dislocated  the  foundations  in  a  way
which  must  necessarily  have  brought  the  whole  upper  building  to  the
ground.  Christian  fanaticism  may  also  have  contributed  to  the  dilapi-
dation of  what  might  be  regarded  by  the  adherents  of  the  new  faith
as  the  chief  stronghold  of  paganism  in  Greece.

VIII.  The  Onidian  Lesche  {Bulletin  de  Corresp.  helUnique^  20
(1896),  pp.  633-639).  The  terrace  on  which  the  Lesche  stood  is
supported  on  the  south  by  a  high  retaining-wall  built  of  blue  limestone
in  the  regular  ashlar  style.  No  doubt  this  is  the  wall  referred  to  in  the
inscription  of  the  third  century  RC  (above,  p.  357).  The  edifice  itself
formed  a  rectangle  18.70  metres  long  by  9.53  metres  broad.  Nothing
of  it  now  remains  above  the  foundations  except  some  blocks  of  the  first
course  on  the  north  side.  At  the  south-^west  comer  even  the  foundations
have  partly  disappeared.  An  earthquake  or  more  probably  a  great  fiood
of  the  torrent  Rodini  seems  to  have  destroyed  the  building  and  swept  away
the  stones,  some  of  which  were  found  lower  down  the  hill  at  the  level  of
the  great  altar  or  even  as  low  as  the  eastern  entrance  to  the  sanctuary.

The  two  long  walls  of  the  building  were  on  the  north  and  south
sides  respectively.  All  along  the  north  wall  ran  another  wall  built
of  polygonal  masonry  which  protected  the  edifice  from  the  thrust  of
the  ground  above  and  served  at  the  same  time  as  the  boundary  of  the
sacred  precinct.  This  boundary  wall  was  supported  at  its  two  ends
by  short  walls  at  right  angles  to  it,  one  at  each  end,  which  skirted  the
eastern  and  western  ends  of  the  Lesche  so  closely  as  to  render  the
building  inaccessible  on  these  sides.  Hence  there  can  have  been  no
doors  in  the  two  short  sides  of  the  Lesche.  The  terrace  on  which  the
Lesche  rests  is  hardly  longer  than  the  building  itself,  but  it  is  deeper  by
3.28  metres.  Thus  there  was  room  for  a  passage  along  the  southern
side  of  the  Lesche,  and  as  this  was  its  only  accessible  side  the  building
must  have  opened  to  the  south.  The  passage  or  walk  is  continued
westward  to  a  point  where  two  roads  seem  to  have  met,  one  coming
from  the  east  along  the  foot  of  the  terrace,  the  other  from  the  theatre
which  lies  to  the  west  In  the  interior  of  the  Lesche  four  cubes  of
marble  have  been  found  occupying  their  original  positions  in  the
eastern  half  of  the  building.  They  are  disposed  so  as  to  form  a  square
of  4.50  metres,  the  sides  of  which  are  synunetrical  to  the  walls.     In  the


636  DELPHI  ADDENDA

upper  surfece  of  each  there  is  a  deep  narrow  socket,  into  which  the  foot
of  a  wooden  pillar  was  probably  fixed.  A  similar  arrangement  existed
in  the  western  half  of  the  building.  Mr.  HomoUe  concludes  that  we
have  to  conceive  of  the  Lesche  as  a  quadrangular  building  closed  on  all
sides  except  that  the  southern  wall  was  broken  by  a  doorway  and
perhaps  by  windows.  There  was,  he  thinks,  no  colonnade  on  any  side,
and  no  large  opening  in  the  walls.  In  the  interior  eight  pillars,
arranged  in  two  parallel  rows,  supported  the  roof,  in  which  there  may
have  been  an  opening  to  light  the  building.  Round  the  walls  bench»
may  have  run  where  idlers  could  lounge  and  talk.  The  paintings  of
Polygnotus,  in  Mr.  HomoUe's  opinion,  began  on  each  side  of  the  door,
to  the  right  and  left  as  Pausanias  says  (x.  25.  2,  x.  28.  i)  ;  they  were
continued  round  the  short  walls  and  met  at  the  middle  of  the  long  north
wall  just  opposite  to  the  door.  Thus  each  of  the  two  great  pictures  {Troy
after  its  capture  and  Ulysses  in  hell)  was  distributed  in  three  different
sections  over  three  separate  walls.  Traces  of  this  triple  division  may,  Mr.
Homolle  thinks,  be  detected  in  Pausanias's  description  of  the  paintings.
Lastly,  at  the  moment  of  going  to  press  (January  1898),  I  have
received  from  Mr.  Homolle  a  number  of  the  Bulletin  de  Correspondance
hellknique  (voL  21.  September-October  1897)  which  contains  the  first
of  a  series  of  articles  by  him  on  the  topography  of  the  Delphic  precinct
(pp.  2  56-320,  wrongly  numbered  420).    I  will  make  a  few  extracts  from  it

I.  Statae  of  Phaylus  the  Grotonian  (Pans.  x.  9.  2).  Fragments
of  the  pedestal  which  supported  this  statue  have  been  found.  The
inscription  is  mutilated,  but  may  be  restored  thus :

[K]/»OTa)[v]iaTat  [<l>ai5]A,A,ov  \tov  Sctvo?  'AttoAAwvi  ai'€^;#c]ai'

"  The  people  of  Crotona  dedicated  (this  statue  of)  Phayllus  son  of  so-
and-so  to  Apollo."  The  pedestal  was  circular  and  of  grey  limestone.
See  Bull,  de  Corresp.  hellenique^  21  (1897),  p.  274.

II.  The  Corcyraean  bull  {Paus.  x.  9.  3).  The  rectangular  pedestal
of  reddish  limestone  on  which  the  figure  of  the  bull  is  believed  to  have
rested  bears  the  following  inscription :

Ko/DKVpatot]  T(07roA,A,a>vt  av^O^v
0]co7r/»o7ros  €7roi€(i)  Atyivaras

"The  Corcyraeans  dedicated  (this  statue)  to  Apollo.  Theopropus  an
Aeginetan  made  (it)."  As  the  inscription  is  not  in  the  Corinthian  alpha-
bet, Mr.  Homolle  thinks  that  it  cannot  be  earlier  than  the  middle  of  the
fifth  century  B.C.    See  Bull,  de  Corresp.  helUnique^  21  (1897),  p.  275  sq.

III.  The  Tegean  (or  rather  Arcadian)  offering  {Paus.  x.  9.  5  sq.\
The  pedestals  of  the  statues  of  Callisto,  Azan,  and  Aphidas  have  been
found  inscribed  with  the  signatures  of  the  three  sculptors  mentioned  by
Pausanias.     The  inscriptions  run  thus  :

KaAA«7T(ii

Ilavo'avtas  cro/i^c
'ATToAXwviaTas

"  Callisto.     Pausanias  of  Apollonia  made  (the  statues)."


VOL.  V  DELPHI  637

[^/ijoAas  hroirj<r€  'ApKcis

"  Azan.     Samolas  an  Arcadian  made  (the  statues)."

'A^iS[as]
* AvTiffxivrjs  €7ro[tiy]<r€  *Apy€io^

"  Aphidas.     Antiphanes  an  Argive  made  (the  statues)."

Further,  the  bases  of  the  statues  of  Areas  and  Triphylus  have  been
found.  The  former  bears  the  name  of  Areas  and  a  mutilated  couplet  in
his  honour ;  the  latter  bears  the  name  of  Triphylus  (T/o[t<^]vAos)  alone.
See  Bui/,  de  Corresp,  helUnique,  21  (1897),  pp.  276-283.

IV.  The  Lacedaemonian  tropl:^  {Pans,  x.  9.  7-1 1).  The  quad-
rangular chamber  which  contained  this  trophy  is  about  26  metres  long
by  6  metres  deep.  It  is  built  of  the  local  breccia  and  grey  limestone.
Within  this  cluunber  the  statues  seem  to  have  been  arranged  in  two
tiers.  Of  the  statues  which  stood  in  the  upper  tier  seven  pedestals  have
been  found  inscribed  with  the  names  of  (i)  Cimmerius,  an  Ephesian,
son  of  Pelasgus  ;  (2)  Aeantides,  a  Milesian,  son  of  Parthenius  ;  (3)  Theo-
pompus,  a  Melian  (not  a  Myndian,  as  Pausanias  says),  son  of  Lapompus  ;
(4)  Autonomus,  an  Eretrian,  son  of  Samius  ;  (5)  ApoUodorus,  a  Troezenian,
son  of  Calliphon ;  (6)  Comon,  a  Megarian  ;  and  (7)  a  Corinthian,  whose
personal  name  is  lost.  Pausanias  mentions  the  statues  of  the  first  six
of  these  as  well  as  the  statues  of  two  Corinthians,  namely  Aristophantus
and  Pythodotus.  Further,  inscriptions  on  the  bases  of  the  statues  of
Aeantides  and  Theopompus  prove  that  these  statues  were  respectively
made,  as  Pausanias  says,  by  the  sculptors  Tisander  and  Alypus.  See
BulL  de  Corresp.  helUnique,  21  (1897),  pp.  284-288.

V.  An  Arcadian  offering  and  a  statue  of  Philopoemen  {fwt
mentioned  by  Pausamas).  At  the  foot  of  the  great  Lacedaemonian
monument  is  a  long  narrow  socle  (12  metres  long)  covered  with  in-
scriptions recording  Delphic  decrees  in  honour  of  various  Arcadians,
citizens  of  Mantinea,  Megalopolis,  Tegea,  etc.  Hence  we  may  infer
that  the  pedestal  which  rested  on  this  socle  supported  offerings  of  the
Arcadians.  Opposite  this  socle,  on  the  left  side  of  the  Sacred  Way,
was  found  the  pedestal  of  a  statue  of  Philopoemen  dedicated  by  the
Achaean  League.  The  pedestal  is  of  grey  limestone.  Only  the  front
part  of  it  has  been  found.  The  inscription  records  that  the  statue  of
Philopoemen  the  Megalopolitan,  son  of  Craugis,  was  dedicated  by  the
confederacy  of  the  Achaeans  in  recognition  of  his  virtue  and  good-will
towards  themselves.  See  BulL  de  Corresp,  helUnique^  21  (1897),  pp.
289-294.

VI.  The  Wooden  Horse  {Paus,  x.  9.  12).  A  few  letters  of  an
inscription  which  Mr.  Homolle  thinks  may  have  recorded  the  dedication
of  this  statue  have  been  found  not  far  from  the  spot  which  the  statue
probably  occupied.  From  the  character  of  the  letters  Mr.  Homolle
believes  the  inscription  to  be  considerably  earlier  than  456  B.C  If  he
is  right  in  dating  the  inscription  and  referring  it  to  the  statue  of  the
Wooden  Horse,  it  will  follow  that  that  statue  cannot  have  been  made.


638  DELPHI  ADDENDA  VOLtI

as  Pausanias  affirms,  by  Antiphanes  of  Argos  (as  to  whom  see  abott,!
p.  262  sq,).  But  even  if  the  inscription  refers  to  the  Wooden  Horse,!
the  archaic  form  of  the  letters,  of  which  barely  five  are  presen-ed,  may
have  been  feigned.  See  Bull,  de  Corresp,  helUnique^  21  ( 1 897),  p|L '
294-297  (numbered  397).

VI I.  The  stataes  of  the  Epigoni  {Paus.  x.  10.  4).     The  diameta
of  the  semicircular  monument  on  which  these  statues  probably  stood  I
is    14  metres,  not  9  metres  as  stated  above  (p.  268).      See  Bullk
Corresp,  helUnique^  21  (1897),  p.  299  (numbered  399).

VIII.  Offerings  of  the  Tarentines  {Pans.  x.  10.  6).  On  the  sotidi
side  of  the  Sacred  Way,  between  the  semicircular  monument  of  tbe
Epigoni  and  the  Sicyonian  treasury,  two  slabs  of  black  limestone,  of
very  fine  workmanship,  have  been  found  which  from  the  marks  of
attachment  on  their  upper  surfaces  appear  to  have  supported  bronze
statues  and  perhaps  horses.  The  fragmentary  inscription  on  the  slabs
(2AEKATAN),  in  letters  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.,  proves  that  the
statues  were  a  tithe-offering.  Probably,  as  Mr.  Homolle  now  thinks,
they  were  no  other  than  the  statues  dedicated  by  the  Tarentines  and
described  by  Pausanias.  See  Bull,  de  Corresp,  hellhiique^  21  (1897),
p.  301  (numbered  401)  sq,     Cp.  above,  p.  269.

IX.  Statae  of  Hiero  {not  mentioned  by  Pausam'as),  Below  the
Sacred  Way,  between  the  semicircular  monument  of  the  Epigoni  and
the  Sicyonian  treasury,  a  block  of  limestone  has  been  found  bearing  in
archaic  letters  the  name  of  Hiero.  Mr.  Homolle  conjectures  that  it
may  have  belonged  to  the  pedestal  of  the  statue  of  the  tyrant  Hiero
which  Plutarch  mentions  {De  Pythiae  oraculis^  8)  after  the  statues  of
the  Lacedaemonian  admirals.  See  Bull,  de  Corresp,  hell/m'qucy  21
(1897),  p.  303  (numbered  403)  sq.

X.  A  Megarian  offering  {not  mentioned  by  Pausanias),  A  con-
siderable number  of  inscriptions  recording  Delphic  decrees  in  honour
of  Megarian  citizens  have  been  found  between  the  Sicyonian  treasury
and  the  angle  which  the  Sacred  Way  makes  in  ascending  the  slope
towards  the  Athenian  treasury.  These  come  no  doubt  from  some
monument  dedicated  by  the  Megarians.  Mr.  Homolle  conjectures  that
the  monument  may  have  rested  on  the  long  foundation  which  may  be
seen  on  the  north  side  of  the  Sacred  Way,  immediately  opposite  the
Siphnian  or  Cnidian  treasury.  See  Bull,  de  Corresp,  helUnique^  21
(1897),  pp.  309-320  (numbered  409-420).


END   OF   VOL.    V


Printed  by  R.  &  R,  Clark,  Limited,  Edinburgh


MAOMILLAN  AND  OO/S  BOOKS  FOB

CLASSICAL  STUDENTS.

HE  HISTORY  OF  GREECE  FROM  ITS  COMMENCEMENT
TO  THE  CLOSE  OF  THE  INDEPENDENCE  OF  THE
GREEK  NATION.  By  Adolf  Holm.  Authorised  Translation  from
the  German.  Revised  by  F.  Clarke,  MA.  In  four  volumes,  8vo.
VoL  I.  Up  to  the  end  of  the  Sixth  Century  B.C.  68.  net  Vol.  II.
The  Fifth  Century  b.c  Bs.  net  VoL  III.  The  Fourth  Century  b.c.
up  to  the  Death  of  Alexander.  6s.  net  Vol.  IV.  The  Graeco-
Macedonian  Age,  the  Period  of  the  Kings  and  the  Leagues,  from
the  Death  of  Alexander  down  to  the  Incorporation  of  the  last
Macedonian  Monarchy  in  the  Roman  Empire.     7s.  6d.  net

CAMBRIDGE  REVIEW.—''  The  '  History  of  Greece '  of  the  day."
CLASSICAL  i?i^F/^»^.—"  Wonderfully  successful."
SPEAKER,— ''Thfi  best  short  history  of  Greece  in  existence."
ACADEMY, — *' A  new  Greek  history  of  moderate  size  was  badly  wanted
1  England,  and  this  translation  is  likely  to  fill  the  place  very  successfully."
TIMES,— ''Th^  translation  is  careful  and  readable."

L  HISTORY  OF  GREEK  ART.  With  an  Introductory
Chapter  on  Art  in  Egypt  and  Mesopotamia.  By  F.  R  Tarbell,
Professor  of  Archaeology  in  the  University  of  Chicago.  Extra
Crown  8va     Price  6s.

L  HANDBOOK  OF  GREEK  SCULPTURE  By  Ernest
Arthur  Gardner,  M.A,  late  Fellow  of  Gonville  and  Cains  College,
Cambridge ;  and  formerly  Director  of  the  British  School  of  Archaeo-
logy at  Athens.  With  Illustrations.  Extra  Crown  8vo.  Part  I.,  5s.
Part  II.,  58.     Complete,  10s.'

^REEK     SCULPTURED     TOMBS.       By    Percy     Gardner,

Professor  of  Archaeology  in  the  University  of  Oxford.  With  Thirty
Collotypes  and  Nxmierous  Illustrations  in  the  Text  Super  Royal
8vo.     258.  net

L  HANDBOOK  OF  GREEK  CONSTITUTIONAL  HISTORY.
By  A  H.  J.  Greenidoe,  M.A,  Lecturer  and  late  Fellow  of  Hertford
College,  and  Lecturer  in  Ancient  History  at  Brasenose  College,  Oxford.
With  Map.     Extra  Crown  8vo.     58.

'HE  MYCENAEAN  AGE.  A  Study  of  the  Monuments
AND  Culture  of  Prb-Hoheric  Greece.  By  Dr.  Chrestos
TsouNTAS,  Ephor  of  Antiquities  and  Director  of  Excavations  at
Mycenae,  and  Professor  J.  Irvtno  Manatt,  Ph.D.,  LLD.,  Professor
of  Greek  Literature  and  History  in  Brown  University.  With  an
Introduction  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld.     4to.     248.

MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Ltd.,  LONDON.


MAOMILLAN  AND  GO'S  BOOKS  FOR

CLASSICAL  STUDENTS.

SELECT  PASSAGES  FROM  ANCIENT  WRITERS,  Illustra-

TIVE  OF  THE  HiSTORY  OP  GREEK  SCULPTURE.      By  BL  StUART  JoNES,

Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Oxford.     Extra  Crown  8vo.     Ts.  net

THE  GROWTH  AND  INFLUENCE  OF  CLASSICAL  GREEK
POETRY.  Lectures  delivered  in  1891  on  the  Percy  Tumbiill
Memorial  Foundation  in  the  Johns  Hopkins  University.  By  R  C
Jebb,  LittD.,  M.P.     Crown  8va     78.  6d.  net

THE  ATTIC  ORATORS,  FROM  ANTIPHON  TO  ISAEUS.
By  R  C.  Jebb,  LittD.,  M.P.     Second  Edition.     2  Vols.     8vo.    25&

SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  ATTIC  ORATORS.  Antiphon,
Andokides,  Lysias,  Isokrates,  Isaeus.  Being  a  companion  volume  to
"  The  Attic  Orators  from  Antiphon  to  Isaeus."  Edited  with  Notes.
By  R  C.  Jebb,  LittD.,  M.P.     Second  Edition.     Fcap.  Sva     Ss.

[Classical  Serui.

MODERN  GREECE:  Two  Lecttures  delivered  before  the
Philosophical  Institution  of  Edinburgh.  By  R  C.  Jebb,  LittD^
M.P.     Crown  8vo.     5s.

PLATO  AND  PLATONISM.    A  Series  of  Lectures.    By  Walter

Pater,  Fellow  of  Brasenose  College,  Oxford.  Extra  Crown  Sva
88.  6d.

GREEK  STUDIES.  A  Series  of  Essays.  By  the  late  Walter
Pater,  Fellow  of  Brasenose  College.  Prepared  for  the  Press  l^y
Charles  L  Shadwell.     Extra  Crown  8vo.     IDs.  6d.

ASPECTS  OF  THE  GREEK  GENIUS.    By  S.  H.  Butcher,  M.A.,

Professor  of  Greek,  University  of  Edinburgh.  Second  Edition,  re-
vised.    Crown  Svo.     Ts.  net

A  SURVEY  OF  GREEK  CIVILIZATION.  By  Prof.  J.  R
Mahaffy,  D.D.,  D.C.L  (Oxon.),  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin.
Extra  Crown  8vo.     68.

MYTHOLOGY  AND  MONUMENTS  OF  ANCIENT  ATHENS.

Being  a  Translation  of  a  portion  of  the  "  Attica  "  of  Pausanias.  By
Margaret  de  G.  Verrall.  With  Introductory  Essay  and  Archaeo-
logical Commentary  by  Jane  R  Harrison,  Author  of  "  Myths  of
the  Odyssey,"  "  Introductory  Studies  in  Greek  Art''  With  Illustra-
tions and  Plans.     Crown  Svo.     16s.

MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Ltd.,  LONDON.


(11


^^


I


I


3  bios  012  a>l3  311


STANFORD  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARIES

CECIL  H.  GREEN  LIBRARY

STANFORD,  CALIFORNIA  94305-6004

14151  723-1493

All  books  may  be  recalled  alter  7  days

DATE  DUE
