Google


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.
We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I


W:\


PAUSANIAS'S
DESCRIPTION  OF  GREECE


PAUSANIAS'S


DESCRIPTION   OF  GREECE


TRANSLATED  WITH  A  COMMENTARY

BY

J.  G.  FRAZER

M.A..    LL.U.  GLASGOW;   FSLLOW  OF  TRINITY  COLLEGE,  CAMBRIDGE;
OF  THE  MIDDLE  TEMPLE,    BARRISTEH-AT-LAW


IN    SIX    VOLUMES

VOL.    Ill
COMMENTARY   ON   BOOKS   lUV


iLonlron

MACMILLAN    AND    CO.,  Limited

NEW  YORK:  THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY

1898

Ail  right*  rtstntd


*       V.'      ^


AZ7^7^


CONTENTS


PACK

COMMENTARV    ON    HOOK    II.    CORINTH  ...  I


tt


•«  «•


„    III.  Laconia  .311

.,     IV.  Messenia  .405

V.  Elis  .465


ILLUSTRATIONS


nc.

1.  Palaemon  on  Dolphin  under  Pine-tree  (Coin  of  Corinth)

2.  Temple  of  Poseidon  at  Isthmus  (Coin  of  Corinth)
3-  Temple  of  Palaemon  (Coin  of  Corinth)

4.  Cenchreae  with  Statue  of  Poseidon  (Corinthian  Coin)

5.  Poseidon  at  Cenchreae  (Corinthian  Coin)

6.  Bellerophon  and  Pegasus  (Corinthian  Coin)

7.  Monument  of  Lais  (Corinthian  Coin)

8.  Temple  of  Octavia  (Corinthian  Coin)

9.  Portal  of  Market-Place  (Corinthian  Coin)

10.  Sun  in  Chariot  (Corinthian  Coin)

11.  Pirene  (Corinthian  Coin)

12.  Pirene  (Corinthian  Coin)

13.  Hermes  and  Ram  (Corinthian  Coin)

14.  Temple  on  Acro-Corinth  (Corinthian  Coin)

15.  Aphrodite  (Corinthian  Coin)

16.  A  Sicyonian  Tomb  (Coin  of  Sicyon)

17.  Pheraean  Artemis  ?  (Sicyonian  Coin)

18.  Athena  (Coin  of  Cleonae)

19.  Opheltes  and  the  Serpent  (Coin  of  Argos)

20.  Opheltes  and  the  Serpent  (Coin  of  Argos)

21.  The  Lions  over  the  Gate  at  Mycenae

22.  Stirrup-jar  {Biigelkanne)

23.  Sectional  Plan  of  the  so-called  Treasury  of  Atreus

24.  Marble  Head  from  the  Heraeum

25.  Marble  Torso  from  the  Heraeum

26.  Marble  Head  from  the  Heraeum,

27.  Marble  Head  from  the  Heraeum


PAGE

4
II

14

17
ib.

18

19

23
ib,

24
ib.

ib,

25

31
ib,

46

68

85
92

ib,

lOI

112
124
170

171
172

173


vm  ILL  USTRA  TIONS


FIG.  PACE


28.  Marble  Head  from  the  Heraeum  ....

29.  Image  of  Hera  (Coin  of  Argos) .....
3a  Hera  and  Hebe  (Coin  of  Argos)  ....

31.  Perseus  with  the  Gorgon's  Head  (Coin  of  Argos)

32.  Cleobis  and  Biton  (0)in  of  Argos)         ....

33.  Zeus  (Coin  of  Argos)     ......

34.  Latona  and  Chloris  (Coin  of  Argos)      ....

35.  Latona  and  Chloris  (Coin  of  Argos)      ....

36.  Transverse  Section  through  the  South  Wall  of  Tiryns  .

37.  The  Sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  at  Epidaunis  (Ground  Plan)

38.  Aesculapius  (Coin  of  Epidaunis)  ....

39.  Aesculapius  (Marble  Relief  found  in  the  Epidaturian  Sanctuary)

40.  The  Rotunda  at  Epidaunis,  as  it  exists  (Ground  Plan) .

41.  The  Rotunda  at  Epidaunis,  as  restored  (Ground-  Plan)

42.  Ground  Plan  of  Theatre  at  Epidaunis    ....

43.  The  Port  of  A^[ina  (Coin  of  Aegina)    ....

44.  Plan  of  Temple  at  Aegina         .....

45.  Coin  of  Troezen  ......

46.  The  Dioscuri  (Coin  of  Troezen)  ....

47.  Hermes  carrying  the  Infiuit  Dionysus  (Coin  of  Lacedaemon)

48.  Artemis  (Coin  of  Laodicea  in  Syria)      ....

49.  Athena  (Coin  of  Lacedaemon)   .....

50.  Hermes  on  Throne  (Coin  of  Aenus)      ....

51.  The  Amydaean  Apollo  on  his  Throne  (restored  by  A.  Furtwangler)

52.  The  Apollo  of  Amyclae  (Coin  of  Lacedaemon)

53.  Ground  Plan  of  the  Arcadian  Crate  at  Messene

54.  Artemis  Laphria  (Coin  of  Messene)       ....

55.  Zeus  of  Ithome?  (Coin  of  Messene)       ....

56.  Port  of  Mothone  (Coin  of  Mothone)      ....

57.  Temple  of  Zeus  at  Olympia       .....

58.  Central  Figures  from  the  East  Crable  of  the  Temple  of  Zeus

59.  Zeus,  Pelops,  and  Oenomaus  (from  the  Eastern  Gable  of  the  Temple

of  Zeus)         .......

60.  Hippodamia  (from  the  East  Gable  of  the  Temple  of  Zeus)

61.  Old  Man  (from  the  East  Gable  of  the  Temple  of  Zeus)

62.  Reclining  Figure,  perhaps  the  River-god  Cladeus  (from  the  East  Gable

of  the  Temple  of  Zeus)  .....

63.  Central  Figures  from  the  West  Gable  of  the  Temple  of  Zeus    .


173
184

18S
186

193
194
201

ib,
220

237
241

242

246

ib,

252

263

269

272

276

329
341
345
352
ib.

356
430

433
440

453

495
506

507
S08

509

510
517


ILLUSTRATIONS


IX


FIG.


64.  Figures  from  the  West  Gable  of  the  Temple  of  Zeus

65.  Figures  from  the  West  Gable  of  the  Temple  of  Zeus

66.  Old  Woman  from  the  West  Gable  of  the  Temple  of  Zeus

67.  Young  Woman  from  the  West  Gable  of  the  Temple  of  Zeus

68.  Hercules  and  Atlas  (Metope  of  the  Temple  of  Zeus)

69.  Hercules  sweeping  the  Augean  Stable  (Metope  of  the  Temple  of  2^us)

70.  Hercules  and  the  Cretan  Bull  (Metope  of  the  Temple  of  Zeus)

71.  Hercules  and  the  Stymphalian  Birds  (Metope  of  the  Temple  of  Zeus)

72.  Image  of  Zeus  (Coin  of  Elis)

73.  Head  of  Zeus  (Coin  of  Elis)

74.  Temple  of  Hera  at  Olympia

75.  Head  of  Hera  (from  the  Heraeum)

76.  Hermes  and  the  Infemt  Dionysus,  by  Praxiteles

77.  Departure  of  Amphiaraus  (Scene  on  a  Corinthian  Vase)

78.  Justice  and  Injustice  (Scene  on  a  Red-figured  Vase)

79.  The  Victory  of  Paeonius  (Marble  Statue  found  at  Olympia)


PAGB

518

519
ib,

520

524

525
526

527

532

ib.

586

594
596
609
612
644


PLATES


I.  The  Temple  in  Corinth    .
II.  The  Citadel  of  Mycenae-.

III.  The  Argive  Heraeum

IV.  The  Upper  Citadel  of  Tiryns
V.  Sparta     .

VI.  Messene  .
VII.  Pylus  and  Sphacteria
VIII.  Olympia  .
IX.  The  Gables  of  the  Temple  of  2^us  at  Olympia  (Restored
by  G.  Treu)     .....
X.  The  Chest  of  Cypselus  (restored  by  H.  Stuart  Jones)


To  face  page    36

98
166

218

324
430
456
490

504
606


CORRIGENDA


Page  254,  line  21  from  top.     For  Vitruvius  (v.  8)  r^o^  Vitruvius  (v.  7).

417*      n     15      »»    f^^-        »»     X-   *•  23  „      X.  31.  2.

607,     ,,     7     »,    top,      „    Plate  ix.  ,,    Plate  x.


»»


BOOK    SECOND


CORINTH

With  the  Second  Book  Pausanias  opens  his  description  of  Peloponnese,  f  \
to  which  he  has  devoted  six  out  of  his  ten  books.  Beginning  with
Argolis  he  takes  the  five  maritine  divisions  or  provinces  of  Peloponnese  ^
(namely  Argolis,  Laconia,  Messenia,  Elis,  and  Achaia)  in  topographical
Qfder,  and  finishes  with  the  central  and  inland  province  of  Arcadia.
Each  province  has  a  book  to  itself  except  Elis,  which  has  two.  The
present  book,  though  it  takes  its  name  {CorintfUacd)  from  Corinth,  deals
in  fact  with  the  whole  of  Argolis,  of  which  the  territory  of  Corinth
fonned  only  a  small  part.

Of  modem  works  which  treat  speciallv  ,of  the  gec^aphy  and  topography  of
Peloponnese  the  following  are  the  most  important :  W.  Gell,  The  Itinerary  of
Greece  (London,  i8io)  (in  spite  of  its  pretentious  title  this  work  contains  little
more  than  an  itinerary  of  Argolis) ;  id..  Itinerary  of  the  Morea  (London,  1817) ;
*i,  Narrative  of  a  journey  in  the  Morea  (London,  I023) ;  W.  M.  Leake,  Travels
ut  tie  Aforea,  in  three  volumes  (London,  1830) ;  id.,  Peloponnesiaca  (London,
1846) ;  M.  E.  Puillon  Boblaye,  Recherches  giographiques  sur  les  ruines  de  la
A5wfe(  Paris,  1835)  (forros  part  of  the  large  work  ExpSditimi  scientifique  de  Morie) ;
L  Ross,  Reisen  und  Reiserouten  durch  Griechenland^  Erster  Theil :  Reisen  im
Pehponnes  (Berlin,  184 1 ) ;  E.  Curtius,  Peloponnesos,  in  two  volumes  (Gotha,
'851-52) ;  E  Beul^,  Etudes  sur  le  Piloponnise  ;  W.  G.  Clark,  Peloponnesus
(Loodon,  1858)  ;  A.  Philippson,  Der  Peloponnes.  Versuch  einer  Landeskunde
nf  geologischtn  Grundlage  (Berlin,  1892)  (treats  of  the  physical  and  especially  the

r logical  configuration  of  the  country).  Argolis  is  the  subject  of  a  monograph
A  Meliarakes,  Teuypa<f>la  toKltuc^  via  koX  dpxo-la  toG  vofioO  'ApyoXldos  Kal
Koputetas  (Athens,  1886),  which  deals  chiefly  with  the  modem  geography  of  the
district.

1.  I.  That  OorintliuB  was  a  son  of  Zeus  etc.  The  legendary
history  of  Corinth  has  been  examined  by  Mr.  E.  Wilisch  (*  Die  Sagen
ron  Korinth  nach  ihrer  geschichtlichen  Bedeutung,'  Neue  Jahrbiicher
fkr  Philologie  und  Pddagogik^  117  (1878),  pp.  721-746).  In  the
legends  he  distinguishes  three  distinct  strains,  an  Ionian,  an  Aeolian,
and  a  Phoenician.  According  to  him,  the  lonians  were  the  original
settlers ;  their  mythical  representatives  are  Theseus,  Poseidon,  and
Marathon.  The  Aeolians,  he  thinks,  were  aristocratic  immigrants  from
Northern  Greece,  who  domineered  over  the  original  Ionian  settlers  ;
ihcir  mythical  representatives  are  Sisyphus,  son  of  Aeolus,  Jason,  and

VOL.  Ill    .    ,  B


2  HISTORY  OF  CORINTH  bk.  ii.  corinth

Neleus.  Lastly,  the  settlement  of  Phoenicians  on  the  Isthmus  of
Corinth  is  attested  by  the  worship  of  Astarte  (the  armed  Aphrodite)  on
the  Acro-Corinth  (Paus.  ii.  5.  i),  by  the  legend  of  Melicertes  (the
Phoenician  Melcarth),  and  by  the  festival  of  the  Hellotia,  which  is
known  to  have  been  observed  at  Corinth.  We  are  told  that  Hellotia  or
Hellotis  was  an  old  name  for  Europa,  whose  connection  with  Phoenicia
is  not  doubtful,  and  that  Europa's  bones  were  carried  in  procession  at
the  festival  of  the  Hellotia,  which  was  celebrated  in  Crete  as  well  as  in
Corinth  (Athenaeus,  xv.  p.  678  b ;  Hesychius,  j.7/.  'EXAxirta  ;  EtymoL
Magnum^  s.v.  'EXAcurta,  p.  332).  According  to  one  account  {EtymoL
Magnum^  I.e.)  hellotia  was  a  Phoenician  word  meaning  *  maiden.'  The
legends  of  the  origin  of  the  festival  seem  to  point  to  a  custom  of  burning
children  in  sacrifice,  as  was  done  by  Semitic  peoples  (see  the  Schol.  on
Pindar,  Olymp.  xiii.  56).  The  story  of  Medea  murdering  her  children
may  possibly  refer,  as  Mr.  Wilisch  thinks,  to  the  same  custom.  Phoe-
nicaeum,  the  name  of  a  Corinthian  mountain  (Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v.
4>otvtifatov),  is  perhaps  another  reminiscence  of  a  Phoenician  settlement
in  this  neighbourhood.  On  traces  of  the  Phoenicians  at  Corinth  see
also  CurtiuSf  PeloponnesoSy  2.  p.  517  sg.  ;  and  on  the  early  history  of
Corinth  see  /V/.,  *Studien  zur  Geschichte  von  Korinth,'  Hermes^  10
(1876),  pp.  215-243  (reprinted  in  his  Gesammelte  Abhandlungen^  i.
pp.  1 81-2 10).

1.  I.  Etunelas.  Eumelus  was  an  old  Epic  poet  of  the  eighth
century  B.C.  The  work  to  which  Pausanias  here  refers  is  supposed  to
have  been  a  prose  epitome,  by  some  later  hand,  of  an  epic  poem  by
Eumelus.  This  prose  work  seems  to  have  been  known  also  to  Clement
of  Alexandria,  who  apparently  entertained  no  doubt  of  its  genuineness,
for  he  says  that  **  Eumelus  and  Acusilaus  the  historians  turned  the
poems  of  Hesiod  into  prose  and  published  them  as  their  own  produc-
tions" {Strom,  vi.  p.  267,  ed.  Sylburg,  p.  751,  ed.  Potter).  Pausanias
tells  us  (i v.  4.1)  that  the  hymn  to  the  Delian  Apollo  was  esteemed  the
only  genuine  work  of  Eumelus.  For  the  date  of  Eumelus  see  Clement
of  Alexandria,  Strom,  i.  p.  398,  ed.  Potter.  Cp.  W.  Christ,  Geschichte
der  griechischen  Utteratur^  p.  79  ;  E.  G.  Wilisch,  Ueber  die  Frapnente
des  Epikers  Eumelos  (Zittau,  1875);  Epicorum  Grcucorum  fragmenta^
ed.  Kinkel,  p.  185  sqq.

1.  2.  when  Oritolans  was  appointed  general  of  the  League  etc.
See  vii.  14-16.

1.  2.  it  was  repeopled  by  Oaesar  etc.  Carthage  and  Corinth
were  rebuilt  in  44  B.C.  (Strabo,  xvii.  p.  833  ;  Appian,  Punica,  136  ;
Plutarch,  Caesar^  57;  Dio  Cassius,  xliii.  50;  CWnXon,  Fasti /fellenia\
3.2  p.  214).  Appian  says  {I.e.)  that  the  colonisation  of  Carthage,
though  planned  by  Caesar,  was  carried  out  by  Augustus  after  Caesar's
death  and  in  accordance  with  Caesar's  directions.  On  excavations  and
discoveries  at  Carthage  in  recent  times  see  A.  W.  Franks,  *  On  recent
excavations  at  Carthage,'  Archaeologia,  38  (i860),  pp.  163-186;  N.
Davis,  Carthage  and  her  remains  (London,  1861);  W.  S.  W.  Vaux,
*  Recent  excavations  at  Carthage,'  Transactions  0/  the  Royal  Society  of
Literature  Second  Series,  7  (1863),  pp.  441-473  ;  Reinach  et  Babelon,


CH.  I  CROMYON


'Sculptures  antiques  trouv^es  \  Carthage/  Gazette  Archdologique^  lo
(1885),  pp.  12,^-1^2  \  Vernax,  *Note  sur  des  fouilles  k  Carthage/
Rrvue  ArMologique^  3""  Serie,  10(1887),  pp.  11-27,  151- 170.  The
remains  of  the  massive  walls  of  ancient  Carthage,  about  33  feet  thick
2nd  containing  a  series  of  chambers  "  resembling  those  of  bomb-proof
bastions,"  were  discovered  by  the  French  archaeologist  Beuld  at  a
depth  of  56  feet.  For  an  attempted  restoration  of  the  walls  see  Perrot
ct  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  VArt  dans  V Antiquit^^  3.  p.  341  sqq,

1.  3.  Cromyon.     Pausanias  now  resumes  his  itinerary  at  the  point

where  he  broke  off  at  the  end  of  Book  First     He  is  proceeding  from

Megara  to  Corinth  by  the  shore  of  the  Saronic  Gulf,  and  the  first  place

to  which  he  comes  in  the  territory  of  Corinth  is  Cromyon  or  Crommyon,

as  it  is  more  commonly  spelt  by  classical  writers  (Thucydides,  iv.  chs.

42,  44,  45;  Xenophon,   Hcllenica^  iv.   4.    13;  Plutarch,   Theseus^  9).

The  site  of  Cromyon  is  now  occupied  by  the  little  Albanian  village  of

H.  Theodori^  situated  just  midway  between  Megara  and  Corinth.     The

village  stands  close  to  the  seashore  in  a  small  but  fertile  plain,  which  on

the  landward  side  is  shut  in  by  the  lower  declivities  of  the  Geranian

mountains.      The  distance  of  the  village   from    Corinth   (13  J   miles)

agrees  closely  with  Thucydides's  statement  (iv.  45)  that  Cromyon  was

distant  120   Greek  furlongs  (13 J  miles)  from  Corinth.     At  the  little

chapel  of  St.   Theodore  beside  the  sea  the  French  surveyors  found

considerable  ruins.     Vischer  saw  foundations  overgrown  with   brush-

vood,  and  columns  and  architectural  fragments  lying  about.     Built  into

the  wall  of  the  chapel  is  a  Greek  inscription  of  the  Imperial  age,  the

epitaph  of  a  girl  Philostrata  who  died  in  her  fifteenth  year  (Kaibel,

Efigrammaia  Graeca^  No.  463).      It  was  probably  at  H,  Tfuodori  that

Whcler  observed  the  ancient  building  which  he  describes  as  3  or  4

yards  high  and  8  square ;  he  saw  some  marble  bas-reliefs  lying  near  it.

Cromyon  was  a  fortified  place  in  antiquity  (Xenophon,  Hellenica^  iv.  4.

13;  Scylax,  Peripius^   55).     It  anciently  belonged  to  Megara  (Strabo,

viil  p.  380),  but  as  early  as  the  fourth  century  B.C.  it  had  been  already

annexed  to  Corinth  (Scylax,  PeripiuSy  55  ;  as  to  the  date  of  this  Periplus

— about  338-335  B.C. — see  C.  Miiller,  Geographi  Graeci  Minores^  i.  p.

xliiL  sq.)     The  present  inhabitants  of  the  place  regard  themselves  as

belonging  to  the   Morea,   not  to   Megara.      The   name   Cromyon   or

Crommyon  is  perhaps  derived  from  kromuon^  *  an  onion ' ;  but  the  form

Crcmmyon  also  occurs  in  ancient  writers  (Scylax,  Periplus^  55  ;  Pliny,

N.  H.  iv.  23  ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v,  Kpefifxytov),

See  \Mieler,  Journey ^  p.  436  sq,  ;  Boblaye,  Recherches  gSographiques^  p.  35  ;
Leake,  Peloponnesiaca^  p.  397  ;  Curtius,  PeloponnesoSy  2.  p.  555  ;  Vischer,  Erin-
9erungen  und  Eindriicke,  p.  229  sq.  ;  \V.  G.  Clark,  Peloponnesus^  p.  45  sq.  ;
BorsiaD,  Geogr,  von  Griecnenland^  I.  p.  384;  Baedeker,'  p.  154;  I'hilippson,
Pelffponnes,  pp.  1 9,  28.  Leake  formerly  identified  Cromyon  with  Kineia^  a
modern  village  with  flat-roofed  houses  situated  in  a  valley  planted  with  olives,
fire  miles  nearer  Megara  than  H,  Tkeodori  (Leake,  Travels  in  the  Morea,  3.  p.

307^.)

1.  3.  the  8OW  Phaea.     On  this  Cromyonian  sow,  which  was  said
to  have  been  the  dam  of  the  Calydonian  boar,  see  Plutarch,  Theseus^  9  ;


4  ISTHMUS  OF  CORINTH  BK.  il.  corinth

Apollodonis,  ed.  R-  Wagner,  p.  173  ;  Strabo,  viii.  p.  380;  Stephanus
Byzantius,  s.v.  Kptufiviuv.  Theseus's  combat  wilh  it  is  depicted  on
vases  {Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  a  (1881),  p.  61  sq.,  with  pi.  x. ;
Baumeistet's  Denkmaler,  p.  1789),  and  is  the  subject  of  one  of  the
sculptured  metopes  of  the  so-calied  Theseum  at  Athens  (Baumeister's
DenkmUler,  p.  1781).

1.  3.  the  pine-ttBe.     This  was  doubtless  the  pine-tree  at  the  foot

of  which   the  body  of  the  drowned  Melicertes  was  said  to  have  been

washed  ashore.       Plutarch   tells   us   {Qftaesl.  Comiiv.  v,  3.  i)   that  the

spot  was  near  Megara  and  was  known  as  the  Path  of  the  Fair  Damsel,

because  Ino  had  rushed  down  it  with  her  child  in  her  arms  to  plunge

into  the  sea.      On   coins  of  Hadrian,  Marcus  Aurelius,  and  Commodus,

Melicertes  is  represented  stretched  on  the  back  of  a

dolphin    under   the    pine-tree   (Imhoof-Blumer   and

Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  on  Paus.  p.  10  sg.,  with  pi.

B  i-vi.)      The   crown  of   pine-leaves    which   was   at

first  the  priie  in   the  Isthmian  games  was  perhaps

supposed  to  be  made  from  this  particular  tree ;  for

the  Isthmian  games  were  instituted   in  honour  of

Melicertes  (Paus.  i.  44.  8).      Afterwards  a  crown  of

FIG.  1.— FALAiHOH  ON   ccleTy  was  substituted,  and  at  a  still  later  time  the

DoifHiH      uHDMR  pnje  was  again  a  crown  of  pine-leaves.     Sec  PIu-

"p'coKrN").  tarch,   Qucust.    Com'iv.    v.    3 ;    id.,    Timoleon,    16  ;

Scbol.  on  Nicander,  Alex.  605;  SchoL  on  Pindar,

Mem.  Introd.  p.  426,  ed.  Boeckh.

1.  4.  the  rohbOT  Sinis.  Cp.  Apollodorus,  iti.  16.  2;  Plutarch,
Tkrseus,  8  ;  Hyginus,  Fab.  38.  Theseus's  adventure  with  him  is  depicted
on  Greek  vases.  See  O.  Jahn,  in  Archmlogische  Zeihing,  23  (1865),
p.  21  sgq.,  with  pi.  cxcv.  ;  W.  Miiller,  Die  Tkeseusmefopen  vom  Theseion
zu  Athen,  p.  36  iq.  ;  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  2  (1881),  pi.  x.  j
Baumeister's  Denkmdler,  p.  1789  ;  W,  Klein,  Euphronios^  p.  193  sqq.  ;
Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  p.  ex.  sqq.

1,  4.  Periphetes.  Cp.  Apollodorus,  iii.  16.  i  ;  Plutarch,  Theseus,
8.  On  representations  of  this  adventure  in  ancient  art  see  W.  Miiller,
op.  cit.  p.  46  sq.

1,  ;.  The  iBthmns  of  Oorintb.  The  Isthmus  of  Corinth,  which
unites  the  Peloponnese  on  the  south  to  the  mountainous  district  of
Megara  and  Central  Greece  on  the  north,  is  a  low  flat  neck  of  land
about  three  and  a  half  miles  wide  at  the  narrowest  part  and  about  260
feet  high  at  the  lowest  point,  stretching  in  a  direction  from  W.S.W.  to
E.N.E.  The  central  part  is  a  flat  tableland,  which  shelves  away  in
steep  terraces  to  the  sea  on  the  southern  side.  Its  surface  is  rugged,
barren,  and  waterless  ;  where  it  is  rot  quite  bare  and  stony,  il  is  mostly
overgrown  with  stunted  shrubs  and  dwarf  pines,  or  with  thistles  and
other  prickly  plants  of  a  grey,  arid  aspect.  There  is  no  underwood  and
no  turf.  In  spring  some  grass  and  herbage  sprout  in  patches  among
the  thistles  and  afford  pasture  to  flocks.  The  niggard  soil,  where  soil
exists,  is  cultivated  in  a  rude,  imperfect  way,  and  yields  some  scanty
crops,  mostly  of  wheat  and  barley.     But  in  the  drought  of  summer


CH.  I  ISTHMUS  OF  CORINTH  5

every  ^n^en  blade  disappears,  and  the  fields  are  little  more  than  a  bare
stony  wilderness  swept  by  whirling  clouds  of  dust.  This  rugged  barren
quality  of  the  soil  was  equally  characteristic  of  the  Isthmus  in  antiquity
(Strabo,  viii.  p.  382).  It  seems  to  have  been  customary  to  gather  the
stones  from  the  fields  before  sowing  the  seed  (Theophrastus,  HisL  Plant,
iii.  20.  5).

In  ancient  times  ships  of  small  burden  were  regularly  dragged  on
rollers  or  waggons  across  the  narrowest  part  of  the  Isthmus  in  order
to  avoid  the  long  voyage  round  Peloponnese ;  hence  this  part  of  the
Isthmus  was  known  as  the  Diolkos  or  Portage  (Strabo,  viii.  pp.  335,
380 ;  Hesychius,  s,v,  ACoXko^  ;  Mela,  ii.  48  ;  Aristophanes,  Thesmoph,
648,  with  the  Schol.  ;  Pliny,  N,  H,  iv.  i  o).     The  Portage  began  on  the
cast  at  Schoenus  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  380),  near  the  modem  Kalamaki;  its
western  termination  is  not  mentioned  by  ancient  writers,  but  was  probably
near  the  west  end  of  the  modem  canal     We  read  of  fleets  of  warships
being  transported  across  the  Isthmus  (Thucydides,  viii.  7  ;  Polybius,  iv.
19,  v.  loi)  ;  for  example  after  the  battle  of  Actium  Augustus  thus  con-
veyed his  ships  across  the  Isthmus  in  pursuit  of  Antony  and  Cleopatra
(Die  Cassius,  li.  5),  and  in  883  A.D.  the  Greek  admiral  Nicetas  Oriphas
transported  a  fleet  across  it  to  repel  an  attack  of  the  Saracens  (Phrantzes,
^-  33»  P-  96  sq.y  ed.  Bekker ;  Zeitschrift  d.  GeselLf.  Erdkunde  zu  Berlitiy
2$  (1890),  p.  85  sq.)     Some   remains  of  the  ancient  portage,  which
seems  to  have  been  a  sort  of  tramway,  may  still  be  seen  near  a  guard-
bouse,  at  the  point  where  the  road  from  Kalamaki  to  Corinth  crosses
tbe  northem  of  the  two  ancient  fortification-walls  (see  below).

The  lowest  and  narrowest  part  of  the  Isthmus,  through  which  the
Portage  went  in  antiquity  and  the  modem  canal  now  runs,  is  bounded
on  the  south  by  a  line  of  low  cliffs.     Along  the  crest  of  these  cliffs  may
be  traced  the  remains  of  an  ancient  fortification-wall  stretching  right
2U70SS  the  Isthmus  from  sea  to  sea.     It  is  built  of  large  blocks  laid  in
fairly  regular  courses,  and  is  flanked  by  square  towers  which  project
from  the  curtain  at  regular  intervals  of  about  100  yards  on  the  north
side,  showing  that  the  wall  was  meant  to  protect  the  Corinthian  end  of
the  Isthmus  against  invasion  from  the  north.     The  wall  does  not  extend
in  a  straight  line,  but  follows  the  crest  of  the  cliffs,  wherever  this  natural
advantage  presented  itself.     The  best  preserved  portion  lies  immedi-
ately to  the  east  of  the  Isthmian  sanctuary  (see  below)  ;  here  the  wall  is
about  23  feet  high  and  8  feet  thick.     On  the  west  the  wall  ended  in  a
square  fortress,  standing  on  the  shore  of  the  Gulf  of  Corinth  about  three
quarters  of  a  mile  to  the  south  of  the  canal.     The  foundations  of  this
fortress  still  remain  under  masonry  of  a  later  date.     About  a  hundred
paces  north  of  this  fortification-wall  there  are  traces,  at  least  on  the
eastern  side  of  the  Isthmus,  of  a  less  massive  wall  mnning  parallel  to
the  former  but  on  lower  ground.

At  what  period  this  double  line  of  fortification  was  constructed  across
the  Isthmus  is  not  known,  but  from  the  regular  style  of  masonry  the
work  seems  to  belong  to  the  best  era  of  Greek  history.  Herodotus  tells
us  (viii.  71)  that  at  the  time  of  Xerxes's  invasion  (480  B.C.)  the  Pelo-
ponnesians,  on  learning  of  the  destruction  of  Leonidas  and  his  men  at


6  ISTHMUS  OF  CORINTH  bk.  ii.  corinth

Thermopylae,  assembled  by  thousands  at  the  Isthmus,  and  working
without  intermission  day  and  night  built  a  wall  right  across  the  Isthmus.
But  from  the  haste  with  which  this  wall  was  erected,  and  the  materials
(stones,  bricks,  wood,  and  sand)  of  which  it  was  constructed,  we  may
infer  with  Col.  Leake  that  it  was  merely  a  temporary  field  work  such  as
has  often  been  thrown  up  in  Greek  warfare.  Neither  Thucydides  nor
Xenophon  alludes  to  any  line  of  defence  as  having  impeded  the  march
of  troops  across  the  Isthmus  in  the  wars  at  the  end  of  the  fifth  and  the
beginning  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  But  Diodorus  relates  (xv.  68)  that
in  369  B.C.  the  Athenians,  Lacedaemonians,  and  their  allies  essayed  to
bar  the  Isthmus  against  Epaminondas  and  the  Boeotians  by  construct-
ing a  palisade  and  deep  trenches  from  Cenchreae  to  Lechaeum.  But
Epaminondas  stormed  their  lines  and  cut  his  way  through.  At  the
time  of  the  Gallic  invasion  in  279  B.C.  the  Peloponnesians  seem  to  have
meditated  fortifying  the  Isthmus  by  a  wall  (Paus.  vii.  6.  7)  ;  and  in
253  A.D.  under  the  emperor  Valerian  the  project  was  revived  and  carried
out  at  a  time  when  an  invasion  of  the  northern  barbarians  was  expected
(Zosimus,  i.  29).  The  wall  was  repaired  by  Justinian  towards  the  close
of  the  sixth  century  A.D.,  and  again  by  Manuel  Palaeologus  in  141 5
(Phrantzes,  i.  33,  p.  96,  ed.  Bekker).

See  Dodwell,  Tour  throttgh  Greece^  2.  pp.  184,  186  j^.  ;  Leake,  Travels  in  the
AloreUt  3.  pp.  286-288,  296-305  ;  Boblaye,  Recherches  gJographiqueSy  p.  36  sq.  ;
Curtius,  PeloponnesoSf  i.  pp.  12-15,  27  sq, ;  iV/.,  2.  pp.  545-547,  596  sq.;  Vischer,
Erinnerungen  und  Eindriickey  pp.  230-233;  Bursian,  Geogr,  v,  Griech,  2.  p.  18^
Monceaux,  in  Gazette  Archiologique^  10  (1885),  p.  2\2  sq,  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  242  sq. ;
Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  200  sq. ;  A.  Philippson,  *  Der  Isthmos  von  Korinth,'  Zcitschrift
d,  Gesell.  f,  Erdkunde  zu  Berlin^  25  (1890),  pp.  1-98  (an  elaborate  description  of
the  physical,  especially  the  geological  features,  of  the  Isthmus) ;  iV/.,  Pelopotmes^
pp.  28-30.

The  ancients  varied  greatly  in  their  estimate  of  the  breadth  of  the
Isthmus.  Scylax  {Peripius,  40),  Diodorus  (xi.  16),  and  Strabo  (viii.
PP'  334>  335)  put  the  breadth  at  forty  Greek  furlongs,  Lucian  at  twenty
furlongs  (Nero^  i),  Philostratus  at  twenty-six  furlongs  {Vit,  Soph.  ii.  i.
10),  Pliny  (N.  H.  iv.  10)  at  five  Roman  miles,  Mela  (ii.  48)  and  Solinus
(vii.  1 5,  p.  64,  ed.  Mommsen)  at  four  Roman  miles.  The  estimates  of
Philostratus,  Mela,  and  Solinus  are  most  nearly  correct.  According  to
the  French  Survey  the  exact  breadth  at  the  narrowest  point  is  5950
metres  (Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  37,  note  i).  The  length  of  the  modern
canal  is  5857  metres  (Philippson,  in  Zeitschrift  d.  Gesell.  f.  Erdkunde
2u  Berlin.  25  (1890),  p.  13).

1.  5.  'Oenchreae Lechaeum.     Cenchreae  was  the  port  on  the

eastern,  Lechaeum  the  port  on  the  western  side  of  the  Isthmus.  On  a
bronze  coin  of  Hadrian  the  two  harbours  are  represented  as  nymphs
turned  opposite  ways,  each  holding  a  rudder.  On  a  bronze  coin  of
Septimius  Severus  they  are  personified  as  reclining  male  figures,  one  of
them  holding  a  rudder,  the  other  an  anchor.  See  Imhoof-Blumer  and
Gardner,  Num.  Comvt.  on  Paus.  p.  15,  witti  plates  C  xL,  G  cxxxiv.

1.  5.  He  who  attempted  to  turn  Peloponnese  into  an  island  etc.
In  antiquity  the  plan  of  cutting  a  canal  through  the  Isthmus  of  Corinth


CH.  I  ISTHMUS  OF  CORINTH  7

was  entertained  at  various  times  by  Periander  (Diogenes  Laertius,  i.  7.

99),  Dei^etrius   Poliorcetes  (Strabo,   i.   p.    54;    Pliny,  N,  H,  iv.  10),

Julius  Caesar  (Pliny,  Lc,  ;  Suetonius, /«//i/j,  44;  Plutarch,  Caesar^  58  ;

Die  Cassius,  xliv.  5),  Caligula  (Pliny,  l.c, ;  Suetonius,  Caligula^  21),  and

Herodes  Atticus  (Philostratus,  Vit.  Soph,  ii.  i.  10)  ;  but  the  only  man  who

actually  set  about  the  work  was  Nero,  to  whom  Pausanias  here  alludes

urithout   mentioning   his  name.      A   great  multitude  of   soldiers   and

prisoners,  including  apparently  6000  Jews  sent  by  Vespasian  from  Judaea,

was  assembled  at  the  Isthmus,  and  operations  were  begun  with  much

solemnity,  apparently  about  the  end  of  67  a.d.     The  emperor  himself,

after  chanting  hymns  in  honour  of  the  marine  deities,  set  the  example

by  giving  a  few  strokes  with  a  golden  pick-axe,  which  the  governor  of

Greece  formally  handed  to  him.     Then  the  multitude  fell  to  work  in

earnest,  the  soldiers  turning  up  the  earth  and  the  prisoners  hewing  at

the  rocks.     A  beginning  was  made  on  the  western  side  of  the  Isthmus,

but  excavations  had  been  carried  for  a  distance  of  only  about  four

furlongs,  when  they  were  suddenly  suspended  in  consequence  of  evil

tidings  which  Nero  received  of  conspiracies  at  Rome  and  disaffection

among  the  armies  of  the  West.     See  Suetonius,  NerOy  1 9  ;  Pliny,  N,  H,

iv.  10 ;    Lucian,  NerOy    1-5  ;  Philostratus,    Vit,  Apollon,   iv.    24 ;  Dio

Cassius,  Ixiii.  16;  Josephus,  BelL  Jud.  iii.   10.    10;  Hertzberg,   Gesch,

Griechenlands  unter  der  Hertschaft  der  Romero  2.  pp.  1 1 5-1 19.

Nero's  excavations,  visible  in  the  time  of  Pausanias,  were  still  to
be  seen  down  to  a  few  years  ago,  when  they  were  effaced,  at  least  in
great  part,  by  the  excavations  for  the  new  canal,  which  follows  exactly
the  same  line  as  Nero*s.  Mr.  Gerster,  the  French  engineer  who  super-
intended the  making  of  the  new  canal,  has  thus  described  the  nature  of
the  soil  and  the  traces  of  Nero's  works.

"At  this  point  the  Isthmus  of  Corinth  is  composed  of  three  quite
distinct  parts.  ( i )  On  the  side  of  the  Gulf  of  Corinth  is  a  plain  com-
posed of  sand  and  alluvial  soil  for  a  distance  of  i^  kilometres.  (2)
Next,  for  a  distance  of  4  kilometres,  is  a  hill,  the  mass  of  which  is
composed  of  sand  and  tertiary  marl,  the  whole  covered  by  a  layer  of
conglomerate  2  or  3  metres  thick.  (3)  Lastly,  on  the  shores  of  the
Gulf  of  Aegina,  is  a  small  plain,  600  metres  wide,  where  the  sand  is
covered  by  alluvial  soil.

"  The  works  of  Nero,  which  follow  a  perfectly  straight  line,  consist
of  two  cuttings,  the  depth  of  which  varies  from  3  to  30  metres,  and  the
breadth  of  which  at  the  two  extremities  of  the  line  is  40  or  50  metres.
The  western  cutting  is  2000  metres  long ;  the  eastern  1 500.

**  In  the  interval  which  separates  the  two  cuttings,  on  the  back  of
the  hill,  are  two  rows  of  shafts,  arranged  in  parallel  lines  and  in  the
same  direction  as  the  length  of  the  canal."

The  western  cutting  was  carried  first  for  1200  metres  through  the
sand ;  then  for  about  600  metres  the  layer  of  conglomerate  had  been
cleared  away.  The  whole  of  the  western  cutting  is  bordered  on  both
sides  by  heaps  of  excavated -soil,  sometimes  20  metres  high  and  visible
from  a  distance  on  the  plain  of  the  Isthmus.  The  eastern  cutting  is
carried  through  the  alluvial  soil,  but  stops  at  the  conglomerate  schist.


8  ISTHMUS  OF  CORINTH  bk.  ii.  corinth

See  B.  Gerster,  in  Bulletin  de  Corr,  HelUmque^  8  (1884),  p.  229
sq,  ;  also  Monceaux,  in  Gazette  Archiologique^  10  (1885),  p.  %I3  sq.

Thus  Pausanias's  statement  that  Nero's  excavations  were  not  pro-
longed into  the  rock  is  true  of  the  eastern  but  not  of  the  western  cutting.
This  seems  to  show  that  he  had  seen  the  eastern  but  not  the  western
side  of  the  Isthmus,  and  this  would  be  natural  enough,  since  journeying
from  Megara  to  Corinth  by  the  Scironian  pass  (i.  44.  8),  Cromyon  (ii.
1.3),  and  the  Isthmian  sanctuary  (ii.  i.  7  sqq,)  he  must  have  kept  along
the  shore  of  the  Saronic  Gulf.  The  rock  to  which  he  refers  is  the
conglomerate-covered  eminence  in  the  centre  of  the  Isthmus.  The
shafts  which  were  sunk  in  this  central  part  face  each  other  at  a  distance
of  40  to  45  metres  from  the  axis  of  the  canal.  They  are  about  40  metres
(131  feet)  deep  and  were  intended,  Mr.  Gerster  thinks,  as  soimdings  to
determine  the  slope  of  the  hills.  The  same  authority  estimates  that  the
mass  of  soil  displaced  must  have  amounted  to  500,000  square  metres,
and  that  the  work  must  have  occupied  5000  or  6000  men  for  three  or
four  months.  The  excavations  may  have  been  continued  after  Nero's
departure,  perhaps  until  his  death  in  the  following  year  (68  a.d.)  See
Mr.  B.  Gerster,  op,  cit,  p.  231  sq,  \  and  on  the  traces  of  Nero's  cutting
see  also  Leake,  Travels  in  the  Morea^  3.  p.  300  sq,  ;  Fiedler,  Reise^
I.  p.  235  sqq.

The  modem  canal  was  begun  in  1881  and  was  opened  for  naviga-
tion in  1893.  There  are  no  locks  on  it.  See  Baedeker,^  p.  242  ;
Guide-Joanne^  2,  p.  201  ;  Philippson,  va  Zeitschrift  d,  GeselLf,  Erdkunde
zu  Berlin^  25(1 890),  p.  1 1  sqq,

1.  5.  to  dig  tlurough  the  promontory  of  Minuui.  Mimas  is  a
mountainous  peninsula  in  Ionia,  to  the  north  of  Erythrae.  Alexander's
design  is  mentioned  by  Pliny  (A''.  H.  v.  116),  who  says  that  Alexander
intended  to  cut  through  a  plain  seven  and  a  half  Roman  miles  wide,  *'  in
order  that  he  might  join  the  two  bays  and  surround  Erythrae  and
Mimas  with  water."  Some  modern  writers  hold  that  the  Isthmus  which
Alexander  proposed  to  cut  through  was  not  the  one  at  Erythrae,  but
the  neck  of  land  further  east,  from  Clazomenae  on  the  north  to  Teos
on  the  south  (Droysen,  Geschichte  des  Hellenismusy  i.  i.  p.  202  ;"H.
Gaebler,  Erythrae  (Berlin,  1892)  p.  15,  note  2).  This  was  the  view
also  of  Chandler,  who  thought  that  he  discovered  here  some  remains  of
the  canal.  He  says  :  **  The  Isthmus  appears  as  a  wide  pleasant  valley,
and  the  land  being  mostly  level  we  could  discern  across  it  the  blue  tops
of  the  island  Samos  .  .  .  Alexander  the  Great,  to  render  the  com-
munication easier,  ordered  that  a  navigable  cut  should  be  made  through
the  plain  here  .  .  .  A  dike  or  canal  running  up  the  valley  is  a  monu-
ment of  that  attempt,  which  failed,  when  the  workmen  came  to  the
rock.  We  passed  it  over  a  bar  of  sand  at  the  mouth"  {Travels  in
Asia  Minor^  p.  84).  It  appears  that  the  people  of  Erythrae  were
grateful  to  Alexander  for  his  good  intention  ;  for  inscriptions  prove  that
he  was  worshipped  at  Erythrae,  and  that  his  priesthood  was  an  office  of
high  dignity  down  to  the  age  of  the  Antonines.  See  Moixrciov  kox  j8ij8A.io-
^i/Ki;  T^s  €v  "^fivpvQ  cvayyeXiic^s  cxoA^s,  I.  (Smyrna,  1875)  p.  108  ;
Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec,  No.  370,  p.  540  with  the  note.


CH.  I THE  ISTHMIAN  SANCTUARY  9

1.  y^The  CnidianB  began  to  dig  through  their  isthmus  etc

Thi»-ws#whcn  the  Persians  under  Harpagus  were  ovemining  Ionia.
See  Herodotus,  i.  174.

1.  6.  Poseidon  had  a  dispute  with  the  Snn  etc.  This  legend  is
told  also  by  Dio  Chrysostom  {Or,  xxxvii.  vol.  2.  p.  296  ed.  Dindorf),  and
is  alluded  to  by  Lucian  {J)e  saltaiioney  42).     Cp.  Paus.  ii.  4.  6.

1.  7-  a  theatre  and  a  stadium.      The  remains  of  both  theatre  and
stadium  may  still  be  seen  a  short  way  south  of  the  fortification-wall
described  above,  and  very  near  the  sanctuary  of  Poseidon  (see  below).
The  ruins  of  the  theatre,  consisting  of  rough  stones,  mortar,  and  a  mass
of  small  pebbles,  lie  in  a  small  ravine  or  hollow  about  150  yards  west
of  the  sanctuary.       Leake  observed  the  substruction  of  the  cavea  or
auditorium  and  some  traces  of  the  stage.     The  building  seems  to  have
been  of  Roman  date.     Mr.  Monceaux  thinks  that  the  Greek  theatre  was
on  the  slope  of  the  same  low  hill,  but  higher  up.     See  Leake,  Morea^  3.
p.  286;  Welcker,  Tagelntch^  i.  p.  166  sq.\  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  542;
Beul^  £tudes  sur  le  P^loponnise^  p.  411  sq,\  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  21  ;
Guzette  ArcfUologique^   10  (1885),  p.  208;  Baedeker,^  p.  242.      The
stadium  occupied  a  dell  between  two  spurs  of  a  hill  to  the  south  of  the
sanctuary  of  Poseidon.       The  torrent  which  formed  the  dell  and  was
doubtless  diverted  or  carried  underground  when  the  stadium  was  made,
has  now  resumed  its  old  course  and  broken  through  the  semicircular
end  of  the  stadium.      Some  foundations  of  the  wall  which  supported  the
rectilinear  end  of  the  stadium  still  exist.       From  this  wall  to  the  upper
end  Leake  measured  650  feet.     The  area  of  the  race-course  is  filled
with  broken  pieces  of  pottery  and  overgrown  with  tufts  of  wild  thyme,
sage,  and  Icntisk.      Some  of  the  marble  seats  to  which  Pausanias  refers
arc  still  in  their  places,  hidden  under  a  screen  of  brushwood.     See
Leake,  Morea^  3.  p.  286  ;  W.  G.  Clark,  Peloponnesus ^  p.  49  sq. ;  Mon-
ceaux, in  Gazette  ArMologiquey  10  (1885),  p.  207  sq,

L  7.  the  sanctuary  of  the  god.     The  Isthmian  sanctuary  or  sacred
enclosure  occupies  the  angle  of  a  natural  plateau  situated  about  half  a
mile  south-west  of  the  eastern  end  of  the  canal.     It  formed  a  fortifica-
tion as  well  as  a  sanctuary,  being  enclosed  on  all  sides  by  a  wall  flanked
with  square  towers.     The  walls  and  towers  are  in-  ruins,  but  enough
remains  to  enable  us  to  trace  the  plan  of  the  sacred  enclosure,  which  is
that  of  a  very  irregular  pentagon.     The  western  and  northern  walls  are,
roughly  speaking,  straight  and  at  right  angles  to  each  other  ;  but  the
south-eastern  wall  is  in  the  shape  of  a  crescent  curving  inwards,  and  it
is  joined  to  the  western  and  northern  walls  respectively  by  shorter  walls
on  the  south  and  north-east.     The  north  and  north-east  walls  form  part
of  the  great  fortification-wall  which  stretches  across  the  Isthmus  (see
above,  p.  5).    The  distance  for  which  the  Isthmian  wall  coincides  with
that  of  the  sanctuary  is  about  220  yards.     The  greatest  length  of  the
sacred  enclosure  from  south-west  to  north-east  is  about  360  yards.    The
French  conducted  some  excavations  on  the  spot  a  few  years  ago  and
made  out  three  gates,  one  on  the  west  side,  one  on  the  south  side,  and
one  at  the  north-eastern  angle.      Mr.  Monceaux,  the  French  archaeolo-
gist to  whom  we  owe  an  account  of  these  explorations,  thinks  that  the


lo  THE  ISTHMIAN  SANCTUARY       bk.  ii.  corinth

north-east  gate,  which  he  calls  the  Triumphal  Gate,  is  of  the  age  of
Augustus.  The  style  of  the  architecture,  according  to  him^points  to
this  date.  Moreover  it  is  improbable,  as  he  justly  remarks,  that  the
Corinthians  would  have  opened  one  of  the  gates  of  the  sanctuary  on  the
side  of  the  enemy,  outside  the  line  of  fortification.  A  paved  road  runs
through  this  gateway,  and  in  the  pavement  the  ruts  made  by  the  chariot-
wheels  are  deeply  marked.  Within  the  sacred  enclosure,  opposite  the
north-east  gateway,  stands  the  Byzantine  chapel  of  St.  John.  No
foundations  or  walls  of  ancient  Greek  masonry  have  yet  been  discovered
within  the  sacred  enclosure ;  so  that  we  cannot  say  in  which  parts  of  it
the  temples  of  Poseidon  and  Palaemon  respectively  stood.  But  Mr.
Monceaux  is  inclined  to  suppose  that  the  temple  of  Poseidon  occupied
the  site  of  the  chapel  of  St.  John.  Pausanias,  coming  from
Cromyon,  would  naturally  enter  the  sacred  enclosure  by  the  north-
east gateway,  would  pass  up  the  paved  way,  bordered  by  the  row  of
pine-trees  on  the  one  side  and  of  statues  on  the  other,  to  the  temple
of  Poseidon  ;  and  the  temple  of  Palaemon,  which  he  says  (c.  2.  i)  was
on  the  left,  would  thus  occupy  the  eastern  angle  of  the  sacred  enclosure,
to  the  south  of  the  paved  way.  This  arrangement  agrees  moreover
with  the  position  in  which  the  architectural  fragments  (triglyphs,  drums
of  columns,  etc.,  see  below,  pp.  11,  14)  have  been  found.  For  all  the
fragments  of  the  temple  of  Palaemon  have  been  discovered  to  the  left  of
the  paved  way  ;  but  none  of  the  fragments  of  the  temple  of  Poseidon  has
been  found  here,  they  all  lie  to  the  north,  the  west,  and  the  south.  Mr.
Monceaux  would  assign  the  enclosing  walls  of  the  sanctuary,  as  well  as
the  north-east  gate,  to  the  age  of  Augustus.  Leake  says  that  the  wall
"  was  of  the  most  regular  kind  of  Hellenic  masonry  externally,  but  filled
up  with  rubble  between  the  casings."  See  Monceaux,  *  Fouilles  et
recherches  archdologiques  au  sanctuaire  des  jeux  Isthmiques,'  Gazette
Arcfi^ologique^  9  (1884),  pp.  273-285,  352-363  ;  id,  10  (1885),  pp.
205-214,  402-412;  Clarke,  Travels^  3.  p.  751  sqq,\  Leake,  Aforea,  3.
pp.  286-296;  Welcker,  Tagebuch,  i.  p.  166;  Curtius,  Pe/oponnesos,  2.
pp.  540-544  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen  und  Eindriicke,  p.  257  j^. ;  W.
G.  Clark,  Peloponnesus,  pp.  47-49 ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  20  j^.  ;
Baedeker,^  p.  7.\2  sq,  ;  Guide-Joanne,  2.  p.  198  sqq,

1.  7*  a  row  of  pine-trees,  most  of  them  shooting  straight  up
into  the  air.  "  To  judge  by  the  present  condition  of  the  soil,  the  only
conifer  which  we  can  conceive  to  be  native  to  the  Isthmus  is  the  pinus
maritinia,  whose  fresh  juicy  green  is  the  last  remaining  ornament  of  the
rocky  coasts  of  Greece.  Firs  {Fickten)  are  not  found  south  of  the  Thes-
salian  mountains  "  (Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  543).  This  species  of  pine,
where  it  grows  by  itself  on  rocky  ground,  is  generally  stunted  ;  but
where  a  number  of  them  grow  together  in  suitable  soil,  the  stems  are
straight  and  strong,  sometimes  100  feet  high  and  2  or  3  feet  thick
(Fiedler,  Reise,  i.  p.  512).  Thus,  as  Curtius  has  pointed  out  {Pelop.  2.
P*  595)>  Pausanias  remarks  upon  the  unusually  straight,  high  growth  of
this  row  of  pines  in  the  Isthmian  sanctuary.  His  words  (ra  7roA.Aa  h
€vOv  avTiov  dvrjKovra)  have  sometimes  (as  by  Leake)  been  interpreted  to
mean  that  the  pines  were  "  planted  for  the  most  part  in  a  straight  line."


CH.  I  THE  ISTHMIAN  SANCTUARY  ii

But  against  this  in teip relation  it  may  be  said  that  (I)  the  words  thus  in-
teqireted  a.re  an  otiose  repetition  of  the  preceding  irc^irrcu/ui'a  (Vt
ffnu'xou  ;  and  (i)  the  usage  of  Pausanias  is  in  favour  of  taking  avr^Kavra,
of  height.  Cp.  iii.  1 7.  1  ovrtav  &  tv  tq  jtoKci  koifxiii'  koI  aXXuiv,  rb
fiakurra  (s  furiinpov  av^Kov  ovo/ux^oi-viv  dKpmroX.iv.  v.  13.  g  T&  £f
v^s  Tou  piufimj  rh  a-i[arav  <t  Svo  Koi  tiKO<Tiv  di^Kfi  iroSaf.  vi.  21.  6
Aw^oi    eoriv    tiv^Kuv    «    d^ij.        viii.     24.    7     KinrapuTxroi    jrt^i!«o<rii'   cs

TOITOVTOV  VlfrOVi    dv^KOlHTat    OXTTC    KtA.  Cp.     also     iV.      20.     2     ipiVtOi    OUK

i!  (I'ffif  ijt^ijTO,  aA.Xa  «!  T(  T&  ptvfia  tirttrrptrfK  ktX..

On  the  different  kinds  of  conifers  in  Greece,  see  Neumann  und
Partsch,  Physikalische  Ceographie  von  Griechenland,  366  sqq.  ;  and  on
ihe  pines  of  the  Isthmus  in  particular  see  A.  Philippson,  in  ZHlschriJl
L  Geiell.  f.  ErdkumU  su  Berlin,  25(1 890),  p.  74  sg.,  who  states  that  the
only  species  of  pine  which  now  grows  on  the  Isthmus  is  the  Aleppo  pine
or  Pinus  halepensis  Mill.

1.  7-  the  temple,  which  Is  not  verr  loiKs.  The  French  excava-
lon  found  a  good  many  fragments  of  the  old  Doric  temple  of  Poseidon,
including  iriglyphs  (in  a  very  damaged  state)  and  drums  of  columns.  In-
sWad  of  twenty  flutes,  which  is  Ihe  usual  number  for  Doric  columns,  these
colninns  had  only  sixteen  flutes,  a  mark  of  bjgh  antiquity.  The  breadth  of
the  flutes  varies  from  .29  metre  at  the  base  to  .22  metre  near  the  capital.
The  inferior  diameter  of  the  columns  was  1.48  metres,  the  superior
diameter  1.23  "which  gave  to  the  shafts  a  decidedly  conical  form."  The
height  of  the  drums  varies  from  .80  to  .90  metre  ;  seven  or  eight  of  them
would  go  to  the  column.  "To  judge  by  the  proportions  of  the  flutes
and  by  comparison  with  the  ancient  buildings  of  Sicily  and  Italy,  it  may
be  held  that  the  height  of  the  columns  in  the  temple  of  Poseidon  at  the
Isthmus  was  4J  times  the  diameter  of  the  base,  i.e.  more  than  6^
metiii.  The  erection  of  the  temple  should  be  assigned  to  the  middle  of
the  sixth  century  B.C. ;  it  is  certainly  later  than  the  temple  of  Corinth  of
Khich  the  remains  are  still  standing  ;  but  it  is  older  than  some  of  the
ancient  temples  of  Sicily,"  The  drums  had  been  sawn  from  top  to
botiom  and  employed  in  repairing  the  enclosing
»-all  of  the  sanctuary.  All  those  now  visible  were
discoveredin  the  foundationsof  the  northern,  western,
and  southern  walls,  none  of  them  in  the  eastern.
See  Monceaux,  in  Gasette  Arckiologigue,  9  (1884),
P-  356  sq.  The  temple  of  Poseidon  is  represented
on  coins  of  Geta,  from  the  evidence  of  which  i
may  be  inferred  that  the  temple  "  was  not  peripteral
but  either  prostyle  or  amphiprostyle  ;  and  we  may  „a.  1.  —  tempi.k  or
ei-en  regard  it  as  probable  that  the  temple  was  fossiooK  at  isth-
telrastyle."  On  these  coins  Tritons  are  represented  »""  (^o'"  "'
standing  over  the  angles  of  the  gable,  in  accordance

with  the  description  of  Pausanias,  whose  statement  that  Tritons  "  stand
upon  the  temple "  means  that  they  stood  as  acroleria,  i.e.  over  the
angles  of  the  gables.  See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Comm.
M  Paus.  p.  16  and  pi.  D  xlix,,  D  I.

1.  ;.  The  images were  dedicated  in  m;  time  br  the


9


\J


i


12  TffE  ISTHMIAN  SANCTUARY       bk.  ii.  corinth

Athenian  Herodes.  Stephani  {Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersmirg)  for
1870-1871,  p.  127)  thought  that  by  dedicating  at  the  Isthmian  sanc-
tuary a  statue  of  Poseidon,  the  divine  president  of  the  Isthmian  games,
Herodes  Atticus  purposely  challenged  comparison  with  Phidias's  statue
of  Zeus,  the  divine  president  of  the  Olympic  games,  at  the  Olympic
sanctuary.  This  comes  out,  he  holds,  in  the  fact  that  the  statues  set
up  by  Herodes  Atticus  were  of  the  same  material  (gold  and  ivory)  as
Phidias's  statue  of  Zeus,  but  it  is  especially  proved  by  the  fact  that  the
birth  of  Aphrodite  from  the  sea  was  represented  on  the  base  of
Poseidon's  statue  as  on  the  base  of  the  Olympic  Zeus.  See  Pausanias,
V.  II.  8.  Stephani  enumerates  (pp,  ciL  p.  129  sq,)  the  surviving
works  of  ancient  art  in  which  he  believes  that  the  artists  copied  tne
relief  on  this  statue  of  Poseidon.  Philostratus  in  his  life  of  Herodes  >
Atticus  (Vit,  Soph,  ii.  i.  9)  mentions  the  colossal  statue  of  Poseidon,  V
the  statue  of  Amphitrite,  and  the  dolphin  of  Melicertes,  among  the
votive  offerings  dedicated  by  Herodes  at  the  Isthmus.

1.  8.  the  boy  Palaemon  is  erect  on  a  dolphin.  On  coins  of
Marcus  Aurelius,  Antoninus  Pius,  and  Severus,  Palaemon  is  represented
standing  on  a  dolphin.  See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num,  Comm,
on  Paus.  p.  1 1 ,  and  pi.  B  ix.  Palaemon  was  the  name  which  Melicertes
received  when  he  became  a  sea-deity  (ApoUodorus,  iii.  4.  3  ;  Hyginus,
Fab,  2  ;  Ovid,  Metam,  iv.  542).

1.  8.  sculptured  in  relief.  The  Greek  is  hreipyaxrroy  the  verb
regularly  used  by  Pausanias  in  this  sense.  Cp.  Schubart,  in  Philologus^
24  (1866),  pp.  581-587 ;  U.  Schaarschmidt,  De  hn  praepositionis
apud  Pausaniam  periegetam  vi  et  usu,  p.  26  sgg.  ;  Fraenkel,  De  verbis
potioribus  quibus  opera  statuaria  Graeci  notabant^  p.  39  sq.

1.  8.  the  Sea  holding  up  the  child  Aphrodite.      On  personifi-
cations of  the  sea  in  ancient  art  see  Adolf  Gerber,  in  Fleckeisen's
Jahrb ticker  fur  class.  PhiloL^  Supplem.   13,    pp.   266-269;    Roscher's
Lexikon^  2.  pp.  2079-2081.     On  Aphrodite  as  sea-bom  see  note  on  v.
II.  8.

1.  8.  the  Nereids.  The  belief  in  the  Nereids  still  exists  in  full
force  among  the  modem  Greeks,  though  the  conception  of  them  has
been  generalised  to  include  nymphs  of  all  kinds — nymphs  of  the
mountains,  trees,  springs,  etc.  as  well  as  sea-nymphs.  They  are  believed
to  be  beautiful  and  gay,  fond  of  the  dance  and  song.  They  are  clad  in
white  garments,  decked  with  roses  and  other  flowers.  They  carry  off
children,  and  if  they  find  a  man  sleeping  at  noon  (especially  a  summer
noon)  beside  a  spring  or  a  river,  or  under  the  shadow  of  a  tree,  they
maim  him  or  drive  him  mad.  There  are  at  this  day  people  in  Greece
who  believe  themselves  to  be  descended  from  the  Nereids.  Offerings
are  made  to  the  Nereids  of  milk  and  honey.  In  Zacynthus  offerings  of
sweetmeats,  etc.  are  made  to  them  at  noon  or  midnight  at  spots  where
three  ways  meet.  In  many  parts  of  Greece  there  are  special  places
where  it  is  customary  to  deposit  offerings  for  the  Nereids  ;  for  example,
a  hollow  under  the  Museum  Hill  at  Athens,  the  source  of  the  Cephisus
at  Cephisia  in  Attica,  and  a  rocky  cleft  in  the  bed  of  the  Ismenus  at
Thebes.     See  B.  Schmidt,  Dcu  Volksleben  der  Neugriechen^  pp.  98-130;


CH.  I  T  THE  ISTHMIAN  SANCTUARY  13

C.  Wacwmuth,  Das  alte  Griechenland  im  neuen^  pp.  29-32,  52-55  ;
J.  T.  Bent,  The  Cyclades^  p.  12  sqq. ;  Lucy  M.  J.  Garnet t,  The  women  of
Turkey^  i.  p.  131  sqq.  Cp.  note  on  ix.  3.  7.  The  root  of  the  word
Nereid  perhaps  survives  in  the  modem-  Greek  name  for  water,  nero  (cp.
Phrynichus,  Eel.  29;  Etymol.  Magnuniy  p.  597  1.  42  sqq,\  but  this  is
doubtful.     See  Classical  Review^  8  (1894),  pp.  100  sq,,  398  sq.

1.  8.  some  people  have  dedicated  precincts  to  them  beside

luffbours  etc     Cp.  iii.  26.  7.    The  connection  of  Achilles  with  harbours

is  shown  by  the  fact  that  two  harbours  are  known  to  have  derived  their

names  from  him,  the  harbour  of  Achilles  at  Taenarum  (Pausanias,  iii.

2$.  4)  and  the  harbour  of  Achilles  at  Scyros  (Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  391).

On  Achilles  in  his  relation  to  the  sea  cp.  Roscher's  Lexikon^  i.  p.  58  sqq.

Scaliger's  view  that  in  the  first  syllable  of  Achilles  and  Achelous  we  have

a  root  signifying  water,  as  in  the  Latin  aqua^  is  accepted  by  Welcker

{Griech,  Gotterlehre^   3.   p.   46),  but  discountenanced   on   philological

grounds  by  G.  Curtius  {Griech.  EtymJ*  p.    119),   who  thinks   that  in

Greek  this  root  must  have  taken  the  form  ap^  as  in  Messapioi  which  is

equivalent  (he  thinks)  to  Methudrioiy  *  the  people  over  the  water.'     Cp.

Lobeck,  Aglaophamus^  p.  952  ;  Roscher's  Lexikon^  i.  p.  65.

1.  8.  Doto  has  a  holy  sanctuary  at  Gabala.  Doto  was  a  Nereid
(Homer,  //.  xviii.  43  ;  Hesiod,  Theog,  248 ;  Apollodorus,  I  2.  6).
Gabala  was  a  town  on  the  coast  of  Syria,  mentioned  by  Hecataeus
(Strabo,  xvi.  p.  753;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v.Tdpaka;  Pliny,  N.If,
V.  79).     Cp.  Reland,  PalaestincL,  p.  784  sq,

1.  8.  the  robe  by  which Eriphyle  was  bribed  etc.     At  her

marriage  Harmonia  received  from  her  husband  Cadmus  the  present  of  a
robe  and  of  a  necklace,  the  latter  a  work  of  Hephaestus.     When  the
Epigoni  were  about  to  march  against  Thebes  they  were  told  by  an  oracle
that  they  would  be  victorious  if  led  by  Alcmaeon.     Alcmaeon  was  un-
willing to  go  to  the  war,  but  his  mother  Eriphyle  was  induced  by  the
bribe  of  the  robe  which  had  once  been  Harmonia's  to  persuade  him  to
join  the  expedition.     She  had,  ten  years  before,  been  bribed  by  the
present  of  the  necklace  to  send  her  husband  Amphiaraus  to  his  doom,
by  obliging  him  to  join  the  first  expedition  against  Thebes.     According
to  Apollodorus,  the  fatal  robe  and  necklace  were  finally  dedicated  by
Alcmaeon's  sons  at  Delphi.     See  Apollodorus,  iii.  4  §  2,  6  §  2,  7  §§  2,  6.
As  to  the  necklace  see  also  Paus.  v.  17.  7  ;  viii.  24.  8  sq,  ;  ix.  41.  2-5.
1.  9.  sayiours  of  ships.     A  marble  tablet  found  at  Kertch  in  the
Crimea  in  1880  is  inscribed  with  a  dedication  in  Greek  "to  Poseidon
saviour  of  ships  and  to  Aphrodite  mistress  of  ships  "  (Jloa-^i^ii^vi.  (ra)o-tV€<p
KoX  'A<l>po8iTy  vaifapxtSi),     The  dedicator  was  an  admiral  Pantaleon.
The  epithets,  as  applied  to  Poseidon  and  Aphrodite,  are  not  known  from
other  sources.     See  Stephani,  in  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg),  1881,
p.  134  sq,

"  The  sons  of  Tyndareus  "  are  of  course  Castor  and  Pollux.  Sailors
in  antiquity  gave  the  name  of  Castor  and  Poiiux  to  a  aouole  light  (of
elcarical  nature)  which  appeared  on  the  masts  or  sails  of  a  ship  during
a  storm.  The  two  lights  were  a  sign  of  safety,  but  a  single  light  was
known  by  the  name  of  Helen  and  was  regarded  as  fatal.     In  the  middle


,/'


14  THE  ISTHMIAN  SANCTUARY        vs..  ii.  corinth

ages  and  in  modern  times  such  lights  have  been  knou-n  as  the  fire  of  Saint
Elmo  or  Saint  Telmo.  My  friend  the  UlC  W.  Robertson  Smith  infoimed
me  that  the  name  Telmo  resembles  a  Phoenician  word  meaning  '  twins.'
See  Pliny,  N.  H.  ii.  loi  ;  Diodoms,  iv,  43  1  Seneca,  Natur.  Qftaest.
i.  I.  13  ;  Lucian,  Dial.  Deorum,  xxvi.  2  ;  Ovid,  Fasti,  v.  720  ;  Plutarch,
De  dtfect.  orac.  30  ;  Th,  Henri  Martin,  in  Revue  ArcMologique,  N.  S.
13(1 866),  pp.  1 68- 1 74  ;  Sebillot,  Ugendes,  crcyances  el  superstitions  de
la  mer  (Paris,  1886),  2.  pp.  87-109.  Similar  lights  were  frequently  ob-
sened  shining  on  spear-heads  in  antiquity  (Pliny,  Ic. ;  Seneca,  fll.  Q.  i.  1.
1 4  ;  Martin,  op.  cit.  p.  171);  and  it  is  said  that  Cossacks,  riding  across
the  steppes  on  stomiy  nights,  see  such  lights  flickering  at  their  lance-
heads  (Potocki,  Voyages  dans  les  steps  d'Aslrakhan  el  du  Caucdie,  1,
p.   143)-

!■      2.   I.  a  temple  of  Falaemon.     The  temple  of  Palaemon  is  repre-
sented on  coins  of  Marcus  Aurelius,  Lucius  Verus,  Geta  and  Caracalla.
From  these  representations  (Fig.  3)  it  appears  that
the  temple  was  circular  and  of  the  Ionic  order,  with
dolphins  as  ornaments  on  the  roof.     On  the  coins
Palaemon  is  sometimes  represented  lying  on  a
1  the  temple.      This  is  probably  a  copy
of  the  temple-statue.      See  Imhoof-Blumer  and
Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  on  Paus.  p.  1 1,  and  plate
B    xi.    xil  xiii. ;    K.   O.     Muller,    Handbuch   d.
Archaeol.  d.  KunsI  (ed.    1S78),  p.  323.     Near
ri^.  3.— lEHrtB  uf  rAi-ns-   (j,g  Koman  gate  at  the  north-east  comer  of  the

HON  (coin  oil  CORINTH).  ,       ,         .  .  ^  ,  .  r  ■,

Isthmian  sanctuary,  the  French  excavators  found
many  drums  of  Ionic  columns  with  twenty-four  flutes.  The  height  of
the  drums  varies  from  .72  to  1.05  metre.  "The  depth  of  the  flutes
(.05  metre),  but  especially  the  breadth  of  the  fillets  (.025  metre),  and
the  form  of  the  capitals  recall  the  most  ancient  Ionic  style."  Mr.
Monceaux  is  of  opinion  that  these  drums  belonged  to  the  temple  of
Palaemon.  He  discovered  also  numerous  fragments  of  very  ancient
circular  architraves  and  cornices.  See  Gazelle  Arcit/elogique,  9  (1884),
p.  362.

2.  I.  the  shrine.  Philostratus  says  that  when  Palaemtfn  (Melicertes)
was  landed  on  the  Isthmus  by  the  dolphin,  the  earth  opened  to  receive
him,  at  the  command  of  Poseidon.  Moreover  Poseidon  bade  Sisyphus
sacrifice  to  Palaemon.  Sisyphus  obeyed  and  sacrificed  a  black  bull.
See  Philostratus,  Imag.  ii.  16.

The  sanctuary  of  Palaemon  at  the  Isthmus  is  mentioned  in  an
inscription  which  was  copied  by  Wheler  at  Corinth  {Journey  inio  Greece,
p.  438),  but  has  since  been  transferred  to  Verona.  The  inscription
mentions  other  buildings  which  are  not  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  It
records  how  Publius  Licinius  Priscus  Juventianus,  who  held  the  office  of
high  priest  for  life,  erected  or  repaired  various  buildings  at  the  Isthmian
sanctuary.  He  built  lodgings  for  the  use  of  the  athletes,  who  assembled
from  all  parts  of  the  world  to  take  part  in  the  Isthmian  games.  He
restored  also  the  following  buildings  ;  the  sanctuary  of  Palaemon  (t&
naAaijuofioc),  with  its   decorations ;  the  place  where  sacrifices  were


CH.  11  THE  ISTHMIAN  SANCTUARY  15

offered  to  Palaemon  (t^  IvaytoT^ptov),  and  its  sacred  entrance ;  the
altars  of  the  Paternal  Gods  (twv  warpifov  ^cwv),  with  their  enclosure
and  fore-temple  ;  the  rooms  in  which  the  athletes  were  examined  (tov?
iyKpiTrjpiovs  oiicovs)  ;  and  the  temple  of  the  Sun,  together  with  its  statue,
and  enclosure.  He  erected  at  his  own  expense  the  enclosure  of  the  Sacred
Grove  {rrjs  ufMS  XaTnys)  and  within  it  the  temples  of  Demeter  and
Proserpine,  Dionysus  and  Artemis,  together  with  their  statues,
ornaments,  and  fore-temples.  He  repaired  the  temples  of  Abundance
(Eueieria)  and  Proserpine,  the  sanctuary  of  Pluto,  and  the  steps  and
substructions  which  had  been  dilapidated  by  the  effect  of  earthquakes
and  time ;  and  he  dedicated  a  colonnade  at  the  stadium,  together  with
arded  chambers  and  their  decorations,  for  the  use  of  the  superintendent
of  the  Market     See  Leake,  Morea^  3.  p.  294  sq, ;  C.  I.  G,  No.  U04.

Of  the  places  mentioned  in  this  inscription,  the  sanctuary  of  Palaemon
is  doubtless  the  temple  of  Palaemon  mentioned  by  Pausanias,  and  the
stadium  referred  to  is  no  doubt  the  one  he  mentions  and  in  which  the
Isthmian  games  were  performed.  The  place  of  sacrifice  (cvaywrT^/otov)
with  its  sacred  entrance  is  most  probably  the  shrine  (adytum)  mentioned
by  Pausanias  (see  below).  The  altars  of  the  Paternal  Gods  may  have
induded  the  altar  of  the  Cyclopes  which  Pausanias  mentions.  The  date
of  the  inscription  is  uncertain.  Boeckh  (on  C.  /.  G,  No.  1104)  thinks
that  it  is  not  earlier  than  the  time  of  Hadrian  or  the  Antonines.  Perhaps
then,  as  Leake  inclined  to  suppose,  the  works  mentioned  in  it  were  not
executed  until  after  the  time  of  Pausanias.

The  word  translated  *  shrine '  in  the  present  passage  is  adytum
(o^CT'oi').  By  adytum  Pausanias  seems  generally  to  have  meant,  as  here,
an  underground  chamber,  whether  natural  or  artificial.  See  vii.  27.  2  ;  ix.
39.  10-13  \  X.  32.  13-18.  In  two  passages  (v.  i.  5  ;  x.  33.  11)  there  is
nothing  to  show  whether  the  adytum  was  subterranean  or  not.  Robertson
Smith  thought  that  "  the  adytum,  or  dark  inner  chamber,  found  in  many
temples  both  among  the  Semites  and  in  Greece,  was  almost  certainly  in
its  origin  a  cave"  {Religion  of  the  Semites^  p.  200).  He  held  that  the
adytum  was  identical  with  what  the  Greeks  called  megaron^  a  word  which,
as  applied  to  a  sacred  chamber,  he  identified  with  the  Semitic  maghar^
*cave.'  Pausanias,  however,  seems  not  to  use  adytum  and  megaron  as
equivalent.     See  Index,  s.v,  *  megaron.'

To  the  south  of  the  Isthmian  sanctuary,  on  a  hill  which  dominates
the  stadium,  ten  minutes  from  the  road  which  leads  to  Old  Corinth,  are
the  remains  of  an  ancient  town  cut  in  the  rock.  The  plateau  where  the
remains  exist  has  a  mean  height  of  300  to  350  feet.  The  eastern  side
of  the  plateau,  for  a  space  of  about  three  quarters  of  a  mile  in  length
by  300  yards  in  width,  is  covered  with  the  remains  of  houses,  streets,
and  staircases,  cut  out  of  the  rock.  Mr.  Monceaux  thinks  that  these
are  the  remains  of  Ephyra,  the  primitive  city  of  the  Isthmus,  and  the
predecessor  of  Corinth.  See  Gazette  ArcIUologique^  10  (1885),  p.  402
sqq. ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  198  j^.

2.  2.  the  graves  of  Sisyphus  and  Neleus.  In  1890  there  were
discovered  on  the  Isthmus  of  Corinth  two  prehistoric  barrows,  which
Mr.  P.  Kastromenos,  the  discoverer,  took  to  be  the  tombs  of  Sisyphus


i6  LECHAEUM  BK.  ii.  corinih

and  Neleus  (American  Journal  of  Archaeology^  6  (1890),  p.  563).  The
graves  of  Sisyphus  and  Neleus  may  have  belonged  to  the  class  of  secret
graves,  on  the  preservation  of  which  the  safety  of  the  state  was  believed
to  depend.     See  note  on  i.  28.  7,  *  the  tomb  of  Oedipus.*

2.  2.  The  Isthmian  games.  They  were  celebrated  every  second
year  in  spring,  not,  as  has  sometimes  been  maintained,  at  midsummer.
See  Thucydides,  viii.  7-9  ;  G.  F.  Unger,  *  Der  Isthmientag  und  die
Hyakinthien,* /'/[//(^/(Cj^T^j,  37  (1877),  pp.  1-42;  Nissen,  in  Rkeimsckes
Museum^  N.  F.  42  (1887),  p.  46  sq,

2.  3.  the  Great  Eoeae.  This  poem  was  attributed  to  Hesiod
(Pausan.  ix.  31.  5).  Cp.  A.  Kalkmann,  *  Hesiod's  /icyaAai 'Houu  bei
Pausanias,'  Rheinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  39  (1884),  pp.  561-565.  It  is
a  question  whether  the  Great  Eoeae  was  or  was  not  identical  with,  or
formed  part  of,  the  poem  called  the  Catalogue  of  Women,  See  Clinton,
Fasti Hellenici^  i.  p.  382  sqq, ;  W.  Christ,  Gesch,  d.griech,  Litteratur^  p.  74
sq.  ;  Epicorum  Graecorum  fraginenta^  ed.  Kinkel,  pp.  90  sqq^  135  sqq,

2.  3.  Lechaenm.  Lechaeum  was  the  port  of  Corinth  on  the  Gulf
of  Corinth  (Pliny,  N,  H,  iv.  12,  who  calls  it  Lecheae).  It  was  united
to  Corinth  by  two  walls,  each  about  twelve  furlongs  long,  in  which  there
were  gates  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  380  ;  Xenophon,  Hellenica^  iv.  4.  7-12).  In
393  B.C.  the  Lacedaemonians  pulled  down  part  of  these  walls  in  order
to  have  a  free  passage  for  their  army  northward  (Xenophon,  Hellenica^
iv.  4.  13).  Lechaeum  contained  a  sanctuary  of  Aphrodite  with  a  ban-
queting-hall  attached  to  it  (Plutarch,  Sept,  Sap.  Conviv,  2),  and  there  were
ship-sheds  beside  the  harbour  (Xenophon,  HelletUca^  iv.  4.  12).  At  the
beginning  of  our  era  the  population  was  small  (Strabo,  /.r.)  Travellers
from  Rome  to  Athens  seem  to  have  landed  in  Lechaeum,  crossed  the
Isthmus  on  foot,  and  then  taken  boat  to  Piraeus  ;  at  least  this  was  the
way  by  which  the  love-sick  Propertius  proposed  to  journey  to  Athens,
hoping  there  in  the  study  of  art  or  literature  to  forget  his  love  (Propertius,
iv.  21.  i^  sqq.)  Lechaeum  has  now  wholly  disappeared.  Its  harbour
is  nothing  but  a  shallow  lagoon  surrounded  by  dreary  sand  dunes.  But
traces  of  the  long  walls  which  united  the  port  town  to  Corinth  can  still
be  discerned  ;  and  there  are  remains  of  three  moles  running  out  into  the
sea,  at  one  of  which  Bursian  found  the  pedestal  of  the  statue  of  a  Roman
proconsul,  Flavius  Hermogenes.  See  Leake,  Morea^  3.  p.  234  ;  Boblaye,
Recherches^  P*  37  ^9-  »  Curtius,  Peloponnesos,  2.  p.  536  sq.\  Vischer,
Erinnerungen  und  Eindriickey  p.  266  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  18  jy. ;
Meliarakes,  Fcwypac^ia  *A/jyoAtSo5,  p.  112.  The  existing  traces  of  the
Long  Walls  to  Lechaeum  are  described  by  Mr.  Skias  in  IX/DafcrifccL
T^s 'A/)X«^o^oy*'<^? 'Erat/otas  for  1892,  p.  116.

2.  3.  a  temple  of  Artemis.  The  image  of  Artemis  in  this  temple
appears  to  be  represented  on  bronze  coins  of  Septimius  Severus  and
Plautilla.  The  goddess  is  portrayed  as  a  huntress  in  a  temple.  But  the
image  thus  represented  is  clearly  not  the  archaic  wooden  image
mentioned  by  Pausanias,  but  a  later  statue  such  as  the  Greeks  from  the
fifth  century  onwards  sometimes  set  up  in  temples  in  place  of  older
images,  which  were,  however,  retained  in  the  background.  See  Imhoof-
Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  on  Paus.  p.  1 8,  with  pi.  D  Ixviii.


at  It  CENCHKEAE  17

%.  ].  Oanchnae.  Cenchreae,  tfae  pan  of  Corinth  on  the  eastern
sideof  the  Isthmus  (Stiabo,  viii.  p.  380),  retains  its  ancient  name  in  the
fbnn  Cuhriais,  though  the  place  has  shrunk  to  two  poor  cottages.
Even  in  Strabo's  time  it  was  merely  a  village  beside  the  harbour.  The
ipadous  bay  is  protected  on  the  north  and  south  by  projecting  head-
lanis;  on  ^e  east  it  is  open.  The  boundary  on  the  south  is  a  line  of
sleep  hnghts ;  on  the  north  the  hills  recede  further,  leaving  a  stretch  of
Sit  land  between  them  and  the  sea.  On  the  landward  side  rises  a  broad
ridge;  [he  numerous  foundation- walls  on  it  prove  that  here  stood  the
poit'lown.  Beside  the  bay  there  are  many  remains  of  antiquity,  includ-
ing a  long  row  of  massive  blocks  of  stone,  the  remnant  of  a  quay  which
ran  along  the  irmer  side  of  the  harbour.  On  the  other  sides  of  the  bay
■Doles  jut  out  into  the  water ;  they  seem  to  have  been  intended  partly  to
divide  the  harbour  into  separate  basins,  partly  to  serve  as  breakwaters
sbettenng  it  seaward.  Pausanias's  brief  description  of  the  port-town  is
■dl  illustrated  by  a  coin  of  Antoninus  Pius,  On  the  obverse  the  port
rf  Cenchreae  is  represented  as  a  semicircular  basin  enclosed  between
1"0  promontories  ;  on  the  extremity  of  each  of
tbese  promontories  is  a  temple  ;  and  in  the  see
the  entrance  of  the  harbour  there  is  a  statue
Poseidon  standing  with  a  dolphin  in  one  hand  and  i
)  nideiil  in  the  other.  See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  f
OaidDcr,  Num.  Comm.  on  Paus.  p,  17,  with  pi.  I
Dlt  Combining  the  information  derived  from  '
Ibis  coin  with  Pausanias's  description  we  infer  that
M  one  extremity  of  the  harbour  there  was  a  temple
1^  Aphrodite,  and  at  the  other  extremity  sanctuaries  nc.  4.  —  cehchhae
if  Aesculapius  and  Isis,  and  that  at  some  inter-  "'th  statue  or
mediate  point  a  mole  running  out  into  the  harbour  k)sbidoh(coiu»th-
npported  an  image  of  Poseidon.   See  Dodwell,  Tiww',

1.  p.  194  sg.  \  Leake,  Morea,  3.  p.  234  sg.  ;  Curtius,  Peloponnesos,  2.
?■  537  -«y-  i  Vischer,  Erinnerungen  und  Eindriicke,  p.  266  sq.  ;  Philipp-
soo,  in  Zeitschrift  d.  GisiH.  f.  Erdkuitde  zu  Btrtin^  23  (1890),  p.  95.
2.  3.  a  bronxe  inutge  of  Poseidon.  On  some  Corinthian  coins  (Fig.
5)  Poseidon  is  represented  standing  naked  with
a  dolphin  in  one  hand  and  a  trident  in  the  other,
"a  figure  well  adapted  for  execution  in  bronte  and
for  a  statue  of  great  size."  As  Poseidon  appears
in  exactly  the  same  attitude  on  the  Corinthian
coin  which  represents  the  harbour  of  Cenchreae
(sec  preceding  note),  we  may  safely  infer  that  the
image  of  Poseidon  on  all  these  coins  is  a  copy
siDOH  AT  of  the  one  at  Cenchreae,  which  Pausanias  mentions.
i(coiiHTH-  The  image  would  seem  to  have  been  of  colossal
siie,  and  was  therefore  probably  set  up  after  the
of  Corinth  in  44  B.C.  ;  for  if  it  had  belonged  to  the  old  city,
<lc  rapacious  Mummius  would  hardly  have  spared  such  a  mass  of
■eaL  See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  on  Faus.  p.
IT.  with  pL  D  Ui.  Ixii.  Ixiii.
TOI,  in  C


i8  THE  BATH  OF  HELEN  bk.  ii.  corinth

2.  3.  the  bath  of  Helen.  "  The  bath  of  Helene  is  found  at  a
mile  to  the  southward  of  the  port  of  Kekhriis  [Cenchreae],  near  a  cape
forming  the  termination  of  the  ridge  which  borders  the  Isthmus  on  the  ,
south,  and  which,  at  the  western  end,  is  separated  from  the  Acn>-
corinthus  by  a  ravine  watered  by  a  small  river.  The  cape  separates
the  bay  of  KekMis  from  that  which  takes  its  name  of  Galatdki  firom  a  -
village  near  the  shore.  The  water  of  the  bath  of  Helene  rises  at  such
a  height  and  distance  above  the  sea,  that  it  serves  to  turn  a  mill  in  its
passage.  The  water  is  tepid  as  Fausanias  has  remarked "  (Leake,
Morea,  3.  p.  335  sg.)  "The  stream  that  issues  from  the  rock  forms
a  deep  bath  several  yards  above  the  level  of  the  sea  ;  the  water  is
beautifully  clear,  rather  saline,  and  in  a  small  degree  tepid.  Instead  of
falling  immediately  into  the  sea,  which,  according  to  Pausanias,  was
originally  the  case,  it  is  diverted  from  its  original  course  by  ditches,  and
a  large  mill  is  turned  by  the  rapidity  of  its  current,  which,  after  a  course
of  a  few  hundred  yards,  enters  the  sea  near  a  round  promontory  "  (Dod-
well,  Tour,  3.  p.  195).  The  neighbourhood  is  hence  called  Muloi,  'the
rmW  {CaniMs,  Pel^onnisos,  2.  p.  538).  Cp.  Clarke,  Travels,  3.  p.  760;
Boblaye,  Reeherches,  p.  39.  Fiedler  {Reise,  I.  p.  245  Jf.)  found  the
temperature  of  the  water  only  2  Reaumur,  and  therefore  denies  that  the
water  can  be  called  warm.  On  the  other  hand  he  testifies  to  the
brackish  character  of  the  water  ;  for  he  observed  sea-anemones  growing
in  it,  such  as  he  never  observed  in  any  other  spring.  Mr.  Philippsoo
describes  the  spring  as  both  salt  and  tepid  (Peloponnes,  p.  32  j^.)

2,  4.  a  grove  of  cypresses  named  Oranenin.  In  this  grove  there
was  a  gymnasium,  which  was  frequented  by  Diogenes  the  Cynic ;  it
was  here  that  Diogenes  was  visited  by  Alexander  the  Great,  whom  he
requested  to  stand  out  of  the  snn  (Diogenes  Laertius,  vi.  2.  77;  Dio
Chrysostom,  Or.  vi.  vol.  I,  p.  66,  ed.  Dindorf ;  id..  Or.  viii.  vol  1.  p.
144111/.,  Or.  ix.  vol.  I.  p.  [52;  Lucian,  Quomodokist.conscri6.Zi
Timaeus,  Lexicon,  s.v.  Kpaviov  ;  Plutarch,  Alexander,  14).  It  seems
to  have  been  the  favourite  suburb  of  Corinth  (Plutarch,  Zfe  «:i/io,  6),
and  was  famed  for  the  serenity  and  purity  of  its  air  (Theophrastus,  De
causis  plant,  v.  14.  2).  Crowds  of  fashionable  loungers  assembled  here
about  noon,  and  the  place  swarmed  with  women  hawking  fruit  and
cake  (Alciphron,  Epist.  iii.  60).  The  suburb  is  mentioned  also  by
Xenophon  [Nellenica,  iv.  4,  4).  Guttling  was  disposed  to  place  the
"  park-like  suburb  "  of  Craneum  (the  name  of  which
he  derives  from  itp^vij  a  fountain  or  water-basin)
the  neighbourhood  of  the  spring  called  'the
bath  of  Aphrodite '  (see  below,  note  on  Pirene,  3.  a).
I  See  C.  Gottling,  '  Die  Quelle  Pirene  auf  Akroko-
rinth  und  das  Kraneion  unterhalb  Korinth,'  Archao-
iQgische  ZHtung,  2  (1844),  pp.  326-330.

2.  4-  &  pretunct  of  Bellerophon.     On  copper

ric.   6.  —  BELLwopHDH   coins  of  Corinth  we  find  Bellerophon  and  his  steed

AiiuPBCAsu»(coHin-    Pegasus  represented  in  various  ways.    One  of  them

TKiAK  coin).  jjj^j,  perhaps  reproduce  a  statue  which  stood  in  the

precinct.      See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  on  Paus.


CH.  II  GRA  VE  OF  LAIS  19

p.  13,  with  pi.  C  xxv-xxx.     One  of  these  coins  (Fig.  6)  shows  Bellero-
I^n  watering  Pegasus  at  the  foot  of  the  acropohs.

2.  4-  BUck  Aphrodite.  The  Black  Aphrodite  of  Corinth  is  men-
tioned by  Atbenaeus  (xiii.  p.  588  c).  See  also  Pausanias,  viii.  6.  S  ;
ix.  37.  5.  At  Delphi  there  was  a  small  image  of  the  Sepulchral
Aphrodite  (K^po&int  'KwiTv/i0ia),  beside  which  the  dead  were  invoked
to  come  and  partake  of  the  libations  offered  to  them  (Plutarch,  Qua^st.
Rom.  33).  Holwerda  is  inclined  to  regard  the  Black  Aphrodite  as  a
goddess  of  the  grave,  like  the  Venus  Libilina  of  the  Romans,  and  he
regards  as  probable  the  view  of  Engel  that  there  was  an  Aphrodite  Fury,
like  the  Demeter  Fury  of  Thelpusa  (Paus.  viii.  25.  4),  comparing
Hesychius,  'Epivvuf*  £ai/uiiv  Karajf^dvios  xf  'A<)tpoSiTri^  f'SuiKoy  (Hol-
nerda,  Die  alien  Kyprier  in  Kunst  und  Cultus,  p.  56  sq.)

1  4-  tliB  graT«  of  LaiB  etc  Polemo  is  the  authority  for  the
staiement  that  Lais  was  buried  in  Thessaly.  According  to  him  her
giave  was  beside  the  Peneus  and  was  surmounted  by  a  water-pot  carved
iasiDfie,  the  symbol  which  marked  the  grave  of  an  unmarried  woman,
te  Athenaeus,  xiii.  p.  589  ab  ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Pluius,  179  ;
Wntarch,  Ama/grius,  2 1  ;  Polemo,  Frag.  44,  ed.  Preller.  The  name
rfhH  Thessalian  lover  is  variously  given  as  Pausanias  (Athenaeus,  I.e.),
Enrylochus  or  Aristonicus  (Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  I.e.),  and  Hip-
polodias  (Plutarch,  I.e.)  The  authority  for  the  statement  that  Lais  was
Iwried  at  Corinth  seems  to  have  been  Timaeus  ;  cp.  Preller  on  Polemo,
F^.  44.  Of  the  two  epitaphs  of  Lais  which  have
beat  preserved  (see  next  note)  the  one  recorded  by
Soidsa  would  seem  to  be  more  appropriate  to  her
Kwib  at  Corinth.  On  Corinthian  bronze  coins  be-  ,
longing  to  the  period  of  independence  and  also  to
^igeof  Septimius  Severus  and  Geta,  the  monument
of  Lais  is  represented  as  a  lioness  standing  over  a
|*n«iate  ram  on  the  top  of  a  Doric  column  (Fig.  7).  fig.  7.  —  monuhkiit
TIm  bead  on  the  obverse  of  the  coins  may  be  either  or  i.«ia  (corim-
A[Arodite  or  Lais  herself  See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  tmiam  com).
Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  on  Paus.  p.  ig,  with  pi.  E  Ixxiv.  Ixxv.  Ixxvi.

2.  ;.  aootber  tomb which  claims  etc.    The  verb  is  ^luvov,

Cpk  i.  17.  4  ;  vi.  19.  6.  In  Greek  sepulchral  and  dedicatory  inscriptions
llie  dead  person  or  the  thing  dedicated  is  often  represented  speaking
io  the  first  person,  "I  am  so  and  so,"  "So  and  so  dedicated  me."
Eiamples  are  too  common  to  be  cited.  Often  also  in  sepulchral
iaicriptions  the  tomb  itself  or  the  headstone  is  introduced  as  speaking,
"I  am  the  tomb  of  Myrrina,  who  died  of  the  plague,"  "  I  am  a  head-
itooe  on  the  tomb  of  Xenareus,  the  son  of  Mixis,"  etc.  See  Kaibel,
Epigrammaia  Craeca,  Nos.  ti,  181,  474,  574.  *6o3,  625,  *648,  665,
679,  843  ;  Roehl,  /.  C.  A.  No.  344  ;  Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr.  Oraec'
.  No.  426  ;  Roberts,  Creek  Epigraphy,  Nos.  49,  96,  100,  127  c,  158  d,
1J7  h  A  Greek  elegiac  inscription  at  Rome,  which  marked  the  grave
rf  a  race-horse,  is  composed  in  the  form  of  a  dialogue  between  the
headstone  and  a  passer-by.  "  Marble  headstone,  whose  grave  are
jw?"     "The  grave  of  a  fleet  horse"  etc.     (Kaibel,  op.  cit.  No.  635).


20  CORINTH  BK.  II.  CORINTH

The  inscription  of  the  Thessalian  tomb  of  Lais  is  given  by  Athenaeus
(xiii.  p.  589  b).  It  is  not  written  in  the  first  person  ;  but  on  the  other
hand  in  the  epitaph  of  Lais  which  Suidas  {5,v.  W^iprqvn])  has  preserved,
the  tomb  is  represented  speaking  in  the  first  person —

AatS*  tybi  TToXt^Tiv  €vf(i>voto  KopCvdov
Utiprjvqs  X.€VK(av  <f>aL8por€pav  kifiaSiav.

*<  I  contain  Lais,  a  citizeness  of  well-girt  Corinth,  a  woman  brighter  than
Pirene's  limpid  drops."

2.  6.  the  city.  Strabo  visited  Corinth  soon  after  it  had  been
rebuilt  by  the  Romans,  and  he  described  its  situation  and  extent.  He
says  that  it  occupied  a  level  tableland  close  to  the  northern  foot  of  the
Acro-Corinth,  the  mountain-citadel  of  Corinth.  The  city  was  40  Greek
furlongs  or  about  4^  miles  in  circumference,  and  was  surrounded  by  a
wall  wherever  it  was  not  protected  by  the  Acro-Corinth.  The  Acro-
Corinth  was  also  encompassed  by  the  wall,  except  where  the  mountain
was  too  steep  to  admit  of  it.  The  entire  circuit  of  the  city  and  the
Acro-Corinth  together  was  about  85  Greek  furlongs  or  about  9^  miles
(Strabo,  viii.  p.  379).  The  number  of  slaves  at  Corinth  is  said  to  have
been  460,000  (Athenaeus,  vi.  p.  272  b).  Diogenes  the  Cynic  praised
the  summer  climate  of  Corinth  ;  the  breezes  from  the  sea  on  both  sides
cooled  the  air,  and  the  mighty  shadow  of  the  Acro-Corinth  was  a  pro-
tection from  the  glare  of  the  sun  (Dio  Chrysostom,  Or,  vi.  vol.  i.  p.  96,
ed.  Dindorf).  The  account  which  Mr.  Philippson  gives  of  the  climate
of  Corinth  is  less  favourable.  He  says :  'Mn  summer  the  sea  winds,
which  sweep  freely  over  the  Isthmus,  bring  some  refreshment.  On  the
whole  the  atmosphere  here  is  almost  never  at  rest,  neither  in  summer
nor  in  winter.  In  winter  frightful  storms  rage  from  the  west,  creating
a  surf  on  the  shore  of  the  Isthmus  har^l^rfess  heavy  than  on  coasts  that
face  the  open  sea.  In  summer  the  sea  wind  blows  for  days  together
so  strongly,  especially  in  New  Corinth,  that  it  becomes  a  regular  plague.
It  drives  before  it  whirls  of  dust  and  clouds  of  sharp  sea-sand,  covering
everything  with  a  yellow  layer"  (ZHtschrift  d,  Ges,  f.  Erdkunde  zu
Berlin^  25  (1890),  p.  64  sg,)

The  site  of  ancient  Corinth  is  a  spacious  rocky  plateau,  about  200
feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  at  the  northern  foot  of  the  Acro-Corinth.
On  its  northern  edge  this  plateau  falls  away  steeply  to  a  second  lower
terrace,  which  extends  towards  the  sea.  Some  remains  of  the  ancient
city- walls  may  still  be  seen.  See  Curtius,  Peloponnesos,  2.  p.  523  sq. ;
Vischer,  Erinnerungen  und  Eindriicke^  pp.  257,  262.

2.  6.  adorned  with  red  iMunt.  Painted  statues  are  mentioned  by
Pausanias  elsewhere.  Thus  he  describes  two  images  of  Dionysus  both
painted  vermilion  (vii.  26.  11  ;  viii.  39.  6) ;  a  statue  of  Dionysus,  made
of  gypsum  and  painted  (ix.  32.  i);  and  a  wooden  image  of  Athena
adorned  with  paint  and  gilding  (viii.  26.  4).  See  Schubart,  in  Netu
Jahrbiicher  f,  PhiloL  und  Paedagog,  109  (1874),  p.  28  sq.  The  face  of
the  statue  ox  Jupiter  on  the  Capitol  at  Rome  was  painted  vermilion  on
festival  days,  and  one  of  the  first  duties  of  the  censors  was  to  contract
for  the  painting  of  Jupiter's  face.     Roman  generals  in  celebrating  their


CH.  II  PAINTED  IMAGES  21

triumph  had  their  faces  reddened  with  vermilion  in  imitation  of  the  red-
faced  statue  of  Jupiter.     Pliny  says  that  in  Ethiopia  the  chiefs  and  the
images  of  the  gods  were  painted  red.     See  Pliny,  N,  H,  xxxiii.  1 1 1  sq,y
XXXV.   157  ;    Servius  on  Virgil,  EcL  vi.    22,  x.  27;   Isidore,  Origines^
xviiu  2.  6.     The  stone  gods  of  the  Gonds  were  smeared  day  and  night
with  red  ochre  by  the  priests  (Panjab  Notes  and  Queries^  2  (1885),  p.
127).     The  images  of  Hanuman  are  always  smeared  with  vermilion
and  oil  (Monier  Williams,  Religious  thought  and  life  in  India^  p.  221).
Amongst  the  Marias  of  the  Mardian  hills  the  stone  which  represents
the  goddess  of  small-pox  is  dabbed  with  red  paint  {Proceed,  R,  Geogr,
Soc.  N.  S.  I  (1879),  p.  380).     On  the  Loango  Coast  (Africa)  the  idol
Chikokko  was  painted  red  by  the  priests,  when  they  desired  inspiration.
**The  emblem   of  Kissongo  by  which  oaths   are    taken  among   the
Kimbunda  is  (according  to  Magyar)  smeared  with  red  paint  instead  of
with  blood,  just  as  in  India  and  elsewhere  the  idols  are  often  smeared
with  red  paint  instead  of  with  blood  "  (Bastian,  Die  deutsche  Expedition
an  dir  Loango-Kiiste^  i.  p.  270).      It  is  a  very  common  custom  among
peoples  of  many  lands  to  smear  the  blood  of  a  sacrifice  upon  the  idol.
Sec  Tijdschrift  v.  Indische  Taal-  Land-  en  Volkenkunde^  26  (1880),  p.
152;  A.  Bastian,  A  Her  lei  aus   Volks-  und  Menschenkunde^   i.  p.  213
sq. ;  Blumentritt,   *  Der  Ahnencultus  und  die  religiosen  Anschauungen
dcr  Malaien  des  Philippinen-Archipels,*  Mittheilungen  d.  Wiener  geogr.
Gfsell.  1882,  p.  174  (cp.  p.  203)  ;  Jessen,  De  Einnorum  Lapponumque
Norwegicorum   religione  pagana^  p.  47  (bound  with  Leemius,  De  Lap-
fonibus  Finmarchiae^  etc   Copenhagen,    1767);  Yule,  Cathay  and  the
"soay  thither^   2.   p.    555  note;  Gmelin,  Reise  durch  Sibirien^  2.  p.  214
iy. ;  Moura,  Royaume  du  Cambodge^    i.   p.  431  ;  Bouche,  La  cSte  des
Esdaves^   pp.    100,    120;  E.    Rae,  The   White  Sea  peninsula^  p.  142;
Fr.  Kunstmann,  *  Valentin  Ferdinand's  Beschreibung  der  Serra  Leoa,'
Abkandl,  d  histor,  Classe  d,  k'on,  Bayer,  Akad,  d,  Wissen,  9  (Munich,
1866),  p.  133;  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  Royal  Commentaries  of  the  Vncas,
Pt  i.  bk.  i.  ch.  1 1  ;  Wellhausen,  Reste  arabischen  Heidentumes^  pp.  50,
113;  A.   B.   Ellis,    Tshi'Speaking  peoples  of  the  Gold  Coasts  pp.  23,  50,
51,  52  ;  Cieza  de  Leon,  Second  Part  of  the  Chronicle  of  Peru  (Hakluyt
Society,  1883),  p.  95.     Sometimes  the  blood  of  the  victim  is  specially
smeared  on  the  idol's  face.     See  Kunstmann,  op.  cit.  p.  131;  Rae,  op,
cit.  p.  150;  Labat,  LJ^thiopie  Ocddentale,  i.  p.  250.     Sometimes  again
the  blood  is  applied  specially  to  the  idol's    mouth.      See    Sahagun,
Histoire  ginirale  des  chose s  de  la  Nouvelle  Espagne,  p.  185  ;   Voyages
«r  Nordf  8  (Amsterdam,  1727),  p.  414  j^. ;  Gmelin,  op,  cit,  2.  p.  476.
Again,  savages  often  smear  their  own  bodies,  and  especially  their  faces,
with  the  blood  of  their  slain  or  wounded  enemies.     See  fount.  Royal
Geogr,   Soc,   27  (1857),  p.   305  ;  Ross  Cox,  The  Columbia  River^  2,  p.
336 ;    Lafitau,   Moeurs  des  sauvages  Amdriquains^    2.    pp.   277,    288,
304;  Chateaubriand,  Voyage  en  Am/rique  (Pslus,  Michel  Levy,  1870),
p.  213  ;  Junghuhn,   Die  Battaldnder  auf  Sumatra^  2.  p.  332  ;   Labat,
op.  cit.  2,  p.  292.     There  are  various  other  occasions  on  which  savages
smear  themselves  with  human  or  animal  blood.     Thus  the  blood  of  the
sacrifice  is  sometimes  smeared  on  the  worshippers  as  well  as  on  the


22  CORINTH  BK.  II.  CORINTH

idol ;  sometimes  the  worshippers  also  drink  the  blood.  See  Bouche,
op,  cit,  p.  loo;  Voyages  au  Nord^  Lc, ;  Labat,  op,  cit  i.  p.  250;  /V/.,
2.  p.  242  ;  Spencer  St.  John,  Ufe  in  the  forests  of  the  far  East,  i,  p.
179.  For  other  occasions  on  which  savages  smear  themselves  with
blood  see  Munzinger,  Ostafrikanische  Studien^  p.  310;  Acosta,  History
of  the  Indies  (Hakluyt  Society),  2.  p.  373  ;  W.  Robertson  Smith,
Kinship  and  marriage  in  early  Arabia^  p.  1^7.  sq,\  Ellis,  Polynesian
Researches^  i.  p.  290;  Edmund  Spenser,  View  of  the  state  of  Ireland^
p.  I  o  I  (in  Morley's  Ireland  under  Elizabeth  and  James  /.)  ;  Asiatick
Researches^  4.  pp.  77,  78,  79 ;  Azara,  Voyages  dans  VAmMque
Mdridionale^  2.  p.  136.  The  red  paint  with  which  savages  often
stain  their  bodies  may  sometimes  be  a  substitute  for  blood,  though
oftener  perhaps  it  is  merely  ornamental.  Cp.  Herodotus,  iv.  191  ;
Valerius  Maximus,  ii.  i.  5  ;  Scheffer,  Lapponia^  p.  235  sq,\  S.  Heame,
Journey  to  the  Northern  Ocean^  p.  235.  The  red  paint  with  which
images  of  the  gods  are  often  smeared  (see  above)  may  in  many  cases
be  a  substitute  for  blood.

2.  7.  getting  np  into  a  tree.  According  to  Euripides  (Bacchaey
1064  sq,)  and  Philostratus  {Imag,  i.  17)  the  tree  was  a  pine-tree;
according  to  Theocritus  (xxvi.  1 1)  it  was  a  mastich-trec.  The  pine-tree
was  especially  sacred  to  Dionysus  (Plutarch,  Quaest.  Conviv,  v.  3).

2.  8.  a  sanctuary  of  all  the  gods.  There  was  a  pantheon  at
Athens,  built  by  Hadrian  (i.  5.  5  ;  i.  18.  8);  another  at  Omeae  in
Argolis  (ii.  25.  6);  another  at  Marius  in  Laconia  (iii.  22.  8);  and
another  at  Messene  (iv.  32.  i).

2.  8.  a  water-basin.  The  Greek  is  K/n/v?;,  which  in  Pausanias
appears  generally  to  mean  a  conduit,  cistern,  or  artificial  water-basin^
sometimes  open  and  sometimes  roofed.  See  i.  40.  i  etm  8c  cv  t^
TrdXet  Kprqvri^  Kai  <r<f>uriv  t^Ko86firi(r€  0€ay€vrjs  .  .  .  t^v  Kpi^vrfv  fuykSovi
€V€Ka  Kal  Koa-fiov  Kal  €S  to  ir\rj6os  tQv  Kioviav  Okas  d^lav  Kot  vStop  €9
avTTjv  p€u  ii.  3.  3  K€K6(rfirfTai  8k  ij  ^VV^  kiOtp  XevK(^,  Kal  TrcTroti^/Acva
ccttIk  oiKYJfJLara  (TTnyXatots  Kara  ravra,  e^  &v  to  vStap  €S  Kpn^VTjv
xnraiSpov  ptt,  ii.  3.  5  Kpv\vai  5^  iroWaX  jmv  dva  rrjv  irokiv  waroirjvrat,
iraxraVy  art  d<l>$6vov  pkovros  (r<f>uTi.v  vSaros  .  .  .  6ka^  Sc  /xaXwrra  a^La,
ri  irapa  to  ayakjia  rb  rrjs  * AprkfiiSo^,  Kal  6  3€kX.€po<f>6vTrjs  cwcoTt,  koI
rh  vSiap  ot  81  oirkrjs  imrov  pet  toO  Hrfyaxrov,  ii.  27.  5  Kpn/jvif  r^  t€
opoffxf  Kol  Kocrpm^  t<^  koiwi^  Okas  ai^la,  ii.  27.  7  cXvt/oov  Kprrjvqs  cs  o
TO  vSiap  (rvX.\ky€rai  <r<f>ixri.  rh  €K  tov  Seov.  ii.  35.  3  Kprjvas  8k  t^v  fikv
(r<f>6Spa  l[)^ov(riv  dp)(aiav,  ks  Sk  avrrjv  ov  <f>av€p(as  rh  v8<ap  kc^tcutav,
cTTiXciTroi  8k  ovK  dv  7roT€,  ov8*  €1  TraKTCS  Karapdvrei  v8pf.viavrai  i^  avr^s*
Tr]v  8'  e<^'  riiilav  TTciroti^Kao'tv,  ovopxi  8k  coTi  T<p  X^P^V  Aci/muv,  oOev  ^t
rb  v8<ap  cs  avrrjv,  x.  4.  I  and  x.  1 2.  6  vSotp  KaT€p\6/jL€V0V  €S  Kprjvrjv,
However  he  seems  occasionally  to  use  Kprjvi]  as  equivalent  to  Ttfyrj
<a  spring.'  See  viii.  16.  i  ;  ix.  10.  5.  But  perhaps  even  in  these
cases  he  really  distinguished  between  the  spring  and  the  masonry  which
enclosed  it.

2.  8.  Apollo  snmamed  Olarian.     Cp.  vii.  5.  4.

2.  8.  Hermogenes  of  Cythera.  This  artist  appears  not  to  be
mentioned  elsewhere.     Brunn  {Gesch,  d,  griech.  ICunstler,   i.  p.  522)


CH.  Ill  CORINTH  23

b  indioed  to  assign  Hennogenes  to  the  period  of  Greek  freedom  ;
but  one  of  his  groiuids  for  so  doing  seems  to  rest  on  a  misunderstanding
of  the  words  of  Pausanias,  11.  2.  6  to  Sc  xoXAa  aurui'  (Ti  t^  &xfJ^%
irwijftf  -nfi  \xntpo\,  which  Bninn  appears  to  understand  of  the  period
previous  to  the  destruction  of  Corinth  by  Muttimius.

3.  1.  »  templfl  of  OctBvia.  On  Corinthian  coins  of  Augustus,
Uvia,  and  Tiberius  there  are  representations  of  the  fa^de  of  a  temple
which  bears  on  the  frieie  the  inscription  CAESAR,  AUGUSTUS,  or
GEHT.  lULI,  Again,  on  Corinthian  coins  of  Tiberius  and  Agrippa,
Julia,  Livia,  or  Octavia  is  represented  seated,  holding  sceptre  and  patera.
"It  vould  seem  probable  from  comparison  of  the  coins  that  the  temple
described  by  Pausanias  as  that  of  Octavia  was  really
<f  the  Gens  Julia.  T^e  seated  lady  holding  sceptre
and  patera  may  be  copied  from  the  statue  in  this
temple.  In  details  it  exactly  resembles  the  figure  on
te  coins  of  Tiberius  commonly  called  Livia,  but  more
ptohably  standing  for  a  personification  of  the  Gens
JiiBa.  Such  a  personification  would  naturally  take  the
fcatmcs  of  one  of  the  imperial  ladies,  Livia  or  Julia  or  fig.  s.— temfli  op
Octavia.  If  in  the  Corinthian  temple  the  cultus-  ocT*viA(eomB.
9Xat  represented  the  Gens  Julia  in  the  likeness  of  '■"'*"  com).
Ocuvia,  then  it  would  be  very  natural  for  any  visitor  to  suppose  that
Ae  temple  was  dedicated  to  Octavia"  (Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,
Hum.  Comm.  on  Paus.  p.  22,  with  pi.  Exciv.)  In  the  collection  of
Bum  Roger  there  is  a  fine  cameo  portrait  of  Octavia  engraved  on  a
urdonyx.  It  is  figured  in  GtxaeHe  ArcUologique,  i  (1875),  pt.  31  ;  cp.
ibe  remarks  of  De  Witte  on  it,  pp.  121-124.

3.  I.  tlie  road  that  leads  to  Lechaeom.     In  1892  Mr.  Skias,

aodocting  excavations  at  Corinth  on  behalf  of  the  Greek  Archaeological

Society,  found  two  ancient  roads  leading  north  from  the  site  of  ancient

Corinth  to  Lechaeum.      Both  roads  retain  many  pieces  of  the  ancient

jMKinent,  composed  of  large  quadrangular  blocks  of  stone,  and  are

Ibed  on  both  sides  by  countless  graves  both  of  the  Greek  and  Roman

periods.     One  of  these  roads  is  probably  the  one  which,  as  we  learn

^^^^^  from   Pausanias,  led  from  the  market-place  to   Le-

^^^^^^^k         chaeum.     Mr.  Skias  thinks  that  here  and  in  §  4

^^^^^^^^^^     Pausanias  is  speaking  of  two  separate  roads  both

^^^^^^^^^^k  leading  from  Corinth  to  Lechaeum  ;  but  this  seems

^^^^^^HH^H   to  be  a  mistake.    See  npaiiTtKa  r^;  'Apx^toAoyiic^

^^^^^^HB^H  'Eraipi'as  for  1892,  p.  112  sqq.

^^^^^^^B^V  3.  2.  a   portal   etc.      On   copper   Corinthian

^^^^^H^^      coins  of  Domician,  Hadrian,  Antoninus  Pius,  Com-

^^^^^  modus,  and  Marcus  Aurelius  a  gateway  is  repre-

nt    ».  —  roiTAi    OF   sented   surmounted  by  a  four-horse  chariot ;  it   is

nirTiAB  coiMl  probably  the   portal  described  by  Pausanias.      On

the  coins  of   the   three   latter  emperors   the  gate-

ny  is  triple,  thai  is,  there  are    three  openings  in  it.     See  Imhoof-

Nmner  and   Gardner,  Num.    Comm.   on  Paus.   p.  22,  with  pi.  F  xcvii.

■criiL  xcix.  c      On  other  Corinthian  copper  coins  of  Imperial  date


PIRENE


the  Sun  is  represented  driving  in  a  four-faorse  chariot  (Fig.  lo).
This  may  be  a  copy  of  the  chariot  of  the  Sun
mentioned  by  Pausanias.  See  Imhoof •  Blumer
and  Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  on  Paiu.  p.  32,  with

\  pi.  F  ci.  cii.

3.  2.  Fiiene.  Pausanias  differs  from  Strabo  in
'  his  identification  of  the  spring  Pirene.  For  whereas
Pausanias  places  Pirene  on  the  road  leading  from
the  market-place  to  Lechaeum,  Strabo  (viii.  p.
379)  places  it  on  the  Acro-Corinth,  just  under  the
(coniHTHiAH  coin).  summit.  This  latter  spring  is  described  by  Pau-
sanias below  (ii.  5.  t),  where  he  mentions  that  some
people  regarded  it  as  the  true  Pirene.  The  lower  spring  which  he  him-
self took  to  be  Pirene  is  now  known  as  '  the  bath  of  Aphrodite.'  It
issues  just  below  the  steep  northern  edge  of  the  broad  terrace  on  which
the  old  city  of  Corinth  stood.  Here  the  rocks  curve  round  in  a  semi-
circle and  overhang  so  as  to  form  grottos  under  their  beetling  brows.
From  these  rocks,  overgrown  with  moss  and  rank  creepers,  the  clear
water  bubbles  and  trickles  in  copious  rills,  which  nourish  a  rich  vegeta-
tion in  the  open  ground  through  which  they  flow.  The  grotto,  which  is
always  fresh  and  cool,  commands  an  uninterrupted  view  over  the  Gulf  to
the  mountains  beyond.  Here  in  the  days  of  the  Turkish  dominion  the
bey  of  Corinth  had  his  gardens,  where  he  led  a  life  of  Asiatic  luxury.  A
marble  staircase  still  leads  from  the  grotto  to  the  terrace  above,  on  the
edge  of  which  stood  his  seiaglio.  All  is  now  ruin  and  desolation.
A  few  pieces  of  ancient  columns  of  green  and  white  streaked  marble
mark  the  site  of  the  seraglio.  The  spring  is
frequented  only  by  washerwomen,  and  its  streams
water  only  vegetable  gardens  and  orchards.  But
the  water  is  as  sweet  as  in  Pausanias's  time,  and
the  grottos  under  the  overhanging  ledge  of  rock
are  doubtless  "the  chambers  made  like  grottos"
of  which  he  makes  mention.  See  Leake,  Morea,
3.  p.  242  sg,  ;  Fiedler,  Rase,  i.  p.  241  sg.  ;  Golt-
ling,  '  Die  Quelle  Pirene  auf  Akrokorinth  und  das

•  Kraneion  unterhalb  Korinth,'  '  t„,*„  com).
Archaologische  Zeitung,  2
(1844),  pp.  326-330  ;  Vischer,  Erintterangen  und
EindrUcke,  p.  263  ;  Curtius,  Peloponnesos,  2.  p.
526  sq.;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  16.  According  to
GSttling  (/.c)  the  water  of  the  spring  leaves  an
ochre-like  deposit,  and  he  suggested  that  this  may
have  given  a  colour  to  the  bronze  which,  as  Pau-
PIC.  II— P1IISMI  (co«-  ^"'**  remarks  immediately,  used  to  be  tempered
iHTHiAH  COIN).         by  being  plunged  into  the  spring.

On  Corinthian  coins  of  the  empire  Pirene  is
portrayed  as  a  seated  nymph,  her  left  hand  resting  on  the  rock,  her
right  hand  holding  a  pitcher;  on  some  of  them  (Fig.  11)  a  snake  is
represented  standing  erect  behind  her;  on  others  (Fig.  12)  Pegasus  i>


CH.  Ill  CORINTH  as

represented  drinking  at  the  fountain  in  front  of  her.  As  the  figure  of
Pirene  is  repeated  without  variation  on  the  coins  of  several  reigns,  it
is  probably  copied  from  a  statue  which  adorned  the  spring.  See
Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Comnt.  on  Paus.  p.  33,  with  p).
F  cv.  cvi.  cviL  cviii.  On  tlie  mythical  connexion  of  serpents  with  water
see  note  on  ix.  10.  ;,

3.  3.  gats  its  colonr.  The  Greek  is  ^aim/rB<u.  The  addition  of
iTi  Tov  v&iTos  TovTov  shows  thai  pd-inta-Oai  cannot  mean  merely  "  is
dipped  in"  the  water,  as  Prof  Curtius  {Ptlop.  2.  p.  530)  appears  to
take  it-  On  the  colouring  of  bronze  in  antiquity  see  K.  O.  Miiller,
Archaol.  d.  Kunst,  §  306,  and  cp.  the  preceding  note.

3.  3.  Oorintli  has  no  bronze  of  its  own.  "  Some  will  have  it  that
there  was  copper  ore  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Corinth,  and  that  from
this  ore  the  Corinthian  bronie  was  prepared.  TTie  ancients,  however,
rally  mention  that  here  copper  was  coloured  and  bronze  manuiaclured  ;
they  do  not  say  that  copper  was  here  smelted  from  the  ore.  There  is
no  slag  found  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Corinth,  and  no  ancient  mines
are  here  known  to  exist.  Yet  they  could  hardly  have  vanished  without
leaving  a  trace"  (Fiedler,  Reise,  1.  p.  242).

3.  4-  a  Mated  figure  of  Hermea  in  hronze :  beside  him  stands  a
lam.  This  group  is  represented  on  Corinthian
copper  coins  of  the  reigns  of  Marcus  Aurelius,
Lucius  Verus,  Caracalla,  and  Severus  Alexander-
Hermes  appears  (Fig.  '*)  seated  on  a  rock,
holding  the  caduceus  in  his  left  hand,  while  his
right  rests  upon  a  ram  which  stands  beside  '
him.  On  a  coin  of  the  reign  of  Antoninus
Pius  tbe  same  group  is  represented,  but  enclosed
wiihm  a  distyle  temple.  See  Imhoof-Blumer  and
Gaidner,  Nunt.  Comm.  on  Paus.   p.  23,  with   pi.    '"^  13.— »Biiusa  and  sam

Fc».CXi.  (CMSTHIAN  C<..»^

3.  4-  Homsr  says  in  the  Iliad,     See  //.  xiv.  490  sq.

3k  4-  a  Btory  told  of  Hermes  and  the  ram.  The  story  is  perhaps  the
one  mentioned  by  Clement  of  Alexandria, /"ro/rfr//.  ii.  15,  p-  13,  ed.  Potter.

3.  5-  EorycIeS.  a  Spartan.  This  is  probably  the  Eurydes  whom
Slnbo  mentions  (viii.  p.  363)  as  a  contemporary  of  his  own  and  the
leading  man  of  Lacedaemon,  He  appears  to  have  been  a  person
of  profuse  and  extravagant  habits,  and  of  a  turbulent  and  dangerous
character,  smooth,  supple,  and  insinuating  in  address,  but  false  and
treacherous  at  heart  After  enriching  himself  by  false  accusations  at  the
court  of  Herod  in  Judaea,  he  used  his  ill-gotten  gains  to  stir  up  sedition  at
Lacedaemon,  on  account  of  which  he  was  finally  driven  into  exile.  See
Josephus,  Antiquit.  xvi.  10.  i  ;  id..  Bell.  Jud.  \.  26;  Strabo,  viii.  p.
366.  A  statue  of  his  son  Gaius  Julius  Lacon  was  set  up  by  the  con-
federacy of  the  Free  Laconians  (C  /,  G.  No.  1389,  cp.  No.  1390).

3.  5-  tile  itone  wliicta  is  quarried  at  Oroceae.  See  iii.  31.  4  note.
Tbe  stone  is  green  porphyry.

3.  s.  tlie  water  wUcli  the  Umperor  Hadrian  brought  from  Lake
s  to  Hadrian's  aqueduct  see  viii.  22.  3  note.


26  CORINTH  BK.  II.  CORINTH

3.  5.  Artemis  Bellerophon  etc.     On  a  Corinthian  coin  of

Caracalla's  reign,  Artemis  is  represented  seated  on  a  rock,  holding  a
bow ;  in  front  of  her,  Bellerophon  mounted  on  Pegasus  is  slaying  the
Chimaera  (Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num,  Comm.  on  Pans,  p.  24).

3.  6.  Glance.  When  Jason  was  about  to  wed  Glauce,  Medea,
jealous  of  her  rival,  sent  by  the  hands  of  her  children  a  wedding-robe
(or,  according  to  Hyginus,  a  golden  crown)  as  a  wedding  present  to
Glauce.  But  she  had  previously  smeared  the  robe  with  baleful  drugs ;
and  when  the  bride  put  it  on,  she  burst  into  flames  and  perished
(Euripides,  Medea^  1 136  sqq,  ;  Apollodorus,  i.  9.  28  ;  Diodorus,  iv.  54  ;
Hyginus,  Fab,  25).  So  in  the  German  folk-tale  of  'Faithful  John,'
there  is  a  bridal  garment  that  looks  as  if  it  were  woven  of  silver  and
gold,  but  really  it  is  nothing  but  sulphur  and  pitch,  and  if  the  royal
bridegroom  were  to  put  it  on,  it  would  bum  him  to  the  marrow  (Grimm,
Kinder-  und  Hausmdrchen^  No.  6).  There  are  many  other  folk-tale
elements  in  the  story  of  Medea.  For  example,  in  order  to  win  the
golden  fleece  Jason  has  to  yoke  two  fire-breathing  bulls  and  with  them
to  plough  a  field  and  to  sow  it  with  dragon's  teeth  (Apollodorus,  i.  9.  23).
So  in  the  Finnish  epic  poem,  the  Kalevala^  the  smith  Ilmarinen  has  to
plough  a  field  of  serpents  before  he  may  win  his  bride  {Kalevala,  Rune,
19).  The  same  story  is  also  current  in  Finnland  as  a  popular  tale
(E.  Schreck,  Finniscke  Mdrchen^  p.  3  sqq^

3.  6.  the  Music  HalL  This  may  perhaps  have  been  the  roofed
theatre  which  Herodes  Atticus  built  at  Corinth  (Philostratus,  Vit.  Sophist,
il  I.  9).

3.  6.  stoned  to  death  by  the  Oorinthians  etc.  The  following  is
the  account  given  by  the  Scholiast  on  Euripides,  Medea^  273 :  "  Par-
meniscus  writes  word  for  word  as  follows.  The  Corinthian  women,  loth
to  be  ruled  by  a  woman  who  was  both  a  foreigner  and  a  witch,  laid  a
plot  against  her  and  slew  her  children,  four  males  and  four  females.
But  Euripides  says  that  she  had  only  two  children.  Being  pursued  the
children  fled  to  the  sanctuary  of  Hera  of  the  Height  and  sat  down  in  it.
But  even  this  did  not  protect  them,  for  the  Corinthians  slew  them  all
upon  the  altar.  Now  a  pestilence  fell  upon  the  city  and  many  people
sickened  and  died.  So  the  Corinthians  inquired  of  the  oracle,  and  the
god  bade  them  expiate  the  pollution  caused  by  the  murder  of  Medea's
children.  Wherefore  the  Corinthians  annually  celebrate  the  following
rites  down  to  this  day.  Seven  boys  and  seven  girls  of  the  most  dis-
tinguished families  spend  a  year  in  .the  sanctuary  of  the  goddess,  and
with  sacrifices  appease  the  anger  of  the  murdered  children  and  the
wrath  which  their  murder  excited  in  the  breast  of  the  goddess.  Didymus,
however,  controverts  this  account  and  quotes  the  story  told  by  Creophilus,
which  runs  thus.  When  Medea  resided  in  Corinth,  she  killed  by  her
spells  Creon,  the  ruler  of  the  city.  So  fearing  the  vengeance  of  his
friends  and  kindred  she  fled  to  Athens ;  but  her  children  being  too
young  to  accompany  her,  she  seated  them  upon  the  altar  of  Hera  of  the
Height,  thinking  that  their  father  would  look  to  their  safety.  But
Creon's  kinsmen  slew  the  children  and  spread  a  report  that  Medea  had
slain  not  only  Creon  but  also  her  own  children.     A  similar  myth  is


CH.  Ill  CORINTH  27

told  about  Adonis."     Cp.  also  the  Scholiast  on  Euripides,  Medea^  9.
The  story  that  the  children  of  Medea  were  slain  by  the  Corinthians  is
mentioned  by  other  writers  (Apollodorus,  i.  9 ;  Philostratus,  Heroica^
XX.  24  ;  Aelian,  Var,  Hist.  v.  21).     According  to  a  tradition  mentioned
by  Aelian  (/.r.)  the  other  \tersion,  namely  that  Medea  herself  slew  her
diildren,  was  first  started  by  Euripides  at  the  request  of  the  Corinthians,
and  it  was  only  through  the  poet's  influence  that  this  version  prevailed
over  the  earlier  one.     Indeed,  there  are  some  lines  in  Euripides's  play
(1378  sqq,)  which  fit  better  with  the  story  that  Medea's  children  were
murdered  by  the  Corinthians  than  with  the  story,  adopted  by  Euripides
in  the  play,  that  Medea  murdered  them  herself.     The  children,  however
slain,  were  said  to  have  been  buried  in  the  sanctuary  of  Hera  of  the
Height ;  the  sanctuary,  according  to  the  Scholiast  on  Euripides,  stood
upon  the  acropolis  (Euripides,  Medea,  1378  sq,,  with  the  Scholiast's
note;  Diodorus,  iv.  55).     Various  ancient  writers  refer  to  the  annual
rites  performed  by  the  Corinthians  for  the  supposed  purpose  of  appeas-
ing the  angry  spirits  of  the  murdered  children.     The  rites  are  described
as  of  a  wild,  mystic,  and  mournful  character  (Philostratus,  I.e.;  Aelian,
/^;  Scholiast  on  Euripides,  Medea,  ^Z79\     The  Argives  seem  to  have
celebrated  similar  rites  in  honour  of  Medea's  children  (Schol.  on  Euri-
pides, Lc)     At  an  annual  sacrifice  offered  by  the  Corinthians  to  Hera
of  the  Height  a  goat  was  sacrificed  with  peculiar  rites ;  the  sacrificial
knife  was  brought  and  concealed  by  some  hired  persons,  and  the  goat
which  was  to  be  sacrificed  was  in  some  way  made  to  discover  the  knife
and  thus  to  be,  in  a  manner,  guilty  of  its  own  death  (Zenobius,  i.  27  ;
Apostolius,  i.  60 ;  Proverb,  e  cod.  Bodl.  29  {Paroemiog.  Gr.,  ed.  Gais-
ferd,  p.  4)  ;  Diogenianus,  i.  52  ;  Suidas,  s.v.  al^  aiyos  ;  Hesychius,  s.7^.
«ij  oTyo).     We  may  conjecture  that  this  annual  sacrifice  of  the  goat
formed  port  of  the  expiatory  rites  in  honour  of  Medea's  children.     The
diildren  who,  according  to  Pausanias,  used  to  poll  their  hair  and  wear
blade  clothing  in  memory  of  Medea's  murdered  offspring  are  doubtless
the  seven  boys  and  seven  girls  who  dwelt  for  a  year  in  the  sanctuary  of
Hera.     See  above,  and  K.  O.  Miiller,  Orchomenos  und  die  Minyer^  p.
264  sq.     On  representations  in  art  of  Medea  murdering  her  children,
see  K.   Dilthey,    in  Annali  delV    Instituto   di   Corrisp.   Archeol.   41
(1869),  pp.  5-69  ;  id.,  in  Archdologische  Zeiiung,  1876,  pp.  63-72.     On
the  Corinthian  legends  of  Medea  see  Maxim.  Groeger,  De  Argonauti-
ctrum  fabularum   historia   quaestiones  selectae  (Warsaw,    1889),    pp.
«-32.

3.  8.  caused  the  people  to  be  called  Medes.  The  tradition  that
Media  and  the  Medes  were  named  after  Medea  is  mentioned  by  Hero-
dotus (vii.  62).  According  to  another  story  it  was  her  son  Medus  who
gave  his  name  to  Media  (Strabo,  xi.  p.  526;  Diodorus,  iv.  55.  7;
ApoUodonis,  i.  9.  28 ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v.  MTjSia ;  Eusebius,
Cknm,  L  vol.  i.  p.  62,  ed.  Schoene).

3.  8.  Hellanicns  calls  him  Polyxenns.  The  statement  probably
•cciirred  in  Hellanicus's  work  on  Thessaly.  See  Frag.  Hist.  Graec.  ed.
Miillcr,  I.  p.  49.  On  Hellanicus  and  his  writings  see  Preller,  Ausge-
^ikiU  Aufsdize,  pp.  23-68.     The  life  of  Hellanicus  seems  to  have


28  CORINTH  BK.  II.  CORINTH

extended  over  the  greater  part  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.     He  survived
the  battle  of  Arginusae  (406  B.a)

3.  9.  the  NanpactiisL     See  x.  38.  1 1  note.

3.  9.  Oinaethon,  the  LacedaemoniaiL  Cp.  ii.  1 8.  6 ;  iv.  2.  i ;
viii.  53.  5.  Various  epics  were  by  some  people  attributed  to  this  poet,
such  as  the  Telegonia^  the  Oedipodia^  the  Heraclia^  and  the  Utile  Ilias,
See  Epicorum  Graecorum  fragmentay  ed.  Kinkel,  p.  1 96  ;  Welcker,  Der
episcke  CycluSy  i.  p.  241  sgq, ;  W.  Christ,  Gesch,  d,  griech,  Litteratur^
p.  79.  As  to  the  Oedipodia  see  ix.  5.  11  note ;  as  to  the  Little  Iliad
see  X.  26.  2  note.

3.  I  o.  Eumeius  says.  Some  of  the  verses  of  Eumelus  here  referred
to  by  Pausanias  have  been  preserved  by  the  Scholiast  on  Pindar,  Olymp,
xiii.  74,  and  Tzetzes,  Schol.  on  Lycophron^  174.  The  verses  preserved
are  eight  in  number,  and  record  the  mythical  events  mentioned  by
Pausanias  down  to  the  departure  of  Aeetes  for  Colchis.  Cp.  Epicorum
Graecorum  fragmenta^  ed.  Kinkel,  p.  188  sq,

4.  I.  Athena  the  Bridler.  On  a  Corinthian  copper  coin  of
Hadrian's  time  Athena  is  represented  holding  in  her  right  hand  a  bridle,
in  her  left  a  spear  and  a  shield.  It  is  probably  a  copy  of  the  temple-
statue.  See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num,  Comm.  on  Paus,  p.
25,  with  pi.  F  cxvi.  In  the  Annali  delP  Inst,  di  Corrisp,  Arch.  30  ( 1 8  58),
Tav.  d'  agg.  E,  there  is  figured  a  bronze  female  head  with  a  horse's
bridle  in  the  mouth,  the  bridle  being  fastened  with  straps  over  the  brow
and  under  the  ears.  The  head  is  joined  back  to  back  with  another
female  head.  See  De  Witte's  remarks  on  the  subject,  p.  85  sqq.  In
his  catalogue  of  the  Durand  collection,  Lenormant  gave  the  bridled  head
the  name  of  Hippa.  De  Witte  identifies  Hippa  with  Demeter  Fury
(see  Pausanias,  viii.  25.  4  sq.)\  and  supposes  that  the  bridled  head  in
question  is  Demeter  Fury  and  that  the  unbridled  head  is  Proserpine.

4.  I.  Bellerophon.  For  lists  of  ancient  works  of  art  illustrative  of
the  Bellerophon  legend  see  R.  Engelmann,  *  Bellerofonte  e  Pegaso,'  in
Annali  delP  Instituto^  46  (1874),  pp.  5-37  ;  Stcphani,  in  Compte  Rendu
(St.  Petersburg),  1881,  pp.  8-42.

4.  I.  Pegasus.  On  Pegasus  see  especially  Stephani  in  Compte
Rendu  (St.  Petersburg),  1864,  pp.  24-49.  According  to  Stephani  the
horse  Pegasus,  which  in  later  times  was  always  represented  with  wings,
was  originally  conceived  as  wingless  and  is  so  represented  on  some  of
the  oldest  monuments.  For  examples  of  such  representations  see
M tiller- Wieseler,  Denkmdler,  i.  pi.  xiv.  Nos.  51,  52;  Baumeister's
Denkmdler^  p.  301  ;  Daremberg  et  Saglio,  Dictionnaire,  i.  p.  685  ;
Roscher's  Lexikon^  i.  p.  770.

4.  2.  Homer.  The  reference  is  to  Iliad^  vi.  159,  which,  however,
scarcely  proves  Pausanias's  point.

4.  2.  brigaded  with  the  Mycenaean  and  other  troops.  See
Homer,  //.  ii.  569  sqq.

4.  4.  the  Bacchids,  or  Bacchiads,  as  they  are  called  by  other
writers,  reigned  for  about  two  hundred  years  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  378).  For
the  story  of  their  fall  see  Herodotus,  v.  92  ;  E.  Wilisch,  *  Der  Sturz
des    Bakchiadenkonigtums  in  Korinth,'  Neue  JoArbOcher,   113  (1876),


CH.  V  ACRO-CORINTH  29

pp.  585-594.     Cypselus  began  to  reign  in  657  B.C  (Busolt,  Griechische
Gesckichie^  i.  p.  638).

4.  4-  poresidents.  These  presidents  {prytanes)  are  mentioned  also
by  Diodorus  (vii.  9),  who  states  that  the  Bacchids  from  year  to  year
elected  one  of  their  own  number  president,  and  in  his  year  of  office  the
president  enjoyed  the  state  and  power  of  a  king.  Cp.  G.  Gilbert,
Griech.  Staaisalterthumer^  2.  p.  88  i*^. ;  G.  Busolt,  *  Die  korinthischen
Prytanen,'  HermeSy  28  (1893),  pp.  312-320.

4.  5.  the  theatre.  In  the  theatre  Aratus  addressed  the  Corinthians
after  he  had  delivered  the  city  from  the  Macedonian  garrison  (Plutarch,
Araiusy  23).

i.  5.  Lenia.     This  spring  is  mentioned  by  Athenaeus  (iv.  p.  156  e)
and  Lucian  {Quomodo  hist  conscrib.  29).

1  5.  linages  of  Aesculapimi  and  Health.  Aesculapius  and
Health  are  represented,  together  or  separately,  on  Corinthian  coins  of
the  Imperial  age.  See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num,  Comm,  on
Paus.  p.  25,  with  pi.  F  cxvii.

i  7*  the  sanctuary  of  Bunaean  Hera.  This  is  supposed  by  Prof.
Curtius  {PeloponnesoSy  2.  p.  533)  to  be  identical  with  the  sanctuary  of
Hera  on  the  Height  (see  note  on  ii.  3.  6).  Bunaean  Hera  seems  to  mean
Hera  on  the  Hill.  Against  the  identi^cation  it  has  to  be  said  that  the
temple  of  Hera  on  the  Height  is  placed  by  the  scholiast  on  Euripides
(lf«i  1378)  upon  Acro-Corinth;  whereas  from  Pausanias's  description  it
appears  that  the  sanctuary  of  Bunaean  Hera  was  on  the  way  up  to
Acro-Corinth.  There  was  a  temple  of  Hera  outside  the  walls  in  the
direction  of  Sicyon  (Plutarch,  Aratus ^  21  sq,)

5.  I.  Acro-Oorinth.      Acro-Corinth,  the  citadel  of  ancient  Corinth,
is  a  nigged  mountain  of  imposing  aspect  which  rises  almost  sheer  from
tbe  plain  at  the  southern  end  of  the  Isthmus  of  Corinth  to  a  height  of
575  metres  or  1886  feet.     It  is,  though  not  the  loftiest,  certainly  the
grandest  acropolis  in  Greece.     Mure  observes  that  the  Acro-Corinth  "  is
by  Cu*  the  most  striking  object  of  its  class  that  I  have  ever  seen,  either
abroad  or  at  home.      Neither  the  Acropolis  of  Athens,  nor  the  Larissa
ofArgos,  nor  any  of  the  more  celebrated  mountain  fortresses  of  western
Europe — not  even  Gibraltar — can  enter  into  the  remotest  competition
with  this  gigantic  citadel."     The  greater  part  of  this  splendid  natural
fortress  is  a  precipitous  crag  of  grey  limestone  towering  up  abruptly  on
every  side,  but  at  the  northern  foot  of  the  precipices  the  descent  to  the
plam  is  broken  by  a  succession  of  steep  slopes,  which  are  kept  green
with  grass  till  late  in  the  summer  by  the  springs  that  ooze  from  under
tbe  crags.       The   ascent  is  from  the  west.       On  this  side  the  Acro-
Corinth  is  connected  by  a  saddle  with  a  lower,  but  still  rugged  and
rocky,  height,  and  through  the  depression  or  gully  which   intervenes
between   the  two  mountains  the  path  ascends  to  the  summit.      The
Ottrance  to  the  citadel  is  through  a  triple    line  of  fortification ;  the
traveller  passes  through  three  gateways,   one  after  the  other.       The
somroit  on  which  he  finds  himself  after  passing  through  these  gates
»rf  great  extent,  measuring  not  less  than  a  mile  and  a  half  in  circum-
^ce  ;  but  its  surface  is  broken  and  indented  by  many  minor  heights


w


I


I

/


30  ACRO'CORINTH  bk.  ii.  corintf

and  hollows,  and  the  whole  is  encircled  by  a  winding  battlemented  wal
of  mediaeval  construction  which  follows  the  slope  of  the  ground,  ascend
ing  and  descending,  turning  and  doubling  back  on  itself,  "  shining  white
in  contrast  to  the  green  sward  and  grey  rock,  and  suggesting  the  simile
of  a  necklace  carelessly  flung  on."  Within  this  spacious  enclosure,  the
most  sheltered  part  of  which  is  filled  with  the  ruins  of  a  Turkish  village,
rise  two  chief  peaks,  the  lower  on  the  west,  the  higher  on  the  east.  The
latter  rises  close  to  the  precipitous  northern  edge  of  the  mountain,  and
is  crowned  with  a  ruined  Turkish  oratory,  which  itself  is  built  on  the
ruins  of  a  Byzantine  church.  To  the  west  of  it  some  large  well-jointec
blocks  are  probably  the  scanty  remains  of  the  temple  of  Aphrexlite  (see
below).  Further,  it  may  be  mentioned  that  in  the  circuit  wall;
of  the  citadel  Mr.  Skias  has  recently  discovered  some  pieces  of  th<
rude  ancient  masonry  known  as  Cyclopean.  The  best  preservec
piece  is  on  the  inaccessible  summit  of  the  most  precipitous  slope  abovi
the  bridge  which  leads  to  the  first  gate,  on  the  right  as  you  approacl
from  below  (II/xtKrtKa  t^s  'Apx*  'Eraip.  for  1892,  p.  1 17  sq^

The  view  from  the  summit  of  Acro-Corinth  has  been  famous  sino
the  days  of  Strabo,  who  has  accurately  described  it  (viii.  p.  379  sq.
The  brilliant  foreground,  indeed,  on  which  he  looked  down  has  vanished
The  stately  city  with  its  temples,  its  terraced  gardens,  its  colonnades,  it
fountains,  is  no  more.  In  its  place  there  is  spread  out  at  our  feet  th<
flat  yellowish  expanse  of  the  Isthmus,  stretching  like  a  bridge  across  thi
sea  to  the  point  where  the  Geranian  mountains,  their  slopes  clothee
with  the  sombre  green  of  the  pine-forests,  rise  abruptly  like  a  massivi
barrier  at  its  further  end,  sending  out  on  their  western  side  a  long  pro
montory,  which  cuts  far  into  the  blue  waters  of  the  Corinthian  Gull
Across  the  Gulf  tower  on  the  north  the  bold  sharp  peaks  of  Cithaeroi
and  Helicon  in  Boeotia.  On  the  north-west  Parnassus  lifts  its  might;
head,  glistering  with  snow  into  late  spring,  but  grey  and  bare  ii
summer.  In  the  far  west  loom  the  Locrian  and  Aetolian  mountains
seeming  to  unite  with  the  mountains  of  Peloponnese  on  the  south,  an<
thus  apparently  converting  the  Gulf  of  Corinth  into  an  inland,  mountain
girdled  lake.  To  the  south-west,  above  ranges  of  grey  limestone  hill
dotted  with  dark  pines,  soar  the  snowy  peaks  of  Cyllene  and  Aroania  ii
Arcadia.  On  the  south  the  prospect  is  shut  in  by  the  high  tableland
and  hills  of  Argolis,  range  beyond  range,  the  lower  slopes  of  the  valley
covered  in  spring  with  cornfields,  their  upper  slopes  with  tracts  o
brushwood.  Eastward  Salamis  and  the  sharp-peaked  Aegina  are  con
spicuous.  In  this  direction  the  view  is  bounded  by  the  hills  of  Attic
— the  long  ridge  of  Hymettus  and  the  more  pointed  summits  of  Pen
telicon  and  Pames,  while  below  them  in  clear  weather  the  Parthenoi
is  distinctly  visible  on  the  Acropolis  nearly  fifty  miles  away,  the  pinnacl<
of  Lycabettus  rising  over  it  crowned  with  its  white  far-gleaming  chapeL

See  Wheler,  Journey,  pp.  44^-443  »  E.  D.  Clarke,  Travels,  3.  pp.  746-750
Dodwell,  Tour  through  Greece,  2.  p.  189  sq.  ;  Leake,  Morea,  3.  pp.  257-260
Fiedler,  Reise,  i.  p.  243  sq,  ;  W.  Mure,  Journal  of  a  tour  in  Greece,  2.  pp.  137
139  ;  Welcker,  Tagebiuh,  i.  pp.  169-17 1  ;  L.  Ross,  Wanderungen,  i.  pp.  233
235  ;    E.   Curtius,  Pelopontusos,    2.    pp.    524,    533-535 ;    Beul!§,  Etudes  sur  i


ACRO-CQRINTH


PiltftHuiie,    pp.    401-408  i    W,    G.    Clark,  Pilefienn


:—\%  represented  on
IS.  On  these  she  is
4)  as  naked  to  the


:  55-60;  Vischer,
,  pp.  z>|7-zoz  ;  Dianaoy,  KamoUs  and  Studia,*  p.
Hi  tq.  ;  Belle,  Treis  aniUts  m  Grice,  pp.  in-36\  ;  Philippson,  in  Zeiliihrifl.  d.
Gtuli.f.  Erdkundt  cu  Btrhn,  25  (1890),  p.  411(1.  ;  Guide-Jean nt,  X.  p.  196  I?.  ;
Budeka,'  p.  240  la.  Sinibo  (viiL  p.  379]  eslimaled  the  height  of  the  Ai^o-
Cninlh  nt  Lhiee  ana  a  half  Greek  furlongs  [620  metres),  which  13  nearly  correct,
theictual  hcighl  being,  as  we  have  seen,  575  melres,

&.  I.  &  tsmple  of  Aphrodite.     It  was  said  to  have  been  founded

by  Medea.    (Plutarch,   De  Herodoti   malignitati,

I      39;Schol.   on  Pindar,    Olymfi.    xiii.    32).       The

I     inrqile  was  a  small  one  {yaXhi.av)  and  stood  on

\     the  summit  of  the  Acro-Corinth  (Strabo,  viii.   p.

379).  •  As  to    its    exact    site   see    the    preceding

note.    The  temple  is  represented  (Fig.    13)  on

Oniathian  coins  of  the  Imperial  age  ;  on  them  it

ippeiis  "sometimes   as   tetrastyle,  sometimes  as

hoastyle,  sometimes  as  prostyle,  and  sometimes

u  pcripetaj  :  aii  of  which  proves  that  in  matters

of  aithitectural  detail  coins  are  not  trustworthy."

See  Imhcxtf-Blumer  and   Gardner,   Num.   Comm.

mPaui.   p.  27,   with  pi.   G  cxxvi.  cxKviii.  cxxix.

Tbe  goddess  of  the  tempie — the  armed  Aphroditi
a  long  series  of  Imperial  coii

•  unifonnly  represented  (Fig.  1
waist  and  holding  a  shield,
winged  Love  beside  her.  "  This  important  series
of  coins  furnishes  complete  proof  ...  of  the
type  of  the  statue  of  Aphrodite  which  stood  on
the  Corinthian  Acropolis.  The  figure  of  armed
Aphrodite  which  existed  there  under  the  Empire
was  no  archaic  figure  of  an  armed  goddess,  such
'^''" "*'"*"""  as  the  Syrian  Astarte,  but  an  unmistakable  Greek
Aphrodite,  using  the  shield  of  Ares  as  a  mirror.
Tbii  is  a  motive  natural  to  Roman  rather  than  to  Greek  art,  and  we  may
tcalmostsure  that  the  statue  does  not  date  from  an  earlier  period  than  that
tfjnlios  Caesar.  Indeed  to  his  time  it  would  be  peculiarly  appropriate,  con-
adeting  his  birth  and  pretensions"  (Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.
Camm.  tm  Paus.  p.  26).  On  the  other,  or  oriental,  type  of  the  armed
Aphrodite  see  note  on  iii.  15.  10.  Crowds  of  courtesans  took  part  in
tke  service  of  Aphrodite's  sanctuary  at  Corinth.  For  it  was  an  ancient
custom  that  whenever  the  state  offered  solemn  prayers  to  the  goddess,
the  courtesans  should  join  in  the  prayers  and  afterwards  be  present  at
the  sacrifice.  For  example,  when  the  Persians  invaded  Greece,  these
■omen  flocked  to  the  temple  of  Aphrodite  and  prayed  for  the  deliver-
ace  of  their  country.  Hence  bronie  statues  of  them,  inscribed  with  an
tpigram  by  Simonides,  were  set  up  in  the  temple.  Moreover,  when
frivate  persons  made  vows  to  the  goddess  they  promised  that,  if  their
players  were  answered,  they  would  bring  courtesans  to  the  temple.
Ste  Alhenaeus,  xiii.  p.  573  sq.  ;  Plutarch,  Di  Herodoti  malignilale,
»;  Scbol.  on  Pindar,  Olymp.  xiii.  33.      The  prayer  of  the  Corinthian


32  ACRO-CORINTH  bk.  ii.  corinth

courtesans  for  the  freedom  of  Greece  is  referred  to  by  the  rhetorician
Choricius  in  a  composition  which  has  been  recently  published  for  the
first  time  {Jahrbuch  d,  arch.  Instituts^  9  (1894),  p.  185).

5.  I.  The  spring  behind  the  temi^e.     This,  and  not  the  spring
at  the  foot  of  the  Acro-Corinth  (see  above,  ii.   3.  2  note)  is  the  one
which  Strabo  (viii.  p.  379)  identified  as  Pirene.     He  says  :  "  Under  the
sunmiit  is  the  water-basin  (Kpvjvrf)  of  Pirene  ;  it  has  no  outlet,  but  is
always  full  of  sweet  and  limpid  water.      They  say  that  the  water-basin
at  the  foot  of  the  mountain  is  fed  from  this  one  and  from  other  subter-
ranean  sources."     The    Pirene   of  Strabo  is  now  identified  with  the
Dragon  Well  {Dragonera\  situated  on  a  small  terrace,  a  little  to  the
east  of  and  below  the  highest  point  of  the  Acro-Corinth.     The  entrance
is  close  to  the  outside  stair  of  a  long  ruined  barrack  about  fifteen  paces
from  the   south  wall  of  the  citadel.     The  water   is   contained   in    a
subterranean    well-house,    which    is    reached   by   an    arched  passage
lined  on  both  sides  with  polygonal  walls.      A  staircase  formerly  led
down  into  this  passage,  but  it  is  now  ruinous,  and  we  descend  by  a
wooden  ladder.     In  the  well-house,  which  is  covered  in  by  a  vaulted
roof  of  Roman  date,  the  water  is  1 2  or  1 4  feet  deep,  and  runs  back  for
a  distance  of  25  feet  or  so.       Out  of  the  water   rises  a  small  column,
which  with  two  pilasters  at  the  sides  supports  a  tiny  temple-like  gable  or
pediment.      The  water  is  so  clear  that  in  the  dim  light  it  is  not  easy  to
distinguish  the  water-line  on  the  rock-cut  steps.      A  traveller  has  been
known  to  walk  down  the  steps  into  the  water  before  he  was  aware  of  it
See  C.  Gottling,  '  Die  Quelle  Pirene  auf  Akrokorinth  und  das  Kraneion
unterhalb    Korinth,'    Archdologische  Zeitung^  2  (1844),    pp.    326-330,
with  sketch  ;  Curtius,  Peloponnesos^  2.  p.  525  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^
p.  259  j^.  ;  Mahaffy,  Rambles^  p.  344  sq,  ;  Baedeker,*  p.  241.

5.  I.  a  gift  of  Asopns  to  Sisyphns.      Another  account  of  the
origin  of  Pirene  was  that  Pegasus  had  struck  the  rock  with  his  hoof  and
that   the  water  gushed   out  (Dio  Chrysostom,   Orat  xxxvi.  vol.  2.  p.
62,   ed.    Dindorf;    Statius,   Theb.    iv.    60  sq,^      A  similar  origin  was
attributed  to   Hippocrene  (*the  Horse's   Fount')  on   Helicon   (see  ix.
31.   3)   and    to    Hippocrene   at    Troezen   (see   ii.    31.    9).       On   the
mythical   connexion    of    horses    with   water   cp.    Stephani    in    Compte
Rendu  (St.  Petersburg),   1864,  p.  24   sqq.      The   statue   of   Pegasus,
from  the  hoof  of  which  the  water  of  a  fountain  gushed  (above,  ii.  3.
5),    had    reference  of  course  to   such  stories.       Another   story  which
connected  Pegasus  with  Pirene  was  that  Pegasus  was  drinking  at  the
spring  when  he  was  caught  by  Bellerophon  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  379  ;  Pindar,
Otymp.    xiii.    63    sqq.)      On  a  marble  relief,  preserved  in  the  Spada
palace  at  Rome,  and  often  figured  in  the  books,  Bellerophon  is  repre-
sented watering  Pegasus  at  a  spring  (probably  Pirene)  which  gushes
from  a  rock.     See  Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  p.  300  ;  Roscher's  Lexikon,
I.  p.   762.      On  a  coin  of  Septimius  Severus  there  is  a  representation
of  Bellerophon  watering  Pegasus,  with  Acro-Corinth  in  the  background
(Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num,  Comm,  on  Pans.  p.    13,   with  pi.
C  xxix. ;  see  above,  p.  1 8  sq, )

The  story  that  Pegasus  caused  water  to  gush  from  the  ground  by


CH.  V  SISYPHUS  33

striking  it   with   his   hoof  has   its  parallels  in  modem  folk-lore.     St.

Milborough's  Well  at  Stoke  St.  Milborough  (Shropshire)  is  said  to  have

originated    in  much  the  same  way.      A  horse,  at  the   bidding  of  St.

Milburga,  struck  his  hoof  into  the  ground  and  immediately  a  spring  of

ivater  gushed  out  (Bume  and  Jackson,  Shropshire  Folk-lore,  p.  418).

When  the  Frisians  were  building  a  dyke  to  keep  out  the  sea  at  the  spot

wbere  St  Boniface  suffered  martyrdom,  they  wished  to  build  a  church

and  a  monastery  at  the  place,  but  found  there  was  no  spring  of  fresh

water  in  the  neighbourhood.       However,  one  of  their  horses  sank  with

his  front  paws  into  the  ground,  and  when  it  was  pulled  out,  a  stream

of  dear  water  gushed  out  and  formed  a  brook  (J.  W.  Wolf,  Nieder-

lanHscke  Sagen,  No.  19,  p.  28  sq,)     In  the  north-east  of  Scotland  "one

mode  of  discovering  where  water  was  to  be  found  was  to  keep  from

water  a  mare  having  a  foal,  and  to  tether  her  on  the  place  where  it  was

wished  to  dig  for  water ;  the  mare,  in  her  desire  to  quench  her  thirst,

pawed  over  the  spot  under  which  the  spring  lay.       If  she  did  not  paw,

there  was  no  spring  within  the  circuit  of  her  tether  "  ( W.  Gregor,  Folk-lore

of  ike  North-east  of  Scotland,  p.  131).

5. 1.  Sisyphus.     On  the  Acro-Corinth,  but  lower  down  than  Pirene,
there  was  a  white  marble  structure  called  the  Sisypheum ;  in  Strabo's
time  only  ruins  of  it  remained,  and  he  was  uncertain  whether  the  build-
ing had  been  a  temple  or  a  palace  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  379).     The  Sisypheum
most  have  been  a  strong  position ;  for  Demetrius  had  much  difficulty  in
carrying  it  by  storm,  and  after  its  capture  the  garrison  in  Acro-Corinth
surrendered  (Diodorus,  xx.    103).      The    punishment  which   Sisyphus
sofered  in  hell  for  betraying  Zeus  was  to  push  a  large  stone  up  hill ;  as
soon  as  the  stone  had  almost  reached  the  top,  it  rolled  down  again
(Homer,  Od.  xi.  593  sqq, ;  ApoUodorus,  i.  9.  3).     This  formed  one  of
the  subjects  of  Polygnotus's  great  series  of  paintings  in  the  Club-room
atDdphi.     See  x.  31.  10.     The  name  Sisyphus  is  said  to  be  formed
by  reduplication  from  (ro<^,  with  the  Aeolic  substitution  of  v  for  o
(Curtius,   Gruch.  EtymoL^  p.    512;  Merry  on   Homer,    Od,  xi.   593;
Vanicek,  Griech.-Lat,  Etymol.  Worterbuch,  p.   592).      Thus   Sisyphus
means  the  Wise,  Wise  One ;  and  the  traditional  character  of  Sisyphus
answered  to  his  name,  for  he  was  reputed  the  craftiest  of  men  (Homer,
n.  vL   153).      One  of  the  stories  told  to  illustrate  his  craftiness  is
rq)eated  in  the  folk-tales  of  many  lands.     It  is  said  that  when  Death
came  to  carry  him  off,  Sisyphus  chained  him  up.     So  Death  being
chained,  nobody  died  till  Ares  came  and  released  Death.     See  Eustathius
on  Homer,  //.  vi.   153.     Similarly  in  an   Italian   story  an  innkeeper,
grown  old,  is  visited  by  Death,  but  having  persuaded  Death  to  enter  a
bottle,  he  corks  him  up  and  keeps  him  a  prisoner.     "  While  Death  was
shut  up  no  one  died ;  and  everywhere  you  might  see  old  men  with  such
long  white  beards  that  it  was  a  sight."     At  last  the  Lord  himself  came
and  expostulated  with  the  innkeeper,  saying,  "There  you  have  kept
Death  shut  up  so  many  years,  and  the  people  are  falling  down  from  old
age  without  dying  ! "     The  innkeeper  stipulates  for  a  place  in  Paradise,
and  when  his  request  is  granted,  he  releases  Death.     See  T.  F.  Crane,
UtHan  Popular  Tales,  No.  63.     In  another  Italian  story  (Crane,  op,  cit,

VOU  III  D


34  SISYPHUS  BK.  II.  CORINTH

No.  64)  Brother  Giovannone  shuts  up  Death  in  a  pouch  and  keeps  him
there,  and  for  forty  years  nobody  dies.    In  another  Italian  story  (Crane,
op,  cit.  No.  66)  Death  comes  to  fetch  the  aged  Beppo.     But  Beppo  tied
up  Death  in  a  sack  and  did  not  let  him  out  for  a  year  and  a  half.    Great
and  universal  was  the  joy ;  the  doctors  especially  were  in  high  feather,
for  none  of  their  patients  died.     "  Then  Death  begged  so  humbly  and
represented  so  forcibly  what  would  be  the  consequences  of  this  disorder,
that  Beppo  agreed  to  let  him  out,  on  condition  that  Death  should  not
come  back  for  him  unless  he  was  willing.     Death  departed  and  sought
by  means  of  a  few  wars  and  pestilences  to  make  up  for  lost  time."     Cp.
also  Crane,  op,  cit.  No.  65.     In  the  commonest  of  this  class  of  stories  the
hero  is  a  cunning  smith  who  is  allowed  three  wishes  by  the  Lord.     He
wishes  that  whoever  climbs  up  a  fruit-tree  in  his  garden  may  be  com»
pelled  to  stay  there  till  he  (the  smith)  lets  him  come  down ;  that  who-
ever sits  down  in  his  easy  chair,  may  be  obliged  to  sit  there  till  he
(the   smith)   lets   him  get  up ;    and   lastly  that  whoever  creeps   into
his    purse,    may  have   to   stay   in   it   till   he    (the    smith)    lets    him
out.     By  means  of  these  three  booby-traps  he  thrice  catches  Death
(or   the    Devil)   who    comes    to    carry  him   off ;   and   each   time   he
extorts   a   promise    from    Death    (or    the    Devil)    to    leave   him    un-
molested for  a  while  longer.     In  particular   when  he  gets  the  Devil
into  his  purse  he  mauls  and  belabours  him  so  terribly  with  his  hammer,
that  when  at  last  the  smith  dies  and  comes  to  hell-gate,  the  Devil  will
not  let  him  into  hell  at  any  price.     So  he  is  obliged  to  try  heaven  ;  here
also  he  is  refused  admission,  but  he  at  last  succeeds  in  getting  in  by
force  or  craft     This  tale  is  told,  with  slight  modifications,  in  many  parts
of  Europe.     See  Asbj5msen  og  Moe,  Norske  Folke-Eventyr^  No.  21
(  =  Dasent,  Popular  tales  from  the  Norse^  *The  Master-smith,'  p.  106
sqq,) ;  Kuhn,  Mdrkische  Sagen  und  Mdrchen^  No.  88  of  the  Sagen;
Zingerle,  Kinder-  und  Hausmdrchen  aus  Tirol^  5  ;  Panzer,  Beitrag  sur
deutschen  Mythologies   i.   p.  94  sqq. ;  Colshom,  Mdrchen  und  Sagen^
p.  248  sqq, ;  Bechstein,  Deutsches  Mdrchenbuch^  p.  44  sqq,  (cp.  p.  42);
Schleicher,  Litauische  Mdrchen^  etc.  p.  108  sqq, ;  Krauss,  Sagen  und
Mdrchen  der  SUdslaven^  2.  Nos.  125,  126;  Blade,  Contes  populaires  de
la  Gascogne^  2,  p.  225  sqq, ;  Amaudin,  Contes  populaires  recueillis  dans
la  Grande-Lcmdey  No.  i.     In  the  corresponding  story  in  Grimm's  collec-
tion (Kinder-  und  Hausmdrchen^  No.  82)  the  hero  is  not  a  smith,  but  a
gambler.     The  bottling  up  of  Death  occurs  also  in  a  Magyar  folk-tale
(The  Folk-tales  of  the  Magyars^  trans,  by  W.  H.  Jones  and  L.  L.  Krop^
p.  82  sq,)     To  return  to  Sisyphus.     Another  way  in  which  he  cheated
Death  was  this.     Before  he  died  he  told  his  i^dfe  to  leave  his  corpse  un-
buried.     She  did  so,  and  accordingly  when  Sisyphus  was  dead  and  in
hell  he  complained  to  Pluto  that  his  wife  had  neglected  to  bury  his  body,
and  asked  leave  to  return  and  punish  her.     He  i^'as  allowed  to  do  so,
but  once  back  on  earth  he  refused  to  return  to  hell,  and  had  to  be  forcibly
dragged  back  by  Hermes.     See  Schol.  on  Sophocles,  Ajax^  625  ;  SchoL
on  Pindar,  Olymp,  i.  97  ;  cp.  Theognis,  703  sq.    This  may  be  compared
H-ith  an  incident  in  one  of  the  Slavonic  stories  of  the  cunning  smith.
In  this  story  the  smith,  before  he  is  at  last  carried  off  by  the  devil,  tells


CH.  V  OLD  TEMPLE  AT  CORINTH  35

his  son  that  when  he  is  dead  he  (the  son)  must  build  a  church.  So  the
smith  dies  and  goes  in  due  course  to  hell.  But  now  his  son  begins  to
batld  a  church,  as  his  father  bade  him ;  and  as  soon  as  the  cross  is  set
up  before  the  door  of  the  church,  the  devils  are  only  too  glad  to  let  the
smith  out  of  helL  He  returns  to  earth  and  lives  two  hundred  years
more.     See  Krauss,  op,  cit.  2.  No.  126.

Pausanias  has  now  completed  his  description  of  Corinth.  Here  then
is  the  fit  place  to  notice  the  few  remains  of  ancient  Corinth  which  are
cither  not  mentioned  by  him  or  at  least  cannot  be  identified  with  build-
ings described  by  him.  Foremost  among  these  remains  are  the  seven
Doric  columns  of  an  ancient  temple  which  stand  at  the  village  of  Old
Corinth,  not  fer  from  the  northern  foot  of  Acro-Corinth.  The  columns
formed  part  of  the  peristyle  of  the  temple.  Five  columns  stand  on  the
western  firont  and,  immediately  adjoining  them,  three  columns  (reckon-
ing the  comer  column  twice  over)  on  the  southern  front.  The  three
columns  on  the  southern  side  and  the  two  adjoining  columns  on  the
western  side  still  support  portions  of  the  architrave ;  but  the  fourth
and  fifth  columns  on  the  western  side  have  lost  their  architrave.
The  fourth  column  has  lost  its  capital  also.  The  columns  have
twenty  flutes,  and  they  are  monoliths,  that  is  each  is  hewn  out
of  a  single  block  of  stone.  The  material  is  a  rough  limestone,
coated  with  a  reddish-yellow  stucco.  The  proportions  of  the  columns
we  more  massive  than  those  of  any  other  existing  Doric  columns
(bcight  23  J  feet ;  diameter  at  the  base  5  ft.  8  in.,  at  the  nop  4  ft.  3  in.)  ;
it  has  therefore  been  commonly  supposed  (as  by  Leake,  Curtius,  and
Vischer)  that  this  is  the  most  ancient  Doric  temple  in  existence.  See
Leake,  Morea^  3.  pp.  245  sq,^  249  j^.,  268  sqq,  ;  Curtius,  Peloponnesos^
2.  pt  525  sq,\  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  p.  264  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  240 ;
GtUde-Jocmney  2.  p.  196.

In  January  and  February  1886  Dr.  Dorpfeld  examined  the  temple
with  care  and  made  a  number  of  excavations  for  the  purpose  of  deter-
mining its  ground-plan,  and  of  bringing  to  light  additional  fragments
of  the  structure.  His  results  are  given  in  a  paper  in  the  Mittheilungen
des  arch.  Instituts  in  Athen^  11  (1886),  pp.  297-308,  with  plates  vii.
and  viii.     The  following  is  a  summary  of  his  conclusions.

He  found  that  there  is  not  one  single  foundation  for  the  whole
temple,  but  that  each  row  of  columns  and  each  wall  had  its  own  separate
foundation  reaching  down  to  the  rock  and  quite  unconnected  with  all
the  rest.  The  surface  of  the  rock  was  not  merely  smoothed  to  receive
the  foundations  ;  but  grooves,  of  the  breadth  of  the  wall  and  from  5  to
30  centimetres  deep,  were  sunk  in  it.

On  the  west  side,  to  the  north  of  the  existing  fifth  column,  there  was
fcund  a  cutting  in  the  rock,  in  which  had  plainly  rested  the  foundation
of  a  sixth  column.  Further  to  the  north  the  rock  had  not  been  worked  ;
so  the  west  front  of  the  temple  can  have  had  only  six  columns.  In
words,  it  was  hexastyle.
At  the  S.E.  extremity  of  the  temple  the  comer  of  the  stylobate  was
ered.  This  gave  the  length  of  the  temple,  which,  measured  on
^  stylobate,  was  about   53.30  metres   (174  ft.   10  in.)     Calculating


36  OLD  TEMPLE  AT  CORINTH         bk.  ii.  corintm

from  the  intercolumniation  of  the  existing  columns,  Dr.  Dorpfeld  con-
cluded that  the  temple  had  fifteen  columns  at  each  of  the  long  sides.
This  proportion  of  the  number  of  the  end  columns  to  the  side  columns
(viz.  6:15)  is  not  uncommon  ;  it  occurs  also  in  the  temple  at  Bassae^
and  in  the  temple  R  at  Selinus.

The  interior  of  the  temple  had  two  inner  rows  of  columns,  one  row
on  each  side  ;  and  it  was  divided  by  a  cross-wall  into  two  compartments,
a  western  and  an  eastern,  of  which  the  eastern  compartment  was  the
larger.  The  length  of  the  western  compartment  was  about  9.60  metres^
(31  ft.  6  in.),  that  of  the  eastern  about  16  metres  (52  ft.  6  in.)  The
western  compartment  was  nearly  square.  Each  compartment  was  a.
temple  in  antis^  not  prostyle.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  thinks  it  probable  that:
each  row  of  columns  in  the  western  chamber  contained  two  columns
and  that  each  row  of  columns  in  the  eastern  chamber  contained  four
columns.  In  the  western  chamber  were  discovered  the  remains  of  a
foundation  which  probably  supported  the  base  of  a  temple-statue.

It  may  be  asked,  was  the  temple  really  a  double  temple  ?  or  was  the
western  compartment  merely  a  treasure-chamber  (as  in  the  Parthenon  at
Athens),  or  an  inner  sanctuary  (as  in  the  temple  at  Selinus)  ?  The
foundation  for  the  base  of  a  statue,  discovered  in  the  western  compart-
ment, furnishes  an  answer  to  these  questions.  For  considering  the  size
and  position  of  the  base,  it  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  it  once  sup-
ported a  temple-statue,  and  that  the  compartment  in  which  the  statue
stood  opened  X»  the  west  For  if  there  had  been  a  door  in  the  cross-
wall  between  the  compartments,  the  base  of  the  statue  would  have  been
so  close  to  it  that  it  would  have  blocked  the  passage.  The  western
compartment,  therefore,  was  neither  simply  a  treasure-chamber  opening
from  the  west,  nor  an  inner  sanctuary  {adytum)  opening  from  the  east  into
the  celia.  It  was  itself  a  cella,  with  a  separate  entrance  and  a  separate
image.

The  threshold,  made  of  Pentelic  marble,  of  the  chief  door  of  the
eastern  chamber  was  discovered,  but  not  quite  in  its  original  place.

On  the  west  front  Dr.  D5rpfeld  discovered  a  small  but  regular
curvature,  the  two  middle  columns  standing  about  2  centimetres  higher
than  the  comer  columns.  This  cannot  be  explained  by  sinking,  for  the
lowest  of  the  three  steps  of  the  temple  is  hewn  out  of  the  rock.

The  diameter  of  the  columns  on  the  short  fronts  was  greater  than
the  diameter  of  the  columns  on  the  long  sides.  The  average  diameter
of  the  former  is  1.72  metres  ;  the  diameter  of  the  latter  is  1.63  metres.
The  distances  between  the  axes  of  the  columns  on  the  short  side  is  also
correspondingly  greater  than  the  distances  between  the  axes  of  the
columns  on  the  long  sides  (4  metres  on  the  short  sides,  against  3.7
metres  on  the  long  sides).  This  difference  of  diameter  and  of  axal
distances  between  the  columns  on  the  short  sides  and  the  columns
on  the  long  sides  occurs  not  uncommonly  in  the  more  ancient
Greek  temples.  It  is  found,  e.g.y  in  the  Heraeum  at  Olympia  and  in
the  pre-Persian  temple  on  the  Acropolis  at  Athens.  As  the  height
of  the  colunms  is  7.21  metres  (about  23 J  feet),  the  proportion  be-
tween   the   lower   diameter   and   the  height  of  the  column   is   i  :  4.2


^^

1

^^p

Iit€

i

o  c

iT

!

o

^1

f"

y^^nj

c

b

y^B;

c

c

0

n

W!i

i    c

I     ',  '1

y.

!

!

»

K

o

p

c

^

D

$

»

9

«j

o

0

c

)

D

g
t

»

3

o

p

1'

^      1

t:

1     1

f

D

M*

iHi

V

S

HH  V"

^

o
o

I

J

s

-

■

1

o
8

-r-  ir-n

1

CH.  V  OLD  TEMPLE  A  T  CORINTH  37

for  the  columns  on  the  fronts  and  i  :  4.4  for  the  columns  at  the
sides;  and  the  proportion  of  the  axal  distance  to  the  height  of  the
column  is  I  :  1.8  on  the  fronts  and  i  :  1.95  on  the  sides.  Since  such
proportions  are  frequently  appealed  to  as  determining  the  age  of  a  Doric
building,  the  fact  that  they  are  found  to  differ  so  much  from  each  other
on  two  sides  of  the  same  building  ought  (as  Dr.  Dorpfeld  observes)  to
warn  us  against  laying  too  much  stress  on  them  as  evidence  of  the  date
of  a  building.

There  is  absolutely  no  evidence  to  what  deity  or  rather  deities  the
temple  was  dedicated.

With  regard  to  the  history  of  the  temple,  Dr.  Dorpfeld  thinks  it  was
built  in  the  sixth  century,  or  perhaps  earlier.  Leake  was  disposed  to
date  it  earlier.  He  says  of  the  columns,  "  We  not  only  find  in  them  the
narrow  intercolumniation,  tapering  shafts,  projecting  capitals,  and  lofty
architraves,  which  are  the  attributes  of  the  early  Doric,  and  which  were
perpetuated  in  the  architecture  of  the  western  colonies  of  Greece,  but  we
find  also  that  the  chief  characteristic  of  those  buildings  is  still  stronger
in  the  Corinthian  temple  than  in  any  of  them,  its  shaft  being  shorter  in
proportion  to  the  diameter  than  in  any  known  example  of  the  Doric
order,  and,  unlike  that  of  any  other  Doric  column  of  large  dimensions,
being  composed  of  a  single  block  of  stone."  Leake  concludes  that  the
latest  date  to  which  the  temple  can  be  attributed  is  the  middle  of  the
se\enth  century  B.C.,  but  that  it  may  be  a  good  deal  earlier  {JMorea^  3.
P-  250  sq.)

^Vhen  Corinth  was  rebuilt  under  Julius  Caesar,  the  temple  seems  to
have  had  a  new  roof  put  on  it,  for  Roman  tiles  (bearing  the  stamp
PONTI)  have  been  discovered  in  plenty,  but  no  Greek  ones.  It  also
received  a  new  coating  of  stucco.  For  great  pieces  of  Roman  stucco
niay  still  be  easily  distinguished  on  the  columns  over  the  Greek
stucco.  See  Dorpfeld,  op,  cit,  pp.  394,  395  ;  Curtius,  Peloponnesos^  2.
P-  526.

When  Spon  and  Wheler  visited  Corinth  in  1676,  there  were  twelve
of  the  columns  standing,  eleven  of  them  belonging  to  the  peristyle,  and
the  twelfth  being  one  of  the  interior  columns  towards  the  west  end
(Spon,  Voyage^  2.  p.  173  ;  Wh^Xtr,  Journey^  p.  440).  In  the  eighteenth
century  when  Chandler  visited  the  temple,  and  when  Stuart  drew  it,  the
twelve  columns  were  still  standing,  but  between  1785  and  1795  ^^^
number  was  reduced  to  seven,  as  at  present  (1895).  See  Chandler,
Travels  in  Greece,  p.  239  j^.  ;  Leake,  Morea,  3.  p.  246  sq.  For  a
sketch  and  a  plan  of  the  temple  as  it  appeared  with  the  twelve  columns
still  standing,  see  Stuart  and  Revett,  The  Antiquities  of  Athens^  3.  ch.
vi.  plates  i.  ii.

.A.t  a  short  distance  to  the  north  of  the  ruin  which  has  just  been
described,  on  the  brow  of  the  cliffs  overlooking  the  plain  and  bay  of
Lechaeum,  there  is  an  artificial  level,  on  which  Leake  remarked  the
foundations  of  a  large  building  and  some  fragments  of  Doric  columns.
Excavations  directed  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  on  this  spot  revealed  three  parallel
«^s,  the  style  and  material  of  which  proved  them  to  have  formed  part,
Bot  of  a  Greek  temple,  but  of  a  great  Byzantine  church  or  of  some


38  RUINS  A  7  CORINTH  bk.  ii.  corinth

building  of  Roman  times.  In  the  most  northerly  of  the  three  walls  is
the  drum  of  a  Doric  column  and  also  a  fragment  of  a  large  Doric  archi-
trave. These  must  have  formed  part  of  a  large  Doric  temple,  larger
probably  than  the  one  of  which  the  seven  columns  are  standing.  For
the  diameter  of  the  drum  (which  Leake  thought  to  be  not  from  the
lowest  part  of  the  shaft)  measures  6  ft.  3  in.,  and  the  architrave  is
exactly  the  height  of  the  architrave  of  the  great  temple  of  Zeus  at
Olympia.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  thinks  that  the  temple  in  question  must  have
stood  not  far  from  the  later  building  in  which  the  fragments  are  found  ;
and  he,  like  Leake,  conjectures  that  the  temple  was  no  other  than  the
temple  of  Apollo  described  by  Pausanias  (ii.  3.  6)  which  stood  on  the
right  of  the  road  leading  from  the  market-place  to  Sicyon.  The  con-
jecture is  somewhat  confirmed  by  a  Latin  inscription  found  on  or  near
the  spot  by  Wheler  and  Spon  in  1676  ;  the  inscription  mentions  ^^aedem
et  statuam  Apollinis  Augusti  et  tabemas  deorum,^^  The  inscription  is
probably  from  a  chapel  within  the  sacred  enclosure  of  Apollo.  See
V^\i^\^Y^  Journey^  p.  444;  Spon,  Voyage^  2.  p.  179;  Leake,  Morea^  3.
p.  247  j^. ;  id.^  Peloponnesiaca^  P*  393  '^7*  >  Dorpfeld,  in  MittkHlungen
d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Aiken,  11  (1886),  p.  306  sqq,  j

Among  the  few  surviving  monuments  of  ancient  Corinth  are  the
remains  of  a  Roman  amphitheatre  excavated  in  the  rock  on  the  eastern
side  of  the  village  of  Old  Corinth,  not  far  from  the  left  bank  of  the
torrent  which  separates  Acro-Corinth  from  the  heights  to  the  eastward.
The  area  below  is  290  ft  by  190.  Under  the  seats  are  chambers  in
the  rock,  in  which  doubtless  the  wild  beasts  were  kept  On  the  north
side  a  broad  passage,  now  open  but  probably  at  one  time  covered,  leads
down  to  the  arena.  It  must  have  been  the  entrance  for  the  gladiators
or  wild  beasts.  As  Pausanias  does  not  mention  this  amphitheatre,  it
was  perhaps  not  yet  made  in  his  time.  Dio  Chrysostom  {Or,  xxxi.  vol.
I,  p.  3SS  sg.  ed,  Dindorf)  describes  the  Corinthians  watching  the  com-
bats of  gladiators  outside  of  the  city  in  a  gully  large  enough  to  contain
a  multitude,  but  so  dreary  that  no  respectable  person  would  consent  to
be  buried  in  it  This  describes  the  situation  of  the  amphitheatre  well
enough,  but  whether  the  amphitheatre  had  been  actually  made  at  the
time  when  Dio  wrote,  must  be  doubtful.  It  is  first  mentioned  by  a
geographer  of  the  age  of  Constantius.  See  Leake,  Aforea,  3.  p.  244  sq,  ;
id,y  Peloponnesiaca,  p.  393  ;  Curtius,  Pelofionnesos,  2.  pp.  527,  591  ;
Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.  264  sq,  ;  Miitheilungen  d.  arch,  Inst,  in
Athen,  2  (1877),  pp.  282-288  (with  plan).  A  plan  of  the  amphitheatre
is  also  given  in  ExpMiticm  Scientifique  de  Morie,  3.  pi.  77.

In  1892  some  excavations  were  made  by  Mr.  Skias  on  the  site  of
ancient  Corinth  at  the  intersection  of  the  roads  from  Lechaeum  and
Cenchreae.  Here,  in  addition  to  remains  of  later  date,  he  found  the
square  courtyard  of  a  building  of  the  fifth  or  sixth  century  B.c.  The
courtyard  measures  about  20  feet  square,  and  the  ancient  pavement,  con-
structed in  a  neat  and  solid  style,  is  preserved  throughout.  See  II/MiicriKoL
T^s 'Apx^^o^' 'Eratp.  for  1892,  pp.  ill- 136.

5.  I.  Zeus  had  carried  off Aegina.     On  representations  of  the

rape  of  Aegina  in  ancient  art  see  Jahn,  Archdologiscke  Bdtrdge,  P*  3 1  sq.


CH.  V  TENEA  39

5.  3.  they  say  that  the  Maeander  etc  Ibycus  held  that  the  Sicyon-
ian  Asopus  rose  in  Phrygia  (Strabo,  vi.  p.  271).  As  to  the  derivation  of
the  Inopus  £rom  the  Nile  see  Strabo,  Lc,  ;  Callimachus,  Hymn,  Dion.
171  ;  id,yHymn,  Del.  206  sqq, ;  Tzetzes,  Schol.  on  Lycophr,  575.  The
water  of  the  Inopus  was  said  to  rise  and  fall  simultaneously  with  that  of
the  Nile ;  hence  the  fable  of  their  connexion  (Pliny,  Nat  Hist,  ii.  229  ;
CallimachuSy  DeL  l.c)  The  fable  of  the  union  of  the  Euphrates  and
Nile  is  repeated  by  Philostratus,  Vit.  Apollon,  i.  20.  2.

5.  4.   Tenea.     Stephanus  Byzantius  {s,v,  Tevea)  tells  us  that  Tenea
was  a  village  which  belonged  to  Corinth  and  was  situated  between  that
dty  and  Mycenae.     Combining  this  statement  with  Pausanias's  state-
TDent  that  Tenea  was  distant  60  Greek  furlongs  (a  little  under  seven
miles)  from  Corinth  along  the  mountain  road,  we  infer  that  Tenea  was
situated  somewhere  in  the  valley  which  opens  on  the  east  side  of  Acro-
Corinth  and  through  which  the  highroad  and  the  railway  now  run  from
Corinth  to  Argos.     The  exact  site  was  first   discovered  by  the   late
H.  G.  Lolling.     It  is  on  a  fiat  projecting  spur  of  the  mountains  which  close
the  valley  on  the  south,  a  little  below  and  to  the  north  of  the  twin
villages  of  Upper  and    Lower  Klenia,      The   spot   is   about   a   mile
and  a  quarter  south  of  Chiliomodi^  a  village  which  lies  in  the  opener
part  of  the  valley,  and  is  a  station  on  the  railway  line  between  Corinth
and  Aigos.     Its  distance  from  Acro-Corinth  is  about  seven  miles,  which
agrees  closely  with  Pausanias's  statement  that  Tenea  was  60   Greek
farlongs  (6f  miles)  from  Corinth.     The  neighbouring  villages  of  Klenia
have  preserved  with  little  alteration  the  ancient  name  of  Cleonae.     The
architectural  remains  of  Tenea  are  scanty,  consisting  of  a  few  founda-
tions and  pieces  of  walls.     Further  evidence  of  an  ancient  settlement
here  is  furnished  by  the  number  of  potsherds,  both  of  the  finer  and
coarser  kind,  lying  about,  and  by  the  rock-hewn  graves  on  the  northern
slope  of  the  hill  toward   Chiliomodi.     These   graves  are  found   both
separately  and  in  groups.     The  valley,  of  which  a  complete  view  is
obtained  from  the  site  of  the  ancient  town,  is  bounded  on  the  north  and
south  by  heights  of  some  elevation  and  on  the  east  by  lower  hills
partially  wooded  with  pine.     On  the  west  the  valley  opens  gradually
into  the  plain  of  Cleonae.     A  stream  traverses  it  from  south  to  north,
and  after  skirting   the   eastern    foot   of  Acro-Corinth   falls   into   the
Gulf  of  Corinth.     The  bottom  of  the  valley  is  cultivated  and  produces
com,  wine,  oil,  and  some  currants ;  the  western  portion  of  it  serves  as
a  winter  pasture.     But  the  hills  which  enclose  it  and  stretch  eastward
to  the  sea  are  for  the  most  part  utterly  barren  and  naked  except  where
they  are  overgrown  with  arid  shrubs  or  pinewood.     Their  sides  are
deft  by  many  dismal  little  gullies  and  ravines.     On  the  whole  the  valley
is  unattractive  and  inhospitable,  though  its  position  on  the  main  route
from  Corinth  to  Argos  and  the  south  must  have  given  it  a  certain
conmiercial  and  political  importance.

According  to  Aristotle,  the  Teneans  were  related  to  the  people  of
Tenedos  through  Tennus,  son  of  Cycnus  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  380).  It  was
at  Tenea  that  the  youthful  Oedipus  was  brought  up  by  Polybus,  and
the  little  town  sent  out  most  of  the  emigrants  who  followed  Archias


40  TENEA  BK.  11.  CORINTH

to  found  Syracuse  (Strabo,  Lc)  In  393  B.C.  Agesilaus  led  a  Spartan
army  from  Argos  to  Corinth  by  Tenea  (Xenophon,  Heiiemcoy  iv.  4.  19).
In  the  war  which  the  Romans  waged  on  the  Achaean  League  Tenea
sided  with  Rome,  and  hence  escaped  the  fate  which  befel  Corinth
(Strabo,  Lc.)  An  Asiatic  Greek  who  contemplated  migrating  to  Corinth
received  an  oracle  to  the  effect  that  "  Blest  is  Corinth,  but  Tenea  for
me!"  (Strabo,  Ix,)  That  there  was  a  sanctuary  of  Apollo  at  Tenea
might  be  inferred  from  Pausanias  and  is  expressly  affirmed  by  Strabo
(Lc)  /^

See  Leake,  Morea,  3.  p.  320  sq,  ;  <V/.,  Peloponnesiaca,  p.  400  sq, ;
Curtius,  PeloponnesoSy  2.  pp.  549-551,  557;  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.
39 ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  22  ;  H.  G.  Lolling,  in  Steffen's  Karten  van
Mykenaiy  Erldutemder  Text^  p.  46  sq, ;  Philippson,  Peloponnes^  p.  34
sq, ;  Baedeker,^  p.  247.

At  the  village  of  Athikia^  situated  among  the  hills  about  four  miles
north-east  of  Tenea,  was  found  the  statue  known  as  the  Apollo  of
Tenea.  It  is  one  of  a  class  of  archaic  statues  which  represent  a  long-
haired youth,  naked,  standing  in  a  stiff  constrained  attitude.  They
were  formerly  called  ApoUos  on  account  of  their  long  hair.  But
according  to  Prof  Milchh5fer  the  discovery  of  bronze  statuettes  in
recent  years  has  proved  that  in  the  older  art  votive  figures  generally
represented,  not  the  god,  but  the  persons  who  dedicated  them.  Other
examples  of  this  class  of  statues  are  the  so-called  Apollo  of  Thera  and
the  Apollo  of  Orchomenus.  Of  the  three  statues  mentioned  the  Apollo
of  Thera  is  the  rudest,  and  the  Apollo  of  Tenea  the  most  advanced.
The  class  to  which  they  belong  is  believed  by  some  critics  to  exhibit
traces  of  Egyptian  influence.  Several  of  these  statues  were  found  in
recent  years  at  the  sanctuary  of  the  Ptoan  Apollo,  on  Mt.  Ptous,  in
Boeotia  (as  to  which  see  Pausanias,  ix.  24.  6),  and  still  more  recently
another  was  discovered  by  the  French  archaeologists  at  Delphi.  See
A.  Milchhdfer,  in  Archdolog,  Zeitungy  39  (1881),  p.  54  sq,\  Max.
Collignon,  *L*Apollon  d'Orchom^ne,*  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  HelUniquey
5  (1881),  pp.  319-322;  /V/.,  Histoire  de  la  Sculpture  Grecque,  i.  pp.
113  sqq,y  195  sqq, ;  M.  Holleaux,  in  Bull,  Corr,  Hellin,  10  (1886),  pp.
66-80  ;  A.  H.  Smith,  Catalogue  of  Sculpture  in  the  British  Museum^  i.
p.  82  sqq,  ;  M.  Holleaux,  *  Statue  archmque  trouvde  k  Milos,'  Bull,  de
Corr,  HelUn,  16  (1892),  pp.  560-567  ;  Friederich-Wolters,  Gipsabgiisse^
pp.  9  sqq,y  25  ;  Murray,  Hist,  of  Greek  Sculpture^  1.2  p.  170  sqq, ;  Lucy
M.  Mitchell,  Hist,  of  Ancient  Sculpture^  p.  204  sq,  ;  Overbeck,  Griech,
Plastiky^  I.  pp.  1 1 4-1 2 1  ;  Furtwangler,  Meisterwerke  d  griech,  Plastik^
p.  712  sqq, ;  Cawadias,  rXvTrra  rov^YtSviKov  Movo-ciov,  i.  Nos.  8-14,
20,  68-72 ;  Th.  Homolle,  in  Gcusette  des  Beaux  Arts^  December,  1894,
p.  444  sqq.  When  I  was  at  Phigalia  in  1890  one  of  these  archaic
statues  had  recently  been  discovered  there.  The  head  was  wanting,
but  the  ends  of  curls  remained  on  either  side  of  the  neck.  The  arms
were  also  wanting  from  the  shoulders ;  to  judge  from  what  remamed
of  them,  they  must  have  adhered  closely  to  the  sides.  The  waist  was
narrow,  the  legs  apart.  But  perhaps  the  most  remarkable  feature  of
the  statue  was  that  it  bore  an  inscription  on  the  front,  just  beneath  the


CH.  V  THE  ROAD  TO  SIC  YON  41

neck.  The  inscription  consisted  of  a  few  letters,  which  I  could  not
read  with  certainty.  They  looked  like  EYNAIAA.  The  inscription
was,  I  think,  archaic,  and  is,  so  far  as  I  know,  the  first  instance  of  an
inscription  found  on  this  class  of  statues.  The  inscription  is  probably  a
man's  name ;  and  this  favours  the  view  that  such  statues  represent
mortals,  not  gods.  Most  of  the  statues  of  this  series  are  preserved
in  the  National  Museum  at  Athens.  They  well  exhibit  the  gradual
progress  of  statuary  from  its  rude  beginnings  up  to  the  time  when  it
approached  its  most  perfect  development.

5.  5.  the  road  that  leads  from  Corinth to  Sicyon.     The

road  from  Corinth  to  Sicyon  traverses  the  plain  which  lies  between  the
Gulf  of  Corinth  and  the  hills  which  extend  parallel  to  the  coast.  This
plain,  the  western  part  of  which  was  called  Asopia  by  the  ancients
(Strabo,  viii.  p.  382,  ix.  p.  408)  and  is  named  Vocha  by  the  modems,
is  extremely  fertile.  Villages  are  numerous,  and  the  level  expanse  is
covered  with  the  stunted  currant-trees,  above  which  an  olive-tree  rises
here  and  there.  The  fertility  of  the  plain,  which  was  famous  in  antiquity
(Livy,  xxvii.  31.  i  ;  Cicero,  De  lege  agraria^  i.  2.  5  ;  Lucian,  Icaro-
merUppuSy  18  ;  id.,  Nccvigium,  20  ;  Zenobius,  iii.  57  ;  Proverb,  e  Cod,
BodUiano,  396  {Paroemiografihi  Graeci,  ed.  Gaisford,  p.  45) ;  Athenaeus,
V.  pt  219a;  Suidas,  s.v,  ei  to  fietrov  Kn/ja-aio ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,
Birds,  968)  is  largely  due  to  the  numerous  streams  which,  issuing  from
glens  among  the  hills,  intersect  it  in  deeply  worn  beds.  The  soil,  a
whitish  marl,  is  heavy  and  slippery  after  rain.  See  Clarke,  Trave/Sy  3.
p.  729;  Dodwell,  Tour,  2.  p.  292  sg.  ;  Welcker,  Tagebuch,  2.  p.  299
sq- ;  Leake,  Morea,  3.  p.  227  sq, ;  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  482  sq,  ;  Vischer,
Erinnerungen  und  Eindriicke,  p.  268  J17. ;  W.  G.  Clark,  Peloponnesus^
p.  344;  Philippson,  Peloponnes,  p.  i\Z  sq,\  Baedeker,^  p.  243.

5.  6.  Aegialens  etc.  According  to  Eusebius  the  annals  of  Sicyon
and  its  kings  extended  back  further  than  any  other  written  records  in
Greece.  Hence  he  begins  his  chronology  of  Greece  with  a  list  of
the  kings  of  Sicyon.  His  list  differs  in  some  points  from  that  of
Paosanias.  Aegialeus,  first  king  of  Sicyon,  was,  according  to  Eusebius,
a  contemporary  of  Bel  and  Ninus,  the  first  kings  of  Assyria.  The
chronicles  of  the  kings  of  Sicyon  were  written  by  a  historian  named
Castor ;  he  first  wrote  a  large  work  and  then  published  an  epitome  of
it  According  to  him  the  kings  of  Sicyon  reigned  altogether  959
years.     See  Eusebius,  Chronic,  i.  vol.  i.  p.  171  sqq.,  ed.  Schoene.

5.  6.  the  portion  of  Peloponnese  which  is  still  called  Aegialns.
A^^ialus  was  the  old  name  of  Achaia  (v.  5.  i  ;  vii.  i.  1-4  ;  Strabo,  viii.
P-  3S3).  Pausanias  speaks  as  if  the  old  name  was  still  in  use  in  his
time.  The  name  means  simply  *  coast-land'  (cp.  vii.  i.  i)  ;  king
Aegialeus  is  an  etymological  fiction.

5.  6.  the  city  of  Aegialea.  Afterwards  it  was  called  Mecone,
*tbc  poppy  town,'  because  Demeter  first  discovered  the  poppy  (/ai^kcdv)
there  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  382  ;  Stephan.  Byz.  s,v,  SikvcUi'  ;  Etytnol,  Magn,
P^  S^S*  55;  Schol.  on  Pindar,  Nem,  ix.  123).  At  the  present  day
po{^ies  "  are  scattered  over  the  plateau  upon  which  the  old  city  was
Wt'*  {American  Journal  of  Archaeology,  5  (1889),  p.  268).    But  these


42  KINGS  OF  SIC  YON  bk.  ii.  corinth

flowers  are  so  common  all  over  Greece,  where  they  turn  many  a  field
into  a  blaze  of  scarlet,  that  they  can  hardly  be  said  to  be  distinctive  of
any  one  place.  It  was  at  Sicyon,  then  called  Mecone,  that  the  gods
were  said  to  have  had  a  dispute  with  men,  and  it  was  on  this  occasion
that  Prometheus  tricked  Zeus  into  choosing  the  bones  and  £at  of  the
victim  instead  of  the  flesh  and  inwards  (Hesiod,  Theog,  535  sqq,)
The  name  Sicyon  seems  to  mean  *the  cucumber  town,'  from  sikua^
*a  cucumber,*  or  perhaps  *a  melon.'

5.  6.  Telchis.  An  old  name  of  Sicyon  was  Telchinia  (Stephanus
Byz.  s.v,  2)tKV(uK).

5.  7*  was  called  Apia  after  him.  According  to  another  tradition,
followed  by  the  poet  Rhianus  (in  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v,  *Airta)  and
Apollodorus  (ii.  i.  i),  the  Apis  after  whom  Peloponnese  was  called
Apia  was  a  son  of  Phoroneus.  The  name  Apia  seems  sometimes  to
have  been  limited  to  Argos  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  371  ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,
i.c,)j  and  it  is  in  this  narrower  sense  that  the  Attic  tragedians  appear  to
use  the  name  (Aeschylus,  SuppL  117,  260  ;  /V/.,  Agam,  256  ;  Sophocles,
Oed,  Col,  1303).  Stephanus  Byzantius,  however,  recognises  the  wider
as  well  as  the  narrower  application  of  the  name,  for  he  says  {l.c)  that
the  adjective  *  Apian '  was  used  in  the  sense  of  *  Peloponnesian.'

5.  7.  Peratus.  In  Eusebius  and  the  chronologists  the  name  of
this  king  appears  as  Eratus,  Heratus,  or  Aratus.  See  Eusebius,  Ckron.
ed-  Schoene,  vol.  i.  pp.  175,  176,  Appendix,  pp.  86,  216.  Between
king  Leucippus  and  king  Eratus  (Peratus)  the  chronologists  interpose
a  king  Messapus  or  Mesapus  (Eusebius,  lixc.)

5.  8.  Coronas.  Instead  of  Coronus,  Eusebius  and  the  chronologists
{ILcc)  mention  a  king  Marathonius  (Marathius,  Marathus).  After  him
and  before  Corax  they  interpose  two  kings  not  mentioned  by  Pausanias,
namely    Marathus    (Marathon,    Maratheus)    and   Echyreus    (Echireus,

yrus,  Chytreus).

6.  I.  The  cause  of  the  invasion  was  this.  With  the  following
legend  of  a  war  between  Sicyon  and  Thebes  compare  Apollodorus,  iii.
5.  5.  ;  Hyginus,  Fab,  8.

6.  I.  Antiope,  daughter  of  Nyctens  etc.     Cp.  L  38.  9  note.

6.  3.  olive  oil  flowed  etc.  The  olives  and  olive-oil  of  Sicyon  were
famous.     See  X.  32.  19;  Virgil,  Georg,  ii.  519;  Statins,  Theb,  iv.  50.

6.  3.  Lamedon.  In  Eusebius  and  the  chronologists  his  name  is
g^ven  as  Laomedon  or  Laomedus  (Eusebius,  Chron.  vol.  i.  p.  176;
Appendix,  pp.  86,  216,  ed.  Schoene).

6.  4.  Asins.  This  early  epic  poet  was  a  native  of  Samos.  See
vii.  4.  I  and  Index ;  Epicorum  Graecorum  fragmenta^  ed.  Kinkel,  p.
202  sqq.  He  is  supposed  to  have  flourished  about  01.  35-40  (640-617
B.C.)  (W.  Christ,  Gesck.  d,  griech,  Utteratur^  p.  80).

6.  6.  Polybos  etc.  In  Eusebius  and  the  chronologists  (Eusebius,
Chron,  vol.  i.  p.  176,  Appendix,  pp.  86,  216  sq.^  ed.  Schoene)  the
order  of  kings  is  Polybus,  Inachus,  Phaestus,  Adrastus,  Polyphides,
Pelasgus,  Zeuxippus.  According  to  Castor,  quoted  by  Eusebius  {Chron,
vol.  I.  p.  174,  ed.  Schoene),  who  herein  differs  from  Pausanias,
Zeuxippus  was  the  last  of  the  kings,  and  after  him  the  government  was


CH.  vii  SIC  YON  43

carried  on  by  the  priests  of  the  Camean  Apollo,  six  of  whom  held  rule
in  a  space  of  thirty-three  years.     Then  a  seventh  priest,  Charidemus,
succeeded ;  but  being  unable  to  support  the  expenses  of  his  office  he
retired  into  exile.       Pausanias,    on  the  other   hand,    says    that   after
Zcuxippus  there  reigned  two  kings,  Hippolytus  and  Lacestades ;  and
he  states  that  in  the  reign  of  the  former  king  Sicyon  was  forced  to
acknowledge  the  supremacy  of  Argos.     To  explain  this  divergence  of
the  authorities  Mr.  Frick  has  invented  a  somewhat  elaborate  hypothesis.
He  supposes  that  the  annals  of  the  kings  of  Sicyon  were  redacted  in  the
reign  of  the  tyrant  Clisthenes,  about  600-570  BC,  and  that  the  redac-
tors purposely  omitted  the  names  of  Hippolytus  and   Lacestades,   in
order  to  blot  out  the  fact  that  Sicyon  had  once  been  subject  to  Argos.
The  seven  priests  of  the  Camean  Apollo  were  a  mere  figment  of  the
redactors,  inserted  in  the  annals  to  fill  up  the  blank  caused  by  the
omission  of  two  kings.     But  the  truth  was  preserved,  Mr.  Frick  thinks,
in  oral  tradition,  and  Pausanias  ascertained  it  by  inquiries  on  the  spot.
Sec  C.  Frick,   'Der  tyrann   Kleisthenes  und  die  'ANAFPA^H    von
Sikyon,'  Neue  JaJtrhucher^    107   {Fleckeiset^ s  Jahrbucher^   19)    (1873),
pp.  707-712.     It  seems  certainly  true  that  Clisthenes  (in  whose  days
Sicyon  appears  to  have  reached  the  height  of  its  power)  was  very
jealous  of  Argos  ;   for  he  forbade  the  bards  to  recite  the  poems  of
Homer,  because  these  poems  told  of  the  glories  of  Argos  ;  and  he  tried
to  abolish  a  shrine  (Jteroum)  of  Adrastus  which  stood  in  the  market-
place of  Sicyon,  on  the  gpround  that  Adrastus  was  an  Argive  (Herodotus,
V.  67).

<    7. 1 .  The  city  in  the  plain was  demolished  by  Demetrius  etc.

Diodorus  Siculus  tells  us(xx.  102)  that  in  303  B.C.  Demetrius  Poliorcetes
"  lared  to  the  ground  that  part  of  the  city  of  Sicyon  which  adjoined  the
harbour,  because  the  place  was  utterly  without  natural  strength  ;  and  he
transferred  the  population  to  the  acropolis.  And  because  he  helped  the
people  to  build  and  restored  them  their  freedom  they  bestowed  on  him
divine  honours  for  his  benefits.  For  they  named  the  city  Demetrias,  and
voted  to  perform  sacrifices  and  hold  a  festival  and  games  every  year  and
to  assign  him  all  the  other  honours  as  their  founder.  These  resolutions
have  fallen  into  abeyance  through  lapse  of  time  and  the  vicissitudes  of
afiairs ;  but  the  people  of  Sicyon,  finding  the  new  situation  far  better  than
the  old  one,  continued  to  dwell  in  it  down  to  my  time.  For  the  acropolis,
a  spacious  and  level  expanse,  is  surrounded  on  every  side  by  inaccessible
clifEs,  so  that  siege-engines  cannot  be  brought  up  against  the  walls  ;  and
it  has  abundance  of  water,  whence  the  people  have  constructed  many
gardens ;  and  thus  by  providing  both  for  peaceful  enjoyment  and  safety
in  war  the  king's  foresight  has  been  justified  by  the  result."  Compare
Plutarch,  Demetrius^  25.  Strabo  says  (viii.  p.  382)  that  the  site  to
vhich  Demetrius  transferred  Sicyon  was  "  a  strong  hill  distant  twenty  or,
according  to  others,  twelve  furlongs  from  the  sea."

The  site  to  which  Demetrius  removed  Sicyon,  and  which  the  city
thenceforward  occupied  through  the  rest  of  the  classical  ages,  is  a
vaarkably  fine  one.  The  moimtains  at  this  part  of  the  coast  "  fall  down
towards  the  sea  not  in  a  continuous  slope,  but  in  a  succession  of  abrupt


44  SICYON  BK.  II.  CORINTH

descents  and  level  terraces — a  series  of  landslips,  as  it  were,  so  that  green
smooth  pastures  alternate  with  white  steep  scaurs.  These  are  severed
at  intervals  by  deep  rents  and  gorges,  down  which  the  mountain  torrents
make  their  way  to  the  sea,  spreading  the  spoils  of  the  hills  over  the  flat
plain  two  miles  in  breadth  which  lies  between  the  lowest  cliffs  and  the
shore  "  (W.  G.  Clark).  Between  two  such  deep  gorges,  on  a  spacious
and  fertile  tableland  overlooking  the  plain  and  distant  about  two  miles
from  the  sea,  stood  the  new  city.  The  tableland  is  roughly  triangular
in  shape,  with  its  apex  turned  towards  the  hills  on  the  south,  and  its
base  fronting  the  sea  on  the  north.  It  is  between  three  and  four  miles
in  circumference.  On  every  side  it  is  defended  by  a  natural  wall  of
precipices,  which  admit  only  of  one  or  two  narrow  ascents  into  it  firom
the  plain  below.  Even  at  its  southern  extremity — the  apex  of  the  tri-
angle— it  falls  steeply  away  and  is  connected  only  by  a  narrow  ridge
with  the  higher  hills  to  the  south.  The  ancient  walls  ran  all  round  the
tableland,  and  remains  of  them  may  be  seen  at  intervals  along  the  edge
of  the  cliffs  on  all  sides.  The  river  which,  issuing  from  a  dark,  narrow
glen,  flows  through  the  gorge  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  tableland  is  the
Asopus  (the  modem  Vasilikopotamos)  ;  the  much  smaller  stream  which
traverses  the  gorge  on  the  western  side  of  the  tableland  is  probably  the
Helisson  (Paus.  ii.  12.  2).  The  tableland  itself  is  divided  into  two
terraces  by  a  low  ledge  of  rocks  which  extends  quite  across  it  from  east
to  west,  forming  an  abrupt  separation  between  the  two  levels.  The
upper  terrace,  which  occupies  the  apex  or  southern  part  of  the  triangle,
is  only  about  half  the  size  of  the  lower  or  northern  terrace.  This  upper
terrace  doubtless  formed  the  acropolis  of  the  new  city,  while  the  city
itself  was  spread  over  the  lower  terrace.  At  present  the  village  of
Vasiliko  stands  on  the  lower  terrace,  near  the  northern  edge  of  the  table-
land ;  at  this  point  the  line  of  cliffs  is  broken  by  a  gully,  down  which  a
steep  and  narrow  path  leads  from  the  plateau  to  the  plain  below.  Here
doubtless  was  one  of  the  city-gates.

The  ruins  of  ancient  Sicyon,  that  is  of  the  city  founded  by  Demetrius,
are  very  considerable  and  are  scattered  over  a  wide  area.  Portions  of
the  circuit-wall,  as  already  remarked,  still  exist  in  many  places  ;  they  are
regularly  and  solidly  built  and  measure  8  feet  in  thickness.  In  the
ledge  of  rocks  which  divides  the  upper  from  the  lower  terrace  may  be
seen,  near  the  western  edge  of  the  tableland,  the  remains  of  a  theatre
and  a  stadium  (see  below).  On  the  lower  terrace — the  site  of  the  city
of  Sicyon  as  distinct  from  its  acropolis — many  foundations  of  houses  and
larger  buildings  are  scattered  among  the  fields.  With  such  exactness  do
these  foundations  extend  in  straight  lines  from  north-east  to  south-west,
or  from  north-west  to  south-east,  that  it  is  clear  the  city  was  built  on  a
regular  plan,  with  broad  streets  crossing  each  other  at  right  angles.  And
so  numerous  are  the  remains  that  even  now  a  careful  survey  would  probably
enable  us  to  restore  the  plan  of  the  city,  in  its  main  outlines,  with  toler-
able certainty.  The  best  preserved  of  the  ruins,  apart  from  those  of  the  -
theatre,  are  the  remains  of  a  large  building  of  Roman  date  which  stand
on  the  lower  terrace  a  little  to  the  north-east  of  the  theatre.  The  walls
of  this  edifice,  which  are  standing  to  a  height  of  8  or  9   feet,  are


CH.  VII  SICYON  45

bailt  partly  of  bricks  alone,  partly  of  bricks  and  hewn  stones  in  alternate
courses,  but  they  rest  on  foundations  of  ashlar  masonry.  In  the  walls
there  are  small  arched  doorways  and  large  quadrangular  windows.
The  building  contains  many  small  chambers,  some  of  which  have  semi-
circular ends.  Leake  supposed  that  this  edifice  was  the  Praetorium  or
residence  of  the  Roman  governor.  More  probably  it  contained  public
baths.  Not  far  from  it  Dodwell  observed  what  he  took  to  be  "  the
remains  of  the  gymnasium,  supported  by  strong  walls  of  polygonal
construction."  Some  dilapidated  churches  probably  occupy  the  sites  of
ancient  temples.  In  particular  we  may  note  a  small  church,  containing
some  Byzantine  paintings,  which  stands  near  the  edge  of  the  cliff,  at  the
north-eastern  extremity  of  the  ancient  city,  to  the  east  of  the  village  of
VasiUko.  In  and  about  this  church  are  remains  of  antiquity,  including
part  of  a  shaft  of  a  large  Doric  column,  some  triglyphs,  and  an  architrave
of  white  marble.  Hard  by,  a  tunnel  in  the  rock,  wide  enough  for  one
man  to  pass,  leads  down  through  the  cliffs  to  a  gully  in  which  there  is  a
spring.  The  tuimel  was  probably  a  postern,  constructed  to  allow  the
townspeople  access  to  the  spring  in  case  of  a  siege.  There  are  massive
foundations  of  walls  round  its  upper  outlet.

On  the  upper  terrace,  the  acropolis  of  Sicyon,  the  ruins  are  less
numerous,  but  some  ancient  foundations  may  be  seen  near  the  theatre.
There  seem  to  be  no  traces  of  a  wall  dividing  the  acropolis  from  the
lower  city.

In  the  rocky  slope  which  divides  the  upper  from  the  lower  terrace,
to  the  cast  of  the  theatre,  are  the  mouths  of  several  subterranean  aque-
ducts, which  have  been  cut  through  the  soft  rock.  It  is  possible  to
penetrate  through  some  of  these  rock-hewn  passages  for  considerable
distances.  They  are  lit  at  intervals  by  perpendicular  shafts.  Water
was  brought  to  Sicyon  from  the  hills  by  an  aqueduct  and  distributed
through  the  city  by  these  subterranean  channels.  Arches  and  pillars  of
the  aqueduct  which  conveyed  the  water  from  the  hills  are  still  to  be  seen
on  the  narrow  ridge  which  unites  the  extreme  point  of  the  acropolis  with
the  heights  to  the  south.

Few  ancient  cities  were  more  advantageously  or  beautifully  situated
than  Sicyon.  Built  on  a  spacious  and  level  tableland,  defended  on
every  side  by  cliffs,  abundantly  supplied  with  water,  at  a  distance  both
safe  and  convenient  from  the  sea,  from  which  it  was  divided  only  by  a
strip  of  fertile  plain,  across  which  blew  the  cool  refreshing  breezes  from
the  water  to  temper  the  summer  heat,  the  city  possessed  a  site  secure,
wholesome,  and  adapted  both  for  agriculture  and  commerce.  Nor  are
the  natural  beauties  of  the  site  less  remarkable  than  its  more  material
advantages.  Behind  it  rise  wooded  mountains,  and  in  front  of  it,
across  the  narrow  plain,  is  stretched  the  wonderful  panorama  of  the
Corinthian  Gulf,  with  Helicon,  Cithaeron,  and  Parnassus  towering
beyond  it  to  the  north,  and  the  mighty  rock  of  Acro-Corinth  barring
the  prospect  on  the  east.  At  sunrise  and  sunset  especially  the  scene
is  said  to  be  one  of  indescribable  loveliness.  The  ancients  themselves
•ere  not  insensible  to  the  charms  of  Sicyon.  "  A  lovely  and  fruitful
cay,  adapted  to  every  recreation,"  says  a  scholiast  on  Homer  (//.   ii.


46  SlCYOif  BK.  II.  coBiwra

572),  and  Diodonis  (xx.  102)  speaks  of  Sicyon  as  a  place  "for  peaceful
enjoyment."

Of  the  older  city  of  Sicyon,  which  stood  in  the  plain  between  the
tableland  and  the  sea,  the  remains  are  very  scanty.  The  plain  is  now
covered  with  vineyards,  but  there  seem  to  be  some  vestiges  of  antiquity
at  the  village  of  Moulki  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Helisson ;  and  near
the  church  of  St.  Nicholas,  which  stands  below  Vasiliko,  and  not  br
from  the  Asopus,  Vischer  observed  some  pieces  of  columns  and  an
ancient  altar;  in  the  church  itself  he  saw  the  capital  of  a  Corinthian
column.

See  Clarke,  Travels,  3.  pp.  719-729  \  Dodwell,  Tour,  a.  pp.  293-297  ;  Gell,
Itinerary  ef  the  Merea,  p.  15  sq.  \  Lealte,  Morta,  3.  pp.  355-373;  Bobkjre,
/{tcherchts,  p.  30  w. ;  L.  Ross,  Keisen  und  Reiienmten  durch  Gritchmlatid,  pp.
46-481  Welcker,  Tagetuch,  2.  pp.  300-306;  Canm^Pelofaniusoi,  2.  pp.  483-49B;
BeuU,  Eludes  mr  U  Pilnponnist,  pp.  316-327;  Visclier,  ErinneruHgfn,  pp.
271-278  ;  W.  G.  Clack,  Pttopannisus,  pp.  338-344  ;  Bursian,  Gtegr.  a.  pp.  25-30*
Baedeker,'  p.  Z44 ;  Guide-Joanne,  X,  p.  400  i^j.  ;  \V.  J.  McMurlry,  in  Ameriam
feiimal  of  Archaeology,  5  (1889),  pp.  269-271.

7.  I.  an  earthiinake,  which  nearly  depopulated  the  titj  etc.

The  date  of  this  earthquake  is  somewhat  uncertain.  Bursian  suggested
{Geogr.  1.  p.  26)  that  it  may  have  been  the  earthquake  of  23  a.d.,  which
was  felt  both  in  Greece  and  in  Asia  Minor  (Tacitus,  Annales,  iv.  13).
Loewy  would  place  it  in  141  or  142  a.d.  Cp.  Archiiolog.  epigraph,
Mittheilungm  aus  Oesterreich-Ungam,  13  (1890),  p.  191.  Hertiberg
understands  the  earthquake  to  be  the  fearful  one  of  the  middle  of  the
second  century  A.D.,  which  totally  destroyed  the  city  of  Rhode*
{Geschichte  Grieclunlands  unter  der  Herrschafi  der  Rbmer,  2.  p.  364).
See  viii.  43.  4  note.

7.  I.  the  Sibylline  onde  tonchlng  Rhodes.  This  may  be  the
oracle  which  is  stil!  preserved  in  our  collection  of  Sibylline  oracles  (viL
1  -3,  ed.  Rzach) :  it  declares  that  Rhodes  will  perish  and  be  void  of  men
and  destitute  of  the  means  of  life.

7.  2.  build  a  basement  of  stone  etc.     This  description  of  the
Sicyonian   sepulchral   monuments   is  confirmed  and   illustrated   by  the
vidence  of  Sicyonian  coins,  on  some  of  which  tombs
are  figured.     On  these  coins  (Fig.   1 5)  we  see  a  base-
ment or  pedestal,  apparently  round,  supporting  four
I    pillars,  which  in  turn  support  a  gable  or  pediment
I  On  each  side  of  the  tomb  stands  a  stiff  figure  and
I  cypress  tree.      See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,
Num.  Comm.  on  Paus.  p.  z8,  with  pi.  Hi.  ii.     Two
fragmentary  epitaphs  were  found  by   Mr.   Earle  at
Tia.  i6.-«  sicvoNiAH    Vasiiiko,  on  the  site  of  Sicyon,  in  iSgi.     So  far  as
sicvoH).  "'   '■''*^  ^°  ^^^'^  agree  with  Pausanias's  account  of  the

Sicyonian  epitaphs.  See  Classical  Review,  6  (1893),
p.  134  sq.  The  inscription  'Farewell'  (x^'pf)  is  very  common  on
Greek  tombs,  being  by  no  means  confined  to  those  of  Sicyon.

7.  3.  the  painting.  Elsewhere  (vii.  23.  6)  Pausanias  mentions  a
remarkable  painting  upon  a  tomb.     The  discoveries  of  recent  years  have    .


CH.  VII  SIC  YON  47

brought  to  light  several  ancient  Greek  paintings  upon  tombs.  The  best
known  of  these  is  the  tombstone  of  Lyseas,  a  tall  narrow  slab,  discovered
in  1839  at  Velanideza  in  Attica,  on  which  the  deceased  is  depicted
holding  a  branch  in  his  raised  left  hand  and  a  two-handled  cup  in  his
right  Underneath  is  painted  a  small  picture  representing  a  man
galloping  on  horseback.  The  tombstone  and  painting  seem  to  date  from
the  sixth  century  B.C.  See  Loeschcke,  *  Altattische  Grabstelen,'  MiiiheiL
d,  arch.  Inst  in  Athen^  4  (1879),  PP-  36-44;  Milchhofer,  *Gemalte
Grabstelen,'  ib.^  5(1880),  pp.  164-194;  Michaelis,  *  Polychromie  der
Grabstelen,*  Berichte  uber  die  Verhandl.  d.  k.  sacks,  Gesell.  d.  Wissen  zu
Lriptig^  Philog.  histor.  Classe,  19  (1867),  pp.  11 3-1 19;  L.  Gurlitt,
*Bemaltcn  Marmorplatten  in  Athen,'  in  Aufsdize  Ernst  Curtius  gewid-
wAp.  151  sqq,  ;  Baumeister,  Denkmdler^  pp.  852-854,  866-868.  When
Paosanias  says  that  the  tomb  was  specially  adapted  to  suit  the  painting,
he  probably  meaiT3  that  a  square  or  oblong  compartment  had  been  sunk
in  the  surface  of  the  tombstone,  and  that  the  picture  was  painted  on  this
sunken  compartment  in  order  to  protect  it  from  the  weather.  Many
Greek  sepulchral  reliefs  are  similarly  carved  on  a  sunken  compartment  in
the  tombstone,  as  e.g.  is  the  case  with  many  of  the  sculptured  tomb-
stones found  outside  the  Dipylum  at  Athens.  And  in  fact  Mr.  Gurlitt  has
detected  the  faint  remains  of  a  painting  on  the  sunken  compartment  of
one  of  these  very  tombstones.  See  his  essay  (cited  above),  p.  165.  In
its  architectural  arrangement  the  tombstone  in  question  (which  is  repre-
sented in  Curtius  and  Kaupert's  Atlas  von  Athen^  pi.  iv.  fig.  viii.)
probably  resembled  the  one  described  by  Pausanias.  The  literary
evidence  for  the  custom,  as  practised  by  the  ancient  Greeks,  of  painting
upon  stone  is  discussed  by  G.  Hermann  in  a  paper  *  De  veterum
Graecorum  pictura  parietum  conjecturae,'  reprinted  in  his  Opuscula^  5.
pp.  206-229.

Sicyon  was  famous  for  its  painters.  It  was  long,  says  Pliny,  the
native  home  (patria)  of  painting.  Some  people  thought  that  the  art
of  drawing  was  invented  at  Sicyon.  It  was  at  Sicyon  that  painting
was  first  taught  in  schools  as  an  element  of  liberal  education.
Three  great  Greek  schools  or  styles  of  painting  were  distinguished,  the
Ionic  school,  the  Attic  school,  and  the  Sicyonian.  Of  the  last  the  most
prominent  masters  were  Eupompus,  Pamphilus,  and  Pausias.  See
Plmy,  Nat.  Hist.  xxxv.  §§  15,75-77,  123-127.  A  characteristic  specimen
of  the  art  of  Pausias  is  described  by  Pausanias  later  on  (ii.  27.  3).
So  high  did  the  reputation  of  the  Sicyonian  academy  stand  that  the
great  Apelles  himself  studied  under  Sicyonian  masters,  more,  however,
for  the  sake  of  profiting  in  his  professional  career  by  the  reputation  of
the  school  than  because  he  had  any  sympathy  with  its  aims  and  methods.
For  the  methods  of  the  Sicyonian  school  of  painting  iappear  to  have  been
rf a  purely  formal  and  technical  character.  It  tried  to  reduce  the  art  of
painting  to  a  science,  and  by  an  exact  study  of  the  principles  of  propor-
tion and  perspective  to  lay  down  a  set  of  inflexible  rules,  by  following
which  any  one  gifted  with  sufficient  manual  dexterity  might  become  a
lunter.  The  higher  qualities  of  feeling  and  imagination,  as  they  cannot
^  reduced  to  rules  and  taught  in  the  lecture-room  and  the  studio.


48  SIC  YON  BK.   II.  CORINTH

would  seem  to  have  been  of  small  account  at  Sicyon.  The  school  was
a  school  or  academy  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word.  Its  principles
were  taught  by  a  succession  of  masters  and  expounded  in  manuals  and
handbooks  on  painting.  In  its  main  characteristic — technical  correct-
ness of  execution — the  Sicyonian  school  of  painting  closely  resembles,  as
Brunn  has  happily  pointed  out,  the  Argjve  school  of  sculpture,  by  which
it  was  probably  influenced.  The  works  of  Polyclitus,  the  great  master
of  the  Argive  school  of  sculpture,  rigidly  correct  in  their  proportions,
strike  us,  in  their  existing  copies,  as  somewhat  cold  and  hard,  with
little  of  the  generous  Are  which  softens,  warms,  and  animates  with  an
ineffable  charm  whatever  can  be  traced,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  the
'  hand  of  Praxiteles  or  Scopas.  Wustmann  has  well  suggested  that  in
the  Sicyonian  school  of  painting,  as  in  the  Argive  school  of  sculpture,
we  may  detect  the  hard  realism  of  the  Dorian  stock  as  contrasted  with
the  sweet  and  noble  idealism  which  inspired  the  art  and  literature  of
the  Ionian  race.  See  Brunn,  Geschichte  der  griech.  Kunstler,  2.  pp.
130-158,  and  an  article  by  G.  Wustmann,  *Die  Sikyonische  Maler-
schule,*  Rheinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  23  (1868),  pp.  454-479.  Sec
also  C.  T.  Michaelis,  *  Bemerkungen  zur  Sicyonischen  Malerschule,'
Archdolog,  Zeitung^  33  (1876),  pp.  30-39;  W.  Klein,  'Studien  zur
griechischen  Malergeschichte,  I.  Die  Sikyonische  Schule,*  Archdolog,
epigraph,  MittheiL  aus  Oesierretch-Ungam^  11  (1887),  pp.  193-223;
Beul^  Etudes  sur  le  Piloponnise^  pp.  328-346  ;  Murray,  Handbook  of
Greek  Archaeology^  p.  388  sqq.  The  passages  of  ancient  writers  bearing
on  the  subject  are  collected  by  Overbeck,  Schriftquellen^  §§  1 745-1 770.
7.  4-  the  Sicyonians  who  fell  at  Pellene  etc.  See  ii.  8.  5 ;  ii.
9.  I  sq,

7.  4-  At  the  gate  is  a  spring  in  a  grotto.  As  Pausanias  approached
Sicyon  from  Corinth,  this  gate  was  probably  on  the  north-eastern  side
of  Sicyon.  Now  we  have  seen  (p.  44)  that  near  the  north-eastern
extremity  of  the  tableland  on  which  Sicyon  stood  there  is  a  natural
opening  in  the  line  of  cliffs  up  which  a  steep  narrow  path  leads  to  the
site  of  the  ancient  city.  It  is  almost  certain  that  there  must  have  been  a
gate  here  ;  and  if  so,  it  may  very  well  have  been  the  gate  here  mentioned
by  Pausanias.  At  the  head  of  the  ascent  is  the  modem  village  of
Vasiliko,  A  little  to  the  east  of  this  point,  there  is  a  fine  spring  in  a
gully  at  the  foot  of  the  line  of  cliffs  ;  a  tunnel  leads  down  to  it  from  the
tableland  (above,  p.  45).  This  may  perhaps  have  been  the  Dripping
Spring  described  by  Pausanias.  It  is  true  that  at  present  the  spring  is
not  in  a  grotto,  but,  as  Prof.  Curtius  suggests,  the  rocks  which  once
formed  the  roof  of  the  grotto  may  have  fallen  in.  See  Dodwell,  Tour^
2.  p.  295  ;  Leake,  Morea,  3.  p.  372  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  488  ;  Vischer,
Erinnerungen^  p.  274  ;  W.  G.  Clark,  Peloponnesus^  p.  343  j^.  ;  Bursian,
Geogr,  2.  p.  27.  Mr.  M.  L.  Earle  thinks  that  the  Dripping  Spring  was
probably  the  one  now  called  J//>tr<?  Brysis  (* small  spring'),  the  most
northerly  fountain  of  Vasiliko^  situated  north  of  the  village  in  the  gorge
through  which  the  ordinary  road  to  Moulki  passes.  The  fountain  is  at
present  concealed  by  a  Turkish  wall,  but  the  dropping  can  be  heard
through  a  small  square  opening  in  the  wall.     There  are  ancient  tombs


CH.  VII  THE  A  TRE  A  T  SIC  YON  49

■   -  — ^  II

above  and  below  the  fountain.     S^^  A  fnerican  Journal  of  Archaeology^
5  (1889),  p.  287  sq.

7.  5.  tlie  present  acropolis.  The  site  of  this,  the  second  or  later
acropolis,  is  determined  by  the  statement  of  Pausanias  that  the  theatre
lay  under  the  acropolis.  For  the  theatre,  though  ruined,  still  exists  (see
below)  and  is  situated  on  the  rocky  slope  which  divides  the  lower  level
of  the  tableland  from  the  higher  (see  above).  It  follows,  therefore,  that
the  upper  level  was  the  acropolis  in  Pausanias's  time.  Cp.  Leake,
Mono,  3.  pp.  368  sq.^  370.

7.  5.  Fortime  of  the  Height.  On  Sicyonian  coins  of  Imperial
times  this  goddess  is  represented  standing  and  holding  a  bowl  and  a
homof  plenty  (Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num,  Comm,  on  Paus.  p.
28,  with  pL  H  iii.)

7. 5.  The  theatre.  The  theatre,  which  of  all  the  buildings  mentioned
by  Pausanias  is  the  only  one  that  can  now  be  identified,  is  partly  hollowed
out  of  the  rocky  declivity  which  separates  the  upper  level  of  the  tableland
from  the  lower.  It  is  near  the  western  cliffs,  and  &ces  north-east.  It
has  been  often  described.  See  Leake,  Morea,  3.  p.  368  sq. ;  Clarke,
Traveb^  3.  p.  723  sq, ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  490 ;  W.  G.  Clark,  Pelop,
p.  342;  Welcker,  Tagebuch^  2.  p.  302  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  27  sq,  ;
^fxM^  Etudes  sur  le  Pdoponnhe^  p.  320  sqq.  In  1886,  1887,  and  1891
it  was  partially  excavated  under  the  direction  of  the  American  School  of
Classi<al  Studies  at  Athens.  The  results  of  the  excavations  are  reported
in  The  American  Journal  of  Archaeology^  5  (1889),  pp.  267-303  ;  id.^
7(1891),  p.  281  sq.  ;  id.j  8  (1893),  pp.  388-409.

The  total  breadth  of  the  theatre  was  about  400  feet.  The  tiers  of
scats  are  mostly  cut  out  of  the  rock ;  but  at  the  wings  the  seats  were
prolonged  out  from  the  rock,  being  supported  on  masses  of  fine  masonry.
The  American  excavations  laid  bare  five  parallel  foundation  -  walls
belonging  to  the  stage  structure.  Of  these  only  one  wall  and  part  of
another  are  Greek,  the  rest  are  Roman.  The  front  and  back  walls  are
both  Roman,  and  the  similarity  of  their  dimensions  and  construction
"makes  it  probable  that  both  were  built  at  the  same  time,  when  the
stage  of  the  theatre  was  altered  and  probably  enlarged  to  conform  with
the  Roman  standard."  The  length  of  the  front  wall  is  23.60  metres,
its  average  height  about  0.55  metres,  its  thickness  0.65  metres.  There
are  three  doorways  in  it,  and  in  front  of  the  base  of  the  wall  a  marble
step  or  plinth  extends  almost  the  entire  length.

The  orchestra  comprised  somewhat  more  than  half  the  circumference
of  a  not  entirely  perfect  circle,  the  diameter  of  which  was  about  20  metres
(65  ft.  7  in.)  If  carried  up  to  the  front  (Roman)  wall  of  the  stage,  the
orchestra  would  still  fell  considerably  short  of  a  complete  circle.  The
floor  of  the  orchestra,  like  that  of  the  theatre  at  Epidaurus,  consists
amply  of  stamped  earth.  A  carefully  constructed  drain,  about  1.25  m.
vide  and  i  m.  deep,  ran  round  the  orchestra,  like  the  drain  in  the
Dionysiac  theatre  at  Athens.  Opposite  each  of  the  stairs  which  gave
access  to  the  seats,  the  drain  is  bridged  by  a  slab  of  stone.  Another
citting  extends  right  across  the  centre  of  the  orchestra  at  right  angles
%  ^  stage  walls,  under  which  it  is  carried ;  whether  it  was  a  drain  or

TOL.  Ill  E


50  THEATRE  AT  SICYON  bk.  ii.  corinth

not  is  doubtful.  Another  drain  crossed  the  orchestra  at  right  angles  to
the  last-mentioned  cutting  and  parallel  to  the  stage  walls,  starting  from
the  termination  of  the  seats  at  each  side  of  the  theatre.

The  Paroduses  (entrances  to  the  orchestra  from  the  sides  of  the
theatre)  were  laid  bare  by  the  excavations.  It  was  found  that  in  each
Parodus  one  wall  (the  one  supporting  the  ends  of  the  seats  of  the
theatre)  was  composed  of  large  rectangular  blocks ;  while  the  opposite
wall  of  the  Parodus  was  formed  of  the  native  rock,  on  which  traces  of
stucco  appear.

Of  the  seats,  the  Americans  excavated  only  a  small  portion  of  the
northern  half,  including  three  tiers  of  seats  and  the  front  of  another  tier.
The  entire  number  of  rows  of  seats  seems  to  have  been  about  forty ;  the
uppermost  tiers  of  seats,  though  cut  out  of  the  natural  rock,  are  very
incomplete.  The  seats  were  divided  into  fifteen  sections  by  fourteen
staircases.  "  Accordingly,  a  line  drawn .  from  the  middle  point  of  the
stage  through  the  centre  of  the  orchestra  passes  through  the  middle  of
the  eighth  section  of  seats,  and  does  not  coincide,  as  in  some  theatres,
with  one  of  the  stairways.  This,  at  least,  is  the  method  of  division  in
the  lower  section  of  seats."  The  seats  in  the  front  tier  are  superior  to
the  others,  resembling  in  this  respect  the  stone  chairs  in  the  front  tier  of
the  Dionysiac  theatre  at  Athens  and  of  the  great  theatre  at  Epidaurus.
They  were  doubtless  intended  for  the  accommodation  of  priests  or  other
officials.  They  are  not  of  marble,  but  are  of  the  same  common  stone  as
the  ordinary  seats.  These  front  seats  have  backs  and  arms  ;  each  seat
is  cut  from  two  blocks,  which  are  joined  at  the  middle.  Some  of  the
arms  show  remains  of  ornamental  scroll-work  on  the  outer  side.  The
ordinary  seats  ''  are  divided  into  two  parts  by  a  longitudinal  depression.
The  front  part,  or  seat  proper,  is  0.35  m.  wide;  while  the  back  part,
upon  which  the  persons  sitting  behind  placed  their  feet,  is  0.20  m.
wide."  The  rock-cut  seats  still  remaining  in  the  upper  part  of  the
theatre  "  differ  in  form  from  the  lower  ones.  The  feet  of  the  row  of  the
persons  behind  were  not  on  the  same  level  as  the  surface  on  which  the
persons  in  front  sat,  but  rested  on  an  elevation  which  was  0.35  m.  above
the  seat  and  the  same  in  width."

Two  vaulted  passages,  one  on  the  northern,  the  other  on  the  southern
side  of  the  theatre,  give  access  to  the  seats  from  without  The  original
length  of  the  southern  passage  was  about  16  metres,  the  breadth  is
2.55  m.  The  walls  and  vault  are  composed  of  rectangular  blocks  put
together  without  any  cement.  The  vault  is  formed  of  six  courses  of
stones  on  either  side,  exclusive  of  the  keystone  course.  These  vaults  or
arches  are  very  important  as  specimens  of  true  Greek  arches.  They
"  belong  unquestionably  to  the  best  Hellenic  period — the  best,  that  is,
in  a  masonic  point  of  view.  There  is  every  probability  that  they  were
erected  by  Demetrius,  the  benefactor  of  Sicyon,  if  indeed  they  be  not  of
a  still  remoter  date ;  so  that  we  find  that  the  Greeks  were  acquainted
with  the  mystery  of  throwing  an  arch  at  least  as  early  as  the  end  of  the
fourth  century  B.C."  (W.  G.  Clark,  Pelop,  p.  342  sq,)

Lastly,  the  American  excavations  revealed  the  foundations  of  two
structures  situated  at  the  opposite  ends  of  the  stage.     At  the  southern


cavil  SIC  YON  51

end  of  the  stage  was  a  square  chamber,  apparently  of  Greek  construc-
tioD.  Around  the  inner  walls  of  this  chamber  there  is  a  continuous
rock-cutting  in  the  form  of  a  bench  or  seat.  At  the  other  end  of  the
stage  are  the  remains  of  what  must  have  been  an  ornamental  fountain  of
Roman  times.  The  back  of  it  is  semicircular.  Both  the  square  chamber
and  the  fountain  opened  outwards  from  the  theatre.

A  litde  to  the  west  of  the  theatre  are  the  remains  of  the  stadium,

which  is  not  mentioned  by  Pausanias.     The  upper  or  semicircular  end

of  it  occupies  a  fold  or  recess  in  the  same  rocky  slope  against  which  the

theatre  is  built.     The  recess  is  partly  natural,  partly  excavated.     "  The

stadium  resembles  that  of  Messene,  in  having  had  seats  which  were  not

continued  through  the  whole  length  of  the  sides.     About  80  feet  of  the

rectilinear  extremity  \i.e,  of  the  straight  sides  as  distinguished  from  the

semicircular  end]  had  no  seats,  and  this  part,  instead  of  being  excavated

out  of  the  hill  like  the  rest,  is  formed  of  factitious  ground,  supported  at

the  end  by  a  wall  of  polygonal  masonry,  which  still  exists.     The  total

length,  including  the  seats  at  the  circular  end,  is  about  680  feet,  which,

deducting  the  radius  of  the  semicircle,  seems  hardly  to  leave  a  length  of

600  Greek  feet  for  the  line  between  the  two  metae  [turning-posts].     It

is  very  possible,  however,  that  an  excavation  would  correct  this  idea ;

for  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  there  was  any  difference  in  the  length  of

the  6po/ios,  or  course,  in  the  several  stadia  of  Greece.  ...   If  the  length

of  the  course  had  ever  varied,  it  must,  I  think,  have  been  alluded  to  in

some  of  the  ancient  authors  "  (Leake,  Morea,  3.  p.  370).     Cp.  Clarke,

TrwtlSy  3.  p.   725  ;  Curtius,  Pelap,  2.  p.  490;  W.  G.  Clark,  Pelop.  p.

342 ;  VVelcker,  Tagebuch^  2.  p.  303  sq, ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  p.  276  ;

Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  28  ;  Beul<5,  Atudes  sur  le  Pdloponn^se^  p.  322  sq,

7.  5.  a  temple  of  Dionysus.     Just  below  the  theatre  Leake  found

"the  basis  of  a  column,  together  with  that  of  one  of  the  antae,  of  a

small  temple ;  the  column  was  two  feet  seven  inches  and  a  half  in

diameter."     He  thinks  that  this  may  have  been  part  of  the  temple  of

Dionysus,  which  we  know  from  Pausanias  must  have  been  near  the

theatre  (Leake,   Morea,   3.  pp.    369,  371).     On    coins  of  Sicyon   of

Imperial  times   Dionysus   is   represented  standing,   holding   a   goblet

(cmikarus)  and  a  thyrsus,  with  a  panther  at  his  feet  (Imhoof-Blumer

and  Gardner,  Num.  Comm,  on  Paui,  p.  28,  with  pi.  H  iv.  v.)     Bursian

(Gtogr,  2.  p.  28)  conjectured  that  the  Dionysus  of  this  temple  may  have

been  really  Adrastus,  because  we  know  from  Herodotus  (v.  67)  that

there  was  a  shrine  (Jieroum)  of  Adrastus  at  Sicyon  and  that  the  Sicyonians

celebrated  his  sufferings  in  tragic  choruses.    But  Bursian  has  overlooked

the  feet,  mentioned  by  Herodotus,  that  the  shrine  of  Adrastus  stood  on

the  market-place  ;  and  this  market-place,  being  that  of  the  old  city,  must

lave  been  in  the  plain  ;  whereas  the  temple  of  Dionysus,  being  near  the

theatre,  must  have  stood  on  the  plateau  which  was  the  citadel  of  the

<id,  and  the  site  of  the  new,  city.

7.  5.  Bacchantes  in  white  marble.  On  some  coins  of  Sicyon  a
liacdiante  or  Maenad  is  represented  in  an  attitude  of  rapture,  holding  a
hife  (Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num,  Comm,  on  Pans.  p.  29,  with
|IH  VL  vii.)


52  SIC  YON  BK.  II.  CORINTH

7.  6.  mistaking  the  meaning  of  the  oracle  etc.  Hyllus  son  ol
Hercules  inquired  of  the  Delphic  oracle  in  what  manner  the  banished
Heraclids  might  return  to  Peloponnesc.  The  oracle  told  him  that  they
should  "  wait  for  the  third  fruit  and  then  return."  By  "  the  third
fruit  ^  the  god  meant  the  third  generation.  But  Hyllus  understood  it
of  the  third  year ;  so  having  waited  that  space  of  time  he  led  an  army
into  Peloponnese.  But  he  was  defeated  by  the  Peloponnesians ;  and
Aristomachus,  one  of  the  Heraclids,  fell  in  the  battle.  See  Apollodorus,
ii.  8.  2.

7.  6.  Artemis  of  the  Lake.  "  The  worship  of  Artemis,  as  Curtius
has  observed,  was  peculiarly  associated  with  low-lying  land  and  reed-
covered  marshes.  The  reeds  shared  with  men  in  the  worship  of  the
goddess,  and  moved  to  the  sound  of  the  music  in  her  festivals,  or,  as
Strabo  says,  the  baskets  danced,  or  in  Laconia  maidens  crowned  with
reeds  danced  "  (Prof.  W.  M.  Ramsay,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  4
(1883),  p.  36).  A  Greek  inscription  discovered  at  Gondane  in  Pisidia,
near  the  large  double  lake  Egerdir  Gdl  and  Hoiran  Gdl,  proves  that
Artemis  was  the  great  goddess  of  this  lake  district  (Ramsay,  i.c, ;  cp.
Index  s,v,  *  Artemis';  K.  O.  Miiller,  Die  Dorier^'^  i.  p.  378  5qq.\
Roscher's  Lexikon,  i.  p.  560).  For  the  juxtaposition  here  at  Sicyon  of
Artemis  with  Dionysus  the  Deliverer  and  Dionysus  Bacchius,  Stephani
{Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1865,  p.  29)  compares  the  similar
collocation  of  deities  at  Corinth  (Paus.  ii.  2.  6).  At  Sicyon,  indeed,
Artemis  is  the  goddess  of  the  Lake,  and  at  Corinth  she  is  the  Ephesian
goddess ;  but,  as  Prof.  W.  M.  Ramsay  has  remarked,  "with  slight  local
modifications  the  cultus  of  Artemis  Tauropolus,  Limnatis  [/>.  Artemis  of
the  Lake],  Orthia,  Orthosia,  etc.,  is  essentially  the  same  as  that  of  the
Lydian  [Ephesian]  Artemis  ;  and  few  will  now  try  to  maintain  that  the
strict  separation  which  prevailed  in  Hellenic  polytheism  between  the
different  goddesses  had  any  counterpart  in  the  primitive  cultus  "  (Jfoum,
Hellen.  Stud.  3  (1882),  p.  55).

7.  7*  the  market-place.  Not  far  below  the  theatre  and  stadium,
near  the  centre  of  the  lower  level  of  the  tableland,  are  the  remains  of  a
Roman  building  with  several  chambers ;  there  are  also  some  traces  of
the  street  which  led  from  this  quarter  to  the  theatre.  From  the  position
of  this  Roman  building  about  the  centre  of  the  later  Sicyon,  Leake
thought  that  it  probably  stood  on  the  market-place ;  and  he  conjectured
that  the  building  was  the  palace  of  the  Roman  governor  in  the  interval
between  the  destruction  of  Corinth  by  Mummius  and  its  restoration  by
Julius  Caesar ;  for  during  this  period  the  greater  part  of  the  Corinthian
territory  was  attached  to  Sicyon,  which  was  the  capital  of  the  surround-
ing country.  See  Leake,  Morea,  3.  pp.  369,  370  j^.  But  the  Roman
building  in  question  was  probably  the  public  baths.    See  above,  p.  44  j^.

7.  7.  Aegialea.  This  was,  as  we  have  seen  (ii.  6.  5),  an  old  name
of  Sicyon.  But  there  is  an  island  of  the  same  name  (Aegialia  or  Aegilia)
midway  between  Crete  and  Cythera.  In  1 889  excavations  conducted  in
this  little  island  by  the  Greek  Government  revealed  the  foundations  of
an  ancient  Greek  building,  which  from  an  inscription  found  near  it  seems
to  have  been  a  sanctuary  of  Apollo  Aegileus.     Mr.  Staes,  who  directed


CH.  vii  PURIFICA  TION  OF  APOLLO  53

the  excavations,  has  hence  conjectured  that  the  Aegialia  to  which  Apollo
and  Artemis  went  after  slaying  the  Python  was  the  island  of  that  name,
and  not  Sicyon,  to  which,  through  a  confusion  of  names,  the  tradition
was  afterwards  attached.  It  was  more  natural,  he  observes,  that  Apollo
and  Artemis  should  have  gone  to  Crete  from  the  neighbouring  island  of
Aegialia  than  from  the  distant  Sicyon.  See  'KpxaioXoyiKhv  AeXriov,
November  1889,  p.  240  sg,

7.  7-  to  be  purified.      The  slaughter  of  the  dragon  Python  by
Apollo  and  the  subsequent  purification  of  the  god  from  the  taint  of
blood-guiltiness  were  represented  every  eighth  year  at  Delphi  in  a  solemn
fcsti\'al,  which  drew  great  crowds  of  spectators,  especially  from  the
north  of  Greece.     The  festival  was  called  the  Festival  of  Crowning  (to
Imnriptov),  and  is  thus   described  by  Plutarch  (Quaes f.  Graec.  12):
"The  Festival  of  Crowning  seems  to  be  an  imitation  of  the  god's  battle
with  the  Python  and  of  the  flight  and  pursuit  to  Tempe  after  the  battle.
For  some  say  that  after  the  fight  Apollo  fled  because  he  desired  to  be
purified.     But  others  say  that  the  Python  was  hurt  and  fled  away  along
the  road  which  they  now  call  the  Sacred  Road ;  but  Apollo  pursued
after  it  and  came  up  with  it  soon  after  it  expired.     For  he  found  that
the  monster  had  died  of  its  hurt  and  had  been  buried  by  a  boy  whose
name  was  Goat."     In  another  passage  (De  defectu  orac,  1 5)  he  describes
more  fiilly  one  of  the  scenes  of  the  sacred  drama.     When  the  eighth
>'ear  came  round  a  temporary  shed  was  erected  upon  *  the  threshing-
floor.'    This  '  threshing-floor '  was  no  doubt  one  of  those  large  circular
spaces  paved  with  stones  and  in  the  open  air,  which  are  still  to  be  seen
everywhere  in  Greece  and  on  which  the  horses  tread  out  the  com.
This  house  represented  the  abode  of  the  dragon  ;  but  with  the  usual
neglect  of  scenic  propriety  the  shed,  says  Plutarch,  bore  much  more
resemblance  to  a  lordly  palace  than  to  a  dragon's  den.     A  formal  attack
^■15  then  made  upon  the  dragon's  house  by  persons  who  bore  blazing
torches  in  their  hands  and  led  with  them  a  lad  whose  father  and  mother
were  both  alive.     The  lad  probably  represented  Apollo,  and  shot  an
arrow  at  the  dragon  who  was  supposed  to  be  lurking  in  the  shed.    This,
however,  is  not  expressly  said  by  Plutarch,  perhaps  because  he  thought
it  impious  to  describe  the  deed  of  blood.     But  after  the  dragon  may  be
supposed  to  have  received  his  deadly  wound,  the  persons  who  carried
lighted  torches  set  fire  to  the  shed,  upset  the  table,  and  fled  away  without
turning  to  look  behind  them.     Last  of  all,  the  boy  who  represented
Apollo  wandered  away,  served  as  a  menial,  and  was  purified  at  Tempe.
The  last  part   of  the  ceremony,   namely  the  wanderings  of  Apollo's
representative  and  his  final  purification  at  Tempe,  are  described  by
Aelian  (  Var.  Hist,  iii.  i ),  whose  account  explains  why  this  festival  was
oiled  the   Festival  of  Crowning.      After  describing  in  high-wrought
bnguage  the  beauty  of  the  Vale  of  Tempe,  he  proceeds :  "Here  the
Thessalians  say  that  the  Pythian  Apollo  purified  himself  by  command  of
Zeus,  after  he  had  shot  to  death  with  his  arrows  the  Python,  the  dragon
that  guarded  Delphi  in  the  days  when  the  oracle  was  in  the  hands  of
tarth.     So  Apollo  made  himself  a  crown  from  the  laurel  tree  at  Tempe,
^  taking  in  his  right  hand  a  branch  from  the  same  laurel  tree  he  came


54  PURIFICATION  OF  APOLLO         bk.  ii.  corinth

to  Delphi  and  took  over  the  charge  of  the  oracle.  An  altar  stands  on
the  very  spot  where  the  god  twined  himself  a  crown  and  broke  the
branch.  And  still,  when  the  eighth  year  comes  round,  the  Delphians
send  a  procession  of  high-bom  boys,  with  one  of  the  boys  as  leader.
They  come  to  Tempe,  and  after  offering  a  splendid  sacrifice  they  return
again,  but  not  until  they  have  plaited  crowns  from  the  same  laurel  tree
from  which  on  the  memorable  occasion  the  god  himself  wreathed  his
brows.  The  procession  goes  by  the  road  which  is  called  the  Pythian
road  ;  it  leads  through  Thessalia  and  Pelasgia  and  Oete  and  the  land  of
the  Aenianes  and  of  the  Melians  and  of  the  Dorians  and  of  the  Western
Locrians.  All  these  peoples  escort  the  procession  with  as  much  rever-
ence and  honour  as  is  accorded  to  those  who  bring  to  the  same  god  the
sacred  things  from  the  land  of  the  Hyperboreans.  And  at  the  Pythian
games  the  crowns  given  to  the  victors  are  made  from  this  laurel."  On
his  return  from  Tempe  the  boy  who  carried  the  laurel  branch  stopped
at  Dipnias,  a  village  near  Larissa,  to  dine ;  because  according  to  the
legend  Apollo  first  broke  his  fast  there  on  his  return  from  being  purified
at  Tempe  (Stephanus  Byzant.  s,v,  AciTrvias).  Probably  therefore  the
boy  fasted  more  or  less  strictly  during  the  pilgrimage  from  Delphi  to
Tempe  and  back  to  Dipnias.

The  burning  of  *the  Python's  shed,'  mentioned  by  Strabo  (ix.  p.
422)   on    the    authority  of    Ephorus,    makes  certain,    what  otherwise
would  be  only  a  matter  of  inference   from    Plutarch,   that   the  shed
which  was  burned  at  the  festival  really  represented  the  dwelling  of  the
dragon.      The  menial  service  which  the  boy  who  played  the  part  of
Apollo  was   obliged  to  take  is  probably  to  be  explained,   as   K.  0.
Miiller   saw,    by   the   story   that   Apollo   had    been   forced    to    serve
Admetus,  king  of  Pherae,  for  a  year  as  a  punishment  for  killing  the
Cyclopes   (ApoUodorus,  iii.    10.   4  ;  Servius  on  Virgil,  Aen,  vii.  761 ;
Diodorus,  iv.  71,  vi.  7;  Preller,  Grieck.  Mythol.^  i.  p.  287).     Such  a
legend  seems  to  point  to  an  old  custom  of  obliging  a  manslayer  to
expiate  his  offence  by  doing  menial  service  for  a  certain  time  among
strangers.     (Similarly  Hercules  was  sold  into  slavery  for  three  years  as
an  expiation  for  the  murder  of  Iphitus.     See  ApoUodorus,  ii.  6.     And
Cadmus  served  Ares  eight  years  for  killing  the  dragon  which  guarded
the  spring  at  Thebes.     See  note  on  ix.  10.  i.)     Probably  the  procession
to  Tempe  passed  through  Pherae,  and  the  boy  who  acted  Apollo  went
through  some  pretence  of  servitude  at  the  very  place  where  the  god  him-
self was  said  to  have  served  Admetus.     See  K.  O.  Miiller,  Die  Dorier?
I.  pp.  203  sqq.^  321-324  (English  trans,  vol.  i.  p.  230  sqq.^  336  sqq,)t
Aug.  Mommsen,  Delphika^  p.  206  sqq,  (Mommsen  Lc,  and  Preller  Lc*
give  the  name  of  the  festival  as  Septerion.     The  sole  authority  for  this
seems  to  be  Hesychius,  (rcTr-nypta*  KadapjjAs'  lic^wrts.     There  appeals
to  be  no  variation  in  the  MSS.  of  Plutarch).     Probably  there  was  »
local  Sicyonian  legend  that  Apollo  had  killed  the  Python  at  Sicyon.
For  according  to  Hesychius  {s.v.  To^tov  /Sovvos)  there  was  at  Sicyon  a
hill  of  the  archer  Apollo,  and  the  legend  of  the  slaying  of  the  Python
seems  to  have  been  attached  to  this  hill.     See  Th.  Schreiber,  Apollarf
Pythoktonos  (Leipzig,  1879),  p.  43  ^99-


CH.  VII  PURIFICATION  FOR  SLAUGHTER  55

The  l^end  of  the  purification  of  Apollo  for  killing  the  dragon
Python  seems  to  carry  us  back  to  the  days  of  primitive  Greek  savagery,
when  the  killing  of  certain  animals  was  supposed  to  need  expiation,  and
the  slayer  was  deemed  unclean  until  he  had  performed  some  purificatory
or  expiatory  rites.     Examples  of  similar  ideas  and  customs  are  to  be
found  among  savages  to  this  day.     For  instance  in  Dahomey,  if  a  man
bas  killed  a  fetish  snake,  he  is  treated  as  follows.     A  hut  is  made  of
iry  faggots  thatched  with  dry  grass.     The  culprit  is  drenched  with  palm
ail ;  a  dog,  a  kid,  and  two  fowls  are  fastened  on  his  back ;  and  in  this
condidon  he  has  to  crawl  into  the  hut  by  a  very  low  entrance.     The
but  is  then  set  fire  to,  and  the  man  has  to  make  his  escape  through  the
flames  as  best  he  can  to  the  nearest  running  water.    During  his  passage
thither  he  has  to  run  the  gauntlet,  the  mob  pelting  him  with  sticks  and
:lods.     Reaching  the  water,  he  plunges  into  it,  and  is  then  ^'  considered
to  be  cleansed  of  all  the  sin  or  crime  of  the  snake  murder.''     Thirteen
days  afterwards  a  *  custom '  or  holy  day  is  held  for  the  dead  snake.
Sec  John  Duncan,  Travels  in  Western  Africa^  i.  p.  195  J^. ;  cp.  F.  E.
Forbes,  Dahomey  and  the  Dahomans,  i.  p.  107  ;  Bouche,  La  CSte  des
EsclaveSy  p.  397.     But  it  is  not  only  for  the  slaughter  of  sacred  or
deified  animals  that  expiation  or  purification  is  required  on   savage
principles.      Amongst  the   Kafirs    "the  slaughter  of  a  lion,  however
honourable  it  is  esteemed,  is  nevertheless  associated  with  an  idea  of
moral  uncleanness,  and  is  followed  by  a  very  strange  ceremony.     When
the  hunters  approach  the  village  on  their  return,  the  man  who  gave  the
lion  the  first  wound  is  hidden  from  every  eye  by  the  shields  which  his
comrades  hold  up  before  him.     One  of  the  hunters  steps  forward  and
leaping  and  bounding  in  a  strange  manner  praises  the  courage  of  the
Iton-killer.     Then  he  rejoins  the  band,  and  the  same  performance  is
repeated  by  another.      All  the  rest  meanwhile  keep  up  a  ceaseless
shouting,  rattling  with  their  clubs  on  their  shields.     This  goes  on  till
they  have  reached  the  village.     Then  a  mean  hut  is  run  up  not  far  from
the  village  ;  and  in  this  hut  the  lion-killer,  because  he  is  unclean,  must
remain  four  days,  cut  off  from  all  association  with  the  tribe.     There  he
dyes  his  body  all  over  with  white  paint ;  and  lads  who  have  not  yet  been
circumcised,  and  are  therefore,  in  respect  to  uncleanness,  in  the  same
state  as  himself  bring  him  a  calf  to  eat  and  wait  upon  him.     When  the
four  days  are  over,  the  unclean  man  washes  himself,  paints  himself  with
red  paint  in  the  usual  manner,  and  is  escorted  back  to  the  village  by  the
head  chief,  attended  with  a  guard  of  honour.     Lastly,  a  second  calf  is
killed ;  and,  the  uncleanness  being  now  at  an  end,  every  one  is  free  to
cat  of  the  calf  with  him  "  (L.  Alberti,  De  Kaffers  aan  de  Zuidkust  van
Afrikoy  p.  158  j^.)     Cp.  Lichtenstein,  Reisen  im  siidlichen  Africa^  i.  p.
419.     Again,  among  the  Kafirs  a  man  who  happened  to  kill  a  boa-
constrictor  "  was  formerly  required  to  lie  in  a  running  stream  of  water
during  the  day  for  several  weeks  together ;  and  no  beast  whatever  was
allowed  to  be  slaughtered  at  the  hamlet  to  which  he  belonged,  until  this
duty  had  been  fiilly  performed.     The  body  of  the  snake  was  then  taken
and  carefully  buried  in  a  trench,  dug  close  to  the  cattle-fold,  where  its
remains,  like  those  of  a  chie^  were  henceforward  kept  perfectly  undis-


56  PURIFICATION  FOR  SLAUGHTER     bk.  ii.  corinth

turbed"  (S.  Kay,  Travels  and  Researches  in  Cajffraria^  p.  341  sq,)
Among  the  Hottentots  when  a  man  has  killed  a  lion,  leopard,  elephant,
rhinoceros,  or  elk,  he  is  esteemed  a  great  hero,  but  he  is  deluged  with
wine  by  the  medicine-man  and  has  to  remain  at  home  quite  idle  for
three  days,  during  which  his  wife  must  not  come  near  him ;  she  is  also
enjoined  to  eat  no  more  than  is  absolutely  necessary.  On  the  evening
of  the  third  day  the  hero  kills  a  fat  sheep  and  calls  all  his  neighbours  to
the  feast.  See  Kolbe,  Present  State  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope^  i .  pp.
251-254.  Similarly  the  Lapps  deem  it  the  height  of  glory  to  kill  a  bear.
Nevertheless  all  the  men  who  take  part  in  the  slaughter  are  regarded  as
unclean,  and  have  to  live  by  themselves  for  three  days  in  a  hut  made
specially  for  them ;  during  the  three  days  none  of  them  may  visit  his
wife.  At  the  expiry  of  three  days  they  run  thrice  round  the  fire  ;  this  is
regarded  as  a  purification,  and  they  are  then  allowed  to  rejoin  their
wives.  See  Scheffer,  Lapfionia,  pp.  235-243  ;  Leemius,  De  Lappombus
Finmarchiae^  p.  502  j^.  ;  Jessen,  De  Finnorum  Lapponumque  Norwegi-
corum  Religione  Pagana  (bound  up  with  Leemius's  work),  p.  64  sq.
Among  the  Kaniagmuts  of  Alaska  the  men  who  attacked  the  whale  were
considered,  during  the  fishing  season,  as  unclean,  though  otherwise  they
were  held  in  high  honour  (W.  Dall,  Alaska  and  its  Resources^  p.  404).
Amongst  their  neighbours  the  Aleutians,  when  a  hunter  had  struck  a
whale  with  his  spear,  "  he  would  not  throw  again,  but  would  proceed  at
once  to  his  home,  separate  himself  from  his  people  in  a  specially  con-
structed hovel,  where  he  remained  three  days  without  food  or  drink,  and
without  touching  or  looking  upon  a  female.  During  this  time  of  seclu-
sion he  snorted  occasionally  in  imitation  of  the  wounded  and  dying
whale,  in  order  to  prevent  the  whale  struck  by  him  leaving  the  coast.
On  the  fourth  day  he  emerged  from  his  seclusion  and  bathed  in  the  sea,
shrieking  in  a  hoarse  voice  and  beating  the  water  with  his  hands.  Then,
taking  with  him  a  companion,  he  proceeded  to  the  shore,  where  he
presumed  the  whale  had  lodged,  and  if  the  animal  was  dead  he  com-
menced at  once  to  cut  out  the  place  where  the  death-wound  had  been
inflicted.  If  the  whale  was  not  dead  the  hunter  returned  to  his  home
and  continued  washing  himself  until  the  whale  died  "  (Petroff,  Report
on  Alaska^  p.  154  ^^.)  The  Central  Eskimo  think  that  all  sea  animals
were  originally  made  from  the  severed  fingers  of  the  goddess  Sedna ;
hence  the  Eskimo  must  make  an  atonement  for  every  animal  he  kills.
When  a  seal  is  brought  into  the  hut,  the  women  must  stop  working  until
it  is  cut  up.  After  the  capture  of  a  ground  seal,  walrus,  or  whale,  they
must  rest  for  three  days.  See  Franz  Boas,  *The  Central  Eskimo,'
Sixth  Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology  (Washington,  1888),
p.  595  ;  /V/.,  Proceedings  and  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of
Canada^  5  (Montreal,  1888),  section  ii.  p.  36;  /V/.,  Zeitschrift  fur
Ethnologic^  17  (1885),  Verhandl.  der  Berl.  Ges.  fiir  Anthrop.  Ethnol.
u.  Urgesch,  p.  itT,  sq,\  C.  F.  Hall,  Life  with  the  Esquimaux^  2.  p.  321
sq.  ;  /V/.,  Narrative  of  the  Second  Arctic  Expedition  made  by  Charles  F.
Ifall^  edited  by  Prof.  J.  E.  Nourse,  p.  191  sq.  When  the  Hidatsa
Indians  are  out  hunting  eagles,  they  pitch  a  small  *  medicine  '-hut,  where
certain  ceremonies  are  performed.    On  returning  from  sitting  beside  the


CH.  VII  PURIFICA  TION  FOR  SLA  UGHTER  57


caglMrap  the  hunter  is  avoided  by  every  one,  for  no  one  may  see  him
till  he  enters  the  *  medicine  Modge.  His  trapping  lasts  four  days,  during
whidi  he  must  see  none  of  his  family  and  speak  to  none  of  his  friends
except  those  who  are  engaged  in  the  trapping.  See  Washington
Matthews,  The  HidcUsa  Indians^  P-  58  sqq.  Among  the  Damaras  of
South  Africa  when  a  hunter  returns  from  a  successful  hunt,  he  takes
water  in  his  mouth,  and  ejects  it  three  times  over  his  feet,  and  also  into
the  fire  on  his  own  hearth  (C.  J.  Andersson,  Lake  Ngami^  p.  224).
When  a  Catauxi  Indian  returns  successful  from  the  chase,  he  smears  his
face  with  soot  as  he  approaches  his  house  (R.  Spruce,  in  Travels  of
Cma  de  Leon^  trans,  by  C.  R.  Markham,  p.  342).  Some  Indian  hunters
after  killing  an  animal  used  to  purify  themselves  in  water  as  a  religious
rite  (Adair,  History  of  the  American  Indians^  p.  118).  Amongst  the
Wagandas  of  Central  Africa  it  is  a  rule  that  the  hunter  shall  return
from  the  chase  by  a  path  different  from  that  by  which  he  went  (R.  W.
Felkin,  *  Notes  on  the  Waganda  tribe  of  Central  Africa,'  Proceedings
of  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  13  (1884- 1886),  p.  735).  All
these  customs  may  be  explained  by  a  desire  to  elude  the  angry  spirit
of  the  slain  or  wounded  animal.  The  original  object  of  rules  of  cere-
monial purity,  as  Porphyry  long  ago  observed,  is  not  to  bring  man  into
relation  with  God,  but  to  keep  evil  spirits  at  a  distance  (Porphyry,  quoted
by  Eosebius,  Praefiar,  Evang,  iv.  23).

7.  7.  to  Oarmanor  in  Orete.     Carmanor  lived  at  Tarrha,  on  the
southern  coast  of  Crete,  towards  the  western  end.     See  x.  16.  5  ;  cp.
X.  7.  2;  ii.  30.  3  ;  K.  O.  Miiller,  Dorier^  i.  p.   208  (i.  p.  236,  Engl.
Trans.)    We  have  seen,  in  the  preceding  note,  that  the  Delphian  legend
fixed  on  Tempe  in  Thessaly,  not  Tarrha  in  Crete,  as  the  place  where
Apollo  was    purified.      The  Scholiast  on  Pindar  (Introd.  to  Pyth,  p.
298,  ed.  Boeckh)  combines  the  two  legends  by  saying  that  Apollo  went
first  to  Crete  and  afterwards  to  Tempe.     In  the  early  days  of  Greece
the  Cretans  seem  to  have  had  a  high   reputation  as  exorcisers  and
deansers  of  religious  pollution.     It  was  from  Crete  that  Epimenides
came  to  purge  Athens  from  the  plague  (see  note  on  i.  14.  4)  ;  and  it  was
hy  the  Dactyls  of  Mount   Ida  in  Crete  that  Pythagoras  was  purified.
"He was  purified,"  says  Porphyry  ( F//.  Pythag.  17),  "with  the  thunder-
stone,  in  the  morning  lying  on  his  face  beside  the  sea,  and  at  night  lying
beside  the  river,  crowned  with  the  wool  of  a  black  lamb."     There  were
certain  Cretan  diviners  called  Cretids  (Photius,  Lexicon,  s.v.  KpiyrtSat).
7.  8.  the  children  go  to  the  Sythas  etc.     The  ceremony  may
have  resembled,  as  K.  O.  Miiller  suggested,  the  Attic  festival  of  the
Delphinia,    when  maidens    went   as    suppliants    in    procession    to    the
Delphinium,  or  temple  of  the  Delphian  Apollo,  bearing  a  branch  or
branches    of  the    sacred    olive-tree   wreathed  with  white  wool.      See
Plutarch,  Theseus,   18  ;  K.  O.  Miiller,  Dorier^  i.  p.  330  sq.  (vol.  i.  p.
346  sq,  Eng.  Trans.) ;  Aug.  Mommsen,  Heortologie,  p.  398  sqq.     The
river  Sythas  to  which  the  children  went  in  procession  from  Sicyon  has
been  identified  with  the  modem  river  of  Xylokastro  or  Trikkalas,  the
<aly  considerable  river  in  this  neighbourhood  (Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  498).
But  as  the  Xylokastro  is  about  10  miles  by  road  from  Sicyon,  Leake


58  SIC  YON  BK.  II.  CORINTH

(Peloponnesica^  p.  404  sq,)  objects  that  the  children  could  hardly  have
gone  in  procession  there  and  back.  See  note  on  vii.  27.  12.  The
Sythas  was  at  all  events  to  the  west  of  Sicyon.     See  ii.  12.  2.

The  Sicyonian  ceremony  implies  that  Apollo  and  Artemis  were
supposed  to  absent  themselves  annually  for  a  time  from  their  temples.
So  Apollo  was  supposed  to  spend  the  six  summer  months  at  Delos  and
then  to  depart  to  Patara  in  Lycia  for  the  winter  (Servius  on  Virgil,  Aen,
iv.  144  ;  cp.  Horace,  Odes^  iii.  4.  65).  It  seems  to  have  been  thought  that
Apollo  was  absent  from  Delphi  for  the  three  winter  months ;  for  during
this  period  the  Paean  was  not  sung,  and  Dionysus  was  invoked  instead  of
Apollo  (Plutarch,  De  EI  apud  DelphoSy  9 ;  cp.  Pindar,  Pyth,  iv.  5  ovk
ajToSdfiov ' Arrokkisivos  tvxovtos).  At  the  temple  of  Aphrodite  at  Mt
Eryx  in  Sicily  the  goddess  was  supposed  to  go  to  Africa  every  year  for
nine  days.  This  period  of  nine  days  was  called  the  Anagogia^  because
the  goddess  was  believed  at  this  time  to  go  to  sea  (anagesthcu).  During
these  days  the  sacred  doves  disappeared,  having  gone  with  the  goddess
to  Africa.  But  at  the  end  of  the  nine  days  a  solitary  dove  used  to  be
seen  flying  from  across  the  sea ;  it  alighted  on  the  temple  and  was  soon
followed  by  all  the  other  doves.  This  was  a  signal  for  a  general  out-
burst of  joy ;  all  the  people  who  were  well-to-do  feasted,  all  the  people
who  were  not  well-to-do  played  castanets  with  great  joy ;  and  all  the
neighbourhood  smelt  of  cow's  cheese,  which  was  a  sign  that  the  goddess
had  returned.  See  Athenaeus,  ix.  pp.  394  f-395  a.  In  the  twelfth  month
of  every  year  the  Aztecs  celebrated  a  festival  which  they  called  *  The
Return  of  the  Gods,'  teotleco.  It  fell  in  October,  the  loveliest  season  of
the  year  on  the  high  plateau  of  Mexico ;  for  then  the  rain  is  over,  the
sky  is  blue,  and  all  the  land  is  fresh  and  green.  On  the  1 5th  of  the
month  the  altars  were  adorned  with  green  branches  or  reeds,  tied  in
bundles  of  three.  On  the  1 8th  the  gods  began  to  come.  The  first  to
arrive  was  Telpochtli  or  Tezcatlipoca,  for  being  young  and  nimble  he
outstripped  the  other  gods,  who  did  not  arrive  till  the  last  day  of  the
month.  At  midnight  on  that  day  a  little  heap  of  maize  flour,  in  the
form  of  a  cheese,  was  made  upon  a  mat.  A  priest  watched  the  heap  of
maize,  and  when  he  saw  upon  it  the  print  of  a  tiny  foot,  he  cried,  "  His
Majesty  has  arrived  ! "  At  these  words  all  the  priests  and  ministers  of  the
idols  rose  up  briskly  and  blew  upon  their  horns  and  conches  in  all  the
temples  and  in  all  quarters  of  the  town.  So  all  the  people  were  apprised
of  the  return  of  the  gods  and  flocked  to  the  temples  to  present  their
offerings  to  the  newly  arrived  deities.  See  Sahagun,  Hisioire  gindrale
des  choses  de  la  Nouvelle-Espagne  (Paris,  1880),  p.  139  sq,  ;  Clavigero,
History  of  Mexico,  i.  p.  308,  trans,  by  Cullen  ;  Brasseur  de  Bourbourg,
Histoire  des  nations  civilisdes  du  Mexique  et  de  PAmMque-Centrale^  3.
p.  526  J^.  ;  J.  G.  Miiller,  Geschichte  der  amerikanischen  Urreligionen^
p.  618  j^. ;  Bancroft,  Native  Races  of  the  Pacific  States,  2.  p.  332  sq,\
Reville,  Les  Religions  du  Mexique^  de  PAmMque  Centrale  et  du  P^roUy
p.  1 39  sq,

7.  8.  the  temple  of  Apollo.  Beside  this  temple  there  was  a  colossal
statue  of  King  Attains,  i  o  cubits  high,  which  the  Sicyonians  set  up  out  of
gratitude,  because  he  had  ransomed  for  them  the  sacred  land  of  Apollo


CH.  VII  SIC  YON  59

at  a  great  price.     On  a  subsequent  occasion  they  voted  him  a  golden
statue  and  an  annual  sacrifice.     See  Polybius,  xvii.  (xviii.)  i6.

7.  8.  Proetus.     On  Proetus  and  his  daughters  see  ii.  1 8.  4  ;  viii.
18.  7  note,  and  Index.

7.  9-  the  spear  wherewith  he  despatched  the  boar.    On  ancient
representations  of  Meleager  and  the  hunt  of  the  Calydonian  boar,  and  of
hunting  in  general,  see  Stephani,  in  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for
1867,  pp.  58-159.     In  this  paper,  marked  by  his  usual  exhaustive  learn-
ing, Stephani  has  shown  that  on  the  monuments  the  instrument  of  the
boar's  death  is  generally  a  spear,  not  an  arrow.     On  the  Fran9ois  vase,
indeed,  the  boar  is  depicted  pierced  with  many  arrows,  and  several
archers  are  represented  kneeling  (see  Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  vol.  3.
Tafel  74) ;  and  the  Greeks  certainly  used  bows  and  arrows  in  hunting
(Oppian,  Cyrug,  i.  153,  iv.   54;  /V/.,  Halieut  i.  238;  Anthelog.  Palat.
\i  296.  3  ;  Pollux,  V.  19,  V.  20,  X.  141).     But  they  seem  to  have  used
them  comparatively  seldom.     Apart  from  representations  of  Artemis  and
Atalanta  and  of  barbarians  hunting,  bows  and  arrows  seldom  appear  as
weapons  of  the  chase  on  ancient  works  of  art.     For  representations  of
Meleager  slaying  the  boar  with  a  spear  see  Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  2.
figures  990,  992.     The  skin  of  the  Calydonian  boar  was  shown  in  the
great  temple  of  Athena  Alea  at  Tegea  (Pans.  viii.  47.  2).     One  of  its
tusks  was  preserved  in  the  Imperial  Gardens  at  Rome ;  the  other  had
unfortunately  been  broken  (Paus.  viii.  46.  5).     The  subject  of  the  boar-
hunt  was  represented  in  the  eastern  gable  of  the  temple  of  Athena
Alea  at  Tegea  (Paus.  viii.  45.  6  sq.)

7.  9.  the  flutes  of  Marsyas  etc.     Marsyas  was  a  Phrygian  satyr  or
Silenus  (sometimes  he  is  called  the  one  and  sometimes  the  other),  who
finding  the  flutes  which  Athena  had  thrown  away  (see  i.  24.  i)  picked
them  up  and  practised  on  them.     At  last  he  challenged  Apollo  to  a
musical  contest,  he  to  play  on  his  flutes  and  Apollo  to  play  on  his  lyre.
Being  vanquished,  Marsyas  was  tied  up  to  a  pine-tree  and  flayed  alive,
or  cut  limb  hova  limb  either  by  Apollo  himself  or  by  a  Scythian  slave.
See  Apollodorus,  i.  4.  2  ;  Hyginus,  Fab,  165.     The  skin  of  Marsyas
was  to  be  seen  in  historical  times  at  Celaenae  in  Phrygia ;  and  it  was
said  that  whenever  one  of  his  native  Phrygian  airs  was  played  near  it,
the  skin  of  the  dead  satyr  vibrated  ;  but  if  the  musician  struck  up  an  air
in  praise  of  Apollo,  the  skin  remained  motionless  (Herodotus,  vii.  26  ;
Xcnophon,  Arutd.  i.   2.   8;    Aelian,    Var,  Hist.  xiii.   21).      The  river
Marsyas,  which  was  said  to  have  sprung  from  the  blood  of  Marsyas
(Hyginus,  Lc.\  is  a  small  tributary  of  the  Maeander  in  Phrygia.     The
ancient  authorities  seem  to  differ  as  to  the  source  of  the  river,  but  their
statements  may  be  reconciled  by  supposing  that  it  rose  in  the  little  reedy
lake  on  the  mountain  above  Celaenae,  and  that  after  disappearing  under-
ground it  issued  from  the  rock  under  the  citadel  of  Celaenae,  where  it
fell  with  the  roar  of  a  cataract  into  a  rocky  basin  in  the  market-place.
Besides  Herodotus  and  Xenophon,  ll.cc^  see  Quintus  Curtius,  iii.  i  ;
Strabo,  xii.  8.  5  ;  Pliny,  iV.  ^.  v.  ^  106,  113;  Paul/s  Real-Encyclopadie
and  Smith's  Diet  of  Geography^  s,v,  *  Marsyas.'

"  The  myth  of  Marsyas  and  Apollo  implies  as  its  scene  a  place  where


6o  SIC  YON  BK.  II.  CORINTH

reeds  abounded.  The  basis  of  the  legend  is  undoubtedly  the  contrast
between  the  music  of  the  lyre  employed  in  the  worship  of  the  Ionian
Apollo  Citharoedos  and  of  the  flute  used  in  the  religion  of  southern
Phrygia.  The  Ionian  Greeks  were  in  direct  communication  with  southern
Phrygia  by  the  Lycus  valley  route,  and  Celaenae  was  therefore  a  natural
place  in  which  to  localise  the  mythical  contest.  The  myth  was  placed
where  the  reeds  from  which  the  earliest  simplest  kind  of  flute  was  made
abounded.  The  actual  course  of  the  river  Marsyas  does  not  and  could
not  in  ancient  time  have  afforded  such  a  scene,  but  the  lake  from  which
it  was  believed  to  rise  is  not  much  more  than  a  reedy  marsh.  Here
therefore  the  scene  was  laid  "  (Prof.  W.  M.  Ramsay,  in  Joum.  of  Hellen.
Studies,  4  (1883),  p.  71).  For  representations  in  ancient  art  of  the
contest  of  Marsyas  with  Apollo  and  the  punishment  of  the  former,  see
Miiller  -  Wieseler,  Denkmdler,  2.  pi.  xiv. ;  Baumeister's /?^«^»Mr7ifr,  2.
p.  887  sqq.  The  well-known  statue  at  Florence  called  *the  Grinder,'
representing  a  man  with  up-turned  face,  kneeling  and  sharpening  a  knife
upon  a  stone  (Baumeister,  fig.  964),  can  be  shown,  by  a  comparison  of
monuments,  to  have  been  one  of  a  group  representing  the  flaying  of
Marsyas,  the  kneeling  man  being  the  Scythian  slave  who  is  sharpening
his  knife  to  do  the  dreadful  deed.  See  Sir  Gardner  Wilkinson,  *  The
listening  slave  and  the  flaying  of  Marsyas,'  Transact.  Royal  Soc.  of
Literature,  2nd  Series,  11  (1878),  pp.  263-272,  with  the  note  by  Mr.
Vaux,  pp.  273-279.  The  attitude  and  look  of  *the  Grinder'  agree
with  the  description  which  Philostratus  Junior  {Imag,  3)  gives  of  the
barbarian  who  is  about  to  flay  Marsyas.  *  The  grinder '  is  probably  an
original  work  of  the  Pergamene  school  of  sculpture,  which  excelled  in
the  representation  of  barbarian  types,  the  irruption  of  barbarians  into
Greece  about  288  B.C.  having  furnished  Greek  artists  with  plenty  of
opportunities  of  studying  barbarians  from  the  life.  Cp.  Archdolog,
epigraph.  Miitkeilungen  aus  Oesterreich-Ungam,  13  (1890),  p.  55  sq.
The  works  of  ancient  art  on  which  the  musical  contest  between  Apollo
and  Marsyas  is  represented  are  enumerated  and  described  by  Ovcrbeck,
Griech.  Kunstmythologie,  Besonderer  Theil,  3.  pp.  420-482.

7.  9.  Pythocles.  This  may  be  the  sculptor  mentioned  by  Pliny
(iV.  H,  xxxiv.  52)  in  the  list  of  respectable  artists  who  revived  the  art
of  sculpture  after  Olympiad  156  (15 6- 153  B.C.)

8.  I.  Olisthenes.  See  note  on  ii.  6.  6.  For  his  date  see  Pausanias,
X.  7.  6.     As  to  Myron  see  vi.  19.  2.

8.  I.  a  shrine  of  the  hero  Aratns.  Aratus  died  at  Aegium  ;  and
in  order  to  bury  him  in  Sicyon  it  was  necessary  to  get  leave  from  the
Delphic  oracle,  since  an  ancient  law,  backed  by  a  strong  superstitious
feeling,  forbade  the  Sicyonians  to  bury  a  corpse  inside  the  walls.  The
shrine  of  Aratus  (the  Arateum)  was  situated  in  a  conspicuous  spot,  and
here  he  was  laid  with  all  the  honours  due  to  "  the  founder  and  saviour
of  the  city."  Two  annual  sacrifices  were  offered  to  him ;  one  was
offered  on  the  anniversary  of  the  day  on  which  he  freed  Sicyon  from
the  tyrant,  being  the  fifth  day  of  the  month  Daesius  ( =  the  Athenian
Anthesterion  =  Feb.  -  March) ;  the  other  was  offered  on  his  birthday.
The  former  sacrifice  was  begun  by  the  priest  of  Zeus  the  Saviour ;  the


CH.  VIII  SIC  YON  6i

second  by  the  priest  of  Aratus,  who  wore  a  white  headband  with  a  purple

stripe.     The  association  called  *the  artists  of  Dionysus'  (see  Foucart,

De  collegiis  scenicorum  artificum  apud  Graecos ;  O.  Luders,  Die  Diony-

siscke  KiinstUr)  accompanied  the  sacrifices  with  hymns  and  the  music

of  the  lyre ;  the  master  of  the  gymnasium  led  a  procession  of  boys  and

youths ;  and  the  senators  followed  wearing  wreaths.      Most  of  these

rites  had  ^len  into  disuse  when  Plutarch  wrote.  See  Plutarch,  Aratus^  5  3.

8.  2.  After  the  tyranny  of  Oleon  etc.     According  to  Plutarch

(Aruius,  2)  the  tyrant  Cleon  was  slain,  and  after  his  death  the  people

dose  as  their  rulers  Timoclidas  and  Clinias,  two  citizens  of  reputation

and  influence.     Timoclidas  died,  and  Clinias  was  murdered  by  Abantidas

who  raised  himself  to  the  tyranny.     Abantidas  sought  also  to  slay  Aratus,

the  youthful  son  of  Clinias  ;  but  in  the  confusion  the  boy  escaped,  and

being  protected  by  Soso,  sister  of  Abantidas,  was  sent  secretly  by  night

to  Argos.     On  the  history  of  Aratus  see  Plutarch's  life  of  him,  and

Polybius.      The  delivery  of  Sicyon  by  Aratus  occurred   in  251    B.C.

(Clinton,  Fasti  Hellenici^  3.  p.  18).

8.  4-  Oorintli  was  held  by  Antigonus  etc.     Cp.  vii.  8.  3.     The
story  of  the  capture  of  Corinth  by  Aratus  has  been  told  by  Plutarch  with
a  wealth  of  picturesque  details  which  he  doubtless  took  from  the  Memoirs
written  by  Aratus  himself.     The  city,  and  especially  the  lofty  and  pre-
cipitous acropolis  of  Corinth,  was  held  for  King  Antigonus  by  a  Mace-
donian garrison.     Aratus  resolved  to  take  the  place  by  a  night  surprise.
For  this  perilous  service  he  picked  out  four  hundred  men,  and  led  them
to  one  of  the  city-gates.     It  was  midsummer :  a  full  moon  rode  in  a
cloudless  sky,  and  the  assailants  feared  that  its  bright  beams,  reflected
from  so  many  helmets  and  spears,  might  betray  their  approach  to  the
sentinels  on  the  walls.     But  just  as  the  head  of  the  column  neared  the
gate,  a  heavy  bank  of  clouds  came  scudding  up  from  the  sea  and  veiled
the  moon,  blotting  out  the  line  of  walls  and  shrouding  the  storming-
party  in  darkness.     Favoured  by  the  gloom  eight  men,  in  the  guise  of
travellers,  crept  up  to  the  gate  and  put  the  sentinels  to  the  sword.    Order-
ing the  rest  of  his  men  to  follow  him  at  the  best  speed  they  could  make,
Aratus  now  advanced  at  the  head  of  a  forlorn  hope  of  one  hundred  men,
planted  the  ladders,  scaled  the  wall,  and  descended  into  the  city.     Not
a  soul   was    stirring  in  the  streets,  and  Aratus  hurried  along  in   the
direction  of  the  acropolis,  congratulating  himself  on  escaping  observation,
when  a  patrol  of  four  men  was  seen  coming  down  the  street  with  flaring
torches.     The  moon  shone  full  on  them,  but  Aratus  and  his  men  were
in  shadow.     Aratus  whispered  his  men  to  stand  close  in  the  shadow  of
the  houses.     The  unsuspecting  patrol  came  on :  in  a  minute  three  of
them  were  cut  down,  and  the  fourth  escaped  with  a  gash  on  his  head,
crying  out  that  the  enemy  were  within  the  walls.     A  few  moments  more
and  the  trumpets  rang  out  and  the  whole  city  was  up.     The  streets,
lately  silent  and  deserted,  were  thronged  with  crowds  hurrying  to  and
fro :  lights  glanced  at  the  windows ;  and  high  above  the  city  a  line  of
twinkling  points  of  fire  marked  the  summit  of  the  acropolis.     At  the
same  time  a  confused  hum  of  voices  broke  on  the  ear  f^om  all  sides.
Undeterred  by  these  symptoms  of  the  gathering  storm,  Aratus  pressed


62  SIC  YON  BK.   II.  CORINTH

up  the  winding  path  towards  the  acropolis  as  fast  as  the  steep  and
nigged  nature  of  the  ground  allowed.

Meantime  the  three  hundred  men  whom  he  had  left  behind,  be-
wildered by  the  sudden  uproar,  the  flashing  of  multitudinous  lights,  and
all  the  tumult  of  the  rudely  awakened  city,  missed  the  path  up  the
acropolis  and,  knowing  not  whither  to  turn,  halted  under  an  overhanging
crag  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain.  Here  they  remained  in  a  state  of  the
utmost  anxiety  and  alarm.  For  by  this  time  Aratus  was  hotly  engaged
with  the  garrison  on  the  summit,  and  the  noise  of  battle  and  of  distant
cheering  came  floating  down  to  them,  but  so  faint  with  distance,  so
broken  and  distorted  by  the  reverberation  of  the  cliffs,  that  the  men
below,  listening  intently,  could  not  tell  from  which  direction  the  sounds
proceeded.  While  they  were  still  crouching  under  the  shadow  of  the
precipice,  they  were  startled  by  a  loud  peal  of  trumpets  close  at  hand,
and  peering  through  the  gloom  they  perceived  a  large  body  of  men
marching  past  them  up  the  slope.  It  was  the  king's  troops  hastening
to  the  relief  of  the  garrison  on  the  acropolis.  Instantly  the  three
hundred  charged  out  from  their  lurking-place,  and  taking  the  enemy
completely  by  surprise,  broke  them  and  drove  them  in  confusion  towards
the  city.  They  were  still  flushed  with  victory,  when  a  messenger  came
hurrying  down  at  break-neck  speed  from  the  citadel,  telling  them  that
Aratus  was  at  it,  cut  and  thrust,  with  the  garrison,  who  stood  bravely  to
their  arms,  and  imploring  them  to  hasten  to  his  assistance.  They  bade
him  lead  the  way ;  and  as  they  toiled  upwards  they  shouted  to  let  their
comrades  know  that  help  was  at  hand.  By  this  time  the  clouds  had
passed  over  and  the  sky  was  again  clear  ;  and  so  all  up  the  weary  ascent
they  could  see  the  weapons  of  friend  and  foe  glittering  in  the  moonlight,
as  the  fight  swayed  this  way  and  that,  and  could  hear  their  hoarse  cries,
multiplied  apparently  a  thousandfold  as  they  rolled  down  on  the  night
air  from  crag  to  crag.  At  last  they  reached  the  top,  and  charging  side
by  side  with  their  friends,  forced  the  enemy  from  the  walls.  Day  was
beginning  to  break  when  Aratus  and  his  men  stood  victorious  on  the
summit.  See  Plutarch,  Aratus^  21  sg,\  cp.  Polyaenus,  vi.  5.  These
events  took  place  in  243  B.C.  (Clinton,  Fasti  Hellenici^  3.  p.  24).

8.  5.  the  coa4it  of  Argolis.  The  Greek  is  t^v  'A/^yoXtSa  *A#ctt}v.
Here  Acte  (*  coast ')  is  used  as  a  proper  name  to  designate  the  eastern
seaboard  of  Argolis,  including  the  territory  of  Epidaurus  and  Troezen.
It  is  similarly  used  by  Plutarch,  Demetrius^  25  ;  Polybius,  v.  91  ;  Dio-
dorus,  xii.  43,  xv.  31.

8.  5.  the  Lacedaemonians captured  Pellene  etc.     Cp.  viL

7.  3  ;  viii.  27.  14.

8.  6.  he  bribed  Diogenes  etc.  See  Plutarch,  Aratus^  34.  The
withdrawal  of  the  Macedonian  garrisons  from  Athens,  etc.,  took  place  in
229  B.C.  Diogenes  seems  to  have  been  a  soldier  of  fortune.  So  grate-
ful were  the  Athenians  to  him  that  they  dedicated  a  sacred  enclosure
(the  Diogenium)  to  him  and  established  a  festival  in  his  honour,  at  which
the  Athenian  lads  {ephebot)  sacrificed  a  bull  to  *  Diogenes  the  Benefactor.'
The  Diogenium  became  "  the  centre  of  what  may  be  called  the  academic
life  of  Athens  under  the  empire  "  ;  in  it  the  youths  of  Athens  attended


CH.  IX  SIC  YON  63

lectures  on  grammar,  geometry,  rhetoric,  and  music.  The  name  of
*  Diogenes  the  Bene£ictor '  is  inscribed  on  one  of  the  marble  seats  in
the  theatre  of  Dionysus  at  Athens  (fourth  row  behind  the  seat  of  the
priest  of  Dionysus  Eleuthereus).     See  Plutarch,  Quaest.  Conviv,  ix.  i.

1 ;  Kohler,  in  Hermes^  7  (1873),  PP-  1-6  ;  C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  379,  iii.  No.

299;    Hicks,  Greek  Historical  Inscriptions^    No.    181  ;  Dittenberger,

SyUoge  Inscr.  Graec,  No.  180.

8.  6.  Azistomadiiis,  tyrant  of  Argos  etc.     After  joining  the

Adiaean  confederacy  Aristomachus  abandoned  it  again  for  an  alliance

with  Cleomenes,  tyrant  of  Sparta  ;  and  being  taken  prisoner  by  Antigonus

he  was  conveyed  to  Cenchreae  and  there  put  to  death,  either  by  drowning

or  the  rack  (Polybius,  ii.  44  and  59  J^.)

8.  6.  he  captured  Mantinea.  Cp.  Droysen,  Gesch.  d,  Hellenismusy
ill  2.  p.  38  note;  Dittenberger,  in  Hermes^  16  (1881),  p.  177.

9.  I.  Oleomenes having  succeeded  to  the  kingdom.    There

is  some  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  year  of  Cleomenes's  accession  to
the  throne.  Prof.  G.  F.  Unger  (in  Philologus^  46  (1888),  pp.  766-770)
shows  some  grounds  for  regarding  227  B.C.  as  the  year  of  his  accession  ;
and  he  would  accordingly  correct  €KKai8€Ka  in  Plutarch  {Cleomenes^
S^jinto  c^  icat  rjfiurv;  for  Cleomenes  died  in  exile  in  220  or  219  B.C.,
and  could  not  therefore  have  reigned  sixteen  years,  if  Unger  is  right  as
to  the  date  of  his  accession.  Prof.  Unger's  views  are  combated  by  Mr.
Max  Klatt,  who  defends  the  traditional  reading  €KKat8€Ka  in  Plutarch.
Stt  RAeiniscAes  Museum^  N.  F.  45  (1890),  pp.  335-360.

9.  2.  Dyme,  beyond  Patrae.  On  the  battle  of  Dyme  see  Polybius,
il  51 ;  Plutarch,  Cleomenes,  14.  Dyme  was  situated  to  the  west  of,  and
hence  beyond  (vjrcp)  Patrae,  considered  from  Sicyon,  the  place  which
Pausanias  is  at  present  describing.  See  E.  Reitz,  De  praepositionis
VHEP  apud  Pausaniam  periegetam  usu  locally  p.  9  sq,

9.  2.  Sellasia.     As  to  the  battle  of  Sellasia  see  iii.  10.  7  note.

9.  3.  fell  by  his  own  hand.  On  the  death  of  Cleomenes  see
Polybius,  V.  39  ;  Plutarch,  Cleomenes^  37.

9.  4.  by  administering  poison.  A  slow  poison  was  administered
toAratus  by  Taurion,  a  tool  of  Philip.  See  Polybius,  viii.  14  ;  Plutarch,
Aratus,  52.     On  Philip  as  a  poisoner  cp.  vii.  7.  5.

9.  4.  Eoryclides  and  Micon.  Cp.  Polybius,  v.  106 ;  Plutarch,
Araius,  41.  Their  names  occur  in  inscriptions  and  on  coins  of  Athens.
SccGrotefende  in  Philologusy  28  (1868),  pp.  70-85.

9.  5.  his  younger  son,  Perseus.  This  is  a  mistake.  Perseus  was
older  than  Demetrius  (Polybius,  xxiv.  7 ;  Livy,  xxxix.  35  and  53).
Perseus  was  jealous  of  his  younger  brother,  who  was  a  favourite  of  the
people  and  of  the  Romans  ;  accordingly  Perseus  feared  that  on  the  death
rf  their  father  his  younger  brother  might  succeed  to  the  throne  instead
of  himself!

9.  5.  the  inspired  saying  of  Hesiod.    See  Hesiod,  Works  and

Days,  265.

9.  6.  that  of  Zeus  resembles  a  pyramid.  No  such  representation
tf  Zeus  in  ancient  art  has  survived.  But  on  a  vase,  representing  the
oath  of  Pelops  and  Oenomaus,  Zeus  appears  as  a  colunm  resting  upon


64  SIC  YON  BK.  II.  CORINTH

a  basis  ;  the  name  AI02  is  inscribed  on  the  column.  See  Overbeck,
Griech.  Kunstmythologie^  2  (Besonderer  Theil,  i ),  p.  5  sq, ;  Annali  delV
InsL  12  (1840),  tav.  d'agg.  N  ;  Archdolog,  Zeitung,  11  (1853),  Taf.  54.
I.  There  was  a  pyramid-shaped  image  of  Apollo  Carinus  at  Megara
(i.  44.  2  note).

9.  6.  CliBtlienes  bnilt  it  from  the  spoils  etc.  Cp.  x.  37.  6  with
the  notes.

9.  6.  SSeus,  a  work  of  Lysippns.  On  a  Sicyonian  coin  of
Caracalla's  reign  Zeus  is  represented  standing  undraped,  and  holding
the  thunderbolt  and  sceptre.  "The  standing  figure  would  certainly
well  suit  the  school  of  Lysippus.  .  .  .  Zeus  is  entirely  undraped,  and
of  a  scheme  which  especially  befits  bronze"  (Imhoof-Blumer  and
Gardner,  Num.  Comm,  on  Pans.  p.  29,  with  pi.  H  x.)

9.  7.  Wolfish  {Lukios)  Apollo.  The  story  which  Pausanias  tells
of  this  shrine  seems  to  make  it  certain  that  the  adjective  Lukios  ( Avicios)
here  applied  to  Apollo  meant  *  wolfish'  (from  \vkos  *wolf'),  not  *god
of  light'  (from  Xuki;  Might').  Cp.  ii.  19.  3  sg,,  and  the  note  on  i.  19.
3  *The  Lyceum.'

9.  8.  Next  to  this  sanctuary  etc.  Besides  the  buildings
and  statues  which  Pausanias  has  described  there  was  another  edifice
on  the  market -place  at  Sicyon.  This  was  the  painted  colonnade
{Stoa  Poikile\  which  was  built  for  the  Sicyonians  by  Lamia,  the
mistress  of  Demetrius.  It  was  therefore  probably  built  at  the  time
when  Demetrius  changed  the  site  of  the  city.  It  contained  paintings,
works  no  doubt  of  Sicyonian  artists,  which  were  described  by  the
antiquarian  Polemo  in  a  separate  work.  See  Athenaeus,  vi.  p.  253  b,
xiii.  p.  577  c  ;  Polemonis  Periegetcte  Fragmenta,  ed.  L.  Preller,  p.  45  sg. ;
Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  493,  The  building  must  have  lost  its  importance
in  Pausanias's  time,  since  he  does  not  mention  it.  Perhaps  the  paintings
had  been  carried  away  to  Rome.

10.  I.  insisted  on  sacrificing  to  Hercules  as  to  a  irocL
According  to  Diodorus  (iv.  39),  after  the  death  of  Hercules  his  friend
Menoetius  instituted  at  Opus  an  annual  sacrifice  of  a  boar,  a  bull,  and
a  ram  to  Hercules  as  to  a  hero.  The  Thebans  did  the  same ;  but  the
Athenians  were  the  first  to  honour  Hercules  as  a  god,  and  their  example
was  copied  by  all  the  Greeks  and  by  all  mankind.  Herodotus  (ii.  145)
says  that  Hercules,  Dionysus,  and  Pan  were  considered  by  the  Greeks
to  be  the  youngest  of  the  gods ;  and  he  reckons  that  Hercules  (the  son
of  Alcmena)  lived  about  900  years  before  himself

10.  2.  an  image of  Sleep  lulling  a  lion.  On  ancient  repre-
sentations of  sleep  see  G.  Kriiger,  *  Hermes  und  Hypnos,'  Fleckeisefis
Jahrbiichery  9  (1863),  pp.  288-301;  H.  Bazin,  *  Hypnos,  dieu  du
sommeil,'  Gazette  Arch^ologique^  13  (1888),  p.  25  sqq,  with  plate  6;
Murray,  Hist,  of  Gr.  Sculpture^  2.  p.  259.  Kriiger,  in  the  article
referred  to,  remarks  that  the  ancients  represented  Sleep  either  passively
as  himself  overcome  by  drowsiness,  or  actively  as  the  dispenser  of  sleep
to  others.  The  statue  which  Pausanias  here  describes  evidently  be-
longed to  the  latter  category ;  but  on  the  chest  of  Cypselus  at  Olympia
(v.  18.  I )  Sleep  was  represented  passively,  as  a  slumbering  boy.


CH.  X  SIC  YON  65

10.  3.  an  image  of  the  god,  beardless.  Pausanias  mentions
ioQages  of  the  beardless  Aesculapius  at  Phlius  (ii.  13.  5)  and  at  Gortys
in  Arcadia  (viii.  28.  i).  On  extant  monuments  Aesculapius  is  generally
represented  as  bearded,  seldom  as  young.  See  W.  Wroth,  in  Joum.
ofHelUn,  Studies^  4  (1883),  pp.  46-52.

10.  3.  Calamis.     See  v.  25.  5  note.

10.  3.  the  finit  of  a  cnltiyated  pine-tree.  That  is,  a  fir-cone.
Cp.  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^  i.  p.  58.  A  late  votive-relief  found
m  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  at  Athens,  inscribed  with  a  dedication
to  Aesculapius  and  Health,  represents  the  snake-encircled  staff  (the
common  emblem  of  Aesculapius)  with  two  large  fruits  on  one  side  of  it,
and  two  pine-cones  on  the  other.  "The  pine-cone  also  enters  as  an
ingredient  into  one  of  the  curious  prescriptions  ordered  by  the  God  of
Medicine  for  a  patient  who  probably  frequented  his  temple  on  the  Tiber
Island  at  Rome"  (W.  Wroth,  in  Joum,  of  Hellen,  Stud,  5  (1884),  p.
93  ^.)  The  prescriptions  referred  to  by  Mr.  Wroth  are  preserved  in
an  inscription  (C.  /.  G.  No.  5980).  A  patient  named  Julianus  who
had  been  bringing  up  blood,  and  whose  life  was  despaired  of,  was
ordered  to  take  grains  of  a  pine-cone  {kokkov^  crrfM^ikov)  from  the
triple  altar  and  to  eat  them,  mixed  with  honey,  for  three  days.  The
patient  was  cured  and  publicly  testified  his  gratitude.

10.  3.  the  god  was  brought  to  them in  the  likeness  of  a

Mpenl  Compare  the  story  told  of  the  foundation  of  Epidaurus
Limcra  (iii.  23.  7),  in  which  it  is  plain  that  the  serpent  was  no  other
than  Aesculapius  himself.  Similarly  when  Rome  had  long  been
ravaged  by  pestilence,  the  Romans  were  bidden  by  an  oracle  to  fetch
Aesculapius  from  his  great  sanctuary  at  Epidaurus.  Ambassadors  were
sent,  and  the  god  in  the  form  of  a  serpent  glided  down  from  the  temple
to  the  sea,  embarked  on  the  Roman  vessel,  and  sailed  in  it  to  Rome.
Here  the  serpent  landed  at  the  little  island  of  the  Tiber,  on  which  a
temple  was  therefore  built  to  Aesculapius.  With  the  arrival  of  the
serpent  the  plague  was  stayed.  See  Livy,  xi.  Epitome ;  Valerius
Maximus,  i.  8.  2  ;  Ovid,  Metam.  xv.  626-744 ;  Aurelius  Victor,  De
vhis  illusir.  22  ;  Plutarch,  Quaes t.  Rom.  94.  In  Epidaurus  certain
serpents,  of  a  species  peculiar  to  the  district,  were  sacred  to  Aesculapius
(Pans.  ii.  28.  i).  Sacred  serpents  were  kept  in  his  temples  (Aristophanes,
flutus,  733  ;  Pausanias,  ii.  11.  8),  and  visitors  to  his  temple  fed  the
serpents  with  cakes  (Paus.  /.^. ;  Herodas,  iv.  90  sg,)  All  this  makes  it
tolerably  certain  that  originally  Aesculapius  was  neither  more  nor  less  than
*  serpent,  which  at  a  later  time  was  transformed  into  an  anthropo-
nwrphic  god  with  a  serpent  symbol.  His  usual  symbol  in  Greek  art  is  a
serpent  coiled  round  a  staff.  Again,  the  story  that  Aesculapius  brought
the  dead  to  life  (ApoUodorus,  iii.  10.  3  ;  Schol.  on  Pindar,  Pyth.  iii.  96  ;
Pansanias,  ii.  27.  4)  points  to  the  serpent  origin  of  Aesculapius.  For
Sttpents  are  popularly  believed  to  be  gifted  with  a  knowledge  of  the
pbats  which  can  revive  the  dead.  Thus  according  to  Greek  legend
^  seer  Polyidus  having  killed  a  serpent,  observed  another  serpent
approach  the  dead  one  and  lay  upon  it  a  certain  grass.  The  dead
*pcnt  thereupon  came  to  life.     Polyidus  took  the  hint,  procured  some

lOU  III  F


66  SERPENTS  AND  HEALING  bk.  ii.  corinth

of  the  same  grass  and  with  it  restored  a  dead  man  to  life.  See  Apollo-
dorus,  iii.  3.  i.  A  similar  incident  occurs  in  modem  Greek,  German,
Italian,  and  Lithuanian  stories.  See  Hahn,  Griechische  und  Albanesiscke
Mdrchen^  No.  9,  Var.  2,  p.  204,  cp.  64,  Van  i  and  3,  pp.  260,  274  ;
Grimm,  Kinder-  und  Hausfndrcken^  No.  16;  cp.  Panzer,  Beitrag  zur
deutschen  Mythologies  2.  §  360,  p.  206  ;  Basile,  Pentamerone^  First
day,  seventh  story,  vol.  i.  pp.  99,  109  (Liebrecht's  German  trans.) ;
Schleicher,  Litauische  Mdrchen^  pp.  57,  59.  In  a  Syrian  story  the
king  of  the  serpents  restores  three  slain  men  to  life  by  washing  them
with  the  water  of  life,  which  one  of  his  subject  serpents  had  fetched  for
him  (Prym  und  Socin,  Syrische  Sagen  und  Mdrchen^  No.  33,  p.  121).
In  Russian  popular  tales  a  serpent  is  often  represented  as  in  possession
of  a  magic  water,  which  heals  all  wounds,  restores  sight  to  the  blind,
and  vigour  to  the  cripple.  Thus  one  Russian  tale  "speaks  of  a
wondrous  garden,  in  which  are  two  springs  of  healing  and  vivifying
water,  and  around  that  garden  is  coiled  like  a  ring  a  mighty  serpent "
(Ralston,  Russian  Folk  TcdeSy  p.  233).  According  to  a  Slavonic  notion
the  king  of  the  serpents  has  a  crown  on  his  head  and  his  tongue  is  a
diamond.  If  you  can  kill  him  and  carry  off  his  crown  and  his  tongue,
you  will  be  lord  of  the  whole  world  and  immortal  to  boot  (F.  S.  Krauss,
Sagen  und  Mdrchen  der  SOdslaven,  2.  No.  62,  p.  107).  The  ancients
explained  the  connexion  of  the  serpent  with  Aesculapius  by  saying  that
it  is  the  natural  symbol  of  the  healing  art,  since  it  periodically  renews
itself  by  sloughing  off  its  old  skin.  See  Scholiast  on  Aristophanes,  Lc, ;
Comutus,  Nat,  Dear,  33  ;  Macrobius,  Sat,  i.  20.  2.  With  the  Jews
also  the  serpent  seems  to  have  been  a  symbol  of  healing  {Numbers^
xxi.  9).  "  The  south  Arabs  regard  medicinal  waters  as  inhabited  by  jinn^
usually  of  serpent  form"  (W.  Robertson  Smith,  Religion  of  the  Semites^
p.  168).  "In  Cashmere  .  .  .  the  descendants  of  the  Naga  [serpent]
tribes  are  to  this  day  remarkable  for  their  medical  skill,  and  possession
of  healing  arts  and  nostrums,  which  their  ancestors  (in  common  with
Esculapius)  received  from  the  health-giving  serpent.  The  same  skill  in
healing  is  attributed  to  him  by  many  nations.  The  Celts  acquired  their
medical  lore  by  drinking  serpent-broth  ;  the  Mexicans  hung  snake-bones
round  the  neck  of  the  sick  ;  in  Pegu,  at  the  birth  of  a  child,  a  snake's
tongue  is  tied  within  a  tiny  bell  and  hung  round  the  baby's  neck  as  a
preventive  of  sickness  and  harm.  And  in  many  parts  of  India  it  is
customary  to  make  a  serpent  of  clay  or  metal,  literally  a  brazen  serpent,
and  offer  sacrifice  to  it  on  behalf  of  the  sufferer"  (Miss  C.  F.  Gordon
Cumming,  In  the  Hebrides  (London,  1883),  p.  53  j^.)  In  Fernando  Po
when  an  epidemic  breaks  out  among  children  it  is  customary  to  set  up
a  serpent's  skin  on  a  pole  in  the  middle  of  the  public  square,  and  the
mothers  bring  their  infants  to  touch  it  (A.  Bastian,  Ein  Besuch  in
San  Salvador^  P-  3i8).  In  Madagascar  "one  of  the  chief  idols  of  the
central  province,  which  was  the  god  of  healing  and  of  medicine,  was
held  also  to  be  the  patron  of  serpents,  and  to  be  able  to  employ  them
as  the  agents  of  his  anger  should  any  one  become  obnoxious  to  him.
And  so,  when  this  idol,  Ramkhavkly,  was  carried  abroad,  his  attendants
used  each  of  them  to  carry  a  serpent  in  his  hand,  which,  as  it  writhed


CH.  X  SICYON  67

and  twined  about  him,  inspired  terror  in  the  beholders  "  (J,  Sibree,  The
Great  African  Island,  p.  268,  cp.  p.  299  sgr, ;  W,  Ellis,  History  of
Madagascar,  i.  pp.  404-409 ;  Folk-lore  Record,  2.  p.  20).  On  the
superstition  that  great  medical  skill  may  be  acquired  by  eating  some
part  of  a  serpent,  see  The  Archaeological  Review,  i  (1888),  p.  176  sg,
10.  5.  Oanachus.     See  note  on  vi.  13.  7.

10.  5.  the  Apollo  at  Didyma  etc.  See  i.  16.  3  ;  viii.  46.  3  (with
the  note) ;  ix.  10.  2.

10.  5.  on  her  head  the  goddess  carries  a  flrmament.  A  statue
found  at  Pompeii  represents  a  woman  wearing  the  modius  or  calathus
on  her  head.  It  is  supposed  to  be  an  Aphrodite  (Venus),  and  Baumeister
(Denkmaler,  i.  p.  88)  takes  the  calathus  on  her  head  to  be  the  firma-
ment (Polos)  such  as  crowned  the  head  of  Aphrodite  at  Sicyon.  See
Mullcr-Wieseler,  Denkmaler,  2.  pi.  xxiv.  No.  262.  As  to  the  meaning
of  the  word  polos  see  note  on  vi.  19.  8.

10.  5.  an  apple.  The  apple  was  sacred  to  Aphrodite,  and  to
present  an  apple  to  a  woman  was  a  declaration  of  love,  as  it  still  is
in  sonie  parts  of  Greece.  See  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Clouds,  997  ;
Propertius,  i.  3.  24  ;  C.  Boetticher,  Der  Baumkultus  der  Hellenen,  p.
461  sqq. ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Das  alte  Griechenland  im  neuem,  p.  83.
Amon^t  the  South  Slavonians  the  apple  plays  a  prominent  part  at  the
ceremonies  of  betrothal  and  marriage.  Thus  in  Bosnia  a  wooer  sends
a  representative  ^th  an  apple  to  a  maiden  ;  if  she  accepts  the  apple,  the
engagement  is  complete.  In  Croatia  before  a  bride  enters  her  husband's
luuse  she  throws  an  apple  over  it ;  and  bride  and  bridegroom,  after
marching  thrice  round  the  well,  fling  an  apple  into  it,  which  the  wedding
goests  try  to  intercept.  In  Bulgaria  three  apples  are  presented  to  the
bride ;  and  a  gilded  apple  is  carried  as  a  sort  of  banner  in  the  wedding
procession.  When  the  procession  reaches  the  bridegroom's  house,  the
apple  is  thrown  over  the  roof.  See  F.  S.  Krauss,  Sitte  und  Brauch  der
Sidslaven,  pp.  368,  386,  438,  447.

10.  5.  save  those  of  swine.  As  a  rule  the  Greeks  did  not  sacrifice
urine  to  Aphrodite  (Aristophanes,  Acham,  793,  with  the  Scholium).
Bat  there  were  exceptions.  The  Argives  sacrified  a  pig  to  Aphrodite  at
a  festival  called  *the  festival  of  Swine'  (wrr^pta)  (Athenaeus,  iii.  p.  95  f-
96  a).  At  Castniiun  in  Pamphylia  Aphrodite  was  worshipped  with
sacrifices  of  swine,  which  led  Callimachus  to  remark  that  the  Aphrodite
of  Castnium  was  the  most  sensible  of  all  the  Aphrodites  because  she  was
tbc  only  one  of  them  who  accepted  sacrifices  of  pigs  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  437
ly.)  In  Cyprus  wild  boars  were  sacrificed  to  Aphrodite  on  the  2nd  of
April  (Joannes  Lydus,  De  mensibus,  iv.  45),  though  as  a  rule  swine  were
not  sacrificed  to  her  in  Cyprus  (Porphyry,  De  abstin,  i.  14).  The  story
dot  Adonis  had  been  killed  by  a  wild  boar  was  alleged  as  a  reason
both  for  sacrificing  and  not  sacrificing  the  pig  to  Aphrodite  (Schol.  on
Aristophanes,  Lc. ;  Joannes  Lydus,  l.c)  Probably  wherever  the  pig  was
acrificed  to  Aphrodite  it  was  an  exceptional  or  mystical  sacrifice,  the

Ifif  representing  the  divine  Adonis  himself.  Cp.  W.  R.  Smith,  Religion
^tke  Semites,^  p.  290  ^^.,  411  ;  J.  G.  Frazer,  The  Golden  Bough,  2.  p.
In  M


68  SIC  YON  BK.  II.  CORINTH

10.  6.  paideros.  According  to  Dioscorides,  De  materia  medica^
iii.  17  (19),  this  was  another  name  for  the  plant  called  acantha.  Pliny
mentions  two  plants  called  paideros.  In  one  place  (A^.  H,  xix.  170)  he
says  that  paideros  is  the  Greek  name  for  caerifolium  (chervil)  ;  in
another  place  (xxii.  76)  he  says  it  is  a  kind  of  acanthus  with  smooth
leaves.  The  phallophori  in  the  theatre  used  to  wear,  instead  of  a
mask,  a  propolium  (?)  made  of  paideros  and  creeping  thyme,  and  this
again  was  surmounted  by  a  thick  wreath  of  violets  and  ivy  (Athenaeus,
xiv.  p.  622  c).  Demetrius  Phalereus,  who,  possessed  of  an  enormous
revenue,  lived  in  the  most  extravagant  luxury,  used  to  dye  his  hair
yellow,  and  to  stain  his  face  white  with  paideros  (Athenaeus,  xii.  p.
542  d,  cp.  xiii.  p.  568  c).  Th^  paideros  is  perhaps  the  quercus  Ballota^
or  the  quercus  coccifera  (Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  585).

10.  6.  less  than  those  of  the  oak  etc.  In  the  present  passage
Pausanias  uses  three  different  words  for  *  oak,*  namely  drus  (the  generic
name  for  all  species  of  oak),  phegos  (a  species  of  oak  which  has  not
been  identified  with  certainty,  see  note  on  i.  17.  5),  and  prinos  (the
evergreen  or  holly  oak,  a  tree  with  small  dark  prickly  leaves  like  those
of  holly,  but  smaller;  see  note  on  x.  36.  i,  kokkos).  Cp.  viii.  12.  i
note.

10.  7.  Pheraean  Artemis.  On  Sicyonian  coins  of  the  reigns  of
Geta  and  Caracalla,  Artemis  is  represented  (Fig.  16)  in  a  long  mantle,

with  torches  in  her  raised  hands.  "  There  can  be  little
doubt  that  we  have  in  this  figure  a  copy  of  the  statue
which  stood  in  the  temple  of  Artemis  Pheraea.  We
are  told  that  it  was  brought  from  Pherae.  The  coins
of  Pherae,  from  the  fourth  century  onwards,  present  us
with  a  female  figure  holding  two  torches  or  one  torch,
which  may  be  meant  for  Artemis,  but  more  probably
FIG.  17.— PHERAKAN  represeuts  Hecate,  a  deity  greatly  worshipped  in  the
ARTEMIS  ?(sicY-  south  of  Thessaly.  But  the  distinction  is  not  important,
oNiAN  coiN>  ^g  ^^  torch-bearing  Artemis  and  Hecate  are  closely
allied  "  (Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  on  Paus.  p.  30  sq.^
with  pi.  H  xvii.  xviii.  xix.)  On  the  other  hand  Stephani  (in  Compte
Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  i860,  p.  46)  holds  that  the  Pheraean
Artemis,  whose  worship  was  imported  into  Sicyon,  Athens,  and  Argos
(see  ii.  23,  5),  was  represented  riding  on  horseback.  He  refers  to  a
coin  of  Pherae  on  which  Artemis  is  represented  riding  on  horseback
and  carrying  a  torch  (Miiller-Wieseler,  Denkmdler^  2.  pi.  xvi.  No.  173).
On  Artemis  as  a  goddess  of  horses  see  viii.  1 4.  4 ;  Pindar,  Olymp.  iii.
27  ;  Pyth,  ii.  7  sq.  On  vases  she  is  frequently  represented  in  a  chariot
with  horses  (K.  O.  Miiller,  Dorier^  i.  p.  383).  It  was  natural,  as
Stephani  remarks,  that  Artemis  should  be  associated  with  horses  at
Pherae,  since  the  Thessalian  breed  of  horses  was  esteemed  the  finest  in
Greece  (Herodotus,  vii.  196).

11.  I.  the  gate  called  Sacred.  Leake  thinks  that  the  Sacred  Gate
must  have  been  near  the  village  of  Vasiliko  at  the  remarkable  gully  or
opening  in  the  cliffs,  down  which  a  steep  and  narrow  path  leads  from
the  tableland  to  the  plain  below  (see  above,  p.  44).     He  would  there-


CH.  XI  TITANE  69

fore  look  for  the  temple  of  Athena  and  the  sanctuary  of  Hera  on  the
site  of  the  modem  village.  See  Leake,  Morea^  3.  p.  372,  q).  p.  364.
Beul^  and  Curtius  apparently  share  this  view  (Beul^,  Etudes  sur  le
Pilopannisey  p.  319;  ZmxXxms^  Pelop,  2.  pp.  495,  496,  498).  W.  G.
Clark,  however,  while  he  admits  that  one  of  the  city-gates  must  have
been  at  this  natural  gully,  thinks  that  the  Sacred  Gate  "  probably  led
to  the  sanctuary  of  Titane,  the  especial  object  of  Sicyonian  veneration,
and  was  therefore  on  the  landward  side"  (Clark,  Pelap,  p.  343).
11.  2.  Flenmaens.  See  ii.  5.  8.
11.  2.  Fhalces.     See  ii.  6.  7.

11.  3.  Followiiig  the  direct  road Pyraea.     The  direct  road

from  Sicyon  to  Phlius  lies  up  the  narrow  glen  of  the  Asopus.  See  note
on  ii.  12.  3.  As  Pausanias  does  not  say  how  far  along  this  road  he
went  before  taking  the  turning  to  the  left  which  led  to  Pyraea,  we  cannot
determine  the  site  of  this  place.  All  we  can  say  is  that  it  must  have
been  among  the  hills  about  a  mile  to  the  east  of  the  Asopus.

11.  4-  libations  of  honey  mixed  with  water.  Similarly  Sophocles
represents  Oedipus  as  pouring  out  a  libation  of  water  and  honey  to  the
Furies  {Oed.  CoL  481).  The  Scholiast  on  Sophocles  {Oed,  CoL  100)
speaks  as  if  only  water  were  offered  to  the  Furies,  but  this  is  doubtless
a  mistake.  The  poets  speak  of  the  Furies  and  their  offerings  as  *  wine-
less'  (Aeschylus,  Eumenides,  107;  Sophocles,  Oed.  Col.  100).  On
wineless  libations  see  note  on  v.  15.  10.  Honey  was  offered  especially
to  the  nether  gods  and  to  the  dead.  See  Robert-Tomow,  De  apium
nullisqiu  apud  veteres  significatione  (Berlin,  1893),  p.  135  sqq.

11.  4.  flowers.  On  a  relief,  found  near  Argos,  the  Eumcnides  are
represented  as  women  of  mild  aspect  carrying  serpents  in  their  right
hands  and  flowers  in  their  left.  See  MittheiL  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,
4  (1879),  plate  ix.

11.   5.  Titane.     The  site  of  Titane  was  first  identified  by  Ludwig

Ross.     It  lies  a  few  minutes  to  the  north  of  the  village  of  Voivonda.

At  this  point  a  spur  projects  eastwards,  promontory-like,  into  the  valley

from  the  line  of  heights  which  dominates  the  left  bank  of  the  Asopus.

The  top  of  this  spur  forms  a  plateau,  terminating  at  the  eastern  end,  i.e.

towards  the  valley,  in  a  hill,  the  rocky  sides  of  which  drop  steeply  down

into  the  valley  on  the  north  and  east     This  terminating  hill  must  have

been  a  small  acropolis,  for  it  is  enclosed  by  walls  of  fine  Greek  masonry,

which  on  the  south  and  south-west  rise  to  the  height  of  20  or  30  feet,

and  are  flanked  by  three  or  four  square  towers.     The  towers  are  built

of  great  rectangular  blocks  in  regular  horizontal   courses ;  the  walls

between  the  towers  are  mostly  polygonal.      Upon  this  little  acropolis

are  some  ancient  foundations  and  a  chapel  of  St.  Tryphon.     In  the

chapel  are  fragments  of  Doric  columns  and  a  small  Doric  entablature,

the  triglyphs  of  which  are  40  centimetres  high,  and  the  metopes  33

centimetres  broad.     The  columns  would  therefore  seem  to  have  been  9

or  10  feet  high.     Probably  the  chapel  occupies  the  site  of  the  temple  of

Athena,  which  Pausanias  describes  (ii.  12.  i)  as  standing  on  a  hill.

The  fragments  of  Doric  architecture  in  the  chapel  probably  belonged  to

the  temple  in  question.


70  TITANE  BK.   II.  CORINTH

The  view  from  this  acropolis  is  very  fine,  embracing  in  the  northern
distance  the  peaks  of  Parnassus,  Helicon,  and  Gerania,  while  below
stretches  the  green  vale  of  the  Asopus.

The  plateau  immediately  to  the  west  of  this  acropolis  is  strewn  with
ancient  remains,  including  foundations,  square  blocks,  fragments  of  thin
white  marble  plates,  and  bits  of  tiles  and  pottery.  Ross  thought  that
the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  (see  §§  5-8  of  this  chapter)  must  have  stood
on  this  plateau,  and  Bursian  shares  this  view.  But  Prof.  Curtius,  with
whom  Mr.  Martha  agrees,  objects  that  the  plateau  is  too  small  to  have
contained  the  sanctuary  with  its  dependant  buildings.  He  therefore
inclines  to  think  that  die  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  may  have  occupied
one  of  the  lower  slopes  towards  the  Asopus.

Near  the  chapel  of  St.  Tryphon  Mr.  Martha  copied  the  following
fragmentary  inscription.  It  contains  a  dedication  to  "Titanian
Aesculapius ''  by  a  certain  man,  a  son  of  Eucaerus.

"EvKaipov

Teiravii^
Xlapum^piov,
\//{rj<t>ur/JLaTi)  ^(ovX^s).

See  L.  Ross,  Reisen  und  Reiserouten  durch  Griechenland^  pp.  50-54  ;
Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  pp.  500-503 ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  30  sq, ;  Jules
Martha,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  HelUn.  3  (1879),  p.  192  ^7.  ;  Guide-
Joanne^  2.  p.  393  sq,

11.  6.  suppliants  of  the  god.  That  is,  patients  who  came  to  be
cured,  as  at  the  sanctuaries  of  Aesculapius  at  Athens,  Oropus,  and
Epidaurus.

11.  6.  a  white  woollen  shirt  and  a  mantle.  For  other  examples
of  the  custom  of  dressing  images  in  real  clothes  see  vol.  2.  p.  574  sq,

11.  6.  image  of  Health.  On  the  goddess  Health  {Hygieid)  and
her  representations  in  Greek  art  see  Mr.  Warwick  Wroth,  in  Joum.  of
Hellen,  Studies^  5  (1884),  pp.  82-101  ;  Thraemer,  in  Roscher*s  Lexikon^
I.  pp.  2772-2792.  She  is  commonly  represented  feeding  a  serpent.  See
Muller-Wieseler,  Denkmdler^  2.  pi.  Ixi.  Nos.  780-784,  792b;  Thraemer,
op,  at,  I.  p.  2779  •^^7'  Mr.  Thraemer  thinks  that  the  worship  of
Health  at  Titane  was  probably  the  most  ancient  worship  of  the  goddess
of  which  we  have  any  knowledge.

11.  6.  so  covered  is  it  with  women's  hair  etc.  The  hair  was
probably  a  thank-offering  for  a  cure.  The  Madonna  of  Tenos  at  the
present  day  receives  similar  offerings  from  all  parts  of  Greece.  **  If  a
peasant  girl  is  ill  she  vows  what  she  likes  best  to  the  Queen  of  queens ;
on  recovery  she  reflects  that  it  is  her  hair.  Accordingly,  next  year  she
takes  or  sends  her  long  tresses  as  a  present  to  the  shrine  "  (J.  T.  Bent,
The  CycladeSy  p.  249).

11.  7-  lie  whom  the  Pergamenians name  Telesphoros.    On

Telesphorus  see  Mr.  Warwick  Wroth,  *  Telesphorus,' y^7«r«.  of  Hellen,
Studies^  3  (1882),  pp.  283-300.     Telesphorus  was  a  minor  divinity,  a


CH.  H  TELESPHORUS  71

sort  of  £unulus  of  Aesculapius.     In  art  he  is  represented  as  a  child,
shioaded  in  a  mantle  which  never  reaches  below  his  ankles  and  some-
times falls  a  good  deal  short  of  his  knees.     The  mantle  forms  a  hood
whidi  shrouds  his  head  all  but  his  face,  above  which  it  rises  in  a  high
peak.     See  Miiller-Wieseler,  Denkmdler^  2.  pi.  Ixi.   Nos.    788,   789.
Telcsphorus  is  seldom  mentioned  in  literature.    The  rhetorician  Aristides,
like  Pausanias,  speaks  of  Telesphorus  as  a  divinity  of  Pergamus,  and
says  that  he  was  indebted  to  Telesphorus  for  a  healing  balsam,  with
whidi  he  rubbed  himself  in  the  baths  on  passing  from  the  hot  to  the
cold  water  (Aristides,  Orat.  xxiv.  vol.  i.  p.  467,  ed.  Dindorf).     Marinus
tells  how  once  when  the  philosopher  Proclus  lay  dangerously  ill  a  boy
stood  beside  his  bed,  young  and  fair  to  see,  who  announced  himself  as
Telesphoras,  and  touching  the  sick  man's  head  straightway  made  him
whole;    then   the  vision  vanished  (Marinus,   Proclus^   7).       For    our
bowledge  of  the   diffusion  of  Telesphorus's  worship  we  are   chiefly
dependent  on  the  monuments,  especially  the  coins.     His  worship  was
widely  prevalent  in  Asia  Minor;  the  centre  from  which  it  seems  to
liave  spread  was  Pergamus.     But  though  the  worship  of  Aesculapius
flourished  at  Pergamus  from  the  third  century  B.C.  onward,  there  is  no
record  of  Telesphorus  there  until  Hadrian's  time  (a.d.  i  17-138).     He
first  appears  on  a  coin  of  Pergamus,  which  bears  the  image  of  Hadrian
on  the  obverse  side  and  that  of  Telesphorus  on  the  reverse.     From
Hadrian  to  Gallienus  (a.d.  117-268)  there  occur  at  least  fifteen  sets  of
coins  representing  Telesphorus.   His  worship  was  also  practised  in  Thrace,
as  appears  firom  coins.     In  Greece  proper  he  was  worshipped  in  Attica  ;
for  a  hymn  in  honour  of  him  and  Aesculapius  has  been  discovered  en-
graved on  a  stone.  See  Kaibel,  Epigrammata  Graeca  ex  lapidibus  conlecia^
No.  1027.     Two  terra-cotta  figures  of  Telesphorus  have  been  found  in
Attica,  one  of  them  in  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius.     On  coins  Teles-
phorus often  appears  alone  ;  but  the  favourite  representation  of  him  seems
to  have  been  one  in  which  he  appears  with  Aesculapius  and  Health.  On
tbe  left  stands  Health,  feeding  a  serpent  from  a  saucer,  her  head  turned
towards  Aesculapius,  who  stands  to  the  right,  leaning  on  his  serpent-
todrcled  staff.     Between  them  stands  the  tiny  figure  of  Telesphorus,  in
2  determined  attitude,  but  reaching  no  higher  than  the  top  of  Aescu-
hpius's  staff.     This  group  occurs  on  coins  of  Pergamus  and  of  many
Asiatic  and  Thracian  cities.      It  sometimes  appears  on  gems.     This
onion  in  art  points,  as  Mr.  Wroth  remarks,  to  their  union  in  worship.
There  was  an  image  of  Telesphorus  in  the  sanctuary  of  Health  at
Pergamus   (Aristides,    Orat,  xxvi.  vol.   i.  p.    506,   ed.   Dindorf).     The
meaning  and  functions  of  Telesphorus  are  uncertain.     Some  regard  him
as  concerned  with  mystic  rites  (Jeletai) ;  others,  arguing  from  the  mean-
^%  of  his  name  as  *  the  accomplisher,'   regard  him  as  a  god  of  con-
valescence.    The  foregoing  account  of  Telesphorus  is  summarised  from
Mr.  Wroth's  article  referred  to  above.    See  also  Joum,  ofHellen,  Studies^
4  (1883),  p.  161  sq,\  id.^  5  (1884),  p.  82,  note  2.    A  statuette  of  Teles-
phorus was  discovered  at  Mantinea  in  December  1888.     It  represents
a  boy  wrapt  from  his  head  to  his  ankles  in  a  sleeveless  mantle.     See
BmlUtin  3e  Corresp,  HelUniqttey  14  (1890),  pp.  595-601,  with  plate  viii.


72  TITANE  BK.  II.  CORINTH

11.  7.  whom  the  Epidaorians  name  Acesis.  This  is  confirmed  by
the  hymn  to  Telesphorus  mentioned  in  the  preceding  note.  See  Kaibel,
Epigr.  Gr.  No.  1027,  line  35  sq, :

#cai  (r€  'EiriSavptoi  \tkv  dk€^i)(6pouriv  doiSaU
yr)66(rvvot  /MkiroxxriVy  ava^,  'AKCtrev  icaXcovTcs,

"  And  thee,  my  lord,  the  Epidaurians  hymn  joyfully  in  choral  songs^
calling  thee  Acesis."

11.  7.  Goronis.     She  was  the  mother  of  Aesculapius.     See  iL  26^
The  fact  that  her  image  was  taken  into  the  temple  of  Athena  whexft.
sacrifice  was  being  offered  to  Aesculapius,  points  to  a  connexion  between,
the  worship  of  Athena  and  Aesculapius.     Their  legends  are  connected,
by  the  story  that  Aesculapius  received  from  Athena  the  blood  that:
flowed  from  the  veins  of  the  slain  Gorgon ;  the  blood  from  the  veins  oik.
the  left  was  used  by  Aesculapius  to  destroy  men,  the  blood  from  th&
veins  on  the  right  was  used  by  him  to  heal  men,  and  by  means  of  it  h^
even  restored  the  dead  to  life  (Apollodorus,  iii.  10.  3).     Again,  Athena,
like  Aesculapius,  was  a  healing  goddess  ;  both  at  Athens  and  at  Epidaurus
she  bore  the  surname  <  Health'  (see  Pausanias,  i.  23.  4  note).     But  a.
more  curious  point  of  similarity  between  the  two  is  the  mythical  relaticns.
in  which  they  both  stand  to  the  crow  or  the  raven.     In  the  first  place,
the  name  of  Aesculapius's  mother  Coronis  is  probably  connected  witlm
kordniy  *  a  crow ' ;  and  this  probability  is  confirmed  by  the  story  thalt
when  she  proved  unfaithful  to  her  lover  Apollo  (the  father  of  Aesculapius),
the  news  was  brought  to  Apollo  by  a  crow.     Apollo  cursed  the  bird
a  bearer  of  evil  tidings  ;  and  so  the  crow,  which  before  was  white,
been  black  ever  since.     See  Apollodorus,  iii.  10.  3  ;  Scholiast  on  Pindar,
Pyth,  iii.  48.     Yet,  though  Apollo  cursed  the  crow,  it  was  sacred  to  him
(SchoL   on  Aristophanes,  Clouds^  I33;  Plutarch,   his  et  Osiris^  71  ;
Aelian,  Nat,  An.  i.  48;  cp.   Herodotus,  iv.   15).     Indeed  the  crow  is
called  the  child  of  Apollo  (Athenaeus,  viii.  p.  359  e).     Thus  Aesculapius
seems  to  have  been  related  to  the  crow  both  through  his  father  and  his
mother.     Again,  the  crow  stood  to  Athena  in  much  the  same  sort  oi
ambiguous  relation  as  it  did  to  Apollo.     On  the  one  hand,  the  crow
brought  bad  tidings  to  Athena,  as  it  did  to  Apollo,  and  was  therefore
forbidden  by  her  ever  to  alight  upon  her  great  sanctuary,  the  Acropolis
at  Athens  (Antigonus,  Histor,  Mirab,  12).     Hence  a  crow  was  never
seen  on  the  Acropolis ;  and  between  the  setting  of  Arcturus  and  the
arrival  of  the  swallows,  the  crow  was  rarely  seen  at  any  of  the  sanctuaries
of  Athena  (Pliny,  Nat,  Hist,  x.   30 ;  Aelian,  Nat,  An.   v.   8).     When
the  Athenians  were  preparing  to  sail  on  the  fatal  Sicilian  expedition
crows  pecked  the  gold  from  the  image  of  Athena  at  Delphi  (Paus.  x.  1 5.
5) ;  and  while  the  Athenian  fleets  and  armies  were  perishing  under  the
walls  of  Syracuse,  crows  pecked  at  the  shield  of  Athena's  ancient  statue
at  Athens  (Plutarch,  De  Pyth,  Orac.  8).    Again  the  hostility  of  the  crow
to  Athena  seems  implied  in  the  popular  Greek  idea  of  the  enmity  between
the  crow  and  the  owl,  the  owl  being  pre-eminently  the  bird  of  Athena.
On  the  enmity  of  the  two  birds  see  Aelian,  Nat,  An.  iii.  9 ;  Antigonus,


CH.  XI  TITANE  73

HisLMirab.  $7  (62),     The  opposition  between  the  birds  is  also  implied

in  the  ancient  Greek  proverb,  "  The  voice  of  the  owl  is  one  thing,  and

the  voice  of  a  crow  is  another."    See  Zenobius,  i.  69;  Diogenianus,  ii.  16  ;

Gregorius  Cyprius,  i.  39  ;  Apostolius,  ii.  32 ;  Paroemiogr.  Gr,  ed.  Gais-

ford,  p.  10,  No.  97.     The  idea  of  the  enmity  between  the  crow  and  the

owl  is  not  confined  to  Greece,  but  appears  in  the  literature  of  India  and

Cambodia.    The  Pancka-tantra  (bk.  iii.  at  beginning)  tells  how  the  king

of  the  crows  lived  with  his  people  the  crows  in  a  great  shady  fig-tree ;

and  how  the  king  of  the  owls  lived  with  his  people  the  owls  in  a  cavern

which  was  his  castle.     Every  night  the  king  of  the  owls  used  to  come

prowling  round  the  fig-tree,  snatching  away  and  killing  every  crow  he

could  get  hold  of,  till  all  were  gone.     See  Benfey's  Pantschatantra^  vol.

I-  p.  334  sqq.^  vol  2.  p.  213.     Cp.  Monier  Williams,  Religious  Thought

and  Ufe  in  India^  p.  329  ;  Bastian,  Die  V'olker  des  bstlichen  Asien^  4.

p.  in.    Yet  in  spite  of  this  opposition  between  the  crow  and  Athena,

the  crow  in  one  place  (Nonnus,  Dionys,  iii.  v.  122)  calls  itself  "the  bird

of  Athena,"  and  perches  under  her  sacred  olive  (ib,  z/.  98).    Again,  on  the

acropolis  at  Corone  (Crow-town)  in  Messenia  there  was  a  bronze  statue

of  Athena  holding  a  crow  in  her  hand  (Paus.  iv.  34.  6).     Again,  at

Titane,  as  Pausanias  relates  in  the  present  passage,  the  image  of  Coronis

(whose  kinship  with  the  crows  seems  indubitable)  was  brought  into  the

sanctuary  of  Athena  whenever  a  sacrifice  of  a  bull,  a  lamb,  and  a  pig

was  being  offered  to  Aesculapius.     How  these  apparent  contradictions

are  to  be  explained,  and  what  exactly  was  the  relation  between  Athena

and  her  crows  on  the  one  side  and  Aesculapius  and  his  crow  kindred

on  the  other  side,  I  do  not  pretend  to  say.    Mr.  Schwenk,  in  Rheinisches

Museum,  N.  F.  11  (1857),  p.  492  sqq.,  has  tried  to  solve  some  of  these

difficulties,  but  hardly  with  success.

11.  7*  sacrificing  a  bull,  a  lamb,  and  a  pig.     On  the  custom  of

sacrificing  a  triplet  {trittya  or  trittys)  of  victims  see  P.  Stengel,  in  Neue

JohrbOcheTy    133   (1886),  p.   329  sqq.     In    Homer   {Od,  xi.    130  sq,)

Ulysses  is  bidden  to  ofifer  to  Poseidon  a  lamb,  a  bull,  and  a  boar  (the

same  triplet  as  Pausanias  here  mentions).     Eustathius  on  this  passage

of  Homer  says  that  a  trittya  consisted  of  a  sacrifice  of  three  animals,  as

two  sheep  and  a  cow,  or  a  cow,  a  she-goat,  and  a  sheep,  or  a  boar,  a

ram,  and  a  bull.     Aristophanes  {Plutus^  819  sq.)  speaks  of  sacrificing  a

pig,  a  he-goat,  and  a  ram  to  Aesculapius.    Callimachus  speaks  of  a  trittys

consisting  of  a  ram,  a  bull,  and  a  boar  ;  Ister  mentions  one  of  cows,  she-

^oats,  and  male  pigs,  all  the  victims  being  three-year-olds.    See  Etymol.

Magnum^  s.v.  rpirrvv,  p.  768.  17  sqq,  ;  Photius,  s.v.  rpirrvav ;  Hesy-

chius,  s.v.  TpiKTva.     Suidas,  s.v.  rpirrvs,  speaks  of  a  sacrifice  of  a  pig,

a  ram,  and  a  he-goat     Menoetius  is  said  to  have  instituted  at  Opus  an

annual  sacrifice  of  a  boar,  a  bull,  and  a  ram  to  Hercules,  as  to  a  hero

(Diodorus,  iv.  39).     In  Theocritus  (Epigr.  iv.  17)  a  sacrifice  of  a  heifer,

a  be-goat,  and  a  lamb  is  promised  to  Priapus.     In  an  inscription  found

at  Eleusis  a  triad  of  victims  with  gilded  horns,  of  which  the  first  was  to

be  a  cow,  is  voted  to  Demeter  and  Proserpine  (Dittenberger,  Sylloge

Inscr.  Grace .  No.  13,  line  37  sq.)

11.  8.  Aescnlapius,  sumamed  Gortynian.     He  was  so  called  from


74  SACRIFICES  TO  WINDS  bk.  ii.  corinth

Gortyna  or  Gortys  in  Arcadia,  not  from  the  city  of  that  name  in  Crete.
See  V.  7.  I  ;  viii.  28,  i.

12.  I.  a  sanctuary  of  Athena.     See  note  on  11.  5  above.

12.  I.  the  priest  sacrifices  to  the  winds.     On  Greek  sacrifices  to
the  winds  see  P.  Stengel,  *  Die  Opfer  der  Hellenen  an  die  Winde,'
Hermes^  16  (1881),  pp.  346-350.     There  was  an  altar  to  the  winds  at
Coronea  (Paus.  ix.  34.  3).     The  people  of  Megalopolis  honoured  the
North  Wind  as  much  as  any  of  the  gods ;  he  had  a  sacred  enclosure
near  Megalopolis,  where  sacrifices  were  annually  offered  to  him  (Paus.
viii.  36.  6).     When  the  Persians  were  marching  against  Greece,  the
Delphians  inquired  of  the  oracle,  and  the  god  bade  them  to  pray  to  the
winds  ;  for  the  winds,  he  said,  would  be  great  allies  of  Greece.     So  the
Delphians  built  an  altar  to  the  winds  and  sacrificed  to  them ;  and  they
continued  to  propitiate  the  winds  down  to  the  time  when  Herodotus  wrote
(Herod,  vil  178  ;  Clement  of  Alex.  Strom,  vi.  3  §  29,  p.  753  ed.  Potter).
When  Dionysius  of  Syracuse  approached  Thurii  at  the  head  of  a  gpreat
fleet  crowded  with  soldiers,  a  north  wind  wrecked  and  destroyed  his  ships.
So  the  people  of  Thurii  offered  sacrifice  to  the  North  Wind,  voted  him
the  citizenship,  assigned  him  a  house  and  lands,  and  offered  sacrifices  ta
him  every  year  ( Aelian,  Var,  Hist,  xii.  61).     The  Athenians  sacrificed
to  the  winds  (Aelian,  Nat,  An,  vii.  27).     In  an  Attic  sacrificial  calendar
it  is  prescribed  that  a  cake  should  be  offered  to  the  winds  in  the  month
.  Poseideon  (C  /.  G,  No.  523).     (As  to  the  Athenian  worship  of  the  North
Wind  see  note  on  i.  19.  5.)     At  Tarentum  sacred  asses  were  kept  and
sacrificed  from  time  to  time  to  the  winds  (Hesychius,  s,v.  dve/iiiiTas}.
The  Lacedaemonians  sacrificed  horses  to  the  winds  on  Mount  Taygetus^
and  burned  the  carcases  on  the  spot,  in  order  that  the  winds  might
disperse  the  ashes  far  and  wide  over  the  land  (Festus,  p.  181,  ed.
Miiller).     When  the  Ten  Thousand  had  waded  through  the  Euphrates
waist-deep,  and  were  marching  through  deep  snow  with  a  freezing  north,
wind  blowing  in  their  teeth,  one  of  the  diviners  advised  that  sacrifice
should  be  offered  to  the  wind.     The  sacrifice  was  offered,  and  the
violence  of  the  wind  perceptibly  abated  (Xenophon,  Anabasis^  iv.  5.  4).
At  Corinth  there  was  a  set  of  men  who  professed  to  be  able  to  calm  the
winds  (Hesychius,  s,v,  av^iwKolraC),

The  Persians  as  well  as  the  Greeks  sacrificed  to  the  winds.  After
the  destruction  of  their  ships  at  Artemisium,  the  storm  continuing  to
rage  for  three  days,  the  Persian  magicians  offered  sacrifice  and  used
enchantments  to  still  the  wind  (Herodotus,  vii.  191).  In  various  parts
of  Germany  it  is  customary  during  a  storm  to  throw  a  handful  of  meal
or  a  bundle  of  hay  to  the  wind,  saying,  **  There,  wind,  there  is  meal  for
your  child,  but  you  must  stop  blowing,"  or  "  Mr.  Wind  or  Mrs.  Wind,
here  is  thine,  leave  me  mine,"  or  some  such  words.  This  is  called
"feeding  the  wind."  Or  food  in  a  wooden  trencher  is  placed  on  a  tree
as  an  offering  to  the  wind.  See  Wuttke,  Der  deutsche  Volksaberglaubey^
§  430 ;  Grimm,  Deutsche  Mythologies^  i.  p.  529 ;  Zingerle,  Sitterty
Brduchcy  und  Meinungen  des  Tiroler  Volkes^  No.  1046  ;  Zeit,  f,  deutsche
Mythologie^  4.  p.  300 ;  Grohmann,  Aberglauben  und  Gebrduche  aus
Bohmen  und  Mdhren^  p.  2  sq, ;  Bavaria^  Landes-  und  Volkeskunde  des


CH.  xji  PHLIASIA  75

KmgrHchs  Bayem^  2.  p.  235  ;  Die  gestriegelte  Rockenphilosophte,  iv.  3  ;
Panzer,  Beitrag  zur  deuischefi  Mythologie^  2,  p.  528  ;  Leoprechting,  Aus
dmLtchrcdn^  p.  loi  5q,\  Birlinger,  Volksthumliches  aus  Schwaben^  i.
pi  190  sq. ;  iVi,  Aus  Schwabetiy  i.  p.  100  ;  A.  Peter,  Volksthumliches  aus
Oesterreich-SchJesien^  2.  p.  259 ;  U.  Jahn,  Die  deutschen  Opfergebrduche
hdAckerlniu  und  Viehstucht^  P*  57  ^99'

Attempts  like  these  to  appease  the  wind  by  sacrifice  and  prayer
should  be  distinguished  from  attempts  to  subdue  it  by  force  or  by  magic.
Examples  of  these  latter  modes  of  working  on  the  wind  have  been
collected  by  mc  in  The  Golden  Bought  i.  p.  26  sqq.  See  also  Pausanias,
ii.  34.  2  note.

12.  2.  the  harbonr  of  Sicyon.  The  harbour  of  Sicyon  had
fortifications  of  its  own,  and  could  be  held  by  troops  apart  from  Sicyon
(Xenophon,  HelUnica^  vii.  3.  2  ;  Polyaenus,  Strat,  v.  16.  3).  Still  part
of  the  old  city,  before  Demetrius's  time,  seems  to  have  adjoined  the
harbour  (Diodorus,  xx.  102.  2).  The  harbour  is  now  sanded  up,  and
its  site  is  only  marked  by  a  marsh  (Vischcr,  Erinnerungen^  p.  271  ;
Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  30).

12.  3.  Phliaaia,     The  valley  of  the  Asopus  above  Sicyon  is  a  deep
and  narrow  glen  shut  in  on  either  hand  by  mountains,  the  steep  sides
of  which  are  thickly  overgrown  with  bushes.     In  some  places,  where  the
nnd  is  hemmed  in  between  the  roots  of  the  mountain  and  the  white,
torbid,  rushing  river,  the  bank  is  occasionally  undermined  and  swept
away  by  the  stream,  and  the  path  disappears  altogether.     In  its  upper
reaches  the  glen  widens  so  as  to  admit  of  here  and  there  a  small  river-
side meadow,  prettily  situated  among  oaks  and  shrubbery,  with  now  and
then  a  patch  of  ploughed  land.    After  we  have  followed  the  glen  upwards
from  Sicyon  for  about  four  hours,  it  opens  out  into  a  broad  and  fertile
plain,  encircled  by  steep  mountains,  down  which  brooks  flow  on  all  sides
to  join  the  Asopus.     This  upland  plain,  some  four  miles  long  and
standing  about  1000  feet  above  the  sea,  is  Phliasia,  the  district  of  which
Phlius  was  the  ancient  capital.     On  the  west  its  level  expanse  is  bounded
by  the  picturesque,  rugged,  woody  mass  of  Mount  Gavria  (about  5000
feet  high),  above  which  appears  the  snowy  top  of  the  lofty  Cyllene  in
Arcadia.     The  eastern  side  of  the  valley  is  bounded  by  the  Tricaranian
range  (Xenophon,  Hellenica^  vii.  2.  §§  i,  5,  1 1,  13  ;  Demosthenes,  xvi.
P-  206),  which  with  its  three  flat  summits  divides  the  Phliasian  valley
from  the  vale  of  Nemea.     The  Asopus  rises  among  the  southern  hills
and  flows  northward  through  the  valley  in  a  deep  grassy  bed.     It  is  here
a  dear  and  tranquil  stream,  very  different  from  the  rapid  and  turbid
river  which  it  becomes  in  the  glen  below,  where  it  takes  its  colour  from
the  soil  which  is  washed  down  into  it  by  the  numerous  torrents  from
the  white  argillaceous  mountains    through  which   it  threads  its   way.
About  the  middle  of  the  plain  it  is  joined  by  a  tributary,  longer  than
the  Asopus  itself,  flowing  from  the  mountains  which  enclose  the  south-
western comer  of  the   plain.      The   soil   of  the    Phliasian  valley  is
excellent ;  the  central  part  of  it  is  given  up  almost  exclusively  to  vine-
yards which  furnish  now,  as  they  did  in  antiquity,  a  fine  fiery  wine  like
Burgundy.       The    principal    modem    village    is   St    George   {Hagios
Gi&rgios)  situated  at  the  southern  end  of  the  Tricaranian  range.


76  PHLJUS  BK.  11.  CORINT

The  ancient  Phlius,  the  capital  of  the  district,  was  situated  toward
the  north-east  end  of  the  plain,  on  a  low  spur  which  stretches  from  M
Tricaranum  towards  the  Asopus,  a  little  below  the  junction  of  the  Asopu
with  its  main  tributary  (see  below).  But  the  still  more  ancient  capita
as  Pausanias  informs  us  (§  4  sq,\  was  called  Arantia  or  Araethyrea,  an
was  situated  round  about  a  hill  called  the  Arantine  hill.  This  hill,  h
tells  us,  was  not  far  from  the  hill  upon  which  Phlius  was  afrerward
built ;  and  Strabo  (viii.  p.  382)  says  that  Araethyrea  was  beside  Mour
Celossa,  at  a  distance  of  30  Greek  furlongs  from  the  later  city  of  Phliuj
Hence  modem  topographers  have  identified  the  Arantine  hill  with  th
modem  Polyphengo^  a  steep  rocky  mountain,  full  of  clefts  and  fissure
which  rises  at  the  southern  end  of  the  valley,  near  the  springs  of  th
Asopus.  On  the  west  side  and  at  the  back  of  the  mountain  there  ar
some  ancient  Greek  remains  which  are  taken  to  be  those  of  Aranti
(Araethyrea).  The  site  agrees  well  with  the  description  of  ApoUoniu
Rhodius,  who  says  (i.  115  sqq.)  that  Araethyrea  was  at  the  springs  <
the  Asopus.  See  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  211  5q,\  Leake,  Morea^  3.  p|
339-356;  /V/.,  Peloponnesiaca,  p.  401  sq.  (Leake  gives  the  name  c
Polypfiengo  to  the  hill  upon  which  Phlius  stands,  and  takes  the  Asopu
to  be  the  longer  branch  which  joins  the  river  on  the  west,  rising  at  th
foot  of  Mt.  Gavria;  hence  he  looks  for  Arantia  or  Araethyrea  on  th
slope  of  Mt  Gavria) ;  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  32  ;  Ross,  Reisen^  pj
25-39;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  pp.  470-480;  Welcker,  Tagebuch^  i.  pp.  30^
311;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  pp.  278-282;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  pj
32-35  ;  Philippson,  Peloponnes,  p.  117.

12.  4.  Arantia.  See  the  preceding  note.  Strabo  (viii.  p.  382
says  that  Araethyrea  {t,e,  Arantia)  was  at  the  foot  of  Mt.  Celossa,  an
that  part  of  Mt.  Celossa  was  called  Cameates,  where  the  Asopus  too
its  rise.  The  Arantine  hill  must  have  been  a  spur  of  Celossa  or  Cameate
When  the  Lacedaemonians  garrisoned  Phlius,  Agesipolis  led  a  body  <
Lacedaemonian  troops  against  Argos,  and  after  ravaging  the  countr
built  a  fort  "at  the  pass  beside  Celusa"  (Xenophon,  Hellen.  iv.  7.  7
This  was  probably  in  the  glen  to  the  east  of  the  Arantine  hill ;  for  th
direct  road  from  Phlius  to  Argos  is  through  this  glen.  See  Ross,  Reiset
p.  27  sq.  The  Celossa  of  Strabo  is  doubtless  identical  with  the  Celus
of  Xenophon.  "Mt.  Celossa  and  the  Cclossan  pass  are  for  us  th
Megalo-  Vouno  and  the  gorge  which  leads  from  Phlius  to  Mycenae,  i
spur  of  this  chain,  Mt.  Polyphengos^  all  riddled  with  caverns,  is  probabl
Mt.  Cameates,  which  was  itself  only  a  part  of  Mt.  Celossa.  It  advanc*
into  the  plain  to  a  distance  of  30  furlongs  (stades)  from  Phlius,  an
it  is  at  its  foot  that  Strabo  appears  to  place  the  Araethyrea  of  Home
Mr.  Peyetier  observed  the  ruins  of  a  temple  on  the  ridge  whic
connects  Mt.  Pofyphengos  with  the  Megalo-  Vouno  "  (Boblaye,  Recherche
p.  32).

12.  4.  Oelnsa.  This  is  clearly  the  name  of  the  mountain  in  whic
the  Asopus  rises.     See  preceding  note.

12.  4.  Oeleae.     See  ii.  14.  i  note.

12.  5.  Aras  had  a  son  Aoris  etc  This  passage  is  quoted  I
Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v,  'ApatOvpia,


CH.  xiii  PHLIUS  77

12.  5.  Homer has  the  verse  etc.     See  Iliad^  ii.  571.

12.  5.  the  mysteries  of  Demeter.     See  ii.  14.

12.  6.  is  called  a  son  of  Dionysus.  This  was  an  appropriate
parentage  for  Phlias,  since  the  wine  of  this  district  was  famous
(Athcnaeus,  i.  p.  27  d).  According  to  Hyginus  {Fab,  14,  p.  41,  line  12,
ed.  Bonte)  Phliasus  (Phlias)  was  a  son  of  Dionysus  and  Ariadne.  The
wine  of  the  district,  called  St.  George's  wine  from  the  village  of  St,
George^  is  still  excellent ;  it  is  largely  exported  to  Athens.  See  Gell,
Itinerary  of  Greece^  p.  75  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  470 ;  Vischer,
Erinnerungen,  p.  281;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  33;  Philippson,  Pelo-
foftnes^  p.  117.  Bunches  of  grapes  appear  on  coins  of  Phlius  {Brit.
Mus.  Cat.  of  Gr,  Coins^  Pelop.  p.  35,  pi.  vii.  3.  4).

12.  6.  the  verses  of  the  Bhodian  poet.  See  ApoUonius  Rhodius,
Argonaut,  i.  1 1 5-1 1 7.

13.  I.  The  retnm  of  the  Heraclids.  Prof.  J.  Beloch  has  recently
attempted  to  prove  that  the  tradition  of  the  Dorian  immigration  or  the
return  of  the  Heraclids  to  Peloponnese  was  nothing  but  a  myth  invented
not  earlier  than  the  eighth  century  B.C.  to  explain  the  difference  between
Greece  as  it  was  at  that  time  and  Greece  as  it  was  depicted  in  the
Homeric  poems.  See  J.  Beloch,  *  Die  dorische  Wanderung,'  Rheinisches
Museum^  N.  F.  45  (1890),  pp.  555-598  ;  /V/.,  Griechische  Geschichte^  i.
p.  149  sqq.  But  the  tradition  of  the  Dorian  invasion  and  conquest  is
strongly  confirmed  by  the  archaeological  evidence  which  goes  to  show
that  the  Mycenaean  civilisation  in  Argolis  came  to  a  sudden  and  violent
end  just  about  the  time  to  which  tradition  assigned  the  Dorian  invasion.
SeeTsountas,  MvKiJvai,  p.  238  sq.

13.  3.  the  acropolis  of  Phlius.     The  acropolis  or  citadel  of  Phlius
occupied  a  hill  on  the  eastern  bank  of  the  Asopus.    A  neck  or  ridge  joins
the  hill  to  Mt.  Tricaranum  on  the  east  and  the  higher  Mt.  Spina  on  the
Dorth.   A  brook  flowing  from  Mt.  Tricaranum  falls  into  the  Asopus  at  right
angles,  a  little  to  the  south  of  the  hill.     "  The  town  appears  to  have
covered  the  southern  side  of  this  hill,  and  below  it  to  have  occupied  all  the
angle  bounded  by  the  river  Asopus,  and  the  brook  already  mentioned.
The  wall  is  traceable  on  the  south-eastern  descent  from  the  acropolis  to
the  brook  and  for  a  short  distance  along  its  bank.    On  the  south-west  it
seems  not  to  have  enclosed  so  much  of  the  plain  ;  for  after  its  descent
^om  the  hill,  it  is  traced  for  a  short  distance  only  along  the  foot  and
then  crosses  to  the  Asopus  "  (Leake,  Morea^  3.  p.  340).     The  top  of  the
bill  is  of  some  extent ;  in  antiquity   it  included  not  only  a  grove  of
c>'presses,  as  Pausanias  mentions,  but  also  some  corn-land  (Xenophon,
Hellernca^  vii.  2.  8).     Several  remains  of  ancient  foundations  may  still
be  seen  on  it.     The  walls  of  the  citadel  are  traceable  in  many  places,
but  especially  across  the  neck  of  the  hill  on  its  highest  part ;  they  are
constructed  in  the  polygonal  style  of  masonry ;  the  material  is  a  hard
conglomerate.     The  brook  which  bounded   the   city  on   the  south   is
enclosed  on   both   sides  with  polygonal  walls,   doubtless  for  the  pro-
tection of  the  city  on  this  side.     A   suburb  seems  to  have  extended
beyond  this  brook,  for  to  the  south  of  it  there  are  many  remains  of  walls.
Sec  Leake,  Morea^  3.  p.  339  sq. ;  Ross,  Reisen^  pp.  32-34 ;  Curtius,


78  PHLWS  BK.   11.  CORINTH

Pelop,  2.  pp.  471-473;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  p.   280  sq,\  Bursian,
Geogr,  2.  p.  33  sq, ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  391  sq.

Some  light  is  thrown  on  the  topography  of  Phlius  by  the  events
which  followed  the  battle  of  Leuctra.     The  Phliasians  had  been  friends
of  Sparta  when  Sparta  was  at  the  height  of  her  power ;  and  after  the
disastrous  day  of  Leuctra,  when   Sparta  was  deserted   by  allies    and
subjects  alike,  the  Phliasians  stood  loyally  by  their  old  friends.     This
drew  down  on  them  the  hostility  of  the  victorious  Thebans  and  their
allies.     In  368  B.C.  a  body  of  Arcadians  and  Eleans,  marching  through
the  pass  of  Nemea  to  join  the  Thebans,  were  induced  by  some  Phliasian
exiles  to  make  an  attempt  to  surprise  and  capture  Phlius.     Six  hundred
men,  supplied  with  ladders,  being  sent  in  advance,  concealed  themselves
by  night  at  the  foot  of  the  citadel  walls.     Next  morning  the  sentinels  on
Mt  Tricaranum,  to  the  east  of  the  town,  signalled  the  approach  of  the
enemy  from  the  valley  of  Nemea.     The  eyes  of  the  citizens  were  thus
turned  to  the  hills,  over  which  they  momentarily  expected  to  see  the
enemy  appearing.    Taking  advantage  of  their  distraction  the  six  hundred
men  under  the  acropolis  planted  their  ladders  and  were  soon  masters  of
the  almost  deserted  citadel.     But  the  citizens  rallied,  and  after  a  fierce
struggle  drove  the  enemy  with  fire  and  sword  over  the  ramparts.     See
Xenophon,  Hellenica^  vii.  2.  1-9.     Next  year  the  allies  made  a  more
determined  attempt  to  get  possession  of  Phlius.    The  Theban  conmiander
at   Sicyon  marched  from  that  city  against  Phlius  at  the  head  of  his
garrison  and  of  a  body  of  Sicyonian  and   Pellenian  troops.     He  was
supported  by  Euphron,  tyrant  of  Sicyon,  with  2000  mercenaries.     The
attack  was  again  made  from  the  hills  on  the  east  of  the  town.     On  the
neck  of  land  which  joins  the  citadel  of  Phlius  with  the  hills  a  detachment
of  Sicyonians  and  Pellenians  was  posted,  to  prevent  the  Phliasians  fix>in
ascending  the  hills  and  taking  their  enemies  in  the  rear.    The  rest  of  the
army  then  descended  from  the  hills  in  the  direction  of  a  sanctuary  of
Hera,  meaning  to  ravage  the  cornfields  and  vineyards  in  the  valley.
But  the  Phliasian  cavalry  and  infantry  met  them  and  prevented  them
from  carrying  out  their  intention.     Skirmishing  went  on  most  of  the  day
with  varying  fortune.     At  one  time  Euphron  with  his  mercenaries  drove
the  Phliasians  over  the  broken  ground.     But  as  soon  as  they  reached
open  ground,  where  the  Phliasian  cavalry  could  come  into  play,  they  were
in  turn  driven  back  up  the  hills  as  far  as  the  sanctuary  of  Hera.    At  last    ,
the  assailants  abandoned  the  attack  and  retreated  up  the  hill,  purposing
to  join  the  detachment  of  Sicyonians  and  Pellenians,  which  they  had
left  on  the  neck  of  ground  leading  to  the  citadel.     To  reach  them  they     j
had  to  make  a  long  detour  up  the  hill,  for  a  ravine  lay  between  them  and
their  friends,  the  ravine  namely  along  which  the  city-walls  were  built
The  Phliasians  pursued  them  up  hill  a  little  way,  then  perceiving  the
enemy's  intention  of  forming  a  junction  with  the  detachment  on  the  neck,
they  turned  back  and  taking  a  short  cut  close  under  the  town-walls
hastened  to  attack  the  detachment  of  the  enemy  before  the  main  body
could  come  up  to  their  assistance.     In  this  race  the  cavalry  outstripped
the  infantry  and  charged  the  Pellenians  alone.    The  latter  stood  to  their    ■
arms  and  repelled  the  cavalry,  till  the  Phliasian  infantry  came  running    j


CH.  XIII  PHLIUS  79

up.  Then,  attacked  by  horse  and  foot  simultaneously,  the  Pellenians
and  Sicyonians  gave  way.  The  victorious  Phliasians  erected  a  trophy
and  sang  a  loud  paean.  The  enemy  watched  the  scene  from  the  hills  ;
then,  drawing  together  his  beaten  and  scattered  forces,  fell  sullenly  back
on  Sicyon.  See  Xenophon,  Hellenica^  vii.  2.  11-15.  The  sanctuary  of
Hera  about  which  the  battle  raged  was  not  of  course  the  temple  of  Hera
described  by  Pausanias  in  ii.  13.  4.  The  latter  stood  on  the  acropolis  of
Phlius ;  the  former  must  have  stood  on  one  of  the  lower  slopes  of  the
mountain  (Leake,  Morea^  3.  p.  349  sq.)

13.  3.  Ganyxneda Hebe.    According  to  Strabo  (viii.  p.  382),

Hebe  was  worshipped  both  at  Phlius  and  at  Sicyon  under  the  title  of  Dia.
In  a  tomb  at  Megara  there  was  found  a  terra-cotta  figure  which  has  been
supposed  to  represent  the  Hebe  of  Sicyon.     It  represents  a  young  god-
dess leaning  with  her  left  elbow  on  a  rectangular  monument.    She  is  clad
in  a  long  tunic  and  a  great  veil  which  envelops  the  lower  part  of  her
body  and  is  gracefully  disposed  over  her  head  to  form  a  kind  of  nimbus.
All  round  her  head  the  veil  is  bordered  with  ivy  leaves.     This  suggests
the  Hebe  of  Sicyon,  since  her  festival  (as  Pausanias  mentions  immediately)
was  called  Ivy-cutters.    On  several  vases  Hebe,  associated  with  Hercules,
holds  branches  of  ivy  in  her  hands.    The  name  Hebe  has  been  given  by
Panofka  to  a  statuette  of  a  goddess  holding  a  wine-jug  and  bowl.    Along
with  the  statuette  of  Hebe  found  at  Megara  there  were  found  in  the  same
tomb  a  statuette  of  Aphrodite  with  her  dove  in  her  hand  and  a  statuette
of  Hera.    The  writer  of  the  notice  thinks  that  the  three  goddesses  formed
a  triad,  with   a  mystic   and    sepulchral    significance ;    and    that    the
Dionysus  who  was  worshipped  at  Naples  with  the  surname  of  Hebon
(Macrobius,  Sat.   i.    18.  9)  may  have  been  related  to  Hebe.     A  fine
amphora  of  Nola,  he  says,   represents   the  Dis-Hebon  and  the   Dia-
Hebe  standing    face   to   face.      At   Aegina,    as   we    learn    from   an
inscription   (C   /.    G,   No.  2138),  a  statue  of  Colian   Aphrodite  was
placed  in  a  sanctuary  of  Hebe.      See    De  Chanot,   *  Terres-cuites  de
M^ara,'  Gazette  ArMologique^  2  (1876),  pp.  46-50,  with  pi.  15.     The
geographer  and  antiquarian   Mnaseas  described  a  sanctuary  of  Hebe
beside  a  sanctuary  of  Hercules.     In  these  sanctuaries  it  was  the  custom
CO  keep  sacred  cocks  and  hens,  the  cocks  in  the  temple  of  Hercules,  the
hens  in  the  temple  of  Hebe.    The  sanctuaries  were  divided  by  a  channel
of  pure  and  ever-fiowing  water ;  a  hen  never  crossed  the  water,  but  at
the  proper  season  the  cocks  flew  over  the  channel  and  visited  the  hens.
On  their  return  the  cocks  cleansed  themselves  in  the  running  water.    See
Aelian,  NcU.  Anim,  xvii.  46.

13.  3.  Homer  also  mentions  Hebe  etc.     See  //.  iv.  2  sq, ;  Od,  xi.
60Z.

13.  4.  Ivy-cutters.  Wreaths  of  ivy  appear  on  the  reverse  of  coins
of  Phlius,  encircling  a  large  ^  (for  Phlius).  See  E.  Curtius,  Religious
ckaracter  of  Greek  coins^  p.  6  (Gesammelte  Abhandlungen^  2.  p.  447)  ;
Leake,  Numismata  Hellenica^  Europ.  p.  92  ;  Head,  Historia  Nummorum,
p.  344  ;  Brit,  Mus,  Cat.  of  Gr,  Coins^  Pelop.  p.  34  sq.y  pi.  vii.  2.  5.  On
the  obverse  of  these  coins  is  a  bull  butting,  which  may,  as  Leake  suggests,
represent  the  Asopus.     For  the  ivy  cp.  i.  31.  6  ;  ii.  29.  i.


8o  PHLIUS  BK.   II.  CORINTK

13.  4.  temple  of  Hera.  At  the  village  of  SL  George  near  Phlius
there  is  a  large  stone  with  the  inscription  H  PAS.  It  was  brought  from
Hagios  Ntcolacces,  It  may  have  marked  the  sacred  precinct  of  Hera  at
Phlius.  At  the  same  village  of  St.  George  there  is  an  archaic  inscription
written  from  right  to  left  >A AT  AA«  The  stone  is  broken  just  at  the  last
down  stroke.  The  inscription  was  perhaps  'Aprdfiiros  and  may  have
marked  the  limits  of  a  precinct  of  Artemis.  Pausanias,  in  the  next
section,  mentions  a  statue  of  Artemis  at  Phlius.  See  Bulletin  de  Corresp.
HelUn.  6  (1882),  p.  444.

13.  5.  a  temple  of  Aescnlapius.  From  Pausanias's  description  we
infer  that  this  temple  was  situated  on  the  southern  slope  of  the  acropolis
between  the  summit  ^d  the  town  which  lay  at  the  foot  of  the  hill.  It
may  therefore  have  octpupied  the  site  of  the  ruined  chapel  of  the  Panagia
Rachiotissa,  *  Our  Lady  of  the  Hill,'  which  stands  on  a  terrace  half  way
down  the  slope  of  the  acropolis.  The  chapel  is  built  of  squared  blocks.
It  contains  some  Doric  capitals  and  drums.  The  echinus  of  the  capitals
is  very  straight ;  the  drums  have  twenty  flutes.  There  are  also  some
triglyphs.  All  these  remains  are  of  soft  whitish  limestone.  See  Ross,
Reisen^  p.  32  sq.\  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  473  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  392.

13.  5.  Below  this  temple  is  a  theatre.  The  shape  of  the  theatre
may  be  discerned  on  the  southern  slope  of  the  acropolis,  under  the
chapel  of  the  Panagia  Rachiotissa.  See  Ross,  Reisen^  p.  33  ;  Curtius,
Pelop,  2.  p.  473  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  p.  281.

13.  6.  a  bronze  she-goat,  mostly  gilded.  On  the  goat  in
ancient  religion  see  Stephani,  in  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for
1869,  pp.  19-139.  It  may  be  conjectured  that  the  image  of  the  goat  in
the  market-place  of  Phlius  represented  Dionysus  himself.  For  Dionysus
was  represented  in  goat-form  (Hesychius,  ''E/ot</>os  o  Aio vixros  ;  cp.  Tht
Golden  Bought  i.  p.  326  sqq,^  2.  p.  34  sqq,) ;  the  worship  of  the  vine-god
in  a  wine-growing  district  would  be  appropriate  ;  and  Phlias,  the  mythical
founder  of  Phlius,  was  a  son  of  Dionysus.  See  notes  on  ii.  12.  3  and
6.  The  idea  that  by  worshipping  the  bronze  goat  they  preserved  their
vines  from  blight  points  strongly  in  the  same  direction.  With  the
custom  of  gilding  the  goat  we  may  compare  a  similar  practice  in  Cam-
bodia. "  There  are  idols  which  contain  spirits  ever  ready  to  heal  the
sick  who  worship  them.  One  thing  which  is  thought  to  be  especially
agreeable  to  these  spirits  is  to  gild  them  wholly  or  in  part.  So  the
pilgrims  always  bring  with  them  some  gilt  paper  when  they  are  going  to
pray  to  these  spirits.  To  stick  a  gold  leaf  on  the  statue  is  a  meritorious
act  which  secures  for  the  worshipper  the  cure  of  the  corresponding  part
of  his  body.  If  a  man  prays  for  success  in  speculation,  for  wealth  to  be
acquired  in  commerce,  industry,  fishing,  etc.,  he  gilds  the  whole  statue
from  head  to  foot.  It  is  the  traces  of  gilding  to  be  seen  almost  every-
where on  the  statues  and  chief  figures  in  the  bas-reliefs  which  led  people
to  suppose  that  formerly  all  these  sculptures  were  gilded  all  over "  (J.
Moura,  Le  royaume  du  Cambodge  (Paris,  1883),  i.  p.  179).  Lucian
describes  a  statue  adorned  with  ribbons  and  withered  wreaths,  its  breast
plastered  over  with  gold  leaf.  The  gold  leaf  had  been  put  on  by  a  man
whom  the  statue  had  cured  of  the  ague.     Patients  who  had  been  cured


CH.  XIV  PHLIUS  8i

of  fever  by  the  statue  stuck  silver  coins  or  silver  leaf  on  the  statue,
making  them  adhere  by  means  of  wax.  See  Lucian,  Philopseudes^  1 9
sq.  Similar  customs  arc  still  practised  by  the  Greeks.  In  a  church  in
Rhodes  Sir  Charles  Newton  saw  people  sticking  gold  coins  with  wax  on
the  faces  of  saints,  and  in  a  church  in  Lesbos  he  saw  a  gold  coin  stuck
on  the  fcice  of  the  Panagia,  and  was  told  that  it  was  a  votive  offering  for
recovery  from  sickness  {Travels  and  Discoveries  in  the  Levant^  i.  p.
187,  2.  p.  4).

13.  6.  The  constellation  which  they  name  the  Qoat.  It  was  on
the  left  shoulder  of  the  constellation  called  the  Charioteer.  According
to  one  story,  the  Goat  was  the  goat  which  had  suckled  the  infant  Zeus ;
according  to  another,  it  was  the  goat  with  whose  skin  Zeus  had  covered
himself  when  he  fought  the  Titans.     See  Hyginus,  Astronomica^  1 3.

13.  7*  what  they  call  the  Navel  (^Omphalos),  On  the  reverse  of
some  coins  of  Phlius  is  represented  a  four-spoked  wheel,  which  may
symbolise  the  Omphalos.  It  resembles  the  Navel  {Omphalos)  on  coins
of  Delphi.  See  Brit,  Mus.  Cat.  Gr.  Coins,  Pelop.  p.  33,  pi.  vi.  20.  23  ;
cp.  Head,  Historia  Nummorum,  p.  344.  The  idea  that  Phlius  stood  at
the  centre  of  Peloponnese  is  of  course  absurd.

13.  8.  Oenens,  from  Aetolia  etc.  Oeneus  was  king  of  Aetolia  (ii.
25.  2),  and  the  legend  of  the  death  of  the  cupbearer  was  properly  an
Aetolian  one,  the  scene  of  the  tragedy  being  Calydon  in  Aetolia.  The
name  of  the  cupbearer  is  variously  given  as  Eunomus,  Eurynomus,
Archias,  and  Cherias.  See  ApoUodorus,  ii.  7.  6  ;  Diodorus,  iv.  36  ;
Athenaeus,  ix.  p.  4iof.  At  Proschium  in  Aetolia  the  slain  Cyathus
had  a  sacred  precinct,  which  was  said  to  have  been  dedicated  to  him
by  Hercules.  It  was  called  *the  sanctuary  of  the  cup-bearer.'  See
Athenaeus,  ix.  p.  411  a.

14.  I.  Celeae.  Leake  thought  that  the  site  of  Celeae  may  have
been  at  a  spot  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Asopus,  about  half  a  mile  from
Phlius.  Foundations  of  an  ancient  Greek  building  are  to  be  seen  there.
Sec  Leake,  Morea^  3.  p.  345  sq.  ;  cp.  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  475.

14.  2.  Dsrsanles.  See  i.  14.  3.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the
original  form  of  the  name  was  Disaules,  *he  who  ploughs  (furrows)
twice.'  Cp.  Trisaules  (viii.  15.  4),  *  he  who  furrows  thrice,'  and  Tri-
ptolemus,  which  may  have  had  the  same  meaning  (Preller,  Griech,
Myth.^  I.  p.  770).

14.  3.  The  verses  are  these.  See  Homer,  Hymn  to  Demeter,
474-476.

14.  4.  the  tomb  of  Dsrsanles  etc.     See  ii.  1 2.  4.

14.  4.  the    so-called  aborigines.      The  word    here    translated

'aborigines'  {autochthones)  means  more  properly  *  earth-bom.'     Many

primitive  peoples  believe  that  their  ancestors  issued  from  the  ground  or

vere  actually  formed  from  the  soil.     The  Basutos  in  South  Africa  think

that  "  both  men  and  animals  came  out  of  the  bowels  of  the  earth  by  an

immense  hole,  the  opening  of  which  was  in  a  cavern,  and  that  the  animals

appeared  first"  (Casalis,   The  Basutos,  p.  240).     Similar  legends  are

common  among  the  North  American  Indians.     For  example  the  now

extinct  tribe  of  Mandans  believed  that  their  ancestors  at  first  lived

VOL.  Ill  G


82  CLEONAE  bk.  ii.  corinth

underground  beside  a  subterranean  cave.  A  grape-vine  extended  its
roots  down  to  them ;  some  of  the  people  climbed  up  the  vine  to  the
surface  of  the  earth  and  were  delighted  with  the  earth  and  sky.  They
returned  with  grapes  to  their  people  and  told  them  what  they  had  seen.
So  all  the  people  proceeded  to  climb  up  the  vine ;  but  when  about  half
of  them  had  reached  the  surface  of  the  earth,  a  fat  woman  broke  the
vine  with  her  weight ;  and  all  the  rest  of  the  people  tumbled  down.  Sec
Lewis  and  Clarke,  Travels  to  the  Source  of  the  Missouri  River  (London,
1815),  I.  p.  190  ;  Maximilian,  Prinz  zu  Wied,  Reise  in  das  innere  Nord-
America^  2.  p.  ito  sq.  The  Black  Bear  clan  of  the  Omahas  have  a
tradition  that  their  ancestors  were  made  underground  and  afterwards
came  to  the  ^Mxi^s:^  {Third  Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology
(Washington),  p.  237).  The  Minnitarees  think  that  they  formerly  lived
underground.  Two  boys,  they  say,  "strayed  away  from  them  and
absented  themselves  several  days.  At  length  they  returned  and  informed
the  nation  that  they  had  discovered  another  world,  situate  above  their
present  residence,  where  all  was  beautiful  and  light.  They  saw  the  sun,
the  earth,  the  Missouri,  and  the  bison.  This  account  so  delighted  the
people,  that  they  immediately  abandoned  their  subterranean  dwelling,
and,  led  by  the  boys,  arrived  on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  at  the  spot
which  their  villages  now  occupy,  and  where  they  have  dwelt  ever  since  "
(E.  James,  Expedition  from  Pittsburgh  to  the  Rocky  Mountains^  i.  p.
258).  All  the  Califomian  Indians  "believe  that  their  first  ancestors
were  created  directly  from  the  soil  of  their  respective  present  dwelling-
places"  (S.  Powers,  Tribes  of  CcUifomia^  p.  5,  cp.  p.  147  ;  cp.  D wight,
Travels  in  New  England  and  New  York,  4.  p.  185  ;  C.  C.  Jones,
Antiquities  of  the  Southern  Indians y  p.  4  sq,)

14.  4-  what  is  called  the  Anactonun.  At  Eleusis  the  name
Anactorum  {cmaktoron)  was  applied  to  the  whole  or  a  part  of  the
sanctuary  of  Demeter  (Herodotus,  ix.  65,  with  Bahr's  note ;  Athe-
naeus,  v.  p.  213  d;  Lobeck,  Aglaophamus,  p.  59  J^.)  It  has  been
suggested  (vol.  2.  p.  510)  that  at  Eleusis  the  name,  designated  the
great  Hall  of  Initiation.  At  Celeae  the  name  may  have  had  a
similar  application,  since,  as  Pausanias  has  told  us,  the  rites  at  Celeae
were  a  mere  copy  of  the  rites  at  Eleusis.

15.  I.  Oleonae.  The  ruins  of  Cleonae  are  situated  in  a  valley
about  10  miles  south-west  of  ancient  Corinth  and  16  miles  south-west
of  modem  Corinth.  Strabo  (viii.  p.  377)  gives  the  distance  of  Cleonae
from  Corinth  as  80  furlongs ;  he  mentions  that  Cleonae  was  situated  on
a  hill  and  was  well  fortified.  In  antiquity  the  direct  road  from  Corinth
to  Argos  went  by  Cleonae  (Strabo,  Lc,)\  in  modem  times  the  railway
from  Corinth  to  Argos  runs  through  the  valley  on  its  south-eastern  side.
The  valley  of  Cleonae  and  the  valley  of  Nemea  both  lie  at  the  northern
foot  of  Mt.  Tretus  ;  they  run  parallel  to  each  other  in  a  northerly  direc-
tion, being  separated  from  each  other  by  Mt.  Apesas.  The  valley  of
Cleonae  is  the  broader.  From  the  semicircle  of  wooded  mountains
which  bounds  it  on  the  south  and  west  flow  many  brooks  which  unite
to  form  the  stream  called  the  Longopotamos,  At  its  north  end  the
valley  contracts  into  a  narrow  glen,  through  which  the  Longopotctmos


CH.  XV  CLEONAE  83

flows  northward  to  the  Gulf  of  Corinth.     On  the  western  side  of  this
valley  rises  an  isolated  hill  of  moderate  height,  overgrown  with  bushes,  its
steepest  side  turned  to  the  west,  where  a  stream  flows  at  its  foot.     The
hill  consists  of  two  parts,  an  eastern  and  a  western,  connected  with  each
other  by  a  ridge.     The  western  and  higher  part  seems  to  have  been  the
citadel  of  Cleonae.     On  its  highest  point  may  be  seen  the  remains  of  a
small  quadrangular  building  constructed  of  square  blocks.      On  the
lower  but  broader  eastern  portion  of  the  hill  appear  to  have  stood  some
temples.     The  foundations  of  four  buildings  may  be  distinguished,  and
in  two  at  least  of  them  are  fragments  of  columns  and  triglyphs,  of  rather
small   dimensions.     The  temple  of  Athena,  mentioned  by  Pausanias,
may  have  stood  on  this  eastern  summit.     Remains  of  other  buildings
are  to  be  seen  especially  on  the  southern  slope  of  the  hill.     Six. ancient
terrace  walls  rise  one  above  another  on  the  side  of  the  hill ;  they
probably  supported  the  houses  and  streets.     Fortiflcation-walls  of  con-
siderable extent  enclose  the  hill      They  are  of  polygonal  masonry,  about
6  feet  thick,  and  were  defended  by  towers.     See  Leake,  Morea,  3.  p.
325  ;   Dodwell,  Tour,  2.  p.  206  ;    Cell,  Itinerary  of  Greece,  p.  20  sq, ;
Boblaye,  Recherches,  p.  4 1  ;  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.   510;  Vischer,  Erin-
nerungieny  p.  2Z6  sq, ;  Welcker,  Tagebuch,  i.  p.  173  j^.  ;  }A\it^,  Journal,
2.  pi   142;    Conze  e  Michaelis,   *Viaggio  fatto  nella  Grecia,'  Annali
ddP  Instiiuto,  33  (1861),  p.   14  sq.\  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  37  ;  Bae-
deker,* p.  247  ;    Guide-Joanne,   2.  p.   202.      The  khan  of  Coriesa  or
Cttrtesa  stands  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  to  the  south-east  hill  of
Qeonae  ;  beside  it  are  a  chapel  and  a  fountain  (Gell,  Itinerary  of  Greece,
p.  21 ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  38).

Seneca  describes  a  curious  custom  which  prevailed  at  Cleonae.
Watchmen  were  maintained  at  the  public  expense  to  look  out  for  hail-
storms. When  these  watchmen  saw  a  hail -cloud  approaching  they
made  a  signal,  whereupon  the  farmers  turned  out  and  sacrificed  lambs
or  fowls.  It  was  thought  that  when  the  clouds  had  tasted  the  blood,
they  would  turn  aside  and  go  somewhere  else.  People  who  were  too
poor  to  offer  a  lamb  or  a  fowl  pricked  their  fingers  and  off*ered  their
own  blood  to  the  clouds  to  induce  them  to  go  away.  If  the  vines
and  crops  suffered  from  a  hail -storm,  the  watchmen  were  brought
before  the  magistrates  and  punished  for  neglect  of  duty.  The  watch-
men uttered  incantations  and  used  mole's  blood  or  menstruous  rags
to  avert  the  clouds.  See  Seneca,  Quaest,  Natur.  iv.  6  sq,  ;  Clement  of
Alex.  Strom,  vi.  3.  31,  p.  754,  ed.  Potter  ;  Plutarch,  Quaest.  Conviv.  vii.  2.
2.  Among  the  Aztecs  of  Mexico  there  were  sorcerers  who  by  their  spells
endeavoured  to  charm  away  hail  from  the  maize  and  divert  it  to  waste
lands  (Sahagun,  Histoire  gSndrale  des  c hoses  de  la  Nouvelle  Espagne
*  (Paris,  1880),  p.  486).  There  are  villages  in  India  at  the  present  day
in  which  a  professional  charmer  is  kept  for  the  sole  purpose  of  repeating
incantations  to  drive  away  the  hail  from  the  growing  crops  (Monier
Williams,  Religious  Thought  and  Life  in  India,  p.  241).

15.  I .  Scyllis  and  Dipoenus.  These  artists  are  of  interest  as  the
earliest  Greek  sculptors  who  are  known  to  have  founded  a  school.  Our
knowledge  of  their  personal  history  is  derived  almost  entirely  from  a


84  SCYLUS  AND  DIPOENUS  bk.  ii.  corinth

passage  in  Pliny,  who  says  {^Nat  HisL  xxxvi.  9)  that  they  were  the  first
artists  who  gained  a  reputation  by  carving  statues  in  marble.     They
were  natives  of  Crete,  and  flourished  in  the  days  when  the  Medes  ruled
in  Asia,  before  Cyrus  reigned  over  Persia,  that  is,  says  Pliny,  about  the
50th  Olympiad  (580-577   B.C.)      They  betook  themselves  to  Sicyon,
where  they  received  a  public  commission  to  execute  images  of  the  gods.
But  before  they  had  completed  the  statues,  the  artists  complained  of
being  ill-treated  and  withdrew  to  Aetolia.     Immediately  afterwards  a
dreadful  famine  and  failure  of  the  crops  afflicted  Sicyon.     The  people
inquired  of  the  oracle  and  were  told  that  the  distress  would  cease  if
Scyllis  and  Dipoenus  finished  the  statues.     This,  by  the  promise  of  high
rewards,  the  artists  were  induced  to  do.     They  made  images  of  Apollo,
Artemis,  Hercules,  and  Athena.     This  last  image  was  afterwards  struck
by  lightning.      It  was  probably  the  image  in  that  temple  of  Athena  at
Sicyon  which  Pausanias  describes  as  having  been  destroyed  by  light-
ning (ii.  II.  i).     Moses  of  Chorene,  an  Armenian  historian,  has  recorded
(see  Overbeck,  Schrifiquellen^  No.  326  ;  Robert,  Archdologische  Mdrcken^
p.  19)  that  when  Cyrus    conquered  Croesus  he  carried  off  gilt  bronze
statues  of  Artemis,    Hercules,  and  Apollo.     These  he  transported  to
Armenia.     The  statues  of  Apollo  and  Artemis  were  set  up  at  Armavir ;
but  the  statue  of  Hercules,  which  was  the  work  of  the  two  Cretans
Scyllis  and  Dipoenus,  was  set  up  at  Aschdischad.     In  another  passage
{N,  H,  xxxvi.  14)  Pliny  says  that  Ambracia,  Argos,  and  Cleonae  were
full  of  the  works  of  Dipoenus.     K.  O.  Miiller  ingeniously  conjectured
that  the  images  of  Artemis,  Hercules,  and  Apollo  which  Cyrus  carried
off  to  Armenia  were  identical  with  those  which  Scyllis  and  Dipoenus
made  for  the  Sicyonians.     He  supposed  that  the  four  statues  mentioned
by  Pliny  (/.r.)  formed  a  group  representing  the  contest  between  Apollo
and  Hercules  for  the  tripod,  a  favourite  subject  with  ancient  artists,  as
we  see  from  vase-paintings  ;  and  that  when  one  of  the  group  (Athena)
had  been  destroyed  by  lightning,  the  Sicyonians  sold  or  presented  the
remaining  figures  of  the  group  to  Croesus,  from  whose  hands  they  fell
into  those  of  the  victorious  Cyrus.     The  whole  question  has  been  a  good
deal  discussed  of  late  and  arguments  have  been  adduced  on  both  sides.
On  the  whole  the  evidence  seems  against  Miiller's  view  ;  it  appears  more
probable  that  the  statues  mentioned  by  Pliny  were  separate  statues,  not
a  group  ;  if  one  of  the  group  had  been  struck  by  lightning,  was  it  likely
that  the  others  would  escape  ?     Again,  from  the  way  in  which  Moses  of
Chorene  speaks  of  the  statue  of  Hercules  carried  off  by   Cyrus,  we
infer  that  it  was  a  separate  statue.     The  exact  date  of  the  sculptors
Scyllis  and  Dipoenus  has  also  been  lately  the  subject  of  much  barren
discussion.     There  seems  to  be  no  sufficient  ground  for  questioning  the
date  assigned  to  them  by  Pliny.     See  K.  O.  Miiller,  *  Ueber  Dip6nos
und  Skyllis  nach  Armenischen  Quellen,'  Kunstarchdologische  Werke^  4.
pp.  66-70;  Brunn,   Gesch.  d,  griech,  Kiinstler^   i.  p.  43  sqq, ;  /V/.,  Die
Kunst bet  Horner^  p.  46  j^.;  /V/.,  *Zur  Chronologie  der  alt  griech.  Kiinstler,*
Sitzungsberichie  d.  philos.-philolog.  u.  histor,  Ciasse  der  k.  b.  AkeuL  d,
Wissen,  zu  Miinchetiy  1871,  pp.  545-552;  L.  Urlichs,  Skopas^
227  ;  H.  V.   Rohden,  *  Die  Gdtterbilder  des   Dipoenos  und


H.  XV  PASS  OF  THE  TRETUS  85


'^OTi^  Archdolog,  Zeitung,  34  (1876),  p.  122;  W.  Klein,  *  Die  Dadali-

en,'  Archdolog.-epigr,  Mitiheil.  aus  Oesterreich^  5  (1881),  p.  93  sqq,  ;

lilchhofer,  Die  Anfdnge  der  Kunst  in  Griechenland^  p.  167  sq, ;  Over-

cck,  Gesch,  d,  griech,  PlasHk^^  i.  p.  84  sqq, ;  /V/.,  *  Nochmals  Dipoinos

nd  Skyllis/  Rheinisches Museum^  N.  F.  41  (1886),  pp.  67-72 ;  C.  Robert,

irchdologiscke  Mdrcheriy  p.    1 8  sqq.     On  another  statue  of  Athena  by

hcse  artists,  said  to  have  been  presented  by  Sesostris  to  Cleobulus

Overbeck,  Schriftquellefiy  No.  327),  see  M.  Zucker,  *Zur  altem  griech.

Kiinstlergeschichte,*  iV«^ /dc^r^«V:^<?r  /  PhiloL  u,  Pddag,  135  (1887),

PP-  78 5-79 1 •    The  statue  of  Athena  at  Cleonae,  mentioned  by  Pausanias,

appears  to  be  represented  on  a  coin  of  Cleonae  of  the

age  of  Geta  ;  an  archaic  Athena  stands  holding  lance  and

shield.     **  The  Athene  of  the  coin  §eems  an  interesting

record  of  the  archaic  statue  of  Dipoenus  and   Scyllis,

wbom  Pliny  gives  to  the  50th  Olympiad,  and  who  were

among  the   first   to   produce  national   Greek  types  of

various  divinities.     The  present  coin-type  represents  a

figure  of  Athene  retaining  the  pose  of  the  still  older   fig.  x8.— athena

Palladia,  but  far  more  refined  in  detail.     The  helmet  is        ^l^^J^  ^'^'

laiger,  the  aegis  on  the  breast  worked  out ;  folds  appear

bthe  chiton,  and  the  feet  are  articulate"  (Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,

l^um,  Comm.  on  Paus,  p.  32,  with  plate  H  i.)     Cp.  Head,  Historia  Num-

^tffmm,  p.  369.

15.  I.  the  tomb  of  Eorytns  and  Oteatns.  In  the  open  field,
about  fifteen  minutes  from  the  khan  of  Cur/esa,  there  were  found  some
years  ago  the  remains  of  a  great  circular  or  semicircular  structure,
which  probably  served  as  the  basis  of  some  large  monument.  It  is
composed  of  well- wrought  blocks  of  marble.  An  inscription  on  two
blocks  runs  thus :

Hcvo</>tAos  Ktti  Sr/ottTwv  'A/oycioi  ciroirycav

"The  Argives  Xenophilus  and  Straton  made  (the  statue  or  statues)."
From  the  shape  of  the  letters  the  inscription  seems  to  belong  to
about  the  middle  of  the  second  century  B.C.  Mr.  J.  Schmidt  suggests
that  possibly  these  blocks  may  have  been  part  of  the  tomb  of  Eurytus
ad  Cteatus.  S^^  Bulletin  de  Corr,  HelUnique^  4  (1880),  p.  46  5q,\  J.
Sdimidt,  in  Mittheilungen  d.  archdol,  Inst  in  Athen^  6  (1881),  p.
355  ^9'  \  Loewy,  Inschriften  griech.  Bildhauer^  No.  262.  As  to  the
Kulptors  Xenophilus  and  Straton,  see  ii.  23.  4  note.

15.  2.  From  Oleonae  there  are  two  roads  to  Argos  etc.  At  the
•outhem  end  of  the  valley  of  Cleonae  there  rises  like  a  wall  of  rock  the
oountain  of  Tretus,  which  forms  the  watershed  between  the  Corinthian
nd  the  Argolic  gulfs.  A  straight,  toilsome  path  led  from  Cleonae  in
ntiquity,  and  still  leads  past  the  village  of  Hagios  Vasilios^  over  the
lountain,  descending  into  the  Argolic  plain  at  the  ruins  of  Mycenae.
ut  the  more  convenient  way  from  the  valley  of  Cleonae  to  the  plain  of
rgos  bends  round  to  the  west,  where  the  mountain  is  not  so  high,  and
ns  up  a  gradually  ascending  gully.  This  was  the  pass  of  the  Tretus,
e  chief  line  of  communication  between  Corinth  and  the  south.     In


86  PASS  OF  THE  TRETUS  bk.  ii.  corinth

antiquity  it  was,  as  Pausanias  tells  us,  a  driving  road,  and  the  ruts  worn
by  the  chariot -wheels  can  still  be  seen  in  many  places.  The  defile,
though  long  and  narrow,  shut  in  by  high  mountains  on  either  hand,  is
nowhere  steep,  and  the  rise  is  not  considerable.  The  road  runs  by  a
deeply  worn  watercourse,  at  the  bottom  of  which  a  clear  and  shallow
stream  finds  its  way  amid  luxuriant  thickets  of  oleander,  myrtle,  and
arbutus.  The  lower  slopes  of  the  mountains  are  also  green  with  shrubs,
but  their  upper  slopes  are  grey  and  rocky.  The  pass  is  easily  defended.
On  both  sides,  towards  Cleonae  and  towards  the  plain  of  Argos,  may  be
seen  traces  of  ancient  works  built  to  defend  the  defile.  Near  the  highest
point  of  the  pass,  where  the  road  begins  to  descend  towards  Argos,
there  are  low  Turkish  watch-towers  called  Derweni  on  both  sides,  and
rough  stone  walls  such  as  the  Greeks  threw  up  in  many  passes  during
the  War  of  Independence.  In  1822  the  Turkish  army  under  Dramali
Pasha,  retreating  from  the  plain  of  Argos,  was  caught  by  the  Greeks  in
the  pass  of  the  Tretus  and  nearly  annihilated  ;  for  years  afterwards  tbe
defile  was  strewed  with  skeletons  and  skulls  of  men  and  horses.  "  Everf
part  of  the  Argolic  plain  is  considered  unhealthy  in  summer,  and  the
heat  is  excessive  ;  that  of  the  ravine  of  the  Tretus,  in  the  mid-day  hows,
is  said  to  be  something  beyond  bearing,  which  I  can  easily  concdTe,
having  passed  through  it  in  August,  at  an  hour  in  the  morning  when  tbe
heat  was  comparatively  moderate.  Not  long  since,  a  Tartar,  after  hanring
drunk  plentifully  of  wine  and  raki  at  Corinth,  was  found  to  be  dead  when
the  suriji  held  his  stirrup  to  dismount  at  the  khan  of  A^^orz/o//  (Mycenae)^
just  beyond  the  exit  of  the  Tretus"  (Leake).  The  name  Tretus  ('per-
forated ')  was  supposed  by  the  ancients  to  be  derived  from  a  great  cave
in  the  mountain  where  the  Nemean  lion  had  his  lair  (Diodorus,  iv.  11;
cp.  Hesiod,  Theog,  327-331).  As  to  the  ancient  name  of  the  pass,  and
the  supposed  wheel-marks  in  it,  W.  G.  Clark  says :  "  This  is  the  road
known  by  the  name  of  Tretos,  or  *  the  perforated  * ;  not,  I  conceive,  in  ;
consequence  of  the  caverns  in  the  neighbouring  rocks,  which  are  not
more  numerous  hereabouts  than  elsewhere,  but  because  the  glen  is,  as
it  were,  drilled  through  the  rock.  And  drilled  it  has  been  by  the  stream  j
which  flows  at  the  bottom.  We  saw,  or  fancied  we  saw,  frequent  wheel-
marks  in  the  rocks,  and  we  know  that  this  was  the  direction  of  a  carriage-
road.  But  from  my  subsequent  observations  I  learned  to  distrust  these
marks.  The  ordinary  mode  of  carrying  wood  in  Greece  is  to  tic  the
heavier  ends  of  the  poles  on  each  side  to  the  back  of  the  horse  or
donkey,  and  suffer  the  other  ends  to  trail  along  the  ground,  thus  making
two  parallel  ruts  which  in  course  of  time  may  attain  the  depth  of  and  be
mistaken  for  wheel-tracks.  When  a  depression  is  once  made,  it  becomes
a  channel  for  the  winter  rains,  and  so  is  smoothed  and  deepened."  Tht
modem  name  of  the  pass  is  DerveTuM.  The  railway  from  Corinth  to
Argos  runs  through  it.  Towards  the  northern  end  of  the  pass  the  khan
of  Dervenaki  stands  in  a  little  glade  overshadowed  by  tall  poplan,
cypresses,  and  mulberry -trees,  beside  a  murmuring  spring.  At  the  \
southern  outlet  of  the  pass  the  whole  plain  of  Argos,  with  the  mountains
on  either  hand  and  the  sea  in  the  distance,  bursts  suddenly  on  the  view.
On  the  left,  nestling  at  the  foot  of  the  hills,  are  Mycenae  and  Tiryns,


CH.  IV  THE  KONTOPOREIA  87

with  Nauplia  and  its  towering  acropolis  rising  from  the  sea  and  bound-
ing the  plain  on  this  side.  On  the  right  is  Argos  with  its  mountain
dtadd,  and  beyond  it  the  Lemaean  lake  glimmers  faintly  in  the  distance.
In  the  centre  of  the  picture,  beyond  the  long  foreground  of  level  plain,
stretches  the  blue  line  of  the  Argolic  Gulf.

Sec  Chandler,  Travels  in  Greece ^  p.  231  sq,  ;  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  213  sq,  \
Gdl,  Itinerary  of  Greece,  p.  25  sqq.  ;  icL,  Itinerary  of  the  Morea,  p.  161  sq,  ;
Lake,  Morea,  3.  p.  337  sq. ;  Boblaye,  Recherches,  p.  42 ;  Mure,  Journal,  2.  p.
158  sq. ;  Welcker,  Tagtbuch,  i.  p.  177 ;  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  512  j^y.  ;  W.  G.
Oark,  Peloponnesus,  p  64  ^ f .  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungtn,  p.  289  sq,  ;  StefTen,
KvUn  von  MykencU,  Erlduternder  Text,  p.  1 1  sq,  ;  Guide- JoanfU,  2.  p.  203  ;
Phifippson,  Pelaponnes,  p.  41.

So  much  for  the  pass  of  the  Tretus.  The  other  and  shorter  route
from  Qeonae  to  Argos  here  described  by  Pausanias  avoids  the  long
detour  to  the  west  and  strikes  straight  up  the  face  of  the  mountain,  past
the  village  of  Hagios  Vasilios^  which  stands  high  up  on  the  mountain-
side. Beyond  the  village,  near  which  may  be  seen  some  remains  of  an
aqueduct  supposed  by  Bursian  to  have  formed  part  of  the  aqueduct  by
whidi  Hadrian  brought  water  from  Stymphelus  to  Corinth  (Paus.  ii.  3.
5;  viiL  22.  3),  the  path  climbs  the  steep  slope  in  a  series  of  toilsome
flgzags  to  the  pass  of  Guni,  where  a  large  and  well-preserved  mediaeval
castle  stands  in  the  defile  between  Mount  Daphnia  on  the  east  and
Mount  Kuttdia  on  the  west.  The  footpath  then  keeps  on  through  the
narrow  defile  as  far  as  the  solitary  chapel  of  St.  John.  Here  the  valley
opens  out,  and  after  following  the  bed  of  a  stream  downwards  for  about
half  an  hour  we  come  to  the  ruins  of  an  ancient  fort  situated  at  the
northern  foot  of  the  rugged  and  lofty  Prophet  Elias  mountain.  The
fortress,  which  is  of  some  extent,  is  enclosed  by  a  wall  of  polygonal
nasonry  and  is  strengthened  with  a  tower,  also  built  in  the  polygonal
st>'le.  The  intention  of  this  fort  clearly  was  to  defend  the  path,  which
indeed  runs  straight  through  it.  A  little  beyond  the  fort  the  path  turns
southward,  and  keeping  along  the  western  slope  of  the  Prophet  Elias
nu)untain  leads  to  Mycenae  and  so  down  into  the  Argolic  plain.  Traces
rfthe  ancient  road  may  be  seen  at  intervals  along  the  western  slope  of
the  Prophet  Elias,

Leake  thought  that  the  path  just  described  was  the  one  to  which  the

ancients  gave  the  name  of  Kontoporeia  or  *  staff-road.'     The  Kontoporeia

is  mentioned   expressly  by  only  two  ancient   writers,  Athenaeus   and

Polybius.      Athenaeus  quotes  (ii.  p.  43  e)  from   the  memoirs  of  King

Ptolemy  a  passage  in  which  the  king  says  that  once,  marching  to  Corinth

by  the  road  called  the  Kontoporeia^  he  came  to  a  spring  of  water  colder

than  snow  on  the  summit  of  the  ridge  ;  he  drank  of  it  himself,  but  many

of  the  thirsty  soldiers  would  not   taste  it  from  fear  of  being  frozen  to

death.     From  Poly  bins  (xvi.  1 6)  we  learn  that  the  Kontoporeia  led  from

Corinth  past  Mycenae  to  Argos.     The  name  Kontoporeia  (*  staff-road ')

iccms  to  imply  that  the  way  was  not  a  highroad,  but  a  steep  footpath,

diere  the  traveller  was  glad  to  support  his  steps  with  a  staff.     Thus  the

ath  from  Cleonae  by  Hagios  Vasilios  to  Mycenae  and  Argos  answers

cU  to  the  description  of  the  Kontoporeia ;  for  it  is  a  mere  footpath  and


I


88  THE  KONTOPOREIA  bk.  ii.  corinth

it  leads  over  a  mountain  and  past  the  ruins  of  Mycenae.  The  icy  spring
of  which  Ptolemy  speaks  may  have  been  one  of  the  many  springs  near
the  ruined  fort  which  once  barred  the  pass.

Prof.  E.  Curtius,  however,  and  the  late  H.  G.  Lolling  have  proposed
to  identify  the  Kontoporeia  with  another  pass  about  four  miles  further
east,  which  starting  from  the  village  of  Klenia  (the  ancient  Tenea,  see
note  on  ii.  5.  4)  debouches  on  the  plain  of  Argos  to  the  south  of  the
Heraeum.      This  was  undoubtedly  the  road  followed  by  the  Spartan
army  under  Agesilaus  in  393  B.C.,  for  Xenophon  tells  us  {Hellenica^  iv.
4.  19;  cp.  /V/.,  AgesilauSy  ii.  17)  that  Agesilaus  marching  on  Corinth
from  the  plain  of  Argos  crossed  the  mountains  at  Tenea.     The  ascent
begins  above  the  village  of  Klenia.     The  path  here  goes  up  a  narrow
glen  and  then  traverses  a  fertile  plain,  which  is  dominated  on  the  south-
east by  the  sharp-peaked  mountain  of  Hagionori^  crowned  with  the  well-
preserved  wall  and  towers  of  a  mediaeval  castle.     At  the  south-western
foot  of  this  mountain  there  is  a  spring  close  to  the  road ;  its  water  used
to  be  conducted  into  a  well-house,  and  is  famed  for  its  coldness.     H.  G.
Lolling  conjectured  that  this  was  the  cold  spring  of  which  Ptolemy  drank
on  his  march  to  Corinth.     From  the  plateau  a  steep  and  tortuous  path
leads  down,  beside  a  wild  ravine,  in  about  an  hour's  time  to  the  village
of  Berbati,  situated  in  a  valley.     Here  there  are  some  ancient  remains,    ]
including  the  foundations  of  a  square  Greek  tower  at  the  village  spring,
and  some  Roman  brick-buildings  near  a  ruined  chapel  of  St  John  a
little  way  beyond  the  village.     Pursuing  our  way  we  follow  the  valley
for  half  an  hour  or  so  till  it  contracts  into  the  Klisura^  a  narrow  defile,
the  bottom  of  which  is  entirely  occupied  by  the  bed  of  the  river  which
Captain  Steffen  identifies  as  the  Asterion  of  Pausanias  (ii.  15.  5  ;  ii.  I7*
I  sq,)     The  glen  is  about  two  miles  long.     At  its  lower  end  it  opens  on
the  plain  of  Argos,  about  two  and  a  half  miles  to  the  south-east  of  the
Heraeum.

The  existence  of  the  cold  spring  on  this  latter  pass  is  certainly  an
argument  in  favour  of  identifying  the  pass  with  the  ancient  Kontoporeia,
But  on  the  other  hand  a  fatal  objection  to  the  identification  appears  to
be  the  statement  of  Polybius  that  the  Kontoporeia  led  past  Mycenae,
since  the  pass  in  question  does  not  go  by  Mycenae  at  all,  but  opens  on
the  Argolic  plain  about  four  and  a  half  miles  to  the  south-east  of  Mycenae.
On  the  whole,  then,  it  seems  best  to  adhere  to  Leake's  view  that  the
Kontoporeia  was  the  short  way  from  Cleonae  to  Argos  which  Pausanias
describes.

See  Leake,  Morea^  3.  pp.  325-328  ;  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  39  sq, ;
L.  Ross,  Reisen^  P*  2  5  sq.  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  513  sq, ;  Bursian,  Geogr,
2.  p.  38  ;  Lolling,  in  StefTen's  Karten  von  Mykenai^  Erldutemder  Text,
pp.  43-46  ;  Steffen,  ib,  p.  41  (on  the  defile  of  the  Klisura),

15.  2.  the  lion's  cave.  The  valley  of  Nemea  lies  to  the  west  of
the  valley  of  Cleonae,  with  which  it  runs  parallel,  north  and  south.
Crossing  the  stony  ridge  which  separates  the  valley  of  Cleonae  from  the
valley  of  Nemea,  Col.  Leake  observed  "  several  natural  caverns  on  the
right  of  the  road.  These  may  have  been  the  abode  of  wild  beasts  when
the  Nemeian  forest  covered  all  Tretus  and  Apcsas,  but  none  of  them  has


J


CH.  XV  NEMEA  89

any  pretensions,  if  we  follow  Diodorus  and  Pausanias,  to  the  honour  of
ha\qng   been   the   ^vourite   dwelling   of  the  celebrated  lion  slain   by
Hercules,  by  command  of  Eurystheus,  king  of  Mycenae.     That  cavern
was  in  the  Tretus  between  Nemea  and  Mycenae ;  Pausanias  says,  at
onJy  fifteen  stades  [furlongs]  from  the  former  place.     In  that  narrow  pass,
indeed,  like  a  kleft  [robber]  of  the  present  day,  he  was  more  certain  of
intercepting  a  traveller  than  in  these  more  open  hills  "  (Leake,  Morea^  3.
p.  329;  cp.  Chandler,    Travels^   p.  231  ;  Dodwell,    Toury   2.  p.   207  ;
Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  41).     Diodorus  (iv.  11)  says:  "the  lion  dwelt
somewhere  between  Mycenae  and  Nemea,  about  the  mountain  called,
from  its  nature,  Tretus ;  for  right  along  the  whole  foot  of  the  mountain
ran  a  channel  or  ravine ;  and  in  this  ravine  the  lion  used  to  lurk  in  his
den."    Hesiod  (Theog.  331)  speaks  of  the  lion  "lording  it  over  Tretus,
and  Nemea,  and  Apesas."     Apollodorus  (ii.   5.   i)  says  that  the  lion
lived  in  a  cave  with  two  mouths ;  Hercules  blocked  up  one  mouth  of
the  cave,  then  entered  by  the  other  and  slew  the  beast.     The  traveller
E.  D.  Clarke  made  diligent  inquiry  after  the  lion's  den  and  was  shown
as  the  spot  "a  hollow  rock,  hardly  deserving   the  name  of  a  cave,"*
situated  to  the  south-east  of  the  Nemean  temple,  on  the  top  of  the
mountain  just  before  the  descent  begins  towards  Nemea,  but  upon  the
side  looking  to  the  Gulf  of  Argos  {Travels^  3.  p.  711  sq.)     Nowadays
the  den  is  identified  by  the  natives  with  a  cave  on  the  Korakovouni
(Crow's  Hill)  above  the  theatre  syid  stadium  of  Nemea    (Baedeker,*
p.  247),  but  this  clearly  cannot  be  the  one  of  which  Pausanias  speaks,
since  the   latter  H'as  fifteen  furlongs  from   Nemea.     In  an  article  on
the  Nemean  lion  Mr.   Maury  argues  (Revue  ArMologique^  1845,  pp.
521-543)  that  lions  were  unknown  in  Peloponnese  and  that  the  story
of  the  Nemean  lion  was   probably  imported   by  the  Pelopid  dynasty
when  they  came  over  from  Asia  Minor  to  settle  in  Greece.     The  lion
was  the  royal  emblem  all  over  the  East ;  and  it  may  well,  he  thinks,
have  been  the  crest  of  the  Pelopids ;  hence  they  placed  it  over  the  gate-
i»-ay  of  their  royal  castle  at  Mycenae.     The  view  that  the  device  of  the
lions  over  the  gate  at  Mycenae  is  of  Phrygian  origin  has  the  high  support
of  Prof.  W.  M.  Ramsay.    See  below,  p.  102  sq.    Hercules's  combat  with
the  lion  is  depicted  in  a  vigorous  painting  found  at  Pompeii.    See  Over-
beck  und  Mai,  Pompeji^^  p.  589  ;  and  on  representations  of  the  subject
in  ancient  art  generally  see  Roscher's  Lexikon^  i.  p.  2195  sqq.    On  coins
of  Argos  of  the  Imperial  times  Hercules  is  represented  strangling  the
lion  (Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num,  Comm,  on  Pans,  p.  33,  with

Pl.  1  i.)

16.  2.  Nemea.     Between  the  valley  of  Cleonae  on  the  east  and  the

valley  of  Phlius  or  St,  George  on  the  west  is  interposed  the  valley  of

Nemea,  running  like  its  sister  valleys  fi-om  south  to  north.     It  is  a

narrow  dale,  some  two  or  three  miles  long,  and  from  half  to  three-quarters

of  a  mile  broad.     At   its  northern  end  it  contracts  to  a  mere  gully.

Through  the  bottom  of  the  valley,  which  is  almost  a  dead  flat,  meanders

like  a  thread  the  brook  Nemea,  fed  by  the  numerous  rills  which  descend

firom   the   neighbouring   hills.      When   swollen   by   heavy   rain,  these

tributaries,  having  an  insufiScient  outlet  through  the  gully  at  the  north  end.


I


90  NEMEA  BK.  II.  CORINTH

keep  the  bottom  of  the  valley  green,  moist,  and  marshy.  The  dale  is  thus
better  adapted  for  pasturage  than  tillage  ;  indeed  from  the  rich  pastures
which  clothe  its  bottom  and  the  lower  slopes  of  the  hills  it  received  its
I  name  of  Nemea,  *  the  pastoral  vale.*  Byt  if  the  valley  itself,  especially
after  rain,  is  green  and  smiling,  the  surrounding  hills,  scarred  and
seamed  with  the  beds  of  torrents,  are  of  a  dark  and  melancholy  hue,  and,
combined  with  the  absolute  solitude — not  a  human  habitation  being
visible  through  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  dale — affect  the  mind  with
a  sense  of  gloom  and  desolation.  The  solitude  is  only  broken  by  the
wandering  herds  of  cattle,  and  from  time  to  time  by  a  group  of  peasants,
who  come  over  from  St,  George  to  till  their  fields  in  this  secluded  valley.
A  white  track  winds  up  the  western  slope  to  the  mouth  of  a  glen  which
opens  in  the  hill  side.  Through  this  glen  is  the  way  to  St  George  and
Phlius.

See  Dodwell,  T&ur^  2.  p.  210  j^.  ;  Leake,  Aforea,  3.  p.  335  ;  Muie,  Jbumal,
2.  p.  154  s^.  ;  Curtius,  Pg/op,  2.  pp.  505  j^.,  510 ;  Vischer,  Erinfierungen,  p.  282
s^.  ;  W.  G.  Clark,  Fe/op.  p.  61  sa.  ;  Bursian,  Geojp'.  2.  p.  35.  For  the  deriva-
•tion  of  the  name  Nemea  from  the  same  root  that  appears  in  pifiofuu  see  G.
Curtius,  Grieck,  Eiymol^  p.  313.  The  Scholiast  on  Pindar,  Nem,  Introd.,
mentions  the  view  that  the  valley  of  Nemea  was  so  named  because  the  sacred  cows
of  Hera  browsed  in  its  meadows.  In  recent  years  the  foundation  of  the  new
village  of  HeraJkieia  has  somewhat  broken  the  solitude  of  the  pastoral  valley
(Baedeker,'  p.  247  ;  Guide-Joanne,  2.  p.  203).

15.  2.  a  temple  of  Nemean  Zens.  Of  this  temple  three  columns
still  stand  in  the  midst  of  the  valley  of  Nemea.  They  are  of  the  Doric
order.  "  Two  of  these  columns  belonged  to  the  pronaos  [fore-temple],
and  were  placed  as  usual  between  antae ;  they  are  4  feet  7  inches  in
diameter  at  the  base,  and  still  support  their  architrave.  The  third  column
which  belonged  to  the  outer  range  is  5  feet  3  inches  in  diameter  at  the
base,  and  about  34  feet  high,  including  a  capital  of  2  feet.  Its  distance
from  the  corresponding  column  of  the  pronaos  is  1 8  feet.  The  total
height  of  the  three  members  of  the  entablature  was  8  feet  2  inches.  The
general  intercolumniation  of  the  peristyle  was  7  feet ;  at  the  angles,
5  feet  I  o  inches.  From  the  front  of  the  pronaos  to  the  extremity  of  the
cell  within,  the  length  was  95  feet ;  the  breadth  of  the  cell  within,  31
feet ;  the  thickness  of  the  walls,  3  feet.  The  temple  was  a  hexastyle,  oi
about  65  feet  in  breadth  on  the  upper  step  of  the  stylobate  which  consisted
of  three  steps  :  the  number  of  columns  on  the  sides,  and  consequently  th<
length  of  the  temple,  I  could  not  ascertain.  The  slendemess  of  the
columns  is  particularly  remarkable,  after  viewing  those  of  Corinth  ;  it  i;
curious  that  the  shortest  and  longest  specimens,  in  proportion  to  theii
diameter,  of  any  existing  Doric  columns,  should  be  found  so  near  to  on<
another.  The  columns  of  Nemea  are  more  than  six  diameters  high,  oi
as  slender  as  some  examples  of  the  Ionic ;  those  of  Corinth,  as  we  hav<
seen,  very  little  above  four.  The  entablature  of  Nemea  was  less  thai
one-fourth  of  the  height  of  the  column,  whereas  at  Corinth  it  was  abou
a  half"  (Leake).  The  temple  must  have  been  thrown  down  by  ai
earthquake  or  earthquakes  ;  for  besides  the  three  standing  columns  mos
of  the  other  columns  may  be  seen  lying  just  as  they  have  fallen  ;  many  0
the  drums  lie  in  straight  lines  in  front  of  each  other,  so  as  to  occup


CH.  XV  NEMEA  91


the  same  relative  positions  in  their  prostrate  state  that  they  did  when  the
columns  were  entire.  The  walls  of  the  alla^  in  their  entire  length,  are
also  preserved  to  the  height  of  several  feet ;  and  a  great  part  of  the  floor
of  the  temple  is  entire.  The  material  is  a  soft  calcareous  stone,  an
aggregate  of  sand  and  small  petrified  shells,  and  the  columns  are  coated
with  a  fine  stucco.  Some  have  thought  that  there  were  fourteen  columns,
others  that  there  were  only  thirteen,  on  each  of  the  long  sides  of  the
temple.

There  is  no  evidence  in  ancient  literature  as  to  the  date  when  the
temple  was  built.  Leake,  on  historical  grounds,  is  inclined  to  assign  its
erection  to  the  half-century  between  the  Persian  and  the  Peloponnesian
wars.  Prof.  Curtius,  on  architectural  grounds,  especially  on  the  ground
of  its  very  marked  difference  from  the  more  massive  style  of  the  old
Doric  temples,  considers  the  Nemean  temple  later  than  the  temple  at
Bassae,  but  older  than  the  walls  of  Messene ;  in  other  words,  he  would
assign  it  to  the  end  of  the  fifth  century  or  to  the  beginning  of  the  fourth
century  B.C.  Vischer,  arguing  from  the  slendemess  of  the  columns,  the
straightness  of  the  abacus^  and  the  wide  spaces  between  the  columns,
held  that  the  temple  was  considerably  later  than  the  Peloponnesian  war.
The  cypress  grove  which  surrounded  the  temple  in  antiquity  has  entirely
disappeared.  Nemea  was  not  a  town.  Like  Olympia,  the  Isthmian
sanctuary,  and  some  other  religious  establishments  of  smaller  note  in
Greece,  it  consisted  only  of  a  sacred  enclosure  containing  a  temple,  with
a  stadium,  theatre,  and  gymnasiums  attached  to  it.  There  was,  however,
a  village  near  it  called  Bembina  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  zn\  the  site  of  which
has  not  been  discovered.

The  remains  of  the  stadium  are  at  the  foot  of  the  hill  on  the  eastern
side  of  the  valley,  a  little  to  the  left  as  you  approach  Nemea  from  Cleonae.
"The  circular  end  is  the  only  part  of  which  the  form  is  well  preserved  ;
this  made  me  suppose  it  at  first  a  theatre ;  but  the  parallel  sides  of  the
stadium,  although  almost  levelled  by  the  continued  effects  of  the  rain-
water fh)m  the  mountain,  are  still  perfectly  traceable,  and  there  is  even
a  part  of  the  wall  remaining  which  supported  the  rectilinear  extremity
towards  the  plain ;  I  measured  650  feet  from  this  wall  to  the  circular
end ;  it  is  the  usual  extreme  length  of  the  Greek  stadium,  and  would
leave  about  600  Greek  feet  between  the  aphesis  and  campter^  or  two
extremities  of  the  course"  (Leake).  It  was  of  course  in  this  stadium
that  the  contests  took  place  at  the  great  Nemean  games.  Near  the
stadium  Curtius  and  Vischer  speak  of  finding  traces  of  the  theatre.
Curtius  says  that  the  traces  of  it  are  clearer  than  those  of  the  stadium  ;
Vischer  says  that  nothing  but  the  shape  of  it  can  be  seen  in  the  slope  of
the  hill.  Perhaps  they  mistook  the  round  end  of  the  stadium  for  a
theatre,  as  Leake  did  at  first.

See  Chandler,  Travels  in  Greece,  2.  p  232  s^.  ;  Clarke,  Travels,  3.  pp.  714-
718;  Dodwell,  Tour,  2.  p.  209  s^.;  Aftiiquiiies  of  Ionia,  Part  II.  plates  xv.-xvii.  ;
GcII,  Itinerary  of  Greece,  p.  22  sq,  ;  Leake,  Morea,  3.  pp.  330-335  ;  Mure,
Journal,  2,  p.  i$6  sq.;  Welcker,  Tagebuck,  1.  pp.  174-176 ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  pp.
508-510;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.  284  sq.  ;  W.  G.  Clark,  Pelop.  p.  63  sq.  ;
Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  36  sq.  ;  Guide-Joanne,  2.  p.  202  sq. ;  Baedeker,'  p.  247.


9»  NEMBA  BK.  11.  CORINTI

16.  2.  tlie  serpent  killed  Opheltes.  The  story  of  the  Toundation  o
the  Nemean  games,  to  which  Pausanias  only  alludes,  was  this.  Lycurgu
or  Lycus,  king  or  priest  of  Nemea,  had  an  infant  son  Opheltes.  Th'
oracle  had  warned  the  father  that  his  son  should  not  be  set  on  the  grouni
till  he  could  walk ;  so  the  child's  nurse  had  strict  orders  accordingly
But  when  Adrastus  and  the  rest  of  the  Seven  Champions  were  marchinj
with  a  host  against  Thebes,  it  chanced  that  they  passed  through  th-
vale  of  Nemea,  and  being  athirst  and  meeting  the  nurse  with  the  chil-
they  begged  of  her  water  to  drink.  So  she  led  them  to  a  spring  c
water  which  bubbled  up  beside  a  thick  bed  of  celery.  Mindful  of  he
orders  the  nurse  set  down  the  child  on  the  bed  of  celery  and  not  on  th
ground.  But  while  she  was  serving  out  the  water  to  the  warriors,  th
dragon  that  guarded  the  spring  stole  out  and  killed  the  child.  Whei
the  Seven  Champions  found  what  had  happened  they  slew  the  dragoi
and  buried  the  child  ;  and  the  prophet  Amphiaraus  told  them  that  thi
infant's  tragic  end  was  an  omen  of  coming  doom  to  themselves.  St
they  called  the  child  Archemorus  ('  the  beginner  of  doom '),  and  insti
'  tuted  in  his  memory  the  Nemean  games.  A  crown  of  wild  celery
was  the  prize  of  victory  ;  and  the  umpires  always  wore  sad-coloured
raiment,  because  the  games  were  fiinereal.  Sec  Hyginus,  Fab-  jf,
Apollodonis,  iii.  6.  4  ;  Scholia  on  Pindar,  Pytkians,  Introduaion.  The
death  of  Ophehes  is  frequently
represented  on  coins  of  Argos,
the  variety  of  types  seeming  to
show  that  the  subject  was  there
favourite  one  with  anists.
Sometimes  Opheltes  is  repre-
sented in  the  coils  of  the  ser-
pent, sometimes  the  serpent  is
bending  over  him,  sometimes  a

nCS.   19  AND  aa— OPHBLTK^AKD  THK  SKKfENT        j^^^^     j^     fighting      thC      SCTpent.

while  the  nurse  flees,  etc.  Sec
Imhoof- Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  on  Paus.  p.  33,  with  pi.
I  ii.-ix.  The  subject  is  also  represented  on  a  relief  in  the  Palanc
Spada  at  Rome,  See  Roschet's  Lexikon,  i.  p.  473.  On  the  crown  ol
celery,  see  Pausanias,  viii.  48.  3.  It  is  commonly  said  that  the  Nemean
crown  was  of  parsley  ;  but  the  word  translated  parsley  {ai\i.vav)  seem:
to  have  meant  'celery.'  The  plant  was  represented  on  coins  of  Selinus
and,  to  judge  from  these  representations,  it  appears  to  have  been  celcrj
rather  than  parsley.  See  Droysen,  in  Hermes,  14  (1879},  p.  3  ;  Head
ffistoria  Nummorum,  p.  146  sq.  ;  Imhoof- Blumer  und  Otto  Keller,  Tier
und  Pflanzenbilder  auf  Miimen  und  Gemmen,  PI.  vi.  8,  vii.  2,  ix.  9-13
XXV.  19.  The  celery  had  lo  be  fresh;  whereas  the  crown  at  thi
Isthmian  games  was  made  of  withered  celery  (Schol.  on  Pindar,  Nem
Introd.  p.  426,  ed.  Boeckh  ;  cp.  Plutarch,  Quaest.  Conviv.  v.  3.  3  ;  id.
Timoleon,  26).

16.  3'  the  winter  celebration  of  the  Nraiean  featival.  Thi:
winter  celebration  of  the  Nemean  festival  seems  to  be  mentioned  onl;
by  Pausanias  here  and  in  vi.  16.  4.     The  mention  of  a  winter  celebia


CH.  XV  NEMEA  93

tion  implies  of  course  a  summer  celebration  also.     The  Scholiast  on
Pindar,  Nem.   Introd.,   says  that  the  festival  was  held  every  second
year  (rpienys)  on  the  1 2th  day  of  the  month  Panemus.     (According  to
Abel's  edition  of  the  Scholia  on  Pindar  the  festival  fell  on  the  1 8th,  not
on  the  1 2th  of  Panemus.    But  oKrcoKaiSeKarj;  appears  to  be  an  alteration
of  the  MS.  reading  ^(oSeKary,  introduced  on  the  strength  of  a  later  scho-
lium published  by  Tycho  Mommsen  in  1867,  r^yero  8^  firjvl  IXaveyx^  irf  os
miv'lovXios.    See  Philologus^  34  (1876),  p.  64  ;  Rheinisches  Museum^
N.  F.  40  (1885),  p.  364.)     The  month  Panemus  fell  at  different  times
in  different  calendars,  but  seems  to  have  been  always  a  summer  month.
The  Scholiast  on  Pindar  makes  no  reference  to  a  winter  celebration  of
the  games.     To  explain  the  fact  of  a  winter  and  summer  celebration
•nore  than  one  theory  has  been  started.     Scaliger's  view  was  that  the
l2stival  was  celebrated  alternately  in  summer  and  in  winter,  and  this
\'iew  has  had  some  currency,  being  accepted,  e.g,  by  K.  H.  Hermann
and  Schomann.     In  recent  years  Prof  G.  F.  Unger  has  maintained  that
the  winter  celebration  was  first  introduced  by  Hadrian,  and  that  it  was
held  not  at  Nemea,  but  at  Argos,  and  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  great
national  Nemean  games.     The  latter,  he  holds,  were  invariably  cele-
brated every  second  year  on  the    i8th  day  (he  accepts  the  reading
0KT(tf«rai£eicar2/  in  the  scholiast,  l.c)  of  the  first  lunar  month  after  the
summer  solstice.     See  Schomann,  Griech,  Altertkiimer^^  2.  p.  67  sq.\
K.  F.  Hermann,  Gottesdienst  Alter.^  §  49  1  G.  F.  Unger,  *  Die  Zeit  der
ncmcischen  Spiele,'  Philologus,  34  (1876),  pp.  50-64  ;  zV/.,  *Die  Winter-
nemeen,'  PAilologus^   37   (1877),  pp.   524-544;  J.  G.   Droysen,  *Die
Festzcit  der  Nemeen,'  Hermes^  14  (1879),  pp.  1-24.     Prof.  H.  Nissen
holds  that  ancient  temples  were  always  built  east  and  west  in  such  a
direction  as  to  face  the  point  of  the  heavens  at  which  the  sun  rose  upon
the  day  of  the  great  festival  of  the  god  to  whom  the  temple  was  dedi-
cated.    He  thinks  therefore  that  it  is  possible,  by  determining  the  exact
'orientation'  of  any  temple,  to  discover  the  day  of  the  month  on  which
the  great  festival  of  the  temple  was  held ;  or  rather  (since  the  sun  rises
at  the  same  point  of  the  horizon  on  two  days  in  each  year,  once  on  his
passage  to  the  equator  and  once  on  his  passage  from  it)  to  determine  two
days,  on  one  of  which  the  chief  festival  must  have  been  held.    The  orienta-
tion of  the  temple  at  Nemea  is  250°,  according  to  an  observation  made
by  Schoene  in  1867,  or  252*,  according  to  an  observation  made  by  von
Duhn  in  1877.     Nissen  prefers  the  former  observation,  as  made  with  a
better  instrument.     "  Thus  the  axis  of  the  temple  points  to  a  sunrise  40
days  distant  from  the  equinox  and  54  from  the  summer  solstice,  ue,  to
the  beginning  of  May  or  the  middle  of  August."     Nissen  thinks  that
the  latter  date  agrees  with  the  traditional  evidence  as  to  the  time  of  the
celebration  of  the  Nemean  festival.    See  Rheinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  40
(1885),  pp.  363-366.

15.  3.  the  grave  of  Opheltes.  About  twenty  paces  to  the  south  of
the  temple  of  Nemea  there  is  a  regularly  shaped  mound  of  earth  with  a
ruined  chapel  on  it.  Small  Doric  pillars,  fragments  of  an  Ionic  entab-
latare,  etc.,  are  built  into  the  chapel,  which  stands  on  the  west  side  of
the  mound.     The  mound  is  forty-four  paces  long  by  thirty-four  broad.


94  MOUNT  APESAS  bk.  ii.  corin

Besides  the  chapel  there  are  remains  of  small  square  enclosures  on
This  spot  may  have  been  the  grave  of  Opheltes,  or  perhaps  rather  of ;
barrow  of  Lycurgus.  See  Clarke,  Travels^  3.  p.  7 1 6  ;  Cell,  Itinerary
Greece^  p.  23;  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  210;  QMt\x\x&^  Pelop.  2.  p.  5c
Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.  285  ;  Welcker,  Tagebuch^  i.  p.  176  j^.
few  inscriptions  have  been  found  in  the  chapel.  The  most  interestii
perhaps,  is  one  which  mentions  three  of  the  old  Doric  tribes  of  Argo
the  Hylleis,  the  Pamphyli,  and  the  Hymathii.  See  Bulletin  de  Corrc
HelUnique^  9  (1885),  p.  349  sqq, ;  Roehl,  /.  G,  A,  No.  26.  On  th<
tribes  at  Argos  see  G.  Gilbert,  Griech,  Staatsalterthiimer^  2.  p.  77.

15.  3.  The  spring  is  named  Adrastea.  On  descending  into  1
valley  of  Nemea  from  Cleonae  we  come  to  a  Turkish  fountain,  n
dry,  and  a  natural  spring  near  it.  The  latter  is  probably  the  Adrast
which  doubtless  received  its  name  from  the  tradition  (see  note  on  §
that  Adrastus  and  the  rest  of  the  Seven  Champions  drank  of  its  wa
on  the  way  to  Thebes.  It  seems  strange  that  Pausanias  should  \vi
been  ignorant  of  this  part  of  the  legend,  though  he  knew  the  part  ab(
the  death  of  Opheltes.  See  Leake,  Morea^  3.  p.  330  ;  Dodwell,  To\
2.  p.  208;  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  41  ;  Chandler,  Travels  in  Grei
p.  233  ;  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  509  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.  285  j$

16.  3.  Mount  Apesas.  Travellers  agree  in  identifying  Mt.  Apej
with  the  modem  Mt  Pkouka^  a  table-mountain  at  the  north-east  extrem
of  the  valley  of  Nemea,  which  it  separates  from  the  valley  of  Cleon;
It  towers  above  its  neighbours  to  a  height  of  2700  feet.  The  top
broad  and  flat,  from  which  the  sides  slope,  at  first  almost  perpendicular
and  then  more  gently  with  a  gradual  sweep  towards  the  plain.  T
remarkable  truncated  top  is  a  conspicuous  landmark  for  many  mi
round.  I  saw  it  from  the  plain  of  Argos,  rising  up  against  the  northc
sky,  on  my  way  to  the  pass  which  leads  over  the  mountains  to  Tsipia
in  Arcadia.  On  the  summit  of  the  mountain  near  a  chapel  are  some  mi
which  perhaps  belonged  to  the  sanctuary  of  Apesantian  Zeus.  S
Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  210;  Gell,  Itinerary  of  Greece^  p.  24;  Leal
Morea,  3.  p.  325  ;  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  41  ;  Mure,  Journal^  2.
155  sq,\  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  505;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  p.  2
sq. ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  35  sq.  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v,  'Attcot^
thinks  that  the  name  Apesas  was  derived  either  from  a  hero  of  that  nai
or  from  the  fact  of  the  starting  {aphesis)  of  the  chariots  or  from  t
emission  of  the  lion,  who  was  hurled  down  from  the  moon  on  the  top
the  mountain.  The  writer  of  the  Etytnolog,  Magnum  {s.v.  *A</>€0-to9,
176  line  32  sqq.)  quotes  from  the  Bithyniaca  of  Arrian  the  followin
"  Aphesian  Zeus  is  worshipped  in  Argos.  It  is  said  that  when  Deucali
escaped  from  the  deluge  and  got  safe  to  the  top  of  Argos  [for  t^s  * Apyc
read  tov  "Apyovs]  he  founded  the  altar  of  Aphesian  Zeus,  because
had  escaped  from  [df^i^ry]  the  deluge.  The  summit  was  afterwar
called  Nemea,  from  the  herds  of  Argos  that  pastured  there."

15.  4*  Having resumed  the  road  to  Argos,  we  have  on  t

left  the  ruins  of  Mycenae.  Passing  southwards  through  the  pass
the  Tretus,  we  see  the  spacious  plain  of  Argolis  stretched  out  befc
us.     Mycenae  lies  to  our  left  at  the  roots  of  the  mountains  whi


XV


MYCENAE


95


\


bound  the  eastern  side  of  the  plain,  not  far  from  the  point  where  the
pass  of  the  Tretus  opens  out  on  the  plain.     The  Argolic  plain  may  be
roughly  described  as  a  great  triangle,  the  base  of  which,  on  the  south,
is  formed  by  the  Argolic  Gulf,  while  the  eastern  and  western  sides  are
formed  by  the  ranges  of  mountains  which  converge  till  they  meet  in
Mt.  Tretus,  at  the  northern  apex  of  the  plain.     The  length  of  the  plain
from  north  to  south  is  about  twelve  miles,  the  greatest  breadth  from
east  to  west  perhaps  not  much  less.     The  mountains  which  enclose  it
are  barren  and  rocky,  the  highest  being  those  on  the  west  which  form
the  boundary  between  Argolis  and  Arcadia.    The  whole  plain  appears  to
have  been  once  a  bay  of  the  sea,  which  has  been  gradually  filled  up  by
the  deposits  brought  down  froin  the  surrounding  mountains.     The  Gulf
of  Argolis,  a  broad  and   beautiful    sheet  of  water  winding   between
mountains,  must  originally,  before  its  upj)er  waters   were  expelled  by
the  alluvial  deposit,   have  resembled  still   more  closely,  what  it  still
recalls,  a  fine  Scotch  sea-loch  or  a  Norwegian  fiord.      This  alluvial
plain,  situated  at  the  head  of  a  deep  and  sheltered  frith  or  arm  of  the
sea,  which  opening  on  the  Aegean  gave  ready  access  to  the  islands  of
the  Archipelago  and  the  coasts  of  Asia,  was  naturally  fitted  to  become
one  of  the  earliest  seats  of  civilisation   in   Greece.     And  in  point  of
fact  legend  and  archaeology  combine  to  show  that  in  prehistoric  times
Greek  civilisation  reached  a  very  high  pitch  in  the  plain  of  Argolis.      It
contained  at  least  three  fortified  town^  of  great  inyiortance,  of  which
remains   exist  to  this  day,  Tii^ns,  Argos  and   Mycenae   (mentioning
them  in  the  order  in  which  they  lie  from  south  to  north).     Tiryns  and
Mycenae  stand  on  the  eastern,  Argos  on  the  western  side  of  the  plain.
Of  the  three  Tiryns  is  nearest  to  the  sea,  from  which  it  is  distant  not
much  more  than  a  mile.     It,  or  rather  its  citadel,  occupies  a  low  rocky
mound,  not  loo  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  and  rising  in  perfect
isolation  from  the  plain.     Further  inland  Argos  lies  at  the  foot  of  the
last  spur  which  projects  into  the  western  side  of  the  plain  from  the
range  of  Artemisius.     Its  citadel,  the  Larisa,  is  a  fine  bold  peak  nearly
I  coo  feet  high.     Further  inland,  nine  miles  from  the  nearest  point  of
the  sea,  stands  Mycenae,  near  the  northern  extremity  of  the  plain,  but
on  its  eastern  side.     Its  citadel,  in  respect  of  elevation  and  natural
strength,  occupies  an  intermediate  position  between  the  low  citadel  of
Tiryns  and  the  high  mountainous  one  of  Argos.      It  lies  at  the  mouth
of  a  wild  and  narrow  glen,  which  here  o^ns  on  the  eastern  side  of  the
Argolic  plain,  between   two  lofty,  steep,  and   rocky  mountains.     The
mountain  on  the  north  side  of  the   glen   is  now  called  the  Prophet
Elias  (2648  feet),  that  on  the  south  side  is  Zara  (2162  feet).     From
the  mouth  of  this  glen  two  deep  ravines  diverge,  one  (the  Kokoretza
ravine)  running  due  west,  the  other  (the  Chavos  ravine)  running  south-
west     The  triangular  tableland  formed  by  the  divergence  of  these
ravines  is  the  citadel  of  Mycenae.     The  apex  of  the  triangle  is  to  the
east,  at  the  point  of  the  divergence  of  the  ravines ;  its  base  is  towards
the  plain  and  faces  south-west.     The   whole  scene,  viewed  from  the
citadel,  is  one  of  desolate  grandeur.     The  ravines  yawning  to  a  great
depth  at  our  feet  (especially  on  the  south  side,  where  there  is  a  sheer


t^


I


v*)


f


r    T    ^


[


96  MYCENAE  bk.  ii.  corini

drop  in  many  places  of  150  feet  into  the  glen),  the  rugged,  utter
barren  mountains  towering  immediately  across  them,  the  bleak  hig
land  glen  winding  away  into  the  depth  of  these  gloomy  and  forbiddir
hills,  make  up  a  stem  impressive  picture,  the  effect  of  which
heightened  if  one  sees  it,  as  the  present  writer  chanced  to  do,  on
rainy  day.  Then  with  a  lowering  sky  overhead  and  the  mist  clingir
to  the  slopes  of  the  mountains,  no  sound  heard  but  the  patter  of  tl
rain  and  the  tinkling  of  sheep -bells  from  the  glen,  the  whole  Ian
scape  seems  to  frown  and  assumes  an  aspect  more  in  keeping  wA\
the  mist-wrapt  stronghold  of  some  old  robber  chief  in  Skye  or  Loc
aber,  than  with  the  conception  which  the  traveller  had  formed
Agamemnon's  "golden  city."

See  Curtius,  Pelofi.  2.  pp.  335  sqq.^  400  sgg, ;  Vischer,  Erinne
ungen^  p.  291  sqq, ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  39  sqq,  ;  Schlieman
Mycenae^  pp.  24-29 ;  Steffen,  Karten  von  Mykenaiy  Erldutemder  Tex
p.  12  sq. ;  Baedeker,^  p.  264  sqq. ;  Schuchhardt,  Schliemanns  Ausgr
bungen^  P-  1 1 7  sqq,

15.  5.  neither  the  Inachus  nor  any  of  the  said  rivers  has  an
water  etc.  This  is  still  true  of  the  rivers  of  the  Argolic  plain.  D
Philippson  says  {Peloponnes,  p.  62) :  "  All  these  streams  are  torrent
in  which  water  flows  only  exceptionally.  Though  I  visited  the  neig
bourhood  at  different  times  of  the  year,  I  never  found  a  drop  of  wat<
in  them.  But  when  heavy  rains  have  fallen  in  the  mountains,  the
broad  shingly  beds  fill  in  a  surprisingly  short  time  with  a  raging  ma
of  water,  which  often  spreads  stones  and  sand  over  the  fruitf
meadows."  So  Vischer  says  of  the  Inachus  and  Charadrus  that  "  f«
the  greater  part  of  the  year  their  beds  are  quite  dry  and  water  flows  :
them  only  after  rain.  When  I  went  to  Argos  (on  April  i6lh),  tl
Inachus  had  a  little  water,  whereas  the  broad  pebbly  bed  of  tl
Charadrus  showed  not  a  trace  of  it.  Nor  does  one  observe  on  tl
banks  of  either  of  them  those  shrubs  and  plants  which  elsewhere  fring
the  banks  of  even  feeble  brooks"  {Erinnerungen^  p.  292).  A  simil;
statement  is  made  by  Schliemann  {TirynSy  p.  12).  Homer  {Iliad^  i
171)  calls  Argos  "very  thirsty."  According  to  Prof.  Curtius  nor
of  the  great  plains  of  Greece  is  so  scantily  supplied  with  water  as  tl
plain  of  Argos.  This  applies  particularly  to  the  northern  end  of  i
towards  Mycenae.  On  the  other  hand  the  land  close  to  the  sea,  wit
the  exception  of  some  higher  groimd  about  the  mouth  of  the  Inachu
is  a  marsh,  hardly  accessible  even  in  midsummer.  Here  must  ha>
been  the  pastures  of  the  horses  for  which  Argos  was  femous  in  Homer
times  (Homer,  Iliad^  ii.  287).  Between  this  marshy  tract  and  the  ari
upper  reaches  of  the  plain  is  a  great  stretch  of  arable  land.  The  pr
ducts  of  the  plain  vary  with  the  nature  of  the  soil.  Towards  tl
mountains  com  is  grown ;  in  the  moister  parts  cotton,  tobacco  ar
vines  ;  on  the  coast  rice  and  maize.  Before  the  Greek  War  of  Indepe
dence  the  plain  was  rich  in  mulberry-trees,  orange-trees,  and  olive
Different  from  the  rest  of  the  Argolic  plain  is  its  narrow  continuatic
to  the  south  of  Argos  between  the  mountains  and  the  sea.  He:
plentiful  streams  flow  from  the  mountains  and  form  the  Lemean  mars!


CH.  XVI  MYCENAE  97

See  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  pp.  338-342 ;  Philippson,  Peloponnes^  p.
61  sqq,

15.  5.  Phoroneus who  brought  mankind  together  for  the

finttime.  Cp.  Tatian,  Or.  adv.  Graecos^  39,  p.  148,  ed.  Otto,  who
says  that  before  the  time  of  Phoroneus  human  life  had  been  bestial  and
nomad  Hyginus  says  {^Fab.  143)  that  Phoroneus  was  the  first  human
king,  and  that  before  his  time  men  had  lived  without  cities  and  without
laws,  speaking  one  tongue,  under  the  rule  of  Jupiter.  There  was  an
epic  poem  called  Phoroms  on  the  subject  of  Phoroneus.  A  few  lines
of  it  have  been  preserved.  See  Schol.  on  Apollonius  Rhodius,  i.  1 129  ;
Strabo,  X.  p.  471  ;  Epicorunt  Graecorum  fragmenta^  ed.  Kinkel,  p.
211  sqq.  The  author  of  the  epic  described  Phoroneus  as  the  father  of
mortal  men.  See  Clement  of  Alexandria,  Strom,  i.  21.  102,  p.  380,
ed.  Potter.

16.  I.  in  the  way  that  Herodotus  states.  The  Persian  tradition,
according  to  Herodotus  (i.  i ),  was  that  lo  had  been  seized  by  Phoenician
merchants  and  carried  on  board  their  ship  to  Egypt.  The  common
Greek  tradition,  referred  to  by  Pausanias,  was  that  lo,  transformed
into  a  cow,  journeyed  to  Egypt  by  land.  See  Aeschylus,  Prometheus
Vinctusy  700  sqq.

16.  3.  he  founded  Mycenae.  Thus  tradition  represented
Mycenae  as  founded  later  than  Tiryns  and  Argos.  So  far  as  Tiryns
is  concerned,  the  tradition  is  borne  out  by  the  evidence  of  archaeology,
for "  the  walls  of  Tiryns  give  one  the  impression  of  being  older  than
even  the  oldest  part  of  the  circuit-wall  of  Mycenae.  They  consist  of
colossal  blocks  very  little  hewn,  and  show  no  trace  of  having  been
repaired  at  a  later  time.  The  circuit-wall  of  Mycenae,  on  the  other
hand,  was  built  originally  of  somewhat  smaller  stones  and  has  been
subsequently  strengthened  and  completed  at  various  times  with  carefully
executed  ashlar  and  polygonal  masonry"  (Schuchhardt,  Schliemanns
Ausgrabungen?"  p.  1 1 9).

16.  4.  Homer  mentions  a  woman  Mycene  etc.  See  Odyssey^  ii.
120.

16.  4.  Acuselaus  was  an  old  Greek  historian,  who  seems  to  have

lived  in  the  first  half  of  the   5th  century  B.C.     A  spurious  work  on

genealogies  appears  to  have  been  circulated  under  his  name  in  later

times.     See  Fragmenta  Histor,  Graec.  ed.   Miiller,  i.  pp.  xxxvi.  sqq.y

100  sqq.  c

16.  5.  The  Argives  destroyed  Mycenae.     This  took  place  in         .     /^

468  B.C.     The  Mycenaeans,  on  the  strength  of  their  illustrious  history,

refused  to  acknowledge  the  supremacy  of  Argos  and  claimed  to  have

the  direction   of  the   Nemean   games.     This  excited  the  anger  and

jealousy  of  the  Argives  who,  seizing  an  opportunity  when  Sparta,  the

aJly  of  Mycenae,   was  distracted  by  a  rebellion  of  the    Helots  and

Messenians,   besieged  and  captured    Mycenae,   sold   the   people  into

captivity,  and  destroyed  the  city  (Diodorus,  xi.  65  ;  cp.  note  on  v.  23.

3 ;.    Diodorus  adds  that  the  city  had  remained  uninhabited  till  his  day  ;

and  Strabo  says  (viii.  p.  372)  that  not  a  trace  of  the  city  was  to  be

seen,  which  shows  that  he  had  not  visited  the  site.     Though  no  ancient

VOL.  Ill  H


/
/'


98  MYCENAE  bk.  ii.  corinth

historian  mentions  the  fact  that  Mycenae  was  ever  rebuilt  after  its
destruction  in  468  B.C.,  yet  the  excavations  of  recent  years  show  that
the  acropolis  must  have  been  inhabited  again  for  a  long  period,
perhaps  two  centuries,  in  the  Macedonian  age.  For  Dr.  Schliemann
found  on  the  surface  of  the  acropolis  a  layer,  3  feet  thick,  of  ddbris^
which  from  the  character  of  the  pottery  and  the  terra-cottas  he  con-
cluded must  belong  to  this  later  period  Dr.  Schliemann's  conclusion
has  since  been  confirmed  by  the  discovery  of  inscriptions  which  prove
that  a  small  town  or  village  existed  at  Mycenae  for  some  time  from  the
third  century  B.C.  onwards.  The  settlement  must  have  existed  in  the
time  of  Nabis,  tyrant  of  Sparta,  since  one  of  the  inscriptions  mentions
that  the  youth  of  Mycenae  had  been  carried  off  by  him  to  Sparta.
Indeed  from  the  potsherds  found  on  the  site  it  has  been  inferred  that
Mycenae  was  never  wholly  deserted  in  antiquity.  See  Schliemann,
Mycenae^  P«  63  sq,  ;  Schuchhardt,  Schliemanns  Ausgrabungen^  p.  118
sq, ;  *E<fnifi€pls  apx**'°^°7*'^>  1887,  p.  156  sqq, ;  American  J ourncU  oj
Archaeology,  5  (1889),  p.  102;  Berliner  philologische  Wochenschrifty
9  (1889),  p.  129  sq,  ;  Ch.  Belger,  Die  mykenische  Lokalsage  (Berlin,
1893),  p.  39.  From  the  statements  of  Diodorus  and  Strabo  (see  above)
we  should  infer  that  the  place  had  been  again  wholly  abandoned  before
the  beginning  of  our  era.  But  it  is  certain  that  Strabo,  and  not  unlikely
that  Diodorus,  was  misinformed  as  to  the  condition  of  Mycenae  in  his
day.  Still  the  settlement,  if  it  existed  in  the  Imperial  age,  was
probably  small  and  insignificant ;  and  when  Pausanias  visited  the  place
in  the  second  century  of  our  era  he  may  have  seen  the  remains  of  the
ancient  city  in  much  the  same  state  in  which  they  continued  down  to
the  excavations  of  Dr.  Schliemann  in  1876.

16.  5.  the  Mycenaeans  sent  eighty  men  to  Thermopylae.  See
Herodotus,  vii.  202.  The  Mycenaeans  and  Tirynthians  together
contributed  a  contingent  of  400  men  to  the  Greek  army  which  fought
at  Plataea  (Herodotus,  ix.  28).  Accordingly  the  names  of  the
Mycenaeans  and  Tirynthians  were  carved  on  the  famous  bronze
serpents,  now  at  Constantinople,  which  supported  the  commemorative
offering  at  Delphi.     See  note  on  x.  13.  9.

16.  5.  i^aits  of  the  circuit  wall  are  still  left  etc.  As  to  the  site
of  the  citadel  of  Mycenae  see  above,  note  on  1 5.  4.  In  describing  the
remains  of  Mycenae  it  will  conduce  to  clearness  if  we  divide  them  as
follows:  I.  the  walls;  II.  the  gates;  III.  the  graves  in  the  citadel;
IV.  the  palace ;  V.  the  lower  city  with  the  beehive  tombs,  etc

I.  The  Walls.  The  length  of  the  citadel  is  about  350  yards,  its
breadth  about  half  as  much.  The  circuit- walls  of  the  citadel  are  preserved
in  their  entire  extent  (though  not  at  their  original  height)  with  the
exception  of  a  small  piece  on  the  precipitous  slope  to  the  Chavos  ravine.
They  follow  the  natural  sinuosities  of  the  rock.  According  to  Leake,
they  are  15  or  20  ft.  high  in  places ;  according  to  Schliemann,  they
vary  from  13  to  35  feet  in  height  In  thickness  they  vary  from  10  to
23  feet ;  the  average  thickness  is  about  16  feet  But  in  places  on  the
N.  and  S.E.  sides  the  wall  seems  to  have  been  as  much  as  45  feet
thick  ;  here  probably  there  were  galleries  or  casemates  in  the  thickness


VtUllt.itfiiafae,-^


100  GATES  OF  MYCENAE  bk.  ii.  corintk

of  1890  have  proved  that  this  inner  wall  is  nothing  but  a  terrace
wall  built  to  support  the  ancient  road  which  led  from  the  Lions
Gate  to  the  palace.  A  piece  of  the  road  about  80  feet  long  and  i  i
feet  wide  was  laid  bare  by  the  excavations.  It  is  laid  on  great  blocks
of  stone  and  paved  with  pebbles.  See  JIpaKTiKa  rrjs  *Ap\aioX.oyiKrji
'Eraiptas  for  1890,  p.  35  sg.  This  discovery  confirms  Dr.  Schuch
hardt's  opinion  that  owing  to  the  configuration  of  the  ground  the
citadel- wail  must  always  have  run  on  the  outer  side  of  the  circle  oi
graves.  At  the  same  time  he  admits  that  polygonal  masonry  of  thi*
closely  jointed  sort  has  not  been  shown  to  occur  in  any  buildings  of  the
*  Mycenaean '  age  unless  at  Mycenae  itself,  whereas  it  regularly  occun
in  Greek  walls  from  the  7th  to  the  3rd  century  B.C.  While  therefore
he  holds  that  the  citadel-wall  must  always  have  run  on  the  outer  side
of  the  terrace  on  which  are  the  graves,  he  admits  that  the  polygona
masonry  at  this  point  may  have  been  introduced  later  at  the  time  wher
the  erection  of  the  great  circle  of  stones  necessitated  some  alterations
in  the  outer  walL  Polygonal  masonry  is  also  found  at  the  so-caliec
tower  (marked  B)  on  the  south-west,  and  lastly  at  the  north-east  comei
of  the  wall.  See  Leake,  Morea^  2.  p.  368  ;  Schliemann,  Mycenae.
pp.  28-31  ;  Steffen,  Karten  von  Mykenaiy  Text^  p.  21  sqq,\  Adler,  ir
Schliemann's  Tiryns,  p.  xiii.  sqq, ;  Schuchhardt,  SchHemanns  Ausgra
bungen^  pp.  169-172  ;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  VArt  dam
VAntiquiU^  6.  p.  303  sqq,  ;  Tsountas,  MvK^vat,  p.  13  sqq,

IL  The  Gates,  There  are  two  gates  to  the  citadel  of  Mycenae.  The
chief  gate — the  famous  Gate  of  the  Lions — is  on  the  western  side,  neai
the  northern  comer.  The  postern  gate  is  on  the  north  side.  Boti
gates  are  so  placed  that  an  enemy  approaching  them  would  have  tc
pass  between  two  walls,  and  would  thus  be  exposed  to  a  cross-fire  o
missiles.  But  whereas  at  Tiryns  the  approach  to  the  great  gate  is  sc
arranged  that  persons  attempting  to  enter  it  would  present  their  righ
and  therefore  unshielded  side  to  the  inner  wall  of  the  fortress,  a
Mycenae  the  approach  to  the  gates  is  in  the  opposite  direction,  so  tha
an  enemy  would  have  his  left  and  therefore  shielded  side  to  the  innei
wall.  No  doubt  the  garrison  reckoned  on  raking  him  well  from  th<
tower-like  projections  which  he  must  pass  on  his  right  in  order  tc
reach  the  gate.  The  great  gate  (the  Gate  of  th"e  Lions)  stands  at  righ
angles  to  the  adjoining  wall  of  the  fortress,  and  is  approached  by  :
passage  50  feet  long  and  about  30  feet  wide,  formed  by  that  wall  anc
by  another  exterior  wall  which  runs  nearly  parallel  to  it  and  whicl
forms  part  of  a  large  quadrangular  tower  built  for  the  defence  of  th<
entrance.  "  A  zigzag  road  on  immense  Cyclopean  substructions,  nov
covered  with  large  blocks  which  have  ^Ilen  from  the  wall,  led  up  t(
the  entrance  of  the  gateway  "  (Schliemann).

The  opening  of  the  gate  itself  is  i  o  ft.  8  in.  high ;  it  is  somewha
narrower  at  the  top  than  at  the  bottom,  its  width  at  the  top  being  9  ft
6  in.,  at  the  bottom  10  ft.  3  in.  The  lintel  is  composed  of  a  massivi
block  15  ft.  (Schliemann)  or  16^  ft.  (Baedeker)  long,  by  8  ft.  broad
and  3  ft.  thick  in  the  middle.  The  threshold,  a  very  hard  block  o
breccia  1 5  ft.  long  by  8  ft.  broad,  had '  been  buried  under  debris  fo


GAT^  OF  MYCENAE


ages,  till  if  was  excavated  by  Dr.  Schliemann  in  1876.  In  the  lintei
are  round  holes,  6  inches  deep,  for  the  hinges.  In  the  threshold  are
mo  quadrant-shaped  holes,  one  on  each  side,  also  for  the  hinges  ;  and
in  the  middle  of  the  threshold  is  a  quadrangular  hole  ( i  ft.  3  in.  long  by
I  ft.  broad),  where  the  two  doors  of  ihe  gate  met.  In  the  right-hand
door-post  is  a  square  hole  for  the  bolt.  On  the  outer  side  of  the
threshold  is  a  remarkable,  roughly  triangular  hole,  Ihe  purpose  of  which
is  unknown.  According  to  Dr.  Schliemann  there  is  a  similar  hole  in  the
threshold  of  the  great  gate  at  Troy.  The  gateway  leads  into  a  short
passage  13  feet  square,  in  the  left-hand  wall  of  which,  close  to  the
gate,  is  a  small  chamber,  probably  for  the  use  of  the  porter,

"  Over  the  lintel  of  Ihe  gate  is  a  triangular  gap  in  Ihe  masonry  of
the  vail,  fbrtned  by  an  oblique  approximation  of  the  side  courses  of
stone.    The  object  of  this  was  to  keep  off  the  pressure  of  the  super-


incumbent wall  from  the  flat  lintel."  This  niche  is  filled  up  by  a
triangular  slab  of  whitish  grey  limestone  (chemical  analysis  proves  it  to
be  anhydrite).  Where  the  slab  was  quarried  is  uncertain.  It  is  10
feet  high,  12  feet  long  at  the  base,  and  3  feet  thick.     On  the  outer  side


102  GATES  OF  MYCENAE  bk.  ii.  corinth

of  this  slab  are  carved  in  relief,  in  a  stiff  heraldic  style,  two  lions,  or
rather  lionesses,  which  face  each  other,  their  front  paws  resting  on  two
bases  or  altars  placed  beside  each  other.  The  heads,  which  are  missing,
were  made  of  separate  pieces  and  fastened  to  the  bodies  with  bolts,  as
appears  from  the  borings  in  the  animals'  necks.  The  heads  must  have
protruded  and  ^ced  the  spectator.  Between  the  lions  is  a  round  pillar
of  peculiar  character.  It  rests  on  a  small  plinth  placed  directly  over
the  joint  of  the  two  bases  referred  to  above.  The  pillar  increases
slightly  in  thickness  towards  the  top  and  is  surmounted  by  a  capital
ending  with  an  abacus  or  plinth  ;  over  the  abacus  are  four  round  discs
in  a  horizontal  row,  and  over  them  is  another  abacus.  The  meaning  of
this  pillar  has  been  much  discussed.  It  has  been  regarded  as  a  symbol
of  Apollo,  God  of  Streets  (see  note  on  i.  31.  6.),  or  of  the  Pelasgian
Hermes,  or  of  Hestia ;  others  have  seen  in  it  a  fire-altar,  appealing  to
representations  of  fire-altars  of  similar  form  on  coins  of  the  Sassanids
Artaxerxes  I.  and  Sapor  I.  All  such  interpretations  may  safely  be  dis-
missed as  fanciful.  The  pillar  is  simply  a  pillar ;  the  four  round  discs
undoubtedly  represent  (as  Dr.  Adler  seems  to  have  been  the  first  to
point  out)  the  ends  of  wooden  beams,  as  they  often  do  in  rock-cut  tombs
in  Lycia.  See  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  PArt  dans  fAntiquiU^
vol.  5,  figures  250,  260,  261,  264,  266.  In  fact  the  pillar  with  its
capital,  round  discs,  and  upper  abacus  is,  like  Greek  architecture  in
general  (see  Vitruvius,  iv.  2),  simply  a  literal  translation  into  stone  of
wooden  architecture.  The  lower  abacus  of  the  pillar  represents  the
wooden  architrave  beam  which  stretched  from  one  pillar  to  another.
The  round  discs  represent  the  ends  of  the  unhewn  tree-trunks  which,
laid  side  by  side,  formed  the  roof,  being  supported  at  both  ends  by  the
architrave  beams.  The  upj)er  abacus  represents  the  boarding  of  planks
which,  to  complete  the  roof,  were  laid  over  the  tree-trunks,  at  right
angles  to  them  but  parallel  to  the  architrave.  From  the  resemblance
of  the  pillar  with  its  capital  etc.  to  the  architecture  of  Lycia,  Dr.  Adler
infers  that  it  was  a  copy  of  the  latter ;  and  in  support  of  this  view  he
refers  to  the  tradition  that  Tiryns  and  Mycenae  were  built  by  seven
Cyclopes  who  had  been  fetched  for  the  purpose  from  Lycia.  See  Strabo,
viii.  p.  372  sq,  \  Apollodorus,  ii.  2.  2  ;  Euripides,  Iphig,  in  AuL  1500
sq,y  iphig,  in  Taur.  845,  Hercules  Furens^  943  sqq, ;  and  the  statement
of  Pausanias  in  the  present  passage.  This  may  or  may  not  be  so  ;  but
Dr.  Adler's  idea  that  the  double  basis  under  the  lions'  paws  represents  the
thrones  of  the  king  and  his  wife,  and  that  the  slab  upon  which  the  lions'
paws  immediately  rest  represents  the  threshold  of  the  king's  house
seems  purely  fanciful.  Perhaps  they  are  altars  ;  for  on  a  painted  plinth
found  on  the  citadel  of  Mycenae  in  1886  an  exactly  similar  object  is
depicted,  standing  between  a  female  worshipper  and  what  seems  to  be
an  idol  {*^<fyrjfi€pis  dp^aioXoyiKiQ,  1887,  pi.  10).  An  object  of  a  similar
shape  was  found  in  the  beehive-tomb  at  Menidi  {Das  Kuppelgrab  bei
Menidi  (Athens,  1 880),  pi.  v.  34).  On  the  other  hand  the  researches
of  Prof.  W.  M.  Ramsay  and  others  in  Phrygia  have  proved  that  the
whole  device  of  the  rampant  lions  facing  each  other  with  a  pillar  has  its
analogies  in  Phrygia,  where  it  is  a  conmion  device  on  rock-cut  tombs.


CH.  XVI  GATES  OF  MYCENAE  103

•
This,  however,  hardly  justifies  us  in  supposing,  with  Prof.  Ramsay,  that
the  device  must  have  beeri  actually  imported  into  Argolis  by  Phrygian
colonists,  though  certainly  the  legend  that  Pelops,  the  ancestor  of  the
kings  of  Mycenae,  migrated  to  Greece  from  Phrygia  points  to  a  con-
nexion between  the  two  countries  in  prehistoric  times.  In  the  excava-
tions of  the  lower  city  in  1887  there  were  discovered  some  engraved
gems,  on  one  of  which  two  lions  are  represented  in  a  position  closely
resembling  that  of  the  lions  over  the  gate  of  the  citadel  (IIpaKriica  r^$
'Kp^wik,  'Eratp.  1887,  p.  66  ;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  op,  ciL  6.  pi.  xvi.
No.  20,  cp.  No.  11).  On  another  engraved  gem  found  in  a  tomb  at
Mycenae  two  griffins  are  represented  standing  on  either  side  of  a
colunm  just  like  the  lions  over  the  gate ;  the  column  rests  on  an  altar
of  the  same  shape  as  those  which  support  the  lions  in  the  relief  (Perrot
et  Chipiez,  op.  ciL  6.  p.  801,  fig.  374  ;  Tsountas,  Mvic^vai,  pi.  v.  No.  6).

See  Clarke,  Travels,  3.  p.  699  sqq.  ;  Dodwell,  Tour,  2.  p.  238  s^g.  ;  Gell,
Itifurtuy  of  Greece,  p.  36  sqq,  ;  Lealce,  Morea,  2.  p.  369  sqq,  ;  Curtius,  Pehp,
2.  404  sqq,  ;  'bA.xat,  joumal,  2.  p.  167  sqq.  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.  306  so.  ;
W.  G.  Clark,  Pelop.  p.  68  sq,  ;  Welcker,  Tagebtuh,  i.  p.  317  J^.  ;  Mahaffy,
Rambles  and  Sludus  in  Greue,  p.  407  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  264  ;  Schliemann,  Mycenae,
pp.  32  sqq.,  121  sqq.  ;  Schuchnardt,  Schliemanns  Atisgrabungen?  ^9'  '72-174  ;
GottUng,  'Das  Thor  von  Mykenae,'  Rheinisches  Museum,  N.  F.  I  (1842),  pp.
161-175;  E-  Gerhard,  'lo  die  Mondkuhe  und  das  Loewenthor  zu  Mykenae,'
GesammeUe  Akcuiemische  Abhandlungen,  2.  pp.  514-530 ;  F.  Adier,  '  Das  Relief
vom  Lowenthore  zu  Mykenae,*  Archdologiscnt  Zeitung,  Jan.  1865,  pp.  1-13  ;
Overbeck,  Gesch,  d,  griech,  Plastik,^  I.  pp.  24-26 ;  W.  M.  Ramsay,  m/ourn,
Hellen,  Studies,  3  (I082},  pp.  18  sqq.,  256  sqq.  ;  ib.  5  (1884),  p.  24 1  sqq.  ;  ib,
9  (1888),  p.  367  sqq.  ;  ib.  10  (1889),  P*  148*  with  plates  xvii.  xxvii.  xxviii.
xliv.  of  the  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies  (for  the  years  1882,  1 884) ;  Perrot  et
Chipiez,  Histoire  4e  I  Art  dans  VAntiquiti,  vol.  5,  figures  64,  75,  79,  80,  83,  84,
92,  108,  109,  no,  120,  121,  122,  139;  id.,  vol.  6.  pp.  314  sq.,  799-806;
Tsountas,  Mvic^eu,  pp.  16-19 ;  Collignon,  Hist,  de  la  Sculpture  Grecque,  I.
pp.  3^-37.  Gell,  Curtius,  and  Vischer  recognised  that  the  animals  over  tne  gate
were  lionesses,  not  lions.

The  postern  gate  on  the  northern  side  of  the  citadel  of  Mycenae  is
built  and  fortified  like  the  Gate  of  the  Lions,  but  on  a  smaller  scale.
The  approach  to .  it  is  through  a  passage  formed  by  the  wall  of  the
citadel  on  the  left  and  a  projecting  bastion  on  the  right.  The  gate  is
constructed  of  three  great  blocks,  namely  two  uprights  with  a  lintel.
The  opening  of  the  gate,  like  that  of  the  Lions*  Gate,  widens  slightly
from  top  to  bottom ;  it  is  5  ft.  4  in.  wide  at  the  top,  and  5  ft.  1 1  in.  at
the  bottom.  Over  the  lintel  is  a  triangular  slab,  but  it  is  unsculptured.
See  Leake,  Moreoy  2.  p.  371  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2,  p.  406 ;  Schliemann,
MycenaCy  p.  35  sq,  ;  Schuchhardt,  Schliemanns  Ausgrabungen^  p.  174  ;
Tsountas,  MvK^vai,  p.  18  sq,  ;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Hist,  de  VArt  dans
PAnHquit^y  6.  p.  313  sq,

III.  The  graves  in  the  citadel.  Inside  the  Lions*  Gate,  and  only
a  few  paces  from  it,  to  the  right  of  the  path  which  leads  to  the  upper
citadel,  stands  a  circle  of  upright  slabs  of  stone  enclosing  the  famous
graves  discovered  in  1876  by  Dr.  Schliemann,  to  whom  also  the
discovery  of  the  circle  of  stones  is  due.  Before  he  began  his  excava-
tions the  whole  place  was  buried  in  deep  soil,  part  of  which  had  been


104  MYCENAE — THE  SHAFT  GRA  VES    bk.  ii.  corinth

swept  down  in  the  course  of  ages  from  the  rocky  ground  above.  Within
the  circle  of  stones  Dr.  Schliemann  discovered  five  graves,  and  about  a
year  after  his  departure  a  sixth  grave  was  discovered,  also  within  the
circle  of  stones.  The  diameter  of  the  circle  is  87  feet  ;  its  surface  was
levelled.  The  enclosure  is  formed  by  two  concentric  circles  of  stone
slabs  ;  the  circles  are  about  3  feet  from  each  other  and  were  joined  by
cross-slabs  laid  horizontally  on  the  tops  of  the  upright  slabs.  The  cross-
slabs,  of  which  only  six  are  in  their  places,  were  firmly  fitted  to  the
upright  ones  by  means  of  notches,  so  as  to  form  what  is  called  the  mor-
tice and  tenon  joint.  The  space  between  the  two  circles  of  upright  slabs
appears  to  have  been  originally  filled  with  stones  and  earth,  the  whole
forming  a  massive  wall.  Towards  the  Lions'  Gate  there  is  an  opening
in  the  circle  more  than  6  feet  wide,  which  seems  not  to  have  been  closed
with  a  gate.  On  its  eastern  side  the  circle  of  stones  rests  directly  on
the  rock  ;  on  its  western  side  it  rests  on  a  Cyclopean  wall,  for  the  ground
falls  away  rapidly  here.  The  height  of  the  upright  slabs  is  about  3  feet  on
the  east,  and  about  5  feet  on  the  west.  At  present  they  incline  inwards ;
but  this  inclination  appears  to  have  been  produced  by  the  pressure  of
soil  from  without  and  not  to  have  been  original,  for  all  the  angles  on
the  stones,  both  uprights  and  cross-slabs,  are  right  angles.  The  stone
of  which  the  slabs  are  formed  is  a  shell-limestone.  Dr.  Schliemann
concluded  that  this  circle  of  stones  with  its  enclosed  space  must  have
been  the  agora  or  market-place,  and  that  the  double  circle  of  stones
with  the  cross*pieces  were  benches  for  the  people  to  sit  on.  He  shows
from  Pindar  and  Pausanias  that  there  were  tombs  in  the  market-places
of  Cyrene  and  Megara.  See  Pindar,  Pyth,  v.  125  ;  Pausan.  i.  42.  4,
i.  43.  8,  and  the  note  on  i.  43.  3.  He  might  have  added  that  the
grave  of  Danaus  was  shown  in  the  centre  of  the  market-place  at  Argos
(Strabo,  viii.  p.  371).  But  against  this  view  it  may  be  urged  (i)  that
the  stones  are  far  too  high  to  have  been  benches ;  (2)  that  the  existence
anywhere  of  a  round  agora  or  market-place  is  not  proved  by  the  passages
adduced  by  Dr.  Schliemann ;  (3)  that  nowhere  else,  so  far  as  appears,
was  the  market-place  within  the  citadel.  There  was  a  lower  city  at
Mycenae  (see  below),  and  the  market-place  would  naturally  be  in  it.
The  circle  of  stones  would  therefore  seem  to  have  been  intended  simply
to  enclose  the  graves.  Perhaps,  as  Mr.  Tsountas  thinks,  it  served  as  a
retaining-wall  to  hold  together  the  earth  which  was  heaped  over  the
graves  so  as  to  form  a  tumulus  or  barrow.  Mr.  Tsountas  believes  that
the  circle  of  stones  is  of  later  date  than  the  graves,  and  that  the  wall  of
the  acropolis  at  this  point  is  of  later  date  than  both  the  graves  and  the
circle  of  stones  ;  in  his  opinion  the  graves  were  originally  outside  of  the
walls.

Within  the  area  of  the  circle  the  ground  falls  away  abruptly
towards  the  west,  so  that  while  the  floor  of  the  area  is  flush  with
the  rock  on  the  east,  it  is  raised  many  feet  above  it  by  a  deep  bed
u  ^'\Z'  ^^"^  '''''*  side  of  the  circle.  The  graves  discovered
by  Dr.  Schliemann  were  not  m  this  deep  bed  of  earth,  but  were  hewn  in
the  rock  under  it.     At  the  time  when  Dr   ^rl^v  ^.  ^^

tions  the  whole  area  of  the  circle  was  hvik^AA^"^^  ^^^"^  ^'^  ^'^^^^'

*^^  «ieep  under  an  accumulatiot^


CH.  XVI


MYCENAE— THE  SHAFT  GRA  VES


105


of  soil,  and  in  this  layer  of  soil  he  found  a  number  of  tombstones  and  a
small  round  altar  with  a  well-like  opening  in  the  middle,  which  had
doubtless  been  used  for  sacrificing  to  the  dead.     It  is  not  clear  from  his
account  at  what  depth  beneath  the  surface  he  found  the  tombstones.
The  question  has  been  carefully  examined  by   Mr.   Ch.   Belger ;  his
conclusion  is  that  the  tombstones  were  found  at  a  depth  of  1 2  to  1 4  feet
beneath  the  surface,  and  that  they  all  stood  on  the  same  level  as  the
enclosing  circle  of  stones.     The  tombstones  seem  further  to  have  been
arranged  in  groups  of  two  to  three  together,  and  all  faced  the  west.
See  Ch.  Belger,  Die  mykenische  LokcUsage  (Berlin,   1893),  pp.  25-32.
The  graves  are  hewn  vertically  in  the  rock  ;  the  sides  of  most  of  them
have  crumbled  away  in  the  upper  part,  but  in  graves  I  and  v  ^  we  see
that  the  sides  were  from    10  to   16  feet  high.     The  shai)e  of  all  the
graves  is  rectangular,  but  they  differ  much  in  size.     The  largest  (No.
IV)    measures   6.75   metres  (22   feet)  long  by  5  metres  (16  ft.  5  in.)
wide;  the  smallest  (No.  Il)  measures  3  metres  (9  ft.  10  in.)  long  by
2.75  metres  (9  ft.)  wide.^    The  former  grave  contained  five  bodies  ;  the
latter  contained  only  one.     When  the  graves  were  opened,  the  sides
were  found  to  be  lined  with  a  wall  of  small  stones  and  clay.     Numerous
slabs  of  slate  were  found  leaning  against  the  walls  of  the  graves,  and
many  of  the  slabs  were  lying  across  the  corpses.     Schliemann  supposed
that  these  slabs  had  lined  the  walls  of  the  graves.     Further,  as  the
space  over  the  corpses  was  filled  with  earth,  he  concluded  that  the
graves  had  been  filled  up  immediately  after  the  burial,  and  from  the
crushed  state  of  some  of  the  bodies,  pressed  down  by  the  superincum-
bent slabs  and  rubbish,  he  concluded  that  the  burial  had  been  a  hurried
and  careless  one.    A  much  more  probable  explanation  of  the  state  of  the
graves  when  they  were  discovered  has  been  suggested  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld.
He  conjectures  that  the  disorder  in  the  graves  may  have  been  produced
by  the  falling  in  of  the  roof,  which  had  been  partly  formed  of  the  slate
slabs  in  question.     This  theory  explains  the  meaning  of  the  numerous
well-preserved  pieces  of  wood  found  in  the  graves.     One  or  two  strong
beams  had  been  stretched  across  each  grave,  supporting  a  roof  of  slabs.
When  the  wooden  beams  rotted,  the  slabs  tumbled  in,  some  of  them
^ing  right  across  the  bodies ;  and  the  whole  space  was  at  once  filled
up  with  the  earth  which  previously  had  been  piled  over  the  roofs  of  the
graves.     In  the  third  grave  were  found  the  four  bronze  casings  with

^  I  have  followed  Stamatakis's  numbering  of  the  graves,  as  it  is  the  one  now
Senerally  adopted.       It   differs  somewhat   from   Schliemann's   numbering,    as   the
I J      following  table  will  show  : —

I        Stamatakis       .         .         .         .         i  Schliemann


II
III

IV

v

VI


1 1


II

V

III

IV

I

VI


'  These  are  Schuchhardt's  measurements  (SchlUmanns  Ausgrabungen,^  p.  188).
^hliemann's  own  measurements  are  somewhat  larger  ;  according  to  him  the  largest
^ve  is  34  feet  long  by  18}  feet  broad,  and  the  smallest  grave  zi  ft.  6  in.  long  by
9  ft.  8  in.  broad.     See  Schliemann's  Mycenae^  pp.  313,  391.


io6  MYCENAE— THE  SHAFT  GRAVES    bk.  ii.  corinth

which  the  ends  of  the  two  beams  were  shod.  Each  of  these  casings
contained  remains  of  the  wooden  beam  which  was  fastened  into  it  by
strong  copper  nails  driven  into  it  on  all  four  sides.

Ten  tombstones  were  found  over  the  graves,  to  wit,  two  on  grave  I,
one  on  grave  1 1,  two  on  grave  in,  one  on  grave  iv,  three  on  grave  v,
and  one  on  grave  vi.  Fragments  of  others  have  also  been  discovered.
Most  of  the  tombstones  are  made  of  a  yellowish  shell-limestone,  soft
and  friable,  the  same  material  of  which  the  circle  of  slabs  enclosing  the
graves  is  constructed.  The  place  from  which  the  stone  was  brought  is
not  Iqiown.  The  tombstones  found  on  graves  i,  ill,  and  vi  are  plain ;
the  others  are  adorned  with  sculptures  in  low  relief.  It  has  been
suggested  that  the  plain  tombstones  were  placed  over  the  graves  of
women,  and  the  sculptured  tombstones  over  the  graves  of  men.  But
this  distinction  can  hardly  hold.  For  though  women  seem  certainly  to
have  been  buried  in  grave  ill,  and  perhaps  in  grave  i,  the  two  bodies
found  in  grave  vi  were  those  of  men.  The  tombstones  faced  to  the
west,  from  which  Mr.  Tsountas  infers  that  they  were  set  up  before  the
western  wall  of  the  acropolis  was  built,  at  a  time  when  a  highroad  ran
along  the  west  side  of  the  circle  of  graves.  The  carvings  on  the  tomb-
stones consist  partly  of  spiral  ornaments,  partly  of  scenes  of  war  and
the  chase.  A  man  driving  in  a  chariot  is  represented  on  three  of  the
tombstones  ;  on  one  of  them  the  charioteer  is  being  attacked  by  a  man
with  a  long  spear ;  on  another  a  man  with  a  raised  sword  is  standing
at  the  horse's  head  facing  the  same  way  as  the  charioteer.  On  one  of
them,  beneath  the  man  in  the  chariot,  a  lion  is  represented  chasing  an
ibex  or  some  such  animal  The  fragment  of  another  tombstone  presents
us  with  the  foreparts  of  two  horses  galloping  to  the  right,  one  above  the
other.  (In  the  second  edition  of  his  work  Dr.  Schuchhardt  interpreted
this  scene  as  two  goats  or  anteloi)es  browsing  on  a  tree,  and  compared
it  to  similar  scenes  in  Egyptian  and  Asiatic  art.)  The  carving  on  all
the  stones  is  very  rude  and  barbarous.  The  figures  and  ornaments  are
not  modelled,  but  cut  so  as  to  present  a  flat  surface,  like  figures  cut  out
with  a  saw  and  stuck  on  a  background.  Both  in  style  and  material
they  are  far  inferior  to  the  lions  over  the  great  gateway,  from  which  it
is  a  natural  inference  that  they  are  older  than  the  lions.  Mr.  W.
Reichel,  however,  who  has  carefully  examined  the  tombstones,  considers
that  they  are  certainly  not  older  than  the  lions,  and  possibly  much
later  {Eranos  Vindobonensis  (Wien,  1893),  p.  33).  But  this  opinion
will  probably  commend  itself  to  few.

The  human  bodies  found  in  the  graves  niunbered  nineteen  in  all.
They  were  thus  distributed  : — three  bodies  in  grave  i ;  one  body  in
grave  il ;  five  bodies  (apparently  three  women  and  two  children)  in
grave  in  ;  five  bodies  in  grave  iv ;  three  bodies  in  grave  v ;  and  two
bodies  in  grave  vi.  From  the  contents  of  graves  i  and  iv  Dr.  Schuch-
hardt argues  that  all  three  bodies  in  grave  i  and  two  of  the  five  bodies
in  grave  iv  were  those  of  women.  The  bodies  seem  to  have  been
buried,  not  at  full  length,  but  in  a  half-sitting  posture,  with  the  head
propped  on  a  high  support  and  the  legs  doubled  up  under  the  thighs.
Pieces  of  skin  and  flesh  were  still  adhering  to  some  of  the  skeletons  at


CH.  XVI  MYCENAE— THE  SHAFT  GRAVES  107

the  time  of  their  discovery,  from  which  Mr.  Helbig  has  inferred  with
great  probability  that  these  bodies  were  embahned  {Das  homerische
Epos  aus  den  Denkmdlem  erldutert?'  p.  53).  At  all  events  it  seems
clear  that  the  bodies  were  buried,  not  burnt.  Ashes  indeed  were  found
in  the  graves  and  on  the  walls  of  tomb  i  (Schliemann's  tomb  11).  Dr.
Schliemann  observed  black  marks,  which  he  took  to  have  been  pro-
duced by  three  separate  fires  lit  in  the  grave ;  from  which  he  inferred
that  the  bodies  had  been  burnt.  But  the  state  of  the  bodies  and  of  the
vessels,  jewels,  and  ornaments  found  in  the  graves  (which  are  quite
uninjured  by  fire)  is  conclusive  against  this  view.  The  ashes  found  in
the  grave  may  have  been  those  of  victims  offered  to  the  dead  ;  and  the
black  patches  on  the  walls  may  either  have  been  produced  by  the
sacrificial  fires  or,  as  Messrs.  Perrot  and  Chipiez  suggest,  have  been
nothing  but  the  stains  produced  by  moist  and  decaying  matter.  Bones
of  oxen,  goats,  swine,  and  deer,  which  were  found  in  great  quantities
over  the  graves,  prove  that  sacrifices  were  offered  to  the  dead ;  and  the
skulls  and  skeletons  of  men  which  were  found  scattered  in  disorder
among  the  earth  may  be  those  of  slaves  or  captives  who  were  slain  in
order  to  accompany  the  departed  princes  to  the  spirit -land,  just  as
Achilles  slew  twelve  Trojan  prisoners  at  the  funeral  pyre  of  Patroclus
(Homer,  //.  xxiii.  175  sq,)  The  round  altar,  which  stood  exactly  over
the  middle  of  the  fourth  grave,  was  doubtless  used  in  these  sacrifices.
It  is  4  feet  high,  and  contains  a  round  well-like  aperture  or  funnel,
down  which  the  blood  of  the  victims  was  probably  poured  into  the
grave  (cp.  Paus.  x.  4.  10  note).

To  enumerate  all  the  treasures  which  were  found  with  the  dead  in
the  graves  would  be  out  of  place  here.  But  a  brief  notice  of  the  more
important  objects  can  hardly  be  dispensed  with,  since  their  discovery
opened  up  a  new  vista  in  the  history  of  Greece  and  of  Greek  art  The
objects  fall  into  two  classes,  according  as  they  are  either  substantial
articles  for  use  or  ornament  in  daily  life,  or  mere  fiimsy  imitations  of
them  made  only  to  be  buried  with  the  dead.  Many  of  the  ornaments,
for  example  the  bracelets,  are  made  of  sheets  of  gold  so  thin  that
they  could  not  -  have  been  used  in  real  life ;  they  are  clearly  sub-
stitutes for  the  real  jewellery,  which  the  living  doubtless  kept  for
themselves,  while  they  satisfied  the  demands  of  piety  by  burying  the
sham  jewellery  in  the  grave,  deeming  these  splendid  but  unsubstantial
baubles  good  enough  to  deck  the  unsubstantial  figures  of  the  shadowy
dead.  "Every  archaeologist  knows  that  sometimes  the  graves  of
Greece  and  Etruria  contain  the  mere  pretence  of  offerings :  gold
ornaments  as  thin  as  paper ;  leaves  and  fruits  of  terra-cotta ;  weapons
unfit  for  use,  and  vases  of  the  most  unserviceable  kind  "  (P.  Gardner,
New  Chapters  in  Greek  history^  p.  343).  In  a  similar  spirit  of  econo-
mical piety  the  Chinese  bum  paper  houses,  paper  furniture,  paper  ingots
of  gold  and  silver  for  the  use  of  their  departed  kinsfolk  in  the  other
world  (E.  B.  Tylor,  Primitive  Culture^  i.  p.  493 ;  cp.  Sir  J.  Lubbock,
Prehistoric  Times^  p.  158).

Amongst  the  objects  made  on  purpose  to  be  placed  in  the  graves
the  most  remarkable  are  seven  golden  masks,  which  were  found  in  the


io8  MYCENAE— THE  SHAFT  GRA  VES    bk.  ir.  corint

third,  fourth,  and  fifth  graves,  covering  the  faces  of  five  men  and  t\
children.  The  faces  modelled  in  these  masks  are  clearly  portrait
Indeed  the  children's  masks,  being  made  of  thin  gold  leaf,  must  ha
been  moulded  with  the  hand  on  the  faces  of  the  dead.  The  mei
masks,  being  made  of  thicker  plates  of  gold,  cannot  have  been
moulded.  In  one  of  the  children's  masks  holes  are  cut  out  for  tl
eyes  ;  but  in  the  men's  masks  there  are  no  such  holes.  The  hands  ai
feet  of  the  children  were  also  wrapt  in  gold  leaf,  which  still  retains  t
shape  of  the  fingers  and  toes.  The  custom  of  covering  the  faces  of  t
dead  with  masks  appears  to  have  prevailed  widely  in  the  world  and
still  practised  in  some  places.  Thus  golden  masks  are  regularly  plao
on  the  faces  of  dead  kings  of  Siam  and  Cambodia  (Pallegoix,  Royaw
That  ou  SicuHy  i.  p.  247  ;  J.  Moura,  Royaume  du  Cambodge^  i.
349)  ;  and  among  the  Shans  of  Indo-China  the  face  of  a  dead  chief
invariably  covered  with  a  mask  of  gold  or  silver  (A.  S.  Colquhoi:
Amongst  the  Shans ^  p.  279).  In  ancient  Mexico  masks  made  of  gc
or  turquoise  mosaic  or  painted  were  placed  on  the  faces  of  dead  kin
(Bancroft,  Native  Races  of  the  Pacific  States^  2.  p.  606 ;  cp.  Clavigei
History  of  Mexico^  i.  p.  324,  Cullen's  translation).  The  Aleuti;
islanders  put  large  wooden  masks  on  the  faces  of  their  dead  with  t
intention  of  thereby  protecting  the  deceased  against  the  glances
spirits  on  his  way  to  the  spirit-land  (W.  H.  Dall,  Alaska  and
resources^  p.  389 ;  iVil,  *  On  masks,  labrets,'  etc.,  in  Third  Anntt
Report  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology  (Washington,  1884),  p.  139).
ancient  Egypt  every  mummy  had  its  artificial  face ;  and  masks  ma
of  gold,  silver,  bronze,  and  terra-cotta  found  in  Mesopotamia,  Phoenic
the  Crimea,  Italy,  the  valley  of  the  Danube,  Gaul,  and  Britain,  appc
to  testify  to  the  extent  to  which  a  similar  custom  prevailed  both
Western  Asia  and  Europe.  See  O.  Benndorf,  Antike  Gesichtsheh
und  Sepulcralmasken  (Wien,  1878);  R.  Andree,  Ethnographisi
Parallelen  und  Vergleiche,  Neue  Folge  (Leipzig,  1889),  pp.  120-134.
Two  pairs  of  golden  balances,  found  in  the  third  of  the  royal  gra>
at  Mycenae,  are  of  interest  as  showing  that  the  Mycenaeans  wc
familiar  with  the  use  of  the  balance.  They  are  made  of  such  thin  g(
that  they  could  not  have  been  used  for  weighing  anything,  and  <
therefore  part  of  the  sham  outfit  made  on  purpose  to  be  laid  with  t
dead.  To  the  same  class  should  probably  be  referred  several  gold
breastplates,  some  plain,  some  decorated,  which  were  found  on  t
breasts  of  some  of  the  men  in  graves  iv  and  v.  In  the  fourth  gra
a  golden  mask  representing  the  head  of  a  lion  was  discovered.  I
Schliemann  believed  that  it  had  covered  the  face  of  one  of  the  de
men.  If  this  could  be  proved,  it  would  go  to  support  Mr.  A.
Cook's  theory  that  the  lion  was  worshipped  by  the  men  of  t
Mycenaean  age,  who  assimilated  themselves  to  their  god  by  weari
artificial  lion-skins  at  certain  solemn  ceremonies  (A.  B.  Cook,  *  Anir
worship  in  the  Mycenaean  age,'  fournal  of  Hellenic  Studies,
(1894),  pp.  103-120).  But  Dr.  Schuchhardt  denies  that  this  lion-m«
could  have  covered  the  face  of  a  man.  He  holds  that  it  was  faster
as  the  central  device  to  a  shield,  for  all  round  the  head  is  a  horizor


CH.  XVI  MYCENAE— THE  SHAFT  GRA  VES  109

rim,  the  edge  of  which  is  perforated  and  coated  with  a  deposit  of  green
oxide,  as  if  it  had  been  set  in  bronze.

A  large  silver  head  of  an  ox,  admirably  modelled  and  true  to  life,
was  found  in  grave  iv.  The  horns  are  of  thin  gold  plate,  and  there  are
traces  of  gilding  on  the  ears,  eyes,  muzzle,  and  mouth.  On  the  fore-
head is  fastened  a  large  gold  rosette.  The  head  is  hollow.  In  the
same  grave  were  found  fifty-six  small  heads  of  oxen,  cut  out  of  gold
plate,  each  with  a  double-headed  axe  between  the  horns.  Perhaps
they,  as  well  as  the  large  silver  head,  represent  victims  which  had
been  offered  in  sacrifice  to  the  dead.  In  this  connexion  the  golden
horns  of  the  large  head  remind  us  of  the  Homeric  custom  of  gilding  the
horns  of  an  ox  before  sacrificing  it  (Od,  iii.  425  sq,^  437  sq,)

The  quantity  of  men's  and  women's  jewellery  found  in  the  graves  was
immense.  It  includes  diadems,  pendants,  armlets,  shoulder-belts,
sword-belts,  crosses,  rings,  pins,  buttons,  beads,  figurines,  etc.  Almost
all  these  articles  are  of  gold  except  the  beads,  which  are  mostly  of  stone
or  amber.  Seven  golden  diadems  were  found,  namely  three  in  grave
I,  two  in  grave  ill,  and  two  in  grave  iv.  Each  diadem  consists  of  an
oval-shape  plate  of  gold,  about  20  inches  long,  adorned  with  bosses
or  rosettes  in  repouss^  work.  On  four  of  the  diadems  the  pattern
consists  of  a  single  row  of  bosses  surrounded  by  concentric  circles
and  diminishing  in  size  on  either  side  of  the  largest  central  boss.
Another  diadem  is  decorated  with  a  triple  row  of  circles  filled  alternately
with  a  rosette  and  with  seven  small  bosses.  Another  exhibits  a  single
row  of  rosettes ;  and  the  last  is  adorned  with  many  small  protuberant
knobs  or  bosses.  The  diadems  seem  to  have  been  worn  by  women
only.  In  graves  I  and  ill  a  considerable  number  of  golden  pendants
were  found.  They  are  formed  of  gold  plates  in  the  shape  of  a  half
oval,  and  are  adorned  with  bosses  and  rosettes  in  repouss^  work  like
the  diadems.  Holes  in  some  of  them  show  that  they  were  hung  with
the  broad  end  up  and  the  point  down.  From  the  representation  of
somewhat  similar  pendants  on  a  very  archaic  female  statuette  foimd  at
Tiryns  it  is  inferred  that  these  pendants  were  attached  to  a  band  which
crossed  from  shoulder  to  shoulder,  so  that  the  pendants  hung  down  on
the  wearer's  breast.  They  appear  to  have  been  worn  by  women  only.
Thirteen  of  them  were  found  in  grave  in.  Further,  a  number  (nine  at
least)  of  golden  armlets  were  found  in  graves  11,  iv,  and  v ;  two  of
them  being  discovered  actually  on  the  arm-bone  of  the  skeleton.  Some
of  them  are  shaped  like  the  diadems,  consisting  of  a  plate  of  gold
tapering  down  at  the  two  ends,  and  adorned,  like  the  diadems,  with
repouss^  work.  Dr.  Schliemann,  indeed,  mistook  them  for  diadems ;
and  he  fell  into  the  same  error  with  regard  to  the  pendants,  each  of
which  he  supposed  was  half  of  a  diadem.  Both  mistakes  were  corrected
by  Dr.  Schuchhardt.  The  armlets  are  much  narrower  than  the  diadems,
and  seem,  unlike  the  diadems,  to  have  been  worn  by  men  only.  A
large  golden  bracelet  was  found  in  grave  iv.  It  may  have  been  worn
by  a  woman.  Other  feminine  jewellery  consists  of  twenty  golden  crosses,
irfjich  were  found  in  graves  i  and  in.  Fourteen  of  them  (found  in
grave  i)  are  fashioned  in  the  shape  of  laurel-leaves  meeting  at  right


no  MYCENAE— THE  SHAFT  GRAVES    bk.  ii.  corinth

angles  and  decorated  with  bosses.  The  other  six  cross^  (found  in
grave  ill)  consist  of  four  narrow  lancet-shaped  leaves  laid  on  another
cross  of  broad  leaves,  so  that  the  narrow  leaves  alternate  with  the
broad.  In  one  of  these  crosses  the  broad  leaves  seem  to  be  laurel-
leaves,  in  the  others  they  are  probably  fig-leaves.

No  less  than  701  golden  discs,  each  about  2\  inches  in  diameter,
were  found  by  Dr.  Schliemann  in  the  third  grave,  some  of  them  above  and
some  of  them  below  the  skeletons.  They  were  probably  fastened  on
the  garments  in  which  the  dead  were  buried,  though  not  one  of  them
is  perforated  or  shows  any  trace  of  a  fastening.  They  are  beautifully
decorated  with  exquisitely  wrought  patterns,  consisting  either  of  a
natural  object  (cuttle-fish,  butterfly,  palm-leaf,  etc.)  conventionally  treated,
or  of  circles,  wave-lines,  and  spirals  variously  combined.  All  are
believed  to  have  been  struck  with  the  hammer.

A  number  of  small  golden  figures  found  in  the  third  grave  were
probably  also,  like  the  golden  discs,  fastened  as  ornaments  to  the
dresses  of  women.  A  few  of  them  represent  a  naked  woman  standing
with  her  hands  crossed  over  her  breast ;  on  her  head  is  perched  a  dove,
and  on  one  at  least  of  the  figurines  two  more  doves  are  represented
flying  away  from  each  of  her  arms.  These  figures  are  supposed  to
represent  the  Oriental  Aphrodite  or  Astarte,  to  whom  doves  were
sacred  (Lucian,  De  dea  Syria,  54 ;  W.  Robertson  Smith,  The  Religion
of  the  Semites,^  p.  294;  cp.  note  on  i.  22.  3  *  Vulgar  Aphrodite ').
Two  of  these  little  golden  figures  exhibit  a  woman  seated,  with  her  arms
folded  on  her  breast ;  she  wears  a  skirt  which  is  adorned  with  stripes
and  points.  Others  represent  pairs  of  animals  feeing  each  other  in
heraldic  style,  for  example  two  stags  crouching  head  to  head,  two  cat-
like creatures  supported  on  a  palm-tree,  two  swans,  and  two  eagles.
Others  again  represent  single  animals,  as  foxes,  jackals,  sphinxes,  and
(a  solitary  instance)  a  flying  g^ffin.  Further,  there  are  miniature
representations  in  gold  of  temples  viewed  in  front,  with  three  doors  and
a  high  fantastically  shaped  pinnacle  in  the  middle.  On  two  lower
pinnacles  at  the  sides  are  perched  two  doves,  from  which  it  is  inferred
that  the  temples  are  those  of  Aphrodite  or  Astarte.  Here  may  be
mentioned  the  golden  buttons  of  which  great  numbers  were  found  in
the  graves ;  Dr.  Schliemann  coimted  as  many  as  340  of  them  in  the
fifth  grave  alone.  They  are  decorated  with  circles,  spirals,  etc.,
arranged  in  various  patterns,  and  seem  to  have  adorned  the  sheaths
of  swords.

The  vessels  found  in  the  graves  include  many  large  copper  caldrons
and  jugs,  gold  and  silver  cups,  painted  terra-cotta  vases,  two  large  vases
of  alabaster  (one  of  them  with  three  handles),  and  a  tall  alabaster  cup
with  perpendicular  sides.  Thirty-four  large  copper  jugs  and  caldrons
were  found  in  the  fourth  grave,  and  others  were  found  in  the  third
grave.  Perhaps  these  copper  caldrons  may  have  circulated  as  a
medium  of  exchange  instead  of  money,  which  was  certainly  not  coined
in  the  Mycenaean  age.  Caldrons  or  kettles  perhaps  served  a
similar  purpose  in  the  Homeric  age  (cp.  Homer,  //.  ix.  123,  xxiii.
259,  xxiv.  233),  and  in  the  great  inscription  of  Gortyna  certain  sums


CH.  XVI  MYCENAE— THE  SHAFT  GRAVES  iii

are  reckoned  by  kettles,  which,  though  the  reference  may  be  to  coins
stamped  with  a  kettle,  at  least  makes  it  probable  that  kettles  once
circulated  in  place  of  money  at   Gortyna  (W.   Ridgeway,    Origin  of
Metallic  Currency  and  Weight  Standards ^  p.  3 1 4  j^.)     Nine  gold  cups
were  found  in  the  fourth  grave  alone,  which  was  indeed  the  richest  in
treasure.     Most  of  the  gold  and  silver  cups  have   a   single   handle
riveted  on,  and  have  either  no  stand  or  one  of  moderate  height     Others
have  two  handles.     One  such  golden  goblet,  resting  on  a  high  stand,
is  adorned  with  a  golden  dove  on  each  handle,  reminding  us  of  Nestor's
cup  in  Homer  (//.  xi.  632  j^.)     Some  of  the  gold  and  silver  cups  are
plain,  while  others  are  decorated  in  various  ways.     Among  the  latter
may  be  noticed  especially  a  golden  cup  adorned  with  two  rows  of  fish
charmingly  modelled  in  relief.     Still  more  valuable'  is  a  fragment  of  a
silver  vase  found  in  the  fourth  tomb.     Being  encrusted  with  oxide  it
was  neglected  by  Dr.  Schliemann  ;  but  when,  a  few  years  ago,  the  oxide
was  removed  by  Mr.  Koumanoudes,  there  appeared  wrought  in  relief
on  the  silver  a  scene  of  remarkable  interest.     It  represents  a  city  in  a
state  of  siege.     On  the  slope  of  a  steep  hill,  which  is  planted  with  olive-
trees,  rise  die  lofty  walls  of  the  beleaguered  city,  built  of  quadrangular
blocks  laid  in  horizontal  courses.     Above  the  walls  are  seen,  piled  one
above  the  other,  a  number  of  square  buildings,  each  provided  with
windows,  but  without  any  lines  to  indicate  courses  of  stones.     Probably
they  represent  houses  built  of  unbumt  brick  or  wood.     On  the  walls
women  are  stretching  out  their  hands  and  gesticulating  wildly,  as  in  the
act  of  praying  or  encouraging  the  men,  who  have  sallied  from  the  gate
and  are  meeting  the  foe  on  the  hill-side.     Some  of  the  men,  quite
naked,    are   standing   and   whirling   their  slings   above   their   heads  ;
others,  also  naked,  are  kneeling  and  shooting  with  bows  and  arrows.
In  the  foreground,  lower  down  the  hill  than  the  archers  and  slingers,
is  a  man  wearing  a  conical  cap  or  helmet,  and  clad  in  a  sort  of  jerkin  ;
he  seems  to  be  holding  a  sling  in  his  hand.     Behind  the  slingers  and
archers,   higher  up  the  hill,   stand   two   other   men  carrying   angular
shields,  which  are  slung  by  straps  round  their  necks,  and  descend  to
their  knees.      They  are  not   fighting,    but   in  their  right  hands  they
hold  something,  perhaps  spears.     None  of  the  assailants  is  visible,  the
scene  being  a  mere  fragment.     Hesiod  has  described  a  siege  in  words
which  might  almost  pass  for  a  description  of  this  scene  (Shield  of
Hercules^   237  sqq.)      The  precious  fragment  which  thus  in  a  small
compass  brings  before  us  so  vividly  one  aspect  of  life  in  the  Mycenaean
age  was  first  published  by  Mr.  Tsountas,  in  'E^/xcpU  o.p\o.i.o\oyi.K'r\^
1 89 1,  pi.  ii.  2,  with  comments,  p.    11  sqq,     Cp.  /V/.,  Mvic^vat,  p.  92
^q. ;  P.  Gardner,  New  Chapters  in  Greek  history^  p.  66  sq, ;  Perrot  et
Chipiez,  Hist,  de  VArt  dans  VAntiquitiy  6.  p.  773  sqq.     Some  silver
vases  (two  of  them  broken)  were  found  in  the  graves,  also  a  golden
box  with  a  lid,  and  a  small  golden  jug.    Twelve  rectangular  gold  plates,
decorated  with  lions  pursuing  stags,  palm-trees,  spirals,  etc.,  were  found
'n  the  fifth  grave.     They  formerly  cased  the  sides  of  two  hexagonal
wooden  caskets,  of  which  the  bottoms  have  been  preserved.

The  painted  terra-cotta  vases  found  in  the  graves  fisdl  into  two


MYCENAE— THE  SHAFT  GRA  VSS


classes  in  respect  of  their  shape  and  decoration.  In  the  one  class
large-bellied  vesseb  prevail ;  in  the  other  more  or  less  slender  jugs  and
ewers.  In  the  former  class  the  decoration  is  effected  by  dull,  lustreless
colours  (dark  red,  brown,  violet,  and  occasionally  white)  laid  on  so  as
to  form  geometrical  patterns  (siiatght,  curved,  and  twisted  lines,  parallel
bands,  circles  with  crosses  in  them,  and  especially  spirals).  In  the
latter  class  the  decoration  is  effected  by  a  lustrous  glaze,  of  brown,  red,
or  occasionally  white  colour,  and  the  designs  are  mostly  copied  from
the  organic  world,  especially  marine  objects,  such  as  sea-weed,  shells,
polyps,  cuttle-fish,  star-fish,  and  sea-nettles.  The  distinction  between
these  two  classes  of  painted  ware  (the  dull  ware  and  the  lustrous  ware,
as  they  may  be  called  for  shortness)  is  not  confined  to  the  vases  found
in  the  royal  tombs  at  Mycenae,  but  prevails  over  the  wide  area  covered
by  the  ancient  civilisation  to  which  the  name  of  Mycenaean  is  now
given  as  a  general  designation.  The  duII-painted  pottery  is  of  earlier
origin  and  rarer  occurrence  than  the  lustrous  pottery.  At  Mycenae  it
is  found  only  in  the  circle  of  the  royal  graves  and,  outside  of  that  circle,
in  the  lowest  strata  of  the  excavations.  Specimens  of  it  have  also  come
to  light  at  Tiryns,  Thera,  Amorgos,  Melos,  Daulis,  Orchomenus,  Aegina,
and  on  the  Acropolis  at  Athens.  On  the  other  hand,  no  examples  of
it  have  been  found  in  the  graves  of  the  Mycenaean  period  at  Nauplia,
at  Spa/a  and  Menidi  in  Attica,  and  at  lalysus  in  Rhodes.  The  lustrous
Mycenaean  pottery  is  much  more  widely  difTused.  It  has  been  found
in  prodigious  quantities  in  Argolis  (Mycenae  and  Nauplia),  Attica
{Menidi,  Spata,  and  the  Acropolis  of  Athens),  and  the  islands  of  the
Aegean  (particularly  Rhodes,  Calymnos,  and  Carpathos) ;  and  specimens
of  it  have  been  met  with  in  Egypt,  Phoenicia,  Cyprus,  the  west  coast  of
Asia  Minor,  the  Ionian  islands,
eastern  Italy,  and  Sicily.  The
vases  of  this  lustrous  Mycenaean
ware  are,  as  has  been  indicated,
more  elegant  in  shape  than  those
of  the  dull-painted  ware.  Wide-
bellied  vessels  are  found  among
them  also,  but  as  a  nile  the
forms  are  more  elongated  and
taper  from  the  upper  part  down-
wards. One  particular  form  of
jar  is  especially  characteristic  of
the  lustrous  Mycenaean  ware,
being  found  in  no  other  known
style  of  pottery.  Its  peculiarity
is  that  the  neck  of  the  jar  is
closed,  and  that  the  liquid  was
poured  through  a  short  spout  in
the  upper  part  of  the  vessel.
Two  short  handles  rise,  one  on
each  side  of  the  closed  neck,  to  which  they  are  joined  ;  so  that  together
they   present   the    likeness  of  a  pair  of  stirrups,  which    has   earned


■  (BSstOuaau).


CH.  XVI  MYCENAE— THE  SHAFT  GRA  VES  1 13

for  this  kind  of  jar  its  German   name   of  Bugelkanne  or  stirrup-jar
(French  amphore  ^  itrier),     English  archaeologists  have  proposed  to
call  it  the  false-necked  jar.     Some  jars  of  this  class  have  two  such
closed  necks  instead  of  one.     With  regard  to  the  decoration  of  the
lustrous  Mycenaean  ware,  geometrical  patterns,  including  spirals,  often
occur  on  it ;  but  the  characteristic  decoration,  as  already  indicated,  is
the  imitation  of  the  lower  forms  of  marine  life,  both  vegetable  and
animal.     Birds  also  appear  on  it,  but  quadrupeds  and  men  occur  only
on  the  latest  samples  of  it.     On  a  sherd  of  a  vase  of  this  sort  found  at
Mycenae  we  see  oxen  browsing ;  and  on  another  potsherd,  also  found
at  Mycenae,  a  dog  is  depicted  chasing  a  hare.     Among  the  few  speci-
mens on  which  human  figures  are  portrayed  the  most  notable  is  one
found  at  Mycenae  in  the  ruins  of  a  house  to  the  south  of  the  circle  of
graves.     On  this  fragment  a  row  of  warriors  is  depicted  marching  in
single  file ;  they  are  all  armed  with  spear,  helmet,  coat  of  mail,  shield,
and  greaves  or  leggings  ;  each  wears  a  pointed  beard,  but  no  moustache  ;
and  at  one  end  of  the  row  of  warriors  a  woman,  clad  in  a  long  gown,
stands  with  uplifted  arm  watching  them  depart.     The  questions,  where
did  this  lustrous    Mycenaean   pottery   originate?    and   where   was   it
manufactured?  have  been  variously   answered.     It   appears   to   be   a
purely  Greek  product,  betraying  no  traces  of  Oriental  influence ;  the
griifin,  sphinx,  and  lion,  which  appear  on  other  objects  of  Mycenaean
art,  never  figure  on  the  lustrous  pottery.     And  it  is  of  very  ancient
origin,  for  specimens  of  it  have  been  found  at  Thera  under  the  volcanic
matter  which  was  thrown  out  in  the  great  eruption  of  about   2000
B.C.     Professors  Furtwangler  and   Loschcke,  the  authors  of  the  chief
work  on  Mycenaean  pottery  {Mykenische   Vasen^  Berlin,  1886),  are  of
opinion  that  all  the  lustrous   Mycenaean  ware  was  manufactured  at
Mycenae  and  exported  thence  by  way  of  trade  to  all  the  places  where
it  has  been  found.     Their  chief  grounds  for  thinking  so  are  that  more
of  this  ware  has  been  found  at  Mycenae  than  anywhere  else,  and  that
on  the  pots  and  potsherds  found  there  we  can  trace,  as  we  can  nowhere
else,   the  historical  development  of  the  art  through  all  its  successive
stages.     On  the  other  hand  Messrs.  Perrot  and  Chipiez  consider  that
a  style  of  pottery  of  which  the  characteristic  decoration  consists  in  the
representation  of  marine  plants  and  animals  is  more  likely  to  have
originated  in  the  islands  of  the  Aegean  than  at  Mycenae,  which  is
distant  some  miles  from  the  sea ;  and  they  think  it  probable  that,  after
its  invention,  it  was  manufactured  at  more  places  than  one.     Before
wc  quit  the  subject  of  Mycenaean  pottery  it  should  be  observed  that
the   two  kinds  of  painted  ware  which  we  have  been  considering  (the
dull   kind  and  the  lustrous  kind)  resemble  each  other  in  being  both
noade  on  the  potter's  wheel,  and  are  both  to  be  distinguished  from  the
ruder  and  more  archaic  monochrome  pottery  in  which  the  decoration,
where  it  exists,  is  effected,  not  by  painting,  but  by  incised  lines  traced
with  a  sharp  point  on  the  wet  clay.     This  earlier  pottery  is  found  at
Mycenae  along  with  the  two  finer  sorts  of  painted  ware.     It  doubtless
continued  to  be  manufactured  for  domestic  use  contemporaneously  with
them.     It  is  of  coarser  clay,  and  the  pots,  though  mostly  made  on  the

VOL.  Ill  I


114  MYCENAE— THE  SHAFT  GRAVES    bk.  ii.  CORIOTH

wheel,  have  thicker  sides  than  the  painted  vases.  That  the  two  kinds
of  painted  ware  (the  dull  and  the  lustrous)  continued  in  use  together
for  some  time  is  proved  by  their  being  found  together  in  the  royal
graves  at  Mycenae ;  but  that  the  dull  ware  was  finally  supplanted  by
the  other  is  shown  by  the  total  absence  of  duU-painted  vases  in  the
graves  of  the  Mycenaean  period  at  Nauplia,  Spata^  Menidi^  and
lalysus.

The  weapons  found  in  the  royal  graves  at  Mycenae  include  swords,
daggers,  spear-heads,  and  arrow-heads.  The  swords,  daggers,  and
spear-heads  are  all  of  bronze.  No  iron,  in  fact,  was  found  in  the
graves.  The  arrow-heads  are  all  of  hard  obsidian  ;  thirty-five  of  them
were  foimd  in  the  fourth  grave.  More  than  150  swords  were  discovered
in  the  graves ;  they  have  all  straight  two-edged  blades,  and  measure
from  2^  to  3  feet  in  length.  Some  of  the  blades  are  adorned  along
their  whole  length  with  figures  of  running  animals  worked  in  flat  relief ;
for  example,  one  exhibits  a  row  of  grifRns,  all  exactly  alike,  along  each
of  its  edges ;  another  has  similarly  two  rows  of  galloping  horses.
Further,  some  of  the  dagger-blades  are  decorated  with  wonderfully  fine
inlaid  work,  which  is  one  of  the  greatest  triumphs  of  Mycenaean  art.
On  one  of  these  blades  is  wrought  a  lion-hunt.  Four  men  are  seen
attacking  a  lion  which  is  about  to  rend  a  man  who  is  lying  on  the
ground.  Three  of  the  men  are  armed  with  spears ;  the  fourth  is
shooting  an  arrow  from  a  bow.  Behind  the  fighting  lion  two  other
lions  have  turned  tail  and  are  running  away.  The  effect  of  the  highly
artistic  picture  is  heightened  by  the  use  of  colours,  for  the  whole  is
formed  by  various  metals  (gold,  silver,  etc.)  inlaid  on  a  thin  plate  of
bronze  which  is  let  into  the  blade.  On  another  dagger-blade  we  see
cats  chasing  wild  ducks  in  a  marsh.  The  cats  are  leaping  among  the
ducks  and  seizing  them  with  mouth  and  paw.  Between  and  imder  the
animals  is  wrought  a  winding  river,  with  fish  swinuning  and  plants
growing  in  it.  The  plants  are  thought  to  be  Egyptian,  either  papyrus
or  lotus.  The  cats,  plants  and  the  bodies  of  the  ducks  are  of  gold ;
the  wings  of  the  ducks  and  the  river  are  of  silver  or  very  pale  gold.
The  scene  is  represented  in  much  the  same  way  on  both  sides  of  the
blade.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  same  subject  is  depicted  in  Egyptian
wall-paintings  from  Thebes,  which  are  now  in  the  British  Museum  ;  the
river,  the  fish,  the  lotus,  the  cat,  the  ducks,  all  reappear  in  the  paintings
(P.  Gardner,  New  Chapters  in  Greek  history^  p.  66).  Knives,  some  of
bronze  and  some  of  obsidian,  were  also  found  in  the  graves.

Two  gold  signet-rings  ^-ith  finely  carved  intaglios  were  found  in  the
fourth  grave.  The  bezels  or  faces  as  well  as  the  hoops  of  these  rings
are  of  gold  and  are  of  great  size.  On  one  of  them  the  intaglio
represents  two  men  in  a  chariot  hunting  a  stag.  Two  horses,  galloping
at  speed,  draw  the  chariot,  which  consists  of  a  small  body  set  on  a  pair
of  four-spoked  wheels,  thus  resembling  the  chariots  carved  on  the  tomb-
stones which  stood  over  the  graves.  One  of  the  men  is  bending  forward
and  shooting  an  arrow  at  the  stag,  which  is  represented  above  the
horses  of  the  chariot.  The  intaglio  on  the  second  ring  shows  a  scene
of  combat.     Four  warriors  are  represented.     In  the  centre  a  victorious


CH-  XVI  MYCENAE— THE  SHAFT  GRAVES  115

warrior  strides  forward  and  seizes  his  adversary  with  his  left  hand,
while  in  his  right  hand  he  has  raised  his  sword  to  strike.  His  foe  has
sunk  on  his  knees,  but  is  stabbing  with  his  sword  at  the  other's  throat.
Behind  the  kneeling  man  another  soldier,  wearing  a  helmet  from  which
floats  a  plume,  and  protected  by  a  huge  semi-cylindrical  shield,  is
hastening  to  the  rescue,  pointing  a  long  spear  at  the  victor's  head.
Behind  the  victor,  another  man  is  seated  on  the  ground,  supporting
himself  with  his  right  hand  ;  he  is  probably  wounded.  On  both  these
intaglios  the  men,  so  far  as  can  be  made  out,  wear  no  garment  but  a
tight  pair  of  drawers.  Three  other  fine  intaglios  were  found  in  the
third  grave.  They  are  cut  on  three  small  four-sided  prisms  of  gold,
which  are  perforated  for  the  purpose  either  of  being  strung  on  a  necklace
or  being  ^tened  on  a  ring.  One  of  these  intaglios  represents  a  man
fighting  a  lion.  The  lion  is  clawing  one  of  his  legs,  but  the  man  has
seized  the  beast  by  the  mane  and  is  thrusting  his  sword  into  its  face.
The  second  intaglio  represents  a  combat  between  two  men.  One  of
them  is  pressing  forward  and  driving  his  sword  into  the  throat  of  his
foe,  who  is  sinking  to  the  ground  behind  the  great  shield  which  he
carries.  The  vanquished  man  wears  a  helmet  with  a  flowing  plume  ;
the  victor  is  naked  or  clad  only  in  a  pair  of  drawers.  The  third  intaglio
represents  a  lion  running.

Besides  these  gold  intaglios  three  engraved  gems  were  found  in  the
circle  of  graves.  That  so  few  engraved  gems  should  have  been  found
among  the  treasures  of  the  royal  graves  is  at  flrst  sight  remarkable,
since  engraved  gems  of  a  special  sort  are  characteristic  of  Mycenaean
art,  at  least  in  its  later  development,  having  been  found  in  considerable
numbers  at  various  places  where  the  Mycenaean  type  of  civilisation
prevailed.  The  gems  in  question  used  to  be  known  as  Island  gems,
because  they  were  first  found  in  the  islands  of  the  Aegean.  But  the
name  is  no  longer  appropriate,  for  many  of  them  have  been  found  in
continental  Greece,  notably  in  the  beehive  tombs  of  Vaphio  (in  Laconia)
and  Memdi  (in  Attica).  It  seems  better,  therefore,  with  Messrs.
Perrot  and  Chipiez,  to  call  them  Mycenaean  gems,  since  they  are  a
special  product  of  that  phase  of  art  to  which  the  name  Mycenaean  is
now  applied.  The  Mycenaean  or  Island  gems  are  generally  shaped
like  a  lentil  or  round  bean,  and  gems  so  shaped  are  accordingly  called
lenticular  or  lentoid.  Less  commonly  they  are  of  oblong  shape,  like  a
bluntly  pointed  oval,  and  gems  so  shaped  are  called  glandular,  because
they  resemble  a  sling-bullet  {glans).  As  to  material,  they  are  most
conmionly  agate  or  one  of  its  varieties,  such  as  onyx,  sardonyx,  and
camelian.  Jasper,  red,  green,  and  yellow,  is  also  frequently  employed,
and  porphyry  sometimes  occurs.  Rock  crystal  seems  to  have  been
reserved  by  the  gem-cutter  for  his  best  work.  With  a  few  exceptions,
the  stones  are  pierced  with  a  hole  drilled  longitudinally  through  them,
in  order  probably  to  be  set  in  swivel-rings  or  strung  on  a  thread  and
worn  round  the  neck.  The  devices  engraved  on  them  are  very  various,
bat  almost  all  of  them  represent  living  beings,  most  commonly  animals,
snch  as  lions,  goats,  deer,  bulls,  eagles,  and  dogs,  sometimes  arranged
heraldically,  two  similar  animals  being  set  face  to  face  or  back  to  back.


Ii6  MYCENAE— THE  SHAFT  GRAVES    bk.  ii.  corinti

Men  and  women  also  appear  very  commonly  on  them  in  a  great  variety
of  postures,  sometimes  dancing,  sometimes  hunting,  sometimes  grasping
an  animal  by  the  throat  or  horns,  etc  On  some  gems  of  this  class
there  appear  certain  curious  figures,  which  seem  to  be  compounded
of  animals  of  different  species.  Sometimes  the  figure  has  the  head  of
an  ass  and  the  legs  of  a  lion  ;  at  other  times  he  has  the  head  of  a  horse
and  the  legs  of  a  bird  ;  once  at  least  the  head  of  a  bull  and  the  legs  of
a  man,  etc.  Sometimes  he  is  represented  carrying  either  a  single  slain
animal  on  his  shoulders  or  two  such  animals  attached  to  the  ends  of  a
pole.  In  these  curious  figures  Prof.  Milchhofer  found  evidence  of  the
prevalence  of  the  worship  of  the  horse  among  the  primitive  Greeks.
But  Mr.  A.  B.  Cook  has  pointed  out  that  the  horse  is  by  no  means  the
only  animal  which  figures  on  these  gems,  and  he  has  made  it  probable
that  in  most  or  all  of  these  figures  the  upper  part  is  intended  to
represent,  not  a  part  of  a  real  animal,  but  a  cloak  or  mask  made  to
simulate  an  animal ;  and  he  believes  that  these  figures  portray  the
worshippers  of  certain  animals  (lions,  horses,  asses,  bulls,  etc.),  disguised
so  as  to  imitate  the  particular  animal  which  they  worshipped  (Journal
of  Hellenic  Studies^  14  (1894),  pp.  81-169).

We  have  seen  that  in  the  royal  graves  on  the  acropolis  of  Mycenae
intaglios  in  gold  are  more  numerous  than  intaglios  in  stone.  But  in
the  graves  of  the  lower  city  at  Mycenae  and  in  graves  of  the  Mycenaean
period  elsewhere  the  proportions  are  reversed :  intaglios  in  gold  are
rare,  and  intaglios  in  stone  (engraved  gems)  are  conmion.  For
example,  in  the  beehive  tombs  of  Vaphio  and  Menidi  the  proportion  of
engraved  gems  to  gold  intaglios  is  about  forty  to  three.  Hence,  as  the
royal  graves  on  the  acropolis  of  Mycenae  probably  belong  to  the  earlier
part  of  the  Mycenaean  period,  it  is  supposed  that  among  the  Greeks
of  that  epoch  the  art  of  cutting  intaglios  in  gold  preceded  that  of  gem-
engraving,  which,  however,  in  time  became  the  more  popular  art  and
threw  its  older  rival  into  the  shade.

Among  the  miscellaneous  objects  found  in  the  royal  graves  at
Mycenae  the  following  may  be  mentioned.  A  figure  of  a  stag  cast
in  an  alloy  of  lead  and  silver ;  a  short  funnel  on  its  back  seems  to
show  that  the  figure  served  as  a  vessel  for  holding  liquid ;  the  work-
manship is  coarse  and  clumsy.  Two  alabaster  ornaments  representing
a  scarf  tied  in  a  knot ;  from  the  smoothness  of  the  back  and  the
perforations  in  the  middle  it  is  inferred  that  these  alabaster  scarfs  were
affixed  to  some  larger  object ;  in  Egyptian  wall-paintings  and  sculptures
similar  objects  are  represented  in  the  hands  of  kings  or  high-priests.
A  small  helmeted  head  of  a  warrior  in  so-called  Egyptian  porcelain
(a  fine  white  paste  with  a  sand-like  grain).  A  natural  ostrich-egg,
adorned  with  clay  figures  of  fish  glued  to  the  shell ;  it  was  found  in  the
fifth  grave.  Great  numbers  of  perforated  amber  beads  of  various
sizes,  found  in  graves  in,  iv,  v ;  they  seem  to  have  been  worn  by  both
men  and  women ;  chemical  analysis  proves  that  the  amber  is  Baltic
amber.  Objects  made  of  ivory,  including  two  pieces  carved  in  the
shape  of  rams*  horns,  four  crescent-shaped  pieces,  a  handle  with  circles
and  spirals  engraved  on  it,  a  piece  cut  in  the  shape  of  a  beehive,  etc.


£H.  XTi  AfYCENAE—THE  SHAFT  GRAVES  117

A  hemispherical  ball  of  rock  crystal,  perforated  and  hollow ;  in  the
inside  are  traces  of  a  pattern  of  pointed  arches  executed  in  bright  red
and  white ;  it  was  found  in  the  third  grave,  and  is  supposed  to  have
been  the  head  of  a  hair-pin.  Lastly  may  be  mentioned  two  rude  terra-
cotta idols,  found  in  the  first  grave ;  similar  idols  have  been  found  in
greater  numbers  in  the  lower  city  of  Mycenae  (see  below).  Among
the  miscellaneous  objects  just  enumerated  the  ostrich-egg,  the  articles
of  ivory,  and  the  amber  beads  are  of  special  interest,  because  they
show  that  Mycenae  was  in  commercial  relations,  more  or  less  direct,
with  Africa  on  the  south  and  the  Baltic  on  the  north.

With  regard  to  the  chronological  relations  of  these  royal  graves  to
each  other,  it  has  been  already  observed  that  they  are  not  all  con-
temporary. In  this  respect  the  six  graves  fall  into  two  groups  ;  on  the
one  side  graves  i,  11,  and  vi,  and  on  the  other  side  graves  in,  iv,
and  V  belong  closely  together.  In  graves  ill  and  iv  alone  were  found
the  miniature  gold  shrines  of  Astarte,  which  seem  to  have  been  all
cast  in  the  same  mould ;  and  in  graves  in  and  iv  alone  were  found
the  golden  discs  which  served  to  decorate  garments.  And  in  general
in  graves  in,  iv,  and  v  gold  and  bronze  predominate,  whereas  in
graves  I,  ll,  and  vi  the  great  majority  of  the  vessels  are  of  earthenware.
From  this  it  follows  that  the  latter  graves  (l,  ll,  vi)  belong  to  a
simpler  and  less  ostentatious  age  than  the  former.  This  is  confirmed
by  a  more  minute  comparison  of  the  contents  of  the  graves  in  the  two
groups.  If  we  compare  the  women's  grave  i  with  the  women's  grave
III,  and  the  men's  graves  il  and  vi  with  the  men's  graves  iv  and  v,
we  observe  in  each  case  that  the  furniture  of  the  former  group  (i,  n,  vi)
is  much  the  simpler.  The  gold  ornaments  (diadems,  pendants,  crosses)
of  grave  I  have  far  simpler  patterns  than  the  corresponding  ornaments
in  grave  in ;  moreover,  earrings,  armlets,  and  amber  beads  are  not
found  at  all  in  the  former.  Similarly  graves  il  and  vi  are  the  only
men's  graves  which  are  without  masks,  golden  breastplates,  and  golden
sword-belts.  Thus  we  conclude  that  graves  i,  n,  and  vi  are  of  a
different  date  from  graves  in,  iv,  and  v.

The  question  still  remains,  which  of  the  two  groups  is  the  earlier  ?
the  simpler  or  the  more  splendid  ?  The  question  seems  answered  by
the  fact  that  in  graves  iv  and  v  the  pottery  found  is  almost  exclusively
of  the  dull-painted  sort,  whereas  graves  i  and  n,  though  they  also
contain  dull-painted  ware,  are  conspicuous  for  the  lustrous-painted  vases
which  were  found  in  them.  Now  we  have  already  seen  that  dull-painted
pottery  is  earlier  than  lustrous-painted  pottery;  from  which  we  infer
that  graves  in,  iv,  and  v  are  older  than  graves  l,  11,  and  vi.  This  is
the  conclusion  come  to  by  Dr.  Schuchhardt,  whose  arguments  I  have
borrowed.  It  is  confirmed  by  the  high  authority  of  Mr.  Tsountas,  who
also  considers  graves  in,  iv,  and  v  to  be  older  than  graves  i,  n,  and
VL  Mr.  Tsountas  holds  that  the  oldest  of  all  the  graves  is  iv,  which
was  also  the  richest  in  treasure ;  and  of  the  later  group  of  graves
he  thinks  that  grave  n  is  the  earliest.  However,  the  connexion  of  all
the  graves  with  each  other  is,  in  spite  of  minor  differences,  so  close  that
they  must  all  belong  to  the  same  period  of  civilisation.     Dr.  Schuchhardt


ii8  MYCENAE— THE  SHAFT  GRAVES   bk.  ii.  corinth

believes  that  the  interval  between  the  earliest  and  the  latest  grave  need
not  be  more  than  a  century,  and  may  not  be  more  than  half  that  time.

As  to  the  royal  graves  on  the  acropolis  and  their  contents  see  Schliemanny
Mycenae;  Schuchhardt,  Schlienianns  Ausgrabungen^  pp.  183-318;  Tsountas,
Mvjc^yai,  pp.  96-122 ;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  ae  CArt  dans  f  AntiquUiy  6.  pp.
315-340  etc.  ;  Milchhofer,  'Die  Ausgrabungen  in  Mykene,'  Mittheil.  d.  arch,
Inst,  in  Athen,  i  (1876),  pp.  308-327;  Baumeister's  Denkmaler,  p.  986  sag.  ;
C.  T.  Newton,  Essays  an  Art  and  Archaeology^  pp.  246-302 ;  P.  Gardner,  New
Chapters  in  Greek  history ^  p.  62  sqq. ;  Ch.  Belger,  Die  mykenische  Lokalsage
(Berlin,  1893),  PP-  24-34.  As  to  the  tombstones  see  W.  Rdchel,  '  Die  myken-
ischen  Gral»telen,'  Eranos  Vindobtmensis  (Wien,  1893),  pp.  24-33.  ^  ^^
Mycenaean  pottery,  see  A.  Furtwangler  und  G.  Loschcke,  Mykenische  Thonge-
fosse  (Berlin,  1879);  ^m  Mykenische  Vasen  (Berlin,  1886),  especially  pp.  iii-xv
Dumont  et  Chaplain,  Les  ciramiques  de  la  Grice  propre^  vol.  i  (Paris,  1888)
Rayet  et  Collignon,  Histoire  de  la  Ciramique  Grecque  (Paris,  1888),  pp.  3-18
Tsountas,  Mv/c^yai,  pp.  190-193 ;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  op.  cit.^  6.  p.  893  sqq.  As
to  the  Mycenaean  pottery  found  on  the  Acropolis  of  Athens  see  Ch.  Belger,  in
Berliner  philolog.  JVochenschrift,  15  (1895),  P*  59  ^9*  ^  ^^  ^^^  inlaid  daggers
see  U.  Kohler,  *  Mykenische  Schwerter,'  Mittheil,  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  7
(1882),  pp.  241-250;  G.  Perrot,  'Note  sur  quelques  poignards  de  M3rc^nes,'
Bulletin  de  Corr,  HelUnique^  10  (1886),  pp.  341-356;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  op.  cit,,
6.  p.  779  sqq.  As  to  the  Mycenaean  or  Island  gems  see  A.  Milchhofer,  Die  Anfangt
der  griech.  Kwtst  (Leipzig,  1883) ;  J.  H.  Middleton,  The  engraved  gems  of
classiccU  times  (Cambridge,  1891),  pp.  18-21 ;  Tsountas,  Mv/c^veu,  p.  73  sa,  ;
Perrot  et  Chipiez,  op.  cit.^  6.  p.  834  sqq. ;  G.  Busolt,  Griech.  Geschichte^  I.
pp.  103-106 ;  Collignon,  Hist,  de  la  Sculpture  Grecque^  i.  pp.  55-59.

Besides  these  graves  the  excavations  of  Dr.  Schliemann  on  the
acropolis  laid  bare  a  labyrinth  of  walls  immediately  to  the  south  of  the
circle  of  tombs.  These  walls,  which  are  built  of  roughly  hewn  stones
bonded  with  clay,  belonged  probably  to  dwelling-houses.  In  a  small
compartment  of  these  walls,  measuring  only  2  feet  long  by  8  inches
broad,  a  hoard  of  treasure  was  discovered.  Included  in  it  were  four
fine  golden  goblets,  each  with  two  handles  and  a  high  stem ;  two
engraved  signet-rings  of  gold ;  five  plain  gold  rings  and  one  silver
ring ;  and  eleven  spiral  rings  of  golden  wire,  which  in  some  of  the
rings  is  round,  in  others  quadrangular.  All  these  objects  are  of  solid
metal,  and  were  evidently  destined  for  the  use  of  the  living ;  they  are
not  made  of  flimsy  gold-leaf,  like  much  of  the  jewellery  found  in  the
graves.  One  of  the  two  signet-rings  has  engraved  on  its  bezel  or  face
a  scene  which  has  been  variously  interpreted.  A  woman  is  represented
sitting  under  a  tree,  perhaps  a  pine-tree  or  an  olive ;  in  her  raised  right
hand  she  holds  flowers.  In  front  of  her  stand  one  small  and  two  large
female  figures ;  behind  her  another  small  female  figure  is  plucking
something  from  the  tree.  Each  of  the  small  female  figures  stands  on
a  heap  of  stones.  All  the  five  women  seem  to  be  naked  to  the  waist,
but  each  of  them  wears  a  flounced  skirt  which  reaches  to  the  ankles.
The  three  who  stand  in  front  of  the  seated  woman  appear  to  be  offering
her  flowers.  In  the  upper  part  of  the  field,  above  the  women  who  are
offering  flowers,  is  a  double-headed  axe,  and  an  idol  armed  with  a  large
shield  and  brandishing  a  spear.  In  the  highest  part  of  the  field  are
the  sun  and  the  crescent  moon,  with  some  wavy  lines  beneath  them  to
indicate  the  sea  or  clouds.     On  the  left  side  of  the  scene,  at  the  back


CH.  XVI  MYCENAE— THE  PALACE  119

of  the  flower-bearing  women,  is  a  row  of  animals'  heads,  which  some
take  to  be  heads  of  lions.  As  to  the  meaning  of  the  scene  the  woman
is  probably  a  goddess  to  whom  her  worshippers  are  bringing  flowers.
She  has  been  variously  interpreted  as  Astarte,  Rhea,  Aphrodite,  and
the  Earth-goddess.  Some  indeed  have  denied  that  the  woman  repre-
sents a  goddess  at  all ;  but  the  analogy  of  Babylonian  cylinders,  on
which  similar  figures  are  represented  engaged  in  sacrifice  under  the  sun
and  moon  (see  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Hist  de  PArt  dans  VAntiquitd^  2.
figures  20,  230,  314),  is  in  favour  of  the  view  that  we  have  here  a
scene  of  religious  worship.  The  idol  with  the  shield  in  the  upper  part
of  the  field  closely  resembles  a  figure  painted  on  a  tablet  which  was
also  found  on  the  acropoHs  of  Mycenae  (see  below,  p.  121).  In  both
cases  the  shield  is  in  the  shape  of  two  circles  joined  together.  Mr.
Tsountas  holds  that  this  idol  represents  aegis-bearing  Zeus  wielding
the  thunderbolt.  Prof.  Milchh6fer,  who  interprets  the  seated  woman  as
Rhea,  considers  that  the  shielded  figure  represents  one  of  the  Curetes
or  Corybantes.

Other  objects  found  in  the  dwelling-houses  immediately  to  the  south
of  the  circle  of  graves  were  small  terra-cotta  figures  of  women,  like
those  found  in  the  first  grave,  also  figures  of  animals  (apparently  cows),
and  painted  vases.  The  painted  vases  show  signs  of  being  later  in
date  than  those  found  in  the  graves ;  seaweed  and  polyps  appear  rarely
on  them,  and  geometrical  patterns  are  the  commonest.  The  most  im-
portant of  these  vases  is  the  one,  already  mentioned  (p.  113),  on  which
is  depicted  a  row  of  warriors.  It  is  in  the  shape  of  a  large  amphora  or
jar.  Amongst  the  objects  found  in  the  same  place  were  further  some
engraved  stones  with  figures  of  animals,  a  block  of  porphyry  adorned
with  rosettes  carved  in  relief,  and  a  brooch  or  safety-pin,  the  only  one
which  has  been  found  on  the  acropolis.  Brooches  of  the  same  type  have
been  discovered  in  the  lower  city  of  Mycenae  (see  below,  p.  131  sq,)


See  Schliemann,  Alycenae^  p.  351  5qq,\  Milchhofer,  Die  Anfdnge  der  Kunst

Griechenland^  p.  135  sqq,  ;  Schuchhardt,  Schlietnanns  Ausgrabungen?  p.  318

iqq.  ;  Tsountas,   Mvjc^i^cu,   p.   159  sqq.  ;    Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Hist,  de  VArt  dans


tkntiqtM^  6.  pp.  340  sq,^  S40  sqq.     The  goddess  under  the  tree  on  the  gold
intaglio  is  interpreted  as  Astarte  by  Busolt  [firiech,  Gesckichte^  p.  94  sqJ)

IV.  The  palace  and  houses  on  the  acropolis.  In  1886  the  Greek
Archaeological  Society  conducted  excavations  on  the  citadel  of  Mycenae
with  important  results.  On  the  highest  part  of  the  citadel  they  laid
bare  the  foundations  of  an  ancient  temple.  The  temple  lay  roughly
north  and  south  (more  nearly  N.N.W.  and  S.S.E.)  and  measured  43
metres  (141  feet)  in  length  by  20  metres  (65  ft.  7  in.)  in  breadth.
The  architectural  members  discovered  include  three  blocks  of  the
cornice,  one  capital  of  a  column,  and  one  triglyph-block,  all  of  *  poros '
stone.  From  the  style  of  these  fragments  Dr.  Dorpfeld  concludes
that  the  temple  must  have  been  built  in  the  sixth  or  the  beginning  of
the  fifth  century  B.C.  Many  early  Greek  roof-tiles  are  still  lying  near
the  temple.  But  Roman  roof-tiles  have  also  been  found,  showing  that
the  temple  was  rebuilt  or  repaired  in  Roman  times.


120  MYCENAE — THE  PALACE  bk.  ii.  corinth

The  temple  rests,  at  its  northern  end,  on  the  rock ;  at  the  south
end  it  reposes  on  an  artificial  foundation  of  rubbish  about  lo  feet  deep.
In  this  foundation  were  discovered  walls  belonging  to  two  different
periods.  Those  at  the  south-west  comer  of  the  temple  are  thin  and  are
constructed  of  small  stones  bonded  with  clay.  The  other  walls  are  built
of  larger  stones,  and  as  they  enclose  a  floor  of  concrete,  which  extends
under  the  former  walls,  they  must  be  the  older  of  the  two  sets  of  walls.
The  excavations  proved  that  these  older  walls  were  the  remains  of  a  palace
which  in  plan,  materials,  and  method  of  construction  closely  resembles
the  palace  discovered  by  Dr.  Schliemann  on  the  acropolis  of  Tiryns  (see
below,  p.  221  sqq.)  In  the  Mycenaean  palace  a  large  court  (37  ft.  9  in.
broad)  is  approached  from  the  south-west  by  a  flight  of  stairs  which  led
up  to  it  from  a  lower  level.  On  the  eastern  side  of  the  court  runs  a
portico  or  colonnade,  which  opens  into  a  fore-hall  or  ante-chamber,  which
in  turn  opens  into  the  great  hall  (megaron)  for  the  men.  This  hall,  the
largest  room  in  the  palace,  measures  37  feet  9  inches  by  42  feet  5  inches.
Its  roof  was  supported  by  four  pillars  ;  the  bases  of  three  of  these  pillars
were  discovered.  In  the  centre  of  the  hall,  between  the  four  pillars,  was
the  great  circular  hearth,  of  which  about  a  third  is  preserved.  It  is  com-
posed of  clay  laid  over  the  floor  of  the  apartment.  The  outer  circle  of
the  hearth  was  covered  with  stucco  and  adorned  with  paintings  ;  no  less
than  five  of  these  layers  of  painted  stucco  have  been  found,  one  above
the  other.  The  floor  of  the  hall  is  composed  of  concrete,  with  a
chequered  pattern  like  that  of  the  hall  at  Tiryns ;  but  round  the  walls
there  is  a  pavement  of  stone.  The  stone  threshold  of  the  hall  is
preserved,  with  the  square  holes  for  the  antae  or  door-posts.
As  there  is  no  round  hole  for  a  pivot,  we  infer  that  there  was  no  door,
but  perhaps  a  curtain.  The  stone  threshold  between  the  portico  and
the  fore-hall  is  also  preserved,  with  the  square  holes  for  the  door-posts.
The  floor  of  the  fore-hall  is,  like  that  of  the  hall,  composed  of  concrete
with  a  pavement  of  slabs  round  the  wall.  The  floor  of  the  court  is
also  of  concrete.  From  the  west  side  of  the  court,  towards  its  northern
end,  a  passage  gives  access  to  a  series  of  apartments,  which  lay  on  the
northern  side  of  the  court  and  hall.  These  northern  apartments  were
probably  set  apart  for  the  women.  On  the  right-hand  side  of  the
passage  which  leads  from  the  court  to  the  women's  apartments  are
three  stone  steps,  doubtless  part  of  a  staircase  which  led  to  the  upper
floor  of  the  palace.

Of  the  northern  wall  of  the  court  six  courses  of  large  squared  stones
have  been  preserved  to  a  height  of  7  feet  10  inches.  Between  the  first
and  second  of  these  courses  a  wooden  beam  is  laid  horizontally.  The
western  wall  of  the  court  seems  to  have  been  constructed  in  the  same
way.  This  method  of  building  walls  with  beams  interposed  horizontally
between  the  layers  of  stone  was  practised  at  Tiryns,  and  indeed  is
practised  to  this  day  in  Greece.  Bricks  seem  not  to  have  been  much
used  in  the  palace ;  however,  the  upper  part  of  the  walls  of  the  hall  \i*as
apparently  of  brick,  for  some  heaps  of  bricks  were  found  there.  The
stones  of  which  the  walls  are  built  are  mostly  small,  except  in  the  case
of  the  lowest  part  of  the  walls  of  the  hall.     All  or  most  of  the  walls


CH.  XVI  MYCENAE— THE  PALACE  121

seem  to  have  been  coated  with  concrete ;  and  some  of  them  at  least
were  painted.  A  few  pieces  of  these  paintings  have  been  preserved ;
some  of  them  consist  of  stripes  arranged  in  patterns ;  others  represent
men  and  horses,  but  only  fragments  of  these  survive.  Mortar  is
nowhere  used  to  bond  the  stones  together.  The  thresholds  of  the
rooms  are  mostly  of  stone ;  the  door-jambs  were  of  wood  resting  on
bases  of  stone.  The  doors  were  of  wood  and  turned  on  hinges  which
revolved  in  sockets  sunk  in  the  lintel  and  threshold.

There  is  no  room  to  doubt  that  the  palace  thus  fortunately  discovered
is  that  of  the  ancient  kings  of  Mycenae.  From  the  traces  of  fire  found
in  the  building,  it  appears  to  have  been  burnt ;  and  as  there  are  no
signs  that  it  was  ever  rebuilt,  we  infer  that  it  was  destroyed  by  an
enemy  who  continued  in  permanent  possession  of  the  place  and  built
upon  the  site  of  the  old  palace  the  inferior  structure  which  was
discovered  over  it.  We  may  conjecture  that  the  palace  was  the
residence  of  the  Achaean  kings  and  that  the  conquerors  who  destroyed
it  were  the  Dorian  invaders.  Lastly,  about  the  time  of  the  Persian
wars,  the  Doric  temple  was  built  over  both  the  palace  and  the  later
inferior  structure.  Thus  the  temple  in  question  is  of  the  greatest
importance  as  evidence  of  the  high  antiquity  of  the  palace,  and  it
establishes  at  the  same  time  the  great  antiquity  of  the  similar  palace  at
Tiryns.

The  excavations  at  Mycenae  in  1886  further  laid  bare  a  complex  of
buildings  of  different  dates  beside  the  so-called  tower  of  polygonal
masonry  on  the  south-western  front  of  the  acropolis.  Amongst  these
buildings  are  the  remains  of  a  small  private  house  with  court,  fore-hall,
hall  {megaron\  and  three  underground  chambers.  In  the  middle  of
the  hall  is  a  square  hearth,  and  in  the  floor  of  the  court  is  a  hole,
where  ashes  and  bones  of  animals  were  found.  Probably  this  hole  was
a  sacrificial  pit  like  the  one  in  the  palace  at  Tiryns.  But  the  most
interesting  discovery  in  this  part  of  the  citadel  was  a  fragment  of  a
wall-painting,  representing  a  row  of  ass-headed  figures  bearing  on  their
shoulders  a  long  pole  which  they  support  with  their  right  hands.  They
wear  gay-coloured  garments,  but  too  little  of  their  bodies  remain  to
show  whether  they  were  human  or  animal.  Such  ass-headed  monsters
were  hitherto  known  only  as  engraved  on  some  of  the  Mycenaean  or
Island  gems.  There  was  also  found  here  a  tablet  of  limestone  adorned
with  an  interesting  painting.  In  the  centre  stands,  on  a  blue  ground,
a  man  or  an  idol,  covered  with  a  large  shield  in  the  shape  of  two  circles
joined  together.  On  either  side  of  the  idol  stands  a  woman,  apparently
in  an  attitude  of  prayer.  Between  the  idol  and  the  woman  on  the  right
is  an  altar-like  object,  resembling  the  bases  under  the  feet  of  the  lions
at  the  Lions'  Gate.  The  house  seems  to  be  contemporary  with  the
palace,  as  it  is  built  in  the  same  style,  the  walls  being  constructed  of
small  stones  and  coated  with  stucco.  It  is  much  older  than  the  poly-
gonal *  tower '  or  rather  bastion  beside  which  it  is  built.

Remains  of  houses  of  a  much  inferior  sort,  but  still  belonging  to
the  Mycenaean  period,  were  discovered  and  excavated  on  the  acropolis
by  Mr.  Tsountas  in  1890.     They  are  situated  to  the  north-east  of  the


122  MYCENAE— HOUSES  ON  ACROPOLIS   bk.  ii.  corinth

Lions'  Gate,  between  the  wall  of  the  acropolis  and  some  ruins  of  houses
of  later  date  which  are  marked  on  Steffen*s  plan  of  Mycenae.  The
walls  of  the  houses  discovered  by  Mr.  Tsountas  are  built  of  small  rough
stones  bonded  with  clay,  but  not  with  mortar.  The  floors  are  com-
posed of  a  pavement  of  rough  stones  covered  with  a  rather  thin  layer
of  trodden  earth.  The  walls  are  standing  to  a  height  of  about  six  feet,
but  many  of  them  have  neither  doors  nor  windows,  from  which  Mr.
Tsountas  infers  that  these  houses  were  two-storied,  and  that  the
inhabitants  descended  by  ladders  or  staircases  into  the  rooms  on  the
ground-floor,  which  can  only,  he  thinks,  have  served  as  storerooms.
Access  to  the  dwelling-rooms  in  the  first  floor  was  probably  by  means
of  outside  staircases  or  ladders.  On  the  floor  of  the  rooms  were  found,
mingled  with  ashes  and  potsherds,  the  bones  of  animals,  sometimes  in
considerable  quantities.  It  would  seem  that  after  their  meals  the
inhabitants  simply  dropped  the  bones  of  the  animals  which  they  had
been  eating  into  the  room  below.  The  bones  are  those  of  swine,  goats,
sheep,  oxen,  deer,  and  hares,  the  bones  of  swine  being  the  most
numerous.  Bones  of  horses  and  dogs,  and  the  shells  of  oysters  and
other  shell-fish,  are  also  found,  but  no  fish-bones.  In  three  houses  the
graves  and  bones  of  children  were  discovered.  Four  such  graves  were
found  in  a  single  house.  These  graves  are  contemporary  with  the
houses  and  belong  to  the  Mycenaean  period.  Above  the  four  graves
in  the  one  house  was  a  layer  of  earth  about  six  feet  deep,  full  of
potsherds  and  other  objects  of  the  Mycenaean  type.  From  the  nature
of  the  objects  (brooches,  swords,  spear-heads,  etc.)  found  in  the  graves
and  the  houses  it  appears  that  these  dwellings  were  inhabited  down  to
the  end  of  the  Mycenaean  period.

See  Tsountas,  in  n/:>aicTiica  tt/s  *Kpxaio\,  'Eraipias  for  1886,  pp.
59-79  ;  ^^-j  MvK^vai,  pp.  35-45  ;  /V/.,  in  *E<lyrifjj€pls  dpxaiokoyiKtjj  1 891,
pp.  23-30 ;  Schuchhardt,  SMtemanns  Ausgrabungen^  pp.  329-338  ;
Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  VArt  dans  VAntiquiti^  6.  pp.  341-354.
Cp.  also  W.  Dorpfeld,  in  MittheiL  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Atketiy  1 1  (1886),  p.
390  sq.  ;  ib.^  14  (1889),  p.  ii^  sq.\  and  his  letter  in  American  Journal
of  Arckcteology,  5  (1889),  p.  333  sq.  The  chief  paintings  found  both
in  the  palace  and  in  the  buildings  at  the  south-west  side  of  the
acropolis  are  published  and  described  by  Mr.  Tsountas  in  'E<lyqfuph
dp\aio\oyiKrif  1 887,  p.  160  sqq.y  with  plates  10,  II,  12;  see  also
Perrot  et  Chipiez,  op.  cii.,  6.  pp.  554  J^.,  884  sqq.  For  the  ass-headed
figures  on  the  so-called  Island  gems,  see  Milchhofer,  Die  Anfange  der
Kunst  in  Griechenland^  pp.  55,  68  ;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  op.  cit.^  6.
figures  428  and  431  ;  cp.  A.  B.  Cook,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^
14  (1894),  p.  81  sqq.  On  the  subject  of  the  palace  etc.,  see  also
Berliner  philolog.  Wochenschrift^  8  (1888),  p.  282  sqq.  (comparison
of  the  palaces  at  Mycenae,  Tiryns,  and  Athens);  ib.^  9  (1889),  pp.
130  sqq.y  141 1  sqq.  ;  American  Journal  of  Archaeology ^  5  (1889),  pp.
102-104 ;  D.  Joseph,  Die  Pdlasten  des  hotnerischen  Epos  mit  RUcksicht
auf  die  Ausgrabungen  If.  Schliemanns  (Berlin,  1895).

V.  The  lower  city  with  the  beehive  tombs  etc.  The  city  of  Mycenae
occupied  the  lower  ground  to  the  west  and  south-west  of  the  acropolis.


CH.  XVI  MYCENAE— THE  LOWER  CITY  123

From  the  north-west  comer  of  the  acropolis  there  stretches  southward
a  long  narrow  ridge,  which  to  the  right  (west)  fall  gradually  into  the
great  plain,  and  to  the  left  (east)  descends  more  steeply  into  the  deep
Charvos  ravine.  The  summit  and  slopes  of  this  ridge  were  occupied  by
the  lower  city  of  Mycenae,  and  the  city- wall  which  surrounded  it  can
still  be  traced  in  many  places.  The  wall,  like  that  of  the  acropolie,
was  built  in  the  Cyclopean  style,  but  with  smaller  stones,  and  it  is  only
about  6  feet  thick.  Mr.  Tsountas  considers  it  to  be  of  later  date  than
the  walls  of  the  acropolis.  In  many  places  it  has  wholly  disappeared,
and  the  line  which  it  followed  in  the  gaps  can  only  be  conjectured.  It
certainly  joined  on  to  the  wall  of  the  acropolis  at  two  points,  one  to  the
north,  the  other  to  the  south  of  the  Lions'  Gate,  but  neither  point
can  be  precisely  determined.  The  eastern  wall  ran  along  the  lower
slope  of  the  ridge,  parallel  to,  though  without  touching,  the  edge  of  the
Ckavos  ravine.  Isolated  remains  of  Cyclopean  masonry  which  are
found  along  the  steep  bank  of  the  ravine  appear  to  have  belonged  to
supporting-walls.  The  eastern  wall  was  apparently  carried  to  a  point
about  350  yards  south  of  the  Treasury  of  Atreus.  Here  it  turned
westward,  and  passing  the  rocky  height  called  Makri-Uthari^  turned
north  and  was  carried  along  the  western  slope  of  the  ridge  till  it  again
met  the  wall  of  the  acropolis  at  a  point  to  the  north  of  the  Lions'  Gate.
The  ntunerous  remains  of  Cyclopean  walls  immediately  to  the  north  of
Makri'Uthari  seem  to  show  that  at  this,  the  extreme  southerly  point  of
the  city,  there  was  a  gate.  To  the  north  of  the  Panagia  chapel,  which
stands  about  the  middle  of  the  ridge,  there  is  a  series  of  large  squared
blocks  in  the  line  of  the  city- wall ;  it  would  seem  that  Cyclopean  houses
and  edifices  of  a  later  date  were  here  built  abutting  against  the  city-
wall.  The  area  enclosed  by  the  city-wall  is  about  1000  yards  long  from
north  to  south  by  275  yards  wide  from  east  to  west.  About  the  middle
it  seems  to  have  been  divided  into  two  sections,  a  northern  and  a
southern,  by  a  cross- wall,  the  remains  of  which  may  be  seen  about  200
yards  north  of  the  Treasury  of  Atreus.

But  the  lower  city  was  not  confined   to  this  ridge.      Numerous
remains,  mostly  of  Cyclopean  masonry,  exist  outside  the  line  of  walls
which  enclosed  the  ridge,  showing  that  the  city  must  have  outgrown  its
original  limits.     Thus  on  the  western  slope  of  the  ridge  there  are  many
Cyclopean  supporting-walls,  and  on  this  side,  immediately  at  the  foot  of
the  city-wall,  are  many  ruins  of  ancient  houses.     This  outer  city  seems
to  have  extended  to  the  glen  of  the  Elias  river  on  the  north  and  north-
west.    On  the  left  (south)  bank  of  that  glen,  about  650  yards  to  the
north-west  of  the  Lions'  Gate,  are  the  ruins  of  a  large  building  of  the
Mycenaean  age.     The  four  walls  of  the  building  are  still  visible.     It
is  93  feet  long  by  60  feet  broad.     The  foundations  of  another  large
Cyclopean  building  are  to  be  seen  on  the  crest  of  a  height  about  half
a  mile   south-west  of  the   acropolis,   to   the   north  of  the   village  of
Ckarvaii.     In  two  glens  to  the  north-east  and  south-east  of  this  height
are   the   only   two   wells   of   Mycenae.      The   remains   of  Cyclopean
buildings  close  to  them,  and  the   Mycenaean  potsherds  lying  about,
prove  that  both  weUs  were  within  the  suburb  of  the  ancient  city.     Due


124  MYCENAE— THE  BEEHIVE  TOMBS   bk.  ii.  cobinth

south  of  Makri-JJihari  are  the  ruins  of  a  great  Cyclopean  bridge  over
the  bed  of  the  Choma  stream.  The  eastern  half  of  the  bridge  is  still
in  perfect  preservation.  The  high-road  from  Mycenae  to  the  Heraeum
passed  over  this  bridge.

See  Leake,  Morea,  2.  p.  371  Sf,  ;  Mure,  Jvumal,  1.  p.  164  iqq.  ;  Curtius,
Ptlafi.  a.  p.  406  ig.  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungtn,  p.  308 ;  Schliemann,  Mycetitu,  p.
39  Iff. ;  Stelfen,  Karlen  van  Myktnai.  Text,  pp.  Q,  35  sqq.  ;  Schuchhaidt,
Schliemann!  Ausgraiungcn,''  p.  174  sq.  ;  Perrol  et  Chipiei,  Hislaire  di  VArt  dam
/'AntiquM,  6.  p.  355  si/.  ;  TsounlHS,  Mujt^iu,  p.  ai  iq.  As  to  the  evidence
which  goes  to  ^ow  that  the  population  of  Myceoae  was  originally  distributed  io
a  number  of  separate  villages,  each  with  its  own  buiying-ground,  see  below,  p.  1 39.

The  most  important  remains  in  the  lower  city  are  the  so-calted
beehive  tombs,  which  were  formerly  known  as  '  treasuries.'  Eight  of
these  edifices  have  up  to  the  present  (July,  1895)  been  found  at
Mycenae.  Three  of  them  lie  inside  the  wall  of  the  lower  town,  and
the  remaining  five  lie  outside  of  it  to  the  west  and  north.

The  largest  and  best  preserved  is  the  one  which  is  popularly  called
the  Treasury  of  Alreus  or  Tomb  of  Agamemnon.  It  lies  atx>ut  the
middle  of  the  ridge,  on  its  eastern  slope,  into  which  it  is  built.  It
faces  the  acropolis,  from  which  it  is  distant  only  a  few  hundred  paces.
The  structure  consists  of  three  portions,  namely,  a  long  approach  or


dromos,  as  it  is  called,  a  large  circular  vaulted  chamber,  and  a  small
square  chamber  opening  off  the  lai^e  round  one.  The  two  chambers
are  subterranean,  being  built  into  the  side  of  the  hill.  The  dromos  or
passage  leads  horizontally  into  the  hill  from  an  artificial  terrace  paved
with  Cyclopean  masonry.  The  passage  or  dromos  is  about  1 1 5  feet  long
by  30  feet  wide.  The  walls  of  the  passage,  which  of  course  increase
in  height  as  you  advance  inwards,  are  constructed  of  massive  squared
blocks  laid  in  horizontal  courses,  like  the  masonry  of  the  gates  of  the
acropolis.  At  the  further  end  of  the  passage  is  the  door  leading  into
the  great  circular  chamber.  According  to  Schliemann,  the  doorway
is  1 8  ft.  high,  and  is  8  fi.  6  in.  wide  at  the  top,  and  9  ft.  2  in.  wide  at
the  bottom ;  according  to  Dr.  Schuchhardt  it  is  17  ft.  9  in.  high,  8  ft.
I  in.  wide  at  the  top,  and  8  f).  9  in.  wide  at  the  bottom.  On  the
outside  before  each  door-post  stood,  on  a  low  quadrangular  base,  a
peculiarly  shaped  half-column  of  dark  grey  alabaster  (Adler,  Schuch-
hardt) or  green  basalt  (Leake).     The  fh^ments  of  these  semi-columns


CH.  XVI  MYCENAE— THE  BEEHIVE  TOMBS  125

which  have  been  found  show  that  the  shafts  tapered  downwards  and
were  ornamented  in  relief  with  spirals  arranged  in  zigzag  bands,  each
band  of  spirals  being  bordered  on  each  side  by  a  narrower  band  of
lozenges.  A  fragnnent  of  one  of  the  capitals  has  been  found ;  formerly
it  was  taken  to  be  a  fragment  of  a  base.  Like  the  shafts  it  is  adorned
with  bands  of  spirals  and  lozenges,  and  resembles  in  some  points  the
capitals  of  the  temples  at  Paestum.  Messrs.  Furtwangler,  Loschcke,
and  Puchstein  think  that  in  this  fragment  we  see  the  first  stage  in  the
development  of  the  Doric  capital.  Over  the  lintel,  as  over  the  lintel
of  the  Lions'  Gate,  a  triangular  opening  was  left  in  the  massive  wall,  in
order  to  reduce  the  pressure  on  the  lintel.  This  triangular  space,
measuring  about  10  ft.  on  the  sides,  was  filled  up  with  slabs  of  red
porphyry  laid  horizontally  upon  each  other  and  adorned  with  rows  of
spirals.  The  slab  which  filled  the  apex,  and  a  few  fragments  of  the
other  slabs,  have  been  found  and  are  now  in  the  National  Museum  at
Athens.  The  passage  leading  from  the  doorway  into  the  great
circular  vaulted  chamber  is  18  ft.  in  length  and  "is  roofed  by  two
enormous  slabs,  beautifully  cut  and  polished,  of  which  the  inner  one
measures  3  ft.  9  in.  in  thickness,  and  27^  feet  in  length  on  its  lower
and  29  feet  on  its  upper  surface ;  its  breadth  is  1 7  feet,  and  it  is
computed  it  weighs  approximately  300,000  English  pounds "  (Schlie-
mann).  In  the  middle  of  this  passage  the  stone  threshold  of  the  door,
composed  of  three  large  blocks  of  conglomerate,  is  preserved  ;  two  holes
which  may  be  seen  in  it  perhaps  served  to  fasten  a  band  or  threshold
of  bronze,  as  Messrs.  Perrot  and  Chipiez  suggest.  Others,  however,
suppose  that  pivots  of  the  folding  doors  revolved  in  these  holes.

Through  the  doorway  we  pass  into  the  great  circular  chamber,
which  has  the  form  of  a  dome  or  vast  beehive.  It  is  50  ft.  high  and
50  ft.  in  diameter  at  the  level  of  the  floor.  It  is  built  of  well- wrought
blocks  of  hard  breccia,  placed  in  horizontal  courses,  and  joined  with
the  greatest  precision  without  any  binding  material.  "The  stones,
which  on  the  inside  are  smooth  and  well-fitted,  are  on  the  outside  very
irregular,  and,  contrary  to  the  general  belief,  they  are  not  immediately
covered  with  earth,  but  with  enormous  masses  of  stones,  which,  by  their
ponderous  weight,  keep  all  the  stones  of  the  circular  layers  of  masonry
in  their  position"  (Schliemann).  The  dome  is  not  constructed
on  the  principle  of  the  arch,  in  which  the  stones  are  cut  in  the  shape
of  wedges  and  their  joints  converge  towards  the  centre  of  a  circle.
On  the  contrary,  the  stones  are  laid  in  thirty-three  horizontal  circular
courses,  each  course  projecting  inward  over  the  course  below  and
diminishing  in  diameter,  till  the  whole  is  closed  by  a  single  block
placed  upon  the  last  circular  course.  This  highest  block  is  therefore
not  like  a  key-stone  of  an  arch,  which  cannot  be  removed  without  the
whole  arch  tumbling  down ;  it  is  simply  superposed  on  the  lower
courses  and  might  be  removed  without  affecting  their  stability.  The
inner  angles  of  the  courses  are  cut  away,  so  that  the  sides  of  the
chamber  are  perfectly  smooth  and  rise  in  a  continuous,  unbroken  line
from  floor  to  summit,  there  being  no  distinction  of  wall  and  roof.  The
blocks  of  the  lower  courses  are  i  ft.  10  in.  high,  and  from  4  to  7  ft.


126  MYCENAE— THE  BEEHIVE  TOMBS    bk.  ii.  corinth

long  ;  but  towards  the  top  of  the  dome  the  courses  become  gradually
narrower.  The  floor  of  the  chamber  is  the  natural  rock.  From  the
third  course  upwards  smaller  and  larger  holes  may  be  seen  at  regular
intervals  in  the  stones.  Some  of  these  holes  still  contain  bronze  nails,
which  were  used  to  fasten  bronze  rosettes  or  similar  ornaments  to  the
walls.  It  was  formerly  supposed  that  the  whole  surface  of  the  walls
had  once  been  covered  with  bronze  plates ;  but  this  was  not  so,  for
there  are  no  holes  round  the  doorway  such  as  there  must  have  been
if  the  whole  sur&ce  had  been  lined  with  bronze  plates.

On  the  right-hand  (north)  side  of  the  great  beehive  chamber  a  door-
way 9^  ft.  high  and  4  ft  7  in.  broad  leads  to  a  smaller  dark  chamber,
which  is  nearly  square,  being  27  feet  long  and  broad,  and  19  feet  high.
It  is  entirely  cut  out  of  the  rock.  Over  the  door  is  a  triangular  niche,
intended  to  keep  off  the  weight  of  the  masonry  from  the  lintel.  On  the
walls  of  the  chamber  Lord  Elgin's  engineer  discovered  remains  of  a
lining  of  masonry,  which  may  have  been  covered  with  sculptured  slabs
like  those  which  adorned  the  roof  in  the  corresponding  chamber  at
Orchomenus.  In  the  middle  of  the  square  chamber  at  Mycenae  is  a
circular  depression  in  the  floor,  in  the  fonn  of  a  large  wash-bowl,  i  ft.
9  in.  deep  and  3  ft.  4  in.  in  diameter.  If  this  depression  was,  as  some
think,  the  tomb  proper,  the  body  must  have  been  placed  in  it  in  a
crouching  or  doubled-up  posture.  That  these  beehive  structures  were
tombs,  not  treasuries  as  they  were  fonnerly  held  to  be,  has  been  con-
clusively proved  by  the  discovery  of  six  bodies,  with  all  their  ornaments,
in  a  beehive  structure  of  the  same  sort  at  Menidi  in  Attica  (see  below,
p.  137  J^.)  When  the  tombs  were  first  rifled,  the  treasures  which  were
doubtless  discovered  with  the  bodies  would  easily  give  rise  to  the
notion  that  the  buildings  were  treasuries.  But  what  king  would
scatter  his  treasures  in  six  separate  buildings,  all  of  them  outside
the  fortifications  of  the  acropolis  ?  It  is  commonly  supposed  that  in
the  Treasury  of  Atreus  the  side-chamber  alone  was  the  tomb,  while  the
great  circular  vaulted  chamber  served  as  a  mortuary  chapel  in  which
sacrifices  were  offered  to  the  illustrious  dead.  But  out  of  the  many
beehive  tombs  which  have  been  discovered  (see  below)  only  two
(namely  the  Treasury  of  Atreus  and  the  tomb  at  Orchomenus)  have
side-chambers,  and  in  the  case  of  all  the  others  it  is  certain  that  the
beehive  chamber  was  the  actual  tomb.  Mr.  Tsountas  is  therefore
probably  right  in  holding  that  the  beehive  chamber  was  in  all  cases  the
tomb  proper,  and  that  the  side-chamber  was  a  chametrhouse,  in  which
the  bones  of  the  less  illustrious  members  of  the  "royal  family  were
collected.

See  Clarke,  Travels^  3.  pp.  687-699 ;  Dodwell,  TouVy  2.  pp.  229-235 ;  Gell,
Itinerary  of  Greece^  pp.  29-33 »  Leake,  Morea^  2.  pp.  373-302 ;  Curtius,  Pelop.
2.  pp.  407-411;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  pp.  308-31 1  ;  W.  G.  Clark,  Pelop.
pp.  73-81  ;  Mahaffy,  Rambles^  pp.  395-406 ;  Baedeker,'  p.  266 ;  Schliemann,
Mycenaet  p.  41  sqq,  ;  Schuchhardt,  Schliemanns  Ausgrahtingen^  pp.  175-180;
Adier's  Preface  to  SchUemann's  Tiryns,  p.  xxxviii.  sqq.  ;  Thiersch,  *  Die  Tholos
des  Atreus  zu  Mykenae,*  MittheiL  d,  archdol.  Inst,  in  Athen^  4  (1879),  pp.  177-
182  ;  Belger,  Beitrdge  zur  Kenntniss  der  griech.  Kuppelgr^fer,  p.  20  sqq.  ;
Tsountas,    Mvic^at,   pp.   123-127  ;    Perrot   et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  FArt  dans


CH.  XVI  MYCENAE— THE  BEEHIVE  TOMBS  127

tAntiouiti^  6.  Dp.  356  sqq.^  608-641.  Mr.  Tsountas's  views  as  to  the  respective
uses  of  the  beehive  chamber  and  the  side-chamber  are  stated  in  'E0i7/ic/>2s  iLpxoxQ-
XoTiir^,  1889,  p.  135  note  ;  Mvir^yai,  p.  137  sq,

Northv^ard  from  the  so-called  Treasury  of  Atreus  and  on  the  same
side  of  the  long  ridge,  a  little  to  the  west  of  the  Lions'  Gate,  is  another
of  these   beehive    structures.       It   was    partially   excavated   by    Mrs.
Schliemann   in    1876,    and   commonly   goes  by  her  name.     Another
popular  designation  for  it  is  the  Tomb  of  Clytaemnestra.     It  was  more
fully  excavated  by   Mr.  Tsountas  in    1891   and   1892.     In  size  it  is
little  inferior  to  the  Treasury  of  Atreus,  but  is  built  of  smaller  stones,
and  is  not  so  well  preserved,  the  upper  part  of  the  dome  having  long
ago  fiadlen  in.     It  differs  from  the  Treasury  of  Atreus  in  having  no  side-
chamber.     The  dromos  or  horizontal  approach  to  it  is  even  longer  than
the  approach  to  the  Treasury  of  Atreus,  measuring  about  124  feet  in
length  by  20  feet  in  breadth.     The  sides  of  this  approach  are  built  of
hewn   blocks  of  stone  laid  in  horizontal  courses.     In  the  floor  of  the
approach,  about  16  feet  from  the  fagade  of  the  tomb,  an  oblong  hole  is
dug,  2.75  metres  long,  1.20  metres  wide,  and  50  centimetres  deep.     It
seems  to  have  been  a  woman's  grave  ;  some  golden  ornaments  and  two
bronze  mirrors  were  found  in  it ;  the  ivory  handles  of  the  mirrors  are
carved  with  figures  of  women,  palm-trees,  and  doves  in  a  very  Semitic
style.     In  the  dromos  Schliemann  found  some  archaic  pottery,  including
very  rudely  modelled  figures  of  men  on  horseback  holding  the  horse's
neck  with  both  hands ;  similar  figures  have  been  found  in  a  tomb  at
lalysus  in  Rhodes.     The  fragments  of  painted  vases  found  by  Schlie-
mann in  the  dromos  were  "  profusely  covered  with  an  ornamentation  of
key  patterns,  zigzag  lines,  stripes  of  ornaments  like  fish-spines,  bands
with  very  primitive  representations  of  cranes  or  swans,  or  circles  with
flowers,  and  occasionally  with  the  sign  ^."     The  doorway  of  the  tomb
is  5.50  metres  (18  feet)  high,  2.67  metres  (12  feet  6  inches)  wide  at
the  bottom,  and  5.48  metres  (17  feet  9  inches)  deep.     It  was  flanked
by  two  half-columns  of  dark  grey  alabaster,  which  were  fluted  in  their
whole  length  like  Doric  columns  and  rested  on  semi-circular  bases.
Part  of  one  of  these  half-columns  was  found  standing  on  its  base.
These  columns  tapered  slightly  downward  and  were  of  very   slender
proportions ;  their  capitals,  also  made  of  alabaster,  were  smaller  and
simpler  than  those  of  the  Treasury  of  Atreus.     Over  the  doorway,  as
over  that  of  the  Treasury  of  Atreus,  there  is  a  triangular  hollow  space,
which  was  similarly  closed  with  slabs  of  red   marble   adorned  with
sculptured   reliefs.     Indeed   this   triangular   space   is    still   completely
walled  up  within  by  flat  square  slabs,  so  that  the  notion  that  these
triangular  spaces  served  as  windows  must  be  abandoned.     The  relieving
triangle  rests  on  a  lintel  of  leek-green  marble ;  while,  instead  of  the
head-moulding  of  the  door,  there  is  a  projecting  slab   of  blue-gray
marble,  on  which,  frieze-like,  is  cut  in  flat  relief  a  row  of  discs,  which
are  believed  by  Dr.  Adler  to  represent  the  ends  of  the  round  poles  of
a  wooden  roof.     If  this  interpretation  of  them  is  right,  it  confirms  the
explanation  given  above  (p.  102)  of  the  similar  discs  over  the  column  on
the  Lions'  Gate.     The  roof  of  the  doorway  or  passage  leading  from  the


128  MYCENAE— THE  BEEHIVE  TOMBS   bk.  ii.  corinth

dromos  into  the  vaulted  chamber  is  roofed  with  three  huge  slabs  of
stone  ;  in  the  middle  slab,  as  in  the  threshold  below,  may  be  seen  the
pivot-holes  in  which  the  doors  revolved.  But  as  if  the  door  was  not
enough  to  bar  the  entrance  to  the  tomb,  the  doorway  was  built  up  with
a  wall  of  common  stone  in  front  of  the  door.  This  wall  had  to  be  taken
down  in  the  course  of  the  excavations.  A  similar  wall,  about  7  feet
high,  blocked  and  still  blocks  the  outer  end  of  the  dromos  or  approach
to  the  tomb.  The  floor  of  the  circular  chamber  is  the  levelled  rock,
covered  with  a  coating  of  sand  and  chalk.  In  the  walls  of  the  chamber
there  are  no  holes  for  nails.

See  Schliemann,  Mycenae^  pp.  102,  119  sqq,^  139  sqq,  ;  Adler,  PrefJEUX  to
Schliemann's  Tiryns^  p.  xxxvi.  sqq.  ;  Schuchhardt,  Schliemanns  Ausgrabungen^^
p.  181  sq,  ;  MUtheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  \^  (1892),  p.  94  sq,  ;  Tsountas,  in
Bull,  de  Corr.  HelUn,  17  (1893),  p.  197 ;  id,,  Mux^vcu,  pp.  77  sq,,  127-129;
Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  I  Art  dans  P  Antiquity,  6.  pp.  641-647.

Besides  these  two  great  beehive  tombs,  six  other  smaller  tombs  of
the  same  sort  have  been  discovered  at  Mycenae.  Of  these  remaining
six  tombs  only  one  is  within  the  city-walls ;  it  is  situated  between  the
so-called  Tomb  of  Clytaemnestra  and  the  wall  of  the  acropolis.  It  was
discovered  in  November  1 892,  and  has  not  yet  been  fully  excavated.
Its  approach  or  dromos  is  5.7  metres  (nearly  19  feet)  wide,  and  is
mostly  hewn  in  the  rock ;  but  its  sides  are  partly  lined  with  a  wall  of
small  stones  bonded  with  clay.  The  fagade  of  the  tomb  is  carefully
constructed  of  large  hewn  blocks.  Of  the  five  beehive  tombs  outside
the  walls  four  have  been  excavated.  The  largest  and  best  built  of  them
is  situated  to  the  north  of  the  Lions'  Gate,  not  far  from  the  city-wall.
The  approach  to  it  is  22  metres  (72  feet)  long  by  5  metres  (16  ft.  5  in.)
wide ;  the  sides  of  the  approach  are  built  of  quadrangular  blocks  of
stone,  and  its  outer  end  was  closed  with  a  wall.  The  doorway  of  the
tomb  is  5.45  metres  (17  ft.  9  in.)  high,  2.55  metres  (8  ft.  4  in.)  wide
at  the  bottom,  and  5.14  metres  (nearly  17  feet)  deep.  The  lintel  of
the  doorway  is  formed  of  three  large  slabs  ;  in  one  of  these  slabs  is  a
hole  in  which  the  pivot  of  the  door  probably  revolved.  The  upper  part
of  the  domed  chamber  of  the  tomb  has  fallen  in,  as  it  has  in  all  the
other  beehive  tombs  at  Mycenae  except  the  Treasury  of  Atreus.  The
diameter  of  the  domed  chamber  is  14.40  metres  (47  feet  3  inches),
which  is  very  nearly  equal  to  that  of  the  Treasury  of  Atreus ;  its  sides
are  built  of  small  blocks  of  limestone  ;  the  floor  is  levelled  and  coated
with  cement,  on  which  there  are  traces  of  red  paint.  Hewn  in  the
floor  of  the  chamber  are  two  graves,  one  of  which  is  about  1 8  feet  long
by  5  feet  wide  and  10  feet  deep.  The  remaining  beehive  tombs  are
situated  to  the  west  of  the  city.

See  Schliemann,  Mycenae ,  p.  41 ;  Adler's  Preface  to  Schliemann's  Tiryns,
p.  xxxiii.  sq,  ;  Belger,  Beitrdge  zur  Kenntniss  der  griech,  Kuppelgrdbtr,  p.  30 ;
Schuchhardt,  Schliemanns  Ausgralmngen^'*  p.  182;  Berliner  philolog.  Ivbchen-
schrift,  9  (1889),  p.  I410;  id,,  13  (1893),  p.  293;  UpaKTiKdt  riji  *Apx<woX.
"Eraipiai,  1891,  p.  19  sq.  ;  id.,  1892,  p.  56  sq,  ;  id,,  1893,  p.  8;  Tsountas,  in
Bulletin  de  Corr,  Helliniqtu,  17  (1893),  P*  ^97 »  ^",  Muk^kcu,  p.  129  sq,  ;  Perrot
et  Chipiez,  Hist,de  tArt  dans  lAntiquite,  6.  pp.  606-608.


CH,  XVI  MYCENAE— THE  ROCK-CUT  TOMBS  129

Besides  these  great  beehive  tombs,  it  remains  to  notice  a  large
number  of  lesser  tombs  which  have  been  discovered  at  Mycenae  in  the
course  of  excavations  conducted  by  the  Greek  Archaeological  Society
in  the  years  1886,  1887,  1888,  1890,  1892,  and  1893.  The  discovery
of  these  tombs  is  of  great  interest  and  importance,  inasmuch  as  it  seems
to  throw  light  on  the  manner  in  which  the  ancient  cities  of  Greece
gradually  sprang  up.  At  least  seventy-seven  of  these  tombs  have  been
found  and  excavated,  not  counting  some  very  small  ones.  They  do
not  form  one  continuous  burying-ground ;  on  the  contrary  they  occur
in  separate  groups  scattered  up  and  down  the  slopes  to  the  west,  north,
and  north-east  of  the  city.  Mr.  Tsountas,  the  able  Greek  archaeologist
who  superintended  the  excavations,  has  explained  the  scattered  position
of  the  groups  of  tombs  by  supposing  that  each  group  of  tombs  was  the
burying-place  of  a  separate  village,  and  that  each  village  was  inhabited
by  a  separate  family  or  clan,  who  had  their  separate  burying-ground
attached  to  the  village.  This  view  is  supported  by  two  facts — (i)  the
tombs  of  each  group  have  certain  common  characteristics,  both  in
respect  of  their  construction  and  of  the  nature  of  the  objects  found  in
than ;  {2)  the  tombs  are  never  isolated,  they  are  always  found  in
groups.  Thus  it  would  seem  that  in  prehistoric  times  Mycenae  was
simply  a  collection  of  villages,  inhabited  by  distinct  families  or  clans,
each  with  its  own  burying-ground.  We  know  that  down  to  historical
times  Sparta  was  just  such  a  collection  of  villages  (Thucydides,  i.  10)  ;
and  the  Spartans  buried  their  dead  "in  the  city"  (Plutarch,  Lycurg,
27),  probably  in  separate  burying-grounds  situated  between  the  villages
which  together  composed  the  city.  We  know  that  the  tombs  of  the
Agids  and  Eurypontids  were  situated  in  different  parts  of  Sparta
(Paosanias,  iii.  12.  8,  iii.  14.  2).  Thucydides  (/.r.)  states  that  this
anangement  of  the  population  in  villages  was  the  ancient  custom  in
Greece ;  and  Mr.  Tsountas,  arguing  from  the  evidence  of  Mycenae,
thinks  that  every  Greek  city  was  originally  composed  of  a  number  of
separate  unwalled  villages  grouped  round  a  fortified  hill,  each  village
bdng  probably  inhabited  by  a  distinct  family  or  clan,  and  the  land
being  owned  and  cultivated,  not  by  individuals,  but  by  the  families  or
clans.  As  the  villages  extended  they  in  time  met  and  formed  a  single
city,  so  that  the  burying-grounds  were  surrounded  with  houses.  Then
walls  would  be  built  round  the  whole  city,  and  the  practice  of  burying
within  the  walls  would  be  forbidden.  This  union  of  scattered  villages
in  a  single  city  would  be  what  the  Greeks  called  o-woncMr/ios ;  the
process  would  sometimes  be  carried  out  or  at  least  completed  by.  a
powerful  ruler  like  Theseus,  who  had  his  palace  on  the  fortified  hill  or
acropolis.

The  seventy  and  odd  tombs  excavated  by  Mr.  Tsountas  at  Mycenae,
with  which  we  are  now  concerned,  are  not  beehive  tombs,  i,e,  are  not
bailt  of  masonry  in  the  shape  of  beehives  and  covered  over  with  a
nuxmd,  natural  or  artificial,  of  earth ;  they  are  chambers  hewn  out  of
the  rock,  and  are  approached  by  passages  {dromoi)  which  are  also  hewn
out  of  the  rock.  These  passages  are  almost  always  smaller  than  those
leading  to  the  beehive  tombs ;  they  measure  from  16  to  80  feet  in

VOL.  Ill  K


130  MYCENAE— THE  ROCK-CUT  TOMBS    bk,  ii.  counth

length  by  3  to  7  feet  in  breadth.     Sometimes  they  are  horizontal,
sometimes  they  slope  down  to  the  doorway  of  the  tomb.     One  such
passage  has  nine  steps  cut  in  the  rock.     The  sides  of  the  passages  are
generally  not  perpendicular,  but  slope  inward  so  as,  in  some  cases,
almost  to  meet  over  head.      The   doorway  of  the  tomb   is  always
narrower  than  the  passage,  and  was  closed,  not  with  a  door,  but  with
a  wall  of  stones  or  (in  one  case)  of  unbumt  brick.     This  wall,  however,
was  never  carried  right  up  to  the  lintel ;  a  small  space  was  always
left  open  at  the  top.      Then  the  dramas  or  approach  was  filled  up
with   earth ;    and  when  the   earth   was   nearly  level  with  the  lintel,
massive  stones  were  placed  in  front  of  the  opening,  to  prevent  the
earth  from  falling  into  the  tomb.     Above  these  massive  stones  were
often  piled  other  stones,  right  up  to  the  surface  of  the  ground.     The
fronts  of  five  of  the  tombs,  together  with  the  sides  of  the  doorways,  are
coated  with  cement ;  and  in  three  at  least  of  them  the  cement  was
decorated  with  wall-paintings  of  many  colours.     The  rock-hewn  chamber
into  which  we  pass  through  the  doorway  is  generally  quadrangular ;  only
the  smaller  and  more  carelessly  constructed  tombs  approach  in  shape
to  the  circular.     The  roofs  are  not  horizontal,  but  slope  down  horn  the
middle  on  both  sides,  gable-fashion.     The  area  of  the  chamber  varies
from  lo  by  13  to  13  by  1 6  feet,  and  the  height  ftova  6^  to  8  feet  in
the  middle,  under  the  gable-ridge.     Most  of  the  tombs  consist  of  a
single  chamber,  but  three  at  least  have  a  second  chamber  ;  three  others
have  niches  ;  and  one  has  both  a  second  chamber  and  a  niche.     Each
tomb  contained  the  remains  of  several  skeletons,  and  in  the  tombs
which  have  two  chambers  bones  were  found  in  both.     Some  tombs
contained  five  or  six  bodies,  but  the  exact  number  in  each  could  not  be
ascertained.     The  bodies  seem  to  have  been  always  buried,  not  burnt
Ashes  indeed  were  found  in  almost  all  the  tombs,  but  in  such  small
quantities  that  they  must  have  proceeded  from  very  small  fires,  perhaps
merely  from  the  torches  which  must  have  been  used  at  the  burials  to
light  up  these  gloomy  subterranean  chambers.     In  one  tomb  only  was
the  floor  completely  strewn  with  ashes,  but  even  here  the  bones  seem
not  to  have  been  subjected  to  fire,  and  the  ashes  may  have  been  those
of  sacrifices  burnt  in  the  tomb.      The  bodies  appear   to   have  been
deposited  on  the  floor  of  the  tomb  in  a  sitting  attitude,  the  back  perhaps
propped  up  with  cushions  and  the  knees  bent.     No  trace  of  embalming
was  found  on  any  of  the  bodies.

In  the  dramai  or  passages  leading  to  these  rock-cut  tombs  there
are  always  found  potsherds  and  other  objects,  all  belonging  to  the
Mycenaean  epoch,  none  to  a  later  one.  Further,  in  front  of  the  door-
ways of  the  tombs  there  were  often  found  the  bones  of  animals,  and  in
two  or  three  cases  the  horns  of  an  ox  or  of  sheep.  Bones  of  animals
were  also  found  on  the  top  of  the  wall  which  blocked  up  the  doorway,
in  the  empty  space  under  the  lintel.  Probably  flesh  was  laid  on  the
wall  as  food  for  the  dead.  Human  bones,  too,  were  often  found  in
front  of  the  doorway.  In  one  tomb  six  complete  human  skeletons  were
found  at  different  depths  in  the  soil  in  front  of  the  doorway ;  from
various  indications  it  appeared  that  they  had  all  been  buried  simul*


CH.  XVI  MYCENAE— THE  KOCK-CUT  TOMBS  131

taneously ;  probably  they  are  the  remains  of  slaves  or  prisoners  who
were  slain  to  accompany  their  dead  master  to  the  other  world.

Of  the  objects  found  in  these  tombs  some  had  been  purposely
broken  before  they  were  deposited  with  the  dead  ;  this  appears  from
the  &ct  that  many  pieces  of  the  same  object  (for  example  a  vase)  were
scattered  about  in  different  parts  of  the  tomb  or  even  of  the  dromos.
Much  more  rarely  some  of  the  objects  bear  traces  of  fire.  Mr.  Tsountas
believes  that  small  fires  were  lit  in  the  tombs  to  bum  the  garments  and
some  other  ornaments  of  the  dead  in  order  to  convey  these  personal
possessions  to  him  in  the  spirit  land ;  with  a  like  intention  the  tyrant
Pcriander  burnt  a  vast  quantity  of  raiment  for  the  use  of  his  dead  wife
Melissa,  whose  ghost  had  complained  of  being  cold  and  naked  (Hero-
dotus, V.  92).  In  the  long  list  of  objects  found  in  or  before  the  tombs
are  objects  of  gold,  bronze,  iron,  ivory,  and  earthenware.  Amongst
them  are  a  g^reat  many  rude  female  idols  of  clay.  These  were  generally
found  in  the  poorer  graves.  The  goddess  represented  seems  not
always  to  be  the  same.  The  great  majority  of  them  portray  a  diadem-
crowned  goddess,  who  may  perhaps  be  Hera ;  but  one  with  naked
breast  and  a  large  necklace  may  be  Aphrodite.  The  latter  goddess
nuiy  also  be  represented  by  a  number  of  small  figures  made  of  glass-
paste,  of  which  more  than  twelve  were  found  in  one  tomb.  They
exhibit  a  woman,  clad  in  a  skirt  from  the  waist  downward,  holding  her
two  hands  to  her  breasts.  As  these  little  figures  were  found  along  with
a  great  many  beads  of  red  stone  and  glass-paste,  they  were  probably
worn  strong  on  a  necklace  with  the  beads.  A  few  figures  represent-
ing a  woman  with  a  child  in  her  arms  were  also  found ;  they  may
be  images  of  Demeter  in  her  character  of  the  Nursing  Mother.  A
great  many  articles  made  of  ivory  were  discovered  in  the  tombs,
including  for  example  several  ivory  combs.  Particularly  notable  are
three  ivory  heads  in  profile,  which  were  all  found  in  the  same  grave.
The  heads  are  carved  in  relief,  the  back  being  left  fiat  with  holes  for
attaching  them  to  something.  The  face  is  that  of  a  beardless  man  with
regular  features ;  he  wears  what  seems  to  be  a  mitre  or  conical  helmet,
though  Dr.  Schuchhardt  explains  it  as  hair  coiled  in  long  plaits  round
the  bead.  A  head  almost  exactly  alike  had  been  previously  found  at
^aia  in  Attica  (see  below,  p.  144).  Another  ivory  figure,  of  which
two  fragments  were  found  in  a  tomb,  represents  a  woman  with  coarse,
Q^ro-like  features,  clad  in  a  flounced  skirt  and  wearing  a  sort  of  night-
cap with  a  long  tassel ;  a  necklace  composed  of  small  triangular
pendants  is  on  her  neck,  and  a  bracelet  of  the  same  sort  is  on  one  of
her  arms  ;  the  other  arm  is  broken  off.

Other  objects  of  interest  found  in  the  tombs  are  some  bronze  razors,
three  bronze  brooches  in  the  shape  of  safety  pins,  and  round  bronze
ininors,  with  ivory  handles,  which  are  adorned  with  figures  carved  in
relief  Pieces  of  a  small  glass  vase  were  also  found.  Particularly
ootable  are  two  iron  finger-rings,  and  two  fragments  of  another  iron  object,
perhaps  also  a  ring.  This  is  the  first  time  that  iron  has  been  found  in
graves  of  the  Mycenaean  period,  and  the  fact  that  finger-rings  were
made  of  it  proves  that  the  metal  was  rare  and  precious.     The  bronze


132  MYCENAE— THE  ROCK-CUT  TOMBS    BK.  ii.  Corinth

brooches,  mentioned  above,  are  also  important,  for  at  one  time  it  was
thought  that  brooches  were  unknown  to  the  people  of  the  Mycenaean
period,  and  on  this  supposed  fact  was  founded  a  distinction  between  the
Mycenaean  people  and  the  Greeks  of  the  Homeric  age :  the  Myce-
naeans,  it  was  held,  wore  only  sewed  garments,  which  had  no  need  of
brooches  to  fasten  them,  whereas  the  Homeric  Greeks  wore  unsewed
garments  which  were  held  together  by  brooches.  Another  brooch  of
the  same  type  was  found  on  the  acropolis  of  Mycenae,  as  we  have  seen
already  (p.  119).  A  number  of  engraved  gems,  of  the  class  known
as  Island  or  Mycenaean  gems  (see  above,  p.  1 1 5  5q,\  were  also  found  in
the  rock-hewn  tombs.  They  are  all  perforated,  but  show  no  trace  of
having  been  set  in  rings.  Hence  Mr.  Tsountas  believes  that  they  were
not  used  as  signets,  but  worn  as  ornaments  or  amulets.  The  devices
engraved  on  them  mostly  represent  animals,  as  oxen,  antelopes,  lions,
wild  goats,  etc.  On  one  we  see  two  lions  standing  foce  to  £aice,  their
fore-paws  resting  on  a  base  like  the  two  bases  on  the  Lions'  Gate ;  the
heads  of  the  lions  are  united,  and  appear  as  one.  The  most  artistically
remarkable  of  the  objects  found  in  these  tombs  is  perhaps  a  silver
goblet  adorned  with  inlaid  work.  It  is  shaped  like  a  shallow  bowl,  and
has  a  single  handle.  Round  the  rim  of  the  goblet  runs  a  band  of
leaves  formed  of  inlaid  gold,  and  a  similar  band  of  leaves  encircles  the
body  of  the  goblet.  Between  these  two  bands  of  leaves  were  originaDy
twenty-one  heads  of  men  inlaid  with  gold  and  a  dark  alloy,  the  exact
composition  of  which  has  not  yet  been  determined.  The  features  of
the  faces,  which  are  represented  in  profile,  appear  to  be  Greek ;  each
wears  a  beard,  but  no  moustache ;  the  hair  is  long  and  foils  down  on
the  neck  in  curls.  Only  seven  of  these  heads  are  preserved,  but  the
hollows  prepared  for  the  reception  of  the  other  fourteen  are  still  to  be
seen.

The  rock-cut  tombs,  which  have  just  been  described,  appear  to  be
contemporary  with  the  beehive  tombs  but  later  than  the  shaft  graves
discovered  by  Schliemann  on  the  acropolis.  Amongst  the  differences
between  the  contents  of  the  rock-cut  tombs  and  those  of  the  shaft
graves  may  be  noticed  that  in  the  former  the  dead  were  not  embalmed
and  did  not  wear  masks  on  their  faces.  Again,  while  weapons  abounded
in  the  shaft  graves,  they  are  conspicuously  absent  in  the  rock-cut
tombs,  in  which  no  swords  and  only  three  bronze  spear-heads  have  been
found.  The  greater  abundance  of  clay  idols  and  engraved  gems  is
another  feature  which  distinguishes  the  rock-cut  tombs  fh)m  the  shaft
graves.  But  in  spite  of  these  differences  there  is  no  room  for  doubt
that  shaft  graves,  palace,  beehive  tombs  and  rock-cut  tombs,  with  their
contents,  are  the  products  of  a  single  uninterrupted  development  of
society  and  art.

A  full  account  of  most  of  the  rock-cut  tombs  and  their  contents  is  given  by  Mr<
Tsountas  in  'E^i^/xeplf  d/>xa(oXo7tin^,  1888,  pp.   119-180,  with  plates  7-ia     See


also  Tsountas,  Mvit^kk,  pp.    134-152;  Ilpaicriird  r^t  *Apx««>^  'Eraepiaf,   l887t
p.  65  sq,  ;  fi/.,  1888,  p.  28  sq,  ;  iV.,  1890,  p.  36 ;  «/.,  1892,  p.  57  sq,  ;  »</.,  l893»


CH.  XVI  BEEHIVE  TOMB  AT  THE  HERAEUM  133

(1888),  pp.  498-500;  id,^  5  (1889),  p.  491  sq.  ;  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,
10  (1889),  p.  172;  Schuchhardt,  Schliemanns  Ausgrabungen^  pp.  339-345;
Bulletin  di  Corr,  Hellhtique,  17  (1893),  p.  197  sg,-,  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Hist,
de  V Art  dans  V Antiquiti,  6.  pp.  370-377,  8io9-8i2.

So  much  for  the  remains  of  Mycenae.  The  discoveries  of  recent
years  have  shown  that  the  civilisation  of  Mycenae,  as  revealed  in  its
walls,  its  palace,  its  tombs,  and  its  art  treasures,  was  not  isolated,  but
that  a  kindred  civilisation  was  spread  over  a  large  part  of  the  eastern
coast  of  Greece,  Crete,  the  islands  of  the  Aegean,  and  the  north-western
coast  of  Asia  Minor.  Amongst  the  chief  evidence  for  the  wide  diffusion
of  a  civilisation  akin  to  that  of  Mycenae  is  the  existence  of  beehive
tombs,  like  those  of  Mycenae,  at  widely  separated  points  of  continental
Greece.  Not  only  do  these  beehive  tombs  resemble  in  structure  those
at  Mycenae,  but  the  objects  found  in  them  (pottery,  articles  of  gold
and  bronze,  etc.)  are  so  closely  alike  to  those  found  at  Mycenae,  that
they  must  have  belonged  to  approximately  the  same  epoch  and  the  .
same  civilisation.  Of  these  beehive  tombs,  in  addition  to  the  eight  I
at  Mycenae,  at  least  eleven  are  known  to  exist.  They  are,  with  the
exception  of  the  tomb  at  Orchomenus,  inferior  both  in  size  and  con-
struction to  the  great  beehive  tombs  at  Mycenae.  They  are  built  of
smaller  stones,  which  are  often  quite  unhewn.  The  facade  of  none  of
them  is  adorned  with  columns  and  coloured  marble ;  none  of  them
(except  the  tomb  at  Orchomenus)  has  a  second  chamber ;  and  none  of
them,  so  far  as  appears,  had  a  door,  the  entrance  being  merely  blocked
tip  with  a  wall  of  common  stones.  The  tombs  in  question  are  as
follows.

(i)  About  ten  minutes'  walk  to  the  north-west  of  the  Heraeum
(see  below,  note  on  ii.  17.  i),  beside  the  old  carriage-road  which  led
from  it  to  Mycenae,  a  peasant  accidentally  discovered  a  beehive  tomb
in  1872.     The  tomb  was  excavated  in  1878  by  the  Greek  Archaeologi-
cal Society.     It  consists  of  an  approach  or  dromos  1 8  metres  (49  feet)
long,  and  a  round  chamber  9.70  metres  (31  ft.  10  in.)  in  diameter.
The  doorway  and   the   round   chamber  are  built  of  large  and  small
stones,   not    smoothed   or  wrought,    but   arranged    in   more   or    less
lumzontal   courses.     The   doorway  is   blocked   with  a  rough  wall  of
stones  about   10  feet  thick,  which  is  not,  however,  carried  up  to  the
Ibtcl,  an  empty  space  having  been  left  (as  in  the  rock-cut  tombs  at
Mycenae)  between  the  top  of  the  wall  and  the  lintel.     The  upper  part
of  the  beehive  chamber  has  fallen  in  ;  the  wall  is  nowhere  standing  to
a  height  of  more  than  6.50  metres  (21   feet).     Three  quadrangular
graves  are  dug  out  in  the  ftoor  of  the  chamber.     Mr.  Stamatakis,  who
saperintended  the  excavations,  thought  that  these  graves  belonged  to
a  later  age  than  the  tomb  itself ;  but  they  may  be  contemporary  with
it,  for  similar  graves  have  been  found  dug  out  in  the  floor  of  intact
tombs  of  the  Mycenaean  age.     Human  bones,  some  of  them  charred
with  fire,  were  found  in  the  tomb.     The  tomb  had  apparently  been
rifled,  but  contained  sherds  of  Mycenaean  pottery,  small  ornaments  of
gold  and  glass-paste,  and  fragments  of  stone  implements,  of  weapons
and  vessels  of  bronze,  and  of  articles  of  ivory.     It  seems  that  the


134  BEEHIVE  TOMB  AT  VAPHIO  bk.  ii.  corinth

tomb  was  used  as  a  sepulchre  in  the  classical  Greek  age,  for  pottery
of  a  later  epoch,  and  two  pieces  of  a  plinth  stamped  with  a  Greek
inscription  (AH2APXITEKTQN)  of  the  fifth  or  fourth  century  B.C.  were
found  in  it.

See  Stamatakis,  '0  irapd  rh  *Upcuop  rd^tos,  MittfuiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,
3  (1878),  pp.  271-286 ;  Adler,  Prefece  to  Schliemann's  Tirynsy  p.  xxxtL  ;  Perrot
et  Chipiez,  Hist,  de  VArt  dans  VAntiqutti^  6.  pp.  395-397.

(2)  The  beehive  tomb  at  Vaphio  (the  ancient  Pharis,  see  note  on
iii.  20.  3)  has  been  known  since  1805  ;  it  was  excavated  by  Mr.
Tsountas  for  the  Greek  Archaeological  Society  in  1889.  The  tomb  is
situated  on  the  top  of  a  conical  hill  about  five  miles  south  of  Sparta.
The  dromos  or  approach  to  the  tomb  is  29.80  metres  (about  98  feet
long)  by  3.45  metres  (11  ft.  4  in.)  wide  in  front  of  the  doorway.  In
the  soil  with  which  the  dromos  was  filled  up  Mr.  Tsoimtas  found  a
considerable  number  of  potsherds  of  the  Mycenaean  style,  many  of
them  plain,  and  many  of  them  painted,  also  a  few  small  gold  leaves,
and  a  piece  of  an  amber  bead.  In  the  gateway  or  short  passage
leading  from  the  dromos  into  the  beehive  chamber  there  was  found  a
hole  about  6  feet  square  and  6  feet  deep,  the  bottom  of  which  was
covered  to  a  depth  of  about  4  inches  with  a  layer  of  ashes.  Probably
the  hole  was  one  of  those  pits  {/ioOpoi)  in  which  the  ancients  sacrificed
to  the  dead.  The  beehive  chamber,  or  tomb  proper,  is  built  of  hewn
stones  of  no  great  size,  laid  in  horizontal  courses.  The  dome  had  long
ago  fallen  in,  but  the  walls  are  standing  in  places  to  a  height  of  about
10  feet.  The  diameter  of  the  chamber  is  about  10.25  metres  (34
feet).  There  is  no  second  chamber  opening  off  the  beehive  chamber,
as  in  the  Treasury  of  Atreus  at  Mycenae.  The  floor  of  the  chamber,
which  is  uneven  and  formed  of  the  natural  rock,  was  found  strewn
with  a  layer  of  black  earth  mixed  with  ashes  and  a  few  charred  bones,
whether  the  bones  of  men  or  animals  is  uncertain.  Many  small  objects
were  found  scattered  on  the  floor  of  the  tomb.  Among  them  were
some  engraved  gems,  about  thirty  amethyst  beads,  also  beads  of  amber
and  crystal,  two  gold  rings,  two  small  gold  fish,  two  bronze  pins,  some
bronze  nails,  a  few  fragments  of  stone  vessels,  and  a  few  bits  of  silver
and  ivory.  The  potsherds  found  were  few  in  number  and  all  undecor-
ated.  Far  more  important  and  valuable  were  the  objects  deposited  in
a  grave  which  Mr.  Tsountas  found  dug  out  in  the  floor  of  the  chamber.
The  grave,  which  from  its  contents  appears  to  have  been  that  of  a  man,
contained  ashes,  but  no  bones ;  however  from  the  position  of  the
objects  found  in  it  Mr.  Tsountas  inferred  that  the  body  had  not  been
burnt  but  buried  entire,  and  at  fiill  length.  At.  the  place  where  the
head  of  the  body  probably  lay  were  found  a  bronze  sword,  seven  bronze
knives,  two  bronze  spear-heads,  a  bronze  sceptre  (?),  a  bronze  mirror,
five  leaden  discs,  two  stone  vessels,  two  alabaster  vessels,  a  small
silver  vessel,  a  few  earthenware  vessels,  etc.  At  the  place  where  the
neck  and  breast  of  the  body  probably  lay  were  found  about  eighty
amethyst  beads  and  two  engraved  gems ;  on  the  left  side  lay  a  dagger,
and  near  it  a  silver  saucer  with  gilt  rim.     About  the  middle  of  the


CH.  XVI  BEEHIVE  TOMB  AT  VAPHIO  135

grave,  where  the  hands  of  the  dead  may  have  lain,  were  found  two
silver  cups,  one  at  each  hand,  and  two  gold  cups  adorned  with  fine
reliefs   (see   below).     Here  too  were   found,  in  two  heaps,  forty-one
engraved  gems,  which  were  probably  worn  strung  together  as  bracelets.
Also  there  were  found  three  rings,  one  of  gold,  one  of  bronze,  and  one
of  iron.     At  the  feet  of  the  dead  lay  a  bronze  knife,  two  bronze  axes,
and  four  leaden  discs  like  those  foimd  at  the  head  of  the  grave.     The
engraved  gems  found  in  the  tomb  are  both  of  the  lentoid  and  the
glandular  shape  (see  above,   p.    115);    the  devices  on  them  include
dolphins,  lions,  oxen,  geese,  rams'  heads,  chariots  driven  by  pairs  of
horses,  a  woman  dancing,  etc.     But  of  all  the  objects  found  in  the
tomb  at  Vaphio  by  far  the  most  remarkable  are  the  two  gold  cups
mentioned  above.     They  are  indeed  generally  regarded  as  the  master-
piece of  Mycenaean  art  and  one  of  the  most  interesting  monuments  of
prehistoric  Greece.     The  cups  resemble  each  other  in  size  and  shape  ;
each  has  a  single  handle  and  no  stem.     Each  of  them  is  decorated,  in
its  whole  circumference,  with  admirable  reliefs  representing  bulls,  men,
and  trees.     On  one  of  them  we  see  a  bull  caught  in  a  net,  which  is
fsLStened  at  each  end  to  a  tree ;  the  beast  is  thrown  on  its  fore-quarters
on  the  ground,  and  is  lifting  up  its  head  and  bellowing  in  distress.     To
the  right  is  seen  another  bull,  which  has  apparently  just  cleared  the
toils  at  a  bound  and  is  galloping  away.     To  the  left  a  third  bull  is
diarging    in   the   opposite   direction.       Two   men,  the   huntsmen  no
doabt  who  had  laid  the  toils,  have  attempted  to  bar  his  way,  but  the
hull  has  knocked  one  of  them  down  and  is  in  the  act  of  tossing  the
other  on  his  left  horn.     Towards   the   extremities  of  the  scene   two
palm-trees  are  represented.      On  the  other  cup  the  scene  portrayed
is  more  peaceful.     On  the  right  is  a  bull  pacing  slowly  with  lowered
head,  as  if  browsing.     In  the  middle  two  bulls  stand  side  by  side,  with
their  heads  turned  to  each  other  in  a  friendly  way.     To  the  left  walks
another  bull,  with  a  man  behind  him,  who  holds  firmly  with  both  hands
a  rope,  which  is  tied  round  the  bull's  left  hind  leg ;  the  animal  is  lifting
Qp  its  head  and  bellowing.     In  the  background  are  two  trees,  of  the
same  sort  as  those  to  which  the  net  is  ^tened  in  the  other  scene ;
from  their  foliage  and  gnarled  trunks  they  seem  to  be  olives,  but  may
possibly  be  pines.     Both  scenes  are  rendered  with  admirable  vigour
and  truth  to  nature ;  in  style  they  resemble  each  other  so  closely  that
they  are  probably  works  of  the  same  artist.     All  the  bulls  have  short
curved  horns,  and  are  thickset,  powerful  animals.     The  men  are  lean
and  sinewy,  with  well  -  marked  muscles.     They  are  nearly  naked,  but
wear  a   girdle  and  loin-cloth  about   the  waist,    shoes   on   their  feet,
and  straps  bound  round  their  legs  half-way  up  the  calves.     Further,
the  man  who  holds  the  bull  by  the  rope  wears  bracelets.     The  faces  of
all  the  men  are  clean  shaven,  but  their  hair  is  long  and  streams  down
their  back.     In  artistic  execution  the  men  are  inferior  to  the  bulls ;
in  particular  their  bodies  are  too  meagre  and  drawn  in  at  the  waist.
The  cups  are  most  probably,  as  Mr.  Perrot  has  argued  at  some  length,
works  of  a  native  Greek  artist,  and  not  imported  from  abroad.     The
subject  of  the  reliefis  (the  capture  and  taming  of  wild  btdls)  has  been


136  BEEHIVE  TOMB  AT  VAPHIO  bk.  il  corinth

justly  compared  with  a  fragment  of  a  fresco  discovered  in  the  palace
at  Tiryns,  in  which  a  bull  is  depicted  galloping  along,  while  a  man,
attired  like  the  men  on  the  Vaphio  cups,  seizes  it  by  the  horn  (see
note  on  ii.  25.  8).  Mr.  L.  Heuzey  has  also  compared  the  scenes  on
the  Vaphio  cups  with  the  scenes  sculptured  in  relief  on  a  slab  of  green
schist,  found  in  Egypt  and  now  preserved  in  the  Louvre,  which
represents  the  combats  of  men  with  bulls ;  in  one  scene  a  bull  is  goring
a  man  on  the  ground ;  in  another,  which  is  broken,  a  huntsman  seems
to  have  been  represented  tossed  by  a  bull.  The  style  of  these  reliefe
is  rather  Assyrian  than  Egyptian.  In  comparing  them  with  the  reliefs
on  the  Vaphio  cups  Mr.  Heuzey  suggests  that  the  artist  who  made  the
cups  may  have  been  influenced  by  Oriental  models.

On  the  beehive  tomb  at  Vaphio  and  its  contents  see  especially  Mr.  Tsountas,
in  *E<p7ifiiepls  dpxatoXoyiic/i,  1 809,  pp.  136-172,  with  plates  7-ia  See  also
Tsountas,  Mvic^cu,  pp.  130  j^.,  144-146;  npcumird  r^  *ApxouciK.  'Erreuplas,  1889,
p.  21  sq,  ;  American  Journal  of  Archaeology^  5  (iSISq),  pp.  380  sq,,  493*495  >
Schuchhardt,  Schliemanns  Ausgrabungen^  pp.  345-351 ;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,
Histoire  de  VArt  dans  V Antiquiti^  6.  pp.  405-410.  For  earlier  notices  of  the  tomb
see  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  415  sq,  ;  Leake,  Morea,  3.  p.  4;  Mure, /oumal,  2.  p.
246  x^. ;  id,,  in  Rheinisches  Mtiseum,  6  (1839),  p.  247  sq,  ;  Welcker,  Tagebtuh,
I.  p.  210  sq,\  Curtius,  Pehponncsos,  2.  p.  240;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen  und
Eindriicke,  p.  384 ;  Conze  e  Michaelis,  '  Rapporto  d'  un  viaggio  fatto  nella
Grecia,*  Annali  delt  btstitutOy  33  (1861),  p.  49  sq.  ;  Ch.  Belger,  Beitrdge  sur
JCenntniss  der  griech,  Kuppelgraber,  pp.  31-33.  On  the  gold  cups  of  Vaphio  see
also  G.  Perrot,  *  Les  vases  d'or  de  Vz&q,^  Bulletin  de  Corr,  Hell&niqtUj  15  (1891),
PP*  493"537  5  P*  Gardiner,  New  Chapters  in  Gruk  history^  p.  70  sq,  ;  L.  Heuzey,

*  Un  prototype  des  taureaux  de  Tirynthe  et  d'Amyclte,*  Bulletin  de  Corr,  HelUn,
16  (1892),  pp.  307-319 ;  H.  Brunn,  Griechische  Kunstgeschichte,  i.  pp.  46-52 ;
Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Hist,  de  VArt  dans  VAntiquiti,  6.  pp.  784-793  ;  A.  Bertrand,

*  Les  vases  de  Vaphio,*  Comptts  Rendus  de  VAcademie  des  Inscriptions  et  des  Belles
Lettres,  22  (1894),  pp.  363-367.

(3)  In  the"  autumn  of  1889  Mr.  Tsountas  discovered  another
beehive  tomb  at  Arkina  or  Arkinai^  a  place  in  Mount  Taygetus  about
six  hours  to  the  south-west  of  Sparta,  between  the  village  of  Ama  and
the  monastery  of  Gola,  The  district  is  hilly,  and  is  surrounded  on  all
sides  by  higher  summits  except  on  the  east,  where  a  narrow  glen
affords  a  passage  to  the  Gourantiko  river  on  its  way  to  join  the  Eurotas.
The  beehive  tomb  is  poor  in  construction  and  contents.  The  dromos
or  approach  to  it  is  only  2.65  metres  (8  ft.  8  in.)  long.  The  doorway
was  built  up.  The  beehive  chamber  measures  4.75  metres  (15  ft
7  in.)  in  diameter,  and  its  walls  are  standing  to  a  height  of  about
3.75  metres  (12  ft.  3  in.)  Except  the  three  blocks  which  compose  the
lintel,  the  stones  are  all  small  and  quite  unhewn,  so  that  the  joints  gape.
In  the  tomb  were  found  five  beads  of  white  stone,  an  elliptical  stone
perforated  but  not  engraved,  a  small  bronze  nail,  a  gold  ornament,  and
some  fragments  of  undecorated  pottery.  There  were  no  ashes.  The  bones
were  lying  in  confusion ;  of  the  skull  only  the  teeth  were  preserved.

See  IIpaKriird  r^t  *A/>xa(oX.  *£ratp(at,   1 889,  p.  22 ;   ^"E^pxpli  d/>xaioXo7cjc^,
1889,  p.  132  sq, ;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Hist,  de  VArt  dans  V Antiquiti,  6.  p.  405.

(4)  Another  beehive  tomb  was  discovered  in  Laconia  about  1 886.
It  is  situated  at  Kampos  on  the  western  side  of  Mount  Taygetus,  at  the


CH.  XVI  BEEHIVE  TOMB  AT  MENIDI  137

foot  of  the   mountain   which   is    crowned   by  the   Frankish   castle  of

Zctmaia  (see  notes  on  iii.  26.  8   *  Gerenia,*  and  iii.  26.  11  *  Alagonia ').

Kampos  lies  about  two  hours  north  of  Cardamyle  (iii.  26.  7  note)  and

is   the   chief  place   in   the   district  {deme)  of  Abia.     The  tomb  was

excavated  for  the  Greek  Archaeological  Society  by  Mr.  Tsoimtas  in

1 89 1.     It  is  in  a  ruinous  condition,  the  upper  part  of  the  dome  and

most  of  the  walls  which  flanked  the  approach  having  fallen  down.     The

approach  ordromos  is  12.85  metres  (42  feet)  long  by  2.18  metres  (7  feet)

wide ;  its  sides  were  built  of  small  unhewn  stones  bonded  with  clay.

The  doorway  of  the  tomb  is  2.65  metres  (8  ft.  8  in.)  high  and  is  well

preserved.     Its  sides  are  built  of  hewn  quadrang^ar  stones,  and  the

lintel  is  formed  by  three  great  slabs  of  limestone.     The  walls  of  the

beehive  chamber  are  standing  to  a  height  of  about  3.25  metres  (10  ft.

7  in.)  ;  they  are  built  of  hewn  stones,  smaller  than  those  of  the  doorway,

and  laid  in  courses  which  are  meant  to  be  horizontal ;  crevices  in  the

joints  are  filled  with  pebbles.     The  tomb  had  been  rifled,  probably  in

antiquity ;  hence  the  objects  found  in  it  were  few  and  insignificant.

They  comprised  some  ornaments  of  blue  glass,  a  bone  comb,  an  agate

engraved  with  the  figures  of  two  goats,  potsherds  plain  or  only  painted

with  bands,  a  few  gold  ornaments  of  Mycenaean  type,  some  gold  leaves,

and  two  statuettes  of  lead,  one  representing  a  man  and  the  other  a

woman.    The  statuette  of  the  man  is  of  some  interest,  since  it  resembles

in  style  and  its  waist-cloth  the  huntsmen  on  the  Vaphio  cups.

See  AeXWoK  d/>xatoXo7i/K6i',  1 89 1,  pp.  25,  68;  Tsountas,  in  U/xxicrurd  ryfi
'A^otoX.  *£rcup(af,  1 89 1,  p.  23 ;  id.y  in  *E^/xep2f  dpxaioXo7(4c^,  1 89 1,  pp.  189-
V^i\  Berliner  philolog,  Wochenschrift^  li  (1891),  p.  1187;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,
Hist,  de  VArt  dans  VAntiquiti^  6.  p.  410.  The  leaden  statuette  of  the  man  is
figured  in  Tsountas's  Mi/tr^i^ai,  pi.  11,  and  in  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  op,  cit,  6.  p.
759,  fig.  355.

(5)  In    1872  a  beehive   tomb  was   discovered   about   twenty -five
minutes  walk  to  the  south  of  Menidiy  a  village  of  Attica  situated  at  the
foot  of  Mount  Fames,  seven  miles  north-west  of  Athens  (see  note  on
i.  31.  6).     The  tomb  was  excavated  for  the  German   Archaeological
Institute  by  the  late  Dr.  H.  G.  Lolling.     It  is  imbedded  in  the  side  of
a  flat-topped  hillock  of  earth,  called  LykotrupOy  from  the  top  of  which
there  is  a  wide  view  over  the  Attic  plain.     The  edifice  consists  as
usual  of  two  parts,  a  horizontal  approach  or  dromos^  and  a  circular
chamber  roofed  with  a  dome.     It  is  built  in  a  cheap  and  rude  way  of
nibble  limestone,  the  interstices  being  filled  with  small  stones.     Archi-
tectural decoration  there  is  absolutely  none.     The  approach  or  dromos
measures  26.52  metres  (87  feet)  long  by  3  metres  (about  10  feet)  wide.
Its  outer  end  was  blocked  by  a  wall  of  stone.     The  doorway  leading
from  the  dromos  into  the  circular  chamber  is  3.30  metres  (10  ft.  10  in.)
high  by  1.55  metres  (5  ft.  7  in.)  wide  at  the  bottom.     It  was  barred
with  a  wall  of  very  poor  masonry  which  did  not  reach  up  to  the  lintel,
an  empty  space  of  about  a  foot  high  being  left  between  the  lintel  and
the   top  of  the  wall.      The  circular  chamber  measures  8.35  metres
(27  ft.  5  in.)  in  diameter.     The  upper  part  of  the  vault  is  not  intact ;
the  present  height  of  the  wall  is  8.74  metres  (28  ft.  8  in.) ;  the  total


138  BEEHIVE  TOMB  AT  MENIDI  bk.  ii.  corinth

height  originally  may  have  been  about  9  metres  (30  feet).  On  the
floor  of  the  tomb  were  found  the  remains  of  six  human  skeletons,
including  the  skuUs.  The  objects  of  art  found  in  the  tomb  and  its
approach  were  numerous  but  small  and  of  little  value.  They  included
many  little  leaves  of  gold  and  some  small  gold  ornaments,  some  silver
bangles,  many  ornaments  of  glass-paste,  various  objects  of  ivory,  in
particular  a  casket  adorned  with  two  rows  of  animals  in  relief^  various
objecfs  of  bronze,  and  six  engraved  gems,  some  of  the  lentoid  and  others
of  the  glandular  shape  (see  above,  p.  115).  The  potsherds  discovered
in  the  beehive  chamber  are  of  the  Mycenaean  style;  they  include
fragments  of  thirteen  of  those  stirrup- vases  which  are  specially  character-
istic of  Mycenaean  pottery  (see  above,  p.  112  5^.)  In  the  dromos
were  found,  along  with  potsherds  of  Mycenaean  style,  pieces  of  the  later
pottery  known  as  Dipylum  ware,  which  is  decorated  with  geometrical
and  textile  patterns,  and  which  in  Greece  appears  to  have  inmiediately
succeeded  to,  and  supplanted,  the  Mycenaean  ware,  being  perhaps  a
product  of  the  Dorian  conquerors  (see  Furtwangler  und  Loschcke,
Mykenische  Vasen^  p.  xi.  sq^  Further,  there  were  found  in  the  dromos
fragments  of  the  still  later  style  of  pottery  known  as  Corinthian,  and
even  pieces  of  the  best  Attic  black-figured  vases,  and  of  the  earlier
red-figured  vases.  Thus  it  would  seem  that  in  the  dromos  of  this
tomb  we  have  specimens  of  all  the  chief  sorts  of  pottery  which
succeeded  each  other  in  Greece  from  the  Mycenaean  period  down  to
the  classical  era.  The  fact  is  instructive,  for  it  appears  to  prove  that
the  dead  men  in  the  tomb  continued  to  be  worshipped  by  successive
generations  through  many  centuries.

See  Das  Kuppelgrah  bet  Menidi  herausgegtben  vom  deutschen  archaeologiscfun
Institute  in  Athen  (Athens,  1880) ;  Mittheil.  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Atken^  12  (18S7),
p.  139  sq, ;  F.  Adler,  Preface  to  Schliemann's  Tiryns,  p.  xxxv.  sq.  ;  Ch.  Belger,
Beitrdge  zur  Kenntniss  der  grieck,  Kuppelgrdhery  pp.  12,  34;  Tsountas,  Mujr^i'ou,
p.  146;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Hist,  de  I* Art  datis  VAntiquiti^  6.  pp.  4I4-4I7.
Messrs.  Perrot  and  Chipiez  are  in  error  in  saying  (p.  416)  that  no  precious  mctaJs
were  found  in  the  tomb.

(6)  In  1890  a  beehive  tomb  was  discovered  and  excavated  by  Mr.
Staes  at  Thoricus  in  Attica.  It  was  found  buried  in  a  mound  of  earth
on  the  ridge  or  saddle  which  unites  the  hill  of  Velatouri  with  the  lower
hill  to  the  north  (see  vol.  2.  p.  408  sq,)  The  tomb,  like  that  at  Menidi^
is  built  of  small  common  stones.  The  approach  or  dromos  is  in  so
far  peculiar  that  its  sides  are  not  perpendicular,  but  converge  so  as  to
meet  overhead  and  form  a  vaulted  passage  ;  in  this  respect  it  resembles
the  approaches  {dromoi)  to  the  rock-cut  tombs  at  Mycenae  (see  above,
p.  130).  The  beehive  chamber  is  also  peculiar  in  being  of  an  elliptical
instead  of  a  circular  shape ;  it  measures  9  metres  (about  30  feet)  in
length  by  3.22  to  3.55  metres  (about  11  feet)  in  breadth.  The  upper
part  of  the  dome  is  in  a  very  ruinous  state ;  the  total  height  is  about
1 5  feet.  The  tomb  had  been  rifled,  but  there  were  found  in  it  a  little
gold,  some  potsherds  of  Mycenaean  style,  a  fragment  of  a  bronze  spear,
a  piece  of  a  bronze  sword  (?),  and  some,  charred  bones.


CH.  XVI  BEEHIVE  TOMBS  139

See  AeXrfoy  dpx<uo\o7Mr^,  1S90,  p.  159  sq^, ;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Hist,  de  VArt
dans  VAntiquitif  6.  p.  417  sq, ;  M.  Mayer,  m  Berliner  philolog,  Wochenschrifty
13  (1893).  p.  1500-

(7)  In  1893  another  large  beehive  tomb  was  found  at  Thoricus.
It  is  situated  on  the  side  of  the  hill  of  Velatouri  which  fiaces  the  sea.
The  beehive  chamber  is  slightly  elliptical  in  shape,  but  nearly  circular.
Its  diameter  is  about  9  metres  (30  feet).  Three  graves,  covered  with
slabs  of  stone,  were  found  in  the  chamber.  In  one  of  the  graves  a
well  preserved  skull  was  discovered,  and  some  vessels  (of  earthenware  ?)
were  also  found  in  the  tomb.  A  remarkable  feature  of  the  tomb  is
that  two  sarcophagus -like  structures,  about  3  feet  high,  were  reared
on  the  floor  of  the  beehive  chamber ;  each  of  these  structures  is  built  in
the  same  style  as  the  walls  of  the  chamber,  against  which  it  seems  to
have  leaned.  See  M.  Mayer,  in  Berliner  philolog,  Wochenschrift^  13
(^893),  p.  1501  ;  npaicTiica  t^s  *Kpy<i.ioK  ^Eraipias,  1893,  p.  13  sqq.

(8)  A  small  beehive  tomb  has  long  been  known  to  exist  at  Eleusis
in  Attica.  It  is  situated  on  the  south  side  of  the  acropolis.  The
approach  or  dromos  is  4.80  metres  (15  ft.  9  in.)  long  by  1.90  metres
(6  ft.)  wide,  and,  like  the  dromos  of  one  of  the  beehive  tombs  at
Thoricus,  is  roofed  by  the  side  walls  converging  till  they  meet  in  a  vault
overhead.  The  diameter  of  the  beehive  chamber  is  3.20  metres
(10  ft.  6  in.),  and  its  height  3.85  metres  (13  feet).  The  masonry  is
Cyclopean,  the  walls  being  built  of  great  blocks  almost  unhewn ;  the
crevices  are  filled  with  small  stones.  Mr.  Tsountas  inclines  to  believe
that  the  structure  was  not  a  tomb  but  a  cistern  (Mvicijvai,  p.  123).  But
on  the  other  hand  Mr.  Philios  has  justly  pointed  out  that  the  existence
of  the  approach  or  dromos  is  strongly  in  favour  of  its  being  a  tomb
CEc^i^/icpls  aLpya.i,o\oyiKri^  1 889,  p.  1 92  sq,^

See  Welcker,  Tagehuchy  i.  p.  112 ;  Gazette  archiologiquey  8  (1883),  p.  248  sq,^
with  plate  42 ;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Hist,  dt  VArt  dans  I* Antiquity,  6.  p.  417  sq,

(9)  A  great  beehive  tomb  exists  at  Orchomenus  in  Boeotia.  Like
the  Treasury  of  Atreus  at  Mycenae  it  has  been  known  since  antiquity,
and  was  viewed  with  admiration  by  Pausanias.  For  an  account  of  its
renaains  see  the  note  on  ix.  38.  2.

(10)  At  DimirU^  about  three  miles  to  the  west  of  Volo  in  Thessaly,
is  another  beehive  tomb.     It  was  excavated  at  the  cost  of  the  Greek
Government  in  February  and  March  1886.     A  supplementary  excava-
tion was  made  in  April.     The  dromos  or  approach  is   13.30  metres
(43  ft.   8  in.)   long   by    3.30   metres  (10  ft.    10  in.)  wide.      At   its
outer  end    it  was  blocked  up  with  a  wall   of  rough   masonry.      The
doorway   of  the  tomb  is  3.60  metres  (11   ft.   9   in.)  high.       It   was
blocked  up  with  a  roughly  constructed  wall,  which,  however,  did  not
reach  half-way  up  the  doorway.     The  beehive  chamber  measures  8.50
metres   (27   ft.    10   in.)   in   width   by   about   9   metres  (30   feet)   in
height,  but  the  top  has  fallen  in.     Its  dimensions  thus  closely  resemble
those  of  the  beehive  tomb  at  Menidi^  though  they  are  slightly  larger.
The  style  of  the  masonry  is  also  similar,  the  walls  being  built  of  small
irregular  blocks  of  limestone  without  any  binding  material,  while  the


140  BEEHIVE  TOMBS  bk.  ii.  corinth

interstices  are  carefully  filled  with  smaller  stones.  The  round  slab
which  had  formed  the  coping-stone  of  the  dome  was  found  in  the  middle
of  the  chamber.

In  the  dromos^  to  the  right  and  left  of  the  doorway,  were  found
remains  of  bones  and  ashes,  with  some  fragments  of  pottery  and  scraps
of  gold  leaf.  As  some  of  the  bones  are  not  human,  they  are  probably
the  remains  of  sacrifices  offered  to  the  dead.  The  floor  of  the  beehive
chamber  was  covered  with  a  layer  of  ashes  about  2  inches  deep,  in
which  were  found  remains  of  the  dead  and  of  their  ornaments.  Some
of  the  bones  found  in  the  tomb,  including  a  comparatively  well-preser\'ed
skull,  had  plainly  not  been  subjected  to  the  action  of  fire.  Bones  of
animals  also  came  to  light  in  the  chamber.  Among  the  objects  found
in  the  tomb  were  many  small  ornaments  of  gold,  including  about  sixty
rosettes  and  a  gold  ring ;  a  great  many  beads  and  other  small  ornaments
of  glass-paste,  including  some  small  tablets  decorated  with  representa-
tions of  the  nautilus  and  the  purple-shell ;  some  small  objects  made  of
bone  ;  five  bronze  arrow-heads,  some  of  them  broken  ;  a  signet-stone  of
lapis-lazuli  perforated  and  retaining  in  the  hole  a  thin  wire ;  and  twenty
real  shells  of  the  sea-snail  called  Conus,  The  potsherds  found  in  the
interior  of  the  tomb  are  either  plain  or  adorned  only  with  broad  bands.

See  Mittheil.  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Atken^  9  (1884),  p.  99  sqq.  ;  /V/.,  1 1
(1886),  pp.  435-443  ;  /V/.,  12  (1887),  pp.  136-138;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,
Hist  de  VArt  dans  V Antiquity ^  6.  p.  448  sq,

(11)  In  the  island  of  Cephallenia,  at  the  small  village  of  Masarakaia,
a  little  to  the  west  of  the  Venetian  castle  of  St  George^  there  are  the
remains  of  a  beehive  tomb.  The  upper  part  of  the  dome  is  destroyed,
and  the  wall  is  standing  to  a  height  of  only  about  5  feet.  The  circular
chamber  seems  to  have  measured  about  16  feet  in  diameter.  Not  far
from  this  beehive  tomb,  a  little  to  the  south-east  of  the  village,  there
are  other  Mycenaean  tombs  ;  they  are  of  irregularly  quadrangular  shape,
with  passages  leading  to  them ;  both  tombs  and  passages  are  hewn
out  of  the  rock.  See  MittheiL  d.  arch.  Inst  in  Athen^  11  (1886),  p.
456;  Berliner  pMlolog.  Wochenschrift^  7  (1887),  p.  867  sq.\  P.
Wolters,  *  Mykenische  Graber  in  Kephallenia,'  MittheiL  d.  arch.  Inst,  in
Athen,  19  (1894),  pp.  486-490.

Thus,  including  the  eight  beehive  tombs  at  Mycenae,  nineteen  tombs
of  this  sort  are  at  present  (May,  1895)  known  to  exist  in  Greece.
Future  excavations  may  bring  to  light  many  more.  Indeed,  already  Mr.
Tsountas  is  reported  to  have  discovered  in  1894  about  twenty  beehive
tombs  of  the  Mycenaean  age  in  the  island  of  Amorgos  ;  they  contained
vases  and  figurines  of  terra-cotta,  also  lance-heads  (Athenaeum^  24th
November  1894,  p.  722).  And  at  Erganos  in  Crete  Prof.  Halbherr  in
1894  excavated  three  beehive  tombs  of  the  Mycenaean  age  ;  one  of  them,
which  is  perfectly  preserved,  contained  six  bodies  and  several  Mycenaean
vases  {American  Journal  of  Archaeology^  9  (1894),  p.  541).  But
detailed  accounts  of  these  discoveries  are  not  yet  to  hand,  and  we
cannot  even  say  whether  these  tombs  in  Amorgos  and  Crete  are  built
of  masonry  (like  all  the  other  beehive  tombs  enumerated  above)  or
merely  hewn   out  of  the   rock  (like  a  few  which  will   be  mentioned


CH.  XVI  BEEHIVE  TOMBS  141

immediately).  No  such  doubt,  however,  attaches  to  one  which  was
discovered  a  good  many  years  ago  at  Kertch  in  the  Crimea.  It  is  com-
pletely buried  in  a  moimd  called  the  Golden  Mount.  In  plan  and  con-
struction it  resembles  the  beehive  tombs  of  Greece,  consisting  of  a
circular  vaulted  chamber  with  the  usual  approach  or  dromos.  The
circiilar  vault  is  built  of  courses  of  stones  projecting  one  above  the  other
in  corbels,  as  they  are  called.  Nothing  was  found  in  the  tomb.  See
AntiquiUs  du  Bosphore  CimmMen^  Atlas,  plate  A  a,  with  the  Text,  vol.
I,  pp.  cxxv,  cxxvii.

Besides  the  beehive  tombs  which  are  built  of  masonry  and  buried
under  a  mound  or  hillock,  there  have  been  found  a  few  tombs  of  the
Mycenaean  age  which  resemble  the  preceding  ones  in  shape  and  plan,
but  differ  from  them  in  that  they  are  not  built  but  hewn  out  of  the
living  rock.     A  tomb  of  this  latter  type  has  been  discovered  in  Crete.
It  is  situated   on  the  side  of  a  hill  in  the   territory  of  the    ancient
Gortyna,  to  the  east  of  the  modem  village  of  Anoja  Messaritica,     It
consists  of  a  circular  chamber,  of  the  usual  beehive  shape,  approached
by  a  horizontal  passage  or  dromos,  the  whole  hewn  out  of  the  rock.
The  dramas  is  5  metres  (16  ft.  5  in.)  long,   but   so   low   that  it  can
only  be  traversed  on  hands  and  feet ;  its  entrance  was  barred  by  a
stone  wall.     In  the  beehive  chamber  were  found  three  small  ossuaries
or  sarcophaguses  of  terra-cotta,  the   largest  of  which  was   not  more
than  3  feet  long.     At  the  date  of  their  discovery  they  seem  to  have
contained  some  crumbling  fragments  of  bones.     That  this  tomb  is  of
the  Mycenaean  period   is   proved   by  the  discovery  in   it  of  painted
vases    of    the    kind    called    stirrup  -  vases,    which    are    peculiar    to
Mycenaean  pottery  (see  above,  p.  112  sq.)      The  sarcophaguses  are
also    painted    with   patterns    in   the    Mycenaean   style.       See    Perrot
ct  Chipiez,  Histoire  de   VArt  dans   VAntiquitd,   6.    p.    453   sq,      A
similar   tomb  was  discovered  by  the   French  at  Delphi   in    1893    or
1894.     It  consists  of  a  beehive  chamber  approached  by  a  short  passage
or  dramas,  the  whole  being  hewn  out  of  the  soft  tufa  in  the  mountain-
side.    In  the  tomb  were  found  a  dagger,  knife,  razor,  and  brooch,  all
of  bronze  ;  an  idol  of  a  type  found  at  Mycenae  and  Tiryns  ;  and  pottery
decorated  with  lines,  circles,  and  geometrical  patterns.     One  at  least
of  the  vases  was  characteristically  Mycenaean,   being   a   stirrup-vase
adorned  with  two  octopuses  painted  on  its  sides.     See  Th.  Homolle,
in  Gazette  des  Beaux-Arts,  12  (1894),  p.  442.    Further,  two  Mycenaean
tombs  of  the  same  type  {i,e.  of  the  beehive  shape,  but  hewn  out  of  the
rock,  not  built)  were  discovered  by  the  Americans  near  the  Heraeum  in
1894.     See  below,  p.  178.

But  besides  these  beehive  tombs,  whether  built  or  hewn  out  of  the
rock,  two  other  sets  of  sepulchres  have  been  found  in  Greece  which
deserve  mention  here,  because  their  contents  prove  them  to  belong  to
the  Mycenaean  age.

(i)  On  the  north-eastern  slope  of  Palamidi,  the  imposing  rock
which  forms  the  citadel  of  Nauplia,  near  the  gateway  of  the  fortress,
some  prehistoric  tombs  were  excavated  in  1878,  1879,  and  1880.  The
tombs  are  hewn  out  of  the  tufia  rock,  and  each  of  them  consists  of  a


142  TOMBS  AT  NAUPLIA  bk.  ii.  corinth

quadrangular  chamber  with  a  long  narrow  approach  or  drotnos.  The
approaches  {dromoi)  are  from  4  to  7  metres  (13  to  23  feet)  long,
and  the  chambers  from  2  to  3  metres  (6 J  to  10  feet)  square.  The
entrances  to  the  chambers  were  closed  with  masonry.  The  height  of
the  chambers  does  not  exceed  10  feet  The  roofs  are  more  or  less
convex,  but  of  an  indeterminate  shape,  like  the  roof  of  a  cave.  In  the
floor  of  some  of  the  tombs  are  cut  quadrangular  shallow  depressions,
which  were  clearly  graves,  since  bones  mixed  with  Mycenaean  potsherds
have  been  found  in  them.  These  graves  were  covered  by  slabs,  of
which  some  pieces  exist  A  distinctive  feature  of  these  tombs  are  the
niches  which  are  cut  in  the  walls  either  of  the  sepulchral  chamber  or  of
the  dromosj  these  niches  were  closed  either  with  slabs  or  with  a  waU
of  stones,  and  were  found  to  contain  bones  mixed  with  fragments  of
vases  and  of  terra-cotta  statuettes.  The  objects  foimd  in  the  tombs
are  in  general  poor  and  of  little  value,  which  goes  with  the  smallness
and  plainness  of  the  tombs  to  show  that  only  people  of  the  poorer
class  were  buried  in  them.  Among  the  objects  found  in  them  are
many  fragments  of  vases,  which  however  would  seem  to  have  been
small  and  of  indifferent  workmanship ;  terra-cotta  statuettes,  including
small  figures  of  cows  such  as  have  been  found  at  Tiryns,  Mycenae,
and  in  the  lowest  strata  on  the  Acropolis  at  Athens  ;  pieces  of  necklaces  ;
some  gold  ornaments ;  and  beads  and  tablets  of  glass-paste,  both  blue
and  white.  This  is  not  much,  but  it  is  enough  to  prove  that  the  tombs
belong  to  the  Mycenaean  age.  In  two  at  least  of  the  tombs  were  found
bones  of  sheep  or  goats,  the  remnants  of  sacrifices  offered  to  the  dead.

See  IIpaKTtKa  t^s  *\p\aioX,  'Erat/otias  for  1878  (published  1879),
p.  1 7  sq, ;  H.  G.  Lolling,  *  Ausgrabungen  am  Palamidi,'  MittheiL  d.
arch,  Inst  in  Athen^  5  (1880),  pp.  143-163;  Schliemann,  Tiryns^  pp.
82,  120,  124,  164,  176;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Hist  de  VArt  dans
VAntiquitiy  6.  pp.  397-401.

In  1892  thirty-one  more  tombs  were  excavated  for  the  Greek
Archaeological  Society  by  Mr.  Staes  in  the  same  place,  the  north-eastern
slope  of  Palamidi.  In  plan  and  disposition  the  tombs  resemble  those
described  above.  Almost  all  of  them  contained  more  than  two  skeletons,
laid  either  at  full  length  or  in  a  sitting  posture,  as  the  exigencies  of
space  required.  In  one  tomb  the  bones  of  a  horse  were  found  beside
those  of  a  man.  Of  the  objects  brought  to  light  in  these  tombs  the
majority  were  of  terra-cotta,  especially  vases,  of  which  about  twenty-five
were  found  entire.  On  each  of  the  handles  of  one  of  the  vases  there  is
engraved  a  character  resembling  an  H,  which  may  be  alphabetic ;  for
in  the  same  year  (1892)  two  vases  were  found  at  Mycenae  with
characters  (five  or  six  characters  on  the  one  and  three  on  the  other)
inscribed  on  their  handles  :  these  characters  resemble  in  form  symbols  of
the  Cypriote  syllabary  (II/oaicTtKa  t^s 'ApxawA.  'Eratpias,  1892,  p.  57).
Besides  vases  and  potsherds  a  great  many  rude  clay  figurines  of
women,  eight  figurines  of  animals,  and  one  representing  a  chariot  were
found  by  Mr.  Staes  in  the  tombs.  Other  objects  discovered  by  him
were  a  bronze  spear-head,  a  bronze  brooch,  a  bronze  mirror ;  six  gold
rosettes  and  two  rings  of  gold  leaf;  two  necklaces  of  bone  and  glass-


CH.  XVI  TOMBS  AT  SPATA  143

paste,  in  the  middle  of  one  of  which  were  two  engraved  gems  with
representations  of  animals  like  some  found  at  Mycenae ;  and  a  vase  of
red  and  white  marble  of  graceful  shape  and  good  workmanship.  See
II/KiicTiicoL  rr^'i  'ApxatoX,  ^Eraipiasy  1892,  pp.  52-54  ;  Bulletin  de  Corr,
Hellin,  17  (1893),  p.  198.

(2)  The  village  of  Spata  lies  about  nine  miles  to  the  east  of
Athens,  on  the  further  side  of  Mount  Hymettus.  Here  in  December
1876  a  rock-cut  tomb  was  discovered  in  a  small  hill  close  to  the  village.
In  the  following  year  it  was  completely  excavated  for  the  Greek
Archaeological  Society  by  Mr.  Stamatakis,  who  discovered  a  second
smaller  tomb,  also  hewn  in  the  rock,  a  little  to  the  west  of  the  first.
The  larger  tomb  consists  of  three  quadrangular  chambers  united  by
two  short  passages  and  entered  by  an  inclined  road  74  feet  long,
which,  like  the  chambers  themselves,  is  hewn  out  of  the  rock.  The
outermost  of  the  three  chambers  is  the  largest ;  it  measures  20  feet  in
length  by  15  feet  in  breadth  and  16^  feet  in  height.  The  other  two
chambers  are  about  12  feet  square  and  as  many  high.  In  all  three
chambers  the  roof  slopes  down  from  the  middle  on  either  side,  like  the
roof  of  a  house.  The  door  of  the  outermost  chamber  was  blocked
with  a  wall,  which  did  not  reach  up  to  the  lintel.  In  each  of  the  three
chambers  was  found  a  human  skeleton  together  with  a  quantity  of
ashes  and  charcoal ;  and  in  the  smaller  tomb  a  skeleton  of  a  man  was
also  found  along  with  the  skeleton  of  a  large  animal,  perhaps  a  stag.
The  tombs  appear  to  have  been  rifled,  but  a  large  quantity  of  small
articles  was  found  in  the  larger  tomb  and  the  passage  or  dromos  leading
to  it ;  in  the  dromos  alone  more  than  1 300  articles  were  found,  without
counting  potsherds.  These  articles  are  of  gold,  glass-paste,  ivory,  bronze,
stone,  and  pottery.  The  gold  found  is  in  very  small  and  thin  leaves,
which  were  either  used  to  case  other  articles  (especially  ornaments
of  glass-paste)  or  worked  up  into  small  ornaments  to  be  employed
as  p>endants  or  to  be  attached  to  something  else.  Especially  numerous
are  the  articles  of  glass-paste  and  of  ivory.  The  objects  of  glass-paste
are  most  numerous  of  all.  They  have  all  been  cast  in  moulds;  no
fewer  than  eighty  of  them  have  been  turned  out  of  the  same  mould.
The  paste  is  generally  of  a  whitish  tinge ;  less  often  it  is  bright  blue.
A  great  many,  perhaps  even  all  of  these  pastes,  had  been  coated  with
gold  leaf.  They  are  in  the  shape  either  of  small  tablets  adorned  with
reliefs  or  of  pendants,  beads,  and  other  toilet  articles.  Many  of  them
are  p>erforated.  The  tablets  form  the  largest  class  ;  more  than  450  of
them  have  been  found  adorned  with  leaves  and  flowers ;  and  a  great
many  are  decorated  with  marine  creatures,  such  as  shells,  dolphins,
and,  above  all,  the  tentacles  of  a  nautilus  or  some  such  animal.  Four
moulds  have  furnished  more  than  200  pieces  decorated  with  tentacles
alone.  Another  mould  has  furnished  sixteen  tablets  adorned  with  a
sphinx,  who  is  represented  in  Oriental  style  seated  on  her  hind-quarters
with  the  head  of  a  woman  (?)  and  the  body  of  a  lion,  her  wings  extended
and  her  tail  elevated.  Next  in  number  to  the  articles  of  glass-paste
a.re  the  articles  of  ivory,  the  most  interesting  of  which  are  the  tablets
decorated  with  carved  reliefs.     These  reliefs  represent  sometimes  leaves


144  TOMBS  AT  SPATA  BK.  II.  CORINTH

(more  than  i6o  such  tablets  have  been  found)  and  sometimes  animals,
among  which  marine  creatures,  such  as  shells  and  nautiluses,  appear
oftenest.  On  two  tablets  the  combat  of  a  lion  with  a  bull  is  repre-
sented ;  a  sphinx  figures  on  twelve  more.  The  only  human  head  in
ivory  found  in  the  tomb  represents  in  profile  the  head  of  a  man  wearing
a  mitre  or  conical  helmet ;  but  others  (Prof.  MilchhSfer  and  Dr.
Schuchhardt)  take  his  headgear  to  be  a  wig.  A  similar  head,  made
also  of  ivory,  has  been  found  at  Mycenae  (see  above,  p.  131).  The
articles  of  bronze  found  at  Spata  are  comparatively  few  ;  they  include,
however,  thirty-three  arrow-heads  and  some  pieces  of  quadrangular
plates  perforated  at  the  ends.  Among  the  potsherds  (for  no  single
vase  was  found  entire)  are  remains  of  five  stirrup-vases,  one  of  which  is
adorned  in  its  whole  circumference  with  a  band  of  large  fishes  painted
in  brownish  red.  Another  of  the  stirrup-vases  is  painted  in-  geometrical
patterns.  These  vases  alone  would  suffice  to  prove  that  the  tomb  in
which  they  were  found  belongs  to  the  Mycenaean  phase  of  civilisation.
Amongst  the  other  objects  found  at  Sfata  may  be  mentioned  more
than  500  fragments  of  obsidian,  most  of  them  cut  in  the  shape  of
triangular  prisms,  and  about  fifty  boars'  teeth  perforated  as  if  for
suspension.  Moreover,  many  fragments  of  imitation  boar's  teeth,  made  of
glass-paste  and  perforated  as  if  for  suspension,  were  also  found  at  Spata.
While  these  graves  at  Spata  are  of  the  Mycenaean  period,  they
are  probably  later  than  the  royal  graves  on  the  acropolis  of  Mycenae.
One  proof  of  this  is  that,  whereas  the  arrow-heads  found  in  the  graves
at  Spata  are  of  bronze,  those  found  in  the  royal  graves  at  Mycenae  are
of  obsidian ;  it  was  only  in  the  upper  layers  of  soil  at  Mycenae  that
Dr.  Schliemann  found  some  bronze  arrow-heads.

See  Milchhofer,  in  MittheiL  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,  2  (1877),  pp.  82-84,
261-276 ;  U.  Kohler,  *  Ueber  die  Zeit  und  den  Urspning  der  Grabanlagen  in
Mvkene  und  Spata/  id.  3  (1878),  pp.  1-13;  Bulletin  de  Corr.  HelUniqtu^  i
(1877),  pp.  261-263  ;  B.  Haussoullier,  *  Catalogue  descriptif  des  objets  d^couverts
it  Spata/  ib.  2  (1878),  pp.  185-228;  Schliemann,  MycetKU^  pp.  xli-xlviii ;  Perrot
et  Chipiez,  Hist,  de  I'Art  dans  l* Antiquity,  6.  pp.  412-4x4 ;  Dumont  et  Chaplain,
Les  cSramiques  d.  la  Grhe propre^  I.  pp.  59-64.

(3)  In  1894  the  Swedish  archaeologist  Mr.  S.  Wide  excavated  a
barrow  at  Aphidna  in  Attica  (see  vol.  2,  p.  163).  Twelve  graves  of  the
Mycenaean  era  were  found  in  it  They  contained  a  number  of  charred
skeletons,  vases  of  the  Mycenaean  style  resembling  those  discovered  at
Thoricus,  a  golden  necklace  and  golden  earrings  (found  lying  beside
the  skull  of  a  woman's  skeleton),  bracelets,  and  two  copper  finger-rings.
One  of  the  skeletons  was  of  gigantic  size.  See  Berliner  philolog.
Wochenschrift,  15  December,  1894,  p.  1628;  Classical  Review^  9
(1895),  p.  93.  According  to  a  later  account,  however,  the  pottery
discovered  in  these  graves  was  not  Mycenaean,  though  Mycenaean
pottery  was  found  on  the  citadel.  See  Berliner  philolog.  Wochenschrift^
25  May  1895,  P-  699.

Thus  it  appears  that  at  a  very  early  period  a  civilisation  of  the
Mycenaean  type  was  diffused  over  the  whole  eastern  coast  of  continental
Greece,  since  remains  of  it  have  been  found  in  Laconia  (  Vaphio^  Arkina^


CH.  XVI  THE  MYCENAEAN  CIVILISATION  145

Kamfios)^  Argolis  (Tiryns,  Mycenae,  the  Heraeum,  Nauplia),  Attica
(Thoricus,  Aphidna,  Athens,  Spata^  Menidiy  Eleusis),  Boeotia  (Orcho-
menus),  and  Thessaly  {Dimini^  near  Volo),  To  these  remains  must  be
added  the  massive  ruins  of  a  great  fortress  built  in  the  Tirynthian  and
Mycenaean  style,  which  occupy  the  island  of  Goulas  in  the  Copaic
Lake;  here  excavations  conducted  by  French  archaeologists  in  1893
brought  to  light  the  remains  of  a  large  building  which  appears  to  have
been  a  palace  of  the  Tirynthian  style.  See  note  on  ix.  24.  i.  It
seems  probable  that  future  excavations  will  reveal  the  existence  of
Mycenaean  remains  at  many  other  places  on  the  Greek  mainland.

The  type  of  civilisation  to  which  the  epithet  Mycenaean  is  now
applied  as  a  general  designation  was  not,  however,  confined   to   the
mainland  of  Greece ;  remains  of  a  similar,  if  not  identical,  civilisation
have    been    discovered     in     abundance     eastward     over    the    Greek
islands  of  the  southern  Aegean  as  well  as  on  the  larger  islands  of  Crete,
Rhodes,  and  Cyprus.     And  the  excavations  of  Schliemann  and  Dorpfeld
have  revealed  the  same  type  of  civilisation  at  Hissarlik^  the  ancient
Troy.     The  remains  of  "  the  second  or  burnt  city "  at  Troy  represent
the  oldest  stage  in  the  evolution  of  the  Mycenaean  civilisation  ;  they
include  the  ruins  of  a  palace  built  on  the  same  plan  as  the  palaces  of
Tiryns  and   Mycenae,  and  golden  jewellery  adorned  with  the  spirals
and  rosettes  which  are  characteristic  of  Mycenaean  gold-work.     The
pottery  is  mostly  hand-made,  and  is  adorned,  either  with   incised  lines
and  points  sometimes  filled  in  with  white  chalk,  or  with  rude  repre-
sentations of  the  human  face  incised  or  modelled  in  the  clay.      See
Schuchhardt,  Schliemanns  Ausgrabungen^  p.  60  sqq,  ;    Busolt,  Griech,
Oeschichte^   i .  pp.   39-44  ;  Dumont  et  Chaplain,  Les  c^amiques  de  la
Grke  propre^   i.   p.    3   sqq,  ;    Perrot  et    Chipiez,  HisL  de  VArt  dans
^Antiquit^^  6.  p.  176  sqq.     But  the  excavations  of  1890  and  1895  &o
to  show  that  the  ruins  in  the  sixth  layer  at  Hissarlik  (counting  from
the  bottom)  are  those  of  a  citadel  of  the  best  Mycenaean  period,  for
Mycenaean  pottery,  including  some  entire  stirrup-vases,  were  found  in
tills  layer.     Dr.  Dorpfeld  conjecturally  dates  this  sixth  citadel  between
1500  and  1000  RC. ;  while  the  citadel  of  the  second  or  burnt  city  he
would  assign  to  the  second  half  of  the  third  millennium  B.c.  (2500-2000
B.C.)    See  W.  Dorpfeld,  Troja^  1893  (Leipzig,  1894),  pp.  2,  5,  10  sqq.^
56  sqq.^  86  j^.     A  stage  of  the  Mycenaean  civilisation  somewhat  more
advanced  than  that  of  the  second  or  burnt  city  at  Troy  is  attested  by
the  remains  found  in  the  islands  of  the  southern  Aegean,  such  as  Paros,
^'axos,  los,  Amorgos,  Melos,  Thera,  and  Therasia.     In  these  islands  a
number  of  small  graves  have  been  excavated,  which  contained  bronze
weapons    (spear  -  heads,   daggers,  axes),    pottery  (mostly  with  incised
patterns),   marble   vases,    and    marble   statuettes   of  the   rudest  sort,
g^enerally  representing  a  naked  woman  with  her  hands  crossed  on  her
breast      Amongst  the   pottery  found   in   these   graves   some   vessels
resemble  in  form  and  decoration  those  found  in  the  second  city  at  Troy,
but  they  mark  an  advance  upon  the  Trojan  pottery  in  the  use  of  the
potter's  wheel  and  the  decoration  by  means  of  dull  pigments,  which  are
laid  on  in  linear  patterns.     In  fact  these  vases  form  the  transition  to

VOL.  Ill  L


146  THE  MYCENAEAN  CIVILISATION     bk.  ii.  corinth

the  duU-painted  ware  of  Mycenae.     Indeed  vases  of  the  later  lustrous-
painted  sort  and  of  the  characteristic  Mycenaean  shap>e  known  as  stirrup-
vases  (see  above,  p.  \  it,  sq,)  have  been  discovered  in  some  of  the  later
graves  in  the  islands.     Bronze  swords  have  been  found  in  the  islands,
but  not,  so  far  as  is  known,  in  the  graves ;  one  of  them,  found  in  Thera,
is  decorated  with  inlaid  golden  axes  in  the  Mycenaean  style.     See  J.  T.
Bent,  *  Researches  among  the  Cyclades,'  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^
5  (1884),  pp.   42-58;  F.  Diimmler,  <  Mittheilungen  von  den  griech.
Inseln,'  MittheiL  cL  arch,  Inst,  inAthen^  11  (1886),  pp.  15-46;  Busolt,
Griech,   Geschichte^  i.  pp.  48-50  ;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  P Art
dans  PAntiquit^y  6.   pp.   470-472;   Tsountas,  Mvic^vat,  pp.  202-212.
Particularly  interesting  and  important  are  the  relics  of  the  Mycenaean
civilisation  which  have  been  discovered  in  the  islands  of  Thera  and
Therasia,   buried   under    the   volcanic   matter   of  an   eruption   which
geologists  believe  to  have  happened  about  2000  B.c     Here  under  a
layer  of  pumice-stone  ejected  by  the  volcano  were  brought  to  light
walls  of  houses,  which  are  carefully  coated  with  stucco  and  painted
with  stripes  and  floral  decorations  in  colours  like  those  of  Tiryns  (see
below,  p.  227  sq.)     The  pottery  is  mostly  made  on  the  wheel  and  is
closely  akin  to  the  oldest  Mycenaean  ware.     See  Dumont  et  Chaplain,
Les  c^ramiques  de  la  Grhe  propre^    i.  pp.   19-42,  with  pL  i.  and  ii. ;
Busolt,   Griech,    Geschichte?   i.   p.  50;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de
VArt  dans  VAntiquitd^  6.  pp.  135-154;  H.  S.  Washington,  *On  the
possibility  of  assigning  a  date  to  the  Santorini  vases,'  American  Journal
of  Archaeology y  9  (1894),  pp.  504-520  (Mr.  Washington  maintains  that
the  date  of  the  eruption  in  Thera  cannot  be  definitely  fixed  on  g^eological
evidence).     In  Aegina  some  well-preserved  remains  of  houses  of  the
Mycenaean  period  have  recently  been  found,  together  with  much  pottery,
under  the  soil  which  supported  the  so-called  temple  of  Aphrodite  near  the
capital  of  the  island  {MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  19  (1894),  p.  533).
The  great  island  of  Crete,  though  it  has  hitherto  been  little  explored,
is  said  to  swarm  with  relics  of  the  Mycenaean  age.     In  the  course  of
a  six  weeks'  search  in  1894  Mr.  A.  J.  Evans  discovered  two  prehistoric
cities  and  ''  relics  and  remains  which  throw  some  entirely  new  lights  on
the  art  and  religion  of  the  Mycenaean  peoples"  {Athenaeum^  23  June,
1^94)  P*  ^2).     In  particular  the  ruins  of  a  Mycenaean  city  at  Goulas,
a  few  miles  from  the  sea,  on  the   eastern   side  of  the  province  of
Mirabello,  are  described  by  Mr.  Evans  as  stupendous.     ''Wall  rises
within  wall,  terrace  above  terrace,  and  within  the  walls,  built  of  the
same  massive  blocks  of  local  limestone  in  rudely  horizontal  tiers,  the
lower   part  of  the  walls  of  the  houses  and   buildings  are   {sic)  still
traceable  throughout.     The  site  had  been  observed  by  Spratt,  but  so
incompletely  was  it  known  that  I  discovered  here  a  second  and  higher
acropolis  with   remains   of  primitive   buildings   on   the   summit,    one
containing,  besides  a  fore-court,  a  chamber  with  antae  recalling  the
ground-plan  of  more  than   one  megaron  of  the  sixth  or  Mycenaean
stratum  of  Hissarlik.      The  whole  site  abounds  with  primeval  relics,
stone  vessels  of  early  *  Aegean  type,'  bronze  weapons  and  Mycenaean
gems.  ...  In  the  mass  of  remains  existing  above  ground,  the  ruins


CH.  XVI  THE  MYCENAEAN  CIVILISATION  147

of  Goulas  exceed  those  of  any  prehistoric  site,  either  of  Greece  or
Italy,  and  there  cannot  be  a  doubt  that  we  are  here  in  presence  of  one
of  the  principal  centres  of  the  Mycenaean  world"  {Journal  of  Hellenic
Studies^    14  (1894),  p.   277).      We  have  seen  (p.    141)  that  in  the
district  of  Gortyna  a  beehive  tomb,  cut  in  the  rock,  was  found  to
contain  pottery  of  the  most  characteristic  Mycenaean  style,  and  that
at  Eiganos  three  beehive  tombs  of  the  Mycenaean  period  have  been
discovered  (above,  p.  140).     At  Kurtes^  near  Phaestus  and  Gortyna,
there  is  a  very  ancient  necropolis  in  which  Prof.   Halbherr  in  1894
excavated  some  graves  containing    Mycenaean  pottery  of  the  latest
period   (American  Joum,    of  Arch.    9    (1894),    p.    541).       Remains
of  Mycenaean   cities   have  also   been   found   by  Mr.   L.   Mariani  at
MaraihokephcUa    and   Anavlockos   {Classical    ReTnew,    9    (1895),    P-
187  sq.)      On  the  site  of  Cnosus,  one  of  the  chief  cities  of  ancient
Crete,   some  ruins  of  an  edifice  have  been  excavated  which  in  style
and  date  appears  to  have   approached  very  closely  to  the   palace  at
Tiryns.       In  it  were   found   earthenware   vases  which  in  shape   and
decoration  agree  for  the  most  part  exactly  with  the  pottery  discovered
at  Troy,   Mycenae,  Tiryns,   Nauplia,  Spata^  and  other  seats  of  My-
cenaean civilisation.      Amongst  them  was  a  stirrup-vase.      In  Crete,
too,  have  been  found  many  engraved  gems  of  the  Mycenaean  type ;
indeed  they  are  still  worn  by  the  Cretan  women  as  amulets.     See  £.
Fabricius,   'Fiinde  der  mykenaischen    Epoche  in   Knossos,'  MittheiL
(Larch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  11  (1886),  pp.  135-149;  A.  Milchhofer,  Z?/>
Anfdnge  der  Kunst  in  Griechenlandy  p.  125  sqq. ;  G.  Busolt,  Griech.
Gesckichie^  i.  p.  ^o  sq.\  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Hist,  de  VArt  dans  PAnti-
guit/y  6.  pp.  455-462  ;  Dumont  et  Chaplain,  Les  cdramiques  de  la  Grhe
ProprCy  I.  pp.  64-66 ;  A.  J.  Evans,  in  Joum.  Hellen.  Stud.   14  (1894),
p.  276  sqq.  ;  Amer.  Joum.  of  Arch.   10  (1895),  p.   100  sqq.  \  Athen-
aeum^  22  June,  1895,  p.  812  sq.

Rhodes  also  shared  in  the  Mycenaean  civihsation.     In  1868,  1870,

and  1 87 1  the  English  Vice-Consul,  Mr.  A.  Biliotti,  opened  at  lalysus

a  large  number  of  rock-cut  tombs  resembling  in  their  arrangement  the

rock-cut  tombs  at   Mycenae,   Nauplia,  and  Spata.     The  contents  of

these  tombs,  now  in  the  British  Museum,  are  thoroughly  Mycenaean

in  character.     They  include  painted  pottery ;  ornaments  of  gold,  silver

and  bronze ;   bronze  swords,  daggers,  arrow-heads,  and  spear-heads  ;

engrraved  gems ;  and  many  ornaments  of  blue  glass  made  in  moulds.

The  pottery  is  of  the  lustrous-painted  Mycenaean  type,  decorated  with

bands,  spirals,  and  marine  creatures,  particularly  the  cuttle-fish  and

murex  shell.     It  is  later  than  the  pottery  of  Thera,  but  contemporary

apparently  with   that   found  at  Spata  and   with   the   later  pottery  of

Mycenae ;    it    includes    specimens   of   the    characteristic    Mycenaean

stimip-vase.     The  bronze  swords  are  also  later  in  style  than  those

found  in  the  royal  graves  on  the  acropolis  of  Mycenae.     See  Dumont

et  Chaplain,  Les  c^amiques  de  la  Grhe  propre^  i.  pp.  43-46,  with  pi.  iii. ;

fiusolt,  Griech.  Geschichte^^  i.  p.  47  sq.\  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de

rArt  dans  VAntiquit^^  6.  pp.  463-465  ;    A.  S.  Murray,  Handbook  of

Greek  Archaeology ^  p.  2 1  sqq.


148  THE  MYCENAEAN  CIVILISATION     bk.  ii.  corinth

Lastly,  in  very  early,  though  not  the  earliest,  graves  of  Cyprus
pottery  of  the  Mycenaean  sort  has  been  found.  The  vases  are  mostly
of  the  later  Mycenaean  type.  Stirrup-vases  are  especially  common ;
they  are  decorated  mostly  with  simple  bands,  but  sometimes  with
seaweed  patterns.  Potsherds  of  the  older  Mycenaean  sort,  painted
with  broad  spirals,  have  been  found  in  the  necropolis  of  Tzarukas  near
Moroni,  But  all  the  Mycenaean  pottery  found  in  Cyprus  appears  to
have  been  imported,  since  the  clay  differs  fh)m  that  of  the  native
Cyprian  pottery.  It  is  very  remarkable  that  even  the  stirrup-vases
seem  to  have  been  imported  at  a  time  when  the  Phoenicians  had  not
yet  settled  in  the  island.  This  gives  us  some  idea  of  the  antiquity
of  the  Mycenaean  civilisation.  In  later  times  the  Mycenaean  ware,  in-
cluding the  stirrup-vases,  were  copied  by  the  Cyprian  potters.  See  F.
Diimmler,  *  Mittheilungen  von  den  griech.  Inseln,'  MittheiL  d.  arch,  Inst,
in  Athen^  ii  (1886),  pp.  209-262,  especially  pp.  234  sq.^  255  ;  Busolt,
Griech,  Geschichte^  i.  pp.  44-47  ;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  PArt
dans  PAntiquiU^  6.  pp.  465-467.

It  remains  to  ask,  what  was  the  date  of  the  Mycenaean  civilisation  ?
where  did  it  arise  ?  and  to  what  race  did  the  Mycenaean  people
belong  ?

( I )  What  was  the  date  of  the  Mycenaean  civilisation  f  Soon  after
Schliemann's  discovery  of  the  royal  graves  on  the  acropolis  of  Mycenae,
a  distinguished  German  archaeologist,  the  late  L.  Stephani  of  St.
Petersburg,  put  forward  a  theory  that  the  graves  were  those  of
barbarians  who  had  invaded  Greece  in  the  third  or  fourth  century  of
our  era,  and  that  the  treasures  found  in  the  graves  were  part  of  the
booty  which  these  supposed  invaders  had  collected  in  the  course  of
their  ravages  (Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg),  1877,  p.  31  sqq,")  This
view  was  completely  refuted  by  Prof  Percy  Gardner  (^Journal  of
Hellenic  SttuUes^  i  (1880),  pp.  94-106).  The  single  fact  that  over
the  ruins  of  the  palaces  at  Mycenae  and  Tiryns  have  been  found  the
remains  of  two  Doric  temples  built  not  later  than  the  sixth  century
B.C.  suffices  to  prove  that  the  sixth  century  B.C.  is  the  latest  possible
date  for  the  end  of  the  Mycenaean  civilisation  at  these  places.  On  the
other  hand  its  beginning  goes  back  to  a  very  much  earlier  date,  since,
as  we  have  seen,  Mycenaean  remains  have  been  found  in  Thera  and
Therasia  buried  under  volcanic  matter  which  geologists  believe  to  have
been  thrown  out  about  2000  B.C.  But  the  best  clue  to  the  date  of  the
Mycenaean  civilisation  is  furnished  by  its  relations  with  Egypt  For
on  the  one  hand  Egyptian  objects  have  been  found  on  Mycenaean  sites,
and  on  the  other  hand  Mycenaean  objects  and  representations  of  them
have  been  found  in  Egypt.  Thus  at  Mycenae  two  fragments  of
Egyptian  porcelain  have  been  found,  each  bearing  the  cartouche  of
king  Amenophis  III.,  who  reigned  in  Egypt  about  1440  to  1400  B.C.  ;
one  of  them  was  discovered  in  a  tomb  in  the  lower  city,  the  other  in
a  house  of  the  Mycenaean  period  on  the  acropolis.  Further,  a  scarab
bearing  the  name  of  Ti,  the  wife  of  Amenophis  III.,  was  found  in
another  house  on  the  acropolis  of  Mycenae;  and  in  one  of  the
Mycenaean  tombs  at  lalysus  in  Rhodes  a  scarab  of  Amenophis  III.


CH.  XVI  THE  MYCENAEAN  CIVILISATION  149

himself  was  discovered.  On  the  other  hand,  in  Egypt  a  fresco  in  the
tomb  of  Rameses  III.  (about  1200  B.c.)  contains  a  representation  of  five
of  the  characteristic  Mycenaean  vases  known  as  stimip-vases  or  false-
necked  amphoras ;  they  are  decorated  with  three  bands  each,  the  two
zones  between  the  bands  being  filled  with  interlacing  lines  and  inter-
spersed points.  Further,  wall-paintings  in  three  Theban  tombs  of  about
the  time  of  Thothmes  III.  (1600  B.C.)  have  been  supposed  to  represent
Mycenaean  vases  ;  but  in  this  case  the  resemblance  seems  much  more
doubtful,  the  vases  depicted  being  apparently  not  the  characteristic
stirrup-vases  {s^^  Archdologischer  Ameiger^  1892,  p.  13  sq,)  But  actual
Mycenaean  vases,  not  mere  pictures  of  them,  have  been  discovered  in
Egypt.  Thus  at  Gurob  Mr.  Flinders  Petrie  found  five  Mycenaean  stirrup-
vases  decorated  with  iron-glaze  bands ;  he  assigns  them  to  the  reign  of
Amenophis  III.  (Illahun^  Kahun  and  Gurob ^  p.  16  sq. ;  Kahun^  Gurob
and  Hawaray  p.  42  sq.)  Further,  in  a  tomb  at  Kahun,  which  Mr.
Petrie  dates  about  iioo  B.C.,  he  foimd  a  vase  of  Mycenaean  type,
though  not  a  stirrup-vase ;  it  is  of  a  fine  light-brown  paste,  with  a  red
iron-glaze  pattern.  Still  more  recently,  in  excavating  at  Tel-el-Amama,
Mr.  Petrie  has  lighted  upon  a  large  quantity  of  Mycenaean  potsherds,
which  he  dates  between  1400  and  1340  B.C.  These  facts  seem  to
prove  that  from  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century  onward  to  about
IIOO  B.C.  Egypt  stood  in  commercial  relations  with  Mycenae  or  at  all
events  with  lands  in  which  the  Mycenaean  type  of  civilisation  prevailed.
It  is  to  be  observed,  however,  that  the  Mycenaean  pottery  found  at
Gurob  and  Kahun,  being  of  the  glazed  or  lustrous  sort,  represents  the
later  and  more  advanced  pottery  of  Mycenae  rather  than  the  earlier  and
more  primitive  (see  above,  p.  11 1  sqq,)  From  this  it  follows  that  we
ought  to  date  the  foundation  of  Mycenae  considerably  earlier  than  the
middle  of  the  fifteenth  century  B.C.  ;  probably  the  city  existed  at  least
in  the  sixteenth  century  B.C  Mr.  Flinders  Petrie  considers  that  many
of  the  products  of  Mycenaean  art  are  derived  from  Egyptian  models  of
1600  or  1500  B.C.  (Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  12  (1891),  p.  202).
On  the  whole  we  shall  hardly  err  in  assuming  that  the  artistic  and
commercial  activity  of  Mycenae  began  not  later  than  1600  B.C.  and
lasted  till  somewhere  about  11 00  B.C.  That  it  must  have  stretched
over  a  considerable  period  of  time  is  proved  by  the  monuments  of
Mycenae  itself,  in  particular  by  the  royal  graves.  For  the  wide
difference  in  construction  between  the  shaft  graves  of  the  acropolis  and
the  beehive  tombs  of  the  lower  city  points  to  the  conclusion  that  the
kings  who  were  buried  in  them  belonged  to  two  separate  dynasties.
The  number  of  kings  buried  in  the  shaft  graves  has  not  been  exactly
determined  ;  there  would  seem  to  have  been  at  least  five  or  six.  And
as  each  of  the  beehive  tombs  was  probably  the  sepulchre  of  a  king,
and  eight  such  tombs  have  been  up  to  the  present  time  discovered  at
Mycenae,  it  will  follow  that  at  least  thirteen  or  fourteen  kings  reigned
at  Mycenae.

(2)  Where  did  the  Mycenaean  civilisation  originate?  That  the
Mycenaean  civilisation  was  deeply  influenced  and  partly  moulded  by
the  ancient  civilisations  of  the  East,  particularly  by  those  of  Egypt  and


051  THE  MYCENAEAN  CIVILISATION     bk.  ii.  corinth

Syria,  is  admitted  on  all  hands.     We  have  seen  that  Egyptian  products
have  been  found  in  Mycenae,  and  Mycenaean  products  in  Egypt     But
in  addition  to  this  some  branches  of  the  native  Mycenaean  art  were
clearly   derived   from    Egypt ;    the    native    craftsmen    worked    upon
Egyptian    models.      This   is   conspicuously  the   case  with   the   inlaid
dagger-blades,  especially  the  one  on  which  cats  are  represented  hunting
ducks  among  lotus  or  papyrus  plants.     As  these  plants  are  Egyptian
and  the  cat  seems  not  to  have  been  known  to  the  west  of  Egypt  until
historical  times,  it  is  certain  that  this  scene  on  the  dagger-blade  was
derived  from  Egypt.     We  have  seen  (p.  114)  that  the  same  subject  is
depicted  in  Egyptian  wall-paintings.      Moreover,   a  dagger  similarly
inlaid  with  a  gold  pattern  on  a  middle  strip  of  black  metal  has  been
found  in  Egypt  with  the  mummy  of  Queen  Aah-hotep ;  it  is  believed
to  date  from  before  1600  B.c.     Further,  the  pattern  of  the  elaborately
carved  roof  of  the  beehive  tomb  at  Orchomenus  (see  note  on  ix.  38.  2)
closely  resembles  the  patterns  painted  on  some  Egyptian  roofs.  The  spiral
ornament  itself,  so  characteristic  of  Mycenaean  art,  is  believed  by  Mr.
A.  J.  Evans  to  have  been  copied  from  Egyptian  scarabs  of  the  twelfth
dynasty,  instead  of  having  been,  as  is  commonly  supposed,  imitated  from
native  metal-work  (Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  14  (1894),  p.  326  sqq,^
Again,  the  sphinxes  which  appear  on  Mycenaean  jewellery  are  ultimately
derived  from  Eg^pt,  and  so  perhaps  was  the  art  of  glass-making,  of
which  so  many  specimens  have  been  found  in  the  later  Mycenaean
graves,  as  for  example  in  the  tombs  at  Spata,     The  numerous  articles
of  ivory  found  in  Mycenaean  graves,  and  the  ostrich  ^^^  discovered  in
one  of  the  shaft  graves  at  Mycenae,  also  point  to  African  and  probably
Egyptian  influence.      Yet  connoisseurs   seem    to  be   agreed   that,  in
spite  of  the  close  relation  of  Mycenaean  art  to  Eg^tian  art,  the  formei —
is  not  a  product  of  Egypt     Thus   Prof.   Reisch  says  that  "  any  one=
who  is  at  all  familiar  with  both  styles  of  art,  can  with  ease  and  certainty^
distinguish  Mycenaean  from  Egyptian  products."     Prof.  Percy  Gardnei^
says :    **  Notwithstanding    this   close    relation   to    Egyptian    art,    the=3
masterpieces  of  Mycenae  have  much  in  them  which  is  non-Egyptian^  j
and  which  seems  to  mark  a  native  style  of  art.     There  is  a  freedon-^:*
from  convention  and   a  vigour   about   them  which  is  unmistakable'^
{New  Chapters  in  Greek  History^  p.   72  sq,)     And  even  of  the  inlai
daggers,  which  are   held  especially  to  reflect  the  art  of  Egrypt,   Mr
Flinders  Petrie  says  :  **  The  work  of  the  inlaid  daggers  has  long
recognised  as  inspired  from  Egypt ;  but  we  must  note  that  it  is  native
work  and  not  merely  an  imported  article.     The  attitudes  of  the  figures  "•
and  of  the  lions,  and  the  form  of  the  cat,  are  such  as  no  Egyptiar::^
would  ever  have  executed.     To  make  such  things  in  Greece  implies  s^
far  higher  culture,  and  a  more  intimate  intercourse  with  Egypt,  thair^
merely  to  import  them"  (Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  12  (1891),  p^^
203).     Again,  the  Semitic  influence  of  Syria  may  be  traced  in  th
golden  figurines  of  Aphrodite  (Astarte)  with  her  doves,  and  the  littl
golden  models  of  temples  with  doves  perched  on  them,  which  werc^
found  in  the  royal  graves  on  the  acropolis  at  Mycenae.     And  to  the^
same  influence  may  be  ascribed  the  griffins  and  perhaps  the  palm-trees^


CH.  XVI  THE  MYCENAEAN  CIVILISATION  151

and  lions  of  Mycenaean  art ;  though  in  regard  to  the  pakns  and  lions
it  is  to  be  remembered  that  the  Mycenaeans  may  have  found  them
nearer  home  than  in  Syria.  As  to  lions  see  vi.  5.  4  note ;  as  to  palms
see  ix.  19.  8  note.  Again,  the  heraldic  device  of  the  lions  rampant
over  the  gateway  at  Mycenae  has  been  held  to  be  borrowed  from
Phrygia  (see  above,  p.  102  sq,\  and  a  Phrygian  origin  has  also  been
attributed  by  Dr.  Adler  to  the  beehive  tombs  (Preface  to  Schliemann's
TifynSy  p.  xlvi.)  The  device  of  the  lions  rampant  has  imdoubtedly  its
counterparts  in  Phrygia,  but  it  is  too  common  to  allow  us  to  use  it
with  confidence  as  a  proof  of  Phrygian  influence  at  Mycenae.  It  may
be  traced  back  to  the  art  of  Cappadocia  and  Babylon  (P.  Gardner,
New  Chapters  in  Greek  History,  p.  81).  And  there  is  no  sufficient
evidence  that  the  principle  of  the  beehive  tomb  was  derived  from
Phrygia.  No  beehive  tomb  has  been  as  yet  discovered  in  Phrygia  or
indeed  in  any  part  of  Asia.  The  nearest  analogies,  perhaps,  are  some
tombs  in  Caria  (W.  R.  Paton,  m  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  8  (1887),
pp.  67  sq,j  79  sqq. ;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  PArt  dans  VAntiquiU,
5.  p.  317  sq,^\  but  even  these  differ  from  the  beehive  tombs  and  cannot
have  furnished  the  models  for  them,  since  they  are  of  much  later  date
than  the  Mycenaean  age.

On  the  other  hand,  the  characteristic  Mycenaean  pottery,  with  its
decoration  drawn  from  the  observation  of  marine  plants  and  animals,
has  no  analogy  in  Oriental  art,  and  is  to  all  appearance  an  independent
product  of  the  Mycenaean  people.

Thus  on  the  whole,  though  individual  elements  in   Mycenaean  art
may  be  traced  to  Oriental  prototypes,  we  are  not  justified  in  placing  the
original  home  of  the  Mycenaean  civilisation  in  any  region  but  that  in
which   alone   examples   of  all   its   characteristic   products   have   been
found ;  that  region  consists  of  the  coasts  and  islands  washed  by  the
southern  Aegean.     Rhodes  is  excluded  because  its  Mycenaean  remains,
so  far  as  we  know  at  present,  all  belong  to  the  period  of  full  develop-
ment, not  to  that  of  birth  and  growth.     Thera,  though  it  presents  us
with  ^  very  ancient  phase  of  Mycenaean  art,  is  too  small  to  have
originated  the  movement.     Besides  its  development  was  cut  short  at
a  very   early   stage   by  the   great   catastrophe   which   has   helped   to
preserve  the  evidence  of  the  civilisation  which  it  destroyed.     It  would
seem,  therefore,  that  the  birthplace  of  the  Mycenaean  civilisation  was
either  Argolis  or  Crete.     Argolis  possesses  by  far  the  most  numerous,
most  imposing,  and  most  splendid  relics  of  the  Mycenaean  age  with  which
we  are  at  present  accurately  acquainted.    Crete  on  the  other  hand  has  been
little  explored,  but  what  little  we  know  of  it  tends  to  prove  that  it  teems
with  Mycenaean  remains.    Moreover  in  the  traditions  of  Minos  we  have
evidence,  apparently  trustworthy,  of  a  great  Cretan  kingdom  which,  at
a  time  previous  to  the  Trojan  war  and  hence  to  the  period  of  Mycenae's
greatest  splendour  under  Agamemnon,  dominated  the  sea,  conquered
And  levied  tribute  from  parts  of  the  Greek  mainland,  and  extended  its
mfluence  as  far  as  Sicily.     The  existence  at  this  early  date  of  a  great
iQaritime  power  in  Crete,  which  by  its  central  position  between  Greece
and  the  empires  of  the  East  was  well  fitted  to  receive  and  amalgamate


152  THE  MYCENAEAN  CIVILISATION     bk.  il.  corinth

the  characteristics  of  both,  is  just  what  is  needed  to  explain  the  rise
and  wide  diffusion  of  a  type  of  civilisation  like  the  Mycenaean  in  which
Oriental  influences  seem  to  be  assimilated  and  transmuted  by  a  vigorous
and  independent  nationality  endowed  with  a  keen  sense  of  its  own  for
art.  The  spade  will  probably  one  day  decide  the  question  of  priority
between  Argolis  and  Crete,  but  in  the  meantime  the  probability  appears
to  be  that  the  Mycenaean  civilisation  rose  in  Crete  and  spread  from  it
as  a  centre,  and  that  it  was  not  until  the  Cretan  power  was  on  the
wane  that  the  palmy  days  of  Tiryns  and  Mycenae  began.

Of  the  rich  harvest  that  awaits  the  archaeologist  in  Crete  Mr.  A.  J.
Evans  brought  home  in  1894  a  first -fruit  in  the  shape  of  evidence
that  the  people  of  the  Mycenaean  age  in  Crete  possessed  a  system
of  writing  long  before  the  time  when  the  Phoenician  alphabet  was  first
introduced  into  Greece.  Most  of  the  symbols  which  he  interprets
as  writing  are  engraved  on  the  facets  of  certain  small  three-sided  and
four-sided  stones,  and  are  arranged  in  groups  on  what  seem  to  be  fixed
principles.  The  stones,  most  of  which  have  been  found  in  Crete,  though
several  have  been  found  elsewhere,  are  perforated  through  their  axis,
and  Mr.  Evans  believes  that  they  were  used  as  seals  like  the
Babylonian  cylinders.  The  extremely  early  date  of  these  engraved
stones  is  inferred  from  their  having  been  found  apparently  in  tombs
at  Phaestus  along  with  Egyptian  scarabs  of  the  twelfth  dynasty  and
a  painted  vase  like  the  vases  of  Thera.  Hence  Mr.  Evans  would
date  these  tombs  roughly  between  2500  and  1800  B.C.  Two  at  least
of  these  engraved  stones  were  found  at  Cnosus,  the  ancient  capital  of
Minos,  and  here,  too,  on  the  gypsum  blocks  of  a  prehistoric  building,
which  from  the  pottery  found  in  it  appears  to  have  belonged  to  the  best
period  of  Mycenaean  art,  are  carved  symbols  of  the  same  sort  as  those
on  the  faceted  stones.*  Similar  symbols  occur  on  potsherds  found  at
Kahun  and  Gurob  in  Egypt  by  Mr.  Flinders  Petrie,  who  assigns  the
deposits  in  which  they  were  discovered  to  the  twelfth  dynasty.  This
date,  it  will  be  observed,  tallies  with  the  date  at  which,  on  independent
grounds,  Mr.  Evans  would  place  the  engraved  stones  found  at  Phaestus.
The  writing  on  these  various  materials  is  of  two  sorts:  one  is  pictog^phic,
the  other  is  linear  and  quasi-alphabetic.  The  pictographic  is  the  older
of  the  two,  and  though  it  survived  into  Mycenaean  times,  it  can  be
traced  far  back  into  the  third  millennium  B.C  To  all  appearance  it  was
evolved  in  Crete  itself  by  an  aboriginal  race,  which  did  not  belong  to
the  Greek  stock.  This  race  was  probably  the  people  whom  the  ancients
called  the  Eteocretes  or  *true  Cretans.'  Their  principal  city  was
Praesus,  and  near  it  has  been  found  a  remarkable  inscription,  which,
though  written  in  archaic  Greek  characters,  is  in  an  unknown  language.
This  unknown  language  was  probably  the  speech  of  the  Eteocretes,  and
hence  of  the  people  who  originated  the  two  systems  of  writing  in
question,  the  pictographic  and  the  linear ;  and  the  fact  of  the  inscription
being  in  Greek  characters  seems  to  prove  that  the  old  language
continued  to  be  spoken  even  after  the  aboriginal  race  had  come  in
contact  with  the  Greeks  and  had  exchanged  its  own  system  of  writing
for  the   Greek   alphabet.      Though   it  may  have   been   modified   by


CH.  XVI  THE  MYCENAEAN  CIVILISATION  153

Egyptian  influences,  the  Cretan  pictographic  writing  is  not  a  mere
copy  of  Egyptian  hieroglyphs.  Mr.  Evans  regards  it  as  probably  akin
to  the  so-called  Hittite  hieroglyphs  of  Asia  Minor  or  Northern  Syria,
and  as  p>erhaps  shading  off  into  them  by  intermediate  phases.  Yet  as
a  written  system  it  would  seem  to  have  been  confined  chiefly,  if  not
exclusively,  to  Crete,  though  a  signet  engraved  with  these  pictographic
characters  has  been  found  at  Sparta.  The  linear  system  of  writing,  on
the  other  hand,  had  a  far  wider  range ;  for  specimens  of  it  have  been
found  in  Peloponnese  (at  Mycenae  and  Nauplia),  in  Attica  (at  Menidi)^
in  Sjphnos,  and  on  the  early  potsherds  of  Kahun  and  Gurob  in  Egypt.
This  linear  writing  is  certainly  connected  with  the  pictographic,  and  may
perhaps  have  been  evolved  out  of  it.  In  character  it  is  probably
alphabetic  or  at  all  events  syllabic.  It  partially  agrees  with  the
Cypriote  and  Asiatic  syllabaries,  and  shows  many  striking  resemblances
to  Semitic  letters.  See  Mr.  Evans's  letter  in  the  Athenaeum^  23
June,  1894,  p.  812  sq,^  and  his  paper  *  Primitive  pictographs  and  a  prae-
Phoenician  script  from  Crete  and  the  Peloponnese,'  Journal  of  Hellenic
Studies^  14  (1894),  pp.  270-372.  Thus  it  would  seem  that  the  My-
cenaean civilisation  flourished  in  Crete  at  the  end  of  the  third  and  the
b^inning  of  the  second  millennium  B.C.  This,  too,  is  about  the  date  to
which,  on  other  grounds,  we  must  assign  the  remains  of  early  Mycenaean
type  in  the  "  second  city  "  at  Troy,  since  these  remains  are  more  archaic
than  the  Mycenaean  remains  of  Thera,  which  was  destroyed  by  the
eruption  of  about  2000  B.C.  In  this  connexion  it  is  worthy  of  note  that
Teucer,  the  legendary  founder  of  the  oldest  city  in  the  Troad,  is  said  to
have  been  a  Cretan  (Tzetzes,  SchoL  on  Lycophron^  iSoi)-  Such  tradi-
tions are  not  to  be  lightly  set  aside.  For  the  progress  of  archaeological
discovery  tends  more  and  more  to  show  that  Greek  traditions,  which
not  so  long  ago  it  was  the  fashion  to  pooh-pooh,  rest  on  a  solid  basis
of  historical  fact.

(3)  To  what  race  did  the  Mycenaean  people  belong?  We  have
seen  a  certain  amount  of  evidence  (pp.  142,  152  sq,^  that  both  in  Crete
and  on  the  mainland  of  Greece  the  people  of  the  Mycenaean  age
possessed  the  art  of  writing.  If  this  evidence  should  prove  not  to  be
fallacious,  and  we  should  succeed  in  reading  the  Mycenaean  inscriptions,
we  shall  know  what  language  they  spoke,  and  shall  thus  possess  a  clue,
not  of  course  an  infallible  one,  to  their  nationality.  In  the  meantime
we  must  seek  to  determine  their  racial  affinities  by  other  tests.

When  the  royal  graves  were  discovered  by  Dr.  Schliemann  on
the  acropolis  of  Mycenae,  archaeologists  were  at  first  so  much  struck
by  the  Oriental  affinities  and  the  barbaric  splendour  and  profusion  of
the  ornaments  lavished  on  the  dead,  that  they  were  inclined  to
attribute  them  to  an  eastern  and  semi-barbarous  race.  Professor  U.
Kohler  accordingly  propounded  a  theory  that  the  graves  were  those  of
Carian  settlers  in  Greece  {MittheiL  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  3  (1878),
pp.  I- 1 3),  and  this  view  was  adopted  and  reinforced  with  fresh  argu-
ments by  Professors  Diinunler  and  Studnizcka  (*Die  Herkunft  dcr
mykenischen  Cultur,'  Mittheil,  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,  12  (1887),  pp.
1-24).     The  grounds  on  which  it  rests  are  chiefly  these.     The  Carians


154  THE  MYCENAEAN  CIVILISATION     bk.  II.  corinth

are  said  on  the  authority  of  Aristotle  (cited  by  Strabo,  viii.  p.  374)  to
have  occupied  Epidaurus  and  Hermion ;  in  the  time  of  Minos  they
held  the  islands  of  the  Aegean,  and  were  a  powerful  seafaring  people
(Herodotus,  i.  171).  When  the  Athenians  opened  the  graves  and
removed  the  dead  from  the  island  of  Delos  in  the  fifth  century  B.C.,
more  than  half  of  the  dead  were  recognised  as  Carians  by  the  fashion
of  the  weapons  which  were  buried  with  them  (Thucydides,  i.  8).
Moreover,  one  of  the  two  citadels  at  Megara  was  csilled  Caria  after  the
legendary  Car  (Paus.  i.  40.  6 ;  cp.  i.  39.  5  J^.) ;  and  the  double  axe,
which  occurs  as  an  ornament  on  some  of  the  Mycenaean  jewellery,  was
a  symbol  of  the  Carian  Zeus  (Preller,  Griech,  MythologU^^  i.  p.  141,
note  2).  But  this  theory  of  the  Carian  origin  of  the  Mycenaean
civilisation  has  not  been  confirmed  by  subsequent  research  and  is  now
generally  abandoned.  It  has  been  pointed  out  that  the  Mycenaean
civilisation  extended  over  a  far  wider  area  than  that  which  is  said  to
have  been  occupied  by  the  Carians,  and  that  in  Caria  itself  no  archi-
tecture or  sculpture  of  the  Mycenaean  type  is  known  to  exist.

At  the  date  when  the  Homeric  poems,  the  earliest  literary  record
of  the  Greek  race,  were  composed,  somewhere  about  1000  B.C.  or  not
very  long  after  it,  we  find  from  the  poems  that  the  whole  region  which
had  been  the  seat  of  the  Mycenaean  civilisation  was  occupied  by  a
Greek  race,  the  Achaeans,  whose  civilisation  closely  resembled  in  many
respects  that  of  the  Myceiiaean  age,  and  whose  principal  cities
(including  Orchomenus,  Mycenae,  Tiryns,  and  Amyclae)  were  just
those  which  have  been  found  to  contain  the  most  striking  relics  of
Mycenaean  art  From  this  it  is  a  reasonable  inference  that  the
Achaeans  were  the  people  who  reared  the  imposing  fortifications,
palaces,  and  tombs  of  these  cities,  and  created  the  Mycenaean  art,
and  that  the  differences  between  the  Achaean  civilisation,  as  revealed
to  us  by  Homer,  and  the  Mycenaean  civilisation,  as  exhibited  in  the
monuments,  are  to  be  explained  by  the  somewhat  later  date  of  the
poems,  which  on  this  view  portray  a  later  and  perhaps  decadent  phase
of  the  Mycenaean  age,  having  been  possibly  composed  at  a  time  when
the  old  civilisation  was  either  being  slowly  worsted  in  conflict  with  a
younger  and  more  vigorous  rival,  or  had  actually  been  extinguished  in
its  native  home  and  survived  only  in  popular  tradition  and  the  lays  of
minstrels  as  the  fading  memory  of  a  golden  age  in  the  past.

Among  the  resemblances  which  can  be  traced  between  the  Homeric
and  Mycenaean  civilisation  may  be  mentioned  the  fortification  of
the  cities,  the  plan  and  disposition  of  the  palaces,  and  the  rich  and
elaborate  metal-work ;  in  particular  the  scenes  inlaid  in  diverse  metals
on  the  shield  of  Achilles  (//.  xviii.  478  sqq.^  tally  remarkably  with  the
scenes,  similarly  inwrought,  on  the  dagger-blades  found  at  Mycenae.
Further,  a  comparison  of  the  defensive  armour  used  in  the  Mycenaean
and  Homeric  age  respectively  appears  to  show  that  the  two  were  closely
alike,  if  not  identical  (see  W.  Reichel,  Ueber  die  homerische  Waffetty
Wien,  1894).  Again,  in  the  Homeric  poems  Mycenae  is  still  "the
golden  city "  (77.  vii.  1 80,  xi.  46 ;  Od,  iii.  304),  and  the  treasures  of
Orchomenus  are  ranked  with  those  of  Egyptian  Thebes  (//.  ix.  381  sq.)


CH.  XVI  THE  MYCENAEAN  CIVILISATION  155

On  the  other  hand,  among  the  real  or  apparent  difTerences  which
have  been  noted  between  the  Mycenaean  and  the  Homeric  modes  of
life  the  most  striking  are  as  follows.  First,  in  Homeric  times  iron  was
in  use,  at  least  for  certain  implements,  whereas  the  Mycenaeans  were
essentially  in  the  Bronze  Age,  a  very  little  iron  only  having  been  found
in  some  of  the  later,  and  none  at  all  in  the  oldest,  graves  at  Mycenae.
Second,  in  the  Homeric  age  the  dead  were  burnt ;  in  the  Mycenaean
age  they  were  buried.  Third,  the  Homeric  women  wore  garments
fastened  with  brooches,  whereas  the  Mycenaeans  would  seem  to  have
worn  sewn  garments  almost  universally,  since  very  few  brooches  have
been  found  in  their  houses  and  graves.

But  even  these  differences  between  the  Mycenaeans  and  the  Homeric
Greeks  have  turned  out,  with  increased  knowledge  and  more  careful
research,  to  be  less  than  was  at  first  supposed.  For,  first,  in  the
Homeric  poems  iron  plays  a  very  subordinate  part ;  we  hear  of  iron
axes,  knives,  and  arrow-heads,  but  most  of  the  weapons  and  implements
mentioned  in  the  poems  are  of  bronze ;  in  &ct  while  iron  is  men-
tioned in  the  Ilicul  and  Odyssey  only  fifty -eight  times,  bronze  is
mentioned  no  less  than  three  hundred  and  fifty-nine  times.  See  F.  B.
Jevons,  *Iron  in  Homer,*  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  13  (1892-3),  pp.
25-31.  Thus  it  would  seem  that  the  Homeric  Greeks  lived  at  a  very
early  period  of  the  iron  age,  when  bronze  was  still  the  metal  in
commonest  use  (cp.  Pausanias,  iiL  3.  8) ;  and  nearly  the  same  thing
can  be  said  of  the  Mycenaeans,  for  though  bronze  was  the  metal  of
which  they  commonly  made  their  weapons  and  some  of  their  domestic
utensils,  they  were  not  wholly  unacquainted  with  iron,  as  the  occurrence
of  a  few  iron  rings  in  some  of  the  graves  of  the  lower  city  at  Mycenae
has  sufficed  to  demonstrate.  In  short,  all  the  difference  in  this  respect
between  the  Homeric  and  the  Mycenaean  age  is  that  in  the  former
iron  was  in  somewhat  more  general  use  than  in  the  latter,  a  fact  which
confirms  the  conclusion,  reached  by  other  methods,  that  the  Homeric
poems  are  of  later  date  than  the  remains  of  Mycenaean  art  as  a  whole.

Second,  though  the  Homeric  Greeks  burnt  their  dead  and  the
Mycenaeans  buried  them,  yet  even  in  Homer  there  are  traces  of  a
custom  of  embalming  corpses  instead  of  burning  them  (//.  vii.  85,
xvi.  465,  674;  Helbig,  Das  homeriscke  Epos^  p.  54);  and  the
belief  of  the  later  Greeks  touching  the  bones  of  some  of  their
ancient  heroes,  as  Orestes  and  Theseus  (Herodotus,  i.  68  ;  Plutarch,
Theseus^  36),  seems  to  show  that  they  had  a  lingering  tradition  of  a
time  when  their  forefathers  buried  their  dead.  Moreover,  when  an
ancient  Greek  cemetery  was  excavated  in  1891  to  the  north-east  of  the
Dtpylum  at  Athens,  it  was  found  that  in  all  the  oldest  graves,  with  a
single  exception,  the  dead  were  buried  and  not  burnt ;  the  date  of
these  oldest  graves  seems  to  be  the  eight  or  seventh  century  B.C.  See
A.  Bruckner,  in  Jahrbuch  d,  arch,  Instituts,  7  (1892),  Archaologischer
Anzeiger,  p.  19  sqq,\  A.  Briicker  und  E.  Pemice,  *Ein  attischer
Friedhof,'  MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  18  (1893),  P-  73  sqq.

Third,  though  brooches  were  not  found  in  the  oldest  graves  at
Mycenae,  namely  the  shaft  graves  on  the  acropolis,  one  was  found  in


156  THE  MYCENAEAN  CIVILISATION     BK.  IL  CORINTH

a  house  on  the  acropolis  and  a  few  were  found  in  the  graves  of  the
lower  city.  This  proves  that  at  some  period  of  their  history  the
Mycenaeans  at  least  occasionally  wore  garments  fastened  with  brooches
instead  of  sewed  garments,  and  that  therefore  no  such  sharp  distinction
can  be  drawn  between  the  Homeric  and  the  Mycenaean  costume  as
some  archaeologists,  especially  Prof.  Studnizcka,  were  formerly  disposed
to  make.

On  the  whole,  then,  the  evidence  thus  far  tends  strongly  to  show
that  there  was  no  sudden  and  violent  breach  between  the  Mycenaean
and  Homeric  civilisation,  but  that  the  latter  was  merely  the  natural
continuation  and  outgrowth,  perhaps  in  a  somewhat  degenerate  shape,
of  the  former.  The  continuity  of  the  history  of  Greek  art  from  the
Mycenaean  epoch  down  to  the  classical  age  is  confirmed  by  those
features  of  classical  Greek  architecture  which  seem  to  be  directly
descended  from  corresponding  features  in  Mycenaean  architecture.
Thus  the  fundamental  parts  of  a  Greek  temple,  namely  the  sacred
chamber  or  cella  and  the  portico  leading  into  it,  seem  to  be  a  copy
of  the  hall  and  portico  of  the  palaces  of  the  Mycenaean  age,  such  as
have  been  found  at  Troy,  Tiryns,  and  Mycenae.  The  g^rand  portal
or  propylaeum  at  Tiryns  (see  below,  p.  222)  is  identical  in  plan  with
the  similar  portals  which  the  Greeks  of  the  classical  age  erected  as
entrances  to  their  greatest  sanctuaries,  for  example,  the  Acropolis  at
Athens  and  the  precinct  of  Demeter  at  Eleusis  (see  vol.  2.  pp.  249  sgq.^
505  sq,)  Again,  the  Doric  column  seems  to  be  derived  from  the
Mycenaean  column,  so  far  as  the  latter  is  known  to  us  from  the  half-
columns  of  the  tomb  of  Clytaemnestra  (above,  p.  127)  and  from  an  ivory
model  of  a  column  fluted  in  the  Doric  way.  Lastly,  the  sloping  gable-
roofs  of  Greek  temples,  so  different  from  the  fiat  roofs  which  prevail  in
the  hot  climates  of  Asia  and  Northern  Africa,  had  their  counterparts  in
the  sloping  roofs  of  the  Mycenaean  houses ;  for  that  the  Mycenaeans
built  their  houses  with  gable-roofs  may  be  inferred  with  certainty  both
from  the  similar  roofs  of  the  rock-cut  tombs  at  Mycenae  (above,  p.  1 30)
and  from  two  sepulchral  urns  of  the  Mycenaean  period,  found  in  Crete,
which  are  fashioned  in  the  shape  of  tiny  houses  with  gable-roofs.

The  semi-Oriental  style  of  the  Mycenaean  civilisation  is  no  serious
objection  to  the  view  that  the  people  who  evolved  and  spread  that
civilisation  were  of  the  Greek  stock.  For  Greece  after  all  is  at  the
gateway  of  the  East,  and  the  Homeric  Greeks  themselves  would  seem
to  have  been  under  the  influence  of  the  Orient  to  an  extent  which  the
ordinary  reader  of  Homer  hardly  realises.  "  If  the  modem  reader,"
says  Prof  Helbig  (Das  homerische  Epos^  p.  425  j^.)  "were  suddenly
transported  by  magic  into  the  hall  of  an  Ionian  king  in  which  an  Homeric
minstrel  were  in  the  act  of  trolling  out  a  new  lay,  the  artificial  style  and
the  gay  and  varied  colours  which  would  everywhere  meet  his  eye  might
well  make  him  feel  as  if  he  were  not  in  a  Greek  assembly,  but  in
Nineveh  at  the  court  of  Sennacherib  or  in  the  palace  of  King  Hiram  at
Tyre."

The  catastrophe  which  put  an  end  to  the  Mycenaean  civilisation  in
Greece  would  seem  to  have  been  the  Dorian  invasion,  which,  according


CH.  XVI  THE  MYCENAEAN  CIVILISATION  157

to  the  traditional  Greek  chronology,  befell  about  the  middle  of  the
twelfth  century  B.C.  (Busolt,  Griech,  Geschichte^  i.  p.  259  sq.)  That
the  end  of  Mycenae  and  Tiryns  was  sudden  and  violent  is  proved  by
the  conclusive  evidence  which  shows  that  the  palaces  were  destroyed
by  fire  and  that,  once  destroyed,  they  were  never  rebuilt.  The  date,
too,  of  the  Dorian  invasion,  so  far  as  we  can  determine  it,  harmonises
well  with  this  view ;  for  the  Egyptian  evidence  of  the  existence  of  My-
cenae comes  down  to  about  the  time  of  the  Dorian  invasion,  and  there
significantly  stops.  The  cessation  also  of  the  characteristic  Mycenaean
pottery  about  the  same  date  points  to  the  same  conclusion.  It  is  not
indeed  to  be  supposed  that  the  Dorians  swept  over  Greece  in  one
unbroken  wave  of  conquest.  The  tide  of  invasion  probably  ebbed  and
flowed ;  raids  were  met  and  repelled,  but  were  followed  by  incursions
of  fresh  swarms  of  invaders,  the  new-comers  steadily  gaining  ground,
encroaching  on  and  enveloping  the  ancient  Mycenaean  kingdoms  till,
the  last  barrier  giving  way  before  them,  the  capitals  themselves  were
stormed,  their  treasures  plundered,  and  the  palaces  given  to  the  flames.
The  conflict  between  civilisation  and  barbarism,  the  slow  decline  of  the
former  and  the  gradual  triumph  of  the  latter,  may  have  lasted  many
years.  It  is  thus  that  many,  if  not  most,  permanent  conquests  have
been  eflected.  It  was  thus  that  the  Saxons  step  by  step  ousted  the
Britons,  and  the  Danes  obtained  a  footing  in  England  ;  it  was  thus
that  the  Turks  strangled  the  Byzantine  empire.  Events  like  the  fall
of  Constantinople  and  the  expulsion  of  the  Moors  from  Granada  are
only  the  last  scenes  in  tragedies  which  have  been  acting  for  centuries.

To  attribute,  with  some  writers,  the  creation  instead  of  the  destruc-
tion of  the  Mycenaean  civilisation  to  the  Dorians  is  preposterous,  since
the  Dorian  immigration  did  not  take  place  till  the  twelfth  century  B.C,
while  the  Mycenaean  civilisation  is  known  from  Egyptian  evidence  to
have  existed  from  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century  B.C.  at  least.  But
this  attribution  involves  other  than  chronological  difliculties.  The
typical  Dorians  were  the  Spartans,  and  no  greater  contrast  can  well
be  conceived  than  that  between  the  luxurious,  semi-Oriental  civilisation
of  Mycenae  and  the  stem  simplicity  of  Sparta.  On  the  one  side  we
see  imposing  fortifications,  stately  tombs,  luxurious  baths,  magnificent
palaces,  their  walls  gay  with  bright  frescoes  or  glittering  with  burnished
bronze,  their  halls  crowded  with  a  profusion  of  precious  objects  of  art
and  luxury,  wrought  by  native  craftsmen  or  brought  by  merchants
from  the  bazaars  of  Egypt  and  Assyria ;  and  in  the  midst  of  all  a
sultan,  laden  with  golden  jewellery,  listening  to  minstrels  singing  the
talc  of  Troy  or  the  wanderings  of  Ulysses.  On  the  other  side  we  see
an  open  unfortified  city  with  insignificant  buildings,  where  art  and
poetry  never  flourished,  where  gold  and  silver  were  banned,  and  where
even  the  kings  prided  themselves  on  the  meanness  of  their  attire
(Plutarch,  Agesilaus,  36 ;  Cornelius  Nepos,  Agesilaus,  8).  The
Dorians,  if  we  may  judge  of  them  by  the  purest  specimens  of  the
breed,  were  just  as  incapable  of  creating  the  art  of  Mycenae  as  the
Turks  were  of  building  the  Parthenon  and  St  Sophia.

Of  the  Greeks  who  were  rendered  homeless  by  the  Dorian  invasion


IS8  THE  MYCENAEAN  CIVILISATION     BK.  ii.  corinth

most  fled  to  Asia.  There,  on  the  beautiful  island-studded  coast,  under
the  soft  Ionian  sky,  a  new  Greece  arose  which,  in  its  splendid  cities,  its
busy  marts,  its  solemn  fanes,  combined  Greek  subtlety  and  refinement
with  much  of  Asiatic  pomp  and  luxury.  By  this  long  and  brilliant
after-glow  of  the  Mycenaean  civilisation  in  Asia  we  may  judge,  as  it
has  been  well  said,  what  its  meridian  splendour  had  been  in  Europe.

On  the  Mycenaean  art  and  civilisation,  its  character,  date,  affinities,  etc.,  see
U.  Kohler,  '  Ueber  die  Zeit  und  den  Urspning  der  Grabanlagen  in  Mykene  und
Spata,*  Mitiluil.  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  3  (1878),  pp.  I-13;  F.  Lenormant,  in
Gazette  ArckiologiqtUy  5  (1879),  pp.  197-209 ;  C.  T.  Newton,  Essays  on  Art  and
Archaeology  {hondony  1880),  pp.  246-302;  P.  Gardner,  *  Stephani  on  the  tombs
at  Mycenae/ ybttrmz/  0/ Hellenic  Studies,  i  (1880),  pp.  94-106 ;  id.,  New  Chapters
in  Greek  History  (London,  1892),  pp.  55-1^2  ;  A.  Furtwangler  und  G.  Loschcke,
Mykenische  Vasen  (Berlin,  1886),  Introduction ;  F.  Adler,  Pre£Eu:e  to  Schliemann's
Tiryns  (London,  1886),  pp.  v-liii;  Dttmmler  und  Studnizcka,  'Die  Herkunit
der  mykenischen  Cultur,  Mittheil,  cL  arch,  Inst,»in  Athen,  12(1887),  pp.  1-24;
W.  M.  Flinders  Petrie,  *The  Egyptian  bases  of  Greek  Ys^XxstyJ  Journal  of  HeUatic
Studies,  II  (1890),  pp.  I271-277 ;  id,,  'Notes  on  the  antiquities  of  Mykenai,'
Journal  of  Hellen,  Stud,  12  (1891),  pp.  199-205;  Schucnhardt,  Schliemanns
Ausgrabungen^  pp.  368-389;  Cecil  Torr,  in  ClassiccU  Review,  6  (1892),  pp.  127-
131  ;  Cecil  Smitn,  *  £p;ypt  and  Mycenaean  antiquities,'  ib,  pp.  462-466 ;  Stein-
dorfT,  '  Ae^pten  und  die  mykenische  Kxx\\.MX,Wahrbuch  d,  archdoL  Inst,  7  (1892),
Archaologischer  Anzeiger,  pp.  11-16;  M.  Collignon,  Histoire  de  la  Sculpture
Grecque,  I.  pp.  59-64;  H.  Brunn,  Griechische  Kunstgeschichie,  I  (Miinchen,
1893),  pp.  1-64;  G.  Busolt,  Griech,  Geschichte^  i.  pp.  3-126;  Ed.  Meyer,
Gesch,  d,  Alterthums,  2  (Stuttgart,  1893),  ^  81-84  *  Tsountas,  Mv/c^reu  (Athens,
1893),  pp.  172-264;  E.  Reisch,  'Die  mykenische  Frage,'  Verhandlungen  der  ^z„
Versammlung  deutsch,  Philologen  (Leipzig,  1894),  pp.  97-122;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,
Hist,  de  VArt  dans  VAntiquite,  6.  pp.  983-1010;  A.  J.  Evans,  'Primitive
pictographs  and  a  prae-Phoenician  script  from  Crete  and  the  Peloponnese,'
Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  14  (1894),  pp.  270-372.

Mr.  Tsountas,  the  distinguished  Greek  archaeologist  who  has  done
much  to  advance  our  knowledge  of  Mycenaean  art,  has  endeavoured
from  a  study  of  Mycenaean  architecture  to  arrive  at  some  conclusion
as  to  the  original  home  of  the  Mycenaean  people  before  they  migrated
into  Greece.  His  speculations  are  so  ingenious  and  interesting  that
they  deserve  a  brief  notice  here.

He  points  out  that  in  the  beehive  tombs  we  probably  possess
models  of  the  primitive  dwellings  of  the  Mycenaean  people.  For  when
men  believe,  as  the  Mycenaeans  apparently  did,  that  the  dead  live  in
the  grave  a  shadowy  life  which  is  the  reflexion  of  the  life  they  led  on
earth,  they  naturally  make  their  tombs  like  their  houses,  and  place  in
them  the  tools,  weapons,  and  ornaments  which  the  departed  had  used
in  life.  Now  it  seems  clear  that  houses  of  the  beehive  pattern,  built
into  the  side  of  a  hillock  or  covered  over  with  a  mound  of  earth,  are
most  suitable  to  a  country  where  the  winters  are  long  and  cold,  and
where  consequently  people  construct  their  houses  underground  for  the
sake  of  warmth  and  shelter.  Such  houses  have  been  used  and  are  still
used  by  primitive  races  in  many  parts  of  the  world.  In  the  Bronze
Age,  to  which  the  Mycenaean  people  essentially  belonged,  the  rude
tribes  of  northern  Europe  appear  to  have  constructed  both  their  houses
and  their  tombs  in  this  fashion  (see  Sir  J.  Lubbock,  Prehistoric  Timesy^


CH.  XVI  THE  MYCENAEAN  CIVILISATION  159

pp.  56  sqq.^  113  sqq^  It  is  therefore  a  legitimate  inference  that  the
Mycenaean  people,  before  they  migrated  into  the  sunnier  climate  of
Greece,  inhabited  a  bleak  northern  country,  where  they  dwelt  in  round
huts  dug  out  in  the  sides  of  hills  or  covered  over  with  earth,  stones,  and
branches.  Other  evidence,  such  as  the  remains  of  prehistoric  villages
in  the  vaUey  of  the  Po,  and  sepulchral  urns  shaped  like  round  huts,
which  were  found  under  a  layer  of  volcanic  matter  at  Albano  in  18 17,
confirms  the  view  that  while  the  ancestors  of  the  Greeks  and  Latins
lived  together  in  some  part  of  central  Europe,  they  made  their  houses  of
a  circular  shape.  See  Lubbock,  op,  cit,  p.  54  sq, ;  W.  Helbig,  Die
Italiker  in  der  Poebene  (Leipzig,  1879);  Journal  of  Philology^  15
(1886),  pp.  145-148.

But  the  shaft  graves  on  the  acropolis  at  Mycenae  differ  so  totally
in  plan  from  the  beehive  tombs  that  we  can  hardly  suppose  them  to
have  been  constructed  by  the  same  people.  Now  on  the  acropolis  at
Mycenae,  as  we  have  seen  (p.  122),  remains  have  been  found  of  two-
storied  houses,  in  which  the  inhabitants  appear  to  have  lived  in
the  upper  story  and  to  have  used  the  ground  story  either  as  a  store-
room or  merely  as  a  place  in  which  to  deposit  rubbish.  Houses  of  this
type,  raised  above  the  ground,  are  naturally  built  by  people  who  have
previously  been  accustomed  to  erect  their  houses  on  raised  platforms
over  marshes  and  lakes.  The  remains  of  prehistoric  villages  discovered
within  recent  years  in  Switzerland,  Italy,  Germany,  and  other  countries
prove  that  in  the  Stone  and  Bronze  Ages  people  in  many  parts  of  Europe
dwelt  over  lakes  and  marshes  in  huts  built  on  wooden  platforms,  which
were  supported  on  piles  (see  Lubbock,  Prehistoric  Times^  pp.  181-226 ;
R.  Munro,  The  Lake-Dwellings  of  Europe^  London,  1890).  Herodotus
has  graphically  described  (v.  16)  one  such  village  which  existed  in
Paeonia  down  to  the  fifth  century  B.C.  Mr.  Tsountas  has  accordingly
conjectured  that  one  branch  of  the  Mycenaean  people,  that  perhaps
which  made  the  shaft  graves,  were  originally  lake-dwellers,  inhabiting
villages  raised  on  piles  over  lakes  and  swamps.  This  conjecture  is
confirmed  by  the  stone  model  of  such  a  village  which  was  found  many
years  ago  in  Melos,  and  is  now  in  the  Museum  at  Munich.  It  repre-
sents seven  round  huts  forming  three  sides  of  a  square ;  on  the  fourth
side  there  is  a  wall  with  a  gateway  and  porch.  The  huts  are  decorated
on  the  outside  with  the  characteristic  Mycenaean  spirals.  The  platform
on  which  they  stand  is  supported  by  four  pillars,  which  are  represented
as  made  of  logs  laid  one  upon  the  other.  See  Lubbock,  op,  cit,  p.  55.
As  Melos  is  one  of  the  Greek  islands  in  which  early  Mycenaean
remains  have  been  found,  it  seems  not  improbable  that  in  this  model
we  have  a  copy  of  a  lake- village  of  the  early  Mycenaean  period.  Lastly,
Mr.  Tsountas  has  pointed  out  that  some  of  the  most  important  cities  of
the  Mycenaean  age  in  Greece,  as  Orchomenus,  Tiryns,  and  Amyclae,
seem  to  have  been  originally  surrounded  by  marshes,  and  that  the
Greeks  had  traditions  of  towns  which  had  been  swallowed  up  by  the
Copsuc  Lake  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  413  ;  Pausanias,  ix.  24.  2).  The  remains
of  a  great  fortress  of  the  Mycenaean  era  are  still  to  be  seen  on  the
island  of  Goulas  in  the  Copaic  Lake  (see  note  on  ix.  24.  i ).  Mr.  Tsountas


i6o  THE  MYCENAEAN  CIVILISATION     BK.  ii.  corinth

suggests  that  the  choice  of  such  sites  was  determined  by  old  habit,  the
people  settling  among  marshes  because  their  fathers  had  done  so  before
them,  although  much  stronger  situations  might  have  been  found  close
at  hand.

Thus,  according  to  Mr.  Tsountas,  there  were  two  branches  of  the
Mycenaean  people ;  one  dwelt  in  underground  huts,  the  other  in  pile-
villages  built  on  lakes  and  marshes  ;  the  former  he  would  identify  with
the  Homeric  Achaeans,  the  latter  with  the  Homeric  Danai.  He  con-
siders that  the  Minyans  of  Orchomenus,  the  Tirynthians,  and  the
inhabitants  of  the  Greek  islands  belonged  to  the  lake-dwellers  or  Danai.
Mycenae  itself,  on  his  theory,  was  founded  by  the  lake-dwellers  or  Danai
from  Tiryns,  who  after  occupying  the  coast  and  founding  Tiryns  gradu-
ally spread  inland,  and  whose  kings,  the  first  dynasty  of  Mycenae,  were
buried  in  the  shaft  graves  on  the  acropolis.  At  a  later  time  the
Achaeans,  moving  southward  from  Corinth,  made  themselves  masters
of  Mycenae,  and  their  kings,  forming  the  second  dynasty,  were  buried
in  the  beehive  tombs.  This  theory  he  supports  by  the  tradition  that
Mycenae  was  founded  by  Perseus,  king  of  Tiryns  and  son  of  Danae
(Paus.  ii.  1 6.  2  sq.\  that  two  generations  of  Perseus's  descendants
reigned  at  Mycenae  after  him,  and  that  thereupon  a  new  and  more
powerful  dynasty,  that  of  the  Pelopids,  succeeded  to  the  throne  (Thucy-
dides,  i.  9 ;  ApoUodorus,  ed.  R.  Wagner,  p.  185  ;  Strabo,  viii.  p.  377  ;
Eusebius,  Chronic,  L  voL  i.  p.  179,  ed.  Schoene).  He  holds  that
the  shaft  graves  on  the  acropolis  are  the  graves  of  the  older  Perseid
dynasty,  and  that  the  beehive  tombs  are  the  sepulchres  of  the  later
Pelopid  dynasty.

See  Tsountas,  Mvic^i^ai,  pp.  193-199,  204  sq,^  221-245.

16.  6.  a  conduit  called  Peraea.  The  source  of  this  conduit  was
probably  the  copious  spring  which  rises  in  the  glen  about  400  yards
east  of  the  acropolis  of  Mycenae.  Its  water,  which  is  still  famous  for
its  purity  and  salubrious  properties,  flows  southward  into  the  Chceuos
ravine.  In  antiquity  the  water  of  the  spring  seems  to  have  been
brought  in  a  conduit  or  aqueduct  along  the  northern  foot  of  the  acropolis,
where  a  ruined  Turkish  aqueduct  may  still  be  traced.  On  this  northern
slope  of  the  acropolis  there  are  some  cuttings  in  the  rock  which  may
have  belonged  to  the  ancient  aqueduct.  At  the  north-west  comer  of
the  acropolis  there  are  immistakeable  remains  of  an  ancient  aqueduct ;
but  as  the  stones  in  which  the  water-channel  is  cut  are  great  blocks  of
breccia  which  once  formed  part  of  the  fortification-wall  of  the  acropolis,
it  seems  that  the  aqueduct  was  not  made  until  after  the  fortress  had
been  dismantled.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  water  was  ever  brought
within  the  walls  of  the  citadel.  It  is  true  that  there  is  a  deep  rock-cut
cistern  in  the  ancient  house  which  Dr.  Schliemann  discovered  immedi-
ately to  the  south  of  the  circle  of  graves  on  the  acropolis ;  and  a
Cyclopean  conduit  leads  down  into  it  from  the  higher  part  of  the
acropolis-hill,  but  this  conduit  seems  to  have  had  no  connexion  with  the
Persea  spring.  It  is  possible,  however,  that  it  was  this  conduit,  and
not  the  one  outside  the  north  wall  of  the  acropolis,  which  Pausanias
observed  and  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of  Persea.


CH.  XVI  MYCENAE  i6i

But  the  garrison  of  the  acropolis  were  not  wholly  dependent  for

their  water-supply  on  the  cisterns  within  the  walls  and  on  the  aqueduct

at  the  northern  foot  of  the  hill.     Outside  the  north  wall  of  the  fortress

they  had  a  secret  reservoir,  to  which  an  underground  passage  gave

access  from   within    the   walls   of  the  acropolis.     This  reservoir  and

passage  were  discovered  by  Mr.  Tsountas  in  1889,  and  the  present

writer  visited  them  not  long  afterwards.     The  passage  begins  in  the

form  of  a  vaulted  gallery  extending  through  the  thickness  of  the  north

wall  at  a  place  between  the  north  gate  or  postern  and  the  north-west

comer  of  the  acropolis.     It  is  then  continued  underground  outside  the

walls,  running  first  due  north  for  a  short  way,  then  bending  to  the  west,

and  afterwards  to  the  north-east     Its  whole  length  outside  the  walls  is

about  40  yards.     As  the  passage  descends,  there  are  16  steps  in  the

thickness  of  the  wall,  and  83  steps  outside.     The  roof  of  the  first  part

of  the  passage  outside  the  wall  has  fallen  in ;  but  in  the  second  part,

where  the  passage  turns  westward,  the  roof  is  mostly  preserved.     It  is

here  formed  by  blocks  laid  horizontally  on  vertical  side-walls.     But  in

the  last  part  of  the  passage,  the  part  which  runs  north-east  and  is  the

longest  and  best  preserved,  the  roof  is  formed  by  the  inclination  of  the

side-walls  towards  each  other  till  they  meet  overhead,  in  the  style  of  the

galleries  in  the  walls  at  Tiryns  (see  below,  p.  2i()  sq.)     At  its  end  the

passage  is  about  1 5  feet  high  and  4^  feet  wide.     It  terminates  in  a

well,  or  rather  in  a  cistern  shaped  like  a  well,  about  3  feet  wide  and

12  feet  deep.     Immediately  over  the  cistern  there  is  a  hole  in  the  roof,

to  which  a  conduit,  formed  of  earthenware  water-pipes,  leads  under-

ground  from  the  north.     This  conduit  is  now  preserved  for  a  length

of  only  about  1 1  yards,  but  it  appears  to  have  originally  supplied  the

cistern  with  water  from  a  small  but  perennial  spring  which  rises  about

100  yards  nordi  of  the  wall  of  the   acropolis.      By   means   of  this

subterranean  cistern  and  the  underground  passage  leading  to  it  the

garrison  of  Mycenae  could  always,  in  case  of  siege,  obtain  a  supply  of

water  unknown  to  the  enemy.     The  existing  water-pipes  which  supplied

the  cistern  are  of  Roman  date,  and  the  steps  and  walls  in  the  last  part

of  the  passage  are  coated  with  Roman  cement*

See  Schliemann,  Mycenae^  p.  130  sa,  ;  Steffen,  Karten  von  Afykenai,  Tex/,
^  14  sg,  ;  Tsountas,  in  UpaxriKd.  Trjt  Apx^^oX,  'Eroup^at  for  1889,  pp.  1 8-20 ;
*i,  Mvc^cu,  pp.  25-27 ;  Ch.  Belger,  Beitrdge  zur  Kenntniss  der  griech,  Kup-
ft^riiber^  p.  15  ;  li/.,  in  Berliner  pkilolog,  Woclunschrift,  II  (1891),  pp.  449-
452;  Schuchhardt,  Schliemcmns  Ausgrabungen^  p.  167  sq, ;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,
Histoire  de  /'Art  dans  P Antiquity,  6.  pp.  310-313,

16.  6.  underground  bnildings  of  Atrens  and  his  children,  where
their  treasures  were  kept.  By  these  *  underground  buildings'  Pau-
sanias  must  mean  the  beehive  tombs,  since  he  describes  the  beehive  \
tomb  at  Orchomenus  as  a  treasury  (ix.  38.  2).  We  now  know  that  \
these  structures  were  tombs,  not  treasuries.     See  above,  p.  126.

16.  6.  There  Is  a  grave  of  Atreus  etc.  In  this  passage,  which
has  been  much  discussed,  Pausanias  appears  to  mention  eleven  persons
who  were  buried  at  Mycenae,  namely  Atreus,  Cassandra,  Agamemnon,
Eurymedon,  Teledamus,  Pelops,  Electra,  Medon,  Strophius,  Clytaem-

VOL.  Ill  M


i62  GRAVES  AT  MYCENAE  bk.  ii.  corinth

nestra,  and  Aegisthus.     But  we  cannot  be  quite  sure  of  the  number,
since  there  is  a  lacuna  in  the  text.     See  Critical  Note  on  §  7  (voL  i.
p.  571).     Even  assuming  eleven  to  be  the  right  number,  we  cannot  be
sure  of  the  number  of  the  graves,  for  Electra  and  her  sons,  Medon  and
Strophius,  may  have  been  buried  in  a  single  grave,  like  Teledamus  and
Pelops,  and  so  too  may  Aegisthus  and  his  paramour  Clytaemnestra.
If  we  assume  that  this  was  so,  then  the  number  of  the  graves  was
seven,  of  which  six  were  within,  and  one  was  without,  the  walls.     But
if  Electra   was   buried    in   one   grave,  and   her  sons  in  another,  and
Aegisthus  and  Clytaemnestra  were  also  laid  in  separate  graves,  then
the  number  of  the  graves  was  nine,  of  which  seven  were  within,  and
two  were  without,  the  walls.

A  much-debated  question  is,  Where  exactly  were  these  graves?
which  of  the  many  tombs  at  Mycenae  were  pointed  out  to  travellers  in
antiquity  as  the  graves  of  Atreus,  Agamemnon,  and  the  other  famous
personages  enumerated  by  Pausanias  ?

Even  before  his  great  discovery  of  the  royal  graves  on  the  acropolis,
Dr.    Schliemann   had   always   maintained   that   all    the    graves  here
mentioned  by  Pausanias,  except  those  of  Aegisthus  and  Clytaemnestra,
were  on  the  acropolis,  since  in  saying  that  Agamemnon  and  his  com-
panions were  buried  within,  and  Aegisthus  and  Clytaemnestra  without,
the  walls,  Pausanias  can  only  be  referring  to  the  walls  of  the  acropolis.
Accordingly,  when  he  discovered   the  shaft  graves  on   the  acropolis,
just  inside  of  the  wall,   Schliemann  at  once  identified  them  with  the
graves  of  Atreus,  Agamemnon,  etc,  mentioned  by   Pausanias.     This
identification  has  been  disputed,  but  there  are  strong  grounds  for  b^
lieving  it  to  be  correct.     The  question  turns  mainly  on  the  interpreta-
tion of  the  word  *wall'  {rtl\oi)  in  the  present  passage  of  Pausanias
(§   7).       That  Tci^os   in   Greek  writers  generally,   and   in    Pausanias
invariably,  means  a  fortification-wall   is   certain    (cp.    Ch.    Belger,  in
Berliner  philolog.  Wochenschrift^  12   (1892),  p.    131  j^.);  but  here  it
might  be  applied  either  to  the  walls  of  the  acropolis  or  to  the  walls  of
the  lower  city.     That  Pausanias  here  applied  it  to  the  massive  ring-
wall  of  the  acropolis,  which  still  exists,  and  not  to  the  much  slighter
wall  of  the  lower  city  which  has  now  nearly  disappeared,  seems  to  be
proved  by  the  fact  that  a  few  lines  above  (§  5)  he  had  spoken  of  the
circuit-wall  (Trcpi/^oXos)  of  Mycenae  in  a  way  which  makes  it  indubitable
that  by  the  circuit-wall  of  Mycenae  he  meant  the  wall  of  the  acropolis.
Elsewhere  (vii.  25.  6)  he  speaks  of  the  walls  (rv.\o%)  of  Mycenae  in
terms  which  hardly  leave  room  for  doubt  that  there  also  he  had  in
view  the  wall  of  the  acropolis,  not  the  wall  of  the  lower  city.     The
remains  of  the  latter  wall  may  very  well  have  been  nearly  as  ruinous
and  inconspicuous  in  his  time  as  they  are  at  present.     Thus  it  may  be
taken  as  nearly  certain  that  Pausanias  meant  us  to  understand  that  the
graves  of  Atreus,  Agamemnon,  etc.,  were  within  the  acropolis.      Now
just  within  the  wall  of  the  acropolis  Schliemann  found  graves  which  in
respect   of  number  tally  either  exactly  or  approximately   with   those
enumerated  by  Pausanias,  and  which  from  the  profusion  and  splendour
of  the  jewellery  they  contained  can  only  have  been  the  tombs  of  the


CH.  XVI  GRA  VES  A  T  MYCENAE  163

royal  family  of  Mycenae.  This  coincidence  is  too  great  to  be  accidental.
The  inevitable  conclusion  is  that  by  the  graves  of  Atreus,  Agamemnon,
etc.,  our  author  designated  the  graves  discovered  by  Schliemann  on  the
acropolis.

This,  however,  still  leaves  open  the  question  whether  or  not  Pau-
sanias  actually  saw  the  burial-ground  with  its  tombstones  and  the  two
circles  of  slabs  which  enclose  it.     Some  writers  have  held  that  in  the
time  of  Pausanias  (the  second  century  a.d.)  the  whole  burial-ground
must  have  been  completely  hidden  under  a  deep  layer  of  soil  washed
down  from  the  higher  terrace.     This  view  was  formerly  held  by  Dr.
Ch.   Belger  {Beitrdge  zur  Kenntniss  der  griech,  Kuppelgrdber^  p.  19),
and  has  been  accepted,  seemingly  on  his  authority,  by  Messrs.  Perrot
and  Chipiez.     But  a  more  exact  study  of  all  the  evidence  has  since  led
Dr.  Belger  to  the  conclusion   that   "the  circle  of  graves  must  have
remained  visible  so  long  as  the  entrance  to  the  acropolis   was  still
through  the   Lions'   Gate.      The  gradual  disappearance  of  both   the
graveyard  and  the  gateway  under  an  accumulation  of  soil  must  have
gone  on  contemporaneously.     But  since  the  acropolis  was  inhabited,
though  probably  only  to  a  small  extent,  down  to   Roman  times,  we
cannot  shut  our  eyes  to  the  possibility  that  Pausanias  may  still  have
seen  the  tombstones  projecting  from  the  soil "  {Die  mykenische  Lokal-
MLge  (Berlin,    1893),  p.  32).     The  stratum  of  soil,  twelve  to  fourteen
feet  deep,  which  Schliemann  found  overlying  the  tombstones,  may  all
bave  been   accumulated  in  the  sixteen  centuries  which  have   elapsed
between   the  age  of  Pausanias  and  our  own.     But  even  if  when  he
visited  Mycenae  the  graveyard  had  already  disappeared  beneath  the
soil,  the  memory  of  the  number  and  position  of  the  graves  may  well
bave  been  kept  alive  in  the   local    tradition,  and  travellers  may  still
bave  been  shown  the  spot  within  the  Lions'  Gate  where  the  old  kings  of
Mycenae  lay  burifed.     Scholars  who  live  mainly  among  books  are  apt
to  underestimate  the  persistency  and  strength  of  local  tradition  as  it  is
banded  down  orally  from  generation  to  generation  among  the  natives
of  a  district      An  instance  of  this   persistency  and  fidelity  of  local
teuiition  came  to  light  some  years  ago  in  Norway.     Near  the  head  of
tbe  Sandefjord  there  is  a  mound  which  had  been  known  for  centuries  as
'tbe  King's  Mound,'  and  tradition  said  that  a  king  had  been  buried
tbere  with  all  his  treasures.     The  mound  was  excavated  in  1880,  and
it  proved  to  have  been  indeed  the  grave  of  an  old  sea-king  ;  for  a  ship
containing  his  bones  was  discovered  in  it.     But  the  treasures  had  nearly
disappeared,  for  the  tomb  had  been  rifled.     See  G.  H.  Boehmer,  *  Pre-
historic naval  architecture  of  the  North  of  Europe,'  Report  of  the  U.S,
National  Museum  {Smithsonian  Institution)  for  1891,  p.  618  sqq.

It  has  been  suggested  that  Pausanias  derived  his  knowledge  of  the
^ves  neither  from  local  tradition  nor  from  personal  observation,  but
from  the  work  of  some  earlier  writer,  such  as  Hellanicus,  who  lived
in  the  fifth  century  B.C.  and  wrote  a  work  on  Argolis,  and  whom  in
fict  Pausanias  cites  in  this  very  passage  (§  7).  This  is  of  course
possible,  but  as  we  possess  only  a  few  fragments  of  the  writings  of
Hellanicus  the  theory  is  incapable  of  verification.    It  is  also  superfluous.


i64  GRA  VES  A  T  MYCENAE  BK.  ii.  Corinth

since,  as  has  just  been  shown,  there  is  no  reason  why  Pausanias  should
not  have  seen  the  tombstones  for  himself,  or  at  least  have  had  the
situation  of  the  graves  pointed  out  to  him.

Dr.  Belger  has  attempted  to  show  that  the  local  tradition  which
Pausanias  has  preserved,  whether  at  first  or  at  second  hand,  as  to  the
number  of  the  graves  and  the  persons  buried  in  them,  arose  from  a
comparison  of  the  Homeric  narrative  with  the  tombstones  which  stood
over  the  graves  on  the  acropolis,  the  Homeric  legend  having  been  so
manipulated  as  to  fit  the  number  of  the  tombstones  and  the  character
of  the  carving  on  them.  But  this  theory,  more  ingenious  than  con-
vincing, can  hardly  be  held  to  have  been  made  out.

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  consider  seriously  the  view,  advocated  by
Dr.   Schuchhardt  and  formerly  at  least  by  Prof.  Adler,  that  by  the
graves  of  Atreus,  Agamemnon,  etc.,  our  author  meant  the   beehive
tombs  in  the  lower  city.     For,  as  we  have  seen  (p.  i6i),  Pausanias
has   already   described   these   edifices  as  underground  treasuries,  in
ignorance  of  the  fact  that  they  were  tombs.     Besides,  on  this  theory
the  wall  inside  of  which  were  all  except  one  or  two  of  the  royal  graves
must  have  been  the  wall  of  the  lower  city ;  and  accordingly  we  should
expect,  if  this  theory  were  true,  to  find  that  all  the  beehive  tombs
except  one  or  two  were  within  the  city  walls.     But  the  reverse  is  the
case.     Three  only  of  the  beehive  tombs  are  inside  of  the  city  walls,  and
all  the  rest  (five  in  number)  are  outside  of  it.

On  this  question  of  the  graves  see  Schliemann,  Mycenaty  pp.  59  sqq,^  334  sqq.\
Adler,  Preface  to  Schliemann's  Tiryns,  p.  xxxii.  sqq,  ;  C.  T.  Newton,  Essays  on
Art  and  Archaeology,  p.  296  sqq,  ;  Schuchhardt,  Schlienusnns  Ausgrabumgoi}
pp.  189-199 ;  P.  Gardner,  New  Chapters  in  Greek  History,  p.  76  sqq,  ;  Cb.
Belger,  Beitrdge  zur  Kenntniss  der  griech.  Kuppelgrdber  (Berlin,  1887),  p.  14  J^^-  J
id.,  \Vi  Berliner  philolog,  Wochenschrift,  ii  (1891),  pp.  1160  sqq,,  Ii89x^. ;  id-%
in  Berl,  phil,  Wochenschrift,  12  (1892),  p.  131  sq,  ;  id,.  Die  mykenische  Lokal^
(Berlin,  1893) ;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Hist,  de  I'Art  dans  VAntiquiti,  6.  pp.  381-394;
Tsountas,  Mv/c^^ai,  pp.  1 53- 1 57*

16.  6.  The  tomb  of  Cassandra  is  disputed  etc.     This  implies
that  there  was  a  tomb  at  Mycenae  which  was  called  Cassandra's  tomb,
though  the  people  of  Amyclae  denied  the  correctness  of  this  designation.
At  Amyclae  there  was  a  sanctuary  of  Alexandra,  whom  the  Amydaeans
identified  with  Cassandra  (iii.  19.  6) ;  but  this  sanctuary  need  not  have
been  the  tomb  which  the  Amyclaeans  claimed  to  be  that  of  Cassandra.
It  is  possible  that,  as  Prof.   Reisch  has  suggested  {Zeitschrift  f,  die
osterreich,  Gymnasien^  42  (1891),  p.  231),  the  tomb  at  Amyclae  which
was  pointed  out  as  Cassandra's  grave  was  no  other  than  the  beehive
tomb  of  Vaphio  (see  above,  p.  134  sqq,)     Dr.  Belger  has  denied  this
{Berliner  philolog,    Wochenschrift^    11    (1891),    p.    11 89),  but  on  in-
sufficient grounds.

16.  6.  Teledamus  and  Pelops.  Teledamus,  son  of  Agamemnon
and  Cassandra,  is  mentioned  by  a  scholiast  on  Homer  {Od,  xi.  420,  ed.
Dindorf).  Otherwise  these  twins  seem  to  be  mentioned  by  no  ancient
writer  except  Pausanias.  Cp.  v.  Wilamowitz-MoUendorff,  Homeriscke
Untersuchungen,  p.  156  note  18  ;  Ch.  Belger,  Die  mykenische  LokcUsage^
P-  35  sq.


CH.  XVII  THE  HERAEUM  16$

16.  7.  AegisthttS.  The  murder  of  Aegisthus  by  Orestes  is
depicted  on  red-figured  vases.  See  C.  Robert,  Bild  und  Liedy  pp.
149- 191.  Prof.  Robert  holds  that  these  representations  may  be
traced  to  the  influence  of  Polygnotus.  The  scene  does  not  appear  on
black-figured  vases.

17.  I.  the  Heraeiun.    The  site  of  the  Heraeum  or  sanctuary  of  Hera,
the  chief  temple  of  Argolis  and  one  of  the  oldest  and  most  famous    .
temples  in  Greece,  was  accidentally  discovered  in   1831   by  Colonel    /
(afterwards  General)  Gordon  of  Caimess,  while  he  was  out  shooting.

It  had  been  sought  in  vain  by  former  travellers.     The  site  is  a  terraced
hill  (420  feet  high),  rising  in  a  somewhat  insulated  position  at  the  foot
of  a  bare,  steep  mountain,  one  of  the  highest  that  bound  the  plain  of
Argolis  on  the  east.     This  steep,  arid  mountain  (1744  feet)  is  probably
the  Mt  Euboea  of  Pausanias,  as  Captain  Steffen  held ;  indeed  it  bears
the  name  Euboea  in  a  slightly  modernised  form  {Ewia)  to  this  day
(see  Steffen,  Karten  von  Mykenai^  Erldutemder  Text,  p.  39).     Com-
monly, but  less  correctly,  the  ancient  Euboea  is  identified,  not  with  the
mountain,  but  with  the  terraced  hill  at  its  foot,  on  which  the  sanctuary
stands.     The   place   is   distant   about   25    Greek   furlongs  (somewhat     I
under  three  miles)  south-east  of  Mycenae  in  a  straight  line,  so  that     \
Pausanias's  estimate  of  the  distance  (15  furlongs)  is  much  under  the
mark,  and  Strabo's  estimate  of  10  furlongs  (viii.  p.  368)  is  still  more
so.    The  ancient  road  which  led  from  Mycenae  to  the  Heraeum  can
be  traced  at  intervals.     It  keeps  well  up  on  the  steep  mountain-side,
crossing  the  beds  of  several  torrents  on  Cyclopean  bridges,  the  ruins  of
which  can  still  be  seen  (Steffen,  op.  cit.  p.  9).     The  bare  terraced  hill
on  which  the  Heraeum  stands  is  about  three  quarters  of  a  mile  to  the
east  of  the  road  which  leads  from  Charvati  (the  village  near  Mycenae)
toNauplia.     It  forms  a  rough  triangle  with  its  apex  turned  to  the
mountains  and  its  base  to  the  plain.     On  the  north  the  hill  is  divided
by  a  deep  depression  from  the  main  mass  of  the  mountain  (Mt  Euboea),
and  is  enclosed  on  the  north-west  and  south-east  by  two  deep  ravines,
the  Revnta  tou  Kastrou  and  the  Glykia,  in  neither  of  which  does  water
flow  except  after  rain.     The   ravine  on  the  north-west  is  commonly
identified  with  the  Water  of  Freedom  (Eleutherium),  and  the  ravine  on
tlie  south-east  with  the  Asterion.     But  these  identifications  are  perhaps
incorrect  (sec  the  notes  below,  p.  179  sqq,)     The  higher  ridge  or  rocky
summit  to  the  east,  distant  only  some  300  yards  from  the  Heraeum  and
separated  from  it  by  the  Glykia  ravine,  is  no  doubt  the  Mt.  Acraea  of
Pausanias  (§  2).     Prosymna  was  the  low  ground  beneath  the  sanctuary.
The  apex  of  the  triangular  height  on  which  the  Heraeum  stands  is  a
rocky  peak,   below  which  the  hill   descends  in   two  or  rather  three
terraces  to  the  plain.    Each  of  the  two  upper  terraces  is  about  5  5  yards
square ;  a  short  slope  intervenes  between  them  ;  the  difference  of  level
between  the  two  terraces  is  only  some  40  feet.    On  the  uppermost  terrace
stood  the  old  temple  which  was  burnt  down  in  423  B.C.  (Thucydides,  iv.
133);  the  new  temple  was  built  on  the  second  or  middle  terrace.

Excavations  on  the  site  of  the  Heraeum  were  made  on  a  small  scale
by  General  Gordon  in  1836,  and  on  a  larger  scale  in  1854  by  Rangab^


i66  THE  HERAEUM  bk.  ii.  corinth

and  Bursian,  who  laid  bare  some  of  the  foundations  of  the  second
temple,  determined  to  a  certain  extent  its  plan,  and  discovered  a  great
many  fragments  of  marble  sculptures.  In  1892  more  extensive  and
systematic  excavations  were  undertaken  by  the  American  School  of
Classical  Studies  and  have  been  successfully  prosecuted  in  that  and
subsequent  years  (i  892-1 895)  under  the  direction  of  Pro£  Waldstein.
The  result  of  their  labours  has  been  to  uncover  foundations  both  of  the
first  and  second  temple  and  of  several  large  buildings  within  the  sacred
precinct,  and  also  to  bring  to  light  a  few  fine  pieces  of  sculpture  and  an
immense  quantity  of  archaic  pottery,  terra-cottas,  bronzes,  and  other
small  objects.  A  full  account  of  these  interesting  discoveries  has  not
yet  (July,  1895)  been  published.  The  following  brief  description  of
the  sanctuary  is  derived  mainly  from  the  preliminary  reports  of  the
American  excavators ;  but  for  some  details,  as  yet  unpublished,  I  am
indebted  to  the  courtesy  of  Prof.  Waldstein.

The  uppermost  terrace,  on  which  the  old  temple  stood,  is  bounded
on  the  south  side,  toward  the  plain,  by  a  retaining-wall  some  54  metres
(59  yards)  long,  buik  of  huge  irregularly  shaped  blocks  of  conglomerate
heaped  together  in  a  rough  Cyclopean  style.  The  interstices  were  probably
filled  originally  with  small  stones  or  clay,  which  have  now  disappeared.
Three  courses  of  these  Cyclopean  blocks  are  in  general  remaining.
One  triangular  stone  measures  12  feet  on  the  sides,  and  is  4  or  5
feet  thick ;  another  is  1 8  feet  long  and  6  feet  thick.  This  Cyclopean
wall  is  a  conspicuous  object  at  some  distance ;  its  massive  remains  first
drew  Col.  Gordon's  attention  to  the  spot.  When  Bursian  examined  the
upper  terrace  in  1854,  he  observed,  projecting  from  the  soil,  the
beginning  and  end  of  a  long  limestone  wall,  which  probably  inclosed
the  sacred  precinct,  but  did  not  form  part  of  the  temple  itself,  since  it
began  and  ended  on  the  edge  of  the  terrace  and  was  nearly  as  long  as
the  retaining-walL  On  this  upper  terrace  the  American  excavators
cleared  away  all  the  top  soil  down  to  the  early  substructure,  which
measures  about  45  metres  (140  feet)  in  length  by  35  metres  (115  feet)
in  width.  Two  layers  or  platforms  of  hard  black  earth  were  found
extending  parallel  to  each  other  for  a  distance  of  33  metres  (108  feet  ,
nearly  to  the  western  end  of  the  terrace.  The  breadth  of  each  platfor
is  rather  less  than  4  metres  ( 1 3  feet),  and  its  depth  from  one  to  tv  o
inches ;  the  space  between  the  two  platforms  is  7  metres  (23  feet)  m
width.  Under  each  platform  is  a  layer  of  dark  red  soil.  In  or  near
these  platforms  of  black  earth  were  found  pieces  of  charred  wood,  flat
bricks  which  showed  plainly  the  action  of  fire,  and  masses  of  common
stone  which  had  evidently  been  split  by  the  heat  of  a  great  conflagration.
That  we  have  here  remains  of  the  old  temple  which  was  burnt  in
423  B.C.  is  obvious.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  two  platforms  of
black  earth  mark  the  lines  of  the  temple's  walls.  We  have  good
grounds  for  believing  that  in  the  old  temple  of  Hera  at  Olympia  the
upper  walls  were  built  of  unburnt  (sun-dried)  brick,  and  that  the
columns  and  superstructure  were  originally  of  wood  (see  note  on  v.  16.  i ).
Now  if  the  old  temple  on  the  terrace  were  similarly  constnicted,  the
two  black  platforms  may  be  the  remains  of  the  burnt  columns  and


Kgf  ft'SM^ajt  Kl


t*J,


"iSS5FSi(^^jtaES«K


CH.  XVII  THE  HERAEUM  167

roof,  and  the  red  layers  beneath  them  may  be  all  that  is  left  of  the
brick  walls.  However  this  may  have  been,  the  temple  was  not  built
entirely  of  wood  and  brick ;  the  lower  parts  at  least  of  the  walls  were  of
stone.  For  in  1893  ^^^  Americans  found  a  piece  of  an  ancient  wall
14.30  metres  long  by  rather  more  than  a  metre  broad,  which  had
certainly  belonged  to  the  temple.  To  the  west  and  south  of  the  layers
of  black  earth  portions  of  a  pavement  constructed  of  irregular  polygonal
slabs  were  unearthed  ;  they  probably  formed  part  of  a  pavement  which
completely  surrounded  the  temple.  At  various  points  on  the  upper
terrace  fragments  of  pottery  and  of  melted  metal  (iron  and  bronze)
came  to  light ;  the  pottery  is  mostly  plain,  but  some  of  it  exhibits  very
archaic  Mycenaean  patterns.  Further,  in  a  sort  of  pocket  or  recess
near  the  western  end  of  the  terrace  three  basketfuls  of  potsherds  (mostly
thick,  heavy,  and  unpainted)  were  gathered,  also  some  pieces  of  a
lighter  ware,  and  bits  of  melted  iron,  plates  and  rods  of  bronze,  glass
beads,  smaller  beads  of  bone,  and  a  curious  bronze  goat.

The  second  or  middle  terrace  was  also  enclosed  by  a  retaining-wall,
of  which  portions  can  be  seen  at  intervals.  Unlike  the  retaining-wall
of  the  highest  terrace,  it  is  built  of  regular  masonry,  though  of  an
inferior  sort ;  but  an  angle  towards  Naupha,  seen  by  Finlay  in  1831,  was
of  fine  workmanship,  and  differed  from  all  the  remaining  walls  in  con-
sisting of  two  layers  of  large  blocks,  surmounted  by  a  narrower  course.
The  newer  temple  stood  exactly  in  the  centre  of  this  terrace,  with  its
narrow  ends  facing  east-south-east  and  west-north-west.  Nothing  of  it
remains  standing  except  foundations,  which  were  excavated  partially  by
Bursian  and  Rangab^,  and  completely  by  the  American  archaeologists.
Even  the  steps  and  the  stylobate  of  the  temple  have  disappeared.  All
that  remains  is  the  broad  outer  foundation  on  which  steps  and  columns
rested,  and  the  foundations  for  the  walls  of  the  cella  and  for  the  interior
columns.  The  material  of  which  they  are  built  is  a  common  coarse-
grained stone,  one  of  the  many  sorts  which  archaeologists  lump
together  under  the  vague  name  of  poros.  The  blocks  measure  uniformly
{.2o  metre  by  .60  metre  and  .35  metre.  The  columns  of  the  temple,
.ds  we  see  from  their  remains,  were  constructed  of  the  same  coarse
stone  ;  but  the  walls  of  the  cella  were  built  of  a  whitish-grey  limestone,
,15  blocks  of  them,  found  by  Bursian  and  Rangab^,  sufficed  to  prove.

The  outer  foundation,  which  is  preserved  in  its  entire  extent,
inciisures  39.60  metres  in  length  by  19.94  metres  at  the  two  narrow
ends.  It  is  from  3.50  to  3.60  metres  broad,  and  is  very  carefully  built
r.  .tiicmale  courses  of  'headers  and  stretchers*  (blocks  laid  crosswise
and  lengthwise  respectively).  The  depth  of  the  foundation  varies  with
the  level  of  the  underlying  rock.  On  the  north  side,  where  the  rock
!ies  just  below  the  surface,  the  foundation  consists  of  only  one  or  two
rourses.  At  the  west  end,  where  the  rock  slopes  away  with  the  inclina-
:on  of  the  hill,  the  foundation  deepens  from  two  to  eight  courses;
while  a  shaft  which  the  Americans  sunk  at  the  east  end  of  the  temple
revealed  ten  courses  (3.50  metres)  without  reaching  the  lowest.

Contiguous  to  the  eastern  end  of  the  foundation,  just  at  the  middle,
.s  a  platform  4  metres  (13  feet)  square,  which  perhaps  supported  a


i68  THE  HERAEUM  BK.  ii.  corinth

ramp  leading  up  to  the  temple.  The  chief  altar  seems  to  have  been
at  the  north-east  comer  of  the  temple,  for  here  Bursian  and  Rangab^
found  two  square  pavements  of  black  stone  outside  of,  but  close  to,  the
foundations ;  and  on  these  pavements  were  discovered  potsherds  and
bones  of  animals,  as  well  as  many  fragpfnents  of  sculpture.  The  larger
of  the  two  pavements  was  on  the  east,  the  smaller  on  the  north  side  of
the  temple,  but  they  met  at  the  angle.

The  architectural  fragments  which  have  been  found  prove  that
the  temple  was  of  the  Doric  order.  In  1831  Finlay  found  the  shaft
of  a  Doric  column,  1 1  feet  6  inches  in  circumference,  with  twenty
flutes ;  he  described  it  as  of  limestone,  coated  with  cement.  Bursian
and  Rangab^  found  three  fairly  preserved  drums  of  columns,  all  oi poros
stone ;  the  diameter  of  the  largest  was  1.30  metre.  They  also
discovered  a  fragment  of  a  smaller  column  of  the  same  material,  with
twenty  flutes ;  its  diameter  was  .49  metre.  A  Doric  capital,  much
damaged,  was  judged  by  Bursian  to  have  belonged  to  this  smaller
column  or  to  one  of  the  same  set.  On  the  site  of  the  temple  the
Americans  found  two  drums  and  a  single  Doric  capital,  with  twenty
flutes.  From  the  size  of  the  columns  (1.02  metre  in  diameter  at  the
neck,  as  determined  by  the  existing  capital)  and  the  dimensions  of  the
foundations  Mr.  Brownson  thinks  it  probable  that  the  temple  was
peripteral,  that  is,  was  surrounded  by  a  colonnade,  and  that  the  columns
at  each  of  the  narrow  ends  were  six  in  number,  while  the  number  of
the  columns  on  each  of  the  long  sides  was  twelve.  Bursian  also  had
concluded  that  the  temple  was  probably  peripteral  and  hexastyle.
Other  architectural  fragments  found  by  Bursian  and  Rangab^  were
a  triglyph  and  many  blocks  of  the  geisofiy  all  oi  poros  stone.  Each
block  of  the  geison  had  on  its  lower  side  three  rows  oi  guttaey  six  guttae
in  each  row.  Finally,  in  excavating  the  great  colonnade  to  the  south  of
the  second  temple  in  1895  the  Americans  found  masses  of  architectural
fragments  of  the  temple  littering  the  floor  of  the  colonnade ;  it  would
seem  that  the  temple  was  thrown  down  by  an  earthquake,  and  that  its
shattered  pieces  had  rolled  down  the  slope  to  the  place  where  they  were
found.  These  architectural  fragments  include  drums  and  capitals  of
Doric  columns,  metopes,  fragments  of  sculptures  from  the  metopes,
marble  roof  tiles,  and  pieces  of  the  entablature  (an  architrave  block,  a
geison  block,  etc.)  sufficient  to  allow  of  a  reconstruction  of  the  whole
entablature.  Here,  too,  were  found  two  marble  heads  and  two  torsoes
which  had  probably  belonged  to  the  second  temple.

The  temple  was  roofed  with  marble  tiles,  some  of  which  were  found
by  Bursian  and  Rangab^.  These  tiles  were  of  three  shapes  :  some  had
raised  edges  (*  gutter-tiles ')  ;  others  were  roof-shaped  (*  covering-tiles ')  ;
others  again  were  roof-shaped,  but  solid,  not  hollowed  out.  On  the
sima^  or  overhanging  extremity  of  the  sloping  part  of  the  roof,  were
placed  marble  heads  of  lions,  whose  open  mouths  served  as  water-
spouts. Three  at  least  of  these  marble  lion-heads,  as  well  as  a  great
many  fragments  of  others,  have  been  found  at  various  times.  They
were  of  two  sizes,  a  larger  and  a  smaller ;  the  larger  no  doubt  came
at  longer  intervals,  perhaps  only  at  the  comers.     The  marble  blocks  of


CH.  XVII  THE  HERAEUM  169

the  sima  between  the  lion's  heads  were  elegantly  decorated  with  a
pattern  exquisitely  cut  in  low  relief.  The  pattern  consists  of  two
volutes  meeting,  with  a  floral  decoration  (palmette  or  modified  lotus)
rising  from  their  junction,  and  a  bird  perched  on  the  volute  between
each  pair  of  palmettes.  The  bird  perhaps  represents  the  cuckoo,  the
bird  of  Hera.  Other  architectural  decorations  discovered  by  the  earlier
excavators  were  painted  antefixes  of  terra-cotta ;  one  of  them,  found  by
F  inlay,  was  painted  to  imitate  the  tail  of  a  peacock,  another  of  the
sacred  birds  of  Hera.

The  internal  arrangement  of  the  temple  would  seem  to  have  been
the  one  usually  adopted  in  peripteral  temples,  comprising  an  ante-
chamber or  portico  {pronaos)  on  the  east,  a  central  chamber  or  cella
in  the  middle,  and  a  back-chamber  or  portico  {ppisthodomos)  on  the
west.  But  the  imperfect  state  of  the  inner  foundations  leaves  this
uncertain ;  all  that  can  be  made  out  is  the  side  walls  of  the  temple
proper,  the  end  wall  at  the  east,  and  the  wall  dividing  the  cella  from
the  ante-chamber  {pronaos).  The  ante-chamber  was  6.79  metres  wide
by  4.6  metres  deep.  The  cella  was  divided  into  a  central  nave  (3.75
metres  wide)  and  two  very  narrow  aisles  by  two  rows  of  columns
extending  along  the  length  of  the  chamber.  Mr.  Brownson  thinks  that
there  were  five  columns  in  each  row,  and  that  the  length  of  the  cella
was  11.60  metres.  The  internal  decoration  of  the  cella  seems  to  have
been  in  the  Ionic  style ;  for  various  architectural  ornaments,  carved  in
marble  and  of  the  Ionic  style,  were  found  by  Bursian  and  Rangab^ ;
one  piece  was  adorned  with  a  cymatium  exactly  like  those  of  the
Erechtheum.  The  walls  of  the  cella  were  built  of  limestone ;  a  great
many  of  the  blocks  were  discovered  by  Bursian  and  Rangabd  Many
of  them,  decorated  with  three  simple  fillets,  may  have  formed  part  of
the  cornice.  Further,  the  walls  of  the  cella  were  apparently  painted  in
fresco;  for  Bursian  and  Rangab^  brought  to  light  two  fragments  of
stucco  painted  in  fresco,  one  with  yellow  palmettes  and  vine-shoots  on
a  brown  background,  the  other  with  a  brown  maeander  pattern  on  a
greenish  yellow  ground.

Fragments  of  marble  sculptures  have  been  found  in  great  numbers
on  the  site  of  the  second  temple.  No  less  than  550  such  fragments
were  discovered  by  Bursian  and  Rangab^,  most  of  them  at  the  east  and
west  ends  of  the  temple.  Most  of  them  are  of  great  beauty  and  belong
to  the  best  period  of  Greek  art,  but  they  are  unfortunately  so  broken
that  it  is  impossible  to  say  what  they  represent  or  to  unite  them  into
complete  figures  and  groups.  In  their  portrayal  of  the  nude  human
body  they  are  characterised,  according  to  Bursian,  by  *'a  softness  and
tenderness,  which  distinguish  them  from  the  dignified  seriousness  and
severity  of  the  Attic  sculptures  executed  under  the  superintendence  of
Phidias,  and  at  the  same  time  by  a  rich  variety  of  forms,  always  graceful
but  never  excessive  or  extravagant."  The  best  specimen  discovered  by
him  is  a  female  head  with  the  neck,  half  the  size  of  life,  which  was
found  at  the  western  end  of  the  temple.  A  sweet  smile  plays  round
the  closed  mouth  ;  the  hair  is  simply  parted  over  the  brow  and  held
together  at  the  back  by  a  ribbon.     At  the  eastern  end  of  the  temple


i^  THE  HERAEUM  bk.  ii.  corinth

was  found  the  lower  part  of  tlie  head  of  a  young  man ;  it  is  of  life
size ;  the  mouth  exhibits  an  almost  feminine  tenderness.  The  sculptures
found  by  Rangab^  and  Bursian  were  deposited  in  Argos,  but  most  of
them  have  recently  been  removed  to  Athens.

The  marble  sculptures  discovered  by  the  Americans  on  the  site  of
the  second  temple  include,  in  addition  to  a  few  important  pieces  which
will  be  mentioned  presently,  a  great  many  fragments  of  hands,  feet,
arms,  legs,  drapery,  and  so  on.  The  smaller  of  these,  in  Prof.  Wald-
stein's  opinion,  belonged  to  metopes  in  high  relief;  and  there  are  so
many  of  them  that  he  believes  the  sculptured  metopes  to  have  extended


all  round  the  four  sides  of  the  temple.     Other  fragments  are  too  large  for
metopes,  and  Prof.  Waldstein  thinks  that  they  probably  came  from  groups


CH.  xvii  THE  HERAEUM  i?'

which  occupied  the  gables.  In  particular,  an  arm  resting  on  a  cushion
must  almost  certainly,  he  thinks,  have  been  placed  in  the  angle  of  a  gable  ;
and  he  refers  to  the  analogy  of  the  nymphs  resting  on  cushions  in  the
west  gable  of  the  temple  of  Zeus  at  Olympia.  Bursian  had  previously
come  to  the  conclusion  that  both  gables  and  metopes  of  the  temple
were  adorned  with  marble  sculptures.

Among  the  best  of  the  pieces  found  by  the  Americans  is  a  beautiful
female  head  of  Parian  marble  and  life  size  (Fig.  24).  It  was  found
at  the  west  end  of  the  temple,  immediately  in  front  of  the  west  founda-
tion-wall, a  little  to  the  north  of  the  middle  of  the  west  front.  It
represents  a  woman  of  refined  features  and  grave,  sweet  expression,
looking  straight  forward.  Her  wavy  hair  comes  low  down  on  her  brow
and  &lla  in  a  mass  over  the  back  of  her  neck  ;  it  was  formerly  encircled
by  a  filtet  or  ribbon,  probably  of  metal,  which  has,  however,  disappeared.
Ptof.  Waldstein  interprets  the  head  as  that  of  Hera,  and  assigns  it  to
a  sculptor  cf  the  school  of  Polyctiius  living  in  the  fifth  century  B.C.
The  bead  most  akin  to  it  he  holds  to  be  that  of  the  Famese  Hera  at
Naples,  which  in  its  severe,
cfAA  beauty  has  been  sup-  I
posed  to  reflect  the  art  of
Polyclitns  (see  Friederichs  -
Wolten,  Gipiabgiuse,  No.
500 ;  A.  S.  Murray,  Niit.  of
Grt*k  Scu^lurt?  t.  p.  309
i<jq.  \  Collignon,  Hist,  de  la
SaUfitmrt  Grtcqut,  t.  p.  512,  |
with  Fig.  364 ;  Roscher's
LtxikffH,  1.  p.  2ii8  sg.)
Pnt.  Waldatein  thinks  that
the  ttatne  may  have  stood  in
Ibe  western  gable  of  the  tem-
ple, and  may  have  represented
Heia  standing  beside  the
central  figure  or  figures  in  the
scene  of  die  departure  of  Aga-
memnon and  the  Homeric
heroes  iijr  Troy  (see  §  3  of
this  chapter,  with  the  note).
On  the  other  hand.  Prof.
Fmtwangler  denies  that  the
head  il  that  of  Hera  or  has
anything  to  do  with  Polyclitus
and  lus  school ;  he  considers
that  the  sculptures  found  at
the  Heraeum  are  Attic  in
style,  and   are  most    nearly

related   10  the   sculptures  of         fic  3j.— makple  tokbo  mou  thb  hermuu.
the  Erechtheum  and  of  the
temple   of  the   Wingless  Victory  on  the  Acropolis  of  Athens  {Arckao-


17a


THE  HERABUM


BK.  tt.  CORINTH


logische  Studitn  H.  Brunn  dargebratht  (Berlin,  1 893),  p.  90  ;  MeisUr-
■uierke  d.  griecA.  Plasfik,  p.  413  nole  I),

Another  fine  fragment  which  the  Americans  brought  to  light  is  the
torso  of  a  naked  warrior  fighting  (Fig.  25).  From  the  stump  of  the
right  arm  which  remains  we  can  see  that  his  right  hand  was  raised  to
strike  at  a  foe  in  front,  whose  exquisitely  modelled  left  hand  still  adheres
to  the  right  side  of  the  torso.  The  head  and  limbs  (except  stumps  of
the  right  arm  and  left  leg)  are  missing.  The  work,  which  seems  to  be
of  Penielic  marble,  is  in  such  high  relief  as  almost  to  be  in  the  round  ;
but  a  piece  of  the  flat  background  remains  behind  the  left  shoulder.
The  surface  is  in  excellent  preservation ;  the  modelling  very  true  and
delicate.  Especially  remarkable  are  the  ripples  of  the  muscles  on  the
flanks,    and     the    softness    and     grace    of    the    dinging    hand    (a


woman's  hand  ?),  which  with  its  supple  shapely  fingers  pressed  hard
against  the  body  of  the  stalwart  foe  is  almost  pathetic  in  its  expressive-
ness. The  torso  was  found  at  a  considerable  depth  in  the  interior  of
the  temple.  From  its  dimensions  Prof.  Waldstein  judges  that  it  formed
part  of  a  metope.  In  its  exquisite  finish  he  thinks  it  bears  evidence  of
the  style  or  influence  of  Polyclitus.

A  second  fine  head  was  found  in  1894  to  the  north-east  pf  the
temple.  It  is  of  Parian  marble,  about  half  the  size  of  life,  and
represents  a  square-bced  young  man  with  regular  bui  heai7  features
(Fig.  z6).  Prof.  Waldstein  holds  that  its  resemblance  to  the  famous
Spearman  {Dorupkores)  of  Polyclitus,  of  which  so  many  copies  and
imitations  have  come  dnwn  to  us,  is  undeniable.  It  therefore  confirms,
in  his  judgment,  the  view  that  all  the  sculptures  of  the  second  temple
are  Argive  works  of  the  school  of  Polyclitus,  and  not  of  Aitic  sculptors.


CH.  XVII  THE  HERAEUM  173

as  Prof.  Furtwangler  maiptains.  It  seems  to  have  formed  part  of  a
metope.  Two  other  marble  heads  (Figs.  27  and  38),  both  in  high  relief,
were  found  to  the  north  of  the  temple.  One  of  them  (Fig.  a8)  wears
a  sort  of  Phrygian  helmet.  Prof  Waldstein  suggests  that  it  is  the
head  of  a  wounded  Amaton  ;  but  the  features,  though  full  and  rounded,
seem  to  ine  masculine.  From  its  dimensions  it  may  have  belonged  to
a  metope.  The  other  bead  (Fig.  37)  is  lalher  larger  ;  Prof.  Waldstein
does  not  venture  to  assign  it  to  a  melope.  It  also  is  helmeied,  but
the  sofi  rounded  features  are  those  of  a  woman ;  the  lips  are  parted,
and  the  head  droops  slightly,  as  if  in  pain  or  weariness.  Lastly,
a  beautiful  torso  of  a  draped  female  figure,   found  in  a  building  to


the  east  of  the  temple  (see  below,  p.  174),  is  referred  by  Prof.  Wald-
stein to  a  metope.

Prof  Waldstein  considers  that  the  ground  on  which  the  second
temple  was  built  had  previously  been  occupied  by  an  older  structure,
whether  temple  or  altar ;  to  this  earlier  building  some  rough  stones  still
lying  within  the  second  temple  may  perhaps  have  belonged.

On  the  slope  between  the  two  upper  terraces  the  American
e^ccavations  laid  bare  the  foundations  of  a  long  building  or  series  of
buildings  of  white  limestone,  extending  east  and  west,  parallel  to  the
temple,  for  a  distance  of  about  100  metres  (109  yards),  with  an
average  depth  or  width  of  10  metres  (31  ft.  10  in.),  inclusive  of  ihe
back  wall.  It  would  seem  to  have  been  a  colonnade  (the  North
Colonnade),  with  a  projecting  central  portion  or  hall.  The  steps  are
preserved  for  a  considerable  length.  A  row  of  at  least  nineteen  pillars
ran  along  the  middle  of  the  colonnade  ;  some  of  these  pillars  were  found


174  THE  HERAEUM  BK.  ii.  corinth

in  their  orig^inal  positions.  The  back-wall  of  the  colonnade,  about  lo
feet  thick,  was  built  against  the  slope.  Toward  the  north-east  comer
of  the  east  end  of  the  colonnade  there  is  a  depression  which  measures
3.80  metres  in  length  by  3  metres  in  width,  and  is  paved  with  cement.
Prof.  Waldstein  thinks  it  may  have  been  a  bath,  like  the  bath  in  the
palace  at  Tiryns.  The  central  portion  of  the  colonnade  was  found  to
be  crowded  with  the  bases  of  statues  and  monuments  of  all  shapes  and
sizes,  packed  together  without  any  attempt  at  order  or  arrangement.
Some  of  these  bases  must  have  supported  single  statues  or  groups  of
considerable  size.  Still  more  bases  stood  in  front  of  the  colonnade,
in  the  area  between  the  central  hall  and  the  wings.  Connected  with
the  colonnade  is  a  system  of  drains  and  waterworks.

In  a  line  with  the  North  Colonnade,  but  farther  to  the  east,  are  the
remains  of  a  somewhat  intricate  structure  (the  *East  Chambers')
comprising  several  rooms,  the  purpose  of  which  has  not  yet  been
ascertained.  Here  was  found  a  large  quantity  of  pottery,  terra-cottas,
bronzes,  and  small  objects,  as  well  as  the  torso  of  a  draped  female
figure  (mentioned  above),  three  marble  heads,  and  other  fragments.  A
cutting,  20  feet  deep,  which  was  carried  to  the  east  of  these  chambers
for  a  length  of  90  feet,  revealed  some  complicated  early  walls  of  different
periods.  Here,  acting  as  a  support  to  the  upper  terrace,  below  and  to
the  east  of  the  great  Cyclopean  wall  of  the  upper  terrace,  there  runs
another  Cyclopean  wall  for  about  8  feet.  Below  and  partly  under
this  second  Cyclopean  wall  were  found  large  masses  of  pottery,  iron,
bronze,  and  smaller  objects,  most  of  them  belonging  to  the  so-called
Dipylum  and  Mycenaean  periods.  The  head  of  the  youth  figured
above  (p.  172)  was  found  to  the  south  of  the  Cyclopean  wall.  Among
the  many  objects  of  iron  discovered  here  was  a  mass  of  iron  spears,
bound  together  with  iron  bands  at  both  ends,  and  making  up  a  bundle
about  5  feet  long  and  a  foot  thick.  At  the  same  place  was  found  a
large  solid  rectangular  bar  of  iron,  flattened  out  about  a  foot  from  one
end.

To  the  south  of  this  Cyclopean  wall,  and  at  the  easternmost  angle
of  the  terrace  of  the  second  temple,  another  building  was  discovered  in
1894,  which  the  Americans  have  called  the  East  Building.  It  is
supported  on  the  south  and  east  by  strong  walls  built  against  the  hill
slope ;  on  the  north  it  has  a  wall  of  poros  stone  strengthened  by  a
limestone  wall.  The  bases  of  three  rows  of  columns  (five  columns  in
each  row)  are  extant  in  the  interior,  while  at  the  west  front,  facing  the
temple,  the  building  had  a  portico.  In  this  building  were  found  many
objects  of  gold,  silver,  bronze,  and  terra-cotta,  as  well  as  a  scarab  with
a  cartouche,  probably  that  of  Thothmes  III.

On  the  slope  of  the  hill  above  the  North  Colonnade,  immediately
below  the  great  Cyclopean  wall  which  supports  the  upper  terrace,  the
Americans  found  portions  of  walls  built  of  loose  unhewn  stones,  which
are  laid  together  without  mortar  or  clamps.  From  the  objects  found
among  them  Prof.  Waldstein  was  led  to  conjecture  that  these  structures
may  have  been  the  houses  of  the  priestesses  or  attendants  of  the  earlier
temple.     Further,  on  the  slope  at  the  back  of  the  North   Colonnade


CH.  XVII  THE  HERAEUM  175

there  are  some  traces  of  a  rough  pavement,  the  remains  perhaps  of  an
ancient  road  which  led  up  to  these  dwellings.

On  the  slope  to  the  west  of  the  second  temple,  about  25  to  30  feet
below  the  top  of  the  foundation  walls  of  the  second  temple,  the
Americans  discovered  a  large  building  which  they  have  called  the  West
Building.  It  measures  100  feet  (33  metres)  by  93  feet  (30  metres),
and  consists  of  a  colonnade  surrounding  an  open  court  on  the  east,
south,  and  west,  while  on  the  north  there  are  three  chambers  running
from  east  to  west,  which  communicate  with  the  colonnade  and  the  open
court  In  these  chambers  are  the  remains  of  what  seem  to  have  been
tables  or  couches  extending  along  the  walls.  The  entrance  to  the
building  was  in  the  north  wall  of  the  most  westerly  of  the  three
chambers.  In  the  colonnade  there  are  bases  of  columns,  with  some
drums  of  columns  still  in  their  original  places.  In  some  places  the
walls  are  standing  to  a  height  of  several  courses.  Many  fragments
of  the  architectural  ornaments,  as  well  as  pieces  of  sculpture  and  smaller
objects,  were  found  in  this  building.  What  purpose  the  edifice  served
is  not  clear.  It  seems  to  be  older  than  the  second  temple,  being  not
later  than  the  first  half  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  The  Doric  capitals  are
flatter  than  those  of  the  temple,  and  there  are  a  few  letters  of  inscriptions
which  point  to  a  much  earlier  date.

To  the  north  of  the  West  Building  were  found  in  1894  the  ruins  of
an  early  structure,  31  metres  long  by  1 1.40  metres  wide.  In  excavating
it  the  Americans  found  the  face  of  a  colossal  female  head,  heads  of  cows
in  bronze  and  terra-cotta,  a  silver  ring  studded  with  gold  and  inscribed,
etc.

On  the  south  slope  of  the  hill,  below  the  second  temple,  the  Ameri-
cans excavated  in  1894  and  1895  a  large  colonnade  extending  east  and
west  parallel  to  the  temple.  The  colonnade  is  45  metres  (148  feet)  long
by  1 3  metres  (43  feet)  broad.  The  west  and  north  walls  of  the  colonnade
are  finely  constructed  of  limestone.  The  west  wall  reaches  to  the  south-
eastern comer  of  the  West  Building.  The  whole  of  the  north  wall  is
preserved  to  a  height  of  four  courses  :  on  the  outside  (north)  it  is  backed
by  a  thick  wall  oi  poros  stone  :  on  the  inside  (south)  it  is  adorned  with
pilasters,  one  of  which  is  placed  opposite  or  nearly  opposite  every  second
column  of  the  colonnade.  Of  these  columns  there  were  nine,  extending
in  a  row  along  the  middle  of  the  colonnade  from  west  to  east  The
bases  of  all  these  nine  columns  are  preserved,  and  on  four  or  five  there
are  still  standing  drums  of  fluted  Doric  columns.  On  the  last  base  to
the  east  there  are  two  drums  still  in  position,  and  three  more  drums,
with  the  capital,  were  found  fallen  in  front  of  it,  so  that  the  whole  of  this
column  is  preserved.  On  the  slope  of  the  hill  to  the  south  of  the
colonnade  is  a  grand  staircase  in  two  flights  with  a  landing  between
them.  The  staircase  extends  along  the  whole  length  of  the  colonnade,
to  which  it  led  up  ;  it  is  built  of  poros  stone.  Further  to  the  east  the
Americans  discovered  the  remains  of  another  grand  staircase,  also  of
poros  stone,  which  led  up  to  the  second  temple  at  its  south-eastern
comer.

On  the  north  side  of  the  colonnade  which  has  just  been  described


176  THE  HERAEUM  bk.  ii.  corinth

the  excavations  revealed  some  early  graves  of  the  Mycenaean  period.
One  of  them — a  shaft  grave — contained  the  bones  of  the  dead  and
several  vases  of  the  earliest  Mycenaean  style.  Here,  too,  between  the
colonnade  and  the  second  temple  the  Americans  laid  bare  a  Cyclopean
wall,  which  Prof.  Waldstein  takes  to  have  been  the  original  boundary-
wall  of  the  sacred  precinct  before  the  second  temple  was  built.  Remains
of  what  seem  to  have  been  Mycenaean  houses  exist  on  the  east  side  of
the  West  Building,  at  the  foot  of  the  slope  which  leads  up  to  the  second
temple.

To  the  west  of  the  second  temple  the  ground  slopes  gradually  do^-n
to  the  third  or  lowest  terrace,  which  is  considerably  larger  than  either
of  the  two  upper  terraces,  and  is  bounded  on  the  west  by  the  Revma  tou
Kastrou^  commonly  identified  with  the  Water  of  Freedom.  On  this
lowest  terrace,  towards  its  western  side,  the  American  excavators  laid
bare  the  foundations  of  a  long  colonnade  (the  Lower  Colonnade)
extending  north  and  south  for  a  length  of  69.60  metres,  with  a  breadth
of  8.10  metres.  The  colonnade  fronted  east ;  its  back  was  formed  by  a
retaining-wall  built  to  support  the  terrace.  The  foundation-wall  which
supported  the  front  row  of  columns  was  found  to  be  in  a  very  ruinous
and  battered  state.  But  on  the  other  hand  the  end  wall  of  the  colonnade
on  the  south,  which  was  also  a  retaining-wall  built  to  support  the
terrace  on  this  side,  is  very  well  preserved.  The  masonry  is  here  very
fine,  consisting  of  well -hewn  quadrangular  blocks,  some  of  which
measure  as  much  as  4  metres  (13  feet)  in  length  ;  and  the  whole  is  set
off  by  a  projecting  string-course,  still  more  carefully  wrought.  The
edifice  would  thus  seem  to  belong  to  a  very  good  period ;  it  may  have
been  built  at  the  same  time  as  the  second  temple.  The  colonnade  was
double,  that  is,  it  had  an  inner  as  well  as  an  outer  row  of  columns,  foi
bases  of  colunms  were  found  extending  in  a  line,  at  approximately
equal  intervals  of  about  3  metres  (10  feet),  down  the  middle  of  the
building.  The  excavations  of  1895  proved  that  at  its  northern  extremity
this  long  colonnade  was  joined  at  right  angles  by  another  colonnade
which  extended  eastwards  for  a  considerable  distance.  Immediately  to
the  north  of  this  second  colonnade  the  same  excavations  revealed  a
large  building  of  Roman  date,  containing  bath  rooms  with  h>'pocaust
floors.

On  the  upper  or  eastern  side  of  the  lowest  terrace  there  was
discovered  a  cistern  shaped  like  a  cross.  It  is  a  deep  subterranean
basin  hewn  out  of  the  solid  rock,  and  is  open  only  at  the  cross.  The
eastern  arm  of  the  cross  is  the  longest;  it  measures  4.50  metres
(14  ft.  9  in.)  in  length.  Each  arm  is  about  10  feet  wide  and  higl"
enough  to  admit  of  easy  passage,  the  pavement  sloping  from  each
extremity  to  the  cross,  where  it  drops  suddenly  into  a  deeper  basin
The  roof  is  arched,  and  both  roof  and  sides  are  coated  with  cement.

Close  to  this  cistern,  on  the  south,  the  Americans  discovered  wha
seems  to  have  been  a  stone  bath.  It  is  hollowed  out  of  a  single  ston<
and  is  shaped  like  the  half  of  a  huge  shallow  bowl,  with  a  gutter  on  th<
lower  side  to  carry  off  the  water.  An  iron  scraper  {strigil)  was  founc
near  it.


CH.  xvii  THE  HERAEUM  177

The  inscriptions  hitherto  brought  to  light  at  the  Heraeum  seem  to
be  few,  fragmentary,  and  for  the  most  part  insignificant.  They  include
a  fragment  of  a  list  of  precious  objects  stored  in  the  sanctuary ;  many
such  lists  have  been  found  at  Athens  and  elsewhere.  Another  frag-
mentary inscription  appears  to  have  formed  part  of  a  record  of  certain
specifications  touching  the  sale  or  lease  of  a  piece  of  property.  More
interesting  than  these  is  a  boustrophedon  inscription  of  eleven  lines  en-
graved on  a  bronze  plate.  The  characters  belong  to  the  earliest  Argive
alphabet,  and  the  inscription  is  not  later  than  the  sixth  century  B.C.  It
has  not  yet  been  fully  read,  but  it  certainly  relates  to  Hera  and  the
Argives,  and  seems  to  contain  an  imprecation.

On  the  other  hand  the  pottery,  terra-cottas,  bronzes,  engraved  gems,
and  other  small  objects  which  have  been  found  by  the  Americans  at  the
Heraeum  are  inunense  in  point  of  numbers  and  of  great  interest  and
importance  for  the  early  history  of  art.  Unfortunately  very  few  of  them
have  as  yet  been  published,  and  we  possess  only  rough  general  state-
ments as  to  the  character  and  number  of  the  objects  found.  Thus  on
the  site  of  the  second  temple  there  came  to  light,  some  at  a  slight
depth,  others  far  below  and  inside  of  the  temple  foundations,  a  great
quantity  of  archaic  pottery,  terra-cotta  heads,  figures,  and  masks,  pins
and  clasps  of  bronze,  a  bronze  cock,  several  scarabs  (one  of  them
threaded  on  a  bronze  pin),  pieces  of  gold-leaf^  a  spiral  ornament  of
gold,  seals  made  of  stone,  bone,  and  ivory,  beads  of  various  sorts,  and
so  on.  Again,  a  little  to  the  south-east  of  the  second  temple  some
trenches  dug  by  the  Americans  yielded  a  rich  harvest  of  pottery,
bronzes,  engraved  gems,  and  plaques  of  terra-cotta  painted  with
decorative  designs.  But  the  place  where  the  greatest  quantity  of  such
objects  was  found  was  the  slope  of  the  hill  a  few  yards  to  the  west  of
the  second  temple.  Here  at  a  depth  of  i  o  to  15  feet  below  the  surface
the  Americans  came  upon  a  curious  layer  of  black  earth,  of  varying
thickness,  which  sloped  with  the  slope  of  the  rock  underneath.  The  layer
consisted  of  decayed  organic  matter,  with  masses  of  bones  of  animals,
and  many  fragments  of  pottery,  terra-cottas,  bronzes,  etc.  Amongst
the  objects  found  here  were  great  quantities  of  female  heads  and  figures
in  terra-cotta,  of  all  shapes  and  sizes ;  many  are  of  the  archaic  bird-
faced  sort,  some  retain  traces  of  colour,  and  all  exhibit  the  most  varied
st)'les  of  dress  and  ornament.  They  were  no  doubt  votive  offerings  to
Hera,  and  may  represent  the  goddess  herself.  The  potsherds  are  of
the  Primitive  Mycenaean,  Geometrical,  and  Proto  -  Corinthian  styles ;
they  are  thus  all  very  early.  Indeed  nothing  found  in  this  layer  seems
to  be  of  so  late  a  date  as  even  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.
Other  objects  discovered  in  the  same  place  were  many  iron  and  bone
rings,  plaques  of  terra-cotta  and  ivory  adorned  with  reliefs  of  a  very
primitive  style,  scarabs,  seals,  beads,  small  sculptured  figures  of
animals  in  stone,  mirrors,  pins,  clasps,  and  so  on.  Most  of  the  objects
found  were  deposited  in  Argos,  but  a  select  number  of  them  was  sent
Xo  Athens.  This  selection  included  230  bronze  rings,  26  lead  and
silver  rings,  a  bronze  statuette  of  a  cow,  a  bronze  swan's  head,  a  bronze
goat,  2  bronze  horses,  a  bronze  cockatrice,  a  bronze  peacock,  4  bronze

VOL.  Ill  N


178  THE  HERAEUM  bk,  ii.  corinth

clasps,  2  bronze  chisels,  4  terra-cotta  plaques  with  inscriptions,  5  terra-
cotta plaques  with  archaic  incuse  figures,  60  terra-cotta  idols,  2 1  terra-
cotta images  of  animals,  7  ivory  incuse  seals,  an  ivory  cow,  a  gold
rosette  of  the  Mycenaean  style,  2  gold  and  silver  rings,  10  scaraboids,
22  copper  and  silver  coins,  a  porphyry  lion  with  hieroglyphics,  1 2
glass  and  porcelain  beads,  a  porcelain  monkey,  a  porcelain  cat,  32
amber  beads,  etc.  Mingled  with  these  varied  objects  in  this  layer  of
black  earth  were  the  teeth  and  bones  of  animals.  The  most  probable
explanation  of  this  layer  seems  to  be  that  it  consists,  pardy  of  the  refuse
which  had  gathered  about  an  altar,  and  partly  of  old  votive  offerings
which  had  been  thrown  away  as  valueless,  and  that  when  the  new
temple  was  about  to  be  built  the  whole  mass  was  shot  down  here  for
the  purpose  of  levelling  up  the  ground.

Further,  in  1894  the  Americans  found  two  rock-hewn  tombs  of  the
beehive  shape  and  of  the  Mycenaean  period.     One  of  them  is  situated
about  300  yards  north-west  of  the  temple,  beyond  the  ravine ;  the  other
is  only  about  60  yards  north-west  of  the  ravine.     They  are  both  of  the
beehive  shape,  but  hewn  in  the  rock,  not  built  nor  lined  with  masonry.
Each  has  a  narrow  approach  or  dromos  leading  to  the  doorway,  which
after  the  burial  was  blocked  with  large  stones.     The  diameter  of  the
beehive  chamber  is  about  2.46  metres,  the  height  about  3.38  metres.
The  more  distant  of  the  two  tombs  contained  at  least  three  bodies,
perhaps  more  ;  the  bones  were  found  huddled  together  without  order.    In
this  tomb  were  discovered  forty-nine  vases  (nearly  all  in  perfect  preserva-
tion, with  the  decorations  fresh  and  brilliant)  ;  three  terra-cotta  figurines
of  the  earliest  type ;  a  small  terra-cotta  chair,  about  6  inches  high,  gaily
painted  in  the  Mycenaean  style ;  an  engraved  stone  of  the  Mycenaean
or  Island  type  ;  four  steatite  whorls  ;  one  ivory  needle  ;  and  some  beads -
No  metal  of  any  kind  was  found  in  the  tomb.     The  other  tomb,  nearex"
the  Heraeum,  contained  many  beads  and  whorls,  but  only  one  complete
vase  and  some  fragments.

It  was  in  the  old  sanctuary  of  Hera  on  the  uppermost  terrace  tha^t
Agamemnon  was  said  to  have  been  chosen  leader  of  the  expeditioi^
against  Troy  (Dictys  Cretensis,  i.  16).  Thither  Cleobis  and  Biton  dre-*)^
their  mother  in  a  chariot  all  the  way  from  Argos  (ii.  20.  3  note  J-
Strangers  were  not  allowed  to  sacrifice  on  the  altar  (Herodotus,  vi.  81)-
Similarly  strangers  were  not  allowed  to  sacrifice  in  the  sanctuary  o^
Hera  in  Amorgos  (Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Grace,  No.  358).  Afte^
ravaging  the  Argolic  plain,  Cleomenes  III.,  King  of  Sparta,  mockingly
asked  for  the  keys  of  the  temple  that  he  might  sacrifice  to  Hera.  But
the  temple  was  locked ;  the  heights  above  were  occupied  by  the  enemy  ?
and  he  had  to  content  himself  with  sacrificing  below  the  temple  (Plutarch^
Cleomenes y  26).  The  sanctuary  belonged  in  common  to  Argos  and
Mycenae  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  372).

See  ^\.\a^y  Journal^  2.  pp.  177-182;  Leake,  PeUp,  pp.  258-264;  Curtius,
Pe/op.  2.  pp.  396-400,  569  J^. ;  W.  G.  Clark,  Pelop.  p.  81  sgg. ;  Vischer,  Erin-
nertmgen^  p.  316  sq.  ;  C.  Bursian,  *Scavi  dell'  Heraeon  Argivo,'  BuUettino  dtlf
Imtituto  di  Corrisp.  Archtol,  1 854,  pp.  xiii-xvii. ;  id.  Gtogr,  2.  p.  47  5q.\
Baedeker,'  p.  264  ;  Guide- Joanne y  2.  p.  227  sq. ;  Eleventh  Annual  Report  of  the
American  School  of  Classical  Studies  at  Athens^  1891-92,  pp.  29-31  ;   Thirteenth


CH.  XVII  THE  WATER  OF  FREEDOM  179

Annual  Report  of  the  Archaeological  InstittUe  of  America^  1891-92,  pp.  54-66;
Twelfth  Annual  Report  of  the  Anieruan  School  of  Classical  Studies  at  Athens ^


1892-93,  pp.  27-35  (reprinted  in  American  Journal  of  Archaeology ^  9  (1804),  pp.
63-67);  Thirteenth  Annual  Report  of  the  Anterican  School^  etc.,  1893- 1 894,  PP*
41-49;   Ch.  Waldstein,  Excavations  of  the  American  School  of  Athens  at  the


Heraion  of  ArgoSy  No.  1  (London,  1892) ;  icL^  *Some  sculptures  from  the  Argive
Heraeum,*  American  Journal  of  Archaeology^  8  (1893),  pp.  199-204  ;  Overbeck,
in  Berichte  d,  k.  sdchs,  GeselL  d,  IViss,^  Phil.  hist.  CI.  45  (1093),  pp.  31-34 ;  C.  L.
Brownson,  *  Excavations  at  the  Heraeum  of  Argos,  *  ib,  pp.  205-225  ;  American
Journ.  of  Archaeology^  9  (1894),  pp.  287-291 ;  Ch.  Waldstein,  *  A  head  of  Poly-
cletan  style  from  the  metopes  01  the  Argive  Heraeum,'  ib,  pp.  331-339 ;  R.  B.
Richardson,  'Stamped  tiles  from  the  Argive  Heraeum,*  ib,  pp.  340-350;  J.  R.
Wheeler,  'Some  inscriptions  from  the  Argive  Heraeum,*  ib,  pp.  351-360,  548;
The  Timesy  Weekly  Edition^  19  April  1895,  p.  312;  The  ClassiccU Review,  9  (1895),
p.  237  ;  Amer,  Journ,  of  Archaeology,  10  (1895),  P*  '^9  ^^'

17.  I.  the  Water  of  Freedom.  In  one  of  his  comedies  Antiphanes
made  a  slave-girl  say,  '*  If  I  do  not  do  so  and  so,  may  I  never  drink
the  Water  of  Freedom"  (Athenaeus,  iii.  p.  123  c).  We  are  told  that  at
Argos  there  was  a  fountain  or  conduit  {Kprqvq)  called  Cynadra,  the  water
of  which  was  drunk  by  slaves  at  the  time  when  they  received  their
freedom ;  hence  the  water  was  called  the  Water  of  Freedom  and  was
used  as  a  proverbial  expression  for  a  free  life  (Eustathius,  on  Homer,
0(L  xiii.  408  ;  Hesychius,  s,v,  ikfvO^pov  vSwp),  It  seems  probable
that  the  fountain  or  conduit  named  Cynadra  was  identical  with  the  Water
of  Freedom  which  Pausanias  mentions  as  being  on  the  way  from  Mycenae
to  the  Heraeum,  and  that  the  statement  that  the  Cynadra  was  in  Argos
is  not  to  be  taken  literally.  The  Water  of  Freedom  (Eleutherium)  is
commonly  identified  with  the  Revma  tou  Kastrou,  the  rocky  ravine
which  bounds  the  hill  of  the  Heraeum  on  the  north-west.  In  the  bed  of
this  ravine  Finlay  discovered  in  183 1  a  subterranean  aqueduct,  hewn
out  of  the  rock,  which  might  conceivably  be  identified  with  the  Cynadra.
The  aqueduct  was  explored  more  fully  by  the  American  archaeologists
in  1892,  but  they  did  not  get  to  the  end  of  it.  On  the  western  side  of
the  ravine  a  square  shaft  or  *  man-hole,'  with  shallow  notches  cut  in  the
side  to  facilitate  descent  and  ascent,  was  found  to  lead  down  into  the
^ueduct.  On  reaching  the  bottom,  at  a  depth  of  4.40  metres  (14  ft.
5  in.),  the  Americans  found  three  avenues  all  hewn  in  the  solid  rock,
one  leading  in  the  direction  of  Argos,  the  second  back  toward  the
temple,  and  the  third  south-east.  "  The  second  and  third  soon  led  out
of  the  rock  back  to  the  Eleutherium,  a  little  below  the  present  level  of
its  bed.  We  did  not  follow  the  third  in  its  further  course  :  the  second,
however,  not  only  crossed  the  stream  but  entered  the  rock  on  the  eastern
side,  the  side  towards  the  temple.  Through  a  distance,  therefore,  of
^3- 70  metres  walls  and  roof  of  hewn  stone  were  necessary.  How  much
^her  the  passage  continues  as  a  rock-cut  tunnel  we  could  not  tell.
The  first-mentioned  avenue  we  followed  for  a  distance  of  34.25  metres,
^  the  way  through  native  rock."  In  the  sides  of  the  tunnel  there  arc
niches  at  short  intervals,  in  which  the  ancient  workmen  probably  placed
their  lamps  when  they  were  hewing  out  the  tunnel.  It  seems  doubtful
whether  this  aqueduct  was  fed  by  the  water  which  flows  in  the  bed  of
the  ravine  after  heavy  rain.     On  the  other  hand,  it  may  have  been  con-


i8o  THE  WATER  OF  FREEDOM  bk.  Ii.  corinth

nected  with  a  series  of  cisterns  which  are  still  to  be  seen  on  the  left
bank  of  the  ravine,  both  above  and  below  the  sacred  precinct.  One  of
these,  within  the  precinct,  has  been  already  described  (p.  1 76).  A  group
of  four  others  may  be  seen  lower  down,  about  200  yards  from  the  temple.

See  Finlay,  in  Leake's  Pehponnesiaca^  p.  260 ;  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.
p.  399  s^, ;  ExcavuHons  of  the  Afnerican  School  at  the  Hercuon^  No.  i
(London,  1892),  p.  4  ;  American  Journcd  of  Archaeology^  8  (1893),  P-
211  sq.

Captain  Steffen,  however,  has  adduced  good  reasons  for  believing
that  the  Water  of  Freedom  was  not  in  this  ravine  at  all,  but  about  three-
quarters  of  a  mile  to  the  north-west  of  the  Heraeum,  on  the  road  to
Mycenae.  For  Pausanias's  statement  that  the  water  was  "  beside  the
road"  seems  to  imply  that  it  was  at  some  point  intermediate  between
Mycenae  and  the  Heraeum,  not  that  it  was  (like  the  ravine  in  question)
just  beside  the  precinct.  Moreover,  if  the  Water  of  Freedom  issued
from  a  spring  (which  is,  however,  uncertain),  this  would  also  be  against
the  identification  of  the  Revma  tou  Kastrou  with  the  Water  of  Freedom ;
for  in  this  rocky  ravine  there  seems  to  be  no  spring :  any  water  that
flows  in  it  is  rain-water.  On  the  other  hand,  about  three-quarters  of  a
mile  to  the  north-west  of  the  Heraeum,  on  the  road  to  Mycenae,  there
is  a  spring  enclosed  by  ancient  masonry,  which  would  answer  very  well
to  the  Water  of  Freedom.  The  place  is  in  a  ravine  immediately  to  the
east  of  the  ancient  ruins  at  Vraserkcu  Here,  a  few  steps  above  the
spot  where  the  old  road  to  the  Heraeum  probably  crossed  the  ravine,
not  far  from  a  chapel  of  the  Panagia,  there  is  a  modem  water-basin,
which  is  fed  from  a  spring  higher  up.  This  spring  is  itself  enclosed  by
ancient  masonry,  consisting  of  large  finely-cut  blocks  of  marble ;  and
marble  fragments  are  strewed  about.  With  great  probability  Captain
Steflen  has  conjectured  that  this  fountain  was  the  Cynadra,  and  that  its
water  was  the  Water  of  Freedom.  See  Steflen,  Karten  von  Mykenai^
Erldutemder  Text^  p.  41  sq.

Prof,  von  Wilamowitz-M Ollendorff"  agrees  with  Captain  Steffen  in-:
identifying  the  Cynadra  and  the  Water  of  Freedom  with  this  spring  on
the  road  from  Mycenae  to  the  Heraeum.     Yet  though  he  assumes  on— ^
the  authority  of  Pausanias  that  the  Water  of  Freedom  was  here,  and  -
not  at  Argos,  he  charges  Pausanias  with  having  taken  his  information
from  the  book  from  which  Eustathius  and  Hesychius  (see  above)  derived —
their  information — that  is,  from  a  book  which  stated  that  the  water  in
question  was  at  Argos.     It  would  thus  appear,  on  Prof,  von  Wilamowitz-
Mollendorfl^s  own  showing,  that  the  book  from  which  Pausanias  copied
made  a  mistake,  and  that  Pausanias  in  copying  it  made  another  mistake,
which  fortunately  cancelled  the  original  error  of  his  authority,  with  the
net  result  that  he  finally  blundered  into  placing  the  water  quite  correctly
where  Captain  Steflen  found  it      It  requires  less  credulity  to  suppose
that  Pausanias  saw  the  water  for    himself.      See   U.  v.  Wilamowitz-
Mollendorflf,  in  Hermes^  19  (1884),  PP-  463-465.

When  Pausanias  says  that  the  women  who  ministered  at  the
sanctuary  employed  the  Water  of  Freedom  for  purifications,  he  may
mean  that  they  had  to  wash  in  it  before  they  ofliciated  in  the  temple.


CH.  XVII  THE  ASTERION  i8i

Cp.  vii.  20.  I  sq, ;  ix.  39.  5  ;  x.  34.  8  ;  Botticher,  Die  Tektonik  der
Hellenen^  2.  p.  477  sq.  These  washings  may  have  taken  place  in  the
baths  which  have  been  found  at  the  Heraeum  (see  above,  pp.  174,  176)  ;
if  this  were  so,  the  water  must  have  been  conveyed  to  the  sanctuary  in
pitchers  or  by  means  of  an  aqueduct.  Is  it  possible  that  it  may  have
been  so  conveyed  in  one  branch  of  the  rock-hewn  aqueduct  which  has
been  found  the  Revma  tou  Kastrou  f

17.  2.  Proeynma.  Prosymna  is  mentioned  by  Strabo  (viii.  p.  373)
as  being  next  to  Midea :  Stephanus  Byzantius  (s.v,)  says  it  was  a  part
of  Argos:  Statius  calls  it  *' lofty"  and  "green"  {Theb,  i.  383,  iii.  325,
iv.  44).  According  to  Pausanias  it  would  seem  to  have  been  the  low
ground  at  the  foot  of  the  hill  on  which  the  Heraeum  stood.

17.  2.  The  Asterion  flowing  above  the  Heraeum  etc.     The  river

Asterion,   mentioned  only  by  Pausanias   (ii.   15.   5  ;  ii.   17.    i   sq.\  is

commonly   identified  with   the   Glykia  brook,   a  small   torrent   which

descends  from  the  mountain  at  the  back  of  the  Heraeum,  and  after

flowing  in  a  deep  bed  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  plateau,  disappears

without  leaving  a  trace  a  few  hundred  yards  beyond  the  Heraeum  in  the

direction  of  the  plain  (cp.  Mure,  Journal^  2.  p.  180).     But  from  the

legend  of  the  arbitration  of  the  rivers  related  by  Pausanias  (ii.  15.  5)  we

naturally  infer  that  the  Asterion  was  one  of  the  three  chief  rivers  of  the

Argolic  plain,  the  Inachus  and  Cephisus  being  the  two  others.     Now

the  Glykia  has  no  claim  to  such  a  distinction ;  it  is  a  mere  brook,  the

bed  of  which  is  dry  except  after  rain.     Probably  Captain  Steffen  is  right

in  identifying  as  the  Asterion  the  river  which,  rising  among  the  mountains

to  the  north-east  of  Mycenae,  flows  down  the  eastern  flanks  of  the

I^ropfut  Elias  mountain  and  Mt.  Euboea,  and  then  after  traversing  the

narrow  glen  of  the  Klisura  enters  the  Argolic  plain  about  two  and  a

half  miles  to  the  south-east  of  the  Heraeum.     Many  small  tributaries

<icsccnd  to  it  from  the  slopes  of  Mt.  Euboea  and  Mt.  Acraea,  the  two

niountains  which  were  mythically  represented  as  the  daughters  of  the

river.     Pausanias's  statement  that  the  Asterion  disappeared  in  a  gully

applies  well  to  the  river  in  question,  the  water  of  which,  about  a  quarter

of  a  mile  south  of  its  entrance  into  the  narrow  Klisura  glen,  vanishes

wholly  among  the  shingle  and  boulders  of  its  rugged  bed.     See  Steffen,

in  Karten  von  Mykenai^  Text,  p.  40  sq,

17.  2.  a  plant  which  they  also  name  Asterion.     Eustathius  (on

Homer,  Od,  xxii.  481)  states  on  the  authority  of  Pausanias  that  the

plant  Asterion  was  used  for  purificatory  ceremonies.     Pausanias  makes

no  such  statement  here.     Probably  Eustathius*s  memory  played  him

^se,  and  he  confused  what  Pausanias  says  about  the  Asterion  plant

^th  what  he  had  said  just  before  about  the  Water  of  Freedom.     What

the  plant  was  we  do  not  know.     Schliemann,  indeed,  calls  it  a  kind  of

aster  {Mycenae,  p.  25),  but  this  may  be  a  mere  inference  from  the  name.

17.  3.  The  sculptures  over  the  columns  represent  etc.     The

expression  "  the  sculptures  over  the  columns  "  is  ambiguous.     It  would

apply  equally  to  sculptures  in  the  metopes  only,  or  in  the  gables  only,

or  both  in  the  metopes  and  the  gables.     We  are  thus  left  in  uncertainty

as  to  the  places  which  the  sculptured  scenes  occupied  on  the  outside  of  the


i82  THE  HERAEUM  bk.  ii.  corinth

temple.     But  Pausanias,  by  distinguishing  the  sculptures  into  two  groups
(first,  the  birth  of  Zeus  and  the  battle  of  the  gods  and  giants  ;  second,
the  Trojan  war  and  the  taking  of  Ilium)  seems  clearly  to  imply  that
these  two  groups  were  fixed  on  different  parts  of  the  temple.     Probably
the  first  group  occupied  the  front  (east  end),  and  the  other  group  the
back  (west  end)  of  the  temple.    As  the  existing  remains  of  the  sculptures
are  on  two  different  scales,  a  larger  and  a  smaller,  it  seems  probable  that
the  larger  occupied  the  gables  and  the  smaller  the  metopes  (see  above,
p.  170  sq,^     Now  the  birth  of  Zeus  is  a  subject  suitable  for  a  gable;
and  the  capture  of  Troy,  as  the  most  famous  exploit  of  the  Argive  arms,
would  be  a  natural  and  appropriate  subject  to  adorn  a  gable  of  the  chief
temple  of  Aigolis.     On  the  other  hand,  scenes  of  battle,  in  which  the
combatants  can  be  broken  up  into  pairs,  naturally  lend  themselves  to  the
decoration  of  metopes.     Hence  we  may  conjecture,  with  Prof.  Curtius
{Pelofi.  2.  p.  570),  that  the  birth  of  Zeus  was  represented  in  the  eastern,
and  the  capture  of  Troy  in  the  western  gable  ;  and  that  the  battle  of  the
gods  and  giants  was  sculptured  in  the  eastern,  and  the  Trojan  war  in
the  western  metopes.     This  was  Welcker's  view  also,  at  least  so  far  as
regards  the  sculptures  of  the  gables  (Antike  DenkmcUer^  i.  pp.  1 91-194)-
Prof.  Waldstein,  also,  accepts  this  arrangement  of  the  sculptures  in  the-
eastem  gable  and  the  eastern  metopes  ;  but  with  regard  to  the  sculptures—
at  the  west  end  of  the  temple,  he  prefers  to  suppose  that  the  Departure=
for  Troy  occupied  the  gable,  and  the  Capture  of  Troy  the  metopes.     He=
says  that  "in  the  western  pediment  [gable]  we  should  naturally  findJ
the  scene  of  the  Departure  for  Troy,  with  Agamemnon  in  the  presences^
of  Hera  and  the  other  divinities,  most  appropriately  represented  on  this-^
spot  where,  according  to  tradition,  Agamemnon  offered  sacrifice  before  ^^
leaving  for  Troy  "  (Excavations  of  the  American  School  at  the  Hcraion^  ^
No.    I    (London,    1892),   p.   7).      The   suggestion    is   plausible;    but-^
Pausanias's  words,  though  vague  (rot  h  rhv  irphs  Tpoiav  ir6k€fiov),  seem-^
to  imply  that  the  subject  of  these  sculptures  was  not  the  departure  for- —
Troy,  but  the  actual  war  itself ;  and  this  latter  theme  would,  as  I  have  -^
said,  lend  itself  naturally  to  treatment  in  a  series  of  detached  repre —
sentations,  each  pair  or  group  of  combatants  having  a  metope  to  itself

From  the  number  of  fragments  which  have  been  found  of  sculptures  --
which  clearly  belonged  to  metopes,  Prof.  Waldstein  concludes  {/,c.)  that  -^
the  metopes  on  all  four  sides  of  the  temple  were  sculptured,  though  ■*
Pausanias  appears  to  have  mentioned  only  the  subjects  of  the  eastern  -*
and  western  metopes.

17.  3.  statues  of  women  who  have  been  priestesses  of  Hera.    So  ^
at  Hermion  images  of  the  priestesses  of  Demeter  stood  in  front  of  her   '
temple   (ii.  35.  8) ;  and  at  Cerynea  in  Achaia  there  were  statues  of^^
women,  said  to  be  priestesses,  at  the  entrance  to  the  sanctuary  of  the    -
Eumenides  (vii.  25.  7).     At  Paestum  has  been  found  a  statuette,  dedi-
cated to  Athena,  representing  one  of  the  girl  Basket-bearers  (#cav>/<^pot)
who  figured  in  her  worship.     Prof.  Curtius  thinks  that  there  may  have
been  whole  rows  of  such  statuettes  in  the  temples.     See  ArcMologische
Zeitungy  1880,  pp.  27-31  ;  Curtius,  Gesammelte  Abhandlungen^   2.  pp.
286-294.     The  Argives  dated  their  years  by  the  priesthoods  of  Hera.


CH,  XVII  THE  HERAEUM  183

Hellanicus  the  historian  (480-395  B.C.)  wrote  a  history  of  the  priestesses
of  the  Argive  Hera,  which  must  have  been  of  great  importance  for
Greek  chronology.  See  Preller,  Ausgewcihlte  Aufsdtze^  p.  5 1  sqq.  ;
Fragmenta  kistor.  Graec,  ed.  Muller,  i.  pp.  xxvii.  sq,,  51  sq,  Cp.  note
on  i.  27.  4,  *a  well-wrought  figure  of  an  old  woman.'

17.  3.  the  statue is  really  Orestes.     Bachofen  {Die  Sage

von  Tanaquily  p.  xxxvii.  note)  suggested  that  the  reason  for  converting  a
statue  of  Orestes  into  one  of  Augustus  may  have  been  that  both  of  them
avenged  their  fathers'  murder.  (Of  course  Augustus  was  only  the
adopted  son  of  Julius  Caesar.)  On  this  custom  of  transforming  ancient
statues  into  portraits  of  living  men  by  altering  the  inscriptions,  see  note
on  i.  18.  3,  *the  statues  of  Miltiades  and  Themistocles.*

17.  3.  a  oonch  of  Hera.  This  was  perhaps  used  for  the  dramatic
representation  of  the  marriage  of  Zeus  and  Hera,  which  took  place  at
annual  festivals  in  various  parts  of  Greece,  as  at  Cnosus  in  Crete
(Diodorus,  v.  72),  at  Samos  (Lactantius,  InstiL  i.  17),  and  at  Athens
^Photius,  s.v.  up^v  ydfjLov ;  Etymol,  Magn.  s,v,  lepofim^fiovts,  p.  468.
52).  Cp.  K.  O.  Miiller,  Die  Dorier^  i.  p.  400;  The  Golden  Bought
1.  p.  102  sqq.  However,  the  couch  may  only  have  been  intended  for
the  goddess  to  rest  upon.  There  was  a  couch  beside  the  image  of
Aesculapius  near  Tithorea  in  Phocis  (x.  32.  12).

17.  3.  the  shield  which  Menelaus  once  took  from  Enphorbus.

In  Homer  (//.  xvii.  i  sqq,)  Menelaus  kills  Euphorbus  the  Trojan,  and  is

about  to  strip  him  of  his  arms,  when  he  is  forced  to  retire  by  the

^vance  of  Hector   and  the  Trojans ;  it   is  not  said  that   Menelaus

actually  carried  off  the  shield  of  Euphorbus.     The  combat  of  Menelaus

and  Hector  over  the  fallen  Euphorbus  is  painted  on  an  old  Greek  plate

found  at  Camirus  in  Rhodes.    See  A.  Schneider,  Der  troische  Sagenkreis

Mfi  der  dlteren  griechischen  Kunst^  p.    1 1  sqq.  ;  Kekul^,  *  Euphorbos,*

Mheinisches  Museuniy  N.  F.  43  (1888),  pp.  481-485.      A  woodcut  of

the  painting  is  given  by  Kekul^,  /.r.,  and  is  prefixed  to  the  second

'^'ol.  of  Paley's  ed.  of  the  Iliad.     Pythagoras  alleged  that  in  one  of  its

transmigrations  his  soul  had  animated  the  body  of  Euphorbus ;  and  in

proof  of  this  he  recognised  the  shield  of  Euphorbus  in   the   temple

of  Hera.      See    Diogenes    Laertius,  viii.    i.  4  sq.\  Maximus   Tyrius,

J)issert.  xvi.  2  ;  Jamblichus,  Vit.  Pythag.  63  ;  Porphyry,  Vit.  Pythag.

26,  27,  45  ;  Horace,  Odes^  i.  28.  9  sqq.     Diogenes  speaks  of  the  shield

of  Euphorbus  as  having  been  dedicated  in  the  temple  of  Apollo  at

^ranchidae  ;  Jamblichus  and  Porphyry  speak  of  it  as  being  at  Mycenae.

17.  4.  The  image  of  Hera  etc.     This  was  one  of  the  most  famous

Vrorks  of  Polyclitus,  the  great  master  of  the  Argive  school  of  sculpture.

Strabo  says  (viii.  p.  372)  that  the  works  of  Polyclitus  at  the  Heraeum

^ere  the  most  beautiful  in  the  world,  though  in  size  and  costliness  they

^ere  surpassed  by  those  of  Phidias.     Plutarch   couples  the  Hera  of

Polyclitus  with  the  Olympian  Zeus  of  Phidias  {Pericles^  2).     Martial

^ys  (x.  89)  that  Phidias  would  have  been  glad  to  have  been  able  to

claim  the  image  of  Hera  as  his  own.     Maximus  Tyrius  tells  us  {Dissert.

^v.  6)  that  Polyclitus  portrayed  the  goddess  in  queenly  fashion  sitting

®n  a  golden  throne.     The  statue  is  also  alluded  to  in  terms  of  admira-


THE  HERAEUM


tion  by  Phiiostratus  (Vit.  ApoHon.  vi.  19.  2)  and  in  an  epigram  of  the
hMhoAogy  {AntAol.  Plaitud.  216).  But  Patisanias  is  the  only  ancient
writer  who  has  described  the  image  exactly.  From
his  detailed  description  we  are  able  to  identify  copies
both  of  the  head  and  of  the  whole  image  on  coins
,  of  Argos  (Fig.  29).  These  copies  seem  fairly
urate ;  even  the  cuckoo  on  the  goddess's  sceptre
'  is  represented  on  some  of  them.  But  on  the  other
hand  the  figures  of  the  Graces  and  Seasons  which
adorned  the  goddess's  crown  are  omitted  on  the
HO.IO.— luiCBOFHBRA  ™'ns,  and  a  floral  decoration  is  substituted  for  (hem.
(coin  at  jtBcas).  Perhaps  the  artist  who  cut  the  dies  despaired  of  repro-
ducing the  figures  on  so  small  a  scale.  See  Imhoof-
Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  on  Paus.  p.  34,  with  pi.  I  xii.  xiii_
xiv.  XV.  ;  Gardner,  Types  of  Greek  Coins,  p.  137  sq.  i,  with  pi.  viii.  13  ^^
Overbeck,  Grieck,  Kunstmythologie,  3  (Besonderer  Theil,  2),  p.  41  iqg.^^
with  Miinitafel  ii.  and  iii.  ;  Head,  Historia  Nutnmorum,  p.  367.  Thre^^
marble  heads  of  Hera  which  have  come  down  to  us  have  by  some  beer^

supposed  to  reproduce  more  or  less  freely  the  type  of  the  Hera  of  Poly

clitus.      They  are  the   Famese   Hera  at   Naples,  the  Juno  Ludovisi  al=:3
Rome,  and  a  head   in  the   British   Museum.      See   Murray,  History  0^^
Greek  Sculpture.?  I.  p.  303  sqq.;   Lucy  M,  Mitchell,  History  of  Ancien^^
Sculpture^  p.  390  sqq.\   Overbeck,  Gesch.  d.  grieck.  Plastik,*  i.  pp.  509- —
Jii  ;    Collignon,   Histoire  de  la  Sculpture  Grecque,    i.    p.    511  sqq.;S
Friederichs-Wolters,  Gipsabgiisse,  Nos.  500,   501  ;  Baumeister's  Dcnk-  —
mdler,  p.  135a  sqq.   To  these  supposed  copies  or  imitations  of  the  head  J
of  Potyclitus's   Hera  may  now  be  added   the  fine   head   found   by  the    '
Americans  at  the  Heraeum,     See  above,  p.  1 70  sq.    The  image  of  Hera
was   probably  made  for  the  new  temple   in  or  soon  after  423  B.C.,  the     ■
date  of  the  desiruaion  of  the  old  temple.      Polyclitus  was  a  contem-
porary of  Phidias   (Plato,  Protagoras,   p.   31 1  c).     According  to   Pliny
(jV.   H.  xxxiv.  49)   he  flourished   in  01.   90  (420-417    B.C.)      Aristotle
regarded  him  as  the  great  masler  of  bronze-casting,  and   Phidias  as  the
great  master  of  sculpture  in  marble  [Elh.  Nicom.  vi.  7,  p.  1141  a,  g-l  1).
17.  4-  tn  one  hoad  she  carries  a  pomegranate.     On  this  attribute
of  Hera  see   Bolticher,   \a  Archaologische  Zeitung,  1856,  pp.    169.176.
The  pomegranate  has   sometimes  been  taken   as  a  symbol  of  fertility,
appropriate  to  the  goddess  who  presided  over  marriage,     Botticher,

I  however,  interpreted  it  differently.  He  pointed  out  that,  from  the
blood-red  appearance  of  the  inside  of  the  fruit,  it  was  associated  with
ideas  of  blood  and  death.  It  was  said  to  have  sprung  from  the  blood
of  Dionysus  (Clement  of  Alex.,  Protrept.  ii.  19,  p.  16,  ed.  Potter).  The
Furies  planted  a  pomegranate  tree  on  the  grave  of  the  slain  Eleocles  ;
when  the  fruit  was  pulled,  blood  flowed  from  it  (Phiiostratus,  Irnag.  ii.
29).  A  pomegranate  tree  grew  over  the  grave  of  the  suicide  Menoeceus
(Pausanias,  ix.  25.  1).  To  dream  of  pomegranates  foreshadowed
wounds  (Artemidorus,  Onirocr.  i.  73).  Proserpine,  afier  she  had  been
carried  off  by  Pluto  to  the  lower  world,  would  have  been  allowed  to
reitim  to  the  upper  world  if  she  had  not  eaten  a  seed  of  a  pomegranate


CH.  XVII  THE  HERAEVM  185

^Homeric  hymn  to  Demtter,  371  iqq.;  Apoliodoms,  i.  5.  3;  Or\A,Mttam.
V.  530  sqq.)  Hence  the  plant  was  hateful  to  Demeier  (see  note  on  vjii,
37.  7).  For  these  reasons  Bottichcr  concludes  that  the  pomegranate  in
the  hand  of  Hera  was  a  symbol  of  her  triumph  over  her  rival  Demeter
and  her  rival's  daughter  Proserpine.  See  also  Overbeck,  Kunstmytho-
logie,  3  (Besonderer  Theil,  2),  pp.  48,  191  sq.  The  statue  at  Olympia
of  Milon  the  athlete,  who  was  a  priest  of  Hera,  had  a  pomegranate  in
the  left  hand  (Philostratus,  Vit.  Apollon.  iv,  28;  Pausanias,  vi.  14.  6).
The  statue  of  Victory  Athena  at  Athens  had  a  pomegranate  in  her  right
hand  (Haipocration,  s.v.  Nikij  'Aflijya).  See  Bollicher,  Der  Baum-
kttltus  der  Nellenen,  p.  471  sqq.;  Hehn,  Kulturpflaneen  und Hausthiere
in  ikretn  Uebergang  aus  Asien,*  p.  192  sqq. ;  J.  Murr,  Die  Pflanaenwelt
in  der  gritch.  Mythologie  (Innsbruck,  1890),  p,  50  sqq.

17.  4-  the  cnckoo  percbed  on  the  sceptre.     See  ii.  36.  i  note.

17.  5.  an  image  of  Hebe.  On  an  Argive  coin  of  the  reign  of
Antoninus  Pius  (Fig.  30)  the  image  of  Hebe  is  repre-
sented standing  opposite  the  seated  statue  of  Hera,
wiih  the  peacock  between  them  (Imhoof-Blumer  and
Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  on  Paus.  p.  34,  pi.  I  xv.)
On  the  sculptor  Naucydes  see  note  on  vi.  6.  2.

17.  5.  her  most  uicient  Image  is  made  of  \
the  Tood  of  the  wild  pear-tree.  There  was  a
festival  at  Argos  ai  which  the  children  called
each  other  in  sport  '  throwers  of  wild  pears '
{(ficiXAoxpoSts).  Plutarch,  who  mentions  this  '
{Quaes/.  Oraec.  ;t),  suggests  as  an  explanation  that
the  first  people  who  were  brought  by  Inachus  down  from  the  n
lo  the  plains  may  have  lived  upon  wild  pears.  Amongst  the  archaic
lerTa<ottas  found  by  the  American  excavators  at  the  Heraeum  are  some
rade  figures  of  a  sealed  goddess.  These  may  perhaps  be  rough  copies
of  the  very  ancient  image  of  Hera  made  of  pear-tree  wood.  See
Excavations  of  the  American  School  at  the  Heraion,  No.  i  (London,
1892),  p.  19,  with  pi.  vii.  15,  20.  It  may  here  be  mentioned  that  at
the  Heraeum  the  Americans  found  what  they  took  to  be  a  very  rude
stone  idol.  "  It  is  an  octagonal  shaft,  having  a  very  slightly  projecting
base,  narrowing  toward  the  top  and  broken  off  at  a  height  of  about  two
feet  and  a  half"  (American  Joum.  0/ Archaeology,  8  (1893),  p.  225).

17.  6.  the  fiihled  marriage  of  Hebe  and  Hercnles.  This  subject
is  represented  on  ancient  vases,  notably  on  a  large  Apulian  amphora
no*-  at  Berlin.  See  Baumeister's  DenkmdUr,  p.  628  sqq. ;  Roscher,
Uxikon,  I.  p.  1870.

17.  6.  a  peacock  of  gold  and  shining  stoneB.  On  an  Argive  coin
of  Hadrian's  time  a  peacock  is  represented  with  its  tail  spread.  It  is
probably  a  copy  of  Hadrian's  votive  offering.  See  Imhoof-Blumer  and
Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  on  Paus.  p.  34  sq.,  with  pi.  I  xvi.  In  his
«cavations  on  the  site  of  the  Heraeum  General  Gordon  discovered  part
tif  a  marble  peacock,  and  part  of  a  large  antefix  of  terra-cotta  painted
like  the  Uil  of  a  peacock  (Leake,  Peloponnesiaca,  p.  261  ;  Mure,
Journal,  2.  p.  179);  and  the  Americans  in  their  excavations  found  a


i86  THE  HERABUM  BK.  ii.  cokinth

bronze  peacock  {Excavaiions  of  the  American  School  at  the  Heraion,
No.  I.  p.  S).  Sacred  peacocl^  seem  to  have  been  kept  in  the  great
sanctuary  of  Heru  at  Samos,  and  the  peacock  appears  on  Samian  coins
(Athenaeus,  xiv,  p.  655  ab  ;  Gardner,  Stones  and  Samian  Coins,  p.  18,
pL  V.  5).  On  a  wall-painting  in  an  ancient  tomb  discovered  at  Kertch
a  peacock  is  represented ;  but  the  colours  are  conventional,  so  nothing
can  be  deteimined  from  it  as  to  the  species  or  variety  of  peacocks  in
antiquity.  See  Compte  Rendu  (St  Petersburg),  1872,  p-  283  Jf.,  with
plates  ill.  and  viiL  A  peacock  is  also  represented  on  an  ancient
tnedallion  and  an  ancient  bowl  (the  latter  of  Christian  times),  both
found  in  the  south  of  Russia  {pp.  cit.  i874>  p-  34  ;  5«e  also  ib.
1878-79,  p.  166).  Peacocks  seem  to  have  been  first  brought  to
Mediterranean  lands  by  merchants  from  India.  For  peacocks  were
brought  to  King  Solomon  in  ships  (1  Kings  x.  22);  and  the  Hebrew
word  for  a  peacock  is  a  slightly  modified  form  of  the  Sanscrit  name  or
the  bird  {(iJtii) ;  so  the  Ophir  of  ihe  Bible  may  have  been  a  place  on
the  coast  of  India,  perhaps  in  Malabar.  In  a  grove  in  India,  on  the
banks  of  the  river  Hyaratis,  Alexander  the  Great  saw  multitudes  of  wild
peacocks  (Quintus  Curtius,  ix.  I.  2),  and  he  admired  them  so  much
that  he  ordered  that  no  one  should  kill  a  peacock  under  pain  of  his
severe  displeasure  (Aelian,  No/.  An.  v.  21).  The  Greeks  seem  to  have
first  received  the  peacock  through  the  Phoenicians,  for  the  Greek  name
(tucus)  for  the  bird  is  derived  from  the  Semitic  and  hence,  indirectly,
from  the  Sanscrit  word  for  peacock.  Peacocks  could  not  have  been
imported  very  early  into  Greece,  for  in  the  fifth  century  B.C.  they  were
still  a  raree-show  at  Athens.  A  man  named  Demus  kept  a  number  of
peacocks,  and  on  one  day  each  month  he  exhibited  them.  People  paid
to  see  the  birds,  and  came  in  crowds  for  the  purpose,  even  from
Thessaly  and  Sparta  (Athenaeus,  ix.  p.  397  cd ;  Aclian,  I.e.)  See
Movers,  Die  Phoenizier,  Theil  iii.  p.  94  sg. ;  Hehn,  Kulturpflanzen
und  Haustkiere,*  p.  286  sgq.

17.  7-  It  WM  bnmed  down  through  Ohiyseis  etc.  This  is  from
Thucydides,  iv.  133.  Thucydides  says  that  the  priestess  (whom  he
names  Chrysis)  fled  to  Phlius.  The  wreaths  which  caught  fire  were
perhaps  the  garlands  of  asferion,  which  Pausanias  mentions  in  §  2  of
this  chapter.     Cp.  iii.  5.  6.

18.  I.  a  shrine  of  the  hero  Fersens.  On  coins  of  Argos,  Perseus
■5  represented  standing  with  the  Gorgon's  head  in
his  right  hand  and  the  scimitar  in  his  left  (Fig.  31),
As  the  type  is  repeated  without  variation  fromthe  time

t  of  Hadrian  to  that  of  Sevcms,  it  is  probably  copied

I  from  a  statue.     See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner.

Num.  CoJiim.  on  Pans.  p.  35,  with  pi.  1  xvii.  xviii.

18.    I.   he  is  most  honoiued  ]n  Seripbus.

The  infant  Perseus,  the  son  of  Zeus  and  Danae,  was

nc  }i.— piRBsus  WITH  shut  up  with  his  mother  by  Acrisius,  father  of  Danae,

TMm  GoRcoN'a  HEAQ  in  3  cliest,  and  set  floating  on  the  sea.     The  chest

(qoiN  or  ABG05).       landed  at  the  island  of  Seriphus,  where  it  was  found

by  the  fisherman  Dictys  in  his  nets.     See  Strabo,  x.  p.  487  ;  Apollo-


CH.  xviii  PERSEUS  187

donis,  ii.  4.  i  ;  Hyginus,  Fad.  63.  There  was  a  certain  fish  called
the  rcrrif  cvaXios  (Liddell  and  Scott  take  it  to  be  the  lobster)  which
the  fishermen  of  Seriphus  always  threw  back  into  the  sea  when  they
found  it  in  their  nets  ;  and  if  they  found  a  dead  one  they  mourned  over
it.  Most  Greeks  refused  to  eat  of  this  fish,  deeming  it  sacred.  The
people  of  Seriphus  thought  it  was  a  plaything  of  Perseus.  See  Aelian,
AW.  Am'm,  xiii.  26.

18.  I.  in  Athens  there  is  ft  precinct  of  Perseus.  See  the  Critical
Note  on  this  passage  (vol.  i.  p.  572).  If  K.  O.  M liner's  emendation  of
this  passage  be  accepted,  the  translation  will  run  :  "  He  is  most  honoured
in  Seriphus,  where  there  is  a  precinct  of  Perseus  beside  a  shrine  of
Athena."  Perseus  is  said  to  have  been  brought  up  in  a  sanctuary
of  Hera  at  Seriphus  (Hyginus,  Fad.  63).

18.  I.  Clymene.  This  may  perhaps  be  the  sea-goddess,  daughter
of  Ocean  and  Tethys  (Hesiod,  Theog.  351).

18.  I.  Over  the  grave  is  the  stone  figure  of  ft  ram.     In  the
village  Es    Ta  Phickthia^  about  two  miles  from  Mycenae,  a  curious
monument,   apparently  sepulchral,   has  been  discovered   in   a  chapel.
Two  rams'  heads  are  carved  on  it ;  one  of  them  is  on  a  sort  of  round
pillar,  about  which  a  band  is  chiselled,  encircling   the  pillar  several
times.      The  ram's  head  is  the  termination  of  this  band,  which  may  be
meant  to  represent  a  serpent     There  is  a  mutilated  inscription  on  the
monument.       From   the   mention   of  Hecate   and    Proserpine   in    the
inscription  the  monument  appears  to  be  a  tombstone.     See  Mittheil.  d.
arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  8  (1883),   pp.   141- 148.      It  seems  that  rams,
carved  in  the  round  and  adorned  with  sculptures  in  relief  on  their  sides,
are  common   ornaments  of  tombs   in   Armenia.     The   tombs   are   of
Christian  times,  some  of  them  very  late ;  but  Prof.  Milchhofer  thinks
that  this  type  of  sepulchral  decoration  may  be  very  ancient.     In  Phrygia
Prof.  W.  M.  Ramsay  discovered  a  large  stone  ram,  its  sides  carved  with
reliefs  representing  goats,  horsemen,  and  birds.     On  the  analogy  of  the
Armenian  tombs.  Prof.  Milchhofer  concludes  that  the  monument  found
near  Mycenae  was  also  a  tombstone.      See  A.  Milchhofer,  in  Archao-
logisc/ie  Zeitung^  41   (1883),   p.   263;    W.   M.   Ramsay,  va  Joum.  of
Hellenic  Studies,  3  (1882),  p.  25  j^.,  with  plate  xx.       On  the  repre-
sentation of  rams  in  ancient  art  see  Stephani  in  Compte  Rendu  (St.
Petersburg),  1869,  pp.  18-128.     On  the  ram  in  connexion  with  various
deities    (Hermes,  Athena,  etc.)  see   E.   Gerhard,    *  Widdergottheiten,*
Arckaologische  Zeitung,  8  (1850),  pp.  149-160.

18.  I.  Thyestes  obtained  the  golden  lamb.  The  story  of  the
golden  lamb,  as  told  by  Apollodorus  in  the  epitome  of  his  work  which
was  discovered  a  few  years  ago  in  the  Vatican,  is  as  follows.  Atreus
once  vowed  to  sacrifice  the  fairest  animal  of  his  flocks  to  Artemis.
But  when  a  golden  lamb  appeared  among  them,  instead  of  sacrificing
it  to  the  goddess,  he  strangled  it  and  kept  it  in  a  box.  But  his  wife
Aerope  contrived  to  get  possession  of  the  lamb  and  gave  it  to  her
paramour  Thyestes,  the  brother  of  Atreus.  Now  it  came  about  that
the  people  of  Mycenae  were  commanded  by  an  oracle  to  choose  a  king
of  the  Pelopid  family ;  so  they  sent  for  Atreus  and  Thyestes.     In  the


i88  THE  GOLDEN  LAMB  bk.  ii.  corixth

assembly  of  the  people  Thyestes  said  that  the  one  who  had  the  golden
lamb  ought  to  be  king,  to  which  Atreus  agreed,  not  knowing  that  the
lamb  had  been  filched  from  him  by  his  brother.  So  Thyestes  exhibited
the  lamb  and  obtained  the  kingdom.  See  Epitoma  Vaticana  ex
Apollodori  Bibliotheca^  ed.  R.  Wagner,  pp.  60  sq,^  166  sq.  ;  Mytho-
graphi  Graeci,  ed.  R.  Wagner,  p.  185.  The  abridged  and  somewhat
confused  version  of  the  legend  told  by  a  scholiast  on  Homer  (//.  ii.
106)  and  a  scholiast  on  Euripides  {Orest.  811)  was  probably  derived  from
Apollodorus.  A  less  fabulous  account  of  the  way  in  which  the  change
of  dynasty  at  Mycenae  from  the  Perseids  to  the  Pelopids  was  brought
about  may  be  read  in  Thucydides  (i.  9).     Cp.  above,  p.  1 60.

18.  2.  the  avenging  ghost  of  MyrtiloB.     See  viii.  14.  10  sq.

18.  2.  the  Spartan  Glaucus  etc.  See  Herodotus,  vi.  86  ;  Juvenal,
xiii.  199  sqq,     Cp.  Paus.  viii.  7.  8.

18.  3.  Mysian  Demeter.     Cp.  vii.  27.  9  sq,

18.  3.  another  temple,  built  of  burnt  bricks.  The  only  other
building  (I  think)  of  burnt  brick  which  Pausanias  mentions  is  th
Philippeum  at  Olympia  (v.  20.  10).  The  use  of  burnt  bricks  (that  is,
bricks  baked  in  a  kiln)  was  characteristic  of  Roman  rather  than  o
Greek  architecture.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Greeks  made  great  use  o
unbumt  bricks,  that  is,  bricks  dried  in  the  sun,  not  fired  in  a  kiln.  But
edifices  built  of  sun-dried  bricks  soon  moulder  away  when  exposed  to
the  action  of  the  weather.  Hence  Greek  buildings  of  this  sort  have
almost  wholly  disappeared.     See  note  on  v.  16.  i.

18.  4.  three  kingdoms.  On  the  genealogies  of  the  kings  of  Argos
see  Schol.  on  Pindar,  A^em,  ix.  30 ;  Eustathius  on  Homer,  //.  ii.  566.

18.  4.  Melampus cured  them  on  condition  that  etc.     See

Herodotus,  ix.   34  ;  Diodorus,  iv.  68  ;  Schol.  on  Pindar,  A- em,  ix.  30 ;
Apollodorus,  ii.  2  ;  and  the  note  on  Paus.  viii.  18.  7.

18.  7.  Temenus  and  Gresphontes  etc.  As  to  the  foundation  of
the  three  Doric  kingdoms  of  Argos,  Messene,  and  Sparta  under
Temenus,  Cresphontes,  and  the  sons  of  Aristodemus  respectively,  cp.
Plato,  LawSy  iii.  p.  683  c  sqq, ;  Isocrates,  Archidamus,  17-33  >  Apollo-
dorus, ii.  8.  4  sq,

18.  8.  Melanthus.  Though  Melanthus  was  not  a  direct  descend-
ant of  Nestor,  he  belonged  to  the  same  family,  his  ancestor  Pericly-
menus  having  been  a  brother  of  Nestor  (Homer,  Od.  xi.  286).  The
father  of  Nestor  and  Periclymenus  was  Neleus.  Hence  Pausanias
speaks  of  the  family  collectively  as  the  Neleids.  See  the  genealogical
table  in  Topffer's  Attische  Genealogie,  p.  320.

18.  9.  the  rest  of  the  Neleids  went  to  Athens.  Cp.  i.  3.  3  with
the  note  on  *  the  kings  from  Melanthus  to  Clidicus.'  Mr.  Topffer  has
argued  ingeniously  and  plausibly  that  the  whole  story  of  the  emigration
of  the  royal  family  of  Messenia  to  Attica  was  concocted  in  the  fifth
century  B.C.  in  order  to  represent  Athens  as  the  metropolis  of  the  Ionian
cities  which  were  really  founded  by  Messenian  leaders.  See  TopfFer,
Attische  Genealogie,  pp.  225-247,  and  Paus.  vii.  2.  i  with  the  note.
The  legend  as  to  the  accession  of  Melanthus  to  the  throne  of  Athens
was  that,  in  a  war  between  Athens  and  Boeotia,  Thymoetes,  the  last


CH.  XIX  ARGOS  189

king  of  Athens  of  the  house  of  Theseus,  refused  a  challenge  to  single

combat  sent  him  by  Xanthus,  king  of  Boeotia,  but  offered  to  resign  the

throne   to   any   one   who   would   accept   the   challenge   in   his  stead.

Melanthus  accepted  the  challenge,   defeated  his  adversary,   and  was

placed  on  the  throne  of  Athens.    See  Hellanicus,  in  the  Schol.  on  Plato,

Symposium^  p.  208  d ;    Conon,  Narrationes^  39 ;    Strabo,  ix.  p.  393  ;

Eusebius,  Chronic,  vol.  2.  p.  56,  ed.  Schoene ;  Harpocration,  s.v,   Aira-

Tovpia;  Polyaenus,  i.    19;   Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  AchamianSy   146;

Suidas,  s,v,  'AiraTovpia,     One  legend  was  that  the  point  in  dispute

between  Athens  and  Boeotia  was  the  possession  of  a  place  on  the

borders  called  Melaenae  or  Melania  (see  Hellanicus,  Polyaenus,  and

Harpocration,  //.cc, ;  the  scholiast  on  Aristophanes,  /.^.,  whom  Suidas

copies,  calls  the  place  Celaenae,  which  may  be  a  wrong  reading  for

Melaenae).     From  this  and  the  legend  of  the  appearance  of  Dionysus

at  the  combat  clad  in  a  black  goat's  skin,  Mr.  Topffer  has  argued  that

Melanthus  was  a  local  hero  of  Melaenae,  an  embodiment  of  Dionysus

Melanthides  or  Melanaegis,  and  had  originally  no  connexion  either  with

Messenia  or  Athens  {Aitische  GencoUogie^  p.  231  j^.)

19.  2.  was  condemned  by  the  people  and  actually  deposed.  The
Argives  were  governed  by  at  least  a  nominal  king  as  late  as  the  time  of
the  great  Persian  war.  For  at  that  time  the  Spartan  envoys  who  were
sent  to  Argos  are  said  to  have  contrasted  the  two  kings  of  Sparta  with
the  one  king  of  Argos  (Herodotus,  vii.  1 49).

19.  3.  Argos.  The  modem  town  of  Argos  stands  on  the  site  of  the
ancient  city.  It  lies  on  the  western  side  of  the  broad  Argolic  plain,  at
the  eastern  foot  of  the  steep  mountain  (950  ft.  high)  which  formed  the
citadel  of  ancient  Argos  and  was  known  as  the  Larisa.  The  sea  is
distant  about  four  miles  to  the  south,  being  separated  from  the  town  by
a  stretch  of  level  plain.  The  citadel  (the  Larisa)  is  a  projecting  spur  of
the  line  of  moimtains  which  bounds  the  Argolic  plain  on  the  west.
Across  the  plain,  to  the  south-east,  at  the  head  of  the  Argolic  gulf,  but
at  its  eastern  side,  Nauplia  is  in  full  view,  with  its  lofty  citadel,  known
as  the  Palamidi,  A  little  way  inland  from  Nauplia  (which  is  the  natural
harbour  of  Argos)  Tiryns  is  also  plainly  visible  in  the  form  of  a  low
isolated  eminence  rising  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  plain.  Still  on  the
eastern  side  of  the  plain,  but  away  to  the  north,  Mycenae  lies  incon-
spicuous at  the  foot  of  the  mountains  which  form  the  eastern  boundary
of  the  plain.  According  to  Strabo  (viii.  p.  370)  Argos  stood  mostly  on
the  plain  at  the  foot  of  the  Larisa.  The  modem  town  is  wholly  on  the
plain.  It  covers  a  considerable  extent  of  ground,  being  interspersed
^'ith  gardens.  Though  a  rather  dirty  and  untidy  town,  it  is  not  un-
picturesque  with  its  low  red -tiled  houses.  In  particular,  the  main
street,  lined  with  shops  and  coffee-houses,  presents  a  gay  and  animated
scene  when  it  is  thronged  with  white-kilted,  red-capped  peasants  who
have  come  in  from  the  hills  and  the  neighbouring  plain  to  market.
Almost  the  only  remains  of  antiquity  to  be  seen  in  Ae  town  are  the
niins  of  the  theatre  (ii.  20.  7  note).  See  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  217  sq,^
^aedcker^  p.  261.

19.  3.   a  sanctuary  of  Wolfish  Apollo.      Of  all  the  buildings


190  ARGOS  BK.  II.  CORINTH

of  ancient  Argos,  as  described  by  Pausanias,  the  only  one  (if  we
except  the  citadel)  of  which  the  site  can  now  be  identified  with  certainty
is  the  theatre,  hewn  out  of  the  rock  at  the  south-eastern  foot  of  the
Larisa.  The  site  of  all  the  other  ancient  buildings  is  matter  of  inference
and  conjecture.  As  Pausanias,  coming  from  the  Heraeum,  entered
Argos  from  the  north,  and  after  describing  the  sanctuary  of  Wolfish
Apollo  proceeds  to  the  theatre  (ii.  20.  7),  which  must  have  been  towards
the  southern  end  of  the  city,  Leake  supposed  that  the  temple  of  Wolfish
Apollo  stood  in  the  northern  part  of  the  modem  town,  not  £ar  from  the
foot  of  the  Larisa  {Morea^  2.  p.  403).  A  fragmentary  inscription  has
been  found  at  Argos  containing  part  of  an  honorary  decree  with  a
direction  that  a  copy  engraved  on  stone  should  be  set  up  in  the  sanctuary
of  Wolfish  Apollo  (E<f}Yffi€pls  dpxaf-okoytKrjj  1885,  p.  57).  Inscrip-
tions containing  dedications  to  Apollo  (C.  /.  G,  Nos.  1142,  1143,  cp.
No.  II 52)  have  been  found  in  a  church  of  St.  Nicholas,  from  which
Bursian  (Geogr,  2.  p.  53  j^.  note)  inferred  that  the  temple  in  question
must  have  been  near  this  church.  From  Thucydides  (v.  47),  Sophocles
{Electra^  6  sq.^  with  the  Scholiast),  and  Plutarch  {Pyrrhusy  32,  com-
pared with  Pausanias,  ii.  19.  7)  we  know  that  the  temple  abutted  on
the  market-place ;  and  from  Livy  (xxxii.  25)  we  learn  that  the  market-
place was  at  the  foot  of  the  citadel.  Opposite  the  temple  was  a  temple
of  Nemean  Zeus  (Schol.  on  Sophocles,  Electra^  6).

The  wolf  very  commonly  appears  on  coins  of  Argos.  Sometimes
he  is  represented  in  full  between  two  dolphins,  sometimes  alone  ;  some-
times only  his  head  or  forepart  is  given.  See  Head,  Historia  Nummorum^
p.  366  sq,  ;  id,y  Coins  of  the  Ancients^  p.  47,  pi.  iii.  B.  36  ;  Gardner,
Types  of  Greek  Coins^  p.  44  ;  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Nunt^  Comm,
on  Pans,  p.  35  ;  British  Museum  Catalogue  of  Greek  Coins ^  Peloponnesus^
p.  136  sqq.^  plates  xxvii.  xxviii.  Some  iron  coins  of  Argos  with  a  half
wolf  on  them  have  been  found  {Mittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  7
(1882),  p.  2.  sq.)  A  scholiast  on  Sophocles  {Electra^  6)  says  that
wolves  were  represented  on  the  coins  of  Argos  like  owls  on  the  coins  of
Athens.  A  wolfs  head,  in  terra-cotta,  well  modelled,  has  been  found  at
Argos  {Archdologische  Zeitung^  1864,  p.  144).

19.  3.  Attains,  an  Athenian.  The  date  of  this  sculptor  is  unkno^^ii.
The  name  Attalus  was  inscribed  on  one  of  sixteen  marble  statues,  of
good  style,  which  were  found  near  the  theatre  at  Argos.  See  Dodwell,
Toury  2.  p.  217  ;  Brunn,  Gesch.  d.  griech.  KUnstler^  i.  p.  558  ;  C.  I.  G.
No.  1 146;  Loewy,  Ins chrif ten  griech.  Bildhauer^  No.  436.

19.  3.  in  those  days  all  images  were  of  wood.  In  Italy,  down
to  the  conquest  of  Western  Asia  in  the  first  half  of  the  second  century
B.C.,  most  of  the  images  of  the  gods  are  said  to  have  been  of  wood  or
earthenware  (Pliny,  N.  H.  xxxiv.  34).

19.  3.  The  reason  why  Danans  founded  a  sanctuary  of  Wolfish
Apollo  was  this  etc.  A  slightly  different  version  of  the  following  story
is  told  by  Servius  (on  Virgil,  Aen.  iv.  377)  as  follows.  Danaus  received
an  oracular  response  from  Apollo  bidding  him  journey  till  he  saw  a  bull
and  a  wolf  fighting.  He  was  to  watch  the  issue  of  the  fight,  and  if
the  bull  conquered,  he  was  to  found  a  temple  in  honour  of  Neptune


CH.  XIX  ARGOS  191

(Poseidon) ;  but  if  the  wolf  was  victorious,  he  was  to  dedicate  a  shrine
to  Apollo.  The  wolf  conquered  the  bull,  so  Danaus  built  a  temple  to
Wolfish  Apollo.     Cp.  Plutarch,  PyrrhuSy  32.

19.  3.  he  daimed  the  kingdom.  Doubtless  he  was  supposed  to
have  grounded  his  claim  to  the  kingdom  of  Argos  on  his  descent  from
lo,  daughter  of  Argus  or  of  Inachus.  See  Apollodorus,  ii.  i.  On  the
lineage  of  his  adversary,  Gelanor,  see  Paus.  ii.  16.  i.  Gelanor  was
king  of  Argos  at  the  time  when  Danaus  landed  (Apollodorus,  ii.  1.4;
Plutarch,  PyrrhuSy  32).

19.  3.  Gelanor.  Stephanus  Byzantius  {s,v,  SovayeXa)  mentions  a
town  of  Caria  called  Souagela,  at  which,  he  says,  "  was  the  tomb  of  the
Carian.  For  the  Carian  name  for  a  grave  is  sUa^  and  for  a  king  gela.^^
On  the  strength  of  this  statement  Preller  (Ausgewahlte  Aufsdtze^  p.  287)
was  disposed  to  derive  the  name  Gelanor  from  the  Carian  name  for
king.  From  the  same  word  he  would  derive  the  Sicilian  Gelon ;  the
family  of  Gelon  came  from  the  island  of  Telos,  off  Caria.  Further,  he
suggests  that  we  have  the  same  root  in  Geleontes^  the  name  of  one  of
the  four  ancient  Ionic  tribes ;  the  name  would  thus  mean  *  royal  *  or
*  kingly.'  He  thinks  that  Zeus  Geleon,  whose  name  appears  in  an
Attic  inscription  (C  /.  A,  iii.  No.  2),  was  perhaps  the  tribal  god  of  the
Geleontes.  This  trace,  if  it  be  such,  of  a  Carian  settlement  in  Argolis
might  be  used  as  an  argument  by  those  who  hold  that  the  people  who
created  the  civilisation  of  Tiryns  and  Mycenae  were  Carians.  See
above,  p.  1 5  3  sg.

19.  4.  Oelanor  was  like  the  bnll  and  Danaus  like  the  well  Cp.
Plutarch,  Pyrrhus^  32.  Prof.  W.  Robertson  Smith  suggested  (article
*  Sacrifice,'  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  9th  ed.  vol.  21,  p.  135)  that  in
this  legend  we  have  a  reminiscence  of  a  struggle  between  two  clans,
one  of  which  had  for  its  totem  the  wolf,  and  the  other  the  bull.

19.  5.  the  fire  of  Fhoroneos.  From  a  scholiast  on  Sophocles
(^Elcctroy  w.  4,  6)  we  learn  that  this  fire  was  in  the  sanctuary  of
\Volfish  Apollo,  and  that  it  was  thought  to  have  come  down  from
heaven.  On  Phoroneus  see  ii.  15.  5.  Before  his  time  men  all  spoke
one  tongue ;  Hermes  introduced  a  diversity  of  languages,  and  hence
arose  discord  for  the  first  time  (Hyginus,  Fad,  143).  Ad.  Kuhn
i^Herabkunft  des  Feuers^  P-  25  sqq,^  connected  the  name  Phoroneus
^ith  the  Sanscrit  bhuranya^  '  rapid '  (applied  to  Agni,  the  deified  fire),
and  the  Latin  Feronia,  the  goddess  worshipped  at  the  foot  of  Mount
Soracte.  As  to  Feronia  see  W.  Mannhardt,  Antike  Wold-  und  Feld-
JiultCy  p.  327  sqq.

19.  5.  that  Prometheus  gave  fire  to  men.  The  story  that  fire
^as  stolen  from  heaven  and  given  to  men  by  Prometheus  has  its  analogue
in  many  savage  stories  of  the  origin  of  fire.  A  powerful  being  (who
is  sometimes  an  animal)  is  said  to  have  got  possession  of  fire  and  to
have  kept  it  all  to  himself ;  a  beneficent  hero  (who  himself  is  sometimes
an  animal)  contrives  to  steal  a  light  from  him  and  gives  it  to  men.  See
for  examples  of  such  tales  Mr.  A.  Lang's  article  *  Prometheus,'  in  the
Encyclopaedia  Britannica^  9th  ed.  vol.  19,  p.  807  sq.  Many  more  ex-
amples might  be  added.    Ad.  Kuhn  (Herabkunft  des  Feuers^  P-  35  ^99-^


192  ARGOS  BK.  II.  CORINTH

derived  the  name  Prometheus  from  the  Sanscrit  pramantha^  the  name
for  the  fire-sticks,  by  the  friction  of  which  savages  produce  fire.  But  it
is  hard  to  separate  the  name  Prometheus  from  prometkes^  *  prudent/
prometheia^  'prudence,'  etc.  Cp.  H.  Flach,  *Zur  Prometheussage,'
Neue  Jahrbiicher  f,  Philol.  u.  Paedag.  123  (1881),  pp.  817-823.  In  this
article  Dr.  Flach  ventures  on  the  rash  assertions  that  the  Prometheus
story,  in  all  its  features,  is  purely  Greek,  and  that  it  must  have  originated
after  Homer,  since  Homer  makes  no  mention  of  it.

19.  7.  Ladas.     See  iii.  21.  i  note;  viii.  12.  5.

19.  7*  ft  bull  and  a  wolf  fighting*  In  272  B.C.  Pyrrhus,  at  the
head  of  some  of  his  troops,  forced  his  way  into  Argos  by  night  When
day  dawned  he  saw  in  the  market-place  the  sculpture  described  by
Pausanias.  The  king  took  it  as  an  omen  of  death,  since  it  had  been
foretold  that  he  must  die  when  he  should  see  a  wolf  fighting  a  bull
Plutarch,  who  mentions  this,  says  that  the  wolf  and  the  bull  were  of
bronze.  See  Plutarch,  Pyrrhus^  32.  Thus  the  group  would  seem  to
have  been  a  bronze  relief.  The  battle  of  the  wolf  and  bull  is  represented
on  a  coin  of  Argos  (Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num,  Comm,  on  Paus.

P-  36).

19.  8.  Linus.  As  to  Linus,  son  of  Apollo  and  Psamathe,  see  i.  43.
7  sq.y  with  the  note  on  "  when  Crotopus  was  reigning.**  As  to  Linus
the  poet  see  ix.  29.  6  sgq,

19.  8.  an  altar  of  Bainy  Zeus.  See  i.  32.  2,  with  the  note  on
*  Showery  Zeus.'  On  a  ridge  of  Mt.  Tmolus,  to  the  west  of  Sardcs,
there  was  a  spot  which  was  called  the  Birthplace  of  Rainy  Zeus
(Joannes  Lydus,  De  mensibus,  iv.  48).  In  New  Guinea  there  is  a  god
named  Laufao,  who  keeps  the  rain  bottled  up  in  a  bamboo.  WTien
there  is  too  little  rain,  the  people  make  him  presents  of  pigs  and  cooked
food ;  then  Laufao  takes  the  stopper  out  of  his  sacred  bamboo,  and  the
rain  falls.  When  there  is  too  much  rain,  presents  are  made  to  the  god
to  induce  him  to  put  the  stopper  into  the  bamboo.  See  J.  Chalmers,
Pioneering  in  New  Guinea^  p.  I77  sq.

19.  8.  swore  to  take  Thebes  or  die.  The  oath  is  described  by
Aeschylus  (Seven  against  Thebes^  41  sqq.)  They  killed  a  bull  so  that
the  blood  ran  into  the  hollow  of  a  shield,  and  in  swearing  they  touched
the  blood  with  their  hands.  This  was  perhaps  a  form  of  the  blood-
covenant  in  which  the  blood  of  a  victim  had  been  substituted  for  that  of
the  persons  themselves  who  took  the  oath.  "In  ancient  Arabic  litera-
ture there  are  many  references  to  the  blood-covenant,  but  instead  of
human  blood  that  of  a  victim  slain  at  the  sanctuary  is  employed.  The
ritual  in  this  case  is  that  all  who  share  in  the  compact  must  dip  their  hands
into  the  gore,  which  at  the  same  time  is  applied  to  the  sacred  stone
that  symbolises  the  deity,  or  is  poured  forth  at  its  base  "  (W.  Robertson
Smith,  Religion  of  the  Semites?'  p.  314).

19.  8.  As  to  the  tomb  of  Prometheus  etc.  This  seems  to  imply
that  both  Argos  and  Opus  claimed  to  possess  the  grave  of  Prometheus,
but  that  in  Pausanias's  opinion  the  Opuntian  claim  was  the  better
founded.     Other  ancient  writers  appear  to  be  silent  on  the  subject.

20.  I.  Oreugas.     See  viii.  40.  3  sqq.


CH.  XX  ARGOS  193

20.  I.  a  work  of  Polyclitns.  There  were  two  sculptors  of  this
name,  of  whom  the  elder  was  by  fer  the  more  famous.  See  note  on  ii.
32.  7.  Bmnn  {SilzuHgsbericktt  d.  phUos.  pkilolog.  u.  kistor.  Classe  d.
k.  baytrisch.  Akad.  d.  Wissen.  zu  Muncken,  1880,  p.  469)  supposed  that
the  Polyditus  mentioned  here  was  the  younger  Polyclitus.  Overbeck
{Sckriftquellen,  No.  941)  thinks  it  was  the  elder  Polyditus.  The
massacre  of  the  guards,  which  (as  Pausanias  here  relates)  led  to  the
erection  of  the  statue,  occurred  in  418  B.C.  (Thucydides,  v.  8z  ;  Dio-
donis,  xii.  80;  Plutarch,  Alcibiadts,  15).  Overbeck  holds  that  this
date  fits  better  with  the  elder  Polyclitus.  Brunn,  who  assigned  the
statue  to  the  younger  Polyclitus,  supposed  that  it  was  not  executed  for
ume  time  after  the  massacre.

20.  z.  t.  regiment  of  a  thoosaud  picked  men.     This  force  was

i  instituted  in  421  B.C.  The  men  were  chosen  from  amongst  the  wealthiest
dasses,  and  hence  formed  an  aristocratic  corps.  They  were  relieved
(ram  all  other  public  duties,  and  had  to  train  and  exercise  constantly
(Diodonis,  xii.  75).  They  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Mantinea  in
418  B,c.  (Thucydides,  v.  67,  73).

iO.  3-  OleoUs  and  Biton  drawing  the  wagon  etc.  Their  mother's
«  was  Cydippe  and  she  was  the  priestess  of  Hera.  Once  on  a
niM  she  had  to  rep^r  to  the  sanctuary  to  perform  a  sacrifice.  But
the  oxen  had  not  yet  returned  from  the  field,  and  time  was'  pressing.
So  her  two  sons,  Cleobis  and  Biton,  yoked  themselves  to  the  cart  and
drew  their  mother  to  the  sanctuary,  a  distance  of  seven  miles.  There
in  the  crowd  of  worshippers  the  men  complimented  her  on  the  manly
vigour,  and  the  women  on  the  filial  piety,  of  her  sons.  In  the  pride  of
1*[  heart  the  mother  stood  before  the  image  and  prayed  to  the  goddess
that  she  would  bestow  on  the  sons,  who  had  honoured  her  so  greatly,
"e  best  gift  that  could  fall  to  the  lot  of  man.  So  after  sacrificing
'  ltd  feasting  the  young  men  fell  asleep  in  the  sanctuary  and  awoke  no
■ODre,  the  goddess  thus  signifying  that  death  was  belter  than  life.  The
Arpi-es  had  statues  of  the  young  men  made  and  dedicated  them  at
Delphi.  See  Herodotus,  i.  31;  Plutarch,  Consol.  ad  Apolhn.  14;
Cicero,  Tusc.  Diipul.  i.  47.  113;  Hyginus,  Fab.  254;  Servius,  on
"irpl,  Gtorg.  iii.  532  ;  Valerius  Maximus,  v.  4.  Ext.  4.  On  repre-
soiiations  of  Cleobis  and  Biton  in  ancient  art  see
Welcker,  in  K.  O.  Miiller's  Archdologit  der  Kunst,
8119.4.  On  an  Argive  coin  (Fig.  31)  Cleobis
^  Biton  are  represented  drawing  their  mother
in  a  chariot  (Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.
Cemm.  on  Paus.  p.  37,  with  pi.  K  xxxiv.)  Again,
'B  Si.  Marc's  Library  at  Venice  there  is  a  sarco-
[*agus  on  which  their  story  is  carved  in  relief  It
tslls  into  four  scenes.  On  the  left  the  mother  is
«tii  standing  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  two  oxen.  oVToi/ccorK  of  aiI^x
^"0  strong  lads  (Cleobis  and    Biton)  grasp  the

pole  of  the   chariot,  as   if  about  to  unyoke  the  oxen  and  to  draw  the
thiriot  themselves.     In  the  next  scene  the  two  lads  are  sleeping,  face
'Wiward,  on  the  ground  in  front  of  the  temple,  while  the  mother  stands
vou  tii  O


194  ARCOS  BK.  IL  CORINTH

beside  them  with  uplifted  torches  as  if  in  the  act  of  prayer.  In  the
next  scene,  still  further  to  the  right,  a  young  woman  with  fluttering
robes  is  driving  a  chariot  drawn  by  two  prancing  steeds,  the  heads  Of
which  are  held  by  Cleobis  and  Biton.  The  meaning  of  this  scene  J!
obscure ;  it  has  been  interpreted  as  the  Moon  goddess  driving  her  car
through  the  nightly  sky  and  taking  with  her  the  souls  of  the  dead  lads
to  the  spirit-world.  In  the  last  scene,  on  the  extreme  right,  the  motber
is  seen  seated,  putting  her  arms  about  her  two  sons,  who  stand  before
her.  This  perhaps  represents  the  reunion  of  the  mother  and  son
heaven.  See  Archaologische  Zrituttg,  ii  {1863),  pi.  clxxii.,  with  tht
remarks  of  Kriiger,  pp.  17-2?  (who  wrongly  interprets  the  relief  as  a
mythical  representation  of  moonlight  and  dawn) ;  H.  Diitschke,
'  Kleobis  und  Biton,'  Archaologisck  -  epigraphiscfu  Mitthalungen  nnt
Oesterreuk,  7  (1883),  pp.  iS3-i67.  with  pi.  ii.

20.  3-  a  unctnuT  of  Nemean  Zens.  This  sanctuary  m
opposite  the  temple  of  Wolfish  Apollo  (Schol.  on  Sophocles,  Electro,  f>\
It  seems  probable  that  all  the  objects  described  by  Pausanias  from
19.  3  to  the  end  of  30.  2  were  within  the  precincts  of  Wolfish  Apollo.
Sothought  Siebelis(onthispassage),  andBursian(Gff(J^.  2,  p.  53  note!).

20.  3.  tiie  bronse  linage  of  the  god is  a  irork  of  LTBippni-

^^^^  On  Argive  coins  of  Imperial  times  Zeus  is  repre-

^^^^^^^  sented  standing  naked,  with  a  sceptre  in  his  riglit
J^^^^^^^^  hand  and  an  eagle  at  his  feet  (Fig.  33),  As  ifac
^^^K^^^^L  type  persists  practically  unchanged  through  seveni
^^^^^^^^H  reigns,  it  may  be  a  copy  of  Lysippus's  statue.  See
^^^^^^^^V  Imhoof- Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Cotnm.  M
^^^^^^r  fc"^-  P-  36.  pl-  K  xxviii.  ;  British  Museum  Cat*-
^^^  logue  of  Greek  Coins,  Peloponnesus,  pi.  xxviii.  10.

'""^^  "ARcoBr""  "         ^^-    3-    Pftlamedes.       See  note  on  ii.  38.  J     ;

Eustathius  (on  //.  ii.  308,  p.  228)  says  that  ih*
draught-man  (ir«nTM)  of  Paiamedes,  by  which  he  may  mean  the  di**
here  mentioned  by  Pausanias,  was  at  Argos.

20.  4'  the  women  who  marched  with  BIoiitbus  to  Argos.  CT'
ii.  22.  1  ;  ii.  23.  7.  The  expedition  of  Dionysus  and  his  Bacchana-'*
against  Argos  and  the  resistance  offered  by  the  Argives  under  Perse*'*
are  narrated  at  langth  by  Nonnus  (xlvii.  474  sqq.')  \  cp.  ApoUodor***'
iii.  5.  1.  According  to  one  account,  Perseus  killed  Dionysus  (Parth^'J
on  Plutarch,  Ins  and  Osiris,  35).  Two  scenes  on  painted  vases  ha-"*"
been  interpreted  as  Perseus  fighting  the  Bacchanals  (P.  Kretschm^*
'm.Jahrbuch  d.  arch.  Instituts,  7  (1892),  pp.  32-37).

20.  5-  Their  number  is  reduced  \iy  Aeschylus  to  seven.  C^
Verrall  has  pointed  out  that  in  the  Saien  against  Thebes  Aeschyl  *
represents,  not  the  leaders  of  the  expedition  against  Thebes,  but  or»-
the  leaders  of  the  final  assault  upon  the  gales,  as  seven  in  numbe  ^
and  with  fine  literary  tact  he  shows  how  immensely  this,  propel —
understood,  contributes  to  the  dramatic  interest  of  the  play.  See  1^*
introduction  to  his  edition  of  the  play.  '

20.  6.  the  tomb  of  Danans.  This  was  in  the  middle  of  tt=»
market-place  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  371).


CH.  XX  ARGOS  195

20.  6.  where  the  Argive  women  bewail  Adonis.  I  have
examined  elsewhere  the  worship  of  Adonis  (The  Golden  Bought  i.  p.
278  sqq.y  etc.)  On  representations  of  Adonis  in  ancient  art  see  Jahn  and
De  Witte  in  Annali  deW  InsHtuto^  1845,  pp.  347-418  ;  Jahn,  Archdo-
logische  BeitrdgBy  p.  45  sqq, ;  also  Gazette  ArMologique^  4  (1878),  pp.
64-66;  Roscher's  Lexikon^  i.  p.  75;  Paul/s  Real'Encyclopddie^  ed.
Wissowa,  I.  p.  394  sq,

20.  6.  Oephisns.     See  ii.  15.  5.

20.  7*  a  head  x)f  Medusa  made  of  stone.     The  head  of  Medusa

was  said  to  have  the  power  of  turning  into  stone  whoever  looked  upon

it  (ApoUodorus,  ii.  4.  2.  and  3).     In  a  Sicilian  story  a  witch  turns  the

hero  to  stone  by  touching  him  with  one  of  her  hairs  (Gonzenbach,

Sicilianische  Mdrchen^  No.  40,  vol.  2.  p.  277).     Some  of  the  Dyaks

believe  that  if  they  laugh  at  a  dog  or  at  a  snake  crossing  their  path,

they  will  be  turned  to  stone  (Spencer  St.  John,  Life  in  the  Forests  0/  the

Far  Easty  i.  p.  239;  cp.  the  snakes  about  the  Gorgons'  heads).     For

other   magic    modes    of    turning    people    to    stone    see    Chalatianz,

L^  I     Armenische   Mdrchen   und  Sagen^    Einleitung,    p.    v.    sqq, ;    Radloff,

?rokn  der   Volkslitteratur  der  tiirkischen  Stdmme  Siid-  Sibiriens^  2.

^  III  sqq.

20.  7.  the  Judgment  Place.     At  the  eastern  foot  of  the  Larisa,  to

4c  north-east  of  the  theatre  (see  below),  is  a  wall   built  of  great

polygonal  blocks.     It  is  about  100  feet  long  and  has  a  simple  doorway

in  the  middle.     This  wall  supports  an  artificially  levelled  terrace  at  the

foot  of  the  mountain,  and  on  this  terrace  are  the  remains  of  a  Roman

brick  building.     Opposite  the  doorway  there  is  a  square  recess  cut  in

^  wall  of  rock  which  forms  the  back  of  the  terrace.     This   recess

narrows  gradually  inwards  and   ends   in  a  semicircular  niche,  which

forms  the  termination  of  a  channel  cut  in  the  rock.     Prof.   Curtius

supposes  that  the  Judgment   Place  may  have  been  upon  this  terrace.

He  thinks  that  the  order  in  which  Pausanias  mentions  the  buildings

Confirms  this  view ;    for  immediately  after  mentioning  the  Judgment

^lace  Pausanias  mentions  the  theatre.     Now  going  to  the  theatre  from

^  market-place  he  must  have  passed  this  polygonal  wall  with  its

terrace.     On  the  other  hand  Bursian  sees  in  the  whole  structure  simply

*  well-house,  once  fed  by  a  spring  in  the  interior  of  the  mountain  which

^las  now  dried  up.     See   Leake,  Morea^  2.  p.  398  sq, ;  Curtius,  Pelop,

^   p.   351    sq,y   353   sq,y   357;    Vischer,   Erinnerungen^    p.    319    sq,  \

^ursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  351  sq.     Prof.  Ed.   Meyer  agrees  with  Curtius*s

^'icntification  of  the  Judgment   Place,  and  thinks  that  it  is  the  same

^•'ith  the   Pron  mentioned  by  a  scholiast  on  Euripides  {Orestes^  872)

^«  the  place  where  the  Argives  held  their  trials.     See  Philologus^  48

(1889),  p.  185  sqq,

20.  7.  a  theatre.  A  considerable  portion  of  this  theatre,  being
^^t  out  of  the  rock,  is  in  tolerable  preservation.  It  is  at  the  south-east
*^t  of  the  Larisa.  "  Its  two  ends  were  formed  of  large  masses  of  rude
atones  and  mortar,  faced  with  regular  masonry ;  these  are  now  mere
shapeless  heaps  of  rubbish.  The  excavated  part  of  the  theatre
Preserves  the  remains  of  sixty-seven  rows  of  seats,  in  three  divisions,


196  ARGOS  BK.  n.  CORINTH

separated  by  diazontata  [/ .^.  passages  running  round  the  theatre] :  in
the  upper  division  are  nineteen  rows,  in  the  middle  sixteen,  and  in  the
lower  thirty-two,  and  there  may,  perhaps,  be  some  more  at  the  bottom
concealed  under  the  earth"  (Leake,  Morea^  2.  p.  396).     W.  G.  Clark
counted  35  rows  of  seats  in  the  lowest  division,  16  in  the  middle,  and
1 8  in  the  uppermost,  making  69  in  all  (^Peloponnesus^  P*  9  ^  )•   '^hc  ruinous
state  of  the  wings  makes  exact  estimates  impossible,  but  Leake  judged
that  the  diameter  of  the  theatre  may  have  been  450  feet,  and  that  of
the  orchestra  200  feet.     He  calculated  that,  when  entire,  the  theatre
may  have  held  20,000  people.     In  1891  some  excavations  were  made
in  the  theatre  by  Mr.  Kophiniotis  on  behalf  of  the  Greek  Government
Twenty  rows  of  seats  were  discovered  lower  down  than  the  rock-cut
seats  hitherto  visible.     The  front  row  of  seats  is  in  the  form  of  ann-
chairs.     Remains  of  both  a  Greek  and  a  Roman  stage  were  laid  bare,
the  former  built  of  tufa,  the  latter  paved  with  red  stone.    A  subterranean
passage,  to  the  north  of  the  Roman  stage,  united  the  stage  with  the
orchestra,  as  in  the  theatres  at  Eretria,   Magnesia  on  the  Maeander,
Sicyon,    and    Tralles.       See   AcXrtov   apxaiokoyiKov^    1891,   p.   86;
MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  A  then,  16(1891),  p.  383;  Bull.  Corr.  Htll
15  ( 1 89 1 ),  p.  651  ;  American  Journal  of  Archaeology,  7  ( 1 89 1 ),  p.  5 1 8.
"  Contiguous  to  the  south-western  angle  of  the  theatre,  on  the  extreme
foot  of  the  mountain,  are  twenty-one  rows  of  seats  excavated  in  the
rock.     These  rows  are  rectilinear,  forming  a  line  which  is  nearly  that
of  the  orchestra  of  the  theatre  produced ;  the  seats,  therefore,  must
have  belonged  to  some  separate  place  of  spectacle,  as  they  could  not
have  commanded  a  view  of  any  part  of  the  interior  of  the  theatre.
Their  position  clearly  proves  that  the  upper  division  of  the  excavated
seats  of  the  theatre  was  not  prolonged  to  the  wings"  (Leake,  Morea,  2.
P-  397  SQ')     See  also  Curtius,  Pclop.  2.  p.  352  j^. ;  Vischer,  Erinner-
ungen,  p.  320  sq.  \  W.  G.  Clark,  Peloponnesus,  p.  91  ;  Bursian,  Geoff^-
2.  p.  52.  1

20.  7-  the  Spartan  Othryadas.      Herodotus's  version  (i.  82)  ^
this   famous   story  is   as   follows.      The   Lacedaemonians   had  taken
possession  of  the  district  of  Thyrea,  which  belonged  to  the  Argives.
The  two  peoples  agreed  that  each  should  pick  out  300  champions  w1^°
should  fight  each  other,  and  that  Thyrea  should  belong  to  the  victorious
side.     The  fight  took  place.      Of  the   300  Argives  all  fell  but  t^'^'
Alcenor  and  Chromius  ;  of  the  Lacedaemonians  all  were  slain  but  o«^^
Othryades  (Othryadas).     The  two  Argives  ran  to  Argos  to  tell  \y>^
they  had  conquered ;  Othryades  remained  on  the  field,  spoiled  the  sl3-^^
Argives,   and  deposited  the  spoils  in  the   Lacedaemonian  camp,
dispute  hence  arose  between  Sparta  and  Argos,  each  claiming  a  victo^^'
A  battle  was  the  result,  in  which  the  Lacedaemonians  were  victorio*^^'
Othryades,  ashamed  to  return  to  Sparta  when  all  his  comrades  l»^
perished,  slew  himself  on  the  spot.     This  contest  is  believed  to  h^-  "^^
taken  place  in  548  B.C.     It  is  described  by  Pausanias  elsewhere  (ii.  ^
5),  but  without  mention  of  Othryades.     The  combat  was  very  famc^'^
in  antiquity  and  became  a  favourite  subject  of  rhetorical  declamatic^  ^
See  Chrysermus,  in  Fragm.  hist.  Graec.  ed.  Miiller,  4.  p.  361  ;  Theseu^ "


I.  XX  ARGOS  197

.  Stobaeus,  FloriUgium^  vii.  67  ;  Suidas,  s,v,  'OOpvaSas ;  and  the
jmerous  other  writers  cited  by  Kohlmann  in  his  article  *  Othryades,'
heinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  29  (1874),  pp.  463-480  ;  «V/.,  31  (1876),  pp.
30-302.  Now  none  of  the  other  authorities  agrees  with  Pausanias,
ho  represents  the  Spartan  Othryadas  as  killed  by  an  Argive.  In  the
her  accounts  Othryadas  is  represented  either  as  having  killed  himself
ierodotus's  version),  or  as  having  died  of  his  wounds.  As  the  group
"  statuary  representing  Othryadas  being  slain  by  an  Argive  was  at
rgos,  it  is  natural  to  see  in  it  the  embodiment  of  an  Argive  tradition
hich  contradicted  the  Lacedaemonian  tradition  followed  by  Herodotus,
he  Argive  tradition  would  be  told  to  Pausanias  when  the  statue  was
lown  him.  If  Pausanias  (as  has  been  maintained)  took  all  his  facts
om  books,  how  is  it  that  here  his  account  agrees  with  none  of  the  very
umerous  literary  accounts  of  the  same  subject  which  have  come  down
>  us,  but  does  agree  with  what  we  should  expect  to  be  the  local
irgive  tradition,  coloured  by  Argive  patriotic  prejudice  ?

20.  8.  a  sanctuary  of  Aphrodite.  Above  the  theatre  is  a  small
ocky  platform,  on  which  stands  a  chapel  of  St.  George.  Curtius  and
iursian  think  that  this  may  have  been  the  site  of  the  sanctuary  of
Vphrodite.  See  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  pp.  351,  357  j^.,  562;  Bursian,
jeo^r.  2.  p.  52.

20.  8.  the  image  of  the  goddess.  The  word  for  image  here  is
fSo9 ;  it  is  used  by  Pausanias  only  here  and  in  viii.  46.  2.  On  the
*'ord  see  Maxim.  Fraenkel,  De  verbis  potioribus  quibus  opera  siaiuaria
Graeci  notabant^  pp.  24-29.

20.  8.  Telesilla.  See  Plutarch,  De  muL  irirL  4 ;  Polyaenus,  viii.
33;  Suidas,  s.v,  TcXco-tXXa;  Clement  of  Alex.,  Strom,  iv.  19.  §  122  ;
Bahr  on  Herodotus,  vi.  TT,  Telesilla*s  heroic  defence  of  Argos  is
supposed  to  have  taken  place  in  510  B.C.  It  was  commemorated  by  an
annual  festival  called  the  Festival  of  Wantonness  (ra  *Y)8pMmica),
Celebrated  at  the  new  moon  of  the  month  of  Hermaeus  (the  fourth
iionth,  perhaps  June-July ;  see  Daremberg  et  Saglio,  Dictionnaire^  2.
?.  829).  At  this  festival  the  women  dressed  as  men  and  the  men  as
vomen,  the  men  even  wearing  veils  (Plutarch  and  Polyaenus,  ll.cc)
Hie  story  of  the  defence  of  Argos  by  Telesilla  may  have  been  invented
o  explain  the  festival.  Certainly  the  exchange  of  garments  between
tien  and  women  as  a  religious  or  superstitious  rite  is  not  uncommon
'Isewhere.  For  example,  there  was  a  sacrifice  to  Aphrodite  at  which
ncn  were  dressed  as  women  and  women  as  men  (Macrobius,  Sat,  iii.
$.  3).  In  Cos  the  priest  of  Hercules  wore  female  attire  when  he  offered
"acrifices  (Plutarch,  Quaest.  Graec,  58).  Argive  women  on  their
narriage  night  wore  false  beards.  Plutarch,  who  mentions  this  custom,
ittempts  to  assign  an  historical  origin  to  it  {De  mul.  virt,  4)  ;  but  it  is
:ertain  that  the  practice  of  women  dressing  as  men,  or  men  as  women,
>r  both,  is  a  widely  spread  marriage  custom.  Spartan  brides  were
Pressed  in  men's  clothes  on  the  wedding  night  (Plutarch,  Lycurgus^  15).
See  also  Sepp,  Altbayertscher  Sagenschatz^  p.  233  ;  Schroeder,  Die
Volksbrduche  der  Ehsten,  pp.  93  sgq.^  218  sqq,\  J.  Thomson,  Through
^fasai  Landy  p.  442  ;  Matthes,  Bijdragen  tot  de  Ethnologie  van  Zuid-


I

198  ARGOS  BK.  II.  coinrra

Celebes^  P*  35*  Sometimes  it  is  not  the  bride  and  bridegroom  but  their
attendants  who  thus  disguise  themselves.  See  Proceedings  R.  Geogr,  Sec.
1879,  P-  92;  Biddulph,  Tribes  of  the  Hindoo  Koosh^^i^.  jZ^  80;  Griersoo,
Bihar  peasant  life y  p.  365  ;  Folk-lore  Journal^  6  (1888),  p.  122  ;  SebiUot,
Cou fumes  populcUres  de  la  Haute-Bretagne^  p.  138.  Plutarch  (/.f.)
mentions  that  the  women  who  shared  in  the  exploit  of  Telesilla  were
allowed  to  build  a  temple  of  the  war-god  (Enyalius) ;  and  Lucian
(AmoreSf  30)  says  that  in  consequence  of  Telesilla's  victory  the  war-god
(Ares)  was  held  at  Argos  to  be  a  god  of  women.  But,  as  we  Icara
from  Pausanias,  the  statue  of  Telesilla  stood  in  front  of  a  temple  of
Aphrodite.  May  not  this  have  been  the  Armed  Aphrodite  ?  and  would
not  this  explain  the  statements  of  Plutarch  and  Lucian  just  quoted  ?  If
this  were  so,  the  historical  foundation  of  the  story  of  Telesilla  would
become  more  doubtful  than  ever.  On  the  Armed  Aphrodite  see  iii.  15.
10  note.

20.  8.  her  books  axe  lying  at  her  feet,  and  she  is  lookiiig  at  a
helmet.  This  statue  has  been  cited  by  Leopardi  in  a  fine  passage  to
illustrate  the  superiority  of  the  active  over  the  contemplative  life  (//
Parim\  owero  della  gloria^  cap.  i. )

20.  8.  The  Lacedaemonians,  nnder  Cleomenes  etc.     See  Hero-
dotus, vi.  76-80.
-^0.   10.  Herodotus  has  recorded.     See  Herodotus,  vi.  ^^,

21.  2.  Bias.     See  ii.  1 8.  4.
21.  3.    the  Lydian  woman.  1  Omphalei       Cp.   Dionysius  Halic

Antiquit,  Rom.  i.  28.  "---

21.  3.  the  grave  of  Epimenides.  His  tomb  was  also  shown  at
Sparta.     See  iii.  11.  11  ;  also  iii.  12.  11.

21.  4-  as  I  have  shown  in  my  account  of  Attica.     See  i.  13.  8.

21.  5.  the  story  told  of  her  is  this.  With  the  following  account  of
the  Gorgons,  Mr.  E.  Bethe,  in  Hermes^  25  (1890),  p.  31 1  sq.^  compares
Diodorus,  iii.  52  sqq.  Diodorus  admittedly  takes  his  account  of  the
Gorgons  etc.  from  Dionysius,  sumamed  Scytobrachion  ;  and  from  the
supposed  resemblance  between  the  narratives  of  Pausanias  and  Dio-
dorus, Mr.  Bethe  infers  that  Pausanias  also  drew  upon  Dionysius.  This
is  quite  possible,  but  the  supposed  resemblance  seems  far  too  slight  to
warrant  the  inference.

21.  6.  The  desert  of  Libya  contains  wild  beasts  etc.  Cp.
Herodotus,  iv.  191.

21.  7-  it  had  been  the  custom  for  women  to  remain  single  after
their  husbands'  death.      It  is  quite  possible  that  in  very  early  times
Greek  widows  were  forbidden  to  marry  again,  for  among  many  peoples
this   rule    holds,    as   amongst  the   Heh    Kioh    Miau    or   *  Black-footed
aborigines'   (an    aboriginal    tribe   in    China),    in    Su-shin    (an    anciet^^
kingdom  in  Corea),  amongst  some  families  or  tribes  in  Malabar,  among
the  Tamil  potters  of  Travancore,    and    the  Alfoers  of   Ceram.     S^^
Journal  of  the  North  China  Branch  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  vol.     ^'
No.  3  (December   1859),   p.  261  ;    Pfizmaier,    *Nachrichten  von  d^^
alten  Bewohnem  des  heutigen  Corea,'  Sitsungsberichte  der  philoso^^'
histor.  Classe  der  kaiser.    Akad.  der    Wissen.   (Vienna),    57    ( 1 86^ )'


CH.  XXI  ARGOS  199

p.   518;   J.  T.  Phillips,  Account  of  the  religion  etc,  of  the  people  of

MeUabixr^  p.  28 ;  S.  Mateer,  Native  life  in  Travancore,  p.  108  ;  G.  A.

Wilken,  Das  Haaropfer^  P-  44  sq.     Among  some  peoples  the  marriage

of  widows,  if  not  absolutely  forbidden,  is  strongly  discountenanced.     In

the  Chinese  *  Book  of  Rites '  it  is  said :  "  The  widow  is  one  with  her

husband,  and  this  does  not  change  during  the  whole  course  of  her  life  ;

therefore,  when  her   husband  dies,  she  does   not  marry  again"  (De

Groot,  Feesten  en  Gebruiken  van  de  Emoy-Chineezen^  p.  442  ;   J.  H.

Plath,  Die  hdusliche   Verhdltnisse  der  alien  Chinesen,  p.   10;  cp.  /'//.,

Geseti  und  Recht  im  alien  China,   p.    18).     In    conformity  with  this

precept,  at  the  present  day  in  China  "  it  is  considered  very  improper  for

a  widow  to  contract  a  second  marriage  ;  and  in  genteel  families  such  an

event  rarely,  if  ever,  occurs.     Indeed,  if  I  do  not  mistake,  a  lady  of  rank

by  contracting  a  second  marriage  exposes  herself  to  a  penalty  of  eighty

blows"  (Gray,  China,  i.  p.    215).     In  ancient   Peru  the  marriage  of

widows  was  not  approved  of  (Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  Royal  Commentaries

of  the  Incas,  i.  p.  305  sq.,  Markham's  trans.)     The  reason  why  widows

are  not  allowed  to  marry  after  their  husbands'  death  was  given  to  the  old

traveller  Rubruquis  by  the  Tartars.     "Their  widows  never  marry  a

second  time,  for  this  reason,  because  they  believe  that  all  who  have

served  them  in  this  life  shall  do  them  service  also  in  the  life  to  come.

Whereupon   they  are  persuaded   that   every  widow  after  death    shall

return  to  her  own  husband"  (Rubruquis,  'Travels    into  Tartary  and

China,*  in  Pinkerton's  Voyages  and  Travels,  7.  p.  33).     So  among  the

Khi-tan,  a  people  of  eastern  Tartary,  "  the  wife  does  not  marry  a  second

time.     She  is  considered  the  wife  of  the  deceased,  and  no  one  would

niany  her "  (Pfizmaier,  *  Die  fremdlandichen  Reiche  zu  den  Zeiten  der

Sui,'  Sitzungsberichte  d,  philos,  hist.  Classc  d,  kais,  Akad.  d.  IVissen,

(Vienna),  97    (1881),  p.   482).     Hence  the  Alfoers  of  Minahassa,   in

Celebes,  are  afraid  to  marry  a  widow,  thinking  that  if  they  did,  they

^uld  soon  die  (*  lets  over  het  Bijgeloof  in  de  Minahasa,'  Tijdschrift

^HHfr  Nederlandsch  Indie,  July   1870,  p.  3).     They  probably  fear  the

Vengeance   of  the  deceased  husband's  ghost.     For  a  similar  reason,

probably,  in  West  Prussia,  when  a  widow  marries  for  the  third  time,  her

Husband  must  enter  her  house  by  the  window  and  go  thrice  through  it,

**that  no  harm  may  befall  him"  (G.  A.  Wilken,  Das  Haaropfer,  p.  46

riote).      Among  the  Syrian  Christians  of  Travancore  "  remarriage  of

^dows   is   conducted   in   the   early   morning    before    daylight,    as   a

scmewhat    shameful    thing"   (S.   Mateer,    Native  life  in    Travancore,

p.  161).     This  again  may  be  a  precaution  to  evade  the  late  husband's

^host

The  belief  that  the  soul  of  the  wife  would  rejoin  the  soul  of  her

departed  husband  in  the  other  world  has  led  many  barbarous  peoples  to

Will  the  wife  on  the  death  of  her  husband,  in  order  that  the  spiritual

^"^eunion  may  immediately  take  place.   It  is  especially  on  the  death  of  kings

^Jid  great  men  that  these  massacres  are  perpetrated.      In   the  East

I  ndian  island  of  Bali,  when  the  king  died,  all  his  wives  and  concubines,

^Jnounting  sometimes  to  a  hundred  or  a  hundred  and  fifty,  were  burnt

(Crawford,  History  of  the  Indian  Archipelago,  2.  p.  252).     Herodotus


200  ARGOS  BK.  II.  CORINTH

(v.  5)  mentions  that  among  a  Thracian  tribe  it  was  the  custom,  when  a
man  died,  that  his  best-beloved  wife  should  be  killed  and  buried  with
him ;    the  women  used  to  contend  eageriy  for  the  honour.     Prof.  0.
Schrader  is  of  opinion  that  the  custom  of  slaying  the  wife  on  the  death
of  the  husband  was  an  ancient  Aryan  institution  (Sprachvergleichmg
und  Urgeschichte^  p.  565).     The  best  known  instance  of  it  among  an
Aryan  people  is  the  suttee  of  Hindu  widows.     The  custom  of  widow-
burning   does  not  appear  in   the   Vedas ;    but   nevertheless,   as  Mr.
Zimmer  and  Dr.  Tylor  argue,  the  custom  is  probably  older  than  the
Vedas  ;  so  barbarous  a  rite  is  hardly  likely  to  be  a  later  inventioa    It
is,  and  has  been  since  the  days  of  Manu  at  least,  the  rule  that  a  Hindu
widow  never   marries  again  ;    only  among  Pariahs  and  some  Sudras
is  she  allowed  to  marry  again.     See   Laws  of  Manu^  v.    160  17.;
Dubois,  Moeurs  etc.  des  peupies  de  rinde^  i-  PP*  M  s^^y  294  sq, ;  Bose,
The  Hindoos  as  they  are^  p-  237  sqq,  ;  Mayne,  Hindu  law  and  usage^
p.   82  sqq,  ;    Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben^  pp.  326-329  ;    Max  Miiller,
Essays,  i.  pp.  332-337.     Amongst  the  Slavs  there  is  evidence  that  the
wife  was  regularly  burnt  with  her  dead  husband  (J.  Grimm,  Ueber  das
Verbrennen  der  Leichen,  p.   62  sqq,\    V.   Hehn,   Kulturpflanzen  und
Hausthiere,^  p.  440).     Amongst  the  South  Slavs  it  is  still  regarded  a^
an  insult  to  her  late  husband's  memory  if  a  widow  marries  again  (F.  S-
Krauss,  Sitte  und  Brauch  der  Siidslaven,  p.  578).     Among  the  anciex^^
Germans  it  seems  to  have  been  thought  better  that  a  widow  should  ix^
marry  again  (Tacitus,  Germ,  19  ;  Grimm,  Deutsche  RechtsalterthUm^^
p.  453).     In  ancient  Greece  we  seem  to  have  a  reminiscence  of  wido"*^
burning  in  the  legend  that  when  the  corpse  of  Capaneus  was  burning
the  pyre,  his  wife  Evadne  threw  herself  into  the  flames  and  perish*
(Euripides,    Supplices,    980   sqq.  ;    Apollodorus,   iii.    7.     i  ;    Zenobit^  ■
Cent.  i.  30;  Ovid,  Tristia,  v.  14.  38).     In  some  Indian  tribes  of  Nort^
West  America  the  practice  of  burning  the  widow  has  been  mitigat^^
into  a  rule  that  she  must  lie  beside  her  husband's  corpse  on  the  pyre  t^^
she  is  nearly  suffocated,  when  she  is  allowed  to  withdraw.     See  Mors  **
Report  on  Indian  affairs,  p.  339  sq.  ;  Rev.  Sheldon  Jackson,  *Alaste=
and  its  inhabitants,'  American  Antiquarian,  2.  p.    112  sq. ;  Bancroft
Amative  races  of  the  Pacific  States,   i.  p.  126.     For  more  examples  c:::
killing  the  widow  on  the  husband's  death  see  the  works  of  Grimi
and  Hehn  cited  above;    Tylor,  Primitive  Culture,^  i.  pp.  459-467
Herbert  Spencer,  Sociology,^  pt.  i.  ch.  14,  pp.  204-206.     For  evidence
of  the  custom  in  Greece  see  Lasaulx,  *  Zur  Geschichte  und  Philosophi  >
der  Ehe  bei   den  Griechen,'  Abhandl.  d.  philos.  philolog.   Classe  dr^
konig.  bayer,  Akad  d.  IVissen.  7  (1853),  p.  48  sqq.  ;  and  on  the  custor^
in  general  see  Westermarck,  History  of  human  marriage,  p.  124  sqq.

21.  9.  Ohlorifl daughter  of  Niobe.     See  v.  16.  4.     On  th^

mythical  connexion  of  Niobe  with  Argos  see  Stark,  Niobe  und  dim
Niobiden,  p.  337  sqq.  Stark  thought  that  Chloris  was  a  mythica  -
expression  for  the  fresh  green  vegetation  of  spring.  The  adjective  fron^
which  her  name  is  formed  (xXwpos)  is  often  so  applied  in  Greek.  \xC
an  article  on  Chloris  in  Rheinisches  Museum,  10  (1856),  pp.  369-377^
Schwenk  maintained  that  Chloris  corresponded  to  the  Roman  Flora.-


H.  XXII  ARGOS  zoi

>n  representations  .of  the  Niobe  legend  in  ancient  art  see,  in  addition

0  Stark's  monograph,  H.  Heydemann,  '  Niobe  und  die  Niobiden  auf
;riechischen  Vasenbildern,'  Verkandlungen  d.  kbn.  sacks.  Gesell.  d.
Vissen.  zu  Leipwig,  a?  (1875),  pp.  205-230;  id.,  -ii)  (1877),  pp.
'0-103;  id.,  35  (1883),  pp.  159-168;  Lenormant,  in  Gazette  ArcM-
iogique,  3  (1877),  p.  171  sq.\  C.  Robert,  in  Annali  deir  Insl.  di
"lorrisp.  Archeol.  1882,  pp.  285-289.  By  far  the  most  famous  of  the
epresentations  of  ihe  Niobe  legend  is  the  group  in  the  Uffizi  gallery  at
•"lorence,  which  was  discovered  near  the  Lateran  at  Rome  in  1583.
rhe  ancients  themselves  knew  not  whether  to  attribute  the  group  to
icopas  or  to  Praxiteles  (Pliny,  Nat.  Hist,  xxxvi.  28)  ;  and  modem
ipinion  is  still  divided  on  the  subject  See  Friederichs,  Praxiteles
md  die  Niobegruppe ;  Brunn,  Gesch.  d  gritck.  Kiinsller,  1.  pp.  324,
;S7  sq.  ;  Murray,  Hist,  of  Creek  Sculpture,  2.  pp.  314-322  ;  Lucy  M.
4itchel!,  Hist,  of  Ancient  Sculpture,  pp.  475-481  :  Overbed^  Gesch.  d.
Tieck.  Plastit,*  2.  pp.  78-91  ;  Welcker,  Aniike  Denkmdltr,  1.  pp.  218-
;2o  ;  Stark,  Niobe  und  die  Niobiden,  p.  332  sq.  ;  Friederichs-Wolters,
"lipsabgiisse.,  pp.  433-445.  The  images  of  Latona  and  Chloris,  here
lescribed      by     Pausanias,

eem  to  be  reproduced  on

1  series  of  Argive  coins
Figs.  34,  35),  on  which
..atona  stands  clad  in  a  long
;arment,  holding  some  ob-
ect  (a  torch  ?)  in  her  left
land,  and  raising  her  right
land  to  her  shoulder ;  the
imall  figure  of  Chloris  ,,(«.  j^_  35.— latona  *kd  chlows  (coini  of  abcos).
itands  close  to  the  elbow

if  [he  goddess  and  is  similarly  attired.  See  Imhoof- Blumer  and
Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  on  Paus.  p.  38,  pi.  K  xxxvi.  xxxvii.  xxxviii.

22.  1.  Flowery  Hera.  Cp.  Etymolog.  Magnum,  p.  loS.  47.  Girls
3r  women  officiated  as  flower-bearers  in  her  temple,  while  the  flutes  played
1  special  air  (Pollux,  iv.  78).  In  spring  the  Peloponnesian  women  cele-
brated a  festival  called  Erosantheia  or  Eroantkia,  the  chief  feature  of
'hich  seems  to  have  been  the  gathering  of  flowers  (Hesychius,  s.v.
Hpoo-ai'fltKt ;  Photius,  s.v.  'HpoQV^ui),  Probably  this  festival  was
:onnected  with  the  worship  of  Flowery  Hera  ;  the  flower-bearers  who
officiated  in  her  temple  may  have  been  the  girls  who  gathered  flowers
H  the  Erosantheia.  The  Greek  ist  of  May  (our  12th)  is  still  a
esiival  of  flowers  in  Greece ;  the  people  go  out  in  the  morning
ind  gather  flowers,  with  which  they  deck  the  outside  of  their  houses
Folklore,  1  (1890),  p.  518).  This  modem  custom  has  obvious  affinities
*illi  the  celebration  of  May-day  in  northern  Europe.  I  have  suggested
^sewhere  (Tie  Golden  Boug/i,  i.  p.  100  sgq.)  that  at  some  Greek
«ii(als  Zeus  and  Hera  corresponded  to  the  King  and  Queen  of  May.
The  Flowery  Hera,  personated  by  a  girl,  with  her  attendant  flower-
^ring  handmaidens,  would  answer  very  well  to  our  Queen  of  the  May.

22.  I.  a  grave  of  women  etc.     Cp.  ii.  20.  4  note.


202  ARGOS  BK.  II.  CORINTH

22.  I.  Pelasgns,  son  of  Triopas.  On  Pelasgus  see  i.  14.  2.  On
Triopas  see  ii.  16.  i  ;  x.  11.  i  note.

22.  2.  2ieu8  the  Oontriver.  From  an  inscription  it  appears  that
Zeus  was  worshipped  under  this  title  (Mechaneus  or  Machaneus)  in  Cos,
where  the  sacrifices  offered  to  him  every  other  year  were  three  fiill-grown
sheep  and  a  choice  ox.  See  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  9  (1888),
p.  328  ;  Paton  and  Hicks,  Inscriptions  of  Cos,  No.  38.

22.  3.  Now  that  the  Tantalus,  who  was  son  to  Thyestea  etc.
On   this   passage   see   Stark,  Niobe   und  die   Niobiden,  p.   350  sqq.
Pausanias,  who  is  apt  to  take  legends  and  myths  as  literal  truth,  is  sure
that  the  bones  of  the  famous  Tantalus,  son  of  Zeus,  cannot  be  at  Argos,
since  his  tomb  was  on  Mt.  Sipylus  in  Asia   Minor.     But,  as   Stark
points  out,  some  circumstances  certainly  point  to  a  legend  that  the  first,
the  celebrated,  Tantalus  was  buried  at  Argos.    For  unless  such  a  legend
existed,  Pausanias  would  not  have  gone  out  of  his  way  to  refute  it.
Moreover  the  younger  Tantalus,  son  of  Thyestes  and  first  husband  of
Clytaemnestra,  would  have  been  buried  not  at  Argos,  but  with    his
kindred  the  Atridae  at   Mycenae,   the  seat  of  the  dynasty  and  their"
burial  place.     Again,  the  name  of  Tantalus,  son  of  Zeus,  occurs  in  th^=
list  of  the  most  ancient  kings  of  Argos   immediately  before  that  o^
his  son  Pelops  (Hyginus,  Fab,  124).     If  then  there  was  a  legend  thaCfl
Tantalus  reigned  at  Argos,  it  is  perfectly  natural  there  should  hav^=
been  a  legend  that  he  was  buried  there.     It  is  worth  noting,  as  Starl^
points  out,  that  as  here  the  bones  of  Tantalus  are  said  to  have  been-r:
kept  in  a  bronze  vessel,  so  the  bones  of  Pelops,  son  of  Tantalus,  wer^a
preserved  in  a  bronze  box  at  Pisa  (Paus.  vi.  22.  i).     With  regard  tc^:
the  younger  Tantalus,  son  of  Thyestes,  he  is  mentioned  as  one  of  th<
children  whom  his  father  ate  at  the   infamous  banquet  prepared  h\
Atreus  (Hyginus,  Fab.  88,  244,  246;  cp.  Paus.  ii.  16.  2).     Euripides.--
like  Pausanias,  speaks  of  this  younger  Tantalus  as  having  been  th^^
first  husband  of  Clytaemnestra  {iphigenia  in  Aulis^  1 1 50).

22.  3.  Broteas.  See  iii.  22.  4  ;  Gerhard,  *  Broteas,*  Rheinisckex^
Museum,  N.  F.  8  (1853),  pp.  130-133  ;  Stark,  Niobe  und  die  Niobiden^  '
p.  437  sq,  Gerhard  thought  that  the  name  might  be  connected  withr^
^puKTt?,  and  hence  might  mean  *  the  one  who  was  eaten.'  He  suggestec
that  Broteas  was  a  mere  mythological  dummy  invented  to  relieve  Pelops,^'
as  ancestor  of  the  Pelopids,  from  the  odium  of  having  been  partially^*
eaten  by  Demeter.  See  Schol.  on  Pindar,  Olymp,  i.  37.  Broteas  w;
said  to  have  been  so  much  ridiculed  for  his  personal  deformity  that  h<
leapt  into  the  fire  and  was  burnt.  Stark  saw  in  this  feature  of  th<
legend  a  trace  of  Assyrian-Lydian  ideas  of  resurrection  and  apotheosij
through  death.

22.  3.  his  grave  is  on  Mount  Sipylns.     See  v.  13.  7  note.

22.  3.  Ilus  the  Phrygian.  Ilus  was  son  of  Tros  and  brother  of^
Assaracus  and  Ganymede  (Apollodorus,  iii.  12.  2).  "That  Ilus  and-^
Assaracus  were  originally  divinities  of  the  first  rank,  and  divinities  of^
Semitic  and  Assyrian  origin,  is  proved  beyond  doubt  by  their  names.  -
These  names  are  in  fact  purely  Assyrian  and  present,  without  alteration,  «-
two  very  well-known  names  of  the  Ninivite  pantheon,  Ilu  and  Assur-  -^


CH.  XXII  ARGOS  203

akku  (Assur  the  great,  the  powerful).  These  two  names  contain  one  of
the  most  decisive  proofs  of  very  ancient  Assyrian  influence  in  the  Troad  "
(Fr.  Lenormant,  note  in  Gazette  ArcJUologique^  5  (1879),  P*  239).

22.  3.  they  still  throw  bnmmg  tordies  into  the  pit  etc.     On

Easter  Saturday  young  people  in  Albania  march  with  lighted  torches

through   the  village.     Then  they  throw  the   lighted   torches  into   the

river   crying,  "  Hah    Kore !    we  throw  you  into  the  river,  like  these

torches,  that  you  may  return  no  more  ! "    See  Hahn,  Albanesische  StucUen^

I.  p.  160.     The  coincidence  in  name  between  the  Albanian  Kore  and

the  Greek  Kore  (the  Maiden,  ue.  Proserpine)  may  be  merely  accidental.

When  the  Romans  erected  boundary-stones  they  threw  torches  into

holes  in  the  ground  (Lobeck,  Aglaophamus,  p.  981).     In  some  parts  of

Germany  the  people  on  Christmas  morning  throw  fire-brands  into  springs

and  troughs  to  keep  off  the  witches  (A.  Bastian,  in  Zeitschrift  fiir

Ethnologie^  i.  p.  418  ^^.)     In  England  it  seems  to  have  been  an  old

custom  to  carry  lighted  torches  at  a  funeral  and  to  extinguish  them  in

the  earth  with  which  the  corpse  was  about  to  be  covered  (Bume  and

Jackson,  Shropshire  Folklore^  p.  3 1  o).

22.  5.  a  temple  of  the  Dioscuri.  According  to  Plutarch  {Quaest,
Graec.  23)  the  Argives  called  Castor  mixarchagetas^  and  believed  that
he  u'as  buried  in  their  city ;  but  they  worshipped  Pollux  as  one  of  the
Olympian  gods.

22.  6.  Aphidna  had  been  captured  by  the  Dioscuri  etc.  See  i.
17.  4  sq,^  with  the  notes.

22.  7.  his  brother  Naucydes,  son  of  Mothon.     Elsewhere  (Paus.
^"i.  6.  2)  we  learn  that  Polyclitus  was  the  pupil  of  Naucydes.     Naucydes
^ust  therefore  have  been  his  elder  brother.     The  Polyclitus  referred  to
IS  (as  Pausanias  l,c,  remarks)  not  the  great  Polyclitus,  but  a  younger
Namesake.     From  an  inscription  found  at  Olympia  it  appears  that  the
father  of  Naucydes    (and    therefore   of  the   younger    Polyclitus)   was
f*atrocles  (see  note  on  vi.  6.  2).     Further,  inscriptions  found  at  Ephesus
^nd  Olympia  show  that  the  sculptor  Daedalus  of  Sicyon  (see  Index)  was  a
^on  of  Patrocles  (see  vi.  3.  4  and  note  on  \\.  2.  8).     Hence  the  younger
Polyclitus,  Naucydes,  and   Daedalus  were  all  brothers.     Thus  in  the
present  passage  Pausanias  or  his  copyists  seem  to  be  wrong  in  giving
^lothon  as  the  name  of  Naucydes's  father.     See  Critical  Note  on  this
passage.     On  a  block  of  black  marble  found  at  the  church  of  St.  George
^t  Thebes  the  name  of  the  sculptor  Polyclitus  is  found  side  by  side  with
^^at  of  Lysippus ;  two  separate  inscriptions  are  engraved  on  the  block,
^ne  referring  to  a  statue  by  Polyclitus,  the  other  referring  to  a  statue  by
lysippus    (C.  /.  G,  G,  S.    Nos.    2532,    2533;    Kaibel,    Epigrafnmata
^^aeca,  Nos.  492,  492  a;  Collitz,  G.  D.  I.  i.  No.  710,  p.  236  ;  Loewy,
-^^schri/ten  griech,  Bildhauer^  No.  93).     From  this  fact  Messrs.  Foucart
^^d  Loeschcke  have  inferred  that  Polyclitus  the  younger  was  a  con-
temporary of  Lysippus,  though  Prof.  Loeschcke  holds  that  Polyclitus
^^as  a  good  deal  the  older  of  the  two  and  places  his  artistic  activity
^t^^'een  372  and  332  B.C.     The  late  H.  Brunn,  however,  did  not  admit
^*^c  inference.     The  block  of  marble  on  which  the  names  of  the  two
Sculptors  occur  is  not  an  independent  base,  but  an  architectural  member.


204  ARGOS  BK.  II.  CORINTH

and  Brunn  thought  that  it  might  have  formed  part  of  a  building  destined
for  the  reception,  at  successive  times,  of  statues  of  victorious  athletes.
Brunn  himself  supposed  that  Patrocles,  the  father,  may  have  been  bom
about  470  B.C.,  his  son  Naucydes  about  440  B.C.,  and  the  younger
Polyclitus  about  432  B.C.  Prof.  W.  Dittenberger,  however,  one  of  the
highest  living  authorities  on  Greek  epigraphy,  holds  that  the  two  inscrip-
tions in  question  are  undoubtedly  contemporary,  and  that  they  are  later
than  316  B.C.  ;  hence  he  considers  that  the  sculptor  Polyclitus  whose
name  occurs  on  one  of  them  can  be  neither  the  elder  nor  the  younger
Polyclitus,  but  a  third  sculptor  of  the  same  name,  younger  than  either
of  the  two  others.  Mr.  Stuart  Jones  suggests  that  the  inscriptions  may
be  restorations  of  earlier  inscriptions,  and  that  the  statues  to  which  they
were  attached  may  have  had  no  original  connexion.

See  Foucart  in  Revue  Archiologique^  N.  S.  29  (1875),  pp.  i  lo-ii  5  ;
Loeschcke,  in  Archdologische  Zeitung^  36  (1878),  pp.  10-13 ;  E.
Curtius,  ib.  p.  84 ;  Furtwangler  and  Weil,  in  ArchaoL  Zeitung^  37
(1879),  p.  45  sq, ;  H.  Brunn,  in  Silzungsberichte  d,  philos.  Classe  d.  k.
b,  Akad.  d,  IVt'ss,  zu  Miinchen^  Phil,  philolog.  Classe,  6  Novemb.  1880,
p.  464  sq.  ;  Loewy,  Inschriften  griechischer  Btldhauer^  No.  93  ;  Murray,
History  of  Greek  Sculpture^  2.  p.  235  sq,\  Overbeck,  Gesch,  d.  griech,
Plastik^^  I.  p.  531  sqq,  ;  W,  Dittenberger,  note  on  C.  /.  G.  G,  S.  No.
2532  ;  H.  Stuart  Jones,  Select  Passages  from  Ancient  Writers  illustra-
tive of  the  History  of  Greek  Sculpture^  p.  192  sq,

22.  8.  the  gymnasiain  named  Cylarabis.  This  gymnasium  was
less  than  300  paces  outside  the  city-walls,  and  the  gate  which  led  to  it
seems  to  have  been  called  Diamperes  (Livy,  xxxiv.  26 ;  Plutarch,
Pyrrhus^  32;  /V/.,  Cleomenes^  17  and  26;  Lucian,  Apol.  pro  mere,
cond,  11).

22.  8.  Sacadas.  See  iv.  27.  7  ;  vi.  14.  9  sq,  ;  ix.  30.  2  ;  x.  7.  4.
As  to  the  Pythian  tune  see  note  on  x.  7.  4.

23.  2.  Baton.     Cp.  v.  17.  8  note;  x.  10.  3  ;  Apollodorus,  iii.  6.  8.
23.  3.  Hymetho.     One  of  the  Argive  tribes  was  called  after  her

(CoUitz,  G,  D,  I,  3.  Nos.  3296,  3319).  As  to  her  death  and  burial  see
ii.  28.  3  sqq,

23.  4.  Xenophilus  and  Strato.  These  were  Argive  sculptors.
Their  names  appear  in  an  inscription  found  at  Marbcu:ca^  near  Tiryns :

EEN04>IA02KAISTPAT12N
APFEIoI  EnOIHSAN

"Xenophilus  and  Strato,  Argives,  made  (the  statue  or  statues)."
See  Brunn,  Gesch.  d,  griech.  Kiinstler^  i.  p.  420;  Overbeck,  Schrift-
quellen^  No.  1586.  The  same  inscription  {^tv6^iko%  icat  ^rpar^av
'A^y[€r]ot  €Troiri(rav)  was  found  by  Mr.  Collignon  engraved  on  two
blocks,  slightly  concave,  near  the  khan  of  Kourtesa^  on  the  site  of  the
ancient  Cleonae.  These  inscriptions  appear  to  belong  to  the  middle  of
the  second  century  B.C. ;  this  then  may  be  the  date  of  these  two  artists.
See  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  HelUnique^  4  (1880),  p.  46  sq, ;  MittJuilungen
d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  6  (1881),  p.  356  ;  and  note  on  ii.  15.  i.     At


CH.  XXIII  ARGOS  205

Sicyon,  Prof.  E.  Curtius  found  a  mutilated  base  with  some  fragments  of
an  inscription  which  perhaps  included  the  names  of  these  two  sculptors.
See  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  586.  For  all  three  inscriptions  see  Loew)',
Inschriften  griech,  Bildhauer^  Nos.  261,  262,  270.  Another  mutilated
inscription  which  seems  to  have  contained  the  names  of  both  sculptors
has  been  found  at  the  sanctuary  of  Epidaurus.  As  restored  it  runs :
[H€i^<^iXo]s  kqX  ^Tpdrtiiv  hroirp-av  "  Xenophon  and  Strato  made  (it)."
See  AcXrtov  dp^aiokoyiKoVy  1892,  p.  72 ;  Cawadias,  Fouilles
(P^pidaurey  I.  p.  108,  No.  253.  The  statues  of  Aesculapius  and
Health  by  Xenophilus  and  Strato  appear  to  be  reproduced  on  coins  of
Argos.  The  Aesculapius  is  of  a  Phidian  type.  Health  is  represented
clad  in  a  long  tunic,  and  wearing  an  overdress,  of  which  the  end  hangs
over  her  left  arm.  See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Comm,  on
Pans,  p.  40  sq,y  with  plate  K  xlvii.  xlviii.

23.  4-  Alezanor.     See  ii.  11.  5  sqq,

23.  5.  Pheraean  Artemis.     See  ii.  10.  7.

23.  5.  the  Palladium.     See  i.  28.  9.

23.  6.  Helenas,  son  of  PrianL     See  i.  11.  i.

23.  6.  the  district  of  Oestrina  It  was  separated  from  Thesprotis
by  the  river  Thyamis  (Thucydides,  i.  46 ;  cp.  Paus.  i.  11.  i).  Cestrine
is  said  to  have  been  the  older  name  of  Chaonia.  The  oxen  of  the
district  were  famous.  See  Hesychius,  s.v,  Kio-rpiviKol  )8o€s ;  Schol.  on
Aristophanes,  Peace,  925  ;  Suidas,  s.v,  Xapivol  /^ocs.

23.  7.  an  nndergroond  stmctnre.  On  the  south-eastern  slope
of  the  hill  Diras  (see  24.  i  note)  there  is  a  subterranean  passage  which
is  now  open  for  a  length  of  65  feet.  The  sides  of  the  passage  are
composed  of  large,  almost  unhewn  blocks  of  stone ;  the  walls  slope
inward  till  at  the  top  they  are  only  a  foot  distant  from  each  other.  The
passage  leads  into  a  small  circular  chamber.  Curtius  and  Bursian
think  that  this  may  be  what  was  shown  to  sight-seers  as  the  prison  of
Danae.  Bursian  considered  it  to  be  in  reality  an  old  reservoir.  See
Curtius,  Peiop.  2.  pp.  354,  361  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  50  sq.  Cp.
Cell,  Itinerary  of  Greece,  p.  66.  Mr.  Helbig  considers  that  in  the
brazen  chamber  in  which  Danae  was  said  to  have  been  confined  we
have  a  reminiscence  of  buildings  like  the  beehive  tombs  at  Mycenae,
the  walls  of  which  were  lined  with  bronze  plates  or  rosettes  (Helbig,
Das  homerische  Epos  aus  den  Denknicilern  erldutert^  p.  440).  Pau-
sanias  describes  Danae's  prison  as  a  bronze  chamber  above  a  sub-
terranean structure.  Apollodorus  (ii.  4.  i),  with  whom  Sophocles
(Antigone,  944  sqq,)  seems  to  agree,  describes  it  simply  as  a  brazen
underground  chamber.  Horace  (Odes,  iii.  16.  i)  speaks  of  it  as  a
brazen  tower.  I  have  attempted  to  explain  the  story  in  The  Golden
Bough,  2.  p.  237.

23.  7.  Cretan  Dionysns.  See  Preller,  Ausgewdhlte  Aufsdtze,  pp.
293-296.  According  to  Preller,  the  Cretan  legend  of  the  relation  of
Dionysus  to  Ariadne  was  that  Dionysus  loved  her  before  she  became
the  bride  of  Theseus,  and  that  for  her  infidelity  to  the  god  (as  Homer
relates,  Od.  xi.  321  sqq.)  she  was  slain  by  Artemis.

23.  7.  after  warring  with  Persens.     See  ii.  20.  4 ;  ii.  22.  i.


206  ARGOS  BK»  11.  CO&INTR

24.  I.  They  call  the  acropolis  Laxisa.     The  Larisa  or  acropdis
of  Argos  is  a  conical  rocky  mountain  which  rises  abruptly  from  the
plain  to  a  height  of  950  feet.     The  slopes,  though  steep,  can  in  general
be  climbed ;   but  in  a  few  places  the  rocks  are  so  precipitous  as  to
be  inaccessible,   as   on    the   north-east    side,   where   the    conspicuous
monastery  of  the  Panagia  seems  to  overhang  them.     The  top  is  somt-
what  small  in  proportion  to  the  size  of  the  mountain.     "  A  ruined  castle
of  lower  Greek  or  Frank  construction,  which  occupies  the  summit  of
this  rocky  hill,  still  preserves,  amidst  the  rude  masonry  of  its  crumbling
walls,  some  remains  of  those  of  the  famed  Acropolis  of  Argos.     They
are  of  various  dates ;  some  parts  approach  to  the  Tirynthian   [Cyclo-
pean] style  of  building,  others  are  of  the  most  accurate  polygon^  kind,
and  there  are  some  remains  of  towers,  which  appear  to  have  been  a
late  addition  to  the  original  Larissa,  which  was  probably  construaed
without  towers.     The  modem  castle  consists  of  an  outer  inclosure  and
a  keep,  and  in  both  of  these  a  part  of  the  walls  consists  of  Hellenic
work,  thus  showing  that  the  modem  construction  preserves  very  nearly
the  form  of  the  ancient  fortress,  and  that  the  Larissa  had  a  complete
castle  within  the  outer  inclosure.     The  masonry  of  the  interior  work
is  a  fine  specimen  of  the  second  order,  being  without  any  horizontal
courses  ;  and   the  stones  are  accurately  joined  and  smoothed  on  the
outside  ;  in  the  latter  particular  it  differs  from  a  piece  of  the  exterior
Hellenic  wall,  obser\'able  on  the  north-western  side  of  the  outer  inclosure
of  the  modem  castle,  where  the  stones,  though  not  less  irregular  in
shape,  and  joined  with  equal  accuracy,  are  rough  on  the  outside,  and
are  also  of  larger  dimensions.     The  interior  Larissa  was  equal  to  a
square  of  about  200  feet"  (Leake,  Morea^  2.  p.  395  sq.)     The  keep
is  a  quadrangle  of  about  70  paces  in  length  by  60  feet   in  breadth.
Its  ancient  walls  are  standing  to  a  considerable  height,  especially  on
the  north-east  side,  and  are  constructed  of  fine  polygonal  blocks,  with
some   pieces    of  quadrangular   masonry  here    and   there.       From  the
summit  a  fortification- wall  extends  southward  along  the  ridge  and  down
to  the  plain.     On  the  opposite  side  a  similar  wall  descends  the  slope
into  the  saddle  which  divides  the  Larisa  from  the  lower  hill  to  the
north.      There  are  several  cistems  on  the  summit ;  the  oldest  is  within
the  inner  wall.     The  view  is  fine,  embracing  the  whole  of  the  ArgoHc
plain,  with  the  mountains  which  surround  it.     See  Dodwell,  Tour,  2.
p.   217  sgq.  \  Curtius,  Pchp,   2.  p.   350  sq.\  W.   G.  Clark,  Pchp.   P-
91    sqq.\    Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.   317  sqq.\    Guide- Joanne,   2.    P-
218  5q.\  Baedeker,'^  p.  it2  sq.     A  good  general  idea  of  the  view    <^^
the  Argolic  plain  and  gulf  as  seen  from  the  summit  of  the  Larisa    *^
afforded  by  plate  1 9  of  Cell's  Topography  of  Greece,

24.  I.  who  gave  her  name  also  to  two  cities  of  Thessa^^'
Strabo  (ix.  p.  440)  gives  a  long  list  of  places  in  Greece,  Asia  Mir^  ^^
and  the  islands  which  were  called  Larisa  ;  and  Stephanus  Byzant  i  ^
{s.v.  Adpurcra)  enumerates  ten  places  named  Larisa,  exclusive  of  C  •^
citadel  of  Argos.

24.  I.  Hera  of  the  Height.  Argive  coins  of  the  Imperial  2l  ^
exhibit  heads  of  Hera  covered  with  a  goat's  skin.      Hence  Panof


CH.  XXIV  ARGOS  207

conjectured  that  Hera  of  the  Height  was  so  represented.  He  points
out  that  goats  were  sacrificed  to  Hera  of  the  Height  at  Corinth
(Zenobius,  i.  26,  and  note  on  ii.  3.  6).  See  Panofka,  Archdologischer
Commentar  zu  Pausamas  Buck  II.  Kap,  24,  p.  5.  On  sacrifices  of
goats  to  Hera  see  note  on  iii.  15.9.

24.   I.  a  temple  of  Apollo built  by  Pythaens.     See  ii.  35.  2  ;

"•  36.   5  ;  iii.  10.  8  ;  iii.  11.  9.     The  epithet  Pythaean,  as  applied  to

Apollo,  is  doubtless  only  another  form  of  the  more  common  Pythian,

as  Panofka  (op,  cit  p.  8),  following  Boeckh,  rightly  assumed.     On  the

diffusion    of    the   worship    of    the    Pythian    or    Pythaean   Apollo    in

Peloponnese   see   Preller,   Griech.  Mythol^  i.   p.    267.      There   were

sanctuaries  of  the  Pythian  Apollo  near  Pheneus  (viii.  15.5)  and  Tegea

(viii.  54.  5).     An  inscription  (/.  G.  A,  No.  59)  shows  that  the  worship

existed  in  Cynuria.     It  seems  probable  that  Argos  was  the  centre  from

which  the  worship  spread ;    for   the  Epidaurians  and   Spartans  were

bound  to  send  sacrifices  to  the  Pythaean  Apollo  of  Argos  (Thucydides,

V.  53  :  Diodorus,  xii.  78).     Perhaps,  as  Arnold  on  Thucydides  Lc,  puts

it,    "the  worship   of  Apollo,   the   national  god   of  the   Dorians,   was

established  by  the  Argives  earlier  than  by  any  other  of  the  Dorian

states  after  their  conquest  of  Peloponnesus.     Be  this  as  it  may,  we

know  that  Argos  enjoyed  in  early  times  a  much  greater  dominion  and

influence  than  she  possessed  in  the  Peloponnesian  war;  and  she  was

probably  at  the  head  of  a  confederacy  of  the  adjoining  states  (Miiller,

Darter^   i.  p.   154),  and  thus  enjoyed  both  a  political  and  religious

supremacy.     The  religious  supremacy  outlasted  the  political ;  and  the

Argives  still  retained  the  management  of  the  temple  of  Apollo  Pythaeus,

to  whom  offerings  were  due  from  the  sevefW  states  of  the  confederation,

just  as  they  were  sent  by  the  several  states  of  Latium  to  the  common

temple  of  Jupiter  Latiaris  on  the  Alban  mount."     Cp.  Bouch^-Leclercq,

Histoire  de  la  Divination  dans  PAntiquiti^  3.  pp.  no  sq,^  225  sqq,

24.  I .  Apollo  BiradioteB.  The  name  signifies  Apollo  of  the  Ridge,
^ing  derived  from  diras  (6€i/xis)  *  a  ridge.'  Panofka  {Archdologischer
(Commentar  zu  Pausanias  Buck  II,  Kap,  24,  p.  12)  thought  that  combined
^th  this  there  may  be  the  meaning  of  *  the  Skinner,'  the  name  Diradiotis
including  the  sense  of  *  skinning,'  from  the  verb  deiro  or  dero  *  to  skin.'
Hence  he  supposed  that  Apollo  Diradiotis  appears  on  monuments
'^here  the  god  is  represented  as  about  to  skin  Marsyas  or  as  holding
^e  head  of  Marsyas  in  his  hand.  But  to  attribute  this  double  or
punning  sense  to  the  name  Diradiotis  seems  inadmissible.

24.  I.  because  the  place  also  is  called  Diras.  *^The  north-
^^tem  projection  of  the  mountain  of  Larissa  .  .  .  forms  a  conspicuous
^<^ture  of  Argos,  though  it  rises  only  to  one-third  of  the  height  of  the
'fountain.  It  appears  to  be  the  hill  by  Pausanias  called  Deiras  [Diras],
^  Word  which,  though  better  suited  to  the  neck  uniting  this  hill  with
^^e  Larissa,  we  may  easily  conceive  to  have  had  a  more  comprehensive
leaning,  and  to  have  been  applied  to  the  entire  projection.  The  proofs
^f  the  identity  of  Deiras  are :  first,  that  the  ascent  to  the  Acropolis  was
^y  Deiras,  and  the  ridge  in  question  furnishes  the  only  easy  ascent  to
^He  siunmit  of  the  mountain ;  secondly,  that  the  gate  of  Deiras  [see  ch.


208  ARGOS  BK.  II.  CORINTH

25.  I  sqq,'\  led  to  the  river  Charadrus,  to  Oenoe,  to  the  sources  of  the
Inachus,  and  to  Lyrceia,  Omeae,  and  Phlius,  sdl  places  to  which  the
road  from  Argos  would  naturally  lead  out  of  the  city  across  this  ridge.
The  ancient  walls  of  Argos  may  be  traced  along  the  crest  of  the  neck
which  unites  the  projection  with  the  mountain,  and   I   observed  an
opening  in  the  line  of  the  ancient  walls,  which  I  conceive  to  mark
precisely  the  position  of  the  gate  of  Deiras.  .  .  .  The  eastern  extremitjr
of  Deiras  was  probably  the  position  of  that  second  citadel  which  is
alluded  to  by  Livy  (xxxiv.  25):  the  height  and  magnitude  as  well  as
the  situation  of  this  steep  rock  would  naturally,  in  the  progress  (tf
military  science,  suggest  to  the  Argives  the  utility  of  occupying  it  with
an  inclosed  work"   (Leake,  Morea^   2.   pp.   399-401).     Prof.   Curtius
{Pelop,  2.  pp.  350,  560  sq,)  agrees  with  this  identi^cation  of  Diras.
Vischer  and  Bursian,  however,  held  that  the  name  Diras  could  only  %>«
applied  to  the  neck  joining  the  projection  to  the  Larisa.     The  projection
itself,  Bursian  thought,  might  perhaps  be  the  place  called  Shield  (Aspis)
by  Plutarch,  who  describes  it  as  being  above  the  theatre  [CUomm^^%
17  and  21  ;  Pyrrkus^  32).     In  this  case  Plutarch  would  seem  to  ha.*^^
confused  the  theatre  with  the  stadium,  which  was  situated  at  the  Dir"^^
or  neck  between  the  Larisa  and  the  projection  in  question  (Paus.      ^i*
24.   2).      See  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  p.   318;   Bursian,   Geogr,  2.        !>•
50  note.

24.  I.  the  woman  tastes  of  the  blood,  and  becomes
by  the  god.     For  examples  of  the  power  of  divination  supposed  to
acquired  by  tasting  the  blood  of  a  victim,  see   The  Golden  Bough^        ^•
p.  34  sq,

24.  2.  Sharp-sighted  Athena  etc.     See  Homer,  //rW,  v.  127
Panofka  {Arch,  Commentar  zu  Pausanias  Buch  IL  Kap,  24,  p.  20  s\
thinks  that  this   goddess  is  represented  in  an  old  vase-painting,
sharpness  of  her  sight  being  indicated  by  the  serpents  coiling  al
her ;  while,  behind  the  goddess,  Sthenelus  is  bandaging  the  woundi
finger  of  Diomede.     It  seems  that  the  Argive  maidens  annually  carrii
out  this  image  of  Athena  and  washed  it  in  the  water  of  the  Inachu
the  shield  of  Diomede  was  also  carried  in  the  procession.     See  Cal
machus.  Hymn  v,  The  Baths  of  Pallas,     Cp.  Paus.  iii.  18.  2.

24.  2.   the  sons  of  Aegyptns  etc.     With  the  story  of  the  murder
the  sons  of  Aegyptus  by  their  brides,  the  Danaids,  we  may  compare  ti
story  of  the  massacre  of  the  Lemnian  men  by  their  wives  and  daughtei
Hypsipele  alone    sparing  her   father   Thoas    (ApoUodorus,    i.    8.    i
The  Lemnian  massacre  was  said  to  have  been  provoked  because  the  mc
had  married  Thracian  women.     Amongst  the  Gonds  of  India  a  regul^
part  of  a  marriage  ceremony  was  the  killing  of  a  sham  bridegroom
the   bride.       The   sham    bridegroom    was   a    Brahman   boy ;    and
Brahman  boys  were  scarce,  the  murder  of  one  was  used  to  consecra^
simultaneously  a  number  of  marriages.     See  Panjab  Notes  and  Queried
2  (1884-1885),  No.  721.

24.  3.  a  temple  of  Athena.     From  the  evidence  of  Argive  coins  :   ^    '-•
seems  that  the  Palladium,  or  what  the  Argives  showed  as  such  (sec  ir  ^'
23.    5),    was  preserved  in  this  temple   of  Athena.     We  should  hav'^*"*^


[.  XXIV  ARGOS  209

:pected  to  find  it  rather  in  the  temple  of  Sharp-sighted  Athena  (§  2  of
Lis  chapter),  since  that  temple  was  dedicated  by  Diomede,  who  carried
T  the  Palladium.  But  in  fact  the  Palladium  seems  to  have  stood  in
le  temple  of  Athena  on  the  summit  of  the  acropolis.  "  For  the  archaic
nage  of  Pallas,  which  on  some  coins  (K  xliii)  Diomede  carries,  is  identical
1  details  with  the  image  represented  on  other  coins  (K  xlii)  as  occupying
he  temple  on  the  acropolis.  In  form  it  is  an  ordinary  archaic  Palladium,
epresenting  the  goddess  as  stiff  and  erect,  holding  a  spear  in  her  right
land,  and  a  shield  on  her  left  arm.  Below,  the  figure  passes  into  a
Here  column "  (Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Nunu  Comm.  on  Paus.
p.  40 ;  see  plate  K  xlii.-xlv.  of  their  work).

24.  3.  a  wooden  image  of  Zens  with a  third  eye  on  the

forehead.  Panofka  {ArchaeoL  Comtnentar  zu  Pausanias  Buck  II,  Kap,
24,  p.  30  sqq.)  thinks  that  this  three-eyed  Zeus  is  represented  on  two
wases,  of  which  he  gives  woodcuts,  pi.  iii.  15,  15a,  16.  Pausanias's
interpretation  of  the  three  eyes  is  accepted  by  Welcker  {firiechische
Cotter lehre^  i.  p.  161  sq,)^  Overbeck  (Griech,  Kunstmythologie^  2.  p.  7),
and  K.  O.  Miiller  {Archaeologie  dcr  Kunst^  §  349.  2).  But  Mr.
Nlaximilian  Mayer  (Die  Giganten  und  Titanen  in  der  antiken  Sage  und
fCunsty^,  I II)  justly  objects  to  this  interpretation  as  far-fetched.  He
is  probably  right  in  supposing  that  the  story  of  the  Trojan  origin  of
^le  image  was  invented  to  explain  the  barbarous  and  un-Greek  character
^f  the  image,  which  must  have  been  of  extreme  antiquity.  He  ingeniously
r"€minds  us  of  the  oracle  given  to  the  Heraclids  that  on  their  return  to
f^eloponnese  they  should  take  as  their  leader  a  three-eyed  person  (see
f^aus.  v,  3.  5)  ;  and  in  the  three -eyed  person  of  the  oracle  he  sees,
^rhaps  rightly,  the  three-eyed  Zeus.  He  thinks  that  the  Cyclopes  and
f  riops  or  Triopas  are  kindred  mythical  figures,  all  of  which  he  explains
^  divinities  of  thunder  and  lightning.  The  Hindoo  god  Siva  is  always
"^presented  with  three  eyes,  the  third  eye  being  in  his  forehead ;  the
liree  eyes  are  thought  to  denote  his  insight  into  past,  present,  and  future
ime.  See  Monier  Williams,  Religious  Life  and  Thought  in  India,
^.  79  sq. ;  Friederich,  Voorloopig  Verslag  van  Jiet  eiland  Bali,  p.  30
according  to  Mr.  Friederich,  Siva  is  regarded  as  the  god  of  the  sun  and
^f  fire).  The  Chinese  of  the  island  of  Hainan  have  a  great  respect  for
I-  deity  called  Lui-cong,  who  presides  over  thunder  and  is  by  some
xipposed  to  be  the  thunder  itself.  The  images  of  this  deity  are  common
ti  the  island  and  have  three  eyes,  like  those  of  Siva.  See  Moura,
^oyaume  du  Cambodge^  i .  p.  5 1 4.  A  king  of  Burma  is  said  to  have  had
^n  his  forehead  a  third  eye,  with  which  he  could  see  right  through  the
-arth  (A.  Bastian,  Die  V'dlker  des  bstlichen  Asicn^  i.  p.  25).  Another
Burmese  king  had  also  a  third  eye  on  his  forehead,  but  he  lost  it
tirough  wiping  his  face  with  a  cloth  which  a  woman  had  used  before
"^  im  {ib,  p.  76  sq,)

24.  4.  a  verse  of  Homer.     See  //.  ix.  457.

24.  4.  Aeschylns applies  the  name  of  Zens  also  to  the  god

^bo  dwells  in  the  sea.  The  play  of  Aeschylus  in  which  this  passage
*<^curred  is  lost.  According  to  Proclus  (quoted  in  Preller's  Griech.
^tyhologie,^  I.  p.  567),  Poseidon  was  sometimes  called  "the  Zeus  of  the

VOL.  Ill  p


210  ARTEMIS  OF  THE  STEEP  bk.  ii.  cownth

sea."  A  marine  Zeus  was  worshipped  at  Sidon  (Hesychius,  s,v,  Bakatr-
o-ios  Zcvs).  Ahrens  tried  to  show  that  the  name  Poseidon  was  com-
pounded oi  posts  {voa-is)  and  the  same  root  which  appears  in  the  name
Zeus  (Zev?,  Aid?  k.t.X.)  See  H.  L.  Ahrens,  *Ueber  den  Namen  des
Poseidon,'  Philologus^  23  (1866),  pp.  i  sqq,^  193  sqq.  Cp.  Prtllcr,
Griech,  Mythologk^^  I.e.

24.  5.  one  goes  to  Tegea.  "The  road  to  Tegea  leaves  Argos  in
the  neighbourhood  of  the  theatre,  and  runs  at  first  almost  due  south  at
the  foot  of  Mount  Lycone.  To  the  right  of  the  road,  at  the  foot  of  the
mountain,  are  traces  of  an  aqueduct  which  brought  water  to  Argos  from
the  gully  between  Mt  Lycone  and  Mt.  Chaon"  (L.  Ross,  Reisen^  p.  140).

24.  5.  a  sanctuary  of  Artemis  of  the  Steep  {Artemis  Orthia\
The  remains  of  this  sanctuary  were  discovered  by  Mr.  Kophiniotis  in
1888.  At  the  foot  of  Mt.  Lycone  he  found  fragments  of  pottery  and
bits  of  brick ;  on  the  summit  there  was  a  levelled  space  strewn  with
small  worked  stones  and  bits  of  pottery.  Below  and  around  lay  great
squared  blocks  of  good  workmanship,  which  seemed  to  have  formed  part
of  the  inclosure  of  the  sanctuary.  By  his  excavations  Mr.  Kophiniotis
laid  bare  most  of  the  inclosure.  The  north  wall  was  12.30  metres  long,
the  east  and  west  walls  9.80  metres  each.  The  eastern  and  western
walls  were  connected,  at  the  sixth  metre,  by  an  iimer  wall,  a  portion  of
which  remains.  There  is  an  empty  space  7.30  metres  long  between  the
fragment  of  this  interior  wall  and  the  western  wall.  The  north-west  part
was  surrounded  by  a  wall  of  its  own.  This  inclosed  portion  of  the
sanctuary  has  a  mosaic  floor.  Of  the  stones  of  the  inclosing  walls  some
were  not  worked  at  all,  the  rest  were  finished.  Within  and  outside  the
inclosure  were  found  clay  tiles,  lion's  heads  in  clay  and  marble,  and  parts
of  the  arm  and  thigh  of  a  great  statue.  On  the  east  of  the  inclosure
has  been  found  a  well-preserved  torso  of  the  marble  statue  of  a  woman
or  goddess ;  it  is  0.20  metre  high ;  head,  hands,  and  feet  are  missing.
The  workmanship  is  fine.  The  discovery  of  three  Roman  coins  of  Geta
and  Constantius  II.  proves  that  the  sanctuary  was  kept  up  as  late  as  the
middle  of  the  fourth  century  a.d.  See  American  Journal  of  Archaeology^
4  (1888),  p.  360;  id.  5  (1889),  p.  loi  sq.;  AcAtiov  apx^-ioXoyiKov^
1888,  p.  205  ;  Berliner philolog.  Wochenschrift^  29th  December,  1888,
p.  \(i\%  sq.\  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  10  (1889),  p.  273.

24.  6.  trees  grow  at  the  foot  of  it,  and  here  the  water  of  the
Erasinus  comes  to  the  surface.  From  Argos  the  road  to  Tegea  goes
south-west.  At  first  it  skirts  the  foot  of  the  steep  Larisa,  and  then  runs
through  the  southern  part  of  the  Argolic  plain.  On  the  right  rise  the
mountains,  of  no  great  height,  which  bound  the  plain  on  the  west
About  three  miles  from  Argos  this  chain  of  hills  sends  out  a  rocky  spur,
which  descends  in  precipices  of  yellowish  limestone  beside  the  road.  At
the  foot  of  the  precipices  a  body  of  clear,  sparkling  water  comes  rushing
impetuously  in  several  streams  from  the  rocks,  partly  issuing  from  a  low
cavern,  partly  welling  up  from  the  ground.  Under  the  rocks  it  forms  a
deep  pellucid  pool,  then  passing  beneath  the  high  road  in  a  broad  stream
is  diverted  into  several  channels  which,  shaded  by  tall  poplars,  willows,
and  mulberries,  turn  in  a  short  space  a  dozen  of  mills  (the  Mills  of  Argos,


L  XXIV  THE  ERASINUS  an

they  are  called),  and  then  water  the  ricefields.  Farther  on  they  unite
ice  more  into  a  river,  which  finds  its  way  into  the  sea  through  swampy
round,  among  thick  tangled  beds  of  reeds  and  sedge,  some  three  miles
ily  from  its  source  at  the  foot  of  the  hills.  This  river,  the  modem
'epkalati^  is  the  Erasinus  (*  the  lovely  river ')  of  antiquity.  It  is  the
nly  river  of  the  Argolic  plain  which  flows  summer  and  winter  alike ;
nd  the  opinion  both  of  the  ancient  and  the  modem  Greeks  that  it  is  an
missary  of  the  Stymphalian  lake  in  Arcadia,  appears  to  be  well  founded,
n  the  face  of  the  limestone  cliflf,  a  few  feet  above  the  springs  of  the
iver,  are  the  mouths  of  two  caves.  Huge  masses  of  fallen  rock  lie  in
Vont  of  them,  almost  barring  the  entrance.  Passing  through  the  larger
Df  the  two,  the  one  to  the  north,  we  find  ourselves  in  a  lofty,  dimly-lighted
cavern  with  an  arched  roof,  like  a  Gothic  cathedral,  which  extends  into
the  mountain  for  a  distance  of  200  feet  or  more.  Water  drips  from  the
roof,  forming  long  stalactites.  Some  light  penetrates  into  the  cave  from
above  the  fallen  rocks  which  block  its  mouth ;  but  even  at  high  noon  it
is  but  a  dim  twilight.  Bats,  the  natural  inhabitants  of  the  gloomy
cavern,  whir  past  our  heads,  as  if  resenting  the  intmsion.  Several
branches  open  off  the  central  cave.  One  of  them,  near  the  inner  end,
communicates  by  a  shaft  or  aperture  with  the  upper  air  and  the  surface
of  the  mountain.  Another  branch,  about  50  feet  inward  from  the  mouth
ctfthe  cave,  leads  to  the  left,  but  it  is  so  dark  that  it  cannot  be  explored
without  artificial  light.  Part  of  the  cave  is  walled  off  and  forms  a
chapel  of  the  Panagia  Kephalariotissa.  The  worship  of  Pan,  which
Pausanias  mentions,  may  have  been  held  in  this  or  the  neighbouring
cavern  ;  for  Pan,  the  shepherd's  god,  loved  to  haunt  caves,  and  in  these
two  caves  shepherds  with  their  flocks  still  seek  shelter  from  rain  and
storm.  The  chapel  of  the  Panagia,  in  which  there  are  some  ancient
blocks,  may  very  well  have  succeeded  to  a  shrine  of  Pan,  or  perhaps  of
Dionysus,  who  was  also  worshipped  here.  A  festival  is  still  held
annually  on  the  spot  on  the  1 8th  of  April ;  it  may  be  nothing  but  a
continuation,  in  a  changed  form,  of  the  festival  of  Dionysus  called
Tyrbe,  which  Pausanias  mentions.  Opposite  the  mouths  of  the  caves  is
a  tumulus ;  some  small  columns  of  grey  granite  were  discovered  in  it
about  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century.  Farther  off,  on  the  right
bank  of  the  river,  the  mins  of  a  temple  were  discernible  some  years  later,
rhe  whole  place — the  rocky  precipices,  the  shady  caverns,  the  crystal
itream,  the  tranquil  pool,  the  verdure  and  shade  of  the  trees — is  at  once
;o  beautiful  and  agreeable,  that  if  it  had  been  near  Athens  it  would
irobably  have  been  renowned  in  song  and  legend.  But  Argos  had  no
>ophocles  to  sing  its  praises  in  immortal  verse.

Sec  Dodwell,  Toury  2.  p.  224  sq,  ;  Cell,  Itinerary  of  Greece^  p.  79 ;  Leake,
^orea,  2.  p.  340  saq, ;  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  47  ;  Fiedler,  Reise^  ''PP*  30^*3^3  >
V".  'SUae/jourruJy  2.  p.  191  ;  Welcker,  Tagebtuh^  i.  p.  193  sq. ;  L.  Koss,  Reisetiy
.  140  sq.  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  364  sq,  ;  Vischer,  krinnerungen,  p.  325  ;  W.
r.  Clark,  PeloponncsuSf  p.  100  sqq. ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  65  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  275  ;
'uide-Joanm,  2.  p.  233 ;  Philippson,  Ptlopcntusy  p.  70  sq.  The  view  that  the
Irasinus  is  the  emissary  of  the  Stymphalian  lake  is  mentioned  by  other  ancient
Titers  (Herodotus,  vi.  76;  Diodorus,  xv.  49;  Strabo,  vi.  p.  275,  viii.  p.  371)
esides  Pausanias.


11


212  CENCHREAE  BK.  ii.  corinth

24.  6.  the  Bhiti     See  i.  38.  i,  and  vol.  2.  p.  486  sq,

24.  7*  we  see  Oenclireae  on  the  right  of  what  is  called  the  Wheel

Beyond  the  springs  of  the  Erasinus  the  road  forks.  The  modem  highroad
and  railway  to  Tegea,  or  rather  to  Tripolitza^  keep  straight  on  southward
through  the  plain  to  Lema  (Myli) ;  but  a  bridle-path  diverges  to  the
right,  and  after  skirting  the  southern  foot  of  Mount  Chaon  soon  begins
to  ascend  among  the  hills.  This  bridle-path  is  the  old  road  to  Tegea,
and  along  it  Pausanias,  whom  we  follow,  is  now  travelling.  In
about  a  mile  from  the  springs,  at  the  point  where  the  ascent  begins,  we
see  some  ruins  in  the  fields  to  the  right  of  the  path,  and  beyond  them
on  a  rocky  eminence,  about  half  a  mile  away,  the  ruins  of  a  small
pyramid.  These  ruins  were  taken  by  L.  Ross  and  the  French  sur\eyors
to  be  those  of  Cenchreae  (as  to  the  pyramid  see  the  next  note) ;  but
Leake  and  modem  topographers  in  general  look  for  Cenchreae  farther  on.
We  therefore  continue  to  follow  the  bridle-path,  which  ascends  at  first
gradually  and  then  steeply  in  many  zigzags  up  a  toilsome  slope.  On
reaching  the  summit  it  tums  southward  and  winds  for  several  miles
through  a  wild  open  country  among  the  upper  ridges  of  barren  and
rugged  hills.  In  about  three  hours  from  leaving  the  springs  of  the
Erasinus  we  come  to  a  place  which  takes  the  name  of  Sta  Nera  (*  the
waters')  from  the  numerous  springs  which  rise  on  the  spot  and  flow
across  the  path.  There  is  a  large  ruined  khan  here,  and  the  seaward
view  from  it  down  the  valley  to  Lema  and  across  the  gulf  to  Nauplia  is
very  fine.  Here  too  are  some  ruins  of  antiquity  which  are  now  generally
identified  as  those  of  Cenchreae.  They  consist  of  scattered  foundations
together  with  other  vestiges  of  ancient  Greek  buildings  and  monuments,
such  as  blocks  of  marble  and  fragments  of  columns.  Close  to  the  road
Ross  observed  a  small  piece  of  polygonal  wall,  and  beside  a  spring  a
broken  capital  and  two  small  columns  of  blue  marble.  In  a  litde  dell
just  beyond,  Mure  saw  remains  of  a  temple  or  of  a  Christian  church  built
of  ancient  materials.  Two  small  columns  of  cipollino  were  standing,
but  apparently  not  in  their  original  places.  This  position  of  Cenchreae
agrees  with  the  statement  of  Strabo  (viii.  p.  376)  that  Cenchreae  '*lics
on  the  road  which  leads  from  Tegea  to  Argos  over  Mount  Parthenius."
What  the  Wheel  (Trochos)  mentioned  by  Pausanias  may  have  been  is
uncertain.  It  may  have  been  the  name  given  to  this  part  of  the  road
because  of  its  many  windings.  Not  far  from  the  ruins  of  Cenchreae  is
the  deserted  village  of  Palaco-SkaphidakL

See  Cell,  Itifurary  of  Greece^  p.  80  ;  Leake,  Morcay  2.  p.  337  sqq, ;  Boblaye,
RiclKrches^  p.  46  sq.  ;  lAwitj  /oiintal^  2.  p.  195  sqq. ;  L.  Ross,  Reisen^  P«  I4I  •^?^''»
Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  366 ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  p.  328 ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.
p.  66 ;  Baedeker,*  p.  275  ;  Guide-Joanne ^  2.  p.  233  sq.^  Philippson,  Peloponnes^
pp.  70,  81,  Meliarakes,  Fcwypa^/a,  pp.  33,  59,  60.

24.  7-  buried  at  Cenchreae,  each  grave  being  shared  by  many
men.  The  Greek  name  for  the  common  tomb  in  which  many  slain
men  were  buried  together  is  poluandrion.  On  the  spot  described  by
Pausanias  there  appear  to  have  been  several  such  tombs.  One  of  them
has   been    identified   by  some  writers  with  the   ruins  of  the  remark-


.  XXIV  PYRAMID  OF  CENCHREAE  213

le  monument  commonly  known  as  the  Pyramid  of  Cenchreae.  It
inds  on  the  summit  of  a  rocky  eminence,  which  projects  into  the  plain
>m  the  southern  declivities  of  Mount  Chaon,  about  a  mile  and  a
larter  beyond  the  Erasinus,  and  about  half  a  mile  to  the  right  of  the
idle-path  which  leads  to  Tripolitza  and  Tegea  (see  preceding  note).
lie  base  of  the  structure  forms  a  rectangle  of  48  feet  by  39  feet.  The
est  side  is  much  damaged,  but  the  other  three  sides  still  rise  to  a
iight  of  about  10  feet.  The  masonry  "is  of  an  intermediate  style
etween  the  Cyclopean  and  polygonal,  consisting  of  large  irregular
locks,  with  a  tendency,  however,  to  quadrangular  forms  and  horizontal
ourses ;  the  inequalities  being,  as  usual,  filled  up  with  smaller  pieces.
'he  largest  stones  may  be  from  four  to  five  feet  in  length,  and  from  two
D  three  in  thickness.  There  are  traces  of  mortar  between  the  stones,
v'hich  ought,  perhaps,  to  be  assigned  rather  to  subsequent  repairs  than

0  the  original  workmanship.  The  symmetry  of  the  structure  is  not
itrictly  preserved,  being  interrupted  by  a  rectangular  recess  cutting  off
)ne  comer  of  the  building.  In  this  angle  there  is  a  doorway,  consisting
)f  two  perpendicular  side  walls,  surmounted  by  an  open  gable  or  Gothic
irch,  formed  by  horizontal  layers  of  masonry  converging  into  an  apex,
is  in  the  triangular  opening  above  the  Gate  of  Lions  and  *  Treasury  of
Atreus.'  This  door  gives  access  to  a  passage  between  two  walls.  At
its  extremity  on  the  right  hand  is  another  doorway,  of  which  little  or
nothing  of  the  masonry  is  preserved,  opening  into  the  interior  chamber
3r  vault"  QAurt^  Journal^  2.  p.  196,  sq,)      The  inner  chamber  is  nearly

1  square  of  about  23  feet.  Originally  it  was  divided  lengthways  into
:wo  compartments  by  a  thin  partition-wall.  The  whole  structure  rests
)n  a  low  platform  composed  of  large  squared  blocks.  The  outer  walls.
It  the  level  of  the  ground,  are  8  to  9  feet  thick.  The  inner  surfaces  of
iie  u-alls  are  vertical,  but  the  outer  surfaces  incline  inwards,  pyramid-
Rise.  It  appears  that  the  walls  were  never  carried  up  to  an  apex,  but
that  the  structure  must  have  been  roofed  over  at  about  its  present  height
t)f  10  feet.  The  square  holes  for  the  reception  of  the  ends  of  the  rafters
are  still  visible  at  the  upper  edge  of  the  perpendicular  walls.  The
mortar  with  which  the  walls  are  bonded  is  positively  asserted  by  Ross,
Prof.  Curtius,  and  W.  G.  Clark  to  be  original  and  not  to  date,  as
Leake  and  Mure  were  inclined  to  conjecture,  from  a  later  repair  of  the
structure.  At  both  doorways,  the  outer  and  the  inner,  there  were
regular  doors.  The  doorposts  of  both  (according  to  Prof.  Curtius)  are
well  preserved,  and  the  holes  are  clearly  visible  into  which  the  inner
bolts  were  shot.  From  this  fact  Prof.  Curtius  infers  that  the  building
ft^s  meant  to  be  barricaded  from  within  and  defended.  He  thinks  that
he  building  was  a  military  watch-post,  intended  to  command  the  road,
md  that  it  is  not  of  extreme  antiquity.  It  is  justly  objected  that  a
>>Tamid,  without  windows  or  loop-holes,  is  a  structure  adapted  neither
3r  defence  nor  observation.  Ross  and  W.  G.  Clark  inclined  to  regard
:  as  one  of  the  poluandria  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  Ross,  Mure,  and
ischer  have  pointed  out  that  pyramids  exist  or  are  known  to  have
fisted  in  other  parts  of  Argolis,  but  (with  the  exception  of  one  in
)uthem  Laconia)  nowhere  else  in  Greece  ;  and  they  see  in  this  fact  a


214  UYSIAE  BK.  II.  CORINTH

confirmation  of  that  traditional  connexion  between  Argolis  and  Eg>'pt
which  is  embodied  in  the  story  of  Danaus  and  his  daughters.  Pausanias
saw  a  pyramid-shaped  building  between  Argos  and  Tiryns  (ii.  25.  7).
At  Ugurio  (the  ancient  Lessa),  on  the  way  frbm  Nauplia  to  Epidaurus,
there  are  the  remains  of  a  pyramid  (see  note  on  ii.  25.  10).  There  is
another  at  Astros  in  Cynuria,  which  long  belonged  to  Argolis  (Vischer,
Erinnerungen^  p.  327).  Lastly,  the  name  of  the  place  where  Danaus
was  said  to  have  landed  in  Argolis,  was  Pyramia  (Plutarch,
Pyrrhus^  32).

On  the  pyTamid  of  Cenchreae,  as  it  is  called,  see  Leake,  Morea^  2.  pp.  338  i^.,

343;   id,y  Peloponmsiaca,  ^^  251   sq.  \    L.   Ross,  Reisen^  pp.   142-145;  •  Mure,

Journal f  2.  pp.   195- 197 »  Curtius,  Pghp.  2.  pp.  365  j^.,  564 ;  Vischer,  Erinru-

rungetty  pp.  326-328;  W.  G.  Clark,  Pelop.  pp.  98-100 ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  65;

Baedeker,^  p.  275  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  233  sq,

24.  7-  when  Pisistratus  was  archon  at  Athens  etc.  Eurybotus
(or  Eurybates,  as  Dionysius  calls  him)  won  the  foot-race  at  Olympia  in
01.  27.  I  (672/1  B.C.),  as  we  learn  from  Dionysius  of  Halicamasstis
{Antiquit.  Rom,  iii.  i ).  Hence  the  archonship  of  Pisistratus  fell  in  Ol.
27.  4  (669/8  B.C.).  Cp.  Clinton,  Fasti  Hellenici,  i.  p.  188.  There  was
another  Athenian  archon  who  bore  the  name  of  Pisistratus ;  he  was  a
grandson  of  the  tyrant  of  that  name.  See  Thucydides,  vi.  54  and  note
on  i.  19.  I,  *an  image  of  Pythian  Apollo.'

24.  7.  Having  descended  into  the  lower  ground  you  reach  the
ruins  of  Hysiae.     Beyond  the  ruins  at  Sta  Nera  the  road  leads  south
for  about  two  miles  to  the  khan  of  Dakouli^  where  it  is  joined  by  the
modem  highroad  and  railway  from  Lerna  {Myli),     From  this  point  the
road  turns  to  the  west  and  descends  for  about  two  miles  into  an  upland
valley,    a   narrow  but   green   and   fertile   dale   hemmed   in   by   steep
mountains.     In  the  bottom  of  the  valley  com  and  olives  are  cultivated,
and  the  slopes  of  the  mountains  on  the  northern  side  are  partly  wooded
with  tall  evergreen  oaks.    The  water  of  the  dale  is  discharged  through  a
narrow  gully  and  falls  into  the  sea  at  Lema.     This  is  the  valley  of  the
ancient  Hysiae,  the  modem  Achladokampos^  so  called  from  the  wild
pear  trees  {achlades)  which  gjrow  on   the  slopes  of  the   hills.     The
modem  village  of  Achladokampos  stands  upon  the  steep  side  of  the
mountain  to  the  right  of  the  road ;  with  its  houses  peeping  from  among
thick -growing  evergreens,   olives,  ilexes,  and  cypresses   it  presents  a
very  pleasing  aspect.     The  ruins  of  the  ancient  Hysiae  are  to  the  left
of  the  road,  on  a  green  rocky  knoll  in  the  north-eastem  comer  of  the
dale.     The  walls  of  the  acropolis  are  flanked  by  round  towers,   and
are  remarkable  because  they  are  of  polygonal  masonry  resting  upon
a  foundation  of  regular  ashlar  masonry  in  horizontal  courses.     The
walls  are  bonded  with  mortar.     The  little  town  was  destroyed  by  the
Lacedaemonians  in  417  B.C.,  and  its  people  put  to  the  sword  (Thucy-
dides, v.  83;  Diodorus,  xii.  81).

See  Leake,  Morea^  2.  p.  337  ;  Boblaye,  Recherchts^  p.  48  ;  L.  Ross,  Reisen,  p.
147  ;  Mure,  loumaly  2.  p.  199 ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  367  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^
p.  328  sq. ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  66 ;  Baedeker,'  p.  276 ;  Guide- Joantie^  p.  235  ;
Philippson,  Pelopontus^  pp.  70,  80.


CH.  XXV  ROADS  FROM  ARGOS  TO  MANTINEA  215

25.  I.  The  road  from  Argos  to  Mfti^tin^,     Two  roads  lead  from
Argos  to  Mantinea,  both  starting  from  the  north-west  comer  of  the  city.
The  southern  and  shorter  of  the  two  follows  the  bed  of  the  Charadrus
(now  caUed  the  Xerias\  which  rises  at  the  foot  of  Mt.  Kienias^  neai*  the
village  of  Turmki^  and  after  descending  through  a  long  narrow  valley,
sweeps  round  the  northern  and  eastern  sides  of  Argos.     The  northern
and  longer  way  to  Mantinea  follows  the  valley  of  the  Inachus  and  goes
by  the  villages  Kaparelli^  Sanga,  and  Pikemi  to  Mantinea.     These  two
roads  to  Mantinea  are  described  by  Pausanias,  from  the  points  where
they  pass  from  Argolis  into  Arcadia,  in  viii.  6.  4  sqq,  (see  the  notes  on
that  passage).     The  southern  or  shorter  road  is  the  one  which  he  calls
Prinus ;    the  northern  or  longer  is  the  Climax.      The  southern  road
itself  bifurcates  at  a  place  called  CJuIonas  in  the  valley  of  the  Charadrus  ;
the  southern  branch  goes  by  the  village  of  Turniki  over  Mt  Ktenias ;
the  northern  branch  goes  by  the  village  of  Karya  over  Mt.  Artemisius
(the  modem  Malevd),     But  these  two  branches  reunite  at  the  village  of
Tsipiana^  where  the  Arcadian  plain  begins.     See  L.  Ross,  Reiseriy  p.  129
sq.\  Conze  and    Michaelis,  in  Annali  delV  Instituto^  33  (1861),   p.
21  sqq,  \  W.  Loring,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  15  (1895),  p.  80  sqq.
In  going  from  Argos  to  Mantinea  I  followed  the  southern  road,  and  the
southern  branch  of  it.     W.  G.  Clark  {Pelop,  p.  114^^.)  also  followed  the
southem  road,  but  took  the  northem  branch  of  it,  by  Karya,     I  have
called  it  a  road,  but  really  it  is  a  rough  bridle-path  most  of  the  way ;
in  places  it  crosses  the  deep  beds  of  torrents,  which  at  the  time  of  my
journey  (22nd   April,    1890)   were  dry.      The  path  turns   round   the
northern  foot  of  the  Larisa,  and  skirting  the  wide  Argolic  plain,  enters
the  valley  of  the  Charadrus  {Xerias),      It  is  a  long,   narrow   valley,
endosed  by  barren  and  rocky  hills,  and  barred  at  the  farther,  or  western,
^d  by  a  steep  mountain,  on  which,  when  I  saw  it  in  the  distance,
purple  shadows  rested.     The  bed  of  the  river  is   broad  and   stony,
sometimes  as  much  as  300  yards  in  width  ;   it  is  generally  dry,  but
after  heavy  rains   the  spates   that   come   roaring   down   it   from   the
mountains  are  much  dreaded.      Flocks  of  sheep  and  goats  feed  in  the
valley ;   the  herdsmen  carry  long  staves  tipped  with  crooks,  and  some-
times a  gun.      Trains  of  laden  mules  or  asses,  conducted  by  peasants,
also  met  us.     The  head  of  this  long  valley,   immediately  under  the
mountain  barrier,  is  very  picturesque.     The  bottom  is  partly  covered
with  shmbs  and  trees,  among  which  (for  the  place  was  then  in  its  spring
beauty)  I  noticed  the  broom  and  the  hawthorn,  both  in  flower,  also  wild
roses,  and  a  tree  with  a  lovely  purple  bloom,  which  I  believe  to  have
been  the  Judas  tree.     At  the  head  of  the  valley,  before  the  path  begins
the  long  ascent,  is  a  small  hamlet,  consisting  of  a  few  wretched  stone
cottages.     Its  name,  I  was  told,  is  Mazi,      Beyond   the  village   the
path  leads  right  up  the  face  of  the  mountain-wall  in  a  series  of  zigzags.
The   view   backward   from   the   summit  of  the   pass   is    magnificent,
embracing  a  wilderness  of  mountains  with  the  sea  and  the  islands  of
Hydra  and  Spetsa  in  the  distance.     On  the  crest  of  the  ridge  is  a
hamlet  (Turniki  f).     From  the  top  of  the  pass  the  path  drops  down
very  steeply,  almost  precipitously,  to  Tsipiana  in  Arcadia,  which  nestles


2i6  OENO& — LYRCEA  bk.  ii.  corikth

at  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  just  at  the  mouth  of  the  pass.  Cell
took  this  route,  but  in  the  reverse  direction  (from  Tsifdana  to  Aigos).
See  his  Itinerary  of  the  Morea^  p.  174.  The  dangerous  spates  on  the
Xerias  river  are  mentioned  by  Mr.  Philippson  {Peloponnes^  p.  62).

25.  2.  Oeno6.  The  exact  site  of  this  place  is  not  known.  From
the  fact  that  a  pitched  battle  was  fought  at  Oenoe  (see  i.  15.  i;
X.  10.  4)  L.  Ross  inferred  that  the  place  must  have  been  in  the  Ai:give
plain,  near  the  entrance  to  the  narrow  valley  down  which  the  Charadrus
\Xeria5)  flows  {Reisen,  p.  133).  Bursian,  on  the  other  hand,  following
Conze  and  Michaelis,  places  it  at  the  head  of  this  narrow  valley,  at  a
place  called  Palaeochora^  where  ancient  coins  have  often  been  found
See  Ross,  Reisen^  P*  '33  J  Conze  and  Michaelis,  in  Annali delP  Instituto^
33  (1861),  p.  23  sq.  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  64.  Compare  also  Leake,
Morea^  2.  p.  412  5q,\  id,^  Peloponnesiaca^  p.  266  sq.  Others  suppose
that  Oenoe  was  near  the  modem  Schoenochori,  on  a  hill  which  is  now
surmounted  by  a  chapel  of  the  Virgin  (Panagia).  A  road,  bordered  by
tombs,  descended  from  the  hill  for  a  distance  of  several  kilometres.
Near  this  place  was  found  an  archaic  relief  representing  a  lion  seizing  a
bird.  See  Bull.  <ie  Corr,  HelUn.  17  (1893)  P-  ^99  ^q.  The  village  of
Schoenochori  is  among  the  hills  on  the  south  side  of  the  valley  of  the
Inachus,  about  8  miles  north-west  of  Argos.

25.  3-  a  sanctuary  of  Artemis  on  the  top  of  the  moimtain.
Bursian  thought  that  the  site  of  this  sanctuary  is  probably  marked  by  a
ruined  chapel  of  St.  Elias,  which  is  surrounded  by  a  fine  clump  0^
evergreen  oaks  {Geogr.  2.  p.  64).

25.  3.  its  water  does  not  rmi  far.     See  ii.  15.  5  note.

25.  4-  Another  road  leads  from  the  Diras  gate  etc.  This  is  the
longer  of  the  two  roads  to  Mantinea.     See  above,  p.  215.

25.  4.  Lyrcea.     The  site  of  this  place  was  believed  by  L.  Ross  to
be  in  the  valley  of  the  Inachus,  ten  minutes  east  of  the  village  of  Sterna,
at  the  point  where  another  glen  joins  the  valley  on  the  north.     Here  on
a  rising-ground  are  the  ruins  of  a  square  tower  of  irregular  masonry ;
there  are  also  remains  of  other  foundations,  and  the  surface  of  the
rising-ground  is  strewed  with  potsherds.     This  is  the  point  at  which,
descending   the  valley  of  the   Inachus,  we  first  sight  the  citadel  of
Argos.     But  the  distance  from  Argos  (apparently  about  10  miles  in  a
north-westerly   direction)   does   not   agree   well   with   the    60   Greek
furlongs   (under    7  miles)   at   which   Pausanias  estimates  it.     See  L.
Ross,  Reisen,  p.    138;    Leake,  Peloponnesiaca^  p.  268.     Prof.  Curtius
accepts  this  identification  of  the  site  of  Lyrcea,  and  talks  of  "square
towers  with  polygonal  masonry  among  scattered  ruins"  (Pelop.  2.  p.
415),  which  is  probably  only  his  way  of  repeating  Ross's  statement
about  the  one  tower  of  irregular  masonry.

25.  4-  the  Argives  annually  celebrate  a  festival  of  beacon-fires.
From  the  tradition  that  Hypermnestra  lit  a  fire  on  the  summit  of  the
Larisa,  we  may  infer  that  at  the  annual  festival  of  beacons,  supposed  to
commemorate  that  event,  a  bonfire  was  kindled  on  the  top  of  that
mountain.  It  seems  a  fair  conjecture  that  the  festival  of  bonfires  in
question  belonged  to  the  same  class  of  rites   as   those    Midsummer


CH.  XXV  ORNEAE—TIRYNS  217

^nfires  which  are  still  annually  lighted  in  many  parts  of  Europe.
On  St.  John's  Eve  (Midsummer  Eve)  the  Greeks  still  kindle  fires  and
jump  over  them.  On  the  custom  in  general  see  The  Golden  Bought  2.
p.  246  sqq.

25.  5.  Qmeae.     From  the  statement  of  Pausanias  (§  6)  we  infer

that  Omeae  lay  near  the  border  of  Phliasia,     Strabo  says  (viii.  p.  382)

that  it  was  situated  beside  a  river  of  the  same  name,  above  the  Sicyonian

plain.     As  Omeae  must  have  lain  to  the  north-west  of  Argos,  and  its

distance  is  given  by  Pausanias  as  120  Greek  furlongs  (about  13  English

miles),  the  river  beside  which  it  stood  would  appear  to  have  been  the

stream  which  runs  by  the  modem  village  of  Leondi  to  join  the  Asopus

from  the  west.      Accordingly  the  topographers  look  for  the  ancient

Omeae  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Leondi  (so  Ross  and  Curtius)  or  of

Palaeo-Leondi  (so  Bursian).     The  latter  place  is  in  the  same  valley  as

Leondi^  but  higher  up  it,  three  or  four  miles  to  the  south ;   mins  are

said  to  exist  at  it     The  place  is  reached  from  Argos  by  following  the

valley  of  the  Inachus  (the  modem  Panitzd)  as  far  as  the  village  of

Sterna.     West  of  this  village  a  glen  opens  into  the  valley  of  the  Inachus

from  the  north.     By  following  up  this  glen  we  reach  the  narrow  dale  of

Leondi,     See  Ross,  Reisen^  p.    135  note;    QvxixMS^  Pelop,  2.  pp.  415,

478  sq,\   Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  63  sq.      As  to  the  valley  of  Leondi

{Liondi)   see    Philippson,  Peloponnes^    p.    75.      Omeae  was    already

deserted  in  Strabo's  time  ;   he  mentions  there  a  sanctuary  of  Priapus

which  was  in  high  repute  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  382).     Homer's  mention  of

Omeae  is  in  Ili<xd^  ii.  571.     The  destruction  of  Omeae  by  the  Argives

took  place  in  416  B.C.  (Thucydides,  vi.  7).

25.  6.  Menesthens,  who  with  a  body  of  Athenians  etc.  See
Homer,  //.  ii.  552  sqq.^  iv.  327  sqq.  As  to  Peteos,  the  father  of
Menestheus,  see  x.  35.  8.

25.  6.  temple  dedicated  to  all  the  gods.     Cp.  ii.  2.  8  note.
25.  7*  the  way  from  Argos  to  Epidaoria.     The  road  first  strikes
across  the  broadest  part  of  the  great  plain  of  Argos  in  a  south-easterly
direction.     It  then  enters  the  hills,  among  which  it  continues  to  wind  for
a  good  many  miles.     See  below,  notes  on  ii.  25,  9  and  10.

25.  7.  a  pyramid.  See  note  on  ii.  24.  7.  As  to  the  contest
between  Proetus  and  Acrisius  for  the  kingdom  of  Argos  see  ApoUodorus,
'i.  2.  I,  who  also  says  that  shields  were  first  invented  by  these  rivals
for  the  throne.  At  Argos  a  festival  called  Daulis  was  said  to  be  an
imitation  of  the  battle  between  Proetus  and  Acrisius  (Hesychius,  5,v,
i^oi'Xts).

25.  8.  Tiryns.     In   the  south-eastern   part  of  the  Argolic  plain
several  isolated  rocky  hillocks  rise  abruptly  like  islands  from  the  dead
level  of  the  surrounding  country.     Long  ago  they  were  no  doubt  actually
islands,  and  have  been  left  stranded,  as  it  were,  by  the  sea  as  it  re-
treated before  the  alluvial  soil  washed  down  by  the  rivers.     The  most
westerly  of  these  hillocks,  and  at  the  same  time  the  lowest  and  flattest
oi  them  all,  divided  from  the  sea  by  a  mile  of  marshland,  is  crooned  by
the  ruins  of  Tiryns,  on  which  time  would  seem  to  have  wrought  little
change  since  the  day  when  they  excited  the  wonder  of  Pausanias.     The


ai8  TIRYNS  bk.  ii.  corinth

hillock,  a  flat-topped  ridge  of  limestone  measuring  about  300  yards  in
length  by  somewhat  less  than  100  yards  in  width,  is  situated  two  and  a
half  miles  north  of  Nauplia.  The  line  of  railway  which  joins  Nauplia
with  Argos  runs  close  under  the  western  foot  of  the  hillock.  In  shape
the  flat  summit  of  the  hillock,  which  at  its  highest  point  is  only  some
26.39  nietres  (86  feet)  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  has  been  not  inaptly
compared  to  the  sole  of  a  foot.  It  contracts  in  the  middle,  so  that  its
surface  falls  into  two  nearly  equal  parts,  of  which  the  somewhat  broader
southern  half  is  some  feet  higher  than  the  northern.  These  two  terraces,
the  southern  and  the  northern,  may  be  called  respectively  the  Upper
Citadel  and  the  Lower  Citadel.  Between  them,  and  intermediate  in
height,  is  a  much  smaller  terrace,  which  may  be  called  the  Middle
Citadel.  Round  the  whole  of  the  citadel.  Upper,  Middle,  and  Lower,
run  the  famous  fortification-walls  to  which  Homer  refers  (//.  ii.  559)1
and  which  even  in  ruins  are  still  massive  and  imposing.

The  Upper  and  Middle  Citadels  were  excavated  by  Dr.  Schliemann
with  the  assistance  of  Dr.  Dorpfeld  in   1884.     On  the  Upper  Citadel
they  found  the  ruins  of  the  palace  of  the  old  kings  of  Tiryns ;  on  the
Middle  Citadel  they  found  only  some  petty  dwellings,  much  dilapidated,
which  may  have  served  as  lodgings  for  servants.     In  the  Lower  Citadel
Dr.  Schliemann  only  cut  two  trenches  crossing  each  other  at  right
angles  ;  in  these  he  laid  bare  some  foundations  of  buildings.     Otherv-ise
the  Lower  Citadel  has  not  yet  been  excavated.     It  is  conjectured  to
have  contained  storerooms,  stables,  and   servants*  apartments.    Tbc
u'alls  of  the  citadel,  with  their  towers  and  galleries,  were  to  a  grea-*
extent  excavated  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  in  1885.

I.  Walls  and  Gates. — The  circuit -wall  of  the  citadel  is  buil^
throughout  of  very  large  blocks  of  limestone.  The  limestone  is  of  tw^
sorts,  which  were  quarried  in  two  mountains  in  the  neighbourhood  (^*
Tiryns.  One  of  them  is  of  a  light  grey,  the  other  of  a  reddish  colour  it^
its  inner  parts.  While  the  grey  limestone  is  very  hard  and  weather-^
proof,  the  reddish  sort  decays  with  time  ;  and  it  seems*  probable  that  th^
ruinous  state  of  the  walls  in  many  places  has  been  brought  about  by
the  decomposition  and  consequent  falling  in  of  blocks  of  the  red  limestone.
The  citadel  walls  do  not  batter ;  in  other  words,  they  do  not  slope  in-
wards, but  rise  perpendicularly  from  the  base.  Nor  did  they  support  a
wall  of  clay  bricks,  like  the  wall  of  Troy.  Very  many  of  the  stones
are  from  6  to  10  feet  long  by  more  than  a  yard  both  in  height  and
breadth.  The  blocks  are  not,  however,  as  was  formerly  supposed,  quite
unhewn.  Almost  all  the  stones,  before  they  were  built  into  the  walls,
had  been  wrought  on  one  or  several  faces  with  a  pick-hammer.  In  this
way  some  of  them  received  a  better  bed,  others  a  smooth  facing.
Moreover,  they  are  not  piled  one  on  the  top  of  the  other  irregularly,
but  are  laid  as  far  as  possible  in  horizontal  courses.  Lastly,  Dr.
Dorpfeld's  excavations  in  1885  refuted  the  old  opinion  that  the  walli
were  built  without  mortar.  On  the  contrary,  it  appears  that  almost  al
the  walls  of  the  citadel  as  well  as  of  the  palace  were  built  with  cla>
mortar.  Almost  throughout,  wherever  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  excavations  laic
bare  pieces  of  wall  which  had  long   been  covered  with  rubbish,  th<


=j^^^r\-ed.      The  absence  of  the  ti
^Sf^  ■"ife^^  explained    chiefly  by  the
~~  "     '  't  away  ;  but

""^uard^and


VbI.  ///.  It/atl/aei  3i9


2l8


TIRYNS


hillock,  a  flat-topped  ridge  of  limes*'^'

length  by  somewhat  less  thap->^

half  miles  noi

>vith  An

the  flat

26.3r'^

coir


I.  XXV  TIRYNS  219

lortar  within  the  joints  was  well  preserved.  The  absence  of  the  mortar
om  the  exposed  parts  of  the  walls  is  to  be  explained  chiefly  by  the
aion  of  the  rain  which  in  the  course  of  ages  has  washed  it  away ;  but
:  may  also  be  in  part  accounted  for  by  the  burrowing  of  the  lizard^and
ats  which  live  by  hundreds  in  the  walls.

V  The  strength  and  construction  of  the  walls  are  different  in  different
•arts  of  the  citadel.  Around  the  lower  citadel  the  wall  is  uniformly  23
3  26  feet  thick,  and  is  still  standing  to  a  height  of  24  ft.  6  in.  Their
ontinuity  is  here  only  interrupted  by  some  niches  which  are  let  into  the
iner  side  of  the  wall.  The  purpose  of  these  niches  is  unknown  ;  Dr.-
)6rpfeld  conjectures  that  they  were  intended  merely  to  economise
laterial.  Round  the  upper  citadel,  on  the  other  hand,  the  wall  varies
1  thickness  from  16  to  57  feet ;  its  line  is  broken  by  many  salient  and
e-entering  angles ;  and  it  is  strengthened  with  towers,  and  pierced  by
alleries  and  chambers.  The  galleries  and  chambers  are  best  preserved
n  the  southern  portion  of  the  wall.  Here  in  the  great  tower  at
he  south-western  angle  (AA  on  the  plan  of  Tiryns)  are  two  chambers
idjoining  each  other.  They  have  no  entrance  on  any  side,  and  may
»ave  served  as  dungeons  or  provision  -  cellars,  but  more  probably
IS  cisterns.  Their  upper  walls  must  have  been  built  of  bricks,  since  a
luantity  of  brick  rubbish  was  found  in  the  chambers.  The  adjoining
outh  line  of  wall,  the  most  massive  in  the  whole  circuit,  was,  before  Dr.
^orpfeld's  excavations,  supposed  to  have  been  built  in  two  sections  or
rreat  steps.  It  was  assumed  that  on  a  substructure  36  feet  thick  a
etreatirig  superstructure  14  ft.  7  in.  thick  was  built,  so  that  a  free  space
^r  platform  21  ft.  5  in.  in  width  would  thus  be  left  along  the  top  of  the
ower  wall  in  front  of  the  upper  wall.  In  the  upper  structure  the  long
■orridor  or  gallery  with  the  five  doorways  leading  from  it  had  long  been
^nown ;  but  opinions  were  much  divided  as  to  its  object,  until  an  ex-
planation offered  by  Captain  Steffen  gained  universal  acceptance.  He
^ggested  that  in  a  siege  soldiers  mustered  in  the  gallery  and  rushed
'Ut  through  the  doorways  upon  the  outer  platform  to  defend  the  walls,
^ut  the  excavations  of  1885  refuted  this  theory.  It  turns  out  that  the
apposed  platform  on  the  outer  wall  never  existed.  In  its  place  there
ere  found  five  chambers,  which,  as  is  clear  from  the  remains  in  some
laces,  were  roofed  with  a  vaulted  ceiling  formed  by  the  gradual  con-
^rgence  of  the  courses  of  stones  in  the  side-walls.  Over  these  chambers
^e  wall  must  have  been  carried  up  to  the  same  height  as  it  had  on  the
iner  side,  above  the  gallery  and  the  staircase.

The  disposition  of  the  galleries  and  chambers  will  be  understood  by
^ni paring  the  ground -plan  of  the  citadel  with  the  annexed  trans-
-rse  section  (Fig.  36).  From  the  court  F  in  the  interior  of  the
tadel  a  passage,  which  has  not  been  preserved,  gave  access  to  the
^rridor  and  staircase  D  {c  on  the  transverse  section),  which  led  with  a
ngle  bend  into  the  long  corridor  C  {b  on  the  section),  which  is  24  ft.
in.  lower.  This  corridor  or  gallery  is  from  5  feet  to  5  ft.  7  in.  wide ;
3  western  end  is  completely  closed,  but  its  eastern  end  is  lit  by  a
indow  {d)^  which,  starting  with  the  same  width  as  the  corridor,  narrows
Awards  the  outside  till  it  ends  as  a  mere  loophole  4  inches  wide.     The


BK.  II.  C30BINTH


ceiling  of  the  corridor  is  fonned  by  the  convergence  of  the  side-walls,
so  that  it  has  the  shape  of  a  pointed  vault.  From  the  corridor  Gvf
separate  doorways,  of  which  the  stone  sills  are  preserved,  lead  into  Gn


separate  chambers.  The  two  chambers  on  the  west  are  somewhat
larger  than  the  three  on  the  east,  being  1 7  fL  4  in.  deep  as  agaiost
14  ft.  z  in.  These  chambers,  like  the  corridor,  were  roofed  by  the  con-
vergence of  the  side-walls,  and  they  may  each  have  been  lighted  by  a
similar  window.  They  were  doubtless  magaiines.  A  similar  series  of
chambers  opening  off  a  corridor  exists  in  the  walls  of  the  citadel  of
Carthage  and  in  the  walls  of  other  Phoenician  colonies  in  north  Africa.
At  Tiryns  itself  a  second  series  of  chambers  (six  in  mmiber)  opening  otT
a  corridor  is  found  in  the  southern  end  of  the  eastern  wall  of  the  citadel.
The  staircase  which  gave  access  to  it  has  been  completely  destroyed,  but
it  must  have  ascended  from  the  point  marked  S  on  the  plan  of  the
citadel.

In  the  ruins  of  the  southern  wall  there  is  nothing  left  to  show  how
its  broad  upper  surface  was  utilised.  But  remains  of  the  summit  of  the
eastern  wall,  towards  its  southern  CKtremity,  are  fortunately  presened ;
and  here,  on  the  inner  edge  of  the  wall,  four  bases  of  columns  still  exist
in  their  original  places,  proving  that  a  colonnade  was  here  built  on  the
top  of  the  wall  so  as  to  open  inwards  on  the  citadel.  Whether  it
occupied  the  whole  breadth  of  the  wall  or  not,  we  cannot  say.

The  chief  entrance  to  the  citadel  lies  nearly  in  the  middle  of  the
s  of  a  passage,  8  feet  wide,  through  the  citadel


CH.  XXV  TIRYNS  221

wall.  Curiously  enough  the  passage  would  seem  to  have  been  left  quite
open  ;  at  least  no  traces  of  a  threshold  or  of  doorposts  have  here  come
to  light.  Outside  of  the  citadel  an  ascending  road  or  ramp  (A),  built  of
large  blocks,  leads  up  at  an  easy  gradient  to  the  entrance.  The  ramp,
which  is  19  ft  4  in.  wide,  begins  at  the  north  and  ascends  southward,
skirting  the  foot  of  the  citadel  wall.

The  excavations  of  1885  laid  bare  a  second  smaller  ascent  on  the
west  side  of  the  citadel.  A  great  semicircular  structure  or  bastion  is
here  built  out  from  the  line  of  the  wall,  and  a  long  narrow  staircase
leads  up  through  it  to  the  citadel.  The  entrance  from  the  outside  is
through  a  gateway  6  ft.  6  in.  wide  (T),  which  as  usual  has  the  shape  of
a  pointed  arch.  On  passing  through  this  gateway  we  find  that  the  floor
is  at  first  paved  with  large  stones  and  rises  very  gradually.  At  a  dis-
tance of  18  feet  from  the  entrance  the  steps  begin.  The  two  lowest
steps  are  cut  in  the  rock ;  the  rest  consist  of  limestone  slabs.  After
the  sixty-fifth  step  the  staircase  is  completely  destroyed ;  but  farther  on
a  part  of  the  substructure,  about  2 1  feet  long,  has  been  preserved.
Probably  the  staircase  opened  out  at  V  into  the  court  Y  at  the  back  of
the  palace.  From  this  court  a  small  staircase  (X)  led  up  to  the  interior
of  the  palace  itself.

Besides  these  two  entrances,  the  one  on  the  east,  the  other  on  the
west,  there  were  two  posterns  in  the  wall  of  the  citadel :  one  was  on  the
western  side  of  the  middle  citadel ;  the  other  was  at  the  northern
extremity  of  the  lower  citadel.

II.  TAe  Palace. — In  the  upper  citadel  the  excavations  of  Dr.  Schlie-
mann  in  1884  laid  bare  almost  the  entire  ground-plan  of  a  large  palace,
with  its  gateways,  courts,  halls,  and  chambers.  Most  of  the  walls  are
still  standing  to  a  height  of  1 8  inches  to  3  feet ;  many  bases  of  pillars
are  still  in  their  places ;  and  the  huge  stone  door-sills  still  lie  in  the
doorways.  In  describing  the  palace  we  shall  begin  at  the  entrance  and
go  through  it  systematically.  The  reader  will  follow  our  route  on  the
plan.

On  passing  through  the  main  entrance  to  the  citadel,  on  its  eastern
side,  we  turn  to  the  left,  ue,  in  this  case  southward,  and  find  ourselves
in  an  approach  or  passage  shut  in  by  high  walls.  At  a  distance  of  49
feet  hoTCi  the  entrance  we  reach  the  remains  of  a  great  gate  (8),
which  in  material,  size,  and  construction  closely  resembles  the  Lions'
Gate  at  Mycenae.  It  is  built  of  huge  slabs  of  breccia.  The  great
threshold  (4  ft.  9  in.  broad)  lies  intact  ;  the  door-post  on  the  right
(10  ft.  6  in.  high)  is  still  preserved ;  but  the  door-post  on  the  left  is
broken  off  in  its  upper  part,  and  the  lintel  and  all  the  structure  above  it
have  disappeared.  The  entrance  on  the  outside  is  8  ft.  4  in.  wide,  but
on  the  inside  10  ft.  4}  in.,  since  each  door-post  is  rebated  at  a  right
angle.  In  the  recess  thus  formed  folding  doors  were  fixed  ;  they
opened  inwards,  and  when  closed  rested  against  the  projecting  parts  of
the  door-posts.  They  were  barred  by  a  great  wooden  bolt ;  the  holes
meant  to  receive  it  are  still  to  be  seen  about  half-way  up  each  door-post :
on  the  side  of  the  palace  the  hole  is  only  about  i  ft.  4  in.  deep,  but  on
the  opposite  side  the  hole  passes  right  through  the  door-post  into  the


222  TIRYNS  BK.  II.  CORINTH

outer  wall  of  the  citadel ;  so  that  when  the  gate  was  open  the  bolt  could
be  shot  right  back  into  the  wall.

Beyond  the  gateway  the  approach  or  passage  continues  in  the  same
direction  as  before  for  about  33  yards,  when  it  leads  into  an  open  place
or  fore-court  bounded  on  the  east  (left)  by  the  citadel  wall  with  the
colonnade.     On  the  west  side  of  this  fore-court  there  is  a  great  portal
or  propylaeum  (H).     The  ground-plan  of  this  portal  is  substantially  the
same  as  that  of  the  Propylaea  or  grand  portal  of  the  Acropolis  at
Athens  and  of  the  sanctuary  at  Eleusis  (vol.  2.  pp.  249  sq.^  505  sq.)
This  portal  may,  indeed,  be  called  the  archetype  of  all  Greek  orna-
mental gateways  or  portals  (propylaea).     It  comprises  an  outer  and  an
inner  vestibulf ,  while  the  doorway  proper  is  in  the  wall  which  divides  the
two  vestibules.     The  breadth  of  the  portal  is  45  ft.  9  in.     The  fe^adc
of  each  vestibule  was  supported  by  two  columns  between  antae.    The
ground-plan  of  the  portal  is  quite  certain  :  the  walls  are  standing  to  a
height  of  18  inches,  and  the  four  bases  of  the  columns,  as  well  as  the
great  stone /threshold,  are  all  in  their  places  ;  moreover,  in  the  vestibules
pieces  of  ^  concrete  pavement  composed  of  lime  and  pebbles  are  still
to  be  seei|l     The  inner  vestibule  is  somewhat  deeper  than  the  outer.
A  door  vi  its  northern  side-wall  opens  into  a  passage  which  leads  to
the  woinen's  apartments.    A  doorway  on  the  right  of  this  passage,  dose
to  the  pbrtal,  gives  access  to  some  inferior  chambers.

Passing  through  the  great  portal  (H),  we  find  ourselves  in  the  large
court  F,  which  is  bounded  on  the  east  and  south  by  the  citadel  walls
with  their  two  little  colonnades  (E  and  I).  The  west  side  of  the  court
is  completely  destroyed  ;  the  wall  of  the  citadel  seems  to  have  given  way
here.  The  interior  disposition  of  the  court  has  been  almost  wholly
effaced  by  the  construction  of  a  Byzantine  church.  On  the  north  side
of  the  court,  close  to  the  portal  (H),  a  small  side-door  leads  by  the
shortest  way  into  the  colonnade  of  the  men's  court  Westward,  on  the
left,  are  two  chambers,  which  must  have  been  entered  from  the  large
court  (F),  since  there  are  no  doors  on  their  other  sides  ;  but  their  front
walls  have  quite  disappeared.  These  may  have  been  guard-rooms.
Next  to  these  rooms,  on  the  west,  comes  the  smaller  portal  or  propylaeum
K,  which,  though  in  ruins,  shows  the  same  ground-plan  as  the  great
portal  (H),  but  on  a  smaller  scale.    It  seems  to  have  been  36  feet  wide.

This  second  portal  forms  the  entrance  into  the  court  of  the  men's
apartments  (L).     In  this  court  we  stand  in  front  of  the  chief  rooms  of  the
palace.    The  court  itself  is  a  quadrangle,  5 1  ft.  7  in.  long  by  66  ft.  4  in.
broad  ;  it  is  paved  with  a  very  solid  floor  of  concrete,  composed  of  lime
and  pebbles.     Colonnades  surround  the  court  on  all  sides  ;  on  its  north
side  is  the  portico  or  vestibule  leading  into  the  men*s  apartments.     In
the  middle  of  the  south  side  of  the  court  is  a  quadrangular  block  of
masonry,  built  of  flat-shaped  quarry-stones  and  clay ;  it  is  1 1  ft.  6  in.
long  by  9  ft.  \\  in.  wide.     At  first  it  was  supposed  to  be  an  altar ;  but
later  excavations  laid  bare  a  circular  opening  in  the  middle  of  it     This
circular  opening  is  the  mouth  of  a  sort  of  well-like  shaft  or  funnel,  3
feet  deep,  lined  with  masonry,  which  leads  down  into  a  hole   in   the
ground.     The  whole  structure  would  seem  to  have  been  a  sacrificial


:h.  XXV  TIRYNS  223

pit.      In  Homer  {Od,  xxii.  334  sqq,)  mention  is  made  of  an  altar  of

Zeus  in   the   courtyard  of  the  palace   of  Ulysses.     In  the  sanctuary

of  Aesculapius  at  Athens  there  is  a  somewhat  similar  structure,  which

Prof.  U.  Kohler  proposed  to  explain  as  a  sacrificial  pit  (vol.  2.  p.  236).

A  sacrificial  pit,  of  semicircular  shape,  has  been  found  in  the  temple  of

the  Cabiri  in  Samothrace  (O.  Rubensohn,  Die  MysterienheiligtUmer  in

EUusis  und  Samothrake  (Berlin,  1892),  p.  184).     Further,  there  are  two

sacrificial  pits,  lined  with  stones,  in  the  sanctuary  of  the  Cabiri  near

Thebes  (see  note  on  ix.  25.  5).

On  the  north  side  of  the  court,  and  exactly  in  its  axis,  are  the  men's
apartments,  consisting  of  the  great  hall  with  its  ante -chamber  and
vestibule.  Two  stone  steps,  the  lower  st^p  of  sandstone,  the  upper  step
of  red  limestone,  lead  up  into  the  portico  or  Vestibule.  The  fa9ade  of
the  vestibule  was  supported  by  two  columns  between  two  aniae;  the
bases  of  these  columns  and  antae  are  still  well  preserved.  The  floor  of
the  vestibule  was  covered  with  a  concrete  of  lime,  most  of  which  is  pre-
served In  the  north-west  comer  we  can  see  that  the  floor  was  divided
into  squares  and  narrow  rectangles  by  incised  lines.  The  side-walls  of
the  vestibule,  immediately  behind  the  antae^  become  i  ft.  3|  in.  thinner,
which  points  to  their  having  been  cased  with  some  material.  Dr.
Dorpfeld  conjectures  that  they  may  have  been  wainscotted  with  wood,
and  the  wooden  wainscotting  may  itself  have  been  covered  with  bronze
or  other  metal.  On  one  of  these  side-walls  the  remains  of  a  fine  frieze
of  alabaster  are  still  to  be  seen  (see  below  p.  227).

From  the  vestibule  three  doors  lead  into  the  ante  -  chamber ;  the
three  great  door-sills,  made  of  blocks  of  breccia,  are  still  in  their  places.
In  each  door-sill  there  are  two  pivot-holes  so  placed  as  to  show  that
each  door  consisted  of  two  folding  wings  which  opened  inwards.  The
^  door-posts  seem  to  have  been  of  wood.  The  ante-chamber  itself,
which  we  enter  through  the  three  folding  doors,  is  of  about  the  same  size
as  the  vestibule.  On  the  floor  are  the  remains  of  a  concrete  pavement
made  of  lime  and  pebbles ;  no  incised  lines  are  visible  on  it  In  the  west
vail  of  the  ante-chamber  is  a  door  leading  to  the  bathroom  and  other
;  apartments  ;  in  the  doorway  the  great  sill  made  of  breccia  is  still  pre-
served ;  it  has  only  one  pivot-hole,  showing  that  the  door  was  single.  The
door-posts  were  of  wood ;  some  charcoal  and  the  condition  of  the
adjoining  wall  prove  that  they  were  burnt

In  the  north  wall  of  the  ante-chamber  a  large  doorway,  about  6  ft
7  in.  wide,  leads  into  the  great  hall  {megaron)  of  the  men.     The  great
door-sill,  made  of  breccia,  is  still  in  its  place ;  as  it  has  no  pivot-hole,
we  must  suppose   that   the  doorway  was   closed   only  by  a  curtain.
The  great  hall  {megaron\  which  we  now  enter,  is  an  apartment  11.81
metres  (38  ft.  9  in.)  long  from  north  to  south,  by  about  9.80  metres
(42  ft  6  in.)  wide.     The  floor  was  covered  with  excellent  concrete,  the
polished  surfistce  of  which  was  decorated  with  a  pattern  of  incised  lines
crossing  each  other  at  right  angles  and  so  forming  squares  and  rect-
angular strips.     Traces  of  colour  on  the  concrete  show  that  the  squares
were  painted  red  and  the  strips  blue,  so  that  the  floor  presented  a  gaily
coloured  carpet-like  pattern.     So  large  a  room  could  hardly  have  been


224  TfRYNS  BK.  II.  CORINTH

spanned  by  a  free  roof;  hence  four  inner  pillars  were  set  towards  the
middle  of  it,  on  which  lay  strong  supports  to  carry  the  roof  beams.     Of
these  pillars  the  round  stone  bases  still  remain  in  the^ir  places.     On  their
upper  surface  is  an  inner  circle,  within  which  the  stone  is  well  preserved,
while  the  surrounding  edge  has  been  eaten  by  fire  and  partly  chipped
away.    This  proves  that  the  pillars  were  of  wood  and  smaller  in  diameter
than  the  bases.     Dr.  D5rpfeld  conjectures  that  the  part  of  the  roof
which  covered  the  square    included    by  these   four  pillars  was  raised
above  the  level  of  the  rest  of  the  roof  in  the  form  of  a  clere-story,  and
that  windows  in  the  vertical  walls  of  the  clere-story  served  the  double
purpose  of  lighting  the  hall  and  allowing  the  smoke  from  the  hearth  to
escape.     For  the  hearth  was  in  the  centre  of  the  hall,  within  the  square
inclosed  by  the  four  pillars.     Its  position  is  marked  on  the  floor  by  a
circle  about  lo  ft.  9  in.  in  diameter,  within  which  there  is  no  concrete.
It  is  surrounded  by  an  upright  rim  of  plaster,  which  makes  it  likely
that  the  core  of  the  circle,  raised  above  the  level  of  the  floor,  was
made  of  clay,  or  of  clay  bricks  covered  with  mortar.     We  have  seen
(p.  120)  that  the  hearth  occupied  a  similar  position  in  the  palace  d
Mycenae.     This  arrangement  of  the  hearth  surrounded  by  the  pillars
illustrates  well  a  passage  of  the  Odyssey  (vi.  304  sqq,\  where  Ulysses
is  told  by  the  princess   Nausicaa  that  he  will  find  the  queen-mother
sitting  with  her  back  to  a  pillar  beside  the  hearth,  spinning  purple  wool
by  the  light  of  the  fire.     The  outer  walls  which  surround  the  hall  are  all
preserved  to  a  height  of  15I  inches,  except  at  the  north-west  comer:
they  are  built  of  limestone  with  clay  mortar.     The  wall,  so  far  as  it  now
exists,  consists  of  a  single  course  of  stones.     (The  higher  masonry  on
the  east  wall  belongs  to  a  later  alteration.)     Above  this  lowest  course     j
wooden  beams  seem  to  have  been  laid  longitudinally  on  both  faces  of
the  wall.     Above  these  beams  the  walls  were  probably  built  of  clay
bricks,  for  the  hall,  when  excavated,  was  nearly  filled  with  half-burnt
debris  of  bricks.     The  walls  were  coated  first  with  clay  and  over  that
with  good  lime  plaster ;  remains  of  both  are  found  on  the  west  wall,
showing  clear  traces  of  fire.

In  later  times  a  building  was  erected  on  the  site  of  the  men's  apart-
ments. Its  foundations  show  a  rectangle  extending  from  the  north-west
central  pillar  of  the  hall  to  its  east  wall  in  one  direction,  and  to  the
entrance  of  the  vestibule  in  the  other  direction.  Probably  this  building
was  the  temple  of  which  some  architectural  fragments  (including  an  old
Doric  capital  of  sandstone)  have  been  found.

If  we  now  return  to  the  ante-chamber  and  pass  through  the  door  in
its  west  wall,  we  find  ourselves  in  a  passage,  which  soon  leads  to  the
bathroom,  one  of  the  most  interesting  parts  of  the  palace.  The  floor  is
formed  by  a  gigantic  block  of  limestone,  13  ft.  i  in.  long,  over  10  ft.
broad,  and  about  2  ft.  3J  in.  thick.  Its  weight  must  therefore  be
about  20  tons.  The  projecting  rough  edges  of  this  huge  block  ran
under  the  masonry  of  the  walls.  Its  exposed  surface  is  worked  so  as
to  form  a  border  about  4|  inches  to  5  J  inches  broad,  skirting  the  walls,
and  raised  about  \  inch  above  the  polished  rectangle  in  the  centre.  At
regular  intervals  along  this  border  are  found  two  holes  close  together ;


CH.  XXV  TIRYNS  225

these  holes  probably  served  to  fasten  wooden  panels  of  wainscot,  which
lined  the  walls ;  the  panels,  we  may  suppose,  were  fastened  by  dowels
let  into  the  holes.     The  door  of  the  bathroom  was  in  the  south  wall ;
it  is  not  preserved,  for  the  whole  of  that  wall  has  been  destroyed.     But
the  existence  of  the  door  may  be  inferred  from  the  absence  of  dowel-
boles  (and  consequently  of  wainscot)  along  a  part  of  this  wall.     The
central  part  of  the  great  block  which  forms  the  floor  is  well  polished,
and  slopes  gently  so  as  to  let  the  water  run  off,  at  the  north-east  comer,
into  a  gutter,  which  is  here  cut  in  the  stone  floor ;    where  the  great
stone  floor  ends  the  gutter  is  continued  by  a  stone  pipe  through  the
eastern  wall  of  the  bathroom.     Tubs  filled  with  water  must  have  been
placed  on  the  floor  of  the  bathroom  for  the  use  of  bathers.     A  fragment
of  such  a  tub  was  actually  found.      It  is  made  of  thick  terra-cotta,  and
in  shape  resembles  our  own  bathing- tubs ;  it  had  a  thick  upper  rim
and  strong  handles  on  the  sides,  and  was  painted  with  spiral  ornaments
on  the  inside.     Such  were  perhaps  the  "well -polished  bathing-tubs"
mentioned  by  Homer  (//.  x.   576;  Od.  iv.  48,  xvii.  87).     Fragments
of  somewhat  similar  bathing-tubs  have  been  found  in  the  sanctuary  of
Cranaean  Athena  near  Elatea  (see  note  on  x.  34.  8).     In  the  north
wall  of  the  bathroom  there  are  two  roimd  receptacles,  coated  on  the
inside  with  smooth  plaster.     How  high  these  receptacles  reached,  we
cannot  say,  since  the  upper  part  of  the  wall  is  gone.     Perhaps  the
receptacles  held  oil,  with  which  the  Greeks  anointed  themselves  after
bathing  (see  the  passages  of  Homer  referred  to  above).     Possibly  the
oil  was  held,  not  in  the  holes  themselves,  but  in  large  earthen  jars
which  were  fitted  into  the  holes.

A  passage  which  skirts  the  bathroom  on  the  west  and  north  leads
in  many  turns  round  the  north  end  of  the  meif  s  hall  to  the  apartments
of  the  women,  which  lie  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  men's  apartments.
The  arrangement  of  the  women's  apartments  is  so  similar  to  that  of
the  men's  that  a  detailed  description  of  them  is  needless.     There  is  a
great  court,  partly  surrounded  by  colonnades,  within  which  are  traces  of
benches  fixed  against  the  walls.     On  the  north  side  of  the  court  is  the
chief  room  or  large  hall  (O),  approached  through  a  vestibule.     As  the
dimensions  of  these  two  rooms  (18  feet  is  the  breadth)  are  smaller  than
those  of  the   corresponding   apartments  of  the    men,   they   have   no
colnmns  either  in  the  vestibule  between  the  aniae  or  in  the  hall  round
the  hearth.     This  hearth  in  the  women's  hall  is  square.     The  floor  of
I    the  hall  is  of  lime  concrete  ;  in  places  it  shows  a  decoration  effected  by
incised  lines  and  red  colour.     On  the  walls  there  are  traces  of  paintings,
all  the  more  interesting  because  in  the  other  rooms  the  fragments  of
painted  plaster  no  longer  adhere  to  the  walls,  but  were  found  lying  on
the  floor.

Round  the  women's  hall  runs  a  passage  or  corridor,  which  leads  to
some  apartments  lying  on  the  east  side  of  the  hall.  Of  these  the  chief
is  a  large  chamber  with  an  ante-room  ;  it  may  have  been  the  bedroom
of  the  king  and  queen.  South  of  it  are  two  long  narrow  rooms  side
by  side.  It  is  supposed  that  the  stairs  leading  to  the  upper  floor  of  the
palace  were  contained   in  these  two  rooms.      The   stairs  may  have

VOL.  Ill  Q


226  TIRYNS  BK.  II.  CORINTH

ascended  in  two  flights,  first  from  east  to  west  in  the  southern  of  the
two  rooms,  and  then  from  west  to  east  in  the  northern  room.

\  In  the  north-eastern  comer  of  the  palace  are  some  rooms  of  various
sizes,  which  may  have  served  as  treasuries,  armouries,  etc.     South-east
of  the  women's  court  is  another  court ;   and  south  of  this  again  a
labyrinth  of  walls  exists,  of  which  the  ground-plan  cannot  be  restored
with  certainty.     Amongst  them  are  to  be  noted  traces  of  other  very
ancient  walls,  which,   in  opposition  to  the  whole  of  the  rest  of  the
palace,  have  the  same  orientation  as  the  great  portal  (H).     From  this
it  would  appear  that  the  great  portal  was  built  on  lines  taken  over  from
an  earlier  stage  in  the  building  of  the  citadel.     Traces  of  an  eariier  age
have  also  been  found    in  other   places,   especially  in  the  south-west
comer  of  the  middle  citadel,  where  about  lo  feet  below  the  later  floor,
and  even  under  parts  of  the  circuit-wall,  a  floor  of  clay  concrete  was
discovered,   together  with  walls  built  of  rubble  and  bits  of  a  rough
monochrome  pottery.     This  proves  that  the  palace  which  we  have  been
examining  was  preceded  by  an  older  building  on  the  same  site,  and
that  the  massive  circuit-wall  itself  formed  no  part  of  the  earlier  palace.

So  much  for  the  plan  and  disposition  of  the  palace.     With  regard
to  its  materials  and  mode  of  construction,  the  stones  employed  are
limestone,  breccia,  and  sandstone.      Of  these  stones  breccia  (a  con-
glomerate of  pebbles)  is  used  for  some  door-sills  and  a/i/o^-blocks ;  and
the  huge  door-posts  of  the  gate  of  the  upper  citadel  are  also  of  breccia.
Sandstone  is  used  only  for  some  a/i/o^-blocks  and  the  lower  step  of  the
men's  hall.     Limestone  is  the  stone  most  commonly  used  as  building
material  in  the  palace.     It  is  employed  both  in  the  rough  shape  as  it
came  from  the  quarry,  and  in  the  form  of  ashlars  or  hewn  blocks.    The
ashlars  are  employed  for  thresholds,  a/i/o^-blocks,  pillar-bases,  steps,
and  for  the  floor  of  the  bathroom.     On  the  other  hand  the  inner  wails
of  the  palace  are  built  of  small  rough   blocks  (rubble)  of  limestone
cemented  with  clay  mortar ;  the  interstices  between  the  blocks,  which
are  very  rough,  are  partly  filled  with  pebbles.     This  style  of  masonry
is  still  common  in  Greece  and  other  countries.     But  as  walls  built  of
rubble  and  clay,  if  exposed  to  the  weather,  would  soon  crumble  away
through  the  action  of  the  rain,  which  would  wash  the  clay  mortar  out
of  them,   it   is  necessary  to  coat  them  on  the  outside  with  plaster.
Hence  the  walls  of  the  palace  were  coated,  first  with  a  layer  of  clay,
and   over   that   with  a  plaster  of  lime,  which   was  smoothed  on  the
surface  and  painted.     While  the  lower  part  of  almost  all  the  hous^
walls  was  constructed  in  this  manner,  the  upper  part  of  many,  if  noif
most,  of  the  walls  was  built  of  clay  bricks.     This  appears  from  the  fact
that  at  the  time  of  their  excavation  almost  all  the  rooms  of  the  palace
were  found  filled  with  half-burnt  bricks  and  red-brick  cUbris,     In  two
places  only  (namely,  in  the  women's  hall  and  in  the  court  to  the  south-east
of  the  women's  apartments)  does  the  brick-work  start  from  the  ground ;
here,  therefore,  it  is  in  good  preservation.     Elsewhere  it  has  mostly
disappeared,  since  the  walls  are  now  only  standing  to  a  height  of  about
3  feet  at  most  above  the  ground,  and  it  was  just  at  this  height  that  the
brick-work  began.      The  bricks  used  in  the  palace  were  unbumt  or


CH.  XXV  TJRYNS  227

sun-dried,  not  burnt  {i.e.  baked  in  a  kiln).     At  first  sight  it  would  seem

that  the  two  brick  walls  mentioned  above  were  built  of  baked,  not  of

sun-dried,  bricks,  for  the  bricks  are  now,  as  they  stand,  thoroughly

fired  or  burnt     But  that  this  burning  of  the  bricks  took  place  after

the  \^'alls  were  built  is  proved  by  two  facts :  first,  the  mortar  between

the  bricks  is  baked  as  well  as  the  bricks  themselves ;  and,  second,  the

bricks  in  the  woman's  hall  which  were  in  contact  with  a  large  wooden

door-post  are  not  only  fired  but  vitrified.     These  facts  show  that  the

baking  of  the  bricks  was  merely  a  result  of  the  conflagration  in  which

the  palace  perished.

We  have  already  seen  that  in  the  vestibule  of  the  men's  hall  there
was  found  an  alabaster  frieze.  As  this  frieze  seems  to  throw  some
light  on  a  disputed  passage  of  Homer,  a  brief  notice  of  it  may  not  be
out  of  place  here.  The  frieze  was  found  occupying  with  its  seven
slabs  the  whole  foot  of  the  west  wall  of  the  vestibule.  But  various
indications  show  that  this  could  not  have  been  its  original  position.
The  frieze  is  composed  of  broad  and  narrow  slabs  alternately,  and  the
nam)w  slab  projects  beyond  the  broad  one,  just  as  in  the  frieze  of  ^
Doric  temple  the  triglyph  slab  projects  beyond  the  metope.  Now  if  th^
fiicze  was  made  for  the  place  where  it  was  found,  the  concrete  floor
should  have  been  cut  out  so  as  to  fit  into  the  broken  line  of  the  frieze.
This,  however,  is  not  the  case.  The  concrete  floor  is  cut  off  in  a
straight  line  in  front  of  the  frieze,  and  its  edge  skirts  the  projecting
slabs,  leaving  in  front  of  the  receding  ones  a  gap  which  is  filled  only
with  sand.  Hence  probably,  as  Dr.  Dorpfeld  originally  held  (he
changed  his  view  afterwards),  the  frieze  was  at  first  placed  elsewhere,
and  was  transferred  to  the  west  wall  of  the  vestibule  at  some  later  time.
The  slabs  of  the  frieze  are  much  damaged,  but  enough  remains  to  allow
OS  to  restore  the  pattern  of  the  sculptured  ornament  with  tolerable
certainty.  It  consisted  essentially  of  an  elliptical  palmetto  divided  into
tvo  halves  by  a  vertical  band.  The  palmetto  ornament  is  placed  on
the  broad  receding  slabs ;  the  vertical  band  on  the  narrow  projecting
slabs.  Each  vertical  band  is  adorned  with  two  rows  of  rosettes,  and
nxind  the  palmettes  is  a  band  of  spirals  resembling  plaited  work.  The
Qiiddle  of  the  rosettes  and  of  the  spirals,  and  the  dentils  which  form  the
^es  of  both,  are  inlaid  with  a  blue  glass-paste.  The  chemical  composi-
tion of  the  two  materials  of  the  frieze  is  thus  stated  by  Prof.  Virchow :
''The  stone  consists  of  sulphate  of  lime  (gypsum),  but  in  a  form  which
Aches  here  and  there  the  transparent  blue  of  alabaster.  The  glass-
Me  consists  of  a  calcium-glass,  which  is  coloured  with  copper ;  it
contains  no  admixture  of  cobalt."  Probably  this  blue  glass-paste  is  the
^Jtowwj  of  Homer,  as  to  the  meaning  of  which  opinions  were  formerly
mnch  divided.  In  the  palace  of  Alcinous  the  poet  describes  a  frieze
^kuanos  as  running  round  the  walls  of  the  rooms  (fid,  vii.  87) ;  and
this  frieze  of  kuanos  may  have  resembled  in  material,  if  not  in  pattern,
the  fneie  found  in  the  vestibule  at  Tiryns.  See  Helbig,  Das  homerische
Epos  aus  den  Denkmdlem  erldutert^  p.  1 00  sqq.

The  wall-paintings,  fragments  of  which  have  been  found  in  several
of  the  rooms  of  the  palace,  especially  in  the  hall  of  the  men,  were  true


228  TIRYNS  BK.  II.  CORINTH

frescoes,  that  is,  they  were  painted  on  the  plaster  of  the  walls  while  the
plaster  was  still  wet.     Dr.  Dorpfeld  recognised  this  by  noticing  that  in
some  places  the  brush  has  entered  into  the  lime,  leaving  the  painted
surface  rough,  while  the  surrounding  part  is  smooth.     Only  five  colours
are  used — white,  black,  blue,  red,  and  yellow ;   green  and  all  mixed
colours  are  absent.      The  patterns  painted  on  the  plaster  are  often
purely  decorative,  consisting  of  rosettes,  spirals,  dentils,  net-work,  etc.,
variously  arranged  and  combined.     On  the  largest  fragment  of  wall-
plaster  which  has  been  preserved  a  mighty  bull  is  painted  galloping  at
full  speed  to  the  left.     His  head,  with  its  long  curved  horns,  is  lifted
up.     Above  the  back  of  the  bull  is  seen  a  man  in  a  peculiar  position.
He  seems  at  first  sight  to  be  stretched  out  on  the  animal's  back,  which
he  just  touches  with  his  right  knee  and  the  tip  of  his  toe,  while  he
throws  the  other  leg  high  in  air,  and  holds  on  to  the  bulPs  horns  with
his  right  hand ;  his  left  hand  is  under  his  breast.     He  seems  to  be
naked  except  for  a  loin-cloth  and  several  bands  round  his  knees  and  his
ankles.     As  to  the  colours,  the  man  and  the  bull  are  painted  white  or
whitish -yellow ;   but  there  are  red   spots  on  the  animal,  and  various
parts  of  its  body  (breast,  belly,  back,  etc.)  are  brought  out  in  red.    The
background  is  blue.     With  regard  to  the  meaning  of  the  picture,  it  was
at  first  supposed  that  the  man  was  an  acrobat  such  as  Homer  describes
(//.  XV.  679  sqq.)  leaping  from  back  to  back  of  four  horses.     Afterwards
Dr.    Marx   suggested   that   bull  and  man  may  represent   river -gods,
because  on  coins  of  Catana  in  Sicily  a  man-headed  bull  is  figured  with
a  tailed  man  or  satyr  above  its  back  in  much  the  same  attitude  as  the
man  in  the  Tirynthian  wall-painting.     See  Fr.  Marx,   *Der  Stier  von
Xvcyn^^  Jahrbuch  d,  arch,  InstiiutSy  4  (1889),  pp.  11 9- 129.     However,
since  the  discovery  of  the  two  gold  cups  of  VaphiOy  on  which  men  dad
very  similarly  are  represented  catching  and  herding  bulls  (see  above,
p.    135  sq.\  archaeologists  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  wall-
painting  in  question  represents  nothing  more  than  a  man  tr>'ing  to  catch
a  bull.

III.  Separate  objects  found.     Apart  from  the  great  discovery  of  the
palace,  the  excavations  at  Tijyns  did  not  bring  to  light  many  individual
objects  of  interest  and  value ;  certainly  nothing  has  yet  been  found  ^S-
Tiryns  to  vie  with  the  treasures  found  in  the  royal  graves  at  Mycenae-
The  objects  found  consist  chiefly  of  pottery  and  terra-cottas.      Her^
we  have  to  distinguish  the  objects  belonging  to  the  oldest  settlement
from   those   belonging    to   the    later    palace.       It    has   already  beef*
mentioned  that  excavations  in  various  parts  of  the  citadel,  especially  in
the  south-west  comer  of  the  middle  citadel,  revealed  the  existence  of  an^
older  and  much  ruder  settlement  under  the  great  palace.     The  pottery
found  in  this  oldest  settlement  is  (with  the  exception  of  the  cups)  quite
different   in   form,  workmanship,  and  decoration  from   that  which  was
used  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  palace,  and  has  its  closest  analogies  in
the  pottery  of  Troy,  especially  that  of  the  first  and  second  settlement.
For  example,  a  small,  round,  somewhat  flattened  vessel,  made  with  the
hand  and  covered  with  reddish-yellow  clay,  has  on  each  side  of  the  body
a  projection  pierced  with  two  vertical  holes,  through  which  a  string  was


CH.  XXV  TIRYNS  229


passed   to  serve  as  a  handle.     Vases  with  similar  vertically  pierced

projections  were  the  commonest  of  all  in  the  first  town  at  Troy,  but

elsewhere  they  are  rare  and  have  been  found  only  in  the  most  ancient

settlements.      Another  vessel   belonging   to   the   oldest    settlement  at

Tiryns  is  a  terra-cotta  cup  without  a  foot ;  round  its  upper  edge  is  laid

a  stripe  adorned  with  rough  round  impressions,  which  were  obviously

made  with  the  tip  of  the  finger.     This  mode  of  decoration  also  occurs

on  the  Trojan  pottery.     Some  rude  female  idols  or  figurines,  made  of

terra-cotta,  were  found  in  the  oldest  Tirynthian  settlement.     No  object

of  metal  was  discovered  which  could  with  certainty  be  attributed  to

this  most  ancient  settlement ;  but  on  the  other  hand  stone  implements

came  to  light  which  certainly  belonged  to  it.     Amongst  them  are  many

knives  and  arrow-heads  of  obsidian,  also  obsidian  fiakes  and  nuclei,

proving  that  the  knives  and  arrow-heads  were  manufactured  on  the

spot ;  further,  about  a  dozen  rude  stone  hammers,  which  would  seem  to

have  been  grasped  in  the  hand,  not  fixed  in  a  handle ;  a  well-polished

axe  of  very  hard  red  stone,  in  shape  resembling  the  bronze  battle-axes  of

Troy ;  and  several  conical  spinning-whorls  made  of  blue  stone.    To  these

objects  may  be  added  a  perforated  bead  of  blue  glass  like  those  found

at  Spaia  and  Menidi ;  also  a  few  bodkins  and  an  embroidering  needle

made  of  bone.     Hundreds  of  such  needles  have  been  found  at  Troy.

On  the  other  hand,  the  objects  found  in  the  great  palace  at  Tiryns
belong  to   the    Mycenaean   type   of  civili?ation.       Of   the   vases   the
comnionest  type  is  the  so-called  stirojpaxase  {Bugelkanne\  which,  as
we  have  seen  (p.  112  sq.)y  is  the  most  characteristic  shape  of  Mycenaean
potter>\     Many  rude  terra-cotta.  figurines  were  found  in  the  palace.
Some  of  them  represent  a  woman  with  arms  raised  in  the  shape  of
a  sickle,  or  else  clasped  together  in  a  circle.     A  considerable  number
of  unbroken,  and  great  masses  of  broken,  cows  of  terra-cotta  were  also
found ;  they  are  of  small  size  and  painted  for  the  most  part  with  bright
red  or  brown  on  a  ground  of  light  yellow.     Similar  cows  of  terra-cotta
were  found  in  the  prehistoric  graves  at  Nauplia.     Dr.  Schliemann  held
that  "  the  countless  numbers  of  idols  in  form  of  terra-cotta  cows  found
ifl  Tiryns  and  Mycenae,  as  well  as  cows* -heads  of  gold,  women  with
cows'-hom-Iike,  crescent-shaped  projections  from  the  breast,  or  with  the
upper  part  of  the  body  shaped  like  the  disc  of  the  full  moon,  and  also
the  idols  in  Mycenae,  with  cows'-heads,  can  only  represent  Hera7  the
tutelary  divinity  of  Tiryns  and   Mycenae,  especially  as    Homer  con-
stantly  gives  this    goddess  the  epithet  /^oowrts,  which  originally  can      ^
have  had  no  other  meaning  than  'cow-faced'"  {TirynSy  p.  165).     The
objects  of  metal  found  in  the  palace  were  few  and  insignificant.     Of
gold  there  was  only  one  small  ornament  shaped  like  the  pedestals  which
are  carved  in  relief  over  the  Lions'  Gate  at  Mycenae ;  of  silver  there
Has  only  a  signet-ring  with  a  star  engraved  on  it.     Amongst  the  bronze
objects  may  be  mentioned  the  figure  of  a  warrior  fighting,  a  chisel,  a
two-headed  battle-axe,  a  bracelet,  a  brooch,  thirteen  very  common  rings,
and  an  arrow-head  of  very  primitive  shape  without  barbs.     Lead  was
found  in  many  places ;  it  was  used  by  the  Tirynthians  for  clamping
together  broken  vessels  of  earthenware.      No  trace  of  iron  was  dis-


230  TIRYNS  BK.  II.  CORIN

covered.  A  lance-head  of  iron  was  indeed  found  on  the  ramp  leadi;
up  to  the  main  entrance  of  the  citadel,  but  it  certainly  belongs  to
much  later  period.  Of  ivory  there  were  found  only  three  small  objec
On  the  other  hand,  countless  knives  and  arrow-heads  of  obsidian  car
to  light ;  they  appear  to  have  been  in  common  use  among  t
inhabitants  down  to  the  time  when  the  palace  was  destroyed.  The
arrow-heads  have  no  barbs  and  are  extremely  rude  and  primitive,  mui
more  so  than  those  found  at  Mycenae.

Besides  pottery  of  the  Mycenaean  age  there  have  been  found
Tiryns  many  fragments  of  the  later  pottery,  which  is  known  as  Dipylu
ware,  from  the  place  (the  Dipylum  at  Athens)  where  it  has  been  discoven
in  large  quantities.  This  Dipylum  pottery  appears  to  have  everywhe
succeeded  immediately  to  the  Mycenaean  pottery,  and  its  occurrence
Tiryns  is  a  proof  that  the  acropolis  continued  to  be  inhabited  after  tl
close  of  the  Mycenaean  era.  The  chief  difference  between  the  two  styh
of  pottery  is  in  their  modes  of  decoration  ;  for  whereas  the  Mycenaea
pottery  is  painted  with  figures  of  marine  plants  and  animals,  the  Dipylui
pottery  exhibits  patterns  composed  of  lines  such  as  might  be  suggestc
by  woven  fabrics ;  instead  of  the  spiral,  so  characteristic  of  Mycenaea
art,  we  have  the  maeander,  and  instead  of  the  wave  line  the  zigzaj
Seaweed  and  polyps  never  appear  on  Dipylum  vases,  but  on  the  othe
hand  human  figures  are  oftener  represented,  though  in  a  rude  an
clumsy  way.  The  clay  of  the  Dipylum  pottery  is  much  coarser  tha
that  of  the  Mycenaean  pottery ;  the  paints  used  are  always  lustrous.

After  the  end  of  the  Dipylum  period  the  citadel  of  Tiryns  woul
appear  to  have  been  deserted  for  centuries  ;  for  after  the  Doric  templ<
which  was  built  in  the  middle  of  the  men's  hall  and  may  date  froi
the  seventh  century  B.C.,  the  first  traces  of  inhabitation  are  <
the  Byzantine  age :  many  Byzantine  graves  have  been  found  at  th
south  end  of  the  citadel,  and  a  Byzantine  church  was  built  in  the  grei
fore-court  (F).  However,  a  town  of  Tiryns  must  have  existed  down  1
the  Persian  wars,  since  men  of  Tiryns  fought  at  Plataea  (Herodotus,  i
28).

The  chief  work  on  Tiryns  is  Schliemann*s  Tiryns  (London,  1886),  of  whi
not  the  least  valuable  part  was  contributed  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld.  The  researches
Schliemann  and  Dorpfeld  are  summarised  in  Schuchhardt's  Schliemanns  Ausgrt
ungen,^  pp.  11 7- 165;  Perrot  and  Chipiez*s  Histoire  deTArtdans  VAtUiquiti,
pp.  258-303  ;  and  Baumeister's  DeiikmdUr^  pp.  1809-1817.  As  to  tlie  palace
particular  see  also  P.  Gardner,  New  Chapters  in  Greek  History^  pp.  91-117  ;  J.
Middleton,  *  A  suggested  restoration  of  the  great  hall  in  the  palace  of  Tiryr
Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  7(1886),  pp.  161-169;  R.  C.  Jebb,  *  The  Home
house  in  relation  to  the  remains  at  Tiryns,'  ib,  pp.  170-188  ;  D.  Joseph,  I
Paldste  des  honierischen  Epos  mit  Riicksicht  auf  die  Ausgrabungen  Schliemat
(Berlin,  1895).  ^  ^^  some  subsequent  excavations  under  the  bathroom  of  1
palace  see  IlpaKTuch.  rrji* kpxoLf-oK.  'Erat/j/as,  1890,  pp.  37-41  ;  ib,,  1891,  pp.  20-
For  earlier  descriptions  of  Tiryns  see  Dodwell,  Tour,  2.  p.  248  sqq.\  Lea
Morea,  2.  p.  350  sqq,\  Gell,  Itinerary  of  Greece,  p.  54  sqqr,  W.  Mure,  ybwrwa/,
p.  173  sqqr,  Curtius,  Pehponnesos^  2.  p.  384  sqq,\  Vischer,  Erinnerungcn  v
Eindriicke^  p.  296  sqq. ;  W.  G.  Clark,  Pelopontusus,  p.  86  sqq. ;  Bursian,  Geo
2    p.  57  sq.

It  was  in  Tiryns  that  Hercules  dwelt  for  twelve  years  in  the  serv


CH.  XXV  MIDEA  231

of  Eurystheus,  who  imposed  on  him  his  twelve  famous  tasks  (Apollodorus,
ii.  4.  12).

25.  8.  Tiryns  was  depopulated  by  the  Argives  etc.  See  v.  23.
3  note.

25.  8.  tlie  wall,  which  is  a  work  of  the  Cyclopes.  The  Cyclopes
who  built  Tiryns  are  said  to  have  been  seven  in  number  and  to  have
been  fetched  from  Lycia  by  Proetus,  first  king  of  Tiryns  (Strabo,  viii.
p.  372  ;  Apollodorus,  ii.  2.  i).

25.  9.  the  daughters  of  Proetus.  As  to  Proetus,  first  king  of
Tir^jis,  see  ii.  16.  2.     As  to  his  daughters  see  ii.  7.  8  ;  viii.  18.  7.

*lh,  9.  We come  to  Midea  on  the  left.    Pausanias,  proceed-

ing  by  the  highroad  from  Argos  to  Epidaurus,  had  diverged  to  the  right
to  visit  Tiryns.  He  now  resumes  the  route  to  Epidaurus,  and  says  that
going  in  this  direction  we  have  Midea  on  the  left.  Midea  is  now
generally  identified  with  the  ruins  which  occupy  a  steep  and  lofty
mountain,  inaccessible  on  three  sides,  which  rises  to  the  east  of  the
village  of  Dendra,  The  place  is  six  miles  east  by  north  of  the  citadel  of
Argos,  and  lies  at  the  same  distance  to  the  north-east  of  Nauplia.  Four
walls,  following  the  curves  of  the  mountain,  form  four  separate  lines  of
defence,  one  above  the  other.  The  wall  which  protects  the  summit  is
built  of  great  rough  blocks,  the  interstices  being  filled  with  small  stones.
This  wall  is  discontinued  at  the  south-east  and  south-west  sides,  where
precipitous  rocks  are  a  sufficient  natural  defence.  In  one  of  the  walls
there  is  a  gateway  built  of  three  stones,  like  the  postern  at  Mycenae.
The  ruins  extend  from  the  summit  of  the  mountain  down  to  a  spring
which  issues  from  a  grotto  near  a  chapel  of  the  Panagia.  Numerous
potsherds  of  the  Mycenaean  style  are  to  be  seen  on  the  acropolis,  making
it  fairly  certain  that  the  place  is  indeed  Midea.  The  situation  is  a  very
commanding  one.  Standing  on  this  lofty  height  we  see  the  whole
Argive  plain  from  Nauplia  to  Argos  and  northward  to  Mycenae,  with  all
its  side  valleys,  stretched  out  like  a  map  at  our  feet.

To   the  identification  of  this  site  with  the  ancient  Midea  it  was
objected  by  Leake  that  it  lies  too  far  (more  than  three  geographical
miles)  to  the  left  of  the  road  to  Epidaurus.     He  therefore  preferred  to
identify  Midea  with  the  ruins  oiSt  Adrian^  which  crown  a  rocky  hill  to
the  north-east  of  Katzingrty  about  two  and  a  half  miles  due  east  of
Tiryns.     The  fortifications  seem  to  have  included  an  inner  and  an  outer
'^vall,  and  are  visible  for  a  long  distance.     Excavations  were  made  on  the
site  in   1890  for  the  Greek  Archaeological  Society  by  Mr.  Kophiniotis,
^iwho  believes  that  he  has  identified  the  place  as  Midea.     But  the  fortifi-
cations are  of  well-jointed  polygonal,  not  Cyclopean  style,  and  among
tlie  potsherds  found  on  the  site  there  seems  to  be  none  of  the  Mycenaean
sort     Probably,  therefore,  the  place  is  a  small  fortress  of  the  Greek
historical  age,  not  a  prehistoric  citadel  such  as  Midea  must  have  been.
This  is  the  conclusion  to  which  Dr.  Dorpfeld  came  when  he  visited  the
site   in    1891.     Moreover,   the  place   is   to   the  right  of  the  road  to
Epidaurus,  and  therefore  does  not  answer  to  Pausanias's  description.

—^  Sec  Gell,  Itinerary  of  Greece^  p.  97  sq.'y  Leake,  Pelofxmtusiaca^  p.  268  sqq.\
""^^blayc,  Recherches,  p.  52  ;  Curtius,  Pehp,  2,  p.  395  sq. ;  Conze  c  Michaelis,  in


232  LESS  A  BK.  II.  COKU

Annali deir InsiitutOi  33  (iS6i),  p.  l^  sq,;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  62  sq,\  Baedek
p.  263 ;  W.  Dorpfeld,  in  MiitheiL  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,  16  (1891),  p.  255
id. J  17  (1S9T),  p.  95  so.     A  view  of  the  walls  of  Midea,  which  are  even  ir
irregularly  built  than  those  of  Tiryns,  is  given  by  Perrot  and  Chippiez  [Hist
de  VArt  dans  tAntiquiti^  6.  p.  475).

The  legends  that  the  fortifications  of  Midea  were  built  by  Pars
(Apollodonis,  ii.  4.  4),  and  that  Proetus,  first  king  of  Tiryns,  reigi
over  it  (Paus.  ii.  16.  2),  are  evidence  of  the  great  antiquity  of  Mid
and  this  evidence  is  confirmed  by  its  massive  remains.  Professor  W.
Ramsay  says :  "  Midea  appears  to  be  the  city  of  Midas,  and  the  na
is  one  more  link  in  the  chain  that  binds  Mycenae  to  Phrygia  "  (Encyi
paedia  Bfitannica^  9th  edition,  voL  18.  p.  850  j^.)

25.  10.  On  the  straight  road  to  Epidatmu  is  a  village  Les
Modem  travellers  generally  drive  to  the  great  Epidaurian  sanctuary
Aesculapius  by  the  highroad  from  Nauplia,  which  runs  through  unint
esting  scenery  between  low,  barren  hills  of  dull,  monotonous  aspect  '
drearier  tract  of  country,"  says  Welcker,  "  is  scarcely  to  be  found
Peloponnese."  Pausanias,  however,  went  by  the  more  northerly  n
from  Argos,  which  joins  the  road  from  Nauplia  about  five  miles  to
west  of  the  sanctuary.  From  the  point  where  the  road  from  Arg
quitting  the  great  Argive  plain,  enters  the  valley  of  Kopkino^  it  contim
to  run  among  hills  the  whole  way  to  Epidaurus.  On  the  left  rise,  n:
after  mile,  in  monotonous  uniformity,  the  long,  bare,  rocky  slopes
Mount  Arachnaeus.  High  up  on  the  mountain-side  may  be  seen
prettily  situated  monastery  of  St.  Demetrius  Karakala,  but  the  re
keeps  low  down  in  the  valleys,  except  where  it  rises  over  the  ridj
which  divide  them  from  each  other.  The  ground  is  clothed  with  bus!
and  stunted  wood,  through  which  the  pudding-stone  protrudes  its  sh;
edges  like  the  ruins  of  ancient  walls.  About  midway  between  Arj
and  the  Epidaurian  sanctuary,  a  mile  or  so  to  the  south  of  the  ro
there  rises  from  the  little  fertile  level  of  Soulinari  an  isolated  hill  wh
is  crowned  by  one  of  the  best  preserved  fortresses  of  antiquity  in
Peloponnese.  It  is  now  known  as  Kazarma  (or  Kasarmi\  and
been  identified  as  the  Lessa  of  Pausanias  by  Mr.  Cavvadias  and  the  \
H.  G.  Lolling.  The  highroad  from  Nauplia  to  the  sanctuary  runs
the  southern  side  of  the  hill ;  from  Nauplia  to  Kazarma  the  time
this  road  is  about  three  hours.  The  hill  is  a  pretty  high  one  ;  its  si
is  gradual  at  first  but  steep  at  the  top.  The  summit  is  surround
by  a  wall  of  admirable  polygonal  masonry,  which  on  the  east  sid
standing  for  a  considerable  distance  to  a  height  of  20  feet.  At
comers  are  round  towers,  strongly  built,  and  between  them  are  s(
square  towers.  The  wall  also  forms  salient  angles  at  various  poi
On  the  eastem  side  of  the  fortress,  and  parallel  to  its  wall,  is  a  struc
somewhat  in  the  style  of  the  covered  galleries  at  Tiryns.  It  is  a  p
age  or  corridor  about  3  paces  wide  and  sunk  about  4  feet  in
ground  ;  the  sides  are  built  of  excellent  masonry,  and  converge  as
meet  overhead  ;  the  stones  are  bonded  with  mortar.  Within  the  fort
there  are  some  ruins  and  foundations  of  ancient  and  mediaeval  buildi
The  ground  is  littered  with  potsherds  and  broken  tiles.     The  soutl


CH.  XXV  LESSA  233

slope  of  the  hill  and  the  level  ground  at  its  foot  are  also  covered  with
ruins  and  potsherds,  proving  that  a  township  existed  outside  the  walls
of  the  citadel.  About  a  mile  and  a  half  to  the  north-east  of  this  fortress
is  another  large  ancient  acropolis,  which  is  now  called  Kastrakij  it  is
to  the  left  of  the  road  from  Nauplia,  but  to  the  right  of  the  road  from
Argos ;  the  two  roads  unite  about  a  mile  to  the  east  of  Kastraki.  At
Kastrakij  in  addition  to  the  acropolis,  there  are  remains  of  a  town  of
some  size  on  the  north-eastern  side  of  the  fortress.  The  two  considerable
fortresses  just  described  were  probably  built  by  the  Argives  to  defend
their  frontier  against  incursions  from  the  side  of  Epidaurus.

From  the  point  where  the  two  roads  from  Argos  and  Nauplia  meet,
the  valley,  some  four  or  five  miles  long,  widens  and  the  highroad  runs
through  olive  woods  to  the  village  of  UgauriOy  which  stands  conspicu-
ously on  the  slope  of  an  arid  spur  of  Moimt  Arachnaeus  at  the  eastern
end  of  the  valley.     On  the  summit  of  this  spur  is  a  long  line  of  ancient
foundations,  which  topographers  have  generally  identified  as  those  of
X-essa.     The  situation,  on  the  direct  road  from  Argos  to  Epidaurus,
certainly  agrees  better  with  Pausanias's  statement  as  to  the  site  of  Lessa
than  the  fortress  of  Kazarma^  which  lies  about  a  mile  away  from  the
direct  road.     About  half  a  mile  to  the  west  of  Ugourio,  in  a  field  on
the  north  side  of  the  road,  there  is  a  chapel  of  St.  Marina ;  it  contains
two  Ionic  columns,  fragments  of  architraves,  and  some  painted  ante-
fixes,  which  may  perhaps  be  remains  of  the  temple  of  Athena  mentioned
by  Pausanias.     A  little  to  the  east  of  the  chapel  are  the  remains  of  an
ancient  pyramid  ;  the  lower  part  of  it  only  is  left ;  it  was  faced  with  poly-
gonal masonry,  and  measured  nearly  40  feet  square  at  the  base.    From  an
inscription  found  in  the  Epidaurian  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  ('Ao-KAT/Trto)!
A-tycwn/i  o  t€po<^avT?7s  k.t.A.)  Mr.  Cavvadias  infers  that  there  was  an
aticient  village  or  town  called  Liguria,  Ligeia,  or  Ligea,  which  may  have
occupied  the  site  of,  and  bequeathed  its  name  to,  the  modem  Ligoiirio,
If  this  conjecture  is  right,  the  ancient  Lessa  cannot  of  course  have  been
on  the  site  of  Ugourio.     A  little  to  the  south-east  of  Ugourio  is  a
village  called  Karoni;  the  name  may  be  derived  from  Coronis,  the
deputed  mother  of  Aesculapius.

See  Leake,  Aforea,  2.  pp.  416*420;  Dodwell,  Tour,  2.  pp.  253-255;  Gell,
Itinerary  of  Greece,  pp.  9j5-l02  ;  Boblaye,  RechercheSy  p.  52  sq. ;  Welcker,  Tage-
My  I.  p.  326  sq,  ;  Curtius,  Pehp.  2.  pp.  416-418  ;  Vischer,  Erintierungen,  pp.
502*505 ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  62  ;  Baedeker,*  d.  252  sq.  ;  Guide- JoantiCy  2.  p.
22Sj^.  ;  Cavvadias,  in  Etftrj/jiepls  &pxaio\oyLidh  1S84,  p*  21  sqq.\

25.  10.  Monnt  Arachnaeus.     This  is  the  high,  naked  range  on

the  left  or  northern  side  of  the  road  as  you  go  to  the  Epidaurian  sanctuary

from  Argos.     The  most  remarkable  peak  is   Mt.  Arna,  the  pointed

rocky  summit  which  rises  immediately  above  the  village  of  Ugourio,

h  is  3540  feet  high.     The  western  summit,  Mt.  St,  Elt'as,  is  a  little

higher  (3930  ft.)     From  the  summit  of  Mt.  Arna  the  mountains  of

Megara  and  Attica  are  visible.     It  might  well  have  been  on  its  top  that

the  beacon  was  lighted  which  flashed  to  Argos  the  news  of  the  fall  of

Troy  (Aeschylus,  Agam,  320  sq,)     The  name  Arachnaea  is  said  to  have


234  MOUNT  ARACHNAEUS  bk.  ii.  Corinth

been  still  used  by  the  peasantry  in  the  early  part  of  this  century.  The
altars  of  Zeus  and  Hera  upon  which,  according  to  Pausanias,  the  people
sacrificed  for  rain,  appear  to  have  stood  in  the  hollow  between  the  peaks
of  Ama  and  St,  Elias,  for  there  is  here  a  square  enclosure  of  Cyclopean
masonry  which  would  appear  to  have  been  an  ancient  place  of  worship.
See  Boblaye,  Recherches^  ?•  53 ;  Gell,  Itinerary  of  Greece^  p.  99  sq. ;
Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  418  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  72  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  250.
Mt.  Arachnaeus  and  the  mountains  of  the  Argolic  peninsula  in  general
are  little  better  than  a  stony,  waterless  wilderness.  The  climate  is  ver>'
dry,  and  the  beds  of  all  the  streams  are  waterless  except  after  heavy
rain.  The  hardy  little  holly-oak  and  a  few  dun-coloured  shrubs  are
almost  the  only  representatives  of  plant  life.  The  eye  of  the  traveller  is
wearied  by  the  grey  monotony  of  these  arid  mountains  and  desert  table-
lands, and  his  feet  are  cut  and  bruised  by  the  sharp  stones  over  which
he  has  painfully  to  pick  his  steps.  Nowhere  else  in  Greece,  probably,
is  the  scenery  so  desolate  and  forbidding.  See  Philippson,  Peloponnes,
pp.  43  sq.,  65.

26.  I.  Who  dwelt  in  the  conntry  etc.  Strabo  (viii.  p.  374),
following  Aristotle,  says  that  Epidauria,  like  Hermione,  was  formerly
occupied  by  Carians,  and  that,  after  the  return  of  the  Heraclids,  a  colony
of  lonians  from  Attica  settled  in  the  land.

26.  3.  Aesculapius.  With  the  following  genealogies  of  Aesculapius
we  may  compare  another  which  came  to  light  some  years  ago.  Accord-
ing to  Isyllus  of  Epidaurus  the  pedigree  of  Aesculapius  was  as  follows.
Malus  married  the  Muse  Erato.  They  had  a  daughter  Cleophema,
who  married  Phlegyas,  and  had  by  him  a  daughter  called  Aegla  or
Coronis  ;  and  Coronis  was  the  mother  of  Aesculapius  by  Apollo.  The
hymn  of  Isyllus  in  which  this  genealogy  occurs  was  found,  engraved
on  a  limestone  tablet,  to  the  east  of  the  temple  of  Aesculapius  in  the
great  Epidaurian  sanctuary.  See  v.  Wilaniowitz-Mollendorff,  Isyllus  von
Epidaurus,  P-  '3  ;  Cavvadias,  Fouilles  iVEpidaure,  i.  p.  35  J^. ;  Colliu,
G.  D.  I.  3.  No.  3342.

26.  3.  the  mountain  which  is  named  Titthium.     Leake  {Aforea,
2.  p.  419  j^.)  took  this  to  be  the  hill  upon  which  the  modem  village
oi  Ugourio  stands.     See  note  on  ii.  25.  10.     Others  hold  that  Titthium
is  the  modem   Velonidia,  the  mountain  (2815   feet  high)  which  rises
to  the  north  of  the  great  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius ;  it  is  famed  in  the
district  for  the  medicinal  virtues  of  its  plants  (Boblaye,  Recherckes,  p-
54;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  419;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  75  ;  Baedeker,*
p.  251).

26.  4*  one  of  the  goats gave  suck  to  the  forsaken  bab^*

Ancient  myths  and  legends  often  tell  of  persons  who  were  suckled  b>'
animals.  Romulus  and  Remus  were  suckled  by  a  wolf  (see  Liebrecht^
Zur  Volkskunde,  p.  17  sqq,)  Telephus  was  suckled  by  a  deer  (Apollo^
doms,  ii.  7.  4),  Atalanta  by  a  bear  {id,,  iii.  9.  a),  and  so  was  Paris  {id.^
iii.  12.  5;  Tzetzes,  Schol.  on  Lycophron,  138).  Miletus  was  suckled
by  wolves  (Antoninus  Liberalis,  30),  and  a  wolf  suckled  Lycastus  and
Parrhasius  (Plutarch,  Parallela,  36).  The  two  sons  of  Melanippe  were
suckled  by  a  cow  (Hyginus,  Fab,   186);  Hippothous  by  a  mare  [id,.


cu.  XXVI  AESCULAPIUS  235

187).  Meliteus  was  fed  by  bees  (Antoninus  Liberalis,  13),  and
Semiramis  was  fed  with  milk  by  doves  (Diodonis,  ii.  4).  It  is  perfectly
possible  that  some  stories  of  the  suckling  of  children  by  animals  may
be  founded  on  fact.  Mr.  Francis  Galton  says :  'Mt  is  marvellous  how
soon  goats  find  out  children  and  tempt  them  to  suckle.  I  have  had
the  milk  of  my  goats,  when  encamping  for  the  night  in  African  travels,
drained  dry  by  small  black  children,  who  had  not  the  strength  to  do
more  than  crawl  about,  but  nevertheless  came  to  some  secret  under-
standing with  the  goats  and  fed  themselves"  {Transactions  of  the
Ethnological  Society  of  London^  N.  S.  3  (1865),  p.  135  sq.")  In  India
there  are  numerous  stories  of  boys  who  have  been  found  living  with
wolves ;  the  stories  are  recent,  and  particulars  of  names,  places,  and
time  are  given.  A  number  of  them  have  been  collected  by  Mr.  Valentine
Ball  in  his  Jungle  Life  in  India,  pp.  455-496  (the  passage  is  also  ex-
tracted in  the  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  InstitutCy  9  (1880),  p.
565  sqq,)  See  also  Panjab  Notes  and  Queries^  3  (1885-6),  Nos.
452,  602,  603,  604,  659,  660,  661.

26.  5.  he  raised  the  dead.  A  list  of  persons  said  to  have  been
restored  to  life  by  Aesculapius  is  given  by  Apollodorus,  iii.  i  o.  4.  See
also  Paus.  ii.  27.  4,  and  note  on  ii.  11.  7.

26.  6.  Ck>ro]lis.  See  note  on  ii.  11.  7.  It  is  remarkable  that,  as
we  have  seen  (p.  233),  the  name  of  Aesculapius's  mother  is  preser\'ed
in  that  of  a  hamlet  to  the  south-east  of  the  village  of  Ligourio,

26.  7-  0  bom  to  be  the  world's  great  joy  etc.  Some  phrases  of
this  oracle  recur  in  a  hymn  to  Aesculapius  of  which  inscribed,  copies
have  been  found  in  Egypt  and  Athens.  The  Athenian  copy  is  very
fragmentary.  See  Revue  Arch^ologique,  3rd  series,  13  (1889),  p.  70
sq.\  Rhcinisches  Museum,  N.  F.  49  (1894),  p.  315.

26.  8.  PindaSTLS.  A  mountain-range  in  Asia  Minor,  to  the  north  of
Pergamus.    See  Pliny,  N.  H.\,  126  ;  Baumeister's  DenknuUer,  p.  1206.

26.  9-  in  our  time  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius at  Smyrna

was  founded.  This  sanctuary  played  an  important  part  in  the  life  of
the  rhetorician  Aristides.  It  was  not  finished  in  165  A.D.  Hence
Mr.  Gurlitt  supposes  that  Pausanias  wrote  the  second  book  after  that
year.     See  Gurlitt,  Pausanias,  p.  59.

26.  9.  the  one  at  Pergamus.  Cp.  iii.  26.  10  note ;  v.  13.  3.
26.  9.  Lebene  in  Crete.  A  metrical  inscription  has  been  found
at  this  place  referring  to  the  worship  of  Aesculapius.  It  records  the
<iedication  to  Aesculapius  of  two  statues  representing  Dreams  by  a  man
I^iodorus,  who  had  recovered  his  sight  through  the  help  of  the  god.
See  Kaibel,  Epigrammata  Graeca  ex  lapidibus  conlecta,  No.  839.

26.  9.  whereas  the  Gyrenians  sacrifice  goats,  it  is  against  the
Bpidanrian  custom  to  do  so.  At  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  near
Tithorea  in  Phocis  all  animals  were  sacrificed  to  Aesculapius  except
goats  (x.  32.  12).  Sextus  Empiricus  (p.  173  ed.  Bekker)  states  gener-
al/ that  goats  were  not  sacrificed  to  Aesculapius.  A  goat  was  said  to
have  suckled  Aesculapius  (above,  §  4).  On  the  other  hand  Servius  (on
Virgil,  Georg.  ii.  380)  says  that  goats  were  sacrificed  to  Aesculapius
because  there  was  always  fever  where  there  were  goats.


236  SANCTUARY  OF  AESCULAPIUS       bk.  ii.  corinth

26.  lo.  the  words   which   Homer   puts   in    the    month   of
Agamemnon  etc.     See  Iliad^  iv.  193  sq.

27.  I.  The  sacred  grove  of  Aescnlapins  is  surronnded  by  moun-
tains. Leaving  the  village  oi  Ugourio  (above,  p.  233)  on  the  left,  v;t
continue  to  follow  the  highroad  in  a  south-easterly  direction,  and  enter  a
defile  between  two  little  rocky  hills  dotted  over  with  mastich  bushes.
The  entrance  to  the  pass  seems  to  have  been  guarded  by  two  towers.
Having  traversed  the  defile,  we  enter,  in  about  half  an  hour  from
Ugourio^  the  valley  in  which  are  situated  the  ruins  of  the  famous
sanctuary  of  Aesculapius.  It  is  a  fine  open  valley  encircled  by
mountains  from  2000  to  3000  feet  high.  In  spring  the  level  bottom
of  the  vale  is  green  with  com,  interspersed  with  clumps  of  trees  and
bushes.  The  surrounding  mountains,  though  grey  and  barren,  with
undulating  uniform  outlines,  are  rather  still  and  solemn  than  stem  and
sombre  in  character ;  and  the  whole  scene  has  a  certain  pleasing
solitariness  about  it.  The  mins  of  the  sanctuary  lie  towards  the  upper
or  northem  end  of  the  valley.  They  were  excavated  for  the  Greek
Archaeological  Society  under  the  direction  of  Messrs.  Cawadias  and
Staes  in  the  years  1 881-1887,  1 891-1894.  The  place  is  still  called  'the
Sanctuary '  {to  hiero  or  sto  hiero)  by  the  people  of  the  neighbourhood.

•
See  Leake,  Morea^  2.  p.  420 ;  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  255  sq, ;  Cell,  Itintmry
of  Greece^  p.  102  sq, ;  Welcker,  Tagelmchy  I.  p.  327  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  418
sqq.  ;  Vischer,  Erinncrungent  p.  505  sq.  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  7^sq.  ;  Baedeker,'
p.  250  sqq,  ;  GuicU- Joanne^  2.  p.  229 ;  Cawadias,  FouilUs  d  Epidaure^  vol.  I
(Athene  1893).  ^^  this  last-mentioned  work  are  published  the  inscriptions  as
well  as  a  description  of  the  buildings  which  have  been  excavated  in  the  sanctuary.
As  to  these  inscriptions  see  J.  Baunack,  'Zu  den  Inschriften  aus  Epidauros/
Philologtts,  54  (1895),  PP*  '6-63.  Some  more  inscriptions,  discovered  in  1893,
are  published  by  Mr.  Ca\'vadias  in  *E<fnjfiepls  dpxo-ioXoyiKi/if  1894,  pp.  16-24.  The
excavations  of  1894  laid  bare  the  stadium.     See  note  on  iL  27.  5.

The  general  arrangement  of  the  sanctuary  will  be  best  understood
from  the  accompanying  plan  (Fig.  37).  The  chief  buildings  as  yet
discovered  are  the  theatre,  the  temple  of  Aesculapius  (A),  the  Rotunda
(B),  the  temple  of  Artemis  (C),  and  the  great  colonnade  (D).  These
will  be  described  in  detail  later  on.  Meantime  the  less  important
buildings  may  be  briefly  noticed  here.

E  is  a  large  rectangular  edifice,  situated  to  the  south-east  of  the
temple  of  Aesculapius  and  immediately  to  the  north  of  the  temple  of
Artemis.     It  is  built  of  common  stone  and  is  divided  into  several  com-
partments.    Its  arrangement  suggests  that  it  may  have  been  the  house
of  the  priests  or  a  hospice  for  patients.     In  the  Roman  period  it  was
rebuilt  of  bricks,  stone,  and  lime.     A  pavement  of  stone  was  discovered
in  this  building  in  1891  ;  it  seems  to  have  been  part  of  an  altar ;  for  a
channel  or  gutter  runs  round  its  four  sides,  probably  to  convey  away  the
blood  of  the  victims,  and  beside  it  was  found  a  layer  of  charred  bones
and  ashes,  mingled  with  many  small  earthenware  pots  and  bits  of  bronze
vessels.     Some  of  these  bronze  fragments  and  one  potsherd  are  inscribed
with  dedications,  some  to  Aesculapius   and  some  to  Apollo.      These
inscriptions  are  archaic,  being  not  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  fifth


238  SANCTUARY  OF  AESCULAPIUS       BK.  ii.  corinth

century  B.C.  See  AcXriov  dp^^ioXoytKov,  1891,  p.  85  ;  II/xiKTCKa  t7;s
*Apx«toA.. 'Eratpia?,  1 89 1,  p.  26  5q,\  Cavvadias,  FouiUes  cPipidaure^
I.  p.  37  sq,

F  is  a  great  portal  or  propylaeum  of  the  Doric  order,  situated  to  the
south  of  £  and  of  the  temple  of  Artemis,  and  to  the  east  of  the  stadium.
This  great  portal  led  southward  into  a  large  square  building  (not  shown
on  the  plan),  the  ruins  of  which  were  excavated  in  1891.  The  edifice,
which  from  the  style  of  the  architectural  fragments  would  seem  to  have
been  built  in  the  finest  period  of  Greek  art,  was  probably  a  gymnasium ;
it  inclosed  in  the  centre  a  square  court  surrounded  by  colonnades  of  the
Doric  order.  Some  pieces  of  the  columns  of  these  colonnades  are  still
standing  in  their  original  places.  This  building  must  have  fallen  into
ruins  even  in  antiquity,  for  in  one  of  the  comers  of  the  cloistered  court
are  the  remains  of  an  Odeum  or  Music  Hall  of  Roman  date,  built  partly
on  the  stylobate  of  the  colonnade.  The  stage  and  the  entrances  of
the  Music  Hall  are  standing  to  a  height  of  about  18  inches.  The
auditorium  now  numbers  nine  rows  of  seats,  divided  into  two  sections
by  a  single  staircase.  The  floor  of  the  orchestra  consists  of  an  orna-
mental mosaic  pavement.  Into  the  middle  wall  of  the  stage  and  the
north  retaining-wall  of  the  auditorium  are  built  pieces  of  the  columns
of  the  colonnade,  still  standing  in  their  original  places.  See  ^tkriov
apxatoXoyiKOVf  1 89 1,  pp.  19,  33,  65  sq.  ;  UpaKTiKo,  rrjs  'Ap\aio\.
*Eraip4a9,  1 89 1,  p.  26.

G  is  a  large  rectangular  building  situated  between  the  edifice  £  and
the  great  portal  F.  The  use  to  which  it  is  put  is  not  kno^Ti.  It  is
built  of  limestone ;  the  entry  is  on  the  west  side.

H  is  a  small  monument  close  to  the  building  G,  on  the  north  side ;
its  purpose  is  unknown.

J  marks  the  foundations  of  a  building  lying  to  the  south  of  the
temple  of  Aesculapius.

We  may  also  note  the  two  parallel  walls,  divided  by  a  trench  (^),
which,  extending  first  from  north  to  south,  and  then  from  west  to  east,
unite  the  great  colonnade  D  with  the  temple  of  Artemis  and  the  quad-
rangular building  £,  thus  forming  on  two  sides  the  boundary  of  the
sacred  precinct.  The  purpose  and  date  of  these  walls  are  unknown.
For  the  most  part  they  are  built  of  blocks  of  marble  taken  from  various
ancient  buildings  ;  some  of  these  blocks  bear  inscriptions.

To  the  north  of  the  temple  of  Aesculapius  there  is  a  large  and  ver>'
complex  edifice  (not  marked  on  the  plan),  built  in  a  very  commonplace
and  uninteresting  style.  It  is  divided  into  halls,  chambers,  passages,
etc.,  and  was  clearly  a  bathing  establishment.  Not  improbably  it  is  the
bath  of  Aesculapius  built  by  Antoninus  (Paus.  ii.  27.  6).

The  ground  to  the  north-east  of  the  temple  of  Aesculapius  was
excavated  in  1891  and  1892  ;  many  pedestals  and  votive  inscriptions  of
Greek  and  Roman  times  were  discovered  here ;  and  at  a  considerable
distance  in  this  direction  were  laid  bare  the  foundations  of  a  small
temple,  which  may  have  been  the  sanctuary  of  Aphrodite  (Paus.  ii.  27.
5  note).  See  AeAriov  dp\ai.o\oyiK6v^  1891,  p.  85  ;  UpaKTiKa  t7)<»
'ApxatoAoyiK-^S 'Eratpias,  1891,  p.  27;  td.,  1892,  p. -55*


CH.  xxvii  SANCTUARY  OF  AESCULAPIUS  239

There  are  two  paved  platforms  (a  and  ol\  one  to  the  east  and  the
other  to  the  south  of  the  temple  of  Aesculapius.  One  of  them  may
have  supported  the  altar  of  Aesculapius.

See  P.  Cavvadias,  FouilUs  ^Epidaure^  vol.  i  (Athens,  1893),  p.  9  sq.

To  these  buildings  may  be  added  the  names  of  a  few  which  are
known  to  us  only  from  inscriptions.     Thus  we  hear  of  an  Olympium  or
sanctuary  of  Olympian  Zeus,  built  in  the  reign  of  Hadrian  (Cavvadias,
op,  cit.  p.   43,  No.  35) ;  an  Anaceum  or  sanctuary  of  the   Dioscuri
(Cavvadias,  op,  ciL  p.  48,   No.   57) ;  a  workshop,  put  up  apparently
while  the  temple  of  Aesculapius  was  building  (Cavvadias,  op,  cit,  p.  79,
No.  241,  line  27  sq,) ;  and  a  library,  dedicated  apparently  to  Maleatian
Apollo  and  Aesculapius  (Cavvadias,  op,  cit,  p.  57,  No.  131).     From
Inscriptions  also  we  learn  that  under  the  Roman  empire  statues  were
set  up  of  Livia,  Tiberius,  Claudius,  Hadrian,  Marcus  Aurelius,  Septimius
Severus,  and  Caracalla  (Cavvadias,  op,  cit.  Inscriptions  214,  215,  219,
220,  222,  226,  260,  106,  107).    Another  inscription  records  the  dedica-
tion of  an  altar  of  the  Curetes  by  a  priest  of  Aesculapius  (Cavvadias,
op.  cit,  Inscr.  No.  40).

27.  I.  Within  the  enclosure  no  death  or  birth  takes  place  etc.
In  426  B.C  the  Athenians  purified  Delos  by  removing  all  the  dead
from  it,  and  they  enacted  that  for  the  future  no  death  or  birth  should
take  place  in  the  island  (Thucydides,  iii.  104 ;  Diodorus,  xii.  58).  An
inscription  found  during  the  recent  excavations  on  the  Acropolis  of
Athens  declares  that  it  is  the  custom  of  the  country  that  no  one  should
be  bom  or  die  within  any  sacred  precinct  {*E<l>-qfjL€pls  dpxaioXoyiKrj,
1884,  p.  167  sq,)  Another  inscription,  found  in  Egypt,  lays  down
similar  rules  of  ceremonial  purity  to  be  observed  by  persons  entering  a
sanctuary.     It  runs  thus  (so  far  as  it  exists  and  can  be  deciphered)  :

Tovs  Sk  €«riovTa9  ct?  T[h
ayvcuctv  Kara  vttok
dirh  wdSovs  IBiov  koi
rjfJL€pas  ^  ava^raAA.

\-q  €KTp<lXrfJLOV  (TVV

TCTOKViaS  Kol  Tp€<f>ov(rrjs
Kal  €av  €\&Q  (?)  18^  Tovs  5c  a^vSpas
dirh  yvvatKhs  I3\  ras  Se  y\yvaiKas
dKoXov6u}s  TOts  dvSpdcr^iv

dv  kKTfMKTflOV  fX

T^v  8t  r€KO\krav  koI  Tp€^<f>ovcrav
€av  Se  e^^  fh  /3p€(f}0S
aTTojSara  /x7/via)V  ^
dvSpos  1^  fJLVp(rivrjv    8c

This  inscription  is  of  the  time  of  Ptolemy  Philadelphus.  See  Revue
ArcfUologiquCy  3rd  series,  2  (1883),  P-  182.  The  rule  that  no  birth
might  take  place  within  the  sanctuary  is  illustrated  by  a  case  recorded
on  one  of  the  two  great  inscribed  slabs  found  on  the  spot     See  note


240  SANCTUARY  OF  AESCULAPIUS       bk.  ii.  corinth

on  §  3  of  this  chapter.     Cp.  v.  20.  5  ;  v.  27.  10 ;  Antoninus  Liberalis,
19  ;  Lobeck,  Aglaophamus^  p.  249.

27.  I.  The  sacrifices are  consnmed  within  the  bounds.

A  similar  rule  was  observed  in  the  sanctuary  of  Amphiaraus  at  Oropus
(see  note  on  i.  34.  i,  vol.  2.  p.  470),  and  in  the  sanctuary  of  the  Gracious
Gods  at  Myonia  in  Locris  (x.  38.  8).  No  doubt  it  was  feared  that  the
sacred  food  might  be  profaned  if  it  were  carried  outside  the  sanctuar)'.
It  is  not  an  uncommon  rule  of  sacrificial  feasts  that  all  the  food  must  be
consumed  on  the  spot.  The  Arabs  who  sacrificed  to  the  Morning  Star
had  to  consume  the  whole  of  the  victim — flesh,  skin,  and  bones — before
the  sun  rose  upon  it  and  the  Morning  Star  had  faded  (W.  R.  Smith,
The  Religion  of  the  Semites^  p.  282).  At  the  old  Lithuanian  festival  of
first-fruits  all  the  food  had  to  be  eaten  up  with  certain  ceremonial  forms
(The  Golden  Bought  2.  p.  70).  The  North  American  Indians  have
feasts  at  which  every  scrap  of  food  must  be  finished  before  the  ban-
queters disperse.  If  a  man  is  physically  incapable  of  swallowing  the
remainder  of  his  share  he  must  get  some  one  else  to  eat  it  for  him.

27.  2.  The  image  of  Aesculapius.  This  image  doubtless  stood
in  the  temple  of  Aesculapius.  The  remains  of  the  temple  were  dis-
covered in  the  course  of  the  excavations  in  1884.  They  consist  only
of  foundations ;  not  a  column  or  part  of  a  column  is  standing ;  but
architectural  fragments  were  found  in  sufficient  numbers  to  enable  us
to  restore  the  plan.  The  temple  was  peripteral,  and  of  the  Doric
order.  It  had  six  columns  at  each  end,  and  eleven  columns  (inclusive
of  the  end  ones)  at  each  side.  There  was  no  opisthodomos  or  back-
chamber  at  the  western  end.  The  length  of  the  temple  was  24.35
metres,  and  its  breadth  13.04  metres.  The  stylobate  or  platform  on
which  the  temple  stood  was  raised  by  three  steps  above  the  ground,
but  the  entrance  was  by  an  inclined  plane  or  ramp  in  the  middle  of  the
eastern  end.  The  stylobate  was  of  *  poros '  stone,  covered  with  slabs  of
white  limestone  and  black  Eleusinian  stone.  The  black  slabs  probably
paved  the  floor  immediately  in  front  of  the  image  of  the  god,  as  in  the
temple  of  Zeus  at  Olympia  (v.  11.  10),  but  as  none  of  them  was  found
in  position,  this  is  uncertain.  The  temple  itself  was  built  of  *  poros '
stone  coated  with  stucco,  but  the  roof  was  of  wood,  and  the  tiles  were
of  marble.  The  columns  have  twenty  flutes.  There  were  no  reliefs  in
the  metopes,  but  the  gables  were  adorned  with  sculptures  of  Pentelic
marble,  of  which  some  pieces  have  been  found.  The  sculptures  in  the
western  gable  appear  to  have  represented  a  battle  with  the  Amazons  ;
those  in  the  eastern  gable  a  battle  with  the  Centaurs.  Two  female
figures  riding  quietly  on  horses,  found  near  the  western  end  of  the
temple,  may  have  stood  on  the  roof,  crowning  the  two  extremities  of  the
western  gable.  They  probably  represent  Nereids.  The  remains  of  the
sculptures  appear  to  belong  to  the  finest  period  of  Greek  art,  about  the
beginning  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  Mr.  Cavvadias  thinks  they  are  of
the  Attic  school  which  was  founded  by  Phidias.  The  style  of  the  archi-
tecture of  the  temple  also  points  to  about  the  same  date.

A  little  to  the  east  of  the  temple  was  discovered,  in  1885,  a  long
inscription,  giving  full  details  as   to  the  cost  of  construction  of  the


CH.  XXVII  SANCTUAR  Y  OF  AESCULAPIUS  241

temple.     From  this  inscription  it  appears  that  the  temple  was  built  by

contract.     Some  persons  contracted  to  execute  various  portions  of  the

work ;  others  contracted  to  supply  the  materials  and  bring  them  to  the

spot ;  others  again  contracted  only  for  the  transport  of  the  materials.

Amongst  the  contractors  were  men  from  Corinth,  Argos,  Stymphalia,

and  Crete.     The  whole  work  was  under  the  superintendence  of  a  single

architect  named  Theodotes,  who  received  353  drachms  a  year.     The

building  of  the  temple  lasted  four  years,  eight  months,  and  ten  days.

The  sculptures  of  the  gables  and  the  figures  which  stood  on  the  roof

were  executed  by  various  artists  after  models  furnished  by  a  certain

Timotheus,  perhaps  the  same  Timotheus  who  worked  with  Scopas  at  the

Mausoleum  of  Halicarnassus  (Pliny,  N,  H,  xxxvi.  30)  and  who  made

the  image  of  Aesculapius  at  Troezen  (Paus.  ii.  32.  4).     The  doors  of

the  temple  were  of  ivory  and  cost  3070  drachms.     From  the  style  of

the  letters   Mr.  Cavvadias  infers  that  the  inscription  must  have  been

carved  very  soon  after  the  archonship  of  Euclides,  t.e,  about  the  end  of

the  fifth  or  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.

On  the  temple  see  npeucTtJcd  r^  *kpxo-io\.  'Eratp/aj,  1882,  p.  81  sq.,  id,,  1884,
pp.  54-58;  jV/.,  1885,  p.  30;  Cavvadias,  Fouilles  d^Epidaure,  I.  p.  16  sq.  On
the  gable  (pedimental)  sculptures  see  '£^T7/iep2s  fipxaioXo7tict^,  1884,  pp.  49-60 ;
Cavvadias,  op,  cit,  p.  20  sqq,\  Overbeck,  Gesch,  d,  griech.  Plasfiky^  2.  p.  126  sqq.
On  other  sculptures  found  at  Epidaurus  see  'E^/Ae/>2s  ipxci-toKoyiicfiy  1886,  pp.  243-
258;  Cavvadias,  op,  cit,  p.  22  sq.  For  the  inscription  giving  the  cost  of  the
temple  see  UpaicTiKh.  r^j  Apx«  'Ercup.  1 8851  p.  30  sq, ;  *B<l>rifjL€plt  dpxatoXo7i«n^.
1886,  pp.  145-178  ;  Baunack,  Aus  Epidaurus,  p.  22 jqq,;  Collitz,  Griech,  Dialekt-
Inichrifteftf  3.  No.  3325;  Cavvadias,  Fouilles  d^Epidaure,  I.  p.  78  sqq,.  No.
241.  Mr.  Foucart  would  date  the  temple  380-375  B.c.  {Bulletin  de  Corresp.
HdUnique,  14  (1890),  p.  5891^^.)  Prof.  Furtwangler  dates  it  about  420  B.c.  He
considers  the  sculptures  of  the  temple  to  be  nearly  akin  to  those  of  the  Victory
balustrade  at  Athens  (see  voL  2.  p.  258  sqq, ),  but  still  more  closely  allied  to  the
sculptures  of  the  Jleraeum.  He  points  out  that  the  inscription  which  records
the  cost  of  building  the  temple  is  not  necessarily  post  -  Euclidean  because  the
alphabet  is  Ionic ;  for  we  do  not  know  when  the  Ionic  alphabet  was  introduced
into  Epidaurus.  He  thinks  that  three  small  marble  Victories  belong  to  the
temple  of  Artemis,  near  which  they  were  found,  and  not  to  the  temple  of
Aesculapius,  as  Mr.  Cavvadias  at  first  supposed.  His  view  as  to  these  figures
is  now  accepted  by  Mr.  Cavvadias.  See  Berliner  philologischc  Wochenschrift,
24  November,  1880,  p.  1484  j^.

The  image  of  Aesculapius  here  described  by  Pausanias  is  repre-
sented on  coins  of  Epidaurus  (Fig.  38).  The  god  is
seen  seated  on  a  throne,  his  left  hand  holds  a  staff,  his
right  is  extended  over  the  serpent.  His  dog  is  lying
under  or  beside  the  throne.  See  Imhoof-Blumer  and
Gardner,  Num,  Contm,  on  Paus,  p.  43,  with  pi.  L  iv.  v.
In  the  excavations  at  the  Epidaurian  sanctuary  there
were  found  two  marble  reliefs  which    Mr.   Cavvadias,

,       ,   .,•  L  •  t     ^\.  FIG*  38.  —  AESCULA-

with  great  probability,  supposes  to  be  copies  of  the         pj^g  ^^^^^  ^^
god's  statue  in  the  temple.     They  represent  the  god         epidaurus).
seated  in  much  the  same  attitude  as  on  the  coins ;  the
serpent,  dog,  and  staff,  however,  are  all  missing,  but  their  absence  may
peHiaps  be  accounted  for  by  the  mutilated  state  of  the  slabs.     The  two

VOL.  Ill  R


2A2


SANCTUARY  OF  AESCULAPIUS


reliefs  agree  so  closely  that  it  is  quite  plain  they  are  copies  of  the  same
origioal.  The  better  of  the  two,  carved  on  a  slab  of  Pentelic  marble,
is  here  figured  (Fig.  39).  The  siatue  would  seem  to  have  bome  a
considerable  resemblance  to  Phidias's  great  statue  of  Zeus  at  Olympia,
which  may  account  for  the  statement  of  Athenagoras  [Suppiic.  pro  Chris-


tianis,  17.  p.  80,  ed.  Otto)  that  the  image  of  Aesculapius  at  Epidaunis
was  by  Phidias.

See  'Eipyiiupit  dpx<"oXo7<K)},  1885,  p.  48  sqq. ;  ul.  1894,  pp.  11-14,  with  pi.  i.  ;
npoKTiitd  -nit  'ApxoioX.  'Enuplat,  l^,  p.  58  ;  American  Jcumal  ef  Archatchgy,
3  (1887),  pp.  32-37;  Khtiniuhts  AfuKum,  N.  F.  44  (1889),  pp.  474-478  ;
Cav\-adias,  rXuirri  toG  'E«»«oS  HoixriiBV,  I.  Nos.  173,  174  :  iJ.,  FettilUi  d'Efi-


27.  3.  ThrasTmedes,  a  Parian.  The  base  of  a  statue  inscribed  with
the  name  of  this  sculptor  was  found  at  Epidaurus  in  1 894  {Athenaeum,
29  December,  1894,  p.  902  ;  Aintrican  Joum.  of  Archaeology,  10
(i8gs),  p-  116).     In  the  inscription  which  records  the  building  of  the


CH.  XXVII  SANCTUARY  OF  AESCULAPIUS  243

temple  of  Aesculapius  a  certain  Thrasymedes  is  mentioned  as  having
undertaken  to  execute  the  doors  and  the  roof  (Cavvadias,  Fouilles
tTEpidaure^  i.  p.  79,  Inscr.  No.  241,  line  45  sq,) ;  this  maybe  the  same
Thrasymedes  who  made  the  statue  of  Aesculapius.  Compare  Overbeck,
Gesch,  d,  griech,  Plasiik^^  2.  p.  125  j^.

27.  2.  On  the  throne  are  carved  in  relief  Be^erophon

IrilHng  the  Ohimaera  etc.  On  two  terra-cotta  reliefs  from  Melos,  now
in  the  British  Museum,  are  represented  the  scenes  which  Pausanias
describes  as  curved  on  the  throne  of  Aesculapius.  On  one  of  the  reliefs
Perseus  is  seated  on  horseback  with  the  head  of  Medusa  in  one  hand
and  his  scimitar  in  the  other  ;  the  headless  trunk  of  Medusa  kneels  with
extended  arms  beside  the  horse.  On  the  other  relief  Bellerophon,  seated
on  horseback,  lifts  his  sword  to  strike  the  Chimaera,  which  is  under  his
horse.  See  M tiller- Wieseler,  Denkmdler^  1.  pi.  xiv.  Nos.  51,  52.  The
late  H.  Brunn  thought  that  these  terra-cotta  reliefs  might  be  copies  of
the  reliefs  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  Though  their  style  is  somewhat
archaic  or  archaistic,  he  believed  that  they,  or  rather  their  originals,
might  have  been  executed  by  a  contemporary  of  Phidias.  See  Brunn,
*Der  Thron  des  Asklepios  zu  Epidauros,'  in  Sitzungsberichte  of  the
Bavarian  Academy  (Munich),  Philosoph.-philolog.  Class,  1872,  2.  pp.

535-537.

From  inscriptions  found  at  Epidaurus  and  Halicamassus  it  appears

that  games  were  celebrated  in  honour  of  Aesculapius  at  Epidaurus,  at
which  prizes  were  given  for  athletic  and  dramatic  victories  in  the  usual
way.  See  'Etf^fupls  dpxaioXoyiKtjy  1883,  pp.  30,  91  (Inscriptions
ID  and  32);  Baunack,  Studietiy  i.  pp.  85,  91  ;  Cavvadias,  Fouilles
^ipidaure^  i.  pp.  65,  77  sq.^  Inscr.  Nos.  189,  191,  238,  239,  240;
Revue  ArcMologique^  2nd  series,  24  (1872),  p.  109.

27.  2.  the  place  where  the  suppliants  of  the  god  sleep.    The

SQppliants  of  the  god  are  the  patients  who  expected  the  god  to  reveal  to

tiKm  in  a  dream  the  manner  of  their  cure,  or  actually  to  cure  them

iriiile  they  slept.     Compare  ii.  11.  6,  and  vol.  2.  pp.  470,  476.     See

also  the  note  on  the  next  section  of  this  chapter.     Strabo  says  (viii.

pL  374)  that  the  Epidaurian  sanctuary  was  always  full  of  sick  people.     In

the  inscriptions  (as  to  which  see  below  p.  248  sqq,)  the  place  where  the

patients  slept  is  generally  called  the  Abaton^  but  in  one  inscription  it  is

called  the  Dormitory  (hKoifJLrjTrjpiov)  (Cavvadias,  Fouilles  d^Epidaure^

I.  p.   34,  Inscr.  No.  6;  *E<f)r]fi€pU  dpxaioXoyiKrj,  1883,  p.  237,  Inscr.

No.  61  ;  Baunack,  Sludien,  i.  p.  118).     One  inscription  mentions  that

once,  after  the  patients  had  fallen  asleep,  a  man  climbed  up  a  tree  and

peeped  over  into  the  Abaton  (Cavvadias,  Fouilles  d^ipidaure^  i.  p.  26,

Inscr.  No.  i,  line  90  sq,  ;  *E<^/uu  a.p\o.io\.  1883,  p.  215,  Inscr.  No.  59,

line  90  sq.  ;  Baunack,  Studien^  i.  p.  127).     From  this  we  infer  that  the

place  was  either  surrounded  with  a  high  wall  or  elevated  above   the

ground,  and  that  it  was  either  open  to  the  sky  or  had  windows.     Mr.

Cavvadias  identifies   the  Abalon  or    Dormitory   with   the  great  Ionic

colonnade  which  extends  along  the  north-western  side  of  the  sanctuary

for  a  length  of  75  metres  (246  feet  5  inches).     Its  breadth  is  9.7  5  metres

(31    feet    10    inches).     The   colonnade   is    in    fact  composed   of  two


244  SANCTUARY  OF  AESCULAPIUS      BK.  ii.  corinth

colonnades,  which,  however,  form  a  single  straight  line,  and  have  a
common  roof  at  the  same  level.  The  western  colonnade  is  double,  that
is,  it  consists  of  two  stories,  of  which  the  upper  is  on  the  same  level  as
the  eastern  colonnade  and  the  rest  of  the  sacred  precinct  A  staircase
of  nineteen  steps  ^  (marked  d  on  the  plan)  leads  down  to  the  lower  story
of  the  western  colonnade.  The  existence  of  this  lower  story  is  rendered
necessary  by  an  abrupt  fall  in  the  level  of  the  ground  at  this  point ;  this
fall  in  the  ground  is  compensated  by  the  lower  story,  which  supports  the
upper  story  or  colonnade  proper  at  the  same  level  as  the  eastern
colonnade.  Of  these  two  colonnades,  the  eastern  and  the  western,
there  exists  nothing  but  the  foundations  of  the  walls  ;  none  of  the
columns  is  standing,  but  numerous  scattered  fragments  allow  of  a  partial
restoration  of  the  edifice.

The  western  colonnade  is  37  metres  (121  feet  4  inches)  long.  "  Its
lower  story  was  not,  properly  speaking,  a  colonnade ;  it  was  in  fact
formed  simply  by  four  walls,  of  which  the  southern  wall  was  pierced  by
a  door  in  the  middle,  and  flanked  in  its  whole  length  by  pilasters
surmounted  by  a  Doric  architrave  and  a  cornice."  Down  the  middle  of
this  lower  story  ran  a  row  of  six  square,  or  rather  octagonal,  Doric
columns,  which  served  to  support  the  upper  story.  Benches  made  of
limestone  extended  betu'een  these  central  columns,  as  well  as  along  the
side  walls.  One  of  these  benches  is  still  to  be  seen  between  two  of  the
central  columns.  The  upper  story  of  the  western  colonnade  was
a  colonnade  proper.  It  was  divided  down  the  middle,  throughout  its
entire  length,  by  a  row  of  round  or  square  columns  corresponding  to  the
octagonal  columns  of  the  lower  story.  Its  southern  facade  was  formed
of  Ionic  columns  united  by  a  barrier  or  railing  of  limestone,  which
reached  up  to  a  third  of  the  whole  height  of  the  columns.

The  eastern  one-storied  colonnade  was  also  divided  down  the  middle
by  a  row  of  columns,  seven  in  number,  which  were  united  by  a  wall  or
barrier  of  some  kind.  Its  southern  fagade  was  formed  by  sixteen  Ionic
columns,  like  those  of  the  western  colonnade,  and  similarly  united  by  a
barrier  or  railing.  Within  the  eastern  colonnade  tablets  bearing  inscrip-
tions were  placed  against  the  east  wall ;  the  stones  in  which  these  tablets
were  fastened  can  still  be  seen  against  the  northern  half  of  the  east  walL
It  was  here  that  the  two  famous  tablets  inscribed  with  the  cures  effected
by  Aesculapius  were  discovered  (see  below  p.  248  sqq,)  Close  to  these
stones,  in  the  south-eastern  comer  of  the  colonnade,  is  an  ancient  well
46  feet  deep,  in  the  bottom  of  which  were  found  some  black  potsherds
and  iron  handles,  the  remnants  perhaps  of  vessels  which  had  been  used
in  drawing  water  from  the  well.

Such  is  the  great  colonnade  of  the  sanctuary.  Mr.  Cavvadias's
reasons  for  identifying  it  with  the  dormitory  of  the  patients  are  : — ( i )
It  is  over  against  the  temple  of  Aesculapius,  which  agrees  with  Pau-
sanias's  description  of  the  situation  of  the  dormitory ;  (2)  the  inscrip-

^  So  Mr.  Cavvadias  in  IIpaxcTt/ca.  1884,  p.  59,  and  Fouilles  cP^pidaure,  i.
p.  17.  In  my  own  notes,  made  on  the  spot,  I  find  the  number  of  steps  given  as
fourteen.


CH.  XXVII  SANCTUARY  OF  AESCULAPIUS  245

tions  recording  the  cures  were  set  up  in  it,  which  would  be  most  natural
if  it  was  the  place  where  the  cures  were  supposed  to  have  been
effected ;  (3)  the  well  in  the  colonnade  was  probably  a  sacred  one,
and  its  water  may  have  been  used  by  the  patients  for  the  purifications
prescribed  by  ritual.  See  IIpaKTiKa  t^s  *K()\a.i,o\,  ^Eraiplas,  1884
(pub.  1885),  pp.  58-61  ;  Cavvadias,  Fouilles  (V Elpidaure^  i.  p.  17  sq,
Aristophanes,  in  a  well-known  passage  {Plutus,  653  sqq.\  has  described
sick  people  sleeping  in  a  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius.

27.  3.  a  round  building called  the  Rotunda.     The  remains  of

this  very  beautiful  and  interesting  structure  were  brought  to  light  by  the
excavations  of  Mr.  Cavvadias  in   1882.     They  are  situated  some  70
feet  south-west  of  the  temple  of  Aesculapius.       Only  the  foundations
are  standing ;  but  architectural  fragments  exist  in  sufficient  number  to
allow  us  to  reconstruct  the  plan  of  the  edifice.     Its  diameter  is  32.65
metres  (107  feet).   The  existing  foundations  consist  of  six  concentric  walls
built  of  common  (*  poros ')  stone  (Fig.  40).   The  first  or  outermost  of  these
foundation-walls  supported  twenty-six  Doric  columns,  which  formed  the
peristyle  or  outer  colonnade  of  the  building ;  the  second  foundation-wall
supported  the  circular  wall  of  the  building ;  the  third  foundation-wall
supported  fourteen  Corinthian  columns,  which  formed  the  inner  colon-
nade; and  the  three  innermost  foundation-walls  supported  the  marble
floor.    The  entrance  was  on  the  east ;  it  was  approached,  not  by  steps,
but  by  a  ramp  or  inclined  plane,  most  of  which  is  destroyed.     The  outer
colonnade  was  built  of  common  stone  (not  marble)  of  a  fine  grain  ;  the
stone  was  coated  with  stucco,  and  the  stucco  was  painted,  for  traces  of    r
colour  can  be  detected  on  it,  especially  of  red  between  the  guttae  of  the
mutules.     The  metopes  of  this  colonnade  were  decorated  with  rosettes
finely  carved  in  relief.     The  circular  wall  of  the  building,  between  the
outer  and  the  inner  row  of  columns,  was  built  of  various  materials.     The
outer  base  was  of  white  marble ;  the  inner  base  was  of  black  marble  ;
the  frieze  was  of  Pentelic  marble.     The  rest  of  the  wall  was  of  common
stone.     Pausanias  tells  us  that  the  wall  was  adorned  with  paintings  by
Pausias :  we  do  not  know  whether  it  was  the  outer  or  the  inner  face  of
the  wall  which  was  so  embellished.     Inside  of  the  building,  as  we  have
seen,  there  was  a  circular  colonnade  of  fourteen  Corinthian  columns :
this  colonnade  was  entirely  of  marble.     It  is  one  of  the  earliest  known
examples  of  the  use   of  the    Corinthian   order  in  Greek  architecture
(q).  vol.  2.  p.  208).     In  connexion  with  this  colonnade  Mr.  Cavvadias Vl
made  a  curious  discovery.     He  found,  at  the  depth   of  about   3  feet
under  the  ancient  level  of  the  soil,  a  beautifully  chiselled  Corinthian
capital,  almost  intact,  which  yet,  being  without  any  marks  of  attachment,
had  clearly  never  formed  any  part  of  the  colonnade  to  which  by  its
shape  and  dimensions  it  belonged.     It  had  not  been  rejected  by  the
architect  for  any  flaw,  for  it  was  carefully  covered  with  tiles  to  preserve
it  from  injury.     Nor  can  it,  in  Mr.  Cavvadias's  opinion,  have  been  the
model  on  which  the  rest  were  made,  since  such  models  were  made,
not  in  stone,  but  in   wax  or  other  plastic  material.     Perhaps  it  may
have  been  buried  with  some  superstitious   notion   that  so   long  as  it
remained  intact  the  colonnade  itself  would  stand  entire.


CH.  XXVII  SANCTUARY  OF  AESCULAPIUS  247

The  pavement  in  the  interior  of  the  building,  within  the  circle  of  the
Corinthian  colonnade,  was  composed  of  diamond-shaped  flags  of  black
and  white  marble  alternately.  If  this  pavement  extended  from  the
circumference  to  the  centre,  the  central  flag  must  have  been  circular ;
and  as  no  such  circular  flag  was  found,  Mr.  Cawadias  concludes  that
the  centre  was  occupied  by  a  circular  aperture  which  gave  access  to  the
curious  subterranean  vault  under  the  floor  of  the  building.  This  vault
was  formed  by  the  three  innermost  of  the  six  concentric  foundation-
wails,  the  three,  namely,  which  supported  the  pavement  Thus  the
vault  consists  of  three  circular  passages,  one  inside  the  other,  with  a
small  circular  apartment  in  the  middle.  In  each  of  the  circular  walls
there  is  a  door,  so  that  the  passages  communicate  with  each  other,  and
it  is  possible  to  pass  from  the  outermost  passage  into  the  central  com-
partment or  vice  versd.  But  each  passage  is  barred  at  a  certain  point
by  a  cross  wall  so  placed  that  a  person  on  passing  through  the  door  of
any  one  of  the  circular  walls  is  obliged  to  go  the  whole  round  of  the
passage  before  he  comes  to  the  door  leading  into  the  next  passage.
The  vault  thus  forms  a  kind  of  labyrinth  such  that  any  one  starting
from  the  circumference  must  traverse  the  whole  of  it  before  he  reaches
the  centre.

The  rest  of  the  pavement  of  the  building  was  of  limestone,  except
the  part  between  the  Doric  columns,  which  was  of  tufa.

The  ceiling  of  the  edifice  was  coffered  and  richly  adorned  with
carving  and  painting.  It  was  of  white  marble,  except  the  central  part
as  far  as  the  Corinthian  columns,  which  was  of  wood.  At  the  outer
edge  of  the  roof  a  row  of  spouts,  placed  at  regular  intervals  and  exquisitely
carved  in  the  shape  of  lions*  heads,  served  to  convey  the  rain-water  from
the  roof.  From  the  centre  of  the  roof  there  rose  a  floral  decoration,  of
which  some  pieces  have  been  found.

The  whole  of  the  marble  decorations  of  the  building  are  carved  with
the  utmost  delicacy  and  precision,  and  in  style  recall  those  of  the
Erechtheum  at  Athens.

A  long  inscription,  found  in  the  sanctuary,  contains  the  accounts  of
the  moneys  received  and  expended  for  the  construction  of  the  Rotunda.
In  this  inscription  the  building  is  called,  not  the  Rotunda  {Tholos\  but
the  ThumelOj  i.e,  *  altar '  or  *  place  of  sacrifice,'  but  that  the  building
thus  designated  was  the  circular  edifice  just  described  is  clearly  proved
by  the  contents  of  the  inscription.     For  we  learn  from  the  inscription
that   the   building   in    question    contained  a  shrine   {sakos)   with    an
exterior  colonnade,  and  that  it  was  built  of  tufa  brought  from  Corinth,
of  Pentelic  marble,  and  of  black  stone  from  Argos.    The  name  Thumela
applied  to  the  building  seems  to  indicate  that  sacrifices  were  offered  in
tile  Rotunda,  but  what  these  sacrifices  may  have  been,  and  by  whom
oflfered,  we  do  not  know.     Mr.  Cawadias  conjectured  that  some  mystic
J^t€s,  relating  to  the  worship  of  Aesculapius,  may  have  been  performed
Jri   the  curious  vault  under  the  floor  of  the  edifice.     From  the  inscrip-
tion we  infer  that  the  work  of  building  the  Rotunda  was  spread  over
^t    least  twenty-one  years ;  for  twenty-one  priests  are  mentioned  in  it,
a.nd  each  priest  held  office  for  a  year.     Further,  we  learn  that  the


248  SANCTUARY  OF  AESCULAPIUS      bk.  ii.  cownth

work  was  done  by  contract,  different  parts  of  it  being  assigned  to
different  contractors.     Some  of  the  contractors  came  from  a  distance,
as  from  Athens,  Paros,  Troezen,  and  Tegea,  and  were  allowed  travelling
expenses  for  their  journey.      The  duty  of  giving   out  the  work  on
contract  was  entrusted  to  one  set  of  commissioners  (the  eySor^/xs),  and
the  duty  of  superintending  its  execution  was  entrusted  to  another  set  of
commissioners  (the  SvfieXoTroioi).     The  priests  of  Aesculapius  acted
as  treasurers,  disbursing  money  to  the  commissioners  who  superintended
the  execution  of  the  work,  and  receiving  it  from  contractors  in  the
shape  of  fines  inflicted  for  breaches  of  contract.     From  the  shape  oi
the  letters  and  other  indications  the  inscription  seems  to  date  fron^
about  the  middle  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.      This  therefore   gives
approximately  the  date  of  the  construction  of  the  Rotunda,  and  fror^
this  it  follows  that  the  architect  Polyclitus  was  the  younger,  not  tl^^
elder  sculptor  of  that  name  (see  note  on  ii.  22.  7).     This  conclusion   ^  •
confirmed  by  the  masons*  marks  on  some  of  the  stones  of  the  building
for  these  marks  are  letters  of  the  alphabet  of  shapes  which  belong
the  fourth,  but  not  to  the  fifth  century  B.C.

See  npaKTixii  riji  'ApxatoX.  ^Eratplas,  1 882,  pp.  7 7-8 1  ;  id,,  1883,  p.  49  sg.
Cavvadias,   Fouilles  cCEpidaure^   I.   pp.   13-16;   Baedeker,'  p.   251.      For  th
inscription  relating  to  the  construction  of  the  Rotunda  see  *E(fnf/juepis  apxo^oXaryuci^
1892,  p.  69  S(^g. ;  Cavvadias,  op,  cit,  p.  93  sqq,,  Inscr.  No.  242.

27.  3.  Pausias.     See  note  on  ii.  7.  3.

27.  3.  it  represents  Dnmkeimess.     On  a  silver  plate,  found  i
Syria,  but  of  Greek  workmanship,  a  naked  girl  is  represented  holdin
the  arm  of  a  seated  man.     Mr.  De  Witte  interprets  the  girl  as  Drunken-
ness (Methe)  and  the  man  as  Hercules  drunk.    See  Gazette  ArcJUologiqur
6  (1880),  p.  140  sq.^  with  plate  23.

27.  3.  Tablets  stood  within  the  enclosure  etc.  Strabo  says
(viii.  p.  374)  that  the  sanctuary  was  "full  of  votive  tablets,  on  which
are  recorded  the  cures,  just  as  at  Cos  and  Tricca."  Mr.  Cavvadias  had
the  good  fortune  to  discover  two  of  these  curious  documents  in  the
sanctuary.  The  stones  on  which  the  cures  are  inscribed  were  found  in
fragments  built  into  the  walls  of  a  mediaeval  house  at  the  east  end  of
the  great  Ionic  colonnade  (see  note  on  ii.  27.  2).  Being  pieced  together
these  fragments  made  up  two  of  the'  tablets  described  by  Strabo  and
Pausanias.  To  judge  from  the  orthography  and  shapes  of  the  letters,
the  inscriptions  cannot  be  older  than  the  middle  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.
nor  later  than  the  third  century  B.C.  But  some  of  the  cures  at  least
would  seem  to  have  been  much  older  than  the  inscriptions ;  for  one  of
the  cases  (the  curing  of  a  woman  of  Troezen  who  had  a  worm  in  her
stomach,  see  below,  case  8)  was  recorded  by  Hippys  of  Rhegium,  a
writer  who  flourished  in  the  first  half  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  (see  Aelian,
Nat,  An.  ix.  33  ;  Frag,  Hist,  Graec.  ed.  Miiller,  2.  p.  15).  Probably
the  records  contained  in  these  tablets  were  collected  by  the  priests  from
the  inscriptions  engraved  on  the  offerings  of  patients  who  had  been
healed  and  who  had  recorded  in  these  inscriptions  the  manner  of  their
cure.  The  following  may  serve  as  specimens  of  the  cures  recorded  on
the  tablets  : —


CH.  XXVII  SANCTUARY  OF  AESCULAPIUS  249

( I )  A  woman  named  Cleo  was  with  child  five  years.     She  came
and   slept  in  the   Dormitory  (Abatori)  of  the  sanctuary ;  and  in  the
morning,  as  soon  as  she  had  quitted  the  sanctuary,  she  was  delivered  of
a  son,  who  immediately  washed  in  the  cistern  and  walked  about  with
his  mother.  'Jf^^)  A  man,  whose  fingers  were  all  paralysed  but  one,  came
as  a  suppliant  to  the  god.     But  when  he  saw  the  tablets  in  the  sanctuary
with  the  miraculous  cures  recorded  on  them,  he  was  incredulous  and
scoffed  at  the  cures.     However,  he  fell  asleep  in  the  Dormitory  and
dreamed  a  dream.     He  thought  he  was  playing  dice  in  the  temple  and
that  as  he  was  about  to  make  a  throw  the  god  seized  his  hand  and  straight-
ened out  his  fingers.     In  the  morning  he  went  forth  whole.    Jj)  Pan-
dams,  a  Thessalian,  had  letters  branded  on  his  forehead.    Sleeping  in  the
sanctuary  he  dreamed  a  dream.     He  thought  that  the  god  bound  a  fillet
over  the  brands  and  bade  him,  so  soon  as  he  should  leave  the  Dormitory,
take  off  the  fillet  and  dedicate  it  in  the  temple.     When  morning  came,
lie  arose  and  took  off  the  fillet,  and  lo !  the  marks  had  disappeared
^rom  his  face.     But  the  letters  which  had  been  branded  on  his  brow
-were  now  stamped  on  the  fillet,  which  he  dedicated  in  the  temple,  as
the  god  had  commanded  him.    Now  it  happened  that  Echedorus,  whose
face  was  also  branded,  came  to  the  sanctuary  with  money  which  he  had
received  from  Pandarus  to  make  a  dedicatory  offering  to  Aesculapius.
Cut  he  did  not  make  the  offering,  and  as  he  slept  in  the  sanctuary  the
^od  asked  him  in  a  dream  whether  he  had  not  received  money  from
Pandarus   for   the   purpose   of  making   a   dedicatory  offering   in    the
temple.     The  man  denied  he  had  received  the  money,  but  offered,
if  the  god   would  heal   the   marks  on  his   face,   to   have   a   picture
of  the    god    painted    and    hung    in   the    temple.       Then    the    god
bound  the  fillet  of  Pandarus    about    the    brands    of  Echedorus  and
bade  him,   on   leaving   the    Dormitory,   take  off  the  fillet,   wash   his
face  in  the  cistern,  and  look  at  himself  in  the  water.      Morning  being
come,  he  went  forth  from  the  dormitory  and  took  off  the  fillet,  from
vhich  the  letters  had  now  vanished ;  and  on  looking  at  his  own  reflec-
tion in  the  water,  he  saw  that  his  face  was  now  branded  with  the  marks
of  Pandarus  in  addition  to  his  own.     (4)  A  man  who  suffered  much
^m  an  ulcer  on  the  toe  was  brought  forth  by  the  attendants  and  placed
on  a  seat.     While  he  slept,  a  serpent  came  forth  from  the  dormitory
and  healed  the  ulcer  with  his  tongue.     It  then  glided  back  into  the
dormitory.     When  the  man  awoke  he  was  cured,  and  declared  that  he
^  seen  a  vision ;  he  thought  a  young  man  of  goodly  aspect  had
smeared  a  salve  upon  his  toe.    \i^  Alcetas  of  Hal  ice,  a  blind  man,  had
a  dream.     He  thought  that  the  gbd  came  and  opened  his  eyes  with  his
fingers,  and  so  he  saw  the  trees  in  the  sanctuary  for  the  first  time  ;  in  the
morning  he  went  forth  whole.     (^  Thyson,  a  blind  boy  of  Hermion,
had  his  eyes  licked  by  one  of  the  dogs  about  the  temple  and  went  away
whole.

These  cures  are  all  taken  from  the  first  tablet.     The  following  are
from  the  second  tablet :

(7)  Arata,  a  Lacedaemonian  woman,  came  to  Epidaurus  on  behalf
of  her  daughter  who  was  afflicted  with  dropsy  and  had  been  left  behind


250  SANCTUARY  OF  AESCULAPIUS      bk.  ii.  corinth

in  Lacedaemon.     She  slept  in  the  sanctuary  and  dreamed  a  dream.
She   thought    that   the   god    cut   off   her    daughter's   head  and  hung
up    the    headless    trunk,    neck    down.     When   all   the    moisture   had
run  out,  he  took  down  the  body,  and  put  on  the  head  again.     After
she  had  dreamed  this  dream,  the  mother  returned  to  Lacedaemon,
where  she  found  that  her  daughter  was  cured,  and  had  seen  the  very
same  dream.     (8)  Aristagora,  a  woman  of  Troezen,  had  a  worm  in  her
stomach.     She  slept  in  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  at  Troezen  and
dreamed   a   dream.      She   thought   that,  Aesculapius   being  away  at
Epidaurus,  his  sons  cut  off  her  head,  but  that  being  unable  to  put  it  on
again  they  sent  for  Aesculapius  to  come  and  help  them.     Meanwhile
day  dawned,  and  the  priest  saw  that  the  woman's  head  was  of  a  truth
severed  from  her  body.     The  following  night  Aristagora  had  another
dream.     She  thought  that  the  god  came  from  Epidaurus  and  put  her
head  on  her  neck ;  then  he  slit  open  her  stomach,  took  out  the  worm,
and  sewed  up  the  wound.     After  that  she  went  away  cured.     (9)  A
boy,  a  native  of  Aegina,  had  a  tumour  on  his  neck.     He  came  to  the
Epidaurian  sanctuary,  and  one  of  the  sacred  dogs  healed  him  with  his
tongue.     ( i^  Gorgias  of  Heraclea  had  been  wounded  with  an  arrow  'n^
one  of  his  lungs  at  a  battle.     Within  eighteen  months  the  wound  gener-
ated so  much  pus  that  sixty-seven  cups  were  filled  with  it.    He  slept  in  \X^^
dormitory,  and  in  a  dream  it  seemed  to  him  that  the  god  removed  tl*^
barb  of  the  arrow  from  his  lung.     In  the  morning  he  went  forth  whol^
with  the  barb  of  the  arrow  in  his  hands.

See  *E0iuic/)2j  a/)x«*o\o7iici^,  1883,  pp.  197-228  ;  iV/.,  1885,  pp.  1-30;  Cawadi^^^
Fouilles  (T Epidaure^  I.  pp.  23-32;  Baunack,  Studien^  i.  p.  \20  5qq.\  S.  Reina^^
in  Revue  archiologique^  3rd  series,  4  (1884),  PP*  76-83  ;  «V/.,  5  (1885),  PP-  265-27^^
A-  C.  Merriam,  'Marvellous  cures  at  Epidaurus,*  The  American  Antiquarian^
(1S84),  pp.  300-307  (gives  translation  of  first  tablet);  Collitz,  Griech,  Dialek^
Inschriften,  3.  Nos.  3339-334I*

From  these  inscriptions  we  see  that  sacred  dogs  were  kept  in  th
sanctuary  of  Aesculapius,  and  that  they  were  supposed  to  heal  the  sic^
by  licking  them.     Festus  {s.v.  In  insula)  says  that  "  dogs  are  kept  ir"
the  temple  of  Aesculapius  because  he  was  suckled  by  a  bitch."     Lac^
tantius  {Divin,  Inst.  i.  10)  also  says  that  the  youthful  Aesculapius  wa^
nourished  on  dog's  milk.     Hence  the  story  told  by  Pausanias  (ii.  26.  4)^
that  the  infant  Aesculapius  was  suckled  by  a  goat  and  guarded  by  a
dog,  appears  to  be  an  attempt  to  combine  two  separate  legends,  which
explained  the  sacredness  of  the  goat  and  dog  in  the  worship  of  Aescu-
lapius by  saying  that  the  god  had  been  suckled  by  a  goat  or  (according
to  the  other  version)  by  a  dog.     From  an  inscription  it  appears  that  in
the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  at  Piraeus  there  were  dogs  which  were  fed
with  sacrificial  cakes  ('E(f>rjfjL€pU  dp\aiokoyiKrjy  1885,  P*   ^^  *  C.LA.
ii.  No.  165 1  ;  V.  Wilamowitz-Mollendorff, /ry////j' z/t?«  ^//V/ezwrwj,  p.  100).
j  Sometimes  the  flesh  of  these  sacred  dogs  seems  to  have  been  given  to
'  patients  to  eat  as  a  medicine.     At  least  Sexlus  Empiricus  says  (p.  174,
ed.  Bekker) :  "  We  Greeks  think  it  unholy  to  eat  dog's  flesh.      But  some
of  the  Thracians  are  said  to  eat  dog's  flesh,  and  perhaps  this  was  an
old  Greek  custom.     Wherefore  Diodes,  taking  a  leaf  out  of  the  book  of


CH.  XXVII  SANCTUARY  OF  AESCULAPIUS  251

the  disciples  of  Aesculapius,  recommends  that  the  flesh  of  dogs  should
be  given  to  some  patients."  Sacred  dogs  were  also  kept  in  the  temple
and  grove  of  Hephaestus  at  Aetna  in  Sicily  (Aelian,  Nat,  An.  xi.  3),
and  in  the  temple  of  Adranus  at  the  city  of  the  same  name  in  Sicily
{id.  xi.  20).  In  an  inscription  found  at  Citium  in  Cyprus,  and  containing
a  list  of  the  persons  connected  with  a  sanctuary  of  Astarte  (architects,
masons,  scribes,  sacristans,  etc.),  there  occurs  the  Hebrew  word  for  dogs
(Klbm  =  Kelabim\  the  meaning  of  which,  in  this  collocation,  has  given
rise  to  some  discussion.  Mr.  S.  Reinach  plausibly  explains  it  as
referring  to  sacred  dogs  attached  to  the  temple.

See  S.  Reinach,  '  Les  chiens  dans  le  culte  d'EscuIape/  Revue  archiologique^
3rd  series,  4  (1884),  pp.  129-135  ;  H.  Gaidoz,  *  X  propos  des  chiens  d'^pidaure,*
ib.  pp.  217-222;  Clermont  Ganneau,  *Esculape  et  le  chien,*  Revue  critique ^  15
December,  1884,  pi>.  502-504 ;  A.  C.  Merriam,  '  The  dogs  of  Aesculapius,'  The
American  Antiquarian,  7  (1885),  pp.  285-289.

Again  it  appears  from  one  of  the  Epidaurian  inscriptions  (see  case  4,
above  p.  249)  that  serpents  were  kept  in  the  sanctuary,  and  were  believed
to  heal  the  sick  by  licking  them.     See  note  on  ii.  10.  3.

Besides  the  inscriptions  already  mentioned,  and  a  large  number  of
minor  ones,  three  other  inscriptions  found  in  the  sanctuary  at  Epidaurus
may  be  specially  mentioned.  One  records  the  cure  of  M.  Julius  Apellas,
who  had  suffered  from  indigestion  and  was  cured  by  a  course  of  diet
and  exercise.  Another  contains  a  hymn  in  honour  of  Aesculapius,  com-
posed by  Isyllus  of  Epidaurus.  A  third  inscription  records  the  decision
of  some  Megarian  arbitrators  in  a  dispute  as  to  boundaries  between  the
£pidaurians  and  Corinthians.  See  Cawadias,  Fouilles  d'Epidaure^  i.
pp.  33  -y^-i  34  ^99'^  74  s^*  >  'E<fyrifi€pls  dpxai'oXoyiKrjy  1883,  p.  227  sqq.  ;
«Vi,  1885,  PP-  65-84;  id,  1886,  pp.  141-144;  id.,  1887,  pp.  9-24;
Baunack,  Studien,  i.  pp.  no  sqq.,  147  sqq.,  2.  p.  221  sqq.  The  in-
scription containing  the  hymn  of  Isyllus  is  the  subject  of  a  special
Volume  by  Prof.  v.  Wilamowitz  -  M  Ollendorff,  Isyllus  von  Epidaurus
(Berlin,  1886).

27.  4-  there  he  consecrated  to  Artemis  a  precinct.  This
precinct,  situated  on  the  northern  bank  of  the  beautiful  little  woodland
lakeof  Nemi  (the  Arician  Lake),  was  excavated  in  1885  at  the  expense
of  Sir  John  Savile  Lumley  (afterwards  Lord  Savile).  Remains  of  the
temple  of  Diana  (Artemis)  and  a  great  many  votive  offerings  were
discovered.  See  Athenaeum,  10  October,  1885  ;  Bulletino  deW  Inst,  di
Corrisp.  Archeol.  1885,  pp.  149  sqq.,  225  sqq,  ;  G.  H.  Wallis,  Catalogue
of  Classical  Antiquities  from  the  site  of  the  temple  of  Diana,  Nemi,
holy,

27:  4.  the  priesthood is  the  prize  of  victory  in  a  single

combat.  I  have  suggested  an  explanation  of  this  custom  in  The  Golden
Bough.

27.  5.  a  theatre.  This,  the  best  preserved  and  most  beautiful
Greek  theatre  which  survives,  lies  at  the  foot  of  a  mountain  (supposed
to  be  Mount  Cynortium,  see  §  7),  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  to  the
south-cast  of  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius.  It  was  excavated  by  the
Greek  Archaeological  Society  in  1 8  8 1  - 1 8  8  2 .


as*


THEATRE  OF  EPWAURUS


The  auditorium  or  part  reserved  for  the  spectators  is  built  on  lie
slope  of  the  hill  and  looks  to  the  north-west.  It  includes  fifiy-6ve  tien
of  seats  made  of  while  limestone.  A  broad  horizontal  passage  {diaaoma)
divides  the  auditorium  into  two  sections,  an  upper  and  a  lower  ;  there  are
twenty-one  tiers  of  seats  in  the  upper  section  and  thirty-four  tiers  in  the
lower.  The  lower  part  is  divided  into  twelve  wedge-shaped  sections
{kerkida)  by  thirteen  staircases,  each  2  feet  wide.  In  the  upper  part,
above  the  diazoma,  the  number  of  staircases  is  doubled,  so  that  eadi
wedge-shaped  section  in  the  lower  part  corresponds  to  two  such  sections
in  the  upper  part.  The  seats  consist,  as  usual,  of  mere  benches  without
backs,  except  in  three  of  the  rows,  where  they  are  provided  with  hacks.
One  of  these  three  rows  is  the  lowest  row  of  all,  at  the  edge  of  the


orchestra  ;  the  other  two  are  respectively  above  and  below  the  diasoma.
But  even  in  these  belter  rows  Ihe  seals  are  not  separated  from  each
other  by  arms,  like  the  chairs  in  the  front  row  of  the  theatre  at  Athens  ;
nor  do  they  bear  inscriptions,  since  they  were  not,  like  the  chairs  at
Athens,  reserved  for  official  personages.  The  highest  row  of  seats  is
193  feet  from  the  orchestra,  and  74  feet  above  it.  Behind  it  a  passage,
7  feel  wide,  ran  along  the  outside  wall  of  the  building.  Of  this  outside
wall,  about  1  feet  thick,  only  the  foundations  remain.  The  two  retaining
walls  which  supported  the  auditorium  at  its  two  ends  are  built  of
common  ('poros')  stone;  on  the  side  of  the  orchestra  each  of  them
ended  in  a  plinth  which  served  as  the  pedestal  of  a  statue.  On  the  top
of  each  of  the  retaining  walls  there  ran  a  balustrade  of  limestone.     The


CH.  XXVII  THEATRE  OF  EPIDAURUS  253

auditorium  is  separated  from  the  orchestra  by  a  passage  or  rather  a
paved  channel,  into  which  the  water  from  the  upper  part  of  the  theatre
drained.  At  each  end  of  this  channel  there  are  two  holes,  through
ii^'hich  the  water  passed  into  a  subterranean  aqueduct.

The  orchestra  has  the  shape  of  a  complete  circle.     It  is  surrounded
by  a  ring  flagged  with  stones,  which  does  not,  however,  rise  above  the
surface.     Within  this  ring  the  orchestra  proper,  a  circular  space  of
24.32  metres  (79  feet  9  inches)  in  diameter,  was  not  paved  but  merely
covered  with  beaten  earth.     Exactly  in  the  middle  of  the  orchestra  a
round  stone,  2  feet  4  inches  in  diameter,  is  fixed  into  the  earth.     In  its
upper  surface,  which  is  flush  with  the  floor  of  the  orchestra,  there  is  a
deep  round  hole,  in  which  the  altar  of  Dionysus  may  have  been  fastened.
The  circular  shape  of  the  orchestra  is  particularly  interesting,  as  this
was  perhaps  the  original  form  of  all  Greek  orchestras,  but  in  no  other
existing  Greek  theatre  has  it  been  preserved  entire.     There  are,  how-
ever, traces  of  a  circular  orchestra  in  the  Dionysiac  theatre  at  Athens
(vol.  2.  p.  226).

Of  the  stage  enough  remains  to  allow  us  to  reconstruct  its  plan
with  tolerable  certainty.     Close  to  the  circle  of  the  orchestra  extends  a
row  of  stones  sunk  in  the  ground,  which  served  to  support  the  hypo-
skenion  or  front  wall  of  the  stage.     This  front  wall  of  the  stage  was
adorned  with  eighteen  half  columns  of  the  Ionic  order,  each  with  a
diameter  of  .33  metre.     None  of  the  columns  is  standing,  but  the  places
where  they  stood  can  still  be  seen,  and  fragments  of  them  have  been
found.     The  height  of  the  wall  was  3.55   metres  or   12   Greek  feet
exactly.     It  thus  agrees  with  the  statement  of  Vitruvius  (viii.  8)  that
the  height  of  the  Greek  stage  was  not  less  than  i  o  feet  and  not  more
than  12  feet.     The  front  wall  of  the  stage  was  perhaps  adorned  with
sculpture  as  well  as  with  half  columns ;  for  Mr.  Cavvadias  found  two
statues  in  the  space  between  the  orchestra  and  the  base  of  the  wall.
One  was  a  statue  of  Aesculapius,  the  other  an  archaistic  statue  of  a
woman,  perhaps  the  goddess  Health.     Pollux  tells  us  (iv.    124)  that
the  hyposkenion  or  front  wall  of  the  stage  was  commonly  decorated  with
columns  and  statuary.     In  the  middle  of  the  front  wall  of  the  stage
there  was  a  door,  exactly  opposite  the  centre  of  the  orchestra.     The
depth  of  the  stage-buildings  from  front  to  back  is  about  9  metres  (30
feet),  but  of  this  only  perhaps  the  front  portion  (2.41  metres  deep)  was
the  actual  stage.     At  each  end  of  the  stage  there  are  two  small  pro-
jecting wings,  of  quadrangular  shape,  in  each  of  which  there  is  a  door.
In  Roman   times  these  doors  were  apparently  disused,  and  in  their
place  statues  were  set  up,  the  pedestals  of  which  may  still  be  seen.     An
inscription  on  the  eastern  of  the  two  pedestals  proves  that  it  supported
a  statue  of  Livia.     A  ramp  or  inclined  plane  led  up  to  the  stage  at
either  end.     In   the  front  wall  of  each  of  these  ramps,  close  to  the
projecting  wing  of  the  stage,  there  is  a  door.     On  each  side  of  the
theatre,  a  broad  passage  called  the  parodos  led  into  the  orchestra,  being
bounded  on  the  one  side  by  the  retaining  wall  of  the  auditorium,  and  on
the  other  by  the  front  wall  of  the  ramp  which  gave  access  to  the  stage.
At  the  outer  end  of  each  of  these  passages  {parodot)  there  was  a  door.


254  THEATRE  OF  EPIDAURUS  bk.  ii.  corinth

Spectators  entered  by  these  doors,  passed  on  into  the  orchestra,  and
from  it  ascended  by  one  or  other  of  the  staircases  to  their  seats.

All  the  stage-buildings  are  constructed  of  common  ('  poros ')  stone.
In  the  Roman  period  they  were  restored,  but  the  original  plan  seems
to  have  been  retained  unaltered.  According  to  Mr.  Cawadias,  the
foundations  of  the  stage-buildings,  including  the  front  wall  of  the  stage,
are  clearly  of  the  Greek  period,  and  are  entirely  in  harmony  with  the
general  plan  of  the  theatre.  In  the  middle  ages  the  stage-buildings
were  rebuilt,  probably  to  serve  as  dwelling-houses.  At  present  they
rise  but  little  above  the  ancient  level  of  the  soil.  Down  the  length  of
the  central  and  largest  of  these  buildings  there  is  a  row  of  five
square  stones  sunk  at  regular  intervals  in  the  ground ;  they  served
as  bases  for  unfluted  columns  which  supported  the  roof.  At  eadi
end  of  this  central  building  there  are  the  remains  of  two  chambers
of  which  the  purpose  is  not  known.

In   recent  years   Dr.   Dorpfeld  has  propounded  a  theory  that  in
Greek  theatres   the  actors  acted,  not   on  a  raised  stage,  but  on  the
level  of  the  orchestra,  and  that  the  stage-buildings  in  existing  Greek
theatres  were  not  stages  (Aoyctd)  on  which  the  actors  acted,  but  merely
backgrounds  in  front  of  which  they  appeared.     But  this  theory  con-
tradicts (i)  the  express  testimony  of  Vitruvius  (v.  8),  of  Pollux  (who
says,  iv.  127,  that  the  actors  ascended  the  stage  from  the  orchestra  by
ladders  or  staircases),  and  of  other  ancient  writers  who  speak  of  actors
ascending  and  descending  (Aristophanes,  Knights^  149,  Wasps^  I342t
1 5 14,  Eccles,    1 1 52;    Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Knights^    I49  ;   P^^^
Symposium^  p.  194  b) ;  (2)  the  evidence  of  Greek  vases,  on  which  the
actors  are  plainly  depicted  acting  on  a  raised  stage  adorned  in  front
with  columns  like  the  stages  at  Epidaurus  and  Oropus  (Baumeister's
Denkmdlery  p.  1751  5qq,)\  (3)  the  evidence  of  existing  Greek  theatres
in  which  may  be  seen  structures  bearing  all  the  outward  appearance  of
having  been  stages  and  answering  fairly  to  Vitruvius's  description  of
the  Greek  stage ;  (4)  the  evidence  of  a  Delian  inscription  of  the  year
282  B.C.  in  which  the  stage-building  is  definitely  called  the  Aoyciov  or
place  where  the  actors  spoke  {Bull,  de  Corresp,  HelUn,  18  (1894),  pp-
162,  165  sqq. ;  O.   Navarre,  LHonysos^  p.  307  sqq,)  ;  and  (5)  the  rules
of  probability,  since  it  is  very  unlikely  {a)  that  substantial  structures*
deep  as  well  as  long,  such  as  we  find  in  existing  Greek  theatres,  should
have  been  built  merely  as  a  background,  when  a  simple  wall  would
have  answered  the   purpose ;  {b)  that  the   actors    should   have   been
concealed  from    many  of  the   spectators,    especially  from  those  who
occupied  the  best  seats  in  the  front  row,  by  the  interposition  of  the
chorus,  as  they  must  have  been  if  the  chorus  intervened  between  them
and  the  audience,  as  Dr.  Dorpfeld  supposes.      On  all  these  grounds
Dr.  Dorpfeld's  theory  may  be  rejected,  at  least  until  he  supports  it  by
much  stronger  arguments  than  he  has  hitherto  adduced.

We  learn  from  Pausanias  that  the  architect  of  the  theatre  was
Polyclitus.  This  was  no  doubt  the  same  Polyclitus  who  built  the
Rotunda ;  and  as  the  Polyclitus  who  built  the  Rotunda  was  the  younger
artist  of  that  name  (see  above  p.  248),  it  follows  that  the  theatre  was
built  about  the  middle  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.


I.  XXVII  THEATRE  OF  EPIDAURVS  255


As  to  the  Epidauiian  theatre  see  Ilpa/rrcird  rrfl  *Apx<'^o\,  'EroupLas,  1 88 1,  p.
;  s^.,  and  Appendix,  pp.  1-40;  id.,  1882,  pp.  75-77;  id.,  1883,  pp.  46-48;
ivvadias,  FauilUs  cTEpidaurty  I.  pp.  10-13;  Kawerau,  in  Baumeister*s
enkmdUr,  p.  1738  sqq,  ;  K.  Dumon,  Lc  thidtre  de  Polyclite,  Reconstruction
apris  un  module  (Paris  1889) ;  v.  Christ,  '  Das  Theater  des  Polyklet  in
pidauros,'  Sitzungsberichte  d.  philosoph,  philolog,  u,  histor.  Classe  d,  k,  b.  Akcui.

IVissen,  tu  Afiinchen,  1894,  pp.  I -52 ;  Baedeker,'  p.  252  ;  Guide-Joantie,  2.  p.
(I  sq.  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  theory  of  the  al^nce  of  a  stage  in  Greek  theatres,  though
omulgated  about  ten  years  ago,  has  not  ^et  been  fully  explained  and  defended  by
m,  but  he  has  incidentally  expounded  it  on  several  occasions.  See  A.  MUller,
^ie  griechische  BUhnencUterthUnur,  p.  109  note  ;  Bull,  de  Corr,  Ilellht,  18  (1894),
.  167  sq.  ;  O.  Navarre,  Dionysos,  p.  310  x^.  ;  Berliner  philologische  IVocAen-
hrift^  22  December,  1894,  p.  1645  saq.  ;  id,,  12  January  1895,  P*  ^5  ^99'  J
f.y  26  January  1895,  p.  144  sqq.  His  theorv  has  been  combated  b)r  Mr.  A.  £.
laigh  {TAe  Att^  Theatre,  p.  141) ;  Prof.  v.  Christ  (in  the  dissertation  cited  above) ;
I.  Dumon  {Etudes  d*art  Grec  (Paris,  1894),  p.  15  sqq.);  and  O.  Navarre
Dumysos  (Paris,  1895),  PP*  ^7  -^^^m  3^6  sqq,)  On  the  other  hand  the  existence
fa  stage  in  Greek  theatres  of  the  Bfth  century  B.C.  has  been  denied  by  Mr.  J.
^ickard  (*  The  relative  position  of  actors  and  chorus  in  the  Greek  theatre  of  the
ifth  century  B.C.,'  American  JoumcU  of  Philology,  14  (1893),  pp.  68-89,  198-215.
73-304);  E.  Bodensteiner  (*Skenische  Fragen,'  JahrbUcner  fUr  classische
^hilologie,  Supplementband  19  (Leipzig,  1893),  pp.  639-808) ;  and  fc.  Weissmann
Die  scenische  Auffiihrung  der  griech,  Dramen  des  5.  Jahrhunderts,  MUnchen,

1893).

The  excavations  of  1893  ^^i^  \y^xt.  a  large  square  building  opposite
he  theatre.  It  includes  colonnades  and  chambers,  and  resembles  both
n  size  and  internal  arrangement  the  great  gymnasium  beside  the
itadium.     See  II^KTtKa  t^s  *Apx<**o^» 'Eratptas,  1893,  p.  10.

27.  5.  a  temple  of  ArtenUB.  The  remains  of  this  small  temple  are
situated  about  30  yards  south-east  of  the  temple  of  Aesculapius.  Only
the  foundations,  with  some  pieces  of  the  pavement,  are  standing.  It  was
a  Doric  temple  of  the  sort  called  prostyle  hexastyle,  which  means  that
it  had  six  columns  on  the  front  (the  east),  but  none  at  the  sides  or  back.
Its  length  was  13.50  metres  and  its  breadth  9.60  metres.  In  the
interior  there  was  a  row  of  columns  on  each  of  three  sides.  Like  the
temple  of  Aesculapius  it  was  built  of  common  (*  poros ')  stone,  except
the  cornice  (o-T€<^ai^),  and  the  roof-tiles,  which  were  of  marble,  and  the
pavement,  which  was  composed  of  flags  of  hard  limestone.  The  temple
rested  on  three  steps,  but  access  to  it  was  by  a  ramp  or  inclined  plane
on  the  east  side.  To  the  east  of  this  ramp  a  pavement  of  common
('  poros ')  stone  is  preserved,  on  which  an  altar  may  have  stood.  The
exact  date  of  the  temple  cannot  be  inferred  from  its  architectural  frag-
ments, but  probably  it  was  not  much  later  than  that  of  the  temple  of
Aesculapius.  The  reasons  for  identifying  this  little  temple  with  the
temple  of  Artemis  are  as  follows :  ( i )  The  external  cornice  was
ornamented  with  dogs'  heads  instead  of  the  usual  lions'  heads,  and  the
dog,  as  is  well  known,  was  sacred  to  Artemis  in  her  character  of  Hecate  :
[2)  near  the  eastern  fagade  of  the  temple  there  stands,  in  its  original
wsition,  a  large  pedestal  bearing  a  dedication  *  to  Artemis '  ('Afyrdfiiri)
nscribed  on  it  in  large  archaic  letters  ;  (3)  about  half-way  between  this
emple  and  the  temple  of  Aesculapius  there  was  found  a  statue  of  the
riple  Hecate,  on  the  base  of  which  is  inscribed  a  dedication  by  a  certain
"abuUus  *  to  Artemis  Hecate,  hearer  (of  prayers) '  (Cavvadias,  Fouilles


256  SANCTUARY  OF  AESCULAPIUS       bk.  ii.  corinth

d^ipidaure^  i.  p.  58,  No.  141).  Other  inscriptions  containing
dedications  to  Artemis  have  been  ifound  in  the  sanctuary  (Cawadias,
op.  cit.^  Inscriptions  iii,  126,  127,  128,  147,  148,  162;  *E<l>7jfUfHi
dpxaioKoyiKrjf  1 894,  p.  80,  Inscr.  No.  12).  Near  the  temple  of
Artemis  were  found  three  winged  figures  of  Victory,  which  may  have
stood  upon  the  roof.

See  Ilpaimicd  rip  *ApxcLio\,  ^Ercuplas,   1884,  pp.  61-63;  Cawadias,  Fouilks
cTApidaure,  i.  p.  i%  sq,

27.  5.  Epione.  She  was  the  wife  of  Aesculapius  (ii.  29.  i).  In  an
inscription,  found  in  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius,  it  is  recorded  that
a  certain  M.  Julius  Apellas  was  commanded  by  the  god  to  sacrifice  to
Aesculapius,  Epione,  and  the  Eleusinian  goddesses  (Cawadias,  Fouilks
dEpidaure^  i.  p.  33).  Another  inscription,  found  in  the  sanctuary,
mentions  a  certain  Stephanus  who  had  been  a  *  Fire-bearer'  of
Aesculapius  and  Epione  ;  the  inscription  dates  from  133  a.d.  (Cawadias,
Fouilles  dkpidaure^  i.  p.  43,  No.  35).  Cp.  S.  Wide,  De  sacris
Troezeniorum^  Hermionensium^  Epidauriorumy  p.  57.

27.  5.  a  sanctuary  of  Aphrodite.      In  1892  the  foundation  or
platform  {crepidomd)  of  a  small  temple  was  found  at  a  considerable
distance  to  the  north-east  of  the  temple  of  Aesculapius.     As  an  inscrip-
tion found  on  the  spot  mentions  a  sum  of  money  paid  to  a  certain
Heraclidas  for  stones  brought  to  the  sanctuary  of  Aphrodite,  the  founda-
tion or  platform  may  be  that  of  the  sanctuary  of  Aphrodite  here  mentioned
by  Pausanias.     See  AcXTtov  o-p^iokoyiKov^   1892,  p.   39  ;   II/aaKTiKa
Ti}? 'Apxato^' 'Eratptas,  1892,  p.  55.     A  statue  of  Aphrodite,  life-siie,
was  found  in  1886  in  the  Roman  baths  to  the  north-east  of  the  temple
of  Aesculapius.     It  is  of  Parian  marble.     The  feet,  nose,  and  most  of
the  right  arm  are  wanting.    The  statue  reproduces,  with  some  variations,
the    type  known  as  the  Venus    Genetrix  of  which  the  most   famous
example  is  in  the  Louvre  (M tiller- Wieseler,  Denkmdler^  2.  pi.  xxiv.  No.
263  ;  see  above,  vol.  2.  p.  192).     The  goddess  is  represented  standing
erect,  her  weight  resting  on  her  right  foot  ;  her  head  is  inclined  a  little
forward  and   to  the  right.     She  wears  a  light  tunic  which,  though  it
reaches  to   her   feet,    is   too  thin  to  veil  the  beautiful  form  beneath.
Moreover  it  has  slipped  down  from  her  right  shoulder,  leaving  the  right
breast  bare.     A  mantle  is  fastened  over  her  left  shoulder,  and  falls  in
graceful  folds  so  as  to  swathe  the  body  from  the  hips.     At  her  left  side
she  wore  a  sword ;  the  sword-belt  is  slung  over  the  right  shoulder  and
passes  obliquely  across  the  breast.     In  her  left  hand,  which  is  raised,  the
goddess  may  have  held  a  spear.     The  statue  is  certainly  a  copy  of  a
work  of  the  best  Greek  period.     Mr.  Cawadias  considers  it  the  finest  of
all  the  existing  examples  of  this  type  of  statue  ;  in  his  opinion  the  copy
itself  must  have  been  executed  at  a  time  when  Greek  art  was  still  at  a
high  level,  perhaps  in  the  Alexandrine  age.     See  B.  Staes,  in  'F,<f)r)fA€pis
dpxaioXoyiKrj,   1 886,  pp.    256-258  ;   Cawadias,   FAvTrra  tov  'EiOvikov
Movcrciou,  No.  262.     A  plinth  inscribed  with  the  name  of  Aphrodite  was
found  in  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  (Cawadias,  Fouilles  d^  Epidaurc,
I.  p.  57,  No.  125).


H.  XXVII  SANCTUARY  OF  AESCULAPIUS  257

27.  5.  a  stadium.  Even  before  the  recent  excavations  the  lines  of
le  stadium  might  be  traced  to  the  south  and  south-west  of  the  Rotunda,
n  1 894  the  stadium  was  excavated,  at  least  in  part.  The  first  trench-
igs  brought  to  light  several  rows  of  marble  seats  in  perfect  preservation,
^embling  those  of  the  theatre  {Athenaeum^  19  May,  1894,  p.  654).
'he  starting-point  and  goal  have  both  been  found  (American  Journal
(Archaeology^  10  (1895),  p.  116  ;  Classical  Review^  9  (1895),  ?•  335)'
27.  6.  The  buildings  erected  in  our  time  by  the  Roman  senator
Lntoninns.  If  the  reference  is  to  Antoninus  Pius,  the  passage  must
ave  been  written  before  138  A.D.,  when  Antoninus  became  emperor.
f  the  reference  is  to  Marcus  Aurelius  Antoninus,  the  passage  must  have
►een  written  before  161  A.D.,  when  Aurelius  succeeded  Pius  on  the
brone.  But  as  we  know  from  Pausanias  (viii.  43.  4)  that  Antoninus
^ius  adorned  Greece  with  many  buildings,  it  seems  more  probable  that
he  reference  is  to  him.  Thus  Pausanias  would  seem  to  have  written
he  second  book,  or  at  least  this  part  of  it,  in  the  reign  of  Hadrian.  Cp.
-eake,  Topography  of  Athens^  i.  p.  28  ;  Siebelis,  vol.  i.  p.  vii.  of  his
:dition  of  Pausanias.  Mr.  W.  Gurlitt,  however,  has  shown  some  grounds
or  supposing  that  the  second  book  was  not  written  till  after  165  A.D.
Ueber  Pausanias^  p.  i  ;  see  above,  note  on  26.  9).  On  the  other
land,  Schubart  thought  that  there  is  no  ground  for  identifying  "the
Roman  senator  Antoninus  "  with  either  of  the  emperors  (Zeitschrift  fur
Alterthumswissenschafty  1851,  p.  298).

27.  6.  a  bath  of  Aesculapius.  This  may  be  the  large  building  to
the  north  of  the  temple  of  Aesculapius.  See  above  p.  238 ;  and  IIpaKTiKa
ri\%*kp\,  'Eratpias,  1 886,  p.  79  J^. ;  /V/.,  1887,  p.  67.  A  roof- tile,
discovered  in  the  building,  is  inscribed  with  the  name  of  Antoninus,
which  confirms  the  identification  (Cawadias,  Fouilles  (P Epidaure^  i.  p.
107,  x\o.  247).

27.  6.  the  Oolonnade  of  Gotys.  In  1892  the  foundations  of  a
^drangular  building  were  excavated  to  the  east  of  the  stadium.  It
sctms  to  have  been  a  colonnade,  and  as  a  roof-tile  of  clay,  inscribed  with
the  name  of  Antoninus,  was  found  in  it,  we  may  conjecture  that  it  was
^  colonnade  of  Cotys  which,  as  Pausanias  tells  us,  Antoninus  restored.
See  AcXtiov  apx<^ioAoy4KOv,  1892,  p.  49  sq,  ;  II/xzKrtKa  Tr^%* Kp\a.i,o\,
WpMis,  1892,  p.  54  sq,

27.  6.  built  of  unbumt  brick.     Dr.  Dorpfeld  has  shown  that  this

material  was  extensively  employed  in  building  by  the  ancient  Greeks,

and  he  has  traced  some  of  the  characteristics  of  Greek  architecture,

especially  of  the  Doric  style,  to  the  very  general  use  in  early  times  of

unbumt  brick.     All  the  upper  portions  of  the  walls  in  the  Heraeum  at

Olympia  (see  v.   16)  were  of  this  material.     See  W.  Dorpfeld  'Der

antike  Ziegelbau  und  sein  Einfluss  auf  den  dorischen  Stil,'  Histor,  und

pkilolog.    Aufsdtze  Ernst   Curtius  gewidmet^    pp.    139-150.     On  the

Greek  mode  of  making  these  bricks,  see  Bliimner,  Technologic^  2.  p.  i^sq.

Structures  built  of  unbumt  brick  are  often  mentioned  by  Pausanias.    See

V.  5.  6  ;  vi.  20.  1 1  ;  viii.  8.  8  ;  x.  4.  4  ;  x.  35.  10.

.27.  7.  Osmortium — Maleatian  Apollo.  Mt.  Cynortium  is  supposed
0  be  the  hill  at  the  south-east  comer  of  the  valley,  above  the  theatre,  on

VOL.  Ill  S


258  MALE  ATI  AN  APOLLO  bk.  ii.  corinth

the  way  to  Troezen.  The  ruins  and  inscriptions  which  have  been  found
on  this  hill  may  have  belonged  to  the  sanctuary  of  Maleatian  Apollo
mentioned  by  Pausanias  (Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  419).  They  are  situated
on  a  plateau  on  the  side  of  the  hill,  above  some  ruins  called  Kamari,
Here,  along  with  various  remains  of  Greek  antiquity,  there  is  a  rect-
angular base  inscribed  with  the  name  of  Latona  (Cawadias,  FouiUes
d^ Epidaure^  i.  p.  56,  No.  124).  From  an  inscription  which  records  a
decree  to  set  up  a  bronze  equestrian  statue  of  a  certain  Aristobulus  'in
the  sanctuary  of  Maleatian  Apollo  and  Aesculapius '  (Cawadias,  FmdUa
d^Epidaure^  i.  p.  75  J^.,  No.  235),  it  appears  that  the  great  Epidaurian
sanctuary  was  sacred  to  Maleatian  Apollo  jointly  with  Aesculapius.  The
Maleatian  Apollo  is  mentioned,  sometimes  alone,  sometimes  jointly  with
Aesculapius  in  a  number  of  Epidaurian  inscriptions,  mostly  found  in  the
sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  (Cawadias,^.  r//..  Inscriptions  6,  51,  70,93,
130,  131;  *E<fyr)fi€pls  apxaiokoyiKri,  1 883,  pp.  149,  237;  Baunack,
Studien,  i.  pp.  94,  118;  Collitz,  G,  A  /.  3.  No.  3337).  In  the  hymn  of
Isyllus  of  Epidaurus  (see  above,  p.  234)  the  epithet  Maleatian  appears  to
be  derived  from  the  legendary  Malus,  who,  according  to  Isyllus,  "  was  the
first  who  made  an  altar  of  Maleatian  Apollo  and  glorified  his  precinct
with  sacrifices."  The  precinct  here  referred  to  is  probably  the  great
sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  rather  than  the  sanctuary  of  Maleatian  Apollo
on  Mount  Cynortium  ;  since  Isyllus  goes  on  to  relate  that  Aesculapius,
the  great-grandson  of  Malus,  was  bom  in  the  precinct.  Thus  it  would
seem  that  in  the  opinion  of  Isyllus  the  great  Epidaurian  sanctuary  bad
been  sacred  to  Maleatian  Apollo  before  Aesculapius  was  bom.  From
the  same  poem  of  Isyllus  we  learn  that  at  Tricca  in  Thessaly,  the  scat  of
a  very  ancient  and  famous  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  437)>
there  was  an  altar  of  Maleatian  Apollo  upon  which  the  worshipper
had  to  offer  sacrifice  before  he  might  descend  into  the  shrine  {adytutn)
of  Aesculapius.  Maleatian  Apollo  was  worshipped  also  at  Sparta  (Paus.
iii.  12.  8).  A  small  bronze  figure  of  a  warrior,  found  at  Selinus  in
Cynuria,  is  inscribed  with  a  dedication  to  Maleatian  Apollo  {MtttkdL  d.
arch.  Inst,  in  Aihen^  3  (1878),  pp.  16-18,  with  pL  i.  2 ;  Roehl,  /.  G.A-
No.  57  ;  Roberts,  Greek  Epigraphy^  i.  No.  250).  A  small  bronze  rami
also  found  in  Cynuria,  bears  the  inscription  MaAcaTo,  i.e.  *  (the  property)
of  Maleatian  (Apollo) '  (Roehl,  /.  G.  A.  No.  89  ;  Roberts,  op.  cit.  No-
289).     Cp.  Preller,  Griech.  Mythologie^^  i.  p.  252.

28.  I.  The  serpents axe  considered  sacred  to  Aesculapiiis-

**  The  yellow  snakes  which  were  sacred  to  Aesculapius,  and  which  ar«
perfectly  harmless,  are  yet  found  in  the  country.  They  were  seldom
seen  even  when  they  were  held  in  reverence ;  but  an  English  traveller*
who  will  probably  give  to  the  public  an  account  of  his  tour  in  Epidauria^
was  so  fortunate  as  to  see  one,  and  to  examine  its  peculiarities  "  (Gell,
Itinerary  of  Greece^  p.  109).

28.  I.  land-crocodiles  not  less  than  two  ells  long.  Herodotus
says  (iv.  192)  that  in  the  part  of  North  Africa  which  is  now  called
Tripoli  there  were  "  land  crocodiles,  about  three  cubits  long,  very  like
lizards."  Upon  this  Sir  Gardner  Wilkinson  remarks  (in  Rawlinspn's
translation)  :  "  This  immense  lizard,  or  monitor,  is  very  common  in  Egypt


i,  XXIX  EPIDAURUS  259

id  other  parts  of  Africa.  It  is  called  in  Arabic  W6ran,  or  Wurran  e'
^bel,  *  of  the  mountains/  or  W.  el  ard,  *  of  the  earth,*  to  distinguish  it
om  Wurran  el  bahr  *  of  the  river.'  The  former  is  the  Lacerta  scincus  ;
le  latter  Z.  NiloHca,  It  is  generally  about  3  feet  long ;  and  I  have
•und  one  very  large,  which  measured  about  4  feet.  The  latter  is  rather
nailer."  The  land  crocodile  is  also  mentioned  by  Aristotle  (quoted  by
pollonius,  Histor.  Mirab,  39)  and  Aelian  {Nat  An,  i.  58,  xvi.  6).
p.  J.  B.  Meyer,  Aristoteles  Thierkunde^  p.  307.

28.   I.  From  India  alone  are  broni^t  parrots.     Parrots  are  first

lentioned  by  Ctesias  (Jndica^  3,  ed.  Baehr ;  Photius,  Bibliotheca^  72,  p.

5  a,  ed.  Bekker).    He  calls  the  bird  Bittakos,  and  says  '*  it  has  a  human

)ngue  and  voice.    It  is  about  the  size  of  a  hawk,  it  has  a  purple  face,  a

lack  beard,  and  a  dark  blue  neck.     It  talks  like  a  human  being  in  the

ndian  language,  but  can  be  taught  to  speak  Greek  also."    The  parrot  is

icxt  mentioned  by  Aristotle  {Histor.  Anim,  viii.  12,  p.  597  b,  ed.  Bekker).

3p.  Pliny,  Nat  Hist  x.  117;  Solinus,  lii.  43  sqq,^  p.  2 1 1  j^.,  ed.  Mommsen

^with  Mommsen's  preface,  p.  xxii.) ;  Apuleius,  Florida^  ii.  12  ;  Persius,

Prologue^  8  ;  Martial,  x.  3.  7,  xiv.  73  ;  Statius,  Sylv,  ii.  4.     Although

parrots  seem  to  have  been  imported  by  the  classical  nations  from  India

alone,  yet  they  were  known  to  exist  in  Africa  also ;  for  an  exploring

expedition  sent  by  Nero  into  Ethiopia  discovered  parrots  in  that  country

(Pliny,  N.H.  vi.    184).      At  the  present  day  the  ring-necked  parrot

extends  across  Africa  from  the  mouth  of  the  Gambia  to  the  Red  Sea.

In  Asia  parrots  are  not  found  west  of  the  valley  of  the  Indus.     See

Encyclopaedia  Britannica^  9th  ed.  vol.  18,  s,v,  'Parrot.'     In  Greek  and

Roman  graves  discovered  in  the  south  of  Russia,  parrots   have  been

found  represented  on  objects  of  art ;  e,g,  there  are  some  vases  fashioned

and  painted  like  parrots.    See  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg),  1870-71,

PL  6;   /V/.,    1873,   P-   56;    id,y    1878 -1879,   p.   161,   cp.    p.   166;   /V.,

188 1,  p.  no.     On  a  silver  bowl  found  at  Lampsacus  a  black  woman,

^earing  a  turban  and  a  spangled  robe,   is  represented  seated   on  a

iond  of  sofa.     Grouped  about  her  are  what  seem   to  be  long-tailed

monkeys,  a  parrot,  a  turkey,  and  two  lions,  each  of  the  latter  with  a  rope

nxind  its  neck  which  is  held  by  a  small  black  woman.    The  seated  black

Ionian  is  perhaps   India  (or  Asia)   surrounded   by  its   characteristic

aninoals.     See  Gazette  archMogique^  3  (1877),  pl*  I9«    (The  writer  who

comments  on  this  bowl,  pp.  1 19-122,  thinks  that  the  seated  woman  is  the

Asiatic  Artemis,  and  he  calls  the  monkeys  dogs.     He  takes  no  notice  of

the  woman's  colour  nor  of  the  remarkable  birds  on  each  side  of  her.)

28.  2.  Mount  Ooryphum.  This  according  to  Leake  is  probably
the  mountain  to  the  south-east  of  the  Epidaurian  sanctuary  {Morea,  2.
?■  425).  Others  think  it  is  the  hill  which  shuts  the  valley  on  the
south-west  (Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  419  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  76).

28.  8.  Melissa.  See  Herodotus,  iii.  50,  v.  92  ;  Athenaeus,  xiii.  p.
589  f ;  Diogenes  Laertius,  i.  7.  94.

29.  I.  the  city  of  Epidaums.  The  city  of  Epidaurus  was  five
Roman  miles  distant  from  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  (Livy,  xlv.  28).
But  it  takes  about  two  hours  and  a  half  to  ride  the  distance,  for  the
oad  is  very  rough.     The  scenery  on  the  way  is  extremely  beautiful — a


260  EPIDAURUS  BK.  II.  CORIKTH

great  contrast  to  the  dull  road  from  Nauplia  to  the  sanctuary.    The
path  leaves  the  open  valley  by  a  narrow  glen  at  its  northern  end,  and
leads  down  deeper  and  deeper  through  luxuriantly  wooded  dells  into  the
bottom  of  a  wild  romantic  ravine.     Here  we  follow  the  rocky  bed  of  the
stream  for  some  distance  between  lofty  precipitous  banks.     Farther  on
the  path  ascends  the  right  bank  of  the  stream,  and  we  ride  along  it,  with
the  deep  ravine  below  us  on  the  left  and  a  high  wall  of  rock  on  the  right
The  whole  glen,  as  far  as  the  eye  can  reach,  is  densely  wooded.     Wild
olives,  pines,  plane-trees,  Agnus  castus,  laurel,  and  ivy  mantle  its  steep
sides  with  a  robe  of  green.     In  half  an  hour  from  the  sanctuary  another
valley  opens  on  the  left,  down  which  comes  the  road  from  Ligourio,
After  joining  it  we  continue  to  follow  the  glen  along  a  path  darkened  by
trees  and  the  luxuriant  foliage  of  the  arbutus,  while  beside  us  the  stream
flows  through  thickets  of  myrtle  and  oleander.     In  about  half  an  hoar
more  the  valley  opens  out,  and  we  see  the  sea,  with  the  bold  rodcy
headland  of  Methana  stretching  out  into  it  on  the  right,  the  islands  of
Salami s  and  Aegina  rising  from  it,  and  the  Attic  coast  lying  blue  and
distant  on  the  northern  horizon.     Emerging  at  last  from  the  valley  we
cross  a  little  maritime  plain,  covered  with  lemon  groves,  and  reach  the
site  of  the  ancient  Epidaurus.     Its  position  is  very  lovely.     From  the
little  maritime  plain,  backed  by  high  mountains,  the  sides  of  which  are
wooded  with  wild  olives,  a  rocky  peninsula  juts  out  into  the  sea,  united
to  the  mainland  only  by  a  narrow  neck  of  low  marshy  ground.    It
divides  two  bays  from  each  other :  the  northern  bay  is  well  sheltered
and  probably  formed  the  ancient  harbour ;  the  southern  bay  is  an  open
roadstead.     The  ancient  city  seems  to  have  lain  chiefly  on  the  peninsula,
but  to  have  extended  also  to  the  shores  of  the  two  bays.     The  rodcy
sides  of  the  peninsula  fall  steeply  into  the  sea,  and  it  rises  in  two  peaks
to  a  height  of  about  250  feet;    both  peaks  are  thickly  wooded;  the
eastern  is  the  higher.     The  circuit  of  the  peninsula  was  reckoned  at
15  furlongs  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  374).     On  the  edge  of  its  sea-cliffs  maybe
seen  in  many  places,  especially  on  its  southern  side,   remains  of  the
strong  walls  which  enclosed  the  city.     They  are  built  chiefly  in  the
polygonal  style,  of  large  blocks  well  cut  and  jointed.      On  both  the
summits  may  also  be  traced,  in  spite  of  many  gaps,  fortifications  built  io
the  same    style.      The  sanctuary  of  Cissaean  Athena,   mentioned  by
Pausanias,  may  have  occupied  the  western  of  the  two  summits.    ^
retaining  wall,  which  may  have  served  to  support  the  sanctuary,  may
still  be  seen  here ;  and  in  a  hollow  to  the  west  there  is  a  marble  seat-
Everywhere  we  come  across  longer  or  shorter  pieces  of  walls,  an^
ruins  of  buildings,  many  of  which,  however,  are  mediaeval.     On  tb^
northern  edge  of  the  eastern  summit  are  some  graves,  which  have  beei^
opened.     Among  the  shrubbery  which  has  overgrown  the  site  Dodwel^
found  the  ruins  of  a  small  Doric  temple ;  and  among  the  bushes  on  th^
marshy   isthmus  Vischer  saw  three  female  draped  figures  carved  on
sarcophaguses,  and  the  torso  of  a  man  in  armour.     A  small  rocky  spit
juts  into  the  northern  bay,  thus  forming,  along  with  the  larger  peninsula
on  the  south,  the  harbour  proper  of  the  ancient  city.     On  this  rocky
spit,    to    judge    from    Pausanias' s  description,   must   have   stood  the


I.  XXIX  EPIDAURUS  26 r

nctuary  of  Hera.  Its  site  is  supposed  to  be  marked  by  a  chapel  of
:.  Nicholas.  The  view  from  the  summit  of  the  higher  peninsula  (the
te  of  the  ancient  city)  is  very  fine,  especially  when  the  island-studded
a  and  the  high  bold  promontory  of  Methana  on  the  south  are  lit  up  by
e  rays  of  the  setting  sun.

The  modem  village,  called  Old  Epidaurus  {Palaea  Epidavro5\
ands  on  the  northern  bay,  near  the  shore.  On  the  slope  of  the
ountain  not  far  from  the  village,  to  the  left  of  the  road  as  you
)me  from  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius,  seven  prehistoric  tombs  were
scovered  and  excavated  by  Mr.  Staes  in  1888.  They  are  hewn  in  the
)ck,  and  resemble  the  rock-cut  tombs  of  Mycenae  and  Nauplia.  They
re  of  circular  shape ;  the  entrances  were  blocked  with  large  stones,
keletons  and  vases  of  the  Mycenaean  type  were  found  in  them,  also  a
ronze  spear-head  of  fine  workmanship,  and  a  bronze  buckle.

See  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  pp.  261-264;  Gell,  Itimrary  of  Greece,  pp.  1 10- 114;
-eake,  Morea,  2,  pp.  429-431  ;  Boblaye,  Recherchts,  p.  55  ;  Wclcker,  Tagebuchy
•  PP"  33^*334 »  Curtius,  Pehp,  2.  p.  424  sqqr,  Vischer,  Erinmrungen^  p.  508  sq,%
krsian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  74  ;  MahafTy,  Rambles  and  Studies  y  p.  371  ;  Baedeker,' p.  249
q.\  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  209  sq,\  Philippson,  PeloponneSy  p.  39;  Staes,  in  tatKriov
IpXcuoXoytK^r,  1888,  pp.  155-158.

29.  I.  The  image  of  Athena is  of  wood they  surname

it  Oissaean.  This  surname  may  perhaps  be  derived  from  kissos  *  ivy.'
If  this  derivation  is  right,  the  image  was  probably  made  of  ivy-wood.
Dionysus  was  worshipped  under  the  title  of  Ivy  at  Achamae  in  Attica
(Paus.  i.  31.  6).  At  Phlius  there  was  a  festival  called  Ivy-cutters
(Paus.  ii.  13.  4).  Compare  S.  Wide,  De  sacris  Troezeniorum^  Her-
fnimensium,  Epidauriorum^  p.  18  j^.  It  seems  probable,  as  Prof.
Wide  suggests,  that  Cissaean  Athena,  worshipped  on  the  acropolis  of
Epidaurus,  is  identical  with  the  Athena  Polias  who  is  mentioned  in  an
inscription  found  in  the  Epidaurian  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  (Cawadias,
Smiles  iPApidaurey  i.  p.  50,  No.  76).

29.  2.  The  Aeginetans  inhabit  the  island  etc.  The  island  of
^egina  has  an  area  of  33  square  miles,  and  its  circimiference  is  about  22
tniies,  reckoning  from  cape  to  cape  (Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  p.  561  ;
Bacdeker,2  p.  136  Engl.  tr. ;  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  64).  Strabo
fives  the  circumference  as  180  furlongs  (viii.  p.  375).  The  western
half  of  the  island  is  a  stony  plain,  well  cultivated  with  com.  The  rest  is
mountainous,  and  may  be  divided  into  two  parts ;  a  remarkable  conical
Wl,  now  called  the  Oros^  which  occupies  all  the  southern  extremity,  and
the  ridge  on  which  the  famous  ruined  temple  stands,  at  the  north-eastern
side  of  the  island  (Leake,  Morea^  2.  p.  433).

29.  2.  Zens caused  the  people  to  spring  np  from  the  ground.

Fiedler  {Reise^  i.  p.  275)  was  disposed  to  connect  this  legend  with  the
5ne  potter's  clay  which  is  found  in  Aegina ;  he  thought  that  the  skill
»hich  we  may  presume  the  islanders  to  have  attained  in  working  the
lay  into  human  figures  may  have  originated  the  story.  Another
egend  was  that  Zeus  turned  all  the  ants  in  Aegina  into  men,  who  hence
eceived  the  name  of  Myrmedons  (  =  *  ants,'  cp.  Hesychius,  s,v,  fivpfirf-
oV€s).    See  Schol.  on  Pindar,  A^em,  iii.  3 1  ;  Tzetzes,  ScAoL  on  Lycophr,


262  A  EG  IN  A  BK.  II.  COUNTH

176;  ApoUodonis,  iii.  12.  6;  EtymoL  Magn,  p.  597.  4  sqq,\  Ovid,
Met.  vii.  623  sqq, ;  Strabo,  viii.  p.  375.  Another  story  was  that  Zeus,
transforming  himself  into  an  ant,  became  the  father  of  the  Myrmedons
by  Eurymedusa,  daughter  of  Cletor.  For  this  reason  the  people  of
Thessaly  (where  the  Myrmedons  had  their  chief  seat)  were  said  to
worship  ants.  See  Clement  of  Alex.,  Proirept,  ii.  39.  Ants  are  said  to
have  been  sacrificed  to  Poseidon  on  the  Isthmus  (Hermann,  GotUs-
dienstliche  Alterthumer^  §  26.  9).

29.  3.  The  region  had  already  received  its  name  etc    Cp.

X.    I.    I.

29.  4.  AJax  remained  in  a  private  station.     This  is  inconsistent    1
with  i.  42.  4,  as  Schubart  pointed  out  (Zeitschrift  /.  Alterthumswissen-
schafty  185 1,  p.  294).

29.  4*  Epens  who  made  the  wooden  horse.     See  Homer,    ;

Od,  viii.  492  sqq,

29.    5.   the  people  were  expelled  by  the  Athenians.     This    ;

happened  in  431  B.C.  See  Thucydides,  ii.  27;  cp.  Paus.  ii.  38.  5.
The  restoration  of  the  Aeginetans  took  place  in  405  B.C.  (Xenopboiii
Hellenica^  ii.  2.  9).

29.  6.  sunken  rocks  and  reefs  rise  all  round  it.  Chandler,  who
coasted  along  Aegina,  says  :  "  Our  crew  was  for  some  time  engaged  in
looking  out  for  one  of  the  lurking  shoals,  with  which  it  is  environed
These,  and  the  single  rocks  extant  above  the  surface,  are  so  many  in
number,  and  their  position  so  dangerous,  that  the  navigation  to  Aegina
was  antiently  reckoned  more  difficult  than  to  any  other  of  the  islands"
( Travels  in  Greece ^  p.  13).

29.  6.  the   harbour   in  which  vessels   mostly    anchor.     The
modern  town  of  Aegina,  on  the  western  shore  of  the  island,  occupies
almost  exactly  the  site  of  the  ancient  city,  except  that  the  latter  was  .
much  more  extensive,  as  is  proved  by  the  traces  of  the  city-walls.    The
ancient  town  had  two  artificial  harbours,  the  moles  of  which  are  still  in
fairly  good  preservation.     The  northerly  of  the  two  harbours  is  the
smaller ;  it  is  oval  in  form  and  is  sheltered  by  two  ancient  moles  which
leave  only  a  narrow  passage  in  the  middle,  between  the  ruins  of  two
towers  which  stood  on  either  side  of  the  entrance.     To  the  southward
is  the  second  and  larger  harbour ;  it  is  twice  as  large  as  the  former*
Its  entrance  is  similarly  protected  by  ancient  walls  or  moles,  15  or  20
feet  thick.     Between  the  two  harbours  there  seems  to  have  been  3
succession  of  small  basins  or  docks,  separated  from  the  sea  by  a  wall,
and  communicating  with  the  two  harbours.     Both  ports  were  doubtless
closed  by  chains  in  time  of  danger,  and  so  were  what  the  ancients
called  *  closed  harbours '  (kAcmttoi  At/xevcs).     A  little  to  the  north  of  the
two  harbours  there  was  an  open  roadstead,  sheltered  on  the  north  by  a
breakwater,   on  which  there  seems  to  have  stood  a  wall  forming  a
prolongation  of  the  landward  wall  of  the  city.     "There  is  no  more
remarkable  example  in   Greece  of  the  labour  and  expense  bestowed
by  the  ancients  in  forming  and  protecting  their  artificial  harbours"
(Leake).

On  the  landward  side  the  city-walls  could,  at  the  beginning  of  this


L  XXIX  ABGINA  363

:ntury,  still  be  traced  through  their  whole  extent.  They  were  from
3  10  1 2  feet  thick,  and  were  strengthened  by  towers  at  intervals
trying  from  too  to  150  feet.  The  wall  was  further  protected  by  a
loat  cut  in  the  solid  rock  about  100  feet  wide  and  from  10  to  15  feet
L  depth.  There  appear  to  have  been  three  chief  entrances,  of  which
le  one  near  the  middle  of  the  land  front,  leading  to  the  temple  of
.tbena,  "was  constructed  apparently  like  the  chief  gate  of  the  city  of
lataea,  with  a  retired  wall  between  two  round  towers."  To  the  south-
ard the  town-walis  abutted  upon  the  mole  of  the  larger  harbour,
hich  formed  a  continuation  of  the  city-wall.  At  present  only  a  few
'aces  of  the  city-wall  are  visible  above  ground  on  the  landward
de.

See  Leake,  Merea,  z.  p.  436  iq.  ;  Annali  dell'  InslUule,  1  (1829),  p.  204:
ockerell,  TAt  Umptes  o/Jufiler  PanhiHmius  al  Aegina,  and  of  Apollo  Efiinirius
'.  Basiat,  p.  9  sq,  ;  Wefcker,  TagibtKh,  i.  p.  334  sq.  ;  Bursian,  Gtogr.  1.  p.  Si
'. ;  Wordsworth,  Athens  and  Attica,  p.  324  sq.  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  1 39  sqq.

On  one  of  the  coins  (Fig.  43)  of  Aegina  a  semi-circular  port  is
ipresented,  with  a  ship  in  it ;  above  the  port  is  a
exastyle  temple  or  colonnade,  in  the  midst  of
'hich  is  a  door  with  steps  leading  up  to  it.  The
olonnade  may  perhaps  be  that  of  the  temple
iphrodite  (see  next  note)  ;  but  it  looks  more  like
theatre,  market,  or  wharf.  See  Imhoof-Blumer
nd  Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  on  Parts,  p.  4;,  with
•LLi.

29.  6.  a  temple  of  Aphrodite.  On  a  mound  nc  43-— the  fort  of
lear  the  sea,  a  little  to  the  north  of  the  present  ahjik*  (com  of
oorn  of  Aegina,  stands  a  Doric  column  which  is
>lKn  supposed  to  have  formed  part  of  the  temple  of  Aphrodite  mentioned
^  Pausanias.  But  since  it  stands  near  the  smaller  harbour  (which  was
pnibably  the  Secret  Harbour,  see  §  10),  this  is  very  doubtful.  When
Chandler  visited  Aegina  in  1765,  there  were  still  two  columns
standing,  supporting  the  architrave  (Chandler,  TravtU  in  Greece,
i-  [4).  Dodwell  and  Leake  at  the  beginning  of  this  century  found
tile  tiro  columns  still  standing,  but  one  of  them  had  lost  its  capital
lod  the  upper  part  of  the  shaft.  The  entire  column,  including  the  capital,
Ws  25  ft  high,  and  3  ft.  9  in.  in  diameter  at  the  base.  Both
columns  were  of  the  most  elegant  form.  The  intercolumniation  was
't  4  in.  6  lines.  The  entire  column  was  blown  down  a  few  years
ifter  Dodweil's  visit  ;  only  the  imperfect  one  now  stands.  From  the
^e  dimensions  of  the  columns  Leake  inferred  that  the  temple  must
Uve  been  that  of  Hecate,  the  chief  deity  of  the  Aeginetans  (Paus.  ii.
Id  2).  See  Dodwell,  Tour,  i.  p.  560  ;  Leake,  Morca,  1.  pp.  435  sq.,
j8 ;  Vischcr,  Erinncrungen,  p.  511;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  82;
laedeker,*  p.  140;  Wordsworth,  Athens  and  Attica*  p.  225  sq.;
'ntiguifies  0/ Ionia,  Pub.  by  the  Society  of  Dilettanti,  Part  the  Second
^odon,  1797)  p-  15,  with  pi.  I.  In  1829  some  of  the  foundation-
ones  of  the  temple  were  removed  to  be  used  in  repairing  the  harbour.
was  then  discovered  that  the  foundations  consisted  of  eleven  courses


264  AEGINA  BK.  11.  CORINTH

of  squared  blocks,  most  of  which  measured  4  ft.  long  by  3  ft.  wide
The  material  both  of  the  foundations  and  of  the  column  is  a  calcareous
stone  of  a  yellowish  colour,  which  is  quarried  in  the  island.  See  Annali
delV  Instituto^  i  (1829),  p.  205  sqq.

29.  6.  the  Aeaceum.  Le,  the  sanctuary  of  Aeacus.  Leake  suggested
that  it  "may  have  been  situated  upon  the  elevated  level  towards  the
plain"  {Morea^  2.  p.  438).

29.  7.  A  drought  had  for  some  time  afflicted  Greece  etc.  Cp.
i.  44.  9 ;  Apollodorus,  iii.  12.  6 ;  Isocrates,  Evagoras,  14  sq.

29.  8.  it  is  told  as  a  secret  that  this  altar  is  the  tomb  of
Aeacns.     As  to  secret  graves  see  vol.  2.  p.  366  sq.

29.  9.  the  grave  of  Phocus.  This  has  sometimes  been  identified
with  a  large  barrow  about  40  ft.  high,  situated  about  a  mile  to  the
north  of  the  town  of  Aegina  ;  it  attracts  the  eye  of  the  voyager  approadi-
ing  from  Piraeus.  At  the  foot  of  the  barrow  a  large  space,  approximately
square,  has  been  levelled  in  the  rock  ;  one  side  of  it  is  about  100  yards
long.  This  excavation  can  hardly  be  the  Aeaceum,  since  that  structure
was  (according  to  Pausanias)  in  the  most  conspicuous  part  of  the  city.
See  Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  p.  559  ;  Annali  deW  Instituto^  i  (1829),  pp-
207-209 ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  82  sq,  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  141  ;  Wordsworth,
Athens  and  Attica^^  p.  226.

29.  9.  the  murder  of  Neoptolemus.     Cp.  x.  24.  4  note.

29.  10.  plead  his  defence  from  the  deck  of  a  ship  etc    Cp-  >•
28.    II    note.     Plato  in  the  Laws  (ix.   p.   866  d)  enacted  that  if  ^
banished  homicide  should  be  driven  ashore  in  the  country  where  ^^
had  committed  the  offence,  he  was  not  to  land,  but  to  dip  his  feet  ^^
the  sea,  and  hold  on  his  voyage.     (The  passage  is  rather  obscure,  b^^
this  seems  to  be  the  sense  of  it.)

29.  II.  the  Secret  Harbour.     This  was  perhaps  the  smaller  (tl^^
northerly)  of  the  two  ports  of  Aegina.     See  note  on  §  6.

30.  I.  The  image  of  Apollo  is  naked  etc.  On  a  coin  of  Aegii^^
an  archaic  nude  Apollo  is  represented,  holding  a  bow  and  a  branch.  *^
may  be  a  copy  of  the  wooden  image  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  5^
Imhoof -  Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num,  Comnt.  on  Pans,  p.  45,  pi.  L  ***
In  the  church  of  St.  Michael  at  a  place  called  Marathona  on  xX^^
western  coast  of  Aegina  there  is  a  marble  slab  inscribed  with  the  wor^^
"  Boundary  of  the  precinct  of  Apollo  and  Poseidon "  (WordswortJ^^
Athens  and  Attica^  p.  231).

30.  2.  mysteries  of  Hecate.  This  festival  of  Hecate  is  referr^^
to  by  Lucian  {Navig,  15),  and  perhaps  by  Aristophanes  {Wasps,  122  >
Cp.  Lobeck,  Aglaophamus,  p.  242.

30.  2.  Myron Alcamenes Hecate  etc.    Alcamenes  was  -^

contemporary  of  Phidias.     See  Paus.  v.  10.  8  note.     Myron  flourished
about  01.  80  (460  B.C.)  (Pliny,  Nat.  hist,  xxxiv.  49),  but  the  limits  o
his  artistic  career  are  somewhat  difficult  to  determine.     See  Brunn,  ii^
Sitsungsberichte    of    the    Bavarian    Academy     (Munich),     Philosoph.
philolog.  Class,  1880,  p.  474  sqq.     On  the  triple-formed  Hecate  in  art,
see   the   elaborate   dissertation    of   E.    Petersen,    *  Die    dreigestaltige
Hekate,*  Archaeolog.-efiigraph.  Mittheilungen  aus  Oesterreick,  4  (1880),


CH.  XXX  AEGINA  265

pp.  140-174;  id,y  5  (1881),  pp.  1-84;  cp.  Murray,  HisL  of  Greek
Sculpture^  2.  p.  1 40  sq.  The  triple  Hecate  appears  on  coins  of  Aegina
(Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Comm,  on  Pans,  p.  45,  pi.  L  iii.)
The  Hecate  on  the  Tower  at  Athens  (cp.  i.  22.  4  note),  who  is  here
mentioned  by  Pausanias,  may  be  identical  with  the  Artemis  on  the
Tower  (Artemis  Epipyrgidia)  whose  fire-bearing  priest  had  a  seat  in
the  Dionysiac  theatre  (C.  /.  A,  iii.  No.  268).

30.  3.  a  sanctnary  of  Aphaea.     On  the  northern  slope  of  Mt.
Oros  (see  note  on  29.  2),  in  a  wild  and  lonely  valley,  there  is  a  terrace
supported  upon  walls  of  great  blocks  of  trachyte.     On  this  terrace  there
is  a  ruined  chapel  of  the  Hagios  Asomatos  (the  Archangel  Michael),
which  is  entirely  built  of  fine  pieces  of  ancient  architecture.     About  the
middle  of  the  terrace  there  are  a  number  of  large  fiat  stones  laid  at  equal
intervals,  as  if  they  had  been  the  bases  of  columns.     This  was  probably
the  sanctuary  of  Aphaea.     See  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  84  sq, ;  Words-
worth, Athens  and  Attica^^  p.  230  x^.  ;  Leake,  Peloponnesiaca^  p.  277  ;
Welcker,   Tagebuch,   1,  pp.  337-339.     A  mutilated  Greek  inscription,
dating  from  about  the  first  half  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.,  has  been  found
here.     See   Hirschfeld  in  Hermes^    5  (1871),  pp.  469-474;    Loewy,
Inschrt/ten  grtech.   Bildhauer^   No.   448;   Roehl,  /.   G,  A,  No.   352;
Roberts,  Greek  Epigraphy^  i.  No.  120.

30.  3.  Gaxmaiior,  who  purified  Apollo  etc.  See  ii.  7.  7  with  the
notes.

30.  3.  Dictynna.  This  name  (derived  from  dictuon  *a  net'),
together  with  the  story  told  by  Pausanias  about  her,  suggests  that  the
goddess  in  question  may  have  been  a  personification  of  the  nets  used
by  fishermen  and  hunters.  For  the  primitive  fisher  or  hunter  often
regards  his  net  as  animate  and  propitiates  it  accordingly.  Cp.  The
Golden  Bought  2.  p.  117  note  i.  In  Laos  the  hunter  invokes  the
spirits  of  his  weapons  and  other  instruments  of  the  chase,  in  order
that  they  may  favour  him  in  the  hunt ;  and  when  he  is  setting  a  trap
he  makes  an  offering  to  the  spirit  of  the  cord  by  which  the  trap  is  to
be  suspended.  The  trap  is  then  run  up  with  enthusiasm.  Elephant
hunters  before  setting  out  for  the  chase  make  an  offering  of  rice,  brandy,
fowls,  and  ducks  to  the  spirit  of  the  rope  by  which  the  captive  elephant
is  to  be  bound.  See  Aymonier,  Notes  sur  le  Laos,  pp.  23,  25,  114.
In  Tahiti  the  makers  of  fishing-nets  had  a  god  of  their  own,  named
Matatini  (Ellis,  Polynesian  Researches,  i.  p.  329).  The  prophet
Habakkuk  speaks  of  those  who  "sacrifice  unto  their  net  and  bum
incense  unto  their  drag ;  because  by  them  their  portion  is  fat,  and  their
meat  plenteous  "  (Habakkuk,  i.  1 6).

30.  4.  Mount  Panhellenius.  This  is  now  identified  with  Mount
Oros,  the  highest  mountain  in  Aegina  (1742  ft.)  Formerly  it  was
supposed  to  be  the  height  upon  which  the  famous  ruined  temple  still
stands  (see  below,  p.  268  sqq.)  But  a  statement  of  Theophrastus  seems
quite  decisive  in  favour  of  Mt.  Oros.  Theophrastus  observes  {De  signis
iifnpest,  i.  24)  that  when  clouds  settle  upon  Zeus  Hellanius  at  Aegina
(that  is  upon  Mount  Panhellenius)  it  is  a  sign  of  rain.  This  could
only  apply  to  Mt.  Oros,  which  is  a  very  conspicuous  landmark  viewed


266  AUXESIA  AND  DAMIA  bk.  ii.  corinth

from  Athens  and  from  every  part  of  the  Gulf ;  whereas  the  height  upon
which  the  temple  stands  is  quite  inconspicuous,  and  indeed  cannot  be
distinguished  very  easily  even  when  you  are  sailing  near  the  island.  A
chapel  of  St  Elias  now  occupies  the  sunmiit  of  Mt.  Oros,  Remains  of
the  old  wall,  which  followed  the  edge  of  the  summit  in  a  bent  line,  may
still  be  traced ;  and  some  ancient  blocks  have  been  built  into  the  walls
of  the  chapel.  See  Baedeker,^  p.  143  ;  cp.  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  84  sq. ;
Wordsworth,  Athens  and  Attica^^  p.  228  sqq,  \  Leake,  Peloponnesiacoy
p.  277  ;  Welcker,  Tagebuch^  i.  p.  339  sg,

30.  4.  Auxesia  and  Damia.   See  ii.  32.  2  and  Herodotus,  v.  82-87.
They  were  also  worshipped  at  Epidaurus,  as  we  learn  from  an  Epidaurian
inscription,  which  mentions  a  priest  of  Maleatian  Apollo  and  of  the  Az^
sian  goddesses  Damia  and  Auxesia  (Cawadias,  Fotdlles  cPEpidaure^  i.  p-      I
46,  No.  51  ;  Collitz,  G.  D.  L  3.  No.  3337).     And  from  inscriptions  it
appears  that  in  the  later  times  of  antiquity  they  were  worshipped  also
in  Laconia  (S.  Wide,  De  sacris  Troezeniorum^  Hermionensium^  Epi'
dauriorum^  p.  62).     Herodotus  says  (/.r.)  that  once  upon  a  time  tli^
land  of  Epidaurus  yielded  none  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth.     So  t^^
Delphic  oracle  bade  the  people  set  up  images  of  Damia  and  Auxes^^
which  were  to  be  made  of  olive  wood.     Accordingly  the  Epidauri3-^
begged  the  Athenians  to  give  them  wood  from  the  olives  of  Ath^^^'
deeming  these  the  most  sacred  of  all  olives.     The  Athenians  compli  ^
with  the  request  on  condition  that  the  Epidaurians  should  send  sacnfi^^^^
every  year  to  Athena  Polias  and  Erechtheus.     The  Epidaurians  agr^^
to  this,  received  the  olive  wood,  carved  the  images  out  of  them,  a^  "^
set  them  up.     Then  the  land  bore  fruit  once  more.     However,
being  declared  between  the  Epidaurians  and  Aeginetans,  an  Aeginet
cruiser  swooped  down  on  the  coast  of  Epidaurus  and  carried  off  t
images  of  Damia  and  Auxesia  to  Aegina,  where  the  images  were  set
at  an  inland  place  called  Oea,  30  furlongs  distant  from  the  town
Aegina.     Herodotus  then  relates  the  disastrous  attempt  made  by  t
Athenians  to  rescue  the  images  from  the  Aeginetans.     He  gives  som^
curious  details  as  to  the  way  in  which  these  images  were  worshippe
first  by  the  Epidaurians  and  afterwards  by  the  Aeginetans.     He  say^
that  the  images  received  sacrifices  and  were  propitiated  by  chorused
of  women  who  railed  at  each  other ;  ten  men  were  appointed  for  each
of  the  two  divinities  to  furnish  the  chorus.     The  railing  and  abuse  of
the  women  who  composed  these  choruses  were  levelled  exclusively  at
the  women  of  the  district,  never  at  the  men.     There  are  points   of
similarity  between  the  worship  of  Damia  and  Auxesia  on  the  one  side,
and  of  Demeter  and  Proserpine  on  the  other.

(i)  The  raillery  practised  by  the  Epidaurian  women  is  like  the
raillery  practised  by  the  Athenian  women  on  their  way  to  the  great
mysteries  of  Demeter  at  Eleusis.  See  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Plutus^
1014  ;  Suidas,  s,v,  to.  ctti  rrjs  afjid^rjs :  and  above,  vol.  2.  p.  492.

(2)  At  Troezen  a  festival  called  'the  throwing  of  stones'  was
celebrated  in  honour  of  Damia  and  Auxesia  (Pausan.  ii.  32.  2).
Similarly  at  the  Eleusinian  festival  of  Demeter  people  appear  to  have
thrown  stones  at  each  other  as  a  religious  rite.     See  Athenaeus,  ix.  p.


.  XXX  AUXESIA  AND  DAMIA  267

>6  d,  compared  with  Homer,  Hymn  to  Demeter^  265  sqq.  (where
lumeister  wrongly  changes  kv  aAA^Aotcrt  into  'A^vatbicrt).  From
tic  inscriptions  it  seems  that  there  was  a  priest  of  Demeter  who  was
lied  the  Stone-bearer  (At^o<^/>o$).  See  K.  Keil  in  Philologus^  23
866),  p.  242  sq.\  cp.  O.  Crusius,  Beitrdge  zur  griech.  Mythologie^  p.
)  sq.

(3)  Pausanias  expressly  says  in  the  present  passage  that  the  manner
sacrificing  to  Damia  and  Auxesia  was  the  same  as  that  of  sacrificing
the  Eleusinian  deities.

(4)  Zenobius  {(Oent  iv.  20)  says  that  at  Troezen  Demeter  was  called
maea,  and  Proserpine  was  called  Azesia.  (Cp.  Suidas  and  Hesychius,
'J.  'A^rfo-ia :  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^  p.  348  line  26.)  Now  since
i.usanias  tells  us  (ii.  32.  2)  that  Damia  and  Auxesia  were  worshipped

Troezen  it  might  seem  as  if  Amaea  and  Azesia  were  merely  different
rms  of  the  same  names.  However,  this  identification  of  the  names  is
rongly  discountenanced,  if  not  disproved,  by  the  Epidaurian  inscription

which  Damia  and  Auxesia  are  called  the  Azesian  goddesses  (see
KDve  p.  266).

(5)  The  virtue  attributed  to  the  images  of  Damia  and  Auxesia —
unely,  that  of  making  the  fruits  of  the  earth  to  grow  (Herodotus,  v.
2  sq,) — is  exactly  the  function  of  Demeter.

We  may  perhaps  go  further  and  trace  some  resemblances  between
ese  beliefs  and  practices  and  those  of  other  parts  of  the  world.  The
rtilising  influence  ascribed  to  Damia  and  Auxesia  seems  to  have
upended  on  the  fact  that  their  images  were  made  of  a  sacred  wood,
ow  I  have  shown  elsewhere  {The  Golden  Bought  i.  p.  67  sqq,)  that
ses  are  commonly  supposed  to  be  endowed  with  the  power  of  making
e  crops  to  grow,  and  that  this  belief  is  at  the  root  of  many  of  the
»ring  and  midsummer  customs  (May  poles.  May  queens,  etc.)  of  our
uropean  peasantry.  Further,  raillery  directed  at  women  forms  a  special
ature  of  some  of  these  spring  customs  {The  Golden  Bought  i.  pp.  91,
2,  93) ;  and  so  does  stone-throwing  {ib.  i.  p.  264).  Moreover  battles,
lore  or  less  serious,  between  peasants  have  been  a  recognised  mode  of
Tomoting  the  growth  of  the  com  in  modem  Europe  and  apparently
Asewhere.  For  European  examples,  see  Mannhardt,  Baumkultus^  pp.
548-552.  In  Acobamba  (Peru)  the  traveller  Tschudi  saw  two  parties
3f  the  villagers  fighting  with  each  other  in  order  that  the  women  might
^atch  the  flowing  blood  and  sprinkle  it  on  the  fields  (Bastian,  Der
^fensch  in  der  Geschichte^  3*  P*  73)'  In  Tonga,  when  the  yams  were
ipening,  various  ceremonies  were  performed  to  ensure  good  weather
uid  a  fine  crop ;  an  essential  part  of  these  ceremonies  was  a  battle
•etween  the  islanders,  one  half  of  the  island  against  the  other  half.
Tie  fight  was  obstinately  maintained  and  lasted  for  hours.  See  Mariner,
"^onga  Islands^  2.  p.  207.  At  the  harvest  festival  of  some  of  the  Indian
ibes  in  the  south-east  of  the  United  States  the  warriors  used  to  paint
id  adom  themselves  in  their  most  terrific  array  and  fight  a  mock  battle
very  exact  order  (J.  Adair,  History  of  the  American  Indians^  p.  1 10).
mongst  the  Madi  tribe  of  Central  Africa  the  harvest  festival  is  regularly
[lowed  by  a  fight  conducted  according  to  certain  fixed  rules  (R.  W.


268  AUXESIA  AND  DAMIA  bk.  ii.  corinth

Felkin,  *  Notes  on  the  Madi  or  Mora  tribe  of  Central  Africa,'  Proceedings
of  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh^  12  (1882- 1884),  p.  339).  Amongst
the  Khonds  of  Orissa,  who  sacrificed  human  beings  and  buried  their
flesh  in  the  fields  to  fertilise  them,  a  wild  battle  was  fought  with  stones
and  mud  just  before  the  flesh  was  buried  in  the  ground  (S.  C.  Mac-
pherson,  Memorials  of  Service  in  India^  p.  129).  A  sham-fight,  enacted
before  the  chiefs  house,  is  part  of  the  ceremonies  performed  in  connexion
with  the  rice-culture  in  Minahassa,  Northern  Celebes  (N.  Graafland,
De  Minahassa,  i.  p.  56).  In  Gilgit  an  elaborate  sham-fight  marked
the  time  for  pmning  the  vines  and  the  first  budding  of  the  apricot  trees.
The  Rajah  was  besieged  in  his  castle,  and  the  Vizier  led  the  storming
party.  If  the  castle  was  captured,  the  Rajah  had  to  pay  a  ransom ;
but  if  the  Vizier's  party  were  defeated,  every  man  had  to  make  a  present
to  the  Rajah.  See  Biddulph,  Tribes  of  the  Hindoo  Koosh,  p.  102.  In
the  southern  provinces  of  China,  in  the  first  month  of  each  year,  "  the
peasants  of  neighbouring  villages  meet  in  the  open  plains,  form  sides,
and  attack  each  other  with  stones.  These  encounters  are  sometimes
very  serious  affairs.  .  .  .  Like  most  Chinese  customs,  these  conflicts
have  their  origin  in  a  superstitious  belief"  (Gray,  China,  i.  p.  256  j^.)
The  writer  does  not  define  the  superstition,  but  probably  it  related  to  the
fertilisation  of  the  fields.

How  the  raillery  and  abuse  (not  to  say  the  sticks  and  stones)  dis-
charged upon  such  occasions  were  supposed  to  promote  the  fertility  of
the  ground,  it  is  not  easy  to  see.  But  at  least  it  can  be  shown  that  such
a  cause  has  in  fact  been  believed  to  produce  such  an  effect.  See  abo/e,
vol.  2.  p.  492.

To  return  to  Damia  and  Auxesia,  the  place  Oea  at  which  their
images  were  to  be  seen  has  been  identified  by  Leake  and  Bursian  w^ith
the  ruined  town  of  Paiaea-Chora,  situated  among  the  mountains  about
an  hour  from  the  coast.  It  was  to  this  place  that  the  people  of  Aegina
withdrew,  for  fear  of  pirates,  during  the  Turkish  dominion.  There  are
no  ancient  remains  here,  but  the  distance  from  the  town  of  Aegina
agrees  exactly  (according  to  Bursian)  with  the  distance  given  by  Hero-
dotus, namely  20  Greek  furlongs.  Leake,  however,  gives  the  distance  as
30  furlongs.  See  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  83  sq.  \  Leake,  Morea,  2.  p.
439  ^^'  J  ^^'j  Peloponnesiaca,  p.  275  sqq,  Cp.  Fiedler,  Reise,  i.  p.  273  ;
Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.  513.

The  resemblance  of  Damia  and  Auxesia  to  the  corn-spirit  of  Germany,
etc.,  did  not  escape  W.  Mannhardt,  though  he  did  not  draw  out  the
parallel  {Die  Komddmonen,  p.  35).  Cp.  S.  Wide,  De  sacris  Troeseni-
orum,  Hermionensium,  Epidauriorum,  p.  6 1  sqq, ;  Welcker,  Griechische
Gotterlehre,  3.  p.  130  sqq.

By  far  the  most  remarkable  monument  of  antiquity  in  Aegina  is  one
which  Pausanias  has  omitted  to  mention.  This  is  the  temple  of  Athena,
called  till  lately  the  temple  of  Panhellenian  Zeus.  It  was  probably  in
this  temple  that  the  Aeginetans  dedicated  the  prows  of  the  Samian  ships
which  they  had  captured  in  a  sea-fight  fought  about  520  B.C.  (Hero-
dotus, iii.  59).  The  reasons  for  assigning  the  temple  to  Athena  are:
(i)  Athena  was  the  central  figure  of  the  sculptures  in  both  the  eastern


CH.  XXX  TEMPLE  AT  AEGINA  269

and  western  ^bles ;  (2)  at  Bilikada,  in  the  church  of  St.  Athanasius,
situated  about  a  quaiter  of  an  hour  to  the  west  of  the  temple,  there  is  a
large  marble  slab  bearing  the  inscription  :

H0P02

TEMEN02

AOENAIAS

that  is  'The  limit  of  the  precinct  of  Athena.'  See  Wordsworth,  Athens
arid  Attica,^  p.  23?  sq.  This  stone  no  doubt  once  marked  the  sacred
enclosure  of  the  neighbouring  temple.  In  1SS8  another  stone  bearing
exactly  the  same  inscription  was  found  in  digging  up  a  field  in  the
district  called  Asomaton,  beside  the  road  leading  to  the  temple  of
Athena  (^(Atmv  d/>x<>'0'^or "<!>'>  188S,  p.  36;  C.  I.  A.  iv.  No.  538  a,
P'  "57)-
■„.   The  temple  stands  on  the  top  of  a  hill  towards  the  north-east  comer


^1


^i^-T :^at


Seals  or  Feci


of  the  island,  commanding  superb  views  over  the  sea  and  the  coasts
of  Attica  and  Peloponnese.  tt  is  distant  about  two  and  a  half  hours
from  the  town  of  Aegina.  Travellers  from  Athens  who  wish  to  visit  the
temple  commonly  land  in  the  fine  rocky  bay  of  Hagia  Matiita  on  the
eastern  aide  of  the  island.  A  steep  declivity,  sparsely  wooded  with  pine-
trees,  leads  up  from  the  shore  of  the  bay  to  the  temple.  1  shall  always
remember  how  on  a  lovely  day  in  spring  we  landed  here  and  lay  under
the  pine-trees,  looking  down  on  the  intensely  blue  but  crystalline  waters
of  the  bay.  The  air  was  full  of  the  fragrance  of  the  pines,  the  yellow
broom  was  in  flower  at  our  feet,  and  visible  across  the  sea  was  the  coast
of  Attica.  It  was  a  scene  such  as  Theocritus  might  have  immortalised.
The  platform  upon  which  the  temple  stands  is  partly  formed  of  the
solid  rock,  partly  built  up  of  large  polygonal  stones.  It  is  about  230
feet  long  by  1 30  feet  wide,  and  was  paved  with  lat^e  square  slabs  in  two
courses.     The  length  of  the  temple  itself,  upon  the  stylobate  or  upper


270  TEMPLE  AT  AEGINA  bk.  il  corinth

step,  is  94  feet,  the  breadth  45  feet.    The  temple  was  a  Doric  peripteral,
with  six  columns  at  the  ends  and  twelve  at  the  sides,  or  thirty-two
columns  in  all.     Of  these  only  twenty  are  now  standing,  mainly  those
of  the  east  fa9ade  and  the  adjacent  parts  of  the  sides.     They  all  retain
their  entablature.     The  height  of  the  columns  is  17  ft.  2  in.     Their
diameter  at  the  base  is  3  ft.  3  in. ;  at  the  top  it  is  2  ft.  3  in.     Some  of
the  columns  are  monoliths,  but  most  of  them  consist  of  several  drums.
The  temple  has  a  pronaos  (fore-temple)  and  an  opisthodomos  or  posticum
(back-chamber),  as  well  as  a  cella  or  central  chamber.     The  pronaos
and  opisthodomos  were  both  distyle  in  antis^  i.e,  have  each  two  columns
in  front  between  aniaej  the  diameter  of  these  columns  is  3  ft.  2  in.
Two  columns  of  the  fore-temple  are  still  standing  with  their  entablature.
The  cella  had  a  door  at  either  end  opening  into  the  fore-temple  and
back-chamber.     Inside  the  cella  there  was  a  row  of  five  columns  on
each  side.     These  columns  were  2  ft.  4  in.  in  diameter.     The  temple
is  built  of  yellowish   limestone   coated  with    stucco.      The   roof  and
sculptures  are  of  Parian  marble.     The  pavement  of  the  fore-temple  and
cella  was  covered  with  a  very  hard  and  polished  stucco,  of  a  deep
crimson  colour ;  portions  of  it  are  still  preserved.

There  are  some  foundations  of  an  ancient  building,  perliaps  a  portal
(propylaeum),  as  you  approach  the  temple  fh)m  the  south-east  At  the
north-east  angle  there  is  a  cave,  partly  artificial.

Leake  was  of  opinion  that  the  temple  is  the  oldest  Doric  temple  i^
Greece,  except  the  one  at  Corinth.  Cockerell,  the  chief  authority  on
the  subject,  agreed  with  Leake  in  thinking  that  it  cannot  have  bee"
built  much  later  than  600  B.c.  He  says  (p.  24)  :  "  The  marks  of  a  veO'
ancient  order  are  observable  throughout  in  the  lai^ge  proportion  of  the
entablature,  the  short  column  of  twenty  flutings,  much  diminished
[toward  the  top],  the  salient  cap[ital]  and  the  three  sinkings  of  the
hypotrachelium,  and  the  large  size  and  prominence  of  the  upper  mould-
ing of  the  cornice  and  the  cymatium.  The  KpTjTris  is  composed  of  three
lofty  steps,  of  which  the  middle  one  is  the  least,  as  is  the  case  in  most
of  the  examples."

See  Antiquities  of  Ionian  published  by  the  Society  of  Dilettanti,  Part  the  Second
(London,  1797),  pp.  16-19,  with  plates  ii.-vii. ;  C.  R.  Cockerell,  The  Temples  of
Jupiter  Panhellenius  at  Aegina  and  of  Apollo  Epicurius  at  Bassae  near  Phigaleia
(London,  i860) ;  Ch.  Gamier,  *  lie  d'^gine,  Temple  de  Jupiter  Panhell^nien,'
Revue  archiologique^  11  (1854),  pp.  193-204,  343-361,423-440;  Chandler,  Travels
in  Greece^  p.  12;  Dodwell,  Tour,  i.  p.  564  sqq,  ;  Annali  delV  Instiiuto^  i
(1829),  pp.  209-211  ;  Leake,  Morea,  2.  p.  441  sq.,  3.  p.  271  sqq.\  id.,  Pelopon-
nesiaca,  p.  lyo  sqq.  ;  Fiedler,  Keise,  I.  p.  277;  Wordsworth,  Athens  and  Attica  *
p.  226  sqq.  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.  51 1  sqq,  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  84;
Welcker,  Tagebuch,  i.  p.  341  sqq,  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  141  sq.

Most  of  the  sculptures  which  formerly  adorned  the  gables  were
discovered  among  the  ruins  of  the  temple  in  1 8 1 1  by  a  party  of  English
and  German  scholars  and  architects.  In  181 2  the  sculptures  were
bought  by  the  Crown  Prince  of  Bavaria  (afterwards  Ludwig  L)  and  are
now  in  the  Sculpture  Gallery  at  Munich.  Some  partial  restorations
were  skilfully  made  by  Thorwaldsen.  Ten  figures  from  the  west  gable
are  preserved,  and  five  from  the  east.    There  are  also  two  much  smaller


CH.  XXX  TEMPLE  AT  AEG  IN  A  ri\

figures  which  stood  on  the  roof  above  the  gable  {acroieria\  and  a  number
of  fragments  of  the  missing  figures.     The  groups  in  the  two  gables  cor-
responded very  closely  to  each  other.   Each  represented  a  combat  of  spear-
men and  archers  about  a  fallen  warrior.    This  fallen  man  lay  in  the  centre
of  the  gable,  while  above  him  stood  Athena,  armed  with  hehnet,  shield,
and  spear.     In  the  east  gable  a  kneeling  archer  wears  a  head-dress  in
the  form  of  a  lion's  skin.    From  this  it  has  been  inferred  that  the  archer
is  Hercules,  and  that  the  scene  in  this  gable  represents  the  war  waged
on  Laomedon  King  of  Troy  by  Hercules  assisted  by  Telamon,the  father
of  Ajax.     The  fallen  man  is  supposed  to  be  Hercules's  companion
Oicles,  who  was  slain  by  Laomedon  in  the  war  (ApoUodorus,  ii.  6.  4 ;
Diodorus,  iv.  32).     The  sculptures  in  the  western  gable  probably  repre-
sent the  combat  of  the  Greeks  and  Trojans  over  the  body  of  Achilles ;
the  archer  on  the  spectator's  right  with  the  high  Asiatic  helmet  and  the
effeminate  features  is  Paris,  who  shot  the  fatal  arrow ;  the  Greek  who
with  uplifted  spear  protects  the  fallen  Achilles  is  Ajax,  who  rescued  his
body  (see  Quintus  Smymaeus,  iii.  217  sqq,)    Another,  but  less  probable,
explanation  is  that  the  fight  represented  is  the  one  over  the  body  of
Patroclus  in  which  Ajax  distinguished   himself  (Homer,  Iliady  xvii.)
Thus  the  sculptures  were  intended  to  glorify  Aegina's  famous  heroes,
Telamon  and  Ajax.     An  appropriate  time  for  the  erection  of  these
sculptures  would  be  immediately  after  the  great   Persian  war.      For
before  the  battle  of  Salamis  the  Greeks  specially  invoked  the  help  of
Telamon  and  Ajax,  and  sent  a  ship  to  Aegina  to  fetch  the  hero  Aeacus
and    his    descendants  (Herodotus,   viii.   64) ;    and   in  the   battle  the
Aeginetans  were  thought  to  have  distinguished  themselves  above  all
the  rest  of  the  Greeks  (Herodotus,  viii.  93).      After  much  discussion
archaeologists  seem  to  be  now  pretty  well  agreed  that  on  technical
grounds  of  style  the  sculptures  may  most  fitly  be  referred  to  this  period.
They  were  therefore  probably  executed  soon  after  480  B.C.,  and  not
later  than  456  B.C.,  when  Aegina  was  conquered  by  Athens.     Their
style  is  on  the  whole  hard,  stiff,  and  wanting  in  idealism.     But  the
sculptures  of  the  eastern  gable  are  much  superior  to  those  of  the  western
gable.     It  is  supposed  that  they  were  executed  by  a  younger  and  more
skilful  sculptor  who  may  have  worked  either  simultaneously  with,  or  at
any  rate  very  shortly  after,  the  sculptor  who  wrought  the  figures  in  the
western  gable.     The  arrangement  of  the  figures  in  the  gables  and  the
restoration  of  the  missing  figures  have  been  much  discussed,  but  cannot
^  treated  of  here.

See,  in  addition  to  Cockereirs  work  cited  above,  Miiller-Wieseler,  DenkmaUr^
\'  plates  vi.  vii.  viii.  viii.  b ;  Welcker,  Alte  Denkmdler^  i.  pp.  30-66 ;  Brunn,
*  Ueber  das  Alter  der  aeginetischen  Bildwerke,*  in  Sitzungsberichte  of  the  Bavarian
Academy  (Munich),  Philosoph.  philolog.  Class,  1867,  1.  op.  405-428 ;  «i/.,  *  Ueber
*lie  Composition  der  aeginetischen  GieMgrujppen,'  ib,  1808,  2.  pp.  448-464;  id,^
^^^chrethung  der  Glyptothek^^  pp.  66-95  J  ^'  Prachov,  *  La  composition  des  groupes
du  temple  d*Egine,'  Anncdi  delV  Inst,  di  Corrtsp,  ArcheoL  45  (1873),  PP«  MO-
^^2  ;  w.  Klein,  *Zur  Composition  der  aeginetischen  Giebelgruppen,*  Archae-
^^^gische  Ztitung^  1876,  p.  200  sq, ;  K.  Lange,  *  Die  Composition  der  Aegineten,'
in  Berichte  iiUr  die  Verhandlungen  of  the  Saxon  Academy  (Leipzig),  Philolog.
histor.  Class,  31  (1878),  pp.  1-94;  Fleckeisen's  JahrbUcker  f,  class,  FkiloL  25


272  TROEZEN  bk,  ii.  corinth

(1879),  PP*  616-620  (review  of  Lange's  work  by  L.  Schwabe);  Li  Julius,  'Die
Composition  der  Aegineten,*  ib,  26  (1880),  pp.  1-22  ;  Overbeck,  Gtsch,  d.  gruck,
Flastikf^  I.  pp.  164-176;  iV/.,  in  Berichte  iibtr  die  VerhantU,  of  the  Saxon
Academy  (Leipzig),  Phil,  hist  CL  44  (1892),  pp.  38-41 ;  Lucy  M.  Mitchell,
History  of  Ancient  Sculpture,  pp.  237-248 ;  Murray,  Hist,  of  Greek  Sculpture,^  1.
pp.  205-223 ;  Friederichs-Wolters,  Gipsa6^sse,pp.  32-49 ;  O.  Bie,  Kampfgruppt
und  Kdmpfertypen  in  der  Antike,  pp.  76-81 ;  Cfollignon,  Histoire  dc  la  sculpture
Grecque,  I.  pp.  286-302 ;  A.  H.  Smith,  Catalogue  of  Sculpture  in  the  British
Museum^  p.  73  sqq,  ;  A.  Schildt,  Die  Giehelgruppen  von  Aegina  ( Leipzig,  1895).
On  the  history  of  Aeginetan  sculpture,  see  K.  O.  MUller,  *  De  arte  Aeginetica,'
Kunstarchaeologische  IVerke,  1.  pp.  I -19;  Brunn,  Gesch,  d,  griech,  Kiinstler,  I.
pp.  82-96.

30.  6.  Athena  and  Poseidon  had  a  dispute  for  the  possession  of
the  land  etc.  This  legend,  coupled  with  the  &ct  that  Athena  was
worshipped  on  the  acropolis  of  Troezen  under  the  title  of  Polias  (Paus.
ii.  32.  5  compared  with  the  present  passage),  proves  a  close  similarity
between  the  religion  and  mythology  of  Troezen  and  Athens.  Sec
S.  Wide,  De  sacris  Troezeniorum^  Hermionensium^  Epidauriorum^  p.  16.
30.    6.   their  ancient  coins  have  for  device  a  trident  and  a

face  of  Athena.  Some  of  these  coins
are  in  existence ;  the  head  of  Athena
is  on  the  obverse,  the  trident  on  the
reverse  (Fig.  45).  The  identification
of  the  head  as  that  of  Athena  has,
however,  been  doubted,  as  the  type  is
unusual.     The  face  is  bold  and  strons

FIG.   45.— COIM   OF  TROBZSK.  m»*mj««»*.  *  **v.     »«*.%.   xi»   urvrxu    cwavx    ^uvu5

and  wears  no  helmet.  See  Imhoof-
Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num,  Cofnm,  on  Paus.  p.  47,  pi.  M  i.
The  trident  on  the  coins  of  Troezen  is  mentioned  also  by  Plutarch
{Theseus,  6).

30.  7-  the  Phoebaean  lagoon.  Leake  {Morea,  2.  p.  449)  identifies
this  with  the  lagoon  at  the  head  of  the  bay  of  Methana.  See  note  on
ii.  31.  10.

30.  8.  Troezen  and  Pitthens.  They  were  the  sons  of  Pelops  and
came  to  Troezen  from  Pisa  in  the  land  of  Elis  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  374).

30.  9>  Anaphlystus  and  Sphettus.  The  site  of  the  Attic  township
of  Anaphlystus  (Herodotus,  iv.  99  ;  Xenophon,  De  vectig,  iv.  43  ;  Strabo,
ix.  p.  398)  is  occupied  by  the  modem  jinavyso,  a  village  situated  on  the
spacious  and  sheltered  bay  of  St,  Nicholas,  about  six  miles  north-west
of  Cape  Sunium.  There  are  some  ancient  remains  at  the  place,  including
some  pieces  of  ancient  walls  and  of  moles  running  out  into  the  bay.
See  Dodwell,  Tour,  i.  p.  546  sq,  ;  Leake,  Athens,  2.  p.  59  sg.  ;  Milch-
hofer,  Karten  von  AtHka,  Erlduternder  Text,  Heft  iii.-vi.  p.  21.  The
township  of  Sphettus  lay  to  the  east  of  Mt.  Hymettus,  but  its  exact  site
is  disputed.  Prof.  A.  Milchhofer  would  place  it  west  of  the  modem
village  of  Koropi,  See  Leake,  Athens,  2.  p.  24  sqq,  ;  L.  Ross,  Die
Demen  von  Attika,  p.  96;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  346  sq,\  P.  Kastro-
menos.  Die  Demen  von  Attika,  p.  99  sq. ;  A.  Milchhofer,  in  Berliner
philolog,  Wochenschrift,  12  (1892),  pp.  2  sqq,,  2g  sq,,  34  sqq,;  id.,
*  Untersuchungen  iiber  die  Demenordnung  des  Kleisthenes,*  Abhand-
lungen  of  the  Prussian  Academy,  Berlin,  for  1892,  p.  21  sq.


CH.  XXXI  TROEZEN  273

30.  10.  Bihenelna.    See  ii.  18.  5.

31.  I.  Troesen.     The  plain  of  Troezen  lies  between  the  sea  and  a
range   of  rough   and   rocky   hills,  wooded  with  dark  evergreens  and
stunted  trees,  which  shut  it  in  on  the  west  and  south.     The  northern
part  of  the  plain  is  marshy  in  places,  and  the  marshes  breed  fever  among
the  sallow  inhabitants  of  Damaloy  the  wretched  hamlet  which  nestles
among  trees  at  the  foot  of  the  hills  in  the  inmost  comer  of  the  plain,
close  to  the  ruins  of  Troezen.     Stretches  of  pasture-land,  however,  and
of  vineyards  alternate  with  the  swamps  ;  and  eastward,  toward  the  island
of  Calauria  (Poros),  the  plain  is  well  watered,  cultivated  like  a  garden,
and  verdant  with  vines,  olives,  lemon-groves,  and  fig-trees.     Seen  from
the  water  of  the  beautiful  almost  landlocked  bay  the  green  of  this  rich
vegetation,  with  the  tall  dark  cypresses  towering  conspicuously  over  all,
is  refreshing  to  eyes  accustomed  to  the  arid  plains  and  hills  of  Greece.
At  Dantala  groves  of  oranges  and  lemons  yield  the  villagers  a  consider-
able return.     On  higher  ground,  to  the  north-west  of  the  village,  are  the
ruins  of  Troezen.     The  glorious  prospect  over  plain  and  mountain  and
sea  is  unchanged  ;  but  of  the  city  itself,  which,  if  we  may  trust  Pausanias,
its  people  regarded  with  such  fond  patriotic  pride,  nothing  is  left  but
some  insignificant  ruins  overgrown  with  weeds  and  dispersed  amid  a
wilderness  of  bushes.     An  isolated  craggy  mountain,  rising  steeply  on
the   farther   side   of  a  deep  ravine,  was  the  ancient  acropolis.     The
ascent  is  toilsome,  especially  if  it  be  made  at  noon  on  an  airless  summer
day  with  the  sun  blazing  pitilessly  from  a  cloudless  sky,  the  rocks  so
hot  that  you  cannot  touch  them  without  pain,  the  loose  stones  slipping
at  every  step,  the  dry  withered  shrubs   and  herbage  crackling  under
foot  and  blinding  you  with  clouds  of  dust  and  down.     The  wonderful
view  from  the  summit,  however,  makes  amends  for  the  labour  of  the
ascent,  ranging  as  it  does  across  the  green  fertile  plain  at  our  feet  and
away  beyond  a  bewildering  maze  of  islands,  capes  and  bays  to  Sunium
OQ  the   north-east   and   the  snowy  peak  of  Parnassus  on  the  north-
west

Another  picturesque  bit  of  scenery,  of  a  different  kind,  may  be  seen

^y  following  up  the  ravine  to  the  point  where,  at  a  prodigious  height

Overhead,  it  is  spanned  by  an  arch  of  grey  stone,  festooned  with  creepers

3j^d  fringed  with  stalactites,  which  the  peasants  call  the  DeviPs  Bridge.

^t  carries  a  mediaeval  aqueduct  across  the  narrow  but  profound  abyss.

Tiirough    this  romantic   ravine   the   old   path  used  to  lead   over  the

"fountains  to  Hermion.

We  now  retrace  our  steps  to  the  ruins  of  Troezen  in  order  to  look  at

^^^cm  in  more  detail.     Dispersed  amongst  them  are  many  dilapidated

^l^urches,  some  of  which  probably  occupy  the  sites  of  ancient  temples.

^^ide  the  bank  of  the  stream  there  is  a  tableland  of  some  extent  on

^^Wch  stand  the  ruins  of  the  deserted  Bishop's  Palace  {Palaeo-Episkopiy

a^  it  is  called).     It  is  a  great  rambling  building  with  countless  doors  and

^l^yrinthine  arches,  and  the  villagers  have  many  stories  to  tell  of  it.

^Vithin  it  are  several  churches  built  entirely  of  ancient  materials,  among

^'wliich  may  be  seen  pieces  of  fluted  Doric  columns  and  other  fragments  of

white  marble  adorned  with  sculptured  foliage  in  the  style  of  the  Erech-

VOL,  III  T


274  TROEZEN  bk.  ii.  co&inth

theum.  A  few  yards  to  the  south  of  the  deserted  palace  former  travellers
saw  the  lower  walls  of  a  temple  finely  built  of  ashlar  masonry.  A
hollow  to  the  east  of  the  palace  has  been  generally  taken  to  be  the
semi-circular  end  of  the  stadium  in  which  Hippolytus  is  said  to  have
exercised  himself  in  his  manly  sports,  while  the  love-sick  Phaedra
watched  him  stealthily  from  her  bower  hard  by  (Paus.  iL  32.  3).
Others  think  that  this  hollow  marks  the  site  of  the  theatre,  not  of  the
stadium.  To  the  south-east  of  the  palace  some  excavations,  made  io
1890  by  Mr.  Legrand  for  the  French  School  of  Archaeology,  laid  bare
the  foundations  of  a  small  edifice  built  of  tufa,  and  measuring  1 3  metres
(42  feet  8  inches)  in  length  by  6  metres  (19  feet  8  inches)  in  breadth.
Beside  this  building  the  rock  is  artificially  levelled.  A  few  paces  from
it  Mr.  Legrand  excavated  a  rectangular  structure  built  of  rough  stones,
perhaps  an  altar.

To  the  south-east  of  this  structure,  on  a  platform  supported  by
horizontal  courses  of  masonry,  Mr.  Legrand  excavated  a  large  building  of
horse-shoe  shape,  measuring  about  100  feet  long  by  35  feet  wide.  It
opens  to  the  north  and  encloses  a  court,  in  which  there  seems  to  have
been  a  colonnade.  The  main  part  of  the  building  comprises  a  laige
central  hall  and  two  side  halls  in  the  wings,  with  a  pavement  of  coarse
mosaic,  marble  benches,  and,  flush  with  the  ground,  certain  marble
borders  of  which  the  object  is  uncertain.  The  walls,  built  of  well  cat
blocks  of  stone,  are  standing  to  an  average  height  of  about  3  feet
From  inscriptions  found  on  the  spot  it  would  seem  that  the  edifice  is  a
gymnasium  or  a  bathing  establishment.  To  the  south  of  this  building,
but  on  the  same  platform,  and  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  Mr.  L^rand
discovered  the  foundations  of  a  temple  67  feet  long  by  33  feet  broad,
built  of  common  stone.

Between  the  deserted  palace  and  the  village  of  Damala,  at  about
four  minutes  distance  from   the  former,  Gell  saw  on  the  left  "thrc^
columns,   bearing  a  strong  resemblance  both    in  form  and  colour  XP
columns  of  black  basalt     Many  of  these  are  found  among  the  ruins  of
Troezen.     They  have  been  well  cut,  into  eight  flat  faces,  diminishing^
upwards,  so  that  being  7  feet  i  inch  in  circumference  they  measure  only
6   feet   9   at   3   feet   from   the  base.     The   faces   were   at   the  base
about  1 1  inches,  and  at  the  top  of  the  stone  only  9^  inches.     The  holes
into  which  brazen  or  wooden  cubes  were  inserted  for  the  purpose  of
uniting  the  different  blocks  are  7  J  inches  square."     Gell  conjectured
that  these  remarkable  columns,  so  different  from  the  ordinary  types  of
Greek  columns,  may  have  belonged  to  the  sanctuary  of  Thearian  Apollo,
which  Pausanias  (ii.  31.  6)  declared  to  be  the  oldest  sanctuary  that  he
knew.

About  three-quarters  of  a  mile  to  the  east  of  the  Bishop's  Palace  is
a  square  tower  which  is  standing  to  a  considerable  height ;  a  part  of  the
south-east  wall  of  the  city  abuts  upon  this  tower.

In  the  ruined  church  of  Hagia  Sotira  or  Hagia  Metamorphosis,  near
the  village,  Mr.  Legrand  found  a  statue  of  Hermes  with  a  ram  ;  it  is  of
late  date  but  very  fair  style  {Bulletin  de  Corr,  Hellhiique^  16  (1892),
pp.  165-174).     And  in  the  church  of  Hagia  Sotira  a  stone,  serving  as


CH.  XXXI  TROEZEN  275

an  altar,  bears  an  inscription  which  shows  that  it  belonged  to  the  base
of  a  statue  of  Aratus  erected  by  the  people  of  Troezen  (BulL  de  Corr,
HellM.  1889,  p.  193).

In  1889  some  excavations  were  made  at  Troezen  for  the  Greek
government  by  Mr.  Staes.  He  found  a  prehistoric  pit-grave  containing
a  body  (its  head  turned  to  the  east),  two  large  vases  of  the  Mycenaean
style,  and  a  golden  fillet  adorned  with  what  may  be  alphabetic  characters
or  hieroglyphics.  Sixteen  Roman  tombs  were  discovered  in  the  course
of  the  same  excavations.    See  ^tXriov  apxaioXoyiKov^  1889,  P*  1^3  ^99-

Lastly,  on  the  acropolis  (see  above,  p.  273)  there  are  remains  of  a
circuit-wall  flanked  with  towers,  in  which  Roman  or  Byzantine  bricks  are
mixed  with  old  Greek  masonry.

As  to  Troezen  see  Chandler,  Travels  in  Greece,  p.  213  sqar,  Dodwelli  Tour,
2.  p.  267  sqq. ;  Cell,  Itinerary  of  Greece,  p.  1 18  sqq. ;  Leake,  Aforea,  2.  p.  442  sqq. ;
Boolaye,  Kecherckes,  p.  56;  Fiedler,  Reiser  I.  p.  284  sqqr,  L.  Ross,  Wanderun-
gen,  2.  p.  4  sq,\  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  431  sqq,;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  87  5qq,\
Guide-Joanne,  2.  p.  204  sq, ;  Philippson,  Peloponnes,  pp.  46-49.  For  tne  inscnp-
tions  of  Troezen  see  E.  Legrand,  *  Inscriptions  de  Tr^z^ne,'  Bulletin  de  Corr*
HelUnique,  17(1893),  pp.  84-121.

Troezen  was  distant  1 3  Greek  furlongs  from  the  sea  (Strabo,  viii.
P-  373)'  The  name  of  its  harbour  was  Pogon  (*  the  Beard ')  ;  the
Greek  fleet  assembled  in  it  before  the  battle  of  Salamis  (Herodotus,  viii.
42  ;  Strabo,  /.r.)  The  port  is  distant  about  a  mile  and  a  half  from  the
present  village  of  DamcUa;  it  is  now  shallow,  obstructed  with  sand,  and
accessible  only  to  small  boats  (Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  268).

3L  I.  the  market-place.  Bursian  (Geogr,  2.  p.  88  sq!)  thought
that  this  may  have  lain  at  the  place  called  Episkopiy  or  in  a  depression  to
the  east  of  it  (his  language  is  not  quite  clear).  There  are  some  ancient
remains  there.  See  above,  p.  273  sq,  Mr.  £.  Legrand  thinks  that
the  market-place  was  near  the  chapel  of  Hagia  Sotira ;  in  this  chapel  he
found  the  inscribed  base  of  a  statue  of  a  clerk  of  the  market  {agoranomos),
^BulL  de  Corr.  Hdldn,  17  (1893),  P-  97  ^^•

3L  I.  Savionr  Artemis.  Two  inscriptions  containing  dedications
to  Artemis  have  been  found  at  Troezen,  one  in  the  ruined  chapel  of  St.
George,  the  other  in  a  ruined  chapel  to  the  west  of  Episkopi^  above  the
chapel  (also  ruined)  of  the  Apostles  (Bull,  de  Corr,  Hdlin,  17  (1893),

P-  93).

3L  2.  the  hound   of   helL     Cerberus.     In    Hindoo    mythology
"  Yama,  the  regent  of  hell,  has  two  dogs  according  to  the  Purdnas^  one
of  them  named  Cerbura  and  Sabala,  or  varied;  the  other,  SyAma,  or
black  ;  the  first  of  whom  is  also  called  TriHras^  or  with  three  heads^  and
has  the  additional  epithets  of  Calmdsha^  Chitra^  and  Cirmira^  all  signify-
ing stained  or  spotted.     In  Pliny  (vi.  6.  §  18)  the  words  Cimmerium  and
Ccrberion  seem  used  as  synonymous ;  but,  however  that  may  be,  the
Cerbura  of  the  Hindus  is  indubitably  the  Cerberus  of  the  Greeks  "
[Yi.  Wilford    *  On  Egypt,'  etc.  in  Asiatick  Researches^  3.  p.  408  sq,)
This  identification  of  Cerberus  with  the  Sanscrit  Cerbura  or  sarvara  is
approved  by  Prof.  Max  Miiller  (Essays^  i.  p.  493)  and  by  Mr.  Zimmer
{Altindisches  Leben^  pp.  419,  421).     On  Cerberus  cp.  Paus.  ii.  35.  10,


376  TROEZEN  Bk.  li.  coUHta

iii.  25,  6.  The  subject  of  Hercules  dragging  up  Cerbenis  ftwn  the
under  world  is  depicted  on  about  forty  extant  Greek  vases.  See  Fuit'
wangler,  in  Roscher's  Lexicon,  i.  p.  3205  ;  P.  Hartwig,  '  Die  Heraufho-
iung  des  Kerberos  auf  rotfigurigen  S<AtaXea,'  JaJirbuck  d.  arck.  ImliluU,
8(1893),  PP-  >S7-i73-

31.  3.  Semele.  See  ii.  37.  5.  Mr.  Kretschmer  proposes  todeiitt
the  name  Semele  from  a  Phrygian  root  temel,  which  occurs  on  Phrrei*"
tombstones  in  curses  directed  against  any  who  should  violate  the  tomb;.
This  word  Mr.  Kretschmer  interprets  as  meaning  'earth.'  So  Semde
would  be  the  earth-goddess.  Dionysus  in  Greek  mythology  is  closely
associated  with  Thrace,  and  the  result  of  recent  philological  enquiries  is
to  show  a  close  connexion  between  the  Thracian  and  Phrygian  tongues,
which  are  found  to  be  both  Aryan.  Again  Mr.  Kretschmer  agrees  sitli
the  ancients  in  deriving  the  first  part  of  the  name  Dionysus  from  the
same  root  as  Zeus  (Z<vf,  Aids,  etc);  and  the  second  part  (-nriv)
he  thinks  equivalent  to  -nympAus  (connected  with  nymph,  etc) ;  so
that  the  whole  name  Dionysus  would  mean  'the  son  of  Zeus'  =
Dioscurus  (AnxTKovpos).  See  his  essay  '  Semele  und  Dionysos,'  i°
Aus  der  Anomia  (Berlin,  1890),  pp.  17-29.

31.    3.    Ardalufl Ardalldes.       Cp.    Plutarch,    Sepum  saf.

conviv.  4  ;   Stcphanus  Bj-z.  s.v.  'ApSaXiSfs,

31.  4-  the  atone  on  wbicb  nine  men  of  Iiiwzen  once  pnrilM
Orestes  etc.     See  below,  g  8  note.

31.  6.  The  Banctnsrr  of  Theaiian  Apollo.  See  above,  p.  37^
In  the  foundations  of  the  church  of  St.  George  at  Troeien  there  vai
found  an  inscription  in  honour  of  a  certain  Echilaus  of  Plataea,  who  h^
come  to  Troezen  and  contributed  to  "  the  salvation  of  the  country ;
the  inscription  contains  a  provision  that  the  decree  in  his  honour
shall  be  engraved  on  a  slab  of  stone  and  set  up  in  the  sanctuary  0'
Thearian  Apollo  (Bu/I.  de  Corr.  HelUn.  17  (1893),  p.  102  sg.  j  cp.  the
fragmentary  inscription  ib.,  p.  no).  In  Aegina  the  Pythian  Apollo
had  a  Theariuin  (Pindar,  Nem.  iii.  122),  which  would  seem  to  have
been  a  hall  or  dwelling-house  in  which  the  envoys  {ikedroi)  sent  by
foreign  states  to  attend  the  festival  were  lodged  and  entertained  (see
the  Scholia  on  the  passage  of  Pindar).

31.  6.  Tlia  temple  of  Athena  at  Phocaea.     See  vii.  ;.  4.    On

the  occupation  of  Phocaea  by  the  Persians,  see  Herodotus,  i.  1 64,

31.  6.  The  wooden  imageB  of  the  DlOBCtui  are  also  by  Hennon.

a  coin  of  Troeien,  of  the  reign  of  Commodus,

archaic  figures  of   the  Dioscuri    are    represented,

facing  the  spectator,  with  an  altar  between    them

(Fig.  46).     They  stand  naked,  with  long  hair,  both

arms   extended    before   them.      The  type  is  most

probably  copied  from  the  wooden  statues  described  by

Pausanias.      It  is  valuable  as  furnishing  evidence  of

the  style  and  date  of  the  artist  Hermon  of  Troezen.

E  DIOSCURI    See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  on

moEiEN).        />„^j._  p_  ^g^  yj.i[|)  pi_  p^_  ^,ii_

.  the  booth  of  Orestes.     On  the  purification  of  Orestes  at


CH.  XXXI  PURIFICATION  OF  ORESTES  277

Troezen,  see  also  §  4  of  this  chapter.  According  to  others,  Orestes  was
purified  at  the  Three  Rivers  in  Thrace  (Lampridius,  HeliogabaluSy  7),  or
at  Mt.  Amanum  or  Melantium  in  Cilicia  (Stephanus  Byz.  s,v.  "Afiavov :
Tzetzes,  SchoL  on  Lycophr,  1374),  or  at  Coniana  in  Cappadocia
(Strabo,  xii.  p.  535).  There  must  have  been  another  legend  that  he
was  purified  by  Apollo  at  Delphi,  for  on  vases  Orestes  is  not  unfrequently
represented  sitting,  sword  in  hand,  at  the  omphalos^  with  the  avenging
Furies  gathered  round  him  (see  Stephani  in  Compte-Rendu  (St.  Peters-
burg) 1863,  p.  258  sqq.) ;  and  on  at  least  three  vases  the  actual  process
of  purification  is  depicted.  These  representations  are  valuable  as
throwing  light  on  the  rites  observed  on  such  occasions.

(i)  On  an  Apulian  vase  Orestes  is  depicted  sitting  in  a  pensive

attitude,    with   his    back    to   the    omphalos  \    in    his    right    hand   he

holds   the   fatal    sword    unsheathed ;    his   cloak   is  wound   about   his

left    arm.       Apollo   stands    behind    him,    holding   in   his   right  hand

a   little    pig    just    above   Orestes's   head,   and    grasping    in   his   left

hand    a    long    bough    of    laurel.       See    Monumenti    Ineditiy     1847,

pi.   48 ;    Archaeologische  Zeiiung^    i860,    pi.    cxxxviii.  ;    Baumeister's

Denkmdler^  p.  11 17.     Similarly  on  an  ancient  Greek  cameo  Melampus

is    represented   purifying    the   daughters   of    Proetus    (see    Paus.  viii.

18.  7  etc.) ;  he  stands  holding  a  little  pig  over  the  head  of  one  of  them,

while  in  his  left  hand  he  grasps  a  branch  (of  laurel  ?)     See  Gazette

arcUologique^  1879,  pi.  19,  with  the  remarks  of  De  Witte,  p.  127  sqq, ;

Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  fig.  988.     It  would  seem  that  in  these  scenes

Apollo  and  Melampus  are  in  the  act  of  sprinkling  the  pig's  blood  upon

the  persons  who  need  purification.     For  we  know  that  one  mode  of

purification  was  to  wash  the  hands  of  the  guilty  person  in  the  blood  of  a

sucking  pig  (ApoUonius  Rhodius,  iv.  704-707,  with  the  Scholiast's  note

on  z/.   704 ;    Aeschylus,  EumenideSy    283,    449   sq, ;    Eustathius,    on

Homer,  lUadt  xix.  251).     At  Athens  there  were  certain  women  called

fnchytristriae  whose   business   it  was   to  purify  polluted   persons   by

pouring  over  them  the  blood  of  a  sacrificial  victim  (Suidas,  5,v.  cyx^

Tplarptai),     There  is  a  vase-painting  in  which  these  women  are  perhaps

represented  at  their  work.     A  man,  naked  except  for  a  fillet  round  his

head,  is  crouching  with  his  right  foot  (unshod)  planted  upon  something

which  is  stretched  on  the  ground.     His  left  foot  is  in  advance  and  rests

on  the  ground,  being  shod  in  what  seems  to  be  a  very  rough  boot.

Behind  him  are  three  young  women,  two  of  them  with  torches  ;  the  third

holds  a  vessel  of  a  curious  shape  over  the  man's  head.     To  the  right  a

woman  faces  the  man,  holding  up  her  hands ;  still  farther  to  the  right

another  woman  holds  a  bowl  or  saucer  towards  him.     Between  these

two  women  is  a  round-bellied  pot  on  a  stand.     To  the  extreme  right  of

the  picture  is  a  tall  jar  (hydrid)  resting  upon  a  stand  shaped  like  a

sand-glass.     See  Gazette  archdologique^  1884,  plates  44,  45,  46.     The

scene  has  been  recognised  by  De  Witte  and  Fr.  Lenonhant  (/A  p.  352

sq.)  as  one  of  purification ;  and  Lenormant  has  identified  the  object  on

which  the  man's  left  foot  rests  as  the  Atos  Ki^vov  ('  fleece  of  Zeus ').

This  was  the  skin  of  the  victim  sacrified  to  Zeus  ;  it  was  stretched  on  the

ground,  and  persons  who  were  being  purified  stood  with  their  left  foot


278  PURIFICA  TION  OF  ORESTES         bk.  ii.  oownth

on  it.  See  Hesychius  and  Suidas,  s,v.  Ai^s  K(^tov:  Polemo,  ed.
Preller,  pp.  140-142;  Lobeck,  Aglaophamus^  p.  183  sqq,;  W.
Robertson  Smith,  Religion  of  ike  Semites,^  p.  474.  It  is  to  be  noticed,
however,  that  the  man  in  the  scene  referred  to  has  his  right  foot  on  the
object  (whatever  it  is) ;  whereas  Hesychius  states  that  it  was  the  left
foot  which  was  kept  on  the  skin.  May  not  the  rough  boot  which  the
man  wears  on  his  left  foot  be  made  out  of  the  sacred  skin  ?  Shoes
made  out  of  the  skin  of  sacrificial  victims  were  sometimes  ahnost  the
only  ones  which  the  worshippers  were  allowed  to  wear.  See  the
inscription  about  the  Andanian  mysteries  in  Dittenberger's  Sylhge
Inscript.  Graec,  No.  388  line  23  sq,;  Servius  on  Virgil,  Aen,  iv.  518;
Festus,  ed.  Miiller,  p.  161  A  ;  Robertson  Smith,  Religion  of  the  Semites^
p.  438.  The  custom  of  blood-sprinkling  as  a  mode  of  purification  is
common.  See  Leviticus^  xiv.  Among  the  hill  tribes  of  India  near  Raja-
mahall,  if  two  men  quarrel  and  blood  be  shed,  the  one  who  cut  the  other
is  fined  a  hog  or  a  fowl,  the  blood  of  which  is  sprinkled  over  the  wounded
man  "  to  purify  him,  and  to  prevent  his  being  possessed  by  a  devil."
Among  the  same  tribes,  if  a  woman  in  her  courses  touches  a  man,  even
with  her  garment,  he  is  defiled.  The  woman  "  is  fined  a  fowl,  which
is  sacrificed,  and  the  blood  is  sprinkled  on  the  man  to  purify  him."
See  Asiatick  Researches^  4.  pp.  78,  79  (8vo  ed.)  On  the  use  of  the
pig  in  antiquity  for  purposes  of  purification,  see  the  note  on  v.
16.  8.

(2)  In  another  vase-painting,  the  subject  of  which  is  the  purification
of  Orestes,  the  matricide  is  leaning  against  the  omphalos  in  much  the
same  attitude  as  on  the  Apulian  vase.     Apollo  stands  behind  hini)
holding  a  saucer  or  bowl  in  his  left  hand,  while  his  right  hand  grasps^
pair  of  shears  with  which  he  is  about  to  cut  off  a  lock  of  Orestes's  bait-
On  his  left  arm  the  god  supports  a  long  branch  of  laurel.     See  Artf^^},
delV  Instiiuto^  1847,  pi.  x.;  Archaeologische  Zeitung^  i860,  pL  cxx?^^'
(Boetticher,  in  Archaeol,  Zeit,  i860,  p.  62  interprets  the  object  wl^^^
Apollo  holds  in  his  right   hand   as   a  bunch  of  laurel   leaves ;       °^
Stephani,  in  Compte-Rendu  {Si,  Petersburg)  for  1863,  p.  271  sq,^     ^  .
no  doubt  that  the  object  is  a  pair  of  shears  ;  he  says  ancient  scissor'-^
the  same  shape  are  to  be  seen  in  almost  all  archaeological  museur^^^'
This  scene  represents  the  cropping  of  Orestes's  hair  as  a  mod^^^
purification.     See  viii.  34.  3  note.

(3)  On  another  vase  Orestes  is  depicted  in  much  the  same  attit
as  before,   except  that  the  ofnphalos  does  not   appear.      Beside  L
stands  Apollo  with  a  bowl  in  his  left  hand,  while  in  his  right  he  ho^'

a  branch  of  laurel  over  Orestes's  head,  sprinkling  him  with  the  liq^^^
contained  in  the  bowl.  See  Compte-Rendu  (St.  Petersburg),  1863,  ^
213,  with  Stephani's  remarks,  p.  271.

Thus  in  all  three  representations  of  the  purification  a  laurel  bran^^
figures  as  a  necessary  adjunct.     It  must  have  been  one  of  the  objec^^
traditionally  said  to  have  been  used  in  the  purification  of  Orestes  at
Troezen,  for  when  these  objects  were  buried   in  the  ground  a  laurel
sprang   from  them,   as   Pausanias  here   informs  us.      The  laurel  was
regularly  used  by  the  Greeks  for  sprinkling  holy  water  at  lustrations.


XXXII  THE  GOLDEN  STREAM  279

5  Boetticher,  Der  Baumkultus  der  Hellenen^  pp.  369-372  (on  p.  370,
read  of  Clemens  Alex.  Strom,  8,  §  49,  read  Clem.  Alex.  Strom,  v.
§  49);  id.,  Tektonik  der  Hellenen^  2.  p.  481  sgg.  After  the
emony  of  purification  was  over,  the  things  which  had  been  used  to
inse  away  the  impurity  were  commonly  thrown  into  the  sea  or
►osited  where  three  roads  met.  See  Hermann,  Gottesdienstliche
'erihiimer^  23.  15  ;  and  on  purification  in  general  see  the  whole  of
rmann's  23  rd  section,  with  the  notes ;  Lomeier,  De  veterum  gentilium
'rattonibus ;  P.  Stengel,  Griech.  Kultusalterttimer,  S  83  sqq.

31.  9.  Hippocrene  (the  Horse's  Fonnt).     See  above,  p.  32  sq.

31.  9.  Bellerophon Aethra.     Prof.  S.  Wide  has  conjectured

t  the  Troezenian  story  of  Bellerophon  and  Aethra  was  merely  a
uplication,  under  other  names,  of  the  story  of  Hippolytus  and
ledra,  which  again  he  considers  to  have  been  in  origin  substantially
ntical  with  the  myth  of  Venus  and  Adonis.  See  S.  Wide,  De  sacris
oezeniorum,  Her-mionensium,  Epidauriorum,  pp.  86-89.

31.  10.  the  Gk)lden  Stream.  '*0n  the  western  side  of  the  rock,
ich  seems  to  have  been  a  citadel,  a  brook  runs  in  a  deep  ravine.  It
in  all  probability  the  brook  Chrysoroas  [the  Golden  Stream],  It  now
•ns  two  mills"  (Cell,  Itinerary  of  Greece,  p.  121).     Fiedler  {Reise,  i.

285  j^.)  says :  "In  the  ravine  flows,  the  whole  year  through,  a
earn  which  may  very  well  have  been  the  occasion  of  founding  Troezen.
ost  of  its  water  is  diverted  from  the  gully  to  some  mills.  .  .  .  They
^  that  but  little  water  flows  in  it  from  the  end  of  July  till  the  first
n-falls  at  the  end  of  September."     Cp.  Chandler,  Travels  in  Greece,

217  ;  Dodwell,  Tour,  2.  p.  267.  The  stream  described  by  Fiedler
pears  to  be  the  Potami  or  Kremastos,  the  chief  stream  of  the
oezenian  plain.  It  issues  from  a  deep  romantic  glen  in  the  mountains
ir  the  village  of  Damala  (see  above,  p.  273),  and  flows  northward,
t  its  waters,  being  prevented  from  reaching  the  bay  of  Methana  by
!  projecting  spurs  of  the  hills,  form  a  lagoon  near  the  Albanian
age  of  Valaria.  This  lagoon  is  salt,  for  the  waves  of  the  sea  wash
\x  into  it.  Prof.  Curtius  identifies  the  Potami,  not  with  the  Golden
earn  but  with  the  Hyllicus  (see  ii.  32.  7)  ;  he  thinks  that  the  Golden
earn  was  merely  the  chief  of  the  brooks  which  feed  the  Potami.  This
ms  the  more  probable  view,  as  Pausanias  speaks  of  the  Golden  Stream
rely  as  a  water,  while  he  distinctly  calls  the  Hyllicus  a  river  and
ntions  its  source.     See  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  pp.  431,  435.

32.  I.  Every  maiden  before  marriage  shears  a  lock  of  her  hair
Hippolytus.  This  custom  of  the  Troezenian  maidens  is  mentioned
Euripides  (^Hippolytus,  1424  j^^.)and  by  Lucian  {De  dea  Syria,  60).
cian,  speaking  of  Hierapolis  in  Syria,  says :  "  They  observe  another
item  in  which  the  people  of  Troezen,  alone  of  all  the  Greeks,  agree
th  them.  The  Troezenians  made  a  law  for  the  maidens  and  youths
u  they  should  not  marry  before  they  had  shorn  their  hair  in  honour  of
ippolytus  ;  and  they  observe  the  law.     This  custom  is  practised  also

Hierapolis.  The  youths  offer  their  first  beards,  and  the  maidens
ve  sacred  tresses,  which  are  suffered  to  grow  without  being  shorn
m  their  birth.     When  they  come  to  the  temple,  they  (the  youths  and


28o  OFFERINGS  OF  HAIR  bk.  ii.  cokinth

maidens)  cut  their  hair,  and  deposit  it  in  vessels  of  silver  or  gold.
Then  they  hang  up  the  vessels  on  nails  in  the  temple,  write  their  names
on  them,  and  depart.     This  I  did  in  my  youth,  and  the  lock  of  my  hair
and  my  name  are  still  in  the  temple."     Here  it  will  be  noticed  that
according  to  Lucian  the  young  men  of  Troezen,  as  well  as  the  young
women,  cut  off  their  hair  before  marriage  in  honour  of  Hippolytus.
The   statement    is   not  borne   out   by   the    words   of    Euripides  and
Pausanias,  though  it  is  hardly  inconsistent  with  them.     Plutarch,  in
relating  the  life  of  Theseus  (who  was  a  native  of  Troezen),  remarfe
that  it  was  formerly  the  custom  for  lads  to  go  to  Delphi  and  ofier
the  first  clippings  of  their   hair  to  Apollo  (dirdpx&rdai  t^  $€<}  rrji
KOfxrfs)  and  that   Theseus  complied  with  the  custom.     See  Plutardi,
Theseus^  5.     Lucian  is  wrong  in  saying  that  none  but  the  Troezenians
observed  the  custom  in  question.     For  a  similar  custom  was  practised
by  girls  at  Megara  in  honour  of   Iphinoe,    and   by   both    girls   and
lads  at  Delos  in  honour  of  the  Hyperborean  maidens  who  were  buried
there.     See  Pausanias,  i.  43.  4  note.     Again,  Statins  says  {Theb.  ii.
253-256)  that  it  was  the  custom  at  Argos  for  women  to  cut  their  hair  at
their  first  marriage  as  a  sort  of  expiation.       Indeed  Pollux  (iii.  38)
states  generally  that  before  marriage  girls  made  an  offering  of  their
hair  to  Hera,  Artemis,  and  the  Fates.      Cp.    Hesychius,  s.v,  ydfjuav
€$7],     Like  customs  have  been  observed  by  other  peoples  than  the
Greeks.     In  some  of  the  Fiji  islands  a  woman  was  shorn  of  all  her  hai*"
at  marriage ;  in  others  she  lost  only  a  long  bunch  of  hair  which,  as  ^
spinster,  she  had  worn  over  her  temples  (Williams,  Fiji  and  the  FijianSv
I.  p.  171).     In  Cambodia  girls  wear  their  hair  long,  but  cut  it  short  a^
marriage  (Wilken,  Das  Haaropfer^  p.  116).     The  hair  of  a  Zulu  girl  i^
completely  shaved  at  marriage,   except  a  small  tuft  (Wood,  Natural
History  of  Man,  i .  pp.  44,  81).     Among  the  Karague,  another  African
tribe,  girls  allow  their  hair  to  grow  till  they  marry,  when  they  shave  it
off  either   entirely   or   partially   (ib.    p.    447).       In   the   kingdom   of
Miztecapan  (Central  America)  a  lock  of  hair  was  cut  both  from  the
bridegroom's  and  the  bride's  head  at  marriage.     In  Ixcatlan  when  a
man  wished  to  marry  he  went  to  the  priests,  who  took  him  to  the  temple
and  there,  in  presence  of  the  idols,  cut  off  some  of  his  hair.     They
then  showed  the  shorn  locks  to  the  people  and  cried,   "This  man
wishes  to  wed."     He  had  then  to  descend  and  take  the  first  unmarried
woman  he  met,  in  the  belief  that  she  was  destined  for  him  by  the  gods.
See  Bancroft,  Native  races  of  the  Pacific  States,  2.  p.  261.     On  the
other  hand,  among  the   Nagamis  of  Assam,  young  girls  shave  their
heads  completely  till  they  marry  {Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of
Bengal,  1875,  P^-  i*  P-  327).     Inscriptions  discovered  in  recent  years  at
the  sanctuary  of  Zeus  Panamarus  in  Caria  show  that  it  was  the  custom
for  men  (and  women  ?)  to  dedicate  their  hair  in  that  sanctuary.     A
stone  slab  in  the  form  of  a  small   box  was  set  up  in  the  temple  or
its  precinct.     In  the  front  or  back  of  the  slab  was  a  cavity,  which  was
sometimes  closed  with  a  small  plate  of  marble  fitting  in  a  groove.     In
this  cavity  the  hair  was  deposited,  and  on  a  rectangular  sinking  was
carved  the  name  of  the  person  who  dedicated  his  hair  and  the  name  of


CH.  XXXII  TROEZEN  281

the  priest  (or  occasionally  of  the  priestess)  in  charge.  Sometimes  one
slab  contained  the  hair  of  several  persons.  A  considerable  number  of
these  slabs  have  been  found.  See  G.  Deschamps  and  G.  Cousin,
*  Inscriptions  du  temple  de  Zeus  Panamaros,*  Bulletin  de  Corresp,
/fell At.  II  (1887),  p.  390.  It  may  be  conjectured  that  the  persons
who  thus  dedicated  their  hair  were  boys  (and  girls  ?)  at  puberty.
Messrs.  Deschamps  and  Cousin  do  not  say  whether  the  names  in  the
inscriptions  are  masculine  or  feminine  ;  but  they  publish  one  inscription,
in  which  are  the  names  of  five  dedicators  of  hair,  all  masculine.

32.  I.  though  they  know  his  grave  they  do  not  show  it.
Perhaps  the  grave  of  Hippolytus  was  one  of  those  graves  on  which  the
existence  of  the  state  was  supposed  to  depend,  and  which  were
accordingly  kept  secret.     See  vol.  2,  p.  366  sq,

32.  2.  a  temple  of  Seafaring  Apollo.    The  epithet  translated  *  sea-
faring '  is  embaterios.     More  literally  it  means  *  embarking  on  shipboard.'
The  Argonauts  are  said  to  have  set  up  an  altar  to  Apollo  under  a  similar
title  (embcLsios)  at  Pagasae  in  Thessaly  (ApoUonius  Rhodius,  i.  402  sqq.)
Cp.  Preller,  Griech,  Mythologies^  i.  p.  258,  note  3  ;  S.  Wide,  De  sacris
Traezeniorum^  Herfnionensiunty  Epidauriorum^  P»  23.
32.  2.  Damia  and  Auxesia.     See  note  on  ii.  30.  4.
32.  3.  a  stadium.     As  to  the  vestiges  of  the  stadium,  see  above,
p.  274.     Not  far  from  the  supposed  site  of  the  stadium  Mr.  Legrand
found  an  inscription  containing  part  of  a  decree  in  honour  of  a  certain
Cbannus,  master  of  the  gymnasium.     Close   to   the  spot  where   the
inscription  was  found  the  French  archaeologists  excavated  some  remains
which  they  believe  to  have  been  those  of  the  wrestling-school.     In  a
wall  of  PcUaeo-Episkopi  they  found  a  large  pedestal  inscribed  with  a
dedication  by  the  persons  who  used  the  gymnasium  (01  aAei</>o/ievot).
See  Bulletin   de   Corr,    HellMque^    17    (1893),    pp.    95-97.     These
discoveries   confirm   the  view  that  the  hollow  to  the  east  of  Palaeih
Episkofii  marks   the  site  of  the  stadium.     For  the  gymnasium   and
vrestling-school  would  naturally  be  near  the  stadium.     Another  inscrip-
tion, found  at  Damala^  records  a  dedication  by  the  persons  who  used  the
gymnasium  (C  /.  G.  No.  1183).

32.  3.  tiie  myrtle  with  the  pierced  leaves.     See  i.  22.  2.    The

tree  was  probably  a  lusus  naturae^  and  its  perforated  leaves  gave  rise  to

the  legend.     We  may  compare   the  thomless  rose-tree  which   is  still

shown  at  Assisi,  and  is  said  to  have  sprung  from  the  thorns  with  which

St.  Francis  castigated  himself.    It  has  been  suggested  by  Prof.  S.  Wide

that  the  original  story  of  the  love  of  Phaedra  for  Hippolytus  may  have

been  one  of  those  myths  of  the  love  of  a  goddess  for  a  mortal,  of  which

the  myth   of  Venus   and   Adonis   is   the  best  known  example.     He

compares  the  association  of  Phaedra  and  the  myrtle  with  the  association

of  Smyrna  or  Myrrha  (the  mother  of  Adonis)  and  the  myrrh-tree.     See

S.  Wide,    De    sacris    Troesemorum^    Hermionensium^   Epidauriorum^

p.  86  sq.

32.  4.  The  image  of  Aesculapius.  From  one  of  the  Epidaurian
inscriptions  we  learn  that  there  was  a  precinct  of  Aesculapius  at  Troezen
in  which  sick  people  slept  in  order  to  receive  revelations  in  dreams


282  TROEZEN  bk.  ii.  coxintb

{*Edyqfi€pU  dpxawXoyiKrj,  1 88 5,  p.  1 5  sg,;  P.  Cawadias,  Fomlles
iPEpidaurey  i.  p.  28;  see  above,  p.  250).  At  Palaeo  -  Episkopi  vbl
Troezen  the  French  archaeologists  have  found  two  inscriptions  containiog
dedications  to  Aesculapius  {BulL  de  Corr.  HelUn,  17  (1893),  P-  90)«

32.  5.  the  acropolis.  This  is  the  steep  mountain  to  the  west  of
the  village  of  Damala,  The  summit  is  occupied  by  the  shattered
remains  of  a  mediaeval  castle,  under  which  are  some  pieces  of  andent
Greek  fortification.  There  is  also  a  cistern  and  some  fragments  of  Ionic
architecture.  The  view  from  the  summit  is  magnificent,  indeed  one  of
the  finest  panoramas  in  Greece  (see  above,  p.  273).  Towards  the  base
a  spring  issues  from  the  rock  which  Dodwell  identified  with  the  fountain
of  Hercules  mentioned  by  Pausanias  (§  4).  See  Chandler,  Travels  m
Greece^  p.  216  5q.\  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  271  ;  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  ppi
431  sq,y  437;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  89.  The  citadel,  surmounted  by  a
tetrastyle  temple,  is  represented  on  Troezenian  coins  of  the  imperial
age.  See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num,  Comm,  on  Pa$is.  p.  47i
pi.  M  iii.  iv.

32.  5.  The  wooden  image  of  the  goddess.  On  a  Troezenian  coin
of  the  time  of  Commodus  there  is  represented  an  archaic  image  of
Athena.  It  "  may  be  described  in  the  very  words  already  used  in
describing  that  at  Cleonae  [see  ii.  15.  i  note],  which  we  supposed  to  be
copied  from  the  work  of  Dipoenus  and  Scyllis.  This  is  evidence,  so  fer
as  it  goes,  that  Gallon  adhered  to  the  same  general  scheme  as  the
Cretan  artists ;  although,  of  course,  we  must  not  press  the  argument,  as
the  die-sinkers  may  have  intended  merely  to  portray  the  general  type  of
an  archaic  Athene  "  (Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num,  Comm.  on  Poms.
p.  47,  with  pi.  M  V.)  Gallon's  name  (spelt  Galon)  occurs  in  an  inscrip-
tion which  is  believed  to  have  been  found  on  the  Acropolis  at  Athens,  to
the  east  of  the  Parthenon.     The  inscription  runs  : —

KaA(i>v  €7roo/o"6V  At[ytv^T7y9].

From  the  form  of  the  letters  the  inscription  would  seem  to  belong
to  the  very  beginning  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  This  inscription  proves,
what  was  not  known  before,  that  the  sculptor  Gallon  was  employed
in  Attica.  See  Loewy,  Inschriften  griechischer  Bildhauer^  No.  27.
On  Gallon  see  also  Paus.  iii.  18.  8,  vii.  18.  10.  On  Tectaeus  and
Angelion,  see  ix.  35.  3  note.  On  Dipoenus  and  Scyllis,  see  note  on  ii.
15.  I.

32.  6.  Aphrodite  of  the  Height.     Compare  i.  i.  3  note.

32.  7*  the  road  that  leads  through  the  monntains  to  Hermionis.
This  road,  as  we  have  seen  (p.  273),  goes  up  the  wild  ravine  to  the  west
of  the  village  of  Damala,  It  is  still  passable,  though  the  track  is  a  very
rough  one  (Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  437).  The  Devil's  Bridge,  which
spans  the  ravine  at  its  narrowest  point,  is  figured  in  Wordsworth's
Greece^  p.  439.

32.  7.  the  river originally  called  the  Taurius.    Athenaeus

(iii.  p.  122  f)  mentions  this  river  as  the  Taurus  (*bull').     See  ii.  31.  10
note.


CH.  XXXII  TROEZEN  283

32.  7.  the  rock  of  Theseus  etc.  See  i.  27.  8  note.  On  Troe-
zenian  coins  of  imperial  date  Theseus  is  represented  lifting  the  rock
(Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num,  Comm,  on  Pans,  p.  49,  with  pi.
M  xi.)

32.  8.  Poseidon  the  Nurtnrer.  Among  the  ruins  of  the  chapel  of
Hagia  Sotira  at  Troezen  there  is  an  inscribed  pedestal  which  supported
a  statue  of  a  priest  of  Poseidon  the  Nurturer  (phutalmios).  The  pedes-
tal, which  is  of  white  marble,  was  converted  into  the  capital  of  a  column
in  Byzantine  times.  See  Bull,  de  Corr,  Hellin,  17  (1893),  p.  98.
From  inscriptions  we  leam  that  Poseidon  was  worshipped  under  the  same
title  of  Nurturer  at  Athens  (C  /.  A,  iii.  No.  269),  Erythrae  (Moihtciov
Kol  PipXtoOrjKrj  rrjs  EvayycAt/ciJs  2^0 A^s,  Smyrna,  i  (1875),  P*  106;
Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Ins.  Graec,  No.  370,  line  81),  and  at  Rhodes
{Bull,  de  Corr.  HelUn.  2  (1878),  p.  615  ;  Inscr.  Graec.  Insul.^  ed.  H.
de  Gaertringen  (Berlin,  1895),  No.  905  ;  Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr.  Graec. ^
No.  188  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Ins.  Graec.  No.  375).

32.   9.  The  harbour  is  at  Oelenderis  etc.    After  having

pursued  for  a  short  distance  the  mountain-path  that  leads  to  Hermion,

Pausanias  retraces   his  steps  and  goes  down  to  the  sea.     Later  on

(34.  6)  he  returns  to  the  mountain-path  and  follows  it  in  the  direction  of

Hermion.     *  The  harbour  at  Celenderis  *  would  seem  to  be  the  arm  of

the  sea  nearest  to  Troezen  on  the  east.     At  the  western  comer  of  this

bay  there  are  some  ancient  foundations,  which   may  be  the  ruins  of

Celenderis,  the  port  of  Troezen  (Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  pp.  444).      Chandler

says:  "On  this   spot  a  small  fortress  had  been  erected.     We  could

trace  the  two  side-walls  running  up  from  the  sea,  with  two  round  towers

at  the  angles,  inland.     These  remains  are  thick,  and  of  the  masonry

styled  Incertum"  (Travels  in  Greece^  p.  213).     The  harbour  was  named

Pogon.     See  above,  p.  275.

32.  9.  a  plaee  which  they  name  Genethlium.  Prof.  S.  Wide  con-
jectures that  this  place  may  have  been  associated  with  the  worship  of
Poseidon  Genethlius,  who  had  a  sanctuary  at  Sparta  (Paus.  iii.  15.  10).
See  S.  Wide,  De  sacris  Troezeniorum^  Hemtionensium^  Epidauriorum^
p.  12  sq.

32.  10.  the  Psiphaean  Sea.     If  Pausanias  is  continuing  to  follow

the  coast  eastward,  the  Psiphaean  Sea  would  seem  to  be  the  strait  which

separates  the  island  of  Calauria  (the  modem  Poros)  from  the  main-

^d.    This  is  the  view  of  Curtius  {Pelop.  2.  p.  443  sq.),  Bursian  {Geogr.

2.  p.  90),   and   Kiepert.     On  the  other   hand,   Boblaye   {Recherches^

P-  57)  and  Leake  {Morea,  2.  p.  448  sq.)  suppose  that  the  Psiphaean

Sea  is  the  head  of  the  bay  of  Methana,  with  the  salt-water  lagoon  at

Valaria.     (See  note  on  31.    10.)     It  is  generally  assumed   that  the

Psiphaean  Sea  is  identical  with  the  Phoebaean  lagoon  mentioned  by

Pausanias  in  ii.  30.  7.     Hence  it  has  been  proposed  to  alter  Psiphaea

in  the  text  into  Phoebaea  (so  Leake  and  Siebelis),  or  Phoebaea  into

Psiphaea   (so   Bursian).     If  an   alteration   is   necessary,  the  latter  is

preferable  ;  for  an  inscription  found  at  Troezen  makes  mention  of  a  place

Psipha.     The  inscription  gives  a  list  of  the  sums  paid  by  the  Troezenians

for  various  public  works,  amongst  others  a  certain  number  of  drachms


284  THE  SACRED  ISLE  BK.  11.  cownth

<  to  Thessalion  for  making  the  road  from  Psipha.'  See  Bursian  in
Rheinisches  Museunty  N.F.  11  (1857),  pp.  322,  329.

32.  10.  a  wild  oliye  etc.  On  the  culture  of  the  olive  in  ancient
and  modern  Greece,  see  Fiedler,  Reise^  2.  pp.  592-604  ;  Neumann  and
Partsch,  Physikalische  Geographic  von  Griechenland^  pp.  412-423;
Hehn,  Kulturpflanzen  und Hausthierey^  pp.  82-97  ;  Philippson,  Pelopon-
nesy  p.  544  J^.  TYitphulia  is  mentioned  by  Homer  {Odyss.  v.  476^.)
as  one  of  the  two  bushes  under  which  the  shipwrecked  Ulysses  laid
him  down  to  sleep  ;  the  other  bush  was  an  olive  {elaia),

32.  10.  the  sanctuary  of  Saronian  Artemis.  Artemis  is  men-
tioned under  this  title  in  two  inscriptions  found  in  the  great  Epidaurian
sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  (Cawadias,  Fouilles  d^ipidaure^  i.  pp.  51, 57i
Inscriptions  85  and  128).

33.  I .  Sphaeiia the  Sacred  {Hiera)  Isle.  At  the  eastern  mouth

of  the  strait  which  separates  Calauria  {Poros)  from  the  mainland  are  two
small  islets.  The  eastern  of  the  two  has  a  fort,  the  western  a  lazarette.
The  latter,  a  small  round  island  very  near  the  shore  and  surrounded
by  sandbanks,  is  covered  with  the  remains  of  a  temple.  The  island  is
probably  Sphaeria  or  the  Sacred  Isle,  and  the  ruins  are  the  remains  of
the  temple  of  Apaturian  Athena.  It  is  no  longer  possible  to  wade  out
to  the  island  from  the  shore.  See  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  59  ;  Curtius,
Pelop,  2.  p.  446  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  93.  Leake  thought  that  Sphaeria
must  have  been  that  part  of  Calauria  upon  which  the  town  of  Poros  now
stands.  It  is  a  small  peninsula  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  island  by
a  narrow  sand-bank,  which  Leake  supposes  to  be  of  recent  formation
{Moreoy  2.  p.  450  j^.)  But  it  seems  improbable  that  it  could  ever  have
been  possible,  in  historical  times,  to  wade  out  to  Calauria.  The  channel
is  now  navigated  by  the  small  coasting  steamers  plying  between  Piraeus
and  Nauplia  (the  larger  coasting  steamers  keep  outside).

33.   I.  Apaturian  Athena.     Pausanias  clearly  takes  Apaturian  in
the  sense  of  *  deceitful,*    deriving   it  from  apatan,  *  to  deceive.'    Ati
Apaturian  Aphrodite   was  worshipped   at   the    Cimmerian    Bosphonis.
See  Strabo,  xi.  p.  495  ;  Hermann,  Gottesdienstliche  Alterthumer^  66.  32;
cp.  Stephani,  in  Compte-Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1859,  pp.  126-130.
The  epithet  can  hardly  be  separated  from  the  Athenian  and   Ionian
festival  of  the  Apaturia,  as  to  which  see  Herodotus,  i.  147  ;  Schol.  on
Aristophanes,  Acham.  146  ;  Suidas,  Harpocration,  and  Hesychius,  s.v.
'AirarovpLa  :  Miiller's  Dorians^  i.  pp.  xi.  95  (Eng.  trans.)  ;  Daremberg
et  Saglio,  Dictionnaire  des  antiquith^  i.  p.  300  sq.     In  the  Etymolog.
Magnum,  p.  118,  53  sqq,  one  explanation  given  of  the  word  is  that  it
means  *  fatherless ' ;  it  is  said  that  the  boys  were  regarded  as  fatherless
{apatores)  till  after  they  had  gone  through  the  Apaturia.     This  sense
would  be  very  applicable  in  the  circumstances  of  the  legendary  beget-
ting of  Theseus ;  for  till  he  was  grown  up  he  did  not  know  who  his
father  was.     Cp.  i.  17.  3  ;  i.  27.  8  ;  ii.  32.  7.

33.  2.  Oalauria.  This  is  the  island  now  called  Poros,  separated
from  the  coast  of  Troezen  by  a  narrow  strait  about  400  yards  wide  at
the  narrowest.  The  island  is  about  16  miles  in  circumference,  though
Strabo  (viii.  p.  373)  says  it  is  only  30  Greek  furlongs.     It  is  composed


H.  XXXIII  CALAURIA  285

f  round  rocky  hills  mostly  wooded  with  firs ;  gardens  are  to  be  seen
nly  in  the  small  plains  beside  the  sea.  The  town  of  Poros  stands
licturesquely  on  a  rocky  pyramidal-shaped  peninsula  jutting  out  towards
he  mainland  and  joined  to  the  island  only  by  a  low  strip  of  sand,  over
v'hich,  when  the  wind  is  high  from  north  or  south,  the  waves  wash,
rhe  bay  of  PoroSy  to  the  west  of  the  town,  is  deep,  roomy,  and  perfectly
mug  ;  it  is  indeed  one  of  the  finest  harbours  not  only  in  Greece  but  in
the  world.  Seen  from  the  deck  of  a  steamer  the  view  of  the  ahnost
landlocked  bay  is  very  picturesque.  The  white  houses  rising  above
each  other  against  a  back-ground  of  dark  volcanic  rock,  the  deep  blue
surface  of  the  bay,  the  luxuriant  vegetation  on  the  southern  shore,  where
tall  cypresses  tower  above  lemon  groves,  with  the  graceful  line  of
mountains  rising  beyond, — ^all  this  makes  up  one  of  the  most  charming
and  brightly  coloured  scenes  in  Greece.

See  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  274  sqq.  ;  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  59 ;  Curtius,
Ptlop,  2.  p.  447  saq, ;  Baedeker,'  p.  253  sq, ;  Guide-Joannet  2.  p.  204 ;  Philippson,
PtloponruSy  p.  40  sqq.

33.  2.  the  two  gods  exchanged  the  places.  Strabo  says  (viii.
P-  373  sq,)  that  Poseidon  gave  Delos  to  Latona  in  exchange  for
Calauria,  and  Pytho  (Delphi)  to  Apollo  in  exchange  for  Taenanim.
Strabo  quotes  from  Ephorus  the  same  oracle  that  is  cited  by  Pausanias.
Panofka  has  discussed  a  scene  on  an  Etruscan  mirror  which  he  thinks
represents  Apollo  at  Delphi  proposing  to  Poseidon  to  give  him  Calauria
for  Delphi  {Annali  deW  InsHtuio^  17  (1845),  PP-  63-67).

33.  2.  there  is  here  a  holy  sanctuary  of  Poseidon.  The  ruins
of  this  sanctuary  are  situated  in  the  interior  of  the  island  of  Calauria,
about  two  and  a  half  miles  from  the  town  of  Poros,  They  occupy  a
high  plateau  (about  500  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea)  near  the  middle
of  the  island.  The  site  was  excavated  in  1894  by  two  Swedish  archaeo-
logists, Messrs.  Wide  and  Kjellberg.  On  the  eastern  part  of  the
plateau,  looking  towards  Sunium  and  the  open  sea,  they  found  the
remains  of  a  sacred  enclosure  about  ?oo  feet  long  by  100  feet  wide.
The  enclosure  had  two  gates,  one  on  the  east  and  one  on  the  south.
In  the  middle  of  the  enclosure  are  some  remains  of  the  walls  and  pave-
ment of  the  temple,  which  seems  to  have  been  of  the  Doric  order  and
of  the  kind  called  distyle  in  antis.  An  altar  has  also  been  discovered
^thin  the  sacred  enclosure.  Dodwell  found  some  large  blocks  which
had  formed  the  exterior  part  of  a  circular  building :  he  thought  they
might  be  the  remains  of  the  tomb  or  monument  of  Demosthenes  (see
the  next  section).  A  semicircular  seat  of  stone,  near  the  N.W.  end
of  the  temple,  may  possibly  be  the  very  seat  on  which  Demosthenes
was  found  sitting  by  the  emissary  of  Antipater  (Plutarch,  Demosthenes^
29).  Coins  and  the  head  of  an  owl  of  good  workmanship  have  been
brought  to  light  by  the  Swedish  excavators.  On  leaving  the  sanctuary
by  the  south  gate  you  pass  out  upon  a  spacious  terrace.  Here  the
imposing  foundations  of  two  colonnades  of  good  Greek  style  have  been
Jaid  bare.  To  the  west  are  the  remains  of  some  smaller  buildings.  It
may  be  conjectured  that  these  colonnades  and  buildings  served  for  the


286  CALAURIA  bk.  ii.  co&ikth

meetings  of  the  council  of  the  league  which  had  its  federal  capital  in
Calauria  (see  below).     The  materials  of  which  the  buildings  are  con-
structed are  tufa,  blue  limestone,  and  trachyte,  all  stones  native  to  die
island.     The  tiles  of  the  temple  are  of  marble.     Of  the  small  vodve
offerings  found  in  the  sanctuary  most  seem  to  belong  to  the  sixth
century  B.C. ;  some  of  them  relate  to  the  worship  of  Poseidon.    The
temple  itself  appears  to  date  from  the  sixth  century  B.C     One  of  the
so-called  Island  or  Mycenaean  gems  and  a  fragment  of  Mycenaean  pottery
have  also  been  found  here.    See  Chandler,  Travels  in  Greece^  p.  2 1 1  Jf. ;
Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  276  sqq, ;  Boblaye,  Recherckes^  p.   59 ;  Curtius,
Peiop,  2.  p.  448  j^. ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  93  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  254;  Le
Bas,   Voyage  ArcMologique^    Itin^raire,   pi.    15;  Athenaeum^  28  July,
1894,  p.  136;  id,^  8  September,  1894,  p.  328  ;  id,^  19  January,  1895,
p.  91  ;  Bulletin  de  Corr.  HelUnique^  18  (1894),  p.  196  sq,  ;  Americm
Joum,  of  Archaeology^  10  (1895),  p.  128  j^. ;  Strabo  tells  us  (viii.  p.  374)
that  the  sanctuary  of  Poseidon  in  Calauria  was  the  religious  centre  of  a
league  {amphictyonid)  of  seven  cities,  namely   Hermion,    Epidauns,
Aegina,  Athens,  Prasiae,  Nauplia,  and  Orchomenus  in  Boeotia;  at  a
later  time  Argos  took  the  place  of  Nauplia,  and  Lacedaemon  of  Prasiae.
Prof.  E.  Curtius  has  tried  to  prove  that  not  the  Boeotian  but  the  Arcadian
Orchomenus  was  one  of  the  members  of  the  league,  which  he  supposes
to  have  been  instituted  by  Phidon  of  Argos  in  the  time  of  the  second
Messenian  war  as  a  counterpoise  to   the  growing   power  of  Spaita
{HermeSy  10  (1876),  pp.  385-392 ;  Gesammelte  Adhandlungen^  i.  pp.  211*
218).     His  views  are  not  accepted  by  Busolt  {Griech,  Gesch,  i.^  p.  186)
nor  Holm  {Griech,  Gesch.  i.  p.  292).     An  inscription  has  been  found
in  Calauria  {Poros)  which  contains  provisions  for  offering  sacrifices  to
Poseidon  and  Saviour  Zeus  :  a  woman  named  Agasicratis  dedicates  300
drachms  of  silver  to  Poseidon,  out  of  which  sacrifices  were  to  be  offered
every  three  years,  on  the  seventh  day  of  the  month  Artemisius  (CoUit^
G,  D,  I,  3.  No.  3380).

33.  2.  a  girl  till  she  is  old  enough  to  wed.  As  to  priesthood^
held  by  boys  or  girls  under  puberty  see  note  on  vii.  24.  4.  For  anothc^
example  of  a  god  served  by  a  virgin  priestess  see  ix.  27.  6.

33.  3.  he  never  fingered  a  penny  of  the  gold  that  Harpaln^
brought.  The  question  whether  Demosthenes  took  a  bribe  froin^
Harpalus  or  not,  has  been  much  discussed  both  in  ancient  and  modem
times.  See  F.  v.  Duhn,  *Zur  Geschichte  des  harpalischen  Processes,'
Fleckeiser^ s  Jahrbiicher^  21  (1875),  pp.  33-59;  J.  Rohrmoser,  *Ueber
den  Gang  des  harpalischen  Processes  und  das  Verhalten  des  Demo-
sthenes zu  demselben,*  Zeitschrift f.  oesterreich.  Gymnasien^  27  (1876),
pp.  481-496;  H.  Haupt,  *Die  Vorgeschichte  des  harpzdischen  Pro-
cesses,' Rheinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  34  (1879),  pp.  377-387  ;  A.  Holm,
Griech,  Geschichte^  3.  p.  420  sqq,

34.  I.  Methana.  This  is  still  the  name  of  the  mountainous
peninsula  which  runs  far  out  into  the  sea  from  the  coast  of  Troezen,
forming  a  very  conspicuous  landmark  in  the  Saronic  Gulf.  The  isthmus
which  joins  it  to  the  mainland  is  about  1000  feet  across.  This  isthmus
was  fortified  in  the  Peloponnesian  war  (425  B.C.)  by  the  Athenians,  who


CH.  XXXIV  METHANA  287

established  a  fortified  post  on  the  peninsula,  from  which  they  ravaged

the   coasts  of  Troezen  and  Epidaurus  (Thucyd.  iv.  45  ;  Diodorus,  xii.

65).     Remains  of  the  wall  across  the  isthmus  may  still  be  seen  with

the   two  castles  on  the  opposite  shores.     The  castle  on  the  western

shore  is  named  Fort  Diamanti ;  it  is  of  a  regular  elliptical  form.     These

fortifications  were  renewed  in  the  middle  ages  ;  and  the  Greeks  attempted

to  make  use  of  them  in  the  War  of  Independence.     The  peninsula  itself

is  a  mountainous  mass  of  grand  and  picturesque  outline.     The  chief

peak,  Mt.  Chelona^  in  the  heart  of  the  peninsula,  is  a  cone  2281  feet

high.     Most  of  the  peninsula  is  of  volcanic  origin,  the  prevailing  rock

being  a  dark  red  or  brown  trachyte.     The  general  character  of  the

scenery  is  one  of  barren   desolation,  the  whole  peninsula,  with  the

exception  of  a  few  narrow  strips  on  the  coast,  being  occupied  by  the

sharp  mountain-ridges  which  radiate  from  Mt.  Chelona,     Narrow  gullies

divide  these  ridges  from  each  other.     Water  is  scarce,  and  the  air  dry

and  hot.      The  inhabitants,  however,  contrive  to  cultivate  patches  of

ground,  supported  by  terraces,  high  up  on  the  mountain  sides.     The

contrast  is  great  between  this  desolate  and  arid  mountain-mass,  and

the  rich  and  well-watered  plain  of  Troezen  which  adjoins  it  on  the

soatL

I

The  town  of  Methana  was  situated  on  the  western  side  of  the
peninsula,  about  half  an  hour  to  the  south-west  of  the  present  village
of  Megalochorio,  The  acropolis  stood  on  a  low  but  abrupt  rocky
eminence  near  the  sea.  The  walls  are  regularly  built  and  well  pre-
served, extending  round  the  edge  of  the  rock.  Twenty-one  courses  of
stones  were  counted  by  Dodwell  in  one  place.  The  material  is  the
same  red  trachyte  as  the  rock.  A  chapel  of  the  Panagia  within  the
walls  contains  some  ancient  blocks,  including  an  inscription  referring  to
Isis.  This  chapel  may  therefore  have  occupied  the  site  of  the  sanctuary
of  Isis  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  Near  the  sea  Dodwell  found  the
temains  of  two  small  buildings  of  white  marble,  one  of  the  Doric,  the
other  of  the  Ionic  order.

See  Giandler,  Travels  in  Greece^  p.  2\%  sq.  ;  Dodwell,  Toury  2.  p.  280  sqq,  ;
Boblaye,  RechercheSf  p.  57  sq, ;  Leake,  Morea,  2.  p.  453  sqq,  ;  Fiedler,  Reise,  i.
p-  257  sqq,  ;  Curtius,  Peiop,  2.  p.  438  sqq.  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  91  ;  Baedeker,*
P-  253 ;  Guide-Joanne,  2.  p.  205.

All  the  MSS.  of  Thucydides  (iv.  45)  spell  the  name  of  the  place
Methone.  This  appears  to  be  a  corruption  arising  from  a  confusion
between  Methana  in  Argolis  and  Methone  in  Macedonia  and  Messenia
(see  note  on  iv.  35.  i).  But  it  is  a  very  old  corruption;  for  Strabo,
who  spells  the  name  Methana,  notes  (viii.  p.  374)  that  it  is  spelt
Methone  in  some  of  the  MSS.  of  Thucydides.

34.  I.  Hercules.  At  the  village  of  Megcdochorio^  near  Methana,
Mr.  Paul  Jamot  found  an  inscription  commemorating  the  building  of  a
temple  to  Hercules  by  one  Aurelius  Trophimus.  The  characters  of  the
inscription  appear  to  be  later  than  the  time  of  Pausanias,  who  does  not
mention  a  temple,  but  only  an  image,  of  Hercules  at  Methana.  See
Bulletin  de  Corresp,  HeiUnique^  13  (1889),  p.  189  sq.


288  METHANA  bk.  ii.  covnth

34.   I.  warm  baths.      On  account  of  its  volcanic  character  the
peninsula  of  Methana  possesses  hot  sulphur  springs.     Of  these  there
are  two,  one  at   Vromolimni  ('stinking  lake')  on  the  east  coast,  the
other  on  the  middle  of  the  north  coast  at  a  place  called  Vroma  (<  stink ')^
below  the  small  village  of  Kato-Mouska,     The  latter  is  supposed  to  be
the  hot  baths  mentioned  by  Pausanias,  as  the  distance  from  Methana
recorded   by   him   (30   furlongs)  agrees   better   with   the   position  of
Vroma  than  of  Vromolimni,     The  water  flows  from  under  some  fi^len
blocks    of  trach3rte ;    it    is   very   salt,    very   sulphureous,   and   has  a
temperature  of  28^  Reaumur.     On  the  slope  a  little  above  the  spring  is
the  back  wall  of  a  building,  probably  erected  for  the  use  of  bathers.
It  has  three  divisions   and   is   built  of  reddish-brown  trachyte,  with
good  brick  and  mortar  work  interposed.     See  especially  Fiedler,  Rdsty
I.  pp.  257-259;  also  Boblaye,  RechercheSy  p.  58 ;  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.
442  ;  Leake,  Peloponnesiaca^  p.  278.

34.  I.  sharks.  The  Greek  word  is  icvvcs,  *dogs.'  Cp.  iv.  34.3.
Sharks  are  conunon  in  the  Saronic  Gulf.  My  dragoman  told  me  that
they  used  to  frequent  the  bay  of  Methana,  but  that,  disturbed  by  the
steamers,  they  have  left  these  waters  and  gone  to  the  quiet  bay  oi
Epidaurus.  Another  danger  to  bathers  and  to  the  sponge-divers  who
ply  their  trade  in  these  seas  is  the  octopus,  which  is  apt  to  fasten  on
a  man  with  its  powerful  tentacles  (Fiedler,  Reise^  i.  pp.  260,  267  ifi
270).

34.  2.  two  men  take  a  cock  etc.     The  object  of  carrying  the
pieces  of  the  victim  round  the  vineyard  was  to  place  the  vines,  as  it
were,  within  a  charmed  circle,  into  which  the  baneful  influence  of  the
wind  could  not  penetrate.    This  may  be  illustrated  by  parallel  practices.
Meles,  King  of  Sardes,  was  told  that  the  acropolis  of  Sardes  would  be
impregnable  if  a  lion  were  carried  round  the  walls.     So  he  caused  a
lion  to  be  carried  round  the  whole  circuit  of  the  walls  except  one  place,
which  was  so  precipitous  that  he  considered  it  quite  safe.     But  the
soldiers  of  Cyrus  made  their  way  into  the  acropolis  at  this  very  point
(Herodotus,  i.  84).     In  Elmina,  on  the  Gold  Coast  of  Africa,  it  was
formerly  the  custom  to  sacrifice  a  human  victim,  cut  the  body  up,  and
distribute  the  pieces  round  the  town.     A  sheep  is  now  substituted  for
the  human  victim,  and  its  flesh  distributed  in  the  same  way.     This  is
believed  to  render  it  impossible  for  a  hostile  force  to  make  its  way  into
the  town.     See  A.  B.  Ellis,  The  Tshi-speaking  Peoples  of  the  Gold  Coast ^
p.  53.     Some  of  the  Nagas,  a  hill  tribe  of  north-eastern  India,  killed  a
puppy,  cut  it  up,  and  buried  the  pieces  at  various  points  outside  their
gates  on  the  road  along  which  they  expected  an  English  force  to  attack
their  village :  this  was  supposed  to  secure  the  village  and  render  the
bullets  harmless  (Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute^  11  (1882),
p.  70).     In  the  Nijegorod  Government  (Russia)  "  the  Siberian  Plague
is  supposed  to  be  kept  at  a  distance  by  ashen  stakes  being  driven  into
the  ground  at  crossways,  and  the  remains  of  a  dog,  calcined  for  the
purpose,  being  scattered  about  the  village  "  (Ralston,  Songs  of  the  Russian
People^  P-  395)-     In  the  Roman  sacrifice  of  the  suovetaurilia  the  victims
were  carried  round  the  land,  which  was  thus  supposed  to  be  protected


:h.  XXXIV  MET  HAN  A  289

from  fog,  disease,  etc.  (Marquardt,  Das  Sacralwesen^  p.  201).    Roman

and  Greek  writers  record  the  belief  that  if  you  carry  the  skin  of  a  hyaena,

a  crocodile,  or  a  seal  round  your  land,  and  then  hang  up  the  skin  over

the  door  of  the  house,  no  hail  will  fall  on  your  land  (Palladius,  De  re

rustica^  i>  35  >  Geopanica^  i.  14).     It  is  said  to  be  an  Austrian  custom,

on  the  approach  of  a  hail-storm,  to  bury  an  t%%  at  each  of  the  four

comers  of  the  field  (Ulrich  Jahn,  Die  deutsche  Opfergebrducke^  p.  62).

When  the  people  of  Car  Nicobar  (the  most  northerly  of  the  Nicobar

Islands)  see  signs  of  an  approaching  storm,   "the  people  of  every

village  march  round   their  own   boundaries,  and   fix   up  at  different

distances  small  sticks  split  at  the  top,  into  which  split  they  put  a  piece

of  cocoa-nut,  a  wisp  of  tobacco,  and  the  leaf  of  a  certain  plant "  {Asiatick

Researches^  2.  p.  342).     Among  the  Esthonians  it  used  to  be  customary

for  a  farmer  to  go  to  his  fields  on  the  day  of  the  Annunciation  and  let

fall  three  drops  of  blood  from  the  ring  finger  of  his  left  hand  at  each  of

the  four  comers  of  all  his  fields ;  this  was  to  make  the  crops  thrive

(Kreutzwald  und   Neus,  Mythische  und  magische  Lieder  der  Ehsten,

p.  16).

llie  reason  why  the  people  of  Methana  selected  a  white  cock  speci-
ally to  keep  off  the  South  Wester  is  perhaps  explained  by  the  following
custom.  When  the  sky  is  overcast  the  skipper  of  a  Malay  prao  takes
the  white  or  yellow  feathers  of  a  cock,  fastens  them  to  a  leaf  of  a  special
sort,  and  sets  them  in  the  forecastle,  praying  that  the  spirits  will  cause
the  black  clouds  to  pass  by.  Then  the  cock  is  killed.  The  skipper
whitens  his  hand  with  chalk,  points  thrice  with  his  whitened  finger  at
the  black  clouds,  and  throws  the  bird  into  the  sea.  See  Riedel,  De
slutk-  en  kroesharige  rassen  tusschen  Selebes  en  Papua,  p.  4 1 2  sg.  The
idea  of  both  the  Malay  and  the  Greek  custom  seems  to  be  that  the  white
biid  will  chase  away  Uie  black  clouds.

34.  3.  the  Isles  of  Peloids.  "As  Pausanias  remarks  that  the
islands  of  Pelops,  which  were  near  the  coast  of  Methana,  were  nine  in
Qomber,  those  which  lie  between  Epidaurus  and  Aegina  must  have  been
indnded  under  this  denomination.  The  principal  are  Mdni,  Metdpi,
Angkistriy  and  Kyrd;  of  which  Anghistri  is  much  the  largest,  and,
being  chiefly  covered  with  wild  pines,  answers  in  this  respect,  as  well  as
in  its  distance  from  the  continent,  to  the  Pityonnesus,  which  Pliny
[Nat,  Hist  iv.  57]  places  in  face  of  Epidaurus.  Kyrd,  being  nearer  to
Spidaurus,  corresponds  equally  well  with  Cecryphalos  "  (Leake,  Marea,
^'P'455)*  Pliny  {ix.)  says  that  the  islands  are  6  miles  firom  the
niaiiiland.  The  Cecryphalus  of  Pliny,  as  Leake  says,  is  probably  the
Ceciyphalia  of  Thucydides  (iv.  105),  where  the  Athenians  won  a  naval
victory  over  the  Aeginetans.     Cp.  Diodorus,  xi.  78.

34.  3.  to  keep  off  hail  by  sacrifices  and  spells.  Pausanias  perhaps
refers  to  the  ceremonies  which  were  practised  for  this  purpose  at  Cleonae,
and  which  he  himself  may  have  witnessed.  See  note  on  ii.  15.  i.
Another  Greek  way  of  keeping  hail  from  the  vines  was  to  tie  a  strap
round  one  of  the  vines ;  it  was  supposed  that  this  would  save  all  the
rest  (Philostratus,  Heroica,  iii.  25).  Many  other  equally  absurd  modes
of  averting  a  hail-storm  (by  brandishing  bloody  axes  in  a  threatening

VOL.  Ill  U


290  TROEZEN  TO  HERMION  BK.  ii.  oobimth

manner  at  the  sky,  holding  up  a  mirror  to  the  clouds,  rubbing  the
pruning-knives  with  bear's  grease,  etc.)  are  gravely  recorded  by  andott
writers  (Palladius,  De  re  rusticoy  i.  35  ;  Geopomcoy  i.  14 ;  cp.  Pliny,
Nat.  Hist,  xxviii.  yy),

34.  6.  a  road  from  Troezen  to  Hermion  etc.  Pansanias  nov
returns  to  the  road  which  he  quitted  in  32.  9.  The  path  ascends  the
romantic  glen  of  the  Kremastos  (the  ancient  Hyllicus),  passing  the  Devil's
Bridge  (see  notes  on  ii.  31.  10;  ii.  32.  7).  The  ascent  is  exceedingly
steep  and  winding,  almost  dangerously  so.  From  the  top  of  the  pass,
which  is  reached  in  about  an  hour  and  a  quarter,  a  view  of  the  sea  to
the  south  with  islands  {Hydra^  etc.)  is  obtained.  The  path  then
descends  gradually  over  bushy  terraces,  between  which  the  broad,  often
waterless,  bed  of  the  Tkermisi  river  winds  towards  the  sea.  There  is  a
wayside  spring  where  myrtles  and  plane-trees  gn>^w  in  profusion.  Here
perhaps  stood  the  temple  of  Apollo  of  the  Plane-tree  Grove,  mentioned
by  Pausanias.  Lower  down  is  a  table-land,  hemmed  in  by  heights.  It
is  called  //rVz,  and  is  perhaps  the  Ilei  of  Pausanias.  The  dale  then
opens  out  into  a  level  stretch  of  marshy  land,  where  the  river  reaches
the  sea.  To  the  west  of  its  estuary  is  a  large  salt-water  lagoon,  where
the  Venetians  had  a  salt-work.  On  the  south  this  lagoon  is  bounded
by  a  rocky  coast  which  ends  in  Cape  Thermisi,  The  application  of  the
name  Tkermisi  to  the  lagoon,  the  salt-work,  and  the  bay,  as  weU  as  to
the  cape,  seems  to  show  that  the  sanctuary  of  Demeter  Warmth  (JA^r*
masia)y  mentioned  by  Pausanias,  was  in  this  neighbourhood.  Abofe
the  salt-work  is  a  chapel  with  some  ruins ;  perhaps  it  occupies  the  site
of  the  sanctuary.  The  double-peaked  hill  which  rises  steeply  to  the
north  is  crowned  with  the  remains  of  an  old  fortification.

See  Gell,  Ititurary  of  Greece^  p.  123  sqq.  ;  Boblaye,  Reckerches^  p.  61;
Curtius,  Pelop»  2.  p.  451  sq. ;  Leake,  Peloponnesiacay  p.  28 1  sq. ;  Bursian,  doff*
2.  pp.  87,  95 ;  Philippson,  PelopontuSy  p.  49 ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  206.

34.  7*  Jtist  eighty  ftirlongs  off  is  Gape  Scyllaemn.   Cape  ScyUaeom
is  the  modem  Cape  Skyli^  the  sharp  promontory  forming  the  southern
extremity  of  the  Saronic  gfulf,  between  Troezen  and  Hennion.     In
favour  of  identifying  Scyllaeum  with  Skyli  there  is,  besides  the  similarity
of  the  names,  the  testimony  of  Scylax,  who  sailing  along  the  coast  from
Nauplia  to  Corinth,  mentions  Hermion,  then  Cape  Scyllaeum,  and  after-
wards Troezen.     He  says  that  Scyllaeum  is  the  boundary  of  the  Saronic
gulf  (tov  koXvov  tou  7r/3^s  icOfMy),  and  that  it  is  opposite  Sunium  in
Attica ;  both  these  descriptions   point  to  Cape  Skyii,      See    Scylax,
Periplusy  51.     Pausanias  says  that  Scyllaeum  was  80  furlongs  from
the  sanctuary  of  Demeter  Warmth  {Thermasia).     But  Cape  Tkermisi
is  10  geographical  miles  (a  good  deal  more  than  80  fiirlongs)  from
Skyli,     Therefore  if  by  Scyllaeum  Pausanias  meant  Skyliy  and  if  he
has  given  the  distance  rightly,  the  sanctuary  cannot  have  stood  exactly
at  Cape  Tkermisi^  but  must  have  been  farther  to  the  east,  nearer  Cape
Skyli,    On  the  derivation  of  the  name  Scyllaeum  from  Scylla,  daughter  of
Nisus,  cp.  Strabo,  viii.  p.  373.    As  to  Scyllaeum,  see  also  below,  p.  292.

34.  8.  Sailing  from  Scyllaeum  towards  the  capital  etc     From


H.  XXXIV  TROEZEN  TO  HERMION  291

tlus  point  till  he  reaches  Hermion,  Pausanias's  description  of  the  coast
can  with  difficulty  be  reconciled  with  the  actual  coast-line.  Two  ways
of  interpreting  his  description  have  been  proposed.  Both  assume  that
he  has  been  guilty  of  some  error  or  confusion.  As  to  the  position  of
Hermion  itself  there  is,  however,  no  question.  It  was  on  the  site  of
the  modem  village  of  Kastrt.

(i)  It  has  been   supposed   that  Scyllaeum  was  not  Skyli^  but  the

bold  round   promontory  about   a  mile    to    the  north    of  it.      Sfyli

would  then   be  Bucephala;   and   the   islands   of   Haliussa,    Pityussa,

and  Aristerae  would  be  the  three  islets  off  Skyli,      From  Skyli  and

its  islands  Pausanias  then,  compelled  by  contrary  winds  or  for  other

reasons,    sailed    outside    the    large    island    of    Hydra^    the    eastern

extremity  of  which  he  called  Colyergia  and  mistook  for  a  piece  of

the  mainland.     Tricrana  is  the  modem  island  of  Trikera,     Buporth-

mus  is  Cape  Musakt,     Aperopia  is  the  island  of  Doko,      Hydrea  is

Hydra,    The  *  crescent-shaped  beach '  is  the  bay  of  Kappari,    The  *spit

of  land '  is  the  promontory  called  BisH,     Hermion  occupied  the  site

of  the  modem  village  of  Kastri,     This  is  the  explanation  adopted  by

Boblaye  {Reckerches^  p.   60)  and  Leake  {Pelop.  p.   279  sqq,)      The

(Bfficulties  in  the  way  of  it  are :  (i)  It  shifts  Scyllaeum  from  Skyli  to  a

point  a  mile  off.     (2)  In  one  of  the  islands  off  Scyllaeum  Pausanias

says  there  was  a  good  harbour.     But  there  seems  to  be  no  harbour  in

the  islets  off  Skyli.     (3)  It  assmnes  that  Pausanias  mistook  the  eastem

end  of  Hydra  for  the  mainland ;  and  (4)  that  he  entirely  omitted  to

mention  die  large  island  of  Spetzia,

(ii)  The  other  explanation  is  that  Pausanias,  owing  to  some
;  confusion  in  his  notes  or  from  borrowing  his  description  of  the  coast
I  from  a  book  without  having  himself  sailed  round  the  whole  distance,
starts  in  his  description,  not  from  Skyli^  but  from  a  point  on  the  coast
in  the  opposite  direction,  namely  from  a  point  to  the  west  of  Hermion
(Kastri)y  say  from  the  harbour  of  Kiladia.  Bucephala  (< ox-head')
v'oiild  then  be  the  westem  extremity  of  the  Kratddi  peninsula,  between
Cape  Palaeo-TTuni  on  the  north  and  Cape  Korakas  on  the  south.  The
island  of  Haliussa  would  be  the  peninsula  at  the  east  end  of  which  is
Port  Chelij  for  this  peninsula  is  nearly  separated  from  the  mainland  by
2  sah-water  lagoon  and  may  have  been  an  island  in  Pausanias's  time.
The  harbour  of  which  Pausanias  speaks  would  be  Port  Cheli ;  Pityussa
VQold  be  Spetsia ;  and  Aristerae  would  be  Spetzia-poulo,  Colyergia
voold  be  the  cape  on  which  a  chapel  of  St.  Aemilianus  stands  and
which  in  some  maps  is  marked  Cape  Mylonas,  The  rest  of  the  islands
^  capes  (Tricrana,  etc.)  are  the  same  as  in  the  previous  explanation.
This  was  the  view  of  Lolling  {Mittheil.  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  4
('^79)»  P-  107  ^9Q'\  ^^^  ^o  some  extent  of  Bursian,  though  he
identified  Haliussa  with  Spetzia^  Pityussa  with  Spetziorpoulo^  and
Aristerae  with  three  small  islets  east  of  Spetziorpoulo  {Geogr,  von
Grieckeniandy  2.  pp.  86  sq,  note,  100  sq,)

The  advantages  of  this  view  over  the  preceding  are :  (i)  It  supplies
a  harbour  answering  to  the  one  described  by  Pausanias  as  existing  in
Haliussa.     (2)  It  does  not  involve  the  oversight  of  the  large  island  of


292  TROEZEN  TO  HERMION  bk.  ii.  cokutth

SpeiziOy  and  it  perhaps  shows  the  origin  of  the  modem  name  in  tbe
ancient  one  {Spetzia  from  Pityussa).     (3)  The  island  oi Spetzia-fouUxk
more  usually  known  at  the  present  day  as  Arasteri^  in  which  we  easily
recognise  the  ancient  Aristerae.     On  the  other  hand  the  difficulties
about  this  view  are  these:  (i)  It  shifts  Scyllaeum  from  its  true  place
to  one  at  the  very  opposite  end  of  Hermionis.    (2)  It  supposes  that  what
is  now  mainland  was  an  island  in  Pausanias's  time.     (3)  It  seems  veiy
unnatural  that  Pausanias,  approaching  Hermion  from  the  east,  shodd  ,
take  a  g^eat  leap  past  the  town  to  the  west,  and  then  begin  sailing
back   eastwards  to  the   town.      For  on   this    supposition,  if  he  saw
the  coast  as  he  describes  it,  he  must  actually  have  passed  the  towa,
continued  his  journey  for  some  miles,  and  then  sailed  back  to  6e
place  which   he  had  previously  passed  on  foot.      Still  on  the  wbole
the  objections  to  this  view,  grave  as  they  are,  seem  to  me  less  grave
than  those  which  tell  against  the  former  view.     Even  the  most  serious
of  the  mistakes  which  it  seems  to  impute  to  Pausanias,  namely  the
transference  of  Scyllaeum  from  the  eastern  to  the  western  extremity  of
Hermionis,  may  perhaps  be  defended  or  at  least  explained.     For  two
passages  of  ancient  writers  seem  necessarily  to  imply  that  Scyllaeum
was  at  the  western  end  of  Hermionis.     Thus  Strabo  (viii.  p.  368),
making    the   circuit   of    Peloponnese    in   the   reverse   direction  from
Pausanias   (Elis,   Messenia,    Laconia,    Argolis),  says   that   after  cape
Malea  you  come  to  the  Gulf  of  Aigos  and  next  to  the  Gulf  of  Hermionis*
The  Gulf  of  Aigos,  he  says,  extends  as  £ar  as  Scyllaeum ;  then  comes
the  Gulf  of  Hermionis  fiuther  to  the  east,  reaching  as  far  as  to  A^[ina
and  Epidaurus.     If  the  Gulf  of  Hermionis  included,  as  it  surely  did,
the  coast  of  Hermionis,  then  Scyllaeum,  the  termination  of  the  Gulf  of
Argolis,  must  have  been  at  the  western  end  of  Hermionis ;  otherwise
Hermionis  would  have  been,  not  on  the  Gulf  of  Hermionis,  but  on  that
of  Argos.     The  same  thing  is  still  more  clearly  expressed  by  Pliny
{Nat,  Hist,   iv.  17).     He  says  that  the  Gulf  of  Argos  extends  asfer
as  Scyllaeum  ;  then  after  Scyllaeum  comes  the  Gulf  of  Hermionis,  with
the  towns  of  Hermion,  Troezen,  etc.      These  two  writers,  therefore,
certainly  placed  Scyllaeum  to  the  west  of  Hermionis,  and   Pausanias
would  seem  to  have  done  so  too.     Whether  they  were  right  in  doing
so,    is   another   question.      That   the   present   Skyli^   to   the  east  of
Hermionis,  was  called  Scyllaeum  in  antiquity  seems   certain.      That
there  was  another  Scyllaeum  to  the  west  of  Hermionis  is  possible,  bui
unlikely.     It  seems  more  likely  that  all  three  writers,  Strabo,  Pliny,
and  Pausanias,  were  misinformed.

Prof.  £.  Curtius  attempted  a  different  solution  of  the  difficulties  is
the  present  passage  of  Pausanias  {Pelop,  2.  p.  452  sqq,) ;  but  the
objections  to  his  view  are  so  numerous  that  I  have  not  thought  it
necessary  to  discuss  it.

34.  8.  a  harbour  where  there  is  good  anchorage.  This  is
perhaps  the  modem  Port  Cheli.  See  preceding  note.  The  bay  is  small
and  landlocked,  and  the  scenery,  without  being  grand,  is  peaceful  and
homelike,  reminding  a  Scotchman  of  some  quiet  inlet  in  the  Western
Highlands  of  his  native  land.     There  is  no  wharf,  and  hardly  a  sign  of


CH.  xxxiv  HERMION  293

habitation  within  sight.  A  ferry-boat  puts  off  to  the  steamer.  The
people  are  Albanians.

34.  8.  PityuBSa.  This  is  probably  the  modem  Spetzia^  with  its
thriving  town  of  the  same  name.  No  ancient  remains  are  known  to
exist  on  the  island  (Bm^ian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  loi).

34.  8.  Tricrana.  This  is  probably  the  modem  Trikem,  an  unin-
habited island  consisting  of  two  mountains  joined  by  an  isthmus  (Bursian,
Geogr.  2.  p.  loi).

34.  8.  Buporthmns.  Pausanias's  description  of  this  place  applies
well  to  Cape  Mouzakiy  which  is  a  plateau-shaped  mountain  with  steep
sides  thrust  out  into  the  sea  and  joined  to  the  land  by  a  low  and  narrow,
but  rocky  isthmus.     See  Lolling,  in  MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst.  in.Atken^  4

(1879),  p.  109.

34.  9.  Hydrea.  This  island  preserves  its  name  in  the  slightly
changed  form  of  Hydra.  The  town  is  built  on  the  steep  slopes  which
enclose  a  small  inlet ;  the  white  houses  rising  above  each  other  like  a
theatre  present  a  picturesque  aspect  to  the  sea.  Three  insignificant
fragments  of  antiquity  have  been  found  here,  all  of  them,  apparently,
imported  (Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  100).  Worked  flints  and  polished
stone  axes  of  the  neolithic  age  have  been  discovered  in  the  island
(Gutde-Joanney  2.  p.  207).  Hydra  is  the  most  southerly  land  seen  from
Athens ;  on  a  clear  day  (that  is,  nearly  every  day)  it  is  visible  in  the
blue  distance,  where  sea  and  sky  meet.

34.  9.  a  spit  of  land  nms  eastward  into  the  sea.  This  is  the
long  neck  of  land,  now  called  BisHy  which  runs  out  into  the  sea  from  the
village  of  Kastri.  Its  dimensions  agree  with  those  given  by  Pausanias.
<«  The  sea  is  very  deep,  so  that  large  vessels  might  have  lain  close  to  the
walls,  and  the  ports  or  bays  both  on  the  north  and  south  of  the  peninsula,
seem  perfectly  secure  and  land-locked.  The  anchorage  is  excellent"
(Gell,  Itin.  of  Greece^  p.  1 30).  On  the  north  side  of  the  peninsula  some
squared  blocks  may  be  seen  lying,  partly  in  the  water ;  they  are  probably
the  remains  of  an  ancient  mole.  At  the  extremity  of  the  cape,  which
was  fortified  in  Venetian  times  and  in  the  War  of  Independence,  are  the
ruins  of  a  tower  built  of  large  irregular  blocks.  On  the  stunmit  of  the
promontory  is  the  pavement  of  a  temple,  100  feet  long  by  38  feet  broad,
constructed  of  greyish-blue  limestone,  the  blocks  of  unequal  sizes.  It
may  have  formed  part  of  the  temple  of  Poseidon  mentioned  by  Pausanias.
Immediately  behind  it  is  another  ancient  pavement,  80  feet  long.  There
are  numerous  other  ancient  remains  farther  to  the  west,  including  the
ruins  of  a  theatre  on  the  southern  side  of  the  peninsula.  This  theatre
is  built  of  bricks  and  mortar ;  ten  rows  of  seats  are  still  to  be  seen.
See  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  457  sq, ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  96 ;  Philippson,
PeloponneSy  p.  49 ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  206.

34.  II.  The  present  city  is  just  four  ftirlongs  from  the  cape  etc.
The  spit  of  land  now  called  Bisti  on  which,  according  to  Pausanias,
the  older  city  of  Hermion  lay,  runs  eastward  into  the  sea,  dividing  the
northern  from  the  southern  harbour.  Of  these  two  harbours  the
northern  is  the  smaller  but  safer.  At  it  may  be  seen  the  remains  of
an  ancient  mole   (see  the  preceding  note).      A  few  hundred  yards


294  HERMION  BK.  II.  CORIIfTH


I


inland  from  the  promontory  rises  a  hill,  the  Mount  Pron  of  the  andents,
separated  by  a  saddle  from  the  range  of  Mount  Thomax  (Cuckoo
Mountain)  on  the  west.  This  hill  was  the  ancient  acropolis.  The
modem  village  of  Kasiri  lies  on  its  slope.  Vestiges  of  the  ancient  vaD
exist  on  the  north  side  of  the  hill.  The  schoolhouse  is  built  on  ao
ancient  wall,  50  feet  long,  which  may  have  been  part  of  the  wall  of  tbe
acropolis.  The  chief  church  of  Kastri^  dedicated  to  the  Taxiarch  (St
Michael),  seems  to  occupy  the  site  of  an  ancient  temple.  It  stands  in  tbe
upper  part  of  the  village,  and  contains  a  couple  of  ancient  colunms,  some
fragments  of  sculpture,  and  many  ancient  blocks,  including  two  stones
inscribed  with  dedications  to  Demeter,  Clymenus,  and  Proserpine.  We
may  conjectiu^  that  the  church  has  succeeded  to  the  site  of  the  sanctuary
of  Demeter,  which  was,  as  we  learn  from  Pausanias,  the  chief  shrine  of
Hermion.  Smaller  antiquities,  such  as  terra-cottas,  bronzes,  coins  and
inscriptions  are  to  be  found  in  numbers  on  the  site  of  the  ancient  dtjr.

Possessing  no  fertile  territory,  and  being  accessible  on  the  land  side
only  by  a  difficult  mountain  track,  Hermion  was  essentially  a  maridme
city.  It  owed  its  importance  to  its  two  excellent  harbours,  which  are
sheltered  by  capes  and  islands  from  every  wind  that  blows.

See  Gell,  Itinerary  of  Greece,  p.  128  sqq.  ;  Boblave,  Recherckes,  p.  60  ;  CortinSj
Petop,  2.  p.  454  sqq,  ;  AnnalidelP  Imtituto,  33  (1861),  p.  10 ;  Bursian,  Geogr^  2.
p.  95  sq,  ;  PhilippsoD,  Pehponius^  p.  49 ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  206.

35.  I.  Dionysus  of  the  Black  Qoatskin.    This  title  is  said  to  have
originated  in  the  appearance  of  Dionysus,  on  a   certain   momentous
occasion,  clad  in  a  black  goatskin.    See  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Achafft-
146;    Suidas,    s.v,  *Airarovpia\   Etymolog.   Magn,    p.    119.    10.    Ob
Dionysus  in  goat  form,  cp.  The  Golden  Bough,  i.  p.  326  sq,^  2.  p.  34  sq<l'
The  boat-races  and  swimming  -  races  held  at  Hermion  in  honour  ^
Dionysus  may  perhaps  have  been  associated  with  the  story  of  the  god*^
adventure  with  pirates  which  is  told  in  the  Homeric  hymn  to  Dionys*^^
and  illustrated  by  the  sculptures  on  the  monument  of  Lysicrates  at  Athc^^^
(vol.  2.  p.  207).     Cp.  S.  Wide,  De  sacris  Troezeniorum,  Hermionensiuf^^
Epidauriorunty  p.  43  sq.

35.  I.  prizes  for  swimming-races  and  boat-races.  The  shelter^^
bay  of  Hermion  was  well  adapted  for  these  contests.  Boat-races  see^
to  have  been  not  uncommon  in  antiquity.  They  were  held  at  Suniu^
(Lysias,  Or,  xxi.  5)  ;  and  Attic  inscriptions  show  that  boat-races  former^
part  of  the  regular  training  of  the  Athenian  lads  (epheboi)  ;  they  racc^
in  sacred  vessels  round  the  peninsula  of  Piraeus  to  the  harbour  <^
Munychia.  See  Aug.  Mommsen,  Heortologie,  pp.  1 97,  411;  Prof^
Percy  Gardner,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  2  (1881),  pp.  90-97^
315-317  ;  i^'i  6  (1885),  p.  26  ;  C  I.  A.  ii.  No.  470,  line  16  ;  C  /.  A.
ii.  No.  471,  line  29  sq,\  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec.  No.  347,
line  21  sq.'f  id.,  No.  395,  line  78;  Plutarch,  Themistocles,  32.

35.  I.  Artemis  snmamed  Iphigenia.  At  Aegirae  in  Achaia
there  was  a  temple  of  Artemis  which  contained  a  very  ancient  image  of
Iphigenia ;  from  which  Pausanias  concluded  that  the  temple  had
originally  belonged  to  Iphigenia  (vii.  26.  5).  Cp.  S.  Wide,  De  sacris
TroezenioruMy  Hermionensium,  Epidauriorum,  p.  29.


CH.  XXXV  HERMION  295

35.  I.  a  bronze  Poseidon  with  one  foot  on  a  dolphin.  On  coins
of  Hermion  there  is  a  representation  of  Poseidon  which  is  probably
copied  from  the  statue  here  described  by  Pausanias :  the  god  appears
standing  with  a  trident  in  his  hand  and  one  foot  resting  on  a  dolphin
(Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num,  Comm.  on  Paus,  p.  50).  An
inscription  found  at  Hermion  mentions  a  priest  of  Poseidon  (C.  /.  G,
No.  1223).  At  Anticyra  the  god  was  similarly  represented  standing
with  one  foot  on  a  dolphin  (Paus.  x.  36.  8) ;  and  Hyginus  says  {Asiron,
iL  17):  "We  see  that  those  who  make  images  of  Neptune  (Poseidon)
place  a  dolphin  either  in  his  hand  or  under  his  foot."  As  to  the  worship
of  Poseidon  at  Hermion  see  S.  Wide,  De  sacris  Troezeniorum^  Her-
mumensium^  Epidauriorum^  P*  13  sq,

35.  I.  the  shxine  of  Hestia.  The  altar  in  this  shrine  may  have
been  '  the  conmion  hearth '  mentioned  in  a  Hermionian  inscription  as
the  place  where  foreign  ambassadors  were  entertained  by  the  magistrates
(C.  /.  G,  No.  1193  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Graec.  No.  389).

35.  3.  a  plaice  called  Limon  ('meadow').  Prof.  Curtius  thinks
that  this  may  be  a  place  a  good  hour's  distance  on  the  way  to  Kranidi,
There  are  some  springs  at  this  spot     See  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  459.

35.  4*  a  sanctuary  of  Demeter  on  Mount  Pron.  This  sanctuary
perhaps  occupied  the  site  of  the  present  chief  church  of  Kastri^  the
church  of  the  Taxiarch.  See  above,  p.  294.  The  sanctuary  is
mentioned  in  an  inscription  of  Hermion  (C  /.  G,  No.  1193  ;  Ditten-
berger, Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec,  No.  389).

35.  5.  the  goddess  herself  is  certainly  called  Ohthonia and

they  celebrate  a  festival  called  Ohthonia.     Inscriptions  containing

dedications    to   Chthonian   Demeter    have    been   found    at   Hermion

(C.  /.  G.  Nos.  1 193,   1 194,   1 195,  1 198;    Roehl,  /.  G,  A.  No.   47;

Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec.  No.  389 ;    CoUitz,  G.  D.  /.  3.  Nos.

33^2,  3383,  3396).     Demeter  was  worshipped  under  this  title  also  at

Sparta  (Paus.  iii.  14.  5).     The  festival  called  Chthonia  is  thus  referred

to  by  Aelian  {Nat,  Anim,  xL  4) :  "  The  Hermionians  worship  Demeter

and  sacrifice  to  her  magnificently  and  grandly;   and  they  call  the

festival  Chthonia.     I  hear  that  the  largest  cows  are  brought  from  the

herd  to  the  altar  by  the  priestess,  and  that  they  allow  themselves  to  be

sacrificed."     Then  he  quotes  some  verses  of  Aristocles,  in  which  it  is

said  that  a  bull  such  as  ten  men  could  not  master  is  led  to  the  altar  of

Demeter  at  Hermion  by  the  priestess  alone,  the  bull  following  her  as

quietly  as  a  child  follows  its  mother.     From  an  inscription  found  at

Hennion  (C  /.  G,  No.  1 193 ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec,  No.  389)

^  learn  that  a  victim  was  sometimes  sent  by  a  friendly  state  to  be  offered

^t  the  festival  of  the  Chthonia,  that  ambassadors  and  others  assembled

to  wimess  the  sacrifice,  and  that  a  special  official  (called  d€apo86'

m)  was  appointed  to  receive  them.     These  officials  are  mentioned  in

other  Hermionian  inscriptions  (Collitz,  G,  D,  I,  3.  Nos.  3387,  3388).

Two  other  inscriptions  of  Hermion  contain  lists  of  men  and  women,

with  the  names  added,  sometimes  of  their  fathers,  sometimes  of  their

mothers.     Boeckh  thought  that  these  are  lists  of  the  persons  who  had

been  initiated  into  the  mysteries  of  Demeter  (see  Paus.  ii.  34.  10),  with


296  HERMION  BK.  II.  COUNTB

the  names  of  their  fathers  or  mothers  who  had  initiated  them.  See
C  /.  G,  Nos.  1207,  121 1  ;  Bulletin  de  Carresp.  HelUmque^  1879,
p.  75  sqq, ;  Collitz,  G»  D,  I,  3.  Nos.  3398,  3401,  3402.  The  sacn6ce
at  the  festival  of  the  Chthonia  has  been  examined  by  W.  Mannliardt,
who  thought  that  the  cow  in  this  sacrifice  represented  the  spirit  of
vegetation.  See  his  Mythologische  Forschungen^  P*  5^  sqq. ;  cp.  also
his  Komddmonen^  p.  36.  Cp.  S.  Wide,  De  sacris  Troezemonm^
Hermionensium^  Epidauriorum^  p.  48  sqq,

35.  5.  it  seems  to  me  a  hyacinth.  Hyacinths  were  among  the
flowers  which  Proserpine  and  her  playmates  were  gathering  when  she
was  carried  off  by  Pluto.  See  Homer,  Hymn  to  Demeter^  6  sqq,y  425
sqq, ;  Ovid,  Fastt^  iv.  437  sqq, ;  id,^  Met,  v.  392  ;  Sophocles,  Oed,  Cd
682  sqq, ;  Hesychius,  s,v,  SafMTptov,  All  these  passages  are  refened
to  by  Stephani,  in  Campte-Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1865,  p.  15  sq,

35.  5.  inscribed  with  the  same  monrnftil  letters.  So  Ludan
{De  saltatiane^  45)  speaks  of  "the  flower  sprung  from  the  blood  (of
Hyacinth)  and  the  woeful  inscription  on  it."  Milton's  phrase  in  Lyddfis
("  that  sanguine  flower  inscribed  with  woe  ")  will  recur  to  the  reader.

35.  7.  Four  old  women.  Old  women  are  sometimes  specially
selected  to  offer  sacrifices.  Cp.  Pigafetta,  in  Pinkerton's  Voyages  ^
Travels^  10.  p.  342  sq. ;  Crawford,  History  of  the  Indian  ArckipeU^'i
2.  p.  234  sq,

35.  8.  the  thing  they  reverence  above  everything  else.  ^^^
Charles  Newton  {Hist,  of  Discoveries  at  Cnidus^  etc,  2.  p.  414)  thou^l^
that  the  worshipful  object  was  probably  contained  in  the  sacred  b^
{cista),  comparing  Clement  of  Alexandria,  Protrept,  21,  p.  18  ^
Potter;  Pausan.  viii.  37.  4.  Gerhard  {Griech,  Mythol,  §  420.  1
thought  that  the  cista  of  Demeter  contained  a  serpent  (As  to  iX
cista  see  note  on  viii.  25.  7.)  The  women  called  'drawers'  at  \f
Thesmophoria  (a  festival  in  honour  of  Demeter  and  Proserpine)  seem  ^
have  carried  cakes  made  in  the  shape  of  serpents  and  of  phalli,  S^
the  scholium  on  Lucian,  published  in  Rheinisches  Museum^  N.F.  7
(1870),  p.  548  sqq,

35.  9.  Olymenns.  This  was  no  doubt,  as  Pausanias  perceived
only  a  euphuistic  name  for  Pluto.  A  Hermionian  poet,  Lasus  by  name
called  Proserpine  "the  wife  of  Clymenus"  (Athenaeus,  xiv.  p.  624  e)
Cp.  S.  Wide,  De  sacris  Troezeniorum^  Hermionensium^  Epidauriorum
p.  49  sq,

35.  9.  the  god  who  is  said  to  reign  nndergronnd.  Pausania
seems  to  have  been  very  sceptical  about  the  existence  of  hell.  See  i:
24.  4,  ii.  31.  2,  ii.  36.  7,  iii.  25.  5,  v.  20,  3  ;  G.  Kriiger,  Theologumen
Pausaniae^  p.  16  sq.

35.  10.  the  Oolonnade  of  Echo.  There  was  a  colonnade  so  name
at  Olympia  (v.  21.  17).  A  mythical  account  of  the  origin  of  the  ech
is  given  by  Ovid  {Metam,  iii.  356  sqq.)  Some  North  American  Indiar
think  that  echoes  are  the  voices  of  witches  who  live  in  snake  skins,  an
love  to  repeat  mockingly  the  voices  of  passers  by  {First  annual  repot
of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology  (Washington),  pp.  45-47  ;  cp.  Gill,  Mytl
and  Songs  of  the  South  Pacific^  P-  1 1 5  ^99 »)


CH.  XXXVI  HERMION  297

35.  10.  a  chasm  in  the  earth.     This  was  supposed  to  be  a  short  cut

to  helL     The  souls  of  the  dead,  descending  by  this  chasm,  had  not  to  go

round  by  Charon's  ferry.     So  the  thrifty  people  of  Hermion  put  no  money

in  the  mouths  of  corpses  to  pay  the  ferry  across  the  Styx,  as  the  rest  of

the  Greeks  used  to  do  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  373).     On  this  custom  of  giving

money  to  the  dead  to  meet  their  expenses   in  the  other  world,  see

Joum,  of  the  Anthrop,  Inst,  15  (1885),  p.  78.     Caves  and  fissures  of

the  earth  were  naturally  fixed  upon  as  the  places  at  which  to  worship

the  infernal  deities.     If  noxious  mephitic  vapours  issued  from  the  cavern,

so  much  the  better ;  the  place  was  then  indeed  the  mouth  of  hell.     Such

caves  existed  at  Hierapolis  and  Acharaka  in  Asia  Minor;  they  were

sacred  to  Pluto  and  bulls  were  sacrificed  to  him  by  being  driven  into

the  caves,  where  they  were  stifled  by  the  fumes.     When  Strabo  visited

the  cave  at  Hierapolis  he  let  some  sparrows  fly  into  it ;  they  at  once

dropped  dead.     Sick  people  resorted  to  Acharaka,  where   they  were

treated  by  the  priests,  the  mode  of  treatment  being  revealed  to  the

priest  in  a  dream  while  he  slept  in  the  holy  ground.     See  Strabo,  xiii.

p.  629  sq,y  xiv.  p.  649  sq.     The  cave  at  Hierapolis  has  disappeared

(W.  M.  Ramsay,  Cities  and  Bishoprics  of  Phrygia^  i.  p.  86).     In  the

sacred  enclosure  of  the  infernal  deities  at  Cnidus  Sir  Charles  Newton

discovered  a  curious  natural  formation  of  the  rock,  which  he  considers

may  have  reconunended  the  spot  as  a  fit  place  for  the  worship  of  these

subterranean  powers  {Hist,  of  Discoveries  at  HalicamassuSy  etc  2.  p.

414;  id,y  Travels  and  Discoveries^  2.  p.  195  sq,)     Pluto  seems  to  have

been  worshipped  at  Aeane  in  Macedonia.   See  Revue  ArchdologiqtUy  N.S.

18(1868),  pp.  18-28.     Hades  (Pluto)  was  worshipped  at  Elis,  where

he  had  a  temple  (Paus.  vi.  25.  2).     There  were  other  places  in  Greece

besides  Hermion   where  Hercules   was  said  to  have  dragged  up  the

hoand  of  hell,  as  Taenarum  (Paus.  iii.  25.  5),  near  Coronea  in  Boeotia

(Paus.  ix.  34.  5),  and  at  the  fotmtain  or  conduit  known  as  the  Water

of  Freedom,  in  Argolis  (Hesychius,  s.v,  eXcv^cpov  v&op :  see  note  on  ii.

17.  \\

35.  II.  a  sanctuary  of  Ilitlisria.  Ilithyia  is  mentioned  in  a  Her-
inionian  inscription,  which  records  the  dedication  of  a  statue  to  the
goddess  (S.  Wide,  De  sacris  Troeseniorum^  Hermionensiutn^  Epidauri-
'^m,  p.  66  sq.)

35.  1 1 .  a  vast  niimbdr  of  yotive  offerings.  These  would  be  dedicated
^  thank-offerings  by  women  who  had  been  safely  delivered,  Ilithyia
being  the   goddess   of  child-bearing.      Many  such   votive   offerings
^re  fotmd   some   years   ago  at   Nemi   in    Italy,  where   Diana   was
worshipped  by  women  desirous  of  children  or  of  an  easy  delivery.     See
BulletHno  delP  InstitutOy   1885,  p.  153  sq.  ;  Athenaeum^  10  October,
1885;  Preller,  Romische  Mythologie,^  i.  p.  317  ;  G.  H.  Wallis,  Catalogue
of  Classical  Antiquities  from  the  site  of  the  Temple  ofDiana^  Nemi^  J^l^y^
p  13  sqq.    What  appears  to  have  been  an  offering  of  this  kind  was  found
at  Sparta  some  years  ago.     It  is  a  marble  grroup,  representing  appa-
rendy  a  woman  in  the  act  of  child-bearing,  assisted  by  two  male  divini-
ties.    See  Mittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  10  (1885),  pp.  1 77-199.  *

36.  I.  BUUiice.     This  is  probably  the  place  called  Halia  by  Scylax,


298  H ALICE  BK.  IX.  CORINTH

who  says  {Periplus^  50)  that  it  possessed  a  harbour  at  the  mouth  of  the
Argolic  Gulf.  This  makes  it  tolerably  certain  that  the  harbour  is  the
modem  Port  Cheliy  opposite  the  island  of  Spetzia.  (See  note  on  ii.  34.  8.)
On  the  southern  side  of  this  harbour  there  are  the  remains  of  a  consider-
able town,  partly  under  water.  They  are  probably  the  ruins  of  Halice,
though  the  French  Surveyors  identified  the  site  as  Mases.  See  Boblaye,
Recherches^  p.  61  ;  Leake,  Morea^  2.  p.  462  5q.\  id.^  Peloponmsiaca^
p.  287  sqq.\  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  461  sq,\  Lolling,  in  MittheiL  d.  arch.
InsL  in  Athen^  4  (1879),  P-  108.

36.  I.  Mention  is  made  of  natives  of  Halice  on  the  Epidanxian
tablets.  It  is  a  remarkable  proof  of  the  accuracy  of  Pausanias  that  on
the  tablets  to  which  he  refers  and  which  were  discovered  some  years  ago
at  Epidaurus,  there  occur  the  names  of  three  natives  of  Halice.  See
the  first  tablet,  line  120,  and  the  second  tablet,  lines  19  and  69,  in
Cawadias,  Fouilles  d*£pidaure,  i.  p.  27  (Inscr.  No.  i),  pp.  29,  30
(Inscr.  No.  2);  *E<fnjfupU  dpxaiokoyucrj,  1883,  p.  215;  id,^  1885,  pp.
15,  18.     As  to  these  tablets  see  note  on  ii.  27.  3.

36.  I.  the  transformation  of  Zeus  into  a  cnckoo.  The  story  is
told  in  detail  by  a  scholiast  on  Theocritus  (xv.  64),  who  professes  to
derive  it  from  Aristotle.  He  mentions  a  sanctuiary  of  Full-grown
(Teieia)  Hera  on  the  Cuckoo  Mountain.  Pausanias,  who  is  more  likely
to  be  right,  places  the  temple  of  Hera  on  Mt  Pron.  On  the  cuckoo  in
northern  mythology,  see  the  elaborate  essay  of  W.  Mannhardt,  '  Der
Kukuk,'  in  Zeitschrift  fiir  deutsche  Mytkologie  und  Sittenkunde^  3(1855),
pp.  209-298.

36.  2.  Mases.  This  was  probably  situated  on  the  deep  bay  of
KilcuUa,  This  sheltered  harbour  must  have  been,  as  Prof.  Curtius
points  out,  of  some  importance  to  the  people  of  Hermion,  as  it  was  the
nearest  anchorage  on  the  Argolic  Gulf,  and  goods  could  be  transported
from  it  overland  by  a  short  and  easy  road  instead  of  having  to  be
brought  round  the  rocky  coast  in  vessels.  There  are  here  some  ancient
cisterns  and  remains  of  buildings.  See  Leake,  Morea,  2.  p.  463  ;
Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  462  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  98.

36.  2.  as  Homer  represents  it.     See  Iliad^  ii.  562.

36.  3.  Stmthns Philanorium BoleL  Struthus  is  prob-
ably a  cape  somewhere  to  the  north-west  of  the  bay  of  Kiladia,  The
other  places  have  not  been  identified.  The  distance  of  2  50  furlongs  is
probably,  as  Prof.  Curtius  thinks  {Pelop.  2.  p.  464),  a  mistake  ;  it
would  carry  us  quite  out  of  the  district  which  Pausanias  is  describing.

36.  3.  Didsnni  This  place  has  preserved  its  name  in  the  modem
Dufyma,  a  village  surrounded  by  vineyards,  corn-fields,  and  tobacco-
fields,  in  a  small  mountain  valley  at  the  south-west  foot  of  Mt.  Didyma.
This  is  a  double-peaked  mountain  3525  feet  high,  the  shape  of  which  prob-
ably gave  rise  to  the  name  Didymi  (*  the  twins ').  In  the  neighbour-
hood of  the  village  there  are  some  ancient  foundations  and  a  cistern
with  steps.  In  the  church  of  H.  Marina  to  the  east  of  the  village  is
an  inscription  recording  a  dedication  to  Demeter,  a  relic  perhaps  of
the  sanctuary  of  Demeter  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  See  Leake,  Pelo-
ponnesiaca^    p.  289  ;  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  464 ;   Conze   e    Michaelis,


CH.  XXXVI  ASINE  299

in  Annali  delP  Instituto^  33  (1861),  p.   ii   5q.\   Bursian,  Geogr,    2,
p.  98  sgr, ;  Baedeker,^  p.  255  ;  Philippson,  Pelopcnnes^  P-  S^*

36.  4.  Asine.  Strabo  says  (viii.  p.  373)  that  Asine  was  near
Nauplia,  and  as  it  was  on  the  sea-coast  (cp.  Paus.  iv.  34.  12)  the  site
has  been  identified  with  the  ruins  situated  on  a  rocky  promontory  at
Port  ToloHy  about  5  miles  to  the  south-east  of  Nauplia.  "  The  walls,
partly  built  of  neatly-fitted  polygonal  blocks  and  partly  of  layers  of
trapezoids  uneven  in  level,  are  still  better  preserved  than  those  at
Tiryns."  Colossal  towers,  39  feet  broad,  and  projecting  about  23  feet,
give  the  walls  an  imposing  appearance.  The  terrace  of  the  fortress,
where  most  of  the  buildings  seem  to  have  stood,  is  1 2 1  feet  above  the
sea;  the  highest  point  is  164  feet.  On  the  terrace  may  be  seen  the
foundations  of  many  chambers,  built  of  unhewn  Cyclopean  stones.
There  is  a  large  pear-shaped  cistern  cut  in  the  rock,  also  three  smaller
cisterns.  Great  masses  of  potsherds  of  the  painted  prehistoric  kind
characteristic  of  Mycenae  and  Tiryns  are  lying  about,  also  very  many
querns  of  trachyte,  corn-bruisers,  etc,  also  rude  hammers  of  diorite  or
granite,  and  great  quantities  of  knives  and  arrowheads  of  extremely  primi-
tive form,  made  of  obsidian.  Together  with  these  is  to  be  found  black
and  red  lacquered  pottery  of  the  late  Greek  or  Roman  age,  pointing  to
a  later  settlement  In  any  case  the  place  must  have  been  occupied  in
the  late  Middle  Ages,  for  the  walls  and  towers  have  been  repaired  in  the
Venetian  period.

See  Leake,  Morea^  2.  p.  463  sq, ;  id, ,  Peloponnesicua^  p.  290  sqq, ;  Curtius,
Pelop,  2.  p.  46^  5q.\  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  61  ;  Schliemann,  Tiryns^  p.  49  sq.
On  the  destruction  of  Asine  b^  the  Argives  see  also  iiL  7.  4 ;  iv.  8.  3 ;  tv.  14.  3  ;
iv.  34.9.

Farther  to  the  east  than  Port  Tolon  there  is  a  small  maritime  plain
of  triangular  shape.  This  is  the  plain  of  Kandia^  as  it  is  now  called.
In  the  upper  comer  of  this  plain  is  an  ancient  citadel  with  walls  of
polygonal  masonry.  A  fine  spring  issues  fh>m  the  rock  at  the  foot  of
the  citadel.  A  mile  to  the  south-east,  between  two  lagoons,  rises  a  hill
on  which  are  the  fotmdation-walls  of  an  ancient  temple.  The  French
surveyors  inclined  to  identify  this  place  with  Asine  and  the  temple  with
the  temple  of  Pythaean  Apollo  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  But  the
situation  of  the  citadel  away  from  the  sea,  and  its  distance  from  Nauplia,
are  against  the  identification.  The  remains  are  perhaps  those  of
Eiones  or  Eion,  a  place  mentioned  by  Homer  (//.  ii.  561)  and
destroyed  by  the  Mycenaeans  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  373;  cp.  Diodorus,  iv.  37).

See  Boblaye,  RechercheSy  p.  51 ;  Leake,  Ptlop,  p.  292  sq,\  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.
p.  465  5qq,\  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  61.

Still  farther  to  the  east  is  the  broad  and  fertile  plain  of  Iri  on  the
coast  enclosed  by  bare  mountains.  It  is  watered  by  the  Bedeni  or  Iri
river,  the  northern  sources  of  which  are  not  fJEU*  from  the  town  of
Epidaurus.  The  fortress  which  commanded  this  district  was  on  the
>unnmit  of  a  mountain,  which  rises  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Bedeni^  six
geographical  miles  from  its  mouth.  See  Leake,  Pelop,  p.  291  sqq, ;
Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  465  ;  Philippson,  Peloponnes^  p.  52.


I


300  LERNA  BK.  II.  CORINTH

36.  6.  The  sea  at  Lema  etc.  Pausanias  now  leaves  the  eastern
side  of  the  Argolic  Gulf  and  resumes  his  description  of  the  western  side.
See  ii.  24.  5  j^.  It  would  have  seemed  more  natural  if  he  had  continued
his  route  from  Asine  to  Nauplia,  and  so  round  the  head  of  the  Argolic
Gulf  to  Lema.  Instead  of  which  he  crosses  over  from  Asine  to  Lena,
and  then  works  his  way  back  to  Nauplia.

36.  6.  the  Enudnns the  Phrizns.    On  the  Erasinus,  the

modem  Kefalari^  see  note  on  ii.  24.  6.  The  course  of  the  Phrixus,
according  to  Bursian  {Geogr,  2.  p.  65,  note  i),  cannot  now  be  traced,  since
the  water  of  the  KefcUari  is  now  conducted  in  several  channels  direct  to
the  sea.  Leake  thought  that  the  Phrixus  could  be  "  no  other  than  the
brook  which  issues  from  the  opening  between  Mounts  Lycone  and
Chaon,  and  which  is  so  much  smaller  than  the  Erasinus,  that  it  would
have  been  more  correct  to  have  said  that  it  fell  into  the  Erasinus,  than
the  latter  into  it ''  (Morea^  2.  p.  472).  But  this  identification  can  hardly
be  right,  else  Pausanias  going  from  Argos  to  Lema  would  have  crossed
the  Phrixus  before  the  Erasinus  instead  of  after  it.

36.  6.  in  the  same  style  as  those  in  Argos.    See  ii.  22.  5.

36.  7-  msrsteries in  hononr  of  Lemaean  Demeter.    The  fire

which  was  used  in  these  rites  used  to  be  fetched  from  the  temple  of
Pyronian  Artemis  on  Mt.  Crathis  in  Arcadia  (Paus.  viii.  15.  9).

36.  8.  a  mountain  which  they  call  Pontinns  etc.    An  hour  and  a.
half's  ride  to  the  south  of  Argos  we  reach  three  copious  sources  whicl*
form  a  stream  running  to  tum  the  northem  Myli  or  mills  of  Naupl*^
(Anapli)^  to  which  town  they  belong,  though  they  are  on  the  opposite
side  of  the  bay.     The  mills  are  so  called  to  distinguish  them  from  tJ*^
*  mills  of  Argos,'  which  are  turned  by  the  Erasinus  much  nearer  Arg^^
(see  note  on  ii.  24.  6).     The  springs  issue  from  the  foot  of  a  rocky  b^*
of  conical  form,  which,  stretching  eastward  till  it  nearly  touches  the  sC^
terminates  the  plain  of  Argos  in  this  comer.     "The  hill  and  strea-^
are  evidently  those  which  were  anciently  called  Pontinus ;  the  river  h^"^
only  a  course  of  a  few  hundred  yards  before  it  joins  the  sea.     The  ruir>
of  a  castle,  made  of  small  stones  and  mortar,  now  occupy  the  summit
the  hill,  and  consequently  stand  on  the  site  of  the  house  of  Hippomedo^
and  of  the  temple  of  Minerva  [Athena],  whose  epithet  Saitis  indicate-^
that  her  worship  was  introduced  here  from  Egypt,  and  thus  agrees  w\it^
the  reputed  foundation  of  the  temple  by  Danaus.     At  Sais  we  know  tha^
Neith,  the  Greek  Athene,  was  held  in  great  honour  (Herodotus,  ii.  175)'^
(Leake,  Morea,  2.  p.  472  s^.)    See  note  on  ix.  12.  2.    As  to  Pausanias's
statement  that  Mt  Pontinus  absorbs  the  rain  which  falls  on  it,  Dodwell
observes  that  the  hill  "  is  composed  of  a  calcareous  rock,  full  of  deep
fissures,  and  subterraneous  cavities.     The  falling  rain,  therefore,  after
being  absorbed,  is  conducted  by  the  springs  which  are  at  the  base  of  the
rock  to  the  Lemaean  pool "  (Tour,  2.  p.  228).     Cp.  Boblaye,  RecherchcSy
p.  47  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  368  sq. ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  67  ;  Baedeker,^
p.  275  ;  Philippson,  Peloponnes,  P-  7i«

37.  I.  An^niione.  This  is  identified  with  a  stream  which  issues
from  seven  or  eight  openings  under  the  rocks  at  the  foot  of  Mt.  Pontinus,
about  half  a  mile  to  the  south  of  the  river  Pontinus.     The  springs  are


r

\


CH.  XXXVII  LERNA  301

much  more  copious  than  those  of  the  Pontinus.     There  is  a  chapel  of
St.  John  near  the  springs.     See  Leake,  Morea^  2.  p.  473 ;  Curtius,
Pelop,  2.  p.  369 ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  67  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  275.     The
story  was  that  Amymone  was  one  of  the  fifty  daughters  of  Danaus,  whom
their  &ther  sent  out  to  look  for  water  after  Poseidon  in  his  anger  had
dried  up  the  waters  of  the  Argolic  plain  (see  ii.  15.  5).     In  her  search
for  water  Amymone  met  Poseidon,  who  showed  her  the  springs  at  Lema
or  produced  them  by  striking  his  trident  into  the  rock.    See  Apollodorus,
ii.  I.  4 ;  Hyginus,  Fab,  169 ;  Lucian,  Dialog,  Marin,  6.     The  meeting
of  Poseidon  with  Amymone  was  a  favourite  subject  in  art.     See  K.  O.
Miiller,  HaneUmch  der  Archdologie  der  Kunst^  §  356.  3  ;  De  Witte,  in
GazeUe  Archdologique^  7   (1881-1882),  p.  6  sqq.      The  daughters  of
Danaus,  who  in  hell  were  compelled  to  pour  water  continually  into  a
vessel  fiill  of  holes,  have  been  plausibly  explained  as  personifications  of
the  springs  which  flow  into  the  Argolic  plain,  but  dry  up  in  summer.    It
is  a  confirmation  of  this  view  that  Amymone,  who  gave  her  name  to  the
perennial  spring  at  Lema,  was  exempted  from  the  task  of  carrying  water
in  hell  (Lucian,  Lc)     The  wells  at  Argos  were  said  to  have  been  dis-
covered by  the  daughters  of  Danaus  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  371).     Cp.  Mure,
/aunudy  2.  p.  180  sq, ;  Preller,  Griech,  Mythol,^  2,  p.  45  sqq, ;  Stark,
ATiobe  und  die  Niobiden^  p.  347  ;  Roscher's  Lexikon^  s,v,  *  Danaiden.'

37.  I.  images  of  Demeter,  snmamed  Frosyinne,  and  of  Dionysus.
XTiere  is  an  inscription  containing  a  dedication  to  these  deities  which  is
said  to  have  been  discovered  in  this  neighbourhood,  at  the  north-west
comer  of  the  Alcyonian  lake  (see  §  5  of  this  chapter).  Hence  it  has
been  supposed  that  this  was  the  site  of  the  temple  of  Demeter.  See
Come  e  Michaelis,  in  Annali  deiP  Instituto^  33  (1861),  p.  20  sq.  The
inscription  is  also  given  in  Kaibel's  Epigrammata  Graeca^  No.  821.

37.  3.  these  stories  also  have  been  proved  not  to  be  by  Fhil-
ammon  etc.  The  way  in  which  Arrhiphon  proved  that  these  stories
could  not  be  by  Philammon  was  this.  Philammon  lived  in  Greece
l^efore  the  Dorian  invasion,  and  therefore  before  the  Doric  dialect  was
spoken  in  Greece.  But  the  stories  in  question  were  written  in  Doric
Therefore  they  could  not  have  been  written  by  Philanunon.  Pausanias
^ers  to  this  critical  discovery  with  admiration.  The  passage  has  been
entirely  misunderstood  by  Bachofen  (Das  Mutterrecht^  p.  395).

37.  4.  the  hydra.  For  some  ancient  representations  of  Hercules
slaying  tiie  hydra,  see  MonumenU  Ineditiy  1842,  tav.  xlvi. ;  Welcker,
Antike  DenkmaleTy  3.  pp.  257-267  ;  Baumeister's  DenkmcUery  p.  657  sq.
In  a  ditch  at  Lema,  W.  G.  Clark  saw  "two  large  water- snakes —
Umaean  hydras — marked  yellow  and  black.  The  creatures  abound
here  still"  {Peiap,  p.  98).

37.  4.  Pisander,  of  Oamirns.  Cp.  viii.  22.  4.  Pisander  wrote  a
poem  called  Heraclea  in  two  books  on  die  labours  of  Hercules.  Accord-
ing to  some  he  flourished  OL  33  (648-645  B.C.)  See  Suidas,  s,v,
UiuravSpoii  Epicorum  GrMcarum  fragmentay  ed.  Kinkel,  pp.  248-253.
37.  5.  the  spring  of  Amphiarans.  Boblaye,  followed  by  Prof.
Curtius,  identified  this  spring  with  a  copious  source  100  to  1 50  paces  south
ol  the  Alcyonian  lake  (see  next  note).     It  issues  from  a  hill  which  is


302  THE  ALCYONIAN  LAKE  BK.  II.  corinth

crowned  by  the  ruins  of  an  ancient  Greek  sanctuary.  See  Boblaye,
Recherckes^  p.  48 ;  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  369.  Leake  and  Lolling
(Baedeker),  however,  were  of  opinion  that  the  spring  of  Amphiarans
has  disappeared  owing  to  the  extension  of  the  Alcyonian  lake  (see  next
note).  See  Leake,  Morea^  2.  p.  475  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  275.  Nor  could
Ross  (Reisetiy  p.  151)  or  Conze  and  Michaelis  {Annalt  deW  InstUuto^
33  (1861),  p.  20)  discover  anything  to  correspond  to  the  spring  of
Amphiaraus.

37.  5.  the  Alcyonian  Lake.    Between  the  eastern  foot  of  Mount
Pontinus  and  the  sea  there  intervenes  a  narrow  stretch  of  level  coast-
land,  only  a  few  hundred  yards  in  width.     The  ground  is  swampy,
abounding  in  springs,  and  overgrown  with  rank  vegetation.     Along  the
shore  there  is  a  strip  of  firm  gravel,  but  between  this  and  the  foot  of  the
hills  the  traveller  is  reminded  by  ditches  fidl  of  stagnant  water  and  by
the  quaking  of  the  ground  under  his  tread  that  he  is  crossing  the
Lemaean  Marsh.     At  the  foot  of  the  hill  some  clear  and  copious  springs
rush  from  imder  the  conglomerate  rock,  and  close  by  is  a  still,  deep
lake,  or  rather  pool,  some  hundred  paces  in  circumference,  fringed  by  a
luxuriant  growth  of  reeds,  rushes,  yellow  irises,  and  aquatic  plants  of
many  sorts.     This  is  the  Alcyonian  Lake,  which  in  size  and  appearance
still  answers  closely  to  Pausanias's  description  of  it     The  peasants
have  assured  modem  travellers  that  the  pool  is  bottomless,  an  attempt
to  £aithom  it  with  a  ship's  lead  having  proved  fruitless.     The  ground
between  it  and  the  sea  would  be  an  impassable  morass,  were  it  not  that
the  pool  is  dammed  up  and  its  water  escapes  only  by  a  canal.     This
canal  serves  also  as  a  mill-stream,  turning  some  mills  which  stand  close
to  the  seaside  and  give  to  Lema  its  modem  name  of  Myli  ('  Mills  ')•
Lemaean  hydras — great  water-snakes  marked  yellow  and  black — stil^
abound  in  the  swamp.     At  the  beginning  of  the  century  a  large  bu^
neglected  garden,  full  of  orange-trees  and  other  fruit-trees,  extended
northward  from  the  Alcyonian  Lake  to  the  Pontinus  river,  reaching  fron^
the  road  to  the  sea-shore.     It  probably  occupied  part  of  the  site  of  the
Lemaean  grove  (see  §  i  of  this  chapter).

See  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  225  sqq, ;  Leake,  Morea^  2.  p.  473  sqq, ;  Boblaye,
Recherches,  p.  47  sq, ;  L.  Ross,  Reiseftf  p.  150  sq, ;  Mure, /oumal,  2.  p.  190  sqq. ;
Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  368  sqq, ;  W.  G.  Clark,  Peloponnesus,  pp.  96-98 ;  Conze  e
Michaelis,  in  Annalt  deW  Instituto,  33  ( 1 861),  p.  20 ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  66  sq, ;
Baedeker,'  p.  275 ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  234.

37.  5-  Through  this  lake Dionysus  went  to  hell  to  fetch

up  Semele.     Compare  ii.  31.  2.

37.  5.  Polymnns.  He  is  generally  called  Prosymnus,  as  by  Clement
of  Alexandria  {Protrept  ii.  34,  p.  30,  ed.  Potter),  Amobius  {Adversus
nationesy  v.  28),  and  a  writer  in  the  Mytkographi  Graeciy  ed.  Wester-
mann,  p.  368.

37.  6.  yearly  rites,  performed  by  night,  in  honour  of  Dionysus.
These  rites  are  apparently  described  by  Plutarch  {I sis  et  OsiriSy  35).
He  says  :  "  Many  of  the  Greeks  make  bull-shaped  images  of  Dionysus.
.  .  .  The  Argives  sumame  him  *  cow-bom,'  and  they  summon  him  from


CH-  xxxviii  NAUPLIA  303

the  water  by  the  blast  of  trumpets,  throwing  into  the  abyss  a  lamb  for
the  gate-keeper ;  the  trumpets  are  concealed  in  thyrsuses."     The  abyss
referred  to  by  Plutarch  is  probably  the  bottomless  Alcyonian  lake.     Cp.
the  scholiast  on  Pindar,  Olymp,  vii.  60.     As  Dionysus  was  supposed  to
have  descended  through  this  lake  to  hell,  it  was  natural  that  the  trumpet-
call  to  him  to  return  should  be  sounded  on  its  brink.     On  the  relation
of  Dionysus  to  water  and  the  sea,  cp.  De  Witte,  in  Gazette  Archdologique^
I  (1875),  ?•  5  ^Q9'\  O-  Crusius,  <Der  homerische  Dionysoshymnus,'
etc,   Philologusy   48   (1889),   pp.    193-228 ;    K.   Tiimpel,    Aiorvo-os
*AA,i€V9,  ib,  pp.  681-696 ;  and  see  Paus.  ix.  20.  4  note.

38.  I.  Temeninm.  From  Strabo  (viii.  p.  368)  we  learn  that
Temenium  was  26  Greek  furlongs  from  Argos ;  and  from  Pausanias
(§2)  that  it  was  about  50  furlongs  frt)m  Nauplia.  As  the  place  was  on  the
shore,  these  measurements  enable  us  to  fix  its  site.  The  coast,  how-
ever, is  here  so  marshy  that  it  is  generally  inaccessible.  But  in  the  dry
season,  especially  with  a  north  wind,  it  is  possible  to  ride  round  the
shore  from  Nauplia  to  My  It  (the  mills  of  Nauplia).  The  shore  is  flat
and  swampy,  but  at  the  point  nearest  to  Argos,  between  the  sanded-up
mouth  of  the  Inachus  and  the  reedy  estuary  of  the  Erasinus,  there  is  a
stretch  of  higher  and  firmer  ground.  Here  stood  Temenium.  On  the
shore  there  are  foundations,  blocks  of  masonry,  potsherds,  and  fragments
of  dies.  In  the  sea  may  be  observed  remains  of  the  mole,  consisting  of
large  blocks  of  stone.  See  Ross,  Reisen^  p.  149  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.
3^3 ;  cp.  Boblaye,  Recherches^  P*  5^ ;  Leake,  Morea^  2.  p.  476.  Strabo
(/.f.)  mentions  that  Temenus  was  buried  in  Temenium.

38,  2.  Nauplia.      Nauplia,  now  a  busy,  flourishing  seaport,  and

one  of  the  chief  towns  of  Greece,  occupies  the  northern  side  of  a  rocky

peninsula  which  juts  out  westward  into  the  Argolic  Gulf,  near  the  head

of  the  gulf  and  on  its  eastern  side.     The  northern  side  of  the  peninsula

is  flat,  and  here  the  narrow  and  not  too  savoury  streets  of  Nauplia  are

crowded  together.     Thus  the  town  looks  across  the  harbour  to  the

Aigolic  plain  and  has  no  sea-view.     The  southern  side  of  the  peninsula,

at  the  back  of  the  town,  is  a  long  and  lofty  rock  called  Itsh^Kalek^

^ch  seems  to  have  been  the  original  citadel  of  Nauplia ;  for  ancient

^^,  built  in  the  polygonal  style,  may  be  seen  in  places  serving  as

foundations  for  the  mediaeval  and  modem  fortifications.     Other  remains

of  antiquity  exist  in  the  shape  of  rock-cuttings,  staircases,  cisterns,  and

so  forth.     The  steep  southern  slope  of  the  rock  is  thickly  overgrown

^th  cactus.     On  the  northern  side  of  the  peninsula,  between  it  and  the

shore  of  the  Argolic  plain,  stretches  the  harbour  which  gives  Nauplia

its  commercial  importance.     Though  spacious,  it  is  very  shallow  ;  large

steamers  have  to  anchor  far  out.     An  isthmus  connects  the  peninsula

^th  the  mainland.     Immediately  on  the  landward,  that  is,  eastern  side

of  the  isthmus  towers  up  the  precipitous  rocky  height  oi  Palamidi  (705

feet),  one  of  the  strongest   fortresses  in  Greece.      The   fortifications

which  crown  its  summit  were  built  by  the  Venetians  and  Turks ;  they

DOW  serve  as  a  prison.     In  their  walls,  as  well  as  in  the  walls  of  Itsk-

Kaleh  are  built  many  Venetian  inscriptions,  some  of  them  bearing  the

lion  of  St.  Mark.     Three  sides  of  the  mighty  rock  are  precipitous,  but


304  NAUPLIA  bk.  II.  couirra

on  the  south-eastern  side  it  is  accessible,  being  joined  by  a  ridge  to  die
hills.  The  ascent  from  Nauplia  is  by  a  long  staircase  at  the  noitli-
western  comer  of  the  fortress  ;  it  begins  close  to  the  gate  of  the  town.
The  name  PcUamidi  is  derived  from  Palamedes,  the  son  of  Naaplim
(cp.  Strabo,  viii.  p.  368).  Palamedium  was  probably  the  ancient  name  of
the  fortress,  though  no  classical  writer  mentions  it.  The  prospect  froo
the  summit  over  the  gulf  and  plain  of  Argos,  with  the  background  of
mountains  encircling  the  plain,  is  very  fine.  Nor  is  the  view  frtnn  the
quay  of  Nauplia  across  the  bay  to  the  mountains  of  Argolis  one  to  be
easily  forgotten,  especially  if  seen  by  moonlight,  when  the  sea  is  calm,
the  stars  are  shining,  and  the  tall  yard-arms  of  the  lateen-rigged  oaft
stand  out  like  black  wings  against  the  sky,  now  blotting  out  and  nov
disclosing  a  star  as  the  boats  heave  on  the  gentle  swell

Prof.  Curtius  is  of  opinion  that  Palamedes,  to  whom  the  Greeb
ascribed  the  invention  of  writing,  arithmetic,  weights,  measures,  dice,
etc.  (Philostratus,  Herokoy  11),  was  a  personification  of  the  Phoenicians^
from  whom  he  believes  the  Greeks  to  have  derived  much  of  their
civilisation.  Hence  in  the  name  Palamidi  he  sees  the  trace  of  an
ancient  Phoenician  settlement  at  Nauplia.  Prehistoric  tombs  have
been  discovered  and  excavated  on  the  north-eastern  slope  of  PalamMs
but  there  seems  to  be  nothing  to  connect  them  with  the  Phoenicians.
See  above,  p.  142  sq.  Pausanias  believed  the  Nauplians  to  be  of
Egyptian  origin  (iv.  35.  2).

Strabo  says  (viii.  p.  369)  that  close  to  Nauplia  there  were  caverns
with  labyrinths  built  in  them,  and  that  these  caves  and  labyrinths  were
called  Cyclopia.  These  caverns  have  not  been  found  in  modem  times.
Boblaye,  indeed,  who  was  followed  by  Prof.  Curtius,  identified  them
with  some  grottoes  in  the  ravine  behind  Pronia,  the  eastern  suburb  of
Nauplia.  But  these  grottoes  appear  to  be  quite  shallow  and  to  have
no  passage  leading  into  the  interior  of  the  hill.

When  Cleomenes  I.  invaded  Argolis  from  the  south  at  the  head  of
a  Lacedaemonian  army,  and  the  omens  forbade  him  to  cross  the
Erasinus  river  (see  above,  p.  210  sq,),  he  sacrificed  a  bull  to  the  sea  and
transported  his  army  in  ships  across  the  gulf  to  Nauplia,  from  which
he  inarched  northwards  and  encountered  the  Argives  near  Tiryns
(Herodotus,  vi.  76  sq.)

See  Dodwell,  Tour,  2.  p.  246  sqq,  ;  Leake,  Morea,  2.  pp.  356-362 ;  Boblaye,
Recherchesj  p.  50;  Muie, /ourna/,  2.  p.  187  J£;  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  pp.  389-394;
Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  59  sq,  ;  Schliemann,  Tiryns^  p.  50  sqq,  ;  Baedeker,'  p.
255  sqq.  ;  Guide-JoannCy  2.  p.  211  sq,  \  Philippson,  PeloponneSj  p.  64.  Prof.
Curtius  8  paper  on  traces  of  Phoenician  settlements  in  Argolis,  especially  at
Nauplia,  was  printed  in  Rheinisches  Museum,  N.  F.  7  (1850),  pp.  455-460,  and
reprinted  in  the  author's  Gtsammelte  Abhandlungen,  i.  pp.  157-162.

38.  2.  a  spring  called  Oanathns.  There  seems  to  be  no  spring
in  Nauplia  at  the  present  day.  Water  is  brought  to  the  town  by  an
aqueduct  from  a  fine  source  in  one  of  the  rocky  heights  near  Tiryns
(Leake,  Morea,  2.  p.  360).  But  the  spring  in  question  has  been
identified  with  a  fantastically  ornamented  fountain  in  the  shady  garden
of  a  little  nunnery  called  Hagia  Mon^,  about  a  mile  and  a  half  east  of


I.  xxxviii  GENESIUM—APOBATHMI  305

le  suburb  of  Pronia,  The  way  to  the  nunnery  lies  through  vineyards
id  olive-groves.  The  water  of  the  fountain  is  derived  from  an  ancient
laft  in  the  neighbourhood.  See  Boblaye,  Recherches^  P-  5<^  >  Curtius,
'elop.  2.  p.  391  ;  Baedeker,*  p.  257.  With  the  story  which  Pausanias
tils  about  the  spring  we  may  compare  a  somewhat  similar  story  about
spring  in  Mesopotamia.  Hera  was  said  to  have  bathed  in  it  after
er  marriage  with  Zeus ;  hence  the  native  Syrians  fiibled  that  the  spot
as  ever  fragrant,  the  whole  air  being  filled  with  a  sweet  perfume,
'hile  shoals  of  tame  fish  gambolled  in  the  water  (Aelian,  JVaf.  An.  xii.
o).  The  Syrian  deities  whom  Aelian  here  calls  Hera  and  Zeus  were
robably  Atargatis  and  Bel  (W.  Robertson  Smith,  Religion  of  the
'emites^  p.  172).  In  Nauplia  itself  it  is  said  that  the  women  of  the
lace  are  handsome,  and  the  women  of  Argos  are  ugly ;  and  the  cause
f  the  difference  is  ascribed  to  the  difference  of  the  water  in  the  two
>wns.  Leake  thought  that  this  notion  was  derived  from  the  ancient
elief,  recorded  by  Pausanias,  that  Hera  bathed  in  the  spring  called
lanathus  every  year  {Morea^  2.  p.  360).

38.  4.  Gtonesium Apobathmi.     South  of  Lema  the  hills  retire

gain,  leaving  a  small  plain  between  them  and  the  sea.  The  plain  is
losed  on  the  south  by  Mt.  Zavitza,  Here  probably  were  Genesium
nd  Apobathmi.  Plutarch  {PyrrhuSy  32)  calls  the  place  at  which
)anaus  first  landed  Pyramia,  and  speaks  of  it  as  being  in  the  Thyrean
i strict.  But  it  may  have  been  the  same  with  Apobathmi.  A  narrow
alley,  watered  by  the  Kiveri  stream,  opens  into  this  little  plain  from
le  south-west.  Following  up  this  valley  for  a  distance  of  an  hour  and  a
alf  from  Lema  we  reach,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  stream,  the  ruins  of
n  ancient  town.  The  remains  are  of  some  extent,  but  are  much  over-
rown  with  shrubs,  especially  wild  olives.  Among  the  ruins  are  the
olygonal  foundations  of  a  building  about  40  feet  square.  The  place
ras  perhaps  the  ancient  Elaeus  ('place'  of  olives'),  to  which  a  road  led
-om  Lema  (Apollodoms,  ii.  5.  2  ;  cp.  Stephanus  Byz.  s,v,  'EAaiovs).
lie  soil  of  the  valley  is  well  adapted  to  the  cultivation  of  olives,  which
lay  have  given  the  place  its  name ;  and  the  sequestered  situation  of
[le  town,  in  a  narrow  valley  far  from  the  great  military  highways,  may
xplain  the  fact  that  it  is  never  mentioned  by  ancient  historians.

See  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  48  ;  Leake,  Moreay  2.  p.  476  sq,  ;  Ross,  Reisetij
p.  152-156;  Curtius,  Pehp*  2.  p.  371  sq, ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  67  sq,

38.  4.  From  here  we  pass  through  what  is  called  Anigraea  etc.
^ausanias  is  now  proceeding  on  the  way  to  Sparta.  From  the  point
'hich  he  has  reached,  namely  the  little  seaside  plain  of  Kiveri^  hemmed
1  by  the  hills,  three  ways  lead  to  Sparta.

(i)  One  way  leads  up  the  bed  of  the  Kiveri  to  the  south-west,
ast  the  ruins  of  Elaeus,  and  then  on  to  the  villages  of  Andritsena  (not
3  be  confounded  with  the  better  known  Andritsena  near  Olympia)  and
lolianoy  and  so  to  Tegea  and  Sparta.

(2)  The  second  way  strikes  south  from  the  ruins  of  Elaeus,  crosses
tie  Kiveri  river,  ascends  the  steep  side  of  Mt.  Zavitzoy  and  crosses
tie  ridge  at  a  height  of  about  3000  feet.     Here,  on  the  right  of  the

VOL.  Ill  X


306  THYRBA — ROUTE  TO  SPARTA        bk.  n.  coRiinH

path,  are  the  remains  of  an  ancient  watch-tower ;  it  is  round,  built  of
polygonal  masonry,  and  measures  25  feet  in  diameter.  It  probafalf
marked  the  boundary  between  Argos  and  Laconia  at  one  time  (for  ^
boundaries  shifted,  see  below).  The  path  now  descends  the  southen
side  of  Mt.  Zcevitsa.  Half-way  down  are  the  ruins  of  an  andeit
fortress.  Then  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  amid  luxuriant  g^ves  d
olives,  is  the  scattered  shepherd  village  of  Kalyvia  Doliamtika,  It
lies  above  the  river  Loukauy  the  ancient  Tanus.  Crossing  the  river  ic
reach  in  half  an  hour,  on  the  south  side  of  the  valley,  the  monastery  d
Loukou^  the  tall  cypresses  of  which  are  conspicuous  from  far.  Many
ancient  remains  have  been  found  here.  Behind  the  monastery  is  a
gorge,  down  which  flows  a  tributary  of  the  Tanus.  Following  this
gorge  to  the  south  and  crossing  a  broad  tableland  we  see  on  the  left,
at  the  end  of  the  gorge,  the  ancient  fortress  now  called  Helleniko  (see
below,  p.  308).  The  road  now  proceeds  westward  to  the  village  of
If  agios  Joannes  J  which  is  reached  in  about  seven  hours  from  MylL
From  Hagios  Joannes  the  road  goes  by  the  villages  of  Hagios  Pdm
and  Arachova  to  Sparta.

(3)  The  third  road  skirts  the  shore  for  some  distance.     Leaving
the  village  of  Kiveri  the  path  runs  along  the  slope  of  Mt  ZamtsAx
which  falls  steeply  to  the  sea  on  the  left.      This  is  the  road  called
Anigraea,  traversed  by  Pausanias.     It  is  still,  as  it  was  in  his  days,
a  very  rugged  bad  road.     Now  and  then  we  come  to  a  little  cove  with
a  beach  at  the  mouth  of  a  narrow  glen  which  cleaves  the  mountain-
side ;  elsewhere  the  sea  is  bordered  throughout  by  sheer  cliffs,  above
which  the  path  scrambles  up  hill  and  down  dale.     The  sides  of  the
mountains  are  chiefly  clothed  with  lentisks  and  wild  olives,  with  a
patch  of  corn-field  here  and  there.     In  about  two  hours  and  a  half  from
Kiveri  the  path  arrives  opposite  the  Anavolo,  the  ancient  Dine  (see
Paus.  viii.  7.  2).     It  is  an  abundant  source  of  fresh  water  rising  in  the
sea,  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  the  narrow  beach  under  the  cliffs.
The  body  of  fresh  water  appears  to  be  fully  50  feet  in  diameter.    In
calm  weather  it  may  be   seen  rising  with   such  force  as   to  form  a
convex  surface,  disturbing  the   sea  for  several   hundred  feet  arouni
It  is  clearly  the  exit  of  a  subterraneous  river  of  some  magnitude,  and
thus  corresponds  with  the  Dine  of  Pausanias.     After  clambering  along
the   Anigraea   for   nearly   three    hours,    we   find    that    the   mounta^
abruptly   ceases,    and    the    maritime    plain   of   Thyrea    stretches    out
before  us  to  the  south.       This  is  what    Pausanias    describes  as  ***
tract  of  country  on  the  left,  reaching  down   to  the  sea,  where  tre^^'
especially  olives,   thrive  well."      The  plain  is    about    5    miles    lo^^'
but   nowhere    more    than    half   that    in    breadth ;    its    soil    is    a   ri^
loam,    corn-fields  and  olive -groves  cover  its    surface.       The    plain
traversed  by  two  streams,  the  Loukou  (ancient  Tanus)  in  the  norC^
and  the   river  of  //agios  Andreas  in   the   south.      At  the   narrows ^
part  of  the  plain  there  is  a  large   salt-water  swamp  overgrown  wiC
reeds  ;  it  is  called  Moustos;  the  waters  of  the  swamp  are  discharge^
into  the  sea  by  a  small  river.     Thus  the  swamp  and  its  outlet  divide
the  plain  into  two  parts,  a  northern  and  a  southern.     From  the  northen^


CH.  XXXVIII  THYREA— ROUTE  TO  SPARTA  yyj

half  of  the  plain  a  long  rocky  hill  runs  out  into  the  sea ;  on  it  is  the
modem  village  of  Astros,  The  plain,  owing  to  swamps,  is  unhealthy,
and  the  people  have  withdrawn  to  the  terraces  above  it.  Here  are
their  kedyvias  or  winter  villages,  surrounded  by  comland,  vineyards,
and  oliveyards.  But  in  summer  the  people  retire  to  their  larger  villages
higher  up  among  the  hills.  Each  of  these  mountain  villages  {Hagios
Joannes^  McligoUy  Korakavouni^  and  Prastos)  has  its  separate  kalyvia
or  winter  village  (as  to  kalyvias  in  general,  see  especially  Philippson,
PeloponneSy  p.  586  j^.)

The  usual  road  from  Astros  to  Sparta  crosses  the  plain,  passes
through  the  Kalyvia  of  MeligoUy  then  westward  up  a  valley,  passing
on  the  right  the  ruins  called  Helleniko^  then  the  large  village  of  Meligou
on  the  left,  and  so  on  to  the  village  of  Hagios  Joannes,  The  time
from  Myli  to  Hagios  Joannes^  by  Astros^  is  eight  hours.  After  Hagios
Joannes  the  road  to  Sparta  is  the  same  as  in  route  2.

See  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  66  sqq,  ;  Leake,  Morea,  2.  p.  476  sqq,  ;  id,,
Pclopannesiaca^  p.  294  sqq,  ;  Ross,  Reisen^  p.  152  sqq,  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2,  p.
372  sqq, ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  68  sqq.  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  27 1  sqq, ;  Philippson,
Pelcfonnes,  p.  157  sqq.  ;  Guide J&antu^  2.  pp.  243-246.

We  have  still  to  try  to  trace  Pausanias's  route  from  the  time  when
he  entered  the  Thyrean  plain  till  he  reached  the  Laconian  frontier,  and
to  identify  the  places  he  mentions  by  the  way.  He  mentions  four  places  :
(i)  the  place  where  the  battle  took  place  between  the  Argive  and
Lacedaemonian  champions.  (2)  Athene.  (3)  Neris.  (4)  Eva.  Now
there  are  ancient  remains  at  various  places  in  the  district,  but  the
identification  of  any  of  them  with  the  places  mentioned  by  Pausanias  is
largely  a  matter  of  conjecture.     The  most  notable  of  these  remains  are  :

(i)  At  Astros^  on  the  landward  side  of  the  peninsula,  there  are  remains
of  a  very  rough  ancient  wall,  built  of  unhewn  blocks,  the  interstices  being
filled  up  with  smaller  stones.  This  wall  may  have  been  part  of  the  sea-
side fortress  which  the  Aeginetans,  settled  in  the  Thyrean  district,  were
erecting  in  424  B.C.,  when  they  were  interrupted  by  the  attack  of  an
Athenian  squadron  (Thucydides,  iv.  57).  See  Boblaye,  Recherches,
p.  68  ;  Leake,  Morea^  2.  p.  484  j^.  ;  Ross,  Reisen^  p.  162  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,
2.  p.  377  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  69  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  273  ;  Guide  Joanne^
2.  p.  244*

(2)  About  two  miles  to  the  south-west  of  Astros^  in  the  narrow
part  of  the  plain  below  the  monastery  of  the  Holy  Trinity  {Hagia
Triada\  there  are  some  traces  of  ancient  ruins.  They  used  to  be
more  extensive,  but  have  been  partly  obliterated  by  the  cultivation  of
the  land,  partly  carried  away  for  building.     See  Boblaye,  Recherches,

p.  68  ;  Ross,  Reisen^  p.  163  sq. ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  377  sq, ;  Bursian,
Geogr,  2.  p.  69  j^.

(3)  At  the  extreme  south-east  corner  of  the  Thyrean  plain,  on  a  low
rocky  hill  beside  the  sea,  there  are  the  remains  of  a  somewhat  extensive
fortress.  The  circuit  of  the  walls  is  a  walk  of  twenty  minutes.  They
are  9  feet  thick  and  were  provided  at  intervals  with  square  towers  which
projected  14  feet.     The  masonry  is  irregular,  verging  on  the  polygonal.


3o8  THYREA — ROUTE  TO  SPARTA        BK.  ii.  corinth

Within  the  circuit  of  the  walls  are  many  foundations,  the  remains
apparently  of  straight  streets.  The  highest  point  of  the  hill  formed  a
small  acropolis.  Here  there  is  a  chapel  of  St.  Andrew  {Hagios  Andnas\
which  gives  its  name  to  the  ruins.  See  Boblaye,  RechercAeSy  p.  68;
Leake,  MoreUy  2.  p.  497  sq, ;  Ross,  Retsen^  p.  164  sq,\  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.
p.  378 ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  70.

(4)  About  5  miles  from  Astros^  on  the  way  to  Hagios  Joannes  and
Sparta,  are  the  ruins  called  Helleniko  or  Tickio,  They  occupy  the
flat  summit  of  a  rocky  hill,  2090  ft.  high,  on  the  right  of  the  road.
The  walls  are  from  6  to  10  feet  thick,  and  are  provided,  with  a  great
many  towers,  some  round,  some  square.  The  stones  are  small,  and  the
masonry  irregular,  almost  polygonal  The  interior  consists  of  several
long  rocky  terraces,  on  which  fragments  of  house  walls  and  numeroas
cisterns  still  remain.  See  Boblaye,  RechercheSy  p.  66  sq,  ;  Leake,  Monoy
2.  p.  494  ;  Ross,  Reisen^  p.  171  sq.;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  380 ;  Bursian,
Geogr,  2.  p.  70 ;  Baedeker,^  p.  273  j^.  ;  Gtdde-Joanne^  2.  p.  245  sq,

(5)  At  and  near  the  monastery  of  Loukou  (see  above,  p.  306)  many
antiquities  have  been   found,   including  sculptures  and   reliefs   of  the
Roman  period,  capitals  of  columns  of  the  Corinthian  and  Ionic  orders,
fragments  of  mosaic  pavement,  round  sepulchral  tablets  with  inscriptions
of  a  very  late  date,  etc.    In  the  monastery  church  of  the  Transfiguration
{Hagia  Metamorphosis)  are  four  shafts  of  coliuims,  of  streaked  white
marble.    On  one  side  of  the  monastery  garden  there  are  some  remains  of
ancient  walls  formed  of  large  squared  stones  mixed  with  tiles  and  mortar.
The  chief  part  of  the  settlement  seems  to  have  lain  below  the  monastery,
on  the  gentle  slope  which  extends  from  it  to  the  river.     Here  among
the  bushes  which  cover  the  site  are  foundations  and  other  remains  of
masonry.     About  a  quarter  of  a  mile  to  the  north-east  of  the  monastery
lie  five  fragments  of  large  columns  of  grey  granite,  2  feet  5  J  inches  in
diameter,  also  two  Corinthian  capitals  of  limestone  or  coarse   white
marble.     Here,  too,  are   some   very   massive   foundations,  and   some
remains  of  a  semicircular  apse,  built,  like  all  other  remaining  walls  at
this  place,  of  large  squared  stones  joined  with  mortar  and  mixed  with
tiles.

See  Boblaye,  Reckerches,  p.  66  ;  Leake,  Morca^  2.  p.  486  sqq. ;  Ross
Reisetiy  p.  169  sq, ;  Curtius,  Peiop,  2,  p.  378  sqq, ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.
p.  70 ;  Baedeker,^  p.  272  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  244.

(6)  Lastly,  there  are  the  ruins  of  an  ancient  fortress,  already  mentioned
(p.  306),  half-way  down  the  southern  slope  of  Mt.  Zavitsa,  on  the  way
from  Elaeus  to  the  monastery  of  Loukou.  The  ruins  are  now  called
Tsorovos,  They  seem  to  be  very  ancient.  The  stones  are  almost
unhewn.  See  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  66 ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  378 ;
Baedeker,^  p.  271.

None  of  these  remains  can  be  identified  with  certainty  as  the  places
mentioned  by  Pausanias  and  other  ancient  writers.  Thyrea,  the  ancient
capital  of  the  district,  is  not  described  by  Pausanias,  though  he  mentions
it  repeatedly  (viii.  3.  3  ;  viii.  54.  4  ;  x.  9.  12).  It  has  been  conjecturally
identified  with  the  remains  at  the  Loukou  monastery  by  Leake  and  Ross  ;
with  the  Helleniko  by  Lolling  (Baedeker)  ;  with  the  ruins  of  H,  Andreas


I.  XXXVIII  THYREA — ROUTE  TO  SPARTA  309

f  Boblaye  and  Prof.  Curtius ;  and  with  the  remains  at  the  Holy  Trinity
Hagia  TrictcUi)  by  Kiepert.  Bursian  supposes  that  after  its  destruction
^  the  Athenians  in  424  B.C.  (Thucydides,  iv.  57)  the  town  was  never
ibuilt.  If  he  is  right,  the  remains  at  the  Loukou  monastery  can  hardly
ave  been  Thyrea,  since  the  settlement  there  appears  to  have  existed  to
late  date.  Thucydides  (/.r.)  mentions  that  Thyrea  was  10  furlongs
-om  the  sea,  a  distance  which  is  applicable  to  none  of  the  existing
lins,  unless  to  those  of  Hagia  Triada,

There  is  a  similar  divergence  of  opinion  as  to  the  other  places
Athene,  Neris,  Eva)  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  Athene  is  called  Anthene
•y  Thucydides  (v.  41)  and  Lysias  (in  Harpocration,  5,v,  'AvOrjvq) ;  it  is
ailed  Anthana  by  Stephanus  Byz.  (s,v,)  Scylax  (PeripluSy  46)  mentions
I  maritime  town  of  Laconia  called  Methana.  If  Methana  is  here  (as
3ail  conjectured)  a  mistake  for  Anthana,  then  the  Athene  of  Pausanias,
lie  Anthene  of  Thucydides  and  Lysias,  is  probably  to  be  identified  with
the  ruins  of  H.  Andreas^  which  are  the  only  considerable  ancient  remains
actually  existing  on  this  coast.  Accordingly  Bursian  and  Lolling
(Baedeker)  place  Athene  at  this  spot.  It  is  rather  against  this
identification  that  Pausanias,  immediately  after  reaching  the  Thyrean
plain,  seems  to  have  turned  inland  (§  5  "Going  up  inland"  etc.)
Boblaye  and  Leake  identify  Athene  with  Helleniko^  Ross  with  the
remains  at  H,  Triada.

Neris  is  identified  by  Ross  and  Bursian  with  Helleniko ;  by  Leake
and  Lolling  (Baedeker)  with  the  site  of  a  mediaeval  castle  called  Oraeo-
iastroj  *  the  beautiful  castle,'  picturesquely  situated  on  a  high  conical  hill
to  the  left  of  the  road  which  runs  from  //,  Joannes  to  H,  Petros.  (Cp.
Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  67.)  Statius  (Theb,  iv.  46  sq.)  says  that  Neris
stood  beside  a  torrent  (Charadros)  which  foamed  through  a  long  valley.
Ross  thinks  that  the  torrent  referred  to  may  be  the  stream  which  flows
down  from  the  foot  of  Helleniko  in  the  direction  of  Astros.

Eva,  with  its  sanctuary  of  Polemocrates,  is  identified  by  Bursian  and
LoUmg  (Baedeker)  with  the  remains  near  the  monastery  of  Loukou,
Ross  would  identify  it  with  the  ruins  half-way  down  the  southern  slope
ofMt.  Zavitza,

Prof  Curtius,  lastly,  conjectures  that  Athene,  Neris,  and  Eva  may
have  occupied  respectively  the  sites  of  the  modem  villages  of  MeligoUy
Hagios  JoanneSy  and  Hagios  Petros ;  but  he  seems  to  have  confused
the  valley  of  the  Andreas  river  with  the  totally  different  valley  of
Helleniko^  Meligou^  etc.

It  would  seem  that  the  identification  of  these  sites  can  only  be
«ttled  by  future  archaeological  discoveries,  especially  by  inscriptions.

38.  5.  a  place  where  a  battle  was  fought  etc.  See  note  on  ii.  20.
'.  According  to  Chaeroboscus  the  name  of  the  place  where  the  fight
ook  place  was  Par  (Bekker,  Anecdota  Graeca,  p.  1408).

38.  5.  assigned  it  to  the  Aeginetans.     See  ii.  29.  5  note.

38.  5.  they  recovered  it  by  the  award  of  an  arbitration.  After
lie  battle  of  Chaeronea,  Philip  of  Macedonia  restored  to  the  Argives  the
irritory  and  cities  of  which  they  had  been  deprived  by  the  Lacedae-
lonians  (Polybius,  xviii.  (xvii.)  14.  7).


3IO  BOUNDARY  OF  ARGOLIS  BK.  ii.  cou!nv

38.  7*  the  Lacedaemonian  boundary  meets  the  bonndaxies  of
Argolifl  and  Tegea.     The  modem  Hagios  Petros  is  a  thriving  village
on  Mount  Pamon  3000  feet  above  the  sea,  on  the  road  from  Astros  to
Sparta  (see  above,  p.  307).     It  lies  scattered  among  fields  and  trees  on
the  western  side  of  the  deep  valley  of  the  Tanus.    About  2  miles  beyond
the  village,  on  the  road  to  Arachova  and  Sparta,  we  cross  the  crest  of
a  ridge  which  forms  the  watershed  between  the  waters  flowing  to  the
Thyreatic  Gulf,  to  Tegea,  and  to  Sparta.     Ten  minutes  or  so  further  on,
to  the  left  as  we  begin  to  descend,  we  see  three  heaps  of  stones,  each
heap  about  15  feet  in  diameter,  the  three  heaps  forming  a  triangle.
On  these  csums  may  perhaps  have  stood  the  images  of  Hermes  whidi,
as  Pausanias  tells  us,  marked  the  boundaries  between  Argolis,  Laconia,
and  the  territory  of  Tegea.     The  Greeks  commonly  raised  cairns  in
honour  of  Hermes,  and  his  image  sometimes  stood  beside  a  cairn.    See
Babrius,  xlviii.  i  sq,  and  the  note  on  Pans.  viii.  13.  3.     It  is  tolerably
certain,  at  least,  that  Pausanias,  going  to  Sparta,  must  have  passed  this
way ;  for  Hagios  Petros  stands  at  the  point  where  the  chief  passes  over
Mount   Pamon   diverge  towards    Laconia  and  Arcadia.     The  three
cairns  are  now  called  by  the  natives  <  the  places  of  the  slain '  {Shm
Phoneuomenaus\  which  suggests  that  they  were  reared  on  the  site  of  a
murder  or  massacre.     But  this  murder  may  have  been,  as  Mr.  W.
Loring  says,  of  quite  recent  date,  and  in  that  case  the  cairns  could  have
no  connexion  wiUi  the  images  of  Hermes  seen  by  Pausanias.

See  Boblaye,  Rtcherches^  P>  67  ;  L.  Ross,  Reisen^f,  1^2  sqq, ;  Leake,  Fekpm-

nesiacay  p.  298 ;  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  262  ;  Journal  of  the  R,  Geographicid  SocUtym

(London),  27  (1857),  p.  44  (with  sketch);  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  72;  Baedeker,*

p.  274  ;  Guide-Jodnne^  2.  p.  246 ;  Philippson,  Peloponnes^  p.  100;  W.  Loring,  in

Journal  of  HelUnic  Studies^  15  (1895),  p.  55.


BOOK    THIRD


LACONIA

On  the  text  of  Pausanias  in  this  third  book  there  is  a  special  work  by
A.  Beinert,  Symdolae  quaedam  cut  genuinum  Laconicarum  Pausaniae
cmUixtum  resHtutndum  (Olsnae,  1842).  The  literary  sources  upon
which  Pausanias  may  have  drawn  in  writing  this  book  have  been
investigated  by  Mr.  W.  Immerwahr  {Die  Lakonika  des  Pausanias  auf
ihrt  Q^lien  uniersuchty  Berlin,  1889).  His  work  is  vitiated,  in  my
opinion,  by  the  folse  assumption  that  Pausanias  compiled  the  whole
book — the  topographical  as  well  as  the  historical  part  —  from  purely
literary  sources.  The  religion  and  local  worships  of  Laconia  are
examined  by  Mr.  S.  Wide  in  a  special  work  {Lakonische  Kulte^  Leipzig,

1893).

That  Pausanias  wrote  his  Laconia  before  writing  his  Messenia^  EliSy

uid  Arcadia^  is  proved  by  several  passages  in  these  later  books  (iv.  4.  4  ;

n,  4.  10 ;  viii.  27.  II).

1.  I.  tlie  imageB  of  Hermes.    See  ii.  38.  7  note.

1.  I.  the  first  king  who  reigned  in  this  country  was  Lelez  etc.
Hie  genealogy  of  Lelex's  house  is  given  more  fully  by  a  scholiast  on
Euripides  {Orestes,  626)  as  follows:  "The  first  who  reigned  over
Lacedaemon  was  Lelex,  after  whom  the  Leleges  were  named.  By
^erdice  he  had  the  following  children  :  Myles,  Polycaon,  Bomolochus  (?),
Hierapne.  Of  these  Myles  had  by  Cleocharea  two  sons,  Eurotas  and
Delias.  Eurotas,  coming  to  the  throne  after  the  flood,  converted  the
'tagnant  water  into  a  river,  and  named  it  the  Eurotas.  By  Cleta  he
^ad  a  daughter  Sparta,  whom  Lacedaemon,  son  of  Taygete,  took  to
^fe.  And  having  come  to  the  throne  Lacedaemon  named  the  Leleges
-^cedaemonians,  and  the  mountain  Taygetus,  and  he  founded  a  city
"Jid  named  it  Sparta."

1.  I.  Where  Polycaon  deiMurted  to  etc     See  iv.  i.  i  sqq.

1.  3.  Hyacinth's  tomb  is  at  Amyclae.     See  iii.  19.  3.

1.  4.  Tyndarens  fled  to  Pellana.  See  iii.  21.  2.  The  expulsion
^  Tyndareus  by  Hippocoon  is  mentioned  by  Pausanias  elsewhere  (ii.
S.  7).  Another  tradition  was  that  Tyndareus  fled  to  Thestius,  prince
1^  Pleuron  in  Aetolia,  whose  daughter  Leda  he  married  (Apollodorus,
\i*  10.  5;  Strabo,  x.  p.  461).  According  to  this  last  tradition  Icarius
'^ded  with  his  brother  Tyndareus  and  shared  his  banishmenL


3X2  HISTORY  OF  LACEDABMON        BK.  IIL  laconu

1.  4.  Thalamae  in  Messenia.  In  Pausanias's  time  Thalamae
belonged  to  Laconia,  but  the  Messenians  claimed  to  have  possessed  the
district  originally.  See  iii.  26.  1-3.  Theopompus  reckoned  Thalamae
to  Messenia  (Stephanus  Byz.,  s,v,  6aAa/xai).

1.  5.  two  royal  houses  arose.  Various  explanations  of  the  double
kingship  at  Sparta  have  been  put  forward.  Prof.  C.  Wachsmuth
supposes  that  the  double  kingship  arose  fh>m  a  compromise  between
the  Dorian  invaders  and  the  old  Achaean  inhabitants  of  the  land,  who
agreed  that  in  the  united  state  each  race  should  be  represented  by  a
king  of  co-ordinate  jurisdiction.  The  Agids,  according  to  him,  were
the  Achaean  kings ;  the  Eurypontids  were  the  Dorian  kings.  Far
proof  of  this  theory  he  relies  largely  upon  Polyaenus,  i.  10  (where  he
thinks  the  Eurysthids  are  the  same  as  the  Eurysthenids) ;  Herodotus;
v.  72  ;  and  topographical  reasons,  as  to  which  see  note  on  iii.  14. 2.
See  Wachsmuth*s  article,  *Der  histor.  Ursprung  d.  Doppelkonigtums
in  Sparta,'  Fleckeiseris  Jahrbikher^  14  (1868),  pp.  1-9.  Mr.  G.  Gilbert
is  also  of  opinion  that  the  two  royal  houses  of  Sparta  probably  arose
through  the  union  of  two  princely  houses  representing  two  different
conununities,  but  he  leaves  open  the  question  whether  both  these
communities  were  Dorian  or  not.  See  G.  Gilbert,  Studien  sur  cdtspar-
t anise  hen  Geschichte^  p.  57  sqq,j  td.y  Griechische  Staatsalterikiimerf
I.  p.  4  sqq.  See  also  Holm,  Gesch.  GriechenlandSy  i.  pp.  210,  224  Jf^-
(who  shows  the  weakness  of  some  of  Wachsmuth's  arguments) ;  Busolt,
Griech,  Geschichte^  i.  p.  546  sq,  Siam  may  be  quoted  as  another
country  which  has  had  and  still  has  a  double  kingship.  But  the
second  king,  who  is  generally  a  brother  or  near  relation  of  the  first
king,  ranks  distinctly  below  the  other.  See  Pallegoix,  Description^
Royaume  Thai  ou  Siam^  i.  p.  208  sq,

1.  6.  Aristodemos  himself  died  in  Delphi  before  the  DorianB
returned  to  Peloponnese.  According  to  Apollodorus  (ii.  8.  2)
Aristodemus  was  killed  by  a  thunderbolt  at  Naupactus  when  the  Dorian
expedition  was  about  to  embark  for  Peloponnese.  But  the  Lacedae-
monians themselves  affirmed  that  Aristodemus  had  led  the  Dorian  hos^
into  Laconia  (Herodotus,  vi.  52  ;  cp.  Xenophon,  Agesilaus^  viii.  7).

1.  7.  Theras.     The  following  account  of  the  colonisation  of  Tb-^^
by  Dorians  under  Theras  is  taken  from  Herodotus  (iv.  147  sq.)

1.  8.  the  island  Thera.  Thera  (now  Santorin)  has  in  rec^
years  attracted  the  attention  of  archaeologists  on  account  of  the  discov  '^
of  prehistoric  pottery  buried  under  the  ddbris  of  a  volcanic  erupti*
which  is  supposed  by  geologists  to  have  taken  place  about  2000
See  F.  Fouqud,  Santorin  et  ses  Eruptions  (Paris,  1879).  On
pottery  of  Thera  see  Dumont  et  Chaplain,  Les  ciramiqtus  de  la  Gres^
propre^  i.  p.  19-42.  On  the  other  antiquities  of  Thera  (rock-c  ^
tombs,  a  small  temple  in  almost  perfect  preservation  dedicated  to  th^
Goddess  Queen,  0^^  ^oo-tXctji,  etc.),  see  L.  Ross,  in  Annali  det^
InstitutOy  13  (1 841),  pp.  13-24;  Monumenti  ineditiy  1841,  tav.  xx^
xxxvi. ;  A.  Michaelis,  in  Annali  delV  Institute^  36  (1864),  PP-  254-263
Gazette  ArMologique^  1883,  pp.  220-223.  Cp.  note  on  viii.  33.  4  *th^
Sacred  Isle.'


:.  Ill  HISTORY  OF  LACEDAEMON  313

2.  I.  Pstreus Patrae.     Compare  vii.  6.  2  ;  vii.  18.  5.

2.  I.  Penthilns  had   conqnered  the  ii^Umd  of  Leshos.

:cording  to  Strabo  (xiii.  p.  582)  it  was  not  Penthilus  but  his  grandson
ras  who  conquered  Lesbos.  Tzetzes  {Sckol.  on  Lycophrotiy  1374)
presents  Gras,  the  conqueror  of  Lesbos,  as  a  descendant  of  Orestes,
iio  had  attempted  to  colonise  Lesbos  a  century  before.  On  the
listing  antiquities  of  Lesbos  see  A.  Conze,  Reise  auf  der  Insel  Lesbos
lannover,  1865);  and  the  exhaustive  work  of  R.  Koldeway,  Die
Uiken  Baureste  der  Insel  Lesbos  (Berlin,  1 890).

2.  3.  Herodotiis,  in  his  history  of  Oroesns,  says  etc.  See
[erodotus,  L  65.     As  to  Lycurgus  see  iii.  16.  6  note.

2.  4.  the  following  verses  of  Homer.    See  Od.  xix.  178  sq.

2.  5.  Aegys.     See  viii.  34.  5  note.

2.  5.  The  martial  deeds  performed  by  Oharillns  etc     See  iii.

.3.
2.  6.  Teledns  was  assassinated  by  some  Messenians.    See  iv.

.  2  sq,

2.  7.  the  civil  dissensions  that  raged  in  Crete.  We  get  a  vivid
glimpse  of  the  rancorous  feuds  which  raged  between  neighbour  towns  in
^retefrom  an  inscription  found  in  Crete  in  1853.  It  records  an  oath
aken  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Drerus.  Part  of  the  oath  runs
hus :  "I  swear  by  the  holy  fire  (Hestia)  in  the  town-hall,  by  Zeus  of
he  market-place,  by  the  Tallaean  Zeus  and  the  Delphinian  Apollo
ind  the  city-guarding  Athena  and  the  Pythian  (?)  Apollo  and  Latona
ind  Artemis  and  Ares  and  Aphrodite  and  Hermes  and  the  sun  and
Britomartis  and  Phoenix  and  Amphiona  and  the  earth  and  the  sky
uid  heroes  and  heroines  and  fountains  and  rivers  and  all  gods  and
goddesses,  that  I  will  never  be  friendly  to  the  people  of  Lyttus  by  any
Planner  of  means,  neither  by  night  nor  day,  and  that  I  will  do  all  the
unn  in  my  power  to  the  town  of  Lyttus."  See  Philologus^  9  (1853),
)p.  694-7 1  o ;  Sitzungsberichie  of  the  Vienna  Academy,  Philos.  histor.
^  30  (1859),  pp.  431-468  (with  a  facsimile).  On  the  bronze  tablets
ound  at  Gubbio  (Iguvium)  in  Umbria  there  is  some  very  spirited  cursing
Celled  at  a  neighbouring  town.  See  Biicheler^s  Umbrica^  pp.  23  sq,^
6  sq.y  98  sqq.y  114.  Inscriptions  have  furnished  many  examples  of
'irses,  public  and  private.     See  the  collection  made  by  C.  Wachsmuth,

'  Rheinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  18  (1863),  p.  559  sqq, ;  Roehl,  /.  G.  A,
o.  497  ;  Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr,  Graec.^  No.  480 ;  Roberts,  Greek
Pigraphy^  No.  142  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec.  No.  349,  line
t  sqq.y  Nos.  431,  432  ;  Newton,  Essays  on  art  and  archaeology^  pp.
)3  sqq.y  201  sqq.  ;  Kaibel,  Epigr,  Graeca^  No.  1136.

3.  3.  Honours  were  heaped  on  his  memory.  Compare  iii.  11.  10;
•  12.  3.

3.  5.  A  Lacedaemonian,  named  Lichas  etc.  The  following  story
the  finding  of  Orestes's  bones  is  from  Herodotus,  i.  67  sq,

3.  7.  The  bones  of  Theseus.  See  i.  17.  6;  Plutarch,  Theseus^  36;
'•,  Cimon^  8.

3.  8.  weapons  in  the  heroic  age  were  all  of  bronze.  This  is
^me  out  by  the  discovery  of  the  prehistoric  tombs  at  Mycenae  etc,  in


3X4  HISTORY  OF  LACEDAEMON        bk.  hi.  laconu

which  bronze  weapons  are  found,  but  iron  is  ahnost  totally  absent.     Bronze
continued  in  historical  times  to  be  used  in  religious  rites,  where  iron  would
have  been  deemed  profane.     For  example  it  was  used  in  purificatory  rites,
and  bronze  instruments  were  sounded  during  eclipses  of  the  moon.    See
Schol.  on  Theocritus,  ii.  36  ;  Stephani,  in  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersbmg)
for  1859,  p.  58  sq, ;  The  Golden  Bought  i.  p.  172  sqq,     Greek  smitH
perhaps  because  they  wrought  at  iron,  used  to  hang  up  some  ludicrous
symbol  before  their  forges,  in  order  to  avert  evil  influences  (Pollui,  vii
108).      Instruments  of  iron  are,  however,  mentioned  in  Homer.    See
above,  p.  155.

3.  8.  Homer's  lines  about  the  axe  of  Pisander  and  the  anowof
Meriones.     See  lUad^  xiii.  611  sqq,^  650.

3.  8.  the  sanctnary  of  Athena  at  Phaselis.  The  worship  of
Athena  at  Phaselis  is  attested  by  an  inscription  found  there,  which
records  the  honours  bestowed  by  the  council  and  people  of  Phaselis  on
a  certain  man  who  had  been  priest  of  the  goddess  (C  /.  G,  No.  4332).

3.  9.  Anaxandrides had  two  wives  etc.      See  Herodotus,

V.  39  sqq.

4.  I.  Oleomenes invaded  Argolis  etc     See  ii.  20.  8  note.

4.  2.  he  i^reed  Athens  etc.     See  Herodotus,  v.  64  sq, ;  Aristotle,

Constitution  of  Athens^  19.

4.  2.  to  abet  Isagoras  etc  See  vL  8.  6 ;  Herodotus,  v.  ^0  5qq\
Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens y  20.

4.  2.  the  Orgas,  or  sacred  land  of  the  Elensinian  goddesses.  An
inscription  discovered  a  few  years  ago  at  Eleusis  records  an  elaborate
method  of  consulting  the  Delphic  oracle  on  the  question  whether  the
sacred  land  should  be  farmed  out  or  left  untilled.  See  *E<l>r}iupis
dpxaiokoyucrjy  1 888,  pp.  26  sqq.,  113  sqq, ;  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  HelMquit

13  (1889),  PP-  433-467.

4.  2.  He  also  went  to  Aegina  etc     See  Herodotus,  vi.  50.

4.  2.  Darius.  A  letter  of  Darius  to  a  certain  Gadatas  has  latel/
been  discovered  engraved  on  stone.  The  inscription  was  found  in  the
house  of  a  peasant  near  the  road  from  Tralles  to  Magnesia  in  Asia
Minor.  In  this  letter,  which  is  in  Greek  (perhaps  translated  from
Persian),  Darius  praises  Gadatas  for  planting  in  lower  Asia  certain  fruit-
trees  which  he  had  transported  from  beyond  the  Euphrates.  On  the  other
hand  Gadatas  is  blamed  for  having  exacted  tribute  from  the  sacred
gardiners  of  Apollo  and  for  having  made  them  work  on  profane  land.
See  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  HelUniquey  13  (1889),  pp.  529-542.

4.  3.  Oleomenes  intrigued  to  have  Demaratus  deposed  etc     See
Herodotus,  vi.  61-66.

4.  5.  Oleomenes  afterwards  incurred  his  death  in  a  mad  fit.
See  Herodotus,  vi.  75.

4.  6.  at  Elens  the  hero  Frotesilans  avenged  himself  etc.     See
Herodotus,  ix.  11 6- 120.     Cp.  Paus.  i.  34.  2.

4.  9-  Pansaniaa'  treatment  of  the  Ooan  lady.    See  Herodotus,
ix.  76.

4.  10.  Pansanias  would  not  mutilate  the  dead  body  of  Mardonius
etc.     See  Herodotus,  ix«  78  ji^.


«.  VI  HISTORY  OF  LACEDAEMON  315

5.  I.  Psnsanias  repaired  to  Attica  etc.  See  Xenophon,  Hellenica^
.  4.  29  sqq, ;  Plutarch,  Lysander^  21.

5.  3.  Lysander  repaired  to  Phodbi  etc.  See  Xenophon,  Hellmica^
ii.  5.  17  sqq, ;  Plutarch,  Lysander^  28  x^^.

5.  6.  took  sanctoary  in  the  temple  etc.  The  practice  of  allowing
:o  certain  places  the  privileges  of  sanctuary  or  asylum  must  be  very
ancient,  as  it  exists  among  savages.  In  North  America  each  tribe  of
the  Creek  and  Cherokee  Indians  had  '<  either  a  house  or  town  of
refuge,  which  is  a  sure  asylum  to  protect  a  man-slayer,  or  the  unfortunate
laptive,  if  they  can  once  enter  into  it "  (Adair,  History  of  the  American
Indians^  p.  158).  Cp.  Schoolcraft,  Indian  Tribes^  5.  p.  279.  Sanctu-
uies  for  murderers  are  said  to  have  existed  also  among  the  Ojebways
Kohl,  Kitschi'Gamiy  2.  p.  67).  In  some  parts  of  New  Guinea  the
emple  or  dubu  is  a  sanctuary.  "Should  a  man  be  pursued  by  an
nemy,  and  take  refuge  in  the  dubu^  he  is  perfectly  safe  inside.  Any
•ne  smiting  another  inside  the  dubuYiouXd  have  his  arms  and  legs  shrivelled
p,  and  he  could  do  nothing  but  wish  to  die"  (Chalmers  and  Gill,
Vork  and  Adventure  in  New  Guinea^  p.  186).

5.  6.  the  case of  Leotychides.     See  iii.  7.  10.

5.  6.  the  case  of  Ohrysis.     See  ii.  17.  7.

5.  7-  the  guardianship  deyolved  npon  Aristodemns  etc.

ee  Xenophon,  Hellenica^  iv.  2.  9  sqq.

5.  8.  When  Agesipolis  grew  np  etc.     See  Xenophon,  Hellenica^

'.  7.  2-7.

5.  9.  He  next  directed  his  march  against  Olynthns  etc.  See
Cenophon,  Hellenica^  v.  3.  1%  sq.

6.  2.  Two  sons  were  bom  to  Cleomenes  etc.  Compare  i.  13.
\sq.

6.  4.  Arena.  This  king  departed  from  the  ancient  Spartan  custom
by  issuing  coins  bearing  his  own  name  (Gardner,  Tyfies  of  Greek  Coins^
p.  29).

6.  4-  Antigonns attacked  the  Athenians  etc.    Cp.  i.  i.  i ;

W<  3 ;  i-  30.  4.  This  war  was  called  the  Chremonidean  war.  The  dates
^  somewhat  uncertain,  but  it  seems  to  have  begun  in  268  or  267  B.a
(sec  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec.  No.  1 63,  note  i ),  and  to  have
ended  with  the  capture  of  Athens  in  263  B.c.  See  Thirlwall,  History  of
Greece^  8.  pp.  96-101  ;  Droysen,  Gesck,  d.  Hellenismtis^  3.  p.  225  sqq.
Two  Attic  inscriptions  relating  to  the  war  have  been  discovered.  See
C.  /.  A.  ii.  Nos.  332,  334 ;  Hicks,  Greek  Historical  Inscriptions^  Nos.
169,  170;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Graec.  Nos.  163,  164.  The
fomier  of  these  inscriptions  gives  the  text  of  a  decree  of  alliance  between
Ithens  and  Sparta,  Elis,  Tegea,  Mantinea,  etc.  The  decree  was  pro-
K)sed  by  Chremonides.

6.  7.  At  bitter  fend  with  Leonidas  was  lorsander  etc.  How
.eonidas  was  deposed  through  the  intrigues  of  Lysander  and  afterwards
stored  to  the  throne,  is  told  by  Plutarch  {AgiSy  11  sq.y  16).  One  of
le  devices  to  which  Lysander  resorted  to  gain  his  end  was  this.  Once
/^ery  nine  years  it  was  the  custom  of  the  Ephors  to  observe  the  sky  on
bright  moonless  night ;  and  if  during  their  vigil  they  saw  a  filling


3i6  HISTORY  OF  LACEDAEMON        bk.  III.  LAComi

star,  the  kings  were  supposed  to  have  been  guilty  of  impiety  and
were  deposed  until  an  oracle  came  from  Delphi  or  Olympia  oidering
them  to  be  restored.  Lysander  pretended  that  he  had  seen  a
falling  star,  and  on  the  strength  of  this  he  trumped  up  a  charge  against
Leonidas.

6.  9-  Oleoxnenes.     See  ii.  9.  1-3.

7.  I.  Sous.     See  Plutarch,  LycurguSy  2.

7.  3.  the  Lacedaemonians,  lured  on  by  a  deceitful  onude  etc
See  Herodotus,  i.  66  ;  and  note  on  Paus.  viii.  47.  2.  Two  lines  of  the
oracle  are  quoted  by  Pausanias  (viii.  i .  6).

7.  4*  the  Messenians  murdered  Teleclus.    See  iii.  2.  6.

7.  4*  the  Asinaeans were  soon  afterwards  punished  \il

the  Argives  etc.     See  ii.  36.  4  sq.

7.  5.  An  account  of  Theopompus will  be  given  etc.    See

iv.  4.  4 ;  iv.  7.  7  sqq, ;  iv.  8.  8  sq, ;  iv.  i  o.  3.

7.  5.  the  Lacedaemonians  fought  the  Argives  etc.     See  ii.  38.  $.

7.  7.  Aristo,  son  of  Agesides  etc.  With  this  and  the  following
section  compare  Herodotus,  vi.  61-67.

7.  9.  Leotychides  etc  With  this  and  the  next  section  compare
Herodotus,  vi.  71  sq.  Though  Herodotus  mentions  the  Lacedaemonian
expedition  under  Leotychides  into  Thessaly,  and  the  detection  of  the
king  (he  was  found  sitting  on  a  sleeve  full  of  the  ill-gotten  money),  he
makes  no  mention  of  the  Aleuads  in  the  affair  It  would  seem,  therefore,
that  Pausanias  had  access  to  some  other  source.

7.  II.  he  had  not  been  one  of  the  promoters  of  the  war.  See
Thucydides,  i.  80-85.

7.  II.  Sthenelaidas.     See  Thucydides,  i.  85-87.

8.  I.  Cynisca.  Cp.  Paus.  vi.  i.  6;  Xenophon,  Agestlaus^  ix.  6.
Another  woman  who  gained  an  Olympic  victory  is  mentioned  by
Pausanias  (iii.  17.  6).

8.  2.  tiiere  is  no  people  so  dead  to  poetry as  the  Spartans.

Compare  what  Milton  {Areopagitica)  says  of  the  Spartans.  "It  is  to
be  wondered  how  museless  and  unbookish  they  were,  minding  nought
but  the  feats  of  war.  These  needed  no  licensing  of  books  among  them,
for  they  disliked  all  but  their  own  laconic  apophthegms,  and  took  a
slight  occasion  to  chase  Archilochus  out  of  their  city,  perhaps  for  com-
posing in  a  higher  strain  than  their  own  soldiery  ballads  and  roundels
could  reach  to."

8.  2.  the  epigram npon  Oynisca.  This  very  prosaic  compo-
sition is  preserved  in  the  Greek  Anthology  (AnthoL  PalaL  xiii.  16),  and  a
fragment  of  it  has  been  found  engraved  on  a  pedestal  at  Olympia  (see
note  on  vi.  i.  6).

8.  2.  another  which  Simonides  wrote  for  Pausanias  etc.  The
epigram  is  given  by  Thucydides  (i.  132).  As  to  the  votive  tripod  on
which  the  epigram  was  engraved  see  x.  1 3.  9  note.

8.  3.  the  Lacedaemonians  had  various  grudges  against  the
Eleans  etc.  On  this  war  between  Sparta  and  Ells  (401-399  RC.)  see
Xenophon,  HelUnica^  iii.  2.  21-31 ;  Diodorus,  xiv.  17  and  34  ;  cp.  Paus.  v.
4.  8,  vii.  10.  2.     On  the  relation  of  Sparta  to  the  Olympian  sanctuary


CH.  IX  HISTORY  OF  LACEDAEMON  317

see  £.  Curtius,  '  Sparta  und  Olympia,'  Hermes^  14  (1879),  PP-  129-140
(reprinted  in  the  writer's  Gesammelte  Abhandlungefty  i.  219-232).

8.  5.  to  dismantle  the  walls  of  their  city.  It  appears  from
Xenophon  {HellemcOj  iii.  2.  27)  that  at  this  time  Elis  had  no  city-
walls.  Hence  Dindorf  {Praef,  p.  xxxvi.)  supposes  that  Pausanias  must
liave  been  misled  by  the  words  G/xuruSaios  .  .  .  (w€\(op7p'€  cr^as  re
rh  Tcixos  ^rcpicAetv  in  Xenophon,  HellenicOy  iii.  2.  30,  where  a-ffAas  is  a
mistake  of  the  copyists  for  ^cas.  Schubart  {Metkodologie^  p.  98  sqq.)
tries  to  defend  Pausanias,  but  not  very  successfully.  That  Elis  was
unwalled  is  confirmed  by  Strabo  (viii.  p.  358).

8.  6.  Decelea.  Decelea  stood  near  the  site  of  the  modem  Taioi^  about
14  miles  north  of  Athens,  in  a  pass  over  Mt.  Pames.  The  highroad
from  Athens  to  Oropus  and  Boeotia  goes  over  this  pass,  ascending  from
the  Athenian  plain  on  the  south  and  then  descending  in  a  series  of  zig-
zags (the  work  of  French  engineers)  on  the  north  in  the  direction  of  the
Euripus.  The  whole  neighbourhood  is  now  beautifully  wooded,  and  as
it  stands  high  the  air  is  often  cool  and  fresh  here,  when  it  is  hot  and
stifling  at  Athens.  The  king  has  his  summer  palace  among  these
delightful  woods ;  the  highroad  runs  through  its  shady  grounds  and
close  to  the  house.  In  413  B.C.  the  Lacedaemonians  under  King  Agis
fortified  and  garrisoned  Decelea,  and  used  it  for  more  than  eight  years
as  a  fortress  from  which  they  sallied  to  ravage  the  plain  below  as  far  as
the  walls  of  Athens  (Thucydides,  vii.  19,  27,  28  ;  Xenophon,  Hellenica^
il  3.  3).  The  spot  was  admirably  adapted  for  the  purpose ;  since  it  com-
manded on  the  one  side  the  whole  plain  of  Athens  and  on  the  other  side
the  highroad  to  Boeotia,  by  which  supplies  and  reinforcements  could  be
introduced  with  safety,  and  by  which  the  garrison,  if  obliged  to  evacuate
the  place,  could  always  retire  into  friendly  territory.  The  ruins  of  an
ancient  fortress,  now  called  Kastro^  on  a  rounded  summit  to  the  south  of
the  king's  palace  at  Tatoiy  may  be  those  of  the  Lacedaemonian  fortress.
See  Leake,  Athens^  2.  p.  18  sq,\  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  335  ;  P.  Kastro-
mcnos,  Die  Demen  von  Atiika^  p.  77  5qq,\  Baedeker,^  p.  124.  On
ancient  remains  foimd  at  Tatoi  see  A.  Milchhofer,  in  Mittheil,  d,  <xrch,
InsLinAthen  12  (1887),  p.  320  sqq.  Some  excavations  were  made
at  Decelea  in  1888.  See  AeXriW  ap\ai,o\oyiK6v^  1888,  p.  159  x^^.
For  an  important  inscription  found  at  Decelea,  relating  to  the  phra-
tries,  see  *E<^/t€pts  apxaioXoyiKriy  1888,  pp.  1-20;  American  Journal
of  Archaeology,  5  (1889),  pp.  1 35-1 53-

8.  7.  The  indiscretion was  repeated  by  Agis  in  reference

to  his  son  Leotychides  etc.  On  what  follows  see  Xenophon,  HellemcOy
iii.  3.  1-4  ;  Plutarch,  Agesilaus,  3  ;  /V/.,  Lysander,  22.  Alcibiades  was
suspected  of  being  the  father  of  Leotychides.

9.  I.  Agesilans resolved  to  cross  the  sea  to  Asia  etc

On  the  Asiatic  campaign  of  Agesilaus  see  Xenophon,  Hellenica,  iii.  4,
iv.  I ;  mT.,  Agesilaus,  i  ;  Plutarch,  Agesilaus,  7  sqq,

9.  3.  Agesilans  repaired  to  Anlis  to  sacrifice  etc.  See  Xenophon,
Hellenicc^  iii.  4.  3  sq,  ;  Plutarch,  Agesilaus,  6.

9.  5.  Sardes.  On  the  ruins  of  Sardes  see  Philolog,  u.  histor,
Abhandlungen  of  the  Berlin  Academy,  1872,  pp.  84-88  ;  R&uue  Archi-


3i8  HISTORY  OF  LACEDAEMON         bk.  iil  laconia

ologique^  N.  S.  32  (1876),  pp.  73-81  ;  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  i
(1880),  p.  86  sq. ;  Mittheil,  d,  arch,  Inst  in  Aihen^  1881,  pp.  150-153.

9.  9.  theLocriansof  Amphissa.  According  to  Xenophon  (^^/Zoiihi,
iii.  5.  3)  it  \vas  the  Opuntian  Locrians  who  occasioned  the  war  by
plundering  the  debateable  land.

9.  II.  Tlie  eyents  which  followed  etc.    See  iii.  5.  3  sq.

9.  13.  tka  saBetoary  of  Itonian  Athena.     See  ix.  34.  i  note.

^       10.  I.  the  festiral  of  Hyacinth.     This  festival  was  celebrated  in
spring.     See  G.  F.  Unger,  in  Philologus^  yj  (1877),  pp.  13-33.

10.  I.  That  battalion  was  attacked and  cut  to  pieces.

This  ^Eunous  exploit  of  Iphicrates  is  told  in  detail  by  Xenophon  {Hellenka^
iv.  5.  7-17).  The  news  was  brought  to  the  Spartan  king  by  a  hor»
man  who  came  riding  hard,  his  horse  covered  with  foam.  To  the
questions  *  What  tidings  ? '  put  by  bystanders  he  made  no  answer,  but
when  he  came  near  the  king  he  leaped  from  his  horse,  and  with  a  very
sad  face  told  him  that  the  battalion  was  destroyed.

10.  2.  Agesilaus  also  went  to  Aetolia  etc.  See  Xenophon,
Hellenica^  iv.  6.

10.  2.  Oalydon.  On  the  ruins  at  Calydon  (the  modem  Kurtaga)
see  D.  E.  Colnaghi,  in  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  ZJterature^
2nd  Series,  7  (1863),  pp.  543-547.  They  comprise  walls,  towers,  gates,
tombs,  etc.

10.  2.  he  sailed  to  Egsrpt  etc.     See  Plutarch,  Agesilaus^  36  sqq,

10.  5.  he  croeeed  to  Italy  etc.  Cp.  vi.  4.  9 ;  Athenaeus,  xii.
p.  536.

10.  5.  Of  AgiB I  have  spoken.     See  ii.  8.  5  ;  ii.  9.  i.

10.  6.  On  the  way  from  the  images  of  Hermes.  See  ii.  38.  7
note.  On  the  geography  of  Pausanias's  route  from  this  point  till  he
reached  Sparta,  there  is  a  monograph  by  Lieut.-General  A.  Jochmus  in
the  Journal  of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society  (London),  27  (1857),
pp.  34-53,  illustrated  by  two  useful  plans.

10.  6.  the  whole  country-side  is  clothed  with  oak-woods.  The
district  for  a  distance  of  some  hours  is  still  covered  with  a  thick  oak-
coppice  (Boblaye,  Recherches^  P-  72  ;  Jochmus,  op.  cit.  p.  43  sq,  ;  Ross,
Reisen^  p.  175  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  116).  Polybius  (xvi.  ^y)  mentions
Scotitas,  and  says  it  was  between  Tegea  and  Sparta.  In  spite  of
Pausanias  the  place  probably  got  its  name  of  Scotitas  ('the  dark  place')
from  the  shady  woods.  In  the  Highlands  of  Scotland  the  road  between
Loch  Arkaig  and  Loch  Lochy  is  overhung  with  trees  and  is  known  as
*  the  dark  mile.'

10.  6.  Zeus  Scotitas  etc.  It  has  been  conjectured  that  this  sanctuary
may  have  occupied  the  site  of  a  ruined  chapel  of  H.  Theodoros,  situated
on  the  flat  top  of  a  hill  near  the  village  of  Barbitsa^  which  lies  i  o  furlongs
(the  distance  mentioned  by  Pausanias)  to  the  left  of  the  road  to  Sparta
(Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  72  ;  Ross,  Reisen,  p.  174  ;  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.
p.  262  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  274).  Lieut-General  Jochmus,  however,  would
place  the  sanctuary  6  furlongs  to  the  left  (south-east)  of  the  bridge  of
the  village  of  Hagios  Petros.  Here  he  found  the  ruins  of  a  square
building,  which  he  identified  with  the  sanctuary  of  Zeus  Scotitas.     The


CH.  X  CARYAB  3x9

peasants  were  cutting  and  breaking  the  beautiful  blocks  of  limestone^  of
which  the  structure  was  composed,  in  order  to  use  them  for  building.
See  Joum.  R,  Geogr.  Sac,  27  (1857),  p.  44.  The  name  Scotitas  may
have  been  applied  to  Zeus  here  because  of  the  dark  oak  forest  in  which
his  sanctuary  stood  (see  the  preceding  note).  Prof.  S.  Wide,  however,
mterprets  Zeus  Scotitas  as  a  god  of  the  nether  world  {Lakamsche  Kulte^
p.  20).

10.  6.  a  trophy.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  three  heaps  of
stones,  which  are  still  called  <  the  place  of  the  slain '  (see  note  on  ii.  38.
7),  may  have  been  the  trophy  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  In  that  case
the  images  of  Hermes,  which  marked  the  Argive  and  Laconian  frontier,
would  have  to  be  looked  for  a  little  way  off,  perhaps  further  north.  See
Ross,  RHseriy  p.  174;  Jochmus,  in  Joum.  R.  Geogr,  Soc.  27  (1857),

p.  44.

10.  7.  Oaryae.     Caryae  was  situated  on  the  military  road  between
Sparta  and  Tegea,  close  to,  but  within,  the  Laconian  frontier  (Thucy-
dides,  v.  55  ;  Xenophon,  Hellenica^  vi.  5.  25  and  27  ;  Livy,  xxxiv.  26,
XXXV.  27).     The  site  of  Caryae  was  identified  by  Ross  and  others  with
some  supposed  ancient  ruins  situated  on  an  isolated  flat-topped  hill
two  miles  to  the  west  of  Arachava,     The  hill  rises  in  the  fork  between
two  streams,  which  imite  to  form  a  tributary  of  the  Kelepkina  river,  the
ancient  Oenus,  which  flows  from  Arachova  to  join  the  Eurotas.     But
repeated  observation  and  inquiry  convinced  Mr.  W.   Loring  that  no
ancient  remains  exist,  or  have  recently  existed,  near  the  spot  in  question.
It  is  now  occupied  by  a  group  of  cottages,  and  Mr.  Loring  suggests  that
the  disused  threshing-floors  of  the  village  may  easily  have  been  mistaken
for  traces  of  antiquity  by  the  French  surveyors,  who  have  here  marked
some  ancient  ruins  on  their  map.   Thus  it  would  seem  that  we  must  look
for  the  site  of  Caryae  elsewhere.    Mr.  Loring  believes  that  he  has  found  it
at  a  place  which  the  villagers  oi  Arachova  call  the  Analepsis  (*  Ascension').
It  is  a  small  rocky  hill  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Vourvaura  river,  about  a
mile  south-east  of  the  ruined  khan  of  Kryavrisi,     (This  khan,  now  in
nims,  is  situated  in  the  broad  bed  of  the  Saranta  Potamos^  and  used  to
be  well  known  to  travellers,  bound  for  Sparta,  as  the  mid-day  halting-
place  between  Tegea  and  Ar€u:hova,     Just  at  the  khan  the  route  to
Arachova  quits  the  bed  of  the  Saranta  Potamos,  which  it  has  followed
for  some  miles,  and  ascends  the  eastern  bank  of  the  river.     See  note  on
viiu  54.  I.)     The  little  hill  is  the  last  projection  westward  of  Mount
Tsauka^  being  separated  from  it  by  a  lower  neck  on  which  stands,  near
a  holly-oak,  a  ruined  chapel  once  dedicated,  no  doubt,  to  the  Ascension.
Among  the  hewn  blocks  of  this  chapel  is' one  with  the  mark  of  an  I
clamp,  which  is  obviously  ancient ;  and  on  the  southern  slope  of  the  hill
are  distinct  ruins  of  ancient  Greek  walls.    The  peasants  told  Mr.  Loring
that  these  ruins  had  been  formerly  much  more  abundant,  but  that  the
stones  had  been  used  for  building  wine-presses  etc.  in  the  neighbouring
fields.     On  the  top  of  the  hill  are  remains  of  a  large  enclosure,  some  60
feet  square,  built  of  stones,  mortar,  and  a  little  tile,  the  date  of  which  is
quite  uncertain  ;  but  some  sherds  of  the  pottery  which  covers  both  top
and  sides  of  the  hill  have  the  black  glaze  which  is  characteristic  of  Greek


320  SELLASIA  bk.  hi.  laconia

ware.  This,  then,  was  probably  the  site  of  Caryae.  It  appears  to  be
the  place  which  Lieut.-General  Jochmus  also  identified  as  Caryae  a  good
many  years  ago :  he  speaks  of  having  found  the  remains  of  a  tolerably
large  ancient  town  about  half  an  hour  to  the  west  of  the  village  of
VourvourOy  on  the  left  bank  of  the  river.

See  Boblaye,  Recherches,  p.  72  sq, ;  Ross,  Reisen,  p.  175 ;  Curtius,  Pehp,
2.  p.  261  sq, ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungtm,  p.  357 ;  Jochmus,  in  Journal  of  the  R,
Geographical  Society  (London),  27  (1857),  pp.  44  sq,^  49  sq. ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2,
p.  118  sq,;  Baedeker,'  p.  279;  W.  Loring,  in  JouriuU  of  Hellenic  Studies,  15

(1895).  P-  54  iqq-

As  to  the  dancing  of  the  Lacedaemonian  maidens  at  Caryae  in
honour  of  Artemis,  compare  iv.  16.  9.  The  dance  was  said  to  have
been  taught  the  Lacedaemonians  by  Castor  and  Pollux  (Lucian,  De
saltctUoney  10).  It  is  mentioned  by  Pollux  (iv.  104),  and  alluded  to  by
Statins  {Theb,  iv.  225)  and  the  grammarian  Diomede  (bk.  iii.  p.  486,
ed.  Keil).  Clearchus  presented  Tisaphemes  with  a  ring  on  which  were
engraved  figtu-es  of  the  maidens  dancing  at  Caryae  (Plutarch,  Artaxerxes,
18).  The  name  Caryae  means  <  walnut-trees,'  and  may  have  been  given
to  the  town  from  the  walnut-trees  which  grew  here.  Carya  (*  walnut-
tree  ')  was  said  to  have  been  a  daughter  of  Dion,  king  of  Laconia.  She
was  beloved  by  Dionysus,  who,  turned  her  into  a  walnut-tree.  Artemis
informed  the  Laconians  of  this  transformation  ;  hence  they  dedicated  a
temple  to  Artemis  Caryatis.  This  myth  is  told  by  Servius  (on  Virgil,
Eel.  viii.  30).     Cp.  S.  Wide,  Lakonische  Kulte^  pp.  102  sq,^  108.

Vitruvius  (i.  i.  5)  derives  the  architectural  term  Caryatids  (columns
carved  in  the  shape  of  women)  from  the  town  of  Caryae,  and  tells  a
foolish  story  to  justify  the  derivation.  Compare  Preller,  AusgewaklU
Aufsaize^  pp.  136-144.

10.  7.  Sellasia.     Pausanias  had  diverged  from  the  direct  road  to
Sparta  in  order  to  visit  Caryae,  which  lay  to  the  right.     The  point  at
which  he  diverged  from  the  straight  road  was  probably  at  or  near  the
site  of  the  modem  village  of  Arachava,     He  now  resumes  the  road  to
Sparta,  probably  at  the  point  from  which  he  diverged.     At  the  present
day  the  track  from  Arachova  to  Sparta  follows  the  bed  of  the  Kelcphim
river  (the  ancient  Oenus)  for  some  seven  or  eight  miles.     Path  there  is
none.     You  ride  in  the  stony  bed  of  the  river,  crossing  its  scanty  water
backwards  and  forwards  again  and  again.     The  scenery  is  picturesque,
the  river  winding  between  high  banks,  which  are  generally  green  with
shrubs  and  trees.      Indeed  many  trees  grow  in  the  very  bed  of  the
stream,  and  the  traveller  in  riding  has  sometimes  to  be  careful  not  to  be
knocked  off  by  their  boughs.     In  front  of  us,  as  the  valley  widens,  we
get  glimpses  of  the  high,  blue,  snowy  range  of  Taygetus.     The  point  a^.
which,  quitting  the  bed  of  the  stream,  we  ascend  its  western  bank,  aiv^
the  whole  magnificent  range  of  Taygetus  appears  in  full  view  across  \!ir^
valley  of  the  Eurotas,  was  the  scene  of  the  battle  of  Sellasia,      He  :^'
at  the  present  day  is  the  khan  of  Krevatas,    The  ruins  of  Sellasia  its^^-
are  distant  nearly  two  miles  to  the  south  of  the  khan.     They  occu;
the  summit  of  a  hill  over  2700  ft.  high  on  the  fight  bank  of  the  rivi
The  walls  and  towers  may  be  traced  through  nearly  their  whole  circi


I.  X  SELLASIA  321

hich  measures  about  1200  yards.  They  are  10  or  11  ft.  broad,  and
-e  built  of  small  irregular  blocks  of  schistose  limestone  {Kalkschiefer),
he  blocks  are  entirely  unhewn  and  are  merely  piled  together.  Most
r  the  towers  are  round,  but  some  are  square.  The  space  enclosed
y  the  circuit -wall  is  divided  into  two  by  a  cross -wall.  The  smaller
ad  higher  division,  at  the  northern  end  of  the  plateau,  may  have  been
le  acropolis.  The  circuit-wall  of  the  acropolis  and  the  cross-wall  are
dll  preserved  in  their  entire  extent,  though  only  to  a  small  height  above
le  ground.  From  the  ruins  there  is  a  commanding  view  over  the
alley  of  the  Eurotas  with  the  range  of  Taygetus  across  the  valley.

The  battle  of  Sellasia  between  the  Macedonians  under  Antigonus
nd  the  Lacedaemonians  under  Cleomenes  (221  B.C.)  was  fought  at  and
bout  the  khan  of  Krevatas^  2  miles  north  of  Sellasia.  The  small
Team  which  here  joins  the  KeUphina  (Oenus)  on  the  right  or  western
ank  is  the  ancient  Gorgilus ;  the  hill  which  rises  on  the  southern  side
"  the  Gorgilus  is  the  ancient  Mt.  Eva  (now  Mt  Tourlis) ;  the  hill
hich  rises  on  the  opposite  (left  or  eastern)  side  of  the  KeUphina  is  the
icient  Mt.  Olympus.  At  the  khan  of  KrevcUas  the  roads  from  Sparta
I  Tegea  and  Argos  bifiu-cate.  Cleomenes  occupied  both  Mt  Eva  and
[t.  Olympus  with  his  troops ;  and  thus  bestriding  (^  chevat)  the  road
>  Sparta,  which  ran  between  them,  he  was  prepared  to  meet  Antigonus,
a  very  strong  position,  by  whichever  of  the  two  roads  the  Macedonians
ight  advance.  In  195  B.C.  the  Romans,  advancing  against  Sparta,
hich  was  then  under  the  dominion  of  the  tyrant  Nabis,  pitched  their
imp  at  Sellasia  on  the  river  Oenus  (Livy,  xxxiv.  28).  Leake  is  com>
etely  wrong  in  placing  Sellasia  at  the  monastery  of  the  H,  Sarania
Forty  Saints')  some  8  miles,  in  a  direct  line,  to  the  south  of  the
lan  of  Krevatas,  By  posting  himself  there,  Cleomenes  would  not
ive  blocked  the  way  to  Sparta ;  on  the  contrary  he  would  have  left  it
>en,  and  the  enemy  might  have  marched  unopposed  into  Sparta  by  the
ghroad  from  the  north.  Leake's  mistake  is  due  to  his  having  crossed
t.  Pamon  to  Sparta  by  the  H.  Andreas  valley,  instead  of  by  the  road
tiich  goes  by  H,  Joannes  and  H,  Petros,  This  gave  a  twist  to  his
pography  of  this  part  of  Laconia,  which  he  only  partially  corrected  in
s  later  work,  Peloponnesiaca,

On  the  battle  of  Sellasia  see  especially  Polybius,  11.  65  sqq, ;  also  Plutarch,
^ilopoenien,  6 ;  id.^  CUamerus,  27  sq, ;  Paus.  iv.  29.  9,  vii.  7.  4,  viii.  49.  5  sq,
^  the  topography  of  Sellasia  and  the  battle-field  see  Boblaye,  Rccherchts^  p.  73

;  Ross,  Rtisen^  pp.  181 -190  (with  map) ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  pp.  259-261  ;
scher,  Erinnertingen,  pp.  360-370 ;  Bursian,  Ceogr,  2.  p.  1 16  sq,  ;  Baedeker,'
a8o ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  242 ;  W.  Loring,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  15
$9$),  pp.  58  sq,y  71  sqq, ;  and  especially  Lieut. -General  A.  Jochmus,  m  Journal
the  Royal  Geographical  Society  {ljOTidoTi)y  27  (1857),  pp.  34-53  (with  two  maps),
plan  of  the  fortress  of  Sellasia  is  given  by  Mr.  W.  Loring.  Leake's  views  are
'^en  in  his  Aforea,  2.  pp.  524-532,  and  Peloponnesiaca,  pp.  341-353.

A  little  beyond  the  khan  of  Krevatas  the  ancient  route  to  Sparta,
lich  Pausanias  is  now  following,  seems  to  have  diverged  from  the
'^cr,  passed  to  the  west  of  the  hill  of  Hagios  Konstantinos  and  dose  to
e  khan  of  Vourliay  and  so  descended  into  the  plain.  For  after  this
»int  the  bed  of  the  river  (the  Kelephina^  the  ancient  Oenus)  gradually

VOL.  Ill  Y


322  THORNAX  bk.  hi.  laconu

narrows  until  it  becomes  a  deep  and  difficult  ravine.  But  the  precise
spot  at  which  the  ancient  route  descended  into  the  plain  must  remais
doubtful  for  want  of  evidence.  See  W.  Loring,  va  Journal  of  HeUad
Studies^  15  (1895),  P-  59  ^9-

10.  8.  Thomaz,  where  there  is  an  image  of  Pythaean  ApoUc
Thomax  must  have  been  situated  to  the  north  of  Sparta,  somewher
between  that  city  and  Sellasia,  but  its  exact  site  has  not  yet  bee:
determined.  Stephanus  Byzantius  {s,v,  Gopvof )  calls  it  a  mountain  c
Laconia,  but  there  is  nothing  in  the  references  of  Pausanias  and  Herodota
(I  69)  to  show  that  it  was  a  mountain.  Perhaps  Stephanus  confused  i
with  Mount  Thomax  near  Hermion  (Paus.  ii.  36.  i).  Prof.  Curtius
however,  apparently  accepting  the  statement  of  Stephanus,  would  identif
Thomax  with  the  hill  of  Pavleika^  which  would  seem  to  be  the  hi]
between  the  Oenus  {Kelepkina  river)  and  the  Eurotas.  On  the  hill  c
PavletkOy  near  the  track  which  leads  to  Sparta  from  the  valley  of  th
Oenus,  the  French  surveyors  observed  what  they  took  to  be  the  remain
of  the  temple  of  Apollo.  These  remains  consist  of  the  square  marbl
foimdations  of  a  mined  chapel.  There  is  reason,  however,  to  believe  tha
the  sanctuary  of  Apollo  was  in  the  plain.  For  Xenophon,  describing  th
march  of  the  Theban  army  against  Sparta,  says  that  after  burning  aii«
sacking  Sellasia  they  reached  the  precinct  of  Apollo  in  the  plain,  and  tha
next  day,  fearing  to  cross  the  Eurotas  by  the  bridge,  they  mardied  dov:
the  left  bank  of  the  river,  burning  and  destroying  {Hellenica^  vi.  5.  27]
If  this  precinct  of  Apollo  mentioned  by  Xenophon  was,  as  it  is  natuis
to  suppose,  the  sanctuary  of  Apollo  at  Thomax,  then  Thomax  muf
have  been  in  the  level  valley  of  the  Eurotas,  on  the  left  bank  of  th
river,  a  little  higher  up  than  Sparta.  Hesychius  says  {s.v,  Oopva^)  tha
Thomax  was  a  sanctuary  of  Apollo  in  Laconia,  and  that  hence  Apoll
received  the  sumame  of  Thomacian.  In  the  reign  of  Croesus  th
Spartans  sent  to  Sardes  intending  to  buy  gold  with  which  to  gild  th
image  of  Apollo  at  Thomax,  but  Croesus  made  them  a  present  of  th
gold  (Herodotus,  i.  69).

See  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  74  sq. ;  Ross,  Reisetty  p.  190 ;  Leake,  Peloponmsiaa
p.  348  sq. ;  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  259 ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  117  ;  W.  Loring,  i
Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  15  (1895),  P*  60.

/ll.  I.  Sparta.  Ancient  Sparta  stood  upon  a  broad  stretch  of  &ii^^
evel  ground,  broken  by  a  few  low  eminences  (some  50  feet  high),  c
he  right  bank  of  the  Eurotas,  where  the  river  makes  a  bend  to  tl
south-east.  Thus  the  city  was  bounded  on  the  north  and  east  by  ^
wide  gravelly  bed  of  the  river.  Approaching  on  the  north  by  the  big
road  from  Tegea  you  cross  the  river  by  a  new  iron  bridge,  then  traversi
a  flat  strip  of  ground  ascend  through  a  hollow  between  two  of  the  ^
eminences  or  hills  which  were  included  within  the  circuit  of  anci'
Sparta.  Leaving  these  eminences  on  the  right  and  left  you  emerge
the  south  upon  a  level  stretch  of  comland,  with  olive-trees  thickly  dot
over  it  When  I  saw  it,  the  wheat  was  breast  high,  and  its  waV
surface,  dappled  with  the  shadows  of  multitudinous  olive-trees,  preser*
a  rich  and  park-like  aspect     This  plain  is  about  half  a  mile  across  ;


I.  X  SPARTA  323

le  south  it  is  terminated  by  the  low  broad-backed  ridge,  running  east
ad  west,  on  which  stands  the  town  of  New  Sparta.  This  new  town,
'hich  has  sprung  up  since  the  War  of  Independence,  is  charming.  The
treets,  crossing  each  other  at  right  angles,  are  broad  and  pleasant  Many
f  the  houses  are  surrounded  by  gardens,  and  the  soft  verdure  of  the
rees  peeping  over  the  low  walls  is  gratefiil  and  refreshing  to  the  eyes,
rhe  gardens  abound  with  orange-trees,  which,  when  laden  with  fruit,
emind  one  of  the  gardens  of  the  Hesperides.  In  spring  the  air,  even  in  the
treets,  is  heavy  with  rich  perfumes.  On  the  south  the  town  is  bounded
>y  the  river  of  Magoula^  which  here  flows  from  west  to  east,  to  fall  into
he  Eurotas  a  little  below  the  town,  opposite  the  steep  heights  of
rherapnae.  Westward  the  plain  extends  three  or  four  miles  to  the  foot
•f  the  magnificent  range  of  Taygetus,  which  rises  abruptly  with  steep
ocky  sides  to  the  height  of  nearly  8000  feet.  A  conspicuous  landmark
0  the  west,  viewed  from  Sparta,  is  the  sharp  conical  hill  of  Misira^
caning  upon,  but  still  sharply  defined  against,  the  Taygetus  range.
Though  really  a  mountain  over  2000  feet  high,  it  is  completely  dwarfed
>y  the  immense  wall  of  Taygetus  rising  at  its  back.  The  country
between  Sparta  and  Taygetus  offers  points  of  the  most  picturesque
eauty,  especially  if,  instead  of  following  the  highroad,  which  is
ither  tame,  you  strike  straight  across  for  Mistra  from  the  ruined
leatre  of  Old  Sparta.  It  was  a  bright  evening  in  spring  or  early  sunmier
owards  the  end  of  April,  but  summer  is  earlier  in  Greece  than  in
ngland),  when  I  took  this  walk,  and  the  impression  it  made  on  me  was
effaceable.  The  orange  groves,  the  gardens  fresh  and  green  on  all  sides,
en  taking  their  ease  in  the  warm  evening  air  at  a  picturesque  tavern
^der  a  great  spreading  tree,  children  playing  in  the  green  lanes,  a  group

Spartan  maidens  filling  their  pitchers  at  a  spring  that  gurgled  from
grey  time-worn  wall,  a  river  (the  Magould)  spanned  by  a  quaint  old
idge  and  winding  through  groves  of  orange-trees  spangled  with  golden
lit,  and  towering  above  all  the  stupendous  snow-clad  range  of  Taygetus

the  west,  with  the  sunset  sky  above  it — all  this  made  up  a  picture  or
ther  a  succession  of  pictures,  of  which  it  is  impossible  to  convey  in
>rds  the  effect.     It  was  a  dream  of  Arcadia,  the  Arcadia  of  poets,  and

painters  like  the  Poussins.
In  this  union  of  luxuriant  verdure  with  grand  mountain  scenery  the
^ey  of  Sparta  recalls  the  more  famed  but  not  more  beautiful  Granada
ith  its  green  spreading  Vega,  its  lilac-tinted  mountains  basking  under
e  bright  sky  of  Spain,  and  the  snowy  range  of  the  Sierra  Nevada  lying
ce  a  great  white  cloud  on  the  southern  horizon.  But  Taygetus  towers
>ove  the  spectator  at  Sparta  as  the  Sierra  Nevada  certainly  does  not
'^er  the  spectator  at  Granada.  To  see  it  on  a  bright  day  with  all  its
iperb  outline — its  sharp  peaks  and  grand  sweeping  curves — clearly
-fined  in  the  pellucid  air,  its  long  line  of  snowy  summits  glistering  in
e  sun,  and  the  deep  purple  shadows  brooding  on  its  lower  slopes,  is  a
§rht  not  to  be  forgotten.  A  recent  explorer  of  Greece  (Mr.  Philippson)
»^  observed  that  of  all  Greek  cities  Sparta  enjoys  the  most  beautiful
uation.  So  far  as  my  experience  goes,  the  observation  is  just
The  situation  of  Sparta  is  thus  described  by  Polybius  (v.  22)  :  "The


/


4


324  RUJNS  OF  SPARTA  BK.  III.  laconia

city  of  Sparta  is  roughly  circular  in  shape  and  lies  on  level  ground,
though  it  encloses  certain  uneven  and  hilly  places.     The  river  Eurotas
flows  past  it  on  the  east,  and  is  generally  unfordable  by  reason  of  its
size."     Elsewhere  (ix.  21)  Polybius  tells  us  that  the  circumference  of  the
city  was  48  Greek  furlongs  or  more  than  5  miles.     But  we  know  from
an  often  quoted  passage  of  Thucydides  (i.  10)  that  the  city  was  not  built
continuously  in  streets,  but  consisted  of  a  loose  aggregation  of  villages
in   the  ancient  Greek  fashion.     Thucydides  further  observes  that  the
city  contained  no  costly  sanctuaries  or  buildings,  and  that  if  it  were
deserted  and  nothing  but  the  foundations  left,  it  would  seem  incredible
that  such  a  city  should  ever  have  been  so  great  and  powerfiiL     Xenophon
contrasts  the  power  and  fame  of  Sparta  with  the  smallness  of  its  popula-
tion {Respub,  Laced,  i.  i ).     Throughout  the  period  of  its  greatest  power
Sparta  was  unfortified.     When  some  one  asked  Agesilaus  why  Sparta
was  unwalled,  he  pointed  to  the  citizens  in  arms  and  said,   <<  These
are  the  walls  of  Lacedaemon  "  (Plutarch,  Apophthegm.  Lacon.^  Ages,  29).
The  city  was  first  fortified  hastily  with  a  ditch  and  palisade  on  the  invasion
of  Demetrius  Poliorcetes  and  afterwards  of  Pyrrhus  (Pans.  i.  13.  6  ;  vii.  8.
5 ).    In  describing  the  invasion  of  Laconia  by  the  Macedonians  under  King
Philip,  the  historian  Polybius  makes  mention  of  the  walls  and  gates  of  Sparta
(Polybius,  v.  22  sq.)     The  fortifications  were  greatly  strengthened  by  the
tyrant  Nabis  (Paus.  vii.  8.  5) ;  they  included  a  new  ditch  and  a  rampart
(Livy,  xxxiv.  27),  and  two  gates  at  least,  one  leading  to  Pharae,  the
other  to  Barbosthenes  (Livy,  xxxv.  30).     These  fortifications  were  not,
however,  completed  when  the  Romans  under  Quinctius  attacked  Sparta
in  195  B.C.  (Livy,  xxxiv.   38).     After  the  death  of  Nabis  the  walls  of
Sparta  were  demolished  by  the  Achaeans  (Paus.  vii.  8.  5  ;  Livy,  xxxviii-
34,  xxxix.  37),  but  restored  by  order  of  Appius,  the  Roman   legate
(Paus.  vii.  9.  5).

The  ancient  remains  at  Sparta  are  extremely  scanty,  (i)  At  the
south-west  comer  of  the  largest  of  the  eminences  or  low  hills,  at  the
northern  end  of  the  plain,  are  the  remains  of  a  theatre.  The  site  is
well  marked  by  the  vast  semicircle  which  has  been  cut  out  of  the  hill
to  make  the  theatre.  Some  stones  of  the  back  upper  semicircle  are
visible  on  the  brow  of  the  hill,  and  some  of  the  retaining-wall  can  be
seen  a  little  lower  down.  But  the  theatre  has  been  used  as  a  quarry
by  the  people  of  the  neighbourhood  and  very  little  of  it  is  now  left.
Leake  (Morea^  2.  p.  1 5  5  J^.)  estimated  the  breadth  of  each  wing  at  about
115  feet,  and  the  total  diameter  at  450  feet.  See  note  on  14.  i.  Th^
theatre  is  the  only  portion  of  ancient  Sparta  which  can  be  identified
with  certainty.

(2)  The  structure  popularly  known  as  the  tomb  of  Leonidas.  1 1
stands  just  outside  the  town  of  New  Sparta,  on  its  north  side,  on  yoiLx-
right  as  you  enter  the  town  by  the  road  leading  from  the  northern  hills
of  Old  Sparta,  The  building  is  a  quadrangle.  Along  the  lowest:
layer  of  the  foundation  it  measures  12.50  metres  in  length  by  83^^
metres  in  breadth.  The  walls  are  still  standing  to  a  height  of  3.^^
metres  in  one  place.  The  stones  of  which  the  little  building  ^^
constructed  are  of  enormous  size.     One  of  them  is  4.75  metres  lot^S*


RUINS  OF  SPARTA  325

letre  thick,  and  0.95  metre  high.  On  one  side  of  the  building  the
course  consists  of  only  three  blocks.  The  floor,  composed  of
slocks,  is  also  preserved.  The  eastern  end  of  the  building  is
I  off  by  a  cross-wall,  through  which  there  are  two  doorways  into
rger  western  chamber.  This  western  chamber  is  6.90  metres
n  the  inside ;  the  smaller  eastern  compartment  is  3. 1 5  metres

Prof.  Waldstein,  who  made  some  excavations  and  measurements
I  1892,  considers  that  the  building  was  a  temple  in  antis.  But
t  much  whether  he  is  right.  The  appearance  and  arrangement
building  did  not  seem  to  me  to  be  those  of  a  temple.  The  huge
the  blocks  would  be  very  unusual  for  so  small  a  temple.
e  L.  Ross,  Wanderungen^  2.  p.  1 5  j<7. ;  W.  G.  Clark,  Pelo-
usy  p.  163  sq,\  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  224;  Baedeker,^  p.  284;
/aldstein,  in  Thirteenth  Annual  Report  of  the  Archaeological
ie  of  America  (1891-92),  p.  71  sq.

To  the  north  of  Old  Sparta,  on  the  slope  toward  the  Eurotas,

observed  "a  circus,  the  smallest  perhaps  in  existence,  being
^'enty-three  yards  in  diameter  within.  .  .  .  The  wall  of  the  circus
een  feet  thick,  and  was  supported  by  large  buttresses  on  the
:  at  small  distances  from  one  another.  .  .  .  The  entrance  to  the
was  on  the  side  towards  the  river"  {Morea^  2.  p.  151).     I  failed

this  structure.     It  seems  to  have  totally  disappeared  (Baedeker,^

).
On  a  small  terrace  or  platform  towards  the  south-eastern  comer

theatre-hill   I  observed  a  number  of  remains  of  small  columns.

ace  is  on  your  right  as  you  emerge  from  the  hollow  between  the

m   eminences  or  hills  on  the  way  from  the  Eurotas  bridge  to

parta.

To  the  north  of  Old  Sparta  there  are  remains  of  an  ancient
over  the  Eurotas.  This  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  bridge
1,  which  formed  one  of  the  two  extreme  limits  within  which  the
assemblies  of  Sparta  had  necessarily  to  be  held.  See  Plutarch,
T/j,  6 ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  222  sq,  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^
;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  120;  Baedeker,^  p.  285.

There  are  very  considerable  remains  of  fortification  -  walls
^  along  the  northern  edge  of  the  theatre-hill.  They  may  also
ed  on  the  other  hill  or  eminence  inmiediately  to  the  east,  on  the
ide  of  the  road  which  runs  through  the  hollow  between  the  hills,
ppear  to  be  mediaeval.  Some  pieces,  however,  may  be  earlier,
ake,  Moreay  2.  p.  152  ;  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  221  ;  W.  G.  Clark,
p.  170;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  122;  V\s>Q};xtx^  Erinnerun^n^  p.

Lastly,  the  remains  of  a  large  round  building  were  discovered
cavated  by  Prof.  Waldstein  in  1892  and  1893.    They  are  situated

south-east  corner  of  the  theatre-hill,  on  the  right  of  the  direct

hich  runs  from  the  bridge  over  the  Eurotas  to  the  new  town  of

At  this  point  I  observed  in  1890  a  good  many  remains  of

columns,  which  may  have  belonged  to  the  round  building  in

>n  (see  above.  No.  4).     Before  the  excavations  began  the  site


326  RUINS  OF  SPARTA  BK.  in.  uuxmu

presented  the  appearance  of  a  circular  flat-topped  mound  of  earth  about
44  metres  (48  yards)  in  diameter  at  the  base,  lying  on  the  gentle  slope
of  the  ridge,  with  the  summit  of  which  the  upper  surface  of  the  moood
was  continuous  at  the  north-west     The  sides  of  the  mound  rise  steq)fy.
Its  summit  is  highest  above  the  ridge  on  the  south-west,  where  its
height  is  about  20  feet     The  excavations  proved  that  this  mound  was
enclosed  by  a  circular  retaining-wall  of  early  Greek  masonry.     Of  this
wall  the  substantial  part  is  built  of  unwrought  stones  piled  one  upon  tbe
other  and  fitted  together  without  the  use  of  clamps  or  mortar.    Tbe
thickness  of  this  rough  wall  varies  from  2  ft.  7  in.  to  3  ft.  3  in.    On
its  outer  side  this  rough  wall  was  cased  with  a  facing  of  breccia,  which
has  been  entirely  destroyed   in  its  upper  part       Enough,  however,
remains  of  the  lower  courses  of  this  casing  to  give  a  fair  idea  of  what
it  originally  was.     It  consisted  of  the  usual  Greek  basement  of  three
steps,  upon  which  rested  a  vertical  wall  of  about  16  inches  thick  and
of  unknown   height      Where  this  vertical  wall   is  best  preserved  it
consists  of  three  courses.      The  lowest  course  consists  of  a  row  d
uprights,  each  block  about  1 6  inches  thick  and  4  ft.  3  in.  high :  the
second  course  is  a  band  of  unpolished  red  marble  about  i  foot  high :
the  third  course  is  another  row  of  uprights,  about  3  feet  high  and  i7
inches  thick.     This  wall  or  casing  of  breccia,  together  with  the  thre«
steps  of  the  basement,  rests  on  a  foimdation  of  rough  stones  piled  00^
upon  the  other.     Neither  the  rough  retaining-wall  nor  its  outer  £u3i^E
of  breccia  is  preserved  round  the  whole  circumference  of  the  mouii<)-
The  rough  inner  wall  is  standing  for  about  68  metres  (74  yards),  o^
not  much  more  than  half  the  circumference  of  the  circle.     The  heigl*^
of  the  preserved  part  varies  from  i  ft  8  in.  to  6  ft  7  in.  above  the  tap
step  of  the  basement.     The  steps  of  the  basement  are  preserved  fo^
about  62  yards.     Of  the  breccia  casing,  which  rested  on  the  steps,  n<^*
much  is  left — only  ten  blocks  of  the  first  course,  two  of  the  second,  aa^
one  of  the  third.

The  diameter  of  the  circular  platform  enclosed  by  the  retaining-wa.  ^
is  43.3  metres  (1.41  feet),  measured  on  the  outermost  (lowest)  partem*
the  wall.  Its  summit  is  the  native  rock,  which  has  been  weathere^^
into  irregular  cavities.  Near  the  centre  of  the  platform,  however,
area  had  been  artificially  levelled  and  smoothed  for  the  reception  of
large  basis,  part  of  which  was  found.  The  basis  probably  supported
statue  or  a  group  of  statues.  Near  it  was  foimd  the  thumb  of
colossal  marble  statue,  probably  holding  a  sceptre ;  it  is  of  the  Romaic^
or  late  Greek  period.  In  the  centre  of  the  circle  a  round  well-like  holer
about  3  feet  wide  and  20  inches  deep,  is  cut  perpendicularly  in  th
rock.  In  the  bottom  of  this  hole  is  a  second  hole  about  20  inche:^
deep  and  16  inches  wide.

Of  the  edifice  which  stood  on  the  circular  platform  only  twenty-tw^^
more  or  less  scattered  blocks  are  in  their  original  positions.  Thes  ^
blocks  are  nearly  rectangular  in  shape  and  are  of  a  very  soft  whit^  ^
stone.  The  vertical  faces  of  most  of  them  are  left  rough,  but  their  top^
are  carefully  smoothed  and  horizontal.  In  most  cases  the  native  xoc^
has  been  cut  away  to  form  a  solid  bed  for  the  blocks.     The  exta^-^


t

'1


CH,  X  RUINS  OF  SPARTA  327

blocks  are  all  arranged  nearly  in  concentric  circles  round  a  point  which
comes  very  near  the  centre  of  the  whole  platform.     All  of  them,  how-
ever, with  a  single  exception,  lie  north  of  a  line  drawn  east  and  west
through  the  centre  of  the  circle.     But  this  does  not  prove  that  none
formerly  existed  south  of  this  line ;  they  may  have  formed  a  complete
circle,  or  rather  several  concentric  circles.     Most  of  these  blocks  have
DO  special  architectural  feature,  and  their  smoothed  upper  faces  suggest
that  they  served  as  supports  for  the  flags  of  a  pavement.     But  on  the
upper  faces  of  two  of  the  blocks  there  is  a  circular  surface  .42  metre
( I  ft.  4  in.)  in  diameter,  slightly  raised  above  the  rest  of  the  surface  of
the  stone.     And  within  two  yards  of  these  blocks  were  found  two  small
Doric  columns  of  white  marble,  each  .39  metre  in  diameter  at  the  base
and  about  1.40  metre  in  height.     The  diameter  of  the  columns  is  thus
very  nearly  that   of  the   circular   surfaces   on   the   blocks,  and  it  is
probable  that  the  columns  originally  stood  on  them.     Thus  it  would
seem    that    the    circular    platform   supported   a   circular    colonnade,
probably  paved  with  marble,  with  a  statue  or  group  of  statuary  standing
I     on  a  pedestal  in  the  centre.     To  this  statue  or  group  of  statuary  the
colossal  marble  thumb,  mentioned  above,  probably  belonged.      Prof.
Waldstein  would  identify  the  edifice  with  the  round  building  mentioned
by  Pausanias   (iii.    12.    11),    which   contained    images   of   Zeus   and
Aphrodite  and  was  said  to  have  been  built  by  Epimenides.     He  thinks
that  the  style  of  masonry  of  the  enclosing  wall,  with   its  facing  of
breccia,  agrees  with  the  date   of  Epimenides   (about  600  B.C.)      A
ooustrophedon  inscription,  found  on  the  site,  may  belong  to  this  early
period     But  the  building  evidently  underwent  many  changes  during
tbe  Roman  and   Christian  periods.      Traces  of  repairs  in  the  early
building  itself,  and  most  of  the  additions  to  it,  are  of  Roman  date.
Inscriptions,  too,  and  fragments  of  sculpture  of  the  Roman  period  were
^nd  in  it.     Among  the  sculptures  is  a  head  of  a  Roman  emperor  (?)
in  white  marble  ;  the  features  are  cruel  and  recall  the  busts  of  Caracalla.
Of  the  Roman  and  Byzantine  coins  found  on  the  site  none  is  so  early
^  the  age  of  the  Antonines.

The  circular  retaining- wall  of  the  platform  is  joined  at  its  western
extremity  by  a  second  wall  of  similar  construction  and  likewise  curved.
It  also  consists  of  a  supporting  wall  of  rough  stones  faced  with  a  casing
*^f  breccia,  which  rests  on  a  basement  of  three  steps.     The  two  walls
^  joined  at  their  meeting-point  with  much  skill  and  are  apparently  con-
temporary.    Unfortunately  this  second  wall  exists  for  a  length  of  only
^bout  7  feet,  when  it  is  cut  short  by  a  Byzantine  church.     It  may  have
^Oimed  a  semicircle  or  even  a  larger  arc  ;  possibly  it  supported  a  second
^rcular  mound  like  the  one  described  above.     But  the  groimd  here  has
^en  so  built  and  rebuilt  in  Roman  and  Byzantine  times  that  its  original
^Hape  is  entirely  lost.

On  this  circular  edifice  see  Thirteenth  Annual  Report  of  the  Archaeological
■l^*^stiiuic  of  America  (1891-92),  pp.  74-76;  Ch.  Waldstein  and  C.  L.  Meader,

H.eports  on  excavations  at  Sparta,*  American  Journal  of  Archaeology ^  8  (1893),
Pp.  410-428  ;  Ch.  Waldstein,  *  The  circular  building  of  Sparta,'  American  Joum,  of

"  'thaeol.  9  (1894),  p.  545  sq.


328  SPARTA  BK.  III.  LAComA

Besides  these  remains,  the  museum  at  the  east  end  of  the  new  town
contains  a  number  of  antiquities  which  have  been  found  at  or  nor
Sparta.  They  include  reliefs  representing  the  Dioscuri  standing  £u3qg
each  other,  each  holding  a  horse  and  wearing  a  conical  cap.  On  one
relief  only  the  heads  of  the  horses  are  represented  appearing  above  the
ground.  There  are  also  several  dedicatory  inscriptions  beginning  ZANI
EAEVeEPIOI  (to  the  Zeus  of  Freedom).

See  further  Baedeker,'  p.  285  sq, ;  and  on  the  sculptures  and  inscriptioiu  foood
about  Sparta  see  A.  Conze,  '  Sculture  Spartane/  Annali  delF  InstUuto^  42  (18M
pp.  270-290 ;  Dressel  und  Milchhofer,  '  Die  antiken  Kunstwerke  aus  Sparta  mid
Umgebung,'  Mittkeil,  cL  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  2  (1877),  pp.  293-474 ;  Milchhofer,
'  Spartanische  Kunstwerke/  Archaologische  Zeitung,  39  (1881),  pp.  281-300;  mC,
41  (1883),  pp.  223-230;  Bulletin  de  Corr,  HelUnique,  1877,  pp.  378-388;  i^,
1885,  pp.  512-519.

The  remains  of  antiquity  existing  above  ground  at  Sparta  are  fas  too
scanty  to  enable  us  to  determine  the  topography  of  the  ancient  dty,  as  it
is  described  by  Pausanias.  Future  excavations  may  fill  up  some  of  the
blanks  in  our  knowledge,  for  it  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  considerable
ruins  are  hidden  under  the  fertile  comland  and  olive  groves  which  not
cover  most  of  the  site.  To  attempt  to  reconstruct  the  plan  of  andent
Sparta  without  very  extensive  excavations  is  hardly  more  than  guess-woii
But  such  guess-work  has  been  freely  indulged  in  by  some  topographers.

See  Leake,  Morea,  i.  pp.  150-187;  Boblaye,  RechercheSy  pp.  78-81  ;  Curtiiis,
Pelop,  2,  pp.  219-245  ;  Beul^,  J&tudes  sur  U  Piloponnise^  pp.  42-58 ;  VisdMfi


topography  of  Sparta/  American  Journal  of  Archaeology y  8  (1893),  pp.  335-373'


11.  I.  I  stated  in  my  Attica  etc.     See  i.  39.  3.

11.  2.  a  market-place.     The  market-place  was  to  the  east  of  the
theatre.     See  iii.  14.  i.

11.  2.  the  so-called  Bidiaeans.  In  inscriptions  they  are  called
Bidei  or  Bidyi  (Bi&oi  or  BtSvoi).  See  C.  I.  G.  Nos.  1241,  1242,
1254,  1255,  1270,  1271  ;  Gilbert,  Handbuch  der  griech,  Staatsaltef'
thUmer^  i.  p.  28.

11.  3.  the  Persian  Colonnade  etc  From  Vitruvius  (i.  i.  6)  w^
learn  that  the  statues  of  Persians,  represented  in  their  native  barbaric
costume,  supported  the  roof,  like  Caryatides.  Vitruvius  adds  that  the
idea  of  using  the  statues  of  Persians  as  architectural  supports  was  copied
in  many  other  buildings.     Cp.  K.  Lange,  Haus  und  Halle^  P*  io5  •^^•

11.  3.  her  prowess  in  the  sea-fight  at  Salamis.  See  Herodotus,
viii.  87  sq,

11.  5.  a  bronze  statne  of  Agias.  Cp.  x.  9.  7,  with  the  Critical
Note  on  that  passage,  voL  i.  p.  608.

11.  6.  Tisamenns  was  one  of  the  lamids  etc.  See  Herodotus,  ix.
33-36.  As  to  the  lamids  compare  iii.  12.  8  ;  iv.  16.  i  ;  vi.  2.  5  note  ;
viii.  10.  5.

11.  6.  the  pentathlom.  In  the  pentathlum  the  five  contests  were
leaping,  running,  throwing  the  disc,  hurling  the  javelin,  and  wrestling.


SPARTA  329


it  as  to  the  order  in  which  these  contests  came  on,  and  the  rules  by
lich  victory  was  decided,  opinions  have  differed  greatly.  See  H0I-
!rda,  'Zum  Pentathlon,'  Archdologische  ZHtung,  39  (1881),  pp.
15-216;  Percy  Gardner,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  I  (1881),
I.  210-333  ;  E.  Myers,  ib.  2  (1882),  pp.  217-221  ;  Fr.  Fedde,  Der
iMjkantpf  lier  Hellenen  {BTe.%]zM,  1888);  M.  Faber,  'Zum  Funfkampf
r  Hellenen,"  Philologus,  50  (1891),  pp.  469-498.
11.  7-  over  all  the  ArcsdlanB at  Dipaea.     See  viii.  30.  i

11.  8.  tba  Helots.  With  the  relation  of  the  Helots  to  the  Spartans
e  may  compare  the  relation  in  which  certain  slave  communities  stand
I  the  Bakundas,  a  people  of  western  Aiirica,  near  the  Cameroons.
hese  slaves  live  apart  from  their  masters  on  plantations  away  in  the
irest,  where  they  are  practically  uncontrolled.  They  have  wives  and
lOuses  of  their  own,  and  do  not  give  any  of  the  produce  to  their  masters
mless  they  choose  to  do  so.  They  form  in  fact  regular  independent
nminunities,  which  have  kings  of  their  own.  These  are  the  so-called
lave-towns.  As  the  slaves  are  good  soldiers,  their  kings  are  admitted
0  the  councils  of  the  freemen  at  important  consultations.  The  slaves
ue  distinguished  by  a  round  mark  tattooed  on  their  brows  and  temples,
iee  B.  Schwan,  Kamerun.  Reise  in  itit  Hinterlande  dtr  Kolonie  (Leipzig,
1886),  p.  258  sq.

11.  8.  Thsse  events  I  will  describe  presently.     See  iv.  24.  5  sqq.

11.  9.  a  colossal  Btatue  of  the  Spartan  Fettle.  On  artistic
personifications  of  a  whole  people  or  nation  see  voL  2.  p.  27  sq.

11.  10.  the  bones  of  Orestes.    See  iii.  3.  6,  viii.  54.  4.

11.  10.  hiH  UkenesH  is  graved  on  the  signet  etc.  This  shows
thai  the  practice  of  sealing  was  ancient  in  Greece.  Gold  signets  of  a
iaie  not  later  than  the  twelfth  century  B.C.  were  found  in  the  tombs  at
H^cnae.  See  above,  p.  114  sg.,  and  J.  H.  Middleton,  The  Engraved
Gtms  0/ Classical  Times  (Cambridge,  1891),  p.  17  ^?.

11.  11.  Hermes  carrying  the  infiuit  Diony-
ni  On  Spartan  coins  of  Imperial  times  Hermes
is  lepresented  carrying  the  infant  Dionysus  on  his
l<fi  aim,  while  in  his  left  hand  he  holds  the
odueeus  (Fig.  47).  The  representation  is  prob-
ably a  copy  of  d)e  statue  mentioned  by  Pau-
Bnias.  See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.
Cwiw.  on  Pasts,  p.  55,  with  pi.  N  v.  vi.  vii.

11.  II.  the  tom^  of  Epimenides  etc.     See
ii.31.  3.      That  the  remains  of  Epimenides  were   '
«  Sparta  is  mentioned  also  by  Diogenes  Laertius
fi  10,  115)  on  the  authority  of  Sosibius.     As  to        i-*™da«««oh).
^phareus  see  iii.   i.  ^  sq.\  iv.  2.  4  sq.

12.  I.  Booneta.  Bursian  suggested  that  this  may  have  been  the
ffice  of  the  Bodnai  ('  ox-buyers '),  the  officials  who  bought  the  victims
It  the  public  sacrifices  {Geogr.  1.  p.  12).  There  were  such  officials  at
.thens  (Demosthenes,  xxi,  171,  p.  570).

12.  2.  SanaoB  hit  apon  this  device  to  get  his  danghten  nairied


330  SPARTA  bk.  hi.  laconm

etc.  According  to  Pindar  {Pyth.  ix.  193  sqq,)  Danaus  set  his  daughters
at  the  end  of  the  race-course  ;  the  suitors  ran  for  them,  and  before
mid-day  all  the  daughters  had  obtained  husbands.  In  the  same  poem
(line  182  sqq.)  Pindar  tells  how  Antaeus  similarly  decided  the  claims  of
many  noble  suitors  to  the  hand  of  his  daughter  by  setting  them  to  run  a
race.

12.  3.  paid  the  price  in  oxen.  Professor  W.  Ridgeway  has  shown
that  among  the  Greeks  at  an  early  period,  before  the  invention  cf
money,  the  ox  must  have  been  the  unit  of  value,  and  that  the  earliest
gold-unit  (the  talent)  was  equivalent  in  value  to  the  older  ox-unit  See
his  article,  *  The  Homeric  talent,  its  origin,  value,  and  affinities,'  Jcund
of  Hellenic  Studies,  8  (1887),  pp.  133-158  ;  and  his  Origin  0/ MetaBk
Currency  and  Weight  Standards,  p.  i  sqq.  Cattle  formed  the  primitnre
medium  of  exchange  among  the  Romans,  as  is  shown,  amongst  other
things,  by  the  fact  that  their  word  for  money  {pecunia)  is  derived  ftoo
their  word  for  cattle  {fecus).  See  Varro,  De  lingua  Latino,  v.  ^  92, 93  J
Hultsch,  Metrologie^  p.  254.  Amongst  other  primitive  peoples  cattle
have  been  and  still  are  the  regular  measure  of  value,  as  among  the  Irish
in  ancient  and  mediaeval  times  (Ridgeway,  in  Joum,  of  Hell,  Stud.
8  (1887),  p.  156  sqq.;  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  9th  ed.  vol.  13.  p.  235
sq.\  the  Hindoos  of  Vedic  times  (Zinmier,  Altindisches  Leben,  p.  2 $7)1
some  savage  tribes  of  Annam  (Cochinchine  Franqcdse,  Excursions  it
Reconnaissances,  No.  24,  p.  317  sq,\  the  Kaffirs  (J.  Campbell,  Travils
in  South  Africa,  p.  523  ;  Theal,  Kaffir  Folk-lore,  p.  15),  the  Hottentots
(Kolbe,  Present  State  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  i.  p.  262),  the  Kro
negroes  (Bastian,  Ein  Besuch  in  San  Salvador,  p,  191),  some  of  the
people  of  Darfour  (^Travels  of  an  Arab  Merchant  in  Sudan,  p.  129),
the  Ossetes  of  the  Caucasus  (Haxthausen,  Transkaukasia,  2.  p.  30),  the
Circassians  (Koch,  Reise  durch  Russland,  i.  p.  423),  and  the  Nogai
Tartars  (Haxthausen,  Studien  Uberdie  innem  Zustdnde  etc.  Russlands^  2.
p.  371).  The  Kirgis  value  everything  in  horses  or  sheep  (Pallas,  Rei^^
durch  verschiedene  Provinzen  des  russischen  Reichs,  i.  p.  390).  Sec
also  W.  Roscher,  System  der  Volkswirthschaft^^  i.  p.  273  j^. ;  Ad.
Bastian,  Rechtsverhdltnisse,  p.  126;  and  especially  O.  Schrader,  Z/>»-
guistische-historische  Forschungen  zur  Handelsgeschichte  und  Wann-
kunde,  p.  1 1 3  sqq.

12.  4.  those  who  sail  to  India.     The  notices  of  India  by  ancient
writers  are  collected  by  Sir  E.  H.  Bunbury,  in  his  History  of  Ancient
Geography.     On  Indian  embassies  to  Rome  see  Journal  of  the  Roy^
Asiatic  Society,  i860,  pp.  309-321  ;  id.,  1861,  pp.  345-361  ;  id.,  i86l»
pp.  274-298.     On  Roman  coins  foimd  in  India  see  Indian  Antiquary 9
2  (1873),  P«  241  sq.     On  Greek  sculptures  in  India  ^^^  Journal  of  th^
Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,   5   (1836),  pp.    567-570;    E.  Curtius,  i^^
Archdologische  Zeitung,  33  (1876),  pp.  90-95  (reprinted  in  his  Gesan^^
melte  Abhandlungen,  2.  pp.   235-243).     On  Greek  and  Roman  trad^^
with  India  cp.  Hertzberg,  Gesch.  Griechenlands  unter  der  Herrscha^
der  Roiner,  2.  p.  204  sq.     Cp.  an  article  *  Graeco-Roman  influence  0
the  civilisation  of  Ancient  India,*  by  Vincent  A.  Smith,  Journal  of  th^
Asic^c  Society  of  Bengal,  58  (1889),  pt.  i.  PP.  107-198.


H.  XII  SPARTA  331

12.  5.  a  prednct  of  Taenarian  Poseidon.  See  iiL  25.  4.  In-
criptions  found  at  Sparta  show  that  there  was  a  religious  college  or
lociety  called  the  Taenarians,  doubtless  for  the  worship  of  Taenarian
Poseidon.  Among  the  officials  of  the  society  were  a  secretary,  a
^viner,  heralds,  a  flute-player,  a  cook,  a  god-bearer  (siophoros\  etc
See  Conze  e  Michaelis,  in  Annali  deW  Instituto^  33  (1861),  pp.  41-45.
The  college  is  mentioned,  under  the  name  of  the  Taenarists,  by
Hesychius  {s.v,  raivapCas),  who  also  speaks  of  a  Taenarian  festival
celebrated  by  the  Lacedaemonians.

12.  7'  The  people  of  Aegiam  in  Achaia  also  show the

tomb  of  Talthybins.     See  vii.  24.  i.

12.  7.  to  demand  earth  and  water.  As  symbols  that  the  land,
the  rivers,  and  the  seas  of  Greece  belonged  to  Persia.  Symbolic
messages  of  this  sort  are  common  among  barbarous  peoples.  Some  of
the  wild  Naga  tribes  of  eastern  India  have  been  known  to  send  a  piece
of  charred  wood,  a  bullet,  and  a  chilli,  tied  together,  to  a  neighbouring
village.  The  charred  wood  meant  that  they  would  bum  the  village ;
the  bullet  that  they  would  come  with  guns  ;  and  the  chilli  signified  the
smarting,  stinging  nature  of  their  vengeance.  See  Journal  of  the
Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal^  1857,  Pt.  i.  p.  317.  On  symbolic  messages
m  West  Africa  see  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute^  16  (1887),
pp.  295-299.  Amongst  the  Nagas,  already  referred  to,  a  ceremony  of
submission  after  defeat  is  to  take  a  handful  of  earth  and  grass,  and
after  placing  it  on  the  head  to  put  it  on  the  edge  of  a  sword,  and  then
chew  it  between  the  lips  (Joum,  Anthrop,  Inst,  1 1.  (1882),  p.  71).  But
the  idea  in  this  case  is  probably  not  the  same  as  in  the  Persian  demand
for  earth  and  water.

12.  7-  the  wrath  of  Tftlthybins  etc  See  Herodotus,  vii.  134  sqg,
Herodotus  tells  us  that  Talthybius  had  a  sanctuary  at  Sparta,  and  that
his  descendants  dwelt  there,  and  held  the  hereditary  of&ce  of  herald.

12.  8.  Apollo  Acritas.  Prof.  S.  Wide  suggests  that  Apollo  Acritas
nay  have  been  a  form   of  the   Camean  Apollo  {Lahonische  Kulte^

1^91).

12.  8.  Maleatian  Apollo.     See  ii.  27.  7  note.

12.  8.  a  sanctuary  of  Dictjrnna.  From  a  mention  of  this  sanctuary
byLivy  (xxxiv.  38)  it  appears  to  have  been  at  the  outskirts  of  the  city,
which  agrees  with  Pausanias's  description.

12.  9.  Maron  and  Alpheus.     See  Herodotus,  vii.  227.

12.  9.  Tropaean  ('  turner  to  flight ')  Zeus.  The  Attic  lads  sacrificed
to  Tropaean  Zeus  on  the  anniversary  of  the  battle  of  Salamis  (C.  /.  A,
ii-  No.  467).  Tropaean  Zeus  was  also  worshipped  at  Pergamus,  as
'fcleam  from  inscriptions  (Frankel,  Inschriften  von  Pergamon^  i.  Nos.
237,  247).

12.  10.  the  Scias.  It  was  a  round  building  {Etymolog,  Magnum^
Af.&(Mxs,  p.  717).

12.  10.  Theodorus  the  Samian.  See  viii.  14.  7  note;  ix.  41.  i ;
«.  38.  6.

12.  10.  the  lute  of  Timotheus  etc.  It  is  said  that  the  Lacedae-
i&onians,  fearing  to  be   rendered  effeminate   by  the  strains   of  this


333  SPARTA  BK.  III.  LACOML

famous  musician,  took  his  lute  from  him,  cut  out  the  new  strings  wliid
he  had  added,  and  expelled  him  from  the  city  (Die  Chrysostom,  Of
xxxii.  and  xxxiii.,  vol  i.  p.  423,  voL  2.  p.  19  sq,^  ed.  Dindorf).
12.  II.  a  round  bnilding.     See  above,  p.  325  sqq,

12.  II*  Epimenides.     As  to  Epimenides  at  Sparta  see  ii.  21.  3.

13.  I.  Gynortas.     See  iii.  i.  3.

13.  I.  the  sonB  of  Tyndarens.  The  late  W.  Mannhardt  iitta
preted  Castor  and  Pollux,  as  well  as  their  Indian  congeners  the  Asvin^
as  the  Morning  and  Evening  Star  {Zeitschrift  fur  Ethnologie^  7  (187$)
p.  309  sqq,)

13.  2.  Abaris.  See  Herodotus,  iv.  36 ;  Suidas,  s,v,  "APapm
Paul/s  RecU'Encyclopadie^  ed.  Wissowa,  s,v,  *  Abaris.'

13.  3.  Oameus,  whom  ihey  surname  Domestic  etc  A  Laconia
inscription  (C.  /.  G,  No.  1446)  mentions  a  certain  lady  Damosthenii
who  had  been  hereditary  priestess  of  Domestic  Cameus  and  Poseida
of  the  House.  Whatever  he  may  have  been  originally,  this  Cameo
was  no  doubt  identified  in  classical  times  with  Camean  Apollo,  Q
whom  Pausanias  goes  on  to  speak.  The  name  probably  comes  frog
kamosy  'sheep,'  'ram'  (Hesychius,  s,v,  Kapvos).  Literally  it  signifie
'  the  homed  one,'  being  derived  from  the  noun  meaning  '  horn,'  whic
is  etymologically  identical  in  several  languages — Greek  k^ras^  Lati
comu,  English  Aom,  See  Curtius,  Griech,  Etymologie^  p.  147.  Tht
Camean  Apollo  is  the  Homed  Apollo  or  the  Ram  Apollo.  Th
explanation  of  the  name  is  supported  by  the  sacrifice  of  rams  at  tl
Camean  festival  (Theocritus,  v.  82  sq.\  and  by  the  myths,  here  to!
by  Pausanias,  of  the  god's  relations  to  the  two  soothsayers  Camus  ax
Crius,  both  of  whose  names  mean  '  ram,'  and  both  of  whom  consequent
are  probably  nothing  but  anthropomorphised  forms  of  the  old  ram-go
In  the  Camasian  grove  images  of  Camean  Apollo  and  of  the  Rai
bearing  Hermes  stood  together  (Paus.  iv.  33.  4).  It  seems  probab
that  the  ram-god  Cameus  was  worshipped  in  Laconia  by  the  Achaean
or  rather  the  Minyans,  before  the  Dorian  invasion,  and  that  the  Doriar
taking  over  his  worship  from  the  conquered  people,  identified  him  wi
their  Apollo  under  the  title  of  the  Camean  Apollo.  But  while  the  0
god  Cameus,  and  his  later  double  the  Camean  Apollo,  was  on  the  01
hand  a  god  of  sheep,  there  is  some  evidence  that  on  the  other  hand  1
was  also  a  god  of  harvest  or  at  least  of  vintage.  For  his  festival  f<
in  the  month  Cameus  (Thucydides,  v.  54),  which  corresponds  nearly
August,  and  was  the  season  of  the  vintage :  and  at  his  festival  youi
men  bearing  clusters  of  grapes  pursued  a  man,  decked  with  wreatt
who  fied  before  them,  and  as  he  fled  prayed  for  the  public  weal ;
was  a  good  omen  if  they  caught  him,  but  an  ill  omen  if  they  did  n
(Hesychius,  5,v,  <rTa<f>vko8p6fjLoi ;  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^  p.  3c
line  25  sqq,^  The  two  aspects  of  the  god  may  be  reconciled  I
supposing  that  as  a  spirit  of  vegetation  in  general  or  of  the  vintage
particular  he  was  conceived  of  in  the  form  of  an  animal ;  for  emboc
ments  of  a  spirit  of  vegetation  in  animal  form  are  common  in  popul
superstition.  And  the  legend  of  the  murder  of  Camus  (cp.  the  Scholia
on  Theocritus,  v.  83)  may  possibly  be  a  reminiscence  of  a  custom


CH.  XIV  SPARTA


333


killing  the  representative  of  the  spirit  of  vegetation,  in  the  form  of  an
animal  or  man,  at  the  harvest  or  vintage  festival.  Customs  of  this
sort  were  first  collected  and  explained  by  the  late  W.  Mannhardt  (in
his  Mythohgische  Forschungen^  etc.),  and  have  been  touched  upon  by
the  present  writer  (in  The  Golden  Bough).

On  Cameus,  the  Camean  Apollo,  and  the  Camem  festival  see  W.  Mannhardt,
Antikt  Wold'  und  Feldkulte,  p.  254  sq.  ;  the  t^o  articles  *  Kameios '  by  Wide
ud  Hofer  in  Roscher's  Lexikon ;  and  especially  S.  Wide's  Lakonische  JCulte,  pp.
73-87  (of  whose  results  the  foregoing  note  jafa  summary).  That  the  Camean
Apollo  was  a  ram-god  had  been  recogni»«d  by  others.  See  Welcker,  Griech,
GitttrUArg,  i.  p.  471;  Gerhard,  GnetfA,  Myihologu,  §  30a  I ;  G.  Gilbert,
Shdimmrcdtspartanischen  Geschuhte^^  44  sq. ;  Preller,  GrUchische  Mythologies^
I.  p.  251.

13.  5.  there  grew  some  cozmel-trees  etc.  This  derivation  of  the
epithet  Camean  is  mentioned  Ijjy  the  Scholiast  on  Theocritus,  v.  83.
There  was  a  very  holy  comel-tn^  on  the  slope  of  the  Palatine  at  Rome  ;
it  was  s^d  to  have  sprung  fro^  the  spear-shaft  of  Romulus  (Plutarch,
Romulus^  20).

13.  6.  Aphetaens.  Tlfce  name  probably  means  'the  starter.'
Compare  iiL  12.  i,  jjid  Wife's  Lakonische  Kulte^  p.  274.

13.  6.  Ambnlian  Zens,  Ambnlian  Aihena  etc.  The  epithet
Ambnlian  seems  nfot  to  occur  elsewhere  except  in  a  gloss  of  Suidas
(i.v.  'A/ificvkwiY  and  its  meaning  is  uncertain.  The  adjective  perhaps
means  « counselling.*     Cp.  S.  Wide,  Lakonische  Kulte,  p.  1 3.

13.  7-  the  place  named  Oolona,  and  a  temple  of  Dlonysns
Wfloatas.  The  archaeologist  Polemo,  in  a  work  On  the  votive
^firings  in  Luedaenwn^  mentions  both  Colona  and  the  sanctuary  of
Dionysus  at  it ;  he  says  that  close  to  Colona  there  was  a  chapel  of  a
Mted  courtesan  Cottina.  Polemo's  work  is  lost,  but  the  fragment  in
™^  ^  JJM^tions  Colona  is  quoted  by  Athenaeus  (xiii.  p.  574  c  d).
Strabo  (viiL/p.  363)  mentions  "the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  in  the
llanhes'*  f  Sparta;  it  may  perhaps  be  identical  with  the  one  at
Colona.

^^  7r-.he  other  eleven Dlonysiades  etc     Hesychius  {s,v,

oM^umim^  says  that  the  Dionysiades  were  nuudens  at  Sparta  who  ran
a  nee  at  \^  festival  of  Dionysus.
.  IS.  9  Arena  in  his  epic  poem  etc     This  poet  seems  to  be  other-

M»  %  Hipposthenes.    Cp.  iii.  15.  7  ;  v.  8.  9.
^^^  '  a  cenotaph  of  Brasidas.     Brasidas  was  buried  at  Amphipolis
v"Mcydts,  v.  II).

^  *^  '•the  theatre.  See  above,  p.  324.  The  theatre  was  much
1*^^  P*^rved  when  Cell  visited  it  early  in  the  nineteenth  century  than
It  IS  HOIK  He  says  :  "  The  radius  of  the  orchestra  is  70  feet,  and  the
wamgter  a  the  whole  is  418.  The  scene  seems  to  have  been  only
28  feet  deq^  ^nd  the  seats  were  divided  into  three  cinctions,  of  which
the  breads  ascending  were  20  feet  for  the  lowest,  23  feet  for  the
ant,  and  4c  for  the  highest  Above  this  was  a  space  only  1 3  feet
™e,  and  br-hind  that,  the  last,  which  might  have  been  a  portico,  was


/


334  SPARTA  BK.  IIL  LAOONU

32  feet  deep.  The  upper  surface  of  each  seat  was  divided  mto  two
portions,  of  which  a  sinking,  i  ft  4  ins.  in  breadth,  received  the  feet
of  the  person  who  occupied  the  seat  above,  and  a  space  only  x  ft  i  Id.
in  width  was  left  for  the  seat  of  the  person  below.  About  20  juk
to  the  northward  is  an  opening  in  a  wall,  which  may  have  been  tk
entrance  to  the  upper  seats :  the  whole  is  a  strange  mixture  of  good
and  bad  workmanship "  (Gell,  Narrative  of  a  Journey  in  the  Mon^
p.  328).  The  Gynmopaedi^  were  held  in  the  theatre ;  it  was  wfaik
witnessing  this  spectacle  in  the  fheatre  that  the  deposed  king  Deroaratos
was  insulted  by  his  successful  ri^;al  Leotychides  with  the  taunt  whidi
drove  him  into  exile  and  helped  l  to  bring  the  Persians  into  Greece
(Herodotus,  vi.  67).  Again,  it  was  ^ivhile  the  people  were  witnessing
the  Gymnopaediae  in  the  theatre  tnat  messengers  arrived  with  the
tidings  of  the  great  Lacedaemonian  delfeat  at  Leuctra ;  with  true  Spartan
stoicism  the  magistrates  refused  to  alloW  the  festivities  to  be  interrupted
(Plutarch,  Agesilatis^  29).  We  hear  \)f  other  musical  and  atUedc
exhibitions  being  held  in  the  theatre  (Luci^n,  Anacharsis^  38  ;  Athenaess^
iv.  p.  139  e).

14.  I.  Opposite  the  theatre  is  the  tbmb  of  Fftnsanias  etc  ^k
fine  sepulchral  chamber  of  a  square  form,^.-''<"jl2r!ly  constructed  witb
large  blocks,  is  situated  nearly  opposite  the  theatre,  and  a  short  distance
from  it.  It  has  been  opened,  and  the  interior  is  isomposed  of  brid-
work  "  (Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  404).  This  sepulchre  set^s  now  to  have
disappeared.  As  to  the  building  popularly  called  the  Tc^nb  of  Leonidas
see  above,  p.  324  sq.  It  is  too  far  from  the  theatr^  to  answer  to
Pausanias's  description  of  the  site  of  the  real  tomb  of  Ledoidas.

14.  I.  games  are  held.  As  to  games  in  honour  of  the  dead  see
vol  2.  p.  549.  ^

14.  I.  forty  years.  See  Critical  Note  on  this  passage,  voL  i.  p.
576.  \

14.  2.  the  graves  of  the  Agid  kings.     Prof.  C.  \V^achsmuth,  in
Fleckeiseris  Jahrbiicher^    14  (1868),    p.    3,  argues  that  tl>c  graves  0^
the  Agiads  (Agids)  lay  between  the  hills  of  Old  Sparta  anl  the  rivcfi
and  that  the  graves  of  the  other  royal  house,  the  Eurypontic>»  lay  awaj
to  the  south,  on  the  rising  ground  now  occupied  by  New  SparfU     HenC*
he  infers  that  these  two  royal  houses  originally  presided  over  twP  separa^*
conmiunities,  settled  at  Old  and  New  Sparta  respectively,  arl  that  t7^
the  fusion  of  these  two  conmiunities  the  Spartan  state  with   te  doubJ^
kingship  arose.     All  this  is  hardly  more  than  pure  hypothd^s.     TTi
hypothesis,  however,    is   accepted    by   Mr.    G.    Gilbert    (Stifien   su.
altspartanischen  GeschichtCy  p.   60  sq, ;   Griech.   Staatsalter/jSmer^'^  i  ^
p.  4  sq,)

14.  2.  the  Pitanatians.  See  note  on  iii.  1 6.  9.
14.  2.  Aeginaean  Artemis.  Prof.  S.  Wide  suggests  that  he  epithet
Aeginaean  may  be  derived  from  a£r,  *  a  goat,'  and  that  it  r«fers  to  the
goats  which  were  sacrificed  to  Artemis  in  various  places  (Preler,  Griech.
Mythologies^  i.  p.  302,  note  4).  See  S.  Wide,  Lakonische  Kiite,  p.  109.
14.  2.  Artemis  Issora.  Plutarch  {Agesilaus^  32)  meitions  <<the
Issorium,  a  place  well  fortified   and   difficult  to  storm,  Wiere  is  the


CH.  XIV  SPARTA  335

sanctuary  of  Artemis."  And  Polyaenus  (ii.  i.  14}  speaks  of  the  place
as  '^a  hill  sacred  to  Issorian  Artemis,  near  Pitane."  While  the  Theban
army  under  Epaminondas  was  ravaging  the  country  outside,  a  knot  of
disaiTected  Spartans  seized  this  hill ;  but  the  conspiracy  was  quelled  by
A^esilaus  (Plutarch  and  Polyaenus,  ll.cc.)  There  was  a  festival  called
Issoria  (Hesychius,  s,v,  'IcnrcDpta).  Cp.  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v,
'larartapiov,

iL  2.  Britomartis  of  Crete.  I  have  told  her  story  etc  See  ii.
30.  3.

14.  3.  Chionis.  His  first,  second,  and  third  Olympic  victories  were
ivon  in  the  years  668,  664,  and  660  ac.  See  iv.  23.  4  and  10 ;  viii.
39.  3.  There  was  a  tablet  at  Olympia  inscribed  with  a  record  of  his
victories  (vi.  13.  2).

14.  3.  Battns  of  Thera  in  his  expedition  etc  See  Herodotus,  iv.
150  sgg.

14.  3.  Gyrene.  See  Smith  and  Porcher,  Discoveries  at  Cyrenej
F.  B.  Goddard,  *  Researches  in  the  Cyrenaica,'  American  Journal  of
Philology^  5.  pp.  31-53-

14.  5.  the  sanctuary  at  Hennion.     See  ii.  35.  4  sqq.
14.  6.  the  Oonrse.     The  Course  {Dromes)  seems  to  have  been  a
park  outside  of  the  walls ;  for  we  are  told  that  when  the  tyrant  Nabis
suspected  some  of  the  citizens  of  disafTection,  he  led  out  all  the  Lace-
daemonians into  the  field  or  plain  called  the  Coiu^e,  and  there  disarmed
them  and  arrested  eighty  of  the  ringleaders  (Livy,  xxxiv.  27).
14.  6.  Enrydes,  a  Spartan.     See  il  3.  5  note.
14.  6.  Leader  Artemis.     Compare  viii.  37.  i ;  viii.  47.  6.     Prof.
Wide  interprets  Leader  Artemis  as  the  goddess  who  leads  the  souls  of
\      the  dead  to  the  spirit-land  {Lakonische  Kulte^  p.  1 10  sqq,)     He  suggests
\     that  she  was  originally  an  independent  goddess  who  was  afterwards
I     identified  with  Artemis.     Near  Asea  in  Arcadia  a  marble  figure  of  a
I     seated  woman   has   been   found  bearing  the   inscription  'Ayrffjuoy  i,e,
:     *  Leader'  (Roehl,  /.  G.  A,  No.  92).     Cp.  Preller,  GriecA.  Mythologie^^
'     '•  p.  306.

'  14.  7.  Alcon  was  a  son  of  Hippocoon.     So  too  says  Apollodorus

{iu.  10.  5).

14«  7.  Poseidon  of  the  House.  A  Laconian  inscription,  which  has
^^^en  already  referred  to  (note  on  iii.  13.  3),  mentions  a  certain  lady
^aoiosthenia,  who  had  been  hereditary  priestess  of  Domestic  Cameus
*^d  Poseidon  of  the  House  (C.  /.  G.  No.  1446).

14.  8.  The  place  where  the  lads  flght  is  surrounded  by  a  moat
*^c.  Compare  Lucian,  AnacharsiSy  38  :  "  And  remember,  if  you  ever
^ome  to  Lacedaemon,  not  to  laugh  at  them  nor  to  &ncy  that  they  labour
in  vain  when  they  come  to  blows  with  each  other  in  the  theatre  about  a
^,  or  when,  entering  a  place  surrounded  by  water,  they  divide  into
two  troops,  the  troop  of  Lycurgus  and  the  troop  of  Hercules,  and  there-
upon attack  each  other  until  the  one  side  drives  the  other  side  out  of
bounds  by  pushing  them  into  the  water ;  for  after  that  there  is  peace
between  them  and  no  blow  is  struck."  To  this  combat  in  Plane-tree
Grove  Cicero  refers  when  he  says,  *'  I  have  myself  seen  troops  of  lads


336  SPARTA  bk.  iil  laconia

fighting  with  incredible  fury — striking,  kicking,  scratching,  biting,  and
dying  rather  than  confess  themselves  beaten"  {TuscuL  DispuU  v.  27.
77).     The  passage  of  Ludan,  taken  together  with  the  present  passage
of  Pausanias,  seems  to  show  that  on  one  of  the  two  bridges  leading  into
the  island  there  was  a  statue  of  Lycurgus,  and  on  the  other  bridge  a
statue  of  Hercules,  and  that  the  two  troops  were  named  respectively
after  the  one  or  the  other  of  the  statues,  according  to  the  bridge  by
which  they  entered  the  arena.     Accordingly  in  the  text  we  should  read
\^  iKorkf^  with  Buttmann  instead  of  the  MS.  reading  c^'  kKm^
The  translation  will  then  run  :  "  On  one  of  the  two  bridges  there  is  an
image  of  Hercules,  and  on  the  other  a  statue  of  Lycurgus."

14.  9.  the  PhoebaemiL  The  Phoebaeum  was  not  far  from  Therapoe,
as  we  learn  from  Pausanias  (cp.  iii.  20.  2),  who  is  confirmed  by  Hero-
dotus (vi.  61 ).  It  was  one  of  the  places  from  which  the  Romans  attacked
Sparta  in  195  B.C.  (Livy,  xxxiv.  38).

14.  9.  sacrifices  a  puppy  to  Enyalius.  The  Spartan  sacrifice  of
puppies  to  Enyalius  is  mentioned  also  by  Plutarch  {Quaestiones  Ramanai^
III).  Dogs  were  sacrificed  to  the  war-god  by  the  Carians  (Clement  of
Alexandria,  Protrept,  ii.  29,  p.  2  5,  ed.  Potter ;  cp.  [Plutarch,]  Proverb.
Alexandr,  73).

14.  9.  a  black  female  puppy.  On  the  colour  and  sex  of  the  victims
sacrificed  by  the  Greeks  see  P.  Stengel,  in  FUckeisetis  Jahrbucher^  32
(1886),  pp.  321-331  ;  icLy  Die  griech,  Sakrcdaliertumer^  ^  80,  81.

15.  3.  the  fight  with  Hippocoon  and  his  sons  etc.  See  Apollo-
dorus,  ii.  7.  3 ;  Diodorus,  iv.  33 ;  Plutarch,  Qjuaest.  Rom.  90.

15.  3.  to  be  purified  after  the  murder  of  Iphitus.  Iphitus,  I
searching  for  some  lost  mares  and  mules,  came  to  the  house  of  Hercules,
who  entertained  him  hospitably  and  then  treacherously  murdered  him
(Homer,  Od.  xxi.  22  sqq,)  According  to  Apollodorus  (ii.  6.  2),  Hercules
in  a  fit  of  madness  killed  Iphitus  by  hurling  him  from  the  walls  of
Tiryns.  Thereupon  (continues  Apollodorus)  Hercules  went  to  Neleus,
king  of  Pylus,  to  be  purified ;  but  Neleus  refusing  to  purify  him,
Hercules  betook  himself  to  Amyclae,  where  he  was  purified  by  Deipho-
bus,  son  of  Hippolytus.  But  as  he  still  suffered  from  a  grievous  malady
on  account  of  the  murder,  Hercules  next  repaired  to  Delphi,  where  he
was  informed  by  the  oracle  that  he  would  be  healed  of  the  disease  if  he
allowed  himself  to  be  sold  into  slavery,  and  served  three  years  as  a
bondman,  and  paid  a  bloodwit  to  Eurytus,  the  father  of  the  murdered
Iphitus.     Cp.  note  on  ii.  7.  7.

15.  7-  an  ancient  image  of  Enyalius  in  fetters.     For  other  ex-
amples of  fettered  images  see  below,  §  11  ;  viii.  41.  6 ;  ix.  38.  5.    The
images  of  Dionysus  in  Chios,  and  of  Artemis  at  Erythrae,  were  fettered
(Polemo,  referred  to  by  Schol.  on  Pindar,  Ofymp,  vii.  95).     The  feet  o^
Saturn's  image  at  Rome  were  fastened  with  woollen  bands,  which  wcf^
only  taken  off  at  the  Saturnalia  (Macrobius,  Sat,  i.  8.  5  ;  Minucius  Feli^^
22.  5  ;  Amobius,  iv.  24 ;  Statius,  Sylv,  i.  6.  4).     The  people  of  Ty^
are  said  to  have  kept  their  gods  in  bonds  (Plutarch,  Quaest.  Rom.  61  >
When  Tyre  was  besieged  by  Alexander  the  Great,  one  of  the  Tyriat^
dreamed  that  he  saw  Apollo  deserting  the  city.     So  the  Tyrians  chain^^


:h.  XV  CHAINED  IMAGES  337

he  image  of  Apollo  to  the  altar  of  Hercules  (Melcarth)  with  a  golden
:hain  (Curtius  Rufus,  iv.  3.  §  15).     In  Burma  there  are  two  images  of
3uddha  which  are  said  to  have  been  formerly  shackled.     One  of  them
s  at  Pegu,  from  which  it  is  said  to  have  once  run  away.     The  other  is
it  Mandalay ;  it  was  brought  from  Arakan  in  1784,  and  the  people  are
ifraid  it  will  return  thither  (R.  C.  Temple,  in  Folk-lore^  4  (1893),  p.
^49).     The  general  intention  of  chaining  up  a  god  is  to  prevent  him
leserting  or  being   lured  away  by  the  enemy.      When  the   Romans
;at  down  to  besiege  a  city  they  used  to  invite  the  guardian  gods  of  the
memy  to  come  over  to  their  side,  assuring  them  of  good  treatment.
\nd  the  name  of  the  guardian  god  of  Rome  was  kept  a  profound  secret,
est  the  enemies  of  Rome  should  similarly  entice  him  away.     See  Pliny,
Nat  Hist  xxviii.    18,   cp.  iV/.,  iii.   65  ;  Macrobius,  Sat  iii.  9.  2  sq, ;
Servius  on  Virgil,  Aen.  ii.  351  ;  Livy,  v.  21  ;  Plutarch,  Quaest  Rom.
61  ;  Joannes  Lydus,  De  mensidus,  iv.  50.     So  when  the  Tahitians  were
besieging  a  fortress,  they  used  to  take  the  finest  mats,  cloth,  etc.,  as
near  the  ramparts  as  they  could  go  with  safety ;  then  they  would  hold
them  up  and  offer  them  to  the  gods  of  the  enemy,  tempting  them  to
come  over  to  the  side  of  the  besiegers.     The  besieged,  on  the  other
hand,  made  the  best  show  they  could  of  all  their  property  to  induce  the
gods  to  stay.     See  Ellis,  Polynesian  Researches^   i.  p.  316,  cp.  280
(ed.  1832).     It  is  probable  that  the  intention  of  keeping  the  temple  of
Janus  closed  in  peace  and  open  in  war,  was  to  detain  the  war-god  in
custody  till  he  was  wanted  to  go  out  and  fight  the  battles  of  Rome.     So
Virgil  seems  to  have  explained  the  custom  (Aeneid^  i>  293  sqq,^  vii.  611
^^q)    When  the  Alfoers  of  Halmahera  (a  large  island  to  the  west  of,
New  Guinea)  are  going  to  war,  they  catch  their  war-god  (he  lives  in  the
forest),  shut  him  up  in  a  basket,  and  carry  him  with  them  to  battle.
After  the  battle  they  let  him  out  of  the  basket  on  parole.     See  Tijd-
thrift voor  Indische  Taal-^  Land-^  en  Volkenkunde^  27  (1882),  p.  447  j^. ;
Bijdragen  tot  de  Taal-,  Land-^  en  Volkenkunde  van  Neerlandsck  Indie^
4devolg.  8  (1884),  p.  183  sq.     This  may  explain  Homer's  story  {Iliad,
^''  3^5  sqq-)  that  Otus  and  Ephialtes  kept  Ares  shut  up  in  a  brazen
pot  for  thirteen  months.     Cp.  Classical  Review,  2  (1888),  p.  222.     But
^is  need  not  be  the  universal  explanation  of  chained  idols.     In  the
ruins  of  the  temple  of  Mandoot  in  Java  there  are  two  huge  female
^gures,  one  of  which  is  bound  to  the  altar  on  which  it  rests  by  a  chain
^rved  out  of  the  stone ;  the  other  figure  is  nailed  through  the  thigh,
^e  story  is  that  they  were  the  two  jealous  wives  of  the  god  Slambey,
^'ho  punished  them  in  this  way  for  following  him  to  the  war.     See
^.  B.  D' Almeida,  Life  in  Java,  2.  p.  171  sq.     Again,  when  a  god  is  mis-
chievous, it  is  deemed  well  to  keep  him  a  close  prisoner.     In  Samoa  there
^as  a  certain  temple  called  "  the  house  of  the  gods."     It  was  carefully
^hut  up  all  round,  because  "  if  it  was  not  so,  the  gods  would  get  out  and
*>  too  easily,  and  be  all  the  more  destructive"  (Turner,  Samoa,  p.  53).
^t  Vailala  in  New  Guinea  rain,  thunder,  and  lightning  are  supposed  to
^^  the  work  of  a  god  called  Semese.    Hence,  when  the  people  are  going
^  have  a  great  feast,  Semese's  temple  is  shut  up  and  the  god  kept  a
^Hsoner  inside  till  the  feast  is  over.     Then  the  door  is  opened  and  the

VOL.  Ill  Z


338  SPARTA  bk.  hi.  laconia

god  is  free  to  go  and  thunder,  lighten,  and  rain  as  much  as  he  likes.
See  Chalmers  and  Gill,  Work  and  Adventure  in  New  Guinea^  P-  ^S^-

15.  7*  the  Aihenians  have  a  notion  abent  the  Victory  called
Wingless  etc.     See  i.  22.  4  note.

15.  9.  the  only  Greeks  who  surname  Hera  Gh>at-eating.  El»-
where  I  have  shown  groimds  for  believing  that  whenever  a  deity  is
called  the  eater  of  a  certain  animal,  that  animal  was  originally  am
embodiment  of  the  deity  in  question  (The  Golden  Bought  i.  p.  328).
In  the  case  of  Hera  this  is  confirmed  by  a  representation  of  her  wearing
a  goat's  skin,  with  the  head  and  horns  of  the  goat  as  a  head-dress,  and
the  rest  of  the  skin  dangling  about  her.  See  Miiller-Wieseler,  Denik'
mdlery  i.  pi.  lix.  299  b.  Pausanias  is  wrong  in  saying  that  the  Lacedae-
monians were  the  only  Greeks  who  sacrificed  goats  to  Hera.  We  have
seen  (note  on  ii.  3.  6)  that  goats  were  sacrificed  to  Hera  of  the  Heiglit
at  Corinth.

15.  10.  Teledns.    I  shall  mention  him  hereafter  etc.    Seeiv.

4.  2  sq,  ;  iv.  31.  3.

15.  10.  armed  Aphrodite.  Cp.  ii.  5.  i  ;  iii.  23.  i.  A  Laconian  in-
scription (C  /.  G,  No.  1444)  mentions  a  certain  Pomponia  who  had  been
hereditary  priestess  of  Armed  Aphrodite  and  of  many  other  deities.  The
Spartan  worship  of  the  Armed  Aphrodite  is  mentioned  by  Plutardi
(Instil,  Lacon,  28).  The  goddess  seems  to  have  been  represented  widi
a  spear,  shield,  and  helmet  (Plutarch,  De  fortuna  Romanorum^  4 ;
AnthoL  Palat,  Appendix  Planudea,  176).  Roman  schoolboys  wrote
essays  on  the  question.  Why  is  Venus  represented  as  armed  in  Lac^
,  daemon  ?  (Quintilian,  Inst,  Or,  ii.  4.  26).  An  absurd  answer  to  the
question  is  given  by  Lactantius  (Divin,  Inst,  i.  20).  In  the  Greek
Anthology  there  are  several  epigrams  on  the  Armed  Aphrodite  of  Sparta
(Appendix  Planudea,  173-176).  The  type  of  the  Armed  Aphrodite  is
supposed  to  be  of  Phoenician  origin.  A  gloss  in  Hesychius  i^x^^
* A<f>po8iTrf  Kwrptoi)  is  thought  to  show  that  this  type  of  the  goddess
occurred  in  Cyprus,  and  according  to  Prof.  Curtius  "the  recent  dis-
coveries in  Cyprus  (of  no  less  importance  to  the  history  of  religion  than
to  that  of  art)  have  even  brought  to  light,  among  the  numerous  varieties
of  the  native  deity,  some  excellent  examples  of  a  helmeted  type"
(Religious  Character  of  Greek  Coins ^  p.  14;  Gesammelte  Abhandlun^
2.  p.  453)-  Cp.  Welcker,  Griechische  Gbtterlehre^  2,  p.  708  ;  Bernoulli,
Aphrodite^  pp.  58,  424  ;  P.  Gardner,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  1
(1881),  p.  329  j^.  ;  K.  Tiimpel,  *Ares  und  k.^\ixodL\\!t^^  JahrbiUherjiif
classische  Philologie^  Supplementband  11  (1880),  pp.  653  sq,^  660  ^f- 1

5.  Wide,  Lakonische  Kulte^  p.  136  sqq,     Cp.  note  on  ii.  20.  8.

15.  10.  the  only  temple  I  Imow  that  has  an  upper  story
etc.  We  may  compare  the  two  churches  of  the  Franciscan  monastery'
at  Assisi,  built  one  above  the  other,  and  adorned  with  the  frescoes  of
Giotto  and  Cimabue.  The  great  Byzantine  church  of  St.  Luke  at  Stiris
in  Phocis  is  built  over  a  crypt,  which  is  the  church  of  St  Barbara  (sec
note  on  x.  35.  8).

15.  II.  Morpho  is  a  surname  of  Aphrodite  etc.  Cp.  Tzeties,
Schol,  on  Lycophron^  449  ;  Hesychius,  s,v,  Mop<f}<o,


H.  XVI  SPARTA  339

16.  I.  a  sanctuary  of  Hilaira  and  Phoebe Lendiipidaa.

p.  ii.  22.  5  ;  iv.  31.  9  and  12.  Plutarch  mentions  the  sanctuary  of
le  Leucippides  at  Sparta,  and  says  that  beside  it  there  was  a  shrine  of
flysses  {Qu£usiianes  Graecae^  48).  A  Greek  inscription  of  Roman  date,
)und  at  Sparta,  mentions  a  priest  of  the  Leucippides  and  of  the  Tyn-
arids  (Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr,  Graec,^  No.  36).  As  to  the  Leucippides  in
ncient  literature  and  art,  see  S.  Wide,  Lakonische  Kulte^  P-  3^7  sqq.  \
Cuhnert,  art.  '  Leukippiden,'  in  Roscher's  Lexikon^  2.  p.  1988  sqq,

16.  I.  the  author  of  the  epic  called  the  Csrpria.  See  note  on  x.
6.  I.

16.  I.  the  flEunous  egg.  On  representations  of  the  ^%%  of  Leda  in
LHcient  art  sec  Stephani  in  Compte  Rendu  (St  Petersburg)  for  1861,
)p.  137-140.  Lobeck  suggested  that  the  ^%%  seen  by  Pausanias  may
lave  been  an  ostrich  t%%  {Aglaophamus^  P*  52  note).  On  representa-
tions of  Leda  and  the  swan,  see  O.  Jahn,  Arc/tdologische  Beitrdge^
pp.  i-ii  ;  Archdologische  Zeitungy  1865,  plate  cxcviii.,  with  pp.  49-56.
Stephani  maintained  that  the  bird  in  the  original  legend  was  not  a  swan
but  a  goose  {Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1863,  p.  23  j^.)  The
Syrian  Aphrodite  was  said  to  have  sprung  from  a  great  t%g  which  fell
from  heaven  into  the  river  Euphrates.  Some  fish  rolled  the  ^%%  to  the
bank,  and  doves  sat  on  it  and  hatched  it.  So  the  Syrians  looked  on  fish
and  doves  as  gods  and  would  not  eat  them.  See  Hyginus,  Fab,  197.
The  Les  of  Hainan  believe  that  they  are  all  descended  from  an  t%%  (B.  C.
Henry,  Ung-Nam^  P*  397)'  On  the  great  t.%%  which  appears  in  various
primitive  cosmologies  see  Latham,  Descriptive  Ethnology^  i.  p.  439
^q.\  A.  Lang,  Myth^  Ritual^  and  Religion^  i.  pp.  252,  316;  Fr.
Lukas,  *  Das  Ei  als  kosmogonische  Vorstellung,*  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins
fur  Volkskunde,  4  (1894),  pp.  227-243.

16.  2.  the  women  weave  a  tunic  for  the  Apollo  of  Amyclae.
On  the  custom  of  dressing  images  in  real  clothes  see  vol.  2.  p.  574  sqq,

16.  3.  silphiunL  The  plant  called  silphium  by  the  ancients,  once
the  great  staple  of  the  trade  of  Cyrene,  is  now  unknown,  It  is  commonly
represented  on  coins  of  Cyrene.  See  e,g,  Gardner,  Types  of  Greek
(^oins,  plate  ix.  Nos.  29,  30  ;  Head,  Coins  of  the  Ancients^  iii.  c.  44,  iv.
CC  39-41,  V.  c  42.  Cp.  Bahr  on  Herodotus,  iv.  169.  The  process
of  weighing  the  bales  of  silphium  and  storing  them  in  a  magazine
's  represented  on  an  archaic  Greek  vase.  See  Studniczka,  Cyrene^  p.  2  ;
Baumeister's  Denkntdler,  p.  1664.

16.  4.  who  sailed  with  Dorieus.  See  iii.  3.  10  ;  iii.  4.  i  ;  and  on
^e  Sicilian  expedition  of  Dorieus  see  Herodotus,  v.  43-48,  vii.  158.

16.  6.  a  sanctuary  for Lycurgus.      Cp.  Herodotus,  i.  66 ;

Strabo,  viii.  p.  366  ;  Plutarch,  Zy^i//^j,  31  ;  Nicolaus  Damascenus,  Fr.
57  (Miiller's  Frag.  hist.  Graec.  3.  p.  390) ;  Suidas,  s.v,  AvKovpyos,
Annual  sacrifices  were  also  offered  to  Lycurgus  as  to  a  god  (according
^  Plutarch)  or  as  to  a  hero  (according  to  Nicolaus  Damascenus  and
Suidas).  The  *god  Lycurgus'  is  mentioned  in  Laconian  inscriptions,
together  with  the  names  of  several  officers  (eiri/LicXiynJs,  <ruvSi#cos)  connected
'^thhis  worship  (C.  I.  G.  Nos.  1256,  1341,  1362).  An  cfiyyiyr^  twv
Ai/Kov/yyciCtfv  is  also  mentioned  in  an  inscription  (C.  /.  G,  No.  1364)  ;


340  SPARTA  bk.  hi.  lacoma

probably  he  was  an  official  interpreter  or  expounder  of  the  laws  attributed
to  Lycurgus.  Of  late  years  the  historical  existence  of  Lycuigus  lias
been  called  in  question.  Arguing  from  the  fact  of  his  worship  at  Spam
and  from  the  composition  of  his  name,  some  scholars  have  identified  him
with  Lycaean  (Wolfish)  Zeus  or  Lycian  (Wolfish)  Apollo.  See  G.
Gilbert,  Studien  zur  altspartamschen  Geschichte^  pp.  8o-i2o;  t.
Wilamowitz  -  MoUendorff,  Homerische  Untersuchungen^  pp.  267-283;
Ed.  Meyer,  *  Die  Entwickelung  der  Ueberlieferung  iiber  die  lykuiig[isdie
V^riajssMTif^^*  Rheinisckes  Museum^  N.  F.  41  (1886),  pp.  560-591;  tit
42  (1887),  pp.  81-101  ;  Busolt,  Griechische  Geschickie^  i.  p.  565  iyf;
S.  Wide,  Lakofdsche  Kulte^  p.  281  sqq.  Mr.  Gelzer  supposes  thit
Lycurgus  was  the  title  of  a  line  of  priests,  who  regarded  them*
selves  as  incarnations  of  Apollo,  and  who  in  virtue  of  their  semi'
divine  character  were  able  gradually  to  mould  the  Spartan  polity  into
the  shape  in  which  we  know  it.  See  H.  Gelzer,  *  Lykurg  und  die
delphische  Priesterschaft,'  Rheinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  28  (1873),  pp.

1-55.

16.  6.  the  Oleestonaeans.     No  such  people  is  known.     The  Greek

text  is  probably  corrupt.

16.  6.  Eurybiadas.     See  Herodotus,  viii.  2,  42,  74,  124.

16.  6.  the  shrine  of  the  hero  Astrabacns.  The  shrine  stood  at
the  gate  of  the  palace  of  King  Ariston,  whose  wife  pretended  that  she
had  been  visited  by  the  hero  in  phantom  shape,  and  that  Astrabacus  was
the  father  of  her  son  Demaratus  (Herodotus,  vi.  69).  Astrabacus  is
mentioned  again  by  Pausanias  below  (§  9).

16.  7.  The  place  called  LinmaemiL  Limnaeum  means  ^tbe
marshy  place.'  Strabo  says  (viii.  p.  363)  :  "  No  part  of  the  site  (of
Sparta)  is  marshy,  but  of  old  the  suburb  was  marshy  and  they  called  it
Limnae  (*  marshes ')  ;  and  the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  in  Limnae  rested
on  wet  ground,  but  now  it  is  on  dry  soil."  Linmae  was  one  of  the
quarters  or  wards  of  the  city.     See  below,  §  9  note.

16.  7.  The  wooden  image  etc.  Cp.  i.  33.  i  ;  viii.  46.  3  ;  and  see
below,  note  on  §  8  *  the  image was  afterwards  presented '  etc

16.  8.  the  Oappadocians  on  the  Enzine  claim  to  possess  the
image.  According  to  Strabo  (xii.  p.  535)  and  Dio  Cassius  (xxxvi.  13)
the  image  of  the  Tauric  Artemis  was  supposed  to  be  at  Comana  in
Cappadocia.  Comana  was  far  from  the  Euxine  ;  but  the  Cappadocians
on  the  coast  of  the  Euxine  may  very  well  have  set  up  a  rival  claim  to
the  possession  of  the  famous  image.  Cappadocia  extended  to  the  coast
of  the  Euxine,  according  to  Ptolemy  (v.  6),  though  not  according  to
Strabo.     See  Smith's  Did,  of  Geography^  article  *  Cappadocia.'

16.  8.  Artemis  Anaeitis.  For  inscriptions  of  Asia  Minor  in  which
Anaeitis  is  mentioned  see  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  HelUnique^  1880,  p.  128;
ib,  1884,  p.  376  ;  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  10  (1889),  p.  226.

16.  8.  the  image was  afterwards  presented  by  Selencos  to

the  Ssrrians  of  Laodicea.  According  to  Porphyry  {Deabstin.  ii.  56)  a
virgin  was  formerly  sacrificed  every  year  to  Athena  at  Laodicea  ;  but  a
deer  was  afterwards  substituted.  This  Athena  was  probably  the  goddess
whom  Pausanias  calls  Artemis.     It  is  likely  that  she  was  neither  Artemis


CH.  XVI  SPARTA  341

nor  Athena,  but  the  native  Syrian  goddess  Astarte.     Cp.  W.  Robertson
Smith,    Religion    of  the    Semites^    p.    466    sq.        Still    Selcucus    may
perfectly  well  have  identified  her  with  Artemis  and  presented  to  the
city  the  old  Greek  image  of  Artemis  which  had  once  stood  at  Brauron.
Prof,   C,    Robert   {Archdologische  Mdrchen,    p.    146   jyy.)    thinks    that
the  story  of  the  removal  of  the  Brauronian  image  by  the  Persians  was  a
mere  fiction  devised  not  earlier  than  the  time  of  Seleucus  in  order  to
...    give  historical  interest  to  the  image  of  Artemis  which  Seleucus  presented
-;-     to  Laodicea.     He  supposes  that  the  old  image  must  still  have  been  at
'-     Biauron  when  Euripides  wrote  the  Iphigeaia  in  Tauris,  since  Euripides
•f    makes  no  mention  of  the  loss  of  the  image.     It  is  hard  to  see   why
I     Euripides  should  have  mentioned  it ;  for  to  have  done  so  would  have
V     served  no  dramatic  purpose  and  would  only  have  reminded  the  Athenians
1    erf  their  shame.     Some  coins  of  Laodicea  bear  an
;.    archaic  figure  of  Artemis  (Fig.  48).     She  wears  I
%,    'modius'  or  'polos'  on  her  head,  a  long  tunic  and
\     upper  garment ;  in  one  hand  she  holds  aloft  an  axe,  i
the  other  she  has  a  round  buckler.    A  stag  stands  o
each  side  of  her,  making  it  certain  that  the  goddess
it  Artemis.      The  axe  which  she  holds  in  her  hand
ilnot  the  double  axe,  but  "an  axe  of  the  form  of  a
Picketed  celt"    This  figure  on  the  coins  of  Laodicea  is  ""'(co'NoTLAomi^
doobtless  a  copy  of  the  image  presented  by  Seleucus        in  svbiaX
to  ihe  city,  whether  that  image  was  the  Brauronian
oot  or  not.       Sec  Imhoof-Blumer  and   Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  on  Paus.
V  57  J?.,  plale  N  xi.  xii.

16.  9-  the  Spartan  T-<  "'"**'< '™'«,  the  OTnosnrians,  and  the  people
afMMoa  and  Fitaiw.  Limnae  or  Limnaeum,  Cynosura,  Mesoa,  and
Pitane,  seem  to  have  been  the  quarters  or  wards  of  Sparta,  the  in-
lulMtaiits  of  each  quarter  forming  a  local  tribe.  Originally  they  were
pwbably  separate  villages  (cp.  Thucydides,  i.  10),  which  gradually  grew
iMO  a  single  city  and  were  enclosed  at  a  later  time  by  regular  city-walls.
These  quarters  of  the  city  seem  to  have  had  their  own  subdivisions  ;  see
Pus.  iii.  14.  2.  Pitane  appears  to  have  been  the  aristocratic  quarter
(Plutarch,  De  exilio,  6).  Herodotus  speaks  of  it  (iii.  55)  as  a  township
«  parish  (deme).  See  also  Herodotus,  ix.  53;  Thucydides,  i.  20;
Athenaeus,  i.  p.  31  c;  Hesychius,  s.v.  IIiTaVBTTTS  orparos  ;  Polyaenus,
S-  14.  1  ;  Strabo,  viii.  pp.  363  and  364 ;  Stephanus  Byiant.  s.v.
HWoo;  C.  I.  G.  Nos.  1 24 1,  1243,  1338,  1347,  1 377,  1 386,  1425,  1426;
K.  0.  Miiller,  Dis  Dorter^  1.  p.  44  sqg.  ;  G.  Gilbert,  Griech.  Stoats-
'HcrtkUmer,^  I.  p.  43  sg.  ;  Leake,  Morea,  t.  p.  175  tqg.  ;  Curtius,
I'tlofi,  2.  p.  327;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  lai.

IS.  10.  sconrgijig  the  lads.  Spartan  lads  often  died  under  the
scou^e  (Plutarch,  Lycurgus,  18  ;  Lucian,  Anacharsis,  38).  Before
comrng  forward  to  be  scourged,  the  lads  had  to  go  through  a  course  of
("odily  training  (Hesychius,  s.v.  i^ua^ip).  Although  tradition  averred
tbat  the  scourging  of  the  youths  was  instituted  as  a  substitute  for  human
sacrifice,  analogy  suggests  that  it  was  simply  one  of  those  cruel  ordeals
irbich  among  savage  tribes  youths  have   to  undergo  on  attaining  to


342  ORDEALS  AT  PUBERTY  bk.  hi.  lacokia

manhood.  For  example  among  the  Bechuanas  no  lad  may  marry  dJi
he  has  gone  through  the  initiatory  ceremony  called  boguertu  The
ceremony  is  performed  upon  a  number  of  lads  together.  They  live  for
six  or  eight  months  in  huts  erected  in  a  secluded  spot  They  are
scourged  frequently  and  mercilessly,  and  they  "make  it  a  point  of  honoor
to  affect  absolute  impassibility,  and  the  greater  number  display  a  stoidsm
which  would  have  been  admired  at  Lacedaemon,  at  the  feasts  of  Diasa
[Artemis]  Orthia."  Blood  spouts  from  their  backs  under  the  switches,
and  the  marks  remain  deep  and  broad  for  life.  In  other  respects  the
training  of  these  young  blacks  resembles  that  of  the  Spartan  youths.
During  the  boguera  they  are  allowed  no  flesh  meat  except  what  they  can
steal ;  if  they  are  caught  stealing  "  they  are  beaten  unmercifully  for  their
clumsiness,  while  a  successful  foray  is  regarded  as  deserving  of  all  praise."
They  are  trained  to  endure  cold  and  hunger,  and  are  daily  practised  in
the  use  of  arms.  After  the  boguera  they  are  divided  into  bands  under
leaders,  and  hunt  antelopes,  gazelles,  buffaloes,  elephants,  etc  See
Livingstone,  Missionary  Travels  and  Researches  in  South  Africa^  p.  146
sq, ;  Casalis,  The  Basutos^  p.  263  sq.  ;  John  Mackenzie,  Ten  Years  north
of  the  Orange  River^  P*  375  ^99*  J  E.  Holub,  Sieben  Jahre  in  Siid-Afrika^
I.  p.  483  sqq,\  James  Macdonald,  *  Manners,  customs,  superstitions,
and  religions  of  South  African  tribes,'  Journal  of  the  Anthropological
Institute^  19  (1890),  p.  268  sq,  ;  id,^  Light  in  Africa,^,  157.  With  all
this  may  be  compared  the  training  of  the  Spartan  youths  as  descn"bed
by  Xenophon  {Reipub,  Lacedaem,  2-4)  and  Plutarch  (Lycurgus^  16  sqq)
So  among  some  Australian  tribes  at  the  initiatory  ceremony  called  Bora
the  youths  are  all  flogged  severely  by  old  men  with  strips  of  bark  and
have  to  endure  in  silence  (W.  Ridley,  Kamilaroi  aftd  other  Australicai
Languages^  p.  154).  Among  the  Kolosh  of  Alaska  young  men  used  to
be  severely  beaten  with  supple  rods  (A.  Krause,  Die  Tlinkit-Indianer,
p.  251).  Among  savage  tribes  girls  at  puberty  have  also  to  undergo
various  initiatory  ceremonies  ;  among  some  tribes  of  Brazil  and  British
Guiana  the  girls  on  these  occasions  are  lashed  by  their  friends  and
relatives  so  severely  that  they  sometimes  die  under  the  rod  ;  "  it  is  con-
sidered an  offence  to  the  parents  not  to  strike  hard."  See  A  R-
Wallace,  Travels  on  the  Amazon  and  Rio  Negro^  p.  496  (p.  345  of  the
reprint  in  the  Minerva  Library) ;  Schomburgk,  Reisen  in  Britisck
Guiana^  2.  p.  315  sq.  ;  Martius,  Zur  Ethnographie  Amerikds^  p.  644-
The  tortures  undergone  at  initiation  by  the  young  men  of  the  Mandan
Indians  are  familiar  from  the  descriptions  and  sketches  of  Catlin  (Letters
and  Notes  etc,  on  the  North  American  Indians ^  i.  p.  1 57  sqq,)  Probably,
as  I  have  suggested  elsewhere  {The  Golden  Bought  2.  p.  233  sq,\  these  |
ordeals  were  originally  instituted,  not  as  tests  of  endurance,  but  as
religious  purifications.  Among  primitive  peoples  beating  is  certainly
practised  as  a  healing  and  purifying  ceremony,  without  any  idea  0^
punishing  or  testing  the  endurance  of  the  sufferer.  See  The  Gold^
Bough,  2.  pp.  149  sq,,  187,  213-217,  233  note  3.

16.   10.  the  image  grows  so  heavy  etc.     This  mode  of  divinati*^^
by  weight  is  very  widespread.     Among  the  Greeks  themselves  we  ^^
told  that  women  who  desired  the  divine  guidance  on  some  matter  u^^^


H.  XVI  DIVINATION  BY  WEIGHT  343

o  repair  to  a  sanctuary,  and  there  lifting  up  a  clod  or  a  stone  judged  of
he  answer  to  their  question  by  the  apparent  weight  of  the  clod  or  stone ;
o  some  the  clod  or  stone  seemed  light,  to  others  so  heavy  that  they
:ould  hardly  stir  it  (Dio  Chrysostom,  Or,  xiii.  vol.  i.  p.  241  ed.
Dindorf).  So  among  the  Esquimaux  a  woman  will  tie  a  heavy  stone  to
i  strap,  and  twisting  it  about  will  judge  of  the  answer  of  the  goddess
Sidnd  to  her  questions  by  the  apparent  increasure  or  diminution  in  the
weight  of  the  stone  (Ch.  F.  Hall,  Narrative  of  the  Second  Arctic  Expedi-
tion mcuU  by  Ch.  F,  Hall^  edited  by  Prof.  J.  E.  Nourse  (Washington,
1^79)9  P*  i^S>  cp*  P-  242).  We  are  not  told  which  was  regarded  as  the
favourable  sign  by  Greek  and  Esquimaux  women  ;  but  we  may  conjecture
that  the  feeling  of  lightness  was  a  good  omen,  the  feeling  of  weight  a
bad  one.  At  least  this  is  the  general  rule,  where  a  like  mode  of
divination  has  prevailed.  In  regard  to  the  Esquimaux  this  is  directly
stated  by  another  observer.  When  they  are  sick  they  fasten  a  heavy
stone  to  a  stick ;  if  they  can  lift  it  easily,  they  are  sure  of  recovery.
See  Recueilde  Voyages  au  Nord  (Amsterdam,  1 7 1 5),  2.  p.  291  (p.  394  sq,
of  the  Amsterdam  edition  of  1732).  So  when  the  Lapps  lifted  up  the
sacred  stone  which  represented  their  god,  if  the  stone  seemed  heavier
than  usual  it  was  a  sign  that  the  god  was  angry  ;  if  it  felt  light,  it  was  a
sign  he  was  propitious  (Scheffer,  Lapponia  (Frankfurt,  1673),  P-  i  ^  S  -^^O
In  Samoa  there  was  a  war  god  Taema,  who  was  believed  to  reside  in  a
bundle  of  sharks'  teeth  done  up  in  cloth.  Before  going  to  battle  the
people  consulted  the  bundle.  If  it  felt  heavy,  it  was  a  bad  omen ;  if
light,  it  was  a  good  one.  See  Turner,  Samoa,  P«  SS*  On  the  ascent  to
Mandalay  Hill,  in  Burma,  there  is  a  little  chapel  in  which  there  is  a  flat,
oval  stone,  with  mystic  characters  inscribed  on  it.  People  consult .  the
stone  as  to  the  issue  of  a  journey  or  enterprise.  If  the  stone  is  heavy,
the  omen  is  bad.  Again  at  Nyoung  Oo,  in  Burma,  there  is  a  twisted
stone  which  sick  people  try  to  lift.  If  they  can  do  so,  they  will  recover  ;
if  not,  they  will  die.  See  Shway  Yoe,  The  Burman,  i.  p.  287  ;  Bastian,
Die  Vblker  des  ostlichen  Asien,  2.  p.  76.  In  some  parts  of  Loango
(West  Africa)  there  are  certain  iron  hammers  ;  a  woman  who  desires  to
have  children  will  try  to  lift  one  of  these  hammers.  If  she  can  do  so
easily,  she  will  have  a  child.  If  she  cannot  move  it,  she  will  have  none.
See  Bastian,  Z>;V  deutsche  Expedition  an  der  Loango-KOste,  I.  p.  269.
On  the  other  hand,  the  king  of  Gowa  in  Celebes  deems  it  a  very  bad
omen  if  certain  golden  chains  weigh  a  fraction  less  than  they  weighed
the  year  before  (B.  F.  Matthes,  Einige  Eigenthiimlichkeiten  in  den
Festen  und  Gewohnheiten  der  Makassaren  und Buginesen  (Leyden,  1884),
p.  21).

16.  10.  it  was  fotind  in  a  thicket  of  willows  etc.  Avery  similar
legend  was  told  of  the  image  of  Hera  at  Samos.  Some  Tuscan  pirates
earned  it  oflfi  but  finding  that  their  ship  could  not  move  with  the  image
on  board  they  placed  it  on  shore  again.  Here  it  was  discovered  by  some
people  sent  to  look  for  it.  They  set  it  against  a  willow-tree  and  twined
the  longest  willow  branches  round  it.  In  this  state  the  image  was  found
hy  the  priestess.  The  Carian  custom  of  wearing  crowns  of  willow  was
^^plained  by  this  legend.    See  Athenaeus,  xv.  p.  672  sq,    Cp.  Botticher,


344  SPARTA  BK.  in.  LACONU

Der  Baumkultus  der  Helleneriy  pp.  29  sq.^  333  sq.  These  legends  seem
to  show  that  the  willow  was  sacred  both  to  Artemis  Orthia  and  to  the
Samian  Hera.  The  oldest  tree  known  to  the  Greeks  was  said  to  be  the
willow  which  grew  in  the  sanctuary  of  Hera  at  Samos  (Pans.  viii.  23.  5).

17.  I.  like  the  Oadmea  at  Thebes  and  the  LarLsa  at  Argos.  It
is  a  little  strange  to  find  the  Cadmea  classed  with  the  Larisa  as  an
example  of  a  lofty  citadel.  It  is  rather  a  low  tableland  sloping  away
gently  to  the  plain,  very  different  in  all  respects  from  the  steep,  lofty,
sharp-peaked  Larisa.

17.  I.  the  highest  of  them  they  name  the  acropolis.  This  is
probably  the  hill  or  eminence  marked  by  the  remains  of  the  theatre.
There  would  scarcely  have  been  room  upon  the  others  for  all  the  build-
ings described  by  Pausanias.  This  is  the  view  of  Prof.  Curtius  {Pelop.
2.  p.  227),  W.  G.  Clark  {Pelop,  p.  166  sq,\  Vischer  {Ertnnerungm^
p.  376),  Bursian  {Geogr.  2.  p.  122  sq.\  and  Lolling  (Baedeker,'  p.  284).
Leake  thought  {Morea^  i.  p.  173  j^.)  that  the  acropoHs  was  the  smaller
eminence  to  the  north  of  the  theatre  hill.  To  the  present  writer  that
eminence  appeared  to  be  higher  than  the  theatre-hill ;  and  so  thought
Cell  (Journey  in  the  Morea^  p.  330).  W.  G.  Clark,  however,  judged
the  contrary  {Pelop.  p.  1 66).  But  even  if  the  northern  hill  is  the  higher,
we  cannot  be  sure  that  it  was  included  within  the  limits  of  Sparta.

17.  2.  Protectress  of  the  City.  She  is  mentioned  in  a  dedicatory
inscription,  found  at  Mistra^  recording  the  equestrian  victories  of  one
Damonon.  See  Roehl,  /.  G,A,  No.  79  ;  Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr,  Graec}
No.  17  ;  Roberts,  Greek  Epigraphy^  No.  264.

17.  2.  She  of  the  Brazen  House.     The  sanctuary  of  Athena  of  the
Brazen  House  at  Sparta  was  famous.     Most  ancient  writers  refer  to  it  as
a  precinct  or  sanctuary  simply,  but  some  of  them  speak  of  a  temple  of
the  goddess  (Polybius,  iv.  35  ;  Plutarch,  Parallela^  10;  Pausanias  here
and  iv.  15.  5).     The  precinct  certainly  contained  a  small  building  with
a  roof  and  door ;  for  in  this  building  the  royal  traitor  Pausanias  toolc
sanctuary  and,  being  walled  up  in  it,  was  starved  to  death  (Thucydides,
i.  134  ;  cp.  Diodorus,  xi.  45  ;  Polyaenus,  viii.  51  ;  Lycurgus,  In  LeocT'
128;  Plutarch,    Parallela^    10).      We    hear   of  other   persons   taking
sanctuary  within  the  precinct  (Plutarch,  Lycurgus^  5  ;  /V/.,  Agis^  11  ;  /V^»
Apophthegm.  Lacon.^  Lycurg,  1 1 ).  There  was  an  altar  in  it  on  which  sacri-
fices were  offered  (§  7  below  ;  Plutarch,  Apophthegm.  Lacon.^  Agesil.  8  ;
Apostolius,  ix.  22).     The  precinct  must  have  been  of  some  extent,  for
we  read  of  troops  being  ordered  to  muster  in  it  (Polybius,  iv.  22).   At  a
certain  sacrifice  it  was  the  custom  for  the  Spartan  soldiers  to  march  in
procession  to  the  precinct,  where  the  ephors  superintended  the  sacrifice
(Polybius,  iv.  35).     Solemn  oaths  were  sometimes  sworn  in  the  sanctuary
(Plutarch,  Apophthegm.  Lacon.^  Archid.  6).     Lycurgus  is  said  to  have
set  up  an  image  of  Athena  Optilletis  in  the  precinct  (Plutarch,  Ap^
phthegm.  Lacon.^  Lycurg.  7).    In  it,  too,  was  a  picture  of  Famine,  rep^^'
sented  as  a  pale  gaunt  woman  with  her  hands  tied  behind  her  b3<>
(Polyaenus,  ii.  15).     The  Messenian  hero  Aristomenes  is  said  to  ha-"^^
secretly  dedicated  in  the  precinct  a  shield  inscribed  with  a  taunt  to  ^^^
Spartans  (Paus.  iv.    15.   5  ;  Polyaenus,  ii.    31.   3).     We  hear  of  "t*^^


,e


I.  XVII  ATHENA  OP  THE  BRAZEN  HOUSE  345

actuary  having  been  once  robbed  (Plutarch,  De  garruiitate,  1 4).  The
oddess  of  the  Brazen  House  is  mentioned  by  Aristophanes  {Lysistrata,
joo,  1320),

Though  Pausanias  tells  us  here  that  the  temple  was  made  of  bronie
ip.  X.  5.  1 1),  and  Livy  (xxxv,  36)  speaks  of  the  bronie  temple  of  Athena
:p.  Suidas,  i.v.  ;^aXKtbiKot),  it  is  probable  that  the  building  was  merely
ned  with  bronze  plates,  like  the  so-called  Treasury  of  Atreus  at  Mycenae
ibove,  p.  126).  We  must  similarly  interpret  the  statement  of  Pausanias
^i.  19.  2)  that  two  chambers  in  the  treasury  of  the  Sicyonians  at
'lympia  were  made  of  bronze.  The  practice  of  lining  buildings  with
lates  of  bronze  or  copper  prevailed  in  Assyria,  from  which  Mr.
-  S.  Murray  believes  that  it  was  borrowed  by  the  Creeks  at  an
*rly  f)eriod.  He  says;  "That  the  younger  country  had,  in  fact,
amed  from  the  older,  may  be  demonstrated  from  the  circumstance  that
r'hereas  in  Assyria  the  habit  of  plating  wooden  structures  with  coppier
'as  founded  on  utility  and  doubtless  was  evolved  under  necessity,  from
he  scarcity  of  a  durable  and  resisting  material  like  marble  or  stone  ;  in
jreece,  on  the  other  hand,  copper  plating  was  applied  to  walls  of  stone,
^hich,  from  their  massiveness  and  durability,  have  fairly  withstood  all
he  effects  of  time  and  barbarism  from  near  the  Homeric  times  till  now.
rtiere  was  thus  no  obvious  utility  in  the  process,  and  for  this  reason  no
iuffieient  motive  for  the  independent  invention  of  it  in  Greece  "  {History
'/Greet  Sculpture,"  i.  p.  38),  At  Balawat,  in  Assyria,  Mr.  Rassam
'iscovered  some  bronze  plates  which  had  been  attached  to  the  wooden
ales  of  two  large  edifices  built  by  Shalmaneser  II.  between  859  and
24  fi.c.  These  bronze  plates,  now  in  the  British  Museum,  are  adorned
ith  long  belts  of  figures  sculptured  in  relief,  representing  the  king's
^nipaigns  and  victories.  See  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Hisioire  de  FArt  dans
Imtiquiti,  2.  p.  6zo  sqq.     Probably  the  reliefs,  described  by  Pausanias,

the  temple  of  Athena  of  the  Brazen  House,  were  similarly  arranged  in
inds  which  ran  round  the  walls,  Mr.  A.  S.  Murray  thinks  it  probable
at  "  the  original  idea  of  long  narrow  strips  of  bas-relief,  such  as  are
sociated  chiefly  with  the  friezes  of  Greek  temples,  grew  out  of  the
stem  of  covering  and  ornamenting  walls  with  plates  of  copper  "  {pp.  cit.

p.  39).     It  has  been  suggested,  however,  that  the  reliefs  in  the  temple

Athena  of  the  Brazen  House  were  not  on  the
*Us  but  on  the  statue  of  the  goddess.  For  on
^cedaemonian  coins  of  the  reign  of  Gallienus
^ig.  49)  there  is  figured  an  archaic  Athena,
Blmeted,  holding  lance  and  shield,  while  the
'Wer  part  of  her  body  from  the  waist  downwards
'  surrounded  by  horizontal  parallel  bands
<iomed  wnth  reliefs.  This  figure  is  supposed
'y  some  to  be  a  copy  of  Athena  of  the  Brazen
^ouse.    See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  _

"omm.  on  Paus.  p.  58,  with  pi.  N  xiii.  The  ''"  *^l*cid™o»X  "'
'aborate  reliefs  sculptured   on  the  garment  of

^e  colossal  statue  which  was  found  a  few  years  ago  at  Lycosura  (see
'ote  on  viii,  37,  3),  lend  some  support  to  the  view  that  the  relieft  here


346  SPARTA  BK.  in.  laco.vm

described  by  Pausanias  were  on  the  image  rather  than  on  the  walk
But  on  the  whole  the  other  view  (that  they  were  on  the  waJls)  is  the
more  probable.  As  to  these  reliefs  see  W.  Klein,  in  ArcMoUfgisck-
epigraphische  Mittheilungen  aus  Oesterreich  -  Ungarn^  9  (1885X  p.
169  sq,\  A.  S.  Murray,  History  of  Greek  Sculpture^  i.  pp.  38,  M;
Collignon,  Hist  de  la  Sculpture  Grecque^  i.  p.  229  ;  Overbcck,  Gtsck
d,  griecL  Plastik^*  i.  p.  71  sqq.  As  to  the  date  of  Gitiades,  the
sculptor  who  wrought  the  relief^  and  the  image  of  the  goddess,  see
note  on  iii.  18.  7.

17.  2.  the  spoils  of  Aphidna.     See  i.  17.  5  note ;  ii.  22.  6.

17.  3.  the  rape  of  the  daughters  of  Lencippiis.  On  representa-
tions of  this  legend  in  ancient  art  see  Bursian,  *  Raub  der  Leukippiden,'
Archdologische Zeitung^  1852,  pp.  433-444,  with  plates  xl.  xli.;  'EffrifUfk
dpxaioX.oyiKrjj  1885,  p.  1 2 1,  with  pi.  5  ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^
p.  162  sq,;  Kuhnert,  in  Roscher's  Lexikon,  2.  p.  1993  sqq,

17.    3*    Hephaestus  unloosiiig   his  mother  etc.     See  L

20.  3.

17.  3.  the  nymphs  are  giving  him  the  cap  and  the  shoes.  Thi^
subject  is  depicted  on  two  vases  in  the  British  Museum.  On  one  erf
them,  a  black-figured  amphora  of  Chalcis  (No.  584),  Perseus  is  repr^-"
sented  as  a  young  man  armed  with  a  sword  and  moving  to  the  lef«^-
Three  nymphs  are  coming  to  meet  him  ;  the  first  carries  the  winged
shoes,  the  second  the  cap,  and  the  third  the  wallet.  Behind  Perseus  i^
Athena.  On  the  other  vase,  a  red-figured  cratera  (No.  1686),  Pcrsem^
is  depicted  as  a  bearded  man  wearing  a  pointed  cap  and  armed  with  ^
spear  and  an  Argolic  shield.  He  is  standing  between  two  nymph^»
of  whom  the  one  is  presenting  him  with  the  scimitar  and  winged  shoc^*^
the  other  is  offering  him  a  goblet.  See  Fr.  Knatz,  Qjuomodo  Pers€r^
fabulam  artifices  Graeci  et  Romani  tracta^^erin t  (Bonnsiey  1893),  p.  !♦-
The  cap  made  him  invisible  whenever  he  put  it  on  (Apollodonis,  ii-
4.  2).  The  cap  of  invisibility  and  the  shoes  of  swiftness  occur  often  i^*
fairy  tales,  for  ejJample  in  a  Kalmuck  story.  See  B.  Jiilg,  Katfniikisck  ^
MdrcJien^  p.  12  ;  cp.  Steel  and  Temple,  IVide-awake  Stories y  p.  37  ;an^^
in  general  W.  A.  Clouston,  *  Invisible  caps  and  cloaks  :  shoes  of  swifts—
ness '  etc..  Popular  Tales  and  Fictions^  i.  p.  72  sqq,

17.  4-  Lysander his  two  battles.    See  ix.  32.  6  sq,

17.  5.  to  the  melody  of  flutes  and  the  harping  of  lyres  an.^
lutes.  Thucydides  (v.  70),  Aristotle  (quoted  by  Aulus  Gellius,  i.  lO*
and  Plutarch  {LycurguSy  21)  speak  of  flutes  only.

17.  6.  the  parts  have  been  hammered  separately  etc  '^Tli^
most  conspicuous  instance  of  this  process  at  present  known  is  a  bron*^
bust  found  in  the  Polledrara  tomb  at  Vulci  in  Etruria,  and  now  in  tU^
British  Museum,  with  which  were  discovered  several  porcelain  vas^
bearing  incorrect  imitations  of  Egyptian  hieroglyphics,  and  a  porcclaA*^
scarab  with  the  cartouche  of  Psammetichos  I.  (early  part  of  seven tl^
century  B.C.)  "  (Murray,  History  of  Greek  Sculpture^  i.  p.  40  note).

17.  6.  Olearchus  of  Bhegium.  This  artist  is  mentioned  only  ^^
Pausanias  here  and  vi.  4.  4.  Brunn  inclined  to  place  the  active  pe^^^
of  Clearchus's  life  between  540  B.C.  and  500  B.C.  (Geschichte  der  grt^^


CH,  XVIII  SPARTA  347

KiinstUry  i.  p.  50).     On  Dipoenus  and  Scyllis,  his  reputed  masters,  see
note  on  ii.  15.  i.

17.  6.  what  is  called  the  Scenoma.  Pro£  Curtius  has  suggested
{Pelop,  2,  p.  313)  that  this  may  be  the  *  small  building*  mentioned  by
Thucydides  (i.  134)  as  the  place  in  which  King  Pausanias  took
refuge.

17.  7.  Pausanias  his    history    etc.     See    Thucydides,    i.

128-134;  Diodorus,  i.  44  sg.  Cp.  Duncker,  Abhandlungen  aus  der
griech,  Geschichte^^^,  62-86;  H.  Landwehr,  *  Der  Process  des  Pausanias,'
Philologus^  49  (1890),  pp.  493-506.

17.  7-  what  I  heard  firom  a  man  of  Byzantium.  A  story  sub-
stantially  identical  with  what  follows  is  told  by  Plutarch  {Cimon^  6,  and
De  sera  num,  vind.  i  o).     But  see  the  next  note.

17.  9.  he  had  recourse  to  the  wizards  at  Phigalia.    According

to  Plutarch  {Cimon^  6  ;  De  sera  num,  vind,  10)  it  was  at  Heraclea  that

Pausanias  visited  the  necromancers  and  "  by  certain  propitiatory  rites  and

libations  called  up  the  soul  of  the  girl,"  who  appeared  to  him,  and  in  dark

language  hinted  at  his  approaching  death.     There  were  various  places  in

Greece  where  the  souls  of  the  dead  were  summoned  up  and  interrogated,

^  the  ghost  of  Samuel  was  brought  up  by  the  witch  of  Endor.    The  Greeks

^ed  such  places  *  oracles  of  the  dead,'  *  soul-conjuring  places  *  (v€kvo-

l^^^€lov^  \l/vxofJLavT€iov,  \l/vxo7rofi7r€Lov).     There  was  one  in  Thesprotia,

Bear  the  river  Acheron,  where  Periander  had  the  ghost  of  his  murdered

^fe  Melissa  conjured  up  and  questioned  (Herodotus,  v.  92  ;  see  vol.  2.

P'  161).     There  was  an  oracle  of  the  dead  at  Taenarum  (Plutarch,  De

^^^^    num,  vind,  1 7)  ;  and  it  is  said  that  there  was  anciently  one  at

the  I^ake  Avemus  in  Italy  (Diodorus,  iv.  22  ;  Strabo,  v.  p.  244).     Cp.

P.  Stengel,  Die  griechische  Sakralalterthiimery  §  51  ;    Bouch^Leclerq,

Histf^re  de  la  diiHnationy  3.  p.  363  sqq.     According  to  Plutarch  (Con-

iolat^   adApolL  14)  the  regular  mode  of  consulting  such  oracles  was  to

offer    a  sacrifice  and  then  go  to  sleep  in  the  holy  place  ;  the  soul  of

the   ^ead  person  thereupon   appeared  to  the  sleeper  in  a  vision   and

gave    him  his  answer.     But  sometimes,  perhaps,  the   credulous  were

deluded   by   phantoms   raised   by  the  jugglery  of  the  necromancers.

^^Ppolytus   has   described   in  detail  the  tricks  by  which  the  ancient

"^gicians  raised   spectral   apparitions   in    the   dark.     See  his  Refut

^^tum  haeres.  iv.  32  sq,  35  sq, ;  and  cp.  the  words  of  Procopius  cited

^^  H.  Kiihner's  note  on  Cicero,  TuscuL  Disput  i.  16.  37.

17.  9.  at  the  bidding  of  the  Delphic  oracle  the  Lacedaemonians
^^'  Plutarch  tells  us  {De  sera  num,  vind.  17)  that  the  Lacedae-
n^onians,  being  commanded  by  an  oracle  to  appease  the  soul  of  Pau-
^*nias,  fetched  necromancers  from  Italy,  who  by  their  sacrifices  "  dragged
^way  the  ghost  from  the  sanctuary  "  which  it  was  haunting  (aTrccnrcwravro

''^^  U/30V  t6  €t6<l)A.0v).

X7,  9-  a  spirit  called  Epidotes.  The  epithet  Epidotes  (*  bountiful  *)
'«  elsewhere  applied  to  Sleep  (ii.  10.  2),  to  Zeus  (viii.  9.  2),  and  certain

^ocJs  who  are  not  defined  (ii.  27.  6).

.  18.  I.  Aphrodite  Ambologera  ('she  who  staves  off  old  age'),
^^ording   to  Plutarch  {Quaest  Conviv,   iii.  6.  4.  2)  in  some  of  the


34S  AMYCLAE  bk.  hi.  laconia

hymns  to  the  gods  there  was  a  prayer,  "Stave  off  old  age,  O  fair
Aphrodite."

18.  I.  images  of  Sleep  and  Death.     On  the  question  how  the
ancients  represented  Death  see  JuHus  Lessing,  De  mortis  apud  veteres
figura\  C.  Robert,  Thanatos  (Berlin,  1879);  Baumeister's  Z>«f>twMt/^,
p.  1728  sqq.     As  to  Sleep  see  note  on  ii.  lo;  2.

18.  I.  the  lines  in  the  Biad.     The  passage  is  //.  xiv.  231.

18.  2.  Athena  Ophthalmitis.  Plutarch  (Lycurgus^  11)  g^ves  the
surname  of  the  goddess  as  Optilitis  ('OirrtAtTts),  adding  that  the  Dorians
of  the  district  called  eyes  optiloi.  He  mentions  another  view,  that
Lycurgus  did  not  lose  the  sight  of  his  wounded  eye,  and  that  he
dedicated  the  temple  as  a  thank-offering  for  recovering  the  use  of  it
Cp.  Plutarch,  Apophihegin,  Lacon,,  Lycurg,  7.  K.  O.  Miiller  {Die
Dorier^  i.  p.  401)  thought  that  Ophthalmitis  means  no  more  than
*  sharp-sighted,*  comparing  the  *  Sharp-sighted  Athena  *  at  Argos  (ii.  24.
2).  Those  who  see  in  Lycurgus  only  a  god  might  compare  the  one-eyed
Zeus  on  the  Larisa  at  Argos  (ii.  24.  3).

18.  3.  Ammon the  Libyan  oracle.    On  the  oasis  and  oracle

of  Ammon  see  Parthey,  *  Das  OraJcel  und  die  Oase  des  Ammon,'  in  the
Abhandiungen  oi  xhe  Berlin  Academy  (Philosoph.  histor.  section),  1862,
pp.  131-194  ;  J.  Diimichen,  Die  Oasen  der  libyischen  Wiiste  (Strasburg,
1877) ;  Gazette  ArMologique^  1879,  pp.  136  sqq,^  222  sqq,

18.  3*  when  Lyzander  was  besieging  Aphytis  etc.  See  Plutarch,
Lysander^  20.

18.  4.  Cnagian  Artemis.  Welcker  derived  the  epithet  Cnagian
from  the  Doric  knakos  {KvaKos),  *  tawny,*  an  epithet  applied  to  a  goat's
skin  by  Theocritus  (vii.  16;  cp.  iii.  5).  Hence  Welcker  interpreted
the  Cnagian  Artemis  as  Goat  -  Artemis.  He  explained  similarly
Cnacalesian  Artemis  at  Caphyae  (viii.  23.  3)  and  Cnaceatian  Artemis
near  Tegea  (viii.  53.  11).  Artemis  was  certainly  associated  with  the
goat ;  on  a  silver  medallion  from  Herculaneum  her  head  appears  between
two  leaping  goats.  But  the  correctness  of  Welcker's  explanation  of
these  epithets  is  doubtful.  See  Welcker,  Griechische  Gotterlehre^  i.
p.  591  ;  /V/.,  Antike  Denkmdler^  2.  pi.  iii.  5  ;  Preller,  Griechische  Mytho-
logies^ I.  p.  302  sq.\  Schreiber,  in  Roscher's  Lexikon^  i.  p.  506  ;  S.  Wide,
Lakonische  KultCy  p.  120.

18.  5-  I  do  not  believe  that  there  was  a  battle  at  Aphidna  etc.
See  i.  17.  4  sq,

18.  6.  Amyclae.  Polybius  says  (v.  19)  that  Amyclae  was  a  place
with  fine  trees  and  fine  fruits,  distant  20  furlongs  to  the  south  of
Sparta ;  the  precinct  of  Apollo  at  Amyclae  was,  he  remarks,  probably
the  most  famous  sanctuary  in  Laconia.  Excavations  conducted  in  1890
by  Mr.  Tsountas  forthe  Greek  Archaeological  Society  have  proved  that  this
celebrated  sanctuary  occupied  the  conspicuous  hill  of  Hagia  Kyriake  (St.
Sunday),  situated  an  hour  to  the  south  of  Sparta  and  ten  minutes  west  of
the  Eurotas.  On  the  top  of  the  hill  there  is  a  chapel  of  Hagia  Kyriake,
resting  on  ancient  foundations  ;  and  many  ancient  architectural  fragments
are  built  into  the  walls.  Mr.  Tsountas  excavated,  for  a  distance  of
1 1 3  yards,  the  remains  of  a  massive  wall  which  ran  round  the  top  of  the  hill


CH.  xviii  AMYCLAE  349

on  its  eastern  and  northern  sides.  This  wall  appears  not  to  have  been  a
fortification-wall,  but  to  have  been  built  to  support  the  banked-up  earth
on  the  top  of  the  hill.  Hence  it  is  only  found  on  the  northern  and
eastern  sides  of  the  hill,  which  are  steep ;  whereas  on  the  western  and
southern  sides,  where  the  slope  is  gentle,  there  is  no  trace  of  a  wall.
In  places  the  wall  is  preserved  to  a  height  of  over  6  feet  It  is  built  of
large  and  well-wrought  stones,  bonded  with  iron  clamps,  run  with  lead.
The  largest  of  the  stones  measure  from  6  ft.  6.  in  to  7  ft.  6  in.  in  length
by  2  ft.  3  in.  in  height.  To  the  north-west  of  the  chapel  Mr.  Tsountas
discovered  a  semicircular  foundation,  which  he  believes  to  have  been
the  foundation  of  the  throne  of  Apollo,  of  which  Pausanias  has  given
us  an  elaborate  description.  The  semicircular  foundation  is  built  of
unhewn  stones  bonded  with  clay,  and  is,  according  to  Mr.  Tsountas,  the
oldest  of  all  the  walls  discovered  by  him  on  the  hill.  The  earth  to  the
south-east  of  this  semicircular  foundation  was  found  to  be  blackened  as
with  fire ;  here  were  discovered  some  ashes  and  the  bones  of  animals,
including  the  horns  of  rams  and  the  teeth  of  a  cow.  Hence  the  spot
seems  to  have  been  a  place  of  sacrifice.  Among  the  objects  found  by
Mr.  Tsountas  on  the  hill  were  fifteen  fragments  of  roof-tiles,  bearing  the
inscription  (more  or  less  mutilated)  'AttoAAwvos  kv  'AfivKXaCoi  (*of
Apollo  at  the  Amyclaean  sanctuary').  These  inscriptions  prove  that
the  site  of  the  sanctuary  of  Apollo  was  on  the  hill  Some  archaic  bronze
statuettes  like  those  of  Olympia,  and  some  terra-cotta  statuettes  of
women,  like  those  of  Mycenae,  were  also  found.

In  Pausanias's  time  Amyclae  was  a  village  (see  19.  6).  It  is
supposed  to  have  been  situated  in  the  plain  to  the  south  or  south-west  of
the  hill  of  Hagia  Kyriake^  at  or  near  the  villages  of  Mahmoud-Bey
and  Sklavochariy  where  there  are  some  fragments  of  antiquity  and
inscriptions,  particularly  in  the  Byzantine  chapels  at  Sklavochori.

The  road  from  Sparta  to  Amyclae  leads  through  a  rich  and  fertile
country,  among  groves  of  orange -trees,  lemon -trees,  fig -trees,  and
mulberries,  and  fields  of  maize,  barley,  and  wheat.

See  npaicrticd  rrfi  'A/tx*  'Ercup.  1890,  p.  36  sq, ;  'E0i7At«p2f  dpxa«>Xoy(in},  18S9,
p.  131  ;  «/.,  1892,  pp.  1-26 ;  Mittheil.  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  15  (1890),  p.  350
iq.\  American  Journal  of  Archaeology ^  6  (1890),  p.  568;  Leake,  Morea^  i.
pp.  133-147;  ««.,  Pehp,  p.  162  5qq,\  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  245  sqq,%  Vischer,
Erinnerungen^  p.  38 1  sqq.  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  129  sq.;  Baedeker,^  p.  290  sq,',
Guide-Joanne^  2,  p.  257.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Hagia  KyriaMe  hill  two
prehistoric  rock  -  cut  tombs,  like  those  of  Spata^  Nauplia,  and  Mycenae,  were
found  a  few  years  ago  ('E^iuepif  d/)x<woXo7«ioJ»  1889,  p.  131).

18.  6.  a  river  Tiasa.  This  is  sometimes  identified  with  the
Magoula^  which  skirts  the  new  to\yn  of  Sparta  on  the  south.  But
the  Tiasa  may  have  been  the  modem  Panteleimon  further  south,  which
Pausanias  must  also  have  crossed  on  his  way  from  Sparta  to  Amyclae.
The  Magoula  may  have  been  the  ancient  Cnacion,  one  of  the  boundaries
of  Sparta  (see  Plutarch,  Lycurgus,  6).  See  Leake,  Morea^  i.  p.  145  ;
Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  244;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  120;  Baedeker,^  p.
287.     The  Tiasa  is  called  the  Tiassus  by  Athenaeus  (iv.  p.  139  b).

18.  6.  a  sanctuary  of  the  Graces,  Fhaexma  and  Oleta.    Cp.  ix.


350  TRIPODS  AT  AMYCLAB  bk.  hi.  laconia

35.  I.     Not  far  from  this  sanctuary,  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Tiasa,
there  was  a  sanctuary  of  Corythalian  Artemis,  to  which  nurses  carried
their  infants  to  celebrate  a  certain  festival.     Huts  were  erected  in  the
fields,  beds  of  brushwood  were  made  on  the  ground  with  rugs  laid  over
them,  and  the  people  feasted  on  goat's  flesh,  cheese,  beans,  figs,  loaves  of
a  peculiar  shape,  etc.     See  Polemo,  in  Athenaeus,  iv.  p.  138  f- 139  a  b.
Prof.  S.  Wide  interprets  the  epithet  Corythalian,  applied  to  Artemis,
as  meaning    *she  who  makes  children  thrive'  {Lakonische  Kulie,  {x
123  sq,)

18.  7.  bronze  tripods  etc  This  and  the  following  section  are
beset  by  chronological  difficulties.  Pausanias  speaks  of  five  tripods,
three  dedicated  from  the  spoils  of  the  Messenian  war,  two  from  the
spoils  of  Aegospotami.  It  is  with  regard  to  the  three  iformer  that  the
difficulties  arise.  Elsewhere  (iv.  14.  2)  we  are  told  that  the  three
tripods  in  question  were  made  from  the  spoils  of  the  fa^st  Messenian
war,  and  in  the  present  passage  we  are  told  that  the  tripods  were  made
by  the  artists  Gitiadas  and  Gallon.  But  the  first  Messenian  war  was
concluded  in  724  B.c,  and  Gallon  seems  to  have  flourished  about
500  B.C.  (see  note  on  ii.  32.  5).  How  is  this  apparent  contradiction  to
be  explained  ?

(i)  Prof.  Overbeck  formerly  suggested  (Geschichte  tier  gruck.
PlasHk^  I.  p.  112)  that  the  tripods  may  have  been  made  and  dediated
long  after  the  war.     This  is  hardly  probable.

(2)  Bursian,  following  Welcker,  supposed  that  only  the  two  tripods
made  by  Gitiadas  were  dedicated  from  the  spoils  of  the  Messenian  war,
and  that  Pausanias  made  a  mistake  when  he  classed  with  them  the
tripod  made  by  Gallon.  The  date  of  Gitiadas  is  uncertain  ;  all  that
we  know  about  him  is  that  he  made  these  two  tripods,  and  the  temple
and  image  of  Athena  of  the  Brazen  House  (Paus.  iii.  17.  2).  Bursian
supposed  that  Gidadas  may  have  been  at  work  immediately  after  the
first  Messenian  war.     See  Fleckeisen^s  Jahrbiicher'^  2  (1856),  p.  513.

(3)  A  third  view  is  that  Pausanias  has  confused  the  first  Messenian
war  with  the  third,  and  that  it  was  from  the  spoils  of  the  latter  (not  of
the  former)  that  the  tripods  were  made.  The  conclusion  of  the  third
Messenian  war  is  variously  dated  462  B.C.  and  456  B.C.  This  was
Brunn's  view.  He  held  that,  as  we  should  infer  from  Pausanias,  the
artists  Gallon  and  Gitiadas  were  contemporaries,  and  that  Gallon  may
still  have  been  at  work  at  the  close  of  the  third  Messenian  war.
Schubart  was  also  of  opinion  that  Pausanias  has  mistaken  the  first  for
the  third  Messenian  war.

(4)  Prof.  Overbeck  now  considers  that  Pausanias  was  mistaken  in
connecting  the  tripods  with  the  Messenian  wars  at  all.  He  holds  that
Gitiadas  was  a  contemporary  of  Gallon,  and  that  he  lived  at  the  end
of  the  sixth  or  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  century  B.C

On  the  other  hand  Mr.  Gollignon  inclines  to  assign  Gitiadas  to  the
first  half  of  the  sixth  century  RC.

See  Schubart  in  Zeitschrifl  fiir  Alterthumswissenschaft^  8  (1850),  p.  106  sgi'  '
Brunn,   Gesch,  der  griech,  Kiinstler^  i.  p.  8$  sqq,  ;  id,^  Die  Kunst  bet  HoirU<j^
p.  48  sqq,  ;  Immerwahr,  Die  Lakonika  des  Pausanias^  p.  98  sqq, ;  W.  Klein,  i


^iii  BATUYCLES  THE  MAGNESIAN  351

'ihgisch'tpigraphische  Miitheilungen  atis  Oesterreich-Ungam^  9  (1885),  p.
.  ;  Collifi;non,  Histoire  de  la  Sculpture  Grecque^  I.  p.  229  sq,  ;  OverbecK,
d,  griecn,  Plasiiky*  I.  pp.  71  sqq,

).  8.  Aristander  of  Paros.     It  has  been  conjectured  that  this
was  the  father  of  the  famous  Scopas.     For  in  two  inscriptions
at    Delos   mention    is   made    of  a    Parian    sculptor    by   name
mder,  son  of  Scopas.     The  Aristander  of  the  inscriptions  cannot
e  Aristander  here  mentioned  by  Pausanias,  since  the  inscriptions
g  to  a  very  much  later  date  than  405  B.C.,  the  date  of  the  battle
gospotami.     But  as  Greek  family  names  are  known  to  have  often
lated  from  father  to  son,  and  the  profession  of  artist  was  often
itary,  the  Aristander  of  the  inscriptions  may  have  been  a  de-
ant  of  the  Aristander  who  made  the  tripods,  and  the  latter  may
been  the  father  of  the  great  Scopas.     The  date  of  the  tripods,
I  were  made  from  the  spoils  of  the  battle  of  Aegospotami,  would
with  this  supposition.

)r  the  inscriptions  see  Bulletin  de  Corr,  HellMque,  5  (1881),  p.  462  sa,  ;
y,  Itisckriften  grieck.  Bildhauer^  Nos.  287,  288.  On  the  supposed  relation
slander  to  Scopas  see  Urlichs,  Skopas^  p.  3  sqq, ;  Murray,  Hist,  of  Greek
'ure^  2.  p.  285  ;  Brunni  Gesch,  d,  griech*  kumtler^  i.  p.  319  note ;  Overbeck,
.  d.  grieck.  Plastik,^  2.  pp.  l^sq.^  34.

8.  8.  Polyclitns  of  Argos.     It  is  doubtful  whether  this  is  the

or  the  younger  Polyclitus.  Brunn  and  Urlichs  decided  for  the
Itx.  See  Brunn,  Gesch.  d,  griech.  KUnsiler^  i.  p.  280;  /Vf.,  *Zur
h.  Kiinstlergeschichte,'  Sitzungsberichte  of  the  Bavarian  Academy,
ch,  Philos.  philol.  CI.,  November,  1880,  p.  467;  Urlichs,  Skopas^

Overbeck,  Schriftquellen^  No.  942  ;  id.^  Gesch,  d,  griech.  Plastik^^
508  ;  Collignon,  Hist,  de  la  Sculpture  Grecque,  i.  p.  486  sq.
8.  8.  These  tripods  are  larger  than  the  others  etc.  By  <  these
is'  Pausanias  means  us  to  understand  two  tripods  under  which
.  the  image  of  Sparta  and  the  image  of  Aphrodite  respectively,
e  two  tripods,  he  says,  were  larger  than  the  three  which  were
:  out  of  the  spoils  of  the  Messenian  war.

8.  9.  Bathycles  the  Magnesian,  who  made  the  throne  of  the
claean  god.     Nothing  is  positively  known  about  this  artist  beyond

Pausanias  here  tells  us.  It  has  been  supposed,  however,  that  he
1  contemporary  of  Croesus.  For  we  know  that  a  present  of  gold
by  Croesus  was  employed  by  the  Spartans  to  adorn  the  image  of
A.myclaean  Apollo  (Paus.  iii.  10.  8),  and  it  has  been  conjectured
this  *  adornment  *  of  the  image  refers  to  the  making  of  the  throne,
sever  the  artist  was  a  Magnesian  and  his  assistants  were  also
nesians  (§  1 4  of  this  chapter)  ;  which  suggests  that  they  may  have

sent  by  Croesus  along  with  the  gold.  Another  theory  is  that  the
uest  of  Lydia  by  the  Persians  in  the  reign  of  Croesus  may  have
m  this  group  of  Magnesian  artists  to  seek  their  fortunes  abroad.
lither  theory  Bathycles  would  have  flourished  about  550  B.C.  This
would  be  the  approximate  date  of  the  making  of  the  throne,
''he  shape  of  the  throne  and  the  arrangement  of  the  reliefe  upon  it


353


THRONE  OF  AMYCLAEAN  APOLLO  »K.  ill.  lacobu


have  to  be  gathered  from  the  vague  description  of  Pausanias.  Wt
have  to  remember  that  what  the  Greeks  called  a  throne  was  siroplf  a
chair ;  and  we  must  therefore  picture  to  ourscJves  the  Amyclaean  throDc
as  a  colossal  chair,  the  back  and  the  lower  parts  of  which  were  adorned
with  sculptures  in  relief.  Various  conjectural  restorations  of  the  thnme
have  been  proposed.  In  Mr.  A.  S.  Murray's  restoration  the  throne  il
represented,  roughly  speaking,  as  an  arm-chair  without  legs,  the  sea
resting  immediately  on  the  ground  and  the  image  of  Apollo  standing  <n
the  seat.  But  since  Pausanias  speaks  of  the  supports  of  the  thnnie
(iii.  i8.  lo)  and  of  going  under  the  throne  (iii.  19.  i;),
we  must  suppose  that  the  seat  was  raised  above  tlie
ground  on  supports  resembling  the  legs  of  a  chair.
This  view,  as  L.  Stephani  pointed  out,  is  suongjr
supported  by  the  device  on  some  coins  of  Aenus  (Fig.  ja),
which  represents  a  regular  throne  or  arm-chair  with  seal,  j
Fic  JO.— KBRUKs  back,  amis,  and  legs,  and  a  pillar-like  image  of  Hemts,
(coiNOFABMusX  '''^^  '^'^  pillar-lilcc  Amyclaean  Apollo,  set  upright  00  the
seat  (see  P.  Gardner,  Types  of  Greek  Coins,  pL  ni
No.  9;  Head,  Historia  Nummorum,  p.  214  sq.)  On  the  whole  Prot
Furtwangler's  ingenious  and  plausible  restoration  may  be  provisionaHy
accepted  (see  Fig.  51)-  *3"  '*•'*  hypothesis  the  throne  resembled)
chair,  or  rather  a  seat  for  several  persons,  with  a  back  and  legs,  but  no


arms.  The  reliefs  described  by  Pausanias  in  iii.  18.  10-13  *^'*,
arranged  in  three  horijontal  rows,  one  above  the  other,  on  the  back  °'
the  chair.     Each  of  the  scenes  occupied  a  separate  panel,  and  th^^


XVIII  THRONE  OF  AMYCLAEAN  APOLLO  353

-e  nine  panels  in  each  of  the  three  rows,  the  panels  in  the  middle
I  at  the  ends  of  each  row  being  larger  than  the  others,  because  the
nes  portrayed  on  them  contained  more  figures.     The  reliefs  described

Pausanias  under  the  throne  (iii.  18.  15  sq,)  were  placed  on  the
ss-bars  which  connected  the  legs  of  the  chair  on  all  sides  except  the
nt,  which  seems  to  have  been  open.  The  seat  proper  of  the  chair
s  formed,  not  by  slabs  or  planks  fitted  together,  but  by  a  row  of
rizontal  cross-beams  extending  from  the  back  to  the  front  of  the
lir,  with  an  empty  space  between  each  pair  of  beams.  Each  of  these
ams  might  be  regarded  as  a  seat  in  itself :  the  central  beam  was  the
)adest,  and  on  it  the  image  of  the  god  stood  (see  iii.  19.  i).  Im-
idiately  under  this  central  beam  was  the  tomb  of  Hyacinth,  serving

a  pedestal  to  support  the  central  beam  and  the  colossal  image  of
polio  (iii.  19.  4).  Prof.  Furtwangler  supposes  that  the  throne  was  of
)od,  and  that  the  reliefs  were  wrought  on  plates  of  bronze,  which  were
slened  into  the  wooden  framework  of  the  throne.  He  holds  that  the
micircular  foundation  discovered  by  Mr.  Tsountas  (see  above,  p.  349)
is  the  foundation,  not  of  the  throne,  but  merely  of  the  tomb  of
yacinth,  which  seems,  from  some  remains,  to  have  been  constructed

marble.  The  tomb  was  doubtless  far  older  than  the  throne  ;  it  may
ive  been  originally  round,  and  have  had  its  front  cut  away  for  the  sake

symmetry  when  the  colossal  throne  was  erected  over  it.

See  Quatremere-de-Quincy,  Lc  Jupiter  Olytnpicn  (Paris,  181 5),  pp.  196-210;
^I's  articles  in  Archdologiscke  Zeiiung,  10(1852),  pp.  465-476;  id.,,  11  (1853),
».  137-144 ;  also  his  articles  in  Z^itsckrift  fUr  Altertkumswissemchaft,  '853,
OS.  1-6,  13-16,  25-29 ;  Ruhl,  in  Archaologische  Zeitung^  12  (1854),  pp.  257-263  ;
;  Watkiss  Lloyd,  in  Museum  of  Classical  Antiquities y  2  (1852),  pp.  1 32- 1 60;
elcker,  *  Ueber  das  2^italter  des  Gitiadas,'  Kleine  Schriften^  3.  pp.  533-549 ;
^nn,  in  Rheinischcs  Museum^  N.  F.  5  (1847),  p.  325  sqq,  ;  id,,  Cesch.  der  griech.
Unst/eTf  I.  p.  52  sqq.;  id.,  Griechische  Kunstgeschichie,  I.  pp.  178-182;  L.
ephani,  *  Parerga  archaeologica,'  in  MSlanges  Greco-romaines  ttris  du  Bulletin
^toric<hphilologique  de  VAccuUmie  Impirialc  des  Sciences  de  St.  Petersbourg,  i
?49-i855),  pp.  194-200;  Overbeck,  Gesck.  der  griech.  Plastik,*  i.  pp.  67-71  ;
.,  in  Berichte  iiher  die  Verhandl.  d.  k.  siichs.  Gesell.  d.  Wiss.  zu  Leipzig,
lilolog.  histor.  CI.  44  (1892),  pp.  10-25 »  A.  S.  Murray,  History  of  Greek
ulpiure,^  I.  p.  89  sqq.  ;  W.  Klein,  *  Bathykles,'  Archdohgisch  - epigraphische
^ittkcilungen  aus  Oesterreich  -  Ungam,  9  (1885),  pp.  145- 191 ;  E.  Pemice,  in
"^rbuck  des  kais.  deutsch,  archdolog.  Instituts,  3  (1888),  p.  369;  Collignon,
istoire  de  la  Sculpture  Grecque,  I.  pp.  230-232  ;  A.  Furtwangler,  Meisterwerke
^ech.  Plastik,  pp.  689-719.

18.  9.  Leucophryenian  Artemis.     She  was  specially  worshipped
Magnesia  on  the   Maeander.      See  i.  26.  4  note ;  Preller,  Griech.
^ythol.^  1.  p.  331.     This  makes  it  certain  that  the  Magnesia  to  which
athycles  belonged  was  Magnesia  on  the  Maeander.

18.  10.  reliefs  representing  Atlas  etc.  Brunn  thought  it  probable
^ai  Atlas  was  represented,  not  in  a  scene  by  himself,  but  as  part  of
^e  foregoing  group,  watching  the  rape  of  his  daughters  Taygete  and
^cyone  {Griech.  KunstgeschichtCy  p.  179).  This  view  is  accepted  by
'rof.  Overbeck  {Geschichte  d.  griech.  Plastik^'^  i.  p.  70),  but  rejected
y  Prof.  Klein  (Archdolog.  -  epigraph.  Mittheilungen  aus  Oesterreich-
^^garn^  9  (1885),  p.  151).  The  language  of  Pausanias  lends  itself
VOL,  III  •  2  A


354  THRONE  OF  AMYCLAEAN  APOLLO    bk.  hi.  laconm

more  naturally  to  the  view  that  Atlas  was  represented  in  a  separate
scene.

18.  lo.  the  sixigle  combat  of  Hercnles  with  Oycniis.  Cp.  i.  27.
6  note.

18.  10.  Fholus.  The  legend  ran  that  HerciUes  was  hospitabljr
entertained  by  the  centaur  Pholus  in  his  cave  on  Mt  Erymanthus.  But
the  other  centaurs,  attracted  by  the  smell  of  the  wine,  came  armed  with
rocks  and  pine-trees  and  attempted  to  force  their  way  into  the  cave,  till
they  were  chased  away  by  Hercules  (ApoUodorus,  ii.  5.  4).  On  repre-
sentations of  Pholus  and  Hercules  on  vases  see  Stephani,  in  CompU
Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1873,  P-  9^  ^^9*  As  Hercules's  fight  with  a
centaur  was  represented  on  another  part  of  the  throne  (see  below,  §  16),
Prof  Furtwangler  suggests  that  in  the  present  panel  the  scene  depicted
was  not  Hercules's  combat  with  the  centaurs  at  the  cave  of  Pholus,  but
Pholus's  hospitable  entertainment  of  the  hero  {Meisterwerke  d.  gritck
Plastik^  p.  709).

18.  II.  why  Bathydes  represented  the  Bull  of  Ifinos  etc
Theseus's  adventure  with  the  Minotaur  was  represented  on  another  part
of  the  throne  (see  §  16  of  this  chapter).  Probably,  therefore,  Stephani  is
right  in  supposing  that  Pausanias  here  mistook  the  Marathonian  bull  for
the  Minotaur.  For  tradition  always  represented  the  Marathonian  buD
as  led  captive  by  Theseus,  and  the  Minotaur  as  slain  by  him.  See
Stephani,  *  Parerga  archaeologica,'  in  Milanges  Greco -romaims  (St
Petersburg),  i.  p.  129  sqq,  Stephaoi's  suggestion  is  accepted  by  Prof  W.
Klein  {Archdolog.-epigraphische  Mittheilungen  aus  Oesterreich-Ungarn,
9  (1885),  p.  152)  and  Prof.  A.  Furtwangler  {Meisterwerke  d,  griick.
Plastik^  p.  709).     As  to  the  Marathonian  bull  see  Paus.  i.  27.  10  nott

18.  II.  a  troop  of  Phaeacians  dancing  etc.  Prof  Klein  cod-
jectures  that  this  group  is  wrongly  described  by  Pausanias,  and  that  it
really  represented  the  dance  of  the  youths  and  maidens  whom  Theseus
saved  from  the  Minotaur,  and  that  the  figure  whom  Pausanias  took  to
be  Demodocus  was  Theseus  himself  (Archdolog.-epigr,  MittheU,  aa^
Oesterreich'Ungarn^  9  (1885),  p.  153).  His  view  is  accepted  by  Prof.
Overbeck  {Gesch.  d.  griech.  Plastik^^  i.  p.  70).

18.  II.  Perseus,  too,  is  represented  slashing  Medusa.  Luciao
{De  domo,  25)  mentions  a  picture  of  Perseus  cutting  off  Medusa's  head.
The  subject  is  represented  on  many  existing  monuments  of  ancient
art,  especially  reliefs  and  vase-paintings.  On  the  archaic  monuments
Perseus,  generally  represented  beardless,  is  seizing  with  his  left  hand
Medusa,  who  is  running  away,  while  with  his  right  hand  he  puts  the
knife  or  sword  to  her  throat.  On  the  later  monuments  Medusa,  repre-
sented as  a  beautiful  woman  with  naked  breast,  has  fallen  on  her  knees ;
Perseus,  a  young  man  with  a  mantle  fluttering  in  the  wind,  attacks  her
from  the  spectator's  left ;  with  averted  face  he  grasps  her  hair  with  his
left  hand,  while  with  his  right  he  puts  the  sword  to  her  throat.  On  some
of  the  later  monuments  Athena  stands  behind  Perseus  holding  her  shield
so  that  Perseus  may  see  the  reflexion  of  Medusa  in  it,  exactly  as  Lucian
in  another  passage  {Dial.  Marini,  xiv.  2)  describes  the  deed  as  having
been  done.     See  Fr.  Knatz,  Quomodo  Persei  fabulam  artifices  Graeci  et  ^


CH.  XVIII  THRONE  OF  AMYCLAEAN  APOLLO  355

Romani  iractaverint  {^oxxnsjt^  1^93))  PP*  13-16,  54  sq,  ;  G.  Loeschcke,
Die  Enthauptung  der  Medusa  (Bonn,  1894).

18.  II.  Tyndareus'  fight  with  Enrytns.  This  combat  is  otherwise
unknown.  Hence  Mr.  Pemice  conjectured  that  Tyndareus  was  really
represented  as  present  at  the  rape  of  the  daughters  of  Leucippus,  who
were  carried  off  by  Castor  and  Pollux,  the  sons  of  Tyndareus  (jahrbuch
d.  arch,  Inst  3  (1888),  p.  368  sq,)  This  view  was  at  first  rejected  but
afterwards  accepted  by  Prof.  Overbeck.  See  Berichte  uber  die  VerhandL
d,  k,  sacks,  GeselL  d,  IViss.  su  Leipzig^  Philolog.  hist.  CI.  44  (1892),
p.  19  sq, ;  Overbeck,  Gesch,  d,  griech,  Plastik^^  i.  p.  70.

18.  II.  Hermes  is  seen  bearing  the  infknt  Dionysns.  The
regular  tradition,  as  recorded  both  in  literature  and  in  art,  was  that  after
his  birth  Dionysus  was  carried  by  Hermes,  not  to  heaven,  but  to  the
nymphs  to  be  reared  by  them.  Probably,  therefore,  as  Stephani  has
pointed  out,  Pausanias  misinterpreted  the  relief.  See  Stephani, '  Parerga
archaeologica,'  in  Melanges  Greco-rotnaines  (St  Petersburg),  i.  p.  150
sqq.  On  representations  of  the  child  Dionysus  in  the  arms  of  Hermes
sec  H.  Heydemann,  Dianyso^  Geburt  und  Kindheit  (Halle,  1885),
p.  20  sqq.

18.  II.  Athena  is  leading  Hercnles  to  dwell  thenceforward
with  the  gods.  The  same  scene  was  represented  on  the  altar  (iii.  19.  5).
Hence  Prof.  Furtwangler  plausibly  suggests  that  in  the  present  panel
the  scene  represented  was  Athena  shaking  hands  with  Hercules — a
scene  which  is  often  depicted  oa  the  later  black-figured  and  early
red-figured  vases  (Furtwangler,  Meisterwerke  d.  griech.  Plastik,  p.  710  ;
ii,  in  Roscher's  Lexikon^  i.  p.  2216  ;  Welcker's  Antike  Denkmdler^  3.
pL  V.  i).  For  representations  on  vases  of  Hercules  led  to  heaven  see
Atmaliy  52  (1880),  pp.  100- 11 7  ;  Journal  0/ Hellenic  Studies^  5  (1884),
p.  235  sqq.y  with  plate  xli.

18.  12.  Oephalus  is  carried  ofL  by  Day.  See  i.  3.  i  note.
18.  13.  Anazis  and  Mnasinns.  Cp.  ii.  22.  5.
18.  13.  one  horse  is  carrsring  Nicostratns  and  Megapenthes.
Prof.  Klein  is  perhaps  right  in  supposing  that  the  artist  intended  to
convey  the  impression  that  there  were  two  horses,  one  for  each  rider,
but  that  one  of  the  two  was  hidden  by  the  other  {Arch.-epigr,  Mittheil.
(»us  Oesterreich-Ungam,  9  (1885),  p.  155).

18.  15.  Hercnles  slaying  the  sons  of  Actor.     See  ii.  15.  i  ;  v.

2.  I  sq,

18.  15.  Apollo  and  Artemis  are  shooting  arrows  at  Tityns.
The  same  subject  was  represented  in  a  group  of  statuary  at  Delphi.
See  X.  1 1.  I.  It  occurs  on  vase-paintings.  See  Overbeck,  Griechische
Kunstmythologiej  Besonderer  Theil,  3.  pp.  382-391.

18.  16.  the  wrestling  of  Hercnles  with  Achelons.  On  repre-
^tations  of  this  combat  on  vases  see  Archdologische  Zeitung^  1S62,
PP- 314-327,  329-331,  with  plates  clxvii.  clxviii.  ;  Gazette  Arch^ologique^
^875,  p.  84  sqq,^  with  plate  20.

18.  16.  how  Hera  was  bound  fast  etc.     See  i.  20.  3  ;  iii.  17.  3.

18.  16.  Menelaus  and  the  Egyptian  Protens.  See  Homer,  Od.
'^-  3^4  sqq.     Prof.  Overbeck,  however,  holds  that  Pausanias  probably


3S6  THRONE  OF  AMYCLAEAN  APOLLO    bk.  hi.  laconI:*

misinterpreted  this  scene,  and  that  the  wrestlers  were  Hercules  and  the
Old  Man  of  the  Sea  (Gesch.  d.  griech.  PlasHk,*  I.  p.  70).  As  to  the
Old  Man  of  the  Sea  see  iii.  21.9  note.

18.  16.  the  TroJanB  offering  Ubatioiu  to  Hector.  Hector  wu
worshipped  at  Troy  (Ilium)  even  under  the  Roman  empire  ;  indeed  his
worship  survived  the  public  recognition  of  Christianity  by  the  State.  For
the  Emperor  Julian,  in  a  letter  which  was  discovered  some  years  3i%0,
describes  how  the  bishop  took  him  to  the  sanctuary  of  Hector.  Here
the  emperor  saw  a  bronze  statue  of  Hector  in  a  little  shrine.  The
embers  were  still  glowing  on  the  altar  in  front  of  the  statue,  and  the
statue  itself  was  still  glistening  with  oil.  Facing  the  image  of  Hectw,
but  in  the  open  air,  was  a  statue  of  Achilles.  When  the  emperor,  fogs-
ing  surprise,  asked  the  bishop  if  the  people  of  Ilium  still  sacrificed  10
Hector,  ihc  prelate  shrugged  his  shoulders,  and  observed  that  Hedu
had  been  a  good  townsman  of  theirs  and  that  if  they  paid  their  respects
to  him  it  was  no  more  than  Christians  did  to  the  martyrs.  See  Julian,
ed.  Hertlein,  p.  603  sq.  The  letter  was  first  published  by  Hennia;,
in  Htrmts,  9  (1875),  p.  257  sqq.  Cp.  Lucian,  Deorum  condlimK,
12  ;  Strabo,  xiii.  p.  59s  ;   Philostnilus,  Heroica,  iii,  31  sq.

19.  1.  The  part  of  the  throne  where  the  god  would  alt  ii  nrt
coatllinoTis  etc.  For  Prof.  Furtwangler's  interpretation  of  this  passage
see  above,  p.  353,  and  Fig.  51.  The  passage  is  commonly  and  perhaps
more  correctly  interpreted  to  mean  that  on  the  seat  of  the  throne  (irfiidi,
it  must  be  remembered,  was  of  colossal  size)  there  were  a  number!^
smaller  seats  projecting  at  intervals  from  the  back  and  perhaps  from  tbt
sides  of  the  chair ;  thai  the  space  between  the  two  middle  of  these  lesser
seats  was  wider  than  the  space  between  any  of  the  other  seats  ;  and  that
in  this  widest  interval  stood  the  image  of  Apollo.  This  interpretadoo
fits  Pausanias's  language  much  belter  than  the  orie  given  by  ProC
Furtwangler,  For  Pausanias  seems  to  say  that  the  image  stood  in
(tfeimjKt)  the  widest  of  the  intervals  between  the  seats  ;  he  does  nM
say,  what  Prof.  Furtwangler  supposes  him  to  say,  that  the  image  siod
upon  {i<f>iaTt)Kt)  the  widest  of  the  seats.

19.  I  and  2.  here  the  image  atanda  etc.  The  image  is  represented
on  Spartan  coins.  On  one  coin  the  image  is  clad  in  a  long  robe,  on
another  (Fig.  53)  it  is  represented  unclad  an"!
pillar- shaped,  the  pillar  tapering  away  to  ibc
bottom.  The  image  is  helmeted  and  carriesa  lin«
and  a  bow,  exactly  as  it  is  described  by  Pausanias
"The  head  of  the  deity  is  archaic,  with  long  cuH
falling  on  to  the  neck,  and  a  queue  behind"  Se*
Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  0"
Paus.  p.  59,  with  plate  N  xvi.  xvii.  These  writers
nc.  ji.-THH  «pnni.  or  assume  that  the  unclad  type  is  the  older.  B"'
AMvcLAE  (coin  ar  ^^g  know  from  Pausanias  (iii.  16.  a)  that  a  gantient
was  woven  for  the  image  every  year.  May  not  th*
coins  represent  the  image  as  ic  appeared  on  different  occasions,  ro*
clothed,  now  unclothed,  according  to  the  requirements  of  the  ritual  ■
As  10  the  position  of  the  image  standing  upright  on  the  seat  of  th*


c.  XIX  TOMB  OF  HYACINTH  357

rone  or  chair,  there  is  an  exact  parallel  to  this  on  the  coins  of  Aenus.
;e  above,  p.  352.

19.  3.  The  pedestal  of  the  image  is  in  the  form  of  an  altar,  and
Ley  say  that  Hyacinth  is  buried  in  it  etc.  Probably  this  worship  of
e  dead  Hyacinth  was  the  original  local  cult  of  Amyclae,  upon  which  at
later  period  the  worship  of  Apollo  was  superposed  by  the  Dorian
vaders,  just  as  in  later  times  the  Virgin  and  the  saints  succeeded  to,
ithout  wholly  superseding,  the  old  Greek  gods  and  heroes.  See  £.
ohde,  Psyche^  p.  128  sqq,\  A.  Furtwangler,  Meisterwerke  d,  grieck.
lastik^  p.  694 ;  S.  Wide,  Lakonische  Kulte,  p.  289  sqq,

19.  4-  Nicias painted  him  as  the  pink  of  youthftd  beanty.

his  picture  oif  Hyacinth  by  the  Athenian  painter  Nicias  greatly  took
le  fancy  of  Augustus,  who,  after  the  capture  of  Alexandria,  carried  it
f  to  Rome.  Hence  Tiberius  placed  the  picture  in  the  temple  of
ugustus  after  the  death  of  the  latter  (Pliny,  Nat  Hist  xxxv.  131).
ausanias  may  have  seen  the  picture  at  Rome.  The  painter  Nicias  seems
'  have  flourished  in  the  second  half  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  (Brunn,
esc  A.  d,  grieck,  Kiinstler^  2.  p.  167).  He  may  be  the  Nicias,  whose
loregic  monument  was  partly  built  into  the  Beul^  gate  of  the  Acropolis
:  Athens  (see  vol.  2.  p.  250).  The  date  of  that  monument  is  320-319
C.  If  this  identification  is  correct,  the  name  of  the  painter's  father
as  not  Nicomedes,  but  Nicodemus.  And  in  fact  in  Paus.  i.  29.  15
vo  MSS.  (Pc  La)  do  give  the  name  as  Nicodemus.  See  Kdhler  in
Uttheit  d,  arch,  Inst  in  Atken^  10  (1885),  p.  231  sqq,\  Miss  Harrison,
\ncient  Athens^  p.  344  sqq,\  W.  Gurlitt,  Ueber  Pausanias,  p.  181  sq.

19.  6.  a  sanctnary  of  Alexandra.  At  the  village  of  MaAmoud
ley,  about  4^  miles  south  of  New  Sparta,  in  a  garden  near  the  church
f  the  Hagia  Paraskeve,  was  found  in  1878  an  inscription  which  seems
0  show  that  this  was  the  site  of  the  sanctuary  of  Alexandra.  The
ascription  records  a  decree  passed  by  the  people  of  Amyclae  in  honour
if  some  of  their  magistrates,  and  mentions  that  the  stone  bearing  the
ascription  was  to  be  set  up  in  the  sanctuary  of  Alexandra.  Other
"emains  of  antiquity  found  in  the  village  confirm  the  view  that  here  was
:he  sanctuary  in  question.  If  this  is  so,  it  follows  that  the  village  of
Amyclae  in  Pausanias's  time  could  not  have  stood  on  the  hill  of
ffagia  Kyriake,  See  Mittheil,  d,  arch,  Inst  in  Athen,  3  (1878),
pp.  164-17 1  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscript,  Graec,  No.  306;  Cauer,
Delectus  Inscr,  Graec, ^  No.  32  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  291.

19.  6.  the  Dorians  call  wings  psilcL  The  word  psilon  {xj/iXxiv)
seems  to  be  only  a  dialectic  form  oi  ptilon,  pteron  (irrtXov,  irrcpov),  the
regular  Greek  words  for  a  wing.  See  VaniJek,  Griech,  Latein,  Etymolog,
Worterbuch,  p.  466  ;  Gustav  Meyer,  Griech,  GrammaHk^  §  210.  But
Lobeck  (on  Phrynichus,  p.  435)  interprets  Psilax  as  *  beardless'  from
^iA,6s.  On  supposed  representations  of  Dionysus  Psilax  (the  winged
I^ionysus)  in  ancient  art  see  Roscher's  Lexikon,  i.  p.  11 52  sq,\  Gazette
Anhiologique,  1875,  PP-  no- 113.     Cp.  Hesychius,  j.v.  i//iX.aKa.

19.  7.  a  wooden  image  of  Athena  Alea.  Though  Pausanias  only
inentioDs  an  image,  there  appears  to  have  been  a  spacious  precinct  of
the  goddess  ;  for  when  the  Thebans  were  about  to  cross  the  Eurotas  to


358  THERAPNE  bk.  hi.  laconia

attack  Sparta,  they  saw  that  the  precinct  of  Athena  Alea  was  full  of
soldiers.  So  they  refrained  from  crossing.  See  Xenophon,  HelUnka^
vi.  5.  27.  Beside  the  new  bridge  over  the  Eurotas  Mr.  Nestorides  saw
vestiges  of  ancient  foundations  built  of  massive  walls,  together  with  a
piece  of  a  column.  He  conjectures  that  these  were  the  ruins  of  the
sanctuary  of  Athena  Alea.  These  remains  seem  to  have  been  since
destroyed.     See    K.    Nestorides,    T(yn-oypa<l>ta   rrjs   dp\aw    Sira^yn/s,

p.  93.

19.  7.  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand  {koiule),  Sosibius,  as  reported
by  Clement  of  Alexandria,  tells  us  that  in  the  fight  with  the  sons  of
Hippocoon  Hercules  was  wounded  in  the  hand  (Clement  of  Alex.
ProtrepL  ii.  36,  p.  31,  ed.  Potter).  This  seems  at  first  sight  to
determine  the  sense  of  kotuU  here  in  Pausanias.  But  sometimes  the
word  means  the  socket  of  a  joint,  especially  of  the  hip -joint  (see
Liddell  and  Scott,  Lexicon^  s,v,  Korvkrf),  Prof.  S.  Wide  supposes  that
Sosibius  meant  to  say  that  Hercules  was  wounded  in  the  hip-joint
{kotule),  and  that  Clement  of  Alexandria,  in  reporting  him,  misunder-
stood the  obsolete  word  kotule^  and  substituted  for  it  cheir^  'hand'
{Lakomsche  Kulte^  p.  187).  This  view  is  strongly  confirmed  by  a
passage  of  Pausanias,  overlooked  by  Prof.  Wide,  where  our  author  men-
tions ''an  image  of  Hercules,  with  a  wound  on  his  thigh,  which  he
received  in  the  first  battle  which  he  fought  with  the  sons  of  Hippocoon"
(viii.  53.  9).  Probably,  therefore,  in  the  present  passage  of  Pausanias
the  word  kotuU  should  be  translated  'hip-joint,'  not '  hollow  of  the  hand'
My  version  of  the  passage  (vol.  i.  p.  165)  should  be  corrected
accordingly.  For  other  instances  of  divine  or  heroic  beings  wounded
in  the  leg  see  viii.  28.  6  note.

19.  8.  Ares  got  the  snmame  Theritas  etc.  Pausanias  derives
the  surname  Theritas  from  thir^  therion^  *a  wild  beast.'  Prof  S.  Wide
thinks  that  the  worship  of  Ares  Theritas  was  imported  from  Boeotia ;  he
compares  the  name  of  Theras,  a  descendant  of  Cadmus  (Paus.  iii.  !•
7  sq.\  and  is  inclined  to  accept  Prof.  Maass's  conjecture  that  Colchis,
to  which  the  Argonauts  sailed  and  from  which  this  image  of  Ares  was
said  to  have  been  brought  back,  was  no  other  than  Calchis  in  Euboea.
See  S.  Wide,  Lakomsche  KuUe^  p.  149  sq,

19.  8.  as  Homer  says  of  Achilles  etc.     See  //.  xxiv.  41.

19.  9.  Therapne.     Therapne  or  Therapnae,  as  it  was  also  called,
lay  a  little  to  the  south-east  of  Sparta  on  the  opposite  (eastern)  side  of
the  Eurotas.     A  line  of  precipitous  cliffs  here  skirts  the  eastern  bank  of
the  river,  just  opposite  the  point  where  the  Magoula  river  falls  into  the
Eurotas.     The  passage  between  the  foot  of  the  cliffs  and  the  river  is
very   narrow.     On    these   heights,    of  which   the  highest  reaches  an
elevation  of  about  760  feet,  stood  Therapne.     It  has  been  supposed  that
Therapne  was  the  site  of  the  Achaean  city  which  bore  the  name  of
Sparta,  and  that  accordingly  the  Homeric  Sparta  was  at  Therapne  (cp-
Stephanus   Byzantius,   s,v,   QcpaTrvai).     Certainly   the  position  of  the
place,  on  a  commanding  and  not  very  accessible  height,  is  more  like  th^
situations   which,   to  judge  from   Mycenae  and  Tiryns,  the   Achaeal'^
chose  for  their  strongholds  than  the  much  lower  site  of  Sparta.     Th^


1.  XIX  THERAPNE  359

>sociation  of  Menelaus  and  Helen  with  Therapne  points  in  the  same
irection,  and  so  too  does  the  discovery  of  Mycenaean  pottery  near  the
inctuary  of  Menelaus  (see  below).  Herodotus  (vi.  61)  mentions  a
mctuary  of  Helen  at  Therapne ;  it  contained  an  image  of  the  goddess
[elen.  This  sanctuary  of  Helen  may  have  been  identical  with  the
imple  of  Menelaus  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  Polybius  (v.  chs.  18,  21,
2)  and  Livy  (xxxiv.  28)  give  the  name  of  Menelaeum  to  the  height  on
'hich  the  sanctuary  of  Menelaus  stood.  Isocrates  tells  us  (x.  63)  that
t  Therapne  holy  sacrifices  continued  to  be  offered  to  both  Menelaus
nd  Helen  as  to  a  god  and  a  goddess,  not  merely  as  to  a  hero  and
eroinc.  There  was  a  festival  of  Menelaus  (Athenagoras,  SupplicaHo^
4.  p.  62,  ed.  Otto),  and  a  festival  of  Helen,  at  which  the  girls  went  in
rocession  to  the  sanctuary  in  wicker  cars  (Hesychius,  s,vv.  €A€v(€)ta  and
AwoBpa),  It  was  in  Therapne  that  Castor  and  Pollux  were  supposed
0  lie  buried  on  the  alternate  days  when  they  were  not  among  the  gods
in  Olympus  (Pindar,  Nem,  x.  10 1  5qq,\  Pytk.  xi.  94  sqq, ;  Isthtn,  i.  41
q.\  Alcman,  cited  by  the  schol.  on  Euripides,  Troades^  210).  Accord-
ng  to  Stephanus  Byzantius  {s,v,  Otpdirvai)  there  was  a  temple  of  the
Dioscuri  at  Therapne.

The  ruins  of  what  was  probably  the  temple  of  Menelaus  still  exist
on  the  highest  summit  of  the  line  of  heights  at  Therapne.  They  were
partially  excavated  by  Ludwig  Ross  in  the  winter  of  1833-34.  The
edifice  was  in  the  form  of  a  quadrangle  extending  from  north  to  south.
Only  the  foundations  remain,  consisting  of  three  platforms,  the  upper-
most of  which  (38  feet  long  by  20  feet  broad)  no  doubt  supported  the
temple.  Ross  excavated  the  short  north  side  of  the  building,  and
cleared  the  outer  wall  of  the  lowest  platform.  This  wall  is  more  than
60  feet  long  and  is  well  preserved  to  a  height  of  from  3  to  8  feet ;  it  is
built  of  great  blocks  of  a  hard  conglomerate,  some  of  the  blocks  measur-
ing 12  feet  long  and  i^  feet  high.  It  seems  that  the  wall  was  crowned
by  a  marble  cornice  with  simple  mouldings ;  some  of  the  marble  slabs
of  the  cornice  were  found  lying  at  the  foot  of  the  wall.  The  inner  core
of  the  foundations  was  built  of  a  much  softer  stone,  which  has  weathered
^d  crumbled  away.  The  north  wall  of  the  lowest  platform  rests  on  a
step  which  projects  6  or  7  inches.  On  or  beside  this  step  were
found,  lying  along  the  whole  length  of  the  wall,  innumerable  little  leaden
figures,  I  or  2  inches  high.  Some  of  them  represent  men  wearing
piumed  helmets  and  great  round  shields  which  cover  the  body  from  the
neck  to  the  knee,  and  over  the  rim  of  which  the  spear  projects.  Other
figures,  still  more  numerous,  represent  women  clad  in  striped  and
checkered  garments,  which  are  drawn  in  at  the  waist.  Other  figures,
^in,  less  numerous  than  the  preceding,  represent  horses  with  or
^thout  riders.  In  addition  there  was  found  an  immense  quantity  of
^en  rings  with  rays  projecting  from  them  on  all  sides.  Lastly,  a
smaller  number  of  similar  figures  made  of  clay  came  to  light,  most  of
them  very  rudely  shaped.  All  these  were  probably  votive  offerings  to
Menelaus  and  Helen.  The  back  of  all  the  figures  is  quite  smooth  and
^t,  from  which  we  infer  that  they  were  meant  to  be  attached  to  some-
^mg.     In  1889  the  Greek  Government  completed  the  excavation  of  the


36o  THERAPNE  bk.  hi.  laconia

building ;  five  little  leaden  figures  of  men  armed  with  bow  or  shield  etc.
were  found  in  the  course  of  the  excavations.  To  the  south-east  of  the
building,  a  little  lower  down  the  hill,  there  is  a  chapel  of  the  Prophet
Elias,  in  which  some  architectural  fragments  of  antiquity  may  be  seen.
And  ICO  or  200  yards  to  the  south  of  the  chapel  many  potsherds  of
the  Mycenaean  style  have  been  found,  all  of  them,  however,  unpainted
and  imglazed.

See  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  82;  Leake,  Morea^  I.  p.  1 81  5qq,\  id,,  Pdop.
p.  161  5q,\  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  pp.  239  sq.y  316  sq,',  L.  Ross,  in  Archiiologiukt
Zeitung,  12  (1854),  pp.  217-220;  1^.,  Archkologische  Aufsiiise^  2.  pp.  341-344:
iV/.,  Wandcrungen,  2.  p.  13  sq.\  AHttheil,  d.  arch,  InsL  in  Athen^  2  ( 1877),  p.  320
5q.\  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  129  x^.;  Baedeker,'  p.  287;  Guide-Joanney  2.  p.  254;
AeXWoy  d/>xaioXo7iK6y,  1889,  p.  17 1  sq,\  *E<fnifiepls  dpxaitoXoyuc/ft  1 889,  p.  1 30 if

19.  9.  The  story  told  by  the  Rhodians  etc.  A  somewhat  different
legend  is  told  by  Polyaenus  (i.  13).  He  says  that  when  Menelaus  was
returning  from  Egypt  with  Helen,  he  put  into  Rhodes ;  and  that
Polyxo,  hearing  of  their  arrival  and  eager  to  avenge  the  death  of  her
husband  Tleptolemus  who  had  perished  at  Troy,  ran  down  to  the  beach
with  a  multitude  of  men  and  women  armed  with  fire  and  stones.
But  Menelaus  concealed  Helen  in  the  hold  of  the  ship,  and  dressed
up  the  fairest  of  her  handmaidens  in  the  apparel  of  her  mistress.
So  the  Rhodians,  taking  the  handmaiden  to  be  Helen,  slew  her.
But  Menelaus  sailed  away  with  the  real  Helen.  Ptolemaeus  says
(Nov.  Hist,  iv.  p.  189  of  Westermann's  Mythographi  Graeci)  that
a  certain  herb  called  Helen's  herb  grew  in  Rhodes  and  was  so  called
because  it  was  found  growing  beside  the  oak  on  which  Helen  hanged
herself;  all  who  ate  of  the  herb  fell  to  quarrelling.  Cp.  E.  Maass,
Aratea^  p.  367  sq.  With  the  Rhodian  worship  of  Helen  of  the  Tree
{i.e,  of  Helen  who  was  hanged  on  the  tree)  we  may  compare  the  Arcadian
worship  of  the  Strangled  Artemis  (viii.  23.  6  sq,)  That  Helen  of  the
Tree  was  really  a  nymph  or  goddess  of  the  tree  is  probable,  and  the  prob-
ability is  confirmed  by  a  passage  of  Theocritus  (xviii.  43  sqq.)  in  which  he
represents  twelve  Spartan  maidens  about  to  place  a  wreath  of  lotus  flowers
on  a  plane-tree,  to  drop  oil  from  a  silver  flask  under  the  tree,  and  to  cut
on  its  bark  the  words,  "  Worship  me,  I  am  Helen's  tree."  As  here  a
plane-tree  is  sacred  to  Helen,  so  at  Caphyae  in  Arcadia  there  was  a  plane-
tree  named  after  Helen's  husband  Menelaus  (viii.  23.  4).  Cp.  Botticher,
Baumkultus  der  Hellenen,  p.  50  sq.]  W.  Mannhardt,  Antike  Wald-  und
Feldkulte^  p.  22  sq.\  S.  Wide,  Lakonische  Kulte^  p.  342  sqq,

19.  9.  Nicostratns  and  Megapenthes.  They  were  bastard  sons
of  Menelaus  (iii.  18.  6).

19.   II.  the  White  Isle.     On  this  island  see  especially  Philostratus,
Heroica^   xx.    32-40   (pp.    313-316   of  the   Didot  ed.)      According  to
Philostratus  there  was  a  sanctuary  in  the  island  containing  images  01
Achilles  and  Helen.     Seamen  might  land  and  sacrifice  at  the  sanctuary ••
but  they  had  to  quit  the  island  at  sunset.     No  one  was  allowed  to  tak^
up  his  abode  in  the  isle.     Women  might  not  set  foot  on  it.     At  nigl^
Achilles  and  Helen  held  high  revelry,  carousing  and  singing  of  the^
loves  and  chanting  the  verses  of  Homer  in  high  clear  voices,  whic  ^


H.  XX  THE  WHITE  ISLE

rent  ringing  far  over  the  sea,  thrilling  with  awe  and  wonder  t'

rbo  heard  them.     Mariners  who  had  anchored  off  the  shore

x>,  that  they  had  heard  the  trampling  of  horses,  the  clash  of  arms,  an..

lie  shouts  of  warriors.     A  Greek  inscription,  recording  a  decree  of  the

leople  of  Olbia,  has  been  found  on  the  island  {Bulletin  de  Corresp,

'lelUmquty  1885,  pp.  375-379).       Cp.  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  5

1884),  P*  16  X|^. ;  Roscher's  Lexikon^  i.  p.  59  ^1^.

19.  12.  a  Crotonian  named  Leonymns.  The  story  which  follows
3  told  also  by  Conon  {NarrationeSy  18),  but  he  calls  the  hero  of  it
Vutoleon,  instead  of  Leonymus.

19.  12.  AJax  was  posted  in  the  van.  When  the  Locrians  marched
0  battle,  they  used  to  leave  a  clear  space  for  the  soul  of  Ajax  in  their
ine  of  battle  (Conon,  /.r.)  The  Zulus  believe  that  the  souls  of  their
incestors  go  out  to  battle  with  them  and  aid  them  in  the  fight  (Francis
Fleming,  Southern  Africa^  p.  259 ;  cp.  A.  Bastian,  Der  Mensch  in  der
Geschichte,  2.  p.  364  sq,)

19.  12.  the  Pythian  priestess  bade  him  sail  to  the  White  Isle

etc.  On  an  amphora  of  Lower  Italy  a  scene  is  painted  which  has  been
interpreted  as  the  purification  of  the  Locrian  hero  in  the  White  Isle.
A  warrior  is  standing  armed  with  helmet,  shield,  and  spear.  Before
him  sits  a  man  resting  on  his  shield,  and  grasping  in  his  right  hand  a
branch  of  laurel,  while  a  third  man  is  holding  a  bowl  toward  the  seated
man.  These  figures  have  been  interpreted  respectively  as  Leonymus
(Autoleon),  Achilles,  and  Ajax.  A  bird  is  sitting  with  expanded  wings
on  the  thigh  of  the  seated  man.  It  is  supposed  to  be  one  of  the  white
sea-birds  which  attended  on  Achilles  in  the  island,  fanning  his  sacred
grove  with  their  wings  and  sprinkling  it  with  spray  as  they  skimmed
over  it  (Philostratus,  Heroica^  xx.  37).  See  Archdologische  Zeitung^
N.  F.  I  (1847),  pp.  97-107.

19.  1 3.  tell  Stesichoros  that  the  loss  of  his  eyesight  etc.  It  was
said  that  in  one  of  his  poems  Stesichorus  had  spoken  ill  of  Aphrodite,
and  had  been  blinded  by  the  goddess  as  a  punishment,  but  that  on
composing  a  poem  in  recantation  of  his  blasphemy  he  recovered  his
sight  (I Socrates,  Helene,  64).  According  to  one  account,  the  remark
^hich  drew  down  the  wrath  of  the  goddess  was  that  in  sacrificing  to
tlie  gods  Tyndareus  had  forgotten  Aphrodite  (Schol.  on  Euripides,
Orestes^  249).

20.  I.  the  fountain  Messeis.  It  is  mentioned  by  Homer  (//.  vi.
457).

20.  2.  Poseidon,  snmamed  Earth-holder.  From  a  Laconian  in-
scription we  learn  that  chariot-races  were  held  in  his  honour  (Roehl,
^'  G,  A.  No.  79;  Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr,  Graec,^  No.  17).  The  race-
course or  hippodrome  of  Poseidon  the  Earth-holder  near  Sparta  is
■Jientioned  by  Xenophon  {Hellenica^  vi.  5.  30).  It  would  seem  that
^e  shaking  and  rumbling  of  earthquakes  were  supposed  to  be  caused
^y  Poseidon  driving  his  chariot  underground ;  hence  it  was  not  un-
natural that  chariot-races  should  be  held  in  his  honour.  Cp.  S.  Wide,
^--^onische  Kulte^  p.  38.

20.  2.  Alesiae.     This  may  have  been  at  Mistra  or  its  neighbour


362  MISTRA  BK.  III.  LAComA

village  to  the  south  Parori  (Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  131  ;  cp.  Leake,
Pelop.  p.  164  sq.)  The  name  Alesiae  means  no  more  than  *miD-
town,'  and  the  place  was  probably  so  called  from  the  mills  there:
The  French  surveyors  found  a  great  many  millstones  in  the  gardens  at
the  foot  of  the  hill  of  Mistra,  The  rock  of  which  they  are  made  and
which  alone  is  suitable  for  the  purpose  is  found  only  about  Mistn.
See  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  83.  As  to  the  mythical  Miller  (M^)  ^
cp.  Lobeck,  Aglaopkamus,  p.  1194.

The  scenery  of  the  district  at  the  eastern  foot  of  Mount  Taygetus^
to  which  Pausanias  here  conducts  us,  is  well  described  by  Viscfaer
{Erinnerungenj  p.  385  sqq.)  as  follows :  "While  in  Therapne,  Amydae,
and  the  round  buildings  of  Vaphio  and  Marmalia  we  met  with  vestiges
of  a  very  ancient  civilisation  which  flourished  in  the  plain  of  the  Eurotas
before  the  Dorian  invasion ;  on  the  other  hand  when  we  reach  die
first  line  of  the  rocky  heights  of  Taygetus,  we  find  ourselves  in  the
Middle  Ages — in  the  days  of  the  Franks  and  the  Byzantines.  The  first
stage  of  Taygetus  rises  abruptly  from  the  plain  in  bold  cliffs  broken  by
many  gullies,  from  which  the  mountain  torrents  issue.  Crowning  with
its  picturesque  ruins  the  summit  of  one  of  these  heights,  an  hour's  ride
to  the  west  of  Sparta,  is  the  fortress  of  Mistra^  built  by  William  de
Villehardouin  in  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth  century.  Below  the
castle,  on  the  mountain  side,  is  spread  the  extensive  town,  once  a
place  of  much  more  importance,  now  half  in  ruins,  with  its  numerous
churches  and  monasteries  falling  into  decay.  Yet  for  the  traveller,  io
spite  of  its  decay,  Mistra  must  remain  in  virtue  of  its  situation  one  of
the  most  enchanting  spots  which  he  can  find  in  Greece  or  anywhere;
and  the  prospect  from  the  castle  height,  on  the  one  side  over  the  whole
plain,  on  the  other  side  up  to  the  snowy  peaks  of  Taygetus,  across  the
fruitful  levels  and  wooded  slopes  of  the  first  step  in  the  mountain  stair-
case, needs  only  a  view  of  the  sea  to  be  second  to  none.  The  whole
neighbourhood,  too,  is  one  of  indescribable  beauty.  The  way  from  New
Sparta  by  the  village  of  Magoula^  which  lies  scattered  among  fruit-trees
of  every  sort,  is  delightful  enough.  It  passes  through  a  plain  watered  by
fresh  brooks,  where  the  drooping  branches  of  the  olive-trees  and  fig-trees
often  literally  bar  the  way,  and  in  riding  one  has  to  take  heed  not  to  be
hung  by  the  head  among  the  boughs.  But  all  this  is  almost  forgotten
when  we  ride  from  Mistra  by  Parori  and  Hagiannis  along  the  foot  of
the  mountains  to  Sklavochori.  On  this  ride  all  the  beauties  of  the  Eurotas
valley  are  crowded  together ;  for  here  we  have  wild  magnificence  com-
bined with  the  luxuriant  loveliness  of  a  rich  southern  vegetation.  Paron^
which  lies  close  to  Mistra  and  was  formerly  a  suburb  of  it,  is  at  the
mouth  of  a  dark  and  deep  gorge,  from  which  a  stream  comes  brawling-
This  gorge  is  pointed  out  to  travellers  as  the  Caeadas,  the  gully  in^°
which  the  Spartans  used  to  throw  prisoners  of  war  and  afterwards  male-
factors (Thucydides,  i.  134);  and  certainly  the  Caeadas,  as  well  as  th^
Apothetae,  where  weakly  children  were  exposed  (Plutarch,  Zyn/r^j,  i6)»
is  to  be  sought  in  one  of  the  ravines  of  Mount  Taygetus,  of  which  hardly
any  appears  so  stem  and  awful  as  the  one  at  Parori,  At  the  mout^
of  the  gorge,  just  above  the  village,  there  is  a  very  lovely  spot.     Fror^


I.  XX  MISTRA  363

Turkish  fountain  there  pours  a  copious  stream  of  water,  which
ckles  through  creeping  plants  of  all  sorts  into  a  large  basin,  and  before
stand  some  fine  plane-trees.

"  Further  on,  the  way  winds  through  wood  and  thicket,  where  fruit-
ses  alternate  with  tall  oaks,  elms,  and  plane-trees,  to  the  village  of
^agtanms,  hidden  among  groves  of  oranges,  lemons,  fig-trees,  and  olives,
oiongst  the  woods  dark  cypresses  rise  singly  like  columns ;  many
idas-trees  {Cercis  Siiiquastrum)  stood  in  full  blossom,  forming  with
eir  rosy  red  a  pleasant  contrast  to  the  various  shades  of  green,  while
e  oleanders,  growing  as  high  as  trees  beside  every  rill,  had  not  yet
ifolded  their  buds.  Wild  vines  climb  to  the  very  topmost  boughs,
id  many  other  creepers,  such  as  ivy,  bindweed,  and  clematis,  often
eave  trees  and  shrubs  into  an  impenetrable  thicket.  In  wealth  of
fetation  this  district  is  unsurpassed  in  Greece,  and  no  one  who  has
:t  foot  on  Greek  soil  should  fail  to  visit  it.  Yet  it  often  happens  that
avellers,  satisfied  with  having  visited  Sparta,  turn  back  from  it  imme-
iately,  and  then,  full  of  the  impressions  left  on  them  by  the  plains  of
"^ripoliiza^  of  Argolis,  and  of  the  neighbourhood  of  Athens,  complain
Kat  there  are  no  trees  in  Greece."

The  present  writer,  though  he  was  not  further  south  than  Paroriy
an  confirm  the  general  accuracy  of  this  description.  The  view  of  the
)eautiful  valley  of  Sparta  from  the  steep  hill  of  Mistra^  crowded  with
nonuments  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and  dominated  by  the  towering  mass
)f  Mount  Taygetus,  which  rises  like  a  wall  behind  it,  combines  almost
svery  element  of  natural  beauty  and  historical  association.  Immediately
below  the  Frankish  castle  which  crowns  the  summit  of  the  hill  are  the
ruins  of  a  spacious  Byzantine  palace,  once  the  residence  of  the  governor
of  the  Morea,  who  ranked  next  after  the  emperor.  Its  great  hall  opened
on  the  palace  garden,  from  the  terrace  of  which  the  wonderful  view  is
10  be  had  over  the  valley.  Again,  the  fountain,  described  by  Vischer,
at  the  mouth  of  the  tremendous  gorge,  is  a  scene  not  to  be  forgotten.
The  water  gushes  from  many  mouths  in  the  face  of  a  wall  built  against
the  rock.  A  stone  seat  encircles  the  trunk  of  the  great  spreading
plane-tree  which  fronts  the  fountain.  All  this,  with  the  gloomy  gorge
behind,  makes  up  a  picture  such  as  is  oftener  seen  in  dreams  than  in
reality.  Once  more,  the  village  of  Trypi^  situated  a  little  to  the  north
of  Mistra,  at  the  entrance  of  the  famed  Langada  pass  over  Mount
Taygetus,  is  one  of  idyllic  beauty.  It  is  embowered  among  woods  and
orchards  on  the  mountain  side ;  and  entering  it  from  the  south  you  pass
^lie  mouth  of  a  narrow  glen  carpeted  with  ferns  and  overarched  with
^rees.  •

20.  3.  a  river  Phellia.  This  may  be  the  stream  that  flows  past
^iviotisa  (Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  130;  Baedeker,*  p.  290).  Prof.  Curtius
hinks  it  is  the  stream  further  south  which  joins  the  Eurotas  just  above
^aphio  {Pelop,  2.  p.  249).

20.  3.  Pharis.  Pharis  is  mentioned  by  Homer  (77.  ii.  582)  and
Strabo  (viii.  p.  363).  It  was  one  of  the  old  Achaean  towns  (Paus.  iii.
2-  6).  Hence  it  is  believed  to  have  stood  at  or  near  Vaphio^  where  a
^ehive  tomb  containing  treasures  has  been  discovered  (see  above,  p.


364  MOUNT  TALETUM  BK.  iii.  laconu

134  sqq,")  The  tomb  may  have  been  the  burial  place  of  one  of  the  old
Achaean  kings  of  Pharis,  as  the  beehive  tombs  at  Mycenae  were  the
tombs  of  the  Achaean  kings  of  Mycenae.  Vaphio  is  on  a  hill  (m  the
west  bank  of  the  Eurotas,  about  five  miles  south  of  Sparta.  Some
excavations  were  recently  niade  on  the  hill  which  lies  a  few  minutes  to
the  south  of  Vaphio,  There  were  found  some  potsherds  of  Mycenaean
style,  a  small  stone  knife,  etc.,  but  no  walls  of  the  Mycenaean  age.
See  'E<fi7)fi€pU  dpxaiokoyiKrjy  1889,  p.  131.  As  to  Pharis  see  Leake,
Aforea,  3.  p.  3  sg. ;  id,,  Pelop.  p.  165  ;  Curtius,  Pelap.  2.  p.  248  sq.\
Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  130  sq. ;  Baedeker,^  p.  290.

20.  3.  a  prednct  of  Messapian  Zeus.  The  French  surveyois
found  the  remains  of  a  temple  near  a  source  of  water  a  little  to  the
north  of  the  village  of  Kaizaru,  Leake  {Pelap,  p.  165)  thought  that
this  may  have  been  the  temple  of  Messapian  Zeus.  Bursian  looked  for
the  sanctuary  near  the  well-wooded  village  oi Hagios  Joannes  {Hagiannis\
at  the  foot  of  Mt.  Taygetus  {Geogr.  2.  p.  131).  According  to  Stephanos
Byzantius  {s,v,  VLtaxrairkai.)  the  place  where  Messapian  Zeus  was
worshipped  was  called  Messapeae,  and  he  refers  for  his  authority  to  the
fifty-seventh  book  of  Theopompus's  history.

20.  3.  Bryseae.  The  name,  derived  from  jSpvctv,  seems  to  indicate
a  district  where  springs  of  water  abounded.  It  may  have  been  to  the
west  of  the  modem  village  of  Sklavochori,  near  the  site  of  the  modern
villages  of  Katzaru  and  Sinanbei,  The  district  abounds  in  springs.
See  Leake,  Pelop,  p.  163  sq,\  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  131.  Ross  and
Prof.  Curtius  would  place  Bryseae  further  north,  near  the  village  of
H,  Joannes,  The  ground  here  is  well  watered,  and  the  village  stands
in  a  grove  of  orange  -  trees.  Near  a  copious  spring  in  front  of  the
village  there  are  marble  remains  of  buildings  and  sculptures.  See  Ross,
Wanderungen  in  Griechenland,  2,  p.  244  sq. ;  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  251.

20.  4.  Mount  Taletum.  This  may  be  Mt.  St.  Eliasy  the  highest
summit  of  Taygetus  (7900  feet).  Bursian,  however,  doubted  this
identification.  See  Leake,  Pelop.  p.  164  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  104  iy-
note ;  Baedeker,^  p.  288.  In  modem  Greece  almost  every  high  hill
we  are  told,  is  dedicated  to  St.  Elias,  and  it  has  been  supposed  that  the
saint  has  always  succeeded  to  the  ancient  Helios  (the  sun).  Power  over
rain  is  ascribed  to  him,  and  in  time  of  drought  people  flock  to  his
churches  and  monasteries  to  pray  for  rain.  See  J.  T.  Bent,  Tht
Cyclades,  p.  87  ;  Lucy  M.  J.  Gamett,  The  Women  of  Turkey;  Thi
Christian  Women,  p.  124.  This  is  an  argument  for  identifying  the
Mt.  St,  Elias  of  Taygetus  with  the  ancient  Mt.  Taletum  on  which  the
sun  was  worshipped  (see  below).  On  St.  Elias's  day  in  August  a
festival  is  held  on  Mount  St.  Elias  (Baedeker,^  p.  288).

20.  4.  sacred  to  the  Son  etc.     For  evidence  of  sun-worship  i^^
various  parts  of  Greece  see  Index,  s.v,  *  Sun.'      In  the  beautiful  essay
*  In  praise  of  our  native  land  '  {Patriae  encomium)  Lucian  speaks  of  the
sun  as  the  god  worshipped  by  men  of  every  country.     Inscriptions  sho^'
that  at  Athens  there  was  a  regular  worship  of  the  Sun,  conducted  b'if
a  priestess  who  had  a  special  seat  in  the  theatre  of  Dionysus.    S^*
C.  I,  A,  iii.   Nos.  202,  313;   AcAtiov  dpxatoAoytKov,    1889,  p.  19  ^^


CH.  XX  WORSHIP  OF  THE  SUN  365

There  was  also  a  priest  of  the  Sun  at  Athens  (Harpocration,  s,v,  ^Ktpov).
According  to  Polemo,  the  Athenians  offered  *  sober'  {t\e,  wineless)
sacrifices  to  the  Sun  and  Moon  (Schol.  on  Sophocles,  Oed,  Co/,  100).
Cp.  note  on  V.  15.  10.  In  an  inscription  found  at  the  Piraeus  mention
is  made  of  the  sacrifice  of  a  honeycomb  to  the  sun  (^EifyrffiepU
dpxaioXoyiKrj^  1 885,  p.  88;  C. /,  A.  iii.  No.  165 1).  Rhodes  was  a
great  seat  of  sun-worship.  See  Dittenberger,  Z>e  sacn's  Rhodtorum
commeniatio^  p.  iii.  sqq. ;  cp.  Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr,  Graec,^  No.  181
(at  beginning).  The  sun  seems  to  have  been  worshipped  at  Mopsuestia
in  Cilicia  (W.  Froehner,  Les  inscriptions  Grecques  du  Louvre^  No.  17).
On  sun-worship  in  ancient  Greece  see  Preller,  Grieck,  Mythologie^^  i.
p.  429  sqq. ;  Roscher's  Lexicon,  i.  p.  2024  sqq.

20.  4«  wild  goats  and  boars  may  be  hunted  all  over  Mount
Taygetus.  In  the  forests  of  Mount  Taygetus  wild  hogs,  wolves,  jackals,
and  foxes  still  abound ;  deer  are  less  common,  and  bears  have  long
been  extinct  (L.  Ross,  Wanderungen^  2,  p.  218).

20.  5.  a  sanctuuy  of  Demeter  sumamed  Eleusinian.  This  is
conjecturally  placed  by  Prof.  Curtius  near  the  village  of  Anat/ryti,
situated  in  a  glen  of  Mt  Taygetus  (JPelop.  2.  p.  251).  But  this  and
the  other  places  which  Pausanias  mentions  in  Mt.  Taygetus  (Lapithaeum,
Dereum,  and  Harplea)  have  not  yet  been  identified.  On  the  modem
villages  in  this  part  of  Taygetus  see  L.  Ross,  Wanderungen^  2.
p.  203  sqq.

20.  6.  Helos.  See  iii.  22.  3.  The  name  Helots,  which  Pausanias
derives  from  the  name  of  this  town,  is  now  generally  supposed  to  come
from  the  root  A//,  which  appears  in  helein^  *to  take,'  *  conquer.*  Thus
the  name  Helots  would  mean  'captives.'  See  G.  Gilbert,  Griech.
Staatsalterthiimer^  i.  p.  32.

20.  6.  which  Homer  mentions.  See  //.  ii.  584.
20.  6.  the  whole  Oreek  race  were  called  Hellenes  etc  In  historical
times  the  Greeks  called  themselves  Hellenes  and  their  country  Hellas.
But  they  had  a  tradition  of  a  time  when  their  national  name  was
Graikoi,  which  is  identical  with  the  Latin  Grcuci  and  the  English  Greeks.
Thus  Aristotle  {Meteorologica^  i.  14,  p.  352)  says  that  Deucalion's
deluge  took  place  "in  ancient  Greece,  and  ancient  Greece  is  the
district  about  Dodona  and  the  Achelous.  For  there  dwelt  the  Selli
^d  the  people  who  were  then  called  Graikoi  but  are  now  called
Hellenes."  Stephanus  Byzantius  {s.v.  F/aatKos)  mentions  a  certain
Graecus  (Graikos\  son  of  Thessalus,  after  whom  the  Greeks  (Hellenes)
were  named  Graikoi ;  and  he  adds  that  the  mothers  of  the  Greeks  were
called  Graikes  by  Alcman  and  by  Sophocles  in  his  lost  play  The
Shepherds.  The  name  Graikos  occurred  in  Callimachus,  as  we  learn
from  the  writer  of  the  Etymologicum  Magnum^  who  tells  us  (p.  239,
*.?'.  FpatKOs)  that  the  Greeks  were  called  Graikoi  either  on  account  of
their  bravery  or  after  a  certain  man  Graikos.  According  to  Apollodorus
(i.  7-  3)  the  change  of  the  national  name  from  Graikoi  to  Hellenes  was
niade  by  Hellen,  who  called  the  people  Hellenes  after  himself.  The
Parian  Chronicle  assigns  this  change  of  name  to  the  year  1521  B.C.
(^''0^.  Hist.  Graec.  ed.  Miiller,  i.  p.  542  sq.)


366  THE  ROAD  TO  ARCADIA  bk.  in.  laconu

The  remarkable  coincidence  between  this  Greek  tradition  and  the
name  by  which  the  Greeks  were  always  known  to  the  Romans  has  been
variously  explained  by  modem  writers.     The  most  obvious  explanation,
adopted  by  Prof.  Curtius  {Griech.  Geschkhte^^  i.  p.  93)}  is  that  when
the  forefathers  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans  dwelt  together,  the  Greeb
were  actually  called  Greeks  (Graikoi),  and  that  this  name  was  preserved
by  the  Romans  after  it  had  been  abandoned  by  the  Greeks  them-
selves.     A  different   view  is   that   of  Victor   Hehn   (Kulturpfltmun
und  Hausihiere,^  p.   51).      He   supposes   that   the  ancestors  of  the
Greeks,  after  fighting  their  way  through  the  mountains  and  forests  of
the  wild  Illyrian  coast  to  Dodona,  settled  for  a  time  in  Epirus ;  that
they  had  two  national  names,  Graikoi  and  Hellenes ;  and  that  while
the  latter  spread  eastward,  the  former  (Graikoi)  prevailed  in  the  west
and  was  transmitted  across  the  sea  to  the  Italians.     Other  theories  on
the  subject  have  been  propounded  by  Busolt  {Griech.  GeschickU?  i.
p.    198  sq,)  and  Nissen  (ItcUische  Landeskunde^  pp.   120,   544  note).
Cp.  W.  Helbig,  in  Hermes^  11  (1876),  p.  273  sqq, ;  B.  Niese,  *Uebcr
den  Volksstamm  der  Graker,*  Hermes^   12  (1877),  pp.  409-420;  M.
Duncker,  Geschichte  des  Alterthums^  5*  P*  9  •^^^

Hellas  was  originally  the  name  of  a  town  or  district  in  Thessaly,
and  in  this  sense  alone  does  it  occur  in  Homer  (Ebeling,  Lexicon
Homericum^  s.v,   'EAAas).     The  name  Hellenes  occurs  only  once  in
Homer  (//.  ii.  684),  where  it  is  applied,  not  to  the  Greeks  in  general,
but  only  to  the  people  who  inhabited  the  Thessalian  town  or  district  of
Hellas.    Thucydides'  remarked  (i.  3)  that  Homer  never  calls  the  Greeb
Hellenes,  but    always    Danai,    Argives,   or    Achaeans.       The  name
Panhellenes  is  found  once  in  Homer  (//.  ii.  530)  in  the  sense  of 'ail
the  Greeks,*  but  the  line  was  rejected  by  Aristarchus  (Ebeling,  Lexicon
Homertcum^  s,v.  XlavcA-Aiyvcs).      The  question  whether  the   Homeric
Hellas  was  a  town  or  a  district  was  debated  in  antiquity  (Strabo,  ix.
p.  431  sq,\  and  opinion  is  still  divided  on  the  subject     See  BursiaDt
Geogr.    I.   p.    Tf  \    ^\\c\i\io\Zj  Die  homerischen  Reaiien^    i.  pp.  98,102.
The  Roman  geographers  confined  the  name   Hellas  to  the  portion  o^
Greece  north  of  the  Isthmus  of  Corinth.     See  Mela,  ii.  §  37,  38,  48  »
Pliny,  N,H.  iv.  23  ;  Solinus,  vii.  16.

20.  8.  On  the  road  from  Sparta  to  Arcadia.     Pausanias  now^
returns  from  Mount  Taygetus  to  Sparta  and  sets  off  northward  by  th^
road  which  led  to   Megalopolis  in  Arcadia.     As  far  as  the  Arcadian-
frontier  the  track  follows  the  valley  of  the  Eurotas,  keeping  on  th^
right  (west)  bank  of  the  river  and  generally  running  close  to  the  stream^
the  banks  of  which  are  fringed  with  oleanders,  fig-trees,  and  planes.
For  the  first  three  miles  the  valley  is  open  and  possesses  that  combina-
tion of  charms  which  renders  the  vale  of  Sparta  the  most   beautifiil
region  of  Greece.     The  river  flows  on  the  whole  at  the  foot  of  the
somewhat   bare   hills  which   rise   on   the   eastern  side  of  the  valley,
dipping  their  rocky  declivities  in  many  places  in  its  water.     But  on  the
other  side  low  rolling  hills,  covered  with  excellent  soil  and  intersected
by  streams,  stretch  away  to  where  the  long  range  of  Taygetus  stands  up
against  the  western  sky,  its   majestic  snowy  peaks  contrasting   finely


:h.  XX  THE  ROAD  TO  ARCADIA  367

vith  the  dark  woods  of  its  lower  slopes  and  the  luxuriant  vegetation
»f  the  valley.  In  this  open  part  of  the  valley  must  have  lain  all  the
)laces  and  objects  mentioned  by  Pausanias  between  Sparta  and  the
mage  of  Modesty  (§  10) ;  but  no  one  has  yet  ventured  to  identify  them.
\bout  three  miles  from  Sparta  the  valley  contracts  and  the  scenery
:hanges.  We  are  no  longer  in  a  great  open  valley  covered  with
uxuriant  vegetation  and  enclosed  by  grand  mountains.  It  is  a  narrow
lale  through  which  we  are  passing,  hemmed  in  by  low  hills,  at  the
loot  of  which  the  river  flows  between  banks  thickly  wooded  with  willows,
[>oplars,  oleanders,  and  plane-trees.  Well-tilled  fields  lie  on  the  gentle
lower  slopes  of  the  hills  and  occupy  the  stretches  of  flat  land  where  the
hills  retire  from  the  river.  The  bare  upper  declivities  are  dotted  here
and  there  with  a  few  olives.

See  Dodwell,  7b»r,  2.  p.  398  sqq,  ;  Gell,  Journey  in  the  Morea^  P*  3iS  ^99'  *
Leake,  Morea^  3.  p.  12  sqq,  ;  Curtius,  PeUip,  2.  p.  253  sqq.  ;  Vischer,  Erinner-
ungen,  pp.  372,  400 ;  Baedeker,'  p.  292 ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  281 ;  W.  Loring,
\xiJournal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  15  (1895),  p.  41  sq,

20.  8.  a  sanctuary  of  Achilles.  There  was  a  sanctuary  of
Achilles  also  at  Brasiae  (iii.  24.  5) ;  one  of  the  harbours  at  Cape
Taenarum  was  called  the  harbour  of  Achilles  (iii.  25.  4);  and  the
worship  of  Achilles  in  Laconia  was  referred  to  by  Anaxagoras  (Schol.
on  Apollonius  Rhodius,  iv.  815).  On  these  and  other  grounds  Mr.
Tsountas  holds  that  Achilles  was  a  Laconian  as  well  as  a  Thessalian
hero  (MvK^vat,   p.    259   sq,)      Cp.    S.    Wide,    Lakonische  Kulte^    p.

233  m-

20.  9.  swore  the  suitors making  them  stand  on  the  pieces

of  the  horse.  Elsewhere  (iv.  15.  8  and  v.  24.  9)  we  read  of  oaths
taken  on  the  pieces  of  a  boar.  So  in  trials  before  the  court  of  the
Areopagus  at  Athens  the  accuser  took  an  oath,  standing  on  the  pieces
of  a  boar,  a  ram,  and  a  bull,  which  had  been  sacrificed  by  special
persons  on  special  days  (Demosthenes,  Or,  xxiii.  p.  642).  Another
*^y  of  taking  an  oath  was  to  pass  between  the  pieces  of  the  slain
^nimaL  When  Agamemnon  was  about  to  lead  the  Greeks  to  Troy,  the
"Oothsayer  Calchas  brought  a  boar  into  the  market-place,  and  divided
^  into  two  parts,  one  on  the  west,  and  one  on  the  east.  Then  each
^n  with  a  drawn  sword  in  his  hand  passed  between  the  pieces  of  the
*oar,  and  the  blade  of  his  sword  was  smeared  with  the  blood.  Thus
bey  swore  enmity  to  Priam.  See  Dictys  Cretensis,  i.  15.  So  in
eremiah  xxxiv.  18  we  read  of  "the  men  that  have  transgressed  my
ovenant,  which  have  not  performed  the  words  of  the  covenant  which
hey  had  made  before  me,  when  they  cut  the  calf  in  twain,  and  passed
between  the  parts  thereof."  Cp.  Genesis  xv.  9  sqq.  Among  the
Becbuanas  of  South  Africa  "when  Sibonelo,  a  chief  of  the  Barolong,
Tnade  a  covenant  with  Buys,  who  fled  to  him  from  Kafir-land,  the
paunch  of  a  large  ox  was  taken,  with  its  contents,  and  an  incision  being
made  in  each  side  of  the  stomach,  the  one  forced  his  body  through  it,
and  the  other  followed,  intimating  by  this  ceremony  that  they  were
henceforward  one  people  "  (R.   Moffat,  Missionary  Labours  and  Scenes


368  OATHS  AND  PURIFICATIONS       bk.  iil  lacokia

in  Southern  Africa^  p.  278).  Another  form  of  the  oath  among  die
Bechuanas  is  this :  "  An  animal  is  slaughtered,  and  some  of  tbe
contents  of  its  stomach  are  laid  hold  of  by  both  covenanting  parties,
their  hands  meeting  together  and  laying  hold  of  each  other,  whik
covered  over  with  the  contents  of  the  sacrificed  animal's  stomach.  This
would  seem  to  be  the  most  solemn  form  of  public  agreement  known  in
the  country "  (J.  Mackenzie,  Ten  Years  north  of  the  Orange  Rmr^
p.  393)>  Among  the  Nagas  of  eastern  India  the  most  sacred  oath  is
"for  the  two  parties  to  the  oath  to  lay  hold  of  a  dog  or  fowl,  one  by
its  head  the  other  by  its  tail  or  feet,  whilst  the  animal  or  bird  is  cut  in
two  with  a  dAo,  emblematic  of  the  perjurer's  fete "  (Journal  of  tk
Anthropological  Ins titutey  11  (1882),  p.  71).  The  explanation  of  sud
forms  of  oath  is  probably,  as  Robertson  Smith  pointed  out  (ReUgum  nj
the  Semites^  p.  480  sq^^  that  the  parties  to  the  oath  are  believed  to  be
"  taken  within  the  mystical  life  of  the  victim."  Hence  a  cleansing  or
purifying  virtue  is  ascribed  to  ceremonies  of  this  kind.  At  the  tempk
of  the  Moon  the  Albanians  of  the  Caucasus  used  to  sacrifice  a  human
being ;  then  they  all  stood  upon  the  corpse,  as  a  purificatory  ceremony
(Strabo,  xi.  4.  7,  p.  503).  In  Boeotia,  as  a  public  form  of  purification,
they  cut  a  dog  in  two,  and  the  people  passed  between  the  pieces
(Plutarch,  Quaest,  Rom,  iii).  Among  the  Basutos  of  South  Afiica,
"certain  tribes,  after  having  slaughtered  the  victim,  pierce  it  through
and  through,  and  cause  the  person  who  is  to  be  purified  to  pass  between
the  pieces"  (Casalis,  The  Basutos^  p.  256).  When  the  Koreks  of
eastern  Siberia  were  afraid  of  some  infectious  disorder,  they  killed  a
dog,  wound  the  guts  about  two  poles,  and  passed  between  them
(Krascheninnikow,  Beschreibung  des  Landes  Kamtschatka,  p.  277  sq)
When  Peleus  ravaged  lolcus,  he  slew  Astydamia,  wife  of  Acastus,  cut
her  in  pieces,  and  caused  his  army  to  march  between  the  pieces  into
the  city  (Apollodorus,  iii.  1 3.  7).  The  tradition  is  probably  a  reminis-
cence of  a  solemn  mode  of  purification.

20.  9.  Oranius,  sumamed  StemmatiaiL  Cranius  was  probably  the
Camean  Apollo.  See  above,  p.  332.  At  the  Camean  festival  a  man
covered  with  wreaths  {stemmatd)  ran  praying  for  the  welfare  of  the
state  (Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca,  p.  305  line  25  sqq.)  He  may  have  re-
presented the  god,  and  if  so  we  can  understand  why  the  god  was  called
Stemmatian  ('the  wreathed  one').  Cp.  Hesychius,  j.?/.  (rrififiaTuilov ;
K.  O.  Miiller,  Dorier,'^  i.  p.  61  ;  S.  Wide,  Lakonische  Kulte^  p.  78.

20.  9.  Mysian  Artemis.  Prof.  S.  Wide  suggests  that  Mysian
Artemis  is  equivalent  to  Mouse  Artemis,  the  epithet  Mysian  being
perhaps  derived  from  mus^  *  mouse.'  He  points  out  that  at  Lusi
in  Arcadia,  where  there  was  a  sanctuary  of  Artemis  (Paus.  viii.  18.  8),
there  was  also  a  spring  in  which  mice  were  said  to  be  bred  (Aristotle,
Mirab.  Auscult.  125  (137);  Theopompus,  cited  by  Antigonus,  Hut
Mirab,  137).      See  S.  Wide,  Lakonische  Kulte^  p.  118  sq.

20.  10.  The  image  of  Modesty  etc.  On  the  right  (west)  bank  of
the  Eurotas,  about  four  miles  above  Sparta,  the  road  is  hemmed  in
between  steep  cliffs  and  the  river,  which  here  flows  in  the  bottom  of  a
profound  and  narrow   gorge.     The  ruts  of  the  ancient  road  may  be


.  XXI  THE  ROAD  TO  ARCADIA  369

en  in  the  rock.  And  in  the  moss-grown  cliff  above'  the  road  is  a
acious  cavern,  now  called  PkoHmos  (*  the  oven  *) ;  but  its  mouth  is
nciost  hidden  by  brambles  and  the  boughs  of  a  wild  fig-tree.  The
itrance  to  the  cavern  is  formed  by  an  arch  in  the  aqueduct  which  once
fought  water  from  Vivari  to  Sparta,  and  which  for  a  long  way  skirts
le  hills  beside  the  path.  Near  the  cave  is  a  semicircular  niche
ewn  out  of  the  rock.  Some  have  thought  that  in  this  niche  may  have
tood  the  statue  of  Modesty  mentioned  by  our  author.  Others  (Leake,
Eloss,  and  Curtius)  suppose  that  the  niche  was  the  tomb  of  Ladas  (see
21.  i),  but  the  distance  of  the  spot  from  Sparta  does  not  tally  with  the
50  furlongs  of  Pausanias.  See  Leake,  Morea^  3.  pp.  13,  15;  Curtius,
?tlop.  2.  p.  253  sq, ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  115;  Ross's  map  of  Sellasia,
in  his  Reisen  und  Reisenrouten ;  Baedeker,^  p.  292  ;  Guide-JoannCy  2.
p.  281  ;  W.  Loring,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  15  (1895),  P-  43'
Mr.  W.  Loring  has  conjectured  that  the  image  of  Modesty  stood  at  a
place  a  good  deal  nearer  Sparta  than  this  niche  in  the  cliff.  He  thus
describes  the  place  :  "  About  three  miles  from  Sparta  is  a  large  imfinished
building,  one  end  of  which  is  used  as  a  khan,  the  khan  of  Zakhardtos,
Near  it  the  river  makes  a  bend  to  the  eastward,  circumventing  a  low
rocky  hill ;  but  the  track  to  Megalopolis  keeps  straight  on,  passing  left
of  the  hill,  and  rejoining  the  river  beyond  it  some  three-quarters  of  a  mile
from  the  khan.  Leaving  the  track  at  the  khan,  and  keeping  along  the
river  bank,  one  sees  almost  immediately,  on  the  opposite  bank,  the  scanty
remains  of  a  Roman  or  mediaeval  bridge, — probably  the  former, — and
beside  it  the  traces  of  a  river- wall  of  large  blocks  of  stone.  Just  opposite
this  bridge,  if  one  climbs  the  rocks  which  overhang  the  path,  one  finds  a
large  rock-cutting,  which  was  probably  supplemented  by  building  so  as  to
form  altogether  a  level  area  some  30  ft.  x  20  ft  in  extent"  This  cutting,
Mr.  Loring  suggests,  may  possibly  have  been  prepared  for  the  image  of
Modesty.  See  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  15  (1895),  P-  42.  To  the
north  of  this  cutting  Mr.  Loring  observed  other  remains  of  antiquity.
He  says :  "  Still  keeping  to  the  river,  one  reaches  in  a  few  minutes  a
fine  Turkish  bridge, — the  bridge  of  Kopanos^ — which  spans  it  by  a
single  arch.  .  .  .  From  the  bridge  of  Kopanos  to  the  point  at  which  the
river  and  the  track  to  Megalopolis  re-unite,  the  river  flows  in  a  narrow
gorge  between  high  rocks  on  the  eastern  and  the  low  hill  already
mentioned  on  the  western  side.  The  former  assume  shapes  so  curious
as  to  suggest  artificial  cutting  ;  and  on  the  slopes  of  the  latter  are  traces
(i)of  an  aqueduct  or  mill  stream,  (2)  lower  down,  of  a  half-buried  wall,
built  in  order  to  terrace  up  the  soil,  possibly  for  a  road  but  more  prob-
ably for  purposes  of  cultivation.  On  the  north  end  of  the  hill,  where
one  rejoins  the  track  to  Megalopolis,  are  remains  of  polygonal  walls,
and  the  hill  itself  bears  a  fair  sprinkling  of  pottery,  while  immediately
between  the  hill  and  the  river,  on  the  narrow  strip  of  land  which
separates  them,  are  the  lower  courses  of  a  long  wall  consisting  partly  of
Hellenic  and  partly  of  later  masonry,  nearly  parallel  with  the  river.  It
is  evident,  in  fact,  that  on  and  about  this  hill  there  was  a  group  of
^dings,  the  principal  one  being  perhaps  a  small  fort;  and  I  draw
special  attention  to  this  site  because  it  has  scarcely  yet  been  mentioned,
VOL.  Ill  2  B


370  PELLANA  bk.  hi.  laconu

and  never  (so  far  as  I  know)  correctly.  It  is  disappointing  that  ve
cannot  with  much  probability  recognise  in  it  any  of  the  places  or  objects
mentioned  by  Pausanias"  {op,  cit,  p.  42  sq,)  The  remains  of  the  fort
described  by  Mr.  Loring  had  been  aJready  noticed  by  the  Swiss  travdler
Vischer,  who  says  that  the  walls  consist  of  large  blocks,  appnndmately
squared,  and  that  they  are  to  be  seen  on  a  small  steep  rocky  heiglrt
close  to  the  river  {Erinnerungen^  p.  401).

21.  I.  the  tomb  of  Ladas.     From  the  Phoumos  (see  preceding
note)  the   track   continues   to   follow  the   river,  the   banks   of  which
are  thickly  wooded,  though  the   hillsides  are  bare  except  for  a  few
olive-trees   here   and   there.     Now  and    then   we   pass   a    patch  d
maize  and  a  clump  of  mulberry-trees.     About  a  mile  from  Pkounm
a  stream  joins  the  Eurotas  from  the  west,  and  the  valley  is  here  xnoie
open.     The  valley  of  this  tributary  stream  is  spanned,  a  little  higher  op^
by   the   aqueduct  which   has   been   already   mentioned  (p.  369);  the
remains  of  the  piers  that  supported  the  aqueduct  can  still  be  seen.    In
the  low  rocks  to  the  left  of  the  path,  near  the  river,  are  some  ctiiioas
rock-cuttings  known  to  the  peasants  as  the  Mageireia  ('kitchen').    It
has  been  suggested  that  these  cuttings  were  the  tomb  of  Ladas  men-
tioned by  Pausanias  ;  but  Mr.  Loring  thinks  that  they  were  probably
made  for  the  reception  of  some  statues,  altars,  or  the  like  rather  tfaaa
for  a  tomb.     See  Baedeker,^  p.  292  ;  W.  Loring,  \n  Journal  of  HeUak
Studies^  15  (1895),  p.  43  ^^.     As  to  Ladas  see  ii.  19.  7  ;  viii.  13.5-
There  was  a  bronze  statue  of  Ladas  by  Myron  {Anthol.   PaiatuUi
Appendix  Planudea^    54).       Cp.    Brunn,    in    SitzungsberickU  di  the
Bavarian  Academy  (Munich),  Philosoph.   philolog.   CI.,  6  November,
1880,  p.  474  sqq.

21.  2.  the  Oharacoma  ('entrenchment').  About  a  mile  and  a
half  further  up  the  valley  of  the  Eurotas  from  the  Mageireia  (see  pre-
ceding note),  there  are  the  remains  of  a  massive  wall  of  ancient  Greek
masonry  close  to  the  path,  by  the  side  of  a  small  stream.  The  waD,
which  goes  by  the  name  of  Helleniko^  forms  an  angle  with  the  river.
It  is  about  twenty  paces  long  and  is  built  of  ashlar  masonry.  Probably
it  formed  part  of  a  fortification  intended  to  bar  the  pass.  This  fordfica*
tion  may  very  well  have  been  the  Characoma  of  Pausanias.  See
Vischer,  Erinnerungen,  p.  401;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  114  xf.;
Baedeker,^  p.    292  ;   W.   Loring,   in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  15

(1895),  P-  44.

21.  2.  Pellana.  About  three  miles  north  of  Helleniko  (see  pre-
ceding note)  the  valley  of  the  Eurotas  widens  out  and  the  path  to
Megalopolis  begins  to  diverge  from  the  river  to  the  left  (westward).
Here  on  the  opposite  (eastern)  bank  of  the  river  rises  a  rugged  mountain,
crowned  by  two  peaked  rocks,  on  each  of  which  stands  a  chapel ;  one  is
a  chapel  of  St.  John,  the  other  a  chapel  of  St.  Demetrius.  These  peaks
are  the  termination  of  a  hill  which  projects  westward  from  the  village
of  Vourlia,  Between  the  foot  of  this  rugged  mountain  and  the  river  is
a  narrow  grassy  meadow,  some  50  to  200  yards  in  width,  which  is  pro-
tected from  the  encroachments  of  the  river  by  a  wall  of  large  and  very
roughly  squared  stones  laid  without  mortar.     This  wall,  which  seems  to


1.  XXI  PELLANA  371

\  ancient,  is  preserved  for  a  length  of  about  200  yards  and  a  height  of
iree  or  four  courses.  At  the  back  of  the  meadow  which  it  protects,
id  just  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  a  remarkably  fine  spring  rises
nong  the  rocks ;  its  waters  are  dammed  up  so  as  to  form  a  reservoir
hich  supplies  a  mill-stream.  The  spring  is  called  Vivari,  Its  water
as  formerly  conveyed  to  Sparta  by  the  aqueduct  which  has  been
entioned  more  than  once.  The  aqueduct  is  probably  Roman,  A
tie  beyond  this  wall  and  spring  the  river  is  joined  on  the  left  (eastern)
mk  by  a  tributary  which  descends  in  a  broad  bed  from  the  village  of
'onditsa.  At  the  point  where  the  streams  meet,  a  broad  stretch  of
rtile  flat  land  extends  along  both  sides  of  the  Eurotas.  In  the  village
'  Konditsa  there  is  a  copious  spring  of  clear  cold  water ;  and  in  the
ain  below  it  another  abundant  spring  rises,  also  cold  and  clear.  Thus
I  the  neighbourhood  of  Konditsa  there  are  three  large  springs,  namely
ne  in  the  village  itself,  one  in  the  plain  immediately  below  it,  and  a
lird  (the  Vivari)  close  to  the  river,  just  behind  the  ancient  river-wall.
1ie  existence  of  these  springs  and  of  the  ancient  wall  has  led  topo-
raphers  generally  to  identify  this  region  with  Pellana.  The  distances
loth  from  Sparta  and  Belemina  tally  well  with  those  given  by  Pausanias.
rhe  site  of  Konditsa  is  perhaps  too  far  back  from  the  direct  route  to
il^^opolis  to  be  identified  as  that  of  Pellana.  Hence  the  two  springs
D  the  plain  at  the  foot  of  the  hills  may  be  those  which  Pausanias  calls
lie  Pellanian  spring  and  Lancea.  There  are  no  ancient  remains  in  the
:hapels  of  St  John  and  St.  Demetrius.


190  ,

y. ;  W.  Loring,  \n  Journal  of  Hellenic

Pellana,  or  Pellene  as  it  is  called  by  some  ancient  writers,  was  one
rf  three  frontier  Laconian  towns  which  together  were  called  the  Tripolis
''three  cities')  (Polybius,  iv.  81  ;  Livy,  xxxv.  27).  One  of  the
iro  other  towns  was  probably  Belemina  (see  below).  When  the
Boeotian  army  under  Epaminondas  was  marching  against  Sparta,
pilaus  advanced  to  Pellana;  but  he  was  out-manoeuvred  by  the
rheban  general  and  had  to  return  in  great  haste  to  the  capital  (Xeno-
>hon,  Hellenica^  vii.  5.  9  sq.)  After  the  retreat  of  the  Thebans,  an
Orcadian  force  made  an  incursion  into  Laconia,  stormed  Pellana,  and
Kit  the  Lacedaemonian  garrison  to  the  sword  (Diodorus,  xv.  67).  This
lappened  in  369  B.C.  Many  years  afterwards  the  garrison  of  Pellana
umoyed  the  retreat  of  an  Achaean  army  under  Philopoemen  (Polybius,
wl  37).  Plutarch  speaks  of  "the  ravine  at  Pellene"  {AgiSy  8),  by
which  he  probably  meant  the  stream  which  comes  down  from  Konditsa
[see  above).

Continuing  our  journey  northward  we  come,  in  rather  more  than
^  hour  after  leaving  the  site  of  Pellana,  to  the  remains  of  another
ancient  town.      They  are  situated  at  a  village  called  the  Kalyvia  of
^^ghitsi,     A  low  rocky  hill,  steep  on  all  sides  except  the  east,  here
^  immediately  to  the  left  of  the  path.     It  was  an  ancient  acropolis,


yj2  BELEMINA  bk.  hi.  laconu

for  its  top  is   surrounded  by  ruined  walls,  in  which   ancient   Greek
foundations  can  be  discerned  under  late  mediaeval  masonry.     Some  of
the  walls  extend  lower  down  the  hill,  and  at  its  foot  a  fine  spring,
shaded  by  tall  trees,  issues  from  among   the  rocks  and  flows  down
rapidly  to  join  the  Eurotas.     A  little  beyond  the  acropolis,  still  on  the
left  of  the  path,  are  two  circular  caves  cut  in  the  soft  rock,  with  roo6
of  the  beehive  shape.     They  measure  about  i8  feet  in  diameter  by  lo
feet  in  height     Probably  they  were  tombs.     Mr.  Loring  bought  many
coins,  most  of  them  Roman  and  Byzantine,  at  the  village.     He  observed
little  pottery  about,  from  which  he  inferred  that  the  ancient  place  was
small,  perhaps  only  a  fort.     Vischer,  however,  noticed  vestiges  of  a
town  extending  from  the  acropolis  far  down  into  the  plain.     Probably
the  town  was  the  third  of  the  three  ancient  towns  which  made  up  the
Tripolis,  the  other  two  being  Pellana  and  Belemina  (see  above).     But
as  to  the  name  of  the  ancient  town  of  which  the  ruins  exist  at  the
Kalyvia  of  Georghitsi^  the  opinions  of  topographers  differ.     It  would
seem  to  have  been  either  Aegys  (Pans.  iiL  2.   5  ;  Strabo,  x.  p.  446;
Stephanus  Byzantius,  5,v,  Atyvs)  or  Carystus  (Strabo,  Lc, ;  Athenaeus^
i.  p.  3 1  c ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  5,v,  KdpvoTos).     The  wine  of  Carystus
was  mentioned  by  the  poet  Alcman,  as  we  learn  from  the  writers  hst
cited.

See  Leake,  Mareay  3.  p.  18  sq.\  idU^  Peloponnesiaca^  p.  350;  Boblaye^
RecherchcSy  p.  76 ;  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  257  sq,  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungem^  a  401;
Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  114;  Baedeker,'  p.  293;  Guide-Joanne,  2.  p.  282  ;W.
Loring,  m  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  15  (1895),  P*  45  ^^'

21.  3.  Belemina.  Pursuing  our  way  northward  from  the  Kalym
of  GeorgfUtsi  (see  preceding  note)  we  come  in  half  an  hour  to  an
abundant  and  beautiful  spring  gushing  freely  from  beneath  rocks  on
the  left  side  of  the  path  and  surrounded  by  trees.  Below  the  spring,
in  a  little  stretch  of  flat  ground  planted  with  mulberry-trees,  Vischer
observed  some  ancient  walls.  Beyond  this  place  the  track  ascends
and  traverses  a  flat  tableland  of  some  extent,  dotted  with  heaps  of
stones  and  stunted  wild  pear-trees.  This  tableland  goes  by  the  name
oi  Agrapithokambos  (* wild-pear  region*).  Beyond  it  the  track  descends
through  a  bleak  country  and  enters  a  beautiful  pass  in  which  the
hillsides  on  either  hand  are  richly  clothed  with  arbutus.  Hence  the
pass  gets  its  name  of  Goumarokamdos  (* axbutus  region').  From  this
pass  we  emerge  on  the  head  waters  of  the  Eurotas  at  the  khan  of
Longam'ko.  The  time  from  the  Kalyvia  of  Georghifsi  to  the  khan  of
Longaniko  is  about  two  hours.  Here,  on  the  opposite  (northern)  side
of  the  river,  rises  the  fine  conical  mountain  of  Chelmos  (2556  feet),  its
slopes  clothed  with  wood  and  green  pastures.  Although  streams  flov
round  its  base  on  both  sides  to  form  the  Eurotas,  the  mountain  seems
to  the  eye  to  close  the  valley  of  the  Eurotas  on  the  north.  It  is  *
conspicuous  object  whether  seen  from  the  north  or  the  south,  being
visible  both  from  Megalopolis  and  Sparta.  Its  summit  is  encircled  by
extensive  remains  of  fortification-walls,  of  which  a  considerable  part  ^^
generally  held  to  be  ancient,   while  the  rest  is  certainly  mediae^'^


H.  XXI  BELEMINA  373

liese  walls  follow,  as  far  as  possible,  the  verge  of  the  steepest  slope
nd  keep  as  nearly  level  as  the  nature  of  the  ground  allows ;  but  on
tie  eastern  side,  where  the  ground  falls  away  very  abruptly,  the  wall
ecessarily  descends  with  it  fully  200  feet,  in  order  to  rejoin  the  crest
f  the  hill  (here  much  lower)  near  its  north-east  comer.  On  the  west
tie  slope  is  much  more  gradual.  The  fort  consists  of  an  upper  and  a
jwer  enclosure,  the  upper  enclosure  forming  the  citadel  proper.  This
pper  enclosure  was  itself  divided  into  two  by  a  cross-wall  in  mediaeval
nd  perhaps  also  in  ancient  times.  The  massive  walls  both  of  the
ipper  and  lower  enclosure  are  strengthened  at  intervals  by  towers,
emicircular  or  square.  In  respect  of  structure,  the  walls  are  built
entirely  of  unhewn  stones  piled  together ;  but  the  two  faces  are  more
:arefully  put  together,  and  built  of  larger  stones,  than  the  interior.
Mr.  W.  Loring,  the  only  traveller  who  has  examined  and  described  the
fortress  in  detail,  distinguishes  three  styles  in  the  construction  of  the
walls :  (i)  that  of  the  outer  wall ;  (2)  that  of  the  western  part  of  the
cross-wall  which  separates  the  upper  enclosure  from  the  lower;  (3)
that  of  the  remaining  walls  of  the  upper  enclosure.  The  difference
between  styles  i  and  2  lies  in  the  size  of  the  stones,  those  of  the  outer
wall  being  much  larger  than  those  of  the  inner.  In  the  walls  of  style  3
mortar  has  been  extensively,  and  tiles  sparingly,  employed ;  they  are
obviously  mediaeval.  The  walls  of  the  first  two  styles  are  probably
ancient;  from  the  large  size  and  loose  structure  of  the  stones  Dr.
Dorpfeld,  judging  by  Mr.  Loring's  photographs,  inclined  to  think  that,
if  ancient  at  all,  they  belonged  to  the  Mycenaean  age.

This  fortress  on  Mount  Chelmos  has  been  sometimes  identified  with
Belemina,  as  by  Leake  and  Lolling  (Baedeker).  Belemina,  or  Belbina
as  it  was  also  called  (Plutarch,  Cleomenes^  4  ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v,
BfAjStvtt),  was  no  doubt  the  chief  place  of  this  district,  but  from
Pausanias's  description  of  it  as  supplied  with  springs  and  traversed  by
the  Eurotas  we  should  expect  to  find  it  in  the  valley,  not  on  the  top  of
the  mountain.  Probably  Mr.  W.  Loring  is  right  in  identifying  the
fortress  on  Mount  Chelmos  with  the  place  called  the  Athenaeum  by
Plutarch  and  Polybius.  Plutarch  says  that  the  Athenaeum  was  near
Belbina,  on  a  pass  leading  into  Laconia,  and  that  it  was  claimed  by
Megalopolis  in  the  reign  of  Cleomenes  III.,  king  of  Sparta,  who  seized
and  fortified  it  {Cleomenes^  4).  Polybius,  himself  a  native  of  Megalo-
polis, always  speaks  of  the  Athenaeum  as  belonging  to  Megalopolis
0^'  37)  60,  81) :  he  tells  us  (iv.  81)  that  on  one  occasion  the  Lacedae-
monians, being  threatened  with  a  Macedonian  invasion,  dismantled  and
evacuated  the  Athenaeum.  Thus  it  appears  that  the  Athenaeum  was
on  the  frontiers  between  Laconia  and  Arcadia,  and  that  its  possession
was  claimed  by  both  countries.  The  same  thing  was  true  of  Belemina,
as  we  learn  from  Pausanias  (>nii.  35.  3  J^.) ;  it  was  sometimes  held  by
M^alopolis  (Polybius,  ii.  54 ;  Livy,  xxxviii.  34).  The  name  Belemina
or  Belbina  seems  to  have  covered  the  whole  district  in  which  the
Athenaeum  was  situated.  Indeed  it  may  be  questioned  whether
Belemina  or  Belbina  was  not  the  name  of  a  district  only,  not  of  a  town
^  all   Stephanus  Byzantius,  it  is  true,  speaks  of  Belbina  as  a  Laconian


374  CROCEAE  BK.  iii.  laconu

city  {5,v,  BcAjStva),  but  his  authority  is  Pausanias,  whose  language  in
the  present  passage  favours  the  view  that  it  was  a  district  rather  thaa
a  town.  And  Polybius  (ii.  54),  Strabo  (viii.  p.  343),  and  Livy  (zxxvE
34)  speak  of  it  only  as  a  district  No  other  undoubted  remains  of  an
ancient  settlement,  besides  those  on  Mount  ChelmoSy  appear  to  exist  in
this  district  Ancient  remains  have  indeed  been  reported  at  two  other
places,  namely  ( i )  on  the  plateau  to  the  south-east  of  the  village  of
Petrina^  about  two  miles  west  of  Mt  Chelmos^  and  (2)  near  the  du^iel
(now  destroyed)  of  Hagia  Eirene  at  the  eastern  foot  of  Chelmos.  Bat
Mr.  Loring  bailed  to  find  ancient  Greek  ruins  at  either  of  these  placei
He  suggests  that  at  the  former  place  the  white  rocks  protruding  from
the  soil,  with  which  the  plateau  is  studded,  may  have  been  mistaken
at  a  distance  for  ruins.  At  the  latter  place  it  would  seem  that  some
minor  antiquities,  especially  small  bronze  figures,  have  occasionaSj
been  found.

See  GA\j  Journey  in  the  Morea^  p.  318  sq,\  Leake,  Morea^  3.  p.  20 if.;
Boblaye,  Kecnerches,  p.  75  sq.  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  256  sq. ;  Vischer,  Erumff-
ungeny  p.  403;  Bursian,  Gtogr,  2.  p.  113;  Baedeker,'  p.  293;  Guide-Joeauu^l.
p.  282  ;  Philippson,  Pehtcnnes^  p.  105  ;  W.  Loring,  m  Journal  if  Hellenic  Studie^t
15  (1895).  PP-  37-4I1  46,  71-74.

21.  4.  Oroceae.  Pausanias  has  now  returned  from  the  north  of
Laconia  to  Sparta,  and  is  journeying  southward  toward  the  sea.  About  15
miles  south  of  Sparta  on  the  road  to  Gythium  is  the  village  of  Levetstrva.
About  3  miles  further  to  the  south-east,  in  the  undulating  hilly  region
between  the  villages  of  Alai-Bey  and  Siephania^  are  the  quarries  whidi
Pausanias  here  describes.  Croceae  must,  therefore,  have  been  in  the  neigh-
bourhood, perhaps  at  Alai-Bey,  The  quarries  are  situated  on  the  top  of
a  conical  hill,  which  is  mostly  covered  with  earth  and  dotted  over  with
oaks.  The  stone  is  green  porphyry  {verde  anticd) ;  the  Romans  called  it
Lacedaemonian  marble  (Pliny,  N,  H,  xxxvi.  55).  It  has  a  rich  green
ground  speckled  with  rectangular  greenish-white  crystals  of  feldspar.  It
is  very  hard,  and  difficult  to  work,  but  takes  a  fine  polish.  The  rock,
as  Pausanias  says,  is  not  continuous  ;  indeed  the  stratum  is  so  disruptured
that  it  is  not  easy  to  find  a  lump  a  foot  long  by  a  few  inches  thick.
Green  porphyry  is  not  known  to  exist  elsewhere  in  Greece ;  but  frag-
ments, brought  from  Croceae,  may  be  seen  at  Sparta,  Olympia,  and  Argos.
There  is  at  present  a  large  piece  of  it  at  the  east  end  of  the  Acropolis  at
Athens.  But  whether  the  Greeks  made  any  use  of  the  stone  before  Roman
times  is  doubtful.  Strabo  mentions  (viii.  p.  367)  that  a  large  quarry  of
a  costly  stone  had  recently  been  opened  in  Mount  Taygetus  to  supply
the  demands  of  Roman  luxury.  The  reference  may  be  to  the  porphyry
quarries  at  Croceae.  One  of  the  baths  at  Corinth  was  adorned  with
this  green  porphyry  (Paus.  ii.  3.  5) ;  but  of  course  this  bath,  like  the
rest  of  the  city,  was  of  the  Roman  epoch.  Above  the  chief  quarry  there
are  some  remains  of  structures  of  Roman  brick.  Here  perhaps  stood
the  bronze  images  of  the  Dioscuri  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  At  the
neighbouring  village  of  Levetsova  there  is  a  marble  relief  representioS
the  Dioscuri.  Ross  in  vain  tried  to  buy  it.  The  people  thought  t-^^
figures  were  the  guardian  spirits  of  the  village.


I.  XXI  AEGIAE  375

See  Expid,  Scunt,  de  Morie:  Giolo^^  pp.  114, 129-137  ;  Boblaye,  Recherches^
84  sq,  ;  Fiedler,  Reise^  i.  p.  326  sqq,  ;  L.  Ross,  Wanderungm^  2.  p.  240  sq,  ;
urtius,  ^«/(e^.  2.  p.  266  j^.  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  pp.  106,  132;  Baedeker,' p.  291 ;
'uide-JoantUt  2.  p.  260  sq,  ;  BlUmner,  Technologies  3.  p.  19  sqq,  ;  Neumann  und
artscn,  Physikcuische  GeographU  von  Grieckenloitd^  p.  220  sq.  ;  J.  H.  Middleton,
"he  Remains  of  ancient  Ronu^  i.  p.  24 ;  Philippson,  Feioponnes^  pp.  215,  387.

21.  5.  turning  off  to  the  right yon  will  come  to  the  town

r  Aegiae  etc  From  Croceae,  Pausanias  might  have  followed  the
:raight  road  to  the  sea ;  but  instead  he  turns  off  into  the  hills  to  the
ght.  Aegiae  seems  to  have  been  close  to  the  site  of  the  modem
dmni.  Here,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Smenos^  is  a  church  of  St.
Demetrius,  mostly  built  of  ancient  blocks  and  marbles,  with  some
nfluted  columns  and  bad  Ionic  capitals.  Opposite  the  church,  on  the
:ft  bank  of  the  stream,  and  on  the  slope  of  a  small  hill,  are  the  incon-
derable  ruins  of  Aegiae.  The  remains  of  a  bath  may  be  distinguished ;
le  rest  consists  of  foundations  and  single  blocks.  The  epithet  '  lovely '
hich  Homer  {Ilictd^  ii.  583)  applies  to  Aegiae  (or  Augeae,  as  he  calls
)  is  appropriate.  The  little  valley  is  surrounded  by  soft  green  hills,
lostly  wooded  with  oak.  A  marshy  flat,  where  willows  grow,  begins  at
Leg^ae ;  in  winter  it  is  under  water.  At  Limtd  the  valley  bends  south
nd  forms  a  lake.  This  may  be  the  lake  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  The
istance  of  the  place  from  Gythium  agrees  with  the  30  Greek  furlongs
f  Pausanias  (§  6).

See  Boblaye,  Recherchesy  p.  85 ;  Ross,  Wcmderungen^  2.  p.  229  sq, ;  Curtius,
V^.  2.  p.  267  sq,  ;  Leake,  Pelop,  p.  170 ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  145 ;  Guide-
oanne^  2,  p.  260.

21.  5.  the  fish  called  the  Fisher.  This  fish  was  so  called  from  the
ray  in  which  he  catches  his  prey.  It  is  described  by  Aristotle  {Hist,
In,  ix.  37,  p.  620  b  of  the  Berlin  ed.)  and  Plutarch  {De  sollertia
Inimalium^  27.  4)  as  follows.  From  his  eyes  (Aristotle)  or  neck
Plutarch)  project  a  number  (Plutarch  speaks  of  only  one)  of  feelers  or
:ntacles,  resembling  hairs  or  fishing  lines,  each  rounded  at  the  end,  like
ait.  The  fish  stirs  up  the  mud  or  sand,  hides  himself  in  the  turbid
rater,  and  stretches  out  his  long  feelers.  When  a  fish  touches  one  of
bem,  the  'fisher'  fish  gradually  draws  in  his  feeler,  and  with  it  the
ictim,  to  his  mouth.  Aristotle's  description  of  the  fish  is  copied  by
Uitigonus  {Histor,  Mirab,  47).  The  fish  is  the  Lophius  piscatorius^
Dund  on  the  coasts  of  Europe.  Its  scientific  name,  like  its  popular
Lnglish  name  'angler'  and  French  name  raie-pScheresse^  are  derived
rem  its  mode  of  capturing  its  prey,  which  Aristotle  has  described
rorrectly.  It  has  a  number  of  long  filaments  in  a  row  down  its  belly,
from  below  its  mouth.  Claus  says  :  "  The  pelvic  fins,  which  are  small
and  placed  on  the  throat  (jugular),  have  their  so-called  carpal  pieces
elongated,  so  that  they  form  movable  arm-like  supports  for  the  body,
and  are  in  fact  used  for  hopping  and  creeping."  This  may  have
suggested  the  other  name  of  *frog,'  by  which  the  fish  has  been
known  in  ancient  and  modem  times,  Greek  PaTpa^os  (Aristotle,  Lc,  ;
Aelian,  Nat,  An,  xiii.  5),  English  frog-fish^  toad-fishy  German  Frosch-
fischy  FroschteufeL     See  Aubert  and  Wimmer's  German  translation  of


376  GYTHIUM  bk.  hi.  laconia

Aristotle's  History  of  Animals^  voL  i.  p.  146,  with  their  note  on  ix.  37;
J.  Barth^emy  Saint  Hilaire,  in  his  French  translation  of  the  same  work,
vol.  3.  p.  214  ;  Glaus,  Elementary  Text-book  of  Zoology^  Special  fart^
Mollusca  to  Man^  p.  173,  with  die  woodcut  Na  617  on  p.  172.  Cpi
J.  B.  Meyer,  Aristotles  Thierkundey  pp.  277,  281  sq.  On  sacred  fish  sec
note  on  vii.  22.  4.

21.  6.  the  Free  Laconians,  whom  the  Emperor  Angnstos  r»-
leased  etc.  Pausanias  is  wrong  in  saying  that  the  maritime  towns,  of
which  he  gives  a  list  in  the  next  section,  were  first  made  independent  of
Sparta  by  Augustus.  Inscriptions  show  that  before  the  time  of  Augustus
these  towns  were  not  only  independent  of  Sparta  but  confederated
among  themselves.  But  whereas  before  his  time  the  league  had  been
known  as  '  the  commonwealth  of  the  Lacedaemonians,'  from  the  time  of
Augustus  onward  it  was  known  as  the  Free  Laconians  {Eleutkero-
lacones)y  and  the  gift  of  freedom  was  probably  bestowed  by  Augustus.
See  Mommsen,  Romische  Gesckichte^  5.  p.  238  ;  Dittenbergcr,  Syllogt
Inscript,  Graec,  No.  255,  note  3.

21.  6.  the  purple  dye  etc  The  shellfish  which  the  Phoenicians
chiefly  used  for  the  manufacture  of  the  purple  dye  seem  to  have  been
the  Murex  trunculus  and  the  Murex  brandaris.  On  the  beach  at
Sidon  enormous  masses  of  shells  of  the  former  sort  may  still  be  seen;
the  heap  is  more  than  100  yards  long,  and  is  6  or  7  yards  high.  The
head  of  each  shell  has  been  broken,  as  with  a  hammer,  to  extract  tbe
mollusc.  In  Greece  heaps  of  the  Murex  brandaris  may  be  seen  at
various  places  near  the  sea.  The  Phoenicians  set  down  the  discovery
of  the  dye  to  the  dog  of  Hercules  (that  is  of  Melcarth) ;  the  beast
happened  to  fasten  its  teeth  in  one  of  the  shellfish,  and  its  lips  were
seen  to  be  stained  purple  (Pollux,  i.  45  sq,)  By  using  shells  of  different
sorts  and  manipulating  them  in  various  ways,  the  ancient  dyers  contrived
to  extract  from  the  shellfish  dyes  of  diverse  hues  from  blue  and  crimson
to  an  intense  violet.  See  F.  de  Saulcy,  in  Revue  ArchMogique^  N.  S.
9  (1864),  pp.  216-218;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  PArt  dans
VAntiquitdy  3.  p.  878  sqq,  ;  Bliimner,  Technologies  i.  p.  224  sqq.  In
Pausanias's  time  more  than  half  the  population  of  the  seaside  town  of
Bulis  in  Phocis  were  purple-fishers  (x.  37.  3).

21.  8.  Oythinm,  According  to  Strabo  (viii.  p.  363)  the  distance
of  Gythium  from  Sparta  was  240  Greek  furlongs  or  about  27
English  miles.  The  French  surveyors  found  this  measurement  exact
(Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  86).  Gythium,  the  seaport  of  Sparta,  stood  on
the  slopes  of  some  low  hills  and  on  a  small  plain  enclosed  between  the
hills  and  the  sea.  A  torrent  intersects  the  plain.  There  is  no  natural
harbour  here  ;  accordingly  the  ancient  harbour  of  Gythium  was  formed
artificially  by  excavation  (Strabo,  Lc)  Of  this  artificial  harbour  no  certain
trace  has  been  found.  The  remains  of  the  ancient  city  extend  over  a
considerable  area.  On  the  slope  of  the  hill,  some  150  yards  or  so  fit)fli
the  sea,  are  the  remains  of  a  theatre  constructed  of  a  coarse  white  marble-
Some  of  the  seats  are  in  their  places  ;  many  others  are  lying  about  oi
are  built  into  the  terraces  which  support  the  vineyards.  Excavations
made  by  the  Greek  Archaeological  Society  in  1 89 1  cleared  seven  of  tH*


H.  XXI  GYTHJUM  yj*i

)wer  rows  of  scats.     The  seats  in  the  lowest  row,  round  the  orchestra,
ere  provided  with  backs.     On  one  of  the  backs  of  the  seat  is  carved  the
ame  *  Antigonus.*     Five  staircases  led  up  through  the  seats,  two  at  the
ings,  the  rest  in  the  middle.     The  wings  rested  on  an  artificial  founda-
on  of  ashlar  masonry,  rubble,  and  mortar,  of  which  portions  remain,
"he  stage-buildings,  with  the   exception  of  the  back  part,  were  also
eared  in  the  excavations  of  1891.     The  total  diameter  of  the  theatre
5ems  to  have  been  about  250  feet.     The  hill  immediately  above  the
leatre  was  the  acropolis ;  some  pieces  of  the  wall  are  preserved.     In
le  plain,  to  the  north  of  the  torrent  which  intersects  it,  there  are  many
lins  of  Gythium,  but  they  seem  to  be  all  of  Roman  date.     Beside  a
mall  chapel  there  are  some  massive  ancient  walls  standing  to  a  height
f  10  or  12  feet  above  the  ground.     A  little  further  north,  beside  the
ublic  well,  there  is  another  group  of  walls  ;  and  still  further  north  may
«  seen  three  or  four  vaulted  chambers  built  side  by  side.     On  the
outh-west  slope  of  the  acropolis  hill,  near  the  church  of  the  Trinity
Hagia  Triada\  and  lower  down  on  both  sides  of  the  torrent  and  of  the
:arriage  road  to  Sparta,  there  are  many  graves,  some  cut  in  the  rock,
Dthers  built.     Here,  too,  at  the  point  where  the  torrent  is  henmfied  in
most  closely  by  the  hills,  a  long  straight  wall  of  polygonal  masonry,
following  the  bed  of  the  stream,  was  laid  bare  by  a  spate  in   1891.
Beside  the  sea,  to  the  left  of  the  mouth  of  the  torrent,  there  are  extensive
and  massive  remains  of  an  ancient  building ;  they  are  now  surmounted
by  a  windmill  and  partly  submerged  by  the  sea.    Some  rooms  with  mosaic
pavements  and  water-channels  may  be  seen  on  the  land  ;  and  at  the  bottom
of  the  sea,  on  a  calm  day,  ruins  of  all  sorts  may  be  distinguished  ex-
tending far  under  water.     It  used  to  be  supposed  that  these  were  the
remains  of  ancient  breakwaters  which  protected  the  harbour  of  Gythium.
But  a  more  careful  examination  of  them  by  Mr.  Skias  in  1891  proved
that  this  view  is  mistaken.     The  ruins  in  question  are  those  of  a  great
many  perfectly  distinct  buildings,  both  large  and  small,  some  of  them
divided  into  several  apartments.     Arches,  vaults,  and  door-posts  may
be  seen  in  some  places.     In  fact  it  would  seem  that  we  have  here  a
large  part  of  the  ancient  city  sunk  under  the  sea.     To  the  north  of  the
mouth  of  the  torrent,  still  beside  the  sea,  are  the  remains  of  a  large
Biarble  building  buried  deep  under  the  soil.     A  part  of  the  stylobate
«^  excavated  some  years  ago,  and  there  were  found  four  large  marble
Jlocks  of  the  epistyle,  a  piece  of  the  geison  with  waterspouts  in  the
bape  of  lions'  heads,  and  a  Corinthian  capital.     On  the  shore  further
'orth  were  discovered  remains  of  an  aqueduct  or  bath.     Beyond  it  is  a
^rge  subterranean  tomb  with  a  vaulted  roof;  a  marble  sarcophagus,
Jisculptured,  still  rests  in  one  of  two  niches  in  the  tomb.      Further
*om  the  sea,  to  the  south-east  of  the  theatre  and  at  no  great  distance
^m  it,  are  the  ruins  of  a  very  large  building,  from  which  many  blocks
f  stone  have   been   taken   to   build   the   modem   town   of  Gythium
^iarathofUst).     Inscriptions  have  been  foimd  in  it     Mr.  Skias  believes
^t  this  large  edifice  may  have  been  the  market-place.     A  little  nearer
^e  theatre  Mr.  Skias  excavated  the  stylobate  of  a  large  marble  building,
which  seems  to  have  faced  towards  the  sea.     The  stylobate  was  laid


378  GYTHIUM  bk.  hi.  lacoku

bare  for  a  length  of  2 1  metres  (69  feet).  On  it  were  found  two  bases
of  Ionic  columns  (not  in  their  original  places),  a  large  block  of  tiie
epistyle,  and  a  curiously  shaped  marble  monument  consisting  of  a  laige
egg-shaped  sphere  joined  by  a  neck  to  a  square  base.  Further,  on  &
slope  of  the  hill  to  the  south  of  the  theatre,  many  walls  and  scattered
blocks  may  be  seen ;  and  above  the  theatre,  towards  the  top  of  die
hill,  there  is  the  floor  of  some  edifice.  To  the  north  of  the  theatzc,  is
the  glen  which  here  bounds  the  acropolis  hill,  there  are  very  consider-
able remains  of  a  circular  vaulted  building,  perhaps  a  baptistry ;  tliey
are  standing  to  a  height  of  about  7  feet.  Besides  all  these  remains,  tbe
church  of  St.  George  in  the  modem  town  is  to  a  great  extent  boih  of
materials  taken  from  the  ancient  city.

The  modem  town  of  Marathanisi^  officially  known  as  Gythiom,
stands  some  200  yards  south  of  the  ruins  of  the  ancient  city.  It  is
picturesquely  situated  on  the  rocky  slope  of  Moimt  Larysium  (see  Pai&
iii.  22.  2),  which  here  projects  into  the  sea.  The  streets  are  nanow^
crooked,  and  filthy.  The  climate  is  very  hot  and  unhealthy;  i&
summer  the  mosquitoes  make  life  almost  unbearable.  Still  the  trade  of
the  place  is  considerable.  The  population  (3700)  is  notorious  for  its
lawless  violence.

See  Walpole's  Memoirs  relating  to  Turkey^  !.•  p.  57  sq,  ;  Boblaye,  Recktr^
p.  86  sq, ;  Leake,  Morea^  I.  p.  244  sq, ;  Le  Bas,  *  Voyages  et  recherches,'  RffM
Archhlogique,  2  (1S45),  P^  ^^  ^9^-  *  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  268  sqq.;  L.  RoHi
fVofiderungen,  2.  pp.  231-237 ;  Bursian,  Geoj^rr,  2.  p.  144  sq.  ;  Baedeker,' |x  269


Bulletin  de  Corr.  HelUnique,  15  (1891),  p.  654  sq,  \  A.  N.  Skias,  in  ^^fiff^
iLpXaLoKoyucfif  1892,  pp.  60-64 ;  tb.  pp.  185-204  (inscriptions).  The  best  plan  d
Gythium  is  given  by  Le  Has  ( Voyage  arcfUologique^  Itineraire,  pi.  26).

21.  8.  after  contending  for  the  possession  of  the  tripod.  See  x.
13.  7  note.  Prof.  Curtius  conjectures  that  in  this  legend  of  the  joint
foundation  of  Gythium  by  Hercules  and  Apollo,  we  have  a  reminiscence
of  the  union  of  two  hostile  stocks,  namely  the  Dorian  invaders  and  the
old  Minyan  inhabitants  of  the  land,  the  Dorians  being  represented  in
the  legend  by  Hercules  and  the  Minyans  by  Apollo  {Gesammelie  Abhandr
lungen^  2.  p.  223).

21.  8.  In  the  market-place there  are  images  of  Apollo  etc

Though  Pausanias  only  mentions  an  image  of  Apollo,  we  learn  fro©
inscriptions  that  there  was  a  sanctuary  of  Apollo  in  the  market-place.
See  Revue  ArchJologique^  2  (1845),  p.  208  sq, ;  S.  Wide,  Lakonischi
Kulte^  p.  69.     As  to  the  supposed  ruins  of  the  market-place  see  abovCi

p.  377.

21.  9.  an  Old  Man  who  lives  in  the  sea  etc.     <<  The  Old  Man  of
the  Sea"  is  the  title  which   in  the  passage  of  the  Iliad  quoted  by
Pausanias  (//.  xviii.  140  sq,^  Thetis  gives  to  the  father  of  the  Nereids^
her  sisters.      But  the  name  of  Nereus  does  not  occur  in  the  lUi^
or  Odyssey,     In  the  Odyssey  (iv.  384  sq,)  Proteus  is  called  *the  oV^
man  of  the  sea.*     On  a  bronze  relief,  found  at  Olympia,  Hercules  '^


:h.  XXII  THE  OLD  MAN  OF  THE  SEA  379


represented  grappling  with  a  bearded  man,  the  lower  part  of  whose
body  is  a  fish's  tail ;  an  inscription  at  the  side  of  this  fish-tailed  monster
declares  him  to  be  the  *  Old  Man  of  the  Sea.'    See  Milchhfifer,  Anfange
i,  griech,  Kumty  p.  185,  fig.  67  ;  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  4  (1883),
p.  106 ;  Friederichs-Wolters,  Gipsabgiisse^  No.  341  ;  Roehl,  /.  G,  A,
No.  34;  Collitz,  G,  D,  L  3.  No.  3261.     The  title  *01d  Man  of  the
Sea'  is  also  inscribed  beside  the  figure  of  a  bearded  man  on  a  vase
by  the  Attic  vase-painter  Cholchus  (Dressier,   Triton  und  die  Tritonen^
Wunen,  1892/3,  i.  p.  i  ;  Escher,  Triton  und  seine  Bekdmpfung  durch
HtrakleSy  Leipzig,  1 890,  p.  4).     The  combat  of  Hercules  with  a  sea-
monster,  half  man,  half  fish,  is  represented  on  the  frieze  of  the  ancient
temple  at  Assus  (Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  p.   327  ;  Overbeck,  Gesch,
d,  griech,  Plastik^^  i.  p.  108  sq, ;  Murray,  Hist,  of  Greek  Sculpture^
I.  p.  103  ;  Friederichs-Wolters,  Gipsabgiisse^   Nos.   8-12  ;    Collignon,
HisU  de  la  Sculpture  Grecque^   i.  p.  185),  and  is  the  subject  of  two
archaic  groups  of  sculpture  which  occupied    the    gables   of  temples
on  the  Acropolis  of  Adiens  (Collignon,  op,  cit,  i.  p.  207  ;  Overbeck,
op,  at,  I.  pp.   1 8 1- 1 84;   Escher,  op,  cit,  pp.    12 5-1 31).      The  same
combat  is  depicted  on  many  black-figured  vases,  on  some  of  which  the
sea-monster  is  identified  as  Triton  by  inscriptions.     See  Escher,  op,  cit.
p.  132  sqq, ;  K.  Kuruniotis,  Herakles  mil  Halios  geron  und  Triton  auf
Werken  der  dlteren  grieckischen  Kunst  (Munchen,  1893),  pp.   18-33.
As  to  the  Greek  *  Old  Man  of  the  Sea '  see  further  Escher,  op.  cit.  p.  i
jyf. ;  Dressier,  op,  cit,  p.  i  sqq. ;  Kuruniotis,  op.  cit.  p.  5  sqq. ;  S.  Wide,
lakonische  Kulte^  p.  223  sqq,

22.  I.  Jnst  three  fturlongs  from  Gythium  is  an  nnwrought  stone
etc  Near  the  eastern  foot  of  the  hill  Larysium,  a  little  above  the  sea
and  about  3  furlongs  from  the  ruins  of  Gythium,  is  an  inscription  cut
in  the  rock,  in  small  and  very  ancient  characters ;  and  behind  it,
according  to  Leake,  there  was,  on  the  side  of  the  mountain,  <<  a  chair
vith  a  footstep,  hewn  in  the  rock,  and  resembling  the  chairs  at  Athens,
in  the  rocks  near  the  Pnyx."  This  Leake  supposed  to  be  the  stone
referred  to  by  Pausanias.  Mr.  Skias,  however,  has  recently  denied  that
there  is,  or  ever  was,  here  any  such  cutting  in  the  rock.  The  spot  is
now  within  the  town  of  Marathonisi  or  Gythium.  About  200  yards
Anther  north  and  further  from  the  sea,  on  the  northern  slope  of  Mt
Larysium,  is  a  remarkable  stepped  or  terraced  cutting  in  the  rock,
recalling  the  so-called  bema  in  the  Pnyx  at  Athens  (voL  2.  p.  375  sq.^
Ilie  purpose  which  it  served  is  not  known.  Eng^ved  on  the  rock  is
the  mscription  ;  MOIPA  AI02  TEP(A)2TI[0Y],  «the  property  of

Zeus,  god  of  portents.'  See  Leake,  Morea^  i.  p.  248 ;  R,  Weil,  in  Mittheil.
d'  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  i  (1876),  p.  151  sqq.\  Skias,  in  *E<lyrjfupls
<ipX<^^oAoyiic77,  1892,  pp.  55-60.  See  the  view  and  plans  of  the  latter
rock-cutting  in  Le  Bas,  Voyage  arch^ologique^  Itin^raire,  pi.  25.  Pro£
Curtius  {Pelop,  2.  p.  272)  has  confused  the  two  rock-cuttings,  as  may
be  seen  by  comparing  his  text  and  plan  (plate  xii.)  with  the  descriptions
of  Leake  and  Weil  and  the  map  and  plans  (Nos.  25,  26)  of  Le  Bas.
j  ^or  the  inscription  in  front  of  Orestes's  seat  (?),  see  Leake,  MoreOy  3.
pi-  28 ;  R.  Weil,  op.  cit,  p.   154;  Roehl,  /.  G,  A.  No.  72  ;  Roberts,


38o  TRJNASUS^HELOS  bk.

Greek  Epigraphy^  No.  260.  Roehl  gives  six  different  coj
inscription,  the  meaning  of  which  is  still  uncertain.  With  the
association  of  Orestes  with  the  stone  cp.  ii.  31.  4.

22.  I.  the  island  of  Oranae.  This  is  the  little  islan<
thonisi^  off  the  town  of  that  name,  the  modem  Gythium.
phaguses  have  been  found  in  it,  the  one  sculptured,  the  '
{Revue  Archiologique^  2  (1845),  p.  213;  Leake,  Morca^
ILpaKTiKdi  TTJq  'A/OX-  'Erat/j.  1 89 1,  p.  34).  The  passage  of
which  Pausanias  refers  is  //.  iii.  443  sgg.  Homer's  island
was  by  others  identified  with  the  island  of  Helene  off  th
Attica.     See  note  on  i.  35.  i.

22.  2.  Praxidica.     See  ix.  33.  3  note.

22.  3.  Trinasus.  The  ruins  of  Trinasus  are  on  the  shore
of  Gythium,  near  the  village  of  Tn'm'sa;  the  place  in  ancient  2
times  has  got  its  name  from  the  three  rocky  islets  which  her<
coast  The  circuit  of  Trinasus  was  not  more  than  400  or
which  agrees  with  Pausanias's  remark  that  the  place  was
rather  than  a  town.  The  lower  parts  of  walls  of  the  third  or
on  every  side,  except  toward  the  sea ;  and  in  the  centre  are
tions  of  some  buildings  of  the  same  style  of  masonry.  Se
RecAercAes,  p.  94  ;  Leake,  Morea^  i.  p.  232  sq.\  Ross,  Wa
2.  p.  239 ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  287  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.

22.  3.  Helos.  This  is  still  the  name  of  the  plain  on  tl
shore  of  the  Laconian  Gulf,  through  which  the  Eurotas  flov
sea.  The  flat  sandy  sea-beach  is  skirted  by  low  downs,  be!
stretch  wide  marshes,  partially  overgrown  with  reeds  ai
Beyond  this  belt  of  marshes  begins  the  fertile  plain  of  Hel
is  light  and  sandy,  and  it  is  covered  with  corn-fields,  dotte(
there  with  oaks  and  olive-trees.  But  the  exact  site  of  the  ai
of  Helos  is  uncertain.  The  French  surveyors  inclined  to  p
spot  near  the  Kalyvia  of  Bizanty  at  the  eastern  side  of  the  p
they  found  some  heaps  of  d^bris^  potsherds,  and  several  smz
Helos  was  a  seaport  in  the  old  days  (Homer,  Iluid^  ii.  58^
harbour  is  now  a  lagoon  or  marsh.  This  alteration  of  the
the  consequent  decay  of  Helos  (like  the  decay  of  our  old  Ci:
some  of  which  are  now  some  way  from  the  sea)  must  have
by  the  beginning  of  our  era,  for  Strabo  speaks  of  the  marsh  ar
that  Helos  was  now  only  a  village  (viii.  p.  363).  Sc
Recherches^  p.  94  sq,  ;  Curtius,  Peiop,  2.  p.  289  ;  Bursian,  (
133;  Baedeker,^  p.  291 ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  258 ;  Philippson,
..;  p.  180.  Helos  must  have  been  an  old  Achaean  city,  for  it:
7/      founder  Helius  was  said  to  be  a  son  of  Perseus  (Strabo,  I.e.)

22.  4.  Acriae.     The  French  surveyors  found  the  ruin;
at   the   modem   port  Kokinio,   near  the  north-eastern   cor
Laconian  Gulf     The  tower  of  Kokinio  stands  on  the  site
acropolis.     The  sea  has  destroyed  some  of  the  walls.     Se
Reckerches^   P-  95  ;   Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.   289  sq.\   Bursiar

P-  143.

22.  4.  The  oldest  of  all  her  images  etc.     See  v.  13.  7


cxii  GERONTHRAE—MARIUS  381

22.  5.  Nicodes.  Le  Bas  found  on  the  site  of  Acriae  (as  he
tved)  a  block  of  marble  bearing  a  very  mutilated  inscription,  which
^stored  thus :

Ot  'Afc/otarat  NticoicAca

W€KTa/cis  *OX.vfnrioviKrjv

le  people  of  Acriae  (set  up  this  statue  of)  Nicocles,  who  was  five
s  victorious  at  Olympia."     See  Revue  ArcfUologique^  2  (1845),  p.
If  this  restoration  is  right,  the  block  formed  part  of  the  monument
icocles  mentioned  by  Pausanias.

22.  6.  Qeronthrae.  This  is  the  modem  Geraki  or  Hieraki  (the
e  is  written  both  ways,  the  pronunciation  being  nearly  the  same  in
em  Greek).  It  lies  at  the  north-eastern  comer  of  a  plateau  which
es  down  to  the  Eurotas  on  the  west.  The  plateau  is  bounded  on
north  and  south  by  two  torrents  flowing  into  the  Eurotas.  The
ed  town  of  Geraki  occupies  the  acropolis  of  the  ancient  Geronthrae ;
ancient  city  stretched  to  the  south  in  the  fine  plain  watered  by
igs,  which,  as  we  learn  from  Pausanias,  marked  the  site  of  the
ket-place.  The  ruins  in  the  plain  are  of  Roman  date  ;  but  on  the
mit  of  the  hill  which  formed  the  acropolis  there  is  a  long  piece  of
lopean  wall  on  the  north.  The  sanctuary  of  Apollo,  mentioned  by
sanias  (§  7),  is  referred  to  in  an  inscription  which  contains  a  decree
tie  people  of  Geronthrae  (C  /.  G,  No.  1334).  Geronthrae  must
;  been  a  market- town  as  late  as  the  fourth  century  of  our  era ;  for  an
ription  containing  fragments  of  a  Greek  translation  of  Diocletian's
t  about  prices  was  found  here.     Afterwards  the  town  was  the  seat

bishopric.  The  distance  of  120  Greek  furlongs  (13 J  miles)  from
ae,  mentioned  by  Pausanias,  is  exact  See  Boblaye,  RechercheSy  p.
r^.  ;  Leake,  Morea,  i.  p.  6  sqq, ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  302  sq, ;
jian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  136;  Philippson,  Peloponnes^  p.  181.
22.  6.  a  village  called  Palaea  ('old').  Some  mins  on  a  hill
le  west  of  the  modem  Apidia  were  pointed  out  to  Boblaye  as  those
'alaea  {RechercheSy  p.  95  sq,)  Apidia  lies  about  midway  between
ae  and  Geronthrae.

22.  8.  Marius.  This  was  probably  at  or  near  the  site  of  the
em  village  which  still  bears  the  name  of  Mari,  The  village  lies
le  mgged  highlands  to  the  east  of  Geronthrae,  from  which,  however,
distant  75  to  80  Greek  furlongs,  not  100,  as  Pausanias  says.  There
ruins  in  the  plain  near  the  village.     The  old  citadel  is  about  a  mile

a  quarter  south  of  the  village.      Copious   springs   flow   on   all
s,  agreeably  to  Pausanias's  description.     The  place  is  an  oasis  in

mountain  wilderness.      See  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  96 ;  Curtius,
p,  2.  p.  303  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  135  sq,

22.  8.  Glyppia.  This  is  doubtless  the  place  called  Glympeis  by
bins  (iv.  36,  v.  20).  In  218  B.C.  the  Messenians,  marching  from
3lis  to  join  Philip  to  the  southward  of  Sparta,  were  attacked  and
ated  by  the  Spartan  tyrant  Lycurgus  at  Glympeis  or  Glyppia
ybius,  v.  20).  Glyppia  is  generally  identified  with  the  mins  called
'piada  {Lymbiadhd)  at  the  upper  (westem)  end  of  the  gully  which


382  GLYPPIA — ASOPUS  bk.  iiL  laconia

runs  down  to  the  eastern  sea  at  Leomdt,  The  modem  name  may  be  a
comiption  of  the  ancient  one,  which  in  its  turn  may  have  been  a  local
form  of  the  name  Olympia.  The  surrounding  district  is  still  called
Olympixhoria.  See  Boblaye,  RechercheSy  p.  96  sq, ;  Leake,  Pelop,  p.
362  sqq, ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  303  sq,  Bursian,  however,  thought  that
Glyppia  probably  lay  a  good  deal  further  south,  nearer  Marius,  perhaps
at  the  modem  Kosmas  or  still  Ifurther  south  at  Kremasti,  He  holds
that  though  Polybius  (v.  20)  states  that  Glympeis  was  on  the  frontier
between  Argolis  and  Laconia,  this  is  no  argument  in  £avour  of  the  more
northerly  Lympiada^  since  at  the  time  of  which  Polybius  is  writing  the
east  coast  as  far  south  as  Zarax  belonged  to  Argolis.  See  Bursian^
Geogr,  2.  p.  135.

22.  8.  Selintifl.  As  Pausanias  only  mentions  the  distance  of  this
place  from  Geronthrae,  without  mentioning  the  direction,  it  cannot  be
identified.  Leake  {Pelop,  p.  364)  conjectured  that  it  may  have  been  at
the  modem  Kosmas^  where  there  are  some  ancient  tombs  ;  the  villagers
sell  to  strangers  a  quantity  of  bronze  statuettes,  and  affirm  that  there
are  ruins  at  the  foot  of  the  neighbouring  Mt  Mazaraki,  See  Boblaye,
RechercheSy  P-  97-

22.  9.  AJloptifl.  This  town  must  have  been  close  to  the  high  rocky
peninsula  of  Xyli^  which  runs  southward  into  the  sea  about  8  miles  to
the  south  of  Acriae.  The  peninsula  is,  in  fact,  a  limestone  mountain
about  1000  fl.  high.  On  its  eastern  side  the  peninsula  forms,  with  the
mainland  opposite,  a  deep  bay  and  good  harbour.  At  the  head  of  the
bay  there  are  considerable  ancient  remains.  Leake  observed  several
quadrangular  foundations  cut  in  the  rock  and  extending  into  the  water
as  far  as  he  could  see ;  also  the  remains  of  a  public  building,  of  whicli
three  or  four  courses  of  regular  masonry  were  standing,  together  with
some  large  hewn  blocks  of  white  marble  lying  on  the  beach ;  a  great
quantity  of  pottery ;  two  pieces  of  Doric  columns  of  common  stone,  etc.
In  the  shallow  bay  the  ruins  of  buildings  constructed  of  bricks  and
mortar  may  be  seen  extending  under  water  for  a  distance  of  nearly  100
yards  from  the  shore ;  one  of  the  buildings  reaches  up  to  the  surface  of
the  water  and  is  divided  into  several  square  compartments.  To  the
west  of  these  buildings  a  massive  wall  runs  out  under  water ;  it  may  be
the  remains  of  an  ancient  breakwater.  The  modem  name  of  these
ruins  is  Blitra  or  Plitra,  Leake,  Ross,  and  Bursian  identified  them
with  Asopus.  The  summit  of  the  Xyli  peninsula  was  probably  the
acropolis,  where  stood  the  temple  of  Athena  Cyparissia.  About  three-
quarters  of  an  hour  to  the  north-west  of  the  ruins  of  Blitra^  on  the
coast  at  the  northern  foot  of  the  Xyli  promontory,  there  are  the  remains
of  another  ancient  town,  the  mins  of  a  large  church,  and  some
foundations  which  extend  under  the  water.  The  place  is  called  Boic^
Ross  and  Bursian  suppose  that  the  ruins  at  Bosa  are  the  ruins  of  the  city
of  the  Paracypressian  Achaeans,  which  Pausanias  speaks  of.  Boblaye
and  Curtius,  on  the  other  hand,  invert  the  hypothesis,  placing  Asopus  at
BozOy  and  the  city  of  the  Paracypressian  Achaeans  at  Blitra,  Strabo
(viiL  p.  364)  mentions,  as  lying  on  the  coast  between  Acriae  and  Boeac,
<<  the  city  of  Cyparissia,  built  on  a  peninsula  and  possessing  a  harbour."


XXII  HYPERTELEATUM  383

\  peninsula  of  which  he  speaks  is  doubtless  Xyliy  and  the  harbour  is
bay  enclosed  by  Xylu  But  the  exact  relation  of  Cyparissia  to  the
towns  mentioned  by  Pausanias  cannot  be  exactly  determined.

>ee  Leake,  Morea,  I.  p.  225  sqq, ;  iV.,  Felop,  p.  169 ;  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.
Le  Bas,  \xi  Revue  Archiologique^  2  (1845)1  P>  ^^^y  Ross,  WamUrungeny  2,  p.
s^q,  ;  Curtius,  Pe/op,  2.  p.  290  sq. ;  Bursian,  Gecigr.  2.  p.  142  sq, ;  PmlippsoD,
pontuSy  p.  179  sq,

22.  9*  Athena^  sTunamed  Cyparissia  ('she  of  the  cypress*).    On

)in  of  Asopus,  of  the  reign  of  Septimius  Severus,  Athena  is  repre-
:ed  standing  with  a  cypress  branch  in  her  left  hand  and  a  spear  in
raised  right  hand.  See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num,  Comm,
Paus.  p.  63,  with  pi.  O  x.  Compare  Paus.  iv.  36.  7.
22.  10.  HyperteleatmiL  The  French  surveyors  placed  this  at  a
It  on  the  coast  opposite  the  southern  extremity  of  Cape  Xyli^  below
village  of  Demonia,  They  found  here,  beside  the  sea,  some  remains
.n  enclosure  of  a  temple  on  a  rock  artificially  cut ;  also  many  tombs
n  in  the  rock.  In  these  tombs  have  been  found  many  gems
raved  with  the  figure  of  a  stag.  Some  five  hundred  paces  in  the
ction  of  Demonia  there  rises  one  of  the  finest  springs  of  water  in
Peloponnese.     See  Boblaye,  RechercheSy  p.  98 ;  Leake,  Pelop,  p.

sq,  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  294  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2,  p.  142.  When
Bas  visited  the  site  in  1843  or  1844  he  could  find  no  trace  of  the
pie  (Revue  ArcJUologique^  2  (1845),  P-  219).  From  the  head  of
bay  of  Xyli  a  plain  called  Leuke  in  antiquity  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  363)
tches  inland  and  northward.  It  is  about  five  miles  wide  and  is
ounded  by  hills.  Fields  of  com  and  maize  now  cover  its  whole
:nt,  but  the  modem  villages  are  built  on  the  surrounding  heights,  or
he  foot  of  the  hills.  On  the  south-east  side  of  the  plain,  at  the  foot
;he  hills,  is  the  village  of  Phiniki,  In  a  field  near  this  village  a
iber  of  inscriptions  have  been  found  which  show  that  a  temple  of
>erteleatian  Apollo  of  some  importance  must  have  existed  somewhere
^bout.  Seventy-one  bronze  plates  have  been  found  here,  mostly
ribed  with  the  names  of  priests  and  fire-bearers  (7n;/9<^po£)  of
^erteleatian  Apollo.  Inscriptions  on  stone  have  also  come  to  light
!,  containing  decrees  of  'proxeny'  in  favour  of  individuals,  with
ctions  that  the  inscribed  tablets  shall  be  set  up  '<  in  the  sanctuary
Syperteleatian  Apollo."  One  of  these  decrees  was  passed  by  the
pie  of  Cotyrta,  a  Laconian  town  mentioned  by  Thucydides  (iv.  56),

not  by  Pausanias.  Excavations  were  made  on  the  spot  where
yt  inscriptions  were  found,  in  the  hope  of  discovering  remains  of  the
iple,  but  without  success.  Still  it  is  probable  that  the  temple  was
lewhere  in  the  neighbourhood ;  and  unless  Hyperteleatum  was  the
ne  of  the  whole  district,  we  should  have  to  suppose  that  the  sanc-
ry  of  Aesculapius,  here  mentioned  by  Pausanias,  was  near  Phiniki
I  not  on  the  coast,  as  the  French  surveyors  thought.  See  'E^/uicpls
(atoXoytKiy,  1 884,  pp.  79-89,  197-218;  II/xi/CTi/ca  t^S 'Apx*  *ETat/B.
^5)  P*  31  <^7-  As  to  the  name  Hyperteleatian  cp.  'E^/xcpts  apx^^
oyiKi},  1885,  pp.  58-61.


384  ONUGNATHUS—BOEAE  ek.  iil  lacohu

22.  10.  a  cape  OnugnatiliiiB.      This  is  now  the  island  of

Elaphonisiy  the  low  narrow  isthmus  which  once  joined  it  to  the  mainland
being  now  submerged.     But  at  low  water  it  is  still  possible  to  wade
out  to  the  island ;  the  channel  is  only  about  half  a  mile  wide.     On  a
spit  of  land  at  the  northern  end  of  the   island  lies   the  hamlet  ot
Elaphomsiy  inhabited  by  a  few  shepherds.     Behind  the  village  stretches
a  plain  of  shifting  sand,  which,  blown  by  the  north-wind,  is  gradually
encroaching  on  the  inland  pastures.      Beyond  this  sandy  plain  yoo
reach  an  elevated  terrace  on  which,  near  a  few  huts,  some  ancient  wells^
sunk  in  the  rock,  may  be  seen.     There  seem  to  be  no  other  remains  of
antiquity  in  the   island.      Cp.   Strabo,   viii.   p.    363.      See   Boblaye^
Recherches^  p.  98 ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  295  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.
1 40  ;  Philippson,  Peloponnes^  p.  1 76  sq,

22.  II.  the  Bay  of  Boeae the  city  of  Boeae.    The  bay  of

Boeae  is  now  the  bay  of  Vatikoy  the  name  being  the  old  adjecdval
form  (BoicUikos)  slightly  altered.      The  town  of  Boeae  stood  on  its
eastern  shore,  to  the  south-west  of  the  village  of  Pharakh,     The  ruins
occupy  two  small  plateaus  separated  by  a  torrent ;  they  are  of  RomaB
date.     There  are  no  large  blocks  of  stone  in  the  buildings,  not  even  in
the  fortification-walls.     The  wide  plain  which  surrounds  the  spacious
bay  on  the  north  and  north-east  is  arid  and  barren,  the  soil  consisting
of  red  sand  through  which  the  rain-water  rapidly  percolates.    Heit
and  there  a  patch  of  com  or  a  f(^w  scattered  olives  maintain  a  struggling
existence.      Elsewhere   the  expanse  of  the   plain   is  overgrown  with
brushwood.      However    towards    its    southern   extremity,   where  the
mountains  approach    the  coast,  there  are  some  fertile  little  hollows
where  vines  are  cultivated  and  water  is  obtained  by  means  of  draw-
wells.     Here,  beside  the  sea,  is  the  modem  village  of  Neapolts^  founded
about  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century  and  now  the  capital  of  the
district.     It  is  a  place  of  call  for  the  coasting  steamers,   dozens  of
which  may  be  seen  riding  in  its  secure  roadstead  in  stormy  weather,
waiting   for  the  wind   to   fall   in  order   to  round   Cape    Malea.    An
inscription   of  the   second  or  third   century  A.D.  has   been  found  at
Neapolis.     It  is  engraved  on  a  slab  of  white  marble,  and  contains  an
epitaph,    in   elegiac   verses,    on   a   certain    girl   or   woman   by  name
Arescusa  (Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^   8   (1887),  P«   214  sq,)    See
Boblaye,  RechercheSy    p.    98    sq.  ;    Ross,    Wanderungen^    2.    p.   246;
Curtius, /'^/t^.  2.  p.  295  sq.\  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  139;  Philippson,
Peloponnes,  p.  174.

22.  II.  Etis,  Aphrodisias,  and  Side.  The  sites  of  the  two  former
are  unknown,  though  Prof.  Curtius,  as  usual,  has  conjectures  ready.
Scylax  (PeripluSy  46)  speaks  of  Side  as  a  city  and  harbour  between
Cape  Malea  and  Epidaums  (Limera).  Boblaye  accordingly  conjectured
that  Side  was  at  St  George  {Hagios  Georgios\  where  there  is  a  port
and  an  abundant  spring.  See  Boblaye,  Reckerchesy  p.  99 ;  Curtius,
Pelop.  2.  p.  297.

22.  12.  a  hare  a  myrtle  tree  etc      For  other  legends

connecting  the  foundation  of  cities  with  sacred  trees  see  Botticher,
BaumkuUuSy  p.  241  sqq.     Prof  Wide  points  out  that  the  myrtle  aD<i


a.  XXIII  CYTHERA  38/

tie  hare  are  attributes  of  Aphrodite  rather  than  of  Artemis,  and  that
•ut  of  the  three  cities  from  which  the  inhabitants  were  taken  to  found
)oeae,  two  at  least  seem  to  have  been  associated  with  Aphrodite,  the
own  of  Aphrodisias  being  connected  with  her  through  its  name,  and
he  town  of  Etis  through  tfie  legend  of  its  foundation  by  Aeneas,  son  of
\phrodite.  Hence  he  suspects  that  the  goddess  of  Boeae  may  have
acen  Aphrodite  rather  than  Artemis  {Lakonische  KultCy  p.  121  sq^

23.  I.  Oape  Platanistns  etc  Cape  Platanistus  is  now  Cape
Spathi.  The  strait  which  separates  it  from  the  mainland  is  4^  miles
broad  {MittheiL  cL  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  5  (1880),  p.  224),  so  that
Pausanias's  estimate  of  its  width  is  nearly  correct.

23.  I.  Scandea Oythera.      The  chief  bay  of  Cythera  (the

modem  Cerigd)  is  the  Bay  of  Avlemona  on  the  eastern  side  of  the

island.     On  this  bay,  at  a  place  called  Kastri^  there  are  considerable

Tuins  of  an  ancient  town.     As  they  are  the  only  remains  of  antiquity  on

the  coast  of  the  island,  and  are  situated  on  that  part  of  the  coast  which

is  nearest  to  the  ancient  capital,  it  may  be  taken  as  certain  that  they  are

the  ruins  of  Scandea,  the  port  of  Cythera  (cp.  Thucydides,  iv.  54).

These  remains  at  Kastri  include  potsherds,  ancient  blocks  of  sandstone   ^C

(often  built  into  the  walls  of  fields),  sandstone  drums  of  Doric  columns,

ancient  walls  built  of  small  stones  bonded  with  mortar,  etc.     The  walls

may  be  traced  down  to  the  small  headland  which  here  runs  into  the

sea.    South  of  Kastri  there  are  ancient  foundation-walls,  which  may

have  formed  part  of  the  old  harbour.     Curiously  enough  at  Port  St.

Nicholas^  the  best  natural  harbour  of  the  island,  there  seem  to  be  no

ancient  remains.  \  ^v-

Cythera,  the  capital  of  the  island,  occupied  a  mountain  about  two    "  >
miles  (10  furlongs,  according  to  Pausanias)  inland  from  Kastri^  and  ^

nearly  due  west  of  it.      The  place  is  now  called,  like  so  many  ancient
Greek  sites,  Palaeo-Kastro.     The  mountain  is  of  striking  form  and  is  a
conspicuous  landmark  even  from  the  sea.     It  is  covered  with  ancient
remains.     The '  city-walls  are  preserved  on  the  eastern  side  to  a  height
varying  from  two  to  nine  courses.     The  outer  side  of  the  stones  is  left
<iuite  rough ;  horizontal  and  vertical  joinings  are  as  far  as  possible
avoided.     Inside  the  walls,  on  the  slope  of  the  hill,  are  many  remains  of
ancient  house- walls.      Higher  up  stands,  on  a  platform,  a  chapel  of  H.
Kosmas,  built  of  materials  taken  from  the  ancient  temple  of  Aphrodite,
which  occupied  this  site.     From  researches  made  by  Dr.  Schliemann  in
'887  it  appears  that  the  temple  was  built  of  tufa  (Schliemann  calls  it
poros\  with  two  rows  of  Doric  columns,  four  on  each  side,  of  extremely  .
archaic  style.     The  columns  are  all  preserved  in  the  church,  with  their
^pitals  and  ornaments  ;  but  only  two  of  them,  with  the  base  of  a  third,
are  now  in  their  original  places.     The  columns  are  also  of  tufa.     The
situation  is  fine,  and   the  view  extensive,   ranging   over  the   hills    of
Cythera  in  the  foreground  to  the  coasts  and  mountains  of  Pelopon-
nese.      The   temple   of  Aphrodite  was   founded  by  the  Phoenicians   '.
(Herodotus,  i.   105;  Pausanias,  i.   15.  7;  Movers,  Die  Phoenizier^  ii.
2.  p.  270  sqq,^    Probably  they  were  attracted  to  the  island  by  the  shell-
^b,  which  yielded  so  fine  a  purple  dye  that  the  island  is  said  to  have

VOL.  Ill  2  c


386  CYTHERA — MA  LEA  bk.  iil  laconu

been  known  in  eariier  times  as  the  Purple  Island  (Aristotle,  refentd
to  by  Stephanas  Byzant  5,v,  Kv$rjpa ;  Pliny,  No/.  HisL  iv.  56).  In
Phoenix,  the  name  of  a  roadstead  in  Cythera  (Xenophon,  HelUnka^  iy.
8.  7),  we  have  another  trace  of  a  Phoenician  settlement.  The  situadn
of  this  roadstead  is  unknown  ;  possibly  it  may  have  been  the  port  of  Si
Nicholas^  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  island.

In  424  ac  the  Athenians  under  Nicias  invaded  Cythera.  One
force  landed  at  Scandea;  another,  disembarking  on  the  north-easten
coast  of  the  island,  marched  to  attack  the  capital  The  latter  force  was
met  by  the  Cytherians ;  a  battle  took  place,  and  the  Cytherians  fled  to
their  capital  (*  the  upper  city,'  as  Thucydides  calls  it).  They  then  came
to  terms  with  the  Athenians,  surrendering  to  them  Scandea,  the  town  oo
the  harbour  (as  Thucydides  describes  it),  and  allowing  the  Athenians  to
garrison  the  capital.  See  Thucydides,  iv.  54  (where  instead  of  kwi  tj^
hcX  Oakao-ary  wokiv  Ttov  KvOrjpCtav  we  must  either  read  «rt  rrfv  ofi
Oakaaxrrj^  Troktv  r(i>v  KvOrjpmv,  with  Stahl  and  Classen,  or  omit  the
words  arl  BakdaxrQ  altogether,  with  Bursian).  Thus  corrected,  the
passage  of  Thucydides  becomes  clear  and  consistent  both  with  the
existing  remains  of  antiquity  and  with  the  description  of  Pausanias.

The  only  accurate  description  of  the  topography  of  the  island  is  by  Mi.  S.
Weil,  in  Mittheil.  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athene  5  (1880),  pp.  224-243  (with  a  nop)-^
Compare  also  Leake,  'Some  remarks  on  the  island  Cerigo,  anciently  Cytbcn.'
Tratisactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Literature ,  Second  Series,  4  (1853),  pp.  255*
260.     In  this  article,  as  well  as  in  his  Travels  in  Northern  Greece^  i.  p.  72  jjVm
Leake  has  been  misled  by  the  &lse  reading  in  Thucydides  (/.r. )  into  hanrdmg
some  untenable  hypotheses.     Prof.  Curtius  {Pelop.  2.  p.  298  sqqJ)  and  Buisafl
{Geogr,  2,  p.  141  sq.)  have  no  clear  idea  of  the  topography ;  the  former,  indeed,
confesses  as  much.     On  the  researches  of  Dr.  Schliemann  in  the  island  see  Vtr-
handlungen  der  Berliner  Gesell.  fUr  Anthropologie,  20th  December,  1 887,  pp»30-
22  (published  with  the  Zeitschrifi  fur  Ethnologie) ;  American  Journal  if  Archu-
ology^  4(1888),  p.  96  sq,  ;  Berliner  philologische  Wochenschrift^  lOth  March,  l888»
p.  291  ;  Reime  Archiologique^  3rd  series,  II  (1888),  p.  76.

23.   I.  a  wooden  image  armed.     This  type  of  Aphrodite  is  sup-
posed to  be  of  Phoenician  origin.     See  note  on  iii.  15.  10.

23.  2.  a  harbour  named  Nymphaeum.  This  may  be  the  port  of
Santa  {Hagia)  Marina^  an  inlet  in  the  high  and  barren  coast  about  four
miles  west  of  Cape  Malea.  Two  little  valleys  open  on  the  creek,  and  at
the  head  of  it  a  feeble  spring  trickles  from  a  grotto  under  the  chapd  of
the  saint.  This  spring  may  be  the  one  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  From
the  creek  a  difficult  footpath  leads  along  the  face  of  the  sea-cliffs  to  (^pe
Malea.  See  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  99 ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  297  J
Philippson,  Peloponnes^  p.  175.

23.  2.  Gape  Malea.  The  sides  of  Cape  Malea,  the  south-eastern
extremity  of  the  Greek  mainland  and  of  Europe,  are  formed  by  diny
crags,  about  1 000  feet  high,  of  dark,  bare  rocks,  seamed  and  scarred  in
places  by  cracks  and  fissures.  At  the  extreme  end  of  the  cape  there  is
a  great  natural  recess  in  the  cliff ;  and  here  in  the  face  of  the  bluflf,  about
250  feet  above  the  sea,  there  is  a  tiny  terrace  sloping  to  the  perpen-
dicular edge  of  the  precipice.  Two  chapels  are  built  on  the  terrace,  and
close  by,  partly  hewn  in  the  rock,  is  the  cell  of  a  half-naked  and  nearly


.  xxiii  MALEA—EPIDAURUS  LIMERA  387

vage  hermit.  From  the  terrace  you  may  clamber  down,  at  the  risk  of
ur  neck,  to  a  cave  opening  on  the  foam  of  the  great  rollers  which
eak  here  eternally.  In  the  inmost  comer  of  the  cave  is  a  heap  of
unan  bones.  The  sense  of  utter  solitude  and  isolation  from  the  world
hich  the  spot  is  fitted  to  evoke  in  the  mind  is  broken  by  the  sight  of
Lssing  vessels.  In  fair  weather  steamers  of  all  nations  pass  con-
lually;  and  small  Greek  sailing -boats,  with  their  reddish -brown  or
bite  lateen  sails,  skim  along  close  under  the  cliffs.  But  the  cape  has
bad  name  for  storms  and  heavy  surf;  at  times  even  large  steamers
:e  unable  to  weather  it  for  a  week  together.  There  was  an  ancient
roverb,  **  When  you  have  rounded  Malea,  forget  your  home  "  (Strabo,
iii.  p.  378).     See  Philippson,  Peloponnes^  ?•  I75  ^Q'

23.  3.  EpideliunL  This  is  supposed  to  have  been  at  the  fantastically
haped  headland  of  Cape  Katnilo  (so  called  from  its  supposed  re-
emblance  to  the  back  of  a  camel),  where  there  are  said  to  be  some
uins.  The  cape  "  affords  some  shelter  from  the  winds,  and  is  the  only
)lace  on  that  part  of  the  coast  which  is  likely  to  have  been  chosen  for  a
iettlement"  (Leake,  Morea^  i.  p.  215  sq,)  Cp.  Boblaye,  Recherches^
p.  100;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  298;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  139;
Philippson,  Pelaponnes^  p.  176.

23.  3.  Menopbanes,  general  of  Mithridates  etc.  The  sack  of
Ddos  seems  to  have  happened  in  or  about  87  B.C.  Cp.  Journal  of
HelUnic  Studies,  i  (1880),  p.  34.

23.  6.  Epidaums  Limera.  The  ruins  of  this  place  are  now  called
Pahea  ('old')  Monemvasia,  and  are  situated  on  a  bay  rather  more  than
three  miles  to  the  north  of  the  modem  Monemvasia,  They  occupy  the  cliffs
immediately  above  the  beach.  The  acropolis  approaches  to  within  200
or  300  yards  of  the  sea.  The  town  rose  like  a  Greek  theatre  on  the
southern  side  of  the  acropolis.  The  whole  circumference  of  the  place  is
less  than  three  quarters  of  a  mile.  The  walls,  both  of  the  acropolis  and
the  town,  are  traceable  all  round  ;  in  some  places,  especially  towards  the
s^  they  remain  to  more  than  half  their  original  height.  The  walls  of
the  citadel  are  built  of  polygonal  blocks  arranged  roughly  in  courses
which  follow  the  slope  of  the  ground — a  very  unusual  style  of  masonry.
The  towers  are  small,  measuring  10  feet  in  front  and  12  feet  on  the
flanks.  In  the  acropolis  there  is  a  level  space,  which  has  been  exca-
vated for  the  foundations  of  a  wall.  This  platform  may  have  been  the
site  of  the  temple  of  Athena  mentioned  by  Pausanias  (§  10).  The
Wer  town  was  divided  in  two  by  a  wall,  thus  making,  with  the
Acropolis,  three  interior  divisions.  In  the  lower  town,  towards  the  sea
Vont,  there  are  two  terrace-walls,  one  of  them  being  a  fine  specimen  of
he  second  order  of  Greek  masonry.  These  terraces  may  have  sup-
X>rted  the  sanctuaries  of  Aphrodite  and  Aesculapius  (below,  §  10).  See
boblaye,  RechercheSy  p.  100;  Leake,  Moreoy  i.  pp.  210-212;  Curtius,
^elop.  2.  p.  292  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  138  ;  Guide-Joanne,  2,  p.  259.

23.  6.  to  consnlt  Aesculapius  at  Cos.  The  island  of  Cos  was
i  great  seat  of  the  worship  of  Aesculapius  (Strabo,  xiv.  p.  657).  Some
c^mains  of  one  of  the  three  sanctuaries  of  the  god  were  accidentally  dis-
covered a  few  years  ago  on  the  island.     They  consist  of  an  altar,  a


388  THE  ^VATER  OF  INO  BK.  iii.  lacokia

marble  snake,  and  the  horn  of  Amalthea.  See  Berliner  pkilologisck
Wochenschrifty  lo  December,  1887,  p.  1544.  From  inscriptions  «e
learn  that  athletic  games  were  celebrated  in  Cos  in  honour  of  Aescula-
pius. See  Revue  Archdologique^  N.  S.  24  (1872),  p.  no;  Paton  and
Hicks,  The  Inscriptions  of  CoSy  Nos.  14,  104.  Tlie  scene  of  the  fomth
of  the  dramatic  sketches  of  Herodas  (Herondas)  is  perhaps  laid  in  the
sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  at  Cos.

23.  8.  the  water  of  Ino.  This  is  perhaps  the  small  pool  situated
about  2  furlongs  to  the  north-east  of  the  acropolis  of  Epidaurus  Limoa.
It  is  only  about  10  feet  across.  But  its  position,  within  100  yards  of
the  sea ;  the  water,  scarcely  brackish,  which  fills  it  to  the  brim ;  and  its
great  depth  (the  French  surveyors  sounded  it  with  a  line  over  100  feet
long  without  finding  the  bottom)  make  it  very  remarkable.  See  BoUaye,
RechercheSy  p.  100  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  293  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  138.
Leake,  however,  identified  the  water  of  Ino  with  a  deep  reed-fringed
pool  of  fresh  water,  about  100  yards  long  and  30  broad,  which  bordeis
the  sea-beach  about  a  third  of  a  mile  to  the  south  of  the  ruins  of
Epidaurus  Limera  {Moreoy  i.  p.  217).

23.  8.  If  the  water  takes  and  keeps  the  loaves,  it  isa  goodangmy
etc.  So  at  Aphaca  in  Syria  there  was  a  lake  into  which  people  threw
offerings  of  gold,  silver,  and  fine  raiment :  if  the  offerings  were  accepted,
they  sank ;  if  they  were  rejected,  they  floated  on  the  surface  (Zosimos,
i.  58).  The  same  interpretation  was  put  upon  the  sinking  or  floating  of
votive  offerings  thrown  into  a  pool  at  the  foot  of  a  high  waterfidl  in  the
Arabian  desert  (Damascius,  Vita  Isidoriy  199).  Again,  the  same  idea
is  at  the  root  of  the  old  ordeal  for  witchcraft,  which  has  been  practised
in  Arabia  as  well  as  in  England.  "In  Hadramaut,  according  to  Macriii,
when  a  man  was  injured  by  enchantment,  he  brought  all  the  witches
suspect  to  the  sea  or  a  deep  pool,  tied  stones  to  their  backs  and  threw
them  into  the  water.  She  who  did  not  sink  was  the  guilty  person,  the
meaning  evidently  being  that  the  sacred  element  rejects  the  criminal"
(W.  Robertson  Smith,  Religion  of  the  Semites^  p.  1 79).  This  test  for
witches  has  been  practised  in  Burma,  as  well  as  in  England  and  Arabia
(C.  J.  F.  S.  Forbes,  British  Bumuiy  p.  231).  In  Burma  and  Assam,
as  a  judicial  ordeal,  the  parties  to  a  suit  (or  their  attorneys)  duck  their
heads  under  water ;  and  the  person  who  keeps  down  longest  wins  the
suit,  "the  party  emerging  first  being  supposed  to  be  convicted  and
rejected  by  the  aquae  deo.^^  See  Robinson,  Descriptive  Account  oj
Assanty  p.  411;  Dalton,  Ethnology  of  Bengaly  p.  57;  Sangermaiio,
Description  of  the  Burmese  Empire y  p.  72  ;  Shway  Yoe  [J.  G.  Scott],
The  Burmany  2.  p.  254.

23.  9.  The  craters  at  Etna  give  like  indications  etc  Pausanias
perhaps  confounded  the  Lago  di  Naftia  (*  the  lake  of  naphtha ')  with  the
crater  of  Etna.  This  lake  or  rather  pool  (it  is  only  480  feet  in  circum-
ference) is  situated  in  the  interior  of  Sicily,  1 5  miles  west  of  Leontini.
Two  jets  of  volcanic  gas  rise  under  the  water,  causing  a  violent  ebulli-
tion, and  sometimes  throwing  up  the  water  to  a  considerable  height.
The  water  is  strongly  impregnated  with  naphtha  and  sulphur.  In  antiquity
there  seem  to  have  been  two  of  these  pools,  for  they  were  called  the


.  XXIII  CAPE  MINOA  389

Idrons  or  craters  of  the  Palici,  a  name  which  perhaps  misled
.usanias.  The  pseudo- Aristotle  relates  {Mirab,  AusculL  57)  that
len  a  man  wished  to  take  a  solemn  oath  he  wrote  upon  a  tablet  and
ng  it  into  the  water;  if  he  swore  truly,  the  tablet  floated ;  but  if  he
-eswore  himself,  it  sank.  Cp.  Stephanus  Byzant.  s,v,  IlaXiKi^.  The
leal  is  differently  described  by  Polemo  (quoted  by  Macrobius,  Sat.  v.
.26  sqqJ)  and  by  Diodorus  Siculus  (xi.  89).  Cp.  Strabo,  vi.  p.  275  ;
mbury  in  Smith's  Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Roman  Geography ^  s.v,
'alicorum  lacus' ;  Freeman,  History  of  Sicily ^  i.  p.  517  sqq,  Pausanias's
stake,  if  it  is  one,  was  pointed  out  by  Schubart  (Zeitschrift  fUr  Alter-
umswissenschafty  9  (185 1),  p.  295  sq,)  Yet  it  may  be  doubted
lether  Pausanias  was  not  right  afler  all.  His  account  of  the  offerings
rown  into  the  volcano  differs  from  those  of  all  the  writers  who  describe
t  ordeals  at  the  Lago  di  Naflia,  and  on  the  other  hand  it  agrees  with
vide-spread  custom  of  throwing  offerings  into  volcanoes  to  appease  the
ngerous  spirits  who  are  supposed  to  dwell  in  the  mountain.  On  Etna
elf  people  in  antiquity  used  to  throw  incense  into  the  crater  as  an
ering  to  the  gods  of  the  volcano  (Smith's  Diet,  of  Geography^  i.  p.  62).

Hawaii  (the  Sandwich  Islands)  vast  numbers  of  hogs  used  to  be
Fown  into  the  craters  of  the  great  volcano  Kirauea  during  an  eruption

when  an  eruption  was  threatening;  hogs,  too,  were  cast  into  the
Uing  tide  of  lava  to  appease  the  gods  and  stay  its  progress  (Ellis,
^lynesian  Researches ^  4.  p.  250;  cp.  pp.  236,  350).  In  Java  the
Icano  Bromok  is  worshipped  annually,  offerings  of  cocoa-nuts,  plantains,
e,  chickens,  cloth,  money,  etc.,  being  thrown  into  the  crater  (W.  B.
Umeida,  Ufe  in  Java^  i.  pp.  166-173).  ^^  Masai -land  (Eastern
rica)  there  is  an  active  volcano  called  Dounyd  Bourou,  from  the
sures  of  which  jets  of  burning  gas  are  spouted  out  at  rapid  intervals,
to  these  fissures  the  Masai  fling  tuf^s  of  grass  to  propitiate  the  spirits
the  earth.     See  Reclus,  Nouvelle  Giographie  Universelle^  13.  p.  767.

23.  II.  a  cape  called  Minoa.  This  is  now  Monemvasia^  an  island
out  half  a  mile  long,  close  to  the  shore,  with  which  it  is  connected

a  long  old  stone  bridge.  The  island  is  a  lofty  precipitous  rock,
>embling  Gibraltar,  or  the  Bass  Rock  and  Dumbarton  Rock  in  Scot-
id.  The  summit,  crowned  by  the  ruins  of  a  mediaeval  fortress  and  a
Lss  of  tumble -down,  roofless  churches  and  houses  overgrown  with
«ds,  is  now  only  a  sheep-walk.     From  the  summit  the  rock  falls  away

sheer  and  lofty  precipices,  especially  on  the  north.     The  modem
9m  is  huddled  up  at  the  foot  of  the  cliffs  on  the  southern  side.     Strong
Jls  encircle  it,  which  are  connected  with  the  ruined  fortress  on  the  top
the  rock.     Within  the  walls  everything  is  fast  ^ling  to  decay.     Fine
urches,  high  archways,  great  private  houses,  all  deserted  and  in  ruins,  \
stify  to  the  former  prosperity  and  the  present  decline  of  the  town.    :
rade  has  quite  deserted  it ;  the  coasting  steamers  call  only  at  rare  /
tervals.     From  the  town  a  zigzag  path  leads  up  the  fiice  of  the  rock
'  the  old  citadel  on  the  summit

Pausanias  speaks  of  the  place  as  a  headland.  An  author  of  the
velfth  century  describes  it  by  the  very  same  word  (a/c/xi).  Both  authors
^y  have  thought  the  name  applicable  to  an  island  so  close  to  the


390  ZARAX — CYPHANTA  bk.  iil  laconia

shore.  But  it  is  also  possible  that  the  sea  may  have  recently  gained  on
the  shore,  covering  the  neck  which  once  joined  the  island  to  the  mais-
land.  Or  the  isthmus  may  have  been  cut  through  for  purposes  of
defence.  In  the  Middle  Ages  Monemvasia  was  one  of  the  chief  places
of  the  Levantine  trade  and  one  of  the  strongest  fortresses  in  the  Mofbl
It  gave  its  name  to  Malmsey  wine,  which  was  grown  in  the  Cydades,
especially  Tenos,  but  was  called  after  the  port  whence  it  was  shipped  to
the  west.


See  Pouqueville,  Voyage  de  la  Grice^  5.  p.  577  sqq,  ;  Boblaye,  Reckerckis^  p.
100  sq, ;  Leake,  Aforea,  I.  p.  203  sqq, ;  Curtius,  Pebp,  2.  p.  138 ;  Wjx,
Felopcnnesus,  i.  p.  3  sqq,  ;  Baedeker/  p.  269;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  259  sq.\
PhiUppson,  Peloponnis^  p.  173  sq,

23.  II.  pebbles  of  finer  shape  and  of  every  hue.  ''The  beach,
in  fact,  consists  of  pebbles,  and  among  them  I  find  many  colours ;  thous^
I  question  whether  as  varied  a  selection  might  not  be  made  in  many
other  parts  of  the  Laconic  coast"  (Leake,  MoreOy  i.  p.  212  sq,)

24.  I.  Zarax.  About  eight  miles  north  oi  Monemvasia  an  arm  of  the
sea  penetrates  deeply  into  the  land.  A  narrow  winding  channel,  like  a
Norwegian  fjord,  with  high  sheer  cliffs  on  either  side,  leads  into  a  circular,
completely  land-locked  bay  surrounded  by  bare  arid  mountains  on  which
only  goats  can  find  sustenance.  The  shores  of  the  bay  are  marshy;  a
narrow  strip  of  level  ground,  where  com  is  grown,  divides  them  ftom
the  foot  of  the  hills.  This  is  the  port  of  Hieraka^  the  ancient  Zarax.
The  ruins  of  the  old  town  occupy  die  summit  of  the  cliffs  on  the  north
side  of  the  narrow  entrance  to  the  bay.  The  walls  of  the  acropolis  arc
built  in  a  style  which  resembles  that  of  Mycenae.  A  gate  on  the  side
of  the  sea  gives  access  to  a  vaulted  corridor,  which  runs  at  first  parallel
and  then  at  right  angles  to  the  circuit-wall.  Within  the  walls  and  on
the  tableland  to  the  west  there  are  chapels  and  other  ruins  of  the  Middle
Ages.

See  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  loi ;  Leake,  Morea,  I.  p.  219  sq, ;  Curtius,  Pelcf.
2,  p.  291  sq. ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  137 ;  Guide-Joanne,  2.  p.  247 ;  Philippson,
Petoponnes,  p.  173.

24.  I.  Oleomenes,  son  of  Agesipolis.  Cleomenes  was  the  son  of
Cleombrotus.  Agesipolis  was  the  name  of  Cleomenes's  brother,  and
also  of  his  paternal  uncle.  See  chapters  5  and  6.  We  need  not  attribute
the  mistake  to  the  copyists.  Pausanias  may  very  well  have  made  a  slip
in  the  dreary  genealogies  of  the  Spartan  kings.

24.  2.  Oyphanta.  About  1 3  miles  north  of  Zarax  the  sheltered  bay
of  Kyparissi  runs  into  the  land  between  high  limestone  cliffs.  At  the
head  of  the  bay  is  a  little  plain  planted  with  olives  and  com  and  sur-
rounded in  a  semicircle  by  immense  crags  of  dark  limestone,  which  rise
sheer  to  a  height  of  2500  feet.  A  little  glen,  its  bottom  strewn  with
boulders,  opens  on  the  northern  shore  of  the  bay.  Higher  up,  the  glen
contracts  into  a  steep  and  narrow  ravine  shut  in  by  huge  precipices,  up
the  face  of  which  a  toilsome  and  dizzy  path  leads  to  the  tableland  above-
On  this  bay  of  Kyparissi  Cyphanta  is  commonly  supposed  to  have  been
situated.     A  fine  spring  which  gushes  from  the  rocks  about  a  mile  fr©^


:h.  XXIV  CYPHANTA—BRASIAE  391

lie  shore  may  be  the  spring  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  Leake,  however,
who  at  first  placed  Cyphanta  at  Kyparissty  afterwards  identified  it  with
Lhe  ruins  which  are  situated  on  the  coast  much  fiirther  north,  at  the  port
of  Leonidion,  Here  a  rocky  mountain  approaches  the  shore,  and  on  its
exceedingly  rugged  sides  may  be  seen  the  remains  of  an  ancient  city.
Many  terraces  may  be  traced,  and  the  wall  which  faces  towards  Leonidion
is  preserved  to  a  height  of  four  courses  in  some  places.  On  a  peak
there  is  a  square  tower  of  rude  Cyclopean  masonry ;  one  of  the  stones
measures  7  feet  10  inches  by  3  feet.  High  above  the  tower,  on  the
hill,  there  are  considerable  remains  of  a  fortress  called  St,  AtkanctsiuSy
with  ruins  of  churches  and  houses  within  the  walls.  The  fortress  is
probably  mediaeval,  but  some  foundations  seem  to  show  that  there  was
here  an  ancient  tower  or  temple.  But  the  distance  of  these  ruins  from
Zarax  (more  than  25  miles)  far  exceeds  the  100  Greek  furlongs  mentioned
by  Pausanias  as  the  distance  between  Zarax  and  Cyphanta  (cp.  Critical
Note  on  this  passage,  vol.  i.  p.  577).  Moreover  Cyphanta  is  called  a
harbour  by  Pliny  (A''.  H.  iv.  1 7) ;  but  there  is  no  harbour  at  St,
Athanasius,  At  one  time  Cyphanta  belonged  to  Argolis  (Polybius,  iv.
36).  The  aspect  of  the  small  maritime  plain  on  the  southern  side  of
which  the  ruins  lie  is  gloomy  and  forbidding.  High  cliffs  shut  it  in  on
three  sides,  their  dark  colour  adding  to  the  sombre  character  of  the
landscape.  The  modem  town  of  Leonidion^  however,  which  stands  at
the  foot  of  the  precipices  on  the  north  side  of  the  plain,  has  a  quiet,
well-to-do  appearance  ;  many  of  the  houses  are  large  and  trimly  kept.
For  the  inhabitants  are  thrifty  and  enterprising ;  most  of  them  in  their
youth  go  abroad  as  traders,  especially  to  Constantinople,  and  then
return  with  their  earnings  to  spend  the  rest  of  their  days  among  their
wild  native  glens.

See  Boblaye,  RecJurches^  p.  loi  sq,\  Leake,  Morea^  2.  p.  500  sq, ;  idl,  Pelopon-
nesiaca,  p.  298  sqq, ;  Curtius,  Peiop.  2.  p.  306  sq. ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  237 ;
Philippson,  Pe/opomus,  p.  169.

24.  2.  struck  the  rock  with  her  spear  etc.     Cp.  iv.  36.  7.

24.  3.  Brasiae.  By  all  other  ancient  writers  this  place  is  called
Prasiae  or  Prasia.  See  Thucydides,  ii.  56,  vi.  105,  vii.  18;  Aristo-
phanes, Peacey  242 ;  Polybius,  iv.  36 ;  Scylax,  Peripius^  46 ;
Strabo,  viii.  p.  368 ;  Ptolemy,  iii.  14.  32  ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,
^:u,  TLpiuriai,  It  was  sometimes  reckoned  to  Argolis  instead  of  to
Laconia  (Polybius  and  Strabo,  //.cc)  Its  situation  has  not  been  deter-
mined. Boblaye,  Ross,  and  Prof  Curtius  identify  it  with  the  ruins  called
by  the  common  name  of  Palaeo-KastrOy  on  the  cape  to  the  south  of  the
hay  of  Tyru,  The  remains  are  those  of  an  ancient  town  and  include  a
circuit-wall  built  of  irregular  courses.  The  bay  of  Tyru  is  a  natural
harbour,  which  would  tally  with  the  description  which  Scylax  {I.e.)  gives
of  the  place  as  "  a  town  and  a  harbour."  Leake  identified  Brasiae  with
the  ruins  of  St.  Andrew^  situated  at  the  southern  end  of  the  Thyrean
plain  (see  above,  p.  307  sq.)  But  against  this  view  it  is  to  be  said  that
there  is  no  harbour  at  St.  Andrew.  Leake  thought  that  the  ruins  at
^yni  must,  from  the  similarity  of  the  name,  be  those  of  Tyrus,  a  place


392  LAS — MAINA  bk.  iil  laconu

mentioned   by   Stephanus    Byzantius    {s.v.   Tvpos).      Lastly,    Bursian
identified  Brasiae  with  the  ruins  called  5/.  AtAanastus,  near  the  port  of

Leonidion  (see  note  on  §  2  above).

»

See  Boblaye,  Recherckes^  p.  102 ;  Leake,  Morea,  2.  pp.  4S4,  498  sq,  \  ii^
Pelop.  p.  295  ;  Ross,  Reisen,  p.  165  sq, ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  pp.  306,  332 ;  Bmsiao,
Gcogr.  2.  p.  134.

24.  6.  Las.  This  seems  to  have  been  a  very  ancient  town,  for  it  is
mentioned  in  Homer  {liiad^  ii.  585) ;  and  the  Dioscuri  were  said  to
have  captured  it  and  to  have  taken  in  consequence  the  title  of  Lapersai,
*  destroyers  of  Las '  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  364  ;  Stephanus  Byz.  s.v.  Ad).  The
town  derived  its  name  from  the  rocky  hill  {/Os  =  *  rock,'  *  stone  *)  on  which
it  stood  (Stephanus  Byz.  Lc.)  Pausanias  tells  us  that  the  ruins  of  the
ancient  town  were  on  the  top  of  a  hill,  while  the  town  of  his  day  was
built  near  the  fountain  Galaco.  The  ruins  to  which  he  refers  are  on  the
hill  of  Passava^  distant  about  40  furlongs  south-west  of  Gythium,  and
10  furlongs  inland  from  the  sea,  agreeably  to  the  distances  mentioned
by  him.  The  hill,  composed  of  red  marble,  rises  steeply  on  the  soodi
side  of  a  narrow  valley,  which  is  watered  by  a  limpid  river,  the  ancient
Smenus,  now  called  the  river  of  Passava,  The  hill  of  Passava  resembles
Mistrc^  but  is  smaller.  The  summit  is  occupied  by  a  ruined  mediaeval
fortress,  consisting  of  a  battlemented  wall,  flanked  with  one  or  tvo
towers,  but  without  any  moat.  Within  the  walls  are  the  remains  of
houses  and  gardens.  In  the  eastern  wall,  toward  the  southern  end,
there  is  a  piece  of  ancient  Greek  wall,  about  50  paces  long,  and  two-
thirds  of  the  height  of  the  mediaeval  wall  It  is  built  of  lai^e  blocks,
some  of  them  4  feet  long  and  3  broad,  not  accurately  hewn,  nor  yet
quite  rude,  but  requiring  here  and  there  a  small  stone  in  the  interstices.
The  town  possessed  a  seaport,  doubtless  on  the  sheltered  bay  of  Vaikft
into  which  the  Smenus  flows,  to  the  south-east  of  the  town  (Strabo,
viii.  p.  364 ;  Thucydides,  viii.  9 1  ;  Livy,  xxxviii.  30  ;  Scylax,  PeripluSy
46).

See  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  87  sq. ;  Leake,  Morea^  i.  p.  255  sq.  ;  id.^  PikP'
p.  174 ;  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  273  sq.  ;  Bursian,  Gecgr.  2.  p.  147  ;  Guide-Joanau^
2.  p.  263.

j         The  great  central  peninsula  of  Southern  Greece,  which  Pausanias  is
I  now  describing,  has  been  known  since  the  Middle  Ages  by  the  name  of
I  Maina  or  Mani.     The  backbone  of  the  peninsula  is  the  g^eat  range  of
!  Taygetus,  which  runs  south  till  it  terminates  in  Taenarum,  the  modem  Cape
'  Matapan^  the  southern  extremity  of  Greece.    The  scenery  of  the  penfnsula
is  wild  and  savage  ;  the  villages  ding  like  eagles*  eyries  to  the  faces  of
apparently  inaccessible  cliffs,  and  are  reached  by  stony  and  exceedingly
toilsome  footpaths — the  only  semblance  of  roads  in  these  secluded  high-
lands.    Almost  everywhere  the  surface  is  nothing  but  the  naked  rock.
Wood  there  is  none,  but  a  few  bushes  and  here  and  there  some  tufts  of
grass  have  rooted  themselves  in  the  crevices  of  the  rocks,  and  furnish  a
scanty  pasture  to  the  sheep  and  goats.      The  miserable   stony  soil,
wherever  it  exists,  is  carefully  husbanded  by  means   of  terraces,  and


XXIV  MAINA—HYPSA  393

ler  the  soft  southern  sky  of  Laconia  yields  a  tolerable  return.  The
labitants,  the  Mainotes,  Mainiotes,  or  Maniates,  are  a  hardy  and  war-
e  race  of  mountaineers,  who  claim  to^  be  descended  from  die  ancient
artans.  In  the  fastnesses  of  their  rugged  mountains  they  are  said  to
vre  retained  their  primitive  heathenism  till  the  latter  half  of  the  ninth
itury;  and  the  Turks  never  succeeded  in  subjugating  them.  As
ates  they  were  greatly  dreaded.  They  are  still  notorious  for  the
entless  ferocity  of  their  blood-feuds,  which  are  so  common  that  every
nily  of  importance  has  a  tower  in  which  to  take  refuge  from  the
engers  of  blood.  In  these  towers  persons  implicated  in  a  blood-feud
ve  been  known  to  live  for  many  years  without  ever  coming  out  To
is  day  many  heads  of  families  dare  not  quit  their  tower  except  under
strong  guard  of  armed  retainers.'  A  village  will  contain  twenty  to
irty  such  towers  of  refuge.

See  Pouqueville,  Voyage  en  Morie^  i.  pp.  193-221 ;  id,^  Voyage  de  la  Grhe?

pp.  584-616;  Gelly  Journey  in  the  Morea,  p.  251  sqq,  ;  Leake,  Morea^  i.  p.

17  sqq,^  260  sqq,^  318  sq,\  L.  Ross,  IVanderungen,  2.  p.  223  sqq, ;  Tozer,*in

«rn.  of  Hell.  Stud,  3  (1882),  p.  354  sqq.  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  270 ;  truide-Jotinne^

p.  262  sq, ;  Philippson,  Pelop,  pp.  225,  250-252.

24.  6.  Philip  invaded  Laconia.  On  this  campaign  see  Lieut.
ieneral  A.  Jochmus,  \n  Journal  of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society^  27
'^57)>  P*  i<^  ^Q9'  (with  map).  Polybius  has  recorded  (v.  19)  that
hilip,  ravaging  the  south  of  Laconia  as  far  as  Taenarum,  attempted  to
any  the  town  of  Asine  by  assault  but  was  repulsed.  Some  have
apposed  that  this  repulse  was  identical  with  the  defeat  of  the  Mace-
onians.  at  Las  which  Pausanias  here  mentions ;  and  consequently  they
ave  inferred  that  Asine  and  Las  were  two  different  names  for  the
une  place.  But  this  seems  improbable.  Both  Strabo  (viii.  pp.  363,
64)  and  Stephanus  Byzantius  {s,w,  'Aa-Cvrj  and  Aa)  speak  of  Asine  and
-as  as  if  they  were  different  places.  Moreover  the  military  operations
escribed  by  Pausanias  and  Polybius  appear  to  be  different  Polybius
arrates  an  attack  superintended  by  Philip  in  person ;  Pausanias
ecords  the  defeat  of  a  body  of  marauders  who  had  straggled  from  the
^in  body.  However,  the  fact  mentioned  by  Pausanias  that  the  old
3wn  of  Las  stood  on  Mount  Asia  lends  some  colour  to  the  identification
f  it  with  Asine.  The  identification  is  upheld  by  Boblaye  (Recherches,
•  87)  and  Prof.  Curtius  {Pelop,  2.  p.  274).

24.  7.  Galaco.  Leake  says  that  the  river  of  Passava  (which  he
ills  the  Turkovrysi)  has  its  source  in  a  pool  midway  between  the  fort
^Passava  and  the  village  of  Karvela^  which  lies  a  mile  and  a  half  to
»e  west  of  Passava,  This  pool,  Leake  thought,  may  have  been  the
•alaco  spring  described  by  Pausanias  {Morea,  i.  pp.  255,  276;  Curtius,
'^iop.  2.  p.  274).  The  identification  may  be  right,  but  Leake  is  wrong
1  supposing  that  the  river  of  Passava  has  its  source  in  the  pool  in
iiestion.     See  note  on  24.  9.

24.  8.  Hypsa.  The  site  of  this  place  is  unknown.  Leake,  indeed,
laced  it  with  confidence  at  the  south-west  side  of  the  hill  of  Vat^,
We  there  are  some  ancient  remains  (see  next  note).     The  distance

the  ruins  from  Las  agrees  with  that  mentioned  by  Pausanias  (30


394  PYRRHICHUS  BK.  in.  laconu

furlongs).     See  Leake,  Moreoy  i.  pp.  267,  276-279.     But  Vathy  is  od
the  sea,  and  Pausanias  plainly  implies  that  Hypsa  was  inland.

24.  9.  a  temple  of  Artemis  Dictynna.  The  bay  of  VaiJ^  is
bounded  on  the  south  by  the  hill  of  Vathy  or  AgeranoSy  which  juts  oat
into  the  sea.  On  the  south-west  side  of  this  hill,  a  quarter  of  an  hoar
from  the  village,  there  are  some  ancient  remains  of  a  large  building,
constructed  of  stones  and  Roman  tiles ;  "a  semicircular  extremity,  with
five  windows  in  it,  is  still  standing  entire :  the  diameter  is  upwards  of
twenty  yards."  Leake,  Curtius,  and  Bursian  suppose  that  the  temple
of  Artemis  Dictynna  was  about  here.  Boblaye  placed  it,  as  Leake  did
formerly,  at  Cape  Petali,  the  promontory  which  bounds  the  bay  of  Vaikj
on  the  north.  See  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  88 ;  Leake,  Moret^  i.  p|x
267,  276  sq, ;  id,y  Pelop,  p.  173 ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  275  ;  Bursian,
Geogr,  I.  p.  147.

24.  9.  the  river  Smenus.  This  is  probably  the  TurkoT/rysi  or
river  of  Passava^  which  flows  past  the  hill  of  Passava  and  fells  mto  tbe
bay  of  Vathy,  Its  water  is  pure  and  pellucid  all  the  year  round.  Tbe
river  rises  in  Mt.  Taygetus  near  the  village  of  Polyzaravo,  Leake  and
Ross  seem  wrong  in  identifying  the  Smenus  with  the  Bardouma  river
(Leake  calls  it  the  river  of  Passava)^  which  rising  in  the  recesses  d
Mt.  Taygetus  near  the  village  of  Amoj  falls  into  the  sea  between
Gythium  and  Cape  Petali,

See  Boblaye,  Recherches,  p.  87  sq,  ;  Leake,  Morea,  i.  pp.  255,  266, 277 ;  H-^
Pelop,  p.  173;  Ross,  Wandtrungen^  2.  p.  216;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  274  Jff
Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  147.

24.  10.  Arfl.lT^nin.  This  name  seems  preserved  in  the  modem
Ageranos,  as  to  which  see  note  on  §  9 ;  Arainum  may  have  been  in
this  neighbourhood  (Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  88 ;  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p-
275  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  147).

24.  II.  at  the  beginning  of  his  poem  Homer  says  etc  See
Iliad,  i.  158.

24.  II.  Homer  represents  Antilochns  as  saying  etc.  See  //^
xxiii.  790.

24.  II.  he  represents  Ulsrsses  as  telling  Alcinons  etc.  See
Odyssey,  xi.  630  sq.

25.  I.  a  river,  called  the  Scyras.  According  to  Boblaye,  Leake,
and  Curtius  this  is  the  river  of  Dhikova  {Tsichobd)  or  Karyopoli^^
which  falls  into  the  bay  immediately  to  the  south  of  the  promontory  d
Vathy  or  Ageranos.  Near  the  right  side  of  its  mouth  are  some  vestiges
of  antiquity,  which  Leake  thought  may  have  belonged  to  the  sanctuary
and  altar  of  Zeus  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  See  Boblaye,  RechercheS)
p.  88  ;  Leake,  Morea,  i.  p.  277  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  275.  Bursian,
on  the  other  hand,  identified  the  Scyras  with  the  stream,  further  south,
which  flows  into  the  deep  sheltered  bay  of  Skutari  (Geogr.  2.  p.  148).

25.  I.  Pyrrhichos.  The  ruins  of  this  town  are  near  the  village  of
KavaloSy  in  the  transverse  valley  which  here  runs  across  the  peninsuU
of  Taenarum  from  Dyro  on  the  west  to  Kotrones  on  the  east.  The
village  is  about  the  centre  of  the  valley  and  hence  of  the  peninsula-


CH.  XXV  TEUTHRONE  395

Baths  and  various  Roman  remains  are  to  be  seen  here.  The  well  a
little  below  the  village  is  probably  the  one  mentioned  by  Pausanias
g  3).  See  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  88  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  276  ;  Leake,
Pelop.  p.  174;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  276;  Mittheil.  d,  arch.  Inst,  in
Athen^  i  (1876),  p.  158.

25.  4.  Tenthrone.  On  the  north  side  of  the  bay  of  Kolokyntka  is
the  village  of  Kotrones,  A  small  peninsula  called  Skopa  here  runs  out
into  the  bay.  The  citadel  of  Teuthrone  seems  to  have  occupied  this
peninsula,  which  is  still  surrounded  by  walls  built  of  ancient  materials.
On  the  mainland  there  are  some  drums  of  colunms,  the  ruins  of  a
rotunda  built  of  bricks,  and  many  mediaeval  remains.  Pausanias's
estimate  of  the  distance  from  here  to  Cape  Taenarum  is  nearly  correct.
See  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  89 ;  Leake,  Morea,  i.  p.  277  ;  iVi,  Pelop,
p.  172  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  276 ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  148.

25.  4*  One  hundred  and  fifty  ftirlongs  from  Teuthrone  Gape
Taenarum  etc.  As  Pausanias  mentions  no  place  on  this  long  stretch
of  coast,  it  is  probable  that  he  sailed  from  Teuthrone  to  Taenarum.
The  road  along  the  coast  may  have  been  bad  and  difficult,  as  it  is  at
the  present  day.  There  are  traces  of  ancient  hamlets,  however,  at
many  points  of  the  coast.  The  most  considerable  remains  of  antiquity
are  to  be  seen  a  few  minutes  south  of  the  monastery  of  Kumosy  between
the  villages  Nymphi  and  Pagianika,  somewhat  less  than  half-way  be-
tween Teuthrone  and  Taenarum.  Here,  on  a  small  rocky  plateau,  are
the  foundation-walls  and  ruins  of  two  small  Doric  temples  of  greyish
marble,  close  beside  each  other.  The  style  of  the  architecture  is  late
Greek.  A  little  to  the  south-west  of  the  temples  are  some  rock-cut
tombs.  The  modem  name  of  the  ruins  is  Kionia.  The  ancient  name
is  unknown.  See  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  89 ;  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.
277  ;  Bursian,  *  Ueber  das  Vorgebirge  Taenaron,'  in  Abhandlungen  of
the  Bavarian  Academy  (Munich),  Philos.  Class,  7  (1855),  p.  792  sgg, ;
id.y  Geogr.  2.  p.  149.  Drawings,  plans,  and  restorations  of  the  temples
are  given  by  Le  Bas  {Voyage  archdologique^  Architecture,  ii.  i-ii).

The  formation  of  this  long  line  of  coast  is  very  uniform.  The
mountains  descend  into  the  sea  in  cliffs  about  300  feet  high,  with  very
few  creeks  and  inlets  at  their  base.  At  the  top  of  the  cliffs  there  is  a
terrace  or  platform  of  varying  breadth,  from  which  again  the  mass  of
the  mountain-range  rises  in  a  long  uniform  slope.  The  platform  is
everywhere  rocky  and  slopes  towards  the  brow  of  the  cliffs,  but  it  is
terraced  with  laborious  care  so  as  to  retain  the  scanty  soil  formed  by
the  weathering  of  the  marble  rocks.  Thin  and  stony  as  is  the  soil,
every  available  patch  is  planted  with  com,  olives,  and  especially  lupines,
the  seed  of  which  forms  the  chief  food  of  the  Maniates.  Apart  from
these  scattered  patches  of  cultivation  the  country  is  an  absolute  desert ;
here  and  there  a  little  brushwood  may  be  seen,  and  that  is  all.  The
small  villages,  each  composed  of  a  few  high  towers,  are  generally  perched
among  the  crags  high  above  the  terrace,  hedged  in  by  impenetrable
thickets  of  cactus.  Each  tower  is  surrounded  by  a  few  low  huts,  which
serve  as  workshops  and  as  the  lodgings  of  the  subordinate  members  of
the  household.     Frequently  tower  and  huts  together  are  enclosed  within


396  TAENARUM  BK.  in.  lacoxu

a  fortification-wall  strengthened  with  turrets  and  loopholed.  Bitter  fends
often  rage  between  the  towers  of  the  same  village.  There  are  do
springs  or  brooks ;  water  is  obtained  only  from  cisterns,  which  are  kqt
closed  by  their  owners,  and  leave  to  draw  from  them  has  to  be  paid  liot
The  'roads'  are  narrow  paths  shut  in  between  walls  about  as  high
as  a  man ;  and  as  the  inhabitants  have  a  custom  of  dumping  don
on  these  <  roads '  the  piles  of  stones  which  they  gather  from  their  faarra
fields,  the  consequence  is  that  the  paths  are  sometimes  raised  above  the
level  of  the  surrounding  fields.  To  walk  for  any  distance  on  these  loose
stones,  every  one  of  which  gives  way  under  the  tread  and  has  been
polished  by  the  feet  of  mules,  is  one  of  the  most  agonising  experiences
which  a  traveller  can  endure.  On  account  of  the  stony  nature  of  the
country  unshod  mules  are  the  only  animals  used  as  beasts  of  burden
or  for  riding.  Besides,  there  is  no  proper  fodder  for  horses.  See
Philippson,  PehponneSy  p.  224.

25.  4-  the  harbonr  of  Achilles  and  the  harbour  of  Psanutta
The  promontory  of  Taenarum  is  a  mountainous  peninsula  of  roogfal;
circular  form  about  7  miles  in  circumference,  and  joined  to  the  end  of
the    great   Taygetic  promontory  by  an  isthmus  which   is  about  half
a  mile  across.     The  isthmus  is  formed  by  the  intrusion  into  the  land
of  two  deep  bays,  one  on  the  east  coast,  and  one  on  the  west    Tbe
modem  name  of  the  eastern  bay  is  Porto  Quaglio  (*  quail  harbour  *),
the  name  of  the  western  is  Port  Marinari.     The  former  is  the  andest
Psamathus,  the  latter  is  the  ancient  harbour  of  Achilles.    This  is  proved
by  Scylax,  who  says  {PeripluSy  46)  :  "  The  harbour  of  Achilles,  and  back
to  back  with  it  the  harbour  of  Psamathus.     Between  these  two  the
sanctuary  of  Poseidon  juts  into  the  sea,  namely  Taenarus."     As  Scylax
is  describing  the  coast  of  Laconia  from  west  to  east,  the  harbour  o^
Achilles  must  be  the  one  on  the  western  side  of  the  promontory,  an^
Psamathus  the  one  on  the  eastern  side.     This  is  confirmed  by  the  fact
that  there  was  a  town  at  Psamathus  (Stephanus  Byz.  s,v.  "^afifiaOov^  5
Strabo,  viii.  p.  363,  where  the  MSS.  read  *A/ia^ous,  but  even  if  thi^
reading  is  correct,  the  place  referred  to  must  be  the  same).     Now  a."t
Port  Marinari  on  the  western  side  of  the  isthmus  there  is  no  room  fo*'
a  town,  and  there  is  not  the  smallest  trace  of  an  ancient  settlement  ther^-
On  the  other  hand  there  are  ancient  remains  at  Porto  Quaglio.   A  tower
beside  the  sea  contains  some  ancient  blocks ;  and  at  a  spring  near  th^
solitary  monastery  which  stands  on  a  rocky  height  on  the  north  side  o^
the  harbour  there  is  an   ancient  marble  slab.     That    Psamathus  (o^
Amathus)  was  on  the  eastern  side  of  Taenarum  is  also  proved  by
Strabo,  who  says  (/.^.) :  "After  Taenarum,  sailing  in  the  direction  oi
Cape  Onugnathus  and  Malea,  we  come  to  the  town  of  Psamathus."
The  name  Psamathus  means  *  the  sandy '  harbour,  and  the  name  is  still
applicable  to  Porto  Quaglio^  which  is  a  beautiful  circular  harbour  sur-
rounded  by  high   mountains  with   a   narrow  entrance,   a   fine  sandy
bottom,   and   depth   of  water   for   large   vessels.     Besides   these  ti*'0
harbours  there  are  two  other  inlets  on  the  eastern  side  of  Taenaniin»
between   Porto   Quaglio  and  the  extreme  southern  cape.     The  more
northern  of  these,  Port  Vaihy  {i.e.  *  the  deep  bay '),  is  a  narrow  winding


CH.  XXV  TAENARUM  397

channel  extending  like  a  Norwegian  fjord  between  steep  barren  hills.  The
southern  inlet  is  Port  Kisternes^  so  called  from  the  number  of  ancient
cisterns  near  it ;  the  harbour  is  very  small  and  ill-sheltered.  Port
Vathy  was  wrongly  identified  by  Leake  with  the  harbour  of  Achilles ;
while  the  French  surveyors  were  doubly  wrong  in  identifying  Port
Kistemes  with  Psamathus,  and  Porto  Quaglio  with  the  harbour  of
Achilles.  The  latter  appellation  has  unfortunately  been  accepted  by  the
Greek  Government  as  the  official  name  of  Porto  Quaglio,  Boblaye,
however,  one  of  the  French  surveyors,  suggested  the  true  identification
of  the  ancient  harbours.  The  actual  cape  of  Taenarum,  the  southern
extremity  of  the  peninsula  and  of  Greece,  is  a  long,  rather  flat  spit  of
land  terminated  by  a  lighthouse.

On  the  geography  of  Taenarum  and  its  harbours  see  especially  the  work  of
Bursiany  'Ueber  das  Vorgebirge  Taenaron,'  Abhandlungen  of  the  Bavarian
Academy  (Munich),  Philos.  CI.  7  (1855),  pp.  773-795.  See  also  iV/.,  Gfo^,  v.
Griuk,  2.  p.  148  sq,  ;  Boblaye,  Recherches,  p.  89  sq, ;  Leake,  Marea,  i.  p.  294
sqq.  ;  «/.,  JPelop,  p.  175  sqq,  ;  Fiedler,  Reiser  I.  p.  340  sqq,  ;  Curtius,  Pehp,  2.  p.
277  sqq.  ;  Bullettino  delt  Institute  di  Corrisp,  ArchtoL  1857,  p.  154  s^,  ;  R.
Weil,  in  MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  At  hen  (1870),  p.  158  sqq,  ;  Phiiippson,  PelopoH'
nesj  p.  225  sq,

25.  4.  a  temple  like  a  cave.  On  the  north  side  of  the  bay  of
KistemeSy  close  to  the  flat  beach,  and  about  forty  paces  east  of  the
church  of  the  Asomatos,  are  the  remains  of  the  sanctuary  of  Poseidon.
The  foundations  are  19.60  metres  long  by  16  metres  broad.  The  walls
are  partly  formed  of  the  rock,  which  has  been  cut  and  smoothed  ;  above
these  rock-walls  are  courses  of  regularly  hewn  stones.  The  entrance  is
in  the  north  wall,  and  is  2.60  metres  wide  ;  from  the  west  side  of  the
entrance  a  wall  runs  through  the  whole  length  of  the  building  from  north
to  south.  A  parallel  wall  seems  to  have  extended  through  the  building
starting  from  the  east  side  of  the  entrance.  Within  this  building  there
were  found,  in  1856,  seventy  bronze  statuettes,  representing  bulls  and
horses.  These  were  evidently  votive  offerings,  and  make  it  certain  that
the  building  was  the  temple  of  Poseidon.  But  the  plan  of  the  edifice  is
peculiar.  Bursian  conjectured  that  the  building  as  a  whole  was  the
sanctuary  which  served  as  an  asylum  to  criminals  (Thucydides,  i.  128)  ;
and  that  the  long  narrow  space  enclosed  by  the  parallel  walls  was  an
'oracle  of  the  dead.'  There  was  such  an  oracle  at  Taenarum  (Plutarch,
^tsera  numinis  vindicta^  17).  The  ruins  are  at  the  entrance  to  a  gully
which  is  partly  overgrown  with  bushes  and  grass — perhaps  a  relic  of  the
sacred  grove  in  which,  as  we  know  from  Strabo  (viii.  p.  363),  the  sanctu-
ary stood.  Close  to  the  west  side  of  the  building  is  a  shallow  grotto  in
the  rock.  It  may  have  been  through  this  grotto  that  Hercules  was
supposed  to  have  brought  up  Cerberus.  Pausanias  does  not  indeed
clearly  distinguish  between  the  cave  and  the  temple ;  but  Strabo  {l,c.)
says  plainly  that  the  cave  was  near  the  sanctuary.  The  neighbouring
churdi  of  the  Asomatos  is  composed  wholly  of  ancient  blocks ;  Leake
thought  that  some  of  the  walls  of  the  church  were  ancient,  but  this  is
positively  denied  by  Bursian,  who  says  that  all  the  jointing  of  the  stones
is  modem.     About  the  bay  are  numerous  cisterns  and  foundations  of


398  TAENARUM  bk.  ixl  lacoira

houses  cut  in  the  rock,  showing  that  a  small  town  must  have  existed
here  in  antiquity.  It  was  probably  the  ancient  Taenarum.  The  con-
venient situation  of  the  place  as  a  port  from  which  to  sail  to  Crete;
Africa,  Sicily,  and  Italy,  perhaps  explains  why  in  Macedonian  times  lai]^
numbers  of  mercenaries  on  the  look-out  for  employment  took  up  tfadr
quarters  at  Taenarum  (Diodorus,  xvii.  io8,  xviii.  9).  See  Bursian,  'Ueber
das  Vorgebirge  Taenaron,'  and  the  other  authorities  cited  at  the  end  of
the  preceding  note.  For  inscriptions  found  at  the  sanctuary  recording
the  dedication  of  slaves  by  their  masters  to  the  service  of  Po^dco;
see  Roehl,  /.  G,  A,  Nos.  83,  84,  86,  88  ;  Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr.  Gr}
Nos.  19,  21,  22,  23;  Roberts,  Greek  Epigraphy^  No.  265  abed.

25.  5.  here  Hercules  dragged  up  the  hound  of  helL  See  tbe
preceding  note.  The  inhabitants  of  this  neighbourhood  point  to  a
grotto  on  the  western  side  of  Taenarum,  close  to  the  sea,  which  they
regard  as  the  entrance  to  hell  {Bullettino  delV  InsHtutOy  1857,  p.  155
note  (2) ;  B.  Schmidt,  Das  Volksleben  der  Neugriechen^  p.  248).

25.  7.  Arion  on  a  dolphin.  See  Herodotus,  i.  24.  The  branie
group  mentioned  by  Pausanias  was  small,  and  was  said  to  have  been
dedicated  by  Arion  himself  (Aelian,  Nat,  An,  xii.  45  ;  Dio  Chrysostom,
Orat,  xxxvii.  vol.  2.  p.  297,  ed.  Dindorf).  A  small  bronze  group  represent-
ing Arion  on  the  dolphin  has  actually  been  found  among  the  votive
offerings  at  Taenarum  (Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  151  note  i).  In  a  modern
Greek  tale  a  dolphin  saves  a  shipwrecked  king  and  his  daughter  by
canying  them  on  his  back  to  land  (B.  Schmidt,  Griechische  Mdrcken^
Sagen  und  Volkslieder^  p.  91).

25.  7.  the  dolphin  at  Poroselene.  Aelian  tells  us  {Nat.  An,  ii.  6)
that  this  dolphin  was  bred  up  by  an  old  man  and  woman  with  their
young  son,  and  that  they  made  money  by  exhibiting  it.  The  whole
thing  may  have  been  an  imposture.  For  a  similar  story  told  by  Apion
about  a  dolphin  at  Dicaearchia  see  Aulus  Gellius,  vi.  (vii.)  8.  ^  sqq.
Deceptions  of  this  sort  are  sometimes  practised  among  savages  to  enforce
superstitious  beliefs.  At  Fort  Simpson,  Queen  Charlotte  Islands,  the
Indians  "  have  even  got  up  such  things  as  an  artificial  whale,  in  some
way  formed  on  a  canoe.  This  appeared  suddenly  on  the  bay,  seemingly
swimming  along,  with  a  little  child  on  its  back  "  {Geological  Survey  of
Canada^  Report  of  the  Queen  Charlotte  Islands^  1878,  by  G.  M.  Dawson,
p.  125  B).  For  South  Sea  stories  of  sharks,  like  the  Greek  stories  of
dolphins,  see  Ellis,  Polynesian  Researches^  i.  p.  329  (ed.  1831);  Gili»
Myths  and  Songs  of  the  South  Pacific^  P-  9 1  •

25.  8.  a  spring  at  Taenanun.  Above  the  isthmus,  on  the  way
from  Porto  Quaglio  to  the  village  of  Lagia,  there  is  a  copious  spring,
the  water  of  which  is  collected,  a  few  paces  lower  down  the  hill,  in  a
small  natural  basin.  The  place  is  called  Akris  by  the  natives.  Both
harbours  {Quaglio  and  Marinart)  are  visible  from  this  point ;  so  we  may
suppose  that  it  was  in  this  basin  that  the  harbours  and  ships  were  said
to  have  been  formerly  reflected,  as  Pausanias  relates.  At  the  monastery
on  the  north  side  of  Porto  Quaglio  there  is  a  fine  spring  which  has
been  sometimes  identified  with  the  one  Pausanias  speaks  of;  but
from  it  the  harbour  of  Marinari  is  not  visible.     See  Bursian,  *  Uebcr


f.  XXV  CAENEPOLIS—THYRIDES  399

ELS  Vorgebirge  Taenaron,'  p.  774  5q,\  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  89 ;
^eake,  Morea^  i.  p.  305  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2,  p.  278.  The  Samoans  tell
f  a  wonderful  pool  on  which  a  sorceress  imprinted  the  images  of  many
:enes  (Turner,  Samoa^  p.  loi).

25.  9.  Oaenepolis.  Inscriptions  show  that  Caenepolis  occupied  the
te  of  the  modem  village  of  Kyparissa  situated  on  the  coast  two  hours
)  the  north-west  of  Marinari,  The  official  title  of  the  place  was  *  the
ity  of  the  Taenarians.'  Caenepolis  (*new  town*)  was  probably  the  1
opular  name.  All  the  antiquities  found  here  belong  to  the  Imperial  |
g^e.  The  church  of  the  Koimisis  tis  Panagias^  situated  on  a  height  near
le  sea,  contains  numerous  architectural  fragments  of  the  Ionic  style ;
nd  near  the  church  have  been  found  four  large  columns  of  reddish-grey
Ig^tian  granite.  Bursian  thought  these  the  remains  of  the  hall  of
>emeter,  the  site  of  which  he  would  place  among  the  present  vineyards
)  the  north  of  the  church,  where  two  of  the  columns  in  question  are
ing.  Mr.  Weil,  on  the  other  hand,  thinks  that  these  are  the  remains
f  the  temple  of  Aphrodite,  and  he  agrees  with  Leake  in  placing  the
irine  of  Demeter  on  a  hill  near  the  church  of  the  Saviour  (Soter).
ursian  placed  the  temple  of  Aphrodite  on  a  bay  further  to  the  north,
;  the  ruined  church  of  H.  Paraskeve,  where  there  are  ancient  remains.

See  Boblaye,  Rccherches^  p.  90  sq.  ;  Leake,  Morea,  i.  p.  290  sqq* ;  Bursian,
Jeber  das  Vorgebirge  Taenaron,'  p.  785  sqq,  ;  iV/.,  Geogr,  2.  p.  151  sq,  \  Curtius,
'Jop,  2.  p.  280  sq,  ;  R.  Weil,  in  KfittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Aihen,  i  (1876),  p.
o  sq. ;  Philippson,  Pehponnes^  p.  227.

25.  9.  Thyrides,  a  promontory.  Now  called  Kavo  Grosso^  a  pen-
sula  about  six  miles  in  circumference ;  its  coast  is  an  unbroken  line  of
imense  cliffs  rising  sheer  from  the  sea.  The  sea-caves  with  which  the
iffs  are  riddled  and  in  which  the  surf  breaks  with  a  booming  sound,
ive  to  the  promontory  the  ancient  name  of  Thyrides,  i,e,  *  windows.*         I(

See  Boblaye,  Recherches^  P«  9^  »  Leake,  Morca^  i.  pp.  288,  302  sq,  \  Curtius,
ilop,  2.  p.  201  sq,  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2,  p.  152 ;  Philipp^n,  PeUponn^s,  p.  227  sq,

25.  9.  Hippola.  The  sunmiit  of  the  peninsula  JCavo  Grosso  (see
-eceding  note)  descends  in  a  series  of  terraces  from  west  to  east.  On
lese  terraces  there  are  some  villages  standing  among  olive-groves,  stony
>miields,  and  thickets  of  cactus.  One  of  them,  by  name  JCtfiu/a,  may
ive  inherited  both  the  site  and  the  name  of  Hippola.  See  Leake,
e/op,  p.  175  ;  Curtius,  Pelop.  2,  p.  282  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  152
Dte  2  ;  Philippson,  PeloponneSy  p.  228.

25.  9.  the  town  of  Messa  and  a  harbour.  The  harbour  is  the
lodem  Port  Mezapo^  an  excellent  haven,  sheltered  on  the  west  by  the
irrow  peninsula  of  Tigani,  Homer  {Iliady  ii.  582)  calls  Messa  the
•wn  *  of  many  pigeons.*  The  description  still  holds  good,  for  the  cliffs
'  the  neighbouring  Cape  Grosso  abound  with  wild  pigeons.  See  Leake,
foreoy  I.  p.  286  ;  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  91  -r^« ;  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.
282  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  152.

25.  10.  Oetylum.  Ptolemy  (iii.  14.  43)  calls  this  place  Bityla ;
trabo  (viii.  p.  360)  says  it  was  sometimes  called  Baetylus.     It  is  now


(/


400  OETYLUM^THALAMAB  BK.  III.  UkCONU

ViiylOj  a  town  situated  on  the  brow  of  a  steep  hill  which  rises  at  the
north-eastern  end  of  the  deep  narrow  creek  of  Ument  or  Viiylo^  whidi
winds  inland  from  the  sea  and  is  the  harbour  of  the  town.  The  bay  is
about  five  hours  north  of  Port  Mezctpo,  A  mountain  torrent  flows  inio
it  through  a  deep  and  gloomy  glen  barely  wide  enough  to  let  the  water
pass.  On  the  opposite  side  of  the  glen,  to  the  south,  is  another  village:
From  the  plateau  on  which  the  town  of  Vitylo  stands  the  ground  falls
away  abruptly  700  feet  to  the  valley  at  the  head  of  the  bay,  the  descent
being  broken  here  and  there  by  terraces  resting  on  very  steep  walk
Many  of  the  houses  stand  on  the  brink  of  the  precipice.  Behind,  at  a
distance  of  about  a  mile,  a  screen  of  lofty  mountains  shelters  the  town  od
the  north-east.  The  warmth  of  the  climate  is  proved  by  the  presence  of
the  prickly  pear  which  flourishes  here.  Mr.  Morritt  of  Rokeby  (tlie
friend  of  Sir  Walter  Scott)  visited  Vitylo  in  1795.  I**  the  churdi  he
saw  a  fine  Ionic  coliunn  of  white  marble  and  several  Ionic  capitals,  and
outside  the  church  the  foimdations  of  a  temple.  This  was  probably  die
temple  of  Serapis  seen  by  Pausanias.

See  Morritt,  in  Walpole*s  Memoirs  relating  to  Turkey,  i.'  p.  ^sq,;  Boblare,
Recherches,  p.  92 ;  Leake,  Marea,  i.  pp.  313,  330 ;  Curtius,  Pelcp,  2.  p.  283;
Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  152  sg, ;  Tozer,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  3  (1882),
p.  356.

26.  I.  Thalaxnae.  The  site  of  this  place  has  not  been  identified.
To  determine  it  we  have  only  its  distances  from  Oetylus  and  Pephnus  to
go  upon.  Leake  placed  it  at  Platza\  Boblaye,  Curtius,  and  Bursian
place  it  further  north,  in  the  valley  of  the  MiUa.  The  ancient  name  of
the  Milia  seems  to  have  been  Pamisus  ;  but  this  Pamisus  must  not  be
confounded  with  the  larger  river  of  the  same  name  which  flows  through
the  great  plain  of  Messenia  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  316).  See  Boblaye,
Recherches^  P»  92  sq. ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  284 ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.
p.  153  ;  Leake,  Pelop,  p,  178  sq,  Mr.  Morritt,  journeying  from  Plaisa
to  Vitylo,  thus  describes  the  scenery :  "  The  whole  of  this  tract  is  as
barren  as  possible.  The  mountain  of  Taygetus  is  a  continuance  of
naked  crags ;  the  cultivation  disappeared  as  we  proceeded,  and  the
coast  which  lay  before  us  towards  Cape  Grosso  seemed  more  bare  and
savage  than  any  we  had  passed.  The  villages  seemed  poorer,  and  the
people  less  attentive  to  comforts  and  cleanliness  from  the  extreme
poverty  of  the  country.  Still  in  the  scanty  spots  where  vegetation  could
be  produced  at  all,  their  industry  was  conspicuous.  Not  a  tree  or
shrub  is  seea  We  found  many  specimens  of  variegated  marble  in  the
mountains,  and  passed  by  some  ancient  quarries  "  (Walpole's  Memoirs
relating  to  Turkey,  1.2  p.  54).

26.  I.  a  sanctuary  of  Ino  and  an  oracle.  Plutarch  says  (Agis^  9)
that  the  sanctuary  and  oracle  were  those  of  Pasiphae,  who,  according  to  ^
some,  was  a  daughter  of  Atlas  and  was  the  mother  of  Ammon  by  Zeus ;
according  to  others,  she  was  Cassandra,  daughter  of  Priam,  who  had
died  here ;  Phylarchus  identified  her  with  Daphne.  The  Spartan
magistrates  used  to  sleep  in  the  sanctuary  for  the  purpose  of  receiving
revelations  in  dreams  (Plutarch,  Cleomenes^  7 ;  Cicero,  De  divination^)


H.  XXVI  LEUCTRA—CARDAMYLE—GERENIA  401

43.  96).  Pausanias  seems  aware  that  the  oracle  was  sometimes
ttributed  to  Pasiphae ;  but  he  implicitly  rejects  this  view,  remarking
lat  Pasiphae  is  not  a  distinct  divinity  peculiar  to  Thalamae,  but  only  an
pithet  of  the  mooa  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  oracle  originally
•donged  to  Pasiphae  and  was  afterwards  transferred  to  Ino  (£.  Rohde,
^sycke^  p*  176  note  5);  or  that  Pasiphae  and  Ino  were  both  forms  of
Lphrodite  (S.  Wide,  Lakanische  Kulte^  P«  247  sqq,)

26.  2.  an  islet  also  called  Pephnns.  This  is  a  small  island,  or
ather  rock,  off  the  mouth  of  the  river  Milia,  There  are  said  to  be  two
ombs  on  it,  which  the  Greeks  call  the  tombs  of  the  Dioscuri.  See  Gell,
'tinerary  of  the  Morea^  p.  238  ;  Morritt,  in  Walpole's  Memoirs  relating
0  Turkey^  i.*  p.  51  ;  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  92;  Leake,  Morea^  i.
)p.  320,  330  sq,  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  284  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  1 53  sq,
26.  2.  the  people  of  Thalamae  say  that  the  Dioscuri  were  bom
m  it.  Cp.  iii.  1.4.  Other  writers  mention  that  Thalamae  was  sacred
:o  the  Dioscuri  (Photius,  Lexicon^  s.v,  Qakdfmi ;  Eustathius,  on  Homer,
n,  xii.  310,  p.  906  line  49  sq.)  In  the  Homeric  hymns  (xvii.  3,  xxxiii.
4  sqq,)  the  Dioscuri  are  said  to  have  been  bom  under  Mount  Taygetus.
26.  4.  Lenctra.  Now  LeftrOy  a  village  an  hour  to  the  north  of  the
river  Milia ;  there  are  said  to  be  many  ancient  remains  here  (Boblaye,
RechercheSy  p.  93 ;  Leake,  Morea^  i.  pp.  320,  330  sq,  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,
2.  p.  284  sq,\  Bursian,  Geogr,  2,  p.  154).  Morritt  found  "few  and
inconsiderable  traces  of  antiquity "  at  Leuctra  (Walpole's  Memoirs
relating  to  Turkey,  i  .2  p.  51).  The  place  is  called  Leuctrum  by  Strabo
(viii.  pp.  360,  361),  Plutarch  {Pelopidas^  20),  and  Ptolemy  (iii.  14.  32).
26.  4*  believing  him  to  be  the  son  of  Arsinoe.  See  ii.  26.  7 ;
iv.  2.  2.

26.  5.  a  temple  of  Oassandra.     Cp.  iii.  19.  6  note.

26.  6.   The  Messenians  say  that  Lenctra  belonged  to

Hessenia.     The  dispute  was  submitted  to   Philip  of  Macedonia  as
arbitrator  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  361,  cp.  Polybius,  ix.  33).

26.  7.  Cardamyle.  Strabo  (viii.  p.  360)  says  that  Cardamyle  was
situated  on  a  strong  rock ;  and  from  Stephanus  Byz.  {s,v,  KapSafivkrf)
^  learn  that  the  place  was  sometimes  called  Scardamyle  or,  in  Doric,
Scardamyla.  The  place  is  still  called  Kardamyli  or  Scardamyla,  The
village  stands  on  a  rocky  height  about  20  minutes  from  the  coast.  On
a  plateau  to  the  north-east  of  the  village,  about  5000  feet  above  the  sea,
there  are  extensive  ruins.  See  Boblaye,  Recherchesy  p.  93  ;  Leake,
^loreoy  I.  pp.  321,  331  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  285  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2,  p.
154.  Cp.  Morritt,  in  Walpole's  Memoirs  relating  to  Turkey,  i.^  p.  49  sqq,
26.  7*  mentioned  by  Homer.  See  Iliad,  ix.  149  sqq,
26.  8.  The  city  which  in  Homer  is  named  Enope.  See  Hiad,  ix.
'50.  According  to  Strabo  (ix.  p.  360)  the  Homeric  Enope  was  identified
ty  some  with  Pellana  (see  iii.  21.  2),  by  others  with  a  place  near  Carda-
niyle,  and  by  others  with  Gerenia.

26.  8.  Qerenia.     This  seems  to  have  been  at  or  near  the  modem

Kitries,  a  village  situated  on  the  coast,  a  mile  and  a  half  east  of  Cape

Kourtissa,  which  forms  the  northern  extremity  of  the  rocky  promontory

faiown  as  Cape  Kepkali,     The  French  surveyors,  however,  followed  by

VOL  III  2  D


402  GERENIA  BK.  III.  lACOViA

Prof.  Curtius,  place  Gerenia  at  ZamaiOy  three  miles  inland  from  Kiirus
(see  note  on  Alagonia,  §  11).  See  Leake,  Marea^  i.  p.  321  sgg>;  H
Pelop,  p.  180;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  154  j*^.;  Boblaye,  Recherchts^^
93  j^. ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  285.  With  regard  to  the  distances  on
this  coast,  Leake  says :  "  By  land  the  distance  from  Kiirtes  to  Viijk  is
reckoned  ten  hoiu^ — ^three  hours  and  a  half  to  Skardkamtda^  from
thence  to  Lefiro  one  hour  and  a  half^  and  five  more  to  Vifylc,  The
distance  by  the  road  is  not  more  than  thirty  miles,  but  so  nigged  in
some  parts  that  it  cannot  easily  be  done  in  less  than  twelve  hoon^
except  by  a  Maniote  on  foot"  {Morecu^  i.  p.  321  sq.)  Some  of  die
distances  mentioned  by  Pausanias  in  describing  this  coast  are  too  great;
and  Boblaye  suggested  {Recherckes^  p.  93)  that  Pausanias,  judging  of
the  distances  by  the  time  he  took  to  traverse  them,  may  have  o\tr-
estimated  them  in  places  where  the  ground  was  difficult  and  ndieie^
consequently,  travelling  was  slow.  This  view  is  confirmed  by  the
observation  that  in  describing  the  eastern  coast  of  the  Malean  peninsula,
which  presents  similar  difficulties  to  the  traveller  by  land,  Pausanias  I
again  over-estimates  the  distances ;  but  that  while  his  absolute  distances
in  furlongs  are  wrong,  the  relative  distances  between  the  places  are
right.  This  is  just  what  we  should  expect  if  he  estimated  the  distances
by  time.  See  Boblaye,  RechercheSy  p.  100,  and  cp.  Leake,  Mona^  i.
p.  2 1 3  j^.  A  sketch  of  the  picturesque  bay  of  Kitries  is  given  by  GeD,
Journey  in  the  Morea^  facing  p.  260.  In  Uie  neighbourhood  of  Kiirui
'*the  country  is  barren  and  stony  beyond  conception,  and  yet  the
earth,  which  is  washed  by  the  rains  and  torrents  from  the  higher  pazts^
is  supported  on  a  thousand  platforms  and  terraces,  by  the  indefatigable
industry  of  the  inhabitants,  and  these  were  covered  with  com,  malic,
olives,  and  mulberry  -  trees,  which  seemed  to  grow  out  of  the  rock
itself"  (Morritt,  in  Walpole's  Memoirs  relating  to  Turkey y  i.^  p.  45).

26.  9.  Machaon,  son  of  Aescnlapins  etc.  Strabo  says  (ix.  p.
360)  that  at  Gerenia  there  was  a  sanctuary  of  the  Triccaean  Aesculapius,
which  had  been  founded  from  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  at  Tricca
in  Thessaly.  The  Thessalian  sanctuary  seems  to  have  been  near  the
spring  now  called  Guma  at  Trikkala  (Tricca).  See  J.  Ziehen,  ia
MittheiL  d,  deutsch,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  17  (1892),  pp.  195-197.  An
inscription  recently  found  in  the  great  Epidaurian  sanctuary  of  Machaon
seems  to  show  that  Machaon  was  worshipped  there  ('EifyrjfiepU  apx**'
okoyiKrjy  1894,  p.  22,  Inscr.  No.  16).

26.  9.  t^e  Little  Iliad.     See  x.  26.  2  note.

26.  10.  the  sanctuary  of  Aescnlapins  at  Pergamus.     The  site
of  this  sanctuary  has  been  determined  with  some  probability.     It  is
about  half  a  mile  to  the  west  of  Pergamus,  with  which  the   sanctuar)'
was  connected  by  a  colonnaded  and  covered  street.     There  are  some
ruins  on  the  spot  and  a  luke-warm  spring,  probably  the  sacred  spring
of  Aesculapius,  which  forms  the  subject  of  one  of  Aristides's  orations
{Or.  xviii.  vol.  i.  pp.  408-414,  ed.   Dindorf).     See  Die  Ergebnisse  de^
A usgradungen  su  Pergamon  (Berlin,  1880),  pp.  12,  118;  Baumeister's
Denkmater,  p.  1226  ^^.     On  the  worship  of  Aesculapius  at  Pergamus
as  illustrated  by  the  coins  of  the  city,  see  Mr.  W.  Wroth,  *  Asklepios


CH.  XXVI  ALAGONTA  403

and  the  coins  of  Pergamon,'  Numismatic  Chronicle^  3rd  series,  2  (1882),
pp.  1-5 1.

26.  10.  Telephns.  As  to  the  worship  of  Telephus  at  Pergamus
sec  V.  13.  3.  On  representations  of  the  story  of  Telephus  in  ancient
art  see  O.  Jahn,  Archdologische  Aufsatze^  pp.  160-180.  Cp.  note  on
i.  4.  6,  vol.  2.  p.  75  sq.

26.   10.  Podalirins  etc.     Stephanus  Byzantius  {s,v.  2v/)va)  relates

how  Podalirius  (one  of  the  sons  of  Aesculapius)  was  wrecked  on  the  coast

of  Caria  and  saved  by  a  goat-herd,  who  took  him  to  the  king  of  Caria.

The  king's  daughter  had  fallen  from  the  roof:  Podalirius  healed  her

by  bleeding  her  in  both  arms ;  and  the  king  in  gratitude  gave  him  the

princess  to  wife.     So  Podalirius  founded  two  cities,  one  of  which  he

called  Syma  {sic)  after  his  wife.     According  to  another  story  Podalirius

went  to  Delphi  and  inquired  of  the  oracle  where   he  should  dwell.

The  oracle  told  him  to  take  up  his  abode  in  that  city  in  which,  if  the

sky  fell,   he  would  suffer  no  harm.     So  he  settled  in  a  place  in  the

Carian  Chersonese  which  was  surrounded  by  mountains  that  might  be

expected  to  prop  up  the  sky  in  case  it  were  to  falL    See  Apollodorus,  ed.

R.  Wagner,  p.  221  sq.\  Epitoma  Vaticana  ex  Apollodori  bibliothecay  ed.

R.  Wagner,  p.  74  ;  Tzetzes,  SchoL  on  Lycophron^  1047.     Another  story,

followed  by  Lycophron,  was  that  Podalirius  went  to  Apulia  in  Italy,

where  he  died  and  was  buried  ;  and  that  his  spirit  gave  oracles  in  dreams

to  such  as  slept  on  sheepskins  laid  on  his  tomb  (Lycophron,  CassandrOy

1047  sqq.y  with  the  scholia  of  Tzetzes ;    Strabo,   vi.   p.   284).       Cp.

V.  Wilamowitz  -  Mollendorff,  Isyllos  von  Epidauros^    p.    50;    Rhode,

Psyche^  p.  173.

26.  II.  a  cavern.  "At  the  head  of  a  little  valley  behind  the
beach  of  KitrieSy  immediately  under  a  rocky  gorge  in  the  mountain,  I
find  a  very  large  cavern  answering  to  that  described  by  Pausanias  at
Gerenia,  except  that  the  entrance  is  not  narrow,  as  he  says ;  it  may,
perhaps,  have  been  widened  in  order  to  be  made  more  convenient  as
a  jywvSpa,  or  sheepfold,  for  which  it  now  serves "  (Leake,  Morea^  i .  p.
■■  322  sq.)  The  mountain  in  which  the  cavern  exists  is  doubtless  the
ancient  Mt.  Calathium  (Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  155).

26.    II.    Alagonia.      As  this  place  lay  30  furlongs  inland  from

'-.    Gerenia,  it  was  probable  at  or  near  Zamata,  a  village  situated  in  a

\    fertile  little  plain  about  three  miles  inland  from  Kitties,     There  is  here

a  Prankish  castle  on  a  height.     See  Leake,  Morea^  i.  p.  323  j<7. ;  /V/.,

^il(^,  p.    180;    Bursian,    Geogr,   2.   p.   155;    Philippson,  Peloponnes,

p.  221.


BOOK    FOURTH


MESSENIA

fi£  early  history  of  Messenia  is  sketched  by  Diodorus  (xv.,  66) ;  but
e  account  of  it  given  by  Pausanias  in  this  book  is  by  far  the  fiillest
at  we  possess.  On  the  ancient  authorities  for  the  early  history  of
essenia  see  Phil.  Kohlmann,  Quaestiones  Messeniacae  (Bohn,  1866);

Niese,  *Die  altere  Geschichte  Messeniens,*  in  Hermes^  26  (1891),
L  1-32  ;  H.  L.  Ebeling,  A  Study  of  the  Sources  of  the  Messeniaca  of
^usanias  (Baltimore,  1892)  (as  to  this  last  work  see  note  on  iv.  6.  i).
•of.  Niese's  view  is  that  the  connected  history  of  Messenia  was
anufectured  out  of  very  scanty  materials  after  the  restoration  of  the
essenians  in  370  B.C.  The  old  Messenian  traditions,  he  holds,  and
e  old  Messenian  religion  had  been  forgotten  during  the  long  domina-
m  of  Sparta;  hence  after  the  restoration  it  became  necessary  to
rnish  the  country  with  a  history  and  a  religion.  The  history  was
ncocted  and  the  religion  was  instituted,  in  Prof.  Niese*s  view,  on  the
odel  of  the  Spartan  traditions  and  the  Spartan  history  ;  for  he  thinks
at  of  the  population  settled  by  the  Thebans  in  Messenia  in  370  B.C.
large  proportion  were  Spartan  subjects  (irepioucoi)^  who  had  joined
e  Thebans  on  their  invasion  of  Laconia.  (In  proof  of  this  latter
►sition  he  refers  to  Xenophon,  Hellenica^  vi.  5.  25  and  32.  Some  of
e  Helots  also  appear  to  have  been  settled  in  Messenia  by  the  Thebans.
^  Isocrates,  ArchidamuSy  28.)  Prof.  Niese  admits  the  value  of  the
•ems  of  Tyrtaeus,  so  far  as  they  go,  as  evidence  of  the  early  Messenian
Lrs.

1.  I.  The  boimdary  between  Messenia  the  glen  called

Loerins  ('Sow-dale').  The  glen  which  in  the  time  of  Pausanias
ined  the  boundary  between  Messenia  and  Laconia  in  this  quarter  is
e  ravine  of  the  Sandava  river.     See  note  on  30.  i.     But  the  words

Pausanias  imply  that  the  territory  to  the  south  of  the  Sandava  or,

he  puts  it,  in  the  direction  of  Gerenia,  had  formerly  belonged  to
essenia,  from  which  it  had  been  severed  and  handed  over  to  Laconia
}  the  emperor  (Augustus).  Now  Pausanias  has  already  told  us  that
ardamyle  had  been  transferred  by  Augustus  from  Messenia  to  the
partans  (iii.  26.  7) ;  further  that,  though  Gerenia  belonged  to  the
ree  Laconians,  the  population  was  Messenian  (iii.  26.  8) ;  and  that


4o6  HISTORY  OF  MESSENIA  bk.  iv.  mbsseku

the  Messenians  claimed  to  have  formerly  owned  Pephnus  and  Leuctn
(iii.  26.  3  and  6),  of  which  places  the  latter  cert^nly,  and  the  former
probably,  belonged  in  Pausanias's  time  to  the  Free  Laconians  (iii.  21.7).
We  may,  perhaps,  conclude  that  by  "  that  portion  of  its  territory  whid
was   severed    from  it  [Messenia]    by   the  emperor  and   assigned  to
Laconia,"  Pausanias  here  means  the  whole  stretch  of  coastland  from
the  Choerius  glen  (the  Sandava  river)  to  the  island  of  Pephnus  at  tbe
mouth  of  what  is  now  the  Milia  river.     We  know  that  in  the  dvil  war
between  Augustus  and  Mark  Antony  the  Messenians  sided  with  dte
latter,  and  that  the  victorious  Augustus  punished  them  by  deprivio;
them  of  various  parts  of  their  territory  which  he  transferred  to  Laconia,
because  Laconia  had  been  on  his  side  in  the  war  (Paus.  iv.  31.  i  sq)
We  have  also  to  remember  that  in  the  time  of  Augustus  Laconia  was
divided  into  two  separate  states,  namely  Sparta  with  its  dependencies,
and  the  confederacy  of  the  Free  Laconians.     Both  these  states  were
rewarded  by  Augustus  with  pieces  of  Messenian  territory.     To  Spaxta
he  gave  Cardamyle,  Pharae  and  Thuria  (iii.  26.  7  ;  iv.  30.  2 ;  iv.  31.
I  sq.)\   to  the  Free  Laconians  he  seems  to  have  assigned   Leoctra
(with  Pephnus)  and  Gerenia.     The  coastland  in  question,  from  tbe
Sandava   river  to  the  Milia   river,  appears   to   have  been  originally
detached  from  Laconia  and  bestowed  on  Messenia  by  Philip  of  Macedoo
after  the  battle  of  Chaeronea  (338  B.C.)    We  know,  at  least,  that  Philqj
transferred  the  Denthelian  district  from  Laconia  to  Messenia  (Tadtos^
Annals^  iv.  43) ;  and  that  a  dispute  as  to  the  possession  of  Leuctn
was  referred  to  him  as  arbitrator  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  360 ;  cp.  Polybins;
ix.  33).     We  may  fairly  suppose  that  Philip  gave  the  decision  against
his  foes  the  Lacedaemonians.     Thus  Leuctra,  and  probably  with  it  the
adjoining    districts  of  Cardamyle  and   Gerenia,   were  detached  fiwn
Laconia,  and  continued  to  be  Messenian  territory  from  the  time  of
Philip  to  the  time  of  Augustus,  who  restored  the  territory  to  Laconia,
assigning  Cardamyle  to  Sparta,  and  Leuctra  and  Gerenia  to  the  Free
Laconians.

1.  3.  while  enumerating  Pylns,  Arena  etc.    See  Homer,  Jliad^  'i

591  sqq,

1.  3.  the  following  passage  in  the  Odyssey.     See  Odyss.  xxi.  iS-
1.  3.  in  speaking  of  the  bow  of  Iphitns  etc.     See  Odyss,  xxi.
15  sq.

1.  4.  this  he  himself  explains  etc.     See  Odyss,  iii.  488  sq,

1.  5.  Oancon brought  the  orgies  of  the  Great  Goddesses

from  ^ensis.  A  long  and  very  interesting  inscription,  detailing  the
rules  which  regulated  the  celebration  of  these  Messenian  orgies  or
mysteries,  was  discovered  in  1858  near  the  village  of  Konstantino^^
in  the  district  of  Andania,  in  northern  Messenia.  It  was  published
with  a  commentary  by  H.  Sauppe  {Die  Mysterieninschrift  von  Andatdt^
Gottingen,  i860).  See  also  Dittenberger's  Sylloge  Inscript  GraiC-
No.  388  ;  Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr,  Graec,^  No.  47.

As  to  Caucon,  the  legendary  founder  of  the  Andanian  mysteries,  tb^
story  that  he  was  of  Attic  birth  and  came  from  Eleusis  seems  to  hav^
been  the  invention  of  Methapus,  as  to  whom  see  note  on  §  7.     Caucol^


\

i


H.  I  HISTORY  OF  MESSENIA  407

ppears,  on  the  contrary,  to  have  been  a  native  Peloponnesian  hero.
Lccording  to  Apollodorus  (iii.  8.  i)  and  Tzetzes  {SchoL  on  Lycophron^
81)  his  father  was  Lycaon,  the  son  of  Pelasgus.  According  to  Aelian
Var,  Hist,  i.  24)  Caucon  was  a  son  of  Poseidon  and  Astydamia.  The
lessenians  sacrificed  to  Caucon  (iv.  27.  6} ;  but  the  chief  seat  of  his
worship  seems  to  have  been  Lepreus  in  Elis.  See  v.  5.  5  note.  Cp.
.  Topffer,  Attische  Genealogie^  P«  215  sqq,

1.  7*  Metliapas  also  made  some  changes  in  the  mode  of  cele-
rating  the  mysteries.  With  the  restoration  of  Messenian  freedom  rj  ->  r\
fter  the  battle  of  Leuctra  the  ancient  mysteries,  which  during  the  "*•''
partan  domination  seem  to  have  fallen  into  abeyance,  were  revived.
ee  iv.  26.  6  sqq.  It  is  a  probable  conjecture  that  the  changes  in  the
tual,  referred  to  by  Pausanias,  were  introduced  by  Methapus  at  this
me.  As  "  a  deviser  of  mysteries  and  all  sorts  of  orgies  "  he  may  well
ave  been  fetched  from  Attica  to  assist  in  renewing  the  half-forgotten
sremonies.  All  that  Pausanias  knew  about  Methapus  he  seems  to
ave  got  from  the  inscription  which  he  quotes.  This  inscription  was
uved  on  a  statue  of  Methapus  which  stood  in  a  chapel  of  the  Lycomids.
he  Lycomids  were  a  noble  family  of  Attica,  and  they  had  a  chapel  for
le  celebration  of  mystic  rites  at  Phlya  in  Attica,  which  seems  to  have
een  the  family  seat  (see  note  on  i.  31.  4  *  Phlya').  The  "chapel  of
ne  Lycomids  "  to  which  Pausanias  here  refers  was  no  doubt  the  one  at
^hlya  in  Attica ;  Lobeck  {AglaophamuSj  2.  p.  982  sq.)  is  wrong  in
opposing  that  it  was  at  Andania  in  Messenia.  Since  the  statue  of
Methapus  stood  in  the  chapel  of  the  Lycomids,  we  may  conclude  that
Methapus  was  a  Lycomid  himself  Hence  he  may  have  invented  the
story  which  traced  the  lineage  of  Caucon,  the  founder  of  the  Messenian
rites,  to  Phlyus,  the  eponymous  hero  of  Phlya.  Perhaps  the  etymological
connexion  between  the  name  of  the  Lycomids  and  the  name  of  Lycaon,
the  legendary  ancestor  of  Caucon,  may  have  seemed  to  Methapus  a
ground  of  relationship  between  the  Messenian  hero  and  the  Attic  family.
With  regard  to  the  changes  introduced  by  Methapus  into  the  ancient
ntual,  Sauppe  thought  that  we  can  get  some  light  from  the  great
inscription  mentioned  above.  The  date  of  that  inscription  seems  to  be
93  B.C.,  so  that  it  is  posterior  to  the  innovations  made  by  Methapus,  if
^  are  right  in  supposing  Methapus  to  have  lived  about  the  time  of  the
hattle  of  Leuctra.  Now  from  the  inscription  it  appears  that  the  gods
in  whose  honour  the  mysteries  were  celebrated  were  Demeter,  Hermes,
the  Great  Gods,  Camean  Apollo,  and  Hagna  (Proserpine).  Pausanias
seems  to  have  known  all  these  deities  as  the  deities  of  the  mysteries
except  the  Great  Gods  (see  the  verses  of  Methapus  which  he  quotes,
^  iv.  33.  4  sq.)  It  is  true  that  he  mentions  the  Great  Goddesses
repeatedly  in  connexion  with  the  mysteries  (see  iv.  3.  10 ;  iv.  14.  i  ;  iv.
33-  5),  but  he  never  mentions  the  Great  Gods.  Who  were  these  Great
Gods  ?  Sauppe  thought  they  were  the  Cabin  of  Samothrace,  who  were
regularly  styled  the  Great  Gods  (Dionysius  Halicam.  Antiq,  Rom,  L  69  ;
Diodorus,  iv.  49,  etc.)  He  further  conjectured  that  the  introduction  of
^  worship  of  the  Cabiri  into  the  Messenian  mysteries  may  have  been
due  to  Methapus,  since  Pausanias  tells  us  that  Methapus  instituted  the


4o8  HISTORY  OF  MESSENIA  BK.  nr.  msssiku

rites  of  the  Cabin  at  Thebes.  Mr.  Topffer,  on  the  other  hand,  thinb
that  the  Great  Gods  mentioned  in  the  inscription  were  more  probably
f.  the  Dioscuri,  who  were  native  deities  of  Messenia,  not  strangers  and
foreigners  like  the  Cabiri  See  Paus.  iii.  26.  3  ;  iv.  31.  9 ;  and  for  die
title  of  Great  Gods  applied  to  the  Dioscuri  see  i.  31.  i.  On  the
subjects  of  this  note  see  Sauppe,  Die  Mysterieninschrift  van  Andam,
pp.  3  sgg,y  41  sggr.^  52  sgr, ;  J.  Topffer,  Attische  Genealogies  pp.  208-225.

1.  8.  Oancon,  illnstrions  scion  of  Phlyns.  The  Greek  is  here
corrupt  Cp.  Critical  Note,  vol.  i.  p.  579.  I  have  translated  according
to  the  probable  sense.

2.  2.  Oechalia.  In  Homer  Oechalia  is  the  town  of  Eurytus,  the
bowman  who  challenged  Apollo  himself  to  a  shooting  match,  and  ivas

J  slain  by  the  god.  Ulysses  received  the  bow  of  Eurytus  firom  Iphitus,
j  and  with  it  he  shot  the  suitors  dead.  See  Iliad,  ii.  596,  730  ;  0(fyssej,
viii.  224  sqq.y  xxi.  1 1  sqq.  From  the  last  passage  {Od,  xxi.  1 1  sqq,)  we
should  infer  that  Oechalia  was  in  Messenia ;  but  various  towns,  as  we
learn  from  Pausanias,  claimed  to  be  the  Homeric  Oechalia.  See  MiiDer,
Dorier^  i.  p.  460,  note  i  ;  Preller,  Griech,  Mythologie?  2.  p.  224  j|^.;
Roscher*s  Lexikon,  s.v,  *  Eurytos.'  As  to  the  bones  of  Eurytus,  to  which
Pausanias  refers  as  a  proof  that  Oechalia  was  in  Messenia,  see  iv.  33.  5.
Sacrifices  were  said  to  have  been  annually  offered  to  Eurytus  before  the
celebration  of  the  Andanian  mysteries.     See  iv.  3.  10;  cp.  27.  6.

2.  3.  Oreophylus  in  his  poem  Heraclea.  Creophylus  of  Samosis
said  to  have  been  a  friend  of  Homer's,  and  to  have  composed  the  epic
called  The  capture  of  Oechalia,  which  described  how  Hercules  captured
Oechalia,  because  he  had  been  refused  the  hand  of  lole,  daughter  d
Eurytus,  king  of  Oechalia.  The  Heraclea  here  mentioned  by  Pausanias
was  probably  identical  with  the  epic  commonly  called  The  capture  0]
Oechalia.  See  Strabo,  ix.  p.  438,  xiv.  p.  638;  Diodorus,  iv.  37.  55
Epicorum  Graecorum  fragmenta,  ed.  Kinkel,  p.  60  sqq, ;  F.  G.  Welckcr,
Der  epische  Cyclus,  i.  p.  219  sqq,

2.  4-  Her  story  has  already  been  twice  touched  on  by  me.    See

ii.  21.  7  ;  iii.  i.  4.

2.  7.  Protesilaus had  to  wife  Polydora.   Homer  (//.  ii.  ']^)

mentions  the  wife  of  Protesilaus,  but  without  naming  her.  She  is  more
generally  called  Laodamia,  a  name  made  familiar  to  classical  readers  by
Ovid  {HeroideSy  xiii.)  and  to  English  readers  by  Wordsworth's  pocin
Laodameia.

3.  -2.  the  verses  of  Homer  etc.     See  Iliad,  xi.  597  sqq.

3.  2.  the  tomb  of  Machaon  at  Gerenia  etc.     See  iii.  26.  9 ;  i^-

30.  3.

3.  3.  This  I  have  already  mentioned.     See  ii.  18.  7  sq.

3.  5.  Temenus  took  a  pitcher  with  water  etc.  Cp.  ApoUodorus?
ii.  8.  4.

3.  6.  Merope.  See  Hyginus, /a<5.  184;  and  on  representations  0^
her  legend  in  ancient  art,  etc.,  see  O.  Jahn,  *  Merope,*  in  Archdologisch^
Zeitung,  6  (1854),  PP-  225-238.

3.  7-  the  men  of  property  revolted  and  murdered  him.  Accordion
to  Nicolaus  Damascenus,  King  Cresphontes  divided  Messenia  into  fi^'^


H.  IV  HISTORY  OF  MESSENIA  409

larts,  and  gave  the  conquered  Messenians  equal  shares  with  the
onquering  Dorians.  This  excited  the  disgust  of  the  Dorians ;  and
Iresphontes,  perceiving  the  unpopularity  of  his  measures,  attempted  to
indo  thenu  This  did  not  appease  the  Dorians,  who  murmured  at  him
or  having  come  to  terms  with  the  conquered  Messenians  without
:onsulting  his  Dorian  subjects ;  and  the  Messenians  were  alarmed  at
he  prospect  of  being  deprived  of  their  lands.  Hence  a  conspiracy  was
ormed  and  Cresphontes  was  assassinated.  See  Nicolaus  Damascenus,
■^g-  39  {^^^g'  Histor,  Graec.  ed.  Miiller,  3.  p.  376  sq.)  Nicolaus
!>amascenus's  authority  for  this  account  appears  to  have  been  Ephorus  ;
3r  Strabo  (viii.  p.  361)  states  on  the  authority  of  Ephorus  that  Cresphontes
;sta.blished  five  cities  in  Messenia,  and  divided  the  territory  between
hem  ;  Stenyclerus  was  his  capital  and  residence,  and  he  sent  four  petty
lings  to  rule  in  the  other  four  cities ;  he  also  gave  the  Messenians
^ual  rights  with  the  Dorians ;  but  seeing  that  the  Dorians  were  dis-
:ontented,  he  changed  his  mind,  made  Stenyclerus  the  only  city,  and
»llected  all  the  Dorians  into  it.  Though  Strabo  does  not  mention  it,
he  story  of  the  assassination  of  Cresphontes  was  doubtless  told  by
£phorus,  for  the  authorities  used  by  Nicolaus  Damascenus  and  Strabo
jeem  certainly  to  have  been  the  same.  Isocrates  {Arckidamus^  22)
»ays :  "  The  Messenians  were  so  impious  that  they  plotted  against  and
slew  Cresphontes  "  etc.  The  assassination  of  Cresphontes  is  mentioned
also  by  ApoUodorus  (ii.  8.  5)  and  Hyginus  {Fab.  137).  Euripides  wrote
a  drama  called  Cresphontes^  which  Prof.  Niese  believes  to  have  been
the  source  from  which  later  writers  took  their  ideas  of  this  part  of
Messenian  history.     See  B.  Niese,  in  Hermes,  26  (1891),  p.  9  sqq,

3.  8.  Aepytns  etc.  Cp.  Nicolaus  Damascenus,  frag.  39  {Frag,
Hist.  Graec.y  ed.  Miiller,  3.  p.  377) ;  ApoUodorus,  ii.  8.  5.  According
to  Hyginus  {Fab,  184)  the  surviving  son  of  Cresphontes  and  Merope
bore  his  father's  name  Cresphontes,  and  he  was  brought  up  in  Aetolia,
not  Arcadia.  Isocrates  says  {Archidamus,  23)  that  the  sons  of  Cres-
phontes escaped  and  were  aifterwards  restored  to  Messenia  by  the
Spartans.

3.  9.  sacrificed  to  Machaon at  Gerenia.     See  iii.  26.  9.

3.  10.  the  sanctuary  of  Gorgasns  and  Nicomachus  at  Fliarae.
See  iv.  30.  3.

3.  10.  sacrifice  every  year  to  the  river  Pamisns.  On  sacrifices
to  rivers  see  P.  Stengel,  *  Die  Opfer  fiir  Flussgotter,*  in  Fleckeisen^s
J(ihrbucher,  31  (i 891),  pp.  449-453-

4.  I.  Enmelus.     See  note  on  ii.  i.  i.

4.  2.  The  Lacedaemonians  say  etc.  Ephorus,  reported  by  Strabo
(vi.  p.  279),  said  that  the  first  Messenian  war  broke  out  in  consequence
of  the  Messenians  having  murdered  the  Lacedaemonian  king  Teleclus,
who  had  gone  to  sacrifice  at  Messene.  But  Strabo  was  acquainted
^th  the  other  part  of  the  Lacedaemonian  story  also ;  for  elsewhere  he
says  that  the  war  originated  in  the  refusal  of  the  Messenians  to  give
satisfaction  for  the  violation  of  some  Spartan  maidens  at  Limnae ;  the
niaidens  had  come  to  offer  sacrifice  at  the  sanctuaiy  of  Artemis,  the
Messenians  violated  them  and  slew  the  men  who  tried  to  defend  the


410  HISTORY  OF  MESSENIA  bk.  iv.  messesu

damsels.  See  Strabo,  vi.  p.  257,  viii.  p.  362.  Justin  also  (liL  4)  traices
the  outbreak  of  the  war  to  the  lawless  conduct  of  some  Messenius
who  violated  certain  Lacedaemonian  maidens  at  a  solemn  sacrifice  in
Messenia.

4.  5.  There  was  a  man  of  Messenia  called  Polychares  etc  Tfae
story  which  follows  is  told  also  by  Diodorus  (fr.  viii.  5).  Cp.  Ebding,
Sources  of  the  Messetdaca  of  Pausanias^  p.  20  sqq»

5.  I.  the  frand  of  Oresphontes  touching  the  lots.    See  iv.  3.

^sq.

5.  2.  the  Argives,  in  an  assemblF  of  the  league.  The  woid
translated  *  league '  is  ampkiciyoma^  by  which  we  must  here  understand
a  league  of  cities  with  Aigos  at  its  head.  Such  an  Argive  confedezacj
is  only  mentioned  by  one  other  ancient  writer,  to  wit  Plutarch  (ParaUeUt
3).  K.  O.  Muller  (Don'ery^  i.  p.  154)  inferred  from  Herodotus,  vL  92,
that  the  confederacy  must  have  subsisted  as  late  as  the  66th  Olympiad
(516-513  ac)  Cp.  Busolt,  Griech,  Gesch,^  i.  p.  222.  The  existence
of  such  an  Aigive  confederacy  is  doubted  by  K.  W.  Muller  (in  Pauljf^
Real'Encyclopadiey  i.  i.  p.  890  5q.\  and  denied  by  P.  Kohlmann  (Rk»
isches  Museum^  N.  F.  29  (1874),  p.  472).

5.  4*  Apollodorus,  tiie  tyrant  of  Oassandria.    Cassandna  occupied  \
the  site  of  the  older  and  better  known  Potidaea,  in  Macedonia.     See  v.  \
23.  3.     As  to  Apollodorus  see  Diodorus,  xxii.  5  ;  Polyaenus,  vi.  7,iv.    HI
6.  18.     He  was  put  down  by  Antigonus.     Polyaenus  calls  him  the    \l]
bloodiest  tyrant  that  ever  ruled  in  Greece  or  elsewhere.

5.  9.  Amphea.     This  has  been  identified  with  the  ruins  caDed  ^
Palaeokastro  of  Kokla^  situated  on  one  of  the  western  spurs  of  TaygetnS
at  the  north-eastern  comer  of  Messenia.     The  place  lies  about  an  hoof
and  a  half  to  the  south  of  the  Makriplagi  pass,  which  is  the  chief  line  rf
communication  between  Arcadia  and  Messenia.     The  ruins  occupy  th^
westernmost  extremity  of  a  narrow  ridge,  bounded  on  both  sides  by  tw^
deep  glens,  through  which  flow  streams  that  unite  at  the  western  end  of
the  ridge.     From  these  glens  the  ridge  rises,  now  in  steep  slopes,  no"'*"''
in  sheer  crags.     Of  the  terraces  into  which  it  is  divided  the  most  westerly
supports  the  ruins  of  a  mediaeval  castle,  which  is  built  on  ancient  founds"
tions  of  massive  polygonal  walls.     On  a  higher  and  broader  terrace  t^
the  east  the  rock  has  been  artificially  smoothed,  and  here  there  are  many
remains  of  houses  and  some  ruinous  churches.     In  the  perpendicular^
cliff  on  the  south  side  there  is  a  stalactite  grotto  in  an  inaccessible
position.     The  peasants  have  a  tradition  that  Kokla  was  once  the  scene
of  a  massacre  such  that  the  blood  ran  down  to  the  plain  of  Sakorui^
But  it  may  be  doubted  whether  this  tradition  does  not  refer  to  a  victory
of  Villehardouin  over  the  Greeks  or  to  a  massacre  perpetrated  by  the
Turks  under  Mahommed  II.,  rather  than  to  the  slaughter  which  marked
the  beginning  of  the  first  Messenian  war.


5.  10.  in  the  second  year  of  the  ninth  Olympiad.    743  ac.   Tbi^c


\


CH.  VI  RHIANUS  AND  MYRON  411

first  Messenian  war,  according  to  Pausanias,  lasted  from  743  B.c  to  !/
724  B.C  See  iv.  13.  7.  These  dates  are  accepted  by  Kohlmann,  and
approximately  by  Topffer.  Duncker,  on  the  other  hand,  would  date  the
w^  735-716  B.C.  See  Clinton,  Fcisti  Hellenid^  i.  pp.  162,  168;
Kohlmann,  Q^aestiones  Messemacae^  p.  56  sqq. ;  Gilbert,  Siudien  xur
altspartanischen  Geschichte^  p.  174  5qq,\  Duncker,  Gesch.  des  Alter-
ihums,  5.8  p.  421  sq, ;  Busolt,  Griech.  GeschichU^  i.  p.  589  sq. ;  Hohn,
Griech.  Gesck,  i.  p.  240 ;  J.  TQpffer,  *Die  messenische  Kriege,'  Rhdn-
Uches  Museum^  N.  F.  49  (1894),  p.  225  sqq,     Cp.  note  on  iv.  15.  i.

5.  10.  the  people  only  stript  the  descendants  of  Melanthns,  the
Uedontids,  as  they  were  called,  of  most  of  their  power  etc.  See  i.
3-  3)  ii-  18.  8,  with  the  notes  on  both  passages.  The  conmion  tradition,
apparently  followed  by  Pausanias  in  this  passage,  though  not  in  i.  3.  3,
was  that  at  Athens  the  archonship  for  life,  in  place  of  the  kingship,  was
instituted  after  the  death  of  Codrus  son  of  Melanthus,  and  that  Medon
^n  of  Codrus  and  grandson  of  Melanthus  was  the  first  archon  for  life
(Eusebius,  Chronic,  vol.  i.  p.  185,  ed.  Schone  ;  itL^  vol.  2.  p.  60).  The
<iecennial  archonship,  according  to  the  conmion  tradition,  was  instituted
^752  B.C.  and  Charops  was  the  first  decennial  archon  (Eusebius,  Chronic,
^oi  I.  p.  189,  and  voL  2.  p.  80, ed.  Schone;  QXvaXsya^ Fasti Hellenici^  i.
^  1 56)*  Mr.  Topffer  has  called  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  reputed
^cendants  of  Melanthus,  the  Medontids,  were  not  called  after  him  but
^er  Medon,  his  supposed  grandson.  In  this  fact  Mr.  TSpflfer  sees
"Science  that  Melanthus  and  Codrus  were  interpolated  in  the  genealogy

tHe  Medontids  with  whom  they  had  in  reality  (according  to  him)  no
f^iacxion.     See  Topffer,  Attische  Genealogie^  p.  228  sqq,

6.  I.  Bhianns  of  Bene Myron  of  Ftiene.    These  two  writers,

^H  the  poems  of  Tyrtaeus  (see  15.  6),  seem  to  have  been  the  authorities
'Om  Pausanias  chiefly  followed  in  narrating  the  history  of  the  first  two
^ssenian  wars.  Myron's  date  is  unknown.  He  is  conjecturally  referred
ttie  third  or  second  century  B.C.  Two  extracts  from  the  second  book
^is  Messenian  history  are  quoted  by  Athenaeus  (vi.  p.  271  i^  xiv.  p.
y  c  d).  There  was  a  rhetorician  or  orator  named  Myron,  who  is  sup-
ped to  have  been  the  same  as  the  historian.     Pausanias  himself  (§  4

this  chapter)  signifies  the  untrustworthy  character  of  Myron's  work.
-t  he  would  appear  to  have  followed  Myron's  history  closely,  if  we  may
"^g^e  from  the  rhetorical  style  and  colour  of  his  account  of  the  first  |
^ssenian  war,  a  style  totally  foreign  to  his  usual  dry  jejune  manner.  1
^^  Fragm,  Hist,  Graec,  ed.  Miiller,  4.  p.  460  sq, ;  Busolt,  Griech,  Ge-
^tchie^  I.  P«  579  -f^-;  and  especially  Kohlmann,  Qucustiones Messeniaau^
'  4  sqq.  As  to  Rhianus,  we  learn  from  Suidas  {s.v,  Ttavos)  that  he
'^s  a  Cretan,  his  native  town  Bene  being  in  that  island ;  that  he  was  a
ontemporary  of  Eratosthenes,  had  been  originally  a  slave  and  overseer
^  a  wrestling-school,  but  being  educated  he  became  a  granunarian,  and
''"ote  a  poem  called  Heraclias  in  four  books.  He  seems  to  have  com-
"^sed  also  three  ethnographical  poems  on  Achaia,  Thessaly,  and  Elis.
^e  also  edited  Homer ;  his  name  is  often  mentioned  in  the  scholia  on
bonier.  His  poem  on  Messenia  is  repeatedly  referred  to  by  Stephanus
^yzantius,  from  whom  {s,v,  'Ardpvpov)  we  gather  that  it  was  in  six


413  FIRST  MESSENIAN  WAR  BK.  IV.  mkssekia

books  at  least  It  began  with  the  battle  of  the  Great  Trench  in  the
second  Messenian  war,  and  perhaps  brought  the  history  down  to  the
return  of  the  Messenians  to  Peloponnese  after  the  battle  of  Leuctra.  It
seems  probable  that  Rhianus  collected  the  materials  of  his  poem  od
Messenia  from  the  mouths  of  the  people,  for  some  of  the  narratives  of
the  second  Messenian  war,  especially  those  which  describe  the  adventures
of  Aristomenes,  bear  the  stamp  of  genuine  popular  legends,  like  the
stories  told  of  Wallace  and  Bruce  in  Scotland.  See  Kohlmann,  Q^acs-
Hones  Messeniacae^  p.  ii  sqq,  \  Busolt,  Griech,  GescJi^  i.  p.  581.  On
the  authorities  used  by  Pausanias  in  his  history  of  the  Messenian  wais
see  also  O.  Pfundter,  in  FUckeiseris  Jahrbuchery  15  (1869),  pp.  447-452;
Busolt,  ib,  29  (1883),  p.  814  sqq,\  B.  Niese,  'Die  altere  Geschidite
Messeniens,'  Hermes^  26  (1891),  p.  i  sqq.  In  his  dissertation  A
Study  of  the  Sources  of  the  Messemaca  of  Pausanias  (Baltimore,  1892)
Prof.  Ebeling  has  attempted  to  show  that  Myron's  history  extended  not
only  to  the  end  of  the  first  Messenian  war,  but  even  down  to  370  ac,
and  that  Pausanias  himself  used  it  for  the  whole  of  that  period.  But
there  is  no  reason  for  doubting  Pausanias's  statement  that  Myron's
history  stopped  before  the  end  of  the  first  Messenian  war.

6.  3.  In  view  of  this  "wide  discrepancy  between  my  authorities
etc  Pausanias  argues  that  the  interval  between  the  first  and  second
Messenian  wars  (39  years,  according  to  him,  see  1 5.  i)  was  too  great  to
allow  us  to  suppose  that  Aristomenes  figured  in  both  of  them,  and  that
therefore  we  must  choose  between  the  authority  of  Myron  who  repre-
sents Aristomenes  as  figuring  in  the  first  war,  and  the  authority  of
Rhianus  who  represents  him  as  the  hero  of  the  second.  Pausanias
prefers  to  follow  Rhianus.

7.  5.  When  the  armies  advanced  to  the  encounter.  Prof.  Busolt
thinks  that  the  description  of  the  battle  which  follows  was  copied,  with
verbal  echoes,  from  Thucydides's  account  (v.  66-73)  of  the  battle  of
Mantinea  {Griech,  Gesch,  1.2  p.  580  note  6).  I  do  not  see  this.  That
the  description  of  the  battle  in  Pausanias  is  the  work  of  a  rhetorician
(probably  Myron),  who  drew  upon  his  imagination  for  the  details,  is
probably  true.  But  it  does  not  seem  to  me  that  he  copied  specially
from  the  passage  of  Thucydides  referred  to,  though  the  remark  of
Pausanias  as  to  the  slowness  of  the  Lacedaemonian  pursuit  (8.  11)
certainly  agrees  with  the  statement  of  Thucydides  (v.  73).

8.  2.  impiety  towards  the  gods.  The  Greek  is  O^iav  axr€pCi<iy
a  peculiar  construction.  Compare,  however,  ix.  27.  7  ^cwv  axr^Pii^
and  ix.  5.  4  dcrePri^  Aiovva-ov.

8.  3*  the  Dryopians  of  Asine  etc.    See  ii.  36.  5 ;  iii.  7.  4  ;  iv.  14. 3.

9.  2.  mentioned  by  Homer.     See  //.  ii.  729.

9.  2.  Ithome  is  as  high  as  any  mountain  in  Peloponnese.  A
strangely  inaccurate  estimate  of  the  height  of  the  mountain.  Ithome  is
only  2630  ft.  high ;  whereas  Mt.  Elias  in  the  Taygetus  range,  which  is
in  full  view  from  Ithome,  is  7900  ft.  high.  Mt.  Cyllene  in  Arcadia  is
7790  ft. ;  and  Mt.  Chelmos  (the  ancient  Aroania),  also  in  Arcadia,  is
7725  ft  Moreover  Ithome  is  not  an  imposing  mountain,  and  hardly
looks  its  height.     The  ascent  is  perfectly  easy.


CH.  XIV  FIRST  MESSENIAN  WAR  413

11.  5.  the  MesBenian  light  troops  came  on  etc.  Prof.  Busolt
{Griech.  Gesck!^  i.  p.  580  note  6)  thinks  that  the  following  description
of  the  tactics  of  the  Messenian  light  troops  is  modelled  on  the  account
given  by  Xenophon  {Hellemca^  iv.  5.  11  sqq,)  of  the  defeat  of  the  Spartan
division  by  the  light  troops  of  Iphicrates.

12.  2.  the  Trojan  trick  of  Ulysses.  In  the  Uttle  Iliad  it  was  told
how  Ulysses  made  his  way  into  Troy  in  the  guise  of  a  deserter,  but  was
recognised  by  Helen  {Epicorum  Graecorum  frcLgmenta^  ed.  Kinkel,  p.
37).  The  story  is  alluded  to  by  Homer  {Od,  iv.  249  sqq^  and  Euripides
(Hecuba^  239  sqq, ;  Rhesus^  503  sqq.)

12.  4.  When  the  two  shall  have  started  np  together  etc  The
reference  is  to  the  two  eyes  of  the  blind  soothsayer  Ophioneus  recovering
their  sight  (§10  below).  The  last  line  of  the  oracle  ("Before  destiny
overtake  the  things  which  changed  their  nature  ")  foreshadows  the  relapse
of  the  soothsayer's  eyes  into  their  original  state  of  blindness  (see  iv.  13.
3).  But  the  Greek  text  of  the  oracle  is  uncertain.  See  Critical  Note
on  the  passage  (voL  2.  p.  580).

12.  6.  if  the  child  of  a  priestess  or  priest  died the  priest-
hood should  pass  to  another.  The  reason  for  this  rule  was  perhaps,
as  Schoemann  suggested  {Griech,  Alter,^  2.  p.  430),  that  the  priest  was
supposed  to  be  defiled  by  the  death  of  so  near  a  relation.

13.  I.  signs  and  wonders.  Plutarch  mentions  among  the  portents
which  dismayed  Aristodemus,  that  the  dogs  howled  like  wolves  and
that  a  kind  of  grass  called  agrostis  grew  about  his  hearth  {De  supersHHone^
II).

13.  3.  clothe  them  in  white  raiment.  In  the  island  of  Ceos  it
was  enacted  by  law  that  a  corpse  should  be  buried  in  white  garments,
not  exceeding  three  in  number.  See  the  inscription  in  Mittheil,  d,
arck,  Inst  in  Athen,  i  (1876),  p.  140;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,
Graec,  No.  468;  Roehl,  /.  G,  A,  No.  395;  Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr.
Graec,^  No.  530.  Indeed  it  appears  to  have  been  a  general  Greek
custom  to  bury  the  dead  in  white  raiment,  for  Artemidorus  {Qniricr.  ii.
3)  says  that  for  a  sick  man  to  dream  of  wearing  white  garments  was  an
omen  of  death,  because  the  dead  were  carried  to  the  grave  in  white
garments.  The  custom  of  crowning  the  dead  seems  also  to  have  been
common.     See  K.  F.  Hermann,  Griech,  Privatalterthiimerf  ed.  Bliimner,

P-  363.

13.  7*  the  first  year  of  the  fourteenth  Olympiad  etc.  724  b.c
As  to  the  Medontids  and  the  decennial  archonship  see  notes  on  i.  3.  3,
iv.  5.  10;  cp.  ii.  18.  8  note.  Hippomanes  was  the  fourth  of  the
decennial  archons,  his  three  predecessors  being  Charops,  Aesimides,
and  Clidicus.     See  Eusebius,  Chronic,  ed.  Schone,  voL  i.  p.  189  sq,

14.  2.  dedicated  bronze  tripods  etc.    See  iii.  18.  7  note.

14.  3.  the  district  called  Hyamia.  Strabo  (viii.  p.  361)  says
that  the  Dorian  conqueror  Cresphontes  (as  to  whom  see  above,  ch.  3)
divided  Messenia  into  five  districts,  each  with  its  capital,  namely
Stenyclerus,  Pylus,  Rhium,  Mesola,  and  Hyamitis  (  =  Hyamia).  He
fixed  his  own  residence  at  Stenyclerus  and  sent  four  kings  to  bear  rule
in  the  four  other  towns.     He  also  placed  the  conquered  Messenians  on


414  SECOND  MESSENIAN  WAR         bk.  iv.  usssbku

an  equality  with  the  conquering  Dorians.  This  excited  the  discontent
of  the  Dorians ;  and  Cresphontes  was  therefore  obliged  to  make
Stenyclerus  the  only  city  and  to  collect  all  the  Dorians  into  it  The
situation  of  Hyamia  is  not  known ;  perhaps  it  was  on  the  westen  or
north-western  coast.  Cp.  Leake,  Morea^  i.  p.  457  sqq, ;  Curdusi
Pelap,  2.  pp.  126,  164;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  160  note;  Stephanus
Byz.  s,v,  *Yafi€ia.     As  to  Androcles  see  above,  iv.  5.  6  sq,

14.  4.  at  the  ftmerals  of  the  Spartan  kiiigs women  shooli

come  etc  On  the  funerals  of  the  Spartan  kings  see  Herodotus,  vL
58.  Women  regularly  attended  funerals  in  ancient  Greece.  See
Demosthenes,  Or.  xliii.  p.  1071,  and  the  inscription  referred  to  in  note
on  iv.  13.  3.

14.  7.  A  like  tale  is  told about  Olsrmpias and  abost

Axistodama.  For  the  story  about  Olympias,  the  mother  of  Alexander
the  Great,  see  Plutarch,  Alexander^  2  ;  Lucian,  Alexander^  7 ;  Justin,
xi.  II.  3  ;  xii.  16.  2.     As  to  Aristodama  see  Paus.  ii.  10.  3.

15.  I.  the  Messeniana  revolted  in  the  thirty-eiiplith  year  etc
According  to  Pausanias  the  second  Messenian  war  lasted  from  OL
23.  4  (685  B.a)  to  OL  28.  I  (668  b.c.)  See  23.  4  ;  27.  9  note.
The  chronology  of  the  war  is,  however,  uncertain.  By  modem  scholais
it  has  been  variously  dated  679-662  B.C  (Clinton,  Fasti  HelUnici^  i.  pi
253);  645-631  B.C  (Duncker,  Gesch,  des  Alterthims^  5«®  P«  422  note);
645-628  B.C.  (Kohlmann,  Q^aest,  Messen.  p.  65  ;  Curtius  Griedi.
Gesck,  I.®  p.  657).  See  also  Busolt,  Griech,  Gesck^  i.  p.  590  note;
Holm,  Grieck,  Gesch,  i.  p.  240.  Pausanias  is  not  consistent.  Accord-
ing to  the  dates  which  he  assigns  for  the  beginning  and  end  of  the
war,  it  lasted  17  years.  But  his  narrative  embraces  only  14  years.
See  15.  4;  15.  7;  17.  2;  17.  10;  20.  i.  Cip,  CYmton^  Fasti  Hellcmd^
I.  p.  255  ;  Kohlmann,  Quaest.  Messen.  p.  51.

Prof.  B.  Niese  thinks  that  the  date  of  the  conquest  of  Messcnia
is  determined  by  the  statement  of  Plutarch  (Apophthegtnata^  Epanu  23)
that  Messene  was  built  by  the  Thebans  under  Epaminondas  230  years
after  the  conquest  of  the  country  by  the  Spartans ;  hence,  as  Messene
was  built  in  370  ac,  the  conquest  of  Messenia  would  fall  in  600  B.C.
For  the  determination  of  the  date  of  the  first  Messenian  war  the  only
trustworthy  evidence,  according  to  Prof.  Niese,  is  the  register  of  the
Olympic  victors.     In  that  register  Messenian  victors  occur  in  the  OL
3,  4,  7,  8,  9,   10,   II,  but  then  cease;  from  which  Prof.  Niese  infers
that  the  first  Messenian  war  broke  out  some  time  after  OL  1 1  (736  RC)
Now  we  know  from  Tyrtaeus  (our  only  trustworthy  authority  on  the
subject,  in  Prof.  Niese's  opinion)  that  the  first  Messenian  war  lasted
twenty  years  and  took  place  two  generations  before  the  second  ^^ar.
If  we  reckon  two  generations  at  sixty  years  we  shall  get  eighty  years  as
the  interval  between  the  outbreak  of  the  first  and  second  Messenian
wars.     We  do  not  know  how  long  the  second  war  lasted,  but  frocf*
Tyrtaeus  it  would  seem  that  the  struggle  was  long  and  the  fortune  o\
war  varied.     If  we  suppose  that  it  lasted  thirty  years,  then  (as  it  ende^
in  600  B.C.)  it  would  begin  in  630  B.C.,  and  the  first  war  would  begi^
in  710  B.C     Thus  Prof.  Niese  dates  the  first  Messenian  war  approxi'


CH.  XVII  SECOND  MESSENIAN  WAR  4

mately  710-690  B.C.,  and  the  second  war  630-600  B.C.     See  B.  Niese,
'Die  altere  Geschichte  Messeniens,'  Hermes^  26  (1891),  p.  30  sqq,

15.  6.  Tyrtaens.  Cp.  Kohknann,  QuaesHones  Messemacae,  p^
31  sqq.  In  Prof.  Niese's  opinion,  the  first  writer  who  represented
Tyrtaeus  as  an  Athenian  sent  to  the  aid  of  the  Spartans  in  obedience
to  an  oracle,  was  the  historian  Callisthenes,  a  contemporary  of  Alexander
the  Great  Prof.  Niese  thinks  that  Xenophon  can  have  known  nothing
of  such  a  story,  else  he  would  have  introduced  it  into  his  HeUenUa^  vL
5.  33,  where  the  Lacedaemonian  ambassadors  remind  the  Athenians  of
the  mutual  services  which  Athens  and  Sparta  had  rendered  to  each
other  in  days  of  old.     See  B.  Niese,  in  Hermes^  26  (1891),  p.  26.

15.  7*  With  the  Messeniaiui  were  the  Eleans  and  ArcadiaiiB
etc.  Strabo  (viiL  p.  362)  says  that  the  allies  of  the  Messenians  in  the
second  war  were  the  Argives,  Arcadians,  and  the  people  of  Pisa  (in
Elis) ;  he  does  not  mention  the  EUeans.  Hence  Kohlmann  (Quaest,
Messen,  p.  63  sqq,)  is  of  opinion  that  Pausanias  has  mentioned  the
Eleans  where  he  ought  to  have  spoken  of  the  people  of  Pisa.

15.  7-  the  hereditary  celebrants  of  the  orgies  etc     See  iv.

14-  I.

15.  7.  the  descendants  of  Androcles.      See  iv.  5,  6  sq,\  iv.

14.  3.

15.  8.  exchanged  oaths over  the  pieces  of  a  boar.    See  v.

24.  9  sqq, ;  also  iii.  20.  9  note.

16.  5.  the  Dioscnri  were  sitting  on  the  tree.  Prof  Wide
suggests  that  in  this  story  we  have  a  trace  of  tree-worship  (Lakonische
KulU^  p.  316  j^.)  On  coins  of  Gythium  the  Diosciui  are  represented
standing  with  a  tree  between  them  (Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,
Num.  Camm,  on  Paus,  p.  62).  Pindar  speaks  of  Castor  as  seated  on
an  oak-tree  (Nem,  x.  115).

16.  6.  tke  women  threw  ribbons  and  i^sh  flowers  on  him.  On
this  custom  see  Hermann,  Gottesdiensilicke  AlterthUmer^  §  50.  24;
Stephani  in  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg),  1874,  p.  I33  sqq.\  cp.
vL  20.  19  note.

16.  7.  took  the  shield  to  Lebadea  etc.  See  iv.  32.  5  x^. ;  ix.  39.
14.     As  to  the  device  on  the  shield  (an  eagle)  cp.  18.  5.

16.  9.  maidens dancing  at  Oaryae.     See  iii.  10.  7  note.

17.  I.  burned  through  the  cords  etc.     Polyaenus  (ii.  31.  3)  and
Pliny  (Hist,  Nat,  xi.  185)  relate  that,  while  his  guards  slept,  Aristomenes
rolled  himself  up  to  the  fire  and  thus  succeeded  in  burning  his  bonds  /
and  making  his  escape.

17.  2.  corrupted  by  a  bribe  Aristocrates.  The  treachery  of
Aristocrates  at  the  battle  of  the  Great  Trench  is  mentioned  also  by
Polybius  (iv.  33)  and  Plutarch  {De  sera  numtnis  vindicta^  2).

17.  10.  Mount  Ira.  This  is  now  generally  identified  with  the  hill
of  St,  Atkanasiusy  which  rises  to  the  south  of  the  village  of  Kakaletri^
on  the  upper  waters  of  the  river  Neda.  The  hill  is  a  rocky  spur  of
Mt.  Tetrasi  (4550  feet),  from  which  it  descends  in  a  north-westerly
direction.  It  is  bounded  on  the  north  and  south  by  two  deep  gullies^
which  unite  at  the  western  end  of  the  hilL     The  northern  gully  is  the


)


41 6  IRA  BK.  IV.  MESSSNIA

bed  of  the  Neda.  The  sides  of  the  hill  are  steep,  in  some  places  almost
perpendicular.  Beyond  the  gullies  rise  wild  mountains  on  every  side.
The  summit  of  the  hill,  which  is  of  considerable  extent,  is  surrounded
by  fortification  -  walls,  which  api>ear  to  have  been  hastily  thrown  up,
the  stones  being  unhewn  and  the  masonry  irregular.  Two  or  three
courses  are  still  standing ;  there  were  towers  at  the  comers.  Inside
the  walls  there  are  many  ancient  foundations,  also  of  unhewn  stones
The  highest  point  of  the  hill  is  enclosed  by  cross  walls,  as  if  to  form  an
acropolis.  The  hill  takes  its  modem  name  from  a  ruined  chapel  of  St
Athanasius.  Mt.  Aihanasius  is  connected  to  the  west  with  a  lower
eminence  called  Hagia  Paraskeve i  the  saddle  which  joins  them  is  about
300  paces  long.  On  this  lower  eminence  are  the  remains  of  another
fortified  town,  about  ^\^  or  six  furlongs  in  circumference ;  W.  G.  Clari:
estimated  the  site  at  300  yards  long  by  150  broad.  The  walls  are  of
hewn  stone  and  are  well  preserved ;  there  are  seventeen  or  eighteen
towers.  The  style  of  the  masonry  is  good,  recalling  that  of  Messene.
L.  Ross  conjectured  that  this  may  have  been  a  new  Ira,  built  by  the
Messenians  after  they  had  been  restored  to  their  country  by  Epaminondas.
See  Boblaye,  Reckerches^  p.  wo  sq,\  L.  Ross,  Reisen^  p.  95  sqq.\
Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  152  sq. ;  W.  G.  Clark,  Pelop.  p.  248  sqq, ;  Viscier,
Erinnerungen^  p>  452  sqq. ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  162  sq, ;  Baedeker,'
p.  324 ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  308  sq.  Prof.  Niese  thinks  that  the  Ira
(E2pa)  of  Pausanias  is  the  same  as  the  Ir^  ('Ip^)  of  Homer  {Iliady  ix.
150,  292),  the  position  of  which  was  debated  by  the  ancients  them-
selves :  some,  like  Pausanias,  identified  it  with  a  mountain  on  the  bonier
of  the  territory  of  Megalopolis ;  others  identified  it  with  Mesola  on  die
Messenian  gulf,  near  the  foot  of  Mt.  Taygetus  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  360).
Prof.  Niese  holds  that  the  whole  story  of  the  siege  of  Mt.  Ira  is  a  mere
invention  of  later  writers.     See  Hermes^  26  (1891),  p.  26  sq,

18.  4.  to  be  thrown  into  the  abyss.  The  name  of  this  abyss  was
Ceadas  (Kca8as)  according  to  Pausanias;  Thucydides  (i.  134)  calls  it
Caeadas.  Cp.  Suidas,  s.v,  KataSas.  It  may  have  been  the  profound
and  romantically  beautiful  ravine  in  Mt.  Taygetus,  a  little  to  die  south
of  Mistra  (see  above,  p.  362).  Casting  from  a  height  appears  to  have
been  a  common  mode  of  execution  in  early  ages  ;  it  was  perhaps  adopted
to  save  the  executioners  from  actually  spilling  the  blood  of  their  victims.
Cp.  W.  Robertson  Smith,  Religion  of  the  Semites?  P«  4^7  sqq.  This
mode  of  execution  was  practised  at  Athens,  where  criminals  were  thrown
into  the  barathron  (Herodotus,  vii.  133  ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Pluiuiy
431),  and  at  Rome,  where  they  were  hurled  from  the  Tarpeian  rock.
Near  Olympia  there  was  a  mountain  from  which  women  were  cast  down
who  were  detected  witnessing  the  Olympic  games  (Paus.  v.  6.  7).

18.  6.  he  perceived  a  fox  etc  The  escape  of  Aristomenes  by  the
help  of  the  fox  is  told  also  by  Polyaenus  (ii.  31.  2)  and  Pliny  {Nat.  Hist-
xi.  185).  From  ApoUodorus  (ii.  8.  5)  it  would  seem  that  the  fox  was
the  badge  or  symbol  of  Messenia,  the  serpent  the  badge  of  Lacedaemon,
and  the  toad  the  badge  of  Argos.  In  the  Corpus  Inscript.  Graec.  (voL  i-
No.  58)  there  is  figured  a  shield  with  the  inscription  AvaKcriSaiiO^
AcvKo-iSa/Ao  TO  AvaKa-av8po  to  l^vpiKpaT€o  /Jay 09,  i,e,  "  King  Anaxidamus,


CH.  XXII  SECOND  MESSENIAN  WAR  417

son  of  Zeuxidamus,  son  of  Alexander,  son  of  Eurycrates."  On  the  shield
a  serpent  rampant  between  two  falling  foxes  symbolises  the  conquest  of
Messenia  by  Sparta.  But  the  inscription  is  a  forgery,  according  to
Boeckh.  The  genealogy  of  King  Anaxidamus  which  it  contains  is
different  from  the  one  given  by  Pausanias  (iii.  7.  6  ;  iv.  15.3)-

19.  3.  the  sacrifice  called  Hecatomphonia.  This  Messenian  sacri-
fice is  mentioned  also  by  Polyaenus  (ii.  31.  2)  and  Plutarch  {Romulusy
25  ;  Quaest,  Conviv,  iv.  i.  i),  and  it  seems  to  be  referred  to  in  a
confused  or  corrupt  passage  of  Fulgentius  {Expos,  serm,  antiquor,  s.v,
*Nefrendes  sues'  {Mythographi  Laiini^  ed.  Staveren,  p.  770);  Fragm,
Hist.  Graec,  ed.  Miiller,  4.  p.  501).  Cp.  K.  O.  Miiller,  Die  Dorter^  i.
p.  142  ;  Kohlmann,  Quaest,  Messen,  p.  28  sqq,

20.  4-  The  Messenians  had  a  certain  secret  thing  etc.  As  to
talismans  on  which  the  safety  of  states  was  believed  to  depend  see  note
on  viii.  47.  5.

20.  8.  Apteraean  archers.  Aptera  was  a  town  in  Crete.  See  x.
5.  10  note.

21.  5.  Gyges.  The  story  of  the  ring  of  Gyges  which  rendered  its
wearer  invisible  is  told  in  the  second  part  of  the  Indian  work  Sikandar-
ndmak  by  Nizdmf,  who  must  have  translated  it  from  Plato,  Republic^  ii.
p.  359  c  sqq.  See  Prof.  E.  B.  Cowell,  *  Gyges'  ring  in  Plato  and  i
Nizimf,'  Journal  of  the  Astatic  Society  of  Bengal^  30  (1861),  pp.
151-157.

21.  7*  as  the  lightning  was  on  their  right the  sign  was

auspicious.  So  in  Homer  lightning  seen  on  the  right  is  regarded  as  a
fovourable  omen  granted  by  Zeus  (//.  ii.  353,  ix.  236  sq.) ;  and  Pindar
similarly  interpreted  a  peal  of  thunder  on  the  right  {Pyth,  iv.  40).  But  •
on  the  whole  the  Greeks  appear  to  have  paid  but  little  attention  to
omens  drawn  from  thunder  and  lightning ;  it  was  the  Etruscans  who
developed  an  elaborate  system  of  interpreting  such  omens.  See  Bouch^
Leclerq,  Histoire  de  la  Divination  dans  VAntiquiti^  i.  p.  198  sqq,^  2.  p.
32  sqq.

22.  7.  stoned  Aristocrates  to  death.  Cp.  viii.  5.  12  sq.  For
other  Greek  traditions  of  stoning  as  a  mode  of  execution  see  viii.  23.  7  ;
X.  I.  23  ;  Epitoma  Vaticana  ex  Apollodori  Bibliotheca^  ed.  R.  Wagner,
pp.  62,  65,  71  ;  Dinias,  quoted  by  a  scholiast  on  Euripides,  Orestes^
872.  Those  who  entered  the  sanctuary  of  Lycaean  Zeus  on  Mt.  Lycaeus
without  leave  were  stoned  to  death  by  the  Arcadians  (Plutarch,  Quaest,
Graec,  39).  The  Messenian  prisoners  were  stoned  to  death  on  the  tomb
of  Philopoemen  at  Megalopolis  (Plutarch,  Philopoemeny  21).  According
to  Pausanias  (ix.  7.  2)  Olympias  was  stoned  to  death.  Lais  was  stoned
to  death  by  the  Thessalian  women,  according  to  Plutarch  {AmatoriuSy
xxi.  13),  but  according  to  another  account  she  was  beaten  to  death  by
them  with  *  wooden  tortoises'  (Athenaeus,  xiii.  p.  589  ab;  Schol.  on
Aristophanes,  Plutus,  179).  Plutarch  tells  a  story  of  some  murderers
who  were  stoned  to  death  {Amator,  Narrat,  iv.  9).

22,  7.  set  np  a  tablet  etc.  The  inscription  on  this  tablet  is  recorded
also  by  Polybius  (iv.  33),  who  says  that  the  tablet  was  set  up  beside  the
altar  of  Lycaean  Zeus.

VOL.  Ill  2  E


4i8  THIRD  MESSENIAN  WAR  bk.  iv.  mssskru

23.  4.  the  first  year  of  the  twenty-eU^th  OlympiML   Le,  668  b.c

23.  6.  ATift.-riiaji  sent  to  the  MeiwenlanB,  inviting  them  to  Itdy

etc.  Bentley  showed  that  Pansanias  has  entirely  mistaken  the  date  of
Anaxilas,  tyrant  of  Rhegium,  who  was  a  contemporary  of  Darius  and
Xerxes.  The  capture  of  Zancle  by  Anaxilas,  which  Pausanias  assigns  to
the  29th  Olympiad  (664-661  B.C.),  took  place  soon  after  the  capture  of
Miletus  by  the  Persians  in  494  B.C  The  Messenian  exiles  did  not  go^
as  Pausanias  says,  to  Zande,  but  to  Rhegium.  Anaxilas,  tyrant  of
Rhegium,  was  of  Messenian  descent ;  hence  when  he  captured  Zande
he  called  it  Messene  after  the  land  of  his  forefathers.  See  Herodotus,
vi.  22  sq, ;  Thucydides,  vi.  4  ;  Strabo,  vi.  p.  257  ;  Bentley,  DisseriaUm
on  the  Epistles  of  PAalariSy  p.  190  sqq,y  edited  by  W.  Wagner;  Kohl-
mann,  Q^aest,  Messen,  p.  53  sq. ;  Gardner,  Samos  and  Samian  Coins^
p.  36  sq,

24.  3-  the  Diagorids.     See  vi.  7.  1-7.

24.  5.  the  Messenians revolted in  the  seventy-nintli

Olympiad.  Le.  in  464  b.c  On  this  third  Messenian  war  (464-455  B.C)
see  Thucydides,  i.  1 01- 103.  The  name  of  the  archon  at  Athens  seems
to  have  been  Archidemides  (Clinton,  Fasti  Hellenici,  2.  p.  44).  Id
the  present  passage  the  name  Archimedes  may  be  due  to  a  copyist's
mistake.

24.  7-  the  Athenians  gave  them  Nanpactus.  See  Thucydides,
i.  103.

25.  I.  Bnt  after  they  got  Nanpactns  etc.  The  events  recorded  in
this  chapter  are  known  from  Pausanias  alone.

26.  I.  Messenian  slingers  firom  Nanpactns  etc  Cp.  v.  26.  i.
Thucydides  (iv.  32)  mentions  that  the  Athenians  were  assisted  by
Messenian  troops  at  Sphacteria.

26.  2.  the  Lacedaemonians expelled  the  Messenians  from

Nanpactns  etc.  See  Diodorus,  xiv.  34.  The  Euesperites  were  the
inhabitants  of  Euesperides,  a  town  in  Cyrenaica,  situated  at  the  eastern
extremity  of  the  Greater  Syrtis.  The  Ptolemies  changed  the  name  to
Berenice  (Pliny,  N,  H,  v.  31),  which  has  since  been  corrupted  into
Benghazi.  "  It  has  been  supposed  that  the  famous  gardens  of  the
Hesperides  were  at  this  place;  but  Pacho  has  observed  (p.  173)  that
this  is  unlikely,  as  the  whole  country  about  Benghazi  is  bare  of  trees.
He  places  the  gardens  considerably  further  to  the  east,  near  Cape  Phycus
(the  modem  Ras  Sent)  and  not  far  from  Cyrene  "  (Rawlinson  on  Hero-
dotus, i.  198).  Herodotus  (/.r.)  remarks  on  the  great  fertility  of  the
soil  at  Euesperides,  and  Rawlinson  says,  "  Benghazi  is  still  famous  for  its
cereal  crops,  great  quantities  of  which  are  carried  to  Augila,  and  there
offered  for  sale,  year  after  year  (Homemann,  p.  39)."  See  also  Hero-
dotus, iv.  171  ;  Strabo,  xvii.  pp.  836,  837.

26.  3.  the  priest  of  Hercnles  dreamed  etc.  On  Hercules  as  a  god
of  sleep  and  dreams  see  Stephani  in  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg))
1874,  p.  15  sqq.

26.  3.  dreamed  that  he  lay  with  his  dead  mother.  From  this
dream  and  its  interpretation  McLennan  {Studies  in  Ancient  History
(London,  1886),  p.  237  sq,)  inferred  that  the  Messenians  must  ha^'^


:h.  XXVII  FOUNDATION  OF  MESSENE  419

ailed  their  country  not  their  fatherland  (Trarpis)  but  their  motherland
fjLTirpis),  as  the  Cretans  did  (Plutarch,  An  sent  sit  gercnda  respublica^
7  ;  cp.  Aelian,  Nat  An.  xvii.  35 ;  Plato,  Repub,  ix.  p.  575  d).  McLennan
Irew  the  further  inference  that  the  Messenians  must  have  had  female
:inship,  i,e,  must  have  traced  kinship  through  the  mother  rather  than
he  father,  as  the  Lycians  did,  and  many  primitive  peoples  all  over  the
irorld  have  done.  Cp.  Bachofen,  De^  Mutterrecht^  p.  28  sq.\  and  for
upposed  traces  of  female  kinship  in  the  legendary  history  of  Messenia
ee  id,  p.  300  sqq.

26.  7.  a  yew-tree.  The  Greek  word  is  smilax^  which  in  the  form
milakia  or  smilad  is  still  the  modem  Greek  word  for  the  yew.  The  tree
5  now  rare  in  Greece,  being  hardly  found  except  as  a  bush  on  the  highest
nountains,  such  as  Parnassus,  Pamon,  Cyllene,  and  Aroania  {Chelmos).
n  Euboea,  however,  it  is  said  to  attain  a  height  of  30  or  40  feet,  with  a
hickness  of  i  to  2  feet.  See  Fiedler,  Reise^  i.  p.  516 ;  Neumann  und
^artsch,  PhysikcUische  Geographie  von  Griechenland^  p.  370 ;  Legrande,
^iciioftnatre  Grec  Modeme  Franqcdse,  However  the  equivalent  of
milax  is  somewhat  uncertain ;  for  according  to  Theophrastus  {Hist,
"^lant,  iii.  16.  2)  smilax  was  the  name  of  a  tree  resembling  the  ever-
7-ecn  or  holly-oak,  except  that  the  leaves  of  the  smilax  had  no  prickles,
jid  were  softer  and  of  more  varied  shapes.  Theophrastus's  name  for
lie  yew  is  milos  (Hist,  Plant,  iii.  10.  2).

26.  8.  Caucon.     See  iv.  i.  5  note.

27.  I.  it  originated  in  the  following  way.  The  story  which
dIIows  is  told  of  Aristomenes  and  a  friend  by  Polyaenus  (ii.  31.  4),  who
epresents  the  festival  as  being  celebrated,  not  in  the  camp,  but  just
utside  the  walls  of  Sparta.

27.  5.  he  prepared  to  found  the  city.  Messene  was  founded  by
^paminondas  in  369  B.C.  See  Diodorus,  xv.  66,  who  says  (xv.  67)  that
/lessene  was  built  in  eighty-five  days.  This  is  hardly  credible,  consider-
ig  the  extent,  solidity,  and  splendid  masonry  of  the  walls.

27.  6.  sacrificed  to  Dionysns  and  Ismenian  Apollo.  On  the
elation  of  Apollo  to  Dionysus  see  E.  Gerhard,  *Bacchischer  Apoll,'
irchdologische  Zeitung^  1865,  pp.  97-110;  Stephani,  in  Compte  Rendu
St-  Petersburg),  1861,  p.  53  sqq,

27.  7.  the  melodies  of  Sacadas  and  Pronomns.  As  to  Sacadas
se  ii.  22.  8  sq.^  and  Index.     As  to  Pronomus  see  ix.  12.  5  j^.

27.  9.  two  hundred  and  ninety-seven  years  after  the  capture  of
ra  etc.  According  to  Pausanias,  Ira  was  taken  Ol.  28.  i  (668  B.C.)
see  23.  4.),  and  the  Messenians  were  restored  Ol.  102.  3  (370  B.C.)
'he  interval,  excluding  both  extremes,  is  297  years.  See  Critical  Note
n  the  passage,  vol.  i.p.  581.  In§ii  of  this  chapter  Pausanias  speaks
f  the  exile  of  the  Messenians  in  round  numbers  as  having  lasted  300
ears.  According  to  Isocrates  {Archidamus^  27)  400  years  elapsed
etween  the  conquest  of  Messenia  by  the  Spartans  and  the  foundation
f  Messene  by  Epaminondas.  According  to  Lycurgus  {In  Leocrat,  62)
le  interval  was  500  years.  According  to  Plutarch  {Reg,  et  imper.
ipophtkegmata^  Epamin.  23)  the  interval  was  only  230  years.  This
Lst  number  is  accepted  by  Prof.  Niese,  who  accordingly  places  the  con-


1


420  HISTORY  OF  MESSENIA  bk.  iv.  MBSsnu

quest  of  Messenia  by  the  Spartans  in  or  about  600  B.C.     See  Herma^
26  (189 1 ),  p.  30  ^^9* ;  ^^^  above,  note  on  iv.  15.  i.

27.  9.  the  Plateans  were  exiled  etc  For  the  exile  of  the  Plataeav
see  ix.  i  ;  for  the  exile  of  the  Delians  see  Thucydides,  v.  i,  viiL  108;
and  for  the  exile  of  the  Minyans  see  Paus.  ix.  15.  3  and  Diodora^

XV.  79.

27.  9.  AdramTttium.  The  name  is  Semitic.  See  Obbausen  ii
Monatsberichte  of  the  Prussian  Academy  (Berlin),  1879,  p.  571  m^*

27.  10.  The  Minyans  of  Orchomenns,  a^^idn,  were  baniahad  etc
Cp.  ix.  37.  8.

28.  I.  the  Phocian  or  Sacred  War.     See  iii.  10.  3  sq.
28.  3.  as  I  showed  in  my  description  of  Attica.     See  i.  25.  4-
28.  4.  the  Eleans  were  the  most  law-abiding  peoide  in  PBlO'

/  ponnese.  Polybius  (iv.  73  sqq^  draws  a  pleasing  picture  of  the  peacefid,
prosperous,  and  happy  life  of  die  Eleans.  They  were  so  much  attached
to  a  country  life  that  many  well-to-do  fomilies  remained  on  their  estates
or  farms  for  two  or  three  generations  together  without  ever  going  to  the
sea-coast  He  attributes  the  rural  prosperity  of  Elis  to  the  fact  that  it
had  for  ages  been  exempt  from  the  ravages  of  war,  the  land  being  hdd
!  sacred  and  inviolable  on  account  of  the  Olympic  festival.  Annies
!  marching  through  it  gave  up  their  arms  when  they  entered  the  land,
and  received  them  back  when  they  quitted  it.  See  Strabo,  viii.  p.  3S^
28.  5.  with  Laconian  scntcheons  on  their  shields.  The  Lace-
daemonians bore  a  A  (L)  on  their  shields,  that  being  the  first  letter  d
their  name.  For  a  like  reason  the  Messenians  painted  an  M  on  their
shields.  See  Photius,  Lexicon^  s,v,  AdfipSa ;  Eustathius,  on  Homer,  pi
293.  39  sgg.  The  Sicyonians  bore  on  their  shields  the  letter  2(S);
see  Xenophon,  Hellenica^  iv.  4.  10.  The  Mantineans  painted  Poseidon's
trident  on  their  shields,  because  Poseidon  was  one  of  their  great  deities ;
see  schol.  on  Pindar,  Olyntp,  xi.  (x.)  83.  The  shields  depicted  on
Greek  vases  display  a  great  variety  of  blazons,  including  animals  and
birds.  It  might  be  worth  while  making  a  collection  of  these  blazons.
In  the  Seven  against  Thebes  (v.  374  sqq,)  Aeschylus  describes  the
scutcheons  on  the  shields  of  the  champions.  Cp.  Paus.  v.  25.  9,  where
the  blazon  of  a  cock  on  the  shield  of  Idomeneus  is  said  to  have  been
adopted  to  signify  his  descent  from  the  Sun.  On  the  subject  of  ancient
heraldry  see  E.  Curtius,  [/eder  Wappengebrauch  und  WappensHl  im
griechischen  Alterthum  (Berlin,  1874)  (reprinted  in  the  writer's  Gesam-
melte  Abhandlungen^  2.  pp.  77-II5)-

28.  7.  Homer  represents  Patroclns  etc.     See  Iliad^  xvi.  278  sqq.
28.  7.  he  makes  the  Greeks  send  two  scouts  etc.     See  Iliad^  x.
222  sqq,

28.  8.  he  represents  the  Trojans  who  were  too  young  etc    See

Iliady  viii.  5 1 7  sqq,

29.  I.  In  the  section  on  Sicyon  I  have  already  mentioned  etc

See  ii.  9.  4  sq.

29.  2.  the  wall  between  the  city  and  the  summit  of

Ithome.     This  is  probably  the  portion  of  the  city -wall   of  Messene
which  may  still  be  seen,  with  a  gate,  on  the  saddle  between  Mt.  Ithome


CH.  XXX  ABIA — PHARAE  421

and  Mt  Eva,  above  the  monastery  of  Vourkano,  It  would  be  at  this
point  that  Demetrius,  coming  from  the  east,  would  naturally  approach
Messene.

29.  7-  Cneomenes captured Megalopolis.    See  viii.  27.

1 5  sq,  with  the  note ;  also  viii.  49.  4.

29.  9.  tlie  Achaean  army conqnered  Sparta.     See  ii.  9.  2.

29.  10.  Machanidas.    See  viii  50.  2.

29.  10.  He  seized  Messene.     Cp.  viii.  50.  5.

29.  II.  the  Arcadian  army  under  Lycortas  etc  With  what
follows  compare  viii.  51.  5-8.

30.  I.  Abia.  This  is  the  modem  Palaea  Mantinea  {Mandtnia)
or  Old  Mantinea  (also  called  Palaeo-chora\  situated  on  the  coast  about
seven  miles  south  of  the  modem  Kalamata,  The  site  has  been  identified
by  inscriptions  found  here  or  in  the  neighbourhood  (C.  /.  G,  Nos.  1 307,
1457,  1463).  "Here  is  nothing  but  a  church  with  some  remains  of
Hellenic  buildings  on  the  side  of  a  hill,  in  which  there  is  an  opening
leading  through  the  cliffs  to  the  shore"  (Leake).  Boblaye  speaks  of
traces  of  polygonal  masonry,  and  of  great  walls  under  the  sea.  A  mile
to  the  east  of  Old  Mantinea  are  the  two  villages  of  Great  and  Little
Mantinea  {Mandinia),  How  the  name  Mantinea  came  to  be  attached  to
these  sites  is  not  known.  The  distance  of  70  Greek  furlongs  between
Abia  and  Pharae  (§2)  agrees  fairly  with  the  seven  miles  between  Palaea
MantiTtea  and  Kalamata  (Pharae).

See  GtVii  Journey  in  the  Morea,  p.  259  ;  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  104 ;  Leake,
Morea^  I.  pp.  324  sq.^  331  sq.  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  pp.  159  sq.,  193  sq,  ;  Bursian,
Geogr.  2.  p.  170  j^.  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  358;  Guide-Joanne,  2.  p.  265.

30.  I.  They  say  that  of  old  it  was  called  Ire  etc  See  Homer,
//.  ix.  148  sq,

30.  I .  the  Ohoerius  glen.  This  is  the  deep  gully  of  the  Sandava
river ;  the  water  dries  up  in  summer ;  in  the  rainy  season  it  is  a  torrent.
The  distance  of  this  gully  from  Palaea  Mantinea  (Abia)  is  roughly  20
Greek  furlongs,  as  stated  by  Pausanias.  See  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.
104;  Leake,  Morea^  i.  p.  332;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  160;  Bursian,
Geogr,  2,  p.  154.     Cp.  iv.  i.  i.

30.  I.  Glenns,  son  of  Hercules.  This  Glenus  is  mentioned  by
Apollodorus  (ii.  7.  8),  a  scholiast  on  Sophocles  {Trachiniae^  54)  and
Pherecydes  (referred  to  by  a  scholiast  on  Pindar,  Isthmians^  iv.  104).
Diodorus  (iv.  37)  calls  him  Gleneus.

30.  2.  there  is  a  salt  spring  by  the  way.  Half  an  hour  to  the
north  of  Palaea  Mantinea  (Abia)  a  stream  strongly  impregnated  with
salt  gushes  copiously  out  of  a  cavern  at  the  back  of  a  mill,  and  after
turning  the  mill  flows  in  a  large  body  into  the  sea.  The  place  is  called
Armyro  from  this  salt  river,  which  is  doubtless  the  salt  spring
mentioned  by  Pausanias.  See  Morritt,  in  Walpole's  Memoirs  relating
to  Turkey^  1.2  p.  39;  Leake,  Morea^  i.  p.  325  ;  Qf^y  Journey  in  the
Morea^  p.  256  ;  Boblaye,  Recherches,  p.  104  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  159  ;
Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  171.

30.  2.  Pharae.     Pharae,  otherwise  called  Pherae  or  Phere,  prob-


422  PHARAE  BK.  IV.  MBSSEKU

ably  occupied  the  site  of  the  modem  KalamaU^  an  industrial  town  d
10,700  inhabitants,  situated  on  the  left  bank  of  the  broad  stony  bed  of
the  Nedon,  a  mile  from  the  sea.     According  to  Strabo  (viii.  4.  S*  F^
361)  Pharae  was  5  furlongs  from  the  sea;  according  to  Pausanias (31.
I )  it  was  6.     The  greater  distance  of  Kalamata  from  the  sea  may  be
explained  by  the  earth  deposited  at  the  mouth  of  the  wide  and  rapid
torrent  in  the  course  of  ages.     Telemachus,  in  search  of  his  fotho,
lodged  for  the  night  at   Pharae  (Pherae)  on  his  way  fix>ni  Pylas  to
Sparta,  and  again  on  his  return  ;  and  from  Homer  we  gather  that  Phaiae
was  midway  between  Pylus  and  Sparta,  being   distant  a  whole  day's
journey  from  each  {Od.  iii.  483  sqq,^  xv.  182  sqq,")     This  agrees  exactly
with  the  position  of  Kalamata  relatively  to  Old  Navarino  (Pylus)  and
f    Sparta.     It  is  a  long  day's  ride  from  Sparta  to  Kcdamaia^  by  the
I     magnificent  Langada  pass  over  Mt.  Taygetus ;  and  it  is  a  10  hoars'
ride  (exclusive  of  stops)  from  Kalamata  to  Navarino,    Again,  Kahmak
is  identified  as  Pharae  by  its  distance  from  Abia.     See  note  on  3a  i
'  Abia.'     Pausanias  does  not  mention  the  name  of  the  river  on  whid
Pharae  stood,  but  from  Strabo  (viii.  p.  360)  we  learn  that  it  was  the
■   Nedon.      It  is   a  torrent  which   issues  from   a   rocky  gorge   in  Mt
i  Taygetus,  about  a  mile  to  the  north-east  of  a  steep  bill  which  rises  at
the  back  of  the  town.     This  hill  is  crowned  with  a  mediaeval  castle,
built  or  occupied  successively  by  Franks,  Venetians,  and  Turks.    The
presence  of  ancient  hewn  stones  in  the  walls,  as  well  as  the  whole
arrangement  of  the  fortress,  seem  to  show  that  a  castle  stood  here  io
antiquity  also.     There  are  no  other  relics  of  antiquity  in  Kalamata.^
The  town,  with  its  narrow  winding  streets  and  lively  bazaar,  lies~Tn  the
great  Messenian  plain,  near  its  south-eastern  extremity.     This  plain,  open
to  the  south  and  sheltered  from  the  north  by  mountains,  is  the  warmest
part  of  Greece.     Groves  of  oranges,  lemons,  fig-trees,  olives,  and  vine-
yards, succeed  each  other,  all  fenced  by  gigantic  hedges  of  prickly  and
fantastically  shaped  cactuses  and  the  sword-like  aloes,  which,  with  the
hot  air,  remind  a  traveller  from  northern  Europe  that  he  is  in  a  sub-
tropical climate.

See  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  104  sq.  ;  Leake,  Morea,  I.  p.  342  sqg.  ;  Ross,
Wandemngeny  i.  p.  208  sqq.  \  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  pp.  158  sq,,  193;  Welcker,
Tagebuch,  i.  p.  231  sq, ;  W.  G.  Clark,  Pelop,  p.  200  sqq,  ;  Vischer,  Erinrurungen^
p.  427  sq.  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  170 ;  Baedeker,'  p.  355  sq.  ;  Philippson,
Pcloponms,  p.  204 ;  Guide-Joanne ,  2.  p.  270  sq.  In  a  passage  of  the  Iliad  (v.
543)  the  town  is  called  Phere ;  elsewhere  {Od.  iii.  487,  xv.  186 ;  //.  ix.  151)
Homer  calls  it  Pherae,  and  so  does  Strabo  (viii.  p.  360),  who  mentions  that  there
was  a  well-known  sanctuary  of  Nedusian  Athena  {i.e.  Athena  of  the  Nedon)  at  the
town.

Mr.  E.  Pemice  has  recently  proposed  to  place  Pharae,  not  at
Kalamata,  but  at  the  village  oi  Janitza,  situated  three  miles  east  of
Kalamata.  Here  a  narrow  ridge  extends  in  a  direction  from  north-east
to  south-west,  its  sides  falling  away  into  a  glen  on  either  side.  The  glen
on  the  south  side  (that  of  the  Stachteas  stream)  is  deep  and  its  sides
are  nearly  perpendicular.  The  streams  which  flow  down  these  glens
meet  in  the  plain  to  the  westward.    On  a  steep  hill  which  rises  abruptly


CH.  XXX  PHARAE  423

from  the  ridge  are  the  ancient  remains  which  Mr.  Pemice  takes  to  be
those  of  Pharae,  Half-way  up  its  side  may  be  traced  at  intervals  the
ruins  of  a  strong  wall,  which  seems  to  have  encircled  the  hill.  The
best  preserved  piece  of  the  wall  (about  80  feet  long  and  rising  to  1 8
feet  in  height,  with  some  blocks  6  feet  long)  is  on  the  north  side  of  the
hilL  On  the  summit,  which  commands  a  fine  view  over  the  Messenian
plain,  are  considerable  remains  of  an  ancient  building,  as  well  as  two
ruined  chapels.  Mr.  Pemice  thinks  that  we  have  here  the  ruins  of  a
fortress  of  the  Mycenaean  period,  which  in  respect  of  situation  he  com-
pares to  Mycenae  itself  He  supposes  that  the  lower  city  may  have
stood  where  the  village  ofjamtza  now  stands,  at  the  eastern  foot  of  the
bill,  where  the  slope  is  gentler,  and  the  ridge  is  connected  with  the
mountains.  But  the  place  would  seem  to  have  been  too  small  to  be  of
much  importance.  The  level  summit  of  the  hill  measures  only  about
160  yards  by  90,  and  therefore  cannot  compare  in  size  with  the
immense  acropolis  of  Mycenae.

If,  leaving  Janitza^  we  go  eastward  and  make  a  circuit  round  the
SovcUaka  glen  which  bounds  the  ridge  oijanitza  on  the  north,  we  come
to  a  chapel  of  St.  Basil  {Hagios  Vasilios)  on  th&  opposite  side  of  the
glen.  The  chapel  is  constructed  in  part  of  ancient  materials,  and  into
the  modem  terrace  walls  immediately  below  it  are  built  two  ancient  in-
scriptions. Just  above  the  chapel  a  fine  perennial  spring  issues  from  a
small  grotto.  So  strong  is  its  flow  that  it  turns  a  mill  and  converts  the
whole  valley  from  this  point  onwards  into  one  vast  orchard  and  flower-
garden.  This  spring,  Mr.  Pemice  thinks,  may  be  the  one  which
Pausanias  mentions  as  being  a  little  way  from  Pharae  (iv.  31.  i),  and  in
this  smiling  valley  may  have  bloomed  the  grove  of  Camean  Apollo
(i-A)

To  the  south-east  of  Janitza^  separated  from  it  by  some  hills,  is  the
great  broad  gully  of  St  George^  which  leads  eastward  into  a  fertile  plain
surrounded  by  mountains.  In  the  gully,  shortly  before  it  opens  into
the  plain,  some  traces  of  an  ancient  road  may  be  observed  a  little  below
the  modem  road.  Ancient  mts  for  chariot-wheels,  cut  artificially  in  the
rock,  are  to  be  seen  for  a  distance  of  about  50  yards.  Beyond  the
plain  the  ruts  reappear  on  a  rocky  tableland  now  called  TiklL  Mr.
Pemice  believes  that  these  are  the  vestiges  of  an  ancient  road  which
led  from  Messenia  over  Mount  Taygetus  to  Sparta,  and  he  thinks  that
this  was  the  road  by  which  Homer  makes  Telemachus  drive  from  Pylus,
by  way  of  Pharae,  to  Sparta.  See  E.  Pemice,  in  Berliner  philolog,
Wockenschrift^  1 3  (1893),  p.  1373  J^. ;  /</.,  in  MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,
in  A  then,  19  (1894),  pp.  355-36?.

To  this  identification  of  the  mins  at  Janitza  as  those  of  Pharae  it
must  be  objected  that  the  ruins  in  question  are  about  3  miles  from  the
sea,  whereas  Pharae,  according  to  Pausanias  (iv.  31.  i),  was  distant  only
6  fUrlongs  from  it  The  difference  seems  too  gpreat  to  be  explained,
as  Mr.  Pemice  suggests,  by  supposing  that  most  of  the  land  between
Janitza  and  the  sea  has  been  formed  by  alluvial  deposits  since  the  time
of  Pausanias.  Mr.  R.  Weil  would  identify  the  ruins  at  Janitza  as  those
of  the  ancient  Calamae.     See  note  on  iv.  31.  3.


11


424  THURIA  BK.  nr.  mbssssiu


f


30.  2.  The  Emperor  Augustus  separated  Fliazae  from

etc.     See  iv.  i.  i  note;  iv.  31.  i  note.

30.  2.  traced  ftirther  down  by  Homer.    See  lUad^  v.  542  jff.

30.  4*  Homer  was  tlie  first,  so  £ur  as  I  know,  to  meBtki
Fortune.  See  the  Homeric  Hymn  to  Denuter^  v.  417  sqq.  The  void
rvx^  (fortune,  chance)  occurs  also,  as  a  common  noun,  in  the  short
Homeric  Hymn  to  Athena  (v.  5).  Macrobius  (So/,  v.  16.  8)  obsencs
that  the  word  rvxrj  does  not  occur  in  Homer,  i>.  in  the  Iliad  and
Odyssey.  The  same  observation  is  made  by  Joannes  Lydos  {Dt
mensibuSy  iiL  18).

30.  5.  he  represents  Athena  and  Enyo  as  paraaunnit  in  wb.
See  Iliady  v.  332  sq.

30.  5.  Artemis  as  dreaded  by  women  in  childbed.  See  JBai^
xxi.  483  sq.

30.  5.  Aphrodite  as  busied  with  marriages.    See  IHeuly  v.  429.

30.  6.  Bupalus.  Bupalus  and  his  brother  Athenis  were  natives  of
Chios  and  contemporaries  of  the  poet  Hipponax,  who  flourished  OL  60
(540-537  B-C.)  They  are  said  to  have  caricatured  the  poet,  who
retaliated  by  satirising  them  so  stingingly  that  they  hung  themselvts.
See  Pliny,  N.  H.  xxxvi.  1 1  ;  Suidas,  s.v.  *Iinrwvaf ;  Horace,  Epad  vi
14.  Cp.  ix.  35.  6;  Overbeck,  Schriftquellen^  g  314-319;  C.  Robot,
Archdologische  Mdrchen^  pp.  11 5-120;  Loewy,  Insckriften  griedu
BildhaueVy  No.  497.

30.  6.  an  image  of  Fortune  for  the  Smymaaans.  This  was  prob-
ably an  image,  not  of  the  goddess  Fortune  in  general,  but  of  tbe
special  Fortune  of  Smyrna.  In  late  Greek  art  Fortune  is  often  repT^
sented  as  the  embodiment  or  personification  of  particular  cities.  The
image  here  referred  to  is  the  earliest  knou-n  example  of  a  specialised
Fortune  of  this  sort  On  representations  of  the  Fortune  of  cities  sec
Prof.  P.  Gardner,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  9  (1888),  pp.  73-81 ;
cp.  note  on  \'i.  2.  7.

30.  6.  to  represent  her  with  a  firmament  (polos)  on  her  head

etc.     Cp.  K.  O.  Miiller,  Archdologie  der  Kunsty  §  398.  2  ;  Baumeister's
Denkmdler,  p.  1920  ^^.

30.  6.  tiie  horn  of  Amalthea.  It  was  said  to  be  a  bull's  horn
which  could  produce  as  much  food  and  drink  as  its  owner  might  desire
(Apollodorus,  ii.  7.  5).  We  may  compare  the  magic  quern  which
ground  meat  and  drink  in  the  Norse  tale  "Why  the  sea  is  salt"
(Dasenfs  Popular  Tales  from  the  Norse,  p.  10  sqq.)',  and  the  magic
table  which,  at  its  owner's  command,  covered  itself  with  meat  and  i*nne
in  the  German  fair}'  tale  (Grimm,  Kinder-  und  Hausmarchen,  No.
36).  Cp.  Sir  George  W.  Cox,  Mythology  of  the  Aryan  Nations ,  p.  356
sqq.  (ed.  1882).

30.  6.  Pindar called  her  Pherepolis.      This  is  mentioned

also  by  Plutarch  {Defortuna  Romanorum,  10).

31.  I.  Thuria.     The  remains  of  the  older  Thuria  (see  §  2  of  this
chapter)  are  situated  about  6  miles  north-west  of  Kalamata  (Pharae).  fj
They  occupy  a  rocky  plateau  above  the  village  of  Veis  Ago,     At  the
northern  extremit}-  of  the  ancient  site  is  the  hamlet  of  Palaeokastro,


CH.  XXXI  THURJA  425

The  plateau  runs  from  south-west  to  north-east  for  a  distance  of  1000
paces.  It  forms  one  of  the  western  spurs  of  Taygetus,  from  the  higher
terraces  of  which  it  is  separated  by  a  deep  ravine  and  torrent  The
situation  is  fine ;  the  view  embraces  the  Messenian  plain  with  Mt  Ithome
rising  on  the  further  (western)  side  of  it,  and  the  broad  Messenian  gulf
stretching  away  to  the  south.  The  walls  may  be  traced  nearly  all  round
the  edge  of  the  plateau.  The  style  of  masonry  is  on  the  whole  regular.
Towards  the  south-western  end  of  the  plateau  is  a  large  cistern  10  or  12
feet  deep,  hewn  out  of  the  rock  at  one  end,  and  on  the  other  sides  con-
structed with  the  same  regular  masonry  as  the  other  remains.  The  cistern
is  85  feet  long  by  50  feet  broad;  and  is  divided  into  three  parts  by
cross-walls.  East  of  it,  on  the  highest  part  of  the  plateau,  are  numerous
foundation-walls,  including  the  scanty  remains  of  a  theatre,  which  faced
towards  the  plain.  South-east  of  the  theatre  are  the  ruins  of  a  small
Doric  temple.  Towards  the  north  end  of  the  plateau  are  the  foundations
of  a  larger  Doric  temple,  which  seems  to  have  been  peripteral  and  hexa-
style.  The  intercolumniation  is  4  ft. ;  the  diameter  of  the  columns  4  ft
4  inches.

A  narrow  and  winding  path  leads  from  the  plateau  to  the  plain
below.  Here  the  extensive  and  well  preserved  remains  of  a  Roman
building,  standing  in  the  midst  of  fig  and  mulberry  groves,  mark
the  site  of  the  later  Thuria.  The  building  seems  to  have  been  a
Roman  villa.  There  are  three  rows  of  halls  and  chambers  extending
side  by  side ;  some  of  the  rooms  have  an  apse  or  semicircular  end.
The  walls  are  17  ft.  high,  formed  of  equal  courses  of  Roman  tiles  and
mortar.  Parts  of  the  roofs  remain  and  consist  of  rubble  mixed  with
cement.  The  ruins  are  called  Palea  Lutra,  The  neighbouring  stream,
an  eastern  tributary  of  the  Pamisus,  is  the  ancient  Aris.  It  is  now
called  the  Pidima^  and  issues  from  some  copious  sources  at  a  small  village
of  the  same  name  half  an  hour  away  at  the  foot  of  the  hills.  Its  water
is  remarkably  clear.

See  Morritt,  in  Walpole's  Memoirs  relating  to  Turkey^  I.*  p.  38  sq, ;  Boblaye,
Reckerches,  p.  105  ;  Leake,  Morea^  I.  p.  354  sqq, ;  Curtius,  AA^.  2.  p.  161  sq, ;
Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  p.  424  sqq,  ;  Welcker,  Tagebucht  I.  p.  22'jsqq.  ;  Bursian,
Geogr,  2.  p.  168  sq. ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  271  sq,  A  plan  of  upper  Thuria  is
given  by  Le  Bas,  Voyage  archiologi^iu,  '  Itin^raire,'  pi.  29;  ana  after  him  bv
Curtius,  op.  cit.  2.  Taf.  vil  Two  views  of  Thuria  are  given  by  Le  Bas,  *  Itine-
raire,'  pL  27,  28.

31.  I.  the  town  named  Anthea  in  Homer.     See  Iliads  ix.  293.
31.  I.  Angastns  gave  Thnria  to  the  Lacedaemonians  of  Siiarta.

In  the  reign  of  Tiberius,  25  A.D.,  Messenian  envoys  appeared  before  the
Roman  Senate  and  laid  claim  to  what  was  called  the  Denthelian  district
(ager  Dentheliates\  which  had  been  taken  away  from  Messenia  by  Julius
Caesar  and  Mark  Antony  and  assigned  by  them  to  Lacedaemon.  The
district  included  Limnae  with  the  sanctuary  of  Artemis  of  the  Lake,  as
to  which  see  §  3.  The  claim  was  disputed  by  the  Lacedaemonian
envoys,  who  maintained  that  the  district  had  belonged  of  old  to  their
ancestors,  that  it  had  been  unjustly  wrested  from  them  by  Philip  of
Macedon,  and  rightfully  restored  to  them  by  Caesar  and  Antony.    After


426  THURIA  BK.  nr.  ifSSSB^fU

hearing  both  sides  Tiberius  and  the  Senate  decided  that  the  district  ia
question  properiy  belonged  to  the  Messenians,  to  whom  it  was  accoid-
ingly  transferred  See  Tacitus,  Annals^  iv.  43.  Since  the  Denthelian
district  included  the  sanctuary  of  Artemis  of  the  Lake,  it  lay  to  the  east
of  Thuria  (see  note  on  §  3).  It  took  its  name  from  a  town  Denthalii  or
Delthanii  (Stephanus  Byz.,  s,v,  AcA^aviot).  In  the  present  passa^
Pausanias  tells  us  that  Augustus  transferred  Thuria  from  Messeniato
Sparta.  Mr.  Kalkmann  {Pausanias  der  Perieget^  p.  164  sq,)  assumes
that  the  decision  of  Augustus  was  reversed  by  the  award  of  Tiberios,
and  that  therefore  in  Pausanias's  time  Thuria  belonged  to  Messenia.
But  as  Pausanias  makes  no  mention  of  Tiberius's  award  and  evidently
regarded  Thuria  as  still  belonging  to  Lacedaemon,  Mr.  Kalkmann
argues  that  Pausanias  was  ignorant  of  the  actual  state  of  mattos
existing  in  the  district  in  his  day,  and  that  consequently  he  could  not
have  visited  the  places  which  he  is  now  describing.  But  all  this  rests
upon  the  assumption  that  along  with  the  Denthelian  district  Tiberius
also  transferred  the  district  of  Thuria  to  Messenia.  There  is  nothing
whatever  to  show  that  he  did  so.  If  the  important  district  of  Thuria
had  also  been  transferred  to  Messenia,  Tacitus,  who  records  the  trans-
ference of  the  obscure  Denthelian  district,  would  certainly  have  men-
tioned it  It  is  very  unlikely  that  the  Denthelian  district  included
Thuria;  if  it  had  done  so,  the  district  would  almost  certainly  have
taken  its  name  from  Thuria,  the  chief  place  in  the  district,  wbidi
actually  gave  its  name  to  the  distant  Messenian  gulf,  rather  than  from
an  obscure  town  Denthelii,  of  which  nothing  is  known  but  the  name.
We  must  therefore  regard  the  Thurian  and  Denthelian  districts  as  quite
distinct  (as  Mr.  Kalkmann  seems  himself  to  hold,  for  he  speaks  of  Dtr
von  den  Stddten  Thuria  und  Pharai  begrenzte  ager  Dentheliates)  ;  and
as  soon  as  we  recognise  this,  the  fancied  opposition  between  the
decisions  of  Augustus  and  Tiberius  disappears.  Augustus  transferred
Thuria  to  Laconia ;  and  it  continued  to  belong  to  Laconia  in  Pausa-
nias's  time.  Tiberius  transferred  the  Denthelian  district  to  Messenia;
and  it  continued  to  belong  to  Messenia  in  Pausanias's  time,  for  since
he  treats  of  Limnae  (§  3)  under  Messenia  without  saying  that  it  belonged
to  Laconia,  we  must  of  course  assume  that  it  belonged  to  Messenia.
Mr.  R.  Weil  has  shown  from  the  evidence  of  coins  of  Septimius  Severus
that  Thuria  belonged  to  Lacedaemon  in  the  reign  of  that  emperor
{MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  7  (1882),  p.  217  sq.^  He,  like  Mr.
Kalkmann,  assumes  that  the  award  of  Thuria  to  Messenia  by  Augustus
was  overthrown  by  the  decision  of  Tiberius  ;  and  he  is  accordingly  driven
to  assume  that  between  the  time  of  Tiberius  and  that  of  Septimius,  or
rather  of  Pausanias  (whose  evidence  as  to  the  possession  of  Thuria  by
the  Lacedemonians  Mr.  Weil  accepts),  Thuria  was  retransferred  from
Messenia  to  Lacedaemon.  There  is  no  record  of  such  an  assumed
retransference ;  and  the  necessity  to  assume  it  vanishes,  when  we  recog-
nise that  the  decision  of  Tiberius  concerned  only  the  Denthelian  district
and  left  the  Thurian  district  in  possession  of  Lacedaemon,  in  whose  pos-
session it  remained  in  the  time  of  Pausanias  and  as  late  as  the  time  of
Septimius  Severus.     L.   Ross  {Reisen,  p.  1 1   sqq.)  also,  like  Mr.  Kalk-


CH.  XXXI  CALAMAE — LIMNAE  427

mann  and  Mr.  Weil,  fell  into  the  error  of  assuming  that  Augustus's
decision  was  reversed  by  Tiberius  ;  and  as  one  error  begets  another,  he
had  to  assiune  a  contradiction  between  the  statement  of  Tacitus  that  the
disputed  district  was  awarded  to  the  Lacedaemonians  hy  Julius  Ccusar
and  Antony^  and  the  statement  of  Pausanias  that  the  district  was
awarded  to  the  Lacedaemonians  by  Augustus,  But  this  apparent  dis-
crepancy also  vanishes  when  we  observe  that  Tacitus  and  Pausanias  are
referring  to  different  districts  and  to  different  decisions.  Caesar  and
Antony  gave  the  Denthelian  district,  Augustus  gave  Thuria  to  the
Lacedaemonians.

31.  3.  a  village  Oalamae.  This  village  is  mentioned  also  by
Polybius  (v.  92).  From  the  similarity  of  the  names,  Leake,  followed
by  Ross  and  Curtius,  thought  that  Calamae  might  be  the  modem
JCalamiy  a  village  in  the  Messenian  plain,  three  quarters  of  an  hour
to  the  north-west  of  Kalamata  (Le^dce,  MoreOy  i.  p.  362 ;  Ross,
Reisen^  p.  2  note  3  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  158).  Bursian,  on  the  other
hand,  would  identify  Calamae  with  some  ruins  which  crown  a  hill  half
an  hour  north-east  of  Kalamata,  Here  there  are  remains  of  two  ancient
walls  girdling  the  hill  at  different  levels  ;  and  in  the  plain  there  are  the
foundations  of  houses  cut  out  of  the  rock  (Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  171).
Calamae  is  mentioned  in  an  inscription  found,  according  to  Mr.  Foucart,
at  Kalamata  {Bulletin  de  Corr,  Helldnique^  i  (1877),  p.  31).  Mr.  R.
Weil,  however,  states  that  the  inscription  was  found  at  the  village  of
Janitza^  two  hours  east  of  Kalamata^  and  on  the  strength  of  this  he
identifies  Janitza  with  the  ancient  Calamae  {Mittkeil,  d,  arch,  Inst,
in  AtheUj  7  (1882),  p.  216  ;  as  to  the  ruins  2Xjanitza  see  note  on  iv.
30.  2  *  Pharae ').  The  Greek  Government  has  given  the  name  of
Calamae  to  the  modem  Kalamata^  which  probably  occupies,  as  we  have
seen,  the  site  of  the  ancient  Pharae.

31.  3*  a  place  Lixnnae  ('lakes'),  in  which  there  is  a  sanctnary
of  Artemis  of  the  Lake.  This  place  was  on  the  borders  between
Messenia  and  Laconia.  The  events  which  gave  rise  to  the  first
Messenian  war  took  place  at  the  sanctuary.  See  iii.  2.  6,  iv.  4.  2  sq.
The  site  of  the  sanctuary  of  Artemis  of  the  Lake  was  discovered  by
L.  Ross  in  1 840.  It  is  occupied  by  a  ruined  chapel  of  the  Panagia  of
VolimnoSy  standing  at  a  place  called  Volimnos  in  a  narrow  glen  at  the
southern  foot  of  Mount  Gomovouno,  A  brook  runs  southward  through
the  dale  in  a  deep  bed  to  join  the  Nedon.  The  moimtains  which  shut  in
the  glen  on  the  south,  east,  and  north  are  very  precipitous ;  but  the
bottom  is  occupied  by  fields  which  rise  in  terraces  one  above  the  other.
The  chapel  of  the  Panagia  stands  on  one  of  these  terraces,  about  300
feet  above  the  bottom  of  the  glen.  It  is  built  upon  a  considerable  heap
of  ancient  mins,  and  is  constmcted  of  ancient  remains.  Into  the  walls
of  the  chapel  are  built  two  inscribed  marble  slabs ;  the  inscriptions,
which  are  of  the  Imperial  age,  refer  to  Artemis  of  the  Lake,  thus  proving
that  here  was  the  sanctuary  of  the  goddess.  See  L.  Ross,  Reisen^  p.
I  sqq, ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2,  p.  157  sq,  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  170.  The
identification  was,  however,  disputed  by  Leake  {Pelop,  p.  181  sqq,)

The  district  in  which  the  sanctuary  stood  was  called  the  Denthelian


428  THE  PAMISUS  bk-  iv.  mssncu

district  (see  note  on  §  i),  and  for  many  ages  its  possession  was  a  saliject
of  dispute  between  the  Messenians  and  Lacedaemonians.  It  was
successively  assigned  to  the  Messenians  by  Philip,  Antigonus,  Mimumas,
the  Milesians  (who  arbitrated  in  the  dispute),  and  Atidius  Geminos,
the  praetor  of  Achaia.  But  Julius  Caesar  and  Mark  Antony  awarded
it  to  the  Lacedaemonians.  Lastly  the  dispute  was  brought  b^ore  the
Roman  senate  in  25  A.D.  and  decided  in  favour  of  the  Messenians.
See  Tacitus,  Annals^  iv.  43.  This  decision  seems  to  have  been
final ;  the  district  belonged  to  Messenia  in  Pausanias's  time ;  and  the
discovery  some  fifty  years  ago  of  two  boundary-stones  on  the  water-shed
of  Mt.  Taygetus  (to  the  east  and  north-east  of  the  village  of  StUava)
seems  to  prove  that  the  district  never  changed  hands  again.  The
inscription  on  these  boundary-stones  is  opo^  Aoicc&ufiovi  wpib^  Ma^
(njvrjv  (<  boundary  of  Lacedaemon  and  Messene').  One  of  these
boundaiy-stones  was  recently  re-discovered  by  Mr.  E.  Pemice.  It
stands  on  the  siunmit  of  a  peak  which  rises  due  south  of  Mt  Mokw
and  about  half-way  between  the  villages  of  Sitsova  and  Kastama.  The
view  from  this  summit  embraces  a  great  part  of  Peloponnese,  induding
the  whole  of  the  Messenian  plain.  The  boundary-stone  is  now  broken
in  two,  and  the  inscription  is  much  mutilated.

See  L.  Ross,  ReiseH^  p.  3  sq. ;  E.  Pemice,  in  Berliner  philolog.  Wockemckrijlt
21  October,  1893,  p.  1373 ;  id.^  in  Mittheil,  tL  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  19  (1894),  pp^

351-355.


\


31.  4.  the  springs  of  the  Pamisns.     The  Pamisus  was  the  chief
river  of  Messenia,  flowing  through  the  lower  Messenian  plain  which,  X
from  its  wonderful  fertility,  was  called  Makaria  or  *the  happy  land '  (Strabo,  \\
viii.  p.  361).     Its  natural  wealth  and  delightful  climate  were  described
in  glowing  language  by  Euripides  in  a  lost  play,  of  which  some  lines  are
quoted  by  Strabo  (viii.  p.  366).     The  Pamisus  is  now  the  Pimantsa  or
Dipota?no.  What  Pausanias  calls  the  springs  of  the  Pamisus  are  the  copious
springs  of  lukewarm  and  rather  insipid  water  which  issue  at  the  foot  of  the
ridge  of  Skala^  at  the  north-east  comer  of  the  lower  Messenian  plain,  close
to  the  little  hamlet  of  Hagios  Floras,    Some  fine  plane-trees  stand  just  at
the  spot  where  the  waters  gush  from  the  mountain,  and  the  neighbour-
hood of  the  springs  displays  all  the  richness  of  a  southern  vegetation.
The  cottages  of  the  tiny  hamlet  on  either  side  of  the  highroad  are
buried  amid  tall  plane-trees,  fig-trees,  mulberry-trees  and  olives.     A  little
way  from  the  springs  there  are  some  ponds,  and  at  no  great  distance  the
waters  form  a  large  marsh  in  the  plain.     The  river  thus  formed  (the
Pamisus)  flows  south-south-west,  and  joins  the  Mavrozoumenos  two  miles
below,  in  the  middle  of  the  plain.     Strabo  (viii.  p.  361)  says  that  the
Pamisus  had  the  greatest  volume  of  water  of  any  river  in  Peloponnese,
though  its  length  was  not  more  than  100  furlongs.     This  100  furlongs
is  the  exact  distance  between  the  springs  at  Hagios  Floros  and  the  sea.
The  distance  mentioned  by  Pausanias  ( 1 00  furlongs  from  the  sources  of
the  Pamisus  to  Messene)  is  also  exact,  the  distance  being  measured  to
the  nearest  gate  of  Messene,  namely  the  one  which  may  still  be  seen
in  the  saddle  between   Mt.   Ithome  and  Mount  Eva.      See   Boblaye,


CB.  XXXI  MESSENE  429

Recherches^  p.  106  sq, ;  Leake,  Morea^  i.  pp.  389  sq.^  477  sq,  \  Curtius,
Pelop,  2.  p.  1 54  sq,  ;  Philippson,  Peloponnes^  p.  202.

31.  4>  the  city  of  the  Messenians  under  Monnt  Ithome.  From
KcUamata^  the  probable  site  of  the  ancient  Pharae,  the  road  to  Messene
runs  north-west  across  the  fertile  Messenian  plain  between  hedges  of
huge  fantastically  shaped  cactuses  and  groves  of  fig-trees,  olives,  and
vines.  In  front  of  us  loom  nearer  and  nearer  the  twin  peaks  of  Ithome  I
and  Eva  rising  boldly  and  abruptly  from  a  single  base  on  the  western  '
side  of  the  plain,  and  forming  the  natural  citadel,  as  it  were,  of  the
whole  country.  As  we  near  their  base  we  quit  the  dusty  highroad  and
strike  westward  up  the  mountain  side  by  devious  and  rocky  paths.  This
brings  us  in  time  to  the  monastery  of  Vourkano^  where  visitors  to  /
Messene  generally  spend  the  night.  It  is  beautifully  situated  on  the
eastern  slope  of  the  mountain,  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour's  walk  below
the  saddle  which  unites  the  twin  peaks.  The  buildings,  arranged  in
the  form  of  a  quadrangle  round  a  little  church,  stand  on  a  fine  open
terrace  among  cypresses,  oaks,  and  wild  olives,  commanding  an  un-
impeded view  over  the  Messenian  plain  southward  to  the  shining  waters
of  the  gulf  and  northward  to  where  the  plain  ends  at  the  foot  of  the  hills.
Ithome  and  its  sister  peak  rise  from  the  plain  about  midway  between  these
northern  hills  and  the  gulf.  Mount  Eva,  the  lower  of  the  two  peaks,
lies  to  the  south  or  south-east  of  Ithome,  with  which  it  is  connected  by  a
ridge  or  saddle  about  half-way  up  the  two  mountains.  The  eastern  wall
of  Messene  stood  and  still  stands  in  ruins  on  this  saddle.  The  city
itself  lay  on  the  western  side,  in  the  cup  formed  by  the  converging
slopes  of  the  two  mountains.  The  site  may  be  compared  to  an  immense
theatre,  of  which  the  back  is  formed  by  the  saddle  in  question  and  the
wings  by  Mt  Ithome  and  Mt.  Eva.  The  wretched  hamlet  of  Mavromati
lies  nearly  in  the  middle  of  this  theatre-like  hollow ;  there  are  many
remains  of  antiquity  in  its  neighbourhood.  But  the  site  of  the  ancient
city  is  now  chiefly  occupied  by  cornfields,  vineyards,  and  olive-groves.
Mt.  Eva,  now  known  as  St.  Basil  {Hagios  Vasilios\  from  the  chapel  of
the  saint  which  crowns  it,  was  not  included  within  the  fortifications  of
Messene.

See   Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  136  sqq, ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  p.   443  sqq,  ;  '
Philippson,  Fcloponncs^  p.  345  sq.


31.  5.  Messene  is  snrronnded  by  a  wall  etc.  The  circuit  of  the
walls  of  Messene  is  about  five  and  a  half  miles.  Large  portions  of  them
remain  and  are  the  finest  specimens  of  Greek  fortification  in  existence.
The  best  preserved  parts  are  the  northern  and  north-western ;  the  worst
preserved  parts  are  on  the  southern  side  on  the  slope  of  Mt  Eva,  where
the  wall  has  in  some  places  disappeared.  The  finest  piece  of  all  is  the
celebrated  Arcadian  gate  with  its  adjoining  towers  in  the  northern
wall,  directly  under  Mt.  Ithome,  which  rises  steeply  above  it  on  the  east.
It  is  a  double  gate ;  in  other  words,  an  outer  gate  in  the  line  of  the
city-wall  opens  into  a  spacious  circular  court  with  high  walls,  at  the
opposite  end  of  which  there  is  an  inner  gate.  At  the  inner  gate  may
still  be  seen  the  enormous  stone  which  formed  the  lintel  of  the  gate ;


11


430


WALLS  OF  MESSENE


BK.  IV.  MBSSBMl


PIC.    53. — GROUND    PLAN  OP  THB
ARCADIAN  GATB  AT  MSSSENB.


it  is  5.73  metres  long,  1.16  metres  broad,  and  1.12  metres  high.    The
stone  is  broken  in  two  pieces,  one  of  which  is  lying  on  the  ground,  tke

other  piece  leans  against  the  door-post  Tlie
circular  court  between  the  outer  and  inner
gate  measures  about  62  feet  in  diameter,  and
is  built  in  the  most  magnificent  style  of
masonry.  The  lowest  course  is  a  row  of
stones,  each  about  5^  ft.  long,  and  half  as
much  high ;  upon  this  is  placed  another
course  of  stones  of  equal  length  and  of  half
the  height,  the  joints  of  which  are  exacdj
over  the  centre  of  each  stone  in  the  lower
course.  The  other  courses  are  not  quite  so
regular,  but  the  stones  are  joined  and  finished
with  the  same  wonderfiil  accuracy.  As  usoal
in  Greek  masonry  of  the  best  age,  mortar
is  wholly  absent  The  walls  of  this  circular
court  are  preserved  to  a  height  (^  20  to
23  feet;  the  number  of  courses  is  nine  or
ten.  The  outer  gate  is  flanked,  on  the
outside,  by  two  square  towers,  about  33  feet  apart  The  gateway  b
16  ft  10  inches  wide.  On  each  side  of  this  gateway,  on  the  inner  side,
is  a  semicircular  niche.  These  niches  doubdess  contained  statues.
Over  the  left-hand  niche  is  an  inscription  (C  /.  G,  No.  1460)  dedaring
that  it  was  repaired  by  one  Quintus  Plotius  Euphemion.  The  statue  oif
Hermes,  mentioned  by  Pausanias  (33.  3),  may  have  occupied  one  of
these  niches.  From  the  inner  gate  a  paved  road  leads  inwards  for  a
distance  of  40  paces.  It  is  marked  lengthwise  with  the  ruts  of  chariot-
wheels  and  cross- wise  with  cuts  which  afforded  foothold  for  the  horses
ascending  the  hill.

Of  the  towers  which  flank  the  walls  the  best  preserved  are  the  two
immediately  to  the  east  of  the  Arcadian  gate,  where  the  wall  begins  to
ascend  the  rocky  slope  of  Mt.  Ithome.     They  are  square,   each  side
measuring  about  2 1  feet ;  and  they  project   1 3  feet  from  the  curtain  or
line  of  wall..    Their  height  is  about  3 1   feet.     The  towers  are  in  two
stories  ;  the  lower  story  is  entered  from  the  top  of  the  curtain  by  doors
on  each  side  of  the  tower.     In  the  lower  story  are  four  loopholes  for
arrows,  two  to  the  front  and  one  on  each  side.     In  the  upper  story  there
are  six  small  square  windows,  two  on  each  of  the  sides  except  the  back.
In  the  walls  are  visible  the  holes  for  the  rafters  which  supported  the  floor
of  the  upper  story,  and  the  walls  are  rebated  or  set  back  thus  h  to  leave
room  for  the  ends  of  the  fioor-planks  to  rest  on.     The  curtain  between  the
tower  is  9  feet  thick.     Both  curtains  and  towers  in  this  part  of  the  walls
are  built  entirely  of  large  squared  blocks,  admirably  cut  and  jointed
without  rubble  or  cement.     In  general  the  towers  are  square,  but  at  all
the  salient  angles  they  are  nearly  round,  each  tower  forming  about  tvo-
thirds  of  a  circle.     These  round  towers  have  generally  sally-ports.    The
intervals  between  the  towers  vary  according  to  the  nature  of  the  ground.
The  general  style  of  masonry  is  not   like   that  of  the  towers  at  the


XXXI  WALLS  OF  MESSENE  431

radian  gate,  but,  as  in  most  Greek  fortifications,  consists  of  an  outer

L  inner  facing  of  squared  blocks,  the  intermediate  space  being  filled

h    rubble.      These    facings    are    generally    formed    of  equal  and

allel  courses,  but  not  always  of  rectangular  stones.     The  masonry  is

I  that  of  the  walls  of  Mantinea,  which  were  built  about  the  same  time.

1  there  is  this  important  difference,  that  whereas  only  the  lower  part  of

walls  of  Mantinea  seems  to  have  been  built  of  stone,  the  upper  part

ing  apparently  been  built  of  unburnt  brick,  we  have  Pausanias's  word

it  that  the  whole  circuit  of  the  walls  of  Messene  was  built  of  stone

n  top  to  bottom.

The  remains  of  another  gate,  generally  called  the  Laconian  gate,
y  be  seen  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  ridge  or  saddle  which  unites
ome  and  Eva.  On  the  western  side  of  the  ridge,  about  80  yards  off,
the  remains  of  another  wall  running  along  the  ridge,  not  quite
allel  to  the  one  on  the  eastern  side.  At  one  end  of  the  ridge  the
1  rises  towards  Mt  Eva,  then  turns  sharply  off,  leaving  the  upper
t  of  that  mountain  outside  the  line  of  walls.  At  the  other  end  of  the
^e  the  wall  climbs  the  steep  side  of  Ithome  till  it  is  stopped  by  a
pendicular  rock.  In  this  direction  there  is  a  small  square  chamber
:he  walls  with  a  loophole  for  shooting  arrows.  Above  the  perpen-
ular  rock  the  wall  begins  again,  and  is  furnished  at  intervals  with
tresses  instead  of  towers.

See  Blouet,  Expedition  scientifiqve  de  Morie :  Architecture^  I.  pp.  37-42,  with
38-47  ;  Boblaye,  Reckerches^  p.  107  ;  Gell,  Itinerary  of  the  Morea^  p.  60 ;  Leake,
rea^  I.  p.  371  sqq,  ;  Le  Bas,  in  Revue  ArchJoiogiquet  I  (1844),  p.  422  sqq.  ;
*tius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  139  sqq. ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  p.  445  sqq, ;  W.  G.  Clark,
yj>.  pp.  232  sqq,f  237  sqq. ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  166  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2,  p.  275
;  Baedeker,^  p.  360  sq,  A  view  of  the  walls,  with  Mt.  Ithome  and  Mt.  Eva,
iven  by  Le  Bas  { Voyage  archiologique^  *Itin^raire,'  pi.  19),  and  a  view  of  the
adian  gate  by  Fiedler  {Reise^  I.  pi.  iv.)  For  various  views  and  restorations  of
gates  see  Schreiber,  BildercUlas^  xlviii.  7,  xlix.  I.  2,  1.  8.  9.

3L  5.  the  walls  of  Babylon.  These  were  reckoned  one  of  the  seven
nders  of  the  world.  According  to  Herodotus  (i.  178),  the  walls
lied  a  square,  each  side  of  which  was  i20*Greek  furlongs  or  about

miles  long.  The  space  thus  enclosed  would  be  more  than  three
es  the  size  of  Paris.  The  walls,  according  to  Herodotus,  were  50
>its  thick  and  200  royal  cubits  high,  which  would  seem  to  be  about
3  feet,  or  rather  higher  than  the  extreme  height  of  St.  Paul's.
cient  authorities,  however,  differ  in  the  measurements  they  give  of  the
bylonian  walls.  According  to  Ctesias  the  total  circumference  was
D  furlongs ;  according  to  Clitarchus  it  was  365  furlongs.  Ctesias
s  that  the  height  of  the  walls  was  50  fathoms ;  later  writers  say
t  it  was  only  50  cubits.  The  breadth  was  such  that  two  four-horse
iriots  could  pass  each  other  on  the  top  of  it.  None  of  the  walls
lain.     See  Diodorus,  ii.  7  ;  Strabo,  xvi.    p.   738 ;   Pliny,  Nat,  Hist.

121;  the  notes  of  Bahr  and  Rawlinson  on  Herodotus,  Ix, ;  Perrot
Chipiez,  Histoire  de  VArt  dans  VAntiquiU^  2.  p.  469  sqq.

31.  5.  the  Memnonian  walls  at  Snsa.  Tradition  ran  that  Susa
i  been  built  by  Memnon,  son  of  Tithonus.  Hence  the  city  was
led  the  Memnonian  city ;  and  the  great  palace  of  the  Persian  kings


433  MESSENE  BK.  nr.  mbssexu

in  it  was  called  the  Memnonia  or  Memnonium  (Herodotus,  v.  5317.;
Diodonis,  ii.  22  ;  Strabo,  xv.  p.  728).  Another  tradition  was  that  Soa
was  called  the  Menmonian  city  because  the  dead  body  of  Memnon  had
been  brought  thither  by  his  mother,  the  Morning  (Aelian,  V€u^,  HisL  t.  i)l
As  to  the  walls  of  Susa,  Strabo  (/.r.)  says  they  were  120  furlongs  io
circumference  and  were  built  of  burnt  brick  and  asphalt,  like  those  of
Babylon.  Mr.  Dieulafoy,  the  French  explorer  of  Susa,  informs  us  that
the  fortifications  consisted  of  a  large  and  deep  moat  filled  with  wato^
and  double  walls.  Each  of  the  walls  was  faced  outside  and  inside  with
unbumt  bricks,  and  the  space  between  the  facings  was  filled  with  eaitii
tightly  ranuned  down.  See  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  PArt  da»
VAntiquiUy  5.  p.  766  sq,

31.  5.  AmbrosuB  hi  Fhods.     See  x.  36.  3.

31.   5.  Bhodes.     The  city  of  Rhodes,  in  the  island  of  the  same
name,  was  built  in  the  time  of  the  Peloponnesian  war  under  the  supezio-  *
tendence  of  Hippodamus,  the  same  architect  who  laid  out  Piraeus  far
the  Athenians  (see  note  on  i.  i.  2).     According  to  Strabo  the  walls,
harbours,  streets,  and  buildings  of  Rhodes  were  finer  than  those  of  any  *
other  city  in  the  world.     See  Strabo,  xiv.  pp.  652,  654.

31.  6.  In  the  market-place  of  Messene  is a  water-htiift

called  Arsinoe.  Cp.  33.  i.  The  spring  Clepsydra,  which  fed  the  fountain
of  Arsinoe,  is  generally  identified  with  the  fine  spring  which  issues  in
several  jets  from  an  ancient  mossy  wall,  surmounted  by  bushes,  in  the
hamlet  of  Mavromati^  nearly  in  the  middle  of  Messene.  The  spring
gives  rise  to  a  brook  which  flows  through  the  southern  part  of  the
ancient  site.  Accordingly,  if  this  spring  is  the  Clepsydra,  the  water-basin
or  fountain  Arsinoe  and  with  it  the  market-place  must  be  looked  for
somewhat  to  the  south  of  the  spring.  Here  on  a  level  space  on  the
left  bank  of  the  stream  are  various  ancient  foundations,  including  the
remains  of  a  Doric  temple.  At  a  place  now  called  MousgaeSy  between
the  theatre  and  the  stadium  (see  below,  32.  6),  there  are  remains  of
conduits  and  fragments  of  a  large  water-tank.  This  latter  may  hast
been  the  fountain  or  water-basin  (Kprjvrj)  of  Arsinoe.  See  Blouet,  Eip/d.
scientif,  de  Mor^e :  Architecture^  i.  p.  35,  with  pi.  35  ;  Leake,  Mono.
I.  p.  367  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  p.  448  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  167;
Baedeker,^  pp.  360,  361  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  278.  Prof.  Curtius,  on
the  other  hand,  identifies  the  spring  at  MavromoH  with  the  fountain  of
Arsinoe,  and  supposes  that  the  Clepsydra  may  have  issued  from  an
artificial  grotto  which  Le  Bas  found  much  higher  up  the  slope  of
Ithome,  to  the  south-west  of  the  temple  of  Artemis  (see  note  on  §  7).
See  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  pp.  145,  147  ;  icL^  Abhandlung  iiber  grieckiscke
Quell'  und  Brunneninschriften  (reprinted  from  the  8th  vol.  of  the
Abhandlungen  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Gottingen),  p.  1 5  sq,  \V.  G.
Clark  identified  the  Clepsydra  with  a  well  near  the  top  of  Mt.  Ithome.
The  well  is  of  no  great  depth,  but  contains  a  spring  of  perennial  water.
Clark,  therefore,  like  Prof.  Curtius,  would  identify  the  spring  of
Mavromati  with  the  fountain  of  Arsinoe.  See  W.  G.  Clark,  Pelap.  p.
234  sq, ;  and  for  the  spring  near  the  summit  of  Ithome  cp,  Fiedler,
Reise^  i.  p.  354.

31.  6.  DamophoxL     See  Index,  and  note  on  vii,  23.  7.


H.  XXXI  MESSENE  433

31.  7.  Laphria.     See  vii.  18.  8.     According  to  Antoninus  Liberalis
Transform.  40),  who  identified  her  with  Britomartis,  Artemis  Laglpia
ras  also  worshipped  in  Cephallene,  where  she  had  a  sanctuary.     Thus
^ausanias's  statement  as  to  the  limits  of  her  worship  seems  to  need
orrection.     A  temple  of  Artemis  was  discovered  on  the  southern  slope
f  Mt  Ithome  by  Le  Bas,  who  thought  that  it  might  be  the  temple  of
LTtemis  Laphria.     The  ruins  are  near  the  winding  path  which  leads
rom  Mavromati  to  the  summit  of  Ithome.     On  the  right  of  the  path,
bout  half-way  up,  there  are  three  platforms  supported  by  walls.     On
he  highest  of  these  are  the  remains  of  a  small  temple,  5  5  feet  long  by
;2  feet  broad.     It  consisted  of  a  fore-temple  {pronaos)  and  cell(x^  and
Tas  of  the  kind  called  distyle  in  antisj  Le,  it  had  two  columns  between
cji/^  in  front,  but  no  columns  at  the  sides  or  the  back.     The  bases  of
he  two  columns  have  been  found  ;  they  are  either  Ionic  or  Corinthian  ;
^.e  Bas  speaks  of  the  temple  as  Ionic,  but  Landron  has  restored  it  as
Corinthian.     The  temple,  up  to  and  including  the  bases  of  the  columns,
ras  built  by  a  hard  stone ;  above  that  it  was  built  of  tufa  coated  with
itucco.     The  pavement  was  a  rough  mosaic,  without  pattern,  composed
ftf  reddish  cement  with  small  black  and  white  pebbles.     A  few  fragments
ftf  a  statue,  apparently  of  Artemis,  were  discovered,  and  a  dedicatory
nscription  to  (Artemis)  Limnatis.      The  theory  that  the  temple  was
bat  of  Artemis   Laphria  rests  on  the  very  dubious  assumption  that
\jtemis  Linmatis  was  here  identical  with  Artemis  Laphria.     The  date
rf  the  temple  would  seem  to  be  at  least  150  years  later  than  the
bundation  of  Messene.      See   Le   Bas,    Voyage  orMologigue,  ed.    S.
R.einach,  p.  134  sgg, ;  id.  Architecture,  P^loponnese  (i**  S^rie)  pi.  i-io ;
'^,  Revue  Arch^ologigue,  i  (1844),  p.  425  sgq. ;  Curtius,
^ilop.  2.  p.  146  sq.  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  166 ;   Bae-
ieker,3  p.  359  ;  Guide-Joanne,  2.  p.  278.     On  a  coin  of
Messene  Artemis    is  represented    standing,  clad    in   a
^bort  tunic,  a  spear  in  her  right  hand,  her  left  elbow
^ting  on  a  column ;  beside  her  is  a  dog.     "  A  com-
^son  of  this  figure  with  that  of  Artemis  Laphria  on
ht  coins  of  Patrae  [see  note  on  vii.    18.   10],  which   "c  54--"Artemis
■"eproduces    the   statue   of   Menaechmus    and    Soidas,        i-aphria  (coin

*       .  .  OF  mbssbnbX

Umishes  sufficient  reason  for  calling  this  figure  also
-^phria.     It  is  probably,  as  the  pillar  indicates,  a  copy  of  a  statue,
berefore  of  the  statue  of  Damophon"  (Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,
Vum.  Comm.  on  Paus.  p.  67,  with  pi.  P  iii.)

31.  8.  the  size  of  the  temple,  which  is  the  largest  building  in
lie  world.  The  great  temple  of  Artemis  (Diana)  at  Ephesus  was
wice  rebuilt ;  the  third  and  last  temple  was  built  in  the  time  of
Jexander  the  Great  (Strabo  xiv.  p.  640  sq.)  According  to  Pliny  .
Nat.  Hist,  xxxvi.  95)  the  whole  temple  {templum  universum)  was  425  U
loman  feet  long,  and  225  Roman  feet  broad  ;  there  were  100  columns,  of
hich  twenty-seven  were  made  by  kings  ;  each  column  was  60  feet  high,
he  remains  of  the  temple,  which  had  been  buried  for  centuries,  were
scovered  after  laborious  excavations  by  Mr.  J.  T.  Wood  in  1869.  He
md  tliat  the  platform  on  which  the  temple  was  raised  (called  by  Pliny

VOL-  III  2  F


434  MESSENE  bk.  iv.  mbsssnia

iempium  universum)  was  418  ft.  i  in.  long,  by  239  ft.  4^  ins.  broad,
measured  on  the  lowest  step.  The  temple  itself,  according  to  Mr.
Wood's  measurements,  was  342  ft.  6 J  ins.  long  by  163  ft.  9^  ins.
broad.  It  was  octastyle,  having  eight  columns  in  front ;  and  dipteral,
having  two  ranks  of  columns  all  round  it.  The  columns  of  the  peristyle
were  100  in  number,  as  Pliny  says.  (In  Pliny  Lc,  we  must  read  colwmui
c,  xxvii  a  singulis  regibus  factae^  instead  of  columnae  cxxvii  a  sifigMUs
regibus  facfae.)  The  columns  were  6  ft.  ^  in.  in  diameter  at  the  base;
which,  adopting  the  proportion  given  by  Vitruvius  for  the  improved
Ionic  order,  would  give  a  height  of  55  ft.  8  J  ins.  including  the  base.
See  J.  T.  Wood,  Discoveries  at  Ephesus  (London,  1877),  p.  264  sq.
On  the  building  and  rebuilding  of  the  temple  see  Brunn,  in  Sitswip-
berichte  of  the  Bavarian  Academy  (Munich),  Philosoph.  philolog.  CL,
10  June  1 87 1,  p.  531  sqq,

31.  9.  they  sacriflce  all  a.TilTnalB  alike  etc  With  these  hdo-
causts  cp.  vii.  18.  12.

31.  9.  I  have  shown  above  etc.     See  iii.  26.  3.

31.  10.  an  image  of  the  Oity  of  Thebes.  Cp.  viii.  30.  10;  1 5.
3  ;  A.  Gerber,  in  Fleckeiser^s  Jahrbiicher^  Supplem.  Bd.  13(1 884),  ppi
257-266;  Otto  Schultz,  Die  Ortsgotiheiien  d,  griech,  u,  rbm.  Kunsi
(Berlin,  1889).

31.  10.  Epaminondas,  son  of  Oleommis.  The  father  of  Epani-
nondas  is  called  Polymnis  by  Aelian  (  Var,  Hist,  ii.  43,  xi.  9),  by  Coradios
Nepos  (Epam.  i.  i),  and  by  Pausanias  himself  elsewhere  (viii.  52.  4t
ix.  12.  6).  The  name  Cleommis  is  here  a  slip  either  of  Pausanias
or  of  one  of  his  copyists.

31.  II.  portraits  of  Aphareus  and  his  sons  etc.  Brunn  {Gesck.
der  griech,  K tins  tier ^  2.  p.  202)  thought  that  the  figures  in  these  paintings
were  grouped  as  follows  : —

A   Aphareus  B.   Lcucippus
Idas  Hilaira

Lynceus  Phoebe

Crcsphontes  Arsinoe

a.   Nestor  b.  Aesculapius

Thras>Tnedes  Machaon

Antilochus  Podalirius.

31.   12.  Arsinoe.     Cp.  ii.  26.  7  ;  iii.  12.  8  ;  iv.  3.  2.

31.  12.  Omphalion,  a  pupil  of  Nicias.  Omphalion  appears  not  to
be  mentioned  by  any  other  ancient  writer.  As  to  Nicias,  see  note  00
iii.  19.  4.

32.  I.  the  Place  of  Sacrifice  contains  images  of  all  the  god^
See  ii.  2.  8  note.

32.  2.  Aethidas.  "  In  the  village  of  Mavromati  I  find  an  in-
scription in  which  occurs  the  name  of  Aethidas,  who  must  I  think  be
the  same  person  Pausanias  speaks  of,  for  the  monument  was  a  dedication
to  Lucius  Verus,  and  was  consequently  erected  not  long  before  the  time
when  Pausanias  travelled  ;  it  accords,  therefore,  with  his  remark,  that


XXXII  MESSENE  435

hidas  was  a  man  nearly  of  his  own  age  [see  Critical  Note,  vol  i.  p.
•].  As  the  inscription  refers  moreover  to  an  expense  incurred  by
hidas,  it  accords  m  this  particular  also  with  the  observation  of
isanias,  as  to  the  wealth  for  which  Aethidas  was  distinguished.  The
:ribed  stone  is  a  plain  quadrangular  pedestal  of  white  marble,  which
bably  supported  a  statue  of  Lucius  Verus.  The  inscription  is  in  the
owing  terms,  *  The  Hellenes  grateful  to  the  gods,  and  praying  for
ssings  on  the  Imperial  House,  (have  erected)  Lucius  Aelius  Verus
;sar,  Tiberius  Claudius  Aethidas  Caelianus,  High-priest  and  Hellad-
h  of  the  community  of  the  Achaeans  for  life,  having  recommended  it,
I  defrayed  the  expense' "  (Leake,  Morea^  i.  p.  383  j^.)  Cp.  C.  /.  G,
.  1318.

32.  2.  when  Demetrins,  son  of  Philip  etc.     See  iv.  29.  i  sqq,

32.  3.  a  tomb  of  AxlBtomenes  etc.     Aristomenes  was  worshipped

a  hero  by  the  Messenians.     See  iv.  14.  7  ;  iv.  27.  6.     The  victims

rificed  to  heroes  seem  to  have  been  generally  either  black  bulls  or

ck  rams.     Thus  every  year  sacrifices  were  sent  by  the  people  of

essaly  to  the  grave  of  Achilles  at  Troy.     The  victims  were  a  black

I  and  a  white  bull.     First  the  black  bull  was  taken  to  the  top  of  the

row ;  a  trench  was  dug  in  the  ground ;  and  the  bull  was  sacrificed

that  the  blood  poured  into  the  trench.     This  was  the  sacrifice  which

J  offered  to  Achilles  as  to  a  dead  man  or  hero.     Afterwards  the  white

1  was  sacrificed  on  the  shore  to  him  as  to  a  god.     But  the  flesh  of

white  bull  was  carried  on  board  the  ship  to  be  eaten,  for  it  might

be  consumed  on  hostile  ground.     See  Philostratus,  Heroica^  xx.  25

A  black  bull  was  sacrificed  annually  to  the  Greeks  who  fell  at  the

tie  of  Plataea  (Plutarch,  Aristides^  21).     For  sacrifices  of  black  rams

heroes  see  Paus.  i.  34.   5  ;  v.  13.   2  ;  ix.  39.  6;  Strabo,  vi.  p.  284.

the  subject  generally  see  P.  Stengel,  Die  griech.  Sakralalierthiimer^

8.

32.  4-  The  first  people who  asserted  that  the  soul  of  man    \

Jnmortal  etc.     According  to  Herodotus  (ii.  123)  the  Egyptians  were

first  who  held  that  the  human  soul  is  immortal.  Philostratus  {Vita
oUodori^  iii.  19)  represents  the  Brahmans  as  maintaining  that  the
:trine  of  the  transmigration  of  souls  was  borrowed  by  the  Egyptians
m  the  Hindoos.  As  to  the  Egyptian  doctrine  of  immortality  see
•ecially  A.  Wiedemann,  The  Ancient  Egyptian  Doctrine  of  the  Immor-
Uy  of  the  Soul  (London,  1895).

32.  6.  Xenocrates sent  for  the  shield  of  Aristomenes  etc.

inscription  (C  /.  G,  G,  S.  i.  No.  2462)  has  been  found  at  Thebes
ich  seems  to  refer  to  the  incident  here  narrated  by  Pausanias.  It
)ears  to  have  been  carved  on  the  base  of  a  group  of  statuary  repre-
ting  Xenocrates,  Theopompus,  and  Mnasilaus.  The  inscription  is
^erse,  and  somewhat  awkwardly  expressed.  Translated  it  runs  thus  :
Xenocrates,  Theopompus,  and  Mnasilaus.  When  the  spear  of  Sparta
5  prevailing,  then  it  fell  to  the  lot  of  Xenocrates  to  carry  trophies  to
IS.  He  dreaded  not  the  army  from  the  Eurotas  nor  the  Laconian
sld.  So  the  Thebans  were  victorious  in  the  war,  whereof  the  trophy
Leuctra  is  a  proof.     We  \i,e,  Xenocrates,  Theopompus,  and  Mnasi-


436  MESSENE  BK.  nr.  messbnu

laus]  were  not  inferior  to  Epaminondas  in  running."  The  meaning  of
this  inscription  is  obscure  and  has  been  variously  explained.  None  of
the  explanations  suggested  is  convincing.  See  Bulletin  de  Coms^
HelUniquey  i  (1877),  p.  351  ;  /V/.,  2  (1878),  pp.  22-28  ;  Biicheler,  in
Rheitnsches  Museum^  N.  F.  32  (1877),  pp.  479-481  ;  G.  Gilbert,  n
Fleckeiseris  JahrbiUher^  24  (1878),  pp.  304-308  ;  Kaibel,  Epigrammai^
Graeca^  No.  768^1,  p.  xvi.  sq,  Xenocrates  was  one  of  the  Boeotardis
in  command  at  the  battle  of  Leuctra,  and  he  voted  with  Epaminondas
to  give  battle  to  the  Spartans  at  once.  See  ix.  13.  6.  Theopompos
was  a  Theban  of  noble  family  and  a  friend  of  Pelopidas  (Plutaidi,
PelopidaSy  8).    As  to  the  shield  of  Aristomenes  see  iv.  1 6.  5  and  7 ;  ix.

39.  14.

32.  6.  the  stadium  at  Messene.  Considerable  remains  of  the  stadium
may  still  be  seen  at  some  distance  south-west  of  the  hamlet  of  Mam-
matt.  It  was  surrounded  on  three  sides  by  a  colonnade,  which  at  the
upper  (semicircular)  end  was  double  and  comprised  three  rows  of
columns.  Here  the  lower  parts  of  the  columns  are  in  their  original
places ;  there  were  about  twenty  columns  in  each  row,  each  cdaom
measuring  about  i  ft.  10  in.  in  diameter,  with  Doric  fluting^  slightif
indicated.  On  the  right  side  of  the  stadium  part  of  the  colonnade  is
also  in  its  place.  Many  drums  of  Doric  columns  are  l)nng  about  ofi
the  ground,  and  many  more  are  built  at  regular  intervals  of  about  6
feet  into  the  wall  of  a  vineyard  on  the  north-east  side  of  the  stadium,
forming  two  sides  of  a  quadrangle.  These  latter  may  be  in  their
original  positions.  To  the  south  of  the  stadium  I  observed  some  laige
blocks  of  triglyphs  of  rude  workmanship  and  late  date.  The  rows  of
stone  seats  extended  only  about  two-thirds  of  the  length  of  the  lao-
course.  They  are  best  preserved  at  the  semicircular  end,  where  sixteen
rows  of  them  can  be  counted.  The  brook  of  Mavromati  runs  obliquely
through  the  length  of  the  stadium.  On  the  south  side  the  stadium  is
bounded  by  what  seems  to  have  been  the  city-wall,  and  at  its  lower  end
there  are  some  ruins  of  a  small  distyle  Doric  temple,  built  of  a  fine
limestone  and  consisting  of  a  fore-temple  {pronaos)  and  a  narrower
cella.  The  temple  stood  on  an  artificial  terrace,  of  which  the  supporting
wall  remains.

See  Blouet,  ExpSd,  scienttf.  de  Morh:  Architecture^  i.  pp.  27  J<^.,  31  ^m

with  pi.  24-34;   Leake,  Morea^   i.  p.  380  sq,  ;   Curtius,  Pehp,  2.  p.   144  ^.  J

Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  p.   447 ;  W.    G.    Clark,  Pelop.    p.  236  sq, ;   Welckor,

Tagebtuht    i.   p.  253 ;   Bursian,   Geogr,  2.   p.   167 ;  Baedeker,'  p.  361 ;  dddt-

Joamie^  2.  p.  280 ;  Guhl  und  Kohner,  Dcts  Leben  der  Griechen  und  Rdmerf  ^

32.  6.  the  theatre.     The  remains  of  the  theatre  are  situated  due
west  of  the  hamlet  oi  Mctvromati,  about  midway  between  the  village  and  ;
the  stadium.     It  is  a  remarkably  small  theatre,  being  only  about  60  ftct  ^
in  diameter,   thus   contrasting  with   the  spacious  and   once   splendid  \
stadium.     Another  remarkable  feature  about  it  is  that  it  does  not  rest
upon  the  slope  of  a  hill,  as  Greek  theatres  generally  do,  but  is  built  of
solid  masonry  from  the  level  ground  up.     It  rests  on  a  massive  quad-
rangular foundation.     Portions  of  the  side  and  back  wall  are  preserved,


CH.  XXXIII  ITHOME  437

and  the  line  of  the  stage  can  be  traced.  The  theatre  is  built  of  small
blocks.  See  Leake,  Morea^  i.  p.  381  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  145  ;
Vischer,  Erinmrungeny  p.  447  ;  Welcker,  Tagebuch^  i.  p.  253  sq.\
Bursian,  Ceogr,  2.  p.  167 ;  Baedeker,^  p.  361  ;  Guide-Joanney  2.  p.  280.

In  a  field  to  the  south  or  south-south-west  of  the  theatre  I  observed
the  remains  of  five  small  Doric  columns  standing  in  a  row  in  their
original  positions ;  they  are  probably  the  ruins  of  a  colonnade  or  temple.
In  dimensions  and  material  they  resemble  the  Doric  columns  built  into
the  wall  of  the  vineyard  to  the  north-east  of  the  stadium.

33.  I.  the  gninmit  of  Ithome.  The  top  of  Mt  Ithome  (2630  feet)
forms  a  ridge  or  narrow  plateau  running  from  south-east  to  north-west
The  ridge,  to  be  more  exact,  is  made  up  of  four  peaks  (not  three,  as  the
guide-books  say) ;  but  these  are  so  nearly  on  a  level  with  each  other,
and  the  depressions  between  them  are  so  small,  that  the  four  summits
practically  coalesce  into  a  ridge.  This  ridge,  viewed  from  the  plain,
gives  to  Ithome  the  appearance  of  being  a  table-mountain,  which  in
reality  it  is  not.  The  sides  of  the  mountain  fall  away  pretty  sharply  on
both  sides  of  the  ridge.  Ancient  fortification-walls  may  be  traced  ^ong
the  edge  of  the  two  central  peaks,  which  alone  seem  to  have  been
enclosed  by  them.  In  these  walls  there  are  some  pieces  of  irregular
Cyclopean  jointing,  which  Prof.  Curtius  supposes  to  be  remains  of  the
oldest  fortifications  of  Ithome.  Possibly,  however,  they  may  be  relics
of  the  fortifications  raised  by  the  rebel  Messenians  in  the  third  Messenian
war  (465-455  B.C.)  At  least  one  tower  may  be  seen  on  the  side  further
firom  tibe  ancient  city.  On  the  highest  peak  (the  second  from  the  north-
west end  of  the  ridge)  is  a  ruined  monastery,  a  branch  from  the  monastery
of  Vourkano,  There  are  a  few  ancient  remains  (columns  and  archi-
tectural fragments)  in  and  about  it.  A  hermit  who  lives  in  the  ruins
showed  me  an  inscription  built  into  one  of  the  inner  walls ;  but  the
darkness  and  the  worn  state  of  the  stone  rendered  it  illegible.  Near
the  edge  of  the  clifis  to  the  south  of  the  monastery  are  two  large
ancient  cisterns,  with  stone  troughs.  There  is  a  third  cistern  within  the
fortification-walls,  under  the  peak  adjoining  on  the  south-east  the  peak
on  which  the  monastery  stands.  On  this  peak  (the  second  from  the
south-east,  or  the  third  from  the  north-west)  is  the  paved  threshing-fioor
of  the  old  monastery.  Here,  probably,  was  celebrated  the  annual  festival
which  Pausanias  mentions  (§  2).  The  threshing-fioor  is  now  the  scene
of  the  annual  festival  of  the  Panagia,  at  which  the  peasantry  dance
crowned  with  oleander  blossom.

The  view  from  the  top  of  Ithome  is  magnificent  The  whole  of  the
Messenian  plain,  both  the  upper  half  (Stenyclerus)  and  the  lower  half
(Makaria,  'the  happy  land'),  lies  stretched  out  beneath  us.  To  the
south  the  full  sweep  of  the  Messenian  gulf  is  seen,  with  the  glorious
snow-capped  range  of  Taygetus  bounding  both  plain  and  gulf  on  the
east.  High  up  on  Taygetus  is  visible  the  gap  through  which  the  h
Langada  pass  runs.  Over  this  pass,  which  forms  the  direct  route  M
between  Sparta  and  Messenia,  the  Spartans  must  have  often  marched
to  attack  their  ancient  foes ;  and  it  seems  just  possible  that  the  gleam
of  their  burnished  arms  in  the  sunshine,  as  the  army  defiled  over  the


i\


438  THE  SCULPTOR  AGELADAS        bk.  iv.  mbssbnu


pass,  may  have  been  visible  to  the  sentinels  on  Ithome.  Further  to  the
north  we  see  the  mountains  of  Arcadia,  with  the  Lycaean  group  am-
spicuous  on  the  north-east.  Westward  the  view  is  in  general  bounded
by  the  nearer  and  lower  hills  of  Messenia ;  but  where  they  dip  on  the
north-west  and  again  on  the  south-west  we  catch  glimpses  of  the  Ionian
or  (as  the  ancients  also  called  it)  the  Sicilian  sea.

See  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  362  sqq,  ;  Leake,  Morea^  I.  p.  386  sqq,  ;  Cnitias,
Pelop,  2.  p.  147  sq,  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  p.  449  sqq,  ;  W.  G.  Clark,  Ptl^.
p.  234  sq,  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  165 ;  Baedeker,'  p.  358  sq,  ;  Guide-JooMM^  1
p.  277  sq.

33.  I.  who  claim  that  Zeus  was  bom  and  brought  np  amoBf
thexo.  On  the  birth  and  childhood  of  Zeus  as  represented  in  ancient
art  see  Overbeck,  in  the  Verhandlungen  of  the  Royal  Saxon  Academy
(Leipsic),  Phil,  histor.  Class,  18  (1866),  pp.  229-256  ;  fV/.,  Griech.  Kunst-
mythologies  2.  p.  322  sqq,

33.  2.  The  image  of  Zeus  is  a  work  of  Ageladas.  The  chronok)gy
of  the  sculptor  Ageladas  is  beset  with  difficulties.  If,  as  Pausanias  says,
the  image  of  Zeus  was  made  for  the  Messenians  of  Naupactus,  it  cannot
have  been  made  before  455  B.C.,  the  year  in  which  the  banished
Messenians  settled  at  Naupactus  (see  iv.  24.  7).  But  Ageladas  also
made  statues  (i)  of  Anochus,  who  gained  an  Olympic  prize  in  520  B.C
(Paus.  vi.  14.  11) ;  (2)  of  Cleosthenes,  who  gained  an  Olympic  prize  in
516  B.C.  (Paus.  vi.  10.  6);  and  (3)  of  Timasitheus,  who  gained  an
Olympic  prize  not  later  than  507  B.C.  (Paus.  vi.  8.  6).  Thus  the  artistic
activity  of  Ageladas  would  seem  to  have  extended  from  520  B.C.  to  455
B.C.  at  least  But  this  is  not  all.  According  to  a  scholiast  on  Aristo-
phanes {Frogs s  501)  Ageladas  made  the  image  of  Hercules  Alexicacus
(*  warder-off  of  evil ')  which  stood  in  the  Attic  township  of  Melite  ;  and
he  made  it,  according  to  the  scholiast,  during  the  great  plague  which
was  stayed  in  427  B.C.  by  the  making  of  this  very  image.  Moreover
Pliny  {N,  H,  xxxiv.  49)  says  that  Ageladas  flourished  in  Ol.  87  (432-
429  B.a)  Thus  if  we  accepted  these  data,  we  should  have  to  suppose
that  the  artistic  activity  of  Ageladas  extended  over  93  years,  from  520  B.C
to  427  B.C  This  is  practically  impossible,  and  various  ways  of  evading
the  difficulty  have  been  suggested.  The  late  H.  Brunn  proposed  to
shorten  the  artist's  life  at  both  ends.  He  adduced  reasons  for  belie\'ing
that  the  statues  of  Olympic  victors  were  often  not  made  for  some  years
after  the  victory  which  they  were  intended  to  celebrate.  Hence  he  held
that  the  statue  of  Anochus,  the  Olympic  victor  of  520  B.C.,  need  not
have  been  made  till  500  B.C.  Again,  he  showed  that  popular  tradition
was  apt  to  confuse  all  outbreaks  of  pestilence  with  the  great  plague  of
430-427  B.C. ;  and  while  he  did  not  deny  that  Ageladas  made  tfie  image
of  Hercules  Alexicacus,  and  made  it  to  stay  a  pestilence,  he  thought  that
this  pestilence  could  not  have  been  the  great  plague  of  430-427  B.C,
but  must  have  been  an  earlier  one.  He  got  rid  of  Pliny's  statement  by
supposing  that  Pliny,  like  the  scholiast  on  Aristophanes,  had  been  misled
by  assigning  a  wrong  date  to  the  image  of  Hercules  Alexicacus.  Thus
Brunn  reduced  the  artistic  life  of  Ageladas  to  reasonable  limits,  namely


:h.  XXXIII  THE  SCULPTOR  AGELADAS  439

J  00-4  5  5  B.C.  Afterwards  he  docked  the  sculptor  of  seven  more  years  of
lis  life  by  dating  the  end  of  the  Messenian  war,  and  consequently  the
'»ettlement  of  the  Messenians  at  Naupactus,  in  462  B.C.  with  Kriiger,
nstead  of  in  455  B.c.  Prof.  Overbeck  is  also  of  opinion  that  the
scholiast  on  Aristophanes  was  in  error  in  stating  that  Ageladas  was  at
vork  during  the  great  plague  at  Athens  (430-427  B.C.),  and  he  gets  rid
>f  Pliny's  evidence  in  the  same  way  as  Brunn  did.  Further,  he  believes
:hat  Pausanias's  statement  that  the  image  of  Zeus  "  was  originally  made
for  the  Messenians  of  Naupactus  "  does  not  imply  that  the  Messenians
wrere  actually  at  Naupactus  when  the  image  was  made  for  them ;  it  may
nean  that  it  was  made  for  them  before  they  went  to  Naupactus,  while
:hey  were  still  at  Ithome  or  at  Messana  in  Sicily  or  anywhere.  This
singular  interpretation  of  Pausanias's  words,  though  it  is  ^so  maintained
3y  Mr.  A.  S.  Murray,  seems  to  me  quite  inadmissible.  If  Pausanias's
statement  means  anything,  it  means  that  the  image  was  made  for  the
Messenians  while  they  were  at  Naupactus.  Having  thus  thrown  over-
x)ard  the  evidence  of  Pausanias,  Pliny,  and  the  scholiast  on  Aristophanes,
Prof.  Overbeck  is  at  liberty  to  place  the  artistic  career  of  Ageladas  about
520-500  B.C.  Prof.  W.  Klein  cuts  the  knot  by  his  favourite  device  of
issuming  two  artists  of  the  same  name.

Another  factor  in  determining  the  date  of  Ageladas  was  introduced
Dy  the  discovery  at  Olympia  of  the  base  of  a  statue  bearing  the  name  of
\geladas  (spelt  Hagelaidas)  the  Argive,  father  of  the  sculptor  Atotus  or
}f  Argeiadas  (for  the  inscription  is  variously  interpreted).  This  base  was
bund  in  a  position  which  showed  that  it  must  have  been  set  up  before
Jie  great  temple  of  Zeus  was  built.  Hence  if  that  temple  was  built,  as
t  seems  to  have  been,  between  468  and  456  B.C.  (see  note  on  v.  10.  2),
he  son  of  Ageladas  must  have  been  at  work  not  later  than  468  B.C.  and
nay  have  been  at  work  a  good  deal  earlier,  for  the  style  of  the  letters  is
juch  that  the  inscription  may  very  well  date  from  500  B.C.  Prof.  Robert
lolds  that  the  temple  of  Zeus  was  begun  in  01.  75  (480  B.C.),  and  that
ronsequently  the  base  in  question  must  be  earlier  than  that  year.  At  all
jvents  if  the  Hagelaidas  of  the  inscription  is  the  same  with  our  sculptor,
t  would  appear  that  the  son  or  the  slave  (as  Professors  v.  Wilamowitz-
Vlollendorff  and  C.  Robert  interpret  the  inscription)  of  Ageladas  was
It  work  as  a  sculptor  in  the  first  half  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.,  and  that
:onsequently  the  artistic  career  of  Ageladas  himself  must  have  fallen  in
:he  early  part  of  that  century  or  in  the  latter  part  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.
This  agrees  on  the  whole  with  the  other  evidence.  It  does  not  seem
wholly  impossible  that  Ageladas  should  have  made  a  statue  in  520  B.C.
and  one  in  455  B.C.  If  we  suppose  that  he  was  20  years  of  age  when
he  made  the  statue  of  Anochus  in  520  B.C.,  he  would  be  86  years  old
when  he  made  the  image  of  Zeus  for  the  Messenians  of  Naupactus,
supposing  that  the  image  was  made  immediately  after  the  Messenians
settled  at  Naupactus.

See  H.  Brunn,  Geschichte  der  griech,  KiinstUr^  I.  p.  63  sqq, ;  tr/.,  Die  Kunst
hn  Homer ^  p.  48  5q.\  W.  Klein,  in  Archdolog.-epigraphische  Mittheilungen  aus
Oesterrcicky  7  (1883),  p.  60  sqq, ;  Overbeck,  'Zur  Chronologie  des  Agelaidas  oder
'hagelaidas/  Berickte  iiber  die   Verhandlungen  d.  k.  sacks.   GeselL  d,   IVissen.,


440  THE  ZEUS  OF  AGELADAS  BK.  iv.  mbssuu

Pbilolog.  histor.  CL  44  (189a),  pp.  26-34;  id.,  Ceick.  d.  gritek.  Plastikf  l.[i
140;  A,  S.  Murray,  Hislery  of  Crak  Sculptun?  I.  p.  185  tqq.;  C.  BobcB,
ArchaaiogUcke  Mdnktn,  p.  92  i;;. ;  Collignon,  Hist,  dc  la  SaUpiim  Graqm,  1.
p.  316  iq.  Far  the  Olympian  inscription  conlaining  the  name  of  Mageluiui,  rc
Koebl,  /■  G.  A.  No.  42  (cp.  No.  41) ;  id.,  Imagitus  Imcr.  Grate.  Antiqtan.  Ho.
1 1 ;  Loewy,  Intchriften  gritch.  BildMaiter,  No,  30  i  Canei,  Dtltetui  lam.
Grau.*  No.  JS  •  Roberts,  Gntk  Epigraphy,  No.  81  ;  R.  Scholl,  'Griedmck
KUnstlerinschriflen,"  in  flJJ/or.  »»/  fkilalog.  AufiiUii  Emit  Curtitu  gimJad,

p.   117  sqq.

Difference  of  opinion  also  exists  with  regard  to  the  manoer  in  wfudi
Agcladas  represented  Zeus  of  Ithome.  On  the  one  hand  ccuns  of
Messene  portray  Zeus  as  a  bearded  man  striding  towards  the  right,  wA
an  eagle  on  his  outstretched  left  arm  and  a  thnnds-
bolt  in  his  raised  right  hand.  Moreover  sooe
of  these  coins  bear  the  inscription  MESSANIUX
IGfiM.  See  Imhoof-B lamer  and  Gardner,  Num.
Comm.  on  Pans.  p.  67  sq.,  with  pi.  P  iv.  v.  j  Head,
Historia  Nutnmorutn,  p.  361  sq.\  id.,  Coins  of  ^
Andenis,  iii.  B.  3S  and  iv.  B.  24  ;  Gardner,  Tjfa
of  Greek  Coins,  pi.  viii.  25  and  xii.  47;  i^
Catalogue  of  Greek  Coins  in  /he  British  Musetm,
'  Peloponnesus,  p.  109  sqq.,  with  pi.  xxii.  I.  S-  7-
10 ;  Overbeck,  GrieclUscke  Kurtstmytholopt,  J-
p.  II.  Now  since  Ithomatian  Zeus  is  the  only  Zeus  known  to  hat
been  worshipped  by  the  Messenians,  and  since  his  image  was  madt
by  Ageladas,  numismatists  have  naturally  concluded  that  the  represeoB-
tion  of  Zeus  on  the  coins  of  Messene  is  a  copy  of  the  stattie  made  br
Ageladas.  A  different  view  was  taken  by  the  late  H.  Brunn.  He
pointed  out  that  Ageladas  made  a  statue  of  Zeus,  represented  as  a  child,
for  the  town  of  Aegium  (see  Paus.  vii.  34.  4}.  Now  Aegium  lay  directly
opposite  Naupactus,  the  town  for  which,  when  it  was  occupied  by  the
Messenians,  Ageladas  made  the  image  of  Ithomatian  Zeus.  Thus  the
two  towns,  separated  only  by  an  arm  of  the  sea,  had  both  statues  rf
Zeus  by  the  same  artist.  Moreover  both  statues  were  worshipped  in  the
same  way ;  each  year  a  priest  was  chosen,  who  kept  the  image  in  his
own  house.  Again,  the  Messenians  had  a  tradition  that  Zeus  was  bom
and  brought  up  in  Messenia,  and  that  one  of  his  nurses  had  given  he
name  to  Ml.  Ithome  (Paus.  iv.  33.  i).  Similarly  the  people  of  Aep"""
had  a  legend  that  the  infent  Zeus  was  brought  up  by  a  she-goat  ai
Aegium  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  387).  From  all  these  coincidences  Brum
thought  it  highly  probable  that  the  Zeus  of  Ithome,  like  the  Zeus  of
Aegium,  was  represented  as  a  child,  which  would  further  explain  why  tf«
priest,  acting  as  a  sort  of  foster-father,  kept  the  image  of  the  infant  god  in
his  house.  See  Brunn,  Gesch.  der griech.  Kiinsller,  i.p.  73.  This  ingeni-
ous view  is  on  the  whole  accepted  by  Prof  Overbeck,  who  adduces  soow
fresh  arguments  in  support  of  it.  He  points  out  that  the  type  of  Zou
which  appears  on  coins  of  Messene  is  not  confined  to  them,  but  is  founii
also  on  coins  of  Lucania,  Pantalia  in  Thrace,  Megara,  Patrae,  Maniinea!
etc.,  and  that  other  gods  than  Zeus  are  represented  on  coins  in  the  same
attitude,  as  for  example  Poseidon  on  coins  of  Posidonia,  and  Apollo  OB


CH.  XXXIII  THE  BALYRA  441

coins  of  Caulonia.  This,  however,  is  an  argument  that  cuts  two  ways  ;  for
if  this  type  of  image  was  so  common  it  is  all  the  more  likely  to  have  been
found  at  Messene.  Prof.  Overbeck  also  points  out  that  the  type  of  Zeus
on  coins  of  Messene  was  not  always  the  same ;  sometimes  the  god  was
represented  standing  quietly,  not  striding  along.  See  Overbeck,  *  Die
zwei  Zeusbilder  des  Ageladas,'  Rheinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  22  (1867),
pp.  122-127  ;  iV/.,  Gesch,  der  griech,  Plasiik,^  i.  p.  141  ;  id,y  Criechische
Kunstmythologie^  2.  p.  11  sqq,  Brunn's  view  is  also  accepted  by  Mr.
Murray  {History  of  Greek  Sculpture?  i.  p.  187).  Mrs.  Mitchell,  on  the
other  hand,  inclines  to  agree  with  the  numismatists  {History  of  Ancient
Scuipturey  p.  249),  and  Prof.  Collignon  does  so  decidedly  {Hist,  de  la
Sculpture  Grecque^  i.  p.  318).  They  are  probably  right.  In  the  Museum
of  Lyons  there  is  a  bronze  statuette  representing  Zeus  in  the  attitude  in
which  he  appears  on  the  Messenian  coins.  See  £.  de  Chanot,  '  Jupiter,
bronze  du  Musde  de  Lyon,'  Gcusette  Arch^ologique^  6  (1880),  pp.  80-82.
ZZ.  3.  the  stream  of  the  Balsrra.  Pausanias  is  now  journeying
north-east  from  Messene.  He  has  descended  from  the  skirts  of  Mt.
Ithome  into  the  Messenian  plain  and  comes  to  a  stream  which  he  calls
the  Balyra.  This  was  perhaps  the  small  stream  which  flows  into  the
Mavrozoumenos  from  the  west,  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  to  the  south
of  the  Triple  Bridge  (as  to  which  see  below).  The  stream  is  now
called  the  Sphendamosy  as  I  am  informed  by  Mr.  W.  J.  Woodhouse,
who  has  made  a  special  study  of  Messenian  topography  on  the  spot.
It  is  probably  the  stream  which  Gell  crossed  in  i  hoiu-  23  minutes  from
the  Arcadian  gate  of  Messene  (Gell,  Itinerary  of  the  Moreoy  p.  60).
This  distance  would  agree  fairly  with  the  30  furlongs  mentioned  by
Pausanias.  The  Balyra  is  generally  identified  with  the  Mavrozoumenos^
but  this  identification  rests  upon  a  mistranslation  of  the  last  words
of  the  section.  Pausanias  says  :  17  6c  Acvkoctui  koX  "Afi^iros  <rvfipdk'
Xova-iv  €9  rh  avrh  ra  pevfiara,  *  the  Leucasia  and  the  Amphitus  unite
their  streams.'  The  sentence  is  commonly  understood  to  mean :  *  The
Leucasia  and  Amphitus  unite  their  streams  to  it'  (namely  to  the
Balyra).  But  in  Greek  this  would  require  cs  avrS  instead  of  es  rh
avTO,  The  words  (rufi/idXkova-LV  €S  rh  avrb  rot  pevfiara  can  only  mean
*form  a  junction  witA  each  other,  not  with  another  stream.  Hence  /
Pausanias  is  describing  the  conflux,  not  of  three,  but  of  two  rivers :  /
and  this  conflux  must  beyond  doubt  be  the  meeting  of  the  two  rivers
at  the  Triple  Bridge.  Of  the  two  rivers  which  meet  at  the  Triple
Bridge  or  the  Mavrosoumenos  bridge,  as  the  Greeks  call  it,  the  one
which  comes  from  the  north-west,  the  Mavrozoumenos  (or  VasiUko  as
Leake  says  it  is  called  above  the  bridge)  is  probably  the  Leucasia  of
Pausanias ;  the  one  which  comes  from  the  north,  now  called  the  Vivari
(or  Divari),  is  probably  the  Amphitus  of  Pausanias.  This  identification
of  the  rivers  Balyra,  Leucasia,  and  Amphitus  was  made  by  W.  G.
Clark  {Pelop,  p.  240  sq.\  and  is  accepted  by  Mr.  W.  J.  Woodhouse,
at  least  so  far  as  the  Balyra  is  concerned.  There  seems  to  be  only
one  other  possibility.  The  two  streams  which  unite  at  the  bridge  must  be
the  Leucasia  and  Amphitus  ;  but  the  Balyra  may  be  the  river  formed  by
their  junction.     In  favour  of  this  latter  view  it  may  be  said  that,  unless


442  THE  TRIPLE  BRIDGE  bk.  iv.  mksssnu

the  Mavrozoumenos  below  the  bridge  is  the  ancient  Balyra,  we  havt
no  ancient  name  for  this  important  river  from  the   point  where  the
Leucasia  and  Amphitus  meet  to  the  point  where  it  is  joined  by  die
Pamisus  coming  from  H,  Floras,     From  this  latter  point  to  the  sea  the
river  is  the  ancient  Pamisus.     As  to  the  Triple  Bridge,  it  "  owes  its
celebrity,  first,  to  its  antiquity,   and  secondly,   its  singular  plan.    A
horizontal  section  of  it  would  resemble  the  cognizance  of  the  Isle  of
Man,  the  three  legs,  more  than  anything  else.     The  two  rivers,  as  I
have  said,  join,  leaving  an  apex  of   low  land,   liable  to  be  flooded,
between  them.     A  few  yards  above  the  apex  is  the  bridge ;  of  whid
the  western  leg  spans  the  Mavrozoumenos^  the  eastern  the  Vivaria  and
the  northern   leg   stretches  over  the   low   ground   between"   (W.  G.
Clark).      This  northern  leg  is  a  causeway  rather  than  a  bridge ;  the
bridge,  strictly  speaking,  has  only  two  arms.      A  good  deal  of  it  is
ancient,  probably  of  the  same  date  as  Messene,  since  it  is  built  in  the
same   regular   style  of  masonry.     The   bridge   contains  in  all  seven
arches  and  one  rectangular  opening.      This  latter  opening  is  a  sort
of  doorway  for  the  passage  of  the  water ;  it  is  about  7  feet  high  by
4  feet  wide,  with  a  large  single  stone  for  architrave.     The  masonry
of  this  rectangular  opening  or  water-gate  appears  to  be  wholly  ancient
The  arches,  on  the  other  hand,  are  generally  said  to  be  mediaeval  or
modem ;  but  Mr.  W.  G.  Clark  was  decidedly  of  opinion  that  several
courses  in  one  of  the  arches  over  the  western  stream  (the  Marurosovr
menos)  are  ancient     He  says :    "  The  span  of  the  arch  is  about  17
feet,  and  its  height  from  the  water  to  the  keystone  about  1 3  feet,  of
which  9  ft.  6  in.  from    the  water   consist  of  Hellenic   work."    The
matter  is  important  for  the  decision  of  the  question  whether  the  ancient
Greeks  were  acquainted  with  the  principle  of  the  arch.     See  Dodwcll,
Tour^  2.  p.   357  ;  Gell,  Itinerary  of  the  Morea,  p.  58  ;  Leake,  Morea^
I.   p.  479  sqq. ;  Mure,  Journal^  2.   p.   263  sq, ;    Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.
150  sq,\    W.   G.    Clark,   Pelop,  p.    240  sqq,\    Bursian,   Geogr.  2.  p*
163;  Baedeker,^  p.  361  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  284.     At  Xcrofcampo\^
Laconia  one  of  the  western  tributaries  of  the  Eurotas  is  spanned  by  *
single-arched  bridge,  which,  according  to  Mure  {Journal^  2.  p.  247  sqq.\
is  entirely  of  ancient,  if  not  prehistoric  masonry.     A  Greek  engineer,
who  had  been  employed  by  the  government  in  surveying  for  projected
roads,  told  W.  G.  Clark  that  "  he  had  found  in  various  parts  of  Greece
remains  of  bridges,  unquestionably  Hellenic,  the  span  of  which  was  too
wide  to  have  been  accomplished  except  by  means  of  an  arch.     H^
instanced  in  particular  one  at  Kdkino^  near  Thebes,  and  had  no  doubt
whatever  that  the  ancient   Greeks  were  perfectly  conversant  with  tb^
principle  of  the  arch "  (W.  G.  Clark,  Pelop.  p.  203).     However,  with
regard  to  the  arch  of  the  Mavrozoumenos  bridge  referred  to  by  Clark*
Col.  Leake  observes :  "  Six  courses  of  Hellenic  masonry  still  remain  5
and  it  appears  from  the  shaping  of  the  stones  of  these  courses,  wher«
they  are  united  to  one  of  the  modem  arches,  that  the  ancient  arch  w3.s
not   formed  on    the    principle  of  concentric    wedges,   but  by  cours^^
shaped  to  a  curve"  (Leake,  Pelop,  p.  197).     This  also  was  the  opinio^
of  Gell  (/.r.),  and  it  is  entirely  confirmed  by  the  drawing  of  the  brid^^


Ill  THE  STENYCLERIAN  PLAIN  443

y  the  French  surveyors,  from  which  it  clearly  appears  that  the
iped  opening  in  the  bridge,  though  certainly  of  ancient  Greek
j^  is  not  constructed  on  the  principle  of  the  arch  at  all,  but
consists  of  horizontal  courses  of  masonry  protruding  one  above
er  (Blouet,  Expedition  scientifique  de  Marie:  Architecture^  i.
fig.  ii.)  As  to  the  question  whether  the  Greeks  of  the  best
vere  acquainted  with  the  principle  of  the  true  arch  (formed  by
ric  wedges),  see  Leake,  Pelop,  p.  1 1 5  sqq,
Mavrozoumenos  bridge  has  been  compared  to  a  similar  one  at
d  in  Lincolnshire ;  and  at  Inchinnan  in  Renfrewshire  there  is  a
bridge  spanning  the  White  and  the  Black  Cart  just  above  their

•

3.  because  here  Tbamyris  threw  away  {apobalein)  his  lyre.
e  name  of  the  river  was  popularly  derived  from  the  verb  bcUlein^
\s.^  As  to  a  vase-painting  representing  the  contest  of  Thamyris
e  Muses,  see  H.  Heydemann,  '  La  gara  di  Tamiri  coUe  Muse,*
delV  Institute^  39  (1867),  pp.  363-373.  Cp.  §  7  of  this  chapter;
2  ;  X.  30.  8.

4.  the  Stenyclerian  plain.  This  is  the  northern  plain  of
ia.  "  This  fertile  and  weU-watered  expanse,  sheltered  from  the
id  east  winds  by  screens  of  lofty  hills,  is  covered  with  luxuriant
of  orange-trees,  fig-trees,  olives,  and  mulberries,  interspersed
ew  date-palms.  The  vineyards  and  corn-fields  are  surrounded
(penetrable  hedges  of  cactus ;  and  in  the  villages  the  aloe
he  dimensions  of  a  tree"  (Baedeker,  Engl.  Trans.^  p.  291).

central  portion  of  Messenia,  from  north  to  south,  consists  of

alluvial  plain,  or  rather  of  two  such  plains,  a  northern  and  a

1,  divided  from  each  other  by  low  hills,  through  which,  however,

•;rozoumenos  river  makes  its  way  from  the  northern  plain  to  join

lisus  in  the  southern  plain.     The  northern  or  upper  plain  is  the

irian  plain  of  the  ancients ;  the  southern  or  lower  is  the  Makaria

py  land'  (see  above,  p.  428).     "  If  the  mildness  of  its  climate,

idance  of  its  water,  and  the  fertility  of  its  soil  make  the  upper

le  of  the  most  fortunate  districts  of  Greece,  these  advantages

inced  in  the  lower  plain,  which  is  open  to  the  sea  and  which

intains  its  ancient  reputation.     In  no  other  part  of  Greece  will

a  tillage  so  productive,  nowhere  in  equal  measure  the  luxuriant

3n  of  the  south.     High  hedges  of  cactus  divide  the  well-tilled

the  great  aloe  stands  in  thick  clumps,   lemons  and  oranges

plentifully,  the  date  itself  ripens  under  the  Messenian  sun,  and

irabundance  of  oil  and  wine  is  exported  from  Kalamata,     The

ess  of  Messenia  and  the  warmth  of  the  climate  in  its  lowlands

•mth  almost  excessive  for  Greece — could  not  but  influence  the

Df  its  inhabitants.     To  this  day  the  Mainote  of  Taygetus,  with

ike  bearing  and  way  of  life,  forms  a  strong  contrast  to  the  more

ite  husbandman  of  Kalamata^  who  plies  his  peaceful  calling  in

ly  plain,  shaded  by  a  broad  straw  hat.     The  neighbourhood  of

was  the  fatal  dower  of  beautiful  Messenia,  whose  oldest  legends,

as  her  whole  history,  betray  a  certain  weakness  and  lack  of


444  OECHALIA — ANDANJA  BK.  iv.  mkssenu

independence"  (Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  123).  Cp.  Philippson,  Pehponnes^
p.  378  sgg.

33.  4*  Oechalia  the  Oamasian  grove.     This  appears  to

have  been  near  the  site  of  the  modem  village  of  Philia^  towards  the
north-east  comer  of  the  Stenyclerian  plain.  Its  site  is  approximately
determined  by  its  distance  (8  Greek  furlongs,  see  §  6)  from  Andania,
the  situation  of  which  is  known  (see  below).  Thus  the  stream  which
flows  by  the  villages  of  Philia  and  Sandani  seems  to  be  the  Charadras
mentioned  by  Pausanias.  Its  modem  name,  as  I  learn  from  Mr.
J.  W.  Woodhouse,  is  Dzami,  See  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  133  sq.  ;  Bursian,
Geogr,  2.  p.  164.     As  to  Oechalia  see  note  on  iv.  2.  2.

33.  4.  Oamean  ApoUo Hermes  carrying  a  ram.  H^gne.  These

deities  are  all  mentioned  repeatedly  in  the  great  inscription  relating  to
the  Andanian  mysteries  (see  note  on  iv.  i.  5).  It  is  there  provided
(lines  32  sgq,y  69  sgg,)  that  a  boar  shall  be  sacrificed  to  the  Camean
Apollo,  a  ram  to  Hermes,  and  a  sheep  to  Hagne ;  also  a  pregnant  sow
to  Demeter,  and  a  young  two-year  sow  to  the  Great  Gods.

33.  4.  a  spring  of  water  rises  beside  her  image.  The  exactness
of  Pausanias's  description  is  proved  by  the  great  inscription  of  the
Andanian  mysteries  (see  note  on  iv.  1.5),  which  mentions  (line  85  sgq.)
the  spring  and  the  image  beside  it.  The  passage  runs  as  follows:
"  The  fountain  which  is  called  the  fountain  of  Hagna  in  the  ancient
writings,  and  the  image  beside  the  fountain,  shall  be  in  the  charge  of
Mnasistratus  as  long  as  he  lives,  and  along  with  the  Sacred  Men  he
shall  share  in  the  sacrifices  and  mysteries  and  in  all  that  is  offered
upon  the  table  beside  the  fountain,  and  he  shall  get  the  skins  of  the
animals  that  are  sacrificed ;  and  of  the  money  which  is  laid  beside  the
fountain  or  cast  into  the  treasury  (when  it  shall  be  built)  by  persons
who  offer  sacrifice,  Mnasistratus  shall  get  the  third  part."  Provision  is
also  made  in  the  inscription  for  building  two  treasure-houses  with  the
money  offered  by  the  faithful.  The  treasure-houses  were  to  be  built  of
stone  and  were  to  be  secured  with  locks  and  keys.  One  of  the
treasuries  was  to  be  built  in  the  temple  of  the  Great  Gods ;  the  other
beside  the  fountain.  There  were  to  be  two  keys  for  the  latter ;  one  of
the  keys  was  to  be  kept  by  Mnasistratus,  the  other  was  to  be  kept  by
the  Sacred  Men.  Once  a  year,  at  the  time  of  the  mysteries,  the
treasuries  were  to  be  opened  and  money  taken  out.

33.  5.  the  bronze  nm.     See  iv.  26.  7  sg,

33.  6.  the  mins  of  Andania.  See  iv.  i.  2  and  7  sg.  ;  iv.  2.  6;
iv.  3.  7  and  10  ;  iv.  26.  6.  The  ruins  of  Andania  were  discovered  by
Prof.  E.  Curtius  in  1840.  They  occupy  a  projecting  hill  above  the
village  of  Trypha^  at  the  north-eastern  comer  of  the  Stenyclerian  plain,
where  a  stream  (the  Charadms  ?)  issues  from  the  mountains  and  turns  a
mill.  In  the  plain,  three  quarters  of  an  hour  to  the  south-west  of  the
ruins,  the  village  of  Sandani  appears  to  have  preserved  the  ancient
name.  The  hiU  of  Andania  slopes  steeply  on  the  one  side  to  the  plain,
on  the  other  to  the  valley  in  which  the  mill  is.  The  top  is  a  small
tableland,  about  150  paces  square,  and  is  enclosed  with  walls,  thus
forming  an  acropolis.     From  this  acropolis  a  branch-wall  runs  out  to  the


CH.  XXXIV  ANDANIA—DORIUM  445


north-east ;  and  two  other  branch-walls  run  out  southwards  in  the  direc-
tion of  the  mill-stream,  till  their  traces  are  lost  on  the  steep  slopes.  The
back  wall  of  the  acropolis  is  the  best  preserved ;  there  is  an  ancient  gate-
way in  it.  The  walls  are  not  built  of  very  large  blocks,  but  here  and
there  they  are  20  feet  thick.  They  form  angles  and  bastions,  but  have
no  towers.     The  ruins  are  now  called  Helleniko.


See  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  132  sq, ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  164 ;  Baedeker,'  p.
\ ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  283.     Gell  rec       "     "   "
Sandani  {^Itinerary  of  the  Morea,  p.  69).


362  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  283.     Gell  recognised  the  name  Andania  in  the  modem

^ehe  "


33.  6.  Polichna.  Pausanias  now  strikes  westward  from  Andania
across  the  Stenyclerian  plain.  But  the  places  mentioned  by  him  in  the
rest  of  this  chapter  have  not  yet  been  identified  with  certainty.  It  is
conjectured  that  Polichne  may  have  been  near  the  khan  of  Kokla^  at  the
southern  end  of  the  plain  or  valley  of  Soulima,  It  is  reached  by  follow-
ing up  the  narrow  wooded  valley  through  which  the  Mavrozoumenos  flows
above  the  Triple  Bridge.  See  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  154;  Bursian,
Geogr,  2.  p.  163  ;  Philippson,  PeicponneSy  p.  333.

33.  7.  Dorinm.  The  passage  of  Homer  referred  to  by  Pausanias
is  Iltady  ii.  594-600.  Cp.  Stephanus  Byz.,  s,v,  Atopiov,  Strabo  (viii.
p.  350)  says:  "Some  say  that  Dorium  was  a  mountain,  some  that  it
was  a  plain,  and  others  that  it  was  a  small  town.  Nothing  of  it  is  now
shown.  However,  some  say  that  what  is  now  called  Oluris  or  Alura  in
the  Defile  (as  it  is  called)  of  Messenia  is  Dorium."  As  to  the  Defile
{Aulon)  of  Messenia  see  iv.  36.  7  note.  As  to  the  position  of  Dorium
Leake  says  {Morea^  i.  p.  484):  "The  plain  of  Sulimd^  I  have  little
doubt,  is  the  district  of  the  Homeric  Dorium,  as  well  from  Pausanias,
...  as  from  Strabo,  who  informs  us,  that,  according  to  some  opinions,
Dorium  stood  on  the  site  of  a  place  called  in  his  time  Olurus  \sic\  which
was  situated  in  the  Aulon  of  Messenia ;  whence  it  would  seem  that
Strabo  understood  by  Aulon  the  whole  valley  of  Kokhloy  of  which
indeed  the  word  Aulon,  in  its  ordinary  acceptation,  was  exactly  descrip-
tive. Xenophon,  also,  in  describing  King  Agis  as  having  marched  from
Sparta  through  Aulon  of  Messenia  and  the  Lepreatis  (Xenophon,  He!-
lentcoy  iii.  2.  25),  appears  to  refer  to  Aulon  in  the  same  sense  as  Strabo."
Prof.  Curtius  (Pelop,  2.  p.  154)  thinks  that  Dorium  may  have  been
about  the  watershed  between  the  basins  of  the  Mavrozoumenos  and  the
Cyparissiae  river.  Mr.  J.  W.  Woodhouse,  in  a  letter  to  me,  suggests
that  the  site  of  Dorium  may  be  marked  by  some  Cyclopean  ruins  of  the
second  order  at  AieioSy  which  is  a  village  in  the  hills  to  the  south  of  the
plain  of  Soulitna,  There  is  here  a  beautiful  perennial  spring,  which  may
be  the  spring  called  Achaia  by  Pausanias.

t33.  7.  the  epic  poem  called  the  Minyad.     See  x.  28.  2  note.
34.   I.  The  PamisuB  flows  through  tilled  land.     This  is  the  great
southern  plain  of  Messenia  known  in  antiquity  as  Makaria  or  *  the  Happy
Land.'     See  notes  on  30.  2  ;  31.  4  ;  33.  4.     The  modem  name  of  the
Pamisus  is  Pimantsa  or  Dipotamo,

34.  I.  vessels  sail  np  it  from  the  sea  for  about  ten  ftirlongs.
At  present,  in  spite  of  the  marshy  nature  of  the  mouth  of  the  river,  small


446  THE  PAMISUS  DK.  iv.  messenia

craft  can  ascend  the  Pamisus  as  far  as  Nisi^  a  busy  little  town  of  6300
inhabitants,  situated  on  a  sandy  dune  about  two  and  a  half  miles  fircmi
the  mouth  of  the  river  (Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  162  sq, ;  Baedeker,^  p.
362  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  285  ;  Philippson,  PelopanneSy  pp.  349,  496)1

34«   I.  Sea-fish  also  ascend  it.     The  Pamisus  still  aboundis  in  fish,
according  to  Fiedler  {Retse^  i.  p.  353).

34.   I.  the  Rhine.     On  the  Rhine  in  2in\Ai\\i\ty  s^^  Jtthrducher  dis
Vereins  von  Altcrthumsfreunden  im  Rheinlande^  64  (1878),  pp.  1-17.

34.  2.  the  gray  mullet.     The  Greek  word  is  k€<^Xos.     *'  The  fish
is  still  known  by  its  ancient  name,  and  though  it  frequents  the  rivers,  it
attains  the  greatest  size  and  fatness  in  the  lagoons  of  the  coasts  of
Greece,  where  it  constitutes  the  most  profitable  part  of  the  fisheries  of
those  shallow  maritime  lakes.     From  the  roe  is  made  the  coa  rdpix^
Romaic^,  avyordpixovy   Italicd,  botargo"  (Leake,  Morea^   i.   p.  440).
Aristotle  and  Aelian  also  remark  that  this  fish  lives  in  muddy  water
(Aristotle,  Hist  An,  viii.  2.  p.   591  a  25  and  27  (Berlin  ed.)  ;  Aeliao,
Nat.  An,  i.  3).     As  to  the  mullets  in  the  Achelous,  to  which  Pausanias
alludes.  Chandler  writing  last  century  says  :  "  The  Achelous  was  among
the  rivers  most  noted  for  shoals  of  fish,  which  entered  from  the  sea,
especially  in  spring.     It  was  particularly  frequented  by  mullet,  which
delight  in  foul  and  muddy  water.     The  multitudes  now  taken  yearly  at
that  season  on  the  shallows  surpass  belief.     The  rows  [roes]  are  made
into  Botargo  and  Caviaro  [caviare]  ;  a  species  of  food,  which  the  antients
esteemed  as  a  delicacy.     The  small  sheds,  erected  each  on  a  single
post,  extended  as  far  as  one  could  see,  and  appeared  innumerable.
They  are  designed  for  watchmen,  who  obser\'e  the  finny  squadrons,  and
by  closing  the  avenues  of  the  fences,  secure  them  in  prison"  {Trai'els
in  Greece^  p.  281).

34.  3.  the  Nile  contains  hippopotamuses.  The  hippopotamus  is
described  by  Herodotus  (ii.  71),  Aristotle  {Hist,  An,  ii.  7,  p.  502,  Berlin
ed.),  Diodorus  (i.  35),  Pliny  {Nat.  Hist,  viii.  95),  and  accurately  by
/,  Achilles  Tatius  (iv.  2).  In  antiquity  the  animal  seems  to  have  been
very  common  in  Egypt,  especially  in  the  Delta ;  it  was  hunted  with
harpoons  (Diodorus,  i.  35).  An  hippopotamus  hunt  of  this  sort  is
depicted  in  the  great  mosaic  of  Palestrina  (see  Gazette  Arch/olop'que^
5  (1879),  P-  80),  and  in  a  Theban  wall-painting  (see  Wilkinson,  Manners
and  Customs  of  the  Ancient  Egyptians^  2.  p.  128,  ed.  1878).  The
hippopotamus  is  also  well  represented  in  an  Egyptian  landscape  finely
worked  in  mosaic,  which  was  found  on  the  Aventine  in  1858.  See
Gazette  ArMologique^  6  (1880),  p.  170  sq.^  with  plate  25.  There  is  a
doubtful  representation  of  the  animal  on  a  Punic  monument.  See
Gazette  ArMologique^  3  (1877),  p.  23.  Ammianus  Marcellinus  says
(xxii.  15.  24)  that  in  his  time  the  hippopotamus  was  no  longer  found  in
Egypt ;  but  this  can  hardly  be  true,  for  as  late  as  the  year  1600
A.D.  the  Neapolitan  doctor  Zerenglu  caught  two  of  these  animals  at
Damietta.  The  hippopotamus  has  now  retreated  up  the  Nile,  and  '^
not  found  lower  down  than  the  third  cataract.  See  the  notes  of  Bahx*?
Sayce,  and  Wiedemann  on  Herodotus,  l.c,

34.  3.  sharks.     See  ii.  34.  i  note.


CH.  XXXIV  CORONE  447

34.  4.  Oorone.     Pausanias  now  quits  the  north  of  Messenia  and
turns  south  to  the  Messenian  gulf.     According  to  Strabo  (viii.  p.  360
sq.)  Corone  was  on  the  coast,  not  far  to  the  west  of  the  mouth  of  the
Pamisus.     It  is  the  modem  Petalidiy  a  small  town  on  the  western  shore
of  the  Messenian  gulf,  near  the  head  of  the  gulf.     The  modem  town
stands  in  a  small  but  fruitful  plain  close  under  the  slopes  of  Mt.  Lyko-
dimo  (3140  ft.),  the  ancient  Mt.  Mathia.     Remains  of  an  ancient  break-
water, intended  to  shelter  vessels  from  the  south  wind,  may  be  seen
running  out  from  a  flat  promontory.     The  town  stands  partly  on  this
promontory,  partly  on  the  flat  shore  of  the  bay.     In  the  plain  many
ancient  foundations  have  been  found,  also  marble  sarcophaguses,  point-
ing to  the  existence  of  a  thriving  and  art-loving  population  in  imperial
times.     The  broad-backed  height  which  advances  towards  the  sea  from
Mt.  Lykodimo^  bounded  sharply  on  either  side  by  narrow  glens,  was  the
acropolis  of  Corone.     The  ancient  walls  may  be  traced  mnning  round
the  edge ;  they  are  best  preserved  at  the  narrow  upper  end  of  the
plateau.     They  appear  to  belong  to  the  age  of  Epaminondas  and  were
probably  built  when  the  Messenians  were  restored  to  their  country  after
the  battle  of  Leuctra.     Inside  the  acropolis  are  many  remains  of  build-
ings, also  fragments  of  statues  and  inscriptions.     The  little  plain  imme-
diately to  the  north  of  Corone  is  formed  of  alluvial  soil  brought  down  by
numerous  brooks  ;  and  being  abundantly  supplied  with  water  and  enjoy-
ing  an  extremely  mild  climate,  it  is  one  of  the  most  fertile  spots  in
Greece.     The  whole  plain  is  a  thick  wood  of  fmit-trees,  intersected  by
high  and  impenetrable  hedges  of  cactus.      The  chief  product  of  the
\  neighbourhood  is  figs,  which  are  deemed  the  finest  in  Greece.     They
are   exported  in  small  caiques  as  far  as  Albania  and  Dalmatia ;  other
exports  are  olives,   oranges,   lemons,   and  wine.      According  to   Livy
(xxxix.  49)  it  was  to  protect  Corone,  which  was  threatened  by  Lycortas,
that  Philopoemen  made  his  last  and  fatal  expedition.     But  Plutarch
{PAiiopoemeny  18)  mentions  Colonis  {i.e,  Colonides,  see  §  8  of  this  chap-
ter) as  the  place  which  Philopoemen  wished  to  protect.     As  to  the
expedition  cp.  iv.  29.  11  sq.\  viii.  51.  5  sqq.

See  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  165  sq,  ;  «V/.,  BulUttino  ddt  Inst,  1841,  pp.  43-47;
also  Welcker,  Tagebuchy  1.  p.  233  sqq.\  Boblaye,  PeclurcheSy  p.  ill;  Leake,
Morea,,  I.  p.  443  sqq,  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  172  sq,  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  330;  Philipp-
son,  Peloponnes^  p.  356  sq,  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2,  p.  286.

34.  4.  Ino Leucothea.      See  i.  42.  7 ;    i.   44.    7   sq,^  and

Index.

34.  4.  the  water  flows  out  of  a  broad  plane-tree  which  is
:  hollow  inside.  The  oriental  plane,  the  most  beautiful  of  all  the  trees
I  now  native  to  Greece,  loves  water ;  hence  the  classical  writers  often
speak  of  springs  rising  under  or  actually  out  of  a  plane-tree.  See  viL
5-  2  ;  viii.  19.  2  ;  viii.  23.  4.  The  captains  of  the  Greek  host  at  Aulis,
before  sailing  for  Troy,  offered  sacrifice  "under  a  beauteous  plane,
whence  sparkling  water  flowed"  (Homer,  //.  ii.  307).  Theognis  {v,
°79)  bids  the  toper  temper  the  wine  with  water  from  a  plane-tree  grove.
^lato,  in  his  immortal  picture  of  a  summer  noon  in  Attica,  describes  a


\


f


\i


448  CORONE  BK.  IV.  MSSSBNIA

Spring  of  cold  water  gushing  from  under  a  plane-tree  {PAaedruSy  p.
230  b).     A  writer  in  the  Anthology  (ix.   374)  has  an  epigram  00  a
crystal  spring  bubbling  up  under  plane-trees  and  laurels  and  inviting  the
parched  and  weary  traveller  to  slake  his  thirst  at  its  limpid  rill  and  to
rest  beside  it  in  the  shade.     A  sacred  spring  of  Aesculapius  flowed
from  under  a  plane-tree  (Aristides,  Or.xvm.  vol.  i.  p.  410  ed.  Dindcvf).
At  a  roadside  in  Lycia,  beside  a  spring  of  cold  water,  grew  a  gigantic
plane-tree  with  a  hollow  trunk  so  vast  that  the  interior,  paved  with
mossy  stones,  resembled  a  cavern,  and  the  Roman  governor  feasted
eighteen  guests  in  it  at  once,  reclining  on  beds  of  leaves  and  listening
to  the  patter  of  the  rain  among  the  branches  (Pliny,  N,  H.  xii.  9).    The
same  union  of  a  clear  gurgling  spring  with  a  great  umbrageous  plane-
tree  may  still  be  seen  in  Greece  now  as  of  old.     Mure,  travelling  from
Sparta  to  Leondari^  halted  at  a  place  called  Platano  or  '  the  plane-tree.'
It  was  '*  an  enormous  plane-tree,  from  the  roots  of  which  flowed  copious
streams  of  fine  water.  .  .  .  Throughout   the  whole  of   Messenia  and
Western  Arcadia,  a  striking  feature  of  the  scenery  are  these  copious
perennial  springs,  gushing  from  the  base  of  the  mountains.    They  are  for  the
most  part  similarly  adorned  with  gigantic  plane-trees,  the  fibres  of  whose
roots  are  interlaced  with  the  separate  channels  in  which  the  water  finds
issue.     The  oriental  plane  everywhere  prefers  a  situation  where  it  can
bathe  its  roots  in  fresh  water ;  and  hence,  throughout  the  countries  where
it  chiefly  flourishes,  and  which  I  believe  are  Southern  Greece  and  Asia
Minor,  they  are  commonly  to  be  seen  by  the  side  of  rivers  and  foun-
tains" (Joumaly  2.  p.  258).     On  the  way  from  Andritsena  in  Arcadia
to  Krestena  in  Elis  I  drank  of  just  such  a  spring  as  Pausanias  here
describes.     The  water  gushed  from  the  broad  hollow  trunk  of  a  great
plane  ;  a  holy  picture  was  fastened  to  the  bole  of  the  tree.

34.  5.  The  ancient  name  of  Oorone  "was  Aepea.  Aepea  is  men-
tioned by  Homer  {Iliad,  ix.  152,  294).  Strabo  (viii.  p.  360)  identifies
the  Homeric  Aepea  with  Thuria,  but  mentions  that  by  others  it  was
variously  identified  with  Thuria,  Methone  (Mothone),  and  Asine.

34.  6.  Artemis  called  OMld-rearer.  A  trace  of  the  worship  ot
Artemis,  as  the  goddess  who  cared  for  the  upbringing  of  children,
survives  in  Southern  Andros,  where  the  people  taJce  their  sick  children
to  be  cured  at  the  church  of  St.  Artemidos ;  at  the  church  they  change
the  children's  clothes  and  put  on  them  fresh  ones  which  have  been
blessed  by  the  priest  (J.  T.  Bent,  *  Researches  among  the  Cyclades,'
Joumai  of  Hellenic  Studies,  5  (1884),  p.  46).

34.  6.  she  is  holding  a  crow  in  her  band.  On  the  relation  of
Athena  to  the  crow  see  note  on  ii.  11.  7  *  Coronis.*

34.  7-  a  sanctuary  of  Apollo  beside  the  sea.  See  note  on
*  Colonides,'  §  8  of  this  chapter.

34.  7'  Orested-lark  Apollo.  The  current  explanation  of  this
epithet  as  applied  to  Apollo  would  seem  to  have  been  the  story,  here
told  by  Pausanias,  that  the  neighbouring  town  of  Colonides  had  been
founded  by  settlers  from  Attica  who  had  been  led  to  the  spot  by  *
crested-lark.  For  similar  legends  see  note  on  x.  6.  2.  The  people  of
Lemnos  revered  the  crested-lark  because  it  found  and  smashed  the  egg*


CH.  XXXIV  COLONIDES^—ASJNE  449

of  the  locusts  (Plutarch,  Isis  et  Osiris^  74).     Cp.  Critical  Note  on  this
passage  (vol.  i.  p.  582).

34.  8.  Oolonides.  Pausanias  tells  us  that  it  was  80  furlongs  from
Corone  to  the  sanctuary  of  Apollo  (§  7),  and  40  furlongs  from  Colonides
to  Asine  (§  12} ;  but  he  does  not  mention  the  intermediate  distance  from
the  sanctuary  of  Apollo  to  Colonides.  That  distance  must,  however,
have  been  small  (if  we  can  trust  Pausanias's  measurements) ;  for  the
total  distance  from  Corone  {Petalidt)  to  Asine  {Koron)  does  not  exceed
1 20  furlongs.  Above  the  village  of  Kastelia^  on  the  hill  of  St.  Elias^
dose  to  the  sea  there  are  considerable  foundations  of  an  ancient  building,
with  fragments  of  architecture  and  sculpture  scattered  about.  The
remains  are  probably  those  of  the  sanctuary  of  Apollo  or  of  the  town
of  Colonides.  The  distance  of  the  place  from  Asine  {Koron)  tallies
exactly  with  the  distance  of  Colonides  from  Asine,  as  stated  by
Pausanias,  namely  40  Greek  furlongs.  This  points  to  the  ruins  being
those  of  Colonides.  If  so,  the  sanctuary  of  Apollo  must  have  been
situated  a  little  to  the  north,  perhaps  on  the  bank  of  the  river  which  falls
into  the  sea  half  a  mile  to  the  north  of  KasUlia  and  which  may  have
been  the  southern  boundary  of  the  district  of  Corone.  The  village  of
Kasfeiia,  which  was  converted  into  a  heap  of  ruins  by  the  earthquake  of
1886,  stands  in  a  vast  wood  of  olives.  The  neighbouring  coast  is  iron-
bound,  the  cliffs  falling  about  300  feet  sheer  down  to  the  sea.  They
are  being  gradually  undermined  by  the  waves ;  huge  blocks  come
hurtling  down  from  time  to  time.

See  Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  \\\  sq.  \  Leake,  Morea^  i.  p.  443  sqq, ;  id,^  Pelop,
p.  19s  5qq>  ;  Curtius, /V/?/.  2.  p.  167;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  173;  Philippson,
PeloponruSy  p.  360 ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  286.

34.  9.  Asine.  Asine  must  have  occupied  the  site  of  the  modem
town  which  bears  the  name  of  Koron  or  Koroni,  At  this  point  of  the
coast  a  rocky  headland,  about  half  a  mile  long,  juts  out  like  a  horn
into  the  sea,  its  sides  fisdling  down  in  perpendicidar  sandstone  cliffs,
which  are  gradually  crumbling  away  under  the  action  of  the  heavy  surf.
Sheltered  by  the  cape  lies  the  roadstead  of  Koron^  2l  bay  opening  in  a
long  sweeping  curve  to  the  north-east.  Small  sailing  craft  find  a  safe
refuge  here  from  the  dreaded  south  and  south-west  storms  of  the  rainy
season ;  but  even  the  little  coasting-steamers  have  to  anchor  outside  the
breakwater,  in  the  open  bay.  In  spite,  however,  of  its  exposed  anchorage
Asine  must  always  have  been  the  chief  place  on  the  coast.  The  cape,
now  crowned  by  the  imposing  ruins  of  a  Venetian  and  Turkish  castle,
was  probably  the  ancient  citadel  On  the  cape,  to  the  east  of  the
fortress,  there  are  six  ancient  cisterns  and  a  great  quantity  of  broken
pottery  and  terra-cottas.  At  the  edge  of  the  sea-cliffs  are  pieces  of
walls  of  late  Roman  date,  and  some  steps  cut  in  the  rock — a  fragment
of  a  staircase  which  once  led  down  the  face  of  the  dif&  to  the  sea.
Remains  of  the  ancient  break-water,  much  eaten  away  by  the  waves,
may  also  be  seen  in  the  harbour.  About  two  hundred  yards  west
of  the  castle-hill  there  is  another  hill  called  PurgOy  which  is  nearly
on  a  level  with  the  ramparts  of  the  castle.      On  it  there  are  some

VOL.  Ill  2  G


450  ASINE  BK.  nr.  mbssenu

ancient  cisterns  and  remains  of  walls.  The  modem  town  stands  oe
the  narrow  strip  of  sandy  beach  which  skirts  the  bay,  and  the  houses
are  built  also  on  the  low  ridge  which  joins  the  cape  to  the  higber
ground  inland.  There  are  many  fine  old  houses  with  balconies  and
great  stanchioned  windows ;  but  the  town  on  the  whole  seems  in  a  state
of  decay.  The  trade  done  in  its  bazaar  and  harbour  is  but  smalL  It  is
only  at  the  season  of  the  currant-harvest  that  the  town  wears  a  busier
aspect.

Before  the  ancient  city  was  bestowed  by  the  Spartans  on  the
Asinaeans  (cp.  ii.  36.  4  sq, ;  iv.  14.  3),  its  ancient  name  would  seem  to
have  been  Rhium  ;  it  was  the  capital  of  one  of  the  five  petty  kingdoms
into  which  the  Dorian  conqueror  Cresphontes  divided  Messenia  (Stiabo^
viii.  pp.  360,  361).  The  country  about  Asine  appears  to  have  been
well  wooded  in  antiquity ;  for  when  the  Athenians  had  fortified  them-
selves at  Pylus  in  425  B.C,  the  Spartans  sent  ships  to  Asine  to  procore
timber  for  the  manufacture  of  siege  engines  (Thucydides,  iv.  13).  Ho»
the  name  of  Corone  {Koronty  Koran)  came  to  be  transferred  from  die
ancient  place  of  that  name  (now  PetalicU)  to  Asine,  we  cannot  teO.
Perhaps  in  the  Middle  Ages,  when  Greece  was  depopulated,  the  I^
maining  inhabitants  of  Corone  migrated  from  PetcUidi  to  the  deserted
site  of  Asine  and  transferred  the  name  of  Corone  to  their  new  home.
Such  migrations  of  names  have  been  not  uncommon  in  Greece.

See  Blouet,  Expidition  scientifiqtte  de  Morie :  Architecture^  I.  p.  15  xy.,  with
pi.  17  ;  Boblaye,  Recherches,  p.  112  sq,  \  Leake,  M&rea,  i.  p.  435  sqq, ;  id.^Pdtp'
p.  195 ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  167  j^  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  173  i^. ;  BaeddKr.'
P>  330 ;  Guide-JoanrUy  2.  p.  286 ;  rhilippson,  Pel^onms^  p.  362.  An  insaiptkjB
found  at  Hermion  (C.  /.  G,  No  1193)  records  a  decree  of  the  Hermioniaos  in
favour  of  the  people  of  Asine ;  the  decree  purports  to  be  a  renewal  and  confimiatioo
of  old  ties  of  kinship  and  amity.

34.  9.  the  Dryopiajis  were  conquered and  brought  to  Delphi

as  an  offering  to  ApoUo.  On  the  sacred  slaves  attached  to  sanctuaries,
who  tilled  the  temple  lands  and  performed  the  temple  service,  and  on
the  custom  of  dedicating  such  slaves  to  the  gods,  see  K.  O.  Miiller,
Dorians y  i.  p.  282  sqq.  ;  K.  F.  Hermann,  Gottesdienstliche  AltertkUnur}
§  20.  As  to  the  conquest  of  the  Dryopians  by  Hercules  and  their
final  settlement  in  Peloponnese,  see  Herodotus,  viii.  43,  73  ;  Apollodorus,
ii.  7.  7;  Schol.  on  Apollonius  Rhodius,  i.  121 3,  1218;  *  Appendix
Narrationum,*  xxviii.  6  in  Westermann's  Mythographi  Graeci ;  and  on
the  Dryopians  see  Miiller,  Dorians,  i.  p.  47  sqq, ;  Busolt,  Griech,  Gesck'
I.  p.  209  sq,\  J.  Topffer,  in  A  us  der  Anomia  (Berlin,  1890)  p.  4^
sqq,

34.  9*  they  first  occupied  Asine,  near  Hermion.     See  ii.  3^-

4  sq,

34.  1 1,  a  temple  of  ApoUo.  Antoninus  Liberalis  {Transform,  32)
mentions  a  sanctuary  of  Apollo  in  the  Dryopian  land  (Dryopis)  near  Ml
Oeta.  It  was  founded  by  Amphissus  because  his  mother  Dryopc,
daughter  of  Dryops,  had  been  beloved  by  Apollo.  From  this  sanctuai)*
Dry  ope  was  carried  off  by  the  Hamadryad  nymphs  (nymphs  of  the  oal^)'
who  hid  her  in  the  forest  and  made  a  black  poplar  to  spring  up  in  b^


.  XXXIV  ACRITAS—PORT  PHOENJCUS  451

tad,  and  beside  the  poplar  a  spring  of  water.  So  from  a  mortal  woman
ryope  became  a  nymph.  For  this  favour  shown  to  his  mother,
nphissus  founded  a  sanctuary  of  the  nymphs  and  instituted  foot-races,
lich,  says  Antoninus,  are  stiU  kept  up  by  the  natives.  But  no  woman
ly  be  present  at  the  races,  because,  when  Dryope  was  carried  off,  two
jring  girls  went  and  told  it  to  the  people,  and  that  angered  the  nymphs,
10  turned  the  girls  into  pine-trees.

34.  II.  Dryops,  whom  they  affirm  to  be  a  son  of  ApoUo.  Accord-
\  to  Tzetzes  {SchoL  on  Lycophron^  480)  Dryops  was  a  son  of  Apollo
Dia,  daughter  of  Lycaon,  who,  when  she  had  brought  forth  the  babe,
I  it  in  the  trunk  of  an  oak-tree ;  so  the  child  was  called  Dryops  (from
EW,  « an  oak ').  According  to  the  scholiast  on  Apollonius  Rhodius  (i.
1 8)  the  father  of  Dryops  was  Lycaon  and  his  mother  was  Dia,  the
Lighter  of  Lycaonia,  Pherecydes,  referred  to  by  the  scholiast  on
ollonius  Rhodius  (i.  12 12),  said  that  Dryops  was  the  son  of  Polydora,
jghter  of  Danaus,  and  that  his  father  was  the  river  Peneus.  Antoninus
jeralis  (Transform,  32)  agrees  with  Pherecydes  as  to  the  mother  of
yops,  but  says  that  his  father  was  the  river  Spercheus.

34.  12.  Acritas.  This  is  the  rugged  mountainous  promontory,
ich  forms  the  southern  termination  of  Messenia.  Its  extreme  point,
:  Acritas  proper,  now  called  Cape  Galloy  is  a  narrow  spit  of  steep
ks,  round  which  the  surf  breaks  furiously.  The  distance  of  this  cape
m  Asine  (Korori)  is  nearer  80  furlongs  than  the  40  at  which  Pausanias
:s  it.  But  he  may  have  reckoned  the  distance  not  from  the  cape,  but
m  the  highest  point  of  the  promontory.  This  highest  point  (1677
t)  is  now  called  H,  Demetrios^  after  a  chapel  of  the  saint.  The  rocky
Lnd  of  Theganussa  (now  Venetiko)  is  still,  as  it  was  in  Pausanias's
e,  quite  uninhabited.  But  there  are  some  graves  in  it  and  some
IS  beside  a  spring.

See  Leake,  Morta^  i.  pp.  435,  443 ;  id,,  Pelop,  p.  196 ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2,  pp.
,172;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  158;  Baedeker,' p.  330;  Phillppson,  Peloponnes,
(63 ;  Guide-Joanne,  2.  p.  286.

34.  1 2.  port  Phoenicus.  This  is  the  roomy  bay  to  the  north-west
Cape  Galloy  and  sheltered  by  the  Oenussian  islands.  Or  the  name
y  have  been  confined  to  one  particular  inlet  of  this  spacious  bay.  At
;  place  on  the  bay  there  are  the  ruins  of  a  Roman  brick  building  and
I  mediaeval  church,  also  some  remains  of  walls,  and  numerous  pot-
rds.  The  name  *  port  Phoenicus '  may  mean  either  *  the  harbour  of
ms'  (from  phoinix^  *a  palm-tree'),  or  *the  Phoenician  harbour.'
>f.  Curtius  takes  it  in  the  former  way.  Olshausen  took  it  in  the  latter
/,  and  saw  in  the  name  a  reminiscence  of  a  Phoenician  settlement  at

place.  He  pointed  out  that  the  name  Phoenicus  or  its  equivalent
Denix  was  applied  to  other  harbours,  as  to  one  at  Mimas  in  Asia
lor  (Thucydides,  viii.  34),  one  in  Crete  (Strabo,  x.  p.  475  ;  Acts  of
Apostles,  xxvii.  1 2),  one  in  Cythera  (Xenophon,  Heilenica,  iv.  8.  7),
The  Oenussian  islands,  which  shelter  the  bay  on  the  south-west,
sist  of  two  large  islands  (now  called  Cabrera  or  Schiza  and  Sapienza)
b  a  small  one  (now  called  Prasonisi  or  Santa  Maria)  between  them.


452  MOTHONE  BK.  iv.  messenu

The  islands  are  rocky  and  totally  uninhabited,  but   afibrd   pasture  to
cattle  and  horses  in  the  spring.

See  Leake,  Morea^  I.  p.  433  sq. ;  Boblaye,  Recherchcs^  p.  112  ;  Curtius,  PdtL
2.  pp.  169,  172;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  pp.  158,  174;  Baedeker,'  p.  330;  Gttm-
foanne^  2.  p.  287.  On  the  name  Phoenicas  see  Olshausen  in  Rheintsches  Mmsam,
N.  F.  8  (1853),  p.  334  sq,

35.  I.  Mothone.  This  form  of  the  name  is  used  also  by  Plutaidi
{ArcUus,  12).  On  the  other  hand  the  form  Methone  is  used  by  Thaq-
dides  (ii.  25),  Diodorus  (xi.  85),  Strabo  (viii.  p.  359),  Scylax  (/^nj^Att,
46),  and  Mela  (ii.  41,  ed.  Parthey).  In  Ptolemy  (iii.  14.  31)  and  Pliny
(N,//,  iv.  15)  it  seems  doubtful  whether  the  name  should  be  spdlcd
Mothone  or  Methone.  The  modem  name  is  Modon^  pronounced
Mothonj  probably  this,  rather  than  Methone,  was  always  the  local
pronunciation.  The  town  is  situated  at  the  extreme  point  of  a  rocky
ridge  which  runs  out  into  the  sea  opposite  the  island  of  Sapienzcu  Inland
the  mountainous  ridge  stretches  northward  along  the  coast.  On  the
eastern  side  of  these  hills  is  a  plain  about  three-quarters  of  a  mile  wide,
which  opens  on  the  bay  of  Mothone.  This  plain  is  distinguished  by  its
luxuriant  fertility ;  it  is  covered  with  vineyards,  currant-plantations,  and
olive-groves.  A  torrent,  which  dries  up  early  in  the  summer,  traverses
the  plain  from  north  to  south ;  and  over  its  bed  a  bridge,  resting  on
ancient  foundations,  leads  into  the  town.  This  is  the  only  entrance  into
Modon  from  the  land  side.  "  Off  the  outer  end  of  the  town  is  the  littk
insulated  rock  which  Pausanias  calls  Mothon,  and  which  he  describes  as
forming  at  once  a  narrow  entrance  and  a  shelter  to  the  harbour  of  hb
time  :  it  is  now  occupied  by  a  tower  and  lantern,  which  is  connected  by
a  bridge  with  the  fortification  of  Moth6ni  \Modon\,  A  mole  branches
from  it,  which  runs  parallel  to  the  eastern  wall  of  the  town,  and  forms  a
harbour  for  small  vessels.  It  seems  to  be  exactly  in  the  position  of  the
ancient  port,  the  entrance  into  which  was  probably  where  the  bridge
now  stands  "  (Leake).  There  are  some  ancient  foundations  in  the  mole
and  in  the  town  wall,  especially  on  the  side  of  the  harbour.  The
Venetians  held  Modon  in  the  Middle  Ages.  The  extensive  remains  of  a
Venetian  fortress  crown  the  rocky  peninsula ;  and  just  inside  the  land-
ward gate  is  the  old  Venetian  piazza ;  here  stands  the  shaft  of  a  column
of  reddish  granite,  3  ft.  in  diameter  by  12  ft.  high,  which  was  once
surmounted  by  the  lion  of  St  Mark.  The  harbour  of  Modon  is  small
and  partially  sanded  up.  Steamers  enter  it  only  in  summer.  The
inhabitants  busy  themselves  exclusively  with  the  cultivation  of  the
neighbouring  plain.

See  Gell,  Journey  in  the  Morea^  p.  36  sqq.  ;  Blouet,  Expedition  scientifiqiu  di
Morie:  Architecture,  I.  p.  1 1  sqq.,  with  plates  12-15  ;  Boblaye,  Recherches,  p.  IIj;  1
Leake,  Morca,  i.  p.  429  sqq,  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  169  sqq,  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  1    y
p.  17^  sq,  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  330;  Guide-Joantu^  2.  p.  287;  Philippson,  Pelofcmtiit
p.  355-

About  a  mile  and  a  half  to  the  east  of  Modon  is  a  place  called  OW
Mothone,  where  are  the  vestiges  of  a  city,  with  a  citadel  and  a  k^
marbles.     A  river  runs  half  round  the  place.     See  Gell,  Itinerary  cftk


:h.  XXXV  MOTHONE  453

Vomm,  p.  54.  In  this  neighbourhood  the  French  surveyors  found  many
toman  remains  on  the  shore  and  the  neighbouring  hills.  They  observed
I   temple   on    a   small    hillock    near   the   sea.      See  __

Sloaet,  Expid.  ident,  de  Morie:   Architecture,  i,
rs ;    Boblaye,  Rtcherchts,   p.    113.     The    harbour  of
Mothone  is  represented  in  the  shape  of  a  theatre  on
:oins  of  the  city  (Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.
?ef>tm.  on  Paus.  p.  68,  pi.  P  viii.)

35.  I-  was  called  Fedasos.  Pedasus  is  mentioned
ry  Homer  {/Had,  ix.  ijz  and  294)  as  one  of  the  seven  "c  56.  —  wwt  of
Messeniaa  cities  which  Agamemnon  offered  to  give  to  "othoki  (com
Achilles  as  his  daughter's  dowry.

3S.  2.  wh«n  the  NaopUani  wars  expelled  by  the  Argives  etc.
iec  iv,  34.  4  ;  iv.  27.  8.

35.  2.  NanpUu,  son  of  Amymose.  Amymone  was  one  of  the
laughten  of  Danaus.     Cp.  ii.  37.  i  ;  il  38.  2.

36.  4-  T&e  hiitoiy  of  Fyirhu has  been  already  namtad

T  me.     SeeL  11-13.

Sa.  8.  the  country  nsed  to  inlCar  from  stormy  and  onieasonable
rinda.  "  Standing  upon  a  promontory  open  to  a  great  expanse  of  sea
a  the  direction  of  the  prevailing  breezes,  Moth6iii  enjoys  a  temperate
nd  salubrious  climate,  though  1  doubt  not,  that  in  spite  of  Minerva
Athena]  il  is  often  exjxjsed  to  furious  gales  in  winter,  and  even  in
Binmer  may  have  sometimes  too  much  of  the  Etesian  breezes  "  (Leake,
Iferea,  i.  p.  432  sy.)  The  coast  about  Mothone  has  still  an  evil
eputation  for  its  tremendous  surf,  especially  in  spring  and  autumn.  The
piay  is  said  to  be  sometimes  thrown  up  to  a  height  of  150  fi^t
Philippson,  Peloponnes,  p.  355).

35.  8.  the  fragrant  oil  of  Oyzicns.  This  ointment  was  made  from
be  iris  plant  which  grew  best  at  Cyiicus  and  in  Elis  (Athenaeus,  xv.  p.
188  e ;  Theophrastus,  Hist.  Plant,  ix  9.  2).

35.  9-  ^e  blnest  water  I  ever  saw  etc.  At  Thermopylae  there
iTC  two  pools  fed  by  one  of  the  hot  springs  from  which  the  pass  gets  its
lame  gf  Thermopylae  ('  the  hot  gates ').  "  The  water  of  these  pools,
ike  that  of  the  principal  source,  is  very  bright,  and  of  a  deep  blue
niour,  thus  illustrating  in  some  measure  the  remark  of  Pausanias,  that
be  bluest  water  he  ever  saw  was  in  one  of  the  baths  at  Thermopylae
Leake,  Travels  in  Northern  Greece,  z.  p.  36).  Baedeker  says  of  the
pater  that  it  "  appears  bluish-green  "  {Gritchenland,^  p.  206).  On  the
prings  at  Thermopylae  cp.  also  Clarke,  Travels,  4.  p.  247  ;  Dodwell,
Tour,  2,  p.  69  sg.  ;  Fiedler,  Reise,  I.  p.  208  sq.  ;  Vischer,  Erinneruttgen,
y.  638  sq.\  Bursiati,  Geogr.  1.  p.  93.  Herodotus  mentions  (viL  176)
hat  these  waters  were  called  'the  pots.'  From  Philostratus  {Vit.
iop/dst.  ii  I.  9)  we  learn  that  the  swimming-bath  referred  to  by  Pausanias
ras  buih  by  Herodes  Aiiicus,  a  contemporary  of  Pausanias.  This  fact,
rhich  makes  it  nearly  certain  that  Pausanias  had  seen  what  he  describes
nd  was  not  copying  his  description  from  an  older  writer,  is  ignored  by
At.  Kalkmann,  who  as  usual  regards  Pausanias's  statements  of  personal
iiowledge  as  feilse.     See  Kalkmann,  Pausamas  der  Perieget,  p.  33  sq.


454  ^^^    ^^  VERS  BK.  IV.  MESSENU

35.  9.  Bed  water near  the  city  of  Jopiia  etc.     The  peopk

of  Joppa  used  to  show  a  rock  near  their  town  on  which  were  traces  of
the  fetters  with  which  Andromeda  had  been  chained  to  it  (Pliny,  NmL
Hist,  V.  69  ;  cp.  Strabo,  xvi.  p.  759).     No  other  ancient  author  except
Pausanias  mentions  the  red  pool  where  Perseus  washed  off  the  blood  of
the  sea-beast  which  he  had  slain.    But  further  to  the  north,  on  the  same
coast,  there  is  a  well,  the  water  of  which  periodically  assumes  a  nidd)'
hue.     It  is  close  to  the  village  of  Sour^  which  stands  on  a  promontory
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Tyre.     The  women  of  the  village  draw  water  at
this  well.     "  Better  water  is  not  to  be  found  on  this  coast      From  some
unknown  cause,  it  becomes  troubled  in  September,  and  continues  some
days  full  of  a  reddish  day.    This  season  is  observed  as  a  kind  of  festival
by  the  inhabitants,  who  then  come  in  crowds  to  the  well,  and  pour  into
it  a  bucket  of  sea  water,  which,  according  to  them,  has  the  virtue  of
restoring  the  clearness  of  the  water"  (Volney,    Travels  through  Syria
and  Egypt  (E»r\%Vish.  translation,  London,   1787),  voL   i.  p.   213).    In
spring  the  river  Adonis  in  Syria  is  annually  tinged  with  a  blood-red  hue
by  the  red  earth   which   is  washed   down   from   the    mountains.    In
antiquity  the  red  stain  was  believed  to  be  the  blood  of  Adonis  annually
slain  by   the  boar  on  Mt.  Lebanon.     See  Lucian,  De  dea  Syria^  8;
Maundrell,  *  Journey  from  Aleppo  to  Jerusalem,'  in  Bohn's  Early  Travds
in  PalcstinCy  edited  by  Thomas  Wright ;  Baudissin,  Studien^  i.  p.  128.
Cp.  the  lines  in  Milton,  Paradise  Lost,  bk.  i.     (For  the  references  to
Volney  and  Maundrell,  I  am  indebted  to  my  lamented  friend,  the  late
W.  Robertson  Smith.)     The  explorers   Lewis  and  Clarke  observed  a
similar  appearance  on  the  Missouri.     "  In  the  evening  after  the  stonn
the  water  on  this  side  of  the  river  became  of  a  deep  crimson  coloor,
probably  caused  by  some  stream  above  washing  down  a  kind  of  soft  red
stone,    which   we   observed   in   the   neighbouring   bluffs   and  gullies''
{Travels  to  the  Source  of  i/ie  Missouri  River,  i.  p.  387).      From  the
summit  of  Mt.  Kisigau  in  Eastern  Africa  Mr.  Charles  New  "  was  greatly
struck  with  the  deep  red  colour  of  the  soil.     The  water  courses  proceed-
ing from  the  shoulder  of  the  mountain  look  as  if  they  were  stained  with
blood,  indicating  the  richly  ferruginous  character  of  the  soil "  (C.  New,
Life,  Wanderings,  and  Labours  in  Eastern  Africa,  p.  328).    Such  appear-
ances are  naturally  explained  by  primitive  peoples  in  the  way  the  Syrians
explained  the  red  pool  at  Joppa  and  the  crimsoned  waters  of  the  Adonis.
"  The  modem  Albanian  still  sees  the  stain  of  slaughter  in  the  streams
running  red  with  earth.  .  .  .  The  Comishman  knows  from  the  red  filmy
growth  on  the  brook  pebbles  that  murder  has  been  done  there  "  (Tylor,
Primitive  Culture^  i.  p.  406).

35.  I  o.  Astyra,  which  is  the  name  of  the  hot  baths  at  Atarneoa
Atameus  was  deserted  in  Pausanias's  time  (vii.  2.  1 1  ;  Pliny,  Nat,  Hist.
V.  121),  but  of  course  the  warm  springs  would  survive  the  ruin  of  the
city.  Messrs.  Wernicke  and  Kalkmann,  however,  appear  to  think  that
the  springs  must  have  disappeared  with  the  city,  or  rather  with  its  popu-
lation ;  for  they  deny  that  Pausanias  could  have  seen  the  springs,  since
Pliny  (/.r.)  tells  us  that  Atameus  and  Astyre  had  perished.  However  the
hot  springs  are  there  to  this  day.     In   1879  the  site  of  Atameus  was


CH.  XXXV  REMARKABLE  SPRINGS  455

identified  by  the  late  H.  G.  Lolling.  The  ruins  lie  half  an  hour  to  the
north-east  of  Dikeli  and  are  now  called  KaU-Agili  or  Age  It  ^  i,e,  *  the
castle  of  the  herds/  a  significant  name  for  ruins  among  which  herds-
men pasture  their  flocks.  At  Dikeli  there  is  a  hot  spring  which  is
still  used  by  patients ;  and  in  the  marshes  an  hour  and  a  half  to  the
south-east  of  Dikeli^  to  the  right  of  the  road  leading  to  the  upper  valley
of  the  Caicus,  Lolling  observed  countless  hot  springs  ;  most  of  them  are
now  inaccessible  and  can  only  be  recognised  by  the  jets  of  steam  which
rise  from  them.  The  hot  springs  described  by  Pausanias  were  probably
at  one  or  other  of  these  places.  See  H.  G.  Lolling,  '  Atameus,'  Miiih,
tL  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  4  (1879),  pp.  i-io.  Cp.  Wernicke,  De
Pausaniae  siudiis  Herodoieis^  p.  1 08 ;  Kalkmann,  Pausanias  der
Perieget^  p.  33.  Olshausen  thought  that  the  nameAstyra  is  Phoenician,
meaning  '  a  sanctuary  of  Astarte.'  He  made  out  a  list  of  six  places
called  Astyra,  three  of  them  being  in  the  north-west  of  Asia  Minor.
Hence  we  cannot  be  sure  that  the  Astyre  of  Pliny  {J,c,)  is  the  place
referred  to  by  Pausanias.  See  Olshausen,  *  Ueber  ph5nicische  Orts-
namen  ausserhalb  des  semitischen  Sprachgebiets,'  Rheinisches  Museum^
N.  F.  8  (1853),  p.  325  sqg.

S5.  10.  Atameus  is  the  price  which  the  Ohians  received  etc.   See
Herodotus,  i.  160.

35.  I  o.  above  Borne,  across  the  river  Anio,  there  is  white  water.
This  was  called  by  the  Romans  Albula  or  Albulae  Aquae,  i,e,  *  the
white  water,'  the  name  being  doubtless  derived  from  the  colour  of  the
water,  which  is,  as  I  am  informed  by  my  friend  Dr.  J.  H.  Middleton,  as
white  as  milk.  Cp.  Martial,  i.  13.  i  sq,  ;  Strabo,  v.  p.  238  ;  Vitruvius,
viii.  3.  2  ;  Pliny,  Nat,  Hist,  xxxi.  10.  It  is  a  small  lake,  now  called
the  Solfaiara^  about  a  mile  to  the  left  of  the  modem  road  from  Rome  to
Tivoli^  and  about  16  miles  from  Rome.  A  stream  flows  from  the  lake
into  the  Anio.  '*  The  water  is  a  saturated  solution  of  carbonic  acid  gas,
which  escapes  from  it  in  such  quantities  in  some  parts  of  its  surface,  that
it  has  the  appearance  of  being  actually  in  ebullition.  '  I  have  found  by
experiment,'  says  Sir  Humphry  Davy,  '  that  the  water  taken  from  the
most  tranquil  part  of  the  lake,  even  after  being  agitated  and  exposed  to
the  air,  contained  in  solution  more  than  its  own  volume  of  carbonic  acid
gas,  with  a  very  small  quantity  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen.  Its  high
temperature,  which  is  pretty  constant  at  So**  of  Fahr.,  and  the  quantity
of  carbonic  acid  that  it  contains,  renders  it  peculiarly  fitted  to  afford
nourishment  to  vegetable  life '  "  (Sir  Ch.  Lyell,  Principles  of  Geology^^
I.  jp.  403).  Cp.  Sir  E.  H.  Bunbury  in  Smith's  Diet,  of  Geogr,  i.
p.  93  sq,

35.  II.  beside  the  village  of  Dascylus there  is  hot  water

etc  This  water  is  mentioned  by  Athenaeus  (ii.  p.  43),  who  says  that
the  water  was  so  oily  that  persons  who  had  bathed  in  it  did  not  need  to
anoint  themselves  afterwards.

35.  1 2.  Herodotus affirms  that  a  spring  of  bitter  water  etc.

See  Herodotus,  iv.  52.  Cp.  Vitruvius,  viii.  3.  11.  No  traces  of  this
spring  are  to  be  found  at  the  present  day.  "  The  water  of  the  Scythian
river  is  brackish  to  a  considerable  distance  from  the  sea,  but  there  is


45d  CORYPHASrUM—PYLUS  bk.  iv.  mbssenu

now   nothing  peculiar  in  the  water  of  the  Hypanis"  (Rawlinson,  on
Herodotus  Lc)     The  Hypanis  is  now  the  Bog,

35.  1 2.  at  Dioaearchia a  hot  sprixig  etc     Dicaearchia  is  the

Italian  Putcoli  in  Campania.  The  sulphurous  springs  of  Putcoli  are
mentioned  by  ancient  writers  (Varro,  De  lingua  Latina^  v,  25  ;  Fesrts,
p.  218,  ed.  Miiller ;  Pliny,  NeU,  Hist.  xxxi.  4  ;  Strabo,  v.  p.  245);  bnt
the  acid  spring  here  described  by  Pausanias  is  not  mentioned  by  any
other  classical  author.  As  it  was  only  discovered  in  his  time,  it  could
not,  of  course,  have  been  mentioned  by  any  earlier  writer,  TTie
corrosive  power  possessed  by  the  water  was  probably  due  to  the  preseoGe
of  carbonic  acid  gas,  which  is  commonly  disengaged  from  springs  id
almost  all  countries,  especially  near  active  or  extinct  volcanoes.  Water
saturated  with  gas  is  corrosive  in  the  highest  degree  ;  the  only  minenls
that  can  resist  it  are  gold  and  platinum.  See  Lyell,  Princ^les  of
Geology ^^"^  i.  p.  408  ;  Oscar  Peschel,  Physische  Erdkunde^  herausgeg.  wn
G.  Leipholdt,  2.  p.  335.

36.  I.  Oape  Coryphasium Pylns.    Coryphasium  is  the  rody

promontory  at  the  northern  end  of  tho  bay  of  Navarino.  ■  It  is  now
called  Old  Navarino  or  PcUaeokastro  from  the  extensive  ruins  of  a
Venetian  castle  which  crown  it  The  promontory  is  connected  with  the
mainland  on  the  east  only  by  two  narrow  strips  of  sand,  which  endose
between  them  the  large  lagoon  of  Osman  Aga.  On  the  south  side  the
promontory  is  separated  by  a  shallow  channel  (220  yards  wide  and  only  .
18  inches  deep)  from  the  island  of  Sphagia  or  Sphacteria.  This  island
extends  southward  for  about  2^  miles,  in  front  of  the  crescent-shaped
bay  of  Navarino^  which  it  thus  shelters  on  the  west.  On  the  north  side
the  promontory  of  Coryphasium  {Old  Nctuarino)  is  bounded  by  a  small
semicircular  bay,  shallow  and  sandy,  called  Voidokoilia^  i.e.  *  ox's  belly.'
The  rocky  promontory  itself  forms  a  rough  plateau  about  220  yards  long,
rising  from  south  to  north.  The  summit  (720  feet  high)  is  at  the
northern  extremity.  On  the  eastern  side,  or  towards  the  lagoon,  Cory-
phasium is  a  precipice.  To  the  westward,  or  toward  the  open  sea,  it
slopes  more  gradually,  especially  at  the  south-west  comer,  where  the
Athenians  under  Demosthenes,  who  had  entrenched  themselves  at
Pylus,  successfully  opposed  the  attempt  of  the  Lacedaemonians  under
Brasidas  to  effect  a  landing  (Thucydides,  iv.  11  sq,)  The  north  side
descends  in  successive  spurs,  and  there  is  a  stretch  of  flat  sand  both  at
the  northern  and  the  southern  end.  The  ruined  mediaeval  castle  is  of
vast  size,  with  an  inner  and  an  outer  court  built  of  rough  stones  and
mortar,  filled  in  with  small  pebbles.  But  remains  of  ancient  buildings
are  found  near  the  middle  of  the  south  wall  of  the  castle,  and  also  on
the  north-eastern  side.  Some  of  these  are  fragments  of  walls  built  in
the  regular  polygonal  style ;  others  are  of  rough  Cyclopean  masonry.
In  several  places,  two,  three,  and  four  courses  of  ancient  Greek  masonry
may  be  observed  under  the  mediaeval  walls.  There  is  a  large  piece  of  a
Cyclopean  wall  on  the  western  side,  constructed  of  great  rough  blocks,
the  interstices  being  filled  with  smaller  stones.  Ancient  cisterns  and  stair-
cases hewn  in  the  rock  may  also  be  seen ;  and  the  stretch  of  level  sand
at  the  north-eastern  foot  of  the  rocks  is  strewn  in  one  place  with  ancient


PYLUS    &    SPHACTERIA


Lo<ul<n..  M.cmiUui  t  C?L'^


XXXVI  PYLUS  457

sherds.  The  lagoon  of  Ostnan  Aga  washes  the  precipitous  eastern  side
Toryphasium,  with  the  exception  of  the  north-eastern  and  south-eastern
ners,  where  long  narrow  strips  of  sand  join  the  peninsula  to  the  main-
d,  like  ropes  mooring  it  to  the  shore.  Thus  the  rocky  headland  rises
lost  like  an  island  from  the  waves,  being  surrounded  by  the  sea  on
2e  sides  and  nearly  surrounded  by  the  lagoon  on  the  fourth.  The
oon  has  several  openings  to  the  bay  of  NavarinOy  and  is  filled  once  a
r  by  the  sea,  when  fish  are  caught  in  it  in  great  numbers.  It
tears  that  the  lagoon  is  gradually  being  sanded  up,  as  is  also  the
nnel  which  separates  Coryphasium  from  the  island  of  Sphacteria.  It
ms  probable,  therefore,  that  the  sand-bank  which  now  separates  the
Don  from  the  Bay  of  Navarino  did  not  exist  in  antiquity,  and  conse-
:ntly  that  what  is  now  a  lagoon  must  in  antiquity  have  been  part  of

bay  of  Navarino  (Pylus).  This  would  account  for  the  silence  of
Licydides  and  Pausanias  as  to  the  lagoon.  The  other  hypothesis,
>pted  by  Leake  and  others,  that  the  lagoon  is  a  modem  encroachment
;he  sea  upon  what  in  antiquity  was  a  level  stretch  of  sand,  does  not
m  so  consonant  with  the  ^cts.  Captain  Smyth,  who  surveyed  this
.St  for  the  British  Admiralty,  was  decidedly  of  opinion  that  the  lagoon
s  filling  up,  instead  of  being  of  recent  formation.  It  would  seem  in
t  that  the  promontory  of  Coryphasium  must  once  have  been  an  island
I  Sphacteria ;  but  has  been  gradually  united  to  the  land  by  the
:umulation  of  sand.  A  similar  process  promises  in  time  to  convert
fiacteria  into  a  peninsula  joined  to  Coryphasium  by  a  sandy  isthmus.
t  certainly,  so  far  back  as  history  carries  us,  Coryphasium  was  not  an
ind  but  a  peninsula.  The  view  put  forward  by  Dr.  Arnold  that  what
I  ere  called  Coryphasium  was  really  the  ancient  Sphacteria,  that  the
oon  of  Osman  Aga  was  the  ancient  bay  of  Pylus,  and  that  the  rocky
montory  to  the  north  of  the  bay  of  Voidoikoilia  was  Coryphasium,
vholly  inadmissible.

Nor  does  there  seem  any  good  ground  for  doubting  that  the  Homeric
us  was  at  Coryphasium.     Strabo,  indeed,  argues  at  some  length  (viii.

349-353)  that  the  Homeric  Pylus  was  not  at  Coryphasium,  but  in
phylia,  to  the  north  of  the  Neda ;  but  his  view  has  been  sufficiently
I  ted  by  Leake,  Curtius,  etc.  A  chief  argument  in  fevour  of  the
meric  Pylus  being  at  Old  Navarino  rather  than  in  Triphylia  is  furnished
Homer's  account  of  the  journey  of  Telemachus  from  Pylus  to  Sparta

Pharae  and  back  the  same  way  (see  note  on  iv.  30.  2).  If  the
meric  Pylus  had  been  in  Triphylia,  as  Strabo  supposed,  it  would
'e  been  hardly  possible  to  journey  from  it  to  Pharae  {Kalamata)  in  a
^le  day,  as  Homer  represents  Telemachus  doing.  The  100  furlongs
ntioned  by  Pausanias  as  the  distance  between  Mothone  and  Cory-
Lsium  is  within  half  a  mile  of  the  real  distance  between  Modon
othone)  and  Old  Navarino  (Coryphasium).  The  400  furlongs
itioned  by  Thucydides  (iv.  3)  as  the  distance  between  Pylus  (Cory-
.sium)  and  Sparta  is  exact.

See  Gell,  Journey  in  the  Morea,  p.  4  sqq,  ;  Blouet,  Expedition  icientifique  di

-ce:  Architecture,  I.   p.  4  J^.,  with  plates  5-7;  Boblaye,  Recherches,  p.  113

;  Leake,  Morea,  i.  pp.  398-425  ;  id.,  Pelop,  pp.  190-194  ;  Arnold,  Memoir  to


458  PYLUS  BK,  IV.  MsssBifU

Ittustraie  the  Maps  of  the  Neighbourhood  of  Sphacteria^  appended  to  the  second
volume  of  his  ed.  of  Thucydides ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  pp.  172-182;  W.  G.  Qark,
Pelop,  pp.  214-227  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  pp.  431-439  ;  Wclcker,  TagAuckt  I.
pp.  230-239 ;  Bursian,  Geogr^  2.  pp.  1 75- 178  ;  baedeker,' pp.  363-366  ;  I^ilippsoo,
PehponneSf  p.  351  sqq, ;  Guide-yoanne,  2.  pp.  287-291.

According  to  Strabo  (viii.  p.  359)  the  Messenian  Pylus  lay  originally
inland,  at  the  foot  of  Mt  Aegaleum,  and  it  was  only  after  the  destnidioQ
of  this  inland  city  that  some  of  the  people  moved  to  Coryphasium  and
settled  there.  This  account  is  esteemed  probable  by  Prof.  £.  Curtias
{Pelop,  2.  p.  175  sq,\  who  supposes  that  the  Pylus  of  Nestor  was  the
inland  city,  of  which  Navarino  was  the  harbour.  He  agrees  with  Stiabo
(viii.  p.  350)  in  thinking  that  the  narrative  in  the  Odyssey  obliges  us  to
suppose  that  the  town  of  Pylus  lay  inland  from  its  port.  See  espedaSy
Odyssey^  xv.  199  sqq, ;  cp.  ib,  iii.  423  j^.

86.  I.  Nelens  and  tiie  Pelasgians  of  lolcns.  Neleus,  being  driven
from  lolcus  in  Thessaly  by  his  brother  Pelias,  came  to  Messenia  and
founded,  or,  according  to  Pausanias,  took  forcible  possession  of  Pylus.
See  Apollodorus,  i.  9.  8  sq, ;  cp.  Homer,  Od,  xi.  254  sqq.  The
Pelasgians  were  settled  in  Thessaly  (Busolt,  Griech,  GtsMchte?  i.  p.
165),  and  Pausanias  regarded  Neleus  as  one  of  them.

36.  I.  Homer  calls  it  the  city  of  Neleus.  See  //.  xL  682 ;  01
iii.  4.

86.  2.  Thrasyinedes.     He  was  a  son  of  Nestor.     See  iv.  31.  11.

36.  2.  There  is  also  in  the  city  a  cava  This  cave  may  still  be
seen.  It  is  a  spacious  high-roofed  stalactite  cavern  on  the  northern
slope  of  Coryphasium.  A  steep  and  rather  dangerous  path  leads  down
to  it  from  the  Venetian  castle  on  the  summit.  The  arched  entrance  is
30  feet  wide  and  1 2  feet  high.  The  cave  itself  is  60  feet  long  by  40
feet  wide  and  40  feet  high,  with  a  roof  like  a  Gothic  vault.  Light  fells
into  it  through  a  fissure  in  the  roof.  The  stalactites  do  not  hang  free,
but  ding  to  the  walls  in  a  variety  of  fantastic  shapes.  There  can  be
little  doubt  that,  as  K.  O.  Miiller  first  suggested,  this  was  the  cave
where  young  Hermes  was  said  to  have  stowed  away  the  stolen  cattle  of
Apollo.  For  the  author  of  the  Homeric  Hymn  to  Hertnes  represents  the
cave  as  being  at  Pylus,  and  says  that  after  Hermes  had  killed  two  of
the  beasts,  he  stretched  their  hides  on  the  rock,  where,  the  poet  adds,
they  may  be  seen  to  this  day.  The  stalactic  formations  on  the  sides  of
the  cave  probably  gave  birth  to  the  myth.  See  the  Hymn  to  Hemus^
101-126,  397-404.  The  cavern,  like  the  semicircular  bay  which  it
overlooks,  is  now  called  the  Voidokoilia^  *  ox's  belly.'

See  Leake,  Morea^  i.  p.  411  sq,\  Boblaye,  Recherches,  p.  114;  Curtinsj
Pelop,  2.  p.  177 ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen^  p.  435  sq,  ;  Welcker,  Tagebuch^  I.  P-
237  sq,  ;  W.  G.  Clark,  Pelop,  p.  223;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  177;  Baedeker,' p.
366  ;  Guide- Joanne y  2.  p.  291.

36.  3.  Neleus  asked  these  cows  as  a  bridal  present  etc    The

story  was  as  follows.  Neleus  had  a  fair  daughter  Pero,  who  was  wooed
by  many  lovers.  But  her  father  declared  that  the  man  who  would  wed
his  daughter  must  bring  him  the  cows  of  Iphiclus  from  Phylace.    These


\


CH.  XXXVI  THE  COWS  OF  IPHICLUS  459

cows  had  belonged  to  Neleus's  mother  Tyro,  from  whom  they  had  been
wrongfully  taken  by  Iphidus.  Now  among  the  lovers  of  Pero  was
Bias ;  and  his  brother  Melampus  undertook  to  bring  the  cows  of  Iphiclus
to  Neleus,  and  so  to  win  Pero  for  Bias.  It  chanced  that  Melampus  was
a  great  soothsayer.  For  he  had  saved  the  life  of  some  serpents,  and
they,  to  show  their  g^titude,  had  cleansed  his  ears  with  their  tongues
while  he  slept.  After  that  he  understood  the  voices  of  all  birds  as  they
flew  overhead,  and  taught  by  them  he  foretold  what  was  about  to
happen.  Well,  then,  Melampus  went  to  Phylace  to  steal,  or  rather  get
back  the  cows.  But  the  cows  were  guarded  by  fierce  cowherds  and
savage  dogs,  and  when  Melampus  tried  to  steal  them  he  was  caught
and  kept  a  prisoner  for  nearly  a  year.  He  was  guarded  by  a  man  and
a  woman ;  the  man  treated  him  kindly,  but  the  woman  treated  him  ill.
When  the  year  was  nearly  up  (for  before  he  set  out  he  had  foretold
that  he  would  be  caught  and  kept  in  captivity  for  a  year),  he  heard  a
wood-worm  in  the  roof  overhead  talking  to  another  wood-worm,  and
asking  how  much  of  the  roof-beam  had  been  eaten  through.  The  other
made  answer  that  there  was  only  a  tiny  bit  of  the  beam  left  So
Melampus  made  believe  to  be  sick,  and  taking  to  his  bed  he  told  his
guards  to  carry  him  out  of  the  house,  bidding  the  man  take  the  head  of
the  bed  and  the  woman  the  foot  of  it.  They  did  so,  but  when  all  but
the  foot  of  the  bed  was  outside  the  door,  down  came  the  roof  on  the  top
of  the  woman  and  crushed  her  to  death.  But  Melampus  and  the  man
escaped.  When  this  came  to  the  ears  of  Iphiclus,  he  sent  for  Melampus,
and  promised  to  set  him  free  and  give  him  the  kine  to  boot,  if  only  he
would  tell  him  how  he  could  have  a  son ;  for  Iphiclus  was  childless.
So  Melampus  sacrificed  two  bulls,  and  cutting  them  up  invited  the
fowls  of  the  air  to  come  and  feast  on  them.  Only  he  did  not  invite  the
vulture.  When  the  birds  came,  Melampus  asked  them  what  Iphiclus
must  do  to  get  a  son.  But  they  could  not  tell.  At  last  up  came  the
vulture,  who  knew  all  about  it  He  said  that  once  when  Phylacus,  the
father  of  Iphiclus,  was  gelding  rams  in  the  fields,  he  had  laid  down  the
bloody  knife  beside  Iphiclus,  and  had  threatened  him  with  it.  Iphiclus
was  frightened  and  ran  away ;  and  his  father  stuck  the  knife  into  a  sacred
oak-tree,  or,  according  to  others,  into  a  wild  pear-tree.  The  bark  of  the
tree  had  grown  round  the  knife  and  hidden  it  The  vulture  said  that
if  they  found  the  knife,  scraped  the  rust  off  it,  and  gave  the  rust  to
Iphiclus  to  drink  mixed  with  wine  for  ten  days,  he  would  beget  a  son.
This  was  done,  and  it  turned  out  as  the  vulture  had  said.  So  Iphiclus
set  Melampus  free,  and  gave  him  the  cows.  He  drove  them  to  Neleus  1
at  Pylus,  and  so  won  Pero,  Neleus's  daughter,  to  be  the  wife  of  his
brother  Bias.  This  story  is  told,  with  more  or  less  full  detail  and  with
some  trifling  variations,  by  Homer  {Odyssey^  xi.  281-297,  xv.  225-238),
Eustathius  (on  Homer,  Od,  xi.  292),  Apollodorus  (i.  9.  11  sq,\  the
scholiast  on  Apollonius  Rhodius  (i.  118),  a  scholiast  on  Theocritus
(iii.  43),  and  Propertius  (ii.  3.  51  sqq,)

36.  4.  Eryx wrestled  with  Hercnles  etc     Cp.  iii.  16.  4  sq.

36.  4-  Homer  in  the  Iliad  says  etc.     See  Iliady  xi.  244.

36.  5.  the  district  of  Pylus  is  in  general  sandy.    This  is  still


46o  SPHACTERIA  bk.  iv.  messbnia

true.  See  note  on  §  i.  However,  on  the  stretch  of  sand  which  separates
the  lagoon  of  Osman  Aga  from  the  little  sandy  bay  to  the  norUi,  there
grow  scattered  bushes  of  lentisk  and  juniper  and  some  tufts  of  coane
grass.  Here  W.  G.  Clark  counted  ^*  seventy  fine  cattle,  such  as
would  have  charmed  Neleus  or  Hermes,  though  it  was  a  mystery  to  me
how  with  such  pasture  they  got  so  fat"  (Pelop,  p.  223).

36.  6.  the  iflland  of  Sphacteria.  Another  name  for  the  island  in
antiquity  was  Sphagia  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  359  ;  Plato,  Metuxenus^  p.  242  c),
which  it  still  retains.  This  island  extends,  as  already  mentioned,  for  a
length  of  about  7.\  miles  from  north  to  south  in  front  of  the  bay  of
Navarino,  Its  breadth  averages  650  yards.  Thucydides  (iv.  8)  under-
estimates the  length  of  the  island  ;  he  says  it  is  15  Greek  fiirlongs  long.
He  also  greatly  under-estimates  the  breadth  of  the  two  entrances  to  the
harbour.  According  to  him,  the  northern  entrance,  now  called  the  SUda
channel,  between  Sphacteria  and  the  promontory  of  Coryphasium,  was
only  wide  enough  to  admit  two  ships  abreast.  In  reality,  though  it  is  now
too  shallow  to  be  entered  except  by  boats,  it  is  220  yards  wide.  The
other  entrance,  between  the  southern  extremity  of  Sphacteria  and  the
mainland,  is  stated  by  Thucydides  to  have  been  only  broad  enough  to
admit  eight  or  nine  ships  abreast.  In  point  of  fact  it  is  over  1400  yards
wide,  or  not  much  short  of  a  mile.  It  would  seem  therefore  that
Thucydides  had  not  himself  visited  Sphacteria  and  Pylus,  and  that  his
informant  had  wrongly  estimated  these  distances.  In  other  respects  his
description  of  the  events  which  took  place  at  Pylus  and  Sphacteria  in  the
Peloponnesian  war  is  perfectly  borne  out  by  the  natural  features  of  the
place.  In  42  5  B.C.  a  body  of  Athenian  troops  under  the  general  Demo-
sthenes landed  and  entrenched  themselves  on  the  promontory  of  Corypha-
sium (Pylus).  They  were  attacked  by  the  Lacedaemonians  by  sea  and
land)  but  repelled  them.  Meantime  the  Lacedaemonians  landed  420  men
in  the  island  of  Sphacteria.  By  the  arrival  of  an  Athenian  fleet,  which
defeated  the  Lacedaemonian  fleet,  the  Lacedaemonians  were  blockaded  in
the  island,  and  would  have  been  starved  out,  but  that  their  friends  ashore
managed  from  time  to  time,  with  great  difficulty  and  at  much  risk,  to
run  the  blockade  and  throw  stores  into  the  island.  This  was  chiefly
done  by  the  Helots,  who,  tempted  by  the  offer  of  high  rewards,  watched
for  a  stormy  night  and  then,  working  round  to  the  open  sea,  ran  in
before  the  wind  and  landed  on  the  western  (seaward)  shore  of  the
island.  At  last  the  Athenians  landed  troops  in  the  island.  The
Lacedaemonian  outpost  was  camped  about  the  middle  of  the  island
where  the  ground  was  lowest  and  there  was  a  spring  of  water.  Another
division  of  the  Lacedaemonians  garrisoned  the  northern  extremity  of  the
island,  which  was  precipitous  and  almost  impregnable.  The  Athenians
surprised  and  cut  to  pieces  the  Lacedaemonian  outpost,  and  graduall)'
forced  back  the  main  body  till  it  was  cooped  up  in  the  high  precipitous
northern  comer  of  the  island.  A  Messenian  now  discovered  a  difficult
path  along  the  cliflfs,  by  which  he  led  a  party  of  Athenian  troops  and
established  them  in  a  position  commanding  the  enemj/s  rear.  The
Lacedaemonians  were  then  summoned  to  surrender,  find,  after  com-
municating with  their  friends  ashore,  they  laid  down  thefir  arms,  to  the


^.  XXXVI  SPHACTERIA  461

umber  of  292.  The  rest  had  fallen  in  the  skirmishing  which  preceded
ie  surrender.  The  blockade  had  lasted  in  all  seventy-two  days.  See
hucydides,  iv.  3-40.

'^  An  inspection  of  the  island  illustrates  the  description  of  Thucydides
I  the  most  satisfactory  manner ;  the  level  and  source  of  water  in  the
liddle  where  the  Lacedaemonians  encamped  —  the  summit  at  the
orthem  end  to  which  they  retired — the  landing-places  on  the  western
de,  to  which  the  Helots  brought  provisions,  are  all  perfectly  recQg-
i  sable.     Of  the  fort,  of  loose  and  rude  construction  on  the  summit,  it

not  to  be  expected  that  any  remains  should  now  exist ;  but  there
re  some  ruins  of  a  signal-tower  of  a  later  age,  on  the  same  site.  The
jmmit  is  a  pile  of  rough  rocks  ending  in  a  peak ;  it  slopes  gradually
>  the  shore  on  every  side,  except  to  the  harbour,  where  the  cliffs  are
erpendicular,  though  here,  just  above  the  water,  there  is  a  small  slope
ipable  of  admitting  the  passage  of  a  body  of  men  active  in  climbing
mong  rocks  and  difficult  places.  By  this  pass  it  is  probable  the
lessenians  came  upon  the  rear  of  the  Lacedaemonians  on  the  summit,
>r  just  at  the  southern  termination  of  the  pass  there  is  a  passage
1  rough  the  cliffs  which  border  the  greater  part  of  the  eastern  shore
f  the  island,  so  that  by  this  opening  and  along  the  pass  under  the
>cks  to  the  northward  of  it,  the  Messenians  had  the  means  of  passing
nseen  from  the  centre  of  the  island  to  the  rear  of  the  Lacedaemonians
n  the  summit  Though  this  hill,  as  I  have  observed,  slopes  gradually
cm  its  rocky  peak  to  the  shore,  on  every  side  except  the  harbour,

does  not  admit  of  a  landing  at  its  foot,  except  in  the  calmest  weather,
or  is  it  easily  assailed  on  any  side  by  land,  on  account  of  the  rugged-
ess  of  the  sununit,  except  by  the  means  to  which  the  Messenians
;sorted,  so  that  the  words  of  Thucydides  respecting  it  are  perfectly
rcurate.  The  southern  extremity  of  the  island  is  rocky,  steep,  and
iflicult  of  access,  and  forms  a  separate'  hill ;  in  every  other  part  the
round  slopes  from  the  cliffs  on  the  side  of  the  harbour  to  the  western
lore,  which,  though  rocky,  is  low,  so  that  when  the  weather  is  calm,

is  more  easy  in  face  of  an  opponent  to  land,  and  to  mak^  way  into
ie  island  on  that  side  than  on  the  eastern  shore,  where  the  cliffs
dmit  of  an  easy  access  only  in  two  places,  one  towards  the  northern
nd,  of  which  I  have  already  spoken,  the  other  in  the  middle  of  the
iland,  where  an  opening  in  the  cliffs  leads  immediately  into  the  most
:vel  part  of  it ;  exactly  in  the  opening  stands  a  small  church  of  the
*anaghia.  .  .  .  The  principal  source  of  water  is  towards  the  middle
•f  the  island,  at  an  excavation  in  the  rock  20  feet  deep,  which  seems
obe  more  natural  than  artificial''  (Leake,  Morea,  i.  pp.  408-410).


Clark.
Philippso:

The  modem  town  of  Navarino  or  Pylus,  locally  known  as  Neokasiro
0  distinguish  it  from  the  Palaeokastro  on  Coryphasium,  is  situated  at
he  foot  of  a  projecting  spur  of  Mt.  SL  Nicholas^  on  the  southern
r}  trance  to  the  bay  of  Navarino.     On  the  rocky  cape  immediately  to


462  CYPARJSSIAE  BK.  IV.  mbssbnia

the  west  of  the  little  town  stands  a  great  Venetian  and  Turkish  castle,
now  falling  into  decay.  From  the  castle  there  is  a  fine  view  over  the
beautiful  lake-like  bay  and  out  through  the  straits  to  the  broad  bhie
expanse  of  the  Ionian  sea.  The  bay  of  Navarino  is  famous  in  modern
history  as  the  scene  of  the  destruction  of  the  Turkish  fleet  by  the  com-
bined fleets  of  England,  France,  and  Russia.  The  battle  was  fought
20th  October,  1827.  See  Vischer,  Erinnerungetiy  p.  431  sqq,\  Ba^
deker,*  p.  363  sq, ;  Gutde-Joanney  2.  p.  287  sq. ;  Philippson,  Pelop&musj
p.  350  sq.

36.  6.  Oapharens.     Cp.  ii.  23.  i.

36.  6.  Psyttalia.     See  i.  36.  2.

36.  7.  Having  come  to  Oyparissiae  from  Pylns.  The  Messenian
coast  from  Cape  Coryphasium  north  to  Cyparissiae,  a  distance  of  about
20  miles,  is  of  an  extremely  uniform  and  monotonous  character.  It
curves  outward  in  the  form  of  a  bent  bow,  broken  by  no  bays  or  head-
lands of  importance.  A  long  and  lofty  ridge  runs  parallel  to  the  shore,
forming  the  boundary  of  a  broad  tableland  which  is  covered  with  a
fertile  soil.  Between  this  ridge  and  the  sea  there  is  a  narrow,  sandy,
but  well-watered  and  fertile  strip  of  coast  land.  Inland  from  the  ridge,
and  nearly  parallel  to  it,  stretches  a  chain  of  sombre  mountains,  probably
the  Mt.  Aegaleum  mentioned  by  Strabo  (viii.  p.  359).  On  all  this  line
of  coast  Pausanias  mentions  not  a  single  place.  But  Strabo  (viiL
p.  348)  mentions  several,  first,  the  island  of  Prote  (now  called  Prodano)
with  a  town  of  the  same  name  (cp.  Thucydides,  iv.  13) ;  the  island  is
wooded  and  contains  a  chapel  and  some  walls  alleged  to  be  ancient,
perhaps  the  ruins  of  the  town  of  Prote.  Next  Strabo  mentions  the
headland  of  Platamodes,  distant  100  furlongs  from  Coryphasium;  and
lastly  the  town  of  Erane,  situated  perhaps  at  the  mouth  of  the  Longo-
bardo  river,  where  there  are  some  ancient  remains.  See  Leake,  Mdrea^
I.  p.  425  sqq,  ;  Cell,  Journey  in  the  Morea,  p.  62  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.
p.  182  sq.  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  pp.  158  j^.,  178;  Baedeker, s  p.  317;
Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  293  ;  Philippson,  Peloponnes^  p.  348  sq,

36.  7-  OypaiissiarG.     The  city  was  also  called  Cyparissia  (Strabo,
viii.  p.  348  sq,\  Diodorus,  xv.  77^  Cyparissus  (Scylax,  Periplus^  45 ;  Pliny,
Nat.  Hist,  iv.  1 5),  or  Cyparisseis  (Homer,  Iliad^  ii.  593  ;  Stephanus  Byi.
s,v,  Kv7rapta-(nJ€is).     The  modem  town  still  stands  on  the  site  of  the
ancient  city  and  retains  its  ancient  name,  though  from  the  Middle  Ages
down  to  the  War  of  Independence  it  was  called  Arcadia,    The  mediae>'al
castle  on  the  site  of  the  ancient  citadel  of  Cyparissiae  is  situated  about
a  mile  from  the  sea  on  the  narrow  summit  of  a  rock  (500  feet  high),
which  is  connected  with  and  immediately  overlooked  by  the  lofty  Mt.
Psychro  (*the  cold  mountain '),  or  Mt  Hagia  Paraskeve  (St.  Friday),  as  its
highest  peak  (3756  feet)  is  locally  called.     The  castle  looks  down  upon
the  houses  of  the  town,  which  occupy  the  successive  terraces  on  the
very  steep  sides  of  the  acropolis.     The  foot  of  the  rock  abounds  in
springs  and  is  surrounded  by  shady  gardens,  in  which  the  olive-trees
are   particularly   remarkable    for  their   size.      The  whole   situation  is
highly  picturesque,  and  the  view  from  the  castle  is  very  fine,  ranging
over  the  beautifiil  slopes  of  Mt.  Psychro  and  across  die  sea  to  the


H.  XXXVI  CYPARJSSJAE  463

ilands  of  Zante  and  Cepkalonia,  Near  the  town  are  plantations  of
lives  mixed  with  cornfields.  At  the  entrance  to  the  casde  and  in
liferent  parts  of  the  walls  are  some  pieces  of  ancient  Greek  masonry.
Lemains  of  a  very  ancient  wall  may  be  seen  encircling  the  sunmiit,
icluding  blocks  4  or  5  feet  long.  Other  parts  of  the  walls  are  built
1  the  regular  squared  style,  like  the  walls  of  Messene.  A  bastion
uilt  in  this  style  faces  towards  Mt.  Psychro,

Below  the  castle,  about  half-way  between  it  and  the  sea,  is  a
ained  chapel  of  St  George,  near  which  some  large  blocks  of  poros
tone,  bases  and  shafts  of  Ionic  columns,  fragments  of  an  architrave,
nd  a  few  fragmentary  marble  sculptures  have  been  found.  The
anctuary  of  Apollo  may  have  stood  here.  Judging  from  analogy,
'6  should  conjecture  that  the  sanctuary  of  Athena  which  Pausanias
lentions  was  in  or  near  the  citadel.  In  the  midst  of  gardens  between
le  town  and  the  sea  is  a  spring,  the  water  of  which  is  caught  in  an
Qcient  stone  basin  overgrown  with  reeds.  It  is  now  called  the  spring
f  Hagia  Lougoudts^  and  miraculous  properties  are  ascribed  to  its
^ter.  A  fair,  much  frequented  by  the  country  people,  is  held  here
nnually  from  the  8th  to  the  i6th  of  September  (20th  to  28th,  according
>  our  reckoning).  The  spring  is  believed  to  be  the  spring  of  Dionysus,
lentioned  by  Pausanias.

See  Dodwell,  T<mrf  2.  p.  349  sq,  ;  Gt\\t  Journey  in  the  Morea^  p.  76  sqq,
with  a  view  of  Cyparissiae,  or  oi  Arcadia  as  Cell  calls  it) ;  Leake,  Morea,  I.  p.
8  sqq,  ;  Blouet,  ExpMition  scientifiqtu  de  Morie:  Architecturey  I.  p.  48  j^.,  with
1.  49 ;  Boblaye,  RechercheSy  p.  115  j^.  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  184  sq,  ;  Welcker,
"ageimcky  I.  pp.  243-245;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  178  x^.  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  368;
"ruide-Joanne^  2.  p.  294  sq, ;  Philippson,  Pelopomus^  p.  347  sq.

36.  7-  Dionysus  made  the  water  flow  by  smiting  the  earth  with
is  wand.  To  the  wand  or  thyrsus  of  Dionysus  the  power  of  producing  a
pring  of  water  or  wine  by  smiting  the  rock  seems  to  have  been  regularly
scribed.  For  other  examples  see  Euripides,  Bacchae^  704  sq,y  765  sq,  ;
^onnus,  Dionysiacs^  xlviii.  573  sqq.  These  examples  are  cited  by
>tephani  {Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg),  1872,  p.  57).

36.  7.  Athena  snmamed  Oyparissian.  Cp.  iii.  22.  9.  Athena
3yparissia  at  both  places  was  doubtless  originally  the  goddess  or  spirit
»f  the  cypress-tree.  In  the  mountain-valley  of  Psophis  in  north  Arcadia
here  were  tall  and  stately  cypresses  which  the*people  held  sacred  and
railed  *the  Maidens'  (Paus.  viii.  24.  7).  The  native  home  of  the
Impress  is  in  the  highlands  of  Afghanistan,  from  which  it  appears  to
have  spread  over  western  Asia  and  thence  into  Europe.  The  name,
as  well  as  the  tree,  is  of  Asiatic  orgin.  It  is  the  Hebrew  gopher
(Genesis,  vi.  14).  Probably,  therefore,  the  worship  of  the  cypress
came  to  Greece  from  the  East.  Cp.  F.  Lajard,  *  Du  cypres  pyramidal
consider^  comme  symbole  ou  attribut  des  dieux  en  Orient  et  en
Occident,'  AnncUi  delV  InstitutOy  19  (1847),  pp.  36-104;  V.  Hehn,
Kulturpflanzen  und  Hausthierey^  p.  228  sq,

36.  7.  the  Defile  (Aulon),  The  language  of  Pausanias  in  the
next  sentence  implies  that  the  Defile  in  question  is  the  narrow  valley
of  the  Neda.     At  the  mouth  of  the  river  the  valley  opens  out  into  a


464


THE  DEFILE


BK^  IV.  MBSSKXU


fertile  stretch  of  level  ground,  covered  with  luxuriant  v^etadoo.    Hot
probably  stood  the  temple  of  Aesculapius  mentioned  by  Pausanias.    At
the  present  day  fever  and  mosquitoes,  the  two  plagues  of  low4yii¥
districts  by  the  sea  in  Greece,  render  this  plain  and  the  neighbooiiiv
coast  jfrom  Cyparissiae  north  for  many  miles  almost  uninhabitable.    The
view  of  Leake  and  Pro£  Curtius  that  the  Defile  (Aulon)  was  the  vaUq
of  the  Cyparissiae  river  seems  precluded  by  the  language  of  Pausaniai
See  LeaJce,  Morea^  i.  pp.  57,  72,  484 ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2,  p.  185  jy.;
Bursian,  Gtogr,  2,  p.  179.     Cp.  note  oa  iii.  33.  7  *Dorium.'


*!  .


BOOK    FIFTH


ELIS

FECIAL  works  on  this  book  are  P.  Hirt,  De  fontibus  Pausaniae  in
Uiacis  (Greisswald,  1878);  Beinert,  Disputatio  de  locis  quibusdam
X  Pausaniae  Eliacis prioribus  (Breslau,  1853).

In  antiquity  works  on  Elis  ('HXiaKa)  were  composed  by  Rhianus
Q  at  least  three  books  (Stephanus  Byz.  s,w,  Aairc/xra,  Ncuvaxpis,
Vt^^tos),  by  Ister  in  at  least  four  books  (Steph.  Byz.  s,v,  ^vrccov ;
»ee  Fragm.  Histor,  Graec,^  ed.  Miiller,  i.  p.  424),  and  by  Teupalus
[Steph.  Byz.  s,v.  *AvSpia).

1.  I.  who  say  that  PelopcimeBe  is  divided  into  Ave  parts.
Pausanias  seems  to  refer  to  Thucydides,  who  says  (i.  10)  that  the  Lace-
daemonians possessed  two  out  of  the  five  parts  of  Peloponnese.  But
rhucydides  may  only  mean  that  the  Lacedaemonians  possessed  two-fifths
>f  the  whole  area  of  Peloponnese.  The  commentators  Arnold  and  Classen
wderstand  him  in  the  former  way  ;  Professors  Curtius  (Pelop.  2.  p.  93)
uad  V.  Wilamowitz-Mollendorff  {Hermes^  12  (1877),  p.  347),  and  Mr.
^.  H.  Forbes  understand  him  in  the  latter  way.  Mr.  Forbes  (in  his
^tion  of  Thucydides,  book  i.)  adds  that  "the  language  of  Thucydides
Jways  implies  the  ordinary  division  of  the  Peloponnese  into  six  parts ;
V^olis,  Achaea,  Elis,  and  Arcadia,  besides  Laconia  and  Messenia.''
^  Mr.  Forbes  is  right,  Pausanias  appears  to  have  mistaken  Thucydides's
[^^ning  by  interpreting  his  expression  *  parts '  in  the  sense  of  *  divi-
»ons,'  <  provinces.'  Pausanias's  use  of  Thucydides's  history  is  examined
y  Dr.  Otto  Fischbach  (*  Die  Benutzung  der  thukydideischen  Geschichts-
^erkes  durch  den  Periegeten  Pausanias,'  Wiener  Studien^  15  (1893),
P-  161-191).

1.  I.  the  Arcadians  and  Achaeans  are  aborigines  etc    Cp.

Herodotus,  viii.  73.

1.  2.   it  is    two    hundred   and   seventeen   years   since    etc.

<>nnth  was  restored  in  44  B.C.     Hence  Pausanias  was  writing  his

-Count  of  Elis  in  174  A.D.

1.    4.    The  Moon loved    EndymioD.      On   representations

this    myth   in   ancient   art   see   Jahn,  Archdologische  Beitragey  p.

J  sqq.

Vol.  Ill  .  2  H


466  EARL  Y  HISTOR  Y  OF  ELIS  V9i.  v.  KUS

1.  5.  the  Eleans  show  Endymion's  tomb.     See  vi.  20.  9.

1.  7-  the  wrath   of  the  deity  at   the  death   of   Myrtilii&

Cp.  ii.  18.  2  ;  vi.  20.  17  ;  viii.  14.  10  sq.

1.  9.  or  of  some  other  reward.  Apollodorus  says  (ii.  5.  5)  that
Augeas  had  promised  to  give  Hercules  the  tenth  part  of  his  cattle
as  a  reward.

1.  10.  by  tnming  the  stream  of  the  Menius  upon  the  dasf.
As  to  the  Menius  see  vi.  26.  i.  According  to  Apollodorus  (ii.  5.  5),
it  was  the  united  streams  of  the  Alpheus  and  Peneus  that  Hercoks
diverted  from  their  beds  to  wash  away  the  dung.

1.  II.  Actor  and  his  sons.     See  below,  note  on  v.  2.  i.

1.  II.  the  city  of  Hyrmina.  The  city  is  mentioned  by  Homer
(//rW,  ii.  616}.  Strabo  says  (viii.  p.  341):  **  Hyrmina  was  a  small
town,  but  it  exists  no  longer.  It  is  a  mountainous  promontory  sear
Cyllene,  called  Hormine  or  Hyrmina."  Leake  identified  Hyrmina  with
the  site  of  Kastro  Tomese  or  Chlemoutsi^  a  ruined  mediaeval  castk
occupying  a  central  and  commanding  situation  on  the  promontory  tf
Chlemoutsiy  anciently  called  Chelonatas  {Morea^  2.  pp.  170-176).  B«
Hyrmina  is  more  usually  identified  with  the  ruined  Cyclopean  acropofis
on  a  small  rocky  cape  which  forms  the  harbour  of  Koummfeii,  See
Boblaye,  Recherches^  p.  119  j^. ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  33;  Bursian,
Geogr.  2.  p.  308  ;  Baedeker,*  p.  331.  Strabo's  description  of  the  place
as  '^  a  mountainous  promontory  "  certainly  applies  better  to  Cklemauisit
which  is  a  long  ridge  of  rough  hills,  forming  a  very  conspicuous  feature
of  this  part  of  Peloponnese,  both  by  sea  and  land.  "  Kasiro  Tomesi
standing  on  a  height  surrounded  by  plains  or  by  the  sea,  and  hence
easily  recognised  at  a  great  distance,  is  one  of  the  finest  geographical
stations  in  Greece"  (Leake,  Morea^  2.  p.  171).  The  ruined  castle  of
Kasiro  (or  Caste!)  Tomese^  with  its  high,  enormously  thick  walls,  is  one
of  the  most  imposing  remains  of  the  Middle  Ages  in  Greece.  See
Philippson,  Peloponnes^  p.  299.

2.  I.  the  sons  of  Actor  etc.  Their  names  were  Cteatus  and
Eurytus  ;  they  were  called  Actorione  or  Actoriones  after  their  nominal
father,  and  Moliones  or  Molionids  after  their  mother.  Their  real  father
was  said  to  be  Poseidon.  Later  tradition  represented  them  as  a  pair  of
Siamese  twins,  with  a  single  body  between  them.  See  Homer,  lUaiy
xi.  709  (with  Mr.  Leafs  note),  750;  Pindar,  OL  x.  (xi.)  30  sqq,^  with
the  Scholia;  Apollodorus,  ii.  7.  2.  Cp.  Paus.  ii.  15.  i;  iii.  18.  15;
viii.  14.  9.

2.  2.  no  athlete  from  Elis  will  enter  for  the  Isthmian  gamfls.

Cp.  vi.  3.  9  ;  vi.  16.  2.

2.  3-  Oypselus dedicated  a  golden  image  to  Zens.    This

image  of  Zeus,  dedicated  by  Cypselus  and  made  of  beaten  gold,  is  men-
tioned by  Strabo  (viii.  pp.  353,  378).  Cp.  Plato,  Phaedrus^  236  B.
According  to  one  account,  Cypselus  vowed  that  if  he  became  tyrant  of
Corinth  he  would  consecrate  the  property  of  his  subjects  for  ten  years.
He  succeeded  in  his  object,  and  out  of  the  tithes  which  he  levied  he
made  the  golden  image.  See  Suidas  and  Photius,  Lexicon^  s.v,  Kvrffr
Xi8ijv  dvdOrjfia,     According  to  another  account,  the  image  was  dedi-


c.  IV  EARL  Y  HISTOR  Y  OF  ELIS  467

.ted,  not  by  Cypselus,  but  by  his  son  Periander  (Diogenes  Laertius,  i.
96  ;  SchoL  on  Plato,  Lc.)     It  is  said  to  have  stood  in  the  temple  of
era  (Suidas  and  Photius,  ILcc)

2.  5.  Timon,  an  Elean,  won  victories  etc.  See  vi.  16.  2.  He
to  be  distinguished  from  Timon  the  victor  in  the  chariot-race  (vi.  2.
;  VL  12.  6).

3.  I.  Phylens.     See  v.  i.  10.

3.  2.  the  Bady  Water.  A  different  explanation  of  the  name  is
ven,  on  the  authority  of  Echephyllidas,  by  a  scholiast  on  Plato  {Phaedo^
)  c).  He  says  that  when  Hercules  was  defeated  by  Cteatus  and
urytus,  the  sons  of  Actor,  he  was  pursued  as  far  as  the  land  of
iiprasium ;  then  looking  round  and  seeing  none  of  his  enemies
fining,  he  took  breath  and  having  slaked  his  thirst  at  the  river  that
n  by  the  spot,  he  called  it  the  Sweet  Water.  It  is  still  shown,  the
holiast  says,  on  the  way  from  Dyme  to  Elis,  and  it  is  called  by  the
itives  Bathy  (*  sweet  *)  water.  Bathy  (Pa$v)  here  seems  to  be  a
alectical  form  of  r^Sv.  The  P  in  /3a8v  appears  to  stand  for  an  ancient
ganrnia ;  for  there  are  traces  of  the  digamma  in  various  forms  of  rjBvs.
ie  G.  Curtius,  Griech,  Etymologie^  p.  229 ;  and  for  the  transition  of
le  digamma  into  j8  in  Greek  see  id,  p.  584  sqq.  The  author  of  the
tymoL  Magnum  remarks  (p.  426)  that  it  was  customary  in  the  Doric
alect  to  prefix  )3  to  words  beginning  with  a  vowel.

3.  3.  he  returned  to  Dulichinm.  He  had  gone  to  Dulichium
hen  his  father  expelled  him  from  Elis  (ApoUodorus,  ii.  5.  5).  Cp.
x>ve,  V.  I.  10.

3.  4-  This  is  signified  by  Homer  etc.     See  Iliad,  ii.  615  sqq,

3.  5.  take  the  three-eyed  one  to  guide  them  etc.  Cp.  Apol-
idorus,  ii.  8.  3  ;  and  see  note  on  ii.  24.  3.

i.  I.  the  land  of  Elis  was  good  etc  On  the  fertility  of  Elis  cp.
i.  26.  6  ;  Tozer,  Geography  of  Greece ,  p.  267  sq,

4.  I.  one  soldier  should  be  chosen  from  each  side  to  do
attle  etc.  This  combat  is  recorded,  somewhat  more  at  length,  by
>trabo  (viii.  p.  357)  on  the  authority  of  Ephorus,  whom  Pausanias  may
iso  have  followed.

i.  2.  introduced  colonies  of  his  Aetolians  among  them.  The
nidition  of  an  Aetolian  settlement  in  Elis  is  confirmed  by  the  close
"elationship  between  the  dialect  of  Elis  and  the  Locrian  and  Aetolian
iialects.     See  Busolt,  Griech,  Geschichte^  i.  pp.  194,  232  note  3.

4.  2.  assigned  certain  privileges  to  Dius.  The  reference  is  prob-
ably not  to  honours  paid  to  the  living,  but  to  worship  rendered  to  the
leroic  dead.  The  Greek  is  Aty  tc  aircv€t/A€  ycpo.  The  expression
rcpo,  used  in  this  way,  seems  equivalent  to  rt/xai,  which  Pausanias
rftener  employs  in  this  sense.  For  ylpa  in  this  sense  see  iv.  3.  10 ;
^ii.  2.  4 ;  viii.  9.  7.  Thus  the  phrase  ye/xt  or  ri/xas  djrov€fi€iv
''tvt  is  much  the  same  as  *  to  canonize '  him,  and  yepa  cxctv  is  *  to  be
^ored  as  a  hero  or  saint.'

4.  3.  a  small  section  of  the  Achaeans.  According  to  Ephorus,
*  reported  by  Strabo  (viii.  p.  357),  the  Achaeans  possessed  the
Olympian  sanctuary  before  the  Aetolian  conquest.    Prof.  Curtius  accepts


:^


468  BURIAL  IN  THE  GATE  bk.  v.  bus

the  testimony  of  Ephorus  and  points  to  a  variety  of  faucXs  which  seem
to  show  that  Olympia  was  an  Achaean  sanctuary  before  the  Dorian
invasion.  Amongst  the  facts  on  which  he  lays  emphasis  are  the  wozsh^
of  Pelops  and  the  worship  of  Hera  at  Olympia ;  for  both  Pelops  and
Hera,  as  the  legends  and  religion  of  Argolis  prove,  were  intimately
connected  with  the  Achaeans.  See  E.  Curtius,  as  reported  in
Berliner  pMlolog,  Wochensckrift^  14  (1894),  pp.  446  sqq.^  477  jff :
JcJirbuch  d,  archdolog,  InstituiSy  Archaolog^scher  Anzeiger,  9  (1894),

pp.  40-43-

4.  4-  bnriedhiminatoinb inthegate.    The  spirit  of  the  dead

man  was  probably  expected  to  guard  the  gate  against  foes.  The  gnn
of  Laomedon  was  over  the  Scaean  gate  at  Troy,  and  was  believed  to
protect  the  city  (Servius,  on  Virgil,  Aen,  il  241).  Neoptolemos  was
buried  under  the  threshold  of  the  temple  at  Delphi  (SchoL  on  Pindar,
Nem,  vii.  62).  Cp.  Lobeck,  Aglaophamusy  p.  281  note.  It  is
possible  that  in  this  story  of  the  burial  of  Aetolus  in  the  gate  we  have
a  faded  tradition  of  an  actual  human  sacrifice  offered  when  the  gate  was
built.  Such  sacrifices  have  been  offered  in  many  lands  for  the  poipoK
of  securing  the  foundations  of  buildings  and  rendering  cities  impr^naUt
"In  Africa,  in  Galam,  a  boy  and  girl  used  to  be  buried  alive  before  the
great  gate  of  the  city  to  make  it  impregnable,  a  practice  once  executed
on  a  large  scale  by  a  Bambarra  tyrant ;  while  in  Great  Bassam  and
Yarriba  such  sacrifices  were  usual  at  the  foundation  of  a  house  or
village.  ...  When  the  gate  of  the  new  city  of  Tavoy,  in  Tenasserim,
was  built,  perhaps  twenty  years  ago.  Mason  was  told  by  an  eye-witness
that  a  criminal  was  put  in  each  post-hole  to  become  a  protecting  demon.
Thus  it  appears  that  such  stories  as  that  of  the  human  victims  buried
for  spirit-watchers  under  tlie  gates  of  Mandalay,  of  the  queen  who  was
drowned  in  a  Birmese  reservoir  to  make  the  dyke  safe,  of  the  hero  whose
divided  body  was  buried  under  the  fortress  of  Thatung  to  make  it  im-
pregnable, are  the  records,  whether  in  historical  or  mythical  form,  of
the  actual  customs  of  the  land"  (Tylor,  Primitive  Culture^  i.  p.  106
sqq.)  In  Greece  sacrifices  are  offered  at  the  foundation  of  buildings  to
this  day.  A  fowl,  a  ram,  or  a  lamb  is  killed,  its  blood  is  poured  on  the
foundation  stone,  and  the  carcass  is  buried  under  it.  Sometimes,  as  a
substitute  for  an  animal,  the  builder  measures  by  stealth  a  man  or  one
of  his  limbs  or  only  his  shadow  with  a  piece  of  tape,  which  he  then
buries  ;  or  he  lays  the  foundation  stone  upon  the  man's  shadow.  It  is  be-
lieved that  the  man  will  die  within  a  year.  This  seems  plainly  a  substitute
for  human  sacrifices  offered  at  the  foundation  of  buildings.  Traditions  of
such  sacrifices  are  still  current  in  Greece.  Indeed  in  the  island  ^
Zacynthus  the  peasants  to  this  day  believe  that  in  order  to  secure  the
durability  of  important  buildings,  such  as  bridges  and  fortresses,  it  ^
necessary  to  kill  a  man  (especially  a  Mohammedan  or  a  Jew)  and  bo^y
him  on  the  spot ;  and  it  has  been  asserted  that  but  for  the  fear  of  ll<
law  they  would  actually  perform  such  sacrifices.  See  B.  Schrnidtr
Das  Volksleben  der  Neugriechen^  p.  196  sqq,

4.  5.  the  Olympic  truce.      Cp.  v.  20.   i.      According  to

Polybius  (xii.  26)  the  Olympic  truce  was  founded  by  Hercules.    Cp.


I.  IV  THE  OL  YMPJC  REGISTER  469

H.  Krause,  Olympia^  P-  35  sqq.  In  the  island  of  Nukahiwa,  one
f  the  Washington  or  Marquesas  islands  in  the  Pacific,  "the  wars
ith  the  Tai-pihs  are  continued  by  land,  until  one  of  the  two  kings
ind  they  have  both  a  right  to  it)  shall  demand  a  truce  for  the  purpose
r  celebrating  their  dance-feast,  the  Olympic  games  of  these  savages,
tid  which,  according  to  their  custom,  must  not  be  deferred  too  long.

I  order  to  celebrate  this  they  agree  upon  a  term,  and  all  parties,
iends  as  well  as  enemies,  assist  in  the  preparations.  .  .  .  After  the
irmination  of  the  feast,  they  return  home,  and  the  war  recommences  in

II  its  vigour"  (Krusenstem,  Voyage  round  the  worlds  translated  by
loppner,  i.  p.  169  j^.)

4.  5.  wMch  liad  been  diBcontinned  for  a  time.  According  to
hlegon,  a  contemporary  of  Pausanias,  the  Olympic  festival  was  dis-
3ntinued  for  28  Olympiads,  or  112  years,  from  the  time  of  Pelops  and
[ercules,  who  instituted  the  festival,  down  to  the  time  of  Coroebus  the
)lean,  who  won  the  first  historically  recorded  Olympic  victory  in  776
.C.  See  Scriptores  rerum  mirab,  Graeci^  ed.  Westermann,  p.  205  ;
^ragm,  his  tor,  Graec,  ed.  Miiller,  3.  p.  603.  (In  the  text  of  Phlegon
TTo  'I<^4Tov  must  be  wrong.  Prof.  G.  F.  Unger  conjectiu^ed  aTro
<f>iKXov.     See  Phiiologus^  44  (1885),  p.  185.)

4.  6.  to  renew  the  Olympic  games.  The  story  of  the  renewal  of
le  Olympic  festival  by  Iphitus  is  told  somewhat  more  fiiUy  by  Phlegon.
ee  the  references  in  the  preceding  note.

4.  6.  The  inscription  at  Olympia  states  that  Iphitus  was  a  son
f  Haemon.  Phlegon  also  calls  Iphitus  a  son  of  Haemon,  but
lys  that  according  to  others  he  was  a  son  of  Praxonides  {Frag,  hist,
TraeCy  ed.  Miiller,  3.  p.  603).  As  to  the  inscription  mentioned  by
'ausanias  see  v.  20.  i  note.

4.  6.  The  ancient  writings  of  the  Eleans.  These  were  the
ggisters  of  the  Olympic  victors  in  the  foot-race.  Pausanias  often  refers
J  them.  See  Index,  s.v,  *  Eleans,'  and  Hirt,  Defontibus  Pausaniae  in
Zliacis^  p.  12  sqq.  Philostratus  also  made  use  of  them  in  writing  his
reatise  on  gymnastics  {De  arte  gymnastica^  2).  They  were  probably
ng^ved  on  stone.  Cp.  Miiller,  Dorians^  i.  p.  148  sq, ;  L.  Hicks,
"hreek  historical  inscriptions^  p.  2.  Plutarch  tells  us  {Numay  i)  that
he  register  of  Olympic  victors  was  first  published  by  Hippias  of  Elis,
he  sophist  who  is  satirised  by  Plato  and  who  flourished  about  400  B.C.
Professor  Mahaflfy  has  argued  that  the  register  w^as  not  only  edited  but
ictually  compiled  by  Hippias,  and  that  no  complete  and  authoritative
register  had  been  kept  before  his  time.  He  points  out  that  Thucydides
and  the  historians  of  the  fifth  century  do  not  date  events  by  the
Olympic  victors.  (It  is  true  that  Thucydides  v.  49  refers  to  an  Olympic
victory,  but  to  a  victory  in  the  pancratium,  not  in  the  foot-race.)  He
thinks  that  the  practice  of  registering  the  victors'  names  in  inscriptions
only  dates  from  about  the  50th  Olympiad  (580  B.C.),  and  that  for
earlier  dates  Hippias,  in  drawing  up  his  register,  had  no  trustworthy
evidence  to  go  upon.  *  The  ancient  writings  of  the  Eleans '  to  which
Pausanias  so  often  refers  are,  in  Prof.  Mahaif/s  opinion,  nothing  but
^e  treatise   of  Hippias,  preserved  and  copied   at    Elis.      See  Prof.


470  THE  FLAX  OF  ELIS  BK.  v.  klis

Mahaflfy,  *  On  the  authenticity  of  the  Olympian  register,*  Journal  tf
Hellenic  Studies,  2  (1881),  pp.  164-178.

4.  8.  At  the  time  of  the  invasion  of  Agis  etc.  On  this  war  see
iii.  8.  3-5  ;  v.  20.  4  sq,  ;  v.  27.  II.

4.  9.  the  Eleans joined  the  Macedonian  alliance.    See  iv.

28.  4.

5.  I.  AristotiniaB.  The  date  of  his  tyranny  seems  to  have  been
somewhere  about  272  B.C.  A  long  account  of  his  atrocities  and  death
is  given  by  Plutarch,  De  mulierum  virtute,  15  ;  compare  also  Jusdn,
xxvi.  4-10,  who  says  that  the  tyranny  of  Aristotimus  lasted  %l\^  months.
Cp.  Droysen,  Gesch,  des  Hellenismus^  iii.  I.  p.  222  sqq,  Droysea
thought  that  both  Plutarch  and  Justin  have  copied  from  Phylarchos.
Coins  of  Aristotimus  are  extant  bearing  the  letters  AP  or  API.  Sec
E.  Muret  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  HelUniqtie,  4  (1880),  pp.  43-46;
Head,  Historia  Numorum,  p.  356.     Cp.  Paus.  vi.  14.  11.

5.  2.  fine  flax  grows  here.     The  word  translated  'fine  flax'  is
bussos  (Pvavos).     Elsewhere  (vi.  26.  6)  Pausanias  tells  us  that  in  the
land  of  Elis  people  sowed  hemp,  flax,  and  bussos ;  and  in  another  place
(vii.  21.  14)  he  says  that  most  of  the  women  of  Patrae  gained  their
livelihood  by  weaving  head-dresses  and  other  articles  of  dress  out  <rf  the
bussos  which  grew  in  Elis.     In  all  these  passages  bussos  has  commonly
been  taken  to  mean  *  cotton.'     But  against  this  interpretation  it  has  to
be  said  that  (i)  the  general  usage  of  ancient  writers  is  decidedly  in
favour  of  taking  bussos  as  flax,  not  as  cotton.     Thus  Herodotus  says
(ii.  86)  that  the  Egyptian  mummies  were  swathed  in  bandages  oi  fine
bussos  cloth.     Now  microscopical  examination  of  the  mummy-cloths  has
proved  that  these  are  of  linen,  not  (as  used  to  be  asserted)  of  cottoa
Cp.    Paus.   x.    32.    16.      Again    Herodotus   describes   (vii.    181)  how
bandages  of  fine  bussos  cloth  were  used  for  binding  up  wounds.    But
linen  is  the  proper  material  for  bandaging  a  wound  ;  cotton  irritates  it  -
Again,  when  Herodotus  does  actually  describe  cotton,  he  calls  it,  not
bussos,  but  tree-wool  (iii.  47  and  106).     For  the  other  evidence  which
makes  it  practically  certain  that  by  bussos  the  best  writers  of  antiquity
meant,  not  cotton,  but  a  kind  of  flax,  see  Yates,  Textrinum  antiquonm,
p.  267  sqq.  ;  Marquardt,  Das  Privatleben  der  Rotner^  p.   481  j^.;  0.
Schrader,   Unguistisch-historische  Forschungen  zur  HandelsgeschickU
und  Warenkunde,  p.  192  sqq.     In  only  two  passages  of  late  writers  of
antiquity  does  bussos  seem  to  be  used  of  cotton.     Philostratus,  who
wrote  in  the  third  century  A.D.,  describes  ( Vit.  Apollon,  ii.  20)  some
of  the  Hindoos  as  clad  in  bussos,  which  grew,  he  says,  upon  a  tree.
But  his  description  of  the  tree  agrees  neither  with  the  cotton -tree
(Gossypium  arboreum)  nor  with  the  cotton-plant  {Gossypium  kerbacaeum\
Again,  Pollux  (about  200  A.D.)  describes  bussos  as  "a  kind  of  Indian
flax,"  and  he  immediately  adds,   "  In   Egypt  also  wool  is  got  from  a
tree,"  and  he  describes  this  *  wool '  in  a  way  which  shows  he  meant
cotton.     It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  though  he  speaks  of  bussos  25^
kind  of  Indian  flax,  he  meant  cotton.     However,  the  text  of  Pollax  \s
here  open  to  doubt ;  for  the  passage  is  wanting  in  some  of  the  good
MSS. :  and  Yates  {op,  cit,  p.  468  sqq,)  brings  forward  some  argumeo-^


CH.  V  THE  FLAX  OF  ELIS  471

to  show  that  the  passage  should  read  thus  :    koX  /di^v  kqX  ra  /ivaviva
Kal  iq  ISvarros  kCvov  ri  cZSos.      TLapa  8k  'IvSois  dwh  ^vX.ov  n  cptov
yCyverai  etc.     "  And,  moreover,  there  are  cloths  of  bussoSy  and  bussos
is  a  kind  of  flax.     But  among  the  Indians  a  sort  of  wool  is  produced
from  trees,"  etc.

(2)  Again  Pliny  {Nat,  Hist,  xix.  20),  enumerating  the  various  kinds
of  flax,  mentions  the  bussos  of  Elis  as  a  very  valuable  sort,  which  was
used  for  making  female  finery.  Thus  he  certainly  is  describing  the
same  plant  as  Pausanias ;  and  if  he  had  known  it  to  be  cotton,  he
would  hardly  have  omitted  to  refer  to  the  cotton  of  Elis  in  his  descrip-
tion of  the  cotton-plant.  Whereas  in  the  passages  where  he  is  un-
doubtedly describing  the  cotton-plant,  he  makes  no  reference  to  the
fact  that  it  grew  in  Elis ;  and  in  these  passages,  though  he  describes
the  cotton-plant  by  various  names,  he  never  applies  the  name  bussos  to
it.     See  Pliny,  Nat,  Hist,  xii.  25,  38,  39 ;  xix.  14.

(3)  If  the  bussos  referred  to  by  Pausanias  had  been  the  cotton-plant,
it  seems  probable  that,  like  so  many  ancient  writers,  he  would  have
made  some  reference  to  the  curious  fact  of  a  wool-like  substance  being
produced  by  a  tree  or  plant,  and  would  have  referred  to  the  foreign
cotm tries,  especially  India,  where  cotton  grew.  He  is  particularly  fond
of  noticing  remarkable  natural  products  (plants,  animals,  etc.),  and  of
comparing  them  with  those  of  foreign  lands.  It  would  have  been
strange,  therefore,  if  he  had  omitted  so  natural  an  opportunity  of  intro-
ducing a  digression  upon  the  nature  and  native  home  of  the  cotton-plant.

On  the  other  hand,  in  favour  of  taking  bussos  to  mean  '  cotton '  in
Pausanias,  it  may  be  urged :  (i)  that  the  evidence  of  Pollux  and  Philo-
stratus  goes  to  show  that  in  late  writers  bussos  sometimes  meant  cotton ;
(2)  that  Pausanias  repeatedly  distinguishes  bussos  from  flax  (see  vi.  25.
5  ;  vi.  26.  6 ;  x.  32.  16) ;  and  (3)  that  the  terms  in  which  he  speaks  of
it,  as  one  of  the  two  great  wonders  of  Elis,  are  more  applicable  to  a  rare
eacotic  like  cotton  than  to  a  particular  species  of  a  plant  so  familiar  to  the
ancients  as  flax.  The  force  of  this  last  argument  is  weakened  by  the
fact  that  flax  of  any  kind  seems  to  have  been  much  rarer  in  ancient
Greece  than  we  are  apt  to  suppose.  Yates,  indeed  (op,  cit,  p.  286),  thinks
that  the  only  evidence  of  the  growth  of  flax  in  Greece  are  the  passages
of  Pausanias  under  discussion  and  the  parallel  passage  of  Pliny  already
referred  to  {Nat,  Hist,  xix.  20) ;  and  Marquardt,  who  interprets  bussos
in  these  passages  as  cotton,  says  {op,  cit,  p.  482  sq,)  that  in  ancient
Greece  flax  seems  to  have  been  little,  if  at  all,  cultivated.  In  Thucydides
(iv.  26)  we  read  of  pounded  flax-seed  being  used  as  food  on  the  coast  of
Messenia ;  but  it  may  have  been  imported  from  abroad.

The  word  bussos  is  identical  with  the  Hebrew  biis,  which  also  signifies
a  species  of  flax.  On  the  whole,  the  preponderance  of  evidence  seems
in  £Eivour  of  taking  bussos  in  Pausanias  to  mean  a  fine  kind  of  flax.

On  the  meaning  of  bussos  in  classical  writers  and  the  cultivation  of  cotton  in
the  ancient  world,  see  Yates,  Textrinum  Antv^uorum,  pp.  267  sqq,^  334  <f^^-  >
C.  Ritter,  *Ueber  die  geographische  Verbreitung  der  Baumwolle,'  etc.  in
Ahhondlungen  of  the  Prussian  Academy  (Berlin),  1 851,  pp.  297-359;  H.  Brandes,
'Ueber  die  antiken  Namen  und  die  geographische  Verbreitung  der  Baumwolle


472  THE  FLAX  OF  EUS  bk.  v.  lus

im  PA\KtCa!Ocai,^  Jahresbericht  des  Vereins  twn  Freunden  der  Erdkunde  tu  Lapti^y
1865,  pp.  91-119 ;  Neumann  und  Partsch,  Physikaliscke  Ge^grapkie  tfon  GrucAat'
land,  pp.  452-455;  O.  Schrader,  Linguist. -histar.  Forsckungen  %ur  ffamdelsgh
schuhU  und  Warenkunde  (Jena,  1886),  pp.  189-213  ;  De  Candolle,  Orm  ^
Cultivaied  Plants ,  pp.  402-408;  Winer,  Biblisckes  Reahoorterbmck^  s.v.  'Bub-
woUe ' ;  Curtius,  Pelop.  i.  p.  438  s^,,  2.  pp.  10  sf,,  95  ;  Moven,  Die  PMaemsitr,
iii.  I.  p.  259  sg.  ;  Pauly*s  Real-EncyclopSidie,  s.v.  *  Byssus' ;  Wilkinson,  Mamun
and  Customs  of  the  Ancient  Egyptians  (ed.  1878),  2.  p.  \^sqq.\  Bekker,  Charidti^
p.  430  sqq.  (EngL  trans. ) ;  Wiedemann  on  Herodotus  ii.  86,  p.  358  sq. ;  Maiqoaidi,
Das  Pnvaileben  der  Romer,  pp.  481  sq,,  487-491  ;  V.  Hehn,  ICulturpfiamsem  tmd
LfaustAiere,*  p.  143 ;  BlUmner,  Technologie  und  Terminolcgie,  I.  pp.  179  jf.,
187  sq.

Of  the  writers  just  cited,  Brandes,  Neumann,  Winer,  Curtius,  Wled^
mann,  and  Marquardt  understand  btissos  in  Pausanias  to  mean  cottoo.
Yates  and  apparently  Hehn   take  it  to  be  a  kind  of  flax ;   Schiader
thinks  that  the  evidence  for  its  being  cotton  is  extremely  weak  ;  and  De
Candolle,  a  high  authority  on  such  questions,  says :  '*  It  is  evident  tbat
the  cotton  was  never,  or  very  rarely,  cultivated  by  the  ancients.     It  is
so  useful  that  it  would  have  become  common  if  it  had  been  introduced
into  a  single  locality — in  Greece,  for  instance."     The  other  writers  are
doubtful  or  express  no  opinion.      Leake  seems  to  take  it  for  granted
that  the  btissos  of  Elis  was  flax.     He  says  that  one  of  the  chief  products
of  Gastouni^  in  the  plain  of  Elis,  is  flax,  but  that,  *'  contrary  to  its  andest
reputation,  the  flax  of  Gastouni  is  not  very  fine,  which  my  infonnant
ascribes  to  its  being  exposed  to  the  cold  and  running  water  of  the  river,
instead  of  being  soaked  in  ponds  ;  it  is  chiefly  used  in  the  neighbouriog
islands  by  the  peasants,  who  weave  it  into  cloths  for  their  own  ose'
{Marea,  i.  p.  12  sq.)     Cotton  is  now  cultivated  to  a  considerable  extent
in  Greece.     In  the  beginning  of  the  century,  Leake  noted  its  cultivation
in  Elis  ;  but  it  was  the  Civil  War  in  America,  with  its  blockade  of  the
southern  ports,  which  first  led  to  the  cultivation  of  cotton  on  a  laij^c
scale  in  Greece.       It   is   grown  especially  in  the  plain  of  Elatea  in
Phocis  and  the  plains  of  Chaeronea  and  Lebadea  in   Boeotia.    See
Leake,  Morea^  i .  p.  15;  Neumann  und  Partsch,  Physikalische  Gtop-
von  Griechenland^  pp.  453,  455  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  xliii.

5.  2.  the  mares  cannot  be  impregnated  etc.  Cp.  Herodotus,
iv.  30 ;  Plutarch,  Quaest.  Grace.  52  ;  Antigonus,  Histor.  Mirab.  iS*
Of  Maabar  (the  Coromandel  Coast)  Marco  Polo  says  (2.  p.  325^^1
Yule's  trans.,  ed.  2)  :  "  And  another  strange  thing  to  be  told  is  that  thert
is  no  possibility  of  breeding  horses  in  this  country,  as  hath  often  been
proved  by  trial.  For  even  when  a  great  blood-mare  here  has  been
covered  by  a  great  blood-horse,  the  produce  is  nothing  but  a  wretched
wry-legged  weed,  not  fit  to  ride."  Marco  Polo's  account  is  confirmed
by  a  modem  traveller,  quoted  by  Yule.  Mr.  Clermont-Ganneau,  how-
ever, is  probably  right  in  supposing  that  a  religious  scruple  against
breeding  mules  was  the  only  foundation  for  the  belief  mentioned  by
Pausanias,  Herodotus,  and  Plutarch.  He  points  out  that  the  Jews
appear  to  have  been  similarly  prohibited  by  their  religion  from  breeding
mules  {Leviticus,  xix.  19).  See  Clermont-Ganneau,  *Le  dieu  Satrape,'
\n  Journal  Asiatique,  7me  S^rie,  10  (1877),  p.  209  sqq.

5.  3.  Ooing  from  <the  Neda>  you  come  to Samidun.   ^^


I


V  SAMICUM—LEPREUS  473

:sent  the  Neda,  a  river  of  some  size,  flows  between  fields  of  maize  into
sea.  Beyond  its  mouth,  to  the  north,  the  hills  retreat  from  the  coast,
ving  between  them  and  the  sea  a  plain  about  a  mile  and  a  half  wide,
ich  extends  northward  some  eleven  miles.  On  the  north  the  plain  is
sed  by  Mount  Kaidpha^  which  thrusts  itself  forward  till  its  steep,
icy  slopes  almost  touch  the  beach.  TTiis  maritime  plain,  reaching
m  the  mouth  of  the  Neda  on  the  south  to  Mt  Kaidpha  on  the  north,
the  Samicum  of  the  ancients  (cp.  Strabo,  viii.  pp.  344,  347).  A  line
sandy  downs,  overgrown  with  pinewood,  separates  it  from  the  sea.
I  the  inner  side  of  the  downs  the  low  flat  land  is  wooded  with  pines
1  with  shrubs  of  different  sorts.  Interspersed  among  the  pine-forest
\  many  lakes,  pools,  and  marshes,  which  in  spring-time,  reflecting  the
es  and  flowers  in  their  still  waters,  present  scenes  of  idyllic  beauty,
t  in  the  heat  of  summer  they  dry  utterly  up.  Inland  from  these  low-
ng  woodlands  the  country  rises  through  fields  of  com  and  maize  to  a
ling  table-land,  broken  by  many  valleys,  where  fields  of  com  and
Tant  -  plantations  altemate  agreeably  with  groves  of  oranges  and
ions.  On  these  uplands,  for  the  sake  of  the  dryer  soil  and  fresher
,  are  built  many  prosperous  villages.  The  northern  part  of  the  plain
Samicum  is  nearly  covered  by  the  long  lagoon  of  Kaidpha^  which
etches  for  some  three  miles  parallel  to  the  sea,  being  divided  from  it
ly  by  the  strip  of  wooded  downs  already  mentioned.  Strabo  has
scribed  the  plain  in  a  few  words  (viii.  p.  344),  remarking  in  particular
its  fertile  soil  and  the  narrow  strip  of  sandy  beach.

See  Leake,  Marea,  i.  pp.  49-57 ;  Dodwell,  Tour,  2.  p.  344  sqq.  ;   Beul^,
*udes  sur  U  Pilopontitse,  p.  183  sqq,  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  pp.  277,  279  sq,,  281
te ;  Baedeker,'  p.  326  sq, ;  Philippson,  Pelcponnes,  p.   326  sq,     Cp.  notes  on
5.  7 ;  V.  6.  I.

5.  3.  a  city  Lepreus.  Lepreus  was  one  of  six  cities  founded  in
riphylia  by  the  Minyans  who  were  expelled  from  Lemnos  by  the  Pelas-
ans,  and  who  themselves  drove  out  of  Triphylia  the  indigenous  races
^  the  Paroreatians  and  Caucones  (Herodotus,  iv.  145-148).  The  city  was
istant  40  furlongs  from  the  sea  and  1 00  furlongs  from  the  sanctuary  of
le  Samian  Poseidon  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  344).  The  mins  of  its  acropolis
ccupy  the  summit  of  a  steep  hill  to  the  north  of  Strovitsty  a  village
tuated  about  four  miles  from  the  sea,  in  a  well-watered  and  wooded
illey,  the  warm  and  sheltered  position  of  which  is  well  adapted  for  the
iltivation  of  the  orange.  A  stream  (the  Thold)  traverses  the  valley,
pd  then  finds  its  way  down  a  narrow  glen,  between  hills  wooded  with
uie,  into  the  sea.  The  track  that  leads  up  the  glen  through  the  pine-
>rest  is  rough  and  difficult.  From  the  village  of  Stravitsi^  lying  in  the
attom  of  the  open  valley,  a  very  steep  footpath  ascends  a  gorge  to  the
dge  which,  bounding  the  valley  on  the  north,  unites  the  ancient
•ropolis  to  another  hill  on  the  west.  On  reaching  the  ridge  we  turn  to
e  right  and  ascend  eastward  to  the  acropolis.  Before  reaching  it  we
*me  upon  the  ruins  of  a  small  building  about  1 5  feet  long  by  i  o  feet
oad ;  it  may  have  been  the  shrine  of  a  hero.  From  this  point  the
cent  becomes  very  gentle,  and  among  the  broom  and  other  shmbs  we


474  LEPRRUS  bk.  v.  ei

perceive  vestiges  of  the  walls  of  the  ancient  city.  Here,  on  the  northe
verge  of  the  hill,  may  be  seen  a  mediaeval  fortification-wall  built
ancient  materials,  which  served  to  protect  the  hiU  on  this  side  agaii
attacks  from  the  wooded  gorge  below.  In  about  half  an  hour  afi
leaving  Strovitsi  we  suddenly  come  in  sight  of  the  ancient  citadel
is  composed  of  two  parts,  fonning  an  outer  and  an  inner  line
defence.  The  outer  fortress  is  standing  to  a  considerable  heigl
and  with  its  walls,  its  square  towers,  and  its  gates  reminds  us  of  t
splendid  fortifications  of  Messene  (above,  p.  429  sqq,)  The  walls  2
built  of  squared  blocks  laid  in  regular  courses.  The  outer  tower  wiii
izxxs  the  west,  and  is  standing  to  a  height  of  14  feet,  is  almost  an  ex<
reproduction  of  one  of  the  towers  at  the  great  gate  of  Messene.
seems  probable,  therefore,  that  this  outer  fortress  was  constructed  abc
the  same  time  as  Messene,  and  under  the  influence  of  Epaminond
On  the  other  hand  the  inner  fortress,  which  seems  to  have  been  t
primitive  acropolis,  is  of  much  more  ancient  date,  though  the  style  of
polygonal  masonry  testifies  to  the  technical  sidll  of  its  builders,
occupies  a  small  plateau  slightly  higher  than  the  outer  fortress.  1
walb  form  a  triangle  with  the  apex  to  the  east  The  western  wall  «
apparently  repaired  in  the  age  of  Epaminondas,  for  in  style  it  resembl
the  walls  of  the  outer  fortress.  The  other  two  longer  walls  may  ha
been  built  by  the  Minyans  who  founded  Lepreus.  Their  masonry  mar
a  transition  from  the  Cyclopean  style  to  the  regular  ashlar  masonry
the  best  Greek  period.  The  courses  are  generally  but  not  invarial
horizontal  A  gateway,  8  ft.  10  in.  wide,  leads  into  the  interior,
the  thickness  of  the  walls  may  be  seen  a  series  of  chambers,  whi
possibly  served  to  lodge  the  garrison  in  time  of  siege.  About  the  midc
of  this  inner  fortress,  opposite  the  gate,  are  the  foundations  of  a  lar
building  14.80  metres  long  by  6.50  metres  broad.  This  may  pcrha
be  the  sanctuary  of  Demeter  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  At  the  fiirtli
end  of  the  acropolis  are  two  great  massive  towers  \*'ith  some  remains
staircases  in  their  interior.  From  the  sunmiit  there  is  a  fine  view  ov
the  rolling  woodlands  to  the  distant  sea.

The  ruins  of  Lepreus,  however,  are  by  no  means  confined  to  tl
summit  of  the  acropolis -hill.  They  extend  far  down  its  slope,
particular  a  long  wall  stretches  away  down  the  steep  bushy  declivity
the  direction  of  Strovitsi ;  its  ruinous  condition  gives  it  somewhat  tl
appearance  of  a  staircase  ;  hence  the  peasants  call  it  skala  (*  staircase
Further,  we  must  note,  within  the  acropolis  but  on  one  of  its  low
terraces,  the  scanty  ruins  of  a  small  temple  which  came  to  light  a  fe
years  ago.  They  were  discovered  by  some  inhabitants  of  Strovitsi^  wl
were  digging  here  for  stones  and  for  the  lead  with  which  the  anciei
blocks  were  clamped  together.  Unfortunately  most  of  the  walls  of  tJ
little  temple  were  pulled  down,  but  enough  remains  to  show  that  it  v^'z
of  the  Doric  order  and  peripteral,  i.e.  surrounded  by  a  colonnade,  an
that  it  comprised  a  cella  and  a  portico  or  fore-temple  {pronaos)  fecin
east.  It  measured  19  metres  (62  ft.  4  in.)  in  length  by  11  metre
(36  feet)  in  breadth.  A  Doric  capital,  .62  metre  in  diameter,  an
several  triglyphs  and  metopes  were  observed  by  Dr.   Dorpfeld  when  b


CH.  V  LEPREUS—EPIUM  475

visited  the  site  in  189 1.  In  size  and  proportions  the  temple  agrees
closely  with  the  Metroum  or  temple  of  the  Mother  of  the  Gods  at
Olympia.     Hence  Dr.  Dorpfeld  would  assign  it  to  the  fourth  century

B.C.

A  short  way  to  the  east  of  the  acropolis  of  Lepreus,  on  the  other  side
of  the  village  of  Strovitsi^  a  reddish  rocky  hill,  with  a  flat  top  and  steep
rifted  sides,  advances  towards  the  Tholo  river.  It  is  now  called  Kastro
from  the  ruins  of  a  mediaeval  castle  which  crown  its  summit,  and  among
which  some  ancient  squared  blocks  and  pieces  of  columns  may  be  seen.

Sec  Dodwell,  T<mr^  2.  p.  347  ;  Gell,  Itinerary  of  the  Morea^  p.  41  sq,  ;  Leake,
Moreay  I.  p.  56;  Blouet,  Expedition  Scientifique  de  Morh:  Architecture^  I.  p.
51  x^.,  with  pi.  50-52  ;  Boblaye,  RechercheSy  p.  135  ;  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  83  s^,  ;
Beul^,  jbtudu  sur  le  Piloponnisey  p.  184;  Boutan,  'M^moire  sur  la  Triphylie,'
Archives  des  Missions  Scientifiquesy  2me  S^rie,  i  (1865),  pp.  199-208 ;  Bursian,
Geogr,  2.  p.  277  sq,  ;  Baedelcer,'  p.  325  sq,  ;  Gutde-Joanney  2.  p.  310  sq, ;
IX>rpfeld,  in  Mittheil,  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,  16  (1891),  p.  259  sq.  ;  Bulletin  de
Carresp,  Hellhtique,  15  (1891),  p.  655.

If  leaving  Lepreus  we  strike  north-west  for  the  plain  of  Samicum  we
come  in  about  an  hour  and  a  half  to  a  steep  hill,  covered  with  oak-
wood,  rising  from  the  depths  of  a  narrow  ravine.  On  its  summit  are
the  ruins  of  a  very  ancient  citadel  which  Strabo  (viii.  p.  358)  apparently
identified  with  Chaa,  under  whose  walls  Nestor  in  his  youth  fought  a
battle  with  the  Arcadians  (Homer,  //.  vii.  135,  where,  however,  our
copies  of  Homer  read  Pheia  instead  of  Chad),  The  ruins  now  go  by
the  name  of  Palaeo-kastro  tes  Kallidones  or  Gyphtokastro  (*  Gipsy's
castle').  Though  it  is  very  small  (only  some  53  yards  long  by  38  yards
wide),  the  fortress  is  very  interesting.  Both  the  external  walls  and  the
walls  of  the  houses  are  standing  to  a  height  of  about  3  feet  or  more.
The  outer  wall  follows  closely  the  edge  of  the  precipices.  It  is  6  feet
thick,  and  is  built  of  small,  flat,  roughly-hewn  stones  fitted  together  with
some  skill ;  the  core  is  of  earth  and  rubble.  Four  towers  may  be
traced  in  the  circuit-wall,  and  beside  one  of  them,  on  the  south-east  side,
is  a  gateway,  to  which  a  staircase,  cut  in  the  rock,  leads  up.  The  other
three  sides  of  the  hill  are  absolutely  inaccessible.  The  walls  of  the
houses  are  built  in  the  same  style  as  the  fortification-wall,  and  rise  from
among  the  bushes  to  a  height  of  about  6  feet.  From  the  summit
the  islands  of  Zante  and  Cephalonia  are  visible  in  the  distance.  See
Boutan,  *  M^moire  sur  la  Triphylie,'  Archives  des  Missions  Scientifiques^
2ine  S^rie,  i  (1865),  pp.  212-214;  Baedeker,^  p.  326;  Guide-Joanne^
2.  p.  311.

Here,  too,  may  be  mentioned  the  well  -  preserved  remains  of  an
ancient  town,  which  are  believed  to  be  those  of  Epium,  Epeum,  or
Aepium,  one  of  the  six  cities  founded  by  the  Minyans  in  Triphylia
(Herodotus,  iv.  148).  They  are  situated  near  the  village  of  PlcUiana^
about  seven  miles  north  of  Lepreus  in  a  bee-line,  and  may  be  most  con-
veniently visited  on  the  way  from  Andritsena  to  Olympia.  The  ruins
occupy  the  long  narrow  crest  of  a  hill  which  extends  east  and  west  for  a
quarter  of  a  mile,  falling  away  steeply  on  all  sides.  The  crest  of  the
hill  is  surrounded  (except  at  the  south-west  comer,  where  a  precipice


476  EPIUM  BK.  V.  BUS

renders  fortification  needless)  by  a  fortification-wall  6  feet  thick,  buih
mostly  of  large  polygonal  blocks  and  strengthened  by  a  number  of  sqiiare
towers  on  the  south  and  west.     The  northern  part  of  the  space  enclosed
by  this  outer  fortification-wall,  comprising  the  real  crest  of  the  ridge,  is
divided   from  the  rest  by  inner  fortification-walls  on  the  west,  south,
and  east ;  and  thus  forms  an  upper  town  measuring  about  450  yards  in
length  by  20  to  40  yards  in  breadth.     Within  this  upper  town,  again,
five  distinct  plateaus  at  different  levels  can  be  distinguished,  all  of  whid
are  separated  from  each  other  by  cross-walls.     The  most  westerly  of
these  five  plateaus,  which  is  at  the  same  time  the  highest,  doubtless
served  as  the  citadel.     On  the  next  plateau  to  the  east  are  the  remains
of  a  theatre,  nine  rows  of  seats  and  the  foundations  of  the  stage  (32  ft
I  o  in.  long  by  1 4  ft.  5  in.  deep)  being  still  preserved.     The  next  plateau
seems  to  have  been  occupied  by  the  market-place  and  various  public
buildings  ;   while   on   the  two  plateaus  furthest  to  the   east    are  the
foundations  of  private  houses,  as  well  as  of  temples  and  other  public
edifices.     The  lower  town,  extending  in  a  long  narrow  strip  just  below
the  real  crest  of  the  ridge  and  enclosed  within  the  outer  fortification-wall,
contains  the  foundations  of  many  private  houses  and  of  two  temples,
these  last  being  situated  at  and  near  the  eastern  end  of  the  town.     The
ancient  city,  of  which  the  ruins  have  just  been  described,  is  believed
to  have  been  *the  well-built  Aepy'  of  Homer  (//.  ii.   592  ;  cp.  Strabo^
viii.  p.  349 ;  Statins,  Theb.  iv.  180),  which  again  was  probably  identical
with  the  Epium  ('^7rM)v)of  Herodotus  (iv.  148),  the  Epeum  ('HTrewKJof
Xenophon  {Hellemca^  iii.  2.  30),  and  the  Aepeum  (Atirtov)  of  Polybius
(iv.  77  and  80).     Xenophon  tells  us  (/.r.)  that  the  town  lay  between
Heraea  and  Macistus,  which  agrees  well  with  the  situation  of  the  niins
just  described,  if  Macistus  was  identical  with  Samicum  (see  note  on  v.  6.
i).     See   Boutan,   *M^moire  sur  la  Triphylie,'  Archives  des  Missiom
Scientifiques,  2me  S^rie,  i  (1865),  pp.  236-248,  with  a  plan  of  the  site;
Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  284  sq,  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  320  sqq,

5.  3*  The  people  of  Leprens  claim  to  belong  to  Arcadia.    The

Triphylians  in  general  claimed  to  be  Arcadians,  and  the  Arcadians  on
their  side  claimed  Triphylia  against  Elis  (Xenophon,  Hellenica^  vii.  i.
26  ;  Strabo,  viii.  p.  337).  Polybius  (iv.  77)  speaks  of  Triphylia  as  being
the  extreme  portion  of  Arcadia  towards  the  south-west,  and  as  occupying
the  sea-coast  from  Elis  proper  to  Messenia.  With  regard  to  Lepreus
in  particular,  Cicero  tells  us  {Epist.  ad  Atticum^  vi.  2.  3)  that  he
learned  from  the  maps  of  Dicaearchus  that  all  the  Peloponnesian  states
were  maritime  ;  but  that,  surprised  to  find  Arcadia  treated  as  a  maritime
district,  he  had  consulted  his  Greek  friend  Dionysius,  who  was  in  tum
surprised,  but  on  reflection  informed  Cicero  that  Lepreon  (Lepreus)
belonged  to  Arcadia,  and  that  thus  Arcadia  had  a  footing  on  the  coast
Moreover  Scylax  (Periplus^  44)  represents  Arcadia  as  extending  to  the
sea  at  Lepreus,  the  territory  of  which  ran  beside  the  sea  for  1 00  fiirlongs.
5.  3.  AriBtophanes  also  says  etc.  See  Aristophanes,  Birds,  i49-
5.  3.  There  are  three  roads  to  Lepreus  etc  The  route  from
Lepreus  to  Samicum  or  Samia  (v.  6.  i)  now  goes  by  Gyphiokastro
(*Gips/s  castle,'  see  above,  p.  475)  to  Kallidona^  and  thence  over


CH.  V  ROADS  FROM  LEPREUS  477

wooded  hills  to  the  pleasant  village  of  Piskini^  beyond  which  it  descends
gradually  through  cultivated  fields  to  the  village  of  Zacharo^  and  so
enters  the  plain  of  Samicum  near  its  northern  extremity.  The  time
from  Lepreus  to  the  foot  of  Mount  Katdpha^  on  which  lie  the  ruins  of
the  city  of  Samia  or  Samicum,  is  about  four  hours  or  a  little  more.
See  Baedeker,'  p.  326  sq.  The  route  from  Lepreus  to  Elis  might  be
expected  to  coincide  with  the  route  to  Samicum  (Samia)  as  far  as  the
latter  place ;  but  as  Pausanias  distinguishes  it  from  the  route  to
Samicum,  it  would  seem  to  have  kept  more  inland,  going  perhaps  by
Krestena.  Yet  if  it  went  by  Krestena  it  would  naturally  coincide  with
the  route  to  Olympia,  from  which,  however,  Pausanias  distinguishes  it.
The  whole  passage  is  somewhat  obscure  and  difHcult.  The  statement
that  the  longest  of  these  roads  (namely  the  one  to  Elis)  was  only  a
day's  journey  is  open  to  objection ;  for  the  direct  distance  from  Lepreus
to  Elis,  as  the  crow  flies,  is  about  36  miles.  Hence,  when  we  have
allowed  for  the  necessary  detours,  the  ruggedness  of  some  of  the
country  to  be  traversed,  and  the  badness  of  the  roads,  which  would
seem  to  have  been  as  characteristic  of  ancient  as  of  modem  Greece,
it  appears  that  at  an  ordinary  rate  of  travelling  the  journey  from
Lepreus  to  Elis  must  have  occupied  more  nearly  two  days  than  one.

5.  4-  that  he  was  as  good  a  man  as  Hercules  at  eating  etc.  On
the  contests  of  Lepreus  and  Hercules  see  also  Aelian,  Var,  HisL  i.  24  ;
Athenaeus,  x.  p.  4 1 2  a.  One  of  the  contests  was  as  to  who  should
draw  water  £^test.  This  last  contest  seems  to  be  the  subject  of  a
vase-painting  in  which  Hercules  is  represented  hurrying  to  a  well  with
a  jar  in  each  hand.  See  Annali  delV  Instituto^  49  (1877),  PP-  4io-4i7»
with  tav.  d^  agg,  W.

5.  5.  Zeus  Leucaeos  ('of  the  white  poplar').  The  white  poplar
seems  to  have  been  especially  associated  with  Zeus,  since  its  wood  was
the  only  fuel  used  in  sacrificing  to  him  at  Olympia  (v.  14.  2).  It  also
furnished  the  wood  for  the  sacrifices  to  Pelops  at  Olympia  (v.  13.  3).
It  is,  therefore,  needless  to  alter  the  text  in  the  present  passage  of
Pausanias,  as  some  scholars  would  do,  by  reading  AvKatov  instead
of  AcvKtttbv  (Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  117  note  86 ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.
278  note  I  ;  J.  Topffer,  Aitische  Genealogie^  p.  217  note  2).  If  this
alteration  were  adopted,  the  translation  would  be,  *  Wolfish  (Lycaean)
Zeus.'  As  to  the  mythology  of  the  white  poplar  see  C.  Botticher,
Baumkultus  der  Hellenen^  p.  441  sqq, ;  J.  Murr,  Die  Pflanzenwelt  in
der  griech.  Mythologies  p.  20  sqq.  The  epithet  Leucaeus  might  possibly
be  derived  from  leuke^  *  leprosy.'     Cp.  §  1 1  of  this  chapter.

5.  5.  Oaucon.  See  iv.  i.  5  note,  and  Index.  According  to  some,
Caucon  was  the  father  of  Lepreus  (Aelian,  Var,  Hist  i.  24  ;  Athenaeus,
X.  p.  412  a).  The  Caucones,  as  we  have  seen  (p.  473),  were  an
indigenous  race  of  Triphylia  who  were  expelled  by  the  Minyans
(Herodotus,  iv.  148).  According  to  some  ancient  authorities  the
whole  of  Elis  from  Messenia  to  Dyme  in  Achaia  had  once  been  in  the
hands  of  the  Caucones  and  had  been  called  Cauconia.  See  Strabo,
viii.  p.  345  sq.y  who  mentions  that  the  tomb  of  Caucon  was  in  the
territory  of  Lepreus.     Cp.  Tdpflfer,  Attische  Genealogie^  P*  2 1 5  sqq.


478  THE  RIVER  ANIGRUS  bk.  v.  sus

5.  6.  the  wife  of  Aphareiia     See  iv.  2.  4.

5.  7.  the  river  Anignu.  Towards  the  northern  end  of  the
maritime  plain  which  Pausanias  calls  Samiomi  (see  note  on  §  3)  then
is  a  long  and  narrow  but  deep  lagoon  called  the  lake  of  Kaidpha,  At
its  north-eastern  end  the  lagoon  is  overhung  by  the  precipitous  dift
of  Mt.  KcUdpha,  On  the  west  it  is  separated  from  the  sea  by  a  Imsd
strip  of  sand-dunes,  covered  with  a  dense  wood  of  tall  dark  pines.  The
coast-road  runs  along  this  wooded  ridge  between  the  lagoon  and  dte
sea.  At  its  northern  end  the  lagoon  is  separated  by  another  wooded
sand-bank  from  the  southern  extremity  of  the  still  longer  lagoon  of
Agoulenitsa^  which  extends  northward  to  the  mouth  of  the  Alphens^a
distance  of  eight  or  nine  miles,  and  attains  a  breadth  of  nearly  three
miles.  A  short  stream,  spanned  by  a  stone  bridge,  unites  the  two
lagoons.  A  steep  rocky  point  of  Mt.  Kaidpha  here  projects  westward
and  is  separated  from  the  sea  only  by  the  wooded  sand-bank  already
mentioned.  This  is  the  pass  of  Klidi  (*the  key'),  or  of  Kaidpha^
Derveni^  as  it  is  otherwise  called.  It  used  to  be  commanded  by  a
small  Turkish  fort  called  Klidiy  the  ruins  of  which  may  be  seen  on  one
of  the  three  hillocks  between  the  lagoons.  A  mile  or  two  to  the
south-east  of  this  pass,  a  stream  called  the  Mceuro-potamo  ('  Black  River^
falls  into  the  lake  of  KcUdpha  from  the  mountain  of  the  same  name.
At  the  beginning  of  this  century  the  stream  had  an  outlet  from  the
lake  through  the  sandy  ridge  which  divides  the  lake  from  the  sea.
<<  When  the  winds  are  violent,  the  surf  and  the  sand  thrown  up  by  it
reject  the  waters  of  the  river,  and  assist  very  much  in  increasing  the
lake.  This  fact,  which  is  remarked  both  by  Strabo  [viii.  p.  346  sf.]
and  Pausanias,  added  to  other  particulars  in  conformity  with  these
authors,  leaves  no  doubt  of  the  river  being  the  Anigrus.  ...  In
summer  the  marsh  is  said  to  be  very  fetid,  and  the  air  extremely
unwholesome,  as  one  may  easily  conceive,  the  place  being  closely
overhung  by  the  precipices  which  here  terminate  the  mountain  "  (Leake).
At  the  present  day  the  lake  has  no  visible  outlet  to  the  sea.  The
Acidas,  mentioned  by  Pausanias  and  probably  identical  with  the
Acidon  of  Strabo  (viii.  p.  351),  may  be  a  brook  which  descends  into
Lake  Kaidpha  from  Mount  Kaidpha  to  the  south-east  of  the  Anignis
The  face  of  the  country  hereabout  seems  to  have  changed  a  good  deal
since  antiquity,  for  Pausanias  makes  no  mention  of  the  two  large
lagoons.  Strabo,  indeed  (viii.  p.  346),  speaks  of  a  stinking  marsh
formed  by  a  spring  and  by  the  Anignis,  but  this  marsh  can  hardly  ha\t
been  of  the  extent  and  depth  of  the  present  lagoon  of  Kaidpha,  which
is  three  miles  long  and  nearly  a  mile  wide.  The  Anigrus  has  sometimes
been  identified  (as  by  Boblaye,  Ross,  and  Prof.  Curtius)  with  the  river
which  flows  into  the  sea  to  the  south  of  the  lake  of  Kaidpha^  beside  the
solitary  khan  of  St.  Isidore.  But  this  river  seems  to  be  too  far  off
from  the  cave  of  the  nymphs  (see  note  on  §  1 1 )  to  be  the  Anigrus.

See  Pouqueville,  Voyage  de  la  Grice,^  6.  p.  12  sqq.  ;  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  P*
344  sq.  ;  Leake,  Afarea,  1.  pp.  51-54,  66  sq.  ;  Boblaye,  Recherches,  p.  134  ^f?
Ross,  Reiseuy  p.  105 ;  Curtius,  Pelop.  2.  p.  81  sq.  ;  Boutan,  *  Memoire  sar  1*
Triphylie,*  Archives  dts  Missions  Scientijiques^  2me  S^rie,  i  (1865),  PP*  214-217;


H.  V  CA  VE  OF  THE  ANIGRIAN  NYMPHS  479

lursian,  Geozr,  2.  p.   279  sqq»  ;   Baedeker,'  p.   326  sq,  ;   Guide-Joamu^  2.  p.
II  j^.  ;  Phuippson,  PelipanneSy  p.  326  sq,

5.  9.  That  the  old  name  of  the  Acidas  was  Jardanos  etc.
iomer  speaks  of  the  river  Jardanus  as  flowing  near  the  walls  of  Phea
//.  vii.  135).  Cp.  Strabo,  viii.  p.  342,  and  see  Ebeling's  Lexicon
'iomericum^  s,v.  KcAaSwv.  Strabo  says  (viii.  p.  347)  that  between  the
Lnigrus  and  the  mountain  from  which  it  flowed  there  were  shown  the
leadow  and  the  grave  of  Jardanus.     Cp.  note  on  vi.  21.  7.

5.    9.   the  odd  smell  is  caused  by  the  soil  etc.      The

;ver  of  St.  Isidore^  which  some  identify  with  the  Anigrus  (see  note  on
7),  rises  among  the  mountains  near  the  village  of  Troupaes ;  and  in
le  valley  of  Troupaes  the  earth,  according  to  the  peasants,  bums  every
ear  with  a  foul  smell  (Ross,  Reisen^  p.  105).  Cp.  note  on  §  11.  The
lythical  explanations  of  the  unsavoury  smell  are  mentioned  also  by
trabo  (viii.  p.  346).

5.  9.  the  waters  inland  from  Ionia  etc.  Strabo  (xiii.  p.
29  sq^  describes  the  hot  springs  of  Hierapolis  near  Laodicea,  where
lere  was  also  a  cave  full  of  mephitic  vapour  which  proved  instantly
ital  to  any  living  creature  that  entered  the  cave.  He  describes  a
milar  cave,  without  however  mentioning  hot  springs,  between  Tralles
nd  Nysa  (xiv.  p.  649  sq,)

5.  II.  the  cave  of  the  Anigrian  nymphs.  Strabo  (viii.  p.  346)
lentions  that  there  were  two  caves,  one  of  them  sacred  to  the  nymphs
f  the  Anigrus,  the  other  sacred  to  the  daughters  of  Atlas ;  in  the  latter
ave  Dardanus  was  said  to  have  been  bom,  his  mother  being  Electra,
aughter  of  Atlas  (Apollodorus,  iii.  12.  i).  These  caves  still  exist  in
le  fece  of  the  cliff  which  descends  into  the  water  at  the  north  end  of  the
igoon  of  Kaidpha,  They  are  at  the  level  of  the  water  and  can  now
nly  be  approached  by  boat  They  emit  foul  mephitic  vapours  and
iflammable  gas.  Warm  sulphureous  springs  issue  from  fissures  in  the
ock  :  the  most  copious  is  in  the  larger  of  the  two  caves,  where  there  are
aths  which  are  still  used  by  patients.  The  bathing  establishment,
owever,  is  on  a  peninsula  stretching  into  the  lake ;  it  is  only  used  in
ommer.  In  antiquity  the  caves  were  approached  by  a  stone  causeway,
f  which  there  are  remains  in  front  of  the  caves.


See  Dodwell,   Tour,    2.   p.    345 ;   Leake,  Morea^   I.   p.    53  sq, ;  Boblaye,


.  326.

With  the  cure  described  by  Pausanias  we  may  compare  the  cure  of
tie  leper  Haaman  the  Syrian  by  bathing  in  the  Jordan  (2  Kings^  v.
0-14).  It  is  a  curious  coincidence  that  the  old  name  of  the  Anigrus
hould  have  been,  according  to  Pausanias's  Ephesian  informant,  Jardanus,
e,  Jordan.  Strabo  also  mentions  that  the  waters  of  the  Anigrus  were
cure  for  leprosy.  He  describes  a  spring  close  to  the  cave  of  the
ymphs,  most  of  the  water  of  which  fell  into  the  Anigms  (viii.  p.  346  sq,)
'his  makes  it  certain  that  the  Anigms  was  close  to  the  cave.


48o  SAMIA  BK.  V.  Eus

6.  I.  a  city  Samia  standing  on  it.    The  city  was  also  called
Samus  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  347)  or  Samicom  (Polybitis,  iv.  77).     It  seems
probable  that  Samia  was  identical  with  the  ancient  Macistus,  one  of  die
six  cities  founded  by  the  Minyans  in  Triphylia  (Herodotus,  iv.  148).
The  whole  district  from  the  Alpheus  south  to  about  Mounts  KaUfkt
and  Smema  appears  to  have  been  known  as  Macistia.     See  Strabo,  viu.
p.  343  -y^* ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  277.     The  ruins  of  Samia  or  Samicum
occupy  the  summit  and  northern  slope  of  Mt.  Kaidpha^  which  is  a  spor
projecting  westward  from  Mt  Smema  to  within  a  quarter  of  a  mik  of
the  sea,  between  the  two  lagoons  already  described  (note  on  v.  5.  7).  Tbe
hill  of  Kaidpha  is  about  1 000  ft  high  and  slopes  rapidly  away  towards
the  north-west ;  it  is  divided  at  the  back  by  a  shallow  ravine  from  the
rest  of  the  mountain.    The  fortification-walls  of  the  ancient  city  are  about  a
mile  and  a  half  in  circumference.     The  space  enclosed  by  them  seems
to  have  been  roughly  triangular  in  shape,  the  base  of  the  triangle  being
on  the  lower  slope  to  the  north-west,  where,  however,  the  fortificatioD-
wall  has  wholly  disappeared.     On  the  other  hand  the  side-walls,  con-
verging to  the  apex  of  the  triangle  on  the  summit  of  the  hill,  are  poimps
the  finest  extant  specimen  of  ancient  Greek  polygonal  masonry.     Tbqr
average  about  8  feet  thick,  and  are  standing  almost  everywhere  to  a  heiglit
of  1 2  feet.     The  faces  of  the  stones  are  smoothed,  and  the  jointing  of
the  polygonal  blocks  is  accurate,  so  that  no  small  stones  are  needed  to
fill  up  the  crevices.     Here  and  there  a  few  squared  blocks  occur.    The
wall  follows  the  contour  of  the  hill,  with  projecting  and  re-entering  angles
without  towers,  except  on  the  south-west  side  towards  the  sea,  where  it
is  strengthened  with  many  buttresses  and  a  few  square  towers.     These
towers,  which  are  without  any  inner  chambers,  are  perhaps  later  than
the  rest  of  the  wall,  the  style  of  which  points  to  a  remote  antiquity.
There  are  a  number  of  small  sally-ports.     In  places  the  wall  runs  along
the  brink  of  precipices.     Inside  the  circuit  of  the  walls  the  ground  is
very  rugged  and  broken,  and  is  thickly  overgrown  with  trees  and  shrubs.
Foundation-walls  may  be  seen  in  various  places,  especially  on  the  summit;
and  lower  down  there  are  many  terrace-walls.     A  low  ridge  of  rugged
rocks  crosses  the  middle  of  the  slope.

See   Dodwell,    Tour^   2.   p.    344 ;   Leake,   Morea^    i.   p.    52  sq,  \    Bobhye,
Recherches,  p.  133  sq.  ;   Blouet,  Expiditioft  scimiifiqtu  de  Afor^e :  ArckUechtrty


277-280,  282  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  327  sq,;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  312.

There  was  a  much  revered  sanctuary  of  the  Samian  Poseidon  in  a
grove  of  wild  olives  beside  the  sea,  facing  north-west.  The  Macistians
had  charge  of  the  sanctuary,  but  all  the  Triphylians  united  in  paying  it
homage.  It  may  have  stood  at  the  northern  foot  of  Mt.  Samicum
(now  Mt.  Kaidpha).  See  Strabo,  viii.  pp.  343-346.  In  the  pass  of
Klidiy  about  20  yards  beyond  the  hillock,  on  which  are  the  ruins  of  the
Turkish  fort  (see  above,  p.  478),  Mr.  Boutan  observed  the  foundations
of  a  wall  about  82  feet  long  and  8  feet  thick,  which  he  conjectured
may  perhaps  have  formed  part  of  the  temple.     The  wall,  which  abuts  on


■v


M.  VI  SCILLUS  481

he  road,  consists  of  two  facings  of  ashlar  masonry,  with  a  core  of  earth
ind  rubble  between  them.     See  Boutan,  op.  cit,  p.  2 1 7  sq,

6.  2.  tlie  ndllB  of  Arene.  See  Homer,  Iliads  ii.  591,  xi.  723.  The
atter  is  the  passage  here  quoted  by  Pausanias.  Strabo  thought  (viii.  p.
146)  that  Samus  (Samia)  may  have  been  the  citadel  of  Arene.  He
lIso  mentions  the  conjectural  identification  of  the  Anigrus  with  the
^inyeius  of  Homer.

6.  4-  joumeyijig through  a  sandy  district  where  wild  pi&e-

rees  grow.  This  is  still  an  exact  description  of  part  of  the  district
outh  of  the  Alpheus,  which  Pausanias  is  now  passing  through.  Pine-
rees  are  a  conspicuous  feature  in  the  landscape,  and  the  soil  between
Crestena  and  Olympia  is  so  sandy  that  I  obsenred  children  playing  in  it,
1st  as  they  might  do  on  the  sea-shore.

6.  4.  Scillas.  The  site  has  not  been  identified.  As  Pausanias,
oming  from  the  south,  saw  the  ruins  before  he  reached  the  Alpheus,  ^

cillus  must  have  been  on  the  southern  side  of  the  river.     Xenophon        -^  ^'^
dls  us  {AnabasiSy  v.  3.  11)  that  Scillus  was  20  furlongs  from  Olympia  (

n  the  way  to  Sparta.     With  the  prize-money  which  he  had  won  on  his         c    ^
unous  expedition  with  the  Ten  Thousand,  Xenophon  bought  some  land
t  Scillus  and  dedicated  it  to  Artemis.     He  built  a  small  temple  to  her,
model  of  her  great  Ephesian  temple,  and  the  image  of  the  goddess  in  /^

ypress-wood  was  a  copy  of  her  golden  image  at  Ephesus.     The  temple  1^

\ood  in  a  grove  of  fruit-trees.  The  river  Selinus,  stocked  with  fish,
owed  through  the  glebe.  The  sacred  lands  comprised  also  meadows
od  wooded  hills,  where  there  was  pasture  for  swine  and  goats,  for  oxen
ad  horses ;  so  that  travellers  who  came  to  the  festival  of  Artemis
otdd  bait  their  beasts  in  the  neighbourhood.  For  Xenophon  instituted
festival  in  honour  of  Artemis,  at  which  he  sacrificed  a  tithe  of  the
loduce  of  his  lands.  All  the  townspeople  and  the  people  of  the  .
eighbourhood,  with  their  wives,  came  and  partook  of  the  good  cheer,
liey  camped  out  in  temporary  huts  or  bothies,  according  to  a  conunon
iistom  in  antiquity ;  and  the  goddess  furnished  them  from  her  own  lands
rith  flour  and  loaves  and  wine  and  sweetmeats  and  a  share  of  the  beasts
bat  were  sacrificed  and  of  the  game  that  was  killed.  For  Xenophon's
ons  and  the  other  young  men  of  the  neighbourhood  went  hunting  to
rovide  meat  for  the  festival ;  and  came  back  laden  with  wild  hogs,
oebucks,  and  deer.  Xenophon  also  set  up  a  tablet  beside  the  temple  with
n  inscription  as  follows  :  "  This  land  is  sacred  to  Artemis.  Whoever
wns  the  land  and  its  produce  shall  sacrifice  yearly  a  tithe  ;  and  from  the
emainder  he  shall  keep  the  temple  in  repair.  If  he  does  not  do  so,  the
oddess  will  see  to  it."     See  Xenophon,  Anabasis^  v.  3.  7-13.

The  river  Selinus  is  by  some  supposed  to  be  the  stream  which  flows
ast  the  little  town  of  Krestena^  £Edling  into  the  Alpheus  to  the  west  of
>lympia.  It  is  a  pleasant  land  of  vineyards,  and  pine-groves,  and
ixuriant  green  lanes,  deep  in  bushes  and  (a  rare  sight  in  Greece)  ferns,
eminding  one  of  country  lanes  in  Surrey  or  Devonshire.  Cp.  Leake,
^oreoj  2.  p.  213  sqq.)  Curtius,  Pelop,  2.  p.  90  sqq,\  Boutan,  'Mtooire
ur  la  Triphylie,'  Archives  des  Missions  Scientifiques^  2  S^rie,  i  (1865),
p.  228-231 ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  2.  p.  285  sq.\  Baedeker,*  p.  328 ;  Gmde-

VOL.  Ill  2  I


482  TYPAEVM—OL  YMPIA  BK.  v.  bls

Joannty  2.  p.  31 3.  The  people  of  Scillus  are  the  subject  of  an  inscx^
tion  which  was  found  engraved  on  a  bronze  plate  at  Oljrmpia  (Rodi^
/.  G,  A,  No.  119,  pp.  43,  180  sq,\  Cauer,  Ddecius  Inscr,  Grm}
No.  261).

6.  7*  a  predpitoiui  moimtain  with  lofty  diifii


Typaenm.  '*  Opposite  to  Olympia,  on  the  southern  side  of  the  rifo^
rises  a  range  of  heights,  higher  than  the  Cronian  ridge,  in  some  parti
separated  from  the  river  by  a  narrow  level,  in  others  £dling^  to  the  rhm^
bank.  Among  these  hills  is  observed  a  bare  summit,  temunati^f
towards  Olympia  in  a  lofty  precipitous  ridge,  distant  about  half  a  mile
from  the  river.  This  is  the  ancient  Typaeus  [Typaeum].  .  .  .  Vftk
the  exception  of  this  summit  the  mountains  to  the  left  of  the  river  axe
clothed  and  diversified  like  those  on  the  opposite  side,  and  ccHnplete  tbe
sylvan  beauties  of  the  vale  of  Olympia  "  (Leake,  Peiofi,  p.  8  j^. ;  cp.  f^
Morea^  i.  p.  30).  As  to  the  punishment  of  death  by  huiiing  tbe
offender  from  a  height,  see  note  on  iv.  18.  4.  It  was  only  married
women  who  were  excluded  from  witnessing  the  Olympic  games  ;  mai^fK
were  free  to  view  them.  See  vi.  20.  9 ;  cp.  v.  13.  10.  Women  woe
forbidden  to  be  present  at  the  foot-races  instituted  by  Amphissos  is
Dryopis  (Antoninus  Liberalis,  Transform,  32).

6.  7*  Oallipatint,  or  Pherenice.     She  was  a  daughter  of  DiagoI»^
the  Rhodian  athlete.     See  vL  7.  i  sg,     Boeckh  has  made  it  probabk
that  her  name  was  Pherenice,  not  Callipatira  {Explic.  Pindar,  p^  166).
For  Diagoras,  as  we  learn  from  Pausanias  (/.r.),  had  two  daughterly
Callipatira  and   another   whose   name   Pausanias  does   not  mentioa
Callipatira  had  a  son  Eudes  who  was  victorious  among  the  men,  and
her  sister  had  a  son  Pisirodus,  who  was  victorious  among  the  boys.  Tlie
name  of  this  sister,  the  mother  of  Pisirodus,  was  probably  Pherenice,
for  Pausanias  himself  in  the  present  passage  admits  that  she  was  so
called   by  some   people,   and    Pherenice   is  the  name   given   her  bjr
Philostratus  {De  arte gymnasHca^  17),  Aelian  (Var,  Hist  x.  i),  Valerius
Maximus  (viil   15.  12,  ext  4),   and  Pliny  {NcU,  Hist,  vil  133).    (In
Pliny  and  Valerius  Maximus  the  name  appears  as  Berenice,  but  this  is
no  doubt  a  copyist's  mistake  for  Pherenice.)     A  scholiast  on  Pindar
{Olymp,  vii.  Introd.  p.  158,  ed.  Boeckh),  however,  calls  her  Callipatira.
Valerius    Maximus   (/.r.)   calls    Pherenice's    (Berenice's)   son   Eudes
instead  of  Pisirodus.     Cp.   [Aeschines,]  Epist,  iv.   5,  who  does  not,
however,  mention  the  names  of  the  motfier  and  son.

7.  I.  On  reachixig  Olympia  etc.  Olympia  lies  on  the  right  or  nortb
bank  of  the  Alpheus,  where  the  river  meanders  westward  through  a
spacious  valley  (about  seven  miles  long  by  one  mile  broad),  enclosed  by
low  wooded  hills  of  soft  and  rounded  forms,  beyond  which  appear  on  tbe
eastern  horizon  the  loftier  mountains  of  Arcadia.  The  soil  of  the  vaUejT)
being  alluvial,  is  fertile ;  cornfields  and  vineyards  stretch  away  in  aQ
directions.  The  whole  aspect  of  the  scene,  without  being  grand  or
impressive,  is  rich,  peaceful,  and  pleasing.  The  bed  of  the  Alpheus  is
wide ;  but  in  summer  the  water  is  scanty  and  is  divided  into  seveial
streams  running  over  a  broad  gravelly  bed.  The  sacred  precinct  or
Altis  of  Olympia  lies  between  the  river  on  the  south  and  a  low  but  steep


^


CH.  vii  OLYMPIA  483

hin,  thickly  wooded  with  pine-trees  and  shrubs,  which  rises  on  the
north.  This  wooded  hill  is  the  ancient  Mount  Cronius.  Immediately
to  the  west  of  the  precinct  the  Cladeus  flows  between  steep  sandy  banks
Into  the  Alpheus  from  the  north.

Cp.  Leake,  Morea,  i.  p.  23  sag,  ;  Wixt,  Journal,  2.  p.  280  s^,  ;  Curtius  imd
\dler,  Olympia  und  Umeegend^  p.  4  sq.  ;  Botticher,  Olympta?  p.  21  sqq.  ;
Flasch,  'Olympia'  in  Baumeister's  Denkmaler,  p.  1053  sqq,  ;  Olympia:
Ergehtisse,  Textband  2.  p.  I.  On  the  history  of  Olympia  see  £.  Curtius,  '  Die
^haer  in  0\ym'p\aif^  Jahrduch  d.  arch,  Inst,  9  (1894),  Archaologischer  Anzeiger,
>p.  40-43;  uLf  'Studien  zur  Geschichte  von  Olympia,'  Abhandlungen  of  the
lE*kxissian  Academy  (Berlin),  1894,  pp.  1095-1114;  td.,  *  Olympia  in  hellenistischer
Z/taXf  Jahrbuch  d,  arch,  Inst,  10  (1895),  Archaologischer  Anzeiger,  pp.  i6-20.

7.  2.  Arethnsa.  Cp.  vii.  24.  3  ;  viii.  54.  3.  It  was  said  that  on
iie  days  when  the  guts  of  the  sacrificed  victims  were  thrown  into  the
\lpheus  at  Olympia,  the  spring  Arethusa  at  Syracuse  grew  turbid.
Another  story  was  that  a  cup  thrown  into  the  Alpheus  reappeared  in
\rethusa.  See  Antigonus,  Histor,  Mirab,  140  (i  55) ;  Strabo,  vi.  p.  270  ;
Seneca,  NeUur,  Quaest,  iii.  26.  5.  A  painting  found  in  the  baths  of
Trajan  represents  Alpheus  rejoining  Arethusa  (Monumentilmditiy  1839,
tav.  ix.)

7.  5.  living  creatures  float  on  its  surfkce  without  swimming  etc
^  While  the  water  of  the  ocean  contains  from  4  to  6  per  cent  of  solids  in
solution,  the  Dead  Sea  holds  from  24  to  26  per  cent.,  or  five  times  as
tnuch.  The  water  is  very  nauseous  to  the  taste  and  oily  to  the  touch,
leaving  on  the  skin,  when  it  dries,  a  thick  crust  of  salt  But  it  is  very
brilliant  Seen  from  far  away  no  lake  on  earth  looks  more  blue  and
beautifiil.  Swim  out  upon  it,  and  at  a  depth  of  20  feet  you  can  count
the  pebbles  through  the  transparent  waters.  The  buoyancy  of  the  Dead
Sea  is  well  known ;  it  is  difficult  to  sink  the  limbs  deep  enough  for
swimming  ;  if  you  throw  a  stick  on  the  surfstce,  it  seems  to  rest  there  as
on  a  mirror,  so  little  of  it  actually  penetrates  the  water.  .  .  .  No  fish  can
exbt  in  the  waters,  nor  is  it  proved  that  any  low  forms  of  life  have  been
discovered "  (G.  A.  Smith,  Historical  Geography  of  the  Holy  Land^
pu  501  sq,)

7.  6.  Gronos a  temple  was  made  for  him  at  Olympia  etc.

In  this  legend  and  in  the  name  of  Mount  Cronius  (Paus.  vi.  20.  i)
Prof.  Curtius  sees  reminiscences  of  a  Cretan  settlement  at  Olympia
[Archaologischer  AmeigeTy  1894,  p.  42).

7.  6.  the  Oolden  Race.  On  the  classical  fables  of  the  Golden  Age
see  L.  Preller,  Ausgewdhlte  Aufsdtze^  p.  196  sqq, ;  £.  Graf,  'Ad  aureae
gietatis  fabularum  symbola,'  Leipziger  Studien  zur  classischen  Philologies
8  (1885),  pp.  1-84.  Other  peoples  beside  the  Greeks  have  had  their
legends  of  a  Golden  Age.  The  Delaware  Indians  of  North  America
held  *'  that  the  pristine  age  was  one  of  unalloyed  prosperity,  peace  and
happiness,  an  Age  of  Gold,  a  Satumian  Reign.  Their  legends  asseve-
rate that  at  that  time  '  the  killing  of  a  man  was  unknown,  neither  had
there  been  any  instances  of  their  dying  before  they  had  attained  to  that
age  which  causes  the  hair  to  become  white,  the  eyes  dim,  and  the  teeth
to  be  worn  away.'     This  happy  time  was  brought  to  a  dose  by  the


484  THE  OLYMPIC  GAMES  bk.  ▼.  ttis

advent  of  certain  evil  beings  who  taught  men  how  to  kill  each  other  b]r
sorcery"  (D.  G.  Brinton,  The  LendpS  and  their  legends^  p.  135  sq.)
The  people  of  Mangaia  in  the  South  Pacific  have  a  tradition  that  die
Golden  Age  fell  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  reign  of  Mangi,  when  deatii,
war,  famine,  sickness,  and  pain  were  unknown  (W.  W.  Gill,  Myths  ad
Songs  of  the  South  Pacific^  p.  282  sq,)  Cp.  Bancroft,  Native  Races  ^
the  Pacific  States^  3.  p.  274.

7.  6.  the  Idaean  Dactyls.  See  Lobeck,  Agtaophamus^  p.  1156
sqq.  The  discovery  of  iron  was  attributed  to  them ;  they  are  said  to
have  found  it  on  Mount  Ida  {Mamtor  Parium^  line  22).

7.  6.  Ida  in  Grote.  The  cave  of  Zeus  on  Mount  Ida  in  Crete  was
discovered,  or  rather  identified,  by  accident  in  1884.  Elxcavations  have
yielded  a  large  number  of  objects  of  ancient  art,  bronze  shields,  statuettes,
objects  in  ivory,  amber,  rock  crystal,  terra -cottas,  etc  See  Musm
Italiano  di  antichitd  classica,  2  (1888),  pp.  689-904  ;  MittheiL  d  mk,
Inst,  in  Athen,  10  (1885),  pp.  59-72,  280  sq.\  Americcm  Jottrmd  tf
Archaeology^  4  (1888),  pp.  431-449.

7.  7'  the  wild  olive  was  brought  from  the  land  of  tki

Hyperboreans.  This  tradition  is  mentioned  by  Pindar  {OL  iii.  2^sqq.)t
except  that  he  calls  the  tree  an  olive  {elaia\  not  a  wild  olive  {kotiaei).
The  Athenians,  however,  apparently  had  a  tradition  that  the  olive
which  Hercules  planted  at  Olympia  was  a  shoot  obtained  by  him  from  a
certain  sacred  olive-tree  which  grew  at  Athens  beside  the  Ilissus  and  was
fenced  in  by  a  wall,  a  heavy  penalty  being  denounced  against  any  one
who  should  touch  it  ([Aristotle,]  Mirad,  Auscult,  5 1  ;  SchoL  on  Aristo-
phanes, Plutus^  586;  Suidas,  ^.z/.  kot/vov (rr€^v<^).  A  differently^
is  recorded  by  Phlegon  in  a  fragment  which  has  been  preserved  of  hb
Olympic  chronicle.  He  says  that  for  the  first  five  Olympiads  no  crown
was  awarded  to  the  victors.  King  Iphitus  was  then  bidden  by  an
oracle  to  crown  the  victors  with  wreaths  of  wild  olive  made  from  a  tree
which  was  encased  in  spiders'  webs.  He  found  a  tree  answering  to  this
description  in  the  sacred  precinct  at  Olympia,  and  he  enclosed  it  with  a
wall.  From  this  tree  the  victors'  crowns  were  made.  The  first  who
won  the  crown  was  Daicles,  a  Messenian,  in  the  seventh  Olympiad.  See
Fragm.  histor.  Grace,  ed.  Miiller,  3.  p.  604.  As  to  the  olive-tree  from
which  in  historical  times  the  victors'  crowns  were  made,  see  v.  IS*
3  note.

7.  8.  Opis  and  Hecaerge.     See  i.  43.  4  note.

7.  9.  Arifltaeas  of  ProconnesuB.     See  Herodotus,  iv.  13.

7.  9*  The  Idaean  Hercnles  is  therefore  reputed  to  have  bees
the  first  to  arrange  the  games  etc.  It  was  a  conmion  tradition  that
Hercules  had  founded  the  Olympic  games ;  but  opinions  were  divided
as  to  whether  the  Hercules  who  founded  them  was  the  Idaean  Hercules
or  the  more  famous  hero  of  that  name,  the  son  of  Zeus  and  Alcmena.  See
Strabo,  viii.  p.  354  J^. ;  Pindar,  01,  ii.  4  sqq,^  vi.  114  sqq,^  xi.  70  sgg-'i  |^
Diodorus,  iv.  14,  v.  64  ;  Eusebius,  Chronic,  vol.  i.  p.  192,  ed.  Schone;
Lysias,  Or,  xxxiii.  i  ;  Polybius,  xii.  26 ;  Apollodorus,  ii.  7.  2  ;  Plutarch,
Theseus^  25  ;  Helladius,  in  Photius,  Bibliotheca^  P«  533  b,  ed.  Bckker;
Statius,  Theb,  vi.  5  sqq. ;  Solinus,  I  27,  ed.  Mommsen ;  Hyginus,  M


«.  vin  THE  OLYMPIC  GAMES  485

73.  According  to  Pindar  (//.rr.,  with  the  schol.  on  OL  il  2,  5,  7)
ierctiles  instituted  the  games  in  honour  of  Zeus  out  of  the  spoils  which
le  had  taken  at  the  conquest  of  Elis  (cp.  Paus.  v.  3.  i ).     But  according

0  another  tradition  he  established  them  in  honour  of  Pelops  (Statius,
>olinus,  Hyginus,  lLcc.\  Clement  of  Alex.  Strom,  i.  21.  137,  p.  401
d.  Potter).  As  to  the  traditionary  connexion  of  Hercules  with  Olympia,
ee  £.  Curtius,  in  Abhandlungen  of  the  Prussian  Academy  (Berlin),
894,  p.  1098  sq, ;  Busolt,  Griech.  Geschichte^  i.  p.  240  sq.  As  to
be  legends  of  the  foundation  and  early  history  of  the  Olympian  games,
ee  J.  H.  Krause,  Olympia^  p.  26  sqq,

7.  10.  the  flutes  play while  the  competitors  in  the  pent-

thltim  are  leaping.  Cp.  v.  17.  10;  vl  14.  10;  Plutarch,  De
tustca^  26.  Philostratus  says  that  leaping  was  thought  a  very  difficult
ontest,  and  that  hence  the  flutes  played  to  stimulate  the  athletes  {De
tie  gymnctsHcay  55).  In  the  Argive  games  held  in  honour  of  Strong
«us  (cp.  il  32.  7  ;  ii.  34.  6)  the  wrestlers  wrestled  to  the  music  of  the
ute  (Plutarch,  U)

8.  I.  afterwards  Clymenos held  the  games  etc.    According

>  another  tradition,  the  persons  who  celebrated  the  Olympian,  games
etween  the  time  of  their  first  institution  and  their  celebration  by
lercules,  the  son  of  Alcmena,  were  Aethlius,  Epion  son  of  Aethlius,
^ndymion,  Oenomaus,  and  Pelops.  See  Eusebius,  Chronic,  vol  i.
u  191,  ed  Schone.     As  to  Clymenus,  cp.  vi.  21.  6.

8.  2.  Pelops.  The  legendary  connexion  of  Olympia  with  Asia
finor  (see  v.  i.  6  etc.)  has  been  confirmed  by  the  excavations  at
>lympia.     For  "  the  closest  analogies  of  old  Phrygian  art  are  to  be  found

1  the  earliest  bronze  work  in  Olympia,  Italy,  and  the  northern  lands "
Prof.  W.  M.  Ramsay,  article  *  Phrygia,*  Encyclopaedia  Britanmca^  9th
d.  xviii.  p.  850  note).  On  the  bronzes  found  at  Olympia,  especially  in
od  near  the  Pelopium,  see  notes  on  v.  13.  i  ;  v.  14.  8.

8.  3.  Homer  represents  Menelaos  as  driving  a  pair  etc.    See  //.

xiii.  293  sqq,

8.  4-  Hercules  himself  won  the  prizes  for  wrestling  and  the
oncratinm.     See  v.  21.  10  note.

8.  5.  Oxylos,  who  also  held  the  games.  As  to  Oxylus,  the
Letolian,  see  v.  3.  6  sq,  Strabo  says,  on  the  authority  of  Ephorus,  that
lie  charge  of  the  Olympic  sanctuary  had  been  in  the  hands  of  the
Lchaeans  until  it  was  taken  over  from  them  by  the  Aetolians  under
>xylus  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  357).  Prof.  Curtius  has  collected  what  he
dieves  to  be  evidence  of  the  possession  of  Olympia  by  the  Achaeans
t  a  very  early  date.  Amongst  the  facts  to  which  he  appeals  are
le  sanctuary  of  Pelops  at  Olympia  (Paus.  v.  13.  i)  and  the  tradition
f  the  settlement  of  Agorius  and  his  Achaeans  (Paus.  v.  4.  3).  See
ahrbuch  d,  archdol,  InsHtuts^   9   (1894),    Archaologischer  Anzeiger,

p.  40-43-
8.  5.  Iphitos  renewed  the  games,  as  I  have  said  before.     See

•  4-  5  59 "i  with  the  note.  According  to  Velleius  Paterculus  (I  8,  ed.
lalm)  the  renewal  of  the  Olympic  games  by  Iphitus  took  place  823
ears  before  the  consulship  of  M.  Vinicius  (30  A.D.),  i,e,  in  793  B.C.


486  THE  OLYMPIC  GAMES  BK.  ▼.  KUS

According  to  Solinus  (i.  28,  ed.  Mommsen)  it  took  place  408  years
after  the  capture  of  Troy.  Cp.  Eusebius,  Chronic  voL  i.  p.  193,  ed.
Sch5ne  ;  Strabo,  viil  p.  358.

8.  6.  the  point  at  which  the  unbroken  tradition  of  the  Oljii-
piads  begins.  This,  according  to  the  received  chronology,  was  776
B.C.     But  see  note  on  v.  4.  6,  '  the  ancient  writings  of  the  Eleans.'

8.  6.  there  were  at  first  prizes  for  the  foot-race.  Jjt,  the  foot-
race was  at  first  the  only  competition.  Cp.  iv.  4.  5  ;  viiL  26.  4.
Pausanias's  statement  is  confirmed  by  Plutarch  i^QuaesL  Comnv,  v.  2.
12),  Philostratus  (De  arte  gymnasHca^  12),  and  Eusebius  (C^nmiV.  vol
I*  P*  193)  ^-  Schone),  the  two  latter  of  whom  agree  with  Pausaniasas
to  the  date  (01.  14,  2>.  724  B.c)  when  a  second  competition— tbe
double  foot-race — was  added.

8.  6.  Ck)roebll8.  See  viii.  26.  3.  That  Coroebus  of  Elis  won  the
foot-race  in  the  first  Olympiad  is  stated  also  by  Eusebius  {Cknm.  voL  i.
p.  194,  ed.  Sch5ne),  whose  history  of  the  institution  of  the  vaxioas
Olympic  contests  and  the  names  of  the  victors  agrees  with  that  of  Pan-
sanias  except  in  a  few  particulars  noted  below.  The  same  may  be  said
of  the  history  of  the  Olympic  contests  given  by  Philostratus  {De  vU
gymnastica^  1 2  sq,)y  though  it  is  not  so  full  as  that  of  Pausanias.  MI
three  writers  doubtless  drew  their  information  'from  the  Olympic
registers,  as  to  which  see  v.  4.  6  note.

8.  6.  And  in  the  next Acanthus.     Eusebius  tells  us  (Ic)

that  in  the  fifteenth  Olympiad  (720  B.C.)  the  long  foot-race  {doUdios)
was  added,  and  that  the  victor  in  it  was  Acanthus,  a  Laconian.  Phik)-
stratus  says  that  after  the  fourteenth  Olympiad  (by  which  he  probably
means  in  the  fifteenth  Olympiad)  the  long  race  was  introduced,  and  the
victor  was  a  Spartan,  Acanthus  {De  arte  gymnasticay  12).  Pausanias
probably  made  the  same  statement  in  the  present  passage,  but  there
is  a  gap  in  the  text.  That  the  Lacedaemonian  Acanthus  was
victorious  in  the  fifteenth  Olympiad  is  mentioned  also  by  Dionysios
of  Halicamassus  (Antiquit.  Rom,,  vii.  72).

8.  7.  Eurybatns.  According  to  some  he  was  a  Lusian  (Philo-
stratus, De  arte  gymnastica^  12).  Eusebius  agrees  with  Pausanias  in
calling  him  a  Laconian.     As  to  Lusi  see  viii.  1 8.  7  sq.

8.  7-  Smyrna,  which  was  by  that  time  included  in  Ionia.  Aug.
Fick  {Die  homerische  Odyssee  in  ihrer  urspriinglichen  Sprctchform,  p-
26)  thinks  that  the  forced  accession  of  Smyrna  to  the  Ionian  confede-
racy must  have  taken  place  at  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Gygcs,
king  of  Lydia  (720-682  B.C.),  since  the  lonians  were  hard  pressed  by
him.  Smyrna  was  the  first  city  of  Ionia  that  could  boast  of  an  Olympic
victor  (Philostratus,  De  arte  gymnastica^  12).

8.  7.  Pagondas.  In  the  Greek  text  of  Eusebius  {Chron,  vol  i-  P-
1 96,  ed.  Schone)  this  man  is  called  Pagon :  in  the  Armenian  version  0^
Eusebius  he  is  named  Paoron.

8.  8.  Eight  Olympiads  afterwards.  That  is,  in  the  thirty-third
Olympiad,  as  we  know  from  Philostratus  {De  arte  gymnastica^  1 2)  and
Eusebius  {Chron.  vol.  i.  p.  198,  ed.  Schone),  who  says  that  the  horse-
race was  won  by  Craxilas,  a  Thessalian.


IX  THE  OLYMPIC  GAMES  487

8.  8.  Whether  Lygdamis  was  as  big  etc  It  is  said  that  his  foot
\  a  cubit  long  (Philostratus,  De  arte  gymnasHca^  12).
8.  9*  Prizes  for  boys  in  numing  etc  According  to  Philostratus
r  arte  gymnasHca^  13)  the  race  for  boys  was  introduced  in  01.  46
6  B.C),  when  Polymestor  the  Milesian  was  victorious.  But  this
ms  to  be  a  mistake ;  for  Eusebius  agrees  with  Pausanias  as  to  the
e  of  the  introduction  of  the  race  and  the  name  of  the  first  victor,
le  he  also  records  the  victory  of  Polymestor  (Polynmestor)  in  01.  46.
8.  9*  Hipposthenes,  a  LacedaemoniaiL  Cp.  iiL  13.  9;  iil  15.  7.
also  won  the  wrestling-match  at  Olympia  in  OL  39-43  (624,  620,
»,  614,  610  B.C.)  (Eusebius,  Chronic,  voL  i.  p.  199,  ed.  Sch5ne).
8«  9.  In  the  forty-first  Olympiad  they  introduced  boxing  for
"S  etc  According  to  others,  the  boys'  boxing-match  was  introduced
)1.  60  (540  ac),  and  the  first  winner  was  Creon  of  Ceos  (Philo-
tus,  De  arte  gymnastica^  1 3).     But  Eusebius  agrees  with  Pausanias  ;

Philostratus  himself  only  mentions  the  other  account  as  an  alter-
ive  to  the  one  supported  by  Pausanias  and  Eusebius.
8.  9.  Philetas.    Eusebius  calls  him  Philotas  {Chron.  vol.  i.  p.  200,
Schone).    Philostratus  agrees  with  Pausanias  in  calling  him  Philetas
•  arte  gymnasticay  13).

8.  10.  The  race  between  armed  men.  This  race  was  sometimes,
ot  always,  a  double  race,  ue,  the  runners  had  to  traverse  the  race-
rse  twice,  first  in  one  direction  and  then  in  the  other.  See  Paus.
I.  8,  X.  34.  5  ;  Aristophanes,  Birds^  291  5q,y  with  the  Scholium;
lux,  iii.  1 5 1  ;  J.  H.  Krause,  Gymnastik  und  Agonistik  der  Hellenefiy
>.  355  note.  As  to  the  mode  in  which  the  race  was  run,  see  Fr.
iser,  vci  Jakrbuch  d.  arch,  Inst.  2  (1887),  p.  103  sqq,j  ib,  10  (1895),
\Qo  sq,

8.   10.  The  race  called  ssmoris was  instituted  etc    The

le  statement  is  made  by  Xenophon,  who  also  agrees  with  Pausanias

o  the  victor's  name  and  country  {Heltenica^  i.  2.  i).

8.   10.  Sybariades.     Eusebius  calls  him  Eurybatus  {Chran.  vol.  i.

to6,  ed  Sch5ne).

8.  1 1,  a  woman  Belistiche,  from  the  coast  of  Macedonia.     In

Armenian  version  of  Eusebius  (Chron,  vol.  i.  p.  207,  ed.  Schone)

name  of  the  victor  is  given  as  Philistiakhus  Maketi,  i,e,  Philistiachus,

of  Macetus :  in  the  Greek  text  of  Eusebius  the  mention  of  the
itution  of  the  race  and  the  name  of  the  first  victor  are  wanting.
\  Armenian  version  agrees  with  Pausanias  in  placing  the  institution
he  race  in  Ol.  129  (264  B.C.)

8.  II.  Tleptolemus,  a  Lycian.  The  name  of  the  first  victor  in
race  ridden  on  colts  is  given  in  the  Armenian  version  of  Eusebius
Hippocrates,  son  of  Thesalus  {Chron,  vol.  1.  p.  207,  ed.  Schdne) :  in
Greek  text  of  Eusebius  the  mention  of  the  institution  of  this  race
dropped  out,  together  with  the  name  of  the  first  victor.

8.  1 1.  Phaedimus,  an  Aeolian,  from  the  city  of  Troas.  Euse-
s  calls  him  an  Alexandrian  {Chron,  vol.  i.  p.  210,  ed.  Schone),
ming  that  he  was  a  native  of  Alexandria  Troas.

9.  I.  abelished  by  proclamation  in  the  eighty-fourth  Olympiad.


488  THE  OL  YMPIC  GAMES  bk.  v.  klb

A  scholiast  on  Pindar  (Olymp,  v.  Inscr.)  assigns  the  same  date  (^444
B.a)  for  the  abolition  of  the  mule-cart  race  (if  we  accept  BoecWs  cor-
rection 7r8^  for  oS^).  But  on  verses  6  and  19  of  the  same  ode  a
scholiast  mentions  the  85th  Olympiad  as  the  date  of  the  abolition;  and
again  a  scholiast  on  Pindar  (^{k^A  vi.  Inscr.)  mentions  the  85th  or
86th  Olympiad  as  the  date.  The  former  date  may  be  reconciled  with
the  one  mentioned  by  Pausanias,  as  Bentley  has  pointed  out,  *'  for  if  it
was  cried  by  the  publick  crier  at  Olymp.  Ixxxiv,  that  thenceforward
there  should  be  no  more  races  with  mules ;  then  the  first  time  that  it
wcis  left  off  was  Olymp.  Ixxxv."  {Dissertations  upon  the  epistles  o/Phd-
aris^  p.  200,  ed.  W.  Wagner).

9«  2.  the  Monnters.  They  seem  to  have  been  more  commonly
called  the  Dismounters  (apobatat).  They  raced  at  the  Panatheniao
festival  at  Athens.  See  Plutarch,  Phocion^  20 ;  Bekker's  AneMA
Graeca^  p.  426  sq.  For  a  relief  representing  one  of  these  men  leqxog
from  a  four-horse  chariot,  see  Bulletin  de  Corresp,  HelUnique^  7  (1883),
pp.  458-462,  plate  xvii.

9.  2.  an  ancient  curse  etc.     See  v.  5.  2.

9.  3.  The  present  order  of  the  games  etc.  From  the  present
passage  of  Pausanias  we  gather  that  down  to  the  seventy-seventh
Olympiad  (472  B.C)  all  the  contests  took  place  on  one  day.  In  later
times  the  festival  lasted  five  days  (Schol.  on  Pindar,  Olymp.  v.  8;
Tzetzes,  Schol,  on  Lycophron^  41).  The  order  in  which  the  vaiions
contests  came  on  has  been  much  discussed,  but  the  evidence  seems  too
defective  to  enable  us  to  decide  the  question  fiiUy.  However,  a  few  &cts
are  foirly  certain.  Thus  the  long  race,  the  short  race,  and  the  double
race  appear  to  have  been  run  on  the  same  day  in  the  order  mentioned
(Paus.  vi.  13.  3  note).  The  wrestling,  boxing,  and  pancratium  also
took  place  in  one  day  and  in  the  order  mentioned,  though  on  one
occasion  at  least  the  pancratium  preceded  the  boxing  (Paus.  vi.  1 5.  3-5
note).  Further,  the  chariot-races  were  followed  on  the  same  day  by
the  pentathlum,  and  in  the  pentathlum  the  first  contest  was  the  race,
and  the  second  was  the  wrestling  (Xenophon,  HellenicOj  vii.  4.  29).
The  race  between  armed  men  was  the  last  of  the  contests  (Artemidorus,
Oniricr,  i.  63).  At  Olympia  all  the  contests  for  boys  seem  to  have
preceded  the  contests  for  men ;  whereas  at  other  places  the  two  sets
of  contests  alternated,  the  boys'  wrestling-match  being  followed  by  the
men's  wrestling-match,  the  boys'  boxing-match  by  the  men's  boxing-
match,  and  so  on  (Plutarch,  Quaest.  Conviv,  ii.  5.  i).  See  Boeckh,
Explic.  Pindar,  p.  148  ;  L.  Dissen's  Excursus  I.  to  Pindar  (vol.  i.
pp.  263-272  of  his  edition)  ;  J.  H.  Krause,  Olympia^  p.  97  sqq.  ;  AE.  J.
Holwerda,  'Olympische  Studien,'  Archdologische  Zeitung^  38  (1880),
pp.  169-17 1.

With  regard  to  the  time  of  year  at  which  the  Olympic  festival
was  celebrated,  it  has  generally  been  held  that  the  celebration  took
place  on  the  first  full  moon  after  the  summer  solstice,  which  on  an
average  would  be  July  ist.  But  recent  investigators  seem  to  agree
that  the  festival  should  be  placed  somewhat  later  in  the  year.  Pro£
G.  F.  Unger  maintains  that  it  fell  on  the  second  fiill  moon  after  the


CH.  X  THE  OL  YMPJC  GAMES  489

summer  solstice,  and  hence  in  August  or  the  last  days  of  July.  See
his  article,  *Der  Olympienmonat,'  in  Philohgtis^  33  (1874),  pp.  227-
248 ;  and  his  *  Zeitrechnung  der  Griechen  und  Romer,'  in  Iwan
Miiller's  Handbuch  der  klassischen  AUeriums-wissenschafty  vol.  i.  p.
603  sq.  Prof.  H.  Nissen  argues  that  in  the  odd  Olympiads  the  festival
began  on  the  full  moon  in  August,  but  that  in  the  even  Olympiads
it  began  on  the  full  moon  of  September.  See  Rheirdsches  Museum^
N.  F.  40  (1885),  p.  349  J^^.  More  recently  the  question  has  been  again
discussed  by  Mr.  August  Mommsen  in  a  dissertation  Ueber  die  Zeit  der
Olympien  (Leipzig,  1891).  He  inclines  to  the  newer  view,  with  modi-
fications.

The  last  celebration  of  the  Olympic  games  took  place  in  393  A.D.,
after  which  the  games  were  stopped  by  order  of  the  Emperor  Theo-
dosius.  The  last  Olympic  victor  known  to  history  was  an  Armenian
knight  named  Varaztad  or  Ardavazt,  a  man  of  giant  strength.  See
Cedrenus,  Histor,  Compend,  vol.  i.  p.  573,  ed.  Bekker;  Molse  de
Khor^e,  Hist,  d^Armdniey  iii.  40,  vol.  2.  p.  97,  ed.  de  Florival ;  Hertz-
berg,  Geschichte  Griechenlands  unter  der  Herrschaft  der  Romer^  3.  p.
377  sq.

9.  3.  the  sacrifices  for  the  pentathlnm  etc.  This  passage  of
Pausanias  has  been  a  good  deal  discussed  in  connexion  with  the
question  whether  the  great  public  sacrifices  were  offered  before  or  after
the  games.  But  the  passage  is  too  corrupt,  and  the  other  evidence  too
defective,  to  allow  of  a  definite  solution  of  the  question.  See  Krause,
Olympia^  P*  ^3  -f^^*  Various  proposals  have  been  made  to  emend  the
present  passage.  See  Critical  Note,  vol.  i.  p.  584.  As  to  the
pentathlum  see  note  on  iii.  1 1.  6.

9.  4-  in  the  fiftieth  Olympiad  two  men were  entrusted

etc.  This  is  plainly  at  variance  with  what  follows  in  the  next  section  ;
hence  the  text  in  one  or  other  of  the  passages  is  probably  corrupt.
Perhaps  the  most  probable  correction  proposed  is  to  read  ^pBofiriKocrrj
for  €lKO<rr§  in  §  5.  The  translation  of  that  passage  would  then  be :
**  But  in  the  seventy-fifth  Olympiad  nine  umpires  were  appointed."  See
H.  Fdrster,  De  hellanodicis  Olympicis^  p.  20  sqq,  ;  and  Critical  Note,
voL  I.  p.  584.  Aristotle  in  his  Constitution  of  Elis,  as  reported  by
Harpocration  {s.v,  *£XXavoSi#cai),  stated  that  the  Eleans  appointed  at
first  one  mnpire,  afterwards  two,  and  afterwards  nine.  According  to
Hellanicus  and  Aristodemus  the  Elean,  there  were  at  first  two  umpires
and  finally  ten,  one  being  taken  from  each  of  the  ten  Elean  tribes
(Schol.  on  Pindar,  Ofymp,  iii.  22  ;  Harpocration,  I.e.)  Philostratus,
who  was  nearly  a  contemporary  of  Pausanias,  says  that  the  number  of
umpires  was  ten  ( Vit.  Apollon.  iii.  30),  which  agrees  with  Pausanias's
statement  as  to  the  number  in  his  own  time.  See  J.  H.  Krause,
OlympiOf  p.  124  sqq. ;  H.  Forster,  De  hellanodicis  Ofympicis  (Leipsic,

1879).

10.  I.  the  sacred  grove  (alsos)  of  Zeus  has  been  called  Altis  etc
Pausanias's  explanation  of  the  name  Altis  as  only  another  form  of  the
Greek  word  tdsos  (*  sacred  grove ')  seems  to  be  correct.  See  G.  Curtius,
GriecMsche  Etymologief  p.  356.     Pindar  speaks  of  the  sacred  precinct


490  THE  ALTJS  bk.  t.  elb

as  "  the  hospitable  grove  (alsos)  of  Zeus  "  (Ofymp,  iiL  3 1  j^.),  "  Pisa's
well- wooded  grove  beside  the  Alpheus  "  (01.  viii.  11),  **thc  holy  grove"
(OL  xi.  54).  He  also  calls  the  precinct  by  the  name  of  Altis,  aod
attributes  its  formation  to  Hercules  (01,  xi.  55  s^.)  Xenqphon  says
that  the  Cladeus  "flows  down  beside  the  Altis  and  £adls  into  the
Alpheus"  (HelUnica^  vii.  4.  29).  According  to  Strabb  (viiL  p,  3 S3) the
stadium  at  Olympia  was  in  a  grove  of  wild  olives  down  to  his  own  time.

The  first  scholar  in  modem  times  who  called  attention  to  tbe
wealth  of  ancient  monuments  which  excavations  might  bring  to  ligitt
at  Olympia  was  Montfaucon  ;  and  after  him  Winckelmann  aHicei?ed
the  plan,  which  he  did  not  live  to  execute,  of  systematically  explor-
ing the  site  (A.  Bdtticher,  Olympic^  P*  5 1  ^QQ'  \  Flasch,  *  Olympia,'  in
Baumeister's  DenkmdUr^  p.  1061  sq,)  The  first  modem  traveller  who
visited  Olympia  was  the  Englishman  Chandler ;  he  made  his  way  thitber
in  the  summer  of  1766,  and  saw  "the  walls  of  the  cell  of  a'  very  large
temple,  standing  many  feet  high  and  well-built,  the  stones  all  uninjured'
(Travels  in  Greece^  p.  294).  The  temple  of  which  he  speaks  was  prob-
ably the  temple  of  Zeus.  It  was  not,  however,  until  1829  that  excavations
were  actually  made  on  the  site.  In  that  year  the  archaeologists  of  the
French  Expedition  de  Morie  worked  for  six  weeks  at  the  temple  of  Zeos
and  cleared  it  sufficiently  to  make  out  th^plan  and  approximate  dimensions
of  the  building.  They  also  found  some  pieces  of  the  sculptures  whid
had  adorned  the  temple,  particularly  fragments  of  three  of  the  sculptured
metopes.  One  of  these  fragments  exhibits  the  Nemean  lion  slain  by
Heroiles  ;  another  a  sitting  figure  of  Athena  (part  of  the  metope  which
represented  Hercules's  adventure  with  the  Stymphalian  birds) ;  and  the
third,  the  best  preserved  of  all,  shows  Hercules  in  the  act  of  taming  the
Cretan  bull.  (As  to  these  sculptured  metopes  see  below,  p.  523  sqq)
All  the  sculptures  discovered  by  the  French  are  now  in  the  Louvre.
See  Blouet,  Expedition  Scientifique  de  Mor^e :  Architecture^  i.  pp.  56-72,
with  pi.  62-78;  E.  Michon,  *Les  sculptures  d'Olympie  conservdes  au
Louvre,'  Revue  arcJUologique^  3me  S^rie,  27  (1895),  PP*  78-109,  150-
181.

In  the  years  187 5-1 881  the  whole  of  the  Altis,  together  with  many
adjacent  buildings,  was  excavated  by  German  archaeologists  at  the  cost
of  the  German  Government.  This  great  work,  carried  out  with  a  skiD
and  fidelity  which  left  nothing  to  be  desired,  has  been  fruitful  in  results,
which  are  still  in  course  of  publication.  Its  initiation  and  successful
completion  are  due  mainly  to  the  zeal  and  energy  of  Prof.  Ernst  Curtius,
who  roused  the  interest  and  secured  the  concurrence  of  the  Emperor  and
Crown  Prince  of  Germany  in  the  undertaking.  By  the  terms  of  the
agreement  between  the  Greek  and  German  Governments,  the  cost  of  the
enterprise  was  borne  entirely  by  Germany,  while  Greece  acquired
possession  of  all  the  objects  brought  to  light  by  the  excavations.  The
soil  had  accumulated  over  the  ancient  buildings  to  an  average  depth  d
16  or  17  feet;  the  expense  of  clearing  it  away  amounted  to  about
;£4o,ooo.  The  work  was  directed  mainly  from  Berlin  by  Prof.  Ernst
Curtius,  the  architect  Dr.  Adler,  and  a  member  of  the  Foreign  Office,
while  the  conduct  of  the  excavations  on  the  spot  was  entrusted  to  a


■^


THE  ALTIS  491


ig  commission  of  archaeologists  and  architects,  among  whom  may
rticularly  mentioned  G.  Hirschfeld,  Ad.  Bdtticher,  Professors  Treu,
angler,  and  Dorpfeld,  Dr.  Weil,  Dr.  Purgold,  and  the  architects

Borrmann,  Graef  and  Graeber.  The  results  of  their  labours  are
bed  in  three  great  works,  namely:  (i)  Die  Ausgrabungen  zu
bia^  5  vols.  (Berlin,  1876-1881);  (2)  Die  Funde  von  Olympia^  i
Berlin,  1882)  ;  (3)  Olympia:  die  Ergebnisse  dervon  dem  deutschen

veranstalteten  Ausgrabung^  to  be  completed  in  four  volumes  of

and  five  volumes  of  letterpress.  Of  this  last  work,  forming  the
live  publication  of  the  results,  four  volumes  of  plates  and  four
es  of  letterpress  have  up  to  the  present  (May  1896)  been  pub-

;  they  deal  respectively  with  the  architecture,  the  sculpture,  the
;s,  and  the  inscriptions.  More  popular  accounts  are  given  in  the
ing  works :  Curtius  und  Adler,  Olympia  und  Umgegend^  with  two
and  a  plan  drawn  by  Kaupert  and  Ddrpfeld  (Berlin,  1882)  ;  Ad.
her,  Olympia:  Das  Fest  und  seine  Sld/le^  {Berlin,  1886);  A.  Flasch,
ipia,'  in  Baumeister's  DenkmaleVy  pp.  105 3-1 104  PP ;  Baedeker's
\enland^  pp.  333-355  (the  substance  of  this  account  was  supplied
rs.  Dorpfeld  and  Purgold);  Guide  -  Joanne,  2.  pp.  333-362.
ir  summary  of  the  results  is  furnished  by  Prof.  Jebb  in  his  article
ipia,'  in  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica^  9th  ed.
ie  sacred  precinct  or  Altis  appears  to  have  formed  a  quadrilateral
•ut  200  metres  (750  feet)  long  from  east  to  west,  by  175  metres
^eet)  broad  from  north  to  south.  Its  boundary  on  the  north  is
nown,  but  probably  it  was  formed  by  Mount  Cronius.  On  the
three  sides  (west,  south,  and  east)  the  precinct  was  bounded  by  a
he  greater  part  of  which  can  still  be  traced.  On  the  east  side  the
ary-wall  extends  behind  the  Echo  Colonnade,  and  serves  at  the
time  as  the  supporting- wall  of  the  stadium.  On  the  west  side
IS  of  two  walls  can  be  seen  extending  parallel  to,  and  within  a
distance  of  each  other,  for  a  long  way.  The  inner  of  these  two
is  the  earlier,  and  dates  from  the  Greek  period  ;  like  the  east  wall
uilt  of  squared  blocks  of  conglomerate  without  mortar.  The  outer
two  western  walls  is  built  of  squared  blocks  of  conglomerate  and  is
rted  by  buttresses  on  the  inside  ;  it  is  standing  to  a  height  of  more
hree  feet.  Formerly  this  outer  wall  was  supposed  to  have  been
in  the  Macedonian  age ;  but  the  subsequent  discovery  of  tiles,
r,  and  the  masonry  called  opus  incerium  in  the  construction  of  the
as  proved  that  it  is  of  Roman  date.     The  wall  on  the  south  side

Altis  is  also  Roman.      Originally,  the  southern  boundary -wall

to  have  been  further  to  the  north,  on  the  line  of  the  South  Terrace
as  it  is  designated  on  the  plans  of  Olympia.  Thus  we  learn  that
man  times  the  Altis  was  enlarged  on  the  south.  Dr.  Dorpfeld
tares  that  this  enlargement  and  the  consequent  construction  of  the
g  south  wall  were  works  of  the  emperor  Nero,  who  is  known  to
:onverted  the  building  at  the  south-east  comer  of  the  Altis  into  a

(see  below,  p.  575).  A  confirmation  of  this  view.  Dr.  D6rpfeld
,  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  in  these  Roman  walls  of  the  Altis
I  as  in  the  Roman  gateways  are  built  many  fragments  of  older


492  THE  ALTJS  BK.  ▼.  EUS

buildings  and  many  bases  of  statues.  These  fragments,  in  Dr.  DorpfiskFs
opinion,  may  very  well  be  the  remains  of  buildings  destroyed  by  Nero
when  he  was  building  his  palace,  and  these  bases  may  be  the  pedestals
of  the  many  statues  which  he  carried  off  from  Olympia ;  for  it  was  the
emperor's  interest  not  to  leave  the  vacant  pedestals  long  standing  as
silent  but  eloquent  witnesses  of  the  ravages  which  he  had  perpetrated
in  the  sacred  precinct.

The  older  wall  of  the  Altis,  which  may  be  seen  especially  on  the  west,
appears  in  many  places  to  have  been  only  a  low  enclosure,  not  a  high
boundary-walL  Hence  Dr.  Ddrpfeld  suggests  that  perhaps  the  prednct
was  not  fully  enclosed  until  the  Roman  period.  With  this  view  would
accord  very  well  the  fact  that  though  great  pieces  of  the  old  wall  of  the
Altis  are  preserved,  no  trace  of  a  gateway/Older  than  the  Roman  period
has  been  found.  The  existing  gateways  are  all  of  Roman  constractioiL
Of  these  gateways  there  are  three  in  the  west  wall  and  one  in  the  sooth
wall,  not  counting  the  entrance  into  the  Council  House  on  the  sooth  and
the  vaulted  entrance  into  the  stadium  on  the  north-east.  In  the  west
wall  the  two  chief  gates  are  at  the  north-west  and  south-west  ends
respectively.  Their  plan  and  dimensions  are  exactly  the  same;  each
consisted  of  three  openings  in  the  wall  with  a  portico  on  the  outside
supported  by  four  columns  (see  below,  note  on  v.  15.  2).  The  gateway
in  the  middle  of  the  west  wall  was  a  simple  passage.  On  the  other  hand,
the  gateway  in  the  south  wall,  near  its  eastern  end,  was  the  most  spadoos
and  stately  of  all.  From  the  scanty  existing  remains,  it  appears  to  have
had  the  form  of  a  Roman  triumphal  arch  of  Corinthian  style  with  three
openings ;  and  to  have  been  built  to  some  extent,  like  the  later  Altis
wall,  out  of  the  materials  of  older  buildings  and  the  bases  of  statues.
This  imposing  gate  must  certainly  have  been  built  with  the  intention  of
serving  as  the  grand  entrance  by  which  processions  were  to  pass  into
the  Altis.  Yet  in  the  time  of  Pausanias  it  would  appear  that  processions
entered  the  sacred  precinct,  not  by  this  triumphal  gateway,  but  by  the
simpler  gate  at  the  south-west  comer  of  the  Altis  (see  v.  1 5.  2  note).
Hence  Dr.  Ddrpfeld  suggests  that  the  grand  gateway  at  the  south-east
comer  was  built  by  Nero  as  a  new  processional  entrance,  but  that  after
Nero's  death  the  Eleans  abandoned  the  innovation  imposed  by  the
tyrant  and  reverted  to  the  older  usage  of  introducing  processions  by  the
south-westem  gate.

See  Curtius  und  Adler,  Olympia  und  Umgegendy  pp.  19  sq,^  21,  25;  Ad.
Botticher,  Olympia?  pp.  51  sqq,y  1631^.,  400;  Flasch,  *  Olympia,' in  Baumeistei^s
Denkmdler,  Yt,  1061  sqq,  \  Baedeker,'  pp.  338,  346,  348;  W.  Ddrpfeld,  *Di«
Altismauer  in  Olympia,'  MittkeiL  d.  arch,  InsL  in  AlAen,  13  (1888),  pp.  3^7'
336;  id,  in  Olympia:  Ergebnisse,  Textband  2.  p.  61  j^.  ;  Olympia:  Ergebmsit^
Tafelband  i.  pi.  xlv.

10.  I.  Pindar calls  the  place  Altis.    See  Pindar,  01.  xi.  55-

10.  2.  The  temple  and  image  of  Zeus  were  made  from  the
booty  etc.  Pisa  was  conquered  and  destroyed  by  Elis  about  570  B.C
But  it  is  quite  certain  that  the  temple  of  Zeus  was  not  built  till  at  least
a  century  later.  We  must,  therefore,  suppose  either  that  the  Eleans
kept  the  booty  for  a  century  before  expending  it  in  the  erection  of  the


H.  X  THB  TEMPLE  OF  ZEUS  493

^mple,  which  seems  scarcely  credible ;  or  that  the  conquest  to  which
'ausanias  refers  must  be  a  later  one.  Now  Herodotus  tells  us  (iv.  148)
lat  in  his  lifetime  the  Eleans  laid  waste  most  of  the  Triphylian  towns  ;
nd  Strabo  (viii.  p.  355),  apparently  referring  to  the  same  event,  says
lat  after  the  close  of  the  third  Messenian  war  the  Eleans  with  the
elp  of  the  Spartans  reduced  to  subjection  the  whole  country  as  far
>uth  as  the  borders  of  Messenia.  The  third  Messenian  war  came  to
1  end  in  455  B.C  ;  hence,  on  this  calculation,  the  temple  of  Zeus  could
Dt  have  been  begun  before  that  date.  On  the  other  hand,  the
acedaemonians  hung  on  the  eastern  gable  of  the  temple  a  golden
lield  in  commemoration  of  their  victory  at  Tanagra  (see  §  4)  which
as  won  in  457  B.C  We  should  therefore  suppose  that  the  temple
as  finished  or  nearly  finished  in  that  year.

Evidence  as  to  the  date  of  the  building  of  the  temple  has  been
t>tained  by  an  examination  of  the  site.  The  base  of  a  votive  offering
f  a  certain  Praxiteles  (not  the  sculptor)  and  the  base  of  a  statue  by
^natas  (see  v.  27.  8)  were  found  under  the  rubbish  which  was  heaped
p  in  building  the  temple ;  and  the  base  of  the  votive  offerings  of
micythus  (see  v.  26.  2  sqq,)  was  found  above  the  rubbish  heap.  Hence
le  rubbish  heap  must  have  been  made  (and  the  temple  built  either
holly  or  in  part)  after  the  votive  offering  of  Praxiteles  and  the  statue
y  Onatas  were  set  up,  and  before  the  votive  offerings  of  Smicythus.
Tow  a  variety  of  considerations,  palaeographical  and  historical,
ombine  to  show  that  the  bases  of  Praxiteles  and  Onatas  cannot  have
een  set  up  much  before  01.  75  (480  B.C.) ;  and  the  votive  offerings
f  Smicythus  were  certainly  later  than  01.  78  (468  B.C.),  and  probably
ot  later  than  Ol.  80  (460  B.C.),  or  at  the  latest  Ol.  82  (452  B.c)
lence  we  arrive  at  Ol.  75  and  01.  82  as  the  extreme  limits  within
rhich  the  temple  was  built.  We  may  say,  then,  that  it  was  built
etween  the  years  480  B.C  and  452  B.C.  or  (taking  the  last  year  of
be  82nd  Olympiad)  449  B.C.  Dr.  Ddrpfeld  holds  that  the  limits  can
•e  narrowed  still  further,  namely  to  between  468  and  456  B.C.  See
•*urtwangler,  Die  Bronzefunde  aus  Olympia^  p.  4  sq, ;  Ad.  B5tticher,
llympia^  p.  254  sq.\  Flasch,  *01ympia,'  in  Baumeister's  Z>^/i^ma7fr,
•p.  1 09  8- 1 100;  G,  \^o^scYid^<tj  Die  westliche  Gtebelgrt^e  am  Zeustempel
u  Olympiay  p.  5  sqq, ;  L.  Urlichs,  Bemerkungen  Oder  den  olympischen
^empel  und  seine  Bildwerke^  pp.  1-7,  28;  W.  Ddrpfeld,  in  Olympia:
Zrgebnisse,  Textband  2.  p.  19  sqq.

10.  2.  The  temple  is  built  in  the  Doric  style  etc.  The  temple
f  Zeus,  the  largest  and  most  important  of  all  the  buildings  at  Olympia,
tands  not  in  the  middle  but  in  a  comer  (the  south-west  comer)  of  the
acred  precinct.  The  reason  of  this  is  that  at  the  time  when  the  temple
/as  built  the  rest  of  the  precinct  was  already  occupied  by  buildings  and
Itars.  Whether  an  older  temple  stood  on  the  site  of  the  existing
emple  is  not  known ;  at  all  events  no  remains  of  any  such  earlier
emple  have  been  found.  The  ground  on  which  the  temple  stands  has
L  slope  towards  the  south.  It  is  not  a  good  site  for  building,  and  it
vas  necessary  to  raise  it  artificially  by  made  earth  in  order  to  give
lie  temple  the  commanding  position  which  it  enjoys  among  the  other


494  ^-^^  TEMPLE  OF  ZEUS  bk.  v.  bus

edifices  of  the  sacred  precinct  The  foundations,  which  are  preserved
entire,  are  sunk  only  i  metre  deep  in  the  original  soil  of  the  Ahii
Their  height,  measured  to  the  upper  edge  of  the  stylobate,  is  about
4  metres ;  so  that  they  rose  to  an  average  height  of  about  3  metres
above  the  original  level  of  the  gpx>und.  Round  about  the  temple  an
artificial  mound,  composed  of  rubbish  and  earth,  was  raised  so  as  to
hide  the  foundations  and  to  give  the  temple  the  appearance  of  standing
on  an  eminence.  The  natural  soil,  deep  down  under  the  new  sor&ce
which  was  thus  created,  was  found  to  contain  a  multitude  of  small
bronze  objects  which  had  been  deposited  here  before  the  temple  was
built  (see  below,  p.  502).  The  foundations  do  not  form  a  singk
connected  block  of  masonry,  but  consist  of  separate  walls,  whidi
supported  the  upper  walls  and  the  rows  of  columns  of  the  temple.
Like  the  rest  of  the  temple  the  foundations  are  built  of  great  blocks  of
a  coarse  shell-conglomerate  which  Pausanias  calls  poras  (see  below).
The  spaces  between  the  foundation-walls  were  filled  with  earth.

The  temple  rested,  as  usual,  on  three  steps.  These  steps  difo  in
height  and  breadth.  The  two  lower  steps  are  each  .48  metre  high  ;  the
top  step  or  stylobate  proper  is  .56  metre  high.  Correspondingly,  the
lower  step  is  .48  metre  broad ;  the  upper  is  .56  metre.  The  stones  of
the  steps  are  fastened  together  with  yL\  shaped  iron  damps.

The  extreme  length  of  the  temple,  measured  on  the  lowest  step,  is
66.64  metres ;  its  extreme  breadth,  also  measured  on  the  lowest  step,
is  30.20  metres.  Measured  on  the  stylobate,  its  length  is  64.12  metres,
and  its  breadth  27.68  metres.  The  stylobate  is  built  of  enormous
blocks  of  stone,  each  of  them  about  2.60  metres  square.

The   temple   was,    as   Pausanias   says,   of  the   Doric    order    and
surrounded   by  a   colonnade.      This   outer   colonnade    comprised  six
columns  at  each  of  the  narrow  ends,  and  thirteen  colunms  on  each  of
the  long  sides.     It  was  thus  a  hexastyle  temple  of  the  normal  pattern.
The  columns  are  constructed  of  the  same  coarse  conglomerate  as  the
foundations,  but,  like  all  the  parts  of  the  temple  which  were  exposed
to  view,   they  were  coated  with  a  fine   white   marble   stucco.      The
intervals  between  the  columns,  measured  from  axis  to  axis,  was  about
5.20  metres.     But  the  intervals  are  rather  greater  at  the  gable  ends
than  on  the  long  sides,  and  on  the  other  hand  the  intervals  between
the  colunms  at  the  four  comers  are  less  than  the  intervals  between  the
other   columns.      On  account  of  their  great   size  the    columns  were
necessarily  built  of  several  superposed  horizontal  sections  or  drums,
as  they  are  called.     The  number  of  drums  is  not  the  same  in  all  the
columns.   One  column  on  the  south  side  had  fifteen  of  them.    The  drums
were  fastened  together  by  wooden  dowels.     None  of  the  colunms  is  now
standing  entire ;  at  the  most  one  or  two  drums  may  be  seen  in  their
original  position.     On  the  south  side  of  the  temple  some  of  the  columns
lie  stretched  on  the  ground,  just  as  they  were  thrown  down  by  earth-
quakes ;  their  drums,  however,  have  been  severed  from  each  other  by
the  fall.     The  height  of  the  colunms  was  10.43  metres.     Each  column
had  twenty  fiutes,  that  is,  grooves  or  channels  cut  perpendicularly  ^
its  surface.     The  echinus  of  the  capitals  was  somewhat  flat,  forming  io


"

THE  TEMPLE  OF  ZEUS

495

JT

.....

1  I  ir

:ii  ^i:«

1::;::  :::

Tp-'  -  «

d  ?

i

o   s

|:ig

^    :=•

][h]  --

i

--     ?! !

\

I--     M--

--f    --■

1

i--  i'±

a

.. .  r

^

■==  IB

■  ^^i

%--    uH

1  MPi    -- 1

"

1        V-  \-

:::::       ■

•  ::"

.    ^::I

1

1  lar

i^JI-  ^1

1

i

496  THE  TEMPLE  OF  ZEUS  bk.  v.  ilb

this  respect  an  intermediate  stage  between  the  bulging  capitals  of  dw
Heraeum  at  Olympia  and  the  almost  straight  capitals  of  the  PaithenoD
at  Athens.  The  capitals  which  most  nearly  resemble  them  are  those  of
the  old  Pre-Persian  temple  on  the  Acropolis  at  Athens  and  the  temple
at  Aegina.  The  diameters  of  the  columns  vary  somewhat.  At  the
gable  ends  the  lower  diameter  is  2.25  metres  and  the  upper  diameter
1.72  metres ;  on  the  long  sides  the  lower  diameter  is  2.21  metres  and
the  upper  diameter  1.68  metres.

Fragments  of  all  the  members  of  the  entablature  lie  scattered  00
the  ground.  The  architrave,  which  was  2  metres  broad  and  1.75  to
1.77  metres  high,  was  composed  of  three  blocks  placed  side  by  side
and  Ecistened  together  with  ^^  shaped  iron  clamps.  The  triglyphs  and
metopes  are  constructed  of  the  same  coarse  conglomerate  as  the  walls
and  columns  ;  they  were  coated  with  white  stucco  but  were  not  pamted
nor  sculptured.  The  twenty -one  shields  dedicated  by  Munmiius  (Pans.
V.  10.  5)  were  attached,  not  to  the  architrave,  but  to  the  metopes,  as
appears  from  the  dowel-holes  and  other  marks  on  the  metopes.  These
marks  prove  that  ten  of  the  shields  were  fastened  to  the  metopes  of  the
east  front  and  the  remaining  eleven  to  the  most  easterly  of  the  metopes
on  the  south  side.  Each  shield  seems  to  have  measured  1.05  metres  in
diameter.

The  geison  projected  .84  metre.  It  was  quite  plain,  as  in  most
old  temples.  The  mutules  have  regularly  1 8  guttae  apiece,  which  are
generally  carved  out  of  the  same  block  as  the  geison.  The  height  of
the  gables  was  apparently  3.30  metres  {Olympia:  Ergebfdsse^  Textband
3.  p.  116).

The  temple  was  roofed  with  marble  tiles,  of  which  a  great  many
have  been  preserved  and  are  now  collected  at  the  Pelopium.  These
tiles  are  of  various  dates  and  of  different  marbles.  The  original  dies
are  of  Parian  or  some  other  coarse-grained  marble  brought  firom  the
islands  of  the  Aegean.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  thinks  that  the  marble  is  Parian,
Dr.  Lepsius  is  of  opinion  that  it  more  resembles  Naxian  marble
(Lepsius,  Griechische  Marmorstudien^  p.  128).  But  a  great  part  of
the  roof  was  in  later  times  repaired  and  covered  with  tiles  of  Pentdic
marble,  of  which  many  have  been  found.  That  these  tiles  of  Pentdic
marble  are  later  than  those  of  Parian  marble  is  proved  not  only
by  the  style  of  the  workmanship  but  also  by  the  masons'  marks  on
some  of  them  and  by  the  different  style  of  the  lions'  heads  whidi
projected  from  the  sima  or  overhanging  edge  of  the  roof  and  served  as
water-spouts  or  gargoyles.  Of  these  lion-heads  the  earlier  and  better
carved  are  of  Parian  marble  ;  the  later  and  ruder  are  of  Pentelic  marblt
From  the  very  different  styles  of  the  existing  lion-heads  (thirty-nine
of  them  survive  out  of  an  original  total  of  102)  it  appears  that  the  roo(
or  at  all  events  the  sima  with  its  water-spouts,  was  repaired  at  four
different  tim^s,  and  that  three  of  these  repairs  fell  within  the  Roman
period.  The  tiles  with  which  the  roof  was  covered  are  of  two  different
shapes.  One  sort  consists  of  large  flat  tiles  with  raised  edges  or  flanges
at  two  sides.  These  tiles  were  laid  in  rows  side  by  side,  and  the  raised
edges  of  each  contiguous  pair  of  flat  tiles  were  covered  by  a  tile  of  ^


CH.  X  THE  TEMPLE  OF  ZEUS  497

Other  sort,  shaped  like  a  tiny  gable-roof.  In  the  lower  face  of  each
covering  tile,  at  the  upper  end,  were  pegs  which  fitted  into  correspond-
ing* holes  in  the  fiat  tiles,  thus  holding  the  tiles  firmly  together  and
preventing  them  from  slipping.

The  colonnade  which  surrounds  the  temple  proper  is  broader  at  the
east  and  west  ends  than  on  the  long  sides.  At  the  east  and  west  ends
it  is  6.22  metres  broad,  measured  on  the  fioor ;  on  the  long  sides  it  is
3.24  metres  broad.  The  colonnade  is  relatively  broader  than  that  of
the  Parthenon,  but  narrower  than  those  of  the  Sicilian  temples.  Its
floor  is  composed  of  large  blocks  of  conglomerate,  the  upper  surface
of  which  is  covered  with  a  pavement  formed  of  pebbles  and  mortar.
The  pebbles  were  not  visible  in  the  original  pavement ;  nothing  was
seen  on  the  top  but  the  smooth  surface  of  the  mortar.  In  Roman
times  this  simple  pavement  was  replaced  by  a  grand  mosaic  pavement
formed  of  different  coloured  marbles,  considerable  portions  of  which
have  been  found  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  colonnade  as  well  as  in  the
fore-temple  and  the  cella.  The  ceiling  of  the  colonnade,  like  that  of
the  temple  proper,  was  of  wood.  Coffered  ceilings  of  stone  hardly
occur  at  all  in  Olympia  ;  the  oldest  building  with  a  ceiling  of  this  sort
is  the  Philippeum  (see  v.  20.  9  note).  A  great  many  statues  stood
between  the  columns  of  the  long  south  side.  The  marks  which  are
still  to  be  seen  here  on  the  pavement  prove  that  the  statues  were  of
bronze  and  were  placed  immediately  on  the  stylobate,  without  pedestals.

The  outside  of  the  temple  was  painted,  for  traces  of  colour  have
been  detected  on  many  of  the  architectural  members.  Thus  red  was
found  on  the  rings  of  the  Doric  capitals,  on  the  upper  part  of  the
architrave,  etc. ;  and  blue  was  found  on  the  triglyphs,  on  the  guttae  of
the  architrave,  etc.  Some  painted  decorations  in  the  form  of  leaves
and  so  on  have  been  traced  on  the  geison  and  sima,

A  great  ramp  or  inclined  plane  led  up  to  the  middle  of  the  east
front,  forming  the  principal  approach  to  the  temple.  Originally  this
ramp  was  no  broader  than  the  space  between  the  central  pair  of
columns ;  but  in  Roman  times  it  was  enlarged  on  both  sides.

The  dimensions  of  the  temple  given  by  Pausanias  (height  68  feet,
breadth  95  feet,  length  230  feet)  are  tolerably  correct,  if  we  assume
that  the  foot  in  which  they  are  reckoned  is  the  common  Greek  and
Roman  foot  of  .296  metre  (see  vol.  2.  p.  13),  and  that  in  estimating
the  length  of  the  temple  Pausanias  included  the  ramp  at  the  east  end.
He  probably  put  down  the  figures  as  he  received  them  from  his  guides,
who  would  be  pretty  sure,  as  Mr.  A.  Botticher  observes,  to  stretch  the
measures  to  the  utmost  in  order  to  impress  visitors  with  a  sense  of  the
grandeur  of  the  temple.  Converted  into  metres,  his  measurements  are
as  follows  :  height  of  temple  20. 1 3  metres  (which,  according  to  the  best
authority,  Dr.  Dorpfeld,  is  almost  exact);  breadth  28.12  metres  (a
little  greater  than  the  actual  breadth  of  the  stylobate  measured  on  the
top  step,  see  above,  p.  494) ;  length  68.08  metres.

But  from  an  examination  of  the  buildings  at  Olympia,  Dr.  Dorpfeld
deduces  the  conclusion  that  the  foot  employed  in  their  construction
was  not  the  foot  of  .296,  but  a  larger  foot  of  .327  metre,  which  Dr.

VOL.  Ill  2  K


498  THE  TEMPLE  OF  ZEUS  bk.  v.  eus

Dorpfeld  calls  the  Phidonian  foot  (cp.  Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Atfuns,
lo).  He  points  out  that  many  important  dimensions  of  the  temple  of
Zeus,  when  reckoned  in  feet  of  .327  metre,  are  expressed  in  round
numbers,  thus  :

Phidoniazi  fed

16

8

20

40

50
15


Height  of  column

Intercolumniation  on  long  sides

Length  of  abacus  of  columns  on  long  sides

Breadth  of  central  aisle

Breadth  of  cella  in  interior     .

Breadth  of  celia  on  outside,  with  step

Depth  of  fore-temple  and  back-chamber


The  same  foot  seems  to  have  been  employed  in  the  construction  c^
other  buildings  at  Olympia ;  thus  the  Prytaneum,  measured  in  feet  of
0.327  metre,  is  exactly  100  feet  square,  and  the  Echo  Colonnade  is
exactly  300  feet  long.  On  the  other  hand,  the  01>Tnpic  foot  of  .3:1
metre  (or,  more  exactly,  .32045  metre ;  see  note  on  vi.  20.  8)  seems
also  to  have  been  occasionally  employed  at  Olympia ;  for  the  temple
of  Zeus  is  200  Olympic  feet  long,  and  the  length  of  the  vaulted  enn?
to  the  stadium  is  100  Olympic  feet.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  suggests  that  the
Olympic  foot  was  a  sacred  measure,  but  that  in  practice  the  larger
Phidonian  foot  was  employed  by  architects  and  masons.

The  temple  proper  {naos\  in  other  words  the  core  of  the  building,
as  distinguished  from  the  colonnade  which  surrounded  it,  consisted  d
three  compartments,  a  fore-teijiple  (pronaos)  at  the  east  end,  a  great
hall  (cella)  in  the  middle,  and  a  back-chamber  (ppisthodomos)  at  the
west  end.  It  is  raised  on  a  low  step  above  the  level  of  the  surrounding
colonnade.  Its  length,  measured  on  this  step,  is  46.84  metres,  audits
breadth  16.39  metres;  this  latter  measure  corresponds  exaaly  to  30
Aeginetan  feet.  In  size  and  plan  the  fore-temple  and  back-chamber
are  exactly  alike ;  each  had  on  its  front  two  Doric  columns  between
aniac.  The  only  difference  between  them  was  that  the  fore-temple  was
closed  with  doors,  whereas  the  back-chamber  was  open  to  the  public
and  being  furnished  with  a  long  stone  bench  served  as  a  place  ct
meeting  and  conversation  (Lucian,  Herodotus^  i  ;  /V/.,  Fugitiz%  7 ;  i^'
Dc  morie  Peregrini^  22).

The  walls  of  the  temple  consisted,  in  their  lowest  part,  of  tall  slate
set  up  edgeways,  of  which  some  are  still  in  their  original  places.
Above  these  slabs  were  laid  courses  of  squared  blocks  of  the  commoo
shape.  Very  few  remains  of  these  blocks  have  been  found,  but  tbcy
suffice  to  show  that  the  blocks  were  1.28  metres  long  by  0.49  meiit
high.

The  bronze  doors  which   Pausanias  mentions  (v.  10.  5)  ha^-e  left
their  traces  on  the  threshold  of  the  fore-temple.     There  were  three  0^
these  doors,  a  large  one  in  the  middle  between  the  two  central  columns,
and  two  smaller  ones  at  the  sides.     Each  door  was  double,  that  is.
consisted  of  two  folding  pieces.     Traces  of  the  three  thresholds  can  be


CI  I.  X  THE  TEMPLE  OF  ZEUS  499

seen,  each  with  its  sockets  in  which  the  hinges  revolved  and  the  central
bolt  was  shot.

Over  the  columns  and  antae  of  the  fore-temple  and  back-chamber
was  a  Doric  entablature,  consisting  of  an  architrave,  a  triglyph  frieze,
and  probably  a  cornice.  The  architrave  and  triglyph  frieze  were
confined  to  the  two  short  ends  of  the  temple  proper,  but  the  cornice
ran  all  round  it.  The  triglyphs  of  the  frieze  are  of  the  ordinary  con-
glomerate stone  {poros) ;  but  the  metopes  are  of  marble  and  are
adorned  with  sculptures  representing  the  deeds  of  Hercules,  as
Pausanias  has  described  them  (v.  10.  9  note).  There  were  six  of
these  sculptured  metopes  over  the  fore-temple,  and  the  same  number
over  the  back-chamber.  The  way  in  which  the  metopes  are  fitted  into
the  triglyphs  (by  means  of  a  groove  which  does  not  reach  to  the  top
of  the  triglyph)  proves  that  these  sculptured  metopes  were  made  and
inserted  in  their  places  at  the  time  when  the  temple  was  built,  and  not
at  a  later  time.  For  since  the  groove  in  the  triglyph  into  which  the
metope  fitted  is  not  carried  up  to  the  top  of  the  triglyph  block,  the
metope  could  only  have  been  pushed  into  it  from  the  sicie,  not  slipped
down  into  it  from  above.  This  observation,  which  is  due  to  Dr.
Ddrpfeld,  is  of  some  importance  for  the  history  of  the  temple-sculp-
tures. (But  might  not  the  faces  of  the  metopes  have  been  sculptured
after  the  blocks  were  fitted  into  their  places  ?)  The  floor  of  the  fore-
temple  contains  the  remains  of  a  Greek  mosaic,  composed  of  rough
round  pe.bb'-cs  from  the  river  imbedded  in  hard  mortar  and  arranged
so  as  to  represent  Tritons  and  Sirens  within  a  border  of  palmettes  and
meandering  lines.  See  Blouet,  Expid,  Scientif,  de  Morie  :  Architecture ^
I.  pi.  63  and  64;  Olympia:  Ergebnisse^  Textband  2.  p.  1^0  sq,  ;  id.^
Tafelband  2.  pi.  cv.  This  mosaic  is  of  special  interest  as  being
perhaps  the  only  extant  specimen  of  an  ancient  Greek  pavement  in  a
mosaic  pattern.  It  is  certainly  later  than  the  temple,  but  nevertheless
dates  from  Greek  not  Roman  times.  It  is  now  covered  up  in  order  to
preserve  it.

Of  the  great  door  which  led  into  the  cella  or  great  central  hall  of

the  temple  very  few  traces  survive  on  the  threshold,  enough  however

to  show  that  its  breadth  was  about  5  metres.     The  cella  itself  measured

28.74  metres  in  length  by  13.26  metres  in  breadth,  and  was  divided

longitudinally  by  two  rows  of  Doric  columns  into  three  aisles,  namely

a  central  aisle  or  nave  6.50  metres  wide,  and  two  narrower  side  aisles.

Each    row  of  columns  comprised  seven    columns  and   two   pilasters.

Their  height  is  unknown.     The  lowest  drums  of  the  columns  are  still

standing  in  their  places.     The  ceiling  was  doubtless  of  wood,  but  its

height  and  structure  are  not  kno\\Ti.     Above  the  side  aisles,  to  judge

from    Pausanias's    description  (v.    10.    10),   there  seem  to  have  been

galleries,  which  may  have  been  constructed  for  the  special  purpose  of

allowing  visitors  to  approach  the  great  image.     No  other  Greek  temple

is  kno>\Ti  to  have  had  such  galleries.

The  inner  arrangement  of  the  cella  can  still  be  made  out  with
certainty.  The  side  aisles  were  partitioned  off  from  the  central  nave
l>y  screens   which  extended  between  the  columns.     Only  the  spaces


500  THE  TEMPLE  OF  ZEUS  bk.  v.  eus

between  the  first  pair  of  columns  on  each  side  were  open  to  allow  of
access  to  the  side  aisles.  In  the  third  to  the  fifth  intercolumniatioQ
the  screens  were  formed  of  slabs  of  conglomerate,  of  which  portions
still  remain.  From  the  fifth  to  the  eighth  intercolumniation  the  screens
were  of  some  other  material,  probably  of  metal ;  traces  of  them  may  be
seen  on  the  floor  as  well  as  the  holes  in  the  columns  in  which  they  were
fastened.  Each  side  aisle  was  closed  at  the  end  by  a  door  placed
between  the  second  column  and  the  wall.

The  central  nave  was  divided  from  east  to  west  into  four  sections.
The  first  or  most  easterly  section  was  about  7.50  metres  long  and«i3
divided  from  the  next  by  a  screen  or  barrier.  Its  floor,  at  the  time  of
the  excavations,  showed  some  scanty  traces  of  a  Roman  mosaic  pave-
ment resembling  the  one  which  still  exists  in  the  fore-temple ;  but  these
traces  seem  now  to  have  vanished  entirely ;  the  present  writer  looked
in  vain  for  them.  This  first  section  of  the  central  nave  was  clearijr
open  to  the  public.  Not  so  the  second  section,  which,  as  we  have
seen,  was  shut  off  from  the  first  by  a  screen  or  barrier.  This  sec<ffld
section  is  about  9.50  metres  long  and  extended  up  to  the  basis  of  the
great  image  of  Zeus.  The  floor  is  composed  of  two  parts.  The  first
part,  comprising  about  a  third  of  the  whole,  is  paved  with  slabs  of
conglomerate.  The  rest  was  paved  with  flags  of  black  Eleusinian
limestone,  many  pieces  of  which  were  found  lying  about  in  the  cdhu
Round  about  this  square  pavement  of  black  limestone  ran  a  raised
border  or  ledge  of  white  Pentelic  marble.  Some  of  the  sr  ones  of  this
ledge  were  discovered  in  their  original  places ;  others,  which  had  been
removed,  were  found  and  replaced.  They  may  now  be  seen  extending
between  and  in  front  of  some  of  the  columns.  From  the  way  in  whidi
the  black  limestone  pavement  with  its  white  marble  border  was  fitted
into  its  place  Dr.  Dorpfeld  concludes  that  it  formed  no  part  of  the
original  plan  and  must  have  been  put  in  at  some  time  after  the  temple
was  finished.  Further,  since  the  pedestal  of  the  great  image  was  made
of  the  same  black  Eleusinian  stone  as  the  pavement  (see  below},  and
^nce  the  pavement  must  have  been  constructed  at  the  same  time  that
the  image  was  set  up,  it  follows  that  the  temple  must  have  been  finished
some  time  (how  long  we  cannot  say)  before  Phidias  erected  his  great
image  of  Zeus  in  it,  and  that  in  doing  so  he  made  some  changes  in  the
internal  arrangement  of  the  cella.  The  black  pavement  with  its  raised
edge  of  white  marble  answers  well  to  Pausanias's  description  of  it ;  the
only  mistake  he  has  made  is  in  saying  that  the  white  marble  is  Parian,
whereas  in  fact  it  is  Pentelic.

In  the  second   section  of  the  central   nave,   which   has  just  been
described,  probably  stood  the  altar  mentioned  by  Pausanias  (v.  14.  4)-
For  in  the  foundations  which  underlie  the  pavement  of  black  limestone
there   are   many  holes   which   were  obviously  made  for  fastening  the
bases  of  statues,  altars,  or  the  like.     On  three  sides  (north,  east,  and
south)  the  section  was  enclosed  by  screens  or  barriers  ;  on  the  fourth
side  (the  west)  it  was  bounded  by  the  base  of  the  great  image.     The
screens    were    made    of    stone,    and    extended    from    pillar   to   pillar.
Portions   of  them   can   still   be   seen.     Their  thickness   is  exactly  ^^^


CH.  X  THE  TEMPLE  OF  ZEUS  501

width  of  a  flute  of  the  columns.  Their  original  height  is  not  known.
In  the  middle  of  the  eastern  barrier  there  was  probably  a  double  folding
door.  But  this  eastern  barrier  has  disappeared,  leaving  only  scanty
marks  on  the  pavement  beside  the  columns.  On  the  inner  sides  of  the
5tone  screens  or  barriers  which  enclosed  this  second  section  of  the
lave  were  perhaps  painted  the  pictures  of  Panaenus  (see  Paus.  v.  1 1.
5  sq.^  No  vestige  of  these  paintings,  however,  is  left,  and  the  theory
:hat  they  were  painted  on  these  stone  screens  is  open  to  grave  objections
[see  below,  p.  536  sqq.)

The  third  section  or  compartment  of  the  central  nave  was  completely
Dccupied  by  the  base  of  the  great  image  of  Zeus.  The  base  was  6.65
metres  broad,  and  9.93  metres  long,  as  appears  from  the  marks  on  the
iloor.  It  was  constructed  of  bluish-black  Eleusinian  limestone ;  some
3f  the  blocks  have  been  found,  but  the  golden  reliefs  which  once
decorated  the  base  (Paus.  v.  1 1.  8)  have,  of  course,  disappeared.  From
the  dimensions  of  the  existing  blocks.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  infers  that  the
pedestal  was  1.09  metres  high.

"  Thus  from  the  existing  remains  we  are  able  to  form  a  fairly  clear
:onception  of  the  base  and  its  surroundings.  Let  us  suppose  that  we
lave  entered  the  cella  and  advanced  to  the  first  barrier.  We  see  before  *
js  first  of  all  a  pavement  composed  of  bluish-black  flags,  and  sur-
-ounded  by  a  raised  border  of  white  Pentelic  marble.  Above  this
xjrder  rise  on  both  sides  the  Doric  columns  of  the  interior,  the  intervals
jetween  them  being  filled  with  the  screens  on  which  are  the  many-
roloured  paintings  of  Panaenus.  Straight  in  front  of  us  stands  the
luge  base  of  the  image,  its  blue-black  stone  showing  up  well  against
he  border  of  white  marble.  Still  finer  is  the  effect  of  the  golden  reliefs
md  the  golden  ornaments  on  the  dark  Eleusinian  stone.  And  now  if
n  imagination  we  set  upon  this  base  the  mighty  image  fashioned  of
fold,  ivory,  and  ebony,  and  adorned  with  precious  stones,  we  can
mderstand  that  the  splendour  of  the  colours  alone  must  have  made  a
leep  impression  on  the  beholder"  (Dorpfeld).

Behind  the  image  was  a  narrow  space,  making  the  fourth  section  or
rompartment  of  the  central  nave,  and  forming  a  passage  which  united
he  side  aisles  at  the  back  of  the  image.  It  is  1.74  metres  wide,  and  in
:onstruction  matches  the  side  aisles  exactly.  Thus  it  was  possible  to
valk  round  the  image  by  going  down  one  of  the  side  aisles,  along  the
>assage  at  the  back  of  the  image,  and  then  returning  by  the  other  aisle.

Finally,  before  quitting  the  cella^  we  may  notice  at  its  eastern  end
:he  remains  of  what  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  staircase  which
Pausanias  mentions  (v.  10.  10)  as  leading  up  to  the  roof.  The  remains
consist  of  foundations  built  of  squared  blocks  with  holes  let  into  their
upper  surface  for  the  reception  of  strong  posts  or  pillars.  They  are  to  be
seen  on  either  side  of  the  cella^  between  the  wall  of  the  fore-temple
and  the  first  column  in  the  cella.  It  would  thus  appear  that  there  were
two  staircases  leading  up  to  the  galleries  and  so  to  the  roof

With  regard  to  the  lighting  of  the  temple,  Dr.  Dorpfeld  holds  that
here  was  no  opening  in  the  roof,  and  that  the  cella  was  lit  from  the
'oor  only.      It  is  true  that  some  fragments  of  tiles  with  oval  apertures


502  THE  TEMPLE  OF  ZEUS  bk.  v.  elb

in  the  middle  for  the  admission  of  light  have  been  found  at  Olympia.
But  these  apertures,  it  seems,  served  only  to  light  the  large  empty
space  between  the  sloping  roof  and  the  ceiling.  Tiles  with  similar
apertures  have  been  found  in  houses  at  Pompeii  as  well  as  on  the
Acropolis  of  Athens  and  in  the  temples  at  Bassae  and  Tegea.

See  W.  Dorpfeld,  in  Olympia:  Ergebnisse,  Textband  2.  pp.  5-19,  with  Ac
Appendix  by  G.  Treu,  pp.  22-27;  Olympia:  Ergebnisse^  Tafeiband  i.  plates  E.,
viii.-xvii.  ;  Die  Inschriften  von  Olympia^  Nos.  669,  681,  682;  Di€  Funic  v»
Olympia^  p.  32,  with  plates  xxxi.  -  xxxiii.  ;  Curtius  und  Adler,  Olympia  urn
Umgegettd^  p.  38  sq,  ;  Flasch,  *  Olympia*  (in  Eaumeister*s  Z>^ifi6ina^),  p  iioi
sq.  ;  Ad.  Botticher,  Olympia^^  p.  255  sqq.  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  339  sq.

Though  no  trace  of  an  earlier  temple  has  yet  been  found  under  the
existing  temple,  there  is  abundant   evidence  that  the   site  had  been
sacred  long  before  the  temple  was  built.     Two  layers  of  black  earth
or  ashes  were  discovered  extending  round  the  temple  on  the  south,
west,  north,  and  north-east  sides,  and  in  these  layers  was  a  multitnde
of  archaic    bronze  objects,   which    had  seemingly  been  deposited  as
votive  offerings  at  altars  ;  for  remains  of  one  or  two  altars  were  found
here  under  the  soil.     Among  the  bronzes  discovered  here  were  a  great
many   figures   of  animals ;    rude   human   figures ;    several    groups  d
women  dancing  in  a  circle ;  small  waggons ;  large  kettles  ;    pieces  of
cymbals ;    pieces  of  large  tripods ;  bands  decorated  \%dth   geometrical
patterns ;  clasps ;   needles ;   olive  leaves  from  wTeaths  ;  nails ;  arrow-
heads ;  spearheads ;  remains  of  decorated   rims  of  shields  ;   pieces  of
helmets   and    greaves ;    wheels ;    spiral  rings ;    sacrificial  cups ;    small
tripods;    many  fragments  of  vessels  made  of  sheet  -  bronze  ;    armlets;
pieces  of  necklaces  ;  and  remains  of  kettles  adorned  with  g^ffins.     To
the  south-west  of  the  temple  was  found  a  large  plate  of  bronze  adorned
with  interesting  archaic  reliefs,  which  are  arranged  in  four  horizontal
bands.      In  the  uppermost  band  are  represented   some  birds  ;  in  the
second,  two  griffins  are  facing  each  other ;  in  the   third,   Hercules  is
shooting  an  arrow  at  a  Centaur ;  in  the  lowest  a  winged  goddess  is
holding  a  lion  head  downwards  in  each   hand.     See    Furtwangler,  in
0/y?npia:  Ergebnisse^  Textband  4.  p.  4  sq,  ;    Die  Ausgrabungen  von
Olympia^  3   (187 7- 1878),  pi.  xxiii.  :  Die  Funde  von  Olympia^  pi.  xx^i
As  to  the  large  bronze  relief,  see  E.  Curtius,  *  Das  archaische  B^onz^
relief  aus  Olympia,'  Abhandlungen  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Berlin.
1879;  id.^  GesaDwu  Abhandlungen^  2.  pp.  244-270.

10,  2.  It  is  made  of  native  congloinerate.  As  already  obsened.
the  stone  of  which  the  temple  of  Zeus  (as  well  as  most  of  the  buildings
at  Olympia)  is  built  is  a  coarse  shell-conglomerate  or  shell-limestone,  to
which  here  and  in  vi.  1 9.  i  Pausanias  gives  the  name  of  poros  (mpos)
It  is  quarried  near  the  sacred  precinct,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the
Alpheus  (Olympia:  Ergebnisse,  Textband  2.  p.  6).  The  ancients  seem
not  to  have  been  consistent  in  their  use  of  the  term  poros;  for  Theo-
phrastus  (De  lapidibus,  i.  7)  describes  poros  as  a  stone  resembling
Parian  marble  in  its  colour  and  the  closeness  of  its  grain,  but  not  so
heavy,  **  whence,"  proceeds  Theophrastus,  "the  Egyptians  make  a
band  of  it  in  their  fine  buildings."     Now,  no  stone  could  be  more  unlike


CH.  X  POROS  STONE  503

the  glistering  white  Parian  marble  with  its  crystalline  structure  than
the  coarse,  gritty,  dull-coloured  conglomerate  to  which  Pausanias  gives
the  name  oi poros,  Pliny's  description  oiporos  is  borrowed  from  Theo-
phrastus  {Nat,  hist,  xxxvi.  132).  Pollux  mentions  poros  stone,  but
does  not  describe  it  (vii.  123;  x.  173).  Herodotus  contrasts  poros
with  Parian  marble,  the  latter  being  the  finer  stone  (Herod,  v.  62).
Herodotus  and  Pausanias  would  probably  have  applied  the  name  poros
to  any  common  building-stone  except  marble.  In  this  loose  sense  the
name  poros  is  commonly  used  by  modem  archaeologists.  Mr.  H.  S.
Washington  remarks :  "  There  is  great  lack  of  definiteness  in  the  use
of  the  word  poros,  which  is  made  to  include  almost  all  soft,  light-
coloured  stones,  not  palpably  marble  or  hard  limestone.  In  the
majority  of  cases  it  is  a  sort  of  travertine,  again  a  shell-conglomerate,
and  occasionally  a  sandstone  or  some  decomposed  rock,  containing  ser-
pentine or  other  hydrated  minerals  .  .  .  Some  proper  understanding
should  be  arrived  at  on  the  subject,  and  the  different  kinds  better  dis-
criminated, as  in  some  cases  the  differences  are  important "  {American
Journal  of  Archaeology,  7  (1891),  p.  395,  note  i).  Mr.  Philippson
defines  poros  as  "  a  coarse,  granular,  calcareous  sandstone,  of  a  grey  or
yellowish  colour,  easily  wrought,  and  quarried  in  large  blocks,  much
used  as  building  material  both  in  antiquity  and  at  the  present  day"
(Philippson,  Peloponnes,  p.  408,  cp.  p.  416).  The  French  geologists  of
the  Expedition  de  Morie  understood  by  poros  a  limestone,  which  forms
the  uppermost  section  of  a  tertiary  formation  that  encircles  the  whole  of
Peloponnese,  appearing  almost  everywhere  where  the  land  is  but  little
raised  above  sea-level.  This  limestone  is  of  fine  grain,  and  whitish  or
yellowish  colour ;  it  seldom  contains  any  fossils,  and  forms  an  excellent
building  material.  Ancient  Corinth  seems  to  have  been  entirely  built
of  this  stone ;  there  are  immense  quarries  of  it  on  the  roads  from
Corinth  to  Cenchreae  and  Megara.  There  is  also  a  ver>'  large  deposit
of  it  between  Nauplia  and  Epidaurus,  in  a  valley  enclosed  by  the
high  chain  of  Mt.  Arachnaeus  and  a  parallel  range  of  hills.  Here  it
is  bedded  in  thick  and  regular  layers  of  whitish  or  yellowish  colour  and
a  fine  close  grain.  See  Expedition  scientifique  de  iMortfe,  vol.  2.  part  2,
'Geologic  et  Mineralogie,'  pp.  216-230.

10.  3.  The  tiles  are of  Pentelic  marble.    Many  of  these  tiles

have  been  found.  See  above,  p.  496  sg.  The  roof,  as  we  have  seen,  was
originally  covered  with  tiles  of  Parian  marble,  for  which  at  a  later  time,
apparently  in  the  Roman  period,  tiles  of  Pentelic  marble  were  substi-
tuted. This  is  one  among  many  proofs  that  Pausanias  described
Olympia  as  it  was  in  his  own  day,  not  as  it  was  in  the  time  of  Polemo
(about  200  B.C.),  as  some  of  his  modem  critics  maintain.

10.  3.  this  was  a  contrivance  of  Byzes,  a  Naxian.  Mr.  Richard
Lepsius,  a  geologist  who  has  made  a  special  study  of  Greek  marbles,
has  found  that  the  roof-tiles  of  some  of  the  older  Greek  temples  are  of
Naxian  marble.  This,  combined  with  Pausanias's  statement  that  the
inventor  of  roof-tiles  was  a  Naxian,  goes  to  show  that  the  manufacture
of  these  tiles  was  at  one  time  a  regular  industry  in  Naxos.  See  G.  R.
Lepsius,    Griechischc   Marmorstiidien   (Berlin,    1890),    pp.    123,    128;


504  THE  TEMPLE  OF  ZEUS  bk.  v.  eus

American  Journal  of  Archaeology^  7  (1891,  p.  460).  On  ma^bl^
cutting  in  Naxos,  see  B.  Sauer,  *Altnaxische  Marmorkunst,'  Mittkdl
d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  17  (1892),  pp.  37-79-

10.  4.  The  inscription  on  the  shield  etc  A  fragment  of  the  in-
scription quoted  by  Pausanias  has  been  found  at  Olympia  engraved  oa
three  broken  pieces  of  a  marble  block,  which  from  its  shape  appears  to
have  been  placed  on  the  apex  of  the  gable,  thus  : —


The  recovered  fragment  runs  thus  : —

V  €\€L^   €K  0€

fjLa\la  r   av
vaiiav  koX

CKtt  rOV  TTO

Thus  so  far  as  it  goes  the  inscription  agrees  exactly  with  the  copy  of
it  given  by  Pausanias,  except  that  in  the  fourth  line  the  stone  has  die
ordinar>'  genitive  form  tov,  where  Pausanias  gives  the  Doric  form  m
From  this  use  of  the  ordinary  (not  the  Doric)  genitive,  and  from  the
occurrence  of  X  (  =  ch)  in  the  inscription,  it  would  seem  that  the
inscription  was  cut  by  a  Corinthian,  not  a  Laconian,  stone-mason.  Dr.
Purgold  conjectures  that  the  metal  shield  itself  was  made  at  Corinth,
which  was  famed  for  its  metal  work  This  conjecture  is  confirmed  by
the  occurrence  of  the  letters  KOP  on  the  stone  underneath  the
metrical  inscription.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  inscription  was  en-
graved, not  (as  we  should  infer  from  Pausanias)  upon  the  shield  itself,
but  upon  the  marble  block  which  supported  the  shield.  Dr.  Purgold
has  pointed  out  that  elsewhere  (vi.  1.  4  and  7  ;  vi.  10.  7  ;  vi.  12.  7,
etc.)  Pausanias  speaks  of  inscriptions  upon  statues,  where  the  inscrip-
tions were  really  upon  the  bases  which  supported  the  statues.  In  such
expressions  Pausanias  appears  to  treat  statue  and  base  as  a  single
indivisible  whole.

See  Olympia:  Ergebnisse^  Text  band  ^,  Die  Inschrifteny  No.  253;
Purgold,  in  ArchacologiscJu  Zeitung^  40  (1882),  pp.  179-190;  Roehl,
/.  G.  A,  No.  26a,  p.  171  ;  Roberts,  Greek  Epigraphy^  No.  93.  On  the
custom  of  dedicating  arms  in  temples,  see  W.  Greenwell,  '  Votive
armour  and  arms,' y<?wr//.  of  Hell.  Stud,  2  (1881),  pp.  65-82.

10.  4.  The  temple  hath  a  golden  shield.  The  Greek  word  here
translated  *  shield'  is  </)taA?;,  which  properly  means  *a  broad  fiat
bowl,'  but  is  sometimes  used  poetically  in  the  sense  of  'shield.'  Cp.
Aristotle,  Rhetoric^  iii.  4.  4,  iii.  1 1.  11  and  13  ;  id.y  Poetics^  21.

10.  4-  I  mentioned  this  battle  etc.     See  i.  29.  9.

10.  5.  On  the  outside  of  the  frieze  are  one-and-twenty

gilded  shields.     The  marks  of  attachment  of  these  shields  can  still  be
discerned  on  the  metopes.     See  above,  p.  496.

10.  6.  in  the  front  gable  there  is  represented  the  chariot-race
between  Pelops  and  Oenomaus  about  to  begin  etc     The  legend  of


w.  X         SCULPTURES  OF  THE  EAST  GABLE  505

he  chariot-race  between  Pelops  and  Oenomaus  was  as  follows.  Oeno-
naus,  king  of  £lis  and  Pisa,  had  a  fair  daughter  Hippodamia,  whom  he
B^s  unwilling  to  give  in  marriage,  either  because  he  loved  her  so  fondly
hat  he  was  loath  to  part  from  her,  or  because  he  had  been  informed  by
.n  oracle  that  he  would  perish  at  the  hands  of  his  son-in-law.  So  when
nany  wooers  came  courting  his  daughter,  he  offered  to  give  her  in
narriage  to  any  of  them  who  would  run  a  chariot-race  with  him  and  win
he  race.  The  race  was  run  from  the  Cladeus  at  Olympia  to  the  altar  i ,
>f  Poseidon  on  the  Isthmus  of  Corinth.  The  suitor  was  allowed  to  start
irst,  taking  with  him  the  princess  Hippodamia  in  his  chariot.  Mean-
ime  Oenomaus  sacrificed  a  ram  to  Zeus,  and  then  started  in  pursuit,
irandishing  a  spear,  while  his  charioteer  Myrtilus  guided  the  horses.
f  he  overtook  the  suitor  he  ran  him  through  with  his  spear,  and  in  this
vay  he  slew  thirteen  of  his  daughter's  suitors,  and  fastened  their  heads
>ver  the  door  of  his  palace.  But  Pelops,  when  he  came  a-wooing,  bribed
Vlyrtilus  to  leave  out  the  pins  of  Oenomaus's  chariot- wheels  or  to  put
vaxen  instead  of  bronze  pins  into  the  axles.  So  in  the  race  the  chariot
>f  Oenomaus  came  to  the  ground,  and  the  king  himself  was  killed.
Thus  Pelops  won  the  hand  of  the  princess  and  the  kingdom  to  boot.
>ee  Diodorus,  iv.  73;  Schol.  on  Pindar,  01,  i.  114  ;  Schol.  on  Apol-
onius  Rhodius,  i.  752  ;  SchoL  on  Euripides,  Orestes^  990  ;  Tzetzes,
Schoi.  on  Lycophron,  1 56 ;  Hyginus,  Fad.  84 ;  Servius  on  Virgil,
"jeorg.  iii.  7.

Pausanias  tells  us  that  in  the  front  or  eastern  gable  of  the  temple  of
ieus  there  were  sculptures  representing  Oenomaus  and  Pelops  preparing
or  the  chariot-race,  and  he  has  described  thirteen  human  figures,  as
A'ell  as  the  horses  of  the  two  chariots,  all  of  which  stood  in  the  gable.
rhese  thirteen  figures,  together  with  the  eight  horses  (four  horses  for
jach  chariot),  were  found  by  the  German  archaeologists  at  Olympia :
ind  since,  when  arranged  in  the  gable,  they  are  seen  to  have  occupied
:he  whole  of  it,  leaving  no  room  for  any  other  figures,  we  may  feel  sure
:hat  Pausanias  has  described  and  that  we  possess  all  the  figures  that
;ver  stood  in  this  gable.  It  is  true  that  the  figures  are  more  or  less
mutilated,  but  enough  remains  to  allow  us  to  restore  them  with  tolerable
:ertainty.  The  figures  are  one  half  larger  than  life  size,  and  are  wrought
n  the  round,  though  at  the  back  they  are  left  rough.  The  only
exception  is  presented  by  six  of  the  horses,  three  in  each  team,  which
u-e  worked  in  moderate  relief,  while  the  remaining  two  horses  (the  out-
;ide  horse  in  each  team)  are  carved  out  of  separate  blocks,  and  were
ttached  to  the  other  horses  only  by  dowels.  The  marble  of  all  the
gures  is  Parian.

The  disposition  of  the  figures  in  the  gable  has  given  rise  to  much
iscussion,  and  many  different  arrangements  have  been  suggested.  A
>ecial  study  of  the  subject  has  been  made  for  many  years  by  Prof.  G.
reu,  and  the  arrangement  which,  after  various  changes,  he  has  adopted
ay  be  regarded  as  the  best  which  has  yet  been  proposed.  It  has  been
rcepted  by  Prof.  Overbeck,  and  is  likely  in  time  to  be  recognised  as
lal.  It  is  here  reproduced  (Plate  ix.  a).  For  convenience  of  reference
e    figures  are  lettered  from  left  to  right  (south  to  north)  ABC,  etc.


SCULPTURES  OF  THE  EAST  GABLE


so;


Fig.  58  a  view  is  given  of  Ihe  central  figures  of  the  gable,  as  they
arranged  in  the  Museum  at  Olympia.  But  that  arrangement  differs
tome  particulars  from  that  of  Prof.  Treu.  See  beloiv.
The  three  figures,  as  to  the  position  of  which  there  is  no  room  for
stion,  are  the  colossal  standing  figure  of  Zeus  in  the  middle,  and  the
I  reclining  figures  at  the  extremities,  which  Pausanias  calls  Alpheus
I  Cladeus.  With  regard  to  the  figure  of  Zeus,  though  Pausanias  calls
n  image,  the  sculptor  would  rather  seem  to  have  intended  to  represent
IS  as  witnessing  the  scene  in  person,  though  probably  invisible  to  the
nan  acton  in  it ;  at  least  his  free  and  dignified  bearing  is  suggestive


he  god  himself  rather  than  a  mere  image.  Next  to  him  on  either
i  stand  the  two  men  who  are  about  to  race,  Pelops  and  Oenomaus.
las,  indeed,  been  proposed  by  Messrs.  Brunn,  Sauer,  and  Six  to  place

two  women  Hippodamia  and  Sterope  next  to  Zeus ;  but  this  con-
diets  the  description  of  Pausanias,  and  considerations  of  space  have,

a  careful  examination,  proved  it  10  be  impossible.  The  bearded
eriy  man  is  of  course  Oenomaus  ;  the  younger  beardless  man  is  Pelops.
ops  stands  on  the  right  (the  lucky  side}  of  Zeus,  and  the  god's  head  is
ned  towards  him  but  away  from  Oenomaus,  thus  indicating  that  Pelops,
the  favour  of  Zeus,  is  to  win  the  race.  This  arrangement  of  Pelops  and
j  to  the  right  and  left  of  Zeus  is  at  first  sight  contradicted  by


SoS  SCULPTURES  OF  THE  EAST  GABLE

Pausanias,  who  says  that  Oenomaus  was  to  the  right,  and  Pelops  to  ibt
left,  of  Zeus.     Boi  here  as  elsewhere  {e.g.  v.  13.  i)  Pausanias  u
terms  '  right '  and  '  left '  in  the  sense  of  the  spectators  right  and  left :  w
that  in  the  present  passage  '  right '  means  north,  and  left  means  ■  sonih,'
This  is  confirmed  by  the  consideration  that,  thus  interpreted,  Pausar.iis
assigns  the  river  gods  Cladeus  and  Alphcni
appropriately  to  ihe  northern  and  souihtni
extremities  of  the  gable  respectively.
fact  that  Pelops  and  Oenotnaus  are
turning  their  backs  to  Zeus  seems  to  piDie
[hat  the  god  is  supposed  to  be  invisible  w
[hem.     Next  to  Oenomaus  in  the  nonhen
half  of  the  gable  stands  his  wife  Steropt
and  next  to  Pelops  in  the  southern  halfrf
the   gable  stands   his    love,    Hippodamii
(Fig.  60).     These  two  female  figures  wttt
formerly   transposed,   Sterope   (K*}  be-.nj
placed   in   the  southern  half  of  the  gabl(
beside    Pelops  and   denominated    HIppn-
damia,  while  Hippodamia  (F*)  was  placed
in  the  northern   half  of  the  gable  beside
Oenomaus  and  denominated  Sterojje.  The
correction  is  due  to  Prof,  Studnicdia,  «'
pointed  out  that  F*,  draped  in  the  light
attire    of   a    Spartan    maiden,    must    I
Hippodamia,  and  cannot  possibly  represeEi
the  matronly  and  queenly  Sterope,  »ho,    I
as  K*,  is  marked  out  by  her  richer  costume
and   more   dignified    bearing.       The    ne«
.arrangement    is    decisively    confirmed   hy
technical  considerations  of  space  ;  it  would
be  impossible,  for  example,  to  briny  inc
^pear  of  I'eiops  past  the  left  arm  of  K*.
PH..  fo.  — HiproivAMiA  (FiioM  Tus     ^hercss  the  left  shoulder  of  F*  appears  1.1
!.)■  ZEIS).  have  been  made  lower  than   was  natural

on  purpose  10  make  room  for  the  right  arra
of  Pelops.  Sterope  is  supposed  by  Prof.  Treu  to  have  been  holdinj
a  sacrificial  bowl  or  basket  in  her  right  hand— a  hint  of  the  sacrifice
which,  according  to  the  legend,  Oenomaus  used  to  offer  before  starling.
(Note  that  in  Fig,  5S  the  old  arrangement  of  Sterope  and  Hippodamia
is  followed,  the  illustration  being  from  a  photograph  of  [he  sculptures
in  the  Museum  at  Olympia,  where  the  new  arrangement  has  not  ye:
been  adopted.)

Ne."!!  after  Sterope  and  Hippodamia  there  is  on
1  seated  in  front  of  the  chariot  and  horses,


each  side  of  the
n  accordance  «i:h
seated  figure  in


gable

the  description  of  Pausanias,  though,  to  be

front  of  the  horses  of  Pelops  appears  to  be  a  lad  rather  than  a

The   man   seated   in    front   of  the   chariot   of  Oenomaus   is   the

Myrtilus,  as  we  learn  from  Pausanias.     As  for  the  chariots,  they


SCULPTURES  OF  THE  EAST  CABLE


5^9


mentioned  by  Pausanias,  who  speaks  only  of  the  horses.  Bui  since,  in
irefeiring  to  the  chariot-race  at  Olympla,  he  constantly  speaks  of  horses
only,  when  he  means  chariots  and  horses,  this  silence  on  his  part  does
not  prove  that  the  chariots  were  not  represented  in  the  gable...  It  is
true  that  the  chariots  have  not  been  found  nor  any  fragment  of  them ;


but  that  they  figured  in  the  gable  is  demonstrated  by  the  marks  of
attachment  on  the  horses.  For  example,  in  Pelops's  team  there  is  a
leaden  dowel  for  fastening  the  yoke,  and  in  the  hind  legs  of  the  middle
^  '  horses  there  are  square  holes  in  which  the  poles  of  the  chariots  were
;  inserted.

Behind  the  chariot  of  Oenomaus  is  seated  a  stately  old  man  (N)  in
I  a  musing  attitude,  with  his  head  resting  on  his  right  hand,  and  a  far-
away expression  on  his  face  (Fig.  61).    He  seems  plunged  in  melancholy
-\  thought  It  has  been  suggested  that  he  is  a  seer  who  foresees  and  deplores
;   his   master's  approaching  doom.      Corresponding  to   him  on   the  other
:  (southern)  side  of  the  gable  is  a  man  (C)  kneeling  behind  the  chariot  of
:   Pelops.      From  the  marks  of  attachment  of  the  horses'  reins  it  appears
:  that  they  were  carried  backwards,  not  grasped  by  the  lad  who  is  seated
.   in  front  of  the  horses.     Probably  therefore  they  were  held  by  the  man
who  is  kneeling  behind  the  chariot.     If  this  was  so,  it  follows  that  this
leneeling  man  (C)  is  Cillas,  the  charioteer  of  Pelops,  and  that  Pausanias
is  wrong  in  identifying  as  Cillas  the  lad  seated  in  front  of  the  chariot.
Behind  the  musing  greybeard  (N)  on  the  north  side  of  the  gable  is  a
kneeling  maiden  (O),  whom  Pausanias  clearly  mistook  for  a  man  ;  for
he  says  that  behind  the  chariot  of  Oenomaus  were  two  men,  who  seemed
to  be  in  charge  of  the  horses.      The  kneeling  damsel  is  probably  a  hand-
maid of  Sieropc,  but  what  exactly  she  is  supposed  to  be  doing  has  not


Sio  SCULPTURES  OF  THE  EAST  CABLE  Bk.  v.  elis

been  made  out.  Corresponding  to  her  on  the  other  (southern)  side  cs
the  gable  is  a  young  man  (B)  kneeling  and  apparently  assisting  Cilks
in  holding  the  reins.  He  is  one  of  the  two  grooms  mentioned  by
Pausanias.  It  thus  appears  that  while  Myrtilus,  the  charioteer  of
Oenomaus,  was  represented  silting  quietly  in  front  of  the  horses,  Ihe
charioteer  of  Pclops  was  represented  kneeling  behind  the  chariot  iDd
handling  the  reins  as  if  preparing  to  start.  Tnis  difference  in  the
altitude  of  the  two  charioteers  is  plausibly  explained  by  Prof.  Trtu.  He
reminds  us  that  in  the  legend  the  suitors  were  allowed  to  start  befoit
Oenomaus  ;  and  that  Pelops,  as  one  of  them,  would  enjoy  this  privilegt.
Hence  by  the  difference  between  the  attitudes  of  the  two  charioteers—
the  nonchalance  of  Myrtilus  on  the  one  side  and  the  alertness  of  CilliS
on  the  other — -the  sculptor  may  well  have  intended  to  hint  that  tk
chariot  of  Pclops  was  to  be  off  first.

Lastly,  at  the  two  extremities  of  the  gables  are  the  two  recliniog  malt
figures  (A  and  P)  which  Pausanias  interpreted  as  the  river  gods  -■Upheui
and  Cladeus  respectively.  This  interpretation  was  formerly  supposed  to
be  confirmed  by  the  reclining  figures  in  the  extremities  of  the  western
gable,  which  were  believed  to  represent  local  nymphs.  Now,  however,
that  these  latter  figures  are  more  plausibly  explained  as  Lapitb  women
(see  below,  p.  523),  it  seems  probable  that  the  reclining  male  figures  in
the  eastern  gable  are  not  gods  but  merely  human  spectators  of  the  scent
which  is  taking  place  in  the  centre.


Thus  it  will  be  obsened  that  the  figures  on  each  side  of  the  central
fijltire  of  Zeus  fall  into  pairs,  each  figure  on  the  one  side  being  matched
by  a  figure  on  the  other  side  which  corresponds  to  it  in  position  anJ
attitude.  Thus  Pelops  is  matched  by  Oenomaus,  HippodamiabySteropt.
and  so  on  through  all  the  rest.  The  responsion  is  more  exact  in  Prpf-
Treu's  arrangement  of  the  figures  than  in  any  other,  and  this  is  a  siion);
argument  in  favour  of  adopting  it.

A  few  traces  of  colour  have  been  discovered  on  the  sculptures  of  ihe
eastern  gable,  making  it  probable  that  originally  they  were  all  painted.


c  SCULPTURES  OF  THE  EAST  GABLE  511

vestiges  in  question  were  detected  on  the  lips  of  the  musing  old
(N)  and  the  tails  of  the  horses.

>n  the  sculptures  of  the  eastern  gable,  their  technique,  arrangement,  etc. ,  see
reu  in  Olympia:  Ergebnisse^  Textband  3.  pp.  44-69,  1 14- 130  ;  id.^  *Technik

Bemalung  der  olympischen  Giebelgruppen,*  Jahrbtich  d,  arch,  Inst.  10
5),  pp.  1-35;  «</.,  'Die  Anordnung  der  Statuen  im  Ostgiebel  des  Zeus-
^^isy*  Archdologische  Zeitung^  40  (1882),  pp.  215-248;  «/.,  *  Die  Anordnung
Ostgiebels,*  etc.,  in  Jahrbiuh  d.  archaeolog,  Instiiuts,  4  (1889),  pp.  266-
;  iJ.y  *Zum  olympischen  Ostgiebel,'  MittheiL  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  14
5),   pp.  287-300;  !</.,  \n  Berliner  philolog.    Wochenschrift^  1889,  pp.   1573-

;  id.y  *Die  neueste  Versuche  zur  Anordnung  des  olympischen  Ostgiebels,*
buck  d.  archdol.  Inst.  6  (1891),  pp.  63-65;  ia.^  *Nochmals  die  olympischen
•el,'  ib.  pp.  98-105  ;  id.,  in  Berlifur philolog.  Wochenschrifty  1892,  p.  1186  j^.;
urtius,  in  Die  Funde  von  Olympia,  p.  1 1  sqq. ;  id.,  *Die  Giebelgruppen  des  Zeus-
)els  in  Olympia  und  die  rothfigurigen  Vasen,'  Archdologische  Zeitung,  41  (1883),
347-360  (reprinted  in  the  writer's  Gesammelte  Abhandlungen^  2.  pp.  304-
;  id.,  •  Studien  iiber  die  Tempelgiebel  von  Olympia,'  Sitzungsberichte  of  the
sian  Academy,  Berlin,  1883,  No.  33  ;  id.,  in  Archdologische  Zeitung,  42
4),  pp.  220-222;  id.,  *Die  Tempelgiebel  von  Olympia,'  Abhatullungen  of  the
sian  Academy,  Berlin,  1891  (reprinted  in  Gesammelte  Abhandlungen,  2.  pp.
358)  ;  L.  Uriichs,  Bemerkungen  iiber  den  olympischen  Tempel  und  seine
ivcrke  (Wllrzburg,  1 877) ;  Fr.  Studniczka,  *Zum  Ostgiebel  des  Zeustempels  in
npia,'  Archdologische  Zeitung,  42  (1884),  pp.  281-286;  C.  Waldstein,  *The
\m  pediment  of  the  tempel  oiZtyx^^  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  5  (1884),  pp.
204  ;  R.  Kekul^,  *  Die  Anordnung  der  Figuren  im  Ostgiebel  des  Zeustempels
)lympia,'  Rheinisches  Museum,  N.F.  39  (1884),  pp.  481-490;  id.,  Rhein.
eum,  N.F.  40  (1885),  p.  308  sq.  ;  Graef,  *Zu  den  Skulpturen  von  Olympia,'
heil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,  13  (1888),  pp.  402-407  ;  G.  Loeschcke,  Die
iche  Giebelgrtippe  am  Zeustempel  zu  Olympia  (Dorpat,  1885);  H.  Brunn,
her  Giebelgruppen,'  Sitzungsberichte  d.  k.  bayer.  Akad.  d.  Wissen.,  Philos.-
)log.  Classe,  1888,  pp.  182-187  J  ?•  Weizsacker,  *Zur  ostlichen  Giebelgruppe
Zeustempels  zu  Olympia,'  Korresp.  Bl.f.  d.  Gel.  und  Realsch.  1887,  pp.  1-8 ;
ix,  *  On  the  composition  of  the  eastern  pediment,'  etc..  Journal  of  Hellenic
Hes,  10  (1889),  pp.  98-116  ;  P.  Monceaux  and  V.  Laloux,  *  Restauration  des
:ons  d'Olympie,'  Revtte  ArcUologique,  3rd  series,  14  (1889),  pp.  55-58;  Frie-
:hs-\Volters,  Gipsabgiisse,  p.  I23J^^.;  A.  S.  ^\Mxxz.y,  History  of  Greek  Sculpture,
•  157 -^S^^*;  Overbeck,  Griech.  Plastik,^  i.  pp.  309-317;  Lucy  M.  Mitchell,
lent  Sculpture,  261-266;  Ad.  Botticher,  Olympiad  pp.  261-277;  Flasch,
^mpia,'  in  Baumeister's  Dtnkmdler,  pp.   1104X-1104DD  ;   Baedeker,'  p.  350

Guide-Joanm,  2.  p.  356  sq.;  G.  Korte,  *  Der  Ostgiebel  des  Zeustempels  in
Ti^iai,  Berliner  philolog.  IVochenschrift,  12(1892),  pp.  983-989;  Furtw'angler,
>.  1282  j^^.;  Br.  Sauer,  *Der  Ostgiebel  des  olympischen  Zeustempels, 'yiz^r-

d.  archdolog.  Instituis,  6  (1891),  pp.  9-42  ;  Collignon,  Histoirede  la  Sculpture
que,  I.  pp.  43^-444-

10.  7.  Sphaerus Cillas.     As  to  Sphaerus,  see  ii.  33.  i.     The

rioteer  of  Pelops  is  called  Cillas  by  Eustathius  (on  Homer,  //.  i.  38),
Cillus  by  Strabo  (xiii.  p.  613),  a  scholiast  on  Homer  (//.  ii.  38),  and
holiast  on  Euripides  {Orestes,  990).  According  to  the  scholiast  on
ner  {i.e.),  Cillus  died  in  Lesbos,  and  his  ghost  appeared  in  a  dream
i^elops,  who  gave  him  a  splendid  funeral,  heaped  a  barrow  over  his
is,  and  founded  a  sanctuary  of  Cillaean  Apollo  beside  the  barrow,
ibo  {i.e.)  describes  the  tomb  of  Cillus  (Cillas)  as  a  great  mound
de  the  sanctuary  of  Cillaean  Apollo  in  the  territory  of  Adramyttiimi.
f.  C.  Robert  sees  in  this  connexion  of  Cillas  with  Lesbos  a  proof
in  the  original  version  of  the  legend  Oenomaus  and  Hippodamia
>nged  not  to  Olympia  but  to  Lesbos  {Bild  und  Lied^  P*  187  note).


512  THE  GABLE  SCULPTURES  bk.  v.  eus

10.  8.  The  flgures  in  the  front  gable  are  by  Paeonins the

figures  in  the  back  gable  are  by  Alcamenes.  Few  statements  of
Pausanias  have  given  rise  to  so  much  divergence  of  opmion  as  this.
The  views  of  archaeologists  on  the  subject  seem  almost  to  exhaust  the
possibilities  of  difference.  Messrs.  Brunn,  Curtius,  Loeschcke,  and  W.
Gurlitt  take  it  on  Pausanias's  authority  that  the  sculptures  of  the  eastern
(front)  gable  were  by  Paeonius,  those  of  the  western  (back)  gable  hy
Alcamenes.  Mr.  Murray  (History  of  Greek  Sculpture^  2.  p.  i6oi^f)
formerly  accepted  this  view ;  but  he  afterwards  expressed  an  opinion
(Academy^  2nd  October  i886)  that  the  sculptures  of  both  gables  are  by
Paeonius.  Mr.  Six,  on  the  contrary,  and  Dr.  Puchstein  think  that  both
are  by  Alcamenes.  Professors  Kekul^,  Furtwangler,  and  Reisch,  and
Messrs.  R.  Forster  and  Collignon  think  that  neither  Paeonius  nor
Alcamenes  had  any  hand  in  either  the  one  or  the  other  of  the  gables.
Overbeck  formerly  held  that  the  sculptures  of  the  east  and  west
gables  respectively  were  designed  by  Paeonius  and  Alcamenes,  but  that
the  execution  of  them  was  carried  out  by  the  local  stone-masons.  He
afterwards  modified  his  view,  and  inclined  to  agree  with  those  who  con-
sider that  neither  Paeonius  nor  Alcamenes  had  any  share  in  the  work.
To  discuss  fully  the  grounds  for  these  various  opinions  would  be  out  of
place  here ;  it  must  suffice  to  indicate  briefly  some  of  the  chief  con-
siderations which  have  weighed  with  archaeologists.

First,  as  to  Paeonius.  He  executed  for  the  Messenians  of  Naupactus
a  statue  of  Victory  which  was  set  up  at  01>'mpia.  This  statue
has  been  found.  It  stood  on  a  lofty  pedestal  facing  the  eastern
front  of  the  temple  of  Zeus.  (See  v.  26.  i  note.)  The  inscription
on  the  pedestal  declares  that  the  statue  is  a  tithe-offering  presented
to  Zeus  by  the  Messenians  and  Naupactians  from  the  spoil  taken
by  them  from  their  enemies ;  further,  that  the  statue  was  made  by
Paeonius  of  Mende,  who  "  was  also  victorious  in  making  the  akroteria
to  be  placed  upon  the  temple."  Those  who  deny  that  Paeonius  can
have  executed  the  sculptures  in  the  eastern  gable  urge  (i)  that  the  style
of  the  statue  of  Victory  by  Paeonius  is  so  wholly  unlike  that  of  the
gable  sculptures  that  it  is  impossible  that  they  can  have  been  executed
by  the  same  artist ;  (2)  that  in  the  inscription  in  question,  the  word
akroteria^  in  accordance  with  its  usual  sense,  must  refer  to  the  sculpture
placed,  not  within  the  gable,  but  upon  the  roof  at  the  three  angles  of  the
gable ;  in  fact  to  the  statues  of  Victory  and  the  gilded  vases  mentioned
by  Pausanias  in  §  4  of  this  chapter.  Hence  it  is  argued  that  Paeonius
cannot  have  made  the  sculptures  in  the  gables,  else  he  would  hzst
referred  to  them  in  the  inscription  on  the  statue  of  Victory  rather  than
to  the  less  important  akroteria;  for  the  inscribed  statue  of  Victory  which
has  been  found  is  undoubtedly  later  than  the  sculptures  in  the  gables.

Those  who  accept  Pausanias's  statement  that  Paeonius  made  the
sculptures  in  the  eastern  gable  endeavour  to  meet  these  difficulties  thus;
( I )  They  hold  that  the  statue  of  Victory',  though  different  in  style  from,
and  superior  to,  the  gable  sculptures,  may  be  a  later  work  of  the  same
artist,  executed  at  a  time  when  he  had  attained  a  fuller  mastery  oi\:^^^
art ;  (2)  they  think  that  akroteria  may  possibly  have  meant  *  the  figures


CH.  X  THE  GABLE  SCULPTURES  513


in  the  gable/  though  they  admit  that  the  regular  use  of  the  word  is
against  this  interpretation.  They  refer  to  Plutarch,  Caesar^  63,  and
Plato,  Critias^  1 1 6  D.  But  these  passages  certainly  do  not  bear  out
their  interpretation.

With  regard  to  Alcamenes,  it  is  argued  that  he  cannot  have  made
the  sculptures  in  the  west  gable,  because  ( i }  he  was  a  pupil  of  Phidias
(Pliny,  Nat,  hist,  xxxiv.  72,  xxxvi.  16),  and  the  sculptures  in  question
show  no  trace  of  the  Phidian  school.  (2)  He  is  known  to  have  been  at
work  as  late  as  403  or  402  B.C.  (see  ix.  11.  6) ;  therefore  he  can  hardly
have  executed  the  gable  sculptures  for  the  temple  of  Zeus,  which  was
finished  probably  not  later  than  450  and  perhaps  as  early  as  457  B.C.

In  reply  to  the  first  of  these  difliculties,  Brunn,  who  admitted  that
the  sculptures  of  the  west  pediment  show  no  trace  of  Phidian  influence,
suggested  that  they  may  have  been  executed  by  Alcamenes.  as  a  young
man  and  that  later  in  life  he  followed  Phidias  to  Athens  and,  after  an
attempt  to  rival  him  (cp.  Pliny,  iV.  H,  xxxiv.  49  and  Overbeck,  Schrift-
quelleny  §  810),  submitted  to  the  superior  genius  of  Phidias  and  became
his  pupil.  Prof.  Overbeck,  on  the  contrary,  held  that  the  sculptures
of  the  west  gable  contain  undoubted  reminiscences  of  the  Parthenon
sculptures  and  hence.must  be  later  than  they  are.  Mr.  Six,  admitting  the
resemblance,  inverts  the  inference,  supposing  that  one  of  the  pupils  of
Phidias  who  executed  the  Parthenon  sculptures  under  the  direction  of  the
master  must  at  some  earlier  time  have  seen  and  studied  the  gable
sculptures  at  Olympia.

As  to  the  second  difficulty,  it  is  replied  that  though  the  temple  itself
may  have  been  finished  in  457  B.C.  or  even  earlier,  the  sculptures  in  the
gables  need  not  have  been  made  for  some  years  afterwards ;  Brunn
supposed  that  they  were  made  about  01.  84-85  (444-437  B.C.)

A  third  difficulty  arises  in  connexion  with  Alcamenes  from  the  fact

that  he  is  said  to  have  made  an   image  of  Hera  for  a  temple  near

Phalerum  which  was  burnt  by  the  Persians  and  was  still  in  ruins  in

Pausanias's  time  (i.   i.   5   note).     Hence,   as  we  cannot  suppose  the

statue  to  have  been  placed  in  the  temple  after  the  destruction  of  the

building,  the  statue  must  have  been  executed  before  480  B.C.     But  it  is

impossible  that  the  artistic  career  of  Alcamenes  can  have  lasted  from

before    480    B.C.  to    403    or   402    B.C.     To  meet  this  difficulty  Prof.

Loeschcke  and  Mr.  Six  suppose  that  there  were  two  sculptors  of  the  name

of  Alcamenes,  an  elder  sculptor  who  made  the  image  of  Hera  in  the

burnt  temple  and  the  sculptures  of  the  west  gable  at  Olympia,  and  a

younger  artist  who  executed  the  statues  of  Athena  and  Hercules  (Paus.

ix.  II.  6)  in  403  or  402  B.C.     The  elder  Alcamenes,  they  hold,  was  a

native  of  Lemnos  and  a  rival  of  Phidias  (Suidas,  s,v,  'A\Kafi€in]s  ;  Pliny,

A'^   //,    xxxiv.    49 ;    Overbeck,    Schriftquellen^    §    810)  ;    the    younger

Alcamenes  was  an  Athenian  and  a  pupil  of  Phidias  (Pliny,  N,  H.

xxxvi.  16).

Although  the  design  and  composition  of  the  sculptures  in  the  two
gables  are  as  unlike  as  possible  (the  repose  and  order  of  the  figures  in  the
east  gable  contrasting  with  the  wild  tumult  and  disorder  of  the  figures  in
the  west  gable),  yet  the  artistic  style  of  the  two  sets  of  sculpture  is  so

VOL.  Ill  2  L


514  THE  GABLE  SCULPTURES  BK.  v.  elis

similar  that  on  the  strength  of  it  some  critics  (as  Mr.  Murray,  Mr.  Six,
and  Dr.  Puchstein)  have  supposed  that  they  must  be  by  the  same  artisL
Those  who  hold  that  the  sculptures  are  by  two  different  artists  are
obliged  to  admit  either  that  the  two  artists  must  have  belonged  to  the
same  school  or,  as  Prof.  Overbeck  formerly  thought,  that  the  sculptures
were  executed  by  the  same  set  of  stone-masons,  though  the  designs  were
furnished  by  different  sculptors.  Brunn's  view  was  that  both  Paeooios
and  Alcamenes  belonged  to  what  Brunn  called  the  North  Greek  school
of  art.  Evidence  of  the  existence  of  such  a  school  is  supplied,  he
thought,  by  a  few  sculptures  which  have  been  found  in  Thasos,
Macedonia,  etc.,  as  well  as  by  the  coins  of  northern  Greece,  particolaiiy
those  of  Thasos.  The  leading  characteristics  of  this  school,  according
to  Brunn,  were  realism  or  naturalism  and  picturesqueness.  Its  voris
are  marked  neither  by  the  rigid  formalism  and  statuesque  correctness  of
the  Peloponnesian  and  specially  Argive  school  of  art,  nor  by  the  idealism
of  the  Attic  school.  What  the  artist  aimed  at  was  a  broad  piaorial
effect ;  in  pursuing  this  object  he  took  his  models  from  real  life  and
neglected  the  canons  appropriate  to  statuar>'.  The  style  of  the  school,
in  fact,  was  pictorial  rather  than  statuesque,  and  had  been  largely
influenced  by  a  school  of  painting,  above  all  by  the  paintings  of
Polygnotus.  Brunn  held  that  the  greatness  of  Phidias  and  the  Attic
school  of  sculpture  was  due  to  the  fact  that  Phidias  was  able  to  combioe
and  fuse  the  technical  correctness  of  the  Peloponnesian  school  ii^ith  the
picturesqueness  of  the  North  Greek  school.  This  latter  element  Phidias
acquired  (according  to  this  theor>')  through  the  paintings  of  Po^-gnotus.
Brunn's  theory  appears  to  be  on  the  whole  accepted  by  Prof.  E.  Curtios
and  Mr.  Gurlitt ;  and  it  was  formerly  accepted  by  Mr.  A.  S.  Murray  in
his  History  of  Greek  Sculpture,  It  is,  however,  rejected  by  Prof.  Flasch,
Prof.  Kekule,  and  Dr.  Wolters.  Prof  Flasch  accounts  for  the
resemblance  in  style  between  the  sculptures  of  the  two  gables  by  holding
that  both  Paeonius  and  Alcamenes  belonged  to  the  Attic  school  of
Phidias,  and  that  the  general  idea  of  the  sculptures  was  furnished  by
the  master  but  carried  out  by  the  pupils.  He  regards  the  01>'mpian
sculptures  as  a  necessary  phase  in  the  development  of  Greek  sculpture,
without  which  the  sculptures  of  the  Parthenon  could  never  have  come
into  existence.  Prof.  KekuM  and  Dr.  Wolters  disagree  both  with  Brunn
and  Prof.  Flasch.  They  think  that  the  Olympian  sculptures  resemble
the  sculptured  metopes  of  Selinus  so  closely  that  the  same  artists  may
have  executed  both,  or  at  all  events  that  the  art  which  created  the
sculptures  in  the  temple  of  Zeus  at  01>anpia  was  closely  related  to  the
art  of  Sicily.  Prof.  Furtwangler  believes  that  the  sculptures  both  of  the
gables  and  of  the  metopes  were  produced  by  a  school  of  Parian  sculptors.
His  grounds  for  this  belief  are  briefly  these.  In  Phoenicia  and  on  the
sites  of  Phoenician  colonies  in  Cyprus,  Sicily,  and  perhaps  Corsica  there
have  been  found  a  number  of  sarcophaguses  of  Parian  marble,  the  lids  of
which  are  adorned  with  heads  in  high  relief  obviously  carved  by  Greek
artists  of  the  fifth  and  fourth  centuries  B.C.  As  the  sarcophaguses  are  of
Parian  marble.  Prof  Furtwangler  holds  that  they  were  probably  ^(^^^
by  Parian  sculptors  or  masons  who  accompanied  the  blocks  of  marble  in


X  THE  GABLE  SCULPTURES  515

)enician  ships  to  their  destination,  executed  their  commissions  on  the
:,  and  then  returned  to  their  native  island.  And  since  the  heads
,ed  on  the  oldest  of  these  sarcophaguses  closely  resemble  the  heads
he  gable  sculptures  at  Olympia,  Prof.  Furtwangler  concludes  that
latter  sculptures  also  were,  together  with  the  metopes,  executed  by
ian  artists  who  came  with  the  marble  to  Olympia.
In  opposition  to  the  opinion  of  Brunn  and  Prof.  Furtwangler,  both  of
)m  seek  the  origin  of  the  sculptures  outside  of  Peloponnese,  the  view
gaining  ground  among  archaeologists  that  the  sculptures  in  question
probably  the  work  of  a  native  Peloponnesian  school,  which  had  its
\i  seats  in  Sicyon  and  Argos.  Among  the  advocates  of  this  view  are
Lange  and  Professors  Treu,  Studniczka,  Overbeck,  and  Collignon.
jrbeck  suggested  that  the  sculptors  perhaps  belonged  to  a  native
an  school  of  art,  which  may,  however,  have  received  its  impulse  from
school  of  Sicyon  and  Argos.

The  theory  formerly  advocated  by  Overbeck  that  the  sculptures  of
1  gables  were  executed  by  local  stone-masons  on  models  furnished
sculptors  of  distinction  has  proved  to  be  untenable.  For  from  a  care-
sxamination  of  the  figures  Prof.  Treu  concludes  that  in  making  them

original  design  was  modified  in  many  important  respects.  Such
rations,  it  is  obvious,  must  have  been  made  by  the  artist  himself ;
;  could  not  have  originated  with  simple  masons.  The  result  of  Prof.
u's  minute  and  careful  investigations  is  to  confirm  Brunn^s  opinion

the  sculptures  were  designed  and  executed  by  the  same  hands.
If  I  may  venture  to  state  my  own  impressions  side  by  side  with  the
vs  of  far  more  competent  judges,  I  should  say  that  (i)  the  reasons
inst    assigning    either   group    of  gable    sculptures    to    Paeonius  or
imenes  are  so  strong  as  to  be  almost  conclusive  ;  (2)  the  style  of  the

gable  groups  is  so  alike  that  they  were  probably  executed,  if  not  by
same  sculptor,  at  least  by  sculptors  of  the  same  school  working  in
junction  ;  and  (3)  the  style  of  these  groups  is  so  unlike  that  of  the
thenon  sculptures  that  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  the  sculptors  of
Olympian  pediments  either  influenced  or  were  influenced  by  the  art
*hidias.

iee  on  the  whole  subject  Brunn,  *  Paeonios  und  die  nordgriechische  Kunst,'
uHgsherichtc  d.  philos.-philolog.  ii.  histor.  Classe  der  k.  b.  Akad.  d.  IVisseft.
ftifu'/unj  1876,  I.  pp.  315-342;  id.,  *  Die  Sculpturen  von  Olympia,'  ib.  1877,
1-28,  and  1878,  I.  pp.  442-471  ;  C.  T.  Newton,  Essays  on  art  atid archaeobgy,
64  sq.\  W.  Gurlitt,  •  Paionios  und  der  Ostgicbel  des  Zeustempels  in  Olympia,'
Hstoriiche  u.  philologische  Aufsatze  Ernst  Curtitis  gewidmct,  pp.  259-285  ;  G.
1,  in  Archiiologischc  Zeitung,  39  (1881),  p.  78  Anm. ;  A.  Furtwangler,  mArch,
ungy  40(1882),  p.  362;  E.  Curtius,  *  Studien  iiber  die  Tempelgiebel  von
npia,'  in  SitzungsberUhte  d.  kon,  preuss,  Akad,  d.  Wissau  zu  Berlin,  1883 ;
in  Archiiologische  Ziitung,  41  (1883),  pp.  347-360  (reprinted  in  Curtius's
xnunelte  Abhandlttngcn^  2.  pp.  304-314);  id.,  'Zur  Paioniosinschrift,'  Gesam.
andl.  2.  pp.  440-442 ;  R.  Forster,  *  Alkamenes  und  die  Giebelcomposition
Zeustempels  in  Olympia,'  Rheinisches  Museum,  N.F.,  38  (1883),  pp.  421-
;  R.  Kekul^,  *Ueber  einige  mit  den  Sculpturen  von  Olympia  verwandte
'ke,*  Archdologische  Zeitung,  41  (1883),  pp.  229-248;  id.,  in  Baedeker's
tcheuland^^  p.  Ixxvii.  sg.\  K.  Lange,  in  MittheiL  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  AtAen,
$2),  p.  206  S(/q.;  Friederichs-Wolters,  Gipsabgiisse,  pp.  134-136;  Murray,
tory  of  Greek  Sculpture,    2.    p.    143  s</(/.  ;    id.,   in  Academy,  2nd   October


5i6  SCULPTURES  OF  THE  WEST  CABLE         BK.  v.  tih

i8S6,  p.  230  frrvicw  c)f  Cullijjnoii's  Thidia:)',  Overbeck,  C^sck.  d,  griicL
/'/ti/n'/:,*  I.  ]-\i.  323-331  ;  Lucy  M.  Mitchell,  Annent  Scui/Zurf,  pp.  270-273:
Ixjc-ichckc,  f>tt  'west lit- f'l-:  GiiVt'Iipnifpe  am  Zntstempel  zu  Olympia  (Doiptf,
iSSj;-,  pp.  5-ii  ;  Sluciniczka,  in  MitthiU.  d.  arch.  ln:t.  in  Athen^  12  (1887]^  p>
374  S'j.  ;  /c/.,  in  Mittktil,  d.  anh.  In  it.,  Komische  Abtheilung,  2  (18^
pp.  53-57  ;  J.  ."^ix,  \\\  Journal  of  HclUnic  S/ttd/tf,  10  (1S89),  pp.  109-I13;  (X
ruch>lcin.  in  Jahrbitch  d.  arch,  /fistituts,  5  ^1890),  p.  97  St/.  ;  A-  BoCttkl,
Olympia^-  p.  297  j/./.;  Fl.isch,  *  01yn:pia,*  in  liaumoister's  Dctikmaler^  y^  VS^
K\i\ — 1 104  LL  ;  L".  KulxTt,  Arcliiioloj^Jihe  Miirchen^  pp.  41-44;  A-  FnrtwiB|{kt
'  Zii  ilcn  olympischcn  Skulpluren,'  Ar./i,ii?u\^n\\'tf  Sfttdirrt  //.  Brunn  duigfhadl
(Berlin,  1 893),  |.>p.  69-88;  E.  Keiscli,  in  Eranos  Vitixioi^nensis  (Berlin,  iM,
pp.  13-17;  Collignon,  Histoirc  de  la  Sculpture  Grecqui^  I.  pp.  453''46lf  T.
(lardncr,  New  chapters  in  Gnc^  Hisfoiy^  p.  2S0.

Rejfardecl  from  the  purely  artistic  point  of  view  the  sculptures  of
both  gables  arc  certainly  disappointing.  **  It  is  true  that  some  of  tJK
groups  which  represent  Centaurs  struggling  with  their  prey  are  of  great
force  of  design,  and  that  some  of  the  standing  and  reclining  figures  ait
by  no  means  devoid  of  a  certain  largeness  and  nobility  of  treatment
Hut  it  is  agreed  that  the  whole  enfect,  more  especially  of  the  Oenomaos
group,  is  poor ;  that  the  drapery  of  the  figures  is  rendered  in  a  shaDoi'
and  feeble  manner  ;  that  the  faults  of  execution  are  numberless.  Indeed,
an  ordinary  student  of  art  will  find,  in  an  hour's  study  of  these  figuies,
faults  which  in  our  day  an  inferior  sculptor  would  not  commit.  And,
what  is  still  worse  to  a  modern  eye,  the  figures  are  not  only  faulty,  bot
often  displeasing,  and  the  heads  have  a  heaviness  which  sometimes  seems
to  amount  to  brutality,  and  are  repellent,  if  not  absolutely  repulsive'
(I*,  (iardner,  Nczc  chuptcrs  in  Greek  History^  p.  279  j^.)

10.  8.  the  battle  of  the  Lapiths  with  the  Centann  at  fk
wedding  of  Pirithous.  Pirithous,  king  of  the  Lapiths  in  Thessaly,
was  said  to  be  a  son  of  Zeus  (Homer,  I!,  ii.  741).  Being  about  to  wed
Hippodamia  he  invited  the  Centaurs  and  his  friend  Theseus  to  the
marriage.  They  came,  but  at  the  wedding  feast  the  Centaurs,  flow
with  wine,  attempted  to  do  violence  to  the  women.  One  of  them  in
particular,  Eurytion,  or  Kurytus  (as  Ovid  calls  him),  even  essa}*ed  to
carry  oft' the  bride  Hippodamia.  But  the  Lapiths,  led  by  Pirithous  and
Theseus,  defended  the  woman,  slew  many  of  the  Centaurs,  and  dro\c
the  rest  away.  See  Homer,  //.  ii.  741  sqq.  ;  Od,  xxi.  295  jyf ;
Diocloru>,  i\ .  70  sqq.  ;  Plutarch,  Theseus^  30 ;  0\id,  Mttam,  xi-
210  sqq.     Plutarch  (/.t.)  calls  the  bride  Deidamia,  not  Hippodamia.

This  battle  of  the  Lapiths  and  Centaurs  .at  the  wedding  of  Pirilhoi::
and   Hippodamia  formed  the  subject  of  the  sculptures  which  occupied
the  west  gable  of  the  temple  of  Zeus.     Of  these  sculptures  twentj'-ow
tigiires,  some  of  them   ver>'  fragmentary,   have  been   found,   and  iha:
there   ucre   no   more   is  proved   by  the   fact   that    when    restored  arni
arranged  they  till,  and  cNen  crowd,   the  gable.     The   sculptures  havr
been  studied    by  Prof.  Treu  with  conscientious  care,  and  the  arrani;e-
ment  which   he   has  finally  adopted  (Plate  ix.  i:)  may  be  accepted  a?
the  true  and  definitive  one.     (Note  that  in  Figs.  63-65,  reproduced  froni
photographs  of  the  sculptures  as  they  are  arranged   in  the  museum  at
Olyinpia,  the  arrangement  of  the  figures  is  not  the  one  that  has  been
finally  adopted   by  Prof.    Treu.)     At  first  sight,  the  sculptures  0^  !"■'


5iS  SCULPTURES  OF  THE   WEST  CABLE         Bk.  v.  tus

western  sable,  in  marked  contrast  to  ihe  stilT  formality  and  repose  of  the
sculptures  in  the  eastern  gable,  appear  to  be  disposed  without  onkr,
presenting  nothing  but  the  confusion  and  lumult  of  battle.  But  u
attentive  cuamination  of  ihem  shows  that  in  spite  of  this  appnm
confusion  they  are  most  carefully  arranged  about  the  central  figBf  ■
such  a  way  ibat  each  group  and  each  figure  on  one  side  of  tbe  pHc
has  its  counterpart  on  the  other.

The  central  figure  towers  above  all  the  others.  It  is  thu  of  BMP
in  the  prime  of  life,  and  of  a  spare  athletic  frame.  He  is  staad^
drawn  up  to  his  full  height,  and  is  looking  towards  his  ri^i^  pi
stretching  out  his  right  arm  from  the  shoulder  in  the  same  diitfldk^
with  an  air  of  command.  The  face,  which  is  beardless,  is  calm,  infill
somewhat  cold  and  expressionless.  He  is  nude  except  for  seme  %^
drapiery  thrown  negligently  over  his  right  shoulder  and  lower  left  ■■.
This  left  arm  hangs  straight  by  his  side ;  in  the  hand  there  are  mfa
which  seem  to  show  that  it  grasped  a  bow.

On  the  right  of  this  central  figure  (the  spectator's  left)  a  man  is
raising  his  arm  to  attack  a  Centaur  who  is  clutching  a  woman  in  bis
arms,  while  she  thrusts  her  elbow  in  his  face  and  struggles  to  wrench
his  hands  away.  The  man  is  believed  to  have  held  a  sword  in  hi^
right  hand  and  perhaps  the  sheath  in  his  left  On  the  lefl  side  of  the
central  figure  (the  spectators  right)  there  is  a  corresponding  group  of
three — a  man  is  assailing  a  Centaur,  who  has  his  hoofs  twined  roiuida
woman,  while  she  with  her  hands  pressed  against  his  head  is  thrusting
him  away  ivith  all  her  force.  The  man  is  believed  to  have  been
heaving  up  an  axe  in  both  hands.  On  the  right  side  of  the  cennal
figure  (the  spectator's  left)  the  next  group  represents  a  OcKoaa
trying  to  carry  off  a  boy,  probably  a  cup-bearer.  This  gioiqi  i»
mentioned  by  I'ausanias.  It  is  matched  on  the  opposite  side  of  At
gable  by  a  L.ipith  kneeling  and  throttling  a  Centaur.     The  LaimhbH


t«incd  his  right  arm  round  the  Centaurs  nerk  ;  the  Centaur  is  bilin;;  it
sav.igely,  and  the  pain  of  the  bite  is  reflected  in  the  drawn  and  grinning
features    of  the    Lapiih.      On    the    right   of  the   central    figure  ('!"


s  SCULPTURES  OF  THE  WEST  GABLE  519

:laior's  left)  the  next  group  consists  of  three  figures.     A  Centaur
been  brought  to  the  ground  by  a  Lapith,  who  is  kneeling  and  with


uc.  65.-


hands  clasped  round  the  Centaur's  head  is  dragging  him  to  the
h.  But  the  fierce  brute  is  still  clinging  with  hoof  and  hand  to  a
lan,  gripping  her  hair  with  his  left  hand,  while  he  thrusts  his  left
1  hoof  into  her  lap.  This  group  of  three  is  matched  on  the  opposite
of  the  gable  (the  spectator's  right)  by  a  corresponding  group  of


A  kneeling  Lapith  is  thrusting  a  knife  through  the  breast  of  a
ir,  who  is  striving  to  lift  a  woman  on  his  back.     Lastly,  each  of


SK)  SCULPTURES.  OF  THE   WEST  GABLE         bk.  v.  kus   1

the  ends  of  the  gable  is  occupied  by  two  women  reclining  and  gaang
at  the  fight  which  is  going  on  in  the  middle.  The  two  inner  figms
(B  on  the  one  side  of  the  gable  and  U  on  the  other)  are  old  tnma
with  wrinkled  faces  ;  they  are  raised  on  what  seem  to  be  cushions,  ud
are  propping  themselves  on  their  knees  and  elbows.  The  one  cm  dx
spectator's  left  (6)  was  apparently  represented  in  the  act  of  teanog  her
hair ;  her  bee  wears  an  expression  of  anxiety  and  terror  (Fig.  66).
The  two  outer  figures  (A  and  V},  in  the  very  extremities  of  the  gabk,


are  young  and  comely  women  ;  their  garments  have  slipped  or  been
torn  down  so  as  to  leave  the  breast  and  part  of  the  upper  body  ban
(Fig.  67).

All  ihe  figures  in  this  gable  are  of  Parian  marble,  except  the  t*o
old  women  (B  and  U),  the  young  woman  in  the  left  (north)  coraerM
ihe  gable  (A),  and  the  arm  of  the  other  reclining  young  woman  (V),
al!  of  which  are  of  Penlelic  marble.  These  figures  of  Pentelic  marbk
differ  from  the  rest  not  only  in  material  but  in  technical  execution,
though  nol  in  their  general  design  and  composition.  The  difference
in  execution  is  especially  observable  in  the  eyes  and  hair,  but  it  may
also  be  traced  in  the  treatment  of  the  drapery  and  of  the  nude.  So
great  is  this  difference  that  Prof.  Treu  is  of  opinion  that  the  figures  o'
i'entelic  marble  cannot  belong  to  the  fifth  century  B.C.,  but  must  baic
been  made  at  a  time  long  subsequent  to  it,  probably  in  the  Ronun
period.  He  conjectures  that  the  original  sculptures  were  throKn  do»ii
by  the  fall  of  the  projecting  edge  {sima)  of  the  gable,  and  were  replacfJ
by  the  existing  tigurcs.  executed  in  ihe  style  of  an  of  the  day  bur
modelled  on  the  originals.

On  comparing  Pausanias's  description  of  these  sculptures  with  iht


CH.  X        SCULPTURES  OF  THE  WEST  GABLE  521

existing  remains  we  see  that  he  has  not  enumerated  all  the  figures  in
the  gable,  as  he  did  with  the  figures  in  the  eastern  gable.  He  has
confined  his  attention  to  the  central  groups,  and  even  in  interpreting
these  he  has  made  at  least  one  serious  mistake.  For  the  great  central
figure  cannot,  as  Pausanias  supposed,  be  Pirithous.  Its  colossal  size,
far  exceeding  that  of  the  human  actors  in  the  scene,  its  commanding
gesture,  and  its  unruffled  serenity  amid  the  wild  hurly-burly  of  the  fight,
clearly  mark  it  out  as  a  god.  Can  we  suppose  that  Pirithous  would
have  been  represented  thus  calm  and  unmoved  while  his  bride  was
being  ravished  by  a  brutal  Centaur  ?  The  beardless  face  and  muscular
figare  of  the  god  mark  him  out  as  Apollo,  and  this  is  confirmed  by  the
of  a  bow  in  his  left  hand.  His  presence  is  very  appropriate,
he  was  the  ancestor  of  the  Lapiths,  being  the  father  of  L^ithes
by  iStilbe,  a  daughter  of  the  Peneus  (Schol.  on  Homer,  //.  ii.  266 ;
SdhoL  on  Apollonius  Rhodius,  i.  41  ;  Diodorus,  v.  61).  He  may  be
Wfipoted  to  have  hastened  to  the  help  of  his  descendants.  Similarly
m  die  frieie  of  the  temple  at  Bassae  he  is  represented  shooting  at  the
Ccatann  (see  note  on  viii.  41.  7).  Hence  the  interpretation  of  the
oeiitml  figure  as  Pirithous  may  be  dismissed  as  false,  though  it  has
btan  defended  in  modem  times  by  H.  Brunn  and  Mr.  Bruno  Sauer.

-  The  two  men  to  the  right  and  left  of  Apollo  (K  and  M)  are  doubt-
tew  the  two  friends  Pirithous  and  Theseus.  Pausanias  has  preserved
the  tradition  that  they  figured  in  the  gable,  though  he  was  wrong  in  his
identification  of  one  of  them.  They  are  distinguished  from  the  other
Laqnths  by  their  longer  hair  (a  mark  of  higher  rank)  as  well  as  by
thor  conspicuous  position.  Pirithous  is  probably  the  one  on  Apollo's
right  hand  (K),  and  the  woman  whom  he  is  rescuing  fi-om  the  clutches
of  the  Centaur  is  probably  his  bride  Hippodamia.  For  it  is  natural  to
suppose  that  the  god,  who  is  turned  to  the  right,  is  looking  towards
Pirithous  and  Hippodamia,  the  persons  chiefly  concerned.  Moreover,
the  figure  K  is  distinguished  from  all  the  other  men  by  wearing  sandals.
Pausanias  interpreted  this  figure  as  Caeneus,  one  of  the  leaders  of  the
Lapiths  in  the  battle  with  the  Centaurs  (Homer,  //.  i.  264),  who  had
received  from  Poseidon  the  gift  of  invulnerability,  but  in  the  battle  with
the  Centaurs  was  overwhelmed  under  the  trunks  of  pine-trees  and  oaks,
and  thus  driven  by  main  force  into  the  ground.  He  had  irritated  Zeus
by  setting  up  his  spear  in  the  middle  of  the  market-place  and  com-
manding the  people  to  worship  it.  See  Schol.  on  Apollonius  Rhodius,
i.  57  ;  Schol.  on  Homer,  //.  i.  264.  In  ancient  art  Caeneus  is
regularly  represented  in  the  act  of  being  crushed  into  the  earth  under
the  weight  of  rocks  and  tree-trunks,  which  the  Centaurs  are  heaping
upon  him.  He  figures  thus  in  the  west  frieze  of  the  so-called  Theseum
at  Athens  and  in  the  frieze  of  the  temple  of  Apollo  at  Bassae  (Roscher's
Lexikon^  2.  p.  894  sqq,)  As  no  such  incident  is  represented  in  the  west
gable  of  the  temple  of  Zeus,  it  seems  tolerably  certain  that  Caeneus  does
not  appear  in  it  at  all.  Thus  if  H  and  K  are  rightly  identified  as
Hippodamia  and  Pirithous,  it  follows  that  J  (the  Centaur  who  is  carrying
off  Hippodamia)  is  Eurytion.

The  man  on  Apollo's  left  (M)  is  probably  Theseus.     From  Pausanias


522  SCULPTURES  OF  THE  WEST  GABLE         bk.  v.  eus

we  learn  that  he  was  represented  wielding  an  axe,  probably  a  saaifida]
axe,  since  the  affray  took  place  at  a  wedding,  and  the  Lapiths,  withtbe
possible  exception  of  Pirithous,  are  represented  without  warlike  weapons.
The  knife  with  which  one  of  them  is  stabbing  a  Centaur  is  supposed  to
be  a  sacrificial  knife.  In  vase-paintings  Theseus  is  depicted  innelding
an  axe  (e.g.  Journal  of  Hellenic  StiuUeSy  2  (1881),  pi.  x.)  Cp.  Paos-L
27.  7.  The  woman  (O),  whom  Theseus  is  rescuing  from  theCenUQr,s
probably  the  mother  or  attendant  of  the  bride ;  her  more  ample  gamients
seem  to  indicate  that  she  is  a  matron.

The  two  old  women  lying,  or  rather  crouching  on  hands  and  knees,
on  the  cushions  and  watching  the  fight  with  anxiety  and  fear  are  prob-
ably slave- women — nurses,  stewardesses,  or  the  like,  who  have  bceo
thrown  down  on  the  banqueting  couches  in  the  tumult  of  the  fighL
Prof.  Loeschcke,  indeed,  interprets  the  old  dames  as  wood-n>7nphs,
lamenting  over  the  defeat  of  the  Centaurs,  their  sons.  But  this  inter-
pretation has  not  found  much  favour.  It  has  been  pointed  out  that
wood-nymphs  would  scarcely  be  provided  with  cushions  on  which  to
repose.

Lastly,  the  two  comely  damsels  in  the  two  extremities  of  the  gaWe
(A  and  V)  used  commonly  to  be  interpreted  as  local  nymphs.  But  they
are  dressed  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  the  Lapith  women  £,  H,  and  R,
and  their  breasts  are  exposed  in  the  same  way.  Probably,  therefore,  as
Prof.  Treu  now  holds,  they  too  are  Lapith  women  who  have  been
roughly  handled  by  the  Centaurs.  They  seem  to  be  holding  together
their  torn  garments  at  the  shoulder.

The  figures  in  the  west  gable  appear  to  have  been  painted  as  well  as
those  in  the  east  gable  ;  for  a  piece  of  the  mantle  of  Apollo  was  found
bearing  considerable  and  undoubted  traces  of  red  paint.

On  the  sculptures  in  the  west  gable,  their  technique,  arrangement,  etc.,  see  0.
Treu,  in  Die  Ausj^^rabutti^en  zu  Olynpia^  3  (1877-1878),  pp.  16-22,  with  pi.  xxvi.-
xxviii.;  yV/.,  *  Die  Anordnung  des  Westgiebels  am  olympischen  Zeuslempel,'ytf^rA«i^
d.  arch.  Inst.  3  (1888),  pp.  175-188  ;  /V/.,  '  Nochmals  die  olyrapischen  Giebel,'»i.  6
(1891),  pp.  98-109  ;  /</.,  *Technik  und  Benialung  der  olympischen  Giebelgruppen,'
ib.  10  (1895),  P'  '  "^'A/'  I  ''^1  i"  Olympia:  Ergebnissc^  Textband  3.  pp.  69-95,  '3?"
137  ;  K.  Curtius,  in  Die  Fumie  von  Olympia^  pp.  13-15  ;  /</.,  *  Studien  iiber  die
Tempelgiebcl  von  Olympia,'  Sitzunqsberichte  o{  \j\q  Prussian  Academy  (Berlin)  for
1883,  No.  33  ;  /</.,  •  Die  Giebelgruppen  des  Zeustempels  in  Olympia  und  die  roth-
figurigen  Vasen,*  Archiiologische  Zeitung^  41  (1883),  pp.  347-360  (reprinted  in  the
writer's  Gesavimelte  Abhandlutigen^  2.  pp.  304-314);  /</.,  *  Die  Tempelgiebel  des
Zeustempels  in  Olympia,'  Abhaftdlun^en  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Berlin,  1894*
Philosoph.-histor.  CI.,  Abh.  ii.  p.  23  {Gesamtn.  Abhandl.  2.  p.  358);  B.  Forster,
Olympia,  p.  \^  sqq.  ;  G.  Loeschcke,  Die  westliche  Gicbelgruppe  am  Zeustempel :»
Olympia  (Dorpat,  1887) ;  H.  Brunn,  *  Ueber  Giebelgruppen/  SifzttttgsbenchU  oi
the  Bavarian  Academy  (Munich),   1888,   Philosoph.-philolog.  CI.,  pp.    187-197:
Flasch,  *  Olympia,'  in  Baumeister's  Deukmiiler,    pp.    1 104   1)0-1104   on:  Ad.
Botticher,  Olympiad  ^\i.  277-282;  Friederichs-Wolters,  Gipsabgiissf^  pp.  128-131;
P.  Wolters,  in  Mittheil.  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  A  then,  12  (1887),  p.  276  ;  Fr.  Studniaka.
*Zur  Anordnung  des  Westgiebels  am  olympischen  ZeustempeI,*yaAr^i/<-^  d.  ank.
Inst.  4  (1889),  pp.  166-168;  Bruno  Sauer,  *  Pausanias  und  der  Wesigiebel  von
Olympia,'//;.  j^p.   163- 166;   id.,   *  Nachtragliches  zum  olympischen  Westgiebel,'
Jahrbnch  d.  arch.  Inst,  6  (1891),  pp.  88-97  ;  Lucy  M.  Mitchell,  History  of  Ancieni
Sculpture,  pp.  266-270;  A.  S.  Murray,  Hist,  of  Greek  Sculpture,  2.  pp.  I45-^S^'
CoUignon,  Hist,  de  la  Sculpture  Grecijue,   I.   pp.  446-453  ;  Overbeck,  Gesch.  I
griech,  Flastik,*  i.  pp.  317-323-


X  SCULPTURES  OF  THE  METOPES  523


10.  9.  Most  of  the  labours  of  Hercnles  are  also  represented  at
^xnpia  etc.     The  twelve  labours  of  Hercules  were  sculptured  in  relief

twelve  metopes  which  were  arranged  in  two  friezes,  six  metopes  in
h  frieze,  over  the  columns  of  the  fore-temple  {pronaos)  and  back-
.mber  {ppisthodomos)  respectively.  This  arrangement  was  unusual,
nerally,  as  in  the  Parthenon,  the  sculptured  reliefs  were  placed  in  the
topes  of  the  outer  frieze,  over  the  columns  of  the  peristyle.  Pausanias
.  described  the  position  of  these  reliefs  briefly  but  correctly  when  he
s  that  they  were  "  above  the  doors  of  the  temple  "  and  "  above  the
)rs  of  the  back-chamber.'*  Fragments  of  all  twelve  metopes  have
in  discovered.  Some  important  pieces  were  found  by  the  French
haeologists  in  1829,  and  are  now  in  the  Louvre  (see  above,  p.  490).
e  rest  were  found  by  the  Germans  and  are  now  in  the  Museum  at
nmpia.  Each  slab  measured  originally  1.60  metres  in  height  by  1.50
tres  in  breadth,  so  that  the  figures  are  not  much  under  life  size.

Pausanias  has  enumerated  the  metopes  from  south  to  north  at  both
Is  of  the  temple.  But  it  will  be  observed  that  in  his  text,  as  we  have
eleven  metopes  only  are  described.  The  missing  metope  represented
rcules  dragging  up  Cerberus.  It  was  one  of  the  metopes  at  the  east
I  of  the  temple.  From  the  place  in  which  it  was  found  lying  on  the
und,  Prof.  Curtius  infers,  with  great  probability,  that  its  place  was
ond  from  the  north,  between  the  Augean  metope  on  the  north  and

Atlas  metope  on  the  south.     See  E.  Curtius,  in  Abhandlungen  of

Academy  of  Berlin,  1891,  Philos.-histor.  CI.,  Abh.  ii.  p.  4  sq,
'sammelte  Abhandlungen^  2.  p.  339  sq.)  It  seems  likely  that
isanias  noticed  this  metope,  but  that  the  mention  of  it  has  dropped

of  his   text.     See  Critical  Note  on  the  present  passage,  vol.    i.

584.
The  twelve  metopes,  taken  in  the  order  in  which  Pausanias  mentions

m,  that  is,  beginning  on  the  east  side  and  going  from  south  to  north,

as  follows :

( 1 )  The  Erynianthian  boar,  Hercules  was  represented  carrying  the
ir  on  his  shoulders.  Eurystheus,  in  terror,  had  crept  into  a  huge  jar,
f  buried  in  the  ground,  and  was  holding  up  his  hands  imploringly  to
rcules,  who  was  about  to  tumble  the  boar  dowTi  on  the  top  of  him.
e  fragments  of  this  metope  are  scanty ;  but  the  head  and  bust  of
rcules,  the  boar's  snout,  and  the  figure  of  Eur>'stheus  in  his  jar  are
ser\'ed.  The  jar  was  painted  red.  The  same  theme  is  represented
many  vase-paintings,  notably  in  a  fine  one  by  the  celebrated  vase-
nter  Euphronius,  now  in  the  British  Museum.  See  W.  Klein,
phronios^^  p.  86  sqq.

(2)  The  horses  of  Dwmede.  Only  one  horse  seems  to  have  been
resented.      It  was  galloping  to  the  right,  and  Hercules,  striding  in

opposite  direction,  was  stopping  it  by  seizing  the  bridle  with  both
ids.     The  head,  torso,  and  left  arm  of  Hercules  are  preser\'ed.

(3)  Geryon.     The  triple-bodied  Ger>'on  occupied  the  right  side  of
metope.     He  has  sunk  on  his  knees,  and  one  of  his  helmeted  heads

drooping  forward.      With   two  of  his  bodies  he  seems  to   be  still
iting,  for  on  his  arms  he  bears  two  of  his  shields.     His  third  body


524  SCVLFTVRES  OF  THE  METOPES  m.i

seems  to  be  already  slain  by  Hercules,  for  the  head  lies  on  the  gi
Hercules  has  planted  his  left  foot  on  Geryon's  leg,  and  is  appaieatir
heaving  up  his  club  to  deal  the  monster  another  blow.  Preserved  »t
the  sinking  figure  of  Geryon,  the  head  of  his  slain  body,  and  the  M
lower  leg,  head,  and  bust  of  Hercules.

(4)  Atlas.     This  is  one  of  the  best  preserved  and  most  beanti
the  metopes  (Fig,  68).     In  the  centre  stands  Hercules  bearing  op  ib


sky  on  his  shoulders.  The  sky  is  not  represented  but  is  supposed  v-
rest  on  the  cushion  which  Hercules  carries  on  his  shoulders,  while  vii))
bowed  head  and  raised  arms  he  supports  the  heavy  burden.  In  fnwi
of  him,  to  the  spectator's  right,  stands  Atlas  holding  out  to  Hercules
the  golden  apples,  three  in  each  hand.  Hercules  is  looking  down  a:
them  with  a  half-humorous  expression.  Both  Atlas  and  Hercules  are
nude.  Behind  Hercules  stands  a  fair  and  compassionate  maideD.
perhaps  one  of  the  Hesperides  ;  with  her  raised  left  arm  she  is  helping
Hercules  10  uphold  his  burden.  Both  in  composition  and  in  techniol
execution  this  relief  is  admirable.  The  figures  of  Hercules  and  Atlas
are  at  once  strong  and  shapely ;  the  pose  of  Atlas  in  particular  is
remarkable  for  its  easy  grace.

The  story  which  this  metope  illustrates  was  told  by  the  historian
Pherecydes.  It  ran  thus.  Hercules  was  ordered  by  Eurystheus  w
fetch  the  golden  apples  of  the  Hesperides,  which  were  guarded  by  a
dreadful  dragon  with  a  hundred  heads,  far  away  in  the  west  or  nonh,


SCULPTURES  OF  THE  METOPES


5»5


!  land  where  Atlas  held  up  the  sky  on  his  back.  On  his  way
r  Hercules  slew  the  eagle  that  preyed  on  the  liver  of  Prometheus,
)ut  of  gratitude  gave  Hercules  a  piece  of  advice.  "When  you
to  your  Journey's  end,"  said  he,  "  be  careful  not  to  pluck  the  ,
j  yourself,  but  ask  Atlas  to  do  so  for  you,  and  offer  to  holi  up
(y  in  his  stead  while  he  goes  on  your  errand."  Hercules  took
int,  and  Atlas,  nothing  loth  to  be  rid  of  his  burden,  went  and
-d  the  golden  apples,  while  Hercules  held  up  the  sky.  But  when
id  got  the  apples,  Atlas  said  that  he  would  take  them  himself  to
itheus,  and  that  Hercules  might  supf>ort  the  sky  till  he  came  back,
.is  the  crafty  Hercules  replied,  "  Very  well.  But  before  you  go,
lold  up  the  sky  for  a  minute,  while  I  put  a  pad  on  my  shoulders.
II  then  be  able  to  bear  it  quite  comfortably."  Atlas,  thinking  (his
reasonable,  laid  down  the  apples  on  the  ground,  and  relieved
lies  of  his  load.  Then  Hercules  picked  up  the  apples,  bade  Atlas
ell,  and  departed.  See  ApoUodorus,  ii.  ;.  ii  ;  Schol.  on
onios  Rhodius,  iv.  1396;  cp.  [Eratosthenes,]  Calasterismi,  3.
ausanias  misinterpreted  this  metope.  He  says  that  it  represented
'cules  about  to  take  the  burden  of  Atlas  on  himself."  Clearly  he
ok  Atlas  for  Hercules,  and  Hercules  for  Atlas.
;)  Cerberus.     Hercules  is  striding  to  the  left,  dragging  after  him


eniB  by  a  rope,  which  he  holds  in  both  hands.     The  hell-hound  is
>een  in  full,  only  his  head  and  paws  appeared  out  of  the  abyss.


5*6


SCULPTORES  OF  THE  METOPES


This  metope,  which  Pausanias  does  not  mention  (see  above,  p.  ■
was  the  most  difficult  of  all  to  resiore.  The  figure  of  Hercules  h;
be  pieced  together  out  of  more  than  forty  fragments.  The  upper
arm  and  the  left  thit,'h  of  Hercules  are  missing  ;  otherwise  the  li^
fairly  complete.  His  face,  gazing  back  intently  al  the  hound,  is  r
and  expressive.      Of  Cerberus  little  is  left  but  the  snout  and  a  paw.

(6)  The  Augean  slubk.  Hercules  is  vigorously  sweeping  or  p
forking  the  dung  out  of  the  stable  (Fig.  69).  In  his  hands,  wbict
heaved  up  behind  him,  he  held  a  besom  or  pitchfork.  Beside  hire
the  spectator's  right,  stands  Athena  watching  and  directing  the  opera
With  her  right  hand  she  is  pointing  at  the  filth  ;  her  left  hand  res:
the  rim  of  her  shield,  which  stands  edgewise  on  the  ground,
goddess  wears  a  crested  helmet.  Her  tranquil  pose  and  digii:
bearing  contrast  well  ivith  the  hero's  energetic  action.  The  figu/t
Athena  is  almost  entire.  Of  Hercules  the  head,  bust,  anns,  and
greater  part  of  the  legs  are  preserved.

The  foregoing  metopes  were  all  at  the  east  end  of  the  temple.  1
following  were  at  the  west  end.  In  describing  them  we  go  from  soi
to  north,  following  Pausanias.

(7)  The  Amaxon's  girdle.      Of  this  metope  nothing  is   left  bul  i


head  of  the  Amazon  queen.     The  expression  of  tlie  face  shows  thai  si
had  received  the  ftttal  stroke  ;  there  is  death  in  her  eyes.

(8)  The  Ccrynean  deer.     Very  few  fragments  of  this  metope  b>'


SCULPTUKES  OF  THE  METOPES


5*7


n  found.  The  deer  seems  to  have  been  lying  on  the  ground,  while
rcules  pressed  it  down  with  his  knee  and  grasped  it  by  the  horns.

(9)  The  Cretan  bull.  This  is  one  of  the  finest  and  best  preserved
the  metopes  (Fig.  70),     In  the  background  is  the  bull,  njoving  to

right.  In  front  of  it  is  Hercules,  leaning  with  all  his  might  in  the
■osile  direction.     His  left  arm  was  directed  towards  the  bull's  muzzle,

right  was  raised  ;  but  as  the  arms  are  broken  off  very  short,  it  is
>ossible  to  say  with  certainty  what  he  was  doing  to  the  bull.  It  is
jeciured  that  with  the  left  hand  he  was  pulling  at  a  cord  fastened
he  beast's  muzzle,  while  with  the  right  he  was  preparing  to  throw  a
;o  over  its  horns.  The  hero's  powerful  body,  with  its  straining
ides,  is  finely  rendered.

(10)  The  Stymphalian  birds.  Hercules,  standing  on  the  spectator's
It,  is  holding  out  something  (probably  one  of  the  birds)  to  Athena,


D,  wearing  the  aegis  on  her  breast,  is  seated  on  a  rock  (Fig.  71),
T  body  is  turned  away  from  Hercules,  but  her  face  is  looking  towards
at  he  is  offering  to  her.  Her  right  hand  is  held  across  her  body,
■haps  to  receive  the  bird.  With  her  left  hand  she  is  leaning  on  the
k.  The  metope  is  well  preserved,  but  the  hands  and  considerable
ces  of  the  legs  of  Hercules  are  wanting.
(11)  The  hydra.     The  remains  of  this  metope  are  very  fragmentary.


528  SCULPTURES  OF  THE  METOPES  bk.  v.  eui

The  hydra  was  represented  as  a  monster  with  a  thick  trunk  and  a  gitti
many  serpents  growing  out  of  it.  How  Hercules  was  combating  it  we
do  not  know.

(12)  The  Nemean  lion.  In  this  metope  the  fight  is  represented  ai
over.  The  lion  lies  dead  on  the  ground,  its  tongue  lolling  from  b
mouth,  its  head  resting  on  its  paw.  Hercules,  spent  with  the  struggk,
has  planted  his  right  foot  on  the  beast's  shoulder  and  rests  his  head
wearily  on  his  hand  in  a  pensive  attitude.  Beside  him,  to  the
spectator's  left,  stood  a  woman  looking  at  the  victorious  hero.  Her
head  and  right  arm  are  all  that  remain.  The  head  is  beauufol
Hercules  himself  is  in  a  very  dilapidated  state.  His  head,  right  hand,
right  shoulder,  left  arm,  and  right  leg  from  the  knee  downwaiYis  aie,
however,  preserved.

The  metopes  were  certainly  painted,  for  vestiges  of  colour  have  been
found  on  several  of  them.  Thus  the  hair  and  eyes  of  Hercules  in  the
Lion  metope  showed  traces  of  red  paint ;  the  body  of  the  bull  was
painted  red,  and  the  background  bright  blue ;  in  the  Hydra  metope  the
background  was  red.  This  discovery  of  colour  explains  one  of  the
striking  features  of  these  metopes,  namely  their  want  of  elaboration  in
detail.  The  hair  and  beards  of  the  figures  are  simply  blocked  out,  and
some  parts  of  the  garments  are  not  clearly  distinguished  from  each
other.  Plainly  the  sculptor  trusted  to  the  use  of  colour  to  supply  the
details  which  he  did  not  put  in  with  the  chisel.

All  the  figures  of  the  metopes  have  holes  bored  perpendicularly  in
the  tops  of  their  heads,  shoulders,  arms,  hands,  and  in  short  all  exposed
extremities.  Probably  some  pieces  of  mechanism  were  fastened  into
these  holes  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  birds  from  taking  up  their
quarters  and  building  their  nests  among  the  sculptures.  With  this
intention  three-pronged  forks  were  fastened  into  some  of  the  external
ornaments  (the  antefixes)  of  Italian  temples ;  one  such  fork  has  been
found  in  an  antefix  at  Caere.  Golden  spikes  were  fastened  on  the  roof
of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  to  prevent  birds  perching  on  it  (Josephus,
BcU.  Jud.  V.  5.  6)  ;  and  with  a  like  intention  discs  were  attached  to  the
heads  of  Greek  statues  (Hesychius,  s,v,  fiijvurKot,;  Photius,  Lexicon^
s.v.  /xr^vuTKovs).  Euripides  has  described  an  attendant  scaring  aw-ay
the  birds  from  the  temple  at  Delphi  (/on,  154  s^^.)  See  E.  Petersen,
<  Vogelabwehr,'  Miitlieil,  it  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  14  (1889),  pp.  2yy

239-

Pausanias  does  not  name  the  artist  or  artists  who  sculptured  the
metopes.  The  general  opinion,  held  by  Professors  Overbeck  and
Collignon,  and  Messrs.  A.  S.  Murray  and  Ad.  Botticher,  is  that  in  point
of  style  the  metopes  resemble  each  other  and  the  gable  sculptures  so
closely  that  they  must  have  been  executed  by  the  same  sculptors.
With  all  deference  to  such  distinguished  authorities,  I  find  it  difficult  to
share  this  view.  To  me  it  seems  that  the  metopes  have  a  softness  and
grace  which  are  wholly  wanting  in  the  sculptures  of  the  gables.  They
are  pleasing,  while  the  gable  sculptures  are  hard  and  repellent.  Some
of  the  faces  and  figures  in  the  metopes  are  beautiful ;  but  is  there  a
single  figure  in  either  of  the  gables  that  deserves  to  be  called  beautiful  ?


SCULPTURES  OF  THE  METOPES  529

other  hand  the  uniformity  of  style  between  the  metopes  them-
s  so  great  that  they  were  probably  executed  by  the  same
,  or  at  least  by  sculptors  of  the  same  school  working  in
f.  The  late  H.  Brunn,  indeed,  whose  fine  taste  and  wide
ge   entitle   his   opinions   to   be   received   with    great   respect,

that  he  could  detect  a  difference  of  style  between  the  eastern
stem  metopes ;  indeed  so  marked,  in  his  opinion,  is  this
:e  that  he  assigned  the  two  series  not  only  to  different  sculptors
different  schools.  The  western  metopes,  he  thought,  are  the
'  Paeonius,   an  artist  of  what  Brunn  called  the   North  Greek

the  eastern  metopes  are  the  work  of  native  Peloponnesian
s.  The  Atlas  metope  in  particular  was  described  by  Brunn  as
jt  specimen  of  Peloponnesian  sculpture  before  the  time  of  Poly-
its  style,  according  to  him,  is  diametrically  opposed  to  that  of
les.     This  last  assertion  is,  in  my  opinion,  well  founded.

have  seen  (p.  499)  that  the  metopes  were  rabetted  into  the

blocks  in  such  a  way  as  to  prove  that  they  must  have  been
in  position  when  the  temple  was  building,  say  about  460  B.C.
lis  it  has  been  inferred  that  the  sculptured  reliefs  on  the  metopes
ecuted  at  the  same  time.  The  inference  is  probable  but  not
-y,  for  it  seems  possible  that  the  metope  blocks  may  have  been
ifter  they  had  been  placed  in  position.

iie  metopes,  see  Blouet,  Expid,  Scientifique  dt  Morie:  Sculpture,  I.  p.
ith  pi.  74-76  ;  Die  AusgrcSungen  zu  Ofympia,  4.  p.  11  sq.,  with  pi.  xii.
;  Die  Furule  von  Olymtia,  p.  15  sq,,  with  pi.  xx.  and  xxi.  ;  G.  Treu,  in
^che  Zeitungy  39  (1801),  p.  319  sq,  ;  H.  Brunn,  in  Sitzungsberichte  of
irian  Academy  (Munich),  Philos. -philol.  Cl.,  1876,  p.  318  sqq, ;  i^.,
13  saq.  ;  Lucy  M.  Mitchell,  History  of  Ancient  Sculpture,  pp.  256-261  ;
hs  -  Wolters,  Gipsabgiisse,  p.  131  sqq.\  Ad.  Botticher,  Olympiad  p.
;  Flasch,  'Olympia,'  in  Baumeister*s  Denkmdler,  pp.  1098,  1 104  w  sq,  ;
irray,  History  of  Gruk  Sculpture,  2.  p.  152/^^.  ;  Collignon,  Hist,  de  la
t  Grecque,  I.  pp.  429-435 ;  Overbeck,  Gesch,  d,  griech,  Plastik,^
12-339 ;  P.  Gardner,  New  Chapters  in  Greek  History,  p.  281.

9.  cleansing  the  land  of  the  Eleans  etc    There  is  a  parallel
Lugean  stable  in  the  Norse  tale  of  *  The  Mastermaid '  (Dasent's
'  Tales  from  the  Norse^  p.  62  sqq,)     A  prince,  who  is  out  on  his
comes  to  a  giant's  house,  and  is  ordered  by  the  giant  to  clean  his
The  prince  sets  to  work  with  a  pitchfork,  but  for  every  pitchfork-
he  tosses  out  ten  more  come  in.     But  a  princess,  who  lived  in
It's  house,  tells  him  to  turn  the  pitchfork  upside  down  and  toss
e  handle.     He  does  so,  and  in  a  trice  the  stable  was  clean  as
1  been  scoured.     Is  it  possible  that  in  one  version  of  the  Greek
.thena  may  have  similarly  helped  Hercules  ?     In  the  metope
is  standing  beside  the  hero  and  pointing  with  her  hand  at  the
dung  (see  above,  p.  525).

9.  the  deer.  The  deer  which  Hercules  had  to  bring  to  his
Iter  Eurystheus  was  said  to  be  a  hind  with  golden  horns
,  Olymp,  iii.  50  sqq,  ;  Euripides,  Hercules  FurenSy  375  sq,)
le  only  species  of  deer  in  which  the  hind  has  antlers  is  the  rein-
id  as  Hercules  is  said  to  have  gone  to  the  far  north  in  search

III  2  M


530  THE  IMAGE  OF  ZEUS  BK.  t.  us

of  the  hind  with  the  golden  horns  (Pindar,  Lc,\  it  is  not  improbabk
that  in  this  legend  we  have  a  report  which  had  reached  Greece  of  tk
existence  of  the  reindeer.  This  explanation  of  the  legend  is  dne  IB
Prof.  W.  Ridgeway.     See  Americcm  Journal  of  Arckaeaiogy^  9  (1894]^

p.  571  sq.

10.  10.  Ab  yon  enter  the  bronze  doors  etc  As  to  the  interiai
of  the  temple  see  above,  p.  498  sqq,

_     10.  10.  Iphitns  being  crowned  by Kceolilrta,     Cp.  ▼.  36u  2.

11.  I.  The  god  is  seated  on  a  throne  etc  This  colossal  inoge
of  Zeus  by  Phidias  was  the  most  famous  statue  of  antiquity.  But  of
the  many  ancient  writers  who  mention  it,  Pausanias  alone  attenqned
to  describe  it  in  detail.  The  traditions  as  to  the  dimensions  of  Ae
image  are  very  discrepant.  See  note  on  v.  11.  9.  Strabo  tells  «
(viii.  p.  353)  that  the  image,  though  seated,  almost  touched  the  roof
with  its  head,  giving  the  spectator  an  impression  that  if  it  stood  tq»  it
would  lift  off  the  roof  of  the  temple.  He  also  informs  us  (viiL  pi
354)  that  Phidias  was  assisted  in  the  work  by  his  nephew,  the  painter
Panaenus,  who  helped  to  paint  the  image,  especially  the  drapery.  It
is  said  that  Panaenus  asked  Phidias  what  model  he  proposed  to
follow  in  making  the  image,  and  that  Phidias  replied  that  he  intended
to  follow  the  description  which  Homer  gives  of  the  god  in  the  lUtd^
527  sqq.)\

The  son  of  Cronus  spake  and  nodded  with  his  dark  brow,
And  the  ambrosial  locks  waved  from  the  king's
Immortal  head,  and  he  shook  great  Ol3niipus.

This  story  is  told  by  several  ancient  writers  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  353 ;  Dio
Chrysostom,  Or,  xii.,  vol.  i.  p.  220,  ed.  Dindorf;  Eustathius,  on  Homer,
//.  i.  529,  p.  145  ;  Valerius  Maximus,  iii.  7.  Ext.  4  ;  Macrobius,  Sd,
V.  13.  23).  The  workshop  in  which  Phidias  made  the  statue  was
within  the  Altis  and  was  shown  to  visitors  down  to  the  time  of  Pan-
sanias  (v.  15.  i  note).  An  inscription  under  the  feet  of  the  image  set
forth  that  Phidias  was  the  sculptor  (Paus.  v.  10.  2).  On  the  finger  of
the  image  Phidias  carved  the  name  of  his  friend  Pantarces  (Clement
of  Alexandria,  Protrept  iv.  53,  p.  47,  ed.  Potter;  Photius,  Lexicon^  s-v.
'Pa/ivoucrta  Ne/xccis).

The  testimony  of  antiquity  to  the  extraordinary  beauty  and  majesty
of  the  image  is  very  strong.  The  Roman  general  Paulus  Aemilius  ivas
deeply  moved  by  the  sight  of  it  ;  he  felt  as  if  in  the  presence  of  the
god  himself,  and  declared  that  Phidias  alone  had  succeeded  in  embody-
ing the  Homeric  conception  of  Zeus  (Livy,  xlv.  28  ;  Plutarch,  Aemiius
Pau/uSy  28  ;  Polybius,  quoted  by  Suidas,  s,v.  4>€tSias).  Cicero  says
that  Phidias  fashioned  the  image,  not  after  any  living  model,  but  after
that  ideal  beauty  which  he  saw  with  the  inward  eye  alone  (OratcTy  ii.
8).  Quintilian  asserts  that  the  beauty  of  the  image  served  to  strengthen
religion,  the  majesty  of  the  image  equalling  the  majesty  of  the  god
{Insi,  OraL  xii.  10.  9).  A  poet  declared  that  either  the  god  must  hart
come  from  heaven  to  earth  to  show  Phidias  his  image,  or  that  Phidias
must  have   gone   to  heaven   to  behold  it  (AnthoL  Palat,^  Appendix


CH.  XI  THE  IMAGE  OF  ZEUS  531

Planudea,  iv.  81).  The  statue  was  reckoned  one  of  the  seven  wonders
of  the  world  (Hyginus,  Fab,  223),  and  to  die  without  having  seen  it
was  deemed  a  misfortune  (Epictetus,  Dissert,  i.  6.  23).  The  rhetorician
Dio  Chrysostom,  a  man  of  fine  taste,  extolled  it  in  one  of  his  speeches
(Or,  xii.)  He  calls  it  ^*the  most  beautiful  image  on  earth,  and  the
dearest  to  the  gods"  (voL  i.  p.  220,  ed.  Dindorf).  He  represents
Phidias  speaking  of  his  "  peaceful  and  gentle  Zeus,  the  overseer,  as  it
were,  of  united  and  harmonious  Greece,  whom  by  the  help  of  my  art
and  of  the  wise  and  good  city  of  Elis  I  set  up,  mild  and  august  in  an
unconstrained  attitude,  the  giver  of  life  and  breath  and  all  good  things,
the  common  father  and  saviour  of  mankind"  (vol.  i.  p.  236  sq,)  And
again  in  a  fine  passage  he  says :  "  Methinks  that  if  one  who  is  heavy
laden  in  mind,  who  has  drained  the  cup  of  misfortune  and  sorrow  in
life,  and  whom  sweet  sleep  visits  no  more,  were  to  stand  before  this
image,  he  would  forget  all  the  griefs  and  troubles  that  are  incident  to
the  life  of  man"  (vol.  i.  p.  229  sq,)

The  office  of  cleansing  the  image  was  hereditary  in  the  family  of

Phidias  (Fans.  v.   14.   5).     Oil  was  applied  to  it  to  prevent  the  ivory

from  splitting  (v.  11.  10)  ;  and  when,  in  spite  of  these  precautions,  the

ivory  cracked,  it  was  fitted  together  again  by  the  sculptor  Damophon

(iv.    31.   6).     In  the  time  of  Julius  Caesar  the  image  was  struck  by

lightning  (Eusebius,  Praep.  Evang,  iv.  2.  9).     The  emperor  Caligula

meditated  transporting  the  image  to  Rome,  and  replacing  the  head  of

Zeus   with  his  own ;  but  it  is  said  that  the  ship  which  was  built  to

convey  the   image   perished  by  lightning,   and    that  as  often  as  the

emperor's  agents  approached  to  lay  hands  on  the  image,  it  burst  into  a

loud  peal  of  laughter  (Suetonius,  Caligula^  22  ;  Dio  Cassius,  lix.   28.

3  sq. ;  Josephus,  Ant,  Jud,  xix.   i).     The  image  may  have  perished  in

the  fire  which  consumed  the  temple  of  Zeus  in  the  time  of  Theodosius

II. y    who  began    to    reign    in   408    A.D.    (Schol.   on    Lucian,   Rhetor,

prcucept,  10,  vol.  4.  p.  221,  ed.  Jacobitz).     But  the  Byzantine  historian

Cedrenus  tells  us  that  at  a  later  time  it  stood  in  the  palace  of  Lausus

at  Constantinople  (Histor,  Compend,  vol.  i.  p.  564,  ed.  Bekker ;  Over-

beck,  Schriftqtulleny  §  754).     That  palace  was  burnt  down  in  475  A.D.,

and  the  image  of  Zeus  may  have  perished  with  it  (Overbeck,  l.c)

Strange  as  it  may  seem,  no  statues  have  come  down  to  us  which
can  with  any  probability  be  identified  as  copies  of  this  most  famous  of
all  ancient  statues.  It  used  to  be  thought  that  the  bust  of  Zeus  which
was  found  at  Otricoli  and  is  now  in  the  Vatican  was  copied  from  the
Olympian  Zeus  of  Phidias,  and  represented  it  fairly  well.  The  type  of
head  is  leonine,  with  high  pointed  forehead,  broad  nose,  and  great
masses  of  matted  hair,  like  a  lion's  mane.  But  this  view  is  now  aban-
doned. Stephani  combated  it  strongly,  maintaining  that  the  bust  in
question  represents  a  later  and  somewhat  degenerate  type.  The  only
well  authenticated  copies  of  the  statue  are  on  coins  of  Elis ;  the  best
are  on  two  coins  of  Hadrian's  reign.  One  of  them,  now  in  Florence,
represents  the  whole  statue  (Fig.  72) ;  the  other,  now  in  Paris,  repre-
sents the  head  only  (Fig.  73).  On  the  former  of  these  coins  (Fig.  72)  we
see  the  god  seated  on  his  throne,  which  has  the  form  of  an  armchair  with


53»


THE  IMAGE  OF  ZBVS


a  high  back  ;  on  his  extended  right  hand  be  supports  the  winged
of  Victory  mentioned  by  PAusanias ;  in  bis  raised  left  hasd  helwU!
upright  a  long  sceptre  ;  his  feet  rest  on  a  foot-
stool.     His   mantle   is   brought  over   his  left
shoulder  and  drapes  the  upper  part  of  his  left
arm.      Whether   be    wore   a   tunic   under   the
mantle,  or  whether  the  upper  part  of  his  body
was  left  bare,  the  coin  does  not  enable  us  to
determine,  since  it  exhibits  the  statue  only  in
profile.     But  on  another  coin  of  Elis,  now  in
Berlin,  which  shows  the  statue  at  fiill  length,
the  upper  part  of  the  body  seems  to  be  naked.     ^^  ^_,«,^o.  <w  no
On  the  head  of  Zeus,  as  represented  by  the  ^^„  „  ^^^

Paris  coin  (Fig.  73),  we  observe  the  crown  of

olive  mentioned  by  Pausanias;  the  god's  long  hair  £Uls  is  tieuu
down  the  back  of  the  neck ;  his  beard  is  long ;  bis  features  massn,
with  an  expression  of  mild  gravity  ud
dignity.

To  these  copies  of  the   statue  may  dm
perhaps  be    added  a  fresco  which  was  db-
covered  on  the  wall  of  a  building  at  Eleosiii
I  few  years  ago.     The  building  scenns  to  bve
been  a  public  one  ;  it  is  situated  to  the  loatb-
west  of  the  great  portal  (see  voL  3.  p.  ;oik
and  is   believed   to   date   from    the  time  'i
Hadrian.      In  this  painting  the  god  is  pcr-
ric     — HiAn  OF  niu5      "'^y*'^  Seated  on  his  throne  or  bigh-badctd
(coin  or  elis).  armchair.      On  his  extended  right  hand  b(

holds  a  winged  image  of  Victory,  who  in  Ih
turn  is  holding  a  wreath  in  her  hands.  In  his  raised  left  hand  the  god
holds  upright  a  long  sceptre,  the  lower  end  of  which  rests  on  tht
ground.  Unfortunately  the  upper  part  of  the  sceptre  and  the  wholeof
the  god's  head,  with  the  exception  of  a  piece  of  the  beard,  have  be^n
effaced.  The  arms  and  the  body  are  bare  and  are  painted  a  mdd;
colour ;  the  lower  limbs  arc  draped  in  a  violet  mantle  with  a  gr^D
border,  the  end  of  which  is  brought  over  the  left  shoulder.  The  feet  arf
shod  in  sandals  and  rest  on  a  square  four-legged  stool.  This  paintie^',
if  it  is  indeed  a  copy  of  Phidias's  great  statue,  is  of  some  interest,  since
it  confirms  Pausanias's  evidence  as  to  the  sandals  on  the  god's  Ikc,
See  'E^/«pi!  apyaLokoyiK-ii,  1888,  p.  77  sqq.,  with  pi.  5.

The  questions  as  to  the  exact  type  of  the  statue  and  the  manner  in
which  the  throne,  described  by  Pausanias  in  the  present  chapter,  sbouU
be  restored,  have  given  rise  to  a  good  deal  of  speculation.  But  in  ix
absence  of  sufificicnt  materials  to  enable  us  to  form  a  judgment  on  tbKC
questions,  the  discussion  of  them  is  somewhat  barren.

Those  who  with  to  go  into  the  subject  should  consult  Quatrein^-de.Qiui>c>  >
LtJupiliT  Otympien  (Paris,  1S15)  1  Schubait,  'Zui  Beschieiljung  dcs  Dlympiscli"i
Jupiter  bei  Pausanias  <.  10.  li,'  Ztitiikriftfilr  Aliertku>iuiBiittnsck^,T  (l%Vt-
PP>  3^5-413;  Brunn,  in  <f  RnoA' olr//'  /lu/uWn,  13  (1851),  pp.  10S-117;  id.,Gt!A.


CH.  XI  THE  IMAGE  OF  ZEUS  533

der  grUch,  KUnstUr^  i.  p.  \(i%sqq,  ;  Overbeck,  *  Uebcr  den  Kopf  des  phidias'schen
2^us/  Berichie  iibtrdU  Verhandlungen  d,  kbn,  sacks,  GeselL  d,  IVissen.  zu  Leipzig^
Philolog.-histor.  Classe,  18  (1866),  pp.  173-190;  iV/.,  Kumtmythologie^  2.  pp.  34-
45  ;  iV/.,  Griech,  Pleuiik^^  i.  pp.  356-362  ;  E.  Petersen,  Die  Kunst  bei  Phidias j
pp.  342-418 ;  Friedlander,  *Der  Zeus  des  Phidias  auf  den  MUnzen  von  Elis,'
Manaisbtricktt  d,  kon.  preuss,  Akad,  d,  IVissen.  zu  Berlin^  1874,  pp.  498-501  ;
a£,  in  Archdologische  ZcUung^  34  (1876),  p.  34;  Stephani,  in  Compte  Rendu  (St.
Petenbarg),  1875,  PP*  l6l-i9i8;  Murray,  History  of  Greek  Sculpture,  2,  pp.  123-
131  ;  Lucy  M.  Mitcnell,  History  of  Ancient  Sculpture,  f^.  301-306;  Collignon,
Phidias,  pp.  105- 113;  id,  Histoire  de  la  Sculpture  Grecque,  i.  pp.  526-533;
Wfddstein,  'Phidias,  in  Baumeister's  Denkmdler,  pp.  1316- 13 19  ;  Imhoof-Blumer
and  Gardner,  Num,  Comm,  on  Paus.  p.  71  sq,,  with  pi.  P  xx.  xxi.  xxii.  xxiii;
Botticher,  Olympiad  pp.  312-317;  Adler,  reported  in  Berliner  pkilologiscke
Wockensckrift,  11  (189 1),  p.  1184.

The  question  has  been  much  debated  whether  Phidias  made  his
statue  of  Zeus  at  Olympia  before  or  after  his  statue  of  the  Virgin  Athena
^t  Athens.  The  only  direct  evidence  which  we  have  on  the  subject  is
\  statement  of  the  historian  Philochorus  (quoted  by  a  scholiast  on
Aristophanes,  Peace,  605)  that  after  dedicating  the  statue  of  Virgin
Athena  at  Athens  in  01  85.  3  (438  B.C.)  Phidias  was  brought  to  trial
yti  SL  charge  of  having  embezzled  some  of  the  ivory  provided  for  the
>tatue,  and  that  thereupon  he  fled  to  Elis,  made  the  image  of  Zeus  in
Dlympia,  and  after  completing  it  died .  or  was  put  to  death  by  the
Eleans.  This  scholium  has  itself  been  the  theme  of  much  discussion,
3ut  the  able  investigations  of  Prof.  Scholl  of  Munich  leave  no  reasonable
^rround  for  doubt  that  the  whole  account  of  the  trial  and  subsequent
fortunes  of  Phidias  contained  in  the  scholium  is  a  quotation  from
Philochorus.  As  Philochorus  is  known  to  have  been  a  careful  and  well-
nformed  historian,  living  in  the  fourth  and  third  centuries  B.C,  and  as
lis  statement  as  to  the  Zeus  being  a  later  work  than  the  Virgin  Athena
s  contradicted  by  no  ancient  authority,  his  testimony  is  not  to  be
•ejected  without  grave  cause.  Three  chief  reasons  have  been  adduced
o  show  that  Philochorus,  or  at  all  events  the  scholiast  who  cites  him^  was
nistaken,  and  that  Phidias  made  the  Zeus  before  the  Virgin  Athena.

( I )  It  is  said  that  the  scholiast's  account  is  irreconcilable  with  Plu-
arch's  narrative  of  the  trial  and  death  of  Phidias,  and  that  the  testimony
>f  Plutarch  is  to  be  preferred  to  that  of  the  scholiast.  For  in  explaining
he  causes  which  led  to  the  outbreak  of  the  Peloponnesian  war  Plutarch
^ys  that  Phidias  was  brought  to  trial  at  Athens  on  a  charge  of  having
embezzled  some  of  the  gold  provided  for  the  image  of  Athena,  and  of
laving  introduced  portraits  of  himself  and  Pericles  into  the  shield  of  the
roddess,  in  consequence  of  which  Phidias  was  thrown  into  prison,  where
le  died  or  was  poisoned  (Plutarch,  Pericles,  31).  Thus  Plutarch
ipparently  believed  that  the  trial  of  Phidias  took  place,  not  in  438  B.C.
[the  date  assigned  to  it  by  Philochorus),  but  very  shortly  before  the
Peloj>onnesian  war,  in  432  or  431  B.C.  If  he  was  right  in  this  belief,
then  it  is  quite  possible  that  Phidias,  on  the  completion  of  his  statue  of
Virgin  Athena  at  Athens  in  438  B.C.,  went  to  Elis,  and  after  making  the
statue  of  Zeus  at  Olympia  returned  to  Athens,  was  brought  to  trial  there,
and  died  in  prison.  This  view  has  been  held  by  some  scholars.  But  it
is  more  probable  that  Plutarch  or  his  authority  was  misled  by  a  passage


534  THE  IMAGE  OF  ZEUS  bk.  v.  his

of  Aristophanes  {Peace^  605  sqq,)  into  bringing  the  trial  of  Phidias  down
to  the  time  immediately  before  the  Peloponnesian  war,  and  that  his
account  of  the  death  of  Phidias  in  prison  is  nothing  but  a  ccmjectmal
explanation  of  a  vague  reference  in  Aristophanes  to  the  *  misfortime '  of
Phidias.  For  a  comparison  of  Plutarch's  narrative  with  that  of  Diodoiiis
(xii.  38-41)  seems  to  show  that  Plutarch  tacitly,  as  Diodorus  avowedly,
followed  Ephorus,  and  that  Ephorus  had  blundered  seriously  by  accqit-
ing  as  grave  history  Aristophanes's  comic  account  of  the  origin  of  the
Peloponnesian  war.  The  untrustworthiness  of  Plutarch's  nanativt
is  further  suggested  by  the  nature  of  the  charges  which,  according  to
him,  were  brought  against  Phidias.  His  account  of  the  charge  ci  em-
bezzlement and  its  triumphant  refutation  was  probably  made  up  from  a
passage  of  Thucydides  (ii.  13.  4)  which  has  really  nothing  to  do  witb
the  trial  of  Phidias ;  and  the  absurd  charge  about  the  portraits  of
Pericles  and  Phidias  has  all  the  appearance  of  being  a  late  rhetorical
invention,  which  is  far  from  being  substantiated  by  the  supposed  cqses
of  the  shield  that  have  come  down  to  us  (vol  2.  pp.  156  sq,y  317).

(2)  It  is  urged  that  if  the  image  of  Zeus  was  not  begun  until  438
B.C.,  the  temple,  which  was  finished  about  456  B.C.,  remaned  without  as
image  for  nearly  twenty  years,  and  that  this  is  improbable.  To  this  it
may  be  answered  that  many  causes  of  which  we  are  now  ignorant  may
have  prevented  the  Eleans  from  having  the  image  made  sooner.  For
example,  their  treasury  may  have  been  drained  by  the  expense  of  build-
ing the  temple.

(3)  Pliny  dates  Phidias  in  01.  83  (448  B.C.),  and  it  has  been  sug-
gested that  he  did  so  because  Phidias*s  chief  work,  the  great  image  of
Zeus  at  Olympia,  was  dedicated  in  that  year.  But  this  is  a  mere  coo-
jecture.  Pliny  may  well  have  dated  Phidias  in  the  eighty-third  Olympiad
because  the  Parthenon  was  begun  in  the  second  year  (447  B.C)  of  that
Olympiad.

On  the  whole,  then,  the  arguments  for  rejecting  the  evidence  tH
Philochorus  and  dating  the  Zeus  before  the  Virgin  Athena  are  insuflficienL
On  the  other  hand,  the  later  date  of  the  Zeus,  affirmed  by  Philochonis,
is  corroborated  by  other  considerations.

( 1 )  Phidias  is  said  to  have  had  an  affection  for  Pantarces,  an  Elean,
who  won  an  Olympic  victory  in  the  boys*  wrestling  match  in  OL  86
(436  B.C.)  (Paus.  v.  II.  3,  vi.  10.  6  note).  This  agrees  excellently  with
the  view  that  Phidias  was  working  at  Olympia  from  438  B.C  onward.

(2)  The  descendants  of  Phidias  remained  settled  in  Elis  for  centuries
(Paus.  v.  14.  5).  This  was  natural  enough  if  Phidias  spent  the  last
part  of  his  life  in  Elis  and  died  there,  as  Philochorus  says  he  did ;  bot
it  is  much  less  intelligible  if  Phidias's  connexion  with  Elis  terminated
with  the  dedication  of  the  statue  of  Zeus  in  448  B.C.,  many  years  before
his  death.

(3)  No  very  decided  argument  either  way  can  be  deduced  from  a
comparison  of  |he  cella  of  the  temple  of  Zeus  with  the  cella  of  the
Parthenon,  but  owthe  whole  the  balance  of  the  architectural  evidence
inclines,  in  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  opinion,  in  favour  of  the  later  date  of  the  Zeus.
The  small  square  pavement  of  black  Eleusinian  stone  in  front  of  the  image


CH.  XI  THE  IMAGE  OF  ZEUS  535

of  Zeus  appears  to  Dr.  Dorpfeld  a  conscious  imitation  of  the  larger  square
pavement  in  front  of  the  image  of  Virgin  Athena.  "  Besides,"  he  adds,
*<  it  is  more  probable  that  in  settling  the  great  dimensions  of  his  gold-
«and-ivory  images  Phidias  was  guided  by  the  dimensions  of  the  broad
cella  of  the  Parthenon,  and  that  afterwards,  at  the  wish  of  the  Eleans,
he  retained  them  in  his  Olympian  Zeus,  although  in  fact  they  were  much
too  large  for  the  size  of  the  building"  {Olympia:  Ergebnisse,  Textband
2.  p.  16).  The  use  of  black  Eleusinian  stone  side  by  side  with  white
marble  in  the  Olympian  temple  also  favours  the  later  date  of  the  Zeus  ;
for  at  Athens  this  combination  of  black  and  white  occurs  only  in
buildings  which  are  later  than  the  Parthenon,  as  in  the  Propylaea  and
Erechtheum  {op.  cit.  p.  20).

Thus  the  image  of  Zeus  was  probably  begun  in  438  B.C.  How  long
it  was  in  making  is  not  recorded  and  we  cannot  guess,  since  the  date  of
Phidias's  death  is  unknown.  Until  recently,  indeed,  it  was  inferred  from
the  scholium  on  Aristophanes  {Peace^  605),  to  which  reference  has
already  been  made,  that  Phidias  died  or  was  put  to  death  in  OL  87
(432  B.C.)  But  Sauppe  and  Prof.  SchoU  have  proved  conclusively  that
this  date  is  assigned  by  the  scholiast,  not  to  the  death  of  Phidias,  but  to
the  protest  of  the  Megarians  against  their  exclusion  from  the  Athenian
marts.

One  more  point  may  here  be  mentioned,  though  it  does  not  directly
bear  on  the  question  of  the  relative  dates  of  the  Zeus  and  the  Virgin
Athena.  The  statement  that  Phidias  was  put  to  death  by  the  Eleans,
though  it  apparently  rests  on  the  authority  of  Philochorus,  as  quoted  by
the  scholiast  on  Aristophanes,  is  generally  and  with  justice  rejected  by
modem  scholars.  Another  scholiast  on  the  same  passage  of  Aristophanes
{Peace^  605)  adds  the  fiuther  detail  that  the  charge  on  which  he  was
executed  by  the  Eleans  was  one  of  embezzlement.  Now  it  is  hardly
credible  that  the  sculptor  should  have  been  tried  and  punished  for
embezzlement  by  both  the  states  on  which  he  shed  immortal  glory  by
the  two  greatest  of  his  works,  especially  as  the  ancients  themselves
inform  us  that  at  Athens  the  accusation  was  trumped  up  by  a  political
party  for  no  other  purpose  than  to  discredit  Pericles,  the  artisf  s  patron
and  friend.  In  all  probability,  the  story  of  the  trial  and  execution  of
'Phidias  at  Elis  is  merely  a  rhetorical  embellishment  tacked  on  the
artist's  biography  by  some  foolish  writer  who  wished  to  point  the  moral
of  the  world's  ingratitude  to  its  great  men.  It  is  strongly  discountenanced
by  the  honours  which  the  descendants  of  Phidias  enjoyed  at  Olympia  for
centuries  after  his  death  (Paus.  v.  14.  5).  If  the  artist  had  been  executed
as  a  criminal,  is  it  likely  that  his  descendants  would  have  been  allowed
to  inherit  the  honourable  ofHce  of  Burnishers  of  the  image  ?

Sec  H.  Saappe,  *Der  Tod  des  Pheidias,'  Gottinger  Ncuhrichten  d,  k,  Gesell,  d,
JVissen,  1867,  No.  10,  pp.  173-194;  £.  Petei;sen,  <  Das  Ende  des  Pheidias,'
Archaohgische  Zeitung,  25  (1867),  pp.  22-25  >  ^*  Michaelis, '  Phidias  Tod/  ArchdoL
Zeiiuff^,  34  (1876),  pp.  1 58- 161 ;  E  Curtius,  '  Phidias  Tod  und  Philochoros,'
ArchacL  Zniung,  35  (1877),  pp.  134-136  ;  td.^  Griech,  Geschichte^^  2.  jp.  851  sq.  ;
H.  Brunn,  in  Sittungsberichte  of  the  Bavarian  Academy  (Munich),  Philosopn.-
philolog.  CI.,  1878,  voL  I.  pp.  460-464  ;  H.  MUlIer-StrUbing,  *  Die  Legenden  vom
Tode  des  '?\ki6id^y  FleckHsetisJahrbiUher,  28  (1882),  pp.  289-340 ;  G.  Loeschcke,


536  THE  PAINTINGS  OF  PANAENUS  bk.  ▼.  ilB

<  Phidias  Tod  und  die  Chronologie  des  olympischen  Zeus/  in  Histmrischi  Iht^
suchungen  A,  Schafer  gewidmet  (Bonn,  1882),  pp.  25-46 ;  id.^  'Nochnub  Fliddiai
Tod  und  die  Chronologie  des  olympischen  Zeus,*  Festschrift  sumfih^M^Ju^
Jubildum  des  Vereins  von  AUerthutnsfreunden  im  Rkeinlande  (lk>nn,  1891),  pfu
16-22;  SchoU,  'Der  Prozess  des  Phidias/  SUtungsberichU  of  the  Btnnto-
Academy  (Munich),  Philo8oph.-philolog.  CI.,  1888,  voL  I.  pp.  1-53;  Mnn^,
HUt,  of  Greek  Sculpture^  2.  p.  104  sqq. ;  CoUignon,  HisU  de  la  Scuiptwre  Gncfie,
I.  p.  525  sq, ;  Furtwangler,  Meisterwerke  d.  griech.  Plastik^  pp.  58-69.

11.  I.  she  weaxB  a  ribbon  etc.  On  the  ancient  custom  of  adorning
persons,  animals,  and  lifeless  objects  with  ribbons,  see  Stephani,  in
Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg),  1874,  p.  137  sqq.

11.  I.  the  bird  perched  on  the  sceptre  is  the  eagle.  On  the
eagle  as  a  symbol  of  Zeus  see  K.  Sittl,  *  Der  Adler  als  Attribat  des  Zeos,'
Fleckeiseris  Jahrbiicher^  Supplem.  14  (1885),  pp.  3-42.

11.  I.  On  the  robe  are  wrought the  lily  flowen.    Mr.

Famell,  from  a  comparison  of  a  passage  of  Athenaeus  (xv.  p.  684  e),
has  suggested  that  the  lilies  may  have  been  symbols  of  immortality
{Classical  Review^  4  (1890),  p.  68  sq.)  See  the  Critical  Noteonthb
passage,  vol.  i.  p.  584.

11.  2.  ApoUo  and  Artemis  are  shooting  down  the  children  of
Niobe.  Prof.  Furtwangler  thinks  that  copies  of  this  group  have  coQie
down  to  us  in  some  fine  reliefs  of  Roman  date  {Mdsterwerke  d.  grieck
Plastiky  p.  68  sq,)

11.  3.  the  contests  for  boys  were  not  yet  instituted  etc  See
Critical  Note  on  this  passage,  vol  i.  p.  584.

11.  3.  a  likeness  of  Pantarces  etc     See  vi.  10.  6  note.

11.  5.  these  barriers exhibit  paintings  by  Panaenns  etc

Difference  of  opinion  has  existed  as  to  where  these  barriers  were  placed
and  how  the  paintings  were  arranged  on  them.  The  most  obrioos
inference  from  the  words  of  Pausanias  is  that  the  barriers  extended
between  the  legs  of  the  throne,  that  the  paintings  of  Panaenas
were  arranged  on  the  barriers  at  the  two  sides  and  the  back  of  the
throne,  while  the  barrier  in  front  of  the  throne,  facing  the  door,
was  painted  plain  blue,  probably  because  it  was  in  great  part
hidden  by  the  legs  and  drapery  of  Zeus.  This  was,  in  outline,  the
view  taken  by  archaeologists  such  as  Preller  (see  Zeitschrift  f,  die  Alter-
thumswissenschafty  7  (1849),  p.  396  sq,\  H.  Brunn  (Gesch,  (L  grieck,
Kiinstlery  i.  pp.  171-173),  and  Prof.  E.  Petersen  {Die  Kunst  des
PheidiaSy  pp.  352,  359  sqq.\  before  the  complete  excavation  of  the
temple  of  Zeus.  But  when  the  German  excavations  had  established  the
fact  that  the  pedestal  of  the  image  and  a  square  space  in  front  of  it  were
enclosed  by  screens  or  barriers  which  extended  from  pillar  to  pillar  (see
above,  p.  499  sq.\  these  screens  or  barriers  were  not  unnaturaUy  identified
with  the  barriers  mentioned  by  Pausanias,  and  archaeologists  accord-
ingly concluded  that  on  these  barriers,  which  extended,  not  between  the
legs  of  the  throne,  but  between  the  pillars  of  the  cella^  were  placed  the
paintings  of  Panaenus.  Proceeding  on  this  assumption,  Mr.  A.  S.
Murray  proposed  an  arrangement  of  the  pictures,  which  has  been
accepted  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  {Olympia:  Ergebnisse^  Textband  2.  p.  13)
and  Prof.  Overbeck  {Gesch.  d.  griech,  Plastik^^  i.  p.  360  sq.)    The


I.  XI


THE  PAINTINGS  OF  PANAENUS


537


bjects  of  the  pictures,  as  described  by  Pausanias,  appear  at  first  sight
be  nine,  as  follows : —

1.  Hercules  and  Atlas.

2.  Theseus  and  Pirithous.

3.  Greece  and  Salamis.

4.  Hercules  and  the  Nemean  lion.

5.  Ajax  and  Cassandra.

6.  Hippodamia  and  her  mother  (Sterope).

7.  Hercules  and  Prometheus.

8.  Achilles  and  Penthesilea.

9.  Two  Hesperids.

r.  Murray  supposes  that  these  paintings  were  placed  on  the  inner  sides
the  marble  screens  or  barriers  which  enclosed  the  black  Eleusinian
vement  in  front  of  the  image,  and  that  they  were  distributed  thus : —


Door.


.sg


-       CO

C


Achilles.

and

Penthesilea


Hesperid.


Hesperid.


Hercules

and

Atlas.


Base  or  Imagk.


S


¥


n


f


538  THE  PAINTINGS  OF  PANAENUS  bk.  v.  eus


c-


cf


L


Thus  the  two  Hesperids  occupied  the  inner  sides  of  the  two  folding-
doors,  which  seem  to  have  been  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  hairier
which  faced  the  door  of  the  cella.

On  this  arrangement  Mr.  Murray  remarks :  *<  I  have  obtained  a
series  of  three  compositions,  in  each  of  which  the  centnd  place  is
occupied  by  two  female  figures  in  attitudes  of  repose,  while  around  them
is  chiefly  contest,  and  I  venture  to  think  that  Uxis  yields  an  important
artistic  advantage.  .  .  .  Under  my  arrangement  we  can  understand  also
why  Pausanias  mentioned  Achilles  and  Penthesileia  as  the  *  last '  group,
and  yet  immediately  adds  <  and  two  Hesperids,'  these  latter  having  ben
on  the  door  and  not  noticed  at  first,  or  at  all  events  treated  as  a
separate  item."  Mr.  Murray's  arrangement  has  the  further  advantage,
as  he  points  out,  of  bringing  together  the  closely  allied  subjects  of
Hercules  and  the  Hesperids.  The  outer  sides  of  all  three  barriers
were,  in  Mr.  Murray's  opinion,  painted  blue.  As  Pausanias  mentions  |
only  that  the  eastern  barrier,  facing  the  door,  was  painted  blue,  Mr.
Murray  infers  that  our  author  was  not  admitted  to  the  side  aisles,  firom
which  alone  the  outer  sides  of  the  northern  and  southern  barriers  were
visible.  He  thinks  that  the  paintings  of  Panaenus  would  not  be  placed
on  the  outer  sides  of  the  barriers  because  "  these  side  aisles  were  so
narrow  that  pictures  facing  them  could  not  have  been  appreciated,  even
if  fairly  lighted."  See  A.  S.  Murray,  *  The  barrier  of  the  throne  of  Zeus
at  Olympia,'  Mitthdlungen  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  7  (1882),  pp.  274*
276  ;  iV/.,  History  of  Greek  Sculpture^  2.  pp.  125-127.

Plausible  as  Mr.  Murray's  arrangement  is,  there  are  objections  to
it  which  seem  almost  insurmountable.  These  objections  have  been
raised  by  Mr.  E.  A.  Gardner.  Amongst  the  most  formidable  of  them
are  the  following.  If  Pausanias  meant  to  say  that  the  outer  side  of  the
barrier  was  painted  plain  blue,  and  that  on  the  inner  sides  were  the
paintings  of  Panaenus,  he  has  expressed  himself  very  ill  in  saying  that
"  the  part  of  these  barriers  ^  which  faces  the  door  is  painted  blue  only :
the  rest  exhibit  paintings  of  Panaenus."  From  this  description  we
certainly  should  not  gather,  what  Mr.  Murray  assumes,  that  one  and
the  same  barrier  was  painted  blue  on  the  one  side  and  decorated  with
pictures  by  Panaenus  on  the  other.

Again,  Pausanias  says  that  the  effect  of  these  painted  barriers  i^as
to  render  it  impossible  to  go  under  the  throne.  But  the  barriers
between  the  columns,  on  which  Mr.  Murray  supposes  the  paintings  to
have  been  placed,  could  not  effect  this  purpose ;  they  could  only
prevent  people  from  entering  the  enclosed  space  in  front  of  the  pedestal
The  great  throne  would  still,  in  the  absence  of  other  barriers,  be  open
between  the  legs  and  the  supporting  columns ;  and  any  one  who
entered  through  the  door  on  which  Mr.  Murray  places  the  pictures  of
the  Hesperids  would  have  been  quite  free  to  pass  imder  the  throne
from  side  to  side.

Again,  the  order  in  which  Pausanias  mentions  the  barriers  and  the
paintings  on  them  tells  very  strongly  against  the  view  that  these  barriers
were  no  part  of  the  throne  itself,  but  merely  enclosed  the  space  in  front
^  This  is  a  more  exact  rendering  than  I  have  given  above  (voL  x.  p.  252).


.  XI  THE  PAINTINGS  OF  PANAENUS  539

the  pedestal     It  is  to  be  remembered  that  the  throne  did  not  stand

the  floor  of  the  temple,  but  was  elevated  on  a  pedestal  of  black

4Mone   about   three   feet   high.      Now  in  describing   the  throne  itself

IPausanias  begins  with  the  feet  and  goes  upwards.     After  mentioning

legs,  the  cross-bars,  and  the  supporting  pillars,  he  describes  the

l^yainted   barriers   which   prevented   any  one   from   passing   under  the

llurone;  then  he  moves  upward  and  completes  his  description  of  the

^:  throne  by  enumerating  the  figures  carved  on  the  highest  part  of  it

Having  finished  his  account  of  the  throne,  he  describes  the  footstool ;

^len,  still  descending,  he  describes  the  pedestal  on  which  the  throne

itood ;  and  finally,  reaching  the  level  of  the  ground,  he  describes  the

'pavement  of  black  stone  in  front  of  the  pedestal.     It  is  plain  that  the

systematic  order  of  this  description  is  entirely  interrupted  if  we  suppose

tibat  after  describing  the  legs,  cross-bars,  and  supports  of  the  throne,

Pansanias  suddenly  breaks  of^  and  gets  down  (so  to  speak)  frt>m  the

pedestal  to  describe  the  barriers  which  enclosed  the  black  pavement  in

front  of  it ;  then  mounts  the  pedestal  again  and  proceeds  with  his

interrupted  description  of  the  throne,  completes  it,  adds  an  account  of

Uie  footstool  and  pedestal,  and  winds  up  with  a  description  of  the

black  pavement  in  front  of  the  pedestal     If  the  paintings  had  really

been  on  the  barriers  which  enclosed  this  pavement,  surely  Pausanias

Would  have  mentioned  them  along  with  th^  pavement,  and  not  in  the

middle  of  his  description  of  the  throne.

On  these  grounds  it  seems  we  must  reject  Mr.  Murray's  arrange-
ment of  the  pictures,  and  revert  to  the  old  view  that  the  painted  barriers
formed  an  integral  part  of  the  throne  itself,  and  were  placed  between
its  legs.  On  this  view  the  barrier  between  the  two  front  legs  of  the
throne  was  painted  blue ;  the  barriers  at  the  two  sides  and  the  back  of
the  throne  were  adorned  with  the  paintings  of  Panaenus.

But  how  were  the  paintings  arranged  on  these  three  barriers  ?
As  the  subjects  of  the  paintings  seem  at  first  sight  to  be  nine  in
number  (see  above,  p.  537),  it  is  natural  to  divide  them  into  three  sets
of  three  each,  and  to  place  a  set  of  three  pictures  on  each  of  the  three
sides,  in  such  a  way  that  each  picture  had  a  panel  to  itself.  To  this,
however,  it  has  been  objected  that  the  arrangement  would  be  un-
synmietrical ;  the  first  two  pictures  on  each  side  would  comprise  two
figures  in  close  dramatic  relation  (Hercules  and  Atlas,  Theseus  and
Pirithous,  etc),  while  the  third  would  consist  merely  of  two  female
figures  juxtaposed  (Greece  and  Salamis,  Hippodamia  and  Sterope,  etc.)
To  obviate  this  objection  Mr.  £.  A.  Gardner  has  suggested  that  the
picttu-es  on  each  barrier  were  arranged  not  in  three  but  in  four  panels,
and  that  these  panels  were  placed  not  in  a  single  horizontal  row,*  but
in  two  rows,  one  above  the  other,  thus :


540


THE  PAINTINGS  OF  PANAENUS


BK.  V.  KUS


Hercules

and

Atlas


Greece


Theseus

and
Pirithous


Salainis


Hercules

and
Nemean

lioa


Hippodamia


II
II


Ajax

and         I
Cassandra    ■


Hercules
and


'I

I

i


Sterope


AchiDcs
and

Pcnuicsutt


He^>end


nespena


Leftside


Back


Right  side


This  arrangement  fits  well  with  the  cross-bars  and  central  pillars,  wfaicb
were  placed  in  the  intervals  between  the  legs  of  the  throne ;  for  thus
the  pictures  in  the  upper  and  lower  rows  would  be  divided  from  each
other  by  the  cross-bars,  while  the  pictures  in  the  same  row  would  be
divided  from  each  other  by  the  central  pillar.  "  The  square,  metq)^
like  groups  find  their  natural  place  above  the  cross-bar,  divided  by  a
central  pillar.  On  each  side  of  this  central  pillar,  below  the  cross-bar,
stands  a  simple  female  figure,  almost  like  a  Caryatid,  to  help  the
appearance  of  strength  and  solidity  which,  for  the  lower  part  of  the
structure,  is  so  desirable."  Thus  too  the  picture  of  Achilles  and
Penthesilea,  described  by  Pausanias  as  the  last  of  the  pictures,  becomes
really  the  last,  being  placed  at  the  extreme  end  of  the  whole  series;
for  the  two  Hesperids,  mentioned  afterwards  by  Pausanias,  are  not
beyond  it  but  below  it.  Finally,  barriers  or  screens  of  this  sort
extending  between  the  legs  of  the  throne  were  structurally  a  great
advantage,  since  they  made  it  possible  to  set  up  inside  the  throne
whatever  supports  were  necessary  for  the  great  statue  seated  upon  it.
"When  we  remember  the  great  weight  and  complicated  structure  of
the  framework  necessary  to  a  colossal  statue,  we  see  that  it  would  have
been  extremely  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  make  such  a  statue  seated
upon  an  ordinary  chair,  of  which  the  seat  was  supported  only  at  the
sides.  And,  even  apart  from  extra  supports,  the  eight  legs  or  pillars
and  the  cross-bars,  as  described  by  Pausanias,  would  have  been
unsightly  if  one  could  have  seen  right  through  from  one  side  to  the
other,  and  would  have  made  the  whole,  as  has  been  suggested,  more
like  a  scaffolding  than  a  stately  throne.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  each
side  was  completely  filled  with  a  screen,  then  the  pillar  and  the  cross-
bar would  divide  the  field  it  offered  into  four  paneU  admirably  adapted
for  the  subjects  which  were  painted  upon  them  by  Panaenus,"  See  E.  A.
Gardner,  *  The  paintings  of  Panaenus  on  the  throne  of  the  Olympian
7.tnSj  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  14  (1894),  pp.  233-241.  For  a
discussion  of  the  older  views  as  to  the  barriers  and  the  arrangement  of
the  paintings  on  them,  see  Schubart,  in  Zeitschrift  f.  die  Alterthums-
wissenschaft^  7  (1849),  pp.  396-405.

11.  5.  Atlas  upholding  heaven  and  earth.    Cp.  v.  18.  4.    The
original  form  of  the  myth  was  that  Atlas  held  up  the  sky  only.     Homer


:h.  XI  THE  PAINTINGS  OF  PANAENUS  541

»ays  of  Atlas  {Odyss,  i.  52  sqq,)  that  **he  holds  the  tall  pillars  which
ceep  earth  and  sky  asunder."  Hesiod  (Theog,  517  sqq,y  746  sq,)
>peaks  of  Atlas  upholding  the  sky  (but  not  the  earth)  on  his  head  and
irms.  Cp.  Paus.  vi.  19.  8.  In  art  Atlas  is  represented  supporting  a
^lobe  on  which  are  depicted  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac  or  the  moon  and
jtars.  Sec  Miiller-Wieseler,  Denkmdler^  2.  pi.  Ixiv.  No.  822  ;  Abhand-
^ungen  of  the  Prussian  Academy  (Berlin),  Philolog.-histor.  Class,  1841,
plate  ii.  Cp.  Welcker,  Griechische  Gotterlehre^  i.  p.  746  sqq, ;  Gottf.
Hermann,  'De  Atlante,*  Opuscula^  7.  pp.  241-259.

It  is  a  very  common  idea  among  primitive  peoples,  especially  in  the
Pacific,  that  the  sky  used  to  lie  flat  down  on  the  earth,  till  it  was  pushed
jp  by  some  strong  man  or  wonderful  animal  or  plant.  For  example,
the  natives  of  Tracey  Island,  South  Pacific,  say  that  the  sky  used  to  lie
flat  on  the  coral  rocks  which  form  their  island.  But  vapour  from  the
rocks  caused  the  sky  to  ascend  a  little.  Then  one  man  went  to  the
north  and  pushed  up  the  sky  as  far  as  his  arms  would  reach  ;  and  his
brother  went  to  the  south  and  did  the  same ;  but  being  a  shorter  man
be  had  to  get  on  the  top  of  a  hillock  to  raise  the  sky  to  the  same  level
2S  his  brother  had  raised  it  to  in  the  north.  See  Turner,  Samoa^
p.  283.  The  natives  of  Peru,  one  of  the  Gilbert  Islands,  South  Pacific,
>ay  that  the  god  Naleu  separated  the  sky  from  the  earth,  and  pushed
t  up  with  long  poles  {ib,  p.  297).  The  Samoans  tell  how  the  giant
^od  Ti'iti'i  shoved  up  the  sky,  and  in  the  rock  where  he  stood  there  are
lollow  places  nearly  six  feet  long  which  are  shown  as  his  footprints
id,  p.  198).  Cp.  ib.  pp.  279  sq.^  285,  292,  293,  299,  300;  Andrew
Lang,  Custom  and  Myth^  P«  45  sq,  ;  /V/.,  Myih^  ritual  and  religion^
\.  p.  29  sq.

11.  5.  Greece.  As  to  the  personified  representation  of  Greece  on
he  famous  *  Persian '  vase,  see  Heydemann  in  Annali  delV  Institute^
^5  (1^73))  PP*  20-52  ;  and  on  the  personification  of  countries  in  ancient
irt  and  poetry  see  Ad.  Gerber,  in  Fleckeisetis  Jahrbiichery  Supplem.  1 3,
>p.  246-257.

11.  6.  the  ontrage  offered  by  AJax  to  Oassandra.    Cp.  i.  15.  2  ;

^  19.  5  note;  x.  26.  3.

11.  6.  Hercules  killed   the  eagle   that  was   tortnring

Prometheus  on  the  Oancasus.  This  scene  is  depicted  on  archaic
!^reek  vases.  Prometheus  is  seen  impaled,  in  front  of  him  is  the
^gle,  behind  him  is  Hercules  shooting  at  the  bird.  See  O.  Jahn,  in
4rchdologische  Zeitung^  16  (1858),  pp.  165-170,  Tafel  cxiv.  The
'clease  of  Prometheus  by  Hercules  was  the  subject  of  a  sculptured
proup  in  the  temple  of  Athena  at  Pergamus ;  fragments  of  the  group
^ere  discovered  in  the  German  excavations  of  1 880.  See  A.  Milch-
loefer,  Die  Befreiung  des  Prometheus^  ein  Fund  aus  Pergamon  (Berlin,
[882).  On  other  representations  of  the  same  subject  in  ancient  art
>ee  O.  Jahn,  Archdologische  Beitrdge^  p.  226  sqq.

Stories  of  giants  who  are  chained  on  mountains  are  still  current  in
he  Caucasus.  Thus  in  the  district  of  Kabarda,  on  the  northern  slope
)f  the  Caucasus,  a  story  goes  that  a  giant  is  chained  to  the  rock  on  Mt.
Elburz  for  having  tried  to  hurl  down  God.     Seldom  has  it  been  given


542  THE  PAINTINGS  OF  PANAENUS  BK.  v.  elb

to  mortal  men  to  see  him  ;  but  no  man  may  see  him  twice.  He  lies  in
a  sort  of  swoon,  but  from  time  to  time  he  wakes  up  and  asks  his  guards
if  the  rushes  still  grow  on  earth  and  the  sheep  still  drop  their  yotmg.
When  they  say  '  Yes,'  he  falls  into  a  fury  and  clanks  his  chains ;  tfait
makes  thimder.  He  rages  and  howls ;  that  makes  storms.  At  last
he  weeps  in  helpless  fury ;  that  makes  the  rain  and  swells  the  tonents
that  come  rushing  down  from  the  high  hills  and  tell  the  world  of  his
woes.

The  Geoi^gians  say  that  a  giant  called  Amiran  lies  chained  in  a
cave  upon  Mt  Elburz.  But  he  has  two  black  dogs  that  lick  his  fetters ;
so  the  fetters  grow  thinner  and  thinner,  till  every  year  on  Good  Friday
they  are  as  thin  as  a  lea^  and  next  day  they  would  snap  in  two,  if  it
were  not  that  on  the  Friday  evening  or  the  Saturday  morning  all  the
smiths  in  Georgia  give  some  swingeing  blows  on  their  anvils;  that
rivets  the  gianf  s  chains  once  more.  And  this  they  do  to  this  day.
See  Zeitschrift  fiir  Ethnologiey  14  (1882),  p.  86  sq,  A  recent  travelkr
in  Georgia  says :  "  As  is  well  known,  Mkhinvari  is  generally  identified
with  the  story  of  Prometheus,  although  the  mountain  does  not
correspond  with  the  description  given  by  Aeschylus.  Early  traveOen
even  went  so  far  as  to  assert  that  they  had  seen  the  very  chains  with
which  the  hero  was  bound,  and  there  is  a  local  legend  to  the  effect  that
a  giant  still  lies  there  in  fetters.  When  I  approached  the  mountain
from  Kobi  I  could  not  help  being  reminded  of  Prometheus.  I  saw  a
gigantic  black  space  of  irregular  form  with  snow  all  around  it;  an
imaginative  mind  found  in  this  irregular  tract  a  considerable  resemblance
to  a  human  shape  "  (Oliver  Wardrop,  The  Kingdom  of  Georgia  (London,
1888),  p.  60).     Cp.  Haxthausen,  Transkaukasia^  i.  p.  vii.

11.  6.  Penthesilea Achilles.      In  the  Trojan  war  Achilles

slew  Penthesilea,  queen  of  the  Amazons,  who  fought  on  the  Trojan  side.
But  no  sooner  had  he  slain  her  than,  struck  by  her  beauty,  he  mourned
her  death.  See  Dictys  Cretensis,  Bell,  Troj,  iv.  3  ;  SchoL  on  Homer,
//.  ii.  220.

11.  6.  two  Hesperids  bearing  the  apples  etc  To  fetch  a  golden
apple  from  the  Tree  of  Life  which  grew  at  the  end  of  the  world  is
a  task  set  the  hero  in  a  German  folk-tale  (Grimm's  Household  Tales,
No.  17).  In  a  Chaldean  myth  Izdhubar,  after  long  wanderings,  arrives
at  the  gates  of  Ocean,  where  he  finds  a  forest^  the  trees  of  which  bear
fruits  of  emerald  and  crystal,  and  wondrous  birds  lodge  in  the  branches.
Izdhubar  plucks  one  of  the  fruits  and  smites  one  of  the  birds.  He  b
pursued  by  a  nymph  Sidouri,  who  dwells  in  the  forest.  The  scene  is
represented  on  a  Babylonian  cylinder  found  at  Curium  in  Cyprus.  Mr.
C.  W.  Mansell  compares  the  story  with  that  of  Hercules  and  the  apples
of  the  Hesperides.  See  Gazette  ArchMogique^  5  (1879),  PP«  114-119-
"  Among  the  Chinese  a  tradition  is  preserved  concerning  a  mysterious
garden,  where  grew  a  tree,  bearing  apples  of  immortality,  guarded  by
a  winged  serpent,  called  a  dragon"  (E.  R.  Emerson,  Indian  Mythy
p.  136).

11.  6.  Panaenus  was  a  brother  of  Phidias.  Strabo  (viiu  p.  354)
calls  Panaenus  a  nephew  (dd€A</>tSo{;s)  of  Phidias.     Pliny,  like  Pausanias,


CH.  XI


THE  RELIEFS  ON  THE  PEDESTAL


543


calls  him  the  brother  of  Phidias  (A^.  H,  xxxv.  54  and  57,  xxxvi.  177).
Brunn  agreed  with  Strabo  (though  he  translated  oScA^iSovs  by  Vetter),
^xdL  W.  Klein,  on  the  other  hand,  agrees  with  Pausanias  and  Pliny.  See
Brunn,  Gesch.  d.  griech.  Kunstler^  2.  p.  47  ;  W.  Klein,  in  Archaeolog,
epigraph,  Mittheilungen  aus  Oesterreich-Ungam^  12  (1888),  p.  98  sq,
Panaenus  flourished  01.  83  (448-445  B.C.),  according  to  Pliny  (A^.  H.
xxxv.  54).     Cp.  Brunn,  Lc.

11.  7-  in  the  Iliad  Homer  says  etc    See  //rW,  v.  749  sqq,

11.  7.  The  footBtool has  golden  lions.     It  is  not  clear  from

Pausanias's  words  whether  these  golden  lions  were  wrought  in  relief  on
the  footstool,  like  the  battle  of  Theseus  with  the  Amazons,  or  whether
they  were  modelled  in  the  rotmd  and  attached  to  some  part  of  the  foot-
stooL  The  general  and  most  probable  view  is  that  they  supported  the
stool  at  its  four  comers,  serving  instead  of  feet.  See  Schubart,  in
Zeitschrift  fiir  die  Alterthumswissenschafi^  7  (1849},  p.  405  sq.\
Brunn,  Gesch.  d,  griech,  Kiinstler^  i.  p.  174;  Murray,  Hist  of  Greek
Sculpture^  2.  p.  127;  Overbeck,  Gesch,  d,  griech,  PlasHk^^  i.  p.  360;
Adler,  in  Olympia  :  Ergebnisse,  Textband  2.  p.  16  note.

11.  8.  On  the  pedestal there  are  figures  of  gold  etc.     It  is

a  probable  conjecture  that  the  central  scene  of  this  composition  was  the
birth  of  Aphrodite  from  the  sea,  round  which  were  grouped  six  pairs  of
deities,  three  pairs  on  each  side,  the  whole  composition  being  terminated
on  one  side  by  the  Sun  in  his  chariot,  and  on  the  other  side  by  the
Moon  on  horseback.  The  arrangement  would  accordingly  be  as
follows :


"The  Sun


(Hephaestus)

xieiuies

Aphrodite

Apollo

Hercules

Poseidon

and

and

Love

and

and

and

aGxace

Hestia

and  ^
Persttasion

Artemis

Athena

Amphitrite

The  Moon


The  name  of  one  of  the  male  deities  has  clearly  dropped  out  of  the
text  of  Pausanias ;  it  was  probably  Hephaestus,  who  had  one  of  the
Graces  to  wife  (Paus.  ix.  35.  4).  A  composition  so  strictly  symmetrical
could  hardly,  as  Brunn  justly  observed,  be  distributed  round  the  four
sides  of  the  pedestal ;  it  probably  occupied  the  front  only.  This  is
confirmed  by  Pausanias's  remark  that  the  figures  of  Poseidon,  Amphitrite,
and  the  Moon  were  "  at  the  end  of  the  pedestal"  The  idea  which  the
composition  as  a  whole  was  meant  to  illustrate  is  clearly  that  of  the
all-pervading  power  of  the  goddess  of  Love  (^^  Hominum  divotnque
voluptas  ")  in  the  world  of  nature  and  of  the  gods.

Mr.  Thomas  Davidson  considers  that  the  central  subject  of  the
composition  was  the  marriage  of  Zeus  and  Hera,  round  whom  the  other
gods  were  grouped,  with  the  Sun  and  Moon  in  the  sky  above  them.
But  this  view  receives  no  support  from  the  description  of  Pausanias.

See  Brunn,  Gesch.  d,  griech,  Kiiftstler,  i.  p.  174  J^.  ;  E.  Petersen,  Die  Kunst
des  PheidiaSf  pp.  372-374 ;  Murray,  Hist,  of  Greek  Sculpture,  2,  p.  127  sq, ;
Overbeck,  Gesch,  d,  griech,  Plctstik,*  I.  p.  360 ;  Thomas  Davidson,  in  American
foumal  of  Philohgyt  2  (188 1 ),  p.  352  sq.


544  THE  REUEFS  ON  THE  PEDESTAL  bk.  v.  eus


11.  8.  Love  receiving  Aphrodite  as  BherijMBfinim  the  sea^  Then
is  extant  a  small  silver-gilt  medallion  on  which  Aphrodite  is  represemied
in  relief,  rising  from  the  sea,  while  the  winged  Love  (Eros)  bends  over  hs
and  receives  her  in  his  arms.  Prof.  Furtwangler  considers  it  highly  prob-
able that  this  is  a  copy  of  the  relief  on  the  throne  of  Zeus.  See  Gaxdk
arcfUoiogique^  5  (1879),  plate  19,  No.  2,  with  the  remarks  of  De  Witu,
pp.  1 71-174;  Murray,  Hist,  of  Greek  Sculpture^  2.  p.  127;  Roschers
Lexikon^  i.  p.  1356;  Y\xx\yi'2Xi^tx^  Meisterwerke  <L  griech.  PlasHk^\.
68.  On  the  birth  of  Aphrodite  from  the  sea,  and  the  fomoos  piaure  of
Apelles  representing  it,  see  Stephani,  in  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Peteisbuig),
1870-1,  pp.  111-143,  221-223;  /V/.,  1873,  pp.  6  sqg,^  43  sqq,\(^.
Benndorf,  in  MittheiL  <L  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  i  (1876),  pp.  5a-(56;  G
Treu,  *  Aphrodite  Anadyomene,*  Archdologische  Zeitung^  33  (1876),
pp.  39-45,  with  pi.  7  and  8.  A  terra-cotta  found  in  a  tomb  on  tk
peninsula  of  Taman,  in  South  Russia,  represents  Aphrodite  vsam^
from  a  two-valved  cockle-shell.  Stephani  conjectured  that  she  was  so
represented  on  the  base  of  the  image  of  Zeus,  and  that  the  terra-cotta
may  be  a  copy  of  that  sculpture.  Prof.  Treu,  however,  disagrees  witb
him,  and  so  did  Prof.  Overbeck  {Gesch,  d.  grieck,  Plastik^^  i.  p.  372).

11.  8.  the  Moon  riding  what  seeniB  to  me  a  hoiBd.  In  vase
paintings  and  on  coins  the  Moon  is  sometimes  represented  on  horseback
It  has  been  pointed  out  that  *^  in  most  cases  where  we  have  in  Greek
art  a  female  figure  on  horseback,  the  presumption  is  in  favour  of  its
identification  with  Selene  [the  Moon].  Riding  figures  are  very  rarely
represented,  except  in  the  case  of  an  Amazon."  See  Mr.  Cecil  Smith,
in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  9  (1888),  p.  7  sqq, ;  Roscher,  Udir
Selene  und  Verwandtes  (Leipzig,  1890),  p.  39  sqq,  ;  K.  D.  Mylonas,
in  'E<f}r]fjL€pls  dpxaioXoytKrj^  1893,  pp.  218-222,  with  pL  1 5.  More
commonly  the  Moon  was  portrayed  riding  in  a  chariot  See  O.  Jahn,
Archdologische  Beitrdge^  pp.  5 1  sqq,^  79  sqq.  The  "  silly  story  "  aboot
the  moon  and  the  mule  to  which  Pausanias  alludes  is  probably  the  one
mentioned  by  Festus,  s,v,  mulus^  who  says  (p.  148,  ed.  Miiller)  that  the
moon  was  supposed  to  ride  a  mule  because  she  was  as  barren  as  a
mule  ;  or  because,  just  as  a  mule  was  not  bom  of  a  mule  but  of  a  mare,
so  the  moon  shone  not  by  her  own  light  but  by  the  light  of  the  sun.

11.  9.  the  measurements of  Zens.     The  measurements  of

the  image  are  very  variously  given  by  ancient  writers.  Hyginus  speaks
of  it  {Fab,  223)  as  60  feet  (high).  Others  speak  of  it  as  100  feet  or
even  100  cubits  high.  See  Overbeck,  Schriftquellen^  ^732,  733,  734t
736-738  ;  Brunn,  Gesch,  d,  griech.  Kilns  tier ^  i.  p.  175  sq.  We  have  to
remember  that  the  total  height  of  the  temple  was  only  68  feet  (Paus.  v.
I  o.  3).  From  the  dimensions  of  the  temple  and  the  statement  of  Strabo
as  to  the  size  of  the  image  (see  above,  p.  5  30),  Prof.  Adler  has  calculated
that  the  statue  was  seven  times  the  size  of  lifci  {Olympia :  Ergedmsu^
Textband  2.  p.  15  note).

11.  10.  The  ground  in  front  of  the  image  is  flagged witb

black  stone  etc.     See  above,  p.  500.

11.  10.  oil  is  good  for  the  image  etc.  Various  conjectures  have
been  propounded  as  to  the  way  in  which  the  oil  was  applied  so  as  to


CH.  XII  THE  CURTAIN  OF  THE  TEMPLE  545

preserve  the  image  from  the  injurious  effect  of  the  marsh  air.     Metho-
dius informs  us  that  Phidias  gave  orders  to  pour  out  oil  in  front  of  the
image  *'  so  as  to  keep  it  immortal  as  far  as  possible  '^  (Photius,  Biblio-
tAecOy  p.  293  b  I  sqq,^  ed.  Bekker).     But  it  is  hardly  to  be  thought
that   the  mere  evaporation  of  the  oil  so  poured  out  could  avail  to
counteract  the  influence  of  the  climate.     The  most  probable  explanation
was  suggested  by  Schubart.     He  pointed  out  that  the  wooden  core  of
the  statue  would  be  much  more  likely  than  the  ivory  plates  to  suffer
from  the  moisture  of  the  air  and  the  changes  of  temperature,  and  that
if  the  ivory  of  the  statue  cracked,  as  we  know  it  did  (Paus.  iv.  31.  6),  this
was  probably  an  effect  of  the  warping,  shrinking,  or  swelling  of  the  wooden
framework  on  which  the  ivory  plates  were  fastened.     Accordingly  he
supposed  that  the  oil  was  applied,  not  to  the  ivory,  but  to  the  wooden
core  by  means  of  tubes  or  channels  which  ramified  through  the  colossal
image   like   veins   in   the  human  body.     The  oil,  being  poured  into
these  tubes,  would  soak  into  the  wood  and  keep  it  from  warping  and
shrinking ;  and  the  excess  would  trickle  out,  by  some  secret  outlet,
into  the  basin  of  black  and  white  stone  in  front  of  the  image.     The
apertures  of  the  tubes  at  their  upper  ends  were  doubtless  hidden  away
in  inconspicuous  parts  of  the  image,  and  were  probably  closed  with
ivory  plugs.     This  explanation  is  confirmed  by  the  similar  treatment  of
the  wooden  image  of  Artemis  at  Ephesus ;  there  were  a  great  many
holes  in  the  image  into  which  perfumed  oil  was  poured  to  preserve  the
wood  from  splitting  (Pliny,  N,  H.  xvi.  213  sq,)     The  scented  oil  of
Chaeronea,  distilled  from  roses,  lilies,  and  other  flowers,  was  smeared
on  wooden  images  to  keep  them  from  rotting  (Paus.  ix.  41.  7).     See
Schubart,  in  Zeitschrift  f,   die  Alterthumswissenschafty   7  (1849),  pp.
407-413.    Schubart's  explanation  is  accepted  by  Brunn  {Gesch.  d,  griech.
KunstleTj  i.  p.  176  sq,)  and  Overbeck  {Gesch.  d,  griech.  Plastik,^  i.
p.  362).     On  ancient  methods  of  preserving  statues  from  the  effects  of
weather  and  climate,  see  £.  Kuhnert,  *  De  cura  statuarum  apud  Graecos,'
Berliner  StudienfUr  classische  Philologies  i  (1883),  p.  331  sqq.

12.  I.  the  things  which  project  from  an  elephant's  mouth  etc.
Pausanias  is  wrong  in  arguing  that  an  elephant's  tusks  are  horns,  not
teeth ;  they  are  really  a  pair  of  upper  incisor  teeth  (Encyclopaedia
Britcmnica^  9th  ed.,  13.  p.  520).

12.  I.  tiie  elks the  Ethiopian  bulls.     See  ix.  21.  2  sq.^

with  the  notes.

12.  3.  they  imported  ivory  from  India  and  Ethiopia  etc.  See
Blumner,  Technologies  2.  p.  362  sq.  The  best  ivory  is  the  African,  and
the  finest  of  all  is  that  which  comes  from  near  the  equator.  The  tusks
of  the  African  elephants  are  also,  as  a  rule,  larger  than  those  of  the
Indian  elephants  {Encyc,  Britann,  9th  ed.,  13.  pp.  520,  521).

12.  4.  a  woollen  curtain,  a  product  of  the  gay  Assyrian  looms
etc.  There  are  some  grounds  for  believing  that  this  Eastern  curtain,
presented  to  the  temple  of  Zeus  by  Antiochus,  had  been  originally  the
veil  of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem.  For  Antiochus  carried  off  the  veil
(I.  Maccabees,  i.  22  ;  Josephus,  Antiquit  Jud,  xii.  5.  4),  and  after
robbing  and  defiling  the  temple,  attempted  to  reconsecrate  it  to  Olym-

VOL.  Ill  2  N


546  THE  CURTAIN  OF  THE  TBMPUE  BK.T.iyi

pian  Zeus  (II.  Maccabees,  vi.  2).  It  would,  therefore,  be  Teiyiudnl
that  Antiochus  should  dedicate  to  Zeus  in  the  most  faunoos  of  kii
sanctuaries  the  curtain  which  he  had  carried  off  from  the  tenqib  t.
Jerusalem.  See  Clermont-Ganneau,  in  Journal  AsiaHqu€y  yme  S6i^
10  (1877),  pp.  212-215  ;  td,y  in  Palestine  Exphraiian  Fund:  QfiortsAi
Statement  for  1878,  p.  80  sq.  It  is  not  however  certain,  though  itii
highly  probable,  that  the  Antiochus  who  robbed  the  temple  at  Joi'
salem  of  its  veil  was  the  same  Antiochus  who  presented  the  cartuiti
the  temple  of  Zeus.  Josephus  (/.r.)  describes  the  veil  or  rather  itfe
carried  off  by  Antiochus  as  made  of  fine  Unen  (bussos)  and  scarlet.

A  Jewish  Rabbi,  a  contemporary  of  Pausanias,  asserted  that  he  sv
at  Rome  the  curtain  which  had  once  hung  in  the  temple  at  Jen*
salem.  The  passage  of  the  Talmud  in  which  this  statement  occun  w
pointed  out  to  me  by  my  friend  Dr.  S.  Schechter,  Reader  of  Tahnofr
in  the  University  of  Cambridge,  who  was  so  kind  as  to  translate  it  fir
me.  It  runs  thus  :  '<  Rabbi  Eleazar,  son  of  Rabbi  Jose,  said :  '  I  ns
in  Rome,  where  I  have  seen  the  curtain,  on  which  were  still  drops  of
blood  firom  the  sprinkling  on  the  Day  of  Atonement'"  {Babykmt^
Talmud^  Yoma  57  a).  This  statement,  if  true  (and  there  seems  nt
reason  to  question  it),  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  theory  that  the  cmtaki
in  the  temple  of  Zeus  at  Olympia  was  the  one  which  Antiochus  carried  off
from  Jerusalem ;  for  of  course  the  lost  oirtain  would  be  replaced  bf
another,  which  in  its  turn  may  very  well  have  been  brought  to  Rome^
along  with  the  golden  candlestick,  by  the  conqueror  Titus  after  the  sKk
of  Jerusalem.

When  Pausanias  speaks  of  *' Assyrian''  looms  (more  litenBy
woven  stuffs)  he  probably  means  no  more  than  "Syrian,"  as  wbcs
he  says  (i.  14.  7)  that  the  Assyrians  were  the  first  to  worship  tbe
Heavenly  Aphrodite.  On  Syrian  and  Babylonian  woven  stnfi^  see
Movers,  Die  Phoenizier^  ii.  3,  p.  258  sqq, ;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histtin
de  VArt  dans  PAntiquitdy  2.  pp.  769-776.  Some  fragments  of  andeot
textile  fabrics  have  survived  to  the  present  day,  and  are  now  in  the
Hermitage  Museum  at  St.  Petersburg.  See  Compte  Rendu  (St  Peters-
burg) for  1878-79,  Atlas,  pi.  iii.-vi.,  with  Stephani's  remarks  on  the
patterns  used  by  ancient  weavers,  p.  40  sqq.

We  are  told  that  in  Greek  temples  the  curtains  were  drawn  at  nooOi
and  a  sign  was  put  up  on  the  door  to  warn  people  that  they  were  not  to
enter,  because  the  gods  were  journeying  (Porphyry,  De  antra  nym-
pharum^  26  sq,^  The  noonday  hour  is  regarded  by  many  people  with
mystic  awe.     Cp.  The  Golden  Bought  i.  p.  142  x^.

The  mode  of  lowering  the  curtain  in  the  temple  of  Zeus,  instead  of
hauling  it  up  to  the  roof,  is  the  subject  of  an  article  by  Ruhl  ('  Der
Vorhang  im  Tempel  zu  Olympia,'  Archdologische  Zeitung^  13  (i855)»
pp.  41-48).

12.  5.  the  bronze  horses  of  Cynisca  etc.  The  pedestal  on  whidi
this  group  stood  has  been  discovered  at  Olympia.  Though  broken  dSi
below,  it  is  still  about  3  feet  high.  It  is  of  quadrangular  shape  and  of
white  marble  ;  on  the  top  are  three  holes  in  which  dowels  for  attaching  the
statue  were  fitted.     The  inscription  on  the  pedestal  runs  :  f  A«rc]AA««


CH.  XII  THE  HORSES  OF  CYNISCA  547


KoAAiicAiovs  [ciroi]i;(r€,  "  Apelleas,  son  of  Callicles,  made  (it)."   We  can

restore  the   artist's  name,   because  the  same  artist  made  a  statue  of

Cynisca  herself  of  which  the  pedestal  with  the  inscription  has  been

fixind.     See  vi.  i.  6  note.     The  inscription  dearly  belongs  to  the  first

half  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.     See  Olympia:  Ergebmsse^  Textband

5,  Die  InsckrifteHy  No.  634 ;  Furtwangler,  in  Archdologische  Zeitung^

37  (1879),  P'  152  J^. ;  Loewy,  Inschriften  griechischer  Bildhauery  No.

100.      It  was  formerly  stated  that  the  pedestal  was  found  exactly  in

the  position  described  by  Pausanias,  namely  in  the  north-west  comer  of

the  fore-temple.     But  it  appears  that  this  is  a  mistake.    There  certainly

was  a  pedestal  in  this  comer  of  the  fore-temple,  as  the  marks  on  the

pavement  show ;  indeed  the  base  itself  was  discovered  by  the  French

in  their  excavations.    But  this  base  was  not,  according  to  Dr.  Dorpfeld,

the  one  which  supported  the  bronze  horses  of  Cynisca.     See  Olympia  :

Ergebnisse^  Textband  2.  pp.  10,  18.     As  to  Cynisca  see  iii.  8.  i  ;  iii.

15.  I  ;  vi.  I.  6.

12,  6.  the  Achaean  confederacy.  The  Achaean  League  or  con-
federacy, which  had  been  dissolved  after  its  overthrow  by  Mummius
in  146  B.C.,  was  reconstituted  and  extended  by  Augustus;  the  annual
parliament  or  diet  of  the  confederacy  met  in  Aigos.  See  Mommsen,
Romische  Geschichtey  5.  p.  242  sq.

12.  6.  Trajan conquered  the  Getae.   As  to  Trajan's  campaigns

against  the  Getae  or  Dacians  in  what  is  now  Hungary,  see  Dio  Cassius,
facviiL  6-14,  who  describes  (c.  13)  the  stone  bridge  on  twenty  piers  which
Trajan  built  over  the  Danube.  The  piers  of  the  bridge  are  still  visible,
when  the  river  is  low,  at  the  village  of  Severin,  a  little  below  the  Iron
Gate.  See  Merivale,  History  of  the  Romans  under  the  Empire^  8.  p.
36  sq, ;  Smith's  Diet,  of  Geogr,  i.  p.  744.  The  history  of  these  Dacian
campaigns  is  graphically  represented  on  the  sculptured  reliefs  of  Trajan's
Golumiiy  which  is  still  standing  in  Rome.  The  sculptures  wind  in  spiral
bands  round  the  shaft  of  the  column.  <<  Though  wanting  in  grace  and
refinement,  they  are  full  of  dramatic  vigour,  and  form  a  sort  of  encyclo-
paedia of  Roman  costume,  arms,  and  military  engineering,  and  methods
of  advance  and  attack  by  land  and  river,  in  open  field,  and  against  walled
cities,  with  the  most  wonderful  fertility  of  design  and  careful  attention
to  detail"  (J.  H.  Middleton,  The  Remains  of  Ancient  Rome^  2.  p.  31).

12.  6.  made  war  on the  Parthiana.     See  Dio  Cassius,  bcviii.

1 7  sqq.

12.  6.  the  hatha  called  after  him.  These  baths,  of  which  few
or  no  remains  are  now  visible,  seem  to  have  adjoined  the  baths  of  Titus.
See  J.  H.  Middleton,  The  Remains  of  Ancient  Rome^  2.  p.  157  i)^.

12.  6.  a  building  for  horae-racea.  This  perhaps  refers  to  the
alterations  and  improvements  made  by  Trajan  in  the  Circus  Maximus
at  Rome.  See  Pliny,  Panegyricus^  51.  In  his  time  this  vast  Circus
**must  have  been  a  structiu^  of  extraordinary  size  and  magnificence,
wholly  covered  inside  and  out  with  white  marble,  relieved  with  gold  and
painting,  brilliant  mosaics,  columns  of  coloured  Oriental  marbles,  and
atatues  of  white  marble  and  gilt  bronze"  (J.  H.  Middleton,  op.  dt,  2.

p.  44).


548  THE  ERIDANUS  BK.  v.  bus

12.  6.  the  Fonim  at  Borne.  See  x.  5.  1 1 ;  J.  H.  Middleton,  op,  dL
2,  pp.  24-38.

12.  7.  the  round  stractores.  What  exactly  these  roond  structure
were  we  do  not  know.  Schubart  supposed  they  were  niches,  but  this
interpretation  is  not  favoured  by  the  expression  (icarourfceiKur/iara)  which
Pausanias  employs  to  designate  them.  The  same  word  is  used  by  him
elsewhere  (i.  20.  4,  vi.  22.  i)  as  a  general  designation  of  a  building  or
structure.

12.  7.  amber is  found  in  the  sands  of  the  Eridanus.    Whoe

was  the  Eridanus  ?  The  ancients  themselves  gave  different  answers,
and  modem  opinion  is  still  divided  on  the  subject.  Pausanias  seeos
to  have  regarded  it  as  a  river  that  flowed  into  the  northern  ocean
(see  i.  4.  i).  This  view  is  mentioned  by  Herodotus  (iii.  115):  "Some
think,"  he  says,  "  that  Eridanus  is  the  name  given  by  the  barbarians  to
a  river  which  falls  into  the  northern  sea,  and  firom  which  the  amber
comes."  But  Herodotus  himself  rejects  this  view,  and  seems  to  regard
the  river  as  fabulous.  Aeschylus  identified  the  Eridanus  with  the  Rhone
(Pliny,  Naf,  Hist  xxxvii.  32).  But  the  river  which  was  generally  bdd
to  be  the  Eridanus  was  the  Po.  Pherecydes,  a  contemporary  of
Herodotus,  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  who  so  identified  it  (Hyginus,
Fab,  154).  In  modem  times  it  has,  perhaps,  been  generaUy  believed
that  the  tme  Eridanus  was  one  of  the  rivers  of  northern  Europe  at  the
mouth  of  which  amber  is  found,  and  it  has  been  variously  identified  with
the  Rhine,  the  Vistula,  and  the  Rhodaune,  a  small  stream  which  flows
by  Danzig.  As  no  amber  is  found  on  the  Rhone  or  the  Po»  it  has  beeo
conjectured  that  the  reason  why  the  Greeks  so  commonly  regarded  one  or
other  of  these  rivers,  especially  the  latter,  as  the  amber-river,  may  have
been  that  the  amber  was  brought  to  them  from  the  mouths  of  these  riveis,
whither  it  had  been  conveyed  overland  firom  the  shores  of  the  Baltic  and
the  North  Sea.  See  Bahr  and  Rawlinson  on  Herodotus,  Lc, ;  Smith's
Diet,  of  Geogr,  s.v,  *  Eridanus ' ;  Miillenhoff,  Deutsche  Altertumskundty
I.  pp.  212-223,  473  sqq.  Prof.  G.  F.  Unger  thinks  that  the  Eridanus
was  a  river  of  Venetia.  See  his  paper,  *  Der  Eridanos  in  Venetian,'  in
Sitzungsberichte  of  the  Bavarian  Academy  (Munich),  Philos.-philolc^.
CI.  1878,  pp.  261-304.  Mr.  Oskar  Schneider  thinks  that  the  Eridanus
may  have  been  a  river  of  Sicily,  because  amber  is  found  there.  He
identifies  the  Sicilian  amber  with  the  lyncurium  of  the  ancients  (see
Pliny,  N,  H.  xxxvii.  52  sq,^  See  Oskar  Schneider,  Zur  Bemsteinjrage^
insbesondere  iiber  sicilianischen  Bernstein  und  das  Lynkurion  der  Alien
(Dresden,  1887).  Amber  has  been  discovered  in  the  royal  graves  at
Mycenae  and  in  prehistoric  sites  in  northem  and  central  Italy ;  and
by  chemical  analysis  it  has  been  shown  to  be  Baltic  amber.  It  tfaos
appears  that  trade  in  amber  must  have  been  carried  on  between  the
north  and  the  south  of  Europe  in  prehistoric  times.  The  route  was
probably  overland,  as  it  was  in  Pliny's  time  (A''.  H,  xxxvii.  43).  But
the  Phoenicians  may  have  conveyed  it  from  the  mouth  of  the  Rhone
and  the  head  of  the  Adriatic  to  various  parts  of  Greece  and  Italy.  In
Latium  and  Etruria  amber  has  been  found  in  nearly  all  the  tombs
which  contain  objects  of  Phoenician  manufacture.     On  the  other  hand,


CH.  XIII  THE  PELOPIUM  549

though  it  was  so  prized  in  the  west,  it  seems  to  have  been  unknown  in
the  great  empires  of  the  east.  At  least  it  has  not  been  found  in  Egypt
or  Assyria.

See  Schliemann,  Tiryns,  pp.  368-372;  W.  Hclhig^  Die  Ita/ikgrin  der  Pceiene,
p.  21 ;  Zeitschrift fUr  Ethnclogie,  14  (1882),  p.  Jl  sq,]  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire
de  rArt  dans  FAntiquiU,  3.  p.  854  sq»  The  locus  classicus  on  amber  is  Pliny,
A''.  II.  xxxviL  30-53.

12.  7-  the  other  electmm  is  an  alloy  of  gold  with  silver.
'^  Electrum,  although  merely  a  mixture  of  gold  and  silver,  was  regarded
by  the  ancients  as  a  peculiar  and  somewhat  less  valuable  variety  of  gold.
And  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  they  estimated  its  value  as  tenfold
that  of  silver,  and  three-fourths  that  of  gold,  this  being  in  ^sict  not  far
from  the  truth,  as  the  better  sort  of  electrum  does  contain  about  three-
fourths  of  gold  and  one-fourth  of  silver"  (Percy  Gardner,  Types  of  Greek
Cains ^  p.  4).  As  a  natural  alloy  it  is  found  in  the  bed  of  the  Pactolus
and  other  rivers  of  Western  Asia ;  the  oldest  Lydian  coins  were  made
of  it  See  Gardner,  op,  ciL  p.  2  ;  W.  Ridgeway,  Origin  of  metallic
Currency^  p.  204  ;  Hultsch,  Griech,  u,  rom.  Metrologie^  p.  180^^7.  On
electrum  in  Homer,  cp.  P.  Gignet,  *Sur  Pelectrum  d*Hom6re,*  Revue
arclUologique^  April-September,  1859,  pp.  235-241.

12.  8.  the  oath  of  alliance  for  a  hundred  years  etc.  This
treaty  was  concluded  in  420  B.C.  See  Thucydides,  v.  43-47.  A
fragment  of  it  has  been  found  engraved  on  stone  at  Athens  {C,  I.  A.  iv.
p.  14,  No.  46  b;  Hicks,  Greek  historical  Inscriptions^  No.  52).

13.  I.  a  precinct  set  apart  for  Peltfps.  Pausanias  has  exactly
described  the  situation  of  this  precinct,  which  occupied  a  low  hillock,
rising  3  to  6  feet  above  the  level  of  the  surrounding  ground,  to  the
north  of  the  temple  of  Zeus.  It  had  the  form  of  an  irregular  pentagon
with  a  Doric  portal  (propylaeum)  on  the  south-west.  Only  the  fotmda-
tions  of  the  portal  are  standing ;  the  columns  and  entablature  were  used
to  build  the  east  Byzantine  walL  The  portal  had  three  doorways,  a
broad  one  in  the  centre,  and  two  narrow  ones  at  the  sides.  A  ramp,
constructed  of  masonry  of  which  some  remains  exist,  led  up  to  it
There  seems  to  have  been  an  older  portal  on  the  same  site;  Dr.
D5rpfeld  considers  that  two  existing  columns  and  a  wall  belong  to  it.
The  materials  of  which  the  two  portals  were  built  are  different ;  in
both  of  them  the  stone  is  a  shell-limestone,  but  in  the  older  portal
the  limestone  is  hard  and  the  shells  completely  petrified;  in  the
newer  the  limestone  is  softer,  and  the  petrifaction  incomplete.  The
columns  of  the  older  portal  rested,  not  on  a  continuous  stylobate,  but
on  separate  foundations ;  hence  Dr.  D5rpfeld  conjectures  that  they
were  originally  of  wood.  As  to  the  date  of  this  older  portal  we  are
completely  in  the  dark.  The  newer  portal  seems  to  have  been  built
about  the  end  of  the  fifth  or  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  century  B.a,  to
judge  from  the  architectural  and  technical  style  of  the  remains.  In
Roman  times  the  portal  received  a  coating  of  stucco.  Of  the  enclosing
wall  of  the  sacred  precinct  a  piece  is  still  standing  on  the  east  side.     It


550  THE  PELOPIUM  bk.  v.  ujs

is  built  of  squared  blocks  of  conglomerate ;  but  whether  it  is  con-
temporary with  the  older  or  the  newer  portal,  we  cannot  say.

See  Olympia:  Ergebnisse^  Tafelband  i,  pi.  xlii. ;  W.  Dorpfeld,  in  Olympic'-
Ergebnisse^  Textband  2.  p.  56  sq,  ;  Die  FuntU  von  Olympia^  p.  24 ;  Curtins  and
AcUer,  Olympia  und  Umgegend,  p.  36;  Flasch,  'Olympia,'  in  Banmdster's
DenhndUr^  p.  1066  sq, ;  Baedeker,^  p.  341  sq.

Excavations  made  within  the  Pelopium  led  to  the  discovery  of  an
immense  quantity  of  archaic  bronzes  and  terra-cottas.  A  great  layer  of
ashes  deep  down  in  the  western  and  north-western  parts  of  the  predna
was  crowded  with  these  objects,  but  they  seem  to  have  belonged,  not
to  the  Pelopium,  but  to  a  great  altar  situated  between  the  Pelopium  and
the  Heraeum  (see  note  on  v.  14.  8  *  Olympian  Hera').  The  &ct  that
the  ashes  and  votive  offerings  of  the  altar  were  found  under  the  Pdo-
pium  proves  that  the  latter  was  of  more  recent  date  than  the  altar,
which  must  have  lost  much  of  its  sanctity  before  a  new  precinct  could
be  constructed  over  its  ashes.  Large  quantities  of  similar  objects,
however,  were  also  discovered  under  the  eastern  and  south-eastern  slope
of  the  hillock  which  is  enclosed  by  the  Pelopium ;  and  it  is  probable
that  the  objects  here  unearthed  are  votive  offerings  dedicated  to  Pdops.
They  include  terra-cotta  figures  of  men  and  animals ;  a  quantity  of
bronze  animals,  including  a  ram ;  miniature  kettles  to  be  set  on
tripods  ;  fragments  of  large  tripods ;  a  great  many  thin  strips  of  bronze
decorated  with  geometrical  patterns,  which  had  formed  parts  of  diadems
and  girdles ;  clasps  ;  pieces  of  necklaces  ;  armlets  ;  and  needles.  AH
these  things  are  of  very  ancient  pattern.  Further,  there  were  found
plain  rings  of  bronze  in  extraordinary  numbers ;  also  small  spiral
rings ;  cymbals ;  small  double  axes ;  leaf-shaped  spearheads ;  arrow-
heads ;  fragments  of  armour ;  griffin-heads  from  kettles,  and  several
small  ointment  pots,  of  old  Corinthian  style,  belonging  to  the  seventh
century  B.C. ;  and  finally  an  engraved  gem  of  the  eighth  or  seventh
century  B.C.  To  the  south-east,  within  the  Pelopium  but  near  the
boundary  wall,  a  hole  filled  with  black  earth  and  old  votive  offerings
was  discovered.  It  is  conjectured  to  have  been  the  pit  in  which
sacrifices  were  offered  to  Pelops.     See  Olympia  :  Ergebnisse^  Textband

4.  p.  3-

13.  2.  Hercules  also  was  a  great  grandson  of  Pelops  etc  That
is,  Hercules  as  well  as  Theseus  was  a  great  grandson  of  Pelops.  Cp.
v.  10.  8.

13.  2.  sacrificed  into  the  pit the  victim  is  a  black  nun.  The

black  colour  of  the  victim  and  the  fact  that  the  sacrifice  was  performed
in  a  trench  or  pit  instead  of  upon  an  altar  would  suffice  to  show  that
Pelops  was  worshipped  as  a  dead  man  or  hero,  not  as  a  god.  Cp.  ix.
39.  6  ;  and  note  on  iv.  32.  3.  The  tomb  of  Pelops  which  Pindar  men-
tions {Olytnp,  i.  149)  was  probably  the  mound  or  barrow  within  the
precinct.  It  is  said  that  once  a  year  all  the  lads  of  Peloponnese  lashed
themselves  on  the  grave  of  Pelops,  till  the  blood  streamed  down  their
backs  as  a  libation  to  the  departed  hero  (Schol.  on  Pindar,  Olymp,  i.
146).     We  are  also  told  that  the  competitors  in  the  games  sacrificed  to


CH,  XIII  SACRIFICES  TO  PELOPS  551

Pelops  before  they  sacrificed  to  Zeus  (Schol.  on  Pindar,  OL  i.  149).  To
the  south  of  the  Pelopium  ashes  and  charred  wood  have  been  found.
They  may  mark  the  spot  where  the  sacrifices  to  Pelops  were  offered
(Curtius,  Die  Altdre  von  Olympia^  p.  26;  /<r/.,  Gesammelte  Abhandlungeny
2.  p.  61  sq,)

13.  2.  to  give  the  neck to  the  woodxnaiL      A  sacrificial

calendar  of  Cos,  found  inscribed  upon  stone,  prescribes  the  shares  of  the
victim  which  were  to  be  allotted  to  various  persons  as  their  perquisites.
The  priest  generally  got  the  skin  and  a  leg,  but  on  the  occasion  of  the
sacrifice  of  a  sheep  and  a  pregnant  ewe  to  Demeter  he  was  to  get  the
ears.  Another  ofiicial  (whose  title  is  lost)  was,  at  the  sacrifice  of  a
choice  ox  to  Zeus  Polieus,  to  receive  half  of  the  liver  and  half  of  the
paunch ;  the  thyaphoros  was  to  get  part  of  the  leg,  a  double  slice
of  the  back,  some  fiesh  from  under  the  shoulders,  and  at/uuirtov  o/BeXo^
rpiK(a\ios  (which  seems  to  mean  as  much  of  the  blood  or  black-pudding
as  could  be  got  by  plunging  a  three-pronged  fork  into  it)  ;  to  the  family
of  the  Nestorids  was  to  be  given  a  double  slice  of  the  back ;  and  the
physicians,  flute-player,  smiths,  and  potters  were  also  to  receive  shares.
At  the  sacrifice  of  three  full-grown  sheep  and  a  choice  ox  to  Zeus  the
Contriver  (cp.  Paus.  ii.  22.  2)  the  family  of  the  Phyleomachids  were  to
get  a  hoof  and  the  fiat  of  a  foot  of  the  ox,  and  the  breast  and  another
piece  of  the  fiesh  of  each  sheep.  See  Jourmd  of  Hellenic  Studies^  9
(1888),  pp.  323-337;  Paton  and  Hicks,  The  Inscriptions  of  Cos^  Na
38,  pp.  88-90.  Elsewhere  it  was  provided  that  the  priest  should  have
the  tongue  and  a  shoulder,  or  a  leg  and  a  shoulder,  or  the  tongue,  the
loin,  and  the  tail.  See  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Graec,  Nos.  373,
37 ^y  379 ;  and  in  general  P.  Stengel,  Die  griech,  SakralcUierthiimer^
§  67 ;  Mr.  Ward  Fowler,  article  '  Sacrifice,'  in  Smith's  Diet,  of  Gr.  and
Rom,  Antiquities^  2.  p.  585.

13.  3.  the  white  poplar.  See  v.  14.  2  ;  and  cp.  v.  5.  5.  For  the
use  of  a  special  kind  of  wood  to  bum  the  fiesh  of  the  victims,  cp.  ii.  i  o.
5.  In  some  sacrifices  the  use  of  the  wood  of  the  vine  was  forbidden,  it
not  being  a  *  sober'  wood  (Schol.  on  Sophocles,  Oed,  Col,  100).  On
the  ritualistic  sense  of  'sober'  see  note  on  v.  15.  10.

13.  3.  Whoever  eats  of  the  flesh may  not  enter  the  temple

of  Zens.  The  reason  for  this  and  the  analogous  prohibition  at
Pergamus,  which  Pausanias  mentions,  probably  was  that,  Pelops  being
only  a  dead  man  or  hero,  his  worshippers  contracted  a  certain  ceremonial
defilement  which  they  might  not  carry  into  the  sanctuaries  of  the  high
gods.  In  the  island  of  Ceos  persons  who  had  offered  the  annual  sacrifices
to  their  departed  friends  were  unclean  for  two  days  afterwards,  and
might  not  enter  a  sanctuary.  Mourners,  too,  were  unclean  after  a
funeral  and  had  to  wash  before  they  became  *  clean.'  See  Dittenberger,
Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec,  Nos.  468,  469.  No  one  might  enter  the  sanctuary
of  Men  Tyrannus  for  ten  days  after  being  in  contact  with  the  dead
(Dittenberger,  Syll,  Ins,  Graec,  No.  379).

13.  4.  a  bone  of  Pelops.  Cp.  vi.  22.  i  note.  The  same  miraculous
virtue  was  ascribed  in  antiquity  to  bones  of  heroes  which  is  still  attributed
in  Roman  Catholic  countries  to  the  bones  of  saints.     Cp.  Index,  5,v,


552  MOUNT  SIPYLUS  bk.  v.  bus

-   -      -  -

*  Bone  ;'  Lobeck,  AglaophamuSy  p.  281  note  u ;  and  notes  on  i.  35. 5,
and  7.

13.  7.  In  my  country  there  are  still  left  signs  etc.  This  passage
is  important  as  proving  that  Pausanias  was  a  Lydian  ;  probably  he  was
a  native  of  Magnesia,  at  the  northern  foot  of  Mt.  Sipylus.  See  Introduc-
tion. There  is  no  place  to  which  he  is  so  fond  of  referring  as  Mt
Sipylus.  Professor  W.  M.  Ramsay,  who  has  traversed  the  mountain  io
all  directions  and  has  probably  seen  more  of  it  than  any  one  but

~  the  wood-cutters,  says :  '*  One  who  reads  over  the  passages  in  which
Pausanias  refers  to  Sipylos,  Niobe,  and  Tantalus,  cannot  ^1  to  be  stnick
with  the  life-like  and  telling  accuracy  of  his  language  ;  it  is  that  of  a

^  loving  eye-witness"  {Joum.  Hellenic  Studies^  3  (1882),  p.  62  note  3).
It  may  be  convenient  to  collect  here  the  scattered  references  made  by
Pausanias  to  the  natural  features  and  antiquities  of  the  mountain,  and  to
indicate  how  far  these  have  been  identified  in  modem  times.

Mount  Sipylus  is  a  short  range  of  mountains  stretching  east  and
west  between  the  gulf  and  plain  of  Smyrna  on  the  south  and  the  valley
of  the  Hermus  on  the  north.  The  range  falls  into  three  secticms  or
groups,  each  of  which  now  bears  a  special  name.  The  highest  and
steepest  is  the  eastern  section,  now  called  Manissa-dagh.  It  rises  to  the
height  of  about  5000  feet,  and  is  the  true  Sipylus ;  whether,  indeed,  the
name  Sipylus  was  applied  to  the  whole  range,  is  doubtful.  The  most
westerly  section  is  the  lowest  (about  2300  feet) ;  it  is  called  lamanlar-
dagk.  The  middle  section,  uniting  the  other  two,  is  the  Sabemdja^dagk
Two  sets  of  ancient  monuments  have  been  discovered  on  the  two
opposite  sides  of  the  range  ;  namely  one  set  on  the  northern  side  of  the
Mamssa-dagh^  the  other  on  the  southern  side  of  the  lamanlar-dagh.
As  these  two  sets  of  monuments  are  on  opposite  sides  and  at  opposite
ends  of  the  steep  and  rugged  chain,  it  is  probable  that  the  antiquities
mentioned  by  Pausanias  and  other  ancient  writers  are  to  be  identified
with  one  or  other  of  these  two  sets  of  monuments.  But  with  which  ?  the
southern  or  the  northern  ?  Archaeologists  have  been  divided  in  their
answer.  Texier  and  others  decided  in  favour  of  the  southern  set.  But
within  the  last  few  years  the  discovery  of  inscriptions  on  the  north  side
seems  to  have  finally  decided  the  question  in  ia.voMr  of  the  northern

\    monuments.     With  these,  then,  we  have  exclusively  to  deal.

On  the  south  side  of  the  fertile  valley  of  the  Hermus,  Mount  Sipylus
{Manissa-dagh)  towers  up  abruptly,  like  an  immense  wall  of  rock.  Its
sides  are  very  precipitous,  indeed  almost  perpendicular.  The  city  of
Magnesia,  the  modem  Manissa^  lies  immediately  at  its  foot.  About  four
miles  east  of  Magnesia  the  mountain  wall  of  rock  is  cleft,  right  down  to
the  level  of  the  Hermus  valley,  by  a  narrow  ravine  or  cafion,  which
pierces  deep  into  the  bowels  of  the  mountain.  It  is  called  by  the  Turks
the  Yarik  Kaya  or  *  rifted  rock.'  The  canon  is  only  about  100  feet
wide  ;  its  sides  are  sheer  walls  of  rock,  about  500  feet  high ;  there  is  a
magnificent  echo  in  it  A  small  stream  fiows  through  the  bottom;
it  is  probably  the  Achelous  of  Homer  {Iliad^  xxiv.  616).  It  is  plain
that  the  ravine  has  been  scooped  out  in  the  course  of  ages  by  the
stream  wearing  away  the  limestone  rock  ;  but  it  would  naturally  be


CH.  XIII  MOUNT  SIPYLUS  553

regarded  by  the  ancients  as  the  result  of  a  great  earthquake,  such  as  are
common  in  this  district.  On  the  western  edge  of  the  canon,  half-way
up  the  mountain-wall  of  Sipylus,  there  shoots  up  a  remarkable  crag,
which  stands  out  by  itself  from  the  mountain-side.  On  one  side  it  is
possible  from  its  sunmiit  to  drop  a  stone  900  feet  sheer  into  the  canon ;
on  all  other  sides  it  rises  with  a  perpendicular  face  100  feet  from  the
mountain.  Even  to  reach  the  foot  of  this  crag  from  the  plain,  stout
limbs  and  a  steady  head  are  needful ;  for  the  ancient  mule-path,  partly
hewn  out  of  the  rock,  partly  supported  on  walls  on  the  edge  of  precipices,
has  mostly  disappeared ;  and  there  is  nothing  for  it  but  to  cling  as  best
you  can  to  the  bushes  and  the  projections  of  the  rock.  In  this  way  you
at  last  reach  the  foot  of  the  cliff,  the  sheer  face  of  which  seems  to  bar  all
further  advance.  However,  on  the  western  side  of  the  crag  there  is  a
cleft  or  'chimney'  {cheminde\  as  they  would  call  it  in  Switzerland,
which  leads  up  to  the  top,  otherwise  quite  unapproachable,  of  the  crag.
In  antiquity  there  seems  to  have  been  a  staircase  in  the  *  chimney.'
The  first  few  steps  of  it  may  be  seen  under  the  bushes  with  which  the
rocky  fissure  is  overgrown.  The  upper  surface  of  the  crag,  reached
through  this  cleft,  is  nowhere  level ;  on  the  contrary,  it  slopes  like  the
roof  of  a  house  and  is  indeed  so  steep  that  to  climb  up  it  is  difficult.  There
are,  however,  twenty  or  thirty  foundations  of  houses  cut  in  the  rock  and
rising  one  above  the  other  like  the  steps  of  an  immense  staircase.  Also
there  are  seven  or  eight  bell-shaped  cisterns.

The  ancient  settlement  on  the  summit  of  this  remarkable  crag  would
seem  to  be  that  to  which  classical  writers  gave  the  name  of  Tantalis  or
the  dty  of  Tantalus.  They  affirmed,  indeed,  that  the  city  had  disappeared
into  a  chasm  produced  by  an  earthquake ;  but  probably  the  immense
ravine  beneath  suggested  the  idea  of  the  earthquake,  and  popular
mythology  completed  the  legend  by  asserting  that  the  old  city  had  been
hurled  down  into  its  depths.  See  Pausanias,  vii.  24.  13  ;  Pliny,  N<it.
Hist  ii.  205,  V.  117;  Aristides,  Orat.  xv.  vol.  i.  p.  371  sq,^  cd.
Dindorf ;  cp.  Strabo,  i.  p.  58.

On  the  very  topmost  pinnacle  of  the  crag  there  is  a  square  cutting  in
the  rock,  resembling  the  seat  of  a  large  arm-chair,  with  back  and  sides
complete.  It  is  about  5  feet  wide,  3  feet  from  front  to  back,  and  3  feet
high  at  the  back.  The  back  of  the  seat  (as  it  may  be  called)  is  simply
the  top  of  the  precipice,  which  falls  straight  down  into  the  ravine,  a  sheer
drop  of  900  feet  Across  the  ravine  soars  the  arid  rocky  wall  of
Sipylus.  On  the  other  side  the  eye  ranges  over  the  valley  of  the
Hermus,  stretched  like  a  map  at  one's  feet  There  seems  .to  be  little
doubt  that  this  remarkable  rock-cut  seat,  perched  on  the  pinnacle  of  the
dizzy  crag,  is  no  other  than  the  throne  of  Pelops'  mentioned  by
Pausanias  in  the  present  passage.  What  the  original  intention  of  the
cutting  may  have  been,  is  a  different  question.  Professor  W.  M.
Ramsay  thinks  it  was  probably  an  altar  on  which  offerings  were  laid.

Half  a  mile  to  the  west  of  the  ravine,  on  the  slope  of  the  mountain
about  300  feet  above  the  plain,  there  is  a  large  niche,  half  natural,  half
artificial,  in  the  face  of  the  cliffi  It  is  visible  from  the  plain  below  ;  a
steep  stony  path  leads  up  to  it.     The  niche  is  about  25  feet  high,  and  is


554  MOUNT  SIPYL  US  BK.  ▼.  uis

deeply  cut  into  the  rock.  In  the  middle  of  it  a  colossal  figure  is  caned
in  high  relief.  The  work  is  extremely  rude  and  the  outlines  are  de£ued
by  time ;  but  observers  are  agreed  that  the  figure  is  that  iA  a  woman
seated  on  a  throne  with  her  hands  on  her  breast  Small  square  boks
in  the  face  of  the  rock  show  that  votive  tablets  were  here  £Eisteoed
up,  and  that  the  place  was  therefore  a  sanctuary.  Till  recently  this  rode
image  was  identified  with  the  figure  of  Niobe  described  by  Pausanias  (L
21.3;  viii.  2.  7).  But  clearly  the  Niobe  of  Pausanias  was  a  natural  rock
which,  viewed  from  a  distance,  looked  like  a  woman,  but  seen  dose  at
hand  was  perceived  to  be  merely  a  rock.  Whereas  the  figure  in  tbe
niche  is  certainly  artificial,  and  its  resemblance  to  a  woman  increases,
instead  of  diminishes,  as  you  approach  it  Besides  Pausanias  says  tbat
the  figure  of  Niobe  was  seen  to  weep  in  sununer.  This  most  mean  that
water  trickled  over  it  fix>m  the  rocks  above.  But  the  image  in  the  niche
is  so  completely  protected  by  the  overhanging  rock  that  not  a  drop  of
water  wets  even  its  knees  in  heavy  rain ;  the  rain-drops  fiall  fxom  the
fi'ont  of  the  niche  quite  clear  of  the  figure.  Professor  W.  M.  Ramsay
and  Mr.  Humann  are  therefore  certainly  right  in  identifying  the  figure,
not  with  the  Niobe,  but  with  the  Mother  Plastene  mentioned  by  Pausanias
in  the  present  passage.  For  the  Mother  Plastene  was  on  the  mountain
below  the  chair  of  Pelops ;  and  this  answers  to  the  position  of  the  fugast
in  the  niche  relatively  to  the  *  throne  of  Pelops '  on  the  top  of  the  crag.
Again,  Pausanias  tells  us  (iii.  22.  4)  that  the  people  of  Magnesia,  to  the
north  of  Sipylus,  had  a  most  ancient  image  of  the  Mother  di  tfa«  Gods
upon  the  rock  of  Coddinus.  This  ancient  image  can  be  no  other  than
the  rude  figure  in  the  niche.  Finally,  the  identity  of  this  figure  in  the
niche,  first  with  the  Mother  Plastene  of  Pausanias,  and  secondly  with
the  Mother  of  the  Gods  mentioned  by  the  same  writer,  is  put  beyond  a
doubt  by  the  inscription  on  a  bronze  statuette  which  was  found  not  many
years  ago  near  the  niche.     The  inscription  is  as  follows  :

Mt/t/di  ^€(uv  nXcMTT^iTy
KaX/?eMreios  '0p<f>€vs

t,e,  *  Calvisius  Orpheus  dedicated  (this  statuette)  to  Plastene,  Mother  of
the  Gods.'  Further,  a  marble  statuette,  which  was  also  found  near  the
niche,  bears  the  following  inscription :  MrirpoBtapa  *AiroAAxi  fjofTfH
TLkaa-Trjirg  €vxrjvy  i\e.  *  Metrodora,  daughter  of  Apollas,  dedicated  (this
statuette)  to  Mother  Plastene  in  fulfilment  of  a  vow.'  This  latter
statuette  represents  Cybele  or  the  Mother  Plastene  (the  two  were  doubt-
less identical)  seated  on  a  throne,  with  a  lion  on  each  side  of  her ;  her
hands  rest  on  the  heads  of  the  lions.

Below  the  image  of  Mother  Plastene  there  is  a  small  lake  of  dear
water,  fed  by  countless  springs  that  gush  from  the  rocky  foot  of  the
mountain.  The  water  is  dammed  up  and  turns  a  mill.  Some  forty  or
fifty  years  ago,  before  it  was  dammed  up,  the  lake  covered  a  much  larger
area.  It  is  probably  the  Saloe  of  Pausanias  (vii.  24.  13),  the  Sale  of
Fliny  (Nat  Hist,  v.  117).

If  we  now  return  to  the  mouth  of  the  canon  and  proceed  eastward


:h.  XIII  MOUNT  SIPYLUS  555

Tom  it  for  about  three  hundred  yards  we  come  to  a  very  handsome
:omb  cut  in  a  sloping  rock  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain.  A  broad  flight
>f  steps  leads  up  to  a  platform,  from  which  the  tomb  is  entered.  It
:onsists  of  two  quadrangular  chambers,  one  behind  the  other,  connected
Mrith  each  other  by  a  doorway  exactly  in  the  middle  of  the  back  wall  of
rhe  outer  chamber.  The  roofs  of  both  chambers  are  slightly  arched.
rhere  is  no  inscription,  nor  any  trace  of  Greek  work.  The  style  of  the
:omb  is  very  like  that  of  the  Phrygian  tombs.  Professor  W.  M.  Ramsay
ind  Mr.  Humann  are  probably  again  right  in  identifying  this  remark-
able rock-cut  sepulchre  with  the  tomb  of  Tantalus  which  is  mentioned
Dy  Pausanias  in  the  present  passage  and  elsewhere  (ii.  22.  3).

There  are  still  two  places  on  Mount  Sipylus  mentioned  by
Pausanias  which  have  to  be  identified.  These  are  the  lake  of  Tantalus
ind  the  figure  of  Niobe.  The  lake  of  Tantalus  is  probably  the  Kara
G'ol  ('the  Black  Lake'),  a  romantic  pool  deep  in  the  heart  of  the
nountains.  Pausanias  tells  us  (viii.  17.  3)  that  he  had  seen  white
*agles  hovering  over  the  lake ;  and  the  Kara  G'dl  is  the  very  place  to
ook  for  eagles.  The  only  other  lake  in  the  mountains  is  Kyz  G'ol^  '  the
Vfaiden's  Lake.'  But  it  is  small  and  insignificant  and  seems  to  be
Dartly  artificial

As  to  the  figure  of  Niobe,  Mr.  Schweisthal  believed  that  he  had
liscovered  it  in  a  rock  immediately  to  the  east  of  the  canon  of  Yarik
Kaya,  The  rock  looked  to  him  like  a  woman  seated  and  lifting  her  arm
n  the  air.  But  Mr.  Humann,  who  examined  the  rock  and  photographed
t,  could  see  no  resemblance  to  a  woman.  It  seems  obvious,  indeed,
hat  a  rock  of  the  kind  described  by  Pausanias  cannot  be  identified
¥ith  any  approach  to  certainty  or  even  probability.  It  is  very  much
I  matter  of  individual  fancy  whether  a  particular  rock  resembles  a  woman
)r  not

As  to  the  group  of  monuments  on  the  southern  slope  of  lamanlar-
iagh  (the  western  section  of  Mt.  Sipylus),  they  comprise  an  acropolis,  a
>anctuary,  and  a  necropolis  consisting  of  about  forty  tombs,  all  in  the
shape  of  conical  masses  of  stones  resting  on  circular  substructions.  The
argest  of  these  tombs  has  been  generally  called  the  tomb  of  Tantalus.
[t  was  considerably  dilapidated  by  the  excavations  made  in  it  by  Texier
n  1835.

The  best  accounts  of  the  monuments  on  the  northern  side  of  Sipylus  are  those
)f  Professor  W.  M.  Ramsay,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  3  (1882),  pp.  33-68,
ind  Mr.  Humann,  in  MittheiL  d.  arch,  Inst  in  Athene  13  (1888),  pp.  22-41.
>ee  also  Martin  Schweisthal,  '  L'image  de  Niob^  et  Tautel  de  Zeus  Hypatos,'
Gazette  arclUologique^  12  (1887),  pp.  213-232.  Mr.  Schweisthal*s  results  are
mmmarised  by  Mr.  S.  Reinach,  in  Revue  archiologique^  3me  S^rie,  10  (1887),  p.
)7 ;  ib,  II  (1888),  p.  84.  For  the  inscriptions  quoted  above,  see  the  volumes  of
he  Revue  archiologique  just  referred  to,  p.  96  sq,  and  p.  83  sq,  respectively,
^or  other  descriptions  of  the  Mother  Plastene  (formerly  called  Niobe)  and  the
nonuments  on  the  south  side  of  Sipylus,  see  A.  Martin,  in  Revue  etrchiohgique^
\\  (1876),  pp.  328-330;  Hirschfeld,  in  Curtius's  'Beitrage  zur  Geschichte  und
Fopographie  Kleinasiens,*  pp.  74-84,  Abhandlungen  of  the  Prussian  Academy
Berlin),  1872 ;  G.  Weber,  *  Tumulus  et  Hieron  de  B^levi,'  Mowretw  koX  jSi/SXio-
>T^#n7  rrp  e^77eXt/c^  07C<>^^*  (Smyrna),  irep^odos  rfArr^,  1878-79,  1879-80,  pp.
$9-1 19  ;  K.  B.  Stark,  Nach  dem  griechischen  Orient^  pp.  231-254 ;  W.  M.  Ramsay,


556  THE  ALTAR  OF  ZEUS  bk.  v.  klis


'  Newly  -  discovered  sites  near  Smyrna,'  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  i  (1880),
•P«  63-74 ;  Sayce,  ib.  pp.  88-91  ;  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  /nsttluU,  4
.i^75)»  P-  93  >  Gollob  and  Krall,  'Zur  *'  Niabe-statue  "  am  Sipylos  bd  Magnesi,'
fViener  Stmlien,  4  (1882),  pp.  307-313.  Good  and  full  accounts  of  both  sets  of
monuments,  illustrated  with  woodcuts  and  plans,  are  given  by  Perrot  and  Chipiet,
Histoire  de  tArt  dans  tAntiquiti^  4.  pp.  752-759  ;  5.  pp.  39-67.


r.


13.  8.  The  altar  of  Olympian  Zens.  The  very  scanty  remains  of
this  altar  may  be  seen  to  the  east  of  the  Pelopium,  about  equidistant
from  the  temple  of  Zeus  and  the  temple  of  Hera.  Pausanias's  statement
that  the  altar  was  equidistant  from  the  Pelopiimi  and  the  temple  of  Hem
is  not  strictly  correct ;  it  is  nearer  the  Pelopium  than  the  Heraeuxn.
The  altar  occupied  nearly  the  middle  point  of  the  Altis  ;  its  shape  was
elliptical,  with  the  long  axis  directed  north  and  south.  The  dimensions
of  the  ellipse  agree  with  Pausanias's  statement  as  to  the  circumference
of  the  prothusis  or  lowest  stage  of  the  altar.  A  foundation  of  undressed
stones,  which  supported  the  altar,  is  now  partly  buried  ag^in.  Indeed
the  site  of  the  altar  is  marked  at  the  present  day,  not  by  an  elevation,
but  by  an  oval  depression  in  the  ground.

A  thin  layer  of  ashes  was  discovered  in  the  soil  round  about  the
altar ;  but  this  layer  was  at  a  higher  level  than  the  foundations  of  the
altar.  It  contained  bones,  cinders,  and  votive  offerings  resembling  in
kind,  though  vastly  fewer  in  number  than,  the  votive  offerings  whid
were  found  at  the  great  altar  between  the  Pelopiimi  and  the  Heraeom
(see  above,  p.  550}.  The  offerings  found  at  the  altar  of  Zeus  com-
prised some  figures  of  animals  in  terra-cotta,  and  bronze  objects  of  the
following  kinds  :  small  tripod-kettles  ;  bands  decorated  with  geometrical
patterns  ;  pieces  of  necklaces  ;  rings  ;  clasps  ;  nails  ;  fragments  of  large
tripods ;  heads  of  griffins  ;  vessels  of  sheet-bronze,  including  a  good
many  sacrificial  cups  ;  a  considerable  number  of  cymbals  ;  and  weapons,
including  the  only  bronze  sword  that  was  found  at  Olympia.  Pieces  of
large  iron  tripods  were  also  brought  to  light.

In  recent  years  Mr.  Wernicke  and  Dr.  Puchstein  have  proposed  to
identify  the  great  altar  of  Zeus,  not  with  the  remains  which  have  been
just  described,  but  with  the  great  altar  between  the  Pelopiimi  and  the
Heraeum  (see  note  on  v.  14.  8).  But  the  situation  of  the  latter  altar
does  not  answer  to  Pausanias's  description,  who  says  that  the  altar  of
Zeus  was  situated  in  front  {i.e.  to  the  east)  of  the  Pelopium  and
Heraeum.

See  Die  Funde  von  Olympia^  p.  23  sq.  ;  Curtius  und  Adler,  Olympia  und
Umgegend,  p.  35;  Flasch,  *  Olympia,*  in  Baumeister's  Denkmdler,  p.  1067;  A-
Botticher,  Olympia^'^  \>.  190  sqq, ;  Curtius,  Die  Altdre  von  Olympia^  p.  4  sq, ;  1^,
Gesammelte  Abhandlungen,  2.  p.  42  sq,  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  341  ;  K-  Wernicke,  in
Jahrbuch  d.  arch,  Inst.  9  (1894),  p.  9^  sq.  ;  Adler,  in  Jahrbuch  d.  arch.  Inst.  9
(1894),  Archaologischer  Anzeiger,  p.  85  sq.  ;  id.,  in  Jahrbuch  d,  arch.  Inst.  10
(1895),  Archaolog.  Anzeiger,  p.  108  sq.  ;  Puchstein,  ib.  p.  107  ;  Furt^^glcr,  in
Olympia :  Ergebnisse,  Textband  4.  p.  4.

13.  8.  the  altar  at  Pergamns.  The  only  other  ancient  writer  who
speaks  of  this  altar  is  Lucius  Ampelius  who  says  {Liber  Memorialise
viii.   14):  **  At  Pergamus  there  is  a  great  marble  altar,  40  feet  high,


CH.  XIII  THE  ALTAR  AT  PERGAMUS  557

with  very  large  sculptures;  it  comprises  the  battle  with  the  giants."
The  foundations  of  this  altar  and  large  portions  of  the  splendid
sculptured  frieze  representing  the  battle  of  the  giants,  were  discovered
by  the  German  excavators  in  recent  years.  The  altar,  though  included
in  the  market-place,  stood  high  up  on  the  slope  of  the  acropolis,
forming  a  conspicuous  object  even  at  a  great  distance.  It  occupied  the
middle  of  a  platform  which  was  supported  on  a  colossal  substruction
about  100  feet  square  by  about  18  feet  high.  A  grand  staircase,
cutting  into  the  substruction,  led  up  to  the  platform.  The  projecting
wings  of  the  substruction  on  either  side  of  the  staircase,  as  well  as  the
other  sides  of  the  substruction,  were  adorned  with  the  frieze  representing
the  battle  of  the  giants  in  relief.  The  substruction  was  crowned  with
an  Ionic  colonnade,  opening  outward,  which  thus  encircled  the  altar
proper,  except  on  the  side  facing  the  staircase.  The  back-wall  of  this
colonnade  was  decorated  with  a  smaller  frieze,  representing  legends
from  the  mythical  history  of  Pergamus.  See  R.  Bonn  und  A.  Conze  in
Die  Ergebnisse  der  Ausgrabungen  zu  Pergamon^  Vorldufiger  Berichty
(Berlin,  1880),  pp.  35-71  ;  Urlichs,  Pergamofty  Geschichte  und  Kunsty
p.  20  sqq, ;  Baumeister's  DenkmaUty  pp.  12 14  sqq,y  1249  ^^9*  ^^^  ^n
elaborate  discussion  of  the  sculptures  on  the  altar  see  H.  Brunn,
<  Ueber  die  kunstgeschichtliche  Stellung  der  pergamenischen  Giganto-
machie,'  in  Jahrbuch  der  kbn,  preuss.  Kunstsammlungeny  5.  Heft  iii.
(Berlin,  1884).  Before  the  excavations  at  Pergamus,  Brunn  had
rightly  conjectured  that  the  statements  of  Pausanias  and  Ampelius  about
the  altar  at  Pergamus  were  to  be  reconciled  by  supposing  that  the  altar
of  ashes  rested  upon  a  substruction  of  stone.  See  BulletHno  delP
JnstitutOy  1 87 1,  pp.  28-31.  For  other  altars  of  ashes  see  below,  v.
14.  8 ;  V.  14.  10;  v.  15.  9 ;  ix.  11.  7.  General  Cesnola  discovered
in  the  centre  of  the  temple  of  Golgoi,  in  Cyprus,  a  thick  layer  of  ashes
containing  some  large  pieces  of  carbonised  wood.  The  layer  appeared
to  be  10  feet  long  by  7  feet  wide.  See  Cesnola,  CypruSy  p.  150.  This
layer  of  ashes  doubtless  marked  the  site  of  the  altar,  as  Furtwangler
{Die  Bronzefunde  aus  OfymptOy  p.  30)  and  Holwerda  {Die  alien  Kyprier
in  Kunst  und  CultuSy  p.  2)  observe.

13.  8.  sacrificial  hearths.  The  Greek  word  is  kfrxapai.  Porphyry
tells  us  that  while  altars  were  used  in  the  worship  of  the  Olympic  gods,
sacrificial  hearths  were  employed  in  the  worship  of  chthonian  beings
and  of  heroes  {De  aniro  nympharunty  6).  Cp.  Stengel,  Diegriech,  SakrcU-
alteriiimery  §  6.

13.  10.  when  they  are  not  excluded  firom  Olympia.    Cp.  v.  6.  7.

13.  II.  on  the  nineteenth  day  of  the  month  Elaphins.  This
month  must  have  corresponded,  in  part  at  least,  to  our  March,  since
the  spring  equinox  fell  in  it.  See  vi.  20.  i.  On  the  Elean  calendar
sec  E.  Bischoff,  De  fastis  Graecorum  antiquioribusy  p.  346  sqq,

13.  II.  kiieading  them  with  the  water  of  the  iUpheus  etc.
This  is  mentioned  also  by  Plutarch  {De  defectu  oraculoruniy  4 1 )  and  a
scholiast  on  Pindar  {Olymfi.  xi.  (x.)  58).  Plutarch  says  the  paste
would  not  hold  together  when  they  tried  to  make  it  with  any  other
water.


\


558  ZEUS  A  VBRTBR  OF  FURS  bk.  t.  us

14.  I.  Thekitea do  not  moleBt  people  etc    ^  They  say  diat

in  Elis  there  are  kites  which  snatch  the  meat  from  persons  who  ve
carrying  it  through  the  market-place,  bat  do  not  touch  the  flesh  offend
in  sacrifice"  ([Aristotle,]  Mirab,  AuscuU.  123,  p.  43,  ed.  Westemiaim)L
Pliny  says  that  kites  snatched  food  neither  from  the  trays  set  out  npoo
graves  {ex  funerum  ferculis)  nor  from  the  altar  at  Olympia  (Al  iT.
X.  28).

14.  I.  the  EleaiiB  are  said  to  sacrifice  to  Zens  ATarter  of  Iliai
This  sacrifice  is  mentioned  also  by  Clement  of  Alexandria  (/Vo/ngML  i
3^9  P-  339  ^'  Potter).  Pliny  says:  "The  Eleans  invoke  the  flf
catching  god,  because  the  swarms  of  flies  breed  pestilence ;  and  no
sooner  is  the  sacrifice  offered  to  the  god  than  the  flies  perish "  (NtL
Hist,  X.  75).  Aelian  afiirms  that  during  the  Olympic  festival  the  flies
voluntarily  retired  to  the  opposite  bank  of  the  Alpheus  and  swarmed
back  when  the  festival  was  over  (AW.  An.  v.  1 7).  Pausanias  tells  os
(viii.  26.  7)  that  at  Aliphera  in  Arcadia  the  festival  of  Athena  «as
opened  with  sacrifice  and  prayer  to  the  Fly-catcher ;  and  that  afier  the
sacrifice  the  fiies  gave  no  more  trouble.  At  the  festival  of  Apollo  in  the
island  of  Leucas  an  ox  was  sacrificed  to  the  flies,  which,  glutted  with  the
blood,  thereupon  disappeared.  Aelian,  who  reports  this  {Not,  An,  xL
8),  adds  that  the  flies  of  Pisa  (meaning  Olympia)  were  more  virtuoos,
because  they  did  their  duty,  not  for  a  consideration,  but  out  of  pnxt
-  regard  for  the  god.  At  the  shrine  of  Hercules  in  the  Ox-market  at
Rome  flies  were  excluded,  because  when  Hercules  was  handing  the
flesh  to  the  priests  he  had  prayed  to  the  fly -catching  god  (Solinos,
i.  II).  Baal-zebub,  the  Philistine  god  of  Ekron,  whom  the  Jews
represented  as  a  prince  of  devils,  was  literally  Lord  Fly  or  Lord  of
the  Flies.  When  Ahaziah  was  sick  he  sent  to  consult  the  Lord  Fly's
oracle  (II.  Kings  i.  2,  3,  6,  16).  Cp.  Selden,  De  dis  SyriSy  Syntagma
ii.  6,  p.  301  sq, ;  Lenormant,  La  divination  chez  les  Chaldiens^  p.  95
sq,\  C.  W.  Mansell,  in  Gazette  archiologiquey  3  (1877),  p.  76;  W.
Robertson  Smith,  Religion  of  the  Semites^  p.  94  n.  6.  In  the  oM
Lithuanian  translation  of  the  Bible  Baal-zebub  is  translated  Mksiu
birblks^  i.e.  *  fly-hummer.'  Schleicher  thought  that  the  word  is  older
than  the  translation  of  the  Bible,  remarking  that  in  view  of  the  swarms
of  insects  which  the  short  summer  breeds  in  the  damp  climate  of
Lithuania  it  would  not  be  surprising  if  the  Lithuanians  had  had  a  Fly-
god.  See  Sitzungsberichte  d.  phil,  hisior,  Classe  d,  k,  Akad,  d.  WisufL
(Vienna),  11  (1854),  p.  loi  j^.  As  for  the  flies  at  Olympia,  the  hot
climate  and  the  low  damp  situation  still  breed  them  in  multitudes.  I
never  saw  such  swarms  of  flies  anywhere.  In  the  house  where  I  stayed
they  were  a  plague.  If  I  had  thought  that  a  sacrifice  to  Zeus  Avcitcr
of  Flies  would  have  rid  me  of  them,  I  would  gladly  have  offered  it

The  Oetaeans  of  Trachis  were  said  to  worship  a  Locust  Hercules,
because  Hercules  had  rid  them  of  locusts  ;  and  the  people  of  Erythrae
revered  Worm-killing  Hercules,  because  he  destroyed  the  worms  which
gnawed  the  vines  (Strabo,  xiii.  p.  613  ;  Eustathius,  on  Homer,  IHad^
i.  39).  Similarly,  as  Prof.  Ridgeway  has  shown  {Classical  Review^  10
(1896),  p.  21  sqq,\  Dionysus  Bassareus  is  probably  nothing  more  than


CH.  xiy  THE  ALTARS  AT  OLYMPIA  559

Foxy  Dionysus,  the  god  who  was  invoked  to  keep  the  foxes  from  the
vines.  For  biissara  was  a  kind  of  fox  (Tzetzes,  SchoL  on  Lycophron^
771),  and  foxes  were  notoriously  destructive  to  the  vines  (Theocritus,  i.
45  ^9Q'  J  ^<^g  of  Solomoriy  ii.  15).

We  may  conjecture  that  in  these  and  similar  cases  the  god  or  hero
who  is  implored  to  keep  off  or  destroy  insects  or  vermin  was  originally
conceived  as  himself  a  fly  or  locust  or  worm,  etc,  but  as  being  at  the
same  time  the  king  of  flies,  locusts,  worms,  or  what  not,  and  as  there-
fore able  to  protect  mankind  from  the  attacks  of  his  subjects.  To
induce  him  to  exert  his  power  and  stay  the  ravages  of  his  fellow-vermin
was  probably  the  original  intention  of  the  sacrifices  and  prayers  offered
to  these  curious  divinities.  Simple  folk  in  many  parts  of  the  world  have
sought  to  mollify  and  propitiate  the  vermin  that  infest  their  fields  and
houses  {The  Golden  Bought  2.  pp.  129-132).  Probably  the  worship  of
Mouse  Apollo  (Apollo  Smintheus)  was  a  case  of  this  Idnd.  See  note
on  X.  12.  5.

The  idea  that  each  species  of  animals  has  its  king  is  common  in
folk-lore.  The  king  of  serpents  often  occurs  in  folk-tales.  In  Syrian
tales  we  hear  of  the  king  of  flies,  the  king  of  mice,  the  king  of  serpents,
the  king  of  locusts,  the  emperor  of  ants,  the  prince  of  foxes,  the  prince
of  cats,  etc.  See  Prym  and  Socin,  Syrische  Sagen  und  Mdrchen^  Nos.
58-62  etc.  Some  of  the  North  American  Indians  believed  that  each
sort  of  animal  had  an  elder  brother,  who  was  the  origin  of  all  animals  of
that  sort  and  was  besides  very  great  and  powerful  {Relations  des  J^suites^
1^34)  P-  13  o^  the  Canadian  reprint).  Cp.  Lettres  ^difiantesy  6.  p.  334.
A  North  American  Indian  is  known  to  have  fondled  a  dead  mouse  in
order  to  appease  "the  genius  of  mice"  (Charlevoix,  Histoire  de  la
Nouvelle  France^  5.  p.  443).  The  ancient  Peruvians  held  that  "  of  all
beasts  of  the  earth,  there  is  one  alone  in  heaven  like  unto  them,  that
which  hath  care  of  their  procreation  and  increase  ^  (Acosta,  History  of
the  Indiesy  2.  p.  305,  Hakluyt  Society).

14.  2.  the  white  poplar.     See  note  on  v.  5.  5.

14.  2.  the  tree  is  called  acherois  by  Homer.  See  lUady  xiii.
389,  xvi.  482.

14.  3.  no  reeds  grow  so  tall  as  those  in  the  Boeotian  Asopns.
The  bed  of  the  Asopus  is  still  overgrown  with  reeds  {Kanafiitza)^  which
are  woven  into  baskets  (Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen  in  Griechenlandy
2.  p.  74).

14.  4*  all  the  altars  in  Olympia.  Besides  the  great  altar  of
Zeus,  the  remains  of  some  other  altars  were  brought  to  light  by  the
German  excavations,  but  none  of  them  can  be  certainly,  and  only  a  very
few  can  be  probably,  identified  with  those  mentioned  by  Pausanias.
As  our  author  distinctly  and  repeatedly  tells  us  that  he  enumerates
the  altars,  not  in  their  topographical  order,  but  in  the  order  in  which
the  Eleans  sacrificed  upon  them,  the  list  does  not  help  us  much  towards
clearing  up  doubtful  points  in  the  topography  of  the  AJtis.  The  question
of  the  identification  of  the  existing  altars  with  those  in  Pausanias's
list,  and  the  further  question  of  the  source  from  which  Pausanias  derived
his  knowledge  of  the  order  in  which  sacrifices  were  offered  on  them,  are»


560  THE  ALTARS  AT  OLYMPIA  BK.  ▼.  lUS

in  the  total  absence  of  epigrapbical  and  literary  evidence,  necessaiily
insoluble.  This  want  of  evidence  has  not,  however,  deterred  Germas
scholars  from  grappling  with  the  probleoL

See  E.  Curtius,  '  Die  Altare  von  Olympiad  AbhandluMgen  of  the  Prassisa
Academy  for  i88i,  Philolog.  histor.  CI.  (reprinted  in  the  author's  Gesmmmdk
Abhandlungen^  2.  pp.  40-74) ;  Flasch,  '  Olympia,'  in  Baumeister's  DenkmaUr^  jk
1067  sqq.  ;  A.  Kalkmann,  JPausanias,  p.  95  sqq, ;  W.  Gurlitt,  Pausanias^  pfn  346
^£^•1  399  ^<19'\  ^*  Heberdey,  'Die  olympische  Altarperiegese  des  Pausanii^'
kranos  Vindobonatsis  (Wien,  1893),  PP*  37*47  >  ^  Wemidce,  '  Die  Altare  foo
OVjm'^yaLy*  Jahrbtuh  d,  arch.  Inst,  9  (1894),  pp.  88-101.

14.  4*  They  sacrifice,  first,  to  Hestia  in  the  Prytaneum.  See
15.  9.

14.  4.  the  altar  inside  the  temple.  Prof.  £.  Curtius  {Die  AWn
von  OlympiOy  p.  1 1  sq, ;  GesamnulU  Abhandlungefiy  2.  p.  48  sq.)  seems
to  think  that  one  or  more  altars  had  originally  stood  upon  the  ground
afterwards  occupied  by  the  temple  of  Zeus,  and  that  when  the  temple
was  built  the  altars  were  replaced  in  it  on  their  old  sites.  It  has  bees
doubted  whether  there  were  altars  inside  Greek  temples.  Schubait
refers  to  Pausanias  ii.  11.  4,  vi.  20.  3,  and  x.  24.  4  for  other  examples
of  altars  so  situated  (FUckeisetis  JtUtrbiichery  18  (1872),  p.  173).  In  the
Coan  inscription  already  referred  to  (note  on  v.  13.  2),  it  is  directed  that
part  of  the  flesh  of  the  sacrifice  shall  be  burnt  "  on  the  hearth  inside  the
temple"  {Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  9  (1888),  p.  328;  Paton  and
Hicks,  The  Inscriptions  of  Cos,  No.  38).

14.  4.  third,  on  one  altar this  sacrifice  etc.     Apollodonis

tells  us  that  Hercules  founded  six  altars  to  twelve  Gods  at  Olymjna
(Apollodonis,  ii.  7.  2,  reading  €^  for  €^^s  with  Amald  and  R.  Wagner);
and  a  scholiast  on  Pindar  {01,  v.  8)  has  recorded  the  names  of  the  pairs
of  deities  to  whom  these  so-called  *  twin '  altars  were  dedicated.  They
were  (i)  Zeus  and  Poseidon;  (2)  Hera  and  Athena;  (3)  Hermes  and
Apollo;  (4)  Dionysus  and  the  Graces;  (5)  Artemis  and  Alpheus;  (6)
Cronus  and  Rhea.  In  his  present  list  of  altars  Pausanias  mentions
three  of  these  *  twin '  altars,  namely  the  altar  to  Hermes  and  Apollo  (§  8),
that  to  Dionysus  and  the  Graces  (§  10),  and  that  to  Artemis  and
Alpheus  (§  6).  Later  on  (v.  24.  i)  he  mentions  the  altar  of  Zeus  and
Poseidon.  It  seems  probable,  therefore,  that  the  mention  of  that  altar
has  dropped  out  in  the  present  passage.  Thus  we  have  in  Pausanias
mention  of  four  out  of  the  six  *  twin '  altars  founded  by  Hercules.
Scholars  have  endeavoured  to  restore  the  mention  of  the  remaining  two
by  means  of  conjecture.  See  E.  Curtius,  Die  Altare  von  Olympia,  p.  8
{Gesammelte  Abhandlungen,  2.  p.  46) ;  K.  Maurer,  De  arts  Graecorum
piuribus  dels  in  commune  positis,  p.  6  sqq.\  K.  Wernicke,  in  Jakrbuck
d,  arch.  Inst,  9  (1894),  p.  91  sq.\  and  Critical  Notes  on  this  passage
vol.  I.  p.  585.  The  victors  in  the  games  offered  sacrifices  on  all
these  *twin*  altars  (Schol.  on  Pindar,  OL  v.  8).

14.  5.  The  descendants  of  Phidias,  called  Burnishers.  The  base
of  a  statue  of  one  of  these  officials  has  been  found  at  Olympia.  The
inscription  sets  forth  that  "  In  recognition  of  his  piety  and  goodwill  to
themselves,  the  Senate  and  people  of  Elis  <have  set  up  this  statue  of>


CH.  XIV  THE  ALTARS  OF  OLYMPIA  561

Titus  Flavius  Heraclitus,  descendant  of  Phidias,  Burnisher  of  Olympian
Zeus."  See  Die  Inschrifien  von  Olympia^  No.  466 ;  Arch.  ZHtung  35
(1877),  p.  193,  inscr.  No.  100;  Loewy,  Inschrifien  griech.  Bildhauer^
No.  536.  In  Athens  there  was  a  Burnisher  attached  to  the  service
of  Demeter  and  Proserpine,  and  another  to  that  of  'Olympian  Zeus
in  the  city '  (/.^.  of  Zeus  who  was  worshipped  in  the  Olympieum).  The
latter  official  had  a  special  seat  set  apart  for  him  in  the  Dionysiac
theatre,  and  so  had  the  Burnisher  from  Olympia  (<^i3vrTi)s  Aibs  IIcMn/s).

See  C.  /.  A.  iii.  Nos.  5.  283.  291.  928.  1058.  3859  ;  Philologus^  32  (1866),  p.  212
sq.;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Grate.  No.  387  ;  Papers  of  the  American  School  of
Classical  Studies  at  Athens ^  I  (1882-83),  pp.  169,  172 ;  Aug.  Mommsen,  Heortologie^
p.  236  ;  J.  Martha,  Les  sacerdoces  Athiniens^  ?•  54  >  £•  Kuhnert,  *  De  cura
statuanim  apud  Graecos,'  Berliner  Studien  f  classische  Philologies  I  (1884),
p.  336  sqq,

14.  5.  rises  gradually  to  a  height.  Prof.  £.  Curtius  {Die  Altdre
von  Olympia^  p.  6 ;  Gesamm.  AbhandL  2.  p.  43  j^.)  imderstands  this  of
a  pyramidal  altar.  He  also  compares  the  temporary  ramp  which  was
made  to  lead  up  to  the  altar  of  Artemis  Laphria  at  Patrae.  See  vii.
18.  II.

14.  6.  they  sacrifice  to  Alpheus  and  Artemis  on  one  altar.  See
above,  note  on  §  4.  On  the  special  reason  for  uniting  Artemis  and
Alpheus  at  the  same  altar,  see  vi.  22.  8  sqq.  Cp.  C.  Maurer,  De  aris
Graecorum pluribus  deis  in  commune  positis  (Darmstadt,  1 885),  p.  13  sqq.

14.  6.  Warlike  Zeus.  Diodorus  says  (iv.  73)  that  Oenomaus
sacrificed  to  Zeus  before  the  race ;  Philostratus  Junior  says  (Jmag.  i  o)
that  he  sacrificed  to  Ares.  Their  statements  are  to  some  extent  re-
conciled by  the  Elean  tradition,  reported  by  Pausanias,  that  he  sacrificed
to  Warlike  {Areios)  Zeus.  Panofka  has  a  long  dissertation  on  Warlike
Zeus  {Abhandlungen  of  the  Berlin  Academy  for  1853,  Philolog.  histor.
CI.,  pp.  32-42).  His  conclusions,  so  far  as  they  relate  to  the. figure  of
Zeus  in  the  east  gable  of  the  temple  of  Zeus,  have  been  refuted  by  the
discovery  of  the  statues.  Fr.  Lenormant  thought  that  Warlike  Zeus
was  identical  with  the  Armed  Jupiter  of  Virgil  {Aen.  viii.  639).  See
Gazette  Archiologique^  3  (1877),  p.  97.  At  a  place  called  Passaron  in
Molossia  the  kings  of  Epirus  used  to  sacrifice  to  Warlike  Zeus,  and  to
swear  over  the  sacrifices  that  they  would  rule  according  to  the  laws
(Plutarch,  Pyrrhus^  5).  On  a  coin  of  lasus  in  Caria  the  name  of  War-
like Zeus  (ZEY2  APEI02))  occurs,  with  a  figure  of  the  god  armed
with  helmet  and  shield  (Miiller-Wieseler,  Denkmdler^  2.  pi.  ii.  No.  21  ;
Welcker,  Griechische  Gotteriehre^  2.  p.  211).

14.  7*  the  honse  of  Oenomaus.    Cp.  v.  20.  6.

14.  7.  Thunderbolt  Zeus.  The  name  of  Thunderbolt  Zeus  (AI02
KEPAYNO)  is  engraved  on  a  slab  of  limestone  found  in  the  territory
of  Mantinea.  See  P.  Foucart,  *  Le  Zeus  K^raunos  de  Mantin^e,'  in
Monuments  Grecs  Publi/es  par  V  association  pour  V encouragement  des
itudes  Grecques  en  France^  i.  No.  4,  pp.  23-28 ;  Roehl,  /.  G,  A.
No.  1 01.  An  inscription  containing  a  dedication  to  Thunderbolt  Zeus
has  been  found  at  Pergamus  (Frankel,  Inschrifien  von  Pergamony  i.
No.  232).     Cp.  R.  Weil,  in  Revue  Archdologique^  32  (1876),  p.  50  j^.  ;

VOL.  Ill  2  O


562  THE  ALTARS  OF  OL  YMPIA  bk.  ▼.  EUS

M.  Mayer,  Die  Giganten  und  Titanen^  p.  109  j^.  It  is  said  that
Seleucus  sacrificed  to  Thunderbolt  Zeus  at  lopolis  (Joannes  Malala,
viii.  p.  199  ed.  Bekker).  At  Athens  there  was  a  sacrificial  hearth  d
Lightning  Zeus,  where  some  priestly  officials  watched  for  lightning  at
certain  times  of  the  year  (see  vol.  2.  p.  1 90).  The  three  months  dniing
which  they  kept  their  look-out  were  probably  the  summer  months,  iir
sheet-lightning  is  common  at  Athens  about  the  time  of  the  longest  dij,
and  it  is  oftenest  seen  in  the  direction  of  Mt  Fames,  to  the  nortfa-irett
(Aug.  Mommsen,  Heortologie^  p.  315  sq,)     Cp.  viii.  29.  i  note.

14.  8.  an  altar  of  Unknown  Qods.     Cp.  i.  i.  4  note.

14.  8.  one  of  Olympian  Hera.  This  is  probably  the  large  abar
which  was  discovered  due  east  of  the  Heraeum  and  orientated  in  the
same  way  as  the  temple.  Here  were  found  many  archaic  bnuues,
especially  a  large  number  of  figures  of  animals  ;  and  deeper  excavations
brought  to  light  a  multitude  of  terra -cottas  representing  animals,
chariots,  and  human  beings.  See  Olympia:  Ergebmsse^  Textband  2.
p.  163  ;  id.y  4.  p.  4.  Others  incline  to  identify  as  the  altar  of  Hera
the  great  and  very  ancient  altar  situated  between  the  Heraeum  and
the  Pelopium,  but  nearer  to  the  latter.  To  judge  from  the  number
of  archaic  votive  offerings  in  bronze  and  terra-cotta  which  have  been
found  in  its  neighbourhood,  this  altar  must  have  been  in  very  eariy
times  the  chief  altar  of  Olympia.  Whether  it  was  an  altar  of  Hera  or
of  Zeus  and  Hera  together  we  do  not  know.  Certainly  the  altar  vas
older  than  both  the  Pelopium  and  the  temple  of  Hera,  since  a  layer  of
ashes  containing  many  votive  offerings  which  had  certainly  belonged  to
the  altar  was  found  under  the  boundary-wall  of  the  Pelopium  and  tbe
floor  of  the  temple  of  Hera.  The  quantity  of  votive  offerings  discovered
here  was  immense.  Almost  every  stroke  of  the  pickaxe  turned  op
some  of  them.  In  a  single  week  700  litde  animals  of  bronze  were
found,  not  to  mention  a  multitude  of  similar  figures  in  terra-cotta.  Two
layers  of  ashes  were  distinguished.  The  lower  of  the  two  abounded
especially  in  terra  -  cottas.  Both  these  layers  are  older  than  the
Pelopium,  since  the  boundary-wall  of  that  precinct  was  built  over  them :
but  only  the  lower  of  the  two  layers  is  older  than  the  Heraeum.  Tbe
ashes  and  votive  offerings  were  found  over  a  considerable  area — under
the  southern  and  western  colonnades  of  the  Heraeum,  and  in  the  soil
to  the  south  of  that  temple  and  to  the  west  of  the  Pelopium,  as  well  as
in  the  western  and  north-western  parts  of  the  Pelopium  itselfl  To  tbe
east  of  the  altar  the  layer  of  ashes  and  votive  offerings  seems  to  have
extended  as  far  as  it  did  to  the  west.  The  objects  found  in  these  layers
of  ashes  round  about  the  altar  fall  under  the  following  heads.  Particu-
larly characteristic,  especially  for  the  lowest  layer,  were  the  primitive
terra-cotta  figures  of  men  and  animals,  which  came  to  light  here  in
crowds,  whereas  they  were  comparatively  much  rarer  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  the  other  altars  at  Olympia.  Great  numbers  of  bronze  animals
were  also  found,  besides  rude  figures  of  human  beings  in  bronze,  though
these  latter  were  not  nearly  so  common  as  the  human  figures  in  terra-
cotta. Further,  there  were  discovered  small  chariots,  wheels,  and
tripod-kettles  in  great  numbers,  even  in  the  lowest  layer ;  also  pieces  of


CH.  XIV  THE  ALTARS  OF  OLYMPIA  563

larger  tripods  of  iron ;  whereas  fragments  of  bronze  tripods,  fashioned
in  a  more  artistic  style,  were  found  only  in  the  upper  layer  of  ashes,
that  is,  in  the  layer  which  is  posterior  to  the  building  of  the  Heraeum.
In  the  lower  layer,  which  is  older  than  the  Heraeum,  were  discovered
remains  of  diadems  decorated  with  geometrical  patterns ;  plain  rings ;
heads  of  nails ;  small  double  axes ;  a  small  votive  sword ;  plain
hanunered  handles  with  rivets ;  leaf- shaped  spearheads  of  iron ;  pot-
sherds ;  and  a  gold  wire  twisted  in  spiral  form.  But  these  objects  were
not  so  numerous  as  the  figures  of  animals.  There  were  also  found,
though  apparently  only  in  the  upper  layer  of  ashes,  pieces  of  cymbals,
fragments  of  large  bronze  tripods,  clasps,  portions  of  necklaces,  and
weapons.  See  Olympia:  ErgebnissCy  Textband  2.  p.  163;  /^.,  4.
pp.  1-3 ;  cp.  Die  Funde  von  Olympia^  p.  24 ;  Curtius  und  Adler,
Olympia  und  Umgegend^  p.  36 ;  Flasch,  *  Olympia,'  in  Baumeister's
DenkntdleTy  p.  1069 ;  Baedeker,^  p.  342.  On  the  archaic  bronzes  of
Olympia  in  general  see  also  Furtwangler,  *  Die  Bronzefunde  aus  Olympia
und  deren  kunstgeschichtliche  Bedeutung,'  Abhandlungen  of  the  Royal
Academy  of  Berlin,  1879 ;  Ad.  Botticher,  Olympia?'  p.  165  sqq,

14.  8.  an  altar  of  Apollo  and  Hermes  in  common.  An  altar
dedicated  to  Hermes  and  Apollo  in  common  by  a  certain  Asclepiodorus
has  been  found  in  Mysia  (C.  /.  G,  No.  3568  b).  Cp.  Maurer,  De  oris
Graecorum  pluribus  deis  in  commune  positiSj  p.  i  o  sq,

14.  9.  one  of  the  Mother  of  the  Gk>ds.  This  is  probably  the
altar  situated  to  the  west  of  the  Metroum  or  temple  of  the  Mother  of
the  Gods,  with  which  it  is  obviously  contemporary.  Under  the  altar
were  found  two  distinct  layers  of  ashes  separated  from  each  other  by  a
layer  of  sand.  These  layers  of  ashes  extended  also  to  the  north  of  the
altar  and  still  frirther  to  the  south  and  south-west  of  the  Metroum.
In  the  lower  of  the  two  layers  were  found  many  archaic  votive  offerings
of  terra-cotta  and  bronze,  resembling  those  which  were  found  in  and
near  the  Heraeum  (see  above,  p.  ^62  sq.)  They  include  animals  and
men  (charioteers)  oJF  terra-cotta ;  quantities  of  bronze  animals ;  some
rude  bronze  figures  of  human  beings ;  a  great  many  small  tripods ;
bronze  bands  adorned  with  geometrical  patterns ;  needles ;  armlets ;
pieces  of  necklaces ;  wheels  ;  small  rings ;  some  cymbals  ;  small  double
axes  ;  arrowheads  ;  leaf-shaped  spearheads ;  and  pieces  of  large  tripods.
All  these  objects  are  of  bronze,  except  the  terra-cotta  animals  and  men.
The  occurrence  of  the  cymbals  among  the  votive  offerings  does  not  (as
has  been  sometimes  supposed)  prove  that  the  altar  was  that  of  the
Mother  of  the  Gods,  since  bronze  cymbals  were  found  buried  in  other  parts
of  the  Altis,  particularly  at  the  temple  of  Zeus,  the  great  altar  of  Zeus,
and  the  ancient  altar  between  the  Pelopium  and  the  Heraeum.  It  is
true  that  cymbals  were  specially  used  in  the  worship  of  the  Mother  of
the  Gods  (Pindar,  Frag.  48  ed.  Bockh ;  cp.  Catullus,  Ixiii.  21);  but
the  discoveries  at  Olympia  seem  to  show  that  she  was  not  the  only
deity  who  was  supposed  to  love  the  clash  of  cymbals.  Indeed,  amongst
the  objects  found  under  her  altar  there  is  none  that  can  be  referred
with  certainty  to  her  worship.  Hence  we  have  no  evidence  that  she
was  worshipped  at  Olympia  before  the  comparatively  late  time  when  the


564  THE  ALTARS  OF  OLYMPIA  bk.  v.  bus

Metroum  was  built  in  her  honour.  All  that  we  can  say  is  that  tk
Metroum  and  its  altar  were  erected  on  a  spot  which  had  previously  bees
the  site  of  a  very  ancient  worship.

See  Olympia:  Ergebnisse^  Textband  2.  p.  164;  Ftirtwanglery  in  Olym^:
Ergebnisse^  Textband  4.  p.  4;  id.y  Die  Bronufunde  aus  Olympia^  P>  13!
CurtiuSy  Die  Altdre  von  Olympia^  p.  11  ;  id.y  Gesamm,  AbhandUmgen^  2.  p.  49;
Flaschy  '  Olympia/  in  Baumeister's  Denkmaler^  p.  1069.

14.  9.  Opportnnity.  The  personification  and  deification  of  Oppor-
tunity were  no  doubt  late.  There  was  a  feunous  statue  of  him  by
Lysippus,  who  perhaps  originated  the  type  (Callistratus,  Descript  6;
Overbeck,  Sckriftquellefiy  §§  1463- 1467).  On  a  gem  Opportunity  is
represented  as  a  boy  with  winged  feet  hurrying  along  and  holding  a
pair  of  scales  before  him.  In  a  relief  at  Turin  he  appears  holding  a
pair  of  scales  in  his  left  hand,  while  with  his  right  hand  he  makes
the  nearer  scale  to  incline  to  his  side.  He  has  wings  on  his  back  and
on  his  feet,  llie  locks  of  his  hair  are  long  in  front,  but  behind  be  is
bald.  In  late  and  degenerate  art  he  was  represented  standing  00  tvo
spheres  or  wheels.  See  £.  Curtius,  *  Die  Darstellungen  des  Kairos,'
Archdologiscke  Zeitung^  33  (1876),  pp.  1-8;  i(L^  Gesammelte  Akhad-
lungen^  2.  pp.  187-201  ;  Baumeister's  Denkmaler^  P»  77i  Jy. ;  Roschert
Lexikofiy  2.  p.  897  sqq,

14.  9.  Ion  of  Chios.  The  marble  base  of  a  votive  offering  dedi-
cated by  Ion  to  Athena  has  been  found  on  the  Acropolis  at  Athens.
The  inscription,  which  is  in  the  Ionic  dialect,  seems  to  date  from  soon
after  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  See  C.  /.  A.  i.  No.  395;
Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec,  No.  8.

14.  9-  Near  the  treasury  of  the  Sicyonians  is  an  altar  of  Her-
cules. This  is  probably  the  altar  of  which  the  foundations  were
discovered  between  the  treasury  of  the  Sicyonians  and  the  Exedra  of
H erodes  Atticus.  It  appears  that  the  original  form  of  the  altar  was
round,  which  was  afterwards  changed  into  a  square  shape.  The  place
where  the  sacrificer  stood  can  still  be  seen ;  it  is  so  situated  that  in
sacrificing  he  must  have  faced  east.  Hence' Prof.  Curtius  infers  that
the  altar  was  dedicated  to  "  the  older  Hercules,  the  Phoenician-Cretan
god  "  (Hercules  the  Curete)  rather  than  to  Hercules  the  son  of  Alcmena.
See  Curtius,  Die  Altdre  von  Olympia^  P-  3  5  >  '^1  GesammelU  Abhatidr
lungeHy  2.  p.  70 ;  Curtius  und  Adler,  Olympia  und  Umgegend^  p.  H ;
Flasch,  *  Olympia,'  in  Baumeister's  Denkmdlcr^  p.  1069.

14.  10.  the  Gkieum  (sanctuary  of  Earth).  It  has  been  con-
jectured that  the  Gaeum  was  the  small  circular  chamber  to  the  west  of
the  Altis  in  which  an  altar  dedicated  to  a  hero  or  heroes  was  discovered
See  below,  p.  579  sq.  There  was  a  sanctuary  of  Earth  with  the  same
name  near  Aegae  in  Achaia  (vii.  25.  13).  As  to  the  oracle  of  Earth,
cp.  X.  5.  ^  sq,\  andon  oracles  of  Earth  in  general,  see  Curtius,  Alton
von  Olympia^  p.  14  sqq. ;  /V/.,  Gesamm.  AbhandL  2.  p.  52  sqq.  In  early
times  there  was  also  an  oracle  of  Zeus  at  Olympia ;  the  soothsayers
interpreted  the  god's  utterances  by  means  of  the  burnt  sacrifices  which
they  offered  to  him.     But  this  oracle  fell  into  disuse.     See  Pindar,  01


CH.  XV  THE  WORKSHOP  OF  PHIDIAS  565

vi.  70 ;  id,y  viii.  i  sqq,^  with  the  schoL;  Strabo,  viii.  p.  353;  Sophocles,
Oed,  ReXy  901  ;  Herodotus,  viii.  134  ;  Xenophon,  Helletdcay  iii.  2.  22,
iv.  7.  2  ;  Plutarch,  Agis^  1 1  ;  Bouchd-Leclercq,  Histoire  de  la  divination
dans  rAntiquiUy  2.  p.  332  sqq.  It  seems  that  divination  by  means  of
the  lot  was  also  practised  at  Olympia  (Hesychius,  s.v,  <l>pvKThs  ^cA^ts).
14.  10.  Zeus  the  Descender.  I,e.  Zeus  who  comes  down  in  the
thunderbolt,  like  the  Thunderbolt  Zeus  of  §  7.  The  Greeks  regularly
fenced  in  the  spots  which  had  been  struck  by  lightning.  Such  places  were
thenceforth  called  ivqXvaria  or  ^Avo-ia,  and  might  not  be  entered.  See
Pollux,  ix.  41  ;  Hesychius  and  Suidas,  s.v,  'HAwrta  ;  Etymolog.  Magnum^
pp.  341.  8  sqq,y  428.  40.  Altars,  too,  were  erected  within  the  enclo-
sures, and  sacrifices  were  offered  on  them  (Artemidorus,  Onirocr.  ii.  9  ;
cp.  Polcmo,  Frag.  93,  ed.  L.  Preller).  At  Athens  there  was  one  of
these  enclosures  on  the  Acropolis,  as  we  learn  from  an  inscription
(Ai^  Ka[T]a4)8aTo[v]  a/Sarov)  which  was  found  there  a  few  years  ago
(AcAr&oi/  dpxaioXoyiKovy  September  1890,  p.  144).  Another  inscrip-
tion, found  on  the  north  side  of  the  Olympieum  at  Athens,  seems  to
indicate  that  there  was  another  of  these  enclosures  there  (*£^/x€p&s
dp\aio\oyiKrjj  1889,  p.  61  sq,)  The  Etruscans  also  enclosed  places
which  had  been  struck  by  lightning,  and  offered  sacrifices  at  them.
Such  a  spot  was  called  a  bidental  or  puteal.  See  K.  O.  Miiller,  Die
JStrusker,^  2.  p.  173  sqq,\  Preller,  Rbtnische  Mythologie^'^  i.  p.  193;
Marquardt,  Sacralweseny^  p.  263.

14.  10.  an  altar  of  Dionysus  and  the  Graces.  In  the  hymn  to
Dionysus  which  the  Elean  women  sang,  they  invited  the  god  to  "  come
with  the  Graces  to  the  holy  temple  of  the  Eleans  "  (Plutarch,  Quaest
Grace,  36).  Compare  Pindar,  Olymp,  xiii.  25  sq,\  Paus.  ix.  38.  i  ;
Maurer,  De  oris  Graecorunty  p.  1 2  sq.

15.  I.  the  workshop  of  Phidias.  From  Pausanias's  descrip-
tion we  infer  that  the  workshop  of  Phidias  was  situated  outside  of  the
Altis,  near  its  south-western  comer,  since  immediately  afterwards  he
mentions  the  Leonidaeum,  which  was  the  large  building  at  the  south-west
comer  of  the  Altis,  outside  the  walls  of  the  sacred  precinct  Probably,
therefore,  the  workshop  of  Phidias  was  one  of  the  group  of  buildings
of  which  the  remains  have  been  discovered  between  the  Leonidaeum
and  the  Palaestra  (wrestling-school).  Amongst  these  is  a  Byzantine
church,  which  is  orientated  almost  exactly  east  and  west,  and  has  the
form  of  a  basilica  divided  by  rows  of  colunms  into  three  aisles.  On
the  east  it  has  a  semicircular  apse,  and  on  the  west  a  pillared  vestibule
{narihex).  Three  doors  lead  from  the  vestibule  into  the  church,  a
large  door  in  the  middle,  with  a  small  one  on  each  side.  The  side
aisles  were  separated  from  the  central  aisle  by  walls  .50  to  .60  metre
high.  The  central  aisle  or  nave  was  paved  with  ancient  marbles,
comprising  pieces  of  pedestals,  architectural  fragments,  etc.,  among
which  many  inscriptions  were  discovered.  The  marble  columns  which
divided  the  nave  from  the  side  aisles  are  mostly  of  the  Ionic  order  and
Roman  date ;  but  one  capital  is  Doric  and  of  the  Greek  period.
Perforated  marble  screens  of  Byzantine  workmanship  divide  the  eastem
end  of  the  nave  from  the  rest  of  the  church.     The  altar  and  the  ambo


566  THE  WORKSHOP  OF  PHIDIAS  bk.  ▼.  EUS

or  pulpit  (a  small  stone  platform  approached  by  three  steps  oo  t««
sides)  are  also  of  the  Byzantine  period.  From  the  style  of  the
architecture  and  of  two  early  Christian  inscriptions,  it  is  inferred  that  the
church  dates  from  the  first  half  of  the  fifth  century  A.D.,  and  hence  tfast
it  is  one  of  the  oldest  of  its  kind  in  Greece.

This  Byzantine  church  is  substantially  an  ancient  Greek  building
which  was  converted  into  a  church  by  the  addition  of  the  apse  and  1^
some  structural  modifications  in  the  interior.  But  the  original  Greek
foundations  and  walls  are  still  standing,  and  enable  us  to  restore  dK
plan  of  the  edifice.  It  was  a  quadrangular  edifice,  32.18  metres  (100
Olympian  feet)  long  by  14.50  metres  (45  Olympian  feet)  broad,  witb  a
large  single  door  (4.54  metres  wide)  in  the  east  end.  The  waDsait
unusually  thick  and  solid;  their  thickness  is  1.12  metres.  They  as-
sist of  a  lower  portion  or  socle  of  masonry  and  an  upper  poition  of
brick.  The  socle  is  built  of  carefuUy-hewn  blocks  of  conglomente.
The  brickwork  of  the  upper  walls  is  of  two  dates :  the  first  foorteco
courses  of  bricks  belong  to  the  original  Greek  building  ;  the  remainder
is  of  much  later  date,  though  still  of  the  classical  period.

The  threshold  of  the  ancient  doorway  at  the  east  end  is  still  pit-
served.  It  consists  of  two  slabs  placed  side  by  side.  Pro£  Adkr
estimates  the  original  height  of  the  doorway  at  no  less  than  9  metres
(30  feet).

Internally  the  building  was  divided  into  two  compartments,  an  aot^
chamber  at  the  east  end  and  a  long  inner  hall  on  the  west  The  ante-
chamber was  nearly  square  ;  the  inner  hall  was  18.47  metres  long  bj
12.26  metres  wide.  The  division  between  the  two  compartments  was
effected  by  two  short  projecting  walls  on  the  north  and  south  sides
The  space  between  these  two  projecting  walls  appears,  from  certain
technical  indications,  to  have  been  closed  by  a  wooden  partition  wfaidi
could  be  removed  at  pleasure  so  as  to  throw  the  two  compartments  into
one  great  hall.

Both  antechamber  and  hall  were  divided  into  three  aisles  by  two
rows  of  columns.  In  the  antechamber  there  were  two  columns  only  in
each  row ;  in  the  hall  there  were  four.  Of  the  colunms  in  the  ante-
chamber only  the  foundations  exist ;  but  of  the  columns  in  the  hall  many
shafts  have  been  found,  and  are  now  in  their  places.  These  columns
were  of  the  Doric  order  with  unfiuted  shafts.  Their  height  seems  to
have  been  about  7.05  or  7.10  metres.

In  the  antechamber  a  long  narrow  water-basin  (6.15  metres  long  by
1.25  metres  wide)  was  discovered  under  the  pavement  of  the  Byzantine
church.  It  is  enclosed  by  a  raised  border  of  brickwork,  and  was  lined
with  marble  slabs,  of  which  two  have  been  found.

This  ancient  building,  which  was  afterwards  converted  into  a
Byzantine  church,  is  identified  by  Professors  Adler  and  Flasch  with  the
Workshop  of  Phidias.  From  the  style  of  the  masonry,  which  closely
resembles  that  of  the  temple  of  Zeus,  Prof  Adler  judges  that  the  building
belongs  to  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  ;  and  the  singularity
of  its  plan  and  arrangement  seems  to  show  that  it  was  constructed  to
serve  some  very  special  purpose.     Moreover  the  dimensions  and  internal


CH.  XV  THE  WORKSHOP  OF  PHIDIAS  567

arrangement  agree  fairly  with  those  of  the  alia  of  the  temple  of  Zeus ;
so  that  in  making  his  colossal  image  of  Zeus  in  this  building  Phidias
could  judge  of  the  effect  which  it  would  produce  when  transferred  to
the  cclla  of  the  temple.  The  water-channel  which  runs  round  the
building  and  is  provided  with  many  places  for  drawing  off  the  water,
would  be  very  appropriate  and  useful  for  a  workshop.

To  this  identification  it  is  objected  by  Mr.  Ad.  Botticher  that  the
structure  is  far  too  solidly  and  massively  built  for  a  mere  temporary
workshop,  and  that  the  plan  of  the  building,  though  suitable  for  judging
of  the  general  effect  of  the  completed  statue,  was  not  suitable  for  its
actual  construction,  which  would  rather  have  required  a  series  of
separate  compartments.  For  the  statue,  it  is  to  be  remembered,  was
not  carved  out  of  a  single  great  block  of  marble,  but  was  fitted  together
out  of  a  great  many  single  pieces  of  wood,  gold,  and  ivory,  the  prepara-
tion of  which  could  best  be  carried  on  in  separate  rooms.  If  this
edifice  was  really  used  by  Phidias  as  his  workshop,  it  cannot,  Mr.
Bdtticher  thinks,  have  been  built  for  the  purpose,  but  must  have  been
merely  fitted  up  as  such  as  well  as  circumstances  would  allow.  The
long  narrow  ancient  building  immediately  to  the  south  of  the  Byzantine
church  is,  in  Mr.  Botticher's  opinion,  much  better  adapted  for  a  work-
shop ;  it  is  about  57  metres  long  from  east  to  west  and  is  divided  into
a  series  of  compartments  about  7  metres  (23  feet)  deep.  Prof.  Adler
holds  that  the  rough  work  of  smelting  and  hammering  the  metal,  etc.,
was  actually  done  in  the  rooms  of  this  narrow  building,  while  the  colossal
model  was  set  up  in  the  larger  building  which  was  afterwards  converted
into  a  Byzantine  church.

Prof.  Curtius  identifies  the  ancient  building  which  we  have  been
discussing  with  the  Theecoleon  mentioned  by  Pausanias  below  (§  8).
He  supposes  that  the  hall  served  as  the  assembly-room  and  banqueting-
house  of  the  priests  and  other  sacred  officials.  K.  Lange  held  that  the
building  in  question  was  the  Council  House  (as  to  which  see  Paus.  v.
24.  9  note).

See  Olympia:  Ergebnisse^  Tafelband  i.  plates  IxviL-lxx. ;  F.  Adler,  in
Olympia:  Ergtbnisse^  Textband  2.  pp.  93-105;  i<L^  in  Die  Ausgralnmgen  zu
Olymtia^  3  (1877-1878),  pp.  29-32,  with  pi.  xxxvi. ;  Die  Fundt  von  Olympia^
p.  18  sq,  ;  Curtius  und  Adler,  Olympia  und  Umgegtnd^  p.  22 ;  Flasch,
'Olympia,'  in  Baumeister's  Denikmalery  pp.  1070  sq,,  1 104  M.  sqq,  i  Ad.
Botticher,  Olympia,^  P«  3^7  ^99'  >  Baedeker,*  p.  348  sq, ;  Curtius,  Die  Aiiare  von
Olympia,  p.  20;  id.,  GesammelU  Abkandlungen^  2,  p.  57  sq,  ;  K.  Lange,  Haus
und  Halle,  p.  113  sqq,

15.  I.  Having  returned  into  the  Altis,  opposite  to  the  Leoni-

claenm .     Pausanias  was  about  to  add,  "  You  will  come  to  an  altar

of  Aphrodite."  But  having  mentioned  the  Leonidaeum  as  a  topogra-
phical clue  to  the  situation  of  the  altar,  he  stops  to  explain  what  the
Leonidaeum  was.  He  then  resumes  the  thread  of  his  discourse  in  §  3.
Thus  the  whole  of  §  2  is  parenthetical.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that
Pausanias  is  at  present  enumerating  the  altars  of  Olympia,  and  that  he
mentions  other  structures  only  incidentally  in  describing  the  situations  of
the  altars.     For  example,  in  this  section  he  speaks  of  the  workshop  of


568  THE  LEONIDAEUM  bk.  v.  elk

Phidias,  but  he  does  so  only  because  it  contained  an  altar  which  he
had  to  mention.  Cp.  C.  Robert,  in  Hermes^  23  (1888),  p.  433  note
Mr.  R.  Heberdey  has  shown  some  grounds  for  supposing  that  Pausanias
has  taken  over  the  whole  of  his  enumeration  of  the  altars  from  an  earlier
work,  only  interposing  here  and  there  a  parenthesis  of  his  own.  Such
a  parenthesis,  in  Mr.  Heberde/s  opinion,  is  the  present  brief  account  of
the  Leonidaeum.  See  R.  Heberdey,  in  Eranos  Vindobonensis  (Wicn,
'S93)>  P-  39  ^Q9'  This  view  may  possibly  be  right.  It  would  explain
an  apparent  discrepancy  in  Pausanias' s  references  to  the  processional
entrance  (see  below,  note  on  §  2  *  the  processional  entrance  into  the
Altis ').

15.  2.  the  LeonidaeimL  The  identification  of  this  building  was
one  of  the  disputed  points  of  Olympic  topography  until  the  winter  of
1886-87,  when  the  discovery  of  an  inscription  settled  the  question  in
favour  of  the  large  building  outside  the  south-west  comer  of  the  Altis,
which  had  been  marked  by  the  German  excavators  as  the  '  South-west
building.'  The  inscription  had  to  be  laboriously  pieced  together  from
fragments.     As  restored,  it  runs  thus  :

A[€]a»[v]i8[7y]s  Accorov  [NJa^ios  kvol\rfTi

i,e.  *<  Leonides,  a  Naxian,  son  of  Leotes,  made  (it)."  Fragments  of  two,
possibly  of  three,  copies  of  the  inscription  were  found,  all  engraved  on
blocks  which  must  have  formed  parts  of  the  Ionic  epistyle  of  the
building.  Thus  the  inscription  was  repeated  in  large  letters  on  at  least
two,  possibly  on  three  or  four  sides,  of  the  building.  The  fragments
were  all  found  built  into  the  west  Byzantine  wall,  to  the  north  of  the
South  Hall.

The  inscription  shows  that  Leonidas  was  a  Naxian.     Pausanias  says
he  was  a  native,  that  is  an  Elean.     As  the  inscription  was  found  covered
over  with  a  fine  plaster  which  appears  to  be  ancient,  it  is  possible  that
when  the  edifice  was  rebuilt  (as  it  certainly  was)  in  Roman  times,  the
original   inscription  may  have  been  purposely  obliterated.     It  would
therefore  be  invisible  in  Pausanias's  time,  and  the  local  tradition  would
be  glad  to  attribute  the  foundation  of  so  grand  a  building  to  a  native
Elean.     It   has  been  suggested   that    Pausanias   may  have    seen  but
misread  the  inscription,  the  letters  NA^I02  being  easily  mistaken  for
HAEIOS,  especially  when  seen  at  a  distance,  as  they  must  have  be^
by  a  spectator  looking  up  at  the  epistyle  from  the  ground.     See  G.  Trcu,
*  Die  Bauinschrift  des  Leonidaions  zu  Olympia,'  Mittheil.  d.  arch,  Inst  in
Atkeriy  13  (1888),  pp.  317-326  ;  Die  Inschriftenvon  Olympic^  No.  651.
Leonidas,  the  architect  and  founder  of  the  Leonidaeum,  is  the  same
Leonidas  whose  statue  Pausanias  mentions  elsewhere  (vi.  16.  5  note).

As  to  the  building  itself,  though  more  than  a  third  of  it  is  still
unexcavated,  its  extent  and  general  plan  are  certain.  It  is  the  lai^t
building  at  Olympia  except  the  Great  Gynmasium,  which  also  has  not
yet  been  fully  excavated.  It  covers  an  area  more  than  three  times  that
of  the  temple  of  Zeus.  The  shape  is  square  or  rather  oblong,  the  sides
measuring  80.18  metres  (262  feet  7  inches)  by  74  metres  (243  feet).


CH.  XV  THE  LEONIDAEUM  569

Though  it  was  much  altered  in  Roman  times,  the  plan  of  the  original
Greek  building  can  still  be  made  out,  for  its  walls,  completely  destroyed
in  some  places,  are  standing  in  others  to  a  height  of  one  or  two  courses.
The  centre  was  formed  by  an  open  court,  29.67  metres  (97  feet)  square,
surrounded  by  colonnades  in  the  Doric  style ;  the  number  of  columns
in  the  colonnades  was  forty-four.  Rooms  opened  off  the  colonnades
on  the  north,  east,  and  south  sides  to  a  depth  of  about  10  metres  (33
feet)  ;  but  on  the  west  side  to  a  depth  of  about  1 5  metres  (49  feet).  The
principal  rooms  were  therefore  on  the  west  side ;  they  consisted  of  a
large  central  chamber,  with  two  smaller  rooms  on  the  north  and  south.
The  whole  building  was  surrounded  on  the  outside  by  a  colonnade  of  the
Ionic  style  with  138  columns.  The  bases  of  the  colunms  are  still,  with
one  exception,  in  their  places  all  the  way  round,  so  far  as  the  building
is  excavated.  On  some  of  the  bases  the  lower  drums  of  the  columns
were  found  standing.  These  Ionic  columns  have  only  twenty  flutes.  Their
height  is  calculated  to  have  been  about  5.55  metres.  The  bases  and
capitals  are  of  sandstone  ;  the  drums  are  of  shell-limestone.  But  this
difference  of  material  was  concealed  by  a  coating  of  stucco.

When  the  edifice  was  altered  in  Roman  times,  the  inner  Doric  and
the  outer  Ionic  colonnades  were  left,  but  the  rooms  between  them  were
remodelled,  and  the  open  court  in  the  centre  was  tiuned  into  a  garden
with  ponds.  There  was  an  inner  pond  in  the  shape  of  a  ring,  with  a
circular  island  in  the  middle.  The  outer  pond  ran  round  the  whole  of
the  court,  being  separated  from  the  inner  pond  by  an  island,  the  outer
margin  of  which  curved  in  and  out  in  a  regular  pattern.  The  two  islands
were  probably  planted  with  trees  and  connected  with  each  other  by  light
wooden  bridges.     Ponds  and  islands  are  still  in  good  preservation.

While  the  walls  of  the  original  Greek  edifice  are  built  of  blocks  of
conglomerate  carefully  hewn  and  jointed,  the  walls  of  the  Roman  recon-
struction are  of  concrete  faced  with  bricks,  but  resting  on  a  socle  of
masonry.  At  a  still  later  time  in  the  Roman  period  some  further  altera-
tions were  made  in  the  internal  arrangement  of  the  building  for  the
purpose  of  diminishing  the  size  of  the  rooms  and  of  the  openings  in  the
walls.  The  walls  of  this  second  Roman  reconstruction  are  built  in  an
inferior  and  negligent  style  ;  the  socle  consists,  not  of  regular  masonry,
but  of  rubble  and  mortar.

The  situation  of  the  Leonidaeum  relatively  to  the  west  wall  of  the
Altis  seems  of  itself  to  show  that  the  Leonidaeum  already  existed  when
the  west  wall  of  the  Altis  (or  rather  its  southern  end)  was  built.  Hence,
so  long  as  the  west  wall  of  the  Altis  was  believed  to  have  been  built  in
Macedonian  times,  it  seemed  to  be  necessary  to  place  the  date  of  the
foundation  of  the  Leonidaeum  about  the  middle  of  the  fourth  century
B.C.  But  now  that  the  Altis  wall  proves  to  be  Roman  (see  note  on  v.
10.  I),  it  is  unnecessary  to  place  the  date  of  the  Leonidaeum  so  high.
Probably  the  building  is  of  the  Macedonian  period.  Its  palatial  size
and  style  are  more  in  keeping  with  the  luxurious  and  pretentious  taste  of
that  age  than  with  the  refined  simplicity  of  the  best  Greek  period.

The  original  destination  of  the  building  is  not  known  ;  but  if  we  may
judge  from  its  general  plan  and  the  use  to  which  (as  we  learn  from


570  PROCESSIONAL  GATE  OF  ALTIS  bk.  ▼.  Elis

Pausanias)  it  was  put  in  later  times,  the  most  probable  hypothesis  seems
to  be  that  it  was  erected  to  serve  as  an  hotel  for  the  receptioo  of
distinguished  visitors,  such  as  ambassadors  and  princes,  who  came  to
witness  the  Olympic  games.  K.  Lange  suggested  that  the  building  may
have  been  the  official  residence  of  the  umpires  (HellanoiUkai)^  to  match
the  official  residence  which  they  had  at  Elis  (Paus.  vi.  24.  3).  But  this
seems  less  likely.

A  large  part  of  the  architectural  members  of  the  building  (drums  of
columns,  capitals,  entablature,  and  the  terra-cotta  simd)  were  fotmd
built  into  the  Byzantine  fortification  wall,  which  extends  from  the  Sootli
Colonnade  to  the  south-west  comer  of  the  temple  of  Zeus.  The  terra-cotu
sima  or  projecting  edge  of  the  roof,  which  extended  round  the  buildix^
above  the  Ionic  colonnade,  is  remarkable  for  its  rich  sculptured  orna-
mentation. A  band  of  acanthus  tendrils  runs  along  it ;  water-spouts  in
the  shape  of  lions'  heads  project  from  it  at  intervals ;  and  antefixes  of
palmette  form  rise  above  it.  Under  the  band  of  acanthus  tendrils  is  a
painted  maeander  pattern.  The  lions*  heads  also  exhibit  traces  of  colour,
especially  red.

See  Olympia:  Ergebnisse,  Tafelband  i.  plates  Ixii.-lxvi.  ;  R.  Bormumn,  in
Olympia:  Ergebnissey  Textband  2.  pp.  83-93;  ^^-t  ^^  ^^^  Ausgraiungm  sm
Olympia,  5  (1879-1881),  pp.  43-45,  with  pi.  xli.-xliii.  ;  Die  Funde  von  OtymfiA,
p.  19;  Oirtitis  and  Aaler,  Olympia  und  Umgegtnd^  p.  23  sqq,\  BoCtidicr.
Olympiad  p.  353  sqq,%  Flasch,  *  Olympia,'  in  Baumeister's  DenkmdUr^  p.  1104
K  sqq,  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  348  ;  K.  Lange,  Haus  und  Halle,  pp.  331-338.

15.  2.  the  procesBional  entrance  into  the  Altis.  As  Pausanias
tells  us  that  the  processional  entrance  was  opposite  the  Leonidaeam,
there  is  no  room  for  doubt  that  by  the  processional  entrance  he  here
means  the  gate  in  the  west  wall  of  the  Altis,  not  far  from  its  southern
end.  But  elsewhere  he  mentions  the  processional  entrance  in  two
passages  (v.  15.  7  ;  vi.  20.  7),  and  in  both  of  them  the  context  seems  to
point  to  a  gateway  in  the  eastern,  not  the  western,  wall  of  the  Altis.
This  comes  out  most  clearly  in  the  first  of  these  passages  (v.  15.  7)-
Here  he  has  been  describing  the  altars  in  the  hippodrome,  which,  with
the  colonnade  of  Agnaptus,  seems  certainly  to  have  been  situated  beyond
the  stadium,  to  the  east  or  south-east  of  the  Altis  (see  vi.  20.  10).
Immediately  after  describing  these  altars  he  enters  the  Altis  by  the
processional  gate  and  proceeds  straight  to  certain  altars  at  the  back  of
the  Heraeum,  in  the  north-west  part  of  the  Altis  (v.  1 5.  7).  Thus  coming
from  the  east  he  would  naturally  enter  by  a  gate  on  the  east,  not  on  the
west,  side  of  the  Altis.  Now  there  are  two  entrances  on  the  east  side  of
the  Altis  ;  one  at  the  north-east  comer,  the  other  in  the  south  wall  near
its  eastern  extremity.  The  one  at  the  north-east  comer  is  the  Secret
Entrance  into  the  stadium  (vi.  20.  8),  and  cannot,  therefore,  have  been
the  processional  entrance  to  the  Altis.  It  would  seem  to  follow  that  the
processional  entrance  by  which  Pausanias,  coming  from  the  hippodrome,
entered  the  Altis  was  at  the  south-eastem  comer.

The  case  is  not  quite  so  clear  in  regard  to  the  other  mention  of  the
processional  entrance  (vi.  20.  7),  because  the  situation  of  the  Hippo-
damium,  which  was  "  inside  the  Altis,  at   the  processional  entrance,*'


CH.  XV  PROCESSIONAL  GATE  OF  ALTIS  571

has  not  yet  been  determined.  But  according  to  Dr.  D5rpfeld  there  is
absolutely  no  room  in  the  south-west  comer  of  the  Altis  for  a  precinct  of
the  size  of  the  Hippodamium  (it  extended  to  about  a  quarter  of  an  acre,
as  we  learn  from  Pausanias) ;  and  it  would  seem  that  we  can  only  look
for  it  in  the  east  of  the  Altis,  where  there  is  room  for  it  and  to  spare.
This  is  confirmed  by  the  context  of  the  passage  in  which  Pausanias
mentions  the  Hippodamium  ;  for  inmiediately  before  he  had  been  speak-
ing of  a  sanctuary  of  Ilithyia  situated  between  Mount  Cronius  and  the
treasuries,  and  immediately  afterwards  he  goes  on  to  describe  the
stadium.  Thus  it  would  appear  that  the  Hippodamium  and  the  proces-
sional entrance  beside  which  it  lay  were  both  in  the  east  of  the  Altis.

Yet  in  the  present  passage  Pausanias  beyond  doubt  identifies  the
processional  entrance  with  the  gateway  at  the  south-western  comer  of
the  Altis  opposite  the  Leonidaeum ;  and  as  if  to  remove  any  doubt  as
to  whether  there  might  not  be  two  processional  entrances  he  expressly
says  that  this  gateway  opposite  the  Leonidaeum  was  the  only  one  by
which  processions  entered  the  Altis.  How  is  this  apparent  discrepancy
to  be  explained  ?

A  plausible  explanation  has  been  offered  by  Mr.  R.  Heberdey.  We
have  seen  (p.  491  sq,)  that  the  existing  south  wall  of  the  Altis  is  of  Roman
date,  perhaps  a  work  of  Nero,  and  that  the  original  boundary  of  the
Altis  was  further  to  the  north,  on  the  line  of  what  is  called  the  South
Terrace  Wall.  Thus  before  this  Roman  extension  of  the  Altis  the  south-
western gateway,  by  which,  in  the  age  of  Pausanias,  processions  entered
the  Altis,  did  not  exist.  Where,  then,  in  these  days  was  the  proces-
sional entrance  to  the  Altis  ?  The  answer  to  this  question  seems  to  be
furnished  by  the  long  row  of  pedestals  which  extends  parallel  to  the
South  Terrace  Wall,  a  little  to  the  south  of  it.  Probably,  as  Dr.  Dorpfeld
has  shown,  a  stately  street  here  extended  from  the  Leonidaeum  along
the  outside  of  the  South  Terrace  Wall  between  two  lines  of  statues,  the
pedestals  of  which  are  still  standing  on  the  south  side  of  the  street  It
seems  obvious  that  along  this  street,  which  originally  lay  outside  of  the
Altis,  processions  must  have  passed  from  the  south-west  and  entered
the  Altis  at  its  south-east  comer.  Here,  then,  towards  the  east  end  of
the  South  Terrace  Wall,  just  opposite  the  triumphal  gateway  which  was
erected  in  the  later  south  wall  of  the  Altis,  may  have  been  the  original
processional  entrance.  But  when  in  Roman  times  the  Altis  was
extended  to  the  south,  and  the  south-west  gate  was  built  in  the  new
boundary-wall,  this  new  gate  became  the  processional  entrance,  super-
seding the  original  entrance  at  the  south-east.  It  was  not  that  the
route  of  the  processions  was  changed ;  on  the  contrary  they  continued
to  defile  as  before  along  the  stately  street,  lined  with  statues,  on  the
south  of  the  South  Terrace  Wall ;  but  this  street  was  itself  now  within
the  sacred  precinct,  and  consequently  in  entering  it  the  processions
entered  the  Altis.

Thus,  if  this  theory  is  correct,  there  were  at  different  times  two
processional  entrances  into  the  Altis,  namely  an  older  one  at  the  south-
east, and  a  newer  one  at  the  south-west  comer.  In  the  time  of
Pausanias  the  latter  was  the  one  in  use,  as  we  learn  from  the  present


572  PROCESSIONAL  GATE  OF  ALTIS  bk.  v.  eus

passage ;  but  in  the  two  other  passages  examined  above  he  appears  lo
refer  to  the  old  processional  entrance  at  the  south-east  comer.  This
discrepancy  may  be  explained,  as  Mr.  Heberdey  holds,  by  supposing
that  in  the  present  passage  Pausanias  is  writing  from  personal  knowledge
of  the  processional  entrance  of  his  own  day,  but  that  in  the  other  two
passages  he  is  copying  from  authors  who  wrote  before  the  Altis  was
extended  to  the  south,  and  who  consequendy  knew  only  of  a  proces-
sional entrance  at  the  south-east.

This  explanation  of  the  seeming  discrepancy  in  Pausaniass
references  to  the  processional  entrance  is  plausible  and  may  be  correa
That  Pausanias  consulted  the  works  of  previous  topographers  in
composing  his  description  of  Greece  is  highly  probable  ;  but  as  these
works  have  mostly  perished  we  are  unable  to  test  his  use  of
them.  If  Mr.  Heberdey  is  right,  Pausanias  was  guilty  of  culpabk
carelessness  in  copying  from  a  previous  writer  or  writers  topogra^^cal
directions  as  to  the  processional  entrance  which  had  no  application  to
the  processional  entrance  of  his  own  time.  It  would  be  rash  to  affirm
that  he  was  incapable  of  such  a  blunder,  but,  considering  his  general
accuracy  and  our  ignorance  of  the  situation  of  many  of  the  monuments
in  question,  it  seems  better  to  suspend  our  judgment  The  discovery
of  the  Hippodamium  might  setde  the  question,  and  it  is  not  impossible
that  evidence  as  to  its  site  may  yet  be  forthcoming.

If  we  had  only  the  monumental  evidence  to  go  upon  we  should
naturally  infer  that  the  triumphal  gateway  in  the  south  wall  of  the  Altis,
towards  its  eastern  end,  was  the  processional  entrance.  That  it  was
built  to  serve  as  the  processional  entrance  seems  dear.  But  if  Dr.
Dorpfeld  is  right  the  gate  was  built  by  Nero  and  ceased  to  be  emplo>*cd
as  the  grand  entrance  to  the  Altis  after  the  tyrant's  death.

See  above,  p.  491  sq.  ;  W.  Dorpfeld,  in  MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  AtJun,  13
(1888),  p.  yiT  sqq,  ;  R.  Heberdey,  *Die  olympische  Altarperiegese  des  Paussiniis,*
vci  Eranos  P'tttdobonensis  {\\\tr\y  1893),  pp.  34-47;  K.  Wernicke,  \Xi  Jahrbuck  d,
arch,  Inst,  9  (1894),  p.  89  note.

15.  2.  it  is  separated  from  the  processional  entrance  by  a  street

etc.     Pausanias  remarks  that  the  Leonidaeum  was  separated  froifi  the
west  wall  of  the  Altis  by  a  mere  lane,  and  is  surprised  that  the  natives
should  dignify  this    lane   with   the  name  of  a  street.     Dr.    Dorpfeld.
however,  has  pointed  out  that  inside  this  wall  and  parallel  to  it  there
runs  a  line  of  pedestals  terminating  at  the  south  wall  of  the  Altis.    Thus
the  line  of  pedestals  in  question  and  the  west  wall  form  together  a
cul  de  sac.     But  a  line  of  statues  would  certainly  not  have  been  thus
placed  leading  up  to  a  dead  wall.      It  seems  certain  therefore  that  the
line  of  statues  existed  before  the  wall  was  built,  and  that  it  then  formed
the  east  side  of  the  street  which  here  skirted  the  Leonidaeum.    The
street  must  then  have  been  nearly  twice  as  broad  as  it  afterwards  w*as
when  the  west  wall  of  the  Altis  was  built.     The  erection  of  that  wail,
cutting  off  nearly  half  the  breadth  of  the  street,  reduced  it  in  fact  to  a
lane.     But  the  old  name  *  street '  was  retained,  though  the  now  narrow
passage  had  ceased  to  deserve  the  appellation.     Pausanias's  remark  as


CH.  XV  THE  ALTARS  OF  OLYMPIA  573

to  the  narrowness  of  the  passage  and  his  surprise  that  it  should  be
called  a  street,  is  a  further  proof  that  he  is  describing  Olympia  as  it
was  in  Roman  times,  not  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Polemo  before  the
Altis  had  been  extended  in  this  direction.  See  W.  Ddrpfeld,  'Die
Altismauer  in  Olympia,'  MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  13  (1888),
p.  327  sqq,

15.  3.  an  altar  of  Aphrodite,  and  after  it  an  altar  of  the  Seasons.
Inside  the  south-west  gate  of  the  Altis  an  altar  has  been  discovered  on
the  terrace  wall,  a  little  to  the  east  of  the  steps  which  lead  up  to  it
It  is  probably  one  of  the  two  altars  here  mentioned  by  Pausanias.
Prof.  E.  Curtius,  indeed,  identifies  it  with  the  altar  of  the  Nymphs
mentioned  further  down  in  this  section.  But  from  Pausanias's  descrip-
tion we  should  expect  to  find  the  altar  of  the  Nymphs  further  north,
nearly  due  west  of  the  temple  of  Zeus.  See  Flasch,  *  Olympia,'  in
Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  p.  1071  ;  Curtius,  Altdre  von  Olympia^  p.  26  ;
/V/.,  Gesantmelte  Abhandlungen^  2.  p.  62 ;  R.  Heberdey,  in  Eranos
Vindobonensis  (Wien,  1893),  p.  41.  When  Pausanias  says  that  the
altar  of  Aphrodite  lay  ''as  you  are  about  to  pass  to  the  left  of  the
Leonidaeum,"  he  must  mean  by  the  left  the  north  of  the  Leonidaeum  ;
since  the  altar  of  the  Nymphs,  which  he  next  mentions,  was  near  the
temple  of  Zeus,  which  was  certainly  north  (or,  to  be  more  exact,  north-
east) of  the  Leonidaeum.  He  thus  supposes  himself  to  be  standing
with  his  back  to  the  Leonidaeum  and  his  face  to  the  east.  In  this
position,  '  to  the  left  of  the  Leonidaeum '  means  to  the  north  of  it,  and
*  to  the  right  of  the  Leonidaeum '  (§  4)  must  mean  to  the  south  of  it.
Cp.  R.  Heberdey,  op.  cit.  p.  41  sq.

15.  3.  the  Olive  of  tiie  Fair  Orown.  This  tree  was  said  to  have
been  brought  to  Olyihpia  from  the  land  of  the  Hyperboreans ;  see  v.  7.
7  note.  Its  title  (*the  Olive  of  the  Fair  Crown')  is  mentioned  by  other
ancient  writers  ([Aristotle,]  Mirab.  Auscult.  51  ;  Suidas,  s.v.  kotCvov
€rT€<f>dv(f;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Plutus^  586;  SchoL  on  Pindar,
Olymp.  viii.  i,  x.  11  ;  Schol.  on  Theocritus,  iv.  7).  It  is  mentioned  by
Theophrastus  {Histor.  Plant,  iv.  13.  2)  and  Pliny  {N.  H.  xvi.  240)
among  the  trees  which  were  traditionally  said  to  be  extremely  old.  It
grew  at  a  spot  in  Olympia  which  was  called  the  Pantheon  ([Aristotle,]
Lc.\  cp.  Schol.  on  Pindar,  Olymp.  viii.  12),  and  the  branches  which
were  to  form  the  victors*  crowns  were  cut  with  a  golden  sickle  by  a  boy,
both  of  whose  parents  had  to  be  alive  (Schol.  on  Pindar,  Olymp.  iii.
60).  Similarly  among  the  Gauls  the  sacred  mistletoe  had  to  be  cut
by  a  priest  with  a  golden  sickle  (Pliny,  N.  H.  xvi.  251).  Mr.  L.
Weniger  attempts  to  show  that  the  Pantheon  at  Olympia,  where  the
Olive  of  the  Fair  Crown  grew,  was  a  grove  of  wild  olives  within  the
Altis,  at  the  back  of  the  temple  of  Zeus,  and  he  thinks  that  from  this
grove  were  procured  the  olive  branches  which  were  laid  once  a  month
on  the  altars  of  all  the  gods  at  Olympia  (below,  §  10).  See  L.  Weniger,
Der  heilige  Oelbaum  in  Olympia  (Weimar,  1895).

15.  4.  an  altar  of  Artemis  of  the  Market.  This  altar  and  the
altar  of  Zeus  of  the  Market  must  have  stood  on  the  Market-place.
Hence  from  Pausanias's  description  it  appears  that  the  Market-place


574  THE  GRAND  STAND  bk.  v.  eus

was  outside  the  Altis  and  to  the  south  or  south-east  of  the  Lconidaeom
(see  [Mievious  note).  It  probably  lay  on  the  still  unexcavated  gnNmd
between  the  Altis  and  the  Alpheus.  The  South  Colonnade,  which  fronts
southu-ard,  may  have  faced  the  market-place.  See  C.  Robert,  in  Herwus,
23  (1888),  p.  429.  Cp.  the  Critical  Note  on  this  passage  (voL  i.  p.
585).  All  the  places  described  by  Pausanias  in  ^  4-6  appear  to  havt
lain  outside  the  Altis,  to  the  south  or  south-east  It  is  not  till  §  7
that  Pausanias  returns  into  the  Altis.

15.  4«  I  will  tell  about  the  goddess  etc     See  viiL  37.

15.  4.  the  Grand  Stand.  The  Grand  Stand  (Proedrid)  has  not
yet  been  identified  with  certainty.  Professors  Curtiiis  and  Adler
identify  it  with  a  long  marble  basement  or  substructure  which  stands  in
front  of  the  Echo  Colonnade  ;  a  small  semicircular  flight  of  steps  leads
up  to  it  At  one  end  of  the  basement  stood  a  statue  of  Ptolemy  II. :
at  the  other  end  a  statue  of  his  wife  Arsinoe.  Elach  statue  was  raised
upon  a  slender  Ionic  column  about  30  feet  high.  The  statues  were
dedicated  by  Ptolemy's  admiral,  Callicrates  of  Samos.

See  Die  Funde  von  Olympia^  p.  24;  Curtiiis  und  Adler,  Oiympia  und
Umgegtndy  p.  39 ;  Curtius,  Die  AUdre  von  Oiympia^  p.  7 ;  id.^  GesammdU
AbkanfUungen,  2.  p.  45 ;  A.  Botticher,  Olympiad  p.  3SS;  Baedeker,'  p.  344;
Die  Jnschriften  von  Oiympia^  Nos.  306,  307.

Pro£  Flasch,  on  the  other  hand,  identifies  the  Proedria  with  the
building  at  the  south-eastern  extremity  of  the  Altis  which  Nero  coo-
verted  into  a  dwelling-house.  He  thinks  that  the  Proedria  was  the
residence  of  the  presidents  {proedroi)  or  umpires  {Hellcmadikai)  oi  the
games  rather  thaoi  a  Grand  Stand  where  distinguished  persons  were
provided  with  seats  from  which  to  watch  the  processions.  Against  this
view  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  the  official  residence  of  the  umpires
(He/Zanodikai)  would  have  been  called  Hellanodikeon  rather  than
Proedria,  Cp.  Paus.  vi.  24.  i  and  3.  However  that  may  be,  the
South- East  Building  or  House  of  Nero  is  of  sufficient  interest  and
importance  to  deserve  a  brief  description  here.

The  original  Greek  building  comprised  four  chambers,  each  nearly
square,  extending  in  a  row  side  by  side  from  north  to  south,  and
surrounded  on  three  sides  (north,  west,  and  south)  by  Doric  colonnades.
The  foundations  and  stylobate  of  these  chambers  and  coloimades  still
exist ;  they  are  built  of  squared  blocks  of  conglomerate.  But  above  the
stylobate  not  a  single  stone  of  the  original  building  is  in  its  place.  The
colonnades  were  elevated  on  two  steps,  which  still  remain.  There  were
nineteen  columns  on  the  long  west  side,  and  eight  colunms  on  each  of
the  two  short  sides  on  the  north  and  south.  Whether  the  building
extended  further  to  the  east  or  not  is  uncertain.  There  are  certainly
Greek  foundations  existing  under  the  Roman  building  immediately  to
the  east ;  but  as  they  have  no  direct  connexion  with  the  South-East
Building  and  stand  on  a  different  level.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  thinks  it  improb-
able that  they  originally  formed  part  of  it.

Edifices  of  the  form  of  the  South-East  Building  are  e.xceedingly  rare
in  Greek  architecture.  There  is,  however,  a  building  of  the  same  plan
in  the   sanctuary  of  Aesculapius   at  Athens   (see  vol.  2.  p.   236  j^.)


:h.  XV  THE  SOUTH-EAST  BUILDING  575

!)eep  down  under  and  at  the  back  of  the  South-East  Building  were
3und  fragments  of  large  bronze  tripods,  kettles,  and  basins  ;  also  ladles,
pearheads,  weights,  and  lamps,  all  of  bronze.  The  soil  at  the  back  of
he  building  contained  many  potsherds  ;  and  to  the  east  and  north-east,
n  a  layer  of  blackened  earth,  were  found  many  bronze  handles  of
essels,  also  bronze  kettles,  bosses,  weapons,  and  ancient  inscriptions
ngraved  on  bronze  plates.  Perhaps  these  objects  may  help  to  throw
ight  on  the  use  to  which  the  South-East  Building  was  put.  Bronze
objects  of  similar  sorts  have  been  found  in  the  Prytaneum  at  the
opposite  extremity  of  the  Altis  (see  note  on  v.  15.  9).

Although  nothing  of  the  South-East  Building  is  standing  except  the
oundations  and  stylobate,  it  is  still  possible  to  restore  the  whole  of  it,
lot  only  in  general  outline,  but  even  in  all  its  details,  down  to  the
lainting  of  the  different  members  of  the  architecture.  The  reason  of
his  is  that  in  Roman  times  the  painted  architectural  members  were
>roken  up,  and,  being  mixed  with  mortar,  were  used  to  build  walls.
Thus  the  mortar,  by  protecting  their  surfaces  from  the  air,  has  preserved
he  colours  quite  fresh  to  the  present  time.

This  Greek  building  is  assigned  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld,  on  artistic  and
echnical  grounds,  to  the  fourth  century  B.c.  But  it  is  older  than  the
^hilippeum  and  the  Echo  Colonnade,  as  is  proved  (i)  by  the  shape  of
he  clamps  (H  instead  of  the  later  form  r^  ),  and  (2)  by  the  fact  that
he  stylobate  and  steps  are  of  common  conglomerate  instead  of  marble
►r  hard  limestone.  These  better  materials  were  first  used  in  the
^hilippeum  and  the  Echo  Colonnade ;  afterwards  the  use  of  them
became  imiversal.

In  the  early  Roman  period  the  Greek  building  was  taken  down,  and
.  Roman  house  of  the  ordinary  type  erected  on  the  old  foimdations.
^rom  the  western  colonnade  a  central  doorway  led  into  the  tUriumj  at
he  back  (east  side)  of  the  atrium  was  the  tablinum^  with  passages
fauces)  on  the  north  and  south ;  steps  led  down  to  the  peristylium
open  court  surrounded  by  cloisters)  at  the  back  of  the  tablinum,
rhere  were  a  number  of  rooms  to  the  north  and  south  of  the  atrium.
This  Roman  house  was  built  partly  of  good  brickwork,  partly  of  opus
ncertumj  but  some  pieces  of  the  walls  are  constructed  of  regular  opus
-etiadatum,  (As  to  opus  incertum  and  opus  retictdatum  see  J.  H.
^iddleton,  The  Remains  of  Ancient  Rome  (London  and  Edinburgh,
892),  I.  p.  51  sqq,)  The  walls  and  columns  were  coated  with  stucco.
Joth  the  tablinum  and  the  peristylium  lay  at  the  back  (east  side)  of  the
original  Greek  building,  to  which  they  formed  an  addition.  On  the
ither  (west)  side  a  colonnade  was  built  so  as  to  connect  the  house  with
he  triumphal  gateway  standing  further  to  the  west.

The  time  at  which  the  original  Greek  edifice  was  converted  into  a
loman  house  can  fortunately  be  determined.  For  under  the  floor  of
he  Roman  house  was  found  a  leaden  water-pipe  which  had  belonged  to
he  house  and  is  stamped  with  the  words  NERONIS  AUG.  Thus  it
irould  seem  that  Nero,  who  contended  in  person  at  the  Olympic  games
Suetonius,  Nero^  23  sq.\  had  a  house  built  for  his  reception  within,  or
.butting  on,  the  sacred  precinct.


576  THE  ALTARS  OF  OLYMPIA  bk.  v.  iu$

See  Olympia:  Ergebnisse,  Tafelband  I.  plates  liL-liv.  ;  W.  Dofpfidd,  b
Olympia:  Ergebnisse,  Textband  2.  pp.  73-76;  id,^  in  £>ie  Ausgrabtrngm
zu  Olympia^  4  (1878- 1 879),  pp.  46-48,  with  pi.  xxxviL ;  Ad.  Furtwangler,  ic
Olympia :  Ergebnisse^  Textband  4.  p.  6 ;  Die  Fundi  von  Olympia^  p.  ao  if. ;
Curtius  und  Adler,  Olymfia  und  Umgegend^  p.  28;  Ad.  Botticher,  Olympk}
p.  400;  Flasch,  *  Olympia,'  in  Baumeister's  Denkmakr^  pp.  1071,  ii04HJf.:
Ba^eker,'  p.  346.

Prof.  C.  Robert  would  look  for  the  Proedria  in  the  Council  House
(see  below,  note  on  v.  24.  9),  and  conjectures  that  it  may  have  been
the  square  central  chamber  of  that  building  {Hermes^  23  (1888),  p.
436).  Finally,  Mr.  K.  Wernicke  supposes  that  the  Proedria  was  the
southern  wing  of  the  Council  House,  and  that  it  served  as  a  court-house
in  which  the  umpires  {Hellafwdikai)  held  their  sittings.  He  aigoes
that  the  residence  (as  distinguished  from  the  court-house)  of  the  umpires
was  in  the  South -East  Building,  until  they  were  ejected  from  that
edifice  to  make  room  for  the  emperor  Nero.  See  K.  Wernicke,  *  Die
Proedria  und  der  Hellanodikeon,' /o^r^ttr^  d,  arch,  Inst.  9  (1894X  pp-
127-135.  But  all  this  is  a  mere  tissue  of  conjectures  unsupportttl  by
evidence.  We  do  not  even  know  that  the  umpires  had  a  court-hoose
and  fixed  residence  at  Olympia  at  all.  We  do  know  that  they  had  a
fixed  residence  at  Elis,  where  they  lived  for  ten  months  together  (Paus.
vi.  24.  3).

15.  5.  the  place  where  the  chariots  start  The  hippodrome  or
racecourse  for  chariots  and  horses  seems  to  have  lain  to  the  south-east
of  the  Altis.     See  vi.  20.  10  note.

15.  5.  the  Guide  of  Fate.  Cp.  i.  40.  4 ;  viii.  37.  i  ;  x.  24.  4-
On  an  engraved  gem  (a  chalcedony)  in  the  Hermitage  Museum  at  St
Petersburg  Zeus  is  represented  seated  with  an  eagle  at  his  feet  In  his
left  hand  he  holds  a  sceptre ;  on  his  outstretched  right  hand  he  carries
three  small  upright  female  figures  clad  in  long  garments.  Stephani
thought  that  these  three  figures  were  the  Fates  {Moirai)^  and  that  Tms
was  here  represented  in  his  character  of  Guide  of  Fate  {Moiragetas).
See  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1881,  p.  118  sq,,  with  plate
V.  18.

15.  6.  the  so-called  Wedge.  This  was  the  wedge-shaped  starting-
place  in  the  Hippodrome.     See  vi.  20.  10  sqq,

15.  6.  the  Nymphs  whom  they  call  Buzom.  The  epithet  hert
translated  'buxom'  {aKfjLrjvai)  might  also  mean  'at  the  point,'  being
derived  from  a  word  (aKfirj)  which  means  primarily  'point,'  'edge,'
and  secondarily  *  youthful  prime  or  bloom.'  In  its  present  application
the  adjective  may  perhaps  refer  to  the  situation  of  the  altar  at  the  point
of  the  Wedge.

15.  7.  the  processional  entrance.  I.e.  the  gate  at  the  south-west
comer  of  the  Altis.     See  note  on  §  2.

15.  7.  Apollo  Thermius.  Pausanias's  conjecture  that  Thcrmius
(QcpfiLos)  is  a  dialectic  form  equivalent  to  the  Attic  Thesmius  (Becrfuo^)
is  correct.  In  the  inscriptions  found  at  Olympia  r  (p)  often  occurs  in
words  where  in  Attic  we  should  have  s  (s).  See  Cauer,  Delecttis  Inscr.
Graec,^  Nos.  253,  263,  264,  etc.

15.  8.  the  Theecoleon  (priest's  house).     Immediately  to  the  west


CH.  XV  THE  THEECOLEON  577

of  the  Altis,  between  the  Byzantine  church  (see  note  on  §  i)  and  the
Wrestling  School,  there  is  a  group  of  two  buildings  separated  from  each
other  by  a  narrow  lane.  The  large  building  on  the  east  side  of  the
lane  is  probably  the  Theecoleon ;  the  small  building  on  the  west  is
probably  the  edifice  which  Pausanias  here  mentions  as  containing  an
altar  of  Pan.  Both  buildings  are  in  a  very  ruinous  condition ;  but  the
remains  are  sufficient  to  enable  us  to  determine  the  ground-plans,
while  the  architectural  fragments  found  in  the  neighbourhood  throw
some  light  on  the  construction  of  the  walls  and  roofs.

The  ruins  of  the  eastern  building,  identified  as  the  Theecoleon
(OcT/KoAcbii/)  or  Theocoleon,  as  it  is  sometimes  called,  belong  to  three
different  ages ;  for  the  original  Greek  edifice  was  twice  altered  and
enlarged,  first  in  the  Greek,  and  second  in  the  Roman  period.

The  original  structure  covered  a  square  of  about  19  metres  (62
feet),  measured  on  the  sides,  and  consisted  of  eight  rooms  arranged
round  a  square  central  court.  Four  of  the  rooms  opened  on  the  central
court,  the  opening  in  each  case  being  between  a  pair  of  columns  flanked
by  anteu.  The  columns  were  of  the  Doric  order,  fluted  only  in  their
upper  halves ;  the  epistyle  was  Ionic.  The  other  four  rooms  were  in
the  comers,  and  must  have  been  lit  by  windows  in  the  side  walls.
Some  of  the  rooms  communicated  with  each  other  by  doors.  The
house  had  at  least  two  outer  doors,  one  in  the  most  easterly  of  the  three
rooms  on  the  north  side;  the  other  in  the  central  room  on  the
south  side.  The  stone  thresholds  of  the  doorways,  with  the  holes  in
which  the  wooden  linings  were  fixed  and  bolts  shot,  can  still  be  seen.
The  intercolumniations  of  the  central  court  were  mostly  closed  by
barriers  several  feet  high.  On  the  north  side  all  three  intercolumnia-
tions were  so  closed ;  on  the  other  sides  the  central  intercolumniation
was  in  each  case  left  open,  while  the  two  side  intercolunmiations  were
closed  by  barriers.  The  court  was  flagged ;  in  its  north-east  comer
stood  a  covered  draw-well.  In  the  central  room  on  the  south  side
a  carefully -built  hearth  showed  that  the  apartment  had  served  as  a
kitchen.

Of  this  original  Greek  building  the  foundations  are  preserved
almost  entire ;  also  the  central  piece  of  the  north  wall,  some,  blocks  of
one  of  the  northern  partition  walls,  and  some  pieces  of  the  columns,
antae^  and  barriers  of  the  north  side  of  the  court.  Almost  the  whole
of  the  pavement  of  the  court,  together  with  the  well  in  the  comer,  still
exists.  The  shaft  of  the  well  is  cylindrical,  and  is  lined  with  masonry  ;
its  present  depth  is  7.50  metres.  So  far  as  it  is  standing,  the  building
is  constructed  of  stones  laid  without  mortar,  and  apparently  without
clamps.  However  some  detached  blocks,  which  seem  to  have  be-
longed to  the  building,  have  holes  for  the  insertion  of  clamps.  Perhaps
the  stones  of  the  upper  courses  were  clamped  together  for  greater
security.  From  the  excellence  of  the  masonry  and  the  fineness  of  the
architectural  style,  it  is  clear  that  the  building  is  of  the  Greek  period  ;
but  various  technical  indications,  including  the  mixture  of  Doric  and
Ionic  style,  point  to  its  being  later  than  350  B.C.  It  may  be  conjec-
tured that  the  rooms  round  the  court  were  the  abodes  of  the  priests,

VOL.  Ill  2  P


578  THE  THEECOLEON  bk.  v.  eik

just  as  in  some  Greek  monasteries  at  the  present  day  the  cells  of  the
monks  are  arranged  round  a  central  court  on  which  they  open.  This  is
the  arrangement,  for  example,  in  the  monasteries  of  Dtiphm  (vol.  2.  p.
496)  and  Vourkano  (vol.  3.  p.  429).

Within  the  Greek  period  the  edifice  was  extended  to  the  east  by  the
addition  of  a  set  of  three  rooms  and  the  construction  of  a  garden  coon
surrounded  by  cloisters  and  chambers  on  the  north,  east,  and  soath.
This  garden  court,  with  its  cloisters  and  chambers,  measured  4a36
metres  from  north  to  south  by  26.65  metres  from  east  to  west.

At  a  later  time,  within  the  Roman  period,  the  building  was  sdH
further  enlarged  and  to  some  extent  remodelled.  The  eastern  half  o(
the  extended  Greek  building  was  taken  down,  and  the  garden  coot
was  widened.  The  open  central  part  of  the  court  was  paved  vidi
concrete,  and  on  its  southern  side  a  square  altar  was  erected  on  a
platform.  Round  the  four  sides  of  this  open  court  ran  colonnades;
each  colonnade  comprised  eight  coliunns  (the  columns  at  the  conien
being  counted  twice  over) ;  the  lowest  drums  of  eight  of  the  columnj
are  still  standing  in  their  places.  At  the  back  of  the  colonnades  on  the
north,  east,  and  south  sides  were  rows  of  chambers  which  opened  into
the  colonnades.  The  greater  part  of  the  west  side,  on  the  other  hand,
was  occupied  by  a  single  long  hall  (20.50  metres  long  by  4.75  metres
deep),  which  seems  to  have  been  open  towards  the  colonnade  from  end
to  end  ;  its  roof  was  apparently  supported  on  the  side  of  the  colonnadf
by  a  row  of  wooden  pillars.  The  whole  court,  as  finally  enlarged,  with
its  colonnades  and  chambers,  measured  40.36  metres  from  north  to
south  by  38.58  metres  from  east  to  west.

Whether  the  Theecoleon  was  once  connected  with  the  ByantiiK
church  and  the  buildings  to  the  south  of  it  could  not  be  ascertained.

See  Ofympia:  Ergebnisse^  Tafelband  i.  plates  Ixxi.  Ixxii.  ;  P.  Graef,  »
Olympia:  Ergeb^tisse^  Textband  2.  pp.  105,  107-113;  /V/.,  \n  Die  Ausgrabw^
zu  Olympia^  5  (1879- 1 881),  P*  38  sq.^  with  pi.  xxxvii.  ;  Die  Funde  zfon  OlympU^
p.  19 ;  Curtius  und  Adier,  Olympia  und  Umgegend^  p.  22  sq,  ;  Curtius.  Dv
AUdre  von  Olympia^  p.  19 ;  fV/.,  Gesammclte  Abhandlungen^  2.  p.  56  sq.  :  FTasdi.
*  Olympia,'  in  Baumeister's  Denkmaicr,  p.  1072  j^.  ;  Ad.  Botticher,  Olymfi^'
p.  321  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  349.

15.  8.  In  front  of  the   Theecoleon  there  is  a  bmldiof.

This  building  is  probably  the  one  of  which  considerable  remains  exist
immediately  to  the  west  of  the  Theecoleon.  The  core  of  the  structure
is  a  circular  chamber  8.04  metres  in  diameter,  enclosed  by  a  ring-»^
of  large  squared  blocks.  This  circular  chamber  was  itself  enclosed  by
four  outer  walls,  which  formed  a  square,  and  met  the  ring-wall  at  four
points,  tangent-wise.  In  the  middle  of  the  west  wall  was  the  entrance
to  the  circular  chamber.  Three  of  the  walls  of  the  quadrangular  enclo-
sure were  prolonged  beyond  the  angles  of  the  quadrangle  :  the  easterc
and  western  walls  were  prolonged  to  the  south,  where  they  probaW)
met  a  south  wall  at  right  angles  so  as  to  form  a  quadrangular  chamber ;
the  north  wall  was  prolonged  to  the  west  so  as  to  form  the  side  of  a
portico  or  colonnade,  which  opened  westward  with  four  columns.  Most
of   the  blocks    of  the   ring  -  wall   are   in  their  original    places ;    there


CH.  XV  THE  ALTAR  OF  THE  HERO  579

were  nineteen  or  twenty  of  them  originally,  of  which  thirteen  and  a
half  have  been  found.  They  measure  about  1.25  metres  in  length
by  .68  metre  in  height  and  .47  metre  in  thickness.  From  the  way
in  which  the  upper  surface  of  this  ring-wall  is  smoothed,  Mr.  Graef
infers  that  the  upper  part  of  the  structure  was  made  of  wood  or
unbumt  bricks.  It  was  probably  covered  with  a  conical  roof,  for
many  fragments  of  large  triangular  tiles,  which  had  evidently  be-
longed to  a  roof  of  this  shape,  were  found  close  to  the  building.
Most  of  the  blocks  of  the  four  walls  which  enclosed  the  circular
chamber  are  still  standing  in  their  places.  Of  the  prolongation  of  the
eastern  wall  southward  three  blocks  remain ;  but  the  wall  which  this
prolongation  once  met  at  right  angles  has  disappeared,  though  its
situation  can  be  determined  with  great  probability.  Of  the  western
colonnade  or  portico  the  north-western  half  of  the  foundations  is  pre-
served, also  a  piece  of  the  wall,  and  the  two  stones  on  which  an  anta
and  a  column  rested — both  in  their  original  positions.  The  date  of  the
edifice  is  not  known  ;  the  excellence  and  simplicity  of  the  masonry  show
that  it  is  a  work  of  the  Greek  period.

In  the  round  chamber,  close  to  the  wall,  on  the  south  side,  a  small
quadrangular  altar  was  found.  It  is  formed  simply  of  hard  earth
mixed  with  ashes  and  charcoal,  but  is  covered  on  the  top  with  a
broad  flat  brick.  The  three  visible  sides  were  coated  with  plaster
and  painted.  The  altar  rests  on  the  ground  without  any  steps ;  its
dimensions  are  as  follows :  length  .54  metre,  breadth  .38  metre,  height
.37  metre.  That  burnt  sacrifices  were  offered  on  the  altar  is  clear
from  the  marks  of  fire  on  its  top,  as  well  as  from  the  aslies  and
charcoal  that  were  found.  On  both  sides  were  observed  the  traces  of
libations  that  had  flowed  down  here.  The  plaster  on  the  front  and
sides  had  plainly  been  often  renewed,  and  as  it  exhibited  traces  of
paintings  and  letters,  the  German  excavators  had  it  peeled  carefully
off  on  the  front.  Thus  they  discovered  no  less  than  twelve  successive
coats  of  plaster.  Almost  every  coat  had  a  leafy  branch  or  two  painted
on  it,  the  stalks  being  coloured  brown  and  the  leaves  gfreen.  The  tree
represented  may  perhaps  have  been  the  olive  or  bay  ;  but  the  drawing
is  too  slight  and  hasty  to  allow  this  to  be  determined.  Moreover,  on
each  coat  was  painted  in  violet  letters  the  word  HPfiOP  or  HPfi02
(«of  the  hero')  or  HPfifiN  (*of  the  heroes').  Thus  we  leara  that  the
altar  was  sacred  to  a  hero  or  heroes.  Prof.  Curtius  conjectures  that
the  heroes  worshipped  at  it  were  lamus  and  Clytius,  the  ancestors  of
Xwo  families  of  soothsayers  (the  lamids  and  Clytids),  who  were  settled
in  Elis  (Paus.  iii.  11.  6;  iii.  12.  8;  iv.  16.  i  :  vi.  2.  5  ;  vi.  17.  6;
viii.  10.  5).  The  floor  of  the  chamber  is  not  paved  but  consists  merely
of  earth  ;  and  this  earth  to  a  depth  of  .45  to  .50  metre  is  of  a  greenish-
yellow  colour  and  a  clayey  texture,  quite  different  from  the  brown  sandy
soil  of  the  Altis.  It  has  clearly  been  brought  from  Mount  Cronius,
where  a  similar  soil  is  found.  Hence  it  has  been  inferred  that  the
little  sanctuary  was  originally  situated  on  that  hill,  and  that  when  it
was  transferred  to  its  present  site  some  of  the  soil  of  the  holy  mountain
was    transferred   with   it.      Prof.   Curtius   conjectures   that    the  roimd


58o  THE  PRYTANEVM  bk.  v.  kus

chamber  was  the  Gaeum  or  sanctuary  of  Earth  mentioned  by  Pausanbs
above  (v.  1 4.  i  o),  and  that  this  may  have  been  deemed  a  suitable  plaa
for  setting  up  an  altar  to  the  soothsayer  lamus,  because  the  sanctoan
of  Earth  was  the  seat  of  an  old  oracle  (note  on  v.  14.  10).  But  these
conjectures  rest  on  a  very  uncertain  foundation,  since  it  is  not  k&o«s
whether  the  clay  floor  is  part  of  the  original  structure.  It  may  haw
been  made  at  a  much  later  time,  when  a  lime-kiln,  which  may  still  be
seen  in  the  north-west  comer  of  the  chamber,  was  constructed.  Efo
if  it  belonged  to  the  original  structure,  the  clay  may  have  been  chosco,
not  for  any  religious  reason,  but  merely  because  it  afTorded  a  finner
floor  than  the  native  earth.

In  the  quadrangular  apartment  to  the  south  of  the  round  chamber
there  are  some  foundations,  which  may  have  been  those  of  an  altar.
Prof.  Curtius  conjectures  that  the  altar  may  have  been  that  of  Tbcoffi
(Paus.  V.  14.  10).

See  Olympia:  Ergebnisse,  Tafelband  i.  plates  Ixxi.  IxxiL  ;  P.  Giae^  in
Olympia:  Ergtbnisse^  Textband  2.  pp.  105- 107 ;  id.^  in  Die  Ausgrabtrnge*  »
Olympia^  5  (1879*1881),  p.  39  sq.,  with  pl.  xxxviL  ;  Olympia:  ErgtMsst,
Textband  2.  p.  165  sq.  ;  Die  Funde  von  Olympia^  p.  19 ;  Curtios  imd  Adler,
Olympia  und  Umgegend^  p.  22 ;  Curtius,  Die  Altdre  von  Olympia^  pp.  21-36;
fV/.,  Gesamm,  Abhandlungen^  2.  pp.  59-61;  Die  JnschrifUn  tntn  Olympia, 'S^i-
662;  Flasch,  *  Olympia/  in  Baumeister's  Denkmdler,  p.  1073;  A.  Bottkhcr,
Olympiad  pp.  321-325  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  349.

15.  8.  gymnaBJum wrestling-schoolfl.     See  vi.  21.  2  notes.

15.  9*  the  Prytaneum.  The  Prytaneuin  is  the  building  in  the
north-west  comer  of  the  Altis.  When  it  was  fitst  excavated,  it  exhibited
such  a  chaos  of  walls — Greek,  Roman,  and  Byzantine — that  the  attempt
to  make  out  a  definite  ground-plan  seemed  hopeless.  Not  until  the
Byzantine  walls  had  been  cleared  away  did  the  plan  of  the  Roman
building  become  tolerably  plain.  Afterwards  excavations  under  the
Roman  floor  brought  to  light  a  number  of  walls  of  a  still  earlier  period
which,  taken  together  with  the  Greek  walls  previously  laid  bare,  revealed
a  nearly  symmetrical  ground-plan.  The  building  thus  reconstituted  was
the  Greek  Prytaneum.  Its  walls,  though  all  of  the  Greek  period,  arc
not  all  of  the  same  date.  Most  of  them  are  built  of  squared  blocks  d
conglomerate,  but  some  are  built  of  boulders,  and  the  columns  of  the
north  hall  or  court  are  constructed  of  large  round  bricks.  All  the  i^'alls
are  comparatively  thin,  and  therefore  lacked  strength  and  durability.
Hence  they  seem  to  have  been  often  repaired  or  rebuilt  in  antiquity.

The  Greek  building  formed  a  square  of  about  32.80  metres  or
exactly  100  Phidonian  feet,  as  that  foot  is  determined  by  Dr.  DorpfcW
(see  above,  p.  497  sq.)  The  doorway  seems  to  have  been  in  the  middle
of  the  south  side,  perhaps  with  a  pair  of  columns  supporting  the  lintel
Through  this  doorway  you  passed  into  a  vestibule  or  ante-room,  from
which  there  was  access  on  the  right  and  left  (east  and  west)  into  two
colonnades  opening  northwards.  But  if  turning  neither  to  the  right  nor
the  left  you  passed  straight  through  the  vestibule,  you  found  yourself
in  a  square  chamber  measuring  6.80  metres  on  the  sides,  of  which  the
walls  are  still  standing.     This  chamber  would  seem  to  have  been  the


CH.  XV  THE  PRYTANEUM  581

central  point  of  the  whole  building  ;  probably  therefore  it  contained  the
hearth  on  which  burned  the  perpetual  fire.  It  is  true  that  no  certain
traces  of  a  hearth  or  altar  were  found  in  it,  but  considering  the  ruinous
state  of  the  whole  building  this  is  hardly  to  be  wondered  at.

Next  to  this  central  chamber  on  the  north  there  was  a  narrower
apartment,  the  walls  of  which,  so  far  as  they  exist,  belong  to  a  some-
what later  age.  It  must  therefore  remain  uncertain  whether  this  second
room  formed  part  of  the  original  plan.  It  seems  to  have  served  only
as  a  passage  or  ante-room  to  the  large  court  which  occupied  the
northern  half  of  the  Prytaneum.

On  both  sides  of  these  two  central  chambers  lay  two  open  courts,
flanked  on  the  south  by  the  two  small  colonnades  into  which  there  was
apparently  access  from  the  vestibule.  The  foundations  of  the  western
of  these  two  colonnades  still  exist.  On  its  outer  side  each  of  these
two  open  courts  was  bounded  by  a  long  hall  or  colonnade,  which  Dr.
Dorpfeld  calls  the  East  Colonnade  and  the  West  Colonnade  respectively.
The  foundations  of  two  at  least  of  the  columns  of  the  West  Colonnade
are  in  their  places.  This  colonnade  opened  eastward  on  the  court.
Its  northern  part  is  occupied  by  a  series  of  small  chambers,  which  at
some  period  were  completely  rebuilt.  Curiously  enough  the  back  (that
is  the  western)  wall  of  these  little  rooms  was  distinct  from  the  back  wall
of  the  colonnade,  being  separated  from  it  by  a  narrow  passage  only
.60  metre  (not  quite  2  feet)  wide.  What  the  object  of  this  passage
may  have  been  is  not  apparent.  Traces  of  a  hearth  (.?)  and  a  basin,
together  with  the  presence  of  several  water-channels  in  this  part  of  the
building,  suggest  that  here  may  have  been  the  kitchen.  In  Roman
times  a  banqueting  room  (triclinium)  of  the  Roman  fashion  was  built
in  the  West  Colonnade.  The  ends  of  two  of  the  three  couches  on
which  the  guests  reclined  are  preserved,  as  well  as  remains  of  a  many-
coloured  mosaic  pavement.  This  is  doubtless  the  banqueting  room
mentioned  by  Pausanias  (§  12),  in  which  the  Olympic  victors  were
feasted.

The  East  Colonnade  is  not  so  well  preserved  as  the  West  Colonnade.
Of  its  southern  half  not  a  stone  was  foimd  in  its  place.  Probably,
however,  it  was  symmetrical  with  the  southern  half  of  the  West
Colonnade,  though  it  stands  on  a  higher  level,  the  ground  here  sloping
downward  from  east  to  west.  But  the  East  Colonnade  differed  from
its  sister  colonnade  in  at  least  one  respect ;  instead  of  being  closed
at  the  back  by  a  wall,  it  opened  eastward  through  a  row  of  columns.
In  fact,  it  faced  two  ways — inwards  on  the  court  and  outwards  on  the
outside  of  the  building.  Three  bases  of  columns  which  supported  its
outer  facade  are  still  in  their  places  in  the  line  of  the  eastern  wall  of
the  Prytaneum.  What  the  original  use  of  this  East  Colonnade  was,
we  do  not  know.  The  Romans  fitted  up  a  hall  or  chamber  of  some
sort  in  it,  with  a  water  basin  and  a  fine  mosaic  pavement.

Most  of  the  northern  part  of  the  Prytaneum  seems  to  have  been
occupied  by  a  large  open  court  surrounded  by  colonnades  on  at  least
three  sides,  namely  the  north,  the  west,  and  the  south.  Of  some  of
the   columns  of  these  colonnades   the  foundations  alone  remain  ;    of


582  THE  PRYTANEUM  bk.  v.  elis

others,  parts  of  the  shafts  are  still  standing ;  but  most  of  them  have
disappeared  entirely.  The  construction  of  these  columns  was  very
peculiar.  They  were  made  of  thick  semicircular  bricks  placed  one  on
the  top  of  the  other,  a  pair  of  them  making  up  a  drum  of  the  column.
What  the  date  of  these  brick -columns  may  be  is  quite  uncertain.
Water  channels,  provided  with  basins,  run  beside  the  columns  ;  and  at
the  eastern  end  of  the  court  there  is  a  cistern  built  of  regularly  hewr.
blocks  of  conglomerate.  It  is  possible  that  the  central  part  of  the
court  was  not  open  but  roofed  over.

Some  of  the  changes  made  in  the  Prytaneum  in  Roman  times  have
been  already  mentioned.  The  building  was  extended  to  the  west  and
north,  and  here  a  new  colonnade  or  portico  was  built,  of  which  the
stylobate,  together  with  some  stumps  of  columns,  can  still  be  seen.
The  front  (south)  wall  of  the  Prytaneum  was  also  advanced  southward
a  little,  and  a  new  colonnade  was  built  all  along  it.  But  the  central
chamber  in  which  burned  the  perpetual  fire  seems  to  have  been
preserved  unaltered.  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  neither  in  the  Greek
nor  in  the  Roman  walls  of  the  Prytaneum  were  clamps  used  to  bind  the
stones  together.

The  date  of  the  Greek  Prytaneum  cannot  be  exactly  determined,
but  it  seems  to  be  very  early.  This  appears  as  well  from  the  absence
of  clamps  in  the  masonry  as  from  the  fact  that  the  direction  of  the
oldest  west  wall  of  the  Altis  was  evidently  determined  at  this  point  by
the  existence  of  the  Prytaneum,  which  proves  that  the  Prytaneum  was
older  than  the  wall  of  the  Altis.  And  in  the  Greek  Prytaneum  itself
there  are  vestiges  of  a  still  older  building,  which  Dr.  Dorpfeld  is
disposed  to  connect  with  some  exceedingly  ancient  foundations  dis-
covered to  the  north-west  of  the  Heraeum.  At  what  exact  time  within
the  Roman  period  the  Prytaneum  was  rebuilt  we  cannot  say ;  we  do
not  even  know  whether  the  alterations  were  made  before  or  after  the
time  of  Pausanias.  But  the  wretched  masonry  of  all  the  Roman  w^ls
points  to  a  very  late  date.  The  workmanship  of  the  mosaic  floors,
indeed,  is  fairly  good  ;  but  this  does  not  prove  much,  since  even  the
Byzantines  made  excellent  mosaics.

It  deserves  to  be  mentioned  that  within  the  Prytaneum  and  a  little
to  the  north  of  it  a  great  many  ancient  bronze  articles  were  discovered
at  a  considerable  depth  below  the  surface  of  the  ground.  Thus,  within
the  building  there  were  found  many  pieces  of  bronze  vessels,  especially
kettles  and  basins  ;  in  one  narrow  space  several  large  kettles  were
lying  heaped  up,  and  along  with  them  were  some  antique  legs  o\
tripods,  handles,  and  a  griffin's  head  made  of  sheet  bronze.  Other
bronze  objects  brought  to  light  in  the  Prytaneum  were  many  handles
of  basins  ;  fragments  of  pans,  wine-ladles,  etc.  ;  many  ancient  fragments
of  tripods  ;  lions'  claws  from  tables  or  chairs ;  numerous  spearheads :
pieces  of  shields  ;  lamps  ;  weights  ;  leaves  of  olive  wreaths  ;  and  ancient
inscriptions  engraved  on  plates  of  bronze.  The  whole  layer  of  rubbish
was  also  thickly  studded  with  potsherds.  To  the  north  of  the
Prytaneum  a  layer  of  very  black  soil  was  found  to  contain  many  more
articles  of  bronze,  including  fragments  of  vessels  and  tripods ;   spear-


CH.  XV  WJNELESS  LIBATIONS  583

heads ;  weights ;  heads  of  nails ;  several  archaic  statuettes ;  and  a
number  of  rude  figures  of  animals.  A  few  similar  figures  of  animals
were  also  discovered  within  the  walls  of  the  Prytaneum.  All  these
various  articles  had  seemingly  been  thrown  away  as  worthless.

See  Olympia:  Ergebnisse^  Tafelband  i.  plates  xliii.  xliv.  ;  W.  Dorpfeld,  in
Olympia :  Ergebnisse^  Textband  2.  pp.  58-61  ;  A.  Furtwangler,  in  Olympia :
Ergehnisset  Textband  4.  p.  5  sq,  ;  Die  Funde  von  Olympia^  p.  23 ;  Curtius  und
Adler,  Olympia  und  Umgegend^  p.  35 ;  Flasch,  '  Olympia,'  in  Baumeister's  Dcnk-
judler^  p.  1074 ;  Botticher,  Olympia^^  p.  325  sq.  ;  Baedeker,*  p.  343.  As  to
(ireek  Prytaneums  in  genera],  see  vol.  2.  p.  170  sq.

15.  10.  Only  to  the  Nymphs do  they  not  pour  libations  of

wine  etc.  Libations  of  water,  oil,  honey,  or  honey  mixed  with  milk,
were  offered  to  deities  to  whom  it  was  unlawful  to  offer  wine.  Such
libations  were  called  *  sober'  (Photius,  Lexicon.,  s.v.  vq<\>a.\iOi  Ova-lai ;
Suidas,  s.v.  vr)<f>dX.io^  Ova-ia),  For  example,  honey  mixed  with  water
was  offered  to  the  Furies  (ii.  11.  4  note)  ;  and  honey,  not  wine,  was
offered  to  the  Sun,  because  it  was  thought  most  desirable  that  a  god  on
whom  so  much  depended  should  keep  strictly  sober  (Athenaeus,  xv.  p.
693  e  f).  Necromancers  offered  honey  mixed  with  milk  to  the  souls  of
the  dead  (Porphyry,  De  antro  nympharum^  28).  According  to  Polemo,
the  Athenians  offered  *  sober'  sacrifices  to  the  Muse  of  Memory,  the
Dawn,  the  Sun,  the  Moon,  the  Nymphs,  and  Heavenly  Aphrodite
(Schol.  on  Sophocles,  Oed,  Col.  100 ;  cp.  Porphyry,  op.  cit.  19  ;  id.y  De
abstinentia^  ii.  20).  For  other  examples  of  wineless  libations,  see  Paus.
i.  26.  5  ;  vi.  20.  3.  Cp.  Preller  on  Polemo,  Frag.  42  ;  P.  Stengel  in
Hermes^  22  (1887),  p.  645  sqq.-,  id.^  Griechische  Sakralaltertiimer,  §  63;
Robert  Tomow,  De  apium  mellisque  apud  veteres  significatione  (Berlin,
1893),  p.  142  sqq.\  J.  de  Fritze,  De  libatione  veterum  Graecorum
(Berlin,  1893),  P*  32  sqq.  On  libations  in  general,  and  their  repre-
sentation in  ancient  art,  see  Stephani  in  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg),
1873,  pp.  1 13-241  ;  J.  de  Fritze,  op.  cit.

15.  10.  the  Mistresses.  That  is,  Demeter  and  Proserpine.  Cp.
viii.  n.  It  is  only  here  and  in  §  4  of  this  chapter  that  Pausanias  uses
the  plural  to  designate  the  two  goddesses.

15.  10.  the  Priest the  Soothsayers  and  Libation-bearers

the  Ghiide,  the  Flute-player,  and  the  Woodman.    All  these

officials  are  mentioned  in  inscriptions  found  at  Olympia.  A  list  of  them
appears  to  have  been  drawn  up  and  engraved  on  stone  at  the  beginning
of  each  Olympiad.  Many  of  these  lists  have  been  found.  They  date
from  01.  186  (36  B.C.)  to  01.  261  (265  A.D.)  Apparently  the  custom
of  publishing  the  lists  was  introduced  in  the  first  century  B.C.  and  came
to  an  end  in  consequence  of  the  irruptions  of  the  barbarians  in  the
third  century  a.d.  There  seem  to  have  been  regularly  three  priests
(Jheokoloi)  and  three  libation-bearers.  Besides  the  officials  here  men-
tioned by  Pausanias  we  learn  from  the  inscriptions  that  there  were
Keepers  of  the  Keys  (kXciSovxoi),  Dancers-at- the- Libations  (ctfi-
(TwovBopXYjoTai),  an  Interpreter  of  Dreams  (^cow/Kwros  Si  oveCptov),
a  VVine-pourer  (otvoxoos),  a  Secretary  (yfKLfjL/MLTevs),  a  Daily  Sacrificer
(KaOrffjLepoOvTTf^),  an  Architect  or  Builder  (crrcyavc^/Aos  or  dpx^TCKTwv),


584  THE  HERAEUM  bk.  v.  elis

a  Superintendent  (cTri/^ifXTynTs),  a  Physician  (tarpos),  a  Baker  (oproicoaw),
and  a  Cook  (ftayct/aos).  See  /?/>  Inschriften  von  Olympia^  Nos.  59-
141  ;  Beul^  Etude  sur  le  PHoponnise^  p.  232  j^^.  ;  Curtius,  Alt  are
von  Olympia^  p.  18  ;  /V/.,  Gesamm.  Abhand.  2.  p.  56;  Ad.  Botticher,
Olympiad  p.  153  sqq.  In  regard  to  the  Flute -player  it  is  to  be
observed  that  in  inscriptions  down  to  the  second  half  of  the  first  centui)'
A.D.  he  is  described  by  the  general  name  of  avAiyr^s  or  flute-player;
but  that  in  inscriptions  of  the  second  and  third  centuries  A.D.,  he  b
described  by  the  special  name  of  frtrovhavXri^  or  *  player  of  the  flute  at
the  libations.'  It  thus  appears  that  somewhere  about  the  first  centur)-
of  our  era  the  official  title  of  this  musician  was  changed  from  avAip^
to  cnrovSavXi/s.  As  Pausanias  mentions  him  by  his  old  name  of
avXi/T^s,  though  in  his  time  (174  A.D.,  see  note  on  v.  i.  2)  the  official
title  had  been  changed  to  <r7rov&ivA.7ys,  it  was  formerly  argued  by  Pro£
Dittenberger  that  he  must  have  copied  his  list  of  officials  from  some
antiquated  authority  instead  of  taking  them  down  on  the  spot.  This
is  possible,  but  the  argument  does  not  seem  conclusive.  Pausanias
may  very  well  have  preferred  to  call  the  flute-player  by  his  common
name  instead  of  giving  him  the  special  title  of  cnrovSavXi/s,  and  in  this
view  Prof.  Dittenberger  seems  now  to  acquiesce.  See  W.  Dittenberger,
in  Archaeol.  Zeitung^  38  (1880),  pp.  58-60;  Schubart,  m  Fteckeisetis
Jahrbiicher^  29  (1883),  p.  479  sq. ;  W.  Gurlitt,  Pausanias^  p.  403  sq.\
cp.  R.  Heberdey,  in  Eranos  Vindobonensis  (Wien,  1893),  p.  ^^  sq.

15.  II.  the  god  who  is  in  Libya Ammoxiian  Hen

Parammon.  Mr.  C.  W.  Mansell  thinks  that  the  triad  of  Egyptian  gods
here  mentioned  by  Pausanias  is  identical  with  what  he  calls  **tbe
supreme  Libyco-Carthaginian  triad  of  Baal-Khammon,  Tanit,  and  lol"
See  Gazette  arMologique^  2  (1876),  p.  127.  Mr.  Ph.  Berger,  agreeing
as  to  the  first  two  persons  in  this  Carthaginian  trinity,  substitutes  a
serpent,  which  he  calls  "  Eschmun,  the  Phoenician  Aesculapius,"  for
lol  in  the  third  place  in  the  trinity.  See  his  articles  on  *La  Trinitc
carthaginoise '  in  Gazette  arMohgique^  5  (1879),  PP-  I33-I40>  222-229;
ib.  6  (1880),  pp.  18-31.  On  an  interesting  relief  which  my  friend  the
late  W.  Robertson  Smith  brought  back  from  Egypt  in  1 89 1  the  head  of
Ammon  appears  with  the  characteristic  attribute  of  ram's  horns  (cp.
Herodotus,  ii.  42),  and  beside  it  is  the  head  of  a  sheep  ;  the  lattff
seems  to  represent  the  wife  of  Ammon,  the  Ammonian  Hera,  as
Pausanias  calls  her.

16.  I.  the  temple  of  Hera.  The  Heraeum  or  temple  of  Hera  is  of
great  interest  as  being  probably  the  oldest  purely  Greek  temple  known  to
us ;  and  a  study  of  its  construction  throws  much  light  on  the  early  history
of  Greek  architecture.  The  temple  stands  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Cronius,
on  the  northern  side  of  the  Altis.  At  this  point  the  ground  sloped  away
to  the  south  and  west,  and  in  order  to  obtain  a  level  surface  for  building
it  was  necessary  to  cut  away  part  of  the  foot  of  the  hill  and  to  pile  up
the  soil  so  obtained  further  to  the  south.  The  foot  of  the  hill  was  then
supported  by  a  wall  rising  in  steps,  and  the  temple  was  built  so  close  to
this  supporting  wall  that  only  a  narrow  passage  was  left  between  the  wall
and  the  temple.     Excavations  in  the  interior  of  the  temple  showed  that


CH.  XVI  THE  HERAEUM  585

an  altar  probably  stood  near  the  south-west  comer  before  the  temple  was
built.  This  very  ancient  altar  was  probably  replaced  by  the  altar  of
which  some  scanty  remains  were  found  opposite  the  west  end  of  the
south  side  of  the  temple.  In  consequence  of  the  yielding  nature  of  the
soil,  the  temple  has  sunk  on  the  south  and  west,  in  spite  of  the  fact
that  here  the  foundations  were  laid  deeper  and  broader  than  on  the  other
sides.

The  temple  had  only  a  single  step,  in  which  respect  it  differs  from
most  Greek  temples.  At  present,  indeed,  two  steps  are  visible  in  some
places,  but  the  dimensions  and  style  of  the  lower  step  show  that  it  was
not  properly  a  step  but  merely  part  of  the  foundations.  The  level  of  the
ground  about  the  temple  changed  so  much  in  course  of  ages  that  at  a
later  time  two  steps  were  exposed  to  view  on  the  south  side,  and  none  at
all  on  the  north.  After  this  change  had  taken  place,  two  sets  of  steps
were  built  on  the  south  side  of  the  temple,  one  at  the  east  end  and  the
other  at  the  west  end,  in  order  to  afford  easy  access  to  the  temple.  The
steps  at  the  east  end  are  still  preserved.

The  temple  was  of  the  Doric  order  and  surrounded  by  a  colonnade,
with  six  columns  at  each  of  the  narrow  ends  (east  and  west),  and  sixteen
colunms  on  each  of  the  long  sides  (north  and  south).  Its  length  is
50.01  metres  and  its  breadth  18.75  nietres,  measured  on  the  top  step  or
stylobate.  Most  of  the  columns  are  standing  to  a  height  of  several
metres ;  only  six  out  of  the  original  forty  columns  are  entirely  wanting.
Although  they  are  all  Doric,  they  differ  from  each  other  in  so  many
respects  that  archaeologists  were  at  first  puzzled  to  explain  the  discrepancy.
Thus  in  diameter  they  vary  from  1.02  to  1.29  metres.  Indeed  the
difference  in  diameter  between  even  columns  on  the  same  side  of  the
temple  is  in  some  cases  so  g^eat  (one  column  being  thicker  by  a  fourth
than  another)  that  no  one  would  have  suspected  that  they  all  belonged
to  the  Heraeum  if  they  had  not  been  standing  in  their  original  places.
Further,  the  columns  differ  in  the  number  and  shape  of  their  flutes.  One
column  (the  second  from  the  west  on  the  south  side)  has  only  sixteen
flutes,  whereas  all  the  other  columns  have  twenty  ;  on  some  columns  the
flutes  are  deep,  on  others  they  are  shallow.  Further,  the  columns  differ
in  respect  both  of  the  height  of  their  drums  and  of  the  way  in  which  they
were  fitted  together ;  some  of  the  drums  have  large  dowel-holes,  others
have  small,  others  have  none  at  all.  Some  of  the  columns  seem  to  have
been  monoliths.  Finally,  out  of  eighteen  capitals  which  have  been
found  there  are  twelve  of  quite  distinct  shapes.  In  some  the  echinus
bulges  very  much,  after  the  antique  style ;  in  others  it  is  straight,  after
the  later  style.  Some  of  the  capitals  have  a  large,  some  a  small  diameter ;
some  have  rings  round  the  neck,  and  others  have  not.  The  only  prob-
able explanation  of  all  these  remarkable  differences  is  the  one  suggested
by  Dr.  Dorpfeld,  namely  that  the  columns  were  originally  of  wood,  and
that  as  they  decayed  they  were  gradually  replaced  at  different  times  by
columns  of  stone,  which  were  made,  not  on  the  model  of  the  original
columns,  but  in  the  common  style  of  the  day.  This  hypothesis  is
confirmed  by  the  fact  mentioned  by  Pausanias,  that  in  his  time  one  of
the  columns  in  the  back  chamber  of  the  temple  was  still  made  of  oak.


fe    •   &  "8


9       9      H

i^^

o'       0

Z>              L.

n'    "^

P^^-1

ll'     ^ll

il-o"To1

CH.  XVI  THE  HERAEUM  587

This  substitution  of  stone  for  wooden  columns  seems  to  have  begun  as
early  as  the  sixth  or  even  seventh  century  B.C.,  if  we  may  judge  from  the
shapes  of  some  of  the  capitals,  which  are  amongst  the  most  archaic
specimens  of  Doric  architecture  known  to  us.  Others  of  the  existing
columns  appear  from  their  style  to  be  much  later,  perhaps  even  of
Roman  date.

Of  the  entablature  not  a  trace  was  discovered.  This  fact  makes  it
highly  probable  that  down  to  the  destruction  of  the  temple  the  entabla-
ture was  always  of  wood,  never  of  stone.  The  inference  is  confirmed  by
the  unusually  great  distance  between  the  columns,  and  by  the  observa-
tion that  on  the  top  of  the  stone  capitals  there  are  no  holes  such  as
there  must  have  been  for  the  attachment  of  the  architrave,  if  the
architrave  had  been  of  stone.  But  though  the  entablature  has  entirely
disappeared,  we  may  affirm  with  some  confidence  that,  like  the  Doric
entablatures  in  stone,  it  had  a  frieze  of  triglyphs  and  metopes.  The
evidence  of  this  is  that  the  distances  between  the  columns  at  all  the
corners  are  less  by  .20  to  .30  metre  than  the  distances  between  the
other  columns.  For  this  difference  was  a  necessary  consequence  of  a
frieze  of  trigl>'phs  and  metopes,  and  was  indeed  recognised  by  ancient
architects  as  a  blemish  on  the  Doric  order  (Vitruvius,  iv.  3.  i  sq,)

The  roof  of  the  temple  was  covered  with  tiles  of  terra -cotta.
These  tiles  were  as  usual  of  two  shapes  ;  flattish,  slightly  curved  tiles,
alternated  with  semi-cylindrical  tiles  which  served  to  cover  the  junctions
of  the  former  (see  above,  p.  496  sq,)  The  ends  of  the  covering  tiles,
along  the  eaves,  were  closed  by  discs,  which  were  made  in  one  piece
with  the  tiles.  Semi-cylindrical  tiles  of  a  larger  size  extended  along  the
ridge  of  the  roof,  and  their  ends,  at  the  two  extremities  of  the  roof,  were
closed  by  huge  discs,  lavishly  decorated  with  reliefs  and  paintings.
The  greater  part  of  one  of  these  discs  has  been  found ;  it  measures
2.24  metres  in  diameter  (Olympia :  Ergebnisse^  Tafelband  2.  pi.  cxv.  ;
/V/.,  Textband  2.  p.  1 90  sq,  ;  Die  Funde  von  Olympia^  pi.  xxxviii.  2  ;
A.  Botticher,  Olympia^'^  pi.  iv.  ;  Baumeister's  Denkmdler,  Fig.  1275).

The  interior  of  the  temple  is  arranged  in  the  typical  way.  At  the
east  end  there  is  a  fore-temple  (Jfronaos\  in  the  middle  is  the  cella,  and
at  the  west  end  is  a  back-chamber  {ppisthodomos).  The  fagade  of  both
fore-temple  and  back-chamber  was  supported  by  two  columns  between
aniiic.  The  lower  part  of  the  walls  of  the  temple  is  well  preserved,
remarkably  so  in  comparison  Avith  the  other  buildings  in  the  Altis.  So
far  as  they  exist  the  walls  are  composed,  on  the  outside,  of  slabs  set  up
on  their  edges,  and,  on  the  inside,  of  squared  blocks  laid  in  courses
after  the  usual  fashion.  Four  courses  of  these  squared  blocks  on  the
inside  correspond  to  a  single  row  of  the  upright  slabs  on  the  outside,
though  only  three  courses  of  the  squared  blocks  are  visible  on  account
of  the  higher  level  of  the  floor  of  the  cella.  On  this  socle  of  solid
masonry,  about  3  feet  high,  there  was  found,  at  the  time  when  the
temple  was  excavated,  a  thin  Byzantine  wall  of  stone  and  lime,  the  late
origin  of  which  was  proved  by  the  Roman  inscriptions  and  fragments  of
marble  sculptures  which  were  built  into  it.  Thus  the  question  arises.
What  were  the  upper  walls  of  the  temple  built  of  originally  ?


588  THE  HERAEUM  bk.  v.  rus

That  they  were  not  built  of  stone  seems  to  follow  from  several  coo-
siderations.  In  the  first  place,  there  are  no  dowel-holes  on  the  iqjpcr
surface  of  the  existing  walls,  such  as  there  would  probably  have  been  if
the  next  course  had  been  of  stone.  In  the  second  place,  why  should  the
Byzantines  have  pared  down  the  walls  to  a  uniform  height  of  about
3  feet  and  then  proceeded  to  build  up  new  stone  walls  to  replace  those
which  they  had  taken  down  ?  Such  a  proceeding  would  be  uninteUigibte.
We  must  suppose  that  the  original  walls  were  constructed  of  some
perishable  material,  and  had  decayed  or  tumbled  down  before  the
Byzantines  replaced  them  by  walls  of  stone  and  lime.  This  mateml
can  hardly  have  been  wood ;  people  do  not  build  wooden  walls  m8
metres  thick.  Nor  can  it  have  been  baked  bricks,  else  why  should  the
Byzantines  have  been  at  so  much  pains  to  replace  a  good  wall  by  a
bad  one  ?

The  conclusion  at  which  Dr.  Dorpfeld  arrives  seems  inevitaWe.
The  upper  walls  were  originally  made  of  unbumt  or  sun-dried  bricks.
That  many  ancient  buildings,  including  temples  and  palaces,  were  built
of  unbumt  bricks  is  known  from  Vitruvius  (ii.  8.  9  sqq.)  and  Pausanias
(see  ii.  27.  6,  note),  and  that  the  upper  walls  of  the  Heraeum  were  so
constructed  is  shown  by  a  variety  of  evidence.  In  the  first  place,  the
interior  of  the  temple  was  found  to  be  covered  in  many  places  by  a
layer  of  greenish  clay  about  3  feet  thick,  over  which  the  Byzantines
erected  their  dwellings.  This  layer,  which  is  not  found  in  the  neigh-
bouring buildings  (the  Exedra  of  Herodes  and  the  treasuries),  is  most
probably  nothing  but  the  remains  of  the  unbumt  bricks  which  had
crumbled  away  under  the  action  of  rain  and  the  weather  as  soon  as  the
wooden  roof  had  given  way.  For  unbumt  brick  lasts  well  enough  so
long  as  it  is  protected  from  the  weather,  but  rapidly  goes  to  pieces
when  exposed  to  it.  Again,  the  unusual  thickness  (1.18  metres)  of  the
existing  walls  of  the  Heraeum  is  best  explained  on  the  hypothesis  that
they  were  intended  to  support  an  upper  structure  of  unbumt  brick,
which  would  require  a  broad  basis  to  rest  on  ;  whereas  half  the  thick-
ness would  have  sufficed  if  the  upper  stmcture  had  been  of  stone.
Further,  there  are  indications  that  the  doorposts  and  casings  of  the
doorways  were  of  wood.  Now  walls  of  unbumt  brick  need  to  be
protected  at  the  angles  in  this  way  ;  but  if  the  walls  had  been  of  stone
throughout,  wooden  doorposts  and  wooden  casings  would  have  been
meaningless.  Lastly,  on  the  upper  surface  of  the  stone  walls  there  arc
certain  appearances  which  are  believed  to  mark  the  positions  of  the
long  wooden  beams  which  were  used  to  strengthen  the  brickwork.

Thus  the  Heraeum  was  built  originally  of  wood  and  clay  (in  the
form  of  unbumt  bricks),  with  foundations  and  a  socle  of  stone.  The
fact,  which  may  be  regarded  as  established,  that  its  columns  and
entablature  were  at  first  made  of  wood,  goes  far  to  prove  that  the  Doric
style  of  architecture  is  nothing  but  a  translation  into  stone  of  an  older
construction  in  wood.  This  view,  which  has  been  disputed  in  modern
times,  was  enunciated  long  ago  by  Vitmvius  (iv.  2).

The  doorway  which  leads  from  the  fore-temple  into  the  cella  is
interesting  because  it  exhibits  clear  traces  of  the  wooden  casing  which


CH.  XVI  THE  HERAEUM  589

once  masked  the  threshold  and  the  walls.  On  the  stone  threshold  may
still  be  seen  the  iron  dowels  by  which  the  wooden  threshold  was
fastened  to  it,  and  on  the  walls  there  are  horizontal  grooves  which
served  to  attach  the  wooden  casing.

The  cella^  which  is  long  in  proportion  to  its  breadth,  had  a  row  of
eight  columns  on  each  side ;  these  columns  are  no  longer  standing,  but
at  the  time  when  the  temple  was  excavated  the  marks  which  two
of  them  had  left  on  the  stylobate  were  still  visible.  They  seem  to
have  been  of  the  Doric  order ;  for  three  Doric  capitals,  which  from
their  shape  and  dimensions  may  very  well  have  belonged  to  them,  were
found  near  the  temple.  Formerly  it  was  supposed  that  these  inner
columns  were  of  the  Ionic  order,  because  fragments  of  Ionic  capitals
were  found  in  the  cclla.  But  it  is  now  known  that  these  Ionic  capitals
belonged  to  the  Leonidaeum.

Further,  four  short  cross- walls  projected  at  right  angles  from  each
of  the  side  walls  of  the  cella^  so  as  to  meet  every  second  column.
Thus  each  of  the  side  aisles  of  the  cella  was  divided  into  a  series  of
four  equal  compartments,  with  a  smaller  compartment  at  the  west  end,
resembling  the  side  chapels  of  our  cathedrals.  These  short  cross-
walls  have,  indeed,  like  the  columns,  disappeared,  but  their  foundations
remain,  together  with  traces  of  their  attachment  to  the  side  walls  of  the
cello.  The  traces  in  question  consist  of  blocks  sawn  through  the
middle,  of  which  the  other  halves  formerly  fitted  into  the  cross-walls,  thus
acting  as  a  bond  or  ligature  between  the  two  walls.  When  the  cross-walls
were  taken  down,  each  of  these  binding  blocks,  which  fitted  into  both
walls,  was  cut  or  sawn  through,  and  only  the  part  of  it  which  fitted  into
the  side  wall  was  left.  How  high  these  cross- walls  originally  reached
we  cannot  say  with  certainty ;  but  Dr.  Dorpfeld  is  probably  right  in
supposing  that  they  reached  right  up  to  the  ceiling,  acting  as  buttresses
to  support  the  walls  of  unbumt  bricks,  and  perhaps  carrying  the  great
tie-beams  which  probably  crossed  the  whole  width  of  the  temple,  from
the  outer  colonnade  on  the  one  side  to  the  outer  colonnade  on  the  other.
Similar  cross-walls,  ending  in  Ionic  columns,  are  found  in  the  temple  of
Apollo  at  Bassae  (see  viii.  41.  7  note).

In  the  time  of  Pausanias  many  statues  stood  in  the  spaces  between
the  columns  of  the  side  aisles.  Of  those  which  he  mentions  only  the
Hermes  of  Praxiteles  has  been  found.  It  stood  between  the  second  and
third  columns  on  the  north  side,  and  was  discovered  lying  on  the  ground
in  front  of  its  pedestal  (see  below,  p.  595).  Next  to  it,  between  the
first  and  second  columns,  stood  the  statue  of  a  Roman  lady,  which
Pausanias  does  not  mention,  but  which  has  been  found.

At  the  west  end  of  the  cella  stands  the  long  pedestal  which  probably
supported  the  images  of  Zeus  and  Hera  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  It
is  made  of  blocks  of  limestone,  somewhat  rudely  fitted  together,  and
extends  across  the  whole  breadth  of  the  nave,  between  the  two  most
westerly  of  the  columns.  At  the  time  when  the  cross-walls  existed
between  the  colunms  and  the  side  walls  of  the  cellc^  it  must  have  been
impossible  to  get  behind  the  images,  if  the  pedestal  stood  where  it  now
does.     Hence  Dr.  Dorpfeld  conjectures  that  it  originally  stood  either


590  THE  HERAEUM  bk.  v.  eus

against  the  western  wall  or  nearer  the  middle  of  the  cella^  and  that
when  the  cella  was  remodelled  by  the  taking  down  of  the  cross-walls
the  pedestal  was  moved  to  its  present  position  between  the  columns.

The  floor  of  the  cella  is  made  of  concrete,  the  ingredients  of  whkh
are  lime-mortar,  small  pebbles,  and  brick-dust.  Only  the  middle  pan
of  the  nave,  from  the  second  to  the  fourth  column  and  a  little  beyood,
is  paved  with  flags  of  limestone,  on  which  the  marks  of  attachmeot  of
statues  may  be  seen.

That  the  temple  had  a  flat  ceiling  under  the  sloping  roof  is  proved
by  a  story  which  Pausanias  tells  us  (v.  20.  4),  but  no  trace  of  the
ceiling  survives.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  holds  that  there  was  no  opening  in  the
ceiling  and  roof,  and  that  the  temple  was  lit  from  the  door  only.  The
simlight  in  Greece  is  so  strong  that  such  a  method  of  lighting  is  mud
more  effective  there  than  it  would  be  under  the  greyer  skies  of  northern
Europe.

The  back-chamber  {ofiisthodomos)  corresponds  exactly  to  the  fore-
temple  in  plan.  It  was  shut  off  from  the  cella  by  a  wall  in  which  there
was  no  door.  Some  remains  of  a  limestone  pavement  may  be  seen  in
it,  with  the  holes  in  which  the  door  was  fastened.

Mention  has  been  made  of  the  statues  which  stood  in  the  cello.
But  we  have  evidence  that  other  parts  of  the  temple  besides  the  celk
were  enriched  with  statues  and  votive  offerings  of  different  sorts.  In
the  fore-temple  there  are  still  standing  six  marble  pedestals  wfaid
supported  statues  of  Roman  date.  In  the  southern  colonnade,  on  the
step  of  the  cella  wall,  may  be  seen  at  regular  intervals  eight  depressions,
in  which  the  bases  of  statues  were  probably  set  And  between  the
columns  of  the  southern  colonnade  are  many  holes  for  the  attachment  of
statues  or  inscribed  slabs.  Moreover,  on  the  outer  faces  of  these
columns  there  are  many  sinkings,  in  which  inscribed  tablets,  reliefs,  or
paintings  may  have  been  fixed.  Such  sinkings  are  especially  numerous
on  the  two  pairs  of  columns  at  each  end  of  the  colonnade,  confirming
the  view  that  the  ordinary  approaches  to  the  temple  were  between
these  columns  (see  above,  p.  585).  Bases  and  marks  of  many  kinds
on  the  pavement  are  also  to  be  seen  at  the  eastern  front  of  the  temple ;
traces  have  here  been  observed  of  bronze  statues  which  were  fastened
directly  to  the  stylobate.

The  stone  of  which  the  temple  is  built  is  a  shell-conglomerate ;  it
is  distinguished  from  the  conglomerate  of  which  the  temple  of  Zeus  is
built  by  containing  large  oyster-shells.  The  blocks  are  jointed  in  sud
a  way  that  only  their  outer  edges  touch  ;  the  intermediate  spaces  are
slightly  hollow.  The  same  mode  of  jointing  occurs  in  other  old
buildings  at  Olympia  and  elsewhere,  for  example  in  the  palace  at
Mycenae.  Iron  clamps  or  dowels  were  not  used  to  bind  the  stones
together.

With  regard  to  the  date  of  the  temple,  Pausanias  tells  us  that  it
was  founded  by  the  Scilluntians  about  eight  years  after  Oxylus  had
obtained  the  kingdom  of  Ells.  Thus,  if  we  accept  the  traditional  date
of  the  return  of  the  Heraclids  and  the  establishment  of  Oxylus  on  the
throne  of  Elis,  the   Heraeum  was  believed  to  have  been  built  about


CH.  XVI  THE  HERAEUM  591

1096  B.C  Till  recently  this  date  was  regarded  as  too  high;  but  a
careful  examination  of  the  architecture  of  the  temple  has  led  Dr.
Dorpfeld  to  the  conclusion  that  Pausanias's  precise  and  definite  state-
ment is  not  to  be  lightly  rejected,  and  that  the  temple  does  in  fact  date
from  the  eleventh  or  tenth  century  B.C.  He  points  out  that  the  ground-
plan  of  the  temple  with  its  fore-temple  and  cella  has  its  analogies  in  the
porticoes  and  halls  of  the  palaces  at  Tiryns,  Mycenae,  and  Troy ;  and
that  the  method  of  jointing  the  stones  (see  above)  is  the  same  as  that
employed  in  the  palace  at  Mycenae.  But  the  argument  on  which  he
chiefly  relies  is  the  consideration  that  the  original  pillars  were  of  wood,
and  that  nevertheless  some  of  the  existing  stone  columns,  which  replaced
the  wooden  pillars,  are  as  old  as  the  sixth  and  probably  the  seventh
century  B.C.  This  seems  to  throw  the  date  of  the  temple  several
centuries  further  back ;  for  if,  as  we  know,  one  of  the  wooden  pillars
lasted  into  the  time  of  Pausanias  (second  century  A.D.),  surely  the
pillars  which  were  replaced  by  stone  columns  in  the  seventh  century
B.C.  must  have  stood  several  centuries  before  they  became  so  rotten
that  it  was  necessary  to  take  them  down.  Hence  Dr.  Dorpfeld  infers
that  the  temple  was  built  in  the  eleventh  or  tenth  century  B.C.  This
conclusion,  reached  on  independent  grounds,  agrees  so  well  with  the
date  assigned  to  the  temple  by  Pausanias,  that  we  are  not  justified  in
rejecting  his  account  as  a  fable.  The  terra-cotta  tiles  and  ornaments  of
the  roof,  however,  are  considered  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  to  belong  to  a  later
age.  He  thinks  it  probable  that  the  temple  had  at  first  merely  a  flat
roof  coated  with  clay,  and  that  the  gable-roof  with  its  terra-cotta  tiles
was  added  at  some  later  time.  At  all  events,  whatever  may  be  the
exact  date  of  the  Heraeum,  we  can  be  fairly  certain  that  it  is  the  oldest
^temple  at  Olympia ;  perhaps,  indeed,  it  was  the  only  temple  down  to
the  time  when  the  temple  of  Zeus  was  built.  From  that  time  onwards
it  was  a  temple  of  Hera  only ;  formerly  it  would  seem  to  have  been  a
joint  temple  of  Hera  and  Zeus,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  fact  that  the
image  of  Zeus  stood  beside  that  of  Hera  in  the  cella  (Paus.  v.  17.  i).

It  has  been  already  mentioned  (p.  562  sq,)  that  many  archaic  bronzes
and  terra-cottas  have  been  found  under  the  floor  of  the  temple.

See  Olympia:  ErgebnissCy  Tafelband  i.  plates  iii.  xviii.-xxviii. ;  W.  Dorpfeld,
in  Olympia:  Ergebnisse^  Textband  2.  pp.  27-36;  id.^  in  Historische  u.  pnilolo-
gische  Aufsdtze  Ernst  Curiius  gewidmet,  pp.  147-150;  Die  Funde  von  Olympia^
p.  33  sq.,  with  plates  xxxiv.,  xxxv.  ;  Curtius  und  Adler,  Olympia  und  Umgegend^
pp.  36-38;  A.  Botticher,  Olympia^^  pp.  194-203;  Flasch,  *  Olympia,'  in  Bau-
m^\%\!ti'^  DenkmdUr^  pp.  1 102- 1 104;  Baedeker,*  p.  342  j^.  Mr.  K.  Wernicke's
theory'  that  the  Heraeum  was  turned  into  a  museum  of  art  for  the  gratification
of  the  emperor  Nero  on  his  visit  to  Olympia  {Jahrbuch  d.  arch,  Inst.  9  (1894),
pp.  101-114),  is  equally  destitute  of  evidence  and  of  probability.

16.  I.  The  length  of  the  temple  is  <a  hundred  and>  Edxty-
three  feet  etc.  If  we  reckon  the  Greek  foot  at  .296  metre,  then  the
length  of  the  Heraeum  according  to  Pausanias  was  163  x  .296  =  48.248
metres.  But  the  actual  length  of  the  temple,  as  we  have  seen,  is
50.01  metres.  So  that  Pausanias's  measurement  falls  considerably
under  the  mark.     His  measurement  of  the  breadth  (61  feet),  as  given


592  THE  SIXTEEN  WOMEN  bk.  v.  bus


in  the  text,  is  more  nearly  exact  (6i  x. 296  =18.056  metres,  whereas
the  actual  breadth  is  18.75  metres)  ;  but  it  is  to  be  observed  that  this
measurement  is  a  conjectural  restoration  of  the  text  deduced  from  the
actual  measurements  of  the  breadth,  and  that  though  we  may  be  £urlT
certain  that  the  figure  *  sixty '  is  rightly  restored  in  the  text,  we  haw
no  such  assurance  as  to  the  figure  *one.'  In  fact  if  Pausanias  wrote:
"  Its  breadth  is  not  less  than  sixty-three  "  (c^/jos  5€  rpitav  kqX  ^^rfKom
ovK  diroB€i)j  not  only  would  his  measurement  be  nearer  the  truth  (since
63  Greek  feet  =  18.648  metres,  which  is  very  close  to  the  real
measurement  of  18.75  metres),  but  the  corruption  of  his  text  would  be
more  easily  explicable.  Probably,  therefore,  the  translation  (vol.  i.  p.
260)  and  the  Critical  Note  on  the  passage  (vol.  i.  p.  585)  should  be
corrected  accordingly.

16.  2.  the  Sixteen  Women.  Plutarch  speaks  of  them  as  "the
sacred  women  of  Dionysus,  whom  they  call  the  Sixteen"  {Mulierum
virtutes,  15).  The  mythical  relation  of  the  women  to  Dionysus  is
indicated  by  Pausanias  below  (§  7).  Plutarch  tells  us  that  the  women
of  Elis  hailed  Dionysus  as  a  bull,  and  prayed  him  to  come  rushing
with  his  bull's  feet  {Quaest.  Grace.  36 ;  Iris  et  Osiris,  35).  The
women  who  so  invoked  him  may  have  been  the  college  of  Sixteen
Women,  whose  duties  Pausanias  here  describes.  See  L.  Wenigcr,
Das  Kollegium  der  Sechzehn  Frauen  und  der  Dionysosdienst  in  Ehs
(Weimar,  1883).

16.  2.  the  Sixteen  Women  weave  a  robe  for  Hera.  For
examples  of  the  Greek  custom  of  placing  real  garments  on  images,  see
vol.  2.  p.  575  sg^.  A  few  more  details  as  to  the  Athenian  custom  of
presenting  a  robe  to  Athena  may  be  given  here.  The  robe  was  woven
by  girls  of  noble  birth  between  the  ages  of  seven  and  eleven  ;  when
finished,  it  was  submitted  for  approval  to  the  Council  {/SovXrj),  but  in
later  times  to  a  court  of  justice  (Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens^  49,
cp.  60).  The  girls  were  called  Ergastinai  or  *  workers.'  From  lists  of
them  which  have  been  found  in  inscriptions  it  appears  that  there  were
as  many  as  100  or  120  of  these  girl  'workers.'  The  girls  had  to
conform  strictly  to  certain  regulations  laid  down  by  law.  They  wore
white  dresses,  and  if  they  put  on  gold  ornaments,  these  became
sacred.  The  robe,  when  it  was  finished  and  approved,  was  carried
in  procession  at  the  festival  fastened  to  a  mast  and  yardarm.  See
Harpocration  and  Etymol.  Magn.  (p.  149),  s.7k  ' Apprf<f>op€iv ;  Bekker's
Anecdota  Graeca^  p.  446,  line  18  sqq.  ;  Hesychius,  s.v.  €fyyaaTiv<u ;
Philostratus,  Vit.  Sophist,  ii.  i.  7  ;  Plutarch,  Demetrius,  12  ;  Zenobius,
i.  56.  For  inscriptions  referring  to  the  robe  of  Athena,  see  C.  I.  A.  i.
No.  93  ;  U.  Kohler,  in  Mittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  A  then,  8  (1883),  pp.
57-66;  Bulletin  de  Corresp.  HelUnique,  13  (1889),  p.  170 ;  Dittenbergcr,
Sylloge  Ins.  Graec.  No.  143,  line  15  sq.\  Hicks,  Greek  Historicd
Inscriptions,  No.  160,  line  14  sq.  Cp.  K.  Botticher,  Die  Tektonik
der  Hellenen,  2.  §  61.  4 ;  Aug.  Mommsen,  HeortologiA  p.  184
sqq.  ;  L,  de  Ronchaud,  *  Le  P^plos  d'Athdn^  Parth^nos,'  in  Reviu
Archiologique,  N.  S.  23  (1872),  pp.  245-252,  309-319,  390-395*
id.,    N.    S.    24    (1872),    pp.    80-84;    id..   La    Tapisserie   dans   fan-


CH.  XVII  THE  IMAGE  OF  HERA  593

tiquitt^^  le  P^los  (PAthtW,  etc.  (Paris,  1884).  Analogous  cusfoms
have  been  practised  by  barbarous  peoples.  In  ancient  Mexico,  on  the
eve  of  the  festival  of  Tezcatlipuca,  which  fell  in  May,  "  the  Noblemen
came  to  the  temple,  bringing  a  new  garment  like  unto  that  of  the
idoll,  the  which  the  priest  put  upon  him,  having  first  taken  off  his
other  garments,  which  they  kept  with  as  much  or  more  reverence  than
we  doe  our  ornaments  "  (Acosta,  History  of  the  Indies^  bk.  v.,  ch.  29,
vol.  2.  p.  378,  Hakluyt  Society).  Cp.  Clavigero,  History  of  Mexico^  i.
p.  299,  Cullen's  translation.  In  the  Society  Islands  the  god  Tane  was
presented  once  a  year  with  a  new  dress  in  which  he  was  invested  with
much  solemnity.  "  He  was  brought  out  of  his  house  by  his  priest  and
laid  on  his  bed,  having  four  lesser  gods  on  either  side  of  him.  .  .  .
The  old  garments  were  then  removed,  and  examination  made  into  the
interior  of  the  idol,  which  was  hollow,  and  contained  various  objects,
such  as  scarlet  feathers,  beads,  bracelets,  and  other  valuables.  Those
that  began  to  look  shabby  were  removed,  and  others  inserted  to  take
their  place,  and  the  idols  were  then  invested  in  their  new  robes  "  (J.  G.
Wood,  Natural  History  of  Man,  2.  p.  410).  In  Bowditch  Island,  South
Pacific,  the  great  god  was  Tui  Tokelau.  "  He  was  supposed  to  be
embodied  in  a  stone,  which  was  carefully  wrapt  up  with  fine  mats,  and
never  seen  by  any  one  but  the  king,  and  that  only  once  a  year,  when
the  decayed  mats  were  stripped  off  and  thrown  away "  (Turner,  Samoa^
p.  268  ;  cp.  J.  J.  Lister,  *  Notes  on  the  Natives  of  Fakaofu  (Bow-
ditch  Island),*  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute^  21  (1891),
p.  50).

16.  3.  they  are  allowed  to  dedicate  statnes  of  themselTes.

There  is  a  marble  statue  of  a  girl  runner  in  the  Vatican  which  is  sup-
posed to  be  a  portrait  of  one  of  these  Olympic  victors.  The  girl  is
represented  just  starting  off  to  run,  her  body  bending  forward,  her  right
foot  raised.  Beside  her,  on  a  stump,  is  a  palm  branch,  the  emblem  of
victory.  The  original  of  the  statue  was  probably  made  about  the
middle  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  See  Friederichs-Wolters,  Gipsabgiisse,
No.  213.

16.  4-  Ohloris,  danghter  of  Amphion  etc.     See  ii.  21.  9.

16.  8.  purified  themselves  with  a  pig.  See  note  on  ii.  31.  8.
On  the  use  of  pig's  blood  in  purificatory  ceremonies,  see  Apollonius
Khodius,  iv.  704  sqq.,  with  the  Scholiast  on  v,  704 ;  Aeschylus,
Eumenides,  279.  At  Athens  the  place  of  public  assembly  and  the  theatre
were  purified  by  sprinkling  the  seats  with  the  blood  of  a  young  pig
(Scholiast  on  Aristophanes, -^rAar«.  44;  Pollux,  viii.  104).  Purifica-
tion by  means  of  a  pig  is  referred  to  in  a  Coan  inscription  {fount,
Hellenic  Studies,  9  (1888),  p.  326;  Paton  and  Hicks,  The  Inscriptions
of  Cos,  No.  40,  p.  93).  Cp.  De  Witte  \n  Annali  delP  Instituto,  19
(1847),  p.  426  sqq.  ;  P.  Stengel,  Griechische  SakralaltertUmer,  §  85.

17.  I.  The  image  of  Hera.  To  the  west  of  the  temple  of  Hera,  in
front  of  lie  east  wall  of  the  Wrestling-School,  there  was  found  an
archaic  female  head  of  yellowish-white  limestone  (Fig.  75),  which  has
been  identified  with  great  probability  as  the  head  of  the  image  of  Hera
described  by  Pausanias.     That  the  head  represents  a  goddess  seems

VOL.  Ill  2  Q


THE  IMAGE  OF  HERA


I  the  early  time  when  t


twice  that  of  life  (height  .5:
letre)  ;  and  the  matronly  exf
of  the  face,  together  with  ihr
worn  on  the  head,  ace 01
with  the  view  that  the  god
Hera.  The  antiquity  and
the  worship  of  Hera  at  O
where  no  other  goddess
rivalled  her,  are  also  in  fa
the  identification.  Further,  tl
special  grounds  for  believji
the  head  belonged  to  the
in  the  Heraeum  here  de
by  Pauaanias,  For  it  is  r
the  same  soft  limestone
existing  base  which  certair
ported  the  image  of  Hera
Heraeum.  Further,  it  is  v
that  an  image  made  of  a  s
soft  and  liable  to  decompost
the  action  of  the  weather
have  been  set  up  in  the  of
It  must  have  been  set  u]
temple,  and  that  temple  can
have  been  any  but  the  He
image  (to  judge  by  its  archaic


was  made,  there  seems  to  have  been  no  temple  at  Olympia  e
Heraeum  (see  above,  p.  591).  Further,  the  place  where  the  he^
found,  not  far  from  the  Heraeum,  is  another  ground  for  believin
it  belonged  to  an  image  which  had  formerly  stood  in  that  i
And  finally  the  rude  and  archaic  style  of  the  head  agrees  perfecr
Pausanias's  remark  that  "  the  workinanship  of  these  images ""
and  Zeus)  "is  rude"  (e/iya  Si  ifrrtv  dirAo,  with  which  use  of  <
compare  Plutarch,  Poplicohi,  19  uv5(kos — an-AoC?  koX  opxai*
(pyoo-tp).  It  is  probably  a  «ork  of  the  sixth  or  of  the  end  of  the  S'
century  B.C.

The  crown  which  the  goddess  wears  is  divided  \-ertically
series  of  lines,  perhaps  to  represent  leaves  set  upright.  Und
crown  are  the  remains  of  what  i'rof.  Treu  explains  to  ha\e  I
veil,  which  probably  hung  down  the  back  and  sides  of  the  head.
'  back  of  the  head  is  broken  off  and  has  not  been  found.  .A
confines  the  hair  of  the  goddess,  allowing  it  however  to  esc;
waving  lines  over  the  forehead.  Her  eyes  are  large  and  staring
eyeballs  are  indicated  by  incised  hnes.  A  smile  plays  roun
comers  of  the  thin,  straight  lips.      The  chin  is  full  and  rounded,

I  nose,  unfortunately,  is  broken  off.      There  is  nothing   divine  or  be.

'  about  the  face,  hut  it  is  plump  and  good-humoured.

When  the  head  was  discovered,  traces  of  bright  red  were  v
on  the  hair,  and  of  dark  red  on  the  fillet  which  binds  the  hair.


CH.  XVII  THE  HERMES  OF  PRAXITELES  595

See  Olympia:  Ergebnisse^  Tafelband  3.  pi.  i.  ;  id.^  Textband  3.  pp.  1-3;
Die  Ausgrabungen  su  Olympia^  4  (1878- 1879),  P*  ^3  ^^'y  wi'^*  plates  xvi.  and
xvii.  ;  A.  Botticher,  Olympiad  pp.  244-246;  Flasch,  *  Olympia,'  in  Baumeister's
JDenkmdler^  pp.  10^87  (Fig.  1295),  1104  T  sq,\  H.  Bninn,  in  Mittheil.  d,  arch.
Inst,  in  A  then,  7  (1882),  p.  116  sq.\  Friederichs-Wolters,  Gipsabgiisse,  No.  307;
Lucy  M.  Mitchell,  History  of  Ancient  Sculpture^  p.  209  sq. ;  CoUignon,  Histoirc
d€  la  Sculpture  Grecque,  I.  p.  239  sq.\  Overbeck,  Gesch.  d.  griech.  Plastik,^  i.
p.  123  sq.  ;  Roscher's  Lexikon,  l.  p.  21 16  sqq.

17.  I.  with  a  helmet  on  his  head.  Representations  of  Zeus
wearing  a  helmet  are  very  rare  in  Greek  art.  The  god  is,  however,
so  represented  in  a  vase-painting  {Monumenti  Inediti,  vi.  vii.  pi.  78)
and  on  coins  of  lasus  in  Caria  (M tiller- Wieseler,  Denkmdler,  2.  pi.  ii.
No.  21  ;  Overbeck,  Kunstmythologie,  2.  p.  209,  with  Miinztafel  iii.
No.  11).  In  the  vase-painting  he  is  depicted  fighting  the  giants  and
armed  with  sword  and  shield,  as  well  as  with  the  helmet.  '  On  the
coins  he  carries  a  shield  on  his  left  arm  and  a  spear  or  thunderbolt
in  his  raised  right  hand.  A  fragment  of  a  helmeted  head,  which
seems  to  have  belonged  to  the  gable  of  the  Treasur>'  of  the  Megarians
at  Olympia  (see  Paus.  vi.  19.  13  note),  is  interpreted  by  Prof.  Treu
as  having  belonged  to  a  figure  of  Zeus  {Olympia :  Ergebnisse^  Text-
band  3.  p.  9).  Cp.  Welcker,  Griech.  Gbtterlehre^  2.  p.  214  sq.
17.   I.  Smilifl.     See  vii.  4.  4  note.

17.   2.  The  Hesperides.     They  formed  part  of  a  group  of  which
the  rest  was  in  the  Treasury  of  the  Epidamnians.     See  vi.  19.  8.

17.   2.  The  image  of  Athena.     This  formerly  stood  in  the  Treasury
of  the  Megarians.     See  vi.  19.  12.

17.  2.  Medon.     See  vi.  19.  14  note.

17.  3.  Hermes  hearing  the  hahe  Dionysus,  a  work  of  Praxiteles
in  stone.  This  statue  was  found  by  the  German  excavators,  8th  May
1877,  inside  the  Heraeum.  A  portion  of  the  pedestal  of  the  statue
still  stands  between  the  second  and  third  columns,  counting  from  the
east,  on  the  north  side  of  the  cella^  and  other  parts  of  the  pedestal  have
been  found,  including  a  piece  of  the  plinth  with  an  oval  depression  in
which  one  of  the  feet  of  the  statue  was  fastened.  The  stone  of  which
the  pedestal  is  wrought  is  a  hard  whitish-grey  limestone — a  material
which  was  used  for  pedestals  from  the  fourth  century  onwards  into
Roman  times.  But  from  the  careless  and  irregular  workmanship,  and
from  the  style  of  the  moulding,  it  would  seem  that  the  pedestal  is  not
contemporary  with  the  statue  but  dates  from  the  late  Greek  or  early
Roman  period.  If  that  is  so,  we  must  apparently  conclude  that  the
statue  was  originally  set  up  elsewhere  and  was  afterwards,  for  some
reason,  transferred  to  the  Heraeum.

The  statue  itself,  of  Parian  marble,  was  found  fallen  on  its  face

in  front  of  the  pedestal  and  covered  over  with  the  clay  of  which  the

upper  walls  of  the  temple  were  originally  built  (see  note  on  16.    i).

Jt    is  to  this  protecting   layer  of  clay  in  which  the   statue    was  im-

^^dded  that  we  have  to  attribute  its  admirable  state  of  preservation.

^or  though  pieces  of  the  statue  are  missing,  the  surface  of  what  is  left

^s    perfect.      The  legs  from   the   knees  downwards  were  missing ;  so

^'ere  the  greater  part  of  Hermes' s  right  arm  and  the  body  and  head  of


CH.  XVII  THE  HERMES  OF  PRAXITELES  597

the  child  Dionysus.  Afterwards  the  right  foot  of  Hermes  was  dis-
covered, and  the  body  and  head  of  the  child  Dionysus  ;  the  latter  still
grants  the  left  arm,  which  has,  however,  been  restored.  Photographs,
engravings,  and  casts  of  the  statue  have  been  multiplied,  so  that  it  is
now  one  of  the  best  known  of  existing  works  of  ancient  art.

Hermes  is  represented  standing  with  the  infant  Dionysus  on  his
left  arm,  and  the  weight  of  his  body  resting  on  his  right  foot.     His
form  is  the  perfection  of  manly  grace  and  vigour ;  the  features  of  his
oval   face,  under  the  curly  hair  that   encircles  his  brow,  are  refined,
strong,  and  beautiful ;  their  expression  is  tender  and  slightly  pensive.
The  profile  is  of  the  straight  Greek  type,  with  "the  bar  of  Michael    .
Angelo  "  over  the  eyebrows.     The  left  arm  of  the  god  rests  upon  the
stump  of  a  tree,  over  which  his  mantle  hangs  loosely  in  rich  folds,  that
contrast  well  with  his  nude  body.     His  right  arm  is  raised.     The  child
Dionysus  lays  his  right  hand  on  the  shoulder  of  Hermes;  his  gaze  is  fixed
on  the  object  (whatever  it  was)  which  Hermes  held  in  his  right  hand,
and  his  missing  left  arm  must  have  been  stretched  out  (as  it  appears
in  the  restoration)  towards   the  same  object.      As  most  of  Hermes's
right  arm  is  wanting,  we  cannot  know  for  certain  what  he  had  in  his
right  hand.     Probably  it  was  a  bunch  of  grapes.     On  a  wall-painting  at
Pompeii  a  satyr  is  represented   holding   the  infant  Dionysus  on  his
left  arm,  while  in  his  raised  right  hand  he  dangles  a  bunch  of  grapes,
after  which  the  child  reaches.     It  is  highly  probable  that  this  painting
is  an  imitation,  not  necessarily  at  first  hand,  of  the  work  of  Praxiteles  ;
and  if  so,  it  affords  a  strong  ground  for  supposing  that  the  missing
right  hand  of  the   Hermes   held  a  bunch   of  grapes.      See   H.    von
Rohden,    *Zum    Hermes    des    Praxiteles,'   in  Jahrbuch  des  archaolog.
InstitutSy  2  (1887),  pp.  66-68,  with  plate  6.     The  only  objection  of
any  weight  to  this  view  is  that  in  the  statue  Hermes  is  not  looking  at
the  child,  as  we  should  expect  him  to  be,  but  is  gazing  past  him  into
the  distance  with  what  has  been  described  as  a  listening  or  dreamy
look.     Hence  it  has  been  suggested  by  Prof.  Adler  that  Hermes  held
a  pair  of  cymbals  or  castanets  in  his  hand,  to  the  sound  of  which  both
he  and  the  child  are  listening ;  and  a  passage  of  Calpumius  has  been  ^
quoted  in  which  Silenus  is  represented  holding  the  infant  Dionysus  on
his  arm  and  amusing  him  by  shaking  a  rattle.     This  certainly  would
well  explain  the  attitude  and  look  of  Hermes ;  but  on  the  other  hand
cymbals  or  a  rattle  would  not  serve  so  well  as  a  bunch  of  grapes  to
characterise  the   infant    Dionysus.       The    same    may  be   said  of  Mr.
A.    Botticher's  suggestion  that  Hermes,  as  god  of  gain,  held  aloft  a
purse  and  was  listening  to  the  chinking  of  the  money  in  it.     In  his  left
hand   Hermes    probably    held    his    characteristic    attribute,   a  herald's
staff ;  the  round  hole  for  it  in  the  hand  is  still  visible.  **

On  his  head  he  seems  to  have  worn  a  metal  wreath  ;  the  deep
groove  for  fastening  it  on  may  be  seen  in  the  back  part  of  the  hair.
Traces  of  dark  red  paint  were  perceived  on  the  hair  and  on  the  sandal
of  the  foot  when  the  statue  was  found  ;  the  colour  is  supposed  to  have
been  laid  on  as  ground  for  gilding.  The  back  of  the  statue,  which
would  not  be  seen  well,  is  not  carefully  finished ;  it  still  shows  the


^


598  THE  HERMES  OF  PRAXITELES  bk.  v.  zm

strokes  of  the  chisel.-  Otherwise  the  technical  finish  is  exquisite.  The
differences  of  texture  between  the  delicate  white  skin  of  the  god,  the
leather  straps  of  the  sandals,  the  woollen  stuff  of  the  cloak,  and  the
curly  hair  of  the  head,  are  expressed  in  the  most  masterly  way.

The  head  of  the  Hermes  bears  a  close  and  unmistakable  resemblance
to  the  head  of  the  statue  of  an  athlete  now  in  Munich,  which  is  thougk
by  some  to  be  a  copy  of  one  by  Myron ;  the  athlete  was  represented
dropping  oil  into  his  left  hand  from  a  small  vessel  which  he  held  in
his  right.  See  Monumenti  Inediti^  11  (1879),  plate  vii.  ;  H.  Brmin,
Beschreibung  der  Glyptothek^^  No.  165,  p.  218  sqg.  Hence  it  is
supposed  that  in  modelling  the  head  of  his  Hermes,  Praxiteles  followed
an  old  Attic  type  which  had  been  set  or  at  least  rendered  famous  by
Myron.  Overbeck,  however,  questioned  this  dependence  of  Praxiteles
on  Myron,  and  did  not  even  feel  sure  that  the  statue  of  the  athlete  is
older  than  the  Hermes.

The  late  H.  Brunn   was  of  opinion  that  the  Hermes   is   an  early
work  of  Praxiteles,  executed  before  he  had  attained  a  full  master)'  of
his  art.     Such  a  view,  it  would  seem,  can  only  be  held  by  one  who
knows  the  statue  solely  from  photographs  and  casts.      But  no  repro-
ductions give  an  adequate  idea  of  the  beauty  of  the  original.     Engravings
of  it  are  often  no  better  than  caricatures.     Again,  the  dead  white  colour
and  the  mealy  texture  of  casts  give  no  conception  of  the  soft,  ^ossy.
flesh-like,  seemingly  elastic  surface  of  the  original,  which  appears  to
\    glow  with  divine  life.     Looking  at  the  original,  it  seems  impossible  to
\    conceive  that  Praxiteles  or  any  man  ever  attained  to  a  greater  masteiy
\  over  stone  than  is  exhibited  in  this  astonishing  work.

The  foregoing  criticism  of  Brunn's  view  was  written  long  before
the  similar  criticisms  of  Professors  Overbeck  and  Furtwangler  were
published.  I  am  glad  to  find  myself  in  agreement  with  such  dis-
tinguished authorities.  The  former  says :  "  I  freely  confess  that  my
ideal  of  a  youthful  male  form  is  satisfied  by  the  Hermes  of  Praxiteles,
which  I  regard  as  perfectly  beautiful,  and  in  presence  of  which  I  am
unable  to  say  how  greater  perfection  in  the  rendering  of  form  could
be  possible "  {Bcrichte  d.  k,  sacks,  Gesell.  d.  IVtss.  zu  Leipzig^  PhiL
hist.  CI.  45  (1893),  p.  55).  And  Prof.  Furtwangler,  in  w^ords  agreeing
almost  verbally  with  mine,  writes  :  "  We  cannot  admit  that  *  in  the
Hermes  the  artist  had  not  yet  fully  attained  to  that  perfect  certainty
of  execution  which  can  only  be  the  result  of  long  practice.'  For  a
work  of  more  refined  perfection,  of  more  intimate  familiarity  with  all
the  resources  of  sculpture  in  marble,  does  not  exist  in  the  whole  range
—  of  ancient  art  and  cannot  even  be  conceived.  Brunn  would  hardly
have  judged  as  he  has  done  if  he  had  seen  the  original  at  Olympia'
{Meistcrwerke  d.  griech,  Plastik^  p.  533).  Prof.  Furtwangler  assigns
the  statue  to  the  later  period  of  Praxiteles's  life,  chiefly  on  the  strength
of  the  style  and  material  of  the  pedestal,  which  point,  according  to
him,  to  the  second  half  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  But  he  seems  to  be
in  error  both  as  to  the  material  and  the  style  of  the  pedestal  (see
above).

Strange  as   it  may  seem,   doubts   were   formerly  raised  by  some


CH.  XVII  THE  HERMES  OF  PRAXITELES  599

archaeologists  as  to  whether  the  statue  was  really  by  the  great  Praxiteles.
Prof.  Benndorf  even  held  that  the  statue  exhibits  unmistakable  traces
of  the  art  of  Lysippus  or  his  school.  It  is  hardly  possible  to  imagine
a  greater  contrast  than  exists  between  the  rounded  fulness  of  divine
life  in  the  Hermes  and  the  lanky,  raw-boned  prize-fighters  of  Lysippus.
However,  Prof.  Benndorf  appears  to  have  recanted  his  error ;  and  the
doubts  once  expressed  as  to  the  connexion  of  the  statue  with  Praxiteles
are  now  universally  abandoned.

SeeZ>/V  Ausgrabungen  zu  Olympia^  5  ( 1 879- 1 881),  plates  vii.-x.,  with  pp.  8-10  ;
Die  Funde  von  Olympia,  pi.  xviL  xviii.  ;  Olympia :  Ergtbnisse,  Tafelband  3.
plates  xlix.-liii.  ;  H.  Rumpf,  '  Die  Hermesstatue  aus  dem  Heratempel  zu
Olympia,*  PhtiologuSy  40  (1881),  pp.  197-220;  Brunn,  *Der  Hermes  des  Praxiteles,'
in  Deutsche  Rundschau^  May  1882,  pp.  188-205 ;  A.  H.  Smith,  *  On  the  Hermes
of  Praxiteles, 'yi7«nM/  of  Hellenic  Studies,  3  (1882),  pp.  81-95  ;  Ch.  Waldstein,
ib,  pp.  107-110;  A.  Danicourt,  *  Hermes  et  Dionysos,*  Reime  Archiologique,
3rd  series,  4  (1884),  pp.  72-75;  S.  Reinach,  *  L' Hermes  de  PraxitMe,'  ib,  ii
(1888),  pp.  1-4;  H.  von  Ronden,  Jahrbuch  d.  k.  deutsch.  archdoL  InstU,  2
(1887),  pp.  66-68;  H.  Heydemann,  Dionysos^  Geburi  und  Kindkeit^  p.  2^  sqq.  ;
Overbeck,  Gesch.  d,  griech.  Plastik^^  2.  pp.  54-57;  /V/.,  *  1st  der  olympische
Hermes  ein  Jugendwerk  des  Praxiteles  ? '  Berichte  fiber  die  Verkandl,  d,  k,  sacks.
GesclL  d.  Wiss.  zu  Leipzig,  45  (1893),  pp.  46-58  ;  Murray,  Hist,  0/ Or,  Sculpture,
2.  p.  256  sqq.  ;  id..  Handbook  of  Greek  Archaeology,  p.  279  sqq.  ;  Lucy  M.
Mitchell,  Hist,  of  Ancient  Sculpture,  p.  437  sqq.  ;  Frieaerichs-Wolters,  GipscUh
^isse,  §  1 2 12;  Flasch,  *  Olympia,'  in  Baumeister's  Denkmdler,  pp.  1103,  II04
N  N  j^.  ;  A.  Botticher,  Olympiad  pp.  337-342 :  Kekul^,  in  Baeaelcer,'  p.  xciv.
sq.  ;  A.  Schneider,  *Zum  Hermes  des  Praxiteles,'  Festschrift  fiir  Johannes
Overbeck  (Leipzig,  1893),  pp.  85-95  ;  A.  Furtwangler,  Meistenverke  a.  griech.
Plastik,  p.  529  j^^.  ;  H.  Bulle,  in  Olympia:  Ergebnisse,  Text  band  2.  p.  157  sq.
(as  to  the  pedestal).

17.  3.  Cleon,  a  Sicyonian.     See  v.  21.  3  note.

17.  4-  Antiphanes.     Cp.  x.  9.  §§  6,  7,  and  12.

17.  4*  A  gilded  child,  naked,  is  seated  etc.  It  has  been  con-
jectured that  this  statue  was  the  original  work  of  which  we  possess  a
copy  in  the  well-known  statue  of  the  Boy  drawing  a  thorn  out  of  his  foot.
This  statue  is  in  bronze  and  is  preserved  in  the  museum  on  the  Capitol
at  Rome.  There  are  marble  copies  of  it  in  various  museums  of  Europe.
See  Overbeck,  Gesch.  d.  griech.  Plctstik,^  2.  p.  183  sqq.',  Lucy  M.
Mitchell,  Hist,  of  Ancient  Sculpture,  p.  612  sq.\  A.  S.  Murray,  Hist,  of
Greek  Sculpture,^  i.  p.  266  sqq.  But  beyond  the  fact  of  both  boys
being  naked  and  seated,  there  seems  to  be  not  a  shadow  of  ground  for
the  identification.  There  is  even  less  ground  for  identifying  the  seated
boy  with  Sosipolis  (see  vi.  20.  2  sqq.),  as  do  Dr.  Purgold  (Historische
und  philologische  Aufsdtse  Ernst  Curtius  gewidmet^  p.  227  sqq.)  and
Mr.  A.  Botticher  {Olympiad'  p.  205).  In  1882  a  marble  group  was
discovered  at  Beyrout  representing  a  naked  winged  boy  (the  left  wing
broken  off),  seated  at  the  feet  of  a  goddess.  Prof.  F.  Diimmler,  who
published  this  group,  supposes  that  the  winged  boy  is  Love  (Eros)  and
that  the  goddess  beside  him  is  Aphrodite,  though  she  is  clad  in  the  style
of  Athena.  He  compares  the  group  with  the  one  here  described  by
Pausanias,  but  he  is  too  cautious  to  conjecture  that  the  latter  was  the
original  of  the  Be>TOut  group.      See  MittheiL  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,


6oo  THE  CHEST  OF  CYPSELUS  bk.  v.  eus

lo  (1885),  pp.  27-31,  with  plate  i.  Boethus  of  Chalcedon  (see  Critical
Note,  vol.  I.  p.  585  sq.\  the  sculptor  of  the  figure  of  the  child  described
by  Pausanias,  appears  to  have  lived  in  the  first  part  of  the  third  centui}
B.C.  See  Brunn,  in  Sitzungsberichte  of  the  Bavarian  Academy  ( Munich).
Philosoph.  philolog.  CI.  6th  November  1880,  p.  484  sq.

17.  4.  other  statues  of  gold  and  ivory  etc.  One  of  these  statues
seems  to  have  been  that  of  Olympias,  mother  of  Alexander  the  Great;
and  both  the  statues  of  Eurydice  and  Olympias  appear  to  have  been  by
Leochares.     See  v.  20.  10.

17.  5.  a  chest  made  of  cedar-wood  etc.  The  story  of  the  way  m
which  the  infant  Cypselus,  the  future  tyrant  of  Corinth,  was  saved  by  his
mother  from  the  men  who  were  sent  to  murder  him  is  told,  with
picturesque  details,  by  Herodotus  (v.  92)  ;  but  he  makes  no  mendon  d
,the  chest  at  Olympia.  The  only  other  ancient  writer  besides  Pausanias
who  mentions  the  Chest  of  Cypselus  at  Olympia  is  Dio  Chrysostom,  who
wrote  probably  some  fifty  years  before  Pausanias  and  tells  us  that  be
saw  the  chest  in  the  back-chamber  (ppisihodomos)  of  the  temple  d
Hera  {JDr,  xi.  vol.  i.  p.  179  ed.  Dindorf).  There  is  a  gap  in  tbe
text  of  Pausanias.  In  the  words  which  have  dropped  out  he  prob-
ably mentioned  that  the  Chest  of  Cypselus  stood  in  the  back-chamber
of  the  temple ;  for  hitherto  he  has  been  describing  the  statues  in  the
cella.

According  to  Pausanias  the  chest  was  the  very  kupsele  in  which  the
infant  Cypselus  had  been  hidden  by  his  mother;  it  was  made  by  an
ancestor  of  Cypselus  (18.  7),  and  was  dedicated  at  Olympia  by  his  £unily,
the  Cypselids  (17.  5).  According  to  Dio  Chrysostom  (/.^.)  the  chest  was
dedicated  by  Cypselus  himself.  If  Pausanias  is  right,  the  chest  must
have  been  made  a  good  many  years  before  657  B.C.,  the  year  when
Cypselus  made  himself  tyrant  of  Corinth,  and  cannot  have  been
dedicated  at  Olympia  later  than  582  B.C.,  when  the  dynasty  of  the
Cypselids  came  to  an  end  (Busolt,  Griech.  Geschichte^^  i.  pp.  638,  6S7]-
Further,  Pausanias  conjectured  that  the  verses  inscribed  on  the  chest
were  by  the  Corinthian  poet  Eumelus  (19.  10).  If  this  conjecture  were
right,  the  chest  must  have  been  a  work  of  the  eighth  century  B.C,  since
to  that  century  Eumelus  belonged  (see  note  on  ii.  i.  i).  But  Pausanias,
so  far  as  we  can  judge,  had  but  slender  grounds  for  his  conjecture,  and
little  weight  can  be  attached  to  it.

In  recent  years  it  has  been  denied  by  some  scholars  that  the  chest
was  dedicated  by,  or  had  anything  to  do  with,  Cypselus  and  the
Cypselids.  The  chief  reason  adduced  for  this  scepticism  would  seem  to
be  that  the  chest  at  Olympia  is  not  mentioned  by  Herodotus  (v.  92),
Plutarch  {Septem  Sapientium  Convivium^  21),  nor  any  of  the  other
ancient  writers  who  touch  upon  the  history  of  Cypselus  and  his  dynast)'.
But  an  argument  drawn  from  the  silence  of  ancient  writers  on  such  a
point  is  worth  extremely  little.  More  plausible  is  the  argument  that  the
vessel  in  which  the  infant  Cypselus  was  hidden  was  not  a  chest  at  all  but
a  cylindrical  jar  {kupsele).  Certainly  Herodotus  calls  the  vessel  in  ques-
tion a  kupsele^  and  a  kupsele^  if  we  may  judge  from  coins  of  0)^)5613  in
Thrace  on  which  it  is  figured,  was  in  fact  a  cylindrical  jar,  and  not  a


CH.  XVII  THE  CHEST  OF  CYPSELUS  6oi

chest  (cp.  Schol.  on  Lucian,  p.  145,  ed.  Jacobitz).  But  even  if  we  were
sure  that  the  chest  at  Olympia  was  not  the  vessel  in  which  the  infant
Cypselus  was  said  to  have  been  concealed,  this  would  not  be  a  sufficient
reason  for  rejecting  the  tradition  that  the  chest  was  dedicated  by  Cypselus
or  one  of  the  Cypselids.  Why  should  such  a  tradition  have  attached
itself  to  the  chest  if  there  were  no  ground  for  it  ?  Prof.  Furtwangler's
view  that  the  story  was  a  late  fiction  of  the  Olympian  guides  devised  to
lend  interest  to  a  magnificent  chest  about  the  origin  of  which  they  knew
nothing,  is  gratuitous  and  wholly  unwarranted.  On  the  other  hand,  the
tradition  is  confirmed  by  a  variety  of  considerations.  In  the  first  place,
Cypselus  or  his  son  Periander  dedicated  a  famous  golden  statue  at
Olympia  (Paus.  v.  2.  3  note)  ;  there  is,  therefore,  not  the  slightest
improbability  in  the  tradition  that  one  or  other  of  them  dedicated  also  a
magnificent  chest  in  the  same  sanctuary.  Further,  the  inscriptions  on
the  chest,  as  transmitted  by  the  manuscripts  of  Pausanias,  bear  traces  of
the  Doric  dialect  and  of  having  been  written  in  the  alphabet  which  is
employed  on  the  earlier  Corinthian  vases  and  in  the  earlier  Corinthian
inscriptions.  Moreover,  an  examination  of  the  scenes  on  the  chest,  as
described  by  Pausanias,  and  a  comparison  of  them  with  existing  remains
of  archaic  Greek  art,  go  to  show  that  the  chest  was  probably  made  by
a  Corinthian  artist  who  lived  in  the  early  part  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.
Thus,  taken  as  a  whole,  the  evidence — traditional,  epigraphical,  and
artistic — points  to  the  conclusion  that  the  chest  was  made  at  Corinth  at
the  end  of  the  seventh  or  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  and
that  it  was  dedicated  at  Olympia  either  by  Cypselus  himself  or  more
probably  perhaps  by  his  son  Periander,  who  died  in  585  B.C.  Certainly
we  shall  do  ill  to  exchange  the  firm  ground  of  historical  tradition —
strengthened  as  it  is  by  collateral  evidence — for  the  vague,  unsupported,
and  contradictory  surmises  of  modem  critics.

With  regard  to  the  size  and  shape  of  the  chest  we  have  no  positive
information.  Whether  the  story  of  the  hiding  of  Cypselus  be  true  or
false  —  and  it  has  more  the  air  of  a  folk-tale  than  of  history  —  it
might  very  well  be  told  of  one  of  those  large  oblong  chests,  like  our
seamen's  chests,  which  were  commonly  used  in  Homeric  times  for
keeping  clothes  and  plate.  When  Achilles  went  away  to  the  wars,  his
mother  gave  him  such  a  chest  on  board  with  him,  well  filled  with  warm
clothes  and  thick  rugs  (Homer,  //.  xvi.  221  sqq) ;  and  Helen  kept  in
chests  the  silver  cups  of  the  family  and  the  garments  which  she  had
woven  ^4th  her  own  fair  hands  {^Od.  xv.  104  sqq,)  Chests  of  this  sort,
square  or  oblong  in  shape,  are  depicted  in  Greek  vase-paintings  (O.
Jahn,  in  Berichte  d.  k.  sacks.  Ges.  d.  Wiss.  zu  Leipzig^  Phil.  hist.  CI.  i  o
(1858),  p.  100;  Overbeck,  'Die  Lade  des  Kypselos,'  p.  612);  and  to
this  day  they  are  ordinary  articles  of  furniture  in  the  cottages  of  the
Greek  peasants,  where  they  stand  round  the  walls,  and  serve  to  keep
the  family  linen,  etc.  Of  a  somewhat  similar  shape  and  size  was  prob-
ably the  splendid  coffer  which  Pausanias  here  describes.  An  extreme
outside  limit  of  size  is  furnished  by  the  dimensions  (8.34  metres  by  3.54
metres)  of  the  chamber  in  which  the  chest  stood,  probably  with  its  back
to  one  of  the  walls.     The  lower  limit  of  size,  on  the  other  hand,  is  given


6o2  THE  CHEST  OF  CYPSELUS  bk.  v.  elis


by  the  shield  of  Agamemnon  (19.  4),  which  was  adorned  u-ith  a  figure  of
Terror  and  bore  besides  a  long  inscription.

Pausanias  describes  at  length  the  scenes  with  which  the  chest  was
adorned.  Much  diversity  of  opinion  has  prevailed  as  to  the  way  in
which  these  scenes  were  arranged.  The  words  of  Pausanias,  however,
leave  little  room  to  doubt  that  the  scenes  were  distributed  in  five
parallel  horizontal  belts,  one  above  the  other,  on  one  or  more  of  the
sides  of  the  chest.  For  in  describing  the  five  fields  (x<opai)  in  which
the  scenes  were  arranged,  he  speaks  of  the  first  as  being  below  (17.  6)
and  the  fifth  as  being  the  highest  (19.  7).  The  old  view,  therefore,
broached  by  Heyne  in  the  eighteenth  century,  that  the  ^\^  fields  were
the  four  sides  and  the  lid  of  the  chest  is  irreconcilable  with  Pausaniass
description ;  and  the  same  remark  applies  to  the  theory,  started  by
Ruhl  and  revived  by  Prof  G.  Loeschcke,  that  the  scenes  were  confined
to  the  lid  of  the  chest.  Further  it  seems  clear,  from  the  order  in
which  Pausanias  describes  them,  that  the  scenes  cannot  have  extended
round  the  four  sides  of  the  chest,  as  Prof.  W.  Klein  supposes  that  they
did.  For  in  beginning  his  description  of  the  third  and  fourth  fields
Pausanias  says  (18.  i  ;  19.  i)  that  he  will  begin  from  the  left;  from
which  it  follows  that  in  his  descriptions  of  the  first,  third,  and  fifth  field
he  began  from  the  right.  Thus  he  described  the  bands  alternately
from  right  to  left  and  from  left  to  right.  But  there  would  have  been
no  reason  for  thus  alternately  reversing  the  order  of  his  descnption  if
the  bands  had  run  right  round  the  chest ;  in  that  case  he  would
naturally  have  gone  round  and  round  the  chest  uniformly  in  one
direction  till  he  had  finished.  As  it  is,  the  order  of  his  description  is
naturally  explicable  only  on  the  hypothesis  of  the  scenes  being  on  one

^ide  or  on  three  sides  of  the  chest.  That  they  were  on  two  adjacent
sides  only  is  barely  possible,  but  most  improbable.

In  favour  of  the  view  that  the  scenes  occupied  the  front  side  only
of  the  chest  it  has  been  urged  :  ( i )  that  some  of  the  scenes  at  the  ends
of  the  horizontal  belts  are  clearly  meant  to  match  scenes  at  the  other
ends  of  the  belts,  and  that  this  correspondence  would  not  have  been
visible  to  the  eye  unless  the  whole  belts  were  on  the  front  sides ;  (2)

-  that  it  is  very  unlikely  that  the  artist  would  have  broken  up  his  delinea-

^  tion  of  a  single  scene  by  placing  a  piece  of  it  on  the  front  of  the  chest
and  another  piece  of  it  on  one  of  the  sides,  as  he  must  have  done  if  the
belts  extended  round  three  sides  of  the  chest ;  and  (3)  that  the  mistake
which  Pausanias  made  in  annexing  lolaus  to  the  scene  of  the  funeral
games  of  Pelias  instead  of  to  the  scene  of  Hercules  and  the  hydra  (see
1 7.  1 1  note)  could  only  have  occurred  if  the  two  scenes  in  question  were
both  on  the  same  side  of  the  chest,  whereas  on  the  hypothesis  that  the
belts  extended  round  three  sides  we  can  hardly  avoid  supposing  that
the  two  scenes  were  on  different  sides,  namely  the  funeral  games  of
Pelias  on  the  front,  and  Hercules  and  the  hydra  on  the  left  side  of  the
chest.     On  these  grounds  the  theory  that  the  scenes  occupied  the  front

^  only  of  the  chest  has  been  accepted  by  H.  Brunn  and  Prof.  Furt-
wangler.

On  the  other  hand,  in  favour  of  the  view  that  the  belts  of  figures


CH.  XVII  THE  CHEST  OF  CYPSELUS  603

extended  round  three  sides  of  the  chest,  it  has  been  pointed  out  that  in
describing  the  scenes  Pausanias  twice  speaks  of  "going  round"  the
chest  (18.  1  ;  19.  i ),  which  is  mo^  naturally  interpreted  to  imply  that
the  scenes  were  on  more  than  one  side  of  the  chest.  And  in  reply  to
the  arguments  in  favour  of  a  single  decorated  side  it  may  be  said  ( i )
that  the  correspondences  traced  between  the  scenes  at  the  opposite
ends  of  the  belts  are  more  or  less  problematical,  and  that  even  if  the
artist  recognised  them  he  may  not  have  felt  bound  to  consult  the
spectator's  convenience ;  and  (2)  that  the  objection  to  dividing  a  single
scene  between  two  sides  seems  not  to  have  been  felt  by  an  ancient
artist,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  friezes  of  the  Parthenon,  the  temple  of
Apollo  at  Bassae,  and  the  Mausoleum  at  Halicamassus.      The  view

*^  that  the  belts  of  figures  extended  round  three  sides  of  the  chest  has  /
been  maintained  by  Otto  Jahn  and   Mr.   Stuart  Jones.      Mr.   A.   S.
Murray  inclines  to  accept  it  as  the  most  probable,  and  the  present

*"  writer  shares  his  opinion.  Prof.  Overbeck  formerly  held  the  same  view, ,
but  he  now  prefers  to  leave  the  question  as  to  the  arrangement  of  the/
scenes  on  one,  three,  or  four  sides  undecided.

Lastly  may  be  mentioned  the  view  put  forward  in  recent  years  by
Professors  Sittl  and  Studnizcka  that  the  chest  was  cylindrical  and  that
the  belts  of  figures  extended  all  round  it.  The  chief  argument  in
favour  of  this  view  is  drawn  from  the  coins  of  Cypsela,  already
mentioned,  on  which  a  kupsele  is  represented  as  a  cylindrical  jar.  But
on  the  other  side  it  may  be  urged  that  such  a  vessel  would  hardly  have
been  called  by  Pausanias  a  chest  {larnax\  and  that  the  alterations  in
the  order  of  his  description,  from  right  to  left  and  then  from  left  to
right,  are  on  this  hypothesis  inexplicable.

A  comparison  of  the  scenes  on  the  Chest  of  Cypselus,  as  described
by  Pausanias,  with  similar  scenes  on  early  Greek  pottery  and  bronzes  is
fitted  to  throw  considerable  light  on  the  artistic  style  and  affinities  ot
the  former.  Indeed,  as  we  shall  see,  the  correspondence  between  Pau-
sanias's  description  and  a  vase  painting  is  occasionally  so  complete  that
we  can  hardly  help  regarding  the  painting  as  copied  from  the  answering

'—  scene  on  the  Chest  of  Cypselus.     This  comparison  of  the  scenes  on  the

I    chest  with  existing  monuments  of  early  Greek  art  has  been  instituted

i    by  many  archaeologists,  notably  by  Otto  Jahn,  Prof.  Overbeck,  and  Mr.

'  Stuart  Jones.  From  their  investigations  it  seems  to  result  that  the  Chest
of  Cypselus  was  a  product  of  the  early  art  which  arose  in  Greece  after

^  the  close  of  the  Mycenaean  era.     Characteristic  of  this  new  art,  the  be-
ginnings of  which  go  back  to  the  eighth  century  B.C.,  are  the  creation  of

-  artistic  types  like  the  Centaur,  the  Gorgon,  and  the  Chimaera,  and  the
I  substitution  of  definite  mythical  personages  and  m>'thical  scenes,  such
■  as  the  adventures  of  Hercules,  Perseus,  and  Theseus,  for  the  nameless

:  personages  and  generalised  scenes  (a  procession  of  warriors,  a  siege,  a
bull-hunt,  etc.)  of  Mycenaean  art.  By  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  century
B.C.,  the  probable  date  of  the  Chest  of  Cypselus,  two  schools  of  art
may,  according  to   Mr.   Stuart  Jones,  be  traced,  to  which  the  names

,  *  Peloponnesian '  or  *  Doric '  on  the  one  hand  and  *  Ionic '  (including

j  Chalcidian)  on  the  other  are  given.     The  most  characteristic  products


6o4  THE  CHEST  OF  CYPSELUS  bk.  v.  elb


/


of  the  *  Peloponnesian  *  or  *  Doric '  art  are  the  bronze  reliefs  which
have  been  found  within  recent  years  at  Olympia  and  Dodona,  in  Attia
and  Boeotia.  They  are  called  *  4^^® '  because  the  Argive  fonn  of
the  Greek  /  (Jamdda)  occurs  in  the  inscription  halios  geran  ('  Old  Mas
of  the  Sea ')  on  one  of  the  Olympic  plates.  The  *  Doric '  art  has
marked  features  of  its  own.  It  is  characterised  by  severe  compressios
and  concentration  ;  thus  it  restricts  itself  within  the  narrow  limits  of  the
square  or  oblong  field,  which  was  suggested  by  oriental  gold-work,  aod
which  on  a  small  scale  resembled  the  sculptured  metopes  of  the  temples.
*  Ionic '  art,  on  the  other  hand,  known  from  Chalcidian  vases,  the
hydriae  of  Caere,  and  the  archaic  gable  -  sculptures  found  on  tbe
Acropolis  at  Athens,  exhibits  **  instead  of  compression,  diffusion;
instead  of  the  severe  selection  of  pregnant  motives,  a  broad  treatment
and  lavish  detail ;  instead  of  a  concentrated  scene  framed  with  simple
ornament,  an  extended  and  continuous  composition  and  rich  ornamental
bands.  .  .  .  Most  significant  is  the  fact  that  while  on  Corinthian  vases
the  processions  of  animals  pass  on  in  unbroken  files,  the  Chalcidian  or
Ionic  painter  diversifies  them  with  combats  between  individual  beasts
or  groups  in  which  cattle  are  devoured  by  beasts  of  prey"  (Stuart
Jones).  The  same  mythical  subject  seems  to  have  been  sometimes
treated  differently  by  the  two  schools  ;  this  is  the  case,  for  example,
with  Geryon  and  the  scene  of  Hercules  and  the  hydra  (see  below,  notes
on  17.  II  ;  19.  i).  But  neither  of  these  schools,  the  Doric  and  the
Ionic,  remained  wholly  unaffected  by  the  influence  of  the  other.  Tlius
the  Olympian  bronze  reliefs  are  the  purest  product  of  Peloponnesian  or
Doric  art ;  and  yet  on  one  of  them  we  see  represented  the  Old  Man  of
the  Sea  —  a  type  apparently  of  Eastern  origin.  Applying  these
principles  to  the  examination  of  the  Chest  of  Cypselus,  Mr.  Stuart
Jones  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  the  artistic  types  with  which  the
chest  was  adorned  are,  with  extremely  few  exceptions,  those  of  the  art
of  600  B.C.,  but  may  be  distinguished  into  an  earlier  and  a  later  group.
( I )  The  early  group  consists  of  the  types  which  are  described  in  the
same  or  ver>'  similar  form  in  the  Hesiodic  poem  The  Shield  of  Hercules.
and  which  appear  on  Protocorinthian  and  Melian  \'ases,  buccheri  from
Etruria,  and  other  early  monuments.  Such  are  Hercules  and  the
Centaurs,  the  duel  scenes,  the  so-called  Persian  Artemis,  Zeus  and
Alcmena,  Menelaus  and  Helen,  and  other  equally  simple  groups
arising  from  the  combination  of  fundamental  types,  like  Apollo  and  the
Muses,  Perseus  and  the  vGorgons.  (2)  The  second  group  comprises
the  scenes  which  may  be  paralleled  from  developed  Corinthian,  Cha^
cidian,  and  Ionic  vases,  or  from  Peloponnesian  bronze  reliefs.  Such
are  the  departure  of  Amphiaraus,  the  funeral  games  of  Pelias,  Hercules
and  the  hydra,  Phineus  and  the  harpies,  Justice  and  Injustice,  Hercules
and  Geryon,  Ajax  and  Cassandra,  and  the  Judgment  of  Paris.

Further,  Mr.  Stuart  Jones  is  of  opinion  that  the  artist  who  made
the  chest  was  not  limited  by  the  traditions  either  of  the  Doric  (Pelopon-
nesian) or  the  Ionic  school,  but  that  he  combined  methods  of  com-
position and  types  common  to  both  schools.

(i)   In  regard  to  composition,  we  have  seen  that  the  method  of  the


CH.  XVII  THE  CHEST  OF  CYPSELUS  605

Doric  school  was  to  arrange  the  scenes  in  separate  compartments  or
panels,  resembling  the  metopes  of  a  temple ;  while  the  method  of  the
Ionic  school  was  to  arrange  them  in  one  long  unbroken  band  or  frieze.
Now  both  these  methods  were  apparently  employed  on  the  Chest  of
Cypselus.  Of  the  five  horizontal  belts  of  figures  with  which  it  was
adorned,  the  scenes  in  belts  II.  and  IV.  seem  to  have  been  distributed
in  separate  compartments  of  varying  size  ;  while  the  scenes  in  belts  I.,
III.,  and  V.  were  arranged  in  continuous  friezes  without  the  inter-
vention of  any  vertical  bands  of  ornament.  Certainly  there  is  no
question  that  the  figures  in  belt  III.  formed  one  unbroken  frieze;  and
Pausanias's  mistake  as  to  lolaus  in  belt  I.  (see  note  on  17.  11)  could
not  have  occurred  if  the  scenes  in  it  had  been  arranged  in  separate
compartments.

(2)  In  regard  to  types,  Mr.  Stuart  Jones  points  out  that  (a)  the
departure  of  Amphiaraus  and  the  funeral  games  of  Pelias  correspond
closely  with  scenes  both  on  a  Corinthian  vase,  which  was  admittedly
painted  under  strong  Chalcidian  influence,  and  on  an  amphora  of  Ionic
style  found  in  Etruria ;  {b)  the  type  of  the  scene  of  Hercules  and  the
hydra  is  the  Ionic,  not  the  Peloponnesian  type ;  and  (c)  the  type  of
Phineus,  the  Boreads,  and  the  Harpies  is  also  unquestionably  Ionic.  r

The  most  instructive  parallel  to  the  Chest  of  Cypselus  as  a  whole  is
presented  by  the  famous  Frangois  vase,  the  work  of  an  Attic  painter  of
the  first  rank,  who  was,  however,  strongly  influenced  by  Ionic  tradition.
This  vase,  the  most  richly  decorated  of  all  ancient  vases  as  yet  \
discovered,  is  signed  by  the  painter  Clitias  and  the  potter  Ergotimus,
and  is  supposed  to  date  from  between  550  and  500  B.C.  The  body  of
the  vase  is,  like  the  Chest  of  Cypselus,  adorned  with  five  horizontal
belts  of  figures,  while  another  row  of  figures  (representing  the  battle  of
the  Pygmies  and  the  Cranes)  encircles  the  foot  of  the  vase,  and  the
handles  are  decorated  with  vertical  bands  of  figures.  The  figures  on
this  great  vase,  painted  black  on  a  red  ground,  represent  animals,  real
and  fabulous,  and  scenes  from  legend  and  mythology ;  most  of  them
have  their  names  inscribed  beside  them.  Thus  the  parallel  between
the  decoration  of  the  Chest  of  Cypselus  and  that  of  the  Frangois  vase
is  very  close.  Further  it  is  to  be  noted  that  on  the  Chest  of  Cypselus,
while  the  two  upper  and  the  twojower  belts  of  figures  contained  each
a  variety  of  scenes,  the  third  or  central  belt  was  entirely  occupied  by  a
single  scene  (see  18.  6  sqq.)  It  is  the  same  on  the  Francois  vase.  Of
the  five  belts  which  run  round  the  body  of  the  vase,  the  two  upper  and
two  lower  exhibit  each  a  variety  of  scenes  (the  hunting  of  the  Caly-
donian  boar,  the  battle  of  the  Centaurs  and  Lapiths,  the  chariot-race  at
the  funeral  games  of  Patroclus,  the  return  of  Hephaestus  to  Olympus,  etc.) ;
while  the  central  belt,  which  is  also  the  broadest,  is  entirely  devoted
to  a  single  scene,  the  marriage  of  Peleus  and  Thetis  and  the  procession
of  the  gods  approaching  to  grace  the  wedding.  Hence  Overbeck
conjectured,  with  great  probability,  that  on  the  Chest  of  Cypselus  the
belts  were  not  all  of  equal  breadth,  and  that  the  central  belt  was  the
broadest.  Decorative  considerations  obviously  favour  this  view.  Prof.
Furtwangler's  opinion  that  the  second  and  fourth  were  the  chief  belts


;


6o6  THE  CHEST  OF  CYPSELUS  bk.  v.  u>.

and  therefore  presumably  the  broadest,  because  in  them  alone  the
figures  had  epigrams  inscribed  beside  them,  seems  less  probable.  Bu:
in  all  the  belts  on  the  Francois  vase  the  figures  are  arranged,  after  Uss.
Ionic  fsishion,  in  continuous  friezes,  not  in  separate  compartinents :  and
the  spirit  in  which  these  friezes  are  treated  is  also  held  to  be  look.
On  the  other  hand  the  figiu-es  in  the  vertical  bands  which  adorn  th«
handles  of  the  Francois  \'ase  are  arranged  in  separate  panels,  one  ab<»t
the  other,  and  bear  a  close  resemblance  both  in  composition  and  t}'pe
to  the  well-knoHTi  bronze  relief  of  Olympia  (sec  above,  p.  502) :  the
principal  figure  both  on  the  bronze  rehef  and  on  the  handles  of  the
Francois  vase  is  the  winged  Artemis  grasping  a  wild  beast  in  eithtr
hand.  As  the  bronze  relief  of  Olympia  is  a  typical  example  of  the
Peloponnesian  or  Doric  school  of  art,  we  thus  learn  that  Clitias,  the
painter  of  the  Francois  \'ase,  did  not  escape  Peloponnesian  infiueocei
though  he  followed  chiefly  the  traditions  of  the  Ionic  school,  hs,  to
the  Francois  vase  see  Wiener  Varlegebldtter^  1888,  plates  iL  iii.  iv.  i ;
W.  Reichel,  *  Ueber  eine  neue  Aufhahme  der  Fran9ob\'ase,'  Archach
logisch-epigraphisdu  Mittheilungen  aus  Oesierreich.-Ungam^  12  (188S),
pp.  38-59;  R.  Heberdey,  '  Bemerkungen  zur  Frangois-Vase,'  ib.  \\
(1890),  pp.  Ti'%i\  Baumeister's  DenkmdUr^  p.  1799  sqq,^  with
pi.  Ixxiv.  ;  A.  Schneider,  in  Berichte  d,  k,  sacks,  GeselL  d.  IViss.  r*
J^P^igi  Phil-  hist  CL  43  (189 1),  pp.  207-246;  H.  Brunn,  Grieck
Kunstgeschichte^  p.  164  sqq.

Thus  on  the  Chest  of  Cypselus,  as  on  the  Francois  vase,  we  can
trace  the  influence  of  the  two  schools,  the  Peloponnesian  and  the  Ionic ;
but  on  the  Chest  of  Cypselus  the  balance  betix-een  the  two  was,
apparently,  more  evenly  maintained  than  on  the  Francois  vase,  where  i:
inclines  decidedly  to  the  Ionic  side.  The  artist  who  made  the  chest
/  seems  to  have  been  more  familiar  with  the  Hesiodic  than  with  the
'  Homeric  poems  ;  at  least  several  of  the  scenes  show  distinctly  the
'  influence  of  the  Hesiodic  my tholog)' (see  notes  on  18.  i  ;  18.  4  ;  19.  6).
whereas  only  one  of  them  is  certainly  borrowed  from  Homer  (see  19.  ;
note  ;  cp.  1 9.  7  and  9  with  the  notes).

On  the  whole,  then,  the  evidence  points  to  the  conclusion  that  the
Chest  of  Cypselus  was  made  in  the  early  part  of  the  sixth  centur)-  B.c
by  a  Corinthian  artist,  who  knew  the  poems  of  Homer  and  Hesiod,  and
blended  the  diverse  artistic  styles  of  his  time  into  a  harmonious  com-
position.

Pausanias  tells  us  that  the  figures  on  the  chest  were  wrought  in
ivor>%  gold,  and  the  cedar-wood  of  the  chest.  Whether  they  were  inlaid  or
in  relief  we  do  not  know  ;  but  considering,  first,  the  close  correspondence
of  some  of  the  types  to  those  of  early  reliefs  in  gold  and  bronze,  second,
the  existence  of  reliefs  in  ivory,  and,  third,  the  fact  of  some  of  the  tigures
being  wrought  in  the  cedar-wood  of  the  chest  itself,  it  seems  more  prob-
able that  the  scenes  were  represented  in  low  relief.  The  inscriptions
were  perhaps  inlaid  in  gold.

Prof.  C.  Robert  and  Mr.  Kalkmann  argue,  or  rather  assume,  thai
Pausanias  copied  his  description  of  the  Chest  of  Cjrpselus  from  a  work
by  the  antiquar)'  Polemo  on  the  same  subject      But  as  no  such  work  of


A...


CH.  XVII  THE  CHEST  OF  CYPSELUS  607

Polemo's  exists  or  is  known  to  have  ever  existed,  we  need  not  stop  to
examine  so  gratuitous  and  uncritical  an  assumption.

Two  excellent  restorations  of  the  scenes  on  the  chest,  based  on
Pausanias's  description  and  existing  monuments  of  archaic  Greek  art,
have  been  given  by  Overbeck  and  Mr.  H.  Stuart  Jones.  That  of  Mr.
Stuart  Jones,  as  the  later  and  probably  the  more  correct  of  the  two,
is  here  reproduced  (Plate  ix.)

On  the  Chest  of  Cypselus  see  Quatremere-de-Quincy,  Le  Jupiter  Olympieti
(Paris,  1815),  pp.  124-132  ;  K.  O.  MUller,  Archaeologie  der  Kunst,  §  57  ;  Th.
Bergk,  *  Ueber  die  Composition  des  Kastens  des  Cypselus,'  Archaeologische
Z^itung,  3  (1845),  pp.  150-159,  167-176,  182-186;  Otto  Jahn,  Archdologische
Aufsatze^  pp.  3-15  ;  »V/.,  in  Berichte  iiber  die  VerhandL  d.  k.  sacks.  Ges,  d.  Wissen.
zu  Leipzig^  Philol. -histor.  Classe,  10  (1858),  pp.  99-107  ;  id.y  in  Hernus^  3  (1869),
p.  192;  H.  'Br\xviXij'\nRheinisches  Museum,  N.F.  5  (1847),  pp.  335-340;  /i,  Die
Kunst  bei  Homer y  p.  21  sq, 'y  id.,  Griechische  Kunstgeschicntey  i.  pp.  171-178  ;
Ruhl,  *■  Etwas  Uber  die  Eintheilung  der  Bildwerke  aufdem  Kasten  des  Kypselos,*
Zeitschrift  fiir  AlterthuPHS^tvissenscnafty  1 852,  pp.  305-31 1  ;  id,,  *  Noch  einmal  vom
¥^y^%f^o%-Y.'3iSX^Xiy  Archaeologische  Zcitung^  i860,  pp.  27-32;  L.  Mercklin,  'Die
Aufschriftep  des  Kypseloskastens,'/^.  pp.  ioi-io8;  L.  Preller,  *Ueberden  Kasten
des  Kypselos,'  Archaeol.  Zeitungy  12  (1854),  pp.  292-300  (reprinted  in  Preller's
Ausgewdhlte  Aufsatze,  pp.  425-433) ;  Schubart,  in  Fleckeiseti^ s  Jahrbiichery  7
(1861),  pp.  301-315  ;  and  ib,  1 1  (1865),  p.  638  sqq,  ;  Overbeck,  *  tfeber  die  Lade
des  Kypselos,*  Abhandluftgen  d.  philotog.  histor.  Classe  d.  k.  sacks.  Gesell.  d.
Wissen.  4(1865),  pp.  590-674;  id.,  Gesck.  d.  grieck.  Piastik*  l.  pp.  64-67;  id.,
*  Die  neuere  Versuche  zur  Wiederherstellung  der  Kypseloslade,  Berichte  d.  k.
sacks.  Gesell.  d.  Wiss.  zu  Leipzig,  44  (1892),  pp.  i-io;  rantazides,  in 'A^iyvatoi',  9
(1880),  p.  W^sqq. ;  Max  Oette,  Beitrdge  zur  Erkldrung  von  Pausanias  V.  17.  ^ff.
(Altenburg,  1881);  G.  Loeschcke,  Observationes  archaeologicae  (Dorpat,  1880),
p.  5  sqq.  ;  id.,  Boreas  und  Oreitkyia  am  Kypseloskasten  (Dorpat,  1886)  ;  W.
Klein,  *Zur  Kypsele  der  Kypseliden,'  in  Sitzungsberichte  d.  pkilos.  kistor.  CIclssc
d.  k.  Akcui.  d.  IVissen.  (Vienna),  108  (1885),  pp.  51-83  (also  printed  separately) ;
Collignon,  Manuel  d' archeologie  Grecque,  pp.  35-37  ;  id.,  Histoire  de  la  Sculpture
Grecque,  I.  pp.  93-100;  Lucy  M.  Mitchell,  History  of  Ancient  Sculpture,  p.  170
sq.  ;  A.  S.  Murray,  History  of  Greek  Sculpture^  I.  pp.  69-72  ;  C.  Robert,  in
Hermes,  23  (1888),  pp.  436-444;  E.  Pernice,  *Zur  Kypseloslade,*  yii-^r^«f A  d.  k.
deutsck.  arckdolog.  Instit.  3  (1888),  pp.  365-368;  Dumont  et  Chaplain,  Les
c^ramiques  de  la  Grice  propre,  I.  pp.  221-229;  A.  Kalkmann,  Pausanias  der
Perieget,  pp.  98-100,  114  sq.  ;  W.  Gurlitt,  Ueber  Pausanias,  p.  163  sqq.  ;  A.
Schneider,  Prolegomena  zu  einer  tuuen  Gallerie  keroiscker  Bildwerke,  p.  50  sq.  ;
C.  Sittl,  Parerga  zur  cdten  Kunstgesckichte  (Wurzburg,  1893),  P*  24 ;  A.  Furt-
wangler,  Meisterwerke  d.  grieck.  Plastik,  pp.  723-732  ;  Studniczka,  injahrbuch  d.
arch.  Inst.  9  (1894),  p.  52  sq.  note  16  ;  H.  Stuart  Jones,  *  The  Chest  of  Kypselos,*
foumal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  14  (1894),  PP-  30-80.  In  describing  the  two  schools
of  early  Greek  art,  and  analysing  the  artistic  elements  of  the  chest,  I  have  merely
summarised  the  corresponding  parts  of  Mr.  Stuart  Jones's  article,  without  feeling
myself  competent  to  criticise  them.

17.  6.  boustrophedon.  In  this  mode  of  writing  the  letters  run
from  left  to  right  in  the  first  line,  and  from  right  to  left  in  the  second,
or  conversely.  It  was  a  transitional  mode  of  writing  intermediate
between  the  ancient  fashion  of  writing  from  right  to  left  (cp.  Pausanias,
V.  25.  9)  and  the  later  mode  of  writing  from  left  to  right.  A  number
of  inscriptions  written  in  the  boustrophedon  style  have  come  down  to  us.
The  laws  of  Solon,  dating  from  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  centur>'  B.C.,
and  graved  on  tablets  which  were  preserved  on  the  Acropolis  at  Athens,
were  thus  written  (Harpocration,  s.v.  6  Karw^ei'  v6\ioi).      Indeed  bou-


6o8  THE  CHEST  OF  CYPSELUS  bk.  v.  elis

strophedon  seems  to  have  been  the  regular,  though  not  exclusive,  mode
of  writing  throughout  the  whole  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.  Sec  Kirchhoft
Studien  zur  Geschichte  des  griech.  Alphabets ^^  p.  1 6  sqq. ;  Roberts,
Greek  Epigraphy^  p.  5  sq.  The  name  boustropkedon  (literally  *  ox-
turning')  is  a  metaphor  from  ploughing,  the  oxen  turning  back  when
they  reach  the  end  of  the  field.  Cp.  Profc  W.  Ridgeway,  in  Journal  ej
Hellenic  Studies^  9  (1888),  p.  20  j^.  In  regard  to  the  inscriptions  00
the  chest,  it  has  been  noted  that  there  were  no  inscriptions  on  the  third
and  fifth  band  of  figures.  Pausanias  says  this  expressly  of  the  fifth  baikd
(19.  7),  and  we  may  infer  it  as  to  the  third  from  the  difficulty  which  he
had  in  interpreting  it  (see  18.  6  sqq.)  Further,  it  has  been  noted  that
the  metrical  inscriptions  occur  only  on  the  second  and  fourth  bands,
and  apparently  only  in  the  middle  of  these  bands,  not  at  the  extremi-
ties. From  the  latter  fact  Mr.  Mercklin  drew  the  inference  that  the
metrical  inscriptions  occurred  only  on  the  front  of  the  chest,  not  on  the
sides.

17.  6.  written  in  winding  lines.  The  inscriptions  ran  out  and
in  between  the  figures  to  which  they  referred,  the  curves  bein^  necessi-
tated by  the  exigencies  of  space.  There  are  plenty  of  examples  of
such  inscriptions,  especially  on  archaic  vases  (Overbeck,  Ueber  St
Lade  des  Kypselos^  p.  646).  Inscriptions  on  Greek  vases  are  the
subject  of  a  special  work  by  Mr.  P.  Kretschmer  {Die  grieckische  Vasoh
t'nsckrtften,  Giitersloh,  1894).

17.  7-  the  horses  of  Pelops  are  winged.  On  a  terra-cotta  relief
which  was  found  at  Velletri,  Pelops  and  Hippodamia  are  apparently
represented  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  winged  horses  (O.  Jahn,  Arckaoh-
gische  Aufscitze^  p.  6,  note  7).  Pelops  received  the  winged  steeds  as  a
gift  from  Poseidon  (Pindar,  01.  i.  140).

17.  7-  Next  is  represented  the  house  of  Amphiarans  etc.    The
scene  here  described  by  Pausanias  is  depicted  with  surprising  exactness
upon  an  ancient  Corinthian  vase  which  was  found  at  Corvetri  in  1872,
and  is  now  in  the  Berlin  Museum.      On  this  vase-|>ainting  the  house  of
Amphiaraus    is   represented    by   two    buildings   in    the    style   of   Doric
temples  in  antis.     On  the  right  of  the  scene  a  four-horse  chariot  stands
in  front  of  the  house.      In  the  chariot  stands  the  charioteer   Baton  (bis
name  is  written  beside  him),  holding  in  his  right  hand  the  reins  and  a
long  spear,  while  in  his  left  he  receives  a  cup  which  a  man    Leontis  is
presenting  to  him.      Behind  Baton  is  Amphiaraus  in  the  act  of  stepping
into   the   chariot.      His   left  foot   is   on   the   chariot,    his    right   on  the
ground  ;   in  his  right  hand  he  holds  a  drawn  sword.      He   is  looking
back  with  an  air  of  agitation  to  the  group  of  women   and  childrcfl
who  stand  behind   him  at  the  left-hand   comer  of  the   scene  and  in
front  of  one  of  the  two  buildings.      Nearest  to  Amphiaraus  stands  1
small  naked  boy  stretching  out  his  hands  in  an  attitude  of  supplica-
tion.    His  name  is  not  inscribed,  but  from  Pausanias  we  leam  that  he
is  Alcmaeon.     Then  come  two  girls  in  similar  attitudes  ;  the  smaller
and   foremost  of   the  two  is  Eurydice,  the   taller    one    behind   her  is
Damoanasa.      Next  stands  a  woman,    Aenippa,    with   a   baby  on  her
shoulder.     The  baby's  name  is  not  inscribed,  but  from  Pausanias  we


THE  CHEST  OF  CYPSELUS


learn  that  the  child  is  Am-
philochus.  Last  of  all,  on
the  extreme  left,  stands
Eriphyle;  with  her  left  hand
she  raises  the  shawl  in
which  her  head  is  muffled,
in  her  lowered  right  hand
she  holds  a  lai^e  necklace
of  white  pearls.  At  the
other  end  of  the  scene,  on
the  extreme  right,  there  are
two  men :  one  of  them,
Hippotion,  stands  facing  the
horses  i  the  other,  Hali-
medes,  sits  behind  him  on
the  ground.  All  the  figures
have  their  names  written
beside  them  except  Ale-
maeon  and  Amphilochus.
In  the  scene  on  the  chest
of  Cypselus,  as  described
by  Pausanias,  the  three  men
on  the  right  (Leoncis,  Hip-
potion,  and  Halimedes)  are
absent,  the  attitude  of  Baton
s  also  slightly  diRerent,  and


the    1


has


Otherwise,  the  resemblance
between  the  two  scenes  is
perfect.  Prof  C.  Robert,
who  first  published  this  in-
teresting vase,  is  of  opinion
that  the  Corinthian  artist
who  painted  it  did  not  copy
the  scene  on  the  chest  of
Cypselus,  but  only  repro-
duced a  type  which  was
traditional  at  Corinth.  The
letters  of  the  inscription  are
of  the  old  Coriotbian  alpha-
bet Prof  Robert  would
assign  the  vase  to  the  end
of  the  sixth  century  B.C.
The  discovery  of  this  vase
has  not  only  furnished  us
with  a  most  valuable  repro-
duction of  some  of  the
Agures  which  adorned  the
cjiest  of  Cypselus,  but  has
VOL.  til  3  S


6io  THE  CHEST  OF  CYPSELUS  bk.  v.  ilk

made  it  certain  (what  Schubart  had  questioned)  that  the  chest  was  cf
Corinthian  workmanship.  See  Monumenti  Inediti^  lo  (1874-1878),
tav.  iv.,  V.  Ab,  with  the  commentary  of  C.  Robert,  in  Annali  ddP  In-
stituto,  46  (1874),  pp.  82-110;  E.  Wilisch,  Die  cUtkorinthtscAe  Tkn-
indus/n'e  (Leipzig,  1892),  pp.  77-79?  with  Taf.  vi.  54.  The  scene  on
the  vase  is  also  reproduced  in  Baumeister's  DenJhnaUr,  voL  i.  fig.  691
The  same  scene  is  partly  reproduced  in  another  vase-painting  of  archaic
style.  See  Micali,  Monumenti  per  senvire  alP  kistoria  eUgU  anUck
papoli  Italiani,  pL  xcv. ;  Jahn,  Archdologische  Aufsdtse^  p.  154  jf^
It  must  therefore  be  a  copy,  not  necessarily  at  first  hand,  of  the  scene
on  the  chest  of  Cypselus.  Since  then  we  find  that  one  of  the  scenes
on  the  chest  of  Cypselus  is  copied  on  two  existing  vases,  it  seems  hardlf
rash  to  infer  that  not  only  this  particular  scene  on  the  chest  bat  die
other  scenes  also  were  frequently  copied  by  vase-painters.  Compare
notes  on  §  9  and  19.  9.  For  other  vase-paintings  representing  the
parting  of  Amphiaraus  and  Eriphyle,  see  Monumenti  Inediti^  1843,  pL
liv.  ;  Annali  delV  Instiiuto,  15  (1843),  pp.  206-220;  zVi,  35  (1863),
p.  233  sqq.,  with  plate  G.

17.  9.  the  flmeral  games  of  Pelias.  These  are  represented  od
the  Corinthian  vase  found  at  Corvetri  (see  the  preceding  note).  But  d
the  contests  described  by  Pausanias,  only  two  are  depicted  on  the  vase;
these  are  the  chariot-race  and  the  wrestling-match.  And  even  diese  do
not  correspond  to  the  description  of  Pausanias.  For  on  the  vase  the
chariots  are  six  instead  of  five  ;  they  are  drawn  by  four  instead  of  two
horses ;  the  names  of  the  charioteers  (except  those  of  Euphemus  and
Admetus)  do  not  correspond ;  and  the  umpires  seated  on  thrones  are
three  in  number,  but  Hercules  is  not  one  of  them.  Again,  in  the
wrestling-match  the  adversary  of  Peleus  is  Hippalcimus  on  the  vase,
instead  of  Jason.  See  Annali  delV  Instituto,  46  (1874),  P-  91  -W-'
Monumenti  Inediti,  10  (1874),  pl-  iv.  v.  ;  E.  Wilisch,  Die  altkorinthisckt
Thonindustrie  (Leipzig,  1892),  pp.  79-82,  with  Taf.  vii.  55.  On  the
archaic  vase  published  by  Micali  and  described  by  Jahn  (see  preceding
note),  there  is  depicted  a  two-horse  chariot-race,  as  well  as  the  parting
of  Amphiaraus  and  Eriphyle.  As  the  latter  scene  was  copied,  directly
or  indirectly,  from  the  chest  of  Cypselus,  the  former  scene  may  have
been  a  copy  of  the  corresponding  scene  on  the  chest

17.  9.  Hercules  is  represented  seated  on  a  chair.  Prof.  Studniczka
suggests  that  Hercules  may  have  been  represented  as  stationed  at  tbe
turning-post  of  the  racecourse  to  see  that  the  comp)etitors  raced  fairiy.
as  Phoenix  was  stationed  at  the  funeral  games  of  Patroclus  (Homer,  H
xxiii.  359  sqq.)  See  Fr.  Studniczka,  *  Herakles  bei  den  Leichenspieleo
des  Pelias  auf  der  Kypseloslade,'/^^''^''^^  ^^  archdol.  Instiiufs,  9  (1894),
pp.  51-54.

17.  9.  a  woman is  playing  on  a flute.    Pausanias  seems

to  have  mistaken  the  sex  of  the  flute-player,  who  was  probably  represented
as  a  man  clad  in  the  long  ungirt  tunic  which  was  regularly  worn  by
flute-players.  This  costume  was  misunderstood  by  Pausanias,  as  Pro£
Benndorf  pointed  out  (W.  Klein,  Zur  Kypsele  der  Kypseliden,  p.  61
note).


CH.  XVII  THE  CHEST  OF  CYPSELUS  6ii

17.  1 1.  lolauB is  represented  victorious  in  the  fonr-horse

chariot-race.  It  seems  likely  that  Pausanias  has  misinterpreted  the
figure  of  lolaus,  who  was  probably  represented  standing  in  or  beside
his  chariot,  waiting  while  Hercules  despatched  the  Hydra  (see  next
note).  That  Pausanias  should  have  thus  wrongly  assigned  lolaus  to
the  scene  of  the  funeral  games  of  Pelias  instead  of  to  Hercules's
fight  with  the  Hydra  proves  that  the  sculptures  were  here  continuous,
not  divided  into  separate  panels.  See  H.  Brunn,  Griechiscke  Kunst-
geschichte^  p.  177;  A.  Furtwangler,  Meisterwerke  d,  griech,  Plasiik^  p.
727  sq,

17.  II.  Hercnles  shooting  the  hydra.  In  early  Greek  art,
especially  on  vases,  this  scene  is  depicted  in  two  different  ways :  on
some  of  them,  Hercules  and  his  fnend  lolaus  are  both  represented
attacking  the  Hydra ;  on  others  Hercules  alone  assails  it,  while  lolaus
is  waiting  with  the  chariot,  ready  to  convey  away  the  victorious  hero
when  the  monster  is  despatched.  See  Furtwangler,  in  Roscher's
Lexikon^  i.  p.  2198  sq.  From  the  mistake  which  Pausanias  has  made
with  regard  to  lolaus  (see  preceding  note),  it  appears  that  on  the  chest
the  scene  was  represented  in  the  latter  way.  According  to  Mr.  Stuart
Jones,  this  latter  mode  of  representation  is  Eastern,  and  the  former  is
Peloponnesian  {Journ.  of  Hell.  Stud,  14  (1894),  p.  67).  A  well-known
example  of  the  so-called  Eastern  type  of  the  scene  is  furnished  by  an
archaic  group  of  pedimental  sculptures  which  was  found  on  the  Acro-
polis at  Athens  some  years  ago.  Here  Hercules  is  seen  attacking  the
Hydra,  while  lolaus  stands  beside  the  chariot  holding  the  reins  and
looking  back  anxiously  at  the  combat.  See  'E<t>T]fjL€pU  dpxaiokoyLKrj,
1884,  pL  7  ;  Collignon,  Hisl.  de  la  Sculpture  grecque^  I.  p.  213,  ^%.  loi  ;
Overbeck,  Gesch,  d  griech.  Plastik^^  i.  p.  180,  fig.  33.

17.  II.  Hercnles  is  easily  recognised by his  flgnre.

In  Greek  art  Hercules  is  commonly  depicted  wearing  a  lion's  skin,  often
with  the  lion's  scalp  worn  as  a  hood  on  his  head.  Pisander  and
Stesichorus  are  said  to  have  been  the  first  poets  who  described  Hercules
in  this  costume.  See  Athenaeus,  xii.  p.  5i2e-5i3a;  Strabo,  xv.  p.
688  ;  Suidas,  j.z/.  IleuravS/dos  ;  K.  O.  Miiller,  Dorier^  i.  p.  446.  Hence
K.  O.  Miiller  inferred  that  the  chest  of  Cypselus,  on  which  Hercules
seems  to  have  been  represented  wearing  the  lion's  skin,  could  not  have
been  older  than  the  time  of  Pisander,  namely  about  647  ac  (Clinton's
Fasti  Hellenici^  i.  p.  199).  See  Miiller,  Archdolog,  der  Kunst^  §  57*
To  this  Overbeck  replied  with  justice,  that  though  Pisander  may
have  been  the  first  to  introduce  Hercules  in  this  costume  into  poetry,
there  is  nothing  to  show  that  Hercules  may  not  have  been  so  represented
in  local  tradition  and  works  of  art  long  before  the  time  of  Pisander
(Overbeck,  Ueber  die  Lade  des  KyPselos^  p.  631  sq.)  On  the  other
hand,  L.  Preller  thought  that  on  the  chest  of  Cypselus  the  artist
probably  represented  Hercules  without  his  later  attributes,  the  lion's
skin  and  club,  and  armed  only  with  bow  and  arrows  {Ausgewdhlte
Aufsdtzey  p.  426  sq^  According  to  Prof.  Furtwangler,  the  lion's  skin
as  a  symbol  of  Hercules  was  borrowed  by  the  Greeks  fi-om  Phoenician
images  of  the  Egyptian  god  Besa  (Roscher's  Lexikon^  i.  p.  2145).


6t3  THE  CHEST  OP  CYPSELUS  bk.  t.  ilq

17.  II.  FUllAtU,  the  Ttmciut  etc.  As  to  representacioiu  of  tbt
myth  of  Phineus  and  the  Harpies  OD  vases,  see  A.  Flasch,  in  ^mmA'
tUlP  Insl.  46  (1874),  pp.  17S-184;  id.,  in  Arthatologisekt  Zdhof,
38  (1880),  pp.  138-145;  J.  de  Witte,  ib.  39  <i88i),  p.  163  *f.;G.
Jalla,  in  Anmdi  dtlP  Intl.  54  (1882),  pp.  90-99,  with  tav.  d'  agg.  0:
Petersen,  in  Archdolog.  epigraph.  Mitlheilungtn  lats  Oesterrddt,  6
(1882),  pp.  52-63;  BaumeistePs  Denkmaltr,  p.  1330  sq.  Od  ih
myth,  see  F.  H.  de  Gaertringen,  De  Gratcorum  /adulis  ad  Tknca
pertinentibus  (Berlin,  1 886),  pp.  56-80.  It  was  represented  on  lit
throne  of  the  Amyclaean  Apollo  (Paus.  iii.  18.  15).  On  the  Harppes
(literally  'the  Snatchers'),  who  have  been  interpreted  as  persanifia-
tions  of  storm -winds,  sec  J.  F.  Craquand,  'Les  Harpyies,'  Rem
arckiologiqve,  N.  S.  2  (i860),  pp.  367-382:  id.  N.  S.  3  (1861).
pp.  18-35;  J.  Langbehn,  Fliigelgestalten,  p.  42  igq.\  C.  Smidk
'Harpies  in  Greek  Art,'  Jovnud  of  Hellenic  Studies,  13  (1892-93),  pf.
103-114  ;  E.  Rohde,  in  Rheinisckes  Museum,  N.  F.  50  (189;),  pp.  i-S-
IS.  I.  A  wonun  Is  represented  cuirins  a  white  bcqr  ul>*
etc.  Tlie  artist  seems  to  have  taken  the  idea  of  this  scene  fron
Hesiod  {TMeog.  211  tg.,  756  sqg.)  Prof.  Klein  contends  that  Night  was
portrayed  carrying  Sleep  and  Death,  not  in  her  arms,  but  on  her  ou-
stretched  hands.  Sleep  being  represented  sitting  on  the  one  hand  ui
Death  running(I)  on  the  other.  See  Klein,  Zur  Kypsele  der  KypsdUi*,
p.  73.  If  Death  was  so  represented,  he  must  have  been  ninning  in  Ins
sleep,  since  Pausanias  tells  us  that  he  was  "  like  one  that  sleeps.'  Bu
Prof.  Klein's  interpretation  is  ungrammatical  as  well  as  absurd ;  he  seou
unaware  that  to  make  it  fit  the  Gi«^
we  should  have  to  change  SutrrfMft
^vovi  into  Sivrrpafxftivov.  As  10
representations  of  Sleep  and  Dead

IS.  2.  A  comelr  womu  b
pnniBhiug  An  ill-&Toared  one  etc
The  scene  described  by  Pausaniu
is  exactly  represented  on  a  led-
figured  vase.  Justice,  a  comely
woman,  is  throttling  Injustice,  it
ugly  hag,  with  her  left  hand,  wbik
in  her  right  hand  she  lifts  a  ham-
mer to  smite  her  victim,  who  is  a
the  act  of  stumbling  and  falling.  I<
is  possible  that  this  vase  -  paindng
was  copied,  directly  or  indireci)?,
from  the  chest  of  Cypiselus.  5m
Roscher's  Lexikon,  i.  p  10
Furtwangler,  Die  BronsefuHdt
Olympia,  p.  95;  Baumeister's  Denkmaler,  p.  1300,  fig.  1442.  On
personifications  of  Justice  {Dike)  in  Greek  art,  see  A.  Milchho&r, '  Dike,
Jakrbuch  d.  arch.  Inst.  7  (1893X  pp.  203.208.


CH.  XVIII  THE  CHEST  OF  CYPSELUS  613

18.  2.  Two  other  women  are  pounding  with  pestleB  in  mortars.
These  were  probably  the  Fates  brewing  weal  and  woe  for  mankind
(cp.  Hesiod,  Theog,  218  sq,)  This  interpretation  of  the  figures  was
proposed  by  Dr.  W.  Roscher  (*  Die  sogen.  Pharmakiden  des  Kypselos-
kasten/  Pkilologus^  47  (1889),  pp.  703-709),  and  has  been  accepted
by  Prof.  Furtwangler  {Meisterwerkey  p.  729)  and  Mr.  Stuart  Jones.
If  this  interpretation  is  correct,  it  is  notable  that  here  the  Fates  were
only  two  in  number,  whereas  the  Greeks  commonly  held  that  there  were
three  of  them.  At  Delphi,  however,  only  two  Fates  were  recognised
(Paus.  X.  24.  2  ;  Plutarch,  Dc  EI  apud  DelphoSy  2).  Formerly  these
two  figures  on  the  chest  of  Cypselus  were  explained  as  witches  com-
pounding a  hell- broth.  Elsewhere  (ix.  11.  3)  Pausanias  mentions  a
relief  representing  witches,  and  tells  in  connexion  with  them  a  story,
in  another  version  of  which  the  Fates  take  the  place  of  the  witches
(Antoninus  Liberalis,  Trans,  29).  Mr.  Otto  Kern  interpreted  the
women  on  the  chest  as  Ide  and  Adrastia,  two  personages  of  the  Orphic
cosmogony,  as  to  whom  see  Lobeck,  AglaophamuSy  p.  514^^.;  Orphtca,
ed.  £.  Abel,  p.  194  sq.  But  the  interpretation  is  not  a  happy  one.
See  O.  Kern,  *  Die  Pharmakeytriai  am  Kypseloskasten,'  Jahrbuch  d,
arch,  Inst,  3  (1888),  pp.  234-236.

18.  2.  Idas  is  leading  back Marpessa.     The  contest  of  Idas

with  Apollo  for  the  possession  of  his  bride  Marpessa  is  mentioned
by  Homer  (//.  ix.  557  sqq.)  It  is  depicted  on  an  Etruscan  mirror,
and  perhaps  on  two  vases.  See  O.  Jahn,  Archdologische  Aufsatze^
pp.  46-56.

18.  3.  There  is  a  man  clad  in  a  tunic  etc  This  scene  (Zeus  and
Alcmena)  and  the  following  scene  (Menelaus  and  Helen)  are  perhaps
represented  on  an  archaic  marble  relief  found  near  Sparta.  On  one
side  of  the  stone  is  seen  a  beardless  man  standing  opposite  a  woman,
who  is  clad  in  a  long  robe  and  holds  in  her  left  hand  what  seems  to  be
a  crown  or  wreath  ;  the  man  is  laying  his  left  hand  on  the  woman's
shoulder.  These  two  figures  may  be  Zeus  and  Alcmena.  On  the
opposite  side  of  the  stone  a  bearded  man  is  seizing  a  woman  with  his
left  hand,  while  with  his  right  he  points  a  drawn  sword  at  her  throat.
These  two  figures  may  be  Menelaus  and  Helen.  The  comparison  of
these  reliefs  with  the  scenes  on  the  chest  of  Cypselus  was  first  made  by
Prof.  Loeschcke.  See  AnncUi  delP  InstitutOy  33  (i  861),  p.  35  j^.,  with
Tav.  d'  agg.  C;  Conze,  in  PhilologuSy  19  (1863),  p.  173  sq.\  Dressel
and  Milchhofer,  in  MittheiL  d.  arch,  Inst,  2  (1877),  p.  301  sqq,\
Friederichs-Wolters,  GipsadgussCy  §  5  5,  p.  27  sq, ;  Milchhofer,  Anfdnge
der  Kunsty  p.  186  sqq,  ;  Overbeck,  Gcsch,  d,  griech,  Plastiky^  i.  p.  127
sq,  ;  Collignon,  Histoire  de  la  Sadpture  grecqtUy  i.  p.  236  sq,

18.  3.  Menelans  is  advancing  to  slay  Helen.     See  the

preceding  note.  This  scene  is  also  depicted  on  Attic  black-figured
vases  (O.  Jahn,  Archdologische  AufsdtzCy  p.  9 ;  Overbeck,  Ueber  die
Lade  des  KypseloSy  p.  671 ;  Stuart  Jones,  mjoum.  Hell.  Stud  14  (1894),

p.  71).

18.  4.  The  Mnses and  Apollo.    Cp.  Hesiod,  Shield  of  Her-

culesy  201  sqq,     Welcker  thought  that  this  group  formed  part  of  the


6i4  THE  CHEST  OF  CYPSELUS  M.  v.  »LB

preceding  scene,  the  artist  having  intended  to  represent  Apollo  and  tbe
Muses  singing  at  the  wedding  of  Medea.  This  view  has  been  accepted
by  Professors  Robert  and  Furtwangler,  but  rejected  by  O.  Jahn.  Sec
O.  Jahn,  Archdologische  Aufsdtze^  p.  9  note  18 ;  C.  Robert,  in  Hermei^
23  (1888),  p.  443;  Furtwangler,  Meisierwerke,  p.  729.

18.  4*  Atlas  is  npholding  heaven  and  earth  etc     Cp.

Hesiod,  Theog.  517  sqq. ;  and  see  note  on  v.  11.  5.  In  the  oidisaiy
version  of  the  story  Atlas  fetched  the  apples  while  Hercules  held  op  tk
heaven  in  his  stead  (see  above,  p.  524  x^.)  But  on  the  chest,  as  we
learn  from  Pausanias,  Atlas  was  portrayed  supporting  the  sky  and
holding  the  apples  at  the  same  time.  Perhaps,  as  Mr.  Stuart  Jones
suggests,  the  artist  regarded  Atlas  as  himself  the  guardian  of  the  apples,
and  placed  them  in  his  hands  to  indicate  this.

18.  5.  Ares  clad  in  armour,  leading  Aphrodite.  •  Ares  peihaps
appeared  here,  not  as  the  paramour,  but  as  the  husband  of  Aphroditt
Similarly  he  seems  to  be  represented  as  her  husband  in  some  existiog
works  of  art.  See  Muller-Wieseler,  Denkmdler^  i.  pi.  xii.  No.  44;  0.
Jahn,  Archdologische  Aufsdtze^  p.  10,  note  20.

18.  5.  from  the  hand  of  Thetis  a  snake  is  darting  at  him.    On

ancient  vases  the  struggle  between  Peleus  and  Thetis  is  often  depicted.
See  K.  O.  MuUer,  ArchaeologU  der  Kunst^  §  413.  i  ;  O.  Jahn,  Archa^'
logische  Aufsdtze^  p.  10  ;  £.  Pottier's  references  in  Dumont  et  ChapUin.
Les  c&amiques  de  la  Grlce  propre^  p.  225,  note  3  ;  Sidney  Colvin,  in
Joum,  of  Hellenic  Studies,  i  (1880),  p.   119  j^. ;  Baumeister's  Denk-
mdler,  p.  1796^^^.,  with  fig.   1881  and   1882;    Miss  Harrison,  Gred
-  Vase  Paintings,  pi.  xxiii.     In  a  fine  vase-painting  by  the  artist  Pithinns
(Miss  Harrison,  I.e.)  Thetis  is  seen  struggling  in  the  clutch  of  Peleus;
a  snake  darts  from  her  left  hand  at  his  forehead,  while  a  lion  leaps  from
her  right  hand.     The  scene  is  meant  to  illustrate  the  legend  that  the  sea-
goddess  Thetis  tried  to  escape  from  her  importunate  wooer  by  turning
herself  into  a  snake,  a  lion,  fire,  and  water.     See  the  lines  of  Sophocles
quoted  by  the  scholiast  on  Pindar,  Ncm.  iii.  60 ;  also  Pindar,  Nem.  iv.
101  sqq.\  Apollodorus,  iii.    13.   5.     Modem  Greek  peasants  still  think
that  a  man  may  catch  and  wed  a  Nereid  if  he  can  get  possessicm  of
something  belonging  to  her,  especially  her  handkerchief.     In  the  district
of  Pediada  in  Crete  there  is  a  cave  called  the  Nereid's  cave  with  a  fine
spring  of  water  in  it.     Here  the  Nereids  used  to  dance  by  night  to  tbe
music  of  a  young  peasant  from  the  village  of  Sgourokephdii.     But  the
musician  fell  in  love  with  one  of  the  Nereids,  and  an  old  woman,  to  whom
he  opened  his  heart,  told  him  that,  when  the  hour  of  cockcrow  drc*
near,  he  must  seize  the  Nereid  by  the  hair  and  hold  her  fast  till  the
cocks  crew.     He  seized  the  nymph  as  the  old  woman  directed  him;
she  turned  into  a  dog,  a  serpent,  a  camel,  and  fire ;  but  the  young  man
held  on  to  her  till  the  cocks  crew.     Then  the  nymph  took  her  own  feir
form,   and  followed  him  home  to  the  village.     See  B.   Schmidt,  D^
Volksleben  der  Neugriechen,  p.    112  sqq.     Cp.  Th.  Bent,  The  Cycladts,
p.    1 3.      For  parallel    stories  see    W.    Mannhardt,  Antike  Wold-  uni
Feldkulte,  p.  60  sqq.

18.  5.  The  sisters  of  Medusa  are pnrstdng  Perseus,  who  ifl


CH.  XIX  THE  CHEST  OF  CYPSELUS  615

lying  throngll  the  air.  Hesiod  has  described  (Shield  of  Hercules^
216-237)  how  this  scene  was  represented  on  the  shield  of  Hercules ;
Perseus  was  seen  flying  through  the  air  with  Medusa's  head,  pursued
by  the  two  surviving  Gorgon-sisters,  each  of  them  girt  with  serpents.
Euripides  tells  us  {EUctray  458  sqq.)  that  on  the  shield  of  Achilles  there
was  represented  Perseus  flying  over  the  sea  with  his  winged  sandals,
bearing  Medusa's  head  and  accompanied  by  Hermes.  The  flight  ot
Perseus  with  Medusa's  head  is  illustrated  by  many  existing  monu-
ments of  ancient  art,  especially  vase-paintings,  both  black  -  figured
and  red  •  figured ;  on  some  of  them  the  pursuing  Gorgons  are  also
represented.  See  Fr.  Knatz,  Quomodo  Persei  fabulam  artifices  Graeci
et  Romani  tractaverint  (Bonnae,  1893),  pp.  17-24;  E.  Pottier's
references  in  Dumont  et  Chaplain,  Les  ciramiques  de  la  Grice  propre,
I.  p.  226  note  I  ;  Stuart  Jones,  m  Joum,  of  Hellenic  Studies^  14  (1894),

p.  73.

18.  6.  they  are  the  Aetolians  under  Qxylns.     See  v.  4.  i  sq.

18.  6.  the  Pyliana  and  ArcadiAns  abont  to  fight  etc  See  Homer,
//.  vii.  133  sqq,

18.  7-  it  is  incredible  that  Oypselns'  ancestor,  who  was  a
Ckninthian  etc.  On  this  passage  Otto  Jahn  remarked  {Hermes^  3
(1869),  p.  192)  that,  on  the  supposition  that  the  chest  was  indeed  the
chest  of  Cypselus,  Pausanias  was  perfectly  right  in  exp>ecting  to  find
scenes  of  Corinthian  history  illustrated  on  it.  But  the  guides  or  inter-
preters, as  we  learn  from  Pausanias,  did  not  connect  this  central  scene
on  the  chest  with  any  episode  in  Corinthian  history ;  whence  Jahn  con-
cluded that  they  knew  nothing  of  the  supposed  connexion  of  Cypselus
with  the  chest,  and  that  the  tradition  which  connected  the  chest  with
Cypsehis  must  consequently  have  been  late  and  untrustworthy.  As
this  tradition  was  already  current  in  the  time  of  Pausanias,  it  would
follow,  on  Jahn's  theory,  that  the  guides  or  interpreters  to  whom  he
refers  in  the  present  passage  were  not  the  local  ciceroni  but  earlier
writers  whose  works  Pausanias  consulted.  To  this  it  has  been  justly
replied  by  Messrs.  W.  Gurlitt  and  Stuart  Jones  that  on  the  chest  there
were  many  scenes,  attested  by  inscriptions,  which  had  nothing  to  do
with  Corinth ;  and  that  hence  there  is  no  reason  why  an  interpreter,
even  if  he  believed  that  the  chest  had  been  dedicated  by  Cypselus,
should  have  felt  bound  to  explain  this  particular  scene  by  reference
to  Corinthian  history.  See  W.  Gurlitt,  Ueber  Pausanias,  p.  163  j^.  ;
Stuart  Jones,  in  Joum,  HelL  Stud.  14  (1894),  p.  33.  Pausanias's
own  explanation  of  this  scene  is  rejected  by  L.  Preller  {Ausgewdhlte
AufscUze^  p.  428  sq,)  and  Overbeck  {Ueber  die  Lade  des  Kypselos,  pp.
632,  659).

18.  7-  Oypselus  and  his  forefathers  came  originally  from  Gtonnssa
etc.     See  ii.  4.  4.

19.  I.  Boreas  with  Orithyia,  whom  he  has  snatched  away.
The  rape  or  pursuit  of  Orithyia  by  Boreas  is  depicted  on  a  number  of
existing  vases,  none  of  which,  however,  is  very  early,  since  all  are  of  the
red-figured  style.  Sometimes  in  these  paintings  Boreas,  represented  as
a  winged  man,  is  seen  clasping  the  maiden  in  his  arms ;  but  oftener  he


6i6  THE  CHEST  OF  CYPSELUS  bk.  ▼.  tus

is  pursuing  her,  while  she  flees  from  him.  Pausanias's  language  shows
clearly  that  on  the  chest  of  Cypselus  it  was  the  rape,  not  the  poisait,
which  was  represented.  See  Welcker,  *  Boreas  und  Ordthyia,  AiUSet
Denkmdler^  3.  pp.  1 44-1 91  ;  Millin,  Peiniures  dc  Vases  Antiques^  2.  [15
(ed.  S.  Reinach);  G.  Perrot,  *L'enl^vementd'Orithyie,'3/4e'iiiM«tffi/!rGnEa,  I
1874,  pp.  29-52,  with  pL  2  ;  Roscher's  Z^urr^^Tif,  i.  p.  810  ;  Bamneisteh  *
Denkmdler^  P*  35i  ^QQ-  Pausanias  tells  us  that  in  this  scene  Boris
was  represented  with  the  tails  of  snakes  in  place  of  feet.  As  Boreas  is
never  so  represented  in  existing  works  of  ancient  art.  Prof.  C.  Robot
holds  that  Pausanias  must  have  been  mistaken,  and  that  the  snab^
footed  monster  was  not  Boreas  but  Typhon  (Hiller  de  Gaertringo,
De  Graecarum  fabuUs  ad  Thraces  pertinenHlmSy  p.  7  ^.)  But  tbs
view  is  rightly  rejected  by  Prof  Loeschcke  {Boreas  und  Oreitkyia  em
KyPseloskasteUy  Dorpat,  1886,  p.  i  sq.)  Boreas's  name  was  probably
inscribed  beside  him.

19.  I.  Geryon  is  three  men  joined  together.  In  archaic  Greek
art  Geryon  is  represented  in  two  different  ways.  One  type,  knoim
only  from  Chalcidian  vases,  exhibits  him  with  wings  and  a  single  pair
of  legs  supporting  a  triple  body ;  the  other  type,  represented  on  all  the
Attic  vases  which  deal  with  the  legend,  exhibits  him  without  wings  bat
with  three  complete  bodies,  including  the  legs  (G.  Loeschcke,  Bones
und  Oreitkyia  (Dorpat,  1886),  p.  5).  It  was  apparently  in  the  latter
way  that  he  was  portrayed  on  the  chest  of  Cypselus,  though  Mr.  Stuart
Jones,  in  his  restoration  of  the  chest,  has  adopted  the  former  (the
Chalcidian  type).  For  a  list  of  vases  on  which  the  subject  is  depicted
see  W.  Klein,  Euphroniosf  pp.  58-60.  On  Attic  vases  of  the  black-
figured  style  it  is  especially  common.  At  Golgoi  in  Cyprus  a  statue  and
two  statuettes  of  Geryon  were  found ;  all  of  them  represent  him  with
three  complete  human  bodies,  each  body  armed  with  a  shield,  bat
wingless  (Cesnola,  Cyprus ^  p.  155  sq.)  See  also  Roscher's  Lexikon,  i.
pp.  1630  sqq.y  2203  ;  Baumeister's  Denkmdlery  p.  662,  fi%,  729.

19.  I.  Theseus  with  a  lyre.  The  constellation  of  the  Lyre  had
been,  according  to  one  story,  the  lyre  of  Theseus  (Hyginus,  Asironom.
ii.  6).

19.  I.  Achilles  and  Menmon  are  fighting.  This  subject  was
represented  on  the  throne  of  Apollo  at  Amyclae  (Paus.  iii.  18.  1 2),  and
it  is  often  depicted  on  archaic  vases  (O.  Jahn,  Archdologische  Aufsatu,
p.  II,  note  26;  P.  J.  Meier,  in  Rheinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  37  (1882).
PP-  35^-353;  A.  Schneider,  Der  troische  Sagenkreis  in  der  dlUstn
griechischen  Kunsty  pp.  143-145).     See  also  v.  22.  2  note.

19.  2.  Hector  is  fighting  AJax  etc.  See  Homer,  Iliad,  vu
225  sqq,

19.  3.  the  Dioscuri,  one  of  them  beardless  stilL     On  two  vases

in  the  British  Museum  the  Dioscuri  are  depicted,  the  one  bearded,  the
other  beardless,  riding  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  two  horses,  of  which  one
is  black,  the  other  white  (W.  Watkiss  Lloyd,  in  Transactions  of  tk
Royal  Society  of  Literature^  Second  Series,  4(1853),  p.  293).

19.  3.  the  Dioscuri Helen  etc.      Dio  Chrysostom  mentions

that  he  saw  this  scene  upon  the  chest  of  Cypselus.     He  says :  **  I  have


CH.  XIX  THE  CHEST  OF  CYPSELUS  617

myself  seen  at  Olympia,  in  the  back-chamber  of  the  Temple  of  Hera,
a  memorial  of  that  rape  on  the  wooden  box  which  was  dedicated
by  Cypselus ;  I  saw  the  Dioscuri  with  Helen,  who  is  represented
treading  on  the  head  of  Aethra  and  tugging  at  her  hair ;  and  I  saw  an
inscription  carved  in  ancient  letters"  {Or,  xi.  vol.  1.  p.  179, ed.  Dindorf).
The  inscription  mentioned  by  Dio  Chrysostom  is,  of  course,  the  one
here  given  by  Pausanias.  As  to  the  legend,  see  note  on  i.  17.  5.
Homer  represents  Helen  as  waited  upon  at  Troy  by  Aethra  (Uiad^  iii.
144  ;  cp.  Hyginus,  Fab,  92).     See  x.  25.  8  note.

19.  4*  Iphidamas is  lying  on  tlie  ground  etc.     See  Homer,

Ilictd^  xi.  247  sqq,

19.  5.  Hermes  is  leading  to  Alexander the  goddesses.   The

judgment  of  Paris  is  very  often  depicted  on  vases.  See  Welcker,  *  Le
jugement  de  Paris,'  in  Annali  delV  InstiiutOy  17  (1845),  pp.  132-209;
Stephani,  in  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg),  1861,  p.  33  sqq. ;  Archae-
ologische  Zeiiung^  40  (1882),  pp.  209-2 14,  with  plate  1 1  ;  Miss  Harrison,
in  Jourrud  of  Hellenic  Studies^  7  (1886),  pp.  196-219 ;  Brunn,  in  Sit-
xungsberichte  d,  philos,  Classe  d,  k,  b,  Akad  d,  Wissen.  zu  Miinchen^
1887,  voL  2.  pp.  231-252.  Professor  Furtwangler  would  transpose  this
and  the  following  scene  (the  winged  Artemis)  on  grounds  of  symmetry,
in  order  that  Artemis  and  her  beasts  should  balance  Atalante  and  her
fawn,  each  of  the  two  scenes  being  thus  placed  in  corresponding  posi-
tions to  the  right  and  left  of  the  central  group  {Meisterwerke  der  griech,
Plastikj  p.  731).  The  transposition  was  first  suggested  by  H.  Brunn
{Rheinisches  Museum^  N.F.  5  (1847),  p.  338),  and  was  accepted  by
Overbeck  in  his  restoration  of  the  chest  of  Cypselus  ( Ueber  die  Lade
des  KypseloSy  p.  643).  But  the  reason  seems  hardly  sufficient  to  justify
us  in  departing  from  the  order  of  the  scenes  as  given  by  Pausanias.

19.  5.  Artemis  is  represented  with  wings  on  her  shoulders
etc.  This  type  of  Artemis  is  commonly  known  as  the  Asiatic  or
Persian  Artemis,  because  it  is  supposed  to  have  been  derived  from
representations  of  the  Persian  goddess  Anaitis  (see  J.  Langbehn,
FlUgelgestalten  der  dltesten  griech,  Kunst,  pp.  64-76  ;  E.  Curtius,  Gesam-
melie  Abhandl,  2.  p.  1 10  ;  Famell,  The  Cults  of  the  Greek  States ^  2.  p.
521  sq,)  But  this  derivation  is  doubtful  (£d.  Meyer,  in  Roscher's
Lexikon^  i.  p.  333).  Prof.  Studniczka  holds  that  the  type  is  purely
Greek,  and  he  argues  that  Cyrene,  the  divine  patroness  of  the  city  of
that  name,  was  a  deity  of  this  sort  (Kyrene^  eine  altgriechische  Gottin^
p.  153  sqq,)  At  all  events  the  type  was  adopted,  if  it  did  not  originate,
in  Greek  art  very  early,  as  is  proved  by  its  occurrence  on  the  chest  of
Cypselus  and  on  other  early  monmnents,  such  as  the  large  bronze  plate
found  at  Olympia  {Die  Ausgrabungen  von  Olympia^  3  (1877-1878),  pi.
xxiii.  ;  Die  Funde  von  Olympia^  pi.  xxvi. ;  Olympia  :  Ergebnisse^  Tafel-
band  4.  pL  xxxviii. ;  see  above,  p.  502),  gold  ornaments  found  in  the
ancient  necropolis  at  Camirus  in  Rhodes  (A.  Salzmann,  Nicropole  de
CamiroSy  pi.  i.),  the  Francois  vase  (Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  p.  132,
fig.  139,  and  pi.  Ixxiv.),  and  a  painted  Boeotian  casket  of  terra-cotta
(Jahrbuch  d.  arch,  Inst.  3  (1888),  p.  357).  On  one  of  the  so-called
Island  or  Mycenaean  gems  a  goddess  of  this  type  is  portrayed,  grasping


6i8  THE  CHEST  OF  CYPSELUS  bk.  v.  bus

a  great  bird  in  each  hand,  but  she  is  wingless  (A.  Milchhofer,  Dit
Anfdnge  der  Kunsty  p.  86 ;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  PArt  dam
PAntiquiti^  6.  p.  851).  For  a  fuller  list  of  the  monuments  on  iHiicfa
this  type  of  goddess  is  figured  see  Langbehn,  op,  ciL  p.  76  sqq,

19.  5.  Ajax  is  represented  dragging  Cassandra  finom  the  iniie
of  Athena.  This  scene  is  often  depicted  on  existing  works  of  ancient
art,  especially  on  vases.  See  Monumenti  Inediti^  11  (1878-83),  plate
XV.  ;  W.  Klein,  *  Ajace  e  Cassandra,'  AnnaU  delP  InsL  di  Con.
ArcheoL  49  (1877),  pp.  246-268;  Heydemann,  liiuperstSy  p.  34  sqq^
with  Taf.  ii.  i  and  2  ;  Michaelis,  in  Annali  delP  Institute^  52  (1880),
pp.  27-32;  Baumeister's  Denkm&ler^  fig.  795,  800,  801;  Joum.  ef
Hellenic  Studies^  5  (1884),  p.  234  sq,  \  A.  Schneider,  Der  trdsck
SagenkreiSy  p.  176  sqq.  It  is  also  represented  on  a  small  bronze  plate
found  at  Olympia  {Olympia :  Ergebnisse^  Tafelband  4.  pi.  xxxix.  Na
705  ;  id.y  Textband  4.  p.  104).  Arctinus  in  his  epic,  the  Sack  0J
Iliunty  told  how  Ajax,  in  attempting  to  drag  away  Cassandra,  pulkd
down  the  image  to  which  she  was  clinging.  See  Proclus,  in  EpUorum
Graecorum  fragmentay  ed.  Kinkel,  p.  49 ;  cp.  Paus.  x.  26.  3.

19.  6.  Polynices Eteocles.     The  combat  of  the  brothers  is

represented  on  Etruscan  sepulchral  urns.  See  Gazette  ArchMogiqwt^
7  (1881-82),  pp.  64-68;  Baumeister^s  Denkmdlery  p.  1760,  fig.  1841.
On  an  alabaster  urn,  represented  in  these  works,  the  two  brothers,
mortally  wounded,  have  sunk  to  the  ground,  while  beside  them  sits  the
Angel  of  Death,  a  winged  woman  with  a  drawn  sword.  The  artist  wbo
*made  the  chest  seems  to  have  borrowed  his  conception  of  the  grim
figure  of  Doom  from  the  Hesiodic  poem,  The  Shield  of  HercuUs^  in
which  {vv,  248  sqq.)  the  Dooms  {Keres)  are  described  as  hideous
creatures  with  white  teeth  and  great  daws,  who  drank  the  blood  of  the
slain  in  battle.

19.  7.  There  is  a  woman  in  a  grotto  etc.  As  to  representations
of  the  story  of  Ulysses  and  Circe  in  ancient  art,  see  O.  Jahn,  Archa-
ologische  Beitrage,  p.  401  sqq,  ;  Miss  Harrison,  Myths  of  the  Odyssey.
pp.  63-92  ;  Baumeister's  Denkntdlery  p.  781  sqq.  Pausanias's  inter-
pretation of  the  scenes  in  this  uppermost  band  on  the  chest  avowedly
rests  on  conjecture,  since  there  was  no  inscription  to  explain  them.
Modem  archaeologists  incline  to  accept  the  view,  first  put  forward
by  Prof.  Loeschcke,  that  the  subject  of  some  of  the  scenes  was  not
Ulysses  and  Circe,  etc.,  but  the  marriage  of  Peleus  and  Thetis  in  a
cave  on  Mt  Pelion,  with  a  train  of  Nereids  or  goddesses  approaching
in  chariots  and  bringing  the  heavenly  armour  as  a  wedding  present
to  the  bridegroom.  Prof.  Loeschcke  thinks  that  the  cave  in  which  the
man  and  woman  were  depicted  reclining  points  to  Peleus  and  Thetis,
who  were  married  on  Mt.  Pelion  (Euripides,  Iphig,  in  Aul.  704  sqq- ;
Schol.  on  Homer,  //.  xvi.  140;  Tzetzes,  SchoL  on  Lycophron^  178),
rather  than  to  Ulysses  and  Circe,  who  dwelt  in  an  enchanted  palace
(Homer,  Od.  x.  276,  340),  not  in  a  cave.  Further,  he  points  out  that
if  the  artist  had  intended  to  represent,  as  Pausanias  supposed,  the
bringing  of  the  armour  to  Achilles,  he  would  hardly  have  left  out
Achilles  himself.     The  divine  arms  which  the  gods  gave  to  Peleus  at


CH.  XIX  THE  CHEST  OF  CYPSELUS  619

his  marriage  and  which  Peleus  afterwards  gave  to  Achilles  (Homer,  //.
xvii.  194  sgq.)  are,  of  course,  to  be  distinguished  from  the  arms  which
Hephaestus  made  for  Achilles  after  the  death  of  Patroclus  (//.  xviii.
369  sqq.)  This  modem  interpretation  of  the  scenes  on  the  fifth  band
of  the  chest  is  confirmed  by  the  very  similar  representation  of  the
marriage  of  Peleus  and  Thetis  on  the  Francois  vase,  where  Thetis
is  depicted  seated  in  the  palace,  while  her  husband,  Peleus,  stands  in
front  of  it  receiving  a  long  train  of  gods  and  goddesses  who  are  seen
approaching,  some  in  chariots  and  some  on  foot,  headed  by  the  Centaur
Chiron  and  Iris  the  messenger  of  the  gods  (Baumeister's  Denkmdler^
fig*  1883)*  The  figures  on  the  Francois  vase,  unlike  those  on  this  part
of  the  chest  of  Cypselus,  have  their  names  inscribed  beside  them.  See
G.  Loeschcke,  ObservcUiones  archaeoiogicae  {Dor^dX^  1880),  p.  5  sqq.;
W.  Klein,  Zur  Kypsele  der  Kypselidetiy  p.  64  sq.  ;  A.  Schneider,  Der
troiscke  Sagenkrets  in  der  dltesten  griechischen  AV^ij/ (Leipzig,  1886),
p.  88  sqq,  ;  Furtwangler,  Meisterwerke  d.  griech.  Plastik,  p.  727  ;
Stuart  Jones,  mjoum.  of  Hellen.  Studies^  14  (1894),  p.  52  sq,

19.  7*  the  women are  doing  the  works  which  Homer  has

described.     See  Od.  x.  348  sqq.

19.  7-  a  Oentaur with  his  forelegs  those  of  a  man.     In

archaic  Greek  art  the  Centaurs  are  regularly  represented  with  the  fore-
legs of  a  man,  but  with  the  hindlegs  of  a  horse.  They  are  so  represented,
for  example,  on  an  archaic  black-figured  vase  {Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^
I  (1880),  pi.  i),  on  gold  ornaments  found  in  the  very  early  Greek  necro-
polis at  Camirus  in  Rhodes  (Salzmann,  Ndcropole  de  Camiros^  pi.  i.),
and  on  the  archaic  bronze  relief  found  at  Olympia,  which  has  been
repeatedly  referred  to  {Die  Funde  von  Olympia^  pi.  xxvi. ;  see  above,
p.  502).  The  composite  figure  thus  produced  is  excessively  ungainly ;
and  later  Greek  artists,  feeling  this,  gave  their  Centaurs  the  forelegs,
as  well  as  the  hindlegs,  of  a  horse.  The  gain  in  artistic  effect  was
inmiense.  Contrast  for  example  the  older  style  as  represented  in
Miiller-Wieseler,  Denkmdler^  2.  pi.  xlvii.  figs.  591,  592,  with  the  later
style  as  represented  by  figs.  594-598  on  the  same  plate.  Cp.  O.  Jahn,  |
Archdologiiche  Aufsdtze,  P-  ^3  ;  Baumeister's  Denkmdler,  pp.  775  sq.^^
I799i  fig-  1882  ;  S.  Colvin,  mJoum,  of  Hellen,  Stud,  i  (1880),  p.  127
sqq, ;  E.  H.  Meyer,  Gandharven-Kentaureny  p.  59  sqq,

19.  8.  chariots with  women  standing  in  them.      Pausanias

interpreted  these  women  as  Nereids,  and  apparently  supposed  that
they  were  represented  going  to  condole  with  Achilles  on  the  death
of  Patroclus,  as  described  by  Homer  (//.  xviii.  p.  65  sqq,)  Prof.
Loeschcke  interprets  them  as  Nereids  bringing  to  Peleus  at  his  wedding
the  divine  arms  which  the  gods  bestowed  on  him  (Homer,  //.  xvii.
194  sqq.)  At  the  same  time  he  admits  that  the  appearance  of  Nereids
in  chariots  is  otherwise  unexampled  in  art  and  literature  (Loeschcke,
Observationes  Archaeologicae^  p.  7  sq,)  To  meet  this  difficulty  Mr.  A.
Schneider  suggests  that  the  women  in  the  chariots  drawn  by  winged
steeds  were  not  Nereids  but  goddesses  {Der  troiscke  Sagenkreis  in  der
dltesten  griechischen  Kunst^  P-  89  sqq,)

19.  8.  Thetis receiving  t^  arms  from  Hephaestus.     On  a


620  THE  CHEST  OF  CYPSELUS  bk.  v.  ujs

vase  of  Camirus  we  see   Thetis  depicted  with  the  arms  of  AchiDes
{Monumtnti  InediU^  ii  (1878-83),  tav.  viii.)

19.  9.  the  maidens  in  the  mnle-car  etc  Pausanias's  interpna-
tion  of  these  maidens  as  Nausicaa  and  one  of  her  attendants  driving  to
the  washing-tanks  (see  Homer,  Od,  vi.  72  sqq.)  is  rejected  by  Pro£  W.
Klein,  who  holds  that  they  were  more  probably  guests  on  their  way  to
the  wedding  of  Peleus  and  Thetis  (Zur  KypseU  der  Kypselidtny  pi
64  j^.)  Prof.  Klein's  view  is  accepted  by  Prof.  Furtwangler  (Mastth
t  werke  d.  griech,  Plasiik^  p.  727)  and  Mr.  Stuart  Jones  {Joum,  ofHdkn
Studies^  14  (1894),  p.  53),  but  rejected  by  Mr.  A.  Schneider  {fkr
troische  Sagenkreis^  P-  65  sqq^  and  Prof.  Loeschcke  {MittheiL  d  ank
Inst  in  Athen^  19  (1894),  p.  513  note),  who  think  it  unlikely  (i)thit
some  of  the  wedding  guests  should  have  had  only  mules  to  draw  then,
while  others  had  winged  horses,  and  (2)  that  the  artist  would  havt
interposed  the  two  standing  figures  of  Hephaestus  and  his  attendant  is
the  middle  of  a  procession  of  chariots.

19.  9.  The  man  shooting  at  Oentanrs  etc  Cp.  note  on  §  7>
The  subject  of  Hercules  fighting  the  Centaurs  is  depicted  on  the  same
archaic  vase,  published  by  Micali,  and  described  by  O.  Jahn,  on  iriud
is  painted  the  parting  of  Amphiaraus  and  Eriphyle  (O.  Jahn,  Ankat-
logische  Aufsdtzey  p.  154  j^. ;  see  above,  note  on  v.  17.  7).  As  the
latter  scene  was  apparently  copied  from  the  chest  of  Cypsehis,  so
probably  was  the  former.  The  same  scene  (Hercules  shooting  at  a
Centaur)  is  represented  on  the  archaic  bronze  relief  found  at  Olympia,
to  which  reference  has  repeatedly  been  made  (Die  AusgrcJmngen  v»
Olympioy  3  (1877-78),  pi.  xxiii. ;  Die  Funde  von  Olympioy  Tafd  xxvi;
Olympia :  Ergebnisse,  Tafelband  4,  pi.  xxxviii.  ;  see  above,  p.  502).

19.  10.  Eumelns.     See  ii.  i.  i  note;  and  above,  p.  606.

20.  I.  On  the  quoit  of  Iphitns  is  inscribed  the  tmce  etc.  See
V.  4.  5  sq. ;  v.  8.  5.  Aristotle  referred  to  the  quoit  of  Iphitns  as
evidence  of  the  date  of  Lycurgus,  who  is  said  to  have  joined  with
Iphitus  in  instituting  or  reviving  the  Olympic  games  (Plutarch,  Lycurgus^
I  and  23).  If  the  tradition  is  to  be  trusted,  the  inscription  on  the
quoit  could  not  be  later  than  776  B.c.  It  would  thus  be  the  oldest
Greek  inscription  of  which  we  have  any  record.  Cp.  Hicks,  Greek
historical  inscriptions,  p.  i  sq,

20.  2.  Oolotes.  According  to  Pliny  (A';  H,  xxxiv.  87,  xxxv.  54)
Colotes  was  a  pupil  of  Phidias  and  helped  him  with  his  great  statue
of  Zeus  at  Olympia.

20.  2.  Pasiteles.  See  Critical  Note,  voL  i.  p.  586  sq.  This
sculptor  Pasiteles  is  otherwise  unknown.  He  is  not,  of  course,  to  be
confounded  with  the  well-known  sculptor  of  the  same  name  who
flourished  in  the  first  century  B.C.  As  to  the  latter  Pasiteles,  see
especially  Prof.  Waldstein,  in  American  Journal  of  Archa€ology,  3
(1887),  p.  I  sqq.

20.  3.  Contest.     As  to  this  personification  see  v.  26.  3  note.

20.  4.  the  battle  which  the  Eleans  fought  against  the  Lacedse-
monians.     Cp.  v.  27.  11  note.

20.  6.  the  house  of  Oenomans.     Cp.  v.  14.  7.     There  are  some


CH.  XX  THE  METROUM  621

considerable  foundations  between  the  pedestal  of  Dropion  and  the
pedestal  of  the  Eretrian  bull  (see  plan).  As  their  situation  agrees
with  the  description  of  Pausanias,  it  has  been  conjectured  that  these  foun-
dations may  have  formed  part  of  the  house  of  Oenomaus  (Curtius
und  Adler,  Olympia  und  Umgegendy  p.  40  ;  Flasch,  *  Olympia,'  in
Baumeister's  Denkmdler,  p.  1074).  Mr.  Wernicke,  on  the  other  hand,
believes  that  the  large  oval  depression  which  is  commonly  identified  as
the  site  of  the  great  altar  of  Zeus  (v.  1 3.  8  note),  was  in  reality  the  site
of  the  house  of  Oenomaus  {Jahrduch  d,  arch,  Inst,  9  (1894),  p.  93).

20.  8.  A  Roman  senator dug  to  make  a  foundation  etc.

It  has  been  conjectured  that  the  senator  in  question  was  Lucius
Minicius  Natalis,  who  won  a  victory  in  the  chariot -race  at  Olympia
in  01.  227  (129  A.D.)  and  dedicated  a  chariot  in  commemoration  of
his  success.  Two  of  the  blocks  of  the  large  pedestal  which  supported
the  chariot  were  found  at  Olympia  in  1878  built  into  a  Byzantine
wall  in  the  Wrestling -School.  See  Die  Inschriften  von  Olympia^  No.
236;  W.  Gurlitt,  Ueber  Pausanias^  p.  421.

20.  9.  A  sxnall  temple  Metronm.     The  remains  of  this

temple  stand  at  the  southern  foot  of  Mount  Cronius,  to  the  east  of  the
Heraeum,  and  just  beside  the  terrace  on  which  are  the  treasuries.  The
temple  was  demolished  in  the  Byzantine  period,  and  the  materials  were
used  to  build  the  fortification-wall,  which  ran  from  the  temple  of  Zeus
to  the  South  Colonnade.  These  substantial  walls,  10  feet  thick,  were
taken  down  by  the  German  excavators  for  the  sake  of  the  sculptures,
inscribed  stones,  and  architectural  fragments  which  they  contained.
Of  the  Metroum  the  foundations,  consisting  of  three  courses  of  squared
blocks,  are  in  large  part  preserved,  and  at  the  north-west  comer  the
three  steps  which  originally  ran  all  round  the  temple  are  preserved  for
a  short  distance ;  here,  too,  are  standing  a  single  drum  of  a  colunm
and  a  small  piece  of  another.  These  are  all  the  standing  remains  of
the  temple,  but  from  them  and  the  fragments  of  the  entablature  which
have  been  discovered  built  into  the  Byzantine  wall  it  is  possible  to
judge  of  the  general  plan  of  the  building.  The  temple  was  only  20.67
metres  long  by  10.62  metres  broad.  It  was  of  the  Doric  order  and
was  surrounded  by  a  colonnade  containing  six  columns  at  each  of  the
narrow  ends  and  eleven  at  each  of  the  long  sides.  The  columns,  like
the  rest  of  the  building,  were  of  common  stone,  but  they  were  coated
with  fine  stucco ;  they  have  twenty  flutes.  Their  lower  diameter  was
.85  metre;  their  upper  diameter  was  .65  metre.  The  echinus  of  the
capitals  is  very  low  and  almost  straight.  Instead  of  the  usual  rings
under  the  capital  there  is  a  single  undercutting,  which  may  have  held  a
metal  ring.  A  frieze  of  triglyphs  and  metopes  ran  round  the  temple,
and  there  was  a  gable  at  each  of  the  narrow  ends.  The  roof  was  of
terra-cotta.  The  height  of  the  temple  cannot  have  much  exceeded  7.50
metres.  The  floor  of  the  colonnade,  so  far  as  it  exists,  is  composed  of
pebbles,  but  in  so  rough  a  fashion  that  it  probably  formed  part  of  a  late
restoration.  The  temple  itself  as  distinct  from  the  colonnade  which
surrounded  it,  consisted  of  a  cella^  with  a  fore-temple  {pronaos)  at  one
end  and  a  back-chamber  {ppisthodomos)  at  the  other,  but  the  exact


622  ME TROUM— PHILIPPE UM  bk.  v.  eus

measurements  and  disposition  of  these  various  compartments  cannot
now  be  ascertained.  It  is  not  even  certain  whether  the  compartment
at  the  east  end  was  the  fore-temple  or  the  back-chamber ;  in  other
words,  whether  the  temple  faced  east  or  west ;  but  judging  by  analogy
we  may  suppose  that  it  £^ced  east.  Remains  and  traces  of  foundation-
walls  within  the  celia  seem  to  show  that  there  was  a  row  of  colunms  on
each  side  of  it  The  ceiling  of  the  temple  seems  to  have  been  of  wood ;
at  least  no  remains  of  a  stone  ceiling  have  been  found.  Considerable
vestiges  of  colour  have  been  preserved  on  the  architectural  fragments ;
for  example,  red  and  blue  leaves  can  be  seen  on  the  geison^  bright  blue
on  the  triglyphs,  and  red  on  the  architrave.  In  the  parts  of  the  walls
which  rise  above  the  ground  the  stones  are  held  together  with  f— f
shaped  iron  clamps  run  with  lead ;  in  the  foundations  clamps  are  not
employed.  Iron  dowels  were  not  used  in  the  walls  to  bind  the  upper
and  lower  stones  together ;  but  large  wooden  dowels  served  to  hold
together  the  drums  of  the  columns.

From  the  style  of  the  architecture  the  Metroum  appears  to  have
been  built  in  the  first  half  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  That  it  is  later
than  the  temple  of  Zeus  and  the  Parthenon  is  proved  by  the  shape  of
the  capitals ;  and  that  it  is  older  than  the  Philippeum,  which  was  built
in  the  second  half  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.,  is  proved  by  the  clamps
employed  in  it,  which  are  of  the  older  pattern  ( (i^  )  as  distinguished
from  the  later  pattern  (  ^—^ )  employed  in  the  Philippeum  and  in
buildings  of  the  Roman  period.  In  Roman  times,  as  we  learn  firom
Pausanias,  statues  of  the  emperors  were  set  up  in  it,  and  some  of  these
statues  were  actually  found  by  the  Germans  lying  on  the  foundations ;
they  include  a  statue  of  Claudius  tricked  out  with  the  attributes  of
Zeus,  and  a  statue  of  Titus  in  imperial  garb.

See  Olympia:  Ergebnisse^  Tafelband  i.  plates  xxiv.-xxvi. ;  iVf.,  Tafelband  3.
pi.  Ix.  ;  W.  Dcirpfeld,  in  Olympia :  Ergebnissty  Textband  2.  pp.  37-40 ;  Die
Atisgrabungen  zu  Olympia^  3  (1877-1878),  p.  13,  with  pi.  xix. ;  «//.,  4  (1878-1879),
pp.  33-35,  with  pi.  xxxii. ;  Die  Funde  von  0/ympia,  pi.  xxxvi.  ;  Curtius  und
Adler,  Olympia  und  Umgegend^  p.  36  ;  A.  Botticher,  Olympiad  p.  382  iqq- :
Flasch,  *  Olympia,'  in  Baumeister's  Dcnkmdler^  p.  1 104  sqq. ;  Baedeker,'  p.  344*

20.  9.  a  round  building  named  the  Philippeum.  This  building
stood  within  the  Altis,  near  its  north-western  comer,  to  the  west  of  the
Heraeum  and  to  the  south  of  the  Prytaneum.  Only  the  foundations
were  found  standing.  They  consist  of  two  concentric  rings  of  hewn
blocks  of  shell-limestone.  The  inner  ring  is  composed  of  a  single,  the
outer  ring  of  a  triple,  line  of  these  blocks.  The  blocks  of  each  ring
are  clamped  together.  Besides  these  foundations  a  great  many  archi-
tectural fragments  belonging  to  the  building  have  been  found  scattered
about  or  built  into  other  structures.  It  hence  appears  that  the  Philip
peum  was  a  circular  building  raised  upon  three  steps  of  Parian  marble,
and  adorned  on  the  outside  with  a  circular  colonnade  of  eighteen  slender
Ionic  columns,  which  supported  an  entablature  and  a  cornice.  The
columns  and  entablature  were  of  fine-grained  poros  stone  coated  with  a
fine  yellowish  stucco ;  the  cornice  (sima)  and  ante-fixes  were  of  Parian
marble.     The  roof  was  covered  with  marble  tiles.     The  diameter  of


CH.  XXI  THE  PHILIPPEUM  623

the  building,  measured  on  the  top  step,  was  15.25  metres.  Round  the
circular  wall  of  the  interior  there  were,  on  the  inside,  twelve  engaged
Corinthian  columns,  each  with  ten  flutes,  but  without  any  base.  Above
these  engaged  columns  there  was  apparently  another  set  of  twelve  smaller
engaged  coliunns,  which  supported  the  roof  of  the  circular  chamber
at  a  higher  level  than  the  roof  of  the  outer  colonnade ;  but  of  these
upper  engaged  columns  no  remains  have  been  found.  In  this  circular
chamber  were  the  five  statues  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  Eight  blocks
of  the  pedestal  which  supported  them  have  been  found.  The  marble  is
Parian.  The  pedestal  was  in  the  shape  of  a  segment  of  a  circle,  the
segment  being  rather  more  than  a  third  of  a  circle  of  4.50  metres
diameter.  The  circumference  was  concentric  with  the  wall  of  the
chamber.  Four  out  of  the  five  upper  blocks  of  the  pedestal  have  been
discovered,  with  the  holes  in  which  the  statues  were  fastened.  From
these  holes  it  appears  that  the  statues  were  all  standing  figures,  not
larger  than  life.

It  has  been  conjectured  that  the  Philippeum  was  built  by  Alexander
the  Great  rather  than  by  Philip  himself  The  grounds  for  this  view  are,
first,  that  the  interval  between  the  battle  of  Chaeronea  (2nd  August,
338  B.C)  and  the  death  of  Philip  (336  B.C.)  is  too  short  to  allow  for  the
construction  of  the  building,  with  its  five  statues  of  gold  and  ivory,  all
the  work  of  one  man ;  and,  second,  that  the  statue  of  Olympias,  the
divorced  wife  of  Philip,  could  not  have  been  set  up  by  Philip  himself,
but  might  well  have  been  set  up  by  the  filial  piety  of  her  son,  Alexander.
Perhaps  the  most  probable  view  is  that  the  building  was  begun  by
I  Philip  and  finished  by  Alexander  before  he  set  out  on  his  career  of
conquest  in  Asia.

See  Olympia:  Ergebnisse^  Tafelband  2.  plates  Ixxix.-lxxxii ;  F.  Adler,
in  Olympia:  Ergehntsse,  Textband  2.  pp.  128-133;  Die  Ausgrabungen  zu
Olympia^  3  (1877- 1878),  p.  29,  with  pi.  xxxv.  ;  Curtius  und  Adler,  Olympia  und
Umgegendf  p.  39 ;  A  Botticher,  Olympiad  p.  358  sqq,  ;  Flasch,  '  Olympia,'  in
Baumeister's />^»i/;i^iSfr,  p.  11 04  a;  Baedeker,'  p.  343;  G.  Treu,  in  ArchiUh
logische  Zeitungy  40  (1882),  pp.  66-70.

20.  10.  These  are  also  by  Leochares  etc.  See  note  on  v.  17.  4,
*  other  statues  of  gold  and  ivory.'  Prof.  v.  Duhn  suggested  that  a  very
graceful  statue  in  the  Museo  Torlonia,  representing  a  lady  seated,  might
be  a  marble  copy  of  Leochares's  gold-and-ivory  statue  of  Olympias
(Annali  deW  InsHtuto^  51  (1879),  pp.  176-200;  Monumenti  Inediti^  11
(1879- 1 883),  tav.  xi.)  But  an  examination  of  the  pedestal  in  the  Philip-
peum seems  to  show  that  Olympias  was  represented  standing  (G.  Treu,
in  Archdolog.  Zeitung^  40  (1882),  pp.  66-70).

21.  I.  the  statues  and  the  dedicatory  offerings  etc.  From  this
passage,  compared  with  25.  i,  we  see  that  Pausanias  regarded  the
statues  of  the  athletes  in  the  Altis  as  in  no  sense  religious  offerings
dedicated  to  the  god,  but  merely  as  marks  of  honour  bestowed  on  the
victorious  athletes.  His  view  is  to  a  certain  extent  borne  out  by  the
inscriptions  of  the  earlier  statues  of  victors  which  have  been  discovered  ;
for  in  these  inscriptions  (with  the  exception  of  a  few  metrical  ones)  there
is  no  mention  of  a  dedication.     But  in  inscriptions  from  the  first  cen-


624  "^^^  ZANES  BK.  V.  BUS


tury  B.C  onward  the  formula  of  dedication  to  Zens  r^ularly  occurs.
The  distinction,  therefore,  which  Patisanias  makes  between  dedicatory
offerings  and  the  statues  of  victors,  though  it  did  not  hold  good  in  his
own  time,  may  possibly  have  held  good  before  the  Roman  period.  It
would  appear,  therefore,  that  he  got  the  distinction,  not  firom  his  own
observation,  but  from  some  older  writer.  See  A.  Furtwangler,  in
Mitthiil.  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Atken^  5  (1S80X  p.  29  sqq.  Prof.  Reisch,oii
the  other  hand,  argues  that  everything  within  the  sacred  Aids  most
always  have  been  regarded  as  dedicated  to  the  god,  and  that  if  the
earlier  inscriptions  do  not  mention  the  dedication,  this  is  only  a  conse-
quence of  their  studious  brevity.  See  £.  Reisch,  Grieckische  IVMgi-
schenke  (Wien,  1890),  p.  35  sqq.

21.  2.  At  the  terrace  stand  bnmie  images  of  Zens.  The  sixteen
bases  of  these  images  were  found,  and  they  still  stand,  exactly  where
Pausanias  says  they  were,  that  is  at  the  foot  of  the  terrace  which  sup-
ported the  treasuries,  on  the  left-hand  side  as  you  go  firom  the  Metroum
to  the  entrance  into  the  stadium.  It  has  been  pointed  out  that  the
situation  of  these  images,  erected  out  of  the  fines  imposed  on  athletes
who  had  transgressed  the  rules,  was  well  chosen :  they  were  the  last
objects  which  the  competitors  in  the  games  saw  before  they  entered  the
stadium,  and  the  sight  might  well  warn  them  against  resorting  to  unfair
means  of  securing  the  prize.  See  K.  Puigold,  in  Olymfna  :  Ergebmsst,
Textband  2.  pp.  1 51-153;  Die  Funde  von  Olympia^  p.  24;  Flasch,
'Olympia,*  in  Baumeister's  DenkmdUr^  p.  1090.

21.  3.  Two  of  the  images  are  by  Oleon  of  Sicyon.  The  inscrip-
tion on  the  base  of  one  of  these  images  was  found  lying  beside  the
second  base  from  the  west  It  is  cut  on  a  block  of  black  limestone,  and
runs  thus  :  KAicov  SiKvcuviof  €[7ro7;o'€v],  "  Cleon  the  Sicyonian  made  (it)."
From  the  marks  on  the  top  of  the  block  it  appears  that  the  image  was
about  life  size,  and  that  it  rested  on  the  right  foot,  while  the  left  foot
was  drawn  back  and  only  touched  the  ground  with  the  toes.  This
attitude  seems  to  have  been  characteristic  of  all  the  Zane^  or  images  of
Zeus  which  were  erected  out  of  fines  imposed  on  athletes.  See  Dit
Inschriften  von  Olympia^  No.  637  ;  K.  Purgold,  in  Olympia :  Ergeb-
nisse,  Textband  2.  p.  152  ;  Archdologische  Zeitung^  37  (1879),  p.  146;
Loewy,  Inschriften  griech.  Bildhatur^  No.  95.  As  to  the  sculptor
Cleon,  see  v.  17.  3  sq.  ;  and  for  other  works  of  his,  see  Index.  His
date  is  determined  by  the  statement  of  Pausanias  that  the  images  in
question  were  set  up  01.  98  (388  B.C.)     Cp.  note  on  vi.  8.  5.

21.  9.  Strato,  an  Alexandrian.  Cp.  vii.  23.  5.  He  is  called
Stratonicus  by  Eusebius.  His  father's  name  was  Corrhagus,  and  he
came  of  a  good  and  wealthy  family.  At  first  he  practised  athletic  exer-
cises only  for  the  sake  of  his  health,  as  he  suffered  from  a  malady  of
the  spleen.  In  addition  to  his  double  Olympic  victory  in  Ol.  178
(68  B.C.)  he  won  another  victory  at  Olympia  in  01.  179  (64  B,c.),  four
prizes  at  Nemea  on  the  same  day,  and  prizes  at  the  Pythian  and
Nemean  games.  See  Aelian,  Var.  Hist.  iv.  15  ;  Eusebius,  Chronic,  vol
I.  p.  2 1 1,  ed.  Schone  ;  Anecdota  Graeca  e  codd,  Biblioth.  Reg.  Parisiensis^
ed.  Cramer,  2.  p.  154.


CH.  XXI


THE  ZANES


625


21.  9-  a  small  Egyptian  town,  Bhacotis.  It  retained  its  name  as
a  quarter  of  Alexandria,  comprising  the  part  of  the  city  above  the  docks
(Strabo,  xvii.  p.  792).  A  great  temple  of  Serapis  was  afterwards  built
in  it  (Tacitus,  Hist.  iv.  84).  Cp.  Pliny,  N,  H,  v.  62  ;  Stephanus
Byzantius,  s,v,  'PaKwrijs.

21.  10.  to  have  won  the  crown  of  wild  olive  both  for  the  i>an-
czatinm  and  for  wrestling.  This  was  regarded  as  a  very  high  and
special  distinction,  because  Hercules  was  said  to  have  been  victorious  in
both  these  contests  (v.  8.  4).  Hence  in  the  list  of  Olympic  victors  a
special  note  was  made  of  the  men  who  had  won  prizes  both  for  the
pancratium  and  wrestling,  and  they  were  numbered  from  Hercules  (*  the
second  from  Hercules,*  *  the  third  from  Hercules,'  and  so  on).  There
were  only  seven  of  them  in  all,  down  to  the  time  of  Eusebius  (fourth
century  a.d.)  Their  names  are  all  recorded  by  Pausanias  in  the
present  passage.  The  dates  of  their  victories,  as  recorded  by  Eusebius
(Chronic,  vol.  i.  pp.  209-215,  ed.  Schone)  were  as  follows:  Caprus  of
Elis  in  OL  142  (212  B.c)  ;  Aristomenes  of  Rhodes  in  01.  156  (156  B.C.)  ;
Protophanes  of  Magnesia  on  the  Maeander  in  01.  172  (92  B.C.)  ;  Strato
or  Stratonicus  of  Alexandria  in  01.  178  (68  B.C.)  ;  Marion  of  Alexandria
in  01.  182  (52  B.C.) ;  Aristeas  of  Stratonicea  in  01.  198  (13  A.D.) ;  and
Nicostratus  of  Aegeae  in  Cilicia  in  Ol.  204  (37  a.d.)  After  this  last
date  the  Elean  umpires,  for  some  reason  unknown  to  us,  refused  to  allow
athletes  to  enter  for  both  events  (Eusebius,  Chronic,  vol.  i.  p.  215  sq,
ed.  Schone).  Two  athletes  are  known  to  have  entered  their  names  for
both  contests  but  were  disqualified.  They  were  Socrates  in  01.  232
(149  A.D.)  (Eusebius,  Chronic,  vol.  i.  p.  218,  ed.  Schone)  and  Aurelius
Aelix  or  Helix,  in  the  reign  of  Severus,  perhaps  in  Ol.  250  (221  A.D.)
(Dio  Cassius,  Ixxix.  10 ;  Philostratus,  Heroica^  iii.  13  ;  Anecdota  Graeca
e  codd,  Bibl,  Reg,  ed.  Cramer,  2.  p.  155).  On  the  latter  occasion,  in
order  that  Helix  might  not  be  *  the  eighth  from  Hercules,'  the  Eleans
refused  to  allow  any  wrestling  to  take  place,  though  it  was  one  of  the
competitions  which  they  had  advertised  on  the  white  notice-board  (Dio
Cassius,  Lc)  However  Helix  won  in  the  pancratium  (Philostratus,  Lc,\
and  in  the  Capitolian  games  at  Rome  he  won  both  in  the  pancratium
and  wrestling — a  feat  which  no  one  had  ever  performed  there  before
(Dio  Cassius,  I.e.)  Cp.  G.  H.  Forster,  Die  Sieger  in  den  olympischen
Spieletiy  2  Teil,  pp.  9,  12  j^.,  19  j*^.,  21.

21.  10.  Capms  of  Elis.     Cp.  vi.  15.  4  and  10.

21.  10.  Protophanes  of  Maisnesia  on  the  Lethaens.  Cp.  i.  35.  6.
The  Lethaeus  is  a  tributary  of  the  Maeander;  hence  Magnesia  was
sometimes  described  as  on  the  Maeander,  though  in  fact  it  was  much
nearer  the  Lethaeus  (Strabo,  xii.  p.  554,  xiv.  p.  647).

21.  10.  Stratonicea Ohrysaoris.     This  was  a  city  founded

by  the  Macedonians  in  Caria.  Near  the  town  was  a  sanctuary  of  Zeus
of  the  Golden  Sword  (Chrysaoris)^  where  the  Carians  met  to  offer
sacrifice  and  hold  national  councils.  The  confederacy  which  held  its
diet  at  the  sanctuary  was  known  as  the  League  of  the  Golden  Sword ;
the  members  of  the  diet  had  votes  proportioned  to  the  number  of
villages  which  they  represented.     See  Strabo,  xiv.  p.  660.     Eski-hissar^

VOL.  Ill  2  s


626


THE  ZANES


T.  BB


occapying  the  site  of  the  ancient  city,  ^is  a
scattered  among  woody  hills,  eni-iioned  by  faage  mocntahis :  one  of
vdiich,  toward  the  south-west,  has  its  smnmxt  as  vbhe  as  rhalk  It  ii
watered  by  a  limpid  and  li\-ely  rill,  with  rasrai^  Tbe  she  is
with  marble  fragments.  Some  shafts  of  oohmms  ane  scaadzc^
(Chandler,  Travels  in  Asia  Mincr^  "^  191)^  Here  Oiaiidjer  fooDda
inscription  in  which  Zeus  of  the  Golden  Swtxd  vms  twice  mentioori

(P-  «93)-

21.  la  mcostnitiis only  a  GOidaa  im  www      His  &dxn

name  was  Isidotus  (Lucian,   Quomodo  kist,  ctmscw.    izy


tells  us  that  in  his  youth  he  saw  Nicostraxns.  thea  as  oU  xnan    M

strength  (Didi

EiSiae  becanse,a

scAd  in  hisfonk

m

.  p.  676  :  TadtB.


ToEa^


OnU.  iL  8.  14).     Tacitus  refers  to  Nicostrams's  ^
oratcribuSy  10).     Nicostratus  was  a  Cilician  only  in
Pausanias  explains,  he  was  a  native  of  Phrygia.  be:
to  a  purchaser  at  A^eae,  a  town  in  Cilida  (Stxaba
AnmaiSy  xiiL  8).

21.  15.  had  made  a  priTate  monsUiy
readers  it  is  probably  needless  to  explain  tbe  naxme  of  this  peumiiiy
transaction.  The  match  was  sold,  as  many  boxing  matcbes  haie  bca
sold  before  and  since.  It  seems,  howerer,  that  tbe  passage  has  beat
much  discussed  in  Germany.  The  late  ProC  Sdinban,  wiio  devtued  1
laborious  life  to  the  study  of  Pausanias,  was  of  opinkm
not  content  with  the  prize,  agreed  that  the  loser  sboold  make  the
a  present  of  a  sum  of  money.  Surely  in  that  case  tibese  jgciieam
should  have  been  rewarded  rather  than  punished.  Srbcbart  nDghi  hut
gathered  the  nature  of  the  agreement  from  d>e  nex:  sectsoo  of  da
chapter.  The  practice  of  selling  a  match  is  spoken  of  by  Pbfksoass
as  if  it  were  not  uncommon,  and  he  mentions  a  \iery  giarxng  case  *Im
arte  gymnastic a^  45!-

21.  17-  the  Coloimade  of  Eeha  This  was  =3  docbc  ibe  pec
colonnade  which  occupied  neariy  the  whole  eastern  sSde  of  :bc  Ahi
from  the  entrance  of  the  stadium  on  the  north  to  the  Socib-Eas::  Bcildstf
on  the  south.  Only  the  foundations  of  the  walls.  toseTKber  wrti  a  «»
of  the  beautiful  marble  steps,  arc  standing,  bet  laaay  arciracnn!
fragments  were  found  buili  into  the  East  Byxantinc  waZ_  Tbe  coksasas
formed  a  rectangle  about  98  metres  long  by  12.50  nsecrts  oeepL  I:
opened  west^-ard,  for  on  this  side  the  foundation-wall  is  tnaoe  esriedil^^
thick  (2  metres)  to  support  the  columns,  and  on  this  s>ce  T^y*^  art
remains  (especially  at  the  north  end)  of  the  steps  wbicb  ied  13  »  1


The  steps,  as  well  as  the  stylobate,  are  of  a  coarse-graiaed  mbl:e  =ii
and  are  \-er\*  carefiillv  iointed.  None  of  the  co!nn>rs  is  scaac::;;.  is
dowel-marks  on  the  st>-Iobaie  at  regular  intervals  of  2. 1 5  zaecjcs  prrrc  it
the  colonnade  had  ori^inaily  fort>--four  colunms  in  front,  w^ti  two  r»
one  at  each  end.  These  columns  ^-ere  of  the  Doric  ocxier,  w
flutes  ;  many  of  the  drums  and  capitals,  as  well  as  pieces  oc  t^  ertato-
turc  belonging  to  then?.,  were  found  in  the  East  Bx-saati-e  ^riT.  Tbe
sima  (projeaing  ^g^  of  the  roof)  was  adorned  with  Ixscs  beads  k
regular  inten-als.  The  condition  of  the  columns  and  e:itibuar=re  s5sj«s
that  in  late  Romar.  times,  after  the  age  of  Hadrian,  tbe  ^^-a-T^  jc  se


rH.  XXI  THE  ECHO  COLONNADE  627

colonnade  was  remodelled ;  the  flutes  of  the  columns  were  knocked  off ;
the  distances  between  the  columns,  measured  from  axis  to  axis,  were
reduced  from  2. 1 5  m.  to  2.06  m.  or  2.07  m. ;  and  consequently  two
columns  were  added,  making  the  total  number  of  columns  forty-six
instead  of  forty-four.  The  lions'  heads  on  the  sitna  of  the  remodelled
colonnade  were  much  inferior  to  the  old  ones.  Besides  this  outer  row
of  columns  there  was  an  inner  row  running  down  the  length  of  the
colonnade,  but  only  a  few  of  the  foundations  of  these  inner  columns  are
left.  As  these  foundations  consist  almost  entirely  of  architectural
fragments  taken  from  older  buildings,  and  are  distributed  at  irregular
intervals,  it  would  seem  that  this  inner  line  of  colmnns  dates  from  the
reconstruction  of  the  colonnade ;  whether  the  colonnade  had  originally
an  inner  line  of  columns  or  not,  we  cannot  say.  In  the  Byzantine  wall
were  found  a  number  of  Corinthian  columns  which  had  been  rudely
converted  into  Doric  columns  ;  Dr.  Ddrpfeld  inclines  to  think  that  these
belonged  to  the  inner  line  of  columns  of  the  Echo  Colonnade.

The  architectural  style  of  the  Echo  Colonnade  resembles  so  closely
that  of  the  Philippeum  (see  above,  p.  622  sq.)  that  the  two  buildings  were
probably  contemporary  or  nearly  so.  Among  the  points  of  resemblance
between  the  two  are  the  fine  and  careful  style  of  the  steps  and  the
stylobate ;  the  use  of  a  coarse-grained  white  marble  for  the  steps,  and
oiporos  for  the  rest  of  the  building ;  the  employment  of  strong  wooden
dowels,  without  lead,  to  bind  the  columns  to  the  stylobate,  and  of  iron
clamps  of  the  |  |  shape  to  hold  together  the  blocks  of  which  the

steps  were  built.  Hence  the  Echo  Colonnade  was  probably  built  in  the
second  half  of  the  fourth  century  B.C

At  the  back  of  the  Echo  Colonnade  were  found  the  remains  of  an
older  colonnade  running  parallel  to  the  former.  This  older  colonnade
was  about  1 00  metres  long  by  9  metres  deep.  Like  the  Echo  Colonnade
it  was  double,  that  is,  it  had  two  rows  of  columns,  an  outer  and  an
inner,  extending  throughout  its  whole  length.  Of  this  older  colonnade
there  are  preserved  the  back  wall  (which  formed  at  the  same  time  the
eastern  boundary  of  the  Altis),  the  two  short  side  walls,  and  eleven
foundations  of  the  inner  row  of  columns.  This  older  colonnade  would
seem  to  have  been  built  in  the  fifth  century  B.C,  shortly  after  the  temple
of  Zeus,  for  two  architectural  pieces  of  that  temple,  rejected  by  the
builders,  have  been  found  built  into  the  older  colonnade.  Apparently
the  older  colonnade  was  pulled  down  when  the  new  one  was  built,  a
little  farther  to  the  west ;  it  is  conjectured  that  this  destruction  may
have  been  necessitated  by  the  raising  of  the  western  embankment  of  the
stadium  (see  below,  note  on  vi.  20.  8).

Dr.  Ddrpfeld  suggests  that  the  pictures  mentioned  by  Pausanias
may  have  been  painted  on  the  walls,  not  of  the  newer  Echo  Colonnade,
but  of  the  older  colonnade  at  its  back  ;  and  that  hence  it  was  this  older
colonnade  alone  which  had  a  right  to  the  title  *  the  Painted  Colonnade,'
though  that  title  was  transferred  in  popular  parlance  to  the  newer  Echo
Colonnade  which  took  its  place.  Both  colonnades  may  have  been
built  to  serve  as  a  place  of  shelter  for  the  spectators  in  rainy  weather.
The  long  Colonnade  of  Eumenes  at  Athens  served  a  similar  purpose


kA  THE  ECHO  COLOSSADE  3K.  -r.  il3


faftSH  of  Tocnre-oouEriB^  or  KJLjes  has  been  pmti^uL

Tbe  reasrcs  fer  y>TdC if iLig  die  irwu  H'^  wibdt  Itzre  izst
descnijeil  widi  dse  E/ibo  Coioc=ade  of  Paiasaasas  are  as  niovs:
Tbc;  £/:!»  Coirxsnade  ss  the  ochr  coIocBade  mcsdaiaed  br  Paasoai
wrrrn  die  Afcis.  and  zio  odier  ooioonade  dtas  die  one  rir^'i  Tuni  as
been  iocod  diere.  <2;  Pa;isasa5  ceils  os  xa  die  ppcjeni  posaa^  3Z
ooe  of  die  Zanes  ftood  in  front  of  die  Edbo  Coiocixade.  Nov  we  k=ev
dkait  die  odier  Zanes  stood  in  die  nordk-eastem  oocner  of  £ae  Aids  (see
aborer  |  2  Doce; ;  h  is  probable,  dierdbce,  dias  tibis  pi>j??»  vi^r  Za
stood  diere  too,  and  d  so  die  Ecfao  Colocmade  msst  havre  been  ac  ae
Dordi-eastera  comer  of  die  A  Iris,  wbidi  agrees  pezfecdx  vith  die
sttnatson  of  die  ooloonade  described  above.

Tbe  echo  tn  die  coloonadev  as  we  leam  from  Pairsania%  ■^■^^rm*  a
word  seven  rimes.  Hence  die  colonnade  was  often  kmiwu  as  rb
Seven-vofced  Colonnade  (Pliny,  *V.  H.  xxxri  loo ;  Pfaxtardi,  De  Gtmu-
UtaU^  I  ;  Lncian,  De  mcrU  Peregrim^  40^  Xenopbao  speaks  of
colomiades  at  Oiympia  as  tf  diere  were  several  of  diem  {HelUmtca^  riL
4.  31;,  but  tbey  need  not  all  have  been  in  tbe  Aki&

See  Olym^:  EnptPmuu,  Tafefiand  i.  pbtcs  xliz.-lL  ;  W.  Doipieid,  ii
Oiympia :  Ergebrnju,  Textband  z.  pp.  70-72 ;  F.  Adkr,  in  Die  Am^rahm^
tM  Oiympiay  4  (l87S-i879>,  p,  48  :q. ;  DU  Fmmde  zvm  Ofywtpim^  p>  22 ;  Carae
ond  Adler,  Oiympia  und  Umgegtnd,  pi  32;  A.  BbctJdier«  OiymfiA? y,  377:
Flasdi,  '  OlyiDpia,'  in  Baamcisters  DenkmaUr^  p.  1 104  G  if . ;  Baedeka.'^p.  3(^

In  front  of^  and  under,  the  Echo  Colonnade  a  layer  of  black  earth
was  brought  to  light,  in  which  were  found  many  andent  bronzes,
including  figures  of  animals,  fragments  of  vessels,  wea^xms,  especially
rims  of  shields,  and  a  cuirass  (Oiympia  :  Ergebnisse^  Textband  4.  p.  3>

22.  I.  the  trumpeters  and  hendds when  they  eon^ete.

These  competitions  were  introduced  in  OL  96  (396  B.C.)  (Eusebius,
Chronic,  ed.  Schone,  voL  i.  p.  204  sq.)  Competidons  c^  heralds  and
of  trumpeters  took  place  also  in  the  games  of  Amphiaraus  at  Oropos
(C.  I.  G.  G.  S.  I.  Nos.  419,  420),  the  games  of  Sarapis  at  Tanagra  (i^.
No.  540;,  the  games  at  Plataea  (ib.  No.  1667),  the  games  of  the  Muses
at  Thespiae  (ib.  Nos.  1760,  1773,  ^n^\  the  games  of  Saviour  Zeus  at
Acraephia  (ib.  No.  ilil)^  the  games  at  Coronea  (/^.  No.  2871),  the
games  of  the  Graces  at  Orchomenus  (ib,  Nos.  3195,  3196,  3197),  the
games  of  the  Ptoan  Apollo  on  Ml  Ptous  (ib.  Nos.  4147,  41 51),  and
the  games  at  Aphrodisias  in  Caria  {C.I.G.  Nos.  2758,  2759).  The
contest  of  the  heralds  at  Oiympia  is  mentioned  by  Lucian  {De  mcrk
Pcregrim\  32).  Competitions  for  trumpeters  and  heralds  were  also
held  at  the  festival  of  Hera  in  Samos,  as  we  leam  from  an  inscription
found  in  .Samos.  See  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  7  (1886),  p.  15a
An  inscription  found  at  Oiympia  in  1880  records  the  victories  won  in
trumpet-playing  by  an  Ephesian,  Diogenes,  son  of  Dionysius,  at  the
Olympic,  Pythian,  Isthmian,  and  Nemean  games,  as  well  as  in  games  at
Naples,  the  Heraean  games  at  Argos,  etc  (Die  Inschriften  von  Oiympia^
No.  232) ;  it  seems  to  date  from  the  first  centiuy  a.d.


CH.  XXII  ACHILLES  AND  MEMNON  629

22.  2.  tlie  HippodaminiiL     See  vi.  20.  7  note.

22.  2.  a  semidrcnlar  pedestal  etc.  The  subject  of  the  group
of  statuary  here  described  by  Pausanias,  namely  the  combat  of  Achilles
with  Memnon,  was  treated  of  by  Arctinus  of  Miletus  in  his  epic  poem
the  Aethiopis  {Epicorum  Graecorum  Jragmenta,  ed.  Kinkel,  p.  33),  and
was  often  represented  in  early  Greek  art,  as  on  the  throne  of  Apollo  at
Amyclae  (Paus.  iii.  18.  12)  and  on  the  chest  of  Cypselus  (Paus.  v.  1 9.
I  note).  A  new  element  was  introduced  into  the  story  by  Aeschylus,
who,  in  a  tragedy  called  Psychostasia  (*  The  Weighing  of  the  Souls '),
described  how,  while  the  two  heroes  were  fighting  on  earth,  their
mothers  Thetis  and  Morning  (or  Day,  as  Pausanias  calls  her)  prayed
to  Zeus  in  heaven  to  spare  the  lives  of  their  respective  sons.  Zeus  held
the  fates  of  the  two  heroes  in  golden  scales ;  the  balance  inclined
against  Memnon,  the  son  of  the  Morning  (or  Day),  who  was  accordingly
slain  by  Achilles  (Plutarch,  De  audiendis  poeiis^  2,  p.  17  A ;  Schol.  on
Homer,  //.  viii.  70).  This  double  scene  on  earth  and  heaven  was
represented  by  the  sculptor  in  the  group  here  described.  In  the  centre
of  the  semicircular  pedestal  was  seated  Zeus,  with  the  two  divine
mothers  Thetis  and  Day  on  either  side  of  him  praying  for  the  lives  of
their  sons.  At  one  end  of  the  pedestal  was  Achilles,  and  facing  him  at
the  opposite  end  was  Memnon.  The  spaces  between  the  central  group
(Zeus,  Thetis,  Day)  and  the  two  heroes  at  the  extreme  wings  were  filled
up  with  four  other  pairs  of  Greek  and  Trojan  combatants,  which  were
so  arranged  that  all  the  Greek  combatants  (Ulysses,  Menelaus,  Diomede,
Ajax)  were  on  one  wing  of  the  pedestal,  and  all  the  Trojan  combatants
(Helenus,  Alexander,  Aeneas,  Deiphobus)  were  facing  them  on  the
other  side.  "  But  for  the  fact  that  these  figures  are  placed  on  a  semi-
circle, they  would  be  imagined  as  having  been  arranged  like  the  statues
in  the  pediments  of  the  temple  of  Aegina  "  [/>.  all  in  one  straight  line,
the  Greeks  being  all  on  one  side  of  the  central  figures,  and  the  Trojans
all  on  the  other  side].  "  The  semicircular  arrangement  was  an  effort
towards  a  more  vivid  realisation,  allowing  the  combatants  to  be  so
placed  over  against  each  other  that  they  could  strike  without  appearing
to  run  through  those  of  their  own  party  who  chanced  to  be  in  front  of
them,  as  is  the  case  in  a  pediment"  (A.  S.  Murray).  Mr.  Murray
supposes  that  Achilles  and  Memnon  were  placed,  not  at  the  extreme
wings  of  the  semicircular  pedestal,  but  immediately  to  the  right  and
left  of  the  central  group.  This  arrangement,  however,  seems  incon-
sistent with  the  language  of  Pausanias.  See  Overbeck,  Gesch,  d.  griech.
Plastik,^  I.  p.  491  sg.  ;  Murray,  Hist,  of  Greek  Sculpture^  2.  pp.  229-
231.  Of  the  pedestal  which  supported  this  great  group  of  sculpture
three  fragments  seem  to  have  been  found.  They  are  of  black  lime-
stone, and  the  slight  curvature  of  the  blocks  shows  that  they  formed
part  of  a  great  semicircular  pedestal,  which  must  have  measured  about
10  metres  (33  feet)  in  diameter.  Two  of  the  firagments,  which  were
found  on  the  north  wall  of  the  Heraeum  in  1877,  bear  on  their  upper
surface  the  inscription  MEMNON  ('Memnon')  in  broad  and  deeply-
cut  characters  of  archaic  form.  The  statue  of  Memnon,  mentioned  by
Pausanias,  probably  stood  on  this  pedestal,  beside  the  inscription.     On


i^  act^E:^  Ci?  zz


rile  ''^x'rl.  'jivct  -:«  "^iit  ^Mrsesau  wucl


>


3t  "Ail,  /-*-  yc^'Lruzsj&ais^  jcckts.     We  aiaj

ir<i)ric^  tee  Oreriwri-  :i<kriftqi»££UM,  jf  i^  i-i6r :  aiL  '  Vry.    .
PiaittJk,^  :    ^  ^'yi  »ff^ ;  Marrxy,  //lsL  ^f  Gwwtk  ^^^mi-mtamm^  ^    -

22.  3^  i^ollMSa  M  tte  louHi  Sua.    Os
veie  A,  O  Ji>ma.  '  l£cs«de  scr  £cs  n£aes  c  ApoGoDse  ^X^me  e  sir

22*  4^  ikhttitoB  uMi  SikOMto  Is  Hooicnc  t:Bcs  uk  iTfigi'Tri"***
r/f  Efihioea  were  called  Abazstes  /Homer,  /7.  iL  536  Jopf-h.  szii  ise  ad
oame  <^  Eiiboea  if  said  to  bav-e  been  Abantis  'SicpiiaBas  ^jiaasss^  £.t.
'AfS^irm  \  htrabo,  x.  p.  445.-

22.  4'  ApdJoniJt  was  fimadad  Vf  ml«»lgli  frvi  Ohc^iil  I:
was  ffjurAtd  jointly  by  the  CorcjTaeans  and  Corrnthacs  Sci'  n.a.v
Or^/'j  deicripiio^  439  /y.  ;  Stnibo,  "viL  p.  316,.  Tbocydades  caZs  s  a
O/rinthian  '.'Aony  (i.  26;.

22.  3.  Aristonns,  an  AfglneUn,  We  have  no  xaore  b=fbr=:a=-x
than  f'au'',ar>iab  hiad  as  to  the  date  of  this  artist.  As  his  ima^  ot  Ze^
w'/uld  ^j<Am  to  have  >>elongcd  to  a  common  archaic  type  which  is  rerr?-
vented  on  'oinb,  0%erb€ck  inclined  to  put  the  artist's  date  early  {Gn^^i^
Kun\tmytholo}(U^  2.  p.  id  sq.)

22.  6.  the  danghten  of  Asoinia.     Cp.  ii.  5.  2.

22.  6.  Harpina.     Cp.  vi.  21.  8.

22.  7'  Aenesidemns.  A  fragment  of  a  large  pedestal  of  Panar
marble,  iK-aring  the  letters  AIX,  was  found  opposite  the  cast  point  of
the  CJouncil  House  at  Olympia.  The  letters  AIX  may  be  a  frag-
ment of  the  name  of  Aenesidemus,  and  the  pedestal  may  hax-e  sup-
jjoried  the  statue  of  Zeus  which  is  here  described  by  Pausanias.  Sw
!)ie  Imihriften  vtm  Olympia^  No.  838  ;  Archdologische  Zeiiung^  40
M882),  p.  89,  Inscr.  No.  427  ;  Roehl,  /.  G,  A.  No.  590.

22.  7-  the  Aenesidemns  who  was  tyrant  of  LeontinL  This
AencsicUrinus  is  otherwise  unknown.  Perhaps  he  was  identical  with
A<ncsid(:inus,  father  of  Thero,  the  tyrant  of  Acragas  (Herodotus,  m
i^^S).      Cp.  Hockh,  Expiic.  Find,  p.  117.

23.  I .  another  image  of  Zeus dedicated  by  the  Ghreeks  etc

The  iniajie  was  of  bronze  and  was   10  ells  high  (Herodotus,  ix.  Z\\
Dr.  Dorpfeld  proposes  to  identify  as  the  base  of  this  image  a  large


CH.  XXIII  THE  PLATA  RAN  TROPHY  631

pedestal  situated  to  the  north-west  of  the  Telemachus  base  (see  vi.  1 3.
1 1  note),  about  5  metres  north  of  the  South  Terrace  Wall ;  in  the
lower  step  of  the  base  there  is  a  slit  in  which  he  thinks  that  the  bronze
tablet  mentioned  by  Pausanias  below  may  have  been  inserted  (Olympia :
Ergebnissey  Textband  2.  p.  78).  His  chief  ground  for  this  identification
is  Pausanias's  supposed  route  through  the  Altis.  But  Pausanias's  route
is  at  this  point  far  too  uncertain  to  allow  us  to  build  conclusions  on  it

23.  I.  There  are  also  engraved  on  the  right  side  of  the  pedestal
the  names  etc.  Prof.  Fabricius  seems  right  in  inferring  from  Pausanias's
language  that  there  were  two  inscriptions  on  the  base  of  this  statue,
namely  (i)  the  dedicatory  inscription  and  (2)  the  inscription  containing
a  list  of  the  Greek  states  that  took  part  in  the  war.  The  former  in-
scription was  carved  on  the  eastern  front  of  the  pedestal  and  is  sum-
marised by  Pausanias  in  his  usual  way  (for  he  seldom  gives  the  very
words  of  an  inscription)  in  the  sentence,  "It  was  dedicated  by  the
Greeks  "  etc  The  latter  inscription  was  placed,  as  Pausanias  expressly
says,  on  the  right  side  of  the  pedestal.  See  £.  Fabricius,  in  Jahrbuch
des  archdoL  Inst.  i.  (1886),  p.  181  sq.  All  the  names  of  the  Greek
states  cut  on  the  base  of  this  statue  are  found  on  the  still  existing
serpent-column  which  supported  the  twin-trophy  at  Delphi.  See  x.  1 3.
9  note.

23.  2.  the  Plataeans  (the  only  Boeotian  people).  On  the
Delphic  trophy  the  Thespians,  another  Boeotian  people,  are  mentioned.
From  this  fact  Prof,  von  Wilamowitz-MoellendorfT  and  Mr.  Kalkmann
have  inferred  that  the  Thespians  must  also  have  been  mentioned  on  the
Olympic  trophy,  and  that  if  Pausanias  asserts  (as  he  implicitly  does)
the  contrary,  this  only  proves  that  he  had  seen,  not  the  original  inscrip-
tion, but  merely  a  defective  copy  of  it  See  Hermes^  12  (1877),  p.  345,
note  29  ;  Kalkmann,  Pausanias ^  p.  76  x^.  It  has  been  suggested  that
the  Thespians  had  contributed  to  the  Delphic  but  not  to  the  Olympic
trophy,  and  that  for  this  reason  their  names  did  not  appear  on  the
latter.     See  note  on  x.  1 3,  9.

23.  3.  Mycenae  and  Tiryns  were  destroyed  by  the  Argives  etc.
As  to  the  date  of  the  destruction  of  Mycenae,  see  note  on  ii.  16.  5.
Pro£  Mahafiy  argues  that  Mycenae  must  have  been  destroyed  by  the
Argives  long  before  the  Persian  war,  probably  in  the  time  of  Phidon  of
Argos.  He  conjectures  that  the  Mycenaeans  and  Tirynthians  who
fought  at  Plataea  (Herodotus,  ix.  28)  were  a  body  of  rebel  slaves
who  had  seized  the  deserted  fortresses  of  Mycenae  and  Tiryns.  See
Herodotus,  vi.  83.  A  fatal  objection  to  this  theory  is  that  Herodotus,
in  mentioning  the  seizure  of  Tiryns  by  the  rebels  (vi.  83),  says  it  was
only  after  a  battle  that  the  slaves  made  themselves  masters  of  the  place
(fiaxQ  €(r\ov  TifwvOa).  This  plainly  implies  that  Tiryns  was  inhabited,
not  deserted,  when  the  rebels  seized  it.  See  Prof.  Mahafify,  in  Herma-
thena^  3  (1879),  PP*  60-66,  ^TJ  sq,

23.  3.  removed  by  the  Roman  emperor  to  found  Nicopolis  etc.
The  emperor  was  of  course  Augustus.     Cp.  Strabo,  vii.  p.  325.

23.  3.  It  befell  the  Potidaeans  to  be  twice  driven  from  their
country  etc.     Potidaea  was  captured  and  its  inhabitants  expelled  by


632  THE  LACEDAEMONIAN  ZEUS  bk.  v.  eus

the  Athenians  in  the  winter  of  430-429  RC  (Thucydides,  iL  70) ;  in
356  B.C  Philip  of  Macedon  besieged  and  took  it,  enslaved  the  peopk
and  bestowed  the  city  on  the  Olynthians  (Diodorus,  xvi.  8).  Cassandrea
was  founded  by  Cassander  in  316  B.C;  into  it  were  gathered  the
Potidaeans,  the  remnant  of  the  Olynthians,  and  the  inhabitants  of  other
neighbouring  cities  (Diodorus,  xix.  52).

23.  3.  Anaxagoras  of  Aegina.  A  sculptor  of  this  name  is  men-
tioned by  Diogenes  Laertius  (ii.  3.  15).     Cp.  Anihol.  PcUcU,  vi.  139.

23.  4-  a  thirty  years'  treaty  of  peace.  The  treaty  was  concluded
in  445  B.C     See  Thucydides,  i.  115  ;  Diodorus,  xii.  7.

23.  5.  the  chariot  of  Oleosthenes.     See  vi.  10.  6.

23.  6.  Hybla  the  Greater  is  entirely  desolate.  Pliny  {Nat
hist  iii.  91)  speaks  of  Hybla  as  if  it  existed  in  his  time.  If  he  was
not  mistaken,  we  must  suppose  either  that  he  meant  the  other  HyUa,
or  that  between  the  time  of  Pliny  and  the  time  of  Pausanias  Hybla  the
Greater  had  been  abandoned.

23.  6.  the  goddess  Hyblaea.  The  head  of  this  goddess  appears
on  coins  of  Hybla  the  Greater :  she  is  represented  as  veiled  and  wear-
ing a  modius  (Head,  Historia  Numorum^  p.  1 29).

23.  6.  these  B^blaeans  were  interpreters  of  portents.  Cicero
mentions,  on  the  authority  of  Philistus,  that  the  Galeots  in  Sicily  were
interpreters  of  portents  {De  divincUione^  i.  20).  These  Galeots  were
the  inhabitants  of  Little  Hybla  (Stephanus  Byz.  5,v,  '^/iXai ;  cp.  id.,
s.v.  FaXcan-ai).  The  name  Galeots  may  be  the  same  with  the  Geleads
of  Thucydides  (vi.  82,  where  he  calls  the  city  Hybla  Geleatis)  and  the
Gereatis  of  Pausanias.  As  Hybla  was  a  Greek  city  and  Pausanias
nevertheless  speaks  of  the  people  as  barbarians,  it  seems  probable  that,
as  has  been  suggested,  there  always  existed  a  native  Siculian  (Sikel)
town  of  Hybla,  distinct  from  the  Greek  city,  though  subject  to  it  See
Sir  E.  H.  Bunbury,  in  Smith's  Die/,  of  Gr,  and  Rom.  Geography^
article  *  Hybla' ;  Freeman,  History  of  Sicily ,  i.  p.  512  sqq.\  and  on  the
Galeots,  see  note  on  vi.  2.  4.

24.  I.  the  altar  of  Zeus  Laoetas  and  Poseidon  Laoetas.  See
note  on  v.  14.  4.

24.  2.  the  war  which  they  waged  before  the  Modes  etc  See  x.
I.  3-1 1.

24.  3.  a  Zeus twelve  feet  high  etc.      The  round   marble

pedestal  of  this  image  was  found  ten  paces  to  the  south-east  of  the
south-eastern  comer  of  the  temple  of  Zeus.  The  pedestal  is  not,  how-
ever, in  its  original  position.  It  is  a  hollow  cylinder  of  coarse-grained
greyish-blue  marble,  about  .78  metre  high  and  1.27  metres  in  diameter;
it  probably  rested  on  a  quadrangular  substructure  of  shell-limestone.
The  marble  is  of  a  sort  that  occurs  commonly  in  southern  Peloponncse ;
probably  it  was  quarried  in  Laconia.  Inscribed  on  the  upper  edge  of
the  cylindrical  base  are  the  verses  given  by  Pausanias,  but  the  inscription
is  mutilated.  Another  fragment,  containing  a  few  mutilated  letters  of
the  first  two  words  of  the  inscription,  was  afterwards  found  in  the  same
neighbourhood.  As  restored  by  the  editors  of  the  Olympian  inscrip-
tions, Messrs.  Dittenberger  and  Purgold,  the  inscription  runs  thus :


CH.  XXIV  THE  LACEDAEMONIAN  ZEUS  633

[Af^jo,  f  av[a^]  K/oovtSa,  [ZJcv  'OAvviric  KaXbv  a[y]aA/[iia
iA^F(tf[t  ^]fict)£  roi(X)  AaK€Sai/iovto[i9].

Thus  restored,  the  inscription  agrees  with  Pausanias's  copy.  But
Messrs.  Ahrens  and  Roehl  would  restore  the  second  line  differently,
thus :

X\r\Fbi\%  8a]fui)i  roii  AaK€6ai/iovi[(tfv].

If  they  are  right,  the  reading  Qvyj^  in  Pausanias's  copy  is  a  mistake  for
BdfjLip,  and  rots  AaK€8aifwviois  is  a  mistake  for  t<^  AaKc^ai/xovuov  or
T<^  AaKeSaifjLovCtf.  They  suppose  that  in  Pausanias's  time  the  inscrip-
tion was  mutilated  in  the  same  places  as  now,  and  that  the  gaps  were
conjecturally  filled  up  by  Pausanias  or  his  guides.  But  the  restoration
of  the  line  by  Dittenberger  and  Purgold,  agreeing  as  it  does  with  the
copy  of  Pausanias,  is  to  be  preferred.  With  regard  to  the  date  of  the
image,  the  language  of  Pausanias  leaves  it  uncertain  whether  he  sup-
posed it  to  have  been  dedicated  at  the  time  of  the  second  Messenian  war
in  the  seventh  century  B.c.  (see  note  on  iv.  15.  i)  or  at  the  time  of  the
second  Messenian  rebellion  in  464  B.C.  (see  note  on  iv.  24.  5).  But  the
regular  form  of  the  letters  forbids  us  to  set  the  inscription  as  high  as
the  seventh  century  B.c.  Hence  some  scholars  have  accepted  464  B.C.
as  the  date  of  the  dedication  of  the  image,  and  Mr.  Roehl  thinks  that
the  character  of  the  letters  of  the  inscription  admits  of  this  date.  On
the  other  hand,  Messrs.  Dittenberger,  Purgold,  and  Kaibel  assign  the
inscription  to  the  sixth  century  B.C.  If  they  are  right,  it  follows  that
Pausanias  was  mistaken  in  connecting  the  dedication  of  the  image  with
either  of  the  Messenian  revolts.

See  Die  Inschriften  von  Olympian  No.  252  ;  K.  Purgold,  in  Olympia :  Ergeb-
nisse,  Textband  2.  p.  147  s^.  ;  Archdologische  Zeitungy  34  (1876),  p.  49;  ib.  40
(1S82),  p.  91  ;  Roehl,  /.  G.  A,  No.  75,  pp.  30,  174  ;  Hicks,  Greek  histor,  Inscript,
No.  17;  Kaibel,  Epigrammata  Graeca^  No.  743;  C^Mei,  Delectus  Ins,  Graec,^
No.  14 ;  Roberts,  Greek  Epigraphy^  No.  261 ;  E.  Hoffmann,  Sylloge  epigram,
Graecoruniy  No.  311  ;  Kirchhoff,  Studien  %ur  Geschichte  des  griech.  Alpha-
betSy^  p.  1511^.;  Flasch,  *  Olympia,'  in  Baumeister's  Denkmalery  p.  109 1  ;
Schubart,  in  Fleckeisen'sJahrbUcher,  22  (1876),  pp.  681-687  ;  ib,  23  (1877),  p.  385
sq, ;  H.  L.  Ahrens,  *  Die  Inschrift  aus  Olympia  nr.  7,*  PhilologtiSy  38  (1879),  pp.
193-242;  Ad.  Botticher,  Olytnpia^^  ^,  328  j^.

24.  4.  Mnminius  dedicated  a  bronze  Zeus  etc.  Near  the  north-
east comer  of  the  temple  of  Zeus  is  a  pedestal  of  Roman  date  which
Prof  Flasch  thinks  may  have  supported  the  image  in  question
(Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  p.  1092).  Another  image  of  Zeus  dedicated
by  Mummius  is  mentioned  by  Pausanias  below  (§  8).  Several  inscrip-
tions relating  to  votive  offerings  dedicated  by  Mummius  and  to  statues
of  him  have  been  found  at  Olympia.  Thus  a  large  pedestal  of  Pentelic
marble  was  found  in  the  East  Byzantine  wall,  opposite  to  the  Council
House.     It  bears  on  each  of  the  two  short  sides  the  inscription  :

AevKios  Mofifiios  A€VKiov  vlhs
GTparrjyhs  viraros  T(ofiaiwv
All  'OXyfiiriifi


634  MUMMIUS  AND  THE  LEGATES  BK-  v.  elb

'<  Luaus  Mummius,  son  of  Lucius,  commander-in-chief  of  the  Rotuiis^
(dedicated  this  statue)  to  Olympian  Zeus."  The  upper  surface  of  tbe
pedestal  bears  marks  which  show  that  it  supported  the  statue  of  a  hose.
The  statue  cannot,  therefore,  have  been  either  of  the  two  votive  ofierings
of  Mummius  which  Pausanias  mentions.  See  Die  Inschriften  vm
OfympiOy  Nos.  278,  279;  Archaologische  Zeitung^  37  (1879),  P-  M^
sq.^  Inscriptions  291,  292  ;  Hicks,  Greek  historical  inscriptions^  Na  19S.
Further  fragments  of  two  other  inscriptions,  identical  with  the  preced>
ing,  were  found  scattered  in  the  East  Byzantine  waU  and  elsewhere.
They  seem,  like  the  preceding  inscription,  to  have  been  carved  on  tvo
sides  of  the  pedestal  of  an  equestrian  statue.  Probably  both  statues
represented  Mummius  himself  on  horseback.  See  Die  Inschriften  fwi
Olymfiia^  Nos.  280,  281  ;  Archaologische  Zeitung^  36  (1878),  p.  86,
No.  132  ;  cp.  /V£,  34  (1876),  p.  53  sqq,^  Nos.  10,  11.

Further  there  have  been  found  at  Olympia  two  inscriptions  mhich
undoubtedly  refer  to  statues  of  Mummius  himsel£     In  the  first  place  a
pedestal  of  grey  limestone  was  found  built  into  the  East  Byzantine  wall
and  bearing  an  inscription  which  sets  forth  that   ''The  city  of  £lis
(erected  this  statue  of)  Lucius  Mununius,  son  of  Lucius,  commander-
in-chief  of  the  Romans,  on  account  of  his  virtue  and  the  kindness  which
he   continues  to   show  to  it   and   to  the   rest   of  the  Greeks"   (Die
Inschriften  von  Olympia^  No.  319  ;  Archaologische  2^tung^  36  (1878),
p.  86,  No.    131  ;   Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec,   No.   236).      In
the  second  place  five  fragments  of  grey  limestone  were  found  buih
into   the   East    Byzantine  wall  to  the  south  of  the  terrace -wall  and
inscribed  with  the  names  in   Greek  of  Lucius  Mununius  the  Consul,
G.  Sempronius  Tyrtanus,  Aulus  Postumius   Albinus,  Aulus    Terentius
<Varro>,  and  Lucius   Licinius    Murena.      Clearly   these    inscriptions
were  attached  to  a  pedestal  which  supported  statues  of  Miunmius  and
the  ten  legates  who  assisted  him  in  organising  the  province  of  Achaia
after  his  conquest  of  Greece  in  146  B.C.     The  names  of  two  of  the
legates  (Aulus  Postumius  Albinus  and  C.  Sempronius  Tuditanus)  are
known  to  us  from  Cicero  (Ad  Atiicum^  xiii.  epp.  4,    5,  30,  32,  33):
in  the  inscription  the  Latin  surname  Tuditanus  has  been  wrongly  altered
by  the   Greek  stonemason   into  Tyrtanus.     The  ten  legates  are  also
referred  to  by  Polybius  though  he  does  not  mention  their  names  (xi.
8-10).     From  the  style  of  the  inscriptions  it  is  clear  that  the  statues
of  Mummius  and  the  legates  were  not  set  up,  or  at  all   events  that
the  inscriptions  were  not  cut,  till  a  century  or  more  after  the  conquest
of   Greece ;    what  the  occasion  of  setting   up  the    statues  or  of  re-
engraving  the   inscriptions   may  have   been  we   do   not   know.      See
Die  Inschriften  von  Olympia^  Nos.   320-324  ;  Archaologische  Zdtung^
36  (1878),    pp.   86-88,   Inscriptions    133-137.      The    statues    appar-
ently stood  on  the    large  oblong    base    (about    40   feet    long)  which
stands  immediately  to  the  west  of  the  triumphal  gateway  at  the  south-
east comer  of  the  Altis.     The  core  of  the  pedestal  is  of  concrete,  but
it  was  faced  with  large  blocks  of  grey  limestone ;  it   is  on  fragments
of  these  blocks  that  the  inscriptions  are  engraved.     Pedestals  of  this
sort  seem  not  to  have  been  in  use  before  the  imperial  age.     This  is


CH.  XXIV  MUMMIUS  AND  THE  LEG  A  TES  635

another  indication  that  the  statues  of  Mummius  and  the  legates  were
not  set  up  before  the  middle  of  the  first  century  B.C  Dr.  Purgold
suggests  that  the  statues  may  have  been  originally  set  up  soon  after
146  B.C,  but  that  the  alteration  of  the  line  of  the  southern  boundary  wall
(see  above,  p.  491  sq.)  and  the  construction  of  the  triumphal  gateway
may  have  necessitated  the  taking  down  of  the  statues  and  their  reinstal-
ment  on  a  new  pedestal  in  a  different  situation.  And  this  seems  more
probable  than  that  the  monument  should  not  have  been  erected  until
more  than  a  century  after  the  events  which  it  conmiemorated.  See
Purgold,  in  Olympia :  Ergebnisse^  Textband  2.  p.  159  sq. ;  Ad.  Botticher,
Olympiad  p.  410.  Lastly,  it  may  be  mentioned  that  the  inscribed  base
of  the  statue  of  another  Mummius,  the  son  of  Gaius,  was  found  along
with  two  of  the  inscriptions  relating  to  his  more  famous  namesake,  the
conqueror  of  Corinth.  See  Die  Inschriften  von  Olympia^  No.  331  ;
Archdologische  Zeitung^  34  (1876),  p.  $3  ^9^*^  No.  12.

24.  4.  The  largest  of  all  the  bronze  images  etc  Opposite  the
east  front  of  the  temple  of  Zeus  is  a  large  piece  of  a  pedestal  of  con-
glomerate stone.     It  bears  in  large  monumental  letters  the  inscription  :

foXtiiov  TTCpi  ofiOVoCap

*<  Of  the  Eleans,  about  unanimity."  Messrs.  Purgold  and  Dittenberger
think  it  probable  that  the  pedestal,  of  which  this  is  a  part,  supported
the  colossal  bronze  image  dedicated  by  the  Eleans.  See  Die  Inschriften
von  Olympia^  No.  260;  Archdologische  Zeitungy  34  (1876),  p.  219,
Inscr.  No.  22  ;  Histor,  philolog.  Aufsdtze  Ernst  Curtius  gewidmet^  p.
224  sqq,  ;  Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr,  Graec,^  No.  265  ;  CoUitz,  G,  D,  I  i.
No.  1 170.  The  war  between  the  Eleans  and  Arcadians  took  place
365-364  B.C.  (Xenophon,  HelUnica,  vii.  4.  13  sqq,)\  and  the  character
of  the  letters  of  the  inscription  agrees  with  this  date.

24.  s-  Homer  has  told  how  Ganymede  etc.  See  Iliads  v.  265
sqq.y  XX.  231  sqq.  On  representations  of  the  rape  of  Ganymede  in
ancient  art,  see  O.  Jahn,  Archdologische  Beitrdge^  p.  12  sqq.\  Over-
beck,  Griech,  Kunstmythologie^  2.  p.  515  sqq.  ;  Gazette  Archiologique^  2
(1876),  pp.  69-71,  with  plate  19  ;  Annali  delV  Instituto^  48  (1876),  pp.
49-62,  with  Tav.  d'  agg.  A.  B.  C.

24.  5.  Aristocles,  pupil  and  son  of  Oleoetas.  As  to  Cleoetas,  see
i.  24.  3;  vi.  20.  14.  From  the  latter  passage  it  appears  that  the
father  of  Cleoetas  was  also  called  Aristocles.  Thus  we  have  the  three
generations — Aristocles,  Cleoetas,  Aristocles.  It  was  a  common  custom
in  families  of  artists  for  the  names  thus  to  alternate  in  alternate  genera-
tions. A  work  of  a  sculptor  named  Aristocles  is  still  preserved ;  it  is
the  tombstone  of  Aristion,  one  of  the  best-known  monuments  of  early
Attic  art.  In  low  relief  is  represented  a  warrior  standing  in  profile,
with  the  shaft  of  a  lance  in  his  left  hand ;  the  relief  was  painted,  and
the  original  colours  are  to  a  large  extent  preserved.  The  name  of  the
deceased  warrior,  Aristion,  is  inscribed  at  the  foot,  and  above  it  are  the
words  IpTfov  *Apta-TOKk€ovSi  "  a  work  of  Aristocles."  The  inscription
belongs  to  the  second  half  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.    Part  of  the  inscription


636  THE  COUNCIL  HOUSE  bk.  v.  elk

of  another  statue  by  Aristodes  was  found  at  Hitraka  in  Attica,  between
Mt  Hymettus  and  Mt  Pentelicus.  It  is  written  baustrophedon ;  and  in
the  chsiracter  of  the  letters  it  agrees  with  the  inscription  on  the  Aristion
reliefl  Hence  it  was  probably  the  same  Aristodes  who  executed  both
works.  Whether  he  is  to  be  identified  with  the  father  or  the  son  of
Cleoetas  or  with  neither  of  them,  is  a  question  which  the  evidence  does
not  permit  us  to  decide  ;  but  since  Pausanias  expressly  contrasts  (i.  24.
3)  a  work  of  Cleoetas,  as  a  specimen  of  fine  art,  with  "  mere  antiquities,"
it  seems  more  probable  that  the  Aristodes  in  question  was  the  £aither
than  the  son  of  Cleoetas,  and  that  the  latter  flourished  in  the  early  part
of  the  fifth  century  B.C

See  H.  Brunn,  Gtsch,  d.  gruch.  KiinstUr^  i.  p.  106  sqq, ;  Overbeck,  G^sch,  d.

C*  ch,  Plastick,*  I.  pp.  199-201  ;  Murray,  HisL  of  Greek  Sculpture^  I.  p.  140  sqq. ;
y  M.  Mitchell,  Hist,  if  Ancient  Sculpture^  ?•  217  sqq, ;  Friedericns- Welters,
Gipsabgiisse,  §  loi ;  Baumeister's  Denkmdier,  p.  341 ;  P.  Cawadias,  FXinrrd  rw
*E0pixod  lAovffetov,  No.  29  ;  Loewy,  Inschriften  griech,  Bildkauer^  Nos.  9,  la

24.  6.  the  offerings  of  Micytlras.     See  v.  26.  2  sqq,

24.  7-  The  greater  iMurt of  Onidus  is  built  etc     Cp.  Strabo,

xiv.  p.  656.  For  plans,  views,  etc.  of  the  city,  see  Antiquities  of
lonia^  Pt.  iii.  (London,  18 11),  pp.  1-44,  plates  i.-xxxiii.  ;  Sir  C.  T.
Newton,  Travels  and  Discoveries  in  the  Levant^  2.  p.  168  sqq.  Sir  C.
Newton  thought  that  the  original  city  of  Cnidus  occupied  the  island
only,  from  which,  as  the  population  g^ew,  it  gradually  extended  over
the  opposite  part  of  the  mainland.

24.  8.  Ooresns.  One  of  the  mythical  founders  of  the  sanctuary  of
Artemis  at  Ephesus  was  named  Coresus.  From  him,  probably,  the
quarter  of  the  city  was  supposed  to  take  its  name.  See  vii.  2.  7.
Coresus  (or  Coressus)  was  the  name  of  the  round  mountain  whidi
bounded  Ephesus  on  the  east.  See  note  on  vii.  5.  10.  Cp.  Strabo,
xiv.  p.  640.  Diodorus  (xiv.  99)  speaks  of  Coressus  as  "a  lofty
mountain,  distant  forty  furlongs  from  Ephesus."  But  this  distance  is
surely  exaggerated.  Cp.  Herodotus,  v.  1 00 ;  Xenophon,  Hellenica^
i.  2.  9.

24.  9.  the  Oonncil  House.  This  is  commonly  identified  with  the
tripartite  building  which  stands  to  the  south  of  the  temple  of  Zeus,  just
outside  the  later  boundar>'  of  the  Altis.  The  identification  may  be  right,
but  the  argument  on  which  Dr.  Dorpfeld  bases  it  is  not  conclusive.  He
contends  that  from  the  route  followed  by  Pausanias  in  describing  the
various  images  ofvZeus  (chapters  22-24)  it  appears  that  the  Council
House  was  to  the  south  of  the  east  front  of  the  temple  of  Zeus,  where
several  roads  met,  and  that  there  is  no  building  so  situated  except  the
one  in  question.  It  is  true  that  Pausanias,  in  enumerating  the  images
of  Zeus,  repeatedly  mentions  the  Council  House  (v.  23.  i  ;  v.  24.  i  ;
and  in  the  present  passage),  but  there  is  nothing  in  these  references  to
prove  how  the  Council  House  lay  with  reference  to  the  temple  of  Zeus.
On  the  other  hand,  Xenophon,  describing  a  battle  between  the  Eleans
and  the  Arcadians  at  Olympia,  says  that  the  Eleans  drove  their  enemies
**  into  the  space  between  the  Council  House,  the  sanctuary  of  Hestia,


CH.  XXIV  THE  COUNCIL  HOUSE  637

and  the  theatre  that  adjoins  them''  {Hellenica^  vii.  4.  31).  By  'Uhe
sanctuary  of  Hestia''  Xenophon  no  doubt  means  the  hearth  in  the
Prytaneum  (see  above,  p.  580  sg,)  Hence  we  should  expect  to  find  the
Council  House  near  the  Prytaneum,  that  is,  to  the  north-west  of  the
Altis,  not  to  the  south  of  it,  as  Dr.  D5rpfeld  contends.  It  is  possible
that  both  the  Council  House  and  the  theatre  (which  is  unknown  to  us
except  from  this  mention  of  it  by  Xenophon  ^)  may  be  situated  in  the
still  unexcavated  ground  to  the  north-west  of  the  Altis.  Even  if,  with
Dr.  Dorpfeld,  we  interpret  *'  the  theatre  "  to  mean  the  spectators'  seats
in  the  stadium — and,  in  fact,  the  term  was  so  applied  at  Athens
(C  /.  A.  ii.  No.  176  line  17) — we  should  still  be  in  difficulties  ;  for  how
can  the  stadium  be  said  to  adjoin  the  Prytaneum,  from  which  it  is
divided  by  the  whole  length  of  the  Altis  ?  However,  we  may  provision-
ally acquiesce  in  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  identification  of  the  tripartite  building
as  the  Council  House.  A  somewhat  similar  building  at  Eleusis  has
been  conjecturally  identified  as  the  Council  House  (vol  2.  p.  511).

The  Olympian  Council  House,  as  we  may  call  it  for  the  present,
consists  of  a  square  building  flanked  on  the  north  and  south  by  two
long  wings,  each  of  which  terminates  at  its  west  end  in  a  semicircular
apse.  These  apses  are  of  interest  as  the  earliest  examples  of  such
structures  known  to  us  in  Greek  architecture.  The  central  building  is
about  14  metres  square.  The  two  wings  correspond  to  each  other
closely,  though  not  exactly,  in  size ;  they  average  about  30.65  metres
in  length  by  13.78  metres  in  breadth.  In  plan  and  disposition,  so  far
as  we  can  judge  from  their  remains,  the  two  wings  also  corresponded
closely.  Each  of  them  apparently  consisted  of  a  long  quadrangular
hall,  from  which  the  apse  at  the  west  end  was  divided  by  a  cross-wall ;
a  row  of  seven  columns  ran  down  the  length  of  each  of  the  long  halls.
An  entablature  consisting  of  architrave  and  triglyph  frieze  seems  to  have
run  round  the  outer  walls  of  both  buildings ;  remains  of  both  entabla-
tures have  been  found.  Further,  each  wing  rests  on  a  two -stepped
basement,  and  had  three  columns,  between  antae,  on  its  eastern  fa9ade.
An  Ionic  colonnade  extended  along  the  eastern  fronts  of  all  three
buildings.

All  three  buildings  are  constructed  of  squared  blocks  of  common
stone,  but  the  kind  of  stone  in  each  of  them  is  different.  Different,  too,
is  the  state  of  preservation  of  each  of  the  buildings.  The  South  Wing
is  the  best  preserved.  On  its  east  front  the  drums  of  the  three  columns
(of  the  Doric  order)  are  still  standing  in  their  places,  together  with  one
of  the  two  antae;  two  of  the  capitals  of  these  columns,  with  finely-shaped
echinus^  lie  in  front  of  them.  The  outer  walls  of  the  building  are  pre-
served to  a  height  of  one  and  two  courses  ;  and  in  the  interior  there  are
remains  of  two  columns  standing  in  their  places.  These  last  remains
consist  in  each  case  of  a  single  unfluted  drum  of  a  column  without  a

^  It  is  true  that  Pausanias  elsewhere  (viii.  50.  3)  speaks  of  "the  theatre  at
Olympia  "  (rd  bf  'OXvfixLq,  Biarpop),  but  the  context  snows  that  he  means  the
spectators  (ol  Bearal),  The  word  is  used  in  the  same  sense  by  John  Chrysostom
(Homil.  in  princip,  actorum^  L  vol.  3.  p.  59,  ed.  Montfaucon,  rw  Btdrpov
KadjifUvov),


638  THE  COUNCIL  HOUSE  bk.  v.  eus

base  ;  probably  the  columns  were  of  the  Doric  order.  As  these  drums
are  of  a  different  stone  fix)m  the  rest  of  the  building,  it  is  possible  that
the  columns  did  not  belong  to  it  originally.  There  were  seven  of  these
columns  extending  in  a  row  down  the  middle  of  the  long  hall,  thos
dividing  it  into  two  aisles.  Each  colunm  had  a  separate  foundatioD,
which  is  preserved.  The  breadth  of  the  hall  (about  1 1  metres)  was
just  half  its  length  (about  22  metres).  The  apse  at  the  west  end  was
separated  from  the  hall  by  a  cross-wall,  and  was  itself  divided  into  two
compartments  by  a  wall  running  east  and  west  Elach  of  these  com-
partments opened  into  the  great  hall  by  a  door,  of  which  the  threshol<is
(with  holes  for  sockets  and  bolts)  are  preserved.  A  very  peculiar
feature  in  the  architecture  of  the  South  Wing,  which  distinguishes  it  not
only  from  the  North  Wing  but  from  all  other  Greek  buildings  hitherto
observed,  is  that  its  long  walls  are  not  parallel  to  each  other  and
straight,  but  form  with  the  apse  a  long  ellipse,  of  which  one  of  the
narrow  ends  (namely,  the  eastern  end)  has  been  cut  off.  This  shape  is
not  accidental,  for  die  stones,  even  in  the  long  sides,  are  cut  so  that
their  ends  are  not  parallel  to  each  other,  but  radiate  from  the  inner  side
outwards  ;  hence  the  outer  side  of  many  of  the  blocks  is  longer  than  the
inner  by  a  measurable  amount.  The  reasons  for  adopting  this  peculiar
groimd-plan,  which  gives  to  the  building  somewhat  of  the  shape  of  a
ship,  are  quite  unknown.

Of  the  North  Wing  little  but  foundations  and  some  of  the  steps  is
preserved.  In  plan  and  dimensions  it  seems  to  have  corresponded
closely  with  the  South  Wing,  except  that  it  had  the  form,  not  of  a  trun-
cated ellipse,  but  of  a  quadrangle  with  a  semicircular  apse  at  the  west
end.  Whether  the  apse  was  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  building  by
a  cross-wall  and  divided  internally  into  two  compartments  by  another
cross-wall,  we  cannot,  in  the  ruinous  state  of  the  building,  say  for
certain  ;  but  on  the  analogy  of  the  South  Wing  we  may  conjecture  that
it  was  so.  Of  the  row  of  columns  that  ran  down  the  middle  of  the  hall
nothing  but  foundations  is  left :  the  Doric  columns,  found  in  the  West
Byzantine  wall,  which  were  formerly  supposed  to  belong  to  the  interior
of  this  hall,  are  now  referred  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  to  the  portico  of  the
Treasury  of  Gela.  A  capital  of  very  archaic  form,  which  was  found  in
the  East  Byzantine  wall,  in  front  of  the  Council  House,  may  have  be-
longed to  one  of  the  three  outer  columns  which,  on  the  analogy  of  the
South  Wing,  probably  adorned  the  eastern  facade  of  the  building.

Of  the  square  central  building  nothing  is  left  but  foundations.  It
was  not  raised  on  a  two-step  basement  like  the  wings.  Apparently
there  were  columns  on  the  eastern  facade,  and  no  doors  in  the  other
three  sides.  In  the  centre  of  the  square  hall  is  a  foundation  on  which
a  column,  supporting  the  roof,  may  have  rested.  Prof.  Flasch,  however,
believes  that  this  foundation  supported  the  image  of  Zeus,  God  of  Oaths,
mentioned  by  Pausanias,  and  that  the  central  building  was  nothing  but
a  chapel  of  that  god.  Further,  since  oaths  were  taken  in  the  open  air,
he  infers  that  the  chapel  was  roofless.

The  colonnade  which  extended  along  the  whole  east  front  of  the
Council  House  had  twenty-seven  Ionic  columns  on  its  long  facade  and


CH.  XXIV  THE  COUNCIL  HOUSE  639

three  at  each  of  the  narrow  sides  (north  and  south).  Only  three  drums
of  these  columns  are  standing  in  their  places  ;  they  have  twenty  flutes
instead  of  the  usual  twenty-four.  One  of  the  capitals  has  been  found  ;  it
has  very  large  volutes.  Many  drums  of  columns,  both  fluted  and  unfluted,
are  built  into  the  foundations  of  the  colonnade,  also  a  great  many  squared
blocks  coated  with  stucco,  and  a  fragment  of  the  geison  of  the  temple
of  Zeus.  In  Roman  times  a  great  open  court,  surrounded  by  colonnades,
was  constructed  in  front  of  the  Council  House.  The  columns,  resting
on  square  bases,  were  made  of  very  heterogeneous  materials.

With  regard  to  the  history  of  the  Council  House,  Dr.  Dorpfeld  now
holds,  on  grounds  of  architectural  style,  that  the  North  Wing  is  older
than  the  South  Wing,  having  been  built  in  the  sixth  centiuy  B.C.,  while
the  South  Wing  appears  to  be  contemporary  with  the  temple  of  Zeus,
that  is,  to  date  from  the  first  half  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  That  the
square  central  building  is  later  than  the  wings  is  proved  by  the  fact  that
it  is  connected  with  them  by  short  walls  which  are  clearly  contemporary,
not  with  the  wings,  but  with  the  central  building.  The  central  building
itself  appears  to  be  contemporary  with  the  Ionic  colonnade  which
extends  along  the  east  front  of  the  whole  building  ;  but  as  to  the  date  of
the  central  building  and  the  colonnade  Dr.  Dorpfeld  declines  to  pro-
nounce an  opinion.  The  colonnade  may  possibly,  he  says,  have  been
built  in  the  third  or  second  century  B.C.

As  to  the  destination  of  the  three  buildings  which  compose  the
Council  House  opinions  are  divided.  Prof.  Flasch  thinks  that  the
North  Wing,  the  oldest  of  the  buildings,  was  the  original  Council
House,  and  that,  when  it  no  longer  sufficed  for  the  business  of  the
Council,  the  South  Wing  was  added.  But  this  view,  as  Prof.  Flasch
admits,  is  open  to  grave  objections.  If  the  old  Council  House  was  too
small,  why  not  simply  enlarge  it  instead  of  building  a  second  structure
similar  to,  but  quite  separate  from,  the  first  ?  If  the  North  Wing  was
the  original  Council  House,  we  are  almost  driven  to  suppose  that  at  a
later  time  two  separate  Councils  sat  in  the  two  wings.  To  meet  this
difficulty  Dr.  Dorpfeld  now  maintains  that  the  Council  sat  in  the  central
building,  and  that  the  wings  were  merely  offices  for  the  despatch  of
administrative  business.  But  on  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  own  showing  the  central
building  is  later  than  the  wings.  Where  then  did  the  Council  meet
before  the  central  building  was  erected  ?  With  regard  to  the  apses  of
the  wings  Dr.  Dorpfeld  and  Prof.  Flasch  agree  in  thinking  that  the
treasures  and  archives  of  the  Council  were  probably  stored  in  them :
Dr.  Dorpfeld  compares  the  chambers  in  the  pre-Persian  temple  on  the
Acropolis  at  Athens  which  seem  to  have  been  used  as  treasuries  (see  vol.
2.  p.  560  note  i).  This  view  also  is  not  free  from  difficulty.  For  why
should  the  treasures  and  archives  be  dispersed  in  two  separate  buildings  ?

The  Council  House  (if  the  building  we  have  been  examining
deserves  that  name)  lay  some  little  way  outside  of  the  original  South
Wall  of  the  Altis.  But  when  at  a  later  time  the  Altis  was  extended  to
the  south  (see  above,  p.  491),  the  North  Wing  of  the  Council  House,  or
rather  the  north  wall  of  the  North  Wing,  formed  at  this  point  the  new
southern  boundary  of  the  Altis.


640  THE  COUNCIL  HOUSE  bk.  v.  tus


with  ^

Olytnpui'  Efgebnt^^^i  .•m^..^..^^  ..  ^.«.  ...  ...m.  ,  *^.w  ..  wr«M»  cv#»  ^/-•/-/fv^m*, ^ «w ,

Curtius  und  Adler,  Olympia  und  Umgegtnd^  p.  25  ;  Flasch,  '  Olympim,'  in  Bks*
meister's  Dmkmdler,  p.  1 104  j  x^. ;  A.  Botticher,  Olymfnaf  p.  225  sqq.  ;  Gohl  ood
Koner,  Das  Leben  der  Griichen  und  Romer,^  p.  144  sq.

In  excavating  the  Council  House  the  German  archaeologists  dis-
covered, deep  down,  many  archaic  bronzes  resembling  those  which  were
found  in  the  South>£last  Building  and  the  Prytaneum  (see  above,
PP-  575)  5^2  ^9')i  ^mong  the  objects  brought  to  light  were  many  pieces
of  tripods  and  remarkably  many  weights,  also  spearheads,  lamps,  etc
(A-  Furtwangler,  in  Olympia :  Ergebrdsse^  Textband  4.  p.  6).

24.  9.  to  swear  upon  the  cut  pieces  of  a  boar.  See  note  on  ill
20.  9.  In  Tibetan  law-courts,  when  a  great  oath  is  taken  *'*•  it  is  done
by  the  person  placing  a  holy  scripture  on  his  head,  and  sitting  on  the
reeking  hide  of  an  ox  and  eating  a  part  of  the  ox's  heart "  (L.  A.
Waddell,  The  Buddhism  of  Tibet  (London,  1895),  P-  5^9  note  7).

24.  .10.  those  who  examine the  foals.    Cp.  vi.  2.  2.

24.  10.  Homer  proves  this  etc  See  Iliady  xix.  266  sqq.  In  the
first  of  these  lines  our  texts  of  Homer  have  oro/iaxov  (<  throat ')  instead
of  (r<f>dpayov,  which  Pausanias  read.  Eustathius  on  Homer,  I/iad,  iii.  310,
says  that  the  sacrificial  victims  upon  which  oaths  were  taken  were  by
some  peoples  buried  in  the  earth,  by  others  cast  into  the  sea,  it  being
wholly  forbidden  to  partake  of  them.

24.  II.  verses  inscribed to  strike  teiror  into  peijnren.

At  the  village  of  St.  George^  near  Phlius,  a  fragmentary  inscription  was
found,  of  which  the  purport  is  conjectured  by  Mr.  Roehl  to  have  been
similar  to  that  of  the  inscription  here  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  Sec
Roehl,  /.  G,  A.  No.  28.

25.  I.  Alexander,  son  of  Philip.  Dr.  Purgold  thinks  that  the
pedestal  at  the  north-east  comer  of  the  temple  of  Zeus  (see  note  on  24.
4)  may  have  supported  this  statue  rather  than  the  bronze  Zeus  of
Mummius  {Histor,  philohg.  Aufsdtze  Ernst  Curtius  gewidmet^  p.  236).

25.  3.  the  sea  at  this  strait  is  the  stormiest  of  seas  etc.  The
following  absurd  description  of  the  Straits  of  Messina  would  seem  to
show  that  Pausanias  had  never  seen  it.  I  have  thrice  sailed  through
the  Straits  of  Messina  ;  the  weather  was  always  calm  and  clear  ;  and  I
smelt  no  marine  monsters,  nothing  but  the  brisk  pungent  air  of  the  sea

25.  4-  The  ancient  inscription  declared  etc.  From  the  occur-
rence of  the  name  Messenians  in  the  inscription,  we  may  infer  that  the
statue  was  made  after  494  B.C.,  about  which  time  the  old  name  Zande
was  changed  into  Messene  or  Messana.  On  the  other  hand,  as  the
later  inscription  on  the  statue  was  by  Hippias,  who  flourished  about
436  B.C.,  we  may  suppose  that  the  statue  was  made  not  later  than  that
year.  Hence  the  date  of  Gallon,  the  artist  who  made  it,  would  seem
to  fall  somewhere  between  494  and  436  B.C.  See  H.  Brunn,  Gesck.  d.
griech.  Kiinstler^  i.  p.  W}^  sq.  But  an  inscription  from  the  base  of  a
statue  by  this  sculptor  points  to  his  having  been  at  work  between  420
and  410  B.C.  (see  note  on  v.  27.  8).


CH.  XXV  THE  SCULPTOR  CALAMIS  641

25.  4.  Hippias.  This  is  the  sophist  whom  Plato  gibbeted  in  the
dialogue  called  after  him.  (The  second  dialogue  which  bears  the  name
of  Hippias — the  Hippias  Minor — is  perhaps  spurious.)

25.  5.  At  Pachynum there  is  a  city  Motye.     Motye  was

situated,  not  at  Cape  Pachynum,  the  southern  extremity  of  Sicily,  but  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Lilybaeum,  the  most  westerly  cape  of  the  island.
Pausanias  appears  to  speak  of  Motye  as  if  it  were  still  in  existence,
though  it  was  finally  abandoned  about  396  B.C.  Hence  Prof.  Holm
(Geschichte  Siciliens  im  Alterthum^  i.  p.  318)  has  conjectured  that  the
authority  on  whom  Pausanias  here  relied  was  Antiochus,  a  contemporary
of  Herodotus  (fifth  century  B.C.)  and  author  of  a  history  of  Sicily,  with
which  Pausanias  was  acquainted.     See  x.  11.  3.

25.  5.  stretching  out  their  right  hands  as  if  praying.  Cp.  vi.  i.
7.  On  the  attitude  of  prayer  in  ancient  art,  see  Miitheil,  d,  arch,  InsL
in  Atheny  6  (1881),  p.  157  sq.\  A.  Conze,  *  Der  betende  Knabe/
Jahrbuch  d,  archdolog.  Inst  i  (1886),  pp.  1-13;  Ch.  Scherer,  De
Olympionicarum  statuis^  P-  3 1  sqq.  ;  C.  Sittl,  Die  Gcbdrden  dcr  Griechen
und  Romer,  p.  305  sqq.

25.  5.  works  of  Oalamis.  Calamis  was  a  master  of  the  older  style
of  sculpture,  one  of  the  immediate  predecessors  of  Phidias ;  he  would
seem  to  have  flourished  about  500-460  B.C.  The  list  of  his  works
points  to  a  great  versatility  and  range  of  talent.  "The  verdict  of
antiquity  has  ascribed  to  him  a  subdued  and  refined  gracefulness  in  his
female  figures,  unrivalled  excellence  in  his  horses,  and  withal  a  certain
remainder  of  archaic  stiffness.  .  .  .  He  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  having
created  a  new  epoch  in  sculpture,  but  as  one  who,  while  adhering  to  the
principles  in  which  he  had  been  trained,  developed  a  more  natural,
finer,  and  higher  conception  of  what  was  beautiful  in  human  expression
and  physical  form,  in  this  way  rather  preparing  the  way  for  his  succes-
sors than  opening  it  himself  (A.  S.  Murray).  It  has  been  conjectured
that  the  victory  of  the  Agrigentines  over  the  Phoenicians  and  Libyans  of
Motye  may  have  coincided  with  the  defeat  of  the  Carthaginians  by
Gelo  in  480  B.C.,  and  hence  that  the  bronze  group  of  praying  boys,  here
described  by  Pausanias,  may  have  been  executed  by  Calamis  soon  after
that  date.

See  Overbeck,  Schriftqtullen^  §§  508-532;  iV.,   Gesch,  d,  griech.  Plastik^^  i.
p.  277  sqq.  ;  Brunn,  Gtsch.  d.  griech.  KiinstUr^  i.  p.  125  sqq.  ;  Murray,  Hist,  of
Greek  Sculpture^"^  I.   p.  226  sqq,  ;  Lucy  M.  Mitchell,  Hist,  of  Ancient  Sculpture^
p.   289  sqq,  ;   Collignon,  Histoire  de  la  Sculpture  grecquCy   I.  pp.  397-408 ;  E,
Gardner,  Handbook  of  Greek  Sculpture^  \,  pp.  232-236.

25.  6.  Sicily  is  inhabited  by  the  following  races  etc.     On  the
various  ancient  races  in  Sicily,  see  Holm,  Geschichte  des  Siciliens^  i.
P-  57  ^9Q'  *»  S'  Heisterbergk,  *  Fragen  der  altesten  Geschichte  Siciliens,
Berliner  Studien  fUr  classische  Philologie^  9,  Heft  3  (Berlin,  1889).

25.  7.  Nicodamos.     See  Index  and  note  on  vi.  6.  3.

25.  8.  statues  of  the  men  who  etc.  See  Homer,  //.  vii.  161  sqq.
This  group  of  Greek  heroes  is  believed  to  have  occupied  the  large
curved  pedestal  which  stands  1 5  metres  east  of  the  south-east  comer  of

VOL.  Ill  2  T


642  THE  GREEK  HEROES  bk.  v.  elis

the  temple  of  Zeus.  The  pedestal,  which  is  of  poros  stone,  is  only
partially  preserved ;  originally  it  may  have  formed  a  semicircle  with
a  radius  of  nearly  1 1  metres  (36  feet).  The  statue  of  Nestor  shaking
the  lots  in  the  helmet  is  supposed  to  have  stood  on  the  round  base
on  the  opposite  side  of  the  way,  which  in  material  and  technique
agrees  exactly  with  the  other  base.  The  g^oup  of  Greek  hcTDCS
must  have  been  older  than  the  temple  of  Zeus,  since  the  fbaDda-
tions  of  the  pedestal  extend  under  the  rubbish -heaps  thrown  up  in
building  the  temple.  See  A.  Furtwangler,  in  Archaologiscke  Zdtungy
37  (1879),  p.  44,  note  3  ;  K.  Purgold,  in  Olympia:  Ergebnisse^  Textband
2.  p.  145  sqq, ;  Flasch,  *  Olympia,'  in  Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  p.  1092
sq. ;  Baedeker,^  p.  340.

25.  9.  the  cock  is  sacred  to  the  Son.  On  the  religious  significance
of  the  cock  in  antiquity,  see  E.  Baethgen,  De  vi  ac  significaHane  galH
in  religionibus  et  artibus  Graecorum  et  Romanorum  (Gottingen,  1 887) ;
G.  Schlumberger,  in  Gazette  arcJUologique,  6  (1880),  p.  192  sg,

25.  I  o.  Onatas.  This  sculptor  is  only  known  ^m  Pausanias  (see
Index),  a  mention  in  the  Greek  anthology  {Anthol,  Paiat.  ix.  238),  and
an  inscription  from  the  base  of  a  statue  by  him.  The  base  was  found  on
the  Acropolis  at  Athens,  and  bears  the  sculptor's  name.  See  *EifnjfUfH^
dpxaioXoyiKrj,  1 887,  p.  145  sq.     Cp.  notes  on  viii.  42.  7  and  8.

25.  II.  Aristocles,  a  Oydonian.  This  sculptor  is  otherwise  un-
known. Zancle  took  the  name  of  Messene  (Messana)  about  494  ac
(see  note  on  iv.  23.  6).  A  fragment  of  Parian  marble,  which  was  found
in  the  temple  of  Zeus  in  1876,  is  conjectured  to  have  belonged  to  the
pedestal  of  the  g^oup  described  by  Pausanias.  It  bears  in  larg^  archaic
letters  the  word  [Kv]8(DviaTas.  See  Die  Inschrifien  von  Olympia^  No.
836  ;  Archdolog.  Zeitung,  40  (1882),  p.  88,  No.  426  ;  Roehl,  /.  G.  A.
No.  577.

25.  12.  The   Thasians  dedicated    a  statue   of  Hercules.

This  dedication  probably  took  place  between  480  B.C.  and  462  B.C,  the
period  when  Thasos  was  free.  For  some  years  before  480  the  island
had  been  subject  to  the  Persians ;  in  462  it  was  conquered  by  the
Athenians.  This  helps  to  fix  the  date  of  Onatas,  the  sculptor  who  made
the  statue.  Cp.  Brunn,  Gesch.  d.  griech.  Kiinstler^  i.  p.  89;  Murray,
Hist,  of  Greek  Sculptttrcy^  i.  p.  200;  and  the  note  on  viii.  42.  8.  As
to  the  Phoenician  origin  of  the  Thasians,  cp.  Herodotus,  ii.  44,  \\.  47 ;
Conon,  NarrationeSy  37.

25.  12.  Hercules  whom  the  Tyrians  revere.  The  Tynan  Her-
cules was  Melcarth  (W.  Robertson  Smith,  Religion  of  the  Semites^'
p.  292).

25.  13.  the  Aeginetan  school  of  sculpture.  Pausanias  often  refers  to
the  Aeginetan  school  of  sculpture.  See  i.  42.  5 ;  ii.  30.  i ;  vii.  5.  5  ;  viii.  53.
II  ;  X.  17.  12,  36.  5.  "  It  is  clear  that  by  the  'Aeginetan  manner'  he
understood  a  rigidity  and  spareness  of  form  approaching  that  of  Egyptian
statuary,  and  that  generally  *  Aeginetan '  was  a  current  equivalent  wth
him  for  *  archaic,'  whereas  *  Attic '  represented  the  highest  art "  (Murray,
Hist,  of  Greek  Scuipture^^  i.  p.  201).  Prof.  Furtwangler's  interpretation
of  the  terms  *  Aeginetan '  and  *  Attic,'  as  applied  by  Pausanias  to  works


CH.  XXVI  THE  MESSENIAN  VICTORY  643

of  art,  is  different.  He  holds  that  by  *Aeginetan'  Pausanias  meant
the  very  archaic  statues  in  which  the  legs  are  not  separated  at  all ;  that
by  *  Egyptian'  (i.  42.  5  ;  ii.  19.  3  ;  iv.  32.  i  ;  vii.  5.  5)  he  meant  the
somewhat  less  archaic  statues  in  which,  though  the  legs  are  not  com-
pletely separated,  the  left  foot  is  a  little  in  advance  of  the  right — a
conmion  Egyptian  type  of  statue ;  and  that  by  *  Attic '  (cp.  x.  33.  4  ;
X.  37.  8)  he  meant  archaic  statues  in  which  the  legs  are  wholly  separate
so  as  to  produce  the  effect  of  free  and  rapid  motion.  According  to
Prof  Furtwangler,  Smilis  was  regarded  by  Pausanias  as  the  founder  of
the  *  Aeginetan '  style,  and  Daedalus  as  the  founder  of  the  *  Attic '  style
of  archaic  sculpture.  See  Furtwangler,  Meisterwcrke  d.  griech.  Plastik,
pp.  720-723.

26.  I.  the  image  of  Victory  that  stands  on  the  pillar.  This
statue  was  found  in  the  course  of  the  German  excavations  at  Olympia,
2 1  St  December  1875.  ^^  originally  occupied  a  lofty  triangular  pedestal,
about  30  metres  east  of  the  south-east  comer  of  the  temple  of  Zeus.
This  triangular  pedestal,  composed  of  a  number  of  prism-shaped  blocks
of  yellowish  marble  with  large  crystals  (the  same  marble  of  which  the
statue  is  made),  is  the  '  pillar '  which  Pausanias  speaks  of  Nine  of
the  blocks  of  the  pedestal  have  been  found ;  five  of  them  lay  beside  the
statue.  It  is  estimated  that  there  were  twelve  of  these  blocks  in  all,
placed  one  above  the  other,  and  that  the  total  height  of  the  pedestal
was  about  9  metres  (nearly  30  feet).  The  statue  is  colossal  and
represents  the  goddess  of  Victory  flying  through  the  air.  Her  drapery
floats  behind  her  on  the  wind.  Underneath  her  feet  is  a  bird,  perhaps
an  eagle,  showing  that  she  is  conceived  as  actually  aloft  in  the  air.
With  the  exception  of  the  face,  the  lower  arms,  and  the  wings,  the
statue  is  nearly  perfect.  The  style  is  remarkably  bold  and  free ;  the
figure  graceful  and  rounded ;  the  lines  of  the  ample  drapery  are  easy
and  flowing.  Altogether  it  shows  an  immense  artistic  advance  upon
the  somewhat  stiff  and  angular  flgures  of  the  eastern  gable,  and  if
it  were  not  for  the  express  statement  of  Pausanias  (v.  10.  8)  that  the
latter  were  by  Paeonius,  nobody,  probably,  would  have  thought  of  attri-
buting them  and  the  Victory  to  the  same  sculptor.  If  they  are  really
by  the  same  artist,  we  must  suppose  that  the  Victory  was  executed  by
him  some  years  after  the  gable  sculptures,  and  that  in  the  interval  he
had  made  great  strides,  not  merely  in  technical  skill,  but  in  artistic  con-
ception. In  fact  the  resemblance  of  the  Victory  to  the  sculptures  of  the
Parthenon  in  respect  of  grace,  dignity,  and  freedom  of  style  is  so  great,
that  we  can  hardly  help  concluding  that  when  Paeonius  executed  it  he
must  have  studied  under  Phidias,  and  caught  his  manner.

The  pedestal  of  the  statue  bears  the  following  inscription  : —

Mc(r(ravtOi  koI  ^axjiraKrioi,  avc^ev  Ati
'OAv/iTri<{)  hiKorav  airh  TiayL  7roX,€fUiov.

Ilataii'cos  ciroi7/(r€  M€v8aioSf

Kol  TaKpiOTi/jpia  TTOidv  €Trt  rhv  vahv  tViKa,

'<  Messenians  and  Naupactians  dedicated  (this  statue)  to  Olympian
Zeus  as  a  tithe  from  their  enemies.     Paeonius,  a  Mendaean,  made  (it).


CH.  XXVI  THE  MESSENIAN  VICTOR  V  645

and  he  was  victorious  in  making  the  top-figures  (akroieria)  which  were
to  be  placed  on  the  temple."  The  alphabet  of  the  inscription  is  the
Ionic  throughout ;  the  first  two  lines  of  it  are  in  the  Doric  dialect,  the
second  two  are  in  the  Attic  or  more  probably  Ionic  dialect  (see  below).
This  inscription  has  been  much  discussed.  (i)  Who  are  the
*  enemies'  referred  to?  The  remarks  of  Pausanias  on  this  subject
show  that  the  question  was  debated  in  his  day,  and  modem  scholars
have  not  yet  arrived  at  an  agreement  on  the  subject.  Pausanias  him-
self thought  that  the  statue  was  erected  from  the  booty  taken  by  the
Messenians  of  Naupactus  from  the  Acamanians  of  Oeniadae.  He
probably  refers  to  the  capture  of  Oeniadae  by  the  Messenians  of
Naupactus,  as  to  which  see  iv.  25.  It  must  have  occurred  soon  after
456  or  455  B.C.,  the  year  when  the  Messenians  were  settled  at  Nau-
pactus. But  as  the  Messenians  were  forced  to  evacuate  Oeniadae  in
the  following  year,  its  temporary  conquest  seems  hardly  a  fit  subject
for  a  grand  triumphal  monument.  The  other  view  mentioned  by
Pausanias,  that  the  Victory  was  erected  as  a  trophy  of  the  success  which
the  Messenians,  as  allies  of  the  Athenians,  obtained  over  the  Spartans
at  Sphacteria  in  425  b.c.  (Thucydides,  iv.  chs.  9,  32,  36,  41)  agrees
much  better  with  the  style  of  the  statue  (see  above).  Against  this
view,  however,  it  has  been  urged  with  some  force  that  the  booty  taken
at  Sphacteria  was  too  scanty  to  suffice  for  the  erection  of  so  splendid  a
monument,  and  that  the  Naupactians  would  not  have  joined  the  Mes-
senians in  erecting  a  trophy  of  a  victory  in  which  they  had  no  share.
For  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  Naupactians  mentioned  in  the  inscrip-
tion can  hardly  be  the  Messenians  settled  at  Naupactus,  but  must  be  a
remnant  of  the  old  population  who  were  suffered  to  remain  in  Naupactus
after  the  Messenian  settlement  and  who  fought  on  the  side  of  the
Messenian  settlers  in  their  wars.  The  most  probable  view  seems  to  be
that  the  trophy  was  erected  jointly  by  the  new  Messenian  settlers  and
some  of  the  old  inhabitants  of  Naupactus  for  victories  achieved  by  them
alone  or  as  allies  of  the  Athenians  in  the  early  years  of  the  Pelopon-
nesian  war  (cp.  Thucydides,  iii.  105- 113).  On  this  hypothesis  we  may
suppose  that  the  monument  was  set  up  on  the  conclusion  of  the  peace
of  Nicias  in  421  B.C.  (Thucydides,  v.  18  5q,\  and  that  the  enemies
mentioned  in  the  inscription  comprised  a  number  of  peoples  (Ambraciots,
Aetolians,  etc.)  who  had  been  vanquished  on  various  occasions  by  the
allied  Messenians  and  Naupactians.  In  inscriptions  commemorative  of
victories  it  was  not  uncommon  to  refer  to  *the  enemies'  in  general
terms  without  specifying  them  by  name  (Pausanias,  v.  24.  7  ;  Roehl,  /.
6^.  -<4.  3  a,  p.  169  ;  Bull,  de  Corr.  helUn,  i  (1877),  P-  84,  No.  17  ;  /V/.,
15  (1891),  p.  629,  No.  I  ;  CI.  A.  2.  No.  11 54).  Hence  there  is  no
reason  for  supposing  that  in  this  particular  case  the  name  of  the  enemies
was  suppressed  from  fear,  and  that  consequently  the  enemies  in  question
were  the  Lacedaemonians.  Another  inscription  found  at  Olympia
proves  that  a  much  feebler  people  than  the  Messenians  (to  wit  the
Methanians)  were  not  afraid  openly  to  commemorate  a  victory  won  by
them  over  the  Lacedaemonians  {Die  Inschriften  von  Olympia^  No.
247  ;   Roehl,   /.    G.  A.   No.    46 ;    Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr.  Graec,^   No.


646  THE  MESSENIAN  VICTOR  Y  BK.  v.  elfs

63 ;   Roberts,   Greek  Epigraphy^   No.    286 ;    Collitz,    G.  D.   /.    3.  No.

3369).

(2)  The  meaning  of  raic/o<tfn{/9ia  in  the  last  line  of  the  inscripticra

has  been  much  debated  (see  note  on  v.   10.  8).     The  nature  of  the

competition  in  which  Paeonius  was  victorious  (cvtica)  is  also  uncertain.

Was  the  competition  between  designs  sent  in  by  various  artists?  or

was  it  between  finished  works  of  art  ?     The  practice  of  antiquity  seems

in  favour  of  the  latter  view.     See  Pliny,  N,  H.  xxxiv.  59,  xxxv.  65  and

72,,  jOcxvi.   17.     Mr.  A.  S.  Murray  has  suggested  that  there  was  no

oolmpetition  at  all,  and  that   the  verb  mica,   'was  victorious,'  merely

contains  a  punning  reference  to  the  fact  that  Paeonius  had  made  several

statues  of  Victory  (namely  one,  or  perhaps  two,  on  the  roof  of  the  temple,

besides  the  colossal  one  in  question).     But  this  seems  very  unlikely.

The  town  of  Mende,  to  which  Paeonius  belonged,  is  supposed  to
have  been,  not  the  Mende  on  Pallene,  but  the  Thracian  Mende  men-
tioned by  Pausanias  elsewhere  (v.  27.  12).  The  inhabitants  of  the
latter  town  were  lonians  by  descent,  and  this  may  explain  why  the
inscription  on  the  base  of  the  Messenian  Victory  is  in  the  Ionic  alpha-
bet, and  why  the  artist  apparently  recorded  his  name  and  achievements
in  the  Ionic  dialect.

At  a  later  time,  about  140  B.C,  the  Messenians  engraved  on  two
of  the  blocks  of  the  pedestal  a  copy  of  the  award  which  certain
Milesian  arbitrators  had  given  in  favour  of  Messenia  in  the  dispute
between  Messenia  and  Laconia  for  the  possession  of  the  Denthelian
district  {^Die  InschrifUn  von  Olympia^  No.  52  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge
Inscr.  Grace,  No.  240 ;  Hicks,  Greek  histor.  Inscript,  No.  200 ;  as  to
the  Denthelian  district  see  note  on  iv.  31.  i).

As  to  the  statue  and  its  inscription,  see  Olympia:  Ergebnisse,  Tafelband  3.
plates  xlvi.-xlviii.  ;  id.y  Tafelband  2.  pi.  xciii.  ;  Die  Jnschriften  von  Olympia^  No.
259  ;  K.  Purgold,  in  Olympia:  Ergcbnisse^  Tcxtband  2.  pp.  1 53- 1 55  ;  Die  Funde
von  Olympiay  pi.  xvi.  ;  E.  Curtius,  in  Archaologische  Zeitungy  33.  pp.  178-iSi  ;
«V/.,  Gesammelte  Abhandluugen^  2.  pp.  440-442  ;  id.^m  Berliner philolog.  Wochen-
schrifty  7  October  1893,  P*  1308  sij. ;  A.  Michaelis,  in  Ar(kdologisc?u  Zeitungy  34,
(1876),  p.  168  sqq,  ;  R.  Weil,  ib.  p.  229  sq.  ;  J.  Schubring,  ib,  35  (1877),  pp.  59-
67  ;  H.  Bninn,  in  Sitzungsbcrichte  of  the  Bavarian  Academy  (Munich),  Philosoph.*
philolog.  CI.,  1876,  pp.  338-342;  ib.  1877,  p.  21  sqq,  ;  Schubart,  in  Fteckeisens
JakrbUcher^  22  (1876),  pp.  397-401  ;  ib.  23  (1877),  p.  385  sq,  ;  Hicks,  Greek
histor.  Inscriptions^  No.  49  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Graec.  No.  30 ;  Loewy,
Inschriften  griech.  Bildhauer^  No.  49 ;  Roehl,  /.  G,  A.  No.  348 ;  L.  Urlichs,
Bemerkungen  iiber  den  olympischen  Tempel^  p.  7  sqq.  ;  \V.  Gurlitt,  in  Histor.  u.
philolog.  Aufsatze  Ernst  Cur  tins  gewidmet^  p.  263  sqq.  ;  Overbeck,  Gesch,  d.
griech.  Blast ik^*  i.  pp.  541-548  ;  A.  S.  Murray,  Hist  of  Greek  Sculpture^  2,  p.
162  sqq.  ;  id.y  in  Academy,  2  October  1886,  p.  230;  Lucy  M.  Mitchell,  Hist.  ^
Ancient  Sculpture,  pp.  402-405  ;  A.  Kirchhon,  Studien  zur  Geschichte  des  griecL
Alphabets,*  "p.  120  note  I  ;  A.  Bcitticher,  Olympia,"^  \>,  329  sqq.  ;  Flasch,  *  Olympia,'
in  Baumeister*s  Denkmdler,  pp.  1104  g  g  sqq.,  1104  L  L  sqq.  ;  Fr.  Koepp,  *  Uebw
die  Weihinschrift  der  Nike  des  Paionios,*  Kheinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  50  (1895),
pp.  268-276.

26.  2.  the  votive  offerings  of  Micythus.  As  to  Micythus,  see
§  4  sq.  Herodotus  says  of  him  (vii.  1 70),  "  Micythus,  being  a  slave  of
Anaxilas,  was  left  by  him  regent  of  Rhegium.  It  was  he  who,  after
being  banished  from  Rhegium  and  taking  up  his  abode  at  Tegea  in


CH.  XXVI  OFFERINGS  OF  MICYTHUS  647

Arcadia,  dedicated  the  many  statues  at  Olympia.''  Diodorus  tells  us
(xi.  48)  that  when  Anaxilas,  tyrant  of  Rhegium,  died  in  476  B.C.,  he
bequeathed  the  tyranny  to  Micythus  in  trust  for  his  children  ;  and  that
in  467  B.C,  when  the  sons  of  Anaxilas  came  of  age,  they  demanded
an  account  from  Micythus.  He  gave  them  a  good  account  of  all  he
had  done,  proving  that  he  had  been  faithful  to  his  trust ;  they  entreated
him  to  resume  the  government,  but  he  declined ;  and,  placing  his  sub-
stance on  shipboard,  sailed  away,  followed  by  the  good  wishes  of  all  the
common  people ;  he  then  settled  at  Tegea  in  Arcadia,  where  he  died
highly  esteemed  (Diodorus,  xi.  66).  Cp.  Justin,  iv.  2 ;  Macrobius,
Saturn,  i.  11.  29.  Hence  the  votive  offerings  of  Micythus  at  Olympia
must  have  been  made  later  than  467  B.C.,  the  year  in  which  he  settled
at  Tegea.  Cp.  Bentley,  Dissertations  upon  the  epistles  of  Phalaris,  p.
201  sq.j  ed.  Wagner.

Fragments  of  the  pedestal  which  supported  some  of  the  votive
offerings  of  Micythus  have  been  found  at  Olympia.  One  block  of
greyish-white  marble  was  found  (20th  May  1879)  to  the  south-east  of
the  temple  of  Hera  baiuring  the  following  fragmentary  inscription  in  the
Chalcidian  alphabet :

,^  vtos  FoiK€iav  €V  Trycj;

V  icai  Stats  vcurais
at  )(prffiaTtt}Vj  oova  Fol  vXjturra  iytv
cA^cuv,  CTTCira  ev^/itv

The  block  now  lies  outside  the  north-east  comer  of  th^  Pelopium.  The
mutilated  inscription  is  thus  restored  by  Prof.  Kaibel : —

MtKv^os  6  \oipov  ^^rjylvos  koi  M€cro">;]vtos,  f oiiccwv  iv  Tcyejy

rdyaXfjuoLTa  rdSt  Otois  dv€$7]K€  ttgutiJv  koi  6€aLS  irocrais*

iraiShs    Sc    vocrov    <f>0i.vd8a    vocrcovros    kjolI    ^prqfidruiv    oava    Fol

TrAcMrra  €y€v[€TO  Bvvarhv]
IrjTpots  ^iravrjO(VT(av,  h  'Okvfivtrjv]  ikOwv,  CTrctra  €v^dfi€V
OS ...  .  dv€OrjK€vy

"  Micythus  of  Rhegium  and  Messene,  son  of  Choerus,  dwelling  in
Tegea,  dedicated  these  images  to  all  gods  and  goddesses.  His  son
being  sick  of  a  wasting  sickness,  and  having  spent  all  the  money  he
could  upon  physicians,  he  (Micythus)  came  to  Olympia,  and  having
made  a  vow  dedicated "

Again,  to  the  north-east  of  the  temple  of  Zeus,  another  block  of
greyish-white  marble  was  found,  bearing  the  same  inscription  in  a  still
more  mutilated  state,  but  differing  from  the  former  inscription  some-
what in  spelling  and  alphabet  It  appears,  however,  to  have  belonged
to  the  same  pedestal.  One  of  the  groups  dedicated  by  Micythus
contained  so  many  figures  that  a  large  pedestal  must  have  been  required
to  support  them,  and  the  same  inscription  may  have  been  engraved  on
two  parts  of  it  But  it  is  equally  possible  that  the  second  inscription
may  have  belonged  to  a  separate  pedestal  of  similar  style  ;  for  we  know
from  Pausanias  that  the  offerings  of  Micythus  were  not  all  together.
Lastly,  five  small  pieces  of  marble  inscribed  with  a  few  letters  of  the


648  OFFERINGS  OF  MICYTHUS  bk.  v.  elis

same  inscription  have  been  found  at  Olympia  ;  whether  they  belong  to
one  or  other  of  the  two  mutilated  copies  of  the  inscription  already
mentioned  or  to  a  third  copy  of  it,  we  cannot  say  for  certain.

It  is  conjectured  that  the  foundations  of  a  pedestal  (about  40  feet
long)  which  are  to  be  seen  about  30  feet  to  the  north  of  the  temple  of
Zeus,  and  nearly  parallel  with  it,  may  have  supported  what  Pausanias
calls  (§  6)  the  greater  offerings  of  Micythus.  This  would  agree  with
the  statement  of  Pausanias  that  they  were  *^  on  the  left  side  of  the  great
temple,"  supposing  that  in  giving  this  direction  Pausanias  conceived
himself  facing  eastward.  The  foundations  in  question  are  of  poras
stone ;  but  the  pedestal  which  they  supported  may  have  been  of  marble.
If  this  identification  is  right,  the  offerings  were  later  than  the  temple  of
Zeus,  for  the  pedestal  stands  upon  the  rubbish  which  was  thrown  up  in
building  the  temple ;  on  this  hypothesis  they  can  hardly  have  been  set
up  sooner  than  460  ac.

See  Die  Inschrifien  von  Olympia^  Nos.  267,  268,  269  ;  Archiiologische  Zeitung^
36(1878),  p.  139,  Inscr.  No.  175;  id,,  37  (1879),  pp.  lAt^i^i  (Inscr.  No.  300);
Roehl,  /.  G,  A,  Nos.  532,  533 ;  Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr,  Graec.*  No.  537  ;  Loewy,
Inschrifien  griech,  Bildhauer^  No.  31  ;  Roberts,  Greek  Epigraphy^  Nos.  180,  181  ;
G.  Kaibel,  in  Hermes,  28  (1893),  pp.  60-62;  A.  Bottidier,'  Olympia,  p.  327
sq.  ;  Flasch,  *  Olympia,*  in  Baumeister's  Denkmdler,  p.  1093.

26.  2.  Ecechiria  crownixig  Iphitns  etc.     See  v.  10.  10.

26.  2.  Glancus,  an  Argive.  This  sculptor  is  otherwise  unknown.
He  must  have  flourished  soon  after  467  B.C.     See  note  on  §  i.

26.  2.  Hesiod.  On  portraits  of  Hesiod  see  Panofka,  in  Archdolo-
gische  Zeitungy  1856,  p.  253  sq.

26.  3.  a  figure  of  Contest.  For  this  personification,  cp.  v.  20.  3.
Personified  Contest  is  thought  by  some  to  have  been  occasionally
represented  as  a  winged  youth,  but  this  is  doubtful.  See  Gerhard,  in
Archdologische  Zeitung,  7  (1849),  pp.  9-15  ;  /V/.,  Akademische  Abkand-
lungen,  i.  p.  162  sq.^  with  pi.  xii.  2  and  3  ;  De  Witte,  in  Revue
archdologique,  N.S.  17  (1868),  pp.  372-381  ;  K.  O.  Miiller,  Arckaeologie
der  Kunsty  %  406.  2;  Schreiber,  in  Roscher's  Lcxikon^  s.v.  *Agon';
Daremberg  et  Saglio,  Diet,  des  AntiquWs,  i.  p.  147  ;  Reisch,  in  Paul>''s
Real'Encyclopddte^  ed.  Wissowa,  s.v,  *Agon.'

26.  3-  leaping-weights.  Cp.  v.  27.  12  ;  vi.  3.  10.  As  to  leaping-
weights  see  Lucian,  Anacharsis^  27  ;  Philostratus,  De  arte  gymnasiica^
55  ;  Etymol.  Magnum,  p.  71.  20  sqq.  In  the  Museum  at  Olympia  there
is  a  leaping-weight,  made  of  stone,  with  a  place  for  the  fingers  to  slip
through,  such  as  Pausanias  describes.  A  pair  of  ancient  leaping-
weights,  of  exactly  the  shape  described  by  Pausanias,  was  also  found
at  Corinth  some  years  ago.  The  weights  are  of  stone,  each  being  in
the  shape  of  an  ellipse  or  elongated  circle  (as  Pausanias  calls  it).
In  the  diameter  is  a  hole,  with  hollows  on  each  side,  through  which
the  fingers  slipped  in  grasping  the  weight.  See  'E<f>r)fjL€pU  a/)X<»"^
Aoyt/c^,  1883,  pp.  103-105  ;  Schreiber,  Bilder-At/aSj  taf.  xxii.  No.  10.
On  pp.  189,  190  of  the  same  number  of  the  *E<fy>]fi.  dp\.  is  represented
a  leaden  leaping-weight  of  a  different  shape.  On  a  votive  disc  of
bronze,   found  in   Sicily,  an  athlete  is   represented  holding  a  pair  of


CH.  XXVII  THE  herald's  STAFF  649

leaping- weights  in  his  raised  and  outstretched  arms.  See  Gazette
archMogique^  i  (1875),  pl-  35>  with  Fr.  Lenormant's  remarks,  p.  130
sq.  In  later  times  the  leaping-weights  seem  to  have  had  the  shape  of
our  dumb-bells.  See  Monumenti  Inediti^  5  (185 1),  tav.  xxxiii. ;  Ad.
Botticher,  Olympiad  p.  108  sq,

26.  3.  Dionysins,  an  Argive.  Cp.  §  7  of  this  chapter  and  §  2  of
the  next.  The  sculptor  is  otherwise  unknown.  Like  Glaucus  (§  2)  he
must  have  flourished  soon  after  467  B.C.

26.  7-  some  Boeotians  of  Tanagra  also  shared  in  planting  the
colony.  Justin  (xvi.  3)  speaks  of  Heraclea  Pontica  as  if  it  were  a
purely  Boeotian  colony.  According  to  Strabo  (xii.  p.  542)  it  was  a
colony  of  Miletus.

27.  2.  Simon  an  Aeginetan.  As  a  contemporary  of  Gelo  and
Hiero,  as  well  as  of  the  sculptor  Dionysius  (see  §  3  note),  Simon  the
Aeginetan  must  have  flourished  about  488-460  B.C.  Pliny  (NcU,  hist,
xxxiv.  90)  mentions  a  sculptor  Simon  who  made  figures  of  a  dog  and
an  archer.     Cp.  Brunn,  Gesch,  d,  grieck,  Kiinstler^  i.  p.  84.

27.  3.  the  Hippomanes.  The  story  which  follows  about  the
bronze  horse  of  Phormis  is  told  in  substance  also  by  Aeliah  iJDe  nai,
anim.  xiv.  18)  and  Pliny  {Nat,  hist,  xxviii.  181).  On  the  Hippo-
manes, see  Stephani,  in  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg),  1864,  p.
26  sq,

27.  6.  he  chants  the  words  from  a  book.  The  book  may  have
been  the  Zend  Avesta,  or  at  all  events  some  of  the  hynms  which  were
afterwards  included  in  the  Zend  Avesta.  See  Darmesteter's  introduction
to  his  translation  of  the  Zend  Avesta,  vol.  i.  p.  xlii.

27.  8.  Hermes  carrying  the  ram  under  his  arm.  See  note  on
ix.  22.  I.

27.  8.  OaUiteles.     Nothing  more  is  known  of  this  artist.

27.  8.  a  herald's  staff.  This  is  what  the  Romans  called  the
caduceus.  The  common  form  of  the  caduceus  is  a  staff  surmounted  by
a  circle,  and  that  again  by  an  incomplete  circle,  the  circles  being
formed  by  two  serpents  intertwined.  But  there  are  a  number  of  minor
variations  of  form.  On  the  various  forms  of  the  caduceus^  see  L.
Preller,  Ausgewdhlte  Aufsatze^  pp.  147-157;  and  cp.  Gerhard,  Apu-
lische  Vasenbilder^  plates  xi.  and  xiii.  ;  Monutnenti  Inedifiy  8.  taf.  ix.
Sometimes  the  serpents  which  compose  the  caduceus  are  represented
locked  together  in  the  so-called  *  knot  of  Hercules.'  See  Migliarini,  in
Annali  delV  Instituto^  24  (1852),  pp.  105-107,  with  tav.  d'  agg.  F;
Macrobius,  Saturn,  i.  19.  16.  As  to  the  *knot  of  Hercules,'  see  also
Pliny,  Nat,  hist,  xxviii.  63 ;  Festus,  s.v,  *  Cingulo,'  p.  63,  ed.  Miiller ;
Athenaeus,  xi.  p.  500  a.  On  representations  of  the  *  knot  of  Hercules '
in  ancient  art,  see  Stephani,  in  Compte  Rendu  {Sx,  Petersburg),  1880,
p.  32  sqq.  From  these  representations  it  appears,  as  my  lamented
friend  the  late  W.  Robertson  Smith  pointed  out  to  me,  that  the  *  knot
of  Hercules'  is  the  common  *sailor^s  knot.'  Hence  it  is  absurd  to
suggest,  as  Stephani  does,  that  the  Gordian  knot  may  have  been  *  the
knot  of  Hercules,'  for  the  *  sailor's  knot '  is  the  easiest  of  all  knots  to
untie.     Robertson  Smith  suggested  that  the  *knot  of  Hercules'  may


650  THE  HERALD  S  STAFF  bk.  v.  elis

have  been  the  knot  used  by  the  Phoenician  sailors  ;  the  name  seems  to
point  to  an  eastern  origin.

Three  ancient  heralds*  staves  {caducei)  are  known  to  be  in  existence.
They  are  of  bronze,  and  all  bear  inscriptions.  They  were  found  in
Southern  Italy.  See  Th.  Mommsen,  in  Hermes,  3  (1869),  p.  298  jf.
A  figure  holding  a  caduceus  appears  on  an  ancient  Phrygian  monument ;
hence  Prof.  W.  M.  Ramsay  has  conjectured  that  the  caduceus,  "  like  so
many  other  religious  ideas,"  came  to  Greece  from  Phrygia.  See  Journal
of  Hellenic  Studies,  3  (1882),  p.  9  j^.  The  caduceus  also  appears  on
Phoenician  monuments.  See  Mr.  Philippe  Berger,  in  Gazette  Arckio-
logique,  6  (1880),  p.  167  ;  and  for  a  Carthaginian  monument  with  two
caducei  on  it,  see  ib,  9  (1884),  pi.  12.  In  classical  art  the  caduceus  is
generally  represented  in  the  hand  of  Hermes,  the  herald  of  the  gods ;
but  it  is  also  an  attribute  of  Iris,  the  messenger  of  the  gods.  For
examples  of  Iris  with  the  caduceus,  see  Monumenti  Inediti,  6.  pL  58 ;
ib,  6  and  7.  pi.  66;  Annali  delV  Instituto,  1859,  pi.  G  H  ;  GasetU
archdologique,  10  (1884),  pi.  12.  On  a  marble  cippus  found  near  the
Flaminian  Way,  the  dog-  or  jackal-headed  Egyptian  Anubis  is  repre-
sented holding  a  caduceus.  See  Annali  delV  Instituto,  1879,  tav.  d'  agg.
I,  with  the  remarks  of  Mr.  Marucchi,  p.  158  sqq.

With  regard  to  the  meaning  of  the  caduceus,  it  may  be  observed
that  magic  virtue  seems  to  have  been  ascribed  to  serpents  intertwined.
For  the  soothsayer  Tiresias  was  said  to  have  been  changed  from  a  man
into  a  woman  in  consequence  of  seeing  and  wounding  two  snakes  which
he  found  coupling  on  Cyllene,  the  sacred  mountain  of  Hermes,  and
he  afterwards  recovered  his  former  sex  by  seeing  the  same  snakes
coupling  again  (Apollodorus,  iii.  6.  7).  At  the  present  day  people  at
San  Demetrio  in  Calabria  believe  that  a  stick  which  has  touched  or
killed  two  intertwined  serpents  has  special  virtues  as  an  amulet
(Vincenso  Dorsa,  La  tradizione  Greco-latina  negli  usi  e  fulle  crcdenze
popolari  delta  Calabria  Citeriore^^  p.  141).

Intertwined  serpents  like  those  on  the  caduceus  are  car\*ed  on  one
of  the  rock-hewn  temples  of  Ellora  in  India.  See  Asiatick  Researches^
vol.  6,  plate  facing  p.  389  (8vo  edition).  "  In  the  district  of  Kulbarga,
in  the  Nizdm  of  Haidardbdd's  territories  at  Wddf,  there  are  to  be  found
in  every  village  slabs  of  limestone  placed  near  Hindu  shrines,  on  which
are  engraved  rude  images  of  two  serpents  entwined  beneath  a  sun,  like
those  on  the  caduceus  of  Mercury"  {Panjab  Notes  and  Queries,  2  (1885),
§  446).  In  the  neighbourhood  of  Bangalor  stones  car>'ed  with  repre-
sentations of  intertwined  serpents  are  worshipped  by  women.  See
Ifidian  Antiquary^  4  (1875),  P-  5>  ^^'i^h  the  plate.

27.  8.  an  inscription  on  it  declares  that  it  was  dedicated  by
Glaucias  of  Bhegium  etc.  This  inscription  has  been  found.  It  is
on  two  fragments  of  grey  volcanic  stone,  which  were  found  in  the  court
of  the  Wrestling-School  {Palaestra)  at  Olympia.  The  inscription  is
mutilated  ;  as  restored  it  runs  :

TAavKi]at  /x€  KaAcov  y€v[€ttr  /^aA.€to/o  €7rot>/.
rA.a]vKi7y9  o  AvkklScuj
Ttu]t   E/)/A7/  *P[7;]yrvo9.


CTi.  XXVII  THE  ERETRIAN  BULL  651

"  Gallon,  by  birth  an  Elean,  made  me  for  Glaucias.  Glaucias  of
Rhegium,  the  son  of  Lyccides,  (dedicated  me)  to  Hermes."  The  dialect
and  alphabet  of  the  first  line,  which  forms  a  hexameter,  are  Elean  ;  but
the  dialect  of  the  two  last  lines  is  Ghalcidian,  and  the  alphabet  of  these
two  last  lines  is  Ghalcidian,  modified  by  Ionic  influence.  From  the
palaeographical  character  of  these  lines  compared  with  the  legends  on
coins  of  Rhegium,  it  would  seem  that  the  inscription  is  to  be  dated
between  420  and  410  B.C.

See  Die  Inschriften  von  Olympia,  No.  271 ;  Archaohgische  Zeitung^  36  (1878),
p.  142,  No.  187  ;  Roehl,  I,G,  A,  No.  536 ;  Loewy,  Inschriften  griech,  Bildhcuury
No.  33  ;  Gauer,  Delectus  Inscr,  GraecJ  No.  538 ;  Roberts,  Greei  Epigraphy ^  No.
182;  Collitz,  G,  D.  L  No.  1169;  E.  HofTmann,  Sylloge  Epigram,  Graec,  No.
402.     As  to  Gallon's  date,  see  v.  25.  4  note.

27.  9.  the  other  of  the  Eretrians.  The  pedestal  which  supported
the  Eretrian  bull  is  still  standing  in  its  original  position,  about  32  metres
east  of  the  north-east  comer  of  the  temple  of  Zeus.  It  is  about  1 1  feet
long  and  is  composed  of  two  blocks  of  Parian  marble  resting  on  a
substructure  of  native  shell -limestone.  On  the  upper  surface  of  the
pedestal  are  the  marks  of  the  four  places  where  the  feet  of  the  bronze
bull  were  fastened.  These  marks  show  that  the  bull  faced  southward,
and  was  represented  walking  with  the  two  feet  of  the  left  side  in  advance.
A  long  narrow  slit  or  incision  at  the  north-east  comer  of  the  upper
surface  of  the  base  probably  contained  a  bronze  tablet  with  inscription.
On  the  eastem  edge  of  the  upper  surface  of  the  pedestal  is  the  following
inscription,  carved  in  large  archaic  letters :

^tAccrios  c7roi(€).

*Ep€TpliS  TOl  At.

**  Philesius  made  (it).  The  Eretrians  (dedicated  it)  to  Zeus."  The
inscription  appears  to  belong  to  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.
On  the  pedestal  was  found  one  of  the  bronze  ears  of  the  bull,  in  perfect
preservation,  weighing  about  6  lbs.  A  few  paces  to  the  north  of  the
pedestal  was  found  one  of  the  homs  of  the  bull ;  lacking  the  point  it
measures  about  18  inches  long  and  weighs  about  20  lbs.  Both  ear
and  hom  may  be  seen  in  the  Museum  at  Olympia.

See  Die  Inschriften  von  Olympia^  No.  248 ;  K.  Purgold,  in  Olympia :  Ergeb-
nisse,  Textband  2.  p.  147 ;  Olymfia :  Ergebnisse,  Tafelband  2.  pL  xcii.  No.  I2 ;
Archdologische  Zeitung,  34  (1870),  p.  226,  Inscr.  No.  31  ;  Roehl,  /.  G,  A.  No.
373  ;  Loewy,  Inschriften  griech,  Bildhauer^  No.  26 ;  Roberts,  Greek  Epigraphy ^
No.  170;  Gauer,  Delectus  Inscr,  GrcucJ*  No.  552;  KirchhoflT,  Studien  tur
Geschichte  des  griech.  Alphabets ^^  p.  116  sq,\  Flasch,  *  Olympia,'  in  Baumeister's
Denknidler,  p.  1094.

27.  9.  will  be  shown  in  my  description  of  Phocis.    See  x.  9.  3  sq,
27.  10.  guilty  of  blood.     As  to  the  idea  that  inanimate  objects
can  incur  the  guilt  of  bloodshed,  see  note  on  i.  28.  10.

27.  1 1,  a  bronze  trophy for  a  victory  over  the  Lacedae-
monians etc.  According  to  Pausanias  this  battle  was  fought  within
the  Altis  itself  in  the  reign  of  Agis  (v.  20.  4  ;  vi.  2.  3).     Thus  the  war


652  THE  ELEAN  TROPHY  bk.  v.  elis

in  the  course  of  which  the  battle  took  place  was  that  of  401-399  B.C,
which  Pausanias  has  narrated  elsewhere  (v.  8.  3-5).  But  Xenophon,
who  is  our  chief  authority  for  that  war  {HelUnica^  iii.  2.  21-31),  makes
no  mention  of  a  battle  in  the  Altis.  Hence  Prof  Robert  conjectures
that  the  Elean  victory  commemorated  by  the  trophy  in  the  Altis  was
not  gained  in  this  war  at  all,  but  that  it  may  have  been  some  success
achieved  by  the  Eleans  in  4 1 8  B.C.,  when  an  Elean  contingent  of  3000
men  joined  the  Argive  army  which  was  operating  against  the  Lacedae-
monians (Thucydides,  v.  58-60).  As  to  Pausanias's  statement  that  a
battle  was  fought  within  the  Altis,  Prof.  Robert  dismisses  it  on  the
ground  that  it  is  probably  a  mere  unwarranted  inference  from  the  fact
that  the  trophy  stood  in  the  Altis.  See  C.  Robert,  in  Hermes^  23
(1888),  pp.  424-429.  But  we  have  no  right  to  reject  Pausanias's
express  and  repeated  statement  on  such  purely  conjectural  g^unds.
The  silence  of  Xenophon  as  to  a  battle  in  the  Altis  proves  little,  for
Pausanias  may  well  have  had  access  to  other  sources.  Nor  does  Prof.
Robert's  conjecture  as  to  the  date  of  the  victory  receive  any  counten-
ance from  Thucydides,  who  mentions  no  encounter  between  the  Eleans
and  the  Lacedaemonians  in  418  B.C.,  but  on  the  contrary  informs  us
that  the  hostile  armies  returned  home  without  coming  to  a  battle.

27.  12.  Mende,  in  Thrace.  This  town,  not  to  be  confounded
with  Mende  on  the  peninsula  of  Pallene,  appears  to  be  mentioned  by
no  other  writer.     Cp.  note  on  v.  26.  i.


END  OF  VOL.  Ill


Printed  hy  R.  &  R.  Clark,  Limited,  Edinturgk.


c


nHiiiliimiH

3  biQS  012  ats  oia


'f  ■


■  •  'tf:  •' •->


I


.«»•  :.    V


•»''•«.


M.


v^'^^^f.


2  5  1978


.i/


i-^


I


^50*64


Date  Due

^^

BD       CAT.    NO.

14    1«9

/-^—

I  CO   IN    U.S. A

•
