Google


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  Hbrary  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.
We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web

at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/|


From  the  library  of
CAPTAIN  THOMAS  J.  J.  SEE

Presented  to  Stanford  by  bis  son


•n


PAUSANIASS
DESCRIPTION  OF  GREECE


PAUSANIAS'S


DESCRIPTION   OF  GREECE


TRANSLATED  WITH  A  COMMENTARY

BY

J.   G.   FRAZER

M.A.,  LUD.  GLASGOW  ;  FELLOW  OP   TRINITY  COLLBGB,   CAMBRIOCB  ;
OF  THE  MIDDLE  TEMPLE,   BARRISTER-AT'LAW


IN  SIX  VOLUMES

VOL.  II
COMMENTARY  ON   BOOK   I


MACMILLAN    AND   CO.,  Limited

NEW  YORK :  THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY

1898

AH  rifhtt  reserved


r


V.-


CONTENTS


PAGE

Commentary  on  Book  I.  Attica    .  .  .  .  i

Appendix       .......      553


I

f


-N


»»


CORRIGENDA

Page  156,  line  i'^  from  foot.     For  him  read  Micon.

It     209,     ,,24    ,,      ,,       .^fr  statues  of  A^  Dionysus  and.

„     289,     „     2     ,,      ,,       For  xxxm,  read  xxxiv.

504,  ,,  6  ,,  ,,  ,,  coloured  grey  rf a/ coloured  red,  grey,  blue  and
purple.  N.B, — The  references  in  the  text  are  to  the  older  plan  of
Eleusis  published  in  Mr.  L.  Dyer's  Gods  of  Greece,  for  which ^
after  the  text  was  printed  offy  the  later  and  fuller  plan  given  by
Mr.  D.  Philios  in  his  work  Eleusis  {Athens ^  1896)  was  substituted.
The  new  plan  was  adapted  as  far  as  possible  to  the  description  in  the
text^  but  sonte  discrepancies  remain.  The  references  to  the  plan  on
pp.  504,  505  (for  yellow  read  blue),  509  {for  dotted  hatchings  read
green,  etc.),  510  (for  blank  circles  recul  yellow  circles)  should  be
corrected  accordingly.


ILLUSTRATIONS


FIG.

1.  Peace  cairying  Wealth  (Marble  Statue,  Munich)

2.  Peace  carrying  Wealth  (G>in)   .

3.  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton  (G>in)

4.  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton  (Marble  Relief)

5.  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton  (Panathenaic  Amphora)

6.  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton  (Naples  Museum)  .

7.  Plan  of  Ol3rmpieum        ....

8.  Seated  Zeus  (Athenian  Coin)

9.  Dionysus  (Athenian  Coin)
ta  Plan  of  Propylaea

1 1.  The  Graces  (Chiaramonti  Relief)

12.  The  Graces  and  Hermes  (?)  (Marble  Relief)

13.  Diitrephes  (?)  pierced  with  Arrows  (Vase-Painting)

14.  Bohn*s  Diagram  of  the  Health  Athena  Basis  and  Ad

15.  Athena  and  Marsyas  (Athenian  Coin)    .

16.  Athena  and  Marsyas  (Relief  on  Marble  Vase)  .

17.  Athena  and  Marsyas  (Vase-Painting)     .

18.  Marsyas  (Marble  Statue  in  Lateran  Museum)    .

19.  Theseus  and  Minotaur  (Athenian  Coin)
2a  Athena  and  Poseidon  (Athenian  Coin) .

21.  Athena  and  Poseidon  (Athenian  Coin) .

22.  Athena  and  Poseidon  (Vase  at  St.  Petersburg) .

23.  Athena  and  Poseidon  (Marble  Relief  at  Smyrna)

24.  Zeus  Polieus  ?  (Athenian  Coin)

25.  Plan  of  the  Parthenon  ....

26.  Birth  of  Athena  (Marble  Relief  at  Madrid)

27.  West  Pediment  of  Parthenon  (Carrey's  Drawing)

28.  Virgin  Athena  (Varvakion  Statue)

29.  Head  of  Virgin  Athena  (Gold  Medallion  in  Hermitage
5a  Vi^n  Athena  (Intaglio  by  Aspasius)    .

31.  '^rgin  Athena  (Athenian  Coin)

32.  Virgin  Athena  (Cilidan  Coin)    .


PACE

•             ■

86

•

87

•             •

94

•

ib.

•             ■

'   95

•                •

97

•             •             1

180

•               •

182

•           •

216

•             •

.   251

•             •

269

•           •

270

■             •             1

276

cent  Stones

278

■         •

290

•         •

ib.

•         •

291

■         •

293

•         •

295

•         •

300

•         •         ■

ib.

•         ■

301

•         •

302

•         •         ■

ib.

•         •

304

•         •

.   309

•         •

ib.

•         •

314

:  Museum)

•   315

•         ■

316

•         •

317

•         ■

ib.

vm


ILLUSTRATIONS


FIG.


33,  Dead  Gaul  (Statue  at  Venice)    .....

54.  Dead  Giant  (Statue  at  Naples) .....

35.  Leucophryenian  Artemis?  (Athenian  Coin)

36.  Plan  of  the  Erechtheum  and  of  the  Temple  destroyed  by  the  Persians

37.  Champion  Athena?  (Athenian  Coin)     ....

38.  View  of  Acropolis  (Athenian  Coin)        ....

39.  Plan  of  Temples  at  Rhamnus    .....
4a  Relief  from  the  Pedestal  of  the  Image  of  Nemesis  at  Rhamnus

41.  Saviour  Artemis  (Coin  of  Megara)         ....

42.  Apollo,  Artemis,  and  Latona  (Coin  of  Megara)

43.  Megara  and  Nisaea        ......


PAGE

323

ib,

329

333

351
ib.

452

457

524

539
540


PLATES


I.  The  Temple  of  Athena  at  Sunium
II.  The  Piraeus
III.  Dipylum  and  Street  of  Tombs
IV.  Ancient  Athens   .
V.  The  Acropolis  of  Athens
VI.  The  Erechtheum  (existing  remains)
VII.  Modem  Athens  and  its  Neighbourhood
VIII.  Marathon
IX.  Sanctuary  of  Amphiaraus  at  Oropus
X.  Sacred  Precinct  at  Eleusis


To  face  page     2
8

42
46

248

334
398

432
466

504


BOOK  FIRST


ATTICA

Pausanias  describes  Attica  in  the  following  order :  Sunium  and  the
coast  from  Sunium  to  Piraeus  (i.  i.  i);  the  harbours  of  Athens  (i.
I.  2-4) ;  Cape  Colias  and  the  road  from  Phalerum  to  Athens  (i.  i.  5-
i.  2.  i) ;  the  road  from  Piraeus  to  Athens  (i.  2.  2-3) ;  Athens  itself
(u  2.  4-i.  29.  i)  ;  the  road  from  Athens  to  the  Academy  and  Colonus
Hippius  (L  29.  2-i.  30.  4);  the  Attic  townships  (i.  31);  the  Attic
mountains  (i.  32.  1-2) ;  the  Attic  townships  again,  namely,  Marathon
(i.  32.  3-7),  Brauron  (i.  33.  i),  and  Rhamnus  (i.  33.  2-8);  Oropus
and  the  sanctuary  of  Amphiaraus  (i.  34)  ;  the  Attic  islands,  particularly
Salamis  (i.  35.  i-i.  36.  2) ;  the  Sacred  Way  from  Athens  to  Eleusis
(i.  36.  3-L  38.  7)  ;  the  road  from  Eleusis  to  Eleutherae  (i.  38.  8-9) ;
the  road  from  Eleusis  to  Megara  (i.  39.  1-3)  ;  Megara  (i.  39.  4-i.  44.
2) ;  the  harbour  of  Megara  (i.  44.  3) ;  the  mountainous  district  of
Megara,  with  the  towns  Pagae  and  Aegosthena  (i.  44.  4-5) ;  the  road
from  Megara  to  the  Isthmus  of  Corinth  (i.  44.  6-10).

Of  special  works  dealing  with  the  topography  of  Attica,  apart  from
that  of  Athens,  the  most  important  is  the  series  of  large  maps  of  Attica
drawn  by  officers  and  officials  of  the  Prussian  Headquarter  Staff,  and
published  by  the  German  Archaeological  Institute,  with  explanatory  text,
chiefly  by  Professor  A.  Milchhofer.  Twenty-one  of  these  maps  have  been
published  (D.  Reimer,  Berlin,  1881-93),  but  the  series  is  still  (October
1894)  incomplete.  Next  in  importance  to  this  monumental  work  is
Leake's  Derm  of  Attica  (second  edition,  London,  1841).  Of  less
importance  are  L.  Ross's  Demen  von  Attika  (Halle,  1846),  and  P.
Kastromenos's  Demen  von  Attika  (Leipzig,  1886).

1.  I.  Caiie  SimilUlL  Cape  Sunium,  now  called  Cape  Collona  or
Kollonnaes^  from  the  fia.r-seen  columns  which  crown  its  brow,  is  a
massive  and  lofty  headland  of  rugged  crystalline  rock  running  far  into
the  sea  and  joined  to  the  mainland  by  a  low  sandy  isthmus.  The  sides
of  the  headland  fall  sheer  into  the  sea  in  cliffs  about  200  feet
high.  On  the  eastern  side  of  the  isthmus  is  a  narrow  creek  where  sail-
mg  vessels,  unable  to  weather  the  cape,  take  shelter.  The  bay  on  the
western  side  of  the  isthmus  is  roomy,  but  is  exposed  to  the  full  fury  of

VOL.  II  B


f


SUNIUM  BK.  I.  ATTICA


the  south  wind.  The  summit  of  the  cape  is  overgrown  with  shrubs,  and
is  surrounded  by  a  ruined  fortification  wall  except  on  the  brink  of  preci-
pices that  render  all  fortification  needless.  The  wall,  about  ii|
feet  thick,  is  faced  outside  and  inside  with  squared  blocks  of  white
marble  laid  in  regular  courses  ;  the  core  is  of  earth  and  pebbles.  It  is
flanked  with  square  towers,  which  project  lo  feet  from  the  curtain  at
intervals  averaging  65  feet.  The  best-preserved  piece  of  wall  is  on  the
north  side,  towards  the  east  end.  On  the  west  side  it  is  less  carefully
constructed,  and  there  are  no  towers.     The  circuit  is  over  half  a  mile.

On  the  extreme  and  highest  point  of  the  cape  is  the  ruined  temple
of  Athena.  The  platform  on  which  the  temple  stands  is  supported  on
the  north  and  west  by  substructures  of  massive  blocks,  built  to  eke  out
the  small  level  space  on  the  summit  of  the  headland.  The  temple  was
of  the  Doric  order,  with  six  columns  at  each  of  the  ends  and  thirteen
(not  twelve,  as  has  sometimes  been  asserted)  columns  on  each  of
the  flanks,  the  comer  columns  being  reckoned  twice  over.  The
stylobate  (the  pavement  on  which  the  columns  rest)  was  31.15  metres
long  by  13.48  metres  broad  (about  102  feet  by  44  feet).  Nine
columns  of  the  peristyle  are  standing  on  the  south  side  and  two  on  the
north;  they  still  support  their  architraves.  The  columns  are  6.10
metres  (20  feet)  high ;  their  diameter  is  3  feet  4  inches  at  the  base
and  2  feet  7  inches  under  the  capital.  In  diameter  and  in  taper
they  correspond  almost  exactly  to  those  of  the  so-called  Theseum  at
Athens.  They  have  only  sixteen  flutings,  instead  of  twenty,  the  usual
number  in  Doric  columns.  Besides  the  eleven  columns  of  the  peristyle,
there  are  standing  the  north  anta  of  the  fore-temple  {fironaos)  and  its
adjoining  column,  with  some  blocks  of  the  south  anta.  The  German
Transfeldt,  who  was  at  Sunium  in  1674,  saw  seventeen  columns,  including
two  antae.  When  Wheler  visited  Sunium  in  1676  there  were  nine
columns  standing  on  the  south  side,  five  on  the  north,  and  two  pilasters
{antae)  and  part  of  the  fore-temple.  The  stone  of  which  the  temple
is  built  is  a  fine-grained  white  marble,  tinged  with  a  light  bluish-gray.
The  quarries  in  which  it  was  hewn  are  in  the  valley  of  Agrilesa^  two  and
a  half  miles  to  the  north  of  Cape  Sunium.  A  carefully  constructed  and
well-preserved  ancient  road  leads  thither  over  a  low  pass.  Circular
bases  of  columns,  matching  the  columns  at  Sunium  in  diameter,  can
still  be  seen  in  the  quarries.  The  marble  is  less  durable  than  the
Pentelic ;  hence  it  weathers  more  rapidly,  and  the  originally  sharp
flutings  of  the  columns  at  Sunium  are  now  worn  and  blunted.  Nor  does  it
take  on,  by  exposure  to  the  atmosphere,  that  beautiful  golden-brown  patina
which  now  covers  the  columns  of  the  Parthenon.  The  reason  of  this  is
that  whereas  the  Pentelic  marble  contains  an  admixture  of  iron,  which
by  oxidation  produces  a  golden-brown  patina  on  surfaces  exposed  to  the
air,  the  Agrilesa  marble  has  no  tincture  of  iron.  Hence  the  pure
glistering  white  of  the  columns  at  Sunium  is  remarkable,  and,  contrasted
with  the  blue  sky  against  which  they  stand  outlined  and  the  deep  green
of  the  shrubs  in  the  foreground,  makes  a  brilliantly  coloured  picture.

In  front  of  the  fore- temple  {pronaos)  lie  strewed  thirteen  slabs  of
a  yellowish-white  marble,  with  large  crystals.     The  slabs  are  adorned


CH.  I  SUNIUM


with  much -defaced  reliefs,  among  which  Mr.  Fabricius,  who  has
studied  them  with  care,  believes  that  he  can  make  out  a  battle  between
Centaurs  and  Lapiths,  a  battle  between  the  gods  and  the  giants,  and
Theseus  taming  the  Marathonian  bull.

Excavations  conducted  at  Suniiun  by  Dr.  D5rpfeld  in  March  1884
revealed  the  fact  that  the  marble  temple  stands  on  the  foundation  of  an
older  temple  built  of  common  stone,  and  only  a  trifle  smaller  than  the
later  marble  temple.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  found  a  great  many  drums  of  the
columns  and  several  pieces  of  the  architrave  of  the  older  temple ;  the
drums  are  all  unfluted.  It  may  be  conjectured  that  this  older  temple
was  destroyed  by  the  Persians.  The  date  of  the  erection  of  the  marble
temple  is  not  known,  but  on  architectural  grounds  we  may  place  it  in
the  second  half  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  Dr.  D5rpfeld,  whose  opinion
on  all  such  questions  is  entitled  to  the  greatest  respect,  inclines  to  con-
sider it  later  than  the  Parthenon,  and  nearly  contemporary  with,  though
rather  later  than,  the  so-called  Theseum  at  Athens.

To  the  north  of  the  temple  and  slightly  below  it  is  an  artificial
terrace  about  50  feet  long  by  30  broad,  supported  on  the  north  and
west  by  a  well-preserved  wall  of  white  marble.  On  the  east  side  the
terrace  abuts  on  the  fortification  wall  which  encloses  the  siunmit  of  the
cape.  Near  the  north-eastern  comer  of  the  platform  lie  two  Doric
capitals  differing  both  from  each  other  and  from  those  of  the  temple.
Since  the  publication  of  Zii^  Unedited  Antiquities  of  Attica  (London,  1 8 1 7)
it  has  been  generally  supposed  that  this  platform  supported  a  propylcieum
or  portal  leading  into  the  sacred  precinct,  consisting  of  two  gateways  one
at  each  end  of  the  platform,  each  gateway  being  formed  by  two  Doric
colunms  between  antae  with  a  pediment  over  them.  But  it  is  possible
that  the  platform  served  as  a  basement  for  an  altar  or  chapel  of
Poseidon,  who  was  worshipped  at  Suniiun  (Aristophanes,  Knights ^  560,
with  the  scholiast ;  Scylax,  Periplus^  57).  The  regattas  held  at  Sunium
(Lysias,  Or.  xxi.  5)  were  no  doubt  in  honour  of  Poseidon.  Cp.  Hero-
dotus, vi.  87  ;  Paus.  ii.  35.  i  note.

The  earliest  mention  of  Sunium  is  in  the  Odyssey  (iii.  278),  where
it  is  said  that  Menelaus's  pilot  Phrontis  was  struck  down  at  the  helm  by
Apollo's  shafts  as  he  was  steering  past  the  sacred  headland  of  Sunium.
In  the  winter  of  413-412  ac,  during  the  Peloponnesian  war,  the
Athenians  fortified  Sunium  to  protect  vessels  bringing  com  to  Athens
(Thucydides,  viil  4).  On  one  occasion  the  slaves  in  the  neighbouring
mines  of  Laurium  broke  out,  murdered  their  guards,  and  seized  the
fortress  of  Sunium,  from  which  they  laid  waste  Attica  with  fire  and
sword  (Posidonius,  cited  by  Athenaeus,  vi.  p.  272  ef).  Sunium  was  a
township  {deme)  of  the  tribe  Leontis  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  398  ;  Stephanus
Byz.  s.v.  Sovviov ;  C,  L  A,  ii.  No.  864),  and  had  the  reputation  of
admitting  run-away  slaves  to  the  rights  of  burgesses  without  inquiring
too  nicely  into  their  antecedents  (Anaxandrides,  quoted  by  Athenaeus,
vi.  p.  263  c).  The  woods  which  clothed  the  headland  in  the  days  of
Sophocles  {Ajaxy  1217  sqq,^  have  disappeared;  but  the  hills  of
Laurium,  rising  from  the  shore  on  the  landward  side  of  the  cape,  are
still  well  wooded.


LAURIUM  BK.   I.  ATTICA


The  view  of  the  solitary  temple  at  Sunium  overhanging  the  sea  has
been  famous  since  the  publication  of  Childe  Harold,  Byron  found  the
view  of  the  ruins  more  striking  from  the  land  than  from  the  sea  (note
on  Childe  Haroldy  canto  ii.  stanza  86).  The  prospect,  too,  from  the
temple  over  the  sea  to  the  islands  of  the  Aegean  and  the  coast  of
Peloponnese  is  one  of  surpassing  loveliness.

See  J.  G.  Transfeldt's  *Descriptio  promontorii  Sunii,*  m  Miitheilungen  des
deutschen  archdologischeft  Institutes  in  Athen^  i  (1876),  p.  105  sq,  ;  Wheler,yb«r-
ney  into  Greece^  p.  448  sq, ;  Chandler,  Travels  in  Greece,  p.  6  sqq.  ;  The  Unedited
Antiquities  of  Attica  (Society  of  Dilettanti,  London,  18 17),  pp.  53-56,  with  ten
plates;  Antiquities  of  Ionia,  Part  II.  (Society  of  Dilettanti,  London,  18 1 7),  pp.
20-23,  with  plates  ix.-xiv. ;  Dodwell,  Tour  through  Greece,  i.  p.  539  sqq,  ;  Leake,
Topography  of  Athens  and  the  Demi,  2.  p.  62  sqq,  ;  Wordsworth,  Athens  and
Attica,  p.  176  sq.  ;  Fiedler,  Reise,  i.  p.  55  sqq.  ;  W.  Vischer,  Erinnerungen  und
Eindriicke  aus  Griechenland,  p.  64  sqq.  ;  L.  Ross,  IVanderungen  in  Griechenla$ui,
2.  p.  150  sq.  ;  Bursian,  Geographic  von  Griechenland,  i.  p.  354  sa.  ;  A.  Michaelis,
in  Antuili  delt  Institute  di  Corrispondcnza  Archeologica,  36  (1864),  p.  249  sqq,  ;
H.  Belle,  Trois  Annhs  en  Grice,  p.  237  sqq.  ;  K.  Lange,  *  Tempelsculpturen
von  Sunion,*  Mittheil.  d.  deutsch.  archaol.  Inst,  in  A  theft,  6  (1881),  pp.  233-237  ;
W.  Dorpfeld,  *Der  Tempel  von  Sunion,'  ib,  9  (1884),  pp.  324-337  ;  E.  Fabricius,
*  Die  Skulpturen  vom  Tempel  in  Sunion,*  ib.  pp.  338-353;  Baedeker,  Griechen'
land,^  p.  135  sqq,  ;  Guide  Joanne,  Grice,  I.  p.  191  sqq,  ;  A.  Milchhofer,  Karten
von  Attika,  Erliiutemder  Text,  Heft  iii.-vi.  p.  28  sqq.  As  to  the  marble  of  which
the  temple  at  Sunium  is  built,  see  G.  R.  Lepsius,  Griechische  Mamiorstudien
(Berlin,  1890),  pp.  27-29.

^.1.  I.  Lanriom,  where  the  Athenians  once  had  silver  mines.

The  south-eastern  extremity  of  the  Attic  peninsula  is  occupied  by  a
well-marked  and  nearly  isolated  group  of  rugged  and  barren,  but  low
and  somewhat  tame  hills  clothed  with  brushwood  and  firs.  The  highest
summits  do  not  much  exceed  1000  feet.  Limestone,  and  especially
mica-schist,  are  the  rocks  that  chiefly  crop  up  on  the  surface.  The
main  valleys  run  north  and  south  ;  they  are  fruitful  and  well  cultivated  ;
clumps  of  olive-trees,  with  here  and  there  an  oak,  rise  in  the  middle  of
corn-fields.  There  are  many  sweet  sequestered  nooks  in  these  valleys,
their  smiling  and  rustic  aspect  contrasting  agreeably  with  the  bareness
of  the  Athenian  and  Eleusinian  plains.  Such  are  the  hills  of  Laurium  ;
they  extend  about  eleven  miles  north  and  south,  and  about  ^\t,  miles
east  and  west.  In  places  they  are  honeycombed  with  the  shafts  and
galleries  of  the  ancient  silver  mines,  and  heaps  of  slag  and  the  ruins  of
furnaces  are  to  be  seen  everywhere.  More  than  2000  ancient  shafts
have  been  counted.  Some  are  perpendicular,  and  vary  in  depth  from
65  to  400  feet.  In  the  sides  of  these  perpendicular  shafts  there  are
holes  in  which  ladders  were  probably  fixed.  Other  shafts  are  slanting,
with  steps  cut  in  them.  The  shape  of  the  shafts  is  almost  invariably
square,  and  they  measure  about  6  feet  across.  At  a  depth  of  from  80
to  150  feet  the  galleries  begin.  The  roofs  of  these  galleries  are  sup-
ported by  pillars  consisting  sometimes  of  pieces  of  the  native  rock  left
standing,  sometimes  of  built  piers.  As  the  pillars  of  native  rock  con-
tained ore,  the  proprietors  were  tempted  by  cupidity  to  remove  them.
This  dangerous  practice  was  a  capital  offence  at  law,  and  in  the  time  of
the  orator  Lycurgus  the  death-penalty  was  actually  inflicted  on    one


CH.  I  LAURJUAi


Diphilus,  who  had  enriched  himself  by  this  unscrupulous  proceeding
([Plutarch,]  X,  Orator,  vit.^  Lycurgus,  p.  843  d).  In  the  sides  both
of  the  galleries  and  of  th^  shafts  niches  for  lamps  may  be  seen  ;  some  of
the  miners'  lamps,  made  of  clay,  have  been  found,  and  are  exhibited  in  the
small  Museum  at  Ergastiria  or  Lavrion^  as  the  modem  mining  town  is
called.  The  noxious  atmosphere  of  the  mines  at  Laurium  was  remarked
by  the  ancients  (Xenophon,  Memorabilia^  iii.  6.  1 2  ;  Plutarch,  Compar.
Nic.  et  Crass,  i),  and  ventilation  shafts  were  accordingly  constructed
(EtytnoL  Magn.^  s.v,  \l/v\aywyCay  p.  819),  some  of  which  have  been
discovered  descending  to  depths  of  260  to  360  feet.  The  ore  seems  to
have  been  brought  to  the  surface  partly  by  machinery  and  partly  by
slaves.  The  state  owned  the  mines,  and  granted  them  on  perpetual
leases  to  private  persons,  who  obtained  possession  by  paying  a  sum  of
money  once  for  all  as  purchase  or  entry  money  (Demosthenes,  xxxvii.
P*  973  ;  Bockh,  Public  Economy  ofAthens^^  p.  644  sqq,)

It  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  Athens  owed  not  only  her  commercial
but  even  her  political  greatness  in  large  measure  to  the  possession  of
these  silver  mines.  For  Greece  is  very  poor  in  the  precious  metals ;
the  only  other  place  where  [silver  is  said  to  have  been  found  was  the
island  of  Siphnos  (Herodotus,  iii.  57  ;  cp.  Pans.,  x.  11.  2  note).  Hence
a  state  like  Athens  in  the  possession  of  rich  silver  mines  enjoyed  a  great
advantage  over  its  neighbours.  During  the  splendid  period  of  Greek
history  the  Athenian  silver  coinage  had  by  far  the  widest  circulation,
and  its  reputation  for  purity  of  metal  and  accuracy  of  weight  stood  so
high,  not  only  in  Europe  but  in  the  heart  of  Asia  and  Arabia,  that  it  was
deemed  inexpedient  to  make  any  improvement  in  the  types,  lest  its
circulation  should  be  diminished.  For  barbarous  peoples  get  used  to
certain  kinds  of  coins,  and  prefer  them  to  all  others.  For  example,
Maria  Teresa  dollars  are  accepted  to  this  day  in  Abyssinia.  This  ex"
plains  why  Athenian  coins,  contrary  to  what  we  might  have  expected,
have  always  a  certain  rude  and  archaic  appearance,  and  are  amongst
the  least  artistic  of  Greek  coins.  The  earliest  coins  of  Athens,  dating
from  early  in  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  present  us  with  the  head  of  Athena
on  the  one  side  and  her  owl  on  the  other,  and  these  types  were  main-
tained, with  hardly  any  variation,  to  the  last.  See  P.  Gardner,  Types
of  Greek  Coinsy  p.  47  sq.\  Head,  Coins  of  the  Ancients^  p.  18.  The
greatness  of  Athens  as  a  naval  power  dated  from  the  time  when  Themi-
stocles  persuaded  his  countrymen,  instead  of  dividing  amongst  themselves
the  revenue  derived  from  the  mines,  to  expend  it  in  building  a  fleet  of
two  hundred  warships  (Herodotus,  vii.  144).  According  to  other
authors  the  number  of  warships  added  to  the  Athenian  navy  by  Themi-
stocles  on  this  occasion  was  one  hundred  (Aristotle,  Constit.  of  Athens,
17.  \  Plutarch,  Theinisiocles,  4;  Cornelius  Nepos,  Themistocles,  2;  Poly-
aenus,  L  30.  6).  Aristotle  says  {l.c)  that  the  money  was  derived  from
the  mines  of  Maronea.  There  was  a  Thracian  city  named  Maronea,
bat  according  to  Harpocration  {s,v,  Ma/ocuvcia)  there  was  a  place  of  the
same  name  in  Attica.     It  may  have  been  in  the  district  of  Laurium.

The  date  when  the  mines  of  Laurium  began  to  be  worked  is  not
known.     Xenophon  says  that  they  had  been  worked  time  out  of  mind


LAURIUM  BK.  I.  ATTICA


{De  veciigalibuSy  iv.  2),  but  that  they  were  less  productive  in  his  day
than  formerly  {Memorabilia^  iii.  6.  12).  In  Strabo's  time,  about  the
beginning  of  our  era,  the  mines  were  thought  to  be  ahnost  exhausted,  and
the  miners  were  reduced  to  extract  silver  from  the  old  slag  by  resmelt-
ing  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  399).  Diodorus,  too,  writing  about  the  same  time,
says  (v.  37)  that  persons  who  mined  in  Attica  spent  great  sums,  and
often  got  no  return  for  their  money.  A  century  and  a  half  later  all
mining  operations  had  ceased,  for  Pausanias  speaks  of  the  mines  as  a
thing  of  the  past.  This  is  one  among  many  proofs  that  he  described
Greece  as  it  was  in  his  own  day,  instead  of  borrowing  his  descriptions
from  old  books,  as  some  recent  critics  accuse  him  of  having  done.

In  1865  a  French  company  undertook,  with  the  help  of  improved
modem  machinery,  to  resmelt  the  old  slag.  They  were  successful ;  in
a  short  time  8000  to  10,000  tons  of  lead  (containing  12  to  22  ounces
of  silver  a  ton)  were  exported  annually.  There  are  now  two  principal
mining  companies  at  Laurium,  a  French  and  a  Greek.  The  former
appears  to  confine  itself  to  mining  proper,  the  latter  to  resmelting  the
old  slag.  There  is  this  difference  between  the  ancient  and  modem
operations  at  Laurium,  that  whereas  the  ancients  sought  only  to  extract
the  silver  from  the  ore,  the  modems  now  aim  chiefly  at  extracting  the
lead,  together  with  some  zinc.  The  modem  mining  town  of  Lavrion
contains  about  5000  inhabitants,  and  is  connected  with  Athens  by  a
railway.

See  Dodwell,  op.  cit,  i.  pp.  537-539 ;  Leake,  Topography  of  Athens^  2.  p.
65  sq,  ;  Bockh,  *  Dissertation  on  the  Silver  Mines  of  Laurion,'  Public  Economy  of
Athens,'^  pp.  615-676;  Wordsworth,  Athens  and  Attica^  p.  178;  L.  Koss,  Wan-
demngen,  2.  p.  149  sqq,  ;  Fiedler,  Reise,  i.  pp.  36-79 ;  Vischer,  op,  cit.  p.
63  sq.  ;  Bursian,  op.  cit,  i.  p.  352  sq.  ;  H.  Belle,  Trois  Ann/es  en  Grhe,  p.  231
sqq.  ;  I.  H.  Hansen,  De  metal/is  Atticis  (Hamburg,  1885);  Neumann  und  Partsdb,
Pnysikalische  Ceographie  von  Griecheftlandy  pp.  225-229 ;  Baedeker,*  p.  133  sqq. ;
Guide-Joanne,  I.  p.  188  sqq. ;  Milchhofer,  Kartefi  von  Attiha,  Erlautemder  Text,
Heft  iii-vi.  p.  22  sqq,  ;  H.  BlUmner,  Technobgie  und  Terminologies  4.  pp.  33
sq.y  144  sqq,  ;  A.  Kordellas,  KAvp^tariKoX  dpxaiirrjTes,  Mittheil.  d,  arch.  Inst,  in
Athai,  19  (1894),  pp.  238-244.

1.  I.  the  island  of  Patroclns.  This  is  the  bare  rocky  island
about  three  miles  to  the  west  of  Cape  Sunium.  It  is  now  called
Gaidaronisi  (Ass's  Island).  Wild  thyme  grows  on  it,  and  the  herdsmen
of  the  mainland  pasture  their  goats  on  it.  At  the  north-east  comer  of
the  island  may  still  be  seen  the  fortification  wall,  constructed  of  rough
stones,  which,  as  we  here  learn  from  Pausanias,  was  erected  by  the
Egyptian  admiral  Patroclus.  The  island  was  also  known  in  antiquity
as  *the  palisade  (cliarax)  of  Patroclus'  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  398),  whence
comes  the  name  Charaka^  which  is  still  applied  to  the  desolate  bay  on
the  opposite  coast  of  the  mainland.  See  Chandler,  p.  9 ;  Dodwell,
I.  p.  540;  Bursian,  i.  p.  355  sq,\  Karten  von  Attika^  Erlduiemder
Texiy  Heft  iii.-vi.  p.  31.  As  to  the  siege  of  Athens  by  Antigonus,  and
the  attempt  of  the  Egyptian  fleet  under  Patroclus  to  relieve  the  city,
see  especially  iii.  6.  4  sqq.  with  the  note ;  cp.  i.  7.  3  ;  i.  30.  4.

1.  2.  Piraens.  Piraeus  is  a  rocky  peninsula  which  runs  into  the
sea  from  north-east  to  south-west  for  a  distance  of  about  two  and  a  third


CH.  1  PIRAEUS  7

miles.  It  is  composed  of  two  masses,  each  about  a  mile  and  a  quarter
wide,  which  are  united  to  each  other  by  a  somewhat  low  and  narrow
ridge  or  isthmus.  The  south-western  mass,  anciently  known  as  the
Acte  (Aristotle,  Constit  of  Athens y  42  and  61  ;  Dinarchus,  c,  PhilocL  13  ;
Lycurgus,  c,  Leocr,  17  and  55  ;  Diodorus,  xx.  45.  3  ;  Harpocration  and
Snidas,  s,v,  'Akttj  ;  Bekker's  Anecdoia  GraecOy  i.  p.  370 ;  C.  Wachsmuth,
Die  Siadt  A  then  itn  Alterihum,  i.  pp.  316-318),  rises  gradually  on  all
sides  to  a  height  of  187  feet.  The  north-eastern  mass  attains  a
height  of  280  feet  in  the  steep  rocky  hill  of  Munychia.  The
ancients  believed  that  the  peninsula  of  Piraeus  had  been  formerly
an  island,  and  had  received  its  name  because  it  was  the  land  across
{peran)  the  water  (Strabo,  i.  p.  58 ;  Pliny,  NcU,  HisL  ii.  201  ;
Suidas,  5,v,  ''E^fiapos  elfii;  Etymology  Magnum^  s,v.  Il€ipai€v^
p.  667  s^.)  Modem  observation  confirms  the  belief  that  Piraeus  was
once  an  island.  The  peninsula  is  joined  to  the  mainland  by  a  stretch
of  low  swampy  ground,  nowhere  more  than  2  J  metres  (about  8  feet)
above  the  level  of  the  sea.  This  stretch  of  low  land,  which  the  ancients
called  Halipedon  (Xenophon,  Hellenica^  ii.  4.  30 ;  Harpocration,  s.v.
^AXiircSov),  appears  to  be  formed  of  alluvial  soil  brought  down  in  the
course  of  ages  by  the  Cephisus,  which  falls  into  the  sea  a  little  to  the
east,  and  which  has  by  its  deposits  gradually  converted  the  rocky  island
into  a  peninsula.  See  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen^  2.  p.  157  sq,  ;
Kaupert,  in  MancUsberichte  of  the  Berlin  Academy,  1879,  p.  621  ;
Karten  von  Attika,  Texty  Heft  i.  p.  10.

Piraeus  includes  three  harbours,  namely,  the  great  harbour  of
Piraeus,  technically  known  as  the  harbour  of  Cantharus,  on  the  north-
west side  of  the  peninsula,  and  the  two  nearly  circular  harbours  of  Zea
and  Munychia,  on  the  south-eastern  side.  Of  the  two  latter  the  western-
most and  larger  is  Zea.  That  Piraeus  had  three  natural  harbours  is
mentioned  by  Thucydides  (i.  93),  the  scholiast  on  Aristophanes  {Peaces
145),  and  Hesychius  {s.v.  T^ko^y  as  well  as  by  Pausanias  in  the  present
passage.  The  harbours  of  Zea  and  Munychia  were  first  properly
identified  by  H.  N.  Ulrichs.  Previous  scholars  had  wrongly  identified
Munychia  (the  modem  Phanari)  with  Phalerum,  and  Zea  (the  modem
Pasha  Limani)  with  Munychia.  Ulrichs  confined  the  name  of  Can-
tharus to  the  south-westem  bay  of  the  great  harbour  of  Piraeus,  and  in
this  he  has  been  followed  by  most  subsequent  writers.  But  Professor
Dorpfeld  and  Professor  Curt  Wachsmuth  are  probably  right  in  thinking
that  Canthams,  or,  more  correctly,  the  harbour  of  Canthams,  was  the
official  name  for  the  whole  of  the  great  harbour,  though  in  popular
usage  this  harbour  was  known  par  excellence  simply  as  the  harbour  of
Piraeus,  or  (as  Pausanias  calls  it  in  the  present  section)  the  largest
harbour.  See  Aristophanes,  Peace^  145,  with  the  scholiast;  Plutarch,
Phociony  28  ;  C.  /.  A.  ii.  No.  807,  col.  r,  lines  26-35  ;  C.  I.  A.  ii.  No.
808,  coL  dy  lines  95-103  ;  C.  /.  A.  ii.  No.  8ii,  col.  r,  lines  6-10;  C.
Wachsmuth,  in  Berichie  uder  die  Verhandl.  d.  k.  sacks.  GeselL  d.
Wissen.  zu  Leipzig^  Philolog.  histor.  Classe,  39  (1887),  pp.  378-381.
(In  a  later  writing.  Die  Stadt  Aiken  im  Alterthumy  2.  pp.  55,  56  sq.y
Professor  Wachsmuth  leaves  it  an  open  question  whether  the  name


8  PIRAEUS  BK.  I.  ATTICA

Cantharus  applied  to  the  whole  of  the  great  harbour  or  only  to  the
south-western  bay  of  it.)

In  his  archonship,  493-492  B.C.  (see  note  below),  Themistocles
induced  the  Athenians  to  fortify  Piraeus  (Thucydides,  i.  93).  The
fortifications  were  destroyed  by  the  Lacedaemonians  at  the  end  of  the
Peloponnesian  war  in  404  B.C.  (Plutarch,  Lysander^  14  sq,\  Diodorus,
xiii.  107  ;  xiv.  3),  but  were  restored  about  ten  years  later.  The  credit
of  the  restoration  is  commonly  given  to  Conon,  who  is  supposed  to
have  incited  and  helped  the  Athenians  to  rebuild  the  fortifications  in
393  B.C.  after  he  had  defeated  the  Lacedaemonian  fleet  at  Cnidus  in
the  preceding  year.  See  Xenophon,  Hellemca^  iv.  8.  9  sqq, ;  Diodorus,
xiv.  85.  But  an  inscription  found  at  Piraeus  a  few  years  ago  shows
that  the  Athenians  had  begun  rebuilding  the  walls  of  Piraeus  in  394
B.C.  even  before  Conon  had  won  his  victory  at  Cnidus ;  and  from  odier
inscriptions  it  appears  that  the  work  was  not  finished  till  the  archon-
ship of  Philocles  (392-391  B.c)  Sec  Foucart,  in  Bulletin  de  Corresp.
HelUnigue^  11  (1887),  pp.  129-135;  C.  Wachsmuth,  in  Berichte  iibcr
die  Verh,  d.  k,  sacks,  Ges,  d,  IViss,^  Phil.  hist.  CI.,  39  (1887),  pp.
370-373  ;  id,,  Die  Siadt  Athen  im  Alierthum,  2.  p.  iii.  sq, ;  Lechat,  in
Bull,  Corr,  Hell  12  (1888),  pp.  347-351  ;  Kohler,  in  MitthHl.  d,  arch,
Inst,  in  Athen,  3  (1878),  pp.  49-54;  C,  I,  A,  ii.  Nos.  830-832.  In
87-86  B.C.  the  Mithridatic  army  under  Archelaus  occupied  Athens  and
Piraeus,  and  offered  a  desperate  resistance  to  the  Romans  under  Sulla.
At  last  the  place  fell,  and  Sulla,  exasperated  by  the  long  defence,
razed  the  fortifications  and  burnt  the  arsenal  and  the  docks  (Appian,
Mithrid,  41  ;  Strabo,  ix.  p.  396  ;  Plutarch,  Sulla,  14).  The  walls  of
Piraeus  were  never  afterwards  rebuilt.

The  line  of  the  fortification  wall  may  still  be  traced  almost  all  round
the  peninsula,  and  in  most  places  the  foundations  are  still  so  well
preserved  that  it  is  possible  to  reconstruct  the  plan  of  the  fortress  as  a
whole.  The  sea  wall  runs  along  the  shore  at  a  distance  of  20  to  40
metres  (65  to  131  feet)  from  the  water,  out  of  reach  of  the  waves  and
yet  near  enough  the  sea  to  prevent  an  enemy  from  bringing  siege  engines
into  play  on  the  shore.  It  is  from  3  to  3.6  metres  (9  feet  10  inches
to  nearly  1 2  feet)  thick  and  is  very  carefully  built  of  blocks  of  the  native
limestone  without  mortar.  The  quarries  in  which  the  stones  were
hewn  may  be  seen  at  many  points  both  behind  and  in  front  of  the  walL
In  places  where  the  stones  have  been  taken  away  from  the  wall  to
furnish  building  material  for  the  modem  town,  we  can  see  the  grooves
or  channels  cut  in  the  rock  in  which  the  stones  were  originally  bedded.
These  grooves  are  each  70  centimetres  (2  feet  3  J  inches)  wide,  and  run
parallel  to  each  other,  showing  that  only  the  outer  and  inner  facings  of
the  wall  were  of  solid  masonry,  and  that  the  core  must  have  been  (as
in  many  ancient  Greek  walls)  filled  up  with  rubble  and  earth.  In  the
best-preserved  portions  the  wall  is  still  standing  to  a  height  of  nine
courses.  It  is  flanked  by  towers  6  metres  (19  feet  8  inches)  long,
which  project  4  to  6  metres  (13  feet  i  inch  to  19  feet  8  inches)  from  the
curtain  at  intervals  of  50  to  60  metres  (about  55  to  66  yards).

In  addition  to  this  sea  wall  which  skirted  the  coast,  the  mouths  of


CH.  I  PIRAEUS  9

the  three  harbours  were  contracted  by  moles  which  ran  out  to  meet
each  other  on  either  side,  leaving  only  a  narrow  entrance  between
their  extremities,  (i)  The  great  harbour  of  Piraeus  (the  harbour  of
Cantharus)  has  the  widest  mouth  (310  metres  broad),  and  therefore
needed  the  longest  moles  to  close  it  Each  of  its  two  moles  (one  on
the  north,  the  other  on  the  south)  measured  130  metres,  and  thus  the
mouth  of  the  harbour  was  narrowed  to  50  metres.  The  northern  mole
remains  almost  entire ;  the  southern  has  been  washed  away  by  the
waves  to  a  depth  of  4  metres  ( 1 3  feet)  under  the  surface  of  the  water.
These  moles  now  support  the  red  and  green  lights  which  at  night
mark  the  mouth  of  the  harbour.  (2)  The  harbour  of  Zea  is  naturally
stronger,  and  therefore  needed  less  elaborate  fortifications.  It  consists
of  a  circular  basin  lying  about  200  metres  inland  from  the  sea  and  is
approached  by  a  channel  100  metres  broad.  Walls  ran  along  this
channel  on  either  side,  so  that  an  enemy's  ships  endeavouring  to  enter
the  harbour  would  have  to  run  the  gauntlet  of  a  cross  fire.  At  its
inner  end  the  channel  was  flanked  on  either  side  by  a  tower  of  solid
masonry  built  out  into  the  water,  but  connected  with  the  fortification
walls.  (3)  The  third  harbour,  Munychia,  the  smallest  of  the  three,  is
farthest  removed  from  the  business  and  bustle  of  the  modem  town,  and
hence  has,  in  some  respects,  best  preserved  the  relics  of  antiquity.
Originally  it  was  a  mere  open  bay,  and  therefore  needed  vast  con-
structions of  masonry  to  convert  it  into  a  war  harbour.  The  moles
built  for  this  purpose  are  described  by  Lieutenant  von  Alten,  who
examined  them  with  attention,  as  the  most  magnificent  specimens  of
ancient  Greek  fortification  which  have  survived.  The  southern  mole  is
190  metres  long  and  is  built  on  a  reef.  The  northern  mole,  about
31  feet  wide,  is  170  metres  long,  of  which  95  are  built  on  a  spit  of
land,  the  rest  in  the  sea.  In  some  places  on  the  outer  edges  of  the
moles  the  colossal  blocks  of  which  they  are  composed  have  been  piled
up  in  wild  confusion  by  the  heavy  surf,  and  project  like  islets  above  the
surface  of  the  water.  Each  mole  terminated  in  a  tower ;  and  the
entrance  to  the  harbour,  37  metres  wide,  was  between  the  towers.
The  tower  on  the  north  mole  is  still  standing  to  a  height  of  13  feet.  It
is  round,  but  is  built  on  a  square  base,  of  which  the  sides  are  about
39  feet  long.  The  tiny  harbour  is  commanded  by  the  hill  of  Munychia,
which  rises  steeply  from  the  shore.  In  time  of  danger  each  of  the
harbour-mouths  could  be  closed  with  a  chain  stretched  between  the
two  towers  which  flanked  the  entrance.  The  chain  seems  to  have
been  coated  with  tar  to  prevent  it  from  rusting  in  the  water.  See
Vitruvius,  v.  12.  i  ;  Aeneas,  Comment,  Poliorcet,  11.  The  harbours  of
Byzantium  and  Carthage  were  thus  closed  with  chains  (Dio  Cassius,
Ixxiv.  10  ;  Appian,  Ubyc,  96).  Harbours  which  could  be  thus  blocked
against  an  enemy  were  called  by  the  Greeks  *  closed '  {KX€txrroi\  and
this  epithet  is  expressly  applied  to  the  three  harbours  of  Piraeus  (Schol.
on  Aristophanes,  Peace^  I45).

On  the  landward  side  the  peninsula  was  defended  by  a  wall,  which
started  from  the  harbour  of  Munychia,  ascended  the  hill,  and  followed
the  edge  of  the  plateau  first  westward  and  then  northward.     Where  the


10  PIRAEUS  BK.  I.  ATTICA

plateau  sinks  northward  to  the  plain,  the  wall  again  turned  west  and
gradually  descended  to  the  shallow  northern  bight  of  the  great  harbour.
Instead  of  making  a  circuit  round  this  bight,  the  wall  seems  to  have  been
carried  straight  through  it  on  a  mole  or  dam.  On  the  west  side  of  the
bight  the  wall  continues  to  run  westward  for  a  distance  of  about  240
metres,  then  turns  south  and  follows  the  western  coast  of  the  long  rocky
promontory  of  Eetionia  (Thucydides,  viiL  90 ;  Harpocration,  s,v,
'Hencui'cta),  which  encloses  the  great  harbour  on  the  west  This  land-
ward wall,  to  judge  from  its  existing  remains,  appears  to  have  been  a
masterpiece  of  military  engineering,  every  opportunity  offered  by  the
nature  of  the  ground  for  strengthening  the  fortifications  having  been
unerringly  seized  upon  and  turned  to  account.  The  naturally  weakest
place  in  the  whole  circuit  was  where  the  wall  crossed  the  flat  between
the  hill  of  Munychia  and  the  great  harbour.  Here  accordingly  we  find
the  wall  especially  strong ;  it  is  8  metres  (26  feet)  thick  and  is
constructed  of  solid  masonry  in  large  squared  blocks,  without  any  core
of  rubble.  The  gates  were  naturally  in  this  landward  wall  and  opened
north.  Remains  of  four  of  them  can  be  distinguished.  The  principal
gate,  flanked  by  two  square  towers  on  oval  bases,  stood  in  the  flat
ground  between  the  north-east  end  of  the  great  harbour  and  the  heights
of  Munychia.  Through  it  doubtless  ran  the  highroad  to  Athens ;  and
here  at  a  little  side  portal  for  foot  passengers  probably  stood  the  image
of  Hermes,  which  the  nine  archons  dedicated  when  they  set  about  forti-
fying Piraeus  (see  Philochorus,  quoted  by  Harpocration,  j.w.  ir/jos  tq
irv\i8i  *Epfirjs  and  *Epft^s  6  vpos  ry  wvkiSi ;  [Demosthenes,]  c.  Eturg,
et  Mnesib.  p.  1146).  About  160  metres  east  of  this  principal  gate  is
another,  through  which  the  road  to  Athens  went  between  the  two  Long
Walls.  The  gate  is  double,  that  is,  it  is  composed  of  a  court  nearly
square  with  a  g^te  at  each  end.  The  reason  of  this  construction,  which
is  common  in  Greek  fortifications,  was  that,  if  an  enemy  should  force
the  outer  gate,  he  would  still  have  a  second  gate  in  front  of  him,  and
would  in  the  meantime  find  himself  pent  in  a  narrow  court,  as  in  a
trap,  from  the  walls  of  which  he  would  on  all  sides  be  assailed  by  the
missiles  of  the  defenders.  Farther  to  the  south-east,  on  the  hill  of
Munychia,  are  the  scanty  remains  of  a  third  gate  ;  it  stood  just  outside
(south  of)  the  point  where  the  middle  Long  Wall  joined  the  wall  of
Piraeus.  A  fourth  gate,  flanked  with  two  round  towers,  may  be  seen
at  the  north  end  of  Eetionia,  at  the  angle  where  the  wall  turns  south-
ward.

According  to  Thucydides  (ii.  13)  the  whole  circuit  of  the  fortifica^
tions  of  the  Piraeus  measured  60  Greek  furlongs  {stad^s\  which  is
equivalent  to  10,644  metres,  the  Greek  fiu-long  {stade)  being  reckoned
at  177.4  metres  (see  below,  p.  13).  Mr.  Kaupert  estimated  the  circuit
at  11,045  metres.

On  the  fortifications  of  Piraeus  see  especially  von  Alten,  in  Karten  von  Attika,
Text^  Heft  i.  pp.  10-22  ;  B.  Graser,  *  Meine  Messungen  in  den  altathenischen
Kri^shafen,'  Philologm^  31  (1872),  pp.  1-65;  Kaupert,  *  Die  Befestigungsmauem
von  Alt-Athen/  MotiatsUfichte  of  the  Berlin  Academy,  1879,  pp.  008-638  (this
last  article  deals  also  with  the  fortifications  of  Athens  and  the  Long  Walls) ;  P.


CH.  X  PIRAEUS  II

Foacart,  *Les  fortifications  du  Yvci^^  Bull  Corr,  Hell,  1 1  (1887),  pp.  129-144;
H.  Lechat,  'Fouilles  au  Pir^e,*  ib.  pp.  201-21 1  ;  id.^  *Fouilles  au  rir^e.  Les
fortifications  antiques,'  Bull.  Corr.  Hell.  12  (1888),  pp.  337-354;  C.  Wachsmuth,
Die  Stadt  Aiken  im  AUerthum,  2.  pp.  I -50.  On  tlie  topography  and  antiquities
of  Piiaeas  in  general,  see  Dodwell,  I.  pp.  416-467  ;  Leake,  AthefUj  i.  pp.  363-412  ;
Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen^  2.  pp.  156-208;  Vischer,  pp.  208-216;  Bursian,

1.  pp.  264-271 ;  Dyer,  A ftcient  Athens,  pp.  1 12-120,  191-195;  Hirschfeld,  *Topo-
{^aphischer  Versuch  liber  die  Peiraieustadt,*  Berichte  d.  k.  sacks.  Gesell.  d.
fVtssen.  %u  Leipzig,  Philolog.  hist.  CI.,  30  (1878),  pp.  I-31  ;  Baedeker,'  pp.  iii-
115;  Guide-Joanne,  I.  pp.  154-160;  Karten  von  Aitika,  Text,  Hefti.;  Milchhofer,
article  'Pdraieus,*  in  Baumeister's  Denkmdler,  pp.  1 195- 1 201  ;  Wachsmuth,  <>/.
cii.  I.  pp.  306-336  ;  id.,  2.  pj).  1-176.  An  article  by  Mr.  T.  W.  Ludlow  on  *The
Harbors  of  ancient  Athens  in  77ie  American  Journal  of  Philology,  4  (1883),  pp.
192-203,  is  a  futile  attempt  to  revive  long  exploded  errors.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  transference  of  the  port  of  Athens
from  the  open  roadstead  of  Phalerum  to  Piraeus  and  the  fortification  of
the  latter  constituted  one  of  the  most  momentous  steps  in  the  history  of
Athens.  Coupled  with  the  construction  of  a  large  permanent -war-fleet
it  made  Athens  the  first  naval  power  in  Greece,  and  so  determined  her
subsequent  history.  All  three  measures  originated  in  the  far-seeing
mind  of  Themistocles,  who  thus  in  a  sense  created  Athens,  and  proved
himself  thereby  one  of  the  greatest  of  statesmen.  He  saw  that  Piraeus
was  more  important  to  the  Athenians  than  Athens  itself,  and  often
advised  them,  if  ever  they  were  hard  put  to  it  by  land,  to  evacuate
Athens  and  settle  at  Piraeus,  where  with  their  fleet  they  could  defy  the
world.  If  they  had  taken  his  advice,  Athens  might  perhaps  have
played  a  still  greater  part  in  history.  See  Thucydides,  i.  93  ;  Plutarch,
ThemistocUSy  4  and  19  ;  E.  Curtius,  Stadtgeschichte,  p.  98  sqq.

1.  2.  a  towxiflhip  firom  of  old.  Piraeus  was  a  township  {deme)  in
the  tribe  Hippothoontis  (Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v.  Hci/kiios).  As  to
the  townships  {denies)  of  Athens  see  note  on  i.  31.  i.

1.  2.  the  archonsliip  of  Themistocles.  According  to  Dionysius
Halicamensis  (Antiquit.  Rom.  vi.  34)  Themistocles  was  archon  eponymtts
{t.e,  he  was  the  archon  who  gave  his  name  to  the  year)  in  01.  7 1 .  4
{493-492  B.C)  ;  and  in  the  Armenian  version  of  Eusebius'  Chronicle  (vol.

2.  pi  100,  ed.  A.  Schoene)  it  is  said  that  Piraeus  was  fortified  by
Themistocles  in  OL  71.  i  (496-495  B.C.)  There  seems  no  sufficient
reason  for  doubting  that  the  archonship  of  Themistocles  in  493-492  B.C.
was  the  same  archonship  of  Themistocles  to  which  Thucydides  (i.  93)
and  Pausanias  refer,  though  some  scholars  have  conjecturally  placed  the
archonship  of  Themistocles  and  with  it  the  fortification  of  Piraeus  in  OL
74.  3  (482-481  B.C.)  See  Curtius,  Griech.  Gesch.^  2.  p.  814;  Wachs-
muth, Die  Stadt  A  then  im  Alterthum^  i.  p.  513,  note  2;  Busolt,
Griech,  Gesch.  2.  p.  126;  Holm,  Gesch.  Griechenlands^  2.  p.  41;
Kenyon  and  Sandys,  on  Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens,  22.  Eusebius
assigned  the  fortification  of  Piraeus  to  the  right  Olympiad  but  to  the
wrong  year.  A  work  of  such  magnitude  must  have  occupied  a  good
many  years ;  it  is  not  therefore  surprising  that  it  was  incomplete  in  480
B.C,  when  the  Persians  invaded  Greece.

1.  2.  Phalerum  was  the  port  of  Athens  etc  Pausanias  here
tells  us  that  Phalerum  was  the  point  of  the  coast  nearest  to  Athens,  and


12  PHALERUM  BK.  I.  ATTICA

elsewhere  (viii.  lo.  4)  he  tells  us  that  the  distance  was  20  Greek  furlongs.
The  scholiast  on  Aristophanes  {Birds ^  1694)  says  that  it  was  20  furlongs
from  the  Acropolis  to  the  Phaleric  bay.  The  point  on  the  sea-coast
nearest  to  Athens  is  at  the  east  end  of  the  bay  of  Phalenun,  near  the
low  rocky  height  which  is  now  crowned  by  a  chapel  of  Sl  George.  Its
distance  from  the  foot  of  the  Museum  hill  at  Athens  is  about  two  and  a  half
miles,  which  agrees  fairly  with  the  20  Greek  furlongs  given  as  the  dis-
tance by  Pausanias  and  the  scholiast  on  Aristophanes.  (As  to  the
Greek  furlong  or  stoiU^  see  below.)  Near  the  chapel  Dodwcll  and
Ulrichs  found  a  Doric  capital  with  the  upper  part  of  a  fluted  colunm,
which  measured  2  feet  8  inches  below  the  necking.  On  a  hill  a  little  to
the  south-east  are  two  cisterns  hewn  in  the  rock ;  and  potsherds  and
fragments  of  tiles  are  scattered  about  (Dodwell,  i.  p.  427  sq, ;  Ulrichs,
Reisen  und  Forschungeriy  2.  p.  158  sqq,)  In  the  sea  near  the  chapel
Sir  Patrick  Colquhoun  discovered  by  diving  the  foundations  of  a  mole
built  of  solid  ancient  Greek  masonry  (Dyer,  Athens^  p.  115).  Here
then  we  may  place  the  ancient  Phalerum.  According  to  Thucydides
(ii.  1 3),  the  length  of  the  Long  Wall  which  united  Phalerum  to  Athens
was  35  Greek  furlongs.  Mr.  Kaupert  believed  that  he  detected  traces
of  this  wall  at  three  places  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Athens:  (i)  in  the
bed  of  the  Ilissus  at  the  point  where  the  present  highroad  to  Phalerum
crosses  it ;  (2)  at  the  watchhouse  on  the  saddle  between  two  low  hills
530  metres  south-west  of  the  first  point ;  (3)  550  metres  farther  south-
west, in  a  ravine  east  of  the  highroad  to  Phalerum.  Mr.  Kaupert
is  of  opinion  that  the  wall  was  carried  to  a  point  on  the  coast  1050
metres  south-west  of  St.  George ;  and  he  calculates  that  the  total  length
of  the  outer  front  of  the  wall,  measured  out  and  in  the  projecting  towers,
was  6438  metres  (about  36  Greek  furlongs),  which  is  a  close  approxima-
tion to  Thucydides' s  measurement.  See  Kaupert,  in  Monaisberichte  of  the
Berlin  Academy,  1879,  ?•  632  sq.  Professor  Milchhofer  would  place
Phalerum  near,  but  rather  to  the  west  of,  the  chapel  of  the  Saviour
{SoHr\  which  stands  on  a  conspicuous  rocky  elevation  about  a  mile  and
a  quarter  north  of  St.  George,  and  distant  1300  metres  from  the  sea.
To  the  west  of  the  chapel  are  some  ancient  remains,  which  Prof.
Milchhofer  conjectures  may  be  those  of  Phalerum.  See  Milchhofer,  in
Karten  von  Attika,  Text^  Heft  i.  p.  24  sq.^  Heft  ii.  p.  i  sqq.  But
against  placing  Phalerum  near  the  chapel  of  the  Saviour  it  may  be  urged :
(i)  Phalerum  was  the  old  port  of  Athens  (Herodotus,  vi.  116;  Diodorus,
xi.  41  ;  Cornelius  Nepos,  ThemistocleSy  6 ;  Pausanias,  i.  i.  2),  and  must
therefore  have  been  on  the  coast,  whereas  the  chapel  of  the  Saviour  is
nearly  three-quarters  of  a  mile  from  the  sea.  To  this  Prof.  Milchhofer
replies  that  the  stretch  of  marsh  land  and  sandy  dune  which  now
separates  the  chapel  from  the  sea  may  have  been  formed  since  the
classical  age.  (2)  The  chapel  of  the  Saviour  is  only  about  a  mile  and
a  half  from  Athens ;  how  then  could  the  Long  Wall  between  the  two
places  have  measured  35  furlongs,  as  Thucydides  says  it  did?  (3)  If
the  Long  Wall  to  Phalerum  followed  the  direction  indicated  by  Mr.
Kaupert  (see  above),  it  did  not  pass  near  the  site  where  Pro£  Milchhofer
would  place  Phalerum.      (4)  If  Sir  Patrick  Colquhoun  was  right  in


CH.  I  PHALERUM  13

believing  that  he  had  discovered  the  remains  of  an  ancient  Greek  mole
under  water  near  St.  George,  this  practically  settles  the  question.
Phalerum  must  have  been  there.

On  these  grounds  I  agree  with  most  writers  since  Ulrichs  in  placing
Phalerum  at  St.  George.

The  precise  length  of  the  furlong  {stadiunty  5tade\  which  Greek
writers,  including  Pausanias,  employ  as  the  highest  road-measure,  has
been  a  good  deal  discussed  ;  but  it  seems  possible  to  determine  it  with
approximate  accuracy.  Roman  writers  regularly  reckoned  the  Greek
fiirlong  {stade)  as  equal  to  125  paces  or  625  Roman  feet,  8  Greek
furlongs  making  i  Roman  mile  (=1000  paces  =  5000  Roman  feet).
Sec  Columella,  v.  i.  6 ;  Pliny,  A''.  H,  ii.  85  ;  Isidore,  Origines^  xv.
16.  3  ;  Hultsch,  Metrologie^  P-  81,  note  3.  But  this  appears  to  have
been  merely  a  rough  reckoning  adopted  for  convenience  of  reducing
Greek  furlongs  to  Roman  miles.  For  the  careful  Polybius,  as  we
leam  from  Strabo  (vii.  p.  322),  reckoned  8^  Greek  furlongs  to  the
Roman  mile.  Now  the  Greek  ^rlong  was  always  equal  to  600  Greek
feet  (Aulus  Gellius,  i.  i  ;  Suidas,  s,w,  filktov  and  crraStov).  Hence,
according  to  Polybius,  8^x600  =  5000  Greek  feet=i  Roman  mile  =
5000  Roman  feet.  Whence  we  see  that  Polybius  regarded  the  Greek
foot  as  identical  with  the  Roman.  This  is  confirmed  by  independent
determinations  of  the  length  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  foot  For  from
a  variety  of  considerations  we  may  fix  the  length  of  the  Roman  foot,
with  some  certainty,  at  .2957  metre  (see  Hultsch,  op.  cit,  p.  88  sqq,  ;  cp.
Ridgeway,  article  *Mensura,'  Smith's  Diet  of  Antiquities^  2.  p.  159
iq,)  ;  and  from  a  careful  series  of  measurements  of  the  Parthenon,  and
particularly  of  the  cella  of  that  temple,  which  is  known  to  have  measured
J  00  Greek  feet,  Dr.  Dorpfeld  has  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  the
Greek  (Attic)  foot  was  precisely  equal  to  .2957  metres.  See  W.
Dorpfeld,  *  Beitrage  zur  antiken  Metrologie,'  Mittheii.  d,  arch,  Inst,  in
Atkefty  7  (1882),  pp.  277-312.  Hence  the  Greek  furlong  {stade)  =
.2957x600  metres  =  177.42  metres  =194  yards  1.34  inches.  Thus
we  can  hardly  be  far  wrong  in  reckoning  the  Greek  furlong  {stadium^
stade)  as  equivalent  to  177  metres  or  194  yards.  But  the  English
furlong,  being  the  eighth  of  an  English  mile,  is  equal  to  220  yards.
Hence  the  Greek  furlong  {stadium^  stade)  was  26  yards  shorter  than  the
English  furlong;  and  9  Greek  furlongs  (1746  yards)  are  very  nearly
equivalent  to  8  English  furlongs  or  i  mile  (1760  yards).  Hence  a
distance  given  in  Greek  furlongs  {stades)  can  be  readily  turned  into
English  miles  by  dividing  by  nine.  In  the  present  translation  of
Pausanias  '  furlong '  always  means  a  Greek  furlong  {stadey  stadium).

The  Greek  furlong  {stadium)  gave  its  name  to  the  Greek  foot-race-
course, because  the  foot-race-course  was  always  600  Greek  feet  long
(Aulus  Gellius,  i.  i).  The  stadium  at  Olympia  was,  indeed,  exception-
ally long  (see  note  on  vi.  20.  8) ;  but  there  seems  to  be  no  reason  to
suppose  that  the  length  of  the  Olympic  stadium  (192.27  metres)  was  ever
used  as  a  road  measure.

1.  2.  Theseus sailed  from  Phalemm  etc     Cp.  Plutarch,

Theseus^  17  and  22.


14  PIRAEUS  BK.  I.  ATTICA

1.  2.  there  were  Bhip-sheds  there  down  to  my  time.  The  truth
of  this  statement  has  been  called  in  question  by  Mr.  Kalkmann
{Pausanias  der  Perieget^  P-  54  •^^^•)  We  know  that  the  arsenal  and
docks  of  Piraeus  were  burnt  and  the  walls  pulled  down  by  the  Romans
under  Sulla  in  86  B.C.  (see  above,  p.  8).  Cicero's  friend  Servius
Sulpicius,  writing  in  45  B.C.,  says  that  when  he  was  sailing  from
Aegina  to  Megara,  the  once  flourishing  towns  of  Aegina,  Megara,
Piraeus,  and  Corinth  lay  prostrate  and  in  ruins  on  all  sides  of  him
(Cicero,  Epist,  ad  Fam,  iv.  5.  4) ;  and  Strabo  says  (ix.  p.  395  sg,)
that  the  numerous  wars  had  destroyed  the  walls  of  Athens  and  the
fortifications  of  Munychia,  and  had  reduced  Piraeus  to  a  small
settlement  round  about  the  harbours  and  the  sanctuary  of  Zeus.
But  Pausanias,  in  addition  to  the  sanctuary  of  Zeus,  mentions  one
of  Aphrodite,  two  colonnades  which  were  used  as  separate  markets,
and  some  ship-sheds.  All  this,  Mr.  Kalkmann  thinks,  is  inconsistent
with  the  picture  which  Strabo  draws  of  the  desolation  of  Piraeus  in  his
time ;  whence  Mr.  Kalkmann  concludes  that  Pausanias  cannot  be
describing  Piraeus  as  it  was  in  his  own  time,  but  must  have  copied  his
description  of  it  from  an  old  book  or  books  which  depicted  Piraeus  as  it
had  been  in  happier  days  before  the  Roman  sack.  But  between  the
time  of  Strabo  and  the  time  of  Pausanias  a  century  and  a  half  elapsed,
during  which  Greece  enjoyed  profound  peace  and  basked  in  the  sunshine
of  imperial  favour.  It  is  rash  to  assume  that  during  this  long  period
Piraeus  remained  in  precisely  the  same  state  of  ruin  and  desolation  to
which  it  had  been  reduced  by  Sulla's  sack  more  than  two  hundred  years
before.  Mr.  Kalkmann  even  remarks  with  apparent  surprise  that
Pausanias  mentions  no  heaps  of  ruins  in  the  whole  of  Piraeus.  This  is
much  as  if  a  traveller  who  visited  Magdeburg  in  1 83 1  should  be  expected
to  describe  from  personal  observation  the  blood-stained  ruins  in  which
Tilly  left  the  city  after  his  ferocious  sack  in  May  1631.  Criticism  of
this  sort  hardly  deserves  notice,  but  as  it  is  popular  at  present  in  certain
circles  in  Germany  and  imposes  on  some  people,  I  think  it  well  to
expose  it.

There  is,  moreover,  a  good  deal  of  positive  evidence  to  show  that
Piraeus  revived  under  the  Roman  empire.  An  inscription,  which  seems
to  date  from  about  the  middle  of  the  second  century  A.D.,  and  hence  to
be  contemporary  with  Pausanias,  contains  a  decree  of  the  people  as  to
the  sanctuaries  and  sacred  precincts  of  Athens  and  Piraeus.  All  such
holy  places  as  had  been  profaned  by  being  appropriated  by  private
persons  were  to  be  restored  to  the  gods  and  heroes  to  whom  they  right-
fully belonged,  and  the  sale  or  purchase  of  such  places  was  to  be  strictly
forbidden  for  the  future.  The  inscription  expressly  mentions  the  dock-
yards (v€(u/ota)  both  in  the  harbour  of  Zea  and  in  the  great  harbour,  the
colonnades,  and  the  bazaar  or  exchange  (deigma)  dedicated  by  Magnus
(Pompey  the  Great?),  several  public  buildings,  sanctuaries  of
Aesculapius,  Dionysus,  and  Aphrodite,  precincts  of  Good  Fortune  and
Theseus,  etc,  all  of  which  seem  to  have  been  situated  at  Piraeus.  A
copy  of  the  inscription  was  to  be  deposited  in  the  sanctuary  of  Zeus  and
Athena  at  Piraeus.     See '£<^fi€/)i$  d/oxaioXoyi/c^,  1884,  PP-  165-172.


CH.  I  PIRAEUS  15

As  to  the  date  of  the  inscription,  see  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen
im  Alierthumy  2.  p.  12,  note  i  ;  W.  Gurlitt,  Ueber  Pausanias^  p.  238
sqq.  Pro£  Bruno  Keil  would  date  the  inscription  in  the  first  century
B.C,  on  the  ground  of  the  numerals  employed  in  it  {Hermes,  25  (1891),
pp.  317-320);  if  he  is  right,  the  inscription  proves  that  Athens  soon
began  to  recover  from  the  state  of  prostration  into  which  it  had  been
thrown  by  Sulla.  The  Magnus  mentioned  in  the  inscription  is  probably
Pompey  the  Great ;  for  Pompey  is  known  to  have  given  the  Athenians
fifty  talents  to  help  them  to  repair  their  buildings  (Plutarch,  Pompey,  42).

The  mention  of  the  dockyards  in  the  inscription  shows  that  they  had
been  at  least  partially  rebuilt  after  their  destruction  in  86  B.C.  The
docks  and  ship-sheds  were  probably  used  by  ships  of  the  Roman  navy ;
the  tombstones  of  two  marines  of  the  Roman  navy  have  been  found  at
Piraeus.  See  MittheiL  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,  6  (1881),  p.  341;
C  /.  A,  ill  No.  1447  ;  Wachsmuth,  op.  cit.  2.  p.  11.  The  trade  of  the
port  seems  also  to  have  revived ;  for  an  inscription  found  at  Piraeus
contains  the  letter  of  a  Roman  emperor  regulating  the  trafHc  in  the
market  {Philologus,  29  (1870),  pp.  693-695);  and  another  inscription
records  the  dedication  of  a  statue  of  Appia  Regilla,  wife  of  H erodes
Atticus,  by  the  merchants  of  Piraeus  {Mittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,
8  (1883),  pp.  287-289).  This  last  inscription  was,  therefore,  con-
temporary with  Pausanias ;  for  Appia  Regilla  died  in  his  lifetime  (see
vii.  20.  6  note).  Another  inscription  tells  us  that  a  statue  of  Tiberius
Claudius  Appius  Atilius  Bradua  Regillus  Atticus  Marathonius,  son  of
Herodes  Atticus,  was  set  up  by  the  inhabitants  of  Piraeus  for  some
benefit  which  he  had  conferred  on  them  {Mittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in
Athen,  6  (1881),  pp.  309-311).  The  colossal  statue  of  a  Roman
emperor  (Claudius  ?)  and  a  good  bust  of  Augustus  have  also  been  found
at  Piraeus,  attesting  to  some  extent  the  returning  prosperity  of  the  port
and  the  favour  of  the  emperors  {PMlologus,  29  (1870),  p.  696  sq.  ;
KarUn  von  Attika,  Text,  Heft  i.  pp.  33,  50  j^.)  The  wealthy  Proclus
of  Naucratis,  the  teacher  of  Philostratus,  had  a  house  at  Piraeus
(Philostratus,  Vit.  Sophist.  iL  21),  and  remains  of  Roman  villas  have
been  found  there  {Karten  von  Attika,  Text,  Heft  i.  p.  33).
Extensive  remains  of  Roman  baths  were  brought  to  light  by  excava-
tion close  to  the  harbour  of  Zea  in  1892  (II/oaKrtKa  tt}?  'Apxa^oA.
'ET(u/Ma9,  for  1892,  pp.  17-29).  These  baths  were  certainly  later  than
Sulla's  destruction  of  the  dockyards,  since  they  are  actually  built  over
the  remains  of  some  of  the  ancient  ship-sheds.

The  ship  -  sheds  at  Piraeus  were  one  of  the  glories  of  Athens.
Demosthenes  mentions  them  along  with  the  Parthenon  and  the
Propylaea  (xxii.  76.  p.  617).  Isocrates  tells  us  (vii.  66)  that  they
were  built  at  a  cost  of  1000  talents,  and  were  sold  by  the  Thirty
Tyrants  as  building  material  for  three  talents.  Lysias  says  that  the
Thirty  pulled  down  the  dockyards  (xii.  99),  and  he  speaks  of  the  ship-
sheds  going  to  ruin  (xxx.  22).  In  347-346  B.C.  the  Athenians,  incited
apparently  by  Eubulus,  set  about  building  new  docks,  ship-sheds,  and
an  arsenal.  The  works  were  interrupted  by  the  war  with  Philip,  but
were  afterwards  resumed  and  carried  on  till  323-322  b.c.  at  least ;  for  we


l6  PIRAEUS  BK.  I.  ATTICA

learn  from  an  inscription  (C.  /.  A.  iL  No.  270)  that  from  347-346  ac.  to
323-322  B.C.  a  tax  of  ten  talents  was  annually  levied  on  citizens  and
resident  aliens  to  defray  the  cost  of  these  works.  See  also  Dinarchus,
i.  96  ;  Aeschines,  iii.  25  ;  Philochorus,  Frag.  135,  Frag,  Hist  Graec,^
ed.  Muller,  i.  p.  406.  The  resumption  of  the  interrupted  work  and  its
final  completion  were  chiefly  due  to  the  energy  and  patriotism  of  the
orator  Lycurgus.  See  [Plutarch,]  ViL  X,  Orat.  vii.  pp.  841  d,  852  c;
Photius,  Bibliothecoy  p.  497  a,  12  sqq,^  ed.  Bekker ;  Longinus,  in
Rhetores  Graeci^  ed.  Walz,  9.  p.  545  5q,\  Hyperides,  Frag,  121,
ed.  Blass ;  Paus.,  i.  29.  16.  We  have  seen  above  that  the  docks
and  arsenal  were  burnt  by  Sulla  in  86  B.C.,  but  that  the  docks  were
afterwards  rebuilt.

With  regard  to  the  number  of  the  ship-sheds,  we  know  from  inscrip-
tions that  in  the  years  330-329,  326-325,  and  323-322  B.C.,  the  total
number  was  372,  of  which  196  were  in  Zea,  82  in  Munychia,  and  94
in  Cantharus  (the  great  harbour).  (See  C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  807,  col.  r,  lines
27-35  J  ^'  ^'  ^'  "•  No.  808,  col.  df  lines  95-102  ;  C  /.  A.  ii.  No.  811,
col.  IT,  lines  6-10.)  This  agrees  fairly  with  the  strength  of  the  Athenian
navy  at  this  time  ;  for  under  the  administration  of  Lycurgus  it  numbered
about  400  warships.  See  i.  29.  16  note;  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt
Athen  im  Altert/ium^  i.  p.  599,  note  i.  Thus  the  number  of  ships
slightly  exceeded  the  number  of  ship-sheds ;  but  this  could  scarcely
have  caused  inconvenience,  as  some  ships  must  always  have  been  in
commission.  The  number  of  400  ships  seems  rarely,  if  ever,  to  have
been  exceeded  even  in  the  time  of  Athens's  greatest  power.  See
Wachsmuth,  op.  cit,  2.  p.  62.

Very  considerable  remains  of  the  ancient  ship-sheds  are  still  to  be
seen  in  the  harbours  of  Zea  and  Munychia.  In  1871  Mr.  Graser
found  that  the  foundations  of  fifty  of  them  were  sufficiently  well  preserved
to  enable  us  to  estimate  the  original  dimensions  of  the  sheds ;  thirty-
eight  of  the  fifty  were  in  Zea,  and  nine  in  Munychia.  Excavations
conducted  on  the  east  side  of  the  harbour  of  Zea  by  the  Greek  Archaeo-
logical Society  in  1885  laid  bare  the  foundations  of  some  of  the  sheds
so  fully  that  Dr.  Dorpfeld  was  able  to  restore  their  original  plan  with
certainty.  The  flat  beach  all  round  the  basin  of  Zea  was  enclosed  by  a
wall  of  ashlar  masonry,  which  ran  round  the  harbour  in  the  form  of  a
regular  polygon  with  somewhat  obtuse  angles,  at  a  distance  of  about
50  to  60  feet  from  the  water's  edge.  This  formed  the  back  wall  of
all  the  ship-sheds,  which  extended  at  right  angles  to  it  and  parallel  to
each  other  down  to  the  water.  The  average  breadth  of  each  ship-shed
or  berth  was  about  6.50  metres.  The  sheds  were  separated  from  each
other  by  rows  of  unfluted  columns  of  Piraeic  limestone,  the  foundations
of  which,  bedded  on  the  shelving  rocky  beach,  descend  in  steps  to  the
edge  of  the  water,  and  are  continued  under  the  water  at  the  same  angle
for  some  distance.  These  columns  supported  the  roofs,  which  were
probably  wooden,  for  no  remains  of  a  stone  roof  have  been  found.
Between  these  partition-rows  of  columns  the  rock  has  been  hollowed
out  and  smoothed,  so  that  it  forms  an  inclined  plane  descending
gradually,  like  the  rows  of  columns,  to  the  water  and  continued  under


CH.  I  PIRAEUS  I J

the  sur^ce  of  the  water  for  some  way.  Each  of  these  inclined  planes,
cut  in  the  rock  and  bounded  on  either  side  by  a  row  of  columns,  was
the  floor  of  a  ship-shed.  In  the  middle  of  each  of  these  floors  is  built
a  stone  pier,  about  lo  feet  wide  and  a  yard  or  so  high ;  in  some
places  the  native  rock,  hewn  out  at  the  sides,  has  been  left  standing  in
the  centre  so  as  to  form  a  pier  of  similar  dimensions.  These  piers,
whether  built  or  consisting  of  the  native  rock,  slope  gently  into  the
water ;  and  on  them  the  ancient  ships  were  hauled  up  and  down.  A
groove  for  the  ship's  keel  was  probably  cut  down  the  middle  of  each
pier.  Remains  of  these  piers  may  still  be  seen  all  round  the  harbour
of  Zea  running  out  under  the  clear  water.

Similar  constructions,  including  pieces  of  the  back-wall  running
round  the  harbour  and  of  the  stone  piers  extending  into  the  water,  are
also  to  be  seen  in  the  harbour  of  Munychia,  where,  however,  the
breadth  of  the  ship-sheds  (6.25  metres)  seems  to  have  been  somewhat
less  than  that  of  the  ship-sheds  in  Zea.  At  Munychia  a  stone  with  a
groove  for  the  ship's  keel  has  been  found ;  also  three  stones  to  which
ropes  seem  to  have  been  fastened  for  the  purpose  of  hauling  up  the
ships  to  their  berths.  In  the  great  harbour  the  ship-sheds  were  situated
in  the  bay  which  forms  the  southern  extremity  of  the  harbour,  to  the
right  of  the  entrance ;  for  here  the  stone  piers  on  which  the  ships
were  hauled  up  could  still  be  seen  in  the  first  half  of  the  present
century.

See  Graser,  in  Philologus^  31  (1872),  p.  i  sqq, ;  Karten  votCAttika^
Texiy  Hefk  i.  pp.  14  sq,^  48  sq,\  UpaKTiKo.  rrjs  h  'AOrjvais
'ApxO'i^^oyi'i^s  ^Eraipias  for  1885,  pp.  63-68,  with  plates  2  and  3;
Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen^  2.  pp.  60-74.  The  remains  of  the  ship-
sheds  in  the  great  harbour  are  mentioned  by  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und
Forschungefij  2.  p.  181.  Other  vestiges  of  ancient  Greek  ship-sheds
have  been  found  at  Syracuse  and  Oeniadae  in  Acamania.  See  Wachs-
muth, op.  cit.  7,.  p.  61,  note  3.  Round  the  war-harbour  at  Utica
in  Africa  there  are  remains  of  two  rows  of  chambers,  the  one
above  the  other.  The  lower  chambers  opened  on  quays  at  the  level
of  the  water,  and  it  has  been  suggested  that  they  were  the  Cartha-
ginian ship-sheds  or  dry  docks.  But  they  were  perhaps  rather  store-
houses. See  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  tart  dans  rantiquiU^  3.
p.  391  sq,\  Tissot,  La  province  Romaine  dAfrique^  2.  p.  62  sq,^  with
the  Atlas,  plates  ii.  iii.  vi.  The  ship-sheds  in  the  war-harbour  of
Carthage  are  described  by  Appian,  Lifyc,  96.  Remains  of  them  are
thought  still  to  exist,  buried  under  sand  and  reeds.  See  Perrot  et
Chipiez,  op.  cit.  3.  p.  381  ;  Tissot,  op.  cit.  i.  p.  598  sqq.

The  only  remains  of  ancient  ships  which  have  been  found  at  Zea
are  some  plates  of  Parian  marble  representing  great  eyes.  Clearly
these  were  the  ships'  eyes  which  were  fastened  to  the  bows  of  ancient
Greek  vessels  (cp.  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Acham.  95).  Pollux  tells  us
(L  86)  that  the  ship's  name  was  painted  beside  its  eye.  Philostratus
describes  the  picture  of  an  Etruscan  pirate  ship  painted  blue  with
fierce  eyes  at  the  prow  to  frighten  the  enemy  {Imagines^  i.  1 8).  In  a
list  of  missing  or  unserviceable  ships'  furniture  (B5ckh's  Urkunden  idfcr

VOL.  II  c


1 8  ARSENAL  OF  PIRAEUS  bk.  i.  attica

das  Seewesen^  ii.  lines  68,  75)  mention  is  twice  made  of  a  broken  (ship's)
eye.  In  the  ships'  eyes  found  at  Zea  the  iris  is  painted  red  or  blue ;
where  the  pupil  should  be  there  is  a  round  hole,  through  which  doubtless
passed  a  nail,  probably  with  a  shining  knob,  to  fasten  the  eye  to  the
ship's  side.  Some  of  the  eyes  show  traces  of  red  paint  on  the  back  ;
the  paint  probably  adhered  to  them  from  the  ship's  sides ;  for  ships'
bows  were  sometimes  painted  red  (hence  the  epithet  fukroTrdpyoi  *  red-
cheeked'  applied  to  ships,  see  Leaf  on  Homer,  //.  ii.  637).  See
Lolling,  *  Schiffsaugen,'  Mittheil,  d.  arch,  Inst  in  Athen^  5  (1880),  pp.
384-387  ;  Karten  von  Attika^  Text,  Heft  i.  p.  58  sq.  The  ship's
eyes  are  clearly  marked  on  a  Greek  vase  in  the  form  of  a  prow  in  the
British  Museum  (4th  Vase  Room,  case  D,  on  top)  ;  they  also  appear  on
the  prow  of  Ulysses's  galley  in  a  painting  found  at  Pompeii,  which
represents  Ulysses  passing  the  Sirens  (British  Museum,  4th  Vase
Room,  Wall  Case  6).  They  are  also  marked  on  two  terra-cotta
boats  found  in  Cyprus  (Cesnola,  Cyprus,  p.  259),  and  they  are  depicted
on  vase-paintings.  See  Stackelberg,  Die  Graber  der  Hellenen,  pi.
xlvii ;  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  6  (1885),  p.  21  ;  E.  Assmann,  in
Jahrbuch  d.  archdoL  Instituts,  4  (1889),  p.  99.  Modem  Italian
sailors  sometimes  still  paint  an  eye  on  the  bow  of  their  vessel  (J.  J.
Blunt,  Vestiges  of  ancient  manners  and  customs  discovered  in  modem  Italy
and  Sicily,  p.  39).  Every  craft  owned  by  a  Chinaman,  from  a  sampan
up  to  an  English-built  screw  steamer,  has  a  pair  of  eyes  painted  on  its
bows,  that  it  may  see  its  way  and  spy  out  sunken  rocks,  shoals,  and
other  dangers  of  the  deep.  Indeed,  in  all  places  in  eastern  Asia  where
many  Chinese  travel,  the  local  steamers,  whether  owned  by  Chinese  or
not,  all  have  eyes  ;  otherwise  no  Chinaman  would  travel  in  them  or
send  his  goods  by  them  (Shway  Yoe,  The  Bunnan,  i.  p.  81  ;  J.  H.
Gray,  China,  2.  p.  259).  Cambodian  racing  boats  all  have  eyes  at  the
bow,  with  gold  leafage  round  them  (Moura,  Le  royawne  du  Cambodge,
I.  p.  190).

Another  famous  structure  in  Piraeus  was  the  arsenal,  which  formed
a  necessary  adjunct  to  the  ship-sheds  of  the  navy.  We  know  from
ancient  authors  that  it  was  built  from  designs  furnished  by  the  architect
Philo,  who  explained  them  to  the  people  in  a  speech  which  won  him
a  high  reputation  for  eloquence.  The  building  was  admired  for  its
elegance,  and  the  Athenians  were  proud  of  it.  (See  Plutarch,  Sulla,  1 4  ;
Strabo,  ix.  p.  395;  Valerius  Maximus,  viii.  12.  Ext.  2;  Cicero,  De
Oratore,  i.  14.  62  ;  Pliny,  N,  H,  vii.  125  ;  Vitnivius,  viL  prooem.,  12.)
We  know  from  an  inscription  (C.  /.  A,  ii.  No.  270,  see  above,  p.  15  sq,)
that  the  arsenal  was  begim,  or  at  least  that  a  tax  to  defray  the  cost  of  it,
was  first  levied  in  347-346  B.C  ;  and  it  must  have  been  finished  in  330-329
B.C.  For  an  inscription  of  that  year  (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  807,  col.  b,  line
88  sqq,  ;  BSckh's  Urkunden  Uber  das  Seewesen,  No.  xi.)  contains  a  list
of  various  building  materials  which  had  been  left  over  from  the  arsenal,
including  twenty-five  new  iron  nails.  Now  we  know  that  the  boards  of
the  roof  were  fastened  on  with  iron  nails  (see  below)  ;  hence  the  arsenal
must  have  been  roofed  in  330-329  B.C.  It  must  also  have  had  its  doors
on  in  that  year ;  for  in  the  same  inscription  (col.  c,  lines  48  sqq,)  there


CH.  I  ARSENAL  OF  PIRAEUS  19

is  mention  of  a  new  door  which  had  been  removed  from  the  arsenal,
probably  because  it  did  not  fit.  The  new  arsenal  constructed  by  Philo
replaced  an  older  one,  which  is  mentioned  in  the  inscriptions  at  first  as

*  the  arsenal '  simply  and  at  a  later  date  as  *  the  old  arsenal '  (C  /.  A,  ii.
Na  793,  col.  a,  line  13,  and  col.  e,  line  37  ;  Bockh's  Urkunden  iiber
das  SeewescHy  No.  iv.  pp.  312,  323  ;  C.  /.  A,  ii.  No.  795,  col.  f,  line
78  sq. ;  C  /.  A.  ii.  No.  807,  col.  b,  line  153 ;  B6ckh*s  Urkunden^  No.
xL  col.  b,  line  160,  p.  412).  While  the  new  arsenal  was  in  process  of
construction,  wooden  arsenals  were  used  as  temporary  store-houses
(C  7.  A,  ii.  No.  807,  col.  c,  line  26  ;  Bockh*s  Urkundetiy  No.  xi.  p.  414).
The  great  arsenal,  the  pride  of  Athens,  was  finally  burnt  by  Sulla  in  86  ac.
(see  above,  p.  8) ;  and  no  certain  vestiges  of  it  have  been  as  yet  discovered.
But  by  an  extraordinary  piece  of  good  fortune  the  directions  given  to  the
contractors  for  its  construction  have  been  preserved  to  us.  They  were
discovered  in  1882  engraved  on  a  slab  of  Hymettian  marble  not  far
from  the  north-east  side  of  the  harbour  of  Zea,  at  the  foot  of  the  hill  of
Munychia.  The  directions  are  so  full,  clear,  and  precise  that  we  now
know  Philo's  arsenal  from  roof  to  foundation  better  than  any  other
building  of  ancient  Greece,  though  not  a  stone  of  it  has  been  found.  A
brief  description  of  the  arsenal,  derived  from  the  inscription,  may  not  be
out  of  place  here.

The  architect  was  to  be  Philo  of  Eleusis,  son  of  Execestides ;  and
with  him  was  associated,  though  in  what  relation  is  not  clear,  a  certain
Euthydomus,  son  of  Demetrius  ;  the  latter  was  perhaps  the  public  over-
seer of  the  work.  The  arsenal  was  to  be  built  to  store  the  '  hanging-
gear  '  (rigging,  tackle,  sails,  cables  for  undergirding  the  ship,  curtains  or
screens  which  were  stretched  along  the  gunwales,  etc.)  The  *  wooden
gear'  (masts,  spars,  oars,  punting-poles,  rudders,  etc.)  seems  to  have
been  kept  beside  the  ships  in  the  ship-sheds.  (See  C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  793,
coL  c,  line  10  sqq. ;  col.  d,  line  10  sqq, ;  and  on  the  '  hanging  gear '  and

*  wooden  gear '  in  the  Greek  marine,  see  Bockh,  Urkunden  iiber  das
Seewesen^  pp.  1 1 1-166  ;  A.  Cartault,  La  trilre  Athhiienne  (Paris  1 88 1)  p.
1 70  sqq, )  The  arsenal  was  to  be  built  at  Zea,  which  was  the  principal  war-
harbour.  It  was  to  begin  at  the  gateway  which  led  from  the  market
and  was  to  extend  to  the  back  of  the  ship-sheds.  It  was  to  be  built  of
Piraeic  limestone,  an  excellent  building  material  often  mentioned  in
inscriptions  (Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen^  2.  p.  167)  and  still  much  in
use.  The  old  quarries  are  to  be  seen  in  the  centre  and  towards  the
western  edge  of  the  Acte  peninsula  {Karten  von  Attika^  Text^  Heft  i.
p.  55).     The  general  plan  of  the  building  was  to  be  this :

It  was  to  be  a  long  narrow  structure,  400  feet  long  by  50  feet  wide
on  the  inside,  or,  including  the  walls,  405  feet  long  by  55  feet  wide.
Internally  it  was  to  be  divided  into  three  aisles  by  two  rows  of  columns
running  down  its  whole  length.  The  central  aisle,  flanked  by  the
double  row  of  columns,  was  to  be  kept  clear  as  a  passage  for  the  public ;
while  the  two  side  aisles  were  to  serve  for  storing  the  tackle.  For  this
purpose  each  of  the  side  aisles  was  divided  into  two  stories  by  a  wooden
flooring.  On  the  ground  story  the  sails  and  other  canvas  gear  were
kept  in  presses ;  and  in  the  upper  galleries  the  ropes  were  to  be  coiled


20  ARSENAL  OF  PIRAEUS  BK.  I.  attica

on  open  shelves.  Thus  the  arsenal  closely  resembled  what  we  should
call  an  arcade,  except  that  the  sides  were  occupied  by  store-rooms  instead
of  shops.  The  walls  were  to  be  27  feet  high,  the  blocks  being  laid
lengthwise  and  crossways  in  alternate  courses  (alternate  courses  of
*  stretchers  *  and  *  headers '  is  the  technical  English  phrase).  A  triglyph
frieze  and  a  cornice  were  to  run  all  round  the  outside  of  the  building.
It  was  to  be  lit  by  windows  three  feet  high  and  two  feet  broad,  one
window  being  placed  opposite  each  intercolumniation  in  the  long  sides,
and  three  windows  in  each  of  the  gable  ends  ;  the  windows  were  to  be
closed  with  tight-fitting  bronze  shutters.  In  each  of  the  gable  ends
there  were  to  be  two  doorways  nine  feet  wide  each,  opening  into  the
central  aisle  or  arcade.  These  doorways  were  to  be  fitted  with  doors
plated  with  bronze  on  the  outside.  The  columns  of  the  interior,  thirty-
five  in  each  row,  were  to  be  20  feet  high  with  capitals  of  Pentelic
marble.  The  order  of  the  colunms  is  not  mentioned  ;  but  from  the
proportions,  which  were  slender.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  infers  that  they  were
Ionic  The  whole  of  the  interior  was  to  be  paved  with  stone  flags  closely
fitted  together,  their  upper  surface  being  worked  smooth  and  level.  In
the  two  rows  of  coliunns  which  flanked  the  central  arcade  there  was  to
be  a  stone  balustrade,  with  a  latticed  gate  in  the  middle,  betwixt  each
pair  of  columns.  These  gates  gave  admission  to  the  side  aisles.  In
these  side  aisles  on  the  ground  floor,  as  already  mentioned,  the  sails  and
canvas  gear  were  to  be  stored  in  presses  which  were  to  be  placed  against
the  columns  and  the  side  walls.  The  presses  placed  against  the  side
walls  were  to  open  in  front ;  those  placed  against  the  columns  were  to
open  at  the  two  sides,  in  order  that  people  passing  through  the  arsenal
might  see  all  the  gear  that  was  stored  in  it.  In  the  galleries  above
these  side  aisles  the  cordage  was  to  be  stowed  away  on  open  wooden
shelves.  The  roof  of  the  building  was  to  be  constructed  of  strong
wooden  rafters  overlaid  with  boards  which  were  to  be  fastened  on  with
iron  nails  ;  and  the  whole  was  to  be  covered  with  close-fitting  Corinthian
tiles.  To  secure  that  the  building  should  be  well  aired,  which  was
especially  necessary  in  a  magazine  of  this  sort,  lest  the  tackle  should
sufler  from  damp,  slit-like  openings  were  to  be  left  in  the  walls  between
the  joints  of  the  stones,  the  number  and  situation  of  these  air-holes  being
left  to  the  discretion  of  the  architect.  Such  was,  in  outline,  the  great
arsenal  of  the  Piraeus.  Thither  on  the  burning  days  of  simuner,  one
may  suppose,  crowds  were  glad  to  escape  from  the  blinding  glare  and
stifling  heat  of  the  streets,  and  to  promenade  in  the  cool,  lofty,  and  dimly
lighted  arcade,  often  stopping  to  gaze  with  idle  curiosity  or  patriotic  pride
at  the  long  array  of  well-ordered  tackle  which  spoke  of  the  naval  supre-
macy of  Athens.

See  C  /.  A.  ii.  Na  1054 ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec,  No.  352 ;
Foucart,  *L'arsenal  de  Philon,'  Bull,  Corr,  HelL  6  (1882),  pp.  540-555;  T.  W.
Ludlow,  *  The  Athenian  naval  arsenal  of  Philon,*  American  Journal  of  Philology^
3(1882),  pp.  317-328;  E.  Fabricius,  *Die  Skeuothek  des  Philon,'  Hentus^  17
(1S82),  pp.  551-594  ;  W.  Dorpfeld,  *  Die  Skeuothek  des  Philon,*  MUtheiL  d,  arck.
Inst,  in  Athen^  8  (1883),  op.  147-164;  Choisy,  Etudes  ipigraphiques  sur
r architecture  Grecque^  pp.  1-30;  Bruno  Keil,  '  Bemerkungen  zur  Reconstruction


CH.  I  PIRAEUS  21

der  philoneischen  Skeuothck,'  Hermes,  19  (1884),  pp.  149-163 ;  Milchhofer,  in
Baumebter's  DenkmdUr,  p.  1 199  ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Dte  Stadi  Aihett,  2.  pp.  75-89.

Lastly,  before  quitting  the  war-harbours  of  Athens,  we  may  notice
the  ChomOj  a  quay  near  the  mouth  of  the  harbour  on  which,  when  an
armament  was  fitting  out  for  sea,  the  Council  of  the  Five  Hundred  held
their  sittings  daily  till  the  squadron  sailed.  When  all  was  ready,  every
captain  was  bound  by  law  to  lay  his  vessel  alongside  the  quay  to  be
inspected  by  the  Council.  The  inspection  over,  the  fleet  weighed  anchor
and  proceeded  on  its  voyage.  It  must  have  been  a  heart-stirring  sight
to  witness  the  departure  of  a  fleet  for  the  seat  of  war,  as  gallant  ship
after  ship  passed,  in  long  procession,  through  the  mouth  of  the  harbour
and  stood  out  to  sea,  followed  by  the  gazing  eyes  and  by  the  hopes  and
fears  and  prayers  of  thousands  assembled  on  the  shore.

See  Demosthenes,  1.  6.  p.  1208, 11.  4,  p.  1229  ;  Xenophon,  Hellenica,  ii.  3.  46 ;
C,  I.  A.  ii.  No.  809,  col.  a,  line  185  sq.^  coL  b,  line  15  sqq,\  C.  Wachsmuth,
Die  Stadt  Athen,  2.  pp.  94-96.

L  2.  beside  the  largest  harbour  is  the  grave  of  Themistocles.
Diodonis  the  Periegete,  a  contemporary  of  Theophrastus,  wrote  a  work
*  On  Tombs '  in  at  least  three  books  (see  Polemo,  ed.  Preller,  p.  1 70  sqq.j
Frag.  Hist  Grctec,  ed.  Miiller,  2.  p.  353  sq,)  The  work  is  lost,  but
Plutarch  has  preserved  several  fragments  of  it,  in  one  of  which  (Plutarch,
Themistocles^  32)  Diodonis  thus  describes  the  situation  of  Themistocles's
grave  :  "  At  the  great  harbour  of  Piraeus  a  sort  of  elbow  juts  out  from
the  headland  of  Alcimus ;  and  when  you  have  rounded  this  elbow,  on
the  inner  side,  where  the  sea  is  somewhat  calm,  there  is  a  large  base-
ment of  masonry,  and  the  altar-like  structure  on  it  is  the  grave  of
Themistocles.  And  he  (Diodonis)  imagines  that  the  comic  poet  Plato
bears  him  out  in  the  following  passage :

*  Fair  lies  thy  tomb
For  it  will  speak  to  merchants  ever3rwhere  ;
It  will  behold  the  seamen  sailing  out  and  in,
And  mark  the  contests  of  the  ships.  ^ "


)  }>


Tradition  places  the  site  of  the  tomb  on  the  shore  of  the  Acte
peninsula,  near  the  modem  lighthouse,  some  way  to  the  south  of  the
entrance  to  the  great  harbour.  This  identification  is  confirmed  by  Prof.
Milchhofer.  A  square  space,  measuring  about  19  feet  on  the  sides,
has  been  levelled  in  the  rock ;  and  its  outer  margin  has  been  cut  and
smoothed  to  a  breadth  of  2  J  feet,  apparently  to  form  the  bed  of  a
wall  Within  this  square  space  are  three  graves,  a  large  one  and
two  small  ones ;  and  just  outside  it,  on  the  side  away  from  the  sea,  is  a
large  sepulchre  hewn  in  the  rock.  Prof.  Milchhofer  supposes  that  when
this  square  space  was  surrounded  by  its  wall  and  the  interior  space  was
filled  up  with  rubble,  it  may  have  been  the  *  altar-like  structure  *  described
by  Diodonis  the  Periegete,  and  that  the  rock-hewn  tomb  behind  it  and
sheltered  by  it  from  the  surf  and  spray  of  the  neighbouring  sea,  may
have  been  the  supposed  grave  of  Themistocles.  There  is  a  little  bay
here,  which,  he  thinks,  tallies  with  Diodorus's  description.     Aristotle


22  PIRAEUS  BK.   I.  ATTICA

(Hist.  Anim,  vi.  15,  p.  569  b,  9  sqq.)  mentions  a  *  Thcmistocleum '  in
a  shady  and  marshy  spot ;  but  whether  this  '  Themistocleum '  is  the
tomb  described  by  Diodorus  and  Pausanias  seems  doubtful  (See
Milchhofer,  in  Karten  von  Atiifca^  Text^  Heft  i.  p.  54  ;  C.  Wachsmuth,
Vie  Stadt  A  then,  1,  p.  ^20  sq.\  id,  2.  p.  169  sq.)  Thucydides  tells  us
(i.  138)  that  there  was  a  monument  to  Themistocles  in  the  market-place
at  Magnesia  (where  he  died),  but  that  his  relations  asserted  that  at  his
own  request  his  bones  had  been  brought  home  and  laid  secretly  in  Attic
earth  ;  for  as  a  banished  traitor  he  had  no  right  to  burial.  This  seems
to  show  that  in  Thucydides's  time  the  spot  where  his  bones  were  said  to
have  been  laid  in  Attica  was  not  generally  known ;  so  the  later  identifi-
cation of  the  site  may  have  been  merely  a  popular  guess.  The  "  contests
of  the  ships"  referred  to  in  the  lines  of  Plato  may  have  been  the
regattas  ;  for  we  know  that  the  boats  raced  from  the  great  harbour  round
to  the  harbour  of  Munychia  (see  note  on  ii.  35.  i),  and  therefore  must
have  passed  close  to  the  spot  which,  if  Prof.  Milchhofer  is  right,  A^as
traditionally  identified  in  antiquity  as  the  grave  of  Themistocles.

1.  3.  a  precinct  of  Zens  and  Athena.  Their  full  titles  were
Saviour  Zeus  and  Saviour  Athena  (Lycurgus,  c.  Leocr,  1 7  ;  Strabo,  ix.
P«  396  ;  C  /.  A,  ii.  Nos.  325  and  326 ;  C  /.  A.  iii.  No.  281).  As  the
sanctuary  was  clearly  the  chief  one  in  Piraeus  (see  below)  we  may  assume
that  there  was  a  temple  within  the  sacred  close,  though  neither  Pausanias
nor  Strabo  refers  to  it.  Pliny  {N,  H,  xxxiv.  74)  and  an  anonymous
grammarian  (in  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca,  p.  91.  6  sq.)  certainly  mention
a  temple  of  Saviour  Zeus,  but  their  authority  does  not  count  for  much.
In  the  close  there  were  cloisters  containing  fine  paintings  by  dis-
tinguished artists,  and  there  were  statues  in  the  open  air  (Strabo,  ix.
p.  396).  The  colonnade  is  mentioned  in  two  inscriptions  (C.  /.  A,  ii.
Nos.  325  and  326).  Among  the  paintings,  as  we  learn  from  Pausanias,
were  portraits  of  Leosthenes  and  his  sons  by  Arcesilaus  (see  below).
Among  the  statues  was  a  bronze  one  of  the  father  of  Leocrates  (Lycur-
gus, c.  Leocr.  136  sq.)  The  image  of  Athena,  which  was  admired,  was
by  Cephisodotus  (see  below).  From  Pausanias  we  learn  that  it  was  of
bronze  and  held  a  spear.  The  altar  of  Zeus  in  the  sacred  precinct  was
also  by  Cephisodotus,  and  was  a  fine  work  of  art  (Pliny,  I.e.)  A  sum
was  annually  granted  from  the  public  chest  for  adorning  the  altar  at  the
public  sacrifice  offered  to  Saviour  Zeus  (Plutarch,  Demosthenes,  27  ;
[<V/.,]  Vit.  X.  orat.  viii.  p.  846  d).  On  the  occasion  of  this  festival  there
was  a  regatta  (C  /.  A.  ii.  No.  471,  line  29  sq.)  and  a  procession  in
honour  of  Saviour  Zeus  through  certain  wide  streets.  For  we  find  a
decree  of  the  people  (Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Grace.  No.  337)  ordering
that  the  wide  streets  through  which  the  procession  of  Saviour  Zeus  passed
should  be  levelled  and  put  in  the  best  order.  (The  decree  incidentally
throws  some  light  on  the  state  of  the  streets  in  Piraeus ;  for  it  ordains
that  all  persons  who  have  shot  rubbish  in  the  streets  shall  be  compelled
to  remove  it,  and  that  for  the  future  no  one  shall  be  allowed  to  shoot
rubbish  or  throw  out  dung  on  the  streets.)  On  the  last  day  of  the  year
a  sacrifice  was  offered  to  Saviour  Zeus  (Lysias,  xxvi.  6).

The  expenses  of  the  sanctuary  seem  to  have  been  partly  met  by


CH.  I  PIRAEUS  23

levying  a  tax  of  one  drachm  on  every  vessel  which  put  into  the  port
(C  /.  A,  i.  No.  68).  Moreover,  persons  who  had  escaped  from  danger,
for  example  seafaring  men  who  had  come  safe  to  land,  commonly
brought  thank-offerings  to  the  shrine  (Aristophanes,  Plutus^  1174  sqq,)
From  a  fragment  of  the  comedy  of  The  Painter  by  Diphilus  (preserved
by  Athenaeus,  vii.  p.  292  b)  we  see  that,  among  the  long-shore  sharks
who  lay  in  wait  on  the  quays  of  Piraeus  for  sailors  fresh  from  a  voyage,
there  were  cooks  with  an  eye  to  business.  For  in  the  passage  in
question  one  of  the  fraternity  tells  us  how,  whenever  he  spied  a  jolly
tar  just  stepping  ashore,  ready  for  a  spree,  with  a  bulging  purse  and  an
expansive  smile  on  his  sun-burnt  face,  he  used  to  rush  up  to  him,  shake
him  warmly  by  the  hand,  drop  a  delicate  allusion  to  Saviour  Zeus,  and
proffer  his  services  at  the  sacrifice.  The  bait  took,  and  soon  he  was  to
be  seen  heading  for  the  sanctuary  with  the  sailor  man  in  tow.

The  sanctuary  of  Saviour  Zeus,  as  already  remarked,  seems  always
to  have  been  the  principal  one  in  Piraeus.  It  was  so  in  the  second
century  B.c  (see  Livy,  xxxi.  30.  9),  and  it  is  the  only  one  mentioned  by
StrabOy  who  says  that  in  his  day,  about  the  beginning  of  our  era,  the
once  busy  mart  of  commerce  had  shrunk  to  a  petty  town  clustering
about  the  harbours  and  the  sanctuary  of  Zeus  (ix.  p.  395  sq,^  see  above,
p.  14).  In  the  second  half  of  the  second  century  A.D.  we  have  the
evidence  of  Pausanias  that  the  precinct  of  Saviour  Zeus  was  still  the
chief  sight  in  Piraeus ;  and  this  is  confirmed  by  the  evidence  of  the
perhaps  contemporary  inscription  which  records  a  comprehensive
scheme  for  the  restoration  of  holy  places  ;  for  it  is  directed  that  copies
of  that  inscription  shall  be  deposited  in  the  shrine  of  Athena  Polias  on
the  Acropolis  at  Athens  and  in  the  sanctuary  of  Saviour  Zeus  and
Saviour  Athena  at  Piraeus  {'E<f)i]fjLepls  dpxatokoyiK'qy  1884,  p.  167  sqq,,
see  above,  p.  14  sq.)

The  exact  site  occupied  by  the  sanctuary  is  not  known.  Prof.
Milchhdfer  would  place  it  a  little  way  inland  from  the  north-east  comer
of  the  great  harbour,  somewhat  above  the  modem  church  of  the  Trinity
(Hagia  Triada),  where  some  large,  well-preserved  marble  capitals  of  the
Doric  order  have  been  found.  These  capitals.  Prof.  Milchhofer  con-
jectures, may  have  belonged  to  the  temple  of  Saviour  Zeus.  See
K or  ten  von  Attika^  Text,  Heft  i.  p.  41  sq,  Cp.  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die
Stadt  Athen,  2.  pp.  141- 145.

1.  3.  Atliena  holds  a  spear.  This  image  was  much  admired :  it
was  by  the  sculptor  Cephisodotus  (Pliny,  xxxiv.  74,  where,  however,
the  MSS.  read  Cephisodorus).  There  were  two  sculptors  of  this
name  (see  note  on  viii.  30.  10).  Prof.  v.  Brunn  conjectured  that
after  the  restoration  of  the  fortifications  of  Piraeus  in  394-391
B.O.  (see  above,  p.  8)  the  patron  deities  Saviour  Zeus  and  Saviour
Athena  may  have  been  provided  with  new  images  (v.  Bmnn,
Geschichte  der  griechischen  Kiinstler,  i.  p.  269  sq.  ;  cp.  K.  O.  M tiller,
Kunstarchaeologische  Werke,  5.  p.  169).  The  conjecture  is  plausible,
and  if  we  accept  it  we  must  suppose  that  the  sculptor  who  made  the
image  of  Saviour  Athena  was  the  elder,  not  the  younger  Cephisodotus.
This  view  is  assented  to  by  Prof.  Overbeck  (Geschichte  der  griech.


24  PIRAEUS  BK.  I.  ATTICA

Plastik^^  2.  p.  7),  Mr.  A.  S.  Murray  {History  of  Greek  Sculpture^  2.
p.  244),  Prof.  Milchhofer  (Karten  von  Aitika,  Text^  Heft  i.  p.  42),
and  Prof.  C.  Wachsmuth  (Die  Stadt  Athen^  i.  p.  585,  note  2  ;  li/.,  2.
p.  144)  note  2).  Prof.  W.  Klein,  indeed,  clsdmed  the  statue  for  the
younger  Cephisodotus ;  but  Prof.  v.  Brunn  easily  showed  that  his  argu-
ment rested  on  a  misunderstanding.  See  W.  Klein,  in  Archaeologisch-
epigraphische  Mittheilungen  aus  Oesterreich^  4  (1880),  p.  21  5q,\  H.
V.  Brunn,  *  Zur  griechischen  Kiinstlergeschichte,'  Sitzungsberichte  of  the
Bavarian  Academy  (Munich),  Philosoph.  philolog.  CL,  1880,  p.  454  sqq.
Various  attempts  have  been  made  to  identify  existing  statues  as  copies
of  this  image  of  Athena.  Thus  Prof.  Furtwangler  formerly  suggested
that  the  Famese  Athena  (Miiller  -  Wieseler,  Denkmaler^  2.  pi.  xix.
No.  202)  is  a  replica  of  it ;  Prof.  Milchhofer  believes  that  the  Athena  of
Velletri  (Miiller- Wieseler,  op,  cit,^  2.  pi,  xix.  No.  204 ;  Friederichs-
Wolters,  GipsabgUsse^  No.  1434)  is  a  replica  of  it,  and  this  view  is  now
advocated  by  Prof.  Furtwangler,  though  he  would  assign  the  original,
not  to  Cephisodotus,  but  to  Cresilas  {Meisterwerke  der  grieck,  Piastiky
pp.  303-31 1 ).  Dr.  Wolters  dissents  from  them,  and  regards  a  helmeted
bust  of  Athena,  found  at  Herculaneum  and  now  at  Naples,  as  a  replica
of  the  bust  of  the  image.  His  ground  for  doing  so  is  the  resemblance
of  the  face  of  the  bust  to  the  face  of  the  statue  of  Peace  by  Cephisodotus
(see  i.  8.  2,  note).  See  P.  Wolters,  *  Athena  des  Kephisodot,'  Jakrbuck
d,  k,  d.  archdolog,  Instituts^  8  (1893),  pp.  173-180.

1.  3.  a  painting  of  Le<>sthenes by  Arcesilaus.     Leosthenes

was  slain  while  besieging  Lamia  in  Ol.  114.  2  (323  B.C.),  according  to
Diodorus  (xviii.  1 3).  A  painter  of  merit,  Arcesilas,  son  of  Tisicrates,  is
mentioned  by  Pliny  (A^.  H,  xxxv.  1 46).  He  may  be  the  Arcesilaus  of
Pausanias.  Cp.  v.  Brunn,  Gesch.  d.  griech.  Kiinstler^  2.  p.  157  sg.
As  to  Leosthenes,  see  i.  25.  5  and  Index.

1.  3.  the  Long  Oolonnade.  Callicrates  or  Menecles,  quoted  by  the
scholiast  on  Aristophanes  {Peace,  145)  tells  us  that  in  the  harbour  of
Cantharus  (that  is,  in  the  great  harbour  of  Piraeus)  there  were  "  the
docks,  then  the  sanctuary  of  Aphrodite,  then  five  colonnades  round
about  the  harbour."  The  same  edifices  are  mentioned  in  the  same
order  in  an  inscription  of  Roman  date  which  has  been  already  referred

to :    "  in  the  great  (harbour)  the  docks  and  the  sanctuary  of

Aphrodite  and  the  colonnades  as  far  as  the  bars "  (of  the  harbour  ?)
{*E<f)rffi€pU  dpxai.okoyLKrjy  1884,  p.  1 70).  The  Long  Colonnade  men-
tioned by  Pausanias  was  doubtless  one  of  these  five  colonnades  which
skirted  the  shore  of  the  harbour ;  and  it  is  almost  certainly  identical
with  the  colonnade  which  Thucydides  (viii.  90)  describes  as  the  largest
colonnade  and  as  situated  in  Piraeus  immediately  adjoining  the  pro-
montory of  Eetionia.  This  fixes  the  situation  of  the  Long  Colonnade.
It  must  have  stood  on  the  north  side  of  the  harbour,  extending  west-
ward to  the  point  where  the  town-wall  of  Piraeus  crossed  the  shallow
northern  bight  on  a  mole  to  the  peninsula  of  Eetionia  (see  above,  p.  i  o).
The  town-wall  must  thus  have  run  all  along  the  back  of  the  Long
Colonnade  and  may  even  have  formed  the  back-wall  of  that  edifice.
We  can  thus  see   how  easy  it  was   for  the  aristocratic  party,  after


CH.  I  PIRAEUS  25

fortifying  themselves  on  the  peninsula  of  Eetionia  (411  B.C.)  to  cut  off
the  Long  Colonnade  from  the  rest  of  Piraeus  by  a  cross-wall  (Thucy-
dides,  viiL  90).  This  cross-wall  doubtless  ran  from  the  outer  fortification
wall  of  Piraeus  past  the  east  end  of  the  Long  Colonnade  and  terminated
on  the  shore  of  the  harbour.  The  reason  why  the  aristocrats  included
the  Long  Colonnade  within  the  line  of  their  fortress  is  not  clear  at  first
sight.  They  feared  an  attack  from  the  popular  party  in  the  town  of
Piraeus,  and  their  defensive  position  would  have  been  far  stronger  if
they  had  confined  themselves  to  the  peninsula  of  Eetionia.  For  in  that
case  an  attacking  party  which  should  have  attempted  to  assail  them  by
land  from  within  the  town  of  Piraeus,  could  only  have  reached  them  by
crossing  the  narrow  mole,  a  few  feet  wide,  which  carried  the  town-wall
throagh  the  shallow  northern  bight  of  the  harbour ;  and  this  narrow  front
the  defenders  could  have  rendered  practically  impregnable.  Whereas
by  placing  their  line  of  defence  to  the  east  of  the  Long  Colonnade
instead  of  on  the  mole,  they  extended  their  assailable  front  from  a  few
fleet  to  about  130  yards,  the  latter  being  approximately  the  length  of  the
cross-wall  by  which  they  cut  off  the  Long  Colonnade  from  the  rest  of
Piraeus.

But  the  Long  Colonnade  seems  to  have  been  a  public  granary.
For  the  scholiast  on  Aristophanes  {Acham,  548)  tells  us  that  in  Piraeus
there  was  a  certain  colonnade,  built  by  Pericles,  in  which  the  com  of
the  city  was  stored  and  in  which  meal  was  sold ;  and  that  this  was  the
Long  Colonnade  is  made  practically  certain  by  a  passage  in  Demo-
sthenes {Or,  xxxiv.  p.  918),  where  it  is  said  that  in  a  time  of  scarcity
bread  and  meal  were  sold  to  the  people  at  low  prices  in  the  dockyard
and  in  the  Long  Colonnade.  Thus  by  including  the  Long  Colonnade
within  their  lines  the  aristocrats  victualled  themselves  for  a  siege,  and
they  may  very  well  have  thought  that  this  more  than  compensated
the  attendant  disadvantage  of  an  extended  front.  But  perhaps  this
explanation  of  their  motives  is  more  plausible  than  true ;  for  it  would
seem  to  have  been  easier  to  cart  the  sacks  of  meal  from  the  granary
into  their  fort  than  to  build  a  defensible  wall  130  yards  long.

From  the  eastern  end  of  the  Long  Colonnade  the  other  four  colon-
nades probably  ran  southward  in  a  long  line  beside  the  eastern  shore
of  the  harbour.      Together  the  five  colonnades  doubtless  formed  the
public  mart  or  emporium,  as  it  was  called.      The   southern   limit  of
the  emporium  is  marked  by  a  boundary-stone  which  still  stands  in  its
original  position  a  little  way  inland  from  the  south-east  comer  of  the
harbour ;  it  bears  the  inscription  "  Boundary  of  the  emporium  and  of
the  road "  in  letters  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  (C.  /.  A.  I  No.  519;  see
Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen^  2.  p.  192  sqq.)     A  few  yards  to  the
north  of  this  boundary-stone,  at  the  crossing  of  the  two  modem  streets
of  Artemis  and  Notara,  a  portion  of  an  ancient  colonnade  was  excavated
In  1886.     The  style  of  masonry  is  of  the  good  Greek  period,  and  the
colonnade  faced  towards  the  harbour.     Hence  it  was  probably  one  of
the  five  colonnades  which  skirted  the  shore ;  and  if  so,  it  must  have
been  the  most  southerly  of  them  all.      (See  U/wi/cTt/ca  r^?  'Apx*  'Et.
for  1886,  pp.  82-84,  with  pi.  2.)     One  of  the  most  important  buildings


26  PIRAEUS  BK.  I.  ATTICA

in  the  emporium  was  the  so-called  Deigma^  a  sort  of  exchange  where
foreign  merchants  exhibited  samples  of  their  wares  and  where  bankers
seem  to  have  sat  at  the  receipt  of  custom  (Timaeus,  Harpocration,  Suidas,
2SiA  EtymoL  Magnum  (p.  259.  51),  s,v,  Aety/xa;  Bekker's  Anecdota
Graeca^  i.  p.  237.  20  j^.)  It  must  have  been  close  to  the  quays  and
the  shipping,  as  we  learn  from  Polyaenus's  description  (vi.  2.  2)  of  the
successful  raid  which  Alexander  of  Pherae  once  made  on  the  bankers'
counters  in  it.  One  day  a  squadron  was  seen  standing  into  the
harbour.  The  loungers  on  the  quays  watched  it  with  idle  curiosity  till
the  ships  came  alongside  the  wharfs,  when  a  crowd  of  armed  men
leaped  from  the  ships'  sides,  drew  their  swords,  and  with  a  flourish  of
tnimpets  made  a  rush  for  the  exchange,  where  they  swept  the  counters
clean  and  then  returned  with  the  booty  to  their  ships,  without  stopping
to  notice  the  panic-stricken  crowds  who  were  fleeing  in  all  directions.
Again,  in  a  *  cutting  out '  expedition  which  the  Lacedaemonians  made
with  twelve  ships  into  the  harbour  of  Piraeus,  a  handful  of  men  jumped
ashore,  laid  hold  of  some  merchants  and  skippers  in  the  exchange,  and
hurried  them  on  board  (Xenophon,  Hellenica,  v.  i.  19  sqqJ)  It  was  in
the  exchange  that  the  Boast^l  Man  in  Theophrastus  {Characters^  23)
used  to  stand  talking  with  foreigners  about  the  great  sums  he  had  at  sea,
while  he  sent  his  page  to  the  bank  where  he  kept  the  sum  of  tenpence.
Probably  the  exchange  was  one  of  the  five  colonnades  mentioned
above.  It  continued  to  exist  in  imperial  times ;  for  in  an  imperial
letter,  preserved  in  an  inscription  {PhilologuSy  29  (1870)  p.  694),  it
is  ordered  that  a  copy  of  the  letter  be  eng^ved  and  set  up  in  firont
of  the  exchange.  From  another  inscription  of  Roman  times,  already
referred  to  ('E<f>rifjL€pls  apxai-okoyiiajy  1884,  p.  170),  we  infer  that
Pompey  built  an  exchange  at  Piraeus ;  but  perhaps  he  only  repaired
the  old  one,  which  may  have  perished  in  the  sack  of  86  B.C.

On  the  east  side  of  the  harbour  of  Piraeus  two  boundary-stones
have  been  found  in  the  water,  not  far  from  the  bank.  They  both  bear
the  inscription  **  Boundary  of  the  station  of  packet-  boats  "  (C.  /.  A.  i.
Nos.  520,  521).  One  of  the  stones  was  fished  up  at  the  north  end
of  this  side  of  the  harbour,  opposite  the  modem  square  of  Apollo,  the
site  where  the  Long  Colonnade  probably  stood.  The  other  was  fished
up  towards  the  south  end,  at  the  promontory  which  seems  in  antiquity
to  have  divided  the  commercial  from  the  military  part  of  the  harbour,
and  on  which  the  modem  Custom  House  stands.  These  heavy  stones
probably  fell  into  the  water  not  far  from  their  original  positions  ;  hence
we  may  infer  that  at  these  two  points  there  were  wharfs  for  packet-
boats  in  antiquity.  It  would  be  too  much  to  suppose  (as  Mr.  C.  Curtius
and,  formerly.  Prof.  C.  Wachsmuth  supposed)  that  the  whole  stretch
of  shore  between  these  points  was  occupied  with  the  landing-stages
of  packet-boats.  One  line  of  packet-boats  plied  between  Piraeus  and
Aegina.  In  Plato's  time  the  fare  was  twopence,  but  in  Lucian's  day  it
had  risen  to  fourpence  (Plato,  Gorgias^  p.  5 1 1  d  ;  Lucian,  Navigium^  15).
Curiously  enough,  the  two  points  where  the  stones  were  fished  up  are
stations  for  wherries  at  the  present  day.


CH.  I  PIRAEUS  27

See  C  Curtius,  in  FhUohgus,  29  (1870),  p.  691  sqq, ;  Graser,  in  Philologus,
31  (1872),  p.  54  sq,,  note;  Karten  von  Aitika,  Texi^  Heft  i.  pp.  50,  68;
Baumeister's  Denkmdler,  p.  1 197  ;  Guide-Joanne,  i.  p.  157  ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die
StcuU  AtheHy  I.  p.  323;  id. J  2.  p.  99  sq.  As  to  the  commercial  harbour  of
Piraeus  with  its  mart,  exchange,  etc.,  see  especially  L.  Ulrichs,  Jieisen  und
Forsckungen^^  2.  pp.  156 '203  ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athene  2.  pp.  96- 126  ;
cp.  W.  Gurlitt,  Ueber  Pausanias,  p.  236  sqq,

1.  3.  statues  of  Zens  and  the  People,  a  work  of  Leochares.
For  other  works  of  Leochares,  see  i.  3.  4 ;  i.  24.  4  ;  v.  20.  10.  He
flourished  in  the  middle  of  the  fourth  century  B.c,  and  was  one  of  the
sculptors  who  worked  with  Scopas  at  the  Mausoleum  of  Halicamassus
(Pliny,  JV.  H,  xxxvi.  30).  He  made  a  much  admired  group  of  the
eagle  soaring  to  heaven  with  Ganymede  (Pliny,  N,  H,  xxxiv.  79 ;
Tatian,  Or,  contra  Graecos^  34,  p.  136,  ed.  Otto).  Several  copies  or
imitations  of  it  have  come  down  to  us ;  the  best  known  one  is  in  the
Vatican  (O.  Jahn,  Archdologische  Beitrdge^  p.  24  sq,  ;  v.  Brunn,  Gesch,  d,
griecfu  Kunstler^  i.  p.  388  ;  Overbeck,  Gesch,  d,  griech,  Plastik^^  2.  p.
95  ^9^' »  Murray,  History  of  Greek  Sculpture^  2.  p.  323  sq.)  Several
inscribed  bases  of  statues  by  Leochares  have  been  found  at  Athens
(Loewy,  Inschriften  griechischer  Bildhauer^  Nos.  77-83).  Some
authorities  hold  that  the  original  of  the  Apollo  Belvedere  in  the
Vatican  was  a  work  of  Leochares  (see  note  on  x.  23.  i).

Personifications  of  the  People  {dimos)  were  not  uncommon  in  Greek

art.      In  Athens  itself  there  was  a  statue  of  the  People  by  Lyson  (Pans.

L  3.  5),  and  a  painting  of  the  People  by  Euphranor  (i.  3.  3).     Parrhasius

painted  a  picture  of  the  Athenian  People,  which  is  said  to  have  embodied

all  the  most  opposite  qualities,  the  figure  appearing  at  once  passionate,

unjust,  inconstant,  and  yet  merciful  and  pitiful,  at  once  boastful  and

humble,  at  once  bold  and  cowardly,  etc.  (Pliny,  N,  H,  xxxv.  69).     At

Sparta  there  was  a  colossal  statue  of  the  Spartan  People  (Pans.  iii.  11.  10).

llie  people  of  Byzantium  resolved  to  set  up  a  group  of  three  colossal

figures,  each  sixteen  cubits  high,  representing  the  Athenian  People  being

crowned  by  the   People  of  Byzantium  and   the    People  of  Perinthus

(Demosthenes,  xviii.   p.  256).      Hiero  and  Gelo  of  Syracuse  set  up

in  the  Exchange  of  Rhodes  a  g^roup  of  statuary  representing  the  People

of  Rhodes  being  crowned  by  the  People  of  Syracuse  (Polybius,  v.  88).

There  was  a  statue  of  the  People  of  Synnada  in  Phrygia,  as  we  learn

from  an  inscription  {BM,  de  Corr,  Hell,  7  (1883),  p.  301).     Among

existing  monuments  of  antiquity  there  is  an  Athenian  relief  representing

a  man  being  crowned  by  the  People,  who  appears  in  the  g^ise  of  a

bearded  citizen.      Similar   figures  of  the  People  seem  to  have   been

common  in  late  art     And  on  late  coins  of  allied  cities  the  People  is

sometimes  depicted  carrying  an  image  of  the  deity  of  the  city.     Thus

on  an  alliance-coin  of  Pergamus  and  Ephesus,  each  city  is  represented

by  a  draped  male  figure  carrying  the  images  of  Aesculapius  and  Artemis

respectively.     (See  P.  Gardner  m  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  9  (1888),

p.  79 ;  Dumont,  in  Monuments  publics  par  P Association  pour  P encourage-

ff^fnt  des  Etudes  Grecques  en  France,  i   (i 872-1 881),  p.  37  J^.)     The

Peoples  of  Antioch  and  Seleucia  appear  to  be  represented  on  federal

coins  by  two  Zeus-like  heads  united,  the  coins  bearing  the  inscription


28  PIRAEUS  BK.    I.  ATTICA

AAEA<^I2N  AHMI2N  (<  Brother  Peoples*),  (Head,  Historia  Nummorum,
p.  656).  On  coins  of  Tarentum  and  Rhegium  between  479-431  B.C.,
there  occurs  a  seated  male  figure  which  numismatists  identify  as  the
People  of  these  towns  (P.  Gardner,  Types  of  Greek  Coins ^  p.  loi).  On
an  ancient  lead  token  there  is  a  bearded  head  with  the  letters  AHM,
whence  it  appears  that  the  head  is  that  of  the  People  (Bull,  de  Corr.
Hell,  8  (1884),  p.  7,  pi.  i.  No.  27).

The  People  was  not  only  personified  but  deified  by  the  Greeks.
At  Athens  there  was  a  precinct  of  the  People  and  the  Graces  in  which
statues  of  public  benefactors  and  decrees  in  their  honour  were  set  up.
It  seems  to  have  stood  at  the  northern  foot  of  the  hill  on  which  the
so-called  temple  of  Theseus  stands.  The  worship  of  the  People  and
the  Graces  was  cared  for  by  a  priest.  (See  C  /.  A,  ii.  Nos.  467,  469,
470,  471,  605  ;  AcArtov  apxaiokoyiKOv,  1 89 1,  pp.  40-55  ;  Josephus,
AnHquit,  xiv.  8.  5).  The  priest  had  a  seat  allotted  to  him  in  the
theatre  of  Dionysus  (C  /.  A.  iii.  No.  265)  ;  the  office  was  once  held  by
a  certain  T.  Coponius  Maximus  {C,  I,  A,\\\,  No.  661).  The  image  of
the  People  of  Synnada  had  a  temple  and  an  altar  (see  the  inscription
published  by  Prof.  W.  M.  Ramsay,  in  Bull,  de  Corr.  Hell.  7  (1883),
p.  301) ;  and  at  Magnesia  on  the  Maeander  the  worship  of  the  People
was  cared  for  by  a  priest,  as  we  learn  from  a  recently  discovered
inscription  {Jahrbuch  d.  arch.  Inst.  9  (1894),  Archdologischer  Anseiger^

p.  83).

1.  3.  another  market  for  those  who  dwell  farther  fix)m  the
harbour.  This  was  doubtless  the  Hippodamian  market-place,  as  it
was  called  after  the  Milesian  architect  Hippodamus,  who  laid  out  the
town  of  Piraeus  on  a  regular  plan  (Aristotle,  Pol.  ii.  8,  p.  1267  b,  22
sg. ;  Harpocration  and  Photius,  Lexicon^  s.v.  ^IwrroBafieui ;  Bekker's
Anecdota  Graeca^  i.  p.  266  ;  Hesychius,  s.v.  ^IwrroBafiov  vefxtp-is).  It
must  have  been  a  spacious  open  space,  for  we  hear  of  troops  mustering
in  it  (Andocides,  i.  45).  The  distinguished  general  Timotheus  had  a
house  on  the  market-place,  and  it  was  here  that  he  lodged  his  two
royal  visitors,  Jason  of  Pherae  and  Alcetas  king  of  Epirus,  when  they
came  to  give  evidence  at  his  trial.  The  general  had  impaired  his
private  fortune  by  his  exertions  in  the  public  service,  and  when  his
distinguished  visitors  arrived  late  one  evening,  he  had  to  send  out  his
Caleb  Balderstone  in  haste  to  borrow  some  bedding  and  silver  plate
(Demosthenes,  xlix.  pp.  11 90  sq.y  1200).  From  the  market-place  a
street  led  up  hill  to  the  sanctuary  of  Artemis  on  the  hill  of  Muny-
chia.  It  must  have  been  a  wide  street ;  for  in  the  street- fighting
at  the  revolution  which  overturned  the  tyranny  of  the  Thirty  and
restored  the  democracy,  the  troops  of  the  tyrants  formed  in  order  of
battle  in  the  market-place  and  then  marched  up  the  street,  while  the
democratic  party  under  Thrasybulus,  also  in  order  of  battle,  charged
down  the  street  and  met  them  (Xenophon,  Hellenica^  ii.  4.  11  sqq.)
From  an  inscription  (Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Graec.  No.  337)  we
learn  that  in  320-319  B.c  it  was  ordered  that  the  market-place  in
Piraeus  be  levelled  and  put  in  good  repair  and  that  for  the  future  no
one  should  be  allowed  to  shoot  rubbish  or  dump  down  dung  in  it


CH.  I  PIRAEUS  29

The  market-place  was  most  probably  situated  on  the  level  ground
to  the  east  of  the  great  harbour,  about  the  site  of  the  modem  Karat-
skaki  Square.  A  broad  street  led  eastward  from  it  up  hill  to  the
sanctuary  of  Artemis  (see  above) ;  another  led  south  through  a  gate-
way to  the  arsenal  and  dockyards  of  Zea  (see  above,  p.  19);  and
doubtless  one  or  more  streets  led  westward  to  the  great  harbour.
Evidence  of  the  regularity  with  which  the  ancient  town  was  laid  out  by
Hippodamus  is  afforded  by  the  numerous  foundations  of  ancient  houses
still  to  be  seen  running  in  lines  which  form  accurately  straight  streets
on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Acte  peninsula.  Further  proof  is  furnished
by  the  discovery  of  a  nimiber  of  boundary-stones  with  inscriptions  of  the
fifth  century  B.C.,  which  marked  the  limits  of  public  buildings,  streets,
quarters,  etc  See  Hirschfeld,  in  Berichte  d,  k,  sacks.  GeselL  d,  Wissen.
zu  Leipzig^  PhiL  hist.  CI.,  30  (1878),  p.  2  sqq.  ;  Karten  von  Attika^
Texiy  Heft  i.  pp.  29,  41,  55^r^.,  72;  Milchhofer,  in  Baumeister's
Denkmdler^  p.  1198  ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen^  2.  pp.  130-134.
On  the  architect  Hippodamus,  see  M.  Erdmann,  'Hippodamos  von
Milet  und  die  synunetrische  Stadtebaukunst  der  Griechen,'  Philologus^
42  (1883),  pp.  193-227.

The  broad  straight  streets  of  the  new  town  of  Piraeus  must  have
formed  a  striking  contrast  to  the  narrow  and  crooked  streets,  lined
with  mean  houses,  which  Athens  itself  seems  always  to  have  retained
(Dicaearchus,  in  Frag.  Hist  Graec.  ed.  Miiller,  2.  p.  254).  Aristotle
perhaps  had  this  contrast  in  his  mind  when  he  recommended  for  his  ideal
city  a  mixture  of  the  two  modes  of  building,  remarking  that  the  new  straight
streets  in  the  style  of  Hippodamus  were  handsomer  and  more  convenient,
but  that  the  old  crooked  streets  could  be  better  defended  against  an
enemy  (PoL  vii.  11,  p.  1330  b,  21  sqq.)  In  modem  Europe  we  can  still
remark  the  contrast  in  style  between  the  towns  which  have  grown  up
irregularly  in  the  course  of  ages,  and  those  which  have  been  created  at
once,  on  a  regular  plan,  by  the  will  of  a  despot  The  two  most
regularly  built  cities  in  Europe  are  probably  Turin  and  Mannheim.
Turin  still  stands  on  the  lines  laid  down  by  Augustus  when  he  founded
a  colony  on  the  site ;  Mannheim  was  built  by  the  Elector  Palatine
Frederick  the  Fourth  in  1606.  We  may  observe  the  same  contrast
between  Madrid  the  new,  and  Toledo  the  old,  capital  of  Spain ;  though
Madrid,  a  creation  of  Philip  the  Second,  does  not  equal  Turin  or
Mannheim  in  mathematical  regularity  of  constmction.

1.  3.  Beside  the  sea  Oonon  bnilt  a  sanctuary  of  Aphrodite.

Callicrates  or  Menecles,  describing  the  great  harbour  of  Piraeus,  says

that  there  were  "  the  docks,  then  the  sanctuary  of  Aphrodite,  then  five

colonnades  round  about  the  harbour''  (Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Peace^

14s),  and  the  same  structures  are  mentioned  in  the  same  order  in  an

inscription   (E<fnf/J£pU  ap\aioXx)yiKriy   1884,  p.    170).    Now  we   know

tliat  the  ship -sheds  or  docks  of  the  navy  occupied  the  southern  bay

of  the  great  harbour  (see  above,  p.   17),  and   that  the  colonnades,

beginning  a  little  farther  north,  stretched  along  the  eastem  side  of

the  harbour  (see  above,  p.  24  sq.)     Somewhere,  therefore,  between  the

IKHnt  where   the  docks  ended  and  the  colonnades  began  we  should


30  PIRAEUS  BK.  I.  ATTICA

expect  to  find  the  sanctuary  of  Aphrodite.  Now  between  the  two
points  in  question  there  runs  out  a  promontory  on  which  stands
the  modem  Custom  House.  This  would  be  a  suitable  site  for  a
temple  built  to  a  marine  goddess  in  gratitude  for  a  naval  victory.
That  the  sanctuary  actually  stood  here  is  made  probable  by  the  dis-
covery on  or  near  this  spot  of  an  inscription  containing  a  dedication
to  Aphrodite  of  the  Fair  Voyage  by  a  certain  Argius  son  of  Argius
who  was  archon  in  97-96  B.C.  (C  /.  A.  ii.  No.  1206;  Rangabd,
Antiquitds  HellMiqueSy  2.  p.  740,  No.  1069,  cp.  p.  429).  As  the
victory  for  which  Conon  dedicated  a  sanctuary  to  Aphrodite  was  a
naval  one,  and  as  the  victory  was  won  ofif  Cnidus  where,  as  we  learn
from  Pausanias,  Aphrodite  was  worshipped  under  the  title  of  the
Goddess  of  the  Fair  Voyage,  it  seems  probable  that  the  sanctuary  erected
by  him  at  Piraeus  in  memory  of  his  victory  was  also  dedicated  to
Aphrodite  of  the  Fair  Voyage,  and  this  probability  is  strengthened  by
the  inscription  just  mentioned.

But  there  was  at  least  one  other  sanctuary  of  Aphrodite  at  Piraeus.
For  Ammonius,  a  contemporary  of  Plutarch,  in  a  work  *  Upon  Altars '
has  recorded  that  after  the  battle  of  Salamis  Themistocles  dedicated  a
sanctuary  of  Aphrodite  at  Piraeus  (Schol.  on  Hermogenes,  Rhetores
Graeci,  ed.  Walz,  6.  p.  393).  Ammonius  is  the  more  likely  to  have  been
well  informed  on  everything  relating  to  Themistocles,  as  he  had  for  a
pupil  a  namesake  and  direct  descendant  of  the  great  man  (Plutarch,
Themistocles^  32).  Ammonius's  evidence  is  confirmed  by  the  inscription
of  Roman  date,  already  mentioned,  which,  among  the  sanctuaries  to  be
restored,  speaks  of  the  one  "which  Themistocles  founded  before  the
sea-fight  at  Salamis"  {*E<l>rffjL€ph  dpxaioXoyiKT^t  1884,  p.  170).  The
inscription  is  unfortunately  mutilated  and  the  name  of  the  deity  to
whom  the  sanctuary  was  sacred  is  almost  obliterated,  but  enough
remains  to  show  that  it  was  a  goddess ;  and  on  the  strength  of  Am-
monius's evidence  we  may  conclude  that  this  goddess  was  Aphrodite.
The  circumstance  that  Ammonius  speaks  of  the  sanctuary  having  been
dedicated  after  the  battle,  while  the  inscription  says  it  was  founded
de/ore  it,  is  not  very  material ;  tradition  might  vary  on  the  point.
That  a  sanctuary  of  Aphrodite  existed  at  Piraeus  before  Conon  dedicated
his,  is  proved  by  an  inscription  which  enables  us  also  to  fix  the  site  of
the  sanctuary  approximately.  The  inscription,  which  is  dated  in  the
archonship  of  Eubulides  (July  394  B.C. — ^July  393  B.C.,  cp.  Unger,  in
I  wan  Miiller^s  Handbuch  d.  class,  Altertums,  i.  p.  589),  was  found  in
the  outer  wall  of  Piraeus,  at  the  north  end  of  Eetionia,  near  the  ancient
gateway.  It  relates  to  that  restoration  of  the  walls  which  is  commonly
ascribed  to  Conon  after  his  victory  at  Cnidus,  but  which,  from  this
and  another  inscription,  we  now  know  to  have  been  begun  about  two
years  before  Conon  arrived  in  Athens  (see  above,  p.  8).  The
inscription  records  that  a  certain  Boeotian  named  Demosthenes  had
contracted  to  bring  stones  for  the  rebuilding  of  a  portion  of  the  wall,
which  is  defined  as  extending  for  790  feet  "from  the  mark  to  the
middle  column  in  the  gate  at  the  sanctuary  of  Aphrodite,  on  the  right  as
you  go  out "  (aTTo  rov  trrffuiov  dp^dfuvov  fi^Xpi  tov  fJXTfairov  rtov  'jrvkiov


CH.  I  PIRAEUS  31

Twv  Kara  to  'A<f>f>o8ia'Lov  hrl  Sc^ia  i^iovrt^  Bull,  de  Corr,  Hell,  1 1 .
(1887),  p.  131  sq.  As  to  fi€Ti07rov  in  this  sense,  see  Fabricius,  in
Hermes^  17  (1882),  p.  570;  Dorpfeld,  in  MitiheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in
Athen^  8  (1883),  pp.  155,  157  sq,)  The  gate  mentioned  in  the  in-
scription is  probably  the  existing  ancient  gate  near  which  the  inscription
was  found  ;  and  the  sanctuary  of  Aphrodite  seems  to  have  been  close  to
it.  As  the  inscription  was  engraved  sometime  in  the  year  July  394 —
July  393  B.C,  and  Conon  seems  not  to  have  arrived  in  Athens  till  the
summer  of  393  B.a  (Xenophon,  Hellenicay  iv.  8.  7-10),  it  is  impossible
that  the  sanctuary  of  Aphrodite  mentioned  in  the  inscription  can  be  the
one  erected  by  Conon.  The  situation  of  the  sanctuary  is  also  against
the  identification ;  for  the  gate  near  which  it  stood  is  some  little
distance  (about  200  yards)  from  the  shore,  whereas  the  sanctuary
dedicated  by  Conon  is  expressly  said  by  Pausanias  to  have  been  beside
the  sea.

On  the  whole  then  it  appears  that  there  were  at  least  two  sanctuaries
of  Aphrodite  at  Piraeus,  one  on  the  promontory  near  the  south-eastern
comer  of  the  great  harbour,  the  other  at  the  northern  extremity  of
Eetionia,  and  that  the  former  was  founded  by  Conon  and  the  latter  by
Themistocles.

See  Foucart,  in  Bull,  Corr,  Hell,  11.  (1887),  p.  129  sqq.  ;  C.  Wachs-
mnth,  in  Berichte  d,  k,  sacks,  Gesell,  d,   IVissen,,  Phil.   hist.   CI.,  39
(1887),  p.  370  sqq, ;  td,y  Die  Stadt  Athen^  2.  p.  11 9-1 22  ;  Hirschfeld,
in  Berichte  d,  k,  sacks,  Ges,  d,  IViss,,  Phil.  hist.  CL,  30  (1878),  pp.  9
sq.j  27  ;  Karten  von  Attika,  Text,  Heft  i.  p.  49 ;  Milchhofer,  in  Bau-
meistei's  DenkmdUr,  p.  1196  sq, ;  Gurlitt,  Ueber  Pausanias,  P-  247  sq.
(Professor  Wachsmuth  assumes  that  Conon  must  have  built  his  new
sanctuary  on  the  site  of  the  old  sanctuary  mentioned  in  the  inscription.
I  see  no  reason   for  this   assumption.)     The   Syrian  Aphrodite   was
worshipped  by  a  religious  society  {orgednes)  at  Piraeus,  as  we  learn  from
an  inscription  (Rangab^,  AntiquiUs  HelUniques,  2,  p.  429,  No.  809 ;
C  /.  A.  ii.  No.  627).     In  333-332  B.C.  the  Cyprian  merchants  of  Citium
settled  at  Piraeus  received  permission  to  erect  a  sanctuary  to  Aphrodite
(C.  /.  A.  ii.  No.  168;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec,  No.  355),
probably  the  Heavenly  Aphrodite,  for  a  dedication  to  the  Heavenly
Aphrodite  by  a  woman  of  Citium  has  been  found  at  Piraeus  {C.LA,  ii.
No.  1588  ;  Foucart,  Des  associations  religieuses  ckez  les  Grecs,  p.  198).
1.  3.  Aphrodite   of  the   Height.     Cp.  ii.   32.  6.     On  the  pro-
montory of  Olympus  in  Cyprus  there  was  a  temple  of  Aphrodite  of  the
Height,  which  women  might  not  enter  nor  look  upon  (Strabo,  xiv.  p.
682).

1.  3.  Aphrodite  of  the  Fair  Voyage.  The  worship  of  Aphrodite
under  this  title  is  attested  by  inscriptions  at  Piraeus  (C,  I,  A,  ii.  No.
1206,  see  above,  p.  30),  at  Aegae  in  Cilicia  (C  /.  G,  No.  4443 ;  R.
Walpole,  Travels  in  various  countries  of  tke  East,  p.  558),  and  at
Olbia  in  the  south  of  Russia  {Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1874,
p.  103).

1.  4.  a  temple  of  MnnychiaiL  Artemis.     The  temple  stood  on
the  hill  of  Munychia,  above  the  Hippodamian  market-place,  from  which


32  PIRAEUS  BK.   I.   ATTICA

a  broad  street  led  up  to  it  (Xenophon,  Hellemca^  ii.  4.  11),  but  the
exact  site  of  the  temple  is  not  known.  The  sanctuary  is  perhaps
mentioned  in  a  very  mutilated  fragment  of  a  description  of  Piraeus
which  Mr.  Flinders  Petrie  discovered  in  Egypt.  In  the  same  fragment
there  is  mention  of  the  ship-sheds.  See  Berliner philolog,  Wochenschrift^
9  (1889),  pp.  1 5 46- 1 5 48;  E.  Curtius,  Stadigesckichie  van  Athen^  p.
cxx.)  A  curious  legend  was  told  about  this  sanctuary.  Once  on  a
time,  it  is  said,  there  was  a  bear  in  the  sanctuary,  but  the  Athenians
killed  the  bear  and  were  visited  with  a  plague  in  consequence.  An
oracle  told  them  that  the  plague  would  be  stayed  if  one  of  them  would
sacrifice  his  daughter  to  Artemis.  A  certain  man  Embaros  offered  to
do  so  on  condition  that  his  family  should  always  be  priests  of  the
goddess.  He  then  dressed  up  his  daughter,  but  hid  her  and  sacrificed
in  her  stead  a  goat  which  he  had  clothed  so  as  to  resemble  his  daughter.
See  Eustathius  on  Homer,  //.  ii.  732,  p.  331  (Eustathius  quotes  as  his
authority  Pausanias,  but  this  Pausanias  is  probably  the  lexicographer  of
that  name)  ;  Apostolius,  vii.  10  ;  Paroemiographi  Graeciy  ed.  Leutsch  et
Schneidewin,  Appendix  Proverb,  ii.  54,  vol.  i.  p.  402 ;  Suidas,  s.v,
"Efi^apos  elfiL  This  legend,  taken  in  connexion  with  the  similar
legend  about  the  Brauronian  Artemis  and  the  bear-dance  performed  by
unmarried  girls  in  her  honour  (see  note  on  viii.  1 3.  i  Essenes\  points
to  a  worship  of  the  bear.  See  Mr.  Andrew  Lang,  Myth^  Ritual^  and
Religion^  2.  p.  211  sqq.

Before  we  quit  the  peninsula  of  Piraeus  it  may  be  observed  that,
though  Pausanias  mentions  no  theatre  at  Piraeus,  the  remains  of  two
ancient  theatres  are  still  to  be  seen  there.  One  is  on  the  western  slope
of  the  hill  of  Munychia,  about  half-way  up  the  hill ;  the  other  is  situated
a  little  to  the  west  of  the  harbour  of  Zea.  The  former  is  the  older,  and
it  is  to  it  that  Thucydides  (viii.  93.  i),  Lysias  (xiii.  32),  and  Xenophon
{Hellenica,  ii.  4.  32)  refer.  This  theatre  belonged  to  the  municipality,
but  was  let  out  to  contractors  who  were  bound  to  keep  it  in  repair
(C  /.  A.  ii.  No.  573  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec,  No.  297).
It  is  probably  "  the  old  theatre  "  mentioned  in  the  inscription  of  Roman
date  to  which  reference  has  been  repeatedly  made  (*E<fyrffi€pls  dpxato-
XoyiKrif  1884,  p.  169  sq,)  See  Karien  von  Attikay  Text,  Heft  i.  p.  63  ;
C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen^  i.  p.  320;  /V/.,  2.  p.  135  ;  Gurlitt,
Ueber  Pausanias^  p.  240,  note  1 5  ;  Hirschfeld,  in  Berichie  d,  k,  sacks,
GeselL  d,  IVissen,,  Phil.  hist.  CL,  30  (1878),  p.  20  sqq.  The  theatre  to
the  west  of  Zea  seems  to  have  been  built  by  subscription  about  the
middle  of  the  second  century  B.c.  (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  984).  It  was  ex-
cavated by  the  Greek  Archaeological  Society  in  1880.  The  stage,
orchestra,  and  a  great  part  of  the  seats  are  preserved.  See  IIpaicTiicd
Tijs 'Apx- *Et.  for  1880,  p.  47  sqq.\  id^  for  1884,  p.  14;  'E<^/tcp4S
dpxaiokoyLKrjj  1884,  p.  195  sqq.;  id.,  1885,  p.  62  sqq,;  Karten  van
Attikay  Text,  Heft  L  p.  66  sq. ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Aihen,  2.  p.
135  sq,

1.  4-  a  sanctuary  of  Demeter.  This  sanctuary  was  burnt  by  the
Persians  and  remained  in  ruins  down  to  Pausanias's  time.  See  x.  35.  2.
Prof.  MilchhSfer  would  identify  it  with  the  Thesmophorium  or  sanctuary


CH.  I  PHALERUM  33

of  Lawgiver  Demeter  which  is  mentioned  in  two  inscriptions  (C  /.  A,  ii.
No.  573  b,  p.  421  5q,\  C,  /.  A,  ii.  No.  1059),  and  which,  as  appears
from  these  inscriptions,  lay  outside  the  town  of  Piraeus  in  a  district  partly
wooded  and  partly  suited  for  tillage.  His  reasons  for  identifying  them
are  that  the  festival  of  the  Scira  seems  to  have  been  celebrated  at  this
Thesmophorium  (as  we  infer  from  the  former  of  the  two  inscriptions),
and  that  Pausanias  mentions  a  temple  of  Sciradian  Athena  in  close  con-
nexion with  the  sanctuary  of  Demeter.  See  Milchhofer,  in  Karten  von
AtHka^  Texty  Heft  ii.  p.  3  sq, ;  /V/.,  in  Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  p.
1200.

1.  4-  a  temple  of  Sciradian  Athena.  It  was  said  to  have  been
founded  by  a  certain  Scirus  (i.  36.  4),  who  had  a  sanctuary  at  Phalerum
(Plutarch,  Theseus^  17),  At  the  festival  of  the  Oschophoria  ('Fruit-
bearing  ')  two  young  men,  disguised  as  women,  carried  clusters  of  ripe
grapes  from  the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  to  the  sanctuary  of  Sciradian
Athena  at  Phalerum.  The  parents  of  the  young  men  had  to  be  alive.
See  Proclus,  in  Photius,  Bibliotheca^  p.  322  a,  ed,  Bekker  ;  Aristodemus,
in  Athenaeus,  xi.  p.  495  f;  Schol.  on  Nicander,  Alex,  109;  Plutarch,
Theseus^  23;  Harpocration,  so/.  *0(rxo<j)6poL ;  Hesychius,  j.z/z/.*  cio-xo-
<f)6pui  and  wcr^oKfiopiov ;  Alciphron,  Epist,  i.  4,  iii.  i.  Aristodemus
says  (/.r.)  that  this  ceremony  took  place  at  the  festival  of  the  Scira,
from  which  we  should  infer  that  the  Oschophoria  was  part  of  the
Scira ;  but  this  is  doubtful.  On  the  festival  of  the  Oschophoria  see
K.  O.  Miiller,  Kleine  deutsche  Schrifieriy  2.  p.  163  sq, ;  Schomann,
GrUchische  Alterthiimer^  2.  p.  487  sqq, ;  Aug.  Mommsen,  Heortologie^  p.
271  sqq. ;  K.  F.  Hermann,  Gotiesdienstliche  Alierthumer,^  §  56  ;  Stengel,
Die  griech.  SakrcUcUtertumer^  §  116,  p.  1 5  7  jj^.  There  was  a  sanctuary
of  Sciradian  Athena  in  Salamis  (Herodotus,  viii.  94  ;  see  note  on  i.
35.  2).  Some  think  that  there  was  another  temple  or  sanctuary  of
Sdfadian  Athena  at  Scirum  on  the  road  from  Athens  to  Eleusis  (see
note  on  i.  36.  4).

1.  4.  altars  of  gods  named  Unknown.     It  is  impossible  fr-om
Pausanias's  expression  to  determine  whether  there  was  one  altar  or
several  altars  of  Unknown  Gods  at  Phalerum ;  and,  supposing  there
were  several,  we  cannot  tell  whether  each  altar  was  dedicated  to  the
Unknown  God  (in  the  singular),  or  to  Unknown  Gods  (in  the  plural).
At  Olympia   there   was   a   single   altar   to   Unknown    Gods   (v.    14.
S).    Sl  Paul  saw  an  altar  at  Athens  dedicated  to  the  Unknown  God
(Acts  xvii.  23).     The  Greek  commentator  Oecumenius,  on  this  passage
of  AcU^  says  that  the  full  inscription  on  the  altar  was :  "  To  the  gods  of
Asia  and  Europe  and  Libya,  to  the  Unknown  and  Strange  God  "  (quoted
in  Lomeier,  De  veterum  gentilium  lustrationibusy  p.  32).     Tertullian
says  that  there  was  an  altar  at  Athens  dedicated  to  Unknown  Gods  {Ad
NaUoneSf  ii.  9).     Philostratus  speaks  of  altars  of  unknown  divinities  at
Athens  (K//.  Apollan,  vi.  3.   5  ;  Suidas,  5,v,  TtfiaarCtDv),     There  seems
in  fsux  to  have  been  a  number  of  such  altars  in  Attica,  and  an  explana-
tion of  them,  which  has  every  mark  of  probability,  is  given  by  Diogenes
Laenius  (i.  10.  no).     He  says  that  when  Athens  was  wasted  by  a
plague,  the  seer  Epimenides  was  fetched  from  Crete  in  the  year  496-495

VOL  II  D


34  PHALERUM  BK.  I.  attica

B.a  to  put  an  end  to  it.  He  did  so  in  the  following  way.  He  took
some  black  and  white  sheep  to  the  Areopagus  and  there  turned  them
loose,  with  orders  that  the  sheep  should  be  followed,  and  that  wherever
any  one  of  them  lay  down  it  should  be  sacrificed  to  the  appropriate
god.  In  this  way  the  plague  was  stayed.  "  Whence,"  adds  Diogenes,
"you  may  find  to  this  day  nameless  altars  in  the  townships  of  the
Athenians,  a  memorial  of  the  expiation  which  was  then  accomplished."
Similarly,  when  the  Philistines,  after  capturing  the  ark  of  God,  were
grievously  distressed  by  a  pestilence,  they  put  the  ark  on  a  new  cart,
yoked  two  milch  kine  to  the  cart,  and  let  them  draw  it  where  they
pleased.  The  kine  went  with  the  ark  to  the  land  of  Israel,  and  when
the  cart  came  to  a  stand  the  Israelites  sacrificed  the  kine  (i  Samuel
vi.  1-14).  Greek  legends  of  the  founding  of  cities  on  spots  indicated
by  aninials  are  based  on  the  same  belief  in  the  correct  religious  instinct
(so  to  say)  of  the  lower  creatures  (see  note  on  x.  6.  2).

In  the  dialogue  Philopatris^  attributed  to  Lucian,  a  certain  Critias
raps  out  a  number  of  oaths  by  the  old  heathen  gods  and  goddesses,  for
each  of  which  he  is  gravely  taken  to  task  by  his  comrade  Triephon,  who
has  just  been  initiated  into  the  sublime  mysteries  of  the  Christian
theology  by  a  person  of  a  Hebrew  cast  of  coimtenance,  whom  he
describes  as  a  bald-pated,  long-nosed  Galilaean.  At  last  Critias
swears  by  the  Unknown  God  at  Athens  (§  9),  and  this  oath  is  allowed
to  pass  unchallenged  by  Triephon,  who  winds  up  the  dialogue  thus :
^*Let  us,  having  foimd  out  and  worshipped  the  Unknown  God  at
Athens,  raise  our  hands  to  heaven  and  give  him  thanks  that  we  have
been  found  worthy  to  be  subject  unto  so  great  a  power ;  but  let  us
leave  other  folk  to  babble,  satisfied  ourselves  with  applying  to  them  the
proverb  *  Hippoclides  doesn't  care.' "

The  cautious  spirit  of  polytheism  which  induced  the  Athenians  to
set  up  altars  to  Unknown  Gods  is  illustrated  by  the  practice  of  the
Romans  on  the  occasion  of  earthquakes.  Not  feeling  sure  what  god  or
goddess  caused  an  earthquake,  whenever  a  shock  was  felt  they  pro-
claimed a  holy  day,  but  without  mentioning  the  deity  to  whom  the  day
was  holy ;  and  if  the  day  were  desecrated,  the  expiatory  sacrifice  was
offered  not  to  any  definite  deity  but  to  a  being  designated  vaguely  as
"whether  god  or  goddess"  (Aulus  Gellius,  ii.  28).  Minucius  Felix
refers  to  the  custom  of  erecting  altars  to  unknown  gods  and  ghosts
{OctaviuSy  vi.  2).  Varro  distinguished  the  uncertain  gods  from  the
certain  (Augustine,  De  civitate  Dei^  vL  3) ;  and  it  was  the  custom  of  the
Roman  pontiffs  at  all  sacrifices,  after  invoking  the  special  deities,  to  call
upon  the  gods  in  general  (Servius,  on  Virgil,  Georg.  i.  21).  Similarly,
when  the  Zulus  sacrifice  an  ox  to  the  Amatongo  or  spirits  of  their  fore-
feithers  "  they  unite  all  the  Amatongo  in  one  invitation,  for  some  of
them  they  no  longer  know  by  name  ;  but  the  dead  know  all  of  the
living,  and  continually  help  them  and  do  not  forsake  them ;  and  on
that  account  the  living  say,  *  Come,  all  of  you,  and  eat'  For  at  first
those  who  were  known  were  called  by  name ;  but  by  doing  so  they
summoned  disease,  and  it  was  very  great ;  and  they  went  to  the
diviner,  saying,  '  Hau !  what  is  the  meaning  then  of  this,  that  we  have


CH.  I  PH ALE  RUM  35

killed  so  great  an  ox  of  our  tribe,  and  yet  cannot  get  any  breathing  time  ?
What  is  the  meaning  of  this  ? '  And  the  diviner  tells  them,  there  is  a
man  whom  they  have  not  worshipped,  whom  they  do  not  know,  an  old
woman  or  an  infant ;  it  is  they  who  find  fault.  And  thus  arose  the
custom  of  making  no  distinction ;  and  all  are  now  invited  together "
(Callaway,  The  religious  system  of  the  Amcusulu^  pt.  2.  p.  176  sq,)

We  find  the  worship  of  an  Unknown  God  among  the  Incas  of  Peru.
Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  says :  "  Besides  the  sim  they  worshipped
Pachacamac  (as  has  been  said)  inwardly,  as  an  Unknown  God.  They
held  him  in  greater  veneration  than  the  sun.  They  did  not  offer
sacrifices  nor  build  temples  to  him ;  because  they  said  that  he  was  not
known  to  them,  never  having  allowed  himself  to  be  seen.  In  its  proper
place  we  shall  speak  of  the  famous  and  most  wealthy  temple  in  the
valley  called  Pachacamac,  dedicated  to  this  Unknown  God"  (Royal
Commentaries  of  the  Yncas,  First  Part,  bk.  ii.  ch.  4,  Markham's  trans-
lation). The  enlightened  Nezahualcoyotl,  king  of  Tezcuco,  is  said  to
have  built  a  temple  *^  to  the  Unknown  God,  cause  of  causes  "  (Bastian,
Der  Mensch  in  der  Geschichte,  2.  p.  106  note  ;  cp.  J.  G.  Miiller,  Geschichte
der  a$nerikanischen  Urreligioneny  p.  473  J^.;  Bancroft,  Native  races  of
ike  Pacific  States^  3.  p.  196  sq.)

1.  4.  ftltars    of   heroes.       These    heroes    were    probably

Naosithous  and  Phaeax,  who  had  shrines  at  Phalerum  beside  the
sanctuary  of  Scirus.  Nausithous  was  said  to  have  been  the  steersman,
and  Phaeax  the  look-out  man  of  Theseus's  ship  on  his  voyage  to  Crete.
A  festival  called  Kybemesia  (* steering  festival')  was  held  in  their
honour.     See  Plutarch,  Theseus,  17.

1.  4.  Phalerus  sailed  with  Jason.    Cp.  Apollonius  Rhodius,  Argon,
L  96  ;  Orphic  hymns,  Argonautica,  144  sq,

1.  4.  an  altar  also  of  Androgens called  the  altar  of  the  hero.

Cp.  L  27.  10.  Clement  of  Alexandria  says  {Protrept,  ii.  40,  p.  35,  ed.
Potter)  that  at  Phalerum  a  certain  hero  was  worshipped  "  at  the  stem  "
(rifiarac  $€  ns  ical  ^aXr^pol  Kara,  irpvfivav  ^pcos),  and  the  scholiast  on
this  passage  of  Clement  says  that  this  hero  was  Androgens,  and  that  he
was  thus  designated  "  because  he  founded  the  stems  of  ships."  Other-
wise we  should  have  been  tempted  to  suppose  that  **  the  hero  at  the
stem"  was  Nausithous,  steersman  of  Theseus  (see  above).  Funeral
games  were  celebrated  in  the  Ceramicus  at  Athens  in  honour  of  a  certain
Enrygyes,  who  is  said  to  have  been  identical  with  Androgens  (Hesychius,
i.v.  csr*  Evpiryvjy  aywv).

1.  5.  Cape  Colias.  Leake  and  Prof.  Milchhofer  identify  Cape
Colias  with  the  rocky  headland  which  is  or  used  to  be  called  Trispyrgi,
situated  about  600  yards  to  the  south  of  St,  George,  the  site  of  the
ancient  Phalerum  (see  above,  p.  11  sq,)  But  Pausanias  says  that  Cape
Colias  was  20  furlongs  from  Phalenmi.  Hence  Ulrichs,  Bursian,  and
Mr.  Kastromenos  are  probably  right  in  identifying  Cape  Colias  with  the
modem  Cape  Cosmas,  a  low  narrow  tongue  of  land  which  projects  into
the  sea  with  a  steep  shelving  beach  about  three  miles  to  the  south-east
of  St,  George,  On  the  extremity  of  the  cape  is  the  small  church  of  St.
Cosmas,  visible  from  Piraeus.     Some  large  squared  blocks  are  built  into


36  CAPE  CO  LIAS  bk.  i.  attica

the  walls  of  the  church.  A  few  paces  inland  are  some  large  substruc-
tions, and  further  in  the  direction  of  Athens  there  are  the  remains  of
considerable  buildings.  The  country  in  the  neighbourhood  is  barren,
solitary,  and  desolate  in  a  high  degree.  The  stony  and  broken  soil  is
traversed  by  the  beds,  generally  dry,  of  many  brooks.  As  £ir  as  the
eye  can  reach,  from  the  sea  to  the  foot  of  Mt  Hymettus,  ancient  tombs
are  seen  dotted  over  the  landscape,  rising  in  the  form  of  mounds  above
the  stimted  bushes  which  cover  the  low  ground.  Melancholy  at  all
times,  the  landscape  is  doubly  gloomy  in  winter,  when  dark  clouds
lower  on  Mt  Hymettus  and  shut  out  the  view  across  the  sea  to  the
coast  of  Peloponnese.  See  Leake,  Athens ^  2.  p.  51  sq,\  Ulrichs,  Reisen
und Forschungen^  2.  p.  182  sq,\  Bursian,  i.  p.  361  ;  A.  Conze,  in  Annali
delV  Imtituto  di  Corr,  ArcheoL  36  (1864),  p.  183  sq.\  Milchhofer,  in
Karien  von  Attikoy  Text^  Heft  ii.  p.  i  sq,\  P.  Kastromenos,  Die  Demen
von  Attika^  P-  45  s^Q*  Strabo  placed  Cape  Colias  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Anaphlystus  (ix.  p.  398),  which  is  a  great  deal  too  £ar  south  (see  note
on  ii.  30.  9).  On  the  other  hand,  Stephanus  B>'zantius  (sjv,  KoiAias)
placed  it  at  Phalerum,  which  is  in  fovour  of  identifying  Cape  Colias  with
Trispyrgi.

1.  5.  on  which the  wrecks  were  washed  np.     See  Herodotus,

viii.  96 ;  cp.  Strabo,  ix.  p.  398.

1.   5.  an  image  of  Golian  Ajihrodite,  and the  goddesses

named  Qenetyllides.  A  sanctuary  of  Colian  Aphrodite  is  mentioned  by
Strabo  (ix.  p.  398),  Harpocration  and  Hesychius  {s.v.  KcuAiasX  and  the
scholiast  on  Aristophanes  {LystsirtUa^  2).  The  scholiast  on  Aristophanes,
Clouds^  52,  says  there  was  a  temple  of  the  goddess,  and  he  gives  a
number  of  more  or  less  absurd  explanations  of  the  name  Colian.  The
priest  of  the  goddess  had  a  seat  in  the  Dion\*siac  theatre  at  Athens
(C  /.  A.  iii.  No.  339).  The  Genetyllides  ^*ere  goddesses  of  birth ;
Aphrodite  herself  was  odled  Genetyllis.  (See  Aristophanes,  Clouds^  52  ;
fi/.,  LysisL  2  ;  fV/.,  ThesmopK  1 30  ;  the  scholia  on  all  these  passages ;
and  Suidas,  j.f.  rciTrvAAis).  According  to  Hesychius  (s.v,  rcvcrvAAts)
Genetyllis  resembled  Hecate  and  dogs  were  offered  to  her.  On  some
Athenian  coins  there  appears,  beside  the  usual  owl,  a  figure  holding  in
its  right  hand  three  draped  female  figures.  Beul^  interpreted  this
dex-ice  as  the  Colian  Aphrodite  with  the  Genetyllides  (Lts  Monncdes
dAtkhus^  p.  365  sq.^  But  it  seems  rather  to  be  the  Delian  Apollo
with  the  Graces.  See  note  on  Lx.  35.  3.  Cp.  J.  J.  Bernoulli,
Aphrodite^  p.  204.  A  terra-cotta  group  found  in  the  south  of  Russia
represents  Aphrodite  and  Cupid  with  a  tiny  draped  female  figure
standing  beside  Cupid.  Stephani  interpreted  the  small  female  figure
as  Genetyllis  or  Ilithyia.  See  Compte  Rtndu  (St.  Petersbuig)  for  1873,
pp.  10-16,  Atlas  i.  Na  3;  cp.  rV^  for  1S75,  p.  74  5^.;  id,  for  1880,
p.  117.

1.  5.  On  the  way  from  Phalemm  to  Athens  etc  Pausanias  first
approaches  Athens  from  Phalerum  and  enters  it  (L  2.  i);  then  he
retraces  his  steps,  approaches  it  again  from  Piraeus  (L  2.  2),  and  enters
it  (i.  2.  4)«  His  description  of  the  dty,  including  digressions,  lasts  till
L  29.  2,  when  he  quits  it  and  proceeds  towards  the  Academy.


CH.  II  PH ALE  RUM  TO  ATHENS  37

1.  S*  a  temple  of  Hera  that  has  neither  doors  nor  roof  etc.
Cp.  X.  35.  2.

1.  5.  The  existing  image  is,  so  they  say,  a  work  of  Alcamenes ;
it  cannot,  therefore,  have  been  injured  by  the  Modes.  Pausanias
means  that  if  the  statue  was  really  by  Alcamenes,  it  must  have  been
executed  later  than  the  Persian  invasion,  and  therefore  could  not  have
been  injured  when  the  temple  was  burnt  by  the  Persians,  for  the  artistic
career  of  Alcamenes  did  not  begin  till  after  the  Persian  invasion  (see
note  on  v.  10.  8).  Pausanias  found  the  image,  as  well  as  the  temple,
damaged.  Hence  one  of  two  inferences  might  be  drawn:  (i)  if  the
image  was  by  Alcamenes  the  injury  to  it  could  not  have  been  inflicted
by  the  Persians  ;  (2)  if  the  injury  to  the  image  was  inflicted  by
the  Persians,  then  the  image  could  not  have  been  made  by  Alcamenes.
Pausanias  seems  to  have  taken  the  former  view,  namely  that  the  image
was  by  Alcamenes  and  had  been  damaged  at  some  time  subsequent  to
the  Persian  invasion.  But  this  view  is  improbable,  since  it  implies  that
a  new  image  had  been  set  up  in  a  burnt  and  roofless  temple.  If  the
temple  was  really  burnt  by  the  Persians,  as  Pausanias  appears  to  have
believed,  it  is  much  more  likely  that  the  image  was  not  by  Alcamenes.
Attempts  have  been  made  to  identify  existing  statues  as  copies  of  the
image  in  question.  But  since  we  know  absolutely  nothing  about  the
image,  these  attempts  are  necessarily  futile.

Cp.  V.  BrunOi  Gesck,  d,  griech,  KiinstUr^  i.  p.  235  sq,  ;  Overbeck,  Gesch,  d,
gn€ch,  Pktstiky^  i.  p.  380 ;  iV.,  Griechische  KunstmythologUy  3.  pp.  40  sq,^  192  note
31 ;  Murray,  History  of  Greek  Sculpture ^  2.  p.  140 ;  R.  Forster,  in  Rheinisckes
Museum^  N.  F.  38  (1883),  p.  422  sq,  ;  J.  Six,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,
10  (1889),  p.  Ill ;  Petersen,  *  Hera  von  Alkamenes,'  Mittheil,  d,  arch,  Instituts,
Romische  Abtheilung,  4  (1889),  pp.  65-74 ;  F.  Koepp,  in  Jahrbuch  d,  arch,
ImtiiuiSf  5  (1890),   pp.  274-277 ;  E.  Reisch,   in  Eranos  Vindobontnsis  (Wien,

1893),  P-  17  -r^.

2.  I.  Entering  the  city  we  come  to  the  tomb  of  Antiope  the
AmasozL     From  this  it  appears  that  the  tomb  of  Antiope  was  just
inside  the  city-wall  of  Athens.     Plutarch  tells  us  that  a  certain  tomb-
stone beside  the  sanctuary  of  Olympian  Earth  at  Athens  was  thought  by
some  to  mark  the  grave  of  Antiope  the  Amazon  who  had  been  slain  in
the  battle  between  Theseus  and  the  Amazons  (Plutarch,  Theseus^  27,
reading  F^s  for  t^s).     This  tombstone  doubtless  belonged  to  the  tomb
mentioned  by  Pausanias.  Now  the  sanctuary  of  Olympian  Earth  was  within
or  near  the  precincts  of  the  Olympieum  (Paus.  i.  18.  7)  ;  hence  the  gate
by  which  Pausanias  entered  Athens  from  Phalerum  must  have  been  near
the  Olympieum.     The  tomb  of  Antiope  is  no  doubt  the  same  with  the
tombstone  of  the  Amazon  which  is  mentioned  by  Plato  {Axiochus,  p.
364  d-365  a)  as  being  near  the  Itonian  gate.     Hence  we  conclude  that
the  gate  by  which  the  road  from  Phalenmi  entered  Athens  was  named
the  Itonian  gate,  and  that  it  was  not  far  from  the  Olympieum.     The  exact
spot  seems  to  be  about  330  paces  south  of  the  Military  Hospital  where
the  present  high-road  from  Phalerum  crosses  the  line  of  the  ancient  city-
''all  and  where  two  roads  diverge  from  it  to  the  south-east.     At  this
point  ancient  foundations  either  of  the  wall  or  of  the  gate  have  been


38  THE  LONG  WALLS  bk.  i.  attica

found  stretching  across  the  whole  width  of  the  high-road.  See  £.  Curtius,
Attische  Studien^  i.  p.  67  ;  A.  Pervanoglu,  in  PhilologuSy  25  (1867),  p.
337  s^-  \  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen^  i.  p.  151  sq, ;  Milchhofer,
in  Baumeister's  DenkmdUr^  pp.  147,  149;  Lolling:  ' Topographie  von
Athen'  (in  I  wan  M  liner's  Handbuch  der  class,  Altertumswissenschafi<t
vol.  3),  p.  305.  At  the  supposed  site  of  the  gate  was  found  an  in-
scription recording  the  erection  of  a  tower  (doubtless  on  the  city-wall)
by  some  citizens  (see  Revue  archiologique^  N.S.  21  (1870),  p.  319
sqq,)  In  another  inscription  found  about  the  same  spot  (*£<^/[Acpi$
Q^\axo\xiyi,K't\y  1884,  p.  161  sqq,;  C.  L  A,  iv.  No.  53  a,  p.  66  sq,\
mention  is  made  of  the  gate  through  which  persons  initiated  in  the
mysteries  passed  out  to  go  to  the  sea.  The  gate  referred  to  was  prob-
ably near  the  Itonian  gate.  The  Long  Wall  from  Phalerum  (see  above,
p.  12)  appears  to  have  joined  the  circuit-wall  of  Athens  immediately
to  the  east  of  the  Itonian  gate,  perhaps  at  the  point  where  the  remains
of  a  square  tower  are  still  to  be  seen.  Thus  the  road  to  Phalerum  ran
inside  the  Long  WalL  See  Kaupert,  in  Monatsbericht  of  the  Berlin
Academy  for  1879,  P-  633;  Milchh5fer,  in  Karten  von  Attika^  Texf,
Heft  ii.  p.  2,  and  in  Baumeister's  Denkmaler^  p.  147;  Lolling,  '  Topo-
graphie  von  Athen,'  p.  301.  Professor  E.  Curtius  formerly  placed
the  junction  of  the  two  walls  to  the  west  of  the  Itonian  gate,  on  the
eastern  slope  of  the  Museum  hill  (Curtius  and  Kaupert,  Atlcu  von
A  then,  p.  11).  The  square  tower  to  the  east  of  the  Itonian  gate  is
mentioned  by  Professor  Curtius,  Attische  Studien^  i.  p.  67.

2.  I.  Antiope  was  carried  off  by  PirithonB  and  Theseus.  As  to
the  various  stories  about  Antiope  and  Theseus,  see  Plutarch,  Theseus^
26  sq,  A  vase-painting  represents  Theseus  in  the  act  of  carrying  ofT
Antiope  in  his  arms ;  he  is  followed  by  Pirithous.  See  Monumenti
Ineditiy  i  (1833),  ^v.  Iv.  The  marriage  of  Theseus  and  Antiope  is
thought  to  be  depicted  on  another  vase-painting.  See  Monumenti
Inediti^  4  (1847),  tav.  xliii.

2.  2.  Ooing  up  from  Piraens  we  come  to  ruins  of  the  walls  which
Gonon  reared  etc  Pausanias  is  guilty  of  a  serious  historical  blunder
in  supposing  that  the  Long  Walls  which  united  Athens  to  Piraeus  were
originally  built  by  Themistocles.  What  Themistocles  persuaded  the
Athenians  to  do  was  to  fortify  Piraeus  (Thucydides,  i.  93).  The  con-
struction of  the  Long  Walls  was  a  later  work,  the  precise  date  of  which
cannot  be  fixed  with  certainty.  Thucydides  says  (i.  107):  "About
this  time  the  Athenians  also  began  to  build  the  Long  Walls  to  the  sea,
namely  the  wall  to  Phalerum  and  the  wall  to  Piraeus."  The  date
referred  to  seems  to  be  about  460  B.c  The  walls  were  completed  in  a
few  years,  apparently  soon  after  the  battle  of  Oenophyta  in  456  B.C
(Thucydides,  i.  108  ;  the  difficulty  of  laying  the  foundations  in  the
marshy  ground  is  mentioned  by  Plutarch,  Cimon^  13).  Thus  the  two
Long  Walls  first  built  were  those  to  Phalerum  and  Piraeus,  the  old
and  the  new  port  of  Athens.  But  between  Piraeus  and  Phalerum
there  was  a  long  line  of  undefended  coast,  on  which  an  enemy  could
easily  land  and  sever  Athens  from  its  ports.  Hence  Pericles  induced
the  Athenians  to  build  a  third  Long  Wall,  namely  the  wall  to  Munychia,


CH.  II  THE  LONG  WALLS  39

which  was  known  as  the  Middle  Wall  because  it  lay  between  the  wall  to
Piraeus  and  the  wall  to  Phalerum  (Plato,  GorgiaSy  p.  455  e,  with  the
scholiast ;  Harpocration,  s,v,  hia  fua-ov  r€i\ov^).  Its  construction  was
not  begun  till  after  the  conclusion  of  the  Thirty  Years'  Peace  between
Athens  and  Sparta  in  445  B.C,  if  we  can  trust  the  evidence  of  Andocides
(iii.  7)  and  Aeschines  (ii.  174).  The  architect  was  Callicrates,  the
colleague  of  Ictinus  in  building  the  Parthenon  ;  but  the  work  proceeded
slowly  (Plutarch,  Pericles,  13;  id, y  De  gloria  Atheniensiumy  8).  Cp.
C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Aiheriy  i.  p.  556  sqq.  By  the  completion  of
the  Middle  Long  Wall  from  Athens  to  Munychia  the  capital  and  its
port  were  converted  into  one  vast  fortress,  a  day's  journey  in  circum-
ference (Aristides,  Or.  xiii.  vol.  i,  p.  305  ed.  Dindorf),  without  a  single
break  in  the  circuit-wall  except  at  the  gates  and  the  mouths  of  the
harbours.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that,  as  I  have  already  indicated
(above^  p.  11),  the  construction  of  this  immense  fortress  was  a  military  and
political  blunder,  committed  solely  out  of  deference  to  the  religious  and
sentimental  attachment  of  the  Athenians  to  the  old  city.  It  weakened
Athens  both  for  defence  and  offence.  For  the  enormous  length  of  the
fortification- walls  invited  attack  and,  by  needing  a  very  large  garrison  to
man  them,  locked  up  a  powerful  military  force  which  might  have  been
used  for  purposes  of  offence.  If  the  clear-sighted  and  cool-headed
Themistocles,  untrammelled  by  the  religious  and  sentimental  weaknesses
of  his  countrymen,  had  had  his  way,  he  would,  by  transferring  the
capital  to  Piraeus,  have  added  incalculably  to  the  power  of  Athens
abroad.     Cp.  E.  Curtius,  Stadtgeschichiey  p.  109  sqq.

At  the  beginning  of  the  Peloponnesian  war  in  431  B.C.,  the  three

Long  Walls  were  still  intact  (Thucydides,  ii.  13),  but  apparently  in  the

course  of  that  war  the  Phaleric  wall  was  suffered  to  fall  into  decay,

or  was  actually  destroyed  as  no  longer  necessary,  and   henceforward

the  wall  to  Piraeus  and  the  wall  to  Munychia  were  the  Long  Walls

exclusively,    that  to  Piraeus  being  known   as    the   northern,    that    to

Munychia  as  the  southern  wall  (Harpocration,  s.v,  Sia  /xco-ov  Tii\ov^ ;

Andocides,  iii.   5  and  7  ;  Aeschines,  ii.  173  and  174  ;  Plato,  Republic,

iv.  439  e ;  C.  I,  A,  ii.  No.  167,  line  120  ;  Rangab^,  Antiquitis  HelUniques,

Na  771,  line  120).     The  proof  that  the  wall  to  Phalenun  must  have

ceased  to  exist  before  the  end  of  the  Peloponnesian  war  is  afforded  by

the  conditions  of  peace  offered  by  the  Lacedaemonians  to  the  Athenians  ;

for  these  conditions  included  a  demand  that  each  of  the  two  Long  Walls

should  be  pulled  down  for  a  distance  of  10  furlongs  (Xenophon,  Hel-

lem'ca,  ii.    2.   15  ;  Lysias,  xiii.  8).     This  implies  that  only  two  Long

Walls  were  then  in  existence.     But  when  Athens  actually  capitulated  in

404  B.C,  the  whole  of  the  Long  Walls,  as  well  as  the  fortifications  of

Piraeus,  were  razed  to  the  ground  (Plutarch,  Lysander,  1 4  ;  Diodorus,  xiii.

107,  xiv.  85).     They  were  rebuilt  by  Conon  in  393  B.C.,  after  his  naval

victory  won  at  Cnidus  in  394  B,c.,  as  we  learn  from  the  present  passage

of  Pausanias  (cp.  Xenophon,  Hellenica,  iv.  8.  10;  Diodorus,  xiv.  85  ;

Xenophon  and  Diodorus  only  speak  of  the  restoration  of  "  the  walls,"

hat  under  this   they  probably  included  the    Long  Walls).     They  may

lave  been  once  more  destroyed  by  Antigonus  when   he  withdrew  his


40  THE  LONG  WALLS  bk.  i.  attica

garrison  from  Athens  in  256  B.a  (Paus.  iii.  6.  6  ;  Wachsmuth,  Die
Siadt  A  then,  i.  p.  628  sq,)  At  all  events,  when  Philip,  king  of  Mace-
donia, attacked  Athens  in  200  B.C.,  the  Long  Walls  were  half  in  ruins
(Livy,  xxxi.  26),  They  are  mentioned  in  an  inscription  of  Roman
date  {'E<tyqfjL€pls  dpxaioXoytKyjy  1884,  p.  169  j^.),  but  the  reference  is
doubtless  to  the  ruins  of  them.  In  ruins  they  remained  in  Pausanias's
time,  as  he  here  tells  us.

In  modem  times  remains  of  the  Long  Walls  from  Athens  to  Piraeus
were  visible  down  to  the  beginning  of  the  present  century.  In  1676
Wheler  saw  the  foundations  in  many  places  lying  in  a  straight  line
{Journey,  p.  420).  Last  century  Stuart  saw  square  towers  at  intervals
and  remains  of  the  walls  12  feet  thick,  formed  of  large  squared
blocks  bonded  together  with  iron  clamps  (C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt
A  then,  2.  p.  188).  In  Leake's  time  the  foundations  of  the  northern
Long  Wall  could  be  traced  for  a  mile  and  a  half,  beginning  at  half  a
mile  from  the  head  of  the  great  harbour,  and  running  exactly  in  the
direction  of  the  entrance  to  the  Acropolis.  These  foundations,  1 2  feet
thick  and  resting  on  the  natural  rock,  were  formed  of  large  quadrangular
blocks  of  stone,  put  together  in  the  solid  style  which  characterised  the
works  of  Themistocles.  The  southern  Long  Wall  was  not  so  easily
traceable,  except  at  its  junction  with  the  walls  of  Munychia  and  for  half
a  mile  thence  towards  Athens.  See  Leake,  Athens,  i.  p.  417  sq.  The
modem  high-road  from  Piraeus  to  Athens,  constructed  in  1835,  is
largely  laid  on  the  foundations  of  the  northern  Long  Wall  (Wachsmuth,
Die  Stadt  A  then,  2.  p.  188).  As  to  the  scanty  traces  of  the  Long
Walls  which  can  still  be  detected,  see  Kaupert,  in  Monatsbericht  of  the
Berlin  Academy  for  1879,  p.  628  sq.

The  length  of  each  of  the  Long  Walls  was  40  Greek  furlongs
{stades)  according  to  Thucydides  (ii.  13.  9).  Mr.  Kaupert  has  esti-
mated the  length  of  the  northern  Long  Wall  at  6610  metres,  and  that
of  the  southern  Long  Wall  at  6620  metres  {Monatsbericht  of  the  Berlin
Academy  for  1879,  P*  630).  The  two  walls,  starting  from  two  points
in  the  outer  wall  of  Piraeus  (see  above,  p.  10),  first  converged,  then  ran
parallel  to  each  other  at  a  distance  of  184  metres  till  they  approached
Athens,  when  they  again  diverged.  The  northern  wall  seems  to  have
joined  the  ring-wall  of  Athens  on  the  west  side  of  the  Nymphaeum  hill
near  the  modem  Observatory ;  while  the  southern  wall  joined  the  city-
wall  on  the  summit  of  the  Museum  hill.  At  the  point  where  the  Long
Walls  began  to  diverge  as  they  approached  Athens,  they  were  joined
by  a  cross-wall  in  which  there  was  a  gate.  See  E.  Curtius,  Erldutem-
der  Text  der  sieben  Karten  zur  Topographic  von  A  then,  p.  33  ;  C.
Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  A  then,  i.  p.  332  sqq, ;  Curtius  and  Kaupert,
Atlas  von  A  then,  p.  1 1  ;  Kaupert,  in  Monatsbericht  of  the  Berlin  Academy
for  1879,  pp.  619,  620,  628,  631  ;  von  Alten  and  Milchhofer,  in
Karten  von  Attika,  Text,  Heft  i.  p.  6,  Heft  ii.  p.  4  sq.  Some  informa-
tion as  to  the  construction  of  the  Long  Walls  is  furnished  by  an  inscrip-
tion dealing  with  repairs  which  seem  to  have  been  undertaken  in  307  or
306  B.C.  See  C  LA.  ii.  No.  167;  Rangabd,  Antiquitds  HellMques,  No.
771  ;  Kohler,  in  Mittheil,  d  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  5  (1880),  p.  276 ;  C.


CH.  II  PIRAEUS  TO  ATHENS  41

Wachsmuth,  Die  Siadt  Athen^  i.  p.  616  note  2  ;  /V/.,  2.  pp.  vi.  sqq,\
Choisy,  Etudes  ^pigraphiques  sur  Parcfutecture  Grecque^  pp.  43-80.

Two  roads  at  least  seem  to  have  united  Piraeus  and  Athens  ;  one  of
them  ran  between  the  Long  Walls,  the  other  ran  a  little  outside  of  the
Dorthem  Long  Wall  (see  above,  p.  10).  The  road  between  the  Long
Walls  must,  in  entering  Athens,  have  passed  through  the  rugged  stony
defile  between  the  Museum  hiU  and  the  Pnyx  hill ;  whereas  the  road
outside  the  north  wall  would  lie  on  level  ground  the  whole  way.
Hence  the  latter,  as  the  more  convenient,  was  probably  the  regular
thoroughfare  in  time  of  peace ;  while  the  road  between  the  Long  Walls
would  be  important  only  in  time  of  war  when  the  country  outside  was
infested  by  prowling  bands  of  the  enemy.  Pausanias  on  his  way  from
Piraeus  to  Athens  must  have  taken,  or  at  least  must  have  supposed  his
readers  to  take,  the  road  outside  the  Long  Walls,  for  he  mentions  graves
by  the  way.  That  a  road  did  run  outside  the  northern  Long  Wall  to
Piraeus  appears  from  a  passage  in  Plato  {Repub,  iv.  p.  439  e),  where  it
is  said  that  a  certain  man  coming  up  from  Piraeus  under  the  northern
wall,  on  the  outside,  perceived  corpses  lying  at  the  place  of  public
execution.  "  The  carriage  road  to  Piraeus  "  mentioned  by  Xenophon
(Heliemca,  ii.  4.  10)  was  probably  the  road  outside  the  Long  Walls.
Cp.  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadi  Athen,  2.  p.  177  sqq,

2.  2.  the  grave  of  Menander.  The  epitaph  which  seems  to  have
been  eng^ved  on  his  tomb  is  preserved  in  the  Anthology  (AnthoL  Palat,
vii.  370).

2.  2.  a  cenotaph  of  Euripides.  The  epitaph  carved  on  this  ceno-
taph is  said  to  have  been  composed  by  the  historian  Thucydides  or  the
musician  Timotheus.  It  has  been  preserved.  See  Biographi  Graeciy
ed- Westermann,  pp.  135,  140;  AnthoL  Palat  vii.  45.  The  common
tale  ran  that  Euripides  was  accidentally  torn  to  pieces  by  the  hunting
dogs  of  Archelaus,  king  of  Macedonia,  who  had  hospitably  received  the
poet  at  his  court.  See  Biogr,  Or.  ed.  Westermann,  pp.  136,  140;
Diodonis,  xiiL  103.  Between  Athens  and  Piraeus  there  are  the  remains
of  a  large  tumulus  which  Dodwell  thought  (i.  p.  416)  might  be  the
cenotaph  of  Euripides.  It  was  found  to  contain  broken  vases,  bones  of
animals,  etc  But  as  the  tumulus  is  between  the  lines  of  the  two  Long
Walls  it  must  be  older  than  they,  and  cannot  therefore  be  the  cenotaph
of  Euripides.     See  Karten  von  AtHkoy  Text^  Heft  ii.  p.  5.

2.  3.  Anacreon  resided  with  Polycrates.  Cp.  Herodotus,  iii.
121  ;  Strabo,  xiv.  p.  638.

2.  3.  Fhiloxenns  resided  with  Dionysius,  the  Sicilian  tyrant.
An  inscription  found  in  the  theatre  of  Dionysus  at  Athens  contains  a
decree  of  the  Athenian  people  in  honour  of  Dionysius  the  tyrant  and
some  of  his  household,  amongst  whom  is  mentioned  a  certain  Philoxenus
or  Polyxenus  (the  name  is  mutilated  in  the  inscription  and  its  restora-
tion is  uncertain).  If  Philoxenus  be  the  name  in  the  inscription,  the
reference  may  be  to  the  poet.  See  C.  /.  A,  ii.  No.  8  ;  Hicks,  Greek
Historical  Inscriptions^  No.  71  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec.
No.  54.

2.  3.  Antagoras  the  Bhodian  and  Aratos resided  with


42  THE  DIPYLUM  bk.  i.  attica

AntigoniUl.  See  Bicgraphi  Graeciy  e<L  Westennann,  pp.  53  sq,^  58,
60,  6 1  ;  Athenaeus,  viii.  p.  340  e  £

2.  3.  Alcmons  was  attended  lyy  Demodocna.  See  Homer,
Odyssey^  viii.  43  sqq.

2.  3.  Agamemnon  left  a  poet  with  his  wife.    Homer,  Od,  iii.

267  sqq.

2.  3.  a  grave  sunnonnted  \tj  a  waziior.  It  has  been  conjectured
that  this  grave  was  the  shrine  of  the  hero  Chalcodon,  which  stood  near
the  Piraeic  g^te  of  Athens  (Plutarch,  Theseus^  27).  But  the  grave  men-
tioned by  Pausanias  would  seem  to  have  been  a  common  tomb,  not  a
shrine  of  a  hero  (17/K^v).

2.  4*  When  we  have  entered  into  the  city  etc  The  question.
By  which  gate  did  Pausanias  enter  Athens  from  Piraeus  ?  has  been
much  discussed.  There  appear  to  have  been  at  least  four  gates  on  the
west  and  north-west  sides  of  Athens,  through  all  of  which  roads  led  to
Piraeus :  (i)  There  was  a  gate  in  the  saddle  between  the  Museum  hiU
and  the  Pnyx.  This  is  proved  by  the  traces  of  an  ancient  road  crossing
the  saddle  ;  the  deep  ruts  in  the  rock  for  the  wheels  of  the  chariots  and
the  cross  grooves  to  prevent  the  feet  of  the  beasts  from  slipping  are  stiU
to  be  seen.  (2)  There  was  a  gate  between  the  Pnyx  and  the  Nym-
phaeum  hill ;  the  remains  of  the  gate  are  still  visible  on  the  saddle.
(3)  There  was  a  gate  between  the  Nymphaeum  hill  and  the  low  height  on
which  stands  a  chapel  of  St  Athanasius ;  the  foundations  of  the  gate  still
exist  (4)  On  the  north-west  side  of  the  city  there  was  the  great  gate
called  the  Dipylum,  See  B.  Schmidt,  Die  Thorfrage  in  der  Tapographie
Athens^  p.  3  ;  Milchhofer,  in  Baumeister's  Denkmdlery  p.  147  ;  Lolling,
*  Topographic  von  Athen,'  p.  303.  Of  these  gates,  the  first  two  were
between  the  Long  Walls,  and  the  roads  leading  through  them  to  Piraeus  seem
to  have  converged  and  met  a  little  way  outside  the  g^tes.  Gates  ( 3 )  and  ( 4 )
were  outside  the  Long  Walls,  and  the  roads  from  them  to  Piraeus  seem
also  to  have  converged  and  met  some  way  outside  the  city.  We  have
seen  that  Pausanias  approached  Athens  by  the  high-road  which  ran  out-
side of  the  Long  Walls  (see  above,  p.  41).  Hence  he  cannot  have
entered  it  by  either  of  the  first  two  gates,  but  must  have  entered  it  by
gate  (3)  or  gate  (4).  The  former  (gate  3)  seems  to  have  been  the  gate
called  the  Piraeic  g^te  (Plutarch,  Theseus^  27  ;  id^  Sulloj  14 ;  see  E,
Curtius,  Atiische  Studten^  i.  p.  66  ;  Milchhofer,  in  Baumeister's  Denk-
tndler,  p.  147;  Lolling,  however,  thought  that  gate  No.  2  answers  better
to  the  Piraeic  gate,  *  Topographic  von  Athen,'  p.  303).  The  question
thus  reduces  itself  to  this  :  Did  Pausanias  enter  Athens  from  Piraeus  by
the  Piraeic  gate  or  by  the  Dipylum  ?

The  Dipylum  was  the  chief  gate  of  Athens.  Thus  Livy  (xxxi.  24)
speaks  of  it  as  larger  and  wider  than  the  other  gates  and  situated,  as  it
were,  in  the  front  of  the  city.  Again  it  appears  that  the  regular  way
from  Piraeus  was  through  the  Dipylum  (Polybius,  xvi.  25  ;  Lucian,
Navigium,  17  and  46;  id^  Dial,  Meretr,  iv.  2  sq,)  Moreover,  the
road  through  the  Dipylum,  though  not  the  shortest,  was  the  most  con-
venient ;  for  it  avoided  all  hills  and  led  straight  into  the  chief  quarter  of
the  city.     For  these  and  other  reasons,  which  will  appear  in  the  sequel,


CH.  II  THE  DIPYLUM  43

it  seems  probable  that  Pausanias  chose  to  begin  his  tour  through  Athens
at  the  Dipylum  rather  than  at  the  Piraeic  gate.  This  is  the  view  now
generally  accepted.  See  on  the  question  Leake,  Athens^  i.  p.  226  sqq,  ;
E.  Curtius,  AtHsche  Siudien,  2.  p.  17  ;  Bursian,  i.  p.  278,  note  3  ;  K.
Botticher,  in  Philologus^  Suppl  3  (1867),  p.  396  sqq.  ;  Forchhammer,  in
Philologus^  33  (1874),  p.  103  sqq, ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Siadt  Athen^
I.  p.  182  sqq.  ;  B.  Schmidt,  Die  Thorfrage  in  der  Tofiographie  Athens
(Freibui^g  im  B.  1879);  MilchhSfer,  *Athen,'  p.  160;  Lolling,  *Athen,*

p.  310-

The  remains  of  the  Dipylum  were  excavated  by  the  Greek  Archaeo-
logical Society  in  1 872-1 874.  They  are  situated  on  the  north-west  side
of  Athens  about  160  yards  east  of  the  chapel  of  the  Holy  Trinity
(Hagia  Triada)  and  about  the  same  distance  north-west  of  the  Piraeus
railway  station.  A  long  stretch  of  the  ancient  city-wall  was  here
excavated  at  the  same  time.  The  Dipylum  was  a  double  gate.  An
outer  gate  in  the  city-wall,  facing  north-west,  led  into  an  oblong  court
about  40.5  metres  (about  133  feet)  long,  at  the  inner  end  of  which
there  was  a  second  gate.  The  outer  gate  is  not  flush  with  the  city-
wall  but  stands  about  26  feet  back  from  it.  The  approach  to  it  was
flanked  on  both  sides  by  towers  from  which  the  defenders  could  rake
a  body  of  assailants  advancing  to  attack  the  gate.  A  considerable
portion  of  the  southern  (more  strictly  south-western)  tower  is  preserved.
It  is  7  metres  (23  feet)  square,  and  is  constructed  of  solid  masonry,  the
core  being  composed  of  blocks  of  conglomerate  of  uniform  size,  while
the  outer  facing  is  formed  of  courses  of  well  cut  and  well  jointed  blocks
of  limestone.  The  outer  gate  was  itself,  in  another  sense,  double ;  i.e.
it  had  two  openings,  each  3.45  metres  (about  11  feet)  wide,  divided  by
a  pier  of  masonry  3.76  metres  (about  12  feet  4  inches)  wide.  The
lower  part  of  this  pier  is  preserved.  Immediately  in  front  of  it,  on  the
outer  side  of  the  gate,  is  a  square  base,  perhaps  the  remnant  of  a
sepulchral  monument.  The  construction  of  the  inner  gate  was  similar.
Immediately  behind  its  central  pier,  on  the  inner  or  city  side,  is  a
square  base  supporting  a  round  marble  altar  in  its  original  position.
An  inscription  on  the  altar  (C  /.  A.  ii.  No.  1664)  informs  us  that  the
altar  was  sacred  to  Zeus  of  the  Courtyard,  to  Hermes,  and  to  Acamas.
This  Acamas  was  the  eponymous  hero  of  the  tribe  Acamantis,  and  was
appropriately  worshipped  here,  since  this  quarter  of  the  city  (namely  the
Ceramicus)  was  a  township  belonging  to  the  tribe  Acamis  (U.  Kohler,
in  Mittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst  in  Athen^  4  (1879),  p.  288).  The  intention  of
placing  a  gate  within  a  gate,  as  at  the  Dipylum,  has  been  already
explained  (p.  20) ;  it  was  to  furnish  the  defenders  with  a  second  line  of
defence  in  case  the  first  should  be  carried.  In  200  B.C.  Philip  V.,  king
of  Macedonia,  forced  his  way,  at  the  head  of  a  handful  of  cavalry,  into
this  very  court  of  the  Dipylum,  between  the  outer  and  the  inner  gate,
but  he  was  driven  out  again  (Livy,  xxxi.  24).

The  excavations  of  1873-74  brought  to  light  another  double  gate  in
the  city- wall  to  the  south-west  of  the  Dipylum  and  only  60  yards
distant  from  it.  The  general  construction  of  this  second  gate  resembles
that  of  the  Dipylum,  but  it  is  on  a  smaller  scale.    An  outer  gate,  flanked


44  THE  DIPYLUM  bk.  i.  attica

by  towers,  led  into  a  long  narrow  court,  at  the  further  end  of  which  there
was  an  inner  gate.  This  inner  gate  was  flanked  by  bastions,  the
limestone  foundations  of  which  still  remain.  The  strong  tower  which
flanked  the  outer  gate  on  the  south-west  stands  in  its  original  position  ;
but  the  tower  on  the  north-east  side  of  the  gate  has  been  apparently
moved  back  in  order  to  make  room  for  a  vaulted  water-channel  of  very
late  construction.  This  double  gate  to  the  south-west  of  the  Dipylum
is  the  oldest  part  of  the  wall,  and  probably  dates  from  Themistocles*s
time.  It  may  be  the  Sacred  Gale  mentioned  by  Plutarch  in  a  passage
{Sulla^  14)  where  he  says  that  in  the  siege  of  Athens  by  the  Romans
Sulla  entered  the  city  through  a  breach  which  he  had  made  in  the  wall
between  the  Piraeic  Gate  and  the  Sacred  Gate.  There  certainly  would
not  be  two  gates  for  ordinary  traffic  only  60  yards  from  each  other.
The  dead  were  carried  out  through  the  Sacred  Gate  (Theophrastus,
Characters^  14),  just  as  in  Burma  and  Laos  the  dead  are  carried  out
through  a  particular  gate  in  the  city  wall,  which  is  hence  called  *  the
Gate  of  Sorrow '  or  *  the  Gate  of  the  Dead '  (Sangermanno,  Burmese
Empire^  p.  143;  E.  Aymonier,  Notes  sur  le  Laos^  p.  253).  Dr.
Dorpfeld,  however,  believes  that  this  supposed  Sacred  Gate  to  the
south-west  of  the  Dipylum  was  not  a  gate  at  all,  but  only  an  opening  in
the  wall  for  the  passage  of  the  water  of  the  brook  Eridanus  {MittkeiL
d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  13  (1888),  p.  214;  /V.,  14  (1889),  p.  414  sq,  ;
as  to  the  Eridanus,  see  note  on  i.  19.  5).

Between  the  Dipylum  and  the  supposed  Sacred  Gate  remains  of  the
old  city-wall,  or  rather  of  two  such  walls,  an  inner  wall  and  an  outer
wall,  are  still  standing.  The  inner  wall  consists  of  two  rows  of  well
cut,  well  jointed  polygonal  blocks  of  a  fine  blue  limestone  set  up  on
their  narrow  edges  and  enclosing  between  them  a  core  of  rubble.  The
wall  is  only  2.40  metres  (7  feet  10  inches)  thick.  Its  upper  portion
was  probably  constructed  originally  of  unbumt  bricks,  like  the  walls  of
Mantinea  and  other  Greek  fortresses  (see  note  on  viii.  8.  7) ;  but  it
appears  that  at  a  later  time  it  was  strengthened  by  the  placing  of  large
blocks  upon  the  socle  of  polygonal  stones.  The  outer  wall,  built  at  a
later  period  for  the  sake  of  strengthening  the  original  inner  wall,  is
4.30  metres  (about  14  feet)  thick,  and  is  composed  of  an  outer  and
inner  facing  of  regularly  cut  blocks  of  conglomerate,  the  intermediate
space  being  filled  with  earth :  only  the  lower  part  of  the  wall  is
preserved.  Such  are  the  remains  of  the  city- walls  between  the  Dipylum
and  the  Sacred  Gate.  But  beyond  the  Sacred  Gate  both  walls,  the
inner  and  the  outer,  are  prolonged  to  the  south-west  for  about  40  yards
as  far  as  the  slope  of  the  rocky  eminence  on  which  stands  the  chapel
of  St.  Athanasius.  Here  both  walls  come  to  an  end,  the  rocky  slope
having  been  apparently  judged  a  sufficient  natural  defence.  In  this
part,  between  the  Sacred  Gate  and  the  hill  of  St.  Athanasius,  both  walls
are  standing  to  a  greater  height  than  in  the  part  between  the  Sacred
Gate  and  the  Dipylum.  Of  the  inner  wall  seven  or  eight  courses  are
standing  to  a  height  of  4  metres  (13  feet).  Its  lower  part  is  built  of
large  polygonal  blocks  of  limestone,  the  interstices  being  filled  with
smaller  stones.     Its  upper  part,  being  built  of  large  blocks  of  all  sorts,


CH.  II  THE  DJPYLUM  45

including  pieces  of  columns  and  two  seats  of  a  theatre,  is  clearly  a  later
restoration  :  it  may  have  been  constructed  by  the  Athenians  at  the  same
time  that  they  were  repairing  the  breach  which  Sulla  made  in  the  wall
between  the  Sacred  Gate  and  the  Dipylum.  The  outer  wall  is  here  9
metres  (about  30  feet)  distant  from  the  inner  wall.  It  is  built  of  quad-
rangular blocks  of  conglomerate  and  is  in  part  preserved  to  a  height
of  no  less  than  sixteen  courses,  of  which,  however,  the  four  top  courses
seem  to  have  formed  a  parapet  In  the  inner  wall,  immediately  to  the
west  of  the  tower  which  flanks  the  supposed  Sacred  Gate  on  the  south-
west, there  is  a  small  postern  gate.  It  may  be  the  little  gate  in  the
Ceramicus  mentioned  by  Isaeus  (vi.  20)  at  which  wine  was  sold.

In  the  opposite  direction,  namely  to  the  north-east  from  the  Dipylum,
the  inner  and  the  outer  walls  can  be  traced  for  distances  respectively
of  about  55  and  40  yards.  The  inner  wall  is  here  constructed  just  like
the  piece  between  the  Dipylum  and  the  Sacred  Gate ;  but  the  outer  wall
is  here  very  ruinous.

With  regard  to  the  dates  at  which  these  walls  and  gates  were  built
it  seems  that  the  supposed  Sacred  Gate  and  the  lower,  polygonal  part
of  the  inner  wall  belong  to  the  oldest  fortification  of  Athens,  namely
the  one  carried  out  by  Themistocles  soon  after  the  Persian  wars.  The
Dipylum,  a  somewhat  later  structure,  was  probably  built  by  Pericles.
As  to  the  date  of  the  outer  wall,  opinions  have  varied  greatly.  Prof
Adler  placed  it  in  the  age  of  Justinian ;  Lieut,  von  Alten  in  the  age
of  Pericles.  Perhaps  the  most  probable  view  is  that  of  Prof.  C.
Wachsmuth,  that  it  was  built  in  the  Macedonian  period  at  a  time
when  the  great  advance  in  the  art  of  military  engineering,  particularly
in  the  construction  of  formidable  battering  machines,  necessitated  the
strengthening  of  the  old  walls  of  Themistocles.

A  boundary  -  stone  bearing  the  inscription  "Boundary  of  the
Ceramicus"  (C.  /.  A,  iL  No.  iioi)  stands  in  its  original  position
against  the  outer  face  of  the  inner  wall,  between  the  Dipylum  and  the
Sacred  Gate,  about  10  feet  from  the  square  tower  which  flanked  the
Dipylum  on  the  south-west.  The  inscription  is  repeated  twice  on
opposite  sides  of  the  stone :  the  letters  are  arranged  perpendicularly,
one  above  the  other.  From  the  character  of  the  letters  it  would  seem
that  the  inscription  belongs  to  the  first  half  of  the  second  century  B.C.
The  base  and  lower  part  of  another  boundary-stone  were  found  in  a
corresponding  position  on  the  north  side  of  the  Dipylum  ;  but  the  upper
part,  with  the  inscription,  was  lost  (JI/aaKTiKa  t^s  'Apx-  'Eraip.,  June
1873 — June  1874,  p.  15  ^Q')

See  HpcucTtKa  t^s  *Kp^io\,  ^Eraiptas,  June  1871 — June  1872,  p.
8  JS7^. ;  id.,  June  1872 — June  1873,  p.  15  sgg, ;  id.,  June  1873 — June
1874,  p.  9  sgg.;  id,,  June  1874 — Dec.  1875,  p.  13  j^^. ;  id.,  1879
(pub.  1880),  p.  7  sgg. ;  Archdologische  Zeitung,  32  (1875),  p.  157  sqq.  ;
G.  von  Alten,  *  Die  Thoranlagen  bei  der  Hagia  Triada,*  Mittheil.  d.  arch.
Inst  in  Athen,  3  (1878),  pp.  28-48;  MilchhSfer,  'Athen,'  pp.  146  sq.,
149,  160  ;  Lolling,  *  Athen,'  p.  303  sq. ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,
p.  6  sqq. ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen,  2.  pp.  199-202,  209-212,
216-224.


46  THE  POMPEIUM  .  bk.  i.  attica

2.  4-  a  building  for  the  getting  ready  of  the  processionfl.  This
was  the  building  called  the  Pompeium  (IIo/Aircibv  from  vofjarq  '  a  proces*
sion ').  It  contained  a  bronze  statue  of  Socrates  by  Lysippus  (Diogenes
Laertius,  ii.  5.  43),  and  was  adorned  with  paintings,  including  portraits
of  Isocrates  ([Plutarch,]  KiV.  X.  OraL  iv.  p.  839  c)  and  the  comedians
(Pliny,  N,  H,  xxxv.  1 40).  Some  part  of  it,  perhaps  a  colonnade,  was
open  to  the  public ;  for  Diogenes  the  Cynic  seems  to  have  passed  his  time
partly  in  the  Pompeium  and  partly  in  the  colonnade  of  Zeus  (Diogenes
Laertius,  vi.  2.  22).  In  a  time  of  scarcity  com  was  distributed  in  the
Pompeium  (Demosthenes,  xxxiv.  39,  p.  918).  The  building  is  mentioned
in  an  inscription  (C.  /.  A,  ii.  No.  834  c,  line  20,  p.  531).  Leake  thought
{Athens^  i.  p.  108  note  4)  that  the  potnpeia^  or  gold  and  silver  vessels  used
in  the  processions  (Thucydides,  ii.  13;  Diodorus,  xii.  40),  were  kept  in
the  Pompeium.  But  this  seems  unlikely.  They  were  probably  kept  for
safety  on  the  Acropolis  with  the  rest  of  the  sacred  treasures.  It  has  been
plausibly  conjectured  that  the  large  quadrangular  building  of  which  the
foundations,  constructed  of  large  blocks  of  Piraeic  limestone,  are  still
to  be  seen  just  inside  of  the  city- wall,  between  the  Dipylum  and  the
supposed  Sacred  Gate,  may  have  been  the  Pompeium.  Its  north-west
angle  cuts  into  the  inner  of  the  two  parallel  city-walls,  a  little  to  the
south-west  of  the  Dipylum.  The  building  seems  to  have  been  divided
into  three  aisles.  See  von  Alten,  in  MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^
3  (1878),  p.  47  ;  B.  Schmidt,  Die  Thorfrage  in  der  Topographie
Athens^  p.  21  5qq,\  MilchhSfer,  *Athen,*  p.  161;  Lolling,  *Athen,'
p.  3 1 2  sq.  The  mention  of  the  Pompeium  close  to  the  gate  by  which
Pausanias  entered  Athens  is  another  reason  for  believing  that  that  gate
was  the  Dipylum.  For  the  Pompeium  would  naturally  be  at  the
Dipylum,  since  processions  would  no  doubt  commonly  pass  through  the
chief  gate.

2.  4.  a  temple  of  Demeter  with  images  etc  This  was  probably
the  laccheum  or  sanctuary  of  lacchus  at  which  a  grandson  of  the  great
Aristides  earned  a  precarious  livelihood  by  interpreting  dreams,  which
he  did  by  means  of  a  board  or  diagram  (Plutarch,  ArisHdes^  27).  The
place  was  indeed  a  favourite  resort  of  dream-interpreters,  who  sat  here
with  their  boards  in  front  of  them  and  charged  two  drachms  (is.  4d.)
for  a  consultation  (Alciphron,  iii.  59).  These  fellows  would  naturally
choose  some  frequented  thoroughfare  in  which  to  ply  their  trade,  and
there  was  probably  no  busier  street  in  Athens  than  the  one  which  led
from  the  Dipylum  to  the  market-place.  As  to  lacchus,  see  Stephani  in
Compte  Rendu  (St  Petersburg)  for  1859,  p.  39  sqq, ;  Preller,  Ausge*
wdhlte  Aufsdtzey  ^^^  1^1  sq.

2.  4*  h^  inscriivtion  in  Attic  letters  on  the  wall  declares  that
they  are  works  of  Praxiteles.  These  three  statues  of  Demeter,
Proserpine,  and  lacchus  by  Praxiteles  are  mentioned  by  Clement  of
Alexandria  {ProtrepL  iv.  62,  p.  54  ed.  Potter).  The  statue  of  lacchus
seems  to  have  been  the  most  admired  of  the  three,  for  Cicero  asks  "  What
would  the  Athenians  take  in  exchange  for  the  marble  statue  of  lacchus  ?  **
(/«  Verrem^  iv.  60).  The  "  Attic  letters  "  of  the  inscription  are  the  letters
of  the  old  Attic  alphabet  of  eighteen  letters  which  was  officially  abolished


CH.  II  THE  ELDER  PRAXITELES  47

in  the  archonship  of  Euclides  (403-402  B.C.)   in  &vour  of  the  Ionic
alphabet  of  twenty-four  letters.     At  Olympia  Pausanias  remarked  an  in-
scription in  the  old  Attic  alphabet  (vi.  19.  6).    Characteristic  of  the  Ionic,
as  distinguished  from  the  Attic  alphabet,  was  the  use  of  symbols  for  the
long  €  (H)  and  long  6  (fl)  and  of  single  letters  for  the  two  double  con-
sonants H  and  "^P",  which  in  the  Attic  alphabet  were  represented  by
double  letters  (X2  and  ^2).     The  forms  of  some  of  the  letters  were
also  different.     The  Ionic  alphabet  had  been  more  or  less  in  private  use
at  Athens  since  the  time  of  the  Persian  wars  ;  but  in  public  inscriptions
the  old  Attic  alphabet  was  retained  till  403-402  B.C.,  when  the  new  or
Ionic  alphabet  was  officially  adopted  and  the  old  laws  were  transcribed
in  it     Hence  all  public  inscriptions  of  Athens  are  divided  into  two
groups,  according  as  they  date  from  before  or  after  the  archonship  of
Euclides.     See  KirchhofT,  Studien  zur  Geschichte  des  griech.  Alphabets ^^
p.   92  sqq, ;  Curtius,  Griech,  Geschichte^^  3.  pp.  48  sq.^  736.     Now  as
the  new  alphabet  was  finally  adopted  in  403-402  B.c,  and  the  beginning
of  Praxiteles's  artistic  activity  can  hardly  be  placed  earlier  than  364  B.C.
(Pliny,  N.  H,  xxxiv.  50  ;  v.  Brunn,  Gesch.  d.  griech.  Kiinstler^  i.  p.  336  ;
Overbeck,  Gesch.  d.  griech.  Plastik^^  2.  p.  37),  it  is  very  remarkable  that
an  inscription  attached  to  one  of  his  works  should  be  written  in  the  old
alphabet.     The  clue  to  explain  the  difficulty  is  probably  furnished  by
the  fact  noticed  by  Pausanias  that  the  inscription  was  carved,  not  on
the  base  of  the  statue,  but  on  the  wall.     For  it  was  the  regular  custom
with  Greek  sculptors,  when  they  signed  their  works,  to  carve  their  names
on  the  pedestals  of  the  statues.     Hence  in  the  present  case  the  inscrip-
tion on  the  wall  was  probably  not  by  the  hand  of  the  sculptor  himself.
Now  we  know  that  the  use  of  the  old  Attic  alphabet  was  revived  in
Hadrian's  time  and  employed  in  inscriptions  in  temples.     Hence  we
may  suppose  that  the  inscription  seen  by  Pausanias  on  the  wall  was  a
sort  of  ticket  or  label  put  up  for  the  benefit  of  tourists,  especially  Roman
tourists,  who  swarmed  in  Greece  from  the  first  century  a.d.  onward,  and
who  would  often  be  more  impressed  by  the  name  of  a  famous  artist  than
by  his  work.     If  this  explanation,  which  is  due  to  Prof.   K5hler,  is
correct,  the  inscription  must  have  been  put  up  shortly  before  Pausanias's
time ;  and  if  so  we  have  here  a  fresh  proof  that  his  descriptions  were
based  on  personal  observation,  not  copied  from  books  centuries  old.    See
U.  Kohler,  *  Praxiteles  der  altere,*  Mittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  9
(1884),  p.  78  sqq.     Prof  W.  Klein  proposed  to  explain  the  inscription
in  a  different  way.     He  held  that  the  Praxiteles  referred  to  was  not  the
famous  sculptor  of  that  name,  but  an  older  artist,  probably  the  grand-
father of  the  great  Praxiteles  (cp.  Critical  Note  on  v.  20.  2).     To  this
older  Praxiteles  Prof.  Klein  would  assign  a  number  of  works  which  have
hitherto  been  attributed  to  his  great  namesake  (see  notes  on  L  40.  3 ;
i.  44.  2  ;  viii.  9.  i  ;  ix.  2.  7 ;  ix.  11.  6).    See  W.  Klein,  in  Archaeolog,-
epigrapJUsche  Mittheilungen  aus  Oesterreich^  4  (1880),  p.  5  sqq.     But
the  classical  writers  betray  no  knowledge  of  an  older  Praxiteles,  and  the
only  ground  for  assuming  his  existence  is  the  inscription  here  noticed  by
Pausanias,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  may  be  explained  quite  differently.
Indeed  Prof.  Kohler  has  given  plausible  reasons  for  holding  that  the


48  THE  ELDER  PRAXITELES  BK.  I.  attica

three  statues  of  Demeter,  Proserpine,  and  lacchus  could  not  have  been
made  by  a  supposed  older  Praxiteles,  but  must  have  been  made  by  the
great  sculptor  of  that  name.  For  these  statues  may  well  be  the  ones
dedicated  by  the  physician  Mnesitheus  (Paus.  L  37.  4).  Now  Mnesi-
theus  appears  to  have  been  a  contemporary  of  the  comic  poet  Alexis,
who  was  a  younger  contemporary  of  Praxiteles  (Athenaeus,  x.  p.  4 1 9  c  ;
G.  Knaack,  in  Hermes^  18  (1883),  p.  148).  See  Kohler,  Lc.  The
hypothesis  of  an  older  Praxiteles,  based  on  the  present  passage  of  Pau-
sanias,  was  rightly  rejected  by  Profl  v.  Brunn  {Sitzungsberkhte  of  the
Bavarian  Academy  (Munich),  Philos.  philolog.  CL,  1880,  pp.  435-454),
and  apparently  by  Mr.  A.  S.  Murray  {History  of  Greek  Sculpture^  2.
p.  249  sqq,^  On  the  other  hand  it  is  accepted  by  Prof.  Overbeck
(Gesch.  d.  griech.  Plastik^^  i.  p.  498  5qq,\  Mr.  E.  Kroker  {Gleich-
namige  griechische  Kiinstler^  pp.  45-49),  Mr.  E.  Loewy  {Untersuchungen
zur  griech.  KUnstlergesckichte^  p.  4),  and  Profl  C.  Robert  {Archdolo-
gische  Mdrchen^  p.  1 56).  Prof.  Furtwangler  has  recently  extended  the
hypothesis  still  further  by  making  the  supposed  elder  Praxiteles  a  pupil
of  Phidias  and  assigning  to  him  the  great  bronze  statue  of  Athena  (com«
monly  known  as  Champion  Athena)  on  the  Acropolis,  as  well  as  a  con-
siderable number  of  existing  works  of  ancient  art,  including  one  of  the
colossal  equestrian  statues  of  the  Dioscuri  on  the  Quirinal  (Monte
Cavallo)  at  Rome  (Friederichs-Wolters,  Gipsabgiissey  Nos.  1270,  1271  ;
a  Latin  inscription  on  the  statue  declares  it  to  be  a  work  of  Praxiteles).
See  Furtwangler,  Meisterwerke  cL  griech,  Plastik^  pp.  45  sqq,^  128-143  ;
and  the  note  on  i.  28.  2.

2.  4.  Poseidon  on  horseback  hurling  a  spear  at  the  giant
Polybotes  etc.  The  story  was  that  Poseidon  with  his  trident  had  rent
a  piece  from  the  island  of  Cos  and  hurled  it  at  the  giant  Polybotes,
burying  him  under  it,  and  forming  the  island  of  Nisyrus  ofif  Cos  (Strabo,
X.  p.  489 ;  Apollodorus,  i.  6.  2  ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  sro,  ^uTvpo% ;
Eustathius,  Comment  on  Dionysius  Periegetes^  525).  On  vase-paintings
the  combat  of  Poseidon  with  a  giant  is  often  depicted.  Poseidon  is
always  represented  on  foot,  not,  as  in  the  statue  described  by  Pausanias,
on  horseback.  In  his  right  hand  he  wields  a  trident,  and  in  his  left  he
holds  a  rock  ready  to  hurl  at  his  adversary.  On  red-figured  vases  the
rock  is  sometimes  depicted  as  an  island  (Nisyrus)  with  plants  and
animals  on  it.  In  two  of  these  vase-paintings  Poseidon  wields  a  spear
instead  of  a  trident  Poseidon's  adversary  is  always  represented  in  full
human  form ;  on  two  of  the  vases  he  is  named  Polybotes,  on  one  he  is
called  Ephialtes,  on  the  rest  he  is  nameless.  See  Overbeck,  Griech,
Kunstmythologie^  3.  pp.  328-331;  M.  Mayer,  Die  Giganten  und
Titaneny  pp.  316-319;  Baumeister's  Denkmdlery  p.  595,  fig.  637;
'E^/i€/)is  apx^ioXoyiKiJ,  1886,  p.  86  sqq,y  with  pL  7  No.  2.

But  on  an  ancient  gem  Poseidon  is  represented  on  horseback  with
a  spear  raised  to  strike  the  giant.  Poseidon's  horse  is  rearing,  and  the
giant  is  under  his  feet.  See  Miiller-Wieseler,  Denkmaler,  2.  pi.  vii.
No.  78  a;  Overbeck,  op.  ciL  3.  p.  333,  Gemmentafel  iii.  No.  i  ;  Mayer,
op.  cit,  p.  395,  fig.  3.  Similarly  on  two  bronze  phalerae  (ornaments
for  horses),  which  were  found  in  the  south  of  Russia,  Poseidon  is  mounted


CH.  II  POSEIDON  AND  POLYBOTES  49

on  a  rearing  horse  and  is  armed  with  a  trident,  with  which  he  is  fighting
the  giant.  A  sea-dragon  attends  Poseidon  and  aids  him  in  the  fight.
See  Stephani,  in  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1865,  p.  172  j^.,
Atlas  V.  Nos.  5  and  6.  Thus  on  the  gem  and  on  the  phalerae  Poseidon
appears  in  the  same  attitude  as  in  the  group  of  sculpture  described  by
Pausanias.  But  between  the  scene  as  depicted  on  the  gem  and  the
scene  as  depicted  on  the  phalerae  there  is  this  difference  that  whereas
on  the  phalerae  the  giant  is  depicted  in  full  human  form,  armed  with
breast-plate  and  shield,  on  the  gem  his  lower  limbs  are  serpentine.  The
combat  between  Poseidon  and  the  giant  is  similarly  represented  in  a
terra-cotta  group  and  on  about  fifty  "serpent-pillars"  \Schlangensdulen\
all  of  which  were  found  in  the  valley  of  the  Rhine ;  on  all  of  them  the
giant's  lower  limbs  are  serpentine  (Mayer,  op,  cit  p.  389  5q,\  K.
Tiimpel,  in  Philologus^  50  (189 1),  p.  622).

In  which  of  these  two  ways  was  Poly  botes  represented  in  the  group
of  statuary  at  Athens  ?  in  full  human  form  ?  or  with  serpentine  lower
limbs  ?  In  the  Gallic  and  German  provinces  of  the  Roman  empire,  nearly
fifty  examples  have  been  found  of  what  are  called  'giant-pillars'  or
*  serpent-pillars.*  They  represent  a  rider  in  Roman  armour  vanquish-
ing a  serpent-footed  giant.  Mr.  Kopp  has  argued  plausibly  that  they
all  represent  the  emperor  Caligula  in  the  character  of  Poseidon,  and  are
copies  of  a  group  of  statuary  which  may  have  been  set  up  in  one  of  the
chief  cities  of  Gaul  to  commemorate  his  ridiculous  victory  over  the  ocean
(Suetonius,  Caligula^  46).  If  this  view  is  correct,  we  may  assume  that
the  group  of  statuary  of  which  these  *  giant-pillars  *  are  copies  was
itself  a  copy  of  some  famous  group  which  may  very  well  have  been  the
one  at  Athens  which  Pausanias  here  describes.  See  Jahrbuch  d.  k,
deulsch.  archdolog,  Instituts,  5  (1890),  Archdologischer  Anzeiger^  pp.
63-65  ;  K.  Tiimpel,  in  Philologus^  50  (1891),  p.  622  sq.  Hence  it
would  follow  that  in  the  Athenian  group  Polybotes  was  represented  with
serpentine  lower  limbs.  Further,  if  Mr.  Kopp's  view  is  right,  it  becomes
probable  that  the  inscription  which  Pausanias  saw,  and  which,  as  we
infer  from  his  words,  had  replaced  the  original  inscription,  described  the
statue  as  a  portrait  of  Caligula  in  the  act  of  victory.  In  this  case
Pausanias  refers  to  the  bad  emperor  without  naming  him,  just  as  in  one
passage  he  refers  to  Nero  without  naming  him  (ii.  i.  5).  Elsewhere,
however,  he  mentions  both  Caligula  and  Nero  (see  ix.  27.  3  and  Index,
i.v,  *  Nero ').  The  practice  of  altering  the  inscriptions  on  old  statues  so
as  to  pass  off  the  statues  for  portraits  of  modem  men  was  common
ander  the  empire.     See  i.  1 8.  3  note.

Mr.  K-  Tiimpel  has  tried  to  show  that  the  Athenian  group  of
Poseidon  and  Polybotes  was  no  other  than  "  the  monument  of  Brasilas  "
mentioned  by  Theocritus  (vii.  i  o  sq^  He  argues  that  the  name  Brasilas
(Bpcurt-Xas)  meant  *  rock  -  shatterer,'  *  earth-shaker,'  and  was  a  title
applied  to  Poseidon  in  Cos,  where  the  scene  of  Theocritus's  seventh  poem
seems  to  be  laid  (see  Mr.  W.  R.  Paton,  in  Classical  Review^  2  (1888),
p.  265).  He  supposes  that  the  monument  was  originally  set  up  in  Cos
to  commemorate  the  local  legend  of  Poseidon  and  Polybotes,  and  was
transferred  to  Athens  about  the  middle  of  the  third  century  B.c.     These

VOL.  11  E


so  HOUSE  OF  PULYTION  bk.  i.  attica

and  other  equally  rash  speculations  on  the  Coan  legend  and  worship  of
Poseidon  are  set  forth  by  Mr.  Tiimpel  in  two  articles,  *  Poseidon-Brasilas
von  Kos  in  Athen,'  Rheinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  46  (189 1),  pp.  528-551  ;
and  *  Die  Enchelys  von  Kos  im  Poseidon- Poly botes-Kampf,'  Philologus^
50  (189 1 ),  pp.  621-636.

2.  4*  OoloniuuleB  run  from  the  gate  to  the  Oeramiciis.  Hime-
rius  tells  us  {Or.  iii.  12)  that  at  the  Panathenaic  festival  the  procession
of  the  Sacred  Ship  passed  from  the  city  gate  along  a  straight,  smooth
street  lined  on  either  side  with  colonnades  under  which  the  Athenians
and  strangers  bought  and  sold.  It  is  doubtful  whether  this  colonnade-
lined  street  is  the  one  described  by  Pausanias  or  not.  The  street
described  by  Himerius  can  hardly  be  the  one  leading  from  the  Dipylum
to  the  market-place ;  for  Himerius  seems  to  describe  it  as  descending
from  the  gate  into  the  interior  of  the  city ;  whereas  the  ground  rises
from  the  Dipylum  to  the  market-place,  the  height  of  the  Dipylum  above
the  sea  being  41.8  metres,  while  the  lowest  point  of  the  market-place  is
6 1 .4  metres.  The  slope  of  the  ground  from  the  market-place  to  the
Dipylum  is  attested  in  antiquity  by  the  statement  of  Plutarch  (Sulla^
1 4),  that  in  the  sack  of  Athens  by  Sulla  the  blood  shed  in  the  market-
place filled  the  whole  of  the  Ceramicus  inside  of  the  Dipylum,  and,
according  to  some,  even  flowed  out  through  the  gate  into  the  suburb.
Hence  it  would  seem  either  that  the  streets  described  by  Pausanias
and  Himerius  are  not  the  same  ;  or  that,  if  they  are  the  same,  Pausanias
cannot  have  entered  Athens  by  the  Dipylum.  On  the  other  hand,  it
may  be  said  that  the  Panathenaic  procession  described  by  Himerius
certainly  started  from  the  outer  Ceramicus  (Thucydides,  vi.  57  ;  cp.
Philostratus,  Vii,  Soph.  ii.  i.  7),  and  that  the  natural  gate  by  which  to
enter  the  city  from  the  outer  Ceramicus  would  seem  to  be  the  Dipylmn.
See  the  question  discussed  by  Professor  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt
Athen^  i.  p.  193  sqq.  As  to  the  sense  in  which  Pausanias  uses  the
name  Ceramicus,  see  note  on  i.  3.  i.

2.  5.  the  house  of  Pulytion,  in  which,  they  say,  some  illustrious
Athenians  etc.  Pausanias  refers  to  Alcibiades  and  some  of  his  boon-
companions  who  were  accused  of  having  parodied  the  Eleusinian
mysteries  in  a  sort  of  private  theatricals,  Alcibiades  playing  the  part  of
hierophant,  and  Pulytion  that  of  torch -bearer  (Thucydides,  vi.  28  ;
Plutarch,  Alcibiades^  19).  Andocides  (i.  12  and  14)  and  Isocrates
(xvi.  6)  confirm  the  statement  that  the  representation  took  place  in  the
house  of  Pulytion,  which  seems  to  have  been  proverbial  for  its  magnifi-
cence (Plato,  EryxiaSy  pp.  394  c,  400  b).

2.  5.  Dionysus the  MinstreL     The  worship  of  Dionysus  the

Minstrel  was  cared  for  by  two  priests,  each  of  whom  had  an  inscribed
seat  reserved  for  him  in  the  theatre  of  Dionysus  ;  one  of  these  priests
was  chosen  from  the  family  of  the  Eunids ;  the  other  from  the  guild,
partly  religious,  partly  theatrical,  called  "the  artists  of  Dionysus"
(C.  /.  A.  iii.  Nos.  274,  278).  We  know  from  Athenaeus  (v.  p.  212  d  e)
that  "  the  artists  of  Dionysus "  had  a  precinct  in  which  sacrifices  and
libations  were  offered.  This  precinct  may  perhaps  be  identical  with
the  sanctuary  of  Minstrel  Dionysus  here  mentioned  by  Pausanias,  and


CH.  II  OFFERING  OF  EUBUUDES  51

with  "  the  Council  House  of  the  artists "  (of  Dionysus)  which,  as  we
learn  from  Philostratus  {Vit,  Soph.  ii.  8.  4),  was  situated  beside  the
gate  of  the  Ceramicus.  As  to  the  "  artists  of  Dionysus,"  see  O.  Liiders,
Die  dionysischen  JCuns/Ier  (Berliriy  1873);  cp.  U.  Kohler,  in  MittheiL
d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  9  (1884),  pp.  288-298.  As  to  the  family  of  the
Eunids,  see  J.  TbpfTer,  Attische  Genealogie^  pp.  181-206.

2.  5.  Healing  Athena.  One  of  the  five  divisions  of  the  altar  at
Oropus  was  sacred  to  Healing  Athena,  together  with  Jason  and  Health
(s€»  L  34.  3).  Sometimes  Athena  was  herself  sumamed  Health  (see  i.
23.  4;  L  31.  6).  The  head  of  the  statue  of  Healing  Athena,  here
mentioned  by  Pausanias,  has  perhaps  been  found.     See  next  note.

2.  5.  the  work  and  offering  of  Eubulides.  From  the  way  in
which  Pausanias  expresses  himself,  it  is  not  certain  whether  he  meant
to  say  that  the  whole  group  of  statues  or  only  the  statue  of  Apollo  was
made  and  dedicated  by  Eubulides  ;  but  probably  he  meant  the  latter.
The  reading  of  the  passage  is,  however,  somewhat  uncertain.  See  the
Critical  Note.

In  1837  there  were  discovered  at  Athens  certain  ancient  remains
which  by  some  scholars  are  supposed  to  have  formed  part  of  the  work
here  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  The  remains  were  found  in  digging  the
foundations  of  Dr.  Treiber's  house,  which  stands  at  the  west  end  of  the
modem  Hermes  Street,  immediately  to  the  west  of  the  church  of  the
Asomatos,  opposite  the  railway  station.  The  site  is  150  metres  south-
east of  the  Dipylum  gate.  The  remains  comprised  a  portion  of  a
pedestal  or  basement  built  of  large  squared  blocks  of  stone  (not  marble).
It  was  not  fully  excavated,  and  the  place  is  now  built  over ;  but  so  far
as  it  could  be  seen  the  basement  was  8  metres  long,  and  consisted  of
two  steps,  each  25  centimetres  high,  supporting  two  blocks  of  the
pedestal  proper.  There  were  also  found  at  the  same  time  and  in  the
same  place  the  colossal  marble  head  of  a  woman  with  long  hair  bound
in  a  knot  behind  the  neck,  and  a  torso  of  a  colossal  female  statue  of
good  workmanship ;  also  two  male  portrait-heads  of  Roman  date.
Further,  there  was  found  a  large  block  of  Hymettian  marble,  28
centimetres  high  and  1.06  metre  long,  bearing  in  large  letters  an  inscrip-
tion which  can  be  restored  with  certainty  as  follows  {C,  /.  A,  ii.  No.

1645):

[Evj^ovXtSr^S  Eir|x€t/)OS  K/3(i>7ri8rys  tiroirjo'iv

«  Eubulides,  son  of  Eucheir,  belonging  to  the  township  of  Cropia,  made
(the  statue  or  statues)."  The  stone  seems  to  have  formed  part  of  a
frieze.  Furthermore,  in  1874  there  was  discovered  in  the  same  place  a
colossal  female  head  of  Pentelic  marble.  From  the  way  in  which  the
top  is  cut  away,  it  appears  that  the  head  wore  a  helmet ;  it  probably
represented  Athena.

From  the  length  of  the  pedestal  it  is  certain  that  it  must  have
supported  not  a  single  statue,  but  a  group  of  statuary;  and  to  this
group  probably  belonged  the  head  of  Athena  as  well  as  the  other  colossal
fiemale  head  and  the  female  torso.  The  two  male  portrait-heads  had
probably  nothing  to  do  with  the  pedestal     Further,  it  may  be  fairly


52  OFFERING  OF  EUBULIDES  bk.  i.  attica

assumed  that  the  inscription  refers  to  the  group  of  statuary  which
occupied  the  pedestal,  or  at  least  to  some  portion  of  it  That  this  group
was  no  other  than  the  one  here  described  by  Pausanias  has  been  inferred
by  some  distinguished  scholars,  as  L.  Ross,  £.  Curtius,  A.  Milchhofer,
and  others.  But  there  is  a  difficulty  in  the  way  of  this  identification.
For  Pausanias  says  that  Eubulides  not  only  made  but  dedicated  the
statue  or  statues ;  but  the  inscription  records  only  the  making  of  the
statue  or  statues  by  Eubulides,  and  makes  no  mention  of  the  dedication.
This  objection  would,  in  my  opinion,  be  fatal  to  the  identification  if  it
were  certain  that  the  inscription,  as  restored  above,  is  complete.  But
of  this  we  cannot  be  sure.  It  is  true  that  on  the  stone  there  is  a  blank
space  of  .24  metre  at  the  end  of  the  inscription,  which  seems  to  show
that  the  inscription  ended  here ;  but  it  may  have  been  continued  in  the
line  below.  Pausanias's  statement  that  the  statue  or  group  was  dedicated
by  Eubulides  must  certainly  have  been  derived  from  the  inscription ;
and  since  the  inscription,  as  we  have  it,  says  nothing  about  the  dedi-
cation, we  are  not  justified  in  identifying  the  statue  or  statues  to  which
it  refers  with  one  or  more  of  the  statues  here  mentioned  by  Pausanias.
If  the  identification  were  made  out,  it  would  be  a  strong  argimient  in
favour  of  the  view  that  Pausanias  entered  Athens  by  the  Dipylum  gate ;
since  the  pedestal  and  the  fragments  of  the  statues  were  found  only  1 50
metres  to  the  south-east  of  that  gate,  on  the  direct  line  between  the  gate
and  the  ancient  market-place,  and  hence  probably  on  the  ancient  street
which  ran  from  the  one  place  to  the  other.  If,  therefore,  Pausanias
entered  by  the  Dipylum  he  most  probably  passed  the  monument  in
question.

From  the  style  of  the  inscription,  it  appears  to  have  been  engraved
about  the  middle  of  the  second  century  B.C.  This  gives  us  approxi-
mately the  date  of  the  sculptor  Eubulides.  A  considerable  number  of
inscribed  bases  of  statues  by  Eubulides  and  his  father  (?)  Eucheir,  or  by
Eubulides  alone,  have  been  found  at  Athens.  See  C.  /.  A,  ii.  Nos.  1 162,
1386,  1 639- 1 646  ;  Loewy,  Inschriften  griech.  Bildhauer^  Nos.  223-229.
The  sculptor  Eucheir  is  mentioned  by  Pausanias  elsewhere  (viii.  14.  10,
with  the  note).  We  should  be  in  a  position  to  judge  of  Eubulides's
artistic  style  if  we  could  be  certain  that  the  two  colossal  female  heads
and  the  female  torso  found  on  the  site  of  Dr.  Treiber's  house  were  by
him.  But  this  is  doubtful.  For  even  admitting  that  the  statues  of  which
these  are  fragments  occupied  the  pedestal  near  which  they  were  found,
and  that  the  inscription  belonged  to  the  same  monument,  it  is  still
uncertain  whether  the  inscription  referred  to  the  whole  group  of  statuary
on  the  pedestal,  or  only  to  one  or  more  figures  in  it.  In  the  latter  case
it  was  probably,  as  Lolling  supposed  (MittheiL  d.  arch,  Inst  in  Athen^
12  (1887),  p.  366),  only  one  of  a  row  of  inscriptions  containing  the
names  of  all  the  sculptors  who  had  modelled  the  various  figures  in  the
group.  If  Lolling  is  right,  we  cannot  tell  whether  the  fragments  of
sculpture  found  on  the  site  are  by  Eubulides  or  by  one  of  his  colleagues.
The  style  of  the  Athena  head  has  been  examined  by  Mr.  Julius  {MiUheiL
d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  7  (1882),  p.  91  sqq^  He  refers  it  to  the  second
century  B.C.,  and  considers  that  it  exhibits  a  mixture  of  two  styles,  an


CH.  II  OFFERING  OF  EUBULIDES  53

older  and  a  younger.  The  older  style  appears,  according  to  him,  in  the
whole  pose  and  composition  of  the  head ;  the  younger  style  in  the
execution,  particularly  in  a  straining  after  softness  and  in  small  realistic
touches  which  are  inconsistent  with  other  parts  and  with  the  composition
as  a  whole.  He  supposes,  therefore,  that  the  artist  worked  with  an
older  model  before  him,  reproducing  it  freely  and  altering  it  under  the
influence  of  the  taste  of  the  day,  which  required  a  softer  and  gentler  type
than  the  austere  type  of  an  earlier  period.  His  conclusion  is  confirmed
by  a  fact  of  which  he  seems  not  to  have  been  aware,  namely,  that  the
head  is  an  exact  replica  of  the  head  of  the  marble  statue  called  the
Athena  of  Velletri,  now  in  the  Louvre  ;  and,  if  Dr.  Wolters  is  right,
both  the  Athena  head  in  question  and  the  Athena  of  Velletri  are  copies
of  a  bronze  original.  See  Friederichs- Wolters,  Gipsabgusse^  No.  1433  ;
and  for  the  Athena  of  Velletri,  see  Miiller-Wieseler,  Denkmdler^  2.  pi.
xix.  Na  204  :  Furtwangler,  Meisterwerke  d,  griech,  PlasHk^  p.  303  sqq.

On  the  whole  subject  of  the  ancient  remains  found  on  the  site  of  Dr.  Treiber's
house,  and  their  supposed  relation  to  the  present  passage  of  Pausanias,  see  L.
Ross's  letter  to  Col.  L^ke,  printed  in  Ross's  ArchdologischeAufsdtze^  I.  pp.  143-157,
and  translated  in  Transcutions  of  the  RoycU  Society  of  Literature  ^  Second  Series,  i.
(1843))  pp.  28-41  ;  Forchhammer,  in  Zeitsckrift  fur  die  Alterthumswissenschaft,
1S38,  pp.  463-468  ;  id,y  Topographie  von  Athene  p.  29  ;  Rangab^,  in  Revue  Archi-
^legiqutj  2  (1845),  p.  429  sq,;  td,y  Antiquitis  HelUniques^  2.  p.  754^^.,  No.  1109  ;
Stei»iani,  in  Rheinisckes  Museum,  N.I*.  4  (1846),  p.  32  j^.;  v.  Brunn,  Gesch,  d,
griech,  Kunstler,  i.  p.  551  sq.\  Schubart,  in  his  German  translation  of  Pausanias,
I.  p.  6  sqq,\  id.,  in  Fleckeisen s  Jahrbiicher,  9  (1863),  pp.  305-307  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,
vffH  Griechenland,  i.  p.  279  note  I ;  G.  Hirschfeld,  m  Archaologische  Zeitung^  30
(1873),  P*  27  J^.;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen,  i.  p.  198  sqr,  B.  Schmidt,
Die  Thoffrage  in  der  Topographic  Athens,  pp.  37-41 ;  Curtius  and  Kaupert,
Atias  von  Athen,  p.  14 ;  Curtius,  StcuUgeschichie,  p.  293 ;  L.  Julius,  '  Die  Reste
des  Denkmales  des  Eubulides,'  MittheiL  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,  7  (1882),  pp.
81-95;  Loewy,  Inschriften griech,  Bildhauer,  No.  228,  p.  167  sqq.;  Milchholer,
•Athen,'  p.  162;  Lolling  and  Wolters,  in  MittheiL  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  12
(1887),  pp.  365-371  ;  Lofiing,  'Athen,*  p.  313;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,
p.  13 ;  W.  Gurlitt,  Ueber  Pausanias,  pp.  264  sq.,  316  sq.;  A.  Milchhofer,  in
Anckdolegische  Studien  H.  Brunn  dargebracht  (Berlin  1893),  p.  44  sqq.

2.  5.  AcratnB,  one  of  Dionysus*  attendant  sprites.  A  bearded
head  of  Acratus,  with  his  name  attached  to  it,  is  painted  on  an  ancient
vase  found  in  the  island  of  Lipara,  and  now  in  the  possession  of  Mr.
James  Stevenson  of  Glasgow  {Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  7  (1886),
pu  55).  Acratus  was  probably  identical  with  the  hero  Acratopotes
(*  drinker  of  neat  wine ')  who,  as  we  learn  from  Polemo,  was  worshipped
at  Munychia  (Athenaeus,  ii.  p.  39  c)*  A  relief  found  in  the  harbour  at
Piraeus  represents  a  young  beardless  man  reclining  on  a  couch  with  a
drinking-horn  in  his  right  hand ;  at  his  feet  is  seated  a  young  woman,
and  three  actresses  (two  of  them  with  masks  in  their  hands)  are  stand-
ing to  the  left  Professor  C.  Robert  conjectures  that  the  reclining  male
figure  is  Acratus  or  Acratopotes.  An  inscription  under  the  relief,
indeed,  calls  the  young  man  Dionysus ;  but  Professor  Robert  thinks  the
inscription  much  later  than  the  relief  See  MittheiL  d,  arch.  Inst,  in
AiJkeny  7  (1882),  pp.  389-395.  His  conjecture  is  not  accepted  by  Prof.
C  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen^  2.  p.  137  note  2.    At  Phigalia  Dionysus


54  AMPHJCTYON  AND  DIONYSUS  bk.  i.  attica

himself  was  sumamed  Acratophorus  (*  bearer  of  neat  wine  *).  See  viii.
39.  6.  Mr.  Maximilian  Mayer  conjectures  that  what  Pausanias  calls
a  face  of  Acratus  was  really  a  mask  of  Dionysus  himself.  There  was
such  a  face  or  mask  of  Dionysus  in  Athens  (Athenaeus,  xii.  p.  533  c),
and  what  Mr.  Mayer  regards  as  a  similar  mask  of  Dionysus,  made  of
stone  and  of  colossal  size,  has  been  found  at  Icaria  in  Attica  {American
Journal  of  Archaeology^  5  (1889),  p.  461  sqq. ;  Mitiheil.  d,  arch,  Inst  in
A  then,  12  (1887),  p.  390).  See  Mr.  Maximilian  Mayer,  in  MittheiL  d,
arch,  Inst  in  Athen^  17  (1892),  pp.  268-270,  4465-^.  But  the  face  of
Dionysus,  found  at  Icaria,  which  Mr.  Mayer  takes  to  have  been  a  mask,
seems  rather  to  have  been  a  piece  of  a  colossal  statue  of  the  god.  See
note  on  i.  33.  8.

2.  5.  Amphictyon feasting  Dionysiis.     According  to  Philo-

chorus,  as  reported  by  Athenaeus  (ii.  p.  38  c),  Amphictyon  learned
from  Dionysus  the  art  of  mixing  water  with  wine  and  founded  an  altar
of  Upright  Dionysus  in  the  sanctuary  of  the  Seasons.  A  number  of
reliefs  have  come  down  to  us  representing  Dionysus  and  his  train
welcomed  by  a  man  who  is  reclining  at  a  table  covered  with  drinking-
vessels  and  fruit.  These  reliefs  are  generally  supposed  to  represent
Icarius  welcoming  Dionysus  to  Attica.  See  Miiller-Wieseler,  Denkmalery
2.  pi.  1.  No.  624;  Daremberg  et  Saglio,  Dictionnaire,  i.  p.  607,  fig.
684;  O.  Jahn,  Archdologische  Beitrdge,  pp.  198-2 11.  Mr.  Maximilian
Mayer  has  suggested  that  the  group  of  clay  figures  here  described  by
Pausanias  was  a  relief  of  this  familiar  type,  and  that  Pausanias  was  mis-
taken in  giving  the  name  of  Amphictyon  instead  of  Icarius  to  the
entertainer  of  the  god  {MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  17  (1892),  p.
265  sqq,)  But  the  figures  described  by  Pausanias  seem  to  have  been,
not  in  relief,  but  in  the  round,  for  he  calls  them  agalmata^  a  word  which
with  him  almost  always,  I  think,  designates  figures  sculptured  in  the
round.      Perhaps  the  only  exception  to  this  rule  is  viii.  48.  4  "Apecos

ayakfia cKTCTwwrai  ftcv  €7ri  onyA^y.     As  to  Pausanias's  use  of  the

word  agalma  see  Schubart,  in  PhilologuSy  24  (1866),  p.  561  sqq,

2.  5.  Pegasus  of  Eleutherae,  who  introduced  the  god  to  the
Athenians.  See  the  scholiast  on  Aristophanes,  Acharm'ans,  243  ;
Lobeck,  Aglaofihamus^  p*  659  sqq.  The  old  wooden  image  of  Dionysus  at
Eleutherae  had  been  brought  thence  to  Athens  (i.  38.  8),  and  seems  to
have  been  preserved  in  a  temple  near  the  theatre  at  Athens  (i.  20.  3
note).

2.  5.  in  the  days  of  Icarius  etc.  See  note  on  i.  33.  8.  As  to
the  ancient  reliefs  which  perhaps  represent  the  reception  of  Dionysus
by  Icarius,  see  above,  note  on  "  Amphictyon feasting  Dionysus."

2.  6.  Amphictyon  got  the  kingdom  thus.  With  the  rest  of  the
chapter  compare  Apollodorus,  iii.  14,  who  agrees  throughout  with
Pausanias,  except  that  he  calls  Cecrops  (not  Actaeus)  the  first  king  of
Attica.

2.  6.  Herse,  Aglaurus,  and  Pandrosus.     See  i.  18.  2.

2.  6.  Erysichthon.  Cp.  i.  18.  5  ;  i.  31.  2.  This  Attic  Erysichthon
must  be  distinguished  from  the  Thessalian  Erysichthon  who  cut  down  a
grove  of  Demeter  and  was  punished  by  the  goddess  with  insatiable


CH.  Ill  THE  CERAMICUS  55

hunger ;  the  mode  in  which  his  daughter  Mestra  contrived  to  find  the
means  of  satisfying  his  hunger  is  a  folk-tale  incident.  See  Tzetzes,
SchoL  an  Lycophrorty  1393  ;  Ovid,  Metam,  viii.  738  sqq,  ;  Callimachus,
Demeter^  25  sqq, ;  W.  Mannhardt,  Antike  Wald-  und  Feldkulte^  p.  8
sqq,\  Th.  Ziehnski,  *  Erysichthon,'  Philologus^  50  (1891),  pp.  137-
162.

3.  I.  the  Oeramicna,  In  classical  Greek  the  name  Ceramicus  was
applied  to  two  quarters  in  the  north-west  part  of  Athens,  one  outside,  the
other  inside  of  the  Dipylum(Harpocrationand  Hesychius,j.z/.  Kepa/zetKos;
Suidas,  s.v,  KepafuiKoC ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Knights^  772  ;  Thucy-
dides,  vi.  57 ;  Plato, Parmenides,  p.  1 27  b ;  Plutarch,  Sulla^  1 4).  The  inner
Ceramicus  extended  from  the  Dipylum  (Plutarch,  I.e.)  to  the  western
ascent  of  the  Acropolis  (Arrian,  Anabasis^  iii.  1 6.  8).  The  inner  Cerami-
cus thus  included  the  market-place  {agora)  which,  as  modem  scholars
are  now  generally  agreed,  lay  to  the  north  of  the  Areopagus  or,  to  be
more  exact,  in  the  low  ground  which  is  bounded  on  the  south  by  the
Areopagus  and  Acropolis,  and  on  the  west  by  the  hill  on  which  the  so-
called  temple  of  Theseus  stands.  The  eastern  boundary  of  the  market-
place is  fixed  with  certainty  by  the  Colonnade  of  Attalus,  the  only
building  of  classical  antiquity  (if  we  except  the  remains  of  the  so-called
Colonnade  of  the  Giants,  a  work  of  very  late  imperial  times)  in  the
maxket-place  which  has  been  as  yet  discovered.  This  colonnade,  the
remains  of  which  were  long  known  as  the  Gymnasium  of  Ptolemy,
was  excavated  by  the  Greek  Archaeological  Society  in  1 860  and  the
following  years.  It  was  identified  as  the  Colonnade  of  Attalus  by  an
inscription  in  large  letters  which  had  occupied  the  epistyle  and  which,
as  restored,  ran  thus  (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  1 170)  :

[B]cur[tA]cv9  "ATrTaXos]  j8aortA[€a>s  'K.rraXov\  koX  B[a]<r[iAi<r](n;s

A7roA.A(i)v[48os  -  -  -  avc^i/Kc^]

'^  King  Attalus,  son  of  king  Attalus  and  of  queen  ApoUonis,  dedicated
(this  colonnade)."  This  Attalus  was  Attalus  II.  king  of  Pergamus
who  reigned  from  159  to  138  B.c.  The  only  ancient  writer  who
mentions  the  colonnade  is  Athenaeus,  who  thus  describes  (v.  p.  212
e  f)  the  scene  in  the  market-place  when  the  philosophical  tyrant
Athenion  (Aristion)  addressed  the  mob:  "The  Ceramicus  was  full
of  citizens  and  strangers,  and  there  was  a  spontaneous  rush  of  the
mob  to  the  public  assembly.  He  made  his  way  forward  with  diffi-
culty, escorted  by  a  guard  of  honour  composed  of  such  as  wished  to
stand  well  with  the  people,  while  every  man  in  the  crowd  struggled  to
touch  if  it  were  only  the  hem  of  his  garment  So  up  he  gets  on  the
pulpit  which  had  been  built  for  the  Roman  generals  in  front  of  the
colonnade  of  Attalus,  and  casting  his  eyes  round  on  the  multitude  spake
as  f<^ows,"  etc  The  colonnade  extends  in  a  direction  nearly  north  and
south  ;  it  was  raised  on  three  steps  and  was  112  metres  long  by  19.43
metres  deep.  The  fe^ade,  which  opened  westward  on  the  market-place,
was  composed  of  two  stories.  On  the  ground  floor  there  was  a  row  of  45
Doric  columns  in  front ;  an  inner  row  of  twenty-two  Ionic  columns  divided


56  THE  CERAMICUS  bk.  i.  attica

the  colonnade  into  two  aisles.  At  the  back  of  the  inner  aisle  was  a  row
of  square  chambers,  which  probably  served  as  magazines  or  warehouses,
while  the  buying  and  selling  went  on  in  the  aisles  of  the  colonnade.
Each  room  opened  into  the  aisle  by  a  door  and  had  two  narrow  windows,
one  above  the  other,  in  the  back  wall.  The  columns  and  facade  were
of  Pentelic  marble ;  the  rest  of  the  building  of  common  stone.  On  the
outer  side  of  the  wall  which  terminates  the  colonnade  on  the  south  there
are  traces  of  a  staircase  which  led  to  the  upper  story.  This  upper  story
seems  to  have  consisted  of  a  single  aisle,  and  not  to  have  extended  over
the  row  of  chambers  at  the  back.  Like  the  lower  story  it  had  45
columns  in  front ;  between  the  columns  of  the  upper  story  ran  a  balus-
trade of  lattice  work,  made  of  Pentelic  marble.  See  Fevtic^  crvvcAcvcrts
T1J9  kv  'A6.  'Apxdf'Ok,  'Eratp.  i860,  p.  8  sgg, ;  t'd.y  1861,  p.  14  sgg,  ;  id,,
1862,  p.  7  sg^,  ;  id,,  1869,  p.  7  sg,  ;  UpaKTiKo.  r,  €v  *A6.  'ApX'Hiok,
^Eraip,  (June  1873 — June  1874),  p.  18  sgg,;  id,  (June  1874 — December
1875),  p.  22  j^. ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stcuit  Athen,  i.  p.  155  sqq, ;  id,
2.  p.  522  sqq.  ;  Fr.  Adler,  Die  Sfaa  des  Konigs  Attalos  II,  zu  A  then
(Berlin,  1875)  ;  R*  Bohn,  Die  Stoa  Konig  Attalos  des  zweiten  zu  Athen
(Berlin,  1882);  Milchhofer,  'Athen,*  p.  167  sq,-,  Miss  Harrison,
Ancient  Athens,  p.  1 7  sqq.

The  market-place  cannot  have  extended  east  of  the  Colonnade  of
Attalus,  since  the  colonnade,  open  on  its  west  side,  is  closed  on  the  east.
This  agrees  with  the  lie  of  the  ground ;  for  behind  the  colonnade  the
ground  begins  gradually  to  rise,  so  that  the  market-place  is  some  23  feet
lower  than  the  Gate  of  Athena  Archegetis,  which  stands  a  little  to  the
east  (see  note  on  i.  18.  9).

It  is  somewhat  remarkable  that  Pausanias  should  not  have  mentioned
so  large  and  notable  a  structure  as  the  Colonnade  of  Attalus.  The
explanation  of  this  omission  may  be  as  follows.  It  would  seem  that  the
market-place  was  divided  into  two  halves,  a  northern  and  a  southern,
which  were  separated  by  a  row  of  statues  of  Hermes  (Harpocration,  s.v,
^Epfiat;  Xenophon,  Hipparchicus,  iii.  2),  and  that  the  northern  half,
which  comprised  the  Colonnade  of  Attalus,  was  given  up  to  trade  and
commerce,  while  the  southern  half  was  the  centre  of  political  life,  most
of  the  important  public  offices  and  state  buildings  being  ranged  round  it
Pausanias's  interest  was  all  in  this  latter  half  of  the  market-place,  and  he
passed  by  the  merely  conunercial  market  without  remark  (see  Wachs-
muth, Athen,  i.  p.  200  sqq, ;  id,,  2.  p.  31 1  ;  Milchhofer,  *  Athen,'  p.  163).

Lastly,  before  taking  up  Pausanias's  description  of  the  market-place
in  detail,  we  must  note  that  in  later  times,  including  the  age  of
Pausanias,  the  name  Ceramicus  seems  to  have  been  especially  applied,
if  not  indeed  restricted,  to  the  market-place  {agora).  This  appears  to
be  the  sense  in  which  the  name  occurs  in  Pausanias  i.  2.  4,  i.  3.  i,
i.  20.  6 ;  Philostratus,  Vit,  sophist,  ii.  8.  i  ;  Lucian,  Jupiter  Tragoedus,
15  (cp.  Demosthenes,  liv.  7,  p.  1258);  Athenaeus,  v.  p.  212  e,  xii.  p.
533  d.  Pausanias  never  speaks  of  the  outer  Ceramicus ;  with  him  the
Ceramicus  is  always  the  market-place.  Greek  writers  of  the  best  period
(fifth  and  fourth  centuries  B.C.)  never  use  the  word  in  this  restricted
sense.


CH.  Ill  THE  ROYAL  COLONNADE  57

On  the  Ceramicus  and  the  market-place  of  Athens  see  K.  O.  MtiUer,  'De
foro  Athenarum,'  Kunstarchaeologische  Werke^  5.  pp.  133-176;  E.  Curtius,
Attische  Studien,  ii  Der  Kerameikos  und  die  Geschichtc  der  Agora  von  A  then
(Gottingen,  1865);  id,^  Gesammelte  Abhandlungen,  i.  p.  339  sgq.;  id,,  Stadt-
guckichtey  p.  1691^^.;  Kaupert,  'Die  Rekonstruktion  der  Agora  des  Kerameikos/
Berliner  pkilolog,  iVochenschrift,  7  (1887),  p.  571  5q,\  K.  Lange,  Hans  und
Halle t  p.  60  s^q.  ;  Milchhofer,  'Athen,*  pp.  150  sq.,  163  sqq,  ;  P.  Weizsacker,
'Die  Beschreibung  des  Marktes  von  Athen  und  die  Enneakrunosepisode  bei
Pausanias,'  Fleckeisen^ s  Jahrbikher,  33  (1887),  pp.  577-612;  Lolling,  'Athen/
p.  313  sqo.  ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  p.  13  sqq.  ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die
Stadt  Athen,  i.  pp.  152-172,  180-182,  199-212 ;  id,,  2.  pp.  305-527.

3.  I.  lias  its  name  from  a  hero  Oeramus.  The  name  Ceramicus
was  more  probably  derived  from  kerameas  *a  potter,*  as  the  author
of  the  Eiymologicum  Magnum  says  (s.v,  Kcpa/MiKosy  p.  504).  The
Ceramicus  may  have  been  originally  the  potters'  quarter  of  Athens.
Cp.  Pliny,  A''.  //.  xxxv.  155.

3.  I.  the  Boyal  Ooloxmade.  As  Pausanias,  coming  from  the  Dipylum,
entered  the  market-place  from  the  north,  the  Royal  Colonnade,  which
he  describes  as  the  first  building  on  the  right,  must  have  been  situated
on  the  west  side  of  the  market-place,  somewhere  at  the  foot  of  the  hill
on  which  the  so-called  Theseum  or  temple  of  Theseus  stands.

Aristotle  tells  us  {Constitution  of  Athens,  7)  that  copies  of  the
laws  of  Solon  engraved  on  tablets  called  kurbeis  were  deposited  in  the
Royal  Colonnade.  Hence  Professor  von  Wilamowitz-Mollendorff  has
inferred  that  the  Royal  Colonnade  was  as  old  as  the  time  of  Solon
{Aus  Kydathen,  p.  208).  But,  if  we  may  trust  the  evidence  of  the
historian  Anaximenes  (a  contemporary  of  Aristotle),  these  copies  of
Solon's  laws  were  originally  kept  in  the  Acropolis  and  were  first  brought
down  to  the  market-place  by  Ephialtes  (Harpocration  and  Suidas,  s,v,  o
KanaOcv  vo/ios).  A  fragment  of  a  pyramidal  stone  bearing  a  mutilated
and  illegible  inscription  was  found  a  few  years  ago  at  the  **  colonnade
of  Hadrian "  in  Athens.  It  has  been  conjectured  that  this  may  be
one  of  the  copies  of  the  laws  of  Solon.  The  style  of  the  letters  is  that
of  the  early  part  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  See  'Y^ifyqfuph  dpxaioXoyLKrj,
1885,  P-  215  sqq,;  C,  L  A.  iv.  No.  559,  p.  125.  (As  to  the  copies
of  the  laws  of  Solon,  see  also  note  on  §  5  of  this  chapter  "  the  Council
House"  and  i.  18.  3  note.)

Beside  or  in  front  of  the  Royal  Colonnade  stood  slabs  inscribed
with  the  terms  on  which  the  Athenians  had  let  out  certain  portions  of
the  Chalcidian  territory  after  their  conquest  of  Chalcis  (Aelian,  Var,
Hist,  vi.  i).  This  conquest  of  Chalcis  was  effected  in  the  age  of
Clisthenes,  about  507  B.c  (Herodotus,  v.  yy).  Hence  Professor  v.
Wilamowitz-Mollendorff  infers  that  the  Royal  Portico  was  at  least  as
old  as  the  time  of  Clisthenes  (Aus  Kydathen,  p.  208).  This  does  not
follow.  A  building  is  not  necessarily  as  old  as  all  the  monuments  in  its
neighbourhood.  The  colonnade  may  have  been  of  later  date  than  the
inscriptions.  In  410  B.C.,  as  we  learn  from  an  inscription  (C  /.  A,  i.
No.  61),  a  copy  of  Draco's  law  on  homicide  was  ordered  to  be  engraved
on  stone  and  set  up  in  front  of  the  Royal  Colonnade.  Further  there  stood
beside  the  Royal  Colonnade  a  stone  upon  which  oaths  were  taken ;  the


58  THE  ROYAL  COLONNADE  bk.  i.  attica

persons  who  swore  stood  upon  the  stone  in  the  act  of  taking  the  oath.
Thus  the  archons,  on  their  appointment,  swore  to  administer  justice  or,
if  they  transgressed,  to  set  up  a  golden  statue  at  Delphi  equal  in
weight  to  the  stone  or  (as  it  has  been  otherwise  understood)  to  the
amount  of  silver  which  they  had  received  as  a  bribe.  Arbitrators  also
swore  upon  this  stone  and  so  did  witnesses  who  denied  that  they  had
any  knowledge  of  a  case.  See  Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens^  7
and  55  ;  Pollux,  viii.  86  ;  Plato,  Phcudrus^  p.  235  d;  Plutarch,  Solon^
25;  Heraclides  Ponticus,  De  rebus  publicise  i.  11,  in  Frag,  Hist,
Graec.y  ed.  Miiller,  2.  p.  209  sq, ;  Harpocration,  s,v,  XCOos ;  C.  Wachs-
muth.  Die  Stadt  A  then,  2.  p.  351  sq.

With  regard  to  the  structure  of  the  Royal  Colonnade  we  know
nothing ;  but  there  seems  no  reason  to  suppose  that  it  differed  from  the
common  type  of  a  Greek  colonnade.  It  has  been  supposed,  indeed,
that  the  Royal  Colonnade  was  a  house,  that  it  had  been  developed  out
of  the  old  royal  palace,  and  that  it  was  in  turn  the  original  of  the
basilicas  of  Christian  times,  the  very  name  basilica  being,  according  to
some,  derived  from  the  name  of  the  Royal  Colonnade  {Stoa  Basileios).
But  though  we  know  that  the  titular  king  sat  in  judgment  in  the
Royal  Colonnade,  we  are  nowhere  told  that  he  lived  there.  Hence
there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  so-called  colonnade  was  in  reality
a  house.  And  with  regard  to  the  supposed  derivation  of  the  name
basilica  from  stoa  basileios,  it  rests  to  some  extent  upon  a  false  reading
in  a  passage  of  Plato  (CkannideSy  p.  153  a  rov  Tr\s  paxriXiiajs  Upov^
where  the  true  reading  is  Bao-tA-rys,  as  we  now  know  from  an  inscription  ;
see  'E(f>rjiJL€pls  dpxaiokoyiKi^y  1884,  p.  161  sqq,  ;  C,  I,  A,  iv.  No.  53  a,
p.  66  sq, ;  cp.  note  on  i.  19.  5).

On  the  Royal  Colonnade  see  v.  Wilamowitz-MSllendorfF,  Aus
Kydathen,  p.  208  sq, ;  K.  Lange,  Haus  und  Halle,  pp.  60-104  ;  Miss
Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  p.  23  sqq, ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  A  then,  2.  pp.
344-352.

3.  I.  where  the  king  sits  during  his  year  of  office.  The  so-
called  king  at  Athens  was  an  annual  magistrate,  to  whom,  on  the
abolition  of  the  monarchy,  was  transferred  the  title,  together  with  some
of  the  functions,  of  the  old  kings.  He  was  one  of  the  nine  archons.
He  superintended  the  sacrifices  and  tried  cases  of  impiety.  In  early
times  he  resided  at  the  Bucolium,  near  the  Prytaneimi.  See  Aristotle,
Constitution  of  Athens,  3  and  5  7.  Socrates,  being  accused  of  impiety,
was  tried  before  the  king  at  the  Royal  Colonnade  (Plato,  Euthyphro^
p.  2  a ;  id,,  Theaetetus,  p.  210  d).

3.  I.  Theseus  hurling  Sciron  into  the  sea.     See  i.  44.  8  note.

3.  I.  Day  carrying  Oephalus.  The  story  of  the  fair  youth
Cephalus  ravished  by  the  goddess  of  Day  {Hemera)  or  of  the  Morning
{Eos,  Aurora)  is  told  by  Apollodorus  (iii.  14.  3)  and  Ovid  {Met.  vii.
700  sqq,)  Cp.  Hesiod,  Theog.  986  sq.  ;  Hyginus,  Fed).  189.  The
rape  is  often  depicted  on  existing  monuments  of  ancient  art,  especially
on  vase-paintings.  On  some  of  them  the  goddess  is  represented
pursuing  her  favourite  ;  in  others  she  is  carrying  him  in  her  arms.  It
seems  clear  from  Pausanias's  words  that  in  the  group  on  the  roof  of  the


CH.  Ill  THE  ROYAL  COLONNADE  59

Royal  Colonnade  the  goddess  was  represented  with  Cephalus  in  her
arms ;  and  it  is  probable  that  her  attitude  was  the  same  in  the  relief  on
the  Amyclaean  throne.  See  iii.  18.  12  ;  O.  Jahn,  *£os  und  Kephalos,'
Archaologische  Beitrdge^  pp.  93-121  ;  Stephani,  in  Compte  Rendu  (St.
Petersburg)  for  1872,  p.  177  sqq.  It  would  seem  that  the  rape  of
Cephalus  by  Day  (or  the  Morning)  was  often  the  subject  of  a  group  of
sculpture  placed  on  the  apex  of  a  gable.  Such  a  group  crowned  the
west  gable  of  the  temple  of  Apollo  at  Delos ;  while  the  apex  of  the
eastern  gable  was  adorned  with  a  group  representing  Boreas  in  the  act
of  carrying  off  Orithyia,  Fragments  of  both  groups  were  found  at
Delos  by  the  French  archaeologists.  Moreover,  two  terra-cotta  groups
representing  Day  (Morning)  carrying  off  Cephalus  have  been  found  at
Caere  and  at  Curti  near  Capua ;  each  group  seems  to  have  occupied
the  apex  of  a  gable.  Thus  the  terra-cotta  group  on  the  roof  of  the
Royal  Colonnade  would  seem  to  have  been  only  one  of  a  class  of  similar
ornaments.  If  the  colonnade  terminated  in  gables,  it  is  probable  that
the  two  groups  described  by  Pausanias  occupied  the  apexes  of  the
gables.  See  A.  Furtwangler,  in  Archaologische  Zeitung^  40  (1882),  pp.
32 1-364  ;  cp.  E.  Curti  us,  *  Eos  und  Kephalos,'  Archaologische  Zeitung,
33  (J^76)>  P*  166  sq. ;  Roscher's  Lexikon^  i.  p.  1272  sqq, ;  Miss
Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  P*  25  sq,

3.  I.  bore  him  a  son,  Phaethon  etc.  Here  the  father  of  Phaethon
is  called  Cephalus;  and  he  is  so  named  by  Hesiod  {Theog.  986  j^.)
But  more  commonly  the  father  of  Phaethon  is  said  to  have  been  the
Sun.  This  latter  is  the  version  followed  by  Euripides  (Frag.  775,
in  Dindorfs  Poetae  Scenici  Graeci)^  Plato  (Timaeus^  p.  22  c),  Lucian
(Dial,  deorum^  25),  Nonnus  {Dionys,  xxxviii.  98  sqq,\  Ovid  {Metam,
L  751  sqq,),  Cicero  {De  officiiSy  iii.  24  §  94),  Hyginus  {Fab,  152),
Eratosthenes  (cited  by  Hyginus,  Astronomica,  ii.  42),  Servius  (on  Virgil,
Aen,  X.  189),  and  by  Pausanias  himself  elsewhere  (i.  4.  i  ;  ii.  3.  2).
Here  Phaethon's  moUier  is  called  Day  (Hemera\  who  is  identical  with
Hesiod's  Morning  {Eos)  {Theog,  984  sqq.)  Generally  the  mother  of
Phaethon  is  said  to  have  been  Clymene,  a  daughter  of  Ocean  (so
Euripides,  Nonnus,  Ovid,  Hyginus,  and  Servius,  referred  to  above).
The  name  Phaethon  means  "  the  shining  one,"  and  as  an  adjective  the
epithet  is  applied  to  the  sun  by  Homer  (//.  xi.  735,  Od,  v.  479),  and
to  the  planet  Saturn  (Eratosthenes,  Catasterismi,  43 ;  Hyginus,  Astro-
nam,  ii.  42).  Modem  scholars  interpret  Phaethon  either  as  the  Morning
Star  or  as  the  Sun  himself.  The  former  is  the  view  of  Professor  v.
Wilamowitz-Mollendorff  {Hermes,  18  (1883),  p.  396  sqq,)  and  Mr.  Rapp
(Roscher's  Lexikon,  i.  p.  1269)  ;  the  latter  is  the  view  of  Professor  C.
Robert  {Hertnes,  18  (1883),  p.  440  sq,\  Mr.  Th.  Zielinski  {Philologus,
50  (1891),  p.  147  sq,\  Preller  {Griech,  Myth,^  i.  p.  438),  Mr.  Baumeister
{Denkmdlery  p.  1305),  and  Sir  George  Cox  {Mythology  of  the  Aryan
N€Uions,  p.  242).  On  the  latter  view  the  story  of  Phaethon's  luckless
attempt  to  drive  the  chariot  of  the  Sun,  the  conflagration  which  he
caused,  and  his  fall  into  the  Eridanus,  the  river  of  the  West,  are
explained  as  a  mythological  description  of  the  sun  sinking  in  the  west
and  lighting  up  the  sky  and  mountains  with  a  crimson  glow.     The  view


6o  THE  ROYAL  COLONNADE  bk.  i.  attica

that  Phaethon  was  the  Morning  Star  is  countenanced  by  Hyginus  who
expressly  says  {Astran,  ii.  42)  that  the  Morning  and  Evening  star  was
by  some  supposed  to  be  a  son  of  Cephalus  and  the  Morning  {Eos).
The  myth  of  Phaethon  is  depicted  on  Roman  sarcophaguses.

See  V.  Wilamowitz-M Ollendorff,  *  Phaethon,*  Hermes,  18  (1883),
pp.  396-434 ;  C.  Robert,  *  Die  Phaethonsage  bei  Hesiod,*  id,,  pp.  434-
441  ;  G.  Knaack,  Quaes  Hones  Phaethonteae  (Berlin,  1886);  id,,  'Zur
Phaethonsage,'  Hermes,  22  (1887),  pp.  637-640;  Wieseler,  in  Annali
deW  Instituto,  41  (1869),  pp.  130-144  ;  Baumeister's  Denkmdler,  p.
1305  sqq.

There  is  a  parallel  to  the  story  of  Phaethon  among  the  Indians  of
British  Columbia.  They  say  that  the  crow  (who  plays  a  great  part  in
their  mythology)  married  a  daughter  of  the  Sun.  She  bore  a  son  who
undertook  to  guide  the  chariot  of  his  grandsire  the  Sun.  But  as  he
approached  the  meridian  he  grew  timid,  "  and  misdirecting  the  course
of  that  luminary,  he  accidentally  grazed  the  earth  and  set  fire  to  some  of
the  mountains,  one  of  which  is  supposed  to  be  Mount  Baker.  This  is  a
neighbouring  volcano,  which  is  still  observed  occasionally  in  a  state  of
eruption.  The  crow  chastised  the  folly  of  his  son,  and  once  more
restored  the  world  to  order."  M.  Macfie,  Vancouver  Island  and
British  Columbia  (London,  1865),  p.  453  ;  cp.  C.  E.  Barrett-Lennard,
Travels  in  British  Columbia  (London,  1862),  p.  55  sq,

3.  I.  This  tale  is  told  by  Hesiod  in  his  poem  on  women.
This  poem,  which  has  not  come  down  to  us,  is  referred  to  by  Pausanias
elsewhere.  See  i.  43.  i  ;  iii.  24.  10 ;  ix.  31.  5.  In  the  last  passage
(ix.  31.  4  j^.)  Pausanias  mentions  the  view  that  the  poem  was  not  by
Hesiod.  It  is  doubtful  whether  it  was  the  same  as  the  poem  called  the
Great  Eoeae,     See  note  on  ii.  2.  3.

The  story  of  Phaethon  is  also  told  by  Hesiod  in  the  Theogony  (986-
991)  in  much  the  same  form  as  it  is  here  narrated  by  Pausanias.
Phaethon,  according  to  Hesiod,  was  the  son  of  Cephalus  and  the
Morning  (Eos\  and  in  the  bloom  of  his  fair  youth  was  snatched  away
by  Aphrodite  and  made  by  her  the  keeper  of  her  holy  temples.  But  in
his  lost  poem  Hesiod  seems  to  have  given  the  myth  of  Phaethon  in  a
fuller  and  somewhat  different  form,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  references
of  Hyginus  {Fab,  154)  and  Eustathius  (on  Homer,  Od,  xi.  325,  p.
1689).  See  Professor  C.  Robert,  *  Die  Phaethonsage  bei  Hesiod,'
Hermes,  18  (1883),  pp.  434-441;  G.  Knaack,  *  De  Phaethonte
Hesiodeo,'  Quaestiones  Phaethonteae,  pp.  1-16;  id,,  *Zur  Phaethonsage,'
Hermes,  22  (1887),  p.  637  sq,

3.  2.  Near  the  colonnade  stand  statnes  of  Oonon  and  his  son
Timotheus,  and  Evagoras.  Isocrates  tells  us  (ix.  57)  that  the  statues
of  Conon  and  Evagoras  were  set  up  beside  the  image  of  Saviour  Zeus.
He  thus  agrees  with  Pausanias,  for  the  image  of  Saviour  Zeus  was  the
image  which  Pausanias  calls  Zeus  of  Freedom  (see  note  below).
Conon's  statue  was  in  bronze  (Demosthenes,  xx.  70,  p.  478).  That
there  was  a  statue  of  Timotheus  beside  that  of  his  father  in  the  market-
place is  mentioned  also  by  Cornelius  Nepos  {Timotheus,  2).  Aeschines
also  mentions  the  statue  of  Timotheus  (iii.  243).     There  were  statues


CH.  in  THE  COLONNADE  OF  ZEUS  6i

of  Conon  and  Timotheus  on  the  Acropolis  (Paus.  i.  24.  3  note).  Philo-
stratus  refers  in  general  terms  to  the  statues  near  the  Royal  Colonnade
( Vit  Apollon,  iv.  20).  A  fragment  of  a  decree  in  honour  of  Evagoras
has  been  found  inscribed  on  a  stone  near  the  theatre  of  Dionysus  at
Athens  (C  /.  A.  ii.  No.  10  b,  p.  397 ;  Hicks,  Gr,  hist,  Inscr,  No.  72).
From  another  inscription  we  learn  that  the  people  of  Erythrae  resolved
to  set  up  a  statue  of  Conon  in  gilt  bronze  (Hicks,  Gr.  hist,  Inscr,  No.
70  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylioge  Inscr,  Gr,  No.  53).

3.  2.  prevailed  on  King  Artaxerxes  to  give  Oonon  the
Phoenician  galleys.  According  to  Diodonis  (xiv.  39)  it  was  the
satrap  Phamabazus  who  persuaded  the  Persian  king  to  place  Conon
at  the  head  of  the  fleet  with  which  he  afterwards  defeated  the
Lacedaemonians  at  Cnidus.

3.  2.  he  traced  his  lineage  up  to  Teucer.  Cp.  Isocrates,  ix.
14-18.

3.  2.  Zeus  of  Freedom.  The  inscription  on  the  base  of  this
image  described  it  as  Saviour  Zeus  ;  but  the  image  was  also  very
commonly  called  Zeus  of  Freedom.  According  to  Didymus,  the  image
was  set  up  to  commemorate  the  deliverance  from  the  Persians ;  but
according  to  the  orator  Hyperides,  the  image  received  its  name
(Zeus  of  Freedom)  because  the  neighbouring  colonnade  had  been  built
by  fireedmen.  Didymus's  account  is  the  more  probable  of  the  two.
See  Harpocration,  Hesychius,  and  Suidas,  s,v.  'EXcv^cpio?  Zcvs ;  Schol.
on  Plato,  EryxiaSy  p.  392  a ;  Etymolog,  Magnum^  s,v,  'EAev^epos,  p.
329,  44  sqg,  Isocrates  mentions  the  image  of  Saviour  Zeus  beside
the  statues  of  Conon  and  Evagoras  (ix.  57).  The  worship  of  Zeus  of
Freedom  at  Athens  is  mentioned  by  Aristides  {Or,  xiii.  vol.  i.  p.  204,  ed.
Dindorf).

3.  2.  a  statue  of  the  Emperor  Hadrian.  Hadrian  was  worshipped
at  Athens  under  the  title  of  Liberator  {Eleuthereus) ;  for  one  of  the  seats
in  the  theatre  of  Dionysus  was  reserved  for  his  priest  (C  J,  A,  iii.
Na  253).  It  is  probable  that  this  worship  was  performed  at  an  altar
in  front  of  the  statue  of  Hadrian  here  mentioned  by  Pausanias,
since  the  image  of  Zeus  of  Freedom  (Eleutherios)  stood  close  by.

3.  3.  Behind  is  built  a  colonxiade  etc.  This  was  the  colonnade
known  as  the  Colonnade  of  Zeus  of  Freedom,  from  the  image  of  that
god  which  stood  in  front  of  it  (Paus.  x.  21.  6;  Xenophon,  Oeconom,
viL  I  ;  Plato,  Theages^  p.  121  a  ;  /V/.,  Eryxias^  p.  392  a ;  Eustathius,  on
Homer,  Od,  i.  395,  p.  1425).  It  was  also  called  simply  the  Colonnade
of  Zeus  (Diogenes  Laertius,  vi.  2.  22  ;  Rangab^,  Antiquitis  HelUniques^
2.  No.  793,  p.  411;  CI,  A,  ii.  No.  325).  It  seems  to  have  been  used
as  a  place  for  lounging  and  conversation  (see  Xenophon  and  Plato,  ILcc,^ ;
in  particular  it  was  a  favourite  haunt  of  Diogenes  the  Cynic  (Diogenes
Laertius,  /.r.)  Engraved  copies  of  public  decrees  were  sometimes  set
up  in  or  beside  it  (Rangab^,  Lc,  \  C,  I.  A,  ii.  No.  325).  One  such  inscrip-
tion was  found  in  1892  in  the  course  of  making  the  new  cutting  for
the  Piraeus  railway,  which  runs  parallel  to  Hermes  Street  from  the  old
station  to  the  end  of  Athena  Street,  under  which  it  continues  northward
to  the  Place  de  la  Concorde.     The  inscription,  which  is  a  decree  in


62  THE  COLONNADE  OF  ZEUS  bk.  i.  attica

honour  of  a  certain  Euphron,  contains  a  provision  that  a  copy  of  it
shall  be  set  up  "  beside  Saviour  Zeus."  See  AcXtiov  ap')^io\jQyiKQv^
1892,  p.  56  sqq.  ;  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  13  (1892-3),  p.  142  sq.
In  the  colonnade  hung  the  shields  of  distinguished  soldiers,  till  they
were  taken  down  by  Sulla  (Pans.  i.  26.  2 ;  x.  21.  5  j^.)  From
Pausanias's  description  it  is  clear  that  the  Colonnade  of  Zeus  was  near
the  Royal  Colonnade,  and  it  is  expressly  stated  by  other  writers  that
the  two  colonnades  were  beside  each  other  (irap  dA.A.i;Xa9  is  the  ex-
pression of  Harpocration  and  Suidas,  s.v.  PaxriXcto^  oTod ;  cp.  Eustathius,
on  Homer,  Od,  i.  395,  p.  1425).  Hence  the  Colonnade  of  Zeus  is
doubtless  the  colonnade  which  Aristophanes  mentions  (Eccles.  686)
as  beside  the  Royal  Colonnade.  It  must  therefore  have  stood  on  the
west  side  of  the  market-place,  inunediately  to  the  south  of  the  Royal
Colonnade.

3.  3.  paintings  of  the  gods,  who  axe  called  the  Twelve  etc
The  paintings  by  Euphranor  (see  §  4)  in  the  Colonnade  of  Zeus  were
famous  and  are  often  referred  to  by  classical  writers.  The  artist  was  a
native  of  Corinth  and  flourished  in  Ol.  104  (364-361  B.C.),  according
to  Pliny  {N,  H,  xxxiv.  50,  xxxv.  128).  He  was  a  man  of  great  and
versatile  powers,  being  distinguished  as  a  painter,  sculptor,  and  writer
on  art  (Pliny,  N,  H,  xxxv.  128  sq,)  Lucian  classes  him  as  a  sculptor
with  Phidias,  Alcamenes,  and  Myron,  and  as  a  painter  with  Apelles
and  Parrhasius  (Jupiter  Tragoedus^  7  ;  De  mercede  conducHs^  42).  To  •
illustrate  Cicero's  many-sidedness  Quintilian  compares  him  to  Euphranor,
"that  master  of  many  arts"  {Inst  Or,  xii.  10.  12).  Euphranor  seems
to  have  displayed  a  strong  bent  to  realism  in  art ;  this  came  out  in  his
remark  that  the  Theseus  of  Parrhasius  had  been  fed  on  roses,  but
his  Theseus  on  beef  (Pliny,  N,  H,  xxxv.  129;  Plutarch,  De  gloria
Atheniensium^  2).  On  the  style  of  Euphranor,  see  v.  Brunn,  Gesch.  d
griech,  Kiinstler^  i.  pp.  314-318;  id.  2.  pp.  181-193  ;  Furtwangler,
Meisterwerke  d,  griech,  Plastik^  pp.  578-597.  The  references  to  him
in  ancient  writers  are  collected  by  Overbeck  (Schriftquellen^  ^  828
note,  1074,  1 109,  1704,  1726,  1728,  1786-1806).

Pliny  mentions  together  (A^.  H,  xxxv.  129)  the  three  works  of
Euphranor  (the  Cavalry  Battle,  the  Twelve  Gods,  and  the  Theseus)
which,  as  we  learn  from  Pausanias,  were  all  in  the  Colonnade  of  Zeus.
As  Pausanias,  after  mentioning  the  picture  of  the  Twelve  Gods,
remarks  that  Theseus,  Democracy,  and  the  People  were  painted  on  the
opposite  wall,  we  may  perhaps  infer  that  these  two  pictures  occupied
the  two  short  walls  at  the  ends  of  the  colonnade,  while  the  battle-piece
occupied  the  long  back-wall.  With  regard  to  the  picture  of  the
Twelve  Gods  we  learn  that  the  painting  of  Hera's  hair  was  especially
beautiful  (Lucian,  Imagines^  7),  and  that  Poseidon  was  more  majestic
than  Zeus  (Valerius  Maximus,  viii.  11,  ext.  5).

3.  3.  Democracy  and  the  People.  There  was  a  statue  of  Demo-
cracy at  Athens  beside  which  public  decrees  were  sometimes  set
up  (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  470,  line  62),  and  sacrifices  were  offered  to  it
(C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  740,  frag,  c,  line  10;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Gr,
No.  374,  line  68).     As  to  representations  of  the  People  in  Greek  art,


CH.  Ill  THE  COLONNADE  OF  ZEUS  63

see  note  on  i.  1.3!  ^^^  on  personification  in  ancient  art  in  general,
sec  A-  Gerber,  *  Naturpersonification  in  Poesie  und  Kunst  der  Alten,'
Fleckeisetis  Jahrbiicher^  Suppl.  13,  pp.  239-317;  Steuding,  article
'  Lokalpersonifikationen/  in  Roscher's  Lexikon^  2.  p.  2074  sqq.

3.  3.  his  descendants,  after  the  death  of  Menesthens,  con-
tinned  to  bear  mle  down  to  the  third  generation.  Towards  the
dose  of  his  life  Theseus  was  supplanted  on  the  throne  of  Athens  by
Menestheus.  But  after  Menestheus  was  slain  in  the  Trojan  war,  the
sons  of  Theseus  returned  to  Athens  and  regained  the  kingdom.  See
L  17.  5  Jf . ;  Plutarch,  Theseus^  31 -35'  The  three  generations  of
Theseus's  family  who  sat  upon  the  throne  of  Athens  after  the  death  of
Menestheus  were  his  son  Demophon,  his  grandson  Oxyntes,  and  his
great-grandson  Thymoetes.  See  Plutarch,  Theseus,  28  ;  Diodorus,  iv.
62  ;  Hyginus,  Fab,  48  ;  Nicolaus  Damascenus,  Frag.  50  {Frag,  Hist,
Graec,  ed.  Miiller,  3.  p.  386);  Pausanias,  ii.  18.  9.  According  to
Eusebius  {Chronic,  vol.  i.  p.  185,  ed.  Schone)  Oxyntes  was  succeeded
by  his  son  Aphipas,  who  after  reigning  one  year  was  succeeded  by  his
brother  Thymoetes,  son  of  Oxyntes.  But  this,  though  it  increases  by
one  the  number  of  Theseus's  descendants  who  sat  on  the  throne,  does
not  alter  the  number  of  their  generations,  since  two  of  the  kings
(Aphidas  and  Thymoetes)  were  brothers.

3.  3.  I  conld  have  enumerated  the  kiogs  from  Melanthus  to

didicns.     In   order  to   refute  the   popular  error  that  Theseus   had

established  the  democracy  at  Athens,  Pausanias  has  pointed  out  that

the  monarchy  had  subsisted  for  three  generations  after  Theseus.     He

now  reminds  his  readers  that  even  after  the  dynasty  of  Theseus  had

come  to  an  end,  the  government  was  still  monarchical,  the  old  Attic

dynasty  having  been  succeeded  by  a  new  foreign  dynasty,  of  whom

Melanthus  was  the  first  king.     Melanthus,  according  to  the  prevalent

tradition,  was  a  descendant  of  the  royal  Messenian  family  of  Neleus

and  had  himself  been  king  of  Messenia,  till  the  Dorian  invasion  forced

him  to  retire  into  exile  in  Attica,  of  which  he  eventually  became  king,

displacing  Thymoetes,  the  last  Athenian  king  of  the  house  of  Theseus.

See  ii.    18.  9  (with  the  note);  Herodotus,  v.   65;  Hellanicus,  in  the

SchoL    on    Plato,   Symposium,    p.    208    d ;    Conon,  Narrationes,  39 ;

Strabo,  viii.  p.  359,  ix.  p.  393  ;  Eusebius,  Chronic,  vol.  2.  p.   56,  ed.

Schone  ;  Harpocration,  s,v,  'Avarovpia.     Melanthus  was  succeeded  on

the  throne  of  Athens  by  his  son  Codrus  who,  according  to  the  popular

tradition,  was  the  last  king  of  Athens.     His  son  Medon  succeeded  him

with  the  title  of  archon  for  life  ;  and  Medon's  descendants  the  Medon -

tids  continued  afterwards  to  hold  the  archonship  for  life.     See  Velleius

Paterculus,  I  2  ;  Eusebius,  Chronic,  vol.  2.  p.  60,  ed.  SchSne.     But  in

the  present  passage  it  is  clear  that  Pausanias  is  following  a  different

tradition ;  for  he  implies  that  the  kingship  did  not  cease  with  Codrus,

son  of  Melanthus,  but  continued  in  the  family  of  Melanthus  for  several

generations.     This  in  fact  seems  to  have  been  the  older  tradition  ;  both

Plato  {Sympos,  p.  208  d)  and  Aristotle  {Polit,  v.  10,  p.  1310  b,  32  sqq,)

appear  to  have  followed  it     Indeed,  as  has  been  justly  remarked  by

Mr.  TopfTer  {AtHsche  Genealogie,  p.   241),  the  kingship  was  never


64  THE  COLONNADE  OF  ZEUS  bk.  i.  attica

abolished  at  Athens ;  the  second  magistrate  in  Athens  was  always
known  officially  as  the  king  (not  as  the  king-archon,  as  modem  writers
call  him).  The  change  which  tradition  associated  with  the  death  of
Codrus  would  seem  to  have  consisted  in  limiting  the  king's  power  by
giving  him  two  colleagues,  one  of  them  known  as  the  archon,  the  other
as  the  polemarch.  All  three  (king,  archon,  and  polemarch)  at  first
held  office  for  life  but  afterwards  for  ten  years ;  at  a  much  later  time
their  offices  were  all  made  annual,  and  six  colleagues  (called  thesmo-
thetae)  were  associated  with  them,  bringing  the  whole  number  of  the
higher  magistrates  (archons)  up  to  nine.  This  is  the  account  of  the
matter  given  by  Aristotle  {Constitution  of  Athens^  3).

The  successors  of  Codrus  were  Medon  (son  of  Codrus),  Acastus
(son  of  Medon),  Archippus  (son  of  Acastus),  Thersippus  (son  of
Archippus),  Phorbas  (son  of  Thersippus),  Megacles  (son  of  Phorbas),
Diognetus  (son  of  Megacles),  Pherecles  (son  of  Diognetus),  Ariphron
(son  of  Pherecles),  Thespieus  (son  of  Ariphron),  Agamestor  (son  of
Thespieus),  Aeschylus  (son  of  Agamestor),  Alcmaeon.  All  these,  accord-
ing to  the  common  tradition,  held  the  archonship  for  life.  After  Alcmaeon
the  tenure  of  the  office  was  made  decennial.  The  first  decennial  archon
was  Charops,  the  second  was  Aesimides,  and  the  third  was  Clidicus.
See  Eusebius,  Chronic,  vol.  i.  pp.  185-190,  ed.  Schone.

Such  was  the  common  tradition.  But  Pausanias  here  follows  a
tradition  according  to  which  all  these  persons  from  Medon  down  to
Clidicus  were  kings,  not  archons.  Elsewhere  he  seems  to  follow  the
ordinary  tradition ;  for  in  iv.  5 .  10  he  apparently  includes  Aesimides
among  the  decennial  archons.  The  apparent  discrepancy  between  the
two  traditions  may  perhaps  be  reconciled  by  supposing  that  from  Medon
down  to  Clidicus  it  was  the  king  (commonly  called  the  king-archon)
whose  name  was  recorded  and  used  in  dating  events  ;  and  that  after  the
time  of  Clidicus  this  distinction  was  transferred  to  his  colleague  the
archon  proper.  On  this  hypothesis,  the  chief  magistrates  from  Medon
to  Clidicus  might  be  called  either  kings  or  archons.  If  they  were
called  kings,  then  the  kingship  lasted  down  to  the  time  of  Clidicus.
If  they  were  called  archons,  then  the  kingship  stopped  with  Codrus.
Cp.  Busolt,  Griechische  Geschickte^  i.  p.  399  sgq.;  i(Ly  Griech,  Stoats-  und
RechtsaltertUmer^  §  117,  p.  130  sq.  (Iwan  Miiller's  Handbuch^  vol.  4).

An  example  of  the  popular  error  which  Pausanias  is  combating  in
the  present  passage  is  furnished  by  the  pseudo-Demosthenes,  who  says
(Ix.  28,  p.  1397)  that  Theseus  introduced  political  equality  into  Athens.
Similarly  Isocrates  says  (xii.  1 29)  that  Theseus  left  the  control  of  affairs
to  the  multitude,  while  he  constituted  himself  a  sort  of  knight-errant
to  defend  the  liberties  of  the  Grecian  states.

3.  4.  Here,  too,  is  painted  the  battle  fought  at  Mantinea  etc.
This  picture,  if  we  may  trust  Plutarch  {De  gloria  Atheniensium^  2),  was
painted  with  much  energy  and  fire.  There  was  a  copy  of  the  pictiire  at
Mantinea  (Paus.  viii.  9.  8).  Elsewhere  (viii.  1 1.  6  ;  ix.  15.  5)  Pausanias
tells  us  that  in  the  painting  Grylus,  son  of  Xenophon,  was  depicted  in
the  act  of  slaying  Epaminondas.  Either  Pausanias  or  the  painter  seems
to  have  made  a  mistake.     For  the  picture  represented  a  cavalry  fight ;


CH.  Ill  PATERNAL  APOLLO  65

and  we  are  told  that  Epaminondas  was  slain  fighting  on  foot  among  the
infantry  (Diodorus,  xv.  87),  while  Grylus  was  serving  with  the  cavalry
(Diogenes  Laertius,  ii.  6.  54).  The  honour  of  having  slain  Epaminondas
was  assigned  by  different  people  to  different  men.  See  viii.  11.  5  sq.^
with  the  note.  The  fight  depicted  in  the  painting  may  have  been  the
skirmish  between  the  Athenian  cavalry  on  the  one  side  and  the
Boeotian  and  Thessalian  cavalry  on  the  other,  which  preceded  the
general  engagement  between  the  two  armies.  See  Xenophon,  Hellenica^
vii.  5.  14-17  ;  Arnold  Schafer,  in  Rheinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  5  (1847),
pp.  58-69.  The  battle  was  fought  in  363  or  362  B.C.  See  note  on  viii.
II.  5.

3.  4.  Apollo,  snmaixied  Paternal,  in  the  temple  hard  by.  This
temple  was  probably  on  the  west  side  of  the  market-place,  to  the  south
of  the  Colonnade  of  Zeus.  Paternal  Apollo  at  Athens  was  identical  with
the  Pythian  Apollo  (Demosthenes,  xviii.  141,  p.  274;  Aristides,  Or.
xiii.  voL  I.  p.  181,  ed.  Dindorf).  He  was  doubtless  called  Paternal  as
being  the  mythical  father  of  Ion,  the  ancestor  of  the  Ionian  race.  True-
bom,  Athenian  children  were  introduced  to  his  sanctuary  (Demosthenes,
IviL  54,  p.  131 5).  In  the  court  called  Ardettus  the  jurymen  took  an
oath  by  Paternal  Apollo,  Demeter,  and  King  Zeus  (Pollux,  viii.  122).
The  priest  of  Paternal  Apollo  is  mentioned  in  inscriptions  (C  /.  A,  iii.
Nos,  687,  720  a,  p.  501).  He  had  a  seat  reserved  for  him  in  the  theatre
of  Dionysus  (C  /.  A.  iii.  No.  279).  We  are  told  that  a  certain
Neoptolemus,  a  contemporary  of  the  orator  Lycurgus,  gilded  an  altar  of
Apollo  in  the  market-place  ([Plutarch,]  Vit,  X,  Orat.  p.  843  f.)  This
altar  probably  stood  in  front  of  the  temple  of  Paternal  Apollo.  Nothing
is  known  as  to  the  statue  of  Paternal  Apollo  by  Euphranor  which
Pausanias  here  mentions.  Cp.  Overbeck,  Griech,  Kunstmythologie^
Besonderer  Theil,  3.  p.  100.  On  an  altar  found  at  Athens  there  is
sculptured  in  relief  an  image  of  Paternal  Apollo  holding  a  lyre.  See
Daremberg  et  Saglio,  DicHonnaire^  i.  p.  320,  fig.  380;  Miss  Harrison,
Ancient  Athens,  p.  35.  Some  writers  have  proposed  to  identify  the
so-called  *  Theseum '  with  the  temple  of  Paternal  Apollo.  (See  below,
note  on  i.  17.  2.)  But  the  temple  of  Paternal  Apollo  seems  to
have  stood  in  the  market-place,  which  the  so-called  Theseum  did  not.
ProU  £.  Maass  has  argued  that  this  temple  of  Paternal  Apollo  was  the
Delphinium  or  sanctuary  of  Delphinian  Apollo  which  Pausanias  mentions
in  L  19.  I.  See  E.  Maass,  De  Lenaco  et  Delphinio  commentatio
(Greisswald,  1891),  p.  xv.  sqq.

3.  4.  an  image  of  the  god  by  Leochares.  Mr.  H.  Freericks  con-
jectures that  this  image  was  the  original  of  the  Apollo  Belvedere  {Der
Apollo  von  Belvedere  (Paderbom,  1894),  p.  78).  As  we  know  absolutely
nothing  about  the  image  in  question  the  conjecture  is  necessarily  a
mere  guess.

3.  4-  another  by  Galamis.  The  latter  image  is  called  Averter
of  Evil  etc.  It  has  been  conjectured  by  Prof  Conze  that  a  statue  of
a  naked  young  man  which  was  found  in  the  theatre  of  Dionysus  at
Athens,  and  is  commonly  known  as  **  the  Apollo  on  the  Omphalos,''  is  a
copy  of  the  statue  of  Apollo  by  Calamis  which  Pausanias  here  mentions.

VOL.  II  F


66  THE  METROUM  bk.  i.  attica

The  statue  seems  to  date  from  the  first  half  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.,  and
is  probably  a  copy  of  some  famous  Athenian  statue,  for  several  other
replicas  of  it  liave  come  down  to  us,  and  the  same  statue  appears  to  be
represented  on  coins  of  Athens.  But  that  the  original  was  the  statue  of
Apollo  here  mentioned  by  Pausanias,  cannot  be  proved.  Dr.  Waldstein
holds  that  the  statue  is  not  an  Apollo  but  a  pugilist  See  A.  Conze,
Beitrdge  stur  Geschichte  der  griechischen  PlasHk^  pp.  1 3-2 1  ;  Ch.  Wald-
stein, \n  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies ^  i  (1880),  p.  179  sqq,\  n£  2  (1881),
p.  332  5qq,\  A-  S.  Murray,  History  of  Greek  Sculpture^  i.  p.  234  sqq,\
Overbeck,  Gesch,  d. grieck. Plastik^^  i.  p.  301  note  226)  id,  Griech,  Kunst-
mythologiCy  Besonderer  Theil,  3.  p.  83  ;  Friederichs-Wolters,  Gipsabgiisse^
No.  219  ;  Collignon,  Histoire  de  la  Sculpture  Grecque^  i.  pp.  404-406  ;
Furtwangler,  in  Roscher*s  Lexikon,  i.  p.  456;  /V/.,  in  Fiinfzigstes  Pro-
gramm  sum  Winckelmcmnsfeste  (Berlin,  1890),  p.  150;  Th.  Schreiber,
in  Mittheilungen  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  9  (1884),  P-  239  sqq,\  Imhoof-
Blumer  and  Gardner,  Numismatic  commentary  on  PausaniaSy  p.  145,
with  pL  CC,  xv.-xvii.;  Cawadias,  FAvTrra  rod 'E^viicou  Movo-eiov,  Na  45.

Pausanias  tells  us  that  the  special  title  of  this  Apollo  (namely  "  the
Averter  of  Evil  '*)  had  been  bestowed  on  the  god  for  ridding  Athens  of
the  pestilence  in  the  Peloponnesian  war.  But  i^  as  is  natural  to  suppose,
this  was  the  original  title  of  the  statue  and  not  one  bestowed  on  it  at  a
later  date,  the  occasion  of  setting  up  the  statue  can  hardly  be  the  one
indicated  by  Pausanias.  For  Calamis  flourished  about  500-460  B.C
(see  note  on  v.  25.  5),  and  the  final  cessation  of  the  great  plague  at
Athens  did  not  take  place  till  427  B.C  (Thucydides,  iii.  Z^),  The  image
may  have  been  made  as  a  thank-offering  for  deliverance  from  some
earlier  plague,  which  in  later  times  was  confused  with  the  great  plague
of  430-427  B.C  Popular  tradition,  it  would  seem,  tended  to  confound
all  outbreaks  of  pestilence  with  that  terrible  one  (see  note  on  iv.  33.  2).
But  the  deliverance  commemorated  by  the  image  need  not  have  been
from  a  plague :  a  deliverance  from  any  great  evil  would  justify  the
dedication  of  an  image  of  Apollo,  "  the  Averter  of  EviL"  Cp.  Brunn,
Gesch,  d  griech,  Kiinstler,  i.  p.  125  sq,\  Collignon,  Hist,  de  la  Sculpture
Grecqu€y  i.  p.  397  ;  Wadismuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen,  i.  p.  550.

3.  5.  a  sanctuary  also  of  the  Mother  of  the  Gods.  Pausanias
now  proceeds  to  describe  three  public  buildings  which,  he  tells  us,  stood
near  each  other.  These  are  (i)  the  Metroum  or  sanctuary  of  the
Mother  of  the  Gods ;  (2)  the  Council  House  ;  and  (3)  the  Rotunda
(i.  5.  i).  They  appear  to  have  stood  at  the  south  end  of  the  market-
place, just  at  the  northern  foot  of  the  slope  of  the  Areopagus.  For  after
mentioning  the  Rotunda,  Pausanias  says  (i.  5.  i)  that  higher  up  are
statues  of  the  Eponymi,  which  must  mean  that  these  statues  stood  on
the  slope  of  the  hill  above  the  Rotunda.  Further  we  know  from  Arrian
{Anab,  iii.  16.  8)  that  the  Metroum  was  in  the  Ceramicus  opposite  the
statues  of  the  tyrannicides,  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton,  at  the  point
where  people  ascended  from  the  market-place  to  the  Acropolis.  It  has
been  generally  supposed  that  in  antiquity  the  regular  ascent  from  the
market-place  to  the  Acropolis  must  have  been  on  the  east  side  of  the
Areopagus,  up  the  steep  and  narrow  saddle  which  joins  the  Areopagus


CH.  Ill  THE  METRO UM  67

to  the  Acropolis,  and  that  therefore  the  Metroum  must  have  been  situated
in  the  low  ground  at  the  north-eastern  foot  of  the  Areopagus.  But
excavations  directed  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  in  1891  and  1892  laid  bare  a
great  part  of  an  ancient  road  leading  from  the  market-place  up  the  west
side  c^  the  Areopagus,  and  then  curving  round  between  that  hill  and  the
Pnyx ;  the  road  crosses  the  modem  carriage  road  and  then  ascends  east-
ward beside  the  carriage  road  to  the  Acropolis.  It  was  originally  enclosed
by  walls  of  polygonal  masonry,  which,  as  the  ground  rose  in  the  course  of
centuries,  were  gradually  buried  beneath  the  road.  See  Dr.  Dorpfeld,
in  MittkeiL  d.  arch,  Inst  inAthen^  16  (189 1),  p.  444  sq,\  id.^  17  (1892),
p.  90  sq.  There  can  hardly  be  any  doubt  that  this  ancient  road  dis-
covered by  Dr.  Ddrpfeld  was  the  regular  ascent  from  the  market-place
to  the  Acropolis.  It  follows  that  the  statues  of  the  tyrannicides  and  the
Metroum  stood  on  the  west  side  of  the  Areopagus,  at  the  point  where  the
road  began  to  ascend  between  the  Areopagus  and  the  Nymphaeum  hilL
The  statues  of  the  tyrannicides  were  probably  on  one  side  of  the  road  and
the  Metroum  on  the  other.  Cp.  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  38
^q.  The  Council  House  seems  to  have  been  within  the  precinct  of  the
Metroum  (see  Aeschines,  iii.  187  ;  [Plutarch,]  Vit,  X,  Orat,  p.  842  e).

The  legend  of  the  foundation  of  the  Metroum  was  this  :  a  begging
priest  came  to  Attica  and  initiated  the  Athenian  women  in  the  rites
of  the  Mother  of  the  Gods.  But  the  Athenians  slew  him  by  casting
him  headlong  into  a  pit  or  chasm.  A  pestilence  thereupon  broke  out,
and  the  Athenians  were  commanded  by  an  oracle  to  propitiate  the
mardered  man.  So  they  built  a  Council  House  on  the  scene  of  the
murder,  fenced  it  in,  and  dedicated  it  to  the  Mother  of  the  Gods.  They
also  set  up  a  statue  of  the  begging  priest  See  Suidas  s.w,  iiryrpayvfy-
rqi  and  pdpadpov ;  Photius,  Lexicon,  s.v.  Mrjrpipov  ;  Apostolius,  xi.  34  ;
SchoL  on  Aristophanes,  Btutus,  431 ;  Julian,  OrcU,  v.  p.  1 59  a  b.  Within
the  sacred  precinct  there  was  an  altar  of  the  Mother  of  the  Gods  at
which  we  hear  of  a  slave  taking  refuge  (Aeschines,  i.  60).  Here  too
was  the  large  jar  in  which  Diogenes  the  Cynic  is  said  to  have  taken  up
his  quarters  (Diogenes  Laertius,  vi.  2.  23  ;  cp.  Juvenal,  xiv.  308  sqq.;
Seneca,  Epist,  xiv.  2.  14).  It  was  forbidden  to  enter  the  sacred
prednct  after  eating  garlic  (Athenaeus,  x.  p.  422  d).

The  presidents  of  the  Council  sacrificed  to  the  Mother  of  the  Gods,
doabtless  on  the  altar  already  mentioned  (Demosthenes,  Prooem,  p.
1460  ;  Theophrastus,  Characters,  21).  A  festival  called  Galaxia  was  held
in  her  honour,  at  which  a  porridge  made  of  barley  and  milk  was  eaten
(Hesychius,  s.v.  yaka^m ;  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca,  i.  p.  229,  line
25  sqq.  ;  C.  /.  A,  ii.  No.  470,  line  13).  The  lads  {ephebot)  annually
dedicated  a  cup  to  her  (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  465,  line  7  ;  id,.  No.  466,  line  35  ;
id.^  No.  467,  line  40 ;  id.  No.  470,  line  13  ;  id,,  No.  471,  line  23).

The  Metroum  was  the  Record  Office  of  Athens,  in  which  the  public
archives  were  preserved  (Dinarchus,  i.  86  ;  Lycurgus,  c,  Leocr.  66 ;
Julian,  Orat.  v.  p.  159b;  Photius,  s,v,  Mi;rp<^ov  ;  Suidas,  s,v,  fxrfTpayvfy-
n}s ;  Harpocration  and  Suidas,  s,v.  Mi;rp<^ov  ;  Demosthenes,  xix.  129,  p.
381  ;  Athenaeus,  v.  p.  214  e ;  ix.  p.  407  c  ;  Cf,  A,  ii.  No.  446,  line  17  ;
C  LA.  ill  No.  1085,  line  9).    Among  the  documents  in  the  Metroum  was


68  THE  COUNCIL  HOUSE  bk.  i.  attica

the  official  copy  of  the  accusation  of  Socrates,  sworn  to  by  his  accuser
Meletus  ;  it  was  still  here  in  the  second  century  of  our  era  (Diogenes
Laertius,  ii.  5.  40).  The  official  copies  of  the  plays  of  Aeschylus,
Sophocles,  and  Euripides  were  no  doubt  kept  in  the  Metroum  ([Plutarch,]
Vit  X.  Oral,  p.  841  f).  Here  too  was  deposited  the  will  of  Epicurus
(Diogenes  Laertius,  x.  16).  The  keys  of  the  Metroum  were  kept  by  the
chairman  of  the  presidents  of  the  Council,  who  held  office  only  for  one
day  and  one  night,  and  was  never  allowed  to  be  re-elected  (Aristotle,
ConstituHan  of  Athens,  44).

See  E.  Gerhard,  Ueber  das  Metroon  su  A  then  und  iiber  die  Cotter-
mutter  der  griech,  Mythologie  (Berlin,  185 1)  (reprinted  from  the
Abhandlungen  of  the  Prussian  Academy  for  1 849) ;  C.  Curtius,  Das
Metroon  in  Athen  als  Staatsarchiv  (Berlin,  1868);  Miss  Harrison,
Ancient  Athens^  p.  38  sqq,\  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen^  2.  pp.

327-344.

3.  5.  her  image  is  a  work  of  Phidias.  According  to  Pliny
(N,  H.  xxxvi.  17)  this  image  was  by  Agoracritus,  the  pupil  and  friend
of  Phidias.  But  Arrian,  like  Pausanias,  ascribes  the  image  to  Phidias
{Peripius  Ponti  Euxim,  9).  This  discrepancy  is  perhaps  to  be
explained  by  Pliny's  statement  (N,  H.  xxxvi.  17)  that  Phidias,  out  of
regard  for  Agoracritus,  allowed  many  of  his  own  works  to  pass  under  his
pupil's  name.  Cp.  Brunn,  Gesch.  d.  griech,  Kunstler^  \,  p.  239  sq.  The
image,  as  we  learn  from  Arrian  (/.^.)>  represented  the  goddess  seated
with  a  cymbal  in  her  hands  and  lions  under  her  chair.  In  much  the
same  attitude  the  goddess  appears  on  a  considerable  number  of  marble
reliefs  which  have  been  found  in  Athens  and  Piraeus.  She  is  repre-
sented seated  in  a  shrine  with  a  cymbal  in  one  hand  and  a  lion  under
her  chair,  or  lying  on  her  lap,  or  rearing  at  her  side.  The  details  as
well  as  the  style  of  these  reliefs  vary  considerably  ;  they  were  probably
votive  offerings,  and  some  of  them  may  be  free  copies  of  Phidias's  statue.
See  K.  Botticher,  in  Philologus,  Suppl.  3  (1867),  p.  392  ;  Archdolo-
gische  Zeitungy  38  (1880),  plates  i  and  2  ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient
Athens,  pp.  44-51  ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen,  2,  p.  331  sq,

3.  5.  the  Oouncil  House  of  the  Five  Hundred.  The  Council
House  appears  to  have  been  within  the  precinct  of  the  Metroum  (see
above).  Besides  the  statues  which  Pausanias  mentions  it  must  have
contained  an  image  of  Counsellor  Athena  ;  for  Antiphon  says  (vi.  45)
that  in  the  Council  House  there  was  a  sanctuary  of  Counsellor  Zeus  and
Counsellor  Athena,  and  that  the  members  of  the  Council  prayed  to
these  deities  on  entering  the  house.  The  priest  of  these  two  divinities
had  a  seat  reserved  for  him  in  the  theatre  of  Dionysus  (C.  /.  A.  iiL
No.  272).  There  was  also  a  hearth  in  the  Council  House,  by  which
solemn  oaths  were  taken  (Aeschines,  il  45),  and  at  which  persons
in  danger  took  sanctuary  (Andocides,  i.  43  sq,;  id,  ii.  13-15  ;  Xeno-
phon,  Hellenica,  ii.  3.  52 ;  Diodorus,  xiv.  4.  7  ;  [Plutarch,]  Vit,  X,
Orat,  p.  836  f ).  We  read  of  the  pulpit  or  platform  in  the  Council
House  on  which  the  speaker  who  was  addressing  the  house  stood
{Antiphon,  vi.  40),  of  the  benches  on  which  the  presidents  sat  (Lysias,
xiil   37),  and   of  the  railing  which   barred  off  the  public  from  the


CH.  Ill  THE  COUNCIL  HOUSE  69

part  of  the  house  occupied  by  the  members  (Aristophanes,  Knights^
640  sqq.y  675  ;  Xenophon,  Hellenica^  ii.  3.  55  ;  [Demosthenes,]  xxv.  23,
p.  776).  Copies  of  the  laws  of  Solon,  engraved  on  pyramidal  tablets  of
stone,  were  set  up  in  the  Council  House  by  Ephialtes,  if  we  may  trust
the  evidence  of  Anaximenes,  a  contemporary  of  Aristotle  (Harpocration
and  Suidas,  s,v,  6  icarctf^ev  v6\uoi),  (See  above,  note  on  §  i  "  the  Royal
Colonnade,"  and  below,  note  on  i.  18.  3.)  Copies  of  various  public
documents,  engraved  on  stone  or  metal,  were  set  up  in  front  of  or
within  the  Council  House.  Thus  the  list  of  the  lads  (epkeboi)  was
engraved  on  a  bronze  plate  and  set  up  in  front  of  the  building  (Aristotle,
Constitution  of  Athens^  53).  Another  inscription,  set  up  in  the  Council
House,  contained  a  decree  denouncing  the  penalty  of  outlawry  against
all  traitors  who  should  plot  against  the  democracy  (Lycurgus,  c,  Leocr,
124-126).  Other  inscriptions  recorded  the  honours  bestowed  on  dis-
tinguished people  (Aeschines,  iii.  187  ;  C,  L  A,  i.  No.  21  ;  id^  ii.  No.
258);  one  recorded  the  public  pardon  grapted  to  Andocides  (Andocides,
ii.  23).     Cp.  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen^  2.  pp.  320-327.

3.  5.  a  wooden  image.  The  Greek  word  so  translated  is  xoanon.
Being  derived  from  xid  (^€(u)  *to  scrape,*  *  smooth,*  *  polish,*  xoanon
might  be  applied  to  an  image  made  either  of  wood,  stone,  or  ivory,
as  the  Greek  lexicographers  observe  (Hesychius,  s.v.  ^ai/a ;  Efymol,
Magnum^  s.v.  ^avov,  p.  611,  line  12  sqq,)  Strabo  applies  the  word  to
the  gold  and  ivory  statue  of  Zeus  by  Phidias  at  Olympia  (viii.  p.  353
sq.'y  cp.  Paus.  v.  11.  i);  to  the  gold  and  ivory  statue  of  Hera  by
Polyclitus  at  the  Heraeum  (viii.  p.  372  ;  cp.  Paus.  ii.  17.  4);  to  the
marble  statue  of  Nemesis  at  Rhamnus  (ix.  p.  396  ;  cp.  Paus.  i.  33.  2  sq,)  ;
and  to  the  statue  of  Sminthian  Apollo  by  Scopas  at  Chryse  (xiii.  p.
604)  which  was  almost  certainly  of  marble  (see  Bnmn,  Gesch.  d,  grieck.
KUnstlcTy  I.  p.  325).  Lucian  extends  the  use  of  the  word  so  as  to
include  statues  of  bronze  and  silver  (Lucian,  Alexander^  1 8 ;  2V/.,  De
dea  Syriay  39).  But  more  properly  the  term  was  restricted  to  images
made  of  wood,  as  it  is  defined  by  Clement  of  Alexandria  {Protrept,  iv.
46,  p.  40,  ed.  Potter)  and  Servius  (on  Virgil,  Aen,  ii.  225,  iv.  56).
Pausanias  appears  to  use  the  word  always  in  this,  its  restricted  sense ;
at  least  there  are  many  passages  in  his  work  in  which  the  word  must^
and  none  in  which  it  may  not,  mean  a  wooden  image.  Thus  he
enumerates  the  different  kinds  of  wood  out  of  which  xoana  are  made
(viii.  17.  2);  he  mentions  xoana  made  of  olive  wood  (ii.  30.  4),  of
agnus  wood  (iii.  14.  7),  of  oak  (ix.  3.  4),  and  of  the  wood  from  the
figure-heads  of  ships  (ix.  16.  3).  He  opposes  xoana  to  images  made  of
stone  (ii.  11.  8  ;  ii.  "^f,  2  ;  ix.  11.  4),  or  of  bronze  (iv.  34.  7).  In  the
case  of  what  were  called  acroliihic  statues,  ue»  statues  of  which  the
extremities  only  were  of  stone,  he  distinguishes  the  marble  face,  feet,
and  hands  of  the  image  from  the  rest  of  the  image,  which  he  describes
as  xoanon  (ii.  4.  I  ;  vi.  25.  4  ;  vii.  23.  5  ;  vii.  26.  4  ;  viii.  31.6;  ix.  4.
i).  He  mentions  a  xoanon  which  was  said  to  have  floated  from  Delos
to  Peloponnese  (iii.  23.  3  sq.)  Hence,  even  when  there  is  nothing  in
the  context  to  show  what  the  material  was  (as  in  i.  18.  5;  ii.  32.  5  ;
iii.  19.  7),  we  may  always  assume  that  by  xoanon  Pausanias  means  a


70  THE  COUNCIL  HOUSE  bk.  i.  attica

wooden  image.  In  some  passages  it  is  implied  that  the  xoana  were  of
a  rude  archaic  character,  as  we  should  have  expected  (i.  36.  2 ;  i.  42.
5  ;  ii.  19.  3  ;  vii.  25.  13).  He  speaks  of  the  old  images  made  by
Daedalus  as  xoana  (viii.  53.  8 ;  ix.  40.  3),  and  expresses  an  opinion
that  in  the  days  of  Danaus  all  images  (especially  Egyptian  images)  were
xoana  (ii.  19.  3).  He  describes  a  xoanon  of  Aphrodite  at  Delos  of
which  the  lower  part,  instead  of  feet,  was  a  square  pillar  (ix.  40.  3  ;
cp.  BulL  de  Corr.  Hellin.  3  (1879),  P-  99  ^QQ-)  Lastly,  it  may  be  added
that  in  Pausanias  xoanon  is  always  an  image  of  a  deity,  never  a  statue
of  a  man.  Lucian,  however,  applies  the  word  to  statues  of  kings  and
priests  {De  dea  Syria^  39).  Cp.  Siebelis*  edition  of  Pausanias,  vol  i.  p.
xlii.  sq, ;  Schubart,  '  Die  W6rter  ayaAfio,  ei/ccov,  ^ai/ov,  dv8ptas  und
verwandte,  in  ihren  verschiedenen  Beziehungen.  Nach  Pausanias,'
Philologus^  24  (1866),  pp.  561-587;  Maxim.  Frankel,  De  verbis
poHoribus  quibus  opera  statuaria  Graeci  notabant  {^€\^%\z^  "^^1^)%  PP-
10-13.

3.  5.  Goimsellor  Zeus.  Inscriptions  attest  the  worship  of  Coun-
sellor Zeus  in  Laconia  (C.  /.  (7.  Nos.  1245,  1392),  Caria  (C  /.  G,  No.
2909),  and  at  Pergamus  (Frankel,  Inschriften  von  Pergamony  i.
No.  246).  As  to  Zeus  sumamed  Good  Counsellor  (Eubuleus),  see  note
on  i.  14.  3  *  Eubuleus.'     Cp.  Preller,  Griech.  Mythologie^^  i.  p.  150.

3.  5.  Pisias Lyson.    Nothing  more  is  known  of  Pisias.    Lyson

is  mentioned  by  Pliny  {N,  H,  xxxiv.  91)  among  the  sculptors  who  made
figures  of  athletes,  armed  men,  hunters,  and  persons  sacrificing.

3.  5.  The  pictnre  of  the  Lawgivers  is  by  Protogenes  of  Oanxms.
Lawgivers  {Thesmothetai)  was  the  title  of  the  six  archons  who  ranked
after  the  three  chief  archons,  namely,  the  archon  eponumosy  the  king,
and  the  polemarch.  See  Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens,  3  and
59-61.  Professor  Kohler  conjectured  that  the  picture  of  the  Lawgivers
{Thesmothetai)  was  not  in  the  Council  House,  as  we  should  expect
from  Pausanias's  description,  but  in  the  Thesmothesium,  the  building  in
which  the  Lawgivers  used  to  meet,  and  which  Professor  K5hler  con-
jectures to  have  been  on  the  south  side  of  the  market-place,  near  the
Rotunda.  See  K6hler,  in  Hermes,  5  (1871),  p.  342  ;  /V£,  in  Mittheil,  cL
arch,  Inst,  in  A  then,  3  (1878),  pp.  144-146.  But  his  view  that  the
picture  in  question  was  in  the  Thesmothesium  is  hardly  consistent  with
the  words  of  Pausanias ;  and  from  the  way  in  which  Aristotle  speaks  of
the  Thesmothesium  we  should  almost  infer  that  the  building  was  no
longer  in  use  in  his  time ;  he  says  that  at  first  the  Lawgivers  formerly
occupied  the  Thesmothesium,  but  that  in  Solon's  time  all  the  nine
archons  assembled  there  {Constitution  of  Athens,  3).  Cp.  Wachsmuth,
Die  Stadt  Athen,  i.  p.  482,  note  2  ;  id,,  2.  p.  353  sq.

The  painter  Protogenes,  one  of  the  most  famous  artists  of  antiquity,
was  a  contemporary  of  Apelles,  who  generously  acknowledged  his
excellence.  In  early  life  he  had  to  struggle  with  poverty ;  it  is  even
said  that  he  was  a  ship-painter  up  to  the  age  of  fifty.  He  took
enormous  pains  with  his  work ;  but  his  pictures  would  seem  to  have
been  more  remarkable  for  perfection  of  technical  skill  than  for  ideal  and
poetical  beauty.     See  Pliny,  N,  H,  xxxv.  ^  81-83,   87,    101-106;


CH.  IV  THE  GAULS  71

Ovcrbeck,  Sckriftquellen^  ^  1907- 1936;  Brunn,  GesMchte  der  griech.
Kunsiler^  2.  pp.  233-243.

3.  5.  the  portrait  of  Oallippua is  by  Olbiades.     As  to

Callippus,  see  i.  4.  2 ;  x.  20.  5.  The  irruption  of  the  Gauls  into
Greece  took  place  in  279  B.c  (Paus.  x.  23.  14).  The  painter  Olbiades
was  probably  a  contemporary.     Nothing  more  is  known  of  him.

4.  I.  on  the  shore  of  a  great  sea,  which  at  its  extremities  is
not  navigable.  The  ancients  believed  that  the  sea  in  the  far  North,
beyond  Shetland  and  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Arctic  Circle,  was
of  so  dense  and  clanuny  a  consistency  that  ships  could  make  no  way
through  it,  and  even  the  winds  could  hardly  stir  its  sluggish  surface.
They  called  it  the  Clotted  Sea  (Oakdaxrq  TreTnyyvto,  mare  concretum)^
the  Dead  Sea,  or  the  Sea  of  Cronus  (or  Sattun).  See  Dionysius,
Or&is  Description  32  sqq. ;  Orphei  Argonautica^  1081  sqq. ;  Strabo,  i.
p.  63,  iL  p.  104 ;  Plutarch,  De  facie  in  orbe  lunae^  xxvi.  2-4 ;  Pliny,
N.  H.  iv.  95  and  104;  Solinus,  xix.  2  (p.  104,  ed.  Mommsen) ;
Avienus,  Descriptio  orbis  terrae^  56  sqq,  {Geograpki  Graeci  Minores^
ed.  Miiller,  2.  p.  177).  Various  explanations  of  this  belief  have  been
offered  in  modem  times,  as  that  it  may  have  originated  in  an  encounter
with  a  bank  of  floating  sea-weed,  or  jelly-fish,  or  icebergs,  or  in  the
observation  of  the  sea  when  it  is  beginning  to  freeze.  This  last
suggestion  seems  to  answer  best  to  the  accounts  of  the  ancients,
who  apparently  compared  the  consistency  of  the  Clotted  Sea  to  that
of  a  jelly-fish  (Strabo,  ii.  p.  104) ;  which  describes  very  fairly  the  state
of  the  sea  when  the  ice  is  forming.  We  can  hardly  suppose  that  the
andents  ever  sailed  so  far  north  as  to  observe  the  freezing  of  the
sea  within  the  Arctic  Circle,  but  they  may  very  well  have  seen  it  in
the  Baltic  And  in  fact  according  to  one  account  (Dionysius,  Descript
arbis^  316  sq.)  the  Clotted  Sea  was  near  the  land  from  which  amber
came;  and  that  land  was  certainly  the  coast  of  the  Baltic.  Varro
speaks  of  "  the  regions  between  the  Arctic  Circle  and  the  Pole  where
the  sun  is  not  seen  for  six  months  together,  and  navigation  on  the
ocean  is  impossible  because  the  sea  is  frozen "  (De  re  rustica,  i.  2.  4).
But  this  description  of  the  Polar  Sea  may  be  merely  a  speculative
inference,  or,  more  probably,  an  interpretation  of  the  mysterious  name
•  the  Clotted  Sea,'  The  native  Celtic  name  of  the  Northern  Ocean  was,
according  to  the  ancients,  Morimarusa,  which  the  Romans  interpreted
as  martuum  mare  'the  Dead  Sea'  (Pliny,  N.  H,  iv.  95  ;  Solinus,  xix.
2).  This  interpretation  is  correct,  and  furnishes  an  interesting  example
of  the  kinship  of  the  Latin  and  Celtic  tongues.  Morimarusa  is  con-
pounded  of  two  Celtic  words  meaning  *sea*  (Irish  muir^  Welsh  m6r)
and  'dead'  (Irish  marb^  Welsh  marw).  The  former  word  is  still
preserved  in  the  name  of  Morecambe  Bay  in  Lancashire  {marecambe »
'curved  sea').     See  MiillenhofT,  Deutsche  Alterthumskunde^  i.  pp.  410-

425-

4.  I.  The  sea  ebbs  and  flows.     To  the  ancients,  living  on  the

shores  of  the  tideless  Mediterranean,  the  tides  of  the  Atlantic  were  a

standing  marvel,  of  which  sailors  brought  back  descriptions,  but  which

very  few  landsmen  had  ever  seen.     The  first  Greek  to  report  fully  upon


72  THE  GAULS  bk.  i.  attica

the  tides  and  to  connect  them  with  the  phases  of  the  moon  seems  to
have  been  the  bold  traveller  Pytheas  of  Marseilles,  who  in  the  fourth
century  B.C.  explored  the  North-west  of  Europe  as  far  as  Shetland.  See
Mullenhoff,  Deutsche  Alterihumskundey  i.  pp.  364-368.

4.  I.  the  river  Eridanua,  on  whose  bajiks the  daughters  of

the  Son  etc.  The  story  was  that  the  daughters  of  the  Sun  wept  beside
the  river  Eridanus  into  which  their  brother  Phaelhon  had  fallen  from  the
chariot  of  the  Sun,  till  the  gods  in  pity  turned  them  into  black  poplars  ;
and  still  they  weep,  but  their  tears  are  drops  of  amber  exuding  from  the
bark.  See  Euripides,  Hippolytus^  735  sqq, ;  Apollonius  Rhodius,  iv.
596  sqq, ;  Lucian,  Dial,  deorum^  xxv.;  Ovid,  Met  ii.  340  sqq. ;  Hygpnus,
Fab.  154;  Pliny,  N.  H.  xxxvii.  31.  The  story  is  clearly  a  mythical
way  of  saying  that  the  yellow  amber  is  a  product  of  the  yellow  sun
distilled  through  trees.  But  the  tree  which  exudes  amber  is  not  the
black  poplar  but  a  species  of  pine,  as  Pliny  knew  {N.  H.  xxxvii.  42  sq.)
As  to  the  Eridanus  and  the  amber  of  the  ancients,  see  note  on  v.  12.  7.
Here,  as  in  ii.  3.  i,  Pausanias  regards  Phaethon  as  a  son  of  the  Sun.
Cp.  note  on  i.  3.  i.

4.  I.  The  name  Oauls  came  into  vogne  late  etc.  The  people
whom  we  call  Celts  were  known  to  the  ancients  under  three  names,  viz.
Celts  (KcAtoi,  Celtae\  Galatians  (FaAaTat),  and  Gauls  {Galli).

The  first  two  (Celts,  Galatians)  were  the  names  applied  to  them  by
Greek  writers ;  the  last  (Gauls)  was  the  name  employed  by  Roman
authors.  Caesar  tells  us  {De  bello  GallicOy  i.  i)  that  while  Gauls  was
the  name  applied  to  them  by  the  Romans,  their  own  national  name
was  Celts.  This  is  a  point  upon  which  Caesar  could  hardly  have  been
mistaken  ;  it  seems  therefore  somewhat  rash  of  Mr.  Kiepert  to  reject  his
statement  (Monatsberickte  of  the  Berlin  Academy,  1864,  p.  149).  From
the  same  root  is  probably  derived  Celtillus,  the  name  of  Vercingetorix's
father  (Caesar,  Bell.  Gall.  vii.  4) ;  but  this  is  the  only  tolerably  certain
case  of  a  word  derived  from  this  root  in  any  Celtic  language.  It  has
been  proposed  to  connect  the  name  Celt  with  the  Latin  celsus  *  tall '  and
the  Lithuanian  keltas  *  lifted  up,'  iss-keltas  *  lofty.'  If  this  etymology  is
correct  the  name  Celts  means  'the  tall  folic'  The  other  two  names
(Galatians,  Gauls)  are  thought  by  philologists  to  be  derived  from  a
different  root ;  and  of  these  two  the  older  form  is  probably  Galatians.
The  name  is  supposed  to  be  connected  with  the  old  Irish  gal '  bravery,'
galdae  *  brave.'  Hence  Galatians  or  Gauls  would  mean  *lhe  brave
folk.'  See  L.  Contzen,  Die  Wanderungen  der  Kelien^  p.  3  sq. ;  d'Arbois
de  Jubainville,  *  Les  Celtes,  les  Galates,  les  Gaulois,'  Revue  arch^ologique^
N.  S.  30  (1875),  pp.  4-18;  E.  Windisch,  «Keltische  Sprachen,*  in
Ersch  and  Gruber^s  Allgemeine  Encyklopddiey  2te  section,  35.  p.  133  sq.
Pausanias  himself  uses  both  the  names,  Celts  and  Galatians.  For  the
latter  I  have  substituted  the  Latin  form  Gauls,  as  more  familiar  to
English  readers,  but  when  the  reference  is  to  the  Gauls  settled  in  Asia
Minor  I  have,  in  accordance  with  English  usage,  retained  the  form
Galatians.     See  the  index  s.v.  *  Celts,'  *  Gauls,'  and  *  Galatians.'

4.  I.  A  host  of  them  mustered  and  marched  towards  the  Ionian
Sea  etc.     With  the  following  account  of  the  irruption  of  the  Gauls  into


CH.  IV  THE  GAULS  73

Greece  in  279  b.c  compare  the  fuller  narrative  of  the  same  episode  in
X.  19-23.  The  fact  of  Pausanias's  work  including  two  separate  and
detailed  narratives  of  the  same  series  of  events  seems  to  show  that  the
parts  of  his  work  in  which  they  occur  must  have  been  published  separately.
If  he  had  published  the  whole  ten  books  simultaneously  as  a  single  work,
he  would  probably  have  struck  out  the  present  briefer  narrative  after
writing  the  longer  one  in  book  x.  There  is  other  evidence  that  some
at  least  of  the  books  were  published  separately.     See  vii.  20.  6.

4.  5.  Pergamufl,  which  was  called  Teuthrania  of  old.  Cp.  I  11.
2.  Pausanias  seems  to  think  that  Teuthrania  was  only  the  old  name
of  Pergamus.  But  from  other  sources  we  learn  that  Teuthrania  and
Pergamus  were  separate  towns.  See  Xenophon,  Hellenicay  iii.  1.6;
Strabo,  xii.  p.  571,  3ciii.  p.  615.  Teuthrania  appears  to  have  occupied
the  summit  of  the  isolated  hill  now  known  as  ML  St.  EliaSy  situated  on
the  right  bank  of  the  Caicus  river,  about  half-way  between  Pergamus  and
the  sea.  The  modem  village  at  the  foot  of  the  hill  is  called  Kalerga,
The  place  is  about  eight  miles  from  Pergamus.  There  are  ruins  on  the
top  of  the  hill,  including  a  wall  about  60  paces  long,  built  of  polygonal
blocks  and  skirting  the  southern  foot  of  the  steep  slope  of  the  highest
peak.  See  Conze,  *  Teuthrania,'  MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Atken^  12
(1887),  pp.  149-160,

4.  5.  drove  them  away  from  the  sea  into Qalatia.  Cp.  i.  8.

I  ;  i.  25.  2.  Attains,  prince  of  Pergamus,  defeated  the  Gauls  in  a  great
battle ;  after  his  victory  he  took  the  title  of  king  and  reigned  as
Attalus  I.  king  of  Pergamus.  See  Polybius,  xviii.  24  (41  of  Dindorfs
edition);  Livy,  xxxviii.  16;  Strabo,  xiii.  p.  624;  Trogus  Pompeius,
Prologue  xxvii.  From  an  inscription  found  at  Pergamus  we  learn
that  the  battle  was  fought  at  the  springs  of  the  Caicus  river  and  that
the  Gauls  belonged  to  the  tribe  of  the  Tolistoagii  (doubtless  the  tribe
whom  Strabo,  xii.  p.  566  sq,^  calls  the  Tolistobogii).  See  Die
Ergebnisse  der  Ausgrabungen  zu  Pergamon^  Vorlaufiger  Bericht  (Berlin,
1880),  p.  80;  id,  (Second  Report,  Berlin,  1882)  p.  46;  Rheinisckes
Museum^  N.  F.  40  (1885),  p.  117  ;  Hicks,  Greek  histor.  Inscriptions^
No.  180;  Loewy,  Inschriften  griech,  Bildhauery  No.  154;  Frankel,
Insckriften  von  Pergamony  No.  24.  The  exact  date  of  Attalus*s
victory  over  the  Gauls  is  uncertain.  Niebuhr  placed  it  in  230  or
229  B.C. ;  Droysen  between  238  and  235  B.C. ;  Mr.  Koepp  in  240  B.C.
Sec  Contzen,  Die  Wanderungen  der  Kelten^  p.  234  sqq. ;  Droysen,
Gescfdchte  des  Hellenismusy  iii.  2.  p.  9  ;  Fr.  Koepp,  *  Ueber  die  Galater-
kriege  der  Attaliden,'  Rheinisckes  Museum^  N.  F.  40  (1885),  p.  114
sqq. ;  Holm,  Griech,  Geschichte^  4.  p.  377  sq,

4,  5.  Ancyra.  There  were  two  towns  of  this  name  in  Asia  Minor,
one  situated  in  Phrygia  on  the  borders  of  Lydia,  the  other  further  to  the
cast  in  Galatia.  The  former  was  but  a  small  town  ;  the  latter  was  the
one  seized  by  the  Gauls.  See  Strabo,  xii.  p.  567.  The  Galatian
Ancyra  still  retains  its  old  name  in  the  slightly  altered  form  of  Enguri
(commonly  known  as  Angora\  (W.  M.  Ramsay,  Historical  Geography
of  Asia  Minor ^  p.  243).  The  Gauls  who  settled  in  Galatia  and  gave
their  name  to  the  country  were  divided  into  three  tribes,  the  Trocmi,


74  THE  GAULS  bk.  i.  attica

the  Tolistobogii,  and  the  Tectosages.  It  was  the  Tectosages  who  seized
and  held  Ancyra.     See  Strabo,  xii.  p.  566  sq,

4.  5.  The  anchor  which  Midas  found.  Another  legend  to  account
for  the  name  Ancyra  (which  in  Greek  means  < anchor')  is  told  by
Stephanus  Byzantius  {s,v,  "AyKvpa)  on  the  authority  of  Apollonius.  The
legend  is  that  Mithridates  and  Ariobarzanes  aided  the  Gauls  (Galatians)
to  repel  an  Egyptian  army  sent  against  them  by  Ptolemy,  and  after
driving  the  Egyptians  down  to  the  sea  carried  off  the  anchors  of  their
ships.

On  coins  of  the  Galatian  Ancyra  the  City,  personified,  is  represented
seated  and  holding  an  anchor  and  sceptre.  An  anchor  appears  on
coins  of  the  Phrygian  Ancyra  also.  See  Head,  Historia  Nummorum^
PP-  557)  630.  (Mr.  Head  falls  into  the  mistake  of  supposing  that  in
the  present  passage  Pausanias  is  speaking  of  the  Phrygian  Ancyra.
That  Pausanias  is  speaking  of  the  Gsdatian  Ancyra  is  quite  dear  from
the  statement  that  Ancyra  was  beyond,  ue,  east  of,  the  river  Sangarius.)

4.  5.  the  fountain  of  Midas  etc  The  story  ran  that  the  satyr
Silenus  was  gifted  with  supernatural  knowledge  which  he  was  loath  to
impart.  So  to  catch  him  King  Midas  mixed  wine  with  the  water  of  the
spring  out  of  which  the  satyr  was  wont  to  drink.  In  the  drunken  sleep
which  followed  his  draught  from  the  fountain  Silepus  fell  an  easy  prey
to  the  crafty  king,  and  was  not  released  till  he  had  held  high  discourse
on  the  nature  of  the  world  and  the  vanity  of  human  life.  See  Plutarch,
Consol.  ad  Apollon.  27;  Aelian,  Var.  Hist,  iii.  18;  Philostratus,  Vtt,
Apollon,  vi.  27  ;  Cicero,  Tusc.  L  48.  114  ;  Servius  on  Virgil,  EcL  vi.
13  ;  Himerius,  EcL  xvi.  5.  According  to  Xenophon  {Anabasis^  i.  2.  13)
the  fountain  of  Midas,  with  the  water  of  which  he  caught  the  satyr,  was
at  Thymbrium  by  the  wayside.  Cp.  W.  M.  Ramsay,  Historical  Geo-
graphy of  Asia  Minor^  p.  1 40.

The  Macedonians  affirmed  that  Silenus  was  caught  in  Macedonia  in
the  gardens  of  Midas,  where  bloomed  the  sweetest  roses  in  all  the  world
(Herodotus,  viii.  138).  According  to  Bion  the  name  of  the  fountain  at
which  Silenus  was  caught  was  Inna,  and  it  was  between  Paeonia  and
the  land  of  the  Maedi  (Athenaeus,  ii.  p.  45  c).  The  story  of  King
Midas  and  his  ass's  ears  (Ovid,  Met,  xi.  146-193;  Aristophanes,
PluiuSy  287)  is  a  folk -tale  which  is  still  current  in  Greece.  See  B.
Schmidt,  Griechische  Mdrchen^  Sagen  und  Volkslieder^  pp.  70  sq,^
224  sq.  Parallels  to  it  are  found,  with  trifling  variations  of  detail,  in
Ireland  (Grimm,  Household  Tales^  2,  p.  498,  tr.  by  M.  Hunt ;  Patrick
Kennedy,  Legendary  fictions  of  the  Irish  CeltSy  p.  248  sqq,^  ed.  1866),
in  Servia  (Karadschitsch,  Volksmarchen  der  Serben^  No.  39,  p.  225  5qq,\
and  among  the  Mongols  (Jiilg,  Mongolische  Mdrchen-Sammlung^  No.
22,  p.  182  sqq, ;  Sagcufrom  the  Far  East^  No.  21,  p.  206  sqq,)

On  supposed  representations  of  Midas  in  existing  works  of  ancient  art,
see  Th.  Panofka  in  Archdologische  Zeitung^  2  (1844),  pp.  383-398  ;  n/.,
3  (1845),  pp.  87-96.  (One  of  the  figures  which  Panofka  interpreted  as
Midas  is  certainly  Dionysus  on  a  dromedary.)

4.  5.  Mount  Agdistis.  Amobius  tells  us  (Adversus  NationeSy  v.
5,  cp.  id,  V.  9)  that  in  Phrygia  there  was  a  rock  of  a  most  prodigious


CH.  IV  THE  GAULS  75

size  which  the  natives  called  Agdus,  and  which  by  an  unnatural  birth
brought  forth  the  monster  Agdistis  (as  to  whom  see  Paus.  vii.  17.
10-12).  According  to  Prof.  W.  M.  Ramsay,  the  name  Agdus  is  the
Phrygian  word  for  mountain,  being  the  same  as  the  Greek  ochihos
(ox^os) ;  Agdistis  thus  means  **  the  son  of  the  mountain,''  and  Attis
(Atys)  is  only  a  contracted  form  of  Agdistis.  See  Prof.  W.  M.  Ramsay,
\n  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  3  (1882),  p.  56.

4.  6.  The  Pergameniaxis  have  spoils  taken  from  the  Gaols,
and  a  picture  representing  the  battle  with  them.  The  German
excavations  at  Pergamus  in  1878-1881  showed  that  the  temple  of  Athena
on  the  Acropolis  of  that  city  was  enclosed  on  two  sides  by  spacious
colonnades.  In  the  back-walls  of  these  two  colonnades  were  niches,
each  niche  enclosed  by  two  half- columns  supporting  an  architrave.
Further,  there  were  found  fragments  of  two  identical  inscriptions  which
seem  to  have  been  placed  on  the  back-walls  of  the  colonnades.  The
inscriptions  run  thus :

BocrtAcvs  'ArraXos  BouriAccDS  'ArraAov  Au  Kai  'Adrjv^  NtKi;^/9<p

\apurTrjpiov  twv  Kara  iroke/wv  dywvwv

"  King  Attalus,  son  of  King  Attalus,  (dedicated)  to  Zeus  and  Victory-
bringing  Athena  a  thank-offering  from  the  conflicts  in  war."  Perhaps
these  niches  contained  some  of  the  spoils  taken  from  the  Gauls,  and  the
painting  mentioned  by  Pausanias  may  have  also  occupied  part  of  the
back-walls  of  the  colonnades ;  it  was  perhaps  a  long  series  of  pictures.
We  know  from  Pausanias's  description  of  the  colonnades  in  the  market-
place at  Athens  that  it  was  common  to  adorn  the  walls  of  such  edifices
with  paintings.  See  Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  s,v,  *  Pergamon,'  p.  1220
j^f.  It  is  true  that  the  dedication  recorded  in  the  inscription  was  by
Attalus  II.,  but  he  may  very  well  have  commemorated  the  victories  of
his  predecessors  Attalus  I.  and  Eumenes  II.,  both  of  whom  engaged  in  a
series  of  conflicts  with  the  Gauls,  though  Pausanias  seems  to  have  heard
only  of  the  decisive  victory  won  by  Attalus  I.  As  to  the  wars  of  the
kings  of  Pergamus  with  the  Gauls,  see  Contzen,  Die  Wanderungen  der
Kelten^  p.  233  sqq,  \  Fr.  Koepp,  *  Ueber  die  Galaterkriege  der
Attaliden,'  Rheinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  40  (1885),  pp.  1 14-132.

4.  6.  sacred  to  the  Oabiri  of  old.  According  to  Aristides  {Or,
Iv.  voL  2.  p.  709,  ed.  Dindorf),  the  Cabiri  were  said  to  be  the  oldest
divinities  of  Pergamus.

4.  6.  the  band  which  crossed  to  Asia  with  Telephns.  In  classical
literature  we  find  two  different  stories  of  the  coming  of  Telephus  to  Asia.
According  to  Euripides,  who  wrote  a  play  on  the  subject  of  Telephus,
the  infant  Telephus  and  his  mother  Auge  were  placed  in  a  chest  by
Auge's  father,  Aleus,  king  of  Tegea  in  Arcadia,  and  thrown  into  the  sea ;
the  chest  drifted  to  the  mouth  of  the  Caicus  where  it  was  found  by  Teu-
thias,  king  of  the  country,  who  married  Auge  and  adopted  Telephus.  See
Strabo,  xiii.  p.  615,  cp.  id.  xii.  p.  572.  According  to  the  other  story,
Aleus  gave  his  daughter  Auge  to  Nauplius  with  orders  to  drown  her,
but  Nauplius  spared  her  and  ultimately  she  came  into  the  hands  of


76  THE  ROTUNDA  bk.  i.  attica

Teuthras,  king  of  Mysia,  who  married  or  adopted  her.  Meantime  the
infant  Telephus  had  been  exposed  on  Moimt  Parthenius,  but  a  doe  found
him  and  suckled  him.  When  he  grew  up,  Telephus  inquired  of  the  oracle
at  Delphi,  and  was  told  to  go  to  the  court  of  Teuthras  in  Mysia,  where
he  found  his  mother.  See  Diodorus,  iv.  33  ;  Apollodorus,  ii.  7.  4,  iii.  9.
I  ;  Hyginus,  Fab,  99  sq, ;  Tzetzes,  SckoL  on  LycopkroUy  206.  This
latter  story  was  apparently  the  one  followed  by  Pausanias  here  and  else-
where (see  viii.  48.  7  ;  viii.  54.  6 ;  ix.  31.  2),  as  well  as  by  Aristides,
who  speaks  of  the  colony  which  came  from  Arcadia  to  Mysia  with
Telephus  (Or,  xlii.  voL  i.  p.  772,  ed.  Dindorf).  But  in  another
passage  (viii.  4.  9),  Pausanias  follows  Euripides's  version  of  the  legend.
Scenes  from  the  life  of  Telephus  were  depicted  in  relief  on  the  smaller
of  the  two  friezes  on  the  great  altar  of  Pergamus,  as  we  learn  from  the
fragments  of  the  frieze  which  were  discovered  by  the  Germans  at
Pergamus  and  are  now  at  Berlin.  One  of  the  scenes  represents  the
making  of  the  chest  in  which  Auge  is  to  be  shut  up  ;  four  men  are
making  it  with  hammer,  saw,  axe,  and  gimlet,  while  beside  them  sits
Auge,  with  her  head  veiled,  in  an  attitude  of  sorrow.  See  Baumeister's
Denkmdler^  p.  1269  sqq.  This  scene  on  the  frieze  proves  that,  accord-
ing to  one  version  of  the  legend,  Auge  was  put  into  the  chest  by  her-
self while  the  babe  was  left  behind.  This  particular  version  of  the  story
seems  not  to  be  mentioned  in  ancient  literature,  but  it  is  illustrated  by  a
coin  of  Elaea,  the  port  of  Pergamus,  which  represents  the  finding  of  the
chest.  Auge  appears  preparing  to  step  out  of  the  chest  in  the  presence
of  four  men,  one  of  whom  gives  her  his  hand,  while  a  second  holds  the
lid  of  the  chest  open.  The  men  seem  to  be  fishermen  and  to  have
caught  the  chest  in  their  net ;  for  the  bottom  of  the  chest  is  wrapped  in
a  net,  and  the  prow  of  a  boat  is  depicted  to  the  left.  See  Fr.  Marx,
'Broncemiinze  von  Elaia,'  Mittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  10  (1885),
pp.  21-26.  From  its  occurrence  on  these  two  monuments  of  Perga-
menian  art,  we  may  conclude  that  the  solitary  voyage  of  Auge  in  the
chest  to  the  mouth  of  the  Caicus  was  the  orthodox  Pergamenian  legend.
The  story  of  Hercules  and  Auge  is  the  subject  of  some  Pompeian  paint-
ings. See  C.  Robert,  *  Ercole  ed  Auge  sopra  pitture  Pompeiane,'
Annali  delP  InsHtuto^  56  (1884),  pp.  75-87.  Telephus  was  worshipped
at  Pergamus.     See  iii.  26.  10;  v.  13.  3.

4.  6.  Telephufl'  bold  attack  on  the  army  of  Agamemnon  etc
See  ix.  5.  14  note.

5.  I.  the  so-called  Botunda.  This  was  a  round  building  with  a
tiled  roof.  It  was  also  called  the  Skias  (<  umbrella ')  on  account  of  the
conical  shape  of  the  roof.  See  Harpocration,  Hesychius,  Suidas,
Photius  {Lexicon)^  Timaeus  {Lexicon  Platonicum)^  Etymolog,  Magnum
(p.  453),  s.v,  Qo\o% ;  Bekker's  Anecd,  Graeca,  i.  p.  264.  The  name  Skias
appears  to  have  been  the  official  designation  of  the  building,  as  it
is  regularly  employed  in  inscriptions  instead  of  Rotunda  {Tholos)  ;  see
e,g.  C,  L  A,  iii.  No.  105 1,  line  22.  The  presidents  (prutaneis)  of  the
Council  of  Five  Hundred  dined  here  together  daily  at  the  public  expense
and  offered  sacrifices  and  libations  (Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens^  43  ;
Demosthenes,  xix.    190,  p.  400;  Ammonius,  quoted  by  Harpocration,


CH.  V  THE  EPONYMOUS  HEROES  77

s,v,  ^oAos;  Pollux,  viii.  155).  In  a  case  of  emergency  they  slept
in  the  building  (Andocides,  i.  45).  Their  chairman  {efiistates),  who
kept  the  keys  of  the  sanctuaries  in  which  the  public  treasures  and
records  were  preserved,  had  to  stay  in  the  Rotunda  during  his  twenty-
four  hours  of  office,  along  with  one-third  of  his  colleagues,  whom-
ever he  chose  for  the  duty  (Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens^  44).
The  secretaries  of  the  Council  also  dined  with  the  presidents  in  the
Rotunda  (Demosthenes,  xix.  249,  p.  419).  Standard  weights  and
measures  were  kept  in  the  Rotunda  in  charge  of  a  public  slave  (C  /.  A.
ii.  No.  476,  line  37  sqq.)  Socrates  was  examined  in  the  Rotunda
before  the  Thirty  Tyrants  (Plato,  Apol.  Socr,  p.  32  c  d).  On  the
Rotunda,  see  further  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen^  2.  pp.  315-320.

5.  I.  certain  silver  images  of  no  great  size.  Prof.  K6hler  con-
jectured that  these  may  have  been  images  of  the  gods  of  the  hearth
{Hermes^  5  (1871),  p.  334),  and  his  conjecture  is  approved  by  Prof.  C.
Wachsmuth  {Die  Stadt  Athen^  2.  p.  317,  note  i).  But  the  public  hearth
of  Athens  seems  to  have  been  in  the  Prytaneum  (see  i.  18.  3  note),
where  accordingly  we  should  expect  to  find  the  images  of  the  gods  of
the  hearth.  The  scholiast  on  Aristophanes  {Birds ^  436)  speaks  of  a
custom  of  setting  up  a  clay  image  of  Hephaestus  beside  the  hearth  ;  but
this  seems  to  be  merely  an  inference  from  the  passage  of  Aristophanes
on  which  he  is  commenting.

5.  I.  Higher  up  stand  statues  of  the  heroes  etc.  These  statues
appear  to  have  stood  somewhere  on  the  northern  slope  of  the  Areopagus,
above  the  Metroum,  the  Council  House,  and  the  Rotunda.  Aristotle
tells  us  {Constitution  of  Athens^  53)  that  the  bronze  tablet  on  which  was
engraved  the  list  of  the  lads  {ephebot)  was  set  up  "in  front  of  the
Cotmcil  House  beside  the  statues  of  the  eponymous  heroes,"  which
implies  that  these  statues  were  close  to  the  Council  House.  Lists  of
the  men  called  out  for  military  service  were  also  posted  up  at  these
statues,  the  names  being  probably  arranged  in  batches  according  to  the
tribes  and  posted  up  on  or  beside  the  statues  of  the  respective  tribal
heroes ;  thus  the  list  of  the  men  called  out  in  the  tribe  Pandionis  would
be  put  up  on  the  statue  of  Pandion,  etc.  See  Aristophanes,  Peace^
1 180  sqq,^  with  the  scholiast  on  v.  1 183.  It  seems  that  copies  of  pro-
posed laws  were  also  set  up  for  public  inspection  at  the  statues  of  the
eponymous  heroes  (Demosthenes,  xx.  94,  p.  485  ;  id,  xxiv.  23,  p.  707  ;
cp.  Andocides,  i.  83  sq,^  but  the  genuineness  of  the  passage  is  doubtful,
sec  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen^  2.  p.  348,  note  4).  The  names  of
men  who  had  deserved  well  of  the  state  were  proclaimed  or  written  up
in  front  of  these  statues  (Isocrates,  xviii.  61  ;  C,  L  A,  ii.  No.  569)  ;  and
on  the  other  hand,  the  names  of  unpatriotic  citizens  were  posted  up  to
public  execration  at  the  same  place  (Isaeus,  v.  38).  Thus,  as  a  place
for  public  notices,  the  statues  of  the  eponymous  heroes  seem  to  have
served  like  the  town  cross  with  us.  To  have  a  statue  of  one's  self  set  up
beside  those  of  these  heroes  was  a  high  distinction  (Lucian,  Anacharsis^
17).     Cp.  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Atken,  2.  pp.  387-390.

5.  I.  Herodotus  has  told  who  it  was  that  established  ten
tribes  instead  of  four.    Clisthenes  abolished  the  four  old  Attic  tribes


78  THE  EPONYMOUS  HEROES  bk.  l  attica

called  Geleontes,  Hoplites,  Aegicoreis,  and  Argadeis,  and  redivided  the
population  of  Attica  into  ten  new  tribes.  See  Herodotus,  v.  66  and  69.
This  reform  was  effected  in  the  archonship  of  Isagoras,  508-507  ac,
according  to  Aristotle  (Constitution  of  Athens^  21).  See  K.  F.  Hennann,
Griech,  Staatsalterthiimer^  ed.  Thumser,  ^  54^  7 1,  ppt  290  sqq,^  395  5qq.\
G.  Busolt,  Griech,  Stoats-  und  Rechtsaltertiimer^  ^  115,  116,  136,
pp.  124  sqq,y  159  sq,\  G.  Gilbert,  Griech,  Staatsalterthamer^  i.  pp.
113  sqq,y  160  sqq.  The  new  ten  tribes  established  by  Clisthenes  were
named,  in  their  official  order,  as  follows :  Erechtheis,  Aegeis,  Pandionis,
Leontis,  Acamantis,  Oeneis,  Cecropis,  Hippothontis,  Ajantis,  and
Antiochis.  See  C.  I,  A,  ii.  Nos.  172,  943;  *Eif>rjfupU  dp\aioXoyucq^
1883,  p.  123-124,  line  50  sqq,;  [Demosthenes,]  Ix.  27-31,  p.  1397  sqq.
Cp.  Busolt,  op.  at.  p.  217  ;  Gilbert,  ofi.a't,  p.  222.  On  the  eponymous
heroes  and  the  tribes  named  after  them,  see  A.  Mommsen,  <  Die  zehn
Eponymen  und  die  Reihenfolge  der  Phylen  Athens,'  PhilologuSy  47
(1889),  pp.  449-486.

5.  2.  Hippothoon,  son  of  Poseidon  etc   Cp.  i.  38.  4 ;  i.  39.  3  note.

5.  2.  Antiochos.     Cp.  iL  4.  3 ;  x.  10.  i.

5.  2.  Leos,  who  is  said  to  have  given  his  daughters  etc  The
legend  ran  that  Attica  was  afflicted  with  a  famine,  and  the  Delphic
oracle  declared  that  the  only  remedy  was  a  htmian  sacrifice.  So  Leos,
son  of  Orpheus,  voluntarily  gave  up  his  three  daughters  Phrasithea  (or
Praxithea),  Theope,  and  Eubule  to  be  sacrificed  for  the  public  w^.
According  to  another,  and  apparently  older,  version  of  the  legend  the
girb  offered  themselves  as  victims.  The  sacrifice  was  efiectual,  and  the
three  heroic  maidens  were  henceforth  worshipped  by  the  Athenians  in  a
shrine  called  the  Leocorium  which  stood  in  the  centre  of  the  Ceramicus.
See  [Demosthenes,]  Ix.  29,  p.  1398;  Diodorus,  xviL  15;  Cicero,  De
natura  deorum^  iiL  19.  50;  Aristides,  Or,  xiii.  vol  i.  p.  191  sq,^  ed.
Dindorf ;  Aelian,  Var,  Hist.  xii.  28  ;  Harpocration,  Photius  {Lexicon)^
Suidas,  Etymol.  Magn.  (p.  560),  and  Hesydiius,  s.v.  Accuicdpiov;  Bekker's
Anecdota  Graeca^  i.  p.  277,  line  13  sq,;  Apostolius,  x.  53.  That  the
Leocorium  was  in  the  market-place  we  learn  from  Demosthenes  (liv.  7,
p.  1258).  Beside  it  Hipparchus  fell  by  the  swords  of  Harmodius  and
Aristogiton  (Thucydides,  L  20,  vi.  57  ;  Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens^
18).  It  was  one  of  the  &mous  places  of  Athens,  being  mentioned  along
with  the  Acropolis,  the  temple  of  Olympian  Zeus,  the  Painted  Colonnade,
the  Gardens  of  the  Philosophers,  the  Lyceum,  and  the  Academy  (Strabo,
ix.  p.  396).  This  makes  it  all  the  more  remarkable  that  Pausanias  no-
where mentions  it  Modem  scholars  are  not  agreed  as  to  the  uses  to
which  the  building  was  put.  Prof.  E.  Curtius  would  derive  the  name
from  Aecos  'people'  and  Kopetv  *to  sweep,'  and  supposes  that  public
ceremonies  of  expiation  and  purification  were  performed  at  it  See  K.
O.  M tiller,  'De  foro  Athenarum,'  Kunstarchaeologische  Werke^  5.  p.
146;  E.  Curtius,  <Das  Leokorion  und  die  Volksversammlungsraume  von
Athen,'  Monatsberichte  of  the  Prussian  Academy  (Berlin)  for  1878,  pp.
77-87  (reprinted  in  Curtius's  Gesammelte  Abhcmdlungen^  i.  pp.  465-
474) ;  id.y  StcuLtgeschichte  von  Athen^  p.  63  sq,\  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die
Stadt  Athen^  2.  pp.  413-418.


CH.  V  THE  EPONYMOUS  HEROES  79

5.  2.  Erechthens slew Immaradufl.    Cp.  i.  27.  4 ;  i.

38.  3.

5.  3.  tliere  were  two  kings  of  the  name  of  Cecrops  etc.  Cecrops
the  First,  king  of  Athens,  was  supposed  to  be  earth-bom,  and  to  be
half-man  and  half-serpent ;  he  married  Agraulus,  daughter  of  Actaeus.
See  Apollodorus,  iii.  14.  i  sq,\  cp.  Paus.  i.  2.  6.  Cecrops  the  Second
was  the  eldest  son  of  Erechtheus,  and  succeeded  his  father  on  the  throne
of  Athens.  See  Apollodorus,  iii.  15.  5  ;  cp.  Paus.  vii.  i.  2.  He  is  said
to  have  founded  the  town  of  Athens  (Athenae  D lades)  in  Euboea  (Euse-
bius,  Ckron,  vol.  2.  pp.  26,  27,  ed.  Sch6ne).  K.  O.  Miiller  held  that
the  tribe  whose  settlements  were  called  Athens  (there  was  an  Athens
also  in  Boeotia,  see  ix.  24.  2),  and  whose  goddess  was  Athena,  every-
where revered  as  their  founder  a  priestly  chief  named  Cecrops.  But
King  Cecrops  II.  of  Athens  was  probably  (as  K.  O.  Miiller  and  others
have  seen)  a  later  fiction.  See  K.  O.  Miiller,  Orchotnenus^^  p.  116  sq.
Elsewhere  Pausanias  mentions  that  a  certain  Cecrops,  son  of  Pandion,
had  a  shrine  at  Haliartus  in  Boeotia  (see  ix.  33.  i,  and  the  note  on  ix.
24.  2).  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Clisthenes,  in  naming  one  of  his
new  tribes  after  Cecrops,  had  in  mind  the  first  Cecrops,  the  half-man
half-serpent,  as  the  pseudo-Demosthenes  says  (Ix.  30,  p.  1398),  not
his  double,  Cecrops  II.,  who  was  a  mere  genealogical  stop-gap.

5.  3.  two  kings  called  Pandion.  Pandion  I.,  king  of  Athens,
was  a  son  of  Erichthonius  and  a  Naiad  nymph  named  Praxithea.  He
succeeded  his  father  Erichthonius  on  the  throne.  In  his  reign  Demeter
and  Dionysus  are  said  to  have  come  to  Attica.  He  married  Zeuxippe,
by  whom  he  had  two  daughters,  Procne  and  Philomela,  and  two  sons,
Erechtheus  and  Butes.  See  Apollodorus,  iii.  14.  6-8.  Pandion  II.  was
a  son  of  Cecrops  II.  and  Metiadusa,  daughter  of  Eupalamus.  He
succeeded  his  father  Cecrops  on  the  throne  of  Athens,  but  was  expelled
by  the  sons  of  Metion,  and  took  refuge  at  Megara.  See  Apollodorus,
iii.  15.  5.  Eusebius  calls  Pandion  II.  a  son  of  Erechtheus,  not  of
Cecrops  II.  See  the  genealogy  of  the  old  kings  of  Athens  in  Eusebius,
Chron.  voL  i.  p.  183  sqq..^  ed  Sch5ne.  The  pseudo-Demosthenes  (Ix.  28,
p.  1397)  regarded  Pandion  I.  (the  father  of  Procne  and  Philomela)
as  the  eponymous  hero  of  the  Attic  tribe  Pandionis.

5.  3.  driven  from  the  throne  by  the  Metionids  etc  Apollodorus
tells  us  that  Pandion,  king  of  Athens,  was  expelled  by  the  rebel  sons
of  Metion,  and  fled  to  Megara,  where  he  married  Pelia  (or  Pylia)
daughter  of  Pylas,  the  king  of  the  city.  He  afterwards  came  to  the
throne  of  Megara ;  for  Pylas  slew  his  own  paternal  uncle  Bias,  and
withdrew  to  Peloponnese  where  he  founded  Pylus,  leaving  the  kingdom
of  Megara  to  Pandion.  The  sons  bom  to  Pandion  at  Megara  were
Aegeus,  Pallas,  Nisus,  and  Lycus.  See  Apollodorus,  iii.  15.  5  ;  cp.
Paus.  i.  39.  4.  The  usurper  Metion  was  himself  a  scion  of  the  royal
house  of  Athens,  being  either  a  son  or  a  grandson  of  Erechtheus
(Pherecydes,  quoted  by  Schol.  on  Sophocles,  Oed.  Col.  472  ;  Diodorus,
iv.  76).  According  to  one  tradition  the  famous  artist  Daedalus  was  a
son  of  Metion.  See  note  on  ix.  3.  2  ;  and  as  to  the  house  of  the
Metionids,  see  T6pflfer,  Attische  Genealogie^  pp.  161- 169.


8o  THE  EPONYMOUS  HEROES  bk.  i.  attica

5.  3.  his  tomb  is  by  the  sea-shore  in  the  land  of  Megara.

See  i.  41.  6  note.

5.  4*  in  respect  of  his  danghters  Pandion  was  unlucky,  etc

The  daughters  were  Procne  and  Philomela.  See  i.  41.  8  j^. ;  x.  4.  8  note.
"  The  Thracian  prince  '*  is  Tereus ;  he  reigned  at  Daulis  in  Phocis,  but
the  population  of  the  district  was  then  Thracian  (Thucydides,  ii.  29).

5.  5.  tribes  called  after  Attains and  Ptolemy.    In  200  b.c.,

Attalus  I.,  king  of  Pergamus,  visited  Athens  in  company  with  the
Roman  ambassadors,  and  was  received  with  great  demonstrations  of
enthusiasm ;  amongst  other  honours  conferred  on  him  the  tribe  Attalis
was  created  and  named  after  him.  See  Polybius,  xvi.  25  ;  Livy,  xxxi.
15  ;  cp.  Paus.  I.  8.  i.  The  exact  date  when  the  tribe  Ptolemais  was
instituted  is  not  known.  If  the  Ptolemy,  from  whom  the  tribe  took
its  name,  was  Ptolemy  Philadelphus,  as  Pausanias  supposed  (see  i.  6.
8  ;  i.  8.  6),  then  the  tribe  must  have  been  created  between  285  and
247  B.C.,  that  being  the  period  of  the  reign  of  Ptolemy  Philadelphus.
Prof.  Beloch,  however,  has  argued  that  the  Ptolemy  in  whose  honour
the  tribe  was  created  was  Ptolemy  Euergetes,  who  reigned  from  247
to  221  B.C.  His  reason  is  that  in  the  tribe  Ptolemais  there  was  a
township  {deme)  called  Berenicidae  after  Berenice,  the  wife  of  Ptolemy
Euergetes  (Stephanus  Byz.,  s,v,  BcpeviiciSat) ;  this  township  must  have
been  instituted  in  the  reign  of  Ptolemy  Euergetes,  and  Prof.  Beloch
holds  that  the  tribe  Ptolemais  must  have  been  instituted  simultaneously.
According  to  him,  the  creation  of  the  tribe  took  place  somewhere
between  229  6.C.  (the  date  when  the  Macedonian  garrisons  were
withdrawn  from  Attica,  see  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen^  i.
p.  630  sq,)  and  221  B.C.,  the  date  of  the  death  of  Ptolemy  Euergetes.
See  J.  Beloch,  *Die  Errichtung  der  Phyle  Ptolemais,'  Fleckeiseris
Jahrbiicher,  30  (1884),  pp.  481-488.

Pausanias  has  omitted  to  mention  that  in  306-305  B.c  two  new
tribes,  the  Demetrias  and  Antigonis,  were  instituted  in  honour  of
Demetrius  and  Antigonus  (Plutarch,  Demetrius^  10)  ;  but  they  were
abolished  not  very  many  years  afterwards,  though  the  exact  date  of  the
abolition  is  not  known.  See  G.  Gilbert,  *  Zur  Geschichte  der  Zwolfzahl
der  attischen  Phylen,'  Philologus^  39  (1880),  pp.  373-378  ;  zV/.,  Griech.
Staatsalterthiimer^  i.  p.  222  sq,

5.  5.  a  tribe  called  afber  the  Emperor  Hadrian.  This  tribe
(Hadrianis)  is  mentioned  in  many  inscriptions  (C.  /.  A,  iii.  Nos.  81-83,
II 13,  1 1 14,  1 1 20,  1 121  etc.)  See  Hertzberg,  Gesch,  Griechenlands
unter  der  Herrschaft  der  Romer^  2.  p.  343  sq.  From  inscriptions  we
learn  that  there  were  tribes  named  after  Hadrian  at  Megara  and  in
the  Phrygian  town  of  Eumenia  (C  /.  G.  G,  S.  Nos.  72,  74,  10 1  ;  Bull,
Carr.  Hellin,  8  (1884),  p.  234).

5.  5.  he  quelled  the  revolt  of  the  Hebrews.  In  the  reign  of
Hadrian  the  Jews  revolted  (132  A.D.),  but  were  put  down  after  a  long
and  most  desperate  resistance.  More  than  half  a  million  of  them  were
slaughtered,  and  the  number  that  perished  by  hunger,  and  disease,  and
fire  was  past  finding  out.  Judaea  was  almost  turned  into  a  desert.  Its
desolation  is  said  to  have  been  foreshadowed  by  signs  and  omens  before


CH.  VI  HISTORY  OF  PTOLEMY  L  8i

the  war.  For  Solomon's  tomb  had  suddenly  fallen  down,  and  wolves
and  hyaenas  ran  howling  through  the  streets  of  the  cities.  On  the
Roman  side,  too,  the  losses  were  so  heavy  that  in  the  despatches  which
announced  his  victory  the  emperor  omitted  the  usual  preliminary
flourishes  about  the  health  and  spirit  of  the  troops.  It  was  not  Judaea
only  that  suffered ;  the  Jews  all  over  the  world  were  in  agitation  and
engaged  in  hostilities,  more  or  less  open,  against  the  Roman  government,
aided  and  abetted,  from  mercenary  'motives,  by  the  scum  of  other
nations.  So  that,  in  the  words  of  the  ancient  historian  who  records
these  events,  the  whole  world  was  shaken.  All  this  was  because
the  chosen  people  were  not  allowed  to  circumcise  themselves  {quod
veUbaniur  mutilare  genitilia).  See  Dio  Cassius,  Ixix.  13  j^.;  Spartianus,
Hadrian^  14  ;  Merivale,  History  of  the  Romans  under  the  Empire^  8.  p.
'  75  -^^^  >  H.  Schiller,  Geschichte  der  romischen  Kaiserzeity  i.  pp.  612-615.

5.  5.  the  common  Banctnary  of  the  gods.    Cp.  i.  18.  9.

6.  2.  Ptolemy was  really  the  son  of  Philip.     Cp.  Quintus

Curtius,  ix.  8.  22.

6.  2.  when  Alexander  was  in  danger  amongst  the  Ozydracians
etc.  Alexander  the  Great,  in  storming  the  citadel  of  a  city  in  India,
was  the  first  to  mount  the  scaling-ladder ;  but  the  ladder  breaking
dovm  behind  him  he  was  left  alone,  and  it  was  some  time  before  his
men  could  reach  and  rescue  him.  See  Arrian,  Anabasis^  vi.  9  sq, ;
Quintus  Curtius,  ix.  4  sq.  ;  Appian,  Bellum  Civile^  ii.  152  ;  Plutarch,
Alexcmder^  63.  The  city  in  which  this  took  place  is  commonly  said  to
have  been  in  the  territory  of  the  Oxydracian  tribe  (so  Quintus  Curtius
and  Appian,  ll.cc, ;  Lucian,  Dial,  Mori,  xiv.  5  ;  Stephanus  Byz.,  s,v.
'O^vSpaKat).  But  this  is  expressly  denied  by  Arrian,  who  affirms  that
it  occurred  in  the  city  of  an  independent  Indian  tribe  called  the  Malli
(Arrian,  Anadasis,  vi.  11.  3).  His  testimony  is  supported  by  that  of
Plutarch  (/,c.)  Again,  the  view  that  Ptolemy  had  been  among  the  fore-
most in  rescuing  Alexander  from  his  peril,  thereby  earning  the  title  of
Saviour,  is  combatted  by  Arrian,  who  tells  us  that  Ptolemy  in  his
own  published  memoirs  expressly  denied  having  been  present  at
the  action  at  all ;  he  had  been  away,  he  said,  on  an  expedition
against  another  tribe  at  the  time  (Arrian,  Anabasis^  vi.  11.  8).
Clitarchus,  indeed,  affirmed  that  Ptolemy  was  present  on  the  occasion
(Quintus  Curtius,  ix.  5.  21);  but  Ptolemy  must  have  known  better
himself,  and  he  could  have  no  motive  for  disclaiming  a  share  in  the
glory  of  rescuing  Alexander.  Stephanus  Byzantius  compresses  both
mistakes  into  his  short  note  on  the  Oxydracians  ('O^vSpaKai),  Cp.
Droysen,  Gesch,  d  Hellenismus^  i.  2.  p.  185.

6.  2.  he  opposed  those  who  woiild  have  transferred  the  whole
power  to  Aridaeus  etc.     Cp.  Justin,  xiii.  2.  1 1  sq,

6.  3.  He  prevailed  on  the  Macedonians  who  were  charged  with
the  convesrance  of  Alexander's  body  etc.  After  being  brought  with
extraordinary  pomp  from  Babylon  to  Memphis,  the  remains  of  Alexander
were  finally  laid  in  a  splendid  sepulchre  in  Alexandria,  where  sacrifices
were  offered  to  him  as  a  hero,  and  magnificent  games  celebrated  in  his
honour.     Here  the  body  still  reposed  at  the  beginning  of  our  era,  lying

VOU  II  G


82  HISTORY  OF  PTOLEMY  I.  bk.  i.  attica

in  a  crystal  coffin,  the  golden  coffin  in  which  it  was  originally  deposited
having  been  stolen.  Alexander  died  in  323  B.C.  ;  but  nearly  two  years
were  spent  in  preparing  the  funeral  pageant,  and  it  was  towards  the  end
of  322  B.C.  when  the  stately  train  set  out  jfrom  Babylon.  See  i.  7.  i  ;
Diodorus,  xviii.  26-28  ;  Arrian,  in  Photius,  Biblioiheca^  p.  70  b,  ed.
Bekker ;  Strabo,  xvii.  p.  794 ;  Droysen,  Gesch.  d,  Hellenismus^  ii.  i.  p.
no  sqq,

6.  3.  he  was  repulsed  etc.  The  defeat  and  death  of  Perdiccas
took  place  in  321  B.c.  See  Diodorus,  x\'iii.  33-36  ;  Arrian,  in  Photius,
BibliothecOy  p.  71  a,  ed.  Bekker ;  Justin,  xiii.  6  and  8  ;  Droysen,  op.  cit
il  I.  p.  125  sqq,\  Thirlwall,  History  of  Greece^  7.  p.  236  sqq.

6.  4.  when  Seleucns fled  to  him  etc.     Seleucus  fled  to

Ptolemy  in  Egypt  in  316  B.C.,  and  the  alliance  between  Ptolemy,
Lysimachus,  and  Cassander  was  concluded  soon  afterwards.  See  Dio-
dorus, xix.  56;  Appian,  Syr.  53.

6.  5.  fhe  revolt  of  Oyrene.  Cyrene  revolted  in  312  b.c.,  but
was  reduced  to  subjection  by  Agis,  the  general  of  Ptolemy,  according  to
Diodorus  (xix.  79).  Droysen  puts  the  revolt  of  Cyrene  in  313  B.C.
{Gesch.  d.  Hellenismus^  ii.  2.  p.  34  sq.)

6.  5.  entrusting  them  to  his  son  Demetrius  etc.  Demetrius
was  at  this  time  twenty -two  years  old.  He  rashly  gave  battle  to
Ptolemy  at  Gaza  and  was  defeated  in  3 1 2  B.c  See  Diodorus,  xix.  80-
84;  Appian,  Syr.  54;  Plutarch,  Demetrius^  5;  Justin,  xv.  i.  6;
Thirlwall,  Hist,  of  Greece^  7.  p.  340  ;  Droysen,  Gesch.  d.  Heilenisnius^
ii.  2.  p.  40  sqq.

6.  5.  marched  towards  the  Hellespont  etc.  According  to
Diodorus  (xix.  77)  Antigonus  reached  the  Propontis,  and  then,  without
crossing  over  into  Europe,  went  into  winter  quarters.  Cp.  Critical
Note.

6.  5.  he  had  even  surprised  and  cut  to  pieces  a  handftd  of
Egyptian  troops.  Afler  the  battle  of  Gaza,  Ptolemy  despatched  a  force
against  Demetrius  with  instructions  to  drive  him  out  of  Syria.  But
Demetrius  succeeded  in  surprising  and  capturing  the  whole  force  sent
against  him,  including  the  general  (312  B.C.)  His  success  would  seem
to  have  been  much  more  considerable  than  Pausanias  here  represents
it.  See  Diodorus,  xix.  93  ;  Plutarch,  Demetrius^  6  ;  Droysen,  Gesch.
d.  Hellenismusy  ii.  2.  p.  52  sq.

6.  6.  Demetrius  sailed  to  Cyprus  and  defeated  Menelaus

in  a  sea-fight.  In  306  b.c  Demetrius  sailed  to  Cyprus,  landed  in  the
island,  defeated  Menelaus,  the  brother  of  Ptolemy,  in  a  land  battle,
and  besieged  him  in  Salamis.  Ptolemy  came  to  relieve  Salamis  with  a
large  fleet,  but  was  decisively  defeated  by  Demetrius  in  a  great  naval
battle.  After  the  battle  Menelaus  surrendered  Salamis  to  him,  with  all
his  army  and  fleet,  and  Ptolemy  fled  to  Egypt.  On  the  strength  of  this
great  victory  Demetrius  and  his  father  Antigonus  both  assumed  the
title  of  king.  See  Diodorus,  xx.  47-53  ;  Plutarch,  Demetrius^  15-17  ;
Polyaenus,  iv.  7.  7  ;  Thirlwall,  Hist,  of  Greece^  7.  pp.  364-368  ;  Droysen,
Gesch.  d.  Hellemstnus,  ii.  2.  pp.  125-137.  Thus  Pausanias  has  committed
two  mistakes  in  the  present  passage.     He   implies  that  the  Cyprian


CH.  VI  HISTORY  OF  PTOLEMY  /.  83

expedition  of  Demetrius  followed  his  Syrian  at  an  interval  of  a  year,
whereas  there  was  a  lapse  of  six  years  between  them  ;  and  he  says  that
the  battle  which  Menelaus  lost  to  Demetrius  was  fought  at  sea.

6.  6.  Ptolemy was  besieged  by  Antigonua  and  Demetrius.

The  unsuccessful  expedition  of  Antigonus  and  Demetrius  against  Egypt  in
306  B.C.  is  described  by  Diodorus,  xx.  73-76  ;  cp.  Plutarch,  Demetrius^
19;  Thirlwall,  Hist,  of  Greece^  7.  pp.  368-370;  Droysen,  Gesch,  d,
HellenismuSy  ii.  2.  pp.  146-152.

6.  6.  the  Bhodiaiis  sustained  the  siege  with  valour  and  skill.
On  the  memorable  siege  of  Rhodes  by  Demetrius  in  305-304  B.C.,  see
Diodorus,  xx.  81-88,  91-100;  Plutarch,  Demetrius,  21  sq.\  Thirlwall,
Hist  of  Greece^  7.  pp.  372-381  ;  Droysen,  Gesch,  (L  Hellenismus^  ii.  2.
pp.  155-174-

6.  6.  Ptolemy  put  forth  all  his  power  to  assist  them.  He  sent
them  reinforcements  and  provisions  (Diodorus,  xx.  88.  9  ;  xx.  94.  3  ;
XX.  96.  I  ;  XX.  98.  I  ;  cp.  xx.  99.  2).  For  this  help  the  Rhodians
sumamed  him  Saviour.     See  i.  8.  6  note.

6.  7*  Antigonus ventured  to  take  the  field  against  Lysi-

maehus  etc  The  battle  to  which  Pausanias  here  refers  was  fought  at
Ipsus  in  Phrygia  in  301  B.C  It  is  not  certain  that  Cassander  was
present  in  person  on  the  field,  but  some  of  his  troops  probably  took  part
in  the  engagement ;  for  before  the  battle  he  had  sent  a  force  into  Asia
to  the  help  of  his  allies,  Lysimachus  and  Seleucus.  Antigonus,  then
more  than  eighty  years  old,  was  slain  in  the  battle.  See  Diodorus,  xx.
112,  xxi.  I  (fragments);  Plutarch,  Demetrius^  28  sq,\  id,,  Pyrrhus^  4;
Appian,  Syr.  55;  Thirlwall,  Hist  of  Greece ^  7.  p.  395  sqq.\  Droysen,
Gesch.  d.  HellenismuSj  ii.  2.  pp.  215-219.

6.  7-  it  was  by  Antigonus'  means  that  he  had  recovered  the
government  of  Macedonia.  When  Anti pater,  regent  of  Macedonia,
died  in  319  B.a,  he  bequeathed  his  power,  not  to  his  son  Cassander,
but  to  Polysperchon,  one  of  Alexander  the  Great's  veteran  generals.
Cassander  crossed  to  Asia  and  threw  himself  upon  the  protection  of
Antigonus,  who  received  him  kindly  and  afterwards  equipped  him  with
a  fleet  and  military  force,  by  means  of  which  Cassander  ultimately
regained  the  government  of  Macedonia.  See  Diodorus,  xviii.  48  sq.,
54,  68;  Thirlwall,  Hist,  of  Greece^  7.  pp.  259-261,  264,  280,  etc.;
Droysen,  Gesch,  d  Hellenismus^  ii.  i.  pp.  177,  183  sqq,

6.  8.  restored  Pyrrhus  to  Thesprotia  in  Epirus.  Cp.  i.  1 1.  5  note.
Pyrrhus  at  the  age  of  seventeen  was  expelled  from  his  kingdom  of
Epirus.  He  fought  on  the  side  of  Demetrius  and  Antigonus  at  the
battle  of  Ipsus.  On  the  conclusion  of  peace  he  was  sent  as  a  hostage
to  Egypt,  where,  having  won  the  friendship  of  Ptolemy,  he  was  furnished
by  the  king  with  money  and  a  military  force  which  enabled  him  to  return
to  Epirus.  See  Plutarch,  Pyrrhus^  4  sq,\  Droysen,  Gesch,  d.  Hciienis-
muSy  ii.  2.  p.  255  sq,

6.  8.  Oyrene was  taken  in  the  fourth  year  after  the  revolt  by

ICAjftM  etc  Cyrene  revolted  from  Ptolemy  in  313  or  312  B.C.  (see  note
on  §  5).  Hence  Droysen  places  the  expedition  of  Magas  against  it  in
308  B.C.  (fiesch,  d,  HellenismuSy  ii.   2.  p.  64).     But  Pausanias  clearly


84  PTOLEMY  II.  bk.  i.  attica

implies  (i)  that  the  expedition  of  Magas  took  place  after  the  battle  of
Ipsus,  which  was  fought  in  301  B.C.;  and  (2)  that  Cyrene  had  continued
in  a  state  of  revolt  for  four  years  before  it  was  reduced  by  Magas.  If
Pausanias  is  right  in  either  of  these  implications  the  revolt  referred  to
here  cannot  be  the  revolt  of3i3or3i2RC,  since  that  revolt  ( i )  occurred
ten  or  twelve  years  before  the  battle  of  Ipsus,  and  (2)  was  suppressed  in
the  same  year.  It  would  seem  that  after  the  revolt  313  or  312  B.C.,
Cyrene  revolted  a  second  time  not  earlier  than  305  B.c,  and  remained
independent  for  four  years.

6.  8.  he  left  the  kingdom  of  Egypt  to  Ptolemy,  his  son  by  her
etc.  It  is  said  that  Demetrius  Phalereus,  then  residing  in  Egypt,
endeavoured  to  dissuade  the  king  from  this  step  and  to  induce  him  to
leave  the  kingdom  to  the  children  whom  he  had  by  Eurydice  (Diogenes
Laertius,  v.  5.  78).

7.  I.  Ptolemy  fell  in  love  with  his  ftill  sister,  Andnoe,  and
married  her.  The  date  of  the  marriage  of  Ptolemy  II.  (Philadelphus)
with  his  sister  Arsinoe  is  not  known  ;  but  an  Egyptian  inscription,  found
on  the  site  of  the  ancient  Pithom-Heroopolis  {Tell  el-MctschUlah)  and
dated  in  the  reign  of  Ptolemy  Philadelphus,  proves  that  they  were  already
married  in  the  month  of  Pachon  273-272  B.C.  See  A.  Wiedemann,
*Die  Ehe  des  Ptolemaeus  Philadelphus  mit  Arsinoe  II.,*  Philologus^  47
(1889),  p.  81  sq,

Pausanias's  statement  that  it  was  a  custom  with  the  native  Egyptians
to  marry  their  sisters  is  confirmed  by  Diodorus  (i.  27.  i)  and  fully
borne  out  by  the  evidence  of  Egyptian  inscriptions  and  papyruses  which
have  been  deciphered  in  modem  times.  Indeed,  under  the  Ptolemies
and  the  Romans  marriages  with  sisters  seem  to  have  been  the  rule,  not
the  exception,  in  Egypt.  See  Ad.  Erman,  Aegypten  und  dgypHsches
Leben  im  Altertuniy  p.  221  sq.  That  such  marriages  were  still  prevalent
in  Egypt  in  Pausanias's  time  appears  from  a  number  of  Egyptian  tax-
papers  of  the  year  189  A.D.  For  a  decided  majority  of  the  marriages
mentioned  in  these  tax-papers  were  contracted  with  sisters  ;  and  that
these  marriages  were  not  with  half-sisters  only  is  proved  by  a  phrase  in
one  of  the  documents,  "  his  wife,  being  his  sister  by  the  same  father  and
the  same  mother."  See  U.  Wilcken,  *  Arsinoitische  Steuerprofessionen
aus  dem  Jahre  189  n.  Chr.,'  Sitzungsberichle  of  the  Prussian  Academy
(Berlin)  for  1883,  p.  903.

The  marriage  of  brothers  with  sisters  is  reported  to  have  been
practised  amongst  other  peoples  besides  the  Egyptians,  for  example,
amongst  the  Waganda  of  Central  Africa  (R.  W.  Felkin,  in  Proceedings
of  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh^  13  (1884-1886),  p.  756),  the  Masai
(Joseph  Thomson,  Through  Masai  Landy  p.  93  sq.)^  the  Obongos,  a
dwarf  race  of  West  Africa  (Du  Chaillu,  Journey  to  Ashango  Land,  p.
320),  the  Zabalat,  an  African  tribe  between  the  Dender  and  the  Blue
Nile  (Reclus,  Nouvelle  Geographic  UniverscllCy  10.  p.  363),  in  some
parts  of  Borneo  (Schwaner,  Borneo^  i.  p.  198),  among  the  Yesos  (Bas-
tian,  Die  Volker  des  ostlichen  Asien^  6.  p.  1 09  note),  New  Caledonians
(Turner,  Samoa,  p.  341),  and  Hawaiians  (Freycinet,  Voyage  auiour  du
Monde,  2.  p.  599  ;  J.  J.  Jarves,  History  of  the  Hawaiian  or  Sandwich


CH.  VIII  ATT  ALUS  85

Islands^  p.  80;  L.  H.  Morgan,  Ancient  Society y  p.  414  sq,)  (Accord-
ing to  another  report  marriages  between  brothers  and  sisters  in  Hawaii
were  only  allowed  in  the  royal  family,  see  Ch.  Wilkes,  Narrative  of
the  United  States  Exploring  Expeditiony  4.  p.  32.)  Amongst  the  Veddahs
of  Ceylon  the  most  correct  marriage  a  man  could  contract  was  with  his
younger  sister ;  but  for  a  man  to  marry  his  elder  sister  was  incest  {Transac-
tions of  the  Ethnologiccd  Society  of  London^  N.S.  2  (1863),  p.  294).
Among  some  peoples  it  has  been  required  of,  or  permitted  to,  kings  and
ruling  chiefs  to  marry  their  sisters,  in  order  to  maintain  the  blood  royal  pure
from  admixture.  This  was  the  case  with  the  Incas  of  Peru  (Garcilasso  de
la  Vega,  Royal  Commentaries  of  the  Vncas,  trans,  by  Markham,  i.  pp.  93,
308  sq.;  Acosta,  History  of  the  Indies^  2.  pp.  411  sq,y  425,  Hakluyt
Society's  publ.;  Cieza  de  Leon,  Travels^  trans,  by  Markham,  pp.  84,
103  ;  id.^  Second  Part  of  the  Chronicle  of  PerUy  trans,  by  Markham,  pp.
20,  23,  26),  the  royal  family  of  Siam  (Loubere,  Royaume  de  Siam^  i.  p.
159,  Amsterdam  1691 ;  Turpin,  'History  of  Siam,'  in  Pinkerton's  Voyages
and  Travels^  9.  p.  585),  Burma  (Shway  Yoe,  The  Burman^  i.  p.  71  ;
id.^  2.  p.  170),  the  Karagwahs  in  Equatorial  Africa  (Featherman,
Nigritiansy  p.  1 1 6),  the  Wahuma  (J.  A.  Grant,  Walk  across  Africay  p.
1 86),  and  apparently  Bergoo  (W.  G.  Browne,  Travels  in  Africay  Egypt y
and  Syriay  p.  293),  and  Bali  (R.  van  Eck,  *  Schetsen  van  het  eiland
Bali/  in  Tijdschrift  voor  Nederlandsch  Indi'iy  N.S.  9  (1880),  p.  412).
(In  Burma  it  was  only  the  half-sister  whom  the  king  might  marry.)
Myths  and  legends  of  marriages  between  divine  or  human  brothers
and  sisters  are  not  uncommon.  The  Greeks  had  their  stories  of  the
marriages  of  Cronus  and  Rhea,  and  of  Zeus  and  Hera.  Stories  of  the
same  sort  are  found  among  the  people  of  Nias  (Nieuwenhuisen  en
Rosenberg,  Verslag  omtrent  het  Insel  NiaSy  pp.  109,  no),  Java  (Tijd-
schrift voor  Nederlandsch  Indiiy  1852,  Tweede  Deel,  p.  352),  the  Mentra
tribes  {Journal  of  the  Straits  Branch  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society y  No.
10,  December,  1882,  p.  190),  the  Koopas  of  northern  Burma  (Bastian,
Die  Vblker  des  ost lichen  Asieny  i.  p.  117),  and  the  Santals  of  Bengal
(Hunter,  The  anncUs  of  rural  Bengaly  p.  188).  For  other  evidence
of  the  prevalence  of  such  marriages,  see  E.  Westermarck,  The  History
of  human  Marriagey  p.  290  sqq*

7.  3.  I  have  already  mentioned  that  this  Ptolemy  sent  a  fleet
etc     See  i.  i.  i.

8.  I.  the  history  of  Attains.  The  origin  of  the  kingdom  of
Peigamus  is  told  by  Strabo  (xiii.  p.  623  sq,)  The  acropolis  of  Pergamus
was  used  by  Lysimachus  as  a  treasury.  This  treasury  he  entrusted  to
the  charge  of  a  certain  Philetaerus,  a  native  of  Tieum,  a  small  town  in
Bithynia  (Strabo,  xii.  p.  543),  who  had  been  rendered  an  eunuch  by
an  accident  in  childhood.  At  first  Philetaerus  remained  loyal  to
Lysimachus  ;  but  after  a  while,  suspecting  the  intrigues  of  Arsinoe,  wife
of  Lysimachus,  he  revolted  and  went  over  to  the  side  of  Seleucus,  who
conquered  Lysimachus  in  281  B.C.  (cp.  Paus.  i.  10.  4  sq,)  Seleucus
was  murdered  by  Ptolemy  sumamed  Thunderbolt  in  280  B.C.  (cp.
Appian,  Syr,  62  sq.)  But  by  trimming  and  temporising  adroitly
Philetaerus  continued  master  of  the  fortress  and  its  treasures  through


all  the  political  vicissitudes  of  these  troubled  limes.  He  died  in  363
B.C.,  having  been  in  possession  of  Pergamus  for  twenty  years.  He  had
two  brothers  Kumenes  and  Aitalus.     Eumenes,  the  elder  brother,  had


a  son  Eumenes,  who  succeeded  Philetaems  in  possession  of  Per^ainus.
And  Attalus,  the  younger  brother,  had  a  son  Aitalus,  who  succeeded  his
cousin  Eumenes  in  341  B.C.  It  was  this  Aiialus  who  after  defeating
the  Gauls  assumed  the  title  of  king  and  reigned  as  Attalus  1.     As


CH.  VIII  PEACE  AND  WEALTH  87

to  the  chrOQOlt^  of  Philetaeras,  Eumenes,  and  Attalus  1.,  see  Clinton,
Fasti  Hellemea,  3.*  p.  410  ^.

8.  ■■  How  FhlletMnu  rsvolted  from  Lysimachiu  etc.  See  >.
10.  4  sq.

8.  3.  AmphUrans.  Proressor  Kdhler  conjectured  (Hermes,  6
{1872)1  pt  99)  that  this  statue  stood  on  the  right  of  the  way  up  from
the  maricet-place  to  the  Acropolis,  at  the  sanctuary  of  the  Furies,  since
that  sanctuary  contained  statues  of  the  subterranean  deities  (Paus.  i.  38.
6),  with  whom  Amphiaraus  was  elsewhere  associated.

8.  3.  Fmuw  carrying  the  child  Wealth.  This  group  was  by
Ccphitodotus  (see  ix.  16.  3).  It  has  been  conjectured  with  a  high
degree  of  probability  that  the  marble  group  commonly  known  as  the
Leucothcft  at  Munich  (Fig.  i)  is  really  a  copy  of  the  group  here  described
by  Pauaanias.  It  represents  a  woman  clad  in  a  long  robe  bearing  on  her
left  ann  a  little  naked  boy,  who  is  looking  up  at  her  and  stretching  his
right  hand  towards  her  face,  which  is  bent  towards  him  with  a  look  of
tcodemesa.  In  her  raised  right  hand  (which,  with  the  arm,  is  a  modem
restoration)  she  holds  a  long  sceptre.  Both  of  the  boy's  arms  are  also
restored ;  and  his  head,  though  ancient,  does  not  belong  to  the  body.
In  spite  of  these  defects,  both  the  conception  and  the  execution  of  the
group  are  fine.  But  competent  critics  hold  that  it  is  a  copy  of  a  bronze
ori^naL  That  the  original  was  the  group  here  described  by  Pausanias
is  made  probable  by  the  close  resemblance  of  the  Munich  group  to  one
depcted  on  Athenian  coins  (Fig.  1),  where  the  identification  of  the  boy
as  Wealth  is  proved  by  his  holding  a  Horn  of  Plenty
in  hia  left  hand.  In  the  Munich  group  the  boy
holds  in  his  left  hand  a  jug,  but  this  is  a  modem
and  doubtless  incorrect  restoration.  A  marble  ,
replica  of  the  boy,  skilfully  but  somewhat  hastily
execnted,  was  found  in  dredging  the  northern  end
of  the  harbour  of  Piraeus  in  1881  ;  it  bears  still
more  clearly  than  the  Munich  statue  the  marks  of
being  coped  from  a  bronze  original.  This  marble  ',Vg  wKALiiiV  liiT
boy  resembles  somewhat  closely  the  infant  Dionysus
in  the  now  famous  group  by  Praxiteles  representing  Hermes  carrying
the  in&nt  Dionysus  on  his  arm  (see  v.  17.  3  note).  As  Cephiso-
dotua  aeems  to  have  been  the  father  and  master  of  Praxiteles  (see
note  on  viii.  30.  10),  the  son  may  have  borrowed  the  idea  from  his
father.  There  is  a  third  replica,  in  marble,  of  this  boy  in  the  Dresden
Museum.  In  the  seventeenth  century  there  was  found  at  Athens,
among  the  ruins  of  the  chapel  of  St,  Dionysius,  a  marble  statue
described  as  the  Virgin  holding  the  infant  Christ  in  her  arms.  It  was
probably  Peace  holding  Wealth  \  it  may  have  been  the  original  group
by  Cephisodotus  or  (if  the  original  was  in  bronze)  a  marble  copy  of  it.
The  chapel  of  St.  Dionysius  is  at  the  north-east  end  of  the  Areopagus  ;
and  the  original  statue  must  have  stood  very  near  this  spot,  though
probably  lower  down.  The  statue,  when  found,  was  promptly  smashed
by  order  of  the  Archbishop.

It  has  been  plausibly  conjectured  that  the  group  of  Peace  carrying


88  PEACE  AND  WEALTH  bk.  i.  attica

Wealth  was  made  soon  after  the  conclusion  of  peace  between  Athens
and  Lacedaemon  in  374  B.C. ;  for  Isocrates  tells  us  (xv.  109  sq,)  that
from  that  day  the  Athenians  annually  offered  sacrifices  to  Peace  as  to
the  deity  who  had  done  more  for  the  city  than  any  other,  and  Cornelius
Nepos  says  {Timotheus^  2)  that  the  Athenians  then  for  the  first  time
erected  altars  to  Peace  at  the  public  expense  and  spread  a  festal  couch
for  the  goddess.  The  date  374  B.C.  falls  within  the  lifetime  of  the
sculptor  Cephisodotus.  Sacrifices  to  Peace  are  mentioned  in  an  Attic
inscription  (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  741  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Graec,
No.  374,  lines  30  and  64).

See  MUller-Wiescler,  Denkmdler^  2.  pi.  viii.,  Nos.  99  a,  99  b,  pi.  xxxv.  No.
407 ;  H.  Brann,  Beschreibung  der  Glyptothek  K'dnig  Ludwig's  /.  ««  Miinchenf
No.  96,  pp.  126-129;  U.  Kohler,  <Der  Flutes  des  Kephisodot,'  Mittheil,  d,  arch.
Inst,  in  Athen^  6  (1881),  pp.  363-371  ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  A  then,  I.  pp.
166  note  I,  585  note  3 ;  td.^  2.  p.  433  sq, ;  Friederichs- Welters,  Gipsabgiisse,
Nos.  12 10,  121 1  ;  Overbcck,  Gesch,  d,  griech,  Plastik,^  2,  p.  8  sqq,;  Murray,
History  of  Greek  Sculpture,  2.  p.  244  sq,  ;  Lucy  M.  Mitchell,  History  of  Ancient
Sculpture,  p.  433  sqq,  ;  Miss  Harrisen,  Ancient  Athens,  p.  65  sqq,  ;  Imheef-
Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num,  Comm,  on  Pans,  p.  147,  with  pL  DD,  ix.  x.  ;
Cawadias,  rXwrrA  roxi  'E^f^iiroD  VLovvtiov,  Ne.  17$ ;  Furtwangler,  Meisterwerkc
d,  griech,  Plastik,  p.  $13  sq.

On  a  black-figured  Attic  vase,  found  in  a  Greek  grave  of  the  fourth
century  B.C.  in  the  south  of  Russia,  there  is  painted  a  figure  of  Athena
with  a  pillar,  surmounted  by  a  statue,  on  each  side  of  her.  The  statue
on  one  of  the  pillars  represents  a  woman  holding  a  sceptre  in  her
raised  right  hand,  and  a  naked  winged  boy  on  her  left  arm.  Stephani
interpreted  this  as  Peace  carrying  Wealth,  though  he  admitted  that  it
might  perhaps  be  Aphrodite  and  Love.  The  god  of  wealth  seems  to
have  been  sometimes  represented  with  wings  (Philostratus,  Imag,  ii.
27).  See  Stephani,  in  Com  file  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1876,  pp.
14-18,  with  Atlas,  pi.  i.  In  Greek  literature  the  god  of  wealth  is
spoken  of  as  blind  (Aristophanes,  Plutus,  90 ;  Timocreon,  quoted  by
the  scholiast  on  Aristophanes,  Acharnians,  532  ;  Poetae  Lyrid  Graeci,
ed.  Bergk,  3.^  p.  1204;  Theocritus,  x.  19);  and  the  ancient  painters
are  said  to  have  depicted  him  so  (Clement  of  Alexandria,  Protrept,  x.
102,  p.  81,  ed.  Potter) ;  but  on  existing  monuments  of  antiquity  he  is
represented  seeing,  and  he  was  so  depicted  in  a  painting  mentioned  by
Philostratus  {Imagines,  ii.  27).  See  Stephani,  in  Compte  Rendu  (St.
Petersburg)  for  1859,  p.  106.

8.  2.  a  bronze  statue  of  Lycnrgns.  This  statue  was  erected  in
the  market-place  during  the  archonship  of  Anaxicrates,  307-306  B.C.,
as  a  memorial  of  the  great  services  which  the  orator  Lycurgus  had
rendered  to  the  state.  The  decree  for  the  erection  of  the  statue  was
proposed  by  Stratocles,  son  of  Euthydemus.  See  [Plutarch,]  Vit,  X,
Orat,  pp.  843  c,  852.  Two  fragments  of  the  decree  have  been  found
inscribed  on  stone  at  Athens.  See  C,  I,  A,  ii.  No.  240 ;  C.  Curtius,
*Zum  Redner  Lykurgos,*  Philologus,  24  (1866),  pp.  83-114;  Miss
Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  p.  70  sqq.  A  fragment  of  what  seems  to
have  been  the  pedestal  of  the  statue  itself  was  found  at  Athens  in  1888,
at  the  Gate  of  the  Market-place  (gate  of  Athena  Archegetis,  see  note  on


CH.  VIII  PEACE  OF  CALLIAS  89

i.  18.  9).  It  is  of  Hymettian  marble  and  bears  a  mutilated  inscription
which  may  be  thus  restored  :

Avfcov/yyog  Avfc]o<^/aovo9  Bo[vTa8i;9

"  Lycurgus,  son  of  Lycophron,  of  the  Butad  family."  The  style  of  the
letters  is  that  of  the  Macedonian  epoch.  See  AcXrtov  6.p\a.io\oyiK6v^
i888y  p.  190.  The  fragments  of  the  pedestal  of  another  statue  of
Lycurgus  were  found  at  Athens,  but  the  inscription  (C  /.  A,  iii.  No.
944,  AvKovpyos  6  prfrmp  " Lycurgfus  the  orator")  is  of  Roman  date.
Cp.  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Atken^  i.  p.  614  j^.

If  we  may  believe  Dinarchus  (i.  43),  bronze  statues  of  Birisades,
Satyrus,  and  Gorgippus,  tyrants  of  Pontus,  were  set  up  in  the  market-
place on  the  motion  of  Demosthenes,  and  a  statue  of  Diphilus  was
erected  there  also  on  the  motion  of  the  same  orator.  There  was  also  a
bronze  statue  of  Demades  in  the  market-place  (Dinarchus,  i.  10 1).

8.  2.  Oalliaa,  who negotiated  the  peace  etc.    From  the  fourth

century  B.c.  onwards  there  was  a  tradition  that  about  the  middle  of  the
fifth  century  B.C.  the  Greeks  and  particularly  the  Athenians  had  con-
cluded a  peace  with  Persia,  whereby  the  Persian  king  Artaxerxes
bound  himself  to  send  no  warships  into  the  Aegean  Sea,  and  to  allow
none  of  his  troops  to  approach  within  three  days'  march  or  one  day's
ride  of  the  sea ;  the  chief  of  the  embassy  which  negotiated  this  peace
was  said  to  have  been  the  Athenian  Callias.  See  Demosthenes,  xix.
273,  p.  428  j^. ;  Diodorus,  xii.  4;  Plutarch,  Cimon^  13;  Suidas,  s,v,
KoAXtas.  That  Callias  went  with  an  Athenian  embassy  to  Susa  is
certain  (Herodotus,  vii.  151) ;  but  it  is  extremely  doubtful  whether  any
such  peace  as  later  writers  credit  him  with  having  negotiated  was  ever
actually  concluded.  Neither  Herodotus  nor  Thucydides  mentions  it ;
and  the  course  of  events  in  the  second  half  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.
proves  that,  if  such  a  treaty  was  concluded,  it  was  not  observed  by
either  side.  It  is  moreover  intrinsically  improbable  that  the  Persian
king  would  have  bound  himself  to  observe  any  such  conditions  as  were
imposed  on  him  in  the  supposed  treaty.  The  first  writer  who  mentions
the  treaty  is  Isocrates  in  a  speech  (iv.  1 1 8  and  1 20)  composed  about
380  RC.  A  copy  of  the  treaty,  engraved  on  stone,  certainly  existed  in
the  fourth  century  B.C  ;  but  Theopompus  declared  it  to  be  a  forgery,
his  reason  apparently  being  that  the  inscription  was  in  the  new  Ionic
characters  instead  of  in  the  old  Attic  (Harpocration,  s,v,  'Attikc^s
ypafifjuuriv),  (As  to  the  Attic  and  Ionic  alphabets,  see  note  on  i.  2.  4.)
But  Theopompus's  reason  for  treating  the  inscription  as  a  forgery  is  not
conclusive.  The  document  he  saw  may  have  been  a  copy,  not  the
original.  It  may  even  have  been  the  original ;  for  Attic  inscriptions
of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  in  the  Ionic  alphabet  are  not  unknown  (Kohler,
in  Busolt's  Griechische  Geschichte^  2.  p.  514  note).  Craterus  included
the  document  in  his  collection  of  decrees  (Plutarch,  Cimon^  13).  The
terms  in  which  Pausanias  refers  to  the  peace  of  Callias  show  that  he
had  his  doubts  about  it.  See  on  the  subject  £.  Curtius,  Griech,
Geschichtef  2.  p.  181  sqq, ;  Duncker,  Gesch.  des  Alterthunis^  9.  p.
40  sq.\    Busolt,   Griech.   Geschichte^  2.  p.   513  sqq,\    Holm,    Griech,


90  STA  TUE  OF  DEMOSTHENES  bk.  i.  attica

Geschichte^  2.  p.   201  sqq,\  Fr.  Kopp,  *Ein  Problem  dcr  griechischen
Geschichte,'  Rheinisches  Museum^  N.F.  48  (1893),  PP-  485-511.

8.  2.  a  statue  of  Demosthenes.  This  statue  was  erected  in
280-279  B.C  The  decree  for  its  erection  was  moved  by  Demochares,
a  nephew  of  the  orator.  The  statue  was  of  bronze,  a  work  of  Polyeuctus,
and  represented  the  orator  with  his  hands  locked  in  each  other.  It
stood  in  the  market-place  near  the  altar  of  the  Twelve  Gods  and  a
place  called  perischoinisma  ("place  roped  in").  A  small  plane-tree
grew  beside  it  On  the  base  of  the  statue  was  engraved  a  couplet  to
the  effect  that  if  Demosthenes's  power  had  been  equal  to  his  will,
Greece  would  never  have  been  conquered  by  Macedonia.  According
to  Demetrius  the  Magnesian  this  couplet  was  composed  by  Demosthenes
himself  just  before  his  death.  See  [Plutarch,]  Vit,  X,  Orat  pp.
847  ad,  850  e;  Biographi  Graeci^  ed.  Westermann,  pp.  302,  308;
Suidas,  ssj,  Ai]fioa-0€Vi]s.  There  is  a  well-known  marble  statue  of
Demosthenes  in  the  Vatican  which  is  supposed  to  be  a  copy,  with  some
variations,  of  the  bronze  statue  by  Polyeuctus  in  the  market-place  at
Athens.  The  orator  stands  holding  a  roll  in  his  hands,  whereas  in  the
original  statue  (as  we  learn  from  Plutarch)  the  hands  were  locked
together.  This  change,  it  has  been  suggested,  was  made  in  a  later
age  when  Demosthenes's  reputation  as  a  man  of  letters  overshadowed
his  renown  as  a  statesman  and  an  orator.  The  statue  is  full  of  life  and
expression,  the  features  sharply  cut,  the  face  deeply  furrowed,  the
expression  haggard  and  care-worn.  It  struck  Macaulay  very  much  on
his  first  visit  to  the  Vatican.  He  says :  "  The  Demosthenes  is  very
noble.  There  can  be  no  doubt  about  the  face  of  Demosthenes.  There
are  two  busts  of  him  in  the  Vatican,  besides  this  statue.  They  are  all
exactly  alike,  being  distinguished  by  the  strong  projection  of  the  upper
lip.  The  face  is  lean,  wrinkled,  and  haggard  ;  the  expression  singularly
stem  and  intense.  You  see  that  he  was  no  trifier,  no  jester,  no
voluptuary ;  but  a  man  whose  soul  was  devoured  by  ambition,  and
constantly  on  the  stretch.  The  soft,  sleek,  plump,  almost  sleepy,
though  handsome  face  of  Aeschines  presents  a  remarkable  contrast "
(Trevelyan's  U/e  a/id  Letters  of  Lord  Macaulay^  popular  edition,
London,  1890,  p.  361).  There  is  a  replica  of  the  statue  in  possession
of  Lord  Sackville,  at  Knole  in  Kent.  See  Overbeck,  Gesch.  eL  griech,
Plastiky^  2.  p.  115  sq, ;  Friederichs-Wolters,  Gipsabguxse^  No.  1 3 1 2  ;
Baumeister's  Denkmaler^  s,v,  'Demosthenes,*  p.  425  ;  C.  Wachsmuth,
Die  Stadt  At/ten^  2.  p.  407  sq.  On  portraits  of  Demosthenes,  cp.
G.  Scharf,  *  On  the  ancient  portraits  of  Menander  and  Demosthenes,'
Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  IJterature^  Second  Series,  4  (1853),
PP'  381-394.  The  altar  of  the  Twelve  Gods,  near  which  the  statue  of
Demosthenes  stood,  was  set  up  in  the  market-place  by  Pisistratus  and
afterwards  enlarged  under  the  democracy  (Thucydides,  vi.  54.  6  sq,)
It  seems  to  have  been  regarded  as  the  central  point  of  Athens,  for
distances  were  reckoned  from  it  as  from  a  central  milestone.  See
Herodotus,  ii.  7  ;  C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  1078  ;  Kaibel,  Epigrammata  Graecoy
No.  1043.  The  altar  was  an  asylum.  See  Herodotus,  vL  108 ;
Diodorus,  xii.  39 ;  Lycurgus,  c,  Leocr.  93.      Cp.   C.  Wachsmuth,  Die


CH.  VIII  SANCTUARY  OF  ARES  91

Siadi  Athcfiy  2.  pp.  434-436.  The  plane-tree  growing  beside  the  statue
of  Demosthenes  may  have  been  one  of  the  planes  with  which  Cimon
planted  the  market-place  (Plutarch,  Cimon^  13).  The  perischoinisma
is  mentioned  again  by  Alciphron  {Epist  ii.  3),  but  what  it  was  is  not
known.  Pro£  £.  Curtius  conjectured  that  it  was  the  enclosure  in  which
the  citizens  assembled  to  vote  on  certain  occasions,  e.g,  on  a  proposal  of
ostracism.  See  E.  Curtius,  Attische  Siudien^  2,  p.  39  sgg.  {Gesammelte
Abkandlungeny  i.  p.  367)  ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  StadtAihen^  i.  p.  167  sq.

8.  2.  whom  the  Athenians  forced  to  withdraw  to  Oalanria  etc.
Being  accused  of  having  taken  bribes  from  Harpalus,  Demosthenes  was
tried  and  thrown  into  prison  ;  but  he  escaped  and  went  into  exile  in
Troezen  and  Aegina,  from  which,  it  is  said,  he  often  looked  across  to
the  coast  of  Attica  with  tearful  eyes.  From  this  exile  he  was  brought
back  in  triumph  after  the  death  of  Alexander  the  Great.  See  Plutarch,
Demosthenes^  26  sq, ;  [Plutarch,]  Vit.  X,  OraL  p.  846  bed;  Justin,  xiii.
5.  9-11.     Cp.  Paus.  i.  37.  5,  ii.  33.  3-5.

8.  3.  In  his  second  exile  Demosthenes drank  poison  and

diedL  This  was  in  322  b.C.  See  Plutarch,  Demosthenes^  29  sq,\
[Plutarch,]  Vit,  X,  Orat.  pp.  846  e-847  b ;  Diogenes  Laertius,  v.  i.  10 ;
cp.  Paus.  ii.  33.  3.

8.  3.  Archias  was  a  native  of  Thurii  etc.  He  is  said  to  have
been  a  tragic  actor.  His  infEunous  activity  as  a  catchpole  earned  him
the  nickname  of  '  the  exile-catcher.'  Among  the  men  whom  he  haled
to  death  was  the  orator  Hyperides.     See  Plutarch,  Demosthenes^  28.

8.  4.  a  sanctuary  of  Ares.  The  exact  site  of  this  sanctuary  is
not  known.  It  probably  stood  somewhere  on  the  northern  slope  of  the
Areopagus.  Prof.  Milchhofer  thinks  that  the  site  may  be  marked  by
the  ruined  chapel  of  St.  Dionysius  at  the  north-east  comer  of  the
Areopagus  (*Athen,'  p.  165).  L.  Ross  argued  that  the  sanctuary  of
Ares  was  no  other  than  the  well-preserved  temple  traditionally  known
as  the  Theseum.  See  L.  Ross,  Das  Theseion  und  der  Tempel  des  Ares
in  A  then  (Halle,  1852),  p.  52  sqq.  But  it  seems  unlikely  that  the
sanctuary  of  Ares  should  have  been  so  far  from  the  Areopagus,  the  hill
which  the  ancients  associated,  rightly  or  wrongly,  with  Ares  (see  note
on  i.  28.  5).  Besides,  the  sanctuary  of  Ares  was  near  the  statues  of
Harmodius  and  Aristogiton,  which  were  on  the  way  up  from  the  market-
place to  the  Acropolis  (see  §  5  with  the  note).  Prof.  Furtwangler
considers  that  the  Borghese  Ares,  now  in  the  Louvre,  is  a  replica  of
Alcamenes's  image  of  Ares  which  stood  in  this  sanctuary.  The  original
of  the  Borghese  Ares  must  certainly  have  been  a  famous  work,  as  there
are  numerous  other  copies  of  it  in  existence.  The  god  is  represented
as  a  powerfully  built  man,  standing  naked  but  for  a  crested  helmet
which  he  wears ;  his  right  arm  hangs  by  his  side,  his  left  hand  grasped
the  lance.  See  Roscher's  Lexikon^  i.  p.  489  ;  Friederichs-Wolters,
Gipsabgiisse^  No.  1298;  Furtwangler,  Meistenverke  d,  griech,  Plastik^
pp.  121  sq.y  128.  As  to  Alcamenes  see  v.  10.  8  note  and  the  Index.
There  were  many  statues  by  him  in  the  temples  at  Athens  (Pliny,
A''.  H,  xxxvi.  16).

8.  4.  two  imaSTOs  of  Aphrodite.     L.  Urlichs  broached  a  theory


92  STATUE  OF  PINDAR  bk.  i.  attica

that  the  famous  Venus  of  Milo  in  the  Louvre  was  a  copy  of  one  of  these
statues  {Skopas^  p.  122).  The  relation  of  Aphrodite  to  Ares  is  the
subject  of  an  elaborate  dissertation  by  Mr.  K.  Tiimpel,  'Ares  und
Aphrodite.  Eine  Untersuchung  iiber  Ursprung  und  Bedeutung  ihrer
Verbindung,*  FleckeiserCs  Jahrbiicher^  Suppl.  11  (1880),  pp.  641-754.

8.  4.  fiiyo.  We  hear  of  a  priest  of  Enyo  and  Ares  Enyalius  at
Athens  in  Roman  times  (C  /.  A.  iii.  No.  2).

8.  4.  the  sons  of  PraziteleB.  Their  names  were  Cephisodotus
and  Timarchus.     See  ix.  12.  4  note ;  cp.  note  on  viii.  30.  10.

8.  4.  Apollo  binding  his  hair  with  a  fillet.  On  the  ancient
custom  of  tying  ribbons  on  persons,  animals,  and  things  as  a  mark  of
distinction,  especially  in  connexion  with  religion,  see  Stephani,  in
Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1874,  P»  '37  J^^-

8.  4.  Oalades.  Nothing  more  is  known  about  this  person.  The
Greek  word  here  translated  *•  laws '  (vo/iot)  means  also  '  tunes.'  Hence
Bursian  supposed  him  to  have  been  a  musical  composer  rather  than  a
lawgiver  (Geogr,  von  Griechenland^  i.  p.  285,  note  i).  The  suggestion
is,  with  some  reserve,  approved  by  Professor  C.  Wachsmuth  (Die  Siadt
AtheUy  2.  p.  405,  note  i).     Cp.  the  Critical  Note.

8.  4.  Pindar.  According  to  the  pseudo-Aeschines  {Epist  iv.  2  sq,)
the  statue  of  Pindar  was  of  bronze,  and  stood  in  front  of  the  Royal
Colonnade  ;  it  represented  the  poet  seated,  clad  in  a  long  robe,  his
head  decked  with  a  diadem  or  fillet,  a  lyre  beside  him,  and  a  book
unrolled  on  his  knees.  No  copy  of  the  statue  is  known  to  exist,  though
Professor  Brunn  proposed  to  identify  as  Pindar  the  statue  of  a  poet
found  in  the  Villa  Borghese  (Overbeck,  Gesch.  d,  griech,  Plastik^  2.  pp.
146,  184).  The  statement  of  the  pseudo-Aeschines  that  Pindar's  statue
stood  in  front  of  the  Royal  Colonnade,  seems  inconsistent  with  Pau-
sanias's  description  ;  for  amongst  the  statues  near  the  Royal  Colonnade
Pausanias  makes  no  mention  of  the  statue  of  Pindar  (i.  3.  2),  but  says
that  it  was  not  far  from  the  statues  of  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton,
which  we  know  to  have  been  on  the  way  up  to  the  Acropolis.  It  would
seem  that  either  Pausanias  or  the  pseudo-Aeschines  is  wrong.  Prof.  C.
Wachsmuth  attempts  to  reconcile  their  statements,  but  his  solution  is
unsatisfactory  (Die  Stadt  Athen^  i.  p.  169  j^.)  The  statue  must  have
been  put  up  long  after  Pindar's  death,  since  in  describing  the  honours
bestowed  by  Athens  on  the  poet  for  his  eulogium  Isocrates  (xv.  166)
makes  no  mention  of  the  statue,  as  he  would  have  done  if  it  had  been
in  existence  in  his  time ;  he  merely  says  that  Pindar  was  made  a  public
friend  (proxenos)  of  the  city,  and  received  a  present  of  10,000  drachms.
In  the  verses  which  earned  him  these  rewards  Pindar  had  addressed
Athens  as  "  O  bright  and  famous  Athens,  pillar  of  Greece."  See  pseudo-
Aeschines  and  Isocrates,  ILcc,  ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Clouds^  299  ;
Pindar,  Frag,  54,  ed.  Bergk.^  Cp.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Aihen^  2.
pp.  402,  407.

8.  5.  statues  of  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton.  The  statues  of
the  tyrannicides  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton  stood  on  a  conspicuous
spot  in  the  market-place  called  *the  orchestra,'  which  was  used  for
festivals    (Timaeus,    Lexicon    Piatonicum^    s,v,    opxrjoTpa ;    Photius,


CH.  VIII  HARMODIUS  AND  ARISTOGITON  93

Lexicon^  s,v,  opxrjorpa).  The  spot  was  in  the  Ceramicus  (market-
place), on  the  way  up  to  the  Acropolis,  opposite  the  Metroum  (Arrian,
Anabcuisy  iii.  16.  8).  That  the  statues  stood  in  the  market-place
appears  from  other  passages  of  ancient  waiters ;  for  example,  the  chorus
in  Aristophanes's  play  Lysistrata  (v.  633)  speak  of  doing  their  market-
ing beside  the  statue  of  Aristogiton.  Cp.  Aristophanes,  Eccles,  682  sq.\
Lycurgus,  c,  Leocr,  51  ;  Lucian,  Paras,  48.  The  exact  situation  of  this
*  orchestra,'  on  which  the  statues  stood,  is  not  known.  It  is  supposed
to  have  been  some  high  conspicuous  terrace,  semicircular  in  shape,  like
the  orchestra  in  a  Greek  theatre.  Professor  U.  Kohler  conjectured
that  it  may  have  been  the  semicircular,  rocky  terrace  now  occupied  by
the  chapel  of  St  Athanasius,  on  the  north-western  slope  of  the  Areopagus
(Hermes,  6  (1872),  p.  95  j^.)  It  certainly  seems  to  have  been  some-
where on  the  north-west,  rather  than  (as  has  commonly  been  held)  on
the  north-east  side  of  the  Areopagus.  See  note  above  on  i.  3.  5,  <a
sanctuary  of  the  Mother  of  the  Gods.'

Harmodius  and  Aristogiton  were  the  first  men  of  whom  statues
were  set  up  in  the  market-place  (Aristotle,  Rhetoric,  i.  9,  p.  1368  a,  17
sq,  ;  Pliny,  N.  H,  xxxiv.  1 7).  For  a  long  time  it  was  forbidden  to  set
up  any  other  statues  beside  them  (C.  /.  A,  ii.  Nos.  300,  410 ;  cp.  the
decree  in  [Plutarch,]  Vit.  X,  Orat,  p.  852  d).  But  in  307  B.C.
gilt  statues  of  Antigonus  and  Demetrius  standing  in  a  chariot  were  set
up  beside  the  statues  of  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton  (Diodorus,  xx.  46).
At  a  later  time  bronze  statues  of  the  tyrannicides  Brutus  and  Cassius
were  set  up  beside  those  of  the  old  tyrannicides  (Dio  Cassius,  xlvii.  20).
Sacrifices  were  regularly  offered  to  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton  by  the
polemarch  (Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens,  58  ;  Pollux,  viii.  91).

Hipparchus,  brother  of  the  tyrant  Hippias,  was  assassinated  in
514  B.C.,  but  the  statues  of  his  assassins  were  not  set  up  till  510  B.C.,
the  date  of  the  expulsion  of  Hippias  (Pliny,  N,  H,  xxxiv.  17).
The  statues  were  of  bronze  (Arrian,  Anabasis,  iii.  16.  7;  id.,  vii.
19.  2  ;  Valerius  Maximus,  ii.  10.  ext.  i).  After  being  carried  off  to
Persia  by  Xerxes  in  480  B.C.,  they  were  sent  back  to  Athens  by  Alex-
ander the  Great  (according  to  Arrian,  Anabasis,  iii.  16.  8,  and  Pliny,
N,  H,  xxxiv.  70),  or  by  Seleucus  (according  to  Valerius  Maximus,  ii.  i  o.
cxt  i),  or  by  Antiochus  (according  to  Pausanias).  But  in  477  B.C.,  three
years  after  the  statues  had  been  carried  off  by  Xerxes,  they  were  replaced
by  a  new  group  executed  by  Critius  and  Nesiotes  (Parian  Chronicle,
line  70;  Lucian,  Philopseudes,  18).  (Pausanias  mentions  Critius
alone ;  he  was  probably  the  chief  artist.)  The  new  group  was
probably  an  imitation,  more  or  less  free,  of  the  old  one.  Whether  it
was  in  bronze  or  marble  is  not  said,  but  it  would  seem  to  have  been  of
bronze.  For  it  is  said  that  once  at  the  court  of  the  tyrant  Dionysius  I.
(431-367  B.c),  a  discussion  arose  over  the  wine  as  to  which  was  the
best  kind  of  bronze ;  whereupon  the  Athenian  orator  Antiphon,  who
happened  to  be  present,  remarked  that  the  best  bronze  was  that  out  of
which  the  statues  of  the  tyrannicides  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton  were
made  ([Plutarch,]  Vit,  X,  Orat,  p.  833  b).  If  this  story  is  true,
it   makes  it   probable,  though   not  certain,  that  the  later  group  by


94  HARMODWS  AND  ARISTOGITON       BK.  i.  attica

Critius  and  Nesiotes  was  (like  ihe  original  group  by  Antenor)  made  of

bronze ;    for  AntiphoD  would  naturally  refer  to  the  group  which  he

had    himself    often    seen,    rather    than    to    one    which    had    been

carried  off  to  Persia  before  or  immediately  after  his  birth.     Moreover

Lucian  says  that  the  statues  of  the  tyrannicides

n  the  market-place  were  of  bronze  {Parai.  48),

.nd  as  he  elsewhere  {Philopseuiies,  1 8)  mentions

he  group  by  Critius  and  Nesiotes,  it  is  prob-

I  able  that  he  had  it  in  his  mind  in  writing  the

I  former  passage  also.     Afler  the  restoration  of

'  the  old  statues,  the  two  groups  continued  to

stand  side  by  side  down  to  the  time  of  Pau-

sanias,  whose  words  clearly  imply  it.     That  the

old  group  by  Antenor  stood  in  the  Ceramicus

ric.  3.~HAuiciDius  AMD      dowtt  to  his  time,  is  expressly  stated  by  Artiait,

ARisTociTOB  (comX         a  con  temporary  ofPausanias(^»<i*n«>,  iiL  16. 8).

Amongst  existing  works  of  ancient  art  the  following  have  been

recognised  with  great  probability  by  archaeolt^ists  as  representing  one

or  other  of  the  two  groups  of  the  tyrannicides,  either  the  group  by

Antenor,  or  the  group  by  Critius  and  Nesiotes :

1.  On  four -drachm  pieces  of  Athens  (Fitf.  3),  coined  by  the
mint-masters  Mentor  and  Moschioo,  there  are  6gured  two  men
charging  side  by  side
towards  the  left  The
nearer  of  the  two  is
beardless  and  naked ;  he
has  his  sword  raised  to
strike  ;  the  farther  of  the
two  is  bearded  and  has  his
left  arm  stretched  out  in
front  with  a  cloak  hanging
over  it,  and  a  scabbard  in
his  hand.  The  beardless
tigure  is  doubtless  Har-
modius,  the  younger  of  the
two  friends ;  the  bearded
one  is  Aristogiton.  See
Beul^  Monnaies  d'Athhtes,
p.  335  J'f- ;  Gardner,  Typts
of  Greek  Coins,  pi.  xv.  No.
30  ;  Imhoof  -  Blumer  and
Gardner,  Num.  Comtii.  on
Paus.  p.  148,  pi.  DD,  xiv.
XV.  The  same  group  ap-
pears on  coins  of  Cyi'
(Head,    Hisforia    Nun

2.  The   same  group  is  represented  in  relief
formerly  in  Athens,  ~"


a   marble  chair
Broom  Hall  in  Fifeshire.  But  in  the  relief  (Fig.


HARMODIUS  AND  AKIS70C1T0N


9S


4)  the  group  is  represented  from  the  other  side,  charging  to  the  right,  so
that  the  man  with  the  cloak  over  his  left  ann  (Aristogiton)  is  the  nearer ;
in  his  right  haiid  he  carries  a  short  sword.  The  fact  that  on  the  coins
and  on  the  relief  the  group  is  represented  from  opposite  sides  proves
(as  Stackelberg  pointed  out)  that  the  original  must  have  been  a  group
of  statuary  standing  free,  so  that  it  could  be  copied  from  either  side.


See  Ad.  Michaelis,  m  Journal  Hellenic  Studies,  ;  (1884),  p    1
with  plate  xlviiL

3.  On  a  vase  of  the  class  known  as  Panathenaic  amphoras,  found  in
the  Cyrenaica,  and  now  in  the  British  Museum,  Athena  is  depicted
(^ig'  S)  carrying  a  shield  on  which  the  group  described  above  appears
as  a  blazon,  the  two  men  charging  to  the  left  as  on  the  coins.  See  G,
Dennis,  in  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Soiiefy  of  Literature,   Second


96  HARMODIUS  AND  ARISTOGITON       BK.  i.  attica

Series,  9  (1870),  pp.  171- 173,  with  pi.  i.  ;  Monumenti  Inediti^  10
(1877),  tav.  xlviii.  d;  Archaologische  Zdtung^  27  (1869),  pL  24,  No.
2  ;  Baumeister's  Denkfndler^  p.  11 53,  ^%.  I347.

4.  The  same  group  is  repeated  on  two  Attic  lead  tokens,  one  in  a
private  collection,  the  other  in  the  National  Museum  at  Athens.  See
Archaologische  ZHtung^  27  (1869),  pL  24,  No.  i  ;  Archaeology  epigraphs
Mittheilungen  atis  Oesterreich^  3  (1879),  pl-  vi.  No.  2  ;  Zeitschrift  fur
die  osterreich,  Gymnasien^  26  (1875),  P»  618,  No.  48  ;  Bulletin  de  Corr.
Hell^nique^  8  (1884),  P*  I'l  with  pL  iii.  No.  72.

5.  On  a  black-figured  Greek  vase  of  the  shape  called  lel^thos^  in
the  possession  of  Mrs.  Scaramanga  of  Vienna,  the  same  group  is
depicted  charging  to  the  right,  but  with  this  difference,  that  the  beard-
less man  (Harmodius)  with  his  sword  raised  is  striding  ahead  of  the
bearded  man  (Aristogiton),  who,  with  the  cloak  over  his  left  arm,  the
scabbard  in  his  left  hand,  and  the  sword  in  his  right,  is  hurrying  after
him  with  long  steps.  The  style  of  the  drawing  is  distinctly  archaic
See  ArchaeoL  epigraph,  Mittheilungen  aus  Oesterreich^  3  (1879),  p.  76
sq.^  with  pi.  vi.  No.  I.

6.  But  by  far  the  finest  and  most  perfect  reproduction  of  the  group
is  a  well-known  pair  of  marble  statues  in  the  museum  at  Naples,  which
were  first  recognised  as  those  of  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton  by  K.
Friederichs  in  1859.  The  group  is  a  splendid  specimen  of  ancient  art,
the  figures  models  of  athletic  vigour,  their  attitudes  full  of  fiery  energy.
Some  portions  of  the  group  are  restored,  but  on  the  whole  rightly  and
successfully.  The  head  of  the  figure  with  the  cloak  (Aristogiton)  is
ancient,  but  does  not  belong  to  the  group  ;  it  is  a  fine  head,  but  is  much
later  than  the  head  of  Harmodius,  resembling  in  fact  the  head  of  the
Hermes  of  Praxiteles,  whereas  the  head  of  Harmodius  is  entirely
archaic.  It  is  moreover  youthful  and  beardless,  whereas  in  the  original
group  Aristogiton  was  represented  bearded,  as  we  see  from  the  repro-
duction of  the  group  on  the  marble  chair,  the  lead  tokens,  the  Ufythas
of  Vienna,  and  one  at  least  of  the  coins  (Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,
pi.  DD,  xiv.)

See  K.  Friederichs,  ^Harmodios  und  Aristogiton,'  Archaologische
Zei/uttgy  17  (1859),  pp.  65-72,  with  pi.  cxxvii. ;  Friederichs- Wolters,
Gipsabgiissey  Nos.  1 21-124;  Ad  Michaelis,  'Harmodios  und  Aristogi-
ton,' ArchdoL  Zeitung^  23  (1865),  pp.  13-15;  Lucy  M.  Mitchell,
History  of  Ancient  Sculpture^  p.  286  sq,  ;  A.  S.  Murray,  Hist,  of  Greek
Sculpture^  i.  p.  160  sqq,  ;  Overbeck,  Gesch.  d,  griech,  Plastik^^  I.  p.
155  sqq, ;  CoUignon,  Histoire  de  la  Sculpture  Grecque^  i .  p.  369  sqg. ;
Baiuneister's  Denkmdler^  p.  340,  fig.  357.

7.  In  the  Boboli  Gardens  at  Florence  there  are  two  statues  which
have  by  some  been  held  to  be  reproductions  of  the  same  group.  It
appears,  however,  that  one  of  them  (the  supposed  Harmodius)  has  no
connexion  with  the  group  of  the  tyrannicides,  but  that  the  torso  of  the
other  is  ancient  and  is  a  replica  of  the  Aristogiton.  See  Monumenti
Inediti^  8  (1867),  pi.  xlvi.  ;  O.  Benndorf,  *Ritratti  dei  tirannicide
Armodio  ed  Aristogitone,'  Annali  delV  Inst,  39  (1867),  pp.  304-325;
H.   Diitschke,  *Die  vermeintlichen   Statuen  der   Tyrannenmorder   im


CH.  viii  HARMODIUS  AND  ARISTOGITON  97

Boboli-Garten  in  Floreni,'  Arckaol.  Zei/ung,  32  (1875)1  pp.  163-165  ;
A.  Funw^gler,  in  Berliner  philotogisehe  Woihensehrijt,  8  (1888),  p.
i«8  jy.


The  number  of  these  copies  shows  that  the  original  must  have  been
£unous  ;  and  that  it  was  at  Athens  is  proved  by  its  reproduction  on
Athenian  coins  and  a  Panathenaic  vase.     Moreover,  a  comparison  of

VOL.  II  H


98  UARMODWS  AND  ARIS70GIT0N       BK.  i.  attica


these  copies  demonstrates,  as  we  have  seen,  that  the  original  was
a  group  of  statuary  standing  free  and  visible  on  all  sides.  Such  a
group  was  that  of  the  tyrannicides  in  the  market-place  at  Athens  ;  and
as  the  figures  and  attitudes  in  our  copies  answer  perfectly  to  what  those
of  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton  might  be  expected  to  be,  it  is  a  reason-
able conclusion  that  our  copies  represent  the  famous  statues  of  the
tyrannicides  at  Athens.  In  this  conclusion  all  archaeologists  are  agreed
with  the  exception  of  Pro£  £.  Curtius,  who  holds  that  the  works  of  art
enumerated  above  are  copies  of  the  figures  of  Miltiades  and  Callimachus
in  the  painting  of  the  battle  of  Marathon  which  adorned  one  of  the
walls  in  the  Painted  Colonnade  at  Athens  (Paus.  i.  1 5.  3).  This  theory
is  refuted  by  the  single  observation,  made  long  ago  by  Stackelberg,  that
our  copies  represent  the  original  from  different  sides,  showing  that  it
was  not  a  painting  but  a  group  of  statuary  in  the  round  which  stood
free  and  could  be  seen  from  all  sides.  Other  argiunents  in  refutation
of  Profl  Curtius*s  theory  are  adduced  by  Mr.  E.  Petersen.  See  E.
Curtius,  *Harmodios  und  Aristogeiton,'  Hermes,  15  (1880),  pp.  147-
153  ;  E.  Petersen, '  Harmodios  und  Aristogeiton  nochmals,'  ib,  pp.  475-

477.

But  a  question  remains,  in  answering  which  archaeologists  have  not

been  so  unanimous.     It  is  this.     Do  our  copies  represent  the  original

group  by  Antenor,  or  the  later  group  by  Critius  and  Nesiotes  ?      Till

lately  no  work  of  any  of  these  sculptors  was  known  to  be  in  existence,

so  that  a  decisive  answer  to  the  question  was  impossible.       But  among

the  archaic  female  statues  discovered  a  few  years  ago  on  the  Acropolis

at  Athens  there  is  one  by  Antenor,  as  the  inscription  on  the  pedestal

attests.     Like  its  sister  statues  this  one  of  Antenor  (discovered  in  1886)

represents  a  woman  completely  draped  in  garments  of  a  peculiar  cut,

with  long  ringlets  hanging  down  on  either  side  of  her  breast.     The

workmanship  is  refined,  but  the  figure  is  stiff  and  somewhat  lifeless.

The  contrast  between  it  and  the  Naples  group,  glowing  with  exuberant

life  and  energy,  is  immense.       It  is  difficult  to  understand  how  any  one

who  has  seen  them  both  should  conceive  them  to  be  creations  of  the

same  master.      Yet  this  is  the  view  of   Mr.  Collignon  and    Prof.  C.

Wachsmuth ;    and    Mr.    A.    S.   Murray  seems  to  incline  to  it.     Mr.

Studniczka  formerly  took  the  same  view,  but  he  has  since  abandoned  it

On  the  other  hand  Mr.  B.  Graef  has  argued  against  it  at  length ;  and

Prof.  Overbeck  observes  that  a  comparison  of  the  Naples  group  with

Antenor's  statue  on  the  one  hand,  and  with  other  early  statues  of  the

fine  period  of  Greek  art  on  the  other  hand,  leaves  no  room  to  doubt  that

the  representations  of  the  tyrannicides  which  have  come  down  to  us  are

copied,   not  from  the  original  group  by  Antenor,  but  from  the  later

group  by  Critius  and  Nesiotes.     This,  I  am  convinced,  is  the  true  view,

so  far  as  regards  the  Naples  statues  at  least      The  other  copies  of  the

group  are,    with  perhaps   two   exceptions,  too  small   to   enable  us  to

pronounce  with  confidence  on  the  style  of  the  original.       One  of  these

exceptions  is  the  Aristogiton  in  the  Boboli  gardens  at  Florence.      The

other  is  the  painting  on   the  lekythos   in    the    Scaramanga  collection

(which  is  overlooked  by  Prof.  Overbeck,  Prof.  C.  Wachsmuth,  Mr.  A.  S.


CH.  VIII  HA  K MODI  US  AND  ARISTOGITON  99

Murray,  and  Miss  Harrison).  This  painting  is  indeed  more  archaic
in  style  than  the  Naples  statues  and  may  possibly  be  a  copy  of
Antenor's  group.  But  it  is  also  possible  that  its  archaic  style  may  be
due  to  the  painter,  who  has  certainly  taken  great  liberties  with  his
model,  treating  it  in  a  thoroughly  pictorial  rather  than  plastic  style.

As  to  Antenor's  statue  discovered  on  the  Acropolis,  see  Les  Mushs  d^Athhtes^
I"  livr.  pi.  vi.  ;  F.  Studniczka,  in  Jahrbuch  des  k.  deutsck,  arch.  Inst,  2  (1887),
pp.  135-148;  Bull,  de  Corr,  HelUn,  13  (1889),  p.  150  sq,  ;  £.  A  Gardner,  in
Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies  y  10(1889),  PP*  278-200;  n/.,  11  (1890),  pp.  215-217;
P.  Wolters,  in  MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  13  (1888),  p.  225  sq,  ;  B.  Graef,
*  Die  Gnippe  der  Tyrannenmorder  und  stilistisch  verwandte  Werke  in  Athen,'  ib,
15  (1890),  pp.  1-39;  R.  Heberdey,  *  Zur  Statue  des  Antenor,'  ib,  pp.  126-132;
A.  S.  Murray,  Hist,  of  Greek  Sculpture^  I.  p.  158  sq,  ;  Collignon,  Hist,  de  la
Scultiure  Grecgue^  i.  365  sqq,  ;  Overbeck,  Gesch,  d,  griech,  Plastikf^  i.  p.  152  sq,  ;
H.  Lechat,  in  Bull,  de  Corr.  HelUn,  16  (1892),  pp.  485-489.  For  the  inscription
on  the  base  of  Antenor's  statue  see  *E<fnjti€fis  dpxcuoXoyiicii,  1886,  p.  81  ;  C.
Robert,  in  Hermes,  22  (1887),  pp.  129-135  ;  C,  I,  A,  iv.  No.  373",  p.  08.  On  the
statues  of  the  tyrannicides  and  their  reproductions  see  (in  addition  to  the  passages
cited  above)  Welcker,  Antike  Denkmdler,  2.  pp.  213-215  ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die
Stadt  Atken^  i,  pp.  170  sq.,  508  sq,  ;  id,,  2,  pp.  393-398  ;  Miss  Harrison,
Ancient  Athens,  pp.  77-84;  A.  S.  Murray,  op.  cit,^  1.  pp.  159-164;  Mitchell,
ofi.  ciL  pp.  285-287  ;  Overbeck,  op,  cit,  i.  pp.  155-158 ;  Collignon,  op,  cit.  I.  pp.
367-374;  E.  Petersen,  in  Archaeology  epigraph.  MittheiL  aus  Oesterreich,  3  (1879),
pp.  76-86.

The  sculptors  Critius  and  Nesiotes  flourished  in  Ol.  83  (448-444
B.C)  according  to  Pliny  (A^.  H,  xxxiv.  49).  But  they  must  have  been
at  work  much  earlier,  since,  as  we  have  seen,  they  made  the  statues  of
the  tyrannicides  in  477  B.C  Their  style  is  characterised  by  Lucian  as
'*  tight,  sinewy,  hard,  and  with  rigid  lines "  (a9rco-<^ty/A€va  koX  v€vptaSrf
KoX  o'Kkripa  KOi  oKpipiaq  dworera/iiva  rats  ypafifiaU,  Rhet,  praecept,  9).
See  Bnmn,  Gesch,  d,  griech,  Kiinstler^  i-PP-  101-105.  A  statue  of
Apollo  with  a  lyre,  now  in  the  Palazzo  Pitti  at  Florence,  is  assigned
by  Prof.  Furtwangler  to  Critius  (Furtwangler,  Meisterwerke  d.  griech,
PlasHk^  p.  81  sq,\  as  to  the  statue  see  Overbeck,  Griech,  Kunst-
mythologie,  Besonderer  Theil,  3.  p.  170  sq,)  As  to  the  spelling  of  the
name  Critius  (instead  of  Critias)  see  note  on  i.  23.  9.

8.  5.  the  cause  and  the  maimer  of  the  deed  have  been  told  by
otlian.  The  story  of  the  assassination  of  Hipparchus  (the  younger
brother  of  the  tyrant  Hippias)  by  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton  in  5 1 4
B.C.  is  told  by  Thucydides  (i.  20,  vi.  54-58)  and  with  some  variations
by  Aristotle  {Constitution  of  Athens^  18).

8.  6.  the  theatre  which  they  call  the  Music  HalL  See  note  on
L  14.  I.

8.  6.  a  name  bestowed  upon  him  by  the  Bhodians.  Because  he
helped  them  when  they  were  besieged  by  Demetrius.  See  i.  6.  6  note.
They  not  only  called  him  Saviour  but  worshipped  him  as  a  god.  A  square
precinct,  each  side  a  furlong  in  length  and  enclosed  by  a  colonnade,
was  dedicated  to  his  worship  and  called  the  Ptolemaeum  (Diodorus,  xx.
100.  3.  sq,)  A  common,  but  incorrect,  tradition  was  that  Ptolemy  had
received  the  title  of  Saviour  because  he  had  saved  Alexander  the  Great's
life  in  India.     See  note  on  i.  6.  2.

8.  6.  a  statue  of  his  sister  Arsinoe.     There  was  a  statue  of  her


lOO  LYSIMACHUS  bk.  i.  attic  a

in  the  sanctuary  of  the  Muses  on  Mt.  Helicon  (ix.  31.  i)  and  another  at
Olympta  {Archdologische  Zeitung^  36  (1878),  p.  174;  A.  Botticher,
Olyfnfnoy^  p.  388).

9.  I.  Ptolemy,  snmamed  Philometor.  A  head  of  Ptolemy  VI.
(Philometor)  carved  out  of  dark  granite  and  bearing  an  Egyptian
inscription  in  hieroglyphics  was  found  in  the  harbour  at  Aegina  in
1842.  See  J.  Six,  *  Ein  Portrait  des  Ptolemaios  VI.  Philometor/
MittheiL  d.   arch,  Inst  in  Athen^  12  (1887),  pp.    212-222,  with  pi.

•  •  •  •  •

Vll.  VUl.

9.  I.  she  would  not  suffer  him  to  be  called  to  the  throne  etc
Cp.  Justin,  xxxix.  3.

9.  5.  Alexander shut  him  up  iki  a  lion's  den  etc     Cp.

Justin,  XV.  3.  7  sqq,  ;  Plutarch,  Demetrius^  27 ;  Pliny,  N,  H,  viii.  54  ;
Seneca,  De  Ira^  iii.  17.  2  ;  Vsderius  Maximus,  ix.  3.  ext.  i.  Quintus
Curtius  narrates  (viii.  i.  15  sqq.)  that  once  while  hunting  in  Syria
Lysimachus  had  killed  single-handed  a  gigantic  lion;  which,  thought
Curtius,  might  be  the  origin  of  the  common  story  here  told  by
Pausanias.

9.  6.  he  marched  against  the  Oetae  and  their  chief  Dromi-
chaetes  etc.  According  to  Diodorus  (xxi.  11  frag.)  the  Thracians
captured  Agathocles,  son  of  Lysimachus,  but  dismissed  him  with
presents,  in  the  hope  that  Lysimachus  would  in  return  resign  to  them
the  territory  which  he  had  taken  from  them.  On  another  occasion,
according  to  Diodorus  (xxi.  12),  Lysimachus  with  all  his  army  was
captured  by  the  Thracian  King  Dromichaetes,  who  treated  him  in  the
most  hospitable  and  generous  manner  and  set  him  at  liberty,  receiving
in  return  the  places  which  Lysimachus  had  previously  taken  from  him.
The  capture  of  Lysimachus  by  Dromichaetes  is  also  described  or
alluded  to  by  Strabo  (vii.  pp.  302,  305),  Memnon  (Frag.  5,  in  Histor.
Graec.  Frag,  ed.  Miiller,  3.  p.  531  ;  Photius,  Bibliotheca^  p.  225  a
I  sqq,y  ed.  Bekker),  and  Plutarch  (De  sanit,  praecepL  9 ;  /V/.,  De  sera
numinis  vindicta^  1 1).  Polyaenus  says  wrongly  (vii.  25)  that  Lysimachus
and  all  his  men  were  slain  by  Dromichaetes.  Justin  says  (xvi.  i.  19)
that  Lysimachus,  being  hard  pressed  in  war  by  Dromichaetes,  king  of
the  Thracians,  resigned  a  part  of  Macedonia  to  him.  Dromichaetes  is
called  king  of  the  Thracians  by  Diodorus,  Polyaenus,  and  Justin  ;
Pausanias  and  Strabo,  on  the  other  hand,  represent  him  as  king  of  the
Getae ;  and  Plutarch,  though  he  does  not  mention  Dromichaetes,
speaks  of  Lysimachus's  capture  by  the  Getae.  Suidas  (  s.v.  dvaSpofiai)
speaks  of  "the  expedition  of  Lysimachus  through  Thrace  against
Dromichaetes,  king  of  the  Odrysians."  Cp.  Thirlwall,  History  of  Greece^
8.  pp.  24-26 ;  Droysen,  Gesch.  d,  Hellenismus^  ii.  2.  p.  274-278.  As  to
the  Getae  see  E.  Roesler,  *  Die  Geten  und  ihre  Nachbam,'  Sitzungs-
berichte  of  the  Vienna  Academy,  Philos.  histor.  CI.  44  (1863),  pp.  140-
187  ;  K.  Miillenhoff,  Deutsche  Altertumskunde^  2.  p.  383  sqq.  Miillen-
hoff  thought  that  the  Getae  were  the  Slavs  and  Bulgarians.

9.  7.  He  also  crossed  over  to  Asia  etc  In  302  b.c.  Lysimachus
formed  an  alliance  with  Cassander,  Seleucus,  and  Ptolemy,  crossed  with
an  army  into  Asia,  and  afterwards  (301  B.c.)  took  part  in  the  battle  of


CH.  X  LYSIMACHUS  loi

Ipsus  against  Antigonus  and  Demetrius,  in  which  Antigonus  lost  his  life.
See  Diodorus,  xx.  io6  sqq, ;  Thirl  wall,  Hist,  of  Greece^  7.  p.  389  ;
Droysen,  Gesch,  d,  Hellenismusy  ii.  2.  p.  200  sq,  ;  and  Paus.  i.  6.
7  note.

9.  7-  He  founded,  too,  the  present  city  of  Ephesns importing

inhaliitants  from  Lebedns  and  Colophon  etc.  Cp.  vii.  3.  4  sq.
From  the  time  of  Croesus  down  to  the  age  of  Alexander  the  city  of
Ephesus  was  clustered  round  the  sanctuary  of  Artemis.  Lysimachus
built  the  city  on  a  new  site,  and  as  the  inhabitants  were  unwilling  to
leave  the  old  one,  he  blocked  up  the  water-channels  and  flooded  the  old
city  till  the  people  were  glad  to  quit  it  for  the  new  one.  He  called  the
new  city  Arsinoe  after  his  wife,  but  the  old  name  afterwards  prevailed.
See  Strabo,  xiv.  p.  640  ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v,  *£</>€0'o$.

9.  7.  the  iambic  poet  ^oenix.  Verses  of  his  are  quoted  by  Athe-
naeus  (viii.  p.  359  e-360  a,  x.  p.  421  d,  xi.  p.  495  d  e,  xii.  p.  530  e-531  a).

9.  8.  Hieronymns  the  Oardian.  This  writer  composed  a  history
of  the  successors  of  Alexander.  He  was  at  the  head  of  an  embassy
sent  by  Eumenes  to  Antipater  in  320  B.C.  (Diodorus,  xviii.  42),  and  in
319  B.C.  he  was  sent  by  Antigonus  on  an  embassy  to  Eumenes  (Dio-
dorus, xviii.  50).  He  must  have  been  alive  as  late  as  272  B.C.,  since
he  described  the  death  of  Pyrrhus  which  happened  in  that  year  (Paus.
L  13.  9).  According  to  Lucian  {Macrobii^  22)  he  lived  to  the  age  of
one  hundred  and  four,  in  spite  of  all  the  hardships  he  had  endured
and  the  wounds  he  had  received  in  the  wars.

9.  8.  founded  Lysimachia.  Cp.  Justin,  xvii.  i  ;  Strabo,  vii.  p.
331,  frag.  52  and  54.  It  would  seem  either  that  Cardia  was  not  wholly
destroyed  when  Lysimachia  was  founded  or  that  it  afterwards  revived  ;
for  in  describing  the  civil  war  between  Octavian  and  Antony  on  the  one
side  and  Brutus  and  Cassius  on  the  other,  Appian  observes  {BelL  Civ,
iv.  88)  that  Lysimachia  and  Cardia  occupied  between  them,  like  gates,
the  isthmus  of  the  Thracian  Chersonese.  Pausanias  himself  in  the
next  chapter  (i.  10.  5)  speaks  of  Cardia  as  of  a  village  which  still  existed
in  his  time.

10.  I.  he  had  murdered  Alexander  and  reigned  in  his  stead.
This  was  in  294  B.C.  Alexander  had  intended  to  assassinate  Demetrius,
but  Demetrius  anticipated  him.  See  Plutarch,  Demetrius^  36  sq, ;  /V/.,
PyrrhuSy  6  sq,  ;  Justin,  xvL  i  ;  Thirlwall,  Hist,  of  Greece^  8.  p.  18  sq,  ;
Droysen,  Gesch,  d,  Hellen,  ii.  2.  p.  265  sqq,

10.  2.  Pyrrhns  came  to  his  help  etc  In  288  b.c.  Lysimachus
invaded  Macedonia  from  the  east,  while  Pyrrhus  attacked  it  from  the
west.  When  Demetrius,  then  king  of  Macedonia,  would  have  given
battle  to  Pyrrhus,  his  army  went  over  to  the  enemy  and  he  had  to
flee  in  disguise.  Lysimachus  and  Pyrrhus  then  divided  Macedonia
between  them,  the  lion's  share  falling  to  Pyrrhus.  See  Plutarch,
Demetrius^  44  ;  id,^  Pyrrhus^  11  sq,\  Justin,  xvi.  2  ;  Thirlwall,  Hist,  of
Greece^  8.  pp.  33-36 ;  Droysen,  Gesch,  d,  Hellenistnus^  ii.  2.  p.  296-298.

10.  2.  when  Demetrins  fell  into  the  hands  of  Seleucns.  In
286  B.C  Demetrius  was  defeated  by  Seleucus  and  surrendered  to  him
shortly  afterwards.     He  died  in  captivity.     See  Plutarch,  Demetrius^


I02  PY/iRHUS  BK.   I.  ATTICA

49-52  ;  Thirl  wall,  Hist,  of  Greece^  8.  p.  40  sqq. ;  Droysen,  Gesch.  d,
HelUnismuSy  ii.  2.  p.  307  sqq,

10.  2.  By  a  decisive  victory  etc.  See  Plutarch,  Pyrrhusy  12  ;
Justin,  xvi.  3.  i  sq.  According  to  Eusebius  {Chronic,  vol.  i.  p.  233,  cd.
Schdne)  Pyrrhus  had  retained  possession  of  Macedonia  only  seven
months.     Cp.  Droysen,  Gesch,  d,  HelletdsmuSy  ii.  2.  p.  312.

10.  3.  Arsince plotted  against  Agathodes.     According  to

Justin  (xvii.  i.  4),  Arsinoe  poisoned  Agathocles.  But  Memnon  says
(Frag.  8,  Histor,  Grace,  Frag,  ed.  Miiller,  3.  p.  532)  that  Lysimachus,
deceived  by  the  wiles  of  Arsinoe,  attempted  to  poison  his  son  Agathocles,
and  failing  in  the  attempt  cast  him  into  prison,  where  Ptolemy
Thunderbolt,  brother  of  Arsinoe,  despatched  him  with  his  own  hand.
Strabo  merely  says  (xiii.  p.  623)  that  Lysimachus  was  compelled  by
domestic  troubles  to  slay  his  son  Agathocles.  The  murder  seems  to
have  been  perpetrated  in  284  or  283  B.C.  See  Thirl  wall.  Hist,  of
GreccCy  8.  p.  47  ;  Droysen,  Gesch,  d,  HellenismuSy  ii.  2.  p.  321  sqq.  As
to  the  marriage  of  Lysimachus  with  Arsinoe,  see  Droysen,  op,  cit,  ii.
2.  p.  236.

10.  5.  gave  battle  to  Seleucns  etc  The  battle  was  fought  in
28 1  B.C.,  at  a  place  called  the  Plain  of  Corns  in  Hellespontine  Phrygia.
Lysimachus  fell  by  the  hand  of  a  man  named  Malacon,  a  native  of
Heraclea.  See  Eusebius,  Chron,  vol.  i.  p.  234  sq,y  ed.  Schdne ;  Appian,
Syr,  62  ;  Memnon,  Frag.  8  {Frag,  Hist,  GraeCy  ed.  Miiller,  3.  p.  532) ;
Justin,  xvii.  i  sq,  ;  Thirlwall,  Hist,  of  Greece^  8.  p.  48  sq, ;  Droysen,
Gesch,  d,  HellenismuSy  ii.  2.  p.  326  sq,

10.  5.  Alexander succeeded in  obtaining  his  body  etc.

According  to  one  account  the  body  of  Lysimachus  was  left  lying  on
the  field,  guarded  from  the  wolves  and  vultures  by  a  faithful  dog,
till  it  was  found  and  buried  by  Thorax,  a  Pharsalian  (Appian,  Syr,
64  ;  cp.  Plutarch,  De  sollertia  animcdiuniy  xiv.  2  ;  idy  Praecejfft,  gerend,
reipub,  xxviii.  2).  According  to  another  account,  which  is  here
followed  by  Pausanias,  the  remains  of  Lysimachus  were  conveyed  by
his  son  Alexander  to  Lysimachia  in  the  Thracian  Chersonese,  where
they  were  laid  in  a  sanctuary  called  after  him  the  Lysimacheum
(Appian,  l,c,)

11.  I.  a  statne  of  Pyrrhus.  There  was  a  statue  of  Pyrrhus  also
at  Olympia  (vi.  14.  9).  No  portraits  of  Pyrrhus,  authenticated  by  in-
scriptions, have  come  down  to  us.  The  supposed  portraits  on  coins  appear
to  be  ideal  heads,  perhaps  of  Achilles,  the  legendary  ancestor  of  the  royal
family  of  Epirus.  In  the  Uffizi  gallery  at  Florence  there  is  a  black
marble  bust  of  a  man  with  long  dishevelled  locks  and  beard,  which
Mr.  Dutschke  attempted  to  identify  as  Pyrrhus  on  the  strength  of  an
inscription  on  it.  But  he  misread  the  inscription,  which  appears
moreover  to  be  a  forgery.  The  bust,  as  Mr.  Friedlander  remarked,
is  clearly  that  of  a  barbarian.  The  features  seem  Celtic  ;  with  its  wild
expression  and  shock  of  unkempt  hair,  the  head  might  be  that  of  a
Highland  cateran.  Anything  more  unlike  what  we  should  expect  to
be  the  features  of  the  chivalrous  Greek  prince,  it  would  be  hard  to
conceive.    See  H.  Dutschke,  ^Biiste  des  Kdnigs  Pyrrhos,'  Archdologische


CH.  XI  PYRRHUS  103

Zeiiung^  35  (1877),  pp.  68-74;  !•  Friedlander,  Die  Biiste  dcs
Pyrrhos,'  ib,  p.  i-^i  sq,\  C.  Robert,  *  Die  angebliche  Pyrrhos-Buste  der
Uffizien,'  etc.,  Hermes^  17  (1882),  p.  134  sqq.  With  more  plausibility
Mr.  J.  Six  has  identified  as  a  portrait  of  Pyrrhus  a  bust  in  the  National
Museum  at  Naples  (No.  6150).  The  head  is  that  of  a  soldier  wearing
a  Macedonian  helmet  with  cheek-pieces,  which  are  fastened  by  straps
under  his  chin.  It  represents  a  man  in  the  prime  of  life ;  the  features
are  strong,  mobile,  and  masculine,  but  seen  in  front  they  have  a  slight
nervous  contraction,  which  gives  the  face  a  somewhat  anxious  and
haggard  look.  The  helmet  which  he  wears  is  encircled  with  a  wreath
of  oak-leaves,  and  from  under  its  rim  at  the  back  hangs  the  knotted
end  of  a  royal  diadem.  On  the  strength  of  this  diadem  and  of  the  oak-
wreath,  which  is  supposed  to  have  been  a  national  emblem  of  Epirus
(sec  Plutarch,  Pyrrhus^  11  ;  Head,  Hisioria  Nummorum^  p.  273  sq,\
Mr.  Six  concludes  that  the  bust  is  a  portrait  of  Pyrrhus.  See  J.  Six,
*Un  ritratto  del  re  Pirro  d'  Epiro,*  Mittheilungen  d,  arch,  Instiiuis^
Romische  Abtheilung,  6  (1891),  pp.  279-284.  More  recently  Mr.  W.
Helbig  has  claimed  as  a  portrait  of  Pyrrhus  a  marble  head  which  was
bought  by  Mr.  Charles  Jacobsen  at  Naples  in  189 1.  It  represents  a
young  man  Mrith  keen,  well-cut  features,  his  curly  hair  wreathed  with  a
garland  of  oak-leaves.  Mr.  Helbig  holds  that  the  face  is  the  same  as
in  the  Naples  bust  and  is  probably  a  portrait  of  Pyrrhus.  See  W.
Helbig,  *  Deux  portraits  de  Pyrrhus,  roi  d'fipire,'  £cole  Fran^aise  de
Rome.  Melanges  d^archdologie  et  d^histoire^  13  (1893),  pp.  377-390>
with  plates  iii.  and  iv.

11.  I.  PyrrhiiB  was  related  to  Alexander  only  by  ancestry.
The  family  tree,  according  to  Pausanias,  was  this : —

Tharypas

Alcetas  I.


I  1

Neoptolemiis  Arybbas

I  I

i  i  1  i

Alexander  Ol3nnpias  Alcetas  II.  Aeacides

(slain  in  Lucania)  |  (see  §  5)  .       {

See  §  3  Alexander  the  Great  Pyrrhus

A  fuller  tree  is  given  by  Droysen  at  the  end  of  his  Geschichte  des
Hellenismus,

11.  I.  Arybbas.  He  was  expelled  from  his  kingdom  by  Philip
of  Macedonia,  and  died  in  exile,  according  to  Justin  (vii.  6.  11  sq,\
viii.  6).  He  took  refuge  in  Athens,  where  he  was  hospitably  received
and  placed  under  public  protection,  as  we  learn  from  an  inscription
(JC.LA,  iu  No.  115;  Hicks,  Greek  Historical  Inscriptions^  No.  113;
Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec,  No.  106).  Cp.  Fr.  Reuss,  *  Konig
Arybbas  von  Epiros,*  Rheinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  36  (i  881),  pp.  161-

174.

11.  I.  Tharypas  was   educated  at  Athens  and  was  the  first  to


104  PYRRHUS  BK.   I.  ATTICA

introduce  Greek  manners,  laws,  letters,  and  forms  of  civil  government
among  his  subjects.  See  Justin,  xvii.  3.  9-13  ;  Plutarch,  Pyrrhus^  i.
In  429  B.C.  he  was  a  child  under  the  guardianship  of  the  regent
Sabylinthus  (Thucydides,  ii.  80.  8).

11.   I.  I^rrl^ns landed  in  Epiras  etc    Cp.  Plutarch,  Pyrrkm^

I  ;  Justin,  xvii.  3.  3.

11.  I.  He  had  no  child  by  Hermione.  For  the  discrepant
traditions  as  to  the  children  of  Pyrrhus  (Neoptolemus)  by  his  different
wives,  see  the  scholia  on  Euripides,  Andromache^  2^4  and  32.

11.  I.  Andromache  married  Helenns.    Cp.  ii.  23.  6.

11.  2.  CeBtrinns took  possession  of  the  land  etc.     See  iL

23.  6  note.

11.  2.  Pergamns Tenthrania.     As  to  Pergamus  cp.  iii.  20.

8  ;  as  to  Teuthrania,  see  note  on  i.  4.  5.  Nicomedes  of  Acanthus,  in
his  history  of  Macedonia,  represented  Pergamus  as  a  son  of  Pyrrhus
by  Leonassa,  daughter  of  Cleodaeus  (Schol.  on  Euripides,  Andromache^

24,  ed.  Schwartz).

11.  2.  Pielos.  He  is  called  Piales  by  Justin  (xvii.  3.  8).  Pielus
was  mentioned  by  Proxenus  in  the  first  book  of  his  history  of  Epirus
(Schol.  on  Euripides,  Andromache^  32,  where  IltcAov  is  a  correction  of
Schwartz's,  the  MSS.  reading  irpkWov  and  ir.  XAov).

11.  3.  the  sons  of  Alcetas.  These  were  Neoptolemus  and
Arybbas.     See  above  §  i.

11.  3.  Alexander,  son  of  Neoptolemus,  died  in  Lucania.  Cp.
§  7.  He  was  slain  by  a  Lucanian  exile  in  326  B.C.  at  the  river  Acheron,
near  the  town  of  Pandosia,  on  the  borders  of  Lucania  and  Bruttium.
He  had  gone  with  a  fleet  and  army  to  Italy  in  340  B.C.  to  help  the  people
of  Tarentum.  See  Livy,  viii.  3.  6,  viii.  24  ;  Justin,  xii.  2,  xvii.  3.  14  j^.,
xxiii.  I.  15.

11.  3.  Olympias  had  returned  to  Epims  etc  The  restoration  of
Olympias  to  Macedonia  was  effected  jointly  by  Polysperchon  and
Aeacides  in  317  B.c.  Eurydice  the  queen  attempted  to  give  battle  to
their  forces  at  a  place  Evia  in  Macedonia ;  but  her  troops  went  over  to
the  side  of  Olympias.  She  and  her  husband,  Philip  Aridaeus,  fell  into  the
hands  of  Olympias,  who  caused  them  both  to  be  put  to  death,  and  then
executed  Cassander's  brother  Nicanor  and  a  hundred  Macedonians  of  the
highest  rank,  the  friends  of  Cassander.  See  Diodorus,  xix.  1 1  ;  Justin,
xiv.  5.  9  sq,\  Aelian,  Var,  Hist  xiii.  36;  Thirlwall,  Hist,  of  Greece^
7.  pp.  309-311  ;  Droysen,  Gesch.  d.  HellenismuSy  ii.  i.  pp.  238-241.

11.  4.  received  no  more  than  she  deserved  etc.  In  316  ac.
Olympias  fell  into  the  hands  of  Cassander,  who  caused  her  to  be  put  to
death  (Diodorus,  xix.  50  sq,\  Justin,  xiv.  6;  Paus.  ix.  7.  2  note;
Droysen,  Gesch,  d,  Heilenismus,  ii.  i.  p.  246  sqq.\  Thirlwall,  Hist  of
Greece^  7.  p.  315  sqq,)

11.    4.    the    Epirots would  not   receive  Aeacides.    The

Epirots  were  so  disgusted  at  the  support  which  their  king  Aeacides
gave  to  Olympias  that  they  formally  banished  him  and  entered  into
alliance  with  Cassander,  who  sent  Lyciscus  into  the  country  to  manage
the  government  (316   B.c.)      See   Diodorus,  xix.  36  and  52;  Justin,


CH.  XII  PYRRHUS  los

xvii.  3.  i6;  Plutarch,  Pyrrkus,  2;  Droysen,  Gesck,  (L  He  lien.  ii.  i.
p.  244.

11.  4-  A  battle  was  fought  at  Oeniadae  etc.  According  to
Diodorus  (xix.  74)  Philip  defeated  Aeacides  in  two  battles,  in  the  second
of  which  Aeacides  was  slain  (313  B.c.)  Cp.  Droysen,  Gesch.  d.  Hellen,
iL  2.  p.  30  sq.  As  to  the  situation  and  ruins  of  Oeniadae,  see  L.
Heuzey,  Le  Mont  Olymfie  tt  rAcamanie^  pp.  435-460.

11.  5.  The  Epirots  now  recalled  Alcetas  etc.  This  happened
in  312  B.a  The  names  of  the  two  sons  of  Alcetas  who  were  massacred
with  him  were  Eioneus  and  Nisus.  He  had  two  other  sons  named
Alexander  and  Teucer.     See  Diodorus,  xix.  88  sq,

11.  5.  at  the  approach  of  the  Macedonians  Pyrrhus  betook
JiiingAlf  to  Egypt  etc  See  i.  6.  8  note.  Pausanias  here  attributes
Pyrrhus's  expulsion  to  the  approach  of  a  Macedonian  army  under
Cassander ;  Plutarch  attributes  it  to  a  conspiracy  of  his  own  subjects
(PyrrhuSy  4).  The  wife  whom  Ptolemy  gave  to  Pyrrhus  was  Antigone,
daughter  of  Ptolemy's  wife  Berenice  by  Philip,  her  former  husband
(Plutarch,  Pyrrhus^  4).  The  restoration  of  Pyrrhus  to  Epirus  by  the
help  of  Ptolemy  is  dated  by  Droysen  in  295  B.C.  {Gesch.  d.  HellenismuSy
ii.  2.  p.  256).  Prof.  G.  F.  Unger  argues  that  the  restoration  took  place
in  297  B.C.  at  latest,  possibly  in  the  second  half  of  298  B.C.  {PhilologuSy

43(1884),  p.  363  J^.)

11.  6.  what  he  snffered  in  the  war  with  Lsrsimachns.     See  i.  9.

11.  6.  how  he  expelled  Demetrius,  and  reigned  over  Mace-
donia.    See  i.  10.  2.

11.  7-  The  conqnest  of  all  Italy  was  one  of  the  many  dreams
of  Athenian  ambition.  It  is  said  that  Alcibiades  regarded  the  pro-
jected conquest  of  Sicily  as  merely  a  step  towards  the  conquest  of
Carthage,  Africa,  Italy,  and  Peloponnese  (Plutarch,  AlcidiadeSy  17).
Again  Plutarch  tells  us  {Pericles,  20)  that  in  the  age  of  Pericles  the
conquest  of  Etruria  and  Carthage  was  the  dream  of  some  of  the
Athenians,  a  dream  which  they  were  not  hopeless  of  seeing  one  day
fulfilled.

12.  I.  Pyrrhns crossed  the  Ionian  Sea to  attack  the

"RlFmimff  etc  This  was  early  in  280  B.C.  See  Plutarch,  Pyrrhus,  13-15  ;
Justin,  xviii.  i  ;  Droysen,  Geschichte  des  Hellenismus,  iii.  i.  p.  127  sqq.

12.  2.  in  a  battle  between  the  Tarentines  and  Romans  etc
Pyrrhus's  first  battle  with  the  Romans  was  fought  near  Heraclea  in
Lucania  in  280  B.C.  See  Plutarch,  Pyrrhus,  16  sq.\  Justin,  xviii.  i  ;
Florus,  L  13.  (18).  7  sq,\  Droysen,  Gesch.  d,  Hellen.  iii.  i.  p.  140  sq.

12.  3.  Alexander  was  the  first  European  who  acqnired  elephants
alter  his  conqnest  of  Poms  etc  The  number  of  elephants  captured
by  Alexander  after  his  battle  with  Poms  is  said  to  have  been  eighty
(Diodorus,  xvii.  89.  2).  The  total  number  of  elephants  in  the  army  or
in  the  possession  of  Poms  is  variously  stated  at  200,  130,  and  85.  See
Arrian,  Anadasis,  v.  15.  4 ;  Diodoms,  xvii.  87.  2  ;  Quintus  Curtius,  viii.
1 3.  44.  Though  Alexander  the  Great  was  the  first  European  who  owned
elephants,  the  existence  of  elephants  was  known  to  the  Greeks  long


io6  ELEPHANTS  IN  ANTIQUITY  bk.  i.  attica

before  Alexander's  time,  for  Herodotus  (iv.  191)  mentions  the  African
elephants  without  describing  them,  as  if  they  were  familiar  to  his  readers.
Aristotle  knew  of  both  the  Indian  and  the  African  species  {De  CoelOy  ii.
14,  p.  298  a,  12.  sqq,)  The  ancients  considered  the  Indian  elephant
superior  in  size  and  strength  to  the  African  elephant  (Diodorus,  ii.  16.
4,  ii.  35.  4  ;  Quintus  Curtius,  viii.  9.  31).  Ptolemy  Philadelphus,  king
of  Egypt  (283-247  B.C.),  was  the  first  to  tame  the  African  elephant  and
use  it  in  war ;  his  elephants  were  brought  from  Nubia  (C  /.  G.  No.  5127;
Hicks,  Greek  Historical  Inscriptions^  No.  173,  line  10  sqq r,  Bunbury,
History  0/  Ancient  Geography y  i.  pp.  578  sq^  607  sq.)  From  Ptolemy
Philadelphus  the  Carthaginians  probably  borrowed  the  idea  of  taming
the  African  elephant  for  military  purposes  ;  for  in  the  Carthaginian  army
which  defeated  Regulus  in  255  ac.  there  were  about  100  elephants
(Polybius,  i.  32.  9).  It  was  easy  for  the  Carthaginians  to  procure
elephants,  since  in  antiquity  the  animal  was  found  native  in  the  regions
of  North  Africa  now  known  as  Tripoli  and  Morocco  (Pliny,  N.  H  viii.
32).  In  modem  times  the  African  elephant  is  not  found  wild  to  the
north  of  the  Sahara  (Rawlinson,  on  Herodotus,  iv.  191);  indeed  it
had  disappeared  from  North  Africa  by  the  seventh  century  a.d.
(Isidore,  Origines^  xiv.  12).  The  range  of  the  Asiatic  elephant
would  seem  also  to  have  been  much  wider  in  early  times  than  it  is
now,  and  even  than  it  was  in  the  days  of  Alexander  the  Great  For
in  the  time  of  the  i8th  Egyptian  dynasty  elephants  appear  to  have
abounded  in  Syria;  Thutmes  III.,  king  of  Egypt,  hunted  120
elephants  in  the  district  of  Ni  in  Syria,  and  Tiglathpileser  I.  hunted  them
in  the  district  of  Charrin  (Ed.  Meyer,  Geschichte  des  AlterthumSy  i.
§  220).  On  the  obelisk  of  Salmanasar  II.,  king  of  Assyria,  the  Asiatic
elephant  is  sculptured  in  relief  along  with  other  Asiatic  animals,  includ-
ing the  two -humped  Bactrian  camel  and  apes  (Perrot  et  Chipiez,
Histoire  cU  VArt  dans  PAntiquit^^  2.  pp.  270  sq.y  564  sq,y  777  note  5  ;
Fr.  Lenormant,  in  Zeitsckri/t  f,  dgyptiscke  Sprache,  8  (1870),  p.  21  sqq,)
The  Asiatic  elephant  is  easily  distinguished  from  the  Afiican,  even  on
the  monuments,  by  the  comparative  smallness  of  its  ears.  The  ear  of
the  African  elephant  measures  some  four  feet  across  ;  it  can  shelter  a
man  completely  from  the  rain.  The  ear  of  the  Asiatic  elephant  is  not
more  than  a  third  of  this  size.  See  D.  Livingstone,  Missionary  Travels
and  Researches  in  South  Africa^  p.  563  J17.  A  terra-cotta  group  found
in  the  necropolis  of  Myrina  represents  an  Asiatic  elephant  trampling
on  a  Gaul ;  this  is  doubtless  a  memorial  of  the  victories  of  the  kings  of
Pergamus  over  the  Gauls  {Bull.  Corr,  Hellht,  9  (1885),  p.  485  sqq,y
with  pi.  xi.)  There  was  a  well-known  picture  of  an  elephant  at  Per-
gamus (Stephanus  Byz.,  s.v,  Bovpa).  The  large-eared  African  elephant
is  represented  on  a  Punic  monument  (Gasette  Archdologiquey  3  (1877),
p.  24  sq,)\  and  it  is  always  the  African  elephant  which  is  figured  on
Roman  coins  and  monuments  (Bunbury,  op,  cit,  i.  p.  608 ;  Livingstone
/.r.)  That  the  ancients,  from  the  time  of  Ptolemy  Philadelphus  onward,
should  have  so  commonly  tamed  the  African  elephant  is  all  the  more
remarkable,  since  in  modem  times  the  African  species  is  considered
untameable  (Livingstone  and  Bunbury,  ILcc)     The   elephant  appears


CH.  XII  THE  PYGMIES  107

very  little  on  the  Egyptian  monuments,  and  not  at  all  in  Egyptian
mythology  (Mr.  W.  Houghton,  in  Academy^  June  27th,  1885,  p.  459  ;
cp.  Americcm  Journal  of  Archaeology^  3  (1887),  p.  143).  It  is  never
depicted  on  Greek  vases  (Stephani,  in  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)
for  1875,  P'  96  TiOXt,  3).  The  ancients  procured  their  ivory  both  from
the  African  and  the  Indian  elephant  (Paus.  v.  12.  3  note).  On  the
elephant  in  antiquity  see  S.  Reinach,  article  *  Elephas/  in  Daremberg
et  Saglio,  Dictionnaire^  3.  p.  536  sqq,

12.  3.  At  their  appearance  a  panic  now  seized  the  Romans
etc  The  Romans  had  never  seen  elephants  before  ;  they  called  them
Lucanian  oxen  because  they  first  encountered  them  in  Lucania  (Varro,
De  lingua  Latino^  vii.  39;  Pliny,  A^.  H.  viii.  16).  The  panic  of  the
Romans  at  first  seeing  elephants  may  be  compared  with  the  alarm  of
the  Mexicans  at  the  sight  of  the  horses  of  the  Spanish  invaders,  which
they  regarded  "  with  the  mysterious  terror  felt  for  a  supernatural  being  "
(Prescott,  Conquest  of  Mexico^  bk.  iii.  ch.  3).

12.  4.   Homer represents   the  couches    and   houses

adorned  with  ivory.  See  Homer,  Od.  iv.  72  sq.y  xix.  55  sq,^  xxiii.
199  sq.

12.  4.  a  battle  of  pygmies  and  cranes.  Homer  (//.  iii.  3  sqq.)
speaks  of  the  cranes  **  flying  towards  the  streams  of  Ocean,  bear-
ing slaughter  and  doom  to  the  Pygmies."  The  war  waged  by  the
Pygmies  with  the  cranes  is  often  alluded  to  by  ancient  writers.  See,
for  example,  Hecataeus,  Frag.  266  (Frag,  Hist,  Graec,^  ed.  Miiller,  i.
p.  1 8)  ;  Antoninus  Liberalis,  Transform,  1 6  ;  Athenaeus,  ix.  p.  390  b  ;
Aelian,  Nat,  Anint,  xv.  29  ;  Ovid,  Met,  vi.  90  sqq,  ;  id,.  Fasti,  vi.
176;  Pliny,  N,  H,  vii.  26;  Juvenal,  xiii.  167  sqq,  ;  Mela,  iii.  81,  p.
8i»  ed.  Parthey;  Solinus,  x.  11.  Aristotle  mentions  the  war  of  the
Pygmies  and  cranes,  and  positively  asserts  that  the  Pygmies  were  a
real  tribe  living  in  the  marshes  of  Upper  Egypt,  from  which  the  Nile
flowed  (Hist,  An,  vii.  12,  p.  597  a,  6  sqq)  The  ancients  certainly
seem  to  have  had  information  of  dwarf  tribes  in  Central  and  Western
Africa  (see  Herodotus,  ii.  32,  iv.  43).  In  modem  times,  especially
within  the  last  half  century,  travellers  have  brought  accounts  of  dwarf
tribes  in  various  parts  of  Equatorial  Africa,  and  it  appears  not  im-
probable that  reports  of  some  of  these  tribes  had  reached  the  ancients.
But  whether  the  fable  of  the  war  between  the  Pygmies  and  the  cranes
actually  originated  in  such  reports,  may  well  be  questioned.  For
accounts  of  these  dwarf  tribes  of  Africa,  see  *  Adventures  of  Andrew
Battel,'  in  Pinkerton*s  Voyages  and  Travels,  16.  p.  334;  Dapper,
Description  de  VAfrique,  p.  332  ;  Du  Chaillu,  Journey  to  Ashango-
iand,  p.  315  sqq,  ;  Schweinfurth,  Heart  of  Africa^  2.  p.  66  sqq, ;
H.  H.  Johnston,  The  River  Congo,  p.  396  sq,  ;  Proceedings  of  the  Royal
Geographical  Society  (London),  New  Series,  8  (1886),  p.  446;  id,,  9
(1887),  PP«  4^7}  44O)  ^46  \  ^'  Bastian,  Die  deutsche  Expedition  an
der  LocMga-Kiiste,  i,  p.  342  sqq,,  id,  2.  p.  96  sqq, ;  J.  L.  Krapf,
Travels,  Researches,  etc.,  in  Eastern  Africa,  p.  5 1  sqq,  ;  Sibree,  Mador
gasccur,  the  Great  African  Island,  p.  136  j^.  ;  Emin  Pasha  in  Central
Africa,  P-  3  >  H.  M.  Stanley,  In  Darkest  Africa,  i,  pp.  345  sq,,  352


io8  SALTLESS  PEOPLES  bk.  i.  attica

sq, ;  id,  2.  pp.  40  sgq,y  92  sgg.y  etc. ;  Quatrefages,  Les  pygmies ^  p.
239  sqq,  ;  Hellmuth  Panckow,  *  Uebcr  ZwergvSlkcr  in  Afrika  und  Siid-
Asien,*  Zeitschrift  d,  GeselL  f,  Erdkunde  zu  Berlin^  27  (1892),  pp.
75-120;  Windle,  Introd.  to  'Yysor^^  Essay  on  the  Pygmies  (London,
1894),  p.  xxix.  sqq,

Ctesias  described  a  race  of  Pygmies  in  Central  India  (Photius,
Bibliothecay  p.  46,  ed  Bekker),  and  so  did  Megasthenes  and  Basilis
(Frag,  Hist,  Graec,  ed.  Miiller,  2.  pp.  423,  425  ;  Strabo,  ii.  p.  70;
Athenaeus,  ix.  p.  390  b).  A  hardy  tribe  of  men  of  low  stature  who
live  in  trees  is  reported  to  dwell  in  the  upper  valley  of  the  Irawadi.
between  Moulmein  and  Manipur.  Hence  Mr.  V.  Ball  supposes  that  the
accounts  of  Ctesias,  etc.,  may  have  referred  to  this  tribe  {Indian
Antiquary^  12  (1883),  p.  235).  It  is  more  likely  that  Ctesias,  at  least,
was  romancing ;  he  was  a  notorious  liar.

On  the  Pygmies,  their  war  with  the  cranes,  and  its  representation
in  ancient  art,  see  O.  Jahn,  Archdologische  Beitrdge,  pp.  418-434;
Stephani,  in  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1865,  PP-  n  8-1 21.
The  monograph  of  de  Quatrefages,  Les  Pygmies  (Paris,  1887),  and  the
essay  of  Mr.  Windle  (cited  above)  discuss  the  Pygmies  of  antiquity
and  existing  dwarf  races  in  all  parts  of  the  world.

12.  5.  An  embassy  from  Syracuse  diverted  Pyrrhns  to  Sicily
etc.  On  Pyrrhus*s  expedition  to  Sicily,  see  Plutarch,  Pyrrhus^  22  sq.  ;
Appian,  Samn,  11  sq,^  Diodorus,  xxii.  7  sq.  and  10;  Justin,  xviii.  2.
II  sq.y  xxiii.  3;  Droysen,  Gesch.  d.  Hellen.  iii.  i.  p.  162  sqq,\  A.
Holm,  Geschichte  Sict liens ^  2;  p.  277  sqq.

12.  5.  he  now  aspired  to  fight  the  Carthaginians  at  sea.    On

the  naval  victory  of  the  Carthaginians  over  Pyrrhus  in  the  straits  of
Messina,  see  Appian,  Samn.  1 2 ;  Plutarch,  Pyrrhus,  24 ;  Droysen,
Gesch.  d.  Hellen,  iii.  1.  p.  174.

12.  5.  A  verse  of  Homer  etc.     Od.  xi.  122  sq.

12.  5.  Nor  eat  food  seasoned  with  salt.  Many  savage  tribes
are  ignorant  of  salt  or  do  not  use  it  in  food  though  they  can  procure  it
in  abundance.  Such  tribes  are  or  were  the  Numidians  in  antiquity  (Sal-
lust,  Jugurtha,  89),  many  tribes  of  North  American  Indians  at  the  date
of  their  discovery  or  down  to  the  present  time  {Relations  des  JisuiteSj
1634,  p.  53,  Canadian  reprint;  id.  1658,  p.  27;  htsczxhoX^  Histoire
de  la  Nouvelle  France,  Paris,  1612,  p.  317;  Hon  tan,  Mimoires  de
PAmMque  Septentrionale,  p.  100 ;  Sagard,  Le  grand  voyage  du  pays
des  Hurons,  Reprint,  Paris,  1865,  p.  67  sq.\  J.  Carver,  Travels
through  the  Interior  Parts  of  North  America,  p.  262  ;  Sproat,  Scenes
and  Studies  of  Savage  Life,  p.  56 ;  W.  H.  Dall,  Alaska,  p.  201  ;
Bancroft,  Native  Races  of  the  Pacific  States,  i.  p.  55;  Adventures  and
Sufferings  of  R.  Jewitt,  Middletown,  1820,  p.  25  ;  Report  of  the
Smithsonian  Institution  for  1863,  P*  3^6),  the  Caraibs  of  the  West
Indies  (De  la  Borde,  *  Relation  de  Torigine,  etc.  des  Caraibes  sauvages,'
p.  1 7  in  Recueil  de  divers  Voyages  faits  en  Afrique  et  en  PAmMque,
Paris,  1684;  Labat,  Nouveau  Voyage  aux  Isles  de  PAmMque,  Paris,
1742,  2.  p.  155),  some  tribes  of  South  America  (Azara,  Voyages  dans
PAmMque  MMdionale,  2.  p.    13  ;  E.  Bancroft,  Natural  History  of


CH.  XII  SALTLESS  PEOPLES  109

Guiana  in  South  America^  London,  1769,  p.  325  ;  G.  Osculati,
Esplorazione  delle  regione  equaioriali  lungo  il  Napo  ed  il  fiume  delle
Amassom'j  Milan,  1850,  p.  172;  A.  R.  Wallace,  Travels  on  the
Amazons^  2nd  ed.  1889,  pp.  355,  358,  cp.  p.  340;  A.  Simson,  in
Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute^  7  (1878),  p.  503;  id,^  12
(1883),  p.  21;  id^  Travels  in  the  Wilds  of  Ecuador^  p.  151),
many  African  tribes  (Kolbe,  Present  State  of  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope^  I.  p.  207  ;  Lichtenstein,  Reisen  im  Siidlichen  Africa^  2.  pp.
3'6f  534;  !•  Thomson,  Through  Masai  Landy  p.  430;  Reclus,
Nouvelle  Giographie  Umverselle^  10.  p.  140;  Francis  Gallon,  TropiceU
South  Africa^  London,  1 890,  p.  11 1  ;  G.  Nachtigal,  Sahara  und
SudoHj  2.  p.  619;  Featherman,  Nigritiansy  p.  653;  A.  Steedman,
Wanderings  and  Adventures  in  the  Interior  of  Southern  Africa^  i.  p.
263),  many  Beduin  tribes  at  the  present  day  (A.  von  Kremer,  *  Brot
und  Salz,'  Sitzungsberichte  d,  k,  Akad.  d,  Wissen.  in  Wien,  Philosoph.
histor.  Classe,  120  (1890),  p.  28),  the  Koos  of  North-Eastem  India
(Dalton,  Ethnology  of  Bengal^  p.  115),  the  Veddahs  of  Ceylon  {Indian
Antiquary^  8  (1879),  p.  318),  various  tribes  of  the  Malay  Archipelago
(Jonghuhn,  Die  Battdlander  auf  Sumatra^  2.  p.  86  ;  Rosenberg,  Der
malayische  Archipely  pp.  212,  433,  452;  Riedel,  De  sluik- en  kroes-
karige  Rassen  tusschen  Selebes  en  Papua^  p.  2  70 ;  Tijdschrift  voor  Indische
Tool'  Land-  en  Volkenkundey  26  (1881),  p.  82),  some  of  the  Papuan
tribes  of  New  Guinea  {Nieuw  Guinea^  ethnographisch  en  natuurkundig
ondersocht  en  beschreven,  Amsterdam,  1862,  pp.  149,  159;  G.  W.
^jslAj  Papuans^  p.  147  ;  O.  Finsch,  Neu  Guinea  und  seine  Bewohner^
pp.  69,  18 1  ;  Miklucho-Maclay,  in  Natuurkundig  Tijdschrift  voor
Nederlandsch  Indie^  35  (1875),  p.  70),  some  of  the  Melanesians  (W.
Powell,  Wanderings  in  a  Wild  Country ^  p.  174  ;  cp.  C.  M.  Woodford,
A  Naturalist  among  the  Hecul-hunterSy  p.  230),  some  of  the  Micro-
nesians  of  the  Marshall  Islands  (Kotzebue,  Entdeckungsreise  in  die
sad-See  J  Weimar,  1821,  3.  p.  117;  C.  Hager, /?/>  Marshall- Inseln^
p.  64),  some  of  the  Polynesians  (Turner,  Samoa^  p.  112;  A.  S.
Thomson,  The  Story  of  New  Zealand^  i.  p.  161),  the  people  of  Su-
scfain  in  Corea  (A.  Pfizmaier,  ^Nachrichten  von  den  alten  Bewohnem
dcs  heutigen  Corea,'  Sitzungsberichte  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Vienna,
PhiL  hist  CI.  57  (1868),  p.  517),  and  the  Gilyaks  of  Eastern  Siberia
(L.  V.  Schrenk,  Reisen  und Forschungen  im  Amur-Lande^  3.  p.  443  sqq,)
A  few  of  the  tribes  enumerated  above  live  on  the  sea-coast  and  use
sea-water  with  their  food,  but  most  of  them  appear  to  use  salt  in  no
form  whatever,  and  many  of  them  have  a  strong  disgust  at  it.  To
hunting  and  pastoral  tribes,  who  live  on  milk  and  flesh,  salt  is  not  a
necessity  of  life,  as  their  ordinary  food  supplies  them  with  alkalis  in
sufficient  quantity ;  but  with  agricultural  peoples,  who  live  mainly  on  a
vegetable  diet,  salt  is  a  necessity.  Hence  it  is  at  the  transition  from  a
nomadic  to  a  settled  agricultural  life  that  the  need  of  salt  makes  itself
felt ;  and  thus  the  introduction  of  salt  as  a  regular  article  of  diet  marks
an  important  advance  in  civilisation.  Cp.  Schleiden,  Das  Salz,  p.  5
sgq, ;  von  Kremer,  op.  cit,  p.  28  sq. ;  W.  Robertson  Smith,  article
*  Salt,'  Encyclopaedia  Britannica^  9th  ed.,  21.  p.  234.


no  PYRRHUS  bk.  i.  attica

13.  I.  There  he  suffered  a  severe  reverse.  Pyrrhus  was  de-
feated by  the  Romans  under  Manius  Curius,  not  at  Tarentum,  but  at
Beneventum,  whither  he  had  marched  to  attack  them.  This  was  in
275  B.C.  See  Plutarch,  Pyrrhus^  25  ;  Droysen,  Gesch.  d.  Hellenismus,
iii.  I.  p.  176  sqq,  ;  Mommsen,  History  of  Rome^  i.  p.  449  sq,

13.  I.  he sent  letters to  Antigonns  etc.     Cp.  Justin,

XXV.  3.  1-4.

13.  2.  Haying  beaten  the  forces  of  Antigonns  etc  On  this
victory  of  Pyrrhus  over  Antigonus  and  his  Gallic  auxiliaries  (274  B.C),
see  Plutarch,  Pyrrhus^  26 ;  Droysen,  Gesch,  d,  Hellen,  iii.  i.  p.  203.

13.  2.  the  sanctuary  of  Itonian  Athena  etc  Itonian  Athena
was  the  Thessalian  watchword  in  battle  (x.  i.  10).  The  goddess  had
also  a  sanctuary  in  Boeotia  (see  ix.  34.  i  note).

13.  3.  Pyrrhus  the  Molossian  hung  up  etc  This  inscription
is  quoted  also  by  Plutarch  {Pyrrhus^  26).

13.  3.  Aqueous  Zeus.  <  Aqueous'  {Naios)  was  the  regular  epithet
applied  to  Zeus  at  Dodona,  as  we  learn  from  inscriptions.  See  £.  S.
Roberts,  *The  oracle  inscriptions  discovered  at  Dodona,'  Joumcd  of
Hellenic  Studies^  i  (1880),  p.  231  sq,\  id,y  Greek  Epigraphy^  Nos.
105,  273;  S.  Reinach,  Traits  d^Epigraphie  Grecque^  p.  115  ;  Ditten-
berger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec.  No.  429  ;  AcXrtov  ap\au}\oyi,K6v^  1 890,
•p.  145  ;  Collitz,  G,  D,  /.  2.  Nos.  1557,  1564,  1565,  1567,  1582,  etc
Cp.  Schol.  on  Homer,  //.  xvi.  233  ;  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^  p.  283,
line  22  sqq, ;  Preller,  Griech,  Myihologie^^  i.  p.  123  ;  and  especially  G.  F.
Unger,  *Ueber  die  Entstehung  des  Cultus  von  Dodona,'  Philologus^
24  (1866),  p.  392  sqq.  The  inscription  of  a  votive  offering 'dedicated
by  Pyrrhus  to  Aqueous  Zeus  at  Dodona  has  actually  been  found,  but
the  victory  which  it  commemorates  was  gained  over  the  Romans,  not
over  Antigonus  and  his  Gauls.  See  Hicks,  Greek  Historical  Inscriptions^
No.  162;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec.  No.  147.  We  are  told
that  a  sacred  spring  gushed  from  the  roots  of  the  holy  and  oracular  oak
at  Dodona,  and  that  the  purling  of  its  cool  water  was  listened  to  as  the
voice  of  the  god  and  interpreted  as  such  to  pilgrims  by  an  ancient
priestess  (Servius,  on  Virgil,  Aen.  iii.  466 ;  cp.  Pliny,  N,  H.  W.  228  ;
Solinus,  vii.  2.  p.  60  j^.,  ed.  Mommsen  ;  Mela,  ii.  43,  p.  43,  ed.  Parthey ;
EtymoL  Magn,^  s,v,  dvawavo/uvov  vSmpy  p.  98,  line  22  sqq.)  Possibly
the  epithet  <  aqueous '  applied  to  Zeus  at  Dodona  may  have  had  some
reference  to  this  holy  spring.

13.    4-    Oleonymus persuaded   him  etc      See    Plutarch,

Pyrrhus y  26.

13.  5.  To  Oleomenes  were  bom  two  sons  etc     Cp.  iii.  6.  2  sq.

13.  6.  sustained  a  severe  reverse  at  the  hands  of  Antii>ater
and  the  Macedonians.  In  330  b.c.,  while  Alexander  the  Great  was
carrying  on  his  conquests  in  the  East,  the  Peloponnesians  took  up  arms
against  the  Macedonian  supremacy,  but  were  defeated  by  Antipater  in
a  bloody  battle.  Among  the  slain  was  the  Spartan  king  Agis.  See
Diodorus,  xvii.  62  sq,\  Quintus  Curtius,  vi.  i  ;  Thirl  wall.  Hist,  of
Greece^  6.  p.  310  sqq.  ;  Droysen,  Gesch.  d.  Hellenismus^  i*  i-  P-  395  ^99'

13.  6.  the  invasion  of  Demetrius.     In  295  b.c.  Demetrius  de-


CH.  XIII  PYRRHUS  III

feated  the  Lacedaemonians  under  King  Archidamus,  near  Mantinea ;
then  he  invaded  Laconia,  defeated  them  again  under  the  walls  of
Sparta,  and  was  on  the  point  of  capturing  the  city  when  he  was  sud-
denly called  away  by  tidings  from  Asia.  See  Plutarch,  Demetrius^  35  ;
Polyaenus,  iv.  7.  9  ;  Thirlwall,  Hist  of  Greece^  8.  p.  14  sq, ;  Droysen,
GescK  iL  Hellen,  ii.  2.  p.  257  sq,

13.  6.  Pyrrhns  was  victorious  etc.  This  happened  in  272  B.C.
See  Plutarch,  PyrrhuSy  26-30 ;  Polyaenus,  viii.  49  ;  Justin,  xxv.  4.
6-10  ;  Thirlwall,  Hist,  of  Greece^  8.  p.  76  sqq, ;  Droysen,  Gesch,  d.
Hellen.  iii.  i.  p.  209  sqq,

13.  6.  The  Lacedaemonianfl  made  ready  for  a  siege  etc.  They
fortified  the  city  with  a  trench  and  a  barricade  of  wagons.  See
Plutarch,  PyrrhuSy  27  ;  Polyaenus,  viii.  49.     Cp.  Paus.  vii.  8.  5.

13.  7'  Pyrrhns  came  to  Argos  etc.  As  to  Pyrrhus's  attempt  on
Argos  and  his  death  (272  B.C.)  see  Plutarch,  Pyrrhus^  31-34  ;  Justin,
xxv.  5.  I  ;  Polyaenus,  viii.  68  ;  Strabo,  viii.  p.  376 ;  Thirlwall,  Hist,
of  Greece^  8.  pp.  80-83;  Droysen,  Gesch,  d,  Hellen,  iii.  i.  pp.  214-
219.

13.  8.  Bemeter  in  the  likeness  of  a  woman.  The  reason  why
Demeter  might  be  thought  to  have  a  grudge  at  Pyrrhus  and  a  hand  in
his  death  was  no  doubt  (as  Preller  pointed  out,  Ausgewdhlte  Aufsdtzey
p.  114)  that  Pyrrhus  had  once  sacrilegiously  rifled  a  sanctuary  of
Proserpine,  carrying  off  much  gold  which  had  been  stored  in  the  vaults.
The  ships  conveying  the  treasure  were  wrecked,  and  Pyrrhus  in  alarm
restored  the  stolen  gold  to  the  goddess.  But  she  was  apparently  not
appeased ;  for  Pyrrhus's  subsequent  defeat  at  the  hands  of  the  Romans
was  attributed  to  her  displeasure.  See  Dionysius  Halic.  vol.  4.  pp.
2362-2365,  ed.  Reiske  ;  Suidas,  s,w,  ajStxnros  and  XIv/s/oos.

13.  8.  Lyceas,  IJie  local  antianary.  He  is  mentioned  by
Pausanias  elsewhere  (ii.  19.  5  ;  ii.  22.  2  ;  ii.  23.  8).

13.  8.  On  the  spot  where  Pyrrhns  fell  there  is  a  sanctuary  of
Demeter.  See  ii.  21.  4,  where  Pausanias  seems  to  speak  as  if  the
sanctuary  already  existed  when  Pyrrhus  attacked  Argos.

13.  9*  Homer  says  that  Achilles  was  slain  by  Alexander  etc.
See  77.  xxii.  359  J^^.  Later  writers  told  how  his  mother  Thetis  had
dipped  Achilles  in  the  water  of  Styx,  and  so  made  him  invulnerable
except  in  the  heel  by  which  she  had  held  him.  Hence  Paris  killed
him  by  shooting  him  in  the  heel.  See  Servius  on  Virgil,  Aen,  vi.  57  ;
Hyginus,  Fab,  107  ;  Fulgentius,  iii.  7.  Similarly  in  a  Celtic  tale  a
certain  Dermid  is  vulnerable  only  in  the  heel ;  through  the  machina-
tions of  an  enemy  he  is  wounded  in  it  by  the  bristle  of  a  boar  and  dies
in  consequence.  See  J.  G.  Campbell,  The  Finns  (London,  1891),  p.
54.  In  an  Indian  tale  an  ogre  is  cased  in  adamant  all  over  except  in
his  left  hand ;  the  hero  kills  him  by  wounding  him  with  an  arrow  in
that  hand.  See  The  Kathd  Sarit  Sdgara^  translated  by  C.  H.  Tawney,
I.  pp.  70  sq,y  572.

13.  9.  If  Philistns  is  fairly  excused  etc.  On  the  banishment
of  the  historian  Philistus  from  Syracuse  by  the  tyrant  Dionysius  the
elder,  see  Diodorus,  xv.  7;  Plutarch,  Diony   11.     Plutarch  says  that


112  THE  MUSIC  HALL  bk.  i.  attica

Philistus  was  not  restored  to  Syracuse  till  after  the  tyrant's  death ;  but
according  to  Diodorus  he  came  back  in  the  tyrant's  lifetime.

14.  I.  the  Music  Hall.  Pausanias  has  already  spoken  of  this
building  (i.  8.  6)  as  "  the  theatre  which  they  call  the  Music  Hall."  The
statues  which  stood  in  front  of  it  led  him  into  the  long  digression  (i.  ch.
9-ch.  13)  on  the  history  of  the  Ptolemies,  Lysimachus,  and  Pyrrhus.
He  now  resumes  the  thread  of  his  topographical  description  at  the  point
where  he  had  left  off,  namely,  *•*•  the  theatre  which  they  call  the  Music
Hall."  This  building,  he  tells  us,  was  near  the  fountain  called
Enneacrunus ;  hence  the  position  to  be  assigned  to  this  Music  Hall
depends  on  the  position  we  g^ve  to  the  Enneacrunus  (see  next  note).

But  if,  as  we  should  naturally  infer  from  the  order  of  Pausanias's
description,  this  <* theatre  called  the  Music  Hall"  was  in  or  near  the
market-place,  it  is  probably  identical  with  "  the  theatre  in  the  Ceramicus
called  the  Agrippeum  "  which  is  mentioned  by  Philostratus  ( Vit,  Soph,
ii.  5.  4 ;  cp.  /V/.,  ii.  8.  4).  For  a  Roman  Music  Hall  (Odeum)  was
nothing  but  a  small  theatre  roofed  over,  as  we  see  from  the  existing
remains  of  the  Music  Hall  of  Herodes  Atticus  at  Athens.  That  the
same  building  should  be  called  Uhe  Music  Hall'  by  Pausanias  and
'  the  Agrippeum '  by  Philostratus,  is  probably  to  be  explained  (as  Dr.
D5rpfeld  has  pointed  out)  by  the  fact  that  immediately  after  Pausanias's
visit  to  Athens  a  second  Roman  Music  Hall  or  theatre  was  built,  namely
the  Music  Hall  of  Herodes  Atticus  (see  Paus.  vii.  20.  6).  Hence
when  Philostratus  wrote,  the  older  Music  Hall  built  by  Agrippa  could
no  longer  be  called  <  the  Music  Hall '  simply,  but  had  to  be  called  the
Music  Hall  of  Agrippa  or  the  Agrippeum  to  distinguish  it  from  the
Music  Hall  of  Herodes  Atticus.  There  was  a  third  Music  Hall  in
Athens,  namely  the  one  built  by  Pericles,  but  it  seems  to  have  been  no
longer  called  a  Music  Hall  in  Pausanias's  time  (see  i.  20.  4  note).  This
Music  Hall  of  Pericles  was  of  a  different  shape  from  the  Roman
structures  of  the  same  name.  Sec  W.  Dorpfeld,  *Die  verschiedenen
Odeien  in  Athen,'  MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst  in  Athen^  17  (1892),  pp.  252-
260.  Cp.  E.  Hiller,  *Die  athenischen  Odeen  und  der  IIPOArfiN,'
Hermes^  7  (1873),  pp.  393-406.

14.  I.  a  fonntahi  called  Enneacnmiui.  The  question,  where  this
fountain  was  situated,  has  been  much  debated.  From  the  place  which
it  occupies  in  Pausanias's  description  we  should  expect  it  to  be  in  or  near
the  market-place.  For  his  description  of  the  market-place  and  its
immediate  surroundings,  with  historical  digressions,  certainly  extends
from  i.  3.  I  to  i.  8.  5,  and  again  from  i.  14.  6  to  L  17.  2.  It  is  natural,
therefore,  to  suppose  that  the  objects  described  in  the  intermediate
passage  (i.  8.  6-i.  14.  5)  were  also  in  or  near  the  market-place.  The
supposition  is  all  the  more  natural  because  Pausanias  elsewhere
regularly  follows  a  strictly  connected  topographical  order  in  describing
places  and  things,  except  when,  on  rare  occasions,  he  departs  from  it
for  the  purpose  of  describing  together  monuments  akin  in  kind  though
locally  separate,  as  the  courts  of  justice  at  Athens  (t.  28.  8-1 1),  the
altars  at  Olympia(v.  14.  i  to  v.  15.  12),  the  votive  offerings  at  Olympia
(v.  21.  I  to  V.  27.  12),  and  the  honorary  statues  in  the  same  place


CH.  XIV  ENNEACRUNUS  113

(vi.  I.  I  sqq,) ;  and  these  deviations  from  the  topographical  order  are
expressly  indicated  by  the  author,  except  where  such  an  intimation
would  be  obviously  superfluous,  as  where  he  mentions  together  the
various  structures  with  which  Hadrian  adorned  Athens  (i.  1 8.  9).  But
in  the  passage  in  question  (i.  8.  6-i.  14.  5)  Pausanias  gives  no  hint  that
he  has  departed  from  the  neighbourhood  of  the  market-place.  There
is,  therefore,  a  very  strong  presumption  that  the  objects  described  in
this  passage  (namely  the  Odeum,  the  Enneacrunus  fountain,  the
temple  of  Demeter  and  Proserpine,  the  temple  with  the  image  of
Triptolemus,  the  Eleusinium,  and  the  temple  of  Fame)  were  all  in  or
near  the  market-place.  This  presumption  is  strengthened  by  the  fact
that  with  regard  to  two  of  the  structures  in  question,  namely  the
Eleusinium  and  temple  of  Fame,  we  have  independent  reasons  for
believing  them  to  have  been  in  or  near  the  market-place  (see  the
notes  on  ^  3  and  5  of  this  chapter).

If,  then,  Pausanias  has  here  as  elsewhere  followed  the  topographical
order  of  description,  we  should  expect  the  objects  in  question  (the
Odeum,  Enneacrunus  fountain,  etc.)  to  be  at  or  near  the  south  side  of
the  market-place.  For  we  have  seen  that  in  describing  the  market-
place Pausanias  proceeded  from  north  to  south  till  he  reached  the
statues  of  the  tyrannicides  at  the  point  where  the  ancient  road  to  the
Acropolis  began  to  ascend  between  the  Areopagus  and  the  Museum  hill
(see  notes  on  i.  3.  5  '  a  sanctuary  of  the  Mother  of  the  Gods,'  and  i.  8.
5  *  statues  of  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton ').  Thus  we  should  expect
Pausanias  to  follow  up  this  road  and  to  describe  the  objects  which  he
saw  on  or  near  it,  between  the  Areopagus  and  the  Nymphaeum  hill,
and  then  between  the  Areopagus  and  the  Pnyx.  This  expectation,
again,  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  this  part  of  Athens  is  not  described
by  Pausanias  elsewhere  ;  he  either  describes  it  here  or  nowhere.

Can  then  the  Odeum,  Enneacrunus  fountain,  Eleusinium,  etc.,  be
placed  in  this  hollow  between  the  Nymphaeum,  Areopagus,  Pnyx,  and
Museum  hills,  through  which  the  ancient  road  wound  up  from  the
market-place  to  the  Acropolis  ?  In  regard  to  the  Eleusinium  this
question  may  be  answered  affirmatively  (see  note  on  §  3).

In  regard  to  the  Enneacrunus  fountain,  excavations  conducted  by
Dr.  Dorpfield  in  1 891-1894  have  led  to  the  discovery  that  in  antiquity
there  must  have  been  several  natural  springs  rising  at  the  foot  of  the
rocky  Pnyx  hill,  just  below  the  ancient  place  of  public  assembly,  to
the  west  of  the  modem  road  which  leads  up  to  the  Acropolis.  Here
the  rock  has  been  deeply  tunnelled  in  the  search  for  water,  and  cisterns
have  been  hewn  in  the  rock.  At  least  seven  such  tunnels  and  six  cisterns
have  been  found.  The  tunnels  yield  water  no  longer,  but  that  they  did
so  in  antiquity  is  proved  by  the  water-pipes  made  of  earthenware,  which
still  lie  in  or  before  the  tunnels.  The  cisterns,  on  the  other  hand,  still
contain  some  water.  Even  in  antiquity,  however,  the  water  of  these
springs  would  seem  to  have  been  scanty,  since  wells,  some  of  which  still
yield  water,  have  been  found  sunk  in  the  rock  in  front  of  what  seems  to
have  been  the  site  of  the  ancient  fountain.

Inunediately  above  the  site  of  the  fountain  Dr.  Dorpfeld  also  dis-

VOL.  II  I


114  ENNEACRUNUS  bk.  i.  attica

covered  the  remains  of  a  large  cistern  carefully  built  of  polygonal
masonry,  which,  from  its  style,  appears  to  belong  to  the  fifth  or  sixth
century  B.C.  Further,  Dr.  Dorpfeld  excavated  here  a  portion  of  a  large
rock-cut  aqueduct  or  conduit  partly  built  and  roofed  with  large  blocks  of
limestone.  The  style  of  the  conduit  shows  it  to  be  Greek,  not  Roman  ;
and  its  size  suggests  that  it  must  have  been  the  chief  aqueduct  by  which
fresh  water  was  brought  to  Athens.  Its  direction  indicates  clearly  that
it  came  from  the  upper  valley  of  the  Ilissus  and  was  carried  along  the
southern  slope  of  the  Acropolis,  where  indeed  it  has  been  traced.  The
conduit  seems  to  have  ended  originally  at  the  cistern.  It  can,  indeed,
be  traced  beyond  the  cistern  to  the  north  and  west ;  but  this  part  of  the
water-channel  appears,  from  the  manner  of  cutting  and  from  the  built
portions  where  it  is  led  outside  the  rock,  to  be  a  Roman  continuation  of
the  original  Greek  aqueduct.  A  clue  to  the  date  of  the  aqueduct  is
furnished  by  two  sets  of  water-pipes  which  have  been  found  diverging
from  it.  These  pipes  are  made  of  a  yellowish  clay  with  a  red  glaze  in
the  interior.  They  exactly  resemble  the  pipes  of  the  £Eunous  aqueduct
built  by  Polycrates  of  Samos  in  the  sixth  century  B.C  (see  E.  Fabricius,
in  MiitheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Aihen^  9  (1884),  P-  '75  S9')\  presumably,
therefore,  they  are  of  the  same  date.  This  date  is  confirmed  by  the
discovery  of  two  wells  between  the  cistern  and  the  ancient  street.  For
these  wells  were  filled  up  not  later  than  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  as  appears
from  the  style  of  potsherds  found  in  them.  Probably  they  were  filled
up  at  the  time  when  they  were  superseded  by  the  construction  of  the
aqueduct.

From  these  facts  Dr.  Dorpfeld  infers  that  in  the  sixth  century  ac
the  springs  and  wells  at  the  foot  of  the  Pnyx  were  found  insufficient  to
supply  the  needs  of  the  city,  and  that  consequently  an  additional  supply
of  water  was  brought  in  this  large  rock-cut  conduit  or  aqueduct  from  the
upper  valley  of  the  Ilissus.  And  as  we  learn  from  Thucydides  (ii.  15,
7)  and  the  present  passage  of  Pausanias  that  a  certain  open  spring-,
formerly  called  Callirrhoe,  was  enclosed  with  masonry  and  converted
into  a  fountain  with  nine  jets  by  Pisistratus,  Dr.  Dorpfeld  concludes
that  the  springs  of  which  he  has  discovered  the  site  on  the  side  of  the
Pynx  are  no  other  than  the  Callirrhoe  or  Enneacrunus,  and  that  the
conduit  was  made  by  Pisistratus  at  the  same  time  that  he  converted  the
open  spring  into  a  fountain,  the  water  brought  by  the  conduit  being  used
to  reinforce  the  insufficient  supply  of  the  natural  springs.  Pieces  of  the
masonry  which  inclosed  the  fountain  have  been  found.  They  consist
partly  of  large  blocks  of  *  poros  *  stone,  one  of  which  contains  a  water-
channel  with  two  openings  or  mouths ;  partly  of  blocks  of  a  limestone
which  is  quarried  at  Kara^  a  village  at  the  fort  of  Hymettus,  and  which
was  regularly  used  in  buildings  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.

See  Dr.  Dorpfeld,  in  AlittheiL  d.  arch,  Inst,  16  (1891),  p.  444  sq,  ;  id,^  17
(1892),  pp.  92  sq.,  439-445 »  id,  19  (1894),  p.  143  sq^,  ;  id,,  'E<pv/^P^t  dpxoioXo-
yiKi/fy  1894,  PP'  I -10;  Berlifur  philolog,  Wochenschrtft,  13  (1893),  P-  66;  Miss
Harrison,  Ancient  At  hens ,  89  sq,  %  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  13  (i892-93)t
pp.  139-142  ;  id,,  14  (1894),  pp.  224-226  ;  Bulletin  de  Corr,  HellSnique,  17  (1893),
p.  624  sq.


CH.  XIV  ENNEACRUNUS  115

Plausible  as  this  view  of  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  is,  there  are  grave  difficulties
in  the  way  of  accepting  it ;  for  the  evidence  of  ancient  writers  (with  the
exception  of  Pausanias)  is  decidedly  in  favour  of  placing  the  Callirrhoe  or
Enneacrunus  spring  near  the  Ilissus,  in  the  south-east  of  Athens.  Thus
Herodotus  tells  a  story  (vi.  137)  that  in  the  old  days  the  Pelasgians,
dwelling  at  the  foot  of  Mt.  Hymettus  to  the  east  and  south-east  of
Athens,  used  to  violate  the  Athenian  girls  when  the  latter  went  out  to
fetch  water  at  the  Enneacrunus  spring.  Such  a  story  would  hardly  have
been  told  if  the  Enneacrunus  had  been  (as  Dr.  Dorpfeld  supposes)  on
the  west  side  of  Athens.  Again,  Thucydides,  in  a  passage  which  has
been  often  quoted  (ii.  15),  tells  us  that  ancient  Athens  embraced  the
Acropolis  and  the  district  immediately  to  the  south  of  it ;  and  in  proof  of
this  he  refers  to  the  sanctuaries  on  the  Acropolis  and  to  the  south  of
it ;  amongst  the  latter  he  enumerates  the  sanctuary  of  Olympian  Zeus
(which  was  to  the  south-east  of  the  Acropolis),  and  the  sanctuaries  of
the  Pythian  Apollo,  Earth,  and  *  Dionysus  in  the  Marshes.'  He  then
immediately  proceeds  :  "  And  other  old  sanctuaries  also  are  situated  in
this  quarter.  And  the  spring,  which  is  now  called  Enneacrunus  (*  with
nine  jets ')  because  the  tyrants  constructed  it  so,  but  which  of  old,  when
the  springs  were  open,  was  called  Callirrhoe  (* fair-flowing*),  was  used
by  the  ancient  Athenians  for  most  purposes  because  it  was  near,  and  to
this  day  it  is  still  the  custom,  derived  from  antiquity,  to  use  the  water
before  marriages  and  for  other  sacred  rites.  And  down  to  the  present
time  the  Acropolis  is  still  called  *  the  city '  by  the  Athenians  because
they  dwelt  there  of  old."  (The  full  force  of  this  passage  is  especially
brought  out  by  Professor  C.  Wachsmuth,  in  Berichte  iiber  die  Verhand-
lungen  of  the  Royal  Saxon  Society  (Leipsic),  Phil.  hist.  CI.  39  (1887),
pu  382  sqq.)  Again,  the  comic  poet  Cratinus  wrote  :  "  The  fountains  of
his  streams  of  words  do  plash  ;  a  mouth  with  twelve  jets  ;  the  Ilissus  in
his  gullet"  (quoted  by  the  Scholiast  on  Aristophanes,  Knights^  526).
The  allusion  here  certainly  seems  to  be  to  the  Enneacrunus,  though  the
poet  speaks  of  twelve  instead  of  nine  jets  of  water.  Again,  the  writer
of  the  dialogue  Axiochus^  attributed  to  Plato,  says  (p.  364  a) :  "  As  I
was  going  out  to  Cynosarges  and  had  come  to  the  Ilissus,  I  heard  the
voice  of  one  shouting  *  Socrates  1  Socrates ! '  and  turning  round  to
look  whence  the  voice  came,  I  saw  Clinias  the  son  of  Axiochus  running
towards  Callirrhoe."  Again,  the  author  of  the  Etymologicum  Magnum
says  (j.v.  'Ewcox/aouvos,  p.  343) :  "  Enneacrunus  is  a  fountain  at  Athens
b^de  the  Ilissus ;  it  was  formerly  the  Callirrhoe.  They  fetch  the  bathing-
water  for  brides  from  it."  Again,  Himerius  writes  :  "  If  I  had  had  a
poet's  licence  I  would  have  shown  you  the  Ilissus  weeping  and  would
have  painted  in  gloomy  colours  Callirrhoe's  fair  streams"  (Photius,
Bibliotkecoy  p.  369,  ed.  Bekker).  Lastly,  Hierocles  says  (in  the  preface
to  his  tract  *De  febri  equi,'  Veterinariae  Medicinae  libri  duo  (Bile,
1 537),  p.  4) :  "  Tarantinus  relates  that  when  the  Athenians  were  building
the  temple  of  Zeus  near  the  Enneacrunus  they  voted  that  all  the  beasts
of  burden  should  be  collected  from  Attica  into  the  city."  The  temple
of  Zeus  here  referred  to  by  Hierocles  can  be  no  other  than  the  great
temple  of  Olympian  Zeus  to  the  south-east  of  the  Acropolis.


Ii6  ENNEACRUNUS  bk.  i.  attica

On  the  strength  of  these  passages  the  Enneacrunus  or  Callirrhoe  has
been  generally  identified  with  a  spring  which  still  bears  the  ancient
name  of  Callirrhoe,  situated  a  little  to  the  south-east  of  the  temple  of
Olympian  Zeus.  The  water  issues  from  the  foot  of  a  ledge  of  rock
which  here  crosses  the  bed  of  the  Ilissus  ;  so  that  in  rainy  weather  the
spring  is  enveloped  in  a  small  cascade  formed  by  the  river  tumbling
over  the  rock.  But  when  the  bed  of  the  stream  is  (as  it  usually  is)  dry
or  nearly  so,  the  water  of  the  spring  forms  a  pool,  which  never  dries  up,
at  the  foot  of  the  ledge  of  rock.  The  inhabitants  of  the  neighbouring
part  of  Athens  resort  to  the  spring  for  drinking  water,  and  the  women
wash  their  linen  in  the  pool.  See  Leake,  Topography  of  Athens^  i.  p.
175  -y^' ;  Curtius  and  Kaupert,  Atlas  von  Athen^  pL  ix.  3,  with  the  text,
p.  32  ;  E.  Ziller,  in  MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  2  (1877),  P-  no;
E.  Curtius,  Stadtgeschichte^  p.  87  sq.

Dr.  Dorpfeld  holds  that  this  spring  in  the  bed  of  the  Ilissus  was  the
Callirrhoe  of  Greek  writers  from  the  fifth  century  B.C.  onward,  and  that
the  name  Enneacrunus  was  exclusively  applied  to  the  spring  to  the  west
of  the  Acropolis,  the  old  name  of  which  (Callirrhoe)  had  been  abandoned
from  the  time  that  Pisistratus  converted  it  into  a  fountain  with  nine  jets.
But  he  ignores  the  testimony  of  Hierocles  and  the  author  of  the
Etymologicuvi  Magnum^  who  plainly  identify  the  Enneacrunus  with  the
spring  in  the  Ilissus,  near  the  great  temple  of  Olympian  Zeus.  The
testimony  of  Thucydides  to  the  fact  of  the  Enneacrunus  having  been  to
the  south  of  the  Acropolis  is  in  my  opinion  almost  equally  indubitable,
in  spite  of  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  attempt  to  wrest  it  so  as  to  favour  his  own
view.  On  the  whole  the  evidence  of  all  ancient  writers  except  Pausanias
goes  to  show  that  the  names  Callirrhoe  and  Enneacrunus  were  always
applied  to  one  and  the  same  spring,  and  that  this  was  the  spring  in  the
bed  of  the  Ilissus  which  still  bears  the  ancient  name  of  Callirrhoe

But  if  this  spring  on  the  Ilissus  be  the  Enneacrunus,  how  is  it  that
Pausanias's  description  of  the  Enneacrunus  occurs  in  the  middle  of  his
account  of  the  market-place,  which  was  certainly  in  an  opposite  quarter
of  Athens  ?  Two  answers  are  possible  :  either  the  spring  described  by
him  was  not  the  true  Enneacrunus  ;  or  his  description  of  it  has,  whether
purposely  or  accidentally,  been  interpolated  into  the  midst  of  his  account
of  a  totally  different  part  of  Athens.  The  latter  is  the  answer  generally
given.  The  description  of  the  Enneacrunus  and  the  buildings  near  it
is  regarded  as  a  digression  or  episode  ;  but  the  theories  started  to
account  for  this  digression  are  very  various.  As  these  theories  rest
purely  on  conjecture  and  are  unsupported  by  evidence,  it  would  be  idle
to  enumerate  and  criticise  them.  I  will  mention  only  Professor  C.
Wachsmuth's  conjecture  that  the  whole  of  the  passage  containing  the
account  of  the  Enneacrunus  and  the  buildings  near  it  (i.  8.  6-i.  14.  5)
has  been  accidentally  displaced  in  the  manuscripts  and  that  it  originally
occurred  after  i.  1 9.  6.  But  as  all  the  manuscripts  agree  in  placing  the
passage  where  it  occurs  in  our  printed  texts,  and  as  there  is  no  other
example  of  any  such  dislocation  of  the  text  in  Pausanias,  Professor
Wachsmuth's  theory  appears  very  improbable.

If  the  current  view  be  accepted,  that  the  Enneacrunus  or  Callirrhoe


CH.  XIV  ENNEACRUNUS  117

was  the  spring  on  the  Ilissus  which  is  still  called  Callirrhoe,  and  that
the  whole  passage  in  Pausanias  from  i.  8.  6  to  i.  14.  5  is  a  digression,
it  follows  that  all  the  buildings  mentioned  in  that  passage  (namely  the
Music  Hall,  the  temple  of  Demeter  and  Proserpine,  the  temple  contain-
ing an  image  of  Triptolemus,  the  Eleusinium,  and  the  temple  of  Fame)
were  situated,  not  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  market-place,  but  in  the
south-eastern  quarter  of  Athens  near  the  Ilissus.  Against  this  it  has  to
be  urged  that,  as  has  been  already  remarked,  we  have  positive  reasons
for  placing  two  at  least  of  these  structures  (the  Eleusinium  and  the
temple  of  Fame)  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  market-place.  And  the
improbability  of  the  view  that,  in  the  middle  of  describing  the  market-
place in  the  north-west  of  Athens,  Pausanias  should  have  suddenly
digressed,  without  a  word  of  warning,  to  describe  the  south-eastern
quarter  of  Athens,  is  greatly  increased  by  the  fact  that  he  subsequently
describes  this  very  south-eastern  quarter  in  its  proper  topographical
order  (i.  18.  6-i.  19.  6).

On  the  whole  the  balance  of  evidence  seems  to  point  to  these  two
conclusions :  ( i )  the  spring  described  by  Pausanias  as  the  Enneacrunus
and  the  buildings  near  it  were  situated  immediately  to  the  south  of  the
market-place,  in  the  hollow  between  the  Areopagus,  Pnyx,  and  Nym-
phaeum  hills  ;  (2)  the  spring  which  classical  writers  in  general  call  the
Enneacrunus  or  Callirrhoe  was  the  spring  which  still  retains. the  name
of  Callirrhoe,  situated  in  the  bed  of  the  Ilissus,  to  the  south-east  of  the
temple  of  Olympian  Zeus.

Thus  it  would  seem  that  what  Pausanias  calls  the  Enneacrunus  was
not  really  the  spring  to  which  classical  writers  in  general  gave  the  name.
Whether  the  mistake  was  his  own  or  that  of  his  guides,  we  cannot  say.
It  is  possible  that  in  or  before  his  time  the  name  Enneacrunus  may
have  been  transferred  from  the  spring  on  the  Ilissus  to  one  between
the  Pnyx  and  Areopagus.  But,  if  so,  the  historical  tradition  of  the
adornment  of  the  spring  by  Pisistratus  must  have  been  transferred  also.
The  whole  question,  however,  remains  obscure.  Further  excavations,  it
may  be  hoped,  will  one  day  settle  it.

Those  who  desire  to  go  more  fully  into  the  discussion  of  "  the  Enneacrunus
episode,"  as  it  is  called,  may  consult  (in  addition  to  the  works  cited  above)  Leake,
Topography  of  At  kens  J  I.  p.  170  5qq.\  Schubart,  *  Verschiebungen  in  Pausanias,'
FUckeisen's  /ahrbucher^  14  (1868),  pp.  821-831  ;  E.  Curtius,  Attische  Studien^  2.
p.  15  ;  id.y  Erlduiemder  Text  der  sieben  Karten  ztir  Topographie  von  A  then,  pp.
49»  51;  *^'t  *I^ie  Quellen  der  Akropolis,'  Hermes^  21  (1886),  pp.  198-205  (re-
printed in  Gesammelte  Abhandlungen^  2.  pp.  401-408);  C.  Wachsmuth,  in
Rheinisches  Museum^  N.F.  23  (1868),  p.  27  sqq.t,  id.y  Die  Stadt  Athen^  I.  pp.
2ri2,-'2&^\  id,y  *  Kallirrhoe — Enneakrunos,'  Berichte  fiber  die  VerhandL  d,  k,
sacks.  GeselL  d,  IVissen.  Phil,  histor.  CI.  39  (1887),  pp.  381-395 ;  Dyer,  Ancient
Athens,  pp.  517-520 ;  Unger,  *  Enneakrunos  und  Pelasgikon.  Ein  Beitrag  zur
Topographic  der  alten  A  then,*  Sitzungsberichte  d.  pkihs.  pkilolog.  n.  hist.  CI.  d.
Jk,  k  Akad,  d.  IViss.  zu  MUnchen,  1874,  pp.  263-351  ;  G.  Loeschcke,  Die  Ennea-
krunosepisode  bet  Pausanias  (Dorpat,  1803) ;  P.  Weizsacker,  *  Die  Beschreibung
des  Marktes  von  Athen  und  die  Lnneakrunosepisode  bei  Pausanias,*  Fleckeisen*s
/akrbucher,  33  {1887),  pp.  577-612 ;  Wecklein,  in  Sitzungsberichte  d.  philos,
philolog.  u.  hist,  CI.  d.  k.  b.  Akad.  d.  Wiss.  zu  Miimhen,  1887,  pp.  91-97;
Biilchhofer,  'Athen,'  pp.  165,  \%^  sqq.\  id.^  m  Berliner pkiiolog.  Wocnenschri/t,
II  (1891),  p.  TAt^sqq, ;  Lolling,  'Athen,'  pp.  310,  317  ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient


ii8  EUBULEUS  bk.  i.  attica

Athens^  p.  87  sqq,  ;  A.  Kalkmann,  Pausanias  der  Perieget^  p.  70  saq, ;  W.
Gurlitt,  [/eder  Pausanias,  pp.  280-283,  330-335  ;  G.  Niicolaides,  in  E^fupls
dpxcuoKoyiicfi,  1893,  PP*  l77"lS^*

14.  I.  an  image  of  Triptolemns.  In  the  monuments  of  ancient
art  Triptolemus  is  generally  portrayed  seated  or  standing  in  a  winged
or  dragon-drawn  car.  See  vii.  18.  3  note.  But  on  a  well-known  and
very  beautiful  relief,  found  at  Eleusis  and  now  in  the  National  Museum
at  Athens,  Triptolemus  is  represented  as  a  lad  standing  between  Demeter
and  Proserpine,  the  former  of  whom  is  handing  something  (probably  the
ears  of  com)  to  him.  See  WelckeVy  Anlt'ke  Denkmdlery  5.  pp.  104-12 1,
with  pL  vl  (Welcker  interpreted  the  lad  as  lacchus);  Overbeck,  in
Berichte  d.  k,  sacks.  GeselL  d,  IVissen,  su  Leipzig^  Philolog.  histor.  CL
12  (i860),  pp.  163-194  ;  iV/.,  13  (1861),  pp.  133-144  ;  iV/.,  Grieckische
Kunstmythologie^  3.  pp.  426  sqq.y  565  sqq.\  Friederichs  -  Wolters,
Gipsabgusse^  No.  11 82;  Cawadias,  rXvTrra  rov  'E^vikov  Mouo-cibvy
No.  126.

14.  I.  Deiope.  According  to  one  account  Deiope  was  a  daughter
of  Triptolemus  and  mother  of  Eumolpus  by  Musaeus  (Schol.  on
Sophocles,  Oed,  Col,  1053  ;  Aristotle,  Mirab,  Auscult  131  (143)  ;
Photius,  Lexicon^  s.v.  £v/xoX7rtSat).  According  to  another  account  she
was  the  mother  of  Triptolemus.  It  is  said  that  when  the  Athenians  were
building  the  sanctuary  of  Demeter  at  Eleusis  they  found  a  bronze  pillar
or  tablet  with  the  inscription,  **  This  is  the  monument  of  Deiope "
(Aristotle,  /jc,)

14.  2.  Triptolemns  the  son  of  Oelens.  There  were  other  legends
as  to  the  parentage  of  Triptolemus  besides  those  mentioned  by  Pau-
sanias in  the  present  passage.  According  to  Apollodorus  (i.  5.  i  s^,)
his  father  was  Celeus  and  his  mother  was  Metanira.  According  to
others  his  father  was  Eleusinus  and  his  mother  Cothonea  (Hyginus,
Fad.  147)  or  Cyntinia  (Servius,  on  Virgil,  Georg.  i.  19).  Panyasis
said  that  Triptolemus  was  a  son  of  Eleusis  (Apollodorus,  i.  5.  2).

14.  3.  a  child  of  Ocean  and  Earth.  This  was  the  parentage
assigned  to  Triptolemus  by  Pherecydes  (Apollodorus,  i.  5.  2).

14.  3.  Eubulens.  An  inscription  found  at  Eleusis  and  dating  from
the  middle  of  the  fifth  century  B.a  mentions  a  sacrifice  of  a  perfect
victim  "  to  Triptolemus  and  the  God  and  the  Goddess  and  to  Eubulus  "
(Bull.  Corr.  Hellin.  4  (1880),  p.  227  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.
Graec.  No.  13,  line  39  sq.^  That  this  Eubulus  is  identical  with
Eubuleus  we  learn  from  an  inscribed  relief^  also  found  at  Eleusis,
dedicated  by  a  priest  "  of  the  God,  the  Goddess,  and  Eubuleus."  The
relief  is  a  mere  fragment,  but  one  of  the  figures  is  certified  by  an
inscription  to  be  Pluto  ;  from  which  it  probably  follows  that  *  the  God  '
mentioned  in  the  inscription  is  Pluto  and  *  the  Goddess '  Proserpine.
See  *E<f)rjfjL€pls  dpxaiokoyi'K'qj  1886,  p.  25  sq.,  with  pi.  iii.  2  ;  C.  /.  A.  ii.
No.  1620  c.  Further  it  follows  from  this  relief  that  Eubuleus  at  Eleusis
was  not  identified  with  Pluto,  as  in  later  times  he  sometimes  was
(Kaibel,  Epigrammata  Graeca^  No.  272  ;  Nicander,  Alexipharm.  I4|
with  the  Schol.  ;  Hesychius,  s.v.  Ev^ovAcvs).  Another  Eleusinian
inscription  ('E<^iy/A.  apx,  1886,  p.  262  ;  C.  I.  A,  ii.  No.  1620  d)  contains


CH.  XIV  THE  ELEUSINIUM  119


a  dedication  to  Eubuleus  alone.  Now  on  two  inscriptions  of  Amorgus
and  Paros  we  find  Zeus  with  the  surname  of  Eubuleus  (*  Good  Coun-
sellor ')  associated  with  the  Eleusinian  deities  Demeter  and  Proserpine
{Afittkeil,  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Aiken,  i  (1876),  p.  334;  /V/.,  16(1891),
p.  6),  and  on  an  inscription  of  Myconus  it  is  decreed  to  offer,  on  behalf
of  the  crops,  a  pig  pregnant  for  the  first  time  to  Demeter,  an  uncut
boar  to  Proserpine,  and  a  pig  to  Zeus  sumamed  Buleus  (*  Counsellor ')
(Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec,  No.  373,  line  17  sq^  Further  the
name  Eubuleus  (*Good  Counsellor')  is  mentioned  by  Diodorus  (v.  72)
as  a  title  of  Zeus,  and  appears  to  have  been  specially  applied  to  him  at
Gyrene  (Hesychius,  s,v,  Ev^ovAcvs).  It  also  occurs  as  an  epithet  of
Zeus  on  a  mutilated  inscription  copied  by  me  at  Mantinea  in  1890
(sec  note  on  viii.  9.  2  *  Saviour  Zeus  ').

From  facts  like  these  Mr.  Otto  Kern  has  argued  that  Eubuleus  at
Eleusis  was  no  other  than  Zeus.  The  tradition  which  represented  him
as  a  swineherd,  whose  pigs  were  swallowed  up  in  the  chasm  down  which
Pluto  carried  Proserpine  to  the  nether  world  (Schol.  on  Lucian,  ed.  by
E.  Rohde,  Rheinisches  Museum,  N.F.  25  (1870),  p.  548  sqq,;  cp.  Clement
of  Alexandria,  Protrept  ii.  20.  p.  17,  ed.  Potter),  is  held  by  Mr.  Kern
to  be  a  late  Orphic  story,  not  a  genuine  Eleusinian  tradition.  See
O.  Kern,  *  Eubuleus  und  Triptolemos,'  Mittkeil.  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  A  then,
16  (1891),  pp.  1-29.  But  against  this  proposed  identification  of  the
Eleusinian  Eubuleus  with  Zeus,  it  has  to  be  said  that  there  is  little  or  no
other  evidence  of  the  association  of  Zeus  with  the  rites  and  myths  of
Eleusis.  The  identification  is,  however,  accepted  by  Mr.  M.  Frankel,
who  quotes  in  support  of  it  two  Delian  inscriptions,  in  one  of  which
mention  is  made  of  offerings  to  Demeter,  Proserpine,  and  Zeus
Eubuleus,  in  the  other  of  an  offering  of  a  pregnant  sow  to  Demeter  and
a  sucking  pig  to  Zeus  Eubuleus.  See  Berliner  philolog,  Wochenschrift,
II  ( 1 891),  p.  643  sq.  On  the  other  hand.  Prof.  Furtwangler  maintains
that  Eubuleus  was  probably  at  first  an  independent  deity  of  the  subter-
ranean world  who  was  at  a  later  time  identified  with  Zeus  {Meisterwerke
d.  griech,  Plastik,  p.  562  sqq,)  His  view  is  more  in  accordance  with
the  general  development  of  Greek  religion  than  that  of  Mr.  Kern ;  for
the  tendency  was  rather  to  identify  originally  independent  local  divinities
with  the  great  gods  than  to  create  mythological  figures  out  of  the  names
and  attributes  of  these  great  gods.  The  tendency,  in  a  word,  was
rather  to  unification  than  to  multiplication  of  deities.

14.  3.  the  EleoBiniam.  This  sanctuary  was  probably  close  to,  if
it  did  not  indeed  include  within  its  limits,  the  two  temples  mentioned  in
§  I.  Nothing  could  be  more  appropriate  than  that  an  Eleusinium
should  include  temples  of  Demeter,  Proserpine,  and  Triptolemus.  We
have  seen  that  these  two  temples  were  probably  situated  to  the  west  of
the  Acropolis,  in  the  hollow  between  it  and  the  Areopagus  and  Pynx.
Here,  therefore,  probably  lay  the  Eleusinium.  It  would  seem  to  have
been  neariy  at  the  western  foot  of  the  Acropolis,  for  it  is  mentioned  by
Clement  of  Alexandria  {Protrept,  iii.  45,  p.  39,  ed.  Potter;  cp.
Amobius,  Adu.  gentes,  vi.  6)  and  in  an  inscription  (C  /.  A,  iii.  No.  5  ;
Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec.  No.  387),  as  being  situated  "  under


I20  THE  ELEUSINIUM  bk.  i.  attica

the  Acropolis."  This  situation  agrees  well  with  a  passage  in  Xenophon
{HipparcJdcus^  iii.  2),  where  it  is  said  that  to  make  a  fine  show  on
festive  occasions  the  cavalry  should  ride  round  the  market-place,  and
then  gallop  up,  in  squadrons,  as  far  as  the  Eleusinium.  That  is,
Xenophon  proposes  that  the  cavalry  should  ride  up  the  road  to  the
Acropolis  so  far  as  horses  could  go.  The  procession  of  the  ship  at  the
Panathenaic  festival  went  from  the  Ceramicus  as  far  as  the  Eleusinium,
rounded  it,  and  then  passed  by  the  Pelargicum  (Philostratus,  Vit,  Soph.
ii.  I.  7  ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Knights^  566  ;  Suidas,  s.v,  ttcttAos  ;
as  to  the  Pelargicum,  see  note  on  i.  28.  3).  The  Eleusinium  is  men-
tioned by  Plutarch  {De  exiliOy  17)  along  with  the  Parthenon  among
the  holy  places  of  Athens.  It  was  strongly  enclosed  (Thucydides,  ii.
17).  Immaradus,  son  of  Eumolpus  and  Daira,  was  buried  within  the
precinct  (Clement  of  Alexandria,  Lc,  ;  as  to  Immaradus,  see  Pans.  i.  5.
2;  i.  27.  4;  i.  38.  3).  In  accordance  with  a  law  of  Solon  the
Council  of  Five  Hundred  met  in  the  Eleusinium  on  the  day  after  the
celebration  of  the  mysteries  at  Eleusis  (Andocides,  i.  1 1 1  ;  cp.  C  /.  A,
ii.  No.  431,  line  30  sq,)  Such  a  meeting  was  called  a  sacred  assembly
of  the  Council  (C  /.  A.  iii.  No.  2,  line  3).  There  was  an  altar  in  the
Eleusinium  on  which  it  seems  that  suppliants  were  forbidden  to  lay
their  olive-branches,  either  absolutely  or  at  least  during  the  celebration
of  the  mysteries  (Andocides,  i.  no- 116).  Decrees  relating  to  the
rites  of  Eleusis  were  engraved  on  stone  and  set  up  in  the  Eleusinium
(C  /.  A.  ii.  No.  315  ;  C.  L  A,  iii.  No.  5  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.
Grace.  Nos.  386,  387).  There  was  a  bronze  statue  of  a  horse  in  the
Eleusinium,  dedicated  by  Simon,  a  writer  on  horsemanship  of  the  fifth
century  B.C.  ;  on  the  base  of  the  statue  were  reliefs  representing  the
feats  of  Simon  (Xenophon,  De  re  equestri^  i.  i  ;  Hierocles,  *  De  febri
equi,'  Praef.,  Artis  Veterinariae  libri  duo  (Bdle,  1537),  p.  3).  The
horse  is  mentioned  in  an  inscription  which  records  certain  repairs  which
were  to  be  made  in  the  Eleusinium  in  329-328  B.C.  ^C  /.  A.  iii.
No.  834  b,  ii.  line  58).  This  statue  of  the  horse  is  probably  to
be  distinguished  from  the  equestrian  statue  of  Simon  executed  by  the
sculptor  Demetrius  (Pliny,  N.  H.  xxxiv.  76).

An  Eleusinian  inscription  of  329-328  B.C.,  which  refers  repeatedly
to  repairs  carried  out  at  "  the  Eleusinium  in  the  city,"  makes  mention  of
the  making  of  doors  for  it,  the  plastering  and  painting  of  the  edifice,
the  purchase  of  bricks  and  of  pots  of  pitch  for  smearing  roofs  and  doors,
of  logs  and  bolts  (?)  for  the  oven,  etc.  See  'E</>»//x€/ots  d/>x^*oAoy4K7},
1883,  p.  115  sqq.

The  site  of  the  Eleusinium  has  been  the  subject  of  much  difference
of  opinion,  and  the  position  here  assigned  to  it  (immediately  to  the
west  of  the  Acropolis)  cannot  be  regarded  as  certain.

See  Leake,  Topography  of  Athens?  I.  p.  296  sq.  ;  Gerhard,  in  Rheinisches
Afuseum^  N.F.  18  (1863),  pp.  300-302  ;  C.  Botticher,  m  Phiioiogus^  25  (1867),  pp.
193-21 1  ;  iV.,  in  PhilologtiSj  Suppl.  3  (1867),  p.  287  sqq.  ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  m
Rheinisches  Museum,  N.  F.  23  (1868),  p.  57  sqq.  ;  id.^  Die  Stadi  Athen^  i.fp.
297  ^qq'  ;  Dyer,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  222  sqq.  ;  Unger,  in  Sitzungsherichte  d,
philos.  philolog,  u,  hist.  CI.  d,  k.  b.  Akad.  d.  Wiss,  zu  Miinehen,  1874,  PP»  282-


CH.  XIV  EPIMENIDES  121

297  ;  Loeschcke,  Die  EnneakrunosepisocU  bei  Pausanias^  P«  13  >  ?•  Weizsacker,  in
Fleckeisen^ i  JahrbUckeTy  33  (1887),  p.  608;  Lolling,  *Athen,*  p.  317;  Miss
Ilanrison,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  93  sq,  ;  E.  Curtius,  StaJigeschickU,  p.  188.

14.  4-  lie  entered  a  cave  and  slept  etc.  The  story  was  this.
Epimenides,  living  in  the  city  of  Cnosus  in  Crete,  was  one  day  sent  by
his  father  and  brethren  to  a  farm  which  they  owned  to  fetch  a  sheep.
In  the  noontide  heat  he  turned  aside  from  the  road  and  slept  in  a  cave
for  fifty-seven  years.  When  he  awoke  it  seemed  to  him  that  he  had
been  sleeping  only  a  little  while  ;  so  he  went  to  fetch  the  sheep  from
the  farm.  But  when  he  came  to  the  farm  he  found  that  it  had  been
sold  and  was  in  other  hands  and  that  the  whole  appearance  of  the  place
was  changed.  He  returned  to  the  city  much  perplexed,  and  when  he
entered  his  father's  house  the  people  asked  him  who  he  was,  for  most  of
his  relations  were  dead.  At  last  he  found  his  younger  brother,  now  an
old  man,  who  explained  to  him  what  had  happened.  See  Theopompus,
Frag.  69,  in  F,  /^.  6^.  i.  p.  288  ;  Diogenes  Laertius,  i.  10.  109  ;  Pliny,
A^.  H,  vii.  175.  The  number  of  years  during  which  he  slept  is  variously
stated  at  fifty-seven  (Theopompus,  Diogenes  Laertius,  Pliny,  lLcc,\
fifty  (Plutarch,  An  sent  sit  gerend,  respublica^  i.  12),  sixty  (Suidas,  s,v,
*Eirifuvi6rfs),  and  forty  (Pausanias).  His  long  sleep  is  alluded  to  by
Lucian  {TYmon,  6  ;  Philopseudes^  26).  According  to  Maximus  Tyrius
(Dissert,  xvi.  i),  the  cave  in  which  Epimenides  slept  was  the  cave  of
Dictaean  Zeus,  and  as  he  slept  he  beheld  in  a  dream  gods,  and  Truth,
and  Justice.  The  cave  to  which  Maximus  Tyrius  refers  is  probably  the
one  on  Mount  Ida  (see  note  on  v.  7.  6) ;  in  any  case  he  means  to  imply
that  Epimenides  obtained  his  powers  of  divination  by  the  process  of
*  incubation '  or  sleeping  in  a  sacred  place  for  the  purpose  of  receiving  a
revelation  in  a  dream.  But  stories  of  the  Rip  van  Winkle  type  are
widely  spread ;  they  are  folk-tales,  and  need  not  have  originated  in  any
real  events,  such  as  a  practice  of  sleeping  in  a  holy  place  to  obtain
visions.

A  story  of  this  kind  was  current  in  Sardinia,  as  we  learn  from
Aristotle,  who,  after  observing  that  without  change  there  is  no  percep-
tion of  time,  thus  continues  :  "  For  when  a  change  either  does  not  take
place  in  our  minds  or  takes  place  without  our  being  aware  of  it,  it
seems  to  us  that  there  has  been  no  lapse  of  time,  just  as  it  happens  on
awakening  to  the  persons  who  are  fabled  to  sleep  in  the  abode  of  the
heroes  in  Sardinia ;  for  they  join  the  past  to  the  present,  blotting  out
all  the  intermediate  time  because  they  have  had  no  perception  of  it "
{Physic,  Auscult,  iv.  11,  p.  218  b,  21  sqq,)  On  this  passage  of
Aristotle  the  old  Greek  commentator  Philoponus  remarks  :  "  Sick  people
were  said  to  go  to  the  heroes  in  Sardinia  and  to  be  healed  ;  on  their
departure  they  slept  for  two  days  continuously,  and  on  awakening  they
thought  that  the  time  was  the  same  as  when  they  met  the  heroes"
(SchoL  on  Aristode,  p.  388  b,  3  sqq.^  ed.  Brandis).  From  Simplicius*s
conmient  on  the  same  passage  we  learn  that  these  Sardinian  heroes
were  supposed  to  be  nine  of  the  sons  of  Hercules  by  the  daughters  of
Thestius;  these  sons  of  Hercules  had  migrated  from  Thespiae  in  Boeotia
to  Sardinia  (see  Paus.  ix.  23.  i  ;  ix.  27.  6 ;  x.    17.   5  note),  and  after


122  THE  SEVEN  SLEEPERS  bk.  i.  attica

their  death  their  bodies  were  said  to  remain  entire  and  undecayed  as  if
in  sleep  (Schol.  on  Aristotle,  p.  388  a,  ed.  Brandis).  See  £.  Rohde,
*Sardinische  Sage  von  Neunschlafem/  Rheinisches  Museum^  N.F.  35
(1880),  pp.  157-163;  iV/.,  37  (1882),  pp.  465-468.

The  story  of  the  Seven  Sleepers  of  Ephesus  is  another  tale  of  the
same  class.  To  escape  the  persecution  of  the  Emperor  Decius,  seven
noble  youths  of  Ephesus  hid  themselves  in  a  cave.  They  slept  there
for  187  years  and  awoke,  as  they  thought,  after  a  slumber  of  a  few
hours.  One  of  their  number,  being  sent  into*  the  city  secretly  to  buy
food,  was  astonished  to  find  it  completely  changed  and  a  large  cross
planted  over  the  chief  gate  of  Ephesus.  His  quaint  garb  and  obsolete
language  surprised  the  baker  to  whom  he  offered  an  ancient  coin  of
Decius  as  the  current  coin  of  the  empire,  and  inquiries  elicited  his
strange  story.  See  Gibbon,  Decline  and  Fall^  ch.  23,  vol.  6,  p.  32  sqq.
(Edinburgh,  1 8 1 1 ).  The  tale  of  these  sleepers  was  adopted,  with  modi-
fications, by  Mohammed  in  the  Koran  (ch.  18).  A  version  of  the  story,
borrowed  perhaps  from  the  Koran,  is  reported  from  Afghanistan.  See
Pall  Mall  Gazette^  20th  July  1886  ;  Indian  Notes  and  Queries^  4
(1886),  No.  31.  Paulus  Diaconus  transferred  the  Seven  Sleepers  to  a
cave  on  the  shore  of  the  ocean,  in  the  furthest  part  of  Germany,  but
said  nothing  about  their  awakening  {Historia  Langobardorum^  i.  4).  A
Wendish  version  of  the  story  of  the  Seven  Sleepers  includes  the  awaken-
ing of  the  sleepers  and  the  incident  of  offering  the  obsolete  money
as  current  coin.  See  von  Schulenburg,  Wendische  Volkssagen  und
Gebrduche,  p.  63.

A  German  story  tells  how  a  monk  named  Fulgentius  or  Urban,
meditating  on  the  text  "  A  thousand  years  in  thy  sight  are  but  as  yester-
day when  it  is  past,"  was  lured  by  the  sweet  song  of  a  bird  into  a  wood,
where  he  tarried  a  little.  When  he  returned  to  the  monastery  it  was  so
changed  that  he  did  not  know  it,  and  none  of  the  monks  recognised
him.  But  on  searching  the  chronicle  of  the  monastery  it  was  found
that  a  monk  named  brother  Fulgentius  (or  brother  Urban)  had  vanished
without  leaving  a  trace  three  hundred  years  ago.  The  long-lost  brother
then  partook  of  the  sacraments  and  fell  asleep  to  wake  no  more.
See  Dunlop-Liebrecht,  Geschichte  der  Prosadichiungen^  p.  543  ;
Bechstein,  Deutsches  Mdrchenbuch?  p.  205  sq,^  *Der  Monch  und  das
Vogelein.'

In  a  Slovack  tale  a  shepherd  sees  a  great  many  serpents  entering
into  a  cavern.  He  follows  them,  and,  the  mouth  of  the  cavern  closing
by  magic,  finds  himself  unable  to  get  out  He  falls  asleep,  but  wakes
up  after  what  seems  to  him  a  short  time,  and  succeeds  in  escaping  from
the  cavern.  It  was  autumn  when  he  entered  the  cave,  and  to  his
astonishment  he  finds  on  issuing  from  it  that  it  is  now  spring ;  he  had
been  sleeping  all  the  winter  with  the  serpents  in  their  cavern.  Leger,
Contes  populaires  Slaves^  No.  7.

In  a  Lapp  tale  a  hunter  seeks  shelter  for  the  night  in  a  witch's
hut  Next  morning,  so  he  fancies,  he  awakes,  but  finds  to  his  surprise
that  the  food  in  his  bag  is  all  mouldy  and  decayed  ;  he  has  been  sleep-
ing a  whole  year.     Poestion,  Lappldndische  Marcheft^  No.  16.  p.  72  sq»


CH.  XIV  EPIMENIDES  123

The  Canadian  Indians  tell  of  a  hunter  who  made  his  way  to  the  abode
of  a  wonderful  old  man  and  his  daughter  and  stayed  with  them  a  day  or
two,  but  on  returning  home  found  he  had  been  absent  several  years.
See  Relations  des  JisuiteSy  1636,  p.  38  sq.  (Canadian  Reprint);  C.  G.
Leland,  The  Algonquin  Legends  of  New  England^  pp.  259-261  ;  and  for
more  such  tales  see  E.  S.  Hartland,  Science  of  Fcdry  Tales,  p.  161  sqq.
Folk-tales  based  on  a  converse  illusion  in  regard  to  time,  the  hero
of  the  tale  beheving  himself  to  pass  many  years  in  a  space  of  a  few
seconds,  are  also  current,  but  they  are  rarer.  See  The  Spectator,  No.
94  (June  1 8th,  171 1) ;  Katha  Sarit  Sagara,  translated  by  Tawney,  2.  p.
326  sq,\  van  Hasselt,  Volksbeschrijving  van  Midden  Sumatra,  p.  78  sq,

14.  4-  lie  made  verses  and  irarifled  cities,  Athens  among  the
rest.  Epimenides  was  a  contemporary  of  Solon  and  purified  Athens
about  600  B.C.  from  the  pollution  contracted  in  connexion  with  the
conspiracy  of  Cylon.  See  Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens,  i  (with  Dr.
Sandys's  note) ;  Plutarch,  Solon,  1 2  ;  Suidas,  s,v,  'ETnfuviSrjs.  Plato,
indeed,  says  that  Epimenides  came  to  Athens  and  there  performed
sacrifices  and  prophesied  the  repulse  of  the  Persians  ten  years  before  the
Persian  war  broke  out,  that  is,  in  500  B.C.  (De  legibus,  i.  p.  642  d) ;
but  this  must  certainly  be  a  mistake.  The  poems  attributed  to  Epi-
menides included  one  on  the  voyage  of  the  Argo,  a  collection  of  oracles,
a  work  on  methods  of  purification,  etc.  See  Epicorum  Graecorum
Fragmenta,  ed.  Kinkel,  p.  232  sqq,\  E.  Hiller,  in  Rheinisches  Museum,
N.F.  33  (1878),  pp.  525-529.  Prof  Diels  argues  that  these  poems
were  forged  in  Epimenides's  name  about  a  century  after  his  time,  and
that  Plato  was  misled  by  the  date  of  the  appearance  of  these  forged
wridngs  into  supposing  that  Epimenides  lived  and  visited  Athens  in  500
B.C.  That  the  poems  were  later  forgeries  is  possible,  though  the
evidence  adduced  by  Prof.  Diels  (if  it  can  be  called  evidence)  is  inade-
quate to  prove  it.  But  that  Plato  should  have  committed  the  mistake
of  supposing  Epimenides  to  have  lived  at  the  time  when  the  writings
forged  in  his  name  were  published,  is  highly  improbable.  The  forgers
would  certainly  not  represent  Epimenides  as  a  contemporary  of  their
own.  Plato's  anachronism  was  probably  wilful.  See  H.  Diels,  <  Ueber
Epimenides  von  Kreta,*  Sitsungsberichte  of  the  Berlin  Academy,  1891,
ppu  387-403.  The  historical  reality  of  Epimenides  has  been  questioned,
bat  without  sufficient  reason.  See  Rohde,  in  Rheinisches  Museum,  N.F.
33  (1878),  pp.  208-210;  J.  Tdpffer,  Attische  Genealogie,  p.  140^^7^.;
Loeschcke,  Enneakrunosepisode,  p.  23  sqq.

It  has  been  conjectured  that  the  Epimenides  whose  statue  Pausanias
saw  in  front  of  the  temple  of  Triptolemus  was  not  the  Cretan  seer,  but
a  legendary  personage  of  the  same  name,  the  first  of  the  ancient  and
noble  Attic  family  of  the  Buzygae  (*  Ox-yokers ').  See  Servius,  on
Virgil,  Georg,  i.  19;  Hesychius,  s,v,  Bovfuyi^s ;  J.  Topffer,  Attische
Genealogie,  p.  140.

14.  4.  Thales,  who  stayed  the  plague  at  Lacedaemon.  Thales
or  Thaletas  was  said  to  have  stayed  the  plague  at  Lacedaemon  by  his
music,  in  obedience  to  the  Delphic  oracle  (Plutarch,  De  musica,  42  ;
cp.  Aelian,  Var,  Hist,  xiL  50).     He  was  a  famous  musician  ;  Lycurgus


124  TEMPLE  OF  GOOD  FAME  bk.  i.  attica

is  said  to  have  taken  lessons  from  him  (Plutarch,  Lycurgus^  4  ;  Strabo,
X.  pp.  480  sq.^  482  ;  Sextus  Empiricus,  p.  679,  line  i,  ed.  Bekker).

14.  5.  a  temple  of  Qood  Fame.  In  the  inscription  of  Roman
date,  already  referred  to,  which  records  the  repair  of  many  holy  places
in  Athens  and  Piraeus,  mention  is  niade  of  a  sanctuary  of  Good  Fame
and  Good  Order  (Euclea  and  Eunomia).  See  *E<^?y/x€/ois  d/>x<*«>-
XoytKi;,  1884,  p.  170.  A  priest  of  these  two  personifications  is  men-
tioned in  inscriptions  (C  I.  A,  ii.  No.  1598  (==iii.  No.  733) ;  C.  /.  A,  iii.
Nos.  623,  624,  738)  ;  he  had  a  seat  in  the  theatre  of  Dionysus  (C  /.  A,
iii.  No.  277).  The  goddess  of  Good  Fame,  who  was  commonly
identified  with  Artemis,  had  an  image  and  an  altar  in  the  market-place
of  every  town  in  Boeotia  and  Locris  (Plutarch,  Aristides^  20  ;  see  Paus.
ix.  17.  I  note).  At  Corinth  also  her  sanctuary  seems  to  have  been  on
the  market-place ;  for  Xenophon  tells  us  {Hellenica^  iv.  4.  2)  that  the
Corinthians  chose  the  festival  of  Good  Fame  as  an  occasion  for  per-
petrating a  massacre,  because  they  hoped  at  that  time  to  catch  more
people  on  the  market-place  ;  when  the  signal  was  given  and  the  butchery
began,  the  people  rushed  for  refuge  to  the  images  of  the  gods  in  the
market-place.  All  this  raises  a  presumption  that  at  Athens  also  the
temple  of  Good  Fame  was  in  or  near  the  market-place.

14.  5.  Aeschylns,  in  the  prospect  of  death,  etc.  The  current
story  in  antiquity  was  that  Aeschylus  had  been  killed  near  Gela  in
Sicily  by  a  tortoise  dropt  on  his  head  by  an  eagle,  which  mistook  the
bald  shiny  pate  of  the  venerable  poet  for  a  stone,  and  hoped  to  smash
the  tortoise  on  it.  See  Diographi  Graeci^  ed.  Westermann,  p.  120;
Aelian,  Nat  Anim,  vii.  1 6  ;  Suidas,  5,v,  AarxvAos ;  Valerius  Maximus,
ix.  12.  Ext.  2.  This  important  topic  has  produced  the  usual  crop  of
learned  dissertations.  The  late  Professor  F.  G.  Welcker  gravely
discussed  it  by  the  help  of  ornithological  information  derived  from
Aesop's  fables,  notes  of  travel  made  by  the  professor  himself  on  the
supposed  scene  of  the  catastrophe,  and  statistics  as  to  the  number  of
bald-headed  men  in  antiquity.  The  interesting  inquiry  has  since  been
prosecuted  by  other  scholars  with  equal  judgment  and  learning.  The
reader  who  desires  to  peruse  these  ponderous  lucubrations  should  con-
sult Rheinisches  Museum^  N.F.  7  (1850),  pp.  139-144,  285  sq,  ;  iV£,
9  (1854),  pp.  148-155,  i6o* ;  ///.,  37  (1882),  pp.  308-312  ;  Fleckeisen^s
Jahrbiichery  26  (1880),  pp.  22-24;  Welcker,  Antike  Denkmdler^  2.  pp.
337-346.

14.  5.  recorded  nothing  but  his  father's  name  etc.  See  Bio-
graphi  Graeci^  ed.  Westermann,  p.  120;  Athenaeus,  xiv.  p.  627  c  d  ;
Plutarch,  De  exilio^  13  ;  Poetae  Lyrici  Graeci^^  ed.  Bergk,  2.  p.  571.

14.  6.  Above  the  Oeramicus  and  the  Boyal  Ck)lonnade  is  a
temple  of  Hephaestus.  The  Greek  is  vrrkp  8c  r^v  Kc/sa^t/cov  kqX
(Troh.v  T^i/  Kakovfuvrjv  /3axrik€iov  vads  eariv  *Ii<fxiurTov.  Here  it  has
been  questioned  whether  vtfc/j  means  *  above '  or  *  beyond.'  Pausanias's
use  of  the  preposition  vwtp  in  a  local  sense  has  been  carefully  and
exhaustively  studied  by  Mr.  E.  Reitz,  with  the  result  that  in  Pausanias
the  preposition  vir€p  with  the  accusative  is  thrice  used  in  the  sense  of
*  beyond '  and  sixty-three  times  in  the  sense  of  *  above ' ;  while  with


CH.  XIV  TEMPLE  OF  HEPHAESTUS  125

the  genitive  it  thirteen  times  means  *  beyond  *  and  sixty-eight  times
means  *  above.'  These  statistics  are  conclusive ;  wherever  there  is
room  for  doubt  whether  v7r€/o  in  Pausanias  means  *  beyond '  or  *  above '
the  meaning  *  above '  is  to  be  preferred.  For  examples  of  vttc/j  with
the  accusative  meaning  *  above,'  see  ii.  17.  3;  ii.  38.  7;  vii.  25.  5;
viii.  13.  6  ;  ix.  39.  9 ;  X.  25.  5  compared  with  x.  25.  7  ;  x.  27.  i.  The
three  instances  of  vttc/j  with  the  accusative  meaning  *  beyond '  in
Pausanias  are  i.  1 1.  2  ;  v.  7.  7  ;  and  x.  i.  2.  See  Ed.  Reitz,  De  prae-
posttioms  YIIEP  apud  Pausaniam  Periegetam  usu  locali  (Friburgi
Brisigaviae,  1891).

In  the  present  passage,  therefore,  we  may  assume  that  Pausanias
means  to  describe  the  temple  of  Hephaestus  as  situated  above  (not
beyond)  the  Ceramicus  or  market-place  and  the  Royal  Colonnade.  Now
we  have  seen  (note  on  i.  3.  i)  that  the  Royal  Colonnade  probably  stood
at  the  eastern  foot  of  the  hill  on  which  the  well-preserved  Doric  temple
commonly  known  as  the  Theseum  is  situated.  It  follows  that  the
temple  of  Hephaestus  stood  on  this  hill.  This  is  confirmed  by  further
considerations.  For  the  temple  of  Hephaestus  may  be  assumed  to  be
identical  with  the  Hephaesteum  or  sanctuary  of  Hephaestus,  which  is
stated  by  Harpocration  (s.v.  KoAojvcTas)  to  have  stood,  together  with
the  Eurysaceum,  on  the  Market  Hill  {Koldnos  Agoraios)  near  the
market-place.  So  far  this  statement  of  Harpocration  only  shows
that  the  temple  of  Hephaestus  stood  on  a  hill  near  the  market-
place, but  it  does  not  show  whether  the  hill  was  to  the  west  or  the
cast  of  the  market-place.  This  uncertainty  is  removed  by  another
statement  of  Harpocration  {5,v,  Evpixrafcetov)  that  the  Eurysaceum  was
in  the  quarter  Melite  ;  for  M elite,  as  we  shall  see  immediately,  was  the
quarter  to  the  west  and  south-west  of  the  market-place.  It  follows  that
the  Market  Hill,  on  which  the  Eurysaceum  and  Hephaesteum  stood,
was  also  in  Melite,  and  therefore  to  the  west  or  south-west  of  the
market-place.  It  might  thus  be  questioned  whether  the  Market
Hill  was  the  gentle  eminence  immediately  to  the  west  of  the  market-
place on  which  the  so-called  Theseum  stands,  or  the  higher,  more
pointed  and  rocky  hill  to  the  south-west  of  the  market-place,  which  is
known  as  the  Nymphaeum  hill  and  is  crowned  by  the  modem  Observa-
tory- The  statement  of  Pausanias  that  the  Hephaesteum  stood  above
the  Royal  Colonnade  decides  the  question  in  favour  of  the  *  Theseum '
hill  as  against  the  Nymphaeum  hill ;  for  we  have  seen  grounds  for
believing  that  the  Royal  Colonnade  stood  at  the  foot  of  the  former.
We  conclude,  then,  with  tolerable  certainty,  that  the  Market  Hill  was
the  eminence  crowned  by  the  *  Theseum,'  and  that  at  some  point  on
this  eminence  stood  the  temple  of  Hephaestus.

The  evidence  which  proves  that  the  quarter  Melite  lay  to  the  west
and  south-west  of  the  market-place  is  as  follows.  Themistocles  founded
a  sanctuary  of  Artemis  in  Melite  at  a  place  where  afterwards  the  dead
bodies  of  criminals  who  had  been  executed  were  exposed  by  the
executioners  (Plutarch,  Themistocles^  22).  But  we  know  that  the  place
where  the  corpses  of  executed  criminals  were  exposed  was  outside  the
northern  Long  Wall  on  the  way  to  Piraeus  (Plato,  Repub,  iv.  p.  439  e),


126  TEMPLE  OF  HEPHAESTUS  bk.  i.  attica

The  bodies  were  thrown  into  the  baraihron^  a  sort  of  chasm  (Herodotus,
vii.  153;  Plato,  GorgiaSy  p.  516  d  e;  Aristophanes,  Clouds^  1450;
Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  PlutuSy  431  ;  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^  i.  p.
219,  line  10  sqq,\  which  has  been  identified  with  a  hollow  enclosed  by
steep  rocks,  about  60  feet  high,  on  the  west  side  of  the  Nymphaeum
hill,  near  the  modem  Observatory  (C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athetty  i .
p.  350).  This  hollow  in  the  rocks  seems  to  be  artificial,  not  natural ;
it  was  probably  the  oldest  quarry  of  Athens  (G.  R.  Lepsius,  Griechische
Marmorstudien^  p.  115).  Thus  Melite  included  the  Nymphaeum  hill,
and  extended  to  the  western  city- wall  of  Athens.  It  also  included  the
Pnyx  hill  as  well  as  the  Market  Hill  (Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  BirdSy
997).  In  short  it  seems  to  have  comprised  the  hilly  district  in  the  west
and  south-west  of  Athens.  It  must  also  have  extended  to  near  the
market-place,  as  we  learn  from  the  opening  of  Plato's  Parmemdes  (p.
126  a-c),  where  Cephalus  meets  Adimantus  in  the  market-place  at
Athens,  and  says  he  wishes  to  see  Antiphon.  "  That's  easily  done,"
replies  Adimantus,  "  he  has  just  gone  home,  and  lives  near  at  hand  in
Melite."  Again,  in  Demosthenes  (liv.  7.  p.  1258)  we  read:  "I  was
taking  my  evening  stroll  with  a  friend  in  the  market-place  when  up
comes  Ctesias  drunk.  No  sooner  did  he  clap  eyes  on  us  than  he
uttered  a  yell,  and  then,  after  muttering  to  himself  in  the  inarticulate
manner  of  a  tipsy  man,  he  passed  up  to  Melite."  This  latter  passage
proves  that  Melite  was  near  the  market-place  and  on  higher  ground.
Cp.  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Siadi  Athen^  i.  p.  348  sqq, ;  iV/.,  2.  p.  254  sqq, ;
Milchhofer,  *Athen,'  p.  150;  Lolling,  'Athen,'  p.  306.

From  the  preceding  discussion  it  appears  that  the  Market  Hill
(Kolonos  Agoraios)  was  within  the  quarter  Melite.  This,  however,  has
been  denied  on  the  following  grounds  :  Melite  was  a  township  or  deme^
and  so  (according  to  some)  was  the  Market  Hill.  From  this  it  would
follow  that  Melite  and  the  Market  Hill  were  separate  quarters  of  Athens.
But  though  it  is  certain  from  inscriptions  that  there  were  several  town-
ships or  de?nes  called  Hill  {Kolonos\  it  has  not  been  proved  that  the
Market  Hill  was  one  of  them.  Till  this  is  done,  we  may  acquiesce  in
the  testimony  of  Harpocration  {s.w.  KoAojvcTas  and  ^vpva-aMiov)  that
the  Market  Hill  was  in  Melite.  See  A.  Milchhofer,  *  Ueber  die  Lage
des  Kolonos  in  Athen,'  in  Historische  und philologische  Aufsdtse  Ernst
Curtius  gewidmety  pp.  341-352  ;  W.  Dittenberger,  in  Hermes^  9  (1875),
p.  403  sqq,  ;  U.  Kohler,  in  MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  4  (1879),
p.  102  ;  Lolling,  *  Athen,'  p.  306  sq,  ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athett^
2.  pp.  233-238  ;  Milchhofer,  Untersuchungen  Oder  die  Demenordnung-
des  KleistheneSy  p.  7.

The  shops  of  the  braziers  and  ironmongers  were  near  the  sanctuary
of  Hephaestus  (Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^  i.  p.  316,  line  2^  sq,\  cp.
Hesychius,  s.v,  xaXfcea),  a  natural  situation  since  Hephaestus  was  the
patron  of  these  artificers.  The  shops  seem  to  have  stood  on  the  slope  of
the  hill  a  little  below  the  Hephaesteum,  for  Andocides  says  (i.  40)  that
Dioclides,  perceiving  Euphemus  seated  in  a  smith's  shop,  led  him  up  to
the  sanctuary  of  Hephaestus  and  there  made  a  communication  to  him.
The  judicial  torture  of  slaves  to  wring  evidence  from  them  appears  to


CH.  XIV .  TEMPLE  OF  HEPHAESTUS  127

have  taken  place  regularly  at  the  Hephaesteum  (Isocrates,  xvii.  15).
The  Market  Hill  was  also  the  place  where  servants  were  engaged ;  so
numbers  of  them  lounged  about  here  waiting  to  be  hired ;  their  special
station  was  at  the  Eurysaceum  (Harpocration,  5,v.  KoAwvertts ;  Pollux,
vii.  132  sq. ;  Argument  II.  to  Sophocles*  Oed,  Colon.)

The  priest  of  Hephaestus  is  repeatedly  mentioned  in  inscriptions
(C  y.  A,  ii.  No.  1203,  iii.  No.  1280  e) ;  he  had  a  seat  reserved  for
him  in  the  theatre  of  Dionysus  (C.  /.  A,  iii.  No.  288).  A  mutilated
inscription  of  the  fifth  centxuy  B.C.  appears  to  record  the  erection
of  an  altar  and  iniage  to  Hephaestus  (C  /.  A,  iv.  No.  35  b,  p.  64  sq,)
The  image  may  have  stood  in  the  temple  of  Hephaestus,  and  may
possibly  have  been  the  celebrated  one  by  Alcamenes  in  which  the
lameness  of  the  god  was  partially  concealed  by  the  drapery  (Cicero,  De
naiura  deorum^  i.  30.  83  ;  Valerius  Maximus,  viii.  1 1.  Ext.  3).  Another
inscription,  dating  from  343-342  B.C.,  also  appears  to  record  the  dedi-
cation of  an  image  of  Hephaestus ;  it  makes  mention  of  Hephaestian
Athena  (C.  7.  A.  ii.  No.  114).  Two  other  inscriptions  (C  /.  A.  i.
Nos.  318,  319)  prove  that  during  the  years  421-417  B.C.  a  public
commission  was  sitting  engaged  in  arranging  for  the  production  of  two
bronze  images  of  deities  which  were  to  be  placed  on  the  same  pedestal.
Mr.  £.  Reisch  supposes  that  these  two  bronze  images  were  the  images
of  Hephaestus  and  Athena  here  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  He  thinks
that  a  statue  of  Athena  in  the  Villa  Borghese  at  Rome  (Helbig,  Fuhrer
durch  die  bffentlichen  Sammlungen,  2.  No.  928)  is  a  replica  of  the
imag^e  of  Athena  in  question.  Professor  Furtwangler  conjectures  that
a  torso  of  a  male  statue  in  Cassel  is  a  replica  of  the  image  of
Hephaestus.

The  temple  of  Hephaestus  stood,  as  we  have  seen,  on  the  low  hill
where  the  so-called  'Theseum'  still  stands.  It  is  not  improbable  that
the  so-called  *•  Theseum '  is  actually  the  temple  of  Hephaestus,  as
Pervanoglu,  Dr.  Lolling,  and  Professor  D5rpfeld  have  held.  See  note
on  i.  17.  2.

See  P.  Pervanoglu,  *  Das  Hephaesteion  in  Athen,'  Philologus^  27
(1868),  pp.  660-672  ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athetiy  i.  pp.  175-
180;  Milchhofer,  *Athen,'  p.  168;  Lolling,  *Athen,*  p.  318;  Miss
Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  pp.  11 2- 120;  E.  Reisch,  in  Eranos  Vindo-
bonensiSy  p.  21  ;  A.  Furtwangler,  Meisterwerke  d.  griech,  Plastik^  pp.
119  j|7.,  742.

14.  6.  the  story  about  Erichthonius.  Erichthonius  was  said  to
have  been  bom  from  the  ground  in  consequence  of  an  unsuccessful
attempt  made  by  Hephaestus  upon  the  goddess  Athena  (Apollodorus,
iii.  14.  6;  SchoL  on  Homer,//.,  ii.  547;  Augustine,  Civit.  dei^  xviii.
12).  According  to  others,  the  link  between  Hephaestus  and  Athena
was  not  Erichthonius  but  Apollo,  who  was  said  by  some  to  be  a  son  of
Hephaestus  and  Athena,  and  to  be,  in  his  character  of  Paternal  Apollo,
the  guardian  deity  of  Athens  (Cicero,  De  natura  deorum,  i.  22.  55  ;  /V/.,
i.  23.  57 ;  Clement  of  Alexandria,  Protrept,  ii.  28,  p.  24,  ed.  Potter).
The  joint  worship  of  Athena  and  Hephaestus  seems  to  have  been  very
ancient  in  Attica  (cp.  Plato,  Critias,  p.  109  c),  but  it  was  found  nowhere


128  HEAVENLY  APHRODITE  bk.  i.  attica

else,  so  far  as  we  know.  See  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Atheriy  i.  pp.
390-392.  The  joint  temple  of  Hephaestus  and  Athena  (Vulcan  and
Minerva)  at  Athens  is  mentioned  by  Augustine,  Lc,

14.  6.  observing  that  Athena's  image  had  blue  eyes  etc.  This
is  one  of  many  proofs  that  ancient  statues  were  painted.  A  common
Homeric  epithet  of  Athena  is  glaukopis  (*  blue-eyed ').  Dr.  Schliemann
found  at  Troy  certain  rude  representations  of  women  with  what  he  took
to  be  the  heads  of  owls.  On  the  strength  of  these  representations  and
the  sacredness  of  the  owl  to  Athena,  he  proposed  to  explain  glaukdpis
as  *  owl-faced,*  deriving  the  word  from  g/aux  *owr  and  ops  *face,'  and
supposing  that  the  goddess  was  originally  represented  with  the  head  of
an  owl.  See  Schliemann,  Troy  and  its  remains^  pp.  54,  112  sq.  But
these  supposed  owl-faces  seem  to  be  merely  rude  imitations  of  the
human  face  (Schuchhardt,  Schliemann^s  Excavations^  p.  68).  Another
explanation  of  the  epithet  glaukdpis  is  given  by  Mr.  R.  Hildebrandt,  who
derives  it  ixom glaukos  (* bright'  or  *blue')  and  a  root  op  ('water'),  so
that  glaukdpis  would  designate  a  goddess  of  the  bright  blue  sea.  See
R.  Hildebrandt,  ' 'A^?/viy  rAav/cwTris,'  PhilologuSy  46  (1888),  pp.  201-
209.  That  the  Greeks  understood  the  epithet  to  mean  *  blue-eyed '  is
clear  from  the  present  passage  of  Pausanias.  Cicero  says  {Nat.  deor,  i.
30.  83)  that  the  colour  of  Minerva's  (Athena's)  eyes  was  bluish-gray,  and
the  colour  of  Neptune's  (Poseidon's)  eyes  sky-blue.  This  statement  of
Cicero's  is  in  favour  of  interpreting  the  adjective  yXav/covs  in  the  present
passage  as  *  blue '  rather  than  *  gray,'  as  it  is  sometimes  translated ;  for
Pausanias  says  that  Athena's  eyes  were  of  the  same  hue  as  Poseidon's,
and  Cicero  tells  us  that  Poseidon's  eyes  were  sky-blue  {caeruleos).
Pausanias  would  hardly  have  noticed  the  colour  of  the  eyes  of  the
image  if  it  had  been  a  neutral  tint  like  gray.

14.  6.  the  Libyans  say  that  she  is  a  daughter  of  Poseidon  etc
Cp.  Herodotus,  iv.  1 80 ;  Preller,  Griech.  Mythologie^^  i .  p.  1 86  sq.

14.  7*  a  sanctuary  of  Heavenly  Aphrodite  etc.  As  this
sanctuary  was  near  the  temple  of  Hephaestus,  it  probably  stood  on  the
Market  Hill,  the  eminence  crowned  by  the  so-called  Theseum  (see
note  on  §  6  *  temple  of  Hephaestus').  The  worship  of  the  goddess
whom  the  Greeks  called  the  Heavenly  Aphrodite  was  derived,  as  they
were  aware,  from  the  Semitic  peoples  of  Asia.  Her  worship  prevailed
among  all  the  Semites  of  Babylonia,  Assyria,  Syria,  and  Phoenicia.
Each  Semitic  tribe  and  city  had  its  own  local  god  or  Baal  (*lord,'
*  owner'),  and  its  corresponding  goddess  or  Baalat  ('mistress,'  *queen').
In  Babylonia  the  name  Baal  appears  as  Bel,  and  the  name  Baalat  as
Belit;  the  name  Mylitta  (Herodotus,  i.  131  and  199)  is  another  form
of  Belit.  Besides  her  general  title  of  Baalat  or  Belit  (*  mistress ')  the
goddess  commonly  bore  also  a  name  which,  varying  with  the  language  or
dialect  of  her  worshippers,  appears  as  Ishtar,  Ashtar,  Ash  tart,  Astarte,
Ashtoreth,  Attar,  and  Atar.  Whether  this  name  is  of  Semitic  origin,  or
not,  is  disputed.  Wherever  the  Baal  of  a  tribe  or  city  had  a  special
name,  his  female  correlate  the  Baalat  or  Astarte  had  a  corresponding
name.  In  Moab,  for  example,  the  tribal  god  was  Kamosh ;  hence  the
goddess  was  called  Ashtor- Kamosh,  i.e.  the  Astarte  of  Kamosh.     In


CH.  XV  HEA  VENL  Y  APHRODITE  129

North  Syria,  side  by  side  with  the  god  Ate,  we  find  a  goddess  Atar-ate
or  Atargatis  (Strabo,  xvi.  pp.  748,  785),  that  is  the  Atar  of  Ate.  The
goddess  was  always  the  *  queen '  or  *  mistress '  {bacUat  or  rabbaf)  of  the
tribe  or  city  in  which  she  was  worshipped :  e,g,  the  goddess  of  Byblus,
whom  Plutarch  (^Isis  and  Osiris^  15)  calls  Astarte,  is  designated  as

*  my  mistress '  {radbaf)^  *  the  mistress  {baalaf)  of  GebAl  (Byblus),'  with-
out further  title,  in  the  inscription  of  King  Jechaumelek.

The  characters  and  functions  of  all  these  local  Baals  and  Baalats  or
Astartes  seem  to  have  been  pretty  much  alike.  The  Baal  was  viewed
especially  in  two  aspects,  as  the  source  of  fertility,  and  as  the  heaven-
godL  Accordingly  his  female  counterpart,  the  Baalat  or  Astarte,  was
similarly  regarded  as  the  giver  of  fertility  to  plants,  animals,  and  men,
and  as  the  goddess  of  heaven.  In  her  latter  aspect  Jeremiah  speaks  of
her  as  "  the  queen  of  heaven  "  (vii.  1 8,  xliv.  1 8  sqq,) ;  in  her  double
aspect  as  a  goddess  of  love  and  of  heaven  the  Greeks  represented  her
as  the  Heavenly  Aphrodite.

Sometimes  she  came  to  be  regarded  as  a  goddess  of  the  moon.
But  this  seems  to  have  been  chiefly  due  to  an  accident.  The  religious
art  of  Syria,  especially  southern  Syria,  was  wholly  dependent  on  Egypt ;
hence  the  artistic  representations  of  Astarte  were  modelled  on  those  of
the  great  Egyptian  goddesses  I  sis,  Hathor,  etc.  Now  these  Egyptian
goddesses,  as  mothers  of  the  sun,  wore  on  their  heads  the  sun's  disc
between  cows'  horns,  and  were  sometimes  depicted  with  cows'  horns.
Hence  Astarte  came  to  be  similarly  represented ;  and  the  sun's  disc
between  horns  being  mistaken  for  a  symbol  of  the  full  and  crescent  moon,
she  was  held  to  be  a  moon-goddess  (Lucian,  De  dea  Syria^  4  ;  Herodian,
▼.  6).  But  that  this  was  not  her  original  character  is  sufficiently  proved
by  the  fact  that  in  all  Semitic  languages  the  moon  is  masculine.

The  planet  Venus  was  sacred  to  her,  but  this  seems  to  have  been
brought  about  through  Babylonian  influence.  For  the  non- Semitic
population  of  Babylonia,  the  Sumerians  and  Accadians,  worshipped  a
goddess  Nana  or  Nanai,  who  corresponded  to  the  Semitic  Baalat  or
Astarte,  and  was  moreover  identified  with  the  planet  Venus.  Hence  by
analogy  the  Semites  dedicated  *the  planet  of  love'  to  their  Astarte.
The  Greeks  called  this  old  Babylonian  goddess  Nanaea  (11.  Maccabees,
i.  13  sqq.)  ;  the  chief  seat  of  her  worship  was  at  the  very  ancient  city  of
Unik  (OrchoS  in  Greek),  the  modem  Warka,  where  her  temple  was
called  Eann€y  *  the  house  of  heaven.'  She  is  represented  in  a  niunber
of  clay  statuettes  as  a  woman,  sometimes  naked,  sometimes  clothed,
pressing  her  hands  to  her  breasts.

See  Ed.  Meyer,  articles  'Astarte'  and  'Baal'  in  Roscher's  Lexikon ;  id.,
GtsckickU  des  AUertkums^  i.  $§  146,  205-209  ;  C.  P.  Tiele,  Babylonisch-Asiyrischt
Gtschkhii^  pp.  526-528.     On  these  Asiatic  goddesses  compare  also  Fr.  Lenormant,

*  Artemis  Manaea,'  Gautte  Archiologiqtu,  2  (1876),  pp.  lo-i8,  58-68;  id.,  '  Istar-
Semiramis,'  Gat,  ArcJUoL  4  (1878),  pp.  75-81;  C.  W.  Mansell,  *La  Venus
androgyne  Asiatique,'  Gaz,  Archiol,  5  (1879),  PP*  62-70;  Ph.  Berger,  in  Gat,
Arckhl,  6(1880),  pp.  18-31,  164-169;  A.  Odobesco,  'De  la  d^sse  Nana-anat,*
Gaz,  Archhl,  io(i88j),  pp.  2S6-2g6;  id,,  11  (1886),  pp.  5-15,  70-86.  Movers*s
discussion  of  the  subject  {Die  Fhoenitier,  i.  pp.  584  sqq,,  601  sqq.)  is  now
antiqumted.

VOL.  II  K


I30  HEA  VENL  Y  APHRODITE  bk.  I.  attica

Pausanias's  account  of  the  way  in  which  the  worship  of  Astarte,
originating  with  the  Assyrians,  was  transmitted  to  Greece  through  the
agency  of  the  Phoenicians,  seems  to  be  derived  from  Herodotus.  For
in  one  passage  (i.  105)  Herodotus  tells  us  that  the  oldest  sanctuary  of
Heavenly  Aphrodite  that  he  knew  of  was  at  Ascalon,  that  her  sanctuary
in  Cyprus  was  derived  from  the  one  at  Ascalon,  as  the  Cyprians  them-
selves admitted,  and  that  her  sanctuary  in  Cythera  was  founded  by
Phoenicians  from  the  same  part  of  Syria.  In  another  passage  (i.  131)
Herodotus  informs  us  that  the  Persians  learned  the  worship  of  the
Heavenly  Goddess  (/.^.  the  Heavenly  Aphrodite,  Astarte)  from  the
Assyrians  and  Arabians,  and  that  the  Assyrian  name  for  Aphrodite  was
Mylitta,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  is  another  form  of  Baalat  or  Belit  In
her  sanctuary  at  Ascalon,  which  stood  on  the  banks  of  a  lake  full  of  fish
not  far  from  the  town,  the  goddess  was  represented  as  a  woman  from
the  hips  upwards,  but  as  a  fish  from  the  hips  downwards.  Here  and
throughout  Syria  fish  were  sacred  to  her  and  were  not  eaten.  Her
local  name  at  Ascalon  was  Derceto,  which  is  a  corruption  of  Atargatis.
See  Diodorus,  ii.  4 ;  Lucian,  De  dea  Syria^  1 4 ;  Aelian,  Nat.  An,  xii.
2;  Plutarch,  De  superstitione^  10;  Porphyry,  De  abstinentia^  iv.  15.
As  to  the  worship  of  Heavenly  Aphrodite  at  Cythera,  see  Pans.  iii.
23.  I.  Professor  C.  Wachsmuth  regards  the  worship  of  the  Heavenly
Aphrodite  at  Athens  as  evidence  of  an  early  Phoenician  settlement  on
the  spot.     See  Wachsmuth,  Die  Siadt  Aihen^  i.  p.  410  sqq,

14.  7*  the  inhabitants  of  Paphos  in  Oyprns.  As  to  the  sanctuary
of  Aphrodite  at  Paphos,  see  viii.  5.  2  note.

14.  7.  the  misfortunes  of  his  sisters.  The  sisters  of  Aegeus  were
Procne  and  Philomela.     Cp.  i.  5.  4 ;  i.  40.  8  sq,  ;  x.  4.  8  sq,

14.  7.  a  work  of  Phidias.  There  was  another  statue  of  Heavenly
Aphrodite  by  Phidias  at  £lis.     See  vi.  25.  i  note.

14.  7-  an  Athenian  township  Athmonia.    See  i.  31-  4  note.

14.  7.  Porphsrrion.  Professor  C.  Wachsmuth  regards  Porphyrion
('  the  purple  man ')  as  identical  with  Phoenix,  and  like  him  a  representa-
tive of  a  Phoenician  settlement  in  Attica  i^Die  Stadt  Athen^  i.  p.
413  sq,)

15.  I.  On  the  way  to the  Painted  Ck)lonnade.     Pausanias

now  returns  eastward  from  the  Market  Hill  (the  *  Theseum '  hill)  to  the
market-place.  The  Painted  Colonnade  stood  certainly  on  the  market-
place and  probably  on  its  eastern  side,  either  at  its  north-eastern  or  its
south-eastern  extremity  (see  below).  Hence  to  reach  it  Pausanias  has
to  cross  the  market-place,  passing  the  statue  of  Hermes  on  the  way.

15.  I.  a  bronze  Hermes,  sumamed  Hermes  of  the  Market.
This  statue  stood  in  the  market-place  (Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Knights^
297  ;  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^  p.  339,  line  i  5q.\  beside  the  Painted
Colonnade  {Lwoxaxi^  Jupiter  Tragoedus^  33,  with  the  Schol.)  Philochorus,
in  the  third  book  of  his  history  of  Attica,  mentioned  that  this  statue
was  set  up  in  the  archonship  of  Cebris  (Hesychius,  s.v,  'Ayopaio^
^Epfirjs).  The  date  of  Cebris's  archonship  is  unknown,  but  as  Philochorus
mentioned  it  in  his  third  book,  which  seems  to  have  comprised  the
history  of  Attica  between  683  B.C.  and  460  B.C.  (Frag.  Hist.  Graec.  ed.


CH.  XV  HERMES  OF  THE  MARKET  131

Miiller,  i.  p.  393),  the  statue  was  probably  erected  between  these  two
dates.  Now  the  archons  from  480  B.C.  to  460  B.C.  are  known,  and
Cebris  is  not  among  them.  It  follows  that  his  archonship  fell  before
480  B.C.  and  therefore  before  the  sack  of  Athens  by  the  Persians
in  that  year.  But  if  the  statue  was  erected  before  480  B.C.,  it  was
probably  destroyed  or  carried  off  by  the  Persians  when  they  sacked
the  city.  Hence  it  would  seem  that  the  statue  mentioned  by  Pausanias
and  other  writers  was  not  the  original  Hermes  of  the  Market,  but  a  later
one  set  up  to  replace  it  after  the  Persian  invasion.  Cp.  Ad.  Michaelis,
'Das  Datum  des  EPMH2  ATOPAIOS,'  Hermes,  21  (1886),  pp.  493-
495  ;  V.  Wilamowitz-MdllendoHT,  ib,  p.  600  note  2.  But  whether  the
original  statue  or  not,  it  was  a  fine  specimen  of  early  Greek  art ;  its
lines  and  contours  were  much  admired,  and,  if  we  may  believe  Lucian,
artists  were  daily  taking  casts  of  it  in  pitch,  so  that  there  was  generally
some  pitch  adhering  to  it  (Lucian  Jupiter  Tragoedus,  33).  Calli-
stratus,  an  orator  of  repute  in  the  fourth  century  B.C.,  dedicated  an  altar
to  Hermes  of  the  Market  ([Plutarch,]  Vit  X,  OraL  p.  844  b).

The  statue  of  Hermes  of  the  Market  seems  to  have  been  only  one  of
a  row  of  images  of  Hermes  which  extended  from  the  Royal  Colonnade
to  the  Painted  Colonnade  (Harpocration,  s,v,  *Epfmt;  Xenophon,
Hipparchicus,  iii.  2).  The  direction  of  this  row  of  Hermae  depends  on
the  position  of  the  two  colonnades.  If,  as  is  generally  supposed,  the
Royal  Colonnade  and  the  Painted  Colonnade  faced  each  other  on
opposite  sides  of  the  market-place,  the  former  being  on  the  western,  the
latter  on  the  eastern  side,  it  would  follow  that  the  row  of  images  of
Hermes  ran  across  the  market-place  from  west  to  east.  The  writers
who  take  this  view  commonly  suppose  further  that  this  row  of  Hermae
bisected  the  market-place  into  a  northern  and  a  southern  half,  the
former  being  devoted  to  commerce,  the  latter  to  affairs  of  state  and
religion  (see  above,  p.  56).  On  this  view  the  gate  mentioned  by
Pausanias  as  being  near  the  Hermes  of  the  Market  was  probably
situated  in  the  row  of  Hermae,  and  formed  the  principal  thoroughfare
between  the  two  halves  of  the  market-place.

I(  on  the  other  hand,  we  suppose  that  the  Royal  Colonnade  was  on
the  western  side,  and  the  Painted  Colonnade  on  the  northern  side  of  the
market-place,  the  row  of  Hermae  must  have  run  north  from  the  Royal
Colonnade  till  it  met  the  Painted  Colonnade,  thus  forming  the  boundary
of  the  market-place  on  the  north-west.

These  images  of  Hermes,  probably  square  pillars  with  the  head  and

bust  of  Hermes  carved  at  the  top,  were  set  up  both  by  magistrates  and

by  private  persons  (Harpocration,  s,v.  *Epfiat).     The  row  of  these  busts

seems  to  have  been  a  busy  and  lively  part  of  the  market.     Here  the

cavalry  recruits  received  riding-lessons  (Athenaeus,  ix.  p.  402  f.),  and

here  Socrates  was  to  be  seen  elbowing  his  way  through  the  crowds

or  lounging  at  the  stalls  and  the  Hermae  (Theodoretus,  Graecarum

afictionum  curatio,  xii.  p.  175,  ed.  Sylburg).     A  neighbouring  barber's

shop  was  the  favourite  haunt  of  the  people  from  Decelea  who  had  come

bto  town  to  do  their  marketing  and  hear  the  news  (Lysias,  xxiii.  3).

The  row  of  Hermae  was  a  good  point  for  sight-seeing;    for  at  the


132  THE  PAINTED  COLONNADE  bk.  i.  attica

festival  of  the  Panathenaea  a  reckless  and  dissipated  cavalry-general
set  up  a  stand  here,  higher  than  the  Hermae,  for  the  convenience  of  his
mistress,  remarking  that  any  persons  who  should  attempt  to  stop  him
might  go  to  the  devil  (Athenaeus,  iv.  p.  167  f.)  Men  who  had  deserved
well  of  the  state  were  allowed,  as  a  public  honour,  to  have  their
names  carved  on  one  of  these  Hermae  (Demosthenes,  xx.  112).
One  of  the  images  bore  an  inscription  in  archaic  letters,  recording
that  Agamemnon  had  been  decorated  by  the  grateful  Achaeans
(Harpocration,  s.v,  *Epfmij  where  with  ^rjcrav  we  must  understand
raiviais).  There  was  a  colonnade  called  the  Colonnade  of  the  Hermae.
Cimon,  after  defeating  the  Persians  on  the  Strymon,  was  permitted,  as  an
extraordinary  honour,  to  set  up  three  stone  images  of  Hermes  in  the
Colonnade  of  the  Hermae  with  metrical  inscriptions,  but  without
mention  of  his  own  name.  See  Plutarch,  Cimon^  7  sq. ;  Aeschines,  iii.
183  ;  SchoL  on  Demosthenes,  xx.  183,  p.  491,  in  Dindorfs  ed.  of  the
Scholia,  p.  507  note ;  Harpocration,  s,v.  ^Epfmi ;  Tzetzes,  Scholia  in
Hennogenenty  in  Cramer's  Anecdota  Graeca^  4.  p.  21.  But  whether  this
Colonnade  of  the  Hermae  was  near  the  row  of  the  Hermae  or  not,  we
do  not  know.

Statues  of  Hermes  of  the  Market,  as  the  god  of  gain,  were  com-
monly set  up  in  market-places.     See  iii.  11.  11  ;  vii.  22.  2  ;  ix.  17.  2.

Cp.  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadf  Athen^  i.  p.  202  sqq, ;  /V/.,  2.  pp.
430-432;  Milchhofer,  *Athen,*  p.  166  sq,\  Lolling,  *Athen,'  p.  314;
Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  pp.  127-132.

15.  I.  a  victory  gained  by  the  Athenian  cavalry  over  Plist-
arclins  etc.  The  date  and  circumstances  of  this  battle  are  unknown.
Plistarchus  was  a  brother  of  Cassander  (Plutarch,  Demetrius^  31),  who
left  him  to  command  the  Macedonian  garrison  at  Chalcis  in  Euboea
in  312  B.C.  (Diodorus,  xix.  77.  6).

15.  I.  The  first  painting  in  this  colonnade  etc.  The  Painted
Colonnade,  one  of  the  most  famous  buildings  of  ancient  Athens,  stood
in  the  market-place.  This  appears  from  a  passage  of  Aeschines  (iii.
186),  where  he  says:  "Imagine  yourselves  at  the  Painted  Colonnade;
for  the  monuments  of  all  your  glories  are  in  the  market-place."  More-
over, the  statue  of  Solon  which  Pausanias  (i.  1 6.  i )  describes  as  standing
in  front  of  the  Painted  Colonnade,  is  said  by  Demosthenes  (xxvi.  23,
p.  807)  and  Aelian  {Var,  Hist.  viii.  16)  to  have  been  in  the  market-
place. Again,  the  statue  of  Hermes  of  the  Market  is  said  to  have
been  beside  the  Painted  Colonnade  and  in  the  market-place  (see  above,
p.  130).

But  on  which  side  of  the  market-place  was  the  Painted  Colonnade  ?
Pausanias,  entering  the  market-place  from  the  north,  appears  to  have
already  described  the  buildings  on  its  west  and  southern  sides.  It
remains  therefore  that  the  Painted  Colonnade  stood  either  on  the  northern
or  on  the  eastern  side.  But  of  the  east  side  the  northern  half  was
occupied,  as  we  have  seen  (above,  p.  55  sq.\  by  the  Colonnade  of  Attalus.
Thus  the  choice  lies  between  the  northern  side  or  the  southern  half
of  the  east  side.  The  latter  is  the  position  now  generally  assigned  to
the  Painted  Colonnade.     It  is  supposed  to  have  stood  on  the  south-


CH.  XV  THE  PAINTED  COLONNADE  133

eastern  side  of  the  market-place,  directly  opposite  the  Royal  Colonnade
and  united  to  it  by  the  row  of  images  of  Hermes  which  extended  across
the  market-place.  It  seems,  however,  also  possible  that  the  Painted
Colonnade  occupied  the  northern  end  of  the  market-place ;  it  would
thus  enjoy  a  southern  aspect,  a  considerable  advantage  to  it  as  a  popular
lounge  in  winter.  On  this  latter  view,  the  row  of  Hermae,  instead  of
running  across  the  middle  of  the  market-place,  must  have  bounded  it  on
the  north-west,  extending  north  from  the  Royal  Colonnade  (which  stood
on  the  west  side  of  the  market-place)  to  the  Painted  Colonnade,  which  (on
this  theory)  stood  on  the  north  side.  It  has,  indeed,  been  proposed  by
Bursian  and  Professor  C.  Wachsmuth  to  place  the  Painted  Colonnade
in  this  north-western  comer  of  the  market-place,  in  a  line  with,  but  to
the  north  of,  the  Royal  Colonnade.  But  a  fatal  objection  to  this  view
seems  to  be  that  Pausanias,  approaching  the  Painted  Colonnade  from
the  Market  Hill  (^Theseum'  hill),  comes  to  the  statue  of  Hermes  of
the  Market  in  the  row  of  Hermae  before  he  reaches  the  Colonnade
itself;  whereas  if  the  Painted  Colonnade  had  bounded  the  market-
place on  the  north-west,  it  must  have  been  the  first  thing  in  the  market-
place he  came  to  on  descending  into  it  from  the  Market  Hill.  More-
over, the  north-west  comer  of  the  market-place  is  already  occupied  by
the  so-called  Colonnade  of  the  Giants,  which,  though  a  stmcture  of  very
late  Roman  date,  may  very  well  have  existed  contemporaneously  with
the  Painted  Colonnade,  since  the  latter  was  still  in  existence  when
Synesius  visited  Athens  in  402  A.D.  {Epist  135).  As  to  the  ruins  of
the  so-called  Colonnade  of  the  Giants,  see  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt
Atkefiy  I.  p.  158  sq,*,  id,^  2.  p.  526  sq,  ;  Milchhofer,  *Athen,'  p.  168  ;
Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  20  sq.

It  would  seem,  then,  that  the  site  of  the  Painted  Colonnade  was
either  on  the  northem  or  the  south-eastem  side  of  the  market-place.
There  is  this  objection  to  placing  it  on  the  northem  side  of  the  market-
place that  Pausanias's  silence  as  to  the  Colonnade  of  Attalus  would  then
be  more  inexplicable  than  ever.    For  his  omission  to  mention  that  building
maybe  explained  (as  we  saw  p.  56)  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  market-place
was  divided  into  two  sections,  a  northem  section  devoted  to  commerce,
and  a  southern  section  devoted  to  affairs  of  state  and  religion,  and  that
the  conunercial  part,  including  the  Colonnade  of  Attalus,  was  passed
over  by  Pausanias  as  comparatively  uninteresting.     But  if  the  Painted
Colonnade  stood  at  the  northem  end  of  the  market-place,  it  was  (on  the
hypothesis  just  mentioned)  within  the  commercial  part  of  the  market-
place.    I^  then,  Pausanias  described  one  colonnade  in  the  commercial
market-place,  why  should  he  not  have  mentioned  the  stately  colonnade
of  Attalus  which  stood  in  the  same  quarter  ?     On  the  whole,  the  view
that  the  Painted  Colonnade  stood  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  southem
half  of  the   market-place,   to  the  south   of  and   in   a   line  with  the
Colonnade  of  Attalus,  seems  open  to  the  fewest  objections.     It  may,
therefore,  be  provisionally  accepted.     But  the  question  of  its  site,  like
so  many  other  questions  touching  the  topography  of  the  market-place,
can  only  be  settled,  if  at  all,  by  excavations.

The  Painted  Colonnade  was  founded  by  a  certain  Pisianax  (Schol.


134  THE  PAINTED  COLONNADE  bk.  i.  attica

on  Demosthenes,  xx.  112,  p.  507  of  Dindorf  s  ed.  of  the  Scholia ;
Tzetzes,  Scholia  in  Hermogenem^  in  Cramer's  Anecdota  Graecoy  4.  p.  2 1  ;
Schol.  on  Aeschines,  iii.  186,  p.  347  ed.  Schultz),  who  may  have  been
the  father  of  Alcibiades's  cousin  Euryptolemus  (Xenophon,  Hellemca^  i.
4.  19,  i.  7.  12).  Hence  the  colonnade  was  also  called  the  Colonnade
of  Pisianax  after  its  founder  (Plutarch,  Cimon^  4 ;  Diogenes  Laertius,
vii.  1.5;  Schol.  on  Demosthenes,  l.c, ;  Suidas,  s,vv,  Z-qimv  and  oroa).
But  its  official  designation  seems  to  have  been  the  Painted  Colonnade
(C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  778).  In  the  Painted  Colonnade  Zeno  discussed
philosophy  with  his  disciples,  who  hence  acquired  the  name  of  Stoics,
i.e.  "  men  of  the  colonnade  "  (from  sioa,  *  colonnade  *)  (Diogenes  Laertius,
vii.  I.  5).  The  colonnade  had  previously  been  the  favourite  haunt  of
poets,  who  for  the  same  reason  had  been  called  Stoics  (Diogenes
Laertius,  i.e.)  Lucian  and  Alciphron  speak  of  the  grave,  bearded  philo-
sophers who  paced  the  colonnade  or  sat  on  benches  in  the  open  air  out-
side, discoursing  to  their  pupils  or  wrangling  with  each  other  (Lucian,
Jupiter  TragoedtiSy  16 ;  xV/.,  Icaromenippus^  34  ;  id.^  Dialog.  Meretr.
X.  i;  id.y  Piscatory  13;  Alciphron,  Efiist.  i.  3;  id.^  iii.  53  and  64).
Apuleius  describes  a  juggler  swallowing  a  sword  and  a  spear,  and  a
tumbling  boy  exhibiting  his  antics  in  front  of  the  Painted  Colonnade
{Metam.  i.  4).  The  colonnade  was  sometimes  used  as  a  court  of
justice  (C.  /.  A.  ii.  No.  778),  which  may  explain  the  strange  statement
of  Diogenes  Laertius  (vii.  i.  5)  that  under  the  Thirty  Tyrants  1400
citizens  were  put  to  death  in  it  The  total  number  of  victims  put  to
death  by  the  Thirty  Tyrants  is  said  to  have  been  1500  (Isocrates,  vii.
67,  XX.  1 1  ;  Heraclides  Ponticus,  in  Frag.  Hist.  Graec.y  ed.  Miiller,  2.
p.  209) ;  it  is  possible,  then,  that  Diogenes  Laertius  confounded  the
condenmation  of  the  1500  (or  1400)  victims  in  the  Painted  Colonnade
with  their  execution,  which  can  hardly  have  taken  place  there.  We
hear  of  an  altar  in  the  colonnade  (Diogenes  Laertius,  vii.  i.  14).

But  the  Painted  Colonnade  owed  its  name  and  most  of  its  renown
to  the  paintings  with  which  it  was  adorned,  and  in  respect  of  which  it
has  been  spoken  of  by  some  modem  writers  as  the  National  Gallery  of
Athens.  Pausanias  has  described  four  of  them,  namely  (i)  the  battle
between  the  Athenians  and  Lacedaemonians  at  Oenoe ;  (2)  the  battle
between  the  Athenians  and  Amazons ;  (3)  the  Greeks  after  the  capture
of  Troy  ;  and  (4)  the  battle  of  Marathon.  Of  these  paintings  the  first
(the  battle  of  Oenoe)  is  mentioned  by  no  other  ancient  writer  than
Pausanias,  and  the  painter  is  not  known.  The  second  picture  (the
battle  with  the  Amazons)  was  painted  by  Micon  (Aristophanes,  Lysi-
strata^  668  sq.^  with  the  Scholium;  Arrian,  Anabasis ^  vii.  13.  5,  where
for  Kt/Mi>vo9  we  should  read  Mikcdvos).  The  third  picture  (the  Greeks
after  the  capture  of  Troy)  was  by  Polygnotus  (Plutarch,  Cimony  4).  As
to  the  painter  of  the  fourth  picture  (the  battle  of  Marathon)  ancient
writers  are  not  agreed.  According  to  Pausanias  (v.  11.  6)  and  Pliny
(xxxv.  57)  the  painter  was  Panaenus,  the  brother  of  Phidias.  Accord-
ing to  others  the  painter  was  Micon.  This  is  stated  by  Aclian  {^Nat.
An.  vii.  38),  who  adds,  however,  that  by  some  the  picture  was  attrib-
uted to  Polygnotus.       Arrian  (/.<:.,  emended  as  above)  ascribed  the


CH.  XV  THE  PAINTED  COLONNADE  135

picture  to  Micon,  and  so  did  the  rhetorician  Sopatrus,  for  he  wrote  a
discourse  on  the  trial  of  Micon  after  the  battle  of  Marathon  for  having
painted  the  Persians  larger  than  the  Greeks.  Sopatrus's  authority  was
perhaps  the  orator  Lycurgus,  who  in  a  lost  speech  mentioned  a  fine
inflicted  on  the  painter  Micon  (Harpocration,  s,v.  M-iKtoVf  where  Mik(of
and  Miicwva  are  corrections  of  the  MS.  readings  MrJKtav  and  MyjKwva).
Thus  there  are  three  claimants  to  the  honour  of  having  painted  the
battle  of  Marathon  in  the  Painted  Colonnade,  namely  Panaenus,  Micon,
and  Polygnotus.  Of  these  Polygnotus  may  be  dismissed.  He  was  by
far  the  most  famous  of  the  three  ;  some  of  his  work  was  known  to  be
in  the  Painted  Colonnade ;  and  when  the  pictures  in  it  were  referred  to,
his  name  was  often  mentioned  alone  (Harpocration,  s.v.  Uokvyvvrros  ;
Diogenes  Laertius,  vii.  i.  5  ;  Synesius,  EpisL  135).  It  was,  therefore,
likely  enough  that  the  most  famous  and  popular  picture  in  the  gallery,
as  the  picture  of  the  battle  of  Marathon  seems  to  have  been  (Aeschines,
iii.  186,  with  the  Scholium,  p.  347  ed.  Schultz ;  [Demosthenes,]
lix.  94,  p.  1377;  Cornelius  Nepos,  Miltiades^  vi.  3;  Persius,  Sat.  iii.
53  sq.\  Lucian,  Jupiter  Tragoedus,  32  ;  Himerius,  Orat,  x.  2  ;  Schol.
on  Demosthenes,  xx.  112,  in  Dindorfs  ed.  of  the  Scholia,  p.  507),
should  have  been  ascribed  by  ignorant  people  to  the  most  famous  and
popular  of  the  painters  who  had  contributed  to  the  gallery.  The  choice,
then,  lies  between  Panaenus  and  Micon.  The  claims  of  both  painters
are  supported  by  respectable  authorities ;  perhaps  we  shall  do  best  to
suppose,  with  O.  Jahn  and  H.  Brunn,  that  both  artists  had  a  hand  in
painting  the  picture.  See  O.  Jahn,  Archdologische  Beitrdge^  pp.  17-21  ;
Brunn,  Gesch,  d.  griech,  Kunstler^  2.  p.  19.  Prof.  W.  Klein  believes
that  the  picture  was  by  Panaenus  alone  {Archaeolog,  epigr.  Mittheil-
ungen  cuts  Oesterreich-Ungam^  12  (1888),  p.  96).

Polygnotus,  a  man  of  independent  means,  painted  only  for  the  love
of  his  art  and  the  glory  of  his  country ;  Micon,  who  depended  for  his
bread  on  his  profession,  was  paid  for  his  services  (Pliny,  N.  H,  xxxv.
59 ;  Plutarch,  Cimon,  4  ;  Harpocration  and  Suidas,  s.v.  IIoAvy  voiros).
Polygnotus  and  Micon  seem  to  have  flourished  in  the  flrst  half,  and
Panaenus  about  the  middle,  of  the  fifth  century  B.c.    See  Brunn,  Gesch.  d.
griech.  Kiinstler^  2.  pp.  15-17,  46  sq.  ;  and  notes  on  v.  1 1.  6 ;  vi.  6.  i.
The    question   has   been    discussed    whether    these    pictures    by
Polygnotus,  Micon,  and  Panaenus  in  the  Painted  Colonnade  were  wall-
paintings  or  easel-pieces.     In  favour  of  the  view  that  they  were  easel-
[neces  painted  on  wood  is  adduced  an  expression  of  Synesius,  who,
describing  the  removal  or  destruction  of  the  pictures  in  the  Painted
Colonnade,  twice  says  that  "  the  Proconsul  removed  the  boards  "  {Epist.
54  and  135  ras  cravtSas  a<^€iA€ro  or  v<^€tA€To,  the  reading  seems  doubt-
ful).   This  certainly  implies  that  in  Synesius's  opinion  the  paintings  were
on  wood.     But  he  spoke  from  hearsay  ;   when  he  visited  Athens  in
402  A.D.  the  pictures  were  gone ;   how  long  before  his  arrival  they
had  been  removed  or  destroyed  we  do  not  know.     It  has  been  con-
jectured  that   the   occasion   of  their    destruction   was    the    edict    of
Theodosius  against  paganism,  published  in  391  A.D.  ;  but  this  is  no
more  than  a  conjecture.     Synesius's  first  mention  of  the  removal  of  "  the


136  THE  PAINTED  COLONNADE  bk.  i.  attica

boards"  occurs  in  a  letter  (No.  54)  written  before  he  visited  Athens,
and  hence  at  a  time  when  he  could  hardly  have  had  accurate  informa-
tion as  to  the  circumstances  of  their  removal  or  destruction.  All  that
he  seems  to  have  known  was  that  the  pictures  had  been  removed  by  the
proconsul ;  this  he  expresses  in  his  own  way,  taking  it  for  granted  that
the  paintings  were  easel-pieces,  like  most  of  the  pictures  of  his  own  day.
Very  little  weight  can  therefore  be  given  to  his  evidence  on  this  point.

On  the  other  hand  there  is  some  evidence  that  Polygnotus  and  his
contemporaries  painted  generally,  if  not  exclusively,  on  walls.  Pliny
says  of  Polygnotus  {N,  H.  xxxv.  59) :  "  He  painted  the  temple  at
Delphi  and  the  Painted  Colonnade  at  Athens  gratuitously,  while  Micon
painted  part  of  it  for  hire."  (By  "  the  temple  at  Delphi "  Pliny  means,
or  ought  to  mean,  the  Lesche  or  club-room;  see  Paus.  x.  25-31.)
Again,  Pliny  speaks  of  walls  at  Thespiae  which  were  painted  by
Polygnotus,  and  retouched  by  Pamphilus  (A^.  H.  xxxv.  123).  These
expressions  of  Pliny  point  to  wall-paintings  rather  than  to  easel-pieces.
So  does  an  expression  of  Pausanias  in  reference  to  one  of  the  pictures
by  Micon  on  the  walls  of  the  Theseum  (i.  17.  3).  Panaenus  certainly
executed  wall-paintings  in  the  temple  of  Athena  at  Elis  (see  note  on
vi.  26.  3).  Again,  if  the  famous  pictures  by  Polygnotus,  Micon,  and
Panaenus  in  the  Painted  Colonnade  and  the  Theseum  at  Athens  and  in
the  club-room  at  Delphi  had  been  easel-pieces,  the  chances  are  that
some  of  them  at  least  would  have  been  carried  off  to  Italy  by  the  rapa-
cious Romans.  As  they  all  remained  uninjured,  except  by  time,  down
to  Pausanias's  age,  the  presumption  is  that  they  were  spared  because
they  could  not  be  removed,  being  painted  on  the  walls  of  the  buildings.
Only  one  painting  by  Polygnotus  and  not  a  single  one  by  any  of  his
contemporaries  is  reported  to  have  been  conveyed  to  Italy  (see  Pliny,
N.  H.  xxxv.  59).

The  discovery  of  the  remains  of  wall-paintings  in  the  pre-historic
palaces  of  Tiryns  and  Mycenae  proves  that  the  art  of  painting  on  walls
had  been  practised  in  Greece  centuries  before  the  time  of  Polygnotus.
The  paintings  at  Tiryns  seem  to  have  been  true  frescoes,  that  is,  they
were  painted  on  wet  plaster  so  that,  as  the  plaster  dried  and  hardened,
the  colours  were  absorbed  into  it  and  became  ineffaceable  except  by  the
removal  of  the  plaster  itself.  See  Schuchhardt,  ScMiemantis  Ausgrab-
ungen^  pp.  145  sqq,^  335  sqq,\  *E<f^fJL€pls  apxaiokoyiK-q^  1887,  p.
160  sqq, ;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  PArt  dans  PAntiguit^^  6.  p.
883  sgq.  The  difficulty  of  painting  in  fresco  in  this  strict  sense  of  the
word  is  considerable,  for  the  colours  have  to  be  laid  on  with  great
rapidity  before  the  plaster  dries,  and  mistakes  once  made  cannot  be
rectified.  Hence  to  paint  successfully  in  fresco  needs  a  very  sure  and
rapid  touch,  and  a  complete  mastery  of  the  art.

On  the  whole,  the  evidence  seems  to  be  in  favour  of  the  view  that
the  pictures  of  Polygnotus,  Micon,  and  Panaenus  in  general,  and  their
pictures  in  the  Painted  Colonnade  in  particular,  were  wall-paintings,  not
easel-pieces.  See  Welcker,  Aite  Denkmdler^  4.  pp.  220-249  J  H.  Bnmn,
Gesch,  d,  griech.  Kiinsiler^  2.  pp.  60-68.

With  regard  to  the  disposition  of  the  paintings  on  the  walls,  we


CH.  XV  THE  PAINTED  COLONNADE  137

know  nothing  but  what  Pausanias  tells  us,  namely  that  the  first  picture
was  the  battle  of  Oenoe ;  that  on  the  middle  wall  was  the  battle  with
the  Amazons,  and  after  it  was  the  sack  of  Troy  ;  and  that  last  of  all  was
the  battle  of  Marathon.  From  this  we  may  perhaps  infer  that  the
battles  of  Oenoe  and  Marathon  occupied  the  two  short  walls  at  the  ends
of  the  colonnade,  while  the  long  back  wall  contained  the  battle  with  the
Amazons  and  the  sack  of  Troy.  As  to  the  details  of  the  pictures,  see
below.

There  would  seem  to  have  been  other  pictures  in  the  Painted
Colonnade  besides  those  described  by  Pausanias.  We  hear  of  a  portrait
of  Sophocles  with  his  lyre  in  the  colonnade  {Btographi  Graeci^  ed.
Westermann,  p.  127  x^.)  ;  and  a  picture  by  Pamphilus  or  Apollodorus
of  the  Heraclids  seeking  the  protection  of  the  Athenians  is  said  to  have
been  in  "the  colonnade  of  the  Athenians"  (Schol.  on  Aristophanes,
PlutuSy  385),  which  may  have  been  the  Painted  Colonnade.

The  pictures  in  the  Painted  Colonnade  seem  to  have  survived  till
the  middle  of  the  fourth  century  A.D.,  for  Himerius  [Or,  x.  2  sq.)
speaks  of  the  painting  of  the  battle  of  Marathon  as  still  extant  in  his
time.  But  by  402  A.D.,  as  we  have  seen,  they  had  disappeared.
Synesius,  who  visited  Athens  in  that  year,  speaks  of  their  removal  or
destruction  in  terms  which  lead  us  to  suppose  that  it  had  taken  place
not  long  before  he  wrote.  He  had  looked  eagerly  forward  to  his  visit
to  Athens,  but  was  sadly  disappointed  with  the  reality.  Nothing  of  its
ancient  grandeur,  he  says,  remained  except  the  famous  names  of  its
places.  It  was  like  the  bare  hide  of  a  victim  which  had  been  sacrificed,
a  mere  token  or  memorial  of  what  the  living  animal  had  once  been.
You  could  still  walk  about  and  admire  the  Academy,  the  Lyceum,  and
the  Painted  Colonnade,  though  the  colonnade  was  painted  no  longer,
"  for  the  Proconsul  removed  the  boards  to  which  the  Thasian  Polygnotus
had  committed  the  treasures  of  his  art."  But  the  renown  of  Athens  now
rested,  not  on  its  philosophy,  but  on  its  honey.  See  Synesius,  Epist.
135  ;  cp.  Epist.  54.

The  house  of  the  astronomer  Meton  was  near  the  Painted  Colonnade
(Aelian,  Var,  Hist  xiii.  12;  cp.  Plutarch,  NicictSy  13).  Lucian  men-
tions a  money-lender  Demophantes  who  lived  at  the  back  of  the  Painted
Colonnade  {Dial,  Meretric,  viii.  2)  ;  and  in  another  passage  {Nat/igium,
13]  he  makes  one  of  his  characters  say  that  if  he  had  twelve  talents  he
would  build  himself  a  house  in  a  convenient  situation  a  little  above  the
Painted  Colonnade.

See  Gottling,  in  Berichte  iiher  die  Verhandl,  d.  k,  sacks,  Gesell,  d,  Wissen,  zu
^'P^^ii  Philolog.  histor.  CI.,  5  (1853),  pp.  59-72  ;  id,,  Gesammelte  Abhandlungen^
2.  pp.  133-150;  Bninn,  Gesch,  d,  griech,  Kiinstler,  2.  pp.  18-22;  C.  Wachsmuth,
^  Stttdt  Athen,  I.  pp.  206  sq,,  714,  715  ;  id.,  2,  pp.  442,  445-447,  500-522  ;
Mildihofer,  'Athen,*  p.  166  sq.;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  pp.  126  sq.,
132-140 ;  A.  S.  Murray,  Handbook  of  Greek  Archaeology,  pp.  367-369.

15.  I.  the  AthenianB  arrayed  a^^ainst  the  Lacedaemonians  at
Oenoe.  The  battle  of  Oenoe  is  mentioned  by  no  ancient  author  but
Pausanias,  who  refers  to  it  again  in  x.  10.  4.     Its  date  is  uncertain,  but


138  THE  PAINTED  COLONNADE  bk.  i.  attica

a  clue  to  it  is  furnished  by  the  names  of  the  artists  Hypatodorus  and
Aristogiton  who  executed  the  group  of  statuary  which  the  Aigives
dedicated  at  Delphi  in  memory  of  the  joint  victory  (Paus.  x.  lo.  3  sq,)
For  the  names  of  these  artists  occur  on  a  Delphic  inscription  which,
from  the  archaic  style  of  the  letters,  appears  to  have  been  cut  in  the  first
half  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  (Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  509,  Inscr.  No.  4 ;
C  /.  G,  No.  25 ;  Roehl,  /.  G.  A,  No.  165  ;  id,^  Imagines  Inscr,  Graec,  Ant.
No. 5 3,  p.  13  ;  Loewy,  Inschriften griech.  Bildhauer^  No.  loi  ;  Kirchhoif,
Studien  sur  Gesch,  d.  griech,  AlphabetSy^  p.  142  sq.y  note;  Roberts,
Greek  Epigraphy^  No.  204,  pp.  215,  228  j^.)  This  gives  us  approxi-
mately the  date  of  the  artists,  and  consequently  of  the  Argive  trophy  at
Delphi,  and  of  the  battle  of  Oenoe.  Now  we  know  that  after  the  breach
with  Sparta  at  Ithome,  the  Athenians  concluded  an  alliance  with  the
Argives,  who  were  then  at  enmity  with  the  Spartans  (Thucydides,  i.  102).
The  alliance  was  probably  concluded  towards  the  end  of  463  B.C.  (cp.
Busolt,  Griech.  Geschichte^  2.  p.  453  sqq.) ;  and  the  joint  victory  of  the
new  allies  over  the  Lacedaemonians  may  have  taken  place  not  long
after.  But  in  458  B.C.  the  Lacedaemonians  defeated  the  Athenians  and
Argives  at  the  battle  of  Tanagra  (Thucydides,  i.  108  ;  Paus.  i.  29.  9),
and  set  up  at  Olympia  a  conspicuous  trophy  of  their  victory  (Paus.  v.
10.  4).  It  is  a  plausible  conjecture  of  Prof.  C.  Robert's  that  the  proud
trophy  at  Olympia  was  the  reply  made  by  the  Lacedaemonians  to  the
monuments  at  Athens  and  Delphi  by  which  the  Athenians  and  Argives
had  commemorated  the  victory  of  Oenoe.  It  would  follow  that  the
battle  of  Oenoe  was  fought  and  the  picture  commemorating  it  was
painted  between  463  B.a  and  458  B.C.  See  C.  Robert,  in  Hemies^  25
(1890),  pp.  ^\2-^ii.  Other  writers  have  supposed  that  the  battle  of
Oenoe  was  fought  in  the  course  of  the  Corinthian  War  (395-387  B.c)
The  chief  ground  for  this  view  is  the  statement  of  Pliny  (iV.  H.  xxxiv.  50)
that  the  sculptor  Hypatodorus  flourished  in  Ol.  102  (372-369  B.C.)
But  the  inscription  referred  to  above  seems  to  prove  that  the  Hypato-
dorus who  worked  with  Aristogiton  at  the  Argive  trophy  at  Delphi  must
have  lived  about  a  century  earlier  than  the  date  assigned  to  Hypatodorus
by  Pliny.  Either,  therefore,  Pliny  was  mistaken  as  to  the  date  of  Hypato-
dorus, or  there  were  two  sculptors  of  that  name,  and  the  Argive  trophy  at
Delphi  was  executed  by  the  elder  of  the  two,  assisted  by  Aristogiton.
Moreover,  on  the  view  that  the  battle  of  Oenoe  took  place  in  the
Corinthian  War  (395-387  B.C.),  the  picture  of  it  in  the  Painted  Colonnade
must  have  been  painted  many  years  after  the  other  wall-paintings  in  that
building,  which  were  executed  by  Polygnotus  and  his  contemporaries.
But  it  does  not  seem  natural  that  one  wall  should  have  been  left  blank
so  long  after  the  others  had  been  covered  with  paintings.  Cp.  H.
Brunn,  Gesch.  d.  griech.  Kiinstier^  i.  p.  294  sq. ;  U.  Kohler,  in  Hermes
5  (1871),  p.  5  x^.;  E.  Curtius,  Griech.  Geschichte^  3.  p.  184  sq.\  C.
Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen,  2.  pp.  518-521.  As  to  Oenoe  in  Argolis,
where  the  battle  appears  to  have  been  fought,  see  ii.  25.  2  note.
There  were  two  townships  in  Attica  called  Oenoe,  one  near  Marathon
(see  note  on  i.  32.  3),  and  one  on  the  Boeotian  frontier  (Herodotus,  v.
74;  Thucydides,  ii.  18).     The  latter  seems  to  have  been  at  Myupoliy


CH.  XV  THE  PAINTED  COLONNADE  139

a  place  at  the  foot  of  Mt.  Cithaeron,  four  miles  south-east  of  Eleutherae,
where  there  are  extensive  vestiges  of  antiquity,  with  remains  of  walls.
See  A.  Milchh5fer,  *  Demenordnung  des  Kleisthenes,'  p.  32  ;  Leake,
Athens,  2.  p.  130  (who  identifies  the  ruins  of  Eleutherae  with  Oenoe,
and  places  Eleutherae  at  Myupolt).

15.  2.  Theseus  and  the  Athenians  fighting  the  Amazons.  This
painting  was  by  Micon  (see  above,  p.  134).  The  Amazons  were  depicted
on  horseback  (Aristophanes,  LysistrcUa,  678  sq.,  with  the  Scholium).
On  similar  representations  of  Amazons  on  red-figured  Greek  vases,  see
A.  Kliigmann,  <  Combattimento  di  Amazzoni  a  cavallo  sopra  i  vasi  di
stile  bello,'  Annali  delP  InstitutOy  39  (1867),  pp.  i\\'i2^,  A  fine
picture  of  a  fight  between  Greeks  and  mounted  Amazons,  from  a  Greek
vase,  is  given  in  Miss  Harrison's  Ancient  Athens,  p.  135.  Cp.  S.
Colvin,  'Paintings  on  the  Amazon  sarcophagus  of  Cometo,*  Journal
of  Hellenic  Studies,  4  (1883),  pp.  354-369.  As  to  the  expedition  of
Uie  Amazons  against  Adiens,  see  Plutarch,  Theseus,  26  sq.

Reinegg,  in  his  description  of  the  Caucasus,  reports  a  legend  of  the
Amazons  as  still  current  among  the  Circassians  in  his  day.  The
legend,  according  to  him,  was  this :  "  When  our  forefathers,  they  say,
still  dwelt  on  the  shores  of  the  Black  Sea,  they  had  often  wars  with  the
Emmetsh.  There  were  women  who  possessed  what  are  now  the
Circassian  and  Soanian  mountains,  as  well  as  the  whole  plain  as  far  as
Aghla-Kabak.  They  admitted  no  men  among  them,  but,  full  of  warlike
spirit,  associated  with  themselves  every  woman  who  cared  to  share  in
their  wanderings  and  to  join  their  heroic  guild."  At  last,  after  long
wars,  peace  was  made,  and  the  Amazons  became  the  wives  of  the
Circassians.  See  Reinegg,  Beschreibung  des  Kaukasus  (Gotha  and  St.
Petersburg,  1796),  i.  p.  238  j^.

Stories  of  nations   of  Amazons  have   been  reported   from  South

America  from  an  early  date,  and  Sir  Robert  Schomburgk  found  the

stories   still  widely  spread  among  the  Macusis  and  Arawaks  (Indian

tribes)  of  Guiana     The  origin  of  these  stories  has  been  variously  sought

in  the   warlike   character   of  the   women  of  some  Indian  tribes  (so

Schomburgk),  in  the  feminine  appearance  of  the  young  Indian  warriors

with  their  long  hair,  smooth  faces,  necklaces  and  bracelets  (so  Mr.  A.

R.  Wallace),  and  in  a  misunderstanding  of  the  native  word  Amasunu,

which  is  said  to  mean  "  a  torrent  or  roaring  mass  of  water,  and  was

applied  to  the  dangerous  bore  at  the  mouth  of  the  Amazon  "  (Dr.  D.  G.

Brinton).     See  R.  Schomburgk,  Reisen  in  BriHsch-Guicma,  2.  p.  329

W»  id,,  in  Journal  of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society,  15  (1845),  p.

65 ;  A  R.  Wallace,  Travels  on  the  Amcuson  and  Rio  Negro,  p.  343

(ed.  1889)  ;  von  Martins,  Zur  Ethnographic  Amerikci s  zumal  Brasiliens,

p.  I2^sqq,\   H.   H.  Smith,  Brazil,  pp.   573-585  ;  D.  G.   Brinton,  in

^  Americcut  Antiquarian  and  Oriental  Journal,  8   (1886),   p.   250.

On  the  tales  of  Amazons  in  ancient   and   modem   times  in   Europe,

Asia,  Africa  and  America,  see  Archiv  fiir  Anthropologic,  5  (1872),  pp.

220-225.

15.  2.  Themiscyra  was  taken  by  Hercules.    Cp.  i.  2.  i.    As  to
^^^se-paintings  illustrative  of  Hercules's  expedition  against  the  Amazons,


I40  THE  PAINTED  COLONNADE  bk.  i.  attica

see  £.  Petersen,  <  Ercole  e  le  Amazon!,'  AnnaltdelP  Institute^  56  (1884),
pp.  269-284.

15.  2.  a  picture  of  the  Qreeks  after  their  conqnest  of  nimn.
This  picture  was  by  Polygnotus.  It  is  said  that  among  the  Trojan  women
in  the  picture  Polygnotus  introduced  a  portrait  of  Cimon's  sister  Elpinice,
whose  lover  he  was.  She  was  represented  as  Laodice.  See  Plutarch,
Cimofif  4.  Laodice  appeared  also  in  Polygnotus's  great  picture  of  the
capture  of  Troy,  which  adorned  the  club-room  at  Delphi.     See  x.  26.  7.

15.  2.  the  kings  are  gathered  together  to  consult  etc  The
same  subject  was  depicted  by  Polygnotus  in  his  picture  of  the  capture
of  Troy  at  Delphi.  See  x.  26.  3.  Ajax's  outrage  on  Cassandra  is  often
depicted  on  vase-paintings.     See  note  on  v.  19.  5.

15.  3.  The  last  painting  depicts  the  combatants  at  Marathon.
This  picture,  the  most  £Eunous  in  the  gallery,  seems  to  have  been  a  joint
work  of  Micon  and  Panaenus.  See  above,  p.  1 34  s^.  From  Pausanias's
description  it  seems  that  the  picture  was  divided  into  three  sections  or
scenes  :  ( i )  the  Greeks  and  Persians  advancing  against  each  other ;  (2)
the  flight  of  the  Persians  ;  (3)  the  embarkation  of  the  Persians.

15.  3.  the  Boeotians  of  Plataea.  They  were  depicted  advancing
in  loose  order,  each  man  making  the  best  speed  he  could  ;  they  wore  the
Boeotian  helmets  ([Demosthenes,]  lix.  94,  p.  1377).  The  Persians
were  portrayed  weanng  trousers,  their  national  garb  (Persius,  Saf,  iii.  53
sg.)  ;  they  seem  to  have  been  represented  as  larger  men  than  the
Greeks  (see  above,  p.  135).

15.  3.  the  Phoenician  ships  etc.  When  the  Persians  were
throwing  themselves  into  their  ships  and  pushing  off,  an  Athenian
named  Cynegirus  laid  hold  of  one  of  the  ships  to  detain  it,  but  his  hand
was  severed  by  the  blow  of  an  axe  and  he  fell  (Herodotus,  vi.  14  ;  cp.
Justin,  ii.  9.  16-19;  Plutarch,  ParcUlelay  i;  pseudo- Plutarch,  Pro
nobilitate^  10;  Himerius,  Or.  ii.  21).  There  was  a  portrait  of  him  in
the  picture  ;  doubtless  he  was  represented  laying  hold  of  a  Persian  ship
(Aelian,  NaL  An,  vii.  38  ;  Lucian,  Jupiter  Tragoedus^  32  ;  Pliny,  A^.  H,
XXXV.  57  ;  cp.  Himerius,  Or,  x.  2).

15.  3.  tiie  hero  Marathon.  Cp.  i.  32.  4.  The  picture  of  him
in  the  great  battle-piece  is  alluded  to  by  Lucian  (Jupiter  Tragoedus^

32).

15.  3.  Theseus,  seeming  to  rise  ont  of  the  earth.  It  is  said  that
at  the  battle  of  Alarathon  not  a  few  Greeks  ^cied  they  saw  the
phantom  of  Theseus,  clad  in  armour,  charging  at  their  head  against
the  Persians  (Plutarch,  Theseus^  35).  For  other  stories  of  phantom
warriors  in  battle,  see  x.  23.  2  note.  For  examples  of  figures  rising  out
of  the  earth  on  monuments  of  ancient  art,  see  Stephani,  in  Compte
Rendu  (St.  Petersburg),  for  1859,  p.  51  sq,

15.  3.  the  people  of  Marathon were  the  first  to  regard

Hercnles  as  a  god.    Cp.  i.  32.  4.

15.  3.  the  most  conspicuous  in  the  painting  are  Oallimachns,

Miltiades  etc.     The  figures  of  the  leaders  on  both  sides  were

real  likenesses,  not  ideal  or  fiauiciful  portraits.  Pliny  mentions  this  to
show  the  perfection  which  the  art  of  painting  had  reached  in  Panaenus's


CH.  XV  THE  PAINTED  COLONNADE  141

time ;  he  specifies  portraits  of  Miltiades,  Callimachus,  and  Cynegirus
on  the  Athenian  side,  and  of  Datis  and  Artaphemes  on  the  Persian
side  (iV.  H,  xxxv.  57).  Callimachus  was  slain  at  the  ships  (Herodotus,
vi.  114;  qp.  Plutarch,  Parallela^  i).  His  portrait  in  the  picture  is
referred  to  by  Himerius  (C?r.  x.  2)  and  Aelian  {Nat  An,  vii.  38).
Miltiades  was  easily  recognised  though  there  was  no  inscription  to
identify  him ;  for  he  was  represented  in  front  of  all  the  other  Athenian
generals,  extending  one  hand  in  the  direction  of  the  enemy  and  cheering
the  Greeks  on  (Aeschines,  iii.  186,  with  the  Scholium,  p.  347,  ed.
Schultz;  Aristides,  Or,  xlvi.  vol.  2.  p.  232,  ed.  Dindorf;  Schol.  on
Aristides,  vol.   3.  p.   566,  ed.   Dindorf;    Cornelius  Nepos,   Miltiades^

vi.  3)-

Another  portrait  in  the  painting  seems  to  have  been  that  of  Aeschylus  ;
for  elsewhere  (i.  21.  2)  Pausanias  remarks  that  the  statue  of  Aeschylus  in
the  theatre  of  Dionysus  was  executed  much  later  than  the  painting
of  the  battle  of  Marathon,  a  remark  which  implies  that  the  painting
contained  a  portrait  of  the  poet.  Another  portrait  in  the  picture  was
that  of  Epizelus  (Aelian,  Var,  Hist  vii.  38),  who  was  said  to  have  been
mysteriously  struck  blind  by  the  sight  of  a  phantom  in  the  battle
(Herodotus,  vi.  1 1 7  ;  he  is  called  Polyzelus  by  Plutarch,  Parallela^  i ,
and  by  Suidas,  s,v,  ^Imrias).  A  faithful  dog,  who  accompanied  his
master  to  the  battle,  had  also  the  honour  of  a  place  in  the  picture
which  commemorated  the  victory  (Aelian,  Lc)

15.  3.  a  hero  called  Echetliis  etc.     See  i.  32.  5.      Another  hero
to  whom  Micon  is  said  to  have  given  a  place  in  the  picture  of  the  battle
was  Butes  ;  only  his  helmet  and  one  eye  were  visible,  the  rest  of  him
was  hidden  by  a  mountain  ;  his  name  was  inscribed  beside  him.      See
Zenobius,    iv.    28 ;    Proverb,   e   Cod.   BodUiano^    Nos.    224,    492,    in
Paroemiographi  Grcuci^  ed.  Gaisford,  pp.  22,   57  5q.\  cp.  Suidas,  s.v,
BSiTrov  rj  Bovrqs  ;  Hesychius,  s.v.  Bovn;s.     It  has  been  suggested  that
Butes  appeared  in  the  picture  of  the  battle  of  the  Amazons  rather  than
in  that  of  the  battle  of  Marathon.     Zenobius  certainly  only  says  that
Butes  was  depicted  "  among  the  combatants  in  the  colonnade  "  ;  but  con-
sidering that  the  fame  of  the  latter  picture  overshadowed  that  of  all  the
rest  in  the  Painted  Colonnade,  an  expression  like  "  the  battle-piece  in
the  Colonnade "  could  hardly  but  refer  to  the  picture  of  the  battle  of
Marathon.       It  has  been  conjectured  also  that  the  Butes  of  the  picture
was  not  the  hero  (cp.  i.  26.  5  note),  but  the  Argonaut  of  that  name
(Hyginus,  Fab.  14  ;  Apollonius  Rhodius,  i.  95  ;  ApoUodorus,  i.  9.  16),
and  that  the  picture  in  which  he  appeared  was  Micon's  painting  of  the
Argonauts  in  the  sanctuary  of  the  Dioscuri  (Paus.  i.  18.  i).     This  is  the
view  which  O.  Jahn  {Archdologische  Aufsdtse^   p.   19,  note  13),  H.
Brunn  {Gesch,  d,  griech.  Kiinstler^  2.  p.  23),  and  Professor  C.  Wachs-
mnth  {J)ie  Stadt  Athen^  2.  p.  509,  note  3),  are  inclined  to  adopt.     But
there  seems  no  sufficient  reason  for  rejecting   the  express   statement
of  Zenobius  that  Butes  was  depicted  '*  among  the  combatants  in  the
colonnade."

15.  4.  flhields taken  from  the  Sdoniami  and  their  allies.

Scione  revolted  from  Athens  in  423  B.C.,  but  in  421  B.C.  it  was  taken


142  STATUE  OF  SOLON  bk.  i.  attica

by  the  Athenians,  who  put  the  men  to  the  sword  and  sold  the  women
and  children  into  captivity  (Thucydides,  iv.  120,  v.  32).  During  the
siege  of  Scione  some  allied  troops  succeeded  in  breaking  through  the
Athenian  lines  and  reinforcing  the  garrison  (Thucydides,  iv.  131).
They  doubtless  shared  the  fate  of  their  friends,  and  their  shields,  as  we
learn  from  Pausanias,  graced  the  Painted  Colonnade.

15.  4-  the  Lacedaemoxiiaiui  who  were  taken  in  the  island  of
Spliacteria.  The  Lacedaemonians  captured  in  Sphacteria  in  425  B.C
numbered  292  (Thucydides,  iv.  38).  Dio  Chrysostom  mentions  their
shields  along  with  the  sword  of  Mardonius  as  among  the  glories  of
Athens  {Or.  ii.  vol.  i.  p.  27,  ed.  Dindorf).  Among  these  Lacedaemon-
ian shields  was  probably  that  of  the  gallant  Brasidas,  which  he  lost
while  leading  the  attack  on  the  Athenian  entrenchments  at  Pylus ;  it
adorned  the  trophy  which  the  Athenians  set  up  after  repulsing  the
attack  (Thucydides,  iv.  12  ;  Diodorus,  xii.  62  ;  Plutarch,  De  gloria
Athemensium^  7).

16.  I.  bronze  statues  of  Solon  etc.  The  bronze  statue  of  Solon
in  the  market-place  is  mentioned  also  by  Demosthenes  (xxvi.  24,  p.  807)
and  Aelian  ( Var,  Hist,  viii.  1 6).

16.  I.  Selencns fled  to  Ptolemy.     See  Diodorus,  xix.  55  ;

Appian,  Syriac.    53.     His   flight  to  Egypt  took  place  in   316   B.C
(Droysen,  Gesch,  d,  Hellenismusy  ii.   i.  p.  312  ;  Thirlwall,  History  of
Greece^  7.  p.  308).

16.  I.  lie  vanquished  the  army  of  Antigonns  etc  This  was  in
the  battle  of  Ipsus.     See  i.  6.  7  note.

16.  I.  Selencns  took  him  prisoner.    See  i.  10.  2  note.

16.  2.  he  was  assassinated  by  Ptolemy  etc.  Cp.  x.  19.  7.  On
the  assassination  of  Seleucus  by  Ptolemy,  sumamed  Thunderbolt,  in  281
B.C.,  see  Appian,  Syriac.  62  sq, ;  Justin,  xvii.  2.  3  sq.  ;  Memnon,  Frag.
1 1  {Frag.  Hist.  Graec.  ed.  Miiller,  3.  p.  533  sq.) ;  Pliny,  N.  H.v\.  "^x  \
Orosius,  iii.  23.  63  sq.  ;  Droysen,  Gesch.  d.  Hellenismus^  ii.  2.  p.  329
sq.  ;  Thirlwall,  Hist,  of  Greece^  8.  p.  51.

16.  2.  the  guards.  Literally  "the  kings"  (rots  ^(uriXcurtv}.
I  have  adopted  Kayser's  suggestion  {Zeitschrift  fUr  die  Alterthums-
wissenschafty  6  (1848),  p.  499)  that  "the  kings"  is  here  a  compli-
mentary title  given  to  the  Life  Guards  or  Household  troops  (the  French
Maison  du  Rot).  They  may  have  been  recruited  from  petty  chieftains
and  men  of  good  birth,  and  it  may  have  been  thought  advisable  to
humour  their  pride  with  a  high-sounding  title.  The  English  Life
Guards  were  originally  recruited  largely  from  men  of  good  family,  and
were  always  addressed  as  "  Gendemen  of  the  Life  Guards  "  (Macaulay,
Hist,  of  England^  ch.  iii.;  cp.  Scott,  Old  Mortality y  ch.  vi.)  But  in  the
other  passage  on  which  Kayser  rests  this  interpretation  (Arrian,  in
Photius,  BibliothecOy  p.  7 1  a,  ed.  Bekker)  the  expression  "  the  kings  "
refers  to  the  actual  kings  Philip  Arrhidaeus  and  the  youthful  Alexander,
son  of  Alexander  the  Great  and  Roxana,  as  my  friend  Mr.  W.  Wyse  has
pointed  out  to  me.

16.  2.  venturing  to  give  battle  to  the  Gauls he  was  slain

by  them.      Ptolemy  Thunderbolt  was  defeated  and  slain  by  the  Gauls


CH.  XVII  ALTAR  OF  MERCY  143

in  280  B.C.  See  Memnon,  Frag.  14  {Frag,  Hist,  Graec,  ed.  Miiller,  3.
P-  534)  J  Justin,  xxiv.  5.  1-7  ;  Polybius,  ix.  35.  4  ;  Eusebius,  Chronic.
vol.  I.  p.  235,  ed.  Sch5ne;  Droysen,  Gesch,  d,  Heilenismus^  ii.  2.  p.
343  ^9*  ;  Thirlwall,  History  of  Greece^  8.  p.  57  sq.

16.  3.  he  sent  back  to  the  Milesians  at  Branchidae  the  bronze
Apollo  etc.  See  viii.  46.  3  note  ;  and  as  to  the  image,  see  ii.  10.  5  ;
ix.  10.  2.     As  to  the  temple  at  Branchidae,  see  note  on  vii.  5.  4.

16.  3.  he  founded  Selenda  on  the  river  Tigris.  The  decline  of
Babylon  dated  from  the  foundation  of  Seleucia,  to  which  Seleucus  and
his  successors  transferred  the  seat  of  government.  In  the  time  of
Strabo,  at  the  beginning  of  our  era,  Seleucia  was  larger  than  Babylon,
the  greater  part  of  which  lay  desolate.  See  Strabo,  xvi.  p.  738.  Pliny
puts  the  population  of  Seleucia  at  600,000,  and  says  that  its  territory
was  the  most  fertile  in  all  the  east  {N,  H.  y\,  122).  In  the  time  of
Josephus  the  inhabitants  of  Seleucia  were  mostly  Greeks,  mixed  with
many  Macedonians  and  not  a  few  Syrians  {Antiquit.  Jud,  xviii.  9.  8).
All  these  writers  mention  the  foundation  of  Seleucia  by  Seleucus.
Anmiianus  Marcellinus  (xxiii.  6.  23)  calls  it  "  an  ambitious  work  of
Seleucus."  Tacitus  (Ann,  vi.  42)  speaks  of  it  as  a  "  powerful  city,  girt
with  walls,  and  not  sunk  in  barbarism,  but  mindful  of  its  founder
Seleucus."

16.  3.  left  standing  both  the  walls  of  Babylon  and  the  sanctu-
ary of  BeL  Cp.  iv.  23.  10;  iv.  31.  5  ;  viii.  33.  3,  with  the  notes  on
this  last  passage.  As  to  Bel  ( =  Baal)  cp.  note  on  i.  1 4.  7  *  Heavenly
Aphrodite.'

17.  I.  an  altar  of  Mercy.     If  we  may  trust  Statius,  whose  de-
scriptions of  Greece  seem  to  be  accurate  (see  note  on  ix.  19.  6),  this
altar  stood  in  a  grove  of  laurels  and  olives.      There  was  no  image
beside  it     No  incense  was  burnt  and  no  blood  shed  on  the  altar.     But
offerings  of  hair  and  clothes  hung  beside  it,  and  ribbons  were  tied  to
the  laurel  trees.     See  Statius,  Theb,  xii.  481-505.      The  first  writer,
apparently,  who  speaks  of  the  altar  is  ApoUodorus,  who  flourished  about
140  RC.  {Bibl,  ii.  8.  i,  iii.  7.  i).     Later  writers  mention  it  frequently.
See  Diodorus,  xiii.  22.  7  ;  Philostratus,  Vit,  Soph,  ii.  12.  3  ;  id,y  Epist,
13  and  39  ;  Sextus  Empiricus,  ^^z/.  McUhematicoSy  ix.  187,  p.  430,  line
7  sq,y  ed.    Bekker;    Lucian,   Timon^  42;  id,y  DemonaXy   57;  id, ^  Bis
Accusatus,  21  ;  Seneca,  Controvers,  x.  5.  10,  p.  497,  ed.  H.  J.  Miiller;
Libanius,  ed.  Reiske,  i.  p.  463  ;  /</.,  4«  PP»  253,  257,  259  ;  Longinus, '  De
inventione,'  in  Rhetores  Graed^  ed.  Walz,  9.  p.  550;  Sopatrus,  Sioipca-ts
(rfTruidrtoVy  in  Rhet.  Graea\  ed.  Walz,  8.  p.  210  ;  Theophilus  Antecessor,
Paraphrasis  Graeca  Institut,  Caesar, y  lib.  i.  tit.  ii.  vol.   i.  p.  17  ^^.  ed.
G.  0.  Reitz ;  Zenobius,  i.  30;  /V/.,  ii.  61  ;  Schol.  on  Sophocles,  Oed,
Col,    260 ;     Schol.    on    Aristophanes,    KnightSy     11 5 1  ;     Schol.    on
Demosthenes,  ii.  6,  p.   19;   Schol.  on  Aeschines,  ii.  15,  p.  286,  ed.
Schultz.     It  is  also  mentioned  in  a  late  Greek  inscription  found  in  the
Odeum  of  Herodes  Atticus  at  Athens  (C  /.  A,  iii.  No.  1 70  ;   Kaibel,
Epigrammata  Graecoy  No.  792).     It  is  said  that  after  the  war  of  the
Seven  against  Thebes,  Adrastus  fled  to  Athens  and  took  refuge  at  the
altar  of  Mercy  (ApoUodorus,  iii.  7.  i  ;  Zenobius,  i.  30).     Similarly,  the


144  ALTAR  OF  MERCY  bk.  i.  attica

children  of  Hercules,  pursued  by  Eurystheus  after  the  death  of  their
father,  are  said  to  have  taken  sanctuary  at  the  altar  of  Mercy  in  Athens
(Apollodorus,  ii.  8.  i  ;  Zenobius,  ii.  6i  ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Knights^
1 1 5 1  ;  Schol.  on  Demosthenes,  ii.  6,  p.  19).  According  to  one  tradition
it  was  the  children  of  Hercules  who,  grateful  for  the  protection  accorded
them  at  Athens,  founded  the  altar  (Statius,  Theb,  xii.  497  sq, ;  Philo-
stratus,  Epist.  39).  Diodorus  tells  us  (xiii.  22.  7)  that  the  Athenians
were  the  first,  and  Pausanias  here  tells  us  that  they  were  the  only,
Greek  people  who  set  up  an  altar  of  Mercy.  But  in  the  sanctuary  of
Aesculapius  at  Epidaurus  a  small  altar  has  been  found  with  an  in-
scription :  "  Hieroclos  (dedicated)  an  altar  of  Mercy  in  obedience  to  a
dream"  (*E<l)rf/i€ph  apxaioXoyiKrj,  iSS3}  P*  IS^)-

It  has  been  conjectured  that  the  altar  of  Mercy  may  have  been
identical  with  an  altar  of  Zeus  of  the  Market  which  is  thought  to  have
stood  in  the  market-place  (Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^  i.  p.  338,  line  32
sq. ;  compared  with  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Knights^  410 ;  CI.  A,  i.  No.
23,  line  5).  The  grounds  for  this  conjecture  are  (i)  that  Euripides  in
his  drama  The  Heraclids  (69  sqq.)  represents  the  children  of  Hercules
as  suppliants  of  Zeus  of  the  Market,  and  (2)  that  the  common  tradition
represented  them  as  taking  refuge  at  the  altar  of  Mercy  (see  above).
These  two  traditions  may  be  combined  by  supposing  that  the  altar  of
Mercy  was  identical  with  the  altar  of  Zeus  of  the  Market.  But  the
existence  of  this  latter  altar  is  not  well  attested.  The  exact  situation  of
the  altar  of  Mercy  in  the  market-place  is  not  known.  It  was  perhaps  near
the  Painted  Colonnade,  since  Pausanias  mentions  it  immediately  after
the  colonnade.     Cp.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen^  2.  pp.  436-440.

17.  I.  altars  of  Modesty,  of  Bumonr.  The  altar  of  Modesty
(Aidds)  stood  on  the  Acropolis,  near  the  temple  of  Athena  Guardian  of
the  City  (Polias).  Modesty  was  said  to  have  been  the  nurse  of  Athena.
See  Eustathius,  on  Homer,  //.  xxii.  451,  p.  1279,  lines  39-41  ;  Hesychius,
s.v.  At8ovs  ^(afws;  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^  i.  p.  355,  lines  14-16.
There  was  a  priestess  of  Modesty,  who  had  a  seat  reserved  for  her  in
the  theatre  of  Dionysus  (C  /.  A.  iii.  No.  367).  Cp.  Paus.  iii.  20.  10.
Aeschines  mentions  the  altar  of  Rumour  at  Athens  (i.  128)  and  says
that  public  sacrifices  were  offered  to  her  as  a  goddess  (ii.  145).  Her
altar  is  said  to  have  been  erected  after  the  battle  of  the  Eurymedon,
because  the  rumour  of  that  great  Athenian  victory  had  reached  Athens
the  same  day  (Schol.  on  Aeschines,  i.  128,  p.  277,  ed.  Schultz).

17.  2.  the  gymnasium  of  Ptolemy.  Pausanias  has  now  quitted
the  market-place.  The  gymnasium  of  Ptolemy,  which  Pausanias  tells
us  was  not  far  from  the  market-place,  probably  stood  to  the  east  or
north  of  it.  For  a  Greek  gymnasium,  unlike  the  building  to  which  we
now  give  that  name,  was  a  spacious  edifice  with  open  courts  for  the
practice  of  running  and  leaping ;  and  room  for  such  a  structure  could
hardly  have  been  found  to  the  west  or  south  of  the  market-place  on
account  of  the  rise  of  the  ground.  A  number  of  inscriptions  relating  to
the  discipline  and  training  of  the  Athenian  lads  {ephebi)  have  been
found  at  the  Colonnade  of  Attains  which,  as  we  have  seen  (p.  55  sq\
enclosed  the  market-place  on  the  north-east     These  inscriptions  re-


CH.  XVII  GYMNASIUM  OF  PTOLEMY  145

peatedly  mention  the  Ptolemaeum  or  gymnasium  of  Ptolemy  (C  LA,  ii.
No.  468,  line  25  ;  tt£,  No.  471,  line  19  ;  i<L^  482,  line  50)  ;  and  if,  as  is
probable,  they  were  set  up  in  it,  we  may  suppose  that  the  Ptolemaeum
was  somewhere  to  the  east  or  north  of  the  Colonnade  of  Attalus.
Pausanias's  statement  that  the  gymnasium  was  beside  the  Theseum  is
confirmed  by  Plutarch  {Theseus^  36) ;  but  as  the  site  of  the  Theseum  is
itself  uncertain,  this  does  not  help  us  to  determine  the  site  of  the
gymnasium.

The  founder  of  the  gymnasium  was  probably  Ptolemy  Philadelphus
(285-247  B.C)  The  building  included  a  library  to  which  the  lads  con-
tributed a  number  of  volumes  (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  468,  line  25  ;  ;V/.,  No.
482,  line  50).  It  seems  indeed  to  have  been  specially  used  as  a  literary
institute,  for  the  lads  attended  lectures  on  philosophy  in  it  (C  /.  A,  ii.
No.  479,  line  19),  and  Cicero  represents  himself  and  his  friends  as
having  listened  to  a  discourse  by  the  philosopher  Antiochus  in  the  same
building  (De  finibuSy  v.  i.  i).  Cp.  Milchhofer,  *Athen,*  p.  169;
Lolling,  *  Athen,*  p.  319  ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  144  sqq.

17.  2.  Jnba  the  Libyan.  In  the  course  of  the  excavations  con-
ducted at  the  Colonnade  of  Attalus  in  1861  a  marble  head  was  found,
which  H.  Brunn  proposed  to  identify  as  the  head  of  the  statue  of
]uba  II.  here  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  The  head  is  life-size  and  of  fine
woikmanship.  It  represents  a  young  man  with  a  bandage  or  wrapper
vound  round  his  head  several  times.  Brunn  compared  it  with  a  head
of  a  young  man  found  at  Julia  Caesarea  in  Africa,  the  capital  of
Juba  II.  This  African  head  Brunn  had  previously  identified  as  that
of  Juba  II.  on  the  strength  of  its  resemblance  to  portraits  of  Juba  on
coins,  and  on  other  evidence.  He  thinks  that  the  head  found  in  the
Colonnade  of  Attalus  represents  the  same  man,  namely  Juba  II.  See
Anndi  delP  Institute^  29  (1857),  pp.  194-197,  with  Tav.  d*  agg.  E;
ai,  33(1861),  p.  412  sq,\  Bulletino  delP  Inst,  for  1861,  p.  42  j^.  ;
Cawadias,  rXvirra  rov  'E^vikov  Mowrciov,  No.  457.  Brunn  shared
the  belief,  then  general,  that  the  building  in  which  the  head  was  found
•as  the  gymnasium  of  Ptolemy.  It  is  now  known,  however,  to  be
the  G)lonnade  of  Attalus  (see  above,  p.  55).  This  weakens  Brunn*s
aigument  to  some  extent.  In  the  Colonnade  of  Attalus  was  found
the  inscribed  base  of  a  statue  of  King  Ptolemy,  son  of  Juba ;  it  was
erected  by  the  Athenian  people,  and  probably  stood  beside  or  near  the
statue  of  his  father  King  Juba  in  the  gymnasium  of  Ptolemy  (Stuart
and  Rcvett,  Antiquities  of  Athens^  3.  p.  i  ;  C  /.  G.  No.  360 ;  C,  L  A.
iii.  No.  555).

17.  2.  Ohrsrsipinui  of  SolL  Cicero  (De  finibusy  i.  11.  39)  and
Diogenes  Laertius  (vii.  7.  182)  mention  a  statue  of  Chrysippus  in  the
nttrket-place  (Ceramicus)  at  Athens.  It  represented  the  philosopher
Mated  with  his  hand  stretched  out,  but  so  puny  in  person  that  the
statue  was  almost  hidden  by  that  of  a  burly  cavalier  which  stood  beside
it    Whether  this  was  the  statue  seen  by  Pausanias  is  doubtful.

17.  2.  a  sanctuary  of  Thesens.  This  sanctuary  is  said  to  have
l>een  constructed  to  enshrine  the  bones  of  Theseus  which  were  brought
to  Athens  by  Cimon  after  the  Persian  war,  apparently  in  the  year  469

VOL  II  L


146  THE  THESRUM  BK.  L  attica

B.C.  (see  note  on  §  6).  It  became  one  of  the  most  sacred  and
famous  sanctuaries  in  Athens  (Plutarch,  De  exUiOy  \^ ;  Strabo,  ix.  p.
396).  It  enjoyed  the  privil^es  of  an  as>'lum  or  sanctuary  in  the  strict
sense ;  all  persons  in  danger  who  took  refuge  within  its  precinct  were
safe.  Runaway  slaves  especially  seem  to  have  fled  to  it.  See  Plutarch,
Theseus^  36;  Aristophanes,  Knights^  131 1  sq,^  with  the  Scholium;
Aristophanes,  Seasons^  quoted  by  Pollux,  vii.  2.  13;  Diodorus,  iv.  62 ;
Etymolog.  Afagnum^  s,w.  B^ctov  and  ^rffrtioTpi}!/ ;  Hesychius  and
Photius,  Lexicon^  s.v.  Giycrctbv;  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^  i.  p,  264,
line  2 1  jy. ;  Schol.  on  Aeschines,  iiL  13,  p.  3 1 8,  ed.  Schultz.  The
precinct  must  have  been  of  some  extent,  for  we  hear  of  troops  bivouack-
ing (Thucydides,  vi.  61)  and  of  Pisistratus  addressing  an  assembly  of
the  people  in  it  (Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens^  15}.  The  Council  of
the  Five  Hundred  occasionally  met  in  the  Theseum  (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.
48 1,  line  2  sq.\  and  it  is  said  that  trials  were  sometimes  held  in  it  (Photius,
Lexicon^  s.v.  6?^€iov;  Etymolog.  Afagnum^s.v.  Bi^<r«ov,  p.  451).  The
elections  by  lot  to  certain  magistracies  r^^lariy  took  place  in  the
Theseum,  the  officers  who  presided  at  the  elections  being  the  six  archons
called  Thesmothetae  or  *  lawgivers '  (Aeschines,  iii.  1 3,  with  the  SchoL
p.  318,  ed.  Schultz ;  Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens^  62).  We  hear
of  building  materials  being  fetched  from  the  Theseum  (C  /.  A.  ii.  834  b,
col.  i.  lines  9  sg.^  30  sq.^  65  sg.^  col.  ii.  lines  31,  55  sg.\  and  mention  is
made  of  treasures  of  Theseus  (C  /.  A.  i.  Nos.  210,  273),  which  were
probably  kept  in  his  sanctuary.  Festivals  were  held  in  honour  of
Theseus  ;  they  included  a  procession,  athletic  contests,  and  a  torch-race.
The  names  of  the  victors  in  the  contests  were  engraved  on  a  slab  of
stone  or  bronze  which  was  set  up  in  the  Theseum.  See  C.  L  A.  ii.  Nos.
444,  445,  446,  448,  471  ;  C.  I.  A.  iii.  Nos.  104,  107  ;  AcArtoy  aLp\fkUi-
Aoyticdi',  1889,  p.  \\^  sq.  Cp.  Plutarch,  Theseus^  36;  A.  Mommsen,
Heortologie^  p.  269  sqq.  The  priest  of  Theseus  had  a  seat  reserved  for
him  in  the  theatre  of  Dionysus  {C.  /.  A.  iii.  No.  41).

With  regard  to  the  position  of  the  Theseum,  Plutarch  says  that  it
was  situated  '*  in  the  middle  of  the  city,  beside  the  present  gymnasium  "
{Theseus^  36).  This  tallies  with  the  statement  of  Pausanias  that  the
Theseum  was  beside  the  gymnasium  of  Ptolemy,  which  was  not  far  from
the  market-place.  We  have  seen  some  ground  for  supposing  that  the
gymnasium  was  near  the  Colonnade  of  Attains,  either  to  the  north  or
east  of  it.  A  passage  in  Aristotle  seems  to  show  that  the  Theseum  was
not  far  from  the  ascent  to  the  Acropolis.  The  passage  in  question
narrates  how  Pisistratus  succeeded  in  disarming  the  Athenians  and
making  himself  master  of  Athens.  It  runs  thus  {Constitution  of  Athens^
15):  **  Having  caused  the  citizens  to  assemble  under  arms  in  the
Theseum,  he  (Pisistratus)  attempted  to  address  them.  But  he  purposely
lowered  his  voice  a  little ;  and  when  they  said  that  they  could  not  hear,
he  bade  them  ascend  to  the  gateway  of  the  Acropolis,  in  order  that  he
might  be  more  audible.  While  he  spun  out  his  harangue,  men
appointed  for  the  purpose  took  the  weapons  and  shut  them  up  in  the
buildings  near  the  Theseum,  after  which  they  went  and  told  Pisistratus.
He,  on  the  conclusion  of  his  speech,  informed  the  people  what  had  been


CH.  XVII  THE  THESE  UM  147

done  about  the  weapons,  and  told  them  not  to  be  surprised  or  dis-
couraged but  to  go  and  mind  their  own  affairs,  while  he  would  attend  to
the  business  of  government."    The  reading  in  the  manuscript  is  uncertain
in  one  part  of  this  passage ;  according  to  another  reading  ('AvaiC€/<^
instead  of  Brfrtit^)  Pisistratus  assembled  the  citizens  not  in  the  Theseum
but  in  the  Anaceum.      This  is  supported  by  a  parallel  passage  in
Polyaenus   (i.   21.   2),  who  describing  the  same  event  says  that  the
citizens  assembled  under  arms  in  the  Anaceum,  and  that  when  they  had
followed  Pisistratus  to  the  gateway  of  the  Acropolis  his  agents  "gathered
op  and  brought  down  the  weapons  to  the  sanctuary  of  Agraulus."     The
Anaceum  and  the  sanctuary  of  Agraulus  were  near  each  other  on  the
northern  slope  of  the  Acropolis  (see  i.  1 8.  i  sg,  with  the  notes).     Hence
if  we  adopt  the  reading  'AvaK€i<j>  in  the  passage  of  Aristotle,  it  will
follow  that  the  Theseum  was  situated  on  the  northern  slope  of  the
Acropolis,  not  far  from  the  Anaceum.    Cp.  C.  Wachsmuth,  in  Rheinisches
Museum^  N.  F.  46  (1891),    p.    327  sq.     Even  without  adopting  this
reading  we  may  to  some  extent  reconcile  the  accounts  of  Aristotle  and
Polyaenus  by  supposing  that  among  "  the  buildings  near  the  Theseum  "
mentioned  by  Aristotle  was  the  sanctuary  of  Agraulus  mentioned  by
Polyaenus.     From  this  again  it  would  follow  that  the  Theseum  lay  on
the  northern  slope  of  the  Acropolis  near  the  Anaceum  and  the  sanctuary
of  Agraulus.     In  any  case,  if  Aristotle  is  right,  there  was  a  Theseum  at
Athens  long  before  Cimon  brought  back  the  supposed  bones  of  Theseus
to  Athens  in  469  B.C

Thus  the  evidence  of  Aristotle,  taken  in  connexion  with  that  of
Pansanias  and  of  the  inscriptions  found  in  the  Colonnade  of  Attains,
points  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Theseum  stood  somewhere  between
the  Colonnade  of  Attains  and  the  north-western  foot  of  the  Acropolis,
pethaps  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  ruined  chapel  of  Joanna.

An  attempt  has  been  made  to  determine  the  position  of  the  Theseum
in  another  way.  Demosthenes  says  in  one  passage  (xviii.  129,  p.  270)
titttTromes,  the  father  of  Aeschines,  was  a  slave  of  a  certain  Elpias,
who  kept  a  school  beside  the  Theseum ;  and  in  another  passage  (xix.
249)  p.  419)  Demosthenes  says  that  Aeschines's  father  taught  a  school
beside  the  sanctuary  of  the  Physician  Hero.  It  seems  natural  to  sup-
pose that  in  these  two  passages  Demosthenes  is  referring  to  the  same
period  in  Tromes's  life  when  he  was  an  usher  in  the  school  of  Elpias  ;
^  if  this  is  so,  it  follows  that  the  Theseiun  was  near  the  sanctuary  of
Ae  Physician  Hera  This  was  the  view  taken  by  Apollonius  in  his  life
rf  Aeschines ;  for,  evidently  combining  the  two  statements  of  Demo-
sthenes, he  says  that  the  father  of  Aeschines  **  was  originally  a  slave  and
^ght  letters  with  fetters  on  his  legs  beside  the  Theseum  and  the  shrine
rfthe  Physician"  {Biographi  Graeci^  ed.  Westermann,  p.  265).  Now,
two  inscriptions  relating  to  the  Hero  Physician  and  his  sanctuary  have
been  found  at  Athens  in  Athena  Street  opposite  the  fountain  of  Boreas.
One  of  these  inscriptions  (C  /.  A,  ii.  403)  contains  a  dedication  to  the
Hero  Physician  by  a  certain  Eucles,  followed  by  a  decree  of  the  Council
^  Five  Hundred  ordering  that  a  commission  be  appointed  to  manufac-
ture a  jug  for  the  Hero  Physician  out  of  some  of  the  petty  silver  offer-


148  THE  THESEUM  bk.  i.  attica

ings  in  his  shrine,  and  providing  that  the  names  of  the  persons  who  had
dedicated  the  silver  offerings  which  were  to  be  used  in  making  the  jug
should  be  engraved  on  a  slab  of  stone  and  set  up  in  the  sanctuary.
The  inscription  concludes  with  a  list  of  these  petty  offerings,  the  names
of  their  dedicators,  the  weight  of  silver  used  in  making  the  jug,  the
expense  of  making  it,  and  the  sum  paid  for  cutting  the  inscription  on
the  stone.  Among  the  petty  offerings  used  up  in  making  the  jug  are
silver  eyes,  legs,  and  a  hand,  doubtless  dedicated  by  persons  who
ascribed  to  the  Hero  Physician  the  cure  of  corresponding  members  of
their  own  bodies.  The  other  inscription  (C  /.  A.  ii.  No.  404)  contains
a  decree  of  the  Council  of  Five  Hundred  ordering  that  some  new  vessels
be  made  for  service  in  the  sanctuary  of  the  Hero  Physician  to  replace
others  which  were  old  and  worn  out  The  two  inscriptions  are  pub-
lished with  notes  by  Prof.  G.  Hirschfeld  in  Hermes^  8  (1874),  pp.
350-360.  As  the  stones  on  which  these  two  inscriptions  are  carved  are
large  and  heavy,  it  has  been  conjectured  that  the  sanctuary  in  which
they  were  originally  set  up  cannot  have  been  fiu*  from  the  spot  where
they  were  found.  If  so,  the  sanctuary  of  the  Hero  Physician  must  have
been  near  the  fountain  of  Boreas  in  Athena  Street,  to  the  north  of  the
modem  Hermes  Street,  at  a  considerable  distance  north  of  the  so-
called  Colonnade  (more  properly  Gymnasium)  of  Hadrian  (see  note  on
i.  18.  9).  It  would  follow  that  the  Theseum,  being  near  the  sanctuary
of  the  Hero  Physician,  would  also  have  to  be  looked  for  in  this  neigh-
bourhood. This  is  confirmed  by  an  inscription  containing  a  dedication
to  Theseus  which  Pittakis  copied  at  the  fountain  of  Boreas  (C  /.  A,  ii.
1 1 80;  Rangab^  Antiquith  HelUniqueSy  2.  p.  736,  No.  1059).  But
on  the  other  hand  the  evidence  of  Aristotle,  as  we  have  seen,  is  in
favour  of  placing  the  Theseum  much  further  south.  The  inscriptions
nriay  very  well  have  been  transported  from  their  original  sites.

The  Hero  Physician,  it  may  here  be  remarked,  has  sometimes  been
wrongly  confounded  with  Toxaris,  whose  tomb  was  not  far  from  the
Dipylum  on  the  left  of  the  road  to  the  Academy.  Toxaris  was  said  to
be  a  Scythian  who  died  at  Athens  and  was  worshipped  by  the  Athenians
as  a  hero  under  the  name  of  the  Stranger  Physician.  A  white  horse
was  regularly  sacrificed  at  his  tomb.  See  Lucian,  Scytha^  i  sq.  ;  L.  v.
Sybel,  *  Toxaris,'  Hermes^  20  (1885),  pp.  41-55.  The  original  name  of
the  Hero  Physician,  on  the  other  hand,  was  said  to  be  Aristomachus ;
he  was  buried  at  Marathon  beside  the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus,  and  was
revered  by  the  natives  of  the  district  See  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^  i .
p.  262,  line  16  sqq.  ;  cp.  SchoL  on  Demosthenes,  xix.  249,  p.  419.

Some  of  the  inscriptions  relating  to  the  Theseum  (C  /.  A,  ii.  Nos.
444,  445,  446)  were  found  at  the  chapel  of  St.  Demetrius  Katephores,
and  as  they  contain  a  provision  that  copies  of  them  were  to  be  set  up  in
the  Theseum,  it  might  be  inferred  that  the  Theseum  stood  at  or  near
the  spot  where  the  inscriptions  were  found.  The  chapel  of  St  Deme-
trius Katephores,  which  has  been  removed,  stood  about  half-way
between  the  Metropolitan  Church  and  the  north-eastern  foot  of  the
Acropolis,  at  the  spot  where  the  maps  now  mark  the  Diogeneum  or
gynmasium  of  Diogenes  (cp.  Plutarch,  Quaest  Conviv.  ix.  i.  i),  on  the


CH.  XVII  THE  THESEUM  149

strength  of  a  number  of  inscriptions  relating  to  the  gymnasium  which
have  been  found  there  (see  E.  Curtius,  Stctdtgeschichte^  p.  Ixxxv.)  But
the  evidence  of  Pausanias  is  against  placing  the  Theseum  so  far  to  the
east  and  at  such  a  distance  from  the  market-place.  It  would  seem  that
the  stones  which  contain  the  inscriptions  were  carried  thither  to  help
in  building  the  Frankish  wall,  which  is  commonly  called  the  wall  of
Valerian.     See  Milchhofer,  *Athen,'  p.  173  sq,

A  scholiast  on  Aristophanes  (Eccles,  685  sq,)  states  that  the
Theseum  was  beside  the  Royal  Colonnade.  But  this  statement  of  the
scholiast  seems  to  be  a  mere  unwarrantable  inference  of  his  own  from
the  passage  of  Aristophanes  on  which  he  is  commenting ;  he  supposes
that  the  Theseum  was  a  colonnade,  which  it  certainly  was  not.

The  Theseum  we  have  been  discussing  was  not  the  only  sanctuary
of  Theseus  at  Athens.     This  appears  from  the  terms  in  which  Thucy-
dides  refers  to  it ;  he  speaks  of  it  as  "  the  Theseum  in  the  city  "  (vi.  61 ),
deariy  implying  that  there  was  at  least  one  other  Theseum  outside  the
city  proper.      That  there  was  another  Theseum  between  or  near  the
Long  Walls  is  made  certain  by  a  passage  in  Andocides  (i.  45),  where  it
is  said  that  during  the  alarm  excited  by  the  mutilation  of  the  Hermae
the  residents  in  the  city  were  ordered  to  assemble  under  arms  in  the
market-place,  while  the  residents  between  the  Long  Walls  were  to  gather
in  the  Theseum,  and  the  residents  in  Piraeus  were  to  muster  in  the
market-place  of  Hippodamus.     It  is  clearly  out  of  the  question  that  the
Theseum  here  mentioned  by  Andocides  should  have  been  the  famous
one  which,  as  Plutarch  says  {Theseus^  36),  stood  in  the  heart  of  the
city.     The  Theseum  between  or  near  the  Long  Walls  may  be  the  one
which,  as  we  learn  from  an  inscription  (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.   1059),  was
fiumed  out  by  the  corporation  of  Piraeus  along  with  other  sacred  pre-
cincts.    If  this  identification  is  correct,  the  precinct  was  more  probably
outside  of,  than  between,  the  Long  Walls ;  for  in  the  inscription  it  is
stipulated  that  the  tenants  of  the  precincts  shall  not  grow  com  on  more
than  one-half  of  the  sacred  lands,  and  that  no  timber  or  earth  shall  be
removed  by  them  from  the  Theseum.     This  implies  that  the  precinct  of
the  Theseum  was  of  some  extent     Professor  Milchhdfer  proposes  to
identify  it  with  a  large  quadrangular  enclosure  on  a  spur  which  projects
northward  into  the  plain  from  the  hill  of  Munychia.     The  enclosure,
about  58  to  60  metres  long  from  east  to  west,  is  formed  by  blocks  of
conglomerate  stone  set  upright  in  rows.     There  are  four  such  rows  on
the  west  side,  and  two  rows  on  each  of  the  other  sides.      See  Milch-
b6fer,  in  Kctrten  von  Attika^  Erlduternder  Texty  Heft  i.  p.  37  sq. ;  /Vi,
*  Piraeus,' in  Baumeister's  Denkmdiery  p.  1200.     Cp.  Leake,  Athens,  i.
pp.  392,  419  note  I  ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen,  i.  p.  335  ;  id,,
^  pp.  148,  193.     The  inscription  of  Roman  date,  already  repeatedly
v^cferred  to,  which  records  the  restoration  of  sanctuaries  in  Athens,
Piraeus,  etc,  makes  mention  of  "precincts  of  Theseus"  (*E<^/i€pis
«PX<uoAoyiici},   1884,  p.  170),  showing  that  there  were  at  least  tWo  of
^J«m.    According  to  Philochorus  (referred  to  by  Plutarch,  Theseus,  35)
'kcre  were  four  sanctuaries  of  Theseus  in  Athens  or  Attica ;  there  had
^^'nnerly  been  more,  but  Theseus  dedicated  all  the  rest  to  Hercules


150  THE  THESEUM  bk.  i.  attica

from  gratitude  for  having  been  released  by  him  from  the  lower  world
(cp.  §  4  note).

The  name  Theseum  has  been  traditionally  given  to  the  beautiful
Doric  temple,  the  best  preserved  of  all  Greek  temples,  which  stands
about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  to  the  north-west  of  the  Acropolis  at  Athens.
Before  examining  the  claims  of  the  temple  to  its  traditional  designation,
it  will  be  necessary  briefly  to  describe  it.

It  stands  on  an  eminence  which  projects  northward  into  the  plain
from  the  group  of  low  hills  (Areopagus,  Nymphaeum  hill,  etc.)  that  lies
to  the  west  of  the  Acropolis.  This  eminence  was  known  in  antiquity  as
the  Market  Hill  {Kolanos  Agaraios)^  since  it  bounded  the  market-place
on  the  west  (see  above,  p.  125).  The  temple  is  of  the  Doric  order,  and
of  the  class  called  peripteral  hexastyle,  Le,  it  is  surrounded  by  a
colonnade  and  has  six  columns  at  each  of  its  narrow  ends.  It  rests
upon  a  three-stepped  basement.  The  foimdations  and  the  lowest  of
the  three  steps  are  constructed  of  hard  Piraeic  limestone ;  the  two  upper
steps  and  the  temple  itself  are  built  of  white  Pentelic  marble.  The
temple  faces  about  eight  degrees  to  the  south  of  east.  It  measures  104
feet  in  length  by  45  feet  in  breadth  on  the  highest  step  of  the  basement.
The  number  of  columns  in  the  colonnade  is  thirty-four,  of  which  there  are
six  at  each  of  the  ends  and  thirteen  at  each  of  the  sides,  the  comer
columns  being  reckoned  twice  over.  The  columns  are  19  feet  high,
including  the  capitals,  and  vary  in  diameter  from  3  feet  5  inches  at  the
base  to  2  feet  7  inches  at  the  top.  They  are  thus  slenderer  than  those
of  the  Parthenon.  Each  column  is  composed  of  seven  drums  and  has
twenty  flutes,  the  depth  of  which  diminishes  towards  the  top.  The
entasis  or  swelling  of  each  column  in  the  middle  is  very  slight  The
intercolumniation  or  distance  between  the  colunms  is  5^  feet.

The  cella  or  core  of  the  temple  consists  of  a  central  chamber  or
wios  in  the  narrow  sense,  with  a  fore-chamber  {pranaos)  at  the  east  end
and  a  back-chamber  {ppisthodomos)  at  the  west  end.  The  fore-chamber
is  deeper  than  the  back-chamber,  and  this,  together  with  the  richer
sculptural  decoration  at  the  east  end,  proves  conclusively  that  the  east
end  was  the  front  of  the  temple.  Both  fore<hamber  and  back-chamber
opened  on  the  colonnade  through  a  pair  of  columns  between  antae^  as
the  pillar-like  terminations  of  the  side- walls  were  called.

All  round  the  outside  of  the  temple,  above  the  architrave,  runs  a
Doric  frieze  of  alternate  triglyphs  and  metopes.  The  metopes  are  68
in  number.  Of  these  only  eighteen  are  adorned  with  sculptured  reliefs,
namely  the  ten  at  the  eastern  end  of  the  temple,  and  the  eight  at  the
eastern  ends  of  the  north  and  south  sides  (four  on  the  north  side  and
four  on  the  south  side).

The  subjects  of  the  sculptures  in  the  ten  metopes  of  the  eastern
front  are  nine  of  the  labours  of  Hercules,  one  of  the  labours  being
represented  on  two  metopes.  These  labours  are,  beginning  with  the
south:  (i)  Hercules  and  the  Nemean  lion;  (2)  Hercules  and  the
Lemaean  hydra ;  (3)  Hercules  and  the  Cerynaean  hind  ;  (4)  Hercules
and  the  Erymanthian  boar;  (5)  Hercules  and  the  horse  of  Diomede  ;
(6)  Hercules  and  Cerberus  ;  (7)  Hercules  and  Hippolyta,  queen  of  the


CH.  XVII  THE  THESEUM  151

Amazons;  (8  and  9)  Hercules  and  the  triple-bodied  Geryon  ;  (10)
Hercules  and  one  of  the  Hesperides.  These  ten  metopes  are,  however,
much  damaged.  The  eight  metopes  on  the  north  and  south  sides  are
better  preserved.  They  represent  the  exploits  of  Theseus,  namely,  on
the  south  side  (beginning  at  the  east):  (i)  the  conquest  of  the
Minotaur ;  (2)  the  capture  of  the  bull  of  Marathon  ;  (3)  the  punishment
of  Sinis  ;  (4)  the  punishment  of  Procrustes  ;  on  the  north  side  (beginning
at  the  east) :  (5)  the  conquest  of  Periphetes  the  club-man  ;  (6)  the
wrestling  with  the  Arcadian  Cercyon ;  (7)  the  conquest  and  punishment
of  Sciron  ;  (8)  the  capture  of  the  Crommyan  sow.

In  addition  to  these  sculptured  metopes  there  is  a  sculptured  frieze

at  each  end  of  the  cellcu     The  arrangement  of  these  friezes  is  peculiar.

The  western  frieze  extends  simply  across  the  width  of  the  cella^  from  anta

to  onto.     But  the  eastern  frieze  is  prolonged  in  a  straight  line  beyond

the   cmta   on  each  side  so   as  to  cross  the  ambulatory  and  meet  the

epistyle  or  beams  surmotmting  the  colonnade.     The  west  frieze  is  about

25  feet  long  ;  the  east  frieze  is  about  37  feet  long.     The  subject  of  the

west  frieze  is  the  battle  between  the  Centaurs  and  Lapiths.     The  subject

of  the  east  frieze  is  a  battle  fought  in  presence  of  six  seated  deities,

wbo  are  divided  into  two  separate  groups  of  three  each.     The  battle

depicted  in  this  east  fneze  has  not  been  identified  with  certainty  ;  various

conjectural  explanations  of  it  have  been  offered.     Leake  thought  it  was

a  batde  of  the  giants,   because  some  of  the  combatants  are  hurling

rocks.     But  the  adversaries  of  the  giants  were  the  gods  ;  and  in  the

frieze  the  gods  are  seated  tranquilly  looking  on,  without  taking  part

m  the  fight     K.  O.  MtiUer  explained  the  battle  to  be  that  between

Theseus  and  the  rebel   Pallantids  (Plutarch,  Theseus^  13);  H.  Brunn

vgoed  that  it  represents  the  battle  fought  by  the  Athenians  against

Eorystheus  on  b^ialf  of  the  Heraclids  who  had  fled  from  Eurystheus

and  taken  refuge  at  Athens  (see  i.  32.  6  note).

AU  these  sculptures  are  in  their  places  ;  they  are  carved  out  of
Parian  marble.  (Miss  Harrison  says  that  the  friezes  are  of  Pentelic
ntaible.  But  this  seems  to  be  a  mistake.  See  Lepsius,  GrUchische
Marmarstudien^  p.  118.)  They  were  all  painted,  and  retained  traces  of
tbeir  colours  down  to  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century.  Leake
says:  "Vestiges  of  brazen  and  golden-coloured  arms,  of  a  blue  sky,
*»d  of  blue,  green,  and  red  drapery  are  still  very  apparent''  The
liQilding  itself,  or  at  least  large  portions  of  it,  was  also  painted ;  vestiges
of  odour  are  still  to  be  seen  in  places,  while  in  others  only  the  drawing
of  the  pattern  remains.  A  painted  foliage  and  maeander  pattern  may
^  seen  on  the  interior  cornice  of  the  peristyle,  and  painted  stars  on
the  cassettes  of  the  coffered  ceiling.  The  triglyphs  and  mutules  were
^  the  guttae  bright  red.  Coloured  restorations  of  a  capital  of  one
of  the  antae  and  of  the  cassettes  of  the  ceiling  are  given  by  Prof  G.
Semper  in  his  work,  Der  Stilf  i.  plates  i.,  v.,  and  vi.

The  sculptures  of  the  gables  have  disappeared  ;  that  they  existed  is
proved  by  the  traces  of  their  fastenings.

The  existing  sculptures  must  have  been  executed  contemporaneously
with  the  building  of  the  temple ;  for  they  are  so  fitted  in  that  they  must


152  THE  THESEUM  bk.  i.  attica

have  been  in  their  places  before  the  roof  was  put  on.  The  walls  of  the
temple  show  traces  of  having  been  coated  with  stucco,  probably  to
receive  paintings.  As  to  the  precise  date  when  the  temple  with  its
sculptures  was  erected,  opinions  differ.  All  are  agreed  that  it  is  a  work
of  about  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  Its  fine  proportions,  the
presence  of  the  optical  curves,  the  exquisite  finish  of  the  workmanship,
and  the  nature  of  the  materials,  all  prove  that  the  temple  belongs  to  the
age  of  Pericles.  But  whether  it  was  built  soon  before  or  soon  after  or
simultaneously  with  the  Parthenon,  is  disputed.  Formerly  the  general
view  was  that  the  temple  was  earlier  than  the  Parthenon ;  but  in  recent
years  opinion  has  veered  round,  and  architects  now  incline  to  hold  that
the  so-called  Theseum  is  the  later  of  the  two  temples,  mainly  because
it  is  supposed  to  exhibit  more  advanced  tendencies  to  lonicism  in
architectural  details.  This  is  the  opinion  of  Dr.  D5rpfeld  and  Mr.  P.
Grae£

The  conclusions  as  to  the  dates  of  the  two  temples,  drawn  firom  a
comparison  of  their  sculptures,  are  also  discrepant.  All  admit  that  the
resemblances  between  the  west  frieze  of  the  so-called  Theseum  and  the
metopes  of  the  Parthenon  are  so  dose  that  the  one  must  have  been  to
some  extent  modelled  on  the  other.  Take,  for  example,  the  figure
of  the  Centaur  who  is  heaving  up  a  wine-jar  to  hurl  it  at  a  prostrate
Lapith.  This  fig^e  occurs  both  on  the  frieze  of  the  Theseum  and  on
one  of  the  metopes  of  the  Parthenon.  But  which  was  the  original  and
which  the  copy  ?  The  answer  seems  supplied  by  the  observation  that
the  figures  on  the  frieze  are  broken  up  into  separate,  metope-like  groups,
loosely  connected  by  a  figure  thrown  in  here  and  there  to  give  an
artificial  unity  to  the  whole.  From  this  the  natural  conclusion  would
seem  to  be  that  the  sculptor  of  the  frieze  had  before  him  the  metopes
of  the  Parthenon  depicting  the  battle  between  the  Centaurs  and
Lapiths,  and  that  he  made  up  his  frieze  by  putting  together  into  a  single
battle-piece  the  scenes  which  were  separately  represented  in  the
metopes,  altering  the  figures  to  some  extent  and  adding  some  fresh  ones
to  link  the  whole  together,  but  not  so  skilfully  as  to  conceal  the  joinings.
The  opposite  conclusion,  it  is  true,  has  been  drawn  by  Mr.  A.  S.
Murray.  He  thinks  that  the  partial  separation  of  the  groups  on  the
frieze  suggested  to  the  sculptor  of  the  Parthenon  the  idea  of  employing
the  same  subjects  for  metopes.  But  this  view,  I  confess,  seems  to  me
forced  and  tmnatiual.

A  comparison  of  the  sculptured  metopes  of  the  so-called  *  Theseum '
with  the  similar  subjects  depicted  on  Attic  vase-paintings  seems  also  to
£&vour  the  later  date  of  the  *  Theseum.'  The  comparison  has  been  insti-
tuted by  Mr.  Walther  Miiller.  He  finds  that  the  metopes  of  the  'Theseum '
have  been  imitated  on  many  Attic  vases,  but  that  none  of  these  imita-
tions is  older  than  430  ac  The  conclusion  is  that  the  metopes  were
executed  not  much  before  that  year.  But  from  the  way  in  which  the
metopes  are  fitted  in  between  the  triglyphs,  we  know  that  they  must
have  been  placed  in  position  before  the  temple  was  roofed  (L.  Julius,  in
Annali  delP  Instituio^  50  (1878),  p.  204).  It  would  follow  that  the
'Theseum'   was   completed  little  if  at  all  before  430  B.C.     But  the


CH.  XVII  THE  THESEUM  153

Parthenon  was  built  between  447  B.C.  and  432  B.C.     See  note  on  i.

24.  5-

The  names  of  the  sculptors  who  adorned  the  temple  are  not  known.
From  the  style  of  the  metopes  Mr.  L.  Julius  has  argued  that  they  were
probably  executed  by  Myron  or  his  pupils.  He  bases  this  conclusion
on  the  multiplicity  and  variety  of  the  situations,  the  absence  of  drapery,
the  vigour,  vivacity,  and  truth  to  nature  of  the  nude  himian  figures  and
animals,  the  want  of  intellectual  expression  on  the  faces,  and  the  super-
ficial, somewhat  stiff,  archaic  treatment  of  the  hair  and  beards.  His
view  is  accepted  as  probable  by  Prof.  Overbeck  and  Mr.  A.  S.  Murray,
though  the  latter  is  of  opinion  that  the  sculptures  were  executed  rather
by  a  pupil  of  Myron  than  by  Myron  himself ;  for  "  they  may  have
his  &ults  and  peculiarities,  but  they  have  not  the  style  of  so  great  a
master."

The  temple,  though  on  the  whole  well  preserved,  has  sustained
some  damage  in  the  course  of  ages.  Lightning  has  shattered  a  portion
of  the  north-west  comer,  and  earthquakes  have  displaced  some  of  the
drums  of  the  columns.  The  interior  of  the  temple  was  altered  in
Byzantine  times  to  convert  it  into  a  church  of  St.  George.  The  ancient
roof  has  been  replaced  by  a  barrel-vault

It  remains  to  state  the  arguments  for  and  against  the  view  that  this
fine  Doric  temple  is  the  Theseum :    (I)  in  favour  of  the  view  that  it  is
the  Theseum  there  are  (i)  the  tradition  which,  for  some  centuries  at
least,  has  designated  the  temple  as  the  Theseum ;  (2)  the  evidence  of
the  eight  sculptured  metopes  representing  the  deeds  of  Theseus,  and  the
west  frieze  representing  the  fight  of  the  Centaurs  and  Lapiths,  at  which
Theseus,  according  to  the  legend,  was  present ;  and  (3)  the  traces  of  a
coating  of  stucco  on  the  inside  walls  of  the  temple ;  for  this  goes  to
prove  that  the  walls  were  embellished  with  paintings,  and  we  know  from
Pausanias  that  the  walls  of  the  Theseum   were   so   adorned.     With
regard  to  ( i ),  the  first  writer  in  modem  times  to  call  the  temple  the
Theseum  was  the  anonymous  author  of  a  Greek  tract  on  the  topography
of  Athens,  which  is  preserved  in  the  Paris  library,  and  seems  to  have
been  written  about  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century.     See  C.  Wachsmuth,
l>\t  Stadt  Athen^  i.  pp.  357,  743;  MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst  in  Atheny
^  (iS^3)»  P>   30  sqq.     Henceforth  the  temple  continued  to  bear  the
ume  of  the  Theseum  without  question  till  about  the  middle  of  the  nine-
teenth century,  when  Ludwig  Ross  disputed  its  claim  to  the  title  and
proposed  to  identify  it  with  the  temple  of  Ares   (Paus.    i.   8.  4),   a
designation  which  had  already  been  applied  to  the  temple  by  the  early
Italian  traveller  Cyriacus  of  Ancona  (C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen^
'•  PP-  358,  727).     This  brings  us  to

(11)  the  arguments  against  the  temple  being  the  Theseum:  (i)
Theseus  was  not  a  god  but  a  hero ;  hence  his  sanctuary  was  not  a
topic  but  a  herdony  or  hero's  shrine.  The  distinction  between  deities
^d  worshipful  heroes  was  a  sharp  one  in  Greek  religion  ;  only  a  deity
^  a  temple  {tuws) ;  a  hero  had  a  heroic  shrine  (herdon\  precinct
{Umeno5\  or  sanctuary  (hieron).  The  only  two  writers  who  speak  of
t^  Theseum  as  a  temple  are  Hesycbius  (5,v,  Oi^cSov)  and  the  author


IS4  THE  THESEUM  bk.  i.  attica

of  the  Etymologicum  Magnum  (p.  451,  5,v,  Oijo-ciov).  But  very  little
weight  can  be  attached  to  the  evidence  of  such  late  writers.  The
Theseum  is  called  a  sanctuary  (hieron)  and  a  sacred  close  (sikos)  by
Pausanias  (i.  17.  2  and  6),  a  hero's  shrine  {herdon)  by  Photius  {Lexicon,
s.v,  Brf(r€Lov)  and  an  anonymous  writer  in  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^  i.
p.  264,  line  2 1  ;  and  a  precinct  (Ununos)  by  Harpocration  and  Suidas
\s,v,  Brfo-etov)  as  well  as  on  an  inscription  (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  444).
Generally,  however,  it  was  called  simply  the  Theseum,  as  by  Aristo-
phanes {Knights,  131 2),  Thucydides  (vi.  61),  Demosthenes  (xviii.  129,
p.  270),  Aeschines  (iii.  13),  PixisioXX^  {Constitution  of  Athens,  15  and
62),  Diodorus  (iv.  62),  and  Plutarch  {De  exilio,  17).  Now,  whereas
Greek  temples  regularly  fronted  east,  it  would  seem  that  the  shrines  or
precincts  of  heroes  faced  west.  At  least  we  are  told  that  sacrifices  to
deities  were  offered  to  the  east,  sacrifices  to  heroes  to  the  west  (SchoL
on  Pindar,  Isthm.  iii.  no,  ed.  Bdckh)  ;  and  this  is  confirmed  by  the
precinct  of  the  hero  Pelops  at  Olympia,  which  has  been  found  to  open
to  the  south-west  (see  note  on  v.  13.  i ).  But  the  so-called  Theseum
at  Athens  is  a  regular  temple  with  its  front  to  the  east  (see  above).
It  must  therefore  have  been  dedicated  to  a  god,  not  to  a  mere  hero  like
Theseus.  (It  is  true  that  Diodorus,  iv.  62,  says  the  Athenians  honoured
Theseus  *'  with  god-like  honours  "  ;  but  this  expression  is  clearly  loose
and  incorrect.  Plutarch  rightly  describes  the  honours  paid  to  Theseus
as  heroic,  not  divine.     See  Plutarch,  Theseus,  35  ;  id.,  Cimon,  8.)

(2)  The  temple  in  question  belongs  by  its  style  to  the  age  of  Pericles
and  seems  to  be  later  than  the  Parthenon,  which  was  completed  about
432  B.C.  But  the  Theseum  was  constructed  in  the  age  of  Cimon  and
seems  to  have  been  begun  not  later  than  469  ac.  (see  note  on  L  17.  6).
It  follows  that  the  two  edifices  cannot  be  the  same.

(3)  The  evidence  of  Aristotle,  Plutarch,  and  Pausanias  as  to  the
situation  of  the  Theseum  is  against  identifying  it  with  the  temple  in
question,  and  is  in  favour  of  placing  it  to  the  east  of  the  market-place
and  the  north  of  the  Acropolis  (see  above,  p.  146  sq,)

(4)  The  argument  that  the  temple  must  be  the  Theseum  because
eight  of  the  metopes  and  one  at  least  of  the  friezes  represented  the
exploits  of  Theseus  is  met  by  showing,  as  L.  Ross  did,  that  the  subjects
sculptured  on  the  metopes  and  on  the  friezes  of  Greek  temples  had  no
necessary  relation  to  the  deities  of  the  temples.  Thus,  for  example,  the
Centaurs  of  some  of  the  Parthenon  metopes  have  no  connexion  with
Athena,  the  goddess  of  the  temple.  The  labours  of  Hercules  were
sculptured  on  the  metopes  of  the  temple  of  Zeus  at  Olympia  (see  v.
10.  9).

On  the  whole,  the  preponderance  of  evidence  is  against  the  view
that  the  so-K:alled  *  Theseum'  was  really  the  sanctuary  of  Theseus.
But  if  the  temple  in  question  was  not  the  Theseum,  to  what  god  was  it
dedicated  ?

Various  answers  to  this  question  have  been  given.  L.  Ross,  as  we
have  seen,  thought  that  the  temple  was  that  of  Ares  (see  i.  8.  4  note).
Another  theory,  advocated  by  Professor  C.  Wachsmuth  and  Professor
£.  Curtius,  identifies  the  temple  with  the  "  very  famous  sanctuary  of


CH.  XVII  THE  THESEUM  155

Hercules,  Averter  of  Evil,  in  Melite"  mentioned  by  a  scholiast  on
Aristophanes  (Frogs^  501  ;  cp.  Hesychius,  s,v.  €k  MeXinys  fuumylas ;
Zenobius,  v.  22).  The  so-called  ^Tbeseum'  certainly  seems  to
have  been  in  the  quarter  Melite  (see  note  on  i.  14.  6);  and  the  ten
metopes  on  the  eastern  front  illustrating  the  labours  of  Hercules  would
be  very  appropriate  in  a  temple  of  Hercules.  But  Pausanias  makes  no
mention  of  a  temple  of  Hercules  in  this  quarter,  and  it  is  very  unlikely
that  he  would  have  passed  over  without  notice  so  striking  and  beautiful
a  temple  as  the  so-called  *  Theseum.*  Professor  Curtius's  conjecture
(Siadtgeschichte^  p.  295),  that  Pausanias  purposely  omitted  to  mention
this  temple  of  Hercules  because  his  religious  feelings  as  an  Ionian
Greek  were  hurt  at  the  deification  of  Hercules,  can  hardly  be  taken  very
seriously.

Another  view,  adopted  by  Professors  U.  K6hler  and  Loeschcke,  and
now  by  Professor  Milchhofer  (Berliner  philolog,  Wochenschrift^  11
(1891),  p.  753  sq.\  is  that  the  temple  is  that  of  Paternal  Apollo  (see
Paus.  i.  3.  4  note).  But  the  temple  of  Paternal  Apollo  seems  to  have
been  in  the  market-place ;  and  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  market-
place extended  so  far  westward  as  to  include  the  eminence  on  which
the  <  Theseum '  stands.

It  is  enough  to  mention  the  theory  of  K.  Lange  (Haus  und  Halley
p.  67),  that  the  so-called  *  Theseum  *  is  the  sanctuary  of  Heavenly
Aplirodite  (Paus.  i.  14.  7),  and  the  view  of  Dr.  Dyer  that  it  may  have
been  the  sanctuary  of  the  Amazons  (as  to  which  see  Plutarch,  TheseuSy
27;  Diodorus,  iv.  28.  2  ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  j.z/. 'A/xa^dvcioi' ;  Har-
pocration,  s.v.  'Afm(6v€iov).

Lastly,  it  has  been  proposed  to  identify  the  so-called  *  Theseum  *  with
the  temple  of  Hephaestus  described  by  Pausanias  (i.  14.  6).  This  view,
first  advocated  by  Mr.  Pervanoglu,  has  been  accepted  by  H.  G.
Lolling,  Dr.  Ddrpfeld,  and  Miss  Harrison.  The  only  argument  in
favour  of  it  is  that  it  seems  best  to  harmonise  with  Pausanias's  accoimt
of  the  topography.  An  objection  to  this  view  is  that  in  the  sculptured
metopes  and  frieze  of  the  *  Theseum*  there  is  no  reference  to  Heph-
aestus. However,  as  we  have  seen,  the  sculptures  of  the  metopes  and
even  of  the  frieze  of  a  Greek  temple  appear  to  have  often  had  little  or  no
relation  to  the  god  of  the  temple.  It  was  otherwise  with  the  sculptures
of  the  gables  or  pediments ;  they  seem  generally  to  have  had  a  direct
reference  to  the  deity  of  the  temple ;  but  in  the  case  of  the  so-called
*  Theseum'  these  sculptures  have  disappeared.

On  the  whole,  the  view  which  identifies  the  so-called  *  Theseum  *
with  the  temple  of  Hephaestus,  though  it  is  not  free  from  difficulties,
seems  less  open  to  serious  objections  than  any  of  the  others.  U  may,
therefore,  be  provisionally  accepted.

On  the  Theseum  and  the  temple  which  has  so  long  gone  by  the  name  of  the
^^^tseum,  see  Stuart  and  Revett,  TAe  Antiquities  of  Athens ,  3.  pp.  i-io,  with
P)*tcs  L-xxiv.  ;  Dodwell,  I.  pp.  362-370 ;  Leake,  At  hens  ^  I.  pp.  498-512 ;  L
Ross,  Das  Theseion  und  der  Tempel  des  Ares  in  Athen  (Halle,  1852) ;  K.  O.
Mttller,  '  Die  erhobenen  Arbeiten  am  Friese  des  Pronaos  vom  Theseustempel  ru
^^^  Kunstarchaeologische  fVerhe,  4.  pp.   1-19;  MUller-Wieseler,  Denkmaler^


156  PAINTINGS  IN  THESEUM  bk.  i.  attica

I.  plates  xx.-xxL ;  Ulrichs,  'Spiegazione  de'  Monumenti  sul  Pronaos  del
Theseam,'  Annali  deW  Instituto,  13  (1S41),  pp.  74-83  (reprinted  in  German  in
\i\s  Ret'sen  und  Forschungen^  2.  pp.  135-147);  Dyer,  Anaent  Athens^  pp.  228-
233  ;  £.  Curtius,  Erlduternder  Text  der  suben  Karten^  p.  52  sq.\  id.^  Stadi-
geschichtff  pp.  120  sq,^  1 21  sq.^  136,  294-296;  C.  Botticher,  Bericht  uber  die
Untersiuhungen  auf  der  Akropolis  von  Aiken^  pp.  182-189;  id,,  in  Philologus,
Supplem.  3  (1867),  pp.  383-389;  P.  Pervanoglu,  'Das  Hephaesteion  in  Athen,'
Philohgus,  27  (i860),  pp.  660-672;  H.  Bninn,  'Die  Bildwerke  des  Theseion,'
Sitzungsberichte  der  philos,  philology  und  histor,  CL  d.  k.  bayer,  Akad.d,  fViss,  zu
MuHcAeftf  1874,  2.  pp.  51-65  (sammarised  in  Rerme  archhlcgique,  N.S.  29(1875),
pp.  395-404);  Aug.  Schultz,  De  Theseo  (Vratislaviae,  1874);  W.  Gurlitt,  Das
Alter  der  Bildwerke  und  die  Bauteit  des  sogenatmten  Theseion  in  Athen  ( Wien,
1875)  >  ^'t  Ueber  PcLusaniaSy  pp.  2841^.,  335  J<^. ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  DieStcuU  A  theft  ^
'•  PP>  357*365;  Monumenti  tnediti^  10  (1874-8),  plates  xliii,  xliv.,  Iviii.,  lix.  ;  L.
Julius,  '  Le  metopi  del  Tempio  di  Teseo  in  Atene,'  Annali  dell*  Institute,  49
(1877),  PP*  92-95  ;  <^»  50  (1878),  pp.  193-210 ;  G.  iKXSchcVtj  Die  Enneakrunosepi-
sode,  p.  21  sq,  ;  v.  Wilainowitz  -  MoUendorff,  Aus  Kydathen^  p.  135  sq.  ;  W.
Dorpfeld,  in  Mittheil,  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  9  (1884),  p.  326;  Nissen,  in
Rheinisches  Museum,  N.F.  40  (1885),  pp.  343-346;  Friedericns- Welters,  Gipsab-
giisse,  Nos.  526-528 ;  Overbeck,  Gesch,  d,  griech.  Plastik,^  i.  pp.  457-469 ;
Mitchell,  History  of  Anciettt  Sculpture,  pp.  365-368 ;  A.  S.  Murray,  History  of
Greek  Sculpture,'^  I.  pp.  275-292;  MUchhofer,  *  Athen,'  pp.  169-171 ;  id,,  in
Berliner  philolog,  Wochenschrih,  ii  (1891),  p.  753  sq.\  Guide-Joanne,  I.  pp.
87-90 ;  Baedeker,'  pp.  86-89  ;  Walther  MUller,  Die  Theseusmetopen  vom  Thesei4fn
zu  Athen  in  ihrem  Verhdltniss  zur  Vasenmalerei  (Gottingen,  1888);  Penrose,
Principles  of  Athenian  Architecture  {lAmAoTi,  1888),  p.  72  x^.,  with  plates  xxxv.,
xxxvi.  ;  P.  Graef  and  A.  Baumeister,  article  *  Theseion,*  in  Baumeister's  Denk-
mdler,  pp.  1774-1786;  Lolling,  'Athen,'  pp.  318,  319;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient
Athens,  pp.  112-122,  146-149;  A.  H.  Smith,  Catalogue  of  Sculpture  in  the
British  Museum,  i.  pp.  216-231.

17.  2.  iMkintings  of  the  Athonians  fighting  the  Amazons  etc
It  appears  that  the  painter  of  the  pictures  in  the  Tbeseum  was  Micon
(see  §  3).  Harpocration  and  Suidas  (x.z/.  noAvyvan-os)  mention  that
according  to  some  people  the  paintings  in  the  Theseum  were  by
Polygnotus.  (In  these  passages  of  Harpocration  and  Suidas  it  would
seem  that  we  must  read  Gi^ci^  or  Oi/o-cois  ic/9^  for  Orfa'avpi^  the
reading  of  the  MSS.,  which  is,  however,  defended  by  Prof  J.  Williams
White  in  a  privately  printed  paper,  T^  Opisthodomus  on  the  Acropolis
at  Athens,  p.  13  x^.)  It  is  possible  that  he  may  have  painted  the
battle  of  the  Athenians  and  Amazons  or  that  of  the  Centaurs  and
Lapiths ;  for  the  only  one  of  the  three  pictures  Which  Pausanias
expressly  attributes  to  him  is  the  picture  of  Theseus  and  Amphitrite.
It  is,  however,  perhaps  more  probable  that  they  were  all  by  Micon,
and  that  it  was  only  the  overshadowing  reputation  of  Polygnotus  which
caused  these  works  of  his  contemporary  Micon  to  be  ascribed  to  him.

17.  2.  This  war  is  represented  also  on  the  shield  of  Athena.
The  reference  is  to  Phidias's  statue  of  Virgin  Athena  in  the  Parthenon.
The  battle  with  the  Amazons  was  represented  in  relief  on  the  outer  side
of  her  shield ;  on  the  inner  side  were  carved  the  combats  of  the  gods
with  the  giants  (Pliny,  N,  H,  xxxvi.  18).  It  is  said  that  into  the  relief
the  sculptor  Phidias  introduced  portraits  of  himself  and  of  Pericles.
He  portrayed  himself  as  an  old  bald-headed  man  lifting  up  a  stone
in  both  hands ;  while  Pericles  was  represented  brandishing  his  spear
against  the  Amazons  in  such  a  way  that  his  raised  hand  partially  con-


CH.  XVII  PAINTINGS  IN  THESEUM  157

cealed  the  likeness,  which  is  said  to  have  been  a  very  fine  one.     See

Plutarch,  Pericles^  31  ;  cp.  Aristotle,  De  mundo,  6.  p.  399  b,  33  sfq,  ;

Die  Chrysostom,  Or,  xii.  vol.  i.  p.  214  sq.,  ed.  Uindorf ;  Cicero,  TuscuL

i-  15-  34;  Valerius  Maximus,  viii.  14.  6;  Apuleius,  De  mundo^  32.    The

shield  of  the  image  of  Cranaean  Athena,  near  Elatea,  was  adorned

with  reliefs  copied  from  those  on  the  shield  of  Virgin  Athena  (Pans.  x.

34.  8).     Several  copies,  all  except  one  fragmentary,  of  the  shield  of  the

Virgin  Athena  have  come  down  to  us  ;  and  though  rude  in  style  they

enable  us  to  form  a  general  idea  of  the  way  in  which  the  battle  with

the  Amazons  was  represented  on  it.     The  best  known  of  these  copies

is  the  fragmentary  Strangford  shield  in  the  British  Museum ;  it  is  of

marble.    See  Overbeck,  Gesch.  d.  griech,  Plastiky^  i.  p.  353  sqq.  ;  A.  S.

Murray,   Hist   of  Greek  Sculpture^   2.  p.   121    sq,  ;  Mitchell,  Ancient

Sculpture^  P-  312  sq,\  Collignon,  Phidias^  pp.   25,  32  sq.  ;  Schreiber,

*  Die  Athena  Parthenos  des  Phidias  und  ihre  Nachbildungen,'  AbhandL

d,  philolog,  hist,  CI,  d,  k.  sacks,  Gesell.  d.  IVissen.  8  (1883),  p.  599  sqq,

17.  2.  and  on  the  pedestal  of  Olympian  Zeus.     See  v.  11.  7.

17.  3.  When  Minos  brought  Theseus  etc.     This  story  is  told  also

by   Hyginus  (Astronomica,   ii.    5)  as  follows :  "It  is  said  that  when

TTieseus  came  to  Minos  in  Crete  with  seven  maidens  and  six  boys,

Minos,  attracted  by  the  beauty  of  one  of  the  maidens  whose  name  was

Eriboea,  would  have  offered  her  violence.     But  Theseus  would  not  suffer

it,  alleging  that  he  was  the  son  of  Neptune  (Poseidon),  and  as  such

could  protect  a  maiden's  honour  against  a  tyrant.     The  dispute  now

turning  not  on  the  girl  but  on  Theseus's  birth,  to  wit  whether  he  were

the  son  of  Neptune  or  no,  it  is  said  that  Minos  took  a  golden  ring  from

his  finger  and  threw  it  into  the  sea,  bidding  Theseus  bring  it  back  to

him,  if  he  would  really  be  thought  to  be  a  son  of  Neptune.     He  him-

selfi  continued  Minos,  could  easily  prove  himself  a  son  of  Jupiter,  and

accordingly  he  prayed  his  father  to  give  him  a  sign  that  he  was  indeed

his  sire.     A  clap  of  thunder  and  a  flash  of  lightning  immediately  gave

the  sign.     For  a  like  reason  Theseus,  without  any  prayer  or  solemn

appeal  to  his  parent,  plunged  into  the  sea.     At  once  a  great  school  of

dolphins,  gliding  along  the  sea,  led  him  through  the  rippling  waves  to

the  Nereids.      From  them  he  received  Minos's  ring  and  from  Thetis  a

crown,  the  wedding-gifl  of  Venus,  sparkling  with  a  host  of  jewels.      But

others  say  that  he  received  the  crown  from  Neptune's  wife  (Amphitrite)

and  bestowed  it  on  Ariadne,  when  he  received  her  hand  as  the  meed

of  his  valour  and  magnanimity.       This  crown,  after  Ariadne's  death,

Bacchus  is  said  to  have  placed  among  the  stars."

This  story,  the  subject  of  one  of  Micon's  pictures  in  the  Theseum,  is
depicted  on  four  ancient  vases  which  have  come  down  to  us.  ( i )  On
a  vase  found  at  Caere  and  now  in  the  Louvre,  the  youthful  Theseus
is  represented  clad  in  a  short  tunic  standing  with  his  right  hand
stretched  out  to  clasp  the  offered  hand  of  Amphitrite,  who  draped  in
W  flowing  robes  is  seated  on  the  spectator's  right,  holding  in  her  left
^and  the  crown  which  she  is  about  to  bestow  on  Theseus.  In  the  back-
^und,  between  Theseus  and  Amphitrite,  stands  Athena,  depicted  as
^  ^cefiil  and  beautiful  woman,  wearing  a  helmet  and  the  aegis,  with


158  PAINTINGS  IN  THESEUM  bk.  i.  attica

a  spear  in  her  left  hand  and  an  owl  in  her  right.  The  scene  is  laid
at  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  for  three  dolphins  are  swimming  behind
Theseus,  and  he  is  standing  supported  on  the  head  and  hands  of  Triton,
who  is  represented  with  a  bearded  human  head  and  the  long  scaly
body  and  tail  of  a  fish.  The  names  of  all  the  figures  are  painted  beside
them.  The  picture  is  signed  by  Euphronius,  a  £&mous  vase-painter,  of
whose  works  we  possess  a  considerable  number.  The  drawing  is  extra-
ordinarily refined  and  beautiful ;  indeed  the  picture  is  considered  one
of  the  finest  Greek  vase-paintings  in  existence.  See  De  Witte,  *  Les
exploits  de  Thes^e,  coupe  peinte  par  Euphronius,'  Monuments  Grecs^
I  ( 1 872-1 884),  No.  I,  pp.  5-15,  with  pL  I  ;  W.  Klein,  Euphronios^
pp.  182-192 ;  Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  p.  1793,  fig.  1877 ;  Miss
Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  pp.  147-149;  /V/.,  Greek  Vase  Paintings^  pL
xiv.  (2)  On  a  vase  found  at  Girgenti  and  now  in  the  National  Library
at  Paris,  young  Theseus,  clad  in  a  short  tunic,  is  depicted  standing  in
fh)nt  of  and  shaking  hands  with  Poseidon,  who  is  seated  on  a  richly
adorned  chair  holding  his  trident  in  his  left  hand.  Behind  Poseidon
stands  Amphitrite  with  the  crown  in  her  hands.  No  names  are  attached
to  the  figures,  and  the  picture  has  consequently  been  misinterpreted  by
Welcker  and  others.  See  Monumenii  Inediti^  i  (182 9- 1833),  tav.  Hi.  ;
Welcker,  Antike  Denkmdlery  3.  pp.  404-409,  with  taf.  xxv. ;  Roscher's
Lexikon,  i.  p.  1679  j^.  (3)  On  a  vase  found  in  an  Etruscan  cemetery
at  Bologna  and  now  in  the  Civic  Museum  of  that  city,  Theseus,
represented  as  a  naked  youth,  is  supported  in  the  arms  of  Triton,  a  semi-
human  being  with  a  long  winding  fish-tail.  In  front  of  Theseus  is  seated
Amphitrite,  richly  clad  and  wearing  a  crown ;  in  her  hands  is  the
wreath  which  she  is  about  to  give  to  Theseus,  who  is  stretching  out  his
hands  to  take  it  Beside  Amphitrite  reclines  Poseidon  on  a  couch,
holding  his  trident  in  his  right  hand.  Other  figures  are  depicted  in  the
background.  See  G.  Ghirardini,  Museo  ItcUiano  di  Antichitd  Classica^
3  (1890),  pp.  1-40,  with  tav.  i.  This  last  vase-painting  is  decidedly
later  in  style  than  the  two  former.  (4)  On  a  red-figured  vase,  found
at  Truvo^  Theseus,  clad  in  a  short  tunic,  is  depicted  shaking  hands
with  Poseidon,  who  is  standing  with  the  trident  in  his  left  hand.
Behind  Theseus  stands  Amphitrite  with  the  crown  (?),  and  behind
Poseidon  stand  Nereus(?)  and  a  woman.  See  MittheiL  d,  arch.  Inst,^
Rom.  Abtheilung,  9  (1894),  p.  229  sq,^  with  pi.  viii.  The  four  paintings
differ  so  much  from  each  other  that  we  cannot  draw  any  inferences
fh)m  them  as  to  M  icon's  picture  of  the  same  subject  in  the  Theseum.
On  none  of  them  is  the  ring  of  Minos  represented  ;  whence  Professor
W.  Klein  has  conjectured  that  there  was  the  same  omission  in  Micon's
picture  and  that  this  is  what  Pausanias  refers  to  in  the  remark  that  Micon
had  not  painted  the  whole  story  {Euphronios^  p.  190  sq.)  Professor
Klein  thinks  that  a  scene  on  the  famous  Portland  vase,  which  is  commonly
interpreted  as  the  meeting  of  Peleus  with  Thetis  in  presence  of  Poseidon,
really  represents  the  meeting  of  Theseus  with  Amphitrite  and  Poseidon
at  the  bottom  of  the  sea.     See  Baumeister*s  Denkmdler^  p.  1801.

17.  4*  Of  the  death  of  Theseus  many  inconsistent  tales  are
told  etc      From  the  following  dissertation  on  the  death  of  Theseus


CH.  XVII  DODONA  159

it  has  been  sometimes  supposed  that  there  was  a  picture  of  the  death  of
Theseus  in  the  Theseum.  But  there  is  no  sufficient  ground  for  the  sup-
position. It  was  natural  that  Pausanias  should  touch  on  the  legends
of  the  hero's  death  in  describing  the  chapel  which  contained  his  remains.

17.  4.  he  was  bound  fkst  till  Hercules  brought  him  to  the
upper  world.  The  legend  ran  that  Pirithous  helped  Theseus  to  carry
off  Helen  from  Sparta,  and  that  Theseus  in  return  undertook  to  assist
Pirithous  in  carrying  off  Proserpine  from  the  lower  world.  The  two
friends  descended  into  hell  but  were  caught  and  kept  in  durance  there
until  Hercules,  who  had  gone  down  to  hell  to  fetch  up  the  dog  Cerberus,
interceded  for  them  with  Pluto  and  procured  the  release  either  of  both
Theseus  and  Pirithous  or  of  Theseus  alone.  See  Diodorus,  iv.  63  ;
Hyginus,  Fab,  79 ;  Apollodorus,  Epitoma  VcUicana^  ed.  R.  Wagner
(Leipsic,  1891),  p.  58  ;  Mythographi  Graeciy  ed.  R.  Wagner,  i.  p.
181  sq.;  cp.  Paus.  ix.  31.  5  ;  x.  29.  9.  The  rationalistic  version  of  the
legend  preferred  by  Pausanias  is  followed  also  by  Plutarch  {Theseus^
31  and  35)  and  by  Aelian  (Var,  Hist  iv.  5).

17.  5.  a  sanctuary  of  Zeus  in  Dodona.  The  site  of  Dodona,  long
debated  in  modem  times,  was  determined  by  the  excavations  of  Mr.
Carapanos,  whose  work  on  the  subject  {Dodone  et  ses  mines)  was
published  in  1878.  The  ruins  are  situated  about  eleven  miles  to  the
south-west  of  Jannina^  in  the  valley  of  Tcharacovista,  a  spacious  and
well-watered  plain,  rich  in  pasture  and  corn-land,  and  dotted  with
clumps  of  oaks  and  thickets  where  in  spring  wild  flowers  bloom  in  pro-
fusion. On  the  south  the  valley  is  dosed  by  the  picturesque  and
imposing  heights  of  Mount  Olytzika^  the  ancient  Tomarus.  The
scenery  has  none  of  that  solemn,  severe,  and  melancholy  cast  which  we
are  apt  to  associate  with  great  religious  capitals,  and  which  impresses
us  so  deeply  at  Delphi.  On  the  contrary  it  is  fresh,  smiling,  luxuriant.
The  ruins  of  the  ancient  tovm  occupy  the  extremity  of  a  flat  ridge
xunning  out  into  the  middle  of  the  valley  from  the  low  green  hills  which
divide  it  from  the  valley  ofjanmna.  On  the  southern  side  of  this  low
ridge  are  the  remains  of  a  large  theatre  scooped  out  in  the  side  of  the
hill,  and  immediately  to  the  east  of  the  theatre  is  the  sacred  precinct,
situated  partly  in  the  plain  and  partly  on  the  lowest  slope  of  the  hill.
It  is  of  considerable  extent  and  is  surrounded  by  ancient  Greek  walls  of
ashlar  masonry.  Within  this  precinct,  on  a  plateau  at  the  foot  of  the
>ii11,  are  the  remains  of  the  temple  of  Zeus  and  Dione.  In  Christian
times  the  temple  was  converted  into  a  church.  When  Wordsworth
visited  Dodona  in  1832,  fourteen  coliunns,  or  fragments  of  them,  were
still  standing  in  th&  temple.  See  Carapanos,  *  L'oracle  de  Dodone,'  in
Monuments  Grecs,  vol.  i.  No.  6  (1877),  pp.  25-42,  with  the  plan  on  pi.
4  ;  Wordsworth,  Greece  (ed.  1882),  p.  328  sqq, ;  Journal  of  Hellenic
Studies^  2  (1 881),  pp.  228-232;  Lolling,  *  Hellenische  Landeskunde
und  Topographie,'  p.  158  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  pp.  1 19-123.

17.  5.  an  oak  sacred  to  the  god.  The  Greek  word  which  Pau-
sanias here  employs  to  designate  the  oak  of  Dodona  is  phegos.  Else-
where (vii.  21.  2  ;  viii.  23.  5)  he  calls  the  oak  of  Dodona  driis.  The
oak  of  Dodona  is  called  dms  by  Homer  {Od,  xiv.  328,  xix.  297),  but


i6o  OAK  OF  DODONA  BK.  I.  attica

phigos  by  the  author  of  the  poem  called  Eoeae  which  was  attributed
to  Hesiod  (Schol.  on  Sophocles,  Trackin,  1167);  and  Zeus  himself
received  the  epithet  of  Phegonaios^  Le,  *  oaken'  (Stephanus  Byzantius,
s,v.  AtoStavq).  It  is  well  known  that  this  Greek  word  phigos  *•  an  oak  '
is  etymologically  identical  with  the  Latin  fagus  <  a  beech '  as  well  as
with  the  Slavonic  buky^  the  German  buck^  and  the  English  beecK  The
fact  that  the  same  word  should  mean  *  oak '  in  Greek  and  *  beech '  in
most  other  European  languages  has  given  rise  to  various  speculations.
It  is  known  that  the  beech  has  supplanted  the  oak  in  Denmark  (Lyell,
Antiquity  of  Man^  p.  9  ;  J.  Geikie,  Prehistoric  Europe^  p.  486  sq)
Hence  Professor  Max  Miiller  conjectured  that  the  word  in  question
originally  designated  the  oak,  that  **  Teutonic  and  Italic  Aryans  witnessed
the  transition  of  the  oak  period  into  the  beech  period  .  .  .  and  that
while  the  Greeks  retained  phigos  in  its  original  sense,  the  Teutonic  and
Italian  colonists  transferred  the  name,  as  an  appellative,  to  the  new
forests  that  were  springing  up  in  their  wild  homes  "  (Lectures  on  the  Science
of  Language^  2,  p.  260).  Others  prefer  to  suppose  that  the  word
originally  meant  '  beech '  and  was  transferred  to  the  oak  by  the  Greeks
when  they  migrated  into  Greece,  where  the  beech  is  said  not  to  be
found  south  of  a  line  drawn  from  the  Ambracian  to  the  Malean  Gul£
See  O.  Schrader,  Sprachvergleichung  und  Urgeschichte^  p.  395  sq,  \
Isaac  Taylor,  The  Origin  of  the  Aryans^  p.  26  sq.  But  the  Greeks
were  certainly  acquainted  with  the  beech,  which  they  called  oxua^  and
which  in  the  time  of  Theophrastus  grew  commonly  in  Arcadia  as  well  as
Macedonia  (Theophrastus,  Hist.  Plant,  iii.  i  o) ;  and  according  to  one
authority  forests  of  the  red  beech  are  still  found  in  Aetolia  (Neumann
und  Partsch,  Physikalische  Geographie  von  Griechenland^  p.  383).

The  rustling  of  the  leaves  of  the  sacred  oak  would  seem  to  have
been  regarded  as  the  voice  of  the  god,  and  these  mysterious  utterances
were  interpreted  by  priestesses  to  the  inquirers  who  came  to  consult
the  oracle.  See  Homer,  Od.  xiv.  327  sq.^  xix.  299  sq. ;  Stephanus
Byzantius  and  Suidas,  s.v.  AoiScuvi/ ;  Schol.  on  Homer,  //.  xvi.  233  ;
Aeschylus,  Prometheus^  851.  On  the  oracle  of  Dodona,  see  Bouch^
Leclerq,  Histoire  de  la  divination  dans  Pcmtiquiti^  2.  pp.  277-331  ;  and
on  the  sacred  oak,  see  B5tticher,  Baumkultus  der  Hellenen^  pp.  iii-
115.  It  is  said  that  out  of  the  wood  of  the  talking  oak  of  Dodona  was
carved  a  talking  image  of  Athena,  which  was  fixed  into  the  prow  of  the
Argo  (ApoUodorus,  i.  9.  16).  Zeus  of  Dodona  is  represented  in  art,
especially  on  coins,  wearing  a  garland  of  oak  leaves.  See  Overbeck,
Griech.  Kunstmythologie^  2.  p.  231  sqq.  ;  Fr.  Lenormant,  in  Gazette
archMogique^  3  (1877),  P*  95  ^99'

17.  5.  Oichyms  the    Achenuian    lake  the    riyer

Acheron Oocyttis.     The  ancient  name  of  Cichyrus  was  Ephyra,

according  to  Strabo  (vii.  p.  324).  It  was  in  Thesprotis,  inland  from
the  sea  beside  the  Acherusian  lake ;  the  river  Acheron  flowed  into  the
Acherusian  lake  or  marsh,  and  then  out  of  it  into  the  sea.  See
Thucydides,  i.  46 ;  Strabo,  I.e.  ;  Scylax,  Periplus^  30  {Geographi
Graeci  Minores^  ed.  Miiller,  i.  p.  34) ;  Livy,  viii.  24.  3.  The  Acheron
is  the  river  now  known  as  the  Suliotiko  or  Phanariotiko  which  comes


CH.  XVII  ACHERON— COCYTUS  i6i

down  from  the  mountains  of  the  once  famous  Suli  and  winds,  a  sluggish,
turbid,  and  weedy  stream,  through  the  wide  plain  of  Phanari^  traversing
some  swamps  or  meres  before  it  reaches  the  sea.  These  swamps,
which  extend  nearly  to  the  sea  and  never  dry  up  though  they  shrink  in
summer,  are  the  Acherusian  lake.  The  plain,  where  it  is  not  too  marshy,
is  covered  with  fields  of  maize  and  rice  and  meadows  where  herds  of
buffidoes  browse.  A  few  plane-trees  and  low  tamarisks  fringe  the
margin  of  the  winding  river.  Otherwise  the  plain  is  mostly  treeless.
On  its  eastern  side  rise,  like  a  huge  grey  wall,  the  wild  and  barren
mountains  of  Sulu

Before  entering  the  plain,  on  its  passage  from  these  rugged  high-
lands, the  Acheron  flows  through  a  profound  and  gloomy  gorge,  one  of  the
darkest  and  deepest  of  the  glens  of  Greece.  On  either  side  precipices
rise  sheer  from  the  water's  edge  to  a  height  of  hundreds  of  feet,  their
ledges  and  crannies  tufted  with  dwarf  oaks  and  shrubs.  Higher  up,
where  the  sides  of  the  glen  recede  from  the  perpendicular,  the  moun-
tains rise  to  a  height  of  over  three  thousand  feet,  the  black  pine-woods
which  ding  to  their  precipitous  sides  adding  to  the  sombre  magnificence
of  the  scene.  A  precarious  footpath  leads  along  a  perilous  ledge  high
up  on  the  mountain  side,  from  which  the  traveller  gazes  down  into  the
depths  of  the  tremendous  ravine,  where  the  deep  and  rapid  river  may
be  seen  rushing  and  foaming  along,  often  plunging  in  a  cascade  into  a
dark  abyss,  but  so  far  below  him  that  even  the  roar  of  the  water-fall  is
lost  in  mid-air  before  it  can  reach  his  ear.

At  the  point  where  the  river  emerges  from  the  defile  into  the  plain,
there  are  a  few  cottages  with  some  ruins  of  a  church  and  fortress  on
the  right  bank.  The  place  is  called  Glyky,  The  church  seems  to  have
occupied  the  site  of  an  ancient  temple;  some  fragments  of  granite
columns  and  pieces  of  a  white  marble  cornice,  adorned  with  a  pattern
of  acanthus  leaves,  may  be  seen  lying  about  Here,  perhaps,  was  the
seat  of  that  Oracle  of  the  Dead  where  the  envoys  of  Periander,  tyrant
of  Corinth,  summoned  up  the  ghost  of  his  murdered  wife  Melissa
(Herodotus,  v.  92),  and  where  Orpheus  vainly  sought  to  bring  back  his
lost  Eurydice  from  the  world  of  shades  (Pans.  ix.  30.  6).

The  Cocytus  is  now  the  Vouvo  river.     It  rises  at  the  head  of  a  long

valley  near  Paramytkia^  a  town  romantically  straggling  among  gardens

shaded  by  plane-trees  and  cypresses  and  refreshed  by  numerous  streams

and  fountains,  on  the  declivity  of  a  steep  hill,  which  is  crowned  by  a

rained  castle.     Behind  the  castle  soar  the  cliffs  and  fir-clad  summits  of

a  lofty  mountain.     From  here  the  Cocytus  flows  southward  through  the

valley  between  ranges  of  mountains  bare  and  rocky  in  their  middle

dopes,  but  belted  at  their  summits  with  pine-forests.     At  the  end  of  the

valley  the   Cocytus  emerges  on  the  plain  of  Phanari  and  joins  the

Aderon  below  the  Acherusian  lake,  about  three  miles  from  the  mouth

of  the  river.     In  the  valley  the  bed  of  the  Cocytus  is  dry  in  summer,

Iwt  in  the  plain  it  never  lacks  water  all  the  year  round.     Its  water

is  reputed  unwholesome ;  hence  the  people   of  the  villages  which  lie

OQ  the  slopes  of  hills  near  it  resort  to  wells  or  fetch  water  from  the

Sulioiiko  (Acheron).      This  bears  out  Pausanias's  remark   that  the

VOL.  II  M


x62  CICHYRUS—APHIDNA  bk.  i.  attica

water  of  Cocytus  is  "  a  joyless  stream "  or  (more  literally)  "  a  most
unpleasant  water."

The  site  of  Cichynis  (Ephyra)  has  not  been  determined.  From
Thucydides's  description  (L  46),  combined  with  that  of  Pausanias,  we
infer  that  it  stood  beside  the  Achemsian  lake,  near  its  southern  extremity,
where  the  Acheron  issues  from  the  lake  to  flow  into  the  sea.  Leake
thought  that  some  remains  of  walls  of  ancient  polygonal  masonry
existing  under  a  church  of  St  John,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Vattvo
(Cocytus),  about  three  or  four  miles  from  Port  Pkanariy  might  be  those
of  Cichynis.  But  these  ruins  are  beside  neither  the  Acheron  nor  the
Achemsian  lake.  Bursian  proposed  to  identify  as  Cichynis  the  extensive
ruins  of  an  ancient  Greek  city  which  crown  the  summit  and  descend  the
slopes  of  an  isolated  rocky  hill  near  the  village  of  Kastri^  towards  the
northern  end  of  the  Achemsian  mere.  The  fortification  walls  are  of  well-
jointed  polygonal  masonry,  flanked  with  square  towers  at  irregular
intervals.  But  the  situation  of  these  mins  hardly  answers  to  Thucydides's
description.  They  are  generally  taken,  with  greater  probability,  to  be
those  of  the  ancient  Pandosia  (Livy,  viii.  24  ;  Justin,  xii.  2  ;  Strabo,  vL
p.  256,  vii.  p.  324).

Port  Phanari^  into  which  the  united  streams  of  the  Acheron  and
Cocytus  fall,  was  variously  known  in  antiquity  as  Elaea  (Scylax,  Peripius^
30,  in  Geogr,  Graec.  Minores^  ed.  Miiller,  i.  p.  34)  and  the  Sweet
Harbour  (Strabo,  vil  p.  324).  The  latter  name  it  owed  doubtless,  as
Strabo  supposed,  to  the  quantity  of  fresh  water  poured  into  it  by  the
Acheron  and  Cocytus.  The  entrance  to  the  harbour  is  narrow,  being
nothing  more  than  a  gap  between  two  lofty  cliffs ;  but  a  wide  and
tranquil  bay  lies  within.  In  consequence  of  the  amount  of  fresh  water
emptied  into  the  harbour  by  the  rivers,  a  strong  current  flows  constantly
out  of  the  narrow  entrance,  rendering  access  difficult  for  sailing  boats
unless  the  wind  is  fair  and  strong.  Stt  Journal  of  the  Royal  Geographical
Society^  18  (1848),  p.  142.  The  Sweet  Harbour  of  the  ancients  is  now
sometimes  identified  with  Port  Agio  Janni  further  to  the  north.  (Cp.
note  on  viii.  7.  2.)  But  Strabo  expressly  says  that  the  Sweet  Harbour
was  the  one  into  which  the  Acheron  flowed,  />.  it  was  Port  Phanariy
which  besides  answers  his  description  better  than  Agio  Janni,

See  Leake,  Northern  Greece,  i.  pp.  231-242;  /V/.,  4.  pp.  50-66;
Wordsworth,  Greece,  pp.  332-339  ;  Bursian,  Geografihie  von  Griechen-
land,  I.  pp.  27-29;  Lolling,  *  Hellenische  Landeskunde  und  Tojjo-
graphie,'  p.  156;  Guide-Joanne,  2.  pp.  1 04-1 11.

17.  5.  Homer modelled  his  descriptioiiB  of  hell  on  them

etc.     See  Homer,  Od,  x.  512  sqq,

17.  5.  the  sons  of  Tyndarens  marched  against  Aphidna  and  took
it.  The  story  was  that  when  Theseus  carried  off"  Helen,  then  a  young
girl,  from  Sparta,  he  placed  her  for  safe-keeping  at  Aphidna  or  Aphidnae,
a  stronghold  in  Attica,  under  the  charge  of  his  mother  Aethra.  But  while
he  went  down  to  hell  with  Pirithous  to  win  Proserpine  for  his  friend,
Helen's  brothers  Castor  and  Pollux,  the  sons  of  Tyndareus,  marched
against  Aphidna,  captured  it,  rescued  their  sister  and  carried  oflf
Theseus's  mother  Aethra  a  prisoner  to  Sparta.     See  Herodotus,  ix.  73  ;


CH.  XVII  APHIDNA  163

Hellanicus,  in  SchoL  on  Homer,  Iliad^  iii.  144  and  242  ;  Isocrates,  x.

19  ;  Diodorus,  iv.  63;  Strabo,  ix.  p.  396;  Plutarch,  Theseus ^  31,  32,

34  ;  Dio  Chrysostom,  Or,  xL  vol.  i.  p.  179,  ed.  Dindorf ;  Hyginus,  Fab,

79 ;  Demosthenes,  xviii.  38,  p.  238  ;  Paus.  i.  41.  3  sq, ;  /V/.,  ii.  22.  6  ;

ieL^  iil  17.  2  ;  id.^  iii.  18.  4  sq.     As  the  situation  of  Aphidna  was  said

to  have  been  pointed  out  to  the  Dioscuri  by  the  people  of  Decelea  or

their   eponymous   hero    Decelus    (Herodotus,   ix.    73),  we   infer   that

Aphidna  was  near  Decelea.     It  is  now  identified  with  the  ruins  of  an

ancient  Greek  fortress  on  the  isolated  hill  of  Kotroni,  which  rises  from  a

little  verdant  plain  enclosed  by  low  wooded  hills,  about  six  miles  to  the

east  of  Decelea  and  thirteen  miles  from  Oropus.     The  hill  is  beautifully

situated,  overlooking  the  fine  undulating  and  wooded  country  through

which  the  Charadra  (the  river  of  Marathona)  flows.     Its  western  and

southern  sides  are  clothed  with  fine  oaks.     The  upper  summit  of  the  hill,

about  200  yards  long  from  north  to  south  by   100  yards  across,   is

surrounded  by  a  rough  wall  or  dyke.     See  G.  Finlay,  '  On  the  position

of  Aphidna,'  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Literature^  3  (1839),

pp.  396-405;    Bursian,    Geographie    von    Griechenland,    i.    p.    336;

Baedeker,3p.  186;  Guide-foanne^  2.  p.  i ;  A.  Milchhdfer,  Untersuchungen

iUr  die  Demenordnung  des  Kleisthenes^  p.  34  ;    Lolling,  *•  Hellenische

Landeskunde  und  Topographie,'  p.  1 19  ;  Milchhofer,  Karten  von  Attika^

Erlaut,  Text,  iil-vi.  p.  60.     According  to  another  version  of  the  legend,

tlie  town  in  which  Helen  was  left  by  Theseus  and  which  was  captured

by  Castor  and  Pollux,  was  not  Aphidna  but  Athens  itself.     This  was

the  version  adopted  by  Alcman  (Paus.  i.  41.  4),  Apollodorus  (iii.  10.

7)  and  Epitoma  Vaticana,  ed.  R.  Wagner,  p.  58),  and  apparently  by

Dio  Chrysostom  {Or.  xi.  voL   i.  p.  179,  ed.  Dindorf)  and  the  artists

^  depicted  scenes  from  the  legend  on  a  Boeotian  vase  (E<f3rjfjL€pis

^Xatokoyucij,   1884,  pi.   5;    C.  Robert,  *Homerische  Becher,'  Ftinf

^ks  Programm  sum   Winckelmannsfeste,  Berlin,    1890,  p.  46  sqq.)

*nd  on  the  chest  of  Cypselus  (Paus.  v.  19,  3,  where,  however,  it  has

^  proposed  to  alter  the  text ;  see  the  Critical  Note  on  the  passage).

^  doubtless  the  scene  of  the  legend  was  originaUy  laid  at  Aphidna.

V  it  had  been  originally  laid  at  Athens,  its  subsequent  transference  to

*n  obscure  country  town  would  be  unintelligible.      Whereas  Athens

jt^torally  tended  to  absorb  the  legends  which  were  originally  told  of  places

*D  oudying  parts  of  Attica.     Cp.  J.  TopfFer,  in  Aus  der  Anomia,  p.

17.  5.  Iiroiight  back  Menestheus  and  set  him  on  the  throne.

According  to  Plutarch,  this  Menestheus  was  a  great  grandson  of  Erech-
t^.  In  Theseus's  absence  he  wheedled  the  mob  and  roused  the  jealousy
^  dislike  of  the  old  nobility  against  Theseus,  who  had  put  down  the
petty  kingships  and  lordships  throughout  Attica,  imiting  the  whole
coimtry  under  one  monarchy,  which  Menestheus  represented  as  a  tyranny.
In  consequence  of  these  machinations  Theseus,  on  his  return  to  Athens,
^d  discontent  and  sedition  so  rife  among  the  people  that  in  despair
ke  quitted  the  country  and  retired  to  Scyros,  after  first  secretly  sending
^  children  for  safety  to  Elephenor  in  Euboea.  Accordingly  Menestheus
n^ed  Athens  as  king,  and  the  sons  of  Theseus  served  as  private  men


i64  THE  ANACEUM  bk.  i.  attica

with  Elephenor  in  the  Trojan  war.  When  Menestheus  fell  in  the
Trojan  war,  the  sons  of  Theseus  returned  to  Athens  and  recovered  the
kingdom.  See  Plutarch,  Thesetis^  32-35.  The  story,  followed  by
Pausanias,  that  Menestheus  was  placed  on  the  throne  by  the  Dioscuri
after  they  had  captured  Aphidna  in  Theseus's  absence,  is  told  also  by
Aelian  {Var,  Hist,  v.  4).  Plutarch  only  says  that  the  invasion  of
Attica  by  the  Dioscuri  gave  a  great  impetus  to  the  revolution  initiated
by  Menestheus,  and  that  Menestheus  induced  the  people  to  welcome
the  Dioscuri  to  Athens  (Plutarch,  Theseus^  32  sq,)

17.  6.  Lycomedes  plotted  his  death.  It  was  said  that  Lycomedes
king  of  Scyros,  either  from  jealousy  of  Theseus  or  a  wish  to  gratify
Menestheus,  lured  Theseus  to  the  top  of  a  precipice  and  pushed  him
over  (Plutarch,  Theseus^  35).

17.  6.  The  dedication  of  a  sacred  dose  to  Theseus  by  the
Athenians  was  snbseauent  to  the  landing  of  the  Modes  etc
It  was  said  that  at  the  battle  of  Marathon  the  phantom  of  Theseus
was  seen  fighting  on  the  Athenian  side  (Plutarch,  Theseus^  35).
Hence  after  the  Persian  wars,  in  the  archonship  of  Phaedo  (476/$
B.C.),  the  Athenians  were  bidden  by  the  Delphic  oracle  to  bring
back  the  bones  of  Theseus  and  preserve  them  with  marks  of
honour  at  Athens.  Accordingly  under  the  leadership  of  Cimon
they  conquered  the  island  of  Scyros,  and  brought  back  the  hero's
bones  with  much  pomp  and  public  rejoicing.  See  Plutarch,  Theseus^
36  ;  «V/.,  Cimon^  8  ;  Paus.  iii.  3.  7 ;  Diodorus,  iv.  62.  Scyros  was
conquered  in  the  archonship  of  Demotion  (470/69  B.C.),  according  to
Diodorus  (xi.  60)  ;  and  the  triumphal  return  of  Cimon  wiUi  the  precious
relics  appears  to  have  taken  place  in  the  archonship  of  Apsephion
(469/8  B.C.)  (Plutarch,  Cimon^  8).  A  difficulty  has  been  made  of  the
Lapse  of  six  years  between  the  command  of  the  oracle  and  the  conquest
of  Scyros.  Hence  Bentley  proposed  to  alter  the  text  in  Plutarch,
Theseus,  36,  so  as  to  make  Plutarch  say  that  the  oracle  was  given  in
the  archonship  of  Apsephion  (469/8  B.C.)  instead  of  in  that  of  Phaedo
(476/5  B.C.)  But  the  mere  feet  that,  with  our  extremely  imperfect  know-
ledge of  the  history  of  these  years,  we  are  imable  to  account  for  the
delay,  seems  hardly  a  sufficient  reason  for  tampering  with  the  text  of
Plutarch.  See  Bentley,  Dissertations  upon  the  Epistles  of  PhaUtris^
p.  300  sqq,  (ed.  1883) ;  Clinton,  Fasti  Helleniciy  2.  p.  36  (who  alters
the  dates  in  what  seems  a  very  arbitrary  way) ;  Holm,  GriecJUsche  Ge-
schichtey  2.  pp.  144  sq,,  148.

18.  I.  The  sanctuary  of  the  Dioscnri  This  sanctuary  was
conmionly  called  the  Anaceum  (Thucydides,  viii.  93  ;  Andocides,  i.  45  ;
Demosthenes,  xlv.  80,  p.  1 1 2  5  ;  Polyaenus,  i.  21.  2  ;  Lucian,  Piscator,
42  ;  Athenaeus,  vL  p.  235  b ;  Harpocration,  s.w,  'AvaKeiov  and
tloAvyvcDTos  ;  Bekker's  Antcdota  Graeca^  i.  p.  214,  line  12  sq.;  Photius,
Lexicon,  s,v.  HoXxryvutrov  Aaycos ;  C,  I.  A,  ii.  No.  660,  line  44),  because
the  Dioscuri  bore  the  title  of  Anaces  or  Anactes  (Mords'),  especially
at  Athens  (Plutarch,  Theseus,  33  ;  Aelian,  Var,  Hist.  iv.  5  ;  Etymology
Magnum,  p.  96  s,v,  'AKa#coi,  p.  98  s.v,  'Avaicatov,  p.  160  s,v.  * hxmAvQ^\
Cicero,  De  naiura  deorum,  iii.  21.  53  ;  C.  I,  A,  i.  Nos.  34,  206,  210  ;


CH.  XVIII  THE  ANACEUM  165

C.  /.  A,  ii.  No.  699,  col.  2,  line  30  ;  C,  /.  A,  iii.  Nos.  195, 290 ;  C  /.  A.  iv.
p.  63,  No.  34  ;  Paus.  ii.  36.  6  ;  id,^  x.  38.  7).  The  situation  of  the
Anaceum  can  be  approximately  determined,  for  it  was  near  the  Aglaurium
or  sanctuary  of  Aglaurus,  which  is  known  to  have  stood  on  the  northern
slope  of  the  Acropolis  (see  note  on  §  2).  The  vicinity  of  the  Anaceum
to  the  Aglauriiun  is  attested  by  Pausanias,  who  says  (§2)  that  the
Aglaurium  was  above  the  Anaceum,  and  by  Polyaenus,  who  says  (i.  21.
2)  that  Pisistratus,  purposing  to  disarm  the  Athenians,  assembled  them
in  the  Anaceum,  from  which  their  weapons  were  conveyed  by  his  satellites
to  the  sanctuary  of  Agraulus  (Aglaurus).  (For  Aristotle's  accoimt  of
this  disarmament  of  the  Athenians  by  Pisistratus,  see  above,  p.  146  sq,)
The  Anaceum,  though  lower  than  the  Aglaurium,  must  still  have  been
on  the  slope  of  the  Acropolis  ;  for  Lucian  (Piscator^  42)  represents  the
needy  philosophers  clambering  up  to  the  Acropolis  like  bees  on  ladders
planted  at  the  Anaceum,  eager  to  receive  a  proffered  dole  ;  and  Demo-
sthenes (xlv.  80,  p.  1 125)  speaks  of  "  that  rascally  slave  from  up  yonder
at  the  Anaceum."  This  last  allusion  is  explained  by  a  statement  that
slaves  waiting  to  be  hired  stood  about  at  the  Anaceum  (Bekker's
Anecdota  Graeca^  p.  212,  line  12  sq.)  Hence  the  Anaceum  was  prob-
ably not  &r  from  the  market-place.  It  would  seem  to  have  been  to
the  west  of  the  Aglaurium,  since  Pausanias,  moving  eastward  along
the  northern  side  of  the  Acropolis,  mentions  the  Anaceum  before  the
Aglaurium.  On  the  whole,  we  may  be  fairly  certain  that  the  Anaceum
stood  on  the  north-western  slope  of  the  Acropolis.  The  northern  slope
of  the  Acropolis  has  not  yet  (1894)  been  excavated.

The  precinct  must  have  been  spacious,  for  we  read  of  infantry
piling  arms  in  it  (Thucydides,  viii.  93)  and  of  cavalry  being  ordered  to
master  there  (Andocides,  i.  45).  Treasure  lists,  preserved  to  us  in
inscriptions,  make  mention  of  silver  cups  and  water-jugs  which  were
kept  in  the  Anaceum  (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  660,  line  44  ;  C,  /.  A.  ii.  No.  699,
coL  2,  line  30).  An  inscription  set  up  in  the  Anaceum  contained
directions  as  to  the  proportions  in  which  the  flesh  of  sacrificed  oxen
was  to  be  divided  (Athenaeus,  vi.  p.  235  b).  The  priest  of  the  Dioscuri
also  attended  to  the  worship  of  a  certain  "hero  on  the  roof"  (hirds
epitegios),  about  whom  nothing  is  known  (C  /.  A,  iii.  Na  290).  It  has
been  conjectured  that  the  "  hero  on  the  roof"  may  have  been  Adonis,
whose  worship  seems  to  have  been  commonly  celebrated  on  the  roofs  of
houses  (Aristophanes,  Lysistrata^  389),  or  that  he  was  a  sort  of  patron
saint  of  houses.  The  priest  of  the  Dioscuri  (Anaces)  and  of  the  "  hero
on  the  roof"  had  a  seat  reserved  for  him  in  the  theatre  of  Dionysus
(C.  /.  A.  iii.  No.  290).

An  inscription  found  at  the  village  of  Sfaka  near  Elatea,  in  Phocis
mentions  an  Anaceiun  in  which  persons  who  sacrificed  were  allowed  or
obliged  to  erect  huts,  but  no  woman  might  enter*  it  {Bulletin  de  Corr,
HelL  8  (1884),  p.  216  ^7. ;  Roberts,  Greek  Epigraphy^  No.  229  bis  \
for  more  examples  of  this  custom  of  encamping  in  temporary  huts
erected  in  a  sacred  precinct,  see  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Graec,  No.
189,  line  II,  No.  362,  line  34  sqq,\  Aristophanes,  Thesmoph,  624,658,
with  the  Scholia ;  Plutarch,  Quaest  Canviv.  iv.  6.  2  ;  Athenaeus,  iv.  p.


i66  THE  ANACEUM  bk.  i.  attica

138  f;  Bull,  de  Corr,  Helldn,  11  (1887),  p.  380  ;  cp.  Paus.  x.  32.  15-

17).

On  the  Anaceum,  cp.  B6tticher,  in  Philologus,  Suppl.  3  (1867),  pp.

339*343  »  ^iss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  pp.  1 51-163.

18.  I.  their  sons.  Their  names  were  Anaxis  and  Mxuisinus  (ii.
22.  5),  or  Anogon  and  Mnesileos  (ApoUodorus,  iii.  11.  2).  They  were
represented  on  horseback  in  the  reliefs  on  the  throne  of  Apollo  at
Amyclae  (iii.  18.  13).

18.  I.  a  painting  by  Polygnotus  of  the  marriage  of  the  Dioscnri
to  the  daughters  of  Lencippns.  The  daughters  of  Leucippus  were
named  Hilaira  (or  Elaira)  and  Phoebe.  They  were  betrothed  to
Lynceus  and  Idas,  the  sons  of  Aphareus.  But  the  Dioscuri  (Castor
and  Pollux),  being  invited  to  the  wedding,  carried  off  the  damsels  from
Messene ;  and  Pollux  married  Phoebe,  while  Castor  married  Hilaira.
See  SchoL  on  Pindar,  Nem,  x.  112  ;  ApoUodorus,  iii.  10.  3,  iii.  11.  2.
The  rape  of  the  daughters  of  Leucippus  by  the  Dioscuri  is  depicted  on
some  vase-paintings  (see  note  on  iii.  17.  3).  Miss  Harrison  is  of
opinion  that  it  was  the  rape  and  not  the  marriage  which  Polygnotus
painted  in  the  Anaceum  {Ancient  Athens^  p.  161);  Mr.  A.  S.
Murray  thinks  it  was  the  marriage  and  not  the  rape  (^Handbook  of
Greek  Archaeology,  p.  370).  If  Pausanias  had  meant  the  rape,  he
would  probably  have  said  so,  as  he  did  in  iii.  18.  11  when  he  had
occasion  to  notice  the  representation  of  that  subject  on  the  throne  of
Apollo  at  Amyclae.  The  painting  of  a  hare  in  this  picture  seems  to  have
been  especially  famous  ;  the  creature  looked  as  if  it  were  alive  (Photius,
Lexicon^  s.v, IIoXvyvwTov  XayuiS',  Paroemiographi Gra^cij^du  Leutsch  and
Schneidewin,  2.  p.  768,  No.  66).  According  to  one  account  Polygnotus,
who  was  a  native  of  Thasos,  received  the  citizenship  of  Athens  in
recognition  of  the  merits  of  his  paintings  in  the  Anaceum  and  Theseum
(Harpocration  and  Suidas,  s.v,  IIoXvyvcuTos,  where  for  Orja-avpi^  we  should
read  Orj(r€itfi  or  Brf(r€(as  Upt^j  as  has  been  already  pointed  out,  p.  1 56).

18.  I.  a  painting  by  Micon  of  those  who  sailed  with  Jason  to
the  land  of  the  Oolchians.  We  do  not  know  what  scene  from  the  tale
of  the  Argonautic  expedition  Micon  depicted  in  the  Anaceum.  From  a
remark  made  by  Pausanias  elsewhere  (viii.  11.  3)  we  infer  that  the  two
daughters  of  Pelias,  Asteropea  and  Antinoe,  were  painted  in  the  picture.
If  this  was  so,  the  scene  of  the  picture  must  have  been  laid  at  lolcus
either  before  the  sailing  or  after  the  return  of  the  expedition.  Prof.  C.
Robert  thinks  that  the  subject  may  have  been  the  mustering  of  the
Argonauts  before  their  departure.  He  interprets  in  this  sense  a  scene
on  a  red-figured  Athenian  vase,  and  conjectures  that  the  vase-painting
may  have  been  a  copy,  more  or  less  free,  of  Micon's  picture.  See
Annali  dell  InstitutOy  54  (1882),  p.  273  sqq.  Pro£  W.  Klein  thinks
that  the  subject  of  the  picture  was  the  funeral  games  celebrated  by
Acastus  in  honour  of  his  father  Pelias  {Archaeolog.  epigr.  Mittheilungen
aus  Oesterreich-Ungam,  12  (1888),  p.  98).  This  subject  was  carved
on  the  throne  of  Apollo  at  Amyclae  (iii.  18.  16)  and  on  the  chest  of
Cypsclus  (v.  17.  9- 1 1 ) ;  and  in  the  scene  on  the  chest  of  Cypselus
the   daughters   of    Pelias    were   portrayed   (v.    17.    11).     From    the


CH.  XVIII  THE  AGRAULIUM  167

pains  which,  according  to  Pausanias,  the  painter  bestowed  on
Acastus,  it  is  natural  to  conclude  that  Acastus  must  have  been
one  of  the  leading  figures,  if  not  indeed  the  most  prominent  figure,
in  the  picture.  And  this  he  would  almost  necessarily  have  been
if  the  subject  of  the  picture  were  the  funeral  games  held  by  him  in
memory  of  his  £ither.  On  the  whole,  Prof.  Klein's  view  seems  to  be
the  more  probable  of  the  two,  and  as  such  it  is  approved  by  Miss
Harrison  {Ancient  Athens^  p.  162),  and  Mr.  A.  S.  Murray  {Handbook
of  Greek  Archaeology^  p.  370).  Cp.  H.  Brunn,  Gesch,  d,  griech
Kiinstler^  2.  p.  22  sq,

18.  2.  a  prednct  of  Aglanrns.  Herodotus  tells  us(viii.  53)  that
the  Persians  ascended  the  Acropolis  on  its  front  side,  behind  the  gates
and  the  road  up  to  it,  at  a  point  where  no  one  was  on  guard,  and  where
no  one  would  have  expected  that  anybody  could  climb  up  ;  and  he
further  defines  the  place  by  saying  that  it  was  "at  the  sanctuary  of
Cecrops's  daughter  Aglaurus,  though  the  ground  is  there  precipitous."
A  doubt  might  be  and  has  been  raised  as  to  which  was  the  side  of  the
Acropolis  referred  to  by  Herodotus  as  the  front  side.  This  doubt  is
removed  by  two  passages  of  Euripides  which  prove  conclusively  that  the
sanctuary  of  Aglaurus  was  on  the  north  side  of  the  Acropolis,  and  that  con-
sequently when  Herodotus  said  "the  front  side"  he  meant  the  north  side.
Euripides  describes  Pan  as  piping  in  his  cave  beside  the  Long  Rocks
where  Agraulus  (Aglaurus)  and  her  sisters  danced  to  the  music  of  his
pipes  on  the  green  sward  before  the  temples  of  Athena  (Euripides,  lon^
493  ^^^-)  Thus  the  poet  places  the  sanctuary  of  Aglaurus  among  the
Long  Rocks  and  near  the  cave  of  Pan.  In  another  passage  {lon^  8  sqq.^
£uriindes  expressly  defines  the  Long  Rocks  as  the  rocks  on  the  north
side  of  the  hill  of  Pallas,  ue,  of  the  Acropolis ;  and  the  cave  of  Pan  is
known  to  have  been  the  grotto  among  the  rocks  at  the  north-western
comer  of  the  Acropolis  (see  i.  28.  4  note).  Now  about  seventy  yards  to
the  east  of  the  cave  of  Pan,  and  about  sixty-three  yards  west  of  the
Erechtheum,  there  is  a  remarkable  cavern  among  the  Long  Rocks  on  the
northern  side  of  the  Acropolis.  A  staircase,  of  which  some  steps  are  still
in  existence,  led  down  into  it  from  the  Acropolis.  The  lower  end  of  the
staircase  is  opposite  to,  and  a  little  above,  the  modem  chapel  of  the  Sera-
phim. Probably  this  cavern  was  within  the  precinct  of  Aglaurus,  to  which
the  staircase  gave  direct  access  from  the  Acropolis.  It  may  have  been
by  this  staircase  that  the  Persians  ascended  the  Acropolis  ;  but  it  may
also  have  happened  that  the  staircase,  though  not  guarded  (Herodotus
tells  us  that  no  guards  were  posted  here),  was  barricaded,  and  that  the
enemy  clambered  up  the  rocks,  which  are  here  accessible.  It  follows
from  this  that  Herodotus  and  probably  the  ancients  in  general  regarded
the  north  side  of  the  Acropolis  as  the  front.  This  is  confirmed  by
other  considerations,  particularly  the  situation  of  the  Erechtheum  on
the  northern  edge  of  the  Acropolis,  and  the  number  of  venerable
stmctures  which  stood  on  its  northern  slope.  Indeed,  this  side  of  the
hill  is  said  to  be  still  commonly  called  the  front  of  the  Acropolis  by
persons,  both  natives  and  strangers,  who  are  unaware  that  any  question
has  been  raised  on  the  subject     See  Leake,  Athens^  i.  p.  264  sq,\


i68  ERICHTHONIUS  bk.  l  attica

Botticher,  in  Phtlologus^  Suppl.  3  (1867),  p.  360  sqq, ;  C.  Wachsmuth
Die  Stadt  Atheftj  i.  p.  301  sq.

After  Pisistratus  had  succeeded  by  an  artifice  in  disarming  the
Athenians  in  the  neighbouring  Anaceum,  his  agents  conveyed  the
weapons  into  the  sanctuary  of  Agraulus  (Polyaenus,  i.  21.  2,  who  instead
of  saying  that  they  carried  the  weapons  dawn  to  the  sanctuary  of
Agraulus,  should  have  said  that  they  carried  them  up,  since  the
Agraulium  was  on  higher  ground  than  the  Anaceum).  On  this  trans-
action see  above,  pp.  146  j^.,  165.

In  the  sanctuary  of  Agraulus  (Aglaurus)  the  Athenian  lads  {ephibai)
took  the  oath  of  loyalty  to  the  state ;  the  divine  personages  whom  they
called  to  witness  the  oath  were  Agraulus,  Enyalius,  Ares,  Zeus,  Thallo,
Auxo,  and  Hegemone.  See  Pollux,  viii.  105;  Stobaeus,  Florilegium^  xliii.
48  ;  Lycurgus,  c,  Leocr,  76 ;  Demosthenes,  xix.  303,  p.  438  ;  Plutarch,
AlcibiadeSy  15;  and  on  representations  of  the  ceremony  on  vase-paintings,
see  A.  Conze,  in  Annali  delV  Instituto,  40  (1868),  pp.  264-267,  with
tav.  d'  agg.  H,  I.  An  inscription  (C.  /.  A^  iii.  No.  1369)  mentions  a
priestess  of  Aglaurus ;  and  from  another  inscription  (C.  /.  A,  iii.  No.
372)  we  infer  that  Demeter  the  Nursing-mother  {kourotrophos)  had  an
altar  within  the  precinct  of  Aglaurus  which  was  attended  to  by  a  priest
or  priestess  who  had  a  special  seat  in  the  theatre  of  Dionysus.

On  the  sanctuaiv  of  Aglaurus,  see  Leake,  Athens,  i.  pp.  262-267  ;  C.  Wachs-
muth, Die  Steult  Atken,  i.  pp.  219-221  ;  Wordsworth,  Athem  and  Attica,  pp.  72-
74 ;  Milchhofer,  '  A  then,'  p.  172  ;  Lolling,  '  A  then,*  p.  320  ;  Miss  Harrison,
Ancient  Athens,  p.  163  sqq,  ;  E.  Curtius,  Stadtgeschichte,  pp.  49,  lOi.

18.  2.  Athena  put  Erichthoniiis  in  a  chest  etc  Erichthonius
was  said  to  have  been  bom  from  the  ground,  Hephaestus  being  his
father.  On  his  birth  Athena  placed  him  in  a  chest,  and  gave  him  in
charge  to  the  three  daughters  of  Cecrops,  as  Pausanias  here  relates,
with  orders  not  to  open  the  chest  till  she  came  back.  She  then  repaired
to  Pellene  to  fetch  a  mountain  with  which  she  proposed  to  buttress  up
the  Acropolis  of  Athens.  Two  of  the  sisters,  however,  moved  by
curiosity  opened  the  chest  and  saw  Erichthonius  with  two  serpents
coiled  about  him.  A  crow  flew  to  Athena  and  told  her  that  Erichthonius
was  exposed  to  view.  At  hearing  this  news  Athena  dropt  the  moimtain
which  she  was  carrying ;  it  has  remained  ever  since  on  the  spot  where
it  fell,  and  is  the  high,  peaked,  rocky  hill  of  Lycabettus  which  dominates
Athens  on  the  north.  And  for  the  ill  tidings  he  had  brought  her,
Athena  forbade  the  crow  ever  to  light  on  the  Acropolis  of  Athens.  Such
is  the  story  as  told  by  Amelesagoras,  quoted  by  Antigonus  Carystius,
Hist.  Mired),  12.  The  story  is  also  told  more  or  less  fully,  with
variations  of  detail,  by  Euripides,  Ion,  20  sqq,,  267-274 ;  Apollodonis,
iii.  14.  6;  Ovid,  Met,  ii.  552  sqq, ;  Hyginus,  Fab,  166  ;  id,,  Astrono-
mica,  ii.  13;  Fulgentius,  ii.  14;  Lactantius,  Diinn,  Instit.  i.  17.  In
some  versions  of  the  tale  all  the  three  sisters  are  said  to  have  dis-
obeyed Athena's  conmiand  in  opening  the  chest  (so  Euripides  and
Hyginus) ;  in  other  versions  only  two  of  the  sisters  were  disobedient,
namely  Aglaurus,  or  Agraulus  as  the  name  is  sometimes  given,  and


CH.  XVIII  ERICHTHONIUS  169

Herse  (according   to    Pausanias  and  Apollodorus),   or  Aglaurus   and

Pandrosus  (according  to  Amelesagoras,  l.c,  and  Athenagoras,  Supplic,

fro  Christ,    i ) ;    while   according    to  Ovid   only  one   of  the    sisters

(namely  Aglaurus)  had  the  curiosity  to  pry  into  the  box.      In  some

versions  of  the  story  what  the  maidens   saw   on   opening   the  chest

was    the    infant    Erichthonius    in    human    form,    with    one    or    two

serpents  coiled  about  him  (so  Euripides,  ApoUodorus,  Amelesagoras,

Ovid,  Lactantius,  Fulgentius,  ll.cc^  Augustine,  De  civ,  deiy  xviii.   12);

according  to  others  the  upper  part  of  Erichthonius  was  human,  but  the

lower  part  was  serpentine  (Schol.  on  Plato,  Timaeus^  p.  23  d;  Etymolog,

Magnum^  P«  37'  J.v. 'Epcx^cvs  ;  Mythographi  Graeci^  ed.  Westermann,

pL  360;  Servius  and  Philargyrius  on  Virgil,  Georg.  iiL  113  ;  Hyginus,

Fab,  166 ;  cp.  /V^,  Astronom,  ii.  13) ;  according  to  others  Erichthonius

was  a  serpent,  pure  and  simple  (Hyginus,  Astronom,  ii.  13  ;  TertuUian,

Dt  spectaculis^  9 ;   cp.   Philostratus,    Vit,  Apoll,  vii.  24).      This  last

would  seem  to  have  been  the  version  followed  by  Pausanias,  for  though

in  the  present  passage  he  makes  no  mention  of  a  serpent  or  serpents,

yet  in  describing  the  statue  of  Virgin  Athena  in  the   Parthenon  he

remarks  that  the  serpent  beside  her  was  probably  Erichthonius  (i.  24.

7]*    He  may  well  have  been  right     In  the  oldest  form  of  the  legend

Erichthonius  or  Erechtheus  (for  the  two  were  originally  identical,  cp.

SdoL  on  Homer,  II,  ii.  547  ;  Etymol,  Magnum^  P-  37'  s,v,  'Epcx^cvs)

was  probably  noUiing  but  the  sacred  serpent  of  Athena  which  lived  in

tbe  Erechtheum,  was  considered  the  guardian  of  the  Acropolis,  and  was

fed  with  honey- cakes  once  a  month.     During  the  Persian  invasion  a

report,  circulated  according  to  Plutarch  by  the  wily  Themistocles,  that

tbe  honey- cake  set  out  as  usual  for  the  sacred  serpent  had  been  left

ontasted,  was  one  of  the  strongest  motives  which  induced  the  Athenians

to  abandon  Athens  to  the  enemy ;  they  thought  that  the  serpent,  and

^th  it  the  goddess,  had  forsaken  the  city.     See  Herodotus,  viii.  41  ;

Phitarch,  Themistocles^  10;  Aristophanes,  Lysistrata^  758  sq,^  with  the

Scholium  ;  Hesychius,  s,w,  SpaKavkos  and  oUovpov  6<f}iv ;  Suidas,  s,v,

^McavAos ;  Etymol,  Magn,  p.   287  j. v.  S/xxicavAos ;  Photius,  Lexicon,^

^v,oiicovphv  6<l>iv;  Eustathius,  on  Homer,  Od,  i.  357,  p.  1422,  line  7

*?•    If  we  may  trust  Philostratus  (fmag,  ii.  1 7.  6)  the  sacred  serpent

continued  to  live  on  the  Acropolis  down  to  his  time  (third  century  a.d.)

According  to  one  story  (Philostratus,  Vit,  Apoll,  vii.  24)  Athena  her-

^  was  the  serpent's  mother.     The  traditions  that  Erichthonius  was

^a  man  and  half  a  serpent,  or  merely  a  man  guarded  by  a  serpent,

''^present  the  usual  successive  stages  of  popular  belief  through  which  an

^imal  god  passes  in  the  course  of  sloughing  off  his  animal  form  and

donning  that  of  a  man.

On  a  vase  found  at  Camirus  in  Rhodes,  and  now  in  the  British
Museum,  is  depicted  the  scene  of  the  finding  of  Erichthonius  in  the
cti^  The  chest  stands  on  a  pile  of  rocks,  probably  representing  the
Acropolis.  The  lid,  ornamented  with  a  wreath  of  olive,  lies  on  the
^^^\  and  from  the  open  chest  appears  the  boy  Erichthonius.  The
*^  and  tail  of  the  serpent  curl  above  the  chest.  On  one  side  Athena,
^th  her  helmet  in  one  hand  and  a  lance  in  the  other,  gazes   with


170  ERICHTHONIUS  bk.  i.  attica

surprise  at  the  child  and  the  serpent ;  on  the  other  side  the  two  naughty
sisters  are  fleeing  in  consternation.  See  Annali  delV  InsHtuto^  51
(1879),  ^v.  d'  agg.  F,  with  the  remarks  of  R.  Engelmann,  pp.  62-66,
and  of  H.  Heydemann,  pp.  11 2-1 19;  Roscher's  Lexikon^  i.  p.  1307  ;
Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  xxxii.  Representations  of  the  birth
of  Erichthonius  occur  on  vase-paintings  and  reliefs.  The  goddess
Earth,  the  upper  part  only  of  her  body  appearing  above  the  ground,  is
depicted  holding  up  the  infant  Erichthonius  to  Athena  who  receives  him
in  her  arms.  Sometimes  Cecrops  appears  in  the  background,  the  lower
part  of  his  body  being  that  of  a  serpent.  See  MonumenH  Inediti^  i.
plates  X.  and  xii.  ;  Miiller-Wieseler,  Denkmdler^  i.  pi.  xlvi.  No.  211a,  id,^
2.  pi.  xxxiv.  Nos.  400,  401  ;  E.  Curtius,  '  Die  Geburt  des  Erichthonios,'
Archdologische  Zeitung,  30  (1873),  pp.  51-57,  with  pi.  63;  A.  Flasch,
*Tazza  Cometana  rappresentante  la  nascita  di  Erichthonios,'  Annali
deir  InsHtutOy  49  (1877),  PP-  418-446  ;  Roscher*s  Lexikon^  1.  p.  1305  ;
Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  p.  492 ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^
p.  xxviii.  sq.  In  the  case  of  some  of  these  representations,  however,  it
is  doubtful  whether  the  scene  depicted  is  the  birth  of  Erichthonius  or
the  birth  of  Dionysus.  See  O.  Jahn,  Archdologische  Aufsdtze^  pp.  60-
82  ;  C.  Robert,  Archdologische  Mdrchen^  p.  190  sqq.  The  story  of  the
birth  of  Erichthonius  has  been  variously  interpreted  by  W.  Mannhardt
{Die  Komddmonen^  p.  33)  and  by  Mr.  Aug.  Mommsen  {Heortologie^
p.  5  sqq.\  as  a  mythical  way  of  describing  the  growth  of  the  com,  and
by  Miss  Harrison  {Ancient  Athens^  p.  xxvi.  sqq,)  as  a  fiction  devised
to  explain  the  ceremony  performed  by  the  two  maidens  called  the
Arrephori  (Paus.  i.  27.  3).  A  story  closely  resembling  it  is  told  in
Java.  See  Tijdschrift  voor  Nederlandsch  Indi'e^  I4de  Jaargang  (1852),
Tweede  Deel,  p.  396.

18.  2.  It  was  at  this  point  that  the  Medes  ascended  etc.  On
the  approach  of  the  Persian  host  under  Xerxes  the  Delphic  oracle
announced  to  the  Athenians  that  when  all  else  was  lost  a  wooden  wall
would  save  them.  Themistocles  explained  the  'wooden  wall'  to  be
their  ships  and  encouraged  the  Athenians  to  abandon  Athens  and  meet
the  Persians  at  sea.  His  advice  was  taken,  and  the  g^eat  naval  victory
of  Salamis  justified  it  and  fulfilled  the  prophecy.  But  a  handful  of  the
Athenians,  interpreting  the  oracle  literally,  stayed  behind  and  entrenched
themselves  on  the  Acropolis  behind  a  wooden  barricade,  which  they
erected  on  the  western  face  of  the  hill.  The  Persians  attacked  the
barricade  from  the  Areopagus  but  were  repulsed.  At  last  a  detachment
of  them  succeeded  in  ascending  the  unguarded  northern  side  of  the
Acropolis,  at  the  sanctuary  of  Aglaurus.  They  opened  the  gates  to  their
friends,  and  soon  all  the  Athenians  who  did  not  seek  death  by  leaping
from  the  rock  were  put  to  the  sword.      See  Herodotus,  vii.  141-143,

viii.  5^-53-

18.  3.  the  PrytanenuL  The  Prytaneum  of  a  Greek  city
was  its  town-hall  or  Hdtel  de  Ville.  But  it  was  only  a  capital  city
that  had  a  Prytaneum.  Hence  when  Theseus,  king  of  Athens,
united  Attica  under  a  single  monarchy,  each  petty  town,  hitherto
independent,  had  to  abolish  its  Prytaneum  and  henceforth  the  Pry-


CH.  XVIII  THE  PRYTANEUM  171

taneum  of  Athens  was  the  Prytaneum  of  Attica  (Thucydides,  ii.   15  ;
Plutarch,  Tkeseus^  24).     The  essential  feature  of  the  Prytaneum  was  its
hearth,  which   was   regarded   and    spoken  of  as  "the  hearth  of  the
city  "  or  **  the  common  hearth  "  (Pollux,  i.  7,  ix.  40  ;  Aristotle,  PoL  vi.
8,  p.  1322  b,  28  ;  Plutarch,  Quaest,  Comnv,  vi.  8.   i  ;  C.  1.  A,  ii.  No.
467,  line  6,  No.  468,  line  5,  No.  469,  line  5,  No.  470,  line  6,  No.  471,
line  6  sq,^  No.  605).     A  perpetual  fire  burned  in  the  Prytaneum,  either
on  an  open  hearth  or  in  the  form  of  a  lamp  (see  note  on  viii.  53.  9).
From  this  perpetual  fire  Athenian  colonists  carried  fire  with  them  to
their  new  homes  (Schol.  on  Aristides,  vol.    3.    p.    48,    ed,    Dindorf;
Etymolog,  Magnum^  p.  694,  s,v,   irpvTav€ta;  cp.   Herodotus,  i.   146),
An  image  of  the  goddess  Hestia  (*  hearth '),    the  counterpart   of  the
Roman  Vesta,  stood  in  the  Prytaneum  at  Athens,  as  Pausanias  here
tells  us.     Whether  such  an  image  was  a  regular  adjunct  of  a  Greek
Prytanetmi,  we  do  not  know.     But  we  learn  from  Athenaeus  (iv.  p.
149  d)  that  at  Naucratis  in    Egypt   the   birthday   of  Hestia   of  the
Prytaneum  (Hestia  Prytanis)  was  celebrated  by  a  feast  in  the  Prytaneum.
Hestia  was  also  worshipped  on  the  Acropolis  at  Athens,  as  we  learn
from  an  inscription.     See  Mittheil.  cL  arch.  Inst  in  Athen^  14  (1889),
p.  321  sq.      Before  Solon's  time  the  chief  archon  resided  in  the  Pry-
taneum (Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens^  3).       Foreign  ambassadors
were  entertained  at  the  public  expense  in  the  Prytaneum,  and  the  same
privilege  was  gp'anted,  either  on  special  occasions  or  for  life,  to  citizens
who  had  rendered  g^eat  services  to  the  state  in  peace  or  war  (see  the
inscription   quoted   in   Hermes,  22   (1887),   p.    561;    Pollux,  ix.  40;
Aristophanes,    AchamianSy    124  sq,  \    id,.    Knights,    709  ;    Schol.   on
Aristophanes,  Knights,  167  ;  Demosthenes,  vii.  20,  p.  81  ;  id.,  xix.  31,
P>35o,  and  234,  p.  414  ;  id,  xxiii.  130,  p.  663;  id.,  1.   13,  p.  12 10;
Aesdiines,  ii.  80  ;  Dinarchus,  i.  43  and  loi).    When  Socrates  was  tried
^  his  life  and  was  asked  what  but  death  he  had  deserved  at  the  hands
of  his  country,  he  replied,  with  perfect  justice,  that  he  deserved  to  be
mabtained  at  the  public  expense  in  the  Prytaneum  (Plato,  Apology,
p.  36;  Cicero,  De  Oratore,  i.   54.  232).     Sometimes  the  privilege  was
Either  conferred  in  perpetuity  on  the  eldest  male  descendants  of  very
<iistinguished  men,  as  on  the  descendants  of  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton
(Isaeus,  V.  47  ;  Dinarchus,  i.   loi),  on  the  physician  Hippocrates  and
W$  descendants  (Soranus,  Ufe  of  Hippocrates,  2,  in  Biographi  Graeci,
^  Westermann,  p.  451),  on  Demosthenes  and  his  posterity  ([Plutarch,]
^^  X.    Orat.    pp.    847    d,    850),    on   a   certain    Phaedrus    and   his
(descendants  (C  /.  A.  ii.  Na  331,  line  82  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.
Gf'oec.  No.  162),  and  on  a  man  of  Delphi  named  Cleomantes  and  his
descendants  for  ever  (Lycurgus,  c.  Leocr.  87).     Decrees  of  the  Athenian
P^ple  containing   invitations   to   dine   in    the    Prytaneum   are   often
recorded  in  inscriptions  (C  /.  A,  ii.  Nos.  3,  38,  52  c,  55,  86,  115,  605).
"Hie  stewards  of  the  games  in  the  Panathenaic  festival  had  their  meals
provided  for  them  in  the  Prytaneum  during  the  continuance  of  the
festival  (Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens,  62).     The   regular   rations
served  out  in  the  Prytaneum  would  seem  to  have  been  of  a  very  frugal
sort;  Solon  ordained  that   they   should   consist   of  a   barley-loaf  on


172  THE  PRYTANEUM  BK.  i.  attica

common  days  and  a  wheaten  loaf  on  festivals  (Athenaeus,  iv.  p.  137  e).
On  this  custom  of  providing  meals  at  the  public  expense  in  the  Pry-
taneum,  see  R.  Schdll,  *  Die  Speisung  im  Prytaneion  zu  Athen,'  Hermes^
6  (1872),  pp.  14-54.

On  certain  occasions  Castor  and  Pollux  were  feasted  in  the  Pry-
taneum  ;  the  banquet  spread  for  them  consisted  of  cheese,  barley-cakes,
and  leeks  (Athenaeus,  iv.  p.  137  e).  The  lads  {ephebot)  offered  sacrifices
on  the  public  hearth  in  the  Prytaneum  (C  /.  A,  ii.  Nos.  467,  468,  469,

470,  471).

Besides  the  statues  mentioned  by  Pausanias  in  the  Prytaneum  there
was  one  of  Demochares,  the  nephew  of  Demosthenes ;  it  represented
him  with  a  sword  girt  on  his  thigh,  and  stood  first  on  the  right  as  you
entered  the  apartment  which  contained  the  public  hearth  ([Plutarch,]
ViL  X,  Orat,  p.  847  c  d  e).  Near  the  Prytaneum  stood  a  statue  of
the  goddess  of  Good  Luck ;  it  was  so  beautifiil  that  a  young  man  is
said  to  have  fallen  violently  in  love  with  it  (Aelian,  Var,  Hist.  ix.  39).

With  regard  to  the  situation  of  the  Prytaneum,  we  learn  from  Pau-
sanias that  it  was  near  the  Agraulium,  which,  as  we  have  seen  (p.  167),
stood  on  the  northern  slope  of  the  Acropolis.  As  Pausanias  is  going
from  west  to  east  and  mentions  the  Prytaneum  after  the  Agraulium,  the
Prytaneum  was  probably  east  of  the  Agraulium.  It  was  on  high
ground,  for  after  describing  it  Pausanias  speaks  (§4)  of  going  thence  to
the  lower  parts  of  the  city.  On  the  northern  slope  of  the  Acropolis,
between  the  chapels  of  St  Saviour  (Sotir)  and  St.  Simeon,  at  the  back
of  the  chapel  of  St  Nicholas,  K.  Botticher  found  the  rock  cut  and
smoothed  in  two  places,  evidently  to  receive  the  foundations  of  two
buildings.  Each  cutting  was  70  to  80  feet  long  and  ran  in  a  direction
firom  north-west  to  south-east  It  is  possible  that,  as  Botticher  supposed,
one  of  these  two  buildings  was  the  Prytaneum.  See  K.  Botticher,  in
Philologus^  Suppl.  3  (1867),  p.  359  •^^-  Professor  E.  Curtius  holds  that
the  Prytaneum  of  Athens  was  originally  on  the  Acropolis,  but  was  after-
wards transferred  to  the  south  side  of  the  city,  and  later  still  to  the
north  side  of  the  Acropolis,  where  Pausanias  found  it  (E.  Curtius,
Attische  Studien^  2.  p.  55  sqq,  ;  /V/,  Stadtgeschichte^  pp.  51,  60,  244  sq,^
302).  This  theory  is  accepted  by  Professor  R.  Schdll  (Hermes^
6  (1872),  p.  18  5qq.\  Mr.  G.  Hagemann  (De  Graecorum  prytemeis^
p.  22  5qq,\  and  Mr.  Marindin  (article  'Prytaneum'  in  Smith's
Dictionary  of  Antiquities^  2.  p.  514).  But  it  is  a  mere  theory,
absolutely  destitute  of  evidence.  There  is  nothing  whatever  to  prove
that  the  Prytaneum  ever  occupied  any  other  site  than  the  one  where
Pausanias  found  it,  on  the  northern  slope  of  the  Acropolis.  Cp.  C
Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen^  i.  p.  462  sqq.

Near  the  Prytaneum  was  the  Bucoleum,  in  which  the  magistrate
called  the  king  resided  before  the  time  of  Solon  (Aristotle,  Constitution
of  Athens^  3  ;  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graece^  i.  p.  449,  line  19  sqq,  ;  Suidas,
s,v,  apx^^%  ^i^d  in  which  the  sacred  marriage  of  the  king's  wife  to
Dionysus  continued  to  take  place  down  at  least  to  the  fourth  century
RC.  (Aristotle,  /,c,)  It  has  been  conjectured  that  the  sacred  ploughing
called  "  the  yoking  of  the  ox "  {bouzugios)  took  place  at  the  Bucolium


CH.  XVIII  THE  PRYTANEUM  '  173

(Plutarch,  Conjug,  Praecefit,  42).  Beside  the  Bucolium  was  the
Basileum  or  Palace  where  the  officials  called  the  Kings  of  the  Tribes
held  their  sittings  (Pollux,  viiu  iii).  Lastly,  at  the  back  of  the  Pry-
taneum  was  a  place  called  '*  the  field  of  Famine  "  ;  it  was  said  to  have
been  dedicated  to  Famine  at  a  time  when  Athens  was  suffering  from
hunger  (Zenobius,  iv.  93 ;  Diogenianus,  vi.  13;  Bekker's  Anecdota
Graeca^  i.  p.  278,  line  4  sqq,  ;  cp.  Hesychius,  s,v,  Aifiov  ireSiov),

On  the  Prytaneimi,  see  Dyer,  Athens,  p.  263  sqg,  ;  C.  Wachsmuth,
Die  Stadt  Athen,  i.  p.  221  sq,\  Milchhofer,  '  Athen,'  p.  172  ;  Lolling,
*Athcn,'  p.  320;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  pp.  165-168.  On
Greek  Prytaneums  in  general,  see  G.  Hagemann,  De  Graecarum
prytands  (Vratislaviae,  1881);  J.  G.  Frazer,  in  JoumcU  of  Philology,
14(1885),  p.  145  sqq.  As  to  the  court  of  justice  held  at  the  Prytaneum,
see  i.  28.  10  note.

18.  3.  the  laws  of  Solon  are  inscribed.  The  copies  of  the  laws
of  Solon  preserved  in  the  Prytaneum  were  engraved  on  quadrangular
wooden  tablets  called  axdnes  which  were  fitted  together  and  turned  on
pivots,  so  that  they  could  be  shifted  round  at  the  reader's  convenience.
Each  tablet  was  engraved  on  both  sides.  See  Polemo,  in  Harpocration,
s,v.  "kfyvi. ;  Etymolog,  Magnum,  5,v.  Kvp^iis,  p.  547.  It  is  said  that
these  tablets  were  first  set  up  on  the  Acropolis  but  were  afterwards
transferred  to  the  Prytaneum,  where  they  could  be  more  easily  inspected
(Pollux,  viil  128).  In  the  time  of  Plutarch  only  scanty  fragments  of
these  old  tablets  remained  in  the  Prytaneum  (Plutarch,  Solon,  25).  It
is  to  these  fragments,  doubtless,  that  Pausanias  here  refers.  He  does
not  say  that  the  tablets  were  entire  in  his  time,  as  Professor  von
Wilamowitz-MollendorfT  insinuates  or  rather  asserts  {A  us  Kydathen,
p.  208}.  Cp.  Schubart,  in  Fleckeiseti s  Jahrbucher,  28  (1882),  p.  42.
We  have  seen  that  copies  of  Solon's  laws,  engraved  on  tablets  called
kttrMs,  stood  in  the  Royal  Colonnade  (note  on  i.  3.  i).  The  question
whether  the  kurbeis  resembled  the  axdnes  in  shape  and  material  has
been  much  debated,  and  a  final  decision  of  the  question  seems,  with  the
evidence  at  oiu-  disposal,  scarcely  possible.  See  Polemo,  ed.  Preller,
pp.  87-91;  V.  Rose,  Aristoteles  Pseudefiigraphus,  pp.  413-415;  C.
Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  A  then,  i.  p.  535  -f^.)  note  ;  K.  Lange,  Haus  und
Halle^  P-  87  sqq, ;  G.  Busolt,  Griech.  Staats-  und  Rechtsaltertiimer^
§  131  ;  Sandys,  on  Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens,  p.  23  sq.

In  a  Russian  court  of  justice  at  Dorpat  the  traveller  Adolf  Erman
observed,  on  the  table  at  which  the  chief  functionaries  sat,  certain
*<  triangular  prisms,  about  a  foot  high  and  five  inches  wide,  turning  on  a
vertical  axis,  and  inscribed  on  their  oblong,  upright  surfaces  with  maxims
of  law.  .  .  .  These  inscribed  tablets  are  here  named  Mirrors  of  Justice :
they  are  always  kept  carefully  covered,  except  when  the  court  is  sitting.
In  former  times,  while  the  code  of  the  Sclavonians  was  short  and  simple,
it  was  all  inscribed  on  the  Mirrors,  but  at  present  these  contain  in
general  only  old  legal  maxims  relating  to  the  duties  of  the  judge  "  (Ad.
£nnan,  Travels  in  Siberia,  i.  p.  28  sq,)  Erman  compared  these  tablets
with  the  axdnes  which  contained  Solon's  laws.

18.  3.  the  pancratiast  Autolycns.     Cp.  ix.  32.  8  note.      The


174  *  "^HE  SERAPEUM  bk.  i.  attica

statue  was  by  Lycius,  a  son  and  pupil  of  Myron  (Pliny,  N,  H,  xxxiv.
79 ;  cp.  note  on  v.  22.  3).

18.  3.  the  statnoB  of  Miltiadea  and  Thamistocles.  In  the
theatre  at  Athens  there  were  statues  of  Miltiades  and  Themistocles,  and
near  them  a  statue  of  a  Persian  prisoner  (Schol.  on  Aristides,  voL  3,  p.
535  SQ't  cd.  Dindorf).  Again,  in  the  temple  of  Artemis  Aristobule  at
Athens  there  was  a  statuette  of  Themistocles  down  to  the  time  of
Plutarch,  who  inferred  from  the  likeness  that  the  heroic  soul  of  Themi-
stocles must  have  been  mirrored  in  his  face  (Plutarch,  Themistocles^  22).
The  practice,  here  referred  to  by  Pausanias,  of  altering  the  inscriptions
on  the  pedestals  of  old  Greek  statues  so  as  to  pass  off  the  statues  for
portraits  of  later  personages,  especially  Romans,  appears  to  have  been
common  under  the  Roman  dominion.  Cp.  Paus.,  i.  2.  4  ;  ii.  9.  8 ;  ii.
17.  3  ;  viii.  9.  9.  We  hear  of  a  statue  of  Alcibiades  which  was
inscribed  with  the  name  of  Ahenobarbus  (Dio  Chrysostom,  Or,  xxxvii.
vol.  2.  p.  304,  ed.  Dindorf),  and  of  statues  of  Eiunenes  and  Attains  at
Athens  which  were  inscribed  with  the  name  of  Mark  Antony  (Plutarch,
Antoniusj  60).  On  the  Acropolis  at  Athens,  beside  the  statue  of
Health,  there  was  a  portrait  statue  of  the  mother  of  Isocrates,  but  the
inscription  was  afterwards  altered  ([Plutarch,]  Vit  X,  OraL  p.  839  d).
Cicero,  writing  to  Atticus  (vi.  i.  26),  says  that  he  loved  Athens  and
should  like  to  be  commemorated  there,  but  that  he  hates  the  practice
of  altering  the  inscriptions  on  statues.  The  same  practice  is  denounced
by  Dio  Chrysostom  (Or.  xxxi.  vol.  i,  p.  346  sq.^  ed.  Dindorf).  Cp.
C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athetiy  i.  p.  679  note  i  ;  Dyer,  Ancient
Athens^  p.  363.

18.  4.  Going  thence  to  the  lower  parts  of  the  city  we  come  to
a  sanctuary  of  Serapis.  Leaving  the  Prytaneum  on  the  northern
slope  of  the  Acropolis,  Pausanias  now  proceeds  eastward  as  far  as  the
stadium  (i.  18.  4-i.  19.  6).  He  then  returns  to  the  Prytaneiun  and,
starting  from  it  a  second  time,  skirts  the  eastern  and  southern  faces  of
the  Acropolis  till  he  reaches  the  entrance  to  the  Acropolis  on  the
western  side  of  the  hill  (i.  20.  i-i.  22.  4).

Hence  from  the  order  of  Pausanias's  description  we  should  infer  that
the  sanctuary  of  Serapis  was  situated  somewhere  to  the  north-east  of
the  Acropolis.  The  inference  is  to  some  extent  borne  out  by  the
discovery,  in  this  region,  of  monuments  relating  to  the  worship  of
Serapis.  Thus  in  laying  the  foundations  of  the  new  Metropolitan
Church,  which  stands  to  the  north-east  of  the  Acropolis,  an  inscription
was  found  recording  the  dedication  of  the  statue  of  a  girl  who  had  acted
as  basket-bearer  in  the  worship  of  Serapis  (C  /.  A,  iii.  No.  923).
Again,  another  inscription,  said  to  have  been  found  in  a  church  at  the
northern  foot  of  the  Acropolis,  contains  a  dedication  to  Serapis  and  Isis
(C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  1612).

Other  Athenian  inscriptions  attest  the  worship  of  Serapis  without
throwing  light  on  the  exact  site  of  his  sanctuary.  Thus,  an  inscription
(C  /.  A.  iii.  No.  140)  records  a  dedication  by  a  priest  of  Isis  and  Serapis,
but  the  place  where  the  inscription  was  originally  found  seems  to  be
imknown.     The  same  is  true  of  another  inscription  (C.  /.  A,  ii.  No.  617)


CH.  XVIII  THE  SERAPEUM  175

which  proves  that  there  was  a  regularly  organised  society  for  the
worship  of  Serapis  at  Athens  with  treasurer,  secretary,  etc.  On  the
other  hand,  a  small  altar  dedicated  to  Serapis  was  found  in  the  sanctuary
of  Aesculapius  on  the  south  side  of  the  Acropolis  (C  /.  A,  iii.  No.  145  a).
In  the  Attic  inscription  of  Roman  date,  which  records  the  restoration
of  many  sanctuaries,  and  which  has  been  often  referred  to  above,  the
name  of  Serapis  occurs  in  a  mutilated  passage  ('£<^/t€/9($  a.p\a.i,Q-
Aoytic^  1884,  p.  170).

18.  4-  Oif  the  Egyptian  sanctnarieB  of  Serapis  the  most  famous
is  at  Alexandria.  The  Serapeum  or  sanctuary  of  Serapis  at  Alexandria
was  a  vast  structure  situated  at  the  headland  of  Rhacotis,  near  the
gardens  and  tombs  of  the  necropolis,  but  divided  from  them  by  a  canal
(Tacitus,  HisL  iv.  84  ;  Clement  of  Alexandria,  Proirept.  iv.  48,  p.  42,
ed.  Potter  ;  Strabo,  xvii.  p.  795).  Here  Serapis  was  worshipped  with
an  almost  frantic  vehemence  of  devotion  (Macrobius,  Sat.  i.  13).
Achilles  Tatius  (v.  2)  has  described  a  torch-light  festival  of  Serapis  at
Alexandria  at  which,  though  it  was  evening  and  the  sun  had  set,  the
multitudinous  glare  of  flambeaus  lit  up  the  city  with  the  brightness
of  the  sun.  The  various  legends  as  to  the  foundation  of  this  great
sanctuary  of  Serapis  are  told  by  Tacitus  {Hist.  iv.  83  sq.\  Plutarch
(Isis  and  Osiris,  28),  and  Clement  of  Alexandria  {Protrept.  iv.  48,
p.  42  sq.y  ed.  Potter).  According  to  Tacitus,  the  story  told  by  the
Egyptian  priests  was  that  Ptolemy  I.,  king  of  Egypt,  in  consequence  of
a  vision  vouchsafed  to  him  in  a  dream,  caused  the  image  of  the  god  to
be  fetched  from  a  temple  near  Sinope,  where  the  deity  had  been
worshipped  from  of  old  as  Jupiter  Dis  (Pluto).  With  this  the  story
told  by  Plutarch  (/.r.)  substantially  coincides.  According  to  Clement
of  Alexandria  {I.e.)  it  was  not  Ptolemy  I.  but  Ptolemy  II.  (Philadel-
phus)  who  fetched  the  image  of  Serapis  from  Sinope.  Others  said  that
the  image  was  brought  from  Seleucia  in  Syria  (Tacitus,  Hist.  iv.  84  ;
Qement  of  Alex,  i.e.);  others  that  it  came  from  Memphis  (Tacitus,
/.r.)  The  sanctuary  of  Serapis  at  Alexandria  suffered  in  a  fire
(Qement  of  Alexandria,  Protrept.  iv.  53,  p.  47,  ed.  Potter).  There  are
said  to  have  been  forty-two  sanctuaries  of  Serapis  in  Egypt  (Aristides,
Or,  viii.  voL  i.  p.  96,  ed.  Dindorf),  aU  of  them  situated  outside  the
walls  of  cities  (Macrobius,  Sat.  i.  7.  15).  As  to  the  true  character  of
Serapis,  see  the  next  note.

18.  4.  the  oldest  is  at  Memphis  etc.  What  the  Greeks  called  the
Serapetun  or  sanctuary  of  Serapis  at  Memphis  was  nothing  more  than
the  cemetery  of  the  famous  sacred  bulls,  which  from  the  earliest  times
had  been  venerated  as  the  chief  deity  of  the  city.  The  sacred  bull  for
the  time  being  was  called  Hapi  by  the  Egyptians,  Apis  by  the  Greeks.
Now  according  to  an  Egyptian  doctrine  every  dead  man  and  every  dead
sacred  animal  becomes  an  Osiris.  Hence  the  dead  bull  Apis  became  an
Osiris-Apis  or,  more  correctly,  Osor-Hapi,  which  the  Greeks  corrupted
into  Serapis  or  Sarapis.  (The  Greeks  commonly  wrote  the  name
Sarapis,  Uie  Romans  Serapis.)  See  Maspero,  Histoire  Ancienne,^
p.  30  sqq, ;  Wiedemann,  Die  Religion  deralten  Aegyptier^  pp.  96,  99  sqq. ;
Tiele,  History  of  the  Egyptian  Religion,  p.  174;  Lafaye,  Histoire  du


176  THE  SERAPEUM  bk.  i.  attica

culte  des  diviniUs  cPAlexandrie  hors  de  t^gypte^  p.  i6  sqq.  Some  of
the  ancients  were  aware  that  Serapis  was  nothing  but  the  dead  Apis
and  they  rightly  identified  the  latter  part  (-apis)  of  the  word  with  the
name  of  the  sacred  bull  of  Memphis  ;  but  they  wrongly  derived  the  first
part  of  the  word  (Sar-  or  Ser-)  from  the  Greek  sdros^  *  a  coffin.'
See  Clement  of  Alexandria,  Strom,  i.  21.  106,  p.  383,  ed.  Potter;
Plutarch,  Isis  and  Osiris y  29  ;  Varro,  in  Augustine,  De  civ,  dei^  xviiL  5.

The  Serapeum  or  burying-place  of  the  sacred  bulls  at  Memphis  was
situated  in  a  district  where  the  sand,  blown  by  the  winds,  gathered  in
such  heaps  that,  when  Strabo  visited  the  place  about  the  beginning  of
our  era,  some  of  the  Sphinxes  were  already  half  buried  in  it,  while  of
others  only  the  heads  protruded  above  the  shifting  waste  (Strabo,  xviL
p.    807).     The   cemetery   was   discovered   by  Mariette  in  185 1.      It
consists   of  a   long  gallery  hewn  in  the  living  rock  with  a  series  of
chambers  or  mortuary  chapels  opening  off  it  on  either  side.     Each  of
these  chambers  contains  an  enormous  sarcophagus,  mostly  hewn  out  of
a  single  block  of  granite  or  basalt,  and  weighing  on  an  average  about
69  tons.     In  these  sarcophaguses  the  remains  of  the  sacred  bulls  were
found.     In  one   chamber,  which  had  remained   absolutely  untouched
since  antiquity,  the  footprints  of  the  last  Egyptian  who  had  trodden  it,
some    3000   years  before,    were   clearly  discernible.     Each   mortuary
chapel,  after  receiving  the  dead  body  of  the  bull,  was  walled  up  ;  but  in
the  gallery  outside,  or  built  into  the  wall  which  closed  the  chapel,  were
found  many  slabs  inscribed  with  the  names  and  prayers  of  pilgrims  who
had  come  thither  to  pay  the  last  honours  to  the  dead  god.     See  Mas-
pero,   Histoire  Ancienne^^  P«  31  ^Q^  \   Wiedemann,  Die  Religion  der
alien  Aegyptier^  p.  100  sq,  ;  Rawlinson,  on  Herodotus,  iii.  29.    A  view  of
one  of  these  mortuary  chapels  of  Apis  is  given  in  Perrot  et  Chipiez,
Histoire  de  V Art  dans  P Antiquity ^  i.  p.  313,  fig.  198.     The  burial  of
one  of  these  bulls  was  a  ceremonious  and  costly  affair  (Plutarch,  Isis
and  Osiris y  35  ;  Diodorus,  i.  84).     Bronze  gates,  called  the  gates  of
Lamentation  and  Oblivion,  were  thrown  open  to  admit  the  corpse,  and
grated  harsh  thunder  as  they  revolved  on  their  hinges  (Plutarch,  Isis
and  OsiriSy  29  ;  cp.  Diodorus,  i.  96.  9).     The  last  Apis  of  which  we
have  record  was  in  the  reign  of  the  emperor  Julian  (Ammianus  Marcel-
linus,  xxii.   14.  6)     On  Apis  see  Wiedemann,  on  Herodotus,  ii.  153.
On   the   representations   of    Serapis   in    Greek    art,    see    Overbeck,
Griechische  Kunstmythologiey  2.  pp.  305-321  ;  A  Michaelis,  mJoumcU
of  Hellenic  Studies^  6  (1885),  pp.  287-318.

18.  4-  a  place  where PirithonB  and  Theeens  coyenanted

etc.  The  covenant  was  that  they  should  carry  off  Helen  from  Sparta,
that  they  should  then  draw  lots  for  her,  and  that  he  to  whom  she
fell  should  aid  the  other  in  winning  a  wife.  See  Diodorus,  iv.
62  ;  Plutarch,  TheseuSy  31  ;  Apollodorus,  Epitoma  Vaticana^  ed.  R.
Wagner,  p.  58;  Mytkographi  Graeciy  ed.  R.  Wagner,  i.  p.  \Z\  sq.
According  to  Diodorus  and  Plutarch  the  covenant  was  not  made  until
after  Helen  had  been  carried  off  by  the  two  friends.  Cp.  i.  17.  4  note.
There  was  a  place  in  Athens  near  the  Theseum  called  Horcomosium
or  "  place  of  swearing  an  oath  " ;  it  was  said  to  have  been  so  named


CH.  XVIII  TEMPLE  OF  ILITHYIA  177

because  on  that  spot  Theseus  had  sworn  peace  with  the  Amazons
(Plutarch,  Theseus^  25),  but  it  may  have  been  identical  with  the  place
where  Theseus  and  Pirithous  were  said  to  have  made  their  covenant.
The  latter  spot  is  referred  to  by  Sophocles  {Oed,  Col,  1593  5q,\  see
note  on  i.  28.  7).

18.  5.  a  temple  of  Ilitliyia.     The  site  of  this   temple  is  not

known.      From  the  order  in  which  Pausanias  mentions  it  we  should  infer

that  it  lay  to  the  north-east  of  the  Acropolis,  somewhere  between  the

Prytaneum  and  the  Oljrmpieum.     This  is  to  some  extent  confirmed  by

the  discovery,  near  the  modem  Metropolitan  church,  of  the  base  of  the

statue  of  a  certain   woman  Chrysippe,  which,   as  we  learn  from  the

inscription  (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  1586),  had  been  dedicated  by  the  woman's

father  to  Ilithyia.     Inscribed  bases  of  other  statues  dedicated  to  Ilithyia

have  been  found  at  Athens  (C.  /.  A,  iii.  Nos.  925,  926,  836  a).     The

last  of  these  (C.  /.  A.  iii.  No.  836  a)  was  found  in  the  sanctuary  of

Aesculapius,  on  the  south  side  of  the  Acropolis.     Besides  this  temple  in

the  city,  Ilithyia  had  a  sanctuary  in  the  suburb  of  Agrae,  to  the  south-east

of  Athens,  as  we  learn  from  an   inscription  on  one  of  the  seats  in

the  theatre  of  Dionysus  (C.  /.  A.  iii.  No.  319).     An  inscription  on  a

small  column  of  Hymettian  marble,  which  was  found  on  the  eastern  side

of  the  missus,  near  the  spring  Callirrhoe,   contains  a   dedication    to

Ilithyia  by  a  certain  woman  named  Philumene,  wife  of  Amphimachus

(C.  /.  A,  ii.  No.  1 590)  ;  the  votive  offering  to  which  this  inscription  refers

^ras  probably  set  up  in   the  sanctuary  of  Ilithyia  in  Agrae.     Isaeus

(v.  39)  speaks  of  a  woman  sitting  publicly  in  the  sanctuary  of  Ilithyia  ;

which  of  her  sanctuaries    the  orator  refers    to  we  do  not  know,  but

probably  the  reference  is  to  the  one  in  the  city.

18.  5.  to  haye  come  from  the  Hyperboreans  to  help  Latona  in
tejangs.     See  the  Homeric  Hymn  to  Apollo^  97-1 19.

18.  5.  the  Delians sacrifice  to  her,  and  sing  a  hymn  of  Olen

^  hfir  honour.      Cp.  viii.  21.  3;  ix.  27.  2  ;  x.  5.  7  sq.]  Herodotus,
iv.35.

18.  5.  The  Cretans  belieye  that  Ilithyia  was  bom  at  Amnisns.
Homer  mentions  a  grotto  of  Ilithyia  at  Amnisus  {Od.  xix.  188) ;  Strabo
(x>  p.  476)  speaks  of  her  sanctuary  there.

18.  5.  The  Athenians  are  the  only  people  whose  wooden  images
<tf  Ilithyia  are  draped  to  the  tips  of  the  feet.  When  Pausanias
^w^  this  he  had  probably  not  visited  Aegium  in  Achaia,  where  he
found  a  wooden  statue  of  Ilithyia  draped  to  the  feet  in  a  fine  robe  (vii.
23*  5)'  Certain  it  is  that  his  description  of  Achaia  was  written  after
his  description  of  Attica.  See  vii.  20.  6  note.  Cp.  Schubart,  in
ZeiUchrift  fur  die  Alterthumswissenschaft^  9  (1851),  p.  294.

18.  5.  the  oldest  was  brought  by  Er3rsichthon  from  Delos.
Plutarch,  quoted  by  Eusebius  {Praep,  Evang.  iii.  8),  says  that
Ei^sichthon  carried  the  first  wooden  image  to  Apollo  at  Delos  in  the
course  of  his  sacred  embassy.  Erysichthon  was  also  said  to  have
founded  the  sanctuary  of  Apollo  at  Delos  (Eusebius,  Chronic,  vol.  2.  p.
28,  ed.  Schone).  Phanodemus  mentioned  the  visit  of  Erysichthon  to
Delos  (Athenaeus,  ix.  p.  392  d) ;  and  Pausanias  says  (i.  31.  2)  that

VOL.  II  N


178  THE  OLYMPIEUM  bk.  i.  attica

Erysichthon  died  at  sea  on  his  way  back  from  Delos,  after  the  sacred
embassy.

18.  6.  the  sanctoary  of  Olympian  Zens.  The  Olympieum  or
sanctuary  of  Oljrmpian  Zeus  is  the  spacious  artificial  platform  situated
to  the  south-east  of  the  Acropolis,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Ilissus,  dose
to  the  Callirrhoe  or  Enneacrunus  spring.  Of  the  temple  of  Olympian
Zeus  which  occupied  the  centre  of  the  platform,  fifteen  gigantic  Corin-
thian colunms  still  stand  and  form  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  features
in  views  of  Athens.  The  identification  of  these  splendid  ruins,  by  far
the  most  imposing  in  scale  of  all  the  remains  of  ancient  Athens,  is
beyond  doubt  Their  situation  answers  to  the  statement  of  Thucydides
(ii.  15)  that  the  sanctuary  of  Oljrmpian  Zeus  was  to  the  south  of  the
Acropolis,  and  to  the  statement  of  Hierocles  {Defebri  equiy  in  Medtcinae
Veterinariae  libri  duo  (Basileae,  1537),  p.  4)>  that  the  temple  of  Zeus
was  near  the  Enneacrunus.  Further,  the  ruined  temple  agrees  with
Vitruvius's  description  (iii.  2.  8 ;  vii.  Praef.  §§15  and  17),  having  been
of  the  Corinthian  order,  surrounded  by  a  double  colonnade  (dipteral),
and  with  eight  columns  at  each  end  (octostyle).  Lastly,  Pausanias  tells
us  that  the  sacred  enclosure  was  full  of  statues  of  Hadrian  ;  and  among
the  ruins  in  question  have  been  found  a  number  of  bases  which,  from
the  inscriptions  on  them,  are  known  to  have  supported  statues  of  Hadrian
(C  /.  A,  iii.  Nos.  479,  480,  481,  482,  484,  486,  487,  491,  494).

The  original  sanctuary  of  Olympian  Zeus  seems  to  have  been  one  of
the  oldest  in  Athens,  for  Thucydides  mentions  it  (iL  1 5)  as  a  proof  that
the  ancient  city  extended  chiefly  to  the  south  of  the  Acropolis ;  and
Pausanias  (i.  1 8.  8)  ascribes  the  foundation  of  the  original  sanctuary  to
Deucalion.  Remains  of  this  oldest  sanctuary  have  been  brought  to
light  in  recent  years,  as  we  shall  see  presently,  by  Mr.  Penrose.  But
the  first  to  set  about  the  construction  of  a  temple  on  a  grand  scale  was
Pisistratus,  probably  about  the  year  530  a  a  He  employed  four
architects,  Antistates,  Callaeschros,  Antimachides,  and  Pormos  (Vitru-
vius,  vii.  Praef.  15).  According  to  Aristotle  {Politics^  v.  11.  %  sq,)  the
building  of  this  great  temple  was  a  device  of  the  tyrant  to  keep  the
people  busy  and  divert  their  minds  from  revolutionary  projects.  In  this
respect  Aristotle  compares  the  temple  to  the  pyramids  of  Egypt  and  the
architectural  works  undertaken  by  the  tyrants  of  Corinth  and  Samos.
The  death  of  Pisistratus  interrupted  the  work,  and  it  long  remained
unfinished.  At  length,  about  174  B.C.,  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  king
of  Syria,  undertook  to  complete  it,  or  rather  to  build  it  afresh  on  a
more  magnificent  scale  than  ever,  at  his  own  expense.  He  employed  a
Roman  architect  named  Cossutius,  who  planned  the  temple  as  a  Corin-
thian dipteros  with  eight  columns  at  each  of  the  narrow  ends.  Cossutius
also  designed  the  epistyle,  and  all  the  ornaments.  The  building,  though
it  again  remained  unfinished,  must  have  been  far  advanced ;  for
Vitruvius  praises  the  skill  and  science  of  the  architect  and  the  noble
style  of  his  work,  observing  that  its  magnificence  was  acknowledged  not
only  by  the  multitude  but  by  connoisseurs.  See  Vitruvius,  iii.  2.  8,  vii.
Praef.  15  and  17  ;  Velleius  Paterculus,  i.  10.  The  temple  is  also  cited
by  Livy  (xli.  20.  8)  and  Athenaeus  (v.  p.   194  a)  as  a  proof  of  the


CH.  xviii  THE  OLYMPIEUM  179

splendid  munificence  of  King  Antiochus  Epiphanes ;  Livy  says  it  was
the  only  temple  on  earth  of  a  magnitude  suitable  to  the  greatness  of  the
god.      The  pseudo-Dicaearchus  (L    i,  in  Geogr,  Graeci  Minores^  ed.
MiJller,  i.  p.  98)  speaks  of  the  temple  as  half  finished  but  planned  on
an  astonishing  scale.     But  the  date  of  this  writer  is  somewhat  uncertain
(cp.  note  on  ix.  7.  6),  and  it  is  possible  that  he  is  referring  to  the  temple
bc^g;mi  by  Pisistratus.     The  temple  remained  unfinished  for  more  than
two  centuries  after  the  time  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  for  Strabo  speaks  of
it  (ix.  p.  396)  as  half  finished,  and  Plutarch  {Solon^  32)  compares  it  to
Plato's  unfinished  dialogue  Critzas.     Lucian  represents  Zeus  as  asking
whether  the  Athenians  ever  meant  to  finish  his  temple  {Icaromenifipus^
24).     Cp.  Hesychius,  s.v,  'Okvfiiriov,     Sulla  carried  off  some  of  the
colunms  to  build  the  temple  of  Jupiter  on  the  Capitol  at  Rome  (Pliny,
N,  H.  xxxvi.  45);   this  he  doubtless  did  after  his  sack  of  Athens  in
86  B.C.     The  columns  so  carried  off  were  probably,  as  Mr.  Penrose  says,
those  of  the  cella,  not  those  of  the  outer  colonnade,  and  may  have
attracted  the  cupidity  of  the  conqueror  by  the  richness  of  their  marbles
or  the  size  of  their  monolith  shafts.     The  columns  of  the  peristyle  or
outer  colonnade,  on  the  other  hand,  being  not  monoliths  but  composed
of  many  drums,  would  probably  escape  spoliation  from  the  difficulty  of
taking  them  down  and  setting  them  up  again  without  great  injury  to  the
pcHection  of  their  joints  (Penrose,  Principles  of  Athenian  Architecture^
ed.  1888,  p.  76).     In  the  reign  of  Augustus  the  kings  and  states  in
alliance  with  or  subjection  to  Rome  formed  a  scheme  of  completing  the
temple  of  Olympian  Zeus  at  Athens  at  their  joint  expense  and  dedicating
it  to  the  Genius  of  Augustus   (Suetonius,  Augustus^  60) ;  but  it  does
not  appear  that  even  a  beginning  was  made  of  putting  the  plan  in  execu-
tion.   The  temple  was  finally  completed  at  the  expense  of  the  emperor
Hadrian  (Philostratus,    Vit.  Soph,    i.   25.  6 ;    Dio  Cassius,  Ixix.    16 ;
ScfaoL  on  Lucian,  Icaromenippus^  24),  who  dedicated  it  in  person  during
one  of  his  visits  to  Athens  (Spartianus,  Hadricm^  13).     Hadrian  seems
to  have  visited  Athens  twice,  first  in  the  autumn  of  125  A. D.,  and  second
from  the  spring  of  129  a.d.  to  the  spring  of  130  A.D.     The  dedication
of  the  temple  of  Olympian  Zeus  appears  to  have  taken  place  during  his
swmd  visit     See  J.  Diirr,  Die  Reisen  des  Kaisers  Hadrian^  P*  42  sqq, ;
^  W.  Dittenberger,  '  Kaiser  Hadrians  erste  Anwesenheit  in  Athen,'
HtrmeSf  7  (1873),  pp.  213-229.     But  on  the  strength  of  two  inscriptions
^nnd  in  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  near  Epidaurus  Mr.  P.  Cawadias
argnes  that  the  dedication  of  the  Olympieum  at  Athens  by  Hadrian
took  place  in  131  A.D.    St&  ^tXriov  apxauoXoyiKov,  1892,  pp.  11 3-1 17.
By  command  of  the  emperor  a  fine  speech  was  delivered  at  the  opening
ceremony  by  the  rhetorician  Polemo  (Philostratus,  l,c,)     Hadrian  dedi-
cated in  the  temple  a  serpent  which  had  been  brought  from  India  (Dio
Cassias,  Ixiz.  16).

At  what   time   the  temple  fell  into  ruins  is  not  known.     When

Cyriacos  of  Ancona  visited  Athens  about  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth

century  there  were  twenty-one  columns  standing  with  their  architraves

(Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen^  i.  p.  727).     In  the  seventeenth  century

the  colmnns  were  reduced  to  seventeen;  and  about  1760  one  of  the


i8o


THE  OLYMPIEUM


BK.   I.  ATTICA


surviving  columns  was  pulled  down  by  the  Turkish  governor  and  con-
verted into  lime  for  the  construction  of  a  new  mosque  (Chandler,
Travels  in  Greece^  p.  76;  Wachsmuth,  op,  ciL  i.  p.  759,  note  2;
Bevier,  p.  189  of  the  paper  cited  at  the  end  of  this  note).  Sixteen
columns  continued  to  stand  till  1852,  when  one  was  thrown  down  by  a
hurricane.

The  platform  on  which  the  remains  of  the  temple  stand  is  con-
structed of  massive  masonry,  and  is  strengthened  with  buttresses  on  the
south  side.  It  measures  676  feet  long  by  426  feet  broad  ;  so  that  the
total  circumference  (2204  feet)  of  the  sacred  precinct  is  very  nearly
equal  to  the  four  Greek  furlongs  (582x4  =  2328  feet)  at  which  Pau-
sanias  estimated  it     On  the  north  side  of  the  platform,  in  a  line  with


z:i.


dkfe


Dooooooooooooooooooc


>  O  O  ^
3  O  O

>  O   O


3  O    O  B


>o«ooo«ooooooo««
QonnonnnnnonnnQ


a  o  o  c

00c

00c

o  •  •  «

•  •  •  «

■  ■  ■  I


■^r-v


"V— u-


l^¥-i-i^^P^RW


tj?  y


?    4    ^    ^    7    ?    ?   '?M5t».


FIG.   7. — PLAN  OP  OLYMPIEUM.

Portions  printed  black  still  extant ;  portions  printed  in  outline  conjecturally  restored.

the  eastern  end  of  the  temple,  are  the  remains  of  a  portico  or  gateway,
which,  from  the  style  of  the  architecture,  appears  to  belong  to  the  age
of  Hadrian  ;  it  was  never  finished.  The  temple  was  one  of  the  largest
Greek  temples  in  the  world.  On  the  upper  step  it  measured  354  feet
in  length  by  135  feet  in  breadth.  It  had  long  been  supposed  that  the
temple  was  decastyle,  Le,  had  rows  of  ten  columns  at  each  of  the  narrow
ends;  but  excavations  conducted  by  Mr.  Penrose  in  1883  and  subse-
quent years  proved  that  it  was  octostyle,  i,e,  had  rows  of  eight  columns
at  the  two  narrow  ends,  as  Vitruvius  (iii.  2.  8)  had  stated  and  Dr.
Dorpfeld  had  maintained.  The  peristyle  or  outer  colonnade  of  the
temple  comprised  more  than  100  Corinthian  columns,  arranged  in
double  rows  of  twenty  each  on  the  northern  and  southern  sides  and  in
triple  rows  of  eight  each  at  the  east  and  west  ends.  The  columns  were
56  feet  7  inches  high  and  5  feet  7  inches  in  diameter  at  the  base ;  they


CH.  xviii  THE  OLYMPIEUM  i8i

have  twenty-four  (lutings.  The  total  height  of  the  fix>nt  is  estimated  to
have  been  91  feet  The  existing  sixteen  columns  are  of  Pentelic  marble
arranged  in  two  groups.  Thirteen  are  standing,  with  their  architraves,
at  the  south-eastern  angle ;  the  remaining  three,  of  which  one  is  pro-
strate, are  of  the  interior  row  of  the  southern  side,  not  far  from  the
south-western  angle  and  separated  from  the  other  thirteen  by  a  gap  of
about  100  feet  From  an  examination  of  the  style  of  the  existing
columns  Mr.  Penrose  concludes  that  they  belong  to  the  part  of  the
temple  built  by  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  not  to  the  part  built  by  Hadrian,
the  carving  of  the  capitals  being  superior  to  that  of  the  capitals  of  the
other  buildings  in  Athens  which  were  unquestionably  built  by  Hadrian,
namely  the  gate  near  the  Olympieum  and  the  Colonnade  or  Gymnasium
<^  Hadrian  (see  below).

The  excavations  conducted  by  Mr.  Penrose  brought  to  light  some

remains  of  wall  and  pavement  more  ancient  than  the  time  of  Antiochus

Epiphanes,  as  well  as  a  number  of  drums  of  large  columns,  unfluted

and  of  conmion  stone.     One  of  these  drums  is  not  less  than  7  feet  6

inches  in  diameter.     Probably  these  are  the  remains  of  the  temple

begun  by  Pisistratus.    It  is  remarkable  that  the  orientation  of  Pisistratus's

temple,  as  discovered  by  Mr.  Penrose,  differed  from  that  of  the  later

temple,  which  is  orientated  almost  exactly  east  and  west     Mr.  Penrose

estimates  that  the  cella  of  Pisistratus's  temple  was  116  feet  long  and  50

wide.

Besides  these  remains  of  Pisistratus's  temple  Mr.  Penrose  discovered
a  roogh  wall  of  still  earlier  date,  built  of  hard  limestone.  This,  the
most  ancient  of  all  the  remains  discovered  within  the  precinct  of  the
Olympieum,  is  considered  by  Mr.  Penrose  to  have  formed  part  of  the
very  early  foundation  which  tradition  ascribed  to  Deucalion.  Dr.
Ddrpfeld,  however,  is  reported  to  deny  the  possibility  of  this  emphatically
{American  Journal  of  Archaeology^  8  (1893),  p.  61).

Near  the  ruins  of  the  temple  was  found  an  inscription  (C  /.  A,  iii.
Na  561)  :  A€KfjLos  Kocra-ovrto^  IloTrkiov^F<a/iatos  "  Decimus  Cossutius,  a
RoiDan,  son  of  Publius."  This  Cossutius  was  no  doubt  the  Roman
anhitect  employed  by  Antiochus  Epiphanes  to  build  the  temple.  The
uucription  may  be  from  the  base  of  a  statue  erected  in  his  honour.

See  Stuart  and  Revett,  TAe  Antiquities  of  Athens^  3  (London,  1794),  pp.  11-

17 >  Dodwell,  Travels  in  Greece,  I.  p.  387  sqq,  ;  Leake,  Athens^  I.  pp.  513-516 ;

^Ij^t  Ancient  Athens^  pp.  272-279;  Milchhofer,  'Athen/p.  ITJ  sq,  ;  L.  Bevier,

*Thc  OlTmpieion  at  Athens,'  Papers  of  the  American  School  of  Classical  Studies  at

Atiem,  I  (1882-1883),  pp.  183-212  ;  Guide-Joanne^  I.  p.  98  sq, ;  Baedeker,'  p.  49

sq* ;  LoUixig,  '  Athen,'  p.  321  sq,  ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  188  sqq, ;

F.  C  Penrose,  m  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  8  (1887),  p.  272  sq,  ;  id,.  Principles

ef  Athenian  Architecture  (ed.    1888),  pp.   74-87,  with  plates  xxxvii.,   xxxviii.,

xxxix.;  *Ei^iufh  dfxaioKcyuc/i,  1883,  p.  19$  sq, ;  Berliner  philolog,  Wochenschrift,

7  (l«87).  p.  702.

18.  6.  The  imai^e  is  worth  seeing  etc.  On  coins  of  Athens  of
Roman  date  Zeus  is  represented  sitting,  naked  to  the  waist,  with  an
image  of  Victory  in  his  outstretched  right  hand  and  a  sceptre  in  his  left
This  was  the  attitude  of  Phidias's  great  statue  of  Zeus  at  Oljrmpia  (see  v.
1 1.  I  note).    Hence  it  seems  probable  that  the  statue  of  Olympian  Zeus


THE  OLYMPIEUM  BK.  I.  ATTICA

copied  (h)in  the  famous  one  at  Olympia,  and  was  in  tarn
copied  on  Athenian  coins.  See  Beul^  Momnaies
iPAtkitus,  p.  396  ;  Overbeck,  Criechiuht  Kunst-
mythohgie,  2.  p.  63  jy . ;  Imhoof - Blumer  and
Gardner,  JVum.  Com.  on  Paus.  pp.  137,  138,  with
pi.  BB  iv.  ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  p.  193.
The  priest  of  Olympian  Zeus  and  the  cleaner  of
hi8  image  had  seats  reserved  for  them  in  the
theatre  at  Athens  (C.  /  A.  m.  Nos.  243,  291).
piti.  s.— lUTKu  nus    As  to  the  ofBce  of  cleaner  of  images,  see  v.  14.  5

(aTKEHIAH  C0IW>  jj^jg^

18.  ti.  bronia  fftatnea  which  the  Athenians  call  tlie  'Ooloniea.'
These  were  probably  female  statues  personifying  the  various  colonies  of
Athens.  Such  personifications  of  cities  and  lands  were  common  in
later  Greek  art.  See  Overbeck,  Gnch.  d.  grieck.  Plailik,*  a.  p.  489
Iff.  ;  Roscher's  Lexikon,  1.  p,  2074  sqq.  ;  cp,  the  personifjcations  of
Peoples  referred  to  in  note  on  i.  I.  3,  "  statues  of  Zeus  and  the  People."
One  of  the  earliest  and  best  known  statues  of  cities  was  the  statue  of
the  Fortune  of  Antioch  by  Eutychides.     See  vi.  2.  7  note.

18.  6.  ersrr  dtr  wt  np  a  statns  of  the  Emperor  ^''"*'iw"
The  inscribed  pedestals  of  a  number  of  these  statues  have  been  found
in  or  near  the  Olympieum.  They  include  the  pedestals  of  the  statues
set  up  by  Laodicea  on  the  Sea,  a  city  of  Syria  (C  /.  A.  iii.  No.  479),
Miletus  (C.  /.  A.  iii.  No.  480),  Pale  in  Cephallene  (C.  /.  A.  iii.  No.
481),  Pompeiopolis  (Soli)  in  Cilicia  (C.  /.  A.  iii.  No.  482),  Sebastopolb
in  Pontus  (C.  /.  A.  iii.  No.  483},  Sestus  in  the  Thracian  Chersonese
(C  /  A.  iii.  Na  484),  Ephesus  (C.  /.  A.  iii.  No.  48;),  and  Ceramtis  in
Caria  (C  /  A.  iii.  No.  486).

18.  7-  a  temple  of  Oro&IU  and  Bbea.  Another  writer  mentions
the  precinct  of  Cronus  as  situated  beside  the  Olympieum  and  extending
as  far  as  the  sanctuary  of  the  Mother  Goddess  in  the  suburb  called
Agrae  (Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca,  i.  p.  273  line  20  j;.,  where  for  ayop^
we  must  read  'Aypj  with  Professor  C.  Wachsmuth,  Ihe  Stadt  AtMen,
I.  p.  227).  A  cake  with  twelve  knobs  on  it  was  sacrificed  to  Cronus
at  Athens  on  the  14th  day  of  the  month  Elaphebolion  (March-April),
as  we  learn  from  an  inscription  (C.  /.  A,  iii.  No.  77).

18.  7-  a  precisct  of  Olympian  Earth.  This  is  probably  the  sanctu-
ary of  Earth  mentioned  by  Thucydides  (ii.  15)  among  the  ancient
sanctuaries  of  Athens  on  the  south  side  of  the  Acropolis.  It  was  beside
the  tomb  of  the  Amazon  Antiope  (Plutarch,  Theseus,  27),  which,  as  we
have  seen  (note  on  i.  2.  i),  was  near  the  Itonian  gate.  Hence  the
precinct  of  Olympian  Earth  seems  to  have  lain  somewhere  to  the  south-
west of  the  temple  of  Olympian  Zeus.

18.  7.  after  the  delnge  which  happened  In  Dencallon's  time
tlie  water  ran  awar  down  thU  deft  Similariy  at  Hierapolis  on  the
Euphrates  a  cleft  was  shown  under  the  temple  of  Hera  (Astarte),  and  a
legend  was  told  that  after  the  great  flood  the  water  had  run  away  down
this  hole.  In  memory  of  this  deliverance  from  the  great  deluge  water
was  brought  from  the  sea  twice  a  year  to  Hierapolis  and  poured  out  in


CH.  XVIII  DEUCALION'S  FLOOD  183

the  temple  of  Astarte.  After  flooding  the  floor  of  the  temple  it  escaped
by  the  cleft  miderground.  The  bringing  of  the  water  seems  to  have
been  a  great  national  ceremony.  We  are  told  that  not  only  the  priests,
but  all  Syria  and  Arabia  and  people  from  beyond  the  Euphrates
made  the  pilgrimage  to  the  sea  and  brought  back  the  water.  See
Ludan,  De  dea  SyriOy  1 2  sq.  On  this  Syrian  custom  my  friend  Professor
W.  Robertson  Smith  furnished  me  with  the  following  note :  '*  The
*sea'  in  this  rite  is  probably  the  Euphrates  (according  to  a  familiar
Semitic  idiom) ;  see  Philostratus,  Vita  Apollonii^  i.  20.  The  closest
parallel  to  the  ritual  of  Hierapolis  is  the  annual  water-pouring  in  the
temple  of  Jerusalem  at  the  feast  of  Tabernacles,  on  which  see  Lightfoot
an  John  vii.  381  ;  Reland,  Ant,  Heb,  p.  448.  The  *  lapis  fimdationis'
at  the  temple  was  believed  to  cover  the  mouth  of  the  great  deep
{Jerusalem  Targum  on  Exodus^  xxviii.  30),  which  makes  the  parallel
more  exact"  The  story  of  the  great  flood  in  which  all  mankind  perished
except  Deucalion  and  his  wife  Pyrrha,  who  were  saved  in  an  ark
(Apollodorus,  i.  7.  2  ;  Lucian,  Ix, ;  Ovid,  Met,  i.  260  5qq,\  belongs  to
a  class  of  legends  which  are  found  in  many  parts  of  the  world.  The
oldest  version  of  the  legend  is  the  Babylonian  one,  from  which  the
Hebrews  derived  the  account  given  in  Genesis.  The  legends  of  this
class  have  been  collected  and  examined  by  Mr.  R.  Andree  {Die
FitUsagen^  Braunschweig,  1891).  He  finds  that  they  occur  in  western
and  southern  Asia,  Australia,  New  Guinea,  the  islands  of  the  Pacific
(Melanesia,  Micronesia,  and  Polynesia),  and  America,  both  North  and
Soath.  On  the  other  hand  genuine  flood-legends  seem  to  be  almost
or  wholly  wanting  in  Africa,  central  and  northern  Asia,  China,  and
Japan.  The  origin  of  such  legends  is  to  be  sought  partly  in  the  re-
Collection  of  real  but  local  floods,  partly  in  inferences  drawn  from  the
discovery  of  shells  and  fossil  fish  on  the  tops  of  hills  and  other  spots
remote  from  the  sea.  Cp.  E.  B.  Tylor,  Researches  into  the  Early
History  of  Mankind?  P-  325  sqq,

18.  7-  Every  year  they  throw  into  it  wheaten  meal  kneaded
with  himey.  This  was  probably  done  at  the  festival  of  the  Water-
carrying  (Hydrophoria),  which  was  held  in  memory  of  the  people  who
had  perished  in  the  great  flood  {Etymolog,  Magnum^  s/u,  ^YSpoKf^opia^  p.
774;  Hesychius,  s.v,  *YSpo€f>opCa),  The  festival  seems  to  have  been
celebrated  on  the  1 3th  day  of  Anthesterion,  which  fell  about  the  first  of
March.  See  Plutarch,  Sut/a^  1 4 ;  SchoL  on  Aristophanes,  Acham,
1076,  and  Knights^  218  ;  K.  F.  Hermann,  Gottesdienstliche  AlterthUmer^
§  58.  30  and  22  ;  Aug.  Mommsen,  Heortologie,  p.  346  sq,

18.  8.  a  statue  of  Isocrates.  The  statue  was  of  bronze  and  was
set  up  by  Isocrates's  adopted  son  Aphareus.  It  bore  the  inscription :
"  Aphareus,  revering  the  gods  and  his  parents'  virtue,  dedicated  to  Zeus
this  statue  of  his  father  Isocrates."  See  [Plutarch,]  Vit.  X,  Orat,  p.  839  b.

18.  8.  the  tidings  of  the  battle  of  Ohaeronea  grieved  him  so
that  he  died  a  Tolnntary  death.  The  common  tradition  in  antiquity
was  that  Isocrates  died  very  shortly  after  the  battle  of  Chaeronea  (338
B.C),  having  been  so  affected  by  the  news  of  the  Greek  defeat  that  he
refused  all  nourishment,  and  after  lingering  a  few  days  expired  at  the  age


ig4  HADRIAN'S  BUILDINGS  bk.  i.  attica

of  ninety-eight  or  thereabout.  See  Dionysius  Halicamassensis,  De  Isocrate
Judicium^  i  ;  Biographi  Graeci^  ed.  Westermann,  p.  258  ;  [Plutarch,]
Vit,  X,  Oral,  p.  838  b;  Philostratus,  Vit,  Soph,  i.  17;  [Lucian,]
Macrobii^  23.  This  tradition  is  contradicted  by  an  apparently  genuine
letter  of  Isocrates  (No.  3)  written  to  King  Philip  alter  the  battle  of
Chaeronea,  in  which  the  silly  old  man,  far  from  expressing  any  grief  at
his  country's  overthrow,  congratulates  himself  on  having  lived  to  see  his
youthful  dreams  in  process  of  fulfilment  by  Philip,  whom  he  fondly
regards  as  the  good  physician  who  had  healed  the  long  internal  dis-
sensions of  Greece,  and  the  brave  champion  who  was  about  to  lead  a
national  crusade  against  Persia.  The  tone  and  purport  of  this  foolish
letter  are  quite  in  harmony  with  all  that  we  know  of  the  writer  and  his
political  creed,  whereas  the  story  of  his  grief  and  despair  at  the  tidings  of
Chaeronea  is  inconsistent  with  the  whole  tenour  of  his  life  Probably,
therefore,  the  story  is  false,  or  at  least  distorts  the  facts.  See  F.  Blass,
'  Isocrates  dritter  Brief  und  die  gewohnliche  Erzahlung  von  seinem
Tode,'  Rheimsches  Museum^  N.  F.  20  (1865),  pp.  1 09-1 16;  R.  C.
Jebb,  The  Attic  Oratorsy  2.  p.  3 1  sqq.

18.  8.  in  proof  that  Dencalion  dwelt  at  Athens  they  point
to  a  graye.  According  to  the  Parian  Marble  (line  6  sq,)  Deucalion  on
the  occasion  of  the  great  flood  fled  from  Lycorea  in  Phocis  to  the  court  of
Cranaus  at  Athens,  where  he  founded  the  sanctuary  of  Showery  Zeus  (see
i.  32.  2  note)  and  offered  thank-offerings  for  his  preservation.  Strabo
mentions  (ix.  p.  425)  that  the  tomb  of  Deucalion  was  at  Athens.

18.  9.  a  sanctoary  common  to  all  the  gods.  In  this  sanctuary
there  was  a  record  of  all  the  benefits  Hadrian  had  conferred  on  Greece.
See  i.  5.  5.  We  hear  of  Pantheons  in  other  parts  of  Greece  (il  2.  8
note).

18.  9.  most  splendid  of  all  are  one  hundred  columns  etc.  To
the  north  of  the  Acropolis  and  east  of  the  ancient  market-place  are
some  considerable  remains  of  a  vast  structure  of  Roman  date.  The
general  plan  of  the  building  is  that  of  a  spacious  quadrangular  court
surrounded  by  cloisters  or  colonnades.  It  is  400  feet  long  from  east  to
west  by  270  feet  wide  from  north  to  south.  Portions  of  the  eastern,
northern,  and  western  walls  are  standing.  The  fa^de  was  to  the  west,
and  the  northern  part  of  it  is  in  fair  preservation.  It  consisted  originally
of  a  wall  built  of  large  square  blocks  of  Pentelic  marble  and  adorned  on
the  outer  (western)  side  with  eighteen  Corinthian  colunms.  The  four
central  colunms,  of  which  only  one  is  now  standing,  were  fluted  and
stood  farther  out  from  the  wall  than  the  other  colunms.  They  formed
a  portal  to  the  building,  with  an  ascent  of  six  steps.  The  seven  columns
of  the  facade  to  the  north  of  this  portal,  together  with  the  marble  wall
at  the  back  of  them,  are  still  standing.  The  interval  between  the
columns  and  the  wall  is  less  than  2  feet,  and  the  interval  between  each
pair  of  columns  is  about  3  feet.  Each  colunm  is  carved  out  of  a  single
block  of  Carystian  (or,  according  to  Mr.  Nicolaides,  of  Phrygian)  marble,
and  is  28J  feet  high  by  3  feet  thick.  The  florid  Corinthian  capitals  are
of  Pentelic  marble.  The  shafts  are  unfiuted.  Each  column  stands  on
a  base  of  its  own,  and  is  surmounted  by  a  horizontal  entablature.


CH.  XVIII  HADRIAN'S  BUILDINGS  185

A  cloister  or  colonnade  ran  round  the  whole  interior  of  the  spacious

quadrangle.     On  the  north,  west,  and  south  sides  this  colonnade  was

about  27  feet  wide,  that  being  the  distance  of  the  columns  from  the

exterior  wall  of  the  structure.     But  on  the  east  side  a  row  of  five

chambers,  of  which  the  middle  one  was  the  largest,  opened  off  the

colonnade.     The  total  number  of  columns  in  this  interior  cloister  or

colonnade  was  one  hundred.     None  of  them  is  standing,  but  the  marks

of  the  bases  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  quadrangle  enable  us  to  calculate

their  number.     The  inner  sides  of  the  walls  were  encrusted  with  plates

of  marble,  as  appears  from  the  fragments  of  marble  scattered  about,

from  a  few  pieces  still  adhering  to  the  walls,  and  from  the  holes  and

bronze  fastenings  still  to  be  seen  in  the  walls.     According  to   Mr.

Nicolaldes  the  marble  is  Phrygian.     In  the  middle  of  this  cloistered

court  there  must  have  been  some  ancient   building,  for  towards  the

eastern  side  of  it  there  remains  a  portion  of  a  marble  wall  of  good

Roman  period,  which,  from  its  style  and  situation,  appears  to  have  been

built  with  reference  to  the  cloistered  court  in  the  middle  of  which  it

stands.     But  the  ground -plan  of  this  central  building  has  been  effaced

by  the  construction  of  two  churches,  one  after  the  other,  on  the  site.

Of  these  churches  themselves  only  ruins  are  left.

From  the  style  of  this  cloistered  court  antiquaries  are  of  opinion  that
it  belongs  to  the  age  of  Hadrian.  Hence  it  has  been  plausibly  con-
jectured that  the  edifice  was  either  the  library  or  the  gymnasium  of
Hadrian,  of  which  Pausanias  here  makes  mention.  Its  hundred
colimms  would  answer  to  Pausanias' s  description  of  either  building.  But,
if  wc  may  judge  from  the  ancient  gymnasiums  of  which  the  ground-
plans  have  been  discovered  at  Olympia,  the  edifice  in  question  hardly
possesses  enough  of  chambers  to  justify  us  in  regarding  it  as  a  gym-
nasium. More  probably,  perhaps,  it  was  the  library.  The  building  in
the  centre  of  the  court  may  have  been  the  "  building  adorned  with  a
gilded  roof  and  alabaster ''  in  which  the  books  were  stored ;  and  the
cloister  with  its  hundred  columns  which  ran  round  the  court  may  be  the
colonnade  of  Phrygian  marble  described  by  Pausanias.  True,  he  says
tbe  walls  of  the  colonnade  as  well  as  the  columns  were  of  marble  ;  and
^  know  that  on  at  least  two  sides  of  the  court  (the  east  and  north)  the
^""alls  were  merely  of  common  stone  faced  with  marble.  But  to  tsdce  a
^  faced  with  marble  for  a  wall  of  solid  marble  would  be  a  natural
^  excusable  blunder.

Amongst  the  many  fine  buildings  with  which  Hadrian  adorned
Athens,  the  library  is  singled  out  by  Jerome  as  a  wonderful  work  (Eu-
scbius,  Chronic,  vol.  2.  p.  167,  ed.  Schone).  The  rhetorician  Aristides
speaks  of  the  libraries  at  Athens  as  the  best  in  the  world  (Or,  xiii.  vol.
*•  p.  306,  ed.  Dindorf).

See  Dyer,  Ancient  Athens^  pp.  2  5  2-2  5  5 ;  Ilpafcrifca  t^s  *  Apxa^oA-oy  tir^s
R^tpta?  for  1885,  pp.  13-24,  with  pi.  i ;  Milchhofer,  *  Athen,'  p.  169  ;
Lolling,  *  Athen,*  p.  319  note  3  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  83  sq, ;  Guide- Joanne^
I.  p.  96  sq,  ;  G.  Nicolaides,  in  *E<t>rffi€f)is  dpx<ii'oXoytK'q,  1888,  pp.
57-66;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  pp.  195-199.

A  few  words  may  here  be  given  to  some  ancient  structures  at  Athens


i86  GATE  OF  THE  MARKET  bk.  i.  attica

which  have  survived  to  the  present  day,  but  which  Pausanias  has
omitted  to  notice.  Two  of  them  are  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  large
quadrangular  court  just  described ;  the  third  is  close  to  the  Olympieum.

I.  To  the  south  of  the  large  cloistered  court  just  described,  and
nearly  in  a  line  with  its  western  front,  is  the  so-called  Gate  of  the  Market
or  Gate  of  Foundress  Athena  (Athena  Archegetis).  It  &ces  west  and
consists  of  four  slender  Doric  columns,  26  feet  high  and  4  feet  thick,
supporting  a  massive  architrave  and  great  part  of  a  plain  pediment  or
gable.  The  architrave  is  adorned  with  triglyphs  and  metopes.  An
inscription  (C  /.  A.  iii.  No.  65)  carved  on  the  architrave  sets  forth  that
the  structure  was  erected  by  the  people  out  of  gifts  made  to  them  by
Julius  Caesar  and  the  emperor  Augustus,  and  that  it  was  dedicated  to
Foundress  Athena.  Above  the  pediment  or  gable  there  was  formerly  a
pedestal  which,  according  to  the  inscription  (C  /.  A,  iii.  No.  445),
supported  a  statue  of  Lucius  Caesar,  the  adopted  son  of  Augustus.
About  6  feet  to  the  east  of  this  portal  was  the  wall  containing  the  gate-
way proper.  One  of  the  antae  of  this  gateway  still  stands  opposite  the
column  at  the  south  comer,  with  which  it  is  connected  by  the  architrave.
Facing  this  anta^  a  little  to  the  north  of  it,  is  a  jamb  of  the  door,  in  a
line  with  the  northern  of  the  two  central  colunms.  On  the  inner  face
of  this  jamb  is  festened,  in  its  original  position,  a  long  inscription  con-
taining a  decree  of  the  emperor  Hadrian  as  to  the  sale  of  oil  (C.  /.  A,
iii.  No.  38).

The  purpose  which  this  structure  subserved  was  formerly  a  matter
of  dispute.  L.  Ross  (Z^ox  TheseioHy  p.  41)  and  P.  W.  Forchhammer
{Topographie  von  Athen^  p.  57)  maintained  that  it  formed  part  of  a
small  temple  of  Foundress  Athena.  But  excavations  made  by  the  Greek
Archaeological  Society  in  1 890  and  1 89 1  have  disproved  this  view  and
settled  the  question.  To  the  east  of  the  gateway,  between  it  and  the
Tower  of  the  Winds  (see  below),  the  remains  have  been  discovered  of  a
market-place  of  Roman  date,  to  which  undoubtedly  the  gateway  in
question  formed  the  western  entrance.  The  market-place  consisted  of
an  open  square  paved  with  marble  flags  and  surrounded  by  an  Ionic
colonnade.  Only  the  south-eastern  comer  of  it  has  as  yet  (1894)  been
excavated.  Here,  along  the  eastern  back-wall  of  the  colonnade,  a  row
of  square  chambers  opening  by  doors  into  the  colonnade,  has  been  dis>
covered.  These  chambers  were  probably  storehouses  or  shops.  Near
die  south-eastern  comer  of  the  market-place  a  gateway  leading  into  it
from  the  east  has  also  been  brought  to  light.  The  outer  (eastem)  front
of  this  gateway  was  adorned  with  four  columns,  its  inner  fix>nt  with
two  columns  of  smaller  diameter;  all  these  columns  are,  like  the
columns  of  the  colonnade,  unfluted  and  of  the  Ionic  order.  The  floor
of  the  gateway  is  paved  with  massive  flags.  This  eastem  gateway  does
not  stand  in  the  axis  of  the  westem  gateway  (the  one  which  supports  the
dedication  to  Foundress  Athena) ;  it  is  to  the  south  of  a  line  drawn
through  that  axis.  Probably  there  was  another  eastem  gateway  in  a
corresponding  position  to  the  north  of  a  line  drawn  through  the  axis
of  the  westem  gateway.  Thus  the  market-place  probably  had  three
entrances  at  least ;  one  on  the  west  and  two  on  the  east.     Whether


CH.  XVIII  TOIVER  OF  THE  WINDS  187

there  were  gates  on  the  north  and  south  sides  we  do  not  know.  Exca-
vations may  inform  us  hereafter.  That  this  open  square  surrounded  by
a  colonnade  or  cloister  was  a  market-place  is  proved  by  a  variety  of
evidence.  Two  standard  measures  of  capacity,  dedicated  by  clerks  of
the  market,  were  found  in  the  course  of  the  excavations,  and  similar
objects  were  found  in  the  same  place  many  years  ago.  Further,  four
cup-like  hollows  of  different  sizes,  cut  very  carefully  in  the  floor  of  the
colonnade  between  two  of  the  columns,  are  also  clearly  measures  of
capacity.  Moreover,  on  one  of  the  columns,  at  a  height  of  about  3  feet
3  inches  fh)m  the  ground,  a  fine  horizontal  line  is  carved  for  a  length  of
.365  metre ;  and  on  the  opposite  column  at  the  same  height  there  is
a  similar  line  of  exactly  the  same  length.  These  lines  are  probably
standard  measures  of  the  length  which  the  Greeks  called  pugan  (irvycov)  ;
it  was  measured  from  the  elbow  to  the  first  joints  of  the  fingers.  Lasdy,
three  inscriptions  of  Roman  date,  two  of  them  cut  on  columns  and  one
of  them  on  the  pavement,  gave  the  names  of  the  merchants  or  hucksters
who  exposed  their  wares  at  the  spots  indicated  by  the  inscriptions.  An
inscription  containing  a  dedication  to  Foundress  Athena  and  the  imperial
&nily  (C  /.  A,  iii.  No.  66),  which  was  found  near  the  Tower  of  the
Winds,  may  have  been  originally  fixed  over  one  of  the  eastern  gateways
of  this  market-place.

See  Leake,  Athens^  i.  p.  211  sqq, ;  C.  BQtticher,  Bericht  fiber  die
Untersuchungen  auf  der  Akropolis  von  Athen^  pp.  223-226 ;  Dyer,
Athens^  p.  243  sqq,  ;  Milchhdfer,  *Athen,'  p.  173  ;  Guide-Joanne^  i.  p.
94  sq, ;  Lolling,  *Athen,'  p.  321  ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  p.
199  sqq,\  E.  Curtius,  Stadtgesckichte^  p.  255  sqq,\  UpaKTiKo,  rrjs
'ApxauoXjoyiKjj^  ^Eraipiai  for  1890,  pp.  11 -19;  id.,  for  1891,  pp.  7-1 1  ;
Baedeker,^  p.  85.

2.  To  the  east  of  the  portal  of  Foundress  Athena,  at  the  southern
end  of  the  modem  Aeolus  Street,  is  one  of  the  best-preserved  buildings
of  ancient  Athens.  This  is  the  Horologium  of  Andronicus,  popularly
called  the  Tower  of  the  Winds.  It  is  an  octagonal  tower  built  of  marble,
36  feet  in  diameter  and  42  feet  high,  including  the  three-stepped  base-
ment on  which  it  stands.  On  the  north-east  and  north-west  faces  were
porticoes,  each  supported  by  a  pair  of  Corinthian  columns,  the  capitals  of
which  may  be  seen  lying  on  the  ground  close  by.  The  eight  sides  of
the  tower  are  turned  towards  the  different  points  of  the  compass,  and
each  hce  is  adorned  with  a  sculptured  relief  representing  the  wind  which
blows  from  that  half-quarter.  The  Winds  are  all  represented  as  winged
figures  floating  in  the  air  in  a  nearly  horizontal  position.  Each  Wind
bears  some  appropriate  emblem  and  its  name  is  carved  on  the  cornice
above  it  On  each  face  of  the  tower,  under  the  figure  of  the  particular
Wind,  is  a  sun-dial.  The  roof  is  in  the  shape  of  a  low  octagonal
pyramid,  and  is  formed  of  slabs  of  marble  held  together  by  a  round
keystone.  Vitruvius  accurately  described  the  tower  (i.  6.  4),  and  from
him  we  learn  that  it  was  originally  surmounted  by  a  bronze  Triton  so
constructed  that  it  revolved  with  the  wind  and  pointed  with  a  rod  to  the
image  of  the  particular  wind  which  happened  to  be  blowing.  Inside
the  tower  was  a  water-clock.     The  circular  channels  in  which  the  water


x88  ARCH  OF  HADRIAN  bk.  i.  attica

ran  are  still  plainly  visible  on  the  floor ;  but  the  exact  nature  of  the
mechanism  by  which  the  clock  was  worked  is  not  known.  The  water
for  the  clock  was  brought  from  a  cistern  in  a  semi-circular  turret-like
structure  which  still  exists  to  the  south  of  the  tower ;  and  the  cistern
was  itself  fed  from  the  Clepsydra  spring  on  the  Acropolis  (see  i.  28.  4
note)  by  means  of  a  covered  channel  or  aqueduct,  of  which  some  portions
are  still  in  existence.  Thus  the  entire  structure  served  to  indicate  the
half-quarter  of  the  sky  from  which  the  wind  blew,  and  the  time  of  day
by  the  sun  when  it  shone,  and  by  water  in  all  weathers  and  at  all  hours
of  the  day  or  night.  The  tower  was  built  by  a  certain  Andronicus  of
Cyrrhus,  a  city  in  Syria  (Vitruvius,  Lc)  It  must  have  been  built  before
37  B.C.,  since  it  is  mentioned  by  Varro  in  a  work  composed  in  that  year
{De  re  rusHca^  iii.  5.  17.  The  date  of  the  composition  of  Varro's
treatise  De  re  rusttca  is  fixed  by  the  author's  own  statement  in  the  pre-
face, i.  I.  I,  that  he  was  then  in  his  eightieth  year.  He  was  bom  in
1 16  B.C  Cp.  Scriptores  rerutn  rusticarum^  ed.  Schneider,  vol.  i.  2.  p.
229  ;  Teuffel,  Geschichte  der  romischen  Literatur^^  §  168,  p.  282).

See  Leake,  Athens^   i.  pp.    190-192  ;  Dyer,  Ancient  Athens^  pp.
255-257;    Milchhofer,  *  Athen,*    p.    173;    Baedeker,^  p.    84;    Guide-
Joanne y  i.  p.  95  x^. ;  Lolling,  *  Athen,'  p.  321  ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient
Athens^  pp.  200-203.

3.  A  few  paces  north  of  the  north-west  comer  of  the  Olympieum  or
platform  on  which  stood  the  temple  of  Olympian  Zeus  is  the  so-called
Arch  of  Hadrian.  This  is  an  isolated  gateway  facing  north-west  and
south-east.  It  is  59  feet  high  and  44  feet  wide,  with  an  archway  20
feet  broad.  It  is  built  of  Pentelic  marble ;  the  order  is  Corinthian.
The  two  piers  of  the  arch,  each  about  1 5  feet  square,  were  adorned  with
a  Corinthian  column  and  pilaster  on  each  side  of  the  arch,  the  whole
stmcture  presenting  an  exactly  similar  appearance  on  both  fronts.  Only
a  few  fragmentary  bases  of  the  columns  remain.  Above  the  archway  is
an  attica  or  second  story,  consisting  of  four  Corinthian  columns  with  a
pediment  over  the  two  middle  ones.  The  window-like  openings  between
these  columns  were  formerly  filled  with  thin  slabs  of  marble.  On  the
north-western  front,  above  the  centre  of  the  arch,  is  an  inscription :
"This  is  Athens,  the  ancient  city  of  Theseus"  (C.  /.  A,  iii.  No.  401).
On  the  south-eastern  front  is  the  inscription :  "  This  is  the  city  of
Hadrian,  and  not  of  Theseus"  (C  /.  A,  iii.  No.  402).  The  gateway
probably  stood  in  the  line  of  the  ancient  city-wall,  at  the  end  of  a  street
leading  south-east  into  the  suburb  which  received  the  name  of  Hadrian-
opolis  or  "  the  city  of  Hadrian  "  (Spartianus,  Hadrian^  20  ;  cp.  Stephanas
Byzantius,  s.v,  *OkvfnrUiovy  where  for  A'qk(^  we  should  probably  read
'AO-qvais)'  The  inscriptions  on  Hadrian's  Arch  at  Athens  are  incor-
rectly reported  by  the  scholiast  on  Aristides  (vol.  3.  p.  201  j^.,  ed.  Din-
dorf).  We  may  compare  the  inscriptions  said  to  have  been  engraved
on  opposite  sides  of  an  ancient  column  which  once  stood  on  the  Isthmus
of  Corinth.  On  one  side  was  the  inscription :  "  This  is  Peloponnese,
not  Ionia."  On  the  other  side  was  the  inscription  :  "This  is  not  Pelo-
ponnese but  Ionia."  See  Plutarch,  Theseus,  25  ;  Strabo,  ix.  p.  392  ;
Schol.  on  Homer,  liiady  xiii.  685  (ed.  Bekker).


CH.  XIX  THE  PYTHIUM  189

On  Hadrian's  Arch,  see  Leake,  Athens^  i.  p.  199  sqq, ;  Dyer,  Ancient
Athens^  p.  270  sqq,  ;  Milchhdfer,  *  Athen,'  p.  178  ;  Baumeister's  Denk-
tnaler^  p.  286,  fig.  287  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  48  sq, ;  Guide-Joanne^  i.  p.  97  sq,  ;
Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  1 93  sq,

19.  I.  an  image  of  Pythian  Apollo.     Although  Pausanias  only
mentions  an   image  of  Pythian  Apollo,   we   know  that   there  was   a
Pythium  or  sanctuary  of  the  Pythian  Apollo  in  this  quarter  of  Athens.
Thucydides  mentions  (ii.  15)  the  Pythium  among  the  ancient  sanctuaries
of  Athens  on  the  south  side  of  the  Acropolis.     The  Greek  lexicographers
tell  us  that  the  sanctuary  was  founded  by  Pisistratus  (Suidas,  s,v.  IIv^iov ;
Photius,  Lexicon^  s.v,  WvOiov ;  Hesychius,  s.v,  kv  TLvOiifi  x^a-ai) ;  but
they  were  perhaps  thinking  of  the  altar  of  Apollo  which,  as  we  learn
from  Thucydides  (vi.  54),  was  erected  in  the  Pythium  by  Pisistratus,
son  of  Hippias  and  grandson  of  the  tyrant  Pisistratus.     He  dedicated
the  altar  in  memory  of  his  tenure  of  the  office  of  archon  and  engraved
on  it  an  inscription  which  Thucydides  (/.r.)  has  preserved  for  us.     It
ran  thus  :  "  Pisistratus  son  of  Hippias  placed  this  memorial  of  his  archon-
ship  in  the  precinct  of  Pythian  Apollo."     This  inscription,  which  Thucy-
dides says  was  still  to  be  seen  in  his  time  in  the  sanctuary,  was  dis-
covered on  May  15th,  1877,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Ilissus,  below  the
spring  Callirrhoe,  two  hundred  paces  west  of  the  modem  bridge  which
now  leads  across  the  stream  to  the  Greek  cemetery.     The  block  of
marble  on  which  the  inscription  is  cut  is  broken  in  two,  and  one  word
and  a  few  letters  have  been  lost ;   otherwise  the  inscription   exactly
agrees  with  Thucydides*s  copy  of  it.     Under  the  inscription  is  a  mould-
ing of  the  sort  called  cymatium^  which  doubtless  ran  round  the  altar.
The  archonship  of  Pisistratus,  and  hence  the  dedication  of  the  altar,
must  have  fallen  between  Ol.  63.  2  (527  B.C.),  the  date  of  the  death  of
the  tyrant  Pisistratus,  and  01.  67.  3  (510  B.C.),  the  date  of  the  expul-
sion of  the  Pisistratidae  (cp.  Thucydides,  I.e.)     See  C  /.  A.  iv.  p.  41,
No.  373  e.

The   Pythiimi   was   probably  situated  where   the   inscription    was

found,   namely   on   the   right  bank  of  the   Ilissus,   below  the  spring

Callirrhoe,  and  to  the  south-west  of  the  Olympieum.     This  inference  is

confinned  by  the  discovery  in  this  neighbourhood  of  other  inscriptions

which  once  stood  in  the  same  sanctuary.     For  we  know  that  persons

who  won  the  prize  with  a  chorus  at  the  festival  of  the  Thargelia  used  to

set  up  their  prize-tripods  in  the  Pythium  (Photius,  Lexicon^  s.v.  livOiov  ;

Suidas,  s.v.  Ilv^ioi' ;  Isaeus,  v.  41) ;  and  here,  on  the  right  bank  of  the

ilissus,  to  the  west  of  the  Olympieum,  three  inscribed  bases  of  these

prize-tripods  have  been  found  (C  /.  A.  ii.  Nos.  1 236, 1237,  1 25 1  ;  Ditten-

^'^'ger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Graec.  Nos.  411,  412,  413).      In  the  same  place

^*^  found  part  of  another  pedestal  inscribed  with  a  dedication  to  Apollo  ;

"^ni  a  foot-print  on  the  surface  of  the  stone  it  appears  that  the  pedestal

^Qpported  a  bronze  statue  (C  /.  A.  ii.  No.  1154).     Plato  speaks  of  a

feinousand  beautiful  offering  which  Aristocrates  son  of  Scellias  dedicated

^  the  Pythium  (Plato,  Gorgias,  p.  472  a,  where  for  Ilv^or  we  should

'^d  Ilv^tov).     What  seems  to  have  been  the  pedestal  which  supported

^is  offering  has  been  found  at  Athens,  though  not  on  the  site  of  the


190  THE  DELPHINIUM  bk.  i.  attica

Pythium.  It  is  a  column  of  Pentelic  marble  and  is  inscribed  with  a
dedication  by  Aristocrates  son  of  Scelias  (sic)  for  a  victory  won  by  Imn
at  a  festival,  apparently  with  a  chorus  (the  inscription  is  mutilated).  See
C.LA,i,  No.  422.  Another  inscribed  base  of  a  tripod  was  found
near  the  site  of  the  Pythium,  but  on  the  opposite  (left)  bank  of  the
Ilissus  (C.  /.  A.  ii.  No.  11 76).  At  the  Panathenaic  festival  a  ship  with
the  robe  of  Athena  floating  at  the  masthead  was  drawn  on  rollers  to  the
Pythium  (Philostratus,  ViL  Sophist,  ii.  i.  7).  The  priest  of  the  Pythian
Apollo  had  a  seat  reserved  for  him  in  the  theatre  of  Dionysus  (C  /.  A,
iii.  No.  247).  On  the  city- wall  between  the  Pythium  and  the  Olym-
pieum  there  was  a  sacrificial  hearth  of  Lightning  Zeus,  where  certain
priestly  officials  called  Pythaists  observed  a  particular  quarter  of  the  sky
for  three  days  and  nights  in  each  of  three  successive  months.  They
kept  looking  to  a  place  called  Harma  on  Mt  Pames,  to  the  north-west
of  Athens ;  and  whenever  they  observed  a  flash  of  lightning  in  that
quarter  of  the  sky,  they  despatched  a  sacrifice  to  Delphi  (Strabo,  ix.
p.  404  ;  cp.  'BtVki&^s  Atucdota  Graeca^  i.  p.  212  line  \b  sq,\  Euripides,
lon^  285).

See  E.  Curtius,  *Das  Pythion  in  Athen,'  Hermes^  12  (1877),  pp.
492-499  (reprinted  in  his  Gesamtnelte  Abhandlungen^  i.  pp.  451-458);
Milchhofer,  <Athen,'  p.  179;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  pp.  203-
206.  As  to  Dr.  Ddrpfeld's  proposal  to  identify  the  Pythium  with  the
sanctuary  of  Apollo  in  the  cave  on  the  north-west  face  of  the  Acropolis,
see  note  on  I  29.  i.

19.  I.  anotiier  sanctnary  of  Apollo,  where  he  is  snmamed  Del-
phinianu  The  site  of  the  Delphinium  or  sanctuary  of  Delphinian
Apollo  is  not  known.  It  is  conjectured  to  have  been  somewhere  to  the
east  of  the  Olympieum.  The  sanctuary  is  said  to  have  been  founded
by  Aegeus,  who  dedicated  it  to  Delphinian  Apollo  and  Delphinian
Artemis  (Pollux,  viii.  119).  According  to  tradition,  Aegeus  himself
dwelt  here ;  a  fenced-in  spot  was  shown  in  the  sanctuary  where,  at  a
banquet  given  by  him  to  Theseus,  a  cup  of  poison  was  spilt  which
Medea  had  mixed  for  Theseus ;  and  an  image  of  Hermes  to  the  east
of  the  sanctuary  was  called  "  the  Hermes  at  Aegeus's  gates ''  (Plutarch,
Theseus^  12).  Before  sailing  for  Crete  with  the  other  destined  victims
of  the  Minotaur,  Theseus  went  to  the  Delphinium  and  implored  the
help  of  Apollo  by  depositing  in  the  sanctuary,  on  behalf  of  himself  and
his  comrades  in  the  perilous  enterprise,  a  branch  of  the  sacred  olive
wreathed  with  wool.  Then  he  went  down  to  the  seashore  and  embarked.
Hence  on  the  anniversary  of  the  day  (the  sixth  of  Munychion,  the  month
which  corresponded  to  the  latter  h^  of  April  and  the  first  half  of  May)
girls  used  to  go  in  procession  to  the  Delphinium  to  offer  supplications
down  to  Plutarch's  time  (Plutarch,  Theseus^  18).  After  he  had  sub-
dued the  Marathonian  bull,  Theseus  exhibited  the  beast  by  driving  it
through  the  streets  of  Athens,  and  then  sacrificed  it  to  Delphinian
Apollo  (Plutarch,  Theseus^  14).  Two  inscriptions  containing  dedications
to  Delphinian  Apollo  have  been  found  at  Athens  (C  /.  A,  iii.  Nos.
138,  939)-  On  the  Delphinian  Apollo,  see  Preller,  in  Berichte  iiber
die  Verkandl.  d,  k,  sacks,  Ges,  d,  Wiss,  zu  Leipzig^  Philolog.  histor.  CL,


CH.  XIX  APHRODITE  IN  THE  GARDENS  xgi

6(1854),  pp.  140-152  (reprinted  in  Preller's  Ausgewdhlte  Aufsatze,
pp.  244-256).  Prof.  £.  Maass  holds  that  the  sanctuary  of  Delphinian
Apollo  was  on  the  market-place,  being  identical  with  the  temple  of
Paternal  Apollo  mentioned  by  Pausanias  in  i.  3.  4.  See  £.  Maass,  De
Unaeo  et  DeipkifUo  CommentaHo  (Greisswald,  1891),  p.  xv.  sqq.  As  to
the  court  of  justice  at  the  Delphinium,  see  i.  28.  10  note.

19.  I.  his  liair  neatly  pLedted.  It  was  an  old  Attic  custom  for
young  men  to  wear  their  hair  coiled  in  long  plaits  at  the  back  of  the
bead.  This  fashion  of  wearing  the  hair  is  well  represented  on  a  fine
archaic  marble  head  of  a  young  man  now  in  the  Acropolis  Museimi
at  Athens.  See  ']&<fyqfjuepls  dpxaioXoyiKrj,  1888,  p.  82  sgg.,  with  pi.  2  ;
Overbeck,  Gesch,  eL  griech,  PlasHk^^  i.  p.  207,  with  fig.  49 ;  Collignon,
Hisimredela  Sculpture  Grecquty  i.  p.  363  sq,y  fig.  184.  Unmarried  girls
also  wore  their  hair  plaited  (Paus.,  viii.  20.  3 ;  x.  25.  10).  On  the
andcnt  Attic  modes  of  wearing  the  hair,  see  Th.  Schreiber,  *  Der  alt-
attische  Krobylos,'  MittheiL  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  8  (1883),  pp.  246-
Vliid-,  9  (1884),  pp.  232-254.

19.  2.  Of  the  place  called  the  Qardens  and  of  the  temple  of
Apbrodite  etc  The  district  called  the  Gardens  is  conjectured  to  have
been  the  low  ground  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Ilissus,  to  the  east  of  the
Olympieum.  This  suburb,  compared  to  the  generally  bare  and  arid
aspect  of  the  country  round  Athens,  is  still  green  and  luxuriant  Here
are  public  gardens  where,  on  summer  evenings  after  the  heat  of  the  day
is  over,  the  modem  Athenians  love  to  take  their  ease,  sipping  coffee
and  lemonade,  and  listening  to  the  more  or  less  sweet  strains  of  foreign
minstrels.  The  district  of  the  Gardens  lay  outside  the  city -walls
{PHny,  N.  H,  xxxvi.  16).  We  hear  of  the  sacrifice  of  a  heifer  to
Heavenly  Aphrodite  in  the  Gardens  (Lucian,  Dial,  Meretr,  vii.  i).
Near  her  temple  was  an  enclosure  to  which  the  maidens  called  Arrephori
^ght  certain  mystic  objects  from  the  Acropolis  (Paus.,  i.  27.  3).  Cp.
Uake,  Athens^  i.  p.  274  sqq,  ;  Dyer,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  283  sqq,  ;
MilchhSfer,  *  Athen,' p.  180;  Baedeker,^  p.  50;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient
^ihensy  p.  209  sqq,

19.  2.  The  form  of  this  image  is  sanare Heavenly  Aphro-

Ate.  Leake  suggested  that  this  square  image  of  Heavenly  Aphrodite
*as  derived  from  the  square  pillar  or  pyramidal  stone,  which  represented
^  oriental  Aphrodite  or  Astarte  in  some  of  her  shrines,  as  we  learn
6nm  Maximus  Tyrius  (Dissert,  viiL  8)  and  the  coins  of  Tyre,  Sidon,
and  Paphos  (Leake,  Athens,  i.  p.  133,  note  2).  Cp.  note  on  i.  44.  2.
As  to  Heavenly  Aphrodite,  see  above,  i.  1 4.  7  note.  Her  worship,  as
Pausanias  there  tells  us,  was  introduced  into  Athens  by  Aegeus.  Now,
considering  that  Aegeus  was  said  to  have  dwelt  in  the  Delphinium  (see
Qote  on  §  I ),  which  appears  to  have  been  near  the  temple  of  Heavenly
Aphrodite  in  the  Gardens,  it  seems  likely  that  the  sanctuary  of  Heavenly
A{>hrodite  traditionally  said  to  have  been  founded  by  Aegeus  was  this
^^  in  the  Gardens  near  his  own  house,  rather  than  the  one  in  the  city
^  Pausanias  apparendy  supposed  (i.  14.  7).  Cp.  Wachsmuth,  Die
^^Athenj  i.  p.  411.

19.  2.  Heavenly  Aphrodite  is  the  eldest  of  the  Fates.    In  some


192  APHRODITE  OF  ALCAMENES  bk.  i.  attica

verses  of  Epimenides  quoted  by  Tzetzes  (Schol.  on  Lycophron,  406),
and  less  fully  by  a  scholiast  on  Sophocles  (Oedipus  Coloneus^  42),
Aphrodite  and  the  Fates  are  represented  as  the  daughters  of  Zeus  by
Euonyme.  Cp.  C.  L.  Visconti,  in  Annali  delP  InstitutOy  41  (1869),  p.
213  sqq.  ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stcuit  Athen^  i.  p.  412,  note  3  ;  Preller,
Griechische  Mythologie^^  i.  p.  358,  note  i.

19.  2.  The  image  of  Aphrodite is  a  work  of  Alcamcmes,

Lucian  speaks  of  this  as  the  most  beautiful  of  all  the  works  of  Alca-
menes.  He  refers  particularly  to  the  cheeks  and  the  front  of  the  face,
the  graceful  turn  of  the  wrists,  and  the  delicate  tapering  of  the  fingers
(Lucian,  Ima^ineSy  4  and  6).  Pliny  also  speaks  of  the  statue  as  a
famous  work,  adding  that  Phidias  himself  was  said  to  have  given  the
finishing  touches  to  it  {N,  H,  xxxvi.  16).  In  recent  years  it  has  been
conjectured  that  this  statue  of  Aphrodite  in  the  Gardens  by  Alcamenes
was  the  original  of  a  particular  type  of  Aphrodite  of  which  many
specimens  have  come  down  to  us.  The  best  known  is  a  statue  of
Parian  marble  in  the  Louvre,  supposed  to  have  been  found  at  Frejus  in
1650.  It  is  commonly  known  as  the  Venus  Genetrix,  and  represents
the  goddess  lightly  draped,  holding  an  apple  in  her  left  hand  and
gracefully  lifting  her  robe  above  her  right  shoulder  with  her  right  hand.
The  original  must  certainly  have  been  a  famous  statue  since  so  many
copies  of  it  have  sur\'ived ;  but  that  it  was  the  celebrated  Aphrodite
of  Alcamenes  can  hardly  be  demonstrated.  See  Mitchell,  Ancient
Sculpture^  p.  320  ;  Overbeck,  Gesch,  d,  griech.  Plastik^^  i.  p.  376  j^.  ;
Friederichs-Wolters,  GipsabgOsse^  No.  1208;  S.  Reinach,  *  La  Venus
drap^e  au  Musde  du  Louvre,'  Gazette  Archiologtque^  12  (1887),  pp.
250-262.  A  list  of  the  existing  reproductions  of  this  type  of  Aphrodite
is  given  by  Bernoulli,  Aphrodite^  p.  86  sq,y  and  a  fuller  list  by  Mr.  S.
Reinach,  Ix,  The  identification  of  this  type  of  Aphrodite  with  the
Aphrodite  of  Alcamenes  was  first  proposed  by  Mr.  S.  Reinach  (Manuel
de  Philologie  Classiquey  2.  p.  94)  and  Professor  Furtwangler  (article
*  Aphrodite'  in  Roscher's  Lexikon^  i.  p.  412  sq,;  cp.  his  Meisterwerke
d.  griech,  Plastik,  p.  117),  and  has  been  accepted  by  Mr.  P.  Wolters
(Mittheil,  d  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  12  (1887),  p.  383)  and  Professor  C.
Robert  (Preller's  Griech,  Mythologie^^  i-  p.  383).  Mr.  S.  Reinach  has
since  retracted  his  opinion  and  accepted  the  view  of  Professor  Curtius
that  the  so-called  Venus  Genetrix  is  a  replica  of  the  draped  statue  of
Aphrodite  by  Praxiteles,  which  the  people  of  Cos  bought  in  preference
to  the  more  famous  nude  statue  by  the  same  sculptor  which  the  Cnidians
afterwards  purchased  (Pliny,  N,  H.  xxxvi.  20).  Mr.  De  Witte  also
agreed  with  Professor  Curtius.  See  Gazette  ArchJologique^  10  (1885),
p.  91  sq,  Mr.  Fr.  Winter  regards  the  Venus  Genetrix  as  a  work  of
the  middle  of  the  fifth  century  B.c.  or  earlier,  possibly  by  Callimachus
or  Calamis,  but  certainly  not  by  Alcamenes  (50/^?^  Programm  sum
Winckelmannsfeste^  Berlin,  1890,  pp.  11 7-1 21).  Dr.  Waldstein  regards
the  same  statue  as  a  copy  of  a  work  of  the  first  century  B.C.  (American
Journal  of  Archaeology^  3  (1887),  p.  10  sqq,)  Professor  Furtwangler's
theory  is  rejected  also  by  Mr.  E.  Reisch  (in  Eranos  Vindobonensis^  pp.
18-20).     As  to  Alcamenes,  see  v.  10.  8  note.


CH.  XIX  CYNOSARGES  193

19.  3.  a  sanctuary  of  Hercules  which  is  called  Csrnosarges.  This
is  said  to  have  been  one  of  the  two  most  revered  sanctuaries  of  Hercules
in  Attica,  the  other  being  the  one  at  Marathon  (Harpocration,  s.v.
'HpoicAcia).  It  was  outside  the  city-walls  (Plutarch,  Themisioclesy  i  ;
Livy,  xxxi.  24 ;  Eustathius,  on  Homer,  Od,  xiii.  408,  p.  1747),  a  little
way  from  the  gate  (Diogenes  Laertius,  vi.  i.  13).  The  gate  in  question
must  have  been  the  Diomean  gate  (Alciphron,  iii.  3  ;  /V/.,  iii.  5 1 ,  where
for  Aiojb»}&>i;9  we  should  read  Aio/iT/tiSos  ;  cp.  Hesychius,  s,v,  ^rudaixrt.
rvAacs),  since  Cynosarges  was  in  the  township  (deme)  of  Diomea
(Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v,  Kvvoo-apycs  ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Frogs,
651 ;  Athenaeus,  xiv.  p.  614  d).  Cynosarges  was  also  near  the  town-
ship of  Alopece  (Herodotus,  v.  63),  which  was  a  mile  and  a  third  or
so  outside  the  walls  (Aeschines,  i.  99).  Alopece  is  believed  to  have
occupied  the  site  of  the  modem  village  of  Ampelokipi  (*  vineyards'),
which  stands  in  a  fruitful  district,  watered  by  ancient  cisterns  and
channels,  at  the  north-eastern  foot  of  Mount  Lycabettus,  a  mile  and  a
quarter  to  the  north-east  of  the  modem  Royal  Palace  at  Athens  (Karten
vm  Attikoy  Erlduternder  Text,  2.  p.  20  sq^  Hence  Cynosarges  lay
somewhere  to  the  north-east  of  Athens,  in  the  direction  of  the  modem
Ampelokipi,  Now  we  are  told  that  the  tombs  of  Isocrates  and  his
femily  were  situated  near  Cynosarges,  on  a  hill  to  the  left  ([Plutarch,]
yu,  X,  Orat,  p.  838  b).  This  hill  may  have  been  Lycabettus,  which
u  on  the  left  as  you  go  from  Athens  to  Ampelokipi,  On  these  grounds
^P<>gniphers  now  generally  agree  in  placing  Cynosarges  on  or  near  the
ate  now  occupied  by  the  shady  gardens  of  the  Monastery  of  the  Angels
(^  Asdmaion,  literally  "  of  the  incorporeal  ones"),  at  the  south-eastem
foot  of  Lycabettus,  near  the  American  and  English  Schools  of  Archae-
<>Jogy.  This  position  agrees  very  well  with  the  narrative  of  Herodotus,
who  tells  us  (vi.  115  sq,)  that  after  the  battle  of  Marathon  the  Athenians,
^ding  that  the  Persian  fleet  was  sailing  for  Phalerum  with  the  intention
of  surprising  Athens  in  the  absence  of  its  defenders,  marched  in  all
^c  to  the  city  and  encamped  in  the  sanctuary  of  Hercules  at  Cynos-
^Jgts  before  the  Persian  fleet  arrived  in  the  bay.  On  rounding  the
''^land  of  Phalerum  the  Persians  saw  that  they  were  anticipated,  and
^thout  attempting  to  effect  a  landing  put  their  ships  about  and  made
^  for  Asia.  The  Monastery  of  the  Angels  stands  high  and  com-
^^ds  a  free  view  of  the  sea,  from  which  it  is  also  visible.  Hence  the
.  ^reek  encampment  on  this  spot  must  have  been  seen  by  the  baffled
Persians  from  their  ships  in  the  bay.

Cynosarges  included  a  gymnasium  as  well  as  a  sanctuary  of  Her-
oes, and  was  surrounded  by  a  grove  (Livy,  xxxi.  24.  17  ;  Harpocra-
^^H  and  Stephanus  Byzantius,  5,v,  Kvvocrapyes ;  Eustathius,  on  Homer,
^^.  xiiL  408,  p.  1747).  The  use  of  the  gymnasium  of  Cynosarges
^^  reserved  for  bastards  and  such  youths  as  did  not  enjoy  the  full
^ti2cnship  of  Athens  through  one  of  their  parents  not  being  a  burgher
vj^emosthenes,  xxiii.  213,  p.  691  ;  Suidas,  s,w,  ct  Kwdcra/jycs,  cis
'^vvoo^pyc?,  and  Kwocafr/es  ;  Photius,  Lexicon,  s.v,  Kwocapycs).  As
"*c  mother  of  Themistocles  was  a  foreign  woman,  he  was  obliged  to
Exercise  in  Cynosarges ;  but  he  contrived  to  efface  the  invidious  dis-

VOU  II  O


194  CYNOSARGES  BK.  i.  Attica

tinction  by  persuading  some  well-bom  youths  to  take  their  exercise  with
him  there  (Plutarch,  Themistocles,  i).  At  the  monthly  sacrifices  offered
in  the  sanctuary  of  Hercules  at  Cynosarges  the  priest  was  assisted  by
certain  persons  called  *  parasites,'  who  had  to  be  chosen  from  the
bastards  and  their  children,  and  probably  had  their  meals  provided  for
them  at  the  public  expense ;  the  law  on  this  subject  was  engraved  on  a
slab  which  stood  in  the  sanctuary  (Athenaeus,  vi.  p.  234  d  e).  In  the
fourth  century  ac.  a  club  of  wits  called  '  the  Sixty'  used  to  meet  at
Cynosarges,  and  their  jests  seem  to  have  had  a  great  vogue.  To  be  a
member  of  the  club  was  something  to  be  proud  of.  Amongst  the
members  it  was  "  The  Sixty  said  this,"  and  "  The  Sixty  said  that,"  and
"  Pm  just  come  from  the  Sixty."  King  Philip,  who  loved  a  jest,  sent
the  club  a  talent  with  a  request  that  they  would  let  him  have  a  written
copy  of  all  their  jokes  (Athenaeus,  xiv.  p.  614  d  e).  But  the  Cynos-
arges was  the  scene  of  graver  discourses  than  those  of  the  Sixty.  For
about  the  same  time  Antisthenes,  the  Cynic,  lectured  there,  and  according
to  some  people  the  Cynic  sect  was  named  after  Cynosarges  (Diogenes
Laertius,  vi.  i.  13).  It  is  said  that  by  the  laws  of  Solon  death  was  the
penalty  for  stealing  anything  from  Cynosarges  or  the  other  gymnasiums
of  Athens  (Demosthenes,  xxiv.  114,  p.  736).  In  200  B.C.  Philip  V.,
king  of  Macedonia,  failing  in  an  attempt  to  surprise  Athens,  encamped
at  Cynosarges,  which,  together  with  all  the  sanctuaries  and  pleasant
places  round  about  the  city,  he  afterwards  gave  to  the  flames  (Livy,
xxxi.  24  ;  Diodorus,  xxviii.  7).

In  Alopece,  near  the  sanctuary  of  Hercules  in  Cynosarges,  was  the
grave  of  Anchimolius,  a  Lacedaemonian,  who  had  led  an  expedition
against  Athens  for  the  purpose  of  driving  out  the  Pisistratidae,  but  had
been  defeated  and  slain  by  the  Thessalian  cavalry  in  the  service  of  the
tyrants  (Herodotus,  v.  63).  It  has  been  already  mentioned  that  the
tombs  of  I  Socrates  and  his  family  (father,  mother,  aunt,  brother,  adopted
son,  etc.)  were  situated  on  a  hill  to  the  left  of  Cynosarges.  Isocrates's
own  tomb  was  surmounted  by  a  column  30  cubits  high,  which  bore  a
Siren  7  cubits  tall,  emblematic  of  the  orator's  mellifluous  rhetoric
Near  it  stood  a  tablet  adorned  with  portraits  of  the  poets  and  of
Isocrates's  teachers ;  among  the  latter  was  Gorgias  looking  at  an
astronomical  sphere  with  Isocrates  standing  beside  him  ([Plutarch,]
Vit  X.  Or  at  p.  838  b  c).

See  Leake,  Athens ^  i.  pp.  276-278;  C.  W.  Goettling,  *Das  Gymnasium
Kynosarges  in  Athen,*  BerichU  ubcrdit  VerhandL  d,  k,  sacks,  GeselL  d.  Wissen,  zu
Leipzig^  Philolog.  hist.  CI.,  6  (1854),  pp.  14-27  (reprinted  in  Goettling*s
Gesamnulte  Abhandlungen^  2.  pp.  156-174);  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  AtAen,
I.  p.  231  s^.  ;  Uyer,  Ancient  Athens^  pp.  2)85-288;  Milchhofer,  *  Athen,'  p.  180  ;
•   Lolling,  *  Athen,'  p.  307,  note  4  ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  pp.  210-219.

19.  3-  the  story  of  the  white  bitch  etc.  The  story  ran  that  as
Diomus  was  sacrificing  to  Hercules  or  to  Hestia  or  on  the  hearth  (the
accounts  vary),  a  white  dog  snatched  up  the  victim  and  ran  away  with
it.  Diomus  was  bidden  by  the  oracle  to  find  the  place  where  the  dog
had  deposited  the  victim  and  there  to  build  an  altar  of  Hercules.
Hence  this  new  sanctuary  of  Hercules  was  called  Cynosarges,  which


CH.  XIX  THE  LYCEUM  195

was  interpreted  to  mean  either  <  white  dog '  or  *  swift  dog '  (from  kudn
•  dog '  and  argos  *  white '  or  *  swift ').  See  Suidas,  s,vv,  cts  Kvvoora/»y€s,
cs  Kwoca/jycs,  and  Kvvo<ra/jy€s ;  Photius,  Lexicon^  s,v,  Kvvocrafyyes ;
Hesychius,  s.v.  Kvvoo-a/oycs ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v,  Kvvoo-a/oyes  ;
Schol.  on  Demosthenes,  xxiv.  114,  p.  736.  Professor  C.  Wachsmuth
suggests  {Dte  Stadt  Athene  i.  p.  461)  that  the  sanctuary  may  have  been
called  after  the  sacred  dogs  which  may  have  been  kept  in  it  at  one
time,  as  they  were  kept  in  other  sanctuaries  in  Greece  and  Sicily  (see
note  on  ii.  27.  3,  *  Tablets').  The  dog  was  especially  associated  with
the  oriental  Hercules.  See  W.  Robertson  Smith,  Religion  of  the
Semites^  p.  291  j^.  A  scene  on  a  Greek  vase  in  the  British  Museiun
has  been  interpreted  by  Mr.  Cecil  Smith  as  Diomus  *'  in  the  act  of
setting  forth  to  accompany  the  dog ''  and  taking  leave  of  his  father  and
mother.     See  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  13(1  S92-3),  p*  1 1 5  sqq,

19.  3.  altars  of  Hercrdes  and  Hebe.  Two  seats  were  reserved
in  the  theatre  of  Dionysus  at  Athens  for  the  priests  or  priestesses  of
Hebe  (C  /.  A.  iii.  Nos.  370,  374).

19.  3.  an  altar of  lolans.      On  the  worship  of  lolaus,  see

note  on  x.  17.  5.

19.  3.  The  Lycenm.      The  sanctuary  of  Apollo  which  was  called

the  Lyceum  took  its  name  from  the  epithet  Lycean  or  Lycian  (Aviceios)

here  applied  to  the  god  (Lucian,  Anackarsis^  7  ;    Bekker's  Anecdota

Graecay  i.  p.  277  line  10  sq,\  not  from  an  imaginary  Lycus,  as  Pau-

sanias  says  it  did.     The  same  epithet  was  applied  to  Apollo  at  Sicyon

and  Aigos,  and  the  stories  told  to  explain  the  epithet  at  these  places

prove  that  the  ancients  understood  it  in  the  sense  of  *  wolfish,'  deriving

it  from  lukos  *a  wolf,'    not  from  luke  *  light  of  dawn,'  as  Macrobius

(Saturn,  i.  17.  36  sqq.)  held,  and  as  some  modems,  including  Welcker

and  K.  O.  Miiller,  have  also  maintained.     See  Paus.,  ii.  9.  7  ;  ii.  19.  3

jy.  Wolves  were  dear  to  Apollo  (Plutarch,  De  Pythiae  oraculiSy  12)  and

they  frequently  appear  in  the  myths  told  of  him.      For  example,  his

modier  Latona  was  in  the  form  of  a  wolf  when  she  gave  him  birth

(Aristotle,  Hist,  An,  vi.  35;  Schol.  on  ApoUonius  Rhodius,  ii.  124;

Adian,   Nat,  Anim,    iv.    4   and   x.  26 ;    Antigonus,    Histor,    Mirab,

56(61),  p.  77  of  Westermann's  Scriptores  rerum  mirabilium  Graect)^

^  Apollo   himself  assumed  the  shape  of  a  wolf  on  more  than  one

occasion  (Servius  on  Virgil,  Aen,  iv.  377).      See  K  O.  Miiller,   Die

J^^^nerf  i,  p.   305  sqq, ;    F.    G.    Welcker,  Griechische  Gotterlehre,   i.

V'Mdsqq,  ;  Preller,  Griech,  Mythologie^^  i.  p.  252  sqq,  ;  Andrew  Lang,

^yih^  Ritual  and  Religion^  2.  p.  199  sqq.     Legend  said  that  at  Athens

he  was  called  Wolfish  either  because  when  he  served  Admetus  it  had

^'•cn  his  duty  to  kill  the  wolves  which  preyed  on  the  herds  ;  or  because

once,  when  Athens  was   infested   by  wolves,  Apollo  commanded   the

P^ple  to  sacrifice  on  the  site  of  the  Lyceum,  and  the  smell  of  the

sacrifice  proved  fatal  to  the   wolves,  for  which  reason  the  Athenians

founded  a  sanctuary  to  Apollo  on   the  spot  (Schol.  on  Demosthenes,

«iv.  ii4j  p.  736).      According  to  the  Scholiast  on  ApoUonius  Rhodius

(li.  124)  the  wolif  was  held  in  honour  at  Athens,  for  whoever  killed  a

wolf  had  to  biuy  it  by  subscription  (dyci/oci  avTcj)  rh,  wpbs  t^v  ra<fyrjv).


196  THE  LYCEUM  bk.  i.  attica

The  Lyceum  would  seem  to  have  been  of  great  antiquity,  if  we  may
judge  from  its  mention  in  the  war  of  Theseus  against  the  Amazons
(Plutarch,  Theseus^  27).

The  image  of  Apollo  in  the  Lyceum  represented  the  god  leaning  on
a  column  in  an  attitude  of  weariness,  as  if  resting  after  long  toil,  his
left  hand  grasping  the  bow,  his  right  arm  bent  over  his  head  (Lucian,
AnacharsiSy  7).  On  coins  of  Athens  the  god  is  so  depicted  ;  hence  it
is  a  probable  conjecture  that  the  artist  who  cut  the  dies  copied  the
statue  in  the  Lyceum.  See  Beul^,  Monnaies  d^Athines^  p.  285  sq,  \
Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Nunt,  Com,  on  Paus.  p.  145,  with  pL  CC
xviii.  xix.  A  number  of  statues  of  Apollo  have  come  down  to  us  which
may  be  replicas,  more  or  less  free,  of  the  one  in  the  Lyceum.  They
represent  Uie  god  as  resting  very  much  in  the  pose  described  by  Lucian.
For  example  there  is  a  famous  statue  of  Apollo  at  Florence  which  por-
trays the  god  leaning  in  a  negligent  or  wearied  attitude  against  the
stump  of  a  tree ;  his  left  arm  rests  on  the  stump,  his  right  arm  is  bent
loosely  over  his  head.  See  Baumeister's  Denkmdlery  pp.  99,  100,  fig.
105  ;  Overbeck,  Griechische  Kunstmythologiey  Besonderer  Theil,  3.  p.
208  sqq.  The  priest  of  Lycean  (*  wolfish ')  Apollo  had  a  seat  reserved
for  him  in  the  theatre  of  Dionysus  at  Athens  (C  /.  A,  iii.  No.  392}.
Water  was  brought  to  the  sanctuary  by  thirty  girls  called  Lyceiades
(Hesychius,  s,v,  AvKrjtaSts  Kopai).  We  hear  of  a  votive  offering  set  up
in  the  sanctuary  (C  /.  A.  ii.  No.  341).

One  of  the  most  famous  gymnasiums  of  Athens  was  at  the  Lyceum
(Lucian,  Anctcharsis^  1-9  ;  Harpocration  and  Suidas,  s.v,  Avkciov,  etc.)
As  to  the  date  of  the  foundation  of  the  gymnasium,  ancient  authorities
differed.  According  to  Theopompus  it  was  founded  in  the  sixth  century
ac.  by  Pisistratus  ;  according  to  Philochorus,  it  was  founded  in  the  fifth
century  B.C.,  under  Pericles's  administration  (Harpocration  and  Suidas,
s,v,  AvKctov) ;  while  according  to  a  third  account  it  was  built  in  the
fourth  century  B.C.  by  the  statesman  and  orator  Lycurgus  (Pausanias,  i.
29.  6;  [Plutarch,]  Vii.  X.  Orat  pp.  841  c,  852  c).  This  last  account,
adopted  by  Pausanias,  is  confirmed  by  an  inscription  contemporary  with
Lycurgus  (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  240,  where  the  restoration  to  yvfivaa-iov
t[5  Kara  to  AvKctov  icaTco'Kcvjao'cv  is  made  almost  certain  by  a  com-
parison with  [Plutarch,]  W/.  X,  OrcU,  p.  852  c).  Lycurgus  may  have
improved  or  even  rebuilt  the  gymnasium,  but  he  cannot  have  founded
it,  if,  as  seems  to  have  been  the  case,  it  was  a  favourite  haunt  of  Socrates
(Plato,  EuthyphrOy  p.  2  a ;  iV/.,  EuthydemuSy  p.  271  a ;  iV/.,  Lysis,  p.
203  a).  Certainly  Lycurgus  appears  to  have  planted  the  enclosure  with
trees  and  built  a  wrestling-school  ([Plutarch,]  Vit.  X.  Orat.  pp.  841  c,
843  f).  Among  the  trees  in  the  Lyceum  Theophrastus  specially
mentions  a  young  plane-tree  growing  beside  a  water-channel  with  roots
33  cubits  long  {HisL  Plant  i.  7.  i  ed.  Wimmer).  A  considerable
stretch  of  open  and  level  ground  must  have  been  included  within  the
precincts  of  the  Lyceum,  since  it  served  as  a  parade-ground  on
which  the  citizens  were  drilled  and  reviews  held  (Aristophanes,  Peace,
355  ^9"t  with  the  scholium;  Suidas,  s,v.  Kvk€iov  \  Hesychius,  j.?'.
AvKi/ov  ;  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca,  i.  p.  277,  line  10  sqq.)     Cavalry  as


CH.  XIX  THE  LYCEUM  197

well  as  infantry  exercised  here.  Xenophon  has  described  some  of  the
manoeuvres  performed  here  by  the  ten  troops  of  horse  which  made  up
the  cavalry  establishment  of  Athens  {Hipparchicus^  iii.  6).  Before  the
legislation  of  Solon  the  polemarch  or  commander-in-chief  had  his  office
at  the  Lyceum  (Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens^  3  ;  Suidas,  j.z/.  (kp\hiv\
Hesychius,  s,v,  hn  KvKiiov\  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^  i.  p.  449,  line
17  sqq,)  We  hear  of  a  superintendent  of  the  Lyceum  (C  /.  A.  iii.  No.
89).  In  front  of  the  wrestling-school  which  he  had  built  Lycurgus  set
up  an  inscription  containing  an  account  of  all  the  public  works  which  he
had  carried  out  in  the  course  of  his  administration  ([Plutarch,]  Vit,  X,
Orat,  p.  843  f).

But  what  gives  the  Lyceum  its  chief  interest  is  that  here,  pacing  the
shady  walks  of  the  gymnasium,  Aristotle  expounded  to  his  disciples  that
philosophy  which  was  destined  to  influence  so  profoundly  the  course  of
European  thought  for  two  thousand  years.  The  tradition  is  that  in  the
morning  he  discussed  the  deeper  problems  of  nature  and  man  with
pupils  who  had  already  given  proof  of  parts  and  learning ;  while  in  the
evening  he  discoursed  on  literary  and  political  topics  with  any  young
men  who  chose  to  attend  him  in  his  walks.  Hence  the  former  dis-
cussions were  called  *  the  morning  walk,'  and  the  latter  *  the  evening
walk' ;  and  philosophers  of  the  Aristotelian  school  were  called  Peripatetics
itovci  this  habit  of  walking  about  {feripatos)  as  they  discoursed.  See
Diogenes  Laertius,  v.  i.  2  ;  Cicero,  Academics^  i.  4.  17  ;  Aulus  Gellius,
XX.  5  ;  Schol.  on  Aristotle,  p.  11  b,  23  sqq,  (Berlin  ed.)  The  Lyceum
appears  to  have  been  the  scene  of  other  feasts  than  those  of  reason,
since  we  hear  of  a  cook  being  whipped  for  spoiling  one  of  the  dishes
which  he  served  up  at  a  banquet  here  (Athenaeus,  iv.  p.  137  f).  The
Lyceum  was  burnt  by  King  Philip  V.  of  Macedonia  in  200  B.C  at  the
same  time  that  he  destroyed  Cynosarges  and  ravaged  the  suburbs  of
Athens  (Livy,  xxxi.  24,  see  above*  p.  194).  Sulla  cut  down  the  trees  of
the  Lyceum  to  make  siege-engines  when  he  was  besieging  Athens  in
87-86  B.C.  (Plutarch,  Sulla^  12).

With  regard  to  the  situation  of  the  Lyceum,  it  is  known  to  have
been  to  the  east  of  Athens  and  outside  the  walls.  Plato  represents
Socrates  as  walking  straight  from  the  Academy  to  the  Lyceum,  his
course  lying  outside  of  and  just  at  the  foot  of  the  city-wall  {LysiSy  p.
203  a).  Strabo  speaks  of  the  Ilissus  flowing  "from  the  parts  above
Agra  and  the  Lyceum"  (ix.  p.  400),  and  elsewhere  (ix.  p.  397)  he  says
that  the  springs  of  the  Eridanus  were  outside  of  the  gate  of  Diochares  at
Athens,  near  the  Lyceum.  Hence  as  the  springs  of  the  Eridanus  appear
to  have  been  on  the  southern  slope  of  Mt.  Lycabettus  (see  note  on  §  5),
the  Lyceum  was  probably  in  this  neighbourhood,  between  Lycabettus
and  the  Ilissus.  But  the  exact  site  has  not  been  determined.  Mr.  P.
Kastromenos  supposes  that  the  Lyceum  was  on  the  left  bank  of  the
Ilissus.  A  street  led  from  it  into  the  city,  by  which,  in  the  civil  war  of
404-403  B.C.,  the  democratic  party  in  Piraeus  attempted  to  bring  up
siege-engines  against  the  walls  of  Athens.  But  the  engineer  of  the
oligarchic  party  in  the  city  defeated  their  intention  by  barricading  the
street  with  great  blocks  of  stone  (Xenophon,  Hellenica^  ii.  4.  27).


198  THE  ILISSUS  bk.  i.  attica

On  the  Lyceum  see  Leake,  Athens^  i.  pp.  278-280;  Dyer,  Ancient
Athens^  pp.  288-291;  Milchhofer,  <Athen,'  p.  182;  P.  Kastromenos,
Die  Demen  von  Attikciy  p.  27  sqq,\  Lolling,  *Athen,'  p.  324;  Miss
Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  219  sqq,

19.  3.  Lycus  also  gave  his  name  to  the  Termilae  etc.  This
derivation  of  the  name  Lycia  from  an  Athenian  Lycus  son  of  Pandion
rests  on  the  authority  of  Herodotus  (i.  173,  vii.  92).  Cp.  Strabo,  xi.  p.
573,  xiv.  p.  667.  According  to  Stephanus  Byzantius  (5,v,  Tp€fdX7i)  the
old  name  of  Lycia  was  Tremile,  and  that  of  the  inhabitants  Tremileis.
He  quotes  some  verses  of  Panyasis  which  derive  the  name  from  a  certain
Tremilus  ;  and  he  mentions  that  Hecataeus  called  the  people  Tremilae.
These  statements  as  to  the  old  name  of  Lycia  and  the  Lycians  are  con-
firmed by  Lycian  inscriptions,  amongst  others  by  the  long  one  on  the  so-
called  obelisk  of  Harpagus  which  is  now  in  London.  Though  these
inscriptions  have  not  yet  been  read,  the  name  Tramele  occurs  on
them  repeatedly  and  is  doubtless  the  native  name  of  the  people.  See
Stein  on  Herodotus,  i.  173 ;  O.  Treuber,  Geschichte  der  Lykier,  p.  20 ;
Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histaire  de  PArt  dans  PAntiquiti^  5.  p.  346.

19.  4*  A  story  is  told  of  this  Nisus  that  he  had  purple  hair
on  his  head  etc  Cp.  Apollodorus,  iil  15.  8  ;  Aeschylus,  Choeph,  612
sqq, ;  Tzetzes,  SchoL  on  Lycophron^  650  (who  speaks  of  the  hair  as
golden);  Hyginus,  Fab.  198;  Propertius,  iv.  19.  21  ^^.  A  similar
tale  was  told  of  Pterelaus  and  his  golden  hair,  which  his  daughter
plucked  out  so  that  he  died  (Apollodorus,  ii.  4.  5  and  7).  These  tales
belong  to  a  widely  diffused  class  of  stories  in  which  the  life  of  a  person
is  represented  as  bound  up  with  some  external  object,  the  destruction  of
which  causes  his  death.  The  oldest  known  example  of  this  incident
occurs  in  the  Egyptian  story  of  "  The  Two  Brothers,"  which  was  written
down  in  the  reign  of  Rameses  IL,  about  1300  B.C.  (Maspero,  Contes
populaires  de  P£gyfite  ancienne  (Paris,*  1882),  p.  5  sqq,)  See  The  Golden
Bought  2.  p.  296  sqq,

19.  5.  The  Athenian  rivers  are  the  Ilissas  and Eridanns.

The  Ilissus  is  the  stream  which,  rising  in  Mt  Hymettus  to  the  east  of
Athens,  flows  on  the  southern  side  of  the  city,  and  after  passing  between
the  Museum  Hill  and  a  rocky  height,  which  rises  on  the  opposite
(southern)  bank  of  the  stream,  disappears  in  the  plain.  The  gravelly
bed  of  the  river  is  nearly  always  dry,  but  sometimes  after  heavy  rains  a
stream  runs  in  it  for  several  days,  swelling  on  rare  occasions  into  an
impetuous  torrent  It  is  only  on  those  rare  occasions  that  the  water
of  the  Ilissus  reaches  the  marshes  which  skirt  the  bay  of  Phalerum.
The  banks  of  the  river  consist  of  low  rocks  or  bare  arid  soil,
diversified  by  the  stiff,  dim-coloured  asphodel,  and  here  and  there  by
patches  of  oleander-bushes  with  their  dark-green  leaves  and  crimson
blossoms,  or  by  bunches  of  a  sort  of  thistle  with  yellow  flowers.  But
they  are  shaded  by  no  plane-trees  like  that  under  whose  spreading  shade
Socrates  discoursed  philosophy  with  Phaedrus  on  a  summer  day,  while
the  fountain  babbled  at  their  side  and  the  shrill  hum  of  the  cicalas  filled
the  air  (Plato,  Phaedmsy  p.  230  b  c).

The  Ilissus  has  two  main  sources.     One  of  these  is  at  the  northern


CH.  XIX  ILISSUS  AND  ERIDANUS  199

extremity  of  Mt.  Hymettus,  near  the  deserted  monastery  of  St.  John
Theologus.  The  other  is  at  Kaesariani^  a  monastery  situated  in  a
green  sequestered  dell  embosomed  among  ancient  olive-trees,  at  the
foot  of  the  bare  stony  slopes  of  Hymettus.  The  grass  is  here  of  a  vivid
green  and  is  speckled  with  the  cyclamen,  the  starry  hyacinth,  and  the
purple  crocus.  In  this  luxuriant  glade,  which  Ovid  has  described  in
some  often  quoted  Hnes  {Ars  Amai.  iii.  687-694),  the  chief  spring  is  on
the  east  side  of  the  monastery  ;  its  water  pours  into  a  basin  out  of  an
ancient  marble  ram's  head  and  is  famous  at  Athens,  whither  it  is  brought
daily  to  be  sold.  In  antiquity  the  spot  was  known  as  '*  the  Cripple's
Wallet "  (Kullou  fiera)  ;  there  was  a  sanctuary  of  Aphrodite  here ;  and
the  water  of  the  spring  was  believed  to  possess  the  property  of  making
barren  women  pregnant  and  of  facilitating  childbirth  (Suidas,  s,w.  KvXXos
and  KvXAov  irripav  ;  Photius,  Lexicon^  s,v.  KvXXov  wrjpav  ;  Hesychius,
s,v,  KvXXov  mypa;  Paroemiographi  Graeci^  ed.  Leutsch  and  Schneidewin,
I.  p.  427).  The  same  virtues  are  still  ascribed  to  the  water  by  the  women
of  Athens.     See  L.  Ross,  Archdologische  Aufsatzey  i.  pp.  220-222.

The  two  streams  which  take  their  rise  at  St,  John  Theologus  and
Kaesariani  respectively,  meet  about  a  mile  and  a  half  to  the  east  of
Athens,  and  the  united  river  or  rather  river-bed  is  the  Ilissus.  Of  the
two  branches  the  north-eastern,  which  rises  at  St.  John  Theologus^  is  the
longer  and' is  generally  regarded  as  the  upper  course  of  the  Ilissus  ;
while  the  eastern  branch,  which  rises  at  Kaesariani^  is  conmionly  taken
to  be  the  Eridanus.  Dodwell,  however,  supposed,  and  Professor  C.
Wachsmuth  has  recently  maintained,  that  the  eastern  branch  is  the
Ilissus,  and  the  north-eastern  the  Eridanus.  See  Wheler,  Journey^  p.
378  sq. ;  Dodwell,  Tour  in  Greece^  i.  pp.  468  sqq,^  484  sqq,  ;  Leake,
Athens^  l.p.  282  ^^. ;  /V/.,  2.  pp.  8-10  ;  Kartenvon  Attika^  Erldutemder
Text,  2.  pp.  18  sq,y  24;  C.  Wachsmuth,  'Eridanos  und  Ilissos,'
Rkeinisches  Museum^  N.F.  40  (1885),  pp.  469-473.

But  still  more  recently  Dr.  Dorpfeld  has  brought  forward  strong
grounds  for  identifying  the  Eridanus  with  neither  of  these  streams,  but
with  a  stream  which,  rising  apparently  to  the  east  of  Athens  at  the  foot
<rf  Mt.  Lycabettus,  flows  underground  along  the  foot  of  the  valley  or
depression  on  the  north  side  of  the  Acropolis  and  comes  to  the  surface
at  the  church  of  the  Holy  Trinity  (Hagia  Triada)  at  the  north-west  end
of  Athens.  Along  the  bottom  of  the  same  valley,  which  separates  the
Acropolis  on  the  south  from  Mt.  Lycabettus  on  the  north,  an  ancient
drain  or  sewer  of  large  size  has  been  traced  at  various  points,  and  Dr.
Dorpfeld  holds  that  this  drain,  following  as  it  does  the  lowest  parts  of
the  valley,  is  the  old  bed  of  the  stream  mentioned  above.  The  mouth
of  this  great  sewer  was  found  in  the  course  of  the  excavations  at  the
Dipylum.  From  the  remains  of  arches  it  appears  that  in  Roman
times  the  sewer  was  covered,  but  that  in  the  best  Greek  period  it
was  mostly  open,  being  only  bridged  over  at  points  where  the  streets
crossed  it.  In  the  city-wall  there  must  have  been  a  special  exit  for
the  stream  which  flowed  along  this  artificial  channel  or  sewer  ;  and  Dr.
Ddrpfeld  conjectures  that  this  exit  is  no  other  than  the  opening,
flanked  with  square  towers,  which  is  commonly  called  the  Sacred  Gate


30O  THE  ERIDANUS  bk.  i.  attica

and  is  to  be  seen  in  the  line  of  the  ancient  city-wall,  about  sixty  yards
to  the  south-west  of  the  Dipylum.  See  above,  p.  43  sq,  ;  von  Alten,
*  Die  Thoranlagen  bei  der  Hagia  Triada  zu  Athen,'  Mittheil,  d,  eirch.
Inst,  in  Athen^  3  (1878),  p.  28  sqq,\  and  as  to  the  sewer  see  E.
Ziller,  in  MittheiL  eL  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  2  (1877),  pp.  11 7- 119.
West  of  the  Dipylum  the  bed  of  the  stream  can  be  traced  as  far  as
the  modem  road  to  Piraeus ;  but  beyond  that  it  disappears.  At  this
point  a  small  hill  rises,  crowned  with  the  remains  of  a  windmill  Round
this  hill  the  stream  must  have  flowed  either  on  the  north  or  the  south
side.  If  it  flowed  on  the  north  side,  it  probably  joined  the  Cephisus ;
if  it  flowed  on  the  south  side,  it  must  have  joined  the  Ilissus  to  the
south-west.     Dr.  Dorpfeld  considers  that  the  latter  is  the  more  probable.

Thus  it  appears  that  in  antiquity  a  stream  was  formed  by  one  or
more  springs  at  the  foot  of  Mt  Lycabettus,  flowed  through  the  city  on
the  northern  side  of  the  Acropolis,  passed  through  the  city-wall  a  little
to  the  south  of  the  Dipylum,  and  after  bending  round  the  north-western
spurs  of  the  Pynx  hill,  joined  the  Ilissus.  This  stream,  according  to  Dr.
Dorpfeld,  was  the  Eridanus.  The  passages  of  classical  authors  on
which  he  relies  to  prove  it  are  these  :

(i)  In  his  fanciful  picture  of  Athens  as  it  was  before  the  Flood,
Plato  says  that  the  Acropolis,  extended  as  &r  as  the  Eridanus  and  the
Ilissus  and  embraced  the  Pnyx  hill,  being  bounded  on  the  side  opposite
the  Pnyx  by  Mt.  Lycabettus  {Critias^  p.  112  a).  It  is  natural  to
suppose  that  here  Plato  referred  to  the  two  streams  which  flowed  along
the  northern  and  southern  sides  of  the  Acropolis,  though  at  some
distance  from  them.  And  if  so,  the  stream  to  the  north  must  have  been
the  Eridanus,  since  the  stream  to  the  south  is  certainly  the  Ilissus.  But
if  we  suppose  the  Eridanus  to  have  been  one  of  the  two  streams  which
unite  to  form  the  Ilissus  at  a  point  about  a  mile  and  a  half  to  the  east
of  Athens,  the  passage  of  Plato  is  hardly  intelligible.

(2)  An  ancient  poet  who  had  spoken  of  the  Athenian  maidens
drawing  *'  the  clear  sparkling  water  of  the  Eridanus,''  was  taken  to  task
for  so  doing  by  Callimachus  in  his  treatise  on  rivers,  who  affirmed  on
the  contrary  that  the  water  of  the  Eridanus  was  such  that  even  cattle
would  not  drink  of  it.  Strabo,  who  quotes  this  criticism  of  Callimachus
(ix.  p.  397),  admits  the  dirtiness  of  the  stream,  but  says  that  the  springs
of  the  river,  situated  outside  the  gate  of  Diochares  near  the  Lyceum,
were  still  pure  and  drinkable,  and  consequently  that  the  stream  itself
might  have  been  clear  in  the  olden  time  to  which  the  poet  referred.
From  this  passage  of  Strabo  we  learn  (i)  that  in  his  time  and  for  some
centuries  before  it  the  water  of  the  Eridanus  was  so  filthy  as  to  be  quite
undrinkable ;  and  (ii)  that  the  springs  of  the  Eridanus  were  outside  one
of  the  gates  of  Athens,  near  the  Lyceum.  Both  these  facts  seem
irreconcileable  with  the  view  that  the  Eridanus  was  one  of  the  two
streams  which  meet  about  a  mile  and  a  half  to  the  east  of  Athens.  For
why  should  one  of  these  streams,  far  from  the  city,  be  so  dirty  that  even
the  cattle  would  turn  away  from  it  in  disgust  ?  And  how  could  the
sources  of  either  of  these  streams  be  described  as  outside  one  of  the  gates
of  Athens,  near  the  Lyceum,  when  the  nearest  of  the  two  sources  is  at


CH.  XIX  THE  ERIDANUS  201

the  foot  of  Mt  Hymettus,  four  miles  from  Athens  ?  Whereas  if  the
Eridanus  is  the  stream  which,  rising  at  the  foot  of  Mt.  Lycabettus,  flowed
through  the  heart  of  the  city,  all  is  clear.  In  the  days  of  Athens's
greatness  this  stream,  doubtless  defiled  with  sewage,  would  be  wholly
undrinkable.  But  a  poet  might  very  well  picture  to  himself  a  far-off
time  when  Athens  was  still  a  little  town  perched  on  the  rocky  heights  of
the  Acropolis,  and  the  Athenian  girls  came  down  with  their  pitchers  to
draw  water  from  the  clear  sparkling  stream  which  bickered  over  the
pebbles  in  the  valley.  And  the  springs  of  this  stream  are  situated  just
where  Strabo  places  the  springs  of  the  Eridanus,  namely,  outside  the
walls  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  city.

(3)  Pausanias  in  the  present  passage  says  that  Athens  (literally  the
Athenians)  has  two  rivers,  the  Ilissus  and  Eridanus.  He  obviously
intends  to  enumerate  the  rivers  which  flowed  through  Athens.  But
there  are  two  and  only  two  such  streams,  one  on  the  north,  the  other
on  the  south  of  the  Acropolis.  The  latter  was  the  Ilissus  ;  the  former
must,  therefore,  have  been  the  Eridanus.

These  argimients  of  Dr.  DSrpfeld  appear  to  me  conclusive.  See
W.  D6rpfeld,  *  Der  Eridanos,'  MittheiL  (L  arch,  Inst,  in  A  then ^  13
(1888),  pp.  21 1-220  ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  pp.  222-224.

19.  5.  the  Celtic  Eridanus.     See  note  on  v.  12.  7.

19.  5.  at  the  nissas Orithyia  was  playing  when  the  North

Wind  etc.  The  spot  where  the  North  Wind  was  said  to  have  carried
off  Orithyia  was  on  the  bank  of  the  Ilissus,  at  the  point  where  the  road
crossed  over  to  the  suburb  of  Agrae  ;  here  there  was  an  altar  to  the
North  Wind  (Plato,  Phaedrus^  p.  229  b  c).  Cp.  Dionysius  Periegetes,
424  sq,  \  ApoUonius  Rhodius,  i.  213  sgq,',  ApoUodorus,  iii.  15.  2;
Statins,  Theb.  xii.  630  sq.  Cicero's  friend  Atticus  had  a  house  near
the  spot  (Cicero,  De  legibusy  i.  i.  5).  According  to  another  version  of
the  story  Orithyia  was  carried  off  from  the  Areopagus  (Plato,  PhaedruSy
p.  229  d).  As  the  North  Wind  had  married  an  Attic  wife,  the
Athenians  regarded  him  as  a  relation  by  marriage ;  and  accordingly
when  they  lay  at  anchor  off  Chalcis  in  Euboea,  hourly  expecting  to
engage  the  Persian  fleet,  they  prayed  to  the  North  Wind  and  his  wife  to
help  them  by  wrecking  the  enemy's  ships.  A  violent  storm  which  cast
away  not  less  than  four  hundred  of  the  Persian  vessels  seemed  an
answer  to  their  prayers  ;  and  so  when  they  retm-ned  home  they  founded
a  sanctuary  of  the  North  Wind  beside  the  Ilissus  (Herodotus,  vii.  189  ;
cp.  Aelian,  Var,  Hist,  xii.  61).  To  this  story  Pausanias  here  alludes,
though  he  does  not  mention  the  sanctuary,  which  was  probably  a  small
enclosure  containing  the  altar  spoken  of  by  Plato.  The  grateful
Athenians  seem  to  have  held  festivals  in  honour  of  the  North  Wind  and
offered  him  banquets  (Hesychius,  s,v,  Bop€axr/wi),  As  to  the  Greek
worship  of  the  winds,  see  ii.  12.  i  note.  The  rape  of  Orithyia  by
the  North  Wind  was  represented  on  the  chest  of  Cypselus  (Pans.  v.
19.  i),  and  it  is  depicted  on  many  existing  red-figured  vases.  •  See
Welcker,  *  Boreas  und  Oreithyia,'  Antike  Denkmdlery  3.  pp.  1 44-1 91  ;
G.  Perrot,  *  L'enl^vement  d'Orithyie  par  Bor^e,'  Monuments  Grecs^
vol.  I.  No.  3  (1874),  pp.  29-52  ;  Gaertringen,  De  Graecorum  fabulis  cui


202  SANCTUARY  OF  COD R US  bk.  i.  attica

Thraces  pertinentibus^  p.  7  sqq, ;  Rapp,  article  *  Boreas/  in  Roscher's
Lexikotiy  I.  p.  804  sqq,

19.  5.  an  altar  of  the  nitwian  Muses.  The  worship  of  the
Muses  at  the  Ilissus  is  attested  also  by  Stephanus  Byzantius  (s.v,
'IXuro-os),  who  refers  to  Apollodorus  as  his  authority.  The  Muses  of
the  Ilissus  are  mentioned  by  Himerius  {Or,  xxii.  9).  When  Wheler
and  Spon  were  in  Athens  in  1676  the  foundations  of  a  small  round
temple  were  visible  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Ilissus,  a  little  way  below
the  church  of  the  Crucified  St  Peter  (Hagios  Petros  Stavromenos)  which
stands  on  the  opposite  (left)  bank,  above  the  stadium.  It  has  been
sometimes  supposed  that  these  ruins,  which  have  since  disappeared,
were  the  remains  of  a  temple  of  the  Ilissian  Muses.  But  this  is  a  mere
unsupported  conjecture.  We  do  not  even  know  that  there  was  such  a
temple.  See  Wheler,  Journey^  p.  377  sq,\  Leake,  AthenSy  i.  p.  278
sq, ;  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen,  i.  p.  235  ;  Milchhofer,  *Athen,'  p.
183.  Professor  C.  Wachsmuth  thinks  that  the  worship  of  the  Muses  in
the  valley  of  the  Ilissus  is  an  indication  .of  a  Thracian  settlement  in  this
quarter  of  Athens  {Die  Stadt  Athen^  i.  p.  399  sqq,)

19.  6.  The  spot,  too,  is  shown  where  the  Peloponnesians  slew
the  Athenian  king  Codrns.  The  legend  ran  that  the  Peloponnesians,
having  resolved  to  conquer  Attica,  were  told  by  the  Delphic  god  that
they  would  capture  Athens  provided  they  did  not  kill  Codrus  the
king.  This  prediction  having  come  to  the  ears  of  Codrus,  he  determined
to  save  his  country  by  sacrificing  himself.  So  when  the  enemy  had
approached  the  city,  he  disguised  himself  as  a  poor  man,  and  stealing
out  of  one  of  the  gates  gathered  a  bundle  of  sticks  not  far  from  the
walls.  Here  he  was  accosted  by  two  of  the  enemy :  he  killed  one  of
them  and  was  himself  slain  by  the  other.  So  Athens  was  saved.  See
Lycurgus,  c.  Leocr.  84-87.  An  inscription  of  Roman  date  which
purports  to  be  the  epitaph  on  Codrus's  grave  was  found  to  the  south-east
of  the  Acropolis,  near  the  monument  of  Lysicrates  (see  below,  p.  207  sq,)
It  is  an  epigram  in  four  verses  engraved  on  a  base  of  reddish  stone  ;
and  states  that  the  body  of  Codrus  was  embalmed  by  the  Athenians  and
buried  at  the  foot  of  the  Acropolis  (C.  /.  A,  iii.  No.  943  ;  Kaibel,
Epigrammata  Graeca^  No.  1083).

From  another  inscription  (C.  /.  A,  iv.  p.  66,  No.  53  a)  found  at  the
southern  outskirts  of  Athens,  to  the  left  of  the  steam  tramway  which
runs  to  Phalerum,  we  learn  that  there  was  a  sanctuary  of  Codrus  at
Athens.  The  inscription  is  cut  on  a  block  of  Pentelic  marble  and  records
a  decree  of  the  people  passed  in  the  archonship  of  Antiphon  (418  B.C.)
The  decree  provides  for  the  enclosing  of  the  sanctuary  of  Codrus,
Neleus,  and  Basile,  and  for  the  letting  out  of  the  sacred  precinct.  The
lease  was  to  run  for  twenty  years :  the  lessee  was  to  enclose  the
sanctuary  of  Codrus,  Neleus  and  Basile  at  his  own  expense  and  to
cultivate  the  sacred  precinct  of  Neleus  and  Basile  by  planting  not  less
than  two  hundred  young  olive-trees,  but  more  if  he  pleased  ;  and  he  was
to  have  control  over  "the  trench  and  all  the  rain  water  that  flows
between  the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  and  the  gate  by  which  the  Initiated
drive  out  to  the  sea,  and  between  the  State  House  and  the  gate  which


CH.  XIX  ARTEAfIS  IN  AGRAE  203

leads  to  the  bath  of  Isthmonicus."  A  copy  of  the  decree  was  to  be
engraved  on  stone  and  set  up  '^  in  the  sanctuary  of  Neleus  beside  the
scaffold  "  (7ra/9a  ra  iKpia).  The  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  mentioned  in  the
inscription  is  no  doubt  the  one  near  the  theatre  (Paus.  i.  20.  3)  ;  and  it
may  be  taken  for  gfranted  that  the  gate  by  which  the  Initiated  passed
out  to  the  sea  was  in  the  city-wall  on  the  south  side  of  Athens,  probably
not  very  far  from  the  Itonian  gate.  Hence  the  sanctuary  of  Codrus,
Neleus,  and  Basile  was  probably  situated  between  the  sanctuary  of
Dionysus  and  the  southern  wall  of  the  city,  on  or  near  the  ground  now
occupied  by  the  Military  Hospital.  Neleus  was  the  son  of  Codrus  and
led  the  Ionian  emigrants  to  Asia  (vii.  2.  1-6).  Who  Basile  (* queen')
was,  is  uncertain.  Professor  £.  Curtius  supposes  that  she  was  a  per-
sonification of  regal  power.  In  the  island  of  Thera  there  is  a  small
temple,  in  perfect  preservation,  dedicated  to  "  the  goddess  Queen  "  (note
on  iii.  I.  8).  The  sanctuary  of  Basile  at  Athens  is  referred  to  by
Plato,  who  mentions  "  the  wrestling  school  of  Taureas  "  opposite  to  it
(jCkarmides^  p.  1 53  a,  where  we  should  read  Boo-iX^s  with  two  MSS.
instead  of  jSourtAtic^s).  See  *'E<f}Yffi€pls  dp\aioXoyiKrjy  1884,  pp.  161-
1 66 ;  E.  Curtius,  *  Das  Nelelon  oder  Heiligthum  der  Basile  in  Athen,*
Sitsungsberichte  d,  k.  preuss.  Akad,  d.  Wissen,  su  Berlin^  1885,  PP-
437-441  (reprinted  in  Curtius' s  Gesatnmelte  Abhandlungen^  i.  pp.  459-
464) ;  J.  R.  Wheeler,  *  An  Attic  decree,  the  sanctuary  of  Kodros,'
American  Journal  of  Archaeology^  3  (1887),  pp.  38-49  ;  Miss  Harrison,
Ancient  Athens^  p.  228  sq,  Cp.  J.  Topffer,  Attische  Genealogie^  p.  232
sgq.

19.  6.  Across  the  Ilissns  is  a  district  called  AgrzA  and  a
temple  of  Hnntress  Artemis.  This  district  on  the  left  (south)  bank
of  the  Ilissus  was  known  indifferently  as  Agrae  or  Agra  (Eustathius,
on  Homer,  //.  ii.  852,  p.  361  ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v,  "Ay pa).
Its  situation  beside  the  Ilissus  is  well  attested  (Plato,  PAaedrus,  p.
229  b  c ;  Strabo,  ix.  p.  400  ;  Clidemus,  in  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^
I.  p.  326,  line  30  sgq,  ;  Suidas,  s,v,  ay  pa',  Eustathius,  l,c.)  That  it
was  on  the  left  bank  of  the  river  appears  fi-om  Plato  {l,c,)  as  well  as
from  Pausanias.  According  to  Clitodemus  or  Clidemus,  the  oldest
writer  on  the  history  of  Attica  (Paus.  x.  1 5.  5  note),  the  original  name
of  the  district  was  Helicon,  and  on  the  highest  point  of  the  ground  there
was  an  altar  of  Heliconian  Poseidon  (Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^  i,  p.
326  sq.)  Every  year,  on  the  6th  day  of  the  month  Boedromion,
the  anniversary  of  the  battle  of  Marathon,  500  goats  were  sacrificed
to  Huntress  (Agrotera)  Artemis.  The  origin  of  the  sacrifice  was
this.  Before  the  battle  of  Marathon  the  Athenians  vowed  to  sacri-
fice to  Artemis  as  many  goats  as  they  should  kill  enemies.  But
after  the  battle,  finding  that  they  had  not  goats  enough  to  perform
their  vow,  they  resolved  instead  to  sacrifice  500  every  year.  See
Xenophon,  Anabasis,  iii.  2.  1 1  sqq.  ;  Plutarch,  De  malignitate  Herodotiy
26 ;  Aelian,  Var,  Hist,  ii.  25  (who  puts  the  number  of  goats  sacrificed
at  300)  ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Knights,  660.  (As  to  the  date  of  the
battle  of  Marathon,  see  also  Plutarch,  De  gloria  Atheniensium,  7  ;  id,,
Camillus,  19).     The  sacrifice  was  offered  by  the  polemarch  or  com-


204  ARTEMIS  IN  AGRAE  bk.  i.  attica

mander-in-chief  (Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens y  58;  Pollux,  viii.  91).
Aristophanes  represents  the  sausage-seller  as  proposing  to  the  Council
that  they  should  sacrifice  1000  goats  to  Huntress  Artemis  on  the  morrow
{Knights^  660  sq,)  On  an  inscription  (C  /.  A,  i.  No.  210,  line  16  sqq,)
we  read  of  a  tithe  of  slaves  belonging  to  Huntress  Artemis ;  and  on
another  inscription  her  name  occurs  in  a  list  of  sacred  monies  (C  /.  A,
i.  No.  273  f,  line  11).  The  lads  {ephibot\  went  in  procession  in  honour
of  Huntress  Artemis  (C  /.  A,  ii.  Nos.  467-471  ;  cp.  Plutarch,  De
maiignitate  Herodoti^  26).  They  also  raced  to  Agrae  (C  /.  A,  iii.  No.
1 147,  coL  iii.  line  48  sq,)  Huntress  Artemis  is  represented  on  coins  of
Athens  with  a  hind  or  a  dog  at  her  feet,  but  without  the  bow  which,  as
we  learn  from  Pausanias,  her  statue  carried  (Beul^,  Monnaies  ePAth^neSy
p.  214  j^.)  It  was  probably  to  Huntress  Artemis  in  her  character  of
Deer-hitter  {Eiaphebolos)  that  deer,  and  cakes  called  *deer,'  were
sacrificed  in  the  month  Elaphebolion  (see  note  on  x.  32.  16).

The  lesser  mysteries  of  Demeter  were  performed  at  Agrae  in  the
month  Anthesterion  (February  -  March)  (Plutarch,  Demetrius^  26 ;
Eustathius,  on  Homer,  //.  ii.  852,  p.  361  ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v,
*  Ay  fKL ;  Bekker's  Anecdota  GraecUy  i.  p.  326,  line  24  sqq,)  Of  the
nature  of  these  lesser  mysteries  little  is  known.  We  hear  of  a  purifica-
tion at  them  (Polyaenus,  v.  1 7),  and  also  of  a  sacrifice  (C.  /.  A,  ii.  No.
315).  The  worshippers  appear  to  have  lived  in  tents  or  huts  during  the
celebration  of  the  rites  (Himerius,  in  Photius,  Bibliothecciy  p.  369  a,  ed.
Bekker),  as  they  did  at  so  many  religious  festivals  (see  above,  p.  xt^sq.)
Hercules  is  said  to  have  been  initiated  at  Agrae  (Stephanus  Byzantius,
s,v,  "Aypa,  where  we  must  read  fjAfiinja-Sai  instead  of  the  fjAfiinja-dai  which
appears  in  Westermann*s  edition).  These  mysteries  were  doubtless
celebrated  in  a  sanctuary  of  Demeter,  though  the  positive  evidence  for  the
existence  of  such  a  sanctuary  is  very  small  (cp.  Suidas,  s.v.  ay  pa ;  Hesy-
chius,  s,v,  "Aypai).  We  have  it  on  the  authority  of  Clitodemus  that  there
was  a  Metroum  or  sanctuary  of  the  Mother  at  Agrae  (Bekker's  Anecdota
Graeca^  i.  p.  327,  line  2  sq,\  but  this  would  more  naturally  mean  a
sanctuary  of  Rhea  than  a  sanctuary  of  Demeter.  The  worship  of  the
Mother  in  Agrae  is  attested  by  inscriptions  (C.  /.  A,  ii.  No.  201,  line  7,
supplemented  by  C.  /.  A,  ii.  No.  273  f,  line  23).  Those  who  suppose
that  the  Eleusinium  mentioned  by  Pausanias  in  i.  14.  3  was  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Callirrhoe,  naturally  assume  that  the  lesser  mysteries
were  performed  in  it  (see  note  on  i.  1 4.  i  *  Enneacrunus ').

Neither  the  site  of  the  sanctuary  of  Huntress  Artemis  nor  that
of  Demeter  in  Agrae  has  been  determined.  It  has  been  sometimes
supposed,  as  by  Wheler  {Journey ^  p.  378)  and  Leake  {Athens^  i.  p.
278),  that  the  church  of  the  Crucified  St.  Peter  (Hagios  Petros
Stavromenos)  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Ilissus,  about  200  yards  above  the
stadium,  occupies  the  site  of  the  temple  of  Huntress  Artemis.  Here
are  or  were  formerly  some  ancient  remains,  including  a  Doric  capital,
fragments  of  granite  columns,  bases  of  columns,  a  Roman  mosaic,  etc.
See  Chandler,  Travels  in  Greece^  p.  83  sq. ;  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt
Athen^  i.  p.  238,  note  2.  Professor  Milchhofer  thinks  it  more  likely
that  the  temple  was  near  the  site  of  the  chapel  of  St.  Elias,  which  lies


CH.  XIX  THE  STADIUM  205

among  the  hills  to  the  south-east  of  the  church  of  the  Crucified  St.
Peter.  To  the  north-east  of  the  chapel  of  St  Elias,  on  the  opposite  side
of  the  road,  there  are  some  ancient  blocks  and  the  drum  of  a  column
of  Pentelic  marble.  See  Milchhofer,  *  Athen,'  p.  183  j^.  ;  Karten  von
Atttkoy  Erlduiemder  Texi^  ii.  p.  25.

The  point  at  which  Pausanias  crossed  the  Ilissus  is  probably  the
place  indicated  by  Plato  where  he  says  (Phaedrus^  p.  229  b  c)  that
the  North  Wind  carried  off  Orithyia  "where  we  cross  over  to  the
suburb  (or  sanctuary)  of  Agra  ;  and  there  is  an  altar  of  the  North  Wind,
I  believe,  on  the  spot."  There  was  an  ancient  bridge  over  the  Ilissus,
opposite  to  the  stadium;  Wheler  in  1676  described  it  as  "an  antient
bridge  of  three  arches,  built  cross  the  Ilissus,  of  large  hewn  stone,  laid
firm  together  without  mortar ;  and  is  about  forty  feet  long "  {Journey^
p.  375).  It  was  destroyed  in  1780  for  the  sake  of  the  stones.  From
the  style  of  the  remains  of  it  which  existed  down  to  1873,  niodem
authorities  are  of  opinion  that  it  was  probably  built  by  Herodes  Atticus
(second  century  A.D.),  who  reconstructed  the  stadium  of  Pentelic  marble.
The  new  bridge  which  now  spans  the  bed  of  the  stream  at  this  point
was  built  in  1873.  See  Dodwell,  Tour  in  Greece^  i.  p.  408  ;  Dyer,
Ancient  Athens^  p.  292  sq.\  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  A  then,  i.  p.
235  sqq.,  696  note  3  ;  Milchhofer,  *Athen,'  p.  185  ;  Baedeker,^  P-  51  >
Guide-Joanne,  i.  p.  100.

As  to  the  suburb  of  Agrae  and  its  sanctuaries,  see  Dyer,  Ancient
Athens,  p.  291  sqq, ;  Milchhofer,  *Athen,'  p.  183  sq,\  Miss  Harrison,
Ancient  Athens,  p.  224  sqq.  As  to  Huntress  Artemis,  see  Index,  and
Preller,  Griech,  Mythologie,^  i.  p.  311  j^.  ;  Roscher,  Lexikon,  i.  p.  581
sq.  As  to  the  celebration  of  the  mysteries  in  Agrae,  see  Aug.  Monunsen,
Heortologie,  pp.  373-378-

19.  6.  a  stadium  of  white  marble.  The  remains  of  the  Pan-
athenaic  stadium  are  a  conspicuous  object  on  the  left  (south)  bank  of  the
Ilissus,  about  a  third  of  a  mile  to  the  east  of  the  Olympieum.  It  was  con-
structed in  the  valley  between  two  low  hills  which  extend  in  two  parallel
lines  to  the  bank  of  the  river.  The  direction  of  the  valley  is  from  south-
east to  north-west.  At  its  south-eastern  extremity  the  valley  was  closed
by  an  artificial  enbankment,  still  existing,  which  joined  the  two  hills  and
formed  the  semi-circular  termination  of  the  stadium.  The  stadiimi
appears  to  have  been  first  constructed  in  the  fourth  century  B.c  by  the
statesman  and  orator  Lycurgus.  The  ground  had  previously  been  the
private  property  of  a  certain  Dinias,  who  gave  it  up  to  the  state.
Lycurgus  levelled  the  valley,  built  a  low  wall  all  round  the  race-course,
and  completed  the  stadium  ([Plutarch,]  Vit.  X,  Orat.  pp.  841  d,  852  c  ;
C.  L  A.  ii.  No.  240).  This  seems  to  have  been  done  in  or  shortly
before  330  B.C.  ;  for  in  an  inscription  dated  Ol.  112.  3  (330-329  B.C.)  a
certain  Eudemus  is  publicly  thanked  for  having  lent  1000  yoke  of  oxen
to  the  state  for  the  construction  of  the  stadium  (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  176).
In  the  third  century  B.C.  the  stadium  appears  to  have  been  repaired  or
improved  by  a  certain  Heraclitus,  if  we  may  judge  from  a  mutilated
inscription  of  that  epoch  (AcArtov  ap\aio\oyiK6v,  1889,  p.  58).
Another  inscription,  of  Roman  date,  to  which  reference  has  already


2o6  THE  STADIUM  bk.  l  attica

been  frequently  made,  appears  to  record  the  repair  of  the  starting-point
in  the  stadium  ('£<^/ic/>is  dpxaioXxtyucijy  1884,  p.  169  sg.)  In  the
second  century  of  our  era  the  wealthy  and  munificent  Herodes  Atticus,
having  received  a  crown  at  the  Panathenaic  festival,  promised  the  people
that  when  they  next  met  to  celebrate  the  festival,  the  stadium  should  be
wholly  fitted  up  with  white  marble.  He  kept  his  word,  and  within  four
years  the  work  was  finished.  Philostratus,  who  records  the  fsict  (  Vit.
Soph,  ii.  1.7),  describes  the  stadium  as  "  beyond  all  other  marvels  and
such  that  no  theatre  could  vie  with  it."

The  race-course  was  cleared  of  rubbish  in  1 869-1 870  at  the  expense
of  King  George.  Its  total  length  is  204  metres  (about  670  feet)  and
its  breadth  33.36  metres  (about  109  feet).  Down  the  middle  of  the
race-course  ran  a  low  wall  with  a  post  {metd)  at  each  end  and  one  in
the  middle.  The  post  at  the  semi-circular  end  of  the  course  was  distant
16.68  metres  from  the  low  wall  or  parapet  which  ran  round  the  course.
This  post  was  found  and  is  now  in  the  National  Museum  of  Athens.  It
is  a  squared  pillar  of  stone  surmounted  by  a  head  of  Hermes  and  a  head
of  Apollo  (or  Dionysus)  back  to  back.  The  starting-point  has  not  been
discovered.  Of  the  marble  parapet  which  ran  round  the  outer  t6%^  of
the  race-course,  dividing  it  from  the  spectators,  some  slabs  and  founda-
tions have  been  found  at  the  semi-circular  end  of  the  stadium.  Behind
this  parapet  there  was  a  passage  or  corridor  9^  feet  wide,  which  gave
access  to  the  lower  tiers  of  seats.  The  number  of  tiers  of  seats  cannot
be  exactly  determined,  but  there  seem  to  have  been  about  sixty  of
thern^  which,  it  is  calculated,  would  contain  over  50,000  spectators.
Staircases  led  from  the  corridor  to  the  upper  rows  of  seats ;  of  these
staircases  there  were  eleven  on  each  side  of  the  stadium  and  seven  at
the  semi-circular  end.  None  of  the  marble  seats  with  which  Herodes
Atticus  adorned  the  stadium  are  to  be  seen.  They  had  already  dis-
appeared when  Spon  and  Wheler  visited  Athens  in  1676.  Remains  of
lime-kilns  in  the  stadium  indicate  that  the  marble  blocks  have  been  con-
verted into  lime.  Above  the  highest  row  of  seats  at  the  semi-circular
end  of  the  stadium  there  are  traces  of  a  Doric  colonnade,  about  105  feet
long  and  33  feet  wide.

On  the  south-eastern  side  of  the  stadium,  where  the  semi-circular
part  begins,  a  tunnel  about  12  feet  wide  by  10  feet  high  leads  from  the
level  of  the  race-course  through  the  side  of  the  hilL  It  has  been  con-
jectured that  this  tunnel  was  made  in  Roman  times  and  served  to  admit
wild  beasts  and  gladiators  to  the  race-course,  which  under  the  empire
seems  to  have  served  as  an  arena.  At  least  we  are  told  that  Hadrian
exhibited  the  slaughter  of  a  thousand  wild  beasts  in  the  stadium  at
Athens  (Spartianus,  Hadrian^  19).  At  the  other  end  of  the  stadium,
towards  the  river,  there  seems  to  have  been  a  portico ;  traces  of  it  may
still  be  seen.  On  the  summits  of  both  the  hills  which  bound  the
stadium,  the  one  on  the  north-east  the  other  on  the  south-west,  there  are
artificial  terraces  and  some  large  ancient  blocks  of  stone.  On  one  of
these  summits,  perhaps  on  the  western  and  higher  one,  may  have  stood
the  temple  of  Fortune  which  Herodes  built  "  on  the  other  side  of  the
stadium " ;   the  image  of  Fortune  in  the  temple  was  of  ivory  (Philo-


CH.  XX  STREET  OF  TRIPODS  207

stratus,  Vit  Sophist,  ii.  i.  8).  It  has  been  conjectured  that  the  build-
ing on  the  other  sununit  was  the  tomb  of  H  erodes  Atticus,  who  was
buried  in  the  stadium  (Philostratus,  op.  cit.  ii.  i.  37).  The  Fortune  to
whom  Herodes  Atticus  dedicated  the  temple  may  have  been  the  Fortune
of  the  City,  of  whom  his  wife  Appia  Regilla  was  a  priestess  {Mittheil.
d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Atken,  8  (1883),  p.  288 ;  cp.  C.  Wachsmuth,  in  id.  9
(1884),  p.  95).  The  hill  which  forms  the  boundary  of  the  stadium  on
the  south-west  is  by  some  topographers  supposed  to  be  Ardettus,  which
is  described  as  a  place  at  the  Ilissus,  above  or  near  the  Panathenaic
stadium  (Harpocration,  s.v.  'ApSnrjTTos ;  Hesychius,  s.v.  'ApSrfTTors ;
Pollux,  viii.  122).  It  was  at  Ardettus  that  the  Athenian  jurymen  swore
that  they  would  give  their  verdicts  in  accordance  with  law  and  equity ;
the  deities  by  whom  they  swore  were  Paternal  Apollo,  Demeter,  and
King  Zeus  (Pollux,  Harpocration  and  Hesychius,  //.cc.  ;  Suidas,  s.v.
'Ap&qTTris ;  Beiskefs  Amcdota  Graeca,  i.  p.  443,  line  24  sqq.)  Other
topographers  incline  to  identify  as  Ardettus  the  hill  to  the  north-east  of
the  stadium,  at  the  western  foot  of  which  lies  the  chapel  of  the  Crucified
St  Peter  (yj2x:YismMX\iy  Die  Stcuit  Athen^  i.  p.  238  ;  Milchhdfer,  *Athen,'
p.  184).

See  \Th!^(ay  Journey^  p.  375 ;  Chandler,  Travels  in  Greecty  p.  80  sq.  ;  Dod-
well.  Tour  in  Greece^  I.  p.  408  sqq.  ;  Leake,  Athens y  i.  pp.  192-195 ;  Wachs-
muth, Die  Stadt  Athen^  i.  p.  236  sq.  ;  Curtius  and  Kaupert,  Atlas  van  A  then,
p.  12  sq. ;  Dyer,  Ancient  Athens,  p.  296  sq,  ;  Baedeker,'  P*  5^  ^q**  Guide- Joanne,
I.  !>.  100  sq.  ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  p.  231  sq.  As  to  Herodes  Atticus,
see  Philostratus,  Vit.  Soph.  IL  i ;  Hertzberg,  Gesch.  Gtiechenlands  unter  der
Herrschaft  der  Rbmer,  2.  p.  377  sqq.

20.  I.  There  is  a  street  called  Tripods  leading  from  the  Fry-
taaeom.  After  describing  the  eastern  suburbs  of  Athens,  Pausanias
now  returns  to  the  Prytaneum,  and  follows  the  street  of  Tripods  which
led  thence  to  the  theatre  of  Dionysus,  skirting  the  eastern  foot  of  the
Acropolis.  The  line  of  the  street  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Acropolis
is  determined  by  the  well-known  choregic  monument  of  Lysicrates,  one
of  the  '  temples '  described  by  Pausanias  as  lining  the  street  and  sup-
porting the  bronze  tripods  which  gave  the  street  its  name.  This  grace-
ful monument  stands  on  level  ground  130  or  140  yards  from  the  eastern
cliff  of  the  Acropolis ;  and  as  the  inscription  on  it  faces  south-east  we
infer  that  the  street  ran  on  this  side  of  it.  The  form  of  the  monument
is  that  of  a  small  circular  temple  of  the  Corinthian  order,  resting  on  a
quadrangular  basement  1 3  feet  high.  This  basement  is  built  of  Piraeic
limestone,  with  a  cornice  of  Eleusinian  marble.  The  circular  part  of
the  monument  is  21^  feet  high  by  9  feet  in  diameter.  It  is  of  Pentelic
marble  and  consists  of  six  fluted  Corinthian  columns  supporting  an
architrave  and  frieze.  The  spaces  between  the  columns  are  filled  up
with  curved  marble  panels,  so  that  there  was  no  opening  into  the
interior  of  the  tiny  temple,  and  it  was  quite  dark  inside.  The  frieze,
about  10  inches  high  only,  is  adorned  with  low  reliefs,  now  much
damaged,  representing  the  punishment  which  Dionysus  inflicted  on  the
pirates  by  turning  them  into  dolphins  (see  the  Homeric  hymn  Dionysus^
or  the  Pirates;  Ovid,  Me  tarn,  iii.  650  sqq. ;    Nonnius,  xlv.   102-165  ;


2o6  STREET  OF  TRIPODS  bk.  i.  attica

Philostratus,  Imagines^  i.  i8).  The  roof  is  cut  out  of  a  single  block  of
marble,  and  is  delicately  chiselled  to  resemble  a  thatch  of  laurel  leaves.
From  the  centre  of  it  rises  a  finely-carved  floral  ornament  which  origin-
ally supported  the  tripod.  From  the  inscription  (C  /.  A.  ii.  No.  1242  ;
Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Graec,  No.  415)  carved  on  the  architrave
we  learn  that  the  monument  was  erected  for  a  scenic  victory  won  by
Lysicrates  son  of  Lysithides  with  a  chorus  in  the  archonship  of  Euaenetus
(335-334  B-^O  It  is  °o^  popularly  known  as  the  lantern  of  Diogenes  ;
formerly  it  was  called  the  lantern  of  Demosthenes,  and  an  absurd  tradi-
tion prevailed  that  Demosthenes  had  shut  himself  up  in  it  to  pursue  his
studies  undisturbed.  The  monument  is  the  oldest  existing  example  of
the  Corinthian  order  of  architecture,  with  the  exception  of  the  inner  part
of  the  Tholos  or  Rotunda  in  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  at  Epidaurus.
The  line  of  the  street  of  Tripods  was  further  determined  by  the  dis-
covery, in  1854,  of  the  quadrangular  base  of  another  choregic  monu-
ment to  the  north  of  the  Lysicrates  monument  This  second  base  is  at
the  north-west  comer  of  the  junction  of  the  modem  Tripod  Street  with
the  modem  Thespis  Street.  Further,  in  the  course  of  the  excavations
at  the  theatre  of  Dionysus  in  1862,  there  was  discovered  the  base  of
what  seems  to  have  been  another  choregic  monument  at  the  entrance  to
the  eastern  parodos^  or  passage  into  the  orchestra  between  the  seats  of
the  theatre  and  the  stage.  The  base  is  of  white  marble  veined  with
blue,  and  is  flanked  by  two  pilasters  of  Pentelic  marble.  In  the  same
passage  was  found  a  fragment  of  a  small  architrave  and  cornice  of  Pen-
telic marble  with  the  end  of  an  inscription.  The  beginning  of  the
inscription  was  found  in  1877  close  to  the  same  place,  built  into  a
mediaeval  tomb.  The  two  pieces  put  together  make  up  a  choregic  in-
scription recording  scenic  victories  won  in  the  archonship  of  Anaxicrates
(307-306  B.C.)  (C  LA,  ii.  No.  1289;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.
Graec,  No.  417  ;  Mittheil,  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  3  (1878),  p.  237).
In  point  of  style  and  workmanship  this  inscribed  architrave  closely
resembles  the  pilaster-flanked  base ;  but  as  their  dimensions  are  some-
what different,  it  would  seem  that  they  belonged  to  two  separate  choregic
monuments,  which  probably  stood  at  the  end  of  the  street  of  Tripods,
close  to  the  theatre.  See  II/Miicriica  t^  'A/};(aioAoyi#c^s  'Erat/jtas  for
1877,  p.  18  ;  E.  Pottier,  *  Fragments  de  monuments  choragiques  k  Test
du  Theatre  de  Bsicchus,*  Bullelsn  de  Corr,  HellMque^  3  (1879),  pp.
221-229.  We  hear  that  the  tyrant  Demetrius  Phalereus  walked  after
breakfast  **  beside  the  tripods,''  which  probably  means  in  the  street  of
the  Tripods  ;  and  hence  the  place  became  a  fashionable  lounge  for  idlers
who  wished  to  attract  his  attention  (Athenaeus,  xii.  p.  542  f).

See  Wheler,y<7«r»<fy  i»  Greece^  pp.  397-399;  Stuart  and  Revett,  Antiquities
of  Athens f  I.  ch.  4,  pp.  27-36,  with  plates  i.-xxvi.  ;  Dodwell,  Tour  in  Greece^
I.  p.  289  sqq,  ;  Leake,  Athens^  1.  pp.  284-287  ;  Archdologische  Zeitung,  12  (1854),
p.  437  sq.  ;  Dyer,  Ancient  Athens^  pp.  299-305 ;  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stattt  Athen^
I.  pp.  240-242;  Milchhofer,  'Athen,'  p.  188  sq.  ;  Baumeister's  DenkmdUr^  pp.
838-840 ;  Lolling,  *  Athen,'  p.  326  ;  Baedeker,*  p.  52  sq,  ;  Guide-Joanne^  I.
p.  68  sq.  ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  pp.  241-253.  As  to  the  sculptured
frieze  on  the  monument  of  Lysicrates,  see  also  MUller-Wieseler,  Denkmaler,  i.
pL  xxxvii. ;  Overbeck,  Geseh,  d,  griech,  Plastikf^  2,  pp.  120-124 ;  Murray,  History


CK.  XX  STREET  OF  TRIPODS  209


of  Gruk  Sculpture^  2.  pp.  330-334 ;  Mitchell,  Ancient  Sculpture^  pp.  485-489 ;
Friederichs-Wolters,  Gipsabpisse^  No.  1328 ;  A.  H.  Smith,  Catalogue  of  Sculpture
in  the  British  Museum^  pp.  248-257  ;  H.  F.  De  Cou,  *  The  frieze  of  the  choragic
monument  of  Lysikrates  at  Athens/  American  fournal  of  Archaeology t  8  (1893),
PP-  42-55.

The  street  of  Tripods  was  not  the  only  place  in  Athens  where  prize
tripods  were  set  up  by  the  men  who  had  won  them  in  scenic  competi-
tions. They  were  dedicated  also  in  the  sanctuaries  of  Dionysus  and  of
the  Pythian  Apollo  (Isaeus,  v.  41  ;  see  note  on  i.  19.  i  *  Pythian  Apollo ').
Nicias  and  his  brothers  set  up  their  prize  tripods  in  the  sanctuary  of
Dionysus  (Plato,  Gorgias^  p.  472  a ;  Plutarch,  Nicias,  3)  ;  and  down  to
Plutarch's  time  there  were  tripods  in  the  same  sanctuary  inscribed  with
the  name  of  Aristides,  but  whether  this  Aristides  was  the  celebrated
personage  of  that  name  or  somebody  else,  was  disputed  (Plutarch,
Aristides,  i ).  A  large  number  of  inscriptions  from  the  bases  of  choregic
monuments  have  been  found  in  Athens.  See  C  /.  A,  i.  Nos.  336  sq,  ;
C.  L  A.  ii.  Nos.  1234,  1235  ^99*  J  U.  Kohler,  *  Documente  zur  Geschichte
dcs  athenischen  Theaters,'  MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  A  then,  3  (1878),
pp.  104  sqq,,  229  sqq.

20.  I.  These  tripods enclose  most  memorable  works  of  art.

The  statues  were  placed  under  the  tripods,  so  that  the  three  long  legs
of  the  tripod  enclosed  the  statue,  and  the  kettle  or  cauldron  served  as  a
roof  to  it  For  other  instances  of  statues  thus  placed  under  tripods,  see
Paus.  iii.  1 8.  8  ;  cp.  iv.  1 4.  2.  An  inscription  found  in  the  theatre  of
Dionysus  at  Athens  (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  1298;  Kaibel,  Epigrammata
Craeca,  No.  924)  mentions  that  a  certain  Praxiteles  set  up  statues  of
Victory  under  two  tripods,  probably  for  scenic  victories  which  he  had
won  with  choruses  trained  at  his  expense.  On  this  custom  of  placing
statues  under  tripods  see  O.  Benndorf,  in  Zeitschrift  fiir  die  osterreich,
Gymnasien,  26  (1875),  P*  734  ^99*  J  E.  Reisch,  Griechische  Weih-
geschenke,  pp.  110-115;  cp.  O.  Kern,  in  MittheiL  d,  arch.  Inst,  in
Athen,  19  (1894),  P*  54  ^99*

20.  I.  here  is  the  Satyr  of  which  Praxiteles  is  said  to  have
been  very  prond  etc.  Athenaeus  mentions  (xiii.  p.  591  b)  that
Praxiteles  allowed  Phryne  to  choose  either  the  statue  of  Love  or  the
statue  of  the  Satyr  in  the  street  of  Tripods  (rov  ctti  Tp&TroScov
Sarv/Mv),  and  that  she  chose  the  Love.  But  he  does  not  relate  the
ruse  to  which,  according  to  Pausanias,  Phryne  had  recourse  in  order  to
discover  which  of  his  statues  Praxiteles  valued  most.  Pliny  mentions
(N,  H,  xxxiv.  69)  a  famous  bronze  statue  of  a  Satyr  by  Praxiteles
which  was  commonly  known  as  Periboitos  or  *  celebrated ' ;  it  formed
one  figure  of  a  group,  the  other  figures  being  Dionysus  and  Drunkenness.
It  has  sometimes  been  supposed  that  this  *  celebrated'  Satyr  was
identical  with  the  one  here  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  But  this  seems
impossible,  since  the  *  celebrated '  Satyr  was  part  of  a  group,  whereas
the  Satyr  here  mentioned  by  Pausanias  was  a  single  figure,  as  appears
clearly  from  the  anecdote  about  Phryne.

We  have  no  information  as  to  the  pose  and  characteristic  beauties
of  the  statue  of  the  Satyr  on  which  Praxiteles  set  so  much  store.     But  a

VOL.  II  P


210  SATYR  OF  PRAXITELES  bk.  i.  attica

great  many  copies  have  come  down  to  us  of  the  statue  of  a  Satyr  which
is  admitted  on  all  hands  to  be  thoroughly  Praxitelean  in  style.     It
represents  a  youthful  and  comely  Satyr  leaning  in  an  easy,  negligent
attitude  against  the  stump  of  a  tree,  and  gazing  idly  before  him  with  a
placid  and  somewhat  dreamy  look.     His  right  arm  rests  on  the  stump
of  the  tree,  his  left  on  his  hip.     In  his  right  hand  he  holds  his  flute.
The  skin  of  a  panther  is  flung  over  his  right  shoulder  and  crosses  the
upper  part  of  his  body  like  a  scar£     The  weight  of  the  body  rests  on
the  left  foot ;  the  right  foot  is  drawn  back.     The  ears  are  pointed,  but
otherwise  there  is  nothing  in  the  graceful  figure  with  its  soft,  flowing
lines,  to  recall  the  brutish  nature  commonly  ascribed  to  the  Satyrs.     Of
hardly  any  ancient  statue  have  so  many  copies  survived  as  of  this.
Almost  every  important  collection  of  sculpture  possesses  one  or  more  of
them.     The  original  must,  therefore,  have  been  one  of  the  most  popular
statues  of  antiquity.     Of  the  existing  copies  by  for  the  finest  is  a  torso
which  was  found  in  one  of  the  imperial  palaces  on  the  Palatine  at  Rome
and  is  now  preserved  in  the  Louvre.     The  material  is  very  fine  Parian
marble   and    the  workmanship   is   most   exquisite.      Indeed   the   late
H.    Brunn,  one   of   the    best  judges   of   Greek   sculpture,    held  that
the  torso  is  an  original  work  of  Praxiteles,  and  superior  even  to  the
'  famous  Hermes  with  the  infant  Dionysus  of  the  same  sculptor.     For,
according  to  Brunn,  the  Hermes  is  a  youthful  and  immature  work  of
the  great  sculptor ;  but  the  torso  of  the  Satyr  must  have  been  executed
by  him  when  he  was  in  the  prime  of  his  powers,  and  represents  the
very  summit  of  his  achievement  in  art.     Whether  this  is  so  or  not,  it
is  highly  probable  that  the  original  statue  was  a  work  of  Praxiteles  ;
and  it  is  possible  that  it  was  the  statue  which  stood  in  the  street  of
Tripods,   as  we  learn  from    Pausanias  and  Athenaeus.      There  was,
indeed,  another  statue  of  a  Satyr  by  Praxiteles  at  Megara  (Paus.  i.  43.
5) ;  but  it  does  not  seem  to  have  enjoyed  the  same  celebrity  as  the  one
in  Tripod  street  at  Athens,  and  copies  of  it  are  less  likely  to  have  been
multiplied.

See  K.  O.  Miiller,  Handbuch  der  Archaeologie  der  Kunst^  §  127.  2;  H.  Brunn,
in  Deutsche  Rundschau^  May,  1882,  pp.  200-205  »  *^'»  Beschreibung  d,  Glyptothek^
Nos.  105,  106;  Friederichs-Wolters,(Ji^ja/jfww^,  No.  1216 ;  Overbeck,  Gesch,  d,
griech.  Plastik^^  2  pp.  40,  58  sqq.  ;  Mitchell,  Ancient  Sculpture^  p.  447  sqq,  ;
Murray,  Hist,  of  Greek  Sculpture^  2.  p.  265  sqq,  ;  Baumeister's  Denkmaler,  p.
1398  sqq,  ;  Beschreibung  d.  antihen  Skulpturen  (Berlin),  Nos.  258,  259  ;  A.
Furtwangler,  Meisterwerke  d,  griech,  Plastik^  pp.  559-561.

s  In  §  2  of  this  chapter  Pausanias  mentions  the  statue  of  a  boy  Satyr
holding  out  a  cup,  which  stood  in  a  temple  of  Dionysus.  Some  distin-
guished archaeologists,  including  K.  B.  Stark,  L.  Stephani,  the  late  H.
Brunn,  and  Professor  Otto  Benndorf,  have  held  that  this  statue  of  the
boy  Satyr  holding  out  a  cup  was  no  other  than  the  one  on  which  Praxi-
teles prided  himself  so  much  ;  that  in  fact  in  ^  i  and  2  of  this  chapter
Pausanias  is  speaking  of  one  statue  only  of  a  Satyr,  not  of  two.  A  fatal
objection  to  this  view  appears  to  be  that,  after  mentioning  Praxiteles*s
favourite  Satyr  and  telling  the  anecdote  about  it,  Pausanias  goes  on  to


CH.  XX  SATYR  OF  PRAXITELES  211

say  that  in  the  neighbouring  temple  of  Dionysus  there  is  a  statue  of  a  boy
Satyr,  etc.  This  surely  implies  that  the  boy  Satyr  was  in  a  temple
different  from,  though  near  to,  the  shrine  which  contained  Praxiteles's
favourite  Satyr.  It  seems,  therefore,  that  Pausanias  is  describing
two  separate  statues  of  Satyrs.  In  regard  to  the  second  statue
(the  boy  Satyr  holding  out  the  cup)  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  it
was  by  Praxiteles.  Nor  does  it  appear  to  have  formed  a  group
with  the  statues  of  Love  and  Dionysus  by  the  sculptor  Thymilus,
which  stood  in  the  same  temple.  Some  scholars,  indeed,  have  not  only
assumed  that  these  three  statues  formed  a  group,  but  have  actually
identified  this  supposed  group  with  the  bronze  group  of  Dionysus,
Drunkenness,  and  a  Satyr  described  by  Pliny  as  a  work  of  Praxiteles
(A^.  H,  xxxiv.  69,  see  above).  They  suppose  that  Pliny  or  his  authority
mistook  the  figure  of  Love  for  a  personi^cation  of  Drunkenness.  But  a
figure  of  Love,  doubtless  represented  as  a  naked  boy,  could  hardly  be
mistaken  for  Drunkenness  {Methe)y  who  would  have  been  represented
as  a  draped  woman.  Moreover,  the  whole  group  described  by  Pliny
was  by  Praxiteles ;  whereas  in  the  supposed  group  described  by  Pausanias
two  of  the  three  figures  were  by  a  sculptor  Thymilus  (otherwise  unknown),
and  in  regard  to  the  third  figure  we  do  not  know  whether  it  was  by
Praxiteles  or  not.  L.  Stephani  maintained  that  the  statue  of  the  boy
Satyr  holding  out  a  cup  (which,  as  we  have  seen,  he  identified  with
Praxiteles's  favourite  Satyr)  is  reproduced  in  a  number  of  statues  which
have  come  down  to  us.  These  statues  represent  a  graceful  young  Satyr
pouring  wine  out  of  a  can  which  he  holds  in  his  raised  right  hand  into
a  drinking-horn  which  he  holds  in  his  left.  One  copy  of  this  wine-
pouring  Satyr  was  found  at  Castel  Gandolfo,  on  the  margin  of  the  Alban-
lake,  and  is  now  at  Dresden.  The  original  of  these  statues  certainly
appears  to  have  been  a  famous  work  of  the  Praxitelean  school,  if  not
of  Praxiteles  himself.  But  we  are  not  justified  in  identifying  it  with  the
statue  described  by  Pausanias  in  §  2.  For,  in  the  first  place,  the
attitudes  of  the  two  statues  are  different ;  and,  in  the  second  place,  as
already  remarked,  we  do  not  know  that  the  statue  described  by  Pausanias
was  by  Praxiteles.  Professor  Furtwangler,  however,  apparently  inclines
to  adopt  Stephanies  view,  identifying  the  wine-pouring  Satyr  with
Praxiteles's  statue,  and  holding  that  it  formed  a  group  with  Thymilus's
figures  of  Love  and  Dionysus.  He  considers  that  the  wine-pouring
Satyr  is  an  early  work  of  Praxiteles,  probably  executed  about  370-360
B.C.,  and  that  it  betrays  the  influence  of  Polyclitus.

See  MUller-Wieseler,  DenkmaJer^  2.  pL  xxxix.  No,  459 ;  Friederichs-Woltcrs,
Cipsahgusse^  No.  1217  ;  Brunn,  Gesch.  d.  griech.  Kiinstler^  I.  p.  338  sq,  ;  L.
Urlichs,  in  Neue  JahrbiUher  fur  Philologie  und  Paedagogiky  70  (1854),  p.  185;
Overbeck,  in  Fleckei sen's  JahrhUcher^  I  (185 5),  pp.  679-681  ;  C  Bursian,  in
Flecktiserf  5  JahrbiUher y  4  (1858),  p.  105  sq,  ;  K-  Friederichs,  Praxiteles  und  die
Niobegruppe^  pp.  12-20  ;  L.  Stephani,  *  Parerga  Archaeolo^ca,*  xxviii.  in  Milanges
Grico-Romainesy  3  (1869- 1874),  pp.  363-398 ;  K.  Lugebil,  m  Philologus,  33  (1874),
pp.  67-97  ;  O.  Benndorf,  in  Zeitschri/t  fur  die  osterreich.  Gymnasien^  26  (1875),  P»
731  sqq.  ;  P.  Wolters,  in  Archdologische  Zeitung,  43  (1885),  p.  81  sqq,  ;  E.  Reiscn,
Griechische  Weihgeschenkey  p.  1 1 1  sq.  ;  A.  Furtwangler,  Meisterwerke  d,  griech,
Plastiky  p.  533  sqq.     As  to  Praxiteles's  statue  of  Love,  see  ix.  27.  3  note.


212  SANCTUARY  OF  DIONYSUS  bk.  i.  attica

20.  3.  the  oldest  sanctuary  of  Dionysns  is  beside  the  theatre.
The  situation  of  the  theatre  at  the  south-eastern  foot  of  the  Acropolis  is
well  known.  The  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  here  described  by  Pausanias
lay  immediately  to  the  south  of  the  theatre,  at  the  back  of  the  stage
buildings,  for  here  have  been  found  the  remains  of  the  two  temples
mentioned  by  our  author.  The  existence  of  a  sanctuary  of  Dionysus
beside  the  theatre  is  noticed  also  by  Vitruvius  (v.  9) ;  and  we  are  told
by  Mannus  {Life  of  Proclus^  29)  that  the  philosopher  Proclus  had  a
house  between  the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  at  the  theatre  and  the
sanctuary  of  Aesculapius,  which,  as  we  know,  was  situated  at  the
southern  base  of  the  Acropolis,  immediately  to  the  west  of  the  theatre.
An  ornamental  gateway  or  portal  led  into  the  precinct.  For  Dioclides,
who  gave  evidence  as  to  the  sacrilegious  mutilation  of  the  Hermae
which  created  such  consternation  in  Athens  on  the  eve  of  the  sailing  of
the  Sicilian  expedition,  described  how,  rising  one  morning  before  day-
break to  go  to  Laurium,  he  came  to  the  portal  of  Dionysus  and  there  by
the  light  of  a  full  moon  saw  a  crowd  of  men  coming  down  from  the
Music  Hall  into  the  orchestra.  Full  of  fear  and  awe  he  entered  the
precinct  and,  crouching  down  in  the  shadow  between  a  pillar  and  a
bronze  equestrian  statue,  beheld  how  the  men,  about  three  hundred  in
number,  divided  themselves  into  bands  of  fives,  tens,  and  twenties,  and
danced  in  the  moonlight,  which  fell  so  full  on  their  faces  that  he
recognised  most  of  thenu  Next  day  he  heard  that  the  Hermae  had
been  mutilated,  and  he  made  sure  that  the  men  he  had  seen  dancing  by
moonlight  in  the  orchestra  were  the  criminals.  See  Andocides,  i.
38  sg.

Until  lately  it  has  been  customary  to  identify  this  sanctuary  of
Dionysus  at  the  theatre  with  (i)  the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  in  the
Marshes,  and  (a)  the  Lenaeum  (sanctuary  of  Lenaean  Dionysus),  which
have  been  regarded  as  identical  with  each  other.

(i)  The  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  in  the  Marshes  is  mentioned  by
Thucydides  (ii.  15)  along  with  the  sanctuaries  of  Olympian  Zeus,  the
Pythian  Apollo,  and  Earth,  as  proof  that  ancient  Athens,  so  far  as  it
exceeded  the  limits  of  the  Acropolis,  lay  chiefly  to  the  south  of  it.
Thucydides  adds  that  the  more  ancient  festival  of  Dionysus  was  cele-
brated at  this  sanctuary  in  the  Marshes  on  the  12th  day  of  the  month  of
Anthesterion  (February-March).  Thus  from  Thucydides  we  learn  that
the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  in  the  Marshes  lay  to  the  south  of  the  Acropolis.
Further,  we  know  that  it  was  within  the  city-walls ;  for  Isaeus  tells  us
(viii.  35)  that  a  certain  Ciron  owned  a  farm  at  Phlya  and  two  houses  in  the
city,  of  which  one,  rented  at  2000  drachms,  was  beside  the  sanctuary  of
Dionysus  in  the  Marshes.  The  pseudo-Demosthenes  (lix.  76,  p.  1371)
speaks  of  this  sanctuary  as  the  oldest  and  holiest  sanctuary  of  the  god
in  Athens ;  it  was  opened,  he  tells  us,  only  once  a  year,  namely  on  the
1 2th  of  Anthesterion,  the  day  when  the  ancient  Dionysiac  festival  was
held.  On  this  day,  known  as  the  Feast  of  Pitchers  (Choes\  people
brought  to  the  priestess  in  the  sanctuary  at  the  Marshes  the  garlands
which  they  had  worn  ;  after  which  they  offered  sacrifices  in  the  sanctuary
(Athenaeus,  x.  p.  437  b-d).     They  also  brought  the  new  wine  in  jars


CH.  XX  SANCTUA  RY  OF  DIONYSUS  2 1 3

and  offered  some  of  it  to  the  wine-god  at  his  sanctuary  in  the  Marshes  ;
then  they  quaffed  it  themselves  (Athenaeus,  xi.  p.  465  a).  But  this
presentation  of  the  new  wine  could  hardly  have  taken  place  in  Anthes-
terion  (February- March) ;  the  natural  time  for  it  would  be  in  autumn.
It  is  not  said  that  the  presentation  took  place  inside  of,  but  only  at  or
beside  {vp6%\  the  sanctuary.  There  was  an  altar  in  the  sanctuary,  and
beside  the  altar  stood  a  stone  pillar  or  slab,  on  which  was  engraved  a
law  ordaining  that  the  Queen,  the  wife  of  the  republican  magistrate
called  the  King,  must  be  a  burgess  and  a  virgin  when  she  married
her  husband  ([Demosthenes,]  lix.  p.  1370).  Beside  this  altar  the
Queen  administered  an  oath  of  chastity  and  ceremonial  purity  to  the
fourteen  women  who  assisted  her  in  her  priestly  functions  ([Demo-
sthenes,] lix.  pp.  1 369-1 372  ;  Hesychius  and  Harpocration,  s,v,  ytpapai).
Aristophanes  refers  to  the  croaking  of  the  frogs  at  this  sanctuary  of
Dionysus  in  the  Marshes  at  the  feast  of  the  Holy  Pots  {Frogs,  215
sgg,)  Cp.  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Frogs,  216,  218,  219;  Stephanus
Byzantius  and  Photius,  Lexicon,  s,v,  ALfivai ;  Harpocration,  s,v,  kv
Ai/ivais  Atovixrtov.  As  to  the  festival  on  the  12th  of  Anthesterion,  see
Aug.  Mommsen,  Heortologie,  p.  356  sqq,

(2)  The  Lenaeum  is  described  as  a  large  enclosure  containing  a
sanctuary  of  Dionysus  in  which  dramatic  exhibitions  were  given  before
the  theatre  was  built  (Hesychius,  s.v,  «rt  Arjvait^ ;  Photius,  Lexicon,
s.v.  Aiyvatbv;  Etymolog,  Magnum,  p.  361,  s,v,*%viktf\vQ.iA^  \  Bekker's
Anecdota  Graeca,  i.  p.  278,  line  8  sq,)  The  comedies  of  Pherecrates
seem  to  have  been  acted  here  (Plato,  Protagoras,  p.  427  d).  The
situation  of  the  Lenaeum  is  not  known.  Hesychius  says  {s^v.  kv\
ArivaU^  dy<ov)  that  it  was  in  the  city ;  but  the  scholiast  on  Aristophanes
{Acham,  202  and  504)  says  that  it  was  in  the  fields.  This  statement
of  the  scholiast  appears  to  be  merely  an  inference  drawn  by  him  from
the  two  lines  of  Aristophanes  on  which  he  is  commenting  ;  but  the  lines
seem  certainly  to  justify  the  inference  that  the  festival  of  Lenaean
Dionysus  was  held  in  the  country.  This  indeed  we  should  expect  to  be
the  case,  since  the  epithet  Lenaean  designates  Dionysus  as  the  god
of  the  wine -press  (linos),  and  wine -presses  are  usually  to  be  found
beside  the  vineyards,  not  in  cities  (cp.  Apollodorus,  cited  by  Stephanus
Byzantius,  s.v.  A^vaios).  Further,  the  distinction  between  "  the  Dio-
nysiac  festival  in  the  city  "  and  "  the  Dionysiac  festival  at  Lenaeum  "
(C.  /.  A,  ii.  No.  741  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Graec,  No.  374)
points  to  the  latter  being  a  rural  festivsd.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is
a  piece  of  evidence  which  seems  to  confirm  Hesychius's  statement  that
the  Lenaeum  was  in  the  city.  In  a  well-known  passage  (xviil  129,
p.  270)  Demosthenes  taunts  his  rival  Aeschines  with  the  meanness  of
his  birth.  The  mother  of  Aeschines,  says  Demosthenes,  was  a  common
prostitute  who  plied  her  trade  in  a  brothel  beside  the  sanctuary  of  the
hero  Calamites ;  and  from  another  source  (Hesychius,  s.v,  icaXa/iin^s
^fMtfs)  we  learn  that  the  sanctuary  of  this  otherwise  unknown  hero  was
beside  the  Lenaeum.  If,  then,  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Lenaeum  was
a  haunt  of  prostitutes,  it  is  more  likely  to  have  been  in  the  town  than
the  country.


214  SANCTUARY  OF  DIONYSUS  bk.  i.  attica

The  questions  still  remain  (i)  Was  the  Lenaeum  identical  with  the
sanctuary  of  Dionysus  in  the  Marshes  ?  and  (2)  Were  these  sanctuaries,
or,  supposing  them  to  be  different,  was  one  of  them,  identical  with  the
sanctuary  of  Dionysus  at  the  theatre  ?

( 1 )  The  first  question  has  been  generally  answered  in  the  affirma-
tive. But  the  only  positive  evidence  for  identifying  the  Lenaeum  with
the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  in  the  Marshes  appears  to  be  a  statement  of
Hesychius  (s.v,  AifAvai)  that  the  Marshes  (Umnai)  was  a  place  in
Athens  dedicated  to  Dionysus  where  the  Lenaean  festival  was  held.  A
difficulty  in  the  way  of  identifying  them  is  that  the  sanctuary  in  the
Marshes  is  said  to  have  been  opened  only  on  the  festival  of  the  1 2th  of
Anthesterion  (see  above) ;  whereas  the  Lenaean  festival  appears  to  have
been  celebrated  in  the  Lenaeum  in  the  month  Gamelion  (Aug.  Mommsen,
Heortologie^  p.  332  sqq,)  The  distinction  of  the  two  sanctuaries  is
maintained  by  Mr.  G.  Oehmichen  {Sitzungsberichte  d,  k,  bayer,  Akad,  d.
Wissen,  2U  Munchen^  Philosoph.  philolog.  CI.  1889,  voL  2,  p.  122  sqq,)

(2)  There  are  some  grounds  for  identifying  the  sanctuary  at  the
theatre  with  the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  in  the  Marshes.  The  situation
of  the  latter  sanctuary  to  the  south  of  the  Acropolis  and  within  the  city-
walls  (see  above)  answers  perfectly  to  the  situation  of  the  sanctuary  at
the  theatre.  Again,  the  sanctuary  at  the  theatre  is  stated  by  Pausanias
to  have  been  the  oldest  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  ;  and  the  same  statement
is  made  of  the  sanctuary  in  the  Marshes  by  the  pseudo-Demosthenes
(lix.  76,  p.  731)  explicitly  and  by  Thucydides  (ii.  15)  implicitly.  Prof,
von  Wilamowitz  -  MollendorfT,  indeed,  thinks  that  Pausanias  merely
copied  from,  and  mistook,  Thucydides,  applying  to  the  sanctuary  at  the
theatre  a  statement  which  Thucydides  made  about  the  sanctuary  in  the
Marshes,  which,  according  to  Prof  von  Wilamowitz-MollendorfT,  was
in  a  different  part  of  Athens  {Hermes^  21  (1886),  p.  621).  But  the
contents  of  the  sanctuary  at  the  theatre  bear  out  Pausanias.  For  here
was  the  temple  of  Dionysus  of  Eleutherae,  whose  worship  was  the  first
introduced  into  Athens  (see  i.  2.  5  ;  i.  38.  8).  The  difBculties  in  the
way  of  identifying  the  sanctuary  at  the  theatre  with  the  sanctuary  in
the  Marshes  are  that  the  situation  of  the  sanctuary  at  the  theatre  is  high
and  arid,  not  at  all  marshy  ;  and  that  the  sanctuary  in  the  Marshes  was
opened  only  on  the  1 2th  of  Anthesterion,  whereas  the  sanctuary  at  the
theatre  must  have  been  opened  in  the  month  Elaphebolion  on  the
occasion  of  <<the  Dionysiac  festival  in  the  city"  (A.  £.  Haigh,  The
Attic  Theatre^  p.  10  sq.)

The  only  ground  for  identifying  the  sanctuary  at  the  theatre  with
the  Lenaeum  would  seem  to  be  that  the  latter  is  said  to  have  been
the  scene  of  dramatic  exhibitions  before  the  theatre  was  built,  and  it  is
not  unnatural  to  suppose  that  the  theatre  was  built  on  the  site  where
the  dramatic  exhibitions  had  previously  been  held.  On  the  other  hand
the  difficulty  in  the  way  of  identifying  the  sanctuary  at  the  theatre  with
the  Lenaeum  is  that  we  should  then  have  to  suppose  that  ^<the
Dionysiac  festival  in  the  city  "  and  "  the  Dionysiac  festival  at  Lenaeum  "
were  celebrated  at  the  same  place,  contrary  to  the  apparent  signification
of  the  names.


CH.  XX  TEAfPLES  OF  DIONYSUS  215


On  the  whole  it  would  seem  that  the  question  of  the  difference  or
identity  of  the  sanctuaries  of  Dionysus  at  the  theatre,  in  the  Marshes,
and  at  the  Lenaeum  must  remain  for  the  present  in  suspense.  Dr.  Dorp-
feld  formerly  held  that  the  sanctuary  in  the  Marshes  was  in  the  north-
western quarter  of  Athens  between  the  market-place  and  the  Dipylum
{Berliner  p  kilo  log.  Wochenschrift^  10  (1890),  p.  461) ;  and  this  view  has
been  supported  at  great  length  by  Mr.  J.  Pickard  {American  Journal  of
Archaeology,  8  (1893),  pp.  56-82),  but  his  arguments  are  not  convinc-
ing. Prof.  £.  Maass  argues  that  the  Lenaeum,  which  he  identifies  with
the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  in  the  Marshes,  was  in  the  market-place  {De
Lenaeo  et  Delphinio  Commentatio,  p.  v.  sqq.^  Dr.  Dorpfeld  now  (1894)
believes  that  he  has  discovered  the  Lenaeum  (which  he  identifies
with  the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  in  the  Marshes)  at  the  western  foot  of
the  Acropolis,  to  the  south  of  the  Areopagus.  In  the  course  of  excava-
tions conducted  here  he  has  found  an  enclosure  about  40  metres  long
by  20  metres  wide,  surrounded  by  ancient  polygonal  walls.  Inside  the
enclosure  were  found  numerous  fragments  ojf  large  black-figured  and
red-figured  vases,  the  lower  part  of  an  altar  or  table  of  stone,  and  a
Greek  wine-press.  Hence  he  believes  that  the  enclosure  was  the
Lenaeum.  The  remains  of  a  Roman  building,  which  from  an  inscrip-
tion appears  to  have  been  the  place  of  assembly  of  a  Dionysiac  society,
were  found  immediately  over  the  supposed  Lenaeum,  which  was  buried
under  them.  Dr.  Ddrpfeld  supposes  that  in  Roman  times  the  worship
of  Lenaean  Dionysus  fell  into  neglect,  and  was  replaced  by  the
Dionysiac  society  which  built  its  meeting-house  or  club-room  immedi-
ately over  the  ancient  sanctuary.  See  Dr.  Ddrpfeld,  in  MittheiL  d,
arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  19  (1894),  pp.  147-150.

Cp.  Leake,  Athens,  I.  pp.  287-289 ;  Dyer,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  305  sq, ;
Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen^  i.  p.  243;  Milchhofer,  *Athen,*  p.  189  ;  von
Wilamowitz-Mollendorlf,  in  Hermes^  21  (1886),  p.  615  sqq.\  Lolling,  *Athen,'
p.  327  ;  W.  Judeich,  '  Lenaion,'  Rheinisches  Museum,  N.  F.  47  (1892),  pp.  53-60.

20.  3.  two  temples  and  two  images  of  Dionysus  etc.  Remains
of  two  small  temples,  doubtless  the  temples  here  mentioned  by
Pausanias,  have  been  found  immediately  to  the  south  of  the  stage-
buildings  of  the  Dionysiac  theatre.  The  older  of  the  two  temples  abuts
on  the  south  wall  of  the  stage  building  at  its  western  end.  All  that
remains  of  this  temple  is  a  portion  of  the  north  wall  and  two  small
pieces  of  wall  at  right  angles  to  it  It  is  orientated  east  and  west.  It
must  have  been  very  small.  From  the  style  of  the  masonry  and  of  the
clamps  it  appears  that  the  temple  is  older  than  the  Persian  wars.  This
was  probably  the  temple  in  which  the  image  of  Eleutherian  Dionysus
stood.  The  image  seems  to  have  been  the  ancient  wooden  one  which,
according  to  tradition,  was  brought  to  Athens  from  Eleutherae  (i.  38.
8)  by  Pegasus  (i.  2.  5).  Every  year  on  stated  days  the  image  was
conveyed  to  a  small  temple  near  the  Academy  (i.  29.  2).  The  temple
was  once  burnt  down  (Clement  of  Alexandria,  Protrept.  iv.  53,  p.  47,
ed.  Potter).  The  chief  seat  in  the  neighbouring  theatre  (a  richly-carved
arm-chair  of  marble  in  the  middle  of  the  front  row)  was  set  apart  for  the


ai6  D/ONYSUS  OF  ALCAMENBS  bk.  i.  attica

priest  of  Eleutherian  Dionysus,  as  we  learn  from  the  inscription  on  it
(C.  /.  A.  iii.  No.  240).

A  few  feet  due  south  of  this  temple,  and  about  46  feet  south  of  the
western  end  of  the  stage-building,  are  the  remains  of  the  other  temple.
It  is  larger  in  siie  and  later  in  style  than  the  one  just  described,  and  its
orientation  is  somewhat  different  Its  length  is  about  75  feet  and  its
width  33  feet.  The  foundations,  which  alone  remain,  are  built  of
breccia  stone.  The  temple  consisted  of  a  ccUa  with  a  fore-temple  or
ante-chamber.  In  the  ctlla  are  the  foundations  of  a  large  base,  which
probably  supported  the  golden  and  ivory  image  of  Dionysus,  the  work
of  Alcamenes.  Dr.  DSrpfeld  has  pointed  out  that  none  of  the  buildings
of  the  age  of  Pericles  has  foundations  of  breccia.  It  seems  probable,
therefore,  that  this  temple  of  Dionysus  was  built  not  earlier  than  430  B.C
See  Milchhfiler,  '  Athen,'  p.  189  ;  Gtddt-Joanm,  i.  p.  71  sq. ;  Miss
Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  pp.  354-2S6  ;  E.  Reisch,  in  Eranos  Vindo-
bonensis  (^\ea,  1893),  p.  I  sgq.

From  the  dimensions  of  the  base  (about  3  metres,  or  16  feet  5
inches  square)  compared  with  those  of  the  temple,  Mr.  E.  Reisch
concludes  that  the  image  of  Dionysus  by  Alcamenes  in  the  larger  temple
was  a  seated  figure  of  colossal  siie,  1 8  to  20  feet  high,  inclusive  of  the
base.  That  the  statue  was  a  seated  figure  is  confirmed  by  the  evidence
of  Athenian  coins,  on  which  a  seated  Dionysus  has  been  identified  with
great  probability  as  a  copy  of  Alcamenes's  statue.  On  these  coins  (Fig.  9)
the  god  is  portrayed  seated  in  a  high-backed  chair  with  the  wine-cup  in
his  outstretched  right  hand  and  the  sceptre  or
thyrsus  in  his  raised  left  hand.  The  lower  part  of
I  his  body  is  wrapped  in  a  mantle,  which  is  brought
r  bis  left  shoulder,  leaving  his  arms  and  breast
I  bare.  He  wears  a  beard  and  his  long  tresses  are
'  crowned  with  a  wreath  of  ivy.  The  likeness  of  the
figure  to  Phidias's  statue  of  Zeus  at  Olympia  (v.
I.  I  note)  is  conspicuous  both  in  the  general
f"°'K«r'i(''coiBr  iitt'fde  and  in  the  arrangement  of  the  drapery.
That  the  image  represented  on  these  coins  was
a  cult-statue  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  a  table  with  an  incense-
pan  stands  before  it  on  two  of  the  coinsL  As  the  temple  in  which  the
ims^e  stood  was  apparently  not  built  before  410  B.C.,  Mr.  Reisch
infers  that  the  image  was  probably  made  somewhere  between  420  and
415  B.C.  His  view  is  accepted  by  Prof  Furtwangler.  See  E.  Reisch,
'  Der  Dionysos  des  Alkamenes,'  Eranoi  VindobonenHs,  pp.  1-23  ;  A.
Furtwangler,  Meisterwerke  d.  griech.  Plastik,  p.  741  ;  Beul^  Monnaies
iAthines,  pp.  261-264;  Catalogue  0/  Greek  Coins  in  the  Britisk
Museum,  Attica,  p.  104,  Nos.  757,  758,  with  pL  xviii.  4;  Imhoof-
Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  on  Paus.  p.  142,  with  pi.  CC.  i-iv.
20.  3.  DlonysoB  bringing  HepIuestiiB  up  to  heaTen.  The
return  to  heaven  of  the  tipsy  Hephaestus,  led  in  triumph  on  foot  or  on
mule-back  by  Bacchus  and  his  jolly  crew,  is  depicted  on  a  great  many
red-figured  Attic  vases,  the  painters  of  which  (as  Preller  conjectured)
may  have  been  influenced  by  the  picture  in  the  temple  of  Dionysus


CH.  XX  RETURN  OF  HEPHAESTUS  217

which  Pausanias  here  describes.  For  example,  on  a  red-figured  vase  in
Munich  we  see  Hephaestus  with  his  hammer  on  his  left  shoulder  and  his
tongs  in  his  right  hand,  his  tottering  steps  (for  he  is  clearly  drunk)
supported  by  an  ivy-crowned,  bald-headed  satyr.  In  front  of  him
marches  Dionysus  in  a  spangled  robe,  holding  a  goblet  in  his  right
hand  and  a  thyrsus  in  his  left.  He  is  looking  back  to  see  how  his  tipsy
friend  is  coming  along.  The  glad  procession  is  headed  by  a  Bacchansd
beating  a  tambourine  and  accompanied  by  a  satyr.  On  the  famous
Fran9ois  vase  Hephaestus  is  depicted  riding  a  mule,  which  Dionysus  is
leading  by  the  bridle  into  the  presence  of  Zeus  and  Hera.  Behind  He-
phaestus, who  looks  tolerably  sober,  stalk  two  Silenuses  with  horses'  legs,
and  the  rear  is  brought  up  by  two  women  with  castanets.  At  the  back
of  Zeus  crouches  abashed  the  culprit  Ares,  whom  Athena  contemplates
with  majestic  disdain.  See  Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  pp.  643-645  and
fig.  1883  ;  Roscher's  Z>jr7^^«,  i.  pp.  2054-2056,  with  the  fig.  on  p.  2040  ;
Miiller-Wieseler,  Denkmdler^  2.  pi.  xviii.  1 96  ;  Preller,  Griech,  Mytha-
logie^^  I.  p.  177;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  pp.  256-258;  id,^
Greek  Vase  Paintings^  pL  iii.  Two  different  stories  are  told  in  Homer
of  the  fall  of  Hephaestus  from  heaven.  According  to  one  version
Hephaestus  interposed  to  protect  Hera  against  the  ill-usage  of  her
husband  Zeus,  who  requited  him  for  his  pains  by  flinging  him

*  *  Sheer  o*er  the  crystal  battlements ;  from  mom
To  noon  he  fell,  from  noon  to  dewy  eve,
A  summer's  day  ;  and  with  the  setting  sun
Dropt  from  the  zenith,  like  a  falling  star.
On  Lemnos  th'  Aegean  isle,"

as  Milton  paraphrases  Homer's  lines  (//.  i.  590  sqq,)  Cp.  Iliad^  xviii.
1 8  sqq,  for  the  cause  of  the  quarrel  of  Hephaestus  and  Zeus ;  Apol-
lodorus,  i.  3.  5  ;  Valerius  Flaccus,  ii.  82-91  ;  Lucian,  De  sacrificiis^  6.
The  other  version,  here  followed  by  Pausanias,  was  that  as  soon  as
Hephaestus  was  bom  his  mother  Hera,  in  disgust  at  his  lameness,  cast
him  from  heaven  into  the  sea,  where  Thetis  and  Eurynome  received
him  (Homer,  //.  xviii.  394  sqq,  ;  Homeric  hymn  to  Apollo^  317  sqq, ;
Mythographi  Graeci^  ed.  VVestermann,  p.  372).

20.  3.  sent  her  as  a  gift  a  golden  chair  with  invisible  bonds
etc  The  following  story  was  told  by  Pindar  and  Epicharmus  (Suidas
and  Photius,  s.v,  "Hpas  8€(r/jLovs),  It  is  alluded  to  by  Plato  (Repud/ic,
ii.  p.  378  d).  Cp.  Mythographi  Graeci^  ed.  Westermann,  p.  372  ;
Hyginus,  Fab,  166 ;  Servius  on  Virgil,  Eel.  iv.  62.  We  may  compare
the  arm-chair  in  which  the  cunning  smith  in  the  folk- tale  imprisons
Death  or  the  Devil.     See  note  on  ii.  5.  i  *  Sisyphus.*

20.  3.  Pentheos  and  Lycurgns  suffering  retribution.  Cp.  ii.  2.
7  ;  ix.  2.  4  ;  ix.  5.  4.  The  murder  of  Pentheus  by  the  Maenads  is  re-
presented on  vase-paintings  and  sculptured  reliefs.  See  Miiller-Wieseler,
Denkmdler^  2.  pi.  xxxvii.  Nos.  436,  437 ;  K.  Dilthey,  *  Tod  des
Pentheus,'  Archdologische  Zeitung^  31  (1874),  pp.  78-94  ;  J.  E.  Sandys,
Introduction  to  The  Bacchae  of  Euripides^ '^.  cvii.  sqq, ;  P.  Hartwig,  *  Der
Tod  des  Vtxi\}\tMS^  Jahrbuch  d.  k,  d,  archdolog.  Instituts^  7  (1892),  pp.


2i8  THESEUS  AND  ARIADNE  bk.  i.  attica

153-164.  As  to  the  punishment  of  Lycurgus,  king  of  the  Edonians  in
Thrace,  for  his  impiety  to  Dionysus,  various  stories  were  told.  Accord-
ing to  Homer  (//.  vi.  130  sqg.)  he  was  blinded  by  Zeus  and  died  soon
afterwards.  According  to  others,  Dionysus  himself  blinded  and  crucified
Lycurgus  (Diodorus,  iil  65)  or  exposed  him  to  panthers  (Hyginus,  Fab.
132).  Apollodorus  relates  (iii.  5.  i)  that  the  land  was  cursed  with
barrenness  and  the  people  were  told  by  an  oracle  that  the  earth  would
only  bear  fruit  if  they  put  Lycurgus  to  death ;  so  they  took  him  to  the
mountains  and  tied  him  to  horses,  which  rent  him  in  pieces.  This  legend
reminds  us  of  the  many  cases  in  which  kings  have  been  held  answer-
able for  the  fertility  of  the  soil  and  have  been  punished  when  the  crops
failed  {The  Golden  Bought  i.  p.  44  sqq,)  According  to  Sophocles
{Antigone,  955  sqq,)  the  impious  king  was  inunured  by  the  offended  god
in  a  rocky  prison.  Another  story  was  that  he  slew  himself  (Hyginus
FcUf,  242),  or  that,  in  aiming  a  blow  at  a  vine,  he  cut  off  one  or  both  of
his  legs  (Servius,  on  Virgil,  Aen.  iii.  14;  Hyginus,  Fab,  132).  This
last  story  reflects  a  common  superstition  that  he  who  attempts  to  cut
down  a  sacred  tree  will  wound  himself  in  doing  so  (W.  Mannhardt,  Der
Baumkultus,  p.  36  sq,)

20.  3.  Ariadne  asleep,  and  Theseus  patting  to  sea  etc  This
subject  is  depicted  on  vase-paintings.  See  A.  Furtwangler,  ^Arianne
dormente  e  Bacco  sopra  cratere  Etrusco,*  Annali  delV  Instiiuio,  50
(1878),  pp.  80-102.  Professor  R.  KekuM  thinks  that  the  painter  of
one  of  these  vases  may  have  borrowed  the  idea  of  his  picture  from
the  painting  which  Pausanias  here  describes.  See  R.  Kekul^,
*  Coppa  Cometana  col  mito  di  Arianna,*  Annali  delV  Instituio,  5  2
(1880),  pp.  150-158.  Cp.  Baumeister*s  Denkmdlery  p.  126.  A  similar
picture  is  described  in  more  detail  by  Philostratus.  Dionysus  clad  in
a  purple  robe,  his  head  wreathed  with  roses,  is  stealing  softly  on  the
sleeping  Ariadne,  while  his  jovial  train  hold  their  breath  for  fear
of  waking  the  dreaming  fair.  In  the  background  is  seen  the  ship
with  Theseus  in  it ;  he  is  not  looking  back  at  his  forsaken  love,  but
is  gazing  seaward.  See  Philostratus,  Jmag,  14  (15).  The  parting  of
Theseus  from  Ariadne  is  the  subject  of  one  of  the  Pompeian  paint-
ings. Under  a  wooded  cliff,  beyond  which  the  walls  and  towers  of  a
city  are  visible,  Ariadne  lies  asleep  on  the  shore.  On  a  plank,  laid
from  the  shore  to  the  gunwale  of  the  ship,  stands  Theseus,  looking
back  wistfully  at  Ariadne ;  but  a  comrade  seizes  him  by  the  hand  and
seems  to  be  hurrying  him  on  board.  Boys  are  shaking  out  and  hoist-
ing the  sails.  Other  paintings  of  Pompeii  and  Herculaneum  exhibit
Dionysus  surprising  Ariadne  asleep,  but  on  none  of  them  do  Theseus
and  the  ship  appear.  See  Otto  Jahn,  Archdologische  Beitrdge,  p.  280
sqq. ;  W.  Helbig,  Untersuchungen  iiber  die  campanische  Wandmalerety
p.  252  sqq.

With  regard  to  the  date  of  these  paintings  in  the  temple  of  Dionysus
nothing  positive  is  known.  From  the  nature  of  the  subjects  of  the
paintings  Mr.  Helbig  infers  that  they  could  not  well  have  been  painted
before  the  time  of  Zeuxis  and  Parrhasius ;  and  he  thinks  it  unlikely
that  monumental  wall-paintings  of  such  importance  would  have  been


CH.  XX  ODEUM  OF  PERICLES  219

executed  at  Athens  later  than  towards  the  end  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.
{UnUrsucAungen  iiber  die  campanische  Wandmalerety  p.  257).

20.  4*  a  Btmctnre  said  to  have  been  made  in  imitation  of
the  tent  of  Xerxes.  This  was  the  Odeum  or  Music  Hall  of  Pericles,
which  was  said  to  have  been  built  in  imitation  of  the  tent  of  Xerxes
(Plutarch,  Pericles^  13).  It  was  a  round  building  with  a  conical  roof
constructed  of  the  masts  and  yard-arms  of  the  Persian  ships  ;  in  the
interior  were  many  stone  columns  and  many  seats  (Plutarch,  Lc, ;
Vitnivius,  v.  9  ;  Theophrastus,  Characters^  3).  The  comic  poet  Cratinus
compared  the  high  conical  head  of  Pericles  to  the  Music  Hall  (Plutarch,
Lc.)  The  pseudo-Dicaearchus  speaks  of  it  as  the  most  beautiful  Music
Hall  in  the  world  {Frag,  Hist.  Grace,  ed.  Miiller,  i.  p.  254);  and
Strabo  (ix.  p.  396)  mentions  it  among  the  famous  places  of  Athens.  It
was  built  under  the  administration  of  Pericles  in  order  to  be  the  scene
of  the  musical  contests  at  the  Panathenaic  festival  (Plutarch,  U, ;  Suidas
and  Photius,  Lexicon^  s,v.  i^^lov\  Bekker's  Aneedota  Graeca^  i.  p.  317
sq,)  Vitruvius  (v.  9)  says  wrongly  that  it  was  built  by  Themistocles.
Again,  in  a  fragment  of  a  speech  by  Hyperides  (Frag.  121,  ed.  Blass)
quoted  by  Longinus  {Rke tores  Gracci^  ed.  Walz,  9.  p.  545)  it  is  said  that
the  Music  Hall  was  built  by  the  statesman  Lycurgus,  but  this  also  is  an
error,  though  it  is  possible  Lycurgus  may  have  repaired  it  (cp.  Wachs-
muth.  Die  Stadt  Athen^  i.  p.  602  note  i,  who  in  the  passage  of  Hyperides
proposes  to  read  oraSiov  for  t^Sciov).  During  the  sack  of  Athens  by
Sulla  in  86  B.C.  the  Music  Hall  was  burnt  down  by  order  of  Aristion,
who  with  a  handful  of  men  had  taken  refuge  in  the  Acropolis  and  feared
that  Sulla  might  make  use  of  the  timber  of  the  Music  Hall  in  besieging
him  (Appian,  Mithridates^  38  ;  Pausanias  wrongly  says  that  it  was  burnt
by  Sulla).  It  was  rebuilt  not  many  years  afterwards  by  Ariobarzanes
II.  Philopator,  king  of  Cappadocia,  who  reigned  about  65-52  B.C.
(Vitruvius,  v.  9  ;  C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  541).

In  the  Music  Hall  the  musical  competitions  were  held  at  the
Panathenaic  festival,  as  already  mentioned.  Here,  too,  the  tragedies
which  were  to  be  exhibited  at  the  Great  Dionysiac  Festival  used  to  be
rehearsed  a  few  days  before  the  festival,  the  actors  at  these  rehearsals
appearing  without  masks  (Schol.  on  Aeschines,  iii.  67  ;  Schol.  on
Aristophanes,  IVasps,  1 1 09).  Suits  relating  to  alimentation  were  tried
in  the  Music  Hall  ([Demosthenes,]  lix.  52,  p.  1362  sg. ;  Pollux,  viii.  33  ;
Bekker's  Aneedota  Graeca,  i.  p.  317  sq,  \  cp.  Aristophanes,  Wasps,
1 1 09  ;  Suidas  and  Photius,  Lexicon,  s,v.  t^'Sciov).  In  a  time  of  scarcity
com  was  doled  out  to  the  people  in  the  Music  Hall  at  a  low  rate
(Demosthenes,  xxxiv.  37,  p.  918  ;  cp.  Bekker's  Aneedota  Graeca,  i.  p.
317  sq,y  Suidas  and  Photius,  ll,cc,)  Under  the  Thirty  Tyrants  the
citizens  capable  of  bearing  arms  were  on  one  occasion  assembled  in  the
Music  Hall  to  be  browbeaten  by  Critias  and  overawed  by  the  Lacedae-
monian garrison  in  arms  (Xenophon,  Hellenica,  ii.  4.  9  sq,)  During
the  same  evil  days,  when  the  oligarchs  in  Athens  were  expecting  to  be
attacked  by  the  democrats  who  had  taken  up  position  at  Piraeus,  the
cavalry  bivouacked  under  arms  in  the  Music  Hall  (Xenophon,  Hellenica,
ii.  4.  24).     The  Music  Hall  was  one  of  the  favourite  lounges  of  the


220  ODEUM  OF  PERICLES  bk.  i.  attica

philosophers  (Sotion,  quoted  by  Athenaeus,  viii.  p.  336  b ;  Diogenes
Laertius,  viii.  7.  184;  Plutarch,  De  exilio,  14).

With  regard  to  the  situation  of  the  Music  Hall  of  Pericles  we  are
told  by  Pausanias  that  it  was  near  the  theatre.  This  is  confirmed  by
Andocides  (i.  38)  who  describes  how  Dioclides  saw,  or  alleged  that  he
saw,  a  crowd  of  men  descending  by  moonlight  from  the  Music  Hall
into  the  theatre.  Vitnivius  says  (v.  9)  that  you  came  to  the  Music
Hall  when  you  quitted  the  theatre  on  the  left  hand  side.  As  the  theatre
faces  south,  and  as  the  directions  *  right '  and  '  left,'  when  applied  to
theatres,  seem  always  to  refer  to  the  point  of  view  of  the  spectator,  not
of  the  actor,  it  follows  that  the  Music  Hall  stood  immediately  to  the  east
of  the  theatre.  This  indeed  is  the  only  side  of  the  theatre  on  which  it
could  have  stood ;  since  immediately  to  the  north  of  the  theatre  rise  the
cliffs  of  the  Acropolis,  while  to  the  south,  as  excavations  have  shown,
was  the  precinct  of  Dionysus  and  to  the  west  the  sanctuary  of  Aes-
culapius. The  ground  to  the  east  of  the  theatre  has  not  yet  been
excavated ;  but  remains  of  the  Music  Hall  probably  exist  here  under
the  soil.

It  has  generally  been  supposed  that  there  was  an  older  Music  Hall
in  Athens  than  the  one  built  by  Pericles,  and  that  it  continued  to  exist
contemporaneously  with  the  latter.  The  only  evidence  of  this  is  a  state-
ment  of  Hesychius  (s,v,  t^^iov)  that  the  Music  Hall  was  <<  a  place  in  which
the  rhapsodists  and  harpers  contended  before  the  theatre  was  built''  As
the  theatre  is  commonly  supposed  to  have  been  built  in  500-499  B.C.
(Suidas,^.z/.  Ilparivas),  it  has  been  inferred  from  this  passage  of  Hesychius
that  there  was  a  Music  Hall  in  Athens  as  early  as  the  sixth  century  B.C.
But  the  view  that  from  the  time  of  Pericles  onward  there  were  two
Music  Halls  in  Athens  is  opposed  to  the  evidence  of  the  classical  writers
of  the  best  period,  all  of  whom  speak  of  *  the  Music  Hall,'  as  if  there
were  only  one.  The  evidence  of  these  writers  is  confirmed  by  pre-
Roman  inscriptions,  which  mention  *  the  Music  Hall '  without  qualifica-
tion (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  421  ;  Bulletin  de  Corr,  Helliiu  10  (1886),  p.  452).
The  statement  of  Hesychius  as  to  "  the  place  in  which  the  rhapsodists
and  harpers  contended  before  the  theatre  was  built"  may  refer,  as
Dr.  Dorpfeld  has  suggested,  to  the  place  called  <  the  orchestra '  near  the
market  (see  note  on  i.  8.  5  *  statues  of  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton ').
For  according  to  some  authorities  dramatic  exhibitions  were  given  in
the  market-place  before  the  theatre  was  built  (Photius,  Lexicon^  s,v,
iKpia ;  Eustathius,  on  Homer,  Od,  iii.  350,  p.  472) ;  and  it  is  natural  to
suppose  that  the  spot  where  these  exhibitions  were  held  was  the  place
which  continued,  long  after  the  theatre  was  built,  to  be  known  as  '  the
orchestra.'  The  theatre  or  Music  Hall  of  Agrippa  in  the  market-place
(see  note  on  i.  14.  i,  *the  Music  Hall')  probably  stood  on  or  near  the
site  of  *  the  orchestra.'  This  would  explain  Hesychius's  statement ;  the
musical  and  dramatic  contests,  before  the  theatre  was  built,  were  held
in  the  market-place  on  a  spot  which  in  after  times  was  occupied  by  a
Music  Hall,  namely  the  Music  Hall  of  Agrippa.  This  Music  Hall  of
Agrippa  in  the  market-place  would  seem  to  have  superseded  the  old
Music  Hall  of  Pericles  as  a  place  of  musical  and  dramatic  entertainment ;


CH.  XX  SULLA  221

for  Pausanias  refers  to  the  Music  Hall  of  Pericles  merely  as  *  a  struc-
ture,' and  does  not  seem  to  be  aware  of  its  original  destination.

See  Milchhofer,  *Athen/  pp.  i86  sq,^  192;  Lolling,  *Athen,*  p.  326;  E.
Hiller,  *  Die  athenischen  Odeen  und  der  wpoaydvy*  Hermes y  7  (1873),  PP'  393"
406 ;  and  especially  W.  Dorpfeld,  *  Die  verschiedenen  Odeen  in  Athen,*  MittheiL
d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  17  (1892),  pp.  252-26a

20.  5.  Aristion,  an  Athenian,  whom  Mithridates  employed  as
an  envoy  etc.  Posidonius  (quoted  by  Athenaeus,  v.  p.  211  d  sqq,)
called  this  personage  Athenion.  All  other  ancient  writers  call  him
Aristion,  and  he  is  so  named  on  coins  of  Athens.  See  Th.  Reinach,
Mithridate  Eupator^  p.  139  sqq.  As  to  the  alliance  of  Athens  with
Mithridates,  see  R.  Weil,  *  Das  Biindniss  der  Athener  mit  Mithridates,'
MittheiL  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  6  (1881),  pp.  315-337.

20.  5.  he  had  overrun  the  territory  of  the  Magnesians  of
Eipylns  etc.  The  repulse  of  the  Mithridatic  army  before  Magnesia
seems  to  have  been  due  in  large  measure  to  the  skilful  generalship  of
Cretinas,  a  patriotic  citizen.  See  Plutarch,  Praecept,  gerend,  reipub,  xiv.
3  5q,\  cp.  Livy,  epit.  Ixxxi. ;  Appian,  Mithrid,  21.  These  writers
mention  Magnesia  simply  ;  the  present  passage  of  Pausanias  proves  that
the  Magnesia  in  question  was  the  city  of  that  name  situated  at  the
northern  foot  of  Mt.  Sipylus,  not  Magnesia  on  the  Maeander,  as  has  been
sometimes  supposed.     See  Th.  Reinach,  Mithridate  Eupator^  p.  128.

20.  6.  Taxilns was  besieging  Elatea.     Cp.  x.  34,  ^  2,  4,

and  6.

20.  6.  the  Roman  general  left  a  iMtrt  of  his  army  to  besiege
Athens  etc.  Pausanias  seems  to  be  in  error.  Sulla  captured  both
Athens  and  Piraeus  before  he  moved  into  Boeotia  to  meet  Taxilus.
But  the  Acropolis,  in  which  Aristion  had  taken  refuge,  held  out  for  some
time  after  the  city  had  fallen,  and  Sulla  left  a  detachment  to  besiege  it.
See  Appian,  Mithrid,  39-4 1  ;  Plutarch,  Sulla^  1 4  sq.  It  was  therefore
the  news  of  the  capture  of  the  Acropolis,  not  of  Athens  itself,  which
reached  Sulla  in  Boeotia  after  his  victory  at  Chaeronea  (see  below).
Cp.  Th.  Reinach,  Mithridate  Eupator^  p.  176.

20.  6.  Tazilns  had  been  defeated  at  Ohaeronea.  Cp.  ix.  40.  7
note.

20.  7.  the  oracle  abont  the  wine-skin.  When  Aegeus  king  of
Athens  inquired  of  the  Delphic  oracle  how  he  might  obtain  children,  he
was  bidden  not  to  open  the  wine- skin  till  he  should  come  to  Athens,
which  was  understood  to  mean  that  he  should  not  know  a  woman  till
he  returned  home  (Plutarch,  Theseus^  3).  On  the  present  occasion  the
oracle  hints  that  Athens,  depopulated  by  war  and  massacre,  might  still
in  time  be  repeopled  by  its  surviving  citizens.

20.  7-  SuUa  was  afterwards  attacked  by  the  disease  to  which

Fherecydes  of  Syros  snccnmbed.     The  disease  was  the  morbus

petUcularis  or  lousy  disease.  See  ix.  33.  6,  and  Plutarch,  Sulla,  36,
who  enumerates  various  persons,  including  Pherecydes,  who  were  sup-
posed to  have  died  of  this  ailment.  As  to  the  death  of  Pherecydes,
see  also  Aristode,  Hist.  Anim,  v.  31,  p.   557  a  i  sqq,   Berlin  ed. ;


222  THE  THEATRE  bk.  i.  attica

Aelian,  Var,  Hist  iv.  27,  v.  2  ;  Diogenes  Laertius,  i.  11.  118;  Apuleius,
Florida^  iL  Num.  15.

20.  7*  SuUa pnt  him  to  death.     Appian  {Mithrid,  39)  and

Strabo  (ix.  p.  398)  seem,  like  Pausanias,  to  imply  that  Aristion  was  exe-
cuted immediately  after  his  capture.  According,  however,  to  Plutarch
(Sulla,  23)  he  was  spared  for  a  time  along  with  other  friends  of
Mithridates,  but  was  afterwards  poisoned  by  Sulla.

21.  I.  the  theatre  at  Athens.  The  remains  of  the  theatre  at
Athens  are  situated  on  the  slope  at  the  south -eastern  foot  of  the
Acropolis.  After  being  buried  for  centuries  imder  a  deep  accumulation
of  soil,  they  were  discovered  and  partially  excavated  by  the  Gennan
architect  Strack  in  1862.  The  excavations  begun  by  him  were  con-
tinued until  1865  by  the  Greek  Archaeological  Society.  Some  addi-
tional excavations  were  made  in  1877  and  1878  by  the  same  society.
In  1886  fresh  excavations  were  made  for  the  German  Archaeological
Institute  under  the  direction  of  Dr.  Dorpfeld.

The  theatre  was  included  within  the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus
(Hesychius  and  Photius,  s,v,  iKpux) ;  hence  it  was  known  as  the
Dionysiac  theatre  (Pollux,  iv.  121,  viii.  133).  According  to  the
tradition  reported  by  Suidas  {s.v.  Upariva^)  the  first  permanent  theatre
was  built  at  Athens  in  consequence  of  an  accident  which  happened  in
01.  70  (500-497  B.C)  In  one  of  the  years  of  that  Olympiad  the  tragic
poets  Aeschylus,  Pratinas  and  Choerilus  were  contending  for  the  prize.
While  a  play  of  Pratinas's  was  being  acted  the  temporary  scaffolding  on
which  the  spectators  sat  fell  down,  and  hence  the  Athenians  built  a
theatre.  The  truth  of  this  circumstantial  tradition  has  been  denied  on
somewhat  slight  grounds  by  Prof,  von  Wilamowitz-M Ollendorff  (see
his  article,  *  Die  Biihne  des  Aeschylos,'  Hermes,  21  (1886),  p.  597  sgq,\
and  A.  E.  Haigh,  The  Attic  Theatre^  p.  107  sq.)  After  the  middle  of
the  fourth  century  B.C.  either  a  new  theatre  was  built  or  the  old  one
was  reconstructed  and  beautified.  In  a  decree  of  the  people  dated  Ol.
109.  2  (343/2  B.C.)  the  Council  is  thanked  and  rewarded  with  a  golden
wreath  for  "  superintending  well  and  justly  the  adornment  of  the
theatre  "  (C  /.  A.  ii.  No.  1 1 4).  The  work  thus  begun  was  completed
under  the  administration  of  the  statesman  Lycurgus  (Pausanias,  i.  29.
16  ;  [Plutarch,]  Vit,  X.  Oral,  pp.  841  c,  852  b ;  CI.  A,  ii.  No.  240  ;
Hyperides,  quoted  by  Longinus,  Rhetores  Graeci,  ed.  Walz,  9.  p.  545  ;
Hyperides,  ed.  Blass,  Frag.  121).  As  Lycurgus  died  in  325  B.C.  the
theatre  must  have  been  built  before  that  year.  It  was  either  finished
or  in  process  of  construction  in  Ol.  112.  3  (330/29  B.C.) ;  for  in  a
decree  of  the  people,  dated  in  that  year,  honours  are  decreed  to  a  certain
Eudemus  of  Plataea  in  return  for  having  promised  to  contribute,  if
necessary,  a  certain  sum  towards  the  expenses  of  war  and  for  having
actually  given  1000  yoke  of  oxen  to  help  in  the  building  of  the  theatre
and  stadium  (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  176;  cp.  C.  Curtius,  in  Philologiis,  24
(1866),  p.  272  sq.)  Fragments  of  a  fa9ade  found  in  the  theatre  seem
to  show  that  the  stage-buildings  were  remodelled  in  the  early  times  of
the  Roman  empire  ;  from  an  inscription  (C  /.  A.  iii.  No.  158)  on  a
piece  of  an  architrave  which  was  found  built  into  a  later  wall  in  the  theatre


CH.  XXI  THE  THEATRE  223

it  has  been  inferred  that  this  reconstruction  of  the  stage  took  place  in
the  reign  of  Nero.  In  late  Roman  times,  apparently  in  the  third
century  A.D.,  a  new  stage  was  constructed  in  the  Roman  style  by  a
certain  Phaedrus,  son  of  Zoilus,  who  commemorated  the  fact  in  an
inscription  (C  /.  A.  iii.  No.  239)  which  may  still  be  seen  on  the
highest  of  the  five  steps  leading  from  the  orchestra  to  the  top  of  the
stage.  After  this  point  the  history  of  the  theatre  is  unknown  until  the
building  was  discovered  in  1862.

The  theatre  at  Athens  was  used  not  merely  for  dramatic  exhibitions
but  for   various    other   purposes.     When  a    distinguished  citizen  was
rewarded  with  a  crown,  proclamation  was  made   by  the  mouth  of  a
herald  in  the  theatre  ;  the  golden  crowns  sent  by  foreign  states  as  a  com-
pliment to  the  Athenian  people  were  displayed  in  the  orchestra ;  so  was
the  tribute  sent  by  the  dependent  states ;  and  here  the  orphans  whose
fathers  had  fallen  in  battle  for  their  country  and  who,  after  being  brought
up  by  the  state,  had  reached  manhood,  were  paraded  in  full  armour  before
being  released  from  state  control.     All  these  ceremonies  and  pageants
took  place  in  the  theatre  in  presence  of  the  assembled  people  before
the  dramatic  performances  began.     (See  Aeschines,  iii.  ^  47  sq.^  153
sq.^  230  sq. ;  Isocrates,  viii.  82.)     Again,  the  annual  cock-fights,  which
the  Athenians  instituted  after  the  great  Persian  wars,  took  place  in  the
theatre  (Aelian,    Var.  Hist,  ii.   28).     Further,    the  public   assemblies
of  the  people  were,  even  in  the  fifth  and  fourth  centuries,  occasionally
held  in  the  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  (Thucydides,  viii.  93  sq, ;    Demo-
sthenes, xxi.   8  sq,^  p.   517  J^.);  if  the  theatre  was  already  built,  the
assemblies  were  doubtless  on  these  occasions  held  in  it.     In  the  theatre
was  held  the  public  assembly  which  condemned  Phocion  and  his  associates
to  death  in  317  B.C.  (Plutarch,  Phocion^  34  sq,)     Demetrius  Poliorcetes,
after  making  himself  master  of  Athens,  addressed  an  assembly  of  the
people   in   the  theatre,  overawing   the  multitude  by  the  sight  of  the
serried  arms  of  his  body-guards    who  thronged    the  stage  (Plutarch,
Demetrius^  34).     These  occasions  were  special,  but  even  in  the  latter
part   of  the  fourth  century  it  had  become  customary  to  hold  public
assemblies    in    the  theatre    regularly  for   certain   purposes    (Aristotle,
Constitution  of  Athens^  42) ;  and  at  a  later  time,  perhaps  about  the
middle  of  the  third  century  RC,  the  theatre  became  the  ordinary  place
of  public  assembly,   though  magistrates  continued    to    be   elected    in
the  old  place  of  assembly,  the  Pnyx  (Pollux,  viii.   132  sq,\  A.  Miiller,
Die  griech,  BiihnenalterthUmery    p.    74).     In  the  degenerate  days  of
Greece  jugglers  and  thimble-riggers  exhibited  their  tricks  in  the  theatre
(Athenaeus,    i.  p.    19  e;   Alciphron,  iii.   20);   and  under  the  Roman
empire    gladiators    fought    in  the  orchestra,    often  staining  with  their
blood  the  marble  chairs  on  which  the  priests  sat  (Dio  Chrysostom,  Or,
xxxi.  voL  I.  p.  386,  ed.  Dindorf ;  Philostratus,  Vit,  AfioUon,  iv.  22).

The  theatre  at  Athens,  like  other  Greek  theatres,  consisted  of  three
chief  parts  :  (i.)  the  auditorium  or  seats  of  the  audience,  (ii.)  the
orchestra,  and  (iii.)  the  stage-buildings.

(i.)  The  auditorium  faces  south,  the  seats  rising  above  each  other,
on  the  slope  of  the  Acropolis,  in  tiers  which  may  be  roughly  described  as


224  THE  THEATRE  bk.  i.  attica

semicircular.      At  the  extremities  of  the  two  wings,  however,  on  the
east  and  west,  artificial  substructions  were  necessary  in  order  to  bring
up  the  back  seats  to  the  proper  height.     The  retaining-walls  on  the
western  side  are  preserved.     They  are  two  in  number,  an  inner  and  an
outer,  united  by  short  cross- walls  at  right  angles.     The  inner  wall  is
built  of  conglomerate  and  formed  the  real  support  of  the  seats  in  this
part.     The   outer  wall  is  of  Piraeic  limestone   and  served  merely  to
cover  and  protect  the  inner  wall     On  the  eastern  side  of  the  theatre  the
retaining  walls  have  almost  disappeared.     The  outer  boundary  of  the
auditorium  seems  to  have  formed  three-quarters  of  a  circle,  the  two  ends
being  prolonged  in  straight  lines.     The  breadth  across  from  the  outer
comer  of  one  wing  to  the  outer  comer  of  the  other  wing  was  288  feet
The  distance  between  the  inside  comers,  measured  across  the  orchestra,
was    72    feet.     The    wings    are    of  unequal    width,  the  eastem  wing
measuring  about   1 1 1  feet  across  at  its  southem  extremity,  while  the
western  wing  measures  only  88  feet.     This  makes  the  arrangement  of
the  theatre  imsymmetricaL     The  seats  in  the  highest  part  of  the  theatre,
immediately  under  the  cliff  of  the  Acropolis,  are  hewn  out  of  the  rock.
The  rest  were  made  of  Piraeic  limestone,  except  the  front  row  which
consisted  of  marble  chairs.     Most  of  the  seats  have  disappeared,  having
been  probably  removed  in  the  Middle  Ages  to  flimish  building  materials.
However,  from  twenty  to  thirty  of  the  bottom  rows  remain,  and  portions
of  a  few  rows  at  the  top.     Of  the  sixty-seven  chairs  of  Pentelic  marble
which  formed  the  front  row,  immediately  encircling  the  orchestra,  fifty-
eight  have  been  found,  all  of  them,  with  the  exception  of  two  or  three,
in  their  original  places.     Most  of  these  chairs,  as  we  learn  from  the
inscriptions  carved  on  them  (C  /.  A,  iii.  Nos.  240-298),  were  reserved
for  special  priests  or  priestly  functionaries  ;  the  rest  were  set  apart  for
the  higher  magistrates,  such  as  the  king,  the  commander-in-chief  (Polem-
arch),    and   the    lawgivers    (Thesmothetae).       The   arm-chair  in  the
middle  of  the  row,  the  largest  and  finest  of  all  the  chairs,  was  reserved
for   the   priest  of  Eleutherian  Dionysus.     It  is  adomed  with  elegant
sculptures  in  low  relief.     On  the  back  of  the  chair,  above  the  seat,  are
carved   two   satyrs,   standing   back   to   back    in   heraldic    style,    sup-
porting a  large  cluster  of  grapes  between  them.     On  the  outside  of
each  arm  of  the  chair  is  sculptured  a  winged  figure  stooping  and  holding
a  cock  which  he  is  about  to  let  go  for  the  fight.     These  latter  reliefs,
which  are  very  graceful  and  delicate,  probably  refer  to  the  cock-fight
which,  as  we  have  seen,  took  place  annually  in  the  theatre.      On  the
front  part  of  the  chair,   immediately  below  the  seat,  are  carved  two
winged   lions    fighting   with    two   men  who,  dressed  in  long  Oriental
garments   and    wearing    Phrygian    caps,   are  kneeling   and   defending
themselves  with  scimitars  against  the  lions.     This  last  design  is  clearly
borrowed  from  the  East,  and  in  point  of  style  seems  to  belong  to  the
second  century  of  our  era  (see  Beul^,  in  Revue  archdologique^  N.S.  6
(1862),  p.  349  J^.  ;  G.   Perrot,  in  Bulletin  de  Corr.  Hellhi,  5  (1881),
pp.  23-25).      It  is  calculated  that  the  rows  of  seats  were  originally  about
100  in  number,  and  that  the  number  of  spectators  which  the  theatre
could  accommodate  was  27,500.     Plato  speaks  in  round  numbers  of


CH.  XXI  THE  THEATRE  22$

over  30,000  spectators  witnessing  a  play  of  Agathon  (Symposium^
p.  175  e).  Access  to  the  seats  in  the  upper  rows  were  afforded  by  four-
teen passages  which  ran  in  divergent  lines,  like  the  spokes  of  a  wheel,
from  the  orchestra  up  to  the  top  of  the  theatre.  Two  of  these  passages,
at  the  southern  extremities  of  the  wings,  immediately  adjoined  the
botmdary  walls  ;  the  other  twelve  divided  the  whole  mass  of  the  seats  into
thirteen  wedge-shaped  blocks,  such  as  the  Latins  called  cunei  ('  wedges  ')
and  the  Greeks  kerkides.  In  addition  to  these  vertical  passages  there
seems  to  have  been  one  horizontal  passage  in  the  higher  part  of  the
auditorium,  dividing  it  into  an  upper  and  a  lower  portion.  This  hori-
zontal passage  or  diazoma  (*belt,'  'girdle'),  as  the  Greeks  called  it,
is  marked  on  a  rude  representation  of  the  theatre  which  is  stamped  on
some  Athenian  coins  (Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num,  Comm,  on
Paus.  p.  143,  with  pi.  CC,  ix.  x.)

In  regard  to  the  date  of  the  auditorium.  Dr.  D5rpfeld,  the  most
competent  living  authority  on  such  subjects,  is  of  opinion  that  all  the
existing  remains  belong  to  the  second  half  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.,
when  the  theatre  was  built  or  rebuilt  by  Lycurg^s.  The  inscriptions  on
the  marble  chairs  are,  indeed,  later  ;  but  the  chairs  themselves  seem  to
be  of  the  age  of  Lycurgus.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  is  reported  to  hold  the  view
that,  in  spite  of  the  tradition  preserved  by  Suidas  (see  above),  there  was
no  permanent  stone  theatre  at  Athens  before  that  date.  This  view  is
to  some  extent  borne  out  by  the  evidence  of  Andocides  who  speaks
(i.  38  sq,)  of  an  orchestra  only,  not  of  a  theatre,  in  the  precinct  of
Dionysus  ;  and  by  the  evidence  of  Thucydides  (viii.  93  j^.)  and  Demo-
sthenes (xxi.  8  sq,^  p.  517  sq,")  who,  speaking  of  public  assemblies  held
in  the  precinct  of  Dionysus,  make  no  mention  of  a  theatre — an  omission
all  the  more  noticeable  in  that  Thucydides  in  the  same  chapter  (viii.  93)
has  mentioned  a  public  assembly  held  in  "  the  Dionysiac  theatre "  at
Munychia.

(ii)  The  orchestra  or  *•  dancing-place '  was  the  flat  ground  enclosed
between  the  stage-buildings  and  the  seats  of  the  auditorium.  In  the
theatre  at  Athens  the  orchestra  is  in  the  form  of  a  semicircle  with  the
two  ends  prolonged  in  straight  lines.  Its  width,  measured  along  the
front  of  the  stage  of  Phaedrus,  is  24  metres  (about  78  feet  6  inches) ;
and  its  depth  from  the  middle  of  the  stage-front  of  Phaedrus  to  the
boundary  in  front  of  the  chair  of  the  priest  of  Dionysus,  in  the  centre  of
the  first  row  of  spectators,  is  17.96  metres  (about  58  feet  6  inches).  It
is  paved  with  slabs  of  Pentelic  and  Hymettian  marble  arranged  in  lines
parallel  to  the  stage,  and  variegated  with  strips  of  a  reddish  marble.
In  this  pavement,  about  the  middle  of  the  orchestra,  but  somewhat
nearer  its  southern  than  its  northern  boundary,  is  a  large  rhombus  or
diamond -shaped  figure,  the  outline  of  which  is  formed  by  lines  of
Pentelic  and  Hymettian  marble,  while  its  interior  is  paved  with
diamond -shaped  pieces  of  Pentelic,  Hymettian,  and  reddish  marble.
In  the  centre  of  this  figure  is  a  block  of  Pentelic  marble  in  which  is  cut
a  shallow  circular  depression,  possibly  intended  to  receive  an  altar  or
image  of  Dionysus.  The  pavement  is  of  excellent  workmanship,  and
perhaps  dates  from   the  first  century  of  our  era.     The  orchestra  is

VOL.  II  Q


226  THE  THEATRE  bk.  i.  attica

divided  from  the  seats  of  the  auditorium  by  a  parapet  composed  of
upright  slabs  of  marble  3  feet  7  inches  high.  Along  the  inside  of  this
parapet  and  separated  by  it  from  the  seats,  there  runs  a  broad  gutter
of  limestone  35^  inches  in  width.  This  gutter  was  originally  open
except  that  opposite  the  vertical  i>assages  which  lead  through  the
tiers  of  seats  it  was  bridged  with  slabs  of  limestone.  In  later  times
it  was  covered  over  with  marble  slabs.  The  intention  of  this  g^utter,
which  forms  part  of  the  original  building,  was  to  drain  off  the  water  from
the  auditorium ;  but  this  intention  was  frustrated  by  the  erection,  at  a
later  time,  of  the  marble  parapet  which  divides  the  orchestra  from  the
auditorium.  The  parapet  and  the  marble  covering  of  the  gutter  belong,
according  to  Dr.  D5rpfeld,  to  the  beginning  of  the  third  century  A.D.
It  is  conjectured  that  the  parapet  may  have  been  erected  to  prevent
the  vanquished  gladiators  from  being  actually  butchered  on  the  laps  of
the  dignitaries  who  sat  in  the  front  row,  as  sometimes  happened  in  the
days  of  Dio  Chrysostom  (Or.  xxxi.  vol.  i.  p.  386,  ed.  Dindorf).

Access  was  afforded  to  the  orchestra  by  two  side-entrances  consist-
ing of  two  open  passages,  9  feet  wide,  which  divided  the  wings  of  the
auditorium  from  the  stage-buildings.  By  these  passages  the  spectators
entered  the  orchestra,  whence  they  ascended  by  the  vertical  passages  to
their  seats ;  and  by  these  same  passages  the  chorus  entered  the
orchestra  at  the  beginning  of  each  play.  Such  passages  or  side-
entrances  into  the  orchestra  were  called  parodoi  (Schol.  on  Aristophanes,
KnigktSy  1 49 ;  Pollux,  iv.  1 26)  or  eisodoi  (Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Birds^
296).

The  original  orchestra,  which  existed  before  the  theatre  was  built,
seems  to  have  been  a  flat  circular  space  enclosed  by  a  low  wall.  Two
portions  of  this  wall,  built  of  rough  polygonal  stones,  and  forming  two
arcs  of  the  circle,  still  exist  among  the  later  stage-buildings  ;  and  a
cutting  in  the  rock  which  forms  an  arc  in  the  same  circle  and  in  which
doubtless  another  piece  of  the  circular  enclosing  wall  was  bedded,  may
be  seen  in  the  eastern  side-entrance  {parodos)  to  the  orchestra,  at  the
point  where  the  stage  of  Phaedrus  abuts  on  the  seats  of  the  auditorium.
The  discovery  and  explanation  of  these  interesting  remains  are  due  to
Dr.  Dorpfeld.

(iii)  The  existing  remains  of  the  stage-buildings  are  of  various  dates.
Dr.  D5rpfeld  distinguishes  four  sets  of  stage-buildings  constructed  at
different  times :  ( i )  The  stage-buildings  of  Lycurgus  consisted  of  a
long  rectangular  hall  with  two  projecting  wings,  each  7  metres  (23  feet)
wide  by  5  metres  (16  feet  5  inches)  deep.  In  the  space  between  the
wings,  about  66  feet  long,  was  set  up  the  scenery ;  it  was  of  wood  and
canvas  and  was  taken  down  when  the  performances  were  over.  There
was  at  this  time,  if  Dr.  Dorpfeld  is  right,  no  permanent  stone  stage.  (2)
At  a  later  time,  perhaps  in  the  Roman  period,  a  piece  was  taken  off  the
front  of  each  wing,  and  a  permanent  scene  or  background,  adorned  with
columns  and  probably  10  or  12  feet  high,  was  erected  between  the
wings.  But  even  when  this  permanent  background  was  erected,  there
was  still  (according  to  Dr  Ddrpfeld)  no  stage.  (3)  In  the  reign  of  Nero
a  stage  was  built  further  to  the  front,  encroaching  on  the  orx:hestia.


CH.  XXI  THE  THEATRE  zri

Slight  traces  only  of  its  front  wall  remain  ;  but  of  the  back  wall  there
are  more  remains.  Fragments  of  the  arches  and  pillars  of  Hymettian
marble  which  adorned  this  stage  have  been  found.  (4)  Lastly,  in  the
course  of  the  third  century  A.D.  a  certain  Phaedrus  erected  a  new  stage
about  8  yards  further  to  th^  front,  so  as  to  stretch  across  the  orchestra
between  the  inner  comers  of  the  two  wings  of  the  auditorium,  thus  com-
pletely blocking  up  the  side -entrances  {parodoi)  into  the  orchestra.  Of
this  later  stage  the  western  half  is  preserved.  It  is  low,  after  the
Roman  Ceishion,  its  height  being  only  4  feet  7  inches.  In  the  middle  a
flight  of  five  steps  led  down  into  the  orchestra.  On  the  top  step,  as  has
b^n  mentioned  already,  is  carved  the  inscription  (C.  /.  A,  iii.  No.  239)
recording  the  erection  of  the  stage.  The  ft-ont  of  the  existing  half  of
this  stage  is  adorned  with  four  groups  of  figures  in  high  relief.  These
reliefs  are  clearly  of  older  date  and  better  workmanship  than  the  stage
which  they  adorn ;  and  the  clumsy  way  in  which  the  slabs  have  been
cut  down  and  fitted  into  their  present  position  shows  that  they  were  not
made  for  it.  The  heads  of  the  figures  are  lost ;  when  they  were  in  their
places  they  must  have  been  higher  than  the  background.  One  of  the
groups  represents  the  birth  of  Dionysus ;  another  represents  Icarius,
attended  by  his  daughter  Erigone,  about  to  sacrifice  a  goat  to  Dionysus ;
in  the  background  crouches  the  faithful  dog  Maera  (ApoUodorus,  iii.  14.
7  ;  Hyginus,  Fad,  1 30).  The  interpretation  of  the  other  two  groups  is
uncertain.  (See  F.  Matz,  <  I  rilievi  del  proscenio  del  teatro  di  Bacco  in
KXxxi<t^  Annali  delP  InstitutOy  ^1  (1870),  pp.  97-106.)  The  reliefis  are
divided  into  two  pairs  of  groups  by  a  deep  niche  in  which  is  the  crouch-
ing figure  of  a  Silenus.  To  the  east  of  the  steps  a  second  Silenus,  the
companion  of  the  other,  has  been  found.  It  doubtless  occupied  a  cor-
responding niche  in  the  eastern  half  of  the  stage-front  These  sculptures
apparently  date  from  the  early  period  of  the  Roman  empire ;  they
perhaps  belonged  originally  to  the  stage  which  was  built  in  the  reign  of
Nero.

See  Dyer,  Ancient  Athens^  pp.  307-343 ;  Leop.  Julias,  *■  Das  Theater  des
Dionysos  zu  Athen,'  Zeitschrift  fiir  bildende  Kunst^  13  (1878),  pp.  193-204,  236-
242  ;  Upoimffd  rxfi  'A/>xcuoXo7cr7f  *Erat/>(af  for  1877,  pp.  6,  18  sq,  ;  id,^  for  1878,
p.  8  iqq,\  J.  R.  Wheeler,  '  The  theatre  of  Dionysus,'  Papers  of  the  Amerieam
SckcJof  Classical  Studies  at  Athens,  vol.  I.  (1882-1883),  pp.  123-179;  Milch-
hofer,  '  Athen,'  pp.  190-192 ;  Albert  MUller,  Die  griech,  BiihnencUterthUmer,  pp.
82-101  ;  W.  Dorpfeld,  ib,  p.  415  sq, ;  G.  Kawerau,  article  *  Theatergelxlude,  in
Banmeister's  DenkmcUer,  pp.  1734- 1738  ;  Guide-Joanne,  i.  pp.  69-72  ;  Baedeker,'
pp.  53-55 ;  A.  Botticher,  Die  Akropolis  von  Athen,  pp.  236-255  ;  A.  E.  Haigh,
The  Attic  Theatre,  ch.  iii.  pp.  101-163  ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  pp.  271-

295-

21.  I.  statneB  of  tragic  and  comic  poets of  little  mark.

Astydamas,  a  writer  of  voluminous  tragedies,  was  allowed  to  set  up  a
statue  of  himself  in  the  theatre  ;  the  inscription  which  he  caused  to  be
carved  on  it  was  so  boastful  that  his  name  became  proverbial  (Suidas,
s,v.  (ravr^v  ciraivci?;  as  to  the  poet,  see  id,^  s,v.  'AtrrvSa/Jtas  o
'wpw^vrrfi).  His  statue  was  of  bronze  and  was  set  up  sooner  than  that
of  Aeschylus  (Diogenes  Laertius,  ii.  5.  43).  Dio  Chrysostom  mentions
the  bronze  statue  of  a  poetaster  which  stood  cheek  by  jowl  with  the


^


228  THE  THEATRE  bk.  i.  attica

Statue  of  Menander  iu  the  theatre  at  Athens  {Or,  xxxi.  vol.  r.  p.  384
lines  4-6,  ed.  Dindorf).  We  hear  of  a  statue  of  a  nobody  called
Euryclides  which  stood  in  company  with  the  statues  of  Aeschylus  and
his  fellows  in  the  same  place  (Athenaeus,  i.  p.  19  e).  Others  besides
poets  and  poetasters  had  statues  in  the  theatre.  There  were  statues  of
Themistocles  and  Miltiades,  the  former  on  the  right,  the  latter  on  the
left ;  and  beside  each  of  them  was  the  statue  of  a  Persian  captive
(Aristides,  Or,  xlvi.  vol.  2.  p.  215  sq,^  ed.  Dindorf;  Schol  on  Aristides,
Lc.  vol.  3.  p.  535  sq,^  ed.  Dindorf).  The  bronze  statue  of  a  general,
beside  which  the  trembling  Dioclides  crouched  as  he  watched  the  im-
pious crew  at  their  moonlight  revels  in  the  orchestra  (Andocides,  i.  38),
may  have  been  the  statue  of  Themistocles  or  the  statue  of  Miltiades.
It  appears  that  twelve  statues  of  the  emperor  Hadrian  were  set  up  in  the
theatre  by  the  twelve  Attic  tribes,  one  statue  by  each  tribe ;  and  that
these  statues  stood  one  in  each  of  the  wedge-shaped  blocks  of  seats,
except  in  the  central  block.  The  inscriptions  on  the  bases  of  four  of  these
statues  have  been  found  in  the  theatre  (C  /.  A,  iii.  Nos.  466-469).  In
the  central  block  of  seats  was  found  the  inscription  from  the  base  of  a
thirteenth  statue  of  Hadrian,  which  had  been  set  up  by  the  Council  of
the  Areopagus,  the  Council  of  the  Six  Himdred,  and  the  Athenian
people  (C.  /.  A,  iii.  No.  464).  See  Milchhofer,  *Athen,*  p.  191  ;
Papers  of  the  American  School  of  Classical  Archaeology^  i  (i  882-1 883),

pp.  149-151-

21.  I.  Menander.  The  pedestal  of  this  statue  was  found  built  into
a  late  wall  at  the  back  of  the  stage.  It  is  of  Pentelic  marble,  and
bears  the  inscription :

Ky/^utoSotos  Tifuip\os  ar6nrfrav

"  Menander.  Cephisodotus  and  Timarchus  made  (the  statue) "  {C,I,A,
ii.  No.  1370;  Loewy,  Inschriften  griech,  Bildhauer^  No.  108).  It
has  been  conjectured  that  a  fine  seated  statue  of  Menander  in  the
Vatican  (Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  p.  923,  fig.  995)  is  no  other  than  the
statue  which  stood  in  the  theatre  at  Athens,  and  of  which  the  inscribed
pedestal  has  been  found.  But  the  shape  and  size  of  the  pedestal  differ
from  those  of  the  plinth  on  which  the  statue  rests.  See  P.  Pervanoglu,
in  Bulletino  delP  Instituto  for  1862,  pp.  163-165  ;  R.  F6rster,  in
Archaologische  Zeitungy  32  (1875),  p.  100  ^^. ;  Loewy,  l,c,  ;  Overbeck,
Gesch,  d,  griech,  Plastik^^  2.  p.  112  sq.  The  sculptors  Cephisodotus
and  Timarchus  were  sons  of  Praxiteles.     See  note  on  ix.  12.  4.

21.  I.  Among  the  famons  tragic  poets  there  are  statnes  of
Euripides  and  Sophocles.  Bronze  statues  of  Aeschylus,  Sophocles,
and  Euripides  were  set  up  on  the  motion  of  the  statesman  Lycurgus
([Plutarch,]  Vit,  X,  Oral,  p.  841  f).  It  was  probably  these  statues
which  Pausanias  saw  in  the  theatre.  If  so,  he  was  right  in  conjecturing
(§2)  that  the  statue  of  Aeschylus  had  been  erected  long  after  the  poet's
death.  The  statue  of  Aeschylus  is  mentioned  by  Athenaeus  (i.  p.  1 9  e)
and  Diogenes  Laertius  (ii.  5.  43)  in  passages  which  have  been  already
referred  to  (see  note  on  §  i  '  statues  of  tragic  and  comic  poets ').     It  is


CH.  XXI  THE  THEATRES  229

hardly  necessary  to  say  that,  though  Pausanias  does  not  mention
Aeschylus  in  the  present  sentence,  he  does  not  intend  to  exclude  him
from  the  list  of  famous  tragic  poets.  After  mentioning  two  of  the  great
tragic  dramatists,  Euripides  and  Sophocles,  our  author  stops  to  tell
parenthetically  an  anecdote  about  Sophocles ;  he  then  resumes  and
concludes  the  list  with  the  mention  of  the  statue  of  Aeschylus.  F.  G.
Welcker  imderstood  the  present  passage  of  Pausanias  in  this  sense  {A lie
Denkmdler^  i.  p.  465  x^.)  He  rightly  combats  Wieseler*s  view  that  in
Pausanias's  time  there  was  no  statue  of  Aeschylus  in  the  theatre.

21.  I.  It  is  said  that  after  the  death  of  Sophocles  etc.  The
following  anecdote  is  told  more  fully  by  the  anonymous  author  of  the
life  of  Sophocles  {Biographi  Graeci^  ed.  Westermann,  p.  1 30)  as  follows  :
"  He  was  laid  in  the  grave  of  his  fathers  on  the  road  to  Decelea,  eleven
furlongs  from  the  walls.  Some  say  that  a  Siren,  others  that  a  bronze
swallow,  was  placed  on  his  tomb.  When  the  Lacedaemonians  had
fortified  this  place  against  the  Athenians,  Dionysus  appeared  in  a  dream
to  Lysander,  and  bade  him  suffer  the  man  to  be  laid  in  the  grave.  As
Lysander  paid  no  heed  to  the  injunction,  Dionysus  appeared  to  him  a
second  time  with  the  same  command.  So  when  Lysander  inquired  of
the  exiles  who  it  was  that  had  died,  and  learned  that  it  was  Sophocles,
he  sent  a  herald  with  leave  to  bury  him."  A  few  years  ago  there  was
excavated,  a  mile  and  a  half  from  Palaiokastron  (Decelea),  a  family
tomb  which  was  reported  to  be  the  tomb  of  Sophocles.  It  contained
three  funeral  urns,  which,  from  the  objects  found  in  them  (a  mirror  and
two  strigils),  appear  to  have  enclosed  the  ashes  of  a  woman  and  two
young  men.  But  there  were  no  inscriptions  to  identify  the  tomb  as  that
of  Sophocles,  and  the  proposed  identification  appears  to  have  been
based  on  the  mistaken  supposition  that  the  tomb  of  Sophocles  was  situ-
ated eleven  furlongs  from  Decelea,  instead  of  (as  the  anonymous  author
of  the  life  of  Sophocles  clearly  implies)  from  Athens.  See  Berliner
philolog,  Wochenschrift^  8  (1888),  p.  1074 ;  /V/.,  13  (1893),  p.  1648  sqq,

21.  3.  a  gilded  head  of  the  (Gorgon  Mednsa  etc.  This  was  set
up  by  King  Antiochus  ;  the  aegis  as  well  as  the  Gorgon  head  was  gilt.
See  V.  I.  42.  Placed  in  this  prominent  position  on  the  wall  of  the
Acropolis  the  Gorgon  head  was  probably  intended  to  serve  as  a  charm
against  the  evil  eye.  The  stone  head  of  Medusa  beside  the  sanctuary
of  Saviour  Zeus  at  Argos  (ii.  20.  7)  may  have  been  placed  there  with
a  like  intention.  Cp.  O.  Jahn,  'Ueber  den  Aberglauben  des  b5sen
Blicks  bei  den  Alten,'  Berichte  iiber  die  Verhandl.  d.  k.  sacks,  GeselL  d.
IVissen.  zu  Leipzig^  Philog.  histor.  CI.  1855,  p.  28  sqq,j  especially  p.  59
sq.',  A.  Milchhofer,  *  Gorgoneion,'  Archdologische  Zeitung^  39  (1881),
pp.  281-293.  With  the  same  intention  the  ancients  sometimes  carved
a  phallic  symbol  on  the  walls  of  their  cities :  such  symbols  may  still  be
seen  carved  on  the  walls  of  ancient  cities  (as  Alatri  and  Ferentino)  in
Italy  and  Africa  (O.  Jahn,  op,  cit,  p.  74 ;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Hist  €k
Part  dans  Vantiquitd^  6.  p.  804).  With  this  Greek  use  of  a  charm
to  avert  the  evil  eye  from  buildings  we  may  compare  a  similar  Hindu
superstition.  Lieut.  Bumes  writes  as  follows  of  a  Jain  temple  which
he  visited  at  Abu  in  Guzerat :  *'  While  admiring  its  beauty  I  observed


230  MONUMENT  OF  THRASYLLUS  bk.  i.  attic  a

the  capital  of  one  of  the  pillars  to  be  of  coarse  unpolished  black  stone,
which  induced  me  to  ask  the  cause  of  such  a  disfiguration ;  when  the
people  informed  me  that  it  had  been  done  intentionally  to  keep  off  the
evil  eye,  as  in  a  place  like  this  where  all  was  beauty,  it  would  inevit-
ably fall  and  become  bewitched  if  there  was  no  foil "  {Journal  of  the
AsicUic  Society  of  Bengal^  i  (1833),  p.  164).

21.  3.  At  the  top  of  the  theatre  is  a  caye  in  the  rocks  etc
This  cave  is  still  to  be  seen  in  the  rock  of  the  Acropolis,  immediately
above  the  theatre.  It  is  about  23  feet  wide  and  50  feet  deep.  The
floor  of  the  cave  is  at  two  different  levels ;  the  back  part  of  it  is  higher
than  the  front  part,  and  is  reached  by  steps  cut  in  the  rock.  The
cavern  has  long  b^m  a  chapel  dedicated  to  the  Virgin  of  the  Cave
(Panagia  Spiliotissa)  or  the  Viigin  of  the  Golden  Cave  (Panagia  Chryso-
spiliotissa),  whose  solitary  light,  when  darkness  has  fiallen,  may  be  seen
glinunering  high  up  on  the  side  of  the  Acropolis.  On  the  walls  of  the
cave  are  some  &ded  Byiantine  paintings.  Down  to  the  beginning  of
this  century  the  mouth  of  the  cave  was  adorned  by  a  Doric  portico,
forming  the  choregic  monument  of  Thrasyllus.  This  elegant  little
structure,  about  29  feet  5  inches  high  by  25  feet  wide,  consisted  of  three
Doric  pilasters  resting  on  two  steps  and  supporting  an  epistyle,  which
was  in  turn  surmounted  by  a  frieze  adorned  with  eleven  marble  wreaths
carved  in  relie£  Thus  much  of  the  structure  was  built  of  white  Pentelic
marble.  Above  the  frieze  were  three  pedestals  of  g^y  marble ;  the
central  one,  resting  on  three  steps,  supported  a  seated  statue,  of  more
than  life-size,  which  is  now  in  the  British  Museum.  The  statue,  which
had  lost  its  head  as  early  as  1676,  is  draped  in  a  long  robe,  and  has  a
panther's  skin  thrown  over  the  shoulders ;  it  is  supposed  to  represent
Dionysus.  The  space  between  the  pilasters,  originally  no  doubt  open,
was  blocked  up  with  a  modem  wall,  which  may  have  been  built  when
the  cave  was  turned  into  a  church.  A  door  in  this  wall  afforded  the
only  access  to  the  cave,  which  was  dimly  lighted  by  two  small  openings
in  the  same  wall  Three  inscriptions  were  carved  on  the  front  of  the
monument.  One  of  them  (C.  7.  A,  ii.  No.  1 247)  engraved  on  the  middle
of  the  epistyle,  imder  the  frieze,  set  forth  that  the  monument  was  dedicated
by  Thrasyllus  of  Decelea,  son  of  Thrasyllus,  in  commemoration  of  a
victory  which  he  had  won  with  a  chorus  in  the  archonship  of  Neaechmus
(320/19  B.C.)  The  other  two  inscriptions  (C  /.  A,  ii.  Nos.  1292,  1293)
carved  on  the  two  pedestals  to  the  right  and  left  of  the  central  pedestal,
which  supported  the  statue  of  Dionysus,  commemorate  two  victories
won  by  choruses  furnished  by  the  state  in  the  archonship  of  Pytharatus
(271/70  ac),  when  Thrasydes  of  Decelea,  son  of  Thrasyllus,  was
president  of  the  games  {agonothetes).  The  monument,  after  being  seen
and  described  by  Wheler,  Stuart,  Chandler,  and  Dodwell,  was  destroyed
during  the  siege  of  the  Acropolis  by  the  Turks  in  the  years  1826  and
1827.  But  the  two  last-mentioned  inscriptions,  with  a  piece  of  the  first,
may  still  be  seen  lying  on  the  ground  to  the  right  and  left  of  the  cave,
though  the  block  on  which  one  of  them  (C.  /.  A,  ii.  No.  1 293)  was
engraved  is  broken  in  three.

As  the  monument  was  erected  to  commemorate  a  choregic  victory.


CH.  XXI  MONUMENT  OF  THRASYLLUS  23*

it  doubtless  supported  a  prize  tripod  (see  i.  20.  i  note),  which,  being
directly  over  the  entrance  to  the  cave,  must  have  been  the  one  seen
by  Pausanias.  In  the  lap  of  the  statue  which  surmounted  the  monument
there  is  a  hole  in  which,  it  has  been  conjectured,  the  tripod  was  fixed.
But  such  a  way  of  supporting  a  tripod  seems  to  be  without  parallel ;  it
is  more  likely  that  the  statue  was  enclosed  within  the  legs  of  the  tripod,
according  to  the  usual  £uhion  of  these  moniunents  (i.  20.  i  note).  It
has,  indeed,  been  suggested  that  the  whole  upper  part  of  the  monument,
consisting  of  the  three  pedestals  and  the  statue  of  Dionysus,  was  a
later  addition  made  by  Thrasycles,  who  removed  his  father's  prize
tripod,  and  substituted  for  it  the  statue  of  Dionysus.  But  in  addition
to  the  improbability  that  Thrasycles  should  have  removed  a  trophy
which  reflected  honour  on  his  family,  we  have  the  positive  evidence  of
Pausanias  that  the  tripod  was  there  in  his  day,  three  centuries  after  the
time  of  Thrasycles.  The  fact  that  the  upper  part  of  the  monument  is
constructed  of  a  different  sort  of  marble  from  the  lower  is  no  proof  that
it  is  a  later  addition.  The  choregic  monument  of  Lysicrates  is  similarly
constructed  of  two  sorts  of  marble  (Eleusinian  and  Pentelic) ;  but  nobody
for  that  reason  supposes  that  the  upper  part  is  a  later  addition.

The  other  two  pedestals  may  have  supported  two  other  tripods  set
up  by  Thrasycles  in  memory  of  the  two  choregic  victories  won  under
his  presidency  in  271/70  B.a  But  as  Pausanias  mentions  only  one
tripod,  it  may  be  that  Thrasycles  contented  himself  with  engraving  two
commemorative  inscriptions  on  his  father's  monument,  without  setting
up  tripods  also.  Neither  of  his  two  inscriptions  mentions  a  tripod  or
even  a  dedication  of  any  kind.  It  should  be  remembered  that  he  had
not,  like  his  father  Thrasyllus,  furnished  the  chorus  himself ;  the  chorus
had  been  furnished  by  the  people,  and  Thrasyllus  had  only  superintended
it ;  to  speak  technically,  he  had  been  agonothetes^  not  choregos.  Now,
though  it  was  certainly  the  custom  for  a  choregos  to  set  up  the  prize
tripod  which  he  had  received  for  a  choral  victory,  it  is  not  certain  that
it  was  the  custom  for  an  agonothetes  to  do  so.  Professor  U.  Kohler
has,  indeed,  inferred  that  the  obligation  was  binding  on  the  agonothetes
as  well  as  on  the  choregos;  but  the  passage  of  the  inscription  on  which
he  bases  this  inference  is  mutilated  (see  Mittheilungen  cL  arch.  Inst,  in
Athen,  3  (1878),  p.  234).,

Pausanias's  expression  "  in  it "  (cv  avr^)  leaves  us  uncertain  whether
the  group  of  Apollo  and  Artemis  slaying  the  children  of  Niobe  was  in
the  cave  or  in  {i.e.  enclosed  by  the  legs  of)  the  tripod.  If,  as  seems
probable,  the  statue  of  Dionysus  was  enclosed  by  the  legs  of  the  tripod,
it  would  follow  that  the  group  of  Apollo,  Artemis,  and  the  children  of
Niobe  was  in  the  cave,  or  perhaps  rather  in  the  portico.  It  has  indeed
been  sometimes  supposed,  as  by  Prof  Milchhofer,  that  the  group  was
represented  in  relief  on  the  tripod ;  but  this  supposition  seems  excluded
by  Pausanias's  language.  If  he  had  meant  to  describe  the  group  as  a
relief  on  the  tripod  he  would  have  said  not  "  in  it "  (cv  avry),  but  "  on
it "  (cir  avT^) ;  and  would  probably  have  added  the  participle  hr^ip-
yaoyicvot.

The  face  of  the  rock  on  both  sides  of  the  cave  has  been  chiselled


232  GRA  VE  OF  CALOS  BK.  i.  attica

into  a  smooth  perpendicular  surface.  Two  large  niches  are  cut  in  it
immediately  to  the  west  of  the  cave.  On  the  steep  slope  above  the
cave,  at  the  foot  of  the  wall  of  the  Acropolis,  are  still  standing  two  high
colunms  of  Hymettian  marble,  with  triangular  Corinthian  capitals.
These  columns,  which  are  of  unequal  height,  originally  supported
tripods  ;  the  holes  in  which  the  feet  of  the  tripods  were  fastened  can  be
perceived  on  the  top  of  the  triangular  capitals  by  looking  down  at  them
from  the  wall  of  the  Acropolis.  To  the  east  of  these  columns  some
votive  inscriptions,  much  weathered  and  defaced,  may  be  seen  carved
on  the  rock.  The  perpendicular  cutting  in  the  face  of  the  rock,  with  its
niches  and  inscriptions,  is  doubtless  what  the  ancients  called  the  KcUa-
tome  or  'scarp.'  Hyperides  spoke  of  a  man  "seated  under  the
scarp  "  ;  and  Philochorus  mentioned  that  a  certain  Aeschraeus,  **  having
gained  a  victory  with  a  chorus  of  boys,  dedicated  a  silver-plated  tripod
above  the  theatre,  and  carved  an  inscription  on  the  scarp  of  the  rock  "
(Harpocration,  s,v,  Kararo/irj;  cp.  Pollux,  iv.  123).

See  Wheler,  yiottr»«ry,  pp.  368-370 ;  Stuart  and  Revett,  Antiquities  of  Athens^
2  (London,  1787),  29-3^,  with  plates  i.-vi.  ;  Chandler,  Travels  in  Greece^  pp.  62-
64;  Dodwell,  Tour  in  GreecCy  i.  pp.  299-301  (with  a  view  of  the  intenor  of
the  cave) ;  Leake,  Athens^  i.  p.  186 ;  Wordsworth,  Athens  and  Attica,  p.  76  sq,  ;
W.  Vischer,  Erinnerungen  und  Eiudriicke,  p.  173  sq.  ;  K.  B.  Stark,  Niobe  und
die  Niobiden,  pp  111-118;  Dyer,  Ancient  Athens ^  pp.  336*341;  Milchhofer,
'Athen,'p.  193;  Baedeker,'  p.  56;  Guide-Joanne^  I.  p.  72;  £.  Reisch,  'Zum
Thrasyllosmonument,*  MittheiL  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  13  (1888),  pp.  383-401 ;
Lolling,  *  Athen,'  p.  328 ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  pp.  266-271 ;  A  H.
Smith,  CatcUogue  of  Sculpture  in  the  British  Museum^  i.  pp.  257-259.

21.  3.  This  Niobe  I  myself  saw  when  I  ascended  Monnt
Sipylns.     Cp.  viii.  2.  7,  and  see  note  on  v.  13.  7.

21.  4.  Oalos  is  buried  etc.  Cp.  i.  26.  4.  The  nephew  of
Daedalus  is  commonly  called  Talos  by  ancient  writers  ;  but  Clement  of
Alexandria  {Protrept.  iv.  47,  p.  41,  ed.  Potter)  and  Suidas  {s,v.  HepSiKos
Upov)  agree  with  Pausanias  in  naming  him  Calos.  Apostolius  (xiv.  1 7)
calls  him  Callos.  According  to  Sophocles  (referred  to  by  Suidas  and
Photius,  Lexicon^  s,v.  IlepSiKos  U/adv),  Ovid  (Metam.  viii.  236  sqq,),
Hyginus  (Fa^,  39,  244,  and  274),  and  Servius  (on  Virgil,  Georg.  i.
143,  and  ^^;i.  vi.  14)  his  name  was  Perdix  ('partridge').  The  story
was  that  Talos  (Calos),  son  of  Perdix,  a  sister  of  Daedalus,  surpassed
his  uncle  and  master  Daedalus  in  mechanical  ingenuity,  and  invented
the  saw,  compass,  and  potter's  wheel ;  whereby  he  excited  his  uncle's
envy,  who  murdered  him  by  throwing  him  from  the  Acropolis  at  Athens.
Being  detected  in  the  act  of  burying  the  corpse,  Daedalus  was  tried
before  the  court  of  the  Areopagus,  and  banished  to  Crete.  Perdix,  the
mother  of  Talos,  hung  herself  for  grief  at  the  death  of  her  son.  So  the
Athenians  dedicated  a  sanctuary  to  her  beside  the  Acropolis,  and  paid
honour  to  her.  See  Apollodorus,  iii.  1 5.  9  ;  Diodorus,  iv.  76  ;  Suidas
and  Photius,  Lexicon^  s,v,  UepSiKos  u/dov  ;  Apostolius,  xiv.  1 7  ;  Schol.
on  Euripides,  Orestes,  1648;  Ovid,  Afetam,  viii.  236-259;  Hyginus,
Fad,  39,  244,  and  274;  Servius,  on  Virgil,  Georg.  i.  143,  and  Aen,
vi.  14.     According  to  Ovid  (/.r.)  when  Perdix  (Talos)  was  hurled  from


CH.  XXI  GRA  VE  OF  CALOS  233

the  Acropolis,  the  goddess  Athena  caught  him  up  and  transformed  him
into  a  new  kind  of  bird,  which  was  ever  afterwards  called  Perdix  (*  part-
ridge ')  after  him.

The  grave  of  Talos  is  mentioned  by  Lucian  in  a  fanciful  passage
{Piscator^  42),  where  he  describes  the  eagerness  with  which  the  hung^ry
philosophers  crowded  up  to  the  Acropolis  to  receive  a  dole ;  too
impatient  to  go  round  to  the  regular  entrance  they  planted  ladders
against  the  wall  and  swarmed  up  wherever  they  could,  amongst  other
places  at  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  and  the  grave  of  Talos.  This
shows  that  the  grave  of  Talos  was  close  to  the  foot  of  the  Acropolis.
The  legend  of  Talos's  death  points  to  the  same  conclusion ;  for  probably
he  was  supposed  to  be  buried  on  the  spot  where  he  fell  from  the  battle-
ments of  the  Acropolis.  Moreover,  the  sanctuary  of  his  mother  Perdix
was  beside  the  Acropolis  (Suidas  and  Photius,  Lexicon^  s.v.  IlepSiKos
t€p6v).  Pausanias  tells  us  that  the  grave  of  Talos  was  on  the  way  from
the  theatre  to  the  Acropolis,  and  as  he  mentions  the  sanctuary  of
Aesculapius  immediately  afterwards,  we  infer  that  the  grave  was  situated
somewhere  between  the  theatre  and  the  sanctuary.  Now  the  sanctuary
of  Aesculapius  lay  (as  we  shall  see  presently)  immediately  to  the  west
of  the  theatre.  Probably,  therefore,  the  grave  of  Talos  was  on  the
slope  of  the  Acropolis  between  the  choregic  monument  of  Thrasyllus
and  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius.

It  has  been  conjectured  that  in  the  Attic  legend  of  Talos  we  have  a
reminiscence  of  the  Phoenician  worship  of  Baal-Moloch.  The  link
between  the  legend  and  the  worship  is  furnished  by  the  stories  told
about  the  Cretan  Talos.  He  is  said  to  have  been  a  man  of  bronze
whom  Zeus  gave  to  Europa  to  guard  the  island  of  Crete.  So  he
patrolled  the  whole  island  thrice  every  day,  keeping  watch  and  ward
against  intruders.  Being  made  of  bronze  he  would  have  been  invulner-
able were  it  not  that  he  had  either  a  tube  of  blood  in  his  heel  or
(according  to  another  story)  a  vein  running  from  his  neck  to  his  ankles,
and  stopped  up  with  a  bronze  naiL  To  this  frailty  he  owed  his  death.
For  when  he  attempted  to  drive  away  the  Argo  from  the  shores  of  Crete
with  showers  of  stones,  Medea  contrived  to  extract  the  nail  from  his
vein  or  to  make  him  stumble  against  a  sharp  stone  and  cut  his  ankle,
so  that  all  his  blood  flowed  out.  According  to  another  story,  Talos
received  the  fatal  wound  in  the  ankle  from  an  arrow  shot  by  Poeas.  See
ApoUodorus,  i.  9.  26;  ApoUonius  Rhodius,  iv.  1638  s^^.,  with  the
scholium  ;  Agatharchides,  in  Photius,  Bibliotheca^  p.  443,  lines  22-25,
ed.  Bekker ;  Lucian,  De  saliatione^  49.  Another  story  was  that  Talos
clutched  people  to  his  bronze  breast  and  leaped  with  them  into  the
fire,  so  that  they  were  roasted  alive  (Schol.  on  Plato,  Republic^  i.  P-  337  21 ;
Custathius,  on  Homer,  Od,  xx.  302,  p.  1893  »  Suidas,  s,v,  a-apSdvios
yiXtus;  Zenobius,  v.  85).  This  last  story  certainly  reminds  us  of  the
bronze  image  of  Baal  at  Carthage,  from  whose  outstretched  arms  human
victims  rolled  into  a  pit  of  fire  (Diodorus,  xx.  14).  On  coins  of
Phaestus,  where  Zeus  was  worshipped  under  the  Semitic  name  ot
Velchanos  (Hesychius,  s,v,  FcAxavos,  for  which,  as  coins  show,  we
should  read  f(X\o,vo%)^  Talos  is  represented  as  a  winged  male  figure,


234  SANCTUARY  OF  AESCULAPIUS  bk.  i.  attica

striding  along  and  about  to  hurl  a  stone  (Head,  Historia  Nummarum,
p.  402).

If  this  supposed  connexion  of  the  Attic  with  the  Cretan  Talos  could
be  made  out,  it  would  follow  that  the  true  name  of  the  former  was  Talos
or  rather  perhaps  Talon,  the  form  which  appears  on  coins  of  Phaestus  (see
Head,  /.r.),  not  Calos,  as  Pausanias  writes  it.  On  this  theory  of  the
Phoenician  origin  of  Talos,  see  L.  Stephani,  in  Melanges  Grico-Romains^
I  (1 849-1 8 5 5),  p.  i\osqq.  The  late  J.  J.  Bachofen  of  Bile  maintained
the  somewhat  fiuicifal  view  that  the  legend  of  the  murder  of  Talos  by
his  maternal  uncle  was  a  reminiscence  of  an  attempt  to  renounce  and
abolish  the  old  matriarchal  system,  as  it  is  calleKl,  in  favour  of  the
patriarchal  system.  Under  the  former  system  the  maternal  "uncle
occupies  towards  his  sister's  children  a  position  of  authority  like  that
which,  under  the  patriarchal  system,  a  &dier  occupies  towards  his  own
children.     See  J.  J.  Bachofen,  Antiquarischi  Briefer  p.  1 1 5  sqq,

21.  4*  took  reftigd  with  Oocalus  in  Sicily.     See  vii.  4.  6  note.

21.  4*  The  sanctuary  of  Aescnlapins  etc.  From  the  theatre
Pausanias  proceeds  westward  along  the  southern  foot  of  the  Acropolis,
and  the  first  sanctuary  which  he  comes  to  is  that  of  Aesculapius.  The
proximity  of  this  sanctuary  to  the  theatre  is  confirmed  by  a  statement
of  Marinus  {Ufe  of  ProcluSy  29)  that  the  house  of  the  philosopher  Pro-
clus  adjoined  both  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  and  the  sanctuary  of
Dionysus  which  contained  the  theatre.  Further  we  know  from  Lucian
that  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  must  have  been  close  to  the  foot  of
the  Acropolis ;  for  in  a  passage  already  referred  to  {Piscatory  42)  he
describes  how  some  of  the  needy  philosophers  planted  ladders  at  the
sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  and  swarmed  up  them  into  the  Acropolis.
These  indications  of  ancient  writers  as  to  the  situation  of  the  sanctuary
were  fully  confirmed  in  1876  by  the  discovery  of  the  sanctuary  at  the
foot  of  the  precipitous  rock  of  the  Acropolis,  immediately  to  the  west  of
and  abutting  on  the  retaining- wall  of  the  theatre.  In  that  and  the  two
following  years  (187 6- 187 8)  the  Greek  Archaeological  Society  undertook
and  carried  out  the  excavation  of  the  whole  of  the  ground  on  the  south
side  of  the  Acropolis  between  the  theatre  of  Dionysus  on  the  east  and
the  Music  Hall  of  Herodes  on  the  west.  The  ground  here  consists  of
a  great  terrace  some  173  metres  (189  yards)  long,  bounded  on  the
north  by  the  rock  of  the  Acropolis,  on  the  east  by  the  theatre,  on  the
west  by  the  Music  Hall,  and  on  the  south  by  the  arched  retaining-wall
popularly  known  in  Athens  as  the  Serpentze^  along  the  foot  of  which,  on
the  south,  stretched  the  Colonnade  of  Eumenes  nearly  the  whole  way
from  the  theatre  to  the  Music  Hall  of  Herodes.  This  great  terrace  is
itself  divided  into  three  low  terraces,  which  rise  one  above  the  other  in
the  direction  from  east  to  west.  The  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  occupied
the  eastern  and  lowest  of  these  three  terraces  ;  whether  it  included  also
the  middle  terrace,  inunediately  to  the  west,  is  doubtful.  From  the
theatre  the  sanctuary  was  reached  by  a  ramp  or  descending  road,  which
led  down  from  about  the  middle  of  the  western  side  of  the  auditorioin.
The  two  walls  which  supported  this  ramp  on  the  north  and  south  are
still  to  be  seen  ;  on  their  outer  sides  the  blocks  are  carefidly  fitted  and


CH.  XXI  SANCTUARY  OF  AESCULAPIUS  235

smoothed,  on  the  inner  sides  they  are  left  rough.  About  four  yards  to
the  north  of  this  ramp  and  nearly  parallel  with  it  are  the  remains  of
the  wall  which  enclosed  the  precinct  of  Aesculapius  on  the  south.  This
wall  starts  from  the  retaining-wall  of  the  theatre  and  extends  due  west
for  some  20  yards  or  so.  It  is  faced  on  both  sides  with  polygonal
masonry,  the  interior  being  filled  with  rubble.  The  sanctuary  of
Aesculapius  was  bounded  by  this  wall  on  the  south,  by  the  retaining-
wall  of  Uie  theatre  on  the  east,  and  by  the  rock  of  the  Acropolis  on  the
north.     Its  western  boundary  is,  as  has  been  said,  uncertain.

Within  the  sanctuary  the  most  considerable  monumental  remains
which  have  been  discovered  are  those  of  a  colonnade  which  extended
along  the  northern  side  of  the  sanctuary,  at  the  foot  of  the  precipitous
rock  of  the  Acropolis  and  abutting,  at  its  eastern  end,  on  the  theatre.
The  colonnade  is  49.50  metres  (162  ft.  5  in.)  long  by  about  1 1  metres
(36  feet)  deep.  The  outer  line  of  the  stylobate  with  portions  of  the
back  and  side  walls  are  preserved.  The  colonnade  rested  on  two  steps,
of  which  the  lower  is  built  of  Piraeic  limestone,  the  upper  (the  stylobate)
of  Hymettian  marble.  The  jointing  of  the  stones  is  excellent.  From
the  marks  left  by  the  columns  on  the  stylobate  it  appears  that  the
colonnade  was  at  some  later  time  rebuilt  with  slenderer  columns  placed
at  wider  intervals.  Two  shafts  of  Doric  columns  belonging  to  the
rebuilt  colonnade  were  found  on  the  stylobate.  They  are  of  Pentelic
marble  with  twenty  flutings  ;  but  the  lower  parts  of  the  shaft,  to  a  height
of  about  1 1  feet,  are  unfluted.  The  original  colonnade  was  also  of  the
Doric  order.  Down  the  middle  of  the  colonnade,  supporting  the  roof,
ran  an  inner  row  of  columns,  as  appears  from  some  bases  in  the  eastern
part  of  the  colonnade  ;  the  intervals  between  these  bases  prove  that  the
distance  between  each  pair  of  columns  in  the  inner  row  was  double  the
distance  between  each  pair  of  columns  in  the  outer  row.  The  back
(north)  wall  and  the  east  wall  of  the  colonnade  are  carefully  and  neatly
constructed  of  blocks  of  limestone.  The  foot  of  the  back  wall  is  faced
with  plates  of  Hymettian  marble  1.15  metres  (about  3  ft.  7  in.)  high.
Parallel  to  the  east  wall,  and  at  a  distance  from  it  of  1.85  metres  (5  ft.
II  in.)  there  ran  a  cross  wall  from  the  back  to  the  front  of  the  colon-
nade. Between  it  and  the  east  wall  a  staircase  probably  led  up  to  a
balcony  or  upper  story.  In  the  middle  ages  a  vaulted  passage  was
constructed  in  the  northern  half  of  the  western  portion  of  the  colonnade.
The  southern  wall  of  this  passage  lies  exactly  on  the  central  long  axis
of  the  colonnade ;  its  northern  wall  conceals  the  original  back  wall  of
the  colonnade.  The  original  pavement  of  the  colonnade  is  almost  gone,
but  a  fragment  of  it  in  the  western  part  of  the  colonnade  shows  that  it
was  of  Hymettian  marble.

An  arched  doorway  in  the  back  wall  of  the  colonnade,  nearer  its
eastern  than  its  western  end,  leads  through  a  narrow  passage  into  a
small  round  chamber  hewn  in  the  rock  of  the  Acropolis,  with  a  dome-
shaped  roof.  In  this  chamber  or  grotto  is  a  spring  of  pure  but  some-
what brackish  water ;  it  is  doubtless  the  fountain  of  which  Pausanias
speaks.  The  water  enters  the  chamber  by  a  square  opening  low  down
at  the  side,  near  the  entrance,  and  flows  roimd  it  in  a  channel  enclosed


236  SANCTUARY  OF  AESCULAPIUS  BK.  i.  attica

by  slabs  set  upright.  This  channel,  as  well  as  the  arched  entrance  to
the  grotto,  date  from  Christian  times  when  the  grotto  was  converted
into  a  chapeL  Its  walls  were  at  the  same  time  coated  with  stucco  to
receive  the  holy  pictures.  In  a  triangular  niche  facing  the  entrance  is
a  picture  of  the  Virgin.  The  peasants  still  pray  and  burn  candles  in
the  grotto.  Xenophon  (Memor,  iiL  13.  3)  speaks  of  the  water  of  the
spring  as  warm ;  and  Pliny  (N,  H,  ii.  225)  says  that  things  thrown  into
it  reappeared  in  the  bay  of  Phalerum  (but  see  note  on  i.  28.  4).

At  the  west  end  of  the  colonnade  is  a  square  platform  about  10  feet
high,  in  the  middle  of  which  is  a  circular  shaft  2.20  metres  (7  ft  2  in.)
deep  and  2.70  metres  (8  ft  10  in.)  wide.  The  bottom  of  the  shaft
is  die  natural  rock  ;  its  sides  are  constructed  of  polygonal  masonry.
Round  the  mouth  of  the  shaft  are  four  square  bases  of  Hymettian
marble ;  they  probably  supported  columns  which  in  turn  supported  a
roof.  Though  there  is  now  no  water  in  the  shaft  it  was  probably  a
well.  Prof.  U.  Kohler,  however,  conjectures  that  it  was  a  sacrificial  pit
into  which  the  blood  of  victims  offered  to  the  dead  was  allowed  to  flow
{MiitheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  2  (1877),  p.  254).

With  regard  to  the  date  of  the  colonnade,  the  use  of  Hymettian
marble  in  its  construction  is  believed  to  show  that  it  cannot  be  earlier
than  the  fourth  century  B.C. ;  for  before  that  century  Hymettian  marble
was  not  employed  for  buildings,  and  hardly  even  for  inscriptions,  in
Athens.  On  the  other  hand,  the  excellence  of  the  masonry  indicates
that  it  can  hardly  be  much  later  than  the  fourth  century  B.C.  The
colonnade  was  doubtless  intended  for  the  use  of  the  patients  and
worshippers  of  the  god,  who  slept  here  in  expectation  of  receiving
revelations  in  dreams  (see  below).  Its  situation  on  the  sunny  southern
side  of  the  Acropolis,  which  completely  sheltered  it  from  the  north,
adapted  it  as  a  resort  for  delicate  and  sickly  persons.  In  a  well-known
passage  (Plutus^  659  sqq,)  Aristophanes  has  described  the  patients
lying  in  the  sanctuary.

Immediately  south  of  the  west  end  of  the  colonnade  are  the  founda-
tions of  an  ancient  building  which  measure  10.50  metres  (34  ft.  6  in.)
from  east  to  west  by  6  metres  (19  ft.  8  in.)  from  north  to  south.  This
was  probably  the  temple  of  Aesculapius.  To  the  east  of  this  building,
nearly  opposite  the  entrance  to  the  grotto,  are  the  remains  of  two
Christian  churches,  which  have  been  supposed  to  mark  the  site  of
another  temple,  or  of  the  great  altar  of  Aesculapius.  Both  these  views
appear  to  be  mere  conjectures.

So  much  for  the  eastern  of  the  three  terraces.  The  middle  terrace
is  somewhat  smaller,  and  is  only  about  2  feet  6  inches  higher  than  the
eastern  terrace.  It  is  in  the  form  of  an  irregular  quadrangle  bounded
on  the  east  and  south  by  a  wall  mostly  of  polygonal  masonry,  which  on
the  south  side  is  in  tolerable  preservation.  On  the  north-eastern  side
of  this  terrace,  at  the  foot  of  the  Acropolis  rock,  are  the  foimdations  of
a  large  building  28  metres  (91  ft.  10  in.)  long  from  east  to  west,  by
14  metres  (46  feet)  wide  from  north  to  south.  The  northern  half  of
this  building,  next  the  Acropolis  rock,  was  occupied  by  a  row  of  four
square  chambers  of  equal  size,  paved  with  small  round  pebbles.     The


CH.  XXI  SANCTUARY  OF  AESCULAPIUS  237

other  (southern)  half  of  the  building  was  a  colonnade  open  to  the  south,
but  closed  at  its  eastern  and  western  ends.  The  steps  at  the  south-
west comer,  together  with  the  base  of  the  westernmost  column,  are
preserved.  The  base  shows  that  the  columns  were  of  the  Ionic  order.
This  building  was  probably  the  house  of  the  priests  and-  other  officials
of  the  sanctuary.  In  respect  of  style  it  is  decidedly  inferior  to  the
colonnade  of  the  eastern  terrace,  and  appears  to  have  been  built  not
earlier  than  the  middle  of  the  second  century  B.c.  To  the  west  of  this
building,  just  at  the  foot  of  the  Acropolis  rock,  is  the  square  shaft  of  an
ancient  well,  the  sides  of  which  are  constructed  of  fine  polygonal
masonry.  It  is  about  2.50  metres  (8  ft.  2  in.)  wide,  and  is  at  present
about  3.50  metres  (11  ft.  6  in.)  deep,  but  it  has  not  been  completely
cleared  out.  On  its  western  side,  which  has  been  destroyed,  it  opens
into  a  large  mediaeval  or  Turkish  cistern  built  of  bricks.  This  cistern
contains  good  drinking  water  which  rises  under  the  rocks  immediately
to  the  north.  Immediately  to  the  south  of  this  cistern  are  the  remains
of  a  small  building  about  5  metres  (16  fL  5  in.)  long  by  4.25  metres
(13  ft.  10  in.)  wide.  It  fronts  south-east,  and  from  the  excellent  style
of  the  masonry  is  judged  to  belong  to  the  best  period  of  Athenian
architecture.  Prof.  U.  Kohler  and  Prof.  A.  Milchhofer  agree  in
thinking  that  it  was  the  temple  of  Themis  mentioned  by  Pausanias
(i.  22.  i).  In  the  outer  side  of  the  polygonal  wall  which  bounds  this
middle  terrace  on  the  south,  there  is  a  stone  with  the  inscription  HOPOS
KPENE2,  "boundary  of  the  fountain"  (C.  /.  A,  iv.  No.  499  a,  p.  51).
From  the  style  of  the  letters  this  inscription  seems  to  belong  to  the
second  half  of  the  fifth  century  B.a  ;  and  from  its  position  in  the
boimdary  wall  of  the  middle  terrace  nearly  opposite  the  ancient  well  it
appears  to  refer  to  this  well  rather  than  to  the  spring  which  rises  in  the
grotto  at  the  back  of  the  eastern  terrace.  As  the  stone,  to  all  appear-
ance, is  in  its  original  position,  it  proves  that  all  the  space  between  it
and  the  well  (or  the  spring  in  the  grotto)  was  hallowed  ground.  A
little  to  the  west  of  this  boundary  stone  the  polygonal  wall  is  interrupted
in  consequence,  apparently,  of  the  construction  of  a  large  mediaeval
cistern  on  its  inner  side.

As  the  westernmost  of  the  three  terraces  was  certainly  not  included
within  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius,  it  need  not  be  described  here.

The  sanctuary  just  described  was  known  as  "the  sanctuary  of
Aesculapius  in  the  city  "  to  distinguish  it  from  the  sanctuary  of  Aescu-
lapius in  Piraeus  (Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  PlutuSy  621;  C,  LA,  ii.  No.
1 59  b,  p.  424  ;  C.  /.  A,  ii.  No.  477  b,  p.  427).  Some  light  is  thrown  on
its  history  by  inscriptions  found  in  or  near  it.  Thus  an  inscription,
unfortunately  much  mutilated,  is  believed  to  have  described  the  bringing
of  the  god  from  Peloponnese  to  Athens,  the  foundation  of  his  sanctuary
on  the  south  side  of  the  Acropolis,  and  its  subsequent  alterations  and
improvements  {CI,  A,  ii.  No.  1649).  A5  this  inscription  is  not  later
than  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.,  it  seems  to  show  that  the
sanctuary  was  already  in  existence  in  the  fifth  century  B.C.  Another
inscription  (C.  LA,  ii.  No.  1650)  appears  to  mention  a  certain  Telemachus
as  the  founder  of  the  sanctuary  and  altar  of  Aesculapius ;  but  like  the


238  SANCTUARY  OF  AESCULAPIUS  bk.  i.  attica

preceding  inscription  it  is  unfortunately  mutilated.  A  good  deal  more
information  is  furnished  by  an  inscription  (C  7.  A,  iii.  No.  489  b,  p.  419
sq, ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Graec,  No.  356),  which  seems  to  date
from  the  second  half  of  the  first  century  B.C  This  inscription  contains
a  decree  of  the  Council  allowing  a  certain  Diodes,  who  had  been  elected
by  lot  priest  of  Aesculapius  for  the  year  after  Lysiades's  archonship,  to
make  certain  necessary  repairs  in  the  sanctuary.  Diodes  had  repre-
sented to  the  Coundl  "  that  the  doors  of  the  former  entrance  into  the
sanctuary,  together  with  the  roof  at  the  back  of  the  portal,  and  the
temple  of  the  andent  foundation  of  Aesculapius  and  Health  were
dilapidated,"  and  had  petitioned  to  be  allowed  at  his  own  expense  '*  to
provide  the  old  portal  with  doors,  and  to  roof  the  back  part  of  the  portal
as  well  as  the  temple  opposite  the  entrance."  His  petition  was  granted ;
the  Council  allowed  him  "  to  set  up  the  doors,  to  roof  the  back  part  of
the  portal,  to  repair  the  old  temple,"  and  to  put  up  inscriptions  on  the
door,  the  roof,  and  the  temple  recording  the  restorations  which  he  had
effected.  From  this  inscription  it  has  been  inferred  that  there  were  two
temples,  an  old  one  and  a  new  one,  within  the  sanctuary,  and  that  there
were  two  entrances,  an  old  one  and  a  new  one,  into  it  Prof  U.
Kohler  and  Prof.  A.  Milchh6fer  suppose  that  the  newer  temple  occupied
the  site  on  the  eastern  terrace  where  there  are  now  some  remains  of
Christian  churches,  nearly  opposite  the  entrance  to  the  round  rock-hewn
chamber  with  its  sacred  spring.  Mr.  P.  Girard,  on  the  other  hand,
would  identify  as  one  of  the  temples  of  Aesculapius  the  foundations  on
the  middle  terrace  which  Prof.  Kdhler  and  Prof.  Milchhofer  take  to  be
those  of  the  temple  of  Themis  (see  above).  Another  inscription,
dating  from  about  the  same  time  as  the  preceding  one  (Prof  K5hler
thinks  it  belongs  to  the  year  64  or  63  B.C.),  records  that  a  certain
Socrates,  son  of  Sarapion,  repaired  and  provided  with  doors  the  fountain
and  the  entrance  in  honour  of  Aesculapius  and  Health.  See  MittheiL
(L  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  2  (1877),  p.  174  ;  E.  Curtius,  StadigeschichUy
p.  xvii.  line  42  sqq.  Lastly,  from  two  inscriptions  of  the  age  of  Hadrian
or  the  Antonines,  we  learn  that  a  certain  Demetrius,  son  of  Antiochus,
who  had  held  the  office  of  custodian  of  the  temple  (^aico/xvcras),  paved
the  floor  of  the  portal  and  of  the  ground  round  the  altar  (C  /.  A,  iii.
Nos.  68  e,  68  f,  p.  483).

Interesting  lists  of  votive  offerings  preserved  in  the  sanctuary  are
furnished  by  two  long  inscriptions  (C  /.  A,  ii.  Nos.  835,  836),  which
were  found  on  the  site.  Though  now  broken  into  a  number  of  pieces,
these  inscriptions  were  evidently  carved  on  opposite  sides  of  the  same
stone.  The  older  of  the  two  inscriptions,  for  they  are  not  contemporary,
seems  to  date  from  about  01.  115  (320-317  B.C.)  Among  the  votive
offerings  enumerated  in  these  inscriptions  are  representations  of  the
human  body  and  various  parts  of  it,  such  as  feces,  eyes,  mouths,  teeth,
ears,  breasts,  hearts,  hands,  legs  and  feet.  Some  of  these  were  of
gold,  others  of  silver.  They  were  doubtless  offered  by  patients  who  had
been  or  hoped  to  be  cured  of  ailments  in  the  corresponding  parts  of
their  bodies.  Amongst  the  offerings  mentioned  are  also  small  silver
and  golden  serpents,  dedicated  probably  with  reference  to  the  sacred


CH.  XXI  SANCTUARY  OF  AESCULAPIUS  239

serpents  which  lived  in  the  sanctuary  (Aristophanes,  Pluius^  733  sqq,  ;
see  notes  on  ii.  10.  3  ;  ii.  27.  3).  Theophrastus  tells  us  (Charcut  21)
that  it  was  characteristic  of  the  man  of  petty  ambition  to  dedicate  a
bronze  ring  in  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius,  and  then  burnish  and
anoint  it  daily ;  and  among  the  votive  offerings  enumerated  in  the
inscriptions  rings  (one  of  them  of  iron)  are  mentioned.  See  P.  Girard
and  J.  Martha,  '  Inventaires  de  PAskl^pieion,  BulL  de  Corr,  Hellin,
2  (1878),  pp.  419-445.  A  number  of  the  votive  offerings  themselves
have  been  found  in  the  sanctuary.  They  include  sculptured  reliefs
representing  parts  of  the  human  body  (legs,  feet,  breasts,  etc.)  with  the
names  of  the  dedicators  inscribed  on  them  (C  7.  A,  ii.  No.  1482  ;  C  /.  A,
iii.  Nos.  132  c,  I32g,  i32h,  132  i,  132  k,  i32p,  I32q,  132  r).  Another
votive,  relief  represents  a  serpent  (C.  7.  A,  ii.  No.  1445) ;  another  a
serpent  coiled  round  a  staff,  with  two  fir-cones  to  the  right  and  fruit  of
some  sort  to  the  left  (C  7.  A,  iii.  No.  181  a).  Other  reliefs  represent
Aesculapius  alone  or  in  company  with  the  goddess  Health,  or  with  his
children  (his  son  Machaon,  and  his  daughters  Aceso,  laso,  Panacea)
receiving  the  vows  and  prayers  of  suppliants.  It  may  possibly  be  to
sculptures  of  this  latter  sort  that  Pausanias  refers  when  he  says  that  the
sanctuary  contained  remarkable  images  of  the  god  and  his  children.
See  P.  Girard,  '  £x-voto  k  Esculape  trouv^  sur  la  pente  m^ridionale
dc  I'Acropole,'  BulL  de  Carr.  HelUn,  i  (1877),  pp.  156-169;  idy
2  (1878),  pp.  65-94;  F.  von  Duhn,  *  Votivreliefs  an  Asklepios
und  Hygieia,'  MittheiL  d.  arch,  Inst  in  Athen,  2  (1877),  pp.  214-222,
with  plates  xiv.-xvi. ;  /V/.,  in  Archdologische  Zeitungy  35  (1877),  pp.
'39-175-  A.  votive  offering  of  a  different  sort  found  in  the  sanctuary
is  a  series  of  three  hymns  inscribed  on  a  slab  of  gray  marble  {CIA,
iii.  No.  1 71  a,  p.  488).  The  first  two  hymns  consist  of  prayers  addressed
to  Aesculapius  by  a  certain  Diophantes,  a  custodian  of  the  temple,  who
had  suffered  agonies  from  gout,  and  now  passionately  implores  the
god  to  restore  to  him  the  use  of  his  feet  that  he  may  return  on  them  to
the  god's  golden  house,  and  "  that  I  may  behold  thee,  my  god,  who  art
brighter  than  the  earth  in  spring."  The  third  hymn  is  a  song  of
thanksgiving  to  the  god  for  having  answered  the  prayer  of  his  servant,
who  can  now  walk  erect,  instead  of  crawling  crab-&shion  or  limping  as
on  thorns.  From  another  inscription  (C.  7.  A,  ii.  No.  352  b,  p.  426)  we
learn  that  the  public  physicians  of  Athens  were  accustomed  to  sacrifice
twice  a  year  to  Aesculapius  and  Health  on  behalf  of  their  patients  and
themselves.  The  priest  of  Aesculapius  had  a  seat  reserved  for  him  in
the  neighbouring  theatre  of  Dionysus  (C  7.  A,  iii.  No.  287).

On  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  see  npa«m«:d  tijt  'A^euoXoyiic^f  'Ereupfar  for
1876*  pp.  14-34,  with  plan ;  id. ,  for  1877,  p.  6  sqq, ,  with  plan ;  id. ,  for  1878,  p.  6  sqq. ;
U.  Kohler,  '  Der  SUdabhang  der  Akropolis  zu  Athen  nach  den  Ausgrabungen  aer
archaologischen  Gesellschaft,'  MittheiL  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,  2  (1877),  pp.
171-186,  229-260;  Curtius  and  Kaupert,  Atlas  van  Athen,  p.  34,  with  plate  xi.  ;
P.  Girard,  VAscUpieion  dAthhus  (Paris,  1882);  A  Milchhofer,  *  Athen,'
pp.  194-197  ;  Guide 'Joanne,  i.  pp.  72-75  ;  A.  Botticher,  Die  Akropolis  von
Athen,  p.  265  sqq.  ;  Lolling,  '  Athen,'  p.  329 ;  Baedeker,'  p.  56 ;  Miss  Harrison,
Ancient  Athens,  p.  299  sqq, ;  £.  Preuner,  '  Zur  Einfiinrung  des  Asklepios-
Kultes  in  Athen,'  Rheinisches  Museum,  N.F.  49  (1894),  pp.  313-316.


340  COLONNADE  OF  EUAfENES  bk.  i.  attica

In  his  description  of  the  south  side  of  the  Acropolis  Pausanias  makes
no  mention  of  two  buildings,  the  remains  of  which  are  still  very  con-
spicuous features  in  this  part  of  Athens.  These  are  (i)  the  Colonnade
of  Eumenes  ;  and  (2)  the  Music  Hall  of  Herodes  Atticus.

( I )  The  great  terrace  on  the  south  side  of  the  Acropolis,  extending
from  the  Dionysiac  Theatre  on  the  east  to  the  Music  Hall  of  Herodes
Atticus  on  the  west,  is  supported  in  nearly  its  whole  length  by  a  high
retaining  wall  built  of  conglomerate  and  strengthened  by  more  than
forty  buttresses.  Each  pair  of  buttresses  is  united  at  the  top  by  an
arch,  so  that  the  appearance  of  the  wall,  seen  from  below,  is  diat  of  a
long  wall  with  a  row  of  pillars  and  arches  placed  fiat  against  it.  Origin-
ally, however,  these  pillars  and  arches  were  concealed  by  a  casing
constructed  of  squared  blocks  of  Piraeic  limestone  with  a  socle  (5  ft
3  in.  high)  of  Hymettian  marble.  Along  the  whole  front  of  this  retain-
ing wall,  so  concealed,  there  extended  a  colonnade  163  metres  (about
178  yards)  long  by  more  than  16  metres  (52  ft.  6  in.)  deep.  It  had
two  rows  of  columns,  one  along  its  outer  edge,  the  other  down  the
middle.  The  substructions  of  the  outer  side  of  the  colonnade,  together
with  the  square  foundations  of  the  inner  row  of  columns,  and  the  side
and  back  walls  to  a  certain  height,  are  preserved.  The  substructions
are  of  limestone  and  conglomerate ;  the  foundations  of  the  columns  are
of  limestone.  At  its  eastern  end  the  colonnade  (and  with  it  the  retain-
ing wall  of  the  terrace)  stops  about  10  metres  (33  feet)  short  of  the
theatre  of  Dionysus ;  it  was  terminated  here  by  a  side  wall.  At  its
western  end  the  colonnade  conununicated,  by  means  of  two  doors  in  the
side  wall,  with  the  rooms  at  the  back  of  the  Music  Hall  of  Herodes
Atticus.  In  the  winter  of  1892-93  a  large  number  of  drums  of  columns
were  found  immediately  to  the  south  of,  and  a  little  way  below,  the
colonnade.  They  are  of  Pentelic  marble,  and  in  shape  and  dimensions
resemble  the  outer  Doric  columns  of  the  Colonnade  of  Attalus  (see
above,  p.  55).  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  they  belong  to  the  colon-
nade we  have  been  describing,  from  which  they  were  probably  rolled
down  hill  to  strengthen  the  mediaeval  fortification  wall.

Opinions  have  differed  as  to  the  date  when  this  great  colonnade,  the
longest  yet  discovered  in  Athens,  was  constructed.  As  the  back  of  the
colonnade  is  exactly  in  a  line  with  the  stage  of  Herodes's  Music  Hall,
and  as  the  two  buildings  communicated  by  doors  in  the  western  end-
wall  of  the  colonnade.  Prof  U.  K5hler  and  Prof.  A.  Milchhofer  con-
cluded that  the  colonnade  was  constructed  by  Herodes  Atticus  at  the
same  time  that  he  built  the  Music  Hall.  This  would  explain  Pausanias's
silence  as  to  the  colonnade,  for  (as  we  shall  see  presently)  when  he  was
in  Athens  the  Music  Hall  was  not  yet  built.  But  Dr.  Dorpfeld  has
shown  good  grounds  for  dissenting  from  this  view.  The  walls  of  the
Music  Hall,  where  they  exceed  a  certain  breadth,  are  regularly  con-
structed of  a  core  of  small  stones  and  mortar  {opus  inceriufn\  with  an
outer  facing  of  Piraeic  limestone.  The  use  of  small  stones  bonded  with
mortar  (a  sure  mark  of  the  Roman  origin  of  the  Music  Hall)  does  not
occur  in  the  colonnade,  which  is  constructed  of  breccia,  limestone,  and
Hymettian  marble,  materials  which  were  employed  at  Athens  in  buildings


CH.  XXI  MUSIC  HALL  OF  HERODES  241

of  the  pre -Roman  time,  especially  in  the  declining  age  of  Greece.
Probably,  therefore,  the  colonnade  is  the  Colonnade  of  Eumenes,  described
by  Vitruvius  (v.  9.  i)  as  situated  near  the  Dionysiac  theatre,  and  used
as  a  place  of  shelter  by  the  spectators  when  a  sudden  shower  of  rain
compelled  them  to  quit  the  open  theatre.  The  Eumenes  at  whose
expense  the  colonnade  was  constructed  was  most  probably  Eumenes  II.,
king  of  Pergamus  (197-159  B.C.)  The  plan  of  the  colonnade  agrees
with  that  of  a  colonnade  in  Pergamus,  which  is  known  to  have  been
built  by  Eumenes  II.  Moreover,  the  agreement  of  the  recently  dis-
covered columns  with  those  of  the  colonnade  of  Attalus  is  another
argument  for  dating  the  colonnade,  with  Dr.  Ddrpfeld,  in  the  second
century  B.C.,  rather  than,  with  Professors  Kohler  and  Milchhofer,  in  the
second  century  a.d.

See  npaicriicd  rrfl  *Apxaio\oyncrjf  'Erou/>(af  for  1877,  p.  12  sag.,  with  plan  ;  td,,
for  1878,  p.  6  s^^,;  J.  Martha,  '  Restes  d'un  portique  au  sua  de  I'Askl^pieion,'
Bull  de  Corr.  HelUn,  2  (1878),  pp.  584-586,  with  pi.  xxiil ;  U.  Kohler,  *  ilallen-
lage  am  SUdfusse  der  Akropolis  zu  Athen,'  Mittheil,  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athene  3
(1878),  pp.  147-154,  with  pi.  viL  ;  Milchhofer,  *Athen,'  p.  193  sq,\  W.  Ddrp-
feld,'Die  Stoa  des  Eumenes  in  Athen,'  MittheiL  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  At  hen,  13
(1888),  pp.  100-102;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  p.  263  sq,',  Mittheil,  d.
arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,  17  (1882),  p.  450  sq,

(2)  The  Music  Hall  of  H erodes  Atticus,  which  stands  at  the  south-
western foot  of  the  Acropolis,  in  a  line  with  the  Colonnade  of  Eumenes,
appears  to  have  been  the  last  great  building  erected  in  ancient  Athens,
and  it  is  now  one  of  the  best  preserved  of  the  Athenian  monuments.
Pausanias  tells  us  elsewhere  (vii.  20.  6)  that  when  he  wrote  his
description  of  Athens  the  Music  Hall  of  Herodes  was  not  yet  begun ;
he  informs  us  further  that  it  was  built  by  Herodes  Atticus  in  memory  of
his  dead  wife,  and  that  in  size  and  magnificence  it  surpassed  the  one  at
Patrae,  which  was  otherwise  unrivalled  in  Greece.  Philostratus,  who
calls  it  a  theatre,  says  that  Herodes  Atticus  built  it  in  memory  of  his
wife  Regilla,  that  it  had  a  roof  of  cedar-wood,  and  was  far  superior  to
the  Music  Hall  which  Herodes  built  at  Corinth  (Philostratus,  Vit,  Soph,
ii.  I.  8).  Suidas  mentions  {s,v,  *H/9d>5i;$  'lovXtos)  that  Herodes  built
**a  roofed  theatre"  at  Athens.  Regilla  died  about  160  or  161  a.d.
(note  on  vii.  20.  6)  ;  hence  the  Music  Hall  must  have  been  built  shortly
after.

In  modem  times,  down  to  the  middle  of  last  century  and  even  later,
the  Music  Hall  of  Herodes  was  often  taken  for  the  Dionysiac  theatre.
The  first  who  gave  the  building  its  true  name  was  Chandler  {Travels
in  Greece,^  p.  64  sqq.)  The  interior  of  the  building,  long  buried  under
a  deep  accumulation  of  soil,  and  even  turned  into  a  cornfield,  was  fully
excavated  under  the  superintendence  of  Pittakis  in  1857  and  1858.
From  the  quantity  of  ashes  brought  to  light  in  the  course  of  the  excava-
tions it  appears  that  the  Music  Hall  must  have  been  partially  destroyed
by  fire.  The  building  has  the  form  of  a  Roman  theatre.  The  seats
rise  steeply  in  a  semicircle,  tier  above  tier,  on  the  rocky  slope  of  the
Acropolis.  The  auditorium,  measuring  about  80  metres  (262  feet)
across,  was  enclosed  by  a  massive  wall  of  limestone,  which  rose  high

VOL.  II  R


242  MUSIC  HALL  OF  HERODES  bk.  i.  attica

above  it,  and  was  strengthened  on  the  east  side  by  buttresses.  This
enclosing  wall  doubtless  supported  the  cedar-wood  roof  mentioned  by
Philostratus  (/.^.)  A  diazoma  or  horizontal  passage,  running  round  the
semicircular  auditorium  at  a  height  somewhat  above  the  middle,  divided
the  seats  into  an  upper  and  a  lower  section,  of  which  the  lower  section
contained  twenty  rows  of  seats,  and  the  upper  section  perhaps  thirteen ;
but  these  upper  rows  of  seats  are  very  ruinous,  and  their  number  cannot
be  exactly  ascertained.  Staircases  divided  the  seats  below  the  diazoma
into  five  wedge-shaped  blocks  {cundy  kerkides\  and  the  seats  above  the
diazoma  into  ten  blocks.  The  seats  were  covered  with  Pentelic  marble,*
which,  however,  in  the  upper  division  has  wholly  disappeared.  The
front  seats  have  backs  and  a  low  step  which  served  as  a  foot-stool.  It
is  calculated  that  the  theatre  held  about  6000  spectators.

The  orchestra,  62  feet  broad,  and  in  shape  rather  larger  than  a
semicircle,  is  paved  with  square  pieces  of  dark  marble,  sprinkled  with
yellow.  From  each  side  of  the  orchestra  a  passage,  similarly  paved
with  marble,  led  past  the  extremity  of  the  stage  and  up  eight  steps  to  a
doorway  opening  into  a  chamber  to  the  south,  from  which  one  passed
into  the  open  air.

The  stage,  about  115  feet  wide,  26  feet  deep,  and  5  feet  high,  was
connected  with  the  orchestra  by  two  staircases  ;  but  only  three  steps  of
the  eastern  staircase  are  preserved.  The  massive  wall  at  the  back  of
the  stage  is  preserved  to  a  height  of  two  stories  throughout,  and  to  a
height  of  three  stories  in  places.  The  two  upper  stories  are  indicated
by  rows  of  arched  windows.  This  wall  at  the  level  of  the  stage  is
pierced  with  three  stage  doors,  and  contains  eight  niches  for  statues.
There  was  also  an  entrance  to  the  stage  through  each  of  the  side-scenes.
A  row  of  columns  seems  to  have  extended  across  the  stage  in  its  back
part,  supporting  a  second  story.  In  the  back  wall  of  the  stage,  at  a
height  of  about  1 6  feet,  may  still  be  seen  the  rows  of  holes  in  which  the
beams  of  this  second  story  were  fixed.  In  this  upper  story  the  gods
and  other  spiritual  beings  may  have  made  their  appearance.

See  R.  Schillbach,  Uber  das  Odeion  des  Herodes  Attikos  (Jena,  1858) ;  S.
Ivanoff,  *  II  teatro  d'  Atene  detto  di  Erode  Attico/  Annali  deiP  Instituto^  30
(1858),  pp.  213-221;  Milchhofer,  *Athen,'  p.  197  5q,\  Baedeker,'  p.  56  sq,  \
Guide-Joanne^  I.  p.  75  sq, ;  A  B5tticher,  Die  Akropolis  von  Athen^  pp.  291-293  ;
Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens ^  p.  263.

21.  4*  a  fonntain  beside  which,  they  say,  Halirrothius


violated  Alcippe.  Cp.  Euripides,  Electray  1258  sqq,  ;  Apollodorus,  iii.
14.  2.  The  mother  of  Alcippe  was  Aglaurus  (Apollodorus,  Lc)  Prof.  v.
Sybel  has  suggested  that  Alcippe  was  the  nymph  of  the  spring  before
Aesculapius  took  possession  of  it  {Mittheilungen  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athetiy
10  (1885),  p.  97  sqq.)  As  to  the  trial  of  Ares  at  the  Areopagus,  see  i.
28.  5  note.

21.  6.  They  make  their  corselets  in  the  following  way  etc
Ammianus  Marcellinus  (xvii.  12.  2)  describes  the  Sarmatian  corselets
as  "made  of  horns  scraped  and  smoothed,  fastened  like  feathers  on
linen  garments."  Tacitus  describes  them  {Hist.  i.  79)  as  made  of  iron
plates  or  hard  hides  and  impenetrable  to  thrust  or  cut


CH.  XXII  TEMPLE  OF  THEMIS  243

21.  7«  Linen  corselets  may  be  seen  dedicated  in  varions
sanctnaxies.  Three  linen  corselets  were  dedicated  in  the  Carthaginian
treasury  at  Olympia  (vi.  19.  7).  Axnasis,  king  of  Egypt,  dedicated  a
fine  linen  corselet  in  the  sanctuary  of  Athena  at  Lindus  in  Rhodes
(Herodotus,  ii.  182  ;  Aelian,  Var,  Hist  ix.  17)  ;  each  strand  in  it  was
itself  composed  of  365  threads,  and  visitors  to  the  temple  used  to  finger
the  corselet  so  much,  in  order  to  count  the  threads,  that  by  Pliny's  time
there  was  little  of  it  left  (Pliny,  Nat,  HisL  xix.  12).  Amasis  sent  a
similar  corselet  as  a  present  to  the  Lacedaemonians,  but  it  was  inter-
cepted at  sea  by  a  Samian  rover.  Figures  of  animals  were  woven  into
it,  and  it  was  adorned  with  gold  and  cotton  (Herodotus,  iii.  47).  A
linen  coat  answering  to  this  description  was  found  in  the  grave  of
Rameses  UI.  (Wiedemann,  on  Herodotus,  il  182).  Some  of  the
Homeric  heroes  wore  linen  corselets  (Homer,  //.  ii.  529,  830).  New
linen  corselets  hung  on  nails  in  the  armoury  described  by  Alcaeus
(Frag.  1 5,  in  Bergk's  Poet  Lyr.  Gr,^  3.  p.  935;  Athenaeus,  xiv.  p.
627  b).  Linen  corselets  were  regularly  worn  by  Persian  soldiers,
according  to  Xenophon  {Cyrop,  vi.  4.  2),  who  had  good  opportunity  of
knowing  them.  Cornelius  Nepos  says  {Iphicraies^  i.)  that  Iphicrates
armed  his  light  infantry  with  linen  corselets.  On  ancient  corselets,  see
Stephani  in  Compte  Rendu  (St  Petersburg)  for  1874,  p.  182  sqq.

21.  7*  Ghrnenm,  where  Apollo  has  a  most  beantiM  grove  etc.
Gryneum  was  a  small  city  of  Aeolis  in  Asia  Minor.  It  possessed  a
sanctuary  of  Apollo  with  an  ancient  oracle  and  a  costly  temple  of  white
marble  (Strabo,  xiii.  p.  622 ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v,  Fpvvoi).  The
Grynean  grove  of  Apollo  is  mentioned  by  Virgil  (EcL  vi.  72).  It  is
described  by  Servius  (on  Virgil,  l,c,)  as  "a  place  clothed  at  all  times
with  many  trees,  reeds,  and  flowers  of  various  sorts,  and  abounding  also
in  springs."  The  sanctuary  is  mentioned  in  Pergamene  inscriptions
(FriUikel,  Inschriften  von  Pergamon^  i.  Nos.  13,  158).

22.  I.  a  temple  of  Themis.  Prof.  U.  Kohler  conjectured  {MittheiL
d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Atken^  2  (1877),  p.  256)  that  this  was  the  small
rectangular  building  of  which  the  foundations  were  discovered  on  the
middle  terrace,  to  the  west  of  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  and  immedi-
ately south  of  the  large  mediaeval  cistern  (see  above,  p.  237).  This
conjecture  was  approved  by  Prof.  Milchh6fer  (*Athen,*  p.  196).  But
it  is  now  said  that  the  building  in  question  is  not  Greek  (Miss  Harrison,
Ancient  Athens,  p.  330) ;  and  there  seems  to  be  no  other  foundation
which  would  answer  to  that  of  a  temple  between  the  sanctuary  of
Aesculapius  and  the  Music  Hall  of  Herodes  Atticus.  It  would  appear,
therefore,  that  the  temple  of  Themis,  together  with  the  sanctuaries  of
Vulgar  Aphrodite,  Earth,  and  Green  Demeter  mentioned  by  Pausanias
below  (§  3),  must  have  been  situated  at  the  south-western  foot  of  the
Acropolis,  somewhere  between  the  Music  Hall  of  Herodes  and  the
entrance  to  the  Acropolis.  But  the  exact  site  of  none  of  them  has  as  yet
been  determined.    For  other  sanctuaries  and  altars  of  Themis,  see  Index.

22.  I.  a  barrow  erected  in  memory  of  Hippolytus.  Beside  the
Acropolis  there  was  a  sanctuary  of  Aphrodite,  who  was  here  called  'Aphro-
dite in  memory  of  Hippolytus'  (c^'  *l7r7roXvr^).     This  sanctuary  was


244  BARROIV  OF  HIPPOLYTUS  bk.  i.  attica

said  to  have  been  founded  by  Phaedra  out  of  love  to  Hippolytus,  and  is
described  by  Euripides  as  being  situated  beside  the  Acropolis  and  in
sight  of  Troezen.  See  Euripides,  HippolytuSy  30  sqq,^  with  the  scholiast ;
Diodorus,  iv.  62  ;  Tzetzes,  Schol,  an  Lycophron^  1329.  An  inscription
(C  /.  A,  i.  No.  212)  seems  to  show  that  '  in  memory  of  Hippolytus'  was
the  official  designation  of  the  goddess  at  this  shrine.  It  is  natural  to
suppose  that  this  sanctuary  of  '  Aphrodite  in  memory  of  Hippolytus '
was  near  the  barrow  or  tomb  of  Hippolytus.  Euripides  has  given  two
indications  of  its  situation,  namely,  that  it  was  beside  the  Acropolis  and
within  sight  of  Troezen.  Now  the  coast  of  Troezen  is  visible  from  the
middle  terrace  on  the  south  side  of  the  Acropolis  (see  above,  p.  236  sq,) ;
but  if  you  go  further  west,  the  prospect  is  cut  ofjf  by  the  Museum  Hill.
Hence  it  has  been  supposed  that  the  sanctuary  of  <  Aphrodite  in  memory
of  Hippolytus '  was  on  the  middle  terrace,  immediately  to  the  west  of
the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius.  To  this  view  it  has  been  objected  that
there  are  no  foundations  of  a  temple  on  this  terrace.  But  ancient
writers  (with  the  exception  of  Tzetzes,  /.r.,  whose  authority  is  worth  very
little)  speak,  not  of  a  temple,  but  only  of  a  sanctuary  of  Aphrodite,  which
may  have  been  merely  an  enclosure  with  an  altar.  If,  however,  the
sanctuary  of  *■  Aphrodite  in  memory  of  Hippolytus '  was  on  this  middle
terrace,  it  can  hardly  have  been,  as  was  suggested  above,  near  the
barrow  of  Hippolytus ;  for  the  barrow  was  near  the  temple  of  Themis,
and,  as  we  have  seen,  there  are  no  foundations  of  a  temple  on  this
terrace.  The  sanctuary  of  '  Aphrodite  in  memory  of  Hippolytus '  is  not
mentioned  by  Pausanias.  It  was  formerly,  indeed,  believed  to  be
identical  with  the  sanctuary  of  Vulgar  Aphrodite  mentioned  by  him
below ;  but  this  appears  to  be  a  mistake  (see  note  on  §  3).  Cp.  Wachs-
muth.  Die  Stadt  Atken,  i.  p.  245  sq. ;  Dyer,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  346
sq,i  Milchhdfer,  *Athen,*  p.  196;  Lolling,  *Athen,*  p.  330;  Miss
Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  328  sqq, ;  P.  Foucart,  in  Bull,  de  Corr,
Hellhi.  13  (1889),  p.  156  sq,

22.  I.  his  death  was  brought  about  by  curses.  Poseidon  had
promised  Theseus  that  he  would  fulfil  any  three  prayers  which  Theseus
might  make  to  him.  Accordingly  when  Theseus,  misled  by  Phaedra's
slander,  cursed  his  son  Hippolytus,  Poseidon  fulfilled  the  curse  by
sending  a  sea-monster  which  frightened  the  horses  of  Hippolytus,  and
so  led  to  his  death.  See  Euripides,  Hippolytus^  43  sqq,^  887  sqq.y
1 1 66  sqq,

22.  I.  how  the  nurse  sought  to  serve  her  by  a  bold  bad  deed.
The  nurse  attempted  in  vain  to  persuade  Hippolytus  to  gratify  Phaedra's
guilty  passion  for  him.  See  Euripides,  Hippolytus^  433  sqq.  The
scene  between  the  nurse  and  Hippolytus  is  represented  on  existing  wall-
paintings  and  on  the  sculptured  reliefs  of  sarcophaguses.

See  O.  Jahn,  Archdologische  Btitrdge^  p.  300  sqq. ;  Monumenti  Inediii^  6
(1857),  pi.  i.  ;  H.  Brunn,  *  Hippolito  e  Fedra,'  Annali  delt  Institute^  29  (1857),
p.  36  sqq,\  H.  Hinck,  *Due  sarcofaghi  riferibili  al  mito  d*  Ippolito  e  Fedra,*
Annali  delt  Institute,  39  (1867),  p.  109/^. ;  A.  Kalkmann,  *  Ueber  Darstellungen
der  Hippolytos-Sage,*  Archdologische  Zeitung,  41  (1883),  PP-  37-8o,  105-154;
Roscher's  Lexikon,  i.  p.  2685  sq.


CH.  XXII  VULGAR  APHRODITE  245

22.  I.  The  Troezenians  have  also  a  grave  of  Hippolytus.  See
ii.  32.  4.

22.  2.  Pallas  and  his  sons  revolted  against  Theseus  etc.  See
Euripides,  Hippolytus^  35  sqg, ;  Philochorus,  quoted  by  the  scholiast  on
Euripides,  Lc,  ;  Plutarch,  Theseus^  1 3 ;  A.  Bruckner,  *  Das  Reich  des
Pallas,'  MitthtiL  cL  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  16  (1891),  pp.  200-234.  Cp.
Paus.  i.  28.  10.

22.  2.  and  laid  the  plot  of  death.  By  accusing  him  falsely  of
having  attempted  her  virtue.     See  Euripides,  HippolytuSy  857  sqq,

22.  2.  There  is  a  myrtle-tree  at  Troezen  etc.     See  ii.  32.  3.

22.  3.  Vulgar  Aphrodite.  Cp.  vi.  25.  i,  note ;  viii.  32.  2  ;  ix.  16.
3  sq.  According  to  Apollodorus,  cited  by  Harpocration  {s,v.  iravS-qfios
'A^/9o^tT7/),  Aphrodite  was  called  Vulgar  (Pandemos)  at  Athens  because
her  image  stood  in  the  ancient  market-place,  where  all  the  people  used
to  meet  in  public  assembly.  A  second  explanation  of  the  title  was  that
Solon  had  established  public  brothels  and  with  the  produce  had  founded
a  sanctuary  of  Vulgar  Aphrodite  (Nicander,  cited  by  Harpocration,  l.c.
and  by  Athenaeus,  xiii.  p.  569  d).  A  third  explanation  is  given  by
Pausanias  in  the  present  passage.  In  modem  times  it  has  been  held
that  Vulgar  Aphrodite  was  identical  with  the  '  Aphrodite  in  memory  of
Hippolytus'  (see  note  on  §  i),  the  latter  being  her  official  title,  the
former  merely  a  popular  epithet.  See  U.  Kohler  in  MittheiL  d,  arch,
Inst,  in  Athen^  2  (1877),  p.  247;  A.  Milchh6fer,  'Athen,'  p.  196;
Lolling,  'Athen,'  p.  330.  This  view  has,  however,  been  disproved  by
the  discovery  of  an  inscription  in  which  the  epithet  *  Vulgar '  {Pandemos)
is  applied  to  Aphrodite  as  an  official  title.  The  inscription,  which  was
found  in  1888  at  the  western  foot  of  the  Acropolis,  between  the  bastion
on  which  rests  the  temple  of  Victory  and  the  southern  bastion  of  Beul^s
gate  to  the  Acropolis,  contains  a  decree  of  the  Council  to  the  effect  that
at  the  time  of  the  procession  in  honour  of  Vulgar  Aphrodite  the  Com-
missioners of  Public  Works  {astunomot)  should  provide  a  dove  for  the
purification  of  the  sanctuary,  anoint  the  altars,  give  the  roofs  a  coat  of
pitch,  wash  the  images,  and  provide  a  certain  weight  of  purple  dye.
This  decree  was  proposed  by  Hermeus  "  in  order  that  the  Commissioners
of  Public  Works  for  the  time  being  may  take  care  of  the  sanctuary  of
Vulgar  Aphrodite  according  to  the  customs  of  our  fathers."  The  decree
is  dated  in  the  priesthood  of  a  lady,  Hegesipyle,  and  in  the  archonship
of  Euthius  (284/3  B-C.)  See  AcXribv  o.pxa.wi\o^iKoVy  1888,  p.  187  sq,  ;
Bull,  de  Corr,  Hellin,  13(1889),  p.  162  sqq,\  Berliner  philolog,  Wochen-
schrifty  9  (1889),  p.  234.  In  1889  there  was  found,  in  the  same  place,
another  inscription  relating  to  the  worship  of  Vulgar  Aphrodite.  It
contains  a  dedication  to  **  great,  august  Vulgar  Aphrodite  "  by  a  certain
Archinus  and  a  priestess  named  Menecretia,  daughter  of  Dexicrates,  of
the  township  Icaria.  The  inscription  is  mutilated,  and  the  name  of  the
deity  whom  Menecratia  served  as  priestess  is  lost.  But  if,  as  is  highly
probable,  the  deity  was  Vulgar  Aphrodite,  the  inscription  proves  that
the  priestess  of  Vulgar  Aphrodite  was  a  true-bom  Athenian  burgess.
The  inscription,  which  seems  to  date  from  the  fourth  century  B.C.,  is  cut
on  what  appears  to  have  been  the  cornice  of  a  building.     Above  the


246  VULGAR  APHRODITE  bk.  i.  attica

inscription  three  doves  are  carved  in  relief;  and  at  the  back  of  the  blocks
composing  the  cornice  are  the  holes  in  which  the  roof-beams  were
probably  fitted.  As  the  cornice  appears  to  have  rested  on  a  wall,  not
on  pillars,  the  late  Dr.  Lolling  thought  that  the  building  was  not  a
temple,  but  that  it  may  have  been  a  house  for  the  priestess  and  other
officials  of  the  sanctuary.  See  AcXrtbv  Q^\a.ixikonfiK(iy^  1889,  pp.
127-129;  Bull,  de  Carr.  HelUn.  13  (1889),  p.  160  sqq.  Another
inscription,  found  in  the  same  place  and  at  the  same  time  (1889)
as  the  preceding,  contains  another  dedication  to  Aphrodite,  but  in  it
the  goddess  does  not  bear  the  surname  of  Vulgar  {Pandemos).
The  inscription  seems  to  date  from  the  sixth  century  or  the
beginning  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  See  AcXriov  ap\aio\oyiK6vf
1889,  p.  126  sq. ;  BulLde  Corr,  Hellhi,  13  (1889),  p.  159  sq.  The  dis-
covery of  these  three  inscriptions  dose  to  the  western  entrance  of  the
Acropolis  makes  it  probable  that  the  sanctuary  of  Vulgar  Aphrodite
was  in  this  neighbourhood.  According  to  Apollodorus,  as  we  have
seen,  the  image  of  Vulgar  Aphrodite  stood  "in  the  ancient  market-
place." It  is  possible  that  die  market-place  at  one  time  extended
up  to  the  western  foot  of  the  Acropolis ;  but  it  is  perhaps  more
probable  that  ApoUodorus's  statement  as  to  the  old  market-place
was  nothing  more  than  an  inference  from  the  surname  Pandemos
(literally,  *of  all  the  people')  borne  by  the  goddess.  At  all  events
it  seems  clear  that  the  sanctuary  of  Vulgar  Aphrodite  must  be  dis-
tinguished from  the  sanctuary  of  '  Aphrodite  in  memory  of  Hippolytus '
(see  note  on  §  i),  since  we  now  know  from  inscriptions  that  both  titles
(*  Vulgar*  and  *in  memory  of  Hippolytus ')  were  official  designations  of
the  goddess,  and  she  could  hardly  have  borne  two  distinct  official  titles
at  the  same  shrine.  Cp.  P.  Foucart,  '  Inscriptions  de  I'Acropole.  Le
temple  d' Aphrodite  Pand^os,'  Bull,  de  Corr,  Hellhi,  13  (1889),  p.  156
sqq, ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  pp.  328-334.  Some  marble
doves  which  have  been  found  on  the  slope  of  die  Acropolis  {MittheiL  d.
arch,  Inst,  in  A  then,  2  (1877),  p.  248)  may  have  been  offerings  dedicated
in  one  or  other  of  these  sanctuaries  of  Aphrodite.  That  the  dove  was
holy  to  Aphrodite  is  well  known  ;  its  special  relation  to  Vulgar  Aphrodite
is  proved  by  the  provision  for  cleansing  her  sanctuary  with  a  dove,  as
well  as  by  the  carvings  on  the  cornice  of  a  building  dedicated  to  her
(see  above).

22.  3.  Persnaaion.  A  sacrifice  was  annually  offered  to  the  goddess
Persuasion  (Isocrates,  xv.  249).  Her  priestess  seems  to  have  had  a
special  seat  in  the  theatre  (C  I,  A,  iii.  No.  351).  There  was  a  sanctuary
of  Persuasion  at  Sicyon  (ii.  7,  7)y  and  another  in  the  island  of  Thasos,
as  we  learn  from  an  archaic  inscription  {Bull,  de  Corr,  HelUn,  6  (1882),

P-  443)-

22.  3.  a  sanctnary  of  Earth,  the  Nursing-Mother,  and  of  Chreen
Demeter.  It  is  said  that  the  first  to  sacrifice  to  Earth  the  Nursing -
Mother  on  the  Acropolis  was  Erichthonius,  who  set  up  an  altar
to  her  and  made  a  rule  that  when  people  were  sacrificing  to  any
god  they  should  first  sacrifice  to  Earth  the  Nursing-Mother  (Suidas,
s,v,  KovpoTp6<f>osy      The  lads    {ephebot)  sacrificed    to    the  Nursing-


CH.  XXII  GREEN  DEMETER  247

Mother  on  the  Acropolis  {C.I,  A.  ii.  No.  481,  line  58  sq,)  In  a  frag-
mentary inscription  found  on  the  Acropolis  the  sacrifice  of  a  pig  to
Earth  the  Nursing-Mother  appears  to  be  prescribed  (C  /.  A.  i.  No.  4).
Another  stone,  found  in  a  Turkish  bastion  near  the  temple  of  Wingless
Victory,  bears  the  inscription  :  "  Entrance  to  the  shrine  of  Blaute  and
the  Nursing-Mother"  (C  /.  A,  iii.  No.  411).  {Blaute  was  the  name  of
a  kind  of  sandal,  and  there  was  a  hero,  ghost,  or  spirit  at  Athens  called
'  the  hero  of  the  blaute  or  sandal,'  because  a  shoemaker  had  dedicated
a  model  of  a  blaute  in  stone.  See  Pollux,  vii.  87.  Blaute  is  described
as  "a  place  in  Athens"  by  Hesychius,  s,v,  pkavrrj,)  Another  stone
with  a  fragmentary  inscription,  which  was  to  be  seen  in  the  portal  of
the  Acropolis  a  few  years  ago,  is  supposed  to  have  marked  the  boundary
of  the  precinct  of  Earth  the  Nursing-Mother  (CI. A.  iv.  No.  555c,
p.  55  ;  Kohler,  in  MittheiL  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  2  (1877),  p.  177).
Solon  spoke  of  Earth  as  the  "buxom  Nursing-Mother"  (Frag.  43  in
Beiigk's  Poetae  Lyrici  Graeci^  2.  p.  438).  Cp.  EtymoL  Magnum^
p.  529,  line  50.

That  the  sanctuary  of  Green  Demeter  was  near  the  entrance  to
the  Acropolis  appears  from  a  passage  in  Aristophanes  (Lysistrata^  831
sqq.\  where  the  women,  who  are  supposed  to  have  taken  possession  of
the  Acropolis,  see  a  man  hurrying  up  the  slope,  beside  the  sanctuary  of
the  Green  Goddess.  The  scholiast  on  this  passage  of  Aristophanes
explains  that  the  Green  Goddess  is  Green  Demeter,  who  had  a  sanctuary
"  on  the  Acropolis,"  in  which  the  Athenians  sacrificed  in  the  month
of  Thargelion  ;  the  authority  to  whom  the  scholiast  refers  is  Philochorus.
The  scholiast  on  Sophocles  (Oed,  Col,  1600)  describes  the  sanctuary  of
Green  Demeter  more  correctly  as  "  near  or  beside  the  Acropolis,"  and
quotes  a  passage  of  Eupolis,  "  I  will  go  straight  to  the  Acropolis  ;  for  I
must  sacrifice  a  ram  to  Green  Demeter."  He  adds  that  the  worship
had  reference  to  the  greenery  of  gardens ;  and  that  sacrifices  were
offered  to  the  goddess  on  the  sixth  of  Thargelion  (mid-May  to  mid-
June).  An  inscription  found  to  the  south  of  the  present  entrance  to  the
Acropolis  records  that  a  certain  Isodotus,  in  obedience  to  an  admonition
received  in  a  dream,  had  dedicated  an  image  of  the  Nursing-Mother  to
Green  Demeter  and  the  Maid  (Proserpine)  (AcXriov  Q.p\o.io\Qr^iKoyy
1889,  p.  130).  Another  inscription,  found  in  the  same  place,  records  a
dedication  to  Green  Demeter  by  a  priestess  named  Nicobule  (AcAt.
a/>XatoA.  l.c, ;  cp.  Bull,  de  Corr,  HelUn,  13  (1889),  p.  167  sq,)  Another
inscription,  containing  a  metrical  oracle,  mentions  the  sanctuary  of
Green  Demeter  as  situated  at  the  highest  part  of  the  city ;  it  was  found
in  1889  to  the  south-west  of  the  Victory  bastion  {Mittheil,  d.  arch,  Inst,
in  Athen^  18  (1893),  pp.  192-198).  The  discovery  of  these  inscriptions,
coupled  with  the  evidence  of  Aristophanes  and  Pausanias,  maJces  it
practically  certain  that  the  sanctuary  of  Green  Demeter  was  close  to
the  main  (western)  entrance  to  the  Acropolis.  A  third  Athenian  inscrip-
tion containing  a  dedication  to  Green  Demeter  is  preserved  (C.  /.  A,  iii.
No.  191).  The  priestess  of  Green  Demeter  had  a  seat  reserved  for  her
in  the  theatre  (C  /.  A,  iii.  No.  349),  and  received  certain  allowances  of
flesh,  wheat,  honey,  oil,  firewood,  etc  {CIA,  ii.  No.  631).     The  name


248  THE  ACROPOLIS  bk.  i.  attica

of  Green  Demeter  appears  to  occur  in  a  treasure-list  (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.
722).

Athens  was  not  the  only  place  where  Green  Demeter  was  worshipped.
In  the  island  of  Myconus  two  sows  (one  of  them  pregnant)  used  to  be
sacrificed  to  Green  Demeter  on  the  twelfth  day  of  the  month  Poseidon
(Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec.  No.  373) ;  and  Comutus  {De  natura
deoruniy  28)  says  that  in  spring  men  sacrifice  to  Green  Demeter  with
mirth  and  gladness  at  sight  of  the  green  earth  with  its  promise  of
abundance.

Pausanias  implies  that  at  Athens  Earth  the  Nursing-Mother  and
Green  Demeter  shared  a  single  sanctuary.  This  is  not  borne  out  by
the  evidence  of  the  other  ancient  writers  and  of  the  inscriptions  referred
to  above,  which  goes  rather  to  show  that  these  goddesses  had  separate
sanctuaries.  But  if  the  sanctuaries  were  separate,  they  were  probably
beside  each  other,  and  situated  near  the  western  approach  to  the  Acro-
polis. Cp.  Leake,  Athens^  i.  p.  302  sqq, ;  Wachsmuth,  Die  StcuU
Athen^  i.  p.  246  sq,\  T^ytx^  Ancient  Aihensy  "p,  349;  U.  Kohler,  in
MittheiL  <L  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  2  (1877),  p.  177  ;  Milchhdfer,  *  Athen,'
p.    197;  Lolling,   *Athen,'  p.   330;    Miss   Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^

P-  334  sq.

Earth  was  not  the  only  goddess  whom  the  Greeks  called  'the
Nursing-Mother'  (KovpoTp6<f)osy  We  find  the  same  epithet  applied  to
Demeter  {Orphic  HymnSy  xL  2  ;  Hesychius,  s,v,  KovpoTp6<f)os),  Latona
(Theocritus,  xviii.  50),  Artemis  (Diodorus,  v.  73  ;  Orphic  HymnSy  xxxvi.
8 ;  cp.  Paus.  iv.  34.  6),  Hecate  (Hesiod,  Theog.  450 ;  Apollonius
Rhodius,  iii.  861,  with  the  Scholiast),  Aphrodite  {AnthoL  Palat,  vi.
318  ;  [Herodotus,]  Life  of  Homers  30  ;  Athenaeus,  xiii.  p.  592  a).  Peace
(Hesiod,  Works  cmd  Days^  228;  Euripides,  Bacchae^  419),  and  the
Nymphs  (Servius,  on  Virgil,  Ed.  x.  62).  See  Stephani,  in  Compte  Rendu
(St.  Petersburg)  for  1859,  pp.  133-136  (from  whom  the  references  just
given  are  borrowed).

22.  4.  There  is  but  one  entrance  to  the  Acropolis  etc.  The
Acropolis  of  Athens  is  a  long  and  lofty  mass  of  rock  extending  east  and
west  On  the  north  and  east  it  is  naturally  steep,  but  on  the  south  side
its  slope  was  originally  much  more  gradual  than  at  present.  Hence  to
strengthen  the  fortress  on  the  south  side  recourse  was  had  to  art  The
face  of  the  rock  on  the  western  half  of  the  south  side,  above  the  sanctu-
ary of  Aesculapius,  was  scarped ;  while  on  the  eastern  half  of  the  same
side,  above  the  Dionysiac  theatre,  a  lofty  wall  was  built.  On  its  western
side  the  Acropolis  slopes  gently  down  towards  the  Areopagus,  and  here
was  always,  at  least  in  historical  times,  the  public  entrance  to  the
fortress.  There  was,  indeed,  a  staircase  leading  down  from  the  north
side  of  the  Acropolis  to  the  sanctuary  of  Aglaurus  (see  note  on  i.  1 8.
2)  ;  and  a  little  to  the  east  of  this  staircase  there  is  a  natural  rift  in  the
rock  in  which  another  staircase  was  built  in  the  middle  ages.  But
neither  of  these  approaches  was  open  to  the  public.  In  addition  there
is  a  prehistoric  staircase  leading  down  to  the  lower  town  from  a  point
to  the  east  of  the  Erechtheum ;  it  was  discovered  a  few  years  ago.

The  top  of  the  Acropolis  is  a  plateau  which  rises  somewhat  towards


KEY   TO   PLAN    OF   ACROPOLIS


X.  Gate  excavated  by  Beuld.

2.  Altar.

3.  Polygonal  walL

4.  Modern  entrance  (now  disused).

4a.  Low  step  and  niche  cut  in  rock ;

probably  the  shrine  of  Aegeus  (see

vol.  2.  p.  262).
Temple  of  Wingless  Victory.
Propylaea.

Monument  of  Agrippa.
Passage  to  Clepsydra  spring.
Health Athena(seevol.  2.  p.  ajysqq.).
Cistern.

Water-channel
Pdasgian  fortiBcation-wall.
Precinct  of  Brauronian  Artemis.
Rock-cut  steps.

Ckalkothekel  (see  vol.  2.  p.  297).
Staircase  in  wall.
Supporting  wall.
Ancient  building.
Offerings  of  Attains.
Modem  museum.

Foundations  under  '  Small  Museum. '
Parthenon.
Terrace  steps.
Fruit-bearing  Earth   (see  vol.  2.  p.

299).
Cisterns.
26.  Temple  of  Rome  and  Augustus  (see

voL  2.  p.  320  sq. ).
Terrace  (highest  point).
Modem  outwork.
Foundations  of  prehistoric  palace.
Staircase  and  entrance.
Erechtheum.
Paved  terrace.
Cuttings  in  rock.
Old  temple  of  Athena  (Pre- Persian

temple).


5-
6.

7.
8.

9-
10.

II.

12.

13.
14.

15-
16.

18.

19-
20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

as


27.
28.
29.
30.
31-
3a.
33.
34.


35-
36.
37.
38.

39-
40.

41.

42.

43-
44.

45-
46.

47-
48.
49.

50-

51-

5a.

53-

54-

55-
56.

57-
58.

59.
60.

61.

62.

63.
64.

65.

66.


Foundations  of  Pelasgian  dwellings.
Rectangular  building.
Hall  with  cistern  below  it.
Staircase  leading  from  Acropolis  to

precinct  of  Aglaurus.
Ancient  well-house.
Position  of  great  bronze  image  of

Athena  (Athena  Promachos),

Theatre  of  Dionysus.

Ancient  circular  orchestra.

Two  temples  of  Dionysus.

Monument  of  Thrasyllus  (see  vol.  2.
p.  230  sq. ).

Columns  which  supported  tripods
(see  vol.  2.  p.  232).

Sanctuary  of  Aesculapius.

Grotto  and  spring.

Shaft  of  well?  (see  vol.  2.  p.  236).

Terrace-wall  with  boundary  inscrip-
tion (see  vol.  2.  p.  236  sq. ).

Colonnade  of  Eimienes  (see  vol.  2.
p.  240  sq. ).

Music  Hall  of  Herodes  Atticus  (see
vol.  2.  p.  241  sq.).

Clepsydra  spring.

Cave  of  Apollo.

Cave.

Subterranean  winding  passage.

Cleft  in  the  rock  with  staircase.

Inscribed  rock.

Votive  niches  in  the  rock.

Hollows  in  the  rock.

Ruined  chapel  of  the  Seraphim.

Chapel  of  St.  Simeon.

Chapel  of  St.  George.

Remains  of  ancient  walls.


}


Ancient  road.


L


SanOrdi  Sfog'-EstafL'nJm


CH.  XXII  THE  PROPYLAEA  2Al^

the  east,  attaining  its  highest  point  (512  feet  above  the  sea)  to  the
north-east  of  the  Parthenon.  The  length  of  the  plateau  from  east  to
west  is  about  300  metres  (328  yards) ;  its  greatest  breadth  from  north
to  south,  after  the  artificial  elevation  of  the  south  side,  is  about  135
metres  (148  yards).

See  Milchhofer,  *Athen,'  p.  200;  Lolling,  *Athen,'  p.  336;  E.
Curtius,  Stadtgeschichte^  p.  49.

The  antiquary  Polemo  wrote  a  work  in  four  books  on  the  votive
offerings  in  the  Acropolis  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  396) ;  and  the  Athenian
Heliodorus,  who  wrote  some  time  after  the  reign  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes
(175-164  B.C.),  devoted  fifteen  books  to  the  description  of  the  Acropolis
(Athenaeus,  vi.  p.  229  e ;  cp.  Frag,  Hist,  Graec,  ed.  Muller,  4.  p.  425).
It  is  probable  that  Pausanias  consulted  these  works  in  writing  his  own
account  of  the  Acropolis ;  at  least  if  he  did  not,  he  should  have  done  so.
But  we  have  no  positive  evidence  that  he  did.  Of  modem  books,
besides  those  which  deal  with  the  topography  of  Athens  in  general,
there  are  special  works  on  the  Acropolis  by  E.  Beul^  {BAcropole
(PAthhus^  Paris,  1853)  and  Mr.  Adolf  Botticher  {Die  Akropolis  von
Athen^  Berlin,  1888).  Pausanias's  description  of  the  Acropolis  has  been
edited  separately,  enriched  with  plans,  elevations,  and  a  most  useful
collection  of  illustrative  passages  from  ancient  authors  and  inscriptions,
by  Otto  Jahn  and  Prof.  A.  Michaelis  {Pausaniae  Descriptio  arcis
Athenarum^  ed.  O.  Jahn.  Editio  altera  recognita  ab  Ad.  Michaelis,
Bonnae,  1880).

22.  4*  The  portal  (Propylaea)  has  a  roof  of  white  marble  etc.
The  great  portal  of  the  Acropolis,  the  remains  of  which  are  still  amongst
the  most  splendid  monuments  of  ancient  Greece,  was  built  under  the
administration  of  Pericles  in  the  fifth  century  B.c.  The  architect  was
Mnesicles.  We  are  told  that  the  building  was  begun  in  the  archonship
of  Euthymenes  (437/6  B.C.)  and  completed  in  five  years,  and  that  the
sum  spent  on  it  was  2012  talents  or  about  ;£424,ooo  (Harpocration
and  Suidas,  s,v.  irpoirvkaia :  Plutarch,  PericUsy  13;  cp.  Thucydides,
ii.  13;  Diodorus,  xii.  40 ;  Plutarch,  De  gloria  Atheniensiunty  8 ;
Schol.  on  Demosthenes,  iii.  25,  p.  35).  It  was  always  reckoned,  with
the  Parthenon,  among  the  glories  of  Athens  (Demosthenes,  xxii.  13,  p.
597  >  i<i'y  xxiii.  207,  p.  689 ;  Phoenicides,  cited  by  Athenaeus,  xiv.  p.
652  d  ;  Cicero,  De  re  publico^  iii.  32.  44  ;  Plutarch,  De  gloria  Atheni-
ensium,  7  ;  Dio  Chrysostom,  Or,  ii.  vol.  i.  p.  27,  ed.  Dindorf ;  Himerius,
Eel.  xxxi.  8).  Epaminondas  told  the  Thebans  that  they  should  carry
off  the  portal  to  Thebes  and  set  it  up  before  the  Cadmea  (Aeschines,  ii.
105).  Fragments  of  the  accounts  of  the  moneys  expended  on  the  con-
struction of  the  portal  have  been  preserved  in  inscriptions  (C.  /.  A.  i.  Nos.
3 1 4,  3 1 5  ;  cp.  C  /.  A,  iv.  No.  315  a  b  c ;  Jahn-Michaelis,  Pausaniae
descriptio  arcis,  p.  39),  One  of  these  inscriptions  (C  /.  A,  i.  No.  314)
mentions  the  archonship  of  Euthymenes  (437/6  B.C.),  thus  confirming
the  date  assigned  by  our  authorities  to  the  commencement  of  the
building.

The  present  entrance  to  the  Acropolis  is  through  the  gate  which  is
known  as  Beul^s  Gate,  from  the  French  archaeologist  E.  Beuld,  who


250  THE  PROPYLAEA  bk.  i.  attica

discovered  it  in  1853,  the  gate  having  been  down  to  that  time
concealed  within  the  wall  of  a  Turkish  fortification.  This  gate-
way is  exactly  opposite  and  parallel  to  the  central  portico  of  the
great  portal  (Propylaea).  It  consists  of  a  marble  wall  pierced  with  a
Doric  doorway  and  flanked  by  two  square  towers  built  of  conmion
stone.  It  total  breadth  is  less  than  23  metres  (75  ft  5  in.)  The
doorway  is  3.87  metres  (12  ft  6  in.)  high  by  1.75  metres  (5J  feet)
wide;  it  lies  exactly  in  the  axis  of  the  central  opening  of  the  great
portal  (Propylaea).  The  marble  wall  which  forms  the  central  part  of
Beul^s  gate  is  constructed  of  blocks  brought  from  a  monument  which,
as  we  learn  from  the  inscription  built  in  above  the  gate  (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.
1 246),  was  erected  by  Nicias,  son  of  Nicodemus,  in  commemoration  of  a
scenic  victory  won  by  him  with  a  chorus  in  the  archonship  of  Neaechmus
(320/19  B.C.)  From  the  remains  of  this  monument  built  into  the
gate  and  lying  around  Dr.  D5rpfeld  was  able  to  restore  its  plan.  It
resembled  the  front  of  a  temple,  with  six  Doric  columns  supporting  a
Doric  architrave  with  a  rather  low  gable  (pediment).  When  first
discovered,  the  mutules  and  triglyghs  still  retained  a  colouring  of  red
and  blue.  Dr.  D5rpfeld  conjectures  that  the  monument  of  Nicias  stood
on  the  slope  of  the  Acropolis  at  a  point  inunediately  to  the  north-east  of
the  Music  Hall  of  Herodes  Atticus.  Here  there  are  strong  and  well-
built  foundations,  which  Dr.  Dorpfeld  holds  to  be  those  of  the  monument
of  Nicias.  He  conjectures  that  the  old  road  from  the  sanctuary  of
Aesculapius  to  the  Acropolis  passed  over  the  ground  now  occupied  by
the  Music  Hall  of  Herodes  Atticus ;  and  that  hence  when  the  Music
Hall  was  built  (about  161  A.D.)  the  line  of  the  road  had  to  be  deflected
and  carried  round  the  north-east  side  of  the  Music  HalL  This  would
necessitate  the  pulling  down  of  Nicias's  monument  which  blocked  the
way.  Hence  Dr.  Dorpfeld  concludes  that  the  monument  of  Nicias  was
taken  down  and  Beul^s  gate  constructed  out  of  its  materials  at  the
same  time  that  the  Music  Hall  of  Herodes  Atticus  was  built,  namely
about  161  A.D.

See  E.  Beul^,  VAcropoU  (TAtkhus^  i.  p.  99  sqq,  ;  Dyer,  Anctent  Athens^  p.
358  5^^'  ;  W.  Dorpfeld,  '  Das  choragische  Monument  des  Nikias,'  MittheiL  d.
arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  10  (1885),  pp.  219-230;  U.  Kohler,  'Die  choregische
Inschrift  des  Nikias,'  ib,  pp.  231-236 ;  Guide  Joanne^  i.  p.  41  sq.  ;  Baedeker,'  p.
59 ;  W.  Dorpfeld,  '  Zum  cnoregischen  Monumente  des  Kikias,'  MittheiL  d,  arch.
Inst,  in  A  then,  14  (1889),  pp.  63-66 ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  pp.  344-350.

From  the  inside  of  Benin's  Gate  a  ruined  marble  staircase,  72  feet
in  width,  leads  up  to  the  portal  (Propylaea).  The  staircase  is  of
Roman  date  and  concealed  the  original  ascent,  which  seems,  from  its
remains,  to  have  been  a  path  winding  up  the  rocky  slope.  At  the  head
of  this  staircase  we  reach  the  portal  (Propylaea).  This  magnificent
structure  of  Pentelic  marble,  the  greater  part  of  which  is  still  standing,
consists  of  a  central  portion  £^cing  a  little  to  the  south  of  west,  with  two
wings  flanking  the  approach  to  it  on  the  north-west  and  south-west.

The  central  portion  contains  the  portal  proper,  which  is  a  wall
pierced  by  five  openings.  The  middle  opening  or  chief  gateway  is
24  fl.  2  in.  high  and  13  ft.  8  in.  wide ;  the  two  gateways  on  either  side


CH.  3(XII  THE  PROPYLASA  351

of  it  are  17  ft.  8  in.  high  and  9  J  ft.  wide ;  and  the  two  side  gateways
are  1 1  ft.  3  in.  high  and  4  ft.  9  in.  wide.  These  five  gateways  were
dosed  by  massive  gates.     Before  and  behind  this  wall  with  its  five


openings  were  porticos.  The  outer  or  western  portico,  about  59  feet
wide  by  49  feet  deep,  has  six  Doric  columns  in  faxA  and  two  rows  of
Ionic  columns  (three  columns  in  each  row)  in  the  interior.    The  two  rows


252  THE  PROPYLAEA  bk.  i.  attica

of  Ionic  columns  are  at  right  angles  to  the  front  row  of  Doric  columns,
and  flank  the  central  passage  which  runs  through  the  portico  to  the
middle  or  chief  gateway.  The  Doric  columns  in  front  are  28  ft.  high,
and  vary  in  diameter  from  5  ft.  3  in.  at  the  bottom  to  3  ft.  11  in.  under
the  capital.  The  flutes,  separated  by  sharp  edges,  are  twenty  on  each
column.  These  front  colunms,  being  Doric,  have  no  bases  but  rise
directly  from  the  stylobate.  The  two  colunms  at  the  ends  of  the  row
retain  their  capitals  with  pieces  of  the  architrave.  The  four  middle
columns  have  lost  their  capitals  as  well  as  the  architrave.  The  space
between  the  two  central  columns  is  12  ft.  7  in. ;  while  the  intervals
between  the  other  colunms  vary  from  5  ft.  10^  in.  to  6  ft.  7  in.  The
Ionic  columns  in  the  interior  of  the  portico  have,  of  course,  bases.
They  were  originally  33  ft.  7  in.  high.  Their  shafts  measure  3  ft.  2  in.
in  diameter  at  the  base  and  have  twenty-four  flutes  separated  by  blunt
edges.  These  Ionic  columns,  of  which  the  capitals  are  now  wanting,  sup-
ported the  marble  roof  which  Pausanias  admired  so  much.  Many  of  the
marble  coffers  of  the  ceiling  are  preserved  and  exhibit  clearly  the
[>attem  of  the  golden  stars  which  adorned  them.  They  mostly  lie
inside  the  portal,  on  its  north-eastern  side.  The  portico  rests  on  four
high  steps  ;  but  the  central  passage  through  it,  instead  of  having  steps,
rises  gradually,  so  that  chariots  could  drive  up  it ;  the  ruts  in  which  the
wheels  ran  can  still  be  seen  in  the  rock.  At  the  inner  side  (back)  of
the  portico,  a  flight  of  five  steps  leads  up  to  the  four  side  gateways ;
each  step  is  about  a  foot  high ;  the  first  four  steps  are  of  Pentelic
marble,  the  uppermost  is  of  black  Eleusinian  stone.  The  middle  gate-
way, through  which  the  main  roadway  passes,  is  without  steps,  so  that
chariots  could  drive  through  it.  The  inner  or  eastern  portico,  into
which  the  five  gateways  open,  has  the  same  width  (59  feet)  as  the
western  portico,  but  it  is  shallower,  its  depth  being  only  19  feet.  Like
the  western  portico  it  has  six  Doric  columns  in  front ;  they  rest  on  a
stylobate  which  is  raised  by  two  steps  above  the  central  roadway.  Five
of  these  columns  still  bear  their  capitals,  and  two  of  them  are  still
joined  by  a  block  of  the  architrave.

The  north-west  wing,  the  best-preserved  part  of  the  whole  structure,
consists  of  a  chamber  nearly  square  (35  ft  3  in.  by  29  ft.  5  in.)  with  a
portico  (35  ft.  3  in.  wide  by  13  ft.  deep)  on  its  southern  side.  As  this
portico  faces  south,  it  is  at  right  angles  to  the  outer  portico  of  the
central  building,  which  faces  west.  Its  front  is  composed  of  three
Doric  columns  between  antae.  The  columns  are  19  ft.  high,  and  vary
in  diameter  from  3^  feet  at  the  base  to  2^  feet  under  the  capitals.
They  still  support  the  architrave  and  a  plain  frieze  of  triglyphs  and
metopes.  The  walls  of  the  square  chamber  at  the  back  of  this  portico
are  still  preserved  to  their  full  height  The  chamber  was  lighted  from
the  portico  by  a  door  and  two  windows  in  the  partition  wall.  The  door
is  14  ft.  high  and  9  ft.  4  in.  wide.  Curiously  enough  the  two  windows
are  not  placed  symmetrically  with  regard  to  the  door.  This  square
chamber  was  probably  the  room  in  which  were  the  paintings  described
by  Pausanias.  Hence  in  modem  times  it  is  commonly  known  as  the
Pinakotheke^  or  picture  gallery.     As  the  walls  show  no  trace  of  having


CH.  XXII  THE  PROPYLAEA  253


been  prepared  to  receive  stucco,  it  is  supposed  that  the  pictures  must
have  been  easel-pieces,  not  wall-paintings.

The  south-western  wing  is  much  smaller  than  the  north-western  one,
consisting  merely  of  a  portico  facing  north,  without  any  chamber  behind
it.  The  front  of  the  portico  corresponds  to  and  matches  with  the  front
of  the  north-western  portico  which  faces  it ;  it  consists  of  three  Doric
columns  between  antiu.  But  the  portico  itself  is  not  so  long  as  its
front ;  its  back  wall  stops,  not  opposite  the  western  anta^  but  opposite
the  third  column,  with  which  it  is  joined  by  an  architrave.  Thus  the
western  ania  was  a  mere  sham ;  it  had  no  wall  behind  it  and  was
clearly  erected  merely  to  make  the  front  of  the  south-west  wing  match
the  front  of  the  north-west  wing,  that  the  eyes  of  persons  ascending  to
the  portal  might  not  be  offended  by  the  want  of  symmetry  between  the
wings.  Hence,  though  the  fronts  of  the  two  wings  match  each  other,
the  south-west  wing  is  smaller  than  the  north-west  wing  in  two  directions :
its  portico  does  not  extend  so  far  to  the  west,  and  it  has  no  chamber  at
the  back  of  the  portico  to  the  south,  corresponding  to  the  chamber
which  forms  the  back  part  of  the  north-western  wing.  The  reason  of
this  want  of  symmetry  between  the  wings  has  been  plausibly  explained
by  Dr.  D5rpfeld.  He  points  out  that  if  the  south-western  wing  had
been  made  as  large  as  the  north-western  one,  it  would  have  encroached
on  the  precinct  of  the  Wingless  Victory  on  the  west  and  on  the  precinct
of  the  Brauronian  Artemis  on  the  south.  Probably  therefore  the  south-
western wing,  which  the  architect  had  intended  to  make  equal  in  size
to  the  north-western  wing,  was  curtailed  in  these  two  directions  in
deference  to  the  opposition  of  the  priests  of  the  Wingless  Victory  and
Brauronian  Artemis,  who  would  naturally  object  to  sacrifice  part  of  the
sacred  precincts  for  a  purely  decorative  purpose.

Dr.  Dorpfeld  has  also  made  it  probable  that  the  original  plan  of
Mnesicles  was  curtailed  in  two  other  directions.  It  seems  that
Mnesicles  intended  to  add  two  large  halls  on  the  north-east  and  south-
east sides  of  the  portal  (Propylaea).  The  north-east  hall  was  to  be
enclosed  on  the  south  by  the  northern  wall  of  the  central  building ;  on
the  west  it  was  to  be  enclosed  by  the  eastern  wall  of  the  north-west
wing ;  on  the  east  it  was  to  have  an  open  front  with  a  row  of  columns.
This  is  proved  by  (i)  the  cornice  running  round  the  two  walls  which
would  have  been  the  inner  walls  of  the  hall  on  the  south  and  west,  but
which  at  present,  being  merely  the  outer  walls  of  the  central  building  and
south-west  wing,  have  no  need  of  such  a  cornice  ;  (2)  the  holes  in  the
walls  for  the  reception  of  the  roof-beams  above  the  cornice ;  and  (3)
an  anta  facing  north  at  the  south-east  comer  of  the  projected  hall  and
clearly  intended  to  receive  an  architrave  coming  frx)m  the  north.  The
north-east  hall  was  to  have  extended  further  north  than  the  north  wall
of  the  north-west  wing ;  for  the  eastern  wall  of  this  wing,  which  was  to
have  been  the  western  wall  of  the  hall,  does  not  stop  at  the  point  where
it  is  met  by  the  north  wall  of  the  wing  but  projects  beyond  it  to  the
north.  Probably  the  hall  was  to  be  continued  north  till  it  met  the
fortification  wall  of  the  Acropolis.  It  is  clear  that  the  architect  not
only  planned  but  fully  expected  to  execute  this  north-east  hall ;   the


254  THE  PROPYLAEA  bk.  i.  attica

holes  prepared  for  the  roof-beams  are  enough  to  prove  it.  The  cause
which  prevented  him  from  carrying  out  his  design  was  probably  the
outbreak  of  the  Peloponnesian  war  which  took  place  in  431  B.C.,  the
year  after  the  portal  (Propylaea)  is  said  to  have  been  finished.

On  the  south-east  side  of  the  portal  the  architect  projected  a  similar
hall,  for  the  ania  is  still  to  be  seen  at  what  would  have  been  the  north-
east comer  of  the  hall.  But  the  absence  of  a  cornice  and  of  holes  for
the  reception  of  roof-beams  on  what  would  have  been  the  northern  and
part  of  the  western  walls  of  the  hall  (namely  the  southern  wall  of  the
central  building  and  the  eastern  wall  of  the  south-west  wing)  proves
that  the  architect  had  given  up  his  intention  of  building  a  south-east
hall  before  he  relinquished  the  hope  of  building  a  north-east  halL  The
abandonment  of  the  south-east  hall  was  therefore  probably  caused,  not
by  the  outbreak  of  the  Peloponnesian  war,  but  by  the  opposition  of  the
priests  of  the  Brauronian  Artemis,  firom  whose  sacred  precinct  a  large
slice  would  have  been  cut  off  by  the  construction  of  such  a  hall.

The  portal  (Propylaea)  seems  to  have  remained  nearly  as  Mnesicles
left  it  down  to  about  1656,  when  some  gunpowder,  which  the  Turks
kept  in  it,  blew  up  and  shattered  most  of  the  roof.  Nevertheless  when
Wheler  and  Spon  visited  Athens  in  1676,  the  west  front  of  the  portal,
with  its  pediment,  seems  to  have  been  still  entire,  and  the  Ionic  colunms
in  the  interior  of  the  outer  (western)  portico  still  supported  some  of  the
marble  beams  of  the  roof.

Among  the  ruins  of  the  portal  of  Pericles  which  I  have  been
describing  there  have  been  found  traces  and  remains  of  an  older  portal.
The  remains  consist  of  a  wall  about  20  feet  long  and  a  few  feet  high,
with  a  short  wall  joining  it  at  right  angles  and  terminated  by  a  marble
anta.  These  remains  are  to  be  seen  immediately  to  the  south  of
Pericles's  portal  (Propylaea),  the  longer  of  the  two  walls  abutting  in
a  direction  from  south-west  to  north-east  against  the  southern  wall
of  the  central  portion  of  Pericles's  portal.  The  continuation  of
the  wall  to  the  north-east  must  have  been  pulled  down  to  make
room  for  Pericles's  portal.  Other  traces  of  this  older  portal
are  to  be  seen  in  the  shape  of  parallel  cuttings  in  the  rock  in
the  central  passage  which  runs  through  Pericles' s  portal.  These
cuttings  are  clearly  the  beds  in  which  the  blocks  forming  the  lowest
course  of  a  wall  were  laid.  If  the  line  of  this  wall  be  produced  to  the
south-east,  and  the  line  of  the  existing  wall  of  the  old  portal  be  produced
to  the  north-east,  the  two  lines  will  meet  at  right  angles.  We  thus
learn  that  the  older  portal  faced  south-west,  and  that  it  formed  a
rectangle,  of  which  the  south-eastern  and  north-eastern  sides  measured
about  44  feet  each.  When  this  older  portal  was  planned  and  whether
it  was  ever  finished  are  questions  which  we  cannot  answer.  It  is
conunonly  thought  to  have  been  a  work  of  Cimon,  but  this  is  a  mere
conjecture.

Pausanias  makes  no  mention  of  the  statue  of  Agrippa,  though  it
must  have  been  a  very  conspicuous  object  on  his  left  hand  as  he  ascended
toward  the  portal.  The  lofty  quadrangular  pedestal  which  supported
the  statue  still  stands  immediately  to  the  west  of  the  north-west  wing  of


CH.  XXII  STATUES  OF  HORSEMEN  255

the  portal,  opposite  the  temple  of  Wingless  Victory.  It  measures  55
feet  in  height  by  12^  and  10  feet  in  the  sides.  The  lowest  part  is  of
limestone ;  the  pedestal  proper  is  of  Hymettian  marble  surmounted
with  a  cornice  of  white  marble.  The  inscription  on  the  west  side  of  the
pedestal  (CI.A,  iii.  575)  states  that  the  statue  was  erected  by  the  people
in  honour  of  their  benefactor  Marcus  Agrippa,  who  had  been  thrice
consul  As  Agrippa  was  consul  for  the  third  time  in  27  B.C.,  the  statue
must  have  been  set  up  sometime  between  that  year  and  12  B.C.,  the
date  of  Agrippa's  death.  The  marks  on  the  top  of  the  pedestal  show
that  Agrippa  must  have  been  represented  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  two  or
four  horses.

See  Wheler,  foumey  in  Greece^  p.  358  sq,  ;  Stuart  and  Revett,  Antiquities  of
Athens^  2  (1787),  ch.  v.  pp.  37-42,  with  plates  i.-xi.  ;  Leake,  AthcnSy  i.  p.  527
5q.\  Beul^,  VAcropole  aAthineSy  i.  p.  162  sqq,\  S.  Ivanoff,  'Sulla  grande
Scalinata  de*  propilei  dell*  Acropoli  d*  Atene,*  Annali  cUlC  Institute^  33  (186 1 ),
pp.  275-293 ;  Dyer,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  362  sqq,  ;  L,  Julius,  *  Uel^r  den  SiidflUgel
der  ft'opylaeen  und  den  Tempel  der  Athena  Nike  zu  Athen,'  Mittheil.  d.  arch,
Inst,  in  Athen^  I  (1876),  pp.  216-228;  {</.,  'Die  Gemalde  des  Polygnot  in  der
Pinakothek  der  Propylaen  ru  Athen,*  Mittheil.  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  2  (1877),
pp.  192-194;  C.  Robert,  'Der  Aufgang  zur  Akropolis,*  in  v.  Wilamowitz-Moellen-
dorfTs  Aus  JCydaihen,  pp.  172-194  ;  R.  Bohn,  Die  Propylaeen  der  Akropolis  zu
Athen  (Berlin  and  Stuttgart,  1882);  Milchhofer,  'Athen,*  pp.  200-202;  W.
Dorpfeld,  *  Die  Propylaen  der  Akropolis  von  Athen,'  Mittheil,  d,  arch,  Inst,  in
Atlun,  10  (1885),  pp.  38-56,  131-144;  Guide-Joanne,  i,  pp.  45-47;  Baedeker,'
pp.  59  sq,,  63-65  ;  A.  Botticher,  Die  Akropolis  von  Athen,  pp.  175-187  ;  Lolling,
'Athen,  pp.  339-341  ;  Baumeister*s  Denkmdler,  s,v,  *  Propylaen,*  pp.  1414-1422;
Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  pp.  350-361 ;  £.  Curtius,  Stadtgeschichte,  p.
147  sqq.

22.  4.  Whether  the  statnes  of  the  horsemen  represent  the  sons
of  Xenophon  etc.  There  appear  to  have  been  two  statues  of  single
horsemen,  facing  each  other  on  opposite  sides  of  the  road  which  led  up
to  the  portal  (Propylaea)  of  the  Acropolis.  Portions  of  the  inscribed
bases  and  pedestals  of  both  statues  have  been  found.  The  inscribed
base  and  pedestal  of  the  statue  which  stood  on  the  south  side  of  the
ascent  were  found  in  1889  near  the  south-west  comer  of  the  Parthenon,
and  have  been  set  up  in  their  original  position,  namely,  between  the
south-west  wing  of  the  portal  and  the  little  staircase  which  leads  up
from  the  main  ascent  to  the  temple  of  Wingless  Victory.  The  pedestal
which  supported  the  other  statue  stands  on  the  opposite  (north)  side  of
the  main  ascent,  at  the  south-western  comer  of  the  south-west  wing  of
the  portal  (Propylaea) ;  but  only  a  small  fragment  of  the  inscribed  base
which  crowned  this  northem  pedestal  has  been  found  as  yet  (C.  /.  A,  iv.
p.  104,  No.  418  h  ;  Mittheil ,  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  5  (1880),  p.  317
sq,  ;  Loewy,  Inschriften  griech.  Bildhauer,  No.  57).  The  southern
pedestal  is  composed  of  a  number  of  blocks  of  Pentelic  marble,  sur-
mounted by  a  slab  of  Hymettian  marble.  On  its  two  broad  flat  surfaces
this  slab  of  Hymettian  marble  bears  marks  which  show  that  each  of
these  surfaces,  at  different  times,  supported  a  statue ;  but  the  marks  on
the  two  surfaces  are  so  different  that  they  cannot  be  those  of  the  same
statue.  Further,  on  each  of  the  two  longer  of  the  narrow  sides  of  the
slab  the  following  inscription  is  carved : —


256  STATUES  OF  HORSEMEN  bk.  i.  attic  a

Hoi  Hmttt^s  aw^  t3v  iroAcfiiov,  l^nncapy^v
Tov  AaiccSai/Liovtb,  Hcvo^vros,  Il/iovairo.
AvKios  €jroiTj(r€v  'EXcv^c/xvs  Mv/sovos.

"  The  cavalry  (dedicated  this  out  of  the  spoils  which  they  took)  fix>m
the  enemy  when  Lacedaemonius,  Xenophon,  and  Pronapes  were
colonels.  Lycius  of  Eleutherae,  son  of  Myron,  made  (this  statue)."
On  the  two  opposite  sides  of  the  stone  this  inscription  reads  a  different
way  up.

These  facts  seem  to  show  that  the  statue  which  stood  on  this  slab
was  at  some  time  taken  down,  the  slab  reversed,  a  different  statute
placed  on  it,  and  the  same  inscription  carved,  the  other  way  up,  on  the
side  opposite  to  that  which  bore  the  original  inscription.

The  original  statues  cannot  have  been  made  later  than  437  B.C.,
the  date  when  Pericles's  portal  was  begun.  For  the  two  pedestals  which
supported  them  are  contemporary  with,  and  form  integral  parts  of,  the
portal,  having  been  clearly  included  in  the  architect's  original  design.
From  the  inscription  it  appears  that  the  two  statues  were  dedicated  by
the  Athenian  cavalry  in  conunemoration  of  some  feat  of  arms.  But
down  to  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century  ac.  a  native  Athenian  cavalry
hardly  existed,  its  place  being  supplied  by  hired  regiments  of  Thessalian
horse.  But  soon  after  that  date  the  Athenians  seem  to  have  wakened
up  to  their  deficiency  in  this  arm,  and  to  have  enrolled  a  fine  body  of
native  cavalry,  which  they  regarded  with  patriotic  pride,  as  we  may
infer  from  the  conspicuous  place  which  the  cavalry  occupies  on  the
sculptured  frieze  of  the  Parthenon.  At  some  time,  therefore,  between
about  450  and  437  B.C.  may  have  been  won  the  victory  which  the
Athenian  cavalry  commemorated  by  these  two  statues  placed  at  the
entrance  to  the  Acropolis.  H.  G.  Lolling  conjectured  that  the  campaign
may  have  been  the  one  in  which  Euboea  was  conquered  by  Pericles
(446  B.C.)  Lacedaemonius,  one  of  the  colonels  in  command,  may
have  been  Lacedaemonius  the  son  of  Cimon  (Thucydides,  i.  45).  It  is
remarkable  that  three  cavalry  colonels  {hipparchai)  are  mentioned  in
the  inscription ;  so  far  as  we  know  from  other  sources  the  regular
number  was  two  (Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens^  61).  The  sculptor
Lycius,  who  made  one  at  least  of  the  two  commemorative  statues,  was
believed  by  H.  Brunn  to  have  flourished  in  Ol.  90  (420-417  B.C.  ;  see
note  on  V.  22.  3) ;  but  the  discovery  of  this  inscribed  base  seems  to  prove
that  Lycius  must  have  been  at  work  twenty  years  or  more  before  that
date.  It  must  be  observed,  however,  that  neither  of  the  two  inscriptions
on  the  base  is  as  old  as  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century  B.C. ;  from  certain
peculiarities  in  the  shapes  of  the  letters  Lolling  inferred  that  both  are
merely  copies  of  the  original  inscription,  made  at  different  dates  by
masons  who  did  not  succeed  perfectly  in  their  attempts  to  imitate  the
old  characters.  If  Lolling  was  right,  the  slab  which  bears  these
inscriptions  cannot  have  belonged  to  the  original  monument.  This  is
confirmed  by  the  nature  of  its  material,  namely  Hymettian  marble,
which  was  hardly  used  at  all  for  inscriptions  at  Athens  in  the  fifth
century  B.C.     It  would  seem  to  follow  that  the  original  statue  with  its


CH.  xxii  WINGLESS  VICTORY  257

inscribed  base  was  at  some  time  destroyed  or  carried  0%  and  was
afterwards  replaced  by  a  copy.

In  addition  to  the  two  copies  of  the  inscription  just  discussed,  the
pedestal  in  question  bears  the  following  inscription : —


c     ««

S€ov  ScQSooTOV  €yyovov.


J^'WrJft^"  K«J^«^


"The  people  (dedicated  this  statue  of)  Germanicus  Caesar,  descendant
of  the  divine  Augustus."  This  inscription  is  cut,  not  on  the  slab  of
Hymettian  marble  which  bore  the  statue,  but  on  a  block  of  the  pedestal
inmiediately  under  it  It  shows  that  the  statue  of  the  horseman  on  the
pedestal  was,  by  the  adulation  of  the  Athenians,  converted  into  a  statue
of  Germanicus,  probably  in  18  A.D.,  when  he  visited  Athens  and  was
received  with  the  most  elaborate  marks  of  respect  (Tacitus,  Annals,

"•  53).

Pausanias's  conjecture  that  the  two  statues  of  horsemen  may  have

represented  the  sons  of  Xenophon  is  not  a  happy  one,  for  the  sons  of
Xenophon  were  not  yet  bom  when  these  statues  were  put  up.  His  eye
would  seem  to  have  caught  the  name  of  Xenophon  on  the  inscription ;
he  jotted  it  down  without  copying  the  rest  of  the  inscription ;  and
then  rashly  propounded  his  conjecture.  The  later  inscription,  which
referred  the  southern  of  the  two  statues  to  Germanicus,  he  either  over-
looked or  purposely  disregarded.

See  C  /.  A.  iv.  p.  183  sg, ;  Lolling,  in  AcAr/bv  dpxaioXoyiKov,  1889,
pp.  179-199;  Joumcd  of  Hellenic  Studies,  11  (1890),  p.  211;  E.
Curtius,  Stadtgeschichte,  pp.  159,  259  sq,,  299.

22.  4*  On  the  rU^t  of  the  portal  is  a  temple  of  Wingless
Victory.  The  goddess  whom  Pausanias  here  and  elsewhere  (iii.  1 5.  7 ;
V.  26.  6)  calls  the  Wingless  Victory  was  more  properly  described  as
Victory  Athena,  that  is,  Athena  in  the  character  and  with  the  attributes
of  Victory  (Harpocration  and  Suidas,  s,v,  Ni/ciy  'ASrjva :  Sophocles,
Philoctetes,  134;  Eustathius,  on  Homer,  //.  xxi.  410  ;  C.  LA,  i.  p.  88  j^..
No.  189  a,  lines  3,  7,  19  ;  C,  L  A,  ii.  No.  163  ;  C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  471,  line
1 4).  Her  image  was  of  wood  and  represented  the  goddess  as  wingless,
with  a  pomegranate  in  her  right  hand  and  a  helmet  in  her  left  (Harpo-
cration and  Suidas,  Lc. ;  Pausanias  mentions  the  wooden  image  in  v.
26.  6).  In  Greek  art  the  personification  of  Victory  was  regularly
represented  as  a  winged  woman  ;  but  as  the  goddess  of  this  temple  was
not  a  mere  personification  of  Victory  but  the  goddess  Athena  herself,
who  was  always  wingless,  it  was  perfectly  natural  that  she  should  here
be  represented  without  wings.  There  was  therefore  no  need  to  explain
her  want  of  wings  in  the  way  which  Pausanias  did  (iii.  15.  7  note).  A
cow,  picked  out  for  its  beauty,  was  sacrificed  to  her  (C.  /.  A,  ii.  No.  163  ;
C.LA,  ii.  No.  471,  line  14).

The  tiny  but  elegant  temple  of  Victory  Athena  (or  the  Wingless
Victory,  as  Pausanias  calls  her)  is  still  standing  in  fair  preservation  on
the  western  extremity  of  the  Acropolis  rock,  on  the  south  side  of  the

VOL.  II  s


258  WINGLESS  VICTORY  bk.  i.  attica

ascent  to  the  Propylaea.  The  precipitous  sides  of  the  rocky  spur  are
faced  with  masonry  forming  a  massive  bastion  26  feet  high,  on  the
summit  of  which  the  temple  stands.  After  being  seen  and  described  by
WTieler  in  1676  the  temple  was  pulled  do\*Ti  about  1685  by  the  Turks,
who  erected  a  battery  on  the  site.  When  the  battery  was  removed  in
1835  the  remains  of  the  temple  were  discovered  by  Ross,  Schaubert,
and  Hansen,  who  out  of  the  remains  rebuilt  the  temple  as  it  now  stands.
The  gables  are  wanting  and  only  a  few  fragments  of  the  roof  have  been
found ;  but  otherwise  the  building  is  almost  entire.  It  is  of  the  Ionic
order,  and  consists  of  a  single  cella^  opening  to  the  east,  with  a  portico
of  four  columns  at  each  front  (east  and  west).  The  material  is  Pentelic
marble.  The  temple  rests  on  a  three-stepped  base,  which  on  the  highest
step  measures  27  ft.  2  in.  long  from  east  to  west  by  18  ft.  3  J  in.  broad
from  north  to  south.  The  height  of  the  columns,  including  base  and
capital,  is  13  ft.  4  in.  ;  their  diameter  above  the  base  is  i  ft.  10  in.  ;
the  height  of  the  entablature  (architrave,  frieze,  and  cornice)  is  3  ft.
8^  in.  Each  of  the  shafts  of  the  colunms  is  composed  of  a  single
block  of  marble  and  has  twenty-four  flutes.  Above  the  architrave  a
frieze,  sculptured  in  high  relief,  runs  all  round  the  temple ;  it  is  86  ft.
long  and  i  ft.  si  in.  high.  Four  panels  of  the  north  and  west  sides  of
the  frieze  were  found  by  Lord  Elgin  and  removed  to  England.  They
are  now  in  the  British  Museum  and  their  place  is  taken  by  casts  in
terra-cotta.  The  scene  represented  on  the  east  frieze  appears  to  be  a
council  of  the  gods  ;  it  has  been  interpreted  by  Mr.  Bruno  Sauer  as  the
gods  sitting  in  judgment  on  Europe  and  Asia.  But  the  figures  are  so
mutilated  that  they  can  hardly  be  recognised  ;  the  goddess  standing  in
the  middle  with  a  shield  is  perhaps  Athena.  Scenes  of  battle  occupy
the  three  other  sides  of  the  frieze.  On  the  west  side  the  combat  is
between  Greeks  and  Greeks,  on  the  north  and  south  sides  between  Greeks
and  barbarians.  The  barbarians,  who  are  both  on  horse  and  on  foot,
appear  by  their  costume  to  be  Persians.  The  cella  is  1 6  ft.  long  ;  the
entrance  to  it  is  between  two  pillars  which  were  connected  with  the  antac
by  a  railing  or  balustrade.

The  platform  on  the  east,  north  and  south  sides  of  the  temple  was
paved  with  marble.  This  pavement  is  still  nearly  entire  on  the  north
side  but  on  the  east  side  only  three  slabs  remain,  and  on  the  south  side
only  one.  On  its  west  side  the  temple  was  built  close  to  the  edge  of
the  bastion,  so  that  there  was  no  room  here  for  a  pavement.  In  the
pavement  immediately  opposite  the  middle  of  the  east  front  are  the
marks  of  what  is  believed  to  have  been  the  altar  mentioned  in  an  inscrip-
tion (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  163)  on  which  the  cow  was  sacrificed.  There
was  a  statue  of  the  triple  Hecate  by  Alcamenes  beside  the  temple
(Paus.  ii.  30.  2  note).

Round  the  precipitous  sides  of  the  bastion  on  which  the  temple
stood  there  ran  a  breast-high  parapet  composed  of  marble  slabs  which
were  clamped  together  and  supported  a  bronze  railing.  The  sockets
into  which  the  marble  slabs  of  the  parapet  fitted  can  still  be  seen  on  the
north  and  west  sides  of  the  temple.  Some  of  the  slabs  as  well  as  a
number  of  fragments  of  the  parapet  or  balustrade,  as  it  is  commonly


CH.  XXII  WINGLESS  VICTORY  259

though  less  correctly  called,  were  found  in  the  course  of  excavations
made  on  the  site  in  1835,  ^^S^)  and  1880.  Three  pieces  of  the  parapet
were  found  on  the  south  side  of  the  Acropolis  in  1877  ;  and  in  1893
Mr.  V.  W.  Yorke  discovered  three  more  fragments  at  the  foot  of  the
Victory  bastion.  The  outer  side  of  the  parapet  was  adorned  with
a  series  of  figures  in  moderately  high  relief,  the  remains  of  which
are  amongst  the  most  beautiful  specimens  of  ancient  sculpture
extant  The  reliefs  represent  a  number  of  winged  Victories  in  various
attitudes.  One  of  them  is  erecting  a  trophy  by  fastening  a  helmet  to  a
pole ;  another,  the  most  beautiful  of  all,  is  stooping  to  adjust  the  sandal
on  her  right  foot ;  two  others  are  leading  a  cow  to  be  sacrificed.  Another
seems  to  have  been  represented  in  the  act  of  sacrificing  a  cow  by
kneeling  on  the  back  of  the  animal  and  plunging  a  knife  into  it.  This
last  group,  of  which  only  a  fragment  survives,  was  perhaps  the  original
of  a  number  of  similar  representations  which  have  come  down  to  us
from  antiquity  (see  A.  H.  Smith,  *  Nikfe  sacrificing  a  bull,'  Journal  of
Hellenic  Studies y  7  (1886),  pp.  275-285).  The  slabs  are  1.05  metres
(about  3  ft.  3^  in.)  high.  A  narrow  staircase,  of  the  same  date  as  the
bastion,  led  up  to  the  temple  from  the  main  ascent  to  the  Propylaea.
Five  steps  of  this  staircase  are  still  preserved.  The  parapet  or  balus-
trade, after  following  the  north  side  of  the  bastion  as  far  east  as  the
staircase,  turned  south  and  skirting  the  west  side  of  the  staircase
ended  where  the  staircase  ends.

We  have  no  positive  information  as  to  the  date  when  the  temple
was  built,  but  that  it  is  a  work  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  may  be  regarded
as  certain.  It  used  to  be  commonly  supposed  that  the  temple  was  built
by  Cimon  as  a  trophy  of  his  victories  ;  but  archaeologists  are  now
generally  agreed  in  referring  the  foundation  of  the  temple  to  the  age  of
Pericles.  But  the  question  whether  the  temple  was  built  before  or  after
or  during  the  construction  of  the  Propylaea  has  given  rise  to  consider-
able divergence  of  opinion.  The  architectural  evidence  afforded  by  the
platform  on  which  the  temple  stands  and  the  staircase  leading  up  to  it
has  been  examined  in  recent  years  by  Mr.  P.  Wolters  with  great  care.
He  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  the  bastion  on  which  the  temple  stands
existed  in  its  present  form  before  the  Propylaea  was  begun  in  437  RC,
and  that  the  axis  of  the  Propylaea  was  determined  by  the  line  of  the
already  existing  north  wall  of  the  bastion  ;  but  that,  on  the  other  hand,
the  temple  of  Victory  Athena  was  not  yet  built  when  the  Propylaea
was  begun.  Mr.  Wolters  supposes  that  the  bastion  was  constructed  by
Cimon  at  the  time  when  he  built  the  south  wall  of  the  Acropolis  (Plu-
tarch, Cimon,  13  ;  Cornelius  Nepos,  Cimony  2  ;  cp.  Paus.  i.  28.  3) ;  and
that  the  temple  of  Victory  Athena  was  built  by  the  conservative  party
in  religion  as  a  protest  against  Mnesicles's  plan  of  curtailing  the  sacred
precinct  of  Victory  Athena  for  the  purpose  of  adding  to  his  grand  portal.
That  a  sanctuary  of  Victory  Athena  existed  on  the  bastion  before  the
Propylaea  was  begun  seems  to  be  proved  by  the  design  of  the  existing
south-west  wing  of  the  Propylaea  (see  above,  p.  253).  Mr.  Wolters* s
researches  make  it  probable  that  down  to  437  B.C  the  sanctuary  was
nothing  more  than  a  sacred  enclosure  with  an  image  and  an  altar  ;  and


26o  WINGLESS  VICTORY  bk.  i.  attica

that  the  temple  was  built  at  some  time  between  437  B.c  and  the  out-
break of  the  Peloponnesian  war  in  431  B.C.

Prof.  Furtwangler  has,  however,  propounded  a  different  theory.
He  supposes  that  the  temple  was  built  in  425  B.c  or  very  soon
after  as  a  trophy  of  the  victories  which  the  Athenians  under  Demo-
sthenes gained  over  the  Ambraciots  in  the  winter  of  426/5  B.C.
(Thucydides,  iii.  10  5- 114).  This  view  is,  he  thinks,  confirmed  by
an  inscription  of  the  fourth  century  B.a,  found  on  the  Acropolis,
which  records  a  commission  appointed  to  repair  a  statue  of  Victory
Athena  which  had  been  dedicated  out  of  spoils  taken  from  the
Ambraciots  (see  U.  Kohler,  in  Hermes^  26  (1891),  pp.  43-50).  The
statue  mentioned  in  this  inscription  is,  according  to  Prof.  Furtwangler,
the  one  in  the  temple  of  the  so-called  Wingless  Victory.  Against  this
theory  it  may  be  urged  that  (i)  the  image  in  the  temple  of  Wingless
Victory  is  known  to  have  been  of  wood,  and  it  seems  unlikely  that  in
the  golden  age  of  Athenian  art  and  arms  the  Athenians  would  have
contented  themselves  with  setting  up  a  merely  wooden  image  to  com-
memorate a  brilliant  success ;  and  (2)  the  sculptured  frieze,  as  Prof.
Furtwangler  himself  admits,  represents  combats  of  Greeks  with  Persians,
which  would  be  a  most  inappropriate  decoration  for  a  temple  erected  to
commemorate  a  victory  over  Ambraciots.  How  old  the  original  sanctuary
was  we  do  not  know ;  but  the  fact  that  the  image  was  of  wood  makes  it
probable  that  the  sanctuary  was  ancient  even  in  the  fifth  century  ac

The  style  of  the  sculptures  both  of  the  frieze  and  of  the  balustrade
confirms  Uie  conclusion  that  the  temple  was  built  after  the  Parthenon
and  consequently  not  earlier  than  437  B.C. ;  for  the  influence  of  the
Parthenon  sculptures  can  be  traced  both  on  the  frieze  and  on  the  balus-
trade. The  battles  on  the  frieze  are  rendered  with  great  dramatic
liveliness  and  skill  in  grouping;  the  bodies  of  the  combatants  are
carefully  and  accurately  modelled ;  their  garments  float  on  the  wind  or
cling  to  their  bodies  in  a  manner  at  once  truthful  and  refined.  The
free  and  flowing  style  of  these  figures,  in  which  no  trace  of  the  stift
archaic  manner  can  be  perceived,  proves  that  the  artist  had  studied  the
epoch-making  sculptures  of  the  Parthenon.  The  reliefs  on  the  balustrade
exhibit  a  still  freer  style,  a  still  more  perfect  mastery  of  the  sculptor's
art  In  these  respects  the  figure  of  the  Victory  stooping  to  adjust  her
sandal  has  probably  never  been  surpassed.  It  is  a  miracle  of  art,  an
astonishing  proof  of  the  power  which  the  human  hand  can  attain  of
moulding  dead  matter  so  as  to  embody  human  thought.  There  is  no
high  idealism  in  the  conception ;  but  the  easy  grace  of  the  figure  and  of
the  flowing  drapery  which  half  hides  and  half  reveals  the  form  beneath,
is  beyond  praise.  It  is  conmionly  supposed  that  the  reliefs  on  the
balustrade  are  somewhat  later  than  those  on  the  frieze ;  but  of  this  there
is  no  sufficient  proof.  They  seem  undoubtedly  to  be  the  work  of  a
greater  sculptor,  but  may  quite  well  have  been  executed  about  432  B.C.,
when  the  temple  was  probably  complete.  The  treatment  of  the  drapery
closely  resembles  that  of  the  three  seated  female  figures  in  the  eastern
gable  of  the  Parthenon.

It  may  be  mentioned  that  in  the  west  &ce  of  the  Victory  bastion,  at


CH.  xxii  WINGLESS  VICTORY  261

the  level  of  the  ground,  there  are  two  quadrangular  niches  side  by  side,
each  about  2.75  (8  ft.  10  in.)  high.  Their  purpose  is  not  known,  but
they  may  have  held  statues.

See  Wheler,  Journey  in  Greece^  p.  358 ;  Stuart  and  Revett,  Antiquities  of
Athens^  2  (1787),  ch.  v.  plates  xii.  and  xiii. ;  Leake,  Athens^  i.  pp.  529-535;
Beul^,  VAcropole  tPAthhteSy  i.  pp.  227-271 ;  Le  Bas,  Voyage  Archiologipie,  ed.
Reinach,  pp.  125-131,  with  plates  (Architect  1-12) ;  Ad.  Michaelis,  'Die  Balu-
strade am  Tempel  der  Athena  Nike  auf  der  Akropolis  von  Athen/  Archdologische
Zeitung,  20  (1862),  pp.  249-267,  with  plate  clxii. ;  C.  Botticher,  '  Ueber  die
Thymele  des  Niketempels,'  Phiiologus^  21  (1864),  pp.  41-72 ;  Pervanoglu,  in  Bullet-
Hno  delT  Instituto,  1868,  pp.  162-164 ;  Dyer,  Amient  Athens^  pp.  372-374 ;  £.
Curtius,  'Die  Cultusstatte  der  Athena  Nuce,'  Archdologische  Zeitung^  37  (1879),
p.  97  sq,f  ;  id,,  Stcultgeschichte,  pp.  130  sq.,  198;  R.  Bonn,  'Zum  Nike-Fyrgos,'
Archdologische  Zeitung,  38  (1880),  pp.  85-91 ;  f</.,  in  Afittheil.  d,  arch.  Inst,  in
A  then,  5  (1880),  pp.  259-267,  309-316 ;  R.  KekuW,  Die  Reliefs  an  der  Balustrade
dtr  Athena  Nike  (Stuttgart,  188 1) ;  EX  Petersen,  in  Zeitschrift  fUr  die  oesterreich,
Gymnasien,  32  (1881),  pp.  261-282;  A.  Milchhofer,  '  Athen,^  p.  202  so.  ;  Bau-
meister's  Denkmdler,  s.v.  '  Niketempel,'  pp.  1021-1027 ;  Ad.  Botticner,  Die
Akropolis  von  Athen,  pp.  193-209 ;  Guide-Joantte,  i.  pp.  47-49 ;  Baedeker,'  p.  61
sq.;  Miss  Harrison,  Aficient  Athens,  pp.  361-367;  r.  Wolters,  'Zum  Alter  des
Niketempels,'  in  Bonner  Studien.  Aufsdtze  aus  der  Altertumswissenschaft  R.
KekuU gewidmet  (Berlin,  1890),  pp.  92-101,  with  plate  5.  6  ;  Friederichs- Wolters,
Gipsabgiisse,  Nos.  747-804,  pp.  281-290;  Mrs.  Mitchell,  History  of  Ancient
Sculpture,  pp.  372-377  ;  Bruno  Sauer,  '  Das  Gottergericht  Uber  Asia  und  Hellas,'
Aus  der  Anomia  (Berlin,  1890),  pp.  96-113  ;  A.  H.  Smith,  Catalogue  of  Sculpture
in  the  British  Museum,  pp.  239-248 ;  Overbeck,  Gesch.  d.  griech.  Plastik,^  i.
pp.  480-489;  V.  W.  Yorke,  'Newly-discovered  fragments  0?  the  balustrade  of
Athena  ^\\it,*  JoumcU  of  Hellenic  Studies,  13  (1892-93),  pp.  272-280;  A.  Furt-
wangler,  Meisterwerke  d.  griech.  Plastik,  pp.  207-222.

22.  5.  AegeuB fltmg  himself  down  and  was  killed  etc.    The

story  of  the  death  of  Aegeus  is  similarly  told  by  Diodorus  (iv.  61),
Plutarch  (Theseus,  1 7  and  22),  and  Servius  (on  Virgil,  Aen.  iii.  74),  except
that  Servius  says  Aegeus  flung  himself  into  the  sea,  which  was  hence-
forth called  the  Aegean  sea  after  him.  According  to  Simonides  (quoted
by  Plutarch,  Theseus,  17)  the  signal  of  safety  was  to  be  the  hoisting  of
a  scarlet  (not  a  white)  sail.  In  a  modem  Greek  tale,  which  preserves
some  of  the  features  of  the  story  of  Theseus  and  the  Minotaur,  the  ship
which  carries  the  destined  victims  puts  to  sea  with  black  sails  (B.
Schmidt,  Griechische  Mdrchen,  Sagen  und  Volkslieder,  *  Die  siebenkopfige
Schlange,'  p.  118  sqq.^  The  ship  which  sailed  annually  from  Thessaly
to  Troy  with  sacrifices  for  Achilles  hoisted  black  sails  on  the  outward
voyage  (Philostratus,  Heroica,  xx.  25,  p.  311,  Didot  ed.) ;  whether
white  sails  were  substituted  on  the  return  voyage,  is  not  said.  In  an
Irish  folk-tale  Fin  brings  the  body  of  Gilla  na  Grakin  to  Ireland,  and  as
he  nears  the  coast  he  hoists  a  black  flag,  '*  for  he  had  promised  Gilla's
wife  to  raise  a  white  flag  if  her  husband  was  well,  but  a  black  one  if  he
was  dead"  (Jeremiah  Curtin,  Myths  aud Folk-lore  of  Ireland,  p.  267).
The  sea,  as  Pausanias  here  says,  is  indeed  visible  from  the  Victory
bastion.  It  is  about  three  miles  off,  but  owing  to  the  clearness  of  the
Attic  air  the  distance  seems  less.  The  peninsula  of  Piraeus  is  seen
stretching  out  into  the  blue  waters  ;  further  off  are  Salami s  and  Aegina,
the  latter  with  its  sharp-peaked  and  ever  beautiful  outline ;  and  beyond
them,  far  away  to  the  south,  the  coast  of  Peloponnese.


262  PICTURE  GALLERY  bk.  i.  attica

22.  5.  the  shrine  of  the  hero  Aeffeus.  At  the  southern  foot  of
the  bastion  on  which  stands  the  temple  of  Victory  Athena  the  rock  of
the  Acropolis  protrudes,  and  here  a  quadrangular  space  has  been  levelled
artificially  in  the  rock  as  if  to  receive  some  building.  This,  as
Lolling  suggested,  was  probably  the  shrine  of  Aegeus,  for  it  is  just  the
spot  where,  according  to  the  tradition,  he  must  have  fallen.  See  Lolling,
*Das  Heroon  des  Aigeus,*  Mittheil.  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  11  (1886),
p.  332  sq, ;  /Vil,  *  Athen,'  p.  341  ;  Baedeker,  Greece}  p.  57.  Dr.  Dorpfeld
formerly  supposed  that  this  quadrangular  cutting  in  the  rock  was  the
site  of  the  choregic  monument  of  Nicias  (see  above,  p.  250);  but  he
now  inclines  to  Lolling's  opinion  (Mittheil,  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^
14  (1889),  p.  63).  The  shrine  of  Aegeus  at  Athens  was  mentioned  by
the  orator  Dinarchus  in  a  lost  speech  (Harpocration  and  Suidas,  s,v.
Aiyctbv:  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graecay  i.  p.  354,  line  8  sq.)

22.  6.  On  the  left  of  the  portal  is  a  chamber  containing  pictures.
This  chamber,  as  we  have  seen  (p.  252),  is  still  in  good  preservation  ;
the  walls  with  the  cornice  are  standing,  though  the  roof  is  gone.  It
has  been  debated  whether  the  paintings  in  this  chamber  were  wall-
paintings  or  easel-paintings.  Beuld,  Ivanofl^  and  Mr.  L.  Julius  have
examined  the  walls  with  care  and  have  discovered  no  traces  on  them
which  would  lead  us  to  suppose  that  they  had  been  prepared  to  receive
wall-paintings.  Not  only  has  no  vestige  of  colour  or  of  stucco  been
found,  but  the  faces  of  the  stonps  are  still  left  rough.  Round  each
block,  both  on  its  perpendicular  and  its  horizontal  edges,  there  runs  a
shallow  channel,  to  indicate  the  depth  to  which  the  face  of  the  stone
was  to  be  chiselled  down  after  it  had  been  placed  in  position.  The
faces  of  the  blocks  which  compose  the  socle  or  lowest  courses  of  the
walls  have  been  thus  cut  down  and  smoothed ;  but  in  the  upper  courses
the  protuberant  faces  of  the  stones  are  left,  which  seems  to  show  that
they  never  were  covered  with  paintings.  One  of  the  many  proofs  of  the
unfinished  state  of  the  great  portal  (Propylaea)  is  that  the  faces  of  all
the  walls  in  the  portal  are  left  in  this  rough  state.  On  the  other  hand,
there  are  no  holes  in  the  walls  of  the  picture  gallery  {Piftakotheke)^  as
it  is  called,  to  indicate  that  the  paintings  were  hung  from  nails.  They
may  have  been  either  placed  loose  against  the  walls  or,  as  Welcker
suggested,  hung  by  cords  from  the  cornice.  The  antiquary  Polemo
wrote  a  dissertation  on  the  pictures  in  the  portal  of  the  Acropolis
(Harpocration,  s.v.  Aafiwds) ;  and  the  title  of  his  treatise  (^cpc  rlav  tv
rois  irpoTTvXaiois  irivaKtaVy  not  ir€pl  tQv  iv  rol^  vpoirvXaCoi^  ypaffnav)  is
in  favour  of  the  view  that  the  pictures  were  easel-pieces  rather  than
wall-paintings.  This  treatise  of  Polemo  on  the  paintings  was  probably
a  section  of  his  general  work  on  the  Acropolis  (C.  Wachsmuth,  Die
Stadt  Atheny  i.  p.  35,  n.  2).  Sec  E.  Beuld,  VAcrvpole  cPAthines^  i.  p.
204  sqq. ;  F.  G.  Welcker,  Antike  Denkmdlery  4.  p.  232  sqq. ;  S.  IvanofT,
in  Annali  delt  Institute^  33  (1861),  p.  278  ;  L.  Julius,  'Die  Gemalde
des  Polygnot  in  der  Pinakothek  der  Propylaen  zu  Athen,*  Mittheil.  d.
arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,  2  (1877),  pp.  192-194.

Pausanias's  description  leaves  it  uncertain  how  many  of  the  pictures
in  the  gallery  were  by  Polygnotus.     It  has,  indeed,  been  denied  that


CH.  XXII  PICTURE  GALLERY  263

Polygnotus  painted  any  of  them  ;  but  the  most  natural  interpretation  of
our  author's  words  seems  to  be  that  Polygnotus  painted  at  least  two  of
the  pictures  (namely,  the  sacrifice  of  Polyxena,  and  Achilles  among  the
maidens  at  Scyros),  and  probably  more.  If  the  pictures  were  wall-
paintings,  Polygnotus  must  have  painted  them  in  extreme  old  age,  since
he  flourished  about  480-457  B.C,  and  the  great  portal,  of  which  the
picture  gallery  formed  part,  was  not  begun  till  437  B.C.  On  the  other
hand,  if  they  were  easel-pieces,  they  may  have  been  placed  in  the  gallery
after  the  painter's  death.  See  £.  Beul^,  op,  cit,  i.  p.  218  sqq^\  H.
Brunn,  Gesch.  d,  griech.  KUnstler^  2.  pp.  17,  24  sq.  On  the  question
whether  the  works  of  Polygnotus  were  wall-paintings  or  easel-pieces,  see
above,  p.  135  sq,

22.  6.  Diomede  and  Ulysses,  the  one  at  Leninos  carrying  off
the  bow  of  Philoctetes,  the  other  carrying  off  the  image  of  Athena
fipcun  THiim  From  Pausanias's  description  of  these  pictures  it  is  not
quite  clear  which  of  the  two  heroes  (Diomede  and  Ulysses)  was  repre-
sented with  the  bow  of  Philoctetes,  and  which  with  the  image  of  Athena.
But  the  order  of  the  words  is  in  favour  of  the  view  that  the  painter
depicted  Diomede  carrying  off  the  bow  of  Philoctetes,  and  Ulysses
carrying  off  the  image  of  Athena.

(i)  According  to  the  Attic  tragedians  it  was  the  crafty  Ulysses  who
succeeded  in  stealing  the  bow  of  Philoctetes,  without  which,  so  the  oracle
ran,  Troy  could  not  be  taken  (cp.  Paus.  v.  13.  4).  This  is  the  story
told  by  Sophocles  in  his  extant  tragedy  Philoctetes^  and  this  was  the
story  told  by  Aeschylus  and  Euripides  in  their  lost  dramas  on  the  same
subject  (Dio  Chrysostom,  Or.  lii.)  But  according  to  an  older  tradition
followed  by  Lescheos  in  his  Little  Iliady  it  was  not  Ulysses  but  Diomede
who  fetched  Philoctetes  and  his  bow  from  Lemnos  to  the  Greek  camp
before  T^roy  (Proclus,  in  Epicorum  Graecorum  Fragmenta^  ed.  Kinkel,
p.  36).  The  substitution  of  Ulysses  for  Diomede  in  the  story  seems  in
fact  to  have  been  an  innovation  which  the  Attic  tragedians  introduced
and  gave  currency  to  (see  F.  W.  Schneidewin,  in  PfUlologus^  4  (1849),
p.  645  sqq,")  The  painter  of  the  picture  in  the  Propylaea  appears,  if  I
have  interpreted  Pausanias  rightly,  to  have  followed  the  original  form
of  the  tradition,  representing  Diomede,  not  Ulysses,  as  the  hero  who
secured  the  bow  of  Philoctetes  for  the  Greeks.  Of  existing  works  of
ancient  art  the  pnly  ones  which  represent  the  winning  of  Philoctetes's
bow  are  the  reliefs  on  some  Etruscan  caskets  for  holding  the  ashes  of
the  dead ;  and  as  Ulysses  figures  on  all  of  them,  it  is  plain  that  the
artists  followed  the  version  of  the  story  introduced  by  the  Attic  tragedians.
But  between  the  tragedies  of  Sophocles  and  Euripides  on  this  theme
there  was  this  difference,  that  while  Sophocles  represented  Ulysses  as
accompanied  and  aided  by  Neoptolemus,  Euripides  represented  him  as
accompanied  by  Diomede  ;  and  this  difference  is  reflected  in  the  reliefs
on  the  caskets,  for  on  some  of  them  the  companion  and  accomplice  of
Ulysses  appears  to  be  Neoptolemus,  and  on  others  Diomede.  On  the
latter  reliefs,  two  in  number,  the  suffering  Philoctetes  is  seated  with  his
bandaged  foot  on  a  stone,  listening  with  a  surly  air  to  the  bland  dis-
course of  the  wily  Ulysses,  while  the  doughty  Diomede  steals  up  behind


264  PICTURE  GALLERY  bk.  i.  attica

him  and  makes  a  grab  at  his  bow.  This  is  clearly  not  the  Sophoclean
version  of  the  story,  but  it  may  very  well  be  the  Euripidean.  See  Fr.
Schlie,  Die  Darstellungen  des  troischen  Sagenkreises  auf  eiruskischen
AschenkisieHy  pp.  134-148  ;  Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  p.  1328,  with  fig.
1483.  Apollodorus  seems  to  have  followed  Euripides,  for  he  says  that
"  Ulysses  went  with  Diomede  to  Philoctetes  in  Lemnos,  and  having  by
guile  got  possession  of  his  bow  and  arrows  he  persuaded  him  to  sail  to
Troy"  {Epitoma  Vaticcma  ex  ApoUodori  Bibliothecay  ed.  R.  Wagner,
p.  67  ;  Mythographi  Graeciy  ed.  R.  Wagner,  i.  p.  205  sqq.)  Quintus
Smymaeus  (ix.  333  sqq^  and  Hyginus  {Fab,  102)  also  agree  with
Euripides  rather  than  Sophocles  in  so  far  as  to  make  Diomede,  not
Neoptolemus,  the  companion  of  Ulysses  in  his  expedition  to  Lemnos.

(2)  In  regard  to  the  stealing  of  the  Palladium  or  image  of  Pallas
Athena,  upon  which  the  safety  of  Troy  depended,  the  common  tradition
seems  to  have  been  that  it  was  effected  by  Diomede  and  Ulysses
together,  but  that  Diomede  played  the  chief  part  by  carrying  off  the
image  in  his  arms.  Such  at  least  appears  to  have  been  the  version  of
the  story  told  by  Lescheos  in  the  Little  Iliad,  It  is  true  that  Proclus
in  his  summary  of  the  Little  Iliad  says  that  "  Ulysses  conveyed  the
Palladium  out  of  Ilium  with  the  help  of  Diomede"  (Epicoruni  Graecorum
FragmentOy  ed.  Kinkel,  p.  37),  which  might  imply  that  Ulysses  was  the
principal  and  Diomede  the  accessory  in  the  affair.  But  in  the  explana-
tion given  of  the  proverb  *  Diomede's  necessity  *  it  is  said  that  Diomede
carried  the  Palladium  and  that  Ulysses  followed  or  accompanied  him
(Conon,  Narrationes^  34 ;  Schol.  on  Plato,  RepubliCy  vi.  p.  493  d ;
Zenobius,  iii.  8  ;  cp.  Apostolius,  vi.  1 5  ;  Eustathius,  on  Homer,  //.  x.
531,  p.  822),  and  this  explanation  of  the  proverb  is  expressly  traced
by  Hesychius  (s,v,  Aio/i^8€io9  avay Krj)  to  the  Little  Iliad,  Moreover,
in  the  representation  of  the  scene  on  the  marble  relief  known  as  the
Tabula  Iliaca  (see  note  on  x.  25.  2),  which  in  this  part  is  professedly
based  on  the  Little  Iliad  of  Lescheos,  Diomede  is  seen  carrying  the
Palladium  in  one  hand  and  a  drawn  sword  in  the  other,  while  Ulysses
follows  him  (see  Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  fig.  775,  Nos.  84  and  85).
The  tradition  to  which  the  author  of  the  Little  Iliad  gave  currency
seems  to  have  been  the  one  generally  accepted  by  artists,  for  on  most
of  the  existing  monuments  which  represent  the  stealing  of  the  Palladium
it  appears  to  be  Diomede  and  not  Ulysses  who  is  carrying  the  image.
The  monuments  in  question  consist  of  a  large  number  of  engraved
gems,  some  red-figured  vases,  and  a  few  reliefs.  On  the  gems  not
uncommonly  Diomede  appears  alone,  either  standing  in  front  of  the
Palladium,  or  seizing  it,  or  carrying  it  away.

But  there  seems  to  have  been  another  version  of  the  tale,  according
to  which  it  was  not  Diomede  but  Ulysses  who  had  the  chief  hand  in
carrying  off  the  Palladium.  Thus  in  the  fragments  of  Apollodorus
recently  discovered  in  the  Vatican  it  is  said :  "  Ulysses,  having  come
with  Diomede  by  night  to  the  city  (Troy),  bade  Diomede  stay  there,
while  he  himself,  after  disfiguring  himself  and  putting  on  mean  attire,
entered  unknown  into  the  city  as  a  beggar.  And  having  been  recognised
by  Helen  and  having  by  her  help  stolen  the  Palladium,  he  slew  many


CH.  XXII  PICTURE  CALLER  Y  265

erf*  the  guards  and  conveyed  the  image  with  Diomede's  help  to  the
ships"  (Epitoma  Vaticana  ex  Apollodori  Bibliotheca^  P-  67  sq,^  ed.  R.
Wagner;  Mythographi  Greudy  ed.  R.  Wagner,  i.  p.  207  sq.^  Not
much  weight,  however,  can  be  given  to  this  narrative  of  Apollodorus,
since  it  has  the  appearance  of  being  a  blundering  version  of  the
account  in  the  Little  Iliad  (see  Proclus,  in  Epicorum  Graecarum
Fragmenia,  ed.  Kinkel,  p.  37).  More  decisive  is  the  evidence  of
the  monuments ;  for  on  some  Roman  gems  Ulysses  is  represented
carrying  the  Palladium,  while  his  comrade  Diomede  looks  cautiously
back ;  and  on  a  terra-cotta  relief  in  the  Berlin  Museum  Ulysses  is
seen  holding  the  Palladium  in  his  left  hand  and  his  raised  sword  in
his  right,  while  Diomede  stands  beside  him  in  a  tranquil  attitude.
See  O.  Jahn,  *Der  Raub  des  Palladion,'  Philologus^  i  (1846),  pp.
46-60 ;  jV£,  « II  ratto  del  Palladio,'  Annali  deW  Instituto,  30  (1858),  pp.
228-264  ;  Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  s.v,  <  Palladion,  Palladionraub.'  The
painter  of  the  picture  here  described  by  Pausanias  seems  to  have  followed
this  latter  version  of  the  story,  assigning  to  Ulysses  instead  of  to
Diomede  the  honour  of  actually  bearing  away  the  Palladium  from  Troy.
Pliny  mentions  a  relief  on  a  cup  which  represented  the  stealing  of  the
Palladium  by  Ulysses  and  Diomede  {N,  H,  xxxiii.  156);  but  he  does
not  say  which  of  them  carried  the  image.

22.  6.  Orestes  slajring  Aegisthns  etc.  The  subject  is  represented
on  red-figured  Attic  vases  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.,  as  well  as  on  an
archaic  relief.  See  O.  Benndorf,  <La  fine  di  Egisto  e  Clitennestra,'
Annali  delP  Instituto^  37  (1865),  pp.  212-243;  C.  Robert,  Bild  und
Ued,  pp.  1 49-1 9 1  ;  Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  p.  11 12  sqq.

*22.  6.  Polyxena  abont  to  be  slaughtered  near  the  grave  of
Axshilles.  This  scene  is  delineated  on  the  Tabula  lUaca,  The  tomb
of  Achilles  is  represented  as  a  square  pillar,  on  the  base  of  which
Polyxena  kneels,  the  upper  part  of  her  body  bare,  and  her  head  drawn
back  by  Neoptolemus  who  raises  his  sword  to  deal  her  the  fatal  blow.
On  the  other  side  of  the  tomb  sits  Ulysses,  plunged  in  thought ;  beside
him  is  Calchas.  See  O.  Jahn,  Griechische  Bilderchronikeny  p.  37  ;
Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  fig.  775,  No.  107.  The  subject  is  seldom
depicted  on  existing  monuments  of  ancient  art.  See  Baumeister's
Denkmdler^  p.  751  ;  C.  Robert,  *Homerische  Becher,*  ^otes  Programm
sum  Winckelmannsfeste^  Berlin,  1890,  pp.  73-75.  There  is  an  epigram
in  the  Anthology  (Antholog,  Planud,  iv.  1 50)  on  a  picture  by  Polyclitus
representing  the  sacrifice  of  Polyxena.  It  has  been  conjectured  that
the  author  of  the  epigram  meant  to  refer  to  the  picture  in  the  Propylaea,
which  he  wrongly  ascribed  to  Polyclitus  instead  of  to  Polygnotus
(Brunn,  Gesch,  d.  griech,  KUnstler^  i.  p.  217).

22.  6.  Homer  did  well to  represent  Scyros  as  captured

by  Achilles.  See  Homer,  //.  ix.  668.  But  according  to  a  scholiast  on
this  passage  of  Homer,  the  Scyros  here  mentioned  by  the  poet  was  not
the  Aegean  island  of  that  name  in  which  Achilles  was  said  to  have
been  brought  up,  but  a  city  of  Phrygia  (Scholia  in  Homeri  Iliadem^  ed.
Bekker,  p.  271).  According  to  Philostratus  (Heroica^  xx.  5)  Achilles
was  sent  by  his  father  Peleus  to  the  island  of  Scyros  to  avenge  the  death


266  PICTURE  GALLERY  bk.  i.  attica

of  Theseus  on  King  Lycomedes.  Cp.  Fr.  Lohr,  '  Achills  Auszug  aus
Skyros/  Archdologisch  -  epigraphische  Mittheilungen  aus  Oesterreich-
Ungam^  13  (1890),  pp.  1 61-175.

22.  6.  Achilles  lived  in  the  company  of  the  maidens  at  Scyros.
The  story  that  the  young  Achilles  wore  female  attire  and  lived  among
the  daughters  of  Lycomedes,  king  of  Scyros  (Hyginus,  Fab.  96  ;  Bion,
ii.  1 5  sqq, ;  Schol.  on  Homer,  //.  ix.  968),  is  perhaps  a  reminiscence  of
a  custom  of  dressing  boys  as  girls  in  order  to  avert  the  evil  eye.  Such
a  custom  is  common  in  some  parts  of  India,  where  the  disguise  is  some-
times carried  so  far  that  the  boy's  nose  is  pierced  and  a  nose-ring
inserted  in  it.  It  is  especially  resorted  to  when  several  male  children
have  previously  died  in  the  family.  See  Paf^ab  Notes  and  Queries^  i
(1884),  Nos.  219,  869,  1029;  /^.,  2  (1885),  Nos.  344,  561,  570;
Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Society  of  Bombay^  i  (1886),  p.  123;
North  Indian  Notes  and  Queries^  3  (1893),  No.  99.  The  practice  is
not  unknown  in  Europe  {Panjab  Notes  and  Queries^  i  (1884),  No.
1007)  ;  Condorcet  in  his  childhood  was  dressed  as  a  girl  for  eight  years
or  more  (John  Morley,  Critical  Miscellanies^  2.  p.  166).  Cp.  Classical
Reifiew^  7  (1893),  p.  292  sq.

The  story  of  Achilles  in  female  attire  detected  by  Ulysses  was
painted  by  Athenion  (Pliny,  N,  H.  xxxv.  134).  It  is  represented  in
relief  on  a  number  of  ancient  sarcophaguses  and  is  the  subject  of  some
Pompeian  wall-paintings.  But  it  seems  to  have  been  neglected  by
vase-painters.  See  O.  Jahn,  Archaologische  Beitrdge^  pp.  352-378  ;
Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  p.  5  sq,y  and  fig.  1528.

22.  6.  Polygnotns  also  painted  Ulysses  at  the  river  etc
Protogenes  painted  a  famous  picture  of  Paralus  and  Hammonias  in  'the
Propylaea  at  Athens ;  the  figure  of  Hanmionias  was  by  some  called
Nausicaa  (Pliny,  N,  H,  xxxv.  loi).  The  picture  was  still  at  Athens
in  the  time  of  Cicero  (In  Verrem^  iv.  60).  Paralus  and  Ammonias
(Hammonias)  were  the  names  of  the  two  warships  which  the  Athenians
employed  on  occasions  of  ceremony  and  in  services  of  special  urgency.
The  old  name  of  the  Ammonias  was  the  Salaminia ;  it  seems  to  have
been  exchanged  for  Ammonias  in  compliment  to  Alexander  the  Great
when  he  assumed  the  title  of  *  son  of  Ammon '  {Frag.  Hist,  Graec,^  ed.
Miiller,  2.  p.  121).  It  is  supposed  that  in  the  picture  by  Protogenes
the  Paralus  was  personified  as  a  mariner  and  the  Anmionias  as  a  young
woman,  and  that  ignorant  people  mistook  the  figures  for  those  of
Ulysses  and  Nausicaa  (Brunn,  Gesch.  d,  griech.  Kiinstler^  2.  p.  238  sq^
K.  O.  Miiller  conjectured  that  this  picture  by  Protogenes  was  the  one
here  described  by  Pausanias,  and  that  Protogenes's  name  has  dropped
out  of  Pausanias's  text  (Handbuch  der  Archaeologie  der  Kunst^  §  142.
i).  For  Homer's  account  of  the  meeting  of  Ulysses  and  Nausicaa,  see
Od,  vi.  85  sqq,

22.  7.  a  picture  of  Aldbiades  etc.  Satyrus,  quoted  by
Athenaeus  (xii.  p.  534  d  e)  says  that  when  Alcibiades  returned  from
Olympia  he  dedicated  two  pictures  by  Aglaophon ;  one  of  them
represented  Alcibiades  crowned  by  Olympias  and  Pythias  (personifica-
tions of  Olympia  and  Delphi) ;  in  the  other  Nemea  was  seen  seated


CH.  XXII  PICTURE  GALLERY  267

with  Alcibiades  on  her  lap,  Alcibiades  being  here  depicted  as  "  fairer

than  the  faces  of  women."     Plutarch  says  that  Aristophon  painted  a

picture  of  Nemea  with  Alcibiades  in  her  arms,  which  the  Athenians

admired  and  came  in  crowds  to  see ;  but  the  older  people  were  disgusted,

considering  that  Alcibiades's  behaviour  in  allowing  himself  to  be  thus

painted  was  "tyrannical  and  illegal  "  (Plutarch,  Alcibiades^  16).     There

can  be  no  doubt  that  in  these  passages    Satyrus  and    Plutarch  are

speaking  of  the  same  picture,  and  very  little  doubt  that  the  picture  was

the  one  here  described  by  Pausanias.    There  is,  however,  a  discrepancy

between  the  statements  of  Plutarch  and  Satyrus.   According  to  Plutarch

the  picture  was  by  Aristophon ;  according  to  Satyrus  it  was  by  Aglao-

phon.     Aristophon  was  a  brother  of  the  great  Polygnotus  ;  their  father

was  named  Aglaophon  (Plato,  Gorgias^  p.  448  b ;    Harpocration,  s,v,

IIoAvyvcaros).     If  Aristophon  painted  Alcibiades,  he  must  have  been  a

good  deal  younger  than  his  brother  Polygnotus,  who  flourished  in  the

first  half  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.     But  if  the  portrait  of  Alcibiades  was,

as  Satyrus  says,  by  Aglaophon,  this  Aglaophon  cannot  of  course  have

been  the  father  of  Polygnotus,  but  may  have  been  his  grandson ;  in

Greek  artistic  families  it  was  a  common  practice  to  call  a  son  after  his

grandfather.       Now    Pliny   (A^.    H,    xxxv.    60)    mentions   a    painter

Aglaophon  who  flourished   in   01.   60  (420-417   B.C.),   and  this  date

would   agree   very  well   with   the   theory  that   he  was  a  grandson  of

Aglaophon  the  father  of  Polygnotus,  and  that  he  painted  Alcibiades.

Hence  Dr.  £.  Kroker  accepts  the  statement  of  Satyrus  that  the  portrait

was  by  Aglaophon,  and  suggests  that  the  passage  in  Plutarch  should

be  corrected  accordingly  (E.  Kroker,  Gleichnamige  griechische  KUnstler^

p.  23  sq^      Prof.   Brunn,  on  the  contrary,  accepted  the  statement  of

Plutarch  that  the  portrait  was  by  Aristophon,  and  proposed  to  emend

the  passage  in  Athenaeus  accordingly  (Gesch,  d.  griech,  Kiinstler,  2.

pp.  13  sq,^  54).     Prof.  W.  Klein  holds  that  the  two  pictures  mentioned

by  Satyrus  were  in  reality  one  picture,  in  which  Alcibiades  was  depicted

reclining  in  the  lap  of  Nemea,   while   Olympias  and  Pythias  placed

crowns    on    his    head    {Arckdolog.  -  epigraphische  Mittheilungen  aus

Oesterreich '  Ungarriy    12  (1888),   p.  94  sq.)     The   reason    why   older

people  regarded  as  illegal  the  picture  of  Alcibiades  reclining  in  the  lap

of  Nemea  probably  was  that  it  was  forbidden  by  law  to  give  the  name

of  a  quadriennial  festival  (like  the   Nemean,  Olympian,  and   Pythian

festiv^s)  to  a  slave  girl,  a  prostitute,  or  a  flute-girl  (Harpocration,  s,v,

Ncfieas:   Athenaeus,  xiii.  p.  587  c) ;  for  the  model  who  sat  for  Nemea

in  Alcibiades's  portrait  would  almost  certainly  belong  to  one  of  these

classes.     On  existing  portraits  of  Alcibiades  see  W.  Helbig,  *  Teste  di

Alcibiade,'  Annali  delV  Insiituto^  38  (1866),  pp.  228-240  ;  Baumeister's

Denkmdler^  p.  47  sq,

22.  7-  Persens carrying  the  head  of  Medusa  to  Polydectes.

The  story  was  that  Perseus  had  promised  Polydectes,  king  of  Seriphos,
that  he  would  bring  him  the  head  of  the  Gorgon  Medusa.  He  kept
his  word,  but  turned  Polydectes  and  his  people  to  stone  by  holding  up
the  Gorgon's  head  before  them.  See  Schol.  on  Pindar,  Pyih,  x.  72  ;
Schol.  on  Apollonius  Rhodius,    iv.   1 5 1 5  ;    Strabo,   x.  p.   487  ;    Ovid,


268  GRACES  OF  SOCRATES  bk.  i.  attica

Met.  V.  242  sqq, ;  Hyginus,  Fab.  64.  The  subject  is  depicted  on  two
ancient  vases.  On  one  of  them,  a  red-figured  Attic  vase  found  at
Bologna  in  1879,  Perseus,  clad  in  an  embroidered  tunic  and  wearing
his  winged  cap  and  winged  shoes,  is  holding  up  in  his  right  hand  the
severed  Gorgon-head  before  Polydectes,  an  elderly  bald-headed  man,
who  stretches  out  his  right  hand  in  a  deprecatory  or  suppliant  attitude,
while  the  lower  part  of  his  body  is  already  turned  into  a  shapeless  stone.
On  the  left  of  the  picture  is  Athena  gazing  intently  at  the  scene.  See
Annali  delP  Instituto^  53  (188 1),  pp.  82-87,  with  Taw.  d'  agg.  F,  G.
On  the  other  vase-painting  the  figure  of  Polydectes  is  very  similar,  but
that  of  Perseus  is  quite  different.  He  is  naked  except  for  a  cloak
thrown  over  his  shoulders,  and  is  holding  up  the  Gorgon's  head  with
both  hands,  while  he  averts  his  own  face.  See  Philologus^  27  (1868),
pi.  iii.  with  O.  Jahn's  description  on  p.  15.  Mr.  H.  Luckenbach,  who
published  the  former  vase-painting,  thought  that  it  might  be  a  copy  of
the  picture  here  described  by  Pausanias.  But  this  seems  hardly  likely ;
since  Pausanias's  description  points  rather  to  a  picttu^  of  Perseus  flying
through  the  air  to  Seriphos  with  the  Gorgon's  head  in  his  hand  (cp.  v.
18.  5  note).  Another  vase-painting  apparently  represents  Perseus  at
the  moment  before  he  takes  the  Gorgon's  head  from  the  bag.  See
'E<fnjfi€pis  dpxatoXoyiKrjy  1885,  pi.  5  ;  P.  Kretschmer,  in  Jahrbuch  d.
arch.  Instituis,  7  (1892),  pp.  37-42.  The  legend  of  Perseus  is  treated
of  by  Mr.  £.  S.  Hartland  in  an  elaborate  monograph,  in  which  parallels
are  cited  from  the  folklore  of  many  lands  (The  Legend  of  Perseus^
voL  I.  *The  supernatural  birth,'  London,  1894).

22.  7.  Timaenetns.     This  painter  is  otherwise  unknown.

22.  7.1  believe  that  the  verses  were  composed  by  Onomacritns.
Onomacritus  edited  the  so-called  oracles  of  Musaeus,  and  was  expelled
from  Athens  by  Hipparchus  for  having  been  convicted  of  forging  one
of  them ;  he  fled  to  the  court  of  Persia  (Herodotus,  vii..6).  He  also
forged  poems  in  the  name  of  Orpheus  (Clement  of  Alexandria,  Strom.
i.  21.  131,  p.  397,  ed.  Potter).  See  Epicorum  Graecorum  Fragmenta^
ed.  Kinkel,  p.  238  sqq.

22.  7.  the  hymn  which  he  made  on  Demeter  for  the  Lycomids.
This  hymn  is  mentioned  again  by  Pausanias  (iv.  i.  5).  As  to  the
Lycomids,  cp.  note  on  iv.  i.  7.

22.  8.  Just  at  the  entrance  to  the  Acropolis  are  jBgnres  of
Hermes  and  the  Graces  etc.  These  figures  of  the  Graces,  said  to  be
by  Socrates,  are  mentioned  by  Pausanias  in  another  passage  (ix.  35.  7),
fit>m  which  we  learn  that  the  figures  were  draped,  and  that  they  stood
"before  the  entrance  to  the  Acropolis."  In  the  same  chapter  (ix.  35.
3),  he  tells  us  that  a  secret  rite  was  performed  beside  the  three  figures
of  the  Graces  before  the  entrance  to  the  Acropolis.  Diogenes  Laertius
mentions,  on  the  authority  of  Duris,  that  the  philosopher  Socrates  had
been  a  sculptor,  and  he  adds  that  the  draped  figures  of  the  Graces  on
the  Acropolis  were  said  by  some  people  to  have  been  made  by  Socrates

i Diogenes    Laertius,    ii.    5.    19;   cp.    Suidas,  s.v.  'ZoiKpdrris).      Pliny
N.  H.  xxxvi.  32)  mentions  the  Graces  in  the  Propylaea  at  Athens
which  were  made  by  Socrates,  "  not  the  same  Socrates  as  the  painter,


GRACES  OF  SOCRATES


269


though  othcTS  think  they  were  the  same  person."  The  scholiast  on
Aristophanes  (Clouds,  773)  attributes  these  figures  to  Socrates  the
philosopher,  and  says  that  they  were  "carved  in  relief  on  the  wall
behind  Athena."

In  the  Museo  Chiaramonti  at  Rome  there  is  a  marble  relief  (Fig.  11)
which  has  been  by  some  supposed  to  be  a  copy  of  the  relief  attributed  to
Socrates.  It  is  cut  on  a  slab  of  yellomsh  Greek  marble  .82  metre
(3  ft  7^  in.)  wide,  and  represents  three  women  hand  in  hand  moving
to  the  spectator's  left  All  three  women  are  clothed  :n  gannents  reach-
ing to  the  feet,  but  the  dress  of  the  woman  on  the  right  differs  fixim


that  of  the  other  two.  They  probably  represent  the  Graces,  though
their  squat,  thick-set  figures  and  heavy  features  are  rather  ungainly
than  graceful  according  to  our  notions.  From  the  stiff  and  somewhat
archaic  style  of  the  relief  it  would  seem  to  have  been  executed  not  later
than  the  first  half  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  A  similar  relief,  apparently
an  exact  reproduction  of  it,  was  formerly  to  be  seen  in  the  Palazio
Giustiniani  at  Rome ;  it  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  dealers,  and  its
present  whereabouts  seems  lo  be  unknown.  Three  fragmentary  copies
of  the  same  relief  have  been  found  at  Athens,  two  of  them  on  the
Acropolis,  and  one  at  its  southern  foot  What  appears  to  be  the  same
group  of  Graces  (three  women  clad  in  long  robes,  moving  hand  in  hand)
is  represented  on   some  coins  of  Athens  (sec  E.   Beul^    MormaUi


ajo  GRACES  OF  SOCRATES  bk.  i.  attica

^Athhtes,  p.  297  sg. ;  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Numismatic  Com-
mentary, p.  150  sq.,  with  plate  EEvi.)  These  facts  make  it  highly
probable  that  the  Chiaiamonti  relief  and  its  duplicates  are  copies  of
some  celebrated  original  which  stood  on  the  Acropolis  and  which  may
very  well  have  been  the  group  assigned  by  tradition  to  Socrates.  The
copies  of  it  were  probably  set  up  as  votive  offerings  by  private  persons.
See  O.  Benndorf,  '  Die  Chariten  des  Sokrates,'  Arck^legische  Zeitung,
27  (1869),  pp.  55-62  ;  A.  Furtwangler,  'Die  Chariten  der  Akropolis,'
Mittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  A/ken,  3  (1878),  pp.  181-202.

But  was  the  original  relief  really,  as  tradition  reported  it,  a  youthfiil


work  of  the  philosopher  Socrates  ?  The  style  of  the  relief  is  not  abso-
lutely conclusive  against  this  view,  though  it  is  more  archaic  than  we
should  expect  in  a  work  of  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  But  in
1889  there  was  discovered  on  the  Acropolis,  not  far  from  the  Propylaea
and  the  Victory  terrace,  a  sixth  relief  (Fig.  12)  representing  the  Graces,
which  seems  to  prove  that  the  original  must  have  been  considerably
earlier  than  the  time  of  Socrates.  This  latest  found  relief  represents  the
three  Graces  clothed  in  tight-fitting  tunics  and  twilled  petticoats,  which
cling  closely  to  their  persons.  They  are  hand  in  hand,  and  striding  to
the  spectator's  left.  Their  faces,  which  are  turned  to  the  front,  wear  the
^miliar  archaic  smile.  The  foremost  of  them  is  holding  some  round
object  in  her  right  hand,  which  is  rdsed  to  her  breast.  The  last  of
them  is  leading  by  the  hand  a  nude  male  figure,  who  is  only  about  half


CH.  XXII  GRACES  OF  SOCRATES  271

her  size.  At  the  head  of  the  procession  walks  a  man  in  a  loose  robe
which  reaches  below  his  knees ;  his  left  arm  is  raised,  and  he  seems  to
have  been  represented  playing  on  a  flute,  but  the  relief  is  here  imperfect.
The  stone  on  which  the  relief  is  carved  is  a  block  of  Pentelic  marble
I  ft.  4  in.  wide  and  i  foot  high.  The  style  of  the  relief  is  so  thoroughly
archaic  that  it  can  hardly  be  dated  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  fifth
century  B.C  ;  more  probably,  perhaps,  it  is  a  work  of  the  sixth  century
B.C.  There  is  little  doubt  that  the  relief  is  a  votive  offering  dedicated
to  the  Graces,  and  that  the  small  male  figure  represents  the  dedicator.
Although  the  figures  of  the  Graces  on  this  relief  differ  from  those  on  the
Chiaramonti  relief  in  so  many  minor  particulars  that  they  cannot  both
be  exact  copies  of  the  same  original,  yet  the  general  agreement  of  their
scheme  of  composition  is  such  that  one  can  hardly  help  regarding  them
as  imitations,  more  or  less  free,  of  a  common  original.  This  original,  if
I  am  right  in  the  date  I  have  assigned  to  the  more  archaic  of  the  two
reliefs,  was  probably  a  work  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  and  cannot  there-
fore have  been  made  by  Socrates  the  philosopher.  See  H.  Lechat,
*  Hermes  et  les  Charites,'  Bulletin  de  Corr.  Helldn,  13  (1889),  pp.  467-
476,  with  plate  xiv.

But  the  more  archaic  of  the  two  reliefs  suggests  a  further  question.
Hidierto  it  has  been  usually  supposed  that  the  figure  of  Hermes  ascribed,
as  Pausanias  tells  us,  to  Socrates,  was  a  distinct  work  from  the  figures
of  the  Graces  which  were  also  ascribed  to  him ;  and  it  has  been  further
supposed  that  while  the  Graces  were  in  relief,  the  Hermes  was  a  statue
in  die  round.  But  Prof.  Ussing  held  that  Hermes  was  represented  in
the  same  relief  with  the  Graces  ;  and  if,  as  Mr.  H.  Lechat  supposes,  the
flute-player  who  is  leading  the  three  Graces  in  the  more  archaic  relief
is  Hermes,  Prof.  Ussing's  view  receives  a  strong  confirmation.  The
view  is  perfectly  consistent  with  the  language  of  Pausanias,  and  is  more-
over supported  by  the  evidence  both  of  ancient  writers  and  of  existing
monuments.  Thus  Plutarch  {De  audtertdo,  1 3)  and  Seneca  (De  beneficiis^
L  3.  7)  say  that  Hermes  and  the  Graces  were  represented  together  in
art ;  and  Comutus  tells  us  {De  natura  deorum^  1 6)  that  Hermes  was
traditionally  regarded  as  the  leader  of  the  Graces.  And  Hermes  is
represented  with  the  Graces  on  an  archaic  relief  of  Thasos  (Ad.  Michaelis,
'Archaisches  Relief  von  Thasos,*  Archdologische  Zeitung^  25  (1867),
pp.  1-14,  with  pi.  ccxvii. ;  Miss  Harrison, -<4«a>«/  Athens^  p.  544,  fig.  6);
on  a  relief  apparently  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  found  on  the  south  side
of  the  Acropolis  at  Athens  {Mittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  A  then,  3  (1878),
p.  199,  but  the  relief  is  mutilated,  only  one  of  the  Graces  is  preserved)  ;
and  on  a  Roman  relief  (O.  Jahn,  Archdologische  Beitrdge,  pi.  iv.  2).

On  the  other  hand,  if  the  original  relief  contained  the  figure  of
Hermes  leading  the  Graces,  it  is  remarkable  that  Hermes  should  be
omitted  on  the  Chiaramonti  relief  and  its  duplicates.  Another  objection
to  the  view  that  the  Propylaean  Hermes  was  grouped  with  the  Graces
in  the  relief  attributed  to  Socrates  is  that  his  figure  would  not  have  been
so  likely  to  receive  a  special  name  (*  Hermes  of  the  Portal ')  as  if  it  had
been  a  separate  image.  If  the  Hermes  was  a  separate  image  it  may
perhaps  have  stood  at  the  north-western  corner  of  the  central  building


272  GRACES  OF  SOCRATES  bk.  i.  attica

of  the  Propylaea,  in  the  niche  formed  by  the  anta  of  the  central  building
on  the  one  side  and  the  projecting  wall  and  anta  of  the  north-west  wing
on  the  other  side.  In  this  niche  there  are  marks  on  the  pavement
which  show  that  the  pedestal  of  a  life-size  statue  probably  stood  here.
In  the  corresponding  niche  at  the  south-west  comer  of  the  central
building  there  are  traces  on  the  floor  of  a  relief  having  been  set  up  here.
This  may  very  well  have  been  the  place  where  the  gn^up  of  Graces
attributed  to  Socrates  stood.  The  position  would  agree  well  with  the
statement  of  Pausanias  that  the  group  stood  just  at  the  entrance  to  the
Acropolis.     See  R.  Bohn,  Die  Propylacen^  P*  24  sq.

The  style  of  the  six  reliefs  discussed  above  proves  that  they  were
executed,  and  consequently  that  a  sanctuary  of  the  Graces  existed  on
the  Acropolis,  before  the  Propylaea  was  built.  Was  then  this  old
sanctuary  absorbed  into  the  Propylaea?  or  did  it  continue  to  exist
separately  after  the  Propylaea  was  built  ?  Pausanias,  as  we  have  seen,
tells  us  (ix.  35.  3)  that  the  Athenians  performed  a  secret  rite  "beside
the  figures  of  the  Graces  before  the  entrance  to  the  Acropolis."  If  the
figures  of  the  Graces  here  referred  to  were  those  which  tradition
ascribed  to  Socrates,  they  stood  in  the  public  entry  to  the  Acropolis,
not  a  very  likely  place  for  the  performance  of  a  secret  rite.  It
seems  more  probable  that  there  was  a  sanctuary  of  the  Graces  separate
from  the  Propylaea,  and  that  in  this  sanctuary  the  mystic  rite  was
performed.  There  are  some  indications  that  such  a  sanctuary  existed
close  to  the  temple  of  Victory  Athena  (Wingless  Victory).  For  we
learn  from  an  inscription  in  the  theatre  of  Dionysus  (C  /.  A,  iii.  No.
268)  that  at  a  date  long  subsequent  to  the  building  of  the  Propylaea
there  was  a  *  fire-bearing  priest '  of  the  Graces  and  Artemis  on  the
Tower ;  and  this  Artemis  on  the  Tower,  as  we  have  already  seen,  is
probably  identical  with  the  Hecate  on  the  Tower  whose  image  stood
beside  the  temple  of  Wingless  Victory  (Paus.  ii.  30.  2) ;  indeed,  the
goddess  is  mentioned  under  her  double  title  of  Artemis  Hecate  on  an
Athenian  inscription  (C.  /.  A,  i.  208).  Moreover,  it  is  unlikely  that  all
the  votive  reliefs,  of  which,  to  judge  by  the  surviving  specimens,  there
must  have  been  a  great  number,  should  have  been  allowed  to  be  &stened
up  in  the  Propylaea.  Probably,  therefore,  there  was  a  small  sanctuary
of  the  Graces  in  the  comer  of  the  Acropolis  immediately  to  the  east  of
the  temple  of  Victory  and  to  the  south  of  the  south-west  wing  of  the
Propylaea.

The  question  still  remains,  why  should  one  of  the  reliefs  representing
the  Graces  have  been  set  down  by  tradition  as  the  work  of  the  philo-
sopher Socrates  ?  We  have  already  seen  it  to  be  highly  improbable
that  he  should  have  executed  the  original  relief.  It  remains  to  suppose
either  that  the  sculptor  of  the  original  relief  was  a  namesake  of  the
philosopher  and  was  confused  with  him,  or  that  the  philosopher  executed
a  copy  of  the  relief  to  be  set  up  as  a  votive  offering  on  the  Acropolis.
Less  probable,  perhaps,  is  the  theory  which  would  explain  the  origin  of
the  tradition  by  the  fact  that  on  some  of  the  Athenian  coins  on  which
the  group  of  the  Graces  is  represented  there  appears  the  name  of  a
magistrate  Socrates.


CH.  xxiii  BRONZE  LIONESS  273

Modem  writers  commonly  identify  the  Propylaean  Hermes  with  an
image  of  Hermes  called  <  the  uninitiated  Hermes,'  which  stood  on  the
Acropolis  (Hesychius,  s,v,  'Ep/i^s  dfivtiros :  Diogenianus,  iv.  63  ;
Clement  of  Alexandria,  Protrept,  x.  102,  p.  81,  ed.  Potter);  but  for
this  identification  there  is  no  sufficient  ground.

In  addition  to  the  papers  of  Professors  O.  Benndorf  and  A.  Furtw'angler  on
this  sabject,  dted  above  (p.  272),  see  Ussing,  Gritchische  Reisen  und  Studien^
pp.  125-144 ;  Dyer,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  374  sqq, ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  DU  Stadt
Athen,  i.  pp.  134-142 ;  A  Milchhofer,  '  Athen,'  p.  203  sq. ;  Baumeister's  Denk-
mdUr^  s.v.  '  Charites,'  p.  376 ;  P.  Weizsacker,  *  Pausanias  und  die  Bildwerke  in
den  Propylaien,*  FUckeisnC s  TahrhiUher^  32  (1886),  pp.  i-ii ;  Lolling,  *Athen/
p.  342 ;  A  Botticher,  Die  Akropolis,  p.  187  sq, ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^
p.  373  sqq,\  Friederichs-Wolters,  GtpsabgUsse,  No.  1 18;  Roscher's  Z/xii^n,  s,v,
*  Chariten,'  i.  p.  880  sq.

It  may  here  be  mentioned  that  the  site  of  the  precinct  of  the  People
and  the  Graces,  the  existence  of  which  was  known  from  an  inscription
(C.  /.  A,  ii.  No.  605)  and  from  Josephus  (Ant,  Jud,  xiv.  8.  5),  was
discovered  in  1891  at  the  foot  and  to  the  north  of  the  hill  on  which  the
so-called  Theseum  stands,  a  little  to  the  east  of  the  Piraeus  railway-r
station.  See  AcAreov  dpxaeoAoyiKoi/,  1891,  pp.  25-27  ;  Th.  Homolle,  in
Bull,  de  Corr,  HelUn.  15  (189 1),  pp.  344-373.

22.  8.  The  Psrthian  priestess  bore  witness  that  Socrates  was
the  wisest  of  men.  See  Plato,  Apology^  p.  20  e-2 1  a ;  Diogenes
Laertius,  ii.  5.  37  ;  E.  Zeller,  Die  Philosophie  der  Griecheny  2.*  p.  50.

22.  8.  a  title  which  she  did  not  give  even  to  Anacharsis.
Anacharsis  the  Scythian  was  reckoned  by  Ephorus  among  the  Seven
Sages  (Strabo,  vii.  p.  303  ;  Diogenes  Laertius,  i.  i.  41).

23.  I.  there  were  Seven  Sages.     See  x.  24.  i  note.

23.  2.  The  story  has  never  before  been  pnt  on  record  etc
Pausanias  seems  not  to  have  been  aware  that  the  following  story  about
Leaena,  the  mistress  of  Aristogiton,  had  already  been  related  by  Pliny
(A^.  H,  xxxiv.  72  ;  cp.  /V/.,  vii.  87)  and  Plutarch  (De  garrulitcUey  8).
Indeed  Cicero  appears  to  have  told  the  story  and  to  have  mentioned
the  bronze  lioness  in  his  lost  work  On  Glory  (see  Philargyrius,  on  Virgil,
Ed,  ii.  63).  The  anecdote  was  repeated  by  Pausanias's  contemporary
Polyaenus  (viii.  45),  and  afterwards  by  Clement  of  Alexandria  (Strom,
iv.  19.  122,  p.  618,  ed.  Potter),  Athenaeus  (xiii.  p.  596  f),  and  Lactantius
(J)ivin,  Instil,  i.  20).  The  bronze  lioness  is  said  to  have  had  no  tongue
in  order  to  signify  that  Leaena,  even  in  the  agony  of  torture,  had
betrayed  the  names  of  none  of  her  associates  (Pliny,  Plutarch,  Polyaenus,
ll.cc,^  That  the  lioness  stood  in  the  Propylaea  is  mentioned  both  by
Plutarch  and  Polyaenus.  The  name  of  the  sculptor  was  Amphicrates
(Pliny,  /.r.)  According  to  Athenaeus  (/.r.)  Leaena  was  the  mistress  of
Harmodius ;  Polyaenus  agrees  with  Pausanias  in  representing  her  as
the  mistress  of  Aristogiton.  The  language  of  Pliny  and  Plutarch  leaves
this  question  open.  Lactantius  absurdly  says  that  Leaena  had  herself
slain  the  tyrant.  L.  Stephani  argued  that  the  whole  story  about  Leaena
was  invented  at  a  late  date  to  explain  the  bronze  statue  of  the  lioness
which,   Stephani  thought,   was  nothing   more   than  a  votive  offering

VOL.  II  T


274  APHRODITE  OF  CALLIAS  bk.  i.  attica

dedicated  to  the  neighbouring  image  of  Aphrodite,  the  lioness  having
been  a  symbol  of  Aphrodite.  See  L.  Stephani,  <  Parerga  Archaeologica,'
vi.  Melanges  Grico-Rotnains^  i.  pp.  173-180.  A  similar  view  was  advo-
cated by  Mr.  R.  Jacobi,  who  thought  that  a  lioness  was  a  symbol  of  a
courtesan,  because  the  grave  of  Lais  was  surmounted  with  the  figtu?e  of
one  (Paus.  ii.  2.  4),  and  that  hence  the  statue  of  the  lioness  was  placed
beside  the  image  of  Aphrodite  as  the  patroness  of  courtesans.  See  R.
Jacobi,  <  Leaena  ein  aetiologischer  Mythos,'  Fleckeisen^s  Jahrbiicher^  1 9
0^73)'  PP*  366-368.  But  it  has  been  objected  with  justice  by  E.  Plew
that  there  is  no  sufficient  evidence  of  the  lioness  having  been,  as  Stephani
and  Mr.  Jacobi  supposed,  a  symbol  or  attribute  of  Aphrodite  (Fleckeiset^s
Jahrbiicher^  20  (1874),  p.  230).  The  bronze  lioness  probably  stood  in
the  eastern  portico  of  the  Propylaea  and  in  its  southern  half ;  this  at  least
is  the  natural  inference  from  the  order  in  which  Pausanias  mentions  it.
On  the  probable  position  of  the  statues  in  the  Propylaea,  see  P.  Weiz-
sacker,  <  Die  Auf^tellung  der  Bildwerke  in  den  Propylaeen  zu  Athen,'
Archdologische  Zeitung^  32  (1875),  p.  no  sq, ;  /V£,  *  Pausanias  und  die
Bildwerke  in  den  Propylaien,'  Fleckeiseiis  Jahrbikher^  32  (1886),  pp.
1-28.

23.  2.  an  image  of  Aphrodite,  which  they  say  was  an  offering
of  Oallias.  What  seems  to  have  been  the  pedestal  of  this  statue  has
been  found  on  the  Acropolis ;  it  stands  on  the  right  when  you  have
passed  through  the  Propylaea.  It  is  a  quadrangular  block  of  Pentelic
marble,  and  bears  on  its  front  the  following  inscription  :

KoAAiias  *IinroviK6  avc^K[c]v,

" Callias  the  son  of  Hipponicus  dedicated  (this  statue)"  (C.  LA,  i.  No.
392;  /Vi,  iv.  p.  44;  Hermesy  3  (1869),  p.  166  sq,-,  Dittenberger,
Sylloge  Inscr.  Graec.  No.  7  ;  Locwy,  Inschrifien  griechischer  Bildhauer,
No.  415).  On  the  upper  surface  of  the  stone  there  are  marks  of  a
statue  having  stood  there.  The  inscription  is  in  the  old  Attic  (pre-
Euclidian)  alphabet,  and  is  judged  to  date  from  some  time  between  476
and  456  B.C.  The  dedicator  of  the  statue  may  have  been  the  Callias  who
fought  at  Marathon,  and  went  by  the  nickname  of  <  the  pit  of  wealth.'
The  story  was  that  a  Persian  prisoner  had  guided  him  to  a  buried
treasure,  which  Callias  appropriated  after  knocking  his  guide  on  the
head  (Plutarch,  Aristides^  5).  As  to  the  sculptor  Calamis,  see  note  on
V.  25.  5.  He  executed  another  statue  of  a  certain  Sosandra  which
stood  on  the  Acropolis  and  was  admired  for  its  demure  smile  and  the
decorous  grace  with  which  the  drapery  was  disposed  about  her  figure
(Lucian,  Imagines^  4  and  6 ;  zVi,  Dialog,  Meretr,  iii.  2).  This  statue
of  Sosandra  by  Calamis  has  sometimes  been  identified  with  the  statue
of  Aphrodite  here  mentioned  by  Pausanias,  it  being  supposed  that
Sosandra  (*  saving  men  *)  was  an  epithet  of  Aphrodite.  But  for  this
view  there  is  not  much  to  be  said.  Prof.  Overbeck  conjectures  that  a
relief  on  a  small  altar  or  pedestal  at  Athens  may  be  a  copy  of  Calamis's
statue  of  Sosandra;  it  represents  a  woman  moving  to  the  right  but
looking  backwards  and  lifting  the  hem  of  her  veil  with  her  left  hand.


CH.  XXIII  STATUE  OF  DIITREPHES  275

The  style  is  delicate  and  refined,  but  somewhat  archaic.  See  Overbeck,
Gesch.  d,griech,  Plastik,^  i.  p.  279  Xi^. ;  Friederichs-Wolters,  Gipsabgusse^
Na  419 ;  Brunn,  Gesch,  d,  griech,  Kiinstler^  i.  p.  129  sq, ;  Miss  Harri-
son, Ancient  Athens^  p.  3^^  ^99 •  Mr.  P.  Weizsacker  essayed  to  prove
that  the  Sosandra  of  Calamis  was  a  statue  of  Hera  (Fleckeiset^s
Jahrhiicher^  32  (1886),  p.  18  sqq^  Although  the  base  of  Calamis's
statue  of  Aphrodite  now  stands  on  the  plateau  of  the  Acropolis,  it  is
probable,  from  the  order  in  which  Pausanias  mentions  it,  that  it  originally
stood  in  the  eastern  portico  of  the  Propylaea,  perhaps  in  its  southern
hal£  See  the  papers  by  Mr.  Weizsacker,  already  cited,  in  Archdolog,
Zdtung^  32  (1875),  p.  no  sq,;  FUckeisetis  JahrbUcher^  32  (1886),
p.  I  sqq.

23.  3*  a  bronze  statne  of  Diitrephes  pierced  with  arrows  etc.
The  capture  of  Mycalessus  by  a  body  of  Thracian  mercenaries  under  the
Athenian  officer  Diitrephes  took  place  in  413  B.C  See  Thucydides,
vii.  29  sq.y  and  note  on  ix.  19.  4.  In  1839  there  was  found,  built  into
the  wall  of  a  cistern  opposite  the  western  front  of  the  Parthenon,  a
pedestal  which  may  have  supported  the  statue  of  Diitrephes  here
described  by , Pausanias.  It  is  a  square  block  of  Pentelic  marble  .70
metre  (2  ft  3^  in.)  long  by  .46  metre  (i  ft.  4  in.)  high.  On  its  top  are
two  square  holes  for  fastening  a  statue,  and  on  its  front  face  is  the
following  inscription :

*£/}/[AoAviico9  Aiir/9€<^os  dirap)(fv,
K/X(riXas  cTToccrcv

<  Hermolycus  son  of  Diitrephes  (dedicated  this  as)  a  first-fruit.  Cresilas
made  (it)  "  (C,  /.  A,  i.  No.  402  ;  Loewy,  Inschriften  griech.  Bildhauer,
No.  46).  From  this  inscription  we  learn  that  the  statue  which  stood  on
this  pedestal  was  dedicated  by  Hermolycus,  son  of  Diitrephes,  and  made
by  Cresilas.  Now  Pliny  tells  us  (N,  H,  xxxiv.  74)  that  Cresilas  made  a
statue  representing  a  wounded  man  swooning  away.  It  is,  therefore,  a
probable  inference  that  this  statue  described  by  Pliny  is  the  one  of
Diitrephes  pierced  with  arrows  which  Pausanias  here  mentions,  and  that
it  stood  on  the  pedestal  in  question.  It  is  no  serious  objection  to  this
view  that  the  statue  on  this  pedestal  was  dedicated  by  the  son  of
Diitrephes  as  a  first-fruit.  More  serious,  perhaps,  is  the  objection  that
the  lettering  of  the  inscription  points  to  a  date  not  later  than  444  B.C.,
whereas  Diitrephes  is  known  to  have  been  alive  as  late  as  411  B.C.
(Thucydides,  viii.  64).  But  on  private  monuments,  like  this,  archaic
forms  of  letters  may  very  well  have  been  employed  after  they  had
been  abandoned  in  public  inscriptions.  To  judge  from  Pausanias's
description  of  the  statue,  Diitrephes  would  seem  to  have  fallen
fighting  against  some  barbarous  people  who  made  use  of  bows  and
arrows.  They  may  have  been  the  Thracians,  since  Diitrephes  was
appointed  to  a  command  in  Thrace  in  411  B.C.  (Thucydides,  viii.  64).
Schubart  thought  that  the  arrows  which  Pausanias  saw  sticking  in  the
statue  may  have  formed  no  part  of  the  original  statue,  but  might  have
been  shot  into  it  accidentally  at  some  later  time  ;  and  Mr.  P.  Weizsacker
suggested  that  the  arrows  might   have   been    discharged  by  Roman


876


STATUE  OF  DllTRBPMES


archers  during  the  siege  of  the  Acropolis  by  Sulla.  But  this  is  highly
improbable.  Pausanias  seems  to  have  regarded  the  arrows  as  a  piece
of  the  statue.  The  statue  probably  stood  within  the  eastern  portico  of
the  Propylaca,  perhaps  in  its  southern  half.

See  L.  Rofs,  ArchaalagiicM^  AitfialK,  l.  pp.  168-170;  Th.  "Bttgk,  \a  Ztitukrifi
far  die  Atlcrthumswisienscki^t,  3  (i&ts),  p.  961  sqq.;  E.  BeuK,  L'AcrofiU
iAtkhu!,  1.  J).  aSl  JO. ;  Bnirm,  Geak.  iUr  griak.  Kii»silir,  I.  p.  ifa  tq. ;
Schubait,  in  FUcktistit's  JaXrbUckrr,  g  (1863),  p-  304  '?■ ;  Dyer,  AncUni  Athens,
p.  377 ;  Ad.  Michselii,  id  MillktiL  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Atken,  1  (1876],  p.  394  tq.  ;
id.,  Mitlheit.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  AtktH,  2  (1877),  pp.  104-106 ;  P.  Weusacker,  in
Fltcieittn's  /akrbiichir,  32  (tSS6),  pp.  15-17;  Ad.  Bbtticher,  Die  Ah-^lis,  p.
188  jjF. ;  Miss  \laitisoa,AHcitHt  Atkins, p.  T^;  Gurlitt,  Utttr  Pauianias,  p.  159
ig.;  0»erbeck,  Gtsch.  d.  grieck.  Plastik*  l.  p.  496;  A.  S.  Muirsy,  History  ef
Greek  Sculfturi,  3.  p.  339  iq.

Mr.  J.  Six  has  lately  published  a  black-figured  vase-painting  (Fig.  1 3)
which  he  takes  to  be  a  copy  of  the  statue  described  by  Pausanias.  It
representsawarriorsinkingback-
ward,  his  legs  pierced  by  two  ar-
s.  He  wears  a  crested  helmet,
brandishes  a  long  sf>ear  in  his
raised  right  hand,  and  carries  a
round  shield  on  his  left  arm.
His  left  fool  is  in  advance  and
is  planted  flat  on  the  ground  ;
while  his  right  foot,  on  which
the  weight  of  the  body  rests,  is
drawn  back  and  only  the  toes
and  ball  of  the  foot  are  in  con-
tact with  the  ground  Mr.  Six
thinks  that  the  statue  represented
not  DiJtrephes,  as  Pausanias  sup-
posed, but  Hermolycus  wounded
by  Persian  arrows  at  the  battle
of  Mycale  (see  note  on  i.  23.
10),  and  that  the  statue  was
dedicated  by  his  grandson  Her-
iv*s»-PAiHTiNc^  molycus,  son  of  Diitrephes.    He

points  out  that  the  marks  of  the  feet  on  the  pedestal  agree  with  the
posture  of  the  warrior  on  the  vase-painting.  See  J,  Six,  '  Hermolykos
und  Kresilas,'  Jahrbuch  d.  k.  d.  arthaolog.  Instiluts,  7  ^892),  pp.
185-188;  cp.  A.  Gercke,  'Vulneratus  deficiens,'  ii.  8  (1S93),  pp.
ii3-[[7.  But  we  do  not  know  that  the  Hermolycus  who  dedicated
the  statue  was  a  grandson  of  the  Hermolycus  who  fought  at
Mycale  ;  nor  do  we  Icnow  that  the  latter  was  wounded  at  Mycale  1  he
certainly  was  not  killed  there  (Herodotus,  ix.  105).  ProC  Furtwjingler
also  thinks  it  probable  that  the  wounded  man  in  the  vase-painting  is  a
copy  of  the  statue  described  by  Pausanias.  He  conjectures,  however,
that  the  Diitrephes  represented  was  not,  as  Pausanias  supposed,  the
general  who  captured  Mycalessus,  but  an  earlier  personage  of  the  same


CH.  XXIII  HEALTH  ATHENA  277

name,  the  father  of  Nicostratus  (Thucydides,  iii.  75)  See  Furtwangler,
Meisierwerke  d.  griech,  PlasHk^  pp.  277-284.

Three  other  inscribed  pedestals  of  statues  by  the  sculptor  Cresilas
have  been  found  (Loewy,  Inschriften  griech,  Bildhauer^  Nos.  45  and
47  ;  and  see  note  on  L  25.  i,  *a  statue  of  Pericles').  Cresilas,  a  native
of  Cydonia  in  Crete,  was  a  contemporary  of  Pericles,  and  flourished  in
the  last  part  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  See  Brunn,  Gesch,  d,  griech,
Kiinstler^  i.  p.  260  sqq,  ;  Overbeck,  Gesch,  d  griech,  Plastik^^  i.  p.  495
sqq, ;  Furtwangler,  Meisierwerke  d,  griech,  PiasHky  pp.  267-339.

23.  4*  the  Oretans  are  the  only  Qreek  people  who  are  accnstomed
to  the  use  of  the  how.  But  the  Athenians  had  a  large  corps  of  native
archers  in  the  Peloponnesian  war  (Thucydides,  i.  13  ;  vi.  25  and  43).

23.  4-  the  Opnntian  Locrians,  whom  Homer  described  etc.  See
H.  xiii.  712  sqq,

23.  4-  one  of  Health,  who  is  said  to  be  a  danghter  of  Aescnla-
pins.  On  a  base  of  Hymettian  marble  found  in  the  eastern  part  of  the
Propylaea,  but  not  in  its  original  position,  there  is  inscribed  a  dedication
to  August  Health  (2€/3(urTy ' Yyci^  sic).  On  the  top  of  the  base  are  the
foot-marics  of  a  statue.  See  C,  /.  A,  iii.  No.  460  ;  L.  Ross,  Archdologische
Aufsdtze^  I.  p.  189  sq,  ;  E.  BeuM,  LAcropoledAthtnes^  i.  p.  285.  The
inscription  is  of  Roman  date,  and  the  August  Health  whose  statue  stood
on  the  pedestal  was  probably  Livia,  wife  of  Augustus,  since  on  Roman
coins  she  is  called  Salus  Augusta  (*  August  Health ').  Her  statue  may
have  been  set  up  near  the  image  of  Health  here  mentioned  by  Pausanias.
Beside  the  image  of  Health  there  stood  a  statue  of  the  mother  of
Isocrates,  but  the  inscription  was  altered  at  a  later  time  ([Plutarch,]
Vit,  X.  Orat,  p.  839  d).  On  representations  of  the  goddess  Health  in
ancient  art,  see  W.  Wroth,  *  Hygieia,'  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  5
(1884),  pp.  82-101  ;  F.  Koepp,  *  Die  attische  Hygieia,'  Mittheil,  d  arch,
Inst,  in  Athen^  10  (1885),  pp.  255-271,  with  plates  viii,  ix.

23.  4*  one  of  Athena,  who  is  also  sumamed  Health.  The  story
of  the  dedication  oC  this  image  is  thus  told  by  Plutarch  {Pericles^  1 3).
While  the  great  portal  (Propylaea)  of  the  Acropolis  was  building  "  the
most  active  and  zealous  of  the  workmen  fell  from  a  height  and  was
badly  hurt,  the  doctors  despairing  of  his  life.  Pericles  was  cast  down
at  the  mishap,  but  the  goddess  appeared  to  him  in  a  dream  and  ordered
him  to  adopt  a  certain  treatment  by  following  which  he  cured  the  man
soon  and  easily.  For  this  he  set  up  the  bronze  image  of  Health  Athena
on  the  Acropolis  beside  the  altar,  which,  they  say,  had  existed  previously."
The  same  story  is  told,  with  some  variations,  by  Pliny,  who,  speaking  of
a  herb  called perdicium  or fiarthenium,  says  {N,  H,  xxii.  44) :  "A  dear
domestic  slave  of  Pericles,  the  Athenian  statesman,  having  been  engaged
in  building  a  temple  on  the  Acropolis  and  having  fallen  from  a  pinnacle
to  which  he  had  climbed,  is  said  to  have  been  healed  by  this  plant,
which  was  revealed  to  Pericles  in  a  dream  by  Minerva  (Athena)  ;  where-
fore the  plant  began  to  be  called  parthenium^  and  is  assigned  to  that
goddess  [viz.  to  Athena  Parthenos  or  Virgin  Athena].  It  is  this  slave
whose  statue,  cast  in  bronze,  is  the  famous  splanchnoptes  [*  roaster  of
entrails ']."     Thus  Pliny's  account  differs  in  two  important  points  from


ars


HEALTH  ATHENA


BK.    I.  ATTICA


Plutarch's.  In  the  first  pUce,  Pliny  says  that  the  accident  to  the  work-
nian  happened  during  the  building,  not  of  the  Fropylaea,  but  of  a
temple,  which  in  the  circumstances  must  have  been  the  temple  of  Athena
Partkenos  or  Virgin  Athena,  i.e.  the  Parthenon.  In  the  second  place,
Pliny  does  not  mention  the  dedication  of  an  image  of  Health  Athena,
but  does  mention  the  erection  of  a  &mous  sta.tue  of  the  slave  which  was
known  as  the  ifilanchnoples  or  "  roaster  of  entrails."  Elsewhere  Pliny
tells  us  {N.  H.  xxxiv.  8t)  that  the  statue  of  the  slave  was  by  a  Cyprian
sculptor  named  Styppax,  and  that  it  represented  the  man  roasting
entrails  while,  with  pufied  and  swollen  cheeks,  he  blew  up  the  flame
with  his  breath.  The  herb  Partkenium  grew  about  the  Acropolis,  and
the  famishing  Athenians  were  fain  to  stay  the  pangs  of  hunger  with  it
during  the  siege  by  Sulta  (Plutarch,  Sulla,  13).  It  is  said  to  be  the
Matricaria  Parlhenium  or  Pariilaria  tUffitsa  of  Linnaeus,  which  still
grows  about  the  Acropolis  in  spring,  "and  pursues  with  its  aroma  the
visitor  who  crushes  it  with  his  foot"  (Beul^).  Certainly  in  spring  the
southern  side  of  the  Acropolis  is  pervaded  by  the  heavy,  sickly  odour
of  some  planL  But  what  the  plant  is  which  emits  this  disagreeable
scent,  1  did  riot  discover.

In  1839  the  pedestal  which  supported  the  statue  of  Health  Athena
was  found  in  its  original  position,  where  it  still  stands,  just  outside  the
eastern  portico  of  the  Propylaea,
opposite  to  and  almost  abutting
on  the  south-eastern  column  of
the  portico.  The  pedestal  proper
(marked  D  in  Fig.  14)  is  of  white
marble  and  has  the  shape  of  about
three-quarters  of  a  circle,  its  flat
side  being  turned  toward  the
column  of  the  portico.       It  mca-

diameter,  and  stands  .405  metre
(l  ft.  3  J  in.)  high,  exclusive  of  the
step  or  base  on  which  it  rests.
This  step  or  base,  which  is  of  the
same  shape  as  the  pedestal,  is
placed  with  its  flat  side  in  contact
with  the  stylobate  of  the  portico,
and  its  top  is  exactly  on  a  level
with  the  top  of  the  stylobate.  On
the  top  of  the  pedestal  are  two
marks  showing  where  the  feet  of
the  statue  stood ;  from  these  marks
the  right  foot,
tfae  left  foot  thrown  a  good  deal  back.     On  the  front  of  the  pedestal.


D  ADJAdHT  STOHIIS.

it  appears  that  the  statue  &ced  north-east  and  rested

with  tfae  left  foot  th  _

lookmg  to  the  north-east  and  east,  is  engraved  the  following  inscription  :


*A0<K<aioi  Tit  'A0<vauu  r«i  'Yytei
Tivppoi  ianiiiam  'A&itaSot


CH.  3KIII  HEALTH  ATHENA  279

"  The  Athenians  dedicated  (this  image)  to  Health  Athena.  Pyrrhus,
an  Athenian,  made  (the  image)  "  (C.  LA,  i.  No.  335  ;  Hicks,  Greek
Historical  Inscriptions^  No.  36 ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Grace,
No.  365  ;  Loewy,  Inschriften  griech,  Kiinstler^  No.  53).  Pliny  tells  us
that  the  sculptor  Pyrrhus  made  a  statue  of  Health  Athena,  doubtless
the  statue  which  stood  on  this  pedestal  (Pliny,  N,  H,  xxxiv.  80,  "  Pyrrhus
(fecit)  HygicLm  et  Minervam^^  where  the  et  should  probably  be  omitted,
as  L.  Ross  said).  As  the  inscription  shows  at  least  one  trace  (viz.  the
use  of  17  in  a  single  instance)  of  the  transition  from  the  old  Attic  to  the
Ionic  alphabet,  L.  Ross  dated  it  about  420  B.C.,  but  Mr.  P.  Wolters
would  put  it  some  years  earlier.

The  inscription  proves  that  the  statue  was  dedicated  by  the
Athenians,  not  by  Pericles,  as  Plutarch  says  it  was.  Mr.  P.  Wolters
has  recently  pointed  out  another  reason  for  questioning  the  truth  of  the
tradition  related  by  Plutarch  as  to  the  setting  up  of  the  statue.  If
Plutarch  is  right,  the  statue  must  have  been  set  up  while  the  Propylaea
was  still  building  or  immediately  after  it  was  finished,  that  is,  just  before
the  outbreak  of  the  Peloponnesian  war.  Now  part  of  the  evidence
which  proves  that  the  Propylaea  was  never  completed  in  accordance
with  the  original  design  of  Mnesicles  is  the  state  of  the  floor.  Each
column  is  placed  in  a  shallow  square  depression  cut  in  the  pavement ;
and  the  original  intention  seems  to  have  been  to  pare  the  whole  pave-
ment down  to  the  level  of  these  shallow  depressions  in  which  the  columns
stand.  This  intention  was  never  carried  out,  so  that  the  pavement
remains  everywhere  (except  in  these  depressions)  a  trifle  higher  than
Mnesicles  meant  that  it  should  be.  Now,  as  we  have  seen,  the  step  or
base  on  which  the  pedestal  of  Health  Athena  rests  is  exactly  on  a  level
with  the  existing  top  of  the  stylobate ;  indeed,  the  edge  of  the  pedestal
actually  overlaps  and  rests  on  the  stylobate.  This  proves,  Mr.  Wolters
thinks,  that  the  statue  was  not  set  up  imtil  all  intention  of  completing
and  perfecting  the  Propylaea  in  accordance  with  Mnesicles's  design  had
been  abandoned.  It  could  not,  therefore,  have  been  set  up  while  the
Propylaea  was  still  building  or  even  at  the  moment  when  its  construction
was  suddenly  interrupted  by  the  outbreak  of  the  Peloponnesian  war,
for  Mnesicles  would  then  still  hope  to  be  able  to  finish  his  great  work.
Probably  it  was  set  up  some  years  after  the  outbreak  of  the  war.  Mr.
Wolters  conjectures  that  it  may  have  been  dedicated  in  429  B.C.  as  a
thank-offering  for  the  cessation  of  the  great  plague.  He  supposes  that  Plu-
tarch's story  of  the  dedication  of  the  statue  arose  from  a  confusion.  A
slave  of  Pericles  had  fallen  from  the  Parthenon,  as  Pliny  implies,  and  his
wonderful  ciu-e  had  been  commemorated  by  the  statue  of  the  '  entrail-
bumer,'  which  probably  stood  close  to  the  Parthenon,  on  the  spot  where
the  man  fell.  Legend,  as  represented  by  Plutarch's  story,  wrongly
transferred  this  incident  from  the  Parthenon  to  the  Propylaea,  and
assigned  it  as  the  occasion  of  dedicating  the  statue  of  Health  Athena.
Such  is  Mr.  Wolters's  theory.

With  regard  to  the  manner  in  which  Health  Athena  was  represented
in  this  statue,  our  only  clue  consists  in  the  marks  on  the  top  of  the
pedestal.     One  of  these  marks  was  thought  by  Prof.  Michaelis  to  indicate


28o  HEALTH  ATHENA  bk.  i.  attic  a

that  the  goddess  had  been  holding  a  spear  with  its  lower  end  resting  on
the  ground.  But  this  mark,  according  to  Mr.  R.  Bohn,  is  probably  of
later  date  than  the  statue.  Another  theory  of  Prof.  Michaelis's,  that  a
statue  in  Cassel  is  a  reproduction  of  the  statue  in  question,  has  been
disproved  by  an  exact  comparison  of  their  pedestals.  Bergk  and  Prof.
Loschcke  conjectured  that  a  relief  on  a  marble  candelabra  in  the  Vatican
representing  Athena  feeding  a  serpent  (Friederichs-Wolters,  GipsabgUsse^
No.  2124)  may  have  been  copied  ^m  Pyrrhus's  statue  of  Health  Athena.
A  similar  group  on  some  Athenian  coins  (a  woman  allowing  a  serpent
to  drink  out  of  a  saucer  which  she  holds  in  her  hand)  was  interpreted
by  Beuld  as  a  copy  of  the  same  statue  (Monncdes  iTAMneSy  p.  259  sq,)
To  these  identifications  it  is  objected  by  Mr.  P.  Wolters  that  the  serpent
as  a  symbol  of  the  goddess  of  Health  was  borrowed  from  the  worship  of
Aesculapius,  which  was  not  imported  into  Athens  until  the  end  of  the
fifth  century  B.C. ;  in  other  words,  until  some  time  after  the  statue  by
Pyrrhus  was  made.  But  the  objection  appears  to  be  refuted  by  a  frag-
ment of  a  vase-painting,  published  by  Mr.  Wolters  himself  in  the  same
article  (see  below).  An  inscribed  statuette  of  white  marble  found  in  the
sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  at  Epidaurus  represents  Health  Athena  armed
with  a  shield  and  rushing  impetuously  along,  her  drapery  fluttering
behind  her ;  her  helmet  is  adorned  with  the  figure  of  a  sphinx  between
two  winged  horses  (£.  Petersen,  '  Athenastatuen  von  Epidauros,'
MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  11  (1886),  p.  309  sqq,\  *E<f}YjfjL€pls
dpxO'f'O^oyiKrj,  1886,  p.  250  sqq,^  with  pi.  12).

Abutting  on  the  pedestal  of  Health  Athena,  or,  more  strictly,  on  the
step  which  supports  the  pedestal,  stand  in  their  original  situations  two
large  blocks  of  marble,  the  meaning  of  which  was  long  a  puzzle  to
archaeologists.  The  larger  of  the  two  (commonly  designated  on  plans
as  F)  is  1.67  metres  (5  ft.  3  in.)  long  by  1.02  metres  (3  ft.  3 J  in.)  deep,
and  abuts  on  the  east  side  of  the  pedestal.  Four  holes  on  the  top  of
the  block  show  that  it  supported  an  altar  or  table  on  which  probably
offerings  to  the  image  were  placed.  As  this  block  rests  on  an  accumula-
tion of  soil  at  a  higher  level  than  the  base  or  step  which  supports
the  pedestal  of  Health  Athena  and  which  is  bedded  on  the  rock,  it  is
probable  that  the  altar  or  sacrificial  table  was  erected  later  than  the
statue.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  inscription  which  shows  that  the
statue  was  set  up  merely  as  a  votive  offering,  not  as  a  statue  to  be
worshipped.

The  other  block  (conunonly  marked  E  on  plans)  measures  1.5 1
metres  long  by  .375  metre  high  and  .465  wide,  and  abuts  on  the  south-
east side  of  the  base  of  the  statue  in  a  slanting  direction,  lying  north-
west and  south-east.  Its  northern  end  fits  into  the  round  step  of  the
Athena  pedestal,  and  its  north-east  comer  lies  under  block  F,  showing
that  F  was  added  later.  The  line  of  the  block  E  is  prolonged  to  the
south-east  by  a  groove  cut  in  the  natural  rock  and  extending  to  the
rocky  wall  which  bounds  the  precinct  of  the  Brauronian  Artemis  on  the
north.  Probably  therefore,  as  Mr.  R.  Bohn  suggested,  block  E  is  the
remnant  of  a  row  of  similar  blocks  intended  to  keep  the  rain-water  from
flowing  into  the  comer  between  the  Propylaea  and  the  precinct  of  the


CH.  XXIII  HEALTH  ATHENA  281

Brauronian  Artemis.  For  the  ground  rises  to  the  east  of  the  Propylaea  ;
hence  the  water  flows  from  it  westward  toward  the  Propylaea.  The  low
dam  formed  by  the  row  of  marble  blocks  diverted  the  water  from  the
comer  between  the  Propylaea  and  the  Brauronian  precinct,  and  caused
it  to  flow  along  the  front  of  the  eastern  portico  to  the  ancient  channel
that  runs  through  the  central  gateu'ay  of  the  Propylaea.

Plutarch,  as  we  have  seen,  tells  us  (Pericles^  13)  that  the  statue  of
Health  Athena  was  set  up  beside  a  previously -existing  altar  of  the
goddess.  Aristides  says  that  "  the  most  ancient  of  the  Athenians  founded
an  altar  of  Health  Athena"  (Or,  ii.  vol.  i.  p.  22,  ed.  Dindorf).  The
marble  foundations  of  this  altar  are  still  to  be  seen  3.60  metres  (11  ft.
10  in.)  east  of  the  pedestal  of  Health  Athena.  On  a  quadrangular
basement  or  step,  2.60  metres  (8  ft.  6  in.)  square,  rises  the  altar  proper,
of  which  a  portion  .88  metre  high  is  still  preserved.  From  the  position
of  the  altar  proper  nearer  the  eastern  than  the  western  side  of  the  base-
ment it  appears  that  the  priest  stood  on  the  western  side  of  it,  facing
east.  This  shows  that  the  worshipped  statue  of  the  goddess  must  have
been  situated  to  the  east  of  the  altar  and  cannot  have  been  the  statue
made  by  Pyrrhus,  otherwise  the  priest  in  sacrificing  would  have  had  his
back  to  the  goddess.  The  sacrifice  to  Health  Athena  is  mentioned  on
an  Attic  inscription  {C,LA,  ii.  No.  163;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,
Graec,  No.  380).  The  altar  seems  to  date  from  the  fifth  century  B.C.,
and  as  the  rock  on  which  it  stands  appears  to  have  been  reduced  to  its
present  level  when  the  Propylaea  was  built,  it  is  probable  that  the  altar
was  built  at  the  same  time  as  the  Propylaea,  and  that  it  replaced  an
older  altar  which  stood  about  the  same  spot,  though  on  a  higher  level.
The  antiquity  of  the  worship  of  Health  Athena  on  the  Acropolis  is
attested  by  the  fragment  of  a  red-figured  vase  foimd  near  the  southern
wall  of  the  Acropolis  in  1888,  and  inscribed  with  the  following  dedica-
tion :  "  To  Health  Athena.  Callias  made  and  dedicated  (this)  "  (AcArioi^
dp\<uo\oyi,K6vy  1888,  p.  32  ;  MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst  in  Athen^  16  (189 1),
p.  154).  From  the  use  of  the  crossed  theta  (0)  in  the  inscription  it
appears  that  the  inscription  must  belong  to  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  since
this  form  of  the  letter  went  out  of  use  in  Attic  inscriptions  at  the  close
of  that  century  (KirchhofT,  Studien  zur  Geschichte  des  griech.  Alphabets ^^
p.  94).  On  this  potsherd,  besides  the  inscription,  there  is  painted  a  bit
of  drapery  and  a  piece  of  a  shield  emblazoned  with  a  serpent.  These
are  doubtless  fragments  of  a  picture  of  Health  Athena  with  the  healing
serpent  as  her  crest.  Hence  we  learn  that  the  serpent-crest  of  Health
Athena  was  known  in  Athens  as  early  as  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  and  was
not  (as  Mr.  Wolters  supposed)  introduced  with  the  worship  of  Aesculapius
from  Epidaurus  at  the  close  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.

See  L.  Ross,  Archdologische  Aufsdize^  I.  pp.  185-194 ;  Th.  Bergk,  in  Zeitschrift
f.  dU  AUerthumswissenschaft^  3  (1845),  p.  966  sqq, ;  £.  Beul^,  LAcropoU
tTAthhuSf  I.  p.  282  sqq, ;  Dyer,  Ancient  Athens,  pp.  377-380 ;  A.  Michaelis,  *  Die
Statue  und  der  Altar  der  Athena  Hygieia,'  MittheU,  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  i
(1876),  pp.  284-294 ;  R.  Bohn,  '  Zur  Basis  der  Athena  Hygieia,'  MittheiL  d,  arch,
Inst,  in  Athen,  5  (1880),  pp.  331-334;  A.  Milchhofer,  'Athen/  p.  204;  Lolling,
*  Athen,'  p.  343 ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  pp.  389-393 ;  r.  Wolters,  'Zur


282  BOY  WITH  SPRINKLER  bk.  i.  attica

Athena  Hygieia  des  Pyrrhos/  MittheiL  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  i6  (1891),  pp.
153-165.

23.  5.  Elderly  Satyrs  are  named  Silennses.  Similarly  the  author
of  the  Etymologicum  Magnum  says  (s,v,  SctAi^vos,  p.  7 1  o)  "  aged  satyrs
are  called  Silenuses,"  and  Servius  on  Virgil,  EcL  vi.  1 4,  says  *<  Silenuses,
before  they  grow  old,  are  satyrs."  This  distinction  was  not,  however,
maintained  in  common  parlance,  the  name  Satyr  being  used  to  include
old  as  well  as  young  members  of  this  fabulous  stock ;  for  example
Pollux  (iv.  142)  speaks  of  "a  hoary  Satyr."  In  Euripides's  play.  The
Cyclops^  Silenus  speaks  of  the  Satyrs  as  his  children  (verses  13,  27,  82,
269),  which  so  far  bears  out  the  distinction  noticed  by  Pausanias.  Cp.
L.  Stephani,  in  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1874,  ?•  67,  note  2.

23.  5.  Enphemns,  a  Carian,  said  that  etc.  The  following  account
of  the  Isles  of  the  Satyrs  situated  in  the  Atlantic  Ocean  has  all  the
appearance  of  being  a  sailor's  yam  with  which  Euphemus  gulled  the
credulous  Pausanias.  Schubart  gravely  treated  it  as  the  narrative  of
an  explorer  whose  ship,  putting  in  to  the  western  coast  of  Equatorial
Africa,  had  been  attacked  by  gorillas  or  other  man-like  apes — as  if  these
shy  and  solitary,  though  certainly  fierce  and  dangerous  creatures,  were
in  the  habit  of  combining  to  rush  out  of  their  forests  and  attack  vessels
which  happen  to  put  in  to  the  shore  I  He  reminds  us  of  the  wild  hairy
men  whom  the  Carthaginian  explorer  Hanno  reported  to  have  seen  on
an  island  off  the  west  coast  of  Africa,  and  which  the  interpreters  called
gorillas  (Hanno,  in  Geographi  Graeci  MinoreSy  ed.  Miiller,  i.  p.  13).
These  latter  may  certainly  have  been  large  apes ;  but  they  did  not  attack
the  ship.  On  the  contrary,  they  fled  with  great  agility,  scrambling  up
the  rocks  most  nimbly,  while  the  three  females  who  were  caught  by  the
sailors  bit  and  scratched  their  captors  so  fiercely  that  they  had  to  be
killed,  and  only  their  skins  were  brought  back  as  a  trophy  to  Carthage.
Moreover,  these  *  gorillas '  of  Hanno  had  not  the  long  tails  with  which
Euphemus  so  liberally  provided  his  wild  men  and  which,  Mr.  Schubart
is  constrained  to  admit,  were  probably  thrown  in  by  the  narrator  to
heighten  the  effect  of  the  picture.  See  Schubart,  in  FleckeisetCs  JcJir-
bucher^  21  (1875),  P-  4^5  ^9'  Others,  with  still  less  probability,  have
identified  the  Isles  of  the  Satyrs  with  the  West  Indies,  and  the  Satyrs
themselves  with  the  Indians.  See  Lafitau,  Mcntrs  des  Sauvages
Ameriquains  (Paris,  1724),  i.  p.  31  f^.  ;  Lucien  de  Rosny,  Les  Antilles
(Paris,  1886),  p.  22.

23.  7'  the  bronze  boy  holding  the  sprinkler.  With  the  mention
of  the  image  of  Health  Athena  (§  4)  Pausanias  fairly  quits  the  Propylaea
and  sets  out  on  his  tour  round  the  Acropolis,  going  first  south-east-
ward towards  the  precinct  of  Brauronian  Artemis,  which  he  mentions
inmiediately  below.  As  a  sprinkler  (perirrhanterion)  was  a  basin  con-
taining holy  water  which  stood  at  the  entrance  to  every  sanctuary  in
order  that  worshippers  might  sprinkle  themselves  before  entering  the
precinct  (Pollux,  i.  8,  i.  25,  i.  32  ;  cp.  viii.  65  ;  K.  B6tticher,  Tektanik
der  Hellenen^  %  51.  7-i4)>  it  has  been  conjectured  that  this  bronze
statue  of  the  boy  with  the  sprinkler  may  have  served  a  practical  purpose,
being  placed  at  the  entrance  to  the  precinct  of  Brauronian  Artemis  (see


CH.  3KIII  BRAURONIAN  ARTEMIS  283

below),  and  holding  the  holy  water  in  his  basin.  Cp.  C.  Wachsmuth,
Die  Stadi  Atheriy  i.  p.  143  sq,\  A.  Milchhofer,  *Athen,'  p.  204;
Lolling,  'Athen,'  p.  345.  Th.  Bergk  considered  that  this  statue  of  the
boy  with  the  sprinkler  was  identical  with  a  statue  of  *  a  boy  fumigator '
(Jnur  suffitar\  which  Pliny  mentions  as  a  work  of  the  same  sculptor
Lycius  {N.  H.  xxxiv.  79).  It  might  be  suggested  that  the  statue  of
the  '  boy  fumigator '  was  identical  with  another  work  of  Lycius,  which
Pliny  in  the  same  paragraph  describes  as  "  a  boy  blowing  up  a  languid
fire."  Pliny,  indeed,  mentions  them  as  if  they  were  distinct  works  ;  but
he  may  possibly  have  taken  his  information  from  two  writers  without
perceiving  that  they  were  referring  to  the  same  statue.  See  Th.  Bergk,
in  Zeitschrift  fur  die  Alterthumswissenschaft^  3  (1845),  p.  970  sq, ;
Brunn,  Gesch,  d,  griech,  KUnstler^  i.  p.  259  ;  Overbeck,  Gesch,  d,griech,
PlcaUk^^  I.  pp.  493  J^.,  505  ;  M.  Mayer,  <  Splanchnoptes,'  Jakrbuch  d
archdoL  Instituts^  8  (1893),  p-  218  sqq.  As  to  the  sculptor  Lycius,
see  note  on  v.  22.  3.

23.  7-  Perseus  after  he  has  done  the  deed  on  Medusa a

work  of  Myron.  Cp.  ii.  27.  2.  Pliny  mentions  a  statue  of  Perseus
by  Myron  (A^.  H,  xxxiv.  57),  which  may  have  been  the  one  here
mentionedjby  Pausanias.  Two  ancient  heads  of  Perseus,  both  replicas
of  a  common  original,  are  conjectured  by  Prof.  Furtwangler  to  be
copies  of  the  head  of  Myron's  statue.  One  of  them  is  in  the  British
Museum :  the  other  was  found  recendy  at  Rome.  See  A.  S.  Murray,
*Bust  of  Perseus,'  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  2  (1881),  p.  55  sq, ;  A.
Furtwangler,  Meisterwerke  d,  griech,  Plastik^  pp.  382-388,  with  pi.  xxil
For  a  list  of  existing  monuments  of  ancient  art  on  which  Perseus  is
represented  after  his  slaughter  of  Medusa,  see  Fr.  Knatz,  Quomodo
Persei  fabulam  artifices  Graeci  et  Rotnatd  tractaverint  (Bonnae,  1 893),
p.  17  sqq,     Cp.  V.  18.  5  note,

23.  7-  a  sanctuary  of  Brauronian  Artemis.  From  the  central
gateway  of  the  Propylaea  an  ancient  road  leads  nearly  due  east  to  the
middle  of  the  Acropolis ;  it  then  turns  south,  and  ends  at  the  eastern
front  of  the  Parthenon.  This  was  doubtless  the  road  along  which  the
great  religious  processions  passed ;  the  grooves  or  ruts  in  which  the
wheels  of  the  chariots  ran  can  still  be  seen  in  places.  On  both  sides  of
the  road,  especially  in  its  first  half,  the  rock  has  been  cut  and  levelled
in  many  places  to  receive  the  bases  of  votive  offerings.  These  cuttings  in
the  rock  begin  near  the  pedestal  of  Health  Athena  (see  above,  p.  277  sqq,)
and  extend  close  up  to  the  wall  of  rock,  which  here  runs  parallel  to  the
processional  road  on  the  south.  This  wall  of  rock,  formed  artificially
by  cutting  away  the  natural  rock  perpendicularly,  is  the  northern  boundary
of  a  terrace  lying  to  the  south-east  of  the  Propylaea.  The  terrace  has
the  shape  of  an  irregular  quadrangle,  and  is  about  48  metres  (157  ft
6  in.)  long  from  east  to  west.  It  is  bounded  on  the  west  by  the  pre-
historic polygonal  wall  (commonly  known  as  the  Pelasgic  wall),  on  the
south  by  the  southern  fortification  wall  of  the  Acropolis,  on  the  north  by
the  wall  of  rock  mentioned  above,  and  on  the  east  by  another  low  wall
of  rock  which  supports  a  higher  but  smaller  terrace  lying  to  the  east
Aflis^oCcq^sm^stqis  cut  is  the  nxic  lads  up  ta  tiie  tenacc  near


284  BRAURONIAN  ARTEMIS  bk.  i.  attica

its  north-eastern  comer.  The  staircase  is  flanked  on  both  sides  by
cuttings  in  the  rock  for  the  reception  of  statues  or  other  votive  offerings.
This  terrace  is  most  probably  the  sanctuary  of  Brauronian  Artemis.  It
appears  to  have  been  merely  a  precinct  with  images  and  an  altar ;  at
least  classical  authors  and  inscriptions  make  no  mention  of  a  temple  of
Brauronian  Artemis  on  the  Acropolis,  and  no  foundations  of  a  temple
have  been  found  within  her  precinct.  But  colonnades  appear  to  have
extended  along  the  eastern  and  southern  sides  of  the  sacred  enclosure.
See  Beul^,  UAcropole  cPAthines^  i.  p.  291  sqq, ;  Milchhofer,  *Athen,'
p.  204  sq,  \  Lolling,  *  Athen,'  p.  344 ;  W.  Dorpfeld,  in  MittheiL  d.
arch.  Inst,  in  Athene  14  (1889),  pp.  304,  306,  with  the  plan  on
p.  307 ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  404.  As  to  the  traces  of
bear-worship  in  the  rites  of  Brauronian  Artemis,  see  note  on  viii.  13.  i.
In  this  connexion  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  a  marble  statuette  of
a  bear  seated  on  his  haunches  was  found  within  the  precinct  of
Brauronian  Artemis  on  the  Acropolis  (Beul^  op,  cit.  i.  p.  298^.
The  statuette  is  figured  in  Miss  Harrison's  Ancient  Athens  (p.  403).
At  the  festival  of  the  goddess  a  goat  was  brought  and  sacrificed  to
her  (Hesychius,  s,v,  'Bpavpatviots  \  cp.  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^  i.
p.  445,  line  5  sqq,)  To  this  sacrifice  Varro  probably  refers  when  he
says  that  a  goat  was  not  driven  up  to  the  Acropolis  except  once  (a
year  ?)  for  a  necessary  sacrifice  (De  re  rustica^  i.  2.  20  ;  the  rule  against
admitting  goats  to  the  Acropolis  is  mentioned  also  by  Athenaeus,  xiii.
p.  587  a).  Elsewhere  I  have  wrongly  assumed  that  the  goat  annually
sacrificed  on  the  Acropolis  was  sacrificed  to  Athena  {The  Golden  Bought
2.  p.  63  sq,)

23.  7-  the  image  is  a  work  of  Praxiteles at  Branron  is  the

old  wooden  image  etc.  Brauron,  Sparta,  Comana  in  Cappadocia,  and
Laodicea  in  Syria,  all  claimed  to  have  the  famous  image  of  the  Tauric
Artemis  which  Iphigenia  was  said  to  have  brought  from  the  Tauric
Chersonese  (the  Crimea)  to  Brauron  in  Attica.  See  i.  33.  i  ;  iii.  16.
7-1 1,  with  the  note  on  8  ;  viii.  46.  3.  Pausanias  himself  thought  that
the  real  image  was  at  Sparta  (iii.  16.  7-1 1).  Prof.  C.  Robert  thinks
that  the  legend  of  the  bringing  of  the  image  from  the  Crimea  to  Brauron
was  an  invention  of  Euripides  in  his  play  iphigenia  in  Tauris^  and  that
the  popularity  which  this  fiction  obtained  through  the  medium  of  the
poet's  verses  induced  various  towns,  which  possessed  ancient  images  of
Artemis,  to  set  up  claims  to  the  possession  of  the  genuine  image  of  the
Tauric  Artemis.  The  story  that  the  ancient  image  at  Brauron  was
carried  off  by  Xerxes  (iii.  16.  8  ;  viii.  46.  3)  is  treated  by  Prof.  C.
Robert  as  another  fiction  devised  to  support  the  claims  of  Laodicea  to
the  possession  of  the  true  image.  He  thinks  that  if  the  image  at
Brauron  had  been  really  carried  off  by  Xerxes,  Euripides  must  have
alluded  to  its  capture  in  his  play,  and  must  have  put  into  the  mouth  of
Athena  a  promise  that  the  image  would  one  day  be  restored.  The
argument  is  scarcely  convincing,  though  Prof.  Robert  regards  it  as
conclusive.     See  C.  Robert,  Archdologische  Mdrchen,  pp.  144-150.

From  inscriptions  containing  lists  of  the  treasures  in  the  sanctuary
of  Brauronian  Artemis  it  appears  that  at  least  as  early  as  OL  108.  3


CH.  xxiii  BRAURONIAN  ARTEMIS  28s

(346/5  B.C.)  there  were  two  images  of  her  in  the  sanctuary.  One  of
the  images  is  referred  to  as  "  the  idol "  (hedos\  "  the  old  idol,"  "  the
stone  idol " ;  the  other  is  designated  "  the  image "  {agalma)^  "  the
upright  image,"  "the  standing  image"  (C,LA,  ii.  Nos.  751,  754,  755,
756,  757,  758;  Jahn-Michaelis,  Pausaniae  Descriptio  arcis^  p.  8  ;  C.
Robert,  Archaologische  Mdrcken^  P*  1 50  sqq,)  From  this  we  infer  that
the  old  image  was  of  stone  and  was  in  a  sitting  posture,  and  that  the
new  image  was  of  some  other  material  than  stone  and  was  in  a  standing
posture.  The  new  image  was  doubtless  the  one  by  Praxiteles  which
Pausanias  mentions.  As  it  was  not  of  marble,  it  must  have  been  of
wood  or  bronze  or  gold  and  ivory.  As  a  work  of  Praxiteles  (whether  we
take  this  Praxiteles  to  be  the  great  sculptor  of  that  name  or  a  namesake
of  his  who  lived  in  the  fifth  century  B.C.)  the  image  was  almost  certainly
not  of  wood,  that  material  being  ^rarely  used  by  Greek  sculptors  of  the
best  period  (though  we  hear  of  wooden  statues  of  the  orator  Lycurgus
and  his  sons  made  by  Timarchus  and  Cephisodotus,  the  sons  of
Praxiteles ;  see  [Plutarch,]  Vit  X,  Orat,  p.  843  e).  Probably  there-
fore it  was  either  of  bronze  or  of  gold  and  ivory.  Prof.  C.  Robert  decides
in  favour  of  gold  and  ivory  on  the  ground  that  the  inscriptions  mention
many  garments  dedicated  by  women  and  actually  worn  by  the  image  ;
for  he  assumes  that  real  garments  would  not  have  been  placed  on  a
bronze  image.  And  since  the  use  of  gold  and  ivory  as  materials  for  a
statue  had  gone  out  in  the  time  of  the  younger  Praxiteles,  Prof.  Robert
concludes  that  the  sculptor  was  the  elder  Praxiteles.  This  argument
rests  on  the  gratuitous  and  unproved  assumption  that  real  garments  would
not  have  been  placed  on  a  bronze  image.  I  see  no  reason  whatever  for
such  an  assumption,  which  is  disproved  by  the  simple  fact  that  linen
garments  were  worn  by  a  bronze  image  at  Elis  (Pausanias,  vi.  25.  5),
and  that  garments  were  regularly  woven  for  the  bronze  image  of  the
Amyclaean  Apollo  (Paus.  iii.  16.  2  ;  cp.  iii.  19.  2).  In  the  present  case
the  probabilities  seem  to  me  all  in  favour  of  bronze  as  the  material  of
the  image  and  the  younger  Praxiteles  as  the  sculptor.  Images  of  gold
and  ivory  were  rare,  and  if  the  image  of  the  Brauronian  Artemis  had
been  of  these  costly  materials,  Pausanias  would  probably  have  noted  the
fact.  Moreover  the  date  (the  third  quarter  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.)
of  the  inscriptions  which  distinguish  the  old  image  from  the  new  one  is
entirely  in  favour  of  the  younger  Praxiteles,  who  was  at  the  height  of
his  activity  and  fame  at  that  time.  Finally,  the  very  existence  of
an  older  Praxiteles  is  a  mere  fiction  of  archaeologists ;  ancient  writers
are  wholly  ignorant  of  any  such  person  (see  note  on  i.  2.  4).
Prof.  Robert,  however,  goes  farther.  Some  years  ago  there  was
found  on  the  Acropolis  a  fragment  of  a  small  vase  adorned  with
the  figure  of  a  woman  (Artemis  ?)  armed  with  a  bow  and  quiver
and  smelling  at  a  flower.  This  figure  on  the  potsherd  Prof.  Robert
supposes  to  be  a  copy  of  the  supposed  gold  and  ivory  statue  of  the
supposed  Praxiteles.  His  views  are  accepted  by  Miss  Harrison.  See
Prof.  Robert's  Archdologische  Mdrchen^  pp.  150-159;  Miss  Harrison,
Ancient  Atherts^  P«  395  ^9^-  Prof.  Studniczka  has  conjectured  that  the
statue  of  a  young  woman  standing  and  fastening  her  robe  over  her


286  THE  WOODEN  HORSE  bk.  i.  attica

right  shoulder  (known  as  the  Diana  of  Gabii)  is  a  copy  of  Praxiteles's
statue  of  Brauronian  Artemis  (Fr.  Studniczka,  Vermutungen  zur  griech,
KunstgescMchte^  pp.  1 8-36 ;  die  statue  is  figxuped  in  MiiUer-Wieseler,
Denkmdler^  2,  pi.  xvi.  No.  180).  As  we  possess  no  description  of
Praxiteles's  statue,  Prof.  Studniczka's  theory  is  necessarily  an  idle  guess.
23.  8.  a  bronze  figure  of  the  so-called  Wooden  Horse  etc.
Hesychius  mentions  (s,v.  8ovpu>s  imros)  that  a  bronze  statue  of  the
famous  Wooden  Horse  stood  on  the  Acropolis  at  Athens,  and  that  four
men  were  represented  peeping  out  of  it.  The  scholiast  on  Aristophanes
(BirdSy  1 1 28)  mentions  the  same  statue,  and  adds  that  it  bore  the
inscription  :  "  Chaeredemus  of  Coele,  son  of  Evangelus,  dedicated  (it)."
In  1840  two  large  blocks  of  Pentelic  marble  bearing  this  inscription
were  found  within  the  precinct  of  Brauronian  Artemis.  They  doubt-
less formed  part  of  the  pedestal  which  supported  the  statue  of  the  horse.
The  inscription  contains  further  the  name  of  the  sculptor;  it  runs
thus:

Xai/DcScjuos  EvayycXov  ck  KoiXcs  dvc^CKcv
SrpoyyvAtbv  kiroUo'tv

"  Chaeredemus  of  Coele,  son  of  Evangelus,  dedicated  (it)  ;  Strongylion
made  (it)  "  (C  /.  A,  i.  406  ;  Loewy,  Inschriften  griech.  Bildhauer^  No.
52).  As  the  inscription  is  in  the  old  Attic  alphabet  it  must  be  earlier
than  403/2  B.c,  the  date  when  the  use  of  that  alphabet  was  officially
abolished.  On  the  other  hand,  the  use  of  the  four-stroke  sigma  ($)
instead  of  the  old  three-stroke  sigma  (^)  makes  it  probable  that  the
inscription  is  later  than  447/6  B.a  (KirchhofT,  Siudien  zur  Gesch,  d,
griech,  Alphabets^^  p.  94).  In  his  play  The  Birds^  which  was  acted
in  414  B.C.,  Aristophanes  speaks  of  "horses  as  big  as  the  Wooden
Horse  "  (y.  1 1 28).  If,  as  seems  probable,  Aristophanes  is  here  referring,
not  to  the  traditionary  Wooden  Horse  of  the  poets,  but  to  the  bronze
statue  of  it  on  the  Acropolis,  it  follows  that  the  statue  must  have  been
set  up  before  or  in  the  year  414  B.C.  Probably  it  had  been  set  up  not
long  before,  and  the  poet  alluded  to  it  as  a  novelty.

It  appears  that  the  pedestal  was  composed  of  six  blocks.  The  two
blocks  foimd  in  the  precinct  of  Brauronian  Artemis,  where  they  still
stand,  are  not  in  their  original  position.  Two  more  blocks  of  the
pedestal  were  found  in  1889  or  1890,  one  of  them  near  the  north-
western comer  of  the  Parthenon,  the  other  between  that  spot  and  the
precinct  of  Brauronian  Artemis.  Probably  the  statue  stood  some-
where between  the  precinct  of  Brauronian  Artemis  and  the  Parthenon.
At  least  this  seems  to  be  the  natural  inference  from  the  order  of
Pausanias's  description.  The  two  blocks  found  in  1 840  composed  the
front  of  the  pedestal ;  each  of  them  is  1.76  metres  long,  so  that  the  total
length  of  the  front  of  the  pedestal  was  3.52  metres  (11  ft.  Sf  in.)

With  regard  to  Strongylion,  the  sculptor  of  the  horse,  Pausanias
elsewhere  remarks  (ix.  30.  i)  that  he  was  extremely  skilful  in  modelling
oxen  and  horses.

See  L.  Ross,  Archdologische  Aufsdtse^  i.  pp.  194-198  ;  E.  Beul^,
PAcropole  d'Athhnes^   i.  pp.  298-301  ;  Dyer,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  382


CH.  XXIII  STATUS  OF  RPICHARINUS  287


sq, ;  Loewy,  Lc, ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  pp.  404-406,
412.

23.  9-  the  one  of  Epicharinns is  \f  Cbdtias.    The  inscribed

base  of  this  statue  was  found  between  the  Propylaea  and  the  Parthenon.
It  is  a  square  pedestal  of  Pentelic  marble,  and  bears  the  following
mutilated  inscription :

'Eirtxa/sivos  [ai'cj^ciccv  6  .  .  .
K/9irio$  Kat  NccTiorcs  eiro[iea']aT€i'

<<  Epicharinns  dedicated  (it).  Critius  and  Nesiotes  made  (it)  "  {C.LA.
L  No.  376 ;  Loewy,  Inschriften  griech,  Bildhauer^  No.  39 ;  Roberts,
Greek  Epigraphy^  No.  68  a).  Thus  we  learn  that  the  statue  of  Epi-
charinns was  dedicated  by  Epicharinns  himself,  and  that  it  was  a  joint
work  of  the  two  sculptors  Critius  and  Nesiotes.  We  do  not  know  in
what  attitude  Epicharinns  was  represented.  Pausanias  does  not  say
that  he  was  represented  running,  but  only  that  he  had  practised  running
in  armour.  But  this  statement  of  our  author  may  very  well  have  been
an  inference  from  the  pose  and  accoutrements  of  the  statue.  As  to  the
sculptors  Critius  and  Nesiotes,  see  note  on  i.  8.  5.  This  is  the  second
work  known  to  have  been  made  by  Critius  and  Nesiotes  which  Pausanias
ascribes  to  Critius  alone ;  the  other  was  the  group  of  the  tyrannicides
Harmodius  and  Aristogiton  (i.  8.  5).  Critius  was  probably  the  chief  artist.
His  name  is  spelt  as  Critias  in  our  manuscripts  of  Pausanias  here  and
in  vi.  3.  5  ;  and  the  same  appears  to  be  the  spelling  in  the  manuscripts
of  Pliny  (N,  H.  xxxiv.  49),  at  least  Detlefsen  in  his  edition  of  Pliny
notes  no  variant.  But  that  the  true  spelling  was  Critius  (Kritios)  is
proved  by  the  present  inscription  and  by  two  other  inscribed  bases  of
statues  by  the  same  artists  which  have  been  found  in  Athens  {C,  L  A,
i-  Nos.  374,  375  ;  Loewy,  Inschriften  griech.  Bildhauer^  Nos.  38  and
40 ;  Kaibel,  Epigrammata  Graeca^  No.  752  ;  Roberts,  Greek  Epigraphy^
Nos.  67  and  68).  Cp.  L.  Ross,  Archdologische  Aufsdtze^  i.  pp.  164-
166;  Dyer,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  383  sq.\  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient
Athens^  p.  406  sq.

23.  9.  Oenobins didagooddeedtoThncydidesetc    Pausanias

implies,  though  he  does  not  expressly  state,  that  there  were  statues  of
Oenobins,  Hermolycus,  and  Phormio  (§  10)  on  the  Acropolis.  They
probably  stood  between  the  sanctuary  of  Brauronian  Artemis  and
the  Parthenon.  Thucydides  was  banished  in  424  B.C  and  his  exile
lasted  twenty  years  (Thuc.  v.  26,  cp.  iv.  104) ;  so  that  the  year  of  his
recall  was  404  B.C.  He  doubtless  returned  after  the  conclusion  of
peace  between  Athens  and  Sparta  in  that  year.  But  it  was  one  of  the
conditions  of  peace  imposed  on  Athens  by  the  victorious  Lacedaemonians
that  the  Athenian  exiles  should  be  allowed  to  return  to  Athens ;  and  of
this  permission  the  exiles  availed  themselves  (Xenophon,  Hellenica^  ii.
3.  20  and  23).  Why  then  should  Thucydides,  as  one  of  the  exiles,  not
have  returned  with  the  rest  under  the  general  amnesty  ?  Why  was  it
necessary  to  recall  him  by  a  special  decree  of  the  people  ?  This  difficulty
has  led  Prof  von  Wilamowitz-Moellendorff  to  reject  Pausanias's  state-


288  THUCYDIDES  bk.  i.  attica

ment  that  Thucydides  was  recalled  by  a  special  decree  of  the  people
proposed  by  Oenobius  (Hermes^  12  (1877),  p.  344  sq^  But  there  is
no  sufficient  ground  for  rejecting  Pausanias's  statement  on  the  subject,
especially  as  it  is  supported  by  the  evidence  of  Pliny,  who  says  (AC
H,  vii.  Ill)  that  the  Athenians  recalled  Thucydides  from  banishment
because  they  admired  the  eloquence  of  his  history.  The  motive  assigned
by  Pliny  for  the  recall  of  the  historian  need  not  be  the  true  one ;  but  at
least  his  statement  implies  that  Thucydides  was  recalled  by  a  special
vote  of  the  people.  As  to  Oenobius  who  proposed  the  decree  nothing
positive  is  known ;  but  it  has  been  proposed  to  identify  him  with  a
general  of  that  name  who  is  mentioned  in  an  inscription  of  410/9  B.C.
(C,  L  A,  iv.  p.  16,  line  27).  The  inscription  contains  a  decree  in
honour  of  the  people  of  Neapolis  in  Thrace,  near  which  town  Thucydides
possessed  gold  mines.  If  Oenobius  held  a  command  in  this  quarter  of
Thrace,  he  may  very  well  have  been  brought  into  contact  with  the
banished  Thucydides,  and  hence  may  have  taken  a  prominent  part  in
procuring  his  recall  (cp.  Scholl,  in  Hermes^  13  (1878),  p.  441  sq.^  If
Pausanias  is  right,  it  would  seem  as  if  Thucydides  had  been  excepted
from  the  general  amnesty  of  404  B.C.,  and  had  been  afterwards  recalled
by  a  special  decree  in  the  same  year,  perhaps  through  the  influence
of  aristocratic  friends  whom  he  may  have  possessed  among  the  oligar-
chical party  then  in  power  (cp.  Classen's  Thukydides^  Einleitung,  p.
xxiii.  sq^

The  accounts  of  Thucydides's  death  are  discrepant.  Pausanias's
statement  that  he  was  murdered  as  he  was  returning  from  exile  can
hardly  be  true,  since  Thucydides's  own  statement  "  I  was  an  exile  from
my  native  land  for  twenty  years "  (v.  26)  seems  to  imply  that  he  was
writing  after  his  return  from  banishment.  According  to  one  account
he  died  in  Thrace ;  according  to  another  account  he  was  murdered  in
Athens ;  and  according  to  a  third  account  he  died  a  natural  death  in
Athens.  See  Plutarch,  Cimon^  4  ;  Marcellinus,  Life  of  Thucydides^  31-
33  and  55  ;  Anonymous  life  of  Thucydides^  9  sq,  (Biographi  Graeuy  ed.
Westermann,  p.  202  sq,)

But  whether  he  died  in  Thrace  or  Athens,  his  tomb,  marked  by  a
slab  inscribed  with  his  name,  seems  certainly  to  have  been  in  the  £unily
burying- ground  of  his  relative  Cimon,  outside  the  Melitian  gate  of
Athens,  in  a  spot  called  Coele.  Plutarch  says,  **  His  tomb  is  shown  in
the  family  burying-ground  of  Cimon  beside  the  grave  of  Cimon's  sister
Elpinice  "  (Plutarch,  Cimon^  4)  ;  and  this  statement  of  Plutarch's,  based,
it  would  seem,  on  personal  laiowledge,  we  have  no  right  to  question.
According  to  some,  however,  this  tomb  was  a  cenotaph,  the  historian
having  been  buried  in  Thrace.  See  Marcellinus,  Life  of  Thucydides^
31  sq.y  55  ;  Anonymous  life  of  Thucydides^  10  (Biographi  Graeciy  ed.
Westermann,  p.  203).  The  Melitian  gate,  outside  of  which  Thucydides's
tomb  was  shown,  must  have  been  one  of  the  western  gates  of  Athens,
since  the  quarter  Melite  was  in  the  west  of  the  city  (see  note  on  i.  14.
6,  *  a  temple  of  Hephaestus ').  Prof,  von  Wilamowitz-Moellendorflf  has
essayed  to  show  tiiat  Thucydides  died  and  was  buried  at  Pella,  in
Macedonia.


CH.  XXIV  ATHENA  AND  MARSYAS  289

See  von  Wilamowilz - Moellendorff,  'Die  Thukydideslegende,*  Hermes^  12
(1877),  pp.  326-367;  R.  Hirzel,  *  Die  Thukydideslegende,'  Hermes,  13  (1878),
pp.  46-49 ;  R^  .Scholl,  *  Zur  Thukydides-Biographie,*  «A,  pp.  433-453  ;  O.  Gilbert,
•Zur  Thukydideslegende,*  Pkilologus,  38  (1879),  pp.  243-268;  Ck^en's  Thuky-
dides^  Einleitung,  pp.  Ixxxviii-xcv.

23.  10.  Hermolycufl,  the  pancratiast.  This  was  probably  Her-
molycus  the  pancratiast  who  distinguished  himself  above  all  the  Greeks
by  his  gallantry  at  the  battle  of  Mycale ;  he  was  afterwards  slain  in
battle  at  Cymus  in  Euboea  and  buried  at  Geraestus ;  his  father's  name
was  Euthoenus  (Herodotus,  ix.  105).  It  has  been  supposed  by  some
scholars  that  the  statue  which  Pausanias  took  to  be  a  portrait  of  the
pancratiast  Hermolycus  was  really  the  statue  which  stood  on  the  base
inscribed  with  a  dedication  by  Hermolycus,  son  of  Diitrephes  (see  above,
p.  375),  and  that  Pausanias  mistook  this  Hermolycus,  son  of  Diitrephes,
for  the  Hermolycus,  son  of  Euthoenus,  whose  bravery  at  the  battle  of
Mycale  has  been  commemorated  by  Herodotus.  See  Th.  Bergk,  in
Zeitschrift  fiir  die  Alterthmnswissenschaft^  3  (1845),  P»  9^^  S99*\  A.
KirchhofT,  in  C.  I,  A,  i.  No.  402  ;  von  Wilamowitz  -  Moellendorff,  in
Hermes,  12  (1877),  p.  346  ;  A.  Furtwangler,  in  MittheiL  d.  arch,  Inst,
in  Atheny  5  (1880),  p.  28.  The  theory  is  arbitrary  and  highly  im-
probable. It  is  much  more  likely  that,  as  we  have  seen,  the  base  in
question  supported  the  statue  of  Diitrephes  pierced  with  arrows.

23.  10.  This  mnch,  however,  I  have  to  add  as  regards  Phormio.
The  following  anecdote  about  Phormio  is  told,  with  variations,  by  the
scholiast  on  Aristophanes  {Peace,  347),  who  cites  as  his  authority
Androtion  in  the  third  book  of  his  Attica,  As  Androtion  was  a  pupil
of  Isocrates  and  a  contemporary  of  Demosthenes  (Suidas,  s.v,  'AvSpo-
TiW:  P'ra£',  Hist,  Graec,  ed.  Miiller,  i.  p.  Ixxxiii)  his  evidence  is  fairly
good.  According  to  him  a  fine  of  100  minae  had  been  inflicted  on
Phormio  on  one  occasion  when  he  was  called  on  to  give  an  account  of
his  public  services.  Being  unable  to  pay  the  fine  he  was  disfranchised
and  retired  to  his  estate.  When  the  Acarnanians  requested  that  he
should  be  sent  as  general  to  them,  Phormio  declined  to  go  on  the
ground  that  he  was  disfranchised.  So  the  Athenians  released  him
from  the  fine.  Phormio's  father  is  called  Asopichus  by  Pausanias,
but  Asopius  by  Thucydides  (i.  64)  and  the  scholiast  on  Aristophanes
{i,c,)

24.  I .  Athena  is  represented  striking  Marsyas  etc.  Athena  is
said  to  have  invented  the  pipes  or  double  flute.  But  as  she  played  on
them  in  the  forest  of  Mt.  Ida,  she  saw  her  puffed  and  swollen  cheeks
reflected  in  the  water  of  a  spring.  Disgusted  at  the  sight  she  threw
away  the  pipes  with  a  curse  on  whoever  should  pick  them  up.  They
were  found  by  the  satyr  Marsyas,  who  practised  on  them  till  he  attained
such  skill  that  he  challenged  Apollo  himself  to  a  musical  contest,  thereby
courting  his  doom.  See  Hyginus,  Fab,  165  ;  Plutarch,  De  cohibenda
ira,  6;  Athenaeus,  xiv.  p.  6i6ef.  It  has  been  conjectured  with  great
probability  that  the  group  described  by  Pausanias  was  identical  with  a
work  of  Myron  which  Pliny  thus  describes  (N.  H.  xxxiii.  57):  "He
made  a  satyr  wondering  at  the  pipes  and  Minerva  (Athena) "  {fecit

VOL.  11  U


ATHENA  AND  MARSYAS


I.  ATTICA


Satyrum  lu/miranUm  tibias  et  Minervam).  Pliny's  words  lea^'e  it
uncertain  whether  the  Minerva  (Athena)  of  Myron  fonned  a  group  «ith
the  "  satyr  wondering  at  the  pipes  "  or  was  a  separate  work.  Btit  that
the  two  figures  fonned  a  group  is  made  highly  probable  by  the  fact  that
several  representatives  of  such  a  group,  evidently  copies  of  some  famous
original,  have  come  down  to  us.

(i)  On  two  bronze  Athenian  coins  (one  of  which  is  figured  here,
Fig.  15)  Athena  is  represented  standing,  dropping
the  flutes  ;  before  her  stands  Mars>-as  with  one  arm
raised  in  an  attitude  of  surprise.  See  Imhoof-
Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Comin.  on  Paus.  p.
132  sq.,   with   pi.  Z,  XX,   xxi.,  and  the  references

(2)  A  similar  scene  is  can'ed  in  relief  (Fig.  16)
on    a   cup    of    Pentelic   marble   found    in   Athens.
>   Athena,  carr^-ing  her  shield   on   her  left   arm,  is  re-
treating towards  the  spectator's  right,  but  is  looking
backwards.       Behind    her,  10  the    spectator's  left,
ttitude  of  surprise,  his  legs  wide  apart,  his  left


stands   Marsyas  in  i


n  raised,  his  right  thro


t  behind  him.     From  a  drawing  of  this


relief  made  last  century  by  Stuart  it  appears  that  the  pipes  were  repre-
sented falling  from  Athena's  hand.  They  have  now  disappeared,  the
marble  being  a  good  deal  worn  in  this  part.  The  relief,  moreo\cr,
is  clearly  unfinished.  The  vase  was  formerly  in  the  Finlay  collec-
tion, but  is  now  in  the  National  Museum  of  Athens.     See  references


CH.  XXIV  ATHENA  AND  MARSYAS  391

(3)  A  painting  (Fig.  17)  on  a  red -figured  vase  (wmm-Aiw),  which
was  found  at  Vari  in  Attica  and  is  now  in  the  Berlin  Museum,  repre-
sents Athena  standing  to  the  spectator's  left.  In  her  left  hand  she
holds  her  spear,  which  leans  against  her  shoulder ;  her  right  arm  is


extended  towards  the  right.  Facing  her,  on  the  spectator's  right,  is
Marsyas  in  the  attitude  already  described.  Between  ihem  the  pipes  ate
seen  falling  to  the  ground  ;  it  is  not  quite  clear  whether  they  have
dropped  from  Athena's  right  hand  or  from  Marsyas's  left  hand  ;  but
they    are    slightly   nearer    Athena    than    Marsyas.       See    references

Moreover,  the  figure  of  Marsyas,  as  it  appeared  in  this  group,  is
known  to  us  from

(4)  A  marble  statue  found  in  the  studio  of  an  ancient  sculptor  on
the  Esquiline  at  Rome  in  1823.  The  statue  (Fig.  18)  is  now  in  the
Laieran  Museum.  The  arms  from  beiow  the  shoulders  have  been  wrongly
restored  on  the  supposition  that  the  statue  represented  a  satyr  dancing
and  playing  the  castanets.  Otherwise  the  pose  of  the  statue  agrees  so
closely  with  that  of  Marsyas  in  the  groups  described  above  that  we
can  hardly  doubt  that  they  are  all  copies  of  a  common  original.  The
statue  represents  Marsyas  starting  back  in  surprise,  his  look  turned
intently  on  the  ground  ;  his  right  arm  (as  we  see  from  the  stump)  was
raised.  The  body  rests  on  the  left  leg,  the  right  leg  being  thrown  far
forward.  The  anatomy  of  the  body  is  finely  rendered,  the  face  is  full
of  vigour,  and  the  whole  statue  is  worthy  of  a  sculptor  of  Myron's
reputation.

(5)  A  marble  head  presen'ed  at  Rome  in  the  Barracco  collection  is


292  ATHENA  AND  MARSYAS  BK.  I.  ATTICA

evidently  a  copy  from  the  same  original  as  the  Lateran  statue.  But  it
probably  reproduces  the  original  more  closely ;  for  the  workmanship  is
superior,  and  the  expression  of  the  face,  with  its  mixture  of  astonishment
and  covetousness,  more  powerfully  rendered.  See  Mdlanges  (^Archd-
ologie  et  d^Histoire^  6cole  Frangaise  de  Rome,  lo  (1890),  pp.  1 18-122,
with  pi.  ii.

(6)  A  bronze  statuette,  found  at  Patras  and  now  in  the  British
Museum,  is  clearly  a  copy  of  the  same  original  as  the  Lateran  statue,
the  pose  of  which  it  reproduces  almost  exactly,  though  the  right  leg  is
not  thrown  so  far  forward  in  the  statuette  as  in  the  statue.  The  right
hand  is  raised  so  as  nearly  to  touch  the  head.  The  hair  and  beard  are
much  more  carefully  and  naturally  rendered  than  in  the  statue,  and  the
expression  of  the  face  is  much  more  powerful.  In  both  these  respects
the  statuette  resembles  the  Barracco  head  more  than  the  Lateran
statue.

That  the  original  of  all  these  works  was  at  Athens  is  probable  from
the  fact  of  the  group  being  represented  on  Athenian  coins.  Moreover,
both  the  other  existing  reproductions  of  the  complete  group  (viz.  the
relief  and  the  vase-painting)  were  found  in  Attica.  Probably,  therefore,
the  original  was  no  other  than  the  group  on  the  Acropolis  here  described
by  Pausanias.  Pausanias,  indeed,  says  that  Athena  was  represented
striking  Marsyas,  whereas  on  two  of  the  existing  copies  (the  coin  and
the  vase-painting)  she  is  represented  standing  quietly,  while  on  the
third  (the  relief)  she  is  actually  retreating.  But  from  the  differences  in
detail  between  these  three  copies  it  is  clear  that  they  reproduced  the
original  only  in  a  very  free  and  general  way.  Hence  very  little  weight
can  be  given  to  their  disagreement  with  Pausanias,  whose  evidence
on  this  point  is  probably  more  trustworthy  than  theirs.  Athena  may
very  well  have  been  represented  raising  her  lance  in  the  act  of  striking
or  threatening  to  strike  Marsyas.  Indeed,  some  such  gesture  on
Athena's  part  is  almost  needed  to  account  for  Marsyas's  attitude  and
expression.

Another  apparent  inconsistency  between  Pausanias's  description  of
the  group  and  our  existing  copies  of  it  is  that,  whereas  the  copies  seem
to  represent  Athena  in  the  act  of  dropping  the  pipes,  Pausanias  says
that  Marsyas  had  already  picked  them  up  and  was  being  struck  by
Athena  for  so  doing.  Thus  Pausanias  appears  to  imply  either  that
Marsyas  held  the  pipes  in  his  hand  or  that  he  had  dropped  them  on  the
ground.  But  it  is  not  absolutely  certain  that  on  our  copies  the  pipes
are  represented  falling  from  the  hand  of  Athena.  For  (i)  on  the  vase-
painting,  as  we  have  seen,  they  may  perhaps  be  regarded  as  falling  from
Marsyas's  hand,  though  the  other  view  agrees  slightly  better  with  their
position.  (2)  On  the  marble  relief  the  pipes  have  wholly  disappeared,
and  we  have  only  the  authority  of  Stuart's  drawing  for  holding  that  they
were  there  originally.  (3)  Although  it  is  usually  said  that  on  the  coins
the  pipes  are  seen  falling  from  Athena's  hand,  the  traces  of  the  pipes
are  apparently  very  slight ;  on  the  photographs  of  the  coins  in  Professors
Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner's  work  the  pipes  are,  to  my  eye  at  least,
quite  invisible.     Moreover,  even  if  it  were  certain  that  in  our  copies  the


294  ATHENA  AND  MAKSYAS  bk.  I.  attica

pipes  were  represented  falling  from  Athena's  hand,  this  would  hardly
prove  anything  as  to  the  original  group.  For  as  the  original  group  was,
apparently,  not  a  relief  but  in  the  round,  the  pipes  could  not  be  repre-
sented falling,  but  must  have  been  represented  either  lying  on  the
ground  or  in  Marsyas's  hand.  But  from  the  expression  of  the  face  and
the  downward  turned  gaze  of  the  Lateran  statue  and  the  statuette  in
the  British  Museum,  it  is  certain  that  the  pipes  were  represented,  not  in
Marsyas's  hand,  but  lying  on  the  ground.  Thus  it  was  probably  open  to
any  one  looking  at  the  original  group  to  suppose  that  the  pipes  had
fallen  from  the  hand  either  of  Athena  or  of  Marsyas.  The  artists  who
made  the  existing  copies  of  the  group  seem  (though  this  is  not  certain)
to  have  taken  the  former  view  ;  Pausanias  adopted  the  latter.  We  are
not  in  a  position  to  say  who  was  right.

See  Beule,  Monnaiis  d^Aihhtcs^  p.  392  sq. ;  A.  Michaelis,  in  Annali  del-
V  InstitutOy  30  (1858),  pp.  317-319  ;  H.  Brunn,  *  II  Marsia  di  Mirone,*  ib,  pp.  374-
383 ;  Monumenti  Iftediti,  vol.  6,  pl.  xxiiu  (reproduces  the  Lateran  statue,  one  of
the  coins,  and  Stuart's  drawing  of  the  relieQ  ;  rr.  Wieseler,  Der  ApoUon  Stroganoffy
p.  105  5q.y  note;  Miiller- Wieseler,  DenkmdUr^  2.  pl.  xxiL,  No.  239  (Stuart's
drawing) ;  id.^  2,  pl.  xxiL,  Nos.  239  a,  239  b  (vase-painting  and  coin) ;  Stephani,
in  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1862,  pp.  86-94 ;  E.  Petersen,  *  Myrons
Satyr,'  Archaolog,  Zeitung^  23  (1865),  pp.  86-93;  ^*  Hirschfeld,  Athena  und
Marsyas  (Berlin,  1872)  (with  two  plates  representing  the  vase-painting,  the  Lateran
statue,  one  of  the  coins,  and  Stuart's  drawing  of  the  relief) ;  R.  Kekul^,  in
BulUttifto  deir  htstiiuto^  1872,  p.  282;  fV/.,  'Athena  und  Marsyas,  Marmorrelief
in  Athen,'  Archdolog,  Zcitung^  32  (1875),  p.  93,  with  pl.  8  (Stuart's  drawing  of
the  relief,  with  a  new  drawing  of  it  by  Schirm) ;  A.  S.  Murray,  *  Marsyas,'
Gazette  Archiologiquey  5  (1879),  pp.  241-248,  with  pl.  34  and  35  (two  views  of  the
British  Museum  statuette) ;  Fr.  Lenormant,  ib,  p.  248  (calls  attention  to  the  head
in  the  Barracco  collection) ;  C.  v.  Pulszky,  '  Satyrstatue  aus  Bronze  im  British
Museum,'  Archiiolog,  2Uitiingy  37  (1879),  pp.  91-93,  with  pl.  8  (British  Museum
statuette);  L.  von  Sybel,  Athena  und  Marsyas  y  Marburg,  1879;  id.y  *Zu  Athena
und  Marsyas,'  Mittheil.  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Atheny  5  (1880),  pp.  342-345  ;  Lucy  M.
Mitchell,  History  of  Awient  Seu//>ture,  p.  291  sq, ;  Friedenchs-Wolters,  Gipsab-
giisscy  Nos.  454,  455,  456 ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  AthettSy  pp.  407-410 ;  A.  S.
Murray,  History  of  Greek  Sculpture^  I.  pp.  256-262 ;  O.  Rayet,  Monuments  de
TArt  AntiqiUy  I,  'Marsyas';  M.  Coliignon,  Histoire  de  la  Sculpture  Grecque,  i.
pp.  465-472 ;  Overbeck,  Gesch,  d.  griech,  Plastiky*  i.  pp.  268-272  ;  P.  Cavvadias,
TXvirrk  Tou  EB¥LKOv  Mouo-clou,  1.  No.  1 27.  In  the  works  of  Coliignon,  Overbeck,
and  Rayet  representations  are  given  of  five  of  the  existing  copies  of  Myron's  work,
namely  the  marble  statue,  the  bronze  statuette,  the  vase,  the  relief,  and  one  of  the
coins.  The  best  reproductions  of  the  statue  are  given  by  Rayet  and  Coliignon  ;
the  best  reproductions  of  the  statuette  by  Murray  in  the  Gazette  Archiologiquey  and
by  Rayet ;  the  best  reproduction  of  the  vase-painting  by  Hirschfeld.  Another
painting  on  an  ancient  red-figured  vase,  now  in  the  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art,
New  York,  has  been  cited  as  reproducing  the  group  of  Athena  and  Marsyas  (L.
von  Sybel,  Athena  und  Marsyas y  p.  15);  but  this  is  a  mistake  (see  Conze,  in
fahrbuch  d,  k,  deutsch,  archdolog,  InstituteSy  2  (1887),  pp.  193-195).

24.  I.  the  legendary  fight  of  Theseus  with  the  bull,  which  was
called  the  bull  of  Minos  etc.  Theseus's  fight  with  the  Minotaur  is
represented  in  three  different  ways  on  coins  of  Athens :  ( i )  on  one  coin
(Fig.  19)  Theseus  naked,  holding  his  club  in  his  right  hand,  is  kneeling
on  the  back  of  the  Minotaur,  who  has  sunk  on  his  left  knee.  (2)  On
another  coin  Theseus,  standing  upright,  with  his  club  raised  in  his  right
hand  and  his  lion's  skin  on  his  left  arm,  is  rushing  at  the   sinking


CH.  XXIV  THESEUS  AND  MINOTAUR  295

Minotaur.  (3)  On  another  coin  Theseus  and  the  Minotaur  are  both
standing; ;  Theseus  raises  his  club  in  his  right  hand  to  strike  the
Minotaur,  while  he  gnisps  the  monster's  right  horn  with  his  left  hand.
On  all  three  coins  the  Minotaur  is  represented  with  the  body  of  a  man
and  the  head  of  a  buIL  See  Imhoof-Blumer  and
Gardner,  Numismatic  Commentary  on  Pausanias,  p.
146,  with  pi.  DD,  iii.  iv.  vi.  ;  BeuW,  Monnaies
ePAehinei,  p.  398.  It  is  possible  that  one  of  these
coin-types  may  be  a  copy  of  the  group  on  the  Acro-
polis. In  1878  a  bronie  statuette  representing
Theseus's  combat  with  the  Minotaur  was  found  in
the  upper  valley  of  the  Maeander,  near  Aphrodisias.
It  represents  Theseus  kneeling  on  the  back  of  the  "°'  '»■— t««k"5
Minotaur  very  much  as  on  the  first  of  the  coin-types  (athiniak  com).
described  above ;  but  instead  of  using  his  club  Theseus
is  in  the  act  of  twisting  the  Minotaur's  head,  grasping  the  monster's
left  horn  «ith  his  left  hand  and  gripping  the  brute's  right  shoulder  with
his  right  hand.  The  Minotaur  is  represented  with  the  body  of  a  man
and  the  head  of  a  bull.  The  composition  of  the  group  is  vigorous  and
skilful.  The  statuette,  which  is  about  a  foot  high,  is  now  at  Berlin.
See  A.  Conze,  Thesetts  und  Minotaurus  (Berlin,  1878).  The  combat  of
Theseus  with  the  Minotaur  is  often  represented  on  vase-paintings,  both
black-figured  and  red-figured.  In  these  paintings  the  Minotaur  regularly
appears  as  a  man  with  the  head  of  a  bull.  He  is  similarly  represented
in  one  of  the  metopes  of  the  so-called  Theseum,  the  subject  of  which  is
Theseus's  conquest  of  the  monster  (Mijller-Wieseler,  Denkmdler,  1,  pi.
XX.,  No.  106;  Overbeck,  Gesch.  li.  griech.  Plastik,"  1.  p.  459).  The
same  subject  is  also  treated  on  Etruscan  sarcophaguses,  mosaics,  etc.
See  O.  Jahn,  Archaologische  Beiiriige,  p.  257  sqq.  \  Journal  of  HelUnic
Studies,  a  (iSSi),  p.  60,  with  pi.  x. ;  'E^ij/«/3is  d/3)[aniAoyiKi),  1885,  p.
219  sqg.,  with  pi.  11.;  Gazette  ArchMogiqui,  g  (1884),  p.  i  sqq.;
Baumeister's  Denkmdler,  p.  1788  sqq.  It  was  represented  on  the  throne
of  Apollo  at  Amyclae  (iii,  18.  16).

24.  2.  PhriniB has  sacrificsd  ths  ram  etc.     Pliny  mentions

a  statue  by  Naucydes  of  a  man  sacrificing  a  ram  (TV.  H.  xxxiv.  80)  i  it
may  have  been  the  one  here  mentioned  bj'  Pausanias.  The  inscribed
base  of  a  statue  by  a  sculptor  Naucydes  or  Glaucydes  (the  reading  is
uncertain)  was  found  on  the  Acropolis  in  1858  to  the  east  of  the  spot
where  the  statue  of  Champion  Athena  (Athena  Promachos)  probably
stood  (Loewy,  Inschriflen  griech.  Bildkauer,  No.  87).  An  ancient  gem
published  by  Panofka  {ArchHologisckcr  Commcntar  su  Pausanias,  ii.  24,
plate  ii.  i)  represents  a  man  sacrificing  a  ram  on  an  altar.  Otto  Jahn
suggested  {Arckdolog.  Zeitung,  20  (1862),  p.  306  sq.)  that  this  gem
may  give  us  a  genera!  idea  of  the  statue  of  Phrixus  sacrificing  the  ram.
The  ram  is  lying  on  the  altar ;  the  man  grasps  it  with  one  hand,  while
with  the  other  he  raises  a  short  sword  to  strike.  As  to  Laphystian
Zeus,  cp.  ix.  34.  5  note;   Busoll,  Griech.  Gtichichte^  1.  p.  57.

24.  2.  Henmlea  atrangUn^  the  BerpentB.     On  representations  of
this  subject  in  ancient  art,  see  Fr.  Lenormant  '  Hercule  et  Iphides,'


296  ATHENA  THE  WORKER  BK.  i.  atfica

Gazette  ArMologique^  i   (1875),  p.  63  •^^^•>  ^^ith  pi.  14.     Cp.  Pindar,
Nem.  i.  50  sqq. ;  Theocritus,  xxiv.  i  sqq,  ;  Apollodorus,  ii.  4.  8.

24.  2.  Athena  rifling  from  the  head  of  Zeus.     Cp.  note  on  §  5.

24.  2.  a  bull  set  up  by  the  Council  of  the  Areopagus.  This
bull  was  of  bronze  and  seems  to  have  been  commonly  known  as  "  the
bull  on  the  Acropolis  "  (Hesychius,  s,v,  fiovs  €v  TrdXct :  Diogenianus,  iii.
67  ;  cp.  Heniochus,  in  Athenaeus,  ix.  p.  396  d).  Prof.  E.  Curtius  con-
jectured that  the  bull  may  have  been  dedicated  as  a  thank-offering  for
the  deliverance  from  the  Persians,  comparing  Paus.  x.  16.  6  (Archilolog,
Zeitung^  18  (i860),  p.  37  -^^0  Some  conjectures  by  Th.  Bergk  on  the
subject  of  the  bull  may  be  read  in  Zeitschrift  fiir  die  Alterthumswissen-
schafty  3  (1845),  PP-  979-987.  For  the  dedication  of  other  bronze  bulls,
sec  V.  27.  9  ;  X.  9.  3  j^.  There  was  a  large  bronze  ram  on  the  Acropolis
which  the  comic  poet  Plato  coupled  with  the  Wooden  Horse  on  account
of  its  size  (Hesychius,  s,v,  Kptb^  curcAyoKcpcos).  Prof.  O.  Benndorf
conjectured  (MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  7  (1882),  p.  46  sq,)
that  the  ram  stood  beside  the  bull  dedicated  by  the  Areopagus,  and  that
an  epigram  in  which  the  figures  of  an  ox  and  a  goaty  engraved  on  a
silver  plate,  are  represented  railing  at  each  other  (Suidas,  s,v,  fiovv  €v
yvdSois  <^/5€i),  was  composed  with  reference  to  the  bronze  statues  of
the  bull  and  raw.  This  absurd  conjecture  has  been  blindly  accepted
and  repeated  by  subsequent  writers  on  the  Acropolis.

24.  3.  they  were  the  first  to  give  Athena  the  surname  of  the
Worker.  Although  Pausanias  does  not  in  this  passage  expressly
mention  any  image,  altar,  or  temple  of  Athena  the  Worker  {Ergane)  it
is  certain  that  his  remark  as  to  her  epithet  of  the  Worker  must  have
been  called  forth  by  the  sight  of  some  monument  of  her  worship  under
this  title.  That  she  was  worshipped  imder  this  surname  on  the  Acropolis
is  proved  by  the  discovery  on  the  Acropolis  of  five  inscriptions  containing
dedications  to  Athena  the  Worker  (C /.  A,  ii.  Nos.  1428,  1429,  1434,
1438;  C.  /.  A,  iv.  No.  373^^^^  p.  205;  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  For-
schungeny  i.  p.  154;  Kaibel,  Epigrammata  Graeca^  No.*  776;  Jahn-
Michaelis,  Pausaniae  descriptio  arcisy  p.  60 ;  ^'iXrlov  apxaioXoyiKoVy
1888,  p.  138).  As  two  of  these  inscriptions  (C  /.  A,  ii.  1429  ;
AcAriov  dpxaiok.  Lc)  were  found  on  the  terrace  between  the  west
end  of  the  Parthenon  and  the  sanctuary  of  Brauronian  Artemis,  it
is  not  improbable  that  the  image,  altar,  or  temple  of  Athena  the
Worker  may  have  stood  there.  This  position  would  fit  in  very  well
with  Pausanias's  route,  for  he  has  described  the  precinct  of  Brauronian
Artemis  (i.  23.  7)  and  is  now  proceeding  eastward  towards  the  Parthenon.
The  statues  which  he  mentions  between  the  sanctuary  of  Brauronian
Artemis  and  the  image,  altar,  or  temple  of  Athena  the  Worker  (i.  23.  8-
i.  24.  2)  appear  to  have  stood  in  two  rows  on  opposite  sides  of  the  road
which  he  followed.  For  after  mentioning  the  Wooden  Horse,  the  statues
of  Epicharinus,  Oenobius,  Hermolycus,  and  Phormio,  and  the  group  of
Athena  and  Marsyas,  he  says  (i.  24.  i)  that  opposite  the  statues  which
he  has  described  are  others  (Theseus's  battle  with  the  Minotaur,  Phrixus
sacrificing  the  ram,  etc.)  But  the  exact  position  of  these  statues  can
no  longer  be  ascertained.     In  the  present  passage  Pausanias  makes


CH.  XXIV  ATHENA  THE  WORKER  297

mention  of  a  temple,  but  as  the  text  is  defective  (see  Critical  Note  on
the  passage)  we  cannot  tell  whether  this  temple  was  a  temple  of  Athena
the  Worker  or  not.  The  terrace  between  the  west  end  of  the  Parthenon
and  the  sanctuary  of  Brauronian  Artemis  has  been  fully  excavated,  and
no  foundations  of  a  temple  have  been  discovered  on  it.  But  this  is  not
absolutely  conclusive  against  the  view  that  a  small  temple  may  once
have  stood  there,  for  the  building  may  have  been  completely  removed  at
some  time.  Similarly  we  know  from  Pausanias  (i.  27.  2)  that  there  was
a  temple  of  Pandrosus  adjoining  the  Erechtheum,  but  no  foundations  of
it  have  been  discovered.  The  excavations  of  1 888-1 889,  indeed,  brought
to  light  the  foundations  of  a  large  building  on  the  southern  part  of  the
terrace,  adjoining  the  Acropolis  wall.  But  this  building  (a  quadrangular
structure  with  a  colonnade  on  its  northern  front)  cannot  have  been  a
temple.  It  may  have  been  the  Chalkotheke  or  <  storehouse  for  bronzes,'
which  is  known  from  an  inscription  (C  /.  A,  iL  No.  61)  to  have  stood
on  the  Acropolis.  See  W.  Dorpfeld,  *  Chalkothek  und  Ergane-Tempel,'
MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  14  (1889),  PP*  304-3^3  >  A.  Michaelis,
Der  Parthenon^  p.  306.

Another  possible  site  for  the  image,  altar,  or  temple  of  Athena  the
Worker  is  to  the  north  of  the  Parthenon.  In  favour  of  this  site  is  the
fact  that  very  soon  after  mentioning  Athena  the  Worker  our  author
mentions  the  image  of  Earth  praying  for  rain.  For  this  image  of  Earth
is  proved  by  an  inscription  carved  on  the  living  rock  to  have  been
situated  a  little  to  the  north  of  the  Parthenon  (see  note  on  §  3,  ^  an
image  of  Earth ').  If  the  monument  of  Athena  the  Worker  was  situated
to  the  north  of  the  Parthenon,  it  would  be  natural  to  suppose  that  the
monuments  described  by  Pausanias  in  i.  23.  8-i.  24.  2  were  situated  on
opposite  sides  of  the  main  road  which  led  eastward  from  the  Propylaea
to  the  eastern  front  of  the  Parthenon.  In  this  case  the  first  group  of
monuments  (from  the  Wooden  Horse  to  the  group  of  Athena  and
Marsyas)  probably  stood  on  the  southern,  and  the  second  group  on  the
northern  side  of  the  road.  But  in  any  case  we  have  no  ground  for
supposing  that  the  two  sets  of  monuments  were  arranged  symmetrically
with  regard  to  each  other,  each  monument  on  the  south  side  of  the
road  being  faced  by  one  on  the  north.  Pausanias  indicates  (i.  24.  2)
that  there  were  other  statues  here  besides  those  which  he  has  mentioned.

Athena  the  Worker  was  worshipped  also  at  Sparta  (iii.  17.  4),
Olympia  (v.  14.  5),  Megalopolis  (viii.  32.  4),  Thespiae  (ix.  26.  8),  and
Samos  (Suidas,  s,v,  'Epydvrj),  She  was  the  goddess  of  the  arts  of  life
(Diodorus,  v.  73)  and  was  worshipped  by  artizans  (Plutarch,  Praecept
gerend,  reipublicaey  5  ;  Clement  of  Alexandria,  Protrefit,  x.  97,  p.  78,  ed.
Potter;  Sophocles,  Frag,  724,  ed.  Dindorf).  Cp.  Harpocration,  s.v,
^'YyUia  'AOrfvd :  EtymoL  Magnum^  s,v,  'Epydvrf,  p.  369,  line  51  sg,  ;
Photius,  Lexicon,  s.v,  'Epydvrj,  As  to  her  worship  and  temple,  altar,  or
image  on  the  Acropolis,  see  H.N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen,  2.
pp.  148-154;  E.  Beul^,  VAcropole  cTAMnes^  i.  pp.  309-328;  Dyer,
Ancient  Athens,  p.  386  sq,  ;  Lolling,  *  Athen,'  p.  346 ;  Miss  Harrison,
Ancient  Athens,  p.  417  sq.  ;  W.  Dorpfeld,  *  Chalkothek  und  Ergane-
Tempel,*  Mittheil,  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  A  then,  14  (1889),  p.  304  sqq.


298  THE  OLD  TEMPLE  bk.  i.  attica

Dr.  Dorpfeld  holds  that  in  the  present  passage  Pausanias  is  describ-
ing the  old  temple  of  Athena  which  was  burnt  by  the  Persians  in  480
B.C.,  and  which,  according  to  Dr.  Dorpfeld,  was  rebuilt  after  the  Persian
wars  and  continued  to  subsist  down  to  the  time  of  Pausanias  at  least.
The  foundations  of  the  temple  were  excavated  in  1886.  See  the
Appendix  at  the  end  of  this  volume,  where  Dr.  D6rpfeld*s  theory  is
examined.  A  few  more  particulars  as  to  the  site  and  construction  of
the  temple  may  be  given  here.  They  are  taken  from  Dr.  Dorpfeld's
description  of  the  remains.

The  site  of  the  temple  is  a  rocky  plateau  which  falls  away  from
south-east  to  north-west.  Hence  it  had  to  be  artificially  levelled  with
made  earth  in  order  to  support  the  temple.  The  foundations  of  the
temple  were  everywhere  carried  down  to  the  rock ;  hence  their  depth
varied  greatly.  At  the  south-east  comer  the  stylobate  lay  immediately
on  the  rock ;  at  the  north-west  comer  the  foundations  were  about  9
feet  deep.  Of  the  foundations  enough  remains  to  allow  us  to  make  out
the  plan  of  the  temple.  The  stylobate  formed  a  quadrangle  measuring
43.44  metres  long  from  east  to  west  by  21.34  metres  wide  from  north
to  south.  The  temple  was  surrounded  by  a  colonnade,  the  foundations
of  which  are  constmcted  of  the  hard  reddish -grey  limestone  of  the
Piraeus.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  estimates  that  this  outer  colonnade  had  six
columns  at  each  of  the  narrow  ends  and  twelve  columns  on  each  of
the  long  sides.  The  temple  proper  had  a  shallow  portico  at  each  of  its
eastem  and  western  ends.  The  eastem  portico  led  into  the  cella^  which
was  divided  by  two  rows  of  columns  into  three  aisles.  The  western
portico  led  into  a  chamber  somewhat  smaller  than  the  cella^  and
not  divided  by  rows  of  columns.  Between  this  western  chamber  and
the  cella  there  were  two  small  chambers  lying  north  and  south  of
each  other ;  both  of  them  probably  opened  into  the  large  western
chamber  through  doors  of  their  own.  All  the  foundations  of  the  temple
proper,  as  distinguished  from  the  colonnade  which  surrounded  it,  are
built  of  the  hard  bluish  limestone  of  the  Acropolis.

Built  into  the  northern  wall  of  the  Acropolis,  not  far  from  this  ancient
temple,  are  some  architectural  fragments  which  Dr.  Dorpfeld  has  identi-
fied as  belonging  to  the  outer  colonnade  of  the  temple.  They  include
drums  of  columns,  two  Doric  capitals,  pieces  of  architraves,  triglyphs,
and  geisa^  all  of  Piraeic  limestone ;  also  some  marble  metopes.  The
part  of  the  Acropolis  wall  into  which  these  fragments  are  built  is  ascribed
to  the  age  of  Cimon.  Near  this  part  of  the  Acropolis  wall  have  been
found  two  large  geisa  of  a  coarse-grained  marble,  which  appear  to  have
belonged  to  one  of  the  gables  of  the  ancient  temple.  From  the  extent
to  which  these  geisa  project  Dr.  Dorpfeld  infers  that  the  gables  con-
tained sculptures.  The  marble  metopes  may  once  have  been  sculptured,
though  no  traces  of  sculpture  now  remain  on  them.  The  Doric  columns
had  each  twenty  flutings.  The  echinus  of  the  capitals  bulges  a  good  deal.
No  architectural  fragments  have  as  yet  been  found  which  can  with
certainty  be  referred  to  the  inner  part  of  the  temple  (the  fore-temple  or
pronaos^  the  cella^  and  the  western  chambers).  The  temple  was  raised
on  a  single  step,  not  on  three  steps  like  almost  all  other  Greek  temples.


CH.  XXIV  EARTH  PRAYING  FOR  RAIN  299

24.    3.  images   of  Hermes   without    limbs.      Cp.    iv.    33.    3.

Thucydides  mentions  (iv.  27)  the  stone  images  of  Hermes,  shaped
like  square  pillars,  which  were  commonly  placed  in  the  doorways  of
private  houses  and  of  sanctuaries  in  Attica.  Cp.  H.  G.  Lolling,
*Altattische  Herme,'  Mittheilungen  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  5  (1880),
pp.  244-255.

24.  3.  a  man  wearixig  a  helmet,  a  work  of  Cleoetas.     For  the
inscription  on  this  statue,  see  vi.  20.  14.

24.  3.  an  image  of  Earth  pra3ring  Zeus  to  rain  on  her.  The
situation  of  this  image  is  determined  by  an  inscription  (C  /.  A,  iii.
No.  166)  cut  in  the  rock  about  30  feet  north  of  the  seventh  column
on  the  north  side  of  the  Parthenon  (counting  from  the  west).  The
inscription  runs :  F^s  KapTro<l>6pov  Kara  /zavrctav,  "  Of  fruit-bearing
Earth,  according  to  the  oracle."  From  the  style  of  the  letters  the
inscription  seems  to  date  from  the  end  of  the  first  or  the  beginning  of
the  second  century  a.d.  The  image  may  perhaps  have  represented
Earth  as  a  woman  rising  from  the  ground,  her  lower  limbs  hidden
beneath  it — an  attitude  in  which  she  is  often  depicted  on  vase-paintings.
If  the  image  was  thus  planted  inunediately  on  the  rock,  without  a
pedestal,  the  inscription  would  necessarily  have  to  be  cut  in  the  rock.
See  H.  Heydemann,  *  Eine  Felsinschrift  auf  der  Akropolis  von  Athen,'
HertneSy  4  (1870),  pp.  381-389;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  p.
414  sqq.  The  impression  of  an  Attic  seal,  stamped  on  a  small  clay
pyramid,  represents  the  upper  part  of  a  naked  woman  looking  upwards
and  lifting  up  her  hands  in  an  attitude  of  supplication.  She  is  in
what  seems  to  be  a  primitive  kind  of  wheeled  cart,  the  body  of  which
is  swathed  in  grass.  A  cart  with  wheels  of  the  same  sort  appears  on
coins  of  Crannon  in  Thessaly,  where  a  certain  bronze  chariot  was  kept,
which  was  shaken  when  rain  was  needed  (Antigonus  Carystius,  Histor,
Alirab,  15).  Hence  Prof  Furtwangler  suggests  that  the  impression
on  the  Attic  seal  represents  the  image  of  the  Earth  Goddess  being
wheeled  about  in  her  cart  as  a  rain-charm.  See  Furtwangler,  Meister-
Tverke  (L  griech.  Plastik,  pp.  257-263.  Cp.  The  Golden  Bought  i.  p.
21  sq.

24.    3.  a  statue  of  Timotheus and  a  statue  of  Conon.

These  two  statues  of  the  father  and  son  stood  on  a  single,  slightly
curved  pedestal  composed  of  four  blocks  of  Pentelic  marble.  Two
of  the  blocks  have  been  found  on  the  Acropolis.  They  bear  the
inscription,  which  is  as  follows  (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  1360;  Dittenberger,
Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec.  No.  66) :

Kova>v  Tt/i[o]^€ov.     Tt/xo^cos  Kova>[vo9]

"Conon,  son  of  Timotheus.  Timotheus,  son  of  Conon."  The  block
containing  the  first  eight  letters  of  the  inscription  was  found  built  into
the  foundation  of  an  edifice,  about  three  feet  to  the  south  of  the  rock-
cut  inscription  of  Earth  (see  preceding  note),  probably  not  far  from  the
spot  where  the  statues  stood.  See  H.  Heydemann,  in  Hermes^  4  (1870),
p.  385  sq,\  A.  Michaelis,  in  Mittheil,  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  i  (1876),
p.  298.


300


ATHENA  AND  POSEIDON


24.  3'  A  group  repTOMnttng  Frocn«  and  Itys  etc.  Prof.  A.
Michaelis  proposes  to  identify  this  work  with  a  group  of  two  figures  in
Parian  marble  which  was  discovered  in  1 836  when  the  west  bastion  in
front  of  the  Propylaea  was  being  taken  down.  It  represents  a  woman
standing  quietly,  clothed  in  long  flowing  robes ;  a  naked  boy  is  pressing
close  against  her  right  knee  as  if  to  hide  himself  in  the  folds  of  her  gown.
The  woman's  head  and  right  arm  are  gone  ;  her  left  arm  is  raised  from
the  elbow,  but  is  broken  off  short.  The  style  of  the  group  points  to
the  end  of  the  fifth  century  or  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.
But  the  work  is  too  faulty  to  be  the  product  of  a  great  sculptor.  The
Alcamenes  who  dedicated  (not  made)  it,  need  not  have  been  the  well-
known  sculptor  of  that  name.  See  A.  Michaelis,  in  Miltheil.  d.  arch.
Inst,  in  Alhen,  i  (1B76),  pp.  304-307  ;  cp.  L.  Ross,  Arckaologische
Aufsdtze,  I.  p.  108.  E.  Beut£  explained  the  group  as  Pandrosus  and
Erichthonius  (LAcropoU  itAthines,  I.  p.  303  sq.)  Mr.  Winter  argues
that  a  female  statue  foimd  on  the  acropolis  of  Pergamus  is  a  replica  of
the  figure  which  Prof.  Michaelis  identifies  as  Procne.  He  accepts  Prof.
Michaelis's  identification,  and  infers  from  the  style  of  the  figures  that
both  are  original  works  of  the  fifth  century  ac,  and  probably  by  the
sculptor  Alcamenes.  See  Berliner  phtlolog.  Wockensckrift,  14(1894),
p.  507  sqq. ;  JahHtuck  d.  archdolog.  Instituti,  9  (1894),  pp.  43-48.

24.  3.  Athena   fs   represented  exhibiting

the  oIlTe-pUnt  etc.    This  subjea  is  represented  on

ns  of  Athens,  but  in  two  different  ways  :  {a)  On

;  set  of  coins  (Fig.  20)  the  olive-tree,  entwined  by

'   Athena's  serpent  and  with  her  owl  perched  among

the   branches,  occupies   the  centre  of  the  scene.

?n  one  side  of  the  tree  stands  Poseidon,  holding

n  his  raised  right  hand  the  trident  which  is  pointed
fiQ.    to.  —  ATHiHA        iQ  t|,g  ground  i  a  cloak  hangs  on  his  left  arm.     At
(atkiniah'coih^        '''^  ***''  '^  "  dolphin.      On  the  opposite  side  of  the

tree  stands  Athena,  her  right  hand  advanced,  her
left  hand  holding  her  spear  and  shield,      {b)    On  a  coin  of  Marcus
Aurelius's  reign  (Fig.  21)  Athena  is  seen
grasping    the    olive-tree    with    her    right
hand ;    behind  her  are  her  serpent  and
shield.      On   the   other    side  of   the   tree
Poseidon    stands    quietly,   his    left    foot
advanced  and  resting  on  a  rock.     In  his
right  hand  he  grasps  his  trident,  which  is
planted  on  the  ground.     His  left  hand  is
advanced  towards  Athena  as  if  he  were
talking  to  her.     The  first  of  these  groups
{a)  appears  to  represent  a  contest  between
the  two  deities ;  the  second  group  (6)  re-
presents a  peaceful  colloquy.     It  is  not  _
improbable  that  the  first  of  these  groups  (*th«»i*ii  coik).
(a)  is  a  copy  of  the  central  group   in   the
western  gable   of  the    Parthenon   (see  below,  p.   310),  and  that  the


CH.  XXIV  ATHENA  AND  POSEIDON  301

Utter  {b)  is  a  copy  of  the  group  here  described  by  Pausanias.  See
Imboof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  on  Paus.  p.  130  jy.,  »ith  pi.
Z  xi.,  xii.,  xiv.,  xv.,  xvi.  The  fonner  group  («)  closely  resembles  a  repre-
sentation  of  the  same  subject  on  a  Greek  vase  (Fig.  33)  found  at  Kertsch,
and  now  at  St.  Petersburg  {Journal  0/ Hellenic  Studies,  3  (1882),  p.  244
sgg.,  see  below,  p.  3 1  o).    The  latter  group  (*)  closely  resembles  a  marble


relief  (Fig.  23)  found  at  Aphrodisias  in  Caria,  and  now  in  the  collection
of  the  Evangelical  School  at  Smyrna.  But  on  the  relief  a  winged  maiden
stands  between  Athena  and  Poseidon  ;  she  holds  in  her  left  hand
an  um,  supported  on  a  table,  while  her  right  hand  is  inserted  in  the
mouth  of  the  um.  The  um  is  clearly  a  voting  um,  and  the  winged
figure  (Iris  or  Victory)  is  drawing  out  the  voting- pebbles.  For  the  con-
test  between  Athena  and  Poseidon  for  the  possession  of  the  land  is  said
to  have  been  decided  by  ihe  votes  of  the  twelve  gods  (Apollodorus,
i.  14,  i)  or  of  the  people  (Varro,  cited  by  Augustine,  De  civitaie  dei,
xviiL  9;  Arisiides,  Or.  xiii.  vol.  1,  p.  i6g,  ed.  Dindorf).  See  C.
Robert,  '  Das  Schiedsgericht  iiber  Athena  und  Poseidon,'  ATHlkeii.  d.
arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,  7  (1882),  pp.  48-58;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient
Athens,  p.  422  sq.  Beul^  identified  as  pieces  of  Ihe  group  described
by  Pausanias  some  marble  fragments  (a  colossal  foot  and  an  olive-tree)
which  have  been  found  on  the  Acropolis  [L'Acropole  d'Atkines,  I.
P-  349  J'??0  This  group  of  Athena  and  Poseidon  had  an  intimate
mythological  connexion  with  the  image  and  aliar  of  Zeus  Polieus,  near
which  it  appears  10  have  been  set  up  (see  the  next  g)  For  it  was  said
that  when  Athena  and  Poseidon  were  contending,  Athena  begged  Zeus
to  give  his  vote  for  her,  and  promised  that  if  he  did  so  a  victim  should
be  sacrificed  on  the  ahar  lo  him  under  the  title  of  Zeus  Polieus
(Hesychius,  s.v.  it&s  S«koi  icoi  Trvraot).     Hence  the  spot  where  the


Z£US  POLIEUS


BK.    I.   ATTICA


contest  between  Athena  and  Poseidon  was  decided  went  by  the  name
of  '  llie  vote  of  Zeus '  (Suidas,  s.v.  A(6f  ^^kk  :  Apostolius,  vi.  20).


24.  4-  an  Image  of  Zeus  made  by  Lflocharea,  and  another  of

Zens  Biuiuuned  Foliens.     On  coins  of  Athens  an  archaic  figure  of

Zeus  is   represented  in  the  act  of  hurling  the  thunderbolt.      He  is  naked

and  is  striding  towards  the  right  \  the  thunderbolt  is  poised  in  his  right

hand   which   is   raised   behind   him,  while  his   left  arm  is  stretched  out

before   him.      This   is   supposed    to   be   a   copy   of  the

image  of  Zeus  Polieus,  because  the  attitude  of  the  figure

resembles  what  is  believed  to  have  been  the  attitude

of  the  kindred  image  of  Athena  Polias  (see  note  on  1.

26.  6).     Further,  on  coins  of  Athens    there  appears

another  figure  of  Zeus,  of  a  somewhat  similar  but  more

modern  type.   It  represents  the  god  standing  naked,  hold-

riu.  .4.— »^3  ™-     jj^g  jj,g  thunderbolt  in  his  right  hand  which  hangs  by  his

Ni*H  coiB).        ^"''^  •  ^'^  '^^^  hand  holds  a  saucer  and  is  stretched  over

an  aliar.     Otto  Jahn  conjectured  that  this  latter  type  of

Zeus  was  a  copy  of  the  image  by  Leochares,  which  may  have  reproduced

in  a  modified  and  modernised  manner  the  archaic  image  of  Zeus  Polieus

beside  which  it  stood.     The  altar  represented  on  coins  of  the  second

type  may  be  the  altar  of  Zeus  Polieus,  which  is  mentioned  in  the  present


CH.  XXIV  ZEUS  POLIEUS  303

passage  by  Pausanias.  See  Overbeck,  Griech,  Kunstmyihologiey  2.  pp.
19,  54  J^.  ;  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Numisniaiic  Commentary  on
PausaniaSy  p.  137  sq^  with  pi.  BB  i.,  ii.,  iii.  ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient
AthenSy  p.  423  sq.  In  the  museum  at  Lyons  there  is  a  bronze  statuette
of  Zeus  thundering,  which  closely  resembles  the  archaic  figure  of  Zeus
on  Athenian  coins.  See  E.  de  Chanot,  in  Gazette  ArchMoj^ique^  6
(1880),  pp.  79-82.  The  priest  of  Zeus  Polieus  had  a  seat  assigned  to
him  in  the  theatre  (C  /.  A,  iii.  No.  242).  A  fragmentary  inscription
containing  a  dedication  to  Zeus  Polieus  was  found  on  the  Acropolis  a
few  years  ago  (AcAtiov  apxoLio^oyiKoVy  1890,  p.  146  ;  Berliner philolog,
IVochenschrifty  11  (1891),  p.  546).  The  image  and  altar  of  Zeus
Polieus  probably  stood  a  little  to  the  north  of  the  eastern  end  of  the
Parthenon.

24.  4-  They  set  barley  mixed  with  wheat  on  the  altar  of  Zens
Poliens  etc.  Cp.  i.  28.  10.  The  ritual  of  this  sacrifice,  which  bears
the  marks  of  great  antiquity,  is  described  more  fully  by  Theophrastus,
quoted  by  Porphyry  {^De  abstinentia,  ii.  29  sq,)  His  account  is  as
follows.  Cakes  of  ground  barley  (il/aurrd)  and  a  mixture  of  meal,  oil,
and  honey  (TrcAavos)  were  placed  on  a  bronze  table  on  the  Acropolis.
Oxen  were  then  driven  round  the  table,  and  the  one  which  ate  of
the  offerings  on  the  table  was  sacrificed.  Before  the  sacrifice  the  axe
and  knife  were  wetted  with  water  brought  by  maidens  called  *  water-
carriers.'  The  weapons  were  then  sharpened  by  men,  and  handed
by  another  man  to  the  two  butchers,  one  of  whom  felled  the  ox  with
the  axe  and  the  other  cut  its  throat  with  the  knife.  The  ox  was  then
skinned  and  all  partook  of  its  flesh.  When  this  was  done,  they  stuffed
the  hide  with  straw,  stitched  it  together,  set  it  up,  and  yoked  a  plough
to  it  to  make  believe  that  the  animal  was  ploughing.  Next  all  who  had
taken  part  in  the  sacrifice  were  put  on  their  trial  for  murder.  The
maidens  who  had  brought  the  water  laid  the  blame  on  the  men  who  had
sharpened  the  axe  and  knife  ;  the  men  who  had  sharpened  the  axe  and
knife  laid  the  blame  on  the  man  who  had  handed  the  weapons  to  the
butchers  ;  he  blamed  the  butcher  who  had  cut  the  animaPs  throat,  and
the  butcher  blamed  the  knife,  which  was  thrown  into  the  sea.  Some  of  the
links  in  the  chain  of  recrimination  seem  to  be  omitted  by  Theophras-
tus. Pausanias  says  here  and  in  i.  28.  10  that  it  was  the  axe  (not  the
knife)  which  was  brought  to  trial.  Aelian  (Viar.  Hist,  viii.  3)  agrees
with  Theophrastus  that  it  was  the  knife  which  was  brought  to  trial.
Perhaps  both  knife  and  axe  were  tried,  condemned,  and  thrown  into  the
sea.  The  sacrifice  was  called  *  the  murder  of  the  ox '  (bouphonia)  ;  the
festival  at  which  it  took  place  was  the  DUpolia^  />.  the  festival  of  Zeus
Polieus.  The  day  on  which  the  sacrifice  took  place  was  the  14th  of
Skirophorion  (June-July).  See  Aelian,  l.c,  ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,
Peace,  419,  and  on  Clouds,  985  ;  Hesychius,  Suidas,  and  EtymoL  Mag-
num, s.v.  pov<f>6vLa  :  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca,  i.  p.  238,  line  21  sqq.
The  persons  who  performed  the  sacrifice  appear  to  have  belonged  to  an
Attic  family  named  the  Thaulonids.  See  Hesychius,  5,v,  jSoiTiVov :
Suidas,  s,v,  SarAwi' :  J.  Topffer,  Attisclie  Genealogie,  pp.  149-160.
As  the  date  of  the  festival  seems  to  correspond  with  the  close  of  the


304


THE  PARTHENON


threshing  in  Attica  (W.  Mannhardt,  Mythologische  Forsckungen,  p.  68),
the  festival  may  have  been  a  harvest  celebiation.  The  pains  taken  by
all  who  had  had  any  share  in  the  sacrifice  to  shift  the  blame  from
their  own  shoulders,  as  well  as  the  name  of  the  sacrifice  ('the  murder
of  the  ox'),  point  lo  the  conclusion  that  the  ox  was  originally  a  sacred
animal,  the  slaughter  of  which  was  regarded  as  sacrilege.  Varro  tells
us  [Be  re  rustica,  \\.  5.  4)  that  to  kill  an  ox  was  formerly  a  capital
crime  in  Attica  ;  but  this  statement  may  be  merely  an  inference  from
the  ritual  of  the  sacrifice.  On  this  sacrifice  see  J.  Bemays,  Tktopkras-
to^  Schrift  iiber  Frommigkeit,  pp.  122-124;  Aug.  Mommsen,  UeorKh
^ogif,  pp.  449-456 ;  W.  Mannhardt,  op.  cit.  p.  58  sqq. ;  W.  Robertson
Smith,  Religion  of  the  Semites,*  p.  304  sgq.  ;  J.  G.  Fraier,  Tfie  Golden
Bough,  1.  p.  3B  sgg.  ;  J,  Tbpfler,  Atlische  Genealogie,  pp.  149-160  ;  P.
Stengel,  '  Buphonien,'  Hermes,  28  (1893),  pp.  489-500.

24.  5.  tile  temple  called  the  Futhenon.  The  ruins  of  this,  the
most  famous  and  beautiful  of  all  existing  Greek  temples,  occupy  the
highest  part  of  the  Acropolis,  about  midway  between  its  eastern  and
western  extremities,  but  much  nearer  its  southern  than  its  northern  edge.
The  existing  remains  comprise  the  whole  of  the  stylobate  ;  the  columns
of  the  outer  colonnade  and  the  eastern  and  western  porticoes,  many
of  them  being,  however,  represented  by  fragments  only,  especially  the
columns  in  the  middle  of  the  northern  and  southern  sides  ;  the  entabla-
ture at  the  eastern  and  western  ends  ;  most  of  the  western  gable  (pedi-
ment) ;  small  pieces  of  the  eastern  gable  ;  and  considerable  portions  of
the  walls,  especially  the  walls  of  the  western  fiortico,  and  the  western
wall  of  the  cella.

As  the  ground  on  which  the  temple  stands  falls  away  steeply  to  the
south,  it  was  necessary  to  prepare  the  site  by  a  vast  substruction,  which


appears  to  have  been  constructed  under  the  administration  of  Cimon,
not  very  long  after  the  Persian  war.  This  substruction  is  250  feet  long
by  loj  feet  broad.  The  stylobate  or  platform  on  which  the  temple
Stands  is  zz8  feet  long  by  loi  broad.  The  temple,  including  the  stylo-
bate, is  entirely  built  of  white  Pentelic  marble.      It  is  of  the  Doric  order


CH.  XXIV  THE  PARTHENON  305

and  peripteral,  Le,  surrounded  by  a  colonnade.  The  colonnade  is  com-
posed of  eight  columns  at  each  of  the  narrow  eastern  and  western  ends,
and  seventeen  columns  on  each  of  the  long  northern  and  southern  sides,
the  comer  columns  being  reckoned  twice.  The  height  of  these  columns
is  about  34^  feet ;  their  lower  diameter  is  6  feet  3  inches,  the  upper
diameter  4  feet  10  inches.  Most  of  the  columns  are  composed  of  twelve
horizontal  sections  or  drums.  Each  column  has  twenty  flutes.  The
entablature  consists  of  a  plain  epistyle  surmounted  by  a  triglyph  frieze.
The  metopes  of  this  triglyph  frieze  are  adorned  with  sculptures  in  high
relief  representing  the  battles  of  the  gods  and  giants  (east  side),  those
of  the  Lapiths  and  Centaurs  (south  side),  and  those  of  the  Athenians  and
Amazons  (west  side).  The  subject  of  the  sculptured  metopes  on  the
northern  side  is  uncertain,  as  they  are  much  weathered  and  decayed.
There  were  originally  ninety-two  metopes,  of  which  forty-one  still  remain
on  the  temple  but  in  a  very  worn  and  imperfect  state.  Fifteen  were
brought  to  England  by  Lord  Elgin  and  are  now  in  the  British  Museum.
Another  is  in  the  Louvre.  These  sixteen  are  all  from  the  south  side  and
represent  fights  between  Centaurs  and  Lapiths.  Above  the  trigl>'ph
frieze  at  the  eastern  and  western  ends  of  the  temple  rose  the  gables
(pediments).  The  eastern  gable  contained  sculptures  representing  the
birth  of  Athena ;  the  western  gable  contained  sculptures  representing
the  contest  between  Athena  and  Poseidon  for  the  possession  of  the
country  (see  below).

The  temple  proper,  as  distinguished  from  the  colonnade  which
surrounded  it,  was  adorned  with  the  famous  sculptured  frieze,  which  ran
all  round  the  top  of  its  outer  walls.  This  frieze  or  sculptured  belt  is
nearly  3  feet  4  inches  high.  The  figures,  car\'ed  in  low  relief,  represent
the  procession  at  the  Panathenaic  festival.  The  greater  part  of  the
frieze  was  removed  to  England  by  Lord  Elgin  at  the  beginning  of  the
nineteenth  century,  and  now  forms  one  of  the  chief  treasures  of  the
British  Museum.

The  interior  of  the  temple  was  divided  into  four  compartments,
namely  (to  take  them  in  order  from  east  to  west)  the  eastern  portico
(pronaos^  irpovrjio^,  irp6v€(its)y  the  eastern  chamber  or  ce//a  {neos  keka-
tompedosy  vcws  €KaT6fiir€8o9),  the  western  chamber  i^parthcnon  in  the
restricted  sense),  and  the  western  portico  {opisthodofnos).  All  these
designations  for  the  four  compartments  of  the  Parthenon  occur  in
inscriptions  (C  /.  A,  i.  Nos.  32,  1 17-175,  273  ;  C,  L  A,  ii.  Nos.  642,
645,  652,  655,  667,  670,  675,  678,  701,  704,  708,  719,  720,  721,  727,
75^  758  ;  C,  L  A,\\\  No.  225  c,  p.  159).  Considerable  difference  of
opinion  has  prevailed  as  to  the  application  of  the  three  latter  designa-
tions {neos  hekaiompedoSy  parthenon,  and  opisthodomos) ;  but  the  applica-
tions given  above  may  now  be  regarded  as  fairly  well  made  out.  The
eastern  chamber  or  cella  is  identified  as  the  neos  hekatompedos  chiefly  on
two  grounds:  (i)  the  cella  is  just  100  Attic  feet  long,  so  that  it  was
literally  hekatompedos  (*  hundred-foot ') ;  and  (2)  the  neos  hekatompedos
is  known  from  inscriptions  to  have  contained  the  gold  and  ivory  statue
of  Athena,  which  of  course  stood  in  the  cella.  See  U.  Kohler,  in
MittheiL  d  arch,  Inst,  in  At/ien,  5   (1880),  p.  89  sqq, ;  W.  Dorpfeld,

VOL.  II  X


3o6  THE  PAKTHEXOy  bk.  i.  attica

ib.  6  (1881),  p.   297  sqq.;  ib.   15  (1890),  pp.   171  sq.^  426  5qq,\  and
the  Appendix  to  this  volume,  pp.  556,  560  sqq.

The  eastern  chamber  or  cella  was  di\ided  longitudinally  into  three
aisles  by  two  rows  of  Doric  columns.  These  colunms  have  all  dis-
appeared, but  some  traces  of  the  positions  which  they  occupied  can  be
made  out  on  the  pavement.  In  the  central  aisle,  towards  the  western
end,  stood  the  gold  and  ivory  statue  of  Athena.  The  spot  where  the
base  of  the  statue  stood  is  still  clearly  marked  on  the  floor  of  the  temple
by  a  quadrangular  space  paved  i^nth  dark  stone.  There  was  no  door
between  the  celia  and  the  western  chamber  in  antiquity ;  the  two  door-
ways on  the  north  and  south  sides  of  the  cella^  of  which  traces  may  still
be  seen  on  the  floor,  were  introduced  in  Byzantine  times  when  the
Parthenon  u*as  converted  into  a  church.  Pro£  Furtwangler's  theor>*
that  Aglaurus,  Herse,  and  Pandrosus,  the  three  maiden  daughters  of
Cecrops,  were  worshipped  in  the  western  chamber  of  the  Parthenon  is
absolutely  destitute  of  e\'idence.  His  argument  {Meisterwerke  d.  griech,
Plastik^  p.  172)  that  the  name  Parthenon  must  necessarily  mean  *the
chamber  of  the  maidens,'  not  '  the  chamber  of  the  maiden,'  has  been
refuted  by  the  subsequent  discovery  of  an  inscription  at  Magnesia  on
the  Maeander,  in  which  the  temple  of  Artemis  is  called  her  Parthenon
(tov  KaT€<rK€vacr/t€vov  avT^  \sciL  *A/>T€/u5i]  vvv  Ilap^cvcova).  See
Jahrbuch  d.  arch,  Instituts^  9  (1894),  Archaologischer  Anzeiger,  p.  122.

With  regard  to  the  history  of  the  Parthenon,  it  was  built  to  replace
the  temple  of  Athena  burnt  by  the  Persians  in  480  B.C.  (Herodotus,  viii.
53).  An  examination  of  the  substructions  of  the  Parthenon  and  of
the  architectural  fragments  still  existing  on  the  Acropolis  has  shown
that  soon  after  the  Persian  war  the  Athenians,  probably  under  Cimon's
administration,  began  to  build  a  large  new  temple  on  the  site  of  the
present  Parthenon  (see  Dr.  Dorpfeld,  in  Mittheil,  d,  arcK  Inst,  in
Athen^  17  (1892),  pp.  158-189).  For  some  reason  the  work  seems
to  have  been  discontinued.  The  present  Parthenon,  as  we  now  know
from  inscriptions,  was  begun  in  447  B.C.  (See  U.  Kohler,  in  MittkciL  d.
arch.  Inst  in  A  then,  4  (1879),  p.  35  ;  P*  Foucart,  in  Bullet,  de  Corr.
Hellin,  13  (1889),  p.  174  sqq,")  In  438  B.C.  it  was  so  far  ready  that
the  gold  and  ivory  statue  of  Athena  was  set  up  in  it  (Philochorus,  quoted
by  the  scholiast  on  Aristophanes,  Peace,  605).  In  435  B.C.  the  moneys
of  Athena  and  of  the  other  gods  were  lodged  in  the  western  portico
{opisihodomos)  of  the  temple,  the  moneys  of  Athena  being  stored  on  the
right-hand  side,  and  those  of  the  other  gods  on  the  left-hand  side  of  the
portico  (C  /.  A.  \,  No.  32  ;  W.  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Grace.
No.  14  ;  E.  L.  Hicks,  Greek  Historical  Inscriptions,  No.  37  ;  as  to  the
date  of  the  inscription  see  A.  Kirchhoff,  in  Philolog,  und  histor,  Abhand-
lungenoi  the  Berlin  Academy  for  1876).  In  the  following  year  (434
B.C.)  the  votive  offerings  were  already  stored  in  the  other  three  compart-
ments of  the  temple  (C  /.  A,  \,  Nos.  117,  141,  161);  but  the  decora-
tive details  seem  not  to  have  been  finished  for  some  years  afterwards,
since  we  learn  from  an  inscription  that  in  433/2  B.c.  the  superintendents
of  the  work  were  still  in  office  {Bulletin  de  Co>r,  Hellin.  13  (1889),
p.   174  sqq,^      The  temple  was  built  under  the  administration  and  by


CH.  XXIV  THE  PARTHENON  307

the  advice  of  Pericles  ;  the  architects  were  Ictinus  and  Callicrates,  but
the  general  superintendence  of  the  work  was  entrusted  to  Phidias
(Plutarch,  Pericles^  13;  Strabo,  ix.  pp.  395,  396;  Pausanias,  viii.  41.
9).  Ictinus  published  a  book  on  the  temple  (Vitruvius,  vii.  praef.
12).

Although  in  the  official  language  of  the  inscriptions  the  name  Par-
thenon was  restricted,  as  we  have  seen,  to  the  western  chamber  of  the
temple,  it  became  the  popular  designation  of  the  whole  temple.  The
first  writer  who  is  known  to  have  used  the  name  in  this  wider  sense  is
Demosthenes.  See  Demosthenes,  xxii.  13,  p.  597;  ib.  7 by  p.  617;
[Dicaearchus,]  DescripHo  Graeciaey  i.  {Geogr,  Graeci  MinoreSy  ed.
Miiller,  i.  p.  98)  ;  Rhetores  Graeci y  ed.  Walz,  7.  p.  4 ;  Strabo,  ix.
PP-  395>  396  ;  Plutarch,  PericleSy  13  ;  /V/.,  Demetriusy  23  ;  Philostratus,
ViL  Apoilon,  ii.  10.  Another  popular  name  for  the  whole  temple  was
the  Hekatompedos,  which  in  official  language  was  restricted,  as  we  have
seen,  to  the  cella  of  the  temple.  See  the  fragment  of  Lycurgus  quoted
from  a  MS.  in  Patmos  in  Bulletin  de  Corr,  HellM.  i  (1877),  p.  150  ;
Plutarch,  Caio  Majory  5  ;  /V/.,  De  sollertia  animaliuffty  1 3  ;  Hesychius,
s,v.  €#caToi^€8o9  :  Harpocration,  s,v,  'EKaro/xTrcSov :  Suidas,  s,v.  cKaro/t-
TTc&s  v€a>9.  The  name  Hekatompedos  (*  hundred-foot ')  probably  de-
scended to  the  Parthenon  from  its  predecessor,  which  is  known  from  an
inscription  to  have  been  called  the  Hekatompedos  (C  /.  A,  iv.  p.  137
sgq,  ;  AcArtbv  a/ax^toAoytKov,  1890,  p.  92  sgg.)

In  Byzantine  times  the  Parthenon  was  converted  into  a  Christian
church  of  the  Mother  of  God,  and  considerable  architectural  changes
were  made  in  order  to  adapt  the  building  to  its  new  purpose.  Under
Turkish  rule  it  was  converted  into  a  mosque.  In  spite  of  these  changes
the  Parthenon  was  still  in  good  preservation  in  1676,  when  Spon  and
Wheler  visited  Athens.  Two  years  previously,  in  1674,  drawings  of
many  of  the  sculptures  had  been  made  by  a  French  artist  Jacques  Carrey ;
as  many  of  the  sculptures  have  since  perished,  Carrey's  drawings  are  of
great  imp)ortance.  In  1687,  a  Venetian  army  under  Count  Konigsmark,
who  acted  as  the  representative  of  the  commander-in-chief  Francesco
Morosini,  seized  Athens.  The  Turks  retreated  into  the  Acropolis  and
were  besieged  there.  A  deserter  brought  the  besiegers  word  that  the
Turks  kept  their  powder  in  the  Parthenon.  The  fire  of  the  Venetian
batteries  was  accordingly  directed  on  the  temple ;  and  on  Friday,  26th
September  1687,  at  seven  in  the  evening,  a  bomb  from  a  mortar  pointed
by  a  German  lieutenant  dropped  into  the  Parthenon,  exploding  the
j)owder  and  blowing  a  great  part  of  the  temple  into  the  air.  Two  days
afterwards  the  Turks  capitulated.  Morosini,  now  master  of  the  Acropolis,
attempted  to  remove  the  figure  of  Poseidon  and  the  horses  of  Athena
from  the  west  gable  of  the  temple,  in  order  to  carry  them  as  a  trophy  to
Venice  ;  but  through  the  unskilfulness  of  the  workmen  employed  to
remove  them  the  sculptures  fell  to  the  ground  and  were  smashed.  In
1 801-1803,  Lord  Elgin,  by  permission  of  the  Turkish  Government,
removed  a  large  part  of  the  remaining  sculptures  to  England,  including
the  figures  from  the  east  gable,  fifteen  metopes,  and  most  of  the  frieze.
In  18 16  the  sculptures  were  bought  for  the  nation  from  Lord  Elgin  by


3o8  THE  PARTHENON  bk.  i.  attica

the  British  Government  and  are  now  in  the  British  Museum.    The  price
paid  for  them  was  j£3 5,000.

The  chief  work  on  the  Parthenon  is  Prof.  A.  Michaelis*s  work  Der  Parthenon
(Leipzig,  1871 ).  The  views  embodied  in  that  work  are  corrected  in  some  important
respects  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  ( '  Untersuchungen  am  Parthenon/  MittheiL  </.  arch,
Inst,  in  Athen^  6  (1881),  pp.  283-302),  The  passages  of  ancient  writers  and
inscriptions  relating  to  the  Parthenon  are  collected  in  Jahn-Michaelis,  Patisaniae
desert ptio  arcis  Athenartim,  See  also  Stuart  and  Revctt,  Antiquities  of  Athens ^  2.
p.  I  sqq,  ;  Leake,  Athens ^  I.  pp.  536-573 ;  E.  Beul^,  VAcropole  (VAthhus^  2.
p.  5  sqq. ;  C.  Bottichcr,  C/ntersuchun^^enau/i/er  Ahropo/is  von  Athen  (Berlin,  1863);
Dyer,  Afuient  Athens^  p.  390  sqq,  ;  L.  v.  Sybel,  '  Parthenon,'  in  Baumeister's
Detikmdler,  2,  pp.  1171-1188;  F.  C.  Penrose,  Principles  of  Athenian  Architecture,
(new  ed.,  London,  1888);  A.  Botticher,  Die  Akropolis  von  A  then,  p.  no  sqq,  ;
Guide-Joanne^  I.  p.  51  sqq,;  Baedeker,' p.  67  sqq,  ;  Furtwangler,  J/rw/^ntvr^c^  </.
griech,  Plastik,  p.  162  sqq.  For  references  to  the  literature  dealing  specially  with
the  sculptures  of  the  Partnenon,  see  next  note.

24.  5.  All  the  figures  in  the  gable  over  the  entrance relate

to  the  birth  of  Athena.  The  back  gable  contains  the  strife  of
Poseidon  with  Athena.  When  Carrey  drew  the  Parthenon  sculptures
in  1674  t^c  central  group  of  the  front  (eastern)  gable  had  already
totally  disappeared,  so  that  we  do  not  know  how  the  birth  of  Athena
was  here  represented.  An  ancient  relief  surrounding  a  putcal  or  well-
head, which  is  now  at  Madrid,  has  been  supposed  to  throw  light  on
the  subject.  In  this  relief  Zeus  is  seen  seated  on  a  throne,  grasping
the  thunderbolt  in  his  right  hand.  He  is  looking  to  the  right.
In  front  of  him  Athena,  armed  with  helmet  and  shield,  is  advancing
to  the  right.  Between  her  and  Zeus  is  a  figure  of  Victory  flying
with  a  wreath  to  place  on  Athena's  head.  Behind  Zeus  is  He-
phaestus with  his  axe  over  his  shoulder.  He  has  just  cleft  the  head
of  Zeus,  and  now  starts  back  in  surprise.  On  the  right  are  the
three  Fates.  See  R.  Schneider,  Die  Geburt  der  Athena^  pL  I.  A
composition  of  this  sort  seems  more  in  harmony  with  the  dignity  of
Athena  as  goddess  of  the  temple  than  the  scheme  which  occurs  on  vase-
paintings  and  Etruscan  mirrors,  where  Athena  is  represented  as  a  tiny
figure  hovering  over  the  head  of  Zeus.  This  is  confirmed  by  Mr.  B.
Bauer's  recent  examination  of  the  ground  of  the  gable  (pediment).
It  now  appears  that  the  centre  of  this  eastern  gable  was  occupied  by  two
large  figures  of  about  equal  size,  not  by  a  single  central  figure  of  Zeus,
as  it  must  have  been  if  the  composition  had  resembled  that  of  the  vase-
paintings.  All  the  figures  in  the  two  extremities  of  the  gable  which
Carrey  drew  are  still  extant,  except  that  the  heads  of  two  of  them  are
>vanting  and  that  some  other  pieces  have  been  chipped  off.  Indeed  two
torsos  belonging  to  this  gable  have  been  found  since  Carrey's  time.
One  of  them  is  supposed  to  be  the  torso  of  Hephaestus,  the  other  the
torso  of  Victory.  Of  the  existing  figures  of  the  eastern  pediment  the
horses  in  the  southern  extremity  of  the  gable  represent  the  chariot  of  the
rising  Sun  ;  the  horses  in  the  other  extremity  of  the  gable  represent  the
car  of  the  setting  Moon.  (One  of  the  heads  of  the  Moon's  horses  is  in
the  British  Museum ;  two  others  were  found  in  their  original  position,  with


3IO  THE  PARTHENON  bk.  i.  attic  a

—  — ■ -      -  -     -

traces  of  a  fourth,  by  Mr.  B.  Sauer  a  few  years  ago.)  The  interpretation  of
all  the  other  figures  is  totally  uncertain,  and  has  been  the  subject  of  the
most  diverse  hypotheses.  The  field  of  conjecture  is  boundless,  and
archaeologists  have  accordingly  expatiated  in  it.

The  sculptures  of  the  western  gable  were  comparatively  intact  in
Carrey's  time ;  but,  as  we  have  seen,  they  were  mostly  destroyed  a  few
years  afterwards.  Accordingly  Carrey's  drawings  are  the  only  trust-
worthy source  of  information  as  to  the  way  in  which  the  subject  of  the
sculptures  (the  contest  between  Athena  and  Poseidon)  was  represented.
In  the  centre  were  Poseidon  and  Athena,  starting  back  from  each  other  ;
beside  Athena  were  two  horses ;  seated  and  reclining  figures  occupied  the
rest  of  the  gable.  A  painting  on  an  ancient  Greek  vase  found  at  Kertsch
and  now  at  St.  Petersburg  (see  above,  p.  301,  Fig.  22)  has  been  supposed
to  be  a  copy,  more  or  less  free,  of  the  group  in  the  western  gable  of  the
Parthenon.  Athena  and  Poseidon  are  represented  standing  on  opposite
sides  of  the  olive-tree.  In  his  right  hand  Poseidon  has  his  trident
raised  ;  in  his  left  he  grasps  the  bridle  of  a  prancing  horse.  Athena
has  her  shield  on  her  left  arm  and  raises  her  spear  in  her  right  hand.
Between  the  two  deities  is  Athena's  serpent,  which  raises  its  head
threateningly  against  Poseidon.  Above,  floating  in  the  air,  is  a  winged
Victory.  But  this  vase-painting  differs  too  much  from  Carrey's  drawing
to  allow  us  to  regard  it  as  a  faithful  copy  of  the  Parthenon  sculptures.
A  similar  group  appears  on  Athenian  coins ;  it  may  be  a  free  copy  of
the  group  of  Athena  and  Poseidon  in  the  western  gable  of  the  Parthenon
(see  above,  p.  300,  Fig.  20).

As  Pausanias  does  not  mention  the  metopes  and  frieze,  it  would  be
out  of  place  to  discuss  them  here.

The  sculptures  of  the  Parthenon  are  described,  and  the  various  theories  about
them  stated,  by  Prof.  A.  Michaelis  in  his  work  Der  Parthenon  (Leipzig,  187 1).
The  chief  contributions  made  to  the  subject  since  Michaelis's  book  was  published
are  as  follows :  Stephani,  in  Compit  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1872,  pp.  1-142
(discusses  the  vase-painting  found  at  Kertsch) ;  E.  Petersen,  Die  Kttnst  ties
Pheidias  (Berlin,  1873),  p*  ^05  ^'il'  \  O.  Liiders,  'Der  WestfHez  der  Cella  des
Parthenon  in  seinem  jetzigen  Zustande,'  Archdologische  Zeitung^  30  (1S73),  pp.
31-34;  H.  Brunn,  *Die  Bildwerke  des  Parthenon,'  Sitzungsberichte  der  phitos,
philolog.  u,  histor,  Ci.  d,  k,  b,  Akad.  d,  Wissett,  zu  A/uncAen,  1 874,  Bd.
2.  pp.  3-50 ;  Fr.  Lenormant,  *  Tete  du  Fronton  occidentale  du  Parthenon,*
Gazette  Arch^ohgique^  I  (1875),  pp.  1-5;  J.  de  Witte,  *La  dispute  d* Athene
et  de  Poseidon,'  Monuments  Grecs^  i.  No.  4  (1875),  PP*  I3"22 ;  C.  Robert,  *Neue
Fragmente  der  Parthenonskulpturen,'  Archiiologiscne  Zeitung^  33  (pub.  1876),
pp.  95-103;  E.  Petersen,  'Die  neueste  Erklarung  der  Westgicbelgruppe  des
Parthenon,'  ib.  pp.  1 15-128;  II.  Brunn,  *Die  Petersburger  Poseidonvase,' ^V/s/zw^-
berichte  of  the  Munich  Academy  (see  above),  1876,  Bd.  i.  pp.  477-490;  G.  Loeschcke,
*  Ueber  Darstellungen  der  Athena-Geburt,'  Archdologische  Zeitung,  34  (1876,  pub.
1877),  pp.  108- 1 19;  E.  Petersen,  *  Vt^XosyXheigxhe^'  Archaoiogtsche  Zeitung,  35
(1877),  p.  136  sq,  ;  li.  BlUmner,  *  Ueber  die  Brunn'sche  Deutung  der  Giebelfelder
des  Parthenon,'  Rheinisches  Museum,  N.F.,  32  (1877),  pp.  1 18- 131  ;  A.  Trendelen-
burg,* Iris  in  den  Giebelgruppen  des  Parthenon,'  Archdologische  Zeitung,  38  (18S0),
pp.  130-134  ;  J.  Overbeck,  *  Analeklen  zur  Kritik  und  Erklarung  der  Parthenon-
skulpturen,' Berichte  iiber  die  Verhdndlungen  d.  k.  sdchs,  Gcsell.  d,  IVissen.  zu
Leipzig,  Philolog.  histor.  CI.,  32  (1880),  pp.  42-55,  161-186;  R.  Schneider,  Die
Geiurt  der  Athena  {\i'\tTiy  1880);  C.  Robert,  *  Der  Strcit  der  Gotter  um  Athcn,'
Hermes,  16  (1881),  pp.  60-87;  Overbeck,   Gcschichte  </.  griech.  Plastik,^  i.    p.


CH.  XXIV  THE  PARTHENON  311

yfi 5qq.  ;  C.  Robert,  'Das  Schiedsgericht  iiber  Athena  und  Poseidon/  Alitthei-
lungen  d,  arch,  Itist,  in  Athene  7  (1882),  pp.  48-^8  ;  £.  A.  Gardner,  'Athene  in
the  west  pediment  of  the  Parthenon,  */i?Mrwtf/  of  Hellenic  Studies  y  3  (1882),  pp.
244-255 ;  L.  de  Ronchaud,  *  Sur  le  Groupe  dit  des  Parques  au  fronton  oriental
du  V^nhtnoiit  Revue  Arch^ologique^  N.S.  44  (1882),  pp.  173-178;  £.  Petersen,
*  Der  Streit der  Gotterum  Aihen/ Hermes ^  17  (1882),  pp.  124-133  ;  /</.,  *  Der  Streit
des  Poseidon  und  der  Athena,'  Wiener  Studien^  5  (1883),  pp.  42-51  ;  Lucy  M.
Mitchell,  History  of  Ancient  Sculpture^  p.  327  sqq,  ;  C.  Robert,  'Die  Ostmetopen
des  V^i^txioxiy  Archdohgische  Zeitung,  42  (1884),  pp.  47-58;  O.  Rossbach,  *Die
drdzehnte  Siidmetope  des  Parthenon,'  ib,  pp.  57-62 ;  A.  Michaelis,  *  Die  LUcken
im  Parthenonfries,'  Archaologische  Zeitung,  43  (1885),  pp.  53-70  ;  Ch.  Waldstein,
'  The  Panathenaic  festival  and  the  central  slab  of  the  Parthenon,'  American  Journal


wly-

foumal  of  Archaeology y  5  (1889),  pp.  1-8  ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens ^  p.  431
sqq,  ;  A.  S.  Murray,  History  of  Greek  Sculpture^  2.  p.  15  sqq ;  O.  Puchstein,  *  Die
rarthenonsculpturen,'  Jahrbuch  d,  k,  deutsch.  archdoiog,  Inst,  5  (1890),  pp.
79-117;  American  foumal  of  Archcuology^  6  (1890),  p.  206  sa,\  Bruno  Sauer,
*  Untersuchungen  Uber  die  Giebelgruppen  des  Parthenon,*  Mittneilungen  d,  arch,
Inst,  in  Athen,  15  (1891),  pp.  59-94;  Furtwangler,  m  Jahrbuch  d,  k,  deutsch.
archdoiog,  Instituts,  6  (1891),  Archaologischer  Anzeiger,  p.  70  sq,  (new  theory  of
the  figures  in  the  west  gable) ;  Berliner  phihlog,  Wochenschrift^  1 1  (1891),  p.  863
sq,  ;  Komain  de  S^ze,  *  Les  deesses  de  la  Mer  au  Parthenon,'  Revtu  ArchJologique^
3me  S^rie,  21  (1893),  pp.  168-185 ;  Bruno  Sauer,  *Zwei  Fragmente  vom  Parthenon,'
Festschrift  fiir Johannes  Overbed {heipzic,  1893),  {Jp. 73-78;  Ad.  Michaelis,  *Peplos
und  Priestermantel,'  ib.  pp.  178-183 ;  S.  Staes,  in  *E<^fiepls  dpxo^o\oyuci/if  1892,
pp.  181 -184  (on  a  statue  found  at  Epidaurus,  conjectured  to  be  a  copy  of  the
figure  of  Athena  in  the  west  gable  of  the  Parthenon) ;  A.  H.  Smith,  Catalogue  of
Sculpture  in  the  British  Museum^  i,  p.  loi  sqq,  ;  tV/.,  'Recent  additions  to  the
sculptures  of  the  VdJXhtnoxit*  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  13  (1892-3),  pp.  88-100 ;
W.  Amelung,  *Frammento  del  fregio  del  Partenone,'  Mittheil,  d.  archdoiog,
Ifistituts^  Romische  Abtheilung,  8  (1893),  PP*  76-78;  A.  Furtwangler,  Meister-
werke  d,  griech,  Plastik,  pp.  184  sqq,,  223-250;  G.  F.  Hill,  *  The  east  frieze  of
the  Parthenon,'  Classical  Review,  8  (1894),  p.  225  sq,  ;  J.  Six,  *Die  Mittelgruppe
des  ostlichen  Parthenongiebels,'  Jahrbuch  d,  k,  deutsch,  archdoiog,  Instituts,  9
([894),  pp.  83-87;  Berliner  philolog,  Wochenschrift,  14(1894),  p.  1501  sq,\
K.  D.  Mylonas,  in  *'&<fn)fjL€pii  dpxato^o7<'^^>  1 894,  p.  187  sq,  (on  fragments  of  the
metopes  of  the  south  side).

Though  Phidias  had  the  oversight  of  the  construction  of  the  Parthenon
(Plutarch,  Pericles^  13),  we  are  not  told  that  he  executed  any  of  the
sculptures  with  his  own  hand.  Since  the  sculptures  were  brought  to
England  it  has  been  generally  supposed  that  they  were  designed  and
partially  executed  by  Phidias.  But  a  few  years  ago  Dr.  O.  Puchstein
attempted  to  show  that  the  sculptures  of  the  gables  and  the  frieze  were
not  by  Phidias  or  even  by  his  pupils,  but  were  executed  at  a  somewhat
later  time  by  sculptors  who  had  abandoned  the  traditions  of  his  school
and  struck  out  a  new  line  for  themselves.  One  of  the  arguments  on
which  he  relies  for  the  proof  of  this  novel  doctrine  is  the  use  of  the
running  borer  in  the  sculptures  of  the  gables  and  frieze.  This  borer  was
invented  by  Callimachus  (Pausanias,  i.  26.  7),  to  whom  Dr.  Puchstein
is  inclined  to  attribute  the  sculptures  of  the  gables  and  frieze.  According
to  Dr.  Puchstein  the  borer  was  not  used  in  making  the  Ionic  capitals
of  the  Propylaea,  but  was  used  in  making  the  Ionic  capitals  of  the
temple  of  Wingless  Victory  (Victory  Athena).     Hence  he  infers  that


312  VIRGIN  ATHENA  bk.  i.  attic  a

the  borer  came  first  into  use  between  437  B.C.  and  430  B.C.  See  O.
Puchstein,  in  Jahrbuch  d.  k,  deuisch,  archdolog,  InstitutSy  5  (1890),
pp.  79-117;  American  Journal  of  Archaeology ^  6  (1890),  p.  206  sq.
Considering  that  Pausanias  speaks  of  Callimachus  as  a  second-class
sculptor  (i.  26.  7),  and  that  Pliny  (N,  H,  xxxiv.  92)  describes  him  as
elaborating  his  works  till  all  ease  and  grace  were  lost,  Dr.  Puchstein's
selection  of  this  artist  as  the  author  of  the  most  graceful  sculptures
bequeathed  to  us  by  antiquity  seems  particularly  unfortunate.  His
theor>'  is  rightly  rejected  by  Prof.  Furtwangler  {Meisterwerke  d,  grieck,
PlcLStiky  p.  72  sqq)

24.  5.  The  image  itself  is  made  of  ivory  and  gold  etc.  This
gold  and  ivory  statue  of  Athena  by  Phidias,  one  of  the  most  famous
statues  of  antiquity,  was  set  up  in  the  Parthenon  in  438/7  B.C.  (Philo-
chorus,  cited  by  the  scholiast  on  Aristophanes,  Peace^  605).  Some
fragmentary  inscriptions  relating  to  the  purchase  of  gold  and  ivory  for
the  statue  have  come  down  to  us  ;  the  purchases  extended  over  at  least
three  years  (C.  I,  A,  i.  Nos.  298,  299  ;  C.  /.  A,  iv.  p.  146  sq.  ;  AcXriov
d/»;(atoAoyiKov,  1889,  p.  6  sqq. ;  Bulletin  de  Corr,  HeUMque^  13  (1889),
p.  1 7 1  sqq. ;  U.  Kohler,  in  Sitzungsberichte  of  the  Berlin  Academy  for
1889,  pp.  223-225  ;  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  10  (1889),  p.  269  sq,  ;
E.  L.  Hicks,  Greek  Historical  Inscriptions^  Nos.  33,  34 ;  cp.  W.  Ridge-
way,  Origin  of  Metallic  Currency  and  Weight  Standards ^  p.  220).
Pausanias's  description  of  the  statue  is  confirmed  and  supplemented  by
the  statements  of  other  ancient  writers.  The  gold  used  in  making  the
statue  could  all  be  removed  (Thucydides,  ii.  13;  Diodorus,  xii.  40  ;
Plutarch,  Pericles^  31);  it  weighed  40  talents  according  to  Thucydides
(ii.  13),  44  talents  according  to  Philochorus  (cited  by  the  scholiast  on
Aristophanes,  Peace,  605),  or  50  talents  according  to  Diodorus  (xii.  40).
The  height  of  the  image  (including  probably  the  pedestal)  was  26  cubits
(Pliny,  A''.  H.  xxxvi.  18).  The  face,  hands,  and  feet  of  the  image  were
of  ivory  (Plato,  Hippias  Major,  p.  290  b).  The  pupils  of  the  eyes  were
of  stone  (Plato,  /.r.),  probably  of  precious  stones.  The  goddess  wore  the
aegis  (Maximus  Tyrius,  Dissert,  xiv.  6;  Aristides,  Or,  xxiv.  vol.  i.  p.  475,
ed.  Dindorf ).  The  shield  was  on  the  left  side  of  the  goddess  (Ampelius,
viii.  I  o).  On  the  outside  of  the  shield  was  wrought  in  relief  the  battle
of  the  Amazons  and  Athenians  (Pliny,  N,  H,  xxxvi.  18  ;  Pausanias,  i.  17.
2).  In  this  battle-scene  Phidias  introduced  a  p)ortrait  of  himself  as  an
old  bald-headed  man  heaving  up  a  stone  with  both  hands,  and  a  portrait
of  Pericles  fighting  an  Amazon,  the  hand  which  grasped  his  spear  being  so
raised  in  front  of  his  face  as  partly  to  conceal  it  (Plutarch,  Pericles,  3 1  ;
Dio  Chrysostom,  Or,  xii.  vol.  i.  p.  214  sq.,  ed.  Dindorf.  ;  Cicero,  Tusc.
i.  15.  34;  Valerius  Maximus,  viii.  14.  6;  [Aristotle,]  De  munch,  6,  p.
399  b,  33  sqq, ;  Apuleius,  De  mundo,  32).  On  the  inside  of  the  shield
were  wrought  the  battles  of  the  Giants  (Pliny,  N,  H,  xxxvi.  18).  Prof.
Furtwangler  thinks  that  they  were  painted,  not  chiselled,  and  that  an
existing  vase-painting  gives  us  an  idea  of  the  composition  {Meisterwerke  d.
gricch,  Plastik,  p.  71  ;  cp.  Max.  Mayer,  Giganten  und  Titanen,  pp.  267-
269).  In  her  extended  hand  Athena  held  the  figure  of  Victory  (Arrian,
Epicteti  Dissertationes,  ii.  8.  20).     The  hand  in  which  she  held  the


CH.  XXIV  VIRGIN  ATHENA  313

Victory  must  have  been  the  right  hand ;  since  the  spear  which  she
grasped  in  the  other  hand  was  apparently  beside  the  shield  (Pausanias,
i.  24.  7),  which  was  on  the  left  side  (see  above).  The  statue  wore
sandals  (Pollux,  vii.  92),  on  which  was  wrought  the  battle  of  the
Centaurs  and  Lapiths  (Pliny,  N,  H,  xxxvi.  18).  On  the  pedestal  of  the
statue  was  represented  in  relief  the  birth  of  Pandora  in  presence  of
twenty  gods  (Pliny,  N.  H.  xxxvi.  19).  The  parts  of  the  statue  which
were  especially  admired  by  connoisseurs  were  the  Victory,  the  golden
serpent  under  the  shield,  and  the  sphinx  on  the  helmet  (Pliny,  /.r.)  The
figure  of  Victory  on  the  goddess's  right  hand  wore  a  golden  crown
(C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  652).

These  descriptions  enable  us  to  identify  various  reproductions  of  the
statue  which  have  come  down  to  us.  The  most  important  of  these
reproductions  are  the  following :

(i)  The  Varvakion  statue.  This  was  found  at  Athens  beside  the
Var\'akion  gymnasium  in  December  1880.  It  is  a  statue  of  Pentelic
marble  1.05  metre,  or  rather  more  than  3  feet  4  inches  high,  including
the  base.  The  goddess  is  represented  standing  upright,  resting  on  the
right  foot,  the  left  foot  being  slightly  drawn  back.  Her  features  are
full,  rounded,  and  matronly ;  not  wanting  in  gravity  and  dignity,  but
somewhat  heavy  and  expressionless.  On  her  head  she  wears  a  helmet
with  three  crests.  The  central  and  highest  crest  is  supported  by  a
Sphinx ;  each  of  the  other  crests  is  supported  by  a  winged  horse  or
Pegasus.  The  cheek-pieces  of  the  helmet  are  raised ;  they  are  quite
plain.  The  goddess  is  clad  in  a  long  double  tunic  which  reaches  to  and
partly  conceals  her  feet ;  the  upper  part  of  the  tunic,  folding  over  the
under  one,  descends  to  below  her  waist,  and  is  drawn  together  at  the
waist  by  a  girdle,  which  ends  in  front  in  two  intertwined  serpents'  heads
forming  the  clasp.  The  tunic  is  sleeveless ;  the  bare  arms  of  the
goddess  are  encircled  at  the  wrists  by  serpent-bracelets.  A  scaly  aegis,
fringed  with  serpents,  covers  the  breast  of  the  goddess  and  falls  over
her  back ;  on  the  front  of  it  is  the  Gorgon's  head,  rudely  sculptured.
The  right  arm  of  the  goddess,  from  the  elbow  downward,  is  extended
forward,  and  her  upturned  hand  supports  an  image  of  Victory  with
drooping  wings,  which  faces  to  the  goddess's  left  and  is  therefore  in
profile  to  her.  The  hand  which  holds  the  Victory  is  supported  on  a
pillar  of  no  particular  order.  The  shield  of  the  goddess  is  set  upright
on  its  edge  at  her  left  side,  and  her  left  hand  rests  on  it.  On  the  outer
side  of  the  shield  is  carved,  in  the  middle,  the  Gorgon's  head.  Other-
wise the  shield  is  plain.  Between  it  and  the  goddess  is  coiled  the
serpent  with  head  erect  and  protruding  from  the  rim  of  the  shield.  The
head  of  the  Victory,  the  head  of  one  of  the  winged  horses,  and  three
fingers  of  Athena's  left  hand  are  wanting  ;  otherwise  the  statue  is  almost
perfect.  It  retains  numerous  traces  of  colour.  The  workmanship  is
extremely  careful,  but  spiritless  and  mechanical ;  the  general  effect  is
heax'y.  The  statue  is  obviously  a  late  Roman  copy ;  it  may  have  been
executed  in  the  age  of  Hadrian.

This  is  on  the  whole  the  best  reproduction  of  the  statue  of  Virgin
Athena  which  has  come  down  to  us.     But  it  differs  from  the  descriptions


314  VIRGIN  ATHENA  BK.  I.  ATTICA

of  ancient  writers  in  wanting  the  spear,  the  griffins  on  the  helmet,  and
the  reliefs  on  the  sliield,  on  the  sandals,  and  on  the  pedest.il.


See  Am.  Hauvette-Besnault,  in  BulUlin  de  Corr.  Helh'niqiu,  5  (1881),  pp.
S4.63,  reprinted  in  Revue  ArihkUgiqtu,  N.  S.  41  (18S1),  p.  41  iqq. ;  K.  Lange,
in  Millhtilungtn  d.  arcA.  last,  in  Athen,  5  (i88o|,  |ip.  370-379;  id.,  Mitlheil,
d.  arch.  fnsl.  in  Aiken,  6  (1881),  pp.  56-94;  'd-,  'Zur  Pailhenos,'  AnhoBlesiicke
Zeilung,  42  (1S84),  pp.  129-134;  C  T.  Newton,  lajt/umal  of  Hellenic  Studies,


CH.  XXIV  VIRGIN  ATHENA  315

3  (1881),  pp.  1-6;  Th.  Schreibet,  'Die  Alhena  Paithenoa  des  Phidias,'  Abkandl.
d.  phiiihg.  kUt.  Cl.d.k.Siich!.GeseU.d.  Whj^.  8(i883j,p.  546  j?^.;  id.,'tleat
Paithenosstudien,'  Anhiiohgitcht  Zcilung,  41  (18S3),  pp.  193-2141  Z77-3o6 ;  Ch.
Waldstein,  Sst^s  tn  the  Art  of  Phidias,  p.  269  laa.;  Friedericlis - Wollers.
Ciptaigiine,  No.  467;  Cawadiat,  rXtnrrA rou ^f^uou  Moixrtiou,  i.  No.  467.

(3)  A  statuette  of  Pentelic  marble  found  ai  Athens  near  the  Pnyx  in
1859.  It  is  .41  metre  high  including  the  base.  It  is  sometimes  known
as  Lenonnant's  statuette,  because  C.  Lenonnant  was  the  first  to  perceive
that  it  is  a  reproduction  of  Phidias's  statue.  The  statuette,  though  in
perfect  preservation,  is  unfinished  and  left  in  the  rough.  The  chief
points  in  which  it  supplements  the  Varvakion  statue  are  the  reliefs  on
the  shield  and  the  base.  The  reliefs  on  the  shield  represent  a  battle  (with
Amazons  ?) ;  those  on  the  base  are  too  rough  and  unfinished  10  allow  us
to  say  whether  they  represent,  as  we  should  expect,  the  birth  of  Pandora.
The  crests  of  the  helmet,  the  Victory,  and  the  spear  are  all  wanting.


Si).  PP-  3
b ;  Fried


iederichs-VVolters,  Gifsah-
rou  MoivcfoK,  I.  No.  izS.

the  tumulus  of  Koul-Oba  near


Kensch  in  1S30,  and  now  in  the  Hermitage  Museum  at  St.  Petersbui^.
They  were  found,  with  other  feminine  jewellery,  on  the  breast  of  a  woman


3i6  VIRGIN  ATHENA  bk.  i.  attica

buried  beside  her  husband.  They  both  represent  in  relief  the  head  of
Phidias's  statue  of  Virgin  Athena.  The  goddess  wears  a  helmet  with
triple  crest  supported  by  a  sphinx  in  the  middle  and  two  winged  horses
at  the  sides,  just  as  on  the  Varvakion  statue.  On  the  cheek-pieces,
which  are  raised,  griffins  are  represented  in  relief.  Thus  we  see  that
Pausanias  omitted  to  notice  the  winged  horses  (sculptured  in  the  round)
on  the  helmet,  but  described  the  griffins  wrought  in  relief  on  the  cheek-
pieces.  Above  the  brow  of  the  goddess  is  a  row  of  animal-heads  pro-
jecting over  the  rim  of  the  helmet ;  the  artist  clearly  intended  to  indicate
that  these  animal-heads  were  in  the  round,  not  in  relief.  Mr.  G.
Kieseritzky,  who  first  published  the  medallions  with  a  full  description,
states  thai  these  animal-heads  are  five  heads  of  griffins  alternating  with
five  heads  of  deer.  On  one  shoulder  of  the  goddess  a  portion  of  the
shaft  of  her  spear  is  seen  resting,  with  a  serpent  coiled  round  it.  On
one  medallion  the  spear  is  on  the  right,  while  on  the  other  it  is  on  the
left,  shoulder  of  the  goddess.  The  latter  is  correct  (see  above).  The
goddess  wears  a  necklace  and  ear-rings.  Her  features  resemble  those
of  the  Van-akion  statue,  being  massive,  heavy,  and  expressionless.  We
have  reason  to  believe  that  these  medallions  present  us  with  tolerably
faithful  copies  of  the  head  of  the  original  statue,  so  far  as  the  details  of
the  lavish  ornaments  are  concerned.  But  we  may  doubt  whether  the  owl
which  on  the  medallions  is  represented  perching  on  one  of  the  cheek-
pieces  was  in  the  original  or  not  ;  it  may  perhaps  have  been  inserted  by
the  artist  of  the  medallions  to  till  up  space.  The  grave  in  which  the
medallions  were  found  is  thought  by  Mr.  Kieseritzky  to  be  not  later  than
the  middle  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  ;  and  he  considers  that  the
medallions,  from  their  style,  must  be  somewhat  older.  In  that  case,  it
would  seem,  they  were  copied  direct  from  the  original  statue  not  very
many  years  after  its  completion.

See  G.  Kieseritiky,  'Athena  Parthenos  der  Ermltage,'  Mitlhdl.  d.  arch.  Inst,
in  Athcn,  8  (1883),  pp.  291-315;  Friederichs-Wolters,  Gipsabgiisst,  Noi.  468,
469  ;  F.  Sludniczka,  in  Arckiinlogischc  Zeiliing,  43  (1S84),  pp.  161-166.

(4)  A  fine  intaglio  in  red  jasper  signed  by  the  engraver  Aspasius,

It  Vienna,  reproduces  in  profile  the  head  of  the

statue  almost  as  it  appears  on  the  gold  medallions.

We  see  the  central  crest  supported  by  the  Sphinx,

one  of  the  side  crests  supported  by  a  winged  horse,

one  of  the   ear-rings,  the   necklace,  and  the   aegis

..  ^^  with  the  Gorgon's  head.     But  over  the  brow  of  the

'jpyi^       J    goddess,  instead  of  the  row  of  heads  of  griffins  and

~,i  /     deer,  there  is  a  row  of  the  foreparts  of  horses  at  full

gallop.      See  Jalirbuch   d.    k.    deutsck.    archdolog.

Instituts,    3    {1888),   pi.    10,    No.    10;    CoUignon,

Fii..  jn.— >i.i.i,N  Ai«c*A    fffsioire  de  la  Sculpture  Gre(que,  1.  p.  542  J?.

^limT"°  "'  *"'*  (5)  '^  marble  head  of  the  goddess,  found  on  the

site  of  the  Gardens  of  Sallust  at  Rome  and  now  in

the  Berlin  Museum,  is  clearly  a  Roman  copy  of  the  head  of  Phidias's


VIRGIN  ATMEHA


317


Statue  ;  for  the  helmet,  though  mutilated,  reproduces  the  winged  horses,
the  galloping  steeds,  and  the  raised  cheek-pieces.  But  the  features  have
been  modernised  to  suit  the  taste  of  the  day.  It  is  a  sweet  girlish
face  as  different  from  the  matronly  fulness  and  gravity  of  Phidias's
Athena  as  the  Madonna  in  the  "  Holy  Family  "  of  Reynolds  is  different
from  the  saintly  Madonnas  of  the  great  Italian  masters  (Ruskin,  Selec-
tions, I.  p.  272  fy.)  See  Beschreibung der  antiken  Siulpturen,  Berlin,
No.  76  A,  p.  39  Jf. ;  Collignon,  op.  cil.  1.  p.  544.

(6)  Coins  of  Athens  reproduce  sometimes  the  enti
times  the  head  only.  On  some  of  those  which  repro-
duce the  entire  statue,  the  goddess  is  represented
holding  the  spear,  as  well  as  the  shield,  in  her  left
hand.  On  some  of  those  which  represent  the  head
alone  there  is  a  row  of  the  forepaits  of  horses  on  the
helmet  immediately  over  the  brow  of  the  goddess.
See  Imhoof- Blumer  and  Gardner,  Numismatic  Com-
mentary on   Pausanias,    pp.    126- izS,  with    pi.    Y   1

(7)  The  Strangford  shield  in  the  British  Museum.
This  is  a  marble  shield  found  at  Athens ;  about  a  third  of  it  is  lost.
On  the  outer  side  of  the  shield  is  carved  in  relief  a  battle  between
Greeks  and  Amazons.  A  comparison  with  the  reliefs  on  the  Lenonnanl
Statuette  (see  above  No.  2)  proves  that  the  shield  is  a  more  complete,
though  still  rough,  copy  of  the  shield  of  Phidias's  statue.  In  the  centre
of  the  shield  is  the  Gorgon's  head.  Immediately  below  the  Gorgon's
head  are  the  two  figures  which  Plutarch  describes  as  portraits  of  Phidias
and  Pericles  (see  above,  p.  312).  See  y\:\€azit\\%  Dcr  Parthenon,  pi.
XV.  34  ;  A.  H.  Smith,  Catalogue  of  Sculpture  in  the  British  Muiemm,
I.  No.  302.  Other  copies  of  the  shield,  most  of  them  fragmentary',
have  come  down  to  us.     See  above,  note  on  i.  17.  2,  p.  157.

The  above  reproductions  of  Phidias's  statue  of  Virgin  Athena  leave
a  few  points  connected  with  the  statue  in  doubt:  {a)  It  is  uncertain
whether  the  row  of  animals  on  the  helmet,  immediately  over  the  brow
of  the  goddess,  were  the  foreparts  of  horses  or  of  griffins  and  deer
alternately  ;  but  it  is  probable  that  they  were  the  foreparts  of  horses,
since  horses  appear  universally  on  the  coins,  and  griflins  and  stags  only
on  the  gold  medallions,  {b)  It  is  uncertain  whether
the  spiear  was  grasped  in  the  left  hand  of  the  goddess
or  rested  on  her  shoulder.  The  coins  are  in  favour  of
the  former  view  ;  the  gold  medallions  are  in  favour
of  the  latter.  Pausanias's  evidence  coincides  with  I
that  of  the  coins,  {c)  It  is  uncertain  whether  the
right  hand  of  the  statue,  which  held  the  Victory,
rested  on  a  pillar  or  not.  The  pillar  does  not  ap-
pear on  the  Athenian  coins;  but  on  a  Cilician  coin  "°'  ^^  ~  ^nciu
(Fig.  32)  of  the  fourth  century,  which  seems  to  re-  coin).
produce  the  statue,  the  hand  of  the  goddess  rests  on
a  stump  of  a  tree,  which  the  dye-engraver  has  apparently  substituted  for
the  pillar  (P.  Gardner,  Types  of  Greek  Coins,  p\.  %.  28;  Imhoof- Blumer  and


3i8  VIRGIN  ATHENA  bk.  i.  attica

Gardner,  Num.  Comm,  on  Paus.^  pi.  Y  xxii.  ;  Zeitschrift  fur  Numtsmatik,
10(1882),  p.  152;  A.  von  Sallet,  in  Archdologische  Zeiiung^  42  (1884),
p.  61  sg,)  Moreover  the  pillar  appears  on  a  bad  token  of  Athens,
which  reproduces  the  statue  in  question  {Zeitschrift  fur  Numismatik,
10  (1882),  p.  1 52  sq,)y  and  on  an  Attic  relief  of  the  fourth  century  which
represents  a  priestess  crowned  by  the  figure  of  Victory  which  Athena
holds  in  her  right  hand  (Michaelis,  Der  Parthenon^  pi.  xv.  7).  It  is
obvious  that  in  all  these  cases  the  artist  had  no  motive  for  inserting  the
pillar,  if  it  did  not  exist  in  the  original.  The  evidence  of  these  works
of  art,  taken  in  connexion  with  that  of  the  Varvakion  statue  (the  most
exact  of  all  the  reproductions  of  the  original),  makes  it  highly  probable
that  the  right  hand  of  the  goddess  was  supported  on  a  pillar.  Such  a
support  was  probably  rendered  necessary  by  the  weight  of  the  Victor}-,
which  was  (as  Pausanias  tells  us)  about  4  cubits  or  6  feet  high.  It
has  been  suggested  that  this  pillar  was  the  stele  on  which  the  name  of
Phidias,  as  the  sculptor  of  the  statue,  was  recorded  (Plutarch,  Pericles^
13).  But  I  doubt  whether  stele  (o-ttJAi;)  ever  means  a  supporting
pillar ;  its  usual,  if  not  invariable,  meaning  is  an  inscribed  or  sculptured
slab  of  stone  or  metal.

The  statue  of  the  Virgin  Athena  seems  to  have  remained  in  the
Parthenon  till  at  least  429  A.D.,  the  year  when  Proclus  visited  Athens,
but  to  have  been  removed  before  Marinus  wrote  his  life  of  Proclus  towards
the  end  of  the  same  century  (Marinus,  Life  of  Proclus,  30).  From  a
passage  in  the  Passio  S,  Philippi  Episcopi  Heracleae  Mr.  Fiihrer  has
inferred  that  the  statue  perished  in  a  conflagration  between  429  and
485  A.D.  (J.  Fiihrer,  *Zur  Geschichte  des  Elagabaliums  und  der  Athena
Parthenos  des  Pheidias,*  MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst.,  Romische  Abtheilung,
7  (1892),  pp.  158-165  ;  cp.  W.  Gurlitt,  in  Analecta  Graeciensia  (Graz,
1893),  p.  10 1  sqq.)

On  Phidias's  statue  of  Virgin  Athena  and  its  reproductions  see  (in  addition  to
the  references  already  given)  Michaelis,  Der  Parthtnon,  pp.  266-284 ;  Th.
Schreiber,  *Die  Athena  Parthenos  des  Phidias/  I.e.,  pp.  545-642;  Overbeck,
Gcsch.  d.  griech.  Plastik*  I.  p.  350  sqq.  ;  Lucy  M.  Mitchell,  History  of  Afuietit
Sculpture f  p.  308  sqq.  ;  A.  S.  Murray,  History  of  Greek  Sculpture,  2.  p.  1 16  sqq.  ;
A.  Botticher,  Die  Akropolis  von  Athen^  p.  162  sqq.  ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient
Athens,  p.  445  sqq, ;  M.  Collignon,  Phidias,  p.  22  sqq,  ;  id.,  Histoire  dela  Sculp-
ture Grecque,  I.  p.  536  s^q.  The  passages  of  ancient  authors  referring  to  the
statue  are  collecte<l  by  Michaelis,  I.e. ;  Overbeck,  SchriftqtuUen,  §§  £^5-690 ;
Jahn- Michaelis,  Pausaniae  cUscriptio  arcis  Athenarum,  p.  14  sqq.  For  other
references  to  the  statue  in  Pausanias,  see  i.  17.  2  ;  i.  25.  7 ;  v.  11.  10 ;  x.  34.  8.

24.  5.  I  will  tell  the  story  of  the  sphinx  etc.  See  ix.  26.  2-4.
On  the  sphinx  in  ancient  art  see  A.  Milchhofer,  *  Sphinx,'  MittheiL  d.
arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,  4  (1879),  pp.  45-78.

24.  6.  Aristeas  of  Procoxmesas  says  in  his  poem  that  these
griffins  fight  for  the  gold  etc.  For  the  story  of  the  griffins  guarding
the  gold  in  the  far  north  of  Europe,  while  the  one-eyed  race  of  Arimas-
pians  endeavoured  to  steal  it  from  them,  see  Herodotus,  iii.  1 1 6,  iv.
13  and  27  ;  Aeschylus,  Prometheus,  802  sqq.  ;  Solinus,  xv.  22  sq,  ;
Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v,  TapKvvia.  The  griffins  were  said  to  mine  as
well  as  guard  the  gold  (Pliny,  A^.  H.  vii.   i  o,  xxxiii.  66 ;  Mela,  ii.  i ).


CH.  XXIV  THE  GRIFFINS  319

The  legend  of  the  griffins  and  the  gold  was  transferred  by  Ctesias  from
the  north  of  Europe  to  India  (Ctesias,  Indicay  1 2,  ed.  Bahr ;  Philostratus,
Vit,  Apollon,  iii.  48,  vi.  i  ;  Aelian,  Nat,  Anim,  \\\  27).  The  griffins
are  described  as  animals  with  the  bodies  of  lions  and  the  heads  of  eagles
by  Servius  (on  Virgil,  Eclog,  viii.  27)  and  Isidore  (OrigineSy  xii.  17).
Three  golden  griffins  were  found  by  Schliemann  in  the  pre-historic
graves  at  Mycenae  (Schliemann,  Mycenae^  p.  177);  and  one  of  the
sword-blades  found  at  Mycenae  is  adorned  with  rows  of  griffins  inlaid
in  the  metal  (C.  Schuchhardt,  Schliemann^ s  Ausgrabungen^^  p.  268).
The  conception  of  the  griffin  was  perhaps  borrowed  by  the  Greeks
from  the  Semitic  East ;  the  name  is  identical  with  the  Hebrew
*  cherub '  (A>T^^)  (E.  Meyer,  Gesch,  dcs  Alterthums^  i.  §  200).  The
cherub  was  a  winged  animal  (Winer,  Biblisches  Realwbrterbuchy  s,v.
'  Cherubim ').  On  the  griffin  in  ancient  literature  and  art  see  L.
Stephani,  in  Compie  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1864,  p.  ^o  sqq,  A
rationalistic  but  somewhat  far-fetched  explanation  of  the  legend  of  the
griffin-guarded  gold  is  offered  by  the  Siberian  traveller  Adolph  Erman.
He  thinks  it  may  have  originated  in  the  discover)'  of  gold-sand  under
formations  of  earth  filled  with  the  fossil  bones  of  *  antediluvian '  animals.
Gold-sand,  he  says,  is  often  found  under  such  formations  at  the  present
day  in  the  Ural  Mountains  (A.  Erman,  Travels  in  Siberia^  2.  p.  87  sg.)
Others  have  identified  the  griffins  with  the  ants  which  are  said  to  have
dug  up  the  gold  in  the  regions  to  the  north  of  India  (Herodotus,  iii.
102-105),  and  these  ants  again  have  been  identified  with  a  species  of
marmot  which  to  this  day  lives  in  large  communities  on  the  sandy  table-
lands of  Tibet.  See  Stein,  on  Herodotus^  iii.  102,  iv.  13;  K.  Miillen-
hoff,  Deutsche  Altertumskunde,  3.  p.  13  sq,  ;  W.  Ridgeway,  Origin  of
Metallic  Currency  and  Weight  Standards^  p.  66  sq.  Aristeas  of  Procon-
nesus  was  an  early  Greek  writer  who  seems  to  have  travelled  into  the
north  of  Europe  and  to  have  embodied  in  a  poem  the  facts  and  fables
collected  by  him  on  his  travels.  See  Herodotus,  iv.  13-15;  Suidas,  s.v,
^Apurrias :  W.  Tomaschek,  *  Kritik  der  altesten  Nachrichten  iiber  den
skythischen  Norden.  i.  Uber  das  Arimaspische  Gedicht  des  Aristeas,'
Sitzungsberichte  d,  philos,  histor,  CI.  d.  k,  Akad.  d.  Wissen,  (Vienna),  1 1 6
(1888),  pp.  715-780.  The  few  notices  and  fragments  of  Aristeas's
poem  are  collected  by  G.  Kinkel,  Epicorum  Graecorum  Fragmenta^  p.
243  sqq,

24.  7.  a  Serpent,  which  may  be  Erichthonius.  See  note  on  i.  18.
2  ''  Athena  put  Erichthonius  in  a  chest,"  etc.

24.  7.  On  the  pedestal  of  the  image  is  wrought  in  relief  the
birth  of  Pandora.  There  seems  to  have  been  a  close  connexion  in
mythology  and  ritual  between  Pandora  and  Athena.  According  to  one
account  Pandora  was  a  daughter  of  Athena's  nursling  Erechtheus  (Suidas,
s.v.  TrapOivoi).  The  antiquary  Philochorus  tells  us  that  whoever  sacrificed
an  ox  to  Athena  was  obliged  to  sacrifice  a  sheep  to  Pandora  (Harpo-
cration  and  Suidas,  s.v.  'Eiri/Soiov:  Etymol.  Magnum^  p.  358,  s.v.
hrijBoiov).  Moreover  the  priestess  of  Athena  wore  a  woollen  robe
called  protonion  because  Pandora  with  her  sisters  was  the  first  to
make  garmeijts  of  wool ;  this  robe  was  placed  by  the  priestess  upon  the


320  PANDORA  bk.  i.  attic  a

man  who  slaughtered  the  victims  (Suidas,  s,v,  irporoviov).  A  mutilated
relief  found  at  Pergamus  is  supposed  by  Dr.  Puchstein  to  be  a  copy  of
the  relief  representing  the  birth  of  Pandora  on  the  pedestal  of  Vir]gin
Athena.  See  Jakrbuch  d.  k,  deutsch.  arcMoL  Instituts^  5  (1890),  p.
113  sqq.  According  to  Hesiod  (Theogony^  561  sqq, ;  Works  and  Day s^
47  ^Q9'^  Pandora,  the  first  woman,  was  created  out  of  earth  by  Hephaes-
tus at  the  command  of  Zeus  to  be  a  source  of  sorrow  and  suffering  to
mankind,  because  Prometheus  had  stolen  fire  from  heaven  and  conveyed
it  to  men.  The  story  that  all  the  ills  which  flesh  is  now  heir  to  were
once  safely  bottled  up  in  a  jar,  and  that  Pandora  was  the  means  of
scattering  them  broadcast  over  the  world  by  removing  the  lid  of  the  jar
and  allowing  them  to  fly  abroad  (Hesiod,  Works  and  Days^  90  sqq.\  has
its  parallels  in  other  lands.  The  ancient  Peruvians  believed  that  pesti-
lence and  sickness  in  the  form  of  butterflies  were  shut  up  in  a  casket
which  was  sent  by  the  Creator  to  the  Inca  Hu>'ana-Capac  by  the  hands
of  a  black  messenger,  and  that  the  box  being  opened  all  the  diseases
were  diffused  among  men  (Ad.  Bastian,  Die  Culturlander  des  alien
America^  i.  p.  475).  Some  Indians  of  Canada  told  Father  Brebeuf
that  a  certain  savage  had  once  received  from  a  powerful  being  named
Messou  the  gift  of  immortality  in  a  small  packet,  accompanied  by  a
warning  not  to  open  it.  So  long  as  he  kept  the  packet  tied  up,  he  was
immortal.  But  his  wife,  curious  to  know  what  it  contained,  undid  the
packet,  the  precious  contents  escaped,  and  men  have  been  mortal  ever
since  {Relations  des  J  ^suites ^  1634,  p.  13,  Canadian  reprint).

24.  7.  the  Emperor  Hadrian.  An  inscribed  pedestal  of  a  statue  ot
Hadrian  has  been  found  on  the  Acropolis  between  the  Parthenon  and
the  Propylaea  (C.  /.  A.  iii.  No.  488).

24.  7.  a  statne  of  Iphicrates.  This  statue  was  of  bronze  (Demo-
sthenes, xxiii.  130,  p.  663).  It  was  set  up  in  372/1  B.C.  (Diony-
sius  Halicamassensis,  De  Lysia  judicium^  1 2).  According  to  Aeschines
(iii.  243)  the  honours  bestowed  on  Iphicrates  were  a  reward  for
his  services  in  cutting  to  pieces  a  Spartan  regiment  in  392  B.C.  (see
Xenophon,  Hellenica^  iv.  5.  10  sqq.)  Iphicrates  himself  mentioned  the
statue  in  a  fragment  of  a  speech  which  is  preserved  by  Aristotle  {Rhetoric^
ii.  23,  p.  1397  b).

In  the  Parthenon  there  were  also  painted  portraits  of  Themistocles
(Paus.  i.  I.  2)  and  Heliodorus  Halis  (Paus.  i.  37.  i).  The  silver-footed
seat  on  which  Xerxes  sat  watching  the  battle  of  Salamis  ^-as  preserved
in  the  Parthenon  (Harpocration,  s.v.  dpyvpoirovs  Bi<f>pos).

Pausanias  makes  no  mention  of  a  temple  of  Rome  and  Augustus
near  which  he  must  have  passed  on  quitting  the  Parthenon.  The
foundations  of  the  temple  were  excavated  a  few  years  ago  25  metres
(82  feet)  east  of  the  Parthenon.  The  temple  was  a  small  circular  edifice
of  white  marble,  7.15  metres  (23  feet  3  inches)  in  diameter,  surrounded
by  a  colonnade  of  nine  Ionic  columns.  The  dedicatory  inscription  {C.I.  A.
iii.  No.  63),  engraved  on  two  pieces  of  the  architrave,  states  that  the
temple  was  dedicated  by  the  people  to  the  goddess  Rome  and  Augustus
Caesar  in  the  archonship  of  Areus.  As  the  emperor  is  here  called  by
his  title  of  Augustus,  the  inscription  cannot  be  earlier  than  27   B.C.


CH.  XXV  LOCUST  APOLLO  321

See  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  472  ;  Curtius,  StcuUgeschichtey
p.  255  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  78.

24.  8.  Locust  Apollo.  The  Aeolic  Greeks  of  Asia  sacrificed  to
Locust  Apollo  (Strabo,  xiii.  p.  613).  Apollo  was  styled  Mouse  Apollo
(Sminthian  Apollo)  for  a  similar  reason.  See  note  on  x.  12.  5.  Prof.
Furtwangler  argues  that  this  statue  of  Locust  Ap>oIIo  was  by  the  supposed
elder  Praxiteles,  pupil  of  Phidias,  and  that  in  the  fourth  century  B.c.  the
sculptor  Leochares  reproduced  the  general  type  of  the  Locust  Apollo
in  a  new  statue,  of  which  the  Apollo  Belvedere  is  a  faithful  Roman  copy.
See  Furtwangler,  Meisterwerke  d,  griech,  Plastik^  pp.  659-671.  As  to
the  Apollo  Belvedere  see  note  on  x.  23.  i.

25.  I .  a  statue  of  Pericles.  The  statue  seems  to  have  stood,  not
to  the  east  of  the  Parthenon  (the  point  which  Pausanias  has  now
reached),  but  near  the  Propylaea,  on  the  north  side  of  the  Acropolis.
See  i.  28.  2.  The  statue  may  have  been  the  one  by  the  sculptor  Cresilas
which  Pliny  mentions  (N,  H.  xxxiv.  74).  What  appears  to  be  part  of
the  pedestal  of  this  statue  was  found  in  excavating  the  rubbish  beside
the  south  wall  of  the  Acropolis  in  1889.  It  is  a  fragment  of  a  pedestal
of  Pentelic  marble  and  bears  the  mutilated  inscription  :

K/»€0"]tAas  eiroic

"  [Of  Per]icles.  [Cres]ilas  made  (it)."  See  C,  L  A,  iv.  p.  154,  No.
403  a;  AcAtiov  apxaioXoyLKov^  1889,  pp.  35-37.  Three  ancient  busts
of  Pericles  have  come  down  to  us,  all  copies  of  one  original :  the
best  is  in  the  British  Museum.  Prof.  Furtwangler  conjectures  that
they  may  have  been  copied  from  Cresilas's  statue  of  Pericles.  They
represent  Pericles  in  the  prime  of  life,  bearded  and  helmeted,  with  curly
locks  escaping  from  under  the  rim  of  the  helmet.  The  face  is  serene
and  noble,  worthy  of  the  character  of  the  man.  See  Furtwangler,
Meisterwerke  d,  griech,  Plastik,  pp.  270-274.  As  to  Cresilas  see  note
on  i.  23.  3,  *  statue  of  Diitrephes.'

25.  I .  one  of  Zanthippns.  A  curious  memorial  of  this  Xanthippus,
the  father  of  Pericles,  was  found  on  the  Acropolis  a  few  years  ago.  It
is  a  fragment  of  a  black-figured  vase  inscribed  with  the  name  *  Xanthip-
pus, son  of  Arriphon '  (Hav^tirTros  'A/»/»t<^vos).  See  C  /.  A.  iv.  No.
570,  p.  192  sq.\  Jahrbuch  d.  k.  deutsch,  archdolog.  InstitutSy  2  (1887),
p.  161.  As  the  name  is  written  right  across  the  remains  of  the  figures
drawn  on  the  vase,  it  clearly  did  not  belong  to  the  vase  originally.  We
know  that  Xanthippus  was  banished  by  ostracism  (Aristotle,  Constitution
of  Athens^  22),  and  that  the  votes  for  banishment  were  recorded  on
potsherds.  This  potsherd  was  doubtless  one  of  those  used  in  the  voting
on  the  banishment  of  Xanthippus.  Another  potsherd  that  had  been
used  for  the  same  purpose,  inscribed  with  the  name  *  Xanthippus,  son  of
Arri[phon],'  was  found  at  Athens  near  Piraeus  Street  in  1891  (C  /.  A.
iv.  No.  571  ;  AcAtiov  o.p\a.io\oyiKovy  1 89 1,  p.  21).  Pausanias  is
mistaken  in  describing  the  battle  of  Mycale  as  a  sea-fight ;  it  was  fought
on  land.     Xanthippus  commanded  the  Athenian  contingent  of  the  Greek

VOL.  II  Y


322  OFFERINGS  OF  ATT  ALUS  bk.  i.  attica

force  on  that  occasion  (479  B.C.)      See  Herodotus,  ix.  98-106,  114;
Plutarch,  Pericles^  3.

25.  I.  Anacreon.  A  statue  of  Anacreon,  formerly  in  the  Villa
Borghese  at  Rome  but  now  in  the  Jacobsen  Collection  at  Copenhagen,
represents  the  poet  as  a  bearded  man  in  the  prime  of  life,  standing  and
playing  on  the  lyre  (the  arms  are  rightly  restored  in  this  attitude).  He
is  naked  except  for  a  short  cloak  thro\vn  over  his  shoulders.  His  head
is  slightly  inclined  to  one  side  and  his  lips  are  parted  as  if  in  song.
The  expression  of  the  face  is  refined,  gentle,  and  pleasing.  The  original
seems  to  have  been  a  fine  work  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.,  and  must  have
been  famous,  for  at  least  four  replicas  of  the  head  exist.  The  best  of
these  replicas  is  at  Berlin.  Another,  found  at  Rome  in  1884,  is  in-
scribed with  Anacreon's  name  and  thus  enables  us  to  identify  the  statue,
which  has  no  inscription.  Prof.  Kekuld  assigns  the  original  statue  to
Cresilas  ;  Prof.  Furtwangler  assigns  it  to  Phidias.  Both  Prof.  Kekuld
and  Prof.  Furtwangler  are  of  opinion  that  the  original  statue,  whether  by
Cresilas  or  Phidias,  was  the  one  on  the  Acropolis  which  Pausanias  here
describes.  Against  this  view  it  must  be  said  that,  whereas  the  statue
seen  by  Pausanias  represented  Anacreon  as  drunk,  the  statue  at  Copen-
hagen represents  him  as  perfectly  sober.  See  P.  Wolters,  in  Archdolo-
gische  Zeiiungy  42  (1884),  pp.  149-153,  with  pi.  11  ;  Friederichs-Wol-
ters,  GipsabgHsse,  No.  1 305  ;  R.  Kekul^,  *  Anakreon,'  Jahrbuch  cL
archdolog,  Jnstituis,  7  (1892),  pp.  119-126  ;  A.  Furtwangler,  Meister-
werke  d,  griech.  Plasfik,  P-  92  sg,

25.  I.  Dinomenes.  Pliny  (A1  H.  xxxiv.  50)  mentions  a  sculptor
Dinomenes  who  flourished  in  01.  95  (400-397  B.C.)  The  inscribed  base
of  a  statue  by  a  sculptor  Dinomenes  has  been  found  on  the  Acropolis,
but  the  inscription  seems  to  be  not  much  earlier  than  the  Augustan  age
(C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  1648  ;  Loe>%y,  Inschriften  griech,  Bildhauer^  No.  233).

25.  I.  the  transformation  of  lo  into  a  cow,  and  of  Oallisto  into
a  bear.     Cp.  iii.  18.  13  ;  viii.  3.  6  note.

25.  2.  At  the  south  wall  are  fi^nires dedicated  by  Attains

etc.  These  were  doubtless  dedicated  by  Attalus  I.  King  of  Pergamus,
in  commemoration  of  his  victories  over  the  Gauls  (see  note  on  i.  4.  5).
Plutarch  tells  us  {Anionius^  60)  that  the  figure  of  Dionysus  in  the
group  at  Athens  representing  the  battle  of  the  Giants  was  blown  by
a  hurricane  from  its  place  and  fell  down  into  the  theatre.  This  group
mentioned  by  Plutarch  was  doubtless  one  of  the  four  sets  of  figures
dedicated  by  Attalus  and  here  described  by  Pausanias.  Plutarch's
statement  shows  that  the  figures  were  in  the  round,  not  in  relief;  for  of
course  a  single  figure  could  not  be  detached  from  a  relief  by  a  storm.
It  also  confirms  Pausanias*s  statement  that  the  figures  were  at  the
south  wall  of  the  Acropolis  ;  for  since  the  figure  of  Dionysus  was  blown
do>%'n  into  the  theatre  the  group  must  have  stood  immediately  above  the
theatre,  on  or  beside  the  southern  wall  of  the  Acropolis.

In  the  museums  of  Europe  there  are  preserved  no  less  than  ten
ancient  marble  statues  which  have  been  identified,  with  great  prob-
ability, as  having  formed  part  of  the  groups  dedicated  by  Attalus  on  the
Acropolis  or  at  all  events  as  being  contemporary  copies  of  them.     This


ca.  XXV  OFFERINGS  OF  ATT  ALUS  3*3

identification  is  due  to  the  sagacity  of  the  late  Prof.  H.  v.  Brunn  of
Munich.  The  grounds  for  it  are  (1)  the  size  of  the  statues,  which  is
about  half  that  of  life,  agreeing  with  Pausanias's  statement  thai  the  figures
were  2  cubits  or  about  3  feet  in  size ;  (j)  the  subjects  of  the  statues,
namely  fighting,  wounded,  or  dead  Gauls  and  Persians,  a  dead  Amazon,
and  a  d^d  Giant,  answering  to  Pausanias's  description  of  the  four
groups ;  and  (3)  the  nature  of  the  marble,  which  is  thought  by  experts
to  be  either  Asiatic  or  quarried  in  Furm,  a  small  island  between  Samos
and  Icaria.

The  ten  statues  are  as  follows:    five  statues  of  Gauls  (three  at


Venice,  one  at  Paris,  one  at  Naples),  three  statues  of  Persians  (one  at
Naples,  one  at  Rome,  one  at  Aix),  one  Giant  (at  Naples),  one  Amazon
(at  Naples).  Thus  they  all  represent  the  vanquished.  From  this  we
might  have  inferred  that  only  the  vanquished  were  represented  in  the
groups.  But  Plutarch's  statement,  cited  above,  shows  that  Dionysus
figured  in  the  battle  with  the  Giants  ;  from  which  it  follows  that  in  this
gniup  the  victorious  gods  were  represented  as  well  as  the  vanquished


Giants.     And  if  the  victors  were  represented  in  one  group,  they  were
probably  represented  in  all.

Archaeologists  are  not  agreed  as  to  whether  the  existing  statues  are


324  OFFERINGS  OF  ATT  ALUS  bk.  i.  attic  a

the  originals  set  up  by  Attalus  or  only  contemporary  copies.  As  most
of  them  preserve  their  original  bases,  and  these  bases  are  not  pieces  of
one  large  base,  but  separate  plinths  each  shaped  so  a$  to  fit  the  position
of  the  statue,  it  seems  more  probable  that  they  are  copies.  Some  think,
from  the  modelling  of  the  figures,  that  the  originals  were  in  bronze.  If
copies,  these  statues  seem  to  have  been  executed  in  Pergamus  contem-
poraneously with  the  originals ;  for  the  marble  appears  to  be  Asiatic,  and
the  style  of  the  sculptures  is  not  Roman.  In  point  of  style  they  closely
resemble  two  famous  ancient  statues  of  dying  Gauls,  namely  the  so-called
Dying  Gladiator  in  the  Capitol  Museum  at  Rome,  and  the  Gaul  and  his
wife  in  the  Villa  Ludovisi  at  Rome  (Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  fig.
1 408-1 410).  Hence,  as  the  marble  of  these  two  latter  statues  is  said
to  be  the  same  as  that  of  which  the  ten  statues  dedicated  by  Attalus
are  composed,  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  so-called  Dying  Gladiator
and  the  Gaul  and  his  wife  are  also  Pergamene  works,  executed  to
commemorate  Attalus's  triumph  over  the  Gauls  ;  but  they  are  probably
copies,  for  the  originals  appear  to  have  been  of  bronze  (Pliny,  N,  H,
xxxiv.  84).  Prof.  V.  Brunn  thought  that  the  groups  dedicated  by
Attalus  at  Athens  were  probably  copies  of  similar  groups,  on  a  larger
scale,  set  up  at  Pergamus.  He  believed  that  the  existing  specimens  of
these  Athenian  groups  bear  marks  of  being  reduced  copies  of  larger
originals.  The  so-called  Dying  Gladiator  and  the  Gaul  and  his  wife  are
life-size,  and  therefore  do  not  belong  to  the  set  of  ten  statues  enumera-
ted above,  which  are  only  half  the  size  of  life.

As  to  the  sculptor  of  these  votive  offerings  of  Attalus,  there  are
some  grounds  for  believing,  with  Prof.  Michaelis  and  Mr.  S.  Reinach,
either  that  some  of  the  figures  in  them  (especially  the  dead  Amazon  at
Naples)  were  by  Epigonus  or  at  all  events  that  they  are  copies  more
or  less  free  of  bronze  originals  which  Epigonus  executed  for  Attalus  at
Pergamus.  The  evidence  for  this  is  briefly  as  follows.  Epigonus  is
known  from  three  inscriptions  at  least  and  probably  from  five  (Frankcl,
DU  Inschriften  von  Pergamon^  i.  Nos.  12,  22,  29,  31,  32  ;  Loe^\y,
Inschriften  griech,  Bildhauer^  Nos.  154,  157,  157  a,  157  b)  to  have
executed  statues  at  Pergamus,  including  apparently  two  which  certainly
commemorated  victories  of  Attalus  over  Antiochus  and  the  Gauls
respectively  (Frankel,  op,  cit,  Nos.  22,  29).  Moreover,  Pliny  tells  us
{N,  H,  xxxiv.  88)  that  Epigonus  distinguished  himself  by  a  statue  of  a
trumpeter  and  by  a  statue  representing  a  baby  caressing  its  slain
mother.  Now  we  know,  both  from  a  contemporary  account  and  from
an  old  drawing  in  the  library  at  Bile,  that  the  statue  of  the  dead
Amazon  at  Naples  had,  at  the  date  of  its  discovery  in  1 5 1 4,  the  figure
of  a  baby  clinging  to  its  right  breast ;  the  figure  of  the  babe  has
disappeared,  but  traces  of  its  attachment  can  still  be  seen  on  the  right
side  of  the  statue.  It  is  therefore  a  fair  conjecture  that  the  dead
Amazon  at  Naples  is  either  the  statue  by  Epigonus  which  Pliny
mentions,  or  at  all  events  that  it  is  a  more  or  less  free  copy  of  it.  It
may  be  added  that  the  other  statue  of  Epigonus  mentioned  by  Pliny,
namely  the  statue  of  the  trumpeter,  has  been  plausibly  identified  as
the   original   of  the    so-called    Dying    Gladiator,   who   is   represented


CH.  XXV  OFFERINGS  OF  ATT  ALUS  325

reclining  with  his  trumpet  under  him.  Probably  the  bronze  originals
of  this  famous  statue  and  of  the  Gaul  and  his  wife  formed  part  of  a
group  of  life-size  statues  set  up  by  Attalus  at  Pergamus  to  commemorate
his  victory  over  the  Gauls.  The  actual  pedestal  which  supported  this
trophy  has  perhaps  been  found  at  Pergamus  (Frankel,  op,  cit.  Nos.
21-28  ;  Loewy,  op,  ciL  No.  154) ;  marks  on  the  flat  upper  surface  of
the  pedestal  show  that  the  statues  which  it  supported  were  of  bronze.
In  Pliny's  list  of  the  sculptors  who  commemorated  by  their  art  the
battles  of  Attalus  and  Eumenes  with  the  Gauls  (A'l  H,  xxxiv.  84)  it  is
highly  probable  that  the  name  of  Epigonus  should  be  substituted  for
that  of  the  otherwise  unknown  Isigonus.

See  H.  V.  Brunn«  'I  doni  di  Attalo/  Annali del  Insiituto,  42  (1870),  pp.  292-
323 ;  O.  Benndorf,  *  Zu  den  Galliem  des  Attalos,'  Mittheilungen  d.  arch.  Inst,  in
Athen^  i  (1876),  pp.  167-171  ;  A.  Michaelis,  *Die  attalischen  Weihgeschenke,'
Mittheil,  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  A  then,  2(1877),  PP«  S'^S*  *^'t  *Der  Schopfer  der
attalischen  Ksunpfgruppen,*  yahrdiich  d.  arch.  Instituts,  8  (1893),  pp.  119-134;
A.  Milchhofer,  Die  Befreiung  des  Prometheus  (Berlin,  1882),  p.  24  sqg.  ;  Over-
beck,  Gesch,  d,  griech.  Plastik,^  2.  p.  234  sqq.  ;  Lucy  M.  Mitchell,  History  of
Ancient  Sculpture,  p.  566  sqq.  ;  Fnederichs-Wolters,  Gipsabgiisse,  Nos.  1403-
1413  ;  A.  S.  Murray,  Hist,  of  Greek  Sculpture,  2,  p.  379  sqq,  ;  P.  Wolters,  *Zum
attalischen  Weihgeschenk,'ya^^^^^  d,  k.  deutsch.  arch.  Inst,  i  (1886),  pp.  85-
87 ;  W.  Malmberg,  *  Ueber  zwei  Figuren  aus  dem  Weihgeschenke  des  Attalos,*
id,  pp.  212-214  ;  A.  Trendelenburg,  in  Baumeister's  Dettkmdler,  p.  1241  sqq,  ;
A.  Botticher,  Die  Akropolis  von  Athen,  p.  278  sqq.  ;  S.  Reinach,  *  Le  guerrier  de
D^los  ct  le  Gaulois  bless^  du  Louvre,'  Bull,  de  Corr.  HelUnique,  13  (1889),  pp.
1 13- 1 30;  id.,  *Les  Gaulois  dans  I'Art  Antique,*  Revue  Archeologique,  3me  serie,
12  (1888),  pp.  273-284;  id,,  id,  13  (1889),  pp.  11-22;  id.,  *  L'ex-voto  d'Attale  et
le  sculpteur  Epigonos,*  Revue  des  £tudes  Grecques,  6(1894),  pp.  37-44;  Miss
Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  p.  474  sqq.  ;  O.  Bie,  Kampfgruppe  ufui  Kdtnpfertypen
(Berlin,  1891),  p.  126  sqq.  Schubart  asserted  that  the  groups  dedicated  by
Attalus  at  Athens  were  relief  {Fleckeisen* s  Jahrbiicher,  14  (1868),  p.  162  sqq,  ;  ib,
18  (1872),  p.  170;  ib,  21  (1875),  p.  413  sq.  ;  ib,  22  (1876),  p.  393  Jf.);  but  there
is  no  ground  whatever  for  this  assertion,  which  is  refuted  by  Prof.  A.  Michaelis
{Mittheil.  d,  arch,  Inst.  2  (1877),  P«  5  ^99-)

25.  2.  the  giants  who  once  dwelt  about Pallene.    Cp.  viii.

29.  I  note.

25.  4.  The  cities  that  joined  them  were  etc.  A  list  of  the  Greek
states  that  took  part  in  the  Lamian  war  (323-322  B.C.)  is  given  by
Diodorus  (xviii.  11)  and  is  partially  preserved  in  an  inscription  \C.  I.  A.
ii.  No.  184;  E.  L.  Hicks,  Greek  Historical  Inscriptions,  No.  133  ;  W.
Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec,  No.  118).

25.  5.  when  Alexander  would  have  banished  to  Persia  all  the
Greek  mercenaries  etc.     Cp.  viii.  52.  5.

25.  6.  a  Macedonian  garrison occupied  Munychia.     This

happened  on  the  20th  of  Boedromion  (19th  September)  322  B.C.  See
Plutarch,  Phocion,  28  ;  /V/.,  Demosthenes^  28  ;  Droysen,  Gesch.  d.  He  lien-
ismus^  ii.  i.  p.  79.

25.  6.  Olympias put  Aridaeus  to  death.     Cp.  viii.  t.  t.

25.  6.  Oassander handed  her  over  to  the  multitude.     Cp.

ix.  7.  2.

25.  6.  the  fortress  of  Panactum  in  Attica.  It  was  on  the  borders
of  Boeotia,  and  was  captured  in  322  B.C.  by  the  Boeotians,  who  dis-


326  MONUMENT  OF  PHILOPAPPUS  bk.  i.  attica

mantled  it  (Thucydides,  v.  3  and  42).  Cp.  Demosthenes,  xix.  326,  p.
446.  Cassander  put  a  garrison  into  it ;  but  Demetrius  Poliorcetes  re-
captured the  place  and  restored  it  to  the  Athenians  (Plutarch,  Demetrius^
23).  Panactum  was  mentioned  by  Androtion  in  the  third  book  of  his
Atthis  (Stephanus  Byzantius,  5,v,  IlavaKTov).  The  French  surveyors
identified  Panactum  with  some  ancient  ruins  on  the  hills  to  the  south  of
the  plain  of  Skourta^  about  two  miles  to  the  south  of  the  village  of
Derveno-SicUesL  The  hills  on  which  the  ruins  stand  form  a  ridge  con-
necting Mt.  Cithaeron  with  Mt.  Pames.  Cp.  Leake,  Athens  and  A iticii,
2.  p.  128  sq,

25.  7.  Lachares.  On  the  tyranny  of  Lachares  (296/5  B.C.)  see
Thirlwall,  Hist,  of  Greece^  8.  pp.  9-1 1  ;  Droysen,  Gesch,  d.  Hellenismits^
ii.  2,  pp.  251-253.

25.  7.  lie  had  taken  down  golden  shields  from  the  Acropolis.
Cp.  i.  29.  16.  After  the  battle  of  the  Granicus  Alexander  the  Great
sent  300  Persian  shields  to  Athens  to  be  dedicated  to  Athena  (Arrian,
Anabasis^  i.  1 6.  7 ;  Plutarch,  Alexander^  1 6).   They  may  have  been  gilded.

25.  7-  stript  the  very  image  of  Athena  of  all  the  ornaments
that  could  be  removed.  A  comic  poet  said  that  Lachares  *<  had  made
Athena  naked"  (Athenaeus,  ix.  p.  405  e).  Cp.  Plutarch,  Isis  and  Osiris^
71.  All  the  golden  parts  of  the  great  image  of  Virgin  Athena  by
Phidias  were  so  contrived  that  they  could  be  taken  off  at  any  time.
See  above,  p.  312.

25.  8.  having  fortified  what  is  called  the  Museum  etc.  That
Demetrius  placed  a  garrison  on  the  Museum  hill  is  mentioned  also  by
Plutarch  (Demetrius^  34).  The  Museum  is  the  hill  to  the  south-west  of
the  Acropolis.  It  is  147.4  metres  (384  ft.)  high.  The  monument  on
the  hill  which  Pausanias  mentions  is  still  a  conspicuous  landmark  in  the
south-western  quarter  of  Athens.  It  stands  on  the  summit  of  the  hill,
facing  north-east  toward  the  Acropolis.  About  two-thirds  of  the  fa9ade
remain  ;  when  Cyriacus  of  Ancona  visited  Athens  in  1436  and  1447  the
monument  seems  to  have  been  entire.  It  is  built  of  Pentelic  marble  on
a  platform  of  Piraeic  limestone.  When  entire  the  facade  consisted  of  a
curved  or  slightly  concave  wall  about  40  feet  high  and  30  feet  in  breadth,
measured  along  the  chord  of  the  curve.  It  had  two  stories,  if  they  may
be  called  so,  divided  from  each  other  by  a  cornice ;  the  lower  story  was
about  10  feet  high,  the  upper  story  occupied  the  rest  of  the  fagade.
This  upper  story  consisted  of  three  compartments  between  four  Corinthian
pilasters,  the  central  compartment  being  larger  than  the  two  others.  In
each  compartment  there  was  a  niche  containing  a  statue ;  the  central
niche  was  semicircular  and  rounded  at  the  top,  the  other  two  niches
were  quadrangular.  The  north-western  part  of  the  fa9ade  is  gone  ;  but
the  central  and  south-eastern  parts  with  their  niches  remain  ;  and  the
statues,  though  headless  and  otherwise  imperfect,  are  still  in  the  niches.
Under  each  of  the  three  statues  was  a  Greek  inscription  giving  the
name  of  the  person  represented.  Under  the  central  statue,  doubtless  a
portrait  of  the  person  in  whose  honour  the  monument  was  erected,  is  the
inscription  <l>iAo7ra7r7ros  'Etfk/kxvovs  B>;o-ai€r5,  "  Philopappus  of  the
township  of  Besa,  son  of  Epiphanes."    Under  the  statue  to  the  spectator's


CH.  XXV  MONUMENT  OF  PHILOPAPPUS  iri

left  is  the  inscription  BacrtAcvs  'Avrioxos  ^cwriAcajs  'Avridxov,  "  King
Antiochus,  son  of  King  Antiochus.''  Under  the  statue  to  the  spectator's
right  (now  gone)  was  the  inscription  (now  gone  also)  BacrtAcvs  ScAcvkos
*AvTtdxov  NiicaTw/o,  "  King  Seleucus  Nicator,  son  of  Antiochus."  Besides
these  three  inscriptions  under  the  three  statues  there  were  two  other
inscriptions,  carved  one  on  each  of  the  two  Corinthian  pilasters  which
enclosed  the  central  niche.  The  one  on  the  pilaster  to  the  spectator's
left  still  exists.  It  is  in  Latin  and  nms  thus  :  C  Julius  C  /(ilius)  Anti-
ochus PkilopappuSy  co{n)s{ul)^  f rater  arvalisy  allectus  inter  praetorios  ab
Jmp{eratore)  Caesare  Nerva  Traiano  Optumo  Augusto  Germanico
DacicOy  i,e.  "  Caius  Julius  Antiochus  Philopappus,  son  of  Caius,  consul,
arval  brother,  admitted  to  praetorian  rank  by  the  emperor  Caesar  Nerva
Trajan  Optumus  Augustus  Germanicus  Dacicus."  On  the  Corinthian
pilaster  to  the  spectator's  right  was  the  following  inscription  (now
gone) :  BcurtAcvs  'Avrio\o^  ^tAoiramros  pworiXkta^  'Etti^vovs  tov
'AvTtoxov,  i.e,  "  King  Antiochus  Philopappus,  son  of  King  Epiphanes,
son  of  Antiochus."  From  the  titles  given  to  the  emperor  Trajan  in  the
Latin  inscription  Th.  Mommsen  decides  that  the  inscription  was  carved
between  114  and  1 16  a.d.  ;  this  then  gives  us  the  date  of  the  monument.
The  person  to  whom  the  monument  was  erected  was  an  Athenian  citizen
named  Philopappus,  of  the  township  of  Besa ;  his  statue  occupied  the
central  niche.  He  filled  the  office  of  archon  at  some  time  between  90
and  100  A.D.  (C,I,A,  iii.  Nos.  78,  1020).  King  Antiochus,  whose
statue  occupied  the  niche  to  the  left,  was  probably  Antiochus  IV.,  last
king  of  Commagene,  grandfather  of  Philopappus.  King  Seleucus,  whose
statue  occupied  the  niche  to  the  right,  was  the  founder  of  the  Syrian
dynasty  of  the  Seleucids ;  Philopappus  was  descended  from  him,  his
great-grandfather  Mithridates,  whom  Augustus  made  king  of  Commagene,
having  married  a  wife  Laodice  of  the  Seleucid  house.  The  two  inscrip-
tions on  the  pilasters  to  the  left  and  right  of  the  statue  of  Philopappus
give  Philopappus*s  Roman  and  Syrian  titles  respectively.  On  the  one
hand  he  was  a  Roman  citizen  and  had  risen  to  the  dignity  of  consul,
etc. ;  on  the  other  hand  as  a  descendant  of  the  kings  of  Commagene  he
took  the  title  of  king,  though  his  grandfather  Antiochus  IV.  had  been  in
reality  the  last  king  of  Commagene.  For  in  72  a.d.  Samosata  the
capital  of  Commagene  was  captured  by  the  Roman  general  Paetus,  and
Antiochus  the  last  king  retired  with  his  wife  and  daughter  to  Cilicia.
His  sons,  however,  Epiphanes  (father  of  Philopappus)  and  Callinicus
fought  an  indecisive  battle  with  the  Romans,  but  being  afterwards
deserted  by  their  soldiers  they  took  refuge  with  Vologeses  king  of  Parthia
(Josephus,  Bell.  Jud,  i.  16.  7,  vii.  7.  2).  Epiphanes  father  of  Philo-
pappus seems  to  have  been  afterwards  pardoned  and  admitted  to  the
Roman  citizenship,  since  in  the  Latin  inscription  quoted  above  his  son
calls  him  Caius.  Philopappus,  son  of  Epiphanes  and  grandson  of
Antiochus,  lived  at  Athens  as  an  Athenian  citizen,  and  must  have  been
very  popular,  else  so  magnificent  a  monument  on  so  conspicuous  a  site
would  hardly  have  been  erected  to  him.  It  commemorated  him  in  his
three  capacities  as  a  descendant  of  the  kings  of  Commagene,  as  a  Roman
citizen  and  consul,  and  as  a  simple  citizen  of  Athens.     That  he  was


328  LEUCOPHRYENIAN  ARTEMIS  BK.  i.  attica

allowed  by  courtesy  to  retain  the  title  of  king  is  shown  by  a  passage  of
Plutarch  (Quaest.  Conviv.  i.  lo.  i).  Plutarch  addressed  one  of  his
treatises  to  Philopappus  under  the  title  of  Antiochus  Philopappus  (De
adulatore  et  amico^  i ).  On  the  lower  story  of  Philopappus's  monument,
under  the  niches  containing  the  statues,  is  a  relief  representing  Philo-
pappus as  consul  driving  in  a  four-horse  car  preceded  by  lictors.  Traces  of
the  quadrangular  mausoleum  may  be  discerned  at  the  back  of  the  fa9ade.

See  Stuart  and  Reveit,  Antiquities  of  Athens ^  3  (London,  1794),  ch-  v.  pp.
35-389  with  eleven  plates  (the  fullest  publication  of  the  monument) ;  L^ike,  Athens
and  Attica,  I.  pp.  494-497  ;  Dyer,  Ancient  At  hens ,  pp.  457-461  ;  C  /.  A.  iii  No.
557  (the  inscriptions) ;  Th.  Mommsen,  in  Mittheil.  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  I
(1876),  p.  36  sqq.\  Milchhofer,  *Athen,*  pp.  146,  159  sq.\  Guide-Joanne^  I.  p.
80  iq. ;  baedeker,'  p.  94  ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens ,  p.  477  sq,

25.  8.  where  they  say  that  Mnsaens was  bnried.     Diogenes

Laertius  (i.  i.  3)  says  that  Musaeus  was  buried  at  Phalerum,  and  he
quotes  the  epitaph  on  his  tomb.

26.  I.  Olympiodorns  led  them against  the  Mace-
donians. This  revolt,  which  is  mentioned  by  Plutarch  (Demetrius^  46),
appears  to  have  taken  place  in  288  B.c.  See  Droy^sen,  Gesch,  d,
Hellenismtis?'  ii.  2.  p.  300.  Thirteen  of  the  men  who  fell  in  the  assault
on  the  Museum  hill  were  buried  in  the  outer  Ceramicus  (i.  29.  13).  An
interesting  light  is  thrown  by  two  inscriptions  on  this  exploit  of  the
Athenian  arms.  It  appears  that  before  advancing  to  the  assault  on  the  hill
the  Athenians  made  proclamation  inviting  the  soldiers  in  the  garrison  to
come  over  to  the  side  of  freedom.  One  pri\*ate  soldier,  Strombichus  by
name,  answered  to  the  call,  joined  the  Athenians,  and  stormed  the
fortress  with  |hem.  Thenceforward  he  remained  a  loyal  soldier  in  the
service  of  Athens,  approving  himself  brave  in  the  field  and  obedient  to
his  officers.  For  these  services  he  received  the  thanks  of  the  State  and
was  crowned  with  a  golden  wreath,  and  he  and  his  descendants  after
him  were  made  citizens  of  Athens.  See  C,  I.  A,  ii.  Nos.  317,  318  ;
Dittenberger,  Sylloge^  Nos.  144,  145.  From  another  inscription  (C  /.  A,
ii.  No.  316  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge^  No.  346)  we  learn  that  the  Museum,
after  its  recovery  from  the  Macedonians,  was  garrisoned  by  the  Athenian
lads  [ephebot).  Spartocus  IV.,  king  of  Bosporus,  and  Audoleon,  king
of  Paeon ia,  appear  to  have  supported  the  Athenians  in  their  revolt,  if  we
may  judge  from  Athenian  decrees  in  their  honour  (C  /.  A,  ii.  Nos.  311,
312  ;  E.  L.  Hicks,  Greek  Historical  Inscriptions^  Nos.  157,  159).

26.  3.  at  Elensis  there  is  a  painting  to  his  memory.  Pliny
mentions  (A''.  H,  xxxv.  1 34)  that  the  painter  Athenion  of  Maronea  in
Thrace  painted  a  picture  of  a  cavalry  general  (J>hularchos)  in  the
temple  at  Eleusis.  This  may  have  been  the  portrait  of  Olympiodorus.
Cp.  H.  Brunn,  Gesch.  d,  griech.  Kiinstler^  2.  p.  294  sq,

26.  3.  the  Phocians  of  Elatea  dedicated  a  bronze  statue  of  him
at  Delphi  etc.     Cp.  x.  18.  7  ;  x.  34.  3.

26.  4.  a  bronze  image  of  Artemis  snmamed  Lencophryenian.  Cp.
iii.  1 8.  9.  Artemis  took  this  title  from  Leucophrys,  a  town  in  the  valley
of  the  Maeander,  near  which  there  was  a  sandy  lake  of  warm  water ;
Xenophon  says  that  her  sanctuary  there  was  very  holy  {Hellenica^  iii.


CH.  XXVI  LBUCOPHRYENIAN  ARTEMIS  319

1.  19,  iv.  8,  17).  The  temple  of  Leucophryenia.n  Artemis  at  Magnesia
on  the  Maeander,  to  which  Pausanias  alludes,  was  a  magnificent  Ionic
structure  built  by  the  architect  Hermogencs,  who  published  a  book
about  it  (Vitnivius,  iii.  2.  6,  vii.  praef.  li).  Strabo  says  (xiv.  p.  647)
that  it  was  the  third  largest  temple  in  Asia,  and  thai,  though  inferior
to  the  temple  of  Artemis  at  Ephesus  in  respect  of  size  and  of  the
number  of  its  votive  offerings,  it  was  far  superior  to  it  in  the  harmony
and  finish  of  its  architecture.  The  remains  of  the  temple  were  ex-
cavated in  1891-1893  for  the  German  Archaeological  Institute  by
Messrs.  Humann,  Heyne,  and  Kem.  The  temple  was  built  of  white
marble  on  a  foundation  of  limestone.  The  entrance  was  from  the  west,
contrary  to  the  usual  arrangement  of  Greek  temples.  See  American
Journal  of  Archaeology,  7  (i8gi),  p.  513  ;  Btrliner  philolog.  Wochen-
schrift,  14  (1894),  pp.  987  sqg.,  1117  sqq.,  1340  sqq.;  Jahrbuch  d.
arci,Jns/.^{iBg4);  Arckdologischer  Anzriger,  ^^.-jb  sqg.,  I22sqq.  Cp.
Preller,  Oriick.  Myl/wlogie,*  i.  331.  On  Magnesian  coins  of  imperial
date  the  image  of  Leucophryenian  Artemis  is  figured  ;  ii  resembles  the
image  of  Artemis  at  Ephesus,  wearing  the  polos  on  the  head,  the  body
resembling  a  pillar,  and  with  pendent  fillets
hanging  from  the  outstretched  hands.  On  coins
of  Athens  there  appears  an  Artemis  of  an
Eastern  character,  holding  a  bowl  and  a  bow
in  her  outstretched  hands.  If  this,  as  has
been  suggested,  is  a  copy  of  the  image  of
Leucophryenian  Artemis,  which  the  sons  of
Themistocles  dedicated  on  the  Acropolis,  it
will  follow  that  that  image  was  not  an  exact
copy  of  the  image  at  Magnesia.     See  Imhoof-

Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Comment,  on  rto.  jj.— levcoi-hbvbhian
Pausanias,  p.  139,  with  pi.  BB  v.  vi.  Cp.  "Temst  (athkbian  coin).
B.  V.  Head,  Historia  Nummorum,  p.  502.

26.  4-  the  Ma^eaians,  whom  the  king  gave  to  Themistocles
to  gOVenL  The  king  was  Artaxerxes.  See  Cornelius  Nepos,  Tfiemi-
stocles,  10;  Diodonis,  xi.  57;  Plutarch,  TAemistocUs,  39.  Cp.  Paus.
i.  1.3.

26.   4-  the  murder  of  Oalns.     See  i.  21.  4  note.

26.  4-  &  seftted  image  of  Athena  by  Endoens  etc.  Although  Pau-
sanias has  just  said  that  Endoeus  was  an  Athenian,  there  are  grounds  for
believing  that  he  was  an  Ionian  Greek.  Two  inscribed  bases  of  statues
by  him  have  been  found  in  Athens.  On  one  of  them  the  inscription,
a  couplet  in  Ionic  Greek,  records  that  the  statue  was  that  of  a  lady  who
died  far  from  her  native  land  (C.  /.  A.  i.  No.  477  :  Loewy,  Imchriften
griech.  Bildhautr,  No.  8).  On  the  other  base,  a  fluted  pillar  of  Pentelic
marble  found  on  the  Acropolis  in  i838,  the  sculptor's  name  is  carved
in  what  seems  to  be  the  Ionic  alphabet,  at  least  the  four-stroke  sigma
(I)  is  Ionic  (A(Atiov  Bpx<"o^o >"«'''.  1888,  p.  208  sq.)  Moreover,
Endoeus  made  images  for  temples  in  Ionia,  including  the  image  of
Artemis  at  Ephesus  (Athenagoras,  Supplicatio  pro  Ckristianis,  17,  p.
78,  ed.  Otto;   Pliny,  N.  H.  xvi.  214,  where  Sillig's  emendation  fw^iw


330  THE  ATHENA  OF  ENDOEUS  bk.  I.  attica

for  eandem  con  should  be  accepted)  and  the  seated  image  of  Athena
at  Erythrae  (Paus.  vii.  5.  9).  Endoeus's  date  is  determined  approxi-
mately by  the  style  of  the  two  inscriptions  referred  to  above ;  they
belong  to  the  latter  part  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  the  age  of  Pisistratus.
At  this  period,  therefore,  it  would  seem  that  Endoeus,  an  Ionian
sculptor,  had  settled  or  at  least  was  at  work  in  Athens.  The  Callias
for  whom  he  made  the  image  of  Athena  may  have  been  the  Callias
who  opposed  Pisistratus  (Herodotus,  vi.  121  sq^  Probably  the  only
ground  for  connecting  Endoeus,  as  Pausanias  does,  with  the  mythical
Daedalus  was  the  archaic  style  of  his  statues.  He  made  the  ancient
image  of  Athena  at  Tegea  (Paus.  viii.  46.  i  and  5).

The  seated  image  of  Athena  by  Endoeus  which  Pausanias  saw  on
the  Acropolis  has  been  conjecturally  identified  with  a  marble  statue  of
Athena  which  was  found  at  the  northern  foot  of  the  Acropolis  at
Athens,  and  is  now  in  the  Acropolis  museum.  It  portrays  the  goddess
seated,  clad  in  a  long  tunic,  the  folds  of  which  are  minutely  represented  ;
her  long  curls  hang  down  on  her  breast ;  her  right  foot  rests  lightly  on
the  ground,  the  toes  are  carefully  articulated  ;  on  her  breast  is  the  aegis.
The  head  and  lower  arms  are  wanting.  The  style  of  the  statue,  though
very  archaic,  shows  considerable  mastery  of  the  sculptor's  art.  The
pose  resembles  that  of  the  famous  archaic  statues  which  lined  the  sacred
road  at  Branchidae  near  Miletus  and  are  now  in  the  British  Museum
(see  note  on  vii.  5.  4).  This  is  a  reason  for  ascribing  the  Athenian
statue  to  an  Ionian  sculptor  like  Endoeus,  who,  as  we  have  seen,
executed  an  image  of  Athena  in  a  similar  attitude  for  Erythrae.
But  the  Athenian  statue  marks  a  great  advance  in  truthfulness  and
realism  on  the  Branchidae  statues,  with  their  rigidly  symmetrical,  lifeless
attitudes  and  almost  foldless  garments.  The  marble  of  which  the
statue  is  made  is  not  Attic,  but  comes  from  the  islands  (G.  R.  Lepsius,
Griechische  Marmorstudien^  p.  70,  No.  2 1 ).  Strabo  tells  us  (xiii.  p.  60 1 )
that  many  ancient  images  of  Athena  represented  the  goddess  seated  ;
such  images  were  to  be  seen,  he  says,  in  Phocaea,  Marseilles,  Rome,
Chios,  and  many  other  cities.  Homer  plainly  conceived  of  the  Trojan
image  of  Athena  as  seated  (///W,  vi.  90  sqq.^  302  sq.)


A.  S.  Murray,  Hist,  of  Greek  Sculpt ure^^  i.  p.  181  sqq.  ;  A,  Botticher,  JL>ie
Akropolis  von  Atken,  p.  83  sq,  ;  CoIIignon  Histoire  de  la  Sculpture  Grecque^  i.
p.  337  sq,  ;  Overbeck,  Gesch,  d.  griecK  Plastik,^  I.  pp.  90-92,  191  sq.  The
supposed  image  of  Athena  by  Endoeus  is  also  represented  in  Daremberg  and
Saglio's  Diet,  des  Antiquitis^  I.  p.  102,  fig.  14a  As  to  Endoeus,  cp.  also  L.
Stephani,  in  Rheinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  4  (1846),  pp.  1-3 ;  H.  Brunn,  Gesck.  d,
griech,  KUmtler^  I.  pp.  98-101 ;  id.y  *  Zur  Chronologic  der  altesten  griech.
KUnstler,*  Sitzungsberichte  d.  k.  bayer.  Akad.  d.  Wiss,  (Munich),  rhilos,
philolog.  CI.,  10  June  1871,  p.  544  sq.  ;  G.  Loeschcke,  in  Mittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,
in  At  hen,  4  (1879),  p.  305  sq.  ;  W.  Klein,  in  Archdolog.  epigraph.  Mittheilungen
aus  Oesterreich,  5  (1881),  p.  88  sq.  (Prof.  Klein  argues  that  Endoeus  was  a
Cretan).

26.  5.  a  building  called  the  Erechthemn.     The  temple  which  we
call    the    Erechtheum,    though    the    ancients    perhaps    restricted   that


CH.  XXVI  THE  ERECHTHEUM  331

name  to  the  western  half  of  it,  was  a  double  temple  containing  a  shrine
of  Athena  Polias  (i,e,  of  Athena  Guardian  of  the  City)  and  a  shrine  of
Erechtheus.  It  seems  to  have  been  the  oldest  temple  on  the  Acropolis,
for  Homer  mentions  in  one  passage  (//.  ii.  549-551)  that  Erechtheus
was  worshipped  by  the  Athenian  youths  with  sacrifices  of  bulls  and
lambs  in  the  temple  of  Athena ;  and  in  another  passage  (Od,  vii.  78-81)
he  says  that  Athena,  after  an  expedition  to  Scheria,  ''  went  into  the
house  of  Erechtheus,"  as  if  that  were  her  home.  These  passages  seem
to  show  that  in  the  Homeric  age  Athena  and  Erechtheus  were  wor-
shipped on  the  Acropolis  in  a  single  joint  temple,  which  might  be  called
the  temple  of  Athena  or  the  house  of  Erechtheus,  according  as  the
speaker  regarded  Athena  or  Erechtheus  as  the  original  inmate  of  the
temple.  Hence,  as  the  oldest  temple  on  the  Acropolis,  the  Erechtheum
is  referred  to  as  "  the  old  temple,"  "  the  old  temple  of  Athena,"  "  the
old  temple  of  Athena  Polias,"  or  "  the  old  temple  of  the  Polias,"  in
inscriptions  and  by  classical  writers  (C  /.  A.  i.  No.  i,  supplemented
in  C.  /.  A,  iv.  p.  i  sq, ;  Dittenberger,  SylL  Ins,  Gr.  No.  384 ;
C,  /.  A,  i.  No.  93  ;  C  /.  A,  ii.  Nos.  74,  163,  464,  672,  733,  758  ;
Xenophon,  Hellenica^  i.  6.  i  ;  Strabo,  ix.  p.  396 ;  see  the  Appendix
to  this  volume,  p.  564  sqq.")  It  was  burnt  by  the  Persians  when  they
sacked  Athens  in  480  B.C.  (Herodotus,  viii.  53-55).  After  lying  in
ruins  for  many  years  the  temple  was  rebuilt  in  the  finest  style  of  Greek
architecture  towards  the  end  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  We  do  not
know  when  the  restoration  was  begun  ;  but  from  an  inscription  con-
taining a  report  of  commissioners  on  the  state  of  progress  of  the  new
temple  we  learn  that  it  was  far  advanced,  but  still  unfinished,  in  409
B.C.  (C  /.  A,  i.  No.  322  ;  Ancient  Greek  Inscriptions  in  the  British
Museum^  Pt.  i.  No.  xxxv. ;  Choisy,  Etudes  £pigraphiques  sur  VArchi'
tecture  Grecque^  p.  88  sqq.)  Inscriptions  have  also  come  down  to  us
containing  specifications  of  the  work  done  by  individual  masons  on  the
new  temple,  together  with  the  sums  of  money  paid  to  each  mason  for
his  work  (C.  /.  A.  i.  Nos.  321,  323,  324  ;  C.  I,  A,  iv.  pp.  1 48-1 51  ;
Choisy,  op,  cit,  p.  100  sqq. ;  AcAriov  o^pyaKoXoyiKOv^  1888,  p.  87  sqq, ;
Berliner  philolog,  Wochenschrift^  8  (1888),  pp.  12 57- 1260).  From  a
consideration  of  these  inscriptions  Prof.  A.  Michaelis  concludes  that  the
new  Erechtheum  was  probably  completed  in  the  summer  of  408  B.C.
(Alittheil,  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  14  (1889),  pp.  349-366).  Two  years
later,  in  406  B.C.,  the  new  temple  was  accidentally  burnt  (Xenophon,
Hellenica^  \,  6.  i).  The  political  events  of  the  following  years  (the
siege  and  capture  of  Athens  by  the  Peloponnesians,  the  tyranny  of  the
Thirty,  and  the  civil  war)  seem  to  have  delayed  its  restoration  ;  it
appears  to  have  been  still  incomplete  in  495  B.C.  (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  829),
but  must  have  been  finished  before  376  B.C.,  for  an  inscription  of  that
year  (C,  I,  A,  ii.  No.  672)  makes  mention  of  a  piece  of  gold  plate
which  was  kept  in  "the  old  temple,"  i.e.  in  the  Erechtheum.  In
Christian  times  the  temple  was  turned  into  a  church  ;  and  the  Turks
used  it  as  a  dwelling-house.

The  Erechtheum  stands  near  the  north  edge  of  the  Acropolis,  about
midway  between  its  western  and  eastern  extremities.     The  form  of  the


332  THE  ERECHTHEUM  bk.  i.  attica

temple  is  peculiar  and  indeed  unique.  The  main  structure  is  a  quad-
rangle measuring  about  7 1  feet  (including  the  eastern  portico)  from  east
to  west,  by  about  37  feet  from  north  to  south.  The  temple  is  of  the
Ionic  order,  and  is  built  of  Pentelic  marble  except  the  frieze,  which  had
a  ground  of  dark  Eleusinian  marble.  At  its  eastern  end  it  had  a  portico
of  six  Ionic  columns.  At  the  western  end  of  its  northern  side  it  had  a
spacious  porch,  the  roof  of  which  was  supported  by  six  Ionic  columns,
four  in  the  front  and  one  behind  each  of  the  comer  columns.  At
the  western  end  of  the  southern  side  of  the  temple  there  was  another
smaller  porch,  the  roof  of  which  was  supported  by  six  sculptured
maidens  (Caryatids),  somewhat  larger  than  life,  standing  on  a  wall  8^
feet  high,  which  encloses  the  porch.  Four  of  the  Caryatids  stand  in  the
front  of  the  porch,  and  one  behind  each  of  the  comer  Caryatids.  The
westem  front  of  the  temple  was  adomed  with  four  engaged  Ionic
columns  standing  on  a  wall  about  12^  feet  high.  Both  the  eastern  and
the  westem  front  of  the  temple  had  a  gable,  as  we  leam  from  one  of  the
inscriptions  (C,  L  A,  iv.  pp.  1 49-1 51).  The  northem  and  southern
walls  of  the  temple  were  unadorned  with  columns.  Round  the  temple,
above  the  architrave,  ran  a  frieze  of  dark  Eleusinian  marble  adomed
with  white  marble  figures  in  relief.  The  Erechtheum  had  four  doors,
(i)  one  in  the  eastem  portico,  (2)  a  lofty  and  richly-adorned  doorway  in
the  northem  porch,  (3)  a  small  door  in  the  westem  wall,  and  (4)  a  door
opening  into  the  Caryatid  porch.  The  approach  to  this  last  door  was
through  a  narrow  opening  at  the  north-east  comer  of  the  Caryatid
porch,  from  which  a  flight  of  steps  led  up  to  the  door.  Moreover,  the
northem  portico  projected  beyond  the  westem  wall  of  the  temple,  and
in  the  south-west  comer  of  this  projection  there  was  a  doorway  opening
into  the  enclosure  at  the  west  end  of  the  temple.

A  remarkable  feature  of  the  Erechtheum  is  that  its  southern  and
eastem  sides  stand  on  a  higher  level  than  its  northem  and  westem  sides  ;
the  difference  of  level  amounts  to  about  9  feet.  A  flight  of  twelve
marble  steps  descended  along  the  outside  of  the  north  wall  of  the
temple  to  the  rocky  plateau  on  which  the  north  porch  is  built  (see
C.  Botticher,  Untersuchungen  auf  der  Akrofiolis^  P-  213  sqg.)

The  existing  remains  of  the  temple  comprise  five  columns  of  the
eastem  portico  with  their  architrave  and  some  blocks  of  the  frieze  (the
column  at  the  north  comer  was  carried  off  by  Lord  Elgin  and  is  now  in
the  British  Museum) ;  the  porch  at  the  north-west  comer  with  its
columns  and  part  of  the  entablature  ;  the  Caryatid  porch  with  its  entab-
lature (one  of  the  Caryatids — the  second  from  the  west  on  the  front —
was  carried  off  by  Lord  Elgin  and  is  replaced  by  a  terra-cotta  copy ;
the  hinder  one  at  the  east  side  is  restored)  ;  and  great  portions  of  the
south,  north,  and  west  walls.  A  few  figures  of  the  sculptured  frieze  are
in  existence,  but  not  enough  to  enable  us  to  determine  with  certainty  the
subjects  represented.  The  frieze  as  a  whole  was  probably  designed  by
one  artist,  but  the  individual  figures  were  executed  by  separate  stone-
masons, as  we  leam  from  an  inscription  (C,  I.  A.  i.  No.  324),  which
mentions  the  sums  paid  to  each  mason  for  his  work.  In  point  of  style
the  Erechtheum  was   one   of  the   most   perfect   specimens   of  Greek


CH.  XXVI  THE  ERECHTHEUM  333

architecture ;    all   the  detiuls  of  the  masonTy  and  ornamentation  are
wrought  with  the  most   exquisite  finish.       Especially  conspicuous   for


nC    jG.— FLAN  or  THE


thdr  beauty  are  the  Caryatid  fiorch  and  the  great  doorway  in  the  north
porch,  though  some  parts  of  this  doorway,  if  Mr.  R.  W.  Schulu  is  right,
belong  to  a  somewhat  later  restoration.

While  much  of  the  exterior  of  the  Erechtheum  remains,  very  little  is
left  of  the  ancient  interior,  the  arrangement  of  which  has  consequently
been  much  disputed.  It  appears  to  have  been  as  follows.  The  temple
was  divided  into  three  chambers,  an  eastern,  a  central,  and  a  western,  of
which  the  eastern  and  central  were  about  equal,  but  the  western  was
much  smaller.  The  eastern  chamber  was  at  a  higher  level  than  the
other  two ;  it  was  entered  through  the  eastern  portico.  It  was  divided
from  the  central  chamber  by  a  cross  wall,  but  traces  on  the  inner  side  of
the  south  wall  make  it  probable  that  the  eastern  chamber  was  connected
with  the  central  chamber  by  a  staircase  placed  against  the  south  wall
and  descending  from  a  doorway  in  the  south  end  of  the  partition  wall.
The  central  chamber  seems  to  have  been  divided  from  the  western
chamber  merely  by  a  row  of  columns  supfiorting  an  entablature.  Under
the  western  chamber  there  is  a  large  ancient  cistern  stretching  across
the  whole  breadth  of  the  temple.  This  cistern  is  partly  hewn  in  the
solid  rock  and  was  evidently  constructed  with  great  care.  It  was
originally  covered  over  with  massive  blocks  of  marble,  parts  of  which
are  still  to  be  seen  projecting  over  the  edge  of  the  cistern.  At  a  later
time  the  cistern  was  covered  over  with  a  brick  vault  which  rose  higher
than  the  threshold  of  the  great  north  door.     A  small  part  of  this  brick


334  THE  ERECHTHEUM  bk.  i.  attica

vaulting  still  remains.  High  up  on  the  south  wall  of  the  western  cham-
ber there  is  a  large  niche  about  3.40  metres  high  by  1.72  metre  long
and  .36  metre  deep.  The  purpose  of  this  niche  has  not  been  explained.
The  western  wall  of  the  temple  between  the  engaged  columns  was
pierced  with  three  windows,  which,  however,  seem  to  have  been  inser-
tions of  the  fourth  century  A.D.  Almost  the  whole  of  this  upper  part  of
the  wall,  with  its  engaged  columns  on  the  outside  and  corresponding
pilasters  on  the  inside,  was  blown  down  during  a  storm  in  1852.
Under  the  north  porch  there  is  a  small  crypt ;  it  was  entered  from  the
central  chamber  by  a  small  door  in  the  north  wall  of  the  temple.  This
door  to  the  crypt  still  exists  ;  a  flight  of  steps  must  have  led  down  to  it
from  the  floor  of  the  central  chamber.  The  floor  of  the  crypt  is  com-
posed of  the  native  rock,  in  the  surface  of  which  there  are  certain  con-
spicuous indentations.  In  the  marble  pavement  of  the  north  porch  there
seems  to  have  been  an  opening  about  1.3 1  metre  square,  exactly  over
these  indentations,  so  that  they  must  have  been  visible  to  any  one  stand-
ing in  the  porch  and  looking  down  the  aperture.  This  aperture  may
possibly  have  been  covered  with  a  grating.  In  the  north-west  corner  of
the  crypt  is  a  small  round  cistern,  not  very  deep,  which  is  now  choked
up.

West  of  the  Erechtheum  is  an  enclosure  bounded  on  the  south  by  a
terrace  wall  about  10  feet  high  and  on  the  north  by  another  wall  of
which  the  foundations  have  been  traced  westward  for  about  150  feet.
These  two  walls,  bounding  the  enclosure  on  the  north  and  south,  converge
westward.  A  small  building  of  some  sort  seems  to  have  stood  in  the  south-
east comer  of  this  enclosure,  abutting  on  the  south  end  of  the  west  wall
of  the  Erechtheum.  For  the  wall  here  is  rough  in  places  and  the  steps
which  run  along  the  foot  of  the  wall  to  the  north  of  the  doorway  are
not  continued  to  the  south  of  it.  Moreover,  at  the  south  end  of  the
wall  there  is  a  gap  about  10  feet  long  and  10  feet  high  in  the  ancient
masonry.  This  gap  extends  partly  under  the  Caryatid  porch  and  is
filled  up  with  modem  masonry.  It  is  spanned  by  an  enormous  ancient
block  about  1 5  feet  long  by  5  deep.

So  much  for  the  existing  remains  of  the  Erechtheum  and  for  its
original  plan,  so  far  as  that  plan  can  be  inferred  from  the  remains.  We
have  now  to  identify  the  various  parts  of  the  building  with  the  descriptions
of  it  bequeathed  to  us  by  ancient  writers  and  especially  by  Pausanias.
Pausanias's  description  of  the  temple  falls  into  three  parts.  First  he
describes  the  Erechtheum  (i.  26.  5),  by  which  he  seems  to  have  desig-
nated, not  the  whole,  but  a  part  of  the  temple  ;  second,  he  describes  the
shrine  of  Athena  Polias  (i.  26.  6-i.  27.  i) ;  and,  third,  he  mentions  the
temple  of  Pandrosus,  which  adjoined  the  Erechtheum,  and  the  abode  of
the  maidens  called  Arrephoroi,  which  was  not  far  from  it  (i.  27.  2  sq,)

The  shrine  of  Athena  Polias  must  have  been  the  principal  part
of  the  temple,  since  Athena  Polias  was  a  far  more  important  figure
in  Attic  religion  than  Erechtheus  ;  indeed  she  was  the  chief  deity
of  Athens  (cp.  the  Appendix  to  this  volume,  p.  570  sqq,)  Hence  in
antiquity  the  temple  as  a  whole  seems  to  have  been  designated,  not  as
the  Erechtheum  or  shrine  of  Erechtheus,  but  as  a  temple  of  Athena,


CH.  XXVI  THE  ERECHTHEUM  335

being  distinguished  from  the  Parthenon,  which  was  also  a  temple  of
Athena,  as  '*the  old  temple  of  Athena"  (Xenophon,  HeUenica^  i.
6.  i),  or  "the  old  temple  of  the  Polias"  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  396),  or
"the  old  temple  of  Athena  Polias"  (C  /.  A.  ii.  No.  464),  or  simply
"the  temple  of  Athena  Polias"  (C.  /.  A.  ii.  No.  332  ;  Eustathius,  on
Homer,  //.  xxii.  451,  p.  1279),  or  "the  temple  of  the  Polias"  (Philo-
chorus,  De  Dinarcho  judicium^  3  ;  Clement  of  Alexandria,  Protrept.
iii.  45,  p.  39,  ed.  Potter;  Eustathius,  on  Homer,  Od,  i.  357,  p.  1423  ;  cp.
Lucian,  Piscatory  21).  On  the  other  hand  when  the  ancients  spoke
of  "  the  Erechtheum "  or  "  the  shrine  or  temple  of  Erechtheus "  they
appear  to  have  referred,  not  to  the  temple  as  a  whole,  but  only  to  that
part  of  it  which  was  devoted  to  the  worship  of  Erechtheus.  In  the
present  passage  of  Pausanias  the  name  Erechtheum  is  better  interpreted
(as  we  shall  see  presently)  of  a  part  of  the  temple  than  of  the  whole.
Apparently  the  only  other  passage  in  an  ancient  writer  where  the  name
Erechtheum  occurs  is  in  the  Life  of  Lycurgus  by  the  pseudo- Plutarch,  p.
843  e,  where  it  is  said  that  a  genealogical  table  of  the  priests  of  Poseidon
was  dedicated  in  the  Erechtheum.  As  Poseidon  was  identified  with
Erechtheus  (see  below)  a  genealogical  tree  of  his  priests  must  of  course
have  been  dedicated  in  that  part  of  the  temple  which  was  devoted  to  his
worship.  Hence  it  is  probable  that  by  the  name  'Erechtheum'  the
pseudo-Plutarch  here  means,  not  the  temple  as  a  whole,  but  only  the
shrine  of  Erechtheus  in  it.  Herodotus  (viii.  5  5)  speaks  of  the  temple  or
cella  (naos)  of  Erechtheus.  Hesychius  (5,v,  otKovpov  6<l>iv)  says  that
the  sacred  serpent,  which  was  identified  with  Erichthonius,  dwelt  "  in  the
sanctuary  of  Erechtheus."  Dionysus  of  Halicamassus,  in  a  passage
quoted  by  Jahn-Michaelis  {Pausantae  descriptio  arcis  Athenarum^  p.  28)
but  which  I  have  not  been  able  to  find,  mentions  the  sacred  olive  "  in
the  chapel  {sikos)  of  the  earth-bom  Erechtheus."  Himerius  {Eel.  v.  30)
speaks  of  "  the  precinct  of  Poseidon  "  as  adjoining  the  temple  or  cella
{naos)  of  the  Polias,  evidently  meaning  by  "  the  precinct  of  Poseidon  "
the  shrine  of  Erechtheus.  Cicero  mentions  the  shrine  {delubrum)  of
Erechtheus  at  Athens  {De  natura  deorum^  iii.  19.  49).  These,  with
Homer's  somewhat  ambiguous  mention  of  "  the  strong  house  of  Erech-
theus" {Od.  vii.  81),  appear  to  be  all  the  references  in  classical  writers
to  the  shrine  of  Erechtheus.     It  is  never  mentioned  in  inscriptions.

But  whether  we  understand  these  references  to  apply  to  the  temple
as  a  whole  or  only  to  the  part  of  it  in  which  Erechtheus  was  worshipped
there  can  be  no  doubt  that,  as  I  have  said,  the  shrine  of  Athena  Polias
was  the  most  important  part  of  the  Erechtheum.  We  should  therefore
expect  to  find  it  occupying  the  principal  chamber  of  the  temple.  Which
was  the  principal  chamber  ?  The  eastern  chamber,  apparently ;  since
the  eastern  chamber  alone  has  a  portico  extending  across  its  whole
front.  The  eastern  chamber,  then,  was  probably  the  shrine  of  Athena
Polias.  This  is  what  we  should  expect,  since  in  Greek  temples  the
image  of  the  deity  regularly  faced  eastward.  Dio  Cassius,  indeed,  says
expressly  (liv.  7)  that  the  image  of  Athena  on  the  Acropolis  faced  east ;
but  he  might  be  referring  to  the  gold  and  ivory  image  in  the  Parthenon.
The  evidence  of  the  antiquary  Philochorus  is  also  in  favour  of  identifying


336  THE  ERECHTHEUM  bk.  i.  attica

the  eastern  chamber  of  the  temple  with  the  shrine  of  Athena  Polias  (see
below,  p.  338).

If,  then,  the  eastern  chamber  of  the  temple  was  the  shrine  of  Athena
Polias,  the  Erechtheum  proper  or  shrine  of  Erechtheus  must  be  sought
in  the  western  part  of  the  temple.  Now  Pausanias  tells  us  in  the
present  passage  that  the  Erechtheum  was  'double.'  This  expression
has  sometimes  been  understood  to  mean  that  the  Erechtheum  had  two
stories,  one  above  the  other,  and  the  Greek  is  certainly  susceptible
of  this  meaning  (cp.  Lysias,  i.  9  oIkiZiov  ccrri  /uux  hvv:\ovv^  ura  €)(ov  ra
dvdi  ToU  Karoi).  But,  in  the  first  place,  the  architectural  evidence
adduced  to  prove  this  turns  out  on  close  inspection  to  be  illusory  ;  and,
in  the  second  place,  whenever  Pausanias  elsewhere  applies  the  expres-
sion *  double '  to  a  building,  the  context  always  proves  that  he  means
two  chambers  beside  each  other,  whether  placed  back  to  back  (ii.  25.1;
viii.  9.  i)  or  opening  the  one  into  the  other  (ii.  10.  2  ;  vi.  20.  3).  More-
over he  tells  us  elsewhere  (iii.  15.  10)  that  a  temple  at  Sparta  was  the
only  temple  he  knew  of  which  had  an  upper  story.  But  if  the  Erech-
theum had  had  an  upper  story,  he  would  not  have  been  likely  to  forget
it.  Now  we  have  seen  that  the  western  half  of  the  Erechtheum  consists
of  two  chambers,  namely  a  small  western  chamber  and  a  larger  inner
chamber  opening  off  it.  It  is  probable,  therefore,  that  Pausanias  refers
to  these  two  chambers  when  he  says  that  the  Erechtheum  was  double.
In  the  outer  of  the  two  chambers  he  seems  to  have  seen  the  altars  of
Poseidon  (Erechtheus),  Butes,  and  Hephaestus.  These  altars,  then,
presumably  stood  in  the  small  western  chamber.  In  the  inner  of  the
two  chambers  he  seems  to  have  been  shown  the  salt  well  of  Poseidon
or  *  sea  of  Erechtheus,'  as  it  was  also  called  (ApoUodorus,  iii.  14.  i  ;
Herodotus,  viii.  55  ;  cp.  Paus.  viii.  10.  4),  and  the  mark  of  Poseidon's  tri-
dent in  the  rock  (cp.  Strabo,  ix.  p.  396).  Probably  the  salt  well  or  *  sea
of  Erechtheus '  was  the  ancient  rock-hewn  cistern  under  the  pavement
of  the  Erechtheum  (see  above),  and  the  mark  of  the  trident  was  the
indentations  in  the  rock  already  mentioned,  which  might  not  unnaturally
be  regarded  as  produced  by  the  stroke  of  a  gigantic  trident.  It  is  true
that  neither  the  cistern  nor  the  indentations  in  the  rock  were  in  the  inner
chamber ;  the  cistern  was  under  the  outer  or  western  chamber,  and  the
indentations  were  in  the  crypt  under  the  north  porch.  But  both  were
apparently  reached  from  the  inner  chamber ;  a  staircase  certainly  led
down  from  the  inner  chamber  into  the  crypt,  and  probably  a  sight  of
the  cistern  was  afforded  to  the  curious  through  an  opening  at  the  foot
of  the  staircase.  Thus  Pausanias  might  very  well  describe  the  salt
well  and  the  trident-mark  as  being  in  the  inner  chamber.  That  the
indentations  in  the  rock  under  the  north  porch  were  pointed  out  as  the
mark  of  Poseidon's  trident  is  made  highly  probable  by  the  fact  that
there  was  an  aperture  in  the  pavement  of  the  porch  immediately  above
them.  For  such  an  aperture,  it  would  seem,  could  only  have  been  left
in  the  marble  floor  in  order  to  allow  people,  standing  in  the  porch,  to
see  some  famous  object  in  the  crypt  below.  Those  who  wished  to
examine  the  marks  more  closely  had  to  descend  into  the  crypt  by  the
flight  of  steps  in  the  inner  or  central  chamber  of  the  temple.


CH.  XXVI  THE  ERECHTHEUM  337

Lastly,  the  Pandrosium  or  sanctuary  of  Pandrosus  was  the  enclosure
immediately  to  the  west  of  the  temple.  This  is  made  certain  by  the
inscriptions  relating  to  the  Erechtheum.  For  one  of  these  inscriptions
(C  /.  A,  i.  No.  322)  speaks  of  **  the  pillars  on  the  wall  which  looks
toward  the  Pandrosium "  {t^v  Kijoviov  twv  cwt  tou  rolyov  toG  tt/^^s
navS/ooo-cibv).  Now  the  only  wall  of  the  temple  which  had  pillars
in  it  was  the  west  wall,  on  which  at  a  height  of  about  12^  feet  stood
four  engaged  columns.  Therefore  the  Pandrosium  must  have  been  to
the  west  of  this  wall.  This  follows  also  from  a  distinction  made  by
another  inscription  (C.  /.  A.  iv.  p.  149  sqq^  between  "the  eastern
gable ''  and  "  the  gable  looking  towards  the  Pandrosium  "  (rov  rrphs  coj
a[icrotr]  .  .  .  hrl  to[/x  irp^hs  rov  llav8poar€iov  aicroi').  The  temple  of
Pandrosus  mentioned  by  Pausanias  therefore  stood  in  this  enclosure,
and  as  Pausanias  says  (i.  27.  2)  that  it  was  contiguous  to  (<rvv€xrjs;)  the
Erechtheum,  we  may  conjecture  that  the  small  building  which  seems
to  have  abutted  on  the  south  end  of  the  west  wall  of  the  Erechtheum
(see  above,  p.  334)  was  the  temple  of  Pandrosus.

One  of  the  inscriptions  relating  to  the  Erechtheum  (C  /.  A.  i.
No.  322)  speaks  of  the  Caryatid  porch  as  "the  porch  beside  the
Cecropium,"  and  mentions  an  angle  of  the  temple  as  "the  angle
toward  the  Cecropium."  Hence  it  has  been  supposed  that  there
was  a  Cecropium  or  sanctuary  of  Cecrops  at  the  south-west  comer
of  the  Erechtheum,  at  the  point  where,  with  Prof.  Michaelis,  I  have
conjectured  that  the  temple  of  Pandrosus  may  have  stood.  It  was
doubtless  in  the  Cecropium  that  Cecrops  was  said  to  be  buried  (Clement
of  Alexandria,  Protrept,  iii.  45,  p.  39,  ed.  Potter ;  Amobius,  Adversus
nationes^  vi.  6 ;  Theodoretus,  Grace.  Affect,  Curatio^  viii.  p.  908,
ed.  Schulze,  vol.  4.  p.  10 17,  ed.  Migne).  As  Pandrosus  was  a
daughter  of  Cecrops,  it  is  possible  that  <the  Cecropium'  and  <the
temple  of  Pandrosus '  may  have  been  different  names  for  a  single  small
shrine  or  chapel  abutting  on  the  south-west  comer  of  the  Erechtheum.
The  great  gap  in  the  ancient  wall  which  is  here  spanned  by  a  lintel
composed  of  a  single  gigantic  block  (see  above,  p.  334)  may  possibly
have  contained  the  tomb  of  Cecrops.  This  last  suggestion  is  due,  I
believe,  to  Dr.  Dorpfeld.  Mr.  Penrose  has  suggested  that  this  gap  was
the  den  of  the  sacred  serpent  (see  note  on  i.  1 8.  2).  But  this  seems
less  probable.  So  huge  a  block  would  be  a  more  suitable  roof  for  the
tomb  of  a  hero  than  the  den  of  a  serpent.  In  the  Pandrosium  or  sacred
precinct  of  Pandrosus,  though  probably  not  in  her  temple,  grew  the
sacred  olive-tree  (see  i.  27.  2  note).

As  Pausanias  describes  the  shrine  of  Erechtheus  before  the  shrine
of  Athena  Polias,  he  must  have  entered  the  Erechtheum  either  by  the
south  porch  (Caryatid  porch)  or  by  the  north  porch.  But  there  seems
to  have  been  no  public  entrance  through  the  south  porch.  For  the
opening  at  the  north-east  comer  of  the  porch  is  narrow,  the  step  up  to
it  from  the  outside  is  very  high  (20  inches),  and  "  the  delicate  mouldings
which  nm  round  the  base  of  the  building  and  are  continued  under  this
opening  would  be  wom  by  almost  every  step  that  was  taken  up  to  it  or
down  from  it,  as  in  fact  they  are  now  being  wom  by  visitors  who,  with

VOL,  II  z


338  THE  ERECHTHEUM  bk.  i.  attica

an  effort,  get  up  to  the  opening  "  (A.  S.  Murray).  Hence  the  entrance
through  the  south  porch  was  probably  a  private  one,  reserved  for  the
priests.  The  regular  public  entrance  must  have  been  through  the
spacious  north  porch  and  the  lofty  and  richly-adorned  doorway  to  which
it  served  as  a  vestibule.  Through  the  north  porch,  accordingly,  Pau-
sanias  entered  the  Erechthetun.  Hence  the  altar  of  Supreme  Zeus,
which  he  describes  as  situated  before  the  entrance  to  the  Erechtheum,
must  have  stood  either  close  to  or  actually  in  the  north  porch.  The
altar  is  mentioned  by  Pausanias  elsewhere  (viii.  2.  3),  but  not,  at  least
under  this  name,  by  any  other  ancient  writer.  It  may  possibly  be
identical  with  the  "  altar  of  the  Thuechoos  "  (rod  6vr]xov)  which  stood
in  the  north  porch,  as  we  learn  from  an  inscription  (C.  L  A.  i.  No.
322  ;  it  is  also  mentioned  in  C.  L  A.  i.  No.  324).  The  Thuichoos  was
a  priest  who  offered  sacrifices  (Photius,  Lexicon^  s.v,  6vrf\ooi),  He  had
a  seat  reserved  for  him  in  the  theatre  (C  /.  A,  iii.  No.  244).  From
the  shrine  of  Erechtheus  our  author  seems  to  have  ascended  by  the
inner  staircase  to  the  shrine  of  Athena  Polias  ;  after  which  he  probably
descended  the  outside  staircase  along  the  north  wall  of  the  temple  and
passing  through  the  north  porch  entered  the  Pandrosium  by  the  door  in
the  south-west  comer  of  the  porch.

It  remains  to  notice  a  famous  passage  of  the  antiquary  Philochonis,
which  has  often  been  cited  as  evidence  of  the  arrangement  of  the
Erechtheum.  As  quoted  verbally  by  Dionysius  of  Halicamassus  {De
Dinarcho  judicium^  3)  it  runs  thus :  "  On  the  Acropolis  the  following
portent  took  place.  A  bitch  entered  the  temple  of  the  Polias,  and,
having  gone  down  into  the  Pandrosium,  ascended  the  altar  of  Zeus  of
the  Courtyard  which  stands  under  the  olive-tree,  and  there  lay  down.
Now  it  is  an  old  established  custom  with  the  Athenians  that  no  dog
shall  ascend  the  Acropolis."  In  the  light  of  the  foregoing  discussion  it
is  easy  to  follow  the  course  taken  by  this  celebrated  dog.  It  entered
the  eastern  chamber  or  shrine  of  Athena  Polias  through  the  eastern
portico,  went  dsyfra  the  stairs  into  the  shrine  of  Erechtheus,  and  thence
passed  out  into  the  Pandrosium,  probably  through  the  door  in  the
western  wall  of  the  temple,  but  possibly  by  the  door  in  the  south-west
comer  of  the  north  porch.  Arrived  in  the  open  precinct  of  the  Pandro-
sium the  dog  jumped  up  on  the  altar  under  the  sacred  olive-tree,  and
there  lay  down.

On  the  Erechtheum  see  Stuart  and  Revett,  Antiquities  of  Athens^  2  (London,
1787),  ch.  ii.  pp.  16-22,  with  20  plates  ;  K.  O.  Miiller,  *  Mincrvae  Poliadis  sacra  ct
aedes  in  arce  Athcnarum/  Kunstarchiiologische  Werke^  i.  pp.  86-147 ;  Leake,
Athens^  I.  pp.  574-592  ;  Th.  Berck,  *Der  Fries  des  Erechtheums,'  Zeitschrift  fUr
die  Alterthumswissenschafty  3  (1845),  PP*  987-991;  Fr.  Thiersch,  *  Ueber  das
Erechtheum,*  Abkattdlungen  d.  philos.  philolog.  CL  d,  k,  bayer,  Akad,  d.  iVissen,
5  (1849),  3te  Abtheilung,  pp.  81-185;  iV/.,  ib.  6  (1852),  pp  101-2JO  (this  article
is  on  the  growth  of  Greek  architecture  in  general) ;  /V/.,  ib,  8  (1858),  pp.  335-425
(this  article  contains  an  important  report  on  the  existing  remains  of  the  Erechtheum
by  a  commission  of  Greek  archaeologists,  together  with  valuable  plans  and  draw-
ings of  the  ruins) ;  J.  M.  Tetaz,  *  Memoire  explicatif  et  justificatif  de  la  restauration  dc
I'Erechtheion  d'Ath^nes,*  Revue  ArctUologiquc,  8  (1851),  pp.  1-12,  81-86;  E.  Beul^,
V Acropole  d* AtlihieSy  2.  pp.  216-294  ;  Ch.  Petersen  and  C.  Bottichcr,  *  Zur  Kennt-
niss  des  Erechtheion,'  Archdologische  Zeitung^  13  (1855),  pp.  65-78  ;  Ch.  Petersen,


CH.  XXVI  THE  ERECHTHEUM  339

'Das  Erechtheum  und  die  Quellen  der  Akropolis,'  Archaologischc  Zeitung^  14
(1S56),  pp.  193-202;  C.  Botticher,  'Das  Prostomiaion  und  die  Parastas  der  Bau-
inschrift  am  Tempel  der  Athena  Polias  zu  Athen/  Archdologische  Zeitung^  16  (1858),
pp.  117-128;  ftrfl,  Untersuchungen  auf  der  Akropolis  von  Athen^  pp.  189-317;
P.  W.  Forchhammer,  'Das  YxexAii^txoTi^^  FUckeisetCs  Jahrbiicher^  5(1859),  pp.
186-189;  Dyer,  Ancient  Athens,  p.  414  sqq,  ;  P.  W.  Forchhammer,  'Das  Erech-
theum und  der  Tempel  der  Athena  Polias,  Arckdologische  Zeiiung,  34  (1876),  pp.
lo6-lo8 ;  A.  Michaelis,  '  Pausanias  Wanderung  durch  den  Tempel  der  Polias,'
Mittheil.  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,  2  {1877),  pp.  15-37  ;  L.  Julius,  Uc^r  das
Erechtheion  (MUnchen,  1878);  A.  S.  Murray,  'The  Erechtheum,* /<?«rfw/ ^
Hellenic  Studies,  i  (1870),  pp.  224-227 ;  J.  Ferguson,  '  Stairs  to  Pandroseum  at
Athens,'  ib,  2  (1881),  pp.  83-09 ;  R.  Borrmann,  '  Neue  Untersuchungen  am  Erech-
theion zu  Athen,'  Mittheil,  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  6  (1881),  pp.  372-392  ;  A.  R.


Rangab^,  'Das  Erechtheion,* /^.  7  (1882),  pp.  258-273,  321-334;  E.  Petersen,

pp.  i-io;  H.  N.
at  Athens,'  Papers  of  the  American  School  of  Classical  Studies  at  Athens,  I  (i885)»


<Zum  Erechtheum,' lA  10(1885),  pp.  i-io;  H.  N.  Fowler,  *The  Erechtheion


pp.  215-236;  A.  Choisy,  Etudes  ipigrapniques  sur  r architecture  Grecque,  pp.
05-166;  LI  Julius,  article  'Erechtheion*  in  Baumeister's  Denkmdler,  pp.  484-
491  ;  A.  Botticher,  Die  Akropolis  von  A  then,  pp.  214-235 ;  F.  C.  Penrose,
Principles  of  Athenian  Architecture  (ed.  1888),  pp.  88-97  ;  Guide-Joanne,  I.  pp.
58-64;  Baedeker,'  pp.  74-77  ;  H.  G.  Lolling,  '  Athen,*  pp.  349-352 ;  Miss  Harri-
son, Ancient  Athens,  pp.  483-496  ;  C.  Robert,  '  Zum  Fries  des  Erechtheion,'
Hermes,  25  (1890),  pp.  431-445  ;  R.  W.  Schultz  and  E.  A.  Gardner,  'The  North
Doorway  of  the  Erechtheum,*  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  12  (1891),  pp.  1-16;
S.  H.  Bamsley,  'The  North  Doorway  of  the  Erechtheum,'  ib,  pp.  381-383  ;  A.
H.  Smith,  Catalogtu  of  Sculpture  in  the  British  Museum,  I.  p.  231  sqq,  ;  Over-
beck,  Gesch,  d,  griech,  Plastik,^  i.  pp.  471-480;  A.  Furtwangler,  Meisterwerke
d,  griech,  Plastik,  pp.  i92-2oa

26.  5.  they  sacrifice  no  living  thing  etc.  Cp.  viii.  2.  3.  There
was  an  altar  at  Delos  called  '^  the  altar  of  the  Pious ''  at  which  no
animal  was  sacrificed  (Porphyry,  De  abstinentm^  ii.  28).  Plato  says
{De  Ugibus,  vi.  p.  782  c)  : — "  We  hear  of  men  who  did  not  even  dare  to
eat  beef,  and  whose  offerings  to  the  gods  were  not  animals  but  cakes
and  fruits  moistened  with  honey  and  such  like  holy  offerings  ;  they
abstained  from  flesh,  deeming  it  impious  to  eat  it  and  to  stain  the  altars
of  the  gods  with  blood.  So  they  led  a  sort  of  Orphic  life  in  those
days,  partaking  only  of  what  had  no  life,  and  abstaining  from  all  living
creatures."  Porphyry  says  that  men  of  old  neither  ate  nor  sacrified
animals  ;  their  offerings  to  the  gods  consisted  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth
{J)e  cUfsttnentia^  ii.  27-29).  Cp.  Lobeck,  Aglctophamus,  p.  245  sqq.
Such  legends  are  plausibly  explained  by  W.  Robertson  Smith  as  re-
miniscences of  a  primitive  pastoral  age  in  which  the  herds  are  sacred
{Religion  of  the  Semites^^  p.  300  sqq.)  Many  pastoral  tribes  in  Africa  at
the  present  day  neither  kill  nor  eat  the  cattle  which  they  breed.

26.  5.  they  lay  cakes  on  it they  are  forbidden  by  custom

to  make  use  of  wine.  On  sacrificial  cakes,  see  K.  F.  Hermann,
Gottesdiensilicke  Alierthiimer,  §  25,  13.  On  wineless  libations,  see  note
on  V.  15.  10.

26.  5.  one  of  Poseidon,  on  which  they  sacrifice  also  to  Erechthens.
Erechtheus  was  in  fact  identified  with  Poseidon  by  the  Athenians
(Hesychius,  j.z/. *Ep€x^€vs).  Athenagoras  says  "the  Athenian  sacrifices
to  Erechtheus  Poseidon"  (Supplicatio pro  Christianis,  i).  An  inscrip-
tion found  at  the  Erechtheum  contains  a  dedication  to  Poseidon  Erech-
theus (C.  /.  A,  i.  No.  387).     His  priesthood  was  called  the  priesthood


340  ATHENA  POLIAS  BK.  i.  ATTICA

of  Poseidon  Erechtheus  ([Plutarch,]  Vit,  X.  Orat.  p.  843  b  c  ;  C,  I.  A.
iii.  No.  805).  The  priest  had  a  seat  reserved  for  him  in  the  theatre ;
the  inscription  on  the  seat  calls  him  **  the  priest  of  earth-holding  Poseidon
and  Erechtheus''  (C  /.  A.  iiL  No.  276).  Erichthonius,  whoi^-as  identical
with  Erechtheus  (see  note  on  i.  18.  2),  was  said  to  be  buried  in  the
Erechtheiun  (Clement  of  Alexandria,  Protrept,  iii.  45,  p.  39,  ed.
Potter;  Amobius,  Adversus  Nationes^  vL  6).  Apollodorus  only  says
(iiL  14.  7)  that  Erichthonius  was  buried  in  the  precinct  (Jemenas)  of
Athena.

26.  5.  the  hero  Bntes.  Butes  was  said  to  be  either  a  twin  brother
of  Erechtheus  (Apollodorus,  iii.  14.  8)  or  a  son  of  Poseidon  (Eustathius,
on  Homer,  //.  L  i.  p.  13 ;  EiymoL  Magnum^  p.  209  jf.,  s,vv.  BovraSac
and  BoirriSi/s).  A  fragment  of  a  marble  seat  bearing  the  inscription  *•*'  of
the  priest  of  Butes  "  (Upcois  Bovrov)  has  been  found  in  the  Erechtheum
(C.  /.  A,  iii.  No.  102).

26.  5.  On  the  walls  are  paintlTigB  of  the  fkmily  of  the  Batada.
The  ancient  family  of  the  Butads,  or  Eteobutads  (i>.  'the  true  old
Butads ')  as  they  were  also  called,  furnished  both  the  priests  of  Poseidon
Erechtheus  and  the  priestesses  of  Athena  Polias  ^Aeschines,  ii.  147  ;
Harpocration  and  Photius,  Lexicon^  s,v.  'ErcojSoirrooai ;  [Plutarch,]  ^7/.
X.  Orat,  p.  843  b  c  e).  The  statesman  and  orator  Lycurgus  belonged
to  this  family,  and  wooden  statues  of  him  and  his  sons,  executed  by
Timarchus  and  Cephisodotus  the  sons  of  Praxiteles,  were  dedicated  in
the  Erechtheum,  together  with  a  genealogical  tree  tracing  the  descent  of
the  family  from  Erechtheus  ([Plutarch,]  VH.  X,  Orat.  p.  748  e).  On
the  Butads  or  Eteobutads  see  K.  O.  MiiUer,  Ktmstarchdologische  Werke,
I.  pp.  96  sqg.y  132  sgg.  ;  J.  Topfier,  Attische  Genealogie,^  P-  113  sqq.

26.  5.  sea-water  in  a  well  etc.  See  above,  pp.  333  sq,^  336.
H^esias,  quoted  by  Strabo  (ix.  p.  396),  mentioned  **the  mark  of  the
enormous  trident ''  on  the  Acropolis.

26.  6.  an  image  of  Athena  in  what  is  now  called  the  Acropolis,
bnt  what  was  then  called  the  city.  This  remark  is  evidently  intended
to  explain  the  epithet  Polias  (from  poUs^  '  city ')  which  was  the  regular
title  of  the  Athena  of  the  Erechtheiun  (see  the  Appendix  to  this  volume,
P-  573  ^f*)  Thucydides  says  (ii.  15)  that  in  the  early  days  of  Athens
the  Acropolis  was  the  city.  In  inscriptions  of  the  fifth  century  B.c.
this  antique  phraseology  is  retained,  the  Acropolis  being  spoken  of  as
the  polis  or  city  {e,g.  C.  I.  A.  \,  i  ;  C.  I.  A,  iv.  p.  139).  The  very
ancient  image  of  Athena  Polias  which  stood  in  the  Erechtheum  was  made
of  olive-wood  (SchoL  on  Demosthenes,  xxii.  13,  p.  597  ;  Athenagoras,
SuppliccUio  pro  ChrisHams^  17).  That  it  was  of  wood  is  testified  by
other  writers  (Plutarch,  De  daedalis  PlcUaeensibus^  in  the  Didot  ed.  of
Plutarch,  vol.  5,  p.  20;  Apollodorus,  iii.  14.  6).  Tertullian  speaks  of
it  as  if  it  were  little  more  than  a  shapeless  log  (Apologeticus^  16).  It
was  said  to  have  been  set  up  by  the  aborigines  (Plutarch,  /.r.)  or  by
Cecrops  (Eusebius,  Praepar.  Evang.  x.  9.  15)  or  by  Erichthonius
(Apollodorus,  iii.  14.  6).  Philostratus  mentions  it  {Vit.  Apollon.  iii.  14)
as  one  of  the  most  ancient  images  in  Greece.  The  Athenians  appear
to  have  saved  the  image  by  taking  it  on  shipboard  with  them  when


CH.  XXVI  ATHENA  POLIAS  341

they  evacuated  Athens   at   the  approach  of  the  Persians  (Plutarch,
ThenUstocles^  10).

As  to  the  type  of  the  image,  the  goddess  seems  to  have  been  repre-
sented standing  and  armed  (Aristophanes,  BirdSy  826-831  ;  cp.
Aeschylus,  Eumenides^  80,  258  sq,^  where  a  suppliant  is  represented
clasping  the  image  in  his  arms,  which  suits  better  with  a  standing  than
a  seated  image).  She  held  a  round  shield  on  which  was  the  Gorgon's
head  (Euripides,  Electro^  12 54-1 2 57;  cp.  Plutarch,  Themistocles^  10;
Eustathius,  on  Homer,  Od,  xi.  634,  p.  1704).  The  antique  image  of
Athena,  constantly  depicted  on  the  vases  which,  filled  with  sacred  oil,
were  given  as  prizes  at  the  Panathenaic  festival  (Schol.  on  Aristophanes,
Clouds^  1005),  was  most  probably  copied  from  the  wooden  image  of
Athena  Polias  in  the  Erechtheimi.  It  represents  the  goddess  in  a  stiff
attitude,  the  left  foot  advanced,  the  right  hand  raised  and  grasping
the  spear,  with  which  she  is  making  a  thrust ;  she  wears  a  crested
helmet  and  holds  in  her  left  hand  a  round  shield.  See  L.  Stephani,  in
Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1876,  pp.  5-108;  J.  de  Witte,
*  Vases  Panath^naiques,'  Annali  deW  Instituto^  49  (1877),  pp.  294-332  ;
Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  pp.  1151-1154.  The  attitude  of  the  Dresden
statue  of  Athena  seems  to  have  been  similar,  though  the  head  and  arms
are  wanting;  down  the  front  of  her  robe  runs  a  perpendicular  stripe
adorned  with  the  battles  of  the  gods  and  giants  (Miiller-Wieseler,
Denkmdler^  i.  pi.  x.  No.  36  ;  Overbeck,  Gesch,  d,  griech,  Plasttk^^  i.
p.  256  ;  Roscher's  Lexikon^  i.  p.  694).  This  last  feature  of  the  Dresden
statue  renders  it  highly  probable  that  we  possess  in  it  a  copy  of  the
wooden  image  of  Athena  Polias,  since  the  robe  periodically  woven  for
the  goddess  and  placed  on  her  old  image  was  similarly  adorned  with
inwoven  scenes  of  the  battles  between  the  gods  and  giants  (Schol.  on
Plato,  Republic^  i.  p.  327  a  ;  Schol.  on  Aristides,  vol  3.  p.  343,  ed
Dindorf;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Knights^  566;  Schol.  on  Euripides,
Hecuba^  467,  468  ;  that  the  robe  was  worn  by  the  old  image  is  proved
by  Hesychius,  s,v,  irpa^upylSai ;  cp.  the  Appendix  to  this  volume,  p.
574  ^^9')  The  archaic  helmeted  head  of  Athena  on  coins  of  Athens  may
be  a  copy  of  the  head  of  the  ancient  image  in  the  Erechtheum.  On  the
type  of  this  image  see  O.  Jahn,  Ve  antiquissimis  Minervae  simulacris
Atticis^  p.  10  sqq.

26.  6.  sq,  a  golden  lamp  etc.  Strabo  mentions  (ix.  p.  396)  the
perpetual  lamp  in  the  Erechtheum.  The  lamp  was  tended  by  elderly
widows ;  during  the  siege  of  Athens  by  Sulla  it  was  allowed  to  go  out
for  lack  of  oil  (Plutarch,  Numa^  3  ;  /V/.,  Sulla^  1 3).  On  the  custom  of
maintaining  a  perpetual  lamp  or  fire,  see  note  on  viiu  53.  9,  'the  Common
Hearth  of  the  Arcadians.*

26.  7.  Oarpasian  flax.  This  was  doubtless  asbestus,  a  fibrous
mineral  of  the  hornblende  family  with  elastic  and  flexible  fibres,  resem-
bling flax,  but  incombustible.  The  ancients  found  it  in  Cyprus  and  at
Carystus  in  Euboea,  and  they  wove  it  into  napkins,  head-dresses,  etc.  In
particular  they  made  wicks  out  of  it  which  burned  with  oil  perpetually
without  being  consumed.  They  called  it  asbestos^  amiantosy  and  Carystian
stone.     See  Sotacus,  quoted  by  Apollonius,  Histor.  Mirab,  36  {Scriptores


342  THE  SCULPTOR  CALLIMACHUS        bk.  l  attica

rerum  mirabilium  Graeciy  ed.  Westermann,  p.  1 1 1  j^.)  ;  Strabo,  x.  p.  446  ;
Plutarch,  De  defectu  oraculorum^  43  ;  Dioscorides,  De  materia  medicay  v.
155.  In  India  the  Brahmins  wore  incombustible  garments  made  out  of
it  (Hierocles,  quoted  by  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v,  BpaxfMV€s),  Like
Pausanias,  Pliny  (N.  H,  xix.  19  J^.)  fell  into  the  mistake  of  regarding  it
as  a  rare  and  valuable  sort  of  flax.  Carpasia  was  a  town  in  Cyprus
(Strabo,  xiv.  p.  682),  near  which  the  mineral  was  presumably  found.
But  the  place  in  Cyprus  where  it  was  found  in  great  abundance  was
between  Gerandrus  and  Soli  (Sotacus,  /.r.)  On  asbestus  and  its  use
in  antiquity,  see  especially  J.  Yates,  Textrinum  Antiquorum^  p.  356
sqq,  ;  cp.  Marquardt,  Das  PrivatUben  der  Rbmer^  p.  500  sq ;  Bliimner,
Technologies  i.  p.  194.

26.  7*  CalliinachuB though  inferior  to  the  best  artists  etc.

The  date  of  this  artist  is  not  positively  known ;  but  as  it  seems  probable
that  he  made  the  golden  lamp  for  the  new  Erechtheum  at  the  time  of  its
completion  about  408  B.C.,  he  may  have  flourished  at  the  end  of  the  fifth
century  B.C.  With  this  it  would  agree  that  Callimachus  was  said  to
have  invented  the  Corinthian  capital  (Vitruvius,  iv.  i.  9) ;  for  the
Corinthian  order  is  first  known  to  have  been  employed  in  buildings  of
the  fourth  century  B.C.,  as  in  the  temple  of  Athena  Alea  at  Tegea
(Paus.  viiL  45.  ^  sq,\  the  Rotunda  at  Epidaurus  (as  to  the  date,  see  P.
Cawadias,  Fouilles  dEpidaure^  i.  p.  15  sq,\  and  the  monument  of
Lysicrates  at  Athens  (see  note  on  I  20.  i).  If  this  was  Callimachus's
date,  he  cannot  have  invented  the  stone-drill,  as  Pausanias  said  he  did ;
since  the  drill  is  known  to  have  been  used  in  the  gable  sculptures  of  the
temple  at  Aegina  and  the  temple  of  Zeus  at  Olympia  (Bliimner,  Techno-
logie,  3.  p.  195  ;  see,  however,  above,  p.  3^'  ^9-)  Perhaps  Callimachus
may  have  used  the  borer  in  a  way  unknown  to  his  predecessors,  as  for
the  making  of  fine  grooves  and  deep  undercuttings  in  imitating  the  folds
and  creases  of  drapery  and  the  wavy  ripples  of  hair,  where  the  chisel
could  not  have  answered  his  purpose.  We  learn  from  Pliny  {N.  H,
xxxiv.  92)  that  the  epithet  *  Refiner  away  of  Art'  was  applied  to  Calli-
machus on  account  of  his  excessive  £^tidiousness  which  impelled  him  to
touch  and  retouch  his  work  without  end.  Pliny  mentions  as  an  instance
a  group  of  dancing  Laconian  girls  by  Callimachus  ;  the  work  was  free
from  any  technical  faults,  but  so  over  elaborated  that  all  ease  and  grace
were  lost.  Vitruvius  says  (iv.  i.  9)  that  the  title  in  question  was
bestowed  on  Callimachus  by  the  Athenians  on  account  of  <*  the  elegance
and  subtlety  "  of  his  work  in  marble.  He  made  a  seated  image  of  Hera
at  Plataea  (Paus.  ix.  2.  7).  Cp.  H.  Brunn,  Gesch.  d,  griech.  Kiinstler^
I.  pp.  251-255  ;  J.  Overbeck,  Gesch,  d  griech,  Piastiky^  i.  pp.  500-
502  ;  A.  Furtwanglcr,  Meisterwerke  d  griech,  Plcutik^  pp.  200-206.

27.  I.  a  folding-chair.  The  folding-chairs  of  the  ancients  were  like
what  we  call  camp-stools.  See  Baumeister's  Denkmaler^  p.  1650  j^^.
Aelian,  describing  the  luxury  of  the  ancient  Athenians,  says  that  they
used  to  be  attended  by  slaves  carrying  camp-stools  in  case  they  might
wish  to  sit  down  anywhere  {Vcu^,  Hist,  iv.  22).

27.  I.  spoiLi  taken  from  the  Medes  etc.  Pericles  reckoned  the
Persian   spoils   among  the   available    wealth    of  the  Athenian   state


CH.  XXVII  THE  SACRED  OLIVE  343

(Thucydidcs,  ii.  13;  Diodorus,  xii.  40).  A  certain  Glaucetas,  when
acting  as  one  of  the  treasurers,  stole  some  of  the  Persian  spoils  from  the
Acropolis,  including  "the  silver-footed  chair  and  the  sword  of  Mardonius,
which  weighed  300  darics  "  (Demosthenes,  xxiv.  129,  p.  741  ;  the  daric
weighed  130  grains  troy,  see  W.  Ridgeway,  Origin  of  Metallic  Currency
and  Weight  Standards,  p.  6  sq,)  This  silver-footed  chair  was  said  to  be
the  one  on  which  Xerxes  sat  watching  the  battle  of  Salamis ;  according  to
Harpocration  it  was  kept  in  the  Parthenon  (Harpocration,  s.v,  dfryvpoirovs
8i<l>po^ ;  Suidas,  s.v.  apyvpovi^a ;  cp.  SchoL  on  Demosthenes,  iii.  25,
p.  35).  But  it  seems  likely  that  the  chair  would  be  kept  with  the  other
Persian  spoils  in  the  Erechtheum  ;  Harpocration  may  have  been  mistaken.
Dio  Chrysostom  says  {Or.  ii.  vol.  i.  p.  27  ed.  Dindorf)  that  the  sword  of
Mardonius  and  the  shields  taken  from  the  Spartans  at  Pylus  were  far
nobler  offerings  than  the  Propylaea  and  the  Olympieum.  The  Persian
sword  {akinakes)  had  a  short,  straight  blade  (Josephus,  Antiquit.  Jud.
XX.  8.  10).

27.  I.  the  corselet  of  Masistins.  It  was  of  gold,  wrought  to
resemble  fine  scales.  Masistius  fell  while  heading  a  charge  of  the
Persian  cavalry  on  some  Athenian  infantry  (not  cavalry,  as  Pausanias
says).  There  was  a  fierce  struggle  over  his  body,  but  it  finally  remained
in  the  hands  of  the  Athenians.     See  Herodotus,  ix.  20-24.

27.  I .  Mardonins fell  by  the  hand  of  a  Spartan.    The  name

of  this  Spartan  was  Aimnestus  (Herodotus,  ix.  64).

27.  2.  the  olive.  Pausanias  does  not  say  where  this  sacred  olive-
tree  was ;  but  from  Philochorus  (quoted  by  Dionysius  of  Halicamassus,
De  Dinarcho  judicium,  3)  we  learn  that  it  was  in  the  Pandrosium  and
that  an  altar  of  Zeus  of  the  Courtyard  stood  under  it.  Apollodorus  also
says  (iii.  14.  i)  that  the  olive  was  in  the  Pandrosium.  We  have  seen
(p.  337)  that  the  Pandrosium  was  the  enclosure  immediately  to  the  west
of  the  Erechtheum.  In  this  enclosure,  about  40  feet  or  so  to  the  west
of  the  temple,  there  is  a  levelled  area  about  8  feet  square,  where  the
altar  of  Zeus  of  the  Courtyard  may  have  stood  ;  *<  and  close  to  it,  towards
the  west,  is  a  large  and  deep  natural  fissure  in  the  rock  where  the  roots
of  the  olive-tree  would  have  found  nourishment "  (Penrose,  Principles  of
Athenian  Architecture,  p.  96,  ed.  1888).  As  Pausanias,  immediately
after  mentioning  the  olive,  mentions  the  temple  of  Pandrosus,  he
would  seem  to  have  found  the  tree  in  close  proximity  to  the  temple,
presumably  in  the  Pandrosium.  Herodotus  says  (viii.  55),  "On
the  Acropolis  there  is  a  temple  of  the  earth -bom  Erechtheus,  in
which  is  the  olive  and  the  sea,  which  are  said  by  the  Athenians
to  have  been  adduced  as  evidence  by  Poseidon  and  Athena  in  their
contest  for  the  land."  From  this  we  should  infer  that  the  olive-
tree  was  within  the  walls  of  the  Erechtheum ;  but  Herodotus  may
mean  no  more  than  that  it  was  within  the  precincts  of  the  temple.
Pliny  (N.  H.  xvi.  240)  and  Hyginus  (Fed).  164)  speak  of  this  famous
olive-tree  as  still  existing  on  the  Acropolis  in  their  time.  Cicero  {De
legibus,  i.  I.  2)  refers  to  "the  eternal  olive  on  the  Acropolis"  at  Athens.
It  was  called  "the  citizen  olive"  (Pollux,  ix.  17  ;  Hesychius,  s.v.  wrny
cAoia;  Eustathius,  on  Homer,  Od.  i.  4,  p.  1383);  or  "the  bent  olive"


344  THE  ARREPHOROI  bk.  i.  attica

(Hesychius,  I.e.  and  s.v.  7rayKu<^s;  Pollux,  vi.  163).  The  olives  of  the
Academy  were  said  to  be  derived  from  the  one  on  the  Acropolis  (see  i.
30.  2  note).  On  the  sacred  olive-tree  of  the  Acropolis,  see  further  C.
Botticher,  Der  Bautnkultus  der  Hellenen^  p.  107  5qq.\  L.  Stephani,  in
Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1872,  p.  5  sqq.

27.  2.  alter  being  bnmed  down  it  sprouted  the  same  day  to  a
height  of  two  cubits.  Herodotus's  account  is  not  quite  so  marvellous  ;
he  says  (viii.  55)  that  on  the  day  after  it  was  burnt  {^tvrkpnQ  ^]y^pjji  airb
r^s  IfiTTfjria'ios)  the  olive  was  found  to  have  sprouted  about  a  cubit.

27.  2.  a  temple  of  Pandrosus  etc.  As  to  Pandrosus,  see  i.  18.  2  ;
as  to  the  probable  situation  of  her  temple,  see  above,  p.  337.  The
Athenian  lads  (ephebot)  sacrificed  to  Athena  Polias  and  to  Pandrosus
{C.I.  A.  iii.  No.  481).  An  inscription  on  a  pedestal  which  had  sup-
ported a  statue  of  one  of  the  girls  called  Arrephoroi  (see  below)  declares
that  in  this  capacity  the  girl  had  served  Athena  Polias  and  Pandrosus
{C.I.  A.  iii.  No.  887;  cp.  C.I.  A.  ii.  No.  1390).  Thallo,  one  of  the
personifications  of  the  Seasons,  was  worshipped  by  the  Athenians  along
with  Pandrosus  (Paus.  ix.  35.  2).

27.  3.  Two  maidens Arrephoroi     What  we  know  of  these

Arrephoroi  from  other  sources  does  not  amount  to  much.  Ancient
writers  generally  call  them  Arrephoroi,  but  Hesychius  {s.v.  'Epprj<f>6poi)
and  Moeris  {s.v.  'Eppi]<f>6poij  p.  1 30,  ed.  Koch)  call  them  Errephoroi,
and  this  form  of  the  name  is  supported  by  the  inscriptions  in  which  the
verb  erriphorein  is  regularly  used  to  designate  the  functions  performed
by  the  maidens  (C.  LA.  ii.  Nos.  1379-1385, 1390,  1391,  1392  ;  C.I.  A.
iii.  Nos.  887,  916,  917,  918).  The  noun  occurs  in  the  singular
{Errephoros)  in  one  inscription  {C.  I.  A.  iii.  No.  902).  On  the  other
hand  the  verb  occurs  in  the  form  arripkorein  in  two  inscriptions  {C.  I.  A,
ii.  No.  453b,  p.  418;  C.I. A.  iii.  No.  822a,  p.  505).  The  account
given  of  the  Arrephoroi  by  writers  other  than  Pausanias  is  as  follows.
They  were  four  girls  of  noble  birth  between  the  ages  of  seven  and  eleven,
chosen  by  the  magistrate  called  the  king.  They  wore  white  robes,  and
if  they  put  on  gold  ornaments  these  became  sacred.  Cakes  of  a  special
kind  called  anastatoi  were  baked  for  them.  Two  of  the  Arrephoroi
began  the  weaving  of  the  sacred  robe  which  was  periodically  presented
to  Athena.  See  Aristophanes,  Lysistrata^  64 1  sq.^  with  the  Scholiast ;
Harpocration,  s.v.  dppi]<f>op€iv  ;  Hesychius,  s.w.  dpfyrj<f>opia^  ippr^tjiopoi ;
Suidas,  s.w.  dpprj<f>op€iv,  dppi]<f>opta^  and  hruoi/zaTo ;  Etymol.  Magnum^
p.  149  s.v.  dpprj<f>6poi,  and  dppq<f)Op€iv  \  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^
pp.  202,  446,  s.v.  dpprj<f>op€iv.  According  to  Moeris  {s.v.  kppr)ff>6poiy
p.  130,  ed.  Koch)  the  Arrephoroi  carried  dew  to  Herse,  one  of  the
three  daughters  of  Cecrops  (Paus.  i.  18.  2).  They  had  a  court  for
ball-play  on  the  Acropolis,  probably  within  the  Pandrosium ;  a  bronze
statue  of  Isocrates,  represented  as  a  boy  riding,  stood  in  the  court
([Plutarch,]  Vit.  X.  Orat.  p.  839b).  The  festival  at  which  the  Arre-
phoroi performed  the  ceremony  described  by  Pausanias  was  called
Arrephoria ;  it  was  in  honour  of  Athena  and  was  held  in  the  month
of  Scirophorion  (June-July)  {Etymol.  Magnum^  p.  149  s.v.  dppi^<f>6poL),
It  seems  to  have  been  a  common  practice  to  set  up  on  the  Acropolis


CH.  XXVII  STATUE  OF  LYSIMACHE  345

statues  of  girls  who  had  been  Arrephoroi ;  the  inscribed  bases  of  a
number  of  these  statues  have  come  down  to  us  (C  /.  y^.  ii.  Nos.  1378-
iS^Sj  I390>  1391,  1393  ;  ^- 1'  A'  »"•  Nos.  887,  916,  917,  918).  Two
of  the  inscriptions  on  these  pedestals  declare  that  the  girl  acted  as
Arrephoros  to  Athena  (or  Athena  Polias)  and  Pandrosus  (C  /.  A.  ii.
No.  1383,  cp.  No.  1390  ;  C  /.  A,  iii.  No.  887).  This  is  practically  all
that  is  known  of  the  Arrephoroi ;  everything  beyond  this  is  pure  specula-
tion. Cp.  A.  Mommsen,  Heortologie^  p.  443  sqq,  ;  C.  Botticher,  Die
Tektanik  der  Hellenen^  p.  567  j^^. ;  Preller,  Griech,  Myihologie^^  i.  p.
210  sq. ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  xxxiii.  sqq.  We  hear  of  a
girl  who  was  Errephoros  to  Demeter  and  Proserpine  (C.  /.  A.  iii.  No.
919);  and  of  Hersephoroi  (sic)  of  "Earth  sumamed  Themis,"  and  of
"  Ilithyia  in  Agrae"  (C.  /.  A,  iii.  Nos.  318,  319).

27.  3.  Aphrodite  in  the  Qardens.     See  i.  19.  2.

27.  4-  a  well-wrought  figure  of  an  old  woman  etc.  This  is
probably  the  Lysimache  who  was  priestess  of  Athena  for  sixty-four  years
and  whose  statue  was  made  by  Demetrius  (Pliny,  A^.  H,  xxxiv.  76).
The  statuette  here  mentioned  by  Pausanias  may  have  been  the  one
made  by  Demetrius,  though  its  small  size  is  remarkable.  Lysimache
seems  to  have  been  famous ;  Plutarch  (De  vitioso  pudore^  14)  tells  an
anecdote  of  her.  Pausanias' s  remark  that  the  statuette  purported  to  be
that  of  Lysimache  (^iuvr\  Siolkovos  €lvai  Ava-ifidxrj/)  implies  that  he  is
giving  the  substance  of  the  inscription  on  the  pedestal  (see  note  on  ii.
2.  5).  The  inscription  was  probably  in  verse,  and  the  expression
'handmaid'  (SidKovos)  instead  of  the  ordinary  'priestess'  (upcta)  was
probably  borrowed  by  Pausanias  from  the  inscription.  The  somewhat
unusual  and  poetical  adjective  translated  *  well-wrought  *  (evrjpis)  may
perhaps  also  be  derived  from  the  same  source.  It  occurs  in  a  metrical
inscription  quoted  by  Pausanias  elsewhere  (iv.  12.  4,  cvi^/xa  r€t\rj).  Prof.
O.  Benndorf  has  conjectured  that  a  round  base  of  Pentelic  marble  which
now  stands  to  the  west  of  the  Parthenon  may  have  supported  Demetrius's
statue  of  Lysimache.  The  base  is  about  a  foot  high  and  2  feet  wide  ;
and  on  its  upper  surface  is  the  print  of  a  left  foot  20  centimetres  (7.87
inches)  long.  The  statue  appears  to  have  been  of  bronze.  On  the
base  is  a  mutilated  inscription,  the  purport  of  which  seems  to  be  that
the  statue  represented  a  woman  who  had  been  priestess  of  Athena  for
many  years.  See  C.  I.  A,  ii.  No.  1376  ;  Kaibel,  Epigrammata  Graeca,
No.  ^43  ;  Loewy,  Inschriften  griech,  Bildhauer^  No.  64  ;  O.  Benndorf,
in  Mitiheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  7  (1882),  p.  47.  On  the  statue  of
Lysimache,  cp.  also  Benndorf,  in  Mittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  i.
(1876),  pp.  48-50;  Schubart,  in  Fleckeiser^ s  Jahrbiicher^  26  (1880),  pp.
1 1 6- II 9.  See  Critical  Note  on  this  passage.  The  sculptor  Demetrius
seems  to  have  been  chiefly  remarkable  for  the  life-like  fidelity  of  his
portraits  ;  he  was  a  realist  who  cared  more  to  produce  a  good  likeness
than  a  beautiful  work  of  art  (Lucian,  Philofiseudes,  1 8-20 ;  Quintilian,
xii.  10.  9).  Two  fragmentary  pedestals  bearing  the  name  of  the
sculptor  Demetrius  have  been  found  on  the  Acropolis  ;  from  the  style  of
the  inscriptions  it  is  inferred  that  the  sculptor  flourished  in  the  first  half
of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  (Loewy,  Inschriften  griech.  Bildhauer^  Nos.


346  ARCHAIC  FEMALE  STATUES  bk.  i.  attica

62,  63).  This  tallies  with  a  conclusion  as  to  Demetrius's  date  arrived  at
from  other  data.  See  H.  Brunn,  Gesch,  d.  grieck,  Kunstier,  i.  p.  255
sqq.  ;  Overbeck,  Gesch.  <L  grieck,  Plastik^^  i.  p.  503  sq,  (who,  however,
dates  him  about  460-420  B.C.)

This  statue  of  Lysimache  was  no  doubt  only  one  of  a  series  of  statues
of  priestesses  of  Athena  which  stood  near  the  Erechtheum,  probably  in
the  Pandrosium.  Inscribed  bases  of  some  of  these  statues  have  been
found  {C.LA.  ii.  Nos.  1377,  1378,  1386,  1392  b,  p.  350).  Perhaps
the  long  series  of  archaic  female  statues  which  were  excavated  in
February  1886  between  the  Erechtheum  and  the  north  wall  of  the
Acropolis  are  statues  of  priestesses  of  Athena.  They  date  from  before
the  Persian  war,  were  doubtless  thrown  down  and  broken  by  the  Persian
invaders  in  480  B.C.,  and  carefully  buried  by  the  Athenians  afterwards.
They  now  form  one  of  the  most  interesting  features  of  the  Museum  on
the  Acropolis.  The  statues  are  life-size  and  wrought  of  Parian  and  other
island  marbles.  They  all  represent  women  standing  in  the  same  attitude,
and  draped  in  long  robes,  with  ringlets  falling  down  on  their  breasts  and
over  their  backs.  The  features  have  the  familiar  archaic  smile.  These
statues  can  hardly  represent  Athena,  since  they  have  none  of  her  attributes
(helmet,  shield,  spear,  aegis,  serpent,  owl).  Though  the  figures  are
somewhat  stiff  and  conventional  in  style,  the  details  are  finished  with
much  care  and  skill  and  exhibit  great  mastery  of  the  sculptor's  art.  The
bright  and  varied  colouring  of  the  statues  is  particularly  remarkable ;
the  colours  used  are  green,  red,  blue,  and  grey.  The  hem  of  the  robes
is  painted  in  stripes  and  a  maeander  pattern  of  red  and  green ;  the
surface  of  the  dress  is  adorned  with  palmette-  and  rosette-shaped  decora-
tions ;  the  hair  is  painted  reddish ;  and  the  eyes  were  coloured.  See
P.  Cawadias,  in 'E<^77/ji€/>is  ap\o.i.o\oyiKri^  1886,  p.  73  sqq.y  with  pi.  v. ;
Les  Musdes  ctAtktnes^  i'  livr.  (Athens,  1886),  pi.  ii.-viii. ;  H.  Lechat,
in  Bulletin  de  Corr,  HellMque^  14  (1890),  pp.  301-362,  552-586;  A.
S.  Murray,  Hist,  of  Greek  Scuipture^^  i.  p.  154  sqq, ;  Collignon,  Hist,
de  la  Sculpture  Grecque^  i.  pp.  340-357  ;  Overbeck,  Gesck,  d,  grieck,
PlcLStiky^  I.  p.  192  j^.;  P.  Gardner,  New  Ckafters  in  Greek  History^
pp.  247-251  ;  A.  Furtwangler,  Meisterwerke  d,  grieck,  Plastik^  p.
174.  It  seems  to  have  been  a  common  custom  to  set  up  statues  of
priestesses  in  front  of  the  temple  where  they  had  served.  See  ii.  17.  3
note;  ii.  35.  8;  vii.  25.  7.  However,  the  discovery  at  Delphi  of  a
female  torso  and  of  two  archaic  female  heads  wearing  the  polos  has
made  it  probable  that  the  similar  female  statues  found  on  the  Acropolis
were,  as  Mr.  A.  S.  Murray  had  independently  suggested.  Caryatids,
i.e,  that  they  served  as  architectural  supports  in  a  building.  See  Mr.
HomoUe's  report  in  Comptes  Rendus  de  PAccuUmie  des  Inscriptions  et
Belles  LettreSy  22  (1894),  pp.  206-208.  The  priestess  of  Athena  on
the  Acropolis  received  a  measure  of  barley,  a  measure  of  wheat,  and  an
obol  (a  penny  farthing)  for  every  death  and  every  birth  (Aristotle,  Oecon,
ii.  p.  1347  a,  14  sqq,)  She  was  forbidden  to  eat  fresh  cheese  unless
it  was  made  abroad  or  in  the  island  of  Salamis  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  394  sq,)

27.  4-  Inronze  fii^nres  of  men  confrontiiig  each  other  for  a  fight
Erechthens  and Eamolpns  etc.    Cp.  i.  5.  2 ;  i.  38.  3.


CH.  XXVII  ERECHTHEUS  AND  EUMOLPUS  347

According  to  Apollodorus  (iii.  15.  4)  it  was  Eumolpus,  not  his  son
Immaradus,  who  was  slain  by  Erechtheus.  A  scholiast  on  Euripides
(Phoenissae^  854)  agrees  with  Apollodorus  in  saying  that  Eumolpus  was
slain  by  Erechtheus,  but  adds  that  Immaradus,  a  son  of  Poseidon,  was  also
slain  by  Erechtheus  in  the  same  war.  According  to  Hyginus  {Fab.  46)
Eumolpus  was  slain  by  Erechtheus,  and  Erechtheus  was  himself  killed
by  Jupiter  with  a  thunderbolt.  Apollodorus  (/.^.)  calls  Eumolpus's  son
Ismarus  instead  of  Immaradus.  See  J.  TbpfTer,  AtHsche  Genealogie^
p.  40  sqq,  Mr.  TopfTer  holds  that  Pausanias  has  preserved  the  origin^
form  of  the  legend,  according  to  which  Ismarus  or  Immaradus  (the  two
names  being  equivalent),  not  Eumolpus,  was  the  adversary  of  Erechtheus.
Elsewhere  (ix.  30.  i)  Pausanias  mentions  a  statue  of  Erechtheus  by
Myron  at  Athens  as  the  most  remarkable  of  all  that  sculptor's  works.
Prof.  A.  Michaelis  has  conjectured  that  Pausanias  is  there  referring
to  the  present  group  of  Erechtheus  and  Eumolpus  on  the  Acropolis
{Mitiheilungen  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  2  (1877),  PP-  85-87).  There
was  also  a  statue  of  Erechtheus  in  the  market-place  (i.  5.  2).  Prof.
Furtwangler  conjectures  that  a  bearded  head  in  the  Museo  Chiaramonti
is  a  copy  of  Myron's  Erechtheus,  but  rather  of  the  statue  in  the  market-
place than  of  the  fighting  Erechtheus  on  the  Acropolis  {Meisierwerke  d,
griech.  Plastik^  p.  393  sq.)

27.  5.  Tolmides.  With  the  following  account  of  Tolmidescp.Thucy-
dides,  i.  108  and  113  ;  Diodorus,  xi.  84,  xii.  6;  Plutarch,  Pericles^  18.
The  battle  of  Coronea  in  which  Tolmides  fell  was  fought  in  447  B.C.
He  and  his  men  were  buried  in  the  outer  Ceramicus  (i.  29.  14).

27.  6.  Oycnns  fighting  with  Hercules.  Cp.  Hesiod,  Scutum
Herculis^  345  sqq, ;  Euripides,  Hercules  Furens^  389  sqq, ;  Apollodorus,
ii.  7.  7  ;  Diodorus,  iv.  37.  The  subject  was  represented  on  the  throne  of
Apollo  at  Amyclae  (iii.  18.  10),  and  is  depicted  on  many  existing  Greek
vases.  See  H.  Heydemann,  in  Annali  delP  InstitutOy  52  (1880),  pp.
78-100  ;  Baumeister's  Denkmdler^  p.  805  sq,

27.  8.  Aegens  deposited  boots  and  a  sword  under  a  rock  etc.
Cp.  ii.  32.  7  ;  Plutarch,  Theseus^  3  and  6 ;  Diodorus,  iv.  59  ;  Apollo-
dorus, iii.  16.  I  ;  Hyginus,  Fab,  37.  The  subject  of  Theseus  lifting
the  rock  and  finding  the  tokens  of  his  birth  under  it  is  represented  on
coins  of  Athens  and  some  other  ancient  monuments.  See  Baumeister's
Denkmdier,  p.  1786;  BeuM,  Monnaies  cPAthines^  p.  397  sq,\  Imhoof-
Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num,  Comm,  on  Pans,  p.  146,  with  pi.  DD  ii.  ;
Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  522.  A  story  very  like  that  of  the
birth  of  Theseus  was  told  about  the  birth  of  Basilus,  son  of  Lyrcus  and
Hemithea  (Parthenius,  Narr,  A  mat,  i).

27.  9.  a  representation  of  another  exploit  of  Thesens  etc.  On
Theseus's  capture  of  the  Marathonian  bull,  see  Plutarch,  Theseus^  1 4 ;
Diodorus,  iv.  59  ;  Hyginus,  Fab,  38.  The  subject  was  treated  of  in
detail  by  Callimachus  in  his  poem  Hecale^  of  which  some  fragments,
dealing  with  this  exploit  of  Theseus,  have  been  recently  discovered  and
published  in  the  Rainer  collection  of  Vienna  (see  the  text  of  the  frag-
ments in  The  Classical  Review^  7  (1893),  p.  429  sq,)  Pausanias
says  (§  10)  that  Theseus  sacrificed  the  bull  to  Athena;  Plutarch  and


348  GREAT  BRONZE  ATHENA  bk.  i.  attic  a

Diodorus  {ll.cc.)  say  that  he  sacrificed  it  to  Apollo.  The  capture  of
the  Marathonian  bull  by  Theseus  is  represented  on  one  of  the  metopes
of  the  so-called  *Theseum*  at  Athens  (Miiller-Wieseler,  Denkmdlcr^
I.  pi.  XX.  No.  107),  and  on  a  fine  red-figured  vase  in  the  British
Museum  (^Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  2  (1881),  p.  64,  with  pi.  x.)
On  some  coins  of  Athens  a  man  is  portrayed  driving  a  bull ;  this  may
be  Theseus  driving  the  Marathonian  bull  to  Athens  (Beul^,  Monnaies
iPAMruSj  p.  398  sq, ;  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num,  Comm,  an
Paus,  p.  146,  pi.  DD  vii.  viii.;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  A thensy  p.  522).

27.  10.  the  Labyrinth  at  OnostUL  Diodorus  (i.  61)  and  Pliny
{N.  H.  xxxvi.  90)  say  that  in  their  time  the  Labyrinth  was  no  longer  to
be  seen.  In  the  mountains  behind  Gortyna  there  is  a  Labyrinth,  con-
sisting of  many  chambers  hewn  in  the  rock  and  connected  with  each
other  by  tortuous  passages.  During  the  revolution  of  182 2- 1828  the
Christian  villagers  of  the  neighbourhood  lived  in  it  for  months.  Some
have  supposed  that  this  was  the  Labyrinth  in  which  the  Minotaur  was
fabled  to  have  dwelt.  It  appears  to  be  a  subterranean  quarry.  See
Toumefort,  Voyage du  Levant  (Amsterdam,  17 18),  i.  p.  26  sq, ;  T.  A.  B.
Spratt,  Travels  and  Researches  in  Crete  (London,  1865),  2.  pp.  43-
56 ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  von  Griechenland^  2.  p.  566 ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.

475-

28.  I.  a  bronze  statne  of  Oylon.  It  may  perhaps  have  been  set
up  as  an  expiatory  offering  for  the  massacre  of  Cylon's  accomplices,
which  had  been  perpetrated  in  defiance  of  promises  given  to  them  in
sanctuary  on  the  Acropolis.  See  Herodotus,  v.  71  ;  Thucydides,  i.
126;  Plutarch,  Solon^  12.  Similarly  the  Lacedaemonians  dedicated
two  bronze  statues  of  Pausanias  to  Athena  as  an  expiation  for  having
violated  her  sanctuary  by  dragging  Pausanias  from  it  (Thucydides,  L
134  ;  Paus.  iii.  17.  7).  Cp.  A.  Schafer,  in  Archdolog,  Zeitungy  24
(1866),  p.  183.  Cylon's  Olympic  victory  was  won  in  01.  35  (640  B.C.),
according  to  Eusebius  {Chronic,  vol.  i .  p.  1 98,  ed.  A.  Schone).

28.  2.  a  bronze  image  of  Athena  etc.  This  is  the  image  which
Demosthenes  calls  "  the  great  bronze  Athena  "  ;  he  says  it  was  set  up
as  a  trophy  of  Athenian  valour  in  the  Persian  war  out  of  money  con-
tributed by  the  rest  of  the  Greeks  (Demosthenes,  xix.  272,  p.  428).  In
later  times  the  image  was  known  as  Champion  {Proniachos)  Athena  to
distinguish  it  from  the  other  two  famous  images  of  Athena  on  the  Acro-
polis, the  image  of  Virgin  Athena  in  the  Parthenon  and  the  image  of
Athena  Polias  in  the  Erechtheum  (Schol.  on  Demosthenes,  xxii.  1 3,  p.
597  ;  CJ.A.  iii.  No.  638),  and  the  epithet  Champion  (JPromachos)  has
generally  been  given  to  it  by  modem  archaeologists.  Aristides  calls  it
sunply  "the  bronze  Athena"  {Or.  1.  vol.  2.  p.  556,  ed.  Dindorf).
Elsewhere  {Or,  xlvi.  vol.  2.  p.  288,  ed.  Dindorf)  he  refers  to  it  as
"  the  Maratlionian  image,"  implying  that  it  was  erected,  as  Pausanias
and  the  scholiast  on  Demosthenes  {Lc)  say,  out  of  the  spoils  of  the
battle  of  Marathon.  This  view  is  irreconcileable  with  the  state-
ment of  Demosthenes  cited  above.  Probably  the  image  was  set  up
after  the  close  of  the  Persian  war,  as  a  scholiast  on  Aristides  (vol.  3.  p.
320,   ed.  Dindorf)  says.     The  Athenians  seem  to  have  been  led  by


CH.  XXVIII  GREAT  BRONZE  ATHENA  349

patriotic  pride  to  refer  to  the  battle  of  Marathon  trophies  which  were  the
fruit  of  the  Persian  war  in  general  (see  Brunn,  Gesch,  d,  griech.  Kunsiler^
I.  p.  162  sqq,  ;  K.  O.  Miiller,  *I)c  Phidiae  vita  et  operibus,*  Kunst-
archdologische  Werke,  2.  p.  13  sqq,)

Pausanias's  statement  as  to  the  distance  at  which  the  point  of  the
spear  and  the  crest  of  the  helmet  were  visible  has  sometimes  been  inter-
preted to  mean  that  they  could  be  seen  from  Cape  Sunium.  But  this  is
impossible,  as  Mt.  Hymettus  (about  3000  feet  high)  lies  between  Cape
Sunium  and  Athens.  All  that  Pausanias  says  is  that  the  point  of  the
spear  and  the  crest  of  the  helmet  were  visible  at  sea  somewhere  between
Sunium  and  the  port  of  Athens.  To  a  vessel  coasting  along  from
Sunium  the  Acropolis  does  not  come  into  sight  till  after  Cape  Zoster  is
passed.  Pausanias's  statement  has  further  been  made  the  base  of  a
£Edse  calculation  of  the  height  of  the  statue.  It  was  supposed  that  the
tip  of  the  spear  and  the  crest  of  the  helmet  must  have  been  seen  from  the
sea  projecting  above  the  Parthenon,  and  consequently  that  the  statue
must  have  been  taller  than  the  Parthenon  or  about  70  feet  high.  But  it
has  been  pointed  out  that  the  statue,  standing  between  the  Erechtheum
and  the  Propylaea  (see  below),  would  have  been  seen  from  the  sea  to
the  left  of,  and  not  hidden  by,  the  Parthenon,  so  that  there  is  no  need
to  suppose  that  it  was  higher  than  the  Parthenon.  What  the  object  was
which  interposed  so  as  to  hide  the  lower  part  of  the  statue  from  a  spec-
tator out  at  sea,  we  do  not  know.  A  clue  to  the  real  size  of  the  statue
is  furnished  by  Pausanias's  statement  elsewhere  (ix.  4.  i)  that  the  image
of  Warlike  Athena  at  Plataea  was  not  much  smaller  than  the  bronze
Athena  on  the  Acropolis  at  Athens.  As  we  have  no  reason  to  suppose
that  the  temple  of  Warlike  Athena  at  Plataea  was  of  other  than  moder-
ate dimensions,  her  image  was  probably  not  more  than  20  feet  high.
We  may  suppose,  then,  that  the  bronze  Athena  on  the  Acropolis  was
about  2  5  feet  high  or,  with  the  pedestal,  about  30  feet.  The  calculation
is  that  of  Prof.  A.  Michaelis  {Mitiheil,  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  2  (1877),
p.  89  sq,)  It  has  been  strikingly  confirmed  by  a  discovery  recently
(1893)  made  by  Mr.  W.  Gurlitt,  who  has  shown  good  grounds  for
believing  that  the  statue  was  preserved  at  Constantinople  down  to  1205
A.D.,  and  that  it  is  described  in  detail  by  the  Byzantine  historian  Nicetas
Choniata.  His  argument  is  briefly  this.  The  rhetorician  Aristides  mentions
together  in  a  single  passage  (Or.  1.  vol.  2.  p.  556,  ed.  Dindorf),  **the
ivory  Athena  at  Athens,  the  bronze  Athena,  and  the  Lemnian  Athena  "
as  masterpieces  of  art.  He  obviously  refers  to  the  three  statues  of
Athena  by  Phidias  on  the  Acropolis,  namely  the  gold  and  ivory  statue
of  Virgin  Athena,  and  the  two  statues  mentioned  by  Pausanias  in  the
present  section.  Now  a  scholiast  on  this  passage  of  Aristides  (vol.  2.
p.  710,  ed.  Dindorf)  has  a  note  on  "  the  ivory  Athena  "  mentioned  by
Aristides.  It  consists  of  a  quotation  from  Arethas,  a  writer  of  the  ninth
and  tenth  centuries  A.D.,  and  runs  as  follows  : — "  It  seems  to  me  that
this  is  the  statue  standing  in  the  market-place  (forum)  of  Constantine
at  the  portal  of  the  Council -House  which  they  now  call  the  Senate.
Opposite  it  on  the  right  as  you  enter  the  portal  stands  an  image  of
Thetis,  her  head  crowned  with  crabs."     From  this  scholium  we  should


350  GREAT  BRONZE  ATHENA  bk.  i.  attica

infer  that  the  gold  and  ivory  statue  of  Virgin  Athena  stood  in  the
market-place  (forum)  of  Constantinople  as  late  as  the  time  of  Arethas.
But  it  seems  incredible  that  a  statue  made  of  such  precious  materials
should  have  been  left  standing  for  centuries  in  the  open  market-place
exposed  to  the  weather  and  thieves.  It  seems  more  probable  that  the
scholiast  on  Aristides  should  have  applied  to  the  gold  and  ivory  statue
of  Athena  a  remark  of  Arethas  which  really  referred  to  the  bronze
Athena  mentioned  by  Aristides  in  the  same  passage.  That  a  statue  or
statues  by  Phidias  stood  in  the  market-place  at  Constantinople  as  late  as
the  twelfth  centiuy  a.d.  is  stated  by  Tzetzes  {Chiliades^  viii.  339).  The
two  statues  described  by  Arethas  as  standing  in  the  market-place  at
Constantinople  are  also  described  by  the  Byzantine  historian  Cedrenus
as  follows  (vol.  I.  p.  565,  ed.  Bekker) :  "  In  the  street  of  the  market-
place there  stand  two  images ;  on  the  west  is  the  image  of  Lindian
Athena  with  a  helmet  and  the  Gorgon's  head  and  snakes  coiled  round
her  neck ;  on  the  east  is  Amphitrite  with  the  claws  of  a  crab  on  her
temples.  The  latter  image  was  also  brought  from  Rhodes."  It  is
clear  that  the  Amphitrite  of  Cedrenus  was  identical  with  the  Thetis  of
Arethas,  and  that  the  Lindian  Athena  of  Cedrenus  was  the  image  which
Arethas  believed  to  be  by  Phidias.  The  epithet  Lindian  which  Cedrenus
gives  to  the  Athena  seems  to  be  due  to  the  writer's  having  confused  the
statue  in  question  with  a  statue  of  Athena  from  Lindus  which  stood  at
the  entrance  to  a  different  Senate-house  in  Constantinople  (Zosimus,  v.
24).  Finally,  the  Byzantine  historian  Nicetas  Choniata  tells  how  a
superstitious  mob  in  1203  A.D.  destroyed  a  bronze  image  of  Athena
which  stood  in  the  market-place  of  Constantinople,  and  he  has  left  us
a  minute  description  of  the  statue  (pp.  738-740,  ed.  Bekker).  It  can
hardly  be  doubted  that  this  statue  is  the  one  mentioned  by  Arethas  and
Cedrenus  and  attributed  by  the  former  to  Phidias.  From  Nicetas's
description,  which  is  preserved  in  two  somewhat  different  forms  in  two
manuscripts,  we  learn  the  following  particulars  about  the  statue.  It
was  of  bronze,  30  feet  high.  The  goddess  was  portrayed  standing
upright,  clad  in  a  tunic  which  reached  to  her  feet  and  was  drawn  in  by
a  girdle  at  the  waist.  On  her  breast  was  a  tight-fitting  aegis  with  the
Gorgon's  head.  On  her  head  she  wore  a  helmet  with  a  nodding  plume
of  horse-hair.  Her  tresses  were  plaited  and  ^tened  at  the  back  of  her
head,  but  some  locks  strayed  over  her  brow  from  beneath  the  rim  of  the
helmet.  With  her  left  hand  she  lifted  the  folds  of  her  garment ;  her
right  hand  was  stretched  out  in  front  of  her,  and  her  face  was  turned  in
the  same  direction  as  if  she  were  beckoning  to  some  one.  There  was  a
sweet  look,  as  of  love  and  longing,  in  the  eyes ;  and  the  lips  seemed  as
if  about  to  part  in  honeyed  speech.  The  ignorant  and  superstitious  mob
smashed  the  statue  because,  after  the  first  siege  and  capture  of  Con-
stantinople by  the  Crusaders,  they  fancied  that  the  outstretched  hand
of  the  statue  had  summoned  the  host  of  the  invaders  from  out  of  the
West  (cp.  Gibbon,  Decline  and  Folly  ch.  Ix.)

We  know  from  Pausanias  that  the  bronze  Athena  of  Phidias  was
equipped  with  spear  and  shield.  If  the  statue  in  the  market-place  of
Constantinople  was  indeed  the  bronze  Athena  of  Phidias,  it  must  have


lUced  in  Phidias'a


CH.  xxviH  GREAT  BRONZE  ATHENA  351

lost  both  spear  and  shield  in  the  time  of  Nicetas,  for  he  mentions
neither  of  them.  The  spear  was  probably  held  in  the  extended  right
hand ;  the  shield  may  have  rested  on  the  ground  at  the  goddess's  left
side  and  may  have  been  lightly  supported  by  her  left  hand  which  held
the  folds  of  her  robe.  The  shield  was  similarly  placed  in  Phidias'a
statue  of  Virgin  Athena.  On  some  coins  of  Athens
a  figure  of  Athena  is  represented  which  K.  Lange
considered  to  be  a  copy  of  the  great  bronze  Athena
of  Phidias.  It  agrees  fairly  well  with  Nici
description  of  the  statue  at  Constantinople,  except  I
that  on  the  coins  the  goddess  carries  her  shield  o
left  ann.  Other  Athenian  coins  (Fig.  38)  give  a
of  the  Acropolis  with  the  colossal  statue  of  Athena
standing  between  the  Propylaea  and  the  Parthenon.  "O'  37-  —  cHAHfioH
However,  little  reliance  can  be  placed  on  these  latter  h^^co'n/""*^
coins  as  copies  of  the  bronie  Athena,  since  on
some  (rf'them  the  type  of  the  statue  is  clearly  that  of  the  Virgin  Athena
with  the  figure  of  Victory  resting  on  her  outstretched  right  hand.  On
others,  which  do  not  reproduce  the  type  of  the
Virgin  Athena,  the  goddess  is  portrayed  standing  at
rest  with  her  spear  held  upright  in  her  right  hand-
She  is  not  represented  in  the  act  of  charging.

From  these  coins  we  learn,  however,  what  we
I   should  have  inferred  from  the  order  of  Pausanias's
description,    that   the    great   bronze   Athena  stood
somewhere  between  the  Erechtheum  and  the  Pro-
pylaea.    A  quadrangular  platform  cut  in  the  rock
rnr.    JO.  —  .i»~     Mt    ijf  jjjg  Acropolis  about  30  yards  east  of  the  Propylaea
Mi«H  coik).  ^^^  been   conjecturally   identified  as  the  site  of  the

statue  ;  it  seems  to  have  been  prepared  for  the  recep-
tion of  a  pedestal  about  1 8  feet  in  diameter.  Prof.  A.  Kirchhoff  formerly
conjectured  that  a  fragmentary  inscription  in  elegiac  verse  (C.  1.  A.  i.  No,
333)  was  part  of  the  inscription  on  the  pedestal  of  the  colossal  bronze
Athena ;  but  he  has  since  withdrawn  his  conjecture  (C  /.  A.  iv.  p.  40).
According  to  the  scholiast  on  Aristides  (vol.  3.  p.  320,  ed.  Dindorf)
the  great  bronze  Athena  was  not  by  Phidias,  but  by  Praxiteles.  Pro£
Furtwangler  accepts  this  statement,  and  argues  that  the  Praxiteles  in
question  was  the  supposed  elder  sculptor  of  that  name  (see  note  on
i.  2.  4).  Prof.  Furtwangler  conjectures  that  the  statue  was  made  in
445-440  B.C.  as  a  memorial  of  the  peace  with  Persia,  which  was  con-
cluded in  445  B.C.  He  argues  that  a  headless  statue  of  Athena,  known
as  the  <  Torso  Medici,'  in  the  £cole  des  Beaux  Arts  at  Paris,  is  a  copy
of  the  statue  in  question,  and  that  a  colossal  head  in  the  Jacobseo
collection  at  Copenhagen  is  a  copy  of  the  head  of  the  statue.

See  Leake,  Athens,  1.  pp.  349  jj^.,  631  sq. ;  K.  O.  Mtlller,  'De  Phidiac  vita
el  operibus,'  Kunslarthaohgischt  Werke,  1.  p.  13  sqq.  %  0.  Jahn,  Di aniiquissimis
Mimrvat  iimulacris  Atlids,  p.  16  iq.  ;  Dyer,  Atuiait  Alhtns,  p.  437  sqq.  ;  C.
Wachiimulh,  Die  Sladt  Athtn,  I.  p.  541  sq.  ;  F.  Adler,  '  Athena  Promachos  aus
h^en,'  Arehdahg.  Zalung,  31  (1874},  pp.  96-99;  A.  Micbaelis,  'Die  Promachas,'


352  BRONZE  CHARIOT  bk.  i.  attica

MittheiL  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  A  then,  2  (1877),  pp.  87-95 ;  K-  Lange,  *Die  Athena
Promachos  des  Phidias/  Archdolog,  Zeitung,  39  (1881,  pub.  1882),  pp.  197-206;
A.  Milchhofer,  '  Athen/  p.  208 ;  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num,  Comm,  on
Pcuis,  p.  128  sq.  with  pi.  Z  i.-vii.  ;  A.  S.  Murray,  History  of  Greek  Sculpture^  2.
p.  Ill  sqq, ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  p.  522  sq. ;  E.  Curtius,  Stadtge-
schichte,  p.  133  sq.  ;  M.  Collignon,  Histoire  de  la  Sculpture  Grecque,  i.  p.  523
sqq.  ;  Overbeck,  Gesch.  d.  griech,  PlcLstik,*  I.  p.  347  sq.  ;  W.  Gurlitt,  *Diegrosse
eheme  Athena  des  Pheidias, '  Analecta  Graeciensia  (Graz,  1893),  pp.  101-121 ;
A.  Furtwangler,  Meisterwerke  d.  griech,  Plastik,  pp.  45  sqq.,  133  sqq.

28.  2.   wrought  by  Mys,  but  designed  by  ParrhaaiiiB.

Athenaeus  mentions  Mys  among  the  artists  who  were  famous  for
chasing  or  working  in  relief  on  metal,  and  says  that  he  had  seen  a  cup
adorned  with  a  representation  of  the  sack  of  Troy  wrought  in  relief,
with  an  inscription  stating  that  the  design  was  by  Parrhasius  and
the  workmanship  by  Mys  (Athenaeus,  xi.  p.  782  b).  This  confirms
Pausanias's  statement  that  Parrhasius  supplied  Mys  with  designs  for
all  his  work.  Pliny  also  includes  Mys  among  the  artists  renowned  for
working  in  relief  on  metal,  and  tells  us  that  in  the  temple  of  Bacchus
in  the  city  of  Rhodes  there  were  cups  adorned  with  Silenuses  and
Cupids  by  the  hand  of  Mys  (Pliny,  N.  H.  xxxiii.  155).  Mys  is  men-
tioned by  Propertius  (iv.  9.  14,  ed.  Paley)  and  repeatedly  by  Martial
(viii.  34  and  51  ;  xiv.  95).  As  a  contemporary  of  Parrhasius  he  must
have  flourished  in  the  latter  part  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  The  adorn-
ment of  the  shield  of  the  colossal  bronze  Athena  may  have  been  carried
out  after  Phidias's  death ;  but  it  is  not  impossible  that  Phidias,  too
busy  to  do  it  himself,  may  have  entrusted  the  work  to  Parrhasius  and
Mys,  then  probably  very  young  men.  Cp.  H.  Brunn,  Gesch,  d.  griech.
KUnstler,  2.  pp.  97,  409  sq.

28.  2.  a  bronze  chariot  etc.  About  507  b.c.  the  Athenians  de-
feated the  Boeotians  near  the  Euripus  and  took  700  of  them  prisoners.
On  the  same  day,  after  their  victory,  the  Athenians  crossed  into  Euboea,
defeated  the  Chalcidians  in  battle  and  captured  some  of  them.  All  the
prisoners,  Boeotian  and  Chalcidian,  were  kept  in  chains  till  they  were
ransomed,  when  the  fetters  were  hung  up  on  the  Acropolis.  These
fetters  were  still  to  be  seen  there  in  Herodotus's  time  hanging  on  a
smoke-blackened  wall.  Out  of  the  tithe  of  the  ransom  the  Athenians
made  a  four-horse  chariot  of  bronze,  which  in  the  time  of  Herodotus
stood  on  the  left  as  you  entered  the  Propylaea  with  an  inscription  in
two  elegiac  couplets,  setting  forth  the  occasion  of  erecting  the  trophy
and  alluding  to  the  iron  chains  with  which  the  prisoners  had  been
bound.  See  Herodotus,  v.  tt  \  Diodorus,  x.  24  ;  Aniholog.  Palat.  vi.
343.  A  fragment  of  the  original  inscription  (C.  I.  A.  iv.  334  a,  p.  78)
was  found  in  1886  or  1887  a  few  steps  to  the  north-east  of  the
Propylaea.  It  is  engraved  on  a  block  of  Eleusinian  marble  in  letters
which  belong  to  the  last  part  of  the  sixth  sixtury  B.a  Another  fragment
of  the  inscription  (C  /.  A.  i.  No.  334  ;  Hicks,  Greek  Historical  Inscrip-
tions, No.  27)  has  been  found  on  the  Acropolis  engraved  on  a  block
of  Pentelic  marble  in  letters  which  apparently  belong  to  the  time  soon
after  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  From  this  we  infer  that  the
original  chariot,  set  up  about  507  B.C.,  was  destroyed  or  carried  off  by


CH.  XXVIII  LEMNIAN  ATHENA  353

the  Persians  in  480  B.C.,  and  that  soon  after  450  B.C.,  perhaps  im-
mediately after  the  conquest  of  Euboea  in  446  ac,  the  Athenians
restored  the  trophy,  setting  up  a  new  chariot  on  a  new  pedestal.  It
was  this  new  chariot  which  Herodotus  (as  well  as  Pausanias)  saw  and
described.  That  Herodotus  had  before  him  the  new  pedestal  is  proved
by  the  feet  that  in  the  new  inscription,  as  we  learn  from  the  surviving
fragment  of  it,  the  two  hexameter  lines  were  transposed,  and  Herodotus
(as  well  as  Diodorus  and  the  Anthology)  quotes  the  inscription  with  the
lines  in  the  new  order.  See  A.  KirchhofT,  in  Siizungsberichte  of  the
Prussian  Academy  (Berlin)  for  1887,  pp.  111-114.

In  Herodotus's  time  it  would  seem  that  the  chariot  stood  immedi-
ately in  front  of  the  Propylaea  on  the  left  of  the  spectator  as  he  ascended
the  slope  ;  at  least  this  is  the  most  natural  interpretation  of  Herodotus's
words.  On  the  other  hand,  we  gather  from  the  order  of  Pausanias's
description  that  in  his  time  the  chariot  stood  inside  of  the  Propylaea,
at  some  point  between  it  and  the  Erechtheum,  but  nearer  to  the
Propylaea.  If  this  is  so,  the  position  of  the  chariot  must  have  been
changed  between  the  time  of  Herodotus  and  that  of  Pausanias.  It  has
been  suggested  that  in  Herodotus's  time  the  chariot  stood  in  the  position
afterwards  occupied  by  the  monument  of  Agrippa  (see  above,  p.  254  5q,\
in  which  case  it  may  have  been  moved  inside  the  Propylaea  when  the
monument  of  Agrippa  was  built.  Or  Herodotus  may  mean  that  the
chariot  was  actually  in  the  Propylaea,  where  it  is  possible  that  Pausanias
found  it.  In  this  case  it  probably  stood  in  the  northern  half  of  the
inner  or  eastern  portico  of  the  Propylaea.  The  objection  to  this
view,  that  there  was  no  room  here  for  a  chariot,  is  not  fatal ;  for  the
chariot  need  not  have  been  of  full  size,  it  may  have  been  a  comparatively
small  model.  The  question  of  the  exact  position  of  the  chariot  seems,
as  our  knowledge  stands  at  present,  incapable  of  a  definitive  solution.
It  has  greatly  exercised  archaeologists.


See  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen^  i.  pp.  150,  547  ;  «/.,  in  Fleckeisen*s
JakrbUcher^  25  (1879),  pp.  18-24  >  P«  Weizsacker,  in  Arckdologische  Zeitung,  33
(1876),  p|.  46  sq.  \  id,,  in  Fleckeisen^s  Jahrbiicher,  32  (1886),  pp.  12,  27;  E.
Curtius,  in  Archaologiscke  Zeitung,  33  (1876),  p.  53  sq.\  A.  Nfichaelis,  *Der
Standort  des  ehernen  Viergespannes,'  Miitheil,  a.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  2  (1877),
pp.  95-106;  A  Milchhofer,  'Athen,*  p.  208;  H.  G.  Lolling,  *Athen,'p.  343;
«/.,  in  AeXr/ov  d/>xcuoXo7ticdy,  1 889,  p.  1 93  sq. ;  A.  Furtwangler,  Meisterwerke  d,
griech,  Plastik,  p.  14  ^q, ;  W.  Miller,  in  American  Journal  of  Archaeology,  8  (1893),
pp.  503-509.


28.  2.  a  statue  of  Pericles.     See  note  on  i.  25.  i.

28.  2.  an  image  of  Athena,  snmamed  Lemnian.  Lucian  agreed
with  Pausanias  in  regarding  this  as  the  most  beautiful  of  all  the  works
of  Phidias.  In  his  dialogue  Imagines  (§  4)  one  of  the  characters  asks,
"  Which  of  the  works  of  Phidias  did  you  praise  most  ?  "  and  the  other
answers,  "  What  but  the  Lemnian  (Athena),  on  which  Phidias  designed
to  carve  his  name  ? "  In  the  same  dialogue  (§  6)  it  is  proposed  to
fashion  a  perfect  image  of  feminine  beauty  by  selecting  the  most  perfect
features  from  all  the  most  famous  statues  ;  and  the  Lemnian  Athena  is
to  furnish  "  the  outline  of  the  whole  face,  and  the  tenderness  of  the

VOL.  II  2  A


354  LEMNIAN  ATHENA  bk.  i.  attica

cheeks,  and  the  shapely  nose."  Aristides  classes  the  Lemnian  Athena
along  with  the  statue  of  Zeus  at  Olympia,  the  statue  of  the  Virgin
Athena,  and  the  great  bronze  Athena,  as  masterpieces  of  art  which
delighted  the  beholder  (Aristides,  Or,  L  vol.  2.  p.  554,  ed.  Dindorf).
Pliny  probably  refers  to  the  Lemnian  Athena  when  he  says  {N,  H,
xxxiv.  54)  that  Phidias  made  a  bronze  Athena  of  such  surpassing  beauty
that  the  statue  took  its  surname  from  its  beauty  (what  the  surname  was
he  does  not  say).  Himerius  says  {Or,  xxi.  5)  that  Phidias  did  not
always  portray  Athena  as  armed,  "but  he  adorned  the  maiden  by
shedding  on  her  cheek  a  rosy  tinge  by  which,  instead  of  a  helmet,  he
meant  to  veil  the  beauty  of  the  goddess."  If  Himerius  here  refers  to
the  Lemnian  Athena,  that  statue  would  seem  to  have  represented  the
goddess  as  unarmed  and  without  a  helmet.  The  statue  is  perhaps
referred  to  in  two  epigrams  in  the  Anthology  (Appendix  Planudea,  169
and  170).

Prof.  Furtwangler  has  argued  that  we  possess  copies  of  the
Lemnian  Athena  in  two  marble  statues  of  Athena  at  Dresden,  another
at  Cassel,  and  a  head  of  the  goddess  at  Bologna.  The  Dresden
statues  and  the  Bologna  head  are  certainly  dose  copies  of  a  conmion
original :  the  Cassel  statue  is  a  much  freer  reproduction  of  it  The
goddess  is  represented  standing  in  a  peaceful  attitude,  her  weight  resting
on  her  right  foot.  On  her  breast  is  the  aegis,  fastened  on  the  right
shoulder  and  drawn  somewhat  to  the  left  side.  Her  head  is  turned  to
the  right  and  is  bare,  except  for  a  fillet  round  her  hair,  which  is  short
and  tied  in  a  knot  at  the  back.  In  both  the  Dresden  statues  the  arms
are  broken  off  short,  but  enough  remains  of  the  left  arm  to  show  that
it  was  stretched  out  straight  from  the  shoulder;  probably  in  her  left
hand  Athena  grasped  the  spear.  The  upper  part  of  the  same  statue
appears  to  be  copied  on  a  gem,  from  which  it  would  seem  that  in  her
right  hand  the  goddess  carried  her  helmet.  The  Dresden  statues  and
the  Bologna  head,  according  to  Prof.  Furtwangler,  are  in  the  style  of
Phidias  and  are  copies  of  a  bronze  original.  Hence  he  infers  that  they
are  copies  of  the  Lemnian  Athena,  since  that  statue  appears  to  have
been  in  bronze  and  to  have  represented  Athena  in  a  peaceful  attitude
without  her  helmet  on  her  head.  He  agrees  with  Prof.  Loschcke  that
the  statue  was  probably  dedicated  by  the  Athenian  colonists  in  Lemnos
before  they  set  out  from  Athens  ;  and  as  the  Athenian  colony  in  Lemnos
seems  to  have  been  planted  between  451  B.C.  and  447  B.C.,  he  infers
that  the  Lemnian  Athena  was  made  by  Phidias  in  one  of  these  years,
just  before  he  set  about  making  the  statue  of  Virgin  Athena  for  the
Parthenon.  See  A.  Furtwangler,  Meisierwerke  d,  griech,  Plastik^  p.  3
sqq,^  with  plates  L  il  iii.  xxxii.  2.  Prof.  Furtwangler's  identification  has
been  accepted  by  Prof.  Overbeck  {Gesch,  d.  griech,  Plasiik^^  i.  p.  349
sq,)  The  Bologna  head  is  reproduced  by  Prof.  Conze,  Bdtrdge  zur
Geschtchte  d.  griech,  Plastik,  pi.  i.  p.  i  sq,^  who  strangely  mistook  the
head  for  that  of  a  young  man.  As  to  the  Cassel  statue  see  Friederichs-
Wolters,  Gipsabgussey  No.  447.  Prof.  3tudniczka  had  formerly  con-
jectured that  two  Athenian  reliefs,  which  represent  Athena  without  a
helmet,  leaning  in  an  easy  attitude  on  her  shield,  were  copies  of  the


CH.  XXVIII  PELASGIC  WALL  355

Lemnian  Athena  (Fr.  Studniczka,    Vemtuiungen  zur  griech,  Kunstge-
schichtey  pp.  5-17).

28.  3.  The  whole  of  the  wall  which  runs  ronnd  the  Acropolis
etc  The  southern  wall  of  the  Acropolis  was  built  out  of  the  produce
of  the  spoils  which  the  Athenians  under  Cimon  won  in  battle  from  the
Persians,  especially  at  the  great  victory  of  the  Eurymedon  (Plutarch,
CimoHy  1 3 ;  /V/.,  Comp,  Cim,  et  Luc,  i  ;  Cornelius  Nepos,  Cimon^  2  ;
cp.  Plutarch,  De  gloria  Aihenienstum,  7).  The  circuit- wall  of  the
Acropolis  is  still  standing,  though  in  some  parts  the  ancient  masonry  is
hidden  by  a  mediaeval  or  modem  casing.  At  the  south-east  comer  a
piece  of  Cimon's  wall  may  be  seen  standing  to  a  height  of  29  courses
or  45  feet  It  is  not  quite  perpendicular,  but  batters,  that  is,  slopes
back,  about  2  feet  in  the  whole  height.  Westward  of  this  point  Cimon's
wall  has  been  almost  entirely  cased  in  mediaeval  and  recent  times,  and
it  is  further  supported  by  nine  buttresses,  which  seem  to  be  mediaeval.
However,  Cimon's  wall  can  be  traced  under  the  casing  all  along  to  the
Propylaea,  wherever  the  casing  is  broken.  The  north  wall  of  the
Acropolis  is  ancient  Greek  work,  and  probably  dates  from  Cimon's
time  ;  since  pieces  of  the  colonnade  of  the  old  temple  which  the  Persians
burnt  in  480  B.C  are  built  into  it  The  eastem  wall  of  the  Acropolis
appears  to  have  been  entirely  rebuilt  on  the  old  foundations  in  the
middle  ages.  The  existing  buttresses  on  the  north  and  east  walls  of
the  Acropolis  seem,  like  those  on  the  southern  wall,  to  be  mediaeval.
See  Penrose,  Principles  of  Athenian  Architecture  (ed.  1888),  p.  2.

Besides  these  extensive  remains  of  Cimon's  wall,  there  exist  at
various  points  of  the  circuit  of  the  Acropolis  pieces  of  a  much  older
fortification-wall.  A  well-preserved  piece  of  this  ancient  wall,  20  feet
thick,  has  long  been  visible  at  the  south- westem  comer  of  the  Acropolis  ;
it  extends  firom  the  Propylaea  to  the  southem  circuit  wall.  Other  pieces
of  this  ancient  wall  were  discovered  in  the  course  of  the  excavations
conducted  within  recent  years ;  they  exist  especially  at  the  south-east
comer  of  the  Acropolis  and  to  the  south-west  of  the  Parthenon.  This
ancient  wall  is  built  of  polygonal  and  almost  unhewn  blocks  of  the
bluish-grey  limestone  of  the  Acropolis ;  the  blocks  measure  from  3  to
4^  feet  in  length.  Though  isolated  fragments  of  this  ancient  wall  alone
remain,  it  is  probable  that  originally  it  ran  all  round  the  edge  of  the
Acropolis ;  since  there  is  hardly  any  part  of  the  natural  rock  which
might  not  be  climbed  or  escaladed  by  active  and  resolute  men.  This
ancient  and  indeed  prehistoric  wall  is  doubtless  the  Pelasgic  wall
to  which  Pausanias  refers  in  the  present  passage.  Other  writers  of
antiquity  speak  of  this  Pelasgic  or  Pelargic  wall  which  the  Pelasgians,  or
Pelargians,  were  said  to  have  built  round  the  Acropolis  (Herodotus,  vi.
137 ;  Myrsilus,  cited  by  Dionysius  Halicamassensis,  Antiguit,  Rom.  i.  28;
Photius,  Lexicon^  s.v.  H^XapyiKov ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Birds^  832
and  1 1 39;  EtymoL  Magnum^  p.  659,  s.v,  IIcXa/ryiKov ;  Bekker's
Anecdota  Graecoy  p.  299,  line  16  sgq.)  Contemporary  with  this  Pelasgic
fortification  -  wall  were  probably  the  ancient  houses,  of  which  some
roughly  built  foundations  were  discovered  a  few  years  ago  near  the
Erechtheum  resting  on  the  rock  at  a  depth  of  45  feet  below  the  surface.


356  THE  PELARGICUM  BK.  L  attica

Two  groups  of  these  foundations  are  distinguished.  Those  to  the  east
of  the  Erechtheum  are  built  of  larger  blocks  and  in  a  more  careful
style.  They  are  conjeaured  to  be  the  remains  of  a  ro>'al  palace  similar
to,  and  contemporary  with,  the  prehistoric  palaces  at  Tir>*ns,  Mycenae,
and  Troy.  This  conjecture  is  confirmed  by  the  discovery-  of  potsherds
of  '  Mycenaean '  st)ie  among  the  foundations  and  in  graves  to  the  south
of  the  Parthenon.  See  £.  Curtius,  StadtgeschickU^  P-  45  ^99- ;  H.  G.
Lolling,  '  Athen,'  p.  337  ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  P-  53^  sq, ;
C.  Wachsmuth,  '  Der  Konigspalast  auf  der  Bui^  nnd  die  pelasgische
Mauer,'  Berichte  uder  die  Verkandl.  d.  k.  sacks.  Ges.  d.  ll'iss.  su  Leipzig^
Philolog.  hist.  CL,  39  (1887),  pp.  399-405  ;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire
de  PAri  dans  VAntiquitiy  6.  p.  419  sqq.

The  Pelasgic  fortress  appears  to  have  had  nine  gates  (Suidas,  s.v.
as-c&i ;  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeccu,  p.  419,  line  27  sqq.  ;  Polemo,  cited
by  SchoL  on  Sophocles,  Oed.  Col.  489).  As  these  nine  gates  could
hardly  be  distributed  round  the  circuit-wall  of  the  Acropolis,  it  has  been
supposed  that  they  were  arranged  ift-ithin  each  other  at  the  entrance  to
the  Acropolis  on  the  western  slope  of  the  hill,  so  as  to  form  a  strong
defence  at  this,  the  weakest  point  of  the  Acropolis.  We  can  scarcely
suppose  that  there  were  here  nine  fortification -walls,  one  i^ithin  the
other,  each  with  its  gate ;  but  the  road  up  to  the  Acropolis  may  have
run  between  two  if^-aUs  and  been  barred  at  difierent  points  of  the  ascent
by  nine  separate  gates.

However  this  may  have  been,  it  appears  that  the  Pelasgic  fortress
subsisted  at  least  till  5 1  o  B.C  ;  for  we  read  that  in  that  year  the  tyrant
Hippias  was  besieged  "  in  the  Pelasgic  fortress  ^  by  the  Athenians  and
Spartans  conjointly  (Herodotus,  v.  64  ;  Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Atkens^
19 ;  Parian  Marble^  45).  It  was  doubtless  dismantled,  along  if^ith  the
other  fortifications  of  Athens,  by  the  Persians  in  480  B.C  (Herodotus,
viii.  53,  ix.  1 3),  if  indeed  the  Athenians  themselves  had  not  already  pulled
doiAH  the  gloomy  old  fortress  which  had  been  the  t>Tant's  castle.  But
though  its  massive  battlements  no  longer  fro^^ned  on  the  lower  city  from
the  slope  and  summit  of  the  hill,  a  space  at  the  north-western  foot  of
the  Acropolis,  which  had  probably  been  enclosed  by  the  elaborate  and
extensive  out- works  of  the  ancient  fortress,  continued  do\»-n  into  late
Roman  times  to  bear  the  name  of  the  Pelasgicum  or,  more  correctly,
Pelargicum,  a  memorial  of  the  earliest  da>'S  of  Athenian  history-.  Thucy-
dides  tells  us  (ii.  17)  that  the  Pelargicum  was  at  the  foot  of  the
Acropolis.  Its  situation  at  the  north-western  foot  of  the  hill  is  made
certain  by  a  statement  of  Lucian  that  the  ca\'e  of  Pan  (see  note  on  §  4
of  this  chapter)  was  a  little  above  the  Pelargiami.  It  must  hav-e  been
close  under  the  ift-all  of  the  Acropolis,  since  Lucian  represents  Philosophy
sitting  on  the  top  of  the  wall  and  letting  a  fishing-line  doift-n  into  the
city  to  catch  hungr>'  philosophers,  while  Parrhesiades  asks  her  if  she
intends  to  fish  up  the  stones  firom  the  Pelargicum  (Lucian,  Piscator^  47).
That  the  Pelargicum  did  not  extend  very  far  in  either  direction  appears
to  follow  from  another  passage  in  the  same  dialogue  of  Lucian  (c.  42)
in  which  Parrhesiades,  looking  doiA*n  from  the  Acropolis,  sees  the  needy
philosophers  swarming  up  on  all  sides  from  the  lower  city  to  receive  a


CH.  XXVIII  THE  PELARGICUM  357

promised  dole.  He  exclaims,  **  Bless  me !  the  ascent  is  full  of  them
jostling  each  other.  Others  have  planted  ladders  and  are  swarming  up,
some  at  the  Pelasgicum,  others  at  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius,  still
more  at  Talus's  grave,  and  some  at  the  Anaceum  (the  sanctuary  of  the
Dioscuri)."  This  passage  proves  that  the  Pelargicum  was  one  of  many
points  lying  at  the  foot  of  the  Acropolis  and  not  (as  Prof.  E.  Curtius
supposes)  a  narrow  belt  stretching  all  round  it.  And  taken  in  conjunction
with  the  preceding  passage  of  Lucian  which  proves  that  the  Pelargicum
was  at  the  north-western  foot  of  the  hill,  immediately  under  the  cave  of
Pan,  the  present  passage  of  the  same  writer  shows  that  the  Pelargicum  did
not  extend  so  far  east  as  the  sanctuary  of  the  Dioscuri  about  the  middle
of  the  north  side  of  the  Acropolis  (see  note  on  i.  18.  i )  nor  further  west
than  the  saddle  which  divides  the  Areopagus  from  the  Acropolis,  since
the  philosophers  who  clambered  up  from  the  Pelargicum  are  distinguished
on  the  one  hand  from  those  who  came  up  from  the  sanctuary  of  the
Dioscuri,  and  on  the  other  hand  from  those  who  came  up  from  the
Areopagus.  Hence  we  conclude  that  the  Pelargicum  occupied  the
space  at  the  north-western  foot  of  the  Acropolis,  between  the  sanctuary
of  the  Dioscuri  on  the  east  and  the  saddle  of  the  Areopagus  on  the  west
It  cannot,  as  Dr.  Dorpfeld  supposes,  have  extended  all  along  the  western
front  of  the  Acropolis,  since  in  that  case  the  philosophers  coming  up  by
the  regular  entrance  on  the  western  side  and  those  coming  up  from  the
Areopagus  would  not  have  been  distinguished  from  those  who  were
coming  up  from  the  Pelargicum ;  they  would  all  have  been  coming  up
from  the  Pelargicum.  Still  less  can  it  have  extended,  as  Dr.  Ddrpfeld
believes,  not  only  along  the  western  front  of  the  Acropolis,  but  along  its
southern  side  as  far  as  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius ;  for  in  that  case
the  philosophers  coming  from  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  would  not
have  been  distinguished  from  those  coming  from  the  Pelargicum.  In  fact,
on  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  theory  that  the  Pelargicum  extended  from  Pan*s  cave
all  the  way  round  to  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius,  all  the  philosophers
mentioned  by  Lucian,  with  the  exception  of  those  ascending  from  the
grave  of  Talus  (see  i.  21.  4)  and  the  sanctuary  of  the  Dioscuri,  must
have  been  coming  from  the  Pelargicum.  This  passage  of  Lucian,
therefore,  disposes  of  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  theory.

Another  theory  of  Dr.  Dorpfeld*s  about  the  Pelargicum,  namely  that
it  continued  to  subsist  as  a  fortress  down  to  the  days  of  Herodes  Atticus
in  the  second  century  a.d.  {Mittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  A  then,  14  (1889),
p.  65  sq,\  has  been  refuted  by  Prof  J.  Williams  White  (^E^ficpU
dp\aLo\oyLKTJ,  1894,  p.  25  sqg.),  who  proves  conclusively  that  it  no
longer  existed  as  a  fortress  in  the  second  half  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.
The  fortress  had  been  entirely  dismantled  by  the  Persians  (Herodotus,
ix.  13),  and  no  mention  of  its  restoration  occurs  in  any  classical  writer
or  inscription.  On  the  contrary,  the  evidence  of  Thucydides  (ii.  17),
who  expressly  distinguishes  it  from  the  enclosed  places  of  the  city,  and
of  an  inscription  (C.  /.  A.  iv.  No.  27  b,  p.  59,  see  below)  which  affixes
a  penalty  for  the  offence  of  taking  stones  or  earth  from  the  Pelargicum,
proves  that  in  the  second  half  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  the  Pelargicum
was  an  open  space,  not  a  fortified  enclosure.


3S8  THE  PELARGJCUM  bk.  i.  attica

It  was  forbidden,  under  penalty  of  a  curse,  to  inhabit  the  Pelargicum,
the  prohibition  being  enforced  by  a  Delphic  oracle  which  declared  that
the  Pelargicum  was  better  unused ;  but  in  the  Peloponnesian  war,  when
the  city  was  crowded  with  fugitives  from  the  country,  the  prohibition
was  disregarded  (Thucydides,  ii.  17).  The  prohibition  perhaps  originated
in  the  hatred  with  which  the  spot  was  regarded  as  a  memorial  of  the
tyrants.  There  were  sanctuaries  and  altars  in  the  Pelargicum ;  for  a
law,  dating  apparently  from  early  in  the  second  half  of  the  fifth  century
B.C.,  ordained  that  "  the  king  (/>.  the  magistrate  who  bore  the  royal
title)  shall  fix  the  boundaries  of  the  sanctuaries  in  the  Pelargicum ;  and
for  the  future  altars  shall  not  be  built  in  the  Pelargicum  without  the
consent  of  the  Council  and  the  people  ;  nor  shall  stones  be  cut  in  it,  nor
earth  or  stones  exported  from  it ;  but  if  any  one  break  any  of  these  rules
he  shall  pay  500  drachms,  and  the  king  shall  report  him  to  the  Council  "
(C.  /.  A,  iv.  No.  27  b,  p.  59  sqq, ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec.
No.  13).  Officers  called  paredroi  were  charged  with  the  duty  of  watch-
ing that  no  man  cut  grass  or  dug  within  the  limits  of  the  Pelargicvun  ;
the  penalty  for  such  an  offence  was  three  drachms  (Pollux,  viii.  loi).
That  as  late  as  the  second  century  of  our  era  the  Pelargicum  was  littered
with  blocks  of  stone,  the  ruins  perhaps  of  the  ancient  fortress,  appears
from  the  passage  of  Lucian  (Piscator^  47)  cited  above.  At  the  Panathenaic
festival  the  ship  with  the  new  robe  of  Athena  fluttering  at  its  mast  was
wheeled  past  the  Pelargicum  on  its  way  from  the  Eleusinium  (see  i.  14.
I  note)  to  the  Pythium  (Philostratus,  Vit,  Soph,  ii.  i.  7  ;  as  to  the
Pythium  see  i.  19.  i  note).  It  is  needless  to  do  more  than  mention
the  theory  of  Welcker  and  Gottling  that  the  Pnyx  (see  below,  p.  375
sqq,)  was  the  Pelargicum.

See  Leake,  Athens,  i.  pp.  309-315;  Gottling,  *Das  Pelasgikon  in  Athen,'
Rheinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  4  (1846),  pp.  321-345  ;  F.  G.  Welcker,  *Der  Felsalter
des  Hochsten  Zeus  oder  das  Pelasgikon  in  Athen,  bisher  genannt  die  Pnyx,*
Abhandlungen  of  the  Berlin  Academy  for  1852,  pp.  266-339;  id,,  *Pynx  oder
Pelasgikon?'  Rheinisches  Museum,^,  ¥,  10(1856),  pp.  31-76;  id,,  *  Ueber  C.
Bursian's  "Athenische  Pnyx,"'  ib.  pp.  591-610;  L.  Ross,  Die  Pnyx  und  das
Pelasgikon  in  Athen  (Brunswick,  1853);  id,,  in  Fleckeisen^ s  Jahrbiicher,  I  (1855),
pp.  181 -185;  C.  Bursian,  *Die  athenische  Pnyx,'  Philologus,  9  (1854),  pp.  631-
645  ;  E.  Beul^,  VAcropole  d'Athhte,  I.  p.  80  sqq, ;  W.  Vischer,  Erinnerungen
und  Eindriicke  aus  Griechenland,  pp.  1 11- 114;  C.  Botticher,  Bericht  iiber  die
Untersuchungen  auf  der  Akropolis  von  Athen,  pp.  217-220;  id,,  in  Philologus,
Suppl.  3  (1867),  pp.  337-339;  C.  Wachsmuth,  in  Rheinisches  Museum,  N.  F.  23
(1868),  pp.  60-62;  id,  Rhein.  Mus.  N.  F.  24  (1869),  pp.  46-51  ;  id,.  Die  Stadt
Athen  im  Alterthum,  1.  pp.  289-295  ;  Dyer,  Ancient  Athens,  pp.  447-450;  G.  F.
Unger,  *  Pelasgikon,*  Sitzungsberichte  d.  philos,  philolog,  u.  hist,  CI,  d.  k,  b,  Akad,
d.  Wiss,  zu  Afiinchen,  1874,  pp.  303-351  (Unger  wrongly  holds  that  the  Pelargicum
was  on  the  south  side  of  tne  Acropolis) ;  C.  Robert,  in  v.  Wilamowitz-MoUen-
dorfFs  Aus  KycUUhen,  p.  iJZ^qq-  *  Milchhofer,  'Athen,'  p.  198  j^.  ;  E.  Curtius,
*  Eleusinion  und  Pelargikon,'  Sitzungsberichte  of  the  Prussian  Academy  (Berlin)
for  1884,  pp.  499-512  (republbhed  in  his  Gesammelte  Abhandlungen,  I.  pp.  435-
450) ;  td,,  Stadtgeschichte,  pp.  47  sq,,  159;  A.  Botticher,  Die  Akropolis  von  Athen,
p.  $6  sqq.  (who  accepts  Prof.  Curtius's  view) ;  Ed.  Meyer,  in  Philologus,  48  (1889),
p.  46g  sqq,  (reprinted  in  Meyer's  Forschungen  zur  alien  Geschichte,  p.  6  sqq,);
H.  G.  Lolling,  *  Athen,*  p.  337  sq,  ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  pp.  535-538  ;
Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  TArt  dans  CAntiquiti,  6.  p.  419  sqq.  (who  accept
Curtius's  view) ;  W.  Miller,  in  American  Journal  if  Archaeology,  8  (1893),  ??•
481-492 ;  J.  W.  White,  in  *B0i7Me/>2f  d/)xaioXoyt«n^,  1894,  PP»  25-62.


CH.  xxviix  CLEPSYDRA  359

28.  3.  the  PelasgiaiiB  who  once  dwelt  at  the  foot  of  the
Acropolis.  Herodotus  says  (vi.  137)  that  the  Pelasgians  received
from  the  Athenians  a  district  at  the  foot  of  Hymettus  (not  of  the
Acropolis)  as  a  reward  for  having  built  the  fortification-wall  round  the
Acropolis.  Strabo  relates  (ix.  401)  that  the  Pelasgians,  being  expelled
from  Boeotia,  came  to  Athens,  where  the  Pelasgicum  (Pelargicum)  was
named  after  them ;  but,  like  Herodotus,  he  says  that  they  dwelt  at  the
foot  of  Mt.  Hymettus.  Pausanias  perhaps  inferred  that  Uie  Pelasgians
dwelt  at  the  foot  of  the  Acropolis  because  the  Pelargicum  was  there.
On  the  tradition  of  a  Pelasgian  settlement  in  Attica,  see  K.  O.  Miiller,
Orckamenos^  p.  433  sqq, ;  Ed.  Meyer,  Forschungen  sur  alien  Geschichte^
I.  p.  6  sqq,  (Prof.  Meyer  holds  that  the  tradition  originated  in  a  simple
misunderstanding  of  the  name  Pelargicum,  which  he  believes  to  have  no
connejuon  with  Pelasgian.)

28.  3.  Agrolas  and  Hyperbins.  Pliny  says  {N,  H,  vii.  194)  that
Euryalus  and  Hyperbius,  two  brothers,  were  the  first  to  introduce  lime-
kilns and  houses  at  Athens ;  previously  men  had  dwelt  in  caves.

28.  4*  below  the  portal,  yon  come  to  a  spring  of  water.
Pausanias  has  now  completed  his  circuit  of  the  Acropolis,  and  passing
out  through  the  Propylaea  turns  to  the  right  and  descends  a  staircase
to  the  spring  called  the  Clepsydra.  We  know  from  Aristophanes
{Lysistratay  911  sqq,)  that  this  spring  was  outside  the  sacred  precinct
of  the  Acropolis.  From  the  scholiasts  on  Aristophanes  {Lysistrata^  911
and  913)  and  Hesychius  (s.v,  Kkeil^vSpa)  we  learn  that  the  spring  was
on  the  Acropolis,  near  the  sanctuary  of  Pan  ;  that  its  original  name  was
Empedo,  but  that  it  was  called  Clepsydra  (*  hiding  the  water  *)  because,
though  it  sometimes  overflowed,  it  sometimes  ran  dry ;  and  that  its
waters  were  supposed  to  flow  underground  to  Phalerum.  The  historian
Ister  (quoted  by  the  scholiast  on  Aristophanes,  Bt'rds,  1694)  informs  us
that,  like  the  Nile  and  the  spring  at  Delos,  the  water  of  the  Clepsydra
rose  when  the  Etesian  winds  began  to  blow,  and  sank  when  they  ceased  ;
and  he  says  that  a  blood-stained  cup,  which  had  fallen  into  the  spring,
reappeared  in  the  bay  of  Phalerum,  twenty  furlongs  off.  The  scholiast
adds  that  the  spring  was  said  to  be  bottomless,  and  that  its  water  was
brackish.  When  Mark  Antony,  after  wintering  at  Athens,  was  about  to
take  the  field  against  the  Parthians,  he  was  induced  by  an  oracle  to  fill
a  vessel  full  of  the  water  of  the  Clepsydra  and  carry  it  with  him ;  he
also  took  with  him  a  branch  of  the  sacred  olive  (Plutarch,  Antom'us,  34).

The  spring  is  situated  on  the  north-western  face  of  the  Acropolis
rock,  and  is  reached  by  a  narrow  flight  of  sixty-nine  steps  which  descends
from  the  back  of  the  pedestal  of  Agrippa,  at  the  north-west  comer  of
the  Propylaea.  The  upper  steps  are  modem ;  the  lower  are  ancient
and  are  cut  in  the  rock.  The  first  part  of  the  staircase  is  arched  by
the  natural  rock ;  lower  down  the  vault  is  of  modem  masonry,  though
the  walls  are  hewn  in  the  rock.  The  staircase  ends  in  a  little  under-
groimd  chapel  of  the  Holy  Apostles,  in  the  floor  of  which  is  a  well-shaft
about  30  feet  deep,  enclosed  by  ancient  blocks  of  marble.  At  the
bottom  of  the  shaft  may  be  seen  the  water  of  the  Clepsydra,  which  is
drawn  up  in  buckets  and  is  said  by  C.  Botticher  to  be  clear  and  sweet,


36o  CLEPSYDRA  bk.  i.  attica

though  Beul^  found  it  brackish.  By  letting  down  burning  tapers  to  the
surface  of  the  water,  C.  B5tticher  perceived  that  it  flowed  sluggishly
westward.  The  spring,  though  it  decreases  in  the  height  of  summer,
never  runs  dry.  The  apse  and  the  vaulted  roof  of  the  chapel  are  of
masonry.  The  rest  of  the  walls  are  hewn  roughly  out  of  the  rock;
they  were  formerly  coated  with  stucco  and  retain  some  faded  paintings
of  saints.  A  dim  light  falls  into  the  little  chapel  from  a  small  round
hole  in  the  roof  immediately  over  the  well.

In  September  1822  the  Greek  general  Odysseus  enclosed  the  spring
within  the  fortifications  of  the  Acropolis  by  erecting  a  bastion  outside  of
it.  He  did  this  in  order  to  secure  a  supply  of  water  in  case  he  should
be  besieged  in  the  Acropolis  by  the  Turks.  This  bastion,  known  as  the
bastion  of  Odysseus,  was  taken  down  in  1888.  In  classical  antiquity
the  spring  cannot  have  been  included  within  the  fortification-line  of  the
Acropolis ;  for  Cylon  and  his  conspirators,  being  besieged  on  the
Acropolis,  suffered  from  want  of  water  (Thucydides,  i.  126);  and
Aristion,  in  similar  circumstances,  was  forced  by  thirst  to  capitulate  to
the  Romans  (Plutarch,  SuUcl^  14).  But  the  analogy  of  the  spring,  or
rather  reservoir,  similarly  situated  just  outside  the  citadel  at  Mycenae,
and  reached  from  it  by  a  similar  staircase  (see  note  on  ii.  16.  5),  makes
it  probable  that,  in  the  days  when  the  Athenian  Acropolis  was  the
fortified  seat  of  a  princely  house,  the  head  of  the  staircase  that  leads
down  to  the  spring  was  always  within  the  castle  walls.  It  was  only
when  the  Acropolis  ceased  to  be  a  fortress  that  direct  access  to  the
spring  could  be  dispensed  with.

On  the  Clepsydra  see  Ch.  Wordsworth,  Athens  and  Attica^  p.  69  j^.  ;  E.  Beul^,
VAcropole  d'Athines^  I.  pp.  1 53- 1 56;  C.  Bursian,  in  Rheinisches  Mtiseum^
N.  F.  10  (1856),  p.  501  sq,  ;  W.  Vischer,  Erinnerungen  und  EindrUcke  aus
Griechenland,  p.  165  sq,  ;  C.  Botticher,  Bericki  iiber  die  Untersuchungen  auf  cUr
AkropoliSy  p.  221  sq,  ;  id.^  in  Philologns^  22  (1867),  p.  71  sqq,  ;  Dyer,  Ancient
AthenSy  p.  442  sqq,  ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Siadi  Athen^  I.  p.  248 ;  Curtius  und
Kaupert,  Atlas  von  Athen,  p.  22  with  pi.  ix.  4 ;  A.  Milchhofer,  '  Athen, '  p.
208  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  60 ;  A.  Botticher,  Die  Akropolis  von  AtAen,  p.  55  sq, ;  Miss


15  jy- ;  ^

.  3^  47,


Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  p.  538  sq,  ;  E.  Curtius,  Stadtgeschichte,  pp.  36,  47,  49.

28.  4-  near  it  a  sanctuary  of  Apollo  in  a  cave  etc.  Euripides
has  told  how  Apollo  met  Creusa  in  a  cave  on  the  northern  cliffs  of  the
Acropolis,  and  how  Creusa  exposed  the  infant  Ion,  the  fruit  of  the
amour,  in  the  same  cave  (Euripides,  lon^  10  sqq,^  283  sqq.y  492  sgg,^
936  sqq,y  1398  sqq.,  1482  sqq.)  The  poet  seems  to  imply  that  the  cave
was  sacred  to  Pan ;  for  he  makes  Creusa  say  {v,  936  sq.\  "  Doest
know  the  northern  cave,  the  Cecropian  cliffs  which  we  call  Long  ? "
To  which  the  slave  answers  {v,  937),  "  I  know,  *tis  where  there  are
shrines  of  Pan  and  altars  near."  Some  modem  writers  suppose  this  to
mean  that  near  the  cave  where  Apollo  met  Creusa  there  was  a  cave
of  Pan  with  altars.  But  Euripides  apparently  means  that  the  cave
where  the  lovers  met  was  a  shrine  of  Pan  and  that  there  were  altars  of
Pan  near  the  cave.  This  is  confirmed  by  w,  500  sqq,^  where  it  is
said,  "Whene'er,  O  Pan,  thou  pipest  in  thy  caves,  where  a  maiden
exposed  the  babe  she  bore  to  Phoebus,"  etc     Through  a  defect  in  the


CH.  XXVIII  CA  VE  OF  APOLLO  AND  PAN  361

text  of  Pausanias  it  is  uncertain  whether  he  distinguished  the  cave  of
Pan  from  the  cave  of  Apollo  or  regarded  them  as  the  same.  The  cave
in  which  he  supposed  Apollo  to  have  met  Creusa,  and  which,  if  I  am
right,  was  also  sacred  to  Pan,  is  most  probably  the  high-arched  but
shallow  cave  immediately  to  the  east  of  the  Clepsydra.  It  fronts  to  the
north-west  and  is  a  conspicuous  feature  in  the  face  of  the  rock  as
viewed  from  the  town  below.  The  walls  of  the  cave  are  studded  with
niches  for  the  reception  of  votive-offerings,  proving  the  veneration  in
which  the  grotto  was  held.  Beside  this  cave,  immediately  to  the  east
of  it  and  further  from  the  Clepsydra,  is  a  twin  cave  of  similar  shape  and
dimensions,  which  has  sometimes  been  identified  as  the  cave  of  Pan.
But  it  contains  no  niches  or  other  vestiges  of  religious  worship.  More-
over the  evidence  of  Aristophanes  and  his  scholiast  is  in  favour  of  the
view  that  the  cave  of  Pan  was  immediately  beside  the  spring  Clepsydra  ;
for  Aristophanes  makes  Cinesias  propose  to  Myrrhina  that  after  giving
him  a  meeting  in  the  sanctuary  of  Pan  she  shall  bathe  in  the  Clepsydra
(Lysisirata^  911  sqq.\  and  the  scholiast  on  the  passage  says  that  the
Clepsydra  was  near  the  sanctuary  of  Pan.  Some  modem  writers  (in-
cluding Gottling,  C.  Botticher,  Prof  A.  Milchhofer,  and  Mr.  A.  Bot-
ticher)  identify  as  Apollo's  cave  a  third  grotto  situated  somewhat  apart
from  the  other  two,  immediately  above  the  Clepsydra,  about  30  feet
higher  up  the  slope.  It  was  formerly  enclosed,  together  with  the
Clepsydra,  by  the  bastion  of  Odysseus.  It  is  a  shallow  arch-shaped
hollow  in  the  face  of  the  cliff.  In  the  back  wall  of  the  grotto  are  cut
some  niches  for  votive-offerings.

There  is  nothing  unusual  in  the  conjunction  of  the  worships  of  two
deities  in  the  same  cave  ;  indeed  such  a  conjunction  seems  to  have  been
common  (L.  Ross,  Wanderungen^  2.  p.  ^^\  The  grotto  at  Vari  on
Mt.  Hymettus  appears,  from  the  inscriptions  cut  in  it,  to  have  been
sacred  both  to  Pan  and  Apollo  as  well  as  to  the  Nymphs  and  the
Graces  (see  note  on  i.  31.  i ).

Apollo  seems  to  have  been  worshipped  in  the  cave  under  the  title  of
**  Apollo  under  the  Heights "  {yrKa.KpaXo%  or  vtt  aKpai?),  for  three  in-
scriptions have  been  found  containing  dedications  to  him  under  this  title
(C  /.  A,  iii.  Nos.  91,  92  ;  MitiheiL  d,  arch,  Inst  inAtJien^  3  (1878),  p.
144) ;  one  of  the  inscriptions  (C.  /.  A,  iii.  No.  91)  is  said  to  have  been
found  at  the  entrance  to  the  Clepsydra  {Rheinisches  Museum^  7  (1850),
p.  5).  Dr.  Dorpfeld  is  of  opinion  that  the  Apollo  of  this  cave  was  the
Pythian  Apollo  (see  note  on  i.  29.  i).

The  story  which  Pausanias  here  tells  of  the  institution  of  the  worship
of  Pan  at  Athens  is  told  also  by  Herodotus  (vi.  105),  who  adds  that
"  the  Athenians  founded  a  sanctuary  of  Pan  under  the  Acropolis  and
propitiate  him  with  annual  sacrifices  and  a  torch-race."  Cp.  Paus.  viii.
54.  6.  Lucian  defines  the  situation  of  the  sanctuary  more  exactly ;  he
says  that  it  was  a  cave  under  the  Acropolis,  a  little  above  the  Pelargi-
cum  (Bis  accusatus^  9),  and  he  represents  the  god  as  grumbling  at  the
Athenians  for  their  shabby  treatment  of  him.  "  However,"  he  admits
grudgingly,  "they  do  come  up  twice  or  thrice  a  year  and  sacrifice  a
rank  he-goat ;  then  they  feast  on  the  flesh,  after  making  me  a  witness


362  THE  AREOPAGUS  bk.  i.  attic  a

of  their  mirth  and  honouring  me  with  mere  applause.  But  their  laughter
and  merry-making  have  a  certain  charm  for  me  "  (Lucian,  Bis  accuscUuSy
10).  Elsewhere  Lucian  represents  Pan  as  boasting  to  Hermes  of  "the
grotto  under  the  Acropolis  "  which  he  had  received  from  the  Athenians
as  a  reward  for  the  gallant  service  he  had  rendered  them  at  the  battle
of  Marathon  (Died,  Deorum^  xxii.  3).  The  scholiast  on  Clement  of
Alexandria  {Proirepi,  iii.  45,  p.  39,  cd.  Potter)  repeats  the  story  of  the
institution  of  Pan's  worship  at  Athens,  describing  his  cave  as  situated
« above  the  Areopagus,"  and  stating  that  the  Athenians  annually
sacrificed  a  he-goat  to  him.  In  the  Anthology  {Anthol.  Planud.
259)  there  is  an  epigram  on  a  statue  of  Pan  made  of  Parian  marble,
which  the  Athenians  placed  on  the  Acropolis  (in  the  cave  ?).  There  is
another  epigram,  attributed  to  Simonides,  on  a  statue  of  Pan  which  was
set  up  by  Miltiades  {Anikol.  PlanucL  232  ;  Poettu  Lyrici  Graeci^  ed.
Bergk,^  3.  p.  1163).  In  1888  a  marble  relief  was  found  in  the  bastion
of  Odysseus  ;  it  represents  Pan  with  a  shepherd's  crook  in  his  left  hand
and  a  skin  hanging  from  his  left  shoulder  (AcAriov  Q.p\ai.o\oyt,K6vy  1888,
p.  183  sq.)

The  cave  of  Pan  and  Apollo  is  represented  on  coins  of  Athens
which  give  a  view  of  the  Acropolis  (Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.
Cotnm,  on  Pans,  p.  128  sq,  with  pi.  Z  iii.-vii.  ;  see  above,  p.  351).

On  the  cave  or  caves  of  Apollo  and  Pan  see  Dodwell,  Tour  through  Greece^  i.
p.  303  sq.  ;  Leake,  A/hens,  I.  p.  169  sq,  ;  Ch.  Wordsworth,  Athens  and  Attica^
p.  68  sq,  ;  Gottling,  *  Die  ApoUogrotte  dcr  Akropolis  von  Athen,'  Rheinisches
Museum^  N.  F.  7  (1850),  pp.  I-I5;  W.  Vischcr,  Erinnerungen  und  Eindrucke
aus  Griechenlandy  p.  165  ;  C.  Bottichcr,  Bericht  Uber  die  Untersuchungen  auf  der
Akropolis^  p.  222  sq.  \  id.,  in  PhilologuSy  22  (1865),  p.  69  sqq,  ;  Dyer,  Ancient
Athens y  p.  445  sq,  ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen,  i.  p.  248  sqo.  ;  Curtius
und  Kaupert,  Atias  von  Athen,  p.  22  sq, ,  with  pi.  ix.  4 ;  A.  Milchhofer,
*  Athen,'  p.  208  sq,  ;  A.  Botticher,  Die  Akropolis  von  Athen,  p.  54  sq,  ;  Guide*
Joanne,  i.  p.  39  sq,  ;  Baedeker,*  p.  60;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  p.  538  sq,

28.  5.  the  Areopagus.  The  situation  of  the  Areopagus  or  Hill  of
Ares  (Mars'  Hill),  as  the  ancients  interpreted  the  name,  is  determined
by  the  statement  of  Herodotus  (viii.  52)  that  it  was  the  hill  opposite  the
Acropolis  which  the  Persians  occupied  when  they  laid  siege  to  the
Acropolis.  Aeschylus,  too,  says  (EumenideSy  685  sqq,)  that  when  the
host  of  the  Amazons  came  to  Athens,  they  occupied  the  Areopagus  as  a
counter-work  (namely  to  the  Acropolis,  the  seat  of  their  foe  Theseus).
The  vicinity  of  the  Areopagus  to  the  western  end  of  the  Acropolis  is
attested  by  Lucian,  who  represents  Pan  sitting  in  his  cave  at  the  north-
west comer  of  the  Acropolis  (see  the  preceding  note)  and  listening  daily
to  the  speeches  made  in  the  neighbouring  court  of  the  Areopagus  (Bis
accusatus,  1 2).  Hence  the  Areopagus  has  long  been  rightly  identified
with  the  rocky  height  (377  feet  high)  to  the  west  of  the  Acropolis,  from
which  it  is  separated  by  a  depression.  On  the  west  it  is  divided  by
another  hollow  from  the  so-called  Nymphaeum  or  hill  of  the  Nymphs,
which  is  crowned  by  the  modem  Observatory.  The  north-east  side  of
the  Areopagus  is  precipitous  ;  the  other  sides  slope  gently  to  the  plain.
A  flight  of  fifteen  or  sixteen  steps  cut  in  the  rock  but  now  minous  leads
up  from  the  south-eastern  side  of  the  hill  to  a  small,  artificially  levelled


CH.  XXVIII  THE  AREOPAGUS  363

platform  on  the  top  of  the  hill,  where  there  are  some  remains  of  rock-
hewn  seats.  It  was  on  this  platform,  probably,  that  the  court  of  the
Areopagus  met ;  for  we  are  told  that  the  court  sat  in  the  open  air
(Pollux,  viii.  118)  on  a  high  hill  (Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^  i.  p.  253,
line  26  sqq,)  Lucian  says  that  the  court  met  in  the  dark  night  (Her-
motimus^  64  ;  De  damOy  1 8).  Down  to  Roman  times  there  was  an
ancient  building  roofed  with  mud  on  the  Areopagus  (Vitruvius,  ii.  i.  5) ;
what  it  was  used  for,  we  do  not  know.  A  pillar  or  slab  of  stone  or
metal  was  set  up  on  the  hill  with  the  laws  relating  to  homicide  engraved
on  it  (Lysias,  i.  30).  The  ruins  of  a  small  church  of  Dionysius  the
Areopagite  at  the  foot  of  the  height,  on  the  north-eastern  side,  confirm
the  identification  of  this  hill  with  the  Areopagus.  Tradition  runs  that
in  this  church  St.  Paul  preached  to  the  Athenians  (Acts  of  the  Apostles^
xvii.  19  sqq,")  Prof.  E.  Curtius  supposes  that  the  writer  of  the  Acts  of
the  Apostles^  l.c,^  meant  to  say  that  St.  Paul  was  taken,  not  to  the
Areopagus  hill,  but  to  the  Council  of  the  Areopagus  seated  in  front  of
the  Royal  Colonnade  (i.  3.  i)  in  the  market-place.

See  Leake,  Athens^  I.  pp.  165,  356 ;  Ch.  Wordsworth,  Athens  and  Attica,  p.
62  sqa,  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen  und  Eindriicke,  p.  I18 ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  v,
Griecnenland,  I.  p.  284;  U.  Kohler,  *Der  Areopag  in  Athen,'  Hermes^  6  (1872),
pp.  92-112;  Dyer,  Ancient  Athens,  p.  451  sq.  ;  Guide-foanne,  I.  p.  76  sq,  ;
fiiiedeker,'  p.  55 ;  Lolling,  *  Athen/  p.  330  sq, ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,
p.  554  sqq,  ;  £.  Curtius,  Stadtgeschichte,  p.  262  sq. ;  id.,  Gesammclte  Abhand-
lungen,  2.  p.  527  sqq.

28.  5.  because  Ares  was  the  first  to  be  tried  there  etc.  See  i.
21.  4.  Euripides  agrees  with  Pausanias  in  saying  that  Ares  was  the
first  to  be  tried  on  the  Areopagus  {Electro,  1258  sqq.)  Cp.  Demosthenes,
xxiii.  66,  p.  641  ;  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca,  i.  p.  444,  line  7  sqq.
According  to  Hellanicus  (cited  by  the  scholiast  on  Euripides,  Orestes^
1648  and  1 651),  Ares  was  the  first  to  be  tried  on  the  Areopagus ;  next,
three  generations  afterwards,  Cephalus  was  tried  there  for  the  murder  of
his  wife  Procris ;  then,  three  generations  later,  Daedalus  was  tried  there
for  the  murder  of  his  nephew  Talus ;  then,  after  three  more  generations,
Orestes  was  tried  there  for  the  murder  of  his  mother  Clytaemnestra.  For
the  trial  of  Orestes  on  the  Areopagus,  see  Aeschylus,  Orestes,  566  sqq. ;
Demosthenes,  l.c.  According  to  Aeschylus,  the  Areopagus  was  so  called
because  the  Amazons  there  sacrificed  to  Ares  when  they  encamped  on
the  hill  (Eumenides,  685  sqq.)  The  place  called  the  Amazonium,  where
the  Amazons  encamped  and  where  some  of  them  were  buried  (Plutarch,
Theseus,  27  ;  Diodorus,  iv.  28  ;  Harpocration  and  Stephanus  Byzantius,
s.v.  ' A/jui(6v€iov),  was  probably  on  or  near  the  Areopagus.  Modem
writers  (C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen,  1.  p.  428  note  2  ;  G.  Gilbert,
Griech.  Staatsaiterthiimer,^  i.  p.  425  note  4)  have  suggested  that
Areopagus  {Areios  pagos)  means  *  the  hill  of  cursing,'  the  first  part  of  the
name  being  derived  from  ara  *  a  curse  *  and  the  reference  being  to  the
Furies  who  had  a  sanctuary  on  the  side  of  the  hill  (see  below),  and  were
sometimes  known  as  Arai,  i.e.  *  the  curses '  (Aeschylus,  EumenideSy
417);  cp.  E.  Rohde,  m  Rheinisches  Museum,  N.  F.  50  (1895),  p.  id  sq.
Mr.  R.  A.  Neil  informs  me  that  the  derivation  o{  areios  from  ara^  though


364  THE  AREOPAGUS  bk.  i.  attica

exceptional,  is  supported  by  old  forms  like  auleios  (from  auU)^
Kuthereia  (from  Kuihera\  as  well  as  by  younger  forms  such  as
numpheios  and  mouseian.  The  regularly  formed  adjective  from  itra
would  be  araioSy  which  was  actually  in  use.  The  explanation  of  the
name  Areopagus  as  *  the  hill  of  cursing '  derives  support  from  the  feet
that  solemn  oaths  by  the  Furies  and  other  deities  were  taken  on  the  hill,
and  that  a  man  who  forswore  himself  in  taking  such  oaths  was  supposed
to  incur  <*  all  the  curses  in  the  city  "  (Dinarchus,  i.  46  sq^  As  to  the
sanctuary  of  Ares  see  i.  8.  4  note.

28.  5.  an  altar  of  Warlike  Athena.  The  Athenians  appear  to
have  sworn  by  the  Sun,  Ares,  and  Warlike  Athena  in  concluding  a
treaty  of  alliance  (C.  /.  A,  ii.  No.  333),  and  so  did  the  people  of
Pergamus  (Frankel,  Jnschriften  von  Pergamon^  i.  No.  13).  Warlike
Athena  was  also  worshipped  at  Plataea  (ix.  4.  i).

28.  $.  the  stone  of  IxUnry  and  the  stone  of  Bnthlessness.
Theophrastus  (cited  by  Zenobius,  iv.  36)  says  that  there  were  altars  of
Injury  and  Ruthlessness  at  Athens ;  he  probably  refers  to  these  stones,
which  may  have  been  altar-shaped  blocks.  According  to  Cicero  {De
legidusy  ii.  11.  28)  the  Athenians,  after  expiating  the  Cylonian  massacre,
erected  a  shrine  of  Contumely  and  Impudence,  by  which  Cicero  means
the  altars  or  stones  of  Injury  and  Ruthlessness.  Xenophon  alludes  to
the  stone  of  Ruthlessness  when  he  says  (Convivium^  viii.  35)  that  the
Lacedaemonians  esteemed  Ruth  {aidds^  i,e,  *  pity,*  *  reverence  *)  a  goddess,
not  Ruthlessness  {anaideia),  Euripides  refers  to  the  two  stones  when
he  makes  Orestes  say  {iphig,  in  Tauris^  961  sqq^  that  on  coming  to  the
Areopagus  to  be  tried  he  occupied  one  pedestal  or  seat  {dathron\  while
the  eldest  of  the  Furies  (his  accusers)  took  the  other.  On  a  cameo  and
a  vase-painting  which  represent  the  acquital  of  Orestes,  the  accused  is
seen  with  his  right  foot  planted  on  a  rough  stone,  probably  the  stone
of  Injury  (Daremberg  et  Saglio,  Diet,  des  Antiquitds^  i.  p.  398  sq,^
^S^s.  491  and  493).  Some  have  fancied  they  could  identify  the  two  stones
with  two  blocks  standing  on  the  platform  on  the  top  of  the  hill.
Wordsworth  says :  "  Immediately  above  the  steps,  on  the  level  of  the
hill,  is  a  bench  of  stone  excavated  in  the  limestone  rock,  forming  three
sides  of  a  quadrangle,  like  a  triclinium :  it  faces  the  south :  on  its  east  and
west  side  is  a  raised  block ;  the  former  may  perhaps  have  been  the
tribunal,  the  two  latter  the  rude  stones  which  Pausanias  saw  here  "
(Athens  and  Attica^  p.  62).

Perhaps  the  two  stones  were  used  to  swear  on,  the  accuser  and
accused  standing  on  them  as  they  took  their  oaths.  We  have  seen  (note
on  i.  3.  i)  that  in  the  Royal  Colonnade  at  Athens  there  was  a  stone
which  was  used  for  a  like  purpose.  The  custom  of  swearing  on  a  stone
is  not  uncommon  among  primitive  peoples.  See  W.  Munzinger,  Sitten
undRechtder  Bogos,  p.  33  sq, ;  Asiaiick  Researches^  3-  P-  3©  ^Q-  (8vo  ed.) ;
Martin's  *  Description  of  the  Western  Islands  of  Scotland,'  in  Pinkerton's
Voyages  and  Travels^  3*  PP-  628,  646,  657  ;  Miss  Gordon  Cumming,
In  the  Hebrides  (London,  1883),  p.  167.

28.  6.  a  sanctnary  of  the  goddesses  whom  the  Athenians  call  the
Venerable  Ones  etc     As  to  this  euphemistic  name  for  the  Eumenides


CH.  xxviii  SANCTUARY  OF  THE  FURIES  365

or  Furies,  cp.  ii.  11.  4.  Helladius  (quoted  by  Photius,  Bibliotheca^
p.  535  a  4  sqq,^  ed.  Bekker)  says  :  "  All  the  ancients,  but  most  of  all  the
Athenians,  were  careful  not  to  use  ill-omened  words  ;  so  they  called  the
prison  '  the  chamber,'  and  the  executioner  *•  the  public  man,'  and  the
Furies  (Erinyes)  they  called  *  Eumenides '  (*  the  kindly  ones  ')  or  *  the
Venerable  Goddesses.' "  The  sanctuary  of  the  Furies  at  Athens  was
said,  according  to  one  account,  to  have  been  founded  by  Epimenides
the  Cretan  (Diogenes  Laertius,  i.  10.  112),  doubtless  at  the  time
when  he  purified  Athens  after  the  affair  of  Cylon.  But  probably  the
sanctuary  was  much  older.  According  to  one  account  it  was  founded
after  the  trial  of  Orestes  (Aeschylus,  Eumenides^  804  sqq,  ;  Dinarchus,  i.
87  ;  Schol.  on  Thucydides,  i.  126).  The  sanctuary  must  have  been  in
the  depression  between  the  Areopagus  and  the  Acropolis  ;  for  here,  as
we  arc  expressly  told  by  Valerius  Maximus  (v.  3.  Ext.  3),  was  the  grave
of  Oedipus,  and  we  know  from  Pausanias  (§  7  below)  that  the  grave  was
within  the  sacred  enclosure  of  the  Furies.  This  situation  agrees  with
the  narrative  of  the  massacre  of  Cylon's  fellow-conspirators  ;  as  they  were
coming  down  from  the  Acropolis  some  of  them  took  refuge  at  the  altars
of  the  Fiuies,  where  they  were  despatched  (Thucydides,  i.  126 ;  Plutarch,
Theseus^  12).  These  altars  are  mentioned  by  Pausanias  elsewhere
(vii.  25.  2).  Euripides  says  that  the  disappointed  Furies,  after  the
acquittal  of  Orestes  at  the  Areopagus,  disappeared  down  a  chasm  in  the
earth  close  beside  the  hill  (Electro^  1270  sqq,)  This  chasm  is  doubtless
the  deep  fissure  at  the  foot  of  the  low  precipice  on  the  north-eastern  side
of  the  hill ;  it  is  approached  through  a  chaos  of  huge  blocks  of  rock  and
contains  a  pool  of  black  water.  Wordsworth  was  told  by  a  woman,
whom  he  found  filling  her  pitcher  here,  that  the  spring  flows  during
summer  and  is  esteemed  for  its  medicinal  virtues.  It  is  a  sunless  and
gloomy  spot.  Two  of  the  three  images  of  the  Furies  were  of  Parian
marble,  works  of  Scopas  ;  the  third,  standing  between  the  other  two,  was
a  work  of  Calamis  (Clement  of  Alexandria,  Protrept  iv.  47,  p.  41,  ed.
Potter;  Schol.  on  Aeschines,  i.  188,  p.  282,  ed.  Schultz).  Oaths  were
taken  by  the  Furies  and  other  deities  at  the  Areopagus  (Dinarchus,  i.
47,  cp.  64),  and  prayers  were  offered  to  them  on  behalf  of  the  state
(Aeschines,  i.  188  ;  C  /.  A.  ii.  No.  57  b,  p.  403).  The  worship  of  the
Furies  was  conducted  by  a  family  called  the  Hesychids  (*H<rvxt5ai)  who
traced  their  descent  from  a  certain  Hesychus  (*  the  quiet  One  ').  They
sacrificed  to  the  Furies  and  headed  the  procession  in  their  honour.  The
family  of  the  Eupatrids  had  no  share  in  the  sacrifice.  Before  sacrificing
to  the  goddesses,  the  Hesychids  sacrificed  a  sacred  ram  to  their  ancestor
Hesychus  whom  they  called  a  hero  and  who  had  a  shrine  *^  beside  the
Cylonium,  outside  the  Nine  Gates,"  as  Polemo  described  the  situation
(Schol.  on  Sophocles,  Oed.  Col.  489 ;  Polemo,  ed.  Preller,  Frag.  49 ;  on
the  Hesychids,  see  J.  Topffer,  Attische  Genealogie^  pp.  170-175).  The
*  Cylonium '  was  probably  a  shrine  of  some  sort  erected  as  an  expiation
on  the  spot  where  some  of  Cylon's  fellow-conspirators  had  been  cut  down,
close  to  the  altars  of  the  Furies  (see  above).  "The  Nine  Gates"  was
probably  the  old  fortified  outwork  on  the  western  face  of  the  Acropolis
(see  above,  p.  356).     Hence  the  sanctuary  of  Hesychus  was  most  prob-


366  TOMB  OF  OEDIPUS  bk.  i.  attica

ably  in  the  hollow  between  the  Acropolis  and  the  Areopagus.  The
priestesses  of  the  Hesychid  family  burnt  honey  cakes  to  the  Furies
(Callimachus,  quoted  by  the  scholiast  on  Sophocles,  Oed,  Col,  489),
and  milk  was  offered  to  them  in  earthen  vessels  (Schol.  on  Aeschines,  i.
188,  p.  282,  ed.  Schultz).  Polemo  tells  us  that  persons  who  had  been
wrongly  supposed  to  be  dead  and  for  whom  funeral  rites  had  consequently
been  performed  were  not  allowed  to  enter  the  sanctuary  of  the  Furies
(Hesychius,  s,v,  SevrepoTrorfws ;  Polemo,  ed  Preller,  Frag.  50).

On  the  sanctuary  of  the  Furies  or  Eumenides,  see  Leake,  Athens ^  I.  pp.  356-358;
Ch.  Wordsworth,  Athens  and  Attica,  pp.  65-67  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen  und
Eindrikkey  p.  118  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  v,  Grtechenland,  I.  p.  284;  C.  Botticher,  in
PhiloioffiiSy  Suppl.  3  (1867),  p.  333  sqq,  ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen  im
Alterthum,  I.  pp.  251-253;  Lulling,  'Athen,'  p.  330;  Baedeker,'  p.  58;  Miss
Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  p.  557  sqq,

28.  6.  whom  Hesiod  in  the  Theogony  calls  the  Furies.     Hesiod,

Theog.  185.

28.  6.  Aeschylus  was  the  first  to  represent  them  with  snakes  in
their  hair.     See  Aeschylus,  Choepkori^  1049  sq,

28.  6.  there  is  nothing  terrible  in  their  images.  On  a  votive
relief  in  the  Church  of  St.  John,  half  an  hour  to  the  east  of  Argos,  the
Furies  are  portrayed  as  three  maidens  of  mild  aspect  clad  in  long
robes,  each  of  them  with  a  serpent  in  her  right  hand  and  a  flower  in  her
left.  See  MittheiL  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  4  (1879),  p.  152  sq.y  with
pi.  ix. ;  Roscher's  Lexikon^  i.  pp.  1330,  1332  sqq.  The  images  of  the
Furies  at  Athens  were  by  Scopas  and  Calamis  (see  above,  p.  365).

28.  7.  the  tomb  of  Oedipus.  Valerius  Maximus  says  (v.  3.  Ext.  3)
that  the  bones  of  Oedipus  were  buried  between  the  Areopagus  and  the
Acropolis,  and  were  worshipped  as  those  of  a  hero,  an  altar  being
erected  to  him.  The  grave  of  Oedipus  seems  to  have  been  regarded  as
a  talisman  which  secured  the  safety  of  the  state  (Sophocles,  Oed,  Col,
1 5 18-1534,  1 760-1 765  ;  Aristides,  Or,  xlvi.  vol.  2.  p.  230,  ed.  Dindorf).
Originally  the  situation  of  the  grave  appears  to  have  been  kept  as  a  state
secret,  which  was  only  communicated  by  a  high  magistrate  (probably  the
titular  king)  to  his  successor  when  he  was  about  to  die  or  lay  down
his  office  (Sophocles,  lLcc.\  just  as  the  knowledge  of  the  grave  of  Dirce
at  Thebes  was  a  secret  communicated  only  by  the  general  of  cavalry  to
his  successor  (Plutarch,  De  genio  Socratis^  5  ;  see  note  on  ix.  17.  6).
But  the  knowledge  of  the  grave  of  Oedipus  at  Athens  had  probably
leaked  out  long  before  the  time  of  Pausanias.  Sophocles  describes  the
death  of  Oedipus  in  a  mysterious  way  which  leaves  it  uncertain  whether
the  poet  supposed  it  to  have  taken  place  at  Colonus  or  at  Athens.  But
there  are  features  in  his  description  which  point  to  Athens  and  the
neighbourhood  of  the  Areopagus  as  the  spot  which  he  associated  with
the  death  and  hence,  probably,  with  the  burial  of  Oedipus.  Thus  he
says  that  Oedipus  was  last  seen  at  "the  sheer  threshold,"  near  the
memorial  of  the  covenant  which  Theseus  and  Pirithous  made  with  each
other,  and  that  his  daughters  went  thence  and  fetched  water  from  **  the
hill  that  looks  on  Green  Demeter"  (Sophocles,  Oed,  Col.  1590  sqq,)
Now  "the  sheer  (or  abruptly  descending)  threshold"  must  mean,  as


CH,  XXVIII  TOMB  OF  OEDIPUS  367

Prof.  Jebb  says,  "  a  natural  fissure  or  chasm,  supposed  to  be  the  com-
mencement of  a  passage  leading  down  to  the  nether  world."  Such  a
fissure  is  the  cave  on  the  northern  side  of  the  Areopagus  down  which
the  Furies  passed  after  the  trial  of  Orestes  (see  above,  p.  365).  (Mr.
P.  Kastromenos,  however,  states  that  there  is  a  cavern  also  at  Colonus,
the  access  being  through  a  house  on  the  south-west  slope  of  the  hill.  See
P.  Kastromenos,  Die  Demen  von  Attika^  p.  24.)  Near  the  fissure  in  the
Areopagus,  at  the  western  foot  of  the  Acropolis,  was  a  sanctuary  of  Green
Demeter  (see  i.  22.  3  note)  ;  and  at  the  foot  of  the  Pnyx  hill,  probably
in  fidl  view  of  the  sanctuary  of  Green  Demeter,  there  were  in  antiquity
some  natural  springs  and  an  important  fountain  (see  note  on  i.  14.  i,
^  Enneacrunus '),  from  which  Sophocles  may  have  supposed  that  the
daughters  of  Oedipus  drew  water.  Further,  there  was  a  place  somewhere
to  the  north  of  the  Acropolis  where  Theseus  and  Pirithous  were  said  to
have  covenanted  (see  i.  1 8.  4  note).  All  these  coincidences  of  Athenian
topography  with  Sophocles's  description  are  in  favour  of  the  view  that
Sophocles  knew  the  grave  of  Oedipus  beside  the  Areopagus  and  hinted  at
it  in  his  play.  It  is  possible  that  the  tomb  was  originally  at  Colonus,
and  that  the  remains  of  the  hero  were  removed  to  Athens  early  in  the
Peloponnesian  war.  If  the  safety  of  the  state  was  really  believed  to
depend  on  these  remains,  the  Athenians  would  hardly  have  left  them
outside  the  walls,  exposed  to  the  risk  of  being  found  and  carried  off  by
the  prowling  parties  of  the  enemy,  who  ravaged  all  the  adjoining  country.
The  grave  of  Oedipus  was  not  the  only  tomb  at  Athens  the  situation  of
which  was  nominally  or  really  kept  a  secret,  because  the  national  safety
was  believed  to  be  bound  up  with  it.  Dinarchus  tells  us  (i.  9)  that
the  Council  of  the  Areopagus  <*  guards  the  secret  graves  on  which  the
safety  of  the  state  depends."  For  other  examples  of  these  state  talismans
in  antiquity,  see  note  on  viii.  47.  5.  On  the  grave  of  Oedipus  see
Ch-  Wordsworth,  Athens  and  Attica^  p.  202  5qq,\  R.  C.  Jebb,  Introduction
to  Sophocles,  Oedipus  Coloneus^  p.  xxviii.  sqq.  As  Pausanias  remarks.
Homer  appears  to  have  supposed  that  Oedipus  died  at  Thebes  ;  for  he
says  {Iliad,  xxiii.  679  sq.)  that  Mecisteus  went  to  Thebes  to  be  present
at  the  funeral  of  Oedipus.  On  the  other  hand,  Aristides  (Or,  xlvi.  vol.
2.  p.  230,  ed.  Dindorf)  and  the  scholiast  on  'Ewri^xdts  {Phoenissae,  1707)
speak  of  Oedipus  as  buried  at  Colonus.  Cp.  i.  30.  4.  Another  legend
as  to  the  grave  of  Oedipus  is  told  by  the  scholiast  on  Sophocles  {Oed,
Col.  91)  as  follows.  When  Oedipus  died  at  Thebes  the  people  would
not  ^low  him  to  be  buried  there.  So  his  remains  were  taken  to  a  place
called  Ceus  in  Boeotia  and  there  interred.  But  misfortunes  afterwards
befell  the  villagers,  which  they  put  down  to  the  burial  of  Oedipus  in  their
midst.  Therefore  they  obliged  the  fi-iends  of  Oedipus  to  remove  his
remains.  His  friends  accordingly  carried  away  the  remains  and  deposited
them  secretly  by  night  at  Eteonus  in  a  sanctuary  of  Demeter,  which  in
the  darkness  they  did  not  recognise  as  such.  The  affair,  however,  came
to  light,  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  place  inquired  of  the  god  what  they
should  do.  But  the  god  told  them  not  to  disturb  the  suppliant  of  the
goddess.  So  the  bones  of  the  wanderer  were  left  in  peace,  and  the
sanctuary  was  called  the  Oedipodeum.


368  THE  LAW-COURTS  bk.  l  attica

28.  8.  The  court  called  Parabjrstnm  etc  The  police  magistrates
called  the  Eleven  presided  in  this  court  (Harpocration,  s.v,  IlapdPwrov  ;
Pollux,  viii.  121  ;  cp.  Aristophanes,  Wasps^  iio8).  The  court  was  at
least  as  old  as  the  fifth  century  B.C,  since  it  was  mentioned  by  Anti-
phon  (Harpocration,  l.c.)  It  appears  to  have  stood  in  the  maiket-
place;  for  Antiphon,  speaking  of  a  case  which  would  seem  to  have
fallen  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Eleven,  says  that  it  was  tried  in  the
market-place  (Antiphon,  v.  lo).  From  the  same  speech  of  Antiphon
(§  ii)  we  infer  that  the  court-house  was  a  roofed  building,  not  an
enclosure  open  to  the  sky  like  the  courts  in  which  cases  of  murder  were
tried.  Pausanias's  statement  that  the  court  was  in  an  out-of-the-way
place  and  that  only  trifling  cases  were  tried  in  it  seems  to  be  a  mere
inference  from  the  name  Parabystum  (*  thrust  aside ').  The  same  may
be  said  of  the  statement  that  the  sittings  of  the  court  were  secret
{EtymoL  Magnum^  p.  651,  s,v,  TLapdPvcrrov ;  Bekkei^s  Amcdota
GraecOy  i.  p.  292,  line  24  sq.^  On  the  northern  slope  of  the  Museum
Hill  there  is  an  artificially  levelled  space  with  a  row  of  seven  seats  hewn
in  the  rock  at  one  side  and  a  bench,  also  hewn  out  of  the  rock,  on
another  side  (see  Curtius  und  Kaupert,  Atlas  von  Athen^  p.  19  sq,^
with  pi.  vi.  4),  Prof  U.  Kohler  suggested  {Hermes^  6  (1872),  p.  96
note)  that  this  remarkable  cutting  in  the  rock  might  be  the  Parabystum.
But  the  conjecture  is  devoid  of  evidence  or  probability.  The  court
Parabystum  is  mentioned  in  an  inscription  (C.  7.  A.  ii.  No.  822).

On  the  Parabystum  see  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen,  2.  pp.  365-368.  On
the  board  of  the  Eleven  see  Wachsmuth,  op.  cit,  2.  p.  386  sq,  ;  K.  F.  Hermami,
Griech,  StaatsaUertkiimer,  ed.  V.  Thumser,  §  99,  p.  566  sqq. ;  G.  Busolt,  Gruck,
Stoats-  und  Recktsaltertiimer^  §  184,  p.  233  ;  G.  Gilbert,  Griech,  Staatsalter-
thilmer^  I.  p  285  sq.

28.  8.  The  court  called  Trigontun.  This  court  was  mentioned  in
lost  works  of  Dinarchus  (Pollux,  viii.  121),  Lycurgus,  and  Menander
(Harpocration,  s.v,  T/oiyoivov  StKowmyptov).  Cp.  Photius,  Lexicon^  s.v.
Tpiy(t}vov  ;  SchoL  on  Aristophanes,  Wasps^  120.

28.  8.  The  Batrachinm  (*  frog-green ')  and  the  Fhoenicinm
(*  red ').  These  two  courts  are  not  mentioned  by  any  other  ancient
writer  ;  but  Aristotle  tells  us  {Constitution  of  Athens^  col.  32,  p.  240,
ed.  Sandys)  that  each  law-court  had  a  certain  colour  painted  on  the
lintel  of  the  doorway,  and  each  juryman  received  a  staff  or  baton
painted  with  the  colour  of  the  court  in  which  he  was  to  sit

28.  8.  the  Heliaea.  Harpocration  says  {s.v,  'HXtata)  :  "  Heliaea
is  the  greatest  law-court  at  Athens,  in  which  public  affairs  were  tried  by
a  thousand  or  fifteen  hundred  jurymen.''  Cp.  Suidas,  Stephanus  Byzan-
tius,  and  Photius,  Lexicon^  s.v.  'HAtata;  Etymol.  Magnum^  p.  427,  s.v,
*HXiata ;  Bekkefs  Anecdota  Graeca,  i.  pp.  189,  262,  310  x^.  ;  Schol.
on  Aristophanes,  Wasps^  88,  772  ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Knights^
898;  Schol.  on  Demosthenes,  xxiv.  21,  p.  706.  The  meaning  of  the
name  and  the  situation  of  the  court  are  both  unknown.  On  the  Heliaea
see  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen,  2.  pp.  358-365  ;  E.  Curtius,
StcuttgeschichtCy  p.   62  sq.  ;  K.  F.  Hermann,  Griech,  StaatsaltertUmer


CH.  xxviii  THE  law-courts  369

cd.  V.  Thumser,  p.  538  sqq,  ;  G.  Busolt,  Griech,  Stools-  und  Rechts-
altertiimer^  p.  278  sqq,  ;  G.  Gilbert,  Griech,  StcuUsolterthumer^  i.
p.  438  sqq.  One  of  the  sections  of  this  court  was  presided  over  by  the
Thesmothetae  and  was  hence  called  the  Heliaea  of  the  Thesmothetae
(C  /.  A,  iv.  No.  27  a,  p.  10  sqq, ;  W.  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,
Groec,  No.  10  ;  Antiphon,  vi.  21,  where  for  riXiaKriv  we  must  read
•fiXtaioLVy  as  Taylor  proposed ;  cp.  Andocides,  i.  28).

28.  8.  the  one  called  after  the  Palladimn,  where  cases  of  in-
▼olimtary  homicide  are  tried.  Aristotle  says  (Constitution  of  Athens^
57)  that  the  cases  tried  in  the  court  of  the  Palladium  were  "involuntary
homicide,  and  conspiracy  (against  life),  and  the  slaying  of  a  slave,  a
resident  alien,  or  a  foreigner."  Cp.  Harpocration,  s,w,  ^ovXcwecus
and  ciri  TlakXaZU^  The  legend  of  the  origin  of  the  court,  as  it  is  here
told  by  Pausanias,  is  also  related,  with  variations  in  detail,  by  Harpocra-
tion and  Suidas  {s,v,  kirl  TlaWahu^),  Pollux  (viii.  118  sq,\  the  scholiast
on  Aeschines  (ii.  87,  p.  298,  ed.  Schultz),  and  an  anonymous  writer
(Bekker's  Anecdoto  Groeco^  i.  p.  311,  line  3  sqq.)  Harpocration  says
{s.v,  €Tr\  TlakXa^iifi)  that  when  the  Argives  under  Agamemnon  put  in  to
Athens  on  their  way  from  Troy,  bringing  the  Palladium  or  image  of
Pallas  with  them,  Demophon  (son  of  Theseus)  carried  off  the  Palladium
and  slew  many  of  the  Argives  who  pursued  him.  Indignant  at  this,
Agamemnon  demanded  justice  on  Demophon,  and  hence  a  court  com-
posed of  fifty  Athenians  and  fifty  Argives  was  formed  to  try  the  case  ;
the  members  of  the  court  were  called  ephetai^  a  title  which  they  ever
afterwards  retained.  This  account  of  Harpocration  is  derived  from
Clitodemus,  as  we  learn  from  Suidas  {s.v,  kin.  IlaAAaSi^).  According  to
Phanodemus  (cited  by  Suidas,  I.e.)  the  Argives,  sailing  from  Troy,  put  in
to  Phalerum,  where  they  were  slain  by  the  natives  in  ignorance ;  but
afterwards  Acamas  (brother  of  Demophon)  recognised  them  and  found
the  Palladium,  and  the  court  of  the  Palladium  was  established  on  the
spot  by  command  of  an  oracle.  Pollux  says  {I.e.)  that  after  the  capture
of  Troy  certain  Argives,  bringing  with  them  the  Palladium,  put  in  to
Phalerum  and  being  slain  by  the  natives  in  ignorance  were  left  weltering
on  the  ground  until  Acamas  revealed  the  fact  of  their  nationality ;  where-
upon they  were  buried  and  received  the  title  of  the  Unknown  Ones  by
command  of  an  oracle  ;  moreover  the  Palladium  was  set  up  on  the  spot,
and  cases  of  involuntary  homicide  continued  to  be  tried  there  thence-
forth. Similarly  the  scholiast  on  Aeschines  {Ix.)  says  that  some
Argives  with  the  Palladium  put  in  to  Phalerum,  where  they  were
unintentionally  slain  by  the  natives  ;  as  the  corpses  remained  long  fresh
and  untouched  by  wild  beasts,  the  natives  made  inquiries  and
learned  from  Acamas  that  the  slain  men  were  Argives ;  so  they  found
the  Palladium,  set  it  up  in  the  sanctuary  of  Athena  at  Phalerum,  and,
having  buried  the  dead,  established  there  a  court  for  the  trial  of  in-
voluntary homicide.  Thus  the  evidence  of  Phanodemus,  Pollux,  and
the  scholiast  on  Aeschines  goes  to  show  that  the  court  of  the  Palladium
was  at  Phalerum.  On  the  other  hand  Plutarch  says  {Theseus,  27)  that
the  right  wing  of  the  army  of  the  Amazons  was  attacked  by  the  Athen-
ians "  from  Palladium,  Ardettus,  and  Lyceum  " ;  from  which,  as  Mt.

VOL.  II  2  B


370  THE  LAW-COURTS  bk.  i.  attica

Ardettus  and  the  Lyceum  were  to  the  east  of  Athens  (see  above,  notes
on  i.  1 9.  3  ;  i.  1 9.  6),  it  would  seem  to  follow  that  the  court  of  the  Palla-
dium was  also  to  the  east  of  Athens.  A  different  account  is  given  by
Polyaenus  of  the  way  in  which  the  Palladium  came  into  the  possession
of  the  Athenians.  He  says  (i.  5)  that  Demophon  received  the  Palladium
from  Diomede  to  take  care  of.  When  Agamemnon  asked  it  back,
Demophon  gave  the  true  Palladium  to  an  Athenian  named  Buzyges  to
take  to  Athens,  while  he  succeeded  in  palming  off  a  copy  of  it  on
Agamemnon.  In  Roman  times  a  new  Palladium  was  made  and  dedica-
ted '*to  the  gods  and  the  city"  at  the  bidding  of  the  Pythian  Apollo
(C  /.  A,  iii.  No.  71).

Persons  convicted  of  involuntary  homicide  in  the  court  of  the
Palladium  had  to  depart  the  country  by  an  appointed  road  within  a
certain  time  and  had  to  remain  in  banishment  till  they  were  pardoned
by  the  kin  of  the  slain  man,  when  they  were  allowed  to  return,  but  not
before  certain  sacrifices  had  been  offered  and  purificatory  ceremonies
performed  (Demosthenes,  xxiii.  71  x^.,  p.  643  sq,y  where  for  aiSerrjrai
reva  it  would  seem  that  we  must  read  ai^€(rqraC  rts ;  cp.  td,,  xliii.  57,
p.  1069,  lix.  9,  p.  1348;  C, /.  A,  i.  61;  Hicks,  Grrgk  Historical
Inscriptions^  No.  59;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Grace,  No.  45).
There  were  images  both  of  Athena  and  Zeus  at  the  Palladium  (C.  /.  A,
i.  No.  273  ;  C.  L  A.  iii.  No.  71).  The  priest  of  Zeus  at  the  Palladium
had  a  seat  reserved  for  him  in  the  theatre  (C.  /.  A,  iiL  No.  273).  In
later  times  the  Palladium  was  one  of  the  haunts  of  philosophers,  like
the  Academy  and  the  Painted  Colonnade  (Plutarch,  De  exilio^  14).

See  Milchhofer,  •  Athen,*  p.  179  sq,\  E.  Curtius,  Stadtgeschtchtc,
p.  55  ;  G.  Busolt,  Griech,  Staats-  und  RcchtsaltcrtUmer^  i.  §  207,
p.  273  ;  G.  Gilbert,  Griech,  StcuitsdlterthUmer^  i.  p.  427  sq.

28.  10.  the  court  of  the  Delphinium.  Aristotle  says  {Constitution
of  Athens^  57)  :  **  If  a  man  confesses  a  homicide  but  asserts  that  it  was
legal,  as  for  example  if  he  caught  his  victim  in  adultery  or  killed  him  by
mistake  in  war  or  in  an  athletic  contest,  he  is  tried  in  the  court  of  the
Delphinium."  Cp.  Demosthenes,  xxiii.  74,  and  Pollux,  viii.  119,  who
tells  the  same  legend  as  Pausanias  with  regard  to  the  foundation  of  the
court.  As  to  the  Delphinium  or  sanctuary  of  Delphinian  Apollo  where
the  court  sat,  see  i.  19.  i  note.  As  to  Theseus's  slaughter  of  Pallas  and
his  sons,  see  i.  22.  2  note.

28.  10.  the  Court  in  the  Prytanenm.  As  to  the  Prytaneum,  see  i.
18.  3  note.  Demosthenes  says  (xxiii.  76,  p.  645) :  "  If  a  stone  or  apiece
of  wood  or  iron  or  any  such  thing  fall  and  strike  a  man,  and  the  person
who  threw  the  thing  is  not  known,  but  they  do  know  and  are  in  posses-
sion of  the  thing  which  killed  the  man,  then  that  thing  is  brought  to  trial
at  the  court  of  the  Prytaneum."  Cp.  Bekker's  Anecdota  Gracca^  i .  p.  311
line  1 5  sq.  Animals  which  had  killed  a  human  being,  as  well  as  inani-
mate instruments  of  death,  were  tried  for  murder  at  the  Prytaneum
(Aristotle,  Constitution  0/ Athens^  57).  The  judges  were  the  titular  king
and  the  officials  called  tribal  kings  ;  on  the  latter  devolved  the  duty  of  cast-
ing the  offending  object  outside  the  boundaries  (Aristotle,  l,c, ;  Pollux,  viii.
90  and  1 20).      These  old-world  ideas  and  practices  were  countenanced


CH.  XXVIII  THE  LAW-COURTS  371

by  Plato,  who,  in  laying  down  laws  for  an  imaginary  commonwealth,
says  {Laws,  ix.  pp.  873  d-874  a) :  "  If  a  beast  of  burden  or  any  other
animal  shall  kill  any  one,  except  it  be  while  the  animal  is  competing  in
one  of  the  public  games,  the  relations  of  the  deceased  shall  prosecute
the  animal  for  murder ;  the  judges  shall  be  such  clerks  of  the  market  as
the  kinsman  of  the  deceased  may  appoint ;  and  the  animal,  if  found
guilty,  shall  be  put  to  death  and  cast  beyond  the  boundaries  of  the
country.  But  if  any  lifeless  object,  with  the  exception  of  a  thunderbolt
or  any  such  missile  hurled  by  the  hand  of  God,  shall  deprive  a  man  of
life  either  by  falling  on  him  or  through  the  man's  falling  on  it,  the  next
of  kin  to  the  deceased  shall,  making  expiation  for  himself  and  all  his  kin,
appoint  his  nearest  neighbour  as  judge  ;  and  the  thing,  if  found  guilty,
shall  be  cast  beyond  the  boundaries,  as  hath  been  provided  in  the  case
of  the  animals."  Pausanias  has  recorded  elsewhere  (v.  27.  10  ;  vi.  1 1.  6)
the  punishment  of  two  statues  for  having  accidentally  caused  the  death
of  human  beings.  In  the  latter  passage  (vi.  11.  6)  he  says  that  the
punishment  of  inanimate  objects  for  having  accidentally  been  the  cause  of
death  was  introduced  at  Athens  by  Draco ;  but  it  was  probably  much
older.  For  such  a  custom,  based  on  the  view  that  animals  and  things
are  endowed  with  a  consciousness  like  that  of  man,  goes  back  to  the
iii£uicy  of  the  human  race,  if  we  may  judge  from  its  prevalence  among
savage  and  barbarous  peoples  at  the  present  day.  Thus  among  some
of  the  aboriginal  tribes  of  Australia,  the  spear  or  other  weapon  of  an
enemy  which  has  killed  a  friend  is  always  burnt  by  the  kinsmen  of  the
deceased  (J.  Dawson,  Australian  Aborigines,  P*  53  J  cp-  Journal  of  the
Anthropological  Institute,  7  (1878),  p.  289).  Among  the  Kookies  of
Chittagong,  when  a  tiger  has  killed  a  man,  his  family  is  obliged  to  hunt
the  tiger  till  they  kill  it  or  another  tiger  and  feast  on  its  flesh  in  revenge
for  the  death  of  their  kinsman.  And  if  a  man  happens  to  be  killed  by.
falling  from  a  tree,  his  kinsfolk  assemble,  hew  down  the  tree,  cut  it  into
chips,  and  scatter  the  chips  to  the  wind  *'  for  having,  as  they  say,  been
the  cause  of  the  death  of  their  brother"  {Asiatic  Researches,  7.  p.  189
sq,  Svo  ed. ;  A.  Bastian,  Vblkerstdmme  am  Brahmaputra,  p.  35}.  In
the  Zend-Avesta  it  is  ordained  that  if  **  the  mad  dog,  or  the  dog  that
bites  without  barking,  smite  a  sheep  or  wound  a  man,  the  dog  shall  pay
for  it  as  for  wilful  murder"  (Vendidid,  xiii.  5.  3'*  vol.  2.  p.  159,  trans.
by  J.  Darmesteter).  The  Jewish  law  ordained  that  an  ox  which  gored
a  man  or  woman  to  death  should  be  stoned  {Exodus,  xxi.  28).  Among
the  Bogos,  an  East  African  tribe,  an  ox  or  cow  or  any  domestic
animal  which  kills  a  human  being  is  put  to  death  (W.  Munzinger,
Sitten  und  Recht  der  Bogos,  p.  83).  On  the  continent  of  Europe,
^<down  to  a  comparatively  late  period,  the  lower  animals  were  in  all
respects  considered  amenable  to  the  laws.  Domestic  animals  were  tried
in  the  conunon  criminal  courts,  and  their  punishment  on  conviction  was
death ;  wild  animals  fell  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  ecclesiastical
courts,  and  their  punishment  was  banishment  and  death  by  exorcism  and
excommunication.  ...  In  every  instance  advocates  were  assigned  to
defend  the  animals,  and  the  whole  proceedings,  trial,  sentence,  and
execution,  were  conducted  with  all  the  strictest  formalities  of  justice.


372  THE  LAW' COURTS  bk.  i.  attica

The  researches  of  French  antiquaries  have  brought  to  light  the  records
of  ninety-two  processes  against  animals,  tried  in  the  courts  from  1 1 20  to
1740,  when  the  last  trial  and  execution,  that  of  a  cow,  took  place."
(Subsequent  research  has  brought  to  light  a  good  many  more  such
cases.)  A  law-suit  between  the  people  of  the  conmiune  of  St.  Julien,
and  a  coleopterous  insect  known  to  naturalists  as  the  Rynchitus  aureus
lasted  for  more  than  forty-two  years.  A  famous  French  jurist,  Chas-
sanee,  first  made  his  name  in  a  law-suit  which  the  diocese  of  Autun
brought  against  rats,  and  in  which  Chassanee  appeared  for  the  rats
and  won  his  case.  A  sow  and  six  young  ones  were  tried  at  Lavegny  in
1457  on  a  charge  of  having  murdered  and  partly  eaten  a  child.  The
sow  was  found  guilty  and  sentenced  to  death  ;  but  the  young  ones  were
acquitted  in  consideration  of  their  youth  and  the  bad  example  set  them
by  their  mother.  At  Basle  in  1474  a  cock  was  tried  for  having  laid  an
^%Zi  and  being  found  guilty  was  burnt  at  the  stake  as  a  sorcerer.  The
recorded  pleadings  in  this  last  case  are  said  to  be  voluminous.  See
Chambers,  Book  of  Day s^  i.  pp.  126-129  (from  which  the  foregoing
quotations  and  facts  are  taken) ;  P.  Le  Brun,  Hisioire  critique  des
pratiques  superstitieuses  (2"*  ed.  Amsterdam,  1733),  i.  p.  243  ;  E.
Robert,  *  Proems  intent^s  aux  animaux,'  Bulletin  de  P Association
Ginirale  des  £tudiants  de  Montpellier,  i  (1888),  pp.  169-18 1  ;  A.
Chaboseau,  <  Proc^  contre  les  animaux,'  La  Tradition^  2  (1888),  pp.
362-364.  An  old  English  law,  only  repealed  in  the  present  reign,
ordained  that  a  beast  that  killed  a  man,  a  cart-wheel  that  ran  over  him,
or  a  tree  that  fell  on  him  and  killed  him,  was  deodand,  or  given  to  God,
in  consequence  of  which  it  was  forfeited  and  sold  for  the  benefit  of  the
poor  (E.  B.  Tylor,  Primitive  Culture,^  i.  p.  286  sq,)

28.  10.  the  Ox-slayer  slew  an  ox  for  the  first  time  etc.  See  i.
24.  4  note.

28.  II.  the  sword  of  Cambyses.  King  Cambyses  is  said  to
have  accidentally  inflicted  a  mortal  wound  on  himself  with  his  own
sword,  the  weapon  penetrating  the  thigh,  just  where  the  king  had  struck
the  sacred  bull  Apis.  Herodotus,  who  tells  the  story  (iii,  64),  appears
to  think  that  the  wound  was  a  righteous  retribution  for  the  king's  impiety.

28.  1 1.  In  Piraeus,  beside  the  sea^  is  a  court  called  Fhreattys
etc.  Demosthenes  says  (xxiv.  77  sq.^  p.  645  sq.)  that  if  a  man,  who
had  been  banished  for  an  involuntary  homicide  and  had  not  yet  been
pardoned  by  the  kinsmen  of  his  victim,  were  accused  of  another  and
voluntary  homicide,  he  was  tried  on  this  second  charge  at  Phreattys,
beside  the  sea,  he  speaking  from  a  ship,  while  his  judges  listened  on  the
shore ;  if  he  were  convicted,  he  was  capitally  punished ;  if  he  were
acquitted,  he  returned  into  banishment  on  account  of  the  former  and
accidental  homicide.  Aristotle  says  (Constitution  0/ Athens,  57)  that  the
second  charge  on  which  a  banished  man  might  be  tried  at  Phreattys  was
that  of  killing  or  wounding  somebody.  According  to  Pollux  (viii.  1 20)
the  accused  was  not  allowed  to  cast  an  anchor  or  put  out  a  gangway
while  he  made  his  defence  from  the  ship.  Theophrastus  supposed  that
the  court  took  its  name  from  a  hero  called  Phreattys  (Harpocration,  s,v,
€v  */>€aTTot).     Helladius,  as  quoted  by  Photius  {Bibliotheca^  p.  535  a,


CH.  XXIX  THE  PANATHENAIC  SHIP  373

line  28  sqq,  ed.  Bekker),  says  that  the  accused  pleaded  his  cause  on
shipboard  "  outside  Piraeus,"  by  which  the  writer  probably  meant  outside
the  great  harbour  of  Piraeus.  An  anonymous  writer,  whose  statement
is  somewhat  confused,  appears  to  place  Phreattys  at  the  harbour  of  Zea
(Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^  i.  p.  17  sqq, ;  as  to  Zea,  see  above,  pp.  7,
9,  16  jj^.)

Prof.  Milchhofer  has  plausibly  identified  Phreattys  with  the  outermost
point  of  the  peninsula  which  bounds  the  entrance  to  the  harbour  of  Zea
on  the  east  Here,  outside  the  ancient  fortification-wall,  and  about  6  feet
above  the  sea,  which  is  particularly  deep  at  this  point,  there  are  at  least
a  dozen  oval  holes  sunk  in  the  rock,  each  hole  measuring  about  3  ft
6  in.  long,  18  in.  wide,  and  3  ft  deep.  Prof.  Milchhofer  suggests  that
these  basins  were  used  for  washing  and  preparing  the  purple  shell  (cp.
H.  Bliimner,  Technologies  i.  p.  230  sqq,\  and  that  they  may  have  given
to  the  spot  the  name  of  Phreattys  or  *  the  place  of  tanks '  (from  phrear^
*a  well'  or  *tank').  See  Karien  von  Attika^  Erldutemder  Texty  i.  pp.
13,  56  sq,^  59  sq,  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  on  the  other  hand,  proposed  to  put
Phreattys  at  a  point  on  the  shore  a  little  to  the  south-west  of  the  entrance
to  Zea.  There  is  here  a  small  harbour  outside  the  line  of  the  ancient
fortifications ;  and  in  the  rocky  shore  there  is  an  oval  depression
resembling  a  bath,  with  a  small  round  hole  in  front  of  it.  Both  these
holes  arc  filled  with  the  water  of  a  spring  called  Tzirloneri,  See
H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen,  i.  p.  iJZsq.  Dodwell  found  in
a  tomb  at  Piraeus  the  bronze  ticket  of  a  juryman  named  Diodorus,  who
had  sat  in  the  court  of  Phreattys  (Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  p.  433  sqq.)

28.  II.  Teucer  was  the  first  to  plead  thns.  However  Pausanias
mentions  elsewhere  (ii.  29.  10)  a  story  that  Telamon,  the  father  of
Teucer,  had  similarly  pleaded  his  defence  standing  on  a  mole  in  the  sea.

29.  I.  a  ship  made  for  the  procession  at  the  Panathenian
festivaL  The  ship  was  moved  on  wheels  and  to  its  mast  was  fastened
the  new  robe,  embroidered  with  scenes  from  the  battles  of  the  Giants
and  Gods,  which  was  presented  to  Athena  every  fourth  year  at  the  great
Panathenaic  festival.  The  crew  of  the  ship  consisted  of  priests  and
priestesses  wearing  golden  crowns  and  garlands  of  flowers.  As  the
vessel  was  being  loosed  from  her  moorings,  a  choir  sang  a  hymn  inviting
the  wind  to  blow  fair  behind  the  sacred  bark.  See  Philostratus,  Vit.
Soph,  ii.  1.7;  Himerius,  Or,  iii.  12  sqq, ;  Heliodorus,  Aethiopica^  i.  10  ;
Harpocration,  s.v,  tottcwv;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  KnightSy  566;
Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Peace,  418;  Schol.  on  Aristides,  Or.  xiii.  (at
end),  vol.  3.  p.  342  sq.,  ed.  Dindorf ;  [Virgil,]  Ciris,  21  sqq.  According
to  Philostratus  {I.e.)  the  route  followed  by  the  procession  with  the  ship
was  from  the  Ceramicus  to  the  Eleusinium,  then  round  the  Eleusinium
and  past  the  Pelargicum  to  the  Pythium  or  sanctuary  of  the  Pythian
Apollo,  where  the  ship  was  moored.  As  to  the  Eleusinium  and  Pelar-
gicum, see  above,  pp.  1 19  sq.,  356  sqq.  If  the  Pythium  is  identified  with
the  image  of  the  Pythian  Apollo  near  the  temple  of  Olympian  Zeus  (i.
19.  i),  it  will  follow  that  the  ship  was  moored  near  that  temple,  in  the
south-east  quarter  of  Athens,  whereas  Pausanias  represents  it  as  kept
near  the  Areopagus,  in  the  western  quarter  of  Athens.     Dr.  Dorpfeld


374  GREAT  SHIPS  bk.  l  attica

has  proposed  to  identify  the  Pythium  with  the  sanctuary  of  Apono  in
the  cave,  on  the  north-western  ^ce  of  the  Acropolis  (see  above,  L  28.  4
note).  This  would  reconcile  the  evidence  of  Pausanias  and  Philostxatus
as  to  the  resting-place  of  the  Panathenaic  ship ;  but  as  we  have  the
unanimous  testimony  of  Thucydides  (ii.  15),  Strabo  (ix.  p.  404),
Pausanias  (L  19.  i),  and  inscriptions  (note  on  i.  19.  i)  to  the  £ict  of
the  Pythium  being  near  the  Olympieum,  it  would  seem  that  Dr.  Dorp-
feld,  in  placing  it  in  the  opposite  quarter  of  Athens,  only  escapes  one
difficulty  to  encounter  a  much  greater.  It  is  fair  to  add  that  Dr.
Ddrpfeld's  view  as  to  the  situation  of  the  Pythium  is  to  some  extent
countenanced  by  Euripides,  who,  describing  the  cliffs  on  the  north  foce
of  the  Acropolis  where  was  the  cave  of  Apollo,  says  {Ion,  285)  that  they
were  honoured  by  '*  the  Pythian  god  and  the  Pythian  lightning."  Prof.
C.  Wachsmuth  suggested  that  there  may  have  been  two  sanctuaries  of
the  Pythian  Apollo  at  Athens,  one  in  the  cave,  and  the  other — the  chief
one — to  the  south-east  of  the  Acropolis  (Rheinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  23
(1868),  p.  55  sqq^y  cp.  ib,  pp.  379  sq.^  531  sqq,)\  but  he  afterwards
admitted  that  this  view  was  open  to  grave  objections,  since  we  know
that  Apollo  in  the  cave  was  worshipped  under  the  title  of  <  Apollo  under
the  heights,'  but  have  no  proof  that  he  was  called  the  Pythian  ApoUo
(C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen^  i.  p.  296).  Cp.  Miss  Harrison,
Ancient  Athens^  p.  564  sqq.  \  J.  Pickard,  in  Ameriam  Journal  of
Archaeology^  8  (1893),  p.  60  sq.

At  Smyrna,  during  the  celebration  of  the  feast  of  Dionysus,  which
fell  in  early  spring  in  the  month  of  Anthesterion,  a  sacred  ship,  steered  by
the  priest  of  Dionysus,  was  carried  aloft  in  procession  round  the  market-
place. The  pageant  was  believed  to  commemorate  an  ancient  naval
victory  which  the  Smymaeans  had  won  over  the  Chians  (Philostratus,
Vit.  Sophist,  i.  25.  i  ;  Aristides,  Or.  xv.  vol.  i.  p.  373,  e±  Dindorf ;
<V/.,  xxii.  vol.  I.  p.  440,  ed.  Dindorf).

29.  I.  a  larger  vessel  than  the  one  at  Delos  etc  Pausanias
apparently  had  not  heard  of  the  colossal  ship  with  forty  banks  of  oars
which  Ptolemy  Philopator,  king  of  Egypt,  had  built  for  himself;  it  was
240  cubits  long  and  48  cubits  high.  See  Callixenus's  description  of
this  monster  ship,  quoted  by  Athenaeus,  v.  p.  203  sq. ;  cp.  Plutarch,
Demetrius^  43.  Ptolemy  Philadelphus  owned  two  ships  with  30  banks
of  oars  each,  one  with  20  banks,  four  with  13  banks,  two  with  12  banks,
fourteen  with  1 1  banks,  thirty  with  9  banks,  etc.  (Athenaeus,  v.  p.  203
c  d).  From  an  inscription  found  at  the  temple  of  the  Paphian  Aphrodite
in  Cyprus  we  learn  that  king  Ptolemy  set  up  a  statue  of  a  naval  architect,
Pyrgoteles  by  name,  who  had  constructed  two  ships,  one  with  30,  the
other  with  20  banks  of  oars  {Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^  9  (1888),  p.
255).  Hiero  king  of  Syracuse  built  a  ship  with  20  banks  of  oars  ;  its
construction  was  superintended  by  Archimedes  (Athenaeus,  v.  p.  206
sqq.)     Cp.  £.  Assmann,  in  Jahrbuch  cL  arch.  Instituts^  4  (1889),  P*

95  ^qq-

Pausanias  has  now  finished  his  description  of  Athens,  and,  quitting
the  city  by  the  Dipylum  gate,  passes  through  the  great  graveyard  of  the
outer  Ceramicus  on  his  way  to  the  Academy,  which  he  describes  in  the


CH.  XXIX  THE  PNYX  375

next  chapter  (c.  30).  Before  we  follow  him  thither  it  will  be  well  to
mention  an  important  monument  of  Athenian  history  which  he  has
£3uled  to  notice,  probably  because  it  had  been,  as  we  know,  unused  for
centuries  before  his  time.  This  is  the  Pnyx  or  place  of  public  assembly.
The  site  has  been  identified,  if  not  with  absolute  certainty,  at  least  with
a  very  high  degree  of  probability.  It  is  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  to
the  west  of  the  Acropolis,  on  the  north-eastern  slope  of  the  low  rocky
hill  which  rises  between  the  Museum  Hill  (to  the  south),  the  Areopagus
(to  the  north-east),  and  the  Hill  of  the  Nymphs  (to  the  north).  The
place  is  a  huge  artificial  platform  or  terrace  in  the  form  of  a  semicircle.
The  chord  of  the  semicircle  is  on  the  highest  part  of  the  slope ;  the
middle  of  the  arc  is  at  the  lowest,  and  here  the  central  part  of  the
curve  is  buttressed  up  by  a  massive  terrace  wall,  about  1 5  feet  high  in
the  middle,  which  prevented  the  soil  on  the  slope  from  slipping  down
into  the  valley  below.  This  wall  is  preserved  for  a  length  of  about  200
feet,  forming  about  a  third  of  a  circle,  and  its  course  eastward  can  be
traced  further.  It  is  built,  without  mortar,  of  immense  blocks  of  stone
which,  without  being  perfectly  regular  in  shape,  approximate  closely  to
the  quadrangular  and  are  well  fitted  together.  The  size  of  the  stones
varies ;  one  of  them  is  more  than  1 3  feet  long  and  6  high.  Two  to
three  courses  are  preserved ;  but  it  is  easy  to  see,  from  the  irregular
line  of  the  upper  stones  and  the  height  of  the  soil  above  it,  that  the  wall
was  originally  higher.  There  is  nothing  in  the  style  of  the  masonry  of
this  wall  to  show  that  it  is  of  extremely  early  date ;  in  other  words,  that
it  is  prehistoric.

The  upper  side  of  the  terrace — the  chord  of  the  semicircle — is  formed
by  a  line  of  rock  hewn  vertically,  so  as  to  present  to  a  spectator,  standing
on  the  terrace,  the  appearance  of  a  wall  about  1 5  feet  high  at  the  highest
point,  but  sloping  down  irregularly  towards  both  ends.  This  wall  of
rock  does  not  run  in  a  straight  line ;  its  two  halves  meet  at  an  obtuse
angle  in  the  middle,  forming  as  it  were  two  radiuses  of  a  circle,  while
the  semicircular  terrace  shelves  gently  down  from  them  to  the  massive
wall  of  masonry  already  described.  It  is  plain  that  this  massive  wall
served  no  other  purpose  than  to  support  the  terrace  and  allow  it  to  be
artificially  raised  in  such  a  way  as  to  compensate  for  the  natural  slope
of  the  ground.  The  surface  of  the  terrace  is  formed  by  a  stratum  of
earth  covering  the  rock  to  a  depth  which  varies  from  a  few  inches  in  the
upper  part  of  the  terrace  to  5  or  6  feet  in  the  lower.  At  one  point  this
stratum  of  earth  is  more  than  7  feet  higher  than  the  present  top  of  the
walL  In  the  middle  of  the  wall  of  rock,  where  the  two  radiuses  meet  at
an  obtnse  angle,  there  projects  a  cube  of  rock  which  was  left  when  the
rock  about  it  was  cut  away  in  forming  the  back  wall  of  the  terrace.
This  cube  of  rock,  about  1 1  feet  long  and  as  many  broad,  rests  on  a
three-stepped  platform  or  plinth,  which  is  about  31  feet  wide  in  front
and  projects  about  2 1  feet  from  the  wall  of  rock.  Against  the  wall  of
rock,  on  each  side  of  the  cube,  is  a  flight  of  steps  leading  up  from  the
floor  of  the  terrace  to  the  top  of  the  cube.  The  height  of  the  cube
above  the  terrace  is  between  9  and  10  feet.  In  the  wall  of  rock  are
more  than  fifty  rectangular  niches,  cut  as  if  to  receive  votive  tablets.


376  THE  PNYX  bk.  i.  attica

All,  with  one  exception,  are  from  5  to  8  inches  wide  and  high  and  an
inch  or  so  deep.  About  40  feet  to  the  east  of  the  cube  of  rock  is  a
niche  much  larger  than  the  rest  (about  8  feet  high,  3  feet  wide,  and  i
foot  deep).  In  clearing  out  the  earth  at  the  foot  of  the  rock-wall  in
1803  Lord  Aberdeen  found  eleven  votive  tablets  of  marble,  which  no
doubt  formerly  occupied  some  of  the  niches  in  the  wall.  These  tablets
are  now  in  the  British  Museum.  All  of  them  are  inscribed  with  the
name  of  the  donor,  and  most  of  them  with  a  dedication  to  "  Highest
Zeus,"  or  simply  to  '*  the  Highest''  The  tablets  also  represent  in  relief
parts  of  the  human  body,  no  doubt  the  parts  which  the  god  was  believed
to  have  cured.  The  donors  are  mostly  women.  The  inscriptions  are
all  of  Roman  date.  See  Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  p.  402  sqq, ;  C  /.  A,  iiL
Nos.  147-156.

The  terrace  measures  395  feet  along  the  chord  of  the  semicircle  and
212  feet  from  the  middle  of  the  chord  to  the  circumference.  Its  area,
excluding  the  projecting  cube  of  rock,  is  6240.5  square  metres,  a  space
which  is  calculated  to  afford  standing  room  for  25,000  to  30,000  persons,
or  seats  for  about  1 8,000.

Immediately  above  this  large  semicircular  terrace  there  is  a  much
smaller  one,  divided  from  the  lower  by  the  perpendicular  wall  of  rock  in
which  are  the  votive  niches.  This  upper  terrace,  about  60  yards  long
by  30  to  40  yards  wide,  has  been  artificially  produced  by  le\*elling  the
rock,  which  here  forms  the  surface  of  the  terrace,  whereas  the  surface  of
the  lower  terrace  consists  wholly  of  made  earth.  At  its  back  (south)
the  upper  terrace  is  bounded  by  a  wall  cut  in  the  rock  resembling,
though  much  shorter  and  lower  than,  the  rock-wall  which  di\'ides  it  firom
the  lower  terrace.  Moreover  the  upper  rock- wall,  unlike  the  lower,  runs
in  a  straight  line.  Close  to  this  upper  rock-wall,  and  nearly  in  the  axis
of  the  cube  of  rock  described  above,  a  square  block  of  rock  has  been
left  standing  when  the  rest  of  the  mass  was  hewn  am-ay  to  form  the
terrace.  It  is  about  1 8  feet  in  diameter  and  i  foot  high,  and  appears
to  have  been  the  base  of  an  altar.  A  wall  constructed  of  enormous
blocks  seems  to  have  extended  along  the  north  side  of  the  upper  terrace,
parallel  to,  and  distant  about  the  breadth  of  a  road  from,  the  perpen-
dicular wall  of  rock  which  separates  the  two  terraces.  Two  of  the
blocks  of  this  wall  remain  near  the  western  end  of  the  terrace ;  they
bear  the  marks  of  hammers  and  are  neatly  jointed  together.  Their
united  length  is  about  33  feet  The  two  terraces  are  connected  by  the
two  flights  of  steps  at  each  side  of  the  cube  of  rock  described  above,
and  also  by  another  flight  of  steps  to  the  west  of  the  cube.  A  little
above  the  upper  rock- wall  are  the  remains  of  the  ancient  city -wall
crowning  the  hill,  which  be\'ond  the  wall  slopes  away  southTK*ard.

There  is  little  room  for  doubt  that  the  large  semicircular  terrace
described  abo\*e  was  the  Pn>'x  or  place  of  public  assembly,  and  that
the  cube  of  rock  projecting  from  the  rock-m-all  on  the  southern  side  of
the  terrace  was  the  platform  from  which  the  speakers  addressed  the
multitude ;  it  was  funiliarly  called  '•  the  stone  in  the  Pn\-x "  (Aristo-
phanes, /'r<ttv.  6 So.  ii-ith  the  Scholium V  It  is  true  that  at  present  the
ground  shel\*es  away  from  this  platform,  so  that  an  audience  assembled


CH.  XXIX  THE  PNYX  377



on  the  terrace  would  now  be  below  an  orator  speaking  from  the  platform.
But  in  antiquity,  as  we  have  seen,  the  retaining-wall  of  the  terrace  was
certainly  higher  than  it  is  now  ;  hence  we  may  suppose  that  the  ground
then  extended  on  a  level  with  the  speaker's  platform  or  rose  above  it
like  a  theatre.

From  ancient  writers  we  learn  that  the  Pnyx  was  on  a  rocky  height
(Aristophanes,  Knights^  312  and  783;  Demosthenes,  xviii.  169,  p.
285;  Plutarch,  Nictas^  y  \  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Knights^  750>
opposite  to  Lycabettus,  the  high  conical  hill  on  the  north-east  of  Athens
(Plato,  Critias^  p.  112  a),  in  the  hilly  district  of  Melite  (Schol.  on
Aristophanes,  Birds^  997))  near  the  Museum  Hill  (Plutarch,  Theseus^
27),  within  sight  of  the  Areopagus  (Lucian,  Bis  accusaiusy  9),  near  the
Acropolis  (Pollux,  viii.  132),  and  within  sight  of  the  Propylaea  (Harpo-
cration,  j.v.  Upoirvkaia  ravra  ;  cp.  Aeschines,  ii.  74).  The  semicircular
terrace  described  above  satisfies  all  these  conditions,  and  it  would  be
hard  to  find  any  other  spot  in  Athens  that  did.  Moreover,  it  answers
well  to  Pollux's  description  of  the  Pnyx  as  "  a  place  near  the  Acropolis
fashioned  in  accordance  with  ancient  simplicity,  not  with  the  splendour
of  a  theatre."  It  is  well  adapted  to  be  a  place  of  public  assembly,  and
could  easily  accommodate  far  more  than  the  six  or  seven  thousand
persons  who  seem  occasionally  to  have  gathered  to  vote  (Demosthenes,
xxiv.  45  j^.,  p.  715  ;  /V/.,  lix.  89,  p.  1375  ;  cp.  Thucydides,  viii.  72).
Lastly,  in  1839  an  inscription  "boundary  of  the  Pnyx"  {opo%
liwKOiy  C,  L  A,  i.  No.  501)  was  found  on  the  terrace  near  the  speaker's
platform,  if  we  can  trust  the  assertion  of  Pittakis,  who  says  he  found
it  himself.  The  inscription  is  genuine,  but  statements  made  by  Pittakis
are  not  above  suspicion.

On  the  whole,  the  evidence  for  identifying  the  semicircular  terrace
with  the  Pnyx  is  sufficient.  The  identification  was  first  made  by
Chandler  in  the  eighteenth  century  {Travels  in  Greece^  p.  68).  In
1852,  however,  F.  G.  Welcker  attempted  to  prove  that  the  terrace  was
a  Pelasgic  or  prehistoric  sanctuary  of  Highest  Zeus,  and  that  the  plat-
form for  speaking  from  was  his  altar.  This  fanciful  theory,  resting  on
the  inscriptions  of  Roman  date  which  contain  dedications  to  Highest
Zeus  and  which  prove  nothing  as  to  an  ancient  worship  here,  has  been
defended  by  Prof.  E.  Curtius  and  accepted  by  Prof  A.  Milchhofer  and
Messrs.  Perrot  and  Chipiez.  I  need  not  waste  words  over  it,  as  it  has
been  abundantly  refuted  by  others.


On  the  whole  subject  see  Dodwell,  Tour  in  Greece^  i.  p.  401  sqq, ;
Leake,  Athens,  i.  pp.  178-183,  517-519;  Ch.  Wordsworth,  Athens  and  Attica^
pp.  54-61  ;  W.  Mure,  Journal^  2.  pp.  60-64  J  the  writings  of  K.  Gottling,
F.  G.  Welcker,  L.  Ross,  and  C.  Bursian  cited  above,  p.  358;  W.  Vischer,
Erinnerungen  und  Ehtdriicke,  pp.  1 08- 1 16;  A.  R.  Rangabe,  Antiquith  Hel-
Uniques,  2.  pp.  579-586  ;  E.  Curtius,  Attische  Studien,  i.  Pnyx  und  Stadtmauer
(republished  in  the  author's  Gesammelie  Abhandlungen^  I.  289  sqq.)\  iV.,  Erldu-
ternder  Text  d,  sieben  Karten  zur  Topographie  von  A  then,  p.  15  sqq.  ;  id.,
Stadtgeschichte,  p.  28  sqq.  ;  Curtius  und  Kaupert,  Atlas  von  Athen,  p.  26,  with
pi.  v.  ;  T.  H.  Dyer,  Ancient  Athens,  pp.  461-472,  531-542;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die
Stadt  Athen,  i.  pp.  369-372;  A.  Milchhiifer,  *  Athen,*  pp.  157-159;  Guide-
Joanne^  I.  p.  78  j^. ;  J.  M.  Crow,  *The  Athenian  Pnyx,*  Papers  of  the  American


378  THE  OUTER  CERAMICUS  bk.  i.  attica

School  of  Ciassual  Studies  at  Athens,  4  (1885-1886),  pp.  207-260  (iudlcknis  sum-
mary and  discussion) ;  Baedeker,'  p.  93  ;  H.  G.  Lolling,  '  Athen,  pp.  331-334 ;
Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  pp.  104-110;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  liistoire  de
I* Art  dans  VAntiquiti,  6.  p.  431  sq.

29.  2.  the  Academy.  See  i.  30.  i  note.  The  road  to  the
Academy,  which  Pausanias  now  follows,  left  Athens  by  the  Dipylum
gate  (Livy,  xxxi.  24 ;  Cicero,  De  finibus,  v.  i.  i  ;  Lucian,  Scytka^  2).
Thus  Pausanias,  after  completing  the  circuit  of  Athens,  quitted  it  by
the  same  gate  by  which  he  had  entered  it  (see  note  on  i.  2.  4,  *  When
we  have  entered  into  the  city'  etc)  Two  other  highroads,  besides  the
road  to  the  Academy,  started  from  the  Dipylum  gate  ;  one  led  to  Piraeus
(see  note  on  i.  2.  4  as  above),  the  other  led  to  Eleusis  (see  note  on  i.
36.  3).  The  road  to  the  Academy  went  north-west ;  the  road  to  Eleusis
went  west ;  and  the  road  to  Piraeus  went  south-west

The  suburb  outside  the  Dipylum  was  called  the  Ceramicus  or
Potter's  Quarter;  the  adjoining  quarter  of  the  city,  inside  of  the
Dipylum,  was  also  called  the  Ceramicus  (Harpocration,  s,v,  K€pcLfjL€uc69 ;
see  i.  3.  I  note).  Modem  writers  distinguish  the  suburb  from  the
quarter  of  the  city  by  calling  the  former  the  Outer  Ceramicus  and  the
latter  the  Inner  Ceramicus.  In  the  Outer  Ceramicus  the  bones  of  all
the  Athenians  who  fell  in  battle  for  their  country  were  buried  by  the
state.  This  public  burial  took  place  at  the  end  of  a  campaign.  The
bones  were  placed  in  coffins  of  cypress  wood  and  were  conveyed  on
wagons  to  the  grave.  There  was  one  coffin  for  each  tribe,  and  one
empty  coffin  for  those  whose  bodies  had  not  been  found.  The  funeral
procession  was  followed  by  all  who  chose  to  attend,  whether  citizens  or
foreigners,  and  the  women  whose  relatives  had  fallen  were  present  at
the  grave.  When  the  coffins  had  been  lowered  into  the  earth,  a  speaker
ascended  a  lofty  pulpit  and  addressed  the  crowd,  praising  the  dead  and
comforting  the  bereaved.  When  he  had  finished  the  crowd  dispersed
(Thucydides,  ii.  34 ;  Aristophanes,  Birds,  395  sqq,  ;  Harpocration,
s.v.  Kcpa/ACiicos ;  Suidas,  s.v.  Kcpa/xceicoi).  These  public  graves  lined
the  road  on  both  sides,  and  tombstones  on  each  grave  told  where  the
men  had  fallen  (Suidas,  s.v,  Kc/oa/xcticos ;  SchoL  on  Aristophanes,
Knights,  772,  and  Birds,  395  ;  and  see  below,  §  4).  A  number  of
Attic  inscriptions  containing  lists  of  the  slain  have  come  down  to  us ;
they  doubtless  stood  originally  over  graves  in  the  Ceramicus  (C  /.  A.
i.  No.  432  sqq,^  One  of  these  inscriptions,  dating  firom  about  459  B.C.,
begins  thus  :  "  Of  the  tribe  of  Erechtheus  the  following  fell  in  battle  in
Cyprus,  in  Egypt,  in  Phoenicia,  in  Haliae,  in  Aegina,  in  Megara  in
the  same  year"  ;  then  follows  a  long  list  of  names  (C.  /.  A,  i.  No.  433 ;
W.  Frohner,  Inscriptions  Grecques  du  Louvre,  No.  112;  Dittenberger,
Sylloge  Jnscr,  Graec.  No.  3;  Hicks,  Gr,  hist,  Inscr.  Na  19;  Roberts,
Greek  Epigraphy,  No.  69).  The  present  chapter  of  Pausanias  proves
that  it  was  the  road  to  the  Academy  which  was  lined  with  these  public
monuments.  Cicero  speaks  of  the  magnificence  of  the  tombs  in  the
Ceramicus  {De  legibus,  iL  26.  64).  Excavations  made  in  1861  and
subsequent  years  outside  and  a  little  to  the  south  of  the  Dipylum,  near
the  church  of  the  Holy  Trinity  (Hagia  Triada),  brought  to  light  a  large


CH.  XXIX  THE  OUTER  CERAMICUS  379

number  of  sepulchral  monuments,  which  from  their  position  appear  to
have  lined  the  road  to  Piraeus.  Many  of  these  monuments  are  still
standing  in  their  original  positions,  and  some  of  them  are  of  great
artistic  beauty ;  but  as,  with  two  exceptions  (Archdologische  Zeitung^
29  (1872),  p.  28  5q,\  they  belong  to  private  tombs,  and  are  not
mentioned  by  Pausanias,  they  do  not  concern  us  here.  See  C.  Curtius,
*  Der  attische  Friedhof  vor  dem  Dipylon,*  Archdologische  Zeitung^  29
(1872),  pp.  12-35  \  Curtius  und  Kaupert,  Atlas  von  Atken^  p*  24  sq,^
with  pi.  iv.  ;  A.  Milchhofer,  *Athen,'  p.  174;  Guide-Joanne^  i.  p.  81
sqq, ;  Baedeker,*  p.  90  sq, ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  577
sqq.  The  only  standing  remains  of  a  tomb  yet  discovered  on  the  road
to  the  Academy  consist  of  a  piece  of  masonry  nearly  cubical  (about  6
feet  high  and  1 5  feet  in  diameter),  which  appears  to  have  formed  the
kernel  of  a  sepulchral  monument  of  Roman  date.  It  is  situated  about
300  yards  north-west  of  the  Dipylum  (Milchhofer,  *  Athen,'  p.  176).

A  few  paces  south-west  of  the  Dipylum  is  a  boundary-stone  built
against  the  outer  face  of  the  ancient  city- wall.  It  bears  the  inscription
"boundary  of  the  Ceramicus"  (see  above,  p.  45).  It  is  doubtful
whether  the  stone  marks  the  boundary  between  the  inner  and  the  outer
Ceramicus  (for  which  the  ancients  had  not  separate  names)  or  the
boundary  between  the  Ceramicus  and  another  township  or  parish  to
the  south.  Cp.  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  7  ;  A.  Milchhofer,
in  Berliner  philolog.  Wochenschrift^  11  (1891),  p.  748.

29.  2.  an  enclosure  sacred  to  Artemis.  Opposite  the  Dipylum
there  was  found  a  base  of  Pentelic  marble  inscribed  with  a  dedication
to  Artemis  by  a  certain  Mitrobates  (C.  /.  A,  ii.  No.  16 10).  The
inscription  seems  to  date  from  about  the  beginning  of  the  second
century  B.C  or  a  little  later.  Further,  a  tablet  of  Hymettian  marble,
built  into  a  wall  to  the  south  of  the  Dipylum,  is  inscribed  with  a
resolution  passed  by  a  religious  brotherhood  (Jkiasos)  to  the  effect  that
a  tablet  should  be  set  up  in  the  sanctuary  of  Artemis,  on  which  were  to
be  engraved  the  names  of  all  the  existing  members  of  the  brotherhood
and  of  all  new  members  on  payment  of  their  subscriptions ;  the  docu-
ment is  signed  by  the  treasurer  and  secretary  of  the  society  (Dittenberger,
Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec,  No.  426).  This  Artemis  appears  to  have  been
identified  with  Hecate ;  at  least  Hesychius  tells  us  {s,v,  KaWUmj)  that
in  the  Ceramicus  there  was  an  image  or  shrine  of  Hecate  who  was
called  Calliste,  and  that  some  people  said  she  was  Artemis.

29.  2.  a  temple to  which  they  bring  the  image  of  Eleuthe-

rian  Dionysns  every  year  etc.  As  to  the  image  of  Eleutherian  Dionysus,
see  i.  20.  3  note.  The  processions  with  the  image  to  and  from  the
little  temple  outside  the  gate  seem  to  have  taken  place  at  the  Festival  of
Flowers  (Anthesteria)  in  the  month  of  Anthesterion  (February-March).
See  Aug.  Mommsen,  Heortologie,  p.  353.  On  the  outward  procession
the  munificent  Herodes  Atticus  used  regularly  to  provide  wine  in  the
Ceramicus  for  the  whole  crowd,  citizens  and  foreigners  alike,  who
quaffed  it  reclining  on  beds  of  ivy  (Philostratus,  Vit,  Soph,  ii.  i.  5).
The  return  procession  took  place  in  the  evening  ;  and  the  lads  {ephebot)^
after  sacrificing  at  the  shrine,  escorted  the  image  by  the  light  of  torches


38o  GRAVES  ON  ROAD  TO  ACADEMY         bk.  i.  attica

to  the  theatre  (C.  /.  A,  ii.  Nos.  470,  471).  A  gay  troop  of  dancers,
disguised  as  Seasons,  Nymphs,  and  Bacchanals,  appears  to  have  followed
or  preceded  the  image,  tripping  to  the  shrill  music  of  flutes  (Philostratus,
Vtt.  Apollon,  i.  21).

Similar  processions  with  images  seem  to  have  been  not  uncommon
in  antiquity.  Cp.  Paus.  vii.  20.  i  and  8.  At  the  festival  of  Dionysus
at  Methymna  the  image  of  the  god  was  carried  round,  as  we  learn  from
an  inscription  {Bull,  de  Corr,  HelUmque,  7  (1883),  p.  37  sq.)  The
image  of  Panamarian  Zeus  at  Stratonicea  in  Caria  would  appear  also
to  have  been  borne  in  procession  at  a  festival  called  the  Ascension
{Bull,  de  Corr,  HelUnique^  11  (1887),  p.  384  sqq.\  id,^  15  (1891),
pp.  174,  178).

29.  3.  Of  the  graves  the  first  is  that  of  Thrasybuliu.  In
addition  to  the  long  list  of  tombs  on  the  road  to  the  Academy  which
Pausanias  has  given  us  in  the  present  chapter,  we  know  that  the  sophist
Phoenix  was  buried  on  the  right  of  the  road  to  the  Academy  near  the
soldiers'  graves  (Philostratus,  Vit,  Sophist,  ii.  22).  We  are  told  that
"  they  buried  Solon  publicly  beside  the  gate,  near  the  wall,  on  the  right
as  you  enter ;  and  his  grave  is  walled  round ''  (Aelian,  Var,  Hist,  viiL
16).  "The  gate"  here  spoken  of  is  probably  the  Dipylum,  which  was
the  principal  and  most  famous  gate  of  Athens.  Again,  the  tomb  of
the  more  or  less  mythical  Scythian  named  Toxaris  stood  not  £ar  from
the  Dipylum,  on  the  left  of  the  road  to  the  Academy.  It  was  a  low
mound  surmounted  by  a  tombstone,  on  which  was  carved  a  Scythian
holding  a  bow  in  his  right  hand  and  a  book  in  his  left  In  Lucian's
time  the  tombstone  was  lying  on  the  ground,  and  the  upper  part  of  it,
including  the  man's  face,  was  worn  and  defaced  with  time ;  but  wreaths
of  flowers  lay  on  it  always,  the  offerings  of  grateful  persons  who  believed
that  they  had  been  healed  of  fevers  by  Toxaris.  For  Toxaris  was
deemed  a  hero,  and  the  Athenians  sacrificed  to  him  as  such  under  the
title  of  the  Foreign  Physician.  It  was  commonly  supposed  that  he
had  stopped  the  great  plague  at  Athens  by  ordering  that  the  streets  should
be  sprinkled  with  wine.  A  white  horse  was  sacrificed  at  his  tomb.
See  Lucian,  Scytha^  i  sq.  We  hear  of  a  building  called  "  the  Council-
chamber  of  the  Artists  beside  the  gate  of  the  Ceramicus  not  fiur  from
the  horsemen  "  (Philostratus,  Vit,  Sophist,  ii.  9.  4).  These  artists  were
probably  one  of  those  societies,  half  religious,  half  theatrical,  which
styled  themselves  "  artists  of  Dionysus  "  ;  they  were  very  conmion  in
ancient  Greece  (see  O.  Liiders,  Die  dionysischen  Kiinstler^  Beriin,
1873;  P.  Foucart,  De  collegiis  Scenicorum  Artificum  apud  Gnucos^
Paris,  1873).  Their  council-chamber  or  club-house  was  probably  placed
at  the  Dipylum  in  order  to  be  near  the  temple  of  Dionysus  which  stood
outside  of  the  gate.  "  The  horsemen  "  near  which  their  club-house  was
situated  may  have  been  the  sepulchral  monument  mentioned  hf
Pausanias  below  (§  6).  The  garden  of  Epicurus  was  on  the  way  to  the
Academy  (Cicero,  De  finibusy  v.  i.  3),  but  apparently  within  the  city-
walls  (Pliny,  N,  H,  xix.  50  sq,\  probably  beside  his  house  in  the  quarter
Melite  (Diogenes  Laertius,  x.  17).  Cp.  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt
AtheHj  I.  p.  264  sq.


CH.  XXIX  CHAVES  ON  HO  AD  TO  ACADEMY  381

29.  3.  Pericles.  His  grave  was  a  little  to  the  right  of  the  road
(Cicero,  Dejbubusy  v.  2.  5).

29.  3.  Ohabrias.  This  distinguished  general  met  his  death  at  the
siege  of  Chios  in  357  B.C.  He  succeeded  in  forcing  an  entrance  into
the  harbour ;  but  here  his  ship  was  surrounded  by  the  enemy,  and  being
rammed  began  to  sink.  The  rest  saved  themselves  by  swimming,  but
Chabrias  refused  to  quit  the  ship  and  remained  fighting  on  the  deck  till
she  went  down  (Cornelius  Nepos,  Chabrias,  4  ;  Diodorus,  xvi.  7).

29.  3.  Phonnio.  His  most  famous  exploit  was  the  defeat  of  a
large  Peloponnesian  fleet  at  the  entrance  to  the  Gulf  of  Corinth  in
429  B.C  (Thucydides,  ii.  86-92).

29.  4.  except  the  men  who  fought  at  Marathon  etc.  Cp.
Thucydides,  ii.  34,  and  see  i.  32.  3  note.

29.  4-  The  first  buried  here  were  the  men  who  in  Thrace  etc.
About  465  ac.  10,000  of  the  Athenians  and  their  allies,  who  had  been
sent  as  colonists  to  Thrace,  were  cut  to  pieces  by  the  Thracians  or
Edonians  at  Drabescus  or  Datum  (Thucydides,  i.  100;  /V/.,  iv.  102;
Herodotus,  ix.  75  ;  Isocrates,  viii.  86).  An  extant  inscription  containing
a  list  of  slain  is  supposed  to  have  stood  over  the  tomb  or  cenotaph  of
these  men  in  the  Ceramicus  (C  /.  A.  i.  No.  432  ;  Roberts,  Greek
Epigraphy y  i.  No.  432).

29.  5.  Leagnis Sophanes Eurybates.     Herodotus  says

(ix.  75)  that  Sophanes  was  slain  along  with  Leagnis  by  the  Edonians
while  fighting  for  the  gold  mines  at  Datum.  The  pentathlete  Eurybates
led  a  thousand  Argive  volunteers  to  the  help  of  the  Aeginetans  when
they  were  at  war  with  Athens.  He  killed  three  adversaries  in  single
combat,  but  was  himself  slain  by  Sophanes,  a  challenge  to  mortal
combat  having  been  given  and  accepted  (Herodotus,  vi.  92,  ix.  75).

29.  5.  expedition under  lolans  to  Sardinia.    Cp.  vii.  2.  2,

ix.  23.  I,  x.  17.  5  with  the  notes.

29.  5.  the  second  was  to  Ionia.     Cp.  vii.  2.

29.  6.  Eleon.  This  town,  mentioned  by  Homer  (//.  ii.  500),
appears  to  have  been  situated  near  Dritsa,  a  modem  village  about  six
miles  north-west  of  Tanagra.  See  note  on  ix.  19.  4,  ^Harma.'  The
engagement  between  the  Athenians  and  Lacedaemonians  in  this  neigh-
bourhood is  not  otherwise  known.  Leake  conjectured  that  it  was  **  an
action  in  the  passes  of  Cithaeron  prior  to  the  battle  of  Tanagra :  the
passes  leading  to  the  Isthmus  were  at  that  time  in  the  hands  of  the
Athenians,  and  the  Lacedaemonians  were  returning  from  Phocis  "  (Leake,
Athens,  i.  p.  595  note  i).  Cp.  Thucydides,  i.  107  sq,  ;  Diodorus,
xi.  80.

29.  6.  the  Thessalian  cavalry,  who  came  for  old  friendship's
sake  etc.  See  Thucydides,  ii.  22.  Some  of  them  fell  in  a  skirmish
with  the  Boeotian  cavalry  at  a  place  called  Phrygia  in  431  B.C,  The
Thessalian  cavalry,  supported  by  a  troop  of  Athenian  horse,  held  their
ground  till  the  Boeotian  infantry  came  up  to  the  support  of  their  cavalry
(Thucydides,  I.e.)  The  first  invasion  of  Attica  by  the  Peloponnesian
army  under  Archidamus,  king  of  Sparta,  took  place  in  43 1  B.c.  (Thucy-
dides, ii.  18  sqq.)


Uta  CitAVES  C3' I:OAI^  TC  A


t^*  C,  Oniaak  Immmikm     T3Qe  corps  a  etsss  -faai  subf  -waft

H-t  ;r^',r<avtii  ti*t  A:i;c  irlbt*  from  focr  id

7 /<>^rv*:  r/>tn  feJI  at  tbe  baatle  of  Tasa^ia  (457  i..C  ; :  aee  beizw;.  |  S  Jf .
iyjfSi^,  ir^XTAXiW  hare  bees  focad  of  as  isscnpocc  maua.  s  coaTCscsaed
V>  >iav«  been  a  Hst  <if  the  CkoDaeans  vix>  feij  a  sis  ^t-V  ^  C  Z  ^  L
No.  44  f  ;  Hfjthi,  L  G.  A.  No.  36  ;  Hk±s,  Grtei  Hzsit^i:;tL  H
No.  22  ;  R/>bertft,  ^z/*.^  Epigrapkr^  Nol  77 :  ddbbcfiL  :s
OV^^^  iL  f^ritch,  Aipka^eis,^  p.  97  ;  G.  Kaibd,  Efi^n
No,  20;,  If  this  conjecture  is  correct,  the  stosie  of  vijc&
tfiKtiW  have  been  found  probably  stood  o\-er  the  gia^e  of  the
in  the  Ctrstrntcus.

29.  7'  tha  Athenians  who  wixred  with  the  AicimtiM  etc
5>ee  Her^xlotuft,  vL  92  /^.

29.  7'  tha  Athaniims  allowed  their  daTea  to  ahare  Oa  hammt
of  a  labile  bnrial  etc  In  great  emergencies,  as  towards  the  end  of
the  Pelopfinnesian  war  and  before  the  battle  of  Chaeronea,  the  Athenians
appear  to  have  freed  and  armed  their  slaves  (Justin,  v.  6 ;  Lfongiis,  c,
Leocr.  41).

29.  7.  the  anny  of  Olynthna.  The  Athenians  sent  three  cxpedi-
tionft  to  the  relief  of  Olynthus  when  it  was  hard  pressed  fay  Philip  of
Ma^xdonia,  On  the  first  two  occasions  the  troops  sent  were  mercenaries;
Init  on  the  third  occasion,  at  the  special  request  of  the  Olynthians,  a
native  Athenian  force  of  2000  infantry  and  300  cavalry,  under  the  com-
mand of  Chares,  was  despatched  to  their  aid  (PhilochoruSy  Frag.  132,
in  Fraf^.  Hist.  Graec.  ed.  Miiller,  i.  p.  405  sq. ;  Demosthenes,  zxL  197,
p,  578).  This  third  expedition  seems  to  have  been  sent  in  349  B.C.
(Grotc,  /////'.  of  Greece^  11.  p.  150).

29.  7-  Melesander,  who  sailed  up  the  Maeander.  Daring  the
I'eloponnesian  war  Melesander  was  sent  with  a  squadron  of  six  ships  to
the  coasts  of  Caria  and  Lycia  in  the  winter  of  430-429  B.C.  The  object
of  the  expedition  was  to  levy  contributions  and  to  put  down  the  enemy's
privateers,  who  swarmed  out  from  these  coasts  and  preyed  on  Uie
merchantmen  sailing  from  Phoenicia  to  Athens.  Melesander  landed  a
force  in  Lycia,  but  was  defeated  and  slain  with  some  of  his  men  (Thucy-
dides,  ii.  69).

29.  7-  the  war  with  Oassander.     Cp.  i.  25.  6 ;  i.  26.  3  ;  x.  18.

7  ;  X.  34.  2  sq,

29.  7*  the  Argives  who  drew  sword  for  Athens.  One  thousand
Argivcs  ifought  on  the  Athenian  side  against  the  Lacedaemonians  at  the
battle  of  Tanagra  in  457  B.C.  (Thucydidcs,  i.  107  sq,  ;  Diodonis,  xi.
80).  Cp.  iii.  II.  8  ;  V.  10.  4.  The  occasion  of  the  alliance  between
Athens  and  Argos  is  told  by  Thucydides  (i.  loi  sq.\  whom  Pausanias
here  follows.     Cp.  iv.  24.  6  sq,

29.  10.  ApoUodorus,  a  captain  of  mercenaries  etc     Perinthus


ca  XXIX  CHAVES  ON  ROAD  TO  ACADEMY  383

was  besieged  by  Philip  of  Macedonia  in  340  B.C  The  Persian  king,
alarmed  at  the  rise  of  Philip's  power,  commanded  his  satraps  on  the
coast  of  Asia  Minor  to  aid  the  beleaguered  city  to  the  utmost  of  their
power.  Accordingly  the  satraps  threw  into  Perinthus  a  force  of  mercen-
aries, along  with  a  supply  of  money,  com,  and  arms  (Diodorus,  xvi.  75).
In  the  following  year  Philip  was  obliged  to  raise  the  siege  (Diodorus,
xvi.  77).  Cp.  Grote,  Hist  of  Greece^  11.  p.  259  sqq.  Arsites,  satrap
of  Hellespontine  Phrygia,  fought  at  the  Granicus  against  Alexander  the
Great  (334  b.c),  and  put  himself  to  death  after  the  battle  (Arrian,
AfuUfosis^  L  16.  3;  cp.  iV/.,  i.  13.  8;  Diodorus,  xvii.  19).  He  is
mentioned  by  Strabo  (xvi.  p.  766).

29.  10.  EnbnlnB,  son  of  Spintharus.  This  was  the  well-known
demagogue  and  orator,  the  adversary  of  Demosthenes  (Demosthenes,
xviii.  21,  p.  233,  xxi.  207,  p.  581,  etc.  ;  Aeschines,  ii.  8  and  184,  iii.
25;  Dinarchus,  i.  96;  Aristotle,  Rhetoric^  i.  15.  15;  Theopompus,
quoted  by  Athenaeus,  iv.  p.  1 66  d  ;  Harpocration,  s,v,  EvPovkos ;
Plutarch,  PhocioUy  7  ;  iV/.,  Praecept  Ger,  Reipub,  xvi.  23  ;  Scholiast  on
Aeschines,  i.  8  and  iii.  25).  That  his  father's  name  was  Spintharus  is
mentioned  also  by  the  pseudo-Plutarch  (  ViL  X,  Orat  p.  840  b).

29.  10.  the  tyrant  Lachares.     See  i.  25.  7  note.

29.  10.  Piraens  when  it  was  held  by  a  Macedonian  garrison.
See  i.  25.  7.

29.  II.  the  men  who  fell  at  Oorinth.  The  Lacedaemonians
defeated  an  allied  army  composed  of  Athenians,  Argives,  Boeotians,  and
Corinthians  at  Corinth  in  394  B.C.  The  Athenian  force  present  at  the
battle  numbered  6000  foot  and  600  horse ;  their  losses  were  heavy.
See  Xenophon,  Hellenica^  iv.  2.  9-23.  Demosthenes  spoke  of  this
engagement  as  "the  great  battle  at  Corinth"  (Demosthenes,  xx.  52,  p.
472).  A  memorial  of  this  battle  was  found  in  1861  outside  the  Dipylum,
near  the  church  of  the  Holy  Trinity.  It  is  a  slab  of  Pentelic  marble
which  formed  the  upper  part  of  a  tombstone  or  sepulchral  monument ;
under  a  sculptured  decoration  are  inscribed  the  names  of  the  cavalrymen
who  fell  at  the  battles  of  Corinth  and  Coronea,  the  numbers  being  eight
at  Corinth  and  one  at  Coronea.  If  the  list  is  complete,  it  proves  that
the  Athenian  cavalry  cannot  have  been  seriously  engaged  in  either  of
the  actions  ;  but  there  may  have  been  many  more  names  on  the  missing
part  of  the  monument  See  C.  /.  A.  ii.  No.  1673 ;  Dittenberger,
Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec.  No.  56  ;  Hicks,  Greek  Historical  Inscriptions^  No.
68  ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  A  then,  1 .  p.  266 ;  Miss  Harrison,
Ancient  Athens,  p.  576  sg.  We  cannot  tell  whether  this  monument  to
the  cavalry  was  a  public  monument  erected  by  the  state  or  a  private
monument  erected  by  the  comrades  of  the  slain,  like  the  tablets  in
memory  of  the  men  of  a  particular  regiment  which  are  now  often  placed
in  churches  by  their  surviving  comrades.  There  must  have  been
another  monument  to  the  infantry,  whose  losses  seem  to  have  been  more
severe ;  Pausanias  probably  saw  this  latter  monument,  but  may  have
seen  the  other  also.  From  the  inscription  on  the  cavalry  monument  we
learn  that  the  name  of  one  of  the  eight  troopers  who  fell  at  Corinth  was
Dexileus ;  and  by  a  remarkable  coincidence  the  private  monument  of


384  GRAVES  ON  ROAD  TO  ACADEMY       BX.  i.  attica

this  Dexileus  has  been  found  outside  the  Dipylum,  where  it  still  saads
in  its  original  position.  The  monument  is  of  Pentelic  mazble,  and  the
inscription  on  it  (C.  /.  A.  ii.  No.  2084  ;  Hicks,  Gr,  Hist  Imscr,  No.  69;
Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Graec.  No.  55)  states  that  DezDeus  son  of
Lysanias,  of  the  township  of  Thoricus,  was  bom  in  the  arcfaonship  of
Tisander  (414  B.C.)  and  died  in  the  archonship  of  Eobulides  (394  BX.)
at  Corinth,  where  he  was  one  of  *Uhe  five  horsemen."  These  five
horsemen  probably  signalised  themselves  by  some  desperate  feat  of
valour ;  but  what  it  was  we  do  not  know.  Above  the  inscripcion  is  a
fine  relief  cut  in  a  sunken  panel  in  the  stone ;  it  represents  a  horsemu
riding  down  a  foot  soldier ;  the  figures  are  life-size.  That  this  nioiiument
of  Dexileus  was  a  private  one  is  certain  ;  for  sepulchral  monuments  of
other  members  of  Dexileus's  family  were  found  beside  it.

See  Dyer,  Ancient  Athens,  pp.  296-298 ;  C.  Curtius,  in  Archaoicgischt  Zdhmi,
29  (1872),  p.  14;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Atken,  I.  p.  266  sq.\  Cartias  sod
Kaupert,  Atlas  von  Athene  p.  24,  with  pL  iv. ;  Friederichs- Welters,  Gipsmigmsst,
No.  1005 ;  A.  S.  Murray,  History  of  Greek  Sculpture,  2.  p.  330,  with  pL  xxx.;
Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  p.  578  sqq,

29.  II.  the  men  who  fell  in  Enboea  and  Ohioa.     Euboea  was

repeatedly  invaded  by  the  Athenians  ;  the  reference  here  is  perhaps  to
the  subjugation  of  the  whole  island  by  Pericles  in  445  B.C.  (Thucydidos,
i.  114).  Chios  revolted  from  Athens  in  412  B.C,  whereupon  the
Athenians  despatched  a  force  which  landed  in  Chios,  defeated  the  rebds,
besieged  them  in  the  capital,  and  ravaged  the  island  (Thucydides,  viii.
14  sq,^  24,  55,  etc.)  In  the  Social  War  (357-355  B.C.)  Chios  once
more  revolted  from  Athens,  and  an  Athenian  army  again  landed  in
the  island  and  laid  siege  to  the  capital  (Diodorus,  xvi.  7  ;  Cornelius
Nepos,  Chabrias,  4).  The  men  whose  tomb  Pausanias  saw  in  the
Ceramicus  probably  perished  in  the  first  Chian  revolt ;  for  the  force
despatched  against  the  island  in  the  second  revolt  probably  OMisisted  of
mercenaries.

29.  12.  he  surrendered  voluntarily,  whereas  Demosthenes  etc.
This  distinction  between  the  conduct  of  Nicias  and  Demosthenes  on  the
disastrous  retreat  from  Syracuse  is  not  borne  out  by  Thucydides,  accord-
ing to  whom  Nicias,  though  broken  down  by  sickness,  behaved  in  these
terrible  days  with  the  utmost  energy  and  heroism,  cheering  the  de-
spondent, restraining  stragglers,  maintaining  strict  order  on  the  march.
The  division  under  Demosthenes  was  the  first  to  be  overtaken  and  to
lay  down  their  arms.  The  division  under  Nicias  struggled  on  till  the
following  day,  when  on  reaching  the  river  Assinarus  the  men,  who  were
parched  with  thirst,  broke  their  ranks  and  rushed  into  the  water.  Then
the  enemy  closed  in  upon  them  from  all  sides  and  the  retreat  became  a
massacre.  But  it  was  not  till  the  dead  were  lying  in  heaps  in  the  river
and  the  army,  as  such,  had  ceased  to  exist,  that  Nicias  surrendered  to
the  Spartan  general  Gylippus,  and  even  then  he  made  no  terms  for
himself,  but  only  asked  for  quarter  for  his  men.  See  Thucydides,  vii.
76-85.  But  though  in  this  last  scene  Nicias  bore  himself  irreproachably
both  as  an  officer  and  a  soldier,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  responsibility


CH.  xxxx  GRAVES  ON  ROAD  TO  ACADEMY  385

for  the  disaster  rested  mainly  on  him ;  for,  against  the  remonstrances  of
Demosthenes,  who  ¥^s  a  far  better  general,  he  had  delayed  the  retreat
till  it  was  too  late.  This  apparently  the  Athenians  coidd  not  forgive ;
so  they  omitted  his  name  from  the  roll  of  honour,  the  list  of  the  dead
in  the  Ceramicus.

29.  13.  at  Megara.  In  445  b.c.  the  Megarians  revolted  from
Athens  and  put  the  garrison  to  the  sword  (Thucydides,  i.  1 14).

29.  13.  when  Alcibiades  pennaded  the  Arcadians  of  Mantinea
etc  In  420  B.C.  the  intrigues  of  Alcibiades  brought  about  an  alliance
between  Athens,  Argos,  Mantinea,  and  Elis.  In  the  summer  of  418
B.C  the  allies  were  defeated  by  the  Lacedaemonians  in  a  great  battle  at
Mantinea.  See  Thucydides,  v.  43-47,  63-74.  A  fragment  of  the  treaty
of  alliance,  of  which  Thucydides  has  transmitted  to  us  a  complete  copy
(v.  47),  was  found  engraved  on  a  tablet  of  Pentelic  marble  between  the
theatre  of  Dionysus  and  the  music-hall  of  Herodes  Atticus  (C.  /.  A,  iv.
No.  46  b,  p.  14  sq,)  It  may  have  been  from  this  very  stone  that  the
copy  of  the  treaty  was  made  for  Thucydides's  history.

29.  13.  defeated  the  Syracnsans  before  the  arrival  of  Demo-
Stlienea.  In  413  b.c  Demosthenes  brought  large  reinforcements  to
the  Athenian  army  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Syracuse  (Thucydides,
vii.  42).  Before  his  arrival  the  Athenians  had  been  successful  in
several  actions  with  the  enemy  (Thucydides,  vi.  67-71,  98-102,  vii.  5,
22  sq,)

29.  1 3*  the  men  who  fonght  in  the  sea-fights  at  the  Hellespont.
A  tombstone,  which  in  all  probability  stood  on  the  grave  of  these  men
in  the  Ceramicus,  was  found  at  Athens  in  1882  or  a  little  earlier;  the
exact  place  where  it  was  discovered  is  uncertain.  It  is  a  slab  of  Pentelic
marble  about  5  feet  high  and  20  inches  wide.  Engraved  on  it  is  a  list
of  the  men,  arranged  according  to  tribes,  who  fell  in  the  Chersonese,  in
Byzantium,  and  in  'Uhe  other  wars.''  Underneath  is  an  epigram  in
four  lines  to  the  effect  that  all  these  men  had  perished  at  the  Hellespont
in  the  flower  of  their  youth.  They  probably  fell  in  the  campaign  of
409  B.C,  in  which  the  Athenians  under  Alcibiades  captured  Selymbria
and  Byzantium,  laid  siege  to  Chalcedon,  and  levied  contributions  about
the  Hellespont  As  to  this  campaign  see  Xenophon,  Hellenica^  i.  3  ;
Diodorus,  xiiL  66  sq, ;  Plutarch,  Alcibiades^  29-31.  For  the  inscription
see  C  /.  A,  iv.  No.  446  a,  p.  108  sqq, ;  A.  KirchhofT,  <Eine  attische
Todtenliste,*  Hermes^  17  (1882),  pp.  623-630;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient
Athens^  p.  575.  The  inscription  does  not  say  whether  the  fights  in
which  these  men  fell  were  fought  by  sea  or  land ;  Pausanias  supposes
that  they  fell  at  sea,  but  this  was  probably  a  mistaken  inference  from  the
inscription.  In  point  of  fact  the  Athenian  operations  on  the  Hellespont
and  the  Bosphorus  in  409  B.c.  were  mostly  conducted  on  land.  The
epigram  appended  to  the  list  of  the  slain  is  imitated  in  an  epigram  in
the  Anthology  {Anthol.  Palat,  vii.  258),  which  is  falsely  attributed  to
Simonides.  See  Bruno  Keil,  *Zu  den  Simonideischen  Eurymedon-
epigranmien,'  Hermes^  20  (1885),  pp.  341-348.

29.  13.  those  who  engaged  the  Macedonians  at  Ohaeronea.
Lycurgus  says  {c.  Leocr,  142)  that  a  thousand  Athenians  fell  in  the

VOL.  II  2  c


386  GRA  VES  ON  ROAD  TO  ACADEMY       bk-  l  attica

battle  and  that  they  received  a  public  burial;  and  he  speaks  of  the
inscriptions  carved  on  their  tombs  at  the  entrance  to  the  city.

29.  13.  those  who  marched  with  Gleon  to  AmiihipdUB.  The
defeat  of  Cleon  by  Brasidas  in  front  of  Amphipolis  is  ^graphically  told  by
Thucydides  (v.  7-1 1).  The  Athenians  lost  six  hundred  men;  the
enemy  only  seven.  Both  generals  died  in  the  battle  in  wa>'s  that  ^-ere
worthy  of  their  lives.  Cleon  was  stabbed  in  the  back  running  away :
Brasidas  fell  chai^ng  at  the  head  of  his  men,  and  only  lived  to  hear
that  the  victory  was  won.

29.  13.  those  who  fell  at  DeliimL  As  to  the  defeat  of  the  Athenians
by  the  Boeotians  at  Delium  in  424  B.C,  see  Thucydides,  iv.  91-10 1,  and
the  note  on  ix.  20.  i.  The  Athenians  lost  little  less  than  1000  of  the
regular  infantry  besides  a  large  number  of  irregulars  and  baggage-
bearers.

29.  13.  those  whom  Leosthenes  led  to  Thessaly.  See  L  i.  3 ;
i.  25.  3-5.

29.  13.  those  who  sailed  with  Oimon  to  Cypms.  In  449  b.c
Cimon  sailed  with  a  fleet  to  Cyprus,  where,  after  defeating  the  Persians
and  capturing  a  number  of  cities,  he  died.  After  his  death  the  Athenian
fleet  and  army  won  another  great  victory  by  sea  and  land  over  the
Persians  at  Salamis  in  Cyprus.  See  Thucydides,  i.  112;  Diodorus,  xii.
3  sq, ;  Plutarch,  Cimon,  iZ  sq.;  Cornelius  Nepos,  Cimon,  3.  Accord-
ing to  Isocrates  (viii.  86)  the  Athenians  lost  one  hundred  and  fifty  war-
ships at  Cyprus.  The  inscription  which  contains  a  list  of  the  Athenians
who  fell  in  Cyprus  etc.,  has  been  already  referred  to  (note  on  i.  29.  2,
*  the  Academy ').

29.  13.  those  who  joined  Olympiodorns  in  driving  out  the
Macedonian  garrison.     See  i.  26.  i  sq,

29.  14.  the  deeds  of  Tolmides  and  his  men.    See  i.  27.  5.

29.  14.  whom  on  the  great  day  Oimon  led  to  victory.  On  this
great  victory,  won  over  the  Persians  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  Eurymedon
in  Pamphylia,  see  Thucydides,  i.  100;  Diodorus,  xi.  61;  Plutarch,
Cimon,  12  sq.  Modem  writers  place  the  victory  variously  in  469  B.C.,
467  B.c,  466  B.C.,  and  465  B.C.  Cp.  Busolt,  Grieck.  Geschickte,  2.  p.
402  note.  The  Athenians  dedicated  a  bronze  palm-tree  at  Delphi  as  a
monument  of  this  victory  (Paus.  x.  15.4  sq.)

29.  15.  Zeno.  Diogenes  Laertius  has  preserved  for  us  a  decree  of
the  Athenian  people  in  which  the  thanks  of  the  state  are  rendered  to
Zeno  in  his  life-time  for  his  services  in  the  cause  of  virtue,  and  it  is  pro-
vided that  a  tomb  shall  be  built  for  him  in  the  Ceramicus  at  the  public
expense ;  in  this  tomb  the  philosopher  was  afterwards  laid  (Diogenes
Laertius,  vii.  11  and  29).

29.  15.  Nicias,  son  of  Kicomedes.  See  iii.  19.  4  note.  The
expression  here  translated  as  "  the  greatest  animal-painter  of  his  time "
(f<f a  apurros  ypaxf/ai,  twv  k<j>  kavrov)  may  perhaps  mean  "  the  greatest
figure-painter  of  his  time,"  the  figures  (ft)a)  being  either  human  or
animal ;  it  seems  to  be  commonly  understood  in  this  general  sense
(Brunn,  Gesch.  d.  griech.  KiinstUr,  2.  p.  195).  Pliny  says  (N,  H.
XXXV.  133)  that  Nicias  painted  dogs  very  successfully.     But  the  subjects


CH.  XXX  GRAVES  ON  ROAD  TO  ACADEMY  387

of  most  of  the  pictures  which  he  is  known  to  have  painted  are  mytholo-
gical.    See  Pliny,  N.H,  xxxv.  130-133  ;  Brunn,  op.  cit.  2.  pp.  194-200.

29.  16.  Lycnrgns  bronght  into  the  public  chest  etc.  The
following  particulars  are  probably  derived  from  the  decree  of  the
Athenian  people  in  honour  of  Lycurgus,  which  was  proposed  by
Stratocles  in  the  archonship  of  Anaxicrates  (307/6  B.C.)  A  copy  of
this  decree  is  preserved  by  the  pseudo-Plutarch  in  his  life  of  Lycurgus
(Vit,  X.  OrcU,  pp.  844,  852).  The  decree  sets  forth  the  many  services
which  Lycurgus  had  rendered  to  Athens.  The  following  extracts  from
it  will  illustrate  the  present  passage  of  Pausanias :  '<  He  provided
ornaments  for  the  goddess,  and  Victories  all  of  gold,  and  processional
vessels  of  gold  and  silver,  and  golden  ornaments  for  a  hundred  basket-
bearers  "  {i,e,  girls  who  carried  baskets  of  sacred  things  in  processions),
**  and  having  been  elected  minister  of  war  he  brought  many  arms  and
50,000  missiles  into  the  Acropolis,  and  provided  four  hundred  sea-
worthy war-ships,  by  building  new  ships  and  repairing  old  ones  ;  and  in
addition  he  completed  and  finished  the  ship-sheds  and  the  arsenal  and
the  Dionysiac  theatre,  all  of  which  he  had  found  half-finished ;  and  he
constructed  the  Panathenaic  stadium  and  the  gymnasium  at  the  Lyceum  ;
and  he  adorned  the  city  with  many  other  buildings."  The  decree  con-
cludes with  a  list  of  honours  to  be  conferred  on  the  memory  of  Lycurgus
(who  had  been  dead  about  fifteen  years),  and  a  provision  that  copies  of
all  the  decrees  in  his  honour  should  be  engraved  on  tablets  of  stone  and
set  up  on  the  Acropolis.  Fragments  of  a  copy  of  the  decree,  engraved
on  slabs  of  Pentelic  marble,  have  been  found.  They  show  that  the
copy  of  the  decree  preserved  by  the  pseudo-Plutarch  is  somewhat  con-
densed and  abridged.  See  C.  I.  A.  ii.  No.  240 ;  Hicks,  Greek  Historical
Inscriptions^  No.  145  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec,  No.  124.
Cp.  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen^  i.  p.  597  sqq.  The  various
buildings  of  Lycurgus  mentioned  in  the  decree  have  been  already
noticed  by  Pausanias  (i.  1.2;  i.  19.  3  ;  i.  19.  6  ;  i.  21.  i)  or  touched
on  in  the  commentary  (see  above,  p.  1 8  sqq.  as  to  the  arsenal).

The  decree  in  honour  of  Lycurgus  mentions  that  two  of  his  ancestors,
Lycomedes  and  Lycurgus,  had  received  public  burial  in  the  Ceramicus
in  recognition  of  their  virtue  or  valour.  These  monuments  Pausanias
has  not  noticed.  Doubtless  there  were  many  more  which  he  passed
over  in  silence.  A  fragment  of  one  such  monument  is  now  in  the
British  Museum.  It  is  a  stone  bearing  a  metrical  inscription  in  twelve
lines  in  honour  of  the  150  Athenians  who  fell  at  Potidaea  in  432  B.c.
(Thucydides,  i.  62-64).  Above  the  inscription  there  is  said  to  have
been  formerly  a  relief  representing  three  naked  warriors  armed  with
round  shields,  helmets,  and  spears  ;  the  one  on  the  spectator's  left  was
stretched  on  the  ground,  stabbed  by  the  spear  of  the  warrior  in  the
middle  ;  the  one  to  the  right  was  brandishing  his  weapon.  This  relief
has  now  disappeared.  See  C,  I.  A.  i.  No.  442  ;  Kaibel,  Epigrammata
Graeca^  No.  21  ;  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  P*  574  ^q^

30.  I.  the  Academy.  Popular  tradition  gives  the  name  of
Academy  (JCathemnia)  to  a  place  about  three-quarters  of  a  mile  north-
west of  the  Dipylum,  in  the  broad  belt  of  olive-wood  which  stretches


388  THE  ACADEMY  bk.  i.  attica

along  both  banks  of  the  Cephisus  from  its  source  at  the  western  foot  of
Mt  Pentelicus  nearly  to  the  sea.  The  exact  spot  is  a  little  to  the
south  of  the  rocky  knoll  on  which  are  the  graves  of  Charles  Lenormant
and  K.  O.  M tiller  and  which  has  been  identified  as  the  famous  Colonus
Hippius.  This  situation  agrees  well  with  the  descriptions  of  ancient
writers ;  for  we  know  that  the  Academy  was  near  Colonus  Hippius
(Paus.  i.  30.  4),  and  Cicero  says  i^De  finibusy  v.  i.  i)  that  the  Academy
was  six  furlongs  (three-quarters  of  a  mile)  from  the  Dipylum.  Liv/s
statement  (xxxi.  24)  that  the  Academy  was  about  a  mile  from  the
Dipylum  is  probably  not  quite  so  exact  Thus,  though  no  remains  of
buildings  belonging  to  it  have  as  yet  come  to  light,  the  situation  of  the
Academy  may  be  regarded  as  approximately  ascertained.  "It  is  on
the  lowest  level,  where  some  water-courses  from  the  ridges  of  Lycabet-
tus  are  consumed  in  gardens  and  olive  plantations.  These  were  the
waters  which,  while  they  nourished  the  shady  groves  of  the  Academy
and  its  plane-trees  remarkable  for  their  luxuriant  growth,  made  the  air
unhealthy.  They  still  cause  the  spot  to  be  one  of  the  most  advantageous
situations  near  Athens  for  the  growth  of  fruit  and  pot-herbs,  and  main-
tain a  certain  degree  of  verdure  when  all  the  surrounding  plain  is
parched  with  the  heat  of  summer"  (Leake,  Athens^  i.  p.  197  sq,)  The
olive-woods,  occupying  a  strip  of  country  about  ten  miles  long  by  two
wide,  offer  a  refreshing  contrast  to  the  bare,  treeless,  dried-up  aspect  of
the  rest  of  the  plain  round  Athens.  "  I  have  wandered  whole  days  in
these  delightful  woods,  listening  to  the  nightingales,  which  sing  all  day
in  the  deep  shade  and  solitude,  as  it  were  in  a  prolonged  twilight,  and
hearing  the  plane-tree  whispering  to  the  elm,  as  Aristophanes  has  it,
and  seeing  the  white  poplar  show  its  silvery  leaves  in  the  breeze,  and
wondering  whether  the  huge  old  olive  stems,  so  like  the  old  pollared
stumps  in  Windsor  Forest,  could  be  the  actual  sacred  trees,  the  fjuoplai^
under  which  the  youths  of  Athens  ran  their  races.  The  banks  of  the
Kephissus,  too,  are  lined  with  great  reeds,  and  sedgy  marsh  plants,
which  stoop  over  its  sandy  shallows  and  wave  idly  in  the  current  of  its
stream.  The  ouzel  and  the  kingfisher  start  from  under  one's  feet,  and
bright  fish  move  out  lazily  from  their  sunny  bay  into  the  deeper  pool.
Now  and  then  through  a  vista  the  Acropolis  shows  itself  in  a  framework
of  green  foliage  "  (Mahaf!y).  (For  a  fuller  description  of  the  valley  of
the  Cephisus  with  its  olive-woods  see  C.  BStticher,  in  Philologus^  22
(1865),  pp.  221-227).

The  Academy  was  said  to  derive  its  name  from  one  Academus  or
Hecademus,  sometimes  called  a  hero,  who  consecrated  or  founded  it
(Paus.  i.  29.  2  ;  Diogenes  Laertius,  iii.  7  ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,
CloudSy  1005;  Suidas  and  Hesychius,  s,v,  *AKa&rjfjL€ia;  Schol.  on
Demosthenes,  xxiv.  114,  p.  736).  When  Castor  and  Pollux  came  to
Attica  in  search  of  their  sister  Helen,  Academus  is  said  to  have  told
them  that  she  was  hidden  at  Aphidna  (see  i.  17.  5  note)  ;  hence  when-
ever the  Lacedaemonians  invaded  and  ravaged  Attica  they  always  spared
the  Academy  for  the  sake  of  Academus  (Plutarch,  Theseus^  32).  There
was  a  shrine  of  the  hero  Academus  in  the  Academy  (Schol.  on  Demo-
sthenes, xxiv.   Ii4»  P-   736).     In  historical  times  the  Academy  is  first


CH.  XXX  THE  ACADEMY  389

heard  of  in  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  when  Hipparchus,  brother  of  the
tyrant  Hippias,  built  a  wall  round  it  at  great  expense,  which  he  com-
pelled the  Athenians  to  defray  (Suidas,  s,v.  to  'iTnrapxov  rctxtov).  But
it  was  Cimon  who  first  converted  it,  from  a  dry  and  dusty  place,  into  a
well-watered  grove  with  trim  avenues  and  shady  walks  (Plutarch,  Cimofty
1 3).  Hence  it  is  described  as  "  a  wooded  suburb  "  (Diogenes  Laertius,
iii.  7 ;  Suidas,  s.v,  *AKa&qfi€La)  and  as  "  the  best  wooded  of  the
suburbs  "  (Plutarch,  Su//a,  1 3).  The  plane-trees  in  one  of  the  avenues
were  £amous  for  their  enormous  size  (Pliny,  A''.  //,  xii.  9).  There  was
a  gymnasium  at  the  Academy  as  early  certainly  as  the  time  of  Aristo-
phanes towards  the  close  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.,  and  probably  much
earlier.  In  the  Clouds  of  Aristophanes  {v.  1002  sqq.)  a  young  man
is  told  :  "  You  will  spend  your  time,  sleek  and  blooming,  in  the  gym-
nasiums. .  .  .  You  will  go  down  to  the  Academy  and  run  races  under
the  sacred  olives  with  a  virtuous  comrade,  crowned  with  white  reeds  and
smelling  of  bindweed  and  careless  ease  and  the  white  poplar  that  sheds
its  leaves,  happy  in  the  springtide  when  the  plane-tree  whispers  to  the
elm."  There  would  seem  to  have  been  an  open  space  of  some  extent
in  the  Academy,  since  Xenophon  speaks  as  if  the  cavalry  paraded  there
on  festival  days  {Hipparch.  iii.  i).

But  the  chief  title  of  the  Academy  to  fame  is  that  Plato  taught  in  it,
as  Aristode  did  in  the  Lyceum  on  the  opposite  side  of  Athens  (Diogenes
Laertius,  iii.  7 ;  Suidas,  5,v.  'AfcaSi^/Licia ;  Schol.  on  Demosthenes,  xxiv.
114,  p.  736;  Biografhi  Graeciy  ed.  Westermann,  pp.  387,  393).
Milton  describes  it  in  familiar  lines  (Paradise  Regained^  iv.  244  sqq,^  as

**  the  olive  grove  of  Academe,
Plato's  retirement,  where  the  Attic  bird
Trills  her  thick- warbl'd  notes  the  summer  long."

It  is  said  that  Plato  taught  at  first  in  the  Academy,  but  afterwards  in  a
garden  of  his  own  adjoining  it,  near  Colonus  Hippius  (Diogenes  Laertius,
iii.  5  ;  Apuleius,  Dedogmate  PlatoniSy  i.  4  ;  Damascius, '  Life  of  Isidore,'
in  Photius,  Bibliothecay  p.  346  a  34  sqq.^  ed.  Bekker ;  Cicero,  De  finibusy
V.  I.  2).  His  house  was  in  the  garden,  and  for  house  and  garden  he
seennLS  to  have  paid  3000  drachms  (Plutarch,  De  exiliOy  10).  He  was
so  much  attached  to  the  place  that  though  it  was  said  to  be  unhealthy
and  the  doctors  advised  him  to  shift  his  quarters  to  the  Lyceum,  he
positively  refused  to  do  so  (Aelian,  Var,  Hist,  ix.  10).  He  founded
in  the  Academy  a  shrine  of  the  Muses,  in  which  his  successor  Speusippus
afterwards  dedicated  images  of  the  Graces  (Diogenes  Laertius,  iv.  i.  i  ;
Biographi  Graeci,  ed.  Westermann,  pp.  387,  393).  A  Persian  named
Mithridates  afterwards  dedicated  to  the  Muses  a  statue  of  Plato  himself
and  placed  it  in  the  Academy;  the  sculptor  was  Silanion  (Diogenes
Laertius,  iii.  25  ;  as  to  Silanion,  see  note  on  vi.  4.  5).  Plato's  grave
was  not  far  from  the  Academy  (§  3  below).  After  his  death  the  Academy
continued  to  be  the  head-quarters  of  his  school.  Xenocrates,  who
succeeded  Speusippus  as  head  of  the  school,  resided  constantly  at  the
Academy ;  he  used  to  go  into  Athens  only  one  day  in  the  year,  the  day
of  the  Dionysiac  festival  when  the  new  tragedies  were  acted  (Plutarch,


390  THE  ACADEMY  bk.  i.  attica

De  exiliOy  i  o ;  Diogenes  Laertius,  iv.  2.  6).  Polemo,  who  succeeded
Xenocrates,  also  lived  regularly  in  the  garden  at  the  Academy ;  his
disciples  put  up  little  huts  for  themselves  beside  his  garden,  where  they
dwelt  near  the  shrine  of  the  Muses  (Diogenes  Laertius,  iv.  2.  6 ;  iV£,  iv.
3.  1 9).  Lacydes,  the  founder  of  the  philosophic  school  called  the  New
Academy,  taught  at  the  Academy  in  a  garden  constructed  by  King
Attalus  (Diogenes  Laertius,  iv.  8.  60).  When  Sulla  laid  siege  to  Athens
in  87-86  B.C.,  he  cut  down  the  woods  of  the  Academy  to  make  siege-
engines  (Plutarch,  Sulla^  1 2  ;  Appian,  Bellum  Mithrid.  30).  Cicero
lays  the  scene  of  one  of  his  philosophic  dialogues  at  the  Academy  {De
finibus^  v.  I ).  Horace  studied  at  Athens  and  learned  '<  to  seek  for  truth
in  Academus's  woods  "  {Epist  ii.  2.  45).  In  Pausanias's  time  the  Academy
was  still  a  gymnasium  (i.  29.  2).  It  was  popularly  said  that  laughter  was
not  permitted  in  the  Academy  (Aelian,  Var,  Hist,  ix.  35).  An  inscrip-
tion, dating  apparently  from  Hadrian's  time,  mentions  plots  of  land  in
the  Academy  which  were  the  property  of  private  persons  (C  /.  A.  iii.
No.  61).  Funeral  games  were  held  in  the  Academy  in  honour  of  the
men  slain  in  war  who  were  buried  in  the  neighbouring  Ceramicus,  and
sacrifices  were  offered  to  them  at  a  pit  in  the  Academy;  the  games
were  superintended  and  the  sacrifices  offered  by  the  Polemarch  or
minister  of  war  (Philostratus,  Vit.  Sophist,  ii.  30 ;  Heliodorus,
Aethiopica^  i.  17;  cp.  Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens,  58).  The
Thessalian  philosopher  Philiscus  was  buried  at  the  spot  where  the
funeral  games  were  held  (Philostratus,  l,c,)  Funeral  games  were  also
held  in  honour  of  Eurygyes,  who  was  identified  with  Androgeus,  son  of
Minos  ;  these  games  are  said  to  have  been  held  in  the  Ceramicus
(Hesychius,  s.v,  ctt  Evpvyvy  aycjv),  but  they  were  probably  held  in
the  Academy  like  the  other  funeral  games ;  the  name  Ceramicus  may
have  been  extended  so  as  to  include  the  Academy.  Marcus  Marcellus,
a  Roman  who  was  murdered  in  Athens  in  45  B.C.,  was  buried  in  the
Academy  and  a  marble  tomb  was  erected  over  his  remains  (Cicero,
Epist.  ad  Fam,  iv.  22).  A  road  led  from  the  Academy  to  the  Lyceum
outside  of,  but  close  to,  the  city-walls  (Plato,  Lysis,  p.  203  a).

More  particulars  as  to  the  Academy  are  given  in  the  following  notes.

Cp.  Dodwell,  Tour,  I.  p.  411  sq,\  Leake,  Athens,  i.  pp.  599-602;  Ch.
Wordsworth,  Athens  and  Attica,  p.  201  ;  Dyer,  Ancient  Athens,  p.  486  sqq,  ;
C  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  At  hen,  i.  p.  255  sqq,  ;  A.  Milchhofer,  'Athen,  p.
176  sq,  ;  J.  P.  MahafFy,  Rambles  and  Studies  in  Greece,  p.  135  sq,  ;  P.  Kastro-
menos,  Die  Demen  von  Attika,  p.  21  sq.  ;  Miss  Harrison,  Anciettt  Athens,  p.
597  ^99-  »  E.  Curtius,  Stadtgeschichte,  p.  89  sq,

30.  I.  an  altar  of  Love.  Charmus  who  dedicated  this  altar  was
a  friend  of  the  tyrant  Hippias  (Athenaeus,  xiii.  p.  609  d).  The  metrical
inscription  carved  on  the  altar  has  been  preser\'ed  by  Athenaeus  (J,c,)
It  ran  thus :  "  To  thee,  O  shifty  Love,  Charmus  dedicated  this  altar  at
the  shady  boundaries  of  the  gymnasium."  This  agrees  with  Pausanias's
statement  that  the  altar  stood  at  the  entrance  to  the  Academy.
Plutarch  says  that  the  tyrant  Pisistratus,  a  friend  of  Charmus,  **  consecrated
the  image  of  Love  in  the  Academy,  where  the  men  who  run  the  sacred
torch-race  kindle  the  fire"  (Plutarch,  Solon,  i).     Hermias  also  says  that


CH.  XXX  THE  ACADEMY  391

the  long  race  at  the  Panathenaic  festival  was  from  the  altar  of  Love,
"  for  the  lads  run  from  there,  after  lighting  their  torches  at  it  **  (Hermias
on  Plato,  Phaedrus^  c.  vii.  quoted  by  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen^
I.  p.  267  n.  4,  and  in  £.  Curtius's  Stadtgeschichte^  p.  xxix.)  Apuleius
also  speaks  of  **  the  altar  which  is  dedicated  to  Love  (Cupid)  in  the
Academy"  {De  dogmate  PlatoniSy  i.  i).  But  the  altar  and  the  image  of
Love  probably  stood  together  not  in,  but  at  the  entrance  to,  the  Academy;
and  the  torch-race  seems  to  have  started,  not  from  the  altar  of  Love,
but  fix)m  the  neighbouring  altar  of  Prometheus  (see  below,  §  2  note).
Sacrifices  were  offered  to  Love  jointly  with  Athena  at  the  Academy
(Athenaeus,  xiii.  p.  561  d  e).

30.  I.  the  altar  of  Love  Betnmed  etc.  The  story  which  Pausanias
tells  to  explain  the  origin  of  this  altar  is  told,  with  some  variations,  by
Suidas  (s,v,  MeAi^ros),  who  however  says  nothing  about  the  altar.  The
name  of  the  lover,  according  to  Suidas,  was  Meletus,  a  well  bom  and
wealthy  youth ;  the  name  of  the  beloved  was  Timagoras.  Meletus
brought  Timagoras  a  present  of  some  fine  cocks,  and  when  his  present
was  rejected,  he  flung  himself  in  despair  from  the  Acropolis.  Timagoras
ran  after  him  with  the  birds  in  his  arms  and  threw  himself  down  from
the  same  place.  In  memory  of  this  affair  a  statue  was  erected  on  the
spot,  representing  a  boy  with  two  cocks  in  his  arms  on  the  point  of
throwing  himself  headlong  down.

30.  2.  an  altar  of  Promethens.  A  fuller  description  of  this  altar
has  been  preserved  in  a  fragment  of  Apollodorus,  quoted  by  the  Scholiast
on  Sophocles  {Oed,  Col,  56).  From  this  we  learn  that  the  altar  was
dedicated  to  Prometheus  and  Hephaestus  jointly,  and  that  it  stood  on  an
ancient  base  on  which  were  carved  in  relief  figures  of  Prometheus  and
Hephaestus,  Prometheus  being  represented  as  an  elderly  man  with  a
staff  in  his  right  hand,  and  Hephaestus  as  a  young  man.  The  altar  was
at  the  entrance  to  the  Academy.  Prof.  C.  Wachsmuth  states  {Die
Stadt  A  then  J  i.  p.  269)  that  there  was  a  temple  as  well  as  an  altar  of
Prometheus  in  the  Academy.  The  authority  to  whom  he  refers  is
Apollodorus  quoted  by  the  Scholiast  on  Sophocles.  But  Mr.  C.  Miiller
in  his  Frag,  Hist.  Graec,  3.  p.  341  and  Mr.  P.  N.  Papageorgius  in
his  edition  of  the  Scholia  on  Sophocles  agree  in  reading  )3(u/ios  (*  altar ')
instead  of  va.6%  (* temple')  in  this  passage,  and  they  note  no  various
reading.  The  passage  is,  however,  often  quoted  with  vaos  instead  of
Piafios,  as  by  Prof.  Wachsmuth  and  by  Leake,  Athens,  i.  p.  600  n.  6.
Which  is  the  true  reading  ?

30.  2.  they  nm  from  it  to  the  city  with  bnming  torches  etc.
Torch-races  are  known  to  have  been  held  at  eight  Athenian  festivals,
namely  the  Panathenaic  festival,  the  festival  of  Prometheus,  the  festival
of  Hephaestus  (Harpocration,  s.v.  kafiirds ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,
Frogs,  131  and  1087;  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca,  pp.  228,  277;
C,  I,  A.  iii.  No.  Ill  ;  cp.  *E(f)r]fX€pU  apxaioXoyiKirj,  1 883,  p.  167  sg^,),
the  festival  of  Pan  (Herodotus,  vi.  105  ;  Photius,  Lexicon,  s.v,  Aa/i7ras ;
Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca,  p.  228),  the  festival  of  Bendis  (Plato,
Repub.  i.  p.  328  a,  with  the  Schol.  on  p.  327  a),  the  festival  of
Hermes  (C.  /.  A,  ii.   No.   1223;  Mittheil,  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  8


392  TORCH-RACES  bk.  i.  attica

(1883),  p.  226),  the  festival  of  Theseus  (C  /.  A,  Hi.  Nos.  107,  108),
and  the  festival  in  honour  of  the  dead  (C  /.  A.  iii.  Nos.  106,  109,  1 10 ;
Aug.  Mommsen,  Heortologiey  p.  282).  At  the  first  three  of  these
festivals  the  torch-race  was  run  in  the  Ceramicus  (Schol.  on  Aristo-
phanes, Frogs,  131),  the  course  being  probably  the  one  here  indicated
by  Pausanias,  namely  from  the  altar  of  Prometheus  in  the  Academy  to
some  point  (not  defined)  in  the  city.  At  the  festival  of  Bendis  the  race,
which  was  run  on  horseback,  took  place  at  Piraeus  (Plato,  Repub.  L  p.
327  a).  Where  it  took  place  at  the  other  festivals  we  are  not  told.
The  race  appears  to  have  been  run  in  two  different  ways.  One  way
was  this.  A  number  of  runners,  each  with  a  lighted  torch,  started
abreast,  and  the  one  who  first  carried  his  torch  alight  to  the  goal  was
the  winner.  This  was  the  kind  of  race  here  described  by  Pausanias.
The  other  way  was  this.  There  were  several  lines  of  runners  posted  at
intervals.  The  first  man  in  each  line,  after  lighting  his  torch  at  the
altar  or  receiving  it  lighted,  ran  with  it  at  full  speed  to  the  next  man  in
the  line,  to  whom  he  passed  it  on  ;  the  second  runner  similarly  trans-
mitted it  to  the  third ;  and  so  on  down  the  line,  till  the  last  man  in  the
line  carried  it  to  the  goal.  The  line  of  runners  which  first  succeeded
in  passing  its  torch  alight  to  the  goal  was  the  winner.  See  Herodotus,
viii.  98;  Aeschylus,  Agamemnon,  312  J(^.  ;  Plato,  Repub,  i.  p.  328  a ;
iV/.,  Laws,  vi.  p.  776  b  ;  Lucretius,  ii.  79.  In  this  latter  form  of  the  race
the  prize  fell  not  to  any  one  man  but  to  a  whole  line  of  runners.  Hence
we  hear  of  fourteen  men  being  winners  in  a  torch-race  (C  /.  A.  iii.
No.  122).  From  inscriptions  which  mention  various  Attic  tribes  as
victorious  in  torch-races  it  would  seem  that  the  lines  of  runners  were
composed  of  men  of  different  tribes,  each  line  consisting  of  men
of  one  tribe  exclusively  (see  Hermes,  7  (1873),  P«  44i)-  On  the  other
hand,  when  inscriptions  mention  a  single  man  as  winner  in  a  torch-race
(C  /.  A,  iii.  Nos.  106-111),  we  may  suppose  that  the  race  was  run  in
the  first  of  the  ways  described  above.

The  origin  of  the  torch-race  has  been  correctly  explained  by  Mr.  N.
Wecklein  (*Der  Fackelwettlauf,'  Hermes,  7  (1873),  PP-  437-452).  It
originated  in  a  custom  of  transmitting  a  new  and  holy  fire  from  a  hearth
or  altar  where  it  had  been  kindled,  to  other  hearths  or  altars  where  the
old,  polluted  fire  had  been  extinguished  as  a  preparation  for  receiving
the  new  and  pure  one ;  and  as  it  was  deemed  important  to  convey  the
new  fire  as  rapidly  as  possible  to  the  altars  that  were  waiting  for  it,  it
was  carried  at  full  speed  cither  by  a  single  runner  or  (if  the  distance
was  great)  by  relays  of  runners  who  passed  it  on  from  hand  to  hand.
That  this  must  have  been  the  origin  of  the  torch-race  appears  from
various  considerations.  In  the  first  place,  the  torches  in  the  race  were
lighted  at  the  altar  of  the  original  fire-bringer  Prometheus  (cp.  the
present  passage  of  Pausanias  with  Plutarch,  Solon,  i),  and  were  used
to  light  a  fire  on  an  altar  which  formed  the  goal  of  the  race  (Bekker's
Anecdota  Graeca,  p.  228,  s.v,  yvfivaxTlap\oi).  In  the  second  place,  there
is  a  widespread  notion  that  fire  becomes  polluted  either  through  daily
use  or  through  some  special  accident,  such  as  a  death  (Plutarch,  Quaes f.
Graec.  24)  or  the  presence  of  an  enemy ;  and  that  hence  it  is  needful


CH.  XXX  ORIGIN  OF  THE  TORCH- RACE  393

either  periodically  or  occasionally,  to  extinguish  the  fire  and  rekindle  it
from  some  pure  flame,  which  is  often  created  by  friction,  the  oldest  and
therefore  holiest  mode  of  obtaining  fire.  Thus,  after  the  battle  of
Plataea  all  the  fires  in  the  district  were  regarded  as  polluted  by  the
presence  of  the  Persians ;  consequently  they  were  extinguished  and
a  new  and  holy  fire  was  fetched  from  the  altar  at  Delphi  by  a
runner,  who  went  at  such  speed  that  after  handing  over  the  new  fire
to  the  expectant  citizens  he  dropt  dead  on  the  spot  (Plutarch,  Aristides^
20).  Similarly  at  the  yearly  purification  of  Lemnos,  an  island  devoted
to  the  worship  of  Hephaestus  (Ovid,  FcLstiy  iii.  82),  all  the  fires  in  the
island  were  extinguished  for  nine  days  and  were  then  rekindled  by  a
pure  fire  which  had  been  brought  for  the  purpose  from  the  sacred  isle
of  Delos  (Philostratus,  Heroica^  xx.  24).  In  ancient  Mexico  at  the  end
of  every  fifty-two  years  all  the  fires  were  extinguished,  and  at  midnight
a  priest  produced  a  new  fire  by  friction  on  the  top  of  a  mountain  distant
about  six  miles  from  the  city  of  Mexico.  As  soon  as  the  fire  blazed  up,
torches  of  pine-wood  were  lit  at  it  and  were  carried  by  the  swiftest
runners  toward  every  quarter  of  the  kingdom.  In  the  city  of  Mexico,
in  the  temple  of  the  god  Huitzilopochtli,  a  fire-place  stood  in  front  of
the  altar  with  fuel  ready  laid  on  it.  Into  this  fire-place  a  blazing  brand
was  flung  by  the  first  runner,  and  from  it  fire  was  carried  to  all  the  houses
of  the  priests,  and  thence  again  to  all  the  city.  See  H.  H.  Bancroft,  The
Native  Races  of  the  Pacific  States^  3.  pp.  393-395 ;  cp.  Sahagun,  Histoire
GiniraU  des  choses  de  la  Nouvelle-Espagne  (Paris,  1880),  pp.  288-290  ;
Acosta,  History  of  the  Indies^  2.  p.  394  (Hakluyt  Society) ;  Clavigero,
History  of  Mexico^  i.  p.  313  (trans,  by  Cullen).  That  at  the  Greek
torch-races  the  brands  carried  by  the  runners  were  used  to  kindle  a
fire  on  an  altar  is  proved,  not  only  by  the  statement  of  an  ancient
writer  (Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^  p.  228,  s,v.  yv/jLvajiriap\oi)j  but  also
by  a  vase-painting,  which  represents  a  runner  holding  his  torch  over  an
altar,  on  the  top  of  which  two  billets  are  laid  across  each  other,  waiting
to  be  ignited.  On  the  other  side  stands  a  winged  Victory  looking  at  the
runner  and  pointing  to  the  unlit  altar  with  an  imperious  gesture.  See
A-  Korte,  *Vase  mit  Fackellaufdarstellung,'  Jahrbuch  d,  k,  d.  archaoL
Inst,  7  (1892),  pp.  149-152.  We  do  not  know  to  which  altar  or  altars
in  Athens  the  fire  was  carried  by  the  runners.  Different  altars  may
have  l)een  the  goal  at  different  festivals.  It  may  be  conjectured  that
at  the  festival  of  Hephaestus  the  fire  was  carried  to  the  temple  of
Hephaestus  situated  above  the  market-place  (Paus.  i.  14.  6).

30.  2.  an  altar  of  the  Muses.  This  was  probably  in  the
sanctuary  of  the  Muses  which  Plato  consecrated  in  the  Academy  (see
above,  p.  389).

30.  2.  an  altar  of  Athena.  The  Academy  was  especially  con-
secrated to  Athena  (Athenaeus,  xiii.  p.  561  d  e).  Athena,  Prometheus,
and  Hephaestus  were  worshipped  together  in  it  (ApoUodorus,  cited  by
the  Scholiast  on  Sophocles,  Oed.  Col.  56).

30.  2.  an  olive-plant  etc  The  sacred  olive-trees  called  moriai
grew  in  the  Academy  ;  their  number  was  at  first  twelve,  and  they  were
believed  to  be  offshoots  of  the  original  olive-tree  on  the  Acropolis  (see


394  "^HE  SACRED  OLIVES  bk.  i.  attic  a

i.  27.  2  note)  (Aristophanes,  Clouds^  1005  ;  Suidas  and  Photius,
Lexicon^  s,v.  fiopiai;  SchoL  on  Sophocles,  Oed.  Col,  701).  The  origin
of  the  name  maricU  was  explained  as  follows :  Halirrothius,  son  of
Poseidon,  being  vexed  at  Athena's  victory  over  his  father  in  the  contest
for  the  possession  of  Attica,  attempted  to  hew  down  the  olive-tree  which
Athena  had  produced.  He  heaved  up  his  axe,  but  missed  his  stroke
and  wounded  himself  fatally.  Hence  the  sacred  olive  was  called  moria
because  Halirrothius  had  incurred  his  doom  (moras)  in  trying  to  hew
it  down  (Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Clouds,  1005  ;  cp.  Mannhardt,  Bourn-
kultuSy  p.  36  x^.)  A  curse  was  supposed  to  rest  on  whoever  should
cut  down  one  of  these  sacred  trees ;  hence  when  the  Lacedaemonians
ravaged  Attica  they  spared  the  olive-trees  in  the  Academy  (SchoL  on
Sophocles,  Oed,  Col,  698,  701).  The  penalty  for  digging  up  or  break-
ing down  one  of  the  sacred  olives  was  originally  death ;  the  case  was
tried  by  the  Court  of  the  Areopagus  (Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens,
60) ;  in  later  times  the  penalty  was  changed  to  banishment  (Lysias,
vii.  41);  and  in  Aristotle's  time,  though  the  law  remained  on  the  statute-
book,  it  was  not  enforced  (Aristotle,  Lc)  The  oil  made  from  the
sacred  olives  was  kept  on  the  Acropolis,  and  jars  of  it  were  given  as
prizes  to  the  winners  in  the  athletic  sports  and  the  horse-races  at  the
Panathenaic  festival  (Aristotle,  I.e. ;  Schol.  on  Plato,  Parfnenides,  127
a  b ;  Lucian,  Anacharsts,  9  ;  Suidas  and  Photius,  Lexicon,  s.v,  fiopiai ;
Schol.  on  Sophocles,  Oed,  Col.  701  ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Clouds,
1005).  The  sacred  olives  (moriai)  were  watched  over  by  Morian  Zeus,
who  had  an  altar  in  the  Academy  beside  the  sanctuary  of  Athena  ;  he
was  here  known  also  as  Kataibates,  i.e.  '  he  who  descends '  in  thunder
and  lightning  (Schol.  on  Sophocles,  Oed,  Col,  705  ;  cp.  Paus.  v.  14.  10).
It  will  be  observed  that  Pausanias  mentions  only  one  olive-tree  in  the
Academy.  The  rest  may  have  been  cut  down  by  Sulla  when  he  robbed
the  Academy  of  its  woods  to  make  siege-engines  (Plutarch,  Sullti,  12  ;
Appian,  Bellum  Mithrid.  12).  Or  Pausanias  may  have  chosen  to
notice  only  the  one  tree  which  was  pointed  out  to  him  as  the  oldest  of  all.

30.  3.  Kot  flEu:  from  the  Academy  iB  the  tomb  of  Plato.
Diogenes  Laertius  says  (iii.  41)  that  Plato  was  buried  in  the  Aca-
demy, but  Pausanias's  statement  is  probably  the  more  exact  According
to  Olympiodorus  (Biographi  Graeci,  ed.  Westermann,  p.  388),  the
Athenians  gave  him  a  splendid  burial  and  carved  a  couplet  on  his  tomb
to  the  effect  that  <*  Apollo  created  the  two,  to  wit  Aesculapius  and
Plato ;  Aesculapius,  that  he  might  save  the  body ;  Plato,  that  he  might
save  the  soul."

30.  3.  Socrates dreamed  that  a  swan  flew  into  his  bosom.

'<  It  is  said  that  Socrates  dreamed  he  had  a  cygnet  on  his  lap,  and  that,
its  wings  suddenly  sprouting,  it  soared  up  with  a  melodious  cry.  And
next  day  Plato  was  introduced  to  him "  (Diogenes  Laertius,  iii.  5  ;  cp.
Biographi  Graeci,  ed.  Westermann,  p.  389  ;  Apuleius,  De  dogmate
Platonis,  i.  i).  According  to  Apuleius  {I.e.)  the  cygnet  seemed  to  fly
into  Socrates's  lap  from  the  altar  of  Love  in  the  Ceramicus.  Plato  is
said  to  have  called  himself  a  fellow-slave  of  the  swan,  because  the  swan
was  ApoUo's  bird  {Biographi  Graeci,  ed.  Westermann,  pp.  383,  389).


CH.  XXX  COLONUS  HIPPIUS  395

30.  3.  a  swan  is  reputed  to  be  versed  in  the  Mnses'  craft.
"  Here  in  the  island  (of  Femem,  to  the  east  of  Holstein)  every  one
knows  the  note  of  the  swan.  It  is  a  strangely  melancholy  cry,  like  the
far-away  chime  of  bells  or  the  clang  of  an  anvil,  sometimes  so  loud  that
persons  not  accustomed  to  it  are  disturbed  in  their  sleep  by  it  at  night "
(K.  Miillenhoff,  Deutsche  Altertutnskunde^  i.  p.  i,  quoting  the  author  of
QutcJkdom).  There  are  two  kinds  of  swans  in  Europe,  the  dumb  swan
and  the  singing  swan.  The  latter  is  able  "  to  utter  two  trumpet-like
or  bell-like  notes,  which  it  generally  does  while  flying,  so  that  when,  as
generally  happens,  there  are  a  number  of  swans  together,  a  ringing  sound
is  heard  which,  under  favourable  conditions  of  weather  and  wind,  may
be  heard  for  miles.  The  home  of  the  singing  swan  is  in  the  far  North,
in  Iceland  and  Spitzbergen,  in  the  north  of  Norway,  Sweden  and
Russia,  away  to  Asia,  where  it  is  especially  common.  With  the
beginning  of  the  cold  winter  they  fly  southward  to  Germany,  England,
and  even  the  north  of  France.  From  Asia  they  fly  over  Russia  to  the
Black  Sea  and  as  far  as  Greece ;  and  a  few  solitary  birds,  as  the
skeletons  in  museums  show,  make  their  way  even  to  Italy  and  the  north
of  Africa"  (K.  Miillenhoff,  op.  ciL  i.  p.  2  sq,^  "The  popular  songs  of
the  Russians  also,  which  are  particularly  rich  in  imagery  derived  from
the  observation  of  aquatic  fowl,  celebrate  perpetually  the  fine  voice  of
the  swan"  (Ad.  Erman,  Travels  in  Siberia^  2.  p.  43  sq,)  In  works  of
ancient  art  Apollo  is  represented  riding  on  a  swan  or  driving  a  car
drawn  by  swans.  See  J.  Overbeck,  Griech,  Kunstmythologie^  Beson-
derer  Theil,  3.  pp.  350-354.  On  swans  in  antiquity  see  L.  Stephani,
in  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)  for  1863,  p.  17  sqq,

30.  3.  the  Lignrians had  a  king  named  Oycnns.     He  is

said  to  have  mourned  the  death  of  Phaethon,  singing  a  melancholy  strain
on  the  banks  of  the  Eridanus,  till  he  was  turned  into  a  swan.  His
descendant  Cuparo  wore  a  crest  of  swan's  feathers  on  his  helmet  to  mark
his  lineage.  See  Virgil,  Aen.  x.  185-193,  with  Servius's  note  on  verse
189;  Ovid,  Met  ii.  367-380;  Hyginus,  Fab.  154.  On  the  legend  of
the  swan -king  of  Liguria  cp.  K.  Miillenhoff,  Deutsche  Altertumskunde^
I.  p.  218.  On  the  Ligurians  see  H.  Nissen,  Italische  Landeskunde^  i.
p.  468  sqq.  ;  J.  G.  Cuno,  *  Die  Lig^rier,*  Rheinisches  Museum^  28
(1873),  pp.  193-210;  H.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville,  *  Les  Lig^res,'
Revue  ArcJUologique^  N.  S.  30  (1875),  PP-  211  sqq.^  309  sqq.^  373
sqq.  ;  /^.  31  (1876),  p.  379  sqq.  ;  ib.  35  (1878),  p.  260  sqq.  ;  /V/.,  Les
premiers  habitants  de  V Europe  (Paris,  1877),  pp.  221-245.

30.  4.  the  tower  of  Timon.  When  Plato  returned  to  Athens  from
Sicily,  "  he  established  a  school  near  the  abode  of  Timon  the  misan-
thrope, who,  though  he  was  soured  at  all  mankind,  as  the  inscriptions  on
his  tomb  show,  yet  bore  the  society  of  Plato  with  much  benignity"
{Biographi  Graeci,  ed.  Westermann,  p.  393).

30.  4.  Golonus  Hippius  (*  horse  knoll ').  Thucydides  tells  us  (viii.
67)  that  Colonus  {i.e.  Colonus  Hippius),  a  sanctuary  of  Poseidon,  was
situated  about  ten  furlongs  outside  of  Athens.  Hence  it  has  been
identified  with  the  rocky  knoll,  about  50  feet  high,  which  rises  from  the
plain  about   1 800  metres  (somewhat  under  a  mile  and  a  quarter)  to  the


396  COLONUS  HIPPIUS  bk.  i.  attica

north-north-west  of  the  Dipylum  gate.  On  the  knoll  stand  conspicuous
the  two  white  marble  tombstones  of  K.  O.  Miiller  (died  1840)  and
Charles  Lenormant  (died  1859).  The  place  is  famous  as  the  scene  of
Sophocles's  great  tragedy,  the  *  Oedipus  at  Colonus.'  The  spot  is  bare
enough  now ;  the  luxuriant  vegetation  which  the  poet  has  described  in
a  famous  chorus  (Oed,  CoL  668  sqq,)  is  gone  ;  but  a  few  hundred  paces
to  the  west,  where  the  olive  groves  begin,  the  vine,  the  laurel,  and  the
olive  are  as  green  as  in  the  days  of  Sophocles,  and  the  nightingale  still
warbles  in  the  shady  thickets  on  the  banks  of  the  Cephisus.  Sophocles
describes  Colonus  as  sacred  ground,  the  possession  of  Poseidon,  and
inhabited  also  by  Prometheus,  and  containing  a  spot  called  the  Brazen
Threshold  (Sophocles,  OecL  CoL  54  sqq,^  with  the  Schol.  on  v.  57).
There  was  also  a  sanctuary  of  the  Furies  at  Colonus  {jb,  yj  sqq.) ;  its
site  is  perhaps  marked  by  the  church  of  Hagia  Eleussa  on  the  north-
west side  of  the  knoll.  The  poet  also  mentions  {v,  1600  sq,)  a  hill  at
which  the  daughters  of  Oedipus  drew  water ;  he  describes  it  either  as
"  the  hill  in  view  of  Green  Demeter  "  or  "  the  hill  of  Green  Demeter  in
view  of"  the  place  where  Oedipus  was  (the  Greek  may  be  translated
either  way).  The  words  are  commonly  taken  in  the  latter  way,  and
"  the  hill  of  Green  Demeter  "  identified  with  the  somewhat  higher  knoll
situated  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  to  the  north  of  Hippius  Colonus.
(But  see  above,  note  on  i.  28.  7,  *the  tomb  of  Oedipus').  Sophocles
himself  belonged  to  the  township  of  Colonus  (Biographi  Graeci,  ed.
Westermann,  p.  126;  Suidas,  s.v,  2)o<^icX^9 ;  Cicero,  De  finibus^  v.
I.  3).  In  411  B.C.  the  oligarchical  conspirators  held  an  assembly  of
the  people  at  Colonus  (Thucydides,  viii.  67).  Plato's  garden  was  near
Colonus  (Diogenes  Laertius,  iii.  5).

See  Dodwell,  Tour,  i.  p.  413  sq,\  Wordsworth,  Athens  and  Attica^  p.  201
sqq,  ;  L.  Ross,  Erinnerungen  und  Mittheilungen  cuis  Grieckcnland^  p.  241  ;
^ursian,  Gtogr.  v.  Griech,  i.  p.  324  sq,  ;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  StcuU  A  then,  I.
pp.  255-257  (who  wrongly  identifies  the  northern  of  the  two  knolls  as  Colonus) ;
Dyer,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  $12  s<^.  ;  Milchhofer,  'Athen,*p.  177;  Guide-Joanne,
I.  p.  153 ;  Baedeker,'  p.  109 ;  P.  Kastromenos,  Die  Demen  von  Attika^  p.  22
sqq, ;  R.  C.  Jebb,  '  Introduction  to  Sophocles,'  Oed.  Col  p.  xxx.  sqq, ;  Miss
Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  p.  600  sqq,

30.  4-  This  is at  Tariance  with  Homer's  poetry.     See  i.

28.  7  note.

30.  4.  Antigonus  when  he  invaded  Attica.  Cp.  i.  i.  i ;  i.  7.  3  ;
iii.  6.  4-7.

31.  I.  The  small  townships  of  Attica.  Having  completed  his
survey  of  Athens  and  the  suburbs  Ceramicus  and  Colonus,  Pausanias
resumes  his  account  of  the  rest  of  Attica ;  he  has  already  mentioned
some  of  the  points  of  interest  on  the  southern  coast  from  Sunium  to
Phalerum  (i.  i.  i  and  5).  In  the  present  chapter  he  mentions  the  chief
points  of  interest  in  the  small  Attic  townships ;  then  he  describes  the
Attic  mountains  (i.  32.  2  sq,)  ;  then  some  more  townships  (i.  32.  3-i.  33.
8) ;  then  Oropus  (i.  34) ;  then  the  islands  of  Attica  (i.  35.  i-i.  36.  2) ;
then  the  road  from  Athens  to  Eleusis  (i.  36.  3-i.  38.  5)  ;  then  Eleusis
itself  (i.  38.  6  sq,) ;  then  the  road  from  Eleusis  to  Bocotia  (i.  38.  8


CH.  XXXI  TOWNSHIPS  OF  ATTICA  397


X7.) ;  then  the  road  from  Eleusis  to  the  frontier  of  Megara  (i.
39-  1-3X  *°^  lastly  Megara,  both  the  city  and  the  territory  (i.  39.  4-
i.  44.  10).  Thus  in  his  description  of  Attica  he  does  not  follow  a  strictly
topogpraphical  order ;  he  selects  and  groups  together  places  (such  as  the
mountains  and  the  islands)  which  have  no  local  connexion  with  each
other.  In  this  respect  his  description  of  Attica  differs  from  his  descrip-
tion of  all  the  rest  of  Greece ;  from  the  time  he  quits  Attica,  or  rather
from  the  time  he  sets  out  along  the  Sacred  Road  to  go  to  Eleusis  (i.  36.
3),  he  adopts  a  strictly  topographical  order  of  description,  from  which
he  hardly  again  deviates  till,  having  conducted  the  reader  through
Peloponnese,  Boeotia,  Phocis,  and  Ozolian  Locris,  he  finally  parts  from
him  at  Naupactus.  This  difference  of  method  proves  that  in  writing  his
account  of  Attica  Pausanias  had  not  yet  definitely  settled  the  lines  on
which  his  work  was  to  be  laid  down.  Hence  we  may  assume,  what
from  the  order  of  the  books  is  in  itself  probable,  that  the  Attica  was  the
first  to  be  written.  This  conclusion  is  confirmed  by  other  evidence  (see
vii.  20.  6  note).  It  follows  from  the  eclectic  method  adopted  by  Pausanias
in  his  first  book  that  his  account  of  the  topography  of  Attica  (exclusive
of  Athens)  is  less  complete  and  precise  than  his  account  of  any  of  the
other  divisions  of  Greece.  This,  though  unfortunate,  is  the  less  to  be
regretted  since  centralisation  was  carried  to  a  far  greater  pitch  in  Attica
than  in  any  other  province  of  Greece,  with  the  exception  perhaps  of
Laconia.  Athens,  as  the  capital  of  Attica,  gathered  into  itself  the
wealth,  the  art,  and  the  political  life  of  the  whole  people ;  the  villages
and  petty  towns  were  comparatively  insignificant ;  they  had  no  inde-
pendence and  no  history,  having  been  so  long  politically  absorbed  by
Athens  that  the  memory  of  a  time  when  they  had  been  independent  was
almost  lost.  The  political  condition  of  Laconia  and  its  vassal  state
Messenia  was  similar.  But  in  all  the  other  divisions  of  Greece  a
multitude  of  petty  independent  cities  throve  side  by  side,  each  surrounded
by  its  own  walls,  and  containing  within  it  the  political,  military,  religious,
and  artistic  life  of  a  whole  state  in  miniature.  We  could  less  easily
have  dispensed  with  descriptions  of  them  than  of  the  townships  of
Attica.

The  system  of  townships  {denies)^  or  local  divisions  each  with  its
own  municipal  government,  was  first  instituted  or  at  least  fully  developed
by  Clisthenes  in  510  B.C.  (Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens^  21).  The
number  of  townships  instituted  by  him  is  uncertain ;  from  Herodotus
(v.  69)  it  has  sometimes  been  inferred  that  the  number  was  100.  At  a
later  time  we  hear  of  174  townships  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  396).  The  names
of  145  of  these  townships  are  well  authenticated  by  inscriptions  and  the
testimony  of  ancient  writers.  Out  of  these  145  townships  we  know  the
positions  of  28  with  tolerable  exactness  and  of  37  approximately  ;  while
the  positions  of  80  (including  some  very  large  ones)  have  not  yet  been
ascertained  (Prof.  A.  Milchhofer,  in  Sitzungsberichte  of  the  Prussian
Academy,  Berlin,  for  1887,  p.  42).  Pausanias  notices  only  a  few  of  the
townships  in  this  and  the  two  following  chapters.  Elsewhere  he  men-
tions a  few  more,  namely  Sunium  (i.  i.  i),  Piraeus  (i.  i.  2),  Phalerum
(i.  I.  2),  Ceramicus  (i.   3.  i),  Aphidna  (i.  17.  5),  Colonus  (i.  30.  4),


ygS  ALIMUS  BK.  I.  attk:a

Laciadae  (L  37.   2),  Scambonidae  (L  38.  i\  Aiia{^ystiis  (iL  30.  9),
Sphettus  {}b.\  Decelea  (iiL  8.  6),  and  Sdria  (x.  35.  8).

On  the  names  and  topography  of  the  townships  and  their  distribotioQ  in  tribes
and  trittyes^  the  following  special  works  may  be  coosolted  :  Leake,  Top«gn^ky  0/
Athens,  toL  2.  Thi  Demi ;  L.  Ross,  Die  Dewun  ten  Attika  und  ihre  Vertketlamg
unUr  die  Phylen  (HaUe,  1846) ;  P.  Kastromenos,  Die  Detmen  van  Attika  (Leipdg,
1886) ;  A.  Milchhofer,  '  Ueber  Stand pankt  and  Metbode  der  attischcn  Demen-
forschung/  Sitzungsberithte  of  the  Prussian  Academy,  Berlin,  lor  1887,  pp.  41-56;
id.,  '  Untersochungen  iiber  die  Demenordnong  des  KJetstbenes,'  AbkandluHgen  of
the  Prussian  Academy,  Berlin,  for  1892;  id.,  'Zni  attischen  LocahrerCtssoi^,'
Mittkeil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,  18  (1893),  PP^  *77-304  J  R-  Lopcr»  *  Die  Trittyen
und  Demen  Attikas,'  Afittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athem,  17  (1892),  pp.  319-433 ;
▼.  Wilamowitz-Mollendorff,  AristateUs  und  Athtm,  2.  pp.  I45-i6Sl  On  the  ciTil
constitution  of  the  townships  there  is  a  special  work  by  ^Ir.  B.  Hanssoollier,  Im
vie  municipcUe  en  Attique  (Paris,  1 884).

31.  I.  AHwifitt  Alimiis  or  Halimtxs  was  a  township  of  the  tribe
Leontis  (Stepbaniis  B>'zantitis,  s.v,  *AAi/Aov9 ;  SchoL  on  Aristophanes,
BirdSy  496  ;  Harpocration  and  Suidas,  s.v.  ^AXi/sovs ;  Bekkei^s  Anecdota
GraeccL,  p.  376).  It  was  situated  on  the  southern  coast  of  Attica,
immediately  to  the  east  of  the  township  of  Phalerum  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  398),
at  a  distance  of  35  Greek  furlongs  from  Athens  (Demosthenes,  IviL  10,
p.  1302).  It  was  probably  therefore  on  or  near  the  site  of  the  modem
Trachones^  a  village  at  the  western  foot  of  Mt  Hymettus,  about  i^
miles  from  the  sea.  The  distance  of  Trachones  from  Athens  is  abom
32  Greek  furlongs  or  3^  miles,  which  agrees  closely  with  the  distance
of  Alimus.  Moreover  in  graves  at  Trachorus  there  have  been  found
two  ancient  tickets  of  jurymen  belonging  to  Halimus  (C  /.  A.  iL  Nos.
892,  906).  Another  argument  for  identifying  Trachones  with  Alimus  is
that  the  sanctuary  of  Lawgiver  Demeter  mentioned  by  Pausanias  at
Alimus  is  probably  identical  with  ^^the  many-pillared  sanctuary  of
Demeter  "  at  Cape  Colias  (Hesychius,  s.v.  KoiAuis),  where  the  Athenian
women  celebrated  the  Thesmophoria  (Plutarch,  Solon,  8)  on  the  tenth
day  of  the  month  Pyanepsion  (October- November),  according  to  the
Scholiast  on  Aristophanes  ( Thesmoph.  80  ;  cp.  Aug.  Monunsen,  Heorto-
logie,  p.  291  sqq.)  For  Cape  Colias,  as  we  have  seen  (note  on  i.  i.  5),
is  probably  the  cape  crowned  with  the  chapel  of  St.  Cosmas,  which  is
distant  about  2  miles  south-west  of  Trachones.  The  territory  of  Alimus
no  doubt  extended  to  the  sea  and  included  Cape  Colias.  Since  Pausanias
mentions  the  sanctuary  of  Demeter  in  connexion  with  Alimus,  not  with
Cape  Colias  (L  i.  5),  we  may  suppose  that  the  sanctuary  stood  a  little
inland,  between  the  cape  and  the  town.  But  that  it  cannot  have  been  £u-
inland  is  proved  by  the  narrative  of  Plutarch  {Solon,  8),  who  tells  us  that
the  Megarians  sent  a  vessel  to  Cape  Colias  with  the  intention  of  waylaying
and  kidnapping  the  women  who  were  celebrating  the  Thesmophoria
there.  Hercules  was  also  worshipped  at  Alimus ;  his  priesthood  was
held  by  a  respectable  citizen  of  the  township  (Demosthenes,  Ivii.  46  and
62,  pp.  13 13,  13 18).  The  historian  Thuc>'dides  belonged  to  Alimus
{Biographi  Gracci^  ed.  Westermann,  pp.  199,  203).  The  country  round
Trachones,  a  hamlet  situated  at  the  foot  of  an  eminence  on  which  are  a
tower  and  a  small  chapel,  contains  many  ancient  remains,  consisting  of


l'


CH.  XXXI  ZOSTER  399

foundation-walls,  tombs,  and  wells.  At  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth
century  Dodwell  found  at  Trachones  "  the  remains  of  a  town,  and  the
foundations  of  the  ceila  of  a  temple,  near  which  is  a  mutilated  bas-relief
representing  the  sacrifice  of  a  goat,  and  some  rites  associated  with  the
mythology  of  Bacchus."  Prof.  A.  Milchhofer  would  place  Aexone
(Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v,  Kl^mvia ;  Strabo,  ix.  p.  398),  not  Alimus,  at
Trachones.

See  Dodwell,  7<wr,  i.  p.  525  sq, ;  Leake,  Athens^  2.  p.  $3  sq,  ;  Bursian,
Geogr,  I.  p.  361  sq, ;  A.  Milchhofer,  in  Karten  von  Attika^  Erldut,  Ttxt^  ii.  pp.
I  j^.,  29 ;  id.^  in  Siizungsberichtc  of  the  Prussian  Academy,  Berlin,  for  1887,  p.
47;  id,t  '  Demenordnung  des  Kleisthenes,'  p.  23;  P.  Kastromenos,  Die  Demen
von  Attiktiy  p.  48 ;  Guide-Joanne^  I.  p.  195  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  138.

31.  I.  Zoster.  Strabo  tells  us  (ix.  p.  398)  that  Zoster  ('girdle*)
was  the  name  of  a  cape  on  the  south  coast  of  Attica,  to  the  south  of
Aexone,  which  was  the  township  next  to  Halimus ;  and  he  adds  that  off
Cape  Zoster  there  lay  an  island  called  Phabra.  Stephanus  Byzantius
{s.v,  ZwoTrjp)  speaks  of  Zoster  as  a  peninsula;  and  Herodotus  says
(viii.  107)  that  when  the  Persians,  sailing  away  to  Asia  after  the  battle  of
Salamis,  were  near  Zoster,  they  were  alarmed  by  the  sharp  headlands
which  here  run  out  into  the  sea,  and  which  they  at  first  mistook  for  ships
of  the  enemy.  Hence  Zoster  may  confidently  be  identified  with  the
massive,  triple-tongued  promontory  immediately  to  the  west  of  the  bay  of
Vari,  The  soil  is  sandy  and  clothed  with  fir-woods  ;  its  rocky  sides  have
a  reddish  hue.  The  most  westerly  of  the  three  capes  or  tongues  in  which
the  promontory  ends  is  now  called  Cape  Kavuras.  The  middle  cape,
which  projects  furthest  to  the  south,  is  a  low,  narrow,  indented  spit  of
land,  connected  with  the  mainland  only  by  a  sandy  isthmus.  It  thus
answers  to  Stephanus' s  description  of  Zoster  as  a  peninsula,  and  is
probably  Cape  Zoster  in  the  narrow  sense ;  though  from  the  passage  of
Herodotus  cited  above  it  appears  that  the  name  Zoster  was  extended  to
include  all  three  capes.  The  modem  name  of  this  middle  cape  is  Oura
or,  in  Albanian,  Bisti,  Off  it,  at  the  distance  of  about  a  mile  and  a
half,  is  a  large,  low  island,  the  ancient  Phabra,  now  called  Phleva ;
though  capable  of  cultivation,  it  is  uninhabited.  The  most  easterly  of
the  three  capes  of  Zoster,  the  one  which  bounds  the  bay  of  Vari  on  the
west,  is  the  broadest  and  highest  (about  460  feet)  of  the  three.  On  its
western  side  is  a  very  picturesque  pool  of  green  sea-water  enclosed  by
precipitous  rocks,  in  the  crannies  of  which  a  rank  and  luxuriant  vegeta-
tion flourishes.  The  pool  is  called  Vuliasmeni,  It  may  have  been  in
this  pool  that  Latona  was  said  to  have  bathed  after  undoing  her  girdle
(Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v.  Ziixmrjp).  At  Cape  Zoster  fishermen  used  to
sacrifice  to  Latona,  Artemis,  and  Zosterian  Apollo  (Stephanus  Byz.  /,c,,
cp.  Hesychius,  s.v.  Zttxmrjp;  EtymoL  Magnunty  p.  414,  5,v,  Zaxrrrip),
An  Attic  inscription  (C  I.  A.  i.  No.  273)  refers  to  Zosterian  Athena  as
in  possession  of  a  treasure  on  which  the  state  had  to  pay  interest.
Pausanias  apparently  supposed  that  Zoster  was  a  township.  But  this
seems  to  have  been  a  mistake ;  at  least  we  have  no  other  evidence  of
Zoster  having  been  a  township.


400  PROSPALTA  bk.  i.  attic  A

The  whole  coast  between  Cape  Zoster  and  Phalerum  is  a  strip  of
flat  land  bounded  on  the  east  by  the  slopes  of  Hymettus  and  only
broken  in  its  northern  portion  by  some  stony  hills.  It  is  a  monotonous,
bare,  and  stony  tract  of  country,  furrowed  by  numerous  water-courses
which  are  generally  dry.  Ruins  of  ancient  buildings  are  to  be  seen  at
many  places,  and  the  plain  is  studded,  far  and  near,  with  countless
ancient  graves  in  the  form  of  mounds,  which  have  furnished  Athenian
dealers  in  antiquities  with  an  abundant  supply  of  vases.

See  Leake,  Athens^  2.  p.  54  sq, ;  F.  G.  Welcker,  Tagebuchy  i.  p.  148  ;  Vischer,
Erinrurungen  und  Eindriukty  p.  58 ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  369  sq, ;  P.  Kastro-
menos,  Die  Demen  von  Attika^  pp.  46-48  (who  wrongly  identifies  Zoster  with
Cape  Punta^  a  headland  about  three  miles  north  of  Zoster) ;  Baedeker,'  p.  138;
A.  Milchhofer,  Karten  vofi  Attika,  Erldut.  Text^  iiL-vi  p.  15  sq,

31.  I.  Prospalta.  Prospalta  was  a  township  of  the  tribe  Acamis
(Demosthenes,  xliii.  64,  p.  1071  ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  5,v,  n/9d<nraATa;
Harpocration  and  Suidas,  s,v,  npocm-aXriot).  The  inhabitants  had
the  reputation  of  being  litigious  (Suidas  and  EtymoL  Magnum^  s.v.
Spvaxapvev),  Eupolis  named  one  of  his  comedies  TAe  ProspcUHans
after  them  (Athenaeus,  vii.  p.  326  a).  The  township  was  on  or  near  the
site  of  the  modem  Kalyvia  Kuvara  (or  shortly  Kalyvia\  a  village  of
about  700  inhabitants  in  the  interior  of  Attica,  about  midway  between
Athens  and  Sunium,  the  distance  to  each  of  these  places  from  the  village
being  about  14  miles  in  a  straight  line.  It  stands  in  a  plain  surrounded
by  hills.  In  the  well-cultivated  ground  called  Ennea  Pyrgai  (*ninc
towers ')  to  the  west  of  the  village  there  are  ancient  blocks  and  vestiges
of  walls.  This  probably  was  the  site  of  Prospalta.  Here  in  the  church
of  St.  Peter  (outside,  over  the  apse)  there  is  a  tombstone  inscribed  with
the  names  of  two  men  of  Prospalta  called  Diagoras  and  Diophon ;  the
inscription  belongs  to  the  fourth  century  B.a  (C  /.  A.  ii.  No.  2512;
Mittheil.  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  12  (1887),  p.  284,  No.  182).  Built
into  the  altar  of  the  same  church  is  a  square  altar  dedicated  to  Colaenis
(see  below,  §  4  note)  with  a  late  and  badly  written  inscription  (Mittheil.
d,  arch,  Inst,  in  A  then,  12  (1887),  p.  2Z2  sq,)  A  second  sepulchral
inscription  containing  the  name  (Hegeso)  of  a  member  of  the  township
Prospalta  was  found  at  Kalyvia  (Mittheil,  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  12
(1887),  p.  284,  No.  183).

In  the  church  of  St.  Demetrius  at  the  village  of  Keratea,  three  miles
south-east  of  Kalyvia,  there  is  an  inscription  containing  a  dedication  to
Aesculapius  by  certain  Prospaltians  who  belonged  to  a  religious  society
(C,  I,  A,  ii.  No.  990).  This  led  Leake  and  Ross  to  place  Prospalta  at
Keratea,  which,  however,  occupies  the  site  of  Cephale  (see  below,  p.  402).
On  the  other  hand  Bursian,  without  the  help  of  the  sepulchral  inscrip-
tions which  enable  us  to  identify  the  sites  of  Prospalta  and  Cephale,  had
rightly  placed  Prospalta  between  the  villages  of  Keratea  and  Markofioulo,

See  Leake,  Athens^  2.  p.  73 ;  L.  Ross,  Demen,  p.  93 ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.
346  sq,  ;  P.  Kastromenos,  Demen^  p.  98  (who  wrongly  places  Prospalta  in  the
pass  of  Prinari  over  Hymettus) ;  A.  Milchhofer,  *  Antikenbericht  aus  Attika,'
Mittheil,  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  12  (1887),  pp.  281-286  ;  id.,  Karten  von  Attika,
Erldut,  Text,  iii.-vi  p.  12;  id,  *  Demenordnung  des  Kleisthenes,'  p.  25.


CH.  XXXI  ANAGYRUS  401

31.  I.  AnagyroB.  Anagyms  was  a  township  of  the  tribe  Erechtheis
(Harpocration  and  Suidas,  s,v,  'Avayvpacrios ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v,
* Avay vpovs).  It  was  situated  on  the  south  coast  of  Attica  between  the
townships  of  Halae  Aexionicae  and  Thorae  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  398).
According  to  some,  the  township  was  named  after  a  hero  Anagyms,  who
had  a  sacred  precinct  at  the  place  and  was  said  to  throw  down  the
houses  of  persons  who  insulted  his  shrine ;  the  '  demon  of  Anagyms '
was  a  proverb  of  ferocity  (Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Lysistratay  67  ;
Suidas,  5,v,  'Avayvpda-ios ;  Zenobius,  ii.  55;  Diogenianus,  i.  25  ;  td.y
iii.  31  ;  Gregorius  Cyprius,  i.  22  ;  Apostolius,  ii.  96)  ;  he  was  said  to
have  inflicted  a  bloody  vengeance  on  the  family  of  a  man  who  had  cut
down  his  sacred  grove  (Suidas,  Lc.)  According  to  another  and  more
probable  account,  the  township  took  its  name  from  anagyrus,  the  stink-
ing bean-trefoil  {anagyris  foetidd)  which  grew  in  profusion  in  the
neighbourhood  (Bekker's  Aiucdota  Graeca^  p.  210;  Suidas,  s.v,
'AvdyvfMS ;  Hesychius,  s.v.  *Avayvpda-tos ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,
Lysistrata^  68;  Zenobius,  ii.  55).

Anagyms  is  commonly  placed  at  Vari^  a  small  village  of  about  200
inhabitants  to  the  east  of  Cape  Zoster.  The  village  is  prettily  situated
about  a  mile  from  the  sea  in  a  maritime  plain  enclosed  by  two  chains  of
barren  hills.  The  chain  on  the  west  is  Hymettus,  which  here  ends  in
Cape  Zoster,  thus  sheltering  the  bay  of  Vari  on  the  west.  A  narrow
glen,  overgrown  with  bushes  and  wooded  with  firs,  pierces  the  lower
spurs  of  Hymettus  immediately  to  the  west  of  the  village.  The  road  to
Athens  mns  through  this  glen  ;  many  ancient  tombs  may  be  observed
on  both  sides  of  it.  The  neighbourhood  of  the  village  is  adorned  with
clumps  of  fine  umbrella  pines,  of  a  vivid  green,  which  scent  the  air  with
their  resinous  and  aromatic  exhalations.  Sandy  downs  and  a  salt
marsh  skirt  the  margin  of  the  bay.  In  autumn  the  marsh  affords
excellent  quail  and  snipe  shooting.  Between  the  village  and  the  shore
of  the  bay  are  the  mins  of  an  ancient  town,  consisting  of  terraces  and
the  remains  of  walls  and  foundations.  Two  inscriptions  found  here
attest  the  worship  of  Hephaestus,  Athena,  and  the  Dioscuri  (MittheiL  d,
arch,  Inst  in  Athen^  13  (1888),  p.  361,  Nos.  762,  763).  There  are
also  ancient  remains  (large  foundations  and  pieces  of  limestone  columns)
in  the  plain  to  the  south-east  of  the  village,  namely  at  the  chapel  of  All
Saints  {Hagii  Pantes)  and  at  a  cistern  nearer  the  sea.  The  chapel  of
All  Saints  may  possibly  occupy  the  site  of  the  sanctuary  of  the  Mother
of  the  Gods  which  Pausanias  mentions.

Vari  is  further  remarkable  for  the  number  of  ancient  graves  in  its
neighbourhood.  They  abound  chiefly  to  the  north  of  the  village  and  in
the  narrow  glen  already  described.  Many  of  these  graves  have  long
been  rifled.  Some  of  them  were  excavated  for  the  Greek  Government
in  1 89 1,  but  without  important  results  (j^€\tIov  dpxaiokoyiKoVy  1891,
pp.  28-32).  Two  sepulchral  inscriptions  (C.  /.  A,  ii.  Nos.  1846,  1852)
found  at  Vari  and  containing  the  names  of  two  natives  of  Anagyms,
confirm  the  view  that  Anagyms  was  at  Vari.  Another  monument,
probably  sepulchral,  is  the  fragment  of  a  large  equestrian  statue  of  grey
Hymettian  marble,  which  now  lies  on  the  ground  in  front  of  the  chapel

VOL.  II  2D


402  CEPHALE  bk.  i.  attica

at  the  entrance  to  the  village.  The  style  is  archaic ;  it  may  date  from
the  beginning  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  The  statue  has  been  published
{MUtheiL  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  4  (1879),  pl«  >"-j  with  the  remarks  of
Prof.  G.  Loeschcke,  p.  302  sq.^

On  Anagyrus  and  Vari^  see  Chandler,  Travels  in  Greece^  c.  3iy  p.  147 ;  Dod-
well,  Totirt  i.  p.  549  sq. ;  F.  G.  Welcker,  Tagelntckj  i.  p.  i^osq.  ;  Leake,
Athens^  2.  p.  s6sq.  ;  Ross,  IVanderungen,  2.  p  70;  Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  p.  358;
P.  Kastromenos,  Demen^  p.  49 ;  Guide-Joanm,  i.  p.  194 ;  Baedeker,'  p.  138 ;  A.
Milchhofer,  '  Antikenbericht  aus  Attika,'  Mittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  A  then,  13
(1888),  pp.  360-362  ;  id.f  Karten  von  Attika^  Erldut.  Text^  iii.-vi.  p.  15.  As  to  the
grotto  on  Mt.  Hymettus,  not  iax  firom  Vari^  see  note  on  i.  32.  i,  'Hymettus.'

31.   I.  Cepliale.     Cephale  was   a  township  of  the  tribe   Acamis
(Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Birds^  476  ;    Harpocration  and  Suidas,  s.v.
K€<f>a\rj$€v).      It  had  an  altar  of  Aphrodite  at  which  oaths  were  taken
(Isaeus,  ii.  31).     Sepulchral  inscriptions  containing  the  names  of  natives
of  Cephale  (C.  I.  A.  ii.  Nos.  21 51,  2154;   Mittkeil.  d.  circh.  Inst,  in
Athen^  12  (1887),  p.  288^^.,  Nos.  210,  211  a,  211  b)  have  been  found
near  Keratea,  a  village  in  the  interior  of  Attica,  eleven  or  twelve  miles
north  of  Sunium.     At  a  place  about  a  mile  to  the  north-west  of  the
village,  near   the   church   of  Hagia    Kyriaki,    there   are   considerable
remains  of  antiquity,  comprising  vestiges  of  walls  as  well  as  loose  blocks
and  potsherds.     This  was  probably  the  site  of  Cephale.     The  valley  in
which  the  remains  are  to  be  seen  is  fruitful  and  well  cultivated.      The
modem  Keratea^  the  chief  place  in  the  south  of  Attica,  is  a  large  and
thriving  village  with  about  1600  inhabitants,  pleasantly  situated  among
vineyards,  olive-trees,  and  almond  trees.       It  is  trim  and  tidy,  and  has
an  air  of  solid  comfort  and  prosperity.     An  inscribed  boundary-stone  of
a  precinct  of  Hera  has  been  found  at  the  church  of  Hagia  Paraskeve  in
Kerateaj  and  in  the  church  of  St  Demetrius  in  the  same  village  is  an
inscription  containing  a  dedication  to  Aesculapius  (C  /.  A.  ii.  Na  990;
cp.  above,  note  on  Prospalta).      These  inscriptions  seem  to  prove  that
Hera  and  Aesculapius  were  worshipped  at  Cephale.     Further,  there  has
been  found  between  Keratea  and  Kaki  Thalassa  (a  bay  on  the  east
coast  of  Attica)  a  stone  bearing  the  inscription  "  boundary  of  Aphrodite
at   Cephale"  (Milchhofer,    * Demenordnung   des   Kleisthenes,'  p   25).
The  sanctuary  of  Aphrodite,  of  which  this  stone  marked  the  boundary,
is  doubtless  the  one  to  which  Isaeus  refers  (ii.  31).

The  mountains  which  bound  the  valley  of  Keratea  on  the  west,
separating  it  from  the  maritime  plain  on  the  south-west  coast  of  Attica,
rise  in  two  places  to  over  2000  feet.  The  eastern  part  of  the  range  is
called  the  Mountain  of  Keratea;  the  western  part  is  called  Mt.  Pani'
In  this  western  part,  about  300  feet  below  the  highest  sununit,  is  a  fine
stalactite  grotto,  the  largest  in  Attica,  if  not  in  Greece.  It  is  probably
the  Paneum  or  sanctuary  of  Pan  which  Strabo  mentions  (ix.  p.  398)  as
being  near  Anaphlystus ;  it  would  seem  to  have  given  its  name  to  this
part  of  the  mountain.

See  Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  p.  533 ;  Leake,  Athens^  2.  p.  61 ;  Ch.  Wordsworth,
Athens  and  Attica^  p.  184 ;  Ross,  Wanderungen,  2.  p.  149  sq.  ;  Vischer,  Erin-
nerungen  und  Eindriickc^  p.  68 ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  pp.  344,  346,  351  j^. ;  P.
Kastromenos,  Demen,  p  87  (who  wrongly  places  Cephale  at  Koropi,  a  village


CH.  XXXI  PRASIAE  403


about  nine  miles  north-west  of  Keratea) ;  Guide-Joanne^  I.  p.  188 ;  Baedeker,^  p.
132;  A.  Milchhofer,  '  Antikenbericht  aus  Attika/  Mittheil,  d,  arch,  Inst,  in
Athen^  12  (1887),  pp.  286-291  ;  id.^  Karten  von  Attika^  Erldut,  Text^  iii.-vi.  pp.
12,  19  ;  id,y  'Die  Demenordnung  von  Kleisthenes,'  p.  25.

31.  2.  Pnudae.  Prasiae  was  a  township  of  the  tribe  Pandionis
(Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v,  II/Mio-iai).  It  was  on  the  east  coast  of  Attica,
between  the  townships  of  Potamus  on  the  south  and  Stiria  on  the  north
(Strabo,  ix.  p.  398  sq. ;  as  to  Potamus  see  note  on  §  3  ;  as  to  Stiria  see
note  on  x.  35.  8).  It  was  a  port  of  Attica  (SchoL  on  Aristophanes,
PeacCy  242  ;  cp.  Thucydides,  viii.  95  ;  Livy,  xxxi.  45).  Athena  was
worshipped  at  Prasiae  with  the  surname  of  Forethought  (Bekker's
Anecdota  GraecOy  p.  299 ;  cp.  note  on  x.  8.  6).

The  township  was  situated  on  the  spacious  and  beautiful  bay  now
called  Porto  Raphti^  on  the  east  coast  of  Attica,  about  sixteen  miles
north-east  of  SuniunL  From  the  fertile  valley  of  Cephale  {Keratea\
the  place  last  mentioned  by  Pausanias,  a  path  leads  north-eastward
through  a  very  deep  and  narrow  glen  to  the  shore  of  the  bay.  In  the
depths  of  this  romantic  glen  there  winds  the  bed  of  a  stream  which  is
sometimes  nearly  or  wholly  dry.  The  sides  of  the  glen,  seamed  with
the  beds  of  torrents  and  rifted  rocks,  are  so  thickly  wooded  and  overhung
with  pine-trees  and  bushes  that  in  many  places  it  is  hard  to  force  a
passage  along  it  Flocks  of  sheep  and  goats  browsing,  and  in  spring
the  warbling  of  numerous  nightingales  in  the  thickets,  alone  break  the
solitude.  At  the  end  of  the  glen,  which  is  about  three  miles  long,
the  view  of  the  wide  bay,  enclosed  by  barren  mountains,  suddenly  bursts
on  us.  On  the  north  Mt.  PeratiUy  with  its  jagged  ridge  and  bold
beautiful  outline,  descends  in  precipices  almost  sheer  into  the  water,  its
sides  bare  except  for  here  and  there  a  thin  patch  of  pinewood.  On  the
south  rises,  dark  and  massive,  the  loftier  Mavronori  ('  the  black
mountain ').  From  its  base  the  rocky  headland  of  Koroni  runs  far  out
into  the  sea,  sheltering  the  bay  on  the  east  and  narrowing  its  entrance
to  about  a  mile  and  a  quarter.  Right  in  the  middle  of  the  entrance,
breaking  the  force  of  the  w^aves  when  the  wind  blows  from  the  east,
a  rocky  islet  in  the  shape  of  a  sugar-loaf  or  pyramid  rises  abruptly
from  the  sea  to  the  height  of  about  300  feet.  Its  sides,  clothed
with  lentisk  bushes  and  dwarf  pines,  are  so  steep  that  it  can  be  scaled
only  on  one  side,  the  north.  On  its  summit,  looking  seaward,  sits  a
colossal  but  headless  and  armless  statue  of  white  marble  on  a  high
pedestal,  the  blocks  of  which  were  falling  to  ruin  at  the  time  of  Dod-
well's  visit  but  are  now  held  together  by  iron  clamps.  This  statue,
which,  to  judge  from  its  style,  dates  from  the  time  of  the  Roman
empire,  is  popularly  supposed  to  resemble  a  tailor  {raphti)  seated  at  his
work ;  hence  it  has  given  its  present  name  {Porto  Raphtt)  to  the  bay.
H.  G.  Lolling  plausibly  conjectured  that  this  is  the  monument
described  by  Pausanias  as  the  tomb  of  Erysichthon  who  died  at  sea  on
his  way  home  from  Delos.  The  striking  monument,  looking  out  from
its  high  lonely  isle  across  the  blue  sea,  may  have  been  erected  on  the
traditionary  site  of  the  hero's  grave  by  some  wealthy  patron  of  art  in
Roman  days,  perhaps  by  Herodes  Atticus  himself.


404  PRASIAE  BK.  I.  attica

The  inner  part  of  the  bay  is  divided  into  two  by  a  rocky  spit  jutting
out  from  the  shore,  to  which  it  is  attached  by  a  low  isthmus.  The
promontory  takes  its  name  from  a  chapel  of  St.  Nicholas  which  stands  on
the  isthmus ;  a  small  island  off  the  promontory  still  bears  the  name  of
Prasonisi  (*  isle  of  Prasiae  *).  The  anchorage  for  fishing  boats  is  on
the  north  side  of  the  isthmus,  and  here  are  the  few  wretched  hovels
which  make  up  the  hamlet  of  Porto  Rapkii,  The  hamlet  is  not  per-
manently inhabited.  For  the  bay,  though  one  of  the  finest  harbours  in
Greece,  is  desolate  and  hardly  frequented  except  in  summer.  By  day
peasants  may  be  met  at  work  in  the  fields  or  carting  fish  to  the  neigh-
bouring villages.  But  all  through  the  colder  seasons  of  the  year  and
even  on  summer  evenings  a  profound  stillness,  broken  only  by  the
lapping  of  the  waves  on  the  beach,  reigns  on  the  shores  of  this  beautiful
bay,  one  of  the  fairest  scenes  in  Attica.

On  the  northern  shore  of  the  bay  there  are  a  few  scanty  remains  of
antiquity  which  seem  to  have  belonged  to  the  township  of  Stiria  (see
note  on  X.  35.  8).    Prasiae  lay  on  the  southern  shore,  which  still  bears  the
ancient  name.      Here,  between  the  sandy  and  in  part  marshy  beach  and
the  hills,  there  stretches  a  strip  of  level  comland  interspersed  with  olives
and  stately  cork-oaks.       Some  vestiges  of  ancient  wall  may  be  traced
at  a  garden  not  far  from  the  shore,  where  there   is  an  ancient  well
But  the  sand  is  gaining  so  fast  here  that  a  few  years  ago  the  ruins  of  a
chapel  with  some  Christian  graves  were  discovered  buried  in  the  downs.
The  citadel  of  Prasiae  occupied  the  rocky  headland  of  Koroni  (probably
the  ancient  Coronea  ;  see  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v,  Ko/xoi^eta),  which,  as
we  have  seen,  shelters  the  bay  on  the  east.     This  bold  headland,  joined
to  the  mainland  by  a  low  sandy  isthmus,  has  obviously  been  at  one  time
an  island ;  indeed  the  whole  of  the  southern  part  of  the  bay  is  being
gradually  sanded  up.       The  fortification-walls,  6  feet  thick  and  built
without  mortar,  may  be  followed  all  round  the  summit  of  the  headland,
which  is  besides  so  well  protected  by  its  steep  cliffs  that  an  attack  from
the  side  of  the  sea  must  have  been  nearly  impracticable.      Another
wall,  8  to  10  feet  thick,  which  seems  to  have  been  strengthened  with
towers  or  bastions,  runs  down  in  a  south-westerly  direction  from  the  ring-
wall  of  the  citadel.     It  probably  served  as  an  outwork  and  may  have
reached  down  to  the  shore,  though  now  it  disappears  some  distance
above  the  water.     Within  the  ring-wall  of  the  citadel  are  the  remains  of
a  number  of  cross-walls  running  at  right  angles  to  it ;  but  they  are  now
so  overgrown  by  dense  underwood,  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  trace
them.       From  the  summit  of  the  headland  there  is  a  fine  prospect,  on
the  one  side  over  the  noble  bay  with  its  rocky  islets,  on  the  other  side
across  the  sea  to  Euboea,  Andros,  and  Ceos.     The  white  houses  which
are  seen  gleaming  in  Ceos  are  those  of  the  modem  town  which  occupies
the  site  of  the  ancient  Julis.

The  prehistoric  necropolis  of  Prasiae  is  now  (December,  1 894)  being
excavated  by  the  Greek  Archaeological  Society.  From  the  tombs
which  have  been  already  opened  more  than  two  hundred  vases  of  the
Mycenaean  type  have  been  obtained,  together  with  two  sword-blades
and  three  rings,  one  of  gold  and  two  of  silver.     The  vases  are  of  the


CH.  XXXI  PRASIAE  405

common  Mycenaean  shapes,  but  some  of  them  are  adorned  with  designs
not  hitherto  observed  on  works  of  art  of  that  period.

See  Wheler,  yjjwrwv*  P*  447  »  Chandler,  Travels  in  Greece^  ch.  33,  p.  157  sq,  ;
Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  p.  531  sq,  ;  Leake,  Athens^  2.  pp.  67,  72  sq,  ;  Wordsworth,
Athens  and  Attica^  p.  185  sq,  ;  L.  Ross,  Wanderungen^  2.  p.  153 ;  Vischer,  Erin-
nerungen  und  EindriUke^  p.  69  j^.  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  p.  351  ;  H.  G.  Lolling,
'Prasiae,'  Mittheil,  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  4  (1879),  pp.  351-365  ;  P.  Kastro-
menos,  Demen,  p.  56 ;  Guide-Joanne,  I.  p.  187  sq,  :  Baedeker,^  p.  132  ;  A.
Milchhofer,  '  Antikenbericht  aus  Attika/  Mittheil.  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  At  hen,  15
(1887),  p.  292  ;  id.,  Karten  twn  Attika,  Erldut,  Text,  iii.-vi.  p.  8  sq. ;  Athenaum,
8  December,  1894,  p.  798.

31.  2.  the  first-fruits  of  the  Hyperboreans  come  thither  etc.
Herodotus  also  describes,  on  the  authority  of  the  Delians,  the  route  by
which  the  offerings  of  the  Hyperboreans  were  forwarded  to  Delos ;  but
the  route  is  quite  a  different  one  from  that  which  Pausanias  here
describes.  According  to  the  Delians,  "the  sacred  things,  wrapt  in
wheaten  straw,  were  carried  from  the  Hyperboreans  to  the  Scythians ;
and  from  the  Scythians  they  were  passed  from  people  to  people  till
they  reached  the  far  west,  the  shore  of  the  Adriatic  Sea ;  thence  being
sent  southward  they  were  received  by  the  people  of  Dodona,  the  first
Greek  people  into  whose  hands  they  came ;  and  from  the  people  of
Dodona  they  came  down  to  the  gulf  of  Malea  and  crossed  to  Euboea,
where  they  were  sent  on  from  town  to  town  till  they  came  to  Carystus ;
and  from  Carystus,  without  touching  at  Andros,  they  were  conveyed  by
the  Carystians  to  Tenos,  and  the  Tenians  took  them  to  Delos  "  (Hero-
dotus, iv.  33).  My  friend  Prof.  W.  Ridgeway  has  suggested  to  me  an
ingenious  explanation  of  the  wide  difference  between  the  two  routes
described  by  Herodotus  and  Pausanias.  He  has  made  it  highly
probable  that  from  very  remote  ages  there  was  a  regular  trade-route
frx>m  the  Black  Sea  up  the  Danube  and  across  to  the  head  of  the
Adriatic  {Origin  of  Metallic  Currency  and  Weight  Standards^  p.  105
sqq.)  This  route  is  the  one  indicated  in  the  account  which  the  Delians
gave  to  Herodotus  of  the  route  by  which  the  offerings  came  from
southern  Russia  to  Delos.  But  with  the  establishment  of  Greek  colonies
in  southern  Russia  this  long  circuitous  route  would  be  exchanged  for
the  direct  one  through  the  Bosphorus,  Hellespont,  and  Aegean.  This
newer  and  shorter  route  appears  to  be  the  one  indicated  by  Pausanias.
He  says  indeed  that  the  offerings  came  from  Scythia  (Russia)  by  way
of  Sinope,  an  important  Greek  colony  situated  on  the  southern  shore  of
the  Black  Sea  opposite  to  the  Crimea.  Now,  though  the  shortest  sea-
passage  from  southern  Russia  to  Greece  would  be,  not  by  Sinope,  but
direct  to  the  Bosphorus,  it  is  quite  possible  that  Greek  sailors  preferred
to  cross  to  Sinope  and  then  coast  along  to  the  Bosphorus.  They  would
thus  have  a  shorter  passage  in  the  open  sea,  and  would  be  able  to  do
business  at  Sinope,  which,  as  a  Milesian  colony,  would  naturally  keep
up  commercial  relations  with  its  sister  colonies  on  the  northern  shores
of  the  Black  Sea.  When  the  Athenians  acquired  the  suzerainty  of
Delos  in  the  fifth  century  B.C.,  they  would  recast  the  old  story  of  the
Hyperborean  offerings  so  as  both  to  suit  the  changed  conditions  of


mmmt


Fairs


406  LAMPTRAE  BK.  i.  attica

trade  and  to  make  it  appear  that  the  offerings  had  always  come  by  way
of  Attica.  Thus,  if  Prof.  Ridgewa/s  suggestion  is  right,  Herodotus
gives  us  the  original  Delian  version  of  the  story  ;  Pausanias  gives  us
the  revised  Athenian  version  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.

The  so-called  first-fruits  of  the  Hyperboreans  were  perhaps  harvest-
offerings  consisting  of  the  first  sheafs  cut,  which  may  have  been  sent  to
Apollo  at  Delos  just  as  some  towns  sent  "  the  golden  summer "  (prob-
ably golden  ears  of  com)  to  Apollo  at  Delphi  (Plutarch,  De  Pythiat
oraculis^  16).  See  K.  O.  Miiller,  Die  Dorter^  i.  p.  269  sqq,  ;  W.
Mannhardt,  Antike  Wald-und  FeldkulUy  p.  232  sqq.

31.  2.  Erysidithoxi,  who  died as  he  was  retunung  from

Delos  after  the  sacred  embassy.  Cp.  i.  18.  5  note.  <<The  sacred
embassy "  to  which  Pausanias  refers  is  the  one  which  the  Athenians
sent  annually  to  Delos.  The  vessel  in  which  Theseus  was  believed  to
have  sailed  to  Crete  conveyed  the  ambassador  to  Delos  ;  on  board  with
him  was  a  choir  who  were  to  sing  a  hymn  to  Apollo,  and  victims  which
were  to  be  sacrificed  to  the  god.  Before  the  ship  sailed,  the  priest  of
Apollo  crowned  its  poop  ;  and  from  the  time  when  this  ceremony  took
place  till  the  ship  returned,  no  one  might  be  put  to  death  in  Athens.
This  procured  a  respite  for  Socrates  ;  for  the  ship  happened  to  be
crowned  the  day  before  he  was  condemned.  See  Plato,  Phaedoy  pp.
58  a-c,  59  d  ;  Xenophon,  Memorabilia^  iv.  8.  2  ;  Plutarch,  Theseus^
23  ;  /^.,  NiciaSy  3.  From  the  present  passage  of  Pausanias  it  has  some-
times been  inferred  that  the  ship  with  the  sacred  embassy  to  Delos
sailed  from  Prasiae,  not  from  the  port  of  Athens.  But  this  has  not
been  proved.

31.  3.  Granaus was  expelled  by  Amphictyon.    See  i.  2.  6.

31.  3.  the  township  of  Lamptrae.  The  township  of  Lamptrae
belonged  to  the  tribe  Erechtheis ;  it  included  two  villages  or  petty
towns.  Upper  Lamptrae  and  Lower  (or  Seaside)  Lamptrae  (Harpocra-
tion,  Suidas,  and  Photius,  Lexicon,  s,v.  Aafiirrpeis;  Hesychius,  s.v.
AafiTTpd).  It  was  on  the  southern  coast  of  Attica,  between  the  townships
of  Thorae  on  the  north  and  Aegilia  on  the  south  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  398).
The  site  of  Upper  Lamptrae  is  marked  by  the  ancient  remains  at
Lambrika,  a  deserted  village  situated  on  an  arable  tableland  surrounded
by  hills,  about  four  miles  north-east  of  Vari  (see  note  on  §  i  *  Anagyrus ').
The  ancient  remains  consist  chiefiy  of  sculptures  and  inscriptions  found
in  the  four  chapels  of  the  village  (St.  John,  St.  Luke,  the  Trinity,  and
Constantine).  Among  the  inscriptions  are  epitaphs  of  natives  of
Lamptrae,  proving  that  Lambrika  occupies  the  site  of  that  township.
The  name  Lambrika  is  obviously  a  modified  form  of  Lamptrae.  Among
the  sculptures  found  here  is  a  tombstone  with  a  relief  representing  a
horseman,  and  surmounted  by  the  figure  of  a  Sphinx.  Another  sculpture
is  a  relief  representing  Hercules's  combat  with  the  lion.  From  a  dedi-
catory inscription  found  in  the  chapel  of  St.  Luke  it  may  be  inferred
that  Apollo  was  worshipped  at  Lamptrae.  The  chapel  of  the  Holy
Trinity  (Hagia  Triada)  contains  some  very  old  paintings  of  the  Last
Judgment  etc  At  a  place  called  Kitsch  i pigadi  (a  favourite  meeting-
place  of  sportsmen)  about  half  a  mile  south-west  of  Latnbrika  there


CH.  XXXI  POTAMI  407

are  some  ancient  remains,  including  marble  blocks  and  fragments  of
inscriptions  ;  an  inscription  found  here  contains  a  decree  of  the  people
of  Lamptrae  in  honour  of  a  certain  Philocedes  of  Achamae  who  resided
at  Lamptrae  (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  582).

See  Leake,  Athens ^  2.  p.  160 ;  L.  Ross,  Wanderungen^  2.  p.  74 ;  Bursian,
Geogr,  I.  p.  357  J^.  ;  MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  A  then,  i  (1876),  p.  74;  A.
Milchhofer,  '  Antikenbericht  aus  Attika,'  Mittheil,  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  12
(1887),  pp.  102-104;  *^'t  Karten  von  Attika,  Erldut,  Text,  iil-vi.  p.  14  sq, ;
Fr.  Winter,  'Grabmal  von  Lamptrae/  Mittheil.  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  A  then,  12
(1887),  pp.  10^- 1 18,  with  pL  ii. ;  £.  Reisch,  '  Heraklesrelief  von  Lamptrae,*  ib,
pp.  1 1 8- 1 30,  with  pi.  ilL

31.  3.  Potami.  Potami  (or  Potamus)  was  a  township  of  the  tribe
Leontis;  the  inhabitants  were  satirised  for  the  readiness  with  which
they  admitted  members  who  had  no  right  to  be  on  the  register
(Harpocration,  s,v,  IXora/tos ;  Suidas,  s,v,  Spva\apv€v ;  EtymoL  Mag-
nuffiy  p.  288,  s,v,  8pva)(apv€v),  Strattis  wrote  a  comedy  called  "  The
Potamians  "  (Athenaeus,  vii.  p.  299  b).  The  township  lay  on  the  east
coast  of  Attica,  between  Thoricus  on  the  south  and  Prasiae  on  the
north  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  398  ;  cp.  Pliny,  N,  H,  iv.  24).  It  comprised  three
villages  or  petty  towns,  namely  Upper  Potami,  Lower  Potami,  and
Diradiotian  Potami  (Schol.  on  Homer,  //.  xxiv.  545  ;  C.  I,  A,  ii.  No.
864;  Mittheil,  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  10  (1885),  p.  105  sqq,)  The
territory  of  the  township  probably  extended  from  the  bay  of  Daskalio
on  the  north  to  the  valley  of  the  river  still  called  simply  Potami  (*  the
river '),  which  flows  south  into  the  bay  of  Thoricus.  On  the  shore  of
the  bay  of  Daskalio^  to  the  north  of  the  modem  miners'  houses,  there
lies  an  unfluted  column  together  with  some  large  limestone  blocks  of
masonry.  On  the  northern  shore  of  the  bay,  at  the  ruined  chapel  of  St.
Andrew,  there  is  a  marble  tablet  with  faint  traces  of  an  inscription.  In
the  sea  there  appear  to  be  remains  of  a  mole  ;  and  on  an  island  in  the
northern  part  of  the  bay  (not  marked  on  the  German  map)  there  are
some  squared  blocks  of  a  large  ancient  building.  All  these  may  be
remains  of  Lower  Potami.  Upper  Potami  and  Diradiotian  Potami  may
have  been  situated  somewhere  in  the  valley  of  the  Potami^  to  the  south-
west of  the  bay  of  Daskalio,  Here  at  a  place  called  Gramba,  on  the
south  side  of  the  Potami,  before  it  bends  southward,  there  are  some
ancient  ruins.  Other  ancient  remains  are  to  be  seen  at  Noka,  a  place
near  Ovrio-Kastro  (* Jew's  Castle'),  which  is  a  mediaeval  ruin  on  a
height  surrounded  by  torrents  about  three  quarters  of  a  mile  south-east
of  Grambay  or  about  two  miles  south-west  of  the  bay  of  Daskalio,

See  Leake,  Athens^  2,  p.  71  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  1.  p.  352 ;  P.  Kastromenos,
Demen,  p.  55  sq.  (who  wrongly  places  Upper  Potami  at  Kalyvia) ;  U.  Kohler,
*Potamos,'  Mittheil.  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  10(1885),  pp.  105-112;  A  Milch-
hofer, '  Antikenbericht  aus  Attika,'  Mittheil,  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,  12(1887),
P'  293;  id.,  Karten  von  Attika,  Erldut,  Text,  iii.-vi.  p.  13;  id.,  '  Demenordnui^
des  Kleisthenes,'  p.  22.  As  to  Ion's  leadership  of  the  Athenians  in  the  war  with
Eleusis,  and  his  grave  at  Potami,  cp.  vii.  I.  5.

Pausanias  has  omitted  to  mention  the  township  of  Thoricus,  which
was  sittiated  a  little  to  the  south  of  Potami.     As  it  was  one  of  the  oldest


4o8  THORICUS  bk.  i.  attica

towns  of  Attica  and  still  contains  some  interesting  architectural  remains,
a  short  account  of  it  may  not  be  out  of  place  here.

Thoricus  was  a  township  of  the  tribe  Acamis  (Demosthenes,  xxxix.
30,  p.  1 003  ;  Harpocration  and  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v,  Oopocos ;
SchoL  on  Sophocles,  Oed,  Col,  1595),  situated  on  the  east  coast  of
Attica,  to  the  north  of  Sunium ;  in  front  of  it  lay  the  island  called
Helene,  which  extended  as  far  as  Sunium  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  398  sq.^  x.  p.
485  ;  cp.  Pliny,  N.  H,  iv.  24  ;  Herodotus,  iv.  99  ;  Thucydides,  viii.  95).
It  was  distant  about  60  Greek  furlongs  (between  six  and  seven  miles)
from  Anaphlystus,  a  township  on  the  southern  coast  (Xenophon,
De  vectigalibus,  iv.  43).  The  place  possessed  two  harbours  (Scylax,
57).  Thoricus  was  one  of  the,  twelve  ancient  and  independent  cities
of  Attica  before  the  time  of  Theseus  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  397),  and  was  asso-
ciated with  Attic  legend  as  the  home  of  Cephalus,  the  husband  of
Procris  (Apollodorus,  ii.  4.  7  ;  Antoninus  Liberalis,  41).  It  is  men-
tioned in  the  Homeric  hymn  to  Demeter  (z/.  126).  Philonis,  a
daughter  of  the  Morning  Star  and  grandmother  of  Thamyris,  w^as  said
to  have  been  bom  at  Thoricus  (Conon,  Narrat  7).  In  410  B.C  the
Athenians  fortified  it  (Xenophon,  Hellenica^  i.  2.  i  ;  cp.  /V/.,  De  vecH-
galibuSy  iv.  43  ;  Scylax,  57).  Under  the  Roman  empire  the  place  had
fallen  into  utter  decay  (Mela,  ii.  46),  which  may  be  the  reason  why
Pausanias  does  not  mention  it.  According  to  Pliny  (iV.  H,  xxxvii.  70)
emeralds  of  an  inferior  quality  were  found  in  the  silver  mines  at
Thoricus.

The  ruins  of  Thoricus  are  to  be  seen  on  a  spacious  bay  about  six
miles  north  of  Sunium.  The  ancient  name  is  still  preserved  in  Thariko
or  TherikOy  the  name  of  the  modem  village  on  the  northem  side  of  the
bay.  A  pointed  hill  called  Velatouri  (480  feet)  rises  on  the  north-
western side  of  the  bay ;  it  is  connected  by  a  saddle  with  a  lower  hill
(400  feet)  on  the  north.  At  the  southem  foot  of  Velatouri  are  most
of  the  remains  of  ancient  Thoricus.  Immediately  to  the  east  of  this
hill  the  peninsula  of  St.  Nicholas  runs  out  into  the  sea,  and  bending
southward  shelters  the  bay  on  the  north-east.  This  sheltered  north-
east part  of  the  bay  is  now  called  Porto  Mandri  \  it  was  no  doubt  one
of  the  two  harbours  of  Thoricus.  On  the  northem  side  of  the  peninsula
of  St.  Nicholas  there  is  a  smaller  bay,  now  called  Franko  Umani  or
Vrysaki.  It  was  doubtless  the  second  harbour  of  Thoricus  mentioned
by  Scylax  (57).  The  peninsula  of  St.  Nicholas,  separating  the  two
harbours,  is  crossed  from  north  to  south  by  two  fortification-walls  of
polygonal  masonry  at  no  great  distance  from  each  other  and  from  the
isthmus  which  joins  the  peninsula  to  the  mainland.  The  eastern  wall
is  comparatively  well  preserved.  It  is  6  feet  thick  and  is  strengthened
by  towers  ( 1 3  feet  broad)  on  its  western  side.  At  the  highest  point  of
this  wall,  near  the  small  chapel  of  St.  Nicholas,  there  are  the  founda-
tions of  a  large  tower,  and  to  the  north  of  it  some  traces  of  a  gateway.

On  the  hill  of  Velatouri^  which  was  probably  the  ancient  acropolis,
considerable  remains  of  fortification-walls  still  exist,  especially  at  its  south-
western foot.  But  it  is  not  easy  to  trace  the  line  of  the  fortification-wall
and  to  distinguish  it  from  other  walls,  especially  terrace-walls ;  for  the


CH.  XXXI  THORICUS  409

town  seems  to  have  been  built  upon  the  side  of  the  hilL  At  the  beginning
of  the  nineteenth  century  the  city-walls  were  apparently  in  better  pre-
servation than  they  are  now.  Dodwell  says :  "  The  city,  which  was  of
an  irregular  form,  was  surrounded  by  a  wall  with  square  projecting  towers,
and  apparently  about  two  miles  and  a  half  in  circuit."  He  adds  that
the  towers  were  about  2 1  feet  broad.  Leake  says  that  the  walls  "  sur-
rounded a  small  plain,  which  terminates  in  Porto  Mandri^  and  may  be
traced  following  the  crest  of  the  hills  on  the  northern  and  southern  sides
of  the  plain,  and  crossing  it  on  the  west."  One  of  the  towers  is  still
standing  to  the  height  of  about  10  feet  near  the  south-western  foot  of
the  hilL  It  is  square  and  is  constructed  of  solid  masonry  in  good
Greek  style.

On  the  southern  slope  of  Velatouri^  embedded  between  two  spurs  of
the  hill,  are  the  remains  of  an  ancient  theatre,  which  was  cleared  of
earth  by  the  archaeologists  of  the  American  School  in  1 886.  It  differs
in  shape  from  all  extant  Greek  theatres,  being  built,  not  in  the  ordinary
horse-shoe  shape,  but  in  an  irregular  curve  like  the  fourth  of  an  ellipse.
The  line  of  the  stage,  or  rather  what  corresponded  to  the  stage,  formed
the  longer  axis  ;  the  seats  began  at  the  shorter  axis  and  rose  above  each
other  in  tiers  which  were  concentric  with  the  curve.  The  reason  why
this  peculiar  shape  was  adopted  has  not  been  explained ;  it  appears  not
to  have  been  necessitated  by  the  nature  of  the  ground.  The  retaining-
wall  which  runs  round  and  supports  the  back  of  the  theatre  is  con-
structed of  solid  ashlar  masonry,  the  blocks  being  large  and  laid  in
approximately  horizontal  courses.  It  is  118.50  metres  (389  feet)  long.
Its  actual  height  is  about  1 5  feet,  though  owing  to  the  accumulation  of
soil  at  the  back  its  top  is  now  only  from  3  to  1 2  feet  above  the  ground.
Inside  of  this  outer  wall,  at  a  distance  of  about  60  feet  from  it,  a
parallel  wall,  constructed  of  thin  unhewn  slabs,  was  discovered  below  the
level  of  the  seats  by  the  American  excavators.  They  believe  that  this
inner  wall  was  originally  the  outside  wall,  and  that  at  some  later  time
the  theatre  was  enlarged  by  adding  twelve  tiers  of  seats  at  the  back  and
constructing  the  present  outer  wall  to  support  the  bed  of  small  stones  on
which  the  seats  rested.  There  seem  to  have  been  thirty-one  rows  of  seats
in  all.  Of  these  the  upper  twelve  rows  are  destroyed,  except  at  the  two
ends.  The  remaining  nineteen  rows  are  in  tolerable  preservation.
Most  of  the  seats  consist  simply  of  smooth  fiat  slabs  ;  a  few  are  cut  out
of  the  rock.  The  seats  are  divided  perpendicularly  into  three  blocks
(technically  called  kerkides)  by  two  narrow  staircases  ascending  from  the
orchestra  through  the  middle  of  the  auditorium,  not  at  the  two  wings.
The  theatre  can  hardly  have  seated  more  than  5000  spectators.  The
seats,  with  the  exception  of  the  curved  part  at  the  east  end,  face  south
and  command  a  fine  view  of  the  sea  and  islands.  The  floor  of  the
orchestra  was  made  of  red  earth  well  beaten  down.  No  vestiges  of  a
stage  have  come  to  light ;  but  the  artificial  mass  of  earth  which  formed
the  floor  of  the  orchestra  was  supported  by  a  long  straight  wall  of  rough
but  strong  masonr>',  which  still  exists.  At  the  west  end  of  the  orchestra
are  the  ruined  foundations  of  a  small  temple  about  21  feet  long.  Por-
tions of  its  walls  nearly  5  feet  high  are  standing  on  the  north  and  west


4IO  THORICUS  BK.  1.  ATTICA

sides.  Architectural  fragments  discovered  here  prove  that  the  temple
was  of  the  Ionic  order  and  in  antis.  It  may  have  been  a  temple  of
Dionysus.

The  theatre  was  entered  from  the  back  (the  north)  by  two  ramps  or
inclined  planes  leading  from  the  slope  of  the  hill  to  the  top  of  the  back
wall  of  the  theatre.  These  inclined  planes  rested  each  on  a  short,  buttress-
like wall  of  solid  masonry,  about  1 5  feet  high,  which  abutted  on  the  back
wall  of  the  theatre  at  right  angles.  The  western  of  these  two  buttresses
(as  we  may  call  them)  is  pierced  by  a  doorway,  the  upper  part  of  which
ends  in  a  pointed  arch.  The  purpose  of  this  doorway  is  uncertain  ;  but
to  regard  it  as  a  postern  in  the  city-wall  in  the  style  of  Tiryns  (as  Words-
worth did)  is  absurd.

The  theatre,  like  most  of  the  ancient  remains  at  Thoricus,  is  con-
structed of  a  whitish-grey  marble,  coarse  and  brittle,  which  was  quarried
in  the  neighbouring  hills.

In  the  plain  about  450  yards  to  the  west  of  the  theatre  are  the
remains  of  a  colonnade,  which  were  excavated  by  the  Dilettanti  Society
in  1 8 1 2  but  have  since  then  been  again  buried  under  the  soil  and  over-
grown with  bushes.  Only  a  few  marble  blocks  and  drums  of  columns
now  project  above  the  ground.  The  colonnade  ^'as  105  feet  long  by  48
feet  wide,  the  measurements  being  taken  on  the  top  step  of  the  stylobate.
It  had  fourteen  columns  on  the  long  sides  and  seven  on  the  others.
The  columns  were  of  the  Doric  order  and  i8|  feet  high,  including  the
capitals.  They  were  fluted  only  for  two  or  three  inches  at  the  top  and
bottom  of  the  shaft.

Two  beehive  tombs  of  the  Mycenaean  type  have  been  discovered  at
Thoricus  within  recent  years.  One  is  on  the  sea  side  of  the  hill  of  Vela-
touri;  the  other  is  on  the  saddle  which  connects  Velatouri  with  its
neighbour  hill  to  the  north.     See  note  on  ii.  16.  5.

As  to  Thoricus  see  Dodwelli  Tour^  i.  pp.  534-536  ;  The  unedited  Antiquities  of
Attica  (Dilettanti  Society,  London,  181 7),  pp.  57-59  with  three  plates ;  Leake,
Athens^  2.  pp.  68-70;  Ch.  Wordsworth,  Athens  and  Attica^  pp.  178-182;
Fiedler,  Reise^  I.  p.  41  ;  F.  G.  Welcker,  Tagebuch^  i.  p.  138  sqq,  ;  L.  Ross,
IVanderungeny  2.  p.  iS^sq.  ;  W.  Vischer,  Erinnerungen  und  Eindriicke^  p.  67  ;
Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  353  so,  ;  P.  Kastromenos,  Demen^  pp.  53-55  ;  Guide-
Joanne^  I.  p.  igosg,  ;  Baedeker,' p.  1321^.  ;  A.  Milchhofer,  '  Antikenbericht  aus
Attika,'  Mittheil,  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  A  then,  12  (1887),  p.  294;  /V/.,  Karten  von
Attika,  Erldut,  Text,  iii.-vi.  p.  26  sq,  ;  Papers  of  the  Atnerican  School  of  Classi-
cal Archaeology  at  Athens^  4  (1885-1886),  pp.  1-34.

It  is  reported  that  "  an  entire  city  has  been  found  at  Thoricus  near
Laurium,  destroyed  and  buried  by  some  convulsion  of  nature  unknown
to  history.  It  appears  to  be  not  a  Greek  city  of  the  historic  period,  but
of  the  prehistoric  or  Mycenaean  age.  At  least  this  is  to  be  inferred
from  the  objects  discovered.  At  the  very  beginning  of  the  work  of
excavation  two  royal  tumuli  were  opened  on  one  side,  and  the  ruins  of  a
palace  on  the  other.  The  tumuli  are  about  2  50  metres  apart.  One,  of
circular  form,  is  situated  some  30  metres  below  the  palace,  which  is  built
on  the  rock  of  Thoriko  which  rises  above  the  surrounding  plain.  The
other  tumulus,  remarkable  for  its  helicoidal  shape,  was  in  so  ruinous  a


CH.  XXXI  PHLYA  411

condition  that  it  has  been  up  to  the  present  impossible  to  clear  it.
These  tombs  had  both  been  ransacked  at  some  previous  period.  The
following  is  the  list  of  objects  found  by  the  Greek  Archaeological  Society,
at  whose  expense  and  under  whose  direction  the  excavations  were  under-
taken. Two  fibulae,  one  of  gold,  the  other  of  amber :  a  gold  ring :  an
ivory  comb,  beautifully  worked,  to  fasten  the  hair :  an  ivory  needle :
some  ten  pearls  of  glass,  jasper,  etc. :  two  stone  arrows  of  very  fine
workmanship  :  an  ivory  quiver :  gold  myrtle  and  laurel  leaves  :  a  leaden
disk  decorated  with  coloured  concentric  rings.  Six  similar  disks  have  been
found  in  other  tombs,  and  the  archaeologist  in  charge  believes  them
to  be  money"  (American  Journal  of  Archaeology^  9  (1894),  p.  316  sq,^

31.  4.  Phlsra.  This  township  belonged  originally  to  the  tribe
Cecropis  (Harpocration,  s.v,  ^\vka ;  Suidas,  5,v.  ^Avcia ;  Stephanus
Byzantius,  s.v,  ^\v€li).  Afterwards  it  was  transferred  to  the  new  tribe
Ptolemais  (Hesychius,  s.v.  <l>Av€is ;  cp.  Paus.  i.  5.  5.)  Euripides  was
a  native  of  Phlya  (Harpocration,  Lc)  The  old  Attic  family  of  the
Lycomids  had  a  chapel  at  Phlya  for  the  performance  of  mystic  rites.
This  chapel  was  burnt  by  the  Persians  ;  but  Themistocles,  who  belonged
to  the  Lycomid  family,  restored  it  and  adorned  it  with  paintings
(Plutarch,  Themistocles^  i).  It  contained  a  statue  of  Methapus,  who
partly  remodelled  the  mysteries  of  Andania  (Paus.  iv.  i.  7).  There  was
also  a  sanctuary  of  Laurelled  Apollo  at  Phlya,  in  which  was  preserved
a  document  or  painting  relating  to  the  dances  which  were  performed  at
the  temple  of  the  Delian  Apollo  at  Athens  by  distinguished  citizens  clad
in  Theraean  robes  (Theophrastus,  quoted  by  Athenaeus,  x.  p.  424  f,
where  it  has  been  proposed  to  read  drjpiaKtav  for  SrjpaiKtoVy  see
A.  B.  Cook,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  14  (1894),  p.  163).  A
certain  Lycomedes,  who  was  the  first  to  capture  a  Persian  ship  at  the
battle  of  Salamis  or  Artemisium,  dedicated  the  ensigns  of  the  captured
ship  to  Laurelled  Apollo  at  Phlya  (Plutarch,  Thetnistocles,  15;  cp.
Herodotus,  viii.  11)  The  orgies  of  the  Great  Goddess,  including  the
Bacchic  mysteries,  are  said  to  have  been  celebrated  at  Phlya  even  before
the  mysteries  were  instituted  at  Eleusis  (Hippolytus,  Refutatio  omnium
haeresium,  v.  20,  where  by  ^Xolovvtl  Hippolytus  probably  means
Phlya).  The  Great  Goddess  was  Earth,  as  we  learn  from  the  present
passage  of  Pausanias.  Earth  was  said  to  have  been  the  mother  of
Phlyus  (Paus.  iv.  i.  5),  from  whom  the  township  Phlya  was  probably
supposed  to  take  its  name.  A  certain  Athenian  named  Ciron  owned  a
piece  of  land  worth  a  talent  at  Phlya  (Isaeus,  viii.  35).  The  neighbour-
hood was  well  wooded  (Seneca,  Hippolytus,  27  sq.)

The  site  of  Phlya  seems  to  be  occupied  by  the  modem  Chalandri,
one  of  the  largest  and  most  thriving  of  the  villages  in  the  Athenian
plain,  situated  about  five  miles  north-east  of  Athens  and  about  three  and
a  quarter  miles  south  of  Cephisia  (Kephisia).  This  identification  is
made  almost  certain  by  inscriptions.  For  one  inscription  (C,  /.  A,  iii.
61,  A  col.  ii.  line  13)  mentions  an  estate  which  was  situated  both  in
Athmonia  and  Phlya ;  and  Athmonia  was  certainly  on  the  site  of  the
modem  Marusi,  the  next  village  to  Chalandri  on  the  north,  distant
from  it  about  two  miles  (see  below).     Another  inscription,  containing


412  MYRRHINUS  bk.  i.  attica

the  epitaph  of  a  native  of  Phlya,  was  found  at  Chalandri  (C,  /.  A,  ii.
No.  2646  ;  Kaibel,  Epigrammata  Graeca^  *25).  Moreover,  between
Chalandri  and  Marusi  the  inscribed  boundary-stone  has  been  found  of
an  estate  which  was  partly  mortgaged  to  the  township  of  Phlya  (C  /.  A,
ii.  No.  1 1 13).  On  the  south  side  of  Chalandri  there  are  numerous
ancient  graves,  some  of  them  with  sepulchral  reliefs.  In  particular
there  are  here  the  remains  of  a  sepulchral  chamber,  built  of  marble,
with  a  well-preserved  barrel-roof,  which  is  now  fitted  up  as  a  chap>el  of
the  Panagia  Marmariotissa.  The  district  is  well-watered  and  fertile,
which  may  explain  why  Earth,  Flowery  Dionysus,  Laurelled  Apollo,  etc.,
were  worshipped  here  in  antiquity.

See  Ln  Ross,  Demen  von  Attika,  pp.  100-102;  A.  Milchhofer,  'Antiken-
bericht  aus  Attika,*  Mittheil,  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Aiken,  13  (x888),  p.  352  sq,  ;  id,,
Karten  von  Attika,  Erldut,  Text,  ii.  p.  36  sq.  ;  id,,  '  Demenordnung  des  Kleis-
thenes,'  p.  30.     Cp,  J.  Topffer,  Attisau  Genealogie,  p.  208  sqq.

31.  4.  Light-bringing  Artemis.  The  Greek  word  for  *  light-bring-
ing *  is  here  Selasphoros,  From  two  Attic  inscriptions  (C  /.  A,  ii.
Nos.  432  and  459)  we  learn  that  at  Athens  sacrifices  were  offered  to
Artemis  under  the  equivalent  title  of  Phosphoros  (Might-bringing*).
Cp.  Preller,  Griech,  Mythologie^^  i.  p.  312,  note  2.

31.  4.  Flowery  Dionysns.  A  priestess  of  Flowery  Dionysus
appears  to  be  mentioned  in  a  mutilated  Attic  inscription  (C  /.  A,  ii.
No.  631).

31.  4.  Zeus,  god  of  Acquisition.  Sacrifices  were  offered  to  Zeus
god  of  Acquitision  {Zeus  Ktesios)  at  Piraeus  (Antiphon,  i.  16  sq,)  and
apparently  at  Athens  (Isaeus,  viii.  16).  We  hear  of  a  white  ox  being
sacrificed  to  him  by  the  Athenian  state  (Demosthenes,  xxi.  53,  p.  531).
He  seems  to  be  mentioned  on  a  fragment  of  an  inscription  found  in  the
sanctuary  of  Aesculapius  at  Athens  (C,  I,  A,  iii.  No.  3854).  His
image  or  symbol  was  regularly  set  up  in  store-rooms  (Harpocration,  s,v,
Ktt/o-iov  Aios).  It  was  placed  in  a  new  jar  with  two  handles  which  were
wreathed  with  white  wool ;  and  whenever  a  person  found  anything  he
put  it  in  the  jar  and  poured  in  *  ambrosia,'  which  was  a  mixture  of  pure
water,  olive-oil,  and  various  fruits  (Athenaeus,  xi.  p.  473  be).  Cp.
Preller,  Griech,  Mythologie,^  i.  p.  147.

31.  4-  Athena  Tithrone.  There  was  a  town  Tithronium  in  Phocis
(Paus.  X.  33.  12).

31.  4.  Myrrhinus.  This  township  belonged  to  the  tribe  Pandionis
(Stephanus  Byzantius  and  Photius,  Lexicon,  s,v,  Mvppivovs).  Its  site
is  occupied  by  Merenda,  a  ruined  village  in  the  interior  of  Attica,  east
of  Hymettus,  about  a  mile  and  three  quarters  south-east  of  the  large
village  of  Markopoulo.  The  name  Merenda  is  a  corruption  of  Myr-
rhinus, and  the  identification  of  the  site  is  established  by  inscriptions.
For  a  decree  of  the  people  of  Myrrhinus  was  found  inscribed  on  a
tablet  of  Hymettian  marble  at  Merenda ;  it  contains  a  provision  that  a
copy  of  the  decree,  engraved  on  stone,  shall  be  set  up  in  the  sanctuary  of
Artemis  Colaenis  (C.  I,  A.  ii.  No.  575).  This  inscription  is  now  built
into  the  church  of  St.  Thecla  at  Markopoulo.     Further,  a  small  quad-


CH.  XXXI  MYRRHINUS  413

rang^ular  altar  inscribed  with  a  dedication  to  Artemis  Colaenis  has  been
found  at  Merenda  {MittheiL  d,  arch.  Inst  in  Athen^  12  (1887),  p.  277
sq.^  We  know  from  the  present  passage  of  Pausanias  that  Colaenis
(i.e,  Artemis  Colaenis)  was  worshipped  at  Myrrhinus.  The  scholiast
on  Aristophanes  (Birds^  873)  says  that  the  people  of  Myrrhinus  gave
Artemis  die  surname  of  Colaenis ;  and  he  tells  us,  on  the  authority  of
Hellanicus,  that  Colaenus,  a  descendant  of  Hermes,  founded  a  sanctuary
'  of  Artemis  Colaenis.  Another  scholiast  on  the  same  passage  of  Aristo-
phanes says  that  kolcdnos  was  a  kind  of  bird,  and  that  consequently
Artemis  Colaenis  meant  '  Bird  Artemis.'  Another  altar  inscribed  with
a  dedication  to  Colaenis  simply  (not  Artemis  Colaenis)  is  now  in  the
chapel  of  St.  Peter  at  Ennea  Pyrgot,  three  miles  south-west  of  Merenda
(see  above,  note  on  §  i  *  Prospalta ') ;  it  has  probably  been  transferred
thither  from  Merenda,  Artemis  Colaenis  was  also  worshipped  at  Athens
(C  /.  A,  iii.  No.  216);  her  priest  had  a  special  seat  reserved  for  him
in  the  theatre  of  Dionysus  (C.  I,  A.  iii.  No.  275,  cp.  No.  360).  An
inscription  engraved  on  a  base  of  Pentelic  marble  and  found  at  Merenda
records  that  Herodes  Atticus  "  repaired  the  temple  and  dedicated  the
image  to  Athena."  The  temple  referred  to  was  probably  a  temple  of
Athena  at  Myrrhinus.  At  the  chapel  of  St.  George  (not  of  the  Trinity,
as  it  is  marked  on  the  German  map)  between  Merenda  and  Markopoulo
there  is  a  torso  of  a  female  statue  which  Prof.  A.  Milchhofer  conjectures
to  have  been  a  piece  of  the  image  of  Athena  dedicated  by  Herodes
Atticus ;  and  in  the  chapel  of  the  Taxiarchi  at  Dagla  or  Dankla^  a
village  to  the  south  of  Markopoulo^  there  is  a  fragment  of  a  statue  of
Athena,  including  the  Gorgon's  head,  which  Prof  Milchhofer  thinks
may  also  be  a  piece  of  the  same  image.  Lastly,  built  into  the  north  wall
of  the  chapel  of  the  Panagia  at  Merenda^  there  is  a  pedestal  of  an
ancient  statue  ;  a  metrical  inscription  on  one  side  of  the  pedestal  declares
that  the  monument  was  that  of  a  maiden  named  Phrasiclea ;  and  a
prose  inscription  on  another  side  of  the  pedestal  states  that  the  sculptor
was  Aristion  of  Paros  (C  /.  A.  i.  No.  469 ;  MittheiL  d,  arch.  Inst,  in
Atheny  i  (1876),  p.  174  j^.  ;  xV/.,  4  (1879),  p.  10 ;  Kaibel,  Epigrammata
GraecOy  No.  6  ;  Loewy,  Inschriften  griech.  Bildhauer^  No.  12).

Strabo  (ix.  p.  399)  places  Myrrhinus  on  the  east  coast  of  Attica,  to
the  south  of  Probalinthus  and  Marathon.  He  perhaps  confused  it  with
the  township  Myrrhinutte  (L.  Ross,  Demen^  p.  85  ;  A.  Milchhofer,
*  Demenordnung  des  Kleisthenes,*  p.  14  sq.)

See  Leake,  Athens^  2.  p.  73 ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  p.  347  ;  Kastromenos,
Demen,  p.  60  sq.  ;  Baedeker,*  p.  132;  A.  Milchhofer,  *  Antikenbericht  aus
Attika,'  MittheiL  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  12  (1887),  p.  277  sq.  ;  iV/.,  Karten  von
Attikdy  Erldut.  Tex/,  iii.-vi.  p.  ii.

31.  4.  The  Athmonians  honour  Amarysian  Artemis.  Athmonia
or  Athmonum  was  a  township  of  the  tribe  Cecropis  (Harpocration,  s.v
'Adfwv€vs  ;  Suidas,  s.v.  'A^/xovta  ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v.  "Adfiovov  ;
Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^  p.  349,  s.v.  'Adfiovtus).  At  a  later  time,
apparently,  it  was  transferred  to  the  new  tribe  Attalis  (Schol.  on  Aristo-
phanes, Peace,    190;  cp.   Paus.   i.    5.    5).     There  was  a  sanctuary  of


414  AMARYSIAN  ARTEMIS  BK.  I.  ATTICA

Heavenly  Aphrodite  at  Athmonia,  which  the  inhabitants  believed  to  have
been  founded  by  King  Porphyrion  (Paus.  i.  14.  7).     Inscriptions  prove
that  Athmonia  was  on  or  near  the  site  of  Marusiy  a  considerable  village
in  the  northern  part  of  the  Athenian  plain,  about  seven  miles  north-east
of  Athens  and  a  mile  and  a  half  south  of  Cephisia  {Kepkisia).     The
village   has  obviously  preserved  the  surname  of  Amarysian   Artemis,
who  was  worshipped  here  in  antiquity.     Two  tombstones  inscribed  with
the  names  of  members  of  the  township  Athmonia  have  been  found  at  or
near  Marusi  {C.  L  A.  ii.   Nos.   1723,   1724);  and  a  third  tombstone
inscribed  with  the  name  of  a  woman,  who  was  a  daughter  of  a  man  of
Athmonia,  has  been  found  in  the  same  neighbourhood  (C  /.  A,  ii.  Na
1722).     Moreover,  two  boundary-stones  of  the  precinct  of  Amarysian
Artemis  have  been  found  to  the  south  and  south-west  of  Marusi.     One
of  these  boundary-stones  (C  /.  A,  i.  No.  526),  the  inscription  of  which
is  carved  in  archaic  characters  of  the  pre-£uclidean  alphabet,  is  built
into  the  back  of  a  church  at  the  ruined  hamlet  of  Pelikoy  on  the  southern
side  of  a  gentle  eminence,  five  or  ten  minutes  south-west  oi  Marusi.
The  other  boundary-stone  is  further  to  the  south,  in  the  chapel  of  Sl
Nicholas,  which  stands  surrounded  by  cypresses  near  some  houses,  a
little  to  the  left  of  the  road  to  Marusi^  from  which  it  is  distant  about  a
mile.     The  forms  of  the  letters  on  this  latter  stone  seem  to  be  archaistic
rather  than  archaic.     H.  G.  Lolling  conjectured  that  the  sanctuary  may
have  been  repaired  and  new  boundary-stones  erected  by  H erodes  Atticus
in  the  second  century  of  our  era  {Mittkeil.  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Atken^  5
(1880),  p.  290).     Thus  the  sanctuary  of  Amarysian  Artemis  appears  to
have  been  situated  a  little  to  the  south-west  of  Marusi.     The  district  '^
suitable  for  a  sanctuary  of  Artemis  ;  since  we  have  here  flowing  waieXi
trees,  and  a  fine  prospect  over  a  great  stretch  of  the  Athenian  plai^-
The  festival  of  Amarysian  Artemis  at  Athmonia  appears  to  have  includ^
athletic  sports  ;  for  an  inscription  found  at  Marusi  {C.  I.  A.  ii.  Na  sS-  ^)
contains  a  decree  of  the  township  that  golden  crowns  shall  be  bestoiw^
on  certain  ofHcials  in  recognition  of  the  zeal   with   which  they  Is-
acquitted  themselves  of  their  duties,  and   that  proclamation  of
honour  shall  be  made   "at  the  Amarysian  games"   {'AfiafnxrMV
dytovi).     The  Amarysian  festival  is  mentioned  also  by  Hesychius  (j
'A/iapv(rta).     Athmonia  seems  to  have  been  noted  for  its  vines  (Ari!
phanes,  Peace^  1 90),  and  its  modem  successor  Marusi  still  stands  am(
vineyards  and  olive-groves.

See^Dodwell,  Tour^  i*  P-  35  (one  ofthe  boundary  inscriptions) ;  Leake,  ^M*^^^
2.  p.  41  sq»  ;  Ch.  Wordsworth,  Athens  and  Attica^  p.  195  sa,  \  Bursian,  Gtogr^'^  /*
p.  543  sq.  ;  H.  G.  Lolling,  '  Neue  Grenzstein  der  Artemis  Amarysia/  MiU^^
d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  5  ( 1 880),  pp.  289-291  ;  P.  Kastromenos,  Dtwun^  p*    70
sq. ;  Baedeker,'  p.    123 ;  A   Milchnofer,  Karten  von  Attika^  Erldut,   Text^   a.
p.   37  sq.  ;  id.,  *  Antikenbericht  aus  Attika,'  Mitthcil.  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  AtA^M^
13(1888),  p.  351  J^-

31.  5.  Amarynthns  in  Enboea.  Amarynthus  was  a  village  distant
seven  furlongs  from  the  walls  of  Eretria  (Strabo,  x.  p.  448).  Here  an
annual  festival  was  held  in  honour  of  the  Amarynthian  Artemis,  whidi
was  attended  by  the  people  of  Carystus  as  well  as  the  Eretrians  (Uvy,


:h.  XXXI  ACHARNAE  4x5

cxxv.  38).  An  inscription  in  the  sanctuary  of  the  goddess  stated  that
}ooo  foot,  600  horse,  and  sixty  chariots  went  from  Eretria  in  procession
>n  these  occasions  (Strabo,  /.r.)  The  festival  included  athletic  sports
[SchoL  on  Pindar,  Ofymp,  xiii.  159).  Curiously  enough,  maimed  victims
vere  offered  to  Artemis  at  Amarynthus  (Aelian,  De  not,  Anim,  xii.  34).
The  site  of  the  sanctuary  is  perhaps  marked  by  the  foundations  of  some
mcient  buildings  half  an  hour  to  the  east  of  Eretria,  near  the  road
n^hich  runs  by  the  coast  to  Vathia  (Bursian,  Geogr,  2.  p.  421  s^. ;  cp.
H.  G.  Lolling,  in  MittheiL  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  10  (1885),  p.  354).

31.  6.  Achamae.  This  township  belonged  to  the  tribe  Oeneis
[Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v.  *k.XQ.pvo).  It  was  the  largest  of  all  the
:ownships  in  Attica  (Thucydides,  i.  19) ;  at  the  beginning  of  the  Pelo-
x)nnesian  war  it  furnished  no  less  than  3000  infantry  to  the  Athenian
umy  (Thucydides,  i.  20).  It  was  situated  sixty  Greek  furlongs  (about
»even  miles)  from  Athens,  in  view  of  the  capital,  but  not  in  the  Athenian
>l^n  (Thucydides,  i.  20  and  21).  The  district  was  fertile  and  cultivated
Lucian,  Icaromenippus^  18).  The  people  traded  in  charcoal  (Aristo-
>hanes,  Achamians^  34  and  332  ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Acham.  34),
md  were  reckoned  stout  soldiers  (Pindar,  Nem.  ii.  25  sq. ;  Aristophanes,
Acham.  1 80  sq.\  but  rough  and  boorish  (Suidas,  s.v.  Spvaxapvtv ;
Eiymol.  Magn.  p.  288,  s.v.  Spvaxapv^v;  Seneca,  Hippolytus^  22).
rhere  was  a  priestly  college  at  Achamae  called  '  parasites,'  who  sacrificed

0  Apollo  (Athenaeus,  vi.  pp.  234  f,  235  c).

The  situation  of  Achamae  is  approximately  determined  by  combining
rhucydides's  statement  that  Achamae  was  sixty  Greek  furlongs  from
Uhens  with  the  ftict  that  when  the  Thirty  Tyrants,  who  had  possession
(f  Athens,  desired  to  g^uard  against  Thrasybulus  and  the  democrats  who
lad  entrenched  themselves  at  Phyle  on  Mt.  Pames,  they  encamped  a
Kxly  of  troops  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Achamae  (Diodoms,  xiv.  32).
^rom  this  it  follows  that  Achamae  was  seven  miles  to  the  north-west  of
Athens,  near  the  foot  of  Mt.  Pames.  This  brings  us  to  the  neighbour-
lood  of  Epano-Uossia  or  Menidi^  two  modem  villages  distant  a  mile  and

1  half  from  each  other,  either  of  which  would  answer  to  Thucydides*s
tatement  of  the  distance  of  Achamae  from  Athens.  As  a  number  of
ombstones  inscribed  with  the  names  of  Achamians  have  been  found  in
\x  uta^  Menidi  {C.  I.  A.  ii.  Nos.  1916,  1918,  1934,  1943,  1946,  1948;
Mittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  13  (1888),  p.  341),  it  has  often  been
upposed  that  Menidi  occupies  exactly  the  site  of  Achamae.  But  though
he  occurrence  here  of  these  tombstones  certainly  proves  that  Achamae
vas  in  this  neighbourhood,  it  does  not  prove  that  Achamae  exactly
KTCupied  the  site  of  Menidi.  For  the  graves  of  a  large  town  like
Achamae  must  have  been  scattered  along  the  roads  for  some  distance
outside  of  the  town  itself.  Menidi  may  therefore  stand  on  the  site,  not
>f  Achamae  itself,  but  of  one  of  its  cemeteries.  This  view  is  confirmed
»y  the  observation  that,  though  many  inscribed  tombstones  both  of  the
Ichamians  and  of  others  have  been  found  at  Menidi  (Mittheil.  d.  arch,
^nst.  in  Athen,  13  (1888),  pp.  341-343),  there  are  no  ancient  remains
except  tombs  in  or  near  it.  Ancient  remains  and  other  traces  of  antiquity
»egin  to  appear  about  three  quarters  of  a  mile  to  the  west  of  the  village,


4i6  ACHARNAE  bk.  i.  attica

in  the  direction  of  Epano-Uossia,  Here,  at  the  foot  of  the  knoll  which
is  surmounted  by  a  chapel  of  the  Forty  Martyrs  (Saranta  Martyrcs)  or
Forty  Saints  (Saranta  Hagioi),  Dodwell  found  *'  some  blocks,  traces,  and
foundations  of  a  considerable  town  "  ;  and  beside  the  chapel  he  saw  some
fine  blocks  of  white  marble,  a  fragment  of  an  Ionic  capital,  and  two
sarcophaguses,  as  well  as  a  third  sarcophagus  in  the  chapel.  Vestiges
of  ancient  walls  are  still  to  be  seen  on  the  western  side  of  the  knoll.
The  chapel  of  the  Forty  Martyrs  and  the  neighbouring  chapel  of  St
Elias  on  the  same  eminence  probably  occupy  the  sites  of  ancient
sanctuaries.  To  the  south  and  south-west  of  this  knoll  traces  of  ancient
walls  and  cisterns  begin  to  be  more  plentiful.  Here,  then,  at  or  a  little
to  the  south  of  Epano-Uossia  may  have  stood  Achamae.  This  is  con-
firmed by  the  traces  of  the  ancient  road  from  Athens  which,  according
to  Prof.  Milchhofer,  appears  to  have  led  straight  to  Epano-Liossia  and
from  that  direct  to  the  pass  over  Mt.  Fames  and  so  on  to  Phyle.  Thus
the  corps,  which  the  Thirty  Tyrants  sent  out  to  watch  the  movements  of
Thrasybulus  and  the  democrats  at  Phyle,  probably  marched  through
Achamae  and  took  up  a  position  considerably  beyond  it,  on  the  skirts  or
actually  in  the  defile  of  Mt.  Fames.  That  these  troops  cannot  have
taken  up  their  quarters  in  the  town  of  Achamae  is  quite  clear  from  the
narrative  of  Xenophon  {Hellenica^  ii.  4.  1-7),  who  describes  how  the  force,
consisting  of  nearly  the  whole  Lacedaemonian  garrison  of  Athens,  with
two  regiments  of  cavalry,  encamped  in  broken  or  wooded  ground
about  fifteen  furlongs  from  Phyle,  where  they  were  surprised  and
defeated  by  the  enemy  early  next  moming,  at  the  time  when  the
men  had  dispersed  from  their  arms  and  the  grooms  were  currying
the  horses.  Clearly  the  force  was  not  encamped  and  surprised  in
a  large  and  populous  town  like  Achamae.  The  distance,  too,  of
the  encampment  from  Phyle  (nearly  15  Greek  furlongs  or  ij  miles)
forbids  the  supposition  that  the  troops  were  quartered  in  the  town
of  Achamae.  For  Phyle  is  about  fourteen  miles  from  Athens  by  road
and  Achamae  was  only  about  seven  ;  so  that  Achamae  must  have  been
at  least  seven  miles  from  Phyle.  Hence  when  Diodorus  says  (xiv.  32)
that  the  troops  of  the  tyrants  encamped  about  («"€/)*)  Achamae,  he
must  be  speaking  loosely,  since,  if  the  measurements  of  Xenophon
and  Thucydides  are  right,  the  camp  was  pitched  at  least  five  miles
from  Achamae.  It  should  be  observed  that  the  incomparably  better
informed  Xenophon  makes  no  mention  of  Achamae  in  describing  the
affair.

In  the  first  year  of  the  Peloponnesian  war  (431  B.c.)  the  Pelopon-
nesian  army  under  King  Archidamus  encamped  at  Achamae,  where  they
remained  a  long  time  devastating  the  surrounding  country  (Thucydides,
ii.  19-23).  About  a  mile  and  a  half  south-east  oi  Epano-Uossia  there  is
a  hill,  the  summit  of  which  (between  500  and  600  feet  above  sea-level)
is  surrounded  by  the  foundations  of  a  wall  for  a  length  of  about  550  yards
from  north-east  to  south-west.  It  is  possible  that  Archidamus  may  have
established  and  fortified  his  camp  on  this  commanding  height ;  but,  if  so,
the  distance  of  the  camp  from  Athens  was  somewhat  less  than  the  sixty
Greek  furlongs  at  which  Thucydides  reckoned  it.     He  may  have  given


CH.  XXXI  ACHARNAE  417

the  distance  to  Achamae,  which  would  be  familiar  to  every  Athenian,
not  the  exact  distance  to  the  camp.

The  village  of  Menidi  seems  to  have  inherited  the  name  of  the  ancient
township  Paeonidae,  the  conversion  oi  p  into  m  and  the  blending  of  two
vowel  sounds  into  one  being  common  in  the  formation  of  modem  Greek
words.  Paeonidae  or  Paeania  (the  former  being  strictly  the  name  of  the
people  of  the  township,  the  latter  the  name  of  the  place,  see  Harpocration
s.v.  Ilaiavieis)  was  situated  near  Mt.  Pames  (Herodotus,  v.  62,  compared
with  Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens^  19).  A  mile  and  a  quarter  to  the
south  of  Menidi  is  the  beehive  tomb  which  was  excavated  by  the  German
Archaeological  Institute.     As  to  this  tomb  see  note  on  ii.  16.  5.

On  Achamae  see  Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  p.  521  sq, ;  Leake,  Athens^  2.  pp.  35-38  ;
Bursian,  Gecp^.  i.  p.  334  ;  Kastromenos,  Demerit  pp.  73-75  ;  A.  Milclihofer,
Karten  von  Attika^  Erldttt.  Text^  ii.  p.  42  sqq,  ;  iV/.,  '  Antikenbericht  aus  Attika/
MittkeiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  13  (1888),  p.  337  sqq,

31.  6.  Apollo,  god  of  streets.  Apollo  as  the  Street  God  (Aguieus)
was  commonly  represented  by  a  conical  pillar  placed  in  front  of  the  house
door.  See  Aristophanes,  Wasps,  869-875,  with  the  Scholiast  on  «/.  875  ;
Harpocration,  s.v.  ayvias  ;  Suidas,  s,7f,  ayviai ;  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca,
p.  331  sq, ;  Pollux,  iv.  123;  Hesychius,  s,v.  ayvwt'v;  Helladius,  in  Photius,
Bibliotheca,  p.  535  line  33  sqq.,  ed.  Bekker.  Cp.  F.  Wieseler,  *  Intomo
all*  *Ayi'4€vs  ossia  ayvtcus  pto/ios,*  Annali  delP  Instituto,  30  (1858),
pp.  222-227;  K.  O.  Miiller,  Dorians,  i.  p.  321  sqq,\  Preller,  Grieck.
Mythologie,^  i.  p.  276.  Two  such  conical  stones,  of  small  size,  have
been  found  at  Pompeii,  and  a  third,  inscribed  with  the  name  (Mys)  of
the  dedicator,  is  preserved  in  the  Museum  of  the  Gymnasium  at  Corfu
(J.  Six,  *  Der  Agyieus  des  Mys,'  Mittheil.  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  A  then,  19
(1894),  pp.  340-345).  These  conical  images  of  Apollo  seem  to  be
represented  on  the  coins  of  various  cities.  See  Overbeck,  Griech,  Kunst-
tnythologie,  Besonderer  Theil,  3.  p.  3  sqq. ;  Miiller-Wieseler,  Denkmdler,
I.  pi.  i.  No.  2.  Apollo  was  represented  by  a  conical  stone  at  Megara
(Paus.  i.  44.  2).

31.  6.  Hercules.  Hercules  is  mentioned  in  a  fragmentary  inscrip-
tion which  is  inserted  in  a  wall  at  the  Church  of  St.  Blasius  at  Menidi
(C.  /.  A.  i.  No.  360 ;  Roberts,  Greek  Epigraphy,  No.  55).

31.  6.  Dionysus  they  call Ivy.     So  the  wooden  image  of

Athena  on  the  acropolis  at  Epidaurus  was  called  Ivy  Athena  (i.  29.  l).
The  ivy  of  Achamae  was  famous.  A  poet  in  the  Anthology  {Anthol,
Paiat,  vii.  2 1  ;  Suidas,  s.v,  'Axapveirrjs)  says  that  Sophocles  often  wore
a  wreath  of  Achamian  ivy  in  his  hair.  Another  poet  remarks  {Anthol,
Pal.  ix.  186)  in  flowery  language  that  much  Achamian  ivy  shook
its  green  hair  on  the  books  of  Aristophanes.  And  a  third  expresses
a  hope  {Anthol,  Pal,  vi.  279)  that  a  youth  who  had  dedicated  his
shorn  locks  to  Apollo  may  receive  from  the  god  as  a  guerdon  "fair
ivy  from  Achamae."  Statius  says  {Theb,  xii.  623)  that  Achamae
"  clothed  the  rude  thyrsuses  with  ivy."  The  poets  spoke  of  Dionysus
as  *  ivy-haired'  {Homeric  Hymns,  xxvi.  i  ;  Pratinas,  quoted  by
Athenaeus,  xiv.  p.  617  f)  or  *  ivy-bound'  (Pindar,  quoted  by  Dionysius

VOL.  II  2  E


4i8  MT,  PENTELICUS  bk.  i.  attxca

Halicamassensis,  De  composiiione  verborutn^  22  ;  Pindar,  ed.  Bergk,
Frag.  53).  *  Ivy-bound '  is  of  course  equivalent  to  Milton's  "  ivy-crowned
Bacchus  "  {L Allegro).

32.  2.  Pentelicus,  where  are  quarries.  The  correct  ancient  name
of  Mt.  Pentelicus  was  Brilessus  (Thucydides,  ii.  23  ;  Theophrastus,  Dt
signts  tempestatunty  iii.  43  ;  Strabo,  ix.  p.  399 ;  Pliny,  N,  H.  iv.  24).
But  it  was  sometimes  called  Mt.  Pentelicus,  as  by  Pausanias  and
Vitruvius  (ii.  8.  9),  this  latter  name  being  derived  from  Pentele,  an  Attic
township  (Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v,  JV^vrkXti)  on  the  southern  slope  of
the  mountain,  near  which  were  the  famous  quarries  of  white  marble
(Theophrastus,  De  lapidibus^  i.  6 ;  Strabo,  l.c, ;  cp.  Xenophon,  De
vectigalibusy  i.  4 ;  Livy,  xxxi.  26).  Mt.  Pentelicus  is  the  pyramid-like
mountain  (3635  ft.)  which  closes  the  Athenian  plain  on  the  north-east,  at
a  distance  of  about  ten  miles  from  Athens.  Its  upper  slopes,  as  seen  from
the  Acropolis  at  Athens,  have  been  aptly  compared  to  the  pediment  or
gable  of  a  Greek  temple.  Through  the  clear  air  of  Attica  the  unaided
eye,  looking  from  the  Acropolis,  can  distinguish  the  white  line  of  the
ancient  quarries  descending  somewhat  to  the  right  of  the  highest  peak
straight  down  into  the  valley  where  the  monastery  of  Mendeli  lies  hidden
by  the  intervening  heights ;  to  the  left  of  the  summit,  half-way  up  the
slope,  may  be  discerned  the  large  white  patches  which  mark  the  site  of
the  modem  quarries.

But  though  the  view  of  the  pyramidal  or  gable-like  summit  is  the  one
which  chiefly  strikes  the  observer  at  Athens,  Pentelicus  is  really  a  range
of  mountains  with  a  number  of  lesser  summits,  extending  from  north-west
to  south-east  for  a  distance  of  about  4^  miles.  The  ancient  quarries
lie  on  the  south-western  side  of  the  highest  peak.  Five-and-twenty  of
them  may  be  counted,  one  above  the  other ;  the  highest  is  situated  not
far  beneath  the  highest  ridge,  at  a  height  of  over  3300  feet  above  the
sea.  They  are  reached  from  the  monastery  of  Mendeli^  the  wealthiest
monastic  establishment  in  Attica,  which  nestles  in  a  well-watered  and
wooded  glade  at  the  southern  foot  of  the  mountain,  about  1200  feet
above  sea  level.  The  ground  in  front  of  the  monastery  is  shaded  by
gigantic  white  poplars,  under  which  flows  a  spring  of  excellent  water.
The  name  Mendeli  is  the  modem  equivalent  of  Pentele,  the  name  of  the
ancient  township,  the  site  of  which  is  perhaps  marked  by  some  ancient
blocks  and  traces  of  walls  and  terraces  at  the  chapel  of  the  Trinit>%  a
little  to  the  north-east  of  the  monastery.

The  quarries  are  situated  in  the  gullies  above  the  monastery.  An
ancient  road,  very  steep  and  rugged,  leads  up  the  eastern  side  of  the
principal  gully  to  the  quarries.  The  road  is  roughly  paved  ;  the  blocks
of  marble  were  probably  brought  down  it  on  wooden  slides.  Square
holes  may  be  seen  at  intervals  cut  in  the  rock  at  the  side  of  the  road ;
the  beams  which  supported  the  wooden  slides  may  have  been  ^tened
in  these  holes.  The  road  appears  to  end  at  the  principal  quarry,  a  spot
now  called  SpiliOy  2300  feet  above  the  sea.  Here  the  rock  has  been
quarried  away  so  as  to  leave  a  smooth  perpendicular  wall  of  marble,  the
top  of  which  is  fringed  with  firs.  The  marks,  delicate  and  regular,  of
the  ancient  chisels  may  be  seen  in  horizontal  rows  on  the  face  of  the


CH.  XXXII  MT.  PENTELICUS  4x9

rock.  At  the  foot  of  this  wall  of  marble,  overgrown  with  shrubs  and
mantled  with  creepers,  is  the  low  entrance  to  a  stalactite  grotto,  well
known  to  visitors,  as  the  names  cut  and  painted  on  the  walls  suffice  to
prove.  The  entrance  is  partly  built  up  with  walls  of  the  Byzantine  age  ;
to  the  right,  roofed  by  the  rock,  is  a  chapel  of  St.  Nicholas.  The  grotto
is  spacious,  cool,  and  dark  ;  its  floor  descends  somewhat  from  the  mouth
inwards.  About  sixty  paces  from  the  entrance  there  is  a  small  side-
grotto  with  a  rocky  basin  full  of  cold  spring-water.

An  examination  of  the  marks  on  the  rock  shows  that  the  ancients
regularly  quarried  the  marble  in  rectangular  blocks,  first  running  a  groove
round  each  block  with  the  chisel  and  then  forcing  it  out  with  wedges.
The  effect  of  this  has  been  to  leave  the  quarries  in  the  shape  of  huge
rectangular  cuttings  in  the  side  of  the  mountain.

The  stone  extracted  from  these  quarries  is  a  white  marble  of  a  close,
fine  grain.  It  is  readily  distinguished  fi-om  Parian  marble — the  other
white  marble  commonly  used  by  Greek  sculptors  and  architects — by  its
finer  grain  and  opaque,  milky  whiteness ;  whereas  the  Parian  marble  is
composed  of  large  transparent  crystals,  and  is  of  a  glittering,  snowy
whiteness.  Parian  marble  resembles  crystallised  sugar ;  Pentelic  marble
resembles  solidified  milk,  though  its  surface  is  of  course  more  granular.
Pentelic  marble,  alone  among  all  Greek  marbles,  contains  a  slight
tincture  of  iron  ;  hence  its  surface,  when  long  exposed  to  the  weather,
acquires  that  rich  golden-brown  patina  which  is  so  much  admired  on
the  columns  of  the  Parthenon  and  other  buildings  constructed  of  Pentelic
marble.  The  Parian  marble,  on  the  other  hand,  though  it  weathers
more  easily  than  the  Pentelic  on  account  of  its  coarser  grain,  always
remains  dazzlingly  white.  Pentelic  marble  is  always  clearly  stratified,
and  in  places  it  is  streaked  \\\\h  veins  of  silvery  white,  green,  and  reddish-
violet  mica.  Blocks  so  streaked  were  either  thrown  aside  by  the  ancients
or  used  by  them  for  buildings,  not  sculpture.  But  even  in  architecture
these  veins  of  mica  entailed  this  disadvantage  that  the  surfaces  contain-
ing them,  when  long  exposed  to  the  weather,  split  and  pealed  off  in
flakes,  as  we  may  see  on  the  drums  of  the  columns  of  the  Olympieum  or
Parthenon.

Besides  the  fine  white  marble  already  described,  which  is  commonly
known  simply  as  Pentelic  marble,  there  occurs  on  Mt.  Pentelicus  a  grey,
bluish-grey,  and  grey-streaked  marble  identical  in  kind  with  the  marble
known  as  Hymettian,  because  the  ancients  quarried  it  on  Mt.  Hymettus.
This  gprey  or  bluish-grey  marble  is  of  more  recent  geological  formation
than  the  white.  It  does  not  appear  to  have  been  quarried  by  the  ancients
on  Mt.  Pentelicus  ;  at  least  no  ancient  quarries  of  it  have  been  dis-
covered on  the  mountain.  But  it  is  now  obtained  in  great  masses  in  the
large  modem  quarries  to  the  east  of  Kephisia^  and  furnishes  Athens  with
building  material  for  the  better  class  of  houses  and  public  edifices ;  even
paving-stones  are  made  of  it.

An  hour's  climb  from  the  great  quarry  at  Sfnlia  takes  us  to  the
summit  of  Mt.  Pentelicus.  The  path  ascends  slopes  which  not  many
years  ago  were  thickly  wooded,  but  are  now  bare  and  stony.  The  view
from  the  top  is  the  clearest  and  most  comprehensive  that  can  be  obtained


420  MT.  PARNES  bk.  i.  attica

of  the  Attic  peninsula.  Conspicuous  below  us  on  the  north  is  the  sickle^
shaped  bay  of  Marathon.  The  snowy  peak  of  Parnassus  closes  the
prospect  on  the  west ;  the  mountains  of  Euboea  bound  it  on  the  north ;
and  to  the  south,  in  clear  weather,  the  island  of  Melos  is  faintly  visible
at  a  distance  of  90  to  100  miles.  On  the  ridge,  a  little  below  and  to
the  south-east  of  the  summit  of  Pentelicus,  there  is  a  small  platfonn,
which  on  three  sides  shows  traces  of  having  been  hewn  out  of  the  rock.
It  is  exactly  in  the  line  of  the  ancient  paved  road,  which,  however,  comes
to  an  end  considerably  lower  down,  at  the  great  quarry.  On  this
platform  probably  stood  the  image  of  Athena  mentioned  by  Pausanias
below.

See  Dodwell,  Taur^  i.  pp.  498-501 ;  Leake,  Athens^  2,  pp.  4-6  ;  Prokesch  von
Osten,  Deftkwurdigkeiten  und  Erinnerungefi  aus  deni  Orient ^  2.  p.  426  sqq.  \
Fiedler,  Reise^  I.  pp.  29-35 »  Bursian,  Gecgr.  x.  p  253 ;  Mahaffy,  Rambles  and
Studies^  P  165  59i' »  Baedeker,'  p.  125  sq. ;  Gutde'Joanne^  i.  p.  171  sqq, ;  H.
BlUmner,  Technologies  3.  p.  27  sqq. ;  Neumann  und  Partsch,  Pnysikaiische  Geo-
graphie  von  Griechenlcutd,  p.  213  j^.  ;  A.  Milchhofer,  Karten  von  Attika^  Erldut,
Text,  ilL-vi.  p.  32  sqq. ;  G.  R.  Lepsius,  Griechische  Marmorstudien^  pp.  1 1 -23.

32.  I.  Fames.  Mt.  Pames  was  one  of  the  three  chief  ranges  of
mountains  visible  from  Athens,  the  other  two  being  Brilessus  (Pentelicus)
and  Hymettus  (Theophrastus,  De  signis  tempestcUum^  iii.  43).  As  Hy-
mettus  and  Brilessus  (Pentelicus)  are  known  to  have  been  the  ranges
which  bound  the  Athenian  plain  on  the  east  and  north-east,  it  follows  that
Pames  is  the  still  loftier  range  (4635  ft.)  which  bounds  the  plain  on  the
north,  forming  with  its  outlying  ridges  the  great  mountain  barrier  between
Attica  and  Boeotia.  This  is  confirmed  by  Plato's  statement  (Critias^
p.  nod,  with  the  Scholiast)  that  in  old  days  the  boundary  of  Attica  on
the  side  of  the  mainland  ran  along  the  peaks  of  Cithaeron  and  Pames.
Further,  some  of  the  defeated  Athenians  after  the  battle  of  Delium  fled
towards  Mt.  Pames  (Thucydides,  iv.  96  ;  Plutarch,  De  genio  Socratzs,
II  ;  Lucian,  De  parasito^  43  ;  Athenaeus,  v.  p.  216  a).  As  Delium  was
situated  between  Tanagra  and  the  Euripus  (see  note  on  ix.  20.  i ),  the
nearest  Attic  mountains  which  would  serve  as  a  refuge  to  the  fugitives
would  be  the  range  in  question,  which  here  separates  Attica  from  Boeotia.
This  then  was  Mt.  Pames.  It  is  the  loftiest  and  most  extensive  of  all
the  Attic  ranges.  On  the  west  it  joins  Mt.  Cithaeron  ;  on  the  north-
east it  sends  its  spurs  down  to  the  shore  of  the  Euripus,  not  in  an
unbroken  chain,  but  in  a  series  of  isolated  heights  divided  by  glens  and
valleys  of  varying  width.  The  lower  parts  of  the  mountains  are  covered
with  pines  ;  higher  up  the  pines  are  mixed  with  holly-oaks  and  firs  ;  and
towards  the  summits  the  forest  consists  of  firs  alone.  Many  brooks
meander  among  the  firs,  and  grassy  glades  and  green  ravines  open
between  them.  Here  and  there,  in  one  of  these  openings,  there  is  a
patch  of  com.  The  scenery  of  the  range  as  a  whole  is  grand  and
picturesque,  presenting  a  maze  of  glens,  crags,  rocks,  precipices,  and
wooded  heights.  Its  forests  continue  to  supply  Athens  with  charcoal  as
in  the  days  of  Aristophanes.     The  modem  name  of  the  range  is  Ozea.

See  Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  p.  502  ;  Leake,  Northern  Greece^  2.  pp.  416-
426 ;  L.  Ross,  Erinnerungen  und  Mittheilungen  aus  Griechenlandy  p.


CH.  XXXII  PHYLE  421

242  sqq. ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  252.  For  other  mentions  of  Mt.  Fames
in  ancient  writers  see  Thucydides,  ii.  23  (where  the  Peloponnesians  are
said  to  have  devastated  some  of  the  townships  between  Fames  and
Brilessus)  ;  Aristophanes,  Clouds^  324  ;  Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens^
19;  Strabo,  ix.  p.  399;  Lucian,  Bis  accusatus,  8;  zV/.,  Icaromenippus^
1 1  ;  Statius,  Theb.  xii.  620  sq.  ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v,  Hdpvrfs.

One  place  on  Mt.  Fames  which  Fausanias  has  omitted  to  mention
deserves  notice  on  account  both  of  its  historical  interest  and  its  striking
remains.  This  is  the  fortress  of  Fhyle,  situated  in  the  heart  of  the
mountains,  at  a  point  on  the  road  from  Athens  to  Thebes,  where  several
ravines  and  passes  meet.  It  was  a  township  of  the  tribe  Oeneis
(Harpocration  and  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v.  ^vkrj).  In  403  B.C.,  when
Athens  was  languishing  under  the  dominion  of  the  Thirty  Tyrants,  the
patriot  Thrasybulus  advanced  from  Thebes  with  about  seventy  men,
seized  the  fortress  of  Fhyle,  and  successfully  defended  it  against  an  army
of  more  than  3000  men  which  the  tyrants  led  against  him.  Afterwards  he
descended  into  the  plain,  surprised  and  defeated  the  forces  of  the  Tyrants,
and  then  established  himself  at  Firaeus.  See  Xenophon,  Hellenica^  ii.  4  ;
Diodorus,  xiv.  32  5q.\  Cornelius  Nepos,  Thrasybulus^  2  ;  Clement  of
Alexandria,  Strom,  i.  24.  163,  p.  418,  ed.  Fotter.  The  language  in
which  ancient  writers  describe  this  exploit  of  Thrasybulus  proves  that
the  place  was  a  fortress  before  he  seized  it.  As  it  dominates  the  pass
through  which  runs  the  shortest  road  from  Thebes  to  Athens,  we  can
hardly  doubt  that  from  a  very  early  date  it  had  been  fortified  by  the
Athenians  as  an  outpost  against  Boeotia.  More  than  a  century  before
its  seizure  by  Thrasybulus  the  place  had  served  as  a  refuge  to  some
Athenians  who  had  revolted  against  the  tyranny  of  Fisistratus  (Flutarch,
Reg,  et  imperat,  apophtlieg^nata^  Pisistr,  i).  At  a  later  time,  when
Athens  was  alarmed  by  the  advance  of  Fhilip  of  Macedonia  into  Fhocis,
the  peasantry  in  this  neighbourhood  were  ordered  to  retire  with  their
goods  into  the  fort  of  Fhyle  (Demosthenes,  xviii.  38,  p.  238).  After-
wards Cassander  put  a  Macedonian  garrison  into  it,  which  was  however
expelled  by  Demetrius  Foliorcetes,  who  restored  the  fort  to  the  Athenians
(Flutarch,  Demetrius^  23).

An  expedition  to  the  ruins  of  Fhyle  is  a  favourite  excursion  of
visitors  to  Athens.  The  distance  by  road  is  about  1 4  miles.  Diodorus
indeed  estimates  the  distance  at  100  Greek  furlongs  (11  miles).  But
he  is  wrong.  Demosthenes,  more  correctly,  says  that  it  was  over  1 20  Greek
furlongs  (xviii.  38,  p.  238).  A  carriage  road  runs  as  far  as  Chasiay  a  large
village  on  the  southern  slopes  of  Mt.  Fames,  about  i  o  miles  from  Athens.
Beyond  this  point  the  way  is  nothing  but  a  steep  and  stony  bridle-path.
After  ascending  it  for  half  an  hour  we  come  to  the  meeting  of  two  deep
and  savage  glens.  In  the  glen  to  the  right  (east)  the  little  monastery
of  Our  Lady  of  the  Defile  {Panagia  tdn  Kleistdn)  stands  romantically
at  the  foot  of  sheer  precipices.  The  path  to  Fhyle  (which  is  at  the
same  time  the  direct  road  to  Thebes)  winds  rapidly  up  the  narrow
western  glen  through  a  thin  forest  of  firs.  In  places  the  path  is  hewn
in  the  rock,  and  the  defile  is  so  narrow  that  a  handful  of  men  might
make  it  good  against  an  army.     Fhyle  is  reached  in  about  an  hour  and


422  PHYLE  BK.   I.  ATTICA

three  quarters  from  C/iasia,  The  fortress  with  its  massive  walls  and
towers  crowns  a  high  precipitous  crag  on  the  southern  side  of  the  pass,
which  it  completely  dominates.  A  ridge  connects  the  crag  with  the
higher  mountains  on  the  east ;  and  along  this  ridge  is  the  only  approach
to  the  fortress.  On  the  west  and  south  the  sides  of  the  crag  fall  away
abruptly  into  a  deep  ravine,  which  is  broken  by  tremendous  precipices,
crested  with  firs  and  tufted  with  shrubs  and  underwood.  The  ruins  of
the  fortress  encircle  a  little  plateau,  scarcely  300  feet  long  from  east  to
west,  on  the  summit  of  the  crag.  The  walls  and  towers,  built  of  fine
quadrangular  blocks  without  mortar,  are  best  preserved  on  the  north-
east side,  where  they  are  still  standing  to  a  height  of  seventeen  courses.
The  tower  at  the  north-east  angle  is  round ;  the  other  two  remaining
towers  are  square.  The  principal  gate  was  on  the  east  side,  ap-
proached from  the  ridge.  There  was  further  a  postern,  also  approached
from  the  ridge,  near  the  south-east  comer.  From  the  fortress,  which
stands  more  than  2000  feet  above  the  sea,  the  view  is  magnificent,
taking  in  the  whole  of  the  Athenian  plain  with  Athens  itself  and
Hymettus,  and  the  sea  with  Salamis,  Aegina,  and  the  coast  of
Peloponnese.

The  high  peak  (Mt.  Pagania)  which  towers  immediately  to  the
north-east  of  Phyle  in  the  form  of  a  crescent-shaped  wall  of  naked  rock
is  probably  the  ancient  Harma,  which  the  augurs  at  Athens  u^atched  till
they  saw  lightning  flash  about  its  summit,  whereupon  they  sent  the
sacrifice  to  Delphi  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  404  ;  see  above,  note  on  i.  19.  i).
Strabo  expressly  says  that  Harma  >^*as  near  Phyle.  On  its  eastern  side
Harma  (Mt.  Pagania)  descends  in  precipices  into  the  deep  glen,  already
mentioned,  at  the  entrance  of  which  is  the  monastery  of  our  Our  Lady
of  the  Defile.

Further  up  this  glen  than  the  monastery,  at  a  height  of  some
hundreds  of  feet  above  the  torrent  (the  Potamt)  which  traverses  it,
there  is  a  cavern  which  is  sometimes  visited.  The  direct  distance  of
this  cavern  from  the  monastery  is  only  about  a  mile  and  a  half.  But  in
the  glen  the  stream,  hemmed  in  by  precipices  advancing  from  the
mountains  on  both  sides,  has  scooped  out  for  itself  between  them  a  bed
so  profound  and  rugged  that  to  scramble  along  it  is  impossible,  even
when  the  water  is  at  its  lowest.  Hence  in  order  to  reach  the  cavern  it
is  needful  to  make  a  long  detour  round  the  western  flanks  of  Mt.
Pagania  and  to  come  do>\7i  into  the  glen  at  a  point  a  good  deal  higher
up.  Having  done  so  we  follow  the  glen  downward  past  the  place  where
another  glen  opens  into  it,  bringing  its  tributary  stream  to  swell  the
Potami,  The  cave  is  situated  high  up  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  main
glen,  a  little  below  the  meeting  of  the  waters.  To  clamber  up  the  steep
slope  to  it  is  far  from  easy.  The  mouth  of  the  cave  is  so  narrow  that
only  one  person  can  enter  it  at  a  time ;  it  is  at  the  foot  of  a  precipice
darkened  by  overhanging  trees  and  flanked  by  two  crags  which  project
like  wings  on  either  side.  In  the  face  of  the  rock  to  the  right  of  the
entrance  into  the  cavern  are  some  votive  niches  with  worn  inscriptions
under  them.  Within  the  cave,  which  may  be  about  a  hundred  paces
deep,  water  dripping  from  the  roof  has  formed  large  stalactites  and  has


CH.  xxxir  MT.  HYMETTUS  433


hollowed  out  basins  in  the  floor.  Broken  lamps  and  potsherds  have
been  found  in  it  in  considerable  quantities,  which,  with  the  votive  niches
outside,  prove  that  this  secluded  spot  was  an  ancient  sanctuary.  It  was
most  probably  the  Nymphaeum  or  sanctuary  of  the  Nymphs,  which
Menander  mentioned  as  being  near  Phyle  (Harpocration,  s,v.  ^v\t\).
Here,  too,  the  people  of  Phyle  probably  offered  the  sacrifices  to  Pan
of  which  Aelian  makes  mention  {Eptstoitie  Rusticae^  15).  For  one  of
the  inscriptions  on  the  rock  outside  the  cave  sets  forth  that  a  certain
Tychander  (?)  caused  workmen  to  put  up  the  image  of  Pan  beside  the
Celadon,  and  that  sacrifices  were  offered  by  one  Trophimianus  {C,  I.  A.
iii.  No.  210).  From  this  inscription  we  learn  that  the  Potamiy  which
flows  in  the  depth  of  the  glen  below  the  cave,  was  called  in  antiquity  the
Celadon,  i.e,  *  the  Roaring  Stream.'

See  Dodwell,  Taurt  i.  pp.  502-508  ;  Leake,  Athens^  2.  pp.  124-127  ;  Welcker,
Tagibuchy  i.  p.  116  sqq,  ;  Le  Bas,  Voyage  Archiohgiqtu^  ItitUrairt^  pL  7  and  7
bis ;  "L,  Ross,  fVanderungen,  2.  pp.  82-88 ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen  und  Ein-
driicke,  pp.  89-91  ;  Bursian,  Gecgr,  i.  p.  333  ;  Mahaflfy,  RambUs  and  Studies ^  p.
187  \sq, ;  H.  G.  Lolling,  '  Das  Nymphaion  auf  dem  Pames,'  Mittheil,  d,  arch*
Inst,  in  Atheny  5  (1880),  pp.  289-291  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  122  sq.  ;  Guide-Joannty  I.
p  184  sq,

32.  I.  wild  boars  and  bears.  Wild  boars  were  found  in  various
parts  of  Greece  in  Pausanias's  time  (iii.  20.  4;  vii.  26.  10;  ix.  23.  7).
Bears  seem  not  to  have  been  so  common ;  but  they  abounded  on  Mt.
Taygetus  (iii.  20.  4).  The  bear  is  no  longer,  so  far  as  I  know,  to  be
met  with  in  Greece.  But  the  wild  boar  still  ranges  the  pine-forests  of
Pames,  Cithaeron,  and  Gerania  (Leake,  N.  Greece^  2.  p.  42 1  ;  Baedeker,^
p.  180 ;  Philippson,  Peloponnes^  p.  27),  and  has  his  lair  in  the  depths  of
the  almost  impassable  ravines  among  the  north-eastern  spurs  of  Mt.
Pentelicus  {Karten  von  Attika^  Erldut,  Text,  iii.-vi.  p.  55).

32.  I.  Hymettus,  which  produces  the  best  food  for  bees  etc.
Hymettus  is  the  uniform,  flat-topped  chain  of  hills  which  bounds  the
plain  of  Athens  like  a  wall  on  the  east.  It  rises  to  the  south  of  Mt.
Pentelicus,  from  which  it  is  divided  by  a  valley  about  three  miles  broad,
and  it  extends  southward  nearly  in  a  straight  line  till  it  ends  in  the  sea
at  Cape  Zoster.  The  only  convenient  road  from  Athens  to  eastern
Attica  is  through  the  valley  at  the  northern  foot  of  this  long  mountain-
^'all.  But  there  is  one  pass  over  it  through  the  glen  of  Pimari^  which
divides  the  chain  into  two.  The  higher  portion  of  the  range  (3370  feet)
to  the  north  of  this  pass  was  called  in  antiquity  the  Great  Hymettus ;
the  lower  part  to  the  south  of  the  pass  was  called  the  Lesser  or  Water-
less {Anudros)  Hymettus  (Theophrastus,  De  signis  tetnpestatum^  i.  20).
The  outline  of  Hymettus,  viewed  from  Athens,  is  even  and  regular  ;  but
its  sides  are  furrowed  by  winter  torrents  and  its  base  is  broken  into
many  small  isolated  hills  of  a  conical  form.  Except  towards  its  base
the  range  is  almost  destitute  of  soil.  Wild  olives,  myrtles,  laurels,  and
oleanders  are  found  only  in  some  of  the  gulleys  at  the  foot  of  the
mountain.  Its  steep  rocky  slopes  are  composed  of  grey  marble  seamed
and  cracked  in  all  directions.  Some  stunted  shrubs,  however,  including
the  lentisk,  terebinth,  and  juniper,  and  sweet-smelling  herbs,  such  as


424  MT.  HYMETTUS  bk.  i.  attica

thyme,  lavender,  savory,  and  sage,  grow  in  the  clefts  of  the  rocks,  and,
with  flowers  such  as  hyacinths  and  purple  crocuses,  furnish  the  bees
with  the  food  from  which  they  still  extract  the  famous  Hymettian  honey.
Hymettus  seems  to  have  been  as  bare  and  treeless  in  classical  antiquity
as  it  is  now ;  for  Plato  remarks  {Critias^  p.  me)  that  some  of  the
Attic  mountains,  which  now  only  provided  food  for  bees,  had  at  no
very  remote  epoch  furnished  the  timber  with  which  some  very  large
buildings  were  still  roofed  at  the  time  when  he  wrote.  The  honey  of
Hymettus  was  renowned  (Horace,  Odes^  ii.  6.  1 3  sqq, ;  /V/.,  Sat.  ii.  2.
15  ;  Cicero,  De  finibus^  ii.  34.  112;  Ovid,  Met,  x.  284  sq.  ;  Strabo,  ix.
p.  399  ;  Pliny,  N.  H.  xi.  32  ;  Nonnus,  xiii.  186  sq, ;  EtymoL  Magnum^
p.  776,  s,v,  *Y/i7jmov  fieki).  It  was  said  that  when  Plato  was  a  babe
the  bees  on  Hymettus  filled  his  mouth  with  honey  (Aelian,  Var,  Hist,
x.  21  ;  Biographi  Graea\  ed.  Westermann,  pp.  382,  390).  The  story
went  that  bees  were  first  produced  on  Hymettus  (Schol.  on  Nicander,
Alex.  449).  Poets  spoke  of  the  flowery  and  fragrant  Hymettus  (Ovid,
Met,  vii.  72  ;  Statins,  Theb,  xii.  622).  The  thyme  and  the  creeping
thyme  {serpyllum)  of  Hymettus  are  specially  mentioned  ;  the  creeping
thyme  was  transplanted  to  Athens  and  grown  there  (Antiphanes,  quoted
by  Athenaeus,  i.  p.  28  d ;  Theophrastus,  Hist,  Plant,  vi.  8.  2  ;  Pliny,
N.  H  xix.  172  ;  Athenaeus,  xv.  p.  681  e  f).  When  ancient  writers
speak  of  Attic  honey  in  general  (Pliny,  N,  H  xxi.  57  ;  Vitruvius,  ii.  9.
1 7),  they  may  have  had  Hymettian  honey  in  view.  Vitruvius  (J,c.)
compares  Attic  honey  to  resin  in  colour,  which  aptly  describes  the  colour
of  the  modem  Hymettian  honey.  When  Synesius  visited  Athens  in  the
fifth  century  A.D.  he  found  that  the  glory  of  its  philosophers  had
departed,  but  that  the  glory  of  its  bee-masters  still  remained  {Epistolaey
1 3  5)'  Opinions  differ  as  to  the  quality  of  the  modem  Hymettian
honey.  Leake  pronounced  it  superior  to  that  of  the  rest  of  Attica  and
of  the  surrounding  provinces  of  Greece.  Others  think  it  inferior  to  the
honey  of  other  parts  of  Greece,  such  as  the  Cyclades,  Corinth,  and
Thebes,  as  well  as  to  the  heather  honey  of  Scotland  and  Ireland.  To
me  it  seemed  excellent.  Most  of  the  honey  sold  as  Hymettian  comes
from  Tourko  Voum\  north  of  Athens,  and  from  other  parts  of  Attica.

Hymettus  was  also  famous  in  antiquity  for  its  marble,  which  seems
to  have  been  especially  prized  by  the  Romans  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  399 ;
Horace,  Odes,  ii.  18.  3  sq, ;  Pliny,  N.  H.  xvii.  6,  xxxvi.  7  and  114).
This  marble,  which  is  still  quarried  in  large  quantities  on  Hymettus,  is
a  bluish-grey,  streaky  marble,  of  finer  and  closer  grain  than  the  white
Pentelic  marble,  but  far  inferior  to  it  in  beauty.  The  Greeks  seem  not
to  have  used  it  commonly  till  the  third  century  B.c.  From  that  time
onward  we  find  it  used  for  tombstones,  inscriptions,  and  the  casing  of
buildings.  The  principal  quarries  are  on  the  western  side  of  the  moun-
tain, on  the  slopes  which  enclose  the  valley  of  St.  George  on  the  south
and  south-east  and  which  on  the  other  (southern)  side  descend  nearly
sheer  into  *  the  DeviPs  Glen'  or  *the  Evil  Glen'  (Kakorrfieuma\  the
deepest  and  wildest  gorge  in  Hymettus.  Vestiges  of  the  ancient  road
or  slide  by  which  the  blocks  were  brought  down  from  the  quarries  may
be  seen  about  a  hundred  yards  above  the  chapel  of  St.  George  ;  the  road


CH.  XXXII  MT.  HYMETTUS  425

seems  to  have  been  led  in  serpentine  curves  down  the  slope,  not  in  a
straight  line  like  the  road  from  the  quarries  on  Pentelicus.

A  great  part  of  the  upper  ridge  of  Hymettus  is  composed  of  a  white
marble  resembling  the  white  marble  of  Pentelicus,  but  inferior  to  it  in
crystalline  structure  and  of  a  duller  white.  The  ancients  apparently
made  little  use  of  this  white  Hymettian  marble.

Clouds  on  Hymettus  were  believed  to  prognosticate  rain  (Theophras-
tus,  De  signis  tempestatutn^  i.  20  and  24) ;  if  during  a  storm  a  long
bank  of  clouds  was  seen  lowering  on  the  mountain,  it  meant  that  the
storm  would  increase  in  fury  (Theophrastus,  op,  cit.  iii.  43).

Hymettus  is  still  as  of  old  (Ovid,  Ars  Amat,  iii.  687)  remarkable
for  the  wonderful  purple  glow  which  comes  over  it  as  seen  from  Athens
by  evening  light.  When  the  sun  is  setting,  a  rosy  flush  spreads  over
the  whole  mountain,  which,  as  the  daylight  fades  and  the  shadows  creep
up  the  slope,  passes  by  insensible  transitions  through  all  intermediate
shades  of  colour  into  the  deepest  violet.  This  purple  tinge  is  peculiar
to  Hymettus ;  none  of  the  other  mountains  which  encircle  the  plain  of
Athens  assumes  it  at  any  hour  of  the  day.  It  was  when  the  sunset  glow
was  on  Hymettus  that  Socrates  drained  the  poisoned  cup  (Plato,  Phaedo^
p.  1 1 6  b  and  e).

See  Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  pp.  478-496 ;  Leake,  Athens^  2.  p.  47  sq, ;  Fiedler,
Jieisey  I.  pp.  25-28  ;  Welcker,  Tagebuch^  I.  pp.  95-97  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  pp.
5,  n.  I,  253  sq.  ;  Milchhofer,  Karien  von  Attika^  Erldut.  Text^  ii.  p.  24  sqq, ;
G.  R.  Lepsius,  Griechische  Marmorstudietiy  pp.  23-27.  For  other  mentions  of
Hymettus  by  ancient  writers  see  Herodotus,  vi.  137  (who  says  that  the  Pelasgians
were  given  lands  under  Hymettus  as  a  reward  for  having  built  the  walls  of  the
Acropolis  of  Athens) ;  Lucian,  Bis  accusatuSj  8  ;  /</.,  Icaromenippus^  ii  ;  icL^  De
mercede  conductis,  35  ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v.  'TfiTprSs,

On  the  south-eastern  side  of  the  Lesser  Hymettus,  about  two  miles
north  of  Van)  there  is  a  grotto  which  deserves  mention  on  account  of
the  inscriptions  and  curious  antique  rock-carvings  which  it  contains.
From  the  inscriptions  (C  /.  A.  i.  Nos.  423-431)  we  learn  that  a  certain
Archedamus,  a  native  of  Thera  but  a  citizen  of  the  Attic  township
ChoUidae,  carved  the  grotto  and  dedicated  it  to  the  Nymphs,  by  whom
he  believed  himself  to  be  possessed  ;  he  also  planted  a  garden  for  them.
Other  inscriptions  prove  that  the  grotto  was  also  sacred  to  the  Graces,
Pan,  and  Apollo  Hersus.  The  carvings  include  the  headless  figure  of  a
woman,  under  life-size,  seated  in  an  arm  chair  ;  a  large  head  of  a  lion ;
and  a  figure  of  Archedamus  himself  cut  in  relief,  clad  in  a  short  tunic,
with  a  mallet  in  his  right  hand  and  a  carpenter's  square  in  his  left.
The  style  of  the  carvings  is  very  uncouth.  From  the  character  of  the
inscriptions  it  is  believed  that  they  were  cut  shortly  before  432  B.C.
The  inner  grotto,  at  a  lower  level  than  the  outer  one,  is  a  circular
chamber,  dimly  lighted  ;  stalactites  hang  from  the  roof,  and  the  sides
are  fretted  ^vith  fantastic  incrustations.  It  contains  a  spring  of  very
clear  and  cold  water.  We  are  told  that  when  Plato  was  bom  his
parents  took  him  to  Hymettus,  wishing  to  offer  sacrifices  there  on  his
behalf  to  Pan,  the  Nymphs,  and  Apollo  (Olympiodorus,  in  Biographi
Graeci^  ed.  Westermann,  p.  382,  cp.  p.  300).      As  the  grotto  described


426  Mr,  HYMETTUS  bk.  i.  attica

above  was  sacred  to  Pan,  the  Nymphs,  and  Apollo,  some  have  supposed
that  it  may  have  been  to  this  very  grotto  that  the  parents  of  Plato  came
with  him  to  offer  sacrifice.  It  was  on  this  occasion  that  the  bees  of
Hymettus  were  said  to  have  filled  Plato's  mouth  with  honey.  From  the
entrance  to  the  cave  there  is  a  fine  view  of  the  sea  and  the  indented
coast  with  its  capes  and  rocky  islands.  The  fragrance  of  the  surround-
ing pine-trees  adds  to  the  pleasure  of  the  scene.

See  Chandler,  Travels  in  Greece^  ch.  32,  p.  149  sqq,  ;  Dodwell.  Taur^  I.  pp.
550-555  (with  a  view  of  the  interior  of  the  cave)  ;  Leake,  Athens,  2.  pp.  57-59 ;
Wordsworth,  Athens  and  Attica,  ch.  25,  pp.  165-172  ;  F.  G.  Welcker,  Tagebuch,
I.  p.  147  ;  L.  Ross,  IVanderungen,  2.  pp.  74-76  ;  Vischer,  Erinmrungen  und
Eiftdriicke,  pp.  59-61  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  358  sq,  ;  Curtius  und  Kaupert,  Atlas
von  At  hen,  p.  30,  with  pi.  viii.  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  138  ;  Guide-Joanne^  I.  p.  194 ;  A.
Milchhofer,  Karten  von  Attika,  Erldut.  Texty  iii.  -vi.  p.  16  sq,

32.  I.  the  land  of  the  Alazones.  The  Alazones  were  a
Scythian  tribe  in  the  south  of  Russia,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Hypanis
(the  Bug).  Unlike  most  of  the  Scythians,  who  were  nomads,  the
Alazones  were  a  settled  people,  living  by  agriculture.  They  grew
wheat,  onions,  garlic,  lentils,  and  millet.  See  Herodotus,  iv.  17  and  52.
Cp.  Strabo,  xii.  p.  550;  Valerius  Flaccus,  vi.  101  ;  Stephanus  Byzan-
tius,  s,v.  'AXa^wv.  Apparently  no  ancient  writer  except  Pausanias
speaks  of  the  bees  of  the  Alazones.  Herodotus  mentions  a  story  (v.
10)  that  the  country  north  of  the  Danube  was  impassable  on  account  of
the  swarms  of  bees.     Cp.  Aelian,  A^at.  An,  ii.  53.

32.  2.  Hymettian  Zeus Showery  Zens.    Th^  worship  of

Hymettian  Zeus  in  Attica  is  mentioned  also  by  Hesychius  {s,v.
*Y/i7/mos).  There  was  an  altar  of  Zeus  on  the  top  of  Hymettus
{Etymol,  Magnum^  p.  352  j. v.  'Ettciic/oios  Zcvs).  It  may  have  been
identical  with  the  altar  of  Showery  Zeus  here  mentioned  by  Pausanias.
There  was  a  propriety  in  worshipping  Showery  Zeus  on  H>'mettus,  since
clouds  resting  on  Hymettus  were  signs  of  rain  (see  above,  p.  425).  An
Athenian  prayer  for  rain  was  this :  "  Rain,  rain,  O  dear  Zeus,  on  the
comland  of  the  Athenians  and  on  the  plains  "  (Marcus  Antoninus,  v.  7).
Cp.  Paus.  i.  24.  3  ;  ii.  19.  8  ;  ii.  25.  10;  viii.  38.  34  ;  ix.  39.  4.  In
Cos  there  was  a  religious  society,  the  members  of  which  went  in  proces-
sion and  offered  sacrifices  on  an  altar  of  Rainy  Zeus,  when  rain  was
wanted  (see  the  inscription  No.  45  in  O.  Luders's  Die  dionysischcn
KUnstler,  p.  165  sq,]  Paton  and  Hicks,  The  Inscriptions  of  Cos
(Oxford,  1 891),  No.  382)  At  Rome  in  time  of  drought  women  went
in  procession  with  bare  feet  and  dishevelled  hair  to  the  Capitol,  praying
to  Jupiter  for  rain  (Petronius,  44  ;  Tertullian,  Apologeticus^  40).

32.  2.  On  Fames  is an  altar  of  Sign-giving  Zens  etc     On

the  top  of  Mt.  Pames  there  was  an  altar  of  Zeus  (^Etymol,  Magnum^  p.
352,  s,v,  'ETTttK/oios  Zci'*?),  which  may  have  been  either  the  altar  of  Sign-
giving  Zeus  or  the  other  altar  of  Zeus  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  It  may
be  conjectured  that  the  altar  of  Sign-giving  Zeus  stood  on  the  top  of  the
peak  of  Pames  which  was  anciently  called  Harma  (now  Mt.  Pagania)^
since  that  was  the  peak  on  which  the  augurs  fixed  their  eyes  when
looking  for  the  flash  of  lightning  which  was  the  sign  for  sending  the


CH.  XXXII  MT.  ANCHESMUS  427

sacrifice  to  Delphi  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  404 ;  see  above,  p.  422).  In  winter,
at  the  time  of  the  setting  of  the  Pleiades,  if  lightning  was  observed  to
flash  on  the  summits  of  Fames,  Pentelicus,  and  Hymettus,  it  was  the
precursor  of  a  heavy  storm ;  but  if  the  lightning  was  seen  on  Fames
only,  it  was  a  sign  of  fair  weather  (Theophrastus,  De  signis  Umpestatum^
iii.  43).  Again,  if  in  winter,  with  a  north  wind  blowing,  the  peaks  of
Fames  above  Phyle  and  westward  were  capped  with  clouds,  it  foretold  a
storm  (Theophrastus,  op,  at.  iii.  47).  Aristophanes  represents  his
chorus  of  Clouds  coming  down  from  Mt  Fames  {Clouds^  324  sq,\  and
retiring  to  it  in  anger  (Fhotius,  Lexicon^  s.v,  Hdpyq^  ;  the  passage  quoted
by  Fhotius  is  not  in  the  extant  copies  of  Aristophanes).  An  inscription
found  at  Markopoulo^  to  the  east  of  Hymettus,  mentions  a  sanctuary  of
Famessian  Apollo  (C.  /.  A,  ii.  No.  609 ;  L.  Ross,  Demetiy  p.  v.)  Par-
nessian  Apollo  is  probably  the  Apollo  of  Mt  Fames,  the  adjective  Par-
nessian  being  equivalent  to  Famethian  (cp.  Aristophanes,  Achamians^
348).  Fames  appears  to  have  been  only  another  form  of  the  name
Parnassus  (cp.  Timaeus,  LexicoKy  s.v.  JIapvrj<r6s).  Hence  we  see  why
lightning  on  Mt.  Fames,  where  Apollo  was  worshipped,  should  have
been  a  signal  for  sending  a  sacrifice  to  the  same  god  in  his  home  on  the
slopes  of  Famassus.

32.  2.  a  small  mountain  called  Anchesmns.  This  mountain,
mentioned  by  no  other  ancient  writer,  is  probably  the  low  chain  of  bare
rocky  heights  now  called  Tourko-Vouni  (* Turk's  hill'),  which  extends
northward  from  Athens  in  the  direction  of  Cephisia,  dividing  this  por-
tion of  the  Athenian  plain  into  an  eastem  and  a  westem  section.  The
southem  termination  of  the  chain,  though  partially  separated  from  it  by
a  hollow,  is  the  conical,  rocky  hill  which  towers  steeply  at  the  back
(north-east  side)  of  Athens,  forming  an  imposing  and  striking  feature  in
the  view  of  the  city.  This  conical  hill,  now  crowned  by  a  small  chapel
of  St.  George,  is  the  ancient  Lycabettus.  Its  summit  (910  feet  above
the  sea)  is  reached  from  the  south  side  by  a  winding  path  and,  in  the
upper  part  of  the  ascent,  steps  cut  out  in  the  rock.  There  are  now
huge  quarries  on  the  north  and  west  slopes  of  the  hill.  That  this  con-
spicuous hill  which  dominates  Athens  on  the  north-east  was  Lycabettus
can  be  shown  by  a  variety  of  evidence.  Lycabettus  was  on  the  side  of
Athens  opposite  to  the  Fnyx  (Plato,  Critias^  p.  112a);  and  since  the
Fnyx  was  on  the  south-west  side  of  Athens,  it  follows  that  Lycabettus
was  on  the  north-east.  Again,  it  is  said  that  Athena  fetched  Lycabettus
from  Pallene,  intending  to  make  it  a  bulwark  of  the  Acropolis  ;  but  that
being  surprised  by  the  evil  tidings  brought  her  by  the  crow  (see  note
on  i.  18.  2)  she  dropped  the  mountain  on  the  spot  where  it  has  ever
since  remained  (Antigonus,  Histor.  Mirab.  12,  where  the  trae  reading
would  seem  to  be  IIaAA^io;i/,  not  J\.^W'{\\n\Vy  as  printed  in  Westermann's
edition).  Now  Pallene  was  north-east  of  Athens,  on  the  direct  road  to
Marathon  (Herodotus,  i.  62  ;  Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens^  1 5  ;
Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Acharn.  234  ;  A.  Milchhofer,  in  Berliner  philo-
log.  Wochenschrifty  12  (1892),  pp.  2  sqq.^  29  sq.^  34  sqq.)\  hence
Lycabettus  must  also  have  been  to  the  north-east  of  Athens,  between
Pallene  and  the  capital.     Again,  Aristophanes  represented  the  choms  of


428  MT,  AEGALEUS  BK.  i.  attica

Clouds  as  retiring  in  dudgeon  by  way  of  Lycabettus  to  Mt.  Fames
(Photius,  Lexicon^  s,v,  HapvYii)  ;  hence  Lycabettus  must  have  been  a  hill
between  Athens  and  Mt.  Fames,  which  agrees  fairly  with  the  position  of
the  conical  hill  at  the  back  of  Athens.  Again,  we  are  told  that  Froclus
was  buried  "  in  the  more  easteriy  suburbs  of  the  city,  near  Lycabettus "
(Marinus,  Life  of  Proclus^  36).  Again,  Lycabettus  was  dry  (Xenophon,
Oeconom.  19),  and  so  barren  that  it  was  valueless  (Flato,  Eryxias,  p.
400  b),  and  it  was  used  either  as  an  observatory  or  as  an  astronomiod
gnomon  by  the  astronomer  Fhaenus  in  determining  the  solstices  (Theo-
phrastus,  De  signis  piuviarum^  i.  4).  All  these  statements  fit  so  well
with  the  character  and  situation  of  the  hill  now  crowned  by  the  chapel
of  St.  George  that  we  need  not  hesitate  to  identify  it  with  Lycabettus.
If  Lycabettus  was  regarded  as  forming  part  of  the  ridge  of  Anchesmus
(  Tourko-  Vbuni),  the  image  of  Anchesmian  Zeus  mentioned  by  Fausanias
may  have  stood  on  the  site  of  the  chapel  of  St  George.  When  Statius
spoke  of  Lycabettus  being  suited  for  the  growth  of  olives  (Theb,  xii.  621),
he  may  have  referred  to  the  lower  slopes  of  the  hill,  where  olives  still
grow.

See  Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  pp.  514-516;  Leake,  Athens,  i.  pp.  204-211  ;  Ch.
Wordsworth,  Athens  attd  Attica^  pp.  46-50  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  255  so,  ;  A.
Milchhofer,  Karten  von  Attika,  Erldut,  Text,  iL  p.  19 ;  P.  Kastromenos,  bemen,
p.  24  sq.  ;  Baedeker,'  p.  108  sq.

In  his  account  of  the  Attic  mountains  Fausanias  has  omitted  to
notice  a  range  which,  though  of  no  great  height,  has  an  important  place
in  Attic  topography.  This  is  Mt.  Aegaleus,  a  chain  of  bare  and  barren
hills  which,  beginning  near  the  south-west  foot  of  Mt.  Fames,  extends  in
a  south-westerly  direction  to  the  strait  of  Salamis.  It  forms  the  western
boundary  of  the  Athenian  plain,  dividing  it  from  the  Thriasian  plain  (the
district  of  Eleusis)  on  the  west.  On  the  north  this  range  of  hills  is
divided  from  Mt.  Fames  by  the  valley  through  which  the  railway  from
Athens  to  Eleusis  and  Megara  now  runs.  In  antiquity  this  valley  was
crossed  from  north  to  south  by  a  fortification  -  wall  which  connected
Mt.  Fames  with  Mt.  Aegaleus.  This  wall  is  still  well  preserved  in
places.  It  is  7  feet  high  and  5^  feet  thick ;  the  masonry  is  very  rude,
but  the  facing  is  constmcted  of  more  regular  stones.  The  top  of
the  wall  forms  a  commanding  platform  towards  the  Thriasian  plain  on
the  west ;  access  to  it  from  the  rear  was  by  a  succession  of  sloping
ramps  or  buttresses.  There  are  narrow  openings  in  the  wall  at  unequal
intervals.  The  range  of  Mt.  Aegaleus  is  crossed  about  its  middle  point
by  the  low  pass  of  Daphm^  over  which  the  Sacred  Way  went  from  Athens
to  Eleusis.  The  highest  point  of  the  range,  situated  to  the  south  of  the
pass  of  Daphni^  is  only  467.6  metres  (1534  feet)  high.  The  whole
chain  is  nearly  as  sterile  as  H>inettus.  It  consists  of  bare  rocks  of
reddish-grey  limestone,  thinly  wooded  in  places  with  stunted  pine-
trees  and  shmbs.  The  low  hills  which  make  up  the  chain  are  inter-
sected by  glens  and  gullies.  They  were  probably  more  fruitful  in
antiquity ;  for  on  their  slopes  (especially  on  the  eastern  and  southern
sides  of  the  range)  are  many  remains  of  terrace  walls  built  to  retain  the


CH.  XXXII  MT.  AEGALEUS  429

soil  and  still  testifying  to  the  assiduity  with  which  the  barren  soil  of
Attica  was  cultivated  by  the  peasantry  of  old.

The  ancient  name  of  the  range  from  its  northern  to  its  southern
extremity  seems  to  have  been  Aegaleus.  This  is  shown  by  the  com-
bined evidence  of  Herodotus  and  Thucydides.  Herodotus  tells  us
(viii,  90)  that  Xerxes  witnessed  the  battle  of  Salamis  "  sitting  at  the
foot  of  the  mountain  which  is  opposite  Salamis  and  is  called  Aegaleus."
As  the  battle  of  Salamis  was  fought  in  the  straits  which  divide  the  east
end  of  the  island  of  Salamis  from  the  mainland,  Herodotus's  statement
implies  that  the  chain  of  hills  already  described,  which  ends  at  the  strait
of  Salamis,  was  called  Aegaleus,  or  at  least  that  its  southern  extremity
was  so  called.  Again,  Thucydides  says  (ii.  19)  that  in  431  B.C.  the
Peloponnesian  army  under  king  Archidamus  invaded  Attica,  devastated
Eleusis  and  the  Thriasian  plain,  routed  the  Athenian  cavalry  at  the
Rhiti,  and  then,  keeping  Mt.  Aegaleus  on  their  right  hand,  marched
through  Cropia  to  Achamae,  where  they  encamped.  As  the  Rhiti  are
situated  at  the  western  end  of  the  pass  oi  Daphni  (see  note  on  i.  38.  i),
it  has  been  supposed  by  Leake  and  others  that  Archidamus,  after  defeat-
ing the  Athenian  cavalry  at  the  Rhiti,  crossed  by  the  pass  of  Daphni  into
the  Athenian  plain,  and  then  turning  northward  skirted  the  eastern  foot
of  the  hills  which  bound  the  Athenian  plain  on  the  west  until  he  reached
Achamae.  On  this  interpretation  of  Thucydides  the  name  Aegaleus
must  have  designated  not  the  whole  chain  of  hills  which  bounds  the
plain  of  Athens  on  the  west,  but  only  the  southern  half  of  it,  which
reaches  from  the  pass  of  Daphni  to  the  straits  of  Salamis,  and  which
Archidamus  would  have  on  his  right  in  crossing  the  pass  of  Daphni,
This  interpretation  seems,  however,  irreconcileable  with  Thucydides's
narrative.  Thucydides  says  (ii.  20)  that  in  this  invasion  Archidamus
did  not  descend  into  the  plain,  i.e,  into  the  plain  of  Athens.  But  if  he
had  crossed  by  the  pass  of  Daphni  he  would  have  found  himself  at  its
eastern  extremity  in  the  heart  of  the  Athenian  plain.  Further,  Thucy-
dides observes  (ii.  21)  that  so  long  as  the  Peloponnesian  army  was  at
Eleusis  and  the  Thriasian  plain,  the  Athenians  hoped  that  it  would
approach  no  nearer ;  but  when  they  saw  the  army  at  Achamae,  sixty
Greek  furlongs  (7  miles)  from  Athens,  ravaging  the  country,  there  was  a
great  outburst  of  popular  indignation  ;  the  whole  city  was  in  an  uproar,
and  Pericles  was  assailed  by  a  storm  of  obloquy  for  refusing  to  march
out  and  give  battle  to  the  enemy.  This  plainly  implies  that  the  Pelopon-
nesian army  first  came  in  sight  at  Achamae,  7  miles  from  Athens.  But
if  it  had  crossed  by  the  pass  of  Daphni^  it  would  have  been  seen  from
Athens  defiling  down  that  pass  at  a  distance  of  about  4  miles  only.
Moreover,  Archidamus's  object,  as  Thucydides  explains,  was  not  to
approach  Athens  or  to  ravage  the  country  immediately  around  it,  but  by
laying  waste  the  district  of  Achamae  to  goad  the  Athenians  (among
whom  there  were  3000  Achamian  infantry)  into  marching  thither  and
giving  him  battle  there.  He  calculated,  no  doubt,  on  defeating  them  in
the  open  and  then  intercepting  their  retreat  with  his  cavalry  before  they
could  regain  Athens.  If  this  plan  should  fail  by  the  obstinate  refusal
of  the  Athenians  to  come  out  and   fight,  then  Archidamus  reckoned


430  MT.  AEGALEUS  bk.  i.  attica

(Thucydides  tells  us)  on  being  able,  in  a  subsequent  invasion,  to  ravage
with  greater  impunity  the  Athenian  plain  and  to  approach  the  walls  of
Athens  ;  for  the  Achamians,  having  lost  their  all  through  the  ravages  of
the  previous  invasion,  would  not  be  eager  to  make  a  sally.  Clearly
Archidamus  was  unwilling  at  first  to  risk  a  battle  in  the  immediate
neighbourhood  of  Athens,  where  his  troops  might  have  been  entangled
and  cut  up  in  the  suburbs,  and  where  the  Athenians,  in  case  of  a  reverse,
could  have  immediately  retreated  within  the  walls.  But  if  Archidamus
had  come  down  into  the  Athenian  plain  by  the  pass  of  Daphni^  he  would
manifestly  have  exposed  himself  to  the  risk  of  being  attacked,  and  of
having  to  fight,  under  these  disadvantages.  What  happened,  then,  was
this.  After  the  engagement  at  the  Rhiti,  the  beaten  Athenian  cavalry
fell  back  over  the  pass  of  Daphni  as  the  nearest  road  to  Athens ;  but
Archidamus,  instead  of  pursuing  them,  marched  north  along  the  western
foot  of  the  hills  till  he  reached  the  valley  which  divides  those  hills  from  Mt
Fames.  Through  this  valley  (the  valley  through  which  the  railway  to
Eleusis  now  runs)  he  marched  eastward,  debouching  on  the  plain  at
Achamae,  where  he  encamped  and  where  he  first  came  in  sight  of  Athens.
From  this  interpretation  of  Thucydides's  narrative,  which  alone  seems  to  fit
the  facts,  it  follows  (i)  that  the  whole  chain  of  hills  which  Archidamus
skirted  on  his  right  hand  till  he  reached  Achamae  was  called  Aegaleus ;
and  (2)  that  Cropia,  through  which  he  passed  on  this  march,  was  on  the
westem  or  northem,  not  on  the  eastem,  side  of  the  hills.  Both  these
inferences  are  confirmed  by  the  other  evidence  which  goes  to  show  that
Cropia  was  to  the  west  of  these  hills  (Milchhofer,  *  Die  Demenordnung
des  Kleisthenes,'  p.  20).

Thus  with  regard  to  the  chain  of  hills  which  bounds  the  Athenian
plain  on  the  west,  we  learn  from  Herodotus  that  its  southern,  and  from
Thucydides  that  its  northem,  portion  was  called  Aegaleus.  Hence  we
infer  that  Aegaleus  was  the  name  of  the  whole  range.  It  would  seem,
however,  that  its  southem  portion  or  one  of  its  heights  bore  a  special
name.  For  Strabo  says  (ix.  p.  395)  that  the  mountain  which  rises
beside  the  strait  of  Salamis  was  called  Corydallus,  and  that  there  was
here  a  township  of  the  same  name.  With  this  it  agrees  that  Theseus
on  his  way  from  Eleusis  to  Athens  was  said  to  have  slain  Procrustes
"  who  dwelt  in  Corydallus  "  (Diodorus,  iv.  5^).  Thus  Corydallus  would
seem  to  have  been  a  special  name  applied  to  the  southem  part  of  Mt.
Aegaleus  ;  probably  it  was  originally  the  name  of  the  township  only,  and
was  afterwards  extended  to  the  hill  on  which  the  township  stood.  Prof.
Milchhofer  points  out  that  the  name  Aegaleus  is  used  only  by  early,  and
the  name  Corydallus  only  by  late  writers ;  from  which  he  infers  that
Aegaleus  was  the  old  name,  and  Corydallus  the  later  name,  for  the  whole
chain  of  hills.  This  is  perhaps  the  correct  view.  The  site  of  the  town-
ship of  Corydallus  is  probably  marked,  as  Prof  Milchh5fer  believes,  by
the  remains  now  called  Palaeo-K astro  or  Pcdaeochora  lying  in  a  hollow
among  the  hills,  a  good  deal  nearer  to  the  strait  of  Salamis  than  to  the
pass  of  Daphni.  The  exact  spot  from  which  Xerxes  witnessed  the  battle
of  Salamis  cannot  be  fixed  with  certainty.  Aeschylus  says  {Persae^  466
sq,)  that  it  was  a  high  hill  or  eminence  {6\6os)  near  the  sea ;  and


CH.  XXXII  MARATHON  431

Phanodemus,  quoted  by  Plutarch  {Themistocles^  13),  says  that  it  was
above  the  sanctuary  of  Hercules,  at  the  point  where  the  island  of  Salamis
is  divided  from  the  mainland  by  a  narrow  strait.  The  spot  may  have
been  either  one  of  the  most  southerly  heights  of  Mt.  Aegaleus  or  (as  has
been  suggested)  the  little  rocky  promontory  called  KeratoPyrgos  which
projects  into  the  bay  from  the  foot  of  Mt.  Aegaleus.  The  promontory
takes  its  name  from  a  Venetian  tower  {Jmrgos)  by  which  it  is  surmounted.

See  Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  pp.  508-513;  Leake,  Athens,  2.  pp.  2,  36  sq,,  49,  143
sq, ;  L.  Ross,  Wanderungen,  2.  p.  94  sq, ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen  und  EindrUcke,
p.  93;  Fr.  Lenormant,  La  Vote  Sacrie,  pp.  425  sqq.,  474  sqq, ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.
p.  252  sq.  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  115  ;  A.  Milcnnofer,  Karten  von  Atiika,  Erldut,  Text,
li  pp.  10  saq,,  46.  For  other  mentions  of  Aegaleus  by  ancient  writers  see  Statius,
Theh.  xii.  020  (who  speaks  of  it  as  well  wooded) ;  Scnol  on  Sophocles,  Oed,  Col,
1059.  For  other  mentions  of  Corydallus,  see  Theophrastus,  quoted  by  Athenaeus,
ix.  p.  390  a  b ;  Aelian,  Nat,  An.  iii.  35.

32.  3.  Marathon.  Marathon  was  a  member  of  an  ancient  con-
federacy called  the  Tetrapolis,  which,  as  the  name  Tetrapolis  (*four
cities ')  implies,  included  four  towns,  namely  Marathon,  Oenoe,  Probalin-
thus,  and  Tricorythus  or  Tricorynthus,  as  the  name  is  also  spelt  (Strabo,
viii.  p.  383  ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v.  ^^rpdiroXis ;  cp.  Plutarch,  Theseus,
14 ;  Diodorus,  iv.  57).  These  four  towns,  of  which  Marathon  was
perhaps  the  chief  (cp.  Plutarch,  /.r.),  were  said  to  have  been  founded
by  Xuthus,  son  of  Deucalion  ;  he  had  married  a  daughter  of  Erechtheus
(Strabo,  Lc.)  The  league  existed  till  Theseus  merged  the  petty  com-
munities of  Athens  in  a  single  state  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  397)  ;  but  for  purposes
of  religion  it  survived  into  classical  times,  as  we  learn  from  an  inscription
of  the  fourth  century  B.C.,  which  contains  a  dedication  to  Dionysus  by
the  Tetrapolitans  {C.  I,  A,  ii.  No.  1324;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.
Graec.  No.  304).  Three  of  the  towns  of  the  league  were  situated  on
the  east  coast  of  Attica  between  Prasiae  on  the  south  and  Rhamnus  on
the  north ;  they  stood  in  the  following  order  from  south  to  north :
Probalinthus,  Marathon,  Tricorythus  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  399).  The  fourth
town,  Oenoe,  stood  very  near  the  others,  but  a  little  inland,  as  we  shall
sec  presently.  Philochorus  wrote  a  work  on  the  Tetrapolis  (Schol.  on
Sophocles,  Oed.  Col.  1047).  Marathon  contained  a  sanctuary  of  the
Delian  Apollo  in  which  sacrifices  were  offered  and  omens  taken  when
the  sacred  embassy  was  annually  despatched  to  Delos  (Schol.  on
Sophocles,  I.e.)

The  plain  of  Marathon,  the  scene  of  the  memorable  defeat  of  the
Persians  by  the  Athenians  in  490  B.C.,  is  a  crescent-shaped  stretch  of
flat  land  curving  round  the  shore  of  a  spacious  bay  and  bounded  on  the
landward  side  by  a  semicircle  of  steep  mountains,  with  bare  rocky  sides,
which  rise  abruptly  from  the  plain.  In  its  north-eastern  comer  the
plain  is  terminated  by  a  narrow  rocky  promontory  running  southward
far  into  the  sea  and  sheltering  the  bay  on  the  north-east ;  in  antiquity
this  promontory  was  called  Cynosura  (*  dog's  tail '),  it  is  now  called  Cape
Stomi  or  Cape  Marathon.  At  its  southern  end  the  plain  is  terminated
by  Mt.  Agrieliki,  a  spur  of  Mt.  Pentelicus,  which  here  advances  so  far
eastward  as  to  leave  only  a  narrow  strip  of  flat  land  between  it  and  the


432  MARATHON  BK.  i.  attica

sea.  Through  this  strip  of  flat  land  at  the  foot  of  Mt.  Agrieliki  runs
the  only  carriage  road  which  connects  Marathon  with  Athens.  The
length  of  the  plain  of  Marathon  from  north-east  to  south-west  is  about
6  miles;  its  breadth  varies  from  i^  to  2^  miles.  The  shore  is  a
shelving,  sandy  beach,  free  from  rocks  and  shoals,  and  well  suited  for
the  disembarkation  of  troops.  A  great  swamp,  covered  with  sharp  reed-
grass  and  divided  from  the  sea  by  a  narrow  strip  of  sandy  beach  over-
grown with  pine-trees,  occupies  most  of  the  northern  end  of  the  plain.
It  never  dries  wholly  up  even  in  the  heat  of  summer ;  two  canals  con-
structed by  General  Sutzos  have  only  partially  drained  it.  Tamarisk
bushes  grow  in  the  dryer  parts  of  the  marsh  ;  their  scarlet  blossoms  are
conspicuous  in  spring.  The  swamp  is  deepest  at  its  western  side,  where
it  is  separated  only  by  a  narrow  passage,  hardly  wide  enough  for  two
horses  to  pass  each  other,  from  the  steep  rocky  slope  of  Mt.  Stavrokoraki,
The  ancient  road  which  led  northward  from  the  plain  of  Marathon  to
Rhanmus  ran  along  this  narrow  passage,  between  the  marsh  on  the  one
hand  and  the  slope  of  the  mountain  on  the  other.  Leake  noticed  traces
of  ancient  chariot  wheels  here ;  and  till  a  few  years  ago  a  long  line  of
stones,  a  little  further  to  the  south,  marked  the  line  of  the  ancient  road.
At  the  northern  end  of  this  defile  between  the  marsh  and  the  mountain
stands  the  modem  village  of  Kato-Soulu  About  a  quarter  of  a  mile  to
the  south  of  it,  close  to  the  road  and  to  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  are  the
deepest  pools  of  the  swamp ;  they  are  easily  distinguished  by  the  luxuriant
vegetation  that  surrounds  them,  the  tall  reeds  being  particularly  notice-
able. These  pools,  beside  which  cattle  find  green  pasture  in  summer
when  the  plains  are  scorched  and  brown  with  heat,  are  fed  by  powerful
subterranean  sources,  the  Macaria  of  the  ancients,  about  which  Pausanias
tells  us  (§  6)  the  legend  of  Macaria,  daughter  of  Hercules,  who  gave  her
name  to  the  spring.  Strabo  tells  us  (viii.  p.  377)  that  the  head  of
Eurystheus  was  cut  off  and  buried  by  lolaus  beside  the  spring  Macaria,
under  the  high-road,  and  that  hence  the  place  was  called  *  the  head  of
Eurystheus.'  At  Kato-Souliy  about  half-way  up  the  slope  of  the  hill
which  rises  above  the  village,  there  are  some  shallow,  niche-like  excava-
tions in  the  rock,  not  unlike  mangers.  It  may  have  been  these  niches
to  which  popular  fancy  gave  the  name  of  *  the  mangers  of  the  horses  of
Artaphemes '  (§  7  below).  On  its  opposite  (eastern)  side  the  great
swamp  ends  in  a  small  salt-water  lake,  now  called  Drakonera^  that  is
*  the  dragon-water '  or  *  the  enchanted  water.'  This  lake  discharges  itself
into  the  sea  by  a  stream  which  flows  exactly  at  the  point  where  the
sandy  beach  of  the  bay  ends  and  the  rocks  of  Cape  Cynosura  begin.
Sea  fish  are  caught  in  the  lake,  and  eels  in  the  fresh-water  pools  of  the
marsh.  The  salt  lake  has  perhaps  been  formed  since  the  time  of
Pausanias,  since  he  describes  (§7)  only  the  marsh  and  a  stream  flowing
from  it  into  the  sea.  At  the  southern  end  of  the  plain  of  Marathon
there  is  another,  but  much  smaller,  swamp  called  Vrcxisa  between  the
sea  and  the  foot  of  Mt.  Agrieliki,  Its  greatest  breadth  is  about  half
a  mile.  It  is  covered  with  reedy  grass  and  shrubs,  and  is  separated  from
the  sea  by  a  strip  of  sand.  The  high-road  to  Athens  runs  between  this
marsh  and  the  foot  of  the  mountains.


'^1


If


CH.  XXXII  MARATHON  433

Between  these  two  marshes,  the  one  on  the  north,  the  other  on  the
south,  the  plain  of  Marathon  is  now  chiefly  covered  with  corn-fields.
But  towards  its  southern  end  there  is  a  stretch  of  vineyards  mixed
with  olives  and  fruit-trees  and  dotted  with  a  few  pines  and  cypresses.
Further  north,  an  isolated  oak-tree  rising  here  and  there,  and  a  green
belt  of  currant-plantations  stretching  from  the  foot  of  the  hills  to  the
shore  of  the  bay,  break  the  uniformity  of  the  endless  corn-fields.  The
plain  is  uninhabited.  The  villages  lie  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains  or  in
the  neighbouring  glens.  On  a  still  autumn  day,  under  a  lowering  sky,  the
wide  expanse  of  the  solitary  plain  presents  a  chilling  and  dreary  aspect.
Not  a  living  creature  is  to  be  seen,  except  perhaps  a  few  peasants  in  the
distance  ploughing  with  teams  of  slow-paced  oxen.

In  this  vast  sweep  of  level  ground  the  eye  is  caught  by  a  single
solitary  object  rising  conspicuously  above  it  This  is  the  famous  mound,
now  called  Soros^  which  covers  the  remains  of  the  Athenians  who  fell  in
the  battle.  It  rises  from  the  plain  a  mile  from  the  foot  of  the  hills,  half
a  mile  from  the  sea,  and  about  three-quarters  of  a  mile  north  of  the
piarsh  of  Vrexisa.  It  is  a  conical  mound  of  light,  reddish  mould,  about
30  feet  high  and  200  paces  in  circumference.  Its  top  has  been  some-
what flattened  by  excavations ;  its  sides  are  overgrown  with  low  brush-
wood. A  wild  pear-tree  grows  at  its  foot  In  April-June  1890  the
mound  was  excavated  under  the  superintendence  of  Mr.  Staes  for  the
Greek  Government  Trenches  were  cut  into  the  mound,  and  at  the
depth  of  about  9  feet  below  the  present  surface  of  the  plain  there  was
found  an  artificial  floor,  constructed  of  sand  and  other  materials,  about
85  feet  long  and  20  feet  broad.  On  this  floor  there  rested  a  layer,  2  to
I  o  centimetres  (about  i  to  4  inches)  thick,  composed  of  ashes,  charcoal,
and  human  bones,  charred  by  fire  and  mouldering  away  with  damp.
Mixed  with  this  layer  of  ashes  and  bones  were  about  thirty  earthenware
vases  of  the  shape  called  lekuihoi^  most  of  them  broken  in  pieces.  These
vases  are  painted  in  the  common  black-figured  style ;  the  subjects  repre-
sented are  generally  chariots,  but  in  some  cases  horsemen  and  foot-
soldiers.  Besides  these  vases  there  was  found  a  long-necked  amphora
adorned  with  friezes  of  beasts  and  monsters  in  the  oriental  style,  and  a
winged  figure  of  the  oriental  Artemis ;  and  another  two-handled  vase  of
reddish-brown  clay,  with  decorations  somewhat  in  the  Mycenaean  style,
was  found  to  contain  charred  bones,  perhaps  those  of  a  general.  Further
excavations  made  in  the  following  year  (1891)  laid  bare  a  sacrificial  pit
or  trench  about  30  feet  long  and  3  feet  wide,  extending  diagonally  under
the  mound  from  north  to  south.  This  trench  is  cased  with  burnt  bricks
(in  his  report  in  the  Mittheilungen  for  1 893,  p.  53,  Mr.  Staes  says  unbumt
bricks,  but  he  is  doubtless  wrong ;  the  oflicial  report  in  the  AcXtiov
Q.pya.iQ\QyiK6v  says  burnt  bricks) ;  and  contained  ashes,  charcoal,  and
the  bones  of  animals  and  birds,  mixed  with  fragments  of  black-figured
vases.  It  had  originally  been  roofed  with  bricks,  which  had  fallen  in.
The  bones  found  in  this  trench  are  clearly  those  of  the  victims  sacrificed
to  the  heroic  dead  before  the  mound  was  heaped  over  their  remains.
The  broken  vases  found  in  the  trench  may  have  been  those  which  were
used  at  the  funeral   banquet     The  Greek  archaeologists  further  dis-

VOL.  II  2  F


434  MARATHON  bk.  I.  attica

covered  some  vestiges  which  led  them  to  belie\'e  that,  even  after  the
mound  had  been  raised,  sacrifices  continued  to  be  annually  offered  at  it
This  confirms  Pausanias's  statement  that  the  men  who  fell  in  the  battle
were  worshipped  as  heroes  by  the  people  of  Marathon.  From  an  in-
scription (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  471)  we  learn  that  the  Athenian  lads  went  to
the  tomb,  laid  wreaths  on  it,  and  sacrified  to  the  dead.  The  excavations
have  finally  disproved  the  theory,  broached  by  Prof.  E.  Curtius  (Archdolog,
Zeitung^  1853,  p.  154)  in  1853  and  maintained  by  Profl  A.  Milchhofer
as  late  as  1889,  that  the  mound  was  prehistoric  and  had  nothing  to  do
with  the  battle  of  Marathon.  For  the  black-figured  vases  found  with
the  bones  and  ashes  of  the  dead  belong  to  the  period  of  the  Persian
wars ;  the  human  remains  can  therefore  be  no  other  than  those  of  the
192  Athenians  who  fell  at  Marathon  (Herodotus,  \'i.  117).  Prof
Curtius's  erroneous  theory  was  apparently  coimtenanced  by  some  imper-
fect excavations  made  by  Dr.  Schliemann  in  1884.  Many  bronze
arrow-heads,  about  an  inch  long  and  pierced  with  a  round  hole  at  the
top  for  the  reception  of  the  shaft,  have  been  picked  up  at  the  mound ;
also  a  great  number  of  black  flints,  rudely  chipped  into  shape.  It  has
been  conjectured  that  these  flints  are  parts  of  the  stone-headed  arrows
discharged  by  the  Ethiopian  archers  in  the  Persian  army  (Herodotus,
vii.  69).  But  against  this  opinion  it  has  been  urged  that  similar  flints
have  been  found  at  other  ancient  sites  in  Attica  and  elsewhere,  especially
in  the  oldest  graves  on  many  Greek  islands,  and  have  not  been  found  at
Thermopylae  and  Plataea,  where,  if  anywhere,  the  stone-headed  arrows
may  be  supposed  to  have  flown  in  showers.

I  do  not  know  what  authority  Prof.  Mahafiy  has  for  saying  that  the
mound  was  once  surmounted  by  the  figure  of  a  lion,  *'  which  has  been
carried  off,  no  one  knows  when  or  whither."

This  sepulchral  mound,  though  the  most  striking,  is  not  the  only
monument  of  antiquity  at  Marathon.  Scattered  about  the  plain  and  in
the  glens  which  open  off  it  there  are  remains  of  ancient  buildings,
collectively  considerable  though  individually  insignificant  I  shall  notice
the  princip>al  of  these  remains  in  topographical  order,  taking  first  the
ruins  in  the  plain,  and  afterwards  the  ruins  at  the  foot  of  the  hills  and
in  the  glens.

To  the  south  of  the  marsh  of  Vrexisa^  which  terminates  the  plain  of
Marathon  on  the  south,  a  large  slab  of  Pentelic  marble  has  been  found
close  to  the  high-road,  on  the  side  of  the  sea.  Inscribed  on  this  slab  are
the  names  of  two  men,  Elpines  and  Eunicus,  who  belonged  to  the  town-
ship of  Probalinthus  (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  2  507  ;  Bulletin  de  Corr,  Hel-
Unique^  3  (1879),  P*  200^^.)  This  inscription  makes  it  probable  that
Probalinthus,  which  is  known  from  Strabo  (ix.  p.  399)  to  have  been
situated  on  the  coast  immediately  to  the  south  of  Marathon,  was  some-
where in  this  neighbourhood.  Some  ancient  tombs  were  found  at  the
same  place.

In  the  swamp  of  Vrexisa  itself  there  is  a  small  island  called  Nisi
near  its  eastern  edge,  close  to  the  sea,  which  is  covered  with  ancient
ruins.  Leake  saw  here  "  several  cippi  or  sepulchral  columns  standing
in  a  certain  regular  order,  together  with  the  remains  of  a  sarcophagus,


CH.  xxxii  MARATHON  435

the  fragments  of  a  female  statue  seated  in  a  chair,  some  shafts  of
columns,  and  a  Corinthian  architrave."  In  the  south-eastern  comer  of
the  island  are  what  seem  to  be  the  quadrangular  foundations  of  a  marble
edifice.  H.  G.  Lolling  remarked  some  unfluted  columns  of  white  and
coloured  marble  lying  about  in  the  island  or  standing  upright,  though
not  in  their  original  positions.  Here  too  were  discovered,  towards  the
close  of  last  century,  a  quantity  of  Roman  coins,  and  highly  finished
busts  of  Socrates,  Lucius  Verus,  Marcus  Aurelius,  and  a  fourth  bust
conjectured  to  be  that  of  Herodes  Atticus.  It  has  been  plausibly  sug-
gested that  all  these  remains  mark  the  site  of  the  family  tombs  of
Herodes  Atticus,  who  belonged  to  Marathon,  was  warmly  attached  to
the  place,  lived  much  at  it,  and  dying  there  desired  to  be  buried  on  the
spot.  His  wishes,  however,  were  disregarded.  The  Athenians,  grateful
for  the  many  splendid  edifices  with  which  he  had  adorned  their  city,
took  forcible  possession  of  his  body  and  carried  it  to  Athens,  where  they
buried  it  at  the  Panathenaic  stadium  (see  Philostratus,  Vii,  Soph.  ii.  i.
30  and  37  ;  and  note  on  i.  19.  6).  Others  have  conjectured  that
Herodes  Atticus  had  his  villa  on  this  island,  or  that  a  temple  of  Athena
Hellotis  {i,e,  *  Athena  of  the  Marsh ')  stood  on  it ;  for  we  are  told  that
Athena  Hellotis  had  a  shrine  at  the  Marathonian  marsh  (Schol.  on
Pindar,  Olymp.  xiii.  56 ;  EtymoL  Magnum^  p.  332,  s,v,  *EA,A,(aTis).
But  the  shrine  may  have  been  beside  the  great  marsh  at  the  northern
end  of  the  plain.

At  a  place  called  Valaria  in  the  plain,  a  little  to  the  north  of  the
marsh  of  Vrexisa^  there  are  considerable  remains  of  antiquity,  especially
the  foundations  of  a  tolerably  large  oblong  building  with  remains  of
columns  and  some  pieces  of  architectural  ornaments  of  the  Ionic
order.

In  the  plain  about  600  yards  north  of  the  great  sepulchral  mound
at  a  spot  called  Pyrgo  (* tower'),  marked  by  some  cypresses,  there  are
the  foundations  of  a  quadrangular  building  lying  in  a  direction  from
north-west  to  south-east  and  measuring  about  twelve  paces  long  by  eight
paces  broad.  On  these  foundations  there  stood  till  a  few  years  ago
some  remains  of  walls  constructed  of  large  well-hewn  blocks  of  Pentelic
marble,  which  were  preserved  to  a  height  of  several  courses.  But  in
1890  the  Greek  archaeologists  found  that  these  marble  blocks  had  been
removed,  and  that  the  foundations  were  constructed  of  bricks  and
mortar  (AcXTtov  cI/ox^'oAoyiKdv,  1890,  p.  65).  Hence  the  building  was
probably  of  Roman  date ;  it  cannot  have  been,  as  archaeologists  had
previously  conjectured,  either  the  Greek  trophy  or  the  tomb  of  Miltiades,
both  of  which  are  mentioned  by  Pausanias  (§§  4  and  5).  A  little  to
the  west  of  Pyrgo  a  flood,  which  happened  not  long  before  Leake's  last
visit  to  Marathon,  laid  bare  "  the  foundations  of  some  houses,  together
with  several  vases  of  ancient  fabric  and  very  large  dimensions,  which
had  been  sunk  in  the  ground."

A  good  deal  to  the  north-east  of  Pyrgo^  at  a  place  in  the  plain  called
Chanty  where  there  is  a  chapel  of  the  Panagia  Misoporitissa,  about  half-
way between  the  sea  and  the  hills  and  half  a  mile  south  of  the  great
swamp,  may  be  seen  the  remains  of  a  building  of  Hymettian  (?)  marble,


436  MARATHON  bk.  i.  attica

about  thirteen  paces  long  by  nine  paces  uide.  On  its  north  side  hes  an
Ionic  capital  of  Pentelic  marble.

Further,  two  inscriptions  containing  dedications  to  Dionysus  have
been  found  in  the  plain  of  Marathon.  One  of  them,  which  has  already
been  referred  to  (p.  431),  contains  a  dedication  to  Dion>^us  by  the
Tetrapolitans  with  the  names  of  the  four  priests  who  offered  sacrifices,
one  from  each  of  the  four  towns  of  the  Tetrapolis.  TTiis  inscription  is
carved  on  a  quadrangular  block  of  Pentelic  marble  and  dates  from  the
middle  of  the  fourth  centur>'  B.C.  It  was  found  at  a  place  called
Divaiiakt  in  the  plain,  about  twenty-five  minutes  south-east  of  the
village  of  Bet  (C.  I.  A.  ii.  No.  1324  ;  Mitthcil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^
3  (1878),  pp.  259-264;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Graec.  No.  304).
The  other  inscription,  containing  a  dedication  to  Dionysus  by  a
certain  Polydeucion,  ^as  found  in  a  vine>'ard  80  or  90  >'ards  south-east
of  Pyrgo;  it  is  engraved  on  a  cubical  block  of  white  marble  {Mitthcil.
d.  arch.  hist,  in  Athen^  10  (1885),  p.  279).  This  Polydeucion
may  have  been  one  of  the  three  favourite  pupils  of  Herodes  Atticus
(Philostratus,  Vit.  Sophist,  ii.  i.  24 ;  see  below).  These  inscriptions
prove  that  there  was  a  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  which  the  members  of  the
four  to^^nships  (the  Tetrapolis)  revered  in  common.  Its  site  is  perhaps
marked  by  the  ruins  of  a  chapel  containing  many  ancient  blocks,  about
100  yards  east  of  the  spot  where  the  second  inscription  was  found
{Mitthcil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  10  (1885),  p.  279).  Beside  the
sanctuary  of  Dionysus  at  Marathon  there  was  a  grave  of  a  certain
Aristomachus,  who  was  worshipped  by  the  people  under  the  title  of
*the  Hero  Physician'  (Bekker^s  Anecdota  Graeca^  p.  262,  line  16  sqq, ;
cp.  American  Journal  of  Philology^  i  (1880),  p.  58  sq.)

So  much  for  the  remains  of  antiquity  in  the  plain.  We  now  retrace
our  steps  southward  and  follow  the  line  of  mountains  which  bounds  the
plain  on  the  west,  noticing  the  chief  ruins  which  lie  at  the  foot  of  the
hills  and  in  the  neighbouring  glens.

At  the  south-west  comer  of  the  plain  the  small  \nllage  of  Vrana
occupies  a  commanding  situation.  Backed  by  wooded  mountains  it
stands  on  a  height  at  the  mouth  of  a  wild  and  romantic  glen.  From
this  glen  issues  the  torrent  of  Rapenfosa^  which  takes  its  name  from  a
deserted  and  partly  ruinous  village  higher  up  the  glen,  and  winding
round  the  southern  foot  of  the  hill  of  Vrana  in  a  deep  stony  bed  forms
a  natural  fortification  to  the  place  on  three  sides.  On  the  height  above
the  village  stands,  close  to  the  edge  of  the  ravine  and  surrounded  by
cypresses  and  pine-trees,  the  church  of  St.  George.  Here  there  are
some  pieces  of  columns,  and  the  tombstone  of  a  certain  Archippe,
daughter  of  Calleus,  a  man  of  Rhamnus.  The  tombstone  is  of  Pentelic
marble,  and  is  adorned  with  a  graceful  relief  representing  a  young
woman  holding  in  her  left  hand  a  small  funeral  urn,  to  which  an  elderly
man,  standing  opposite  her,  is  pointing  (Le  Bas,  Voyage  ArchMogiqtu^
Mon.  fig.  77;  Rangab^,  Antiquitds  HelUhtiques^  No.  1614  ;  Kouma-
noudes,  'Atti*o}s  €inypa<l>al  €7riTVfi/3LoC,  No.  1086 ;  C.  I.  A.  ii.  No.
2523).  Lower  down  the  hill  than  the  church,  but  above  the  village,  is
a  deserted  monastery.     Bursian  conjectured  that  church  and  monaster)'


CH.  XXXII  MARATHON  437

occupy  the  site  of  the  precinct  of  Hercules,  within  which  the  Athenians
bivouacked  for  some  days  before  the  battle  of  Marathon  (Herodotus,  vi.
108  and  1 16).

In  the  plain  a  little  to  the  east  of  Vrana  are  six  or  seven  sepulchral
mounds,  situated  on  the  right  (south)  bank  of  the  torrent.  Again,  about
half  a  mile  to  the  south-east  of  Vrana,  the  chapel  of  St.  Demetrius
stands  on  an  ancient  terrace  in  a  cleft  at  the  foot  of  Mt.  Agrieliki,  On
the  hill  above  the  chapel  is  a  platform  bounded  by  supporting  walls  and
affording  a  view  over  the  whole  plain  of  Marathon.  Other  terraces,
divided  by  walls,  may  be  traced  below  the  chapel  of  St.  Demetrius,
descending  into  the  plain.  L.  Ross  appears  to  have  found  this  site
covered  with  ancient  blocks  of  marble.  Prof.  A.  Milchhofer  believes
that  the  precinct  of  Hercujes,  within  which  the  Athenians  encamped,
was  here.

To  the  north  of  Vrafia  the  valley  of  Avlona  extends  for  about  a  mile
in  a  north-westerly  direction,  between  the  steep  fir-clad  slopes  of  Mt.
Aphoristnos  on  the  west  and  the  rugged  flat-topped  Mt.  Kotroni  on  the
east.  The  valley  has  a  uniform  breadth  of  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile
and  its  bottom  is  good  corn-land,  though  the  vale  is  quite  waterless.
H.  G.  Lolling  conjectured  that  the  precinct  of  Hercules  and  the  Athenian
camp  may  have  been  in  this  valley.  At  the  head  of  the  valley  a  gently
rising  pass  leads  north  into  the  much  longer  and  more  spacious  valley
of  Maratfiona,  In  this  pass,  at  the  head  of  the  valley  of  Avlona,  there
are  some  remains  of  an  ancient  gate.  The  gate  stands  exactly  in  the
hollow  through  which  the  ancient  road  led  from  the  valley  of  Avlona
over  the  pass  to  the  valley  of  Marathona,  It  seems  to  have  been  con-
nected with  the  foundations  of  a  wall  rudely  constructed  of  limestone
blocks,  which  can  be  traced  for  a  circumference  of  near  three  miles,
enclosing  the  stony  and  barren  ground  of  the  pass,  as  well  as  the  slopes
of  the  hills  on  either  side  to  a  certain  height.  The  wall  is  about  5  feet
thick  and  3  feet  high.  The  gate  opening  into  this  enclosure,  so  far  as
its  foundations  can  be  distinguished  among  the  rank  underwood,  was
about  fifteen  paces  wide  from  east  to  west  and  six  paces  deep.  The
core  of  the  masonry  consists  of  stones  bonded  with  mortar ;  but  some
marble  blocks  seem  to  show  that  the  gate  was  cased  with  marble,  at
least  on  its  southern  facade.  An  inscription,  which  has  now  disappeared,
was  carved  on  the  gate  to  this  effect  :  "  The  Gate  of  Immortal  Unani-
mity. The  place  which  you  enter  belongs  to  Herodes"  (C  /.  A»
iii.  No.  403  ;  Koumanoudes, 'Amicijs  hnyfio.^i  cTTiTu/ii/Siot,  No.  2577).
The  remains  of  two  life-size  statues  may  still  be  seen  at  the  gate.  They
represent  two  male  figures  clad  in  long  robes  and  seated  in  chairs,  one
of  which  is  adorned  with  griffins  carved  in  relief  The  remains  of  a
third  statue  were  visible  down  to  the  middle  of  the  present  century,  but
have  since  disappeared  (see  Le  Bas,  Voyage  ArclUologique,  Mon.  fig.
90).  The  Herodes  mentioned  in  the  inscription  on  the  gate  was  doubt-
less Herodes  Atticus  ;  and  the  three  statues  may,  as  Leake  conjectured,
have  represented  his  three  favourite  pupils,  Achilles,  Pollux  (Polydeuces),
and  Memnon.  For  Philostratus  tells  us  (^Vit.  Soph.  ii.  i.  24)  that
Herodes  Atticus   mourned  their  untimely  deaths  as  if  they  had  been


438  MARATHON  bk.  i.  attica

his  sons,  and  set  up  statues  of  them  in  the  character  of  hunters  m
woods  and  fields  and  beside  springs,  with  inscriptions  invoking  curses
on  any  one  who  should  mutilate  or  remove  them  (cp.  Lucian,  Demonax^
24  and  33).  A  number  of  inscriptions  in  honour  of  one  of  these  young
men,  Pollux  (called  in  the  inscriptions  Polydeucion),  have  been  found  in
various  parts  of  Attica  (C  /.  A,  iii.  Nos.  810,  811,  813-818  ;  Kouma-
noudes,  *Att.  kiriyp,  €'n-iTVfif3,  Nos.  2568,  2570-2576).  One  inscription,
found  at  Cephisia  and  now  at  Oxford,  begins  with  the  mention  of  "  the
hero  Polydeucion,"  and  contains  the  imprecations  mentioned  by  Philo-
stratus  (C.  /.  A,  iii.  No.  141 8  ;  Koumanoudes,  op,  cit  No.  2569).  The
pompous  title  of  the  gate  (*  Gate  of  Immortal  Unanimity ')  marks  the
decline  of  good  taste.  At  the  present  day  the  whole  enclosure  is  called
by  the  peasants  *the  Old  Wife's  Sheepfold'  {r\  fidvSpa  ttjs  y/wiias),
because  they  take  one  of  the  statues  to  be  that  of  a  woman  who  had
large  flocks  of  sheep  and  goats,  but  was  turned  into  a  stone  for  jeering
at  Martis  (a  personification  of  the  month  of  March).  (Chandler  and
Le  Bas  also  took  one  of  the  statues  to  represent  a  woman.)

To  the  north  of  the  valley  of  Avlona  a  more  spacious  valley  opens
out  into  the  plain  of  Marathon.  Down  the  valley  flows  a  stream  (the
ancient  Charadra),  which  rises  far  to  the  north-west  at  the  foot  of  Mt.
Pames  and  traverses  in  its  course  the  whole  of  the  mountainous  district
of  northern  Attica.  Between  the  hill  of  Stavrokorctki  on  the  north-east
and  Ko front  on  the  south-west,  the  Charadra  enters  the  plain  of
Marathon  and  crosses  it  about  its  middle  point,  flowing  in  a  broad  and
deeply  channelled  bed,  filled  with  pebbles  and  boulders,  which  testifies  to
the  violence  with  which  still  as  of  old  the  stream  comes  down  in  flood
(see  Zenobius,  v.  29 ;  Apostolius,  xii.  50 ;  Suidas,  s.vv.  Oivatoi  and
OlvoTf ;  Photius,  Lexicon,  s.v.  Otvaiot).  It  not  unfrequently  overflows
its  banks  and  lays  waste  the  neighbouring  fields.  At  the  point  where
the  Charadra  enters  the  plain,  the  village  of  Bei  stands  high  on  the  left
(north)  bank  of  the  stream,  at  the  foot  of  Mt.  Stavrokoraki,  Opposite
Beiy  on  the  right  bank  of  the  river,  are  the  ruins  of  Seferi,  a  village
which  was  destroyed  a  good  many  years  ago  by  a  flood.  About  three
quarters  of  a  mile  further  up  the  valley  is  the  chief  place  of  the  whole
district,  the  village  of  Marathona  (750  inhabitants  in  1893),  prettily
situated  among  well- watered  gardens  and  orchards  which  skirt  the  left
bank  of  the  river.  Cypresses  and  other  tall  trees  render  the  site  of  the
village  conspicuous  even  from  a  distance.  But  though  the  village  has
inherited  the  name  of  the  ancient  Marathon,  it  is  of  comparatively  recent
origin  and  contains  no  antiquities  except  such  as  have  been  brought
from  the  neighbouring  plain.  Immediately  above  the  village,  on  the
opposite  (southern)  bank  of  the  stream,  there  are  considerable  traces  of
an  ancient  road  running  westward  up  the  valley.  Still  higher  up,  the
valley  expands  into  the  triangular  dale  of  Ninoi,  bounded  on  the  north
by  the  steep  rocky  slopes  of  Mt  Kokkinaris  or  the  Red  Mount,  so  called
from  the  colour  of  its  rocks.  The  stream  flows  at  the  foot  of  these  red
slopes.  On  the  western  side  of  the  dale  are  some  ancient  and  mediae\'al
remains.  Here,  on  a  projecting  spur  of  the  hills,  stands  a  ruined  mediae\'al
or  Turkish  watch-tower;   the  walls   are   preserved  to  a  considerable


CH.  XXXII  MARATHON  439

height.  To  the  north-east  of  the  tower,  in  the  bottom  of  the  dale,  is  a
Frankish  church,  with  ancient  blocks  of  marble  and  other  remains,
including  pieces  of  unfluted  columns  and  two  large  Ionic  capitals  with  a
base  to  match.  West  of  the  church  a  spring  of  clear  and  copious  water,
surrounded  by  fresh  vegetation,  issues  from  a  rock  in  the  side  of  the  hill.
It  is  enclosed  by  a  semicircular  foundation  of  large  blocks  of  marble
bound  together  with  iron  clamps.  Many  other  such  blocks  lie  scattered
about ;  some  of  them  have  fallen  into  the  ancient  basin,  forcing  the  water
to  find  its  way  out  by  a  new  exit  a  few  paces  to  the  left  The  modem
name  of  this  place  {Ninoi)  appears  to  be  a  transformation  of  Oenoe,  the
name  of  the  ancient  township,  which  most  probably  occupied  this  well-
watered  dale.  The  fertility  of  Oenoe  seems  to  have  been  celebrated
(Lucian,  Icaromenifipus,  18).  The  township  contained  a  sanctuary  of
the  Pythian  Apollo  in  which  sacrifices  were  offered  daily  by  the  prophet
or  diviner  while  the  sacred  embassy  was  on  its  way  to  and  from  Delphi
(Philochorus,  quoted  by  the  Scholiast  on  Sophocles,  Oed,  Col.  1047).
Oenoe  was  a  township  of  the  tribe  Aiantis  ;  there  was  another  township
of  the  same  name  near  Eleutherae  which  belonged  to  the  tribe  Hippo-
thontis  (Harpocration,  s.v,  Olvon)).

Before  entering  the  dale  of  Oenoe,  the  Charadra  sweeps  in  a  great
curve  round  a  hill,  the  three  sides  of  which  descend  steeply  into  the  bed
of  the  stream.  This  hill  is  the  mountain  of  Pan  mentioned  by  Pausanias
(§  7).  The  cave  of  Pan,  which  he  has  accurately  described,  is  situated
on  the  north-eastern  face  of  the  hill.  Opposite  it,  separated  only  by  the
stream,  are  the  red  declivities  of  Mt.  Kokkinaris,  A  steep  and  rocky
ascent  leads  up  to  the  cave,  which  lies  about  two-thirds  up  the  slope.
The  entrance  to  the  cavern  is  partially  concealed  by  bushes  and  is  not
visible  till  you  stand  in  front  of  it.  Above  it,  the  cliff  rises  perpendicu-
larly. There  are  two  or  rather  three  mouths  to  the  cave,  close  together
and  so  low  and  narrow  that  a  man  can  with  difficulty  creep  through
them.  From  the  point  where  the  three  passages  meet,  the  cavern
expands,  then  divides  into  two  chambers,  which  unite  again  deeper  down.
In  the  sides  of  both  these  large  chambers  there  are  smaller  chambers  of
various  sizes.  The  walls  of  all  these  compartments  are  encrusted  with
stalactites,  some  in  the  form  of  columns,  others  grouped  fantastically.
Water  trickles  here  and  there  down  the  sides  of  the  grotto  or  drips  from
the  roof,  forming  basins  in  the  floor.  The  cave  is  so  deep  and  its
entrance  so  narrow  that  the  sunlight  never  penetrates  it.  Doubtless  the
stalactites  on  the  walls  and  roof,  and  the  basins  in  the  floor,  are  what  the
popular  fancy  of  the  ancients  called  the  goats  and  baths  of  Pan  (§  7).
The  distance  of  the  cave  from  the  village  of  Marathana  is  about  a  mile
and  a  half.

We  now  retrace  our  steps  from  the  cave  of  Pan,  and  returning  down
the  valley  of  the  Charadra  past  the  villages  of  Marathona  and  Bei  re-
enter the  plain  of  Marathon.  Skirting  the  foot  of  the  bare  mountain  of
Starvokoraki  in  a  north-easterly  direction  we  traverse  the  narrow  defile,
already  described,  which  runs  between  the  mountain  and  the  great  marsh,
and  reach  the  village  of  Kato-Souli  at  the  northern  end  of  the  defile.
The  distance  from  Bei  is  about  two  and  a  half  miles.     Inscriptions  found


440  MARATHON  BK.  i.  attica

at  Kato-Souli  prove  that  it  occupies  the  site  of  Tricorythus  (C  /.  A.  ii.
Nos.  2592,  2601;  Koumanoudes,  'Att.  ciriyp.  ewirvfip.  No.  1192;
Mittheil,  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen^  12(1887),  p.  309).  In  the  garden  beside
the  draw-well  of  the  village  is  the  inscription  of  one  of  the  statues  which
H erodes  Atticus  erected  in  memory  of  his  pupil  Pollux  (Polydeucion).
It  sets  forth  that  "  H erodes  dedicated  here  also  a  statue  of  Polydeucion,
whom  he  loved  as  a  son,  because  here  they  were  wont  to  hunt "  (C.  /.  A.
iii.  No.  813  ;  Koumanoudes,  *Att.  eiriyp,  eirirvfip.  No.  2569).  Further,
built  into  the  church  of  St.  Athanasius  in  the  village,  is  a  fragmentary
inscription  containing  the  curses  which  Herodes  Atticus  called  do>Mi  on
the  head  of  any  one  who  should  meddle  with  the  statues  of  his  dead
favourites  (C.  I,  A,  iii.  No.  813;  Koumanoudes,  *Att.  iirtyp.  arirvfip.
No.  2563).  The  village  lies  at  the  foot  of  an  eastern  spur  of  Mt
Stavrokoraki,  This  spur  must  have  been  the  acropolis  of  Tricorythus,
for  the  ancient  fortification-walls  still  encircle  it.  They  consist  of  two
walls  or  rather  dykes  built  of  stones  roughly  put  together.  The
inner  wall,  now  mostly  ruinous,  is  about  5  feet  thick  and  may  be
traced  round  the  upper  slope  of  the  hill  in  a  circumference  of  about
460  paces.  The  outer  wall  averages  about  8  feet  thick.  On  the
side  of  Mt.  Stavrokoraki  it  approaches  within  a  few  paces  of  the
inner  wall,  so  that  the  two  walls  here  run  side  by  side.  Towards
the  north,  however,  the  outer  wall  descends  the  slope  obliquely  till
it  is  half-way  down  the  hill.  At  this  level  it  continues  to  run  above
the  village,  but  afterwards  gradually  ascends  again.  The  two  ring-walls
are  united  by  cross-walls  at  various  points.  At  the  south-west  comer  of
the  outer  wall  the  opening  of  a  gatev^y  may  be  distinguished.  Towards
the  south-east,  where  the  hill  overhangs  the  marsh,  the  lines  of  the  walls
are  interrupted,  doubtless  because  the  stones  have  been  removed  by  the
inhabitants  of  Kaio-Souli  to  build  their  houses  with.  These  fortifications
on  the  hill  were  probably  intended,  in  part,  to  command  the  pass  which
runs  between  the  foot  of  the  hill  and  the  marsh.  Tricorythus  was
tormented  by  the  mosquitoes  bred  in  the  adjoining  swamp  (Aristophanes,
Lysistrata^  1032,  with  the  Scholiast ;  Suidas,  s.v.  kfirris)  ;  and  in  summer
the  inhabitants  of  Kato-Souli  are  still  driven  by  the  mosquitoes  and
the  miasma  to  the  village  of  Epano-Souli  situated  among  the  hills  to  the
north-west.

In  the  plain  to  the  north,  shut  in  between  the  marsh  and  the  hills,
there  are  some  remains  of  antiquity,  especially  on  a  rising  ground  a  mile
to  the  north-east  of  Kato-Souli,  to  the  right  of  the  road  which  leads  to
Rhamnus.  Here  there  are  many  fragments  of  Pentelic  marble,  including
hewn  blocks  and  pieces  of  unfluted  columns.  Leake  thought  that  these
remains  marked  the  site  of  Tricorythus,  but  Prof.  Milchhdfer  considers
them  to  be  merely  sepulchral.

Thus  of  the  four  ancient  townships  which  made  up  the  Tetrapolis,
the  sites  of  two  (Oenoe  and  Tricorythus)  are  identified  with  tolerable
certainty.  The  sites  of  the  other  two  (Marathon  and  Probalinthus)  are
less  certain.  At  first  sight  it  seems  natural  to  suppose  that  the  village  of
Marathona  has  succeeded  to  the  site  as  well  as  to  the  name  of  Marathon.
But  Leake  brought  forward  weighty  arguments  against  this  identification.


CH.  xxxii  MARATHON  441

TTie  village  is  of  comparatively  recent  origin  ;  it  contains  no  vestiges  of
antiquity  except  what  can  be  proved  to  have  been  brought  from  else-
where ;  it  stands  in  the  middle  of  a  valley  without  any  of  that  natural
strength  of  position  which  is  generally  characteristic  of  ancient  sites  ;
and  it  is  distant  not  more  than  a  mile  and  a  half  from  Oenoe,  one  of  the
four  towns  of  the  Tetrapolis.  On  the  other  hand,  the  modem  village  of
Vrana  occupies  a  commanding  situation  which  seems  marked  out  by
nature  to  be  that  of  the  chief  place  of  the  district.  On  the  ground  of
the  natural  advantages  of  its  situation,  combined  with  the  evidence  of  the
ancient  remains  at  and  near  Vrana,  Leake  concluded  that  this  village
stands  on  the  site  of  the  ancient  Marathon,  and  his  view  has  been
generally  accepted  by  subsequent  topographers,  particularly  L.  Ross,  W.
Vischer,  and  Prof.  Milchhofer.  (Bursian  proposed  to  place  Marathon
a  little  to  the  east  of  Vrana,  at  the  foot  of  Mt.  Agrieliki.)  The  identifi-
cation of  Marathon  with  Marathona  is  indeed  generally  abandoned,  even
by  H.  G.  Lolling,  who  once  argued  in  favour  of  it.  Probalinthus
probably  lay  further  south  than  Vrana,  between  the  foot  of  Mt.  Agrieliki
and  the  sea,  as  is  indicated  by  the  inscription  found  to  the  south  of
the  marsh  of  Vrexisa  (see  above,  p.  434).  Lolling,  however,  placed
Probalinthus  at  Vrana,

There  are  two  main  routes  from  the  plain  of  Marathon  to  Athens ;
one  of  them  goes  by  the  south,  the  other  by  the  north  side  of  Mt.  Pen-
telicus.  The  first  route  leaves  the  plain  at  its  southern  extremity  and
passing  between  the  foot  of  Mt.  Agrieliki  and  the  marsh  of  Vrexisa  runs
parallel  with  the  coast  for  some  distance.  It  then  turns  westward  and
passing  through  the  valley  which  divides  the  south  of  Mt.  Pentelicus
from  the  north  of  Hymettus  enters  the  plain  of  Athens.  This  is  by  far
the  easiest  road  ;  it  is  the  only  one  which  vehicles  can  traverse.  The
distance  by  this  road  from  the  great  mound  at  Marathon  to  Athens  is
about  twenty-five  or  twenty-six  miles.  The  other  route,  by  the  north  side
of  Mt.  Pentelicus,  goes  from  Oenoe  {Ninoi)  by  a  very  steep  and  toilsome
path  to  Stamaia,  a  village  in  a  high  situation,  surrounded  by  a  few
barren  fields,  among  woods  of  pine.  In  many  places  the  path  is  so
hemmed  in  between  cliffs  and  precipices  that  there  is  room  only  for  a
single  horse.  Trees  are  rare,  but  the  stony  slopes  of  the  mountain  are
overgrown  with  shrubs  of  many  sorts,  among  which  the  Erica  arborea  is
conspicuous.  In  spring  its  masses  of  white  blossoms  perfume  the  whole
air  with  their  fragrance.  About  half  an  hour  short  of  Staniata,  at  a
point  where  there  is  a  spring  shaded  by  fine  plane-trees,  the  path  is
joined  on  the  left  by  another  path,  also  steep  and  toilsome,  which  comes
up  from  Vrana,  This  latter  path  commands  a  magnificent  view  back-
ward down  the  deep  ravine  through  which  the  traveller  has  ascended.
On  either  side  of  the  ravine  rise  the  mountains,  their  precipitous  sides
covered  with  straggling  pine-forest  or  evergreen  copse,  and  terminating
in  bold  peaks  ;  below  is  spread  out  the  green  expanse  of  the  Marathon-
ian  plain,  backed  by  the  sea  and  Cape  Cynosura  curving  into  the  blue
water  with  the  sweep  of  a  scimitar.  Further  off,  bounding  the  prospect,
stretches  the  long  line  of  the  mountains  of  Euboea.

From  Stamata   the  path  skirts  the  north-western  shoulder  of  Mt.


442  MARATHON  bk.  i.  attica

Pentelicus  and  enters  Cephisia,  from  which  there  is  a  good  high-road
through  the  plain  to  Athens.  The  distance  by  this  route  from  the
mound  at  Marathon  to  Athens  is  roughly  about  twenty-two  miles.

A  third  route,  intermediate  between  the  two  preceding  routes  and
shorter  than  either  of  them,  goes  from  Vrana  up  the  wild,  romantic
ravine  of  Rapentosa  and  crosses  the  southern  shoulder  of  Mt.  Pentelicus,
the  highest  summit  of  which  is  left  about  a  mile  to  the  westward.  It
is  a  rugged  and  precipitous  path,  hardly  practicable  even  for  heavy
infantry.  Within  a  distance  of  little  more  than  nine  miles  the  route
ascends  and  descends  a  ridge  which  rises  more  than  2500  feet  above
the  plain  below.

Clearly  the  first  of  these  routes  is  the  only  road  by  which  a  large
army  with  cavalry  and  baggage-train  could  march.  Therefore  when  the
Persians  landed  at  Marathon,  under  the  g^uidance  of  the  banished
Athenian  tyrant  Hippias,  who  was  of  course  ^miliar  with  the  country,
they  must  have  intended  to  advance  on  Athens  by  the  southern  road,
and  consequently  the  Athenians  must  have  marched  to  meet  them  by
the  same  road,  for  had  they  taken  the  northern  route,  the  enemy  might
have  given  them  the  slip,  and  his  cavalry  might  have  been  entering  the
streets  of  Athens  (then  an  unwalled  town)  at  the  time  when  the  Athen-
ians were  emerging  from  the  defiles  of  Pentelicus  on  the  plain  of  Mara-
thon. Thus  the  traveller  who  drives  to  Marathon  by  the  carriage  road
may  feel  sure  that  he  is  following  very  closely  the  route  by  which  the
Athenian  army  advanced  to  the  battle.

With  regard  to  the  battle  itself,  the  only  trustworthy  account  of  it
which  has  come  down  to  us  is  that  of  Herodotus  (vi.  102-117),  who
probably  conversed  with  men  who  had  taken  part  in  it.  It  is  needless
to  tell  again  the  story  of  the  famous  victory  which  has  been  told  and  dis-
cussed so  often,  especially  as  Herodotus's  narrative  does  not  enable  us  to
determine  the  exact  positions  of  the  hostile  armies  before  and  during
the  progress  of  the  battle.  All  that  may  be  regarded  as  certain  or  fairly
probable  is  that  the  Persians  were  posted  to  the  north  and  the  Athenians
to  the  south,  and  that  many  of  the  defeated  Persians  were  driven  into  the
great  swamp  at  the  northern  end  of  the  plain.  This  latter  fact  is  not
recorded  by  Herodotus,  but  it  was  represented  in  the  picture  of  the
battle  which  was  to  be  seen  in  the  Painted  Colonnade  at  Athens  (Paus.
i.  15.  3),  and  it  is  expressly  stated  by  Pausanias  (§  7  below).  It  is
further  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  great  mound,  which  covers  the
remains  of  the  Athenian  dead,  was  erected  on  the  spot  where  the  fight
had  been  hottest  and  the  Athenians  had  suffered  most  severely.

On  the  topography  and  ancient  remains  of  Marathon  see  Col.  Squire,  *  The
plain  of  Marathon,'  in  Walpole's  Memoirs  relating  to  7><r/6<ry  (London,  18 18),  pp.
329-336;  Chandler,  Travels  in  Greece^  chs.  34-30,  p.  159  J^^.  ;  Dodwell,  Tour,
2.  pp.  157-163 ;  Prokesch  von  Osten,  DenkivUrdigkeiten  und  Erinnerungen
aus  dem  Orient^  2.  p.  430  Sf/^.  ;  Leake,  Athetts,  2.  pp.  77-103;  /V/.,  Northern
Greece^  2.  pp.  426-433;  W.  lAMxe,  Journal,  i.  pp.  100- 1 18;  G.  Finlay,  *0n
the  battle  of  Marathon,'  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Literature,  3  (1839),
PP-  363-395  ;  Wordsworth,  Athens  and  Attica,  pp.  37.42  ;  F.  G.  Welcker,  Tagc-
buch,  I.  pp.  129-131  ;  L.  Ross,  JVanderungen,  2.  pp.  155-161  ;  />/.,  Erinner-
ungen  und  Mitt heilungen  aus  Griechenland,  pp.  176-193  ;  W.  Vischer,  Erinner-


CH.  xxxii  MARATHON  443

ungen  und  Eindriickcy  pp.  71-82,  86-89;  Bursian,  Geogr,  I.  pp.  337-341  ;  H.  G.
Lolling,  *Zur  Topographle  von  Marathon/  Mittheil.  cL  arch,  Inst,  in  AthtHy  i
(1876),  pp.  67-94;  Mahaffy,  Rambles  and  Studies ,  ^a^.  171-178;  H.  Belle,  Trois
Ann/es  en  Grice,  pp.  227-229 ;  P.  Kastromenos,  Demen^  pp.  61-66 ;  Baedeker,
Griechenland,^  pp.  127-130;  Guide-Joanne^  I.  pp.  174-179;  A.  Milchhofer,
*  Antikenbericht  aus  Attika,'  Mittheil,  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  A  then,  12  (1887),  PP-  3o6-
311  ;  id.,  Karteti  von  Attika,  Erldut,  Text,  iii.-vL  pp.  40-54.  Of  these  accounts
the  fullest  and  best  are  those  of  Leake,  Vischer,  Lolling,  and  Milchhofer.  As  to
the  excavations  in  the  sepulchral  mound  see  LtKriov  dpxcuoXoyiKdv,  1890,  pp.  6^67,
123-132;  id.,  1891,  pp.  34,  67,  97;  American  Journal  of  Archaeology,  6  (1890),
p.  365  sq,  ',  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  12  (1891),  p.  390;  id,,  1^  (1892-93),  p.
144;  Berliner  philolog,  Wochenschrift,  11  (1891),  p.  547  sq.\  Bulletin  deCorr,
HelUnique,  15  (1891),  p.  648  sq.  ;  A.  Hauvette,  *Le  tumulus  de  Marathon,*
Nouvelles  Archives  des  Missions  Scientifiques,  2  (1892),  pp.  326-335  ;  B.  Staes,  in
Mittheil,  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,  18(1893),  PP*  46-63>  with  plates  ii.-v.  Schlie-
roann's  excavations  in  the  mound  are  described  by  himself  in  Zeitschrift  fUr
EthnohgU,  16  (1884),  pp.  85-88.

The  battle  of  Marathon  is  discussed  specially  by  Leake,  Athens,  2.  pp.  203-
227 ;  Lieut. -General  Jochmus,  in  Journal  of  the  RoycU  Geographical  Society,
(London),  27  (1857),  p.  16  sqq.  ;  W.  Watkiss  Lloyd,  *The  battle  of  Marathon,'
Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  2  (1881),  pp.  380-395  ;  M.  Duncker,  Abhandlungen
aus  der  griech,  Geschichte,  pp.  17-40;  A.  Yi9.\SiVt\X.^,\xi  Nouvelles  Archives  des
Missions  Scientifiques,  2  (1892),  pp.  335-344.  Other  memoirs  on  the  subject  are
cited  by  G.  Busolt,  Griechische  Geschichte,  2,  p.  47.

32.  3.  the  names  of  the  Dallen  arranged  according  to  tribes.

So  in  inscriptions  containing  lists  of  men  who  fell  in  battle  the
names  are  regularly  arranged  according  to  tribes  (C.  /.  A,  \,  Nos.
433,  443,  446,  447,  450).  The  men  of  each  tribe  were  enrolled  in  a
separate  regiment,  so  that  on  the  field  of  battle  the  men  of  the  same
tribe  stood  and  fell  together.  This  is  expressly  said  to  have  been  the
case  at  Marathon  (Herodotus,  vi.  1 1 1).  The  Athenians  no  doubt  justly
considered  that  regiments  thus  constituted  would  be  animated  by  a
stronger  esprit  de  corps  than  regiments  made  up  of  conscripts  who  were
bound  together  by  no  tie  but  that  of  common  citizenship.  On  a  similar
principle  in  our  country  and  time  the  system  has  been  adopted  of
recruiting  the  line  regiments  from  special  districts  and  naming  them
after  these  districts,  instead  of  recruiting  them  indifferently  from  all  dis-
tricts and  designating  them  by  numbers.

32.  4.  He  died  subsequently  etc.  The  events  which  led  to  the
trial  and  death  of  Miltiades  are  narrated  by  Herodotus,  vi.  132-136;
Cornelius  Nepos,  Miltiades,  7  sq,

32.  4.  Here  every  night  yon  may  hear  horses  neighing  and  men
fighting.  W.  Vischer,  who  slept  one  stormy  night  at  the  wretched
hamlet  of  Vrana  overlooking  the  battlefield,  says :  "  Towards  evening
the  weather  again  grew  worse.  The  rain  poured,  the  wind  howled
through  the  mountains  and  through  the  roof  overhead,  birds  of  prey
screamed,  dogs  bayed,  and  now  and  then  the  sound  of  a  shot  fired  at
wolves  that  were  threatening  the  herds  fell  on  our  ears.  Without  any
great  stretch  of  imagination  we  could  picture  to  ourselves  how  the
ancients  fancied  they  heard  here  every  night  the  snorting  of  horses  and
the  tumult  of  battle "  (^Erinnerungen  und  Eindriicke,  p.  71).  It  is  a
common  superstition  that  the  scenes  of  great  battles  are  haunted  by  the
ghosts  of  the  slain,  who  rise  by  night  to  fight  their  battles  over  again.


MARATHON  bk.  I.  ATTICA


There  was  a  place  in  Boeotia  where  a  battle  was  said  to  have  been  fought
long  ago  ;  a  river  ran  by  the  spot,  and  in  the  roar  of  its  waters  the
peasants  fancied  they  heard  the  snorting  of  phantom  steeds  (Plutarch,
Parallela^  7).  Shepherds  feeding  their  flocks  in  the  plain  of  Troy  saw
spectres  in  armour  begrimed  with  dust  or  dabbled  in  blood  ;  the  ghost
of  Achilles  was  distinguished  by  his  stature  and  his  gleaming  arms  as
he  swept  by  in  a  whirlwind  (Philostratus,  Heroica^  iii.  18  and  26).
After  a  great  battle  fought  against  Attila  and  the  Huns  under  the  walls
of  Rome,  the  ghosts  of  the  dead  are  said  to  have  appeared  and  fought
for  three  days  and  nights  ;  the  clash  of  their  weapons  was  distinctly
heard  (Damascius,  Vita  Isidori,  63).  In  Germany  such  stories  are  told
about  the  battlefields  of  Charlemagne.  At  Frankenberg,  where  he  is
said  to  have  defeated  the  Saxons  in  a  bloody  battle,  and  where  another
engagement  took  place  in  the  Thirty  Years'  War,  woodmen  passing  over
the  battlefield  on  a  winter  night  have  seen  the  spectral  armies,  horse  and
foot,  locked  in  desperate  conflict  (K.  Lynker,  Deutsche  Sagenund  Sitten^
p.  II  sq.)  Legend  says  that  Charlemagne  gained  a  great  victory  at  the
foot  of  the  Odenberg,  but  that  when  evening  fell  the  mountain  opened,
and  the  king  and  his  weary  warriors  passed  into  it,  and  the  rock  closed
behind  them.  But  at  a  certain  time  every  seven  or  every  hundred  years
you  may  hear  the  clash  of  weapons  in  the  air,  the  snorting  of  horses,  and
the  trampling  of  hoofs  ;  for  the  army  of  the  dead  is  then  passing  to  Glis-
bom  to  water  its  horses  at  the  spring  (Grimm,  Deutsche  MythologU^  2.
p.  783).  In  Thiiringen  it  is  said  that  the  ghosts  of  Croats  and  Swedes
who  were  slain  in  a  certain  battle  awake  every  year  at  eleven  at  night  on
the  anniversary  of  the  battle  and  fight  till  the  clock  strikes  one,  when
they  vanish  into  the  earth  (Grimm,  op.  cit,  2.  p.  785).  Cp.  Veckenstedt,
Die  Mythen^  Sagen  und  Legenden  der  Zamaiten^  2.  p.  140  ;  P.  S^billot,
Traditions  et Superstitions  de  la  Haute-Bretagne^  i.  p.  222.  A  similar
superstition  attaches  to  Neville's  Cross  in  England.  A  boy  in  a  Sunday
school  at  Durham  told  his  teacher  that  "  if  you  walk  nine  times  round
the  Cross,  and  then  stoop  down  and  lay  your  head  on  the  turf,  you'll
hear  the  noise  of  the  battle  and  the  clash  of  the  armour  "  (Henderson,
Folklore  of  the  Northern  Counties^  p.  308).  Like  tales  are  told  of  battle-
fields in  India  {Indian  Antiquary^  9  (1880),  p.  80  ;  North  Indian  Notes
and  Queries,  2  (1892-93),  No.  637  ;  /V/.,  4  (1894),  No.  114).  In  this
respect  the  poet's  fancy  resembles  that  of  the  peasant  and  savage.
On  the  battlefield  of  Marengo  Heine  saw,  through  the  morning  mist,  a
figure  in  a  cocked  hat  and  a  grey  greatcoat  passing  like  the  wind,  and
he  heard  like  a  burst  of  music  far  away  "  Allons,  enfants  de  la  patrie."

32.  4-  they  worship Hercules  etc.      Cp.  i.   15.   3.      The

sanctuary  of  Hercules  was  one  of  the  two  most  revered  shrines  of  that
hero  in  Attica  ;  the  other  was  at  Cynosarges  (Harpocration,  s.z'.  *H/)a-
icXcta).  We  have  seen  that  the  Athenians  encamped  in  the  precinct  of
Hercules  at  Marathon  before  the  battle  (Herodotus,  vi.  108  and  116).
Games  were  celebrated  at  Marathon  in  honour  of  Hercules  ;  the  prizes
were  silver  cups  (Pindar,  Olyntp.  ix.  134  sqq.  with  the  Scholiast).

32.   5.  Echetlaens.     Cp.  i.  15.  3,  where  he  is  called  Echetlus.     On
similar  stories  of  succour  given  by  phantom  warriors  see  x.  23.  2  note.


CH.  XXXIII  BRAURON  445

32.  5.  I  could  find  no  grave.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the
six  or  seven  sepulchral  mounds  in  the  plain  a  little  to  the  east  of  the
village  of  Vrana  (see  above,  p.  437)  may  mark  the  graves  of  the
Persians.     Pausanias  seems  to  have  overlooked  these  mounds.

32.  6.  a  spring  called  Macaria  etc.  See  above,  p.  432.  Some
writers,  taking  into  consideration  the  worship  of  Hercules  at  Marathon
and  the  legend  that  Macaria  was  his  daughter,  have  supposed  that  the
name  Macaria  is  a  form  of  the  Phoenician  Makar  or  Melcarth,  the
Phoenician  deity  whom  the  Greeks  identified  with  Hercules ;  and  in  the
legend  of  Macaria's  heroic  suicide  Movers  found  a  reminiscence  of  the
Phoenician  custom  of  sacrificing  maidens.  See  Movers,  Die  Phoenizier^
I.  p.  417  sqq.  ;  J.  Olshausen,  in  Rluinisches  Museum^  N.  F.  8  (1853),
P-  330;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Aihen^  i.  p.  407.  The  stoVy  of
Eurystheus*s  defeat  and  death  in  Attica,  whither  he  had  marched  against
the  children  of  Hercules  who  had  found  a  refuge  in  the  Tetrapolis,  is
told  also  by  Strabo,  viii.  p.  377  ;  Diodorus,  iv.  57  ;  Antoninus  Liberalis,
33.  The  legend  is  the  subject  of  Euripides's  play  The  Heraclids.
Cp.  Thucydides,  i.  9  ;  Isocrates,  Panegyricus,  58  sq.  \  and  H.  Brunn,
in  Sitzungsberichte  d.  philos.  philolog,  CI.  d.  k,  buyer,  Akad.  d.  IViss.
1874,  Heft  iv.  p.  51  sqq.y  who  argued  that  the  defeat  of  Eurystheus
is  represented  on  the  eastern  frieze  of  the  so-called  Theseum  at
Athens.

32.  7.  a  mere,  most  of  which  is  marshy  etc.  Cp.  i.  15.  3  ;  and
see  above,  p.  432.

33.  I .  Branron.  Brauron  was  one  of  the  twelve  ancient  confederate
towns  of  Attica  before  the  time  of  Theseus  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  397).  It
was  situated  on  the  east  coast  of  Attica,  the  townships  of  Prasiae  and
Stiria  being  to  the  south  of  it,  and  the  townships  of  Myrrhinutte,
Probalinthus,  and  Marathon  to  the  north  of  it  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  399,  where
Strabo  seems  to  have  mentioned  Myrrhinus  by  mistake  instead  of
Myrrhinutte).  Hence,  as  the  positions  of  Prasiae  and  Marathon  are
approximately  known,  we  have  to  look  for  Brauron  at  some  point  on
the  east  coast  between  them.  The  position  of  Brauron  on  the  coast
is  confirmed  by  the  legend  that  the  Pelasgians  came  in  a  ship  and
carried  off  the  Athenian  women  while  they  were  celebrating  the  festival
of  Artemis  at  Brauron  (Herodotus,  iv.  145,  vi.  138;  Plutarch,  Quaest,
Graec.  21).  There  was  a  river  Erasinus  at  Brauron  (Strabo,  viii.  p.
371).  Now  between  Prasiae  {Porto  Raphti)  and  Marathon  only  two
rivers  fall  into  the  sea.  One  of  them  flows  into  a  little  bay  about  2
miles  to  the  north  of  Porto  Raphti.  The  other  enters  the  sea  about
6^  miles  further  north  at  Raphina ;  on  the  left  (north)  bank  of  this
latter  river,  about  three-quarters  of  a  mile  inland,  are  some  ancient  wells
and  vestiges  of  walls,  the  remains  of  Araphen,  a  township  of  the  tribe
Aegeis  (Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v.  *Apa<f>rjv  ;  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^
p.  441,  line  26).  In  the  valley  of  the  other,  more  southerly,  river  there
are  two  farms  called  Upper  and  Under  Vraona  (or  Old  and  New  Vraona)^
which  belong  to  the  monastery  of  Asomaton  in  Athens,  but  are  now  in
ruins.  As  the  name  Vraona  appears  to  be  the  modem  equivalent  of
Brauron  (the  b  having  as  usual  passed  into  a  v\  and  the  situation,  beside


446  BRAURON  bk.  i.  attica

a  river  between  Prasiae  and  Marathon,  agrees  with  that  of  Brauron,  we
may  conclude  that  Brauron  stood  in  the  valley  of  this  river  at  or  near  its
mouth,  and  that  the  river  is  the  ancient  Erasinus.  The  harbour  of
Vraona,  into  which  the  river  flows,  is  a  small  but  deep  bay,  bounded  on
the  south  by  the  finely  shaped  Mt.  Perdtia  which  projects  boldly  and
steeply  into  the  sea.  The  ground  at  the  head  of  the  bay,  where  the
river  enters  it,  is  swampy.  On  the  north  side  of  the  bay  the  line  of  an
ancient  road  may  be  traced  by  the  chariot-ruts  in  the  rock.  Here,  too,
some  remains  of  piers  may  be  seen  running  out  into  the  water  ;  and  on
an  eminence  above  this  side  of  the  bay  are  the  foundations  of  an  o>'al
fortification.  A  little  further  inland,  on  the  left  (north)  bank  of  the  stream,
are  vestiges  of  the  foundation  walls  of  an  ancient  town.  Opposite  to  these
remains,  on  the  southern  bank  of  the  river,  rises  an  isolated  rocky  hillock,
almost  overgrown  with  wild  olives.  At  the  projecting  north-west  foot  of
the  hillock  stands  the  ruined  chapel  of  St.  George  on  a  platform  con-
structed of  large  ancient  blocks  of  limestone.  At  this  chapel  Ross  saw
four  small  columns,  two  Doric  capitals  of  white  marble,  and  a  fragment
of  a  small  female  figure  seated  with  a  lion,  dog,  or  bear  (.?)  on  her  lap.
The  back  of  the  chapel  is  built  against  the  rock,  which  is  here  hemi
perp)endicularly ;  and  in  the  rock-wall,  to  the  left  of  the  chapel,  are  some
holes  which  probably  served  to  fasten  votive  offerings.  A  road  hewn  in
the  rock,  about  thirteen  paces  wide,  leads  up  from  near  the  chapel  to  the
summit  of  the  hillock.  On  this  summit,  which  is  level  and  of  crescent
shape,  foundations,  hewn  stones,  and  potsherds  may  be  seen  among  the
thick  shrubbery ;  in  particular  the  foundations  of  a  ring-wall,  about  3
feet  thick,  may  be  made  out.  At  the  northern  foot  of  the  hillock,  a  little
to  the  east  of  the  chapel  of  St.  George,  a  clear  and  copious  spring  issues
from  the  rock  ;  it  seems  to  have  been  enclosed  by  ancient  masonry.
Tiny  fish  dart  about  in  its  sparkling  water.

Inland  from  these  ruins  the  cultivated  and  fruitful  valley  is  occupied
by  gardens.  At  the  distance  of  about  a  mile  from  the  sea  the  valley
divides.  In  the  northern  branch- valley  are  the  ruins  of  Palazo-Vraona
(*  Old  Vraona  *).  In  the  southern  branch-valley,  down  which  the  main
river  comes,  are  the  ruins  of  Vraona  at  a  distance  of  about  two  miles  from
the  sea.  About  half  a  mile  or  so  further  up  the  valley,  beyond  a  well-
preserved  Byzantine  watch-tower,  there  is  a  rocky  knoll  on  the  south  side
of  the  valley,  between  the  main  stream  and  a  smaller  stream  which  joins
it  from  the  south.  On  this  knoll  there  are  the  remains  of  a  double  circuit-
wall  built  of  fine  squared  blocks,  which  on  the  north  side  are  standing  to  a
height  of  two  courses.  Within  these  circuit- walls,  on  a  higher  part  of
the  knoll,  which  is  here  overgrown  with  bushes,  are  the  foundations  of  a
quadrangrular  edifice  measuring  ten  paces  by  seven.  The  general  aspect
of  the  valley  at  Vraona  is  described  by  Wordsworth.  He  says  :  "  Here
the  country  is  of  a  very  pleasing  character.  A  little  before  arriving  at
Braona  (Vraona)  ...  we  cross  a  picturesque  hill  fringed  with  wood,
beneath  which  runs  a  pretty  stream,  probably  the  Erasinus.  It  is  edged
with  a  line  of  white  poplars.  Beneath  them,  by  the  side  of  the  stream,
is  a  garden  of  fruit  and  vegetables — which  is  a  rare  sight  in  this  country.
To  our  left  is  a  grey  square  tower  on  a  hill.     The  landscape  is  softened


CH.  XXXIII  BRAURON  447

by  the  quiet  light  of  the  evening,  which  is  now  coming  on.  .  .  .  This
scene  is  worthy  the  pencil  of  Claude."

Though  Pausanias  (i.  23.  7)  and  Stephanus  Byzantius  (s,v.  Bpavptav)
speak  of  Brauron  as  a  township,  it  does  not  appear  to  have  been  such ;
at  least  it  is  never  mentioned  as  a  township  in  any  inscription.  But  two
townships  were  apparently  included  within  the  district  of  Brauron.  One
of  these  was  Philaidae,  which  was  said  to  have  been  named  after
Philaeus,  a  son  of  Ajax  (Plutarch,  Soloriy  10).  Brauronian  Artemis  was
worshipped  at  Philaidae  (Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Birds ^  873)  ;  and  here
lived  the  bear  whose  slaughter  was  said  to  have  moved  the  anger  of
Artemis  and  hence  to  have  led  to  the  institution  of  the  bear  dance  which
Athenian  maidens  had  to  perform  before  marriage  (Suidas,  s.v,  apKTos  ij
B/oav/Muvtois  ;  see  note  on  viii.  13.  i ).  The  other  township  which  seems
to  have  been  included  within  the  district  of  Brauron  was  Halae  Araphe-
nides,  situated  near  a  salt-lagoon  between  Brauron  and  Marathon  (Strabo,
ix.  p.  399  ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v.  'AAai  'AfHKJyrjviSes),  on  the  coast
nearly  opposite  to  Carystus  in  Euboea  (Strabo,  x.  p.  446).  At  Halae
Araphenides  was  the  temple  containing  the  image  of  the  Tauric  Artemis
which  Iphigenia  was  said  to  have  brought  with  her  from  Scythia  (Euri-
pides, Iphigenia  in  TauriSy  1450  sqq.  ;  Callimachus,  Hymn  to  Artemis^
373  S9'\  Strabo,  ix.  p.  399).  Hence  when  Pausanias  speaks  of  this
ancient  image  as  if  it  were  or  had  been  at  Brauron  (i.  23.  7  ;  i.  33.  i  ;
iii.  16.  7  sq.  ;  viii.  46.  3),  it  would  seem  that  he  is  either  mistaken  or
means  by  Brauron,  not  the  town,  but  the  district  of  Brauron.  The  name
Halae  Araphenides  means  *  the  salt-works  of  Araphen,'  and  implies  that
the  place  was  situated  beside  salt-pans  not  far  from  Araphen,  which,  as
we  have  seen,  must  be  placed  near  Raphina,  about  6i  miles  north  of
the  bay  of  Vraona.  It  was  probably  at  the  salt -lagoon,  which  is  still
called  Aliki  (*  salt  place '),  situated  beside  the  sea  about  four  miles  north
of  the  bay  of  Vraona  and  two  miles  south  of  Raphina.  There  was  formerly
a  salt-work  here.  On  the  strip  of  land  which  separates  the  lagoon  from
the  sea  there  is  a  ruined  chapel  of  St.  Spiridion  with  some  large  ancient
blocks  beside  it ;  and  westward  of  the  southern  end  of  the  lagoon,  to  the
left  of  the  road  which  goes  straight  to  Raphina,  there  are  the  ruins  of  a
large  church  (fifty  paces  long  by  thirty  paces  broad)  hidden  among  bushes
and  fir-trees.  Well  cut  ancient  blocks  of  marble  are  built  into  its  walls,
and  there  are  remains  of  small  columns.  Some  large  columns  are  said
to  have  been  taken  from  the  ruin  to  build  a  church  at  Keratea.  This
ruined  church  near  the  lagoon  probably  occupies  the  site  of  an  ancient
sanctuary,  perhaps  the  temple  of  the  Tauric  Artemis.  L.  Ross  con-
jectured, on  the  other  hand,  that  the  ruins,  already  described,  on  the
bay  of  Vraona  are  those  of  Halae  Araphenides,  and  that  the  chapel  of
St.  George  occupies  the  site  of  the  temple  of  the  Tauric  Artemis.  Here,
too,  between  the  hillock  and  the  head  of  the  bay,  there  is  a  small  lagoon,
from  which  salt  was  formerly  extracted.  But  on  Ross's  view  Halae
Araphenides  must  have  been  distant  about  seven  miles  from  Araphen,  from
which  it  took  its  name.  It  is  perhaps  more  likely  that  the  ruins  on  the
bay  of  Vraona  are  those  of  Brauron  itself  or  of  its  township  Philaidae.
If  they  are  the  ruins  of  Philaidae,  Brauron  may  have  been  further  up


448  RHAMNUS  bk.  i.  attica

the  valley,  perhaps  at  Vraona.  The  scantiness  of  the  ancient  reniains
at  Vraona  is  not  decisive  against  the  hypothesis  that  Brauron  may  once
have  stood  here ;  since  even  in  the  first  century  of  our  era  Brauron  is
said  to  have  existed  only  as  a  name  (Mela,  ii.  46  ;  Pliny,  N.  H.  iv.  24).
Excavations  might  enable  us  to  determine  the  sites  of  these  various
places.  Five  sepulchral  monuments  inscribed  with  the  names  of  persons
belonging  to  Halae  (i.e.  Halae  Araphenides)  have  been  found  at  Vraona
(C.  /.  A.  ii.  Nos.  1781,  1791-1794;  Koumanoudes,  'Att.  any  p.  en-irvfift,
Nos.  159,  170-173).  This  seems  to  favour  Ross's  view  that  Halae
Araphenides  was  on  the  bay  of  Vraona.

At  the  festival  of  Artemis  held  at  Halae  Araphenides  the  throat  of  a
man  was  cut  just  so  far  as  to  draw  blood  (Euripides,  Iphig,  in  Tauris^
1458  sqq.)  This  custom  was  probably  a  substitute  for  a  human  sacrifice.
At  Halae  Araphenides  also  was  the  grave  of  Iphigenia,  at  which  the
clothes  of  women  who  died  in  childbed  were  left  as  an  offering  (Euri-
pides, Iphig.  in  Tauris,  1464  sqq.)

As  to  Brauron,  etc.  see  Dodwell,  Toury  i.  p.  529 ;  Leake,  Athefts,  2.  pp.
22-24  ;  Wordsworth,  Athens  and  Attica,  p.  186  sq. ;  Vischer,  Erinmrungen  und
Eindriicke^  p.  70 ;  L.  Ross,  Archdologische  Aufsatze^  I.  pp.  222-229  \  Bursian,
Geogr.  I.  pp.  348-350 ;  P.  Kastromenos,  Demen,  pp.  57-60 ;  M ilchhofer,  •  Antiken-
bericht  aus  Attika,'  Mittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,  12  (1887),  p.  291  sq, ;  id,^
Kartcn  von  Attika^  Erldut,  Text^  iii.-vi.  pp.  6-8.

33.  I.  in  another  place  I  will  show  who,  in  my  opinion,  possess
the  image.     See  iii.  16.  7  sq,  with  the  note.

33.  2.  Just  sixty  furlongs  from  Marathon  is  Bhamnns.  Rham-
nus  was  a  township  of  the  tribe  Aiantis  (Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v.
*Pa/:ivo{ls),  situated  on  the  east  coast  of  Attica  to  the  north  of  Tricorythus
(Strabo,  ix.  p.  399).  It  was  a  fortress  (Scylax,  Periplus^  57).  WTien
the  Athenians  were  alarmed  by  the  advance  of  Philip  of  Macedonia  into
Phocis,  orders  were  issued  that  the  inhabitants  of  Attica  should  collect
their  property  for  safety  into  one  or  other  of  a  number  of  fortresses,
which  were  named,  and  one  of  these  fortresses  was  Rhamnus  (Demo-
sthenes, xviii.  38,  p.  238).  When  Demetrius  Poliorcetes  invaded  Attica
he  captured  Rhamnus  (Plutarch,  Demetrius,  33;  cp.  /Vf.,  Phodon,  25).
The  place  was  chiefly  celebrated  for  its  temple  and  image  of  Nemesis
(Strabo,  ix.  pp.  396,  399  ;  Zenobius,  v.  82  ;  Mela,  ii.  46  ;  PHny,  N.  H.
xxxvi.  17  ;  Lucan,  v.  233  ;  Anthol.  Palat.  Appendix  Planudea,  No.  222 ;
Hesychius,  Suidas,  and  Photius,  Lexicon,  s.v,  ^Fafivova-la  Nc/xco-is ;  see
below).  There  was  also  a  temple  of  Amphiaraus  at  Rhamnus  (Mela,
ii.  46).  The  orator  Antiphon  belonged  to  Rhamnus  (Suidas,  s.v7f,
*AvTi<jf>(uv  and  *Pa/ivowrM)s).

Rhamnus  is  one  of  the  loneliest  and  most  secluded,  but  at  the  same
time  most  picturesque  and  verdant  spots  in  all  Attica.  It  lies  on  the
north-east  coast  of  Attica,  about  six  and  a  half  miles  north  of  Kato-Souliy
the  village  which  occupies  the  site  of  Tricorythus  (see  above,  p.  439  sq)
The  distance  agrees  well  with  the  sixty  Greek  furlongs  (nearly  seven
miles)  at  which  Pausanias  estimates  it.  The  road  from  Kato-Souli  first
goes  north-east  across  the  northern  portion  of  the  Marathonian  plain,
which  it  quits  by  a  pass  leading  northward  through  the  hills.     The  pass


CH.  XXXIII  RHAMNUS  449

soon  opens  into  an  upland  valley,  three  miles  long  from  south  to  north
by  one  mile  wide,  enclosed  on  both  sides  by  wild  and  barren  hills.  The
upper  slopes  of  these  hills  are  scantily  wooded  with  firs  ;  their  lower
slopes  are  overgrown  with  myrtle,  lentisk,  and  many  sorts  of  thorny
shrubs,  especially  the  one  called  rhamnus^  which  gave  the  district  its
ancient  name.  The  soil  of  the  valley  is  partly  under  cultivation,  but
most  of  it  is  covered  with  dense  underwood  and  oaks  of  the  valanidia
species.  On  a  low  flat  ridge  which  runs  across  the  valley  from  east  to
west  there  are  some  ancient  ruins,  consisting  of  walls  and  foundations  of
houses.  There  are  now  no  permanent  inhabitations  in  the  whole  valley.
A  few  dirty  hamlets,  tenanted  from  time  to  time  by  peasants  for  the
purpose  of  looking  after  their  fields,  lie  at  its  eastern  edge.  The  general
aspect  of  the  country  is  lonesome  and  desolate.

Towards  the  northern  end  of  the  valley  the  ground  gradually  rises ;
and  where  it  terminates  the  scenery  changes.  Here,  at  the  northern
extremity  of  the  valley,  a  deep,  narrow,  woody  glen,  about  half  a  mile
long,  descends  rapidly  in  a  north-easterly  direction  to  the  sea-shore.  At
the  head  of  the  glen,  commanding  a  magnificent  view  down  its  wooded
depths  and  across  the  narrow  channel  of  the  Euripus  to  the  lofty  moun-
tains of  Euboea,  rises  a  stately  terrace  supported  by  exquisitely  constructed
walls  of  white  marble,  which  are  embowered  in  a  luxuriant  growth  of  dark-
green  shrubbery  and  fir-trees.  In  this  superb  situation,  crowning  the
terrace,  stand  side  by  side  the  ruins  of  two  temples,  the  famous  temple
of  Nemesis  and  a  smaller  temple,  probably  of  Themis.  Below,  where
the  glen  opens  on  the  shore,  an  isolated  rocky  hill  juts  out  into  the  sea ;
and  on  its  sides,  half  buried  in  thickly  clustering  masses  of  evergreens,
are  the  white  marble  walls  and  towers  of  Rhamnus.  We  shall  first
descend  through  the  glen  and  examine  this  ruined  fortress ;  aftenaards
we  shall  return  to  the  temple  of  Nemesis.

The  height  on  which  are  the  ruins  of  Rhamnus,  or  rather  of  its
acropolis,  is  a  round  rocky  hill  projecting  eastward  into  the  sea  and
separated  on  the  landward  side  by  a  broad  hollow  or  ravine  from  the
bushy  slopes  of  the  higher  hills,  which  form  a  semicircle  round  it.  It  is
a  place  of  considerable  natural  strength.  On  the  side  of  the  sea  the
hill  ends  in  high  precipitous  rocks ;  on  the  north  it  descends  abruptly
to  the  deep  bed  of  a  torrent ;  on  the  south  there  is  a  small  stretch  of
flat  ground  beside  the  sheltered  bay  where  vessels  ride  at  anchor.  The
hill  is  most  accessible  on  its  south-western  side,  where  a  gradual  slope  con-
nects it  with  the  glen  through  which  the  path  leads  up  to  the  temples.
Accordingly,  the  principal  or  only  gate  of  the  fortress  stood  here,  at  the
head  of  the  slope.  With  its  adjacent  walls  and  massive  flanking  towers
the  gateway  is  still  in  fair  preser\'ation.  The  towers  are  square ;  the
one  on  the  right,  as  you  enter  the  fortress,  is  much  the  larger  of  the
two ;  it  is  about  23  feet  A^nde,  17  feet  deep,  and  is  standing  to  a  height
of  about  9  feet.  The  fortification-wall  can  be  traced  nearly  all  round
the  hill,  though  it  is  only  on  the  south  and  south-west  sides  that  it  is
standing  to  a  considerable  height.  On  the  south  side  it  is  over  13
feet  high  for  a  length  of  about  20  yards.  On  the  seaside  the  wall
ran  along  the  edge  of  the  cliff's,  but  only  three  pieces  of  it  are  tolerably

VOL.  II  2  G


450  RHAMNUS  bk.  i.  attica

preserved.  It  seems  that  here  the  ground  has  given  way  at  some
points  and  slipped  into  the  sea,  carrying  pieces  of  the  wall  with  it.  At
the  north-east  comer,  where  some  large  rocks  would  have  afforded  foot-
hold and  cover  to  assailants,  the  fortress  is  strengthened  by  an  outwork.
The  whole  circuit  of  the  fortress,  which  is  roughly  quadrangular  in  shape,
is  little  more  than  half  a  mile ;  nine  towers  can  still  be  distinguished.
The  walls  and  towers  are  finely  constructed  of  large  blocks  of
white  marble  laid  in  regular  horizontal  courses  without  mortar.  The
marble  was  quarried  in  the  neighbourhood ;  it  takes  a  yeIIo\iish
tinge  through  exposure  to  the  weather.  These  white  marble  walls
rising  out  of,  and  overtopped  by,  the  dense  evergreen  shrubbery,  which
mantles  the  hill  with  a  tangled  thicket,  make,  with  the  blue  sea  beside
them  and  the  high  mountains  of  Euboea  in  the  background,  a  charming
picture.

The  highest  part  of  the  hill,  to>*'ard  the  north-west,  is  enclosed  by
an  inner  ring- wall  so  as  to  form  a  quadrangular  keep  about  one  hundred
paces  square.  Within  this  keep  there  are  large  masses  of  masonry,  the
ruins  of  ancient  buildings,  perhaps  of  watch-towers.  TTie  hill  appears
to  have  been  inhabited  in  antiquity,  especially  in  Roman  times  ;  for  the
remains  of  houses  are  to  be  seen  on  its  eastern  and  western  slopes,  as
well  as  on  the  summit.  These  houses  consisted  of  one,  two,  or  more
apartments.  The  walls,  built  of  rough  stones,  are  standing  to  a  height
of  3  to  6  feet.  On  the  southern  slope  of  the  hill,  not  far  from  the
gateway,  the  remains  of  a  small  quadrangular  edifice  (about  i  5  ft.  by
8  ft.)  were  excavated  by  the  Greek  Archaeological  Society  in  1891.
The  edifice  was  perhaps  a  temple  of  Dionysus  ;  for  a  torso  of  an  image
of  Dionysus,  of  life  size  and  of  the  fine  period  of  Greek  art,  was  found
within  the  building,  together  with  four  uninscribed  pedestals.  To  the
west  of  this  sanctuary  the  excavations  of  the  Society  brought  to  light
a  large  building  divided  into  two  quadrangular  chambers  (about  46  ft.
by  40  ft.  and  7  ft.  by  7  ft.)  which,  from  an  inscription  on  a  pedestal,
seems  to  have  been  a  gymnasium.  As  the  inscription  mentions
archons  who  held  office  in  the  years  333,  332,  and  331  B.C.,  the
gymnasium  may  have  been  built  about  the  middle  of  the  fourth  century
B.C.  Like  the  supposed  temple  of  Dionysus,  it  is  constructed  in  an
inferior  style  of  masonry.  The  ground  to  the  north  of  this  g>'ninasium,
between  it  and  the  wall  of  the  keep,  was  also  excavated  in  1891  ;  it
appears  to  have  been  filled  with  statues  standing  on  inscribed  pedestals ;
some  fragments  of  these  statues  and  inscriptions  were  found.  One  of
the  inscriptions  proves  that  Lenaean  Dionysus  was  worshipped  here.
On  this  part  of  the  hill,  a  little  below  the  wall  of  the  keep,  four
marble  seats  had  been  discovered  about  twelve  years  previously.
These  seats  were  originally  joined  together,  and  they  bear  an  inscrip-
tion (C.  I.  A.  ii.  No.  1 191),  from  which  we  learn  that  they  were
dedicated  to  Dionysus  by  the  priest  of  the  Founder  Hero.  From
another  inscription,  discovered  in  1891,  it  appears  that  there  was  a
theatre  at  Rhamnus.  At  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century
Leake  saw,  in  the  middle  of  the  enclosure  of  the  fortress,  a  monument
of  white  marble,   concave  on  one  of  its    sides  and  broken   into  two


CH.  XXXIII  RHAMNUS  451

pieces,  on  one  of  which  were  canned  the  words  '  Rhamnusian '  and
'comedians*  (PAMN0Y210:S  KfiMOIAOIS).  All  this  points  to  a
regular  worship  of  Dionysus  at  Rhamnus,  with  its  usual  accompani-
ments, a  theatre  and  theatrical  performances.  As  no  remains  of  a
theatre  have  been  discovered,  Dr.  Dorpfeld  supposes  that  it  was  con-
structed of  wood.

The  fortress  of  Rhamnus  is  now  called  Ovrio-Kastro,  that  is  *the
Hebrew  Castle,'  a  name  not  uncommonly  applied  by  the  ignorant
modem  peasants  to  the  ruins  of  ancient  Greek  fortresses.  The  town  of
Rhamnus  probably  stood  on  the  little  seaside  plain  at  the  southern
foot  of  the  castle  hill,  where  vestiges  of  the  ancient  dwellings,  which
Pausanias  mentions,  may  still  be  distinguished.  There  is  no  modem
village  here  or  in  the  neighbourhood.     All  is  solitude  and  silence.

We  now  retrace  our  steps  up  the  glen  to  the  terrace  on  which  stand
and  lie  in  a  confused  mass  the  remains  of  the  two  temples.  The  terrace
or  platform  is  150  feet  wide  and  faces  the  sea.  The  two  walls,  which
support  it  at  right  angles  to  each  other,  are  beautifully  const wicted  of
large  blocks  of  white  marble  laid  in  horizontal  courses,  but  not  jointed
vertically.  The  temples  stand  nearly  in  the  middle  of  the  terrace,  side
by  side,  but  not  quite  parallel  to  each  other.  The  larger  temple  is  on
the  north  side,  toward  the  sea.  The  angle  of  the  smaller  temple
approaches  the  flank  of  the  larger  temple  so  closely  that  there  is  no
room  to  pass  between  them.  The  larger  temple  and  the  walls  of  the
smaller  were  built  of  a  fine  white  marble  which  was  quarried  close  by.
About  20  yards  from  the  temple  the  marks  of  the  quarrying  tools
can  still  be  seen  on  the  rock.  The  terrace  walls,  as  well  as  the  fortifi-
cations on  the  hill  beside  the  sea,  are  constmcted  of  the  same  material.
The  larger  temple  faced  15°  south  of  east,  and  measured  71  feet  long
by  33  feet  broad*  on  the  stylobate.  It  was  of  the  Doric  order  and  of
the  kind  technically  called  a  peripteral  hexastyle,  i.e,  it  was  surrounded
by  a  colonnade,  and  the  number  of  columns  at  each  of  the  narrow  ends
was  six.  It  had  twelve  columns  on  each  of  the  long  sides.  The
columns  of  this  outer  colonnade  (13  ft.  6  in.  high  and  2  ft.  4  in.  thick
at  the  bottom)  are  unfluted  except  for  a  very  small  distance  at  the  top
and  bottom,  which  seems  to  show  that  the  temple  was  never  finished.
The  interior  comprised  a  fore-temple  (J>ronaos\  a  central  chamber  or
ceila^  and  a  back  chamber  (ppisthodomos\  arranged  in  the  usual  way.
The  columns  of  the  fore-temple  {pronaos)  were  fluted  on  the  front  and
planed  behind  ;  the  flutes  are  eleven  and  the  planes  nine  in  number.
The  lower  portions  of  seven  columns  on  the  south  side  and  of  one  in
the  fore-temple  are  still  standing.  All  the  members  of  the  cornice
were  painted  or  gilt ;  among  the  patterns  introduced  were  the  lotus  and
maeander.  On  portions  of  the  cornice  which  were  less  exposed  to  the
air  the  outline  of  the  pattern,  traced  with  a  sharp  instrument,  remains
deeply  engraved.  Pieces  of  every  part  of  the  superstmcture  are  lying
among  the  ruins  and  allow  of  a  complete  restoration  of  the  edifice,
including  the  roof  and  ceiling.  The  elegance  of  the  architecture  and
of  the  painted  ornaments  renders  it  probable  that  the  temple  was
built    about  the   middle   of  the    fifth    century   B.C.      That   it   was   the


45*


RHAMNUS


sanctuary  of  Nemesis  is  proved  by  the  discovery  in  it  of  an  inscription

(C  /.  A.  iii.  No.  811),  which  records  that  Kerodes  Atticus  dedicated
to  Nemesis  a  statue  of  his  favourite  pupil,  Pollux  or  Polydeucion  (see
above,  p.  437  sq.)      The   identification   is  confirmed    by  the  discovery-


in  the  temple  of  fragments  of  the  sculptures  described  by  Pausanias
(see  below).

The  smaller  temple,  3  5  feet  long  by  2 1  feet  wide,  consists  simply  of  a
chamber  or  cella  with  a  portico  in  front,  which  is  supported  by  two
fluted  Doric  columns  between  antiu.  The  walls,  which  are  still  stand-
ing to  a  heijfht  of  6  to  9  feet,  are   built  of  white  marble  hewn  in


CH.  xxxiii  RHAMNUS  453

large  polygonal  blocks,  fitted  together  with  the  nicest  precision  and
polished  on  their  outer  surface.  The  columns,  on  the  other  hand,  and
all  the  architectural  ornaments  are  of  common  stone.  In  the  portico
stood  two  marble  chairs,  one  on  each  side  of  the  doorway.  Inscriptions
on  the  chairs  set  forth  that  the  chair  on  the  right  was  dedicated  to
Nemesis  by  Sostratus  when  Callisto  was  priestess,  and  that  the  chair
on  the  left  was  dedicated  to  Themis  by  Sostratus  when  Philostrate  was
priestess  (C  /.  A,  ii.  Nos.  1570,  1571);  the  inscriptions  are  of  the
fourth  century  B.C.  These  chairs  are  now  in  the  National  Museum  at
Athens.

Further,  excavations  made  by  the  Greek  Archaeological  Society  in
1 890  led  to  the  discovery  of  three  statues  with  their  inscribed  pedestals
in  the  inner  chamber  or  cella  of  the  smaller  temple.  The  pedestals  were
found  standing  in  their  original  positions  against  the  west  wall  of  the
chamber ;  but  the  statues  were  discovered  lying  on  the  ground  in  front
of  the  pedestals.  The  inscription  on  the  pedestal  in  the  left-hand  comer
of  the  temple  declares  that  the  statue  was  dedicated  to  Themis  by
Megacles  of  Rhamnus,  who  had  been  crowned  by  his  fellow-townsmen
when  Callisto  and  Philostrate  were  priestesses,  had  been  successful  as  a
trainer  of  boys  and  men  in  gymnastic  exercises,  and  had  won  a  prize  .
with  the  comedy  which  he  had  put  on  the  stage.  The  inscription  further
states  that  the  statue  was  made  by  Chaerestratus  of  Rhamnus,  son  of
Chaeredemus.  The  statue  of  Themis  which  occupied  this  pedestal  is  of
Pentelic  marble  and  of  more  than  life  size.  It  is  nearly  perfect,  the  right
arm  from  below  the  elbow  alone  being  wanting.  The  corresponding
part  of  the  left  arm  is  broken  off,  but  was  found.  The  goddess  is  repre-
sented standing,  her  weight  resting  on  the  left  foot,  while  the  right  is  a
little  in  front.  She  is  draped  in  the  ample  folds  of  a  loose  flowing  robe,
thrown  over  the  left  shoulder  and  brought  under  the  right,  while  its  train
is  supported  on  her  left  arm.  Under  this  robe  she  wears  a  close  fitting
tunic  which  reaches  to  her  feet  and  is  drawn  in  by  a  cincture  under
the  bosom.  The  pose  of  the  goddess  is  majestic ;  her  features
austerely  beautiful ;  the  expression  stem  and  set.  The  figure  is  a
noble  embodiment  of  the  idea  of  Law  and  Justice.  From  the  style  both
of  the  statue  and  of  the  inscription  it  appears  that  the  work  dates  from
the  early  part  of  the  third  century  B.C.  The  sculptor  Chaerestratus  is
otherwise  unknown.  The  reference  in  the  inscription  to  a  dramatic
contest  confirms  the  conclusion  (see  above)  that  there  was  a  theatre  at
Rhamnus.

The  inscription  on  the  adjoining  pedestal  shows  that  the  statue  which
it  supported  is  that  of  Aristonoe  priestess  of  Nemesis,  and  that  it  was
dedicated  to  Themis  and  Nemesis  by  Aristonoe's  son  Hierocles  of
Rhamnus,  son  of  Hieropoeus.  The  statue  itself  is  of  Pentelic  marble  and
represents  the  priestess  standing  draped  in  a  tunic  and  flowing  robe,
holding  a  shallow  bowl  in  her  right  hand.  It  is  complete  except  that
the  fingers  of  the  left  hand  are  wanting.  The  statue  is  a  tolerable
specimen  of  later  Greek  art.  Mr.  Cavvadias  assigns  it  to  the  early  part
of  the  second  century  B.C.  Mr.  Staes  considers  that  it  is  of  the  Roman
period.


454  RHAMSUS  bk.  i.  attica

The  third  statue,  also  of  Pentelic  marble,  represents  a  boy  standing
with  his  right  arm  raised  ;  the  upper  part  of  the  body  is  nude.  The
hands  are  broken  off  and  missing.  The  pedestal  which  this  statue
occupied  is  placed  exactly  in  the  centre  of  the  west  wall  of  the  cella^  feeing
the  entrance ;  and  the  inscription  on  it  states  that  the  statue  H-as
dedicated  as  a  first-fruit  offering  by  L>'siclides  "to  the  goddess  who
possessed  this  precinct."  St>'le  and  inscription  combine  to  show  that
the  statue  is  a  product  of  the  latter  part  of  llie  fifth  century  B.C  But  it
is  a  thoroughly  dull  and  mechanical  piece  of  work,  unworthy  of  the  great
age  of  Greek  sculpture.  All  three  statues,  ^nith  their  pedestals,  are  now
in  the  National  Museum  at  Athens.

A  fourth  pedestal  was  discovered  in  the  cella  of  the  smaller  temple
during  the  excavations  of  1890.  The  inscription  on  it,  in  characters  of
the  fourth  century  B.C.,  declares  that  "  his  mother  Leonice  dedicated  (this
statue  of)  Antiphilus  son  of  Theodorus."

These  inscriptions  and  statues  prove  that  the  smaller  temple  was  in
use  from  the  fifth  to  the  second  century  B.C.  at  least,  if  not  later.  They
therefore  refute  the  view,  formerly  held  by  some  archaeologists,  that  the
smaller  temple  was  the  original  sanctuary  of  Nemesis  which,  after  being
destroyed  by  the  Persians,  n-as  replaced  in  the  fifth  century  by  the  larger
temple  of  Nemesis.  If  the  smaller  temple  was  a  temple  of  Nemesis,  it
at  least  continued  in  use  after  the  new  one  was  built.  This  seems
hardly  likely.  More  probably  the  temple  was  sacred  to  Themis,  since
one  of  the  chairs  and  one  of  the  statues  were  dedicated  to  her,  and
another  statue  (that  of  Aristonoe)  was  dedicated  jointly  to  Themis  and
Nemesis.  But  no  priestess  of  Themis  is  mentioned.  Perhaps  the
priestess  of  Nemesis  served  both  temples.  The  statue  of  Themis  found
in  the  temple  was  not,  however,  the  worshipped  image  of  the  goddess ;
it  was  merely  a  votive  offering,  as  appears  both  from  the  dedicatory
inscription  and  from  the  position  which  the  statue  occupied  in  a  comer
of  the  temple.

A  torso  of  an  archaic  female  statue,  clothed  in  close  formal  draper)',
was  also  found  in  the  smaller  temple  ;  it  is  now  in  the  British  Museum
(A.  H.  Smith,  Catalogue  of  Sculpture  in  the  British  Museum^  i.  No.

154).

A  grave  in  the  floor  of  the  cella  of  the  smaller  temple,  containing

Roman  lamps  and  coins  of  the  Roman  emperors,  seems  to  show  that  the
temple  *was  no  longer  used  as  a  place  of  worship  under  the  Roman
empire.

So  niuch  for  the  two  temples  on  the  terrace.  The  road  leading  from
the  temples  in  both  directions,  towards  Kaio-Souli  (Tricorythus)  and
down  the  glen  to  the  fortress,  is  lined  with  ancient  tombs,  many  of  which
have  been  clandestinely  opened  and  rifled  of  their  contents.  Further,
remains  of  ancient  masonry  may  be  observed  at  various  points  in  the  glen
which  connects  the  temples  with  the  fortress.  Leake  and  Wordsworth
supposed  that  these  remains  were  the  ruins  of  fortification-walls  built  to
maintain  a  communication  between  the  fortress  and  the  temples.  Vischer,
on  the  other  hand,  regarded  them  as  remnants  of  sanctuaries  and  tombs,
such  as  are  often  found  on  the  roads  leading  to  ancient  temples.     Sub-


CH.  XXXIII  RHAMNUS  455

sequent  research  has  confirmed  Vischer's  view.  Not  only  have  many
of  the  ancient  marble  blocks  here  been  found  to  belong  to  tombs,  but
the  excavations  of  the  Greek  Archaeological  Society  in  1 89 1  led  to  the
discovery  of  the  sanctuary  of  Amphiaraus,  which  Mela  mentions  (ii.  46)
as  one  of  the  things  for  which  Rhamnus  was  renowned.  The  sanctuary
is  on  a  lofty  and  very  steep  height  opposite  to  the  fortress,  on  the  left  of
the  road  which  leads  to  the  fortress  from  the  temple  of  Nemesis.  It
occupies  a  platform  hewn  out  of  the  rock  and  enlarged,  where  the  rock
falls  away  abruptly,  by  a  wall  of  polygonal  masonry.  The  platform  thus
constructed  measures  36  feet  by  1 5  feet  Inscriptions  prove  that  the
sanctuary  was  dedicated  to  "  Amphiaraus,  the  Hero  Physician."  Two
headless  statues,  of  common  workmanship,  were  found  in  the  sanctuary,
one  of  them  lying  on  an  inscribed  pedestal  which  occupies  its  original
position.  The  inscription  on  this  pedestal  pi'oves  that  Amphiaraus  here
bore  the  surname  of  Aristomachus,  which  was  the  name  of  the  Hero
Physician  at  Marathon  (see  above,  p.  436).  In  this  sanctuary  of
Amphiaraus  some  fragments  of  votive  reliefs  were  discovered,  which  in
style  and  subject  resemble  those  found  in  the  sanctuary  of  Aesculapius
at  Athens.  These  sculptures  have  been  removed  to  the  National
Museum  at  Athens.

Sec  Raikes,  in  Walpole's  Memoirs  relating  to  Turkey ^  i.  pp.  308-310 ;  The
Unedited  Antiquities  of  Attica  (London,  18 1 7),  chs.  vi.  and  vii.  pp.  41-52,  with
plates  giving  plans,  restorations,  etc  of  the  temples  of  Nemesis  and  Themis ;  Leake,
Northern  Greece,  2.  pp.  433*435;  id,,  Athens,  2.  pp.  105- ill ;  Wordsworth,  Athens
and  Attica,  pp.  26-36  ;  Welcker,  Tagebuch,  i.  pp.  132-134;  L.  Ross,  Wanderungen,
2.  p.  160  sq, ;  id.,  Archdologische  Aufsdtte,  2.  pp.  397-401  ;  id,,  Erinnerungen  und
Afittheilungen  aus  Griecfunland,  p.  193  sq. ;  W.  Vischer,  Erinnerungen  und
EindriUke,  pp.  84-86 ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  I.  p.  341  sq.  ;  H.  G.  Lolling,  '  Bericht
iiber  Ausgrabungen  in  Rhamnus,'  Mittheu.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  At  hen,  4  (1 879),
pp.  277-286  ;  n^rrticd  r^  'A/)xa(o\.  *£rcup.,  for  1 880,  p.  12  sq.  ;  G.  J.  Schneider,
'Die  Akropolis  von  Rhamnus,'  Berliner  philolog.  IVochenschrift,  4  (18S4),  pp.
1305-1312;  P.  Kastromenos,  Demen,  pp.  66-68;  A.  Milchhofer,  '  Antikenbericht
aus  Attika,'  Mittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  At  hen,  12  (1887),  p.  316  x^.  ;  Baedeker,'
p.  \y>sq.;  GuicU'Joanne,  I.  pp.  179-182;  tkikriov  dpxo^io\oyiK6p,  for  1 890,  pp.
115-117,  134;  id.,  for  1891,  pp.  98,  116  sq.  ;  ^E^nifieplt  dpxf^oXoyiKi/i,  for  1891,
pp.  45-62,  with  plates  4,  5,  6,  7  ;  P.  Cawadias,  rXwrrd  roD  *EdpiKO\)  idovcelov,  I.
Nos.  199,  231,  232  ;  IIpaKTiKd  rrfl  ^ApxcuoXcryiKTJt  'Ercup^af,  for  1890,  pp.  27-30 ;  id.,
for  1891,  pp.  13-18  ;  id.,  for  1892,  pp.  29-31  ;  Athenaeum,  No.  3287,  Oct.  25, 1890,
p.  SS4sq.  ;  id..  No.  3293,  Dec  6,  1890,  p.  783  ;  American  Journal  of  Archaeology,
6  (1890),  pp.  565-568;  id,,  8  (1893),  p.  269  ;  Mittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  A  then,
15  (1890),  p.  349  sq. ;  id.,  18  (1893),  p.  255  ;  Bull,  de  Corr.  HelUnique,  15  (1891),
p.  647  sq.  \  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  12  (1891),  p.  391  sq.  ;  id.,  13  (1892-93),
p.  144.

33.  3.  Of  this  very  marble  Phidias  wronght  an  image  of  Nemesis

etc.  The  image  was  10  cubits  high  (Zenobius,  v.  82  ;  Hesychius,  s.v.
^Pafivova-ia  Ne/Aco-ts).  It  was  much  admired  for  its  beauty  and  size
(Strabo,  ix.  p.  396)  ;  Varro  even  preferred  it  to  all  other  statues  (Pliny,
N.  H.  xxxvi.  17).  The  possession  of  such  a  treasure  naturally  shed
lustre  on  the  little  town  of  Rhamnus  (Mela,  ii.  46).  But  ancient  writers
are  not  agreed  as  to  the  sculptor  of  this  famous  image.  According  to
Pausanias,  Zenobius  (v.  82),  Mela  (ii.  46),  Tzetzes  (quoted  by  Overbeck,
SchriftqueHefiy    Nos.  838,  839),  and   the   lexicographers   (Hesychius,


456  RHAMNUS  BK.  I.  ATTICA

Suidas,  Photius,  s.v.  Ta^ivowria  N€/i€(ris),  the  image  was  by  Phidias.
According  to  Pliny  i^N,  H,  xxxvi.  1 7)  and  others  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  396),  the
image  was  by  Agoracritus  of  Paros,  a  favourite  pupil  of  Phidias.  Pliny
tells  a  story  (/.r.)  that  Agoracritus  and  Alcamenes  of  Athens,  another
pupil  of  Phidias,  each  made  an  image  of  Aphrodite  for  a  competition  at
Athens,  and  that  Alcamenes  won  the  prize,  not  through  the  intrinsic
merit  of  his  work,  but  through  the  partiality  of  the  judges,  who  preferred
a  native  sculptor  to  a  foreigner.  Hence  (continues  Pliny)  in  selling  his
statue  the  indignant  Agoracritus  stipulated  that  it  should  not  be  set  up
in  Athens  and  he  changed  the  name  of  the  statue  to  Nemesis  ;  it  was
finally  placed  at  Rhamnus.  Some  of  those  who  held  that  the  statue
was  by  Phidias  admitted  that  the  sculptor,  out  of  affection  for  Agoracritus^
had  allowed  him  to  pass  it  off  as  his  own  by  means  of  an  inscription
attached  to  the  statue  (Zenobius,  Tzetzes,  Suidas,  Photius,  ILcc)  ;  accord-
ing to  Antigonus  of  Carystus  the  inscription  was  engraved  on  a  tidcet
which  hung  from  the  apple-branch  in  the  goddess's  hand  (Zenobius,  Lc^
The  question  which  thus  divided  the  ancients  is  one  which  we  have  no
means  of  deciding.  Prof.  v.  Wilamowitz-MdllendorfF  has  some  remarks
on  the  subject  {Antigonos  von  Karystos^  p.  10  sqq.)  The  story,  told  by
Pausanias  and  by  poets  in  the  Anthology  {Anthol.  Paiat.y  Appendix
Planudea,  Nos.  221,  222,  263),  that  the  statue  was  carved  out  of  a
block  of  Parian  marble  which  the  Persians  brought  with  them,  intending
to  make  a  trophy  out  of  it,  is  probably  a  popular  fable  or  the  figment  of
a  moralising  rhetorician.

Part  of  a  colossal  female  head  of  Parian  marble  was  found  among
the  ruins  of  the  temple  of  Nemesis  at  Rhamnus  in  the  early  part  of  the
nineteenth  century  and  is  now  in  the  British  Museum.  The  fragment
includes  the  right  cheek,  right  eyelid,  and  right  side  of  the  head  as  £ur
as  the  ear  ;  the  hair  is  wavy  ;  on  the  crown  of  the  head  eleven  holes  are
pierced  in  the  marble,  clearly  for  the  purpose  of  attaching  a  diadem  or
other  ornament.  The  style  resembles  that  of  the  Parthenon  sculptors.
Thus  the  style,  material,  and  place  of  discovery  all  combine  to  make  it
probable  that  this  fragment  is  a  piece  of  the  famous  statue  of  Nemesis.
The  crown  ornamented  with  deers  and  figures  of  Victory,  which  Pausanias
has  described,  was  probably  of  gold  or  of  gilt  bronze,  and  it  would  be
attached  by  means  of  the  holes  which  are  still  to  be  seen  in  the  existing
fragment  of  the  head.  See  A.  S.  Murray,  History  0/  Greek  Sculpture^
2.  p.  134  sq, ;  O.  Rossbach,  ^Zur  Nemesis  des  Agorakritos,'  MUtketi,
d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  15  (1890),  pp.  64-71  ;  A.  H.  Smith,  CcUalogut
of  Sculpture  in  the  British  Museum^  i.  No.  460.  Further,  through  the
excavations  of  the  Greek  Archaeological  Society  in  1890  there  were
discovered  in  the  temple  of  Nemesis  a  number  of  pieces  of  small  figures
which  probably  adorned  the  base  of  the  statue,  as  described  by  Pausanias
(§  7  ^9-)  ^^®  figures,  as  the  fragments  (Fig.  40)  prove,  were  of-small  size
and  in  very  high  relief;  the  material  is  marble  from  one  or  other  of  the
Greek  islands,  probably  from  Paros.  The  style  of  the  reliefs  is  considered
by  Mr.  Cavvadias  to  be  that  of  the  Parthenon  sculptures  in  miniature.
The  pieces  include  two  whole  female  heads  and  the  upper  part  of  a
third  ;  the  head  of  a  young  man  (wrongly  interpreted  by  Mr.  Stacs  as


the  head  of  a  woman) ;  the  head  of  a.  horse,  the  lips  and  nostrils  being
broken  off ;  a  female  torso  from  the   hips  to  the  knees  ;  a  female  bust.


without  the  head ;  a  male  torso  trom  the  shoulders  to  below  the  w
fragments  of  drapery,  etc.     The  horse's  head  probably  belonged  ti


45^  RHAMXUS  bk.  i.  attica

horse  mentioned  by  Pausanias  (.^  8) ;  the  identification  of  the  other
fragments  with  the  figures  described  by  Pausanias  can  only  be  a  matter
of  conjecture.  See  AcArtov  ap;(au>Xayiicdi',  1 890,  p.  \\^  sq.  \  'E,<f>rjfjL€pis
apxatoXjofyitcrj,  1^91)  PP*  63-70;  P.  Cav\'adias,  FAiTra  rov  ^E&vucw
Motxrcioi;,  I.  Nos.  203-214;  P.  Wolters,  in  Miiiheil.  d.  arch,  Inst,  in
Athen^  1 5  (1890),  p.  349  ;  E.  A.  Gardner,  in  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies^
12  (1891),  p.  391  ;  Overbeck,  Gesch,  d,  griech.  Plastik^^  i.  p.  383;
L.  Pallat,  '  Die  Basis  der  Nemesis  von  Rhamnus,'  Jahrbuch  d.  arckaoL
Instituts^  9  (1894),  pp.  1-22.  Leake  seems  to  have  seen  these  or  other
fragments  of  the  reliefs  described  by  Pausanias.  He  says :  *•*•  Several
fragments  of  figures,  in  high  relief,  have  been  found  among  the  ruins  of
the  temple  of  Nemesis :  they  are  of  white  marble,  about  one  foot  in
height,  and  are  wrought  with  such  perfection,  that  we  may  easily  believe
them  to  have  been  a  part  of  that  composition,  in  relief,  on  the  basis  of
the  statue  of  Nemesis,  which,  as  well  as  the  statue  itself,  was  the  work
of  Phidias  "  (Leake,  Athens^  2.  p.  109  sq,)  On  a  coin  of  Cyprus  of  the
period  between  371  and  335  B.a  there  is  represented  a  very  fine  figure
of  a  goddess  which,  from  its  correspondence  nith  Pausanias's  description,
may  possibly  be  a  copy  of  the  Nemesis  of  Rhamnus.  The  goddess
stands  holding  in  her  right  hand  a  bowl  and  in  her  left  a  branch  of  a
tree  ;  on  her  head  is  a  wreath  ;  she  wears  a  tunic  drawn  in  at  the  waist ;
a  mantle  hangs  from  her  shoulders  behind.  The  figure  is  massive  and
in  high  relief.  See  J.  P.  Six,  *  Aphroditd-N^m^sis,'  Numismatic  Chronicle^
3d  series,  2  (1882),  pp.  89-102  ;  P.  Gardner,  Types  of  Greek  Coins,  p.
170,  with  pi.  X.  27  ;  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  on  Paus.
p.  151.  Prof.  A.  Furtwangler  conjectures  that  the  colossal  statue  of
Ceres  in  the  Vatican  is  a  copy  of  the  Nemesis  of  Rhamnus  {Aleisterwerhe
der  griechischen  Plastik^  p.  119).

33.  3.  a  crown  omainented  with  deers  and  small  figures  of
Victory.  These  figures  of  Victory  have  been  explained  as  symbolical
of  the  victory  of  Marathon  (L.  Ross,  Archdologische  Aufsdtse,  2.  p.  398
note  4 ;  F.  G.  Welcker,  GriechiscJie  Gdtterlehre,  3.  p.  28).  Prof.  Studniczka
supposes  that,  taken  along  with  the  deers,  they  represent  the  *  Mistress
of  the  Beasts'  (Trorvia  Oi)piov),  a  winged  goddess  who  is  often  depicted
in  archaic  Greek  art,  her  dominion  over  the  beasts  being  indicated  by
the  wild  creatures  whom  she  grasps  by  the  paws,  the  tail,  or  the  throat
(Studniczka,  Kyrene,  p.  153  sqq.^  especially  p.  159  sqq.)  But  it  does
not  appear  that  these  figures  of  Victory  on  the  crown  of  Nemesis  were
represented  grasping  the  deer.

33.  3.  a  bowl,  on  which  are  worked  figures  of  Ethiopians  etc
L.  Ross  conjectured  that  these  figures  of  Ethiopians  symbolised  the
vanquished  host  of  Orientals  {Archdologische  Aufsdtze,  2.  p.  398  note
4).  There  were  Ethiopians  in  the  army  of  Xerxes  (Herodotus,  vii.  69).
The  black  races  of  Africa  are  figured  not  uncommonly  in  Greek  and
Roman  art.  See  Monumenti  Inediti^  i.  pi.  xxxv.  ;  id.,  8.  pi.  xvi. ;
Gazette  Arc ht^ologique,  3  (1877),  pi.  19  ;  /V/.,  5  (1879),  P-  209  sq.,  with
pL  28  ;  id.,  9  (1884),  pp.  204-206,  with  pi.  27  (fine  bronze  head  of  a
negro);  id.,  10  (1885),  pp.  335-337;  'l^<t>rjfi€pls  dpxaiokoyiKT/j,  1894,
pp.  12 1- 1 28,  with  pi.  6.


CH.  xxxiii  THE  TABLE  OP  THE  SUN  459

33.  3.  Ocean  is  the  father  of  Nemesis.  Cp.  vii.  5.  3 ;  Tzetzes,
SchoL  on  Lycophron^  88.

33.  4.  the  Fish-eaters.  Their  manner  of  life  is  described  in  detail
by  Diodorus  (iii.  1 5-20).

33.  4-  the  Table  of  the  Son.  Cp.  vi.  26.  2.  The  Table  of  the
Sun  was  in  the  land  of  the  Long-lived  Ethiopians,  who  dwelt  on  the
Southern  Sea  (the  Indian  Ocean).  It  was  said  to  be  a  meadow  in
the  suburb  of  their  city ;  every  night  the  rulers  set  forth  great  piles
of  the  boiled  flesh  of  all  kinds  of  quadrupeds,  and  every  day  all  who
chose  came  and  partook  of  the  meat,  in  the  belief  that  it  was  pro-
duced spontaneously  from  the  ground.  King  Cambyses  sent  spies
among  these  Ethiopians  to  see  and  report  on  the  Table  of  the  Sun
(Herodotus,  iii.  17  sq.\  Mela,  iii.  87;  Solinus,  xxx.  10,  p.  147,  ed.
Mommsen).

33.  5.  The  Nasamonians  are  called  Atlantes  by  Herodotus  etc.
Herodotus  says  (iv.  184)  that  the  inhabitants  of  Mt.  Atlas  were  called
Atlantes,  but  he  does  not  identify  the  Atlantes  with  the  Nasamonians,
whose  manner  of  life  he  describes  (iv.  172  and  182).  He  tells  us  that
in  summer  the  Nasamonians  left  their  flocks  beside  the  sea  and  went  up
to  a  place  called  Augila,  where  they  gathered  the  dates  in  a  forest  of
stately  palms.  They  also  caught  locusts,  dried  them  in  the  sun,  and
ate  them  with  milk.  Cp.  Diodorus,  iii.  49  ;  Pliny,  N.  H,  v.  33.  The
Nasamonians  "  were  one  of  the  most  restless  desert  tribes  of  antiquity.
They  dwelt  beside  the  Great  Syrtis,  sometimes  near  the  coast,  some-
times further  inland  ;  by  their  robberies  by  sea  and  land  they  made  the
whole  country  unsafe  (Silius  Italicus,  i.  408  ;  Quintus  Curtius,  iv.  7.  19  ;
Lucan,  ix.  431-441),  whereby  they  often  drew  attacks  on  themselves.
The  trade  between  the  coast  and  the  interior  was  in  their  hands,  hence
they  were  justly  considered  to  have  the  best  knowledge  of  the  Sahara.
It  has  been  proposed  to  recognise  their  descendants  in  the  people,  now
called  NefzAwa  by  the  Arabs,  who  inhabit  the  same  districts  "  (A.  Wiede-
mann, note  on  Herodotus,  ii.  32).  The  Lixitae,  whom  Pausanias  con-
sidered identical  with  the  Nasamonians,  would  seem  to  have  been
a  totally  different  tribe.  They  were  a  nomad  and  pastoral  people  on
the  shore  of  the  Atlantic,  dwelling  beside  a  great  river  called  the
Lixus,  which  was  probably  either  the  Wady  Nun  or  the  VVady  Draa
in  the  south  of  Morocco.  Hanno  the  Carthaginian,  on  his  exploring
voyage  down  the  west  coast  of  Africa,  stayed  among  the  Lixitae
for  a  time,  and  took  some  of  the  men  with  him  as  interpreters  when
he  resumed  his  voyage  (Hanno,  Periplus^  6-8,  11,  with  C.  MSller's
note  on  6).

33.  6.  The  water  of  Atlas  is  turbid,  and  at  the  spring  there
were  crocodiles  etc.  There  seem  to  be  no  crocodiles  now  in  the  region
of  the  Atlas  mountains  (see  Reclus,  Nouvelle  Geographic  Universelle^
II.  p.  685  sq.)  ;  but  Polybius,  who  explored  the  west  coast  of  Africa  in
command  of  a  Roman  squadron,  while  his  patron  and  friend  Scipio  was
besieging  Carthage,  found  crocodiles  in  two  West  African  rivers,  the
Darat  and  the  Bambotus  ;  the  latter  river  swarmed  with  hippopotamuses
as  well  as  crocodiles  (Pliny,  A^.  H,  v.  9  sq,)     The  Bambotus  is  probably


46o  MOUNT  ATLAS  bk.  i.  attica

the  Senegal,  which  of  course  lies  far  to  the  south  of  the  Atlas.  Hanno
the  Carthaginian  seems  to  have  found  crocodiles  and  hippopotamuses  in
the  same  river  (Hanno,  Periplus^  lo,  with  C.  M tiller's  note).  Pausanias
may  have  heard  vaguely  of  the  crocodiles  of  West  Africa  and  have
wrongly  supposed  that  they  were  to  be  found  in  the  Atlas.     His  use  of

the  past  tense  in  speaking  of  the  crocodiles  ("  there  were  crocodiles

they  plunged  into  the  spring")  seems  to  show  that  he  is  copying  from
some  narrative  of  travels.  But  this  narrative  can  hardly  have  been
Polybius's  lost  journal  of  his  voyage,  since  Pausanias  asserts  that  no  one
had  ever  voyaged  along  the  western  seaboard  of  the  Atlas.  Apparentiy
he  had  never  heard  ofi  or  he  had  forgotten,  the  exploring  voyages  of
Hanno  and  Polybius,  not  to  speak  of  the  Phoenician  and  Persian  voyages
mentioned  by  Herodotus  (iv.  42  sq,^  The  report  that  crocodiles  were
to  be  foimd  in  the  rivers  of  West  Africa  appears  to  have  given  rise
to  the  notion,  mentioned  by  Pausanias,  that  the  sources  of  the  Nile
were  in  this  region.  Strabo,  speaking  of  Mauretania,  says  (x^ni.
p.  826)  :  "They  say  that  the  rivers  contain  crocodiles  and  other  kinds
of  beasts  like  those  in  the  Nile ;  some  people  even  imagine  that  the
sources  of  the  Nile  are  near  the  frontiers  of  Mauretania."  Cp.  Mela,
iii.  96.

33.  6.  Atlas  is  so  lofty  that  it  is  said  to  touch  the  sky  etc.
According  to  Herodotus  (iv.  1 84)  Atlas  was  so  lofty  that  its  summit
could  not  be  seen,  being  always  hidden  by  clouds,  both  sununer  and
winter.  Pliny,  who  calls  Atlas  the  most  fabulous  of  African  mountains,
mentions  the  belief  that  the  peak  of  the  mountain  soared  not  only  above
the  clouds,  but  even  into  the  neighbourhood  of  the  moon's  orbit  (A".  H,
V.  5  and  7;  cp.  Solinus,  xxiv.  8,  p.  122  sq,^  ed.  Mommsen).  Mela
informs  us  (iii.  loi)  that  Atlas  was  said  not  only  to  touch  but  to  support
the  sky  and  the  stars.  Suetonius  Paulinus,  the  first  Roman  general
who  crossed  the  Atlas,  reported  that  its  top  was  hidden  by  thick  clouds
even  in  summer,  and  that  dense  forests  of  tall  trees  of  an  unknown
species,  with  leaves  like  those  of  the  cypress,  stretched  along  the
foot  of  the  mountain  (Pliny,  N,  H,  v.  14).  The  highest  peak  of  the
Atlas  is  not  less  than  1 5,000  feet  high ;  it  is  now  called  Tizi-n
Tamjurt  (Joseph  Thomson,  Trar^els  in  the  Ailcu  and  Southern  MoroccOy
p.  462).

33.  7-  the  most  holy  wooden  images  at  Smyrna.  Cp.  viL  5.  3
with  the  note ;  ix.  35.  6.

33.  7.  They  say  that  Nemesis  was  the  mother  of  Helen  etc.
The  story  went  that  Nemesis,  to  shun  the  importunities  of  Zeus,  turned
herself  into  a  goose  ;  that  Zeus,  not  to  be  baffled,  turned  himself  into  a
swan  ;  and  that  as  the  result  of  this  amour  Nemesis  laid  an  t%^y  which
a  shepherd  found  and  brought  to  Leda,  who  put  it  in  a  box,  and  when
the  egg  was  hatched,  Helen  came  forth  (.•Vpollodorus,  iiu  10.  7  ;  Tzetzes,
Schol.  on  Lycophron^  88).  .A.ccording  to  one  writer,  the  meeting  of
Zeus  and  Nemesis,  in  bird  shape,  took  place  at  Rhamnus  (Eratosthenes,
Catastensmi^  25).

33.  8.  Oenoe,  firom  whom  the  township  gets  its  name.  There
were  two  to>*Tiships  called  Oenoe  in  Attica  (see  note  on  L  15.  i).      The


CH.  xxxiii  ICARJA  461

one  to  which  Pausanias  here  refers  is  probably  the  Oenoe  near  Mara-
thon (see  i.  32.  3  note).

Before  accompanying  Pausanias  to  Oropus,  it  may  be  fitting  here  to
notice  a  township  in  this  district  of  Attica  which  he  has  omitted  to  men-
tion but  at  which  some  remains  of  antiquity  have  been  discovered  in
recent  years.  This  is  Icaria  or  Icarium,  famous  in  legend  as  the  first
seat  of  the  worship  of  Dionysus  in  Attica.  (The  form  Icaria  is  attested
by  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v,  ;  the  form  Icarium  by  Athenaeus,  ii.  p.
40  a;  Porphyry,  De  abstineniia^  ii.  10;  and  Suidas,  s.w.  %ecnrvi  and
Mayv»/s.  Thus  the  form  Icarium  seems  to  be  the  more  correct,  though
modem  writers  have  adopted  the  other.)  Icaria  was  a  township  of  the
tribe  Aegeis  ;  it  was  believed  to  take  its  name  from  Icarius  the  father  of
Erigone  (Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v,  *lKapia),  When  Dionysus  first
visited  Attica,  Icarius  received  him  hospitably  ;  so  the  god  rewarded
him  with  a  gift  of  wine,  and  bade  him  communicate  the  blessing  to  man-
kind. Icarius  obeyed ;  but  some  shepherds,  drinking  themselves  drunk
on  the  new  liquor,  imagined  that  Icarius  had  poisoned  them  ;  so  they
incontinently  knocked  him  on  the  head.  His  disconsolate  daughter
Erigone,  led  to  the  body  of  her  murdered  father  by  the  faithful  dog
Maera,  hung  herself  on  a  tree  beside  him.  To  atone  for  these  deaths
the  Athenians  instituted  a  festival  at  which  people,  or  puppets  in  their
stead,  were  swung  to  and  fro  on  swings.  See  Apollodorus,  iii.  14.  7  ;
Hyginus,  Fad.  130  ;  /V/.,  Astronomica^  ii.  4  ;  Servius,  on  Virgil,  Georg,
ii.  389  ;  Lucian,  DiaL  deorum^  xviii.  2  ;  E.  Maass,  Analecta  Erato-
sthenica^  p.  59  sqq,  ;  C.  Botticher,  Baumkulius  der  Hellenen,  pp.  80-89  J
Leist,  Graeco-Iialische  Rechtsgeschichfe^  p.  271  sgg.\  Miss  Harrison,
Ancient  A tJiens^  p.  xxxviii.  sqq.  Cp.  Paus.  i.  2.  5  with  the  notes.  It  was
in  the  woods  of  Marathon,  according  to  Statius  (Theb.  xi.  644-647),
that  Erigone  found  her  father's  corpse  and  hung  herself  on  a  forest-tree.
This  goes  to  show  that  Icaria,  the  home  of  Icarius,  was  not  far  from
Marathon.  Tragedy  and  comedy  were  said  to  have  been  invented  in
Icaria  (Athenaeus,  ii.  p.  40  a) ;  and  here  a  goat  was  sacrificed  for  the
first  time  because  it  had  nibbled  at  the  \'ine  (Porphyry,  De  abstinentia^
ii.  10).  The  tragic  poet  Thespis  and  the  comic  poet  Magnes  were
both  natives  of  Icaria  (Suidas,  s,w.  GeoTris  and  May»o;s).

The  situation  of  Icaria,  the  earliest  home  of  Dionysus  in  Attica,  is
solitary  but  pleasing.  It  lies  in  a  wooded  dell  at  the  foot  of  the  northern
forest-clad  slopes  of  Mt.  Pentelicus.  A  reminiscence  of  the  Dionysiac
worship  for  which  Icaria  was  famous  in  antiquity  survives  in  the  name
Dionysos^  by  which  the  place  is  still  known  to  the  people  of  the  neigh-
bourhood. There  is  no  village  here,  only  a  long  straggling  house
occasionally  inhabited  by  the  peasants  who  come  hither  to  gather  resin
in  the  surrounding  pine  woods.  Eastward  the  ground  slopes  in  terraces,
intersected  by  runnels  and  shaded  by  plane-trees,  to  a  wooded  glen  where,
not  far  from  a  cave  in  the  side  of  the  ravine,  a  stream  tumbles  over
rocks  in  a  picturesque  cascade.  Similar  glens,  their  sides  clothed  with
luxuriant  vegetation,  divide  Dionysos  from  the  deserted  village  of  Rapen-
tosa  situated  only  about  a  mile  to  the  east,  the  inhabitants  of  which  were
forced  to  flee  before  the  bands  of  robbers  who,  not  many  years  ago^


462  JCARJA  BK.  I.  ATTICA

1

infested  this  wild  and  secluded  district.  A  pleasant  excursion  can  be
made  from  Athens  to  Icaria  and  back  in  a  day  by  taking  a  morning
train  to  Cephisia  on  the  south  side  of  Mt.  Pentelicus,  then  walking  or
riding  round  the  north-west  shoulder  of  the  mountain,  and  so  through  the
beautiful  woods  and  dingles  at  its  northern  foot  to  Icaria.  (I  understand
that  these  woods  have  suffered  greatly  by  fire  since  I  walked  through
them  on  a  summer  day  in  1890.)  The  distance  from  Cephisia  to  Icaria
is  about  seven  miles.

The  site  of  Icaria  was  first  identified  by  Prof.  A.  Milchhofer  on  May
9th,  1887.      It  has  since  been  excavated  by  the  archaeologists  of  the
American  School.       The  ruins,  inconsiderable  in  extent,  lie  in  the  open
glade    surrounded    by    woods    and  thickets.      A   ruined   chapel   which
occupied  part  of  the  site  has   been   demolished   in  the  course   of  the
excavations.       Among  the  ancient  remains  is  a  semi-circular  monument
of  marble  erected,  as  the  inscription  informs  us  (C,  I,  A.  ii.  No.   1 3 1 7  ;
Rangab^,  Antiquitds  HelUniqueSy  No.  985),  by  Aenias,  Xanthippus,  and
Xanthides  for  a  victory  which  they  had  obtained,  probably  with  a  chorus
in  a  dramatic  competition.     There  are  also  some  remains  of  a  small
temple  which  faced   south-east.      It  consisted  of  a  sacred  chamber  or
cella^  about  2 1  feet  square,  with  a  portico.     In  the  middle  of  the  cella  is
a  square  pedestal  or  altar  formed  of  four  slabs  of  mica-schist  enclosing  a
mass  of  small  stones.       On  the  stone  which  forms  the  threshold  of  the
temple  there  is  an  inscription  in  letters  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  stating
that  the  temple  is  "the  Pythium  of  the  Icarians."     This  shows  that  the
temple  was  a  sanctuary  of  the  Pythian  Apollo.      It  is  unusual,  if  not  un-
paralleled, for  a  Greek  temple  to  have  its  name  thus  inscribed  on  its
threshold.      In  front  of  the  temple,  but  not  parallel  with  it,  is  a  large
basement  or  platform  composed  of  at  least  twenty  marble  slabs,  fifteen
of  which  are  still  in   their  original  places.     This  may  have  been  the
great  altar.       A  little  beyond  this  basement,  to  the  south-east,  are  two
massive  marble  seats.       Other  seats  of  the  same  sort  were  found  near
the  chapel.     They  seem  originally  to  have  stood  together  in  a  row  of
five  to  the  south-east  of  the  great  altar.     Among  the  sculptures  found
on  the  site  are  the  fragments  (head,  torso,  feet,  and  one  hand)  of  a
colossal  seated  statue  of  a  very  archaic  type,  probably  a  Dionysus ;  the
face  is  bearded  and  the  hair  over  the  brow  is  curled,  the  hand  grasps  a
goblet.      There  is  also  an  archaic  torso  of  a  male  figure  resembling  the
so-called  Apollos  which  have  been  found  at  Tenea,  Thera,  Orchomenus
etc.  (see  note  on  ii.  5.  4).     Some  graceful  reliefs,  apparently  votive  and
sepulchral,  have  also  been  discovered.     Amongst  them  may  be  noted
one    which   seems  to    represent    Hercules,  distinguished  by  his  club,
surrounded  by  the  Muses  ;  and  a  tombstone  adorned  with  the  headless
figure  of  a  warrior  in  flat  relief,  resembling  very  closely  the  well-known
tombstone  of  Aristion  (see  A.  S.  Murray,  History  of  Greek  Sculpture f
I.  p.  139  sqq,y  where  the  two  tombstones  are  figured  side  by  side  ;  cp.
also  Collignon,  Hist,  de  la  Sculpture  Grecque^  i.  p.  386  sq.)     All  the
sculptures  appear  to  be  of  Pentelic  marble.     Among  the  inscriptions
which  have  been  found  is  one  containing  a  decree  of  the   Icarians
thanking  their  mayor  Nicon  for  the  way  in  which  he  had  managed


CH.  XXXIV  OROPUS  463

the  festival  and  games  of  Dionysus ;  another  contains  a  fragment
of  a  decree  of  the  Icarians  about  the  legal  process  called  *  exchange
of  goods '  {antidosis)  which  has  puzzled  modem  scholars ;  two
others  relate  to  the  making  and  dedication  of  images  of  Dionysus
and  Aphrodite  ;  another  is  a  dedication  to  Dionysus  by  Cephisius
of  Icaria ;  another  is  a  dedication  to  Dionysus  by  a  man  Archippus
who  had  won  the  prize  with  a  chorus  ;  another  is  a  dedication  by
three  men  (Ergasus,  Phanomachus,  and  Diognetus)  who  had  won  a
prize  with  a  tragic  chorus.  These  inscriptions  abundantly  prove  that
the  place  where  they  were  found  was  a  seat  of  the  worship  of  Dionysus
and  that  the  place  was  Icaria.

See  A.  Milchhofer,  in  Berliner  philolog,  IVocheftschrift,  7  (1887),  PP*  77^77^  »
/V/.,  *  Antikenbericht  aus  Attika,'  MittheiL  d,  arch,  hist,  in  Athcn^  12  (l887)»  p.
311  sq.\  id.,  Karten  von  Atiika,  Erldut.    Text,   iii.-vi.  p.   1J5   sq.  ;   American
Journal  of  Archaeology,  4  (1888),  pp.  44-48,  421-426  ;  id.,  5  (1889),  pp.  9-33,  154-  '
181,  304-319,  461-477.

34.  I.  The  land  of  Oropus,  between  Attica  and  the  territory  of
Tanagra  etc.  The  district  of  Oropus,  situated  on  the  borders  of  Attica
and  Boeotia,  was  long  a  bone  of  contention  between  the  two  states  (cp.
Strabo,  ix.  p.  399).  Geographically  regarded,  it  belongs  to  Boeotia
rather  than  to  Attica,  since  it  occupies  the  maritime  plain  through
which  the  Asopus  flows  into  the  sea,  and  all  the  upper  valley  of  the
Asopus  is  in  Boeotia.  At  what  time  the  Athenians  flrst  gained  possession
of  Oropus  is  not  definitely  known ;  probably  it  was  in  507  B.C.  when  they
conquered  Chalcis  in  Euboea  (Herodotus,  v.  77).  When  the  Persians
were  advancing  against  Eretriain  490  B.C.,  an  Athenian  force,  falling
back  before  them,  crossed  the  strait  to  Oropus  and  so  marched  home
(Herodotus,  vi.  loi),  which  implies  that  Oropus  then  belonged  to
Athens.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Peloponnesian  war  (43 1  B.C.)  and  for
a  good  many  years  afterwards  Oropus  was  subject  to  the  Athenians
(Thucydides,  ii.  23,  iv.  99).  But  in  412  B.C.  it  fell  into  the  hands  of
the  Boeotians  (Thucydides,  viii.  60),  who  seem,  however,  to  have  left  it
independent.  Party  strife  led  in  402  B.C.  to  the  intervention  of  the
Thebans,  who  removed  the  population  to  a  distance  of  about  seven
Greek  furlongs  from  the  sea,  and  sometime  afterwards  annexed  the
district  to  the  Boeotian  federation  (Diodorus,  xiv.  1 7).  Not  very  many
years  later,  perhaps  in  383  B.C.  after  the  Spartans  had  seized  the
citadel  of  Thebes,  the  Oropians  voluntarily  surrendered  their  land  to  the
Athenians  (Isocrates,  xiv.  20).  In  366  B.C.  the  Thebans  succeeded  in
regaining  possession  of  Oropus  (Diodorus,  xv.  76 ;  cp.  Xenophon,
Hellenica,  vii.  4.  i  ;  Aeschines,  ii.  85) ;  but  after  his  conquest  of  Thebes
in  338  B.C.  Philip  of  Macedonia  restored  Oropus  to  Athens,  as  we  learn
from  the  present  passage  of  Pausanias.  The  hilly  part  of  the  country
was  divided  between  the  Attic  tribes  Acamantis  and  Hippothontis ;
and  when  both  tribes  laid  claim  to  the  same  hill,  the  question  in  dispute
was  submitted  to  the  oracle  of  Amphiaraus  (Hyperides,  Pro  Euxenippo^
p.  40,  ed.  Blass).  Pausanias  seems  to  imply  that  from  338  B.C.  down
to  his  own  time  the  Athenians  remained  in  undisturbed  possession  of


464  OROPUS  BK.  I.  ATTICA

Oropus.      But  if  this  is  his  meaning,  he  is  wrong;  for  by  319  b.c
Oropus  was  independent  (Diodorus,  xviii.   56),  having  been  probably
detached  from  Athens  in  322  B.c.  at  the  close  of  the  Lamian  war.     In
313  or  312  B.C.  Cassander  captured  Oropus  and  placed  a  garrison  in  it ;
but  the  place  was  soon  afterwards  retaken  by  Ptolemy,  who  restored  it
to  Boeotia  (Diodorus,  xix.  'J^  and  78).     From  this  time  down  to  the  close
of  the  first  century  B.c  Oropus  appears  to  have  been  generally  either
a  member  of  the  Boeotian  federation  or  independent.     Many   Oropian
inscriptions  belonging  to  this  period  are  dated  by  the  year  of  office  of
the  federal  archon  of  Boeotia  (C  /.  G.  G,  S.  Nos.  246,  247,  251,  254,
255,   261,  etc.),  proving  that  at  the  time  when  they  were  engraved
Oropus  belonged  to  the  Boeotian  federation  (cp.  F.  Diirrbach,  De  Oropo
et  Amphiarai  sacro,  p.  47  sgq.)     Two  inscriptions,  dated  by  the  year  of
the  archon  of  Oropus  and  the  priest  of  Amphiaraus,  without  any  men-
tion of  the  federal  archon,  seem  to  show  that  when  they  were  engraved
Oropus  was  independent ;  they  may  date  from  a  time  when  the  Boeotian
league  had  been  dissolved  by  the  Romans  (Diirrbach,  op,  cit,  p.  5  2  sq.)
About  156  B.C.  the  whole  population  of  Oropus  was  expelled  by  the
Athenians,  but  was  shortly  afterwards  restored  through  the  intervention
of  the  Achaean  League  (C  /.  G,  G.  5.  No.  411  ;  Pausanias,  vii.   1 1  sq,
with  the  notes).     An  inscription,  which  seems  to  date  from  the  latter  part
of  the  second  century  B.C.  or  the  first  part  of  the  first  century  B.C.,  men-
tions that  the  Athenian  lads  were  conducted  to  the  sanctuary  of  Amphi-
araus (at  Oropus),  and,  after  being  told  how  their  fathers  had  of  old
been   lords   and   guardians  of  the  shrine,   offered   sacrifices  and  then
returned  on  the  same  day  to  their  own  land  (C  /.  A.  ii.  No.  471,  cp.
Kohler,  tb.  p.   287).       In  Strabo's  time,  at  the  end  of  the  first  century
B.C.,  Oropus  was  still  reckoned  to  Boeotia  (Strabo,  ix.  pp.  391,  403).
But   in  Pausanias's  time  it  once  more  belonged  to  Attica ;  when  the
restoration  took  place  we  do  not  know.       And  it  continued  to  belong  to
Attica  in  the  days  of  Philostratus  {Vit  Apollon.  ii.  37).     The  rhetorician
Aristides,  a  contemporary  of  Pausanias,  speaks  of  the  Oropian  oracle  of
Amphiaraus  as  in  Boeotia  (Or,  vii.  vol.  i.  p.  78,  ed.  Dindorf),  but  this  is
probably  a  slip.

The  Oropians  were  reputed  to  be  a  race  of  hucksters,  mean,
avaricious,  and  grasping,  with  rough  and  truculent  manners.  Their
custom-house  officers  were  especially  notorious  for  their  exorbitant
demands  ;  an  exasperated  poet,  who  had  probably  suffered  at  their
hands,  declared  that  "  all  the  Oropians  are  custom-house  officers  and
all  of  them  are  rapacious.  May  they  perish  miserably  ! "  (Dicaearchus,
i.  7  and  25).

The  plain  of  Oropus  extends  along  the  shore  for  about  five  miles ;
inland  it  narrows  to  a  point,  two  or  three  miles  from  the  shore,  where
the  Asopus  issues  from  a  beautiful  defile  (see  note  on  ix.  20.  i).  At
this  inner  angle  of  the  plain  stand  the  modem  villages  of  Orapo  and
Sykamino  on  opposite  sides  of  the  river.  But  the  territory  of  Oropus
included  some  at  least  of  the  low  hills  which  environ  the  plain,  for  we
have  seen  (p.  463)  that  the  hills  of  Oropus  were  at  one  time  divided
between  two  Attic  tribes.     Moreover,   the  sanctuary  of  Amphiaraus,


CH.  XXXIV  OROPUS  465

which  belonged  to  Oropus,  stands  in  hilly  ground  to  the  east  of  the
plain.  The  whole  of  this  district,  lying  between  the  Euripus  and  the
northern  declivities  of  Mt.  Fames,  is  of  great  natural  beauty.  It  is  an
undulating  and  richly  wooded  country,  where  the  road  runs  between
soft  green  hills  and  knolls,  with  charming  and  varied  prospects  across
the  winding  waters  of  the  Euripus  to  the  blue  mountains  of  Euboea,
among  which  the  lofty  Delph  may  be  seen  glistering  white  with  snow
even  in  the  hot  days  of  summer.  The  traveller  who  comes  direct  from
the  monotonous  and  sterile  plain  of  Athens  is  struck,  on  emerging  from
the  wooded  pass  of  Decelea,  by  the  contrast  between  the  scene  which
he  has  left  behind  and  that  which  is  suddenly  unrolled  at  his  feet.  In
antiquity  this  road,  which  went  by  Aphidna  (see  above,  p.  163)  and
could  be  traversed  on  foot  in  a  day,  was  noted  for  the  number  and
excellence  of  its  inns  (Dicaearchus,  i.  6),  a  distinction  which  it  certainly
does  not  enjoy  now.

The  country  between  Oropus  and  Rhanmus,  through  which
Pausanias  conducts  his  readers,  is  of  similar  character.  Parallel  chains
of  hills  run  from  Mt.  Pames  to  the  high,  steep  coast ;  and  between
them  are  fruitful  valleys  watered  by  pleasant  brooks  and  embowered  in
luxuriant  vegetation,  with  thickets  where  the  song  of  the  nightingale
may  be  heard.

The  site  of  the  city  of  Oropus  is  now  occupied  by  Skala  Oropou^  i.e.
*  the  port  of  OropoJ  a  small  hamlet  prettily  situated  among  gardens,
meadows  and  springs,  on  the  shore  of  a  bay  which  is  formed  by  two
low  projecting  points  about  two  miles  asunder.  Across  the  water  the
white  houses  of  Eretria  are  clearly  visible  on  the  shore  of  Euboea  ;  the
mountains  above  them,  when  seen  at  evening  from  Oropus,  are  of  a
deep  azure  blue.  In  the  sea  at  Skala  Oropou  are  the  remains  of  an
ancient  breakwater  extending  parallel  to  the  shore.  Built  into  the
village  well  is  an  inscription  (C  /.  G,  G,  S.  No.  464),  and  some  archi-
tectural fragments  have  been  observed  in  the  ruined  church  of  the
Holy  Apostles.  At  the  back  of  the  hamlet  rises  a  steep  hill  of  moderate
height,  on  the  summit  of  which  are  some  ancient  foundation-walls,
probably  the  vestiges  of  the  acropolis.  In  the  bed  of  a  small  stream,
or  at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  nearer  the  sea,  Leake  saw  some  ancient  blocks.
Among  the  remains  of  antiquity  which  have  been  found  at  Skala
Oropou  is  a  beautiful  marble  relief  of  the  best  period  of  Greek  sculpture,
representing  Amphiaraus  and  his  charioteer  Baton  driving  in  a  car
drawn  by  four  horses ;  the  moment  chosen  by  the  sculptor  is  that  when
the  earth  gaped  to  receive  the  prophet ;  the  horses  are  starting  back  in
terror  at  the  sight  of  the  abyss  which  yawns  at  their  feet  (F.  G.  Welcker,
Anttke  Denkmdler,  2.  pp.  17 2- 181,  with  pi.  ix.  15,  x.  16).

The  situation  of  Skala  Oropou  agrees  well  with  the  description  of
Strabo,  who  says  (ix.  p.  403)  that  Oropus  was  opposite  to  Eretria  and
that  the  distance  between  them  across  the  strait  was  forty  Greek
furlongs.  The  actual  width  of  the  channel  between  the  two  points  is
about  five  miles.  Thucydides,  however,  puts  the  distance  across  the
sea  at  sixty  Greek  furlongs  (viii.  95),  which  is  too  much.  The  situation
of  Oropus  at  Skala  Oropou  is  confirmed  by  Dr.  Lolling*s  discovery  of

VOL.  II  2  H


466  SANCTUARY  OF  AMPHIARAUS  BK.  I.  ATTICA

the  remains  of  an  ancient  harbour  at  Kamaraki^  a  place  on  the  coast
about  an  hour  to  the  east  of  Skala  Oropou.  The  remains  are  under
water,  but  can  be  seen  from  a  boat  in  calm  weather  or  from  the  steep
hill  on  the  shore.  These  remains  are  doubtless  those  of  the  sacred
harbour  called  Delphinium,  which  lay  twenty  Greek  furlongs  to  the  east
of  Oropus  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  403).  See  H.  G.  Lolling,  *  Das  Delphinion
bei  Oropos  und  der  Demos  Psaphis,'  MittheiL  d.  arch.  Inst  in  Aihen^
10  (1885),  p.  350  sqq,  Leake,  indeed,  inclined  to  place  Oropus  at
Oropo^  the  modem  village  which  has  inherited  the  ancient  name,
situated  two  or  three  miles  inland  on  one  of  the  lower  heights  of  a  range
of  pine-clad  hills,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Asopus,  where  the  river
issues  from  its  rocky  gorge.  But  the  testimony  of  Herodotus  (vi.  loi),
Thucydides  (iii.  91,  viii.  60  and  95),  Strabo  (ix.  p.  403),  Pliny  (A'l  H.
XXXV.  167),  and  Pausanias  proves  decisively  that  Oropus  was  on  the
coast,  not  inland ;  and  the  statement  of  Diodonis  (xiv.  17)  that  in  402
B.C.  the  Thebans  removed  Oropus  from  the  seashore  implies  the  same
thing.  We  may  suppose  that  the  removal  was  only  temporary ;  when
the  Athenians  regained  possession  of  the  district  not  many  years  after-
wards, they  probably  shifted  the  people  back  to  the  old  city.  Certainly
Strabo  and  Pausanias  found  the  town  beside  the  sea.  And  if  it  was  on
the  sea-coast,  it  can  hardly  have  been  anywhere  than  on  the  bay  at
Skala  Oropou^  where  ancient  remains  have  been  found.  For  in  the
alluvial  plain  westward  from  Skala  Oropou  there  appear  to  be  no
vestiges  of  an  ancient  site,  nor  any  place  suitable  for  the  construction
of  a  city  or  the  formation  of  a  harbour.

The  sanctuary  of  Amphiaraus,  described  by  Pausanias,  lies  in  a
pleasant  little  glen,  neither  wide  nor  deep,  among  low  hills  partially
wooded  with  pine.  The  place,  now  called  Mavrodhilisi^  is  distant
about  four  miles  south-east  of  Oropus  {Skala  Oropou) ;  Pausanias  has
greatly  understated  the  distance.  The  path  to  it  first  goes  through
cornfields  near  the  sea,  then  turns  inland  and  ascends  through  woods.
A  brook  flows  through  the  glen  and  finds  its  way  between  banks  fringed
by  plane-trees  and  oleanders  to  the  sea,  which  is  more  than  a  mile  off.
The  clumps  of  trees  and  shrubs  which  tuft  the  sides  of  the  glen  and  in
which  the  nightingale  warbles,  the  stretch  of  green  meadow  at  the
bottom,  the  stillness  and  seclusion  of  the  place,  and  its  sheltered  and
sunny  aspect,  all  fitted  it  to  be  the  resort  of  invalids,  who  thronged
thither  to  consult  the  healing  god.  So  sheltered  indeed  is  the  spot  that
even  on  a  May  morning  the  heat  in  the  airless  glen,  with  the  Greek  sun
beating  down  out  of  a  cloudless  sky,  is  apt  to  be  felt  by  a  northerner  as
somewhat  overpowering.  But  to  a  Greek  it  was  no  doubt  agreeable.
The  oracle,  as  we  shall  see,  was  open  only  in  summer ;  and  Livy  (xlv.
27)  speaks  of  "the  ancient  temple  delightfully  situated  among  springs
and  brooks."

The  ruins  of  the  sanctuary,  excavated  by  the  Greek  Archaeological
Society  in  1884,  1886,  and  1887,  lie  on  the  narrow  strip  of  flat  ground
on  the  northern  (left)  bank  of  the  stream.  They  have  been  described,
with  ground  plans,  by  Dr.  D6rpfeld  and  Mr.  Leonardos.  The  remains
of  the  temple  of  Amphiaraus,  mentioned  by  Pausanias  (§  2),  are  at  the


468  SANCTUARY  OF  AMPHIARAUS  bk.  i.  attica

altars  stood  here  originally  and  were  at  a  later  period  united  in  one
large  altar.  On  the  north  side  of  the  altar  are  three  steps  of  common
stone,  extending  in  a  long  crescent-shaped  curve.  Spectators  probably
stood  or  sat  on  these  steps  to  watch  the  sacrifices.

On  the  south  side  of  the  great  altar,  a  few  feet  from  it,  grow  two
fine  plane-trees,  and  between  them  rises  the  sacred  spring,  described  by
Pausanias  (§  4),  into  which  patients  who  had  been  made  whole  used  to
throw  money.  When  I  was  there  in  hot  weather  at  the  end  of  May,
the  water  of  the  spring  was  not  visible  at  the  roots  of  the  plane-trees,
but  oozed  up  in  the  dry  bed  of  the  stream  a  few  feet  below.  An
oleander  in  bloom  grew  beside  one  of  the  planes.

Between  70  and  80  yards  east  of  the  temple  a  long  colonnade
begins  and  extends  eastward  for  a  length  of  about  360  feet.  Its
depth  is  about  36  feet.  The  colonnade  was  open  to  the  south,  towards
the  stream  ;  on  the  other  sides  it  was  closed  by  walls  constructed  in  the
same  style  as  the  walls  of  the  temple.  These  walls  are  well-preserved.
Of  the  open  south  front  of  the  colonnade  nothing  but  the  stylobate
remains  in  position ;  but  from  fragments  foimd  lying  about  it  appears
to  have  been  adorned  with  a  row  of  Doric  columns,  of  which  Mr,
Leonardos  calculates  that  there  were  forty-nine.  On  the  frieze  over  the
columns  was  an  inscription  in  large  letters,  one  letter  being  placed  in
each  metope.  Only  three  letters  of  the  inscription  (HO  and  N)  have
been  found.  The  interior  of  the  colonnade  was  divided  by  two  cross-
walls  into  three  sections,  namely,  a  large  central  hall  (about  310  feet
long)  and  two  small  wings  at  the  east  and  west  ends.  In  the  middle
of  each  cross- wall  an  aperture,  closed  apparently  by  a  grating,  gave
access  from  the  central  hall  to  the  wings.  The  central  hall  itself  was
divided  lengthwise,  from  east  to  west,  into  two  aisles  by  a  row  of  seven-
teen Ionic  columns.  The  foundations  of  almost  all  these  columns  and
the  base  of  one  of  them  are  still  in  their  places.  A  continuous  row  of
marble  benches  ran  all  round  the  inner  side  of  the  three  walls  of  the
colonnade.   The  benches  rested  on  fifty-three  stone  supports  of  this  shape,

— 1    placed  at  regular  intervals  along  the  wall     Forty-four  of

JQ  these  supports  are  preserved.     Of  the  marble  benches

J  themselves  only  five  are  in  their  places,  two  about  the

' middle  of  the  back  wall,  and  three  running  round  the

north-east  comer.  The  inner  surface  of  the  walls  of  the  colonnade
was  coated  with  stucco  and  painted  ;  traces  of  a  wavy  maeander  pattern
in  red  and  green  have  been  discerned  at  the  north-east  comer.

This  colonnade  or  the  central  part  of  it  may  have  been  the  dormi-
tory mentioned  in  an  inscription  (C  /.  G.  G.  S.  No.  235),  where  the
patients  slept,  the  men  on  the  east  side  and  the  women  on  the  west  side
of  an  altar,  expecting  revelations  in  dreams.  We  know  from  Pausanias
(§5)  that  they  slept  on  the  skins  of  the  rams  which  they  had  sacrificed
to  Amphiaraus.

The  open  level  space  between  the  west  end  of  the  colonnade  and
the  temple  is  lined  on  its  northem  side  by  a  continuous  row  of  pedestals
which  once  supported  statues  and  still  bear  many  inscriptions.  Behind
them  the  ground  rises,  forming  the  north  side  of  the  glen.


CH.  XXXIV  SANCTUARY  OF  AMPHIARAUS  469

Beyond  the  colonnade,  at  its  eastern  end,  and  separated  from  it  by
a  space  of  about  2  feet,  are  the  foundations  of  a  building  about  52
feet  square,  constructed  of  massive  blocks  accurately  jointed  in  the  good
Greek  style.  The  building  is  divided  into  ten  apartments  which  served
as  bath-rooms.  In  two  of  these  rooms  the  rows  of  small  pillars,  which
supported  the  floor  so  as  to  allow  the  hot  air  to  circulate  under  it,  arc
still  standing ;  they  are  made  of  bricks  and  are  about  20  inches  high.
A  drain  or  conduit  leads  from  the  neighbourhood  of  the  temple  to  the
baths.  Both  baths  and  drain  are  mentioned  in  an  inscription  which
has  been  found  in  the  sanctuary  (see  below).  The  remains  of  the
baths  prove  that,  though  built  before  the  third  century  B.C.,  they  must
have  been  altered  and  repaired  in  Roman  times.  Coins  of  Aurelian,
Probus,  Numerianus,  etc.,  were  found  in  or  near  them.

Scooped  out  in  the  side  of  the  glen,  at  the  back  or  north  side  of  the
colonnade,  is  a  small  theatre.  The  orchestra  is  circular  and  measures
about  12  metres  (39  feet)  across.  The  stage-buildings  are  about  40
feet  long  by  20  feet  deep.  Their  foundations  are  preserved.  The
front  of  the  stage  is  adorned  by  a  row  of  eight  fluted  half- columns
of  the  Doric  order  with  a  pilaster  at  each  end  of  the  row.  The
half-columns  and  the  pilasters  are  all  standing ;  they  are  monoliths  of
white  marble  and  rest  on  a  marble  stylobate.  They  are  1.883  metres
(about  6  feet  high).  All  the  spaces  between  these  columns,  with  the
exception  of  the  space  between  the  two  central  ones,  were  closed  with
boards  or  slabs  of  stone.  In  the  sides  of  each  half-column,  behind  the
flutes,  are  seen  the  grooves  in  which  the  boards  or  slabs  fitted.  The
space  between  the  two  central  half-columns  was  open,  and  formed  a
doorway  leading  from  the  stage-buildings  to  the  orchestra.  The  half-
columns  and  pilasters  supported  an  entablature  of  white  marble,  of
which  four  inscribed  fragments  have  been  found.  The  fragmentary
inscription  (C,  /.  G,  G.  S.  No.  423  a,  p.  745)  declares  that  so-and-so
"  having  been  director  of  the  games  (dedicated)  the  stage  {proskenion)
and  the  boards."  Between  the  theatre  and  the  back  wall  of  the  long
colonnade  were  found  other  marble  pieces  of  a  Doric  entablature
bearing  a  fragmentary  inscription,  which  states  that  so-and-so  "  having
been  priest  (?)  (dedicated)  the  scene  (skene)  and  the  doorways  to
Amphiaraus"  (C.  /.  G.  G.  S,  No.  423).  The  exact  position  which  this
latter  entablature  occupied  has  not  been  determined.

The  orchestra  was  not  paved,  and  there  are  no  traces  in  it  of  an
altar  (thymele).  Of  the  seats  there  have  been  found  only  five  chairs  of
white  marble,  standing  at  intervals  in  a  semicircle  round  the  orchestra,
facing  the  stage.  The  sides  of  the  chairs  are  decorated  with  ornaments
carved  in  relief;  and  in  front,  between  the  legs  of  each  chair,  is  the
inscription,  "  Nicon,  son  of  Nicon,  having  been  priest,  dedicated  (this
chair)  to  Amphiaraus"  (C.  /.  G.  G.  S,  No.  423  b,  p.  745).  Each  chair
stands  on  a  marble  base.

Such  are  the  principal  remains  of  the  sanctuary  of  Amphiaraus,  so
far  as  it  has  been  excavated.  A  small  museum,  which  has  been  erected
on  the  spot,  to  the  west  of  the  colonnade,  contains  some  triglyphs,
unsculptured  metopes,  Ionic  capitals,  guttae^  and  sepulchral  reliefs.


470  SANCTUARY  OF  AMPHIARAUS  BK.  I.  attica

In  addition  to  these  architectural  remains  there  have  been  found  in
the  sanctuary  a  great  many  inscriptions  which  shed  some  light  on  its
history  and  arrangement,  on  the  statues  and  votive-offerings  which  it  con-
tained, on  the  duties  and  privileges  of  the  priest,  on  the  rules  observed
by  persons  consulting  the  oracle,  and  on  the  games  celebrated  at  the
festival  of  Amphiaraus.  None  of  the  inscriptions  yet  discovered  is  older
than  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  This  goes,  along  with
other  evidence,  to  show  that  the  sanctuary  was  founded  towards  the  end
of  the  fifth  century  B.C.     (See  note  on  ix.  8.  3.)

The  following  are  some  of  the  particulars  which  we  gather  from  the
inscriptions.  The  priest  of  Amphiaraus  was  to  attend  at  the  sanctuary
not  less  than  ten  days  in  each  month  from  the  end  of  winter  to  the  season
of  ploughing  ;  during  this  period  he  was  never  to  be  absent  more  than
three  days  at  a  time,  and  he  was  to  see  to  it  that  the  sacristan  attended
to  his  duties.  For  any  breach  of  rules  committed  in  the  sanctuary  the
priest  might  inflict  a  fine  of  five  drachms  (about  3s.  6d.),  but  not  more.
Every  patient  who  sought  the  advice  of  the  god  had  first  of  all  to  pay
a  fee  of  not  less  than  nine  obols  (about  a  shilling)  of  good  silver  into
the  treasury,  in  presence  of  the  sacristan.  When  the  priest  was  present
he  prayed  over  the  victims  and  laid  their  flesh  on  the  altar  ;  but  in  his
absence  the  person  who  presented  the  sacrifice  might  perform  these
offices  himself.  The  skin  of  every  animal  sacrificed  in  the  sanctuary
was  a  perquisite  of  the  priest  Every  one  was  free  to  sacrifice  any
victim  he  chose ;  but  the  flesh  might  not  be  taken  out  of  the  sacred
precinct.  The  priest  received  the  shoulder  of  every  victim  sacrificed  by
a  private  person,  except  when  the  festival  of  the  god  was  being  held ;
for  then  he  received  the  shoulders  of  the  public  victims.  Every  person
who  complied  with  the  rules  was  allowed  to  sleep  in  the  sanctuary  for
the  purpose  of  receiving  an  oracle  in  a  dream.  When  he  paid  the  fee,
his  name  and  the  name  of  his  city  were  entered  by  the  sacristan  in  a
register,  which  was  open  to  public  inspection.  All  these  details  are
gathered  from  a  single  inscription  (C.  /.  G,  G,  S.  No.  235  ;  'E<l»ffuph
dpxaiokoyiKijy  1885,  P-  93  ^^^'  J  v.  Wilamowitz-M Ollendorff,  in  Hermes^
21  (1886),  p.  91  sqq.)

From  another  inscription  (C.  /.  G.  G,  5.  No.  4255)  we  learn  that
there  were  separate  baths  for  men  and  women,  and  that  the  drainage
of  the  water  from  the  men's  bath  having  been  impeded  by  the  rise  of
the  stream  in  rainy  weather,  it  was  resolved  to  construct  a  covered
drain  of  stone  "  from  the  pavement  of  the  bridge  as  far  as  the  descent
beside  the  women's  bath."  The  baths  of  Amphiaraus  had  been  already
known  from  ancient  writers  (Xenophon,  Memorabilia,  iii.  13.  3 ;
Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.w.  "Ap/xa  and  'Qpttyiros ;  cp.  Athenaeus,  ii.  p.
46  c  d  ;  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca,  p.  81,  line  24).  Another  inscription
(C  /.  G,  G.  S.  No.  3499),  found  not  far  from  the  sacred  spring,
mentions  "  the  cistern  beside  the  sanctuary  of  Ammon,"  "  the  cistern
in  the  sanctuary  of  Amphiaraus,"  and  the  bringing  of  water  in  pipes  to
one  or  both  of  these  cisterns.  On  a  boundary-stone  found  within  the
sanctuary  there  is  an  inscription  forbidding  any  private  person  to  build
within  the  bounds  (C  /.  G.  G.  S.  No.  422  ;    Bui/,  de  Carr.  Hellin.


CH.  XXXIV  SANCTUARY  OF  AMPHIARAUS  471

3   (^879),    p.    437    5qq,\    Dittenberger,    Sylloge  Inscr,    Graec,    No.
361).

Another  inscription  (C  /.  G.  G,  S.  No.  3498  ;  'E<fyqfi€pis  apxat-o-
Xoyucrlj  1889,  p.  2  sqq.y  No.  26;  Bruno  Keil,  in  Hermes^  25  (1890),
pp.  598-623)  contains  a  list  of  the  gold  and  silver  treasures  belonging
to  the  god  Amphiaraus  ;  among  the  articles  mentioned  are  sacred  tables,
lamps,  sacred  censers  (one  of  them  with  a  Love  on  the  lid),  cups,  bowls,
jugs,  a  golden  olive-tree,  and  a  great  many  pieces  representing  men's
breasts,  offered  no  doubt  by  patients  who  had  been  or  hoped  to  be
cured  of  diseases  of  the  breast.  Another  inscription  (C  /.  G,  G,  S.
No.  303 ;  Ancient  Greek  Inscriptions  in  the  British  Museum^  Part  ii..
No.  clx.)  contains  a  decree  enacting  that  a  survey  shall  be  made  of
such  of  the  votive-offerings  in  the  sanctuary  as  are  useless  or  out  of
repair,  and  that  such  offerings  as  need  repair  shall  be  repaired,  and
that  such  offerings  as  may  be  condemned  shall  be  melted  down  and
made  into  new  vessels  for  the  use  of  the  god  ;  this  was  to  be  done
by  three  commissioners  chosen  by  the  people.  Among  the  worn -out
articles  is  mentioned  the  golden  cup  with  which  the  priest  offered
libations  ;  it  was  to  be  replaced  by  a  new  one  made  out  of  gold  bullion
and  gold  coin  which  were  to  be  melted  down  for  the  purpose.  Other
battered  old  treasures  represented  parts  of  the  human  body  (face,  hand,
breast,  etc.),  the  offerings  of  grateful  or  sanguine  sufferers.  Another
inscription  (C  /.  G.  G,  S.  No.  412)  records  that  two  men,  who  had
been  respectively  priest  and  libation-bearer,  dedicated  a  lintel  and
threshold  of  white  marble,  etc.,  to  Amphiaraus  and  the  goddess  Health.
Among  the  statues  which  we  know  from  inscriptions  to  have  stood  in
the  sanctuary  were  those  of  Queen  Arsinoe,  Sulla  and  his  wife  Metella,
Publius  Servilius  Isauricus  (consul  in  79  B.C.),  Appius  Claudius  (consul  in
54  B.C.),  Q.  Fufius  Calenus  (one  of  Caesar's  lieutenants),  the  assassin
Brutus,  and  Marcus  Agrippa  (C.  /.  G.  G.  S.  Nos.  297,  264,  372,  244,
428,  380,  383,  349).  There  was  a  statue  dedicated  by  King  Lysi-
machus  (C  /.  G.  G.  S.  No.  279),  and  an  offering  of  Mummius,  the
conqueror  of  Corinth  (C  /.  G,  G,  S,  No.  433).

Another  inscription  (C  /.  G.  G,  S.  No.  4252)  contains  a  copy  of
a  decree  of  the  Athenian  people,  passed  in  332/1  B.C.,  enacting  that  a
golden  wreath  be  presented  to  the  divine  Amphiaraus  in  recognition  of
his  kind  attentions  to  the  Athenians  who  sought  health  and  salvation  at
his  shrine.  From  another  inscription  ('E<^/Jt€/ots  dpxaiokoyiKrj,  1892,
p.  41  sqg.y  No.  70;  imperfectly  edited  in  C.  /.  G.  G,  S.  No.  349)  we
learn  that  the  town  of  Acraephnium  in  Boeotia  had  been  sending
round  a  deputation  to  the  cities  of  Boeotia  inviting  them  to  increase
their  contributions  to  the  sanctuary  of  the  Ptoan  Apollo  (see  ix.  23.  6
note).  The  deputation,  consisting  of  the  priest  and  the  prophet  of  the
sanctuary  with  three  other  men,  addressed  a  public  assembly  at  Oropus ;
and  in  response  to  their  stirring  appeal  the  Oropians,  with  generous
enthusiasm,  voted  to  send  a  cow  regularly  for  sacrifice  at  the  Ptoan
festival,  the  animal  to  be  accompanied  by  the  magistrates  in  procession.

Another  inscription  refers  to  a  dispute  between  the  people  of  Oropus
and  the  Roman  tax-gatherers  which  had  been  referred  for  decision  to


472  SANCTUARY  OF  AMPHIARAUS  BK.  i.  attica

the  Roman  senate.  It  appears  that  Sulla,  in  fulfilment  of  a  vow,  had
added  to  the  sacred  precinct  of  Amphiaraus  all  the  ground  round  about
the  sanctuary  within  an  area  of  a  square  mile,  and  that  he  had  further
consecrated  to  the  god  Amphiaraus  all  the  revenues  which  the  Romans
derived  from  the  town,  district,  and  harbours  of  Oropus,  with  a  provision
that  these  revenues  were  to  be  devoted  to  the  celebration  both  of  the
customary  games  and  sacrifices  in  honour  of  Amphiaraus  and  of  such
additional  games  and  sacrifices  as  the  Oropians  should  afterwards  cele-
brate in  honour  of  the  Roman  victories.  This  ordinance  of  Sulla  was
confirmed  by  a  decree  of  the  senate.  In  virtue  of  this  ordinance,  so
confirmed,  the  Oropians  claimed  immunity  from  taxation.  But  their
claim  was  denied  by  the  Roman  tax-gatherers,  who  maintained  that  the
exemptions  granted  by  Sulla  applied  only  to  lands  consecrated  to  gods,
and  that  Amphiaraus  was  no  god,  since  he  had  admittedly  once  been  a
man  (cp.  Cicero,  De  natura  deorum^  iii.  1 9.  49).  The  Oropians  appealed
to  the  senate,  who  referred  the  question  to  the  consuls.  On  the  14th
October  73  B.C.  the  case  was  tried  in  the  Basilica  Porcia  before  the
consuls  of  the  year,  Marcus  Terentius  Varro  LucuUus  and  Caius  Cassius
Longinus,  assisted  by  sixteen  assessors,  among  whom  were  Sulla  and
Cicero,  then  a  young  man  of  thirty-three.  The  consuls,  after  hearing
both  sides,  confirmed  the  exemption  granted  by  Sulla,  and  reported  this
decision  in  a  letter  to  the  people  of  Oropus.  This  letter,  or  rather  a
literal  translation  of  it  into  Greek,  is  preserved  in  the  inscription  found
in  the  sanctuary  of  Amphiaraus.  Many  years  afterwards  Cicero,  writing
his  work  *  On  the  Nature  of  the  Gods,'  referred  to  the  question  which
the  Roman  tax-gatherers  had  raised  as  to  the  divinity  of  Amphiaraus
and  which  he  himself  had  helped  to  decide  in  the  affirmative  \De  nat,
deor.,  I.e.)  See  C.  I.  G.  G.  S.  No.  413  ;  * E<f>-qfi€pls  a/ox^w>^oytK^,  1884,
pp.  97-120  ;  Th.  Mommsen,  *  Oropos  und  die  romischen  Steuerpachter,*
J/ermes,  20  (1885),  pp.  268-287  j  Bruns,  Pontes  Juris  Rotnani  Antiqui^^
ed.  Th.  Mommsen,  p.  162  sqq.

The  festival  of  Amphiaraus  was  celebrated  at  Oropus  at  least  as
early  as  the  middle  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  ;  for  an  inscription  of  that
date  (C.  /.  G.  G.  S.  No.  414)  contains  a  list  of  the  victors  in  the  various
competitions,  musical,  literary,  and  athletic,  which  formed  part  of  the
festival.  In  the  first  century  B.C.,  doubtless  in  honour  of  Sulla's  victories
(see  above),  the  festival  was  extended  and  went  by  the  name  of  *  the
Amphiaraian  and  Roman  festival.'  Lists  of  victors  in  the  very  various
competitions  held  at  these  later  festivals  are  preserved  in  inscriptions
{C.  I.G.G.  S.  Nos.  416-420).  The  competitions  seem  to  have  been
popular ;  for  among  the  victors  are  mentioned  natives  of  Italy,  Sicily,
and  distant  cities  of  Asia,  including  Tyre  and  Tarsus.  The  festival  was
held  every  fourth  year  (C.  /.  G.  G.  S.  No.  4253) ;  it  included  a  proces-
sion in  honour  of  Amphiaraus  {C.  I.  G.  G.  S.  No.  4254).  The  Amphia-
raian games  of  Oropus  are  mentioned  in  an  inscription  of  Megara
(C.  /.  G.  G.  S.  No.  48),  and  the  Amphiaraian  and  Roman  games  in  an
inscription  of  Halicamassus  (Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.   Graec,   No.

398).

Amphiaraus  seems  to  have  been  sometimes  styled  Zeus  Amphiaraus


CH.  XXXIV  SANCTUARY  OF  AMPHIARAUS  473

at  Oropus  (Dicaearchus,  i.  6).  The  oracle  continued  to  be  consulted  in
the  time  of  Philostratus,  who  tells  us  (Vit.  Apollon.  ii.  37)  that  persons
desirous  of  consulting  the  oracle  were  obliged  by  the  priests  to  abstain
from  food  for  one  day  and  from  wine  for  three  days  before  receiving  the
revelation.

On  Oropus  and  the  sanctuary  of  Amphiaraus  see  Leake,  N,  Greece,  2.  pp.  440-
447;  id.f  Athens,  2.  pp.   iii-i2i  ;  Wordsworth,  Athens,  p.   18  sq.\  G.  Finlay,

*  On  the  position  of  the  Oropian  Amphiaraeion,'  Tratisactions  of  the  Royal  Society
of  Literature,  3  (1839),  pp.  406-421  ;  F.  G.  Welcker,  Tagebuch,  2.  p.  loi  ;  Preller,

*  Ueber  Oropos  und  das  Amphiaraeion,*  Berichte  iiber  die  Verhandl,  d,  k.  sdchs,
Gesell.  d,  IVissen.  su  Leipzig,  Philolog.  hist.  CI.  5  (1852),  pp.  140- 148;  W.
Vischer,  Epigraphische  ufid  archdologische  Beitrdge  aus  Griechenland,  pp.  62-68 ;
id.,  Erinnertingen  und  Eindriicke,  pp.  679-681;  C.  T.  Newton,  *  On  some
inscriptions  at  Mavrodhilissi,  the  site  of  the  Amphiaraion,'  Transcutiofis  of  the
Royal  Society  of  Literature,  Second  series,  5  (1856),  pp.  107-152  ;  id.,  Travels  and
Discoveries  in  the  Levattl,  i.  pp.  29-34 ;  C.  Bursian,  m  Berichte  itber  die  Verhandl,
d.  k.  sdchs,  Gesell.  d.  IVissen.,  Philolog.  hist.  CI.  11  (1859),  p.  ill  j^.  ;  id.,  Geogr,
I.  p.  220  sq. ;  Baedeker,'  p.  186 ;  C^ide -Joanne,  2.  p.  2  sq. ;  B.  I.  Leonardos
and  W.  Dorpfeld,  in  II/xt#rrtK4  t^j  ' Apxo^oKorfLKris  'Eroupiay,  1 884,  pp.  10- 1 3,  88-93;
Leonardos,  in  UpaKriKk  r^s  'Apx*  'Erat/).  1887,  pp.  51-56;  id.,  in  JlpaKTiKbL  rrjs
*Apx»  'Eratp.  1887,  pp.  59-63  ;  id.,  in  American  fourftal  of  Archaeology,  4  (1888),
pp.  54-56;  id.,  in  UpaKTiKdi  rrjs  *Apx.  'Eraip.  1 890,  pp.  31-33;  *E^fupls
&pxaio\oytKi/i,  1884,  pp.  98-130;  id.,  1885,  pp.  93-110,  153-158;  id.,  1886,  pp.
53-74;  id.,  1889,  pp.  1-50;  id.,  1891,  pp.  71-142;  id.,  1892,  pp.  33-56;  F.
DUrrbach,  De  Oropo  et  Amphiarai  scuro  (Paris,  1890).

34.  2.  at  a  place  Harma.     See  ix.  1 9.  4  note.     Cp.  ix.  8.  3.

34.  2.  Eleus  in  Ohersonese  is  dedicated  to  Protesilaiis.  At
Eleus  or  Elaeus  in  the  Thracian  Chersonese  there  was  a  grave  of
Protesilaus  within  a  sacred  precinct ;  the  votive-offerings  at  this  shrine,
consisting  of  gold  and  silver  cups,  bronze  vessels,  garments,  etc.,  were
carried  off  by  the  Persian  Artauctes  (Herodotus,  ix.  116;  cp.  Paus.  iii.
4.  6).  There  were  few  remains  of  the  sanctuary  in  the  days  of  Philo-
stratus ;  but  a  hillock  was  pointed  out  which  was  believed  to  cover  the
hero's  bones.  Elms  grew  round  the  hillock ;  and  it  was  said  that  the
leaves  of  the  elms  which  faced  towards  Troy,  where  Protesilaus  had
perished,  bloomed  early,  but  withered  and  fell  untimely  like  the  hero
himself  (Philostratus,  Heroica,  iii.  i  sq.  ;  cp.  Pliny,  N.  H.  xvi.  238).
Tzetzes  says  that  Protesilaus  was  worshipped  as  a  god  by  the  natives  of
the  Thracian  Chersonese  (Schol.  on  Lycophron,  532).

34.  2.  Lebadea to  Trophonius.     Cp.  ix.  39  with  the  notes.

34.  3.  The  altar  is  divided  into  parts  etc.  The  existing  remains
of  this  altar,  as  we  have  seen  (p.  467  sq.\  seem  to  show  that  it  was  formed
by  uniting  several  separate  altars  which  had  stood  side  by  side.  It  was
a  very  common  practice  with  the  ancients  to  dedicate  an  altar  to  more
than  one  deity.  Numerous  examples  of  this  practice  are  collected  by
C.  Maurer,  De  aribus  Graecorum  pluribus  dels  in  commune  positts
(Darmstadt,  1885).  Why  the  worship  of  all  the  divinities  here  enume-
rated by  Pausanias  should  have  been  united  at  a  single  altar  can  only  be
a  matter  of  conjecture.  Cp.  C.  Maurer,  op.  cit.  p.  5  5  sqq.  ;  F.  Durrbach,
De  Oropo  et  Amphiarai  sacro,  p.  1 10  sqq.

34.  3.  Paeon  Apollo.  The  meaning  of  this  epithet  applied  to
Apollo  is  discussed  by  Macrobius,  i.  17.  15  sqq.     Cp.  Preller,  Griech.


474  SANCTUARY  OF  AMPHIARAUS  bk.  i.  attica

Mythologie^^  i.  p.  241.  Prof.  Ad.  Bastian,  like  Macrobius,  explains
the  word  to  mean  *  the  striker '  (from  paio\  and  supposes  it  to  refer  to
a  primitive  method  of  cure,  which  consists  in  beating  the  sick  person  in
order  to  drive  out  the  devil  by  whom  he  is  supposed  to  be  possessed
(^Die  Vblker  des  bstlichen  Asien^  4.  p.  11 ).  But  this  explanation  of  the
epithet  is  at  best  extremely  doubtful.

34.  3.  Amphiaxans,  and  the  children  of  Amphilochus.  The  names
of  Amphiaraus  and  Amphilochus  are  engraved  on  a  small  plate  of  white
marble  found  in  the  sanctuary  of  Amphiaraus  at  Oropus  (C  /.  G,  G,  S.
No.  421  ;  *E<l)ii]fJL€pU  dp\aLoX,oyLKrj,  1 885,  p.  1 5 5).

34.  3.  Health and  Pan.     A  small  relief,  found  near  the  base

of  Sulla's  statue  in  the  sanctuary  of  Amphiaraus,  represents  the  goddess
Health  seated  on  a  rock  beside  Amphiaraus ;  above  them  is  carved
a  head  of  Pan  playing  on  his  pipes  (IIpaKTtKot  t^s  'Apx*  'Erat/).  1887,
p.  62  sg^.)  We  have  seen  (p.  471)  that  an  inscription,  found  in  the
sanctuary,  mentions  the  dedication  of  a  lintel  and  threshold  of  white
marble  to  Amphiaraus  and  Health.

34.  3.  Achelons.     Cp.  i.  41.  2  note.

34.  3.  at  Mallus  in  Oilicia  he  has  the  most  inflEdlible  of  all  the
oracles  of  the  present  day.  The  oracles  of  Amphilochus  at  Mallus,
like  those  of  his  father  Amphiaraus  at  Oropus,  were  imparted  in  dreams,
according  to  Plutarch  (De  defectu  oraculorum^  45)  and  Dio  Cassius
(Ixxii.  7).  Lucian  says  {PhilopseudeSy  38)  that  the  inquirer  wrote  down
his  question  on  a  tablet,  which  he  handed  to  the  prophet  The  charge
for  one  of  these  infallible  communications  of  Amphilochus  was  only  two
obols  or  twopence  halfpenny  (Lucian,  Alexander^  19;  /V/.,  Deorum
concilium^  1 2),  which  compares  very  favourably  with  his  father's  tariff
at  Oropus  (see  above,  p.  470).  Cp.  Bouch^-Leclercq,  Histoire  de  la
divination  dans  Vantiquit^^  3.  p.  341  sqq.  Amphilochus  and  Mopsus
were  said  to  have  founded  Mallus  (Strabo,  xiv.  p.  675  ;  Cicero,  De
divinatione^  i.  40.  88  ;  Tzetzes,  Sc/ioL  on  Lycophron^  440-442).

34.  4.  to  drop  silver  and  gold  coins  into  the  spring.  The  custom
of  throwing  an  offering  of  money  into  springs,  rivers,  and  lakes,
especially  as  a  thank-offering  for  recovered  health,  has  been  practised
very  widely.  The  younger  Pliny  speaks  of  the  coins  which  could  be
seen  lying  among  the  pebbles  at  the  bottom  of  the  clear  water  of  the
Clitumnian  spring  {Epist  viii.  8.  2).  All  ranks  at  Rome  threw  money
annually  into  the  lake  of  Curtius  in  fulfilment  of  a  vow  made  for  the
health  of  Augustus  (Suetonius,  Augustus^  57  ;  cp.  Seneca,  De  beneficiiSy
vii.  4.  6).  The  Egyptian  priests,  when  a  certain  festival  came  round,
threw  money  into  the  Nile  (Seneca,  Quaest.  Nat.  iv.  2.  7).  Proof  of  the
prevalence  of  such  customs  in  antiquity  is  furnished  by  the  quantities  of
ancient  money  which  have  been  found  in  springs  and  lakes.

At  the  bottom  of  the  hot  medicinal  spring  of  Vicarello,  on  the  Lago
di  Bracciano  (the  ancient  Lacus  Sabatinus\  many  thousands  of  Roman
coins  as  well  as  more  than  1200  pounds  weight  of  unstamped  copper,
the  oldest  Italian  money,  were  found  about  the  middle  of  this  century,
showing  that  the  custom  of  throwing  money  into  the  spring,  doubtless
as  a  thank-offering  for  restored  health,  had  prevailed  here  for  many


CH.  XXXIV  SANCTUARY  OF  AMPHIARAUS  475

centuries.  See  W.  Henzen,  *  Alterthiimer  von  Vicarcllo,'  Rheinisches
Museum^  N.  F.  9  (1854),  p.  20  sqq.  In  Rome  itself  there  is  a  fountain
(the  Fontana  di  Trevi)  into  the  basin  of  which  people  still  throw  coins
in  the  belief  that  by  doing  so  they  ensure  their  return  to  the  Eternal
City.     The  present  writer  did  not  scruple  to  comply  with  this  custom.

In  one  of  the  hot  sulphur  springs  of  Amdlie-les- Bains,  near  Aries,
Roman  coins,  together  with  inscribed  leaden  tablets,  have  been  discovered
{^Revue  Arch^ologique^  4  (1847),  pp.  409-414}.

At  holy  wells  in  Scotland  it  was  the  custom,  not  long  ago,  to  drop
into  the  water  a  small  coin,  or  a  pin,  or  a  pebble  with  the  name  of  the
patient  attached  to  it  (Sir  Arthur  Mitchell,  On  various  superstitions  in
the  North-west  Highlands  and  Islands  of  Scotland^  p.  23).  It  is  said
that  sick  children  are  still  sometimes  brought  to  the  Grenge  Well  at
Dunkeld,  and  that  silver  coins  have  occasionally  been  cast  into  the  water
in  return  for  supposed  cures  (E.  J.  Guthrie,  Old  Scottish  Customs^
p.  222).  In  1870,  when  St.  Querdon's  Well,  in  the  parish  of  Troqueer,
Kirkcudbrightshire,  was  cleaned,  hundreds  of  copper  coins  were  foimd  at
the  bottom  of  it ;  the  oldest  were  of  the  reign  of  Elizabeth  (Ch.  Rogers,
Social  Life  in  Scotland^  3.  p.  207  sq.^  Epileptic  patients  used  to  repair
to  Sl  Tegla's  Well,  between  Wrexham  and  Ruthin  in  Wales ;  tiiey
washed  in  it  after  sunset  and  deposited  fourpence  in  the  water  {Archcuo-
logia  CambrensiSy  i  (1846),  p.  53).  In  the  Isle  of  Man  there  are  wells
the  water  of  which  is  used  for  bathing  sore  eyes,  and  the  patient  drops
coins  into  them  {Folklore^  5  (1894),  pp.  222,  226  sq,)

The  spring  of  St.  Morand,  in  the  commune  of  Chevaign^,  Brittany,
is  supposed  to  possess  the  property  of  curing  fever ;  but  the  patient  must
resort  to  it  fasting  and  without  speaking.  Not  many  years  ago  small
coins  were  thrown  into  the  water  ;  now  they  are  dropped  into  a  poor's  box
(P.  S^billot,  Traditions  et  superstitions  de  la  Haute-Bretagne^  i.  p.  67).
At  Monterfil  in  Brittany  there  is  a  spring  of  St.  Genou  to  which  people
go  on  pilgrimage  ;  money  used  to  be  thrown  into  the  water  (P.  S^billot,
op,  cit,  I.  p.  69).  In  Esthonia  there  are  many  springs  which  are
believed  to  heal  diseases  of  the  eyes.  Before  drawing  the  water  for  his
eyes  the  patient  must  make  a  small  offering  to  the  spring,  such  as  a
copper  coin,  a  rag,  a  feather,  or  a  little  wool.  If  he  is  too  poor  to  make
any  of  these  offerings,  he  scrapes  a  little  metal  from  a  coin  into  the  water
( Boeder- Kreutzwald,  Der  Ehsten  abergldubische  Gebrduche^  p.  8).  Small
coins  used  to  be  thrown  into  a  spring  in  Esthonia  in  order  to  protect  the
crops  from  hail-storms  (Kreutzwald  und  Neus,  Mythische  und  magische
Ueder  der  Ehsten^  p.  115).

Among  some  of  the  South  Slavs  a  bride  soon  after  her  marriage  is
conducted  with  much  ceremony  to  the  village  well  to  draw  water ;  she
carries  in  her  mouth  an  old  gold  coin,  which  she  must  spit  into  the  well
before  she  draws  the  water  (F.  S.  Krauss,  Sitte  und  Brauch  der  Siid-
Sloven^  p.  451).  Cp.  J.  M.  Mackinlay,  Folklore  of  Scottish  Lochs  and
Springs  (Glasgow,  1893),  p.  188  sqq,

34.  4.  their  skill  lay  in  the  interpretation  of  dreams  etc
Artemidorus  Daldianus,  a  contemporary  of  Pausanias,  wrote  an  elaborate
work  in  &v^  books  on  the  interpretation  of  dreams  {Onirocrita)^  which  is


476  SANCTUARY  OF  AMPHIARAUS  bk.  i.  attica

still  extant.  There  is  a  special  work  by  B.  Btichsenschiitz  on  the  ancient
system  of  dream-interpretation  (TVai/w  undTraufndeutungimAlterthumey
Berlin,  1 868).  As  to  omens  taken  from  the  flight  of  birds,  see  note  on
X.  6.  I.  The  Tahitians,  like  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  drew  omens  from
the  appearance  of  the  entrails  of  the  sacrificed  victims ;  a  quick  or
continued  movement  of  the  heart  or  liver  was  an  omen  of  success  in  war
(W.  Ellis,  Polynesian  Researches^  i.  pp.  303,  371).    Cp.  note  on  vi.  2.  4.

34.  5.  they  sacriflce  a  ram,  and  spreading  the  skin  under  them
go  to  sleep,  awaiting  a  revelation  in  a  dream.  Similarly  the  sooth-
sayer Calchas  was  worshipped  at  Drium  in  Apulia,  and  persons  who
wished  to  inquire  of  him  sacrificed  a  black  ram  and  slept  on  the  skin
(Strabo,  vi.  p.  284).  Virgil  i^Aen,  vii.  81  sqq.')  and  Ovid  {Fastis
iv.  649  sqq.)  have  described  an  ancient  and  much  revered  Italian  oracle
of  Faunus,  at  which  the  mode  of  consultation  was  similar ;  sheep  were
sacrificed,  their  skins  were  spread  on  the  ground,  and  the  inquirer  slept
on  them  and  received  an  oracle  in  a  dream.  No  doubt  the  skin  of  the
sacrificed  animal  was  believed  to  exercise  a  sanctifying  and  protective
influence  over  a  person  who  lay  on  it  or  wrapt  himself  in  it.  This  belief
explains  the  analogous  use  of  the  skins  of  sacrificed  animals  in  other
religious  rites.  Thus  at  the  great  temple  of  the  Syrian  goddess  in
Hierapolis  the  worshipper,  after  sacrificing  a  sheep,  used  to  spread  its
skin  on  the  ground,  kneel  on  it,  draw  the  sheep's  feet  and  head  over  his
own  head,  and  pray  the  goddess  to  accept  the  sacrifice  (Lucian,  De  cUa
Syria^  55).  At  Athens  a  person  who  was  being  purified  stood  with  his
left  foot  on  the  skin  of  a  sheep  that  had  been  sacrificed  to  Zeus  (see  note
on  i.  37.  4).  At  the  marriage  of  the  Flamen  and  Flaminica  at  Rome
the  skin  of  the  sheep  which  had  been  sacrificed  was  spread  on  two  seats
placed  side  by  side,  and  the  couple  sat  down  on  it  (Servius,  on  Virgil,
Aen.  iv.  374).  A  similar  custom  was  perhaps  observed  at  all  Roman
weddings  (Festus,  s.v.  in  pella  lanata^  p.  1 14  ed.  Miiller).  The  use  of
shoes  made  out  of  the  skin  of  sacrificed  animals  is  to  be  explained  on
the  same  principle.     (For  examples  see  note  on  ix.  39.  8.)

These  practices  are  illustrated  by  the  monuments.  Thus  on  a  relief
at  Naples,  representing  a  scene  of  initiation,  the  novice  is  seated,  with
his  head  mufHed,  on  the  skin  of  a  sheep  or  ram,  while  a  priest  pours  a
libation  on  an  altar  (Schreiber,  Bilderatlas^  i.  pi.  xiv.  i).  Again,  on  a
vase-painting  Ulysses  evoking  the  shade  of  Tiresias  is  represented  sitting
with  his  feet  on  the  skin  of  the  sacrificed  ram  (Monumenti  Inediti^  4.
pi.  xix.)     See  also  note  on  i.  37.  4.

Customs  of  this  sort  were  not  confined  to  the  ancient  world.  In  the
highlands  of  Scotland  a  man  desirous  of  receiving  an  oracle  used  some-
times to  lie  all  night  in  a  lonely  place  wrapt  up  in  a  cow's  skin  (Martin,
*  Description  of  the  Western  Islands  of  Scotland,'  in  Pinkerton's  Voyages
and  Travels y  3.  p.  610;  cp.  Miss  Gordon  Gumming,  In  the  Hebrides^
p.  1 74).  The  Algonquin  Indians  of  New  England  tell  of  a  man  who
could  divine  everything  by  dreaming  on  a  magic  bear  skin  (G.  G.  Leland,
The  Algonquin  legends  of  New  England^  p.  344).  Among  the  Basutos
of  South  Africa  "  as  soon  as  a  woman  is  with  child  a  sheep  is  sacrificed,
in  order  to  render  the  gods  propitious  to  her;  and  the  skin  of  the  animal


CH.  XXXV  SALAMIS  477

is  rendered  supple  and  made  into  an  apron,  which  serves  to  screen  her
from  witchcraft"  (Casalis,  The  Basutosy  p.  251).  Again,  among  the
same  tribe  when  a  woman  is  being  purified  after  childbirth,  her  parents
sacrifice  a  sheep,  and  make  the  skin  into  a  kind  of  scarf,  which  serves  to
hold  the  child  at  the  mother's  back  till  it  is  weaned  (Casalis,  op.  cit.
p.  192).  Some  of  the  aborigines  of  Queensland  carefully  flay  their
slain  foes  and  preserve  the  skin  with  the  hairy  scalp  and  even  the  finger
nails  attached.  "  They  look  upon  it  as  a  powerful  *  medicine '  and
cover  their  patients  with  it  as  with  a  blanket"  (Fison  and  Howitt,
Kamilaroi  and  Kurnaiy  p.  223  note).

35.  I.  the  island  of  Patroclus.     See  i.  i.  i  note.

35.  I.  another  beyond  Suninm  etc.  This  is  the  island  now  called
Makronisi  (*  long  island  \  which  lies  off  the  south-east  coast  of  Attica.
It  consists  of  a  bare  and  rugged  ridge  of  rock,  eight  miles  long  from
south  to  north,  extending  parallel  to  the  coast  from  opposite  Cape
Sunium  to  a  point  beyond  Thoricus.  Strabo,  following  Artemidorus,
says  (ix.  p.  399,  x.  p.  485)  that  the  island  was  60  Greek  ftirlongs  in
length,  which  is  too  short.  The  distance  of  the  island  from  the  shore
varies  from  2  to  4  miles.  Its  highest  point  is  about  920  feet  above  the
sea.  The  island  is  inhabited  only  in  summer,  when  herdsmen  cross
over  from  the  mainland  with  their  flocks.  There  are  wells  at  various
places  in  it  The  island  appears  not  to  have  been  permanently  in-
habited in  antiquity,  for  Strabo  (ix.  p.  399)  and  Pausanias  (viii.  14.  12)
speak  of  it  as  desert.  The  isle  of  Cranae  in  which,  according  to  Homer
(//.  iii.  445),  Paris  enjoyed  Helen  on  their  flight  from  Sparta,  was  by
some  identified  with  this  island  off  the  coast  of  Attica  (Euripides,
Heleney  1670  sqq,  \  Strabo,  ix.  p.  399 ;  Mela,  ii.  109 ;  Schol.  on
Homer,  //.  iiL  445).  But  Pausanias  identified  Cranae  with  an  island
off  Gytheum  (iii.  22.  i).  Stephanus  Byzantius,  agreeing  with  or
following  Pausanias,  says  {s.v,  'EXcviy)  that  Helene  was  so  called
because  Helen  had  landed  on  it  after  the  taking  of  Troy.  He  says  that
the  island  was  also  called  Macris  (*  long ')  on  account  of  its  length.

See  Leake,  Athens^  2.  p.  66  sq,  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  356.

35.  2.  SaJamis.  The  island  of  Salamis  has  the  shape  of  an
irregular  and  much  indented  crescent,  the  horns  of  which  are  turned
towards  the  west.  Its  length  from  north  to  south  is  about  9  miles ;
its  greatest  breadth  from  east  to  west  about  10  miles.  The  horns  of
the  crescent  consist  of  two  chains  of  hills  which  are  united  at  the  middle
by  a  low  isthmus  only  a  mile  and  a  quarter  wide.  The  northern  horn
stretches  like  a  bar  across  the  southern  side  of  the  bay  of  Eleusis,
leaving  only  a  narrow  and  tortuous  channel  into  the  bay  at  its  eastern
and  western  ends.  Thus  the  bay  presents  from  many  points  of  view
the  appearance  of  an  inland  lake.  The  hills  of  Salamis  are  low ;  the
highest  point  is  only  about  1250  feet  above  the  sea.  Their  sides  are
sparsely  wooded  with  pines  and  shrubs,  and  are  furrowed  by  numerous
small  water-courses,  which  are  generally  dry.  The  most  considerable
of  these  streams  is  at  the  south-western  comer  of  the  island ;  it  is
probably  the  Bocarus  or  Bocalia  of  the  ancients  (Lycophron,  Cassandra^
451  ;  Strabo,  ix.  p.   394).     The  soil  even  of  the  isthmus  is  thin  and


478  SALAMIS  bk.  i.  attica

stony,  but  is  adapted  for  the  cultivation  of  the  vine  and  the  olive.  In
antiquity  the  island  produced  honey  (Euripides,  TroadeSy  794)  smd
cheese  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  395).  There  was  a  tradition  that  Athena  had
first  created  the  olive  in  Salamis  (Euripides,  Troades^  799)*  At  present
the  island  grows  com  and  vines.

Strabo  {Lc.)  describes  the  city  of  Salamis  as  situated  beside  a  bay,
on  a  peninsula  which  jutted  out  towards  Attica.  The  bay  to  which  he
refers  is  the  bay  of  Ambelaki  on  the  eastern  coast  of  the  island,  fiacing
towards  Piraeus.  It  is  bounded  on  the  north  and  south  by  two  penin-
sulas, of  which  the  southern  one  is  much  the  longer.  At  the  head  of
the  bay,  a  little  way  from  the  shore,  is  the  modern  village  of  Ambelaki.
In  the  water  of  the  bay  may  be  seen  numerous  remains  of  the  ancient
harbour;  and  on  the  peninsula,  now  crowned  by  a  windmill,  which
bounds  the  bay  on  the  north,  are  the  foundations  of  ancient  buildings
and  extensive,  though  insignificant,  remains  of  the  walls  and  towers  of
the  city  of  Salamis.  Strabo  says  (ix.  p.  393)  that  there  was  a  still  older
city  named  Salamis  on  the  south  side  of  the  island,  facing  towards
Aegina.  Near  a  small  port  in  the  south-western  part  of  the  island
Dodwell  observed,  at  the  foot  of  the  hills,  some  ancient  traces  and
foundations  of  considerable  extent,  but  so  overgrown  with  shrubs  and
bushes  that  he  could  not  examine  them  properly.  Possibly  these  may
be  the  remains  of  the  older  Salamis.  H.  G.  Lolling,  however,  believed
that  Salamis  was  always  on  the  bay  of  Ambelaki ^  but  that  originally  the
city  extended  more  to  the  south,  being  connected  by  walls  with  the
long,  narrow,  rugged  promontory  which  bounds  the  bay  on  the  south.
This  southern  promontory,  the  sharp  extremity  of  which  is  now  called
Cape  Varvariy  is  probably  the  ancient  Cynosura  (Herodotus,  viii.  76
sg,)  A  round  hill  which  projects  conspicuously  into  the  bay  oi Ambelaki
from  the  north  side  of  the  promontory  was  supposed  by  Lolling  to  be
what  Sophocles  called  "  the  Cychrean  hill  "  (Sophocles,  Teucer^  quoted
by  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v.  Kvxpcibs  irayos ;  cp.  Lycophron,  Cas-
sandra^ 450  >  i^  i^  ^^^  called  Magoula,  Its  smnmit  is  crowned  by
a  prehistoric  tumulus.  On  its  northern  slope  are  some  graves  and
squared  blocks  ;  on  its  southern  side  are  remains  of  ancient  walls  ;  on  its
western  face  are  numerous  sea-caves  into  which,  in  rough  weather,  the
waves  break.  These  caves  may  be  "  the  caverns  of  Cychreus,"  men-
tioned by  Lycophron  {Cassandra,  451);  for  Cychreus,  as  a  son  of  the
sea-god  Poseidon  (Apollodorus,  iii.  12.  7  ;  Diodorus,  iv.  72),  would
naturally  have  his  home  beside  the  sea.  The  walls  at  the  southern  foot
of  the  hill  may  be,  as  Lolling  conjectured,  the  remains  of  the  sanctuary
of  Cychreus  mentioned  by  Pausanias  (i.  36.  i).

In  the  market-place  of  Salamis  there  was  a  statue  of  Solon.  He
was  represented  as  if  haranguing  the  people,  with  one  hand  in  his  robe,
perhaps  in  the  attitude  of  the  noble  statue  of  Sophocles  which  adorns
the  Lateran.  The  statue  was  erected  in  the  early  part  of  the  fourth
century  B.C.  (Aeschines,  i.  25;  Demosthenes,  xix.  251,  p.  420).  The
heroine  Salamis,  the  mythical  ancestress  of  the  Salaminians,  seems  to
have  had  a  sanctuary  dedicated  to  her  in  the  city  of  Salamis ;  for  in
1882  there  was  fished  up  out  of  the  bay  a  pedestal  of  Hymettian  marble


CH.  XXXV  SAL  AMIS  479

inscribed  with  a  dedication  to  Salamis  by  the  cavalry.  The  pedestal
probably  supported  a  statue  of  Salamis  and  stood  in  her  sanctuary
(H.  G.  Lolling,  *  Inschrift  aus  Salamis,'  MittheiL  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^
7(1882),  pp.  40-44).

At  two  other  places  in  the  island  of  Salamis  there  are  some  ancient
remains  which  may  be  noticed.  One  of  these  places  is  close  to  a  cape
about  two  miles  north  of  the  ruins  of  Salamis,  at  the.  northern  end  of
the  eastern  strait  which  unites  the  bay  of  Eleusis  with  the  sea.  A  short
way  to  the  north  of  the  cape  lies  the  island  of  Nera.  The  vestiges  of
antiquity  are  to  be  seen  a  little  to  the  south  of  the  headland.  Here  at
the  foot  of  a  perpendicular  cliff  of  grey  rock,  in  the  clefts  of  which  birds
of  prey  build  their  nests,  is  an  inscription  carved  in  the  rock  {C.  I.  A.
iii.  No.  1 07 1,  pp.  244,  513),  which  states  that  the  presidents  of  the
tribe  Hippothontis  inscribed  their  names  here  "  out  of  respect  to  the
goddess."  In  front  of  this  clifT,  with  its  inscription,  is  a  roughly  con-
structed terrace  about  40  feet  long,  which  may  have  supported  an  altar.
A  little  to  the  south,  half  way  up  the  side  of  the  hill  (Arapis)  which
here  advances  to  the  sea,  are  two  terraces,  one  above  the  other,  the
supporting  walls  of  which  are  constructed  of  fine  polygonal  masonry  in
good  preservation.  The  lower  terrace  is  about  145  feet  long  and  11
feet  high.  The  upper  terrace,  which  rests  on  the  lower  as  on  a  pedestal,
is  large  enough  to  contain  a  small  temple.  Some  well-hewn  blocks
lying  about  on  it  may  have  belonged  to  the  building  which  the  terraces
were  built  to  support.  At  the  back  of  the  terraces  the  hillside  rises
very  rugged  and  steep.  Eastward  the  upper  terrace  is  prolonged  beyond
the  supporting  walls.  On  this  prolongation  of  the  terrace  are  the
foundations  of  a  quadrangular  building,  about  40  feet  long  by  20  feet
Avide  ;  they  are  standing  to  the  height  of  one  course  above  the  ground.
H.  G.  Lolling  conjectured,  with  great  probability,  that  the  sanctuary
of  Sciradian  Athena,  which  we  know  to  have  been  on  the  coast  of
Salamis  (Herodotus,  viii.  94 ;  cp.  Plutarch,  De  HerodoH  malignitate^
39),  stood  on  the  upper  terrace  ;  and  that  the  foundations  on  the  eastern
prolongation  of  the  terrace  are  those  of  the  sanctuary  of  the  war-god
Enyalius,  which  Solon  founded  near  Cape  Sciradium  in  Salamis  to  com-
memorate a  victory  which  he  won  here  over  the  Megarians  (Plutarch,
Solon^  9).  Thus  the  headland  a  little  to  the  north  of  the  ruins  is
probably  Cape  Sciradium ;  and  the  goddess  mentioned  in  the  rock-cut
inscription  is  Sciradian  Athena.

The  second  place  where  some  notable  ruins  are  to  be  seen  is  at  and
near  the  monastery  of  the  Panagia  Phanaromene  (*  Virgin  brought  to
light'),  which  stands  in  a  narrow  plain  by  the  shore,  on  the  north-
western promontory  of  Salamis,  commanding  views  of  surpassing
loveliness  across  the  bay  to  the  coasts  of  Attica  and  Megara.
The  strait  is  here  so  narrow  that,  about  a  mile  to  the  west  of  the
monastery,  a  ferry  plies  regularly  and  gives  its  modem  name  (Perama,
'  the  ferry ')  to  the  extremity  of  the  promontory.  The  monastery,  an
irregular  but  picturesque  pile  of  turrets,  cupolas,  and  battlements,  is  still
much  frequented  by  the  pious,  and  probably  occupies  the  site  of  an
ancient  temple ;  for  many  large  squared  blocks  are  to  be  seen  at  it,


480  SALAMIS  BK.  I.  ATTICA

together  with  some  fragments  of  Doric  columns.  Leake  supposed  that
the  monastery  stands  on  the  site  of  the  temple  of  Sciradian  Athena.
On  the  summit  of  the  hill  which  rises  to  the  south  of  the  monastery  are
considerable  remains  of  an  ancient  fortress,  consisting  of  foundations  of
walls  and  of  towers,  both  round  and  square,  of  considerable  thickness
and  strength.  They  are  constructed  of  a  mixture  of  small  stones  and
large  unhewn  blocks.  The  ruins  are  no  doubt  those  of  Budorum,  a  fort
which  Thucydides  (ii.  93)  describes  as  situated  on  the  promontory  of
Salamis,  which  looks  towards  Megara ;  the  Athenians  garrisoned  it  and
kept  three  guard-ships  here  to  prevent  the  Megarians  from  sailing  into
the  bay  of  Eleusis.  The  Peloponnesians  captured  it  in  429  B.C.,  but
were  obliged  to  evacuate  it  precipitately  the  next  day  (Thucydides,  i.  93
sq,  ;  Diodorus,  xii.  49  ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v,  BovSciipov).

On  Salamis  see  Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  pp.  574-580;  Leake,  Athens^  2.  pp.  166-176;
Vischer,  ErtnMrungen  und  EindrUckef  p.  221  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  I.  pp.  362-365  ;
H.  Belle,  Trois  annies  en  Grice,  p.  243  sq.  ;  H.  G.  Lolling,  *  Der  Tempel  der
Athene  Skiras  und  das  Vorgebirge  Skiradion  auf  Salamis,'  Alittheil,  d.  arch,  Inst,
in  Athen^  i  (1876),  pp.  127-138 ;  id.^  *  Die  Meerenge  von  Salamis,'  Hist,  u,
philolog.  Aufsdtze  Ernst  Curtius  gewidmet^  pp.  3-10;  Baedeker,' p.  117.  On
some  inscriptions  of  Salamis  see  P.  Monceaux,  '  Inscriptions  de  Salamine/
Bulletin  de  Corr.  HelUnique^  6  (1882),  pp.  521-539.  On  coins  of  Salamis  see
U.  Kohler,  in  Mittheil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  4  (1879),  p.  250  sqq.  As  to  the
battle  of  Salamis  see  below,  i.  36.  2  note.

35.  2.  It  is  said  that  Oychreus  first  called  the  island  by  its
present  name  etc.  The  island  of  Salamis  is  said  to  have  been  originally
called  Sciras  and  Cychrea,  after  the  heroes  Scirus  and  Cychreus  (Strabo,
ix.  p.  393 ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v.  Kvx/xto?  irayos ;  Eustathius,
Commentary  on  Dionysius^  507,  in  Geographi  Graeci  Minores^  ed.
Miiller,  2.  p.  3 1 4  ;  as  to  Cychreus  see  below,  i.  36.  i  note).  Aeschylus
speaks  of  "the  Cychrean  shores"  {Persians^  57o)>  meaning  thereby  the
coast  of  ^alamis.  A  mutilated  inscription,  which  has  already  been
often  referred  to  in  the  present  volume  (E<l>Yjfji€pls  dp\aioX.oyiKi),  1884,
p.  169  sq.)y  seems  to  speak  of  "the  ancient  city  sumamed  Cychrea"  in
Salamis.  As  to  "  the  Cychrean  hill "  see  above,  p.  478.  Diodorus  says
(iv.  72)  that  Salamis,  one  of  the  twelve  daughters  of  Asopus,  was  carried
off  by  Poseidon  to  the  island  which  afterwards  bore  her  name,  and  in
which  she  had  by  the  god  a  son  Cychreus,  who  became  king  of  the
island.

35.  2.  Philaens,  the  son  of  Ear3rsaces surrendered  the  island

to  the  Athenians  etc.  When  the  dispute  between  Athens  and  Megara
for  the  possession  of  Salamis  was  submitted  to  the  arbitration  of  the
Lacedaemonians,  Solon  is  said  to  have  alleged,  in  support  of  the  Athe-
nian claim,  that  Philaeus  and  Eurysaces,  two  sons  of  Ajax,  received  the
Athenian  citizenship,  surrendered  the  island  to  Athens,  and  settled  in
Attica,  one  of  them  at  Brauron,  the  other  in  Melite,  and  that  Philaeus
gave  his  name  to  the  Attic  township  of  Philaidae,  to  which  Pisistratus
belonged  (Plutarch,  Solon^  10).  Pausanias  makes  Philaeus  a  son  of
Eurysaces  and  grandson  of  Ajax.  But  Pherecydes  (quoted  by  Marcel-
linus,  Vita  Thucydidis^  3,  in  Westermann's  Biographi  Graeci^  p.  187)


CH.  XXXV  SALAMIS  481

•
and  Herodotus  (vi.  35),  with  whom  later  writers  agree  (Plutarch,  Ix,  ;
Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v,  ^iXaiiSai ;  Tzetzes,  Schol,  on  Lycophron^  53),
make  Philaeus  a  son  of  Ajax.  Cp.  J.  Topffer,  AtHsche  Genealogie,  p.
269  sqq,

35.  2.  the  Athenians  expelled  the  Salaminians,  on  the  ground
that  they  had  purposely  been  slack  in  the  war  with  Cassander.
While  Cassander  was  besieging  Salamis  he  gained  a  naval  victory  over
an  Athenian  fleet,  and  all  the  Salaminians  whom  he  captured  on  board
the  Athenian  ships  he  released  without  ransom.  This  lenity  gained  him
the  confidence  of  the  Salaminians,  and  they  surrendered  their  city  and
island  to  him  (Polyaenus,  iv.  11).  This  seems  to  have  happened  in
318  B.C.  (Droysen,  Gesch.  d,  Hellerdsmus^  ii.  i.  p.  230).  Cassander
had  a  short  time  previously  been  forced  by  Polysperchon  to  raise  the
siege  of  Salamis  (Diodorus,  xviii.  69).  Cp.  Paus.  i.  25.  6.  From  318
B.C.  onward  Salamis  seems  to  have  been  occupied  by  a  Macedonian
garrison  for  nearly  ninety  years.  In  229  B.C.  Aratus  succeeded  in
restoring  it  to  Athens  (Plutarch,  Aratus^  34  ;  Paus.  ii.  8.  6  ;  Droysen,
Gesch.  d,  Hellenismus^  iii.  2.  p.  57).  It  was  probably  after  thus
recovering  the  island  that  the  Athenians  punished  the  Salaminians  in
the  way  here  described  by  Pausanias.

35.  2.  had  been  chosen  general  of  Salamis.  The  general  of
Salamis  is  mentioned  in  Attic  inscriptions  (C  /.  A,  ii.  Nos.  469,  595).
Along  with  the  archon  of  Salamis,  who  was  appointed  by  lot  (Aristotle,
Constitution  of  Athens^  54),  he  superintended  the  sacrifices  oflfered  by
the  Athenian  lads  to  Ajax  at  Salamis  (see  below).

35.  3.  honours  continue  to  be  paid  by  the  Athenians  to  AjaiL
A  festival  of  Ajax,  comprising  a  procession,  a  sacrifice  to  Ajax,  athletic
sports,  and  a  regatta,  was  annually  celebrated  in  Salamis.  On  these
occasions  the  Athenian  lads  {epheboi)  regularly  rowed  over  to  the  island
and  took  part  in  the  ceremonies  and  contests  (Hesychius,  s.i'.  Aiavrcta  ;
C,  I.  A,  ii.  Nos.  467-471)  ;  on  one  occasion  at  least  they  beat  the
Salaminians  in  *the  long  race'  (C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  470).  It  may  have
been  at  this  festival  that  the  Athenians  used  to  set  out  a  suit  of  armour
on  a  couch  in  honour  of  Ajax  (Schol.  on  Pindar,  Nem,  ii.  1 9)  ;  but  more
probably  perhaps  the  ceremony  was  performed  beside  the  statue  of
Ajax  in  Athens  (Paus.  i.  5.  i  sq.)  Cp.  A.  Mommsen,  Heortologie^
p.  411  sq.\  Topffer,  s,v.  *Aianteia,*  Pauiys  Real  -  Encyclopddie^  i.
p.  926  sqq,

35.  3.  there  is  an  altar  of  Eursrsaces  at  Athens.  The  Eury-
saceum  or  sanctuary  of  Eurysaces  was  in  the  quarter  of  M elite,  on  or
near  the  Market  Hill,  beside  or  in  the  market-place  (Harpocration,  s,vv,
KvpxxTaKtiov  and  KoXwvcTas  ;  Suidas,  s.v,  EvpvcraKTys  ;  Second  Argu-
ment to  Sophocle^s  Oedipus  Coloneus^  Dindorf  s  Poetae  Scenici  Graeci^
p.  51  ;  Pollux,  vii.  132  sq,)

35.  4.  The  inhabitants  of  Salamis  say  that  when  Ajax  died,  the
flower  appeared  for  the  first  time  in  their  land  etc.  The  common
legend  was  that  when  Ajax  fell  on  his  sword  at  Troy,  the  purple
hyacinth  sprang  from  his  blood  inscribed  with  the  letters  AI  AI,  which
form  at  once  the  first  syllable,  twice  repeated,  of  his  name  in  Greek  and

VOL.  II  21


4^2  SALAMIS  BK.  I.  ATTICA

an  exclamation  of  sorrow  (Ovid,  Met  x.  210  sqq.^  xiii.  391  sqq, ;  Pliny,
N,  H,  xxi.  66 ;  Schol.  on  Theocritus,  x.  28 ;  Eustathius,  on  Homer,  //.
"•  557>  P*  285).  The  legend  here  recorded  by  Pausanias  differs  from
the  common  one  in  two  respects :  it  represents  the  flower  as  having
sprouted  in  Salamis  instead  of  at  Troy,  and  as  not  being  the  hyacinth.
Pausanias  recognised  the  letters  on  the  hyacinth,  but  referred  them  to
the  myth  of  Hyacinth  (iii.  19.  5).  A  vase-painting,  which  depicts  Ajax
about  to  commit  suicide,  shows  the  flower  growing  from  the  ground
inscribed  with  the  full  name  of  Ajax  {Compte  Rendu  (St  Petersburg)
for  1 86 1,  p.  139).  Milton  calls  the  hyacinth  "that  sanguine  flower
inscribed  with  woe"  {Lycidas^  106).

35.  4*  the  arniB  were  washed  ashore  at  the  grave  of  A^kl.
"  When  Ulysses  was  shipwrecked,  the  shield  of  Achilles  was  washed
ashore  at  the  tomb  of  Ajax,  and  having  been  set  up  on  the  grave  it  was
struck  by  lightning  on  the  morrow"  (Ptolemaeus,  Nov,  Hist,  5  in  Mytho-
graphi  Graeci^  ed.  Westermann,  p.  192).  Cp.  AnthoL  Paiatina^  ix.
115  and  116.

35.  5.  As  to  the  size  of  Ajax,  a  man  of  Mysia  said  that  etc
The  following  story  of  the  discovery  of  Ajax*s  bones  is  told  also  by
Philostratus  {Heroica^  ii.  3),  who  says  that  the  emperor  Hadrian  went
to  Troy,  embraced  and  kissed  the  bones,  and  raised  a  new  tomb  over
them.  The  bones,  according  to  Philostratus,  were  said  to  be  those  of
a  man  eleven  cubits  tall.  It  is  said  that  Agamemnon  would  not  suffer
the  body  of  the  suicide  Ajax  to  be  burned  in  the  usual  way  ;  and  that
therefore  of  all  the  Greeks  who  fell  at  Troy  Ajax  was  the  only  one
whose  remains  were  laid  in  a  cof!in  (ApoUodorus,  Epitoma  Vaticana^
ed.  Wagner,  p.  67  ;  Mythographi  Graed^  ed.  Wagner,  i.  p.  205  ;
Philostratus,  Heroica^  xiii.  7  ;  Eustathius,  on  Homer,  //.  ii.  557,  p.
285).  The  grave  of  Ajax  was  at  Rhaeteum  in  the  Troad  (ApoUodorus,
Lc,  ;  Quintus  Smymaeus,  v.  653  sqq.)  ;  besides  the  tomb  there  was
here  a  sanctuary  of  the  hero  and  a  statue  of  him  which  Mark  Antony
carried  off  and  Augustus  restored  (Strabo,  xiii.  p.  595).

35.  5.  the  remotest  tribe  of  Celts  called  Caharenses.  The  name
Cabarenses  (Ka^apcis)  may  perhaps  be  akin  to  Cavari,  the  name  of  a
Gallic  tribe  in  the  valley  of  the  Rhone  (Strabo,  iv.  p.  1 86).

35.  6.  Protophanes.     Cp.  v.  21.  10.

35.  6.  Asterius.     Cp.  vii.  2.  5.

35.  7.  Temenothyrae.  From  the  evidence  of  inscriptions  and
coins  it  appears  that  Temenothyrae  was  at  or  near  the  modem  Ushak.
See  W.  M.  Ramsay,  Historical  Geography  of  Asia  Minor,  p.  148  ^^. ;
Bulletin  de  Corr,  HellMque,  17  (1893),  p.  265.  Pausanias's  story  of
the  recovery  of  the  bones  of  Hyllus  at  Temenothyrae  may  have  been
read  by  Philostratus,  who  says  {Heroica,  ii.  7)  that  the  bones  of  Hyllus
son  of  Hercules  was  to  be  seen  in  Phrygia.  Temenothyrae,  which
Pausanias  calls  a  city  of  Upper  Lydia,  is  placed  by  all  the  Byzantine
lists  in  Phrygia  (Ramsay,  op,  cit,  p.  148).  The  river  Hyllus  which
flowed  near  Temenothyrae  (§8)  was  a  tributary  of  the  Hermus  (Homer,
//.  XX.  322,  Herodotus,  i.  8  ;  Strabo,  xiii.  p.  626).  Other  stories  of  the
discovery  of  giants'  bones  are  told  by  Strabo  (xvii.  p.  829),  Philostratus


CH.  XXXVI  SALAMIS  483

{Herotca^  ii.),  Phlegon  {Mtrabilia^  1 1  sgg,y  in  Scrip  tores  rerum  niira-
bilium  Graeciy  ed.  Westermann,  p.  136  sqq,\  Pliny  {N,  H,  vii.  73  sq,\
and  Solinus  (i.  90  sq.)  Such  stones  probably  sometimes  originated  in
the  discovery  of  the  fossil  bones  of  large  animals.  "  Tales  of  giants  and
monsters,  which  stand  in  direct  connexion  with  the  finding  of  great
fossil  bones,  are  scattered  broadcast  over  the  mythology  of  the  world.
Huge  bones,  found  at  Punto  Santo  Elena,  in  the  north  of  Guayaquil,
have  served  as  a  foundation  for  the  story  of  a  colony  of  giants  who
dwelt  there.  The  whole  area  of  the  Pampas  is  a  great  sepulchre  of
enormous  extinct  animals ;  no  wonder  that  one  great  plain  should  be
called  the  '  Field  of  the  giants,'  and  that  such  names  as  *  the  hill  of  the
giant,'  '  the  stream  of  the  animal,'  should  be  guides  to  the  geologist  in
his  search  for  fossil  bones  "  (E.  B.  Tylor,  Early  History  of  Mankind^
p.  322).  In  Sicily  vast  quantities  of  bones  of  animals  long  extinct  in
the  island  (including  mammoths,  elephants,  and  hippopotamuses)  have
been  found  and  have  given  rise  to  the  usual  fable  of  giants  that  dwelt  in
the  land  long  ago  (A.  Holm,  Geschichte  Siciliens^  i.  pp.  57,  356).  The
story  that  the  war  between  the  gods  and  giants  took  place  in  the  great
plain  of  Megalopolis  in  Arcadia  seems  to  have  been  due,  at  least  in
part,  to  the  discovery  of  mammoth  bones  there.  See  viii.  29.  i  note.
Fossil  bones  of  animals  such  as  are  now  only  observed  in  Eastern
Africa  have  been  found  in  abundance  in  the  bed  of  a  stream  near  the
village  of  Pikertni  in  Attica,  to  the  south-east  of  Mt.  Pentelicus  (Milch-
hofer,  Karten  von  Attika^  Erldut  Text^  iii.-vi.  p.  38).

35.  8.  Qeryon  is  at  Cadiz  etc.  Erythea,  the  island  of  Ger>'on,
was  commonly  identified  by  the  ancients  with  the  island  on  which  Cadiz
stands  or  with  another  island  near  it  (Herodotus,  iv.  8  ;  ApoUodorus,  iL
5.  10  ;  Strabo,  iii.  p.  169  ;  Philostratus,  Vit,  Apollon,  v.  4  sq, ;  Pliny,
N.  H,  iv.  120;  Silius  Italicus,  xvi.  195).  Two  trees,  of  a  species  not
known  elsewhere,  were  said  to  grow  on  Geryon's  grave  and  to  drip
blood  ;  they  were  called  Geryon's  trees  and  are  described  as  differing  in
appearance  both  from  the  pinus  pinea  (^rirvs)  and  the  pinus  maritima
(irevKTj)  (Philostratus,  Vit,  Apollon.  v.  5).  Hecataeus  denied  that
Erythea  was  the  island  of  Cadiz  and  maintained  that  it  was  an  island
off  the  coast  of  Ambracia  (Arrian,  ii.  16.  5).  Cp.  K.  Miillenhoff,
Deutsche  Altertumskunde,  i .  p.  130  sqq.

36.  I.  a  trophy  of  the  victory  which  Themistodes  etc  When
the  festival  of  Ajax  was  being  held  at  Salami  s  the  Athenian  lads
{epheboi)  used  occasionally,  if  not  regularly,  to  row  to  the  trophy  and
offer  sacrifice  to  Zeus  of  the  Trophy  (C  /.  A.  ii.  No.  467).  The  battle
of  Salamis  (Aeschylus,  Persae^  350  sqq, ;  Herodotus,  viii.  78  sqq, ;
Diodorus,  xi.  1 5  sqq,)  has  been  much  discussed  by  modem  writers.  It
would  be  out  of  place  to  go  into  the  subject  here.  Cp.  Leake,  Athens^
2.  pp.  228-272  ;  G.  Loeschcke,  *Die  Schlacht  bei  Salamis,'  FleckeiserCs
Jahrbiicher^  23  (1877),  pp.  25-32;  W.  W.  Goodwin,  *  The  battle  of
Salamis,'  Papers  of  the  American  School  of  Classical  Studies  at  Athens^
I  ( 1 882-1 883),  pp.  249-262;  Wecklein,  *  Ueber  Themistokles  und  die
Seeschlacht  bei  Salamis,'  Sitzungsberichte  d,  philosoph,  philolog,  Classe
d,  k,  b,  Akad,  d,  Wissen,  eu  Munchen,  1892,  pp.  2-35  ;  A.  Hauvette,  in


484  PSYTTALIA  BK.  I.  ATTICA

Nouvelles  Archives  des  Missions  ScientifiqueSy  2  (1892),  pp.  345-358.
Other  references  to  the  literature  of  the  subject  are  given  by  G.  Busolt,
Griech.  Geschichie^  2.  p.  170  sq.  In  1884  the  bottom  of  the  strait  of
Salamis  was  explored  by  divers  in  hope  of  discovering  some  relics  of
the  battle,  but  the  enterprise  was  not  successful  (II/xiKTiKa  it/s  'Ap^^ato-
AoyiKT/s 'Era t/3ia9,  1884,  p.  14  sqq.)

36.  I.  a  sanctuary  of  Oycbrens.  During  the  dispute  between
Athens  and  Megara  for  the  possession  of  Salamis  Solon  sailed  across  to
the  island  by  night  and  sacrificed  to  the  heroes  Periphemus  and  Cychreus
(Plutarch,  Solofty  10).  Cychreus  enjoyed  di\'ine  honours  at  Athens
(Plutarch,  Theseus ,  10).  According  to  some,  he  slew  an  enormous
serpent  which  had  devastated  the  island  of  Salamis  (Apollodorus,  iii.  12.
7;  Diodorus,  iv.  72;  Tzetzes,  Schol.  on  Lycophron,  no,  175,  451).
According  to  another  form  of  the  legend  the  serpent  was  bred  by
Cychreus  and  was  called  the  serpent  of  Cychreus,  but  it  was  expelled  by
Eurylochus  because  it  ravaged  the  island ;  Demeter,  however,  received
the  serpent  at  Eleusis  and  it  became  an  attendant  of  the  goddess
(Hesiod,  cited  by  Strabo,  ix.  p.  393).  A  later  rationalistic  version  of
the  legend  was  that  Cychreus  himself  was  sumamed  Serpent  (Ophis)
on  account  of  his  cruelty,  for  which  he  was  expelled  by  Eurylochus
(Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v.  Kvxp^to?  irayos ;  Eustathius,  Commentary  on
DionysiuSy  507,  in  Geographi  Graeci  Minor eSy  ed.  M tiller,  2.  p.  314).
These  tales,  combined  with  the  statement  of  Pausanias  in  the  present
passage  that  Cychreus  was  believed  to  have  appeared  in  serpent  form  at
the  battle  of  Salamis,  point  clearly  to  the  conclusion  that  in  the  original
form  of  the  myth  Cychreus  was  himself  the  serpent.  Cp.  Otto  Jahn,  in
Heydemann's ///i//^rj/j,  p.  12  ;  J.  Topffer,  Attische  Genealogie^  p.  272  sq,

36.  2.  an  island  ciEdled  Psyttalia  etc.  Psyttalia,  now  called
Leipsokoutaliy  is  a  rocky  island  about  a  mile  long,  but  low  and  narrow,
at  the  southern  entrance  to  the  strait  of  Salamis  (Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.
365  ;  A.  Hauvette,  in  Nouvelles  Archives  des  Missions  Scieniifiques^  2
(1892),  p.  350  sq.)  Strabo  describes  it  (ix.  p.  395)  as  "a  small  island,
uninhabited  and  rocky,  which  some  call  the  eye-sore  of  Piraeus."  It
was  supposed  to  be  haunted  by  Pan  (Aeschylus,  Persae,  447  sqq,)  As
to  the  landing  of  the  Persians  in  it  and  their  massacre  after  the  battle,
see  Aeschylus,  I.e. ;  Herodotus,  viii.  76  and  95  ;  Plutarch,  AristideSy  9  ;
cp.  Pausanias,  iv.  36.  6.  The  number  of  the  Persians  who  landed  in
Psyttalia  is  mentioned  by  Pausanias  alone.

36.  3-  the  road  from  Athens  to  Eleusis,  which  the  Athenians
call  the  Sacred  Way.  Having  completed  his  description  of  the  Attic
islands,  Pausanias  returns  to  Athens  and  sets  out  thence  for  Eleusis
along  the  Sacred  Way.  This  was  the  road  by  which  the  initiated  went
from  Athens  to  Eleusis :  the  antiquary  Polemo  devoted  a  whole  book
to  a  description  of  the  road  (Harpocration,  s.v.  i€/oa  oh6%\  Etymolog.
Magnunty  p.  469  s.v.  Upa  686s ;  Dicaearchus,  quoted  by  Athenaeus,  xiii.
p.  594  f ;  [Plutarch,]  Vil.  X.  Oral.  p.  837  c).  The  present  highroad
from  Athens  to  Eleusis  follows  very  closely  the  line  of  the  Sacred  Way.
Of  the  monuments,  mostly  sepulchral,  which  lined  the  ancient  road  a
few  remains  still  exist  at  various  points  along  the  route.     The  distance


CH.  XXX VI  THE  SACRED  WAY  485

of  Eleusis  from  Athens  by  this  road  is  about  1 2  miles.  The  Sacred
Way  seems  to  have  started  from  the  Dipylum.  This  may  be  inferred
from  the  feet  that  the  first  monument  mentioned  by  Pausanias  on  the
Sacred  Way  is  the  tomb  of  Anthemocritus ;  for  Plutarch  tells  us
{Pericles^  30)  that  Anthemocritus  was  buried  "beside  the  Thriasian
gate,  which  is  now  called  the  Dipylum."  It  is  possible  that  the  Sacred
Way  started  from  the  Sacred  Gate,  which  was  near  the  Piraeic  gate
(Plutarch,  Sulla^  14),  and  that  the  Sacred  Gate  is  to  be  identified  with
the  gate-like  opening  in  the  city-wall  about  60  yards  to  the  south-west
of  the  Dipylum  (see  note  on  i.  2.  4).  Even  if  the  latter  view  be
adopted,  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  tomb  of  Anthemocritus  on  the
Sacred  Way  should  have  been  described  by  Plutarch  as  beside  the
Dipylum.  For,  on  this  hypothesis,  the  two  gates  were  very  near  each
other :  the  roads  leading  from  them  may  have  converged  and  met  at  a
short  distance  from  the  walls ;  and  if  the  tomb  in  question  was  at  the
meeting  of  the  roads,  it  may  have  been  equidistant  from  the  two  gates.
However,  it  is  unlikely  that  religious  processions  passed  out  through
the  Sacred  Gate,  since,  as  we  have  seen  above  (p.  44),  the  dead  were
carried  out  by  that  gate,  and  hence  it  would  probably  be  shunned  as
polluted  and  ill-omened.  The  ordinary  highroad  to  Eleusis  most  likely
started  from  the  Dipylum ;  for  Thria,  from  which  the  Dipylum  took  its
old  name  of  the  Thriasian  gate,  was  between  Athens  and  Eleusis.  Two
boundary-stones,  each  bearing  the  inscription  "  boundary  of  the  road  to
Eleusis"  (C.  /.  A,  ii.  No.  1075  I  ^-  -^-  -^^  iv.  No.  505  a,  p.  51),  have
been  found  near  the  church  of  the  Holy  Trinity  (Hagia  Triada)  a  little
way  outside  of  the  two  gates  in  question.  One  at  least  of  the  boundary-
stones  was  not  found  in  its  original  situation.

From  whichever  of  the  two  gates  the  Sacred  Way  started,  it  must
have  followed  approximately  the  line  of  the  modem  highroad  to  Eleusis.
This  road,  running  in  a  north-westerly  direction,  soon  passes  on  the  left
the  Botanic  Garden,  conspicuous  by  its  tall  and  stately  poplars,  and
enters  the  broad  belt  of  olive-wood  which  still  extends,  as  it  doubtless
extended  in  antiquity,  along  both  sides  of  the  Cephisus  for  mile  after
mile.  Through  this  wood  of  ancient  olives,  with  their  massive  gnarled
trunks  and  pale  green  foliage,  the  road  runs  for  more  than  a  mile,  cross-
ing several  arms  of  the  Cephisus,  which  are  generally  dry  and  dusty,
the  water  being  diverted  in  many  petty  rivulets  to  feed  the  olive-yards
and  gardens.  Beyond  the  olive-wood  the  road  at  first  gradually  ascends
through  a  bare  stony  tract  where  nothing  grows  but  thistles ;  then  it
climbs  more  steeply  the  arid  and  rocky  slopes  of  Mt.  Aegaleus,  which  it
crosses  by  a  narrow  but  easy  pass,  enclosed  on  both  sides  by  low  and
desolate  heights.  Near  the  summit  of  the  pass  a  round,  isolated  hill,
crowned  by  a  church  of  St.  Elias,  rises  conspicuously  on  the  right.
From  this  point  of  the  road  there  is  a  famous  view  backward  over  the
Athenian  plain.  The  scene  is  especially  striking  at  sunset,  when  the
Acropolis,  rising  high  above  the  olive-woods,  with  its  temples  lit  up  by
the  dying  splendour  of  the  sun,  stands  out  against  a  background  of
purple  mountains.  A  little  further  on  the  road  turns  and  begins  to
descend,  and  Athens  is  lost  to  sight.


486  THE  SACRED  WAY  bk.  i.  attica

About  a  mile  further  on  we  pass  the  deserted  monastery  of  Daphni^
which  probably  occupies  the  site  of  the  sanctuary  of  Apollo  mentioned
by  Pausanias  (i.  37.  6  note).  It  stands  on  the  left  of  the  road  enclosed
by  a  high  battlemented  wall  above  which  rises  the  dome  of  its  Byzantine
church.  Beyond  the  monastery  the  road  descends  rapidly  towards  the
shore.  Here  the  ancient  road  may  be  traced  for  a  long  way  on  the
north  side  of  the  pass,  running  parallel  to  the  modem  highroad  on  the
left  bank  of  a  dry  water-course  which  descends  from  the  monastery.
The  road  was  partly  cut  in  the  rock,  partly  supported  by  a  wall  of  rough
stones  on  the  side  of  the  water-course.  As  the  road  descends  the  sea
appears  at  the  further  end  of  it,  framed  between  the  stony  slopes  of  the
hills  which  enclose  the  pass.  Further  on,  the  pass  opening  out,  we  see
stretched  below  us,  like  a  lake,  the  deep  blue  waters  of  the  landlocked
Gulf  of  Salamis,  shut  in  on  the  south  by  the  bare  but  beautifully  outlined
hills  of  Salamis,  on  the  north  by  a  graceful  sweep  of  the  Attic  coast,  and
backed  by  the  distant  heights  of  Cithaeron  and  the  mountains  of  Megara
on  the  west.  Through  a  dip  between  the  hills  of  Salamis  and  the
mainland  may  be  seen  in  clear  weather  the  far  conspicuous  peak  of
Cyllene  in  Arcadia  with  its  crown  of  snow.

A  mile  or  so  after  passing  the  monastery  we  see  on  the  right  of  the
road  some  ancient  masonry  and  large  blocks  of  stone  at  the  foot  of  a
rugged  wall  of  rock,  in  the  face  of  which  many  niches  are  cut  This
is  the  sanctuary  of  Aphrodite  mentioned  by  Pausanias  (i.  37.  7  note).
Soon  after  this  point  the  hills  retire  on  both  sides  and  the  pass  ends  in
a  little  plain,  barren  and  waterless  but  partially  planted  with  olives,
beside  the  shore.  Here  the  road  turns  sharply  to  the  right  and,  follow-
ing the  shore,  runs  northward,  hemmed  in  between  the  sea  on  the  one
side  and  the  grey,  arid  slopes  of  Mt.  Aegaleus  on  the  other.  Soon,
however,  the  hills  trend  inland  a  little,  leaving  between  the  foot  of  their
declivities  and  the  road  a  small  lake  or  large  pond  of  clear  salt-water,
fed  by  a  number  of  copious  salt  springs,  the  ancient  Rhiti  (Pausanias,  i.
38.  i).  The  pond  is  formed  by  damming  up  the  water  of  these  springs
by  means  of  a  stone  dyke  or  embankment,  beside  which  the  modem
road  runs  on  a  narrow  strip  of  sand  between  the  pond  on  the  right  and
the  sea  on  the  left.  Fiedler  observed  flying-fish  of  the  size  of  herrings
rising  from  the  surface  of  the  pool :  he  says  their  flesh  is  white  and
succulent,  better  than  that  of  the  sea  fish  in  the  neighbouring  bay.  In
antiquity,  as  Pausanias  tells  us,  the  right  of  fishing  here  was  strictly
preserved  by  the  priests  of  Eleusis.  A  strong  stream,  turning  a  mill,
flows  out  of  the  pool  into  the  sea.  At  the  further  end  of  the  pond  Mt.
Aegaleus  sends  down  its  last  spur  close  to  the  road ;  after  passing  it  the
road  skirts  on  the  right  another  salt-pool  and  enters  the  Thriasian  plain.
The  stream  which  issues  from  the  second  of  the  two  salt-ponds  turns,  or
rather  used  to  turn,  another  mill.  Opinions  have  differed  as  to  whether
the  ancient  road  ran,  like  the  modem  road,  between  the  salt-pools  and
the  sea,  or  skirted  the  foot  of  the  hills,  making  a  circuit  round  the  pools.
The  latter  was  Leake's  view.  He  says  that  the  marks  of  the  ancient
chariot-wheels  are  visible  on  the  rocks  at  the  foot  of  the  hills  on  the
inner  side  of  the  pools.     On  the  other  hand,   there  are  vestiges  of


CH.  XXXVI  THE  SACRED  WAY  487

the  ancient  road  which  seem  to  lead  directly  into  the  southern  of
the  two  pools.  Mr.  Philios,  who  has  studied  the  spot  repeatedly,
says  that  the  ancient  road,  after  turning  inland  and  following  the
foot  of  the  hill  for  some  distance,  struck  straight  through  the  middle
of  the  pool,  parallel  to  the  modem  road  and  at  a  distance  of  40  to
50  paces  from  it.  The  traces  of  it  have  been  observed  as  ^  as  the
first  mill  (sec  Mr.  D.  Philios,  in  MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst  in  Afhen^
19  (1894),  p.  165  sqq,)  In  any  case  it  seems  probable  that  in
antiquity  the  water  of  the  salt-springs  was  not  dammed  up  as  at  present
so  as  to  form  pools,  but  was  allowed  to  flow  directly  into  the  sea  in
brooks  which  hence  received  the  name  of  Rhiti  (*  streams ').

After  entering  the  Thriasian  plain  the  road  continues  to  skirt  the
shore.  As  the  ground  is  here  low  and  marshy,  the  road  is  raised  on  a
causeway,  which  consists  of  ancient  materials  mixed  with  those  of  later
ages.  This  causeway  therefore  marks  the  line  of  the  Sacred  Way.  On
the  right  of  it,  about  half  a  mile  beyond  the  salt-pools,  where  the  road
to  Eleutherae  branches  off  across  the  plain  to  the  right,  there  are
remains  of  an  ancient  monument,  which  appears  to  have  consisted
originally  of  a  cubical  mass  of  earth,  cased  with  white  marble  and
supporting  a  tombstone.  An  inscription  {C.LA,  iii.  No.  1778)  proves
that  the  monument  marked  the  tomb  of  one  Strato,  his  wife  PoUa
(Paula)  Mimatia,  and  his  son  Isidotus.  This  sepulchre,  one  of  the
many  sepulchres  which  lined  the  Sacred  Way  in  antiquity,  is  not  men-
tioned by  Pausanias.

The  Thriasian  plain  (Herodotus,  viii.  65,  ix.  7  ;  Thucydides,  ii.  19
and  21),  through  which  the  Sacred  Way  led  to  Eleusis,  is  surrounded
by  mountains  and  hills  except  on  the  south,  where  it  is  bounded  by  the
Gulf  of  Salamis.  It  is  about  nine  miles  long  from  east  to  west,  and
five  miles  wide  at  the  broadest  part,  from  north  to  south.  The  northern
and  western  parts  of  the  plain  are  stony  and  barren.  Nearer  the  sea
there  is  a  tract  of  fertile  comland,  but  it  does  not  extend  much  to  the
north  of  Eleusis  itself  The  monotony  of  the  otherwise  treeless  expanse
is  broken  here  and  there  by  some  scattered  olive-trees  and  oaks.  In
spring  and  early  summer  the  plain  is  gaily  carpeted  in  places  with
anemones,  red,  purple,  and  blue.

See  Wheler,  Journey^  p.  425  sqq, ;  Chandler,  Travels,^,  184  sqq,  ;  The  Un-
edited Antiquities  of  Attica  (London,  1817),  p.  3  sqq.  ;  Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  p.
285  sq.  ;  f</.,  2.  p.  168  sqq,  ;  Leake,  N,  Greece^  2,  p.  381  sqq,  ;  id,  Athens,  2,  p.
135  sqq.  ;  Fiedler,  Reise,  I.  p.  80  sqq.  ;  Welcker,  Tagebtuh,  i.  p.  107  sqq.  ;  L.
Ross,  IVanderungen,  2.  p.  89  sqq,  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen  und  EindrUcke,  p.  92
sqq,  ;  W.  G.  Clark,  Peloponnesus ^  p.  29  sqq.  ;  L.  Preller,  'De  via  sacra  Eleusmia,'
Ausgewdhlte  Aufsdtze,  pp.  117-13$;  Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  p.  ^26  sqq,  ;  Fr.  Lenor-
xnant,  Monographie  de  la  Voie  Satrie  Eleusinienne  (Paris,  i8iS4) ;  H.  Belle,  Trots
annies  en  Grice,  p.  44  sqq, ;  Milchhofer,  Karten  von  Attika,  Erldut,  Text,  Heft  iL
pp.  15-17,  46-49;  Baedeker,' pp.  no,  11%  sq.\  Guide-Joanne,  i.  p.  iq6  sqq,;  Bulletin
de  Corr,  HelUnique,  17  (1893),  P-  ^95*  The  view  of  Athens  from  the  pass  of
Daphni  is  described  by  Chateaubriand,  Itiniraire  de  Paris  h  Jerusalem,  I.  p.  166
sqq.  ;  W.  Mure,  Journal,  2,  p.  43  sq.  ;  and  Fr.  Lenormant,  op,  cit.  p.  455  sqq,

36.  3.  the  tomb  of  Anthemocritus  etc.  Shortly  before  the  out-
break of  the  Peloponnesian  war  Anthemocritus  was  sent  by  Pericles  to


488  SCI  RUM  BK.  I.  ATTICA

Megara  and  Sparta  to  complain  that  the  Megarians  were  encroaching
on  the  sacred  land.  He  died  on  the  embassy  ;  and  the  Athenians,
believing  that  the  Megarians  had  murdered  him,  declared  war  against
Megara  and  voted  that  Anthemocritus  should  be  buried  beside  the
Thriasian  gate,  that  is,  the  Dipylum.  The  Megarians,  however,  protested
their  innocence.  See  Plutarch,  Pericles^  30,  and  above,  p.  485.  Demo-
sthenes says  (xii.  4.  p.  159)  that  on  account  of  this  supposed  murder
the  Athenians  excluded  the  Megarians  from  the  mysteries  and  set
up  a  statue  of  Anthemocritus  in  front  of  the  gate,  that  is,  the  Thria-
sian gate  or  Dipylum  (Harpocration,  5,v,  'Av^cftoK/airos).  The  statue
probably  formed  part  of  the  sepulchral  monument.  There  were  baths
beside  the  statue  (Isaeus,  quoted  by  Harpocration,  Lc.)  These  baths
were  probably  supplied  with  water  by  the  aqueducts  which  traversed  the
city.  The  courses  of  these  aqueducts  are  now  known  (see  E.  Ziller,
*  Untersuchungen  iiber  die  antiken  Wasserleitungen  in  Athen,*  Mittheil.
d,  arch,  Inst  in  Athen^  2  (1877),  pp.  1 07-1 31).  Two  of  these
aqueducts  seem  to  have  met  near  a  cistern  a  little  to  the  west  of  the
church  of  the  Holy  Trinity  (Hagia  Triada)  outside  the  Dipylum.  Prof.
Milchhofer  accordingly  conjectures  that  the  baths  and  the  tomb  of
Anthemocritus  were  in  this  neighbourhood  (Karten  von  Attika^  Erldut,
Text,  Heft  ii.  p.  1 5).

36.  3.  whom  even  the  Emperor  Hadrian  conld  not  make  to
thrive.  Hadrian  was  a  benefactor  of  Megara  (Paus.  I  42.  5  ;  i.
44.  6)  and  was  styled  by  the  Megarians  their  **  founder,  legislator,
and  nourisher"  (C.  /.  (7.  G.  S,  Nos.  70-71);  but  from  Pausanias*s
present  remark  it  would  seem  that  the  emperor's  benefits  had  no
permanent  effect.  Cp.  Hertzberg,  Geschichte  Griechenlands  unter  der
Herrschaft  der  Romer,  2.  p.  308.

36.  4.  the  grave  of  Molottns  etc.  When  Plutarch,  tyrant  of
Eretria  in  Euboea,  was  threatened  by  Philip  of  Macedonia  in  350  B.C.,
the  Athenians  despatched  a  force  under  Phocion  to  his  assistance.
Phocion  was  afterwards  superseded  by  Molottus  who,  however,  fell  into
the  hands  of  the  enemy.     See  Plutarch,  Phocion^  12-14.

36.  4-  a  place  which  is  called  Scimm  etc.  The  situation  of  this  place
can  be  approximately  determined.  We  learn  from  Pausanias  that  it  was
beside  a  torrent  called  the  Scirus  between  Athens  and  the  Cephisus  ;  for
Pausanias  begins  his  description  of  the  Sacred  Way  just  outside  Athens
and  does  not  reach  the  Cephisus  till  i.  37.  3.  Now  the  only  torrent
which  approaches  the  Sacred  Way  between  Athens  and  the  Cephisus  is
the  stream  which  rises  in  the  hills  called  Tourko-Vouni  to  the  north  of
Lycabettus  and  flows  round  the  north  side  of  Athens  in  a  deep  bed.
At  the  present  day  the  course  of  this  stream  has  been  diverted  in  a
north-westerly  direction  to  supply  some  oil-presses,  so  that  it  does  not  now
approach  the  Sacred  Way  till  near  the  Arboretum,  immediately  beyond
the  Botanic  Garden  on  the  road  to  Eleusis ;  the  water  is  however  lost
in  the  olive-grove  before  it  reaches  the  road.  But  before  this  diversion,
which  seems  to  be  recent,  was  made,  the  stream  must  have  crossed  the
road  to  Eleusis  at  a  point  a  little  short  of  the  Botanic  Garden.  Here
then,  at  a  distance  of  about  half  a  mile  or  so  from  the  Dipylum,  was


CH.  XXXVI  SCIRUM  489

probably  the  place  called  Scirum.     See  Leake,  Athens^  2.  pp.  40,  41 ;
Milchhofer,  in  Karten  von  Atiika^  Erldut,  Text^  Heft  ii.  p.  1 5  sq.

Scirum  was  a  notorious  haunt  of  rakes,  gamblers,  and  prostitutes
(Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.it,  'EKipos ;  Alciphron,  Epist.  iii.  8  and  2  5  ;
Theopompus,  cited  by  Harpocration,  s,v.  ^Kif>d<f>ia),  Diviners  also  plied
their  trade  here  (Photius,  Lexicon^  s,v,  ^Kipov).  On  the  twelfth  day  of
the  month  of  Scirophorion,  which  would  fall  not  far  from  Midsummer  Day,
a  festival  called  Scira  was  celebrated,  at  which  the  priestess  of  Athena,
the  priest  of  Poseidon-Erechtheus,  and  the  priest  of  the  Sun  went  in
procession  from  the  Acropolis  to  Scirum.  The  priest  of  Poseidon-
Erechtheus  carried  a  white  umbrella  in  the  procession  (Harpocration
and  Suidas,  s,v,  ^Kipov ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Eccles.  18;  cp.
Photius,  Lexicon^  sAn*.  ^Kipov  and  ^Kipos).  A  sacred  ploughing  took
place  at  Scirum  once  a  year  in  memory  of  the  origin  of  agriculture
(Plutarch,  Conjugalia  Praecepta^  42).  This  ploughing  may  very  well
have  formed  part  of  the  Midsummer  festival  of  the  Scira  ;  for  Xenophon
advises  the  farmer  to  break  up  his  fallow  land  at  Midsummer  {Oecono-
micus^  xvi.  13  sq,)  Some  late  writers  of  antiquity  speak  of  a  temple
or  sanctuary  of  Sciradian  Athena  at  Scirum  (Pollux,  ix.  96 ;  Bekker's
Anecdota  Graeca^  p.  300,  line  2  5  sqq, ;  Eustathius,  on  Homer,  Od,  i.
107,  p.  1397).  But  they  probably  confused  Scirum  with  the  temple  of
Sciradian  Athena  at  Phalerum  (see  i.  i.  4  note).  If  there  had  been  a
temple  of  Sciradian  Athena  at  Scirum,  Pausanias  would  probably  have
mentioned  it  Other  geographical  writers  who  mention  Scirum  (Strabo,
ix.  p.  393  ;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s,v.  ^Kipos)  are  equally  silent  as  to
a  temple  or  sanctuary  of  Sciradian  Athena  at  the  place.  The  name
Scirum  and  the  epithet  Sciradian  {Skiras)  applied  to  Athena  seem  to  be
derived  from  a  word  meaning  *  white  earth,*  *  gypsum'  (Schol.  on
Aristophanes,  Wasps,  926  ;  Suidas  and  Photius,  Lexicon^  s,v,  ^Kipos ;
Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca,  p.  304,  line  8  sqq,)

On  the  festival,  the  meaning  of  the  name,  and  the  question  whether  there  was
a  temple  of  Sciradian  Athena  at  Scirum  see  K.  O.  Mliller,  KUine  Schriften^  2.  p.
162  sqq.  ;  K.  F.  Hermann,  Gottesdienstliche  Alterihumer^  §  61.  14 ;  G.  F.
Schbmann,  Griech,  Altertkiimer^  2.  p.  474  sqq.  ;  Fr.  Lenormant,  La  Vote  Sacrie^
p.  179  sqq. ;  K.  Botticher,  in  Phihlogtts^  22  (1865),  p.  Z'fisqq.  ;  Aug.  Mommsen,
Heortohgie,  p.  440  sqq.  ;  /V/.,  *  Die  attische  Skirabrauche/  Philologus,  50  (189 1 ),
pp.  108-136;  C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadi  Athett,  I.  p.  ^i  sqq.  ;  C.  Robert,
•Athena  Skiras  und  die  Skirophorien,'  Hernus,  20  (1885),  pp.  349-379;  E.
Rohde,  in  Hermes t  21  (1886),  pp.  116-125;  Preller,  Griech.  Mythologie,^  I.  p.
204  sqq.  ;  P.  Stengel,  Griech,  SakralaUertiimer,  §  1 24,  p.  1 70.

36.  4.  a  soothsayer  from  Dodona  named  Scims.  Philochorus  in
the  second  book  of  his  A  Mis  represented  Scirus  as  an  Eleusinian  sooth-
sayer :  Praxion,  on  the  other  hand,  derived  the  name  Scirum  from  the
notorious  Sciron  (Harpocration,  s.v.  ^Kipov ;  as  to  Sciron  cp.  Paus.  i.
39.  6  ;  i.  44.  6  and  8).  Others  derived  the  name  from  the  Salaminian
hero  Scirus  (Suidas  and  Photius,  Lexicon,  s.v,  ^Kipoi),  See  i.  39.  6,
note  on  *  Sciron.'

36.  5.  the  tomb  of  Cephisodoms.  We  learn  from  Polybius
(xvii.  10)  that  the  embassy  of  Cephisodoms  to  Rome,  mentioned  by


490  THE  SACRED  WAY  bk.  i.  attica

Pausanias  (§  6),  took  place  in  01.  145.  3  (198/7  B.C.),  shortly  before
the  battle  of  Cynoscephalae,  in  which  Philip  V.  of  Macedonia  was
defeated  by  the  Romans  under  Flamininus.  Nothing  seems  to  be
known  of  Cephisodorus  beyond  what  Pausanias  tells  us  here.

36.  6.  alter  he  had  slain  Alexander,  son  of  Oassander.    See  i.

ID.    I.

37.  I.  HeliodomB  Halls,  whose  picture  etc.  Nothing  more  is
known  of  this  man.  It  is  not  even  certain  from  Pausanias's  expression
whether  the  picture  was  a  portrait  of  Heliodorus  or  a  painting  by  him.
Preller  (Ausgewdhlte  Aufsdtzey  p.  120)  and  Schubart  {Fleckeiseris
Jahrbucher^  9  (1863),  p.  301)  understood  Pausanias's  expression  in  the
latter  way.  An  ancient  painter  of  this  name  is  not  known  from  any
other  source.  In  favour  of  understanding  Pausanias  to  mean  a  portrait  of
Cephisodorus  might  be  quoted  a  parallel  expression  in  ix.  22.  3.

37.  I.  Acestinm the  daughter  of  Xenocles  etc.    This  lady

is  mentioned  as  "  Acestium  daughter  of  Xenocles,  a  man  of  the  town-
ship of  Achamae "  in  a  list  of  noble  ladies  preserved  in  an  inscription
(C.  I,  A,  ii.  No.  956).  From  another  inscription,  found  in  the  precinct  of
Demeter  at  Eleusis,  we  learn  that  a  statue  of  Sophocles,  brother  of
Acestium,  was  set  up  there  by  his  wife.  The  inscription  runs  as  follows
(C.  /.  A,  ii.  No.  141 4):  "  Ctesiclea,  member  of  an  orgiastic  society,
daughter  of  Apollonius,  a  man  of  the  township  of  Achamae,  dedicated
(this  statue  of)  her  husband  Sophocles  son  of  Xenocles  of  the  township
of  Achamae ;  he  was  twice  torchbearer  to  Demeter  and  the  Maid."
This  inscription  therefore  confirms  Pausanias's  statement  that  Sophocles
son  of  Xenocles  had  held  the  office  of  torchbearer.  The  same  Sophocles
seems  to  be  mentioned  in  another  inscription  which  is,  however,  mutilated
(C  /.  A,  ii.  No.  1047).  Acestium  and  her  brother  Sophocles  apparently
lived  about  the  beginning  of  the  first  century  B.C.  Cp.  J.  Topflfer,
Atiische  Genealogie^  p-  73*

The  torchbearer  was  one  of  the  two  chief  dignitaries  who  officiated
at  the  Eleusinian  mysteries,  the  other  being  the  hierophant,  who  ranked
above  him.  The  office  of  torchbearer  was  throughout  the  whole  period
of  classical  antiquity  hereditary  in  the  family  of  the  Ceryces  or  '  heralds  '
(Paus.  i.  38.  3).  From  the  present  passage  of  Pausanias,  indeed,  taken
in  conjunction  with  a  passage  of  Plutarch  {Themis tocles^  i),  it  has  often
been  inferred  that  at  some  time,  the  family  of  the  Ceryces  becoming
extinct,  the  office  of  torchbearer  was  transferred  to  the  family  of  the
Lycomids.  For  Themistocles  belonged  to  the  Lycomids  (Plutarch,  /.r.),
and  here  Pausanias  informs  us  that  the  office  of  torchbearer  was  held
by  many  of  Themistocles's  descendants.  But  Pausanias  does  not  tell
us  whether  the  descendants  of  Themistocles  who  held  the  office  were
descended  from  him  in  the  male  or  in  the  female  line.  If  they  were
descended  from  him  in  the  male  line,  they  must  of  course  have  been
Lycomids,  and  the  supposed  transference  of  the  office  from  the  Ceryces
to  the  Lycomids  must  have  taken  place.  But  the  inscriptions  cited
above,  by  showing  that  the  descendants  in  question  belonged  to  the
township  of  Achamae,  prove  that  they  were  descended  from  Themistocles
in  the  female  line.     For   Themistocles  belonged  to  the  township  of


CH.  XXXVII  THE  SACRED  WAY  491

Phreari  (Plutarch,  Themistocles,  i ),  not  of  Achamae  ;  and  if  Sophocles,
Xenocles,  and  the  rest  of  his  descendants  mentioned  by  Pausanias  had
been  descended  from  him  in  the  male  line,  they  also  must  have  belonged
to  the  township  of  Phreari.  As  they  did  not,  they  must  have  been
descendants  in  the  female  line,  and  cannot  therefore  have  been  Lycomids.
From  which  it  follows  that  the  supposed  transference  of  the  office  of
torchbearer  from  the  Ceryces  to  the  Lycomids  did  not  take  place.  See
W.  Dittenberger,  in  Hermes^  20  (1885),  p.  10  sqq.  The  old  error  is,
with  others  on  the  same  subject,  repeated  in  some  recent  books.

37.  2.  a  precinct  of  tiie  hero  Lacius,  and  a  township  named
Laciadae.  K.  O.  Miiller  {Die  Dorier^  i.  pp.  1 14  ^^.,  227  sqq,)  identified
Lacius  with  Rhacius,  as  to  whom  see  vii.  3.  i  sq,^  ix.  33.  2.  Three  or
four  hundred  yards  to  the  right  (north)  of  the  road  to  Eleusis,  just  before
you  come  to  the  Botanic  Garden,  there  is  a  small  ruined  church  of  St.
David  built  on  the  site  and  with  the  materials  of  an  ancient  edifice.
Fr.  Lenormant  thought  that  this  church  marked  the  site  of  the  precinct
of  Lacius  {La  Vote  Sacr^e^  p.  205).  The  township  Laciadae  belonged
to  the  tribe  Oeneis  (Stephanus  Byzantius  and  Photius,  Lexicon^  s.v,
AaKiASai),  It  produced  radishes  (Hesychius,  s.v,  AaKia^i ;  Suidas,
s,v,  &  AaKidSai),  Among  its  members  were  Miltiades  and  Cimon
(Plutarch,  Ctmon,  4 ;  /</.,  AlcibiadeSy  22).

37.  2.  the  goddess  gave  him  the  fig-tree.  The  spot  on  the  Sacred
Way  where  Phytalus  was  supposed  to  have  received  the  first  fig-tree
from  Demeter  was  called  Hiera  Syce,  i,e,  *  Sacred  Fig '  (Athenaeus,  iii.
p.  74  d;  cp.  Eustathius,  on  Homer,  Od,  xxiv.  341,  p.  1964;  Plutarch,
QjuciesL  Conviv.  vii.  4.  4 ;  Hesychius,  s,v,  Upd ;  Photius,  s.v.  Up^
(rvKYJ ;  Etytnol,  Magnum^  p.  469,  s.v,  Upa  (rvKrj),  The  processions
stopped  and  rested  at  the  place  on  their  return  from  Eleusis  (Philo-
stratus,  Vtf,  Sophist,  ii.  20.  3).  The  sophist  ApoUonius  was  buried
here  (Philostratus,  l,c,)  It  has  been  conjectured  that  the  site  of  the
sanctuary  of  Demeter,  Proserpine,  and  Poseidon,  which  stood  at  this
point  of  the  road,  is  marked  by  the  church  of  St.  Sabas  in  the  wood  of
olives  on  the  road  to  Eleusis  (L.  Preller,  Ausgewdhlte  Aufsdtze^  p.  126  ;
Fr.  Lenormant,  La  Vaie  Sacrde^  p.  227  sqq,)  The  church  certainly
contains  remains  of  antiquity  and  probably  occupies  an  ancient  site  ;  but
as  it  stands  to  the  west  of  what  seems  to  have  been  the  main  arm  of  the
Cephisus  in  antiquity,  the  site  which  it  occupies  can  hardly  be  that  of
the  sanctuary  of  Demeter  which,  from  the  order  of  Pausanias's  description,
clearly  stood  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Cephisus.  See  below,  note  on
§  4,  *  an  ancient  altar  of  Gracious  Zeus.'  An  inscription  found  at  Eleusis
mentions  the  expense  of  making  or  repairing  the  tiled  roof  over  the
sacred  fig-tree  (C  /.  A,  iv.  No.  225  c,  p.  169 ;  *E<t>r)fi€pis  dpxo-i'OkoyiKij,
1888,  p.  50).  If  the  sacred  fig-tree  referred  to  in  this  inscription  is,  as
is  probable,  the  one  on  the  Sacred  Way,  the  inscription  proves  that  the
tree  was  protected  from  the  weather  by  a  roof.  That  the  epitaph  quoted
by  Pausanias  was  of  late  origin  is  proved  by  the  incorrect  form  of
Demeter's  name  {Arjfj.rjTpav)  which  appears  in  the  second  line  and  is
necessary  to  the  metre.  This  was  pointed  out  by  Prof,  van  Herwerden
{Mnemosyney  N.  S.  15  (1887),  p.  52).


492  THE  CEPHISUS  bk.  i.  attica

37.  3.  Before  you  cross  the  Oephisns.  The  Cephisus  is  a  river
which,  in  spite  of  the  assertion  of  Strabo  to  the  contrary  (ix.  p.  400),
never  dries  up  even  in  the  most  scorching  heat  of  summer.  Its  sources
are  at  the  southern  foot  of  Mt.  Fames  and  the  western  foot  of  Mt
Pentelicus.  One  fine  spring  is  at  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Saviour  near
Cephisia.  Here  a  stream  of  beautifully  clear  water,  three  feet  wide  even
in  the  driest  season,  rushes  impetuously  from  the  ground,  and  finds  its
way  in  a  south-westerly  direction  to  the  plain  through  the  gardens  and
olive -groves  of  Cephisia.  At  the  point,  however,  where  the  road  to
Eleusis  crosses  the  Cephisus,  the  stream  flows  in  three  separate  channels,
which  have  been  made  for  the  purpose  of  irrigating  the  olives.  Thus  it
is  impossible  to  say  with  certainty  which  of  these  channels  is  the  old
bed  of  the  river.  But  on  the  whole  the  central  channel,  about  300
yards  east  of  the  church  of  St.  Sabas,  appears  to  have  the  best  claim  to
represent  the  ancient  river-bed.  Here,  therefore,  at  the  point  where
the  road  to  Eleusis  crosses  it,  probably  stood  the  ancient  bridge  which  a
Rhodian,  Xenocles  of  Lindus,  built  for  the  convenience  of  the  pilgrims
to  Eleusis,  in  order  that  they  might  cross  dryshod  and  in  safety  even  when
the  river  was  in  flood  {Anthol.  Palat,  ix.  147).  In  the  eighteenth  century
Chandler  saw  some  piers  which  he  took  to  be  those  of  the  ancient  bridge.
When  the  long  procession  of  pilgrims  was  defiling  over  the  bridge  on  its
way  to  or  from  the  solemn  ceremonies  at  Eleusis,  a  crowd  of  idlers  used
to  gather  on  the  bridge  and  assail  the  pilgrims  with  a  running  fire  of
jeers  and  gibes,  which  the  pilgrims  returned  with  vigour  (Hesychius,  s.v,
y€<f>vpurTai ;  Strabo,  ix.  p.  400;  cp.  Aristophanes,  Frogs^  384  sqq.\
EtymoL  Magn.  p.  229  s.v.  T€<t>vp€ls).  The  custom  has  been  compared
with  the  licence  of  the  Carnival  and  with  the  railleries  exchanged  between
the  crowd  and  the  occupants  of  carriages  returning  from  the  Derby.
But  probably  it  had  a  superstitious  origin.  For  abusive  language  is
believed  in  certain  circumstances  to  bring  good  luck  to  the  person
against  whom  it  is  directed.  Thus  in  India  "  much  virtue  is  ascribed
to  abuse  in  this  district  of  Behar.  It  is  supposed  to  bring  good  luck  in
some  cases.  On  occasion  of  marriages,  people  who  accompany  the
marriage  procession  to  the  bride's  house  are  often  vilely  abused  by  the
women  folk  of  the  bride's  family,  in  the  belief  that  it  will  lead  on  to  the
good  fortune  of  the  newly-married  couple.  In  the  same  way  on  the
occasion  of  the  Jamadwitiya  Day  in  Behar  .  .  .  brothers  are  abused  by
sisters  to  their  heart's  content,  and  this  is  done  under  the  impression  that
it  will  prolong  the  lives  of  the  brothers  and  bring  good  luck  to  them "
{Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Society  of  Bombay^  2  (1892),  p.  598  j^.)
Esthonian  fishermen  believe  that  they  never  have  such  good  luck  as
when  some  one  is  angry  with  them  and  curses  them  ;  they  think  that
every  curse  brings  at  least  three  fish  into  the  net  (Boecler-Kreutzwald,
Der  Ehsten  abergldubische  Gebrduche^  p.  90  sq.)  When  a  Greek  sower
sowed  cummin  he  had  to  curse  and  swear  all  the  time,  otherwise  the
crop  would  turn  out  ill  (Theophrastus,  Histor.  Plant,  viii.  3  ;  Plutarch,
Quaest.  Conviv.  vii.  2.  2).

See  Chandler,  Travels  ^  p.  184  sq. ;  Unedited  Afttiquities  of  Attica^  p.  3 ;  Dodwell,
Tour^  I.  p.  476  sq.  ;  Leake,  Athens^  2.  pp.   140,   141  sq.  ;  Preller,  Ausgezvdhlte


CH.  XXXVII  ALTAR  OF  GRACIOUS  ZEUS  493

AufsdtUf  p.  120  sqq,  ;  Fr.  Lenormant,  La  Vote  Sacr^Cf  p.  234  sqq,  ;  Milchhofer,
Karten  von  Attika^  Erldut.  Text,  Heft  ii.  p.  16.

37.  3.  the  tomb  of  Theodoms,  the  best  tragic  actor  of  his  time.
Theodorus  lived  in  the  first  half  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  The  orator
Aeschines  in  his  youth  acted  with  him,  taking  the  inferior  parts
(Demosthenes,  xix.  246,  p.  418).  Theodorus  often  played  in  the
Antigone  of  Sophocles  (Demosthenes,  l.c)  His  acting  in  the  play  of
Merope  was  so  pathetic  that  even  the  stony-hearted  tyrant  Alexander  of
Pherae  was  melted,  burst  into  tears,  and  rushed  out  of  the  theatre
(Aelian,  Var,  Hist  xiv.  40).  It  was  a  rule  with  Theodorus  never  to
allow  another  actor  to  appear  before  him  in  a  play ;  he  thought  that  the
tone  of  the  audience  was  determined  by  the  first  actor  who  appeared
(Aristotle,  PoliL  vii.  17.  11,  p.  1336  b,  27  sqq,^  Berlin  ed.)  His  voice
never  seemed  to  be  feigned,  but  always  to  be  the  true  and  natural  voice
of  the  character  he  was  representing  (Aristotle,  Rhet.  iii.  2.  p.  1404  b,
22  sqq,)  Cp.  Plutarch,  De  gloria  Aiheniensium^  6 ;  id,^  De  se  ipsum
laudando^  17  ;  id,^  Quaest,  Conviv.  ix.  i.  2.

37.  3.  Mnesimache.  She  was  a  daughter  of  Dexamenus.  When
she  was  about  to  be  married  by  force  to  the  centaur  Eurytion,  Hercules
delivered  her  by  slaying  the  centaur  (ApoUodorus,  ii.  5.  5).  Fr.
Lenormant  indulged  in  a  vein  of  speculation  on  the  subject  of  Mnesi-
mache, whom  he  supposed  to  be  a  form  of  Proserpine  {La  Voie  Sacrie^
p.  294  sqq,)

37.  3.  shearing  his  hair  in  honour  of  the  Cephisns.  On  this
custom  see  note  on  viii.  41.  3.  The  passage  of  Homer  to  which
Pausanias  here  refers  is  Iliad^  xxiii.  141  sqq.

37.  4.  an  ancient  altar  of  Gracions  Zeus  etc.  The  site  of  this
altar  is  perhaps  marked  by  the  church  of  St.  Sabas  which  stands  with  a
few  houses  clustered  about  it  in  the  olive-wood  to  the  west  of  the  middle
branch  of  the  Cephisus.  The  spot,  which  is  distant  about  a  mile  and  a
half  from  the  Dipylum,  is  a  favourite  resort  of  Athenian  holiday-makers.
The  church  seems  certainly  to  occupy  an  ancient  site  :  its  walls  contain
many  ancient  wrought  stones,  apparently  all  taken  from  tombs.  See
Fr.  Lenormant,  La  Voie  Sacr^e^  p.  227  sqq,  ;  Milchhofer,  Karten  von
Attika^  Erldut,  Text^  Heft  ii.  p.  16.  That  the  descendants  of
Phytalus  purified  Theseus  at  the  Cephisus  from  the  stain  of  bloodshed
is  mentioned  also  by  Plutarch  {Theseus^  12,  cp.  23).  As  to  Gracious
Zeus  {Zeus  Meilichios)  see  ii.  9.  6  ;  ii.  20.  i.  He  appears  to  have  been
especially  resorted  to  in  expiatory  and  purificatory  ceremonies.  At  an
annual  purification,  performed  towards  the  end  of  the  month  of  Maemac-
terion  (November-December),  a  sheep  was  sacrificed  to  Gracious  Zeus,
and  the  skin  of  the  ram  so  sacrificed  was  preserved  and  used  in
purificatory  ceremonies,  being  spread  under  the  left  foot  of  the  person
who  was  being  purified  (Eustathius,  on  Homer,  Od,  xxii.  481,  p.  1935  ;
Hesychius  and  Suidas,  s,v,  A109  kcoSioi/  ;  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca,  p.
7,  line  1 5  sqq,  ;  Polemo,  ed.  Preller,  p.  1 40  sqq,)  Theseus  was
probably  supposed  to  have  been  purified  by  the  Phytalids  in  this
manner.  A  scene  on  a  red-figured  vase  was  interpreted  by  de  Witte
as  the  purification  of  Theseus.     It  represents  a  man,  naked  except  for


494  TEMPLE  OF  CYAMITES  BK.  i.  attica

a  fillet  round  his  head,  kneeling  with  his  right  foot,  planted  on  a  semi-
circular object  (the  ram's  skin  ?),  while  the  left  foot,  which  is  shod  with
a  rough  shoe  of  a  very  peculiar  sort,  rests  on  the  ground.  Before  and
behind  him  are  women  engaged  in  various  ceremonies.  See  J.  de
Witte,  *  L'expiation  ou  la  purification  de  Th^see,*  Gazette  Archdologiqtu^
9  (1884),  p.  352  sq,^  with  pi.  44,  45,  46.  When  Xenophon  returned
from  the  expedition  of  the  Ten  Thousand,  he  offered  whole  burnt-
offerings  of  pigs  to  Gracious  Zeus  at  Lampsacus  (Xenophon,  Anadasis,
vii.  8.  3-5).  A  great  festival  called  the  Diasia  was  annually  celebrated
outside  Athens  on  the  23rd  day  of  the  month  of  Anthesterion  (February-
March)  in  honour  of  Gracious  Zeus  (Thucydides,  i.  126;  Schol.  on
Aristophanes,  Clouds,  408  ;  Aug.  Mommsen,  Heortologie,  p.  379  sqq,)
A  votive  tablet  adorned  with  a  relief  and  inscribed  with  a  dedication  to
Gracious  Zeus  was  found  at  Piraeus.  The  relief  represents  Zeus  seated
on  a  throne  with  a  sceptre  in  his  left  hand  and  a  bowl  in  his  right
In  front  of  him  is  a  square  altar,  and  beyond  it  three  worshippers  (a
man,  woman,  and  child)  are  approaching  the  god.  Other  votive  tablets
have  been  found  inscribed  with  dedications  to  Gracious  Zeus,  each
accompanied  by  the  figure  of  a  serpent  carved  in  relief.  See  P.
Foucart,  *  Bas-relief  du  Pir^e.  Culte  de  Zeus  Milichios,'  Bulletin  de
Corr.  HelUnique,  7  (1883),  pp.  507-514.  On  Gracious  Zeus  see  Preller,
Griech,  Mythologie,^  i.  p.  130  note  4.

37.  4.  the  grave  of  Theodectes  of  Phaselis.  Theodectes  was
a  rhetorician,  a  pupil  of  Isocrates :  he  afterwards  wrote  tragedies
([Plutarch,]  Vit,  X,  Orat  p.  837  c ;  Suidas,  s,v.  0€o8€KTrjs).  The
author  of  the  Vlt.  X.  Oratorum  says  {Lc.)  that  the  tomb  of  Theodectes
"is  as  you  go  toward  the  shrine  of  Cyamites  by  the  Sacred  Way
to  Eleusis :  it  is  now  fallen  into  ruins."  Stephanus  Byzantius  {s.v.
^aoT/Ais)  has  preserved  the  epitaph,  in  four  verses,  which  was  carved
on  the  tomb.  It  sets  forth  that  in  thirteen  poetical  contests  Theodectes
had  won  eight  prizes.

37.  4-  images,  amongst  others  an  image  of  lacchus.  Prof.  U.
Kohler  has  conjectured  that  these  images  may  have  been  the  group  of
Demeter,  Proserpine,  and  lacchus  in  the  temple  of  Demeter  at  Athens
(Paus.  i.  2.  4).  See  Mittheil,  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  9  (1884),  p.  80
j^.,  and  the  note  on  i.  2.  4.

37.  4-  a  small  temple  called  the  temple  of  Cyamites.  At  the
western  edge  of  the  olive-wood,  on  the  north  side  of  the  road  to  Eleusis,
there  is  a  small  chapel  of  St.  George  or  of  the  Saviour,  which  is  mostly
built  of  stones  taken  from  ancient  tombs.  It  may  occupy  the  site  of  the
temple  of  Cyamites.  Fr.  Lenormant,  who  called  it  a  chapel  of  St.  Blase,
thought  it  occupied  the  site  of  the  altar  of  Gracious  Zeus,  and  identified
as  the  ruins  of  the  temple  of  Cyamites  some  ancient  foundations  on  the
north  side  of  the  road  to  Eleusis,  at  the  point  where  two  rivulets,  de-
scending from  Mt.  Aegaleus,  unite  and  cross  the  Sacred  Way.  See  Leake,
Athens,  2.  p.  142  ;  Fr.  Lenormant,  La  Vote  Sacrie,  pp.  311  sq,,  337  ;
Milchhofer,  Karten  von  Attika,  Erldut.  Text,  Heft  ii.  p.  16.  Nothing
is  known  of  the  hero  Cyamites  beyond  what  Pausanias  tells  us  here  (cp.
[Plutarch,]  Vit  X.  Orat  p.  837  c ;  Hesychius  and  Photius,  Lexicon,


CH.  XXXVII  TOMB  OF  PYTHIONICE  495

s,v,  KvafUTTf^;  Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^  p.  274,  line  14  sq,)  Fr.
Lenormant  again  gave  the  reins  to  his  fancy  on  this  topic  {La  Vote
SacriCy  p.  337  sqq,)  In  remarking  that  "the  discovery  of  beans  cannot
be  attributed  to  Demeter,''  etc,  Pausanias  is  referring  to  the  Eleusinian
and  Orphic  prohibition  to  eat  beans.     See  viii.  15.4  note.

37.  5.  Ajnong  the  largest  and  stateliest  of  the  tombs  is  one  of  a
Bhodian  etc.  Fr.  Lenormant  conjectured  that  this  Rhodian  may  have
been  Xenocles  of  Lindus  who  built  the  bridge  over  the  Cephisus  (JLa
Vote  Sacrdey  pp.  234  sq»y  446  :  see  above,  p.  492).

37.  5.  another  was  erected  by  the  Macedonian  Harpalus  etc.
Pythionice  or  Pythonice  (as  the  name  was  also  spelt),  to  whom  her  lover
Harpalus  erected  this  magnificent  tomb,  had  been  originally  a  slave  of
an  Athenian  flute-girl  named  Bacchis,  and  had  gained  a  livelihood  by
prostitution  (Athenaeus,  xiii.  p.  595  a  b).  When  Alexander  the  Great,
setting  out  on  his  expedition  to  India,  left  Harpalus  behind  in  charge  of
his  treasures,  Harpalus  caused  Pythionice  to  be  sent  to  him  at  Babylon,
treated  her  like  a  queen,  and  on  her  death  erected  two  sumptuous  tombs
to  her  memory,  one  at  Babylon,  the  other  near  Athens  on  the  Sacred
Way  to  Eleusis :  the  two  tombs  together  cost  more  than  200  talents,  or
about  ;£42,ooo  (Diodorus,  xvii.  108  ;  Athenaeus,  xiii.  p.  595  b).  The
superintendence  of  the  construction  of  the  tomb  on  the  Sacred  Way
was  entrusted,  in  Harpalus's  absence,  to  Charicles ;  the  bill  of  costs
sent  in  by  him  to  Harpalus  amounted  to  30  talents  or  about  ;£6300.
Plutarch,  who  mentions  this  {Phodon^  22),  adds  disparagingly  that  the
tomb  was  not  worth  the  money.

The  situation  of  the  tomb  is  described  exactly  by  Dicaearchus
(quoted  by  Athenaeus,  xiii.  pp.  594  e-595  a).  He  says:  "A  similar
feeling  would  be  roused  in  any  one  who  came  to  Athens  by  what
is  called  the  Sacred  Way  from  Eleusis.  For  standing  at  the  point
where  the  temple  of  Athena  and  the  city  first  come  into  sight,  he  will
see  built  beside  the  road  a  tomb  of  which  the  like  or  anything  even
approaching  it  in  size  does  not  exist.  Naturally  he  would  say  at  first,
*  Surely  this  is  the  tomb  of  Miltiades  or  of  Pericles  or  of  Cimon  or  of
some  other  great  man,  and  it  must  have  been  built  by  the  nation  at  the
public  expense.'  But  when  on  examination  he  finds  that  it  is  the  tomb
of  the  courtesan  Pythionice,  what  must  his  feelings  be  ?  "  This  proves
that  the  tomb  stood  in  the  pass  of  Daphnty  at  the  point  where  to  a
traveller  coming  from  Eleusis  the  view  of  Athens  and  the  Acropolis  first
bursts  upon  him  (see  above,  p.  485).  Here  on  the  south  side  of  the
road,  opposite  the  conical  height  which  rises  on  the  other  side  of  the
road  crowned  by  the  white  walls  of  the  church  of  St  Elias,  the  remains
of  an  ancient  tomb  were  excavated  in  1854.  Fr.  Lenormant  believed
that  this  was  the  tomb  of  Pythionice ;  but  it  seems  to  have  been  a  com-
mon tomb,  cheaply  constructed  of  inferior  masonry  with  a  coating  of
stucco  scored  to  imitate  blocks  of  marble.

Not  content  with  erecting  a  stately  mausoleum  to  his  dead  leman
on  the  Sacred  Way,  Harpalus  built  a  temple  and  altar  to  her  under  the
title  of  Pythionice  Aphrodite.  All  these  facts  were  set  forth  in  a  letter,
full  of  bitter   invectives   against  the   profligacy  and  extravagance  of


496  SANCTUARY  OF  APOLLO  bk.  i.  attica

Harpalus,  which  Theopompus  sent  to  Harpalus's  master  Alexander.  An
extract  from  the  letter  has  been  preserved  by  Athenaeus  (xiii.  p.  595 abc).

The  district  in  which  the  tomb  of  Pythionice  stood  belonged  to
Hermus,  a  township  of  the  tribe  Acamantis  (Plutarch,  Phocion^  22  ;
Harpocration,  Suidas,  and  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v,  'Ep/Aos).  There
was  also  a  stream  called  Hermus  in  the  district  (Harpocration,  s.v.)  It
is  doubtless  the  water-course  near  the  deserted  hamlet  of  Chmdari  to
the  north  of  the  isolated  hill  on  which  the  church  of  St.  Elias  stands.
The  remains  of  walls  and  aqueducts  near  the  village  make  it  probable
that  the  township  of  Hermus  was  here.  A  headless  image  of  Hermes,
inscribed  with  a  couplet  which  is  preserved  in  the  Anthology  {Anthol,
Palat.  vi.  138),  was  found  at  Chaidari  (C.  /.  A.  i.  No.  381).

See  Fr.  Lenormant,  La  Vote  Sacrie^  p.  446  sqq. ;  Milchhofer,  Karten
von  Attika^  Erldut  Text,  Heft  ii.  p.  46  sq.     As  to  Harpalus,  cp.  Paus.

»•  33.  3  sqq,

37.  6.  the  sanctuary  was  originally  made  for  Apollo  alone.

The  site  of  this  sanctuary  of  Apollo  is  probably  occupied  by  the  monastery
of  Daphni^  which  stands  about  the  middle  of  the  pass  over  Mt.  Aegaleus,
on  the  southern  side  of  the  road,  at  a  height  of  about  300  feet  above  the
sea.  The  monastery  seems  to  have  been  founded  in  the  thirteenth
century  by  the  Burgundian  Dukes  of  Athens  of  the  La  Roche  family.
In  common  with  many  monasteries  of  the  Middle  Ages  it  is  fortified,
being  surrounded  by  a  high  battlemented  wall,  from  which  towers  project
at  intervals.  The  monastery  consists  of  a  courtyard  surrounded  by  a
cloister  and  cells,  with  a  fine  church,  built  on  the  Byzantine  model,  on
the  north  side.  The  church  is  in  the  form  of  a  Greek  cross  with  a  lofty
dome  in  the  middle.  The  old  paintings  which  formerly  covered  the
walls  are  mostly  faded.  The  interior  of  the  dome  is  adorned  with  a
colossal  bust  of  Christ  worked  in  mosaic  on  a  gold  ground.  Lower
down,  at  the  springing  of  the  vault,  are  figures  of  the  Twelve  Apostles ;  and
lower  still,  between  the  windows  which  light  the  dome,  are  the  Prophets,
all  in  mosaic.  Like  most  Byzantine  mosaics,  these  figures  are  somewhat
stiff  and  angular ;  but  in  the  twilight,  when  they  are  seen  glimmering
dimly  from  their  golden  background  through  the  deepening  gloom,  while
the  solitary  lamp  bums  before  the  holy  picture,  and  the  air  is  heavy
with  the  lingering  scent  of  incense,  the  effect  is  solemn  and  impressive.
Both  the  church  and  the  wall  which  encloses  the  monastery  are
largely  built  of  ancient  squared  blocks  of  marble.  Down  to  1801  three
fluted  Ionic  columns  stood  immured  in  one  of  the  walls  of  the  church.
In  that  year  they  were  removed  by  Lord  Elgin  and  are  now  in  the
British  Museum.  These  columns,  with  some  fragments  of  Ionic  columns
which  are  still  to  be  seen  at  the  monastery,  seem  to  show  that  the
sanctuary  of  Apollo  mentioned  by  Pausanias  comprised  a  temple  of  the
Ionic  order.  In  a  niche  in  the  church  are  two  sarcophaguses ;  on  one
of  them  are  carved  the  lilies  of  the  Burgundian  Dukes.  Excavations
conducted  at  the  monastery  by  the  Greek  Archaeological  Society  in  1892
brought  to  light  the  marble  torso  of  a  female  statue,  life-size  and  of  good
style ;  a  piece  of  a  frieze  representing  a  warrior  striking  down  another ;
and  some  fragmentary  inscriptions  of  little  importance.


CH.  XXXVII  TEMPLE  OF  APHRODITE  497

The  old  frontier  between  Athens  and  Megara  would  seem  to  have
been  here ;  at  least  Philochorus  (cited  by  Strabo,  ix.  p.  392)  said  that
in  the  days  of  Nisus,  king  of  Megara,  the  Megarian  territory  extended
from  the  Isthmus  of  Corinth  to  the  Pythium  or  sanctuary  of  the  Pythian
Apollo,  which  may  have  been  identical  with  this  sanctuary  of  Apollo  on
Mt.  Aegaleus.  Pandion,  king  of  Athens,  is  said  to  have  divided  his
kingdom  into  four  parts  among  his  four  sons :  Aegeus  received  the
district  which  extended  from  Athens  to  the  Pythium  (Schol.  on  Aristo-
phanes, LysistratOy  58).  Sophocles  apparently  alludes  to  this  sanctuary
of  the  Pythian  Apollo  \Oed.  Colon,  1047).

See  Chandler,  Travels ^  p.  185  sq,  ;  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  169 ;  Leake,  N,
Greece,  2.  p.  385  sq, ;  id.,  Athens,  2.  p.  144  sq,  ;  L.  Ross,  IVanderungen,  2.  p.
95  ^99-  J  Vischer,  Erinnerun^en  und  Eindriicke,  p.  93  sq.  ;  W.  G.  Clark,  Pelo-
ponnesus, p.  32  sqq.  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  p.  326  sq.  ;  Fr.  Lenormant,  La  Vote
Sacrie,  p.  478  sqq.  ;  H.  Belle,  TVois  attttees  en  Grice,  p.  53  sqq.  ;  Milchhofer,
Karten  von  Attika,  Erlaut.  Text,  Heft  ii.  p.  47;  Baedeker,'  p.  118;  Guide-
/oanne,  I.  p.  197  sq.  ;  AeXriw  dpxaioXoyt'Kdp,  1892,  pp.  5,  37-39,  49,  72  ;  npaxrucd
r^s  *Apxoiio\oyiicrfS  "Eraiplas,  1 89 1,  p.  12  sq.  ;  id.,  1 892,  pp.  lO  sq.,  15  sq.  ;
American  Journal  of  Archaeology,  8  (1893),  P«  265- j^,

37.  6.  OephaluB was  the  first  to  inhabit  the  island  which

is  now  called  Oephallenia.  This  legendary  connexion  of  the  Attic
hero  Cephalus  with  the  island  of  Cephallenia  was  probably  based
merely  on  the  similarity  of  the  names.  The  tradition  is,  however,  as
old  as  Aristotle,  who  in  his  Polity  of  Ithaca  spoke  of  Cephalus  as
residing  in  the  islands  which  were  called  Cephallenian  after  him
{Etymol.  Magn.  p.  144,  s.v.  'ApK€i(rios;  Aristotle,  Frag.  507,  ed.  V.
Rose).  The  story  of  the  joint  expedition  of  Cephalus  and  Amphitryo
against  the  Teleboans  and  the  subsequent  settlement  of  Cephalus  in
Cephallenia  is  told  also  by  Strabo  (x.  p.  456)  and  in  the  Etymol.
Magnum  (p.  507,  s.v.  K€<^AAi/via).  On  coins  of  Pale  in  Cephallenia
the  hero  Cephalus  is  represented  sitting  naked  on  a  rock,  with  a  spear
in  his  hand  (Head,  Historia  Nummorum^  p.  358).  In  the  Cabinet  des
medailles  at  Paris  there  is  a  bronze  figure,  which  resembles  the  Cephalus
on  the  coins  of  Pale  so  closely  that  it  may  be  taken  to  represent  that
hero ;  it  seems  to  have  formed  part  of  a  composition  in  relief  (Gazette
Archdologique,  2  (1876),  p.  144  sq.,  with  pi.  36).  Cp.  J.  Topffer,
Attische  Genealogie,  p.  263  sq.

37.  7.  a  temple  of  Aphrodite.  The  remains  of  the  temple  or
sanctuary  of  Aphrodite  are  to  be  seen  in  the  pass  of  Daphni  about  a  mile
to  the  west  of  the  monastery  of  that  name.  They  are  situated  on  the
northern  side  of  the  modem  highroad,  in  front  of  a  rugged  wall  of
rock,  in  the  face  of  which  a  number  of  niches  of  various  sizes  have  been
cut  for  the  reception  of  votive  offerings.  Under  some  of  these  niches
are  carved  inscriptions,  much  defaced,  containing  dedications  to  Aphro-
dite (Dodwell,  Tour,  2.  p.  170;  C.  I.  G.  Nos.  507-509;  C.  I.  A.  iii.
No.  3823).  Some  marble  doves  and  a  pair  of  bronze  doves  billing
have  been  found  at  the  foot  of  the  rock.  No  doubt  they  were  votive
offerings  to  the  goddess,  and  probably  occupied  some  of  the  rock-cut
niches.     Immediately  in  front  of  the  rock  are  the  remains  of  the  precinct

VOL.  II  2  K


498  TEMPLE  OF  APHRODITE  bk.  i.  attica

of  Aphrodite.  They  were  fully  excavated  by  the  Greek  Archaeological
Society  in  1891  and  1892.  The  sacred  precinct  occupied  a  space
about  210  feet  long  by  about  60  feet  wide,  enclosed  on  the  north-cast
by  the  rock  and  on  the  other  sides  by  walls.  Within  this  enclosure
there  seem  to  have  been  several  divisions,  but  no  foundations  of  a
regular  temple  have  been  discovered.  However,  some  fragments  of
triglyphs  of  white  marble,  observed  here  by  L.  Ross,  appear  to  show
that  there  was  a  small  Doric  temple.  The  chief  entrance  to  the  sacred
enclosure  was  apparently  on  the  south,  opposite  to  the  votive  niches  in
the  rock.  The  excavations  of  1891-92  brought  to  light  some  mutilated
marble  statuettes  of  Aphrodite,  marble  doves,  and  other  votive  offerings
inscribed  with  dedications  to  Aphrodite  by  women.  Four  bases  were
also  found  with  dedicatory  inscriptions ;  two  of  the  dedications  are  to
Aphrodite  ;  one  is  to  Persuasion  by  a  certain  Callimachus  of  Soli.

Outside  of  the  sacred  precinct,  at  its  south-eastern  comer,  are  the
foundations  of  a  quadrangular  building  about  82  feet  long  by  38  feet
wide.  These  foundation-walls,  nearly  30  feet  thick,  are  constructed  of
great  rude  masses  of  stope  in  the  style  of  the  walls  of  Tiryns.  This  is
doubtless  the  building  described  by  Pausanias  as  "a  wall  (or  'fort,'
Tctxo?)  of  unwrought  stones  that  is  worth  seeing  in  front  of  the  temple."
It  is  probably  an  ancient  fort  built  to  defend  the  pass.  The  Sacred
Way  ran  between  it  and  the  precinct  of  Aphrodite.  A  well-preser\-ed
piece  of  the  ancient  road  was  cleared  in  the  recent  excavations  ;  and  on
it  was  found,  beside  the  fort,  one  of  the  square  effigies  of  Hermes,
headless,  with  an  inscription  of  Roman  date,  Z  £HAST£122),  <  Seven
(miles)  from  the  city.*  About  30  yards  to  the  west  of  the  fort  are  the
foundations  of  a  square  tower  of  similar  construction.  It  probably
formed  part  of  the  works  which  defended  the  pass.

Above  the  rock  in  which  are  the  votive  niches  a  footpath  hewn  in
the  rock  leads  to  a  small  plateau,  which  may  have  been  a  place  of
sacrifice.

We  are  told  that  a  certain  Adimantus  of  Lampsacus,  a  toady  of
Demetrius  Poliorcetes,  built  a  temple  at  Thria  in  Attica,  calling  it  the
temple  of  Phila  Aphrodite  and  the  place  Philaeum  in  honour  of  Phila
the  wife  of  Demetrius  (Athenaeus,  vi.  p.  255  c,  where  fiifTpos  is  a
mistake  for  yvvaiKos;  cp.  id.  p.  254  a).  Hence,  relying  on  two  of  the
rock-cut  inscriptions  mentioned  above,  which  contain  dedications  to
Aphrodite  by  a  certain  Phila  and  a  certain  Phile  (different  forms  of  the
same  name),  some  scholars  have  inferred  that  the  sanctuary  of  Aphro-
dite on  the  Sacred  Way  was  the  one  founded  by  Adimantus  in  honour
of  the  wife  of  Demetrius.  But  the  name  Phila  or  Phile  was  too
common  to  allow  us  to  base  this  inference  on  its  occurrence  in  these
inscriptions.  And  moreover  Thria,  though  certainly  in  this  neighbour-
hood, seems  not  to  have  been  here  but  at  Kalyvia^  a  village  in  the
Thriasian  plain  about  four  miles  away  (Milchhofer,  *  Antikenbericht  aus
Attika,'  MitiheiL  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  Athcn,  12  (1887),  p.  326;  id.,
*  Demenordnung  des  Kleisthenes,*  p.  28).

Another  of  the  rock-cut  inscriptions  (C.  /.  G.  No.  508  ;  C.  I.  A.  iii.
No.  3823)  mentions  a  certain  Pythonice,  who  cannot,  however,  have


CH.  XXXVIII  THE  RHITI  499

been  the  mistress  of  Harpalus  (see  above,  i.  37.  5),  since  the  inscription
is  of  Roman  date.

See  Dodwell,  Totir^  2.  p.  169  sqq.  ;  Leake,  N,  Greece^  2.  p.  384  sq,  ;  iV/.,
At  hefts  y  2.  p.  145  sqq.  ;  L.  Ross,  Wanderttngen^  2.  p.  97  sq,  ;  Le  Bas,  Voyage
ArckiologiqtUy  Itineraire,  pi.  8 ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen  und  Eindriicke^  p.  95  ;
Preller,  Ausgewdhlte  Aufsiitze^  p.  130  sq,  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  p.  327 ;  Curtius
und  Kaupert,  Atlas  von  Athen^  p.  30  sq. ,  with  pi.  viii.  3 ;  Milchhofer,  Karten
von  Attikaj  Erldut.  Text^  Heft  ii.  p.  47  sq,  ;  AcXWov  dpx<"o^o7tif6i',  1 89 1,  p.  114;
id.f  1892,  p.  4  sq.  ;  Tl/oa^rticd  r^j  'Apx^toX.  'Eratp^as,  1 892,  pp.  IO-13  ;  Mittheil.  d,
arch,  Inst,  in  A  then,  17  (1892),  p.  93  sq.  \  /ottmal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  13
(1892-3),  p.  143;  American  Joumcd  of  Archaeology  f  8  (1893),  P*  266.

38.  I.  the  Bhiti.  See  above,  p.  486  sq.  The  first  skirmish  in
the  Peloponnesian  war  took  place  here  in  431  B.C. ;  it  resulted  in  the
defeat  of  the  Athenian  cavalry  (Thucydides,  ii.  19  ;  see  above,  p.  429
sq.)  The  accounts  which  the  ancient  lexicographers  give  of  these  salt-
streams  or  pools  are  less  exact  than  that  of  Pausanias.  Hesychius  says
{s.v.  'PciToi^  :  "  The  Rhiti  at  Eleusis  are  two  clefts  in  Attica.  The  one
beside  the  sea  is  deemed  sacred  to  the  elder  goddess  (Demeter),  and
the  one  towards  the  city  is  deemed  sacred  to  the  younger  goddess
(Proserpine).  Whence  the  troops  of  worshippers  are  purified  in  these
baths  "  (?  reading  tois  Xovrpois  for  tovs  Xovrpovsi).  Photius  {Lexicon,
s.v,  *P€iTa)  says  :  "  What  are  called  the  Rhita  {sic)  are  two  rivulets
flowing  from  one  spring.  Sophocles  used  the  word  in  this  sense."
The  author  of  the  Etymologicum  Magnum  says  (p.  703,  s.v,  'Pcitt^s)  :
"  The  Rhiti  are  two  rivers  flowing  through  a  chasm  under  ground  in  the
Thriasian  plain  near  Eleusis."  The  notion  that  the  Rhiti  flowed  under-
gfround  from  the  Euripus,  which  Pausanias  repeats  elsewhere  (ii.  24.  6),
is  of  course  absurd.  As  to  a  stone  bridge  which  was  perhaps  con-
structed over  one  of  these  ponds  in  the  fifth  century  B.c.  see  below,
note  on  i.  38.  5  *  the  Cephisus.'

38.  2.  the  palace  of  Orocon  etc.  Crocon  was  the  legendary
ancestor  of  the  "  sacred  family "  of  the  Croconids  at  Athens  (Bekker's
Anecdota  Graeca,  i,  p.  273,  line  7  sqq,\  Harpocration,  5,v,  KoipmviSaL ;
Suidas,  s.v.  KvpwviSai).  The  tradition  which  Pausanias  mentions  as
current  in  the  township  of  Scambonidae  that  Crocon  married  Saesara,
daughter  of  Celeus,  is  irreconcileable  with  the  tradition  that  Crocon
was  a  son  of  Triptolemus  (Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca,  l.c,\  since  Tripto-
lemus  himself  was  a  son  of  Celeus  (Paus.  i.  14.  2).  Saesara  appears
not  to  be  mentioned  by  any  other  ancient  writer ;  but  an  old  name  of
Eleusis  is  said  to  have  been  Saesaria  (Hesychius,  s.v,  'Eaurapia),  Cp.
J.  Topffer,  Attische  Genealogie^  p.  10 1  sqq.  The  township  of  Scam-
bonidae belonged  to  the  tribe  Leontis  (Harpocration  and  Stephanus
Byzantius,  s,v.  2Ka/A/3a)vt8ttt).  It  seems  to  have  been  near  Athens,
perhaps  at  the  beginning  of  the  Sacred  Way  (Milchhofer,  Demenordnung
dcs  Kleisthenes,  p.  19;  v.  Wilamowitz-MollendorfF,  in  Hermes,  22
(1887),  p.  120  sq.)

38.  2.  Eumolpus  came  from  Thrace,  and  was  a  son  of

Poseidon  and  Ohione.     The  tradition  that  Eumolpus  was  a  son  of
Poseidon  and  Chione  is  mentioned  also  by  Lycurgus  {c.  Leocr,  98),


500  THE  CERYCES  bk.  i.  attica

Apollodonis  (iii.  15.  4),  and  the  scholiast  on  Euripides  {Phoeniss.  854).
Other  writers  simply  say  that  he  was  a  son  of  Poseidon  (Isocrates,  iv.
68,  xii.  193  ;  Hyginus,  Fab,  46).  On  the  lineage  of  Eumolpus  and
the  tradition  that  he  was  a  Thracian  see  Hiller  de  Gaertringen,  De  Grac-
corum  fabulis  ad  Thraces  pertinentibus^  p.  1 1  sqq, ;  J.  Topffer,  AtHschc
Genealogiey  p.  24  sqq,

38.  2.  Homer calls  him  '  manly.'     Eumolpus  is  mentioned

neither  in  the  Iliad  nor  in  the  Odyssey.  The  passage  to  which  Pau-
sanias  here  refers  is  in  the  Homeric  hymn  to  Demeter,  v.  154,  where,
however,  in  our  texts  Eumolpus  is  called  *  blameless'  (a/iv/xovos),  not
*  manly'  (dy^/vo/oos).  But  the  latter  epithet  occurs  in  the  following
line,  being  there  applied  to  Celeus.  It  would  seem  that  in  Pausanias's
copy  of  the  hymn  the  epithets  were  transposed.

38.  3.  In  a  battle  between  the  EleoBinians  and  the  Athenians
etc.  The  prevalent  tradition  was  that  in  the  war  between  Athens  and
Eleusis  the  general  of  the  Eleusinians  was  Eumolpus  (Thucydides,  ii.
19  ;  Plato,  MenexenuSy  p.  239  b  ;  Isocrates,  iv.  68,  xii.  193  ;  Lycurgus,
c,  Leocr,  98  ;  Philochorus,  Frag.  14,  in  Frag.  Hist  Graec,  ed.  Miiller,
I.  p.  386;  [Demosthenes,]  Ix.  8;  Apollodonis,  iii.  15.  4;  Strabo,  viii.
p.  383  ;  Lucian,  Anacharsis^  4  ;  Harpocration,  s.v.  BorfSpofiia ;  SchoL
on  Homer,  //.  xviii.  490  ;  Schol.  on  Sophocles,  Oed.  Col,  1053  ;  Schol.
on  Euripides,  Phoeniss,  854  ;  Hyginus,  Fab,  46),  and  that  he  was  slain
by  Erechtheus  (Apollodonis,  iii.  15.  4 ;  Schol.  on  Euripides,  I.e. ;
Hyginus,  Fab,  46 ;  cp.  Paus.  i.  27.  4,  note).  By  asserting  here  and
elsewhere  (i.  5.  2  ;  i.  27.  4)  that  it  was  not  Eumolpus  but  his  son
Immaradus  who  was  slain  by  Erechtheus,  Pausanias  might  be  thought
to  imply  that  Immaradus,  not  Eumolpus,  was  the  leader  of  the  Eleu-
sinians in  the  war ;  but  this  implication  is  not  necessary.  The  tradition
of  the  war  between  Athens  and  Eleusis  most  probably  rested  on  a  basis
of  fact.  Cf.  Lobeck,  Aglaop/tamus,  p.  206  sqq, ;  Hiller  de  Gaertringen,
De  Graecorum  fabulis  ad  Thraces  pertinentibus^  p.  12  sqq,  ;  J.  Topffer,
Attische  Genealogie,  p.  41  sqq.

38.  3.  Pamphos  and  Homer  agree  in  calling  these  damsels
Diogenia,  Pammerope,  and  Saesara.  In  our  text  of  the  Homeric
hymn  to  Demeter  {%'.  105  sqq.)  it  is  said  that  the  daughters  of  Celeus
were  four  in  number,  and  that  their  names  were  Callidice,  Clisidice,
Demo,  and  Callithoe.  Here  again,  therefore,  it  would  seem  that
Pausanias's  text  of  the  hymn  differed  from  ours.  Cp.  Baumeister's
note  on  the  passage  in  his  edition  of  the  Homeric  hymns,  p.  293
sq.

38.  3.  the  Oeryces  themselves  say  that  Ceryx  was  a  son  of
Hermes  by  Aglanms  etc.  According  to  others  Ceryx  was  a  son  of
Hermes  and  Herse,  daughter  of  Cecrops  (C  /.  G,  No.  6280  ;  Kaibel,
Epigrammala  Graeca,  No.  1046),  or  of  Hermes  and  Pandrosus,  another
daughter  of  Cecrops  (Pollux,  viii.  103  ;  Schol.  on  Homer,  //.  i.  334).
Other  authorities  simply  say  that  Ceryx  was  a  son  of  Hermes  (Harpo-
cration, Hcsychius,  and  Suidas,  s.v,  KiJ/jvkcs).  The  tradition  that
Ceryx  was  a  son  of  Eumolpus  is  mentioned  by  the  Scholiast  on  Sopho-
cles {Oed.   Col.    1053).     On  the  family  of  the  Ceryces  see  W.  Ditten-


CH.  XXXVIII  THE  ELEUSINIAN  CEPHISUS  501

berger,  *Die  eleusinischen  Keryken/  Hermes^  20  (1885),  pp.  1-40;
J.  Topffer,  Aiiische  Genealogie^  pp.  80-92.

38.  4-  a  shrine  of  the  hero  Hippothoon  etc.  Cp.  i.  5.  2  ;  i.  39.
3.  His  shrine  (Jierdon)  is  mentioned  by  Hesychius  {s,v,  'iTnro^ocov-
Tciov),  and  by  Stephanus  Byzantius  {s,v,  Zdpr]^)y  who  here  copies
Pausanias.  A  priest  of  Hippothoon  is  mentioned  in  an  inscription  of
Eleusis  (K<lyrjfi€pls  dp^aioXoytKij,  1883,  p.  1 25  sg,)

38.  4.  Zarex  Zaxax.       According    to    Tzetzes    (Sc/to/.    on

Lycophrofiy  580)  Zarex  was  a  son  of  Carystus  or  of  Caryx,  the  son  of
Chiron  ;  he  married  Rhoeo,  the  daughter  of  Staphylus,  and  had  two
children  by  her.     As  to  Zarax  see  iii.  21.7;  iii.  24.  i.

38.  5.  the  Oephisus,  a  more  impetuons  stream  etc.  The  Eleusi-
nian  Cephisus  is  the  stream  which,  rising  in  Mt.  Cithaeron,  near
El'eutherae,  flows  into  the  sea  a  little  to  the  east  of  Eleusis.  For  the
greater  part  of  the  year  the  bed  of  the  stream  is  either  quite  dry  or  can
at  most  show  only  three  or  four  slender  rills  trickling  among  the  gravel.
But  occasionally  it  is  filled  with  a  broad  and  raging  torrent,  which
overflows  its  banks  and  spreads  devastation  over  the  plain.  This,  as
Pausanias  justly  remarks,  contrasts  with  the  gentler  flow  of  the  Athenian
Cephisus.  Demosthenes  speaks  (liv.  28,  p.  1279)  of  the  havoc  wrought
by  floods  among  the  fields  at  Eleusis.  After  one  of  these  destructive
floods  the  emperor  Hadrian,  who  was  wintering  at  Athens  and  had
been  initiated  in  the  mysteries  at  Eleusis,  caused  an  embankment  to  be
raised  for  the  protection  of  Eleusis  against  inundations  of  the  river
(Eusebius,  Chron.  vol.  2.  p.  1 66,  ed.  Schone).  In  the  plain  about  a
mile  to  the  north  of  Eleusis  remains  of  two  ancient  mounds  may  still
be  seen.  One  of  them  was  clearly  constructed  for  the  purpose  of  diverting
some  of  the  superfluous  water  into  the  north-west  comer  of  the  bay  ;
the  other,  extending  along  the  western  bank  of  the  stream,  was  intended
to  protect  the  eastern  side  of  the  town  from  the  torrent.  These  are
probably  remains  of  Hadrian's  embankment.  See  Unedited  Antiquities
of  Attica^  p.  5  ;  Leake,  Athens^  2.  pp.  139,  154  sqq,  ;  Preller,  Ausge-
wdhlte  Aufsdtse^  p.  133.  An  inscription  found  at  the  sanctuary  of
Eleusis  contains  a  decree  of  the  year  421-420  B.C.  relating  to  the  con-
struction of  a  bridge  over  tqv  'Pcitoi'  tov  irapa  tov  oo-tco)?,  i.e.  *the
stream  (or  pool)  beside  (or  as  you  come  from)  the  city.'  It  is  doubtful
whether  the  stream  or  pool  in  question  was  the  Eleusinian  Cephisus  or
one  of  the  two  salt-pools  called  Rhiti  (see  above,  pp.  486  sq.,  499).  The
decree  enacts  that  the  bridge  shall  be  constructed  with  "  the  stones
which  have  been  taken  down  from  the  old  temple  and  have  not  been
used  in  the  construction  of  the  fortification- wall."  The  object  of  the
bridge  is  said  to  be  "  that  the  priestesses  may  carry  the  sacred  objects
in  safety  "  ;  and  it  is  ordained  that  the  width  of  the  bridge  shall  be  only
5  feet,  "  in  order  that  waggons  may  not  drive  over  it,  but  that  it  may
be  used  by  persons  going  on  foot  to  the  sacred  rites."  See  MittheiL  d,
arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,  19(1 894),  pp.  1 63- 1 7 1 .  From  another  inscription
found  at  Eleusis  we  learn  that  in  the  last  quarter  of  the  fourth  century
B.C.  a  certain  Xenocles  constructed  at  his  own  expense  a  stone  bridge
"  for  the  safety  of  the  crowd  of  worshippers  coming  to  Eleusis  and  to


502  ERINEUS  BK.   I.  ATTICA

the  sanctuary,  as  well  as  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  suburb,  and  of  the
farmers"  (*E</»iy/x€/ois  apx«*oAoyiiciJ,  1893,  p.  loi  sqq.)  Remains  of  an
ancient  stone  bridge  are  still  to  be  seen  in  the  old  bed  of  the  Eleusinian
Cephisus,  at  the  place  called  *  the  fair  well '  {kalon  phrear\  where  the
villagers  draw  water  CE<f>rjfi,  dp\aiok.  1892,  p.  106).

38.  5.  a  pla4^  which  they  call  Erinena.  Plato  in  the  Tfuaetetus
(p.  143  b)  represents  Eudides  as  having  escorted  the  sick  and  wounded
Theaetetus  from  the  port  of  Megara,  as  £»-  as  Erineus,  on  the  road  to
Athens.  The  distance  from  Xisaea  the  port  of  Megara  to  the  Eleusi-
nian  Cephisus,  on  the  bank  of  which  was  the  spot  called  Erineus,  is
about  fourteen  miles.  So  Euclides  had  had  a  long  walk ;  and  he
admitted  that  he  would  be  glad  to  rest.  As  to  the  scene  of  the  rape  of
Proserpine,  which  Pausanias  places  at  Erineus,  see  below,  p.  507.

38.  5.  At  this  Oephisns  a  robber  named  Polsrpemoii  etc.  0\-id
also  represents  Procrustes  as  dwelling  beside  the  Cephisus  (Met.  \\\.  438.
But  according  to  Plutarch  {Theseus^  11)  and  Diodorus  (iv.  59)  the
robber  Procrustes  had  his  hold  at  Hermes  or  Hermus,  on  Mt.  Con*-
dallus  (see  above,  p.  430).  Plutarch  and  Hesychius  (s.v.  \aniaxrnf;)
say  that  Procrustes's  real  name  was  Damastes,  not  Pol>'pemon.  In  the
epitome  of  Apollodorus,  which  was  recently  discovered  in  the  Vatican,
both  the  robber's  names  are  mentioned.  The  passage  runs  thus :
"  Sixthly  he  (Theseus)  slew  Damastes,  whom  some  call  Polypemon.
This  Damastes  dwelt  beside  the  road,  and  he  spread  two  beds,  one
small  and  the  other  large.  He  offered  hospitality  to  the  passers-by ;
and  the  short  men  he  laid  on  the  large  bed  and  hammered  them  out
till  they  were  as  long  as  the  bed ;  but  the  tall  men  he  laid  on  the  little
bed  and  sawed  off  their  extremities  "  (Apollodorus,  Epitoma  I  a/ttaitd,
ed.  R.  Wagner,  p.  54  J"^.)  A  parallel  to  the  story  of  Procrustes  occurs
in  the  Talmud,  where  it  is  said  that  the  wicked  citizens  of  Sodom  had
a  particular  bed  provided  for  travellers  ;  if  the  traveller  was  too  short
for  the  bed,  they  stretched  him  out ;  if  he  was  too  long,  they  cut  him
down  to  the  length  of  the  bed.  When  Eliezer,  the  ser\ant  of  Abraham,
visited  Sodom,  he  was  invited  to  sleep  on  this  bed,  but  evaded
compliance  on  the  pretext  that  since  his  mothers  death  he  had  made
a  vow  not  to  sleep  in  a  bed.  The  passage  occurs  in  the  Talmud.
Sanhedrim^  p.  109  b,  as  I  am  informed  by  Dr.  Schechter,  Reader  in
Talmudic  in  the  University  of  Cambridge,  who  has  also  pointed  out  to
me  references  to  this  Talmudic  legend  in  B.  Beer's  Lebcn  AbrahanCs
nach  Auffassung  der  jiidischen  Sage^  p.  41;  M.  Griinbaum,  Xeue
Beiirdge  zur  semitischen  Sagenkundc\  p.  135.  A  trace  of  the  same
story  appears  in  a  Persian  poem  in  which  the  princess  Nighara  says  to
the  disguised  poet  Kurroglu,  "  I  will  fetch  thee  one  of  my  father's
robes  ;  and  if  it  should  be  too  short  for  thee  I  \\\\\  have  thy  legs
chopped  off  just  at  the  place  to  which  the  robe  will  reach  ;  if  it  should
be  too  long,  I  will  direct  a  nail  to  be  driven  into  each  of  thy  heels,  that
thou  mayest  become  taller."  To  this  the  poet  replies,  **Then  thou
would'st  treat  me  after  Abii  Hurera's  code  ? "  See  W.  A.  Clouston,  in
Punjab  Xotes  and  Queries,  3  (1886),  No.  860.

38.  6.  The  Elensinians  have  a  temple  of  Triptolemns  etc.


CH.  XXXVIII  ELEUSIS  503

Eleusis  was  one  of  the  twelve  originally  independent  cities  of  Attica  which
Theseus  is  said  to  have  united  in  a  single  state  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  397).
The  poor  and  fever-haunted  village  of  Levsina^  with  about  1200
inhabitants,  mostly  Albanians,  stands  on  the  site  and  has  preserved  the
name  of  the  ancient  city.  Eleusis  was  situated  near  the  south-western
comer  of  the  Thriasian  plain,  at  the  eastern  end  of  a  low  rocky  hill,
a  mile  long,  which  runs  parallel  to  the  sea-shore  at  a  distance  of  a  few
hundred  yards.  On  the  west  the  hill  is  separated  by  a  narrow  branch  of
the  plain  from  the  mountains  which  form  the  western  boundary  of  the
Thriasian  plain.  The  narrow  ridge  of  this  low  hill  was  the  ancient
acropolis  of  Eleusis  ;  the  fortifications  may  be  traced  along  its  northern
side  and  less  clearly  along  the  southern  side,  as  far  as  the  square
Frankish  tower  which  occupies  the  most  westerly  and  the  highest  point
of  the  ridge.  This  mediaeval  tower  stands  on  ancient  foundations  and
is  partially  built,  especially  in  its  lower  courses,  of  large  ancient  blocks.
The  view  from  this  point  over  the  beautiful  landlocked  bay  to  Salamis,
and  across  the  plain  to  the  mountains  which  encircle  it  on  three  sides,
is  very  fine.  On  the  ridge,  between  the  fortification-walls,  there  are
some  ancient  cisterns  cut  in  the  rock.  On  the  southern  side  of  the  hill,
facing  the  sea,  Chandler  last  century  saw  some  traces  of  a  theatre,  but
these  have  now  disappeared.  That  there  was  a  theatre  at  Eleusis  is
known  from  inscriptions  ('E(f>rjfi€pls  dpxaioXoyiKi^,  1883,  pp.  83,  iii
sg. ;  Mittheil,  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Aihen^  19  (1894),  p.  180).  There  was
also  a  stadium  near  the  theatre,  as  we  learn  from  an  inscription
(Mittheil,  d.  arch,  Inst,  in  A  then,  l.c)  The  iovn\  of  Eleusis  lay  on  the
level  ground  at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  especially  between  the  south-eastern
extremity  of  the  hill  and  the  sea.  Traces  of  the  two  town-walls  which
extended  from  the  acropolis  to  the  sea  may  still  be  seen.  The  eastern
of  these  two  walls  was  built  along  the  summit  of  an  artificial  embank-
ment, which  was  here  carried  across  the  marshy  flat.  This  wall,  in
accordance  with  a  practice  often  adopted  by  Greek  military  engineers,
was  prolonged  into  the  sea,  so  as  to  make  a  breakwater  for  the  harbour.
The  harbour  of  Eleusis,  small  in  size  and  nearly  circular  in  shape,  was
formed  artificially  by  two  curved  moles,  which  ran  out  into  the  sea  for
about  100  yards.  The  breakwater,  formed  by  the  continuation  of
the  town-wall,  jutted  into  the  middle  of  the  harbour,  dividing  it  into
two,  but  not  reaching  so  far  out  into  the  water  as  the  two  outer  moles.
Remains  of  walls  and  buildings  may  be  seen  along  the  shore  to  the
west  of  the  harbour.

The  remains  of  the  sanctuary  of  Demeter,  to  which  Eleusis  owed  its
fame  in  antiquity,  are  situated  at  the  eastern  foot  of  the  hill.  The  rock
has  here  been  cut  away  perpendicularly  and  levelled  horizontally,  so  as
to  form  an  artificial  terrace ;  and  on  this  terrace  the  group  of  buildings
which  composed  the  sanctuary  was  placed.  The  site  was  partially
excavated  by  the  Dilettanti  Society  in  the  early  part  of  the  present
century ;  and  some  further  excavations  were  made  by  Fr.  Lenormant  in
1 860.  But  the  honour  of  completely  clearing  the  site  belongs  to  the
Greek  Archaeological  Society.  The  work  was  begun  in  1882  and
practically  finished  in   1887,  though  some  supplementary  excavations


504  THE  ELEUSINIAN  SANCTUARY         bk.  i.  attica

have  since  been  made.     Mr.  D.  Philios  superintended  and  reported  on
the  excavations :  Dr.  W.  Dorpfeld  executed  the  plans.

The  earliest  mention  of  the  sanctuary  of  Demeter  at  Eleusis  occuis
in  the  Homeric  hymn  to  Demeter  (v.  270  sqq.\  where  the  goddess  is
represented  bidding  the  people  of  Eleusis  build  her  a  great  temple  and
altar  on  a  projecting  hill,  at  the  foot  of  the  citadel,  and  above  Callichorum
(as  to  which  see  below).  The  old  sanctuary  was  burnt  by  the  Persians
in  480  or  479  B.C.  (Herodotus,  ix.  65).  The  new  sanctuary  was  built,
or  at  least  begun,  under  the  administration  of  Perides.  According  to
Strabo  and  Vitruvius  the  architect  was  Ictinus,  who  built  the  Parthenon.
Strabo  says  (ix.  p.  395):  "Next  comes  Eleusis,  in  which  is  the
sanctuary  of  Eleusinian  Demeter  and  the  mystic  close  (6  /ivcrrtic^
<n;/cds),  which  Ictinus  constructed  capable  of  holding  such  a  crowd  as
would  fill  a  theatre."  Vitruvius  says  (vii.  Praef  16):  "Ictinus  con-
structed the  shrine  (cellct)  of  Ceres  and  Proserpine  at  Eleusis  of  an
enormous  size,  in  the  Doric  style,  without  external  columns."  Plutarch
agrees  with  Strabo  and  Vitruvius  in  representing  the  new  sanctuary  as
built  or  begun  in  the  age  of  Pericles,  but  he  has  given  a  different  account
of  the  architects  by  whom  the  work  was  designed  and  executed.  He
s2Ly^  {Pericles,  13):  "Coroebus  began  to  build  the  Hall  of  Initiation
{telesteriori)  at  Eleusis.  He  set  up  the  columns  on  the  floor  and  united
them  by  the  epistyles.  After  his  death  Metagenes  the  Xypetian  put  on
the  frieze  and  the  upper  columns.  But  the  opaion  on  the  anaktoron  was
completed  by  Xenocles  the  Cholargian."  (What  the  opuion  and  anak-
toron were  is  uncertain.  The  architect  of  the  Dilettanti  Society  under-
stood opaion  to  be  the  pannelled  ceiling  and  anaktoron  to  be  only
another  name  for  the  telestcrion  or  Hall  of  Initiation.)  Plutarch's
detailed  account  is  probably  to  be  preferred  to  the  summary  accounts  of
Strabo  and  Vitruvius.  So  famous  a  building,  designed  or  executed  in
the  age  of  Pericles,  might  naturally,  though  incorrectly,  be  ascribed  by
popular  report  to  Ictinus,  the  most  illustrious  architect  of  the  ag^c.
Vitruvius  (/.r.)  reckons  the  building,  along  with  the  temple  of  Artemis
at  Ephesus,  the  temple  of  Apollo  at  Miletus,  and  the  temple  of  Olympian
Zeus  at  Athens,  as  among  the  finest  examples  of  sacred  architecture  in
marble.

The  general  arrangement  of  the  sanctuary  will  be  best  understood
from  the  accompanying  plan.  The  following  remarks  are  meant  to
explain  and  supplement  the  plan.

The  sacred  precinct  was  bounded  on  the  west  by  the  rock  of  the
acropolis  and  on  the  other  three  sides  by  a  fortification-wall  strengthened
with  towers.  It  was  thus  a  fortress  united  to  the  acropolis.  The
fortification- wall  was  built  of  unbumt  bricks  on  a  foundation  and  socle  of
limestone.  Remains  of  this  wall,  including  portions  of  the  upper  part
built  of  unbumt  bricks,  may  still  be  seen.  They  are  coloured  grey  on
the  plan.

The  area  of  the  sacred  precinct  was  enlarged  at  least  twice.  Origin-
ally it  appears  to  have  terminated  on  the  south  at  the  middle  of  the
three  round  towers  marked  in  the  plan.  The  extension  of  the  precinct
to  the  south  took  place  in  the  period  of  Greek  independence,  perhaps  in


USI


^jt—  A  A.


9


M;


}     BASE


CH.  XXXVIII  THE  ELEUSINIAN  SANCTUARY  505

the  fourth  century  B.C.  At  a  later  time,  under  the  Roman  empire,  the
precinct  was  extended  in  the  opposite  direction,  towards  the  north.  The
new  wall  built  to  enclose  the  space  thus  added  to  the  precinct  on  the
north  is  coloured  yellow  on  the  plan.  The  outer  face  of  this  wall  is  of
much  later  date,  and  so  is  the  wall  on  the  west,  which  is  also  coloured
yellow  on  the  plan.

The  entrance  to  the  sacred  precinct  was  on  the  north.  Outside  of
the  precinct  there  was  a  spacious  court  paved  with  stone  flags.  In  the
middle  of  this  court,  about  60  feet  north  of  the  great  portal  or  Propylaea,
are  the  foundations  of  a  small  temple  about  40  feet  long  by  20  feet
broad.  These  foundations  are  constructed  of  the  masonry  called  opus
incertum.  The  temple  was  therefore  built  in  the  Roman  period,  and
not,  as  was  formerly  supposed,  in  the  fourth  or  third  century  B.C.  It
had  a  portico  at  each  end  ;  but  whether  each  of  these  porticoes  opened
through  columns  placed  between  antae^  as  was  formerly  asserted,  seems
to  be  doubtful.  The  temple  was  probably  the  temple  of  Artemis  of
the  Portal  and  Father  Poseidon  mentioned  by  Pausanias.

Outside  of  the  sacred  precinct,  on  each  side  of  the  Great  Propylaea,
are  the  remains  of  two  Roman  triumphal  arches.  (Only  the  one  on  the
eastern  side  of  the  Propylaea  is  marked  on  the  plan.)  The  inscriptions
which  surmounted  these  two  arches  declare  that  they  were  dedicated  "  to
the  Two  Goddesses  and  the  Emperor  "  by  all  the  Greeks.  The  emperor
to  whom  the  arches  were  dedicated  may  have  been  Hadrian,  who  was  a
benefactor  of  Eleusis  and  had  been  initiated  in  the  mysteries  (see  above,
p.  501) ;  it  appears  from  an  inscription  that  games  were  held  at  Eleusis
in  honour  of  Hadrian  (E<f>r]fi€pls  dpxaioXoyiKrj^  1883,  p.  19).  Or  the
arches  may  have  been  dedicated  to  Antoninus  Pius,  who  repaired  the
sanctuary  at  Eleusis  at  great  expense  (Schol.  on  Aristides,  vol.  3.  p.
308  s^.y  ed.  Dindorf ;  see  below,  p.  509).  Beside  the  eastern  of  the
two  triumphal  arches  there  is  a  tank,  the  floor  of  which  is  lined  with
burnt  bricks.  Its  front  is  of  marble,  and  here  there  are  a  number  of
holes  through  which  the  water  poured  into  a  corresponding  number  of
small  basins.

Still  outside  of  the  sacred  precinct,  at  the  eastern  side  of  the  Great
Propylaea,  an  ancient  well  was  discovered  in  1893.  This  well,  which  is
at  a  level  considerably  below  that  of  the  existing  pavement,  is  carefully
constructed  of  polygonal  blocks  :  its  mouth  is  surrounded  by  concentric
circles.  The  Romans,  who  built  the  Great  Propylaea,  evidently  respected
the  well ;  for  the  lowest  of  the  steps  leading  up  to  the  Propylaea  has
been  cut  away  so  as  not  to  interfere  with  it.  This  no  doubt  is  the
Callichorum  well  mentioned  by  Pausanias  and  by  other  ancient  writers
(see  below,  note  on  *a  well  called  Callichorum,'  p.  514).

The  grand  portal  or  Great  Propylaea  faces  north-east.  It  is  a  close,
almost  slavish  copy  of  the  Propylaea  on  the  Acropolis  at  Athens,  except
that  the  wings  are  omitted.  Not  only  the  proportions,  but  the  actual
dimensions  of  the  Athenian  Propylaea  are  reproduced.  Six  marble
steps,  which  have  been  broken  away  at  the  north-west  comer,  lead  up  to
the  portal.  The  bases  of  the  two  rows  of  Ionic  columns  which  flanked
the  central  passage  are  still  in  their  original  situations.     In  front  of  the


5o6  THE  ELEUSINIAN  SANCTUARY  bk.  i.  attica

portal,  among  the  ddbris,  lies  a  colossal  medallion  of  white  marble,
rudely  sculptured,  which  occupied  the  central  place  in  the  external  fagade
of  the  gateway,  over  the  middle  door.  The  whole  structure  is  of  Roman
date ;  it  may  perhaps  have  been  erected  by  Hadrian.

To  the  south-west  of  the  Great  Propylaea  were  found  in  1 888  the
foundations  and  parts  of  the  walls  of  a  large  house  of  Roman  date.  On
the  walls  are  some  interesting  paintings,  one  of  which  is  a  copy  of
Phidias's  statue  of  Olympian  Zeus  ('E<fir]fi€pls  dp\aLoX.oyiKrj,  1888,  p.
77  ^99 -i  with  pi.  4  and  5  :  see  Paus.  v.  11.  i,  note).  The  house  (which
is  not  marked  on  the  plan)  may  have  been  the  official  residence  of  some
of  the  ministers  of  the  sanctuary.

About  50  feet  to  the  south  of  the  Great  Propylaea  is  a  second
portal,  the  Small  Propylaea.  It  faces  north,  and  consists  of  a  passage
33  feet  wide  between  two  parallel  walls,  each  50  feet  long.  At
its  inner  extremity  the  passage  is  divided  into  three  by  two  short
walls  parallel  to  the  two  outer  walls.  The  central  of  the  three  open-
ings thus  formed  is  13  feet  wide.  The  outer  ends  of  the  two  short
inner  walls  were  adorned  with  anfae,  opposite  to  which  stood  two
columns  with  florid  capitals  adorned  with  griffins'  heads.  These  two
columns  supported  the  epistyle,  not  tripods,  as  K.  Botticher  asserted.
The  epistyle,  of  which  pieces  remain,  consisted  of  an  architrave
surmounted  by  a  frieze  sculptured  with  the  emblems  of  Demeter's
worship  (wheat  sheaves,  flowers,  and  sacred  vessels).  A  mutilated  Latin
inscription  on  the  architrave  informs  us  that  the  portal  had  been  vowed  to
Demeter  and  Proserpine  by  Appius  Claudius  Pulcher  in  his  consulship
(54  B.C.),  and  that  it  was  afterwards  erected  or  completed,  in  fulfllment
of  the  vow,  by  two  of  his  nephews  (C.  L  L.  i.  No.  619  ;  C,  I.  JL  iii.  i.
No.  547).  This  Appius  Claudius  was  a  friend  of  Cicero,  who  addressed  10
him  a  number  of  letters  which  are  still  extant  (all  the  letters  of  the  third
book  of  the  Epistolac  ad  Familiares).  He  appears  to  have  been  a
weak  man,  the  slave  of  his  superstitions  (Cicero,  De  divinatiom,  i.  58.
132  ;  id.y  TuscuL  Dispui.  i.  16.  37  ;  Valerius  Maximus,  i.  8.  10).  In
two  letters  addressed  to  Atticus  in  50  B.C.  Cicero  alludes  to  Appius's
design  of  erecting  this  very  portal  at  Eleusis  ;  but  he  does  so  in  a  way
which  shows  that  when  he  wrote  these  letters  the  portal  was  either  not
begun  or  at  least  not  finished  {Epist.  ad  Atticum^  vi.  i.  26  ;  ib.^  vi.  6.  2),
Stirred  up  by  his  friend's  example  Cicero  conceived  the  design  of  com-
memorating himself  by  building  a  portal  to  the  Academy  ;  but  this
design  was  never  executed.

Excavations  under  Appius  Claudius's  portal  have  led  to  the  discovery
of  some  well-preserved  remains  of  a  large  tower.  This  proves  that  the
entrance  to  the  sacred  precinct  was  formerly  through  a  fortified,  not  an
ornamental,  gateway.

From  this  portal  a  paved  road  leads  south  to  the  great  Hall  of
Initiation.  The  pavement  of  this  road  is  of  Roman  date.  There  are
some  pedestals  beside  it,  perhaps  in  their  original  places.  The  wall
which  at  present  supports  the  road  on  the  east  is  mostly  modem.

On  the  right  (west)  side  of  this  road,  as  soon  as  we  have  passed
through  the  Small  Propylaea,  we  perceive  a  triangular  area  enclosed  on


CH.  xxxviii  THE  ELEUSINIAN  SANCTUARY  507

one  side  by  the  rock  of  the  acropolis,  and  on  the  other  two  sides  by
the  remains  of  ancient  walls.     In  the  rock  is  a  grotto  which  is  reached
by  a  small  flight  of  roughly  heu-n   steps ;  and  in   the  middle  of  the
triangular  area  may  be  seen  the  foundations  of  a    small   temple  in
antis^    6.70   metres  (about   22    feet)  long   by   5.20  metres   (17   feet)
wide.       Two   or   three  courses  of  the   foundations,    built  of   squared
blocks  of  common  stone,  are  standing.     From  the  style  of  the  masonry
it  appears  that  the  temple  was  not  older  than  the  fifth  century  B.C.  ;
but  traces  of  much  older  walls  have  also  been  discovered  here.     On
the  other  hand,  the  walls  which  enclose  the  area  on  two  sides  seem
to  be  later  than  the  temple,  being  carelessly  constructed  of  blocks  of
common  stone  taken  from  other  buildings.     Two  votive  reliefs  found
in   the  enclosure  seem  to  show  that    it    was    the   precinct   of   Pluto
which  is  repeatedly  mentioned  in  an  important  inscription  of  329/8
B.C.  relating  to  repairs  and  alterations  made  in  the  great  Eleusinian
sanctuary    (E<fyrffi€pls    dp\aio\oyiKrj^    1883,    p.    113    J^^.)       One    of
the  votive  reliefs  was  dedicated  by  a  certain  Lysimachidcs  to  Pluto
and  Proserpine   under   the    titles  of   *  the  god  *    and    *  the  goddess ' ;
they  are  represented  feasting.     On   the  other  relief,  of  which  only  a
fragment  remains,  are  seen  the  heads  of  Pluto  and  Proserpine ;  they  are
identified  by  having  their  names   (*  Pluto '   and   *  goddess ')  inscribed
beside  them.     This  second  relief  was  dedicated  by  "  a  priest  of  the  god
and  goddess  and  of  Eubuleus."      (See  'Effftj/Mpls  apxaLoXoyticrj,  1886,
pp.  19-32,  with  pi.  3.)     Hence  the  little  temple  in  the  middle  of  the
triangular  precinct  was  probably  a  temple  of  Pluto  or  of  Pluto  and
Proserpine  jointly.     The  inscription  of  329/8  B.C.,  mentioned  above,
refers  to  the  purchase  of  boards  of  elm-wood  for  the  construction  of
doors  to  the  sanctuary,  the  cost  of  polishing  the  an/ae  and  of  sculp-
turing and  painting  their  capitals,   etc.     Hence  it  seems  natural  to
suppose  with  Mr.  Foucart  that  the  temple  had  just  been  built  and  was
receiving  its  last  touches  in  329/8  B.C.  (Bui/,  de  Corr.  HeiiMiquCy  7
(1883),  p.  387  sqq,)     The  same  inscription  mentions  the  cost  of  plaster-
ing and  whitewashing  the  altar  of  Pluto.     The  grotto  in  the  rock  was
no  doubt  connected  with  the  worship  of  Pluto  here  :  it  may  be  the  very
"  cave  at  Eleusis,  where  are  the  Gates  of  Hell,"  down  which  Pluto  is
said  to  have  swept  his  young  bride  in  a  chariot  to  the  gloomy  subter-
ranean world  {Orphic  Hymns,  xix.  1 2  sqq.)     Pausanias,  however,  places
the  scene  of  the  rape  on  the  banks  of  the  Cephisus,  outside  of  the  great
sanctuary  (see  above,  §  5).     The  return  of  Proserpine  from  the  nether
world  is  said  to  have  also  taken  place  at  Eleusis  (R.  Forster,  Der  Raub
und  die  Riickkehr  der  Persephone,  p.  46).      In  the  precinct  of  Pluto  was
found  the  marble  head  of  a  beardless  young  man  with  flowing  curly
locks,  apparently  a  work  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.     Professors  Benndorf
and  Furtwangler  argue  that  it  represents  Eubuleus  and  is  a  work  of
Praxiteles.     A  small  base  inscribed  with  a  dedication  to  Eubuleus  was
found  near  it.     As  to  this  marble  head  see  'Ecftrjficpls  apxaioXoyiK-q^
1886,  p.  257  sqq.,  with  pi.    10;    Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens,  p.
105;  P.   Cavvadias,  VkvirTo.  tov'ESvlkov  }ilov(r€iov,  No.    181  ;  P.  J.
Meier,   *  Zur  Eubuleusbiiste  des  Praxiteles,'  Jahrbuch.  d.  arch,  Inst,  5


5o8  THE  ELEUSINIAN  SANCTUARY  bk.  i.  attica

(1890),  pp.  209-212  ;  O.  Kern,  in  Mittheil.  <L  arch,  Inst  in  Athen^  16
( 1 89 1 ),  p.  51  sqq. ;  A.  Furt wangler,  MeisUrwerke  d,  grieck,  PhuHk^  pp.
561-567.

To  the  south  of  the  precinct  of  Pluto  a  broad  flight  of  steps  cut  in
the  rock  on  the  western  side  of  the  paved  road  leads  up  to  a  small
plateau,  where  the  cuttings  in  the  surface  of  the  rock  show  that  a  small
building  once  stood  here  ;  but  no  stones  of  it  remain.

Immediately  to  the  south  of  this  flight  of  stairs,  on  the  same  side  of
the  road,  are  the  remains  of  a  small  quadrangular  edifice  built  of  conmion
stone.  It  is  conjectured  to  have  been  a  treasury ;  for  from  the  great
inscription  of  329/8  B.C.  we  learn  that  there  were  two  treasuries  at
Eleusis,  one  of  Demeter  and  the  other  of  Proserpine  :  the  inscription
mentions  the  doors,  roof,  and  tiles  of  one  of  the  treasuries  ('E^i^/ac/ms
apyaiokoyiKX]^  iS^Si  PP'  1 15  sqq,^  125  sq,)

The  great  Hall  of  Initiation,  to  which  the  paved  road  leads  from  the
Small  Propylaea,  is  a  vast  single  chamber  about  170  feet  square,  the
sides  of  which  face  north,  south,  east,  and  west  The  whole  of  the
west  side,  together  with  the  western  parts  of  the  northern  and  southern
sides,  are  bounded  by  the  rock  of  the  acropolis,  which  has  been  cut
away  perpendicularly  to  make  room  for  the  hall.  The  roof  of  the  hall
was  supported  by  six  rows  of  columns,  seven  columns  in  each  row :  the
bases  of  all  these  columns  except  one  are  still  to  be  seen  in  their  places.
Eight  tiers  of  steps,  partly  cut  in  the  rock,  partly  built,  ran  all  round  the
hall  except  at  the  entrances,  of  which  there  were  six,  namely,  two  on  the
north,  two  on  the  east,  and  two  on  the  south.  On  these  tiers  of  steps
the  initiated  probably  sat  watching  the  performance  of  the  mysteries
which  took  place  in  the  body  of  the  hall.  It  is  calculated  that  about
3000  people  could  find  room  on  them.  The  steps,  originally  narrow,
were  widened  at  a  later  date  by  a  casing  of  marble.  That  this  marble
casing  of  the  steps  is  a  late  work  appears  from  the  use  of  mortar  to
fasten  it  on.

Outside  of  the  Hall  of  Initiation,  on  its  northern  and  southern  sides,
two  flights  of  steps  cut  in  the  rock  lead  up  to  a  terrace  about  40  feet
wide,  which  has  been  levelled  in  the  rock  of  the  acropolis  along  the
whole  of  the  western  side  of  the  great  hall,  at  a  height  above  the  hall  of
some  20  feet.  The  southern  flight  of  steps  is  about  40  feet  wide  :  the
northern  is  only  1 1  feet  wide.  From  the  terrace  to  which  these  stair-
cases lead  up  it  is  supposed  that  access  was  obtained  to  an  upper
chamber  over  the  Hall  of  Initiation.  The  passage  of  Plutarch,  quoted
above  (p.  504),  seems  to  favour  the  view  that  there  was  an  upper  story
to  the  grand  hall.

The  eastern  front  of  the  Hall  of  Initiation  was  adorned  with  a
spacious  portico  183  feet  long  from  north  to  south  by  37 J  feet  deep.
Twelve  columns  stood  on  the  long  eastern  front  of  the  portico,  and  there
was  one  more  column  behind  each  of  the  comer  columns  on  the  narrow
northern  and  southern  sides  of  the  portico.  These  fourteen  columns
were  of  the  Doric  order  and  of  Pentelic  marble.  They  measured  6 J
feet  in  diameter  at  the  base.  Apparently  they  were  never  finished  ;  for
only  a  narrow  ring  at  the  top  and  bottom  of  each  shaft  was  fluted.     We


CH.  XXXVIII  THE  ELEUSINIAN  SANCTUARY  509

learn  from  Vitnivius  (vii.  Praef.  17)  that  this  portico  was  built  by  the
architect  Philo  at  the  time  when  Demetrius  Phalereus  was  master  of
Athens  (3 1 8-307  B.C.)  Philo  was  the  architect  of  the  great  naval  arsenal
at  Piraeus  (see  above,  p.  18  sqq.^  An  inscription  found  at  Eleusis
mentions  "  the  bringing  from  Pentelicus  to  Eleusis  of  the  capitals  of  the
fourteen  columns  in  the  portico  at  Eleusis"  {'E<fyr)fjL€pls  dpxaiokoyiKrjf
1890,  p.  121);  and  another  inscription  contains  some  minute  architec-
tural particulars  as,  to  the  construction  of  the  columns  of  the  portico
(see  Mittheil,  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  19  (1894),  pp.  186-189).

Such  was  the  great  Hall  of  Initiation  in  the  later  period  of  antiquity.
Most  of  the  remains  of  it  which  have  been  described  are  of  Roman  date.
For  the  style  and  workmanship  of  the  few  fragments  of  marble  capitals
which  have  been  found  in  the  hall  betray  the  decline  of  art ;  and  the
foundation  of  one  of  the  columns  (the  column  in  the  north-east  comer)
is  partly  composed  of  two  pedestals,  one  of  which  bears  an  inscription
of  Imperial  date.  Many  of  the  foundations  of  the  other  columns  contain
architectural  fragments  or  simple  blocks  taken  from  earlier  buildings.
It  seems  probable,  therefore,  that  the  final  condition  of  the  Hall  of
Initiation,  as  described  above,  was  the  work  of  the  emperor  Antoninus
Pius,  who  is  said  to  have  repaired  '*  the  temple  at  Eleusis "  at  great
expense  (Schol.  on  Aristides,  vol.  3.  p.  308  sq.  ed.  Dindorf).

But  the  excavations  of  the  Greek  Archaeological  Society  in  the  hall
brought  to  light  vestiges  of  four  older  edifices  on  the  same  site.  These
vestiges  are  marked  on  the  plan.     They  are  as  follows  :

(i)  Oldest  of  all  are  the  remains  of  two  walls  meeting  at  a  right
angle  in  the  northern  half  of  the  hall  On  the  plan  they  are  indicated
by  dotted  hatchings  and  the  letters  a  a  a.  They  are  built  of  polygonal
blocks  of  the  dark  Eleusinian  marble,  and  may  have  formed  part  of  the
temple  of  Demeter,  mentioned  in  the  Homeric  hymn  (see  above,  p.  504).
To  the  south,  east,  and  north  of  these  very  ancient  walls  are  some
isolated  pieces  of  walls  of  the  same  period  :  they  are  indicated  on  the
plan  by  dotted  hatchings  and  the  letters  b  b  b.  From  the  style  of  these
pieces  and  the  directions  in  which  they  lie,  it  is  conjectured  that  they
are  parts  of  the  ancient  wall  which  enclosed  the  oldest  precinct  and  the
oldest  temple  {a  a  ct).

(2)  The  remains  of  a  hall  were  found  occupying  exactly  the  north-
east comer  of  the  area  afterwards  filled  by  the  great  hall.  They  are
marked  in  red  on  the  plan.  This  lesser  hall  was  about  82  feet  square
in  the  inside ;  the  roof  was  supported  by  five  rows  of  columns,  five
columns  in  each  row,  the  square  bases  of  which  are  still  in  their  places.
A  portico  extended  along  the  eastem  front  of  the  hall.  It  is  thought
that  this  hall  was  built  in  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  and  that  it  was  probably
a  work  of  Pisistratus.  At  all  events  it  was  probably  the  hall  destroyed
by  the  Persians.  An  inscription  built  into  one  of  the  foundations  of  the
columns  dates  apparently  from  the  first  half  of  the  sixth  century  B.c.
Another  Eleusinian  inscription,  dating  from  421-420  B.C.,  contains  a
decree  that  the  stones  of  the  old  temple  which  had  not  been  used  up  in
constructing  the  fortification- wall,  should  be  employed  to  build  a  bridge
(MittheiL  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  19  (1894),  p.  163  ;  see  above,  p.  501).


5IO  THE  ELEUSINIAN  SANCTUARY  bk.  i.  aitica

r '

The  "  old  temple  "  mentioned  in  this  latter  inscription  may  be  the  hall
of  which  the  remains  have  just  been  described.

(3)  There  are  vestiges  of  the  foundations  of  three  rows  of  columns,
seven  columns  in  each  row,  extending  all  across  the  northern  half  of  the
great  hall  from  east  to  west,  but  not  encroaching  on  the  southern  half  of
the  hall.  They  are  indicated  on  the  plan  by  blank  circles.  It  is  con-
jectured that  these  foundations  are  part  of  a  provisional  restoration  and
extension  of  the  hall  carried  out,  possibly  by  Cimon,  soon  after  the  de-
struction of  the  sanctuary  by  the  Persians  in  480  or  479  B.C

(4)  In  the  southern  half  of  the  great  hall  are  some  square  founda-
tions of  columns  {p  P  P  on  the  plan),  which  are  supposed  to  have
formed  part  of  the  enlarged  hall  erected  or  at  least  begun  in  the  time  ^
Pericles  (see  above,  p.  504).  Dr.  Dorpfeld  thinks  that  in  this  hall,  as
planned  by  Ictinus  or  other  architects  of  Pericles,  the  new  southern  half
of  the  great  hall  was  divided  from  the  old  northern  half  by  a  partition
wall ;  in  the  southern  of  the  two  compartments  thus  formed  the  roof  was
supported  by  eight  columns  {p p p  on  the  plan),  while  in  the  northern
half  it  continued  to  be  supported  by  the  twenty-one  colunms  (indicated
by  blank  circles  on  the  plan)  which  are  conjecturally  referred  to  Cimon.
We  know  from  Vitruvius  (vii.  Praef.  16)  that  the  hall  built  in  Pericles's
time  had  no  portico.  It  has,  however,  been  conjectured  that  some
foundation-walls  near  the  north-east  and  south-east  comers  of  the  hall
(marked  P  P  P  on  the  plan)  were  intended  by  Pericles's  architect  to
support  a  portico  or  colonnade  which  was  to  extend  round  the  north,
east,  and  south  sides  of  the  hall.

So  much  for  the  existing  remains  of  the  great  Hall  of  Initiation  in
which  the  mysteries  of  Eleusis  were  celebrated.  There  are  passages  of
ancient  writers  which  seem  to  imply  that  besides  the  place  to  which  the
initiated  had  access  there  was  an  inner  Holy  of  Holies  called  the  anaJt-
ioron  or  megaron^  which  none  but  the  high-priest  of  the  mysteries  might
enter  and  which,  being  suddenly  thrown  open,  disclosed  to  the  view  of  the
awestruck  beholders  the  most  sacred  objects  of  their  religious  veneration
lit  up  by  a  blaze  of  dazzling  light  (Plutarch,  De  project,  in  virt.  10;
Athenaeus,  iv.  p.  167  f;  Himerius,  Orat.  xxii.  7  ;  Suidas,  s.zn/.  cvi'ovxos,
l€po<f>dvTr)Si  amd  fX€yapov ;  '^<f>i]fX€pls  dpx^aLokoycKrj,  1883,  p.  79).  But
no  trace  of  any  inner  chamber  or  enclosure  has  been  discovered  in  the
great  Hall  of  Initiation.  It  may  therefore  be  suggested  that  the  anaJi:'
toron  or  megaron  was  perhaps  nothing  but  the  body  of  the  hall,  w^hich
may  have  been  screened  by  curtains  from  the  spectators  sitting  in  dark-
ness on  the  tiers  of  seats  that  ran  all  round  it,  till  suddenly  the  curtain
rose  and  revealed  the  vast  hall  brilliantly  illuminated,  with  the  gor-
geously attired  actors  in  the  sacred  drama  moving  mazily  in  solemn  pro-
cession or  giddy  dance  out  and  in  amongst  the  forest  of  columns  that
rose  from  the  floor  of  the  hall,  while  the  strains  of  grave  or  voluptuous
music  filled  the  air.  Then,  when  all  was  over,  the  curtain  would  as
suddenly  descend,  leaving  the  spectators  in  darkness  and  silence,  with
nothing  but  the  memory  of  the  splendid  pageant  that  had  burst  upon
them  and  vanished  like  a  dream.

It  remains  to  notice  some  other  buildings  within  the  boundaries  of


CH.  XXXVIII  THE  ELEUSINIAN  SANCTUARY  511

the  sacred  precinct.  To  the  north  of  the  Hall  of  Initiation,  and  separa-
ted from  it  only  by  the  rock-cut  staircase  which  ascends  to  the  terrace,
are  the  remains  of  a  building  about  69  feet  long  from  east  to  west,  by  about
39  feet  wide.  Of  the  actual  building  only  some  scanty  pieces  of  founda-
tions, constructed  of  common  stone,  are  left ;  but  its  plan  can  be  made
out  from  the  cuttings  in  the  rock  made  to  receive  the  walls.  It  appears
to  have  been  a  temple,  consisting  of  a  single  chamber  or  cella  with  a
portico  on  the  east  front.  There  is  nothing  to  show  to  what  deity  it
was  dedicated.  Mr.  O.  Rubensohn  conjectures  that  it  was  a  temple  of
Demeter  built  before  the  Persian  wars,  and  this  is  as  likely  a  conjecture
as  any  other.  But  we  have  no  proof  that  in  historical  times  there  was  a
temple  of  Demeter  at  Eleusis.  The  author  of  the  Homeric  hymn  to
Demeter,  indeed,  mentions  a  temple  of  Demeter  at  Eleusis  (7/.  270)  :  but
no  later  writer  and  no  inscription  yet  discovered  speaks  of  such  a  temple.
Strabo,  in  a  passage  already  quoted  (p.  504),  refers  to  "the  sanctuary
(t€/)oi')  of  Eleusinian  Demeter  and  the  mystic  close  "  :  but  this  does  not
imply  the  existence  of  a  temple.

Abutting  on  the  eastern  end  of  the  fortification- wall  which  bounds
the  sacred  precinct  on  the  south  are  the  remains  of  a  building  of  some-
what peculiar  ground-plan.  It  consisted  of  three  compartments  side  by
side,  the  central  one  of  which  ends  on  the  south  in  a  large  semicircular
apse :  the  other  two  compartments  are  quadrangular.  The  building
dates  from  the  good  Greek  period,  and  is  probably  the  Council  House
which  is  knoi^Ti  from  at  least  one  inscription  (C.  I.  A.  iii.  5  ;  Ditten-
berger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Grace,  No.  387)  to  have  stood  within  the  sacred
precinct  at  Eleusis.  The  Council  House  at  01>Tnpia  was  of  somewhat
similar  form  (see  note  on  v.  24.  9).  The  date  of  the  construction  of  the
Council  House  at  Eleusis  and  the  purpose  which  it  served  are  both
somewhat  uncertain.  The  inscription,  already  referred  to,  which  un-
doubtedly mentions  it,  appears  to  date  from  about  the  middle  of  the
second  century  A.D.  ;  but  the  Council  House  seems  to  be  also  mentioned,
though  this  has  been  questioned,  in  an  inscription  of  about  the  middle  of
the  fifth  century  B.C  (C  /.  A.  iv.  No.  27  b,  p.  59  sq.  ;  Dittenberger,
Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec.  No.  13;  Bulletin  de  Corr.  HelUn,  4  (1880),  p.
225  sqq,)  With  regard  to  the  use  to  which  the  Council  House  was  put,
it  has  been  conjectured  that  **  the  Sacred  Senate "  (17  i€/>tt  ycpova-ia),
which  is  mentioned  in  an  Eleusinian  inscription  of  the  end  of  the  second
century  A.D.  (C  /.  A.  iii.  No.  702),  may  have  held  its  sittings  here.
But  about  this  Sacred  Senate  nothing  further  is  known.  It  seems  more
probable  that,  as  Mr.  Rubensohn  has  suggested,  the  Council  of  the  Five
Hundred  at  Athens,  which  apparently  exercised  supreme  control  over
the  Eleusinian  sanctuary,  its  treasures,  and  its  ceremonies,  may  have
met  in  the  Council  House  at  Eleusis  on  certain  days  to  make  arrange-
ments for  the  celebration  of  the  mysteries.  We  know  that  on  stated
days  or  special  occasions  the  Council  of  the  Five  Hundred  held  their
sittings  at  places  other  than  their  regular  place  of  assembly,  the  Council
House  in  the  market-place  at  Athens.  Thus  they  met  in  the  Eleusinium
on  the  day  after  the  great  Eleusinian  festival  (see  note  on  i.  14.  3),
and  they  met  from  day  to  day  on  one  of  the  quays  in  the  harbour  when


512  THE  ELEUSINIAN  SANCTUARY  bk.  i.  attica

a  naval  squadron  was  fitting  out  for  sea  (see  note  on  i.  i.  2,  p.  21).
At  some  time  in  the  Roman  period  the  Council  House  at  Eleusis  was
pulled  down,  and  a  double  colonnade  erected  on  its  site.  The  two  rows
of  bases  which  supported  the  columns  still  exist.

The  last  remains  of  an  ancient  building  which  we  shall  notice  within
the  sacred  precinct  are  those  of  a  temple  of  Roman  date  standing  at  the
northern  end  of  the  rock-cut  terrace  above  the  Hall  of  Initiation.  A
broad  flight  of  stairs  leads  up  from  the  end  of  the  terrace  to  the  temple,
which  faced  south  and  consisted  of  a  single  chamber  or  cella  widi  a
portico  in  front,  the  whole  measuring  about  72  feet  long  by  46  feet  wide.
It  has  been  suggested  by  Mr.  Rubensohn  that  the  temple  was  dedicated
to  "  the  New  Demeter,"  the  title  bestowed  by  the  degenerate  and  Owning
Greeks  on  Sabina,  wife  of  Hadrian  (C.  /.  G,  G.  S.  Nos.  73,  74  ;  Hertzberg,
Gesch,  Griechenlands  unter  der  Herrschaft  der  Romer^  2.  p.  334)  and
on  Faustina,  wife  of  Antoninus  Pius  (Kaibel,  Epigrammata  Groicoy
No.  1046  line  6,  with  KaibePs  note).

From  inscriptions  found  at  Eleusis  we  learn  that  the  open  space
within  the  sacred  precinct  was  called  the  Court  of  the  Sanctuary
(E<f>-qfji^piS  dpxaio^oyiKijy  1 883,  p.  84  ;  /V/.,  1 884,  p.  135  sg,;  /V/.,  1887,
p.  5  sg.)  Many  buildings  or  precincts  situated  within,  or  connected  with,
the  great  sanctuary  are  known  only  from  inscriptions.  Such  are  the
sanctuary  of  Dionysus  ('E<^7y/i.  dpxaiok,,  1883,  p.  113  j^.;  id.,  1884,
p.  74),  the  sanctuary  of  Theseus  ( 'E^rifi.  oipx-t  1 883,  pp.  i  ii  sg,,  113  x^.,
115  sg,y  121  sg.),  *the  sacred  houses'  ('E<^/i.  ap\.,  1883,  pp.  113  sg.,
119  sg,y  125  sg.),  the  house  of  the  priestess  {id.,  pp.  109  sg.,  113  sg.,
iig  sg.,  12^  sg.),  the  house  of  the  Ceryces  {id.,  pp.  1 10  j^.,  125  sg. ;  as
to  the  Ceryces,  see  Paus.  i.  38.  3  note),  the  Neocorium  or  house  of  the
custodians  {'E<f>y]fi.  apx-,  pp*  11 5- 118),  the  Epistasium  or  house  of  the
overseers  {id.,  pp.  113  sg.,  119  sg.),  the  wardrobe  {id.,  p.  125  sg.),  and
the  sacred  winepress  {id.,  p.  119  sg.)  The  sacred  threshing-floor,
mentioned  in  the  great  inscription  of  329-8  B.C.  (id.,  p.  121  sg.),  is
probably  identical  with  the  threshing-floor  of  Triptolemus  mentioned  by
Pausanias,  from  whom  we  learn  that  it  was  outside  of  the  great  sanctuary.
Another  inscription  relates  to  the  sacred  waste  land  {orgas)  which
belonged  to  the  sanctuary,  and  describes  a  curious  mode  of  consulting
the  Delphic  oracle  on  the  question  whether  the  sacred  waste  should  or
should  not  be  let  out  (*E</»//i.  dpxatoX.,  1888,  pp.  25  sgg.,  113  sgg. ;
Bulletin  de  Corr.  HdUnigue^  13  (1889),  pp.  433-467).

Among  the  sculptures  found  at  Eleusis  is  a  fine  statue  of  a  young
man,  which  Mr.  Philios  conjectures  to  have  been  a  copy  of  Polyclitus's
statue  of  the  man  (or  boy)  scraping  himself  (Pliny,  N.  H.  xxxiv.  55).
But  as  both  arms  and  one  of  the  legs  of  the  statue  are  missing,  it  is
impossible  to  be  certain  as  to  its  original  attitude.  The  statue  is  of
Pentelic  marble.  See  *E<^iy/i€/)is  d.pxp.^o\oyiKr\,  1890,  p.  207  sgg.,  with
pi.  10,  II.

Lastly,  it  deserves  to  be  mentioned  that  evidence  of  the  former  pre-
valence of  the  early  type  of  civilisation  denominated  Mycenaean  has  come
to  light  at  Eleusis.  Such  evidence  is  furnished  by  the  existence  of  a
beehive  tomb  on  the  south  side  of  the  acropolis  {Gazette  arcfUologigue,


CH.  XXXVIII  THE  ELEUSINIAN  SANCTUARY  513

8  (1883),  p.  248  sq.  ;  'E<^?//xc/>i9  ap^aioXoyiKiiy  1889,  p.  1 92  note  2  ;
see  note  on  ii.  16.  5),  the  discovery  of  a  grave  containing  pottery  of
the  Mycenaean  type  (*E<^T/fi.  o.p\fxio\,  1889,  p.  187  j^^.),  the  discovery
within  the  sacred  precinct  of  a  large  number  of  rude  clay  figures  like
those  found  at  Mycenae  and  Tiryns  (Il/oaicriica  t^s  * Kfi\Q.i.o\oy\.Ky\%
'Erai/jtas,  1 884,  p.  76),  and  the  discovery  of  two  gold  plates  embossed
with  patterns  of  the  Mycenaean  style  {*E<f>rffi€pls  dp)^aioX.oyLKTfjy  1885,
p.  180  sgg.,  with  pi.  9,  fig.  i  and  2).

The  site  of  the  temple  of  Triptolemus  mentioned  by  Pausanias  is  not
known.  It  has  often  been  supposed  that  the  chapel  of  St.  Zaccharias,
about  170  yards  north-east  of  the  sacred  precinct,  stands  on  the  site  of
the  temple  ;  for  here  were  found  three  reliefs  representing  scenes  in  the
myth  of  Triptolemus,  including  the  beautiful  relief  now  in  the  National
Museum  at  Athens  (see  note  on  i.  14.  i).  But  extensive  excavations
conducted  beside  the  chapel  by  Mr.  D.  Philios,  in  1888,  convinced  him
that  no  important  building  of  Greek  or  Roman  times  existed  here.  He
discovered,  however,  some  insignificant  remains  of  Roman  houses,  and
the  ruins  of  a  large  and  tolerably  ancient  Byzantine  church,  in  the  con-
struction of  which  stones  taken  from  older  buildings  seem  to  have  been
employed  (IIpaKTtica  rrjs  * Ap\/ETaLpCaSy  1888,  p.  26  sg.)

As  to  the  images  of  Demeter  and  Proserpine  in  their  great  sanctuary
at  Eleusis  we  have  no  positive  information.  But  from  fragments  of
votive  reliefs  and  the  sherd  of  a  painted  vase  found  at  Eleusis  Mr.  O.
Kern  concludes  that  Demeter  was  represented  sitting  on  the  cylindrical
a'sta  or  basket  (see  note  on  viii.  2  5.  7),  perhaps  with  a  sceptre  in  her
raised  left  hand  and  a  bunch  of  ears  of  corn  in  her  right,  while  Proserpine
stood  beside  her  with  a  torch  in  each  hand  (O.  Kern,  *  Das  Kultbild  der
Gottinen  von  Eleusis,'  MittheiL  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  At/ten,  17  (1892),
pp.  125-142).

On  Eleusis  see  Wheler,  Journey y  p.  427  sqq.  ;  Chandler,  Travels  in  Greece^
p.  189  sqq,  ;  Antiquities  of  lonia^  pt.  ii.  (London,  1797),  p.  22  sq,^  with  pi.
xix.-xxi.  ;  The  Unedited  Antiquities  of  Attica  (London,  1817),  pp.  1-40,  with
views,  maps,  plans,  elevations  etc.  ;  Dodwell,  Tour^  i.  p.  581  sqq, ;  Leake,
Athens^  2.  p.  154  sqq,  ;  Welcker,  Tagebuch,  I.  p.  no  sqq.i  Vischer,  Erintter-
ungen  und  Eindriicke^  p.  97  sqq,  ;  Fr.  Lenormant,  Recherches  Archhlogiques  H
Eleusis  (Paris,  1862);  id,,  *Triptoleme  et  les  grandes  dresses.  Bas-relief
d*Eleusis,'  Revtu  Archiologique,  N.  S.  15  (1867),  p.  161  sq,,  with  pi.  iv.  ;  id.,  *  Bas-
reliefs  votifs  d'jfeleusis,*  Gazette  Archiologiqtu,  I  (1875),  p.  87  sq,,  with  pi.  22;
Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  328  sqq,  ;  Mahaffy,  Rambles  and  Studies,  p.  180  sqq.  ;
Baedeker,'  p.  119  sqq.  ;  Guide-Joanne,  1.  p.  199  sqq,  ;  UpaKTiKh.  r^s  *A/JXtt*oXo7tic%
'Erouplas  (Jan.  1 882  -  Jan.  1883),  pp.  84-103;  id,,  1883,  pp.  51-67;  id,
1884,  pp.  64-87;  id,,  1885,  pp.  25-29;  id,,  1886,  p.  50  sq,  ;  id,,  1887,
pp.  50-58;  id,,  1888,  pp.  23-27;  id.,  1889,  pp.  22-25;  id,,  1890,  p.  26  sq, ;
id.,  1892,  pp.  31-35;  E0?7juc/)is  dpxatoXoyiK'ii,  1883,  PP*  '-22,  75-86,  109-148,
253-264 ;  id,  1884,  pp.  69-74,  135-148,  179-186,  213-218  ;  id.,  1885,  pp.  I45-I54*
169-184;  id,  1886,  pp.  19-32,  185-214,  257-266;  id.,  1887,  pp.  i-io,  109-114,
171-196;  id,,  1888,  pp.  21-58,  77-82,  113-118,  193-198;  id.,  1889,  pp.  117-139,
171-194  ;  id,,  1892,  pp.  101-106;  D.  Philios,  Fouilles  d* Eleusis  (Atiiens,  1889);
L.  Julius,  *  Das  Alter  der  kleinen  Propylaen  zu  Eleusis,'  Mittheil,  d  arch,  Inst,
in  Athen,  2  (1877),  pp.  190-192;  P.  Foucart,  *  Inscriptions  d'Eleusis,*  Bulletin
de  Corr.  Hellinique,  6  (1882),  pp.  434-438;  V.  Blavette,  *  Fouilles  d*Eleusis,'
Bulletin  de  Corr,  HelUnique,  8  (1884),  pp.  254-264  ;  id.,  9  (1885),  pp.  65-67,  with
pi.  I  ;  American  Journal  of  Archaeology ,  I  (1885),  pp.  435-437  ;  Mittheil,  d,  arch,

VOL.  II  2  L


514  THE  WELL  CALLICHORUM  bk.  i.  attica

Inst,  in  Athen,  ii  (i8$6),  p.  328  sq.  ;  A.  Michaelis,  *Das  sogenannte  Dreifbss-
kapitell  von  Eleusis/  Mittfuil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Ath^n^  14  (1889),  pp.  9-14 ;  W.
Dorpfeld,  /A,  p.  123  sq.  ;  Ch.  Diehl,  Excursions  arcfUologiques  en  Grhty  pp.
302-309  ;  L.  Dyer,  Studies  of  the  gods  in  Greece ^  p.  185  sqq.  ;  O.  Rubensohn,  Die
Mysterienheiligtiimer  in  Eleusis  und Samothrcdu  (Berlin,  1892) ;  Bulletin  de  Corr.
Helleniqiu^  17  (1893),  p.  195  sq.  ;  Ber lifter  phi lolonsc he  IVochetischrift ,  13  (1893),
p.  674;  M.  Mayer,  in  'E<fnjfupls  dpxcuoXoryucijf  1893,  pp.  191-200,  ^ith  pi.  14
(remains  of  pedimental  sculptures) ;  D.  Philios,  ^Ewiypatpal  i^  *EXn«<ri>aj,  MittheiL
d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen^  1 9  (1894),  pp.  1 63- 1 93;  A.  N.  Skias,  ^wiy pa^
*EXeu<r(yof,  in  ^Eifnjfupis  dpxctioXoyiKifff  1S94,  pp.  i6i-i85.

It  would  be  out  of  place  to  examine  here  the  scanty  information  we  possess  as
to  the  mysteries  of  Eleusis.  See  Lobeck,  Aglaophamus^  p.  3  sqq.  ;  Aug.  Mommsen,
Heortoiogie,  pp.  64  sqq.,  222-269;  Fr.  Lenormant,  *The  Eleusinian  mysteries,'
in  Contemporary  Review^  for  May,  July,  and  September,  1880 ;  Fr.  Lenormant
and  E.  Pottier,  art.  *  Eleusinia,  in  Daremberg  and  Saglio's  Dicticntmire  da
Antiquites  ;  P.  Gardner,  New  Chapters  in  Greek  History^  p.  381  sqq.  ;  E.  Rohde,
Psyche  (Freiburg  und  Leipzig,  1894),  pp.  256-276.

38.  6.  a  well  called  Oallichonun.  Callichomm  is  mentioned  in
the  Homeric  hymn  to  Demeter  {v.  270  sqq.  ;  see  above,  p.  504).  The
name  means  the  well  "  of  the  fair  dances,"  and  Pausanias  tells  us  that
the  women  danced  here  in  honour  of  Demeter.  The  well  was  discovered
in  1892  just  outside  the  grand  portal  of  the  sacred  precinct  (see  above,
p.  505).  It  is  carefully  built  of  polygonal  stones,  and  the  mouth  is
surrounded  by  concentric  circles,  which  probably  mark  the  rounds
in  which  the  Eleusinian  women  tripped  about  it  in  the  dance.  See
lipaKTiKa  T^s  *Apx-  'Eratpias,  1 892,  p.  33  sq.  ;  Bulletin  de  Corr.
HcllMque^  17  (1893),  P-  '9^;  Berliner  philolog.  Wochenschrift^  13
(1893),  p.  674.  Solemn  oaths  were  sworn  beside  the  well.  Alciphron
has  described  (iii.  69)  how  a  wife,  suspected  of  infidelity,  led  her
husband  to  the  Callichorum  well  at  Eleusis  and  there  swore  her  inno-
cence. Some  ancient  writers  thought  that  it  was  beside  this  well  that
the  sad  Demeter  rested  from  her  wear)'  wanderings  in  search  of  her
loved  and  lost  Proserpine  (Apollodorus,  i.  5.  i  ;  Nicander,  Thcriaca^
486;  Callimachus,  Hymn  to  Demeter^  16).  But  the  local  Eleusinian
legend  seems  to  have  placed  the  scene  of  the  goddess's  rest  and  of  her
meeting  with  the  king's  daughters  at  another  well  on  the  road  to
Megara  (see  i.  39    i  note).

38.  6.  the  Rarian  plain.  The  author  of  the  Homeric  hymn  to
Demeter  {v.  450  sqq.)  has  described  how  the  Rarian  plain,  once  a  fat
comland,  lay  waste  and  leafless  while  Proserpine  was  under  ground  ;  but
how  in  springtime  it  would  be  a  waving  expanse  of  corn  once  more,  and
how  the  swathes  would  be  heavy  with  the  ears  which  the  reapers  would
bind  in  sheaves.  The  plain  was  supposed  to  take  its  name  from  Rams,
who  had  received  Demeter  hospitably  on  her  wanderings  (Suidas,  s.v.
'Paptas).  Rarus  was  said  to  be  the  father  or  grandfather  of  Triptolemus
(Suidas,  I.e.  ;  Paus.  i.  14.  3  ;  Photius,  Lexicon^  s.v.  *Pap),  who  first
sowed  com  in  the  Rarian  plain  {Martnor  Pan'um,  25).  One  of  the
three  sacred  Athenian  ploughings  was  held  in  the  Rarian  plain  (Plutarch,
Conjug.  Pracccpta^  42).  The  great  Eleusinian  inscription  of  329/8  RC
mentions  a  payment  made  to  a  man  for  removing  a  corpse  from  the
Rarian  plain,  and  another  payment  made  to  a  man  for  purifying  the


CH.  xxxviii  ELEUTHERAE  515

plain  from  the  defilement ;  the  purification  seems  to  have  included  the
sacrifice  of  a  pig  ( *E<^ry/x€pi9  a.p\(kio\oyiK^']y  1883,  p.  119  sq.)  The
common  name  of  the  plain  seems  to  have  been  Raria  (or  Rharia)  ;
this  at  least  is  the  form  vouched  for  by  the  inscription,  the  Parian  marble
(25),  and  Plutarch  (/.r.)  The  author  of  the  Homeric  hymn  (Jx.)  uses
the  form  Rarium.  Both  forms  of  the  name  are  recognised  by  Stephanus
Byzantius  {s.v,  *Pa/3tov).  The  exact  situation  of  the  Rarian  plain  is  not
known.

38.  6.  it  is  their  cnstom  to  take  the  sacrificial  barley  etc.  The
Eleusinian  inscription  of  329/8  B.C.  mentions  the  amount  of  barley  to
be  used  in  making  the  sacred  cakes  {*E<f>r]fi€ph  ap\aiokoyiKy^,  1883,
p.  123  sq.)  Another  Eleusinian  inscription,  which  relates  to  the  first-
fruits  of  corn  to  be  oflfered  to  Demeter  and  Proserpine,  mentions  the
sacred  cake  (C  /.  A.  iv.  No.  27  b,  p.  59  sq.  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge
Inscr.  Grace.  No.  13,  line  37  ;  Bulletin  de  Corr,  HeUMque^  4  (1880),
p.  227).  Com  taken  from  the  threshing-floor  was  used  to  make  the
sacred  cakes  which  were  offered  to  the  gods  (Harpocration,  s.v.  TrcAai'os).

38.  7.  the  wall  of  the  sanctuary.  The  Greek  word  {jtlxo^)  here
used  to  designate  the  wall  implies  that  it  was  a  fortification-wall  ;  and
the  excavations  at  Eleusis  have  shown  that  the  sacred  precinct  was  sur-
rounded by  a  fortification -wall  strengthened  with  towers  (see  above,
p.  504).  Livy  (xxxi.  25)  correctly  describes  the  castle  or  citadel  as
"  overhanging  and  surrounding  the  temple."

38.  7.  The  hero  Eleusis.  Others  called  him  Eleusinus  (Harpo-
cnition  and  Suidas,  j.?/.  'EXci'o-tVta ;  Servius,  on  Virgil,  Georg.  i.  19;
Hyginus,  Fab.  147).  According  to  one  legend,  Eleusis  or  Eleusinus
was  the  king  of  Eleusis  who  received  Demeter  when  she  came  to  the
city  in  search  of  her  daughter,  and  he  was  slain  by  Demeter  because  he
interrupted  her  when  she  was  in  the  act  of  making  his  infant  son  Tripto-
lemus  immortal  by  placing  him  on  the  fire  (Panyasis,  referred  to  by
Apollodorus,  i.  5.  2  ;  Servius  and  Hyginus,  ll.cc.)  But  according  to
the  common  legend  it  was  Celeus,  not  Eleusis  or  Eleusinus,  who
received  Demeter  at  Eleusis.  See  the  Homeric  hymn  to  Demeter,  v.
96  sqq.  ;  Apollodorus,  i.  5.  i  ;  Paus.  i.  39.  i  ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes
Knights^  698.

38.  8.  Formerly  Eleutherae  was  the  limit  of  Boeotia  etc.
From  Eleusis  the  road  to  Eleutherae,  which  is  at  the  same  time  the  high-
road from  Athens  to  Thebes,  goes  north-west  across  the  plain.  The  olive-
trees  begin  to  appear  soon  after  we  have  left  Eleusis,  and  the  road  runs
for  three  miles  through  thick  groves  of  them  to  the  large  village  of
Mandra  situated  on  a  small  height  at  the  entrance  to  a  valley ;  for  here
the  mountains  which  bound  the  plain  of  Eleusis  begin.  The  native
rock  crops  up  among  the  houses  and  streets  of  the  village.  The  hills
that  rise  on  both  sides  of  the  valley  are  wooded  with  pine.  Beyond  the
village  the  valley  contracts,  and  the  road  ascends  for  a  long  time  through
the  stillness  and  solitude  of  the  pine-forest.  A  little  wayside  inn  (the
khan  of  Palaio-Koundoura)  is  passed  in  a  lonely  dale  ;  and  then,  after
a  further  ascent,  the  prospect  opens  up  somewhat,  and  the  tops  of
Hymettus  and  Pentelicus  are  seen  away  to  the  east,  appearing  above  a


5i6  ELEUTHERAE  bk.  i.  attica

nearer  range  of  hills.  Soon  aften^'ards  the  road  descends  into  a  culti-
vated and  fertile  little  plain  or  valley  watered  by  the  chief  arm  of  the
Eleusinian  Ccphisus,  and  bounded  on  the  north  by  the  principal  rai^
of  Cithaeron,  on  the  south  by  the  lower,  outlying  chain  which  we  have
just  crossed.  This  no  doubt  is  the  plain  in  which  stood  the  temple  of
Dionysus  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  At  the  northern  end  of  the  valley
or  plain  there  is  now  a  police-barrack  on  the  right  of  the  road,  and  a
little  further  on  a  public-house,  the  khan  of  Kasa.  Here  the  pass  over
Cithaeron,  in  the  strict  sense,  begins.  It  is  a  narrow  rocky  defile,  up
which  the  road  winds  tortuously  between  high  pine-clad  slopes  on  either
hand.  In  the  very  mouth  of  the  pass,  immediately  beyond  the  public-
house,  a  steep,  conical,  nearly  isolated  hill  rises  up  as  if  to  bar  the  road
Its  summit  is  crowned  with  the  grey  walls  and  towers  of  Eleutherae.

The  ruins  of  Eleutherae,  now  called  Gyphto  -  kasiro  or  *  GyTpsy-
castle,'  form  one  of  the  finest  extant  specimens  of  Greek  fortification.
The  circuit  of  the  walls,  which  is  but  small,  encloses  the  summit  and
part  of  the  southern  slope  of  the  hill.  The  north  wall,  strengthened
with  seven  square  projecting  towers,  is  complete.  It  is  about  8  feet
thick,  and  is  built  of  blocks  laid  in  regular  courses,  with  a  core  of
rubble.  As  the  ground  falls  away  to  the  north,  the  wall  is  higher  on
the  outside  than  on  the  inside.  On  the  inside  it  may  average  1 1  feet
in  height ;  on  the  outside,  1 4  or  15  feet.  The  towers  are  about  thirty
paces  apart.  They  measure  about  22  feet  square,  projecting  from  the
curtain  about  10  feet  on  the  outer  and  4  feet  on  the  inner  side.  From
the  number  of  the  courses  of  stones  I  judged  the  towers  to  be  about
16  feet  high  on  the  inside  and  about  30  feet  high  on  the  outside.  The
thickness  of  the  walls  of  the  towers  is  only  about  3  feet.  Each  tower
consisted  of  two  stories.  The  lower  story  was  entered  by  a  door  at  the
back  on  the  level  of  the  ground.  The  upper  story  was  entered  from
the  ramparts  by  two  doors,  one  on  each  side  of  the  tower.  These  doors
are  still  to  be  seen,  though  the  floors  of  the  upper  stories,  having  been
of  wood,  have  of  course  perished.  The  doors  narrow  somewhat  from
below  upward.  Each  tower  has  three  small  windows  or  loopholes,  one
in  each  of  the  sides  which  project  outward  beyond  the  curtain.  Traces
of  the  wall  and  towers  on  the  other  and  lower  sides  of  the  hill  can  still
be  seen,  but  they  are  far  less  perfect  than  on  the  north  side.  The  chief
gate  was  on  the  south.  On  the  highest  point  of  the  hill  are  the  remains
of  an  oblong  rectangular  edifice  built  of  polygonal  masonry.  It  may
have  been  an  inner  keep.  The  whole  place  is  now  an  utter  solitude.
When  I  visited  it,  on  a  day  in  May,  the  ground  was  carpeted  with
yellow  flowers  :  goats  were  balancing  themselves  on  the  grey  ruins  ;  and
the  goatherd  was  sleeping  in  the  shadow  of  one  of  the  towers.  On
either  hand  the  mountains,  clothed  in  their  sombre  mantle  of  dark  pine-
forests,  towered  into  the  bright  sky.

If  from  the  ruins  of  Eleutherae  we  return  to  the  highroad  which
winds  along  the  western  foot  of  the  hill,  and  follow  it  for  a  few  miles  to
the  top  of  the  pass,  we  obtain  a  commanding  view  over  the  wide  plain
of  Boeotia  stretching  away  to  the  line  of  far  blue  mountains  which
bounds  it  on  all  sides.     Below  us,  but  a  little  to  the  west,  at  the  foot  of


CH.  XXXVIII  ELEUTHERAE  517

the  long  uniform  slope  of  Cithaeron,  the  red  village  of  Kokla  marks  the
site  of  Plataea.  Thebes  is  hidden  from  view  behind  the  dip  of  a  low
intervening  ridge.  The  sharp  double-peaked  mountain  on  the  west,
beyond  the  nearer  fir-clad  declivities  of  Cithaeron,  is  Helicon.  The
grand  mountain-mass  which,  capped  with  snow,  looms  on  the  north-west,
is  Parnassus.  The  mountains  on  the  north-east  are  in  Euboea,  but  the
strait  which  divides  them  from  Boeotia  is  not  visible.

But  we  must  turn  and  retrace  our  steps  down  the  pass  to  Eleutherae.
For,  following  the  guidance  of  Pausanias,  we  have  a  long  way  to  travel
and  much  to  see  before  we  descend  with  him  into  the  plain  of  Boeotia.

The  military  importance  of  Eleutherae,  as  a  fortress  commanding
the  pass  over  Mt.  Cithaeron  and  distant  only  a  few  miles  from  the  great
Boeotian  plain,  will  be  readily  understood.  That  this  fortress  was
indeed  Eleutherae  seems,  even  in  the  absence  of  inscriptions,  to  be
rendered  certain  by  the  evidence  of  Strabo  (ix.  p.  41 1  sq.)  and  Pausanias
(here  and  ix.  i.  i  and  6),  both  of  whom  represent  Eleutherae  as  the
frontier  town  of  Attica  and  immediately  adjoining  Plataea  in  Boeotia.
For  between  the  fortress  in  question  and  Plataea  there  was  hardly  room
for,  and  certainly  there  is  no  vestige  of,  an  ancient  town.  The  vicinity
of  the  two  places  appears  also  from  a  passage  in  Xenophon  {HeUenica^
V.  4.  14).  Yet  Leake,  with  some  hesitation,  named  the  ruined  fortress
Oenoe,  not  Eleutherae.  His  chief  grounds  for  doing  so  were  that  (i)
when  Cleomenes,  king  of  Sparta,  marched  from  the  Isthmus  of  Corinth
to  Eleusis  in  507  B.C.,  Oenoe  was,  according  to  Herodotus  (v.  74),  a
frontier  town  of  Attica  on  the  side  of  Boeotia ;  and  (2)  Oenoe  is
described  by  Thucydides  (ii.  18)  as  a  fortress  on  the  borders  of  Attica
and  Boeotia  and  as  the  first  place  in  Attica  which  the  invading  Pelopon-
nesian  army  came  to  and  attacked  in  431  B.C.  But  this  only  ser\es
to  show  that  down  to  the  end  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.,  when  Herodotus
and  Thucydides  wrote,  Eleutherae  still  belonged  to  Boeotia,  and  that
the  Attic  frontier  lay  somewhat  further  to  the  south.  This  view  fits  the
narrative  of  Thucydides  much  better  than  the  view  which  identifies  the
fortress  in  question  with  Oenoe.  For  why  should  the  Peloponnesian
army,  marching  to  Eleusis  and  Athens,  have  turned  out  of  its  way  some
miles  to  attack  a  fortress  which  did  not  threaten  their  communications,
and  the  road  through  which  led  to  no  place  that  they  wished  to  go  to  ?
On  the  other  hand,  if  Oenoe  lay  some  miles  to  the  south  of  the  fortress
in  question,  it  would  be  nearer  by  so  much  to  the  line  of  march  of  an
army  bound  for  Eleusis ;  and  the  commander  of  such  an  army  would
naturally  be  unwilling  to  leave  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy  a  fortress
which  might  prove  a  continual  source  of  annoyance  and  danger  in  his
rear.  Hence  the  ruins  which  Leake  identified  as  those  of  Eleutherae
may  be  those  of  Oenoe.  They  are  situated  in  the  plain  about  four
miles  south-east  of  Eleutherae  and  consist  of  the  ruins  of  a  very  small
town,  which  had  a  citadel  or  inner  enclosure  at  one  angle.  The  masonry
is  for  the  most  part  regular,  and  exists  in  many  places  to  a  height  of
two  or  three  courses.  The  place  is  called  MyupoH.  Two  miles  to  the
north  of  it,  on  the  southern  slope  of  Cithaeron,  stands  the  ivy-mantled
monastery  of  St.  Meletius,  delightfully  situated  among  numerous  springs


5i8  ELEUTHERAE  bk.  i.  attica

_    .     m  _

which  descend,  shaded  by  great  bay-trees,  to  the  gardens  and  hanging
woods  of  olives  and  beeches  on  the  mountain-side,  keeping  them  alwa)'S
fresh  and  green,  a  pleasing  contrast  to  the  wild  rocks  and  dark  pine-
forests  above.

Eleutherae  claimed  both  to  be  the  birth-place  and  to  have  been
founded  and  named  by  Dionysus  (Diodorus,  iii.  66.  i,  iv.  2.  6).  Others
thought  the  town  was  named  after  Eleuther,  son  of  Apollo  (Stephanus
Byzantius,  s.v,  *E\€v6€pai).  Most  of  the  Argives  who  perished  in  the
war  of  the  Seven  against  Thebes  were  said  to  have  been  buried  here
(Euripides,  SuppiiceSy  756-759);  their  graves  were  still  shown  in
Plutarch's  time  (Plutarch,  Theseus^  29).  At  what  period  Eleutherae
separated  itself  from  Boeotia  and  joined  Athens,  we  do  not  know  ;  if  1
am  right,  the  union  took  place  not  earlier  than  the  beginning  of  the
fourth  century  B.C.  In  Pausanias's  time  the  place  seems  to  have  been
ruinous  and  deserted.  This  is  confirmed  by  a  passage  in  Lucian  who
represents  a  certain  Ismenidorus  as  murdered  by  robbers  on  his  way
over  Cithaeron  to  Eleusis  ;  the  d>nng  man  bitterly  reproaches  himself
with  his  rashness  in  having  ventured  with  only  two  ser\'ants  to  cross
Cithaeron  "and  the  district  of  Eleutherae,  left  utterly  waste  by  the
wars"  (Lucian,  Dial.  Mort.  xxvii.  2).

See  Dodwell,  Tour^  I.  p.  282  sqq,  ;  Leake,  N.  Greece ^  2.  pp.  371-378;  ««/.,
Athens^  2.  p.  129  sqq.  ;  Mure,  Journal ^  2.  p.  i  sqq.  ;  Welcker,  Tagebuch^  2.  p.
ig  sij(/.  ;  L.  Ross,  IVanderungen^  i.  p.  13  st/q.  ;  tW.,  Archiiologische  Aufsdtze,  I.
p.  234  sq.  ;  Le  Has,  Voyage  archhlogique^  Itineraire,  pi.  9-11  ;  Vischer,  Erin-
neningen  und  Eittdriicke^  p.  531  sqq.  \  Bursian,  Geogr,  I.  p.  249  ^^  ;  H.  Belle,
Trots  aunties  en  GrhCy  p.  50  sqq.  ;  Mahaffy,  Rambles  and  Studies ^  p.  190  sqq.  ;
Baedeker,^  p.  179  sq.  ;  Guide-Joanne j  2.  p.  7  sq.

38.  8.  it  was  from  here  tliat  the  old  wooden  image  was
brought  to  Athens.     See  i.  20.  3  with  the  note.

38.  9-  a  cave  of  no  great  size,  and  beside  it  is  a  spring  of  cold
water  etc.  At  the  western  foot  of  the  hill  of  Eleutherae  a  copious
spring  called  Petrogeraki  rises  beside  the  road  (Dodwell,  Tour,  i.  p.
283;  Leake,  A^.  Greece,  2.  p.  373;  L.  Ross,  Wandertingen,  i.  p.  15:
Vischer,  Erinnerungen  uttd Eindriickc,  p.  533).  This  then  was  probably
the  spring  in  which  the  twin  babes  Amphion  and  Zethus  were  washed
by  the  shepherd  who  had  found  them  in  the  neighbouring  cave.  For  it
was  at  Eleutherae  that  their  mother  Antiope  was  said  to  have  brought
them  forth,  as  she  was  being  carried  back  a  prisoner  from  Sicyon  to
Thebes.  See  Paus.  ii.  6.  1-4  ;  Apollodorus,  iii.  5.  5  ;  Dio  Chr>'sostoni,
Or.  XV.  vol.  I.  p.  261,  ed.  Dindorf ;  Hyginus,  Fab.  8  ;  Schol.  on  Apol-
lonius  Rhodius,  iv.  1090.  The  legend  which  Pausanias  follows  here
and  in  ii.  6  appears  to  be  the  one  to  which  Euripides  gave  currency  in
his  tragedy  of  Anliope  (Hyginus,  I.e.  j  Foclac  Scctnci  Gracci,  ed.  Dindorf,
p.  301  sq.)

39.  I.  Another  road  leads  from  Eleusis  to  Megara.  From  Eleusis
to  Megara  by  road  or  railway  the  distance  is  about  14  miles.  The
road  first  passes  along  the  northern  side  of  the  low  ridge  which  formed
the  acropolis  of  Eleusis  ;  then  it  turns  down  to  the  sea  and  follows  the
shore.     The  plain  of  Eleusis  is  divided  from  the  plain  of  Megara  by  a


CH.  XXXIX  THE  FLOWERY  WELL  519

chain  of  wooded  hills  which  advances  southward  from  Mt.  Cithaeron  to
the  shore  of  the  bay  at  about  a  third  of  the  way  from  Eleusis  to  Megara,
thus  interrupting  the  level  coast  for  some  distance.  From  the  two
pointed  summits  in  which  this  range  terminates  it  was  known  in  antiquity
as  Mount  Cerata  or  *  the  horns ' :  it  formed  the  boundary  between  Attica
and  the  territory  of  Megara  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  395  ;  Diodorus,  xiii.  65  ;
Plutarch,  Themistocles^  13).  The  road  skirts  the  foot  of  these  hills,
ascending  and  descending,  traversing  olive-groves,  and  winding  round
little  bays  and  headlands,  commanding  views,  ever  shifting  but  ever
beautiful,  of  the  coast  of  Salamis  across  the  blue  and  blue-green  waters
of  the  lake-like  bay,  which  is  here  so  narrow  that  the  white  monastery
of  Phaneromene,  with  its  clustered  domes  and  turrets,  can  be  plainly
seen  standing  among  green  fields  on  the  opposite  shore.  Then,  when
the  last  spur  of  the  hills  is  rounded,  the  plain  of  Megara,  covered  with
olives  and  vines,  and  backed  by  high  mountains,  opens  out  before  us.
In  the  distance  can  be  distinguished  the  picturesque,  oriental-looking
town  of  Megara,  with  its  white- washed,  flat-topped  houses  rising  in
terraces,  one  above  the  other,  on  the  sides  of  two  isolated  hills  in  the
far  comer  of  the  plain :  the  higher  of  the  two  hills  is  crowned  by  a
square  mediaeval  tower.  See  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  174  sqq,\  Leake,
yV.  Greece^  2.  p.  390  sqq,  ;  Welcker,  Tagebuchy  i.  p.  159  sq,\  Vischer,
Erinnerungen  und  Eindriicke^  p.  220  sqq,  ;  H.  Belle,  Trois  annexes  en
Grhe^  p.  242  sqq, ;  Baedeker,^  p.  152  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  191  sq.

39.  I.  the  Flowery  Well.  This  may  be  the  spring  now  called
Vlika^  about  a  mile  and  a  half  to  the  west  of  Eleusis,  on  the  road  to
Megara  {The  Unedited  Antiquities  of  Attica^  p.  6).  The  Flowery  Well
is  doubtless  no  other  than  the  Maiden's  Well,  beside  which,  in  the
Homeric  hymn  to  Demeter  (z/.  98  sqq.\  the  goddess  is  represented  as
sitting,  sad  at  heart,  under  the  shadow  of  an  olive-tree.  The  stone  on
which  the  goddess  sat  down  was  called  the  Laughless  Stone  (ApoUo-
dorus,  i.  5.  I  ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Knights^  785  ;  Hesychius,  s,v.
aycXaoTos  irerpa  ;  Suidas,  s.v.  2ttA.a/xivo9).  It  was  shown  in  historical
times ;  for  in  the  great  Eleusinian  inscription  of  329/8  B.C.  mention  is
made  of  the  carriage  of  bricks  from  the  Laughless  Stone  (*E<^;/x€/3i9
dpxaiokoyLKTfj,  1 883,  p.  115  sq.)  This  perhaps  goes  to  show  that  the
Laughless  Stone  was  not  in  Eleusis  itself,  but  at  some  distance  from  it.
And  as  the  Laughless  Stone  was  no  doubt  beside  the  well,  it  follows,  on
this  supposition,  that  in  the  local  Eleusinian  belief  the  well  beside  which
the  king's  daughters  found  Demeter  sitting  was  not  the  well  called  Cal-
lichorum  in  the  city,  as  some  writers  supposed  (see  above,  i.  38.  6  note).
Thus  Pausanias  would  seem  to  have  here  followed  the  local  Eleusinian
version  of  the  legend,  which  placed  the  meeting  of  the  goddess  with  the
princesses  at  a  well  outside  the  city,  not  the  literary  version,  which
placed  it  at  a  well  in  the  city.

39.  2.  graves  of  the  men  who  marched  against  Thebes.  The
common  soldiers  of  the  Argive  army,  which  fought  under  the  Seven
Champions  against  Thebes,  were  buried  at  Eleutherae  (see  above,  p.
518),  but  the  generals  were  buried  near  Eleusis  (Plutarch,  T/ieseus,  29).
On  the  shore  of  the  bay  of  Eleusis,  to  the  south  of  the  spring  V/ika


520  THE  ROAD  TO  MEGARA  bk.  i.  attica

there  is  a  tumulus  which  may  possibly  have  been  pointed  out  as  the
grave  of  the  Argive  generals  (The  Unedited  Antiquities  of  Attica^  p.  6).
The  story  that  Theseus  at  the  head  of  an  Athenian  army  compelled  the
Thebans  by  force  of  arms  to  give  up  the  Argive  dead  for  burial  is  followed
by  Euripides  in  his  Supplices  {z',  634  sqq.)  But  according  to  Plutarch
(l.c)  the  common  story  was  that  the  Thebans  had  yielded  to  the  argu-
ments and  persuasion,  not  to  the  arms,  of  Theseus.  From  Pausanias
we  learn  that  this  latter  version  of  the  legend  was,  as  might  have  been
expected,  the  one  which  found  favour  at  Thebes.

39.  3.  the  tomb  of  Alope  etc.  The  story  of  Alope  and  Hippothoon
is  told  by  Hyginus  {^Fab.  187).  It  was  the  theme  of  a  tragedy  of
Euripides  (Harpocration,  s,v,  'AXottt/).  Hippothoon  was  said  to  have
been  so  named  because  he  had  been  suckled  by  a  mare  (hippos).  He
gave  his  name  to  an  Attic  tribe  (i.  5.  2  ;  i.  38.  4).  Alope  at  her  death
was  turned  by  her  lover  Poseidon  into  a  spring  which  was  called  Alope
after  her  (Hyginus,  I.e.)  The  spring  was  at  Eleusis  (Hesychius,  s.v.
'Akoirrj).  It  may  perhaps  be  the  spring  which  rises  close  to  the  shore,
at  the  south-western  foot  of  the  range  of  hills  which  divides  the  plain  of
Eleusis  from  the  plain  of  Megara  (Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  p.  331  note).  If
so,  the  tomb  of  Alope  was  probably  shown  close  beside  it.  The  story
of  Alope  is  represented  in  relief  on  a  Roman  sarcophagus  (Miss  Harrison,
Ancient  At/tens,  p.  cvii.  sqq.)  and,  according  to  Stephani,  on  a  gold
plate  found  in  the  south  of  Russia.  See  Compte  Rendu  (St.  Petersburg)
for  1864,  pp.  1 42-1 7 1,  with  pi.  iv.  of  the  Atlas.

39.  3.  the  art  of  wrestling  was  invented  by  Theseus.  Accord-
ing to  Polemo  the  art  of  wrestling  was  invented  by  an  Athenian  Phorbas,
the  trainer  of  Theseus  ;  but  Ister,  whom  Pausanias  perhaps  followed,
ascribed  the  invention  to  Theseus  himself  (Schol.  on  Pindar,  Nem.
V.  89).

39.  4.  Megaris,  which  also  of  old  belonged  to  the  Athenians,
Eling  Pylas  having  bequeathed  it  to  Pandion.  See  i.  5.  3  note.  On
the  genealogy  of  the  kings  of  Megara,  see  K.  Seeliger,  'Alkathoos  und
die  megarische  Konigsliste,'  Festschrift  fiir  J.  Overbeck  (Leipzig,  1893),
pp.  27-44.

39.  4.  the  grave  of  Pandion.     See  i.  5.  3  ;  i.  41.  6.

39.  4-  in  the  reign  of  Codrus  the  Peloponnesians  marched  against
Athens  etc.  Herodotus  (v.  76)  and  Strabo  (ix.  p.  393)  agree  with  this
account  of  the  conquest  of  Megara  by  the  Dorians.  Strabo  (I.e.)  sa>'5
that  after  the  conquest  the  Dorians  took  down  the  column  which  had
formerly  stood  on  the  Isthmus  of  Corinth  marking  the  boundary
between  the  lonians  and  the  Peloponnesians.  The  Dorians  who  settled
at  Megara  are  said  to  have  been  mostly  of  Corinthian  or  Messenian
origin  ([Scymnius  Chius,]  Orbis  description  v.  502  sqq.)

39.  5.  Megareus,  son  of  Poseidon,  dwelt  in  Onchestus  etc.  Cp.  i.
42.  I.  Megareus  was  said  to  be  a  son  of  Poseidon  by  Oenope,  daughter
of  Epopeus  (Hyginus,  Fab.  157).  Apollodorus  calls  him  a  son  of
Hippomanes,  and  says  that  he  came  from  Onchestus  to  help  Nisus,  but
was  slain  by  Minos  (Apollodorus,  iii.  15.  8).  According  to  Stephanus
Byzantius  (s.v,  ^\k-^apa)  Megareus  was  a  son  of  Apollo.     Others  called


CH.  XL  MEGARA  521

him  a  son  of  Onchestus  (Plutarch,  Quaest,  Graec,  16  ;  [Scymnius  Chius,]
Orbis  description  v.  505  sqJ)

39.  6.  Lelez  came  firom  Egypt  and  reigned  etc.  Cp.  i.  44.  3.
Hence  Ovid  speaks  of  "  the  Lelegian  walls  "  and  "  the  Lelegian  shores  "
of  Megara  (Metam,  vii.  443,  viii.  6).  A  colony  of  the  Leleges  from
Megara,  led  by  Pylus,  son  of  Cleson,  was  said  to  have  founded  Pylus  in
Messenia  (iv.  36.  i).

39.  6.  Sciron.  The  Athenians  represented  Sciron  as  a  robber  and
murderer  of  whom  Theseus  relieved  the  world  (i.  3.  i  ;  i.  44.  8).
Megarian  writers,  on  the  contrary,  maintained  that  Sciron  was  a  man  of
exemplary  life,  the  foe  of  robbers  and  the  friend  of  all  good  men
(Plutarch,  Theseus^  10):  the  highroad  from  Megara  to  the  Isthmus  of
Corinth  was  said  to  have  been  made  by  him  (Paus.  i.  44.  6).  The
Athenians  distinguished  Sciron  the  robber  from  Scirus  one  of  the  first
settlers  in  Salamis  (see  note  on  i.  35.  2,  *  It  is  said  that  Cychreus,'  etc.)
But  the  Megarians  identified  the  settler  in  Salamis,  the  grandfather  of
Peleus  and  Telamon,  with  the  much  maligned  Sciron  (Plutarch,  Theseus^
10  ;  Harpocration,  s,v.  ^Kipov).  They  admitted  that  Sciron  fell  by  the
hand  of  Theseus,  but  held  that  this  took  place,  not*  during  Theseus's
first  journey  to  Athens  when  he  knocked  a  number  of  rogues  on  the
head,  but  at  a  later  time  when  the  Athenians  under  Theseus  wrested
Eleusis  from  the  Megarians  (Plutarch,  /.c,  ;  cp.  Paus.  i.  36.  4).  See  K.
Seeliger,  in  Festschrift  fUr  J,  Overbeck^  P-  35  ^99-

40.  I.  In  the  city  there  is  a  water-basin  etc.  The  modem  town
of  Megara  (population  6250)  stands  on  the  site  and  has  preserved  the
name  of  the  ancient  city.  It  is  clustered  on  the  slopes  of  two  adjoining
hills  or  rather  of  a  single  hill  with  a  double  summit,  which  rises  from
the  plain,  near  its  south-western  comer,  at  a  distance  of  about  a  mile
and  a  half  from  the  sea.  The  plain  itself,  almost  the  only  level  and
tolerably  fertile  district  in  the  whole  of  the  mountainous  and  barren
territory  of  Megara,  is  six  or  seven  miles  long  by  as  many  wide  and  is
everywhere  shut  in  by  hills  except  on  the  side  of  the  sea.  Of  the  two
hills  on  which  the  town  stands,  the  eastern  is  the  lower  and  flatter  ;  its
slope  is  comparatively  gentle.  The  western  hill  (950  feet),  joined  to
the  eastern  by  a  low  ridge  or  saddle,  is  higher,  more  pointed,  and
steep)er.  The  modem  town  is  chiefly  confined  to  the  western  hill,  the
southern  slope  of  which  it  occupies  to  the  summit.  The  narrow,  steep
streets,  the  white,  flat-roofed,  windowless  houses,  with  low  doorways
opening  into  courts  shaded  here  and  there  by  a  fig-tree,  have  much  the
appearance  of  an  Arab  village.  The  dazzlingly  white  walls  make,  in  the
brilliant  sunshine,  an  excellent  background  for  the  gay  costume  of  the
women,  the  bright  colours  of  which  (red,  green,  blue,  violet)  add  to  the
Eastem  effect  of  the  scene.

The  two  citadels  mentioned  by  Pausanias  (i.  40.  6  ;  i.  42.  i)  no
doubt  occupied  the  two  hills  on  which  the  modem  town  stands.  It  is
generally  supposed  that  the  eastem  and  lower  hill  was  the  acropolis
called  Caria  (i.  40.  6),  and  that  the  higher  westem  hill  was  the  acropolis
of  Alcathous  (i.  42.  1).  This  identification  of  the  two  citadels  is  based
on  the  order  in  which  Pausanias  mentions  them ;  for,  having  come  to


522  MEGARA  BK.    I.  ATTICA

Megara  from  the  east,  he  would  naturally,  in  accordance  with  his  habit
of  describing  places  in  their  topographical  order,  mention  the  eastem
citadel  before  the  western.  The  identification  is  also  supported  by  the
fact  that  the  Olympieum,  which  he  mentions  just  before  ascending  the
acropolis  of  Caria,  appears  to  have  been  situated  at  the  north-western
foot  of  the  eastem  hill  (see  note  on  i.  40.  4).  On  the  other  hand  Caria
seems  from  Pausanias's  account  to  have  been  the  older  acropolis  ;  and
we  should  naturally  expect  that  the  western  hill,  the  higher  and  stronger
of  the  two,  would  have  been  the  first  to  be  fortified.

The  ancient  remains  at  Megara  are  extremely  scanty.  On  the
south  side  of  the  eastem  hill  there  are  some  pieces  of  the  old  fortifica-
tion-wall, built  of  large  irregular  blocks.  Fragments  of  columns,  sculp-
tures, and  inscriptions  may  also  be  seen  l>nng  about  or  built  into
modem  walls.  In  particular  the  numerous  chapels  on  the  western
hill  are  mostly  constructed  of  such  fragments.  The  mediaeval  tower
which  crowns  the  western  hill  stands  on  ancient  foundations.  At
PalaeochorUy  about  half  an  hour  to  the  north  of  Megara,  there  are
several  ruined  churches  containing  architectural  fragments  (Ionic  and
Corinthian  capitals  of  white  marble,  complete  columns  of  bluish
marble,  etc.),  which  have  been  transported  thither  from  ancient  temples
in  the  city.

Megara  seems  to  have  been  noted  in  antiquity  for  the  size  of  its
private  houses  and  the  massive  style  of  its  buildings.  Isocrates  sa>'s
that  "  the  Megarians,  though  they  have  no  land  or  harbours  or  silver
mines,  and  till  the  bare  rock,  nevertheless  ohti  the  largest  houses  in
Greece  "  {De  pace^  1 1 7).  And  Diogenes  the  C>Tiic  said  of  the  Mega-
rians, who  were  notorious  gluttons,  that  "  they  dined  as  if  they  were  to
die  to-morrow,  and  built  as  if  they  were  to  live  for  ever  "  (Tertulhan,
Apohgeticus,  39).

A  correspondent  of  Cicero  spoke  of  Megara,  in  a  famous  passage,  as
if  it  lay  in  mins  (Cicero,  Epist.  ad  Fam.  iv.  5) ;  but  this  was  probably
a  rhetorical  exaggeration.  Strabo,  who  wrote  at  a  later  date,  says  (ix.
P*  393)  that  in  spite  of  the  many  vicissitudes  which  it  had  experienced
the  city  subsisted  down  to  his  time.

See  Wheler,  Journey ,  p.  431  S(^q.  ;  Chandler,  Travels  in  Greece^  p.  192  sqq.  ;
Dodwell,  Toury  2.  p.  177  S(/t/.  ;  Leake,  A".  Greece ^  2.  p.  392  sqq.  ;  Welckcr,
Tagebuchy  l.  p.  160  sqq.  ;  \V.  G.  Clark,  Peloponnesus,  p.  39  j^/^/.  ;  Vischer,  Erin-
nemngen  umi  Eindnkke,  p.  222  sqq.  ;  Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  p.  373  sqq.  ;  H.  Belle,
Trois  Annies  en  Grhce,  p.  245  sqq,  ;  Baedeker,^  p.  152  sq.  ;  Guide -Joan  fie,  2.  j\
191  sqq,

40.  I.  Theagenes gave  his  daughter  in  marriage  to  Cylon.

Cp.  i.  28.  I.

40.  I.  the  water  of  the  Sithnidian  nymphs.  In  the  plain  about
half  a  mile  north  of  the  westem  hill  on  which  Megara  stands  there  is
an  aqueduct  which  furnishes  a  copious  supply  of  water.  This  may  be
the  water  of  the  Sithnidian  nyTnphs.  Beside  it  are  some  ancient  wash-
ing-troughs, several  of  which  are  still  used.  The  women  of  Megara
still  come  hither  to  draw  water  in  pitchers  of  an  antique  shape.  Bur-
sian, Gcogr.  I.  p.  374  ;  Baedeker, ^  p.  153  ;  Guide-Joanne^  2.  p.  192  j^.


CH.  XL  MEGARA  523

40.  I.  Megarns escaped  from  Deucalion's  flood  to  the  tops

of  Mount  Q^rania  etc.  This  explanation  of  the  name  Gerania  is
given  also  in  the  Etymol,  Magnum  (p.  228,  s,v,  Tepdveia),  It  is  prob-
ably derived  from  a  work  on  Megara  by  a  native  Megarian  named
Dieuchidas ;  for  we  are  told  that  Dieuchidas  began  his  history  of
Megara  at  the  point  where  a  work  by  Hellanicus  on  Deucalion's  flood
left  off  (Clement  of  Alexandria,  Strom,  vi.  2.  p.  752,  ed.  Potter;  Frag,
Hist.  Graec.y  ed.  Miiller,  4.  p.  388  ;  the  Deucaliona  of  Hellanicus  is
mentioned  by  Athenaeus,  x.  p.  416  b;  see  Frag.  Hist.  Graec.^  ed.
Miiller,  i.  p.  48  sq.)  Cp.  Kalkmann,  Pausanias^  p.  152  j^.;  K.
Seeliger,  in  Festschrift  fiir  J.  Overdeck,  p.  29  sq.

Mount  Gerania  is  the  rugged  mass  of  mountains  which  reaches
across  the  territory  of  Megara  from  sea  to  sea,  with  steep  declivities  on
both  sides,  thus  interposing  a  natural  barrier  between  central  Greece
and  Peloponnese.  The  highest  summit  is  about  4500  feet  above  the
sea.  An  unbroken  forest  of  pines  covers  the  whole  range.  Deer,  wild
boars,  foxes,  and  wolves  abound  in  it,  but  permanent  human  habitations
there  are  none,  except  in  the  small  patches  of  level  ground  at  the
mouths  of  the  torrents,  where  some  com  and  olives  are  grown.  In
summer,  however,  the  peasants  penetrate  into  the  forest  to  gather  resin.
Three,  and  only  three,  natural  defiles  lead  through  this  wild  region  from
Boeotia  and  Attica  on  the  north  to  Corinth  on  the  south.  One  of  them
is  a  rugged  path  along  the  face  of  the  cliflfs  on  the  northern  coast :  the
second  is  the  pass  of  Megaloderoni  and  Mygaesvrysis  through  the
gorges  of  the  interior :  the  third  is  *  the  Evil  Staircase '  {Kake  Skaia)
along  the  sea-cliffs  of  the  southern  coast.  All  three  ways  are  naturally
difficult.  The  last  is  the  shortest,  and  now  that  a  highroad  and  the
railway  to  Corinth  have  been  carried  along  it,  it  has  ceased  to  be  for-
midable.

See  Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  p.  367  sq.  \  Vischer,  Erinnerungen  und
Eindriicke^  p.  225  sq.\  Philippson,  Peloponnes,  pp.  18-28.

40.  2.  statues  of  Roman  emperors  stand  in  it.  Many  of  the
inscriptions  which  were  car\'ed  on  the  pedestals  of  these  statues  have
been  found  at  Megara.  From  these  inscriptions  we  learn  that  there
were  statues  of  Julius  Caesar,  Augustus,  Tiberius,  Nero,  Hadrian,
Marcus  Aurelius,  Caracalla,  and  Gallienus  ;  also  statues  of  Livia,  wife  of
Augustus,  and  of  Sabina,  wife  of  Hadrian.  See  C.  I.  G.  G.  S.  Nos.
62,  63,  65-81,  3491.  Hadrian,  as  a  benefactor  of  Megara  (see  i.
42.  5  ;  i.  44.  6),  seems  to  have  been  especially  popular.  Inscribed
pedestals  of  no  less  than  five  statues  of  him  have  been  found  (C  /.  G.
G.  S.  Nos.  69-72,  3491).  That  there  was  an  organised  worship  of  the
emperors  at  Megara  is  proved  by  an  inscription  on  a  pedestal  which
supported  a  statue  of  a  certain  Polymnia  who  had  been  "  high-priestess
of  the  Augusti "  (C.  /.  G.  G.  S.  No.  in).

40.  2.  a  bronze  image  of  Artemis  sumamed  Saviour.  This
image  was  by  Strongylion  (below,  §  3),  and  there  was  a  replica  of  it  at
Pagae  (i.  44.  4).  Coins  of  Megara  and  Pagae  present  us  with  an
identical  type  of  Artemis,  which  may  therefore  be  regarded  with
certainty  as  a  copy  of  Strong>'lion's  statue.     The  goddess  is  represented


534  MEGARA  bk.  i,  attica

running  lou-ards  the  right ;  she  wears  a  short   tunic  and  carries  a  torch

in  each  hand  (Fig.  41).      See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Numismaik

Commentary  on  Pausanias,  pp.  4,  8  sq.,  with  pi.  A  i.  ;   Miiiler-Wieseler,

VenkmaUr,   2.   pi.  xvi.   No.  274  b.      The  inscribed

•  pedestal  of  a  statue  of  a  certain  Faustina  who  had
been  priestess  of  Saviour  Artemis  may  be  seen  built
into  the  north  -  west  angle  of  Ihe  church  of  Sl
Demetrius  at  Megara  :  the  church  stands  about  the
middle  of  the  slope  of  the  western  hill  (C.  1.  G.  G.  S.
No.  112).  A  fragmentary  inscription  containing
a  dedicalion  to  Artemis  has  also  been  found  at
Fic  4-.  -  BAvioui.  Megara  (C.  /.  G.  G  S.  No.  44  ;  Collitz,  G.  D.  1.
iib!a>a).  "'     3-  ^<'-  3026).

40.  2.  men  of  tbe  armr  of  Uaxdonios,  after
sconring  the  Megarian  territorr  etc.  The  place  where  this  destruc-
tion of  the  Persians  took  place  was  near  Pagac.  See  i.  44.  4.  Hero-
dotus tells  us  (ix.  14)  thai  Mardonius  advanced  against  Megara,  and
that  his  cavalry  scoured  the  Megarian  territory.  The  Megarian  poei
Theognis  attributed  to  Apollo  the  deliverance  of  Megara  from  "the
insolent  army  of  the  Medes"  [v.  775  sgg.)  The  Megarians  who  feU
in  the  Persian  war  were  buried  in  the  cily.      See  i.  43.  3  note.

40.  3.  isugeB  of  the  TwoIto  Goda said  to  be  works  of

Praxiteles.  Archaeologists  who  believe  that  there  were  two  dis-
tinguished sculptors  of  this  name  in  antiquity  (see  note  on  1,  2.  4)  are
of  opinion  thai  these  images  of  the  Twelve  Gods  were  probably  by  the
elder  Praxiteles,  the  supposed  grandfather  of  the  great  Praxiteles  (W.
Klein,  Archaolog.  epigraph.  Mittheiliingen  aus  Oesterreich,  4  (1880),
p.  12  sqq,  ;  Overbeck,  Gcsch.  d.  griech.  Plastik^  1.  p.  500).  To  me,
as  to  H.  Brunn  i^Silsungsberiektc  of  the  Bavarian  Academy,  Munich,
Philosoph.  philolog.  CI.,  6  Nov.  1880,  p.  446  sqg.')  and  to  Mr.  A.  S.
Murray  {ffislory  0/  Greek  Sculpture,  2.  p.  281)  this  appears  a  gratuitous
and  baseless  assumption.  Pausanias  mentions  a  number  of  other
statues  by  Praxiteles  at  Megara  (i.  43,  5  and  6  ;  i.  44.  2).  If  there
were  two  sculptors  of  this  name  and  works  of  both  were  to  be
seen  at  Megara,  why  did  not  Pausanias  distinguish  between  them  as
be  distinguished  between  the  elder  and  the  younger  Polyditus
(vi.  6.  2)  ?

40.  4'  the  precinct  of  Zetis,  which  is  called  the  OlTmpienm.
This  precinct  was  situated  in  the  saddle  between  the  two  citadels,  near
the  north-west  foot  of  the  eastern  hill.  For  here  many  stones  inscribed
with  complimentary  decrees,  which  were,  as  the  inscriptions  show,  to  be
set  up  in  Ihe  OljTnpieum,  have  been  found  built  into  ancient  substruc-
tions or  modem  edifices.  See  C  /-  G.  G.  S.  Nos.  1-14;  Mittheil.
d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Aihen,  8  (1883),  p.  183  sgg.  ;  CoIIitz,  G.  D.  I.  3.  Nos.
3003-3014;  Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr.  Grace.  Nos.  105-107.  The  stone
on  which  the  inscriptions  are  cut  is  a  dark  j;rey  limestone,  \'eined  with
white.  Bursian  observed  in  this  neighbourhood  a  great  many  ancient
blocks  built  into  modem  walls  ;  they  had  probably  formed  part  of  the
boundary  wall    of   the    sacred    precinct  (Bursian,    Geegr.    1.    p.    374).


CH.  XL  MEGARA  525

Another  inscription  found  at  Megara  mentions  a  certain  Matroxenus  who
"  had  been  master  of  the  g>Tnnasium  in  the  Olympieum  "  (C.  /.  G.  G.  S,
No.  31  ;  Collitz,  G.  D.  /.  3.  No.  3024).

40.  4-  the  Athenians  annually  ravaged  the  Megarian  terri-
tory.    Cp.  Thucydides,  ii.  31  ;  Plutarch,  Pericles,  30.

40.  4-  The  &ce  of  the  image  of  Zens  is  of  ivory  and  gold  etc.
This  passage  is  of  interest  as  throwing  some  light  on  the  process  of
making  a  statue  of  gold  and  ivory.  "  It  would  thus  appear  that  the
process  was  first  to  model  and  set  up  the  figure  in  clay,  then  to  replace
the  clay  by  a  figure  of  wood  on  which  a  surface  of  gold  and  ivory  was
attached  "  (A.  S.  Murray,  History  of  Greek  Sculpture,  2.  p.  11 7).  The
figures  of  the  Seasons  and  Fates,  which  Pausanias  says  were  "  over  the
head  of  Zeus,"  were  probably  attached  to  the  top  rail  of  the  back  of  his
throne,  just  as  the  figures  of  the  Graces  and  Seasons  were  placed  on  the
throne  of  Zeus  at  Olympia  (v.  11.  7).  This  goes  to  show  that  the  Zeus
which  Theocosmus,  assisted  by  Phidias,  made  at  Megara  was  closely
modelled  on  the  Zeus  of  Phidias  at  Olympia.  Cp.  A.  S.  Murray,  op,
cit.  2.  p.  137  J^.  ;  Overbeck,  Gesch,  d.  griech.  Plastik,^  i.  p.  385.  As
to  Theocosmus  see  also  vi.  7.  2  ;  x.  9.  8.  On  coins  of  Megara  Zeus  is
represented  sitting  in  the  attitude  of  Phidias's  statue  of  Zeus  at  Olympia
(see  v.  II.  I  note),  grasping  a  sceptre  in  his  raised  left  hand  and
holding  a  Victory  or  an  eagle  in  his  outstretched  right  hand.  The
type  is  probably  copied  from  the  statue  here  described  by  Pausanias.
See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Numism.  Comm,  on  Pausanias,  p.  4
sq,,  with  pi.  A  iii.

40.  5.  Solon  stirred  them  np  by  his  verses.  The  story  ran  that
the  Athenians,  weary  of  the  long  and  fruitless  war  with  Megara  for  the
possession  of  Salamis,  had  passed  a  law  that  no  one  should  under  pain
of  death  propose  to  renew  the  war.  Solon  composed  verses  inciting
his  countrymen  to  engage  in  the  struggle  once  more ;  and  feigning
madness  in  order  to  escape  the  penalty  of  the  law  rushed  into  the
market-place  and  recited  his  verses.  The  people  crowded  round  to
hear  him,  listened,  were  convinced,  repealed  the  law,  and  conquered
Salamis.  See  Demosthenes,  xix.  252,  p.  420;  Plutarch,  Solon,  8;
Diogenes  Laertius,  i.  2.  46  sq, ;  Justin,  ii.  7  ;  Polyaenus,  i.  20 ;  Cicero,
De  Officiis,  i.  30.  1 08  ;  E.  Piccolomini,  *  La  simulata  pazzia  di  Solone
e  r  elegia  2aAa/xts,'   Museo  Italiano  di  Antichitil  Classica,  2  (1888),

pp.  510-558-

40.  6.  the  acroiK>lis  called   Oaria.      Similarly   Stephanus

Byzantius  {s.v,  Kapia)  says :  "  The  acropolis  of  Megara  was  called
Caria,  after  Car,  the  son  of  Phoroneus."  He  perhaps  copied  from
Pausanias,  whose  work  he  often  cites.

40.  6.  Nocturnal  Dionysns.  Cp.  Plutarch,  De  E  apud  Delphos,
9  ;  Virgil,  Aen.  iv.  303  ;  Ovid,  Metam,  iv.  15;  Etymol,  Magnum,  p.
609,  s.v,  NuKTcAios.  In  the  nocturnal  rites  {Nuktelia)  of  Dionysus
the  mystery  of  the  death  and  resurrection  of  the  god  seems  to  have
been  set  forth ;  in  this  respect  Plutarch  compares  the  rites  to  those  of
the  Egyptian  Osiris  {Isis  and  Osiris,  35  ;  cp.  id.,  Quaestiones  Romanae,
112).     The  licentious  orgies  held  under  the  cloak  of  these  rites  were


526  MEGARA  bk.  i.  attica

put  do\**n  by  the   Romans  (Semus,   on  \'irgil,  Aen.  iv.    303).     Cp.
Foucart,  Des  associations  religiiuses^  P-  ^3  ^QQ-

40.  6.  Epistrophian  Aphrodite.  '  Epistrophian '  (from  epistre-
pkein,  *to  turn  towards')  here  probably  means  *she  who  turns  the
hearts  of  men  to  love,'  as  Preller  interpreted  it  (Griech.  Myihoiogie^^  i.
p.  368).  The  converse  of  Epistrophian  Aphrodite  u-as  Apostrophian
Aphrodite,  i.e.  Aphrodite  the  Averter  (Paus.  ix.  16.  3  sg.)  An  inscrip-
tion containing  a  dedication  to  Aphrodite  by  the  magistrates  styled
damiorgoi  has  been  found  at  Megara  (C  /.  G.  G.  S.  No.  41  ;  Collitz,
G.  D.  I.  3.  No.  3030).  There  was  another  sanctuary  of  Aphrodite  at
Megara  (i.  43.  6).

40.  6.  tlie  oracle  of  Night.  Cp.  Bouch^-Leclerq,  Histoire  de  la
divination  dans  VantiquiU^  2.  p.  256.

40.  6.  Bryazis.  This  sculptor,  a  contemporary  and  n\'al  ctf
Scopas,  chiselled  the  frieze  on  the  north  side  oif  the  Mausoleum  at
Halicamassus  (Pliny,  N.  H.  xxx\i.  30  sq.)  Columella  mentions  him
along  with  Lysippus,  Praxiteles,  and  Polyclitus,  as  one  of  the  great
masters  of  sculpture  {^De  re  rustica^  i.  Praef.  31).  A  considerable
number  of  his  works  are  known  to  us  by  name.  See  Brunn,  Gesch,  d.
griech.  Kiinstler,  i.  p.  383  sgg. ;  A.  S.  Murray,  Hist.  0/ Greek  Sculpture,
2.  p.  326  sq.  ;  Overbeck,  Gesch.  d.  griech.  Piastik,^  2.  p.  97  j^.  In  the
course  of  excavations  made  at  Athens  in  1891  for  the  purpose  of
extending  the  railway  line  which  goes  to  Piraeus,  a  pedestal  inscribed
with  the  name  of  the  sculptor  Br>'axis  was  discovered  to  the  north-west
of  the  so-called  Theseum.  The  inscription  on  the  pedestal  mentions
the  names  of  three  cavalry  colonels  (Demaenetus  and  his  two  sons
Demeas  and  Demosthenes),  who  had  won  prizes  at  the  anthippasia  or
review  of  the  cavalry,  at  which  the  ten  cavair>'  regiments  were  paraded,
and  a  prize  awarded  to  the  colonel  whose  regiment  had  made  the  most
soldierly  appearance  (Xenophon,  Hipparchicus,  3  ;  C.  I.  A.  ii.  No.
1291  ;  Kohler,  in  MittJieil.  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athen,  9  (1884),  p.  49  J^^.)
In  the  inscription  the  names  of  the  three  colonels  are  followed  by  die
words  "  Br>'axis  made  (it)."  This  inscription  is  car\ed  on  one  side  of
the  pedestal,  which  is  a  square  block  of  Parian  marble.  On  each  of  the
other  three  sides  of  the  pedestal  is  car\ed  in  low  relief  a  horseman
riding  at  a  foot  pace  towards  a  large  tripod.  Each  horseman  is  bearded,
bare-headed,  unarmed,  and  clad  in  a  short  tunic  drawn  in  at  the  waist.
These  three  horsemen  no  doubt  represent  the  three  officers  mentioned
in  the  inscription,  and  the  tripods  represent  the  prizes  which  they  won
on  three  separate  occasions.  In  point  of  style,  the  horses  are  faithfully
rendered  ;  but  the  men  are  much  inferior,  their  figures  being  squat,
lifeless,  and  commonplace,  and  their  draper)'  stiff  and  flat.  It  is  con-
jectured that  these  reliefs  are  an  early  work  of  Bryaxis,  executed  about
350  B.C.,  when  his  style  was  still  immature.  But  it  is  also  possible
that  they  were  executed,  not  by  Br>'axis  himself,  but  by  an  inferior
artist,  Bryaxis  having  made  only  the  statue  or  other  monument  which
the  pedestal  supported.  On  the  upper  surface  of  the  pedestal  is  a
small  circular  base  with  a  hole  in  it.  On  this  round  base  there  probably
stood  a  column  supporting  a  statue,  the  work  of  Br>'axis.     Now  about


CH.  XLi  MEGARA  527

fifty  yards  to  the  east  of  the  pedestal  there  was  found  the  torso  of  a
wingless  figure  of  Victory,  made  of  the  same  marble  as  the  pedestal,
and  apparently  a  work  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  Mr.  Cavvadias  has
therefore  conjectured  with  considerable  probability  that  this  figure  of
Victory  is  the  statue  by  Bryaxis,  which  stood  on  the  pedestal  inscribed
with  his  name.

See  AcXr/oi'  dpxaio^07i'^^>^»  1891,  pp.  34-36,  55-62  ;  MittheiL  d.  arch,  Inst,  in
Athen^  16  (1891),  p.  252  sq,  ;  Bulletin  de  Corr,  HelUn.  15  (1891),  pp.  369-373,
644 ;  L.  Couve,  *  Base  portant  la  signature  de  Brj-axis,'  Btill.  de  Corr,  Hellen.  16
(1892),  pp.  550-559;  Cavvadias,  in  E0i7/i€/)ij  d/)xatoXo7tKi},  1893,  PP*  39"48>  with
pl-  4i  5i  6,  7-

41.  I.  the  tomb  of  Alcmena.  Cp.  ix.  16.  7.  The  grave  of
Alcmena  was  also  shown  at  Haliartus  in  Boeotia  (see  note  on  ix.  32.
5  'Haliartus').

41.  2.  a  place  which  he  alleged  was  named  Bhos.  Plutarch  says
{Theseus,  27):  *'The  Megarians  also  show  a  grave  of  the  Amazons  in
their  city  as  you  go  from  the  market-place  to  the  place  called  Rhus,
where  is  the  Rhomboid."  The  grave  of  the  Amazons  here  mentioned
by  Plutarch  is  probably  the  tomb  of  Hippolyte,  mentioned  by  Pausanias
below  (i,  41.  7).

41.  2.  an  altar  to  Achelons.  The  river-god  Achclous  was  wor-
shipped also  at  Oropus  (i.  34.  3).  As  to  the  worship  of  Achelous  the
historian  Ephorus,  quoted  by  Macrobius  {Saturn,  v.  18.  6  sqq.),  wrote
as  follows :  "  Other  rivers  receive  sacrifices  only  from  the  men  who
dwell  near  them  ;  but  the  Achelous  alone  is  worshipped  by  all  men,  for
they  use  the  proper  name  Achelous  in  a  general  sense.  In  fact  we
designate  water  in  general  by  the  name  of  Achelous.  The  chief  cause
of  the  prevalence  of  this  designation  is  to  be  found  in  the  oracles  of
Dodona.  For  in  almost  all  of  them  the  god  is  wont  to  command  men
to  offer  sacrifice  to  Achelous ;  so  that  many  people,  believing  the  oracle
to  mean  by  Achelous,  not  the  river  that  flows  through  Acamania,  but
water  in  general,  adopt  the  designations  employed  by  the  god.  That
in  this  use  of  the  word  there  is  a  religious  reference  is  proved  by  the
fact  that  it  is  especially  in  oaths,  prayers,  and  sacrifices  that  we  call
water  Achelous."  A  scholiast  on  Homer  (//.  xxiv.  6 16)  says:  "The
god  in  Dodona  advised  people  to  sacrifice  to  Achelous.  Hence  the
Athenians,  Dymaeans,  Rhodians,  and  Siceliots  honour  him,  and  the
Acarnanians  hold  games  in  his  honour."  There  was  a  sanctuary  of
Achelous  near  the  Ilissus  at  Athens  (Plato,  Phaedrus,  p.  230  b).  In
the  island  of  Myconus  a  full-grown  sheep  and  ten  lambs  were  sacrificed
on  certain  stated  days  to  Achelous  (Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec,
No.  373)*  The  worship  of  Achelous  at  Mantinea  is  attested  by  an
archaic  inscription  (Roehl,  Inscript,  Graec,  Antiquissimae,  No.  104).
The  suggestion  that  the  first  syllable  of  the  name  Achelous  contains  the
same  root  as  the  Latin  aqua  *  water '  is  open  to  philological  objections
(G.  Curtius,  Griech,  Etynwlogief  p.  1 1 9).

41.  2.  Hyllns who  engaged  in  single  combat  with

Echemns  etc.     Cp.    i.   44.    10,  and  see  viii.    5.   i,  where  Pausanias
corrects  his  present  statement  by  saying  that  this  invasion  of  Pelopon-


528  MEGARA  bk.  i.  attica

nese  by  the  Heraclids  under  Hyllus  probably  took  place  in  the  reign
of  Echemus,  not  of  Orestes.  Herodotus  also,  in  his  account  of  these
events  (ix.  26),  represents  Echemus,  the  adversary  and  conqueror  of
Hyllus,  as  king  of  Tegea.  Cp.  Apollodorus,  ii.  8.  2.  It  was  Hyllus
who  challenged  Echemus,  not  Echemus  who  challenged  Hyllus  (Dio-
dorus,  iv.  58).

41.  3.  Alcathons  built  it  after  slaying  the  lion of  Oithae-

ron.  The  scholiast  on  Apollonius  Rhodius  (i.  517)  relates,  on  the  authority
of  the  Megarian  historian  Dieuchidas,  the  story  of  Alcathous  and  the
lion  as  follows :  "  Alcathous  son  of  Pelops,  having  been  banished  from
Megara  on  account  of  the  murder  of  Chr>'sippus,  departed  to  dwell
in  another  city.  Now  it  chanced  that  he  fell  in  with  a  lion  that  >»-as
ravaging  Megara,  and  against  which  other  men  had  been  sent  by  the
king  of  Megara.  So  Alcathous  slew  the  beast,  cut  out  its  tongue,  put  it
in  his  wallet,  and  returned  to  Megara.  And  when  the  men  who  had
been  sent  to  hunt  the  lion  reported  that  they  had  slain  the  beast,
Alcathous  produced  his  wallet  and  confuted  them.  Therefore  the  king,
after  sacrificing  to  the  gods,  placed  the  tongue  last  on  the  altars  ;  and
this  custom  has  been  obser\-ed  by  the  Megarians  from  that  time  forward."

This  narrative  supplements  Pausanias's  version  of  the  story,  and  by
putting  the  two  together  we  see  that  the  story  of  how  Alcathous,  by
slaying  the  lion,  won  the  hand  of  the  king's  daughter  and  the  kingdom
with  her,  is  only  one  of  a  widely  spread  class  of  popular  tales,  of
which  the  following  is  the  general  plot.  A  young  man,  the  hero  of  the
tale,  comes  to  a  city  which  is  all  hung  with  black  and  plunged  in  sorrow.
He  inquires  the  cause  and  is  told  that  a  many-headed  dragon  has  long
been  in  the  habit  of  periodically  devouring  a  human  being  ;  that  it  has
now  fallen  to  the  lot  of  the  king's  daughter  to  be  the  victim  ;  and  that  if
any  one  "wWX  slay  the  dragon  and  rescue  the  princess,  the  king  has
promised  to  give  him  the  princess  to  wife  and  to  make  him  his  heir.
The  hero  accordingly  slays  the  dragon,  cuts  out  its  many  tongues,  puts
them  in  his  A^-allet,  and  departs  for  a  season.  But  a  false  knight  or  a
churl  of  low  degree  finds  the  rescued  princess  and  the  dragon  weltering
in  its  blood.  He  cuts  off  the  dragon's  heads,  forces  the  princess,  under
threat  of  instant  death,  to  promise  that  she  will  acknowledge  him  as  her
deliverer,  and  returns  with  her  and  the  dragon's  heads  in  triumph  to  the
city.  The  king  receives  him  with  joy  and  gratitude  and  prepares  to
keep  his  promise  by  giving  him  the  princess  in  marriage.  The  wedding  is
about  to  be  celebrated,  when  the  hero  appears,  refutes  the  claim  of  the
pretender  by  producing  the  dragon's  tongues  from  his  wallet,  and  marries
the  princess,  while  his  crestfallen  rival  is  hurried  away  to  execution.
In  some  versions  of  the  story  the  hero  is  murdered  by  the  villain,  but
brought  to  life  again  by  some  beasts,  his  faithful  friends,  who  apply  to
the  corpse  a  certain  healing  herb  or  the  water  of  life.

For  examples  of  this  class  of  tales,  told  with  considerable  variety  of  details,  see
Legrand,  Contes  populaires  Grecs,  p.  1 69  sqt^.  ;  Hahn,  Griech.  und  albanesischt
Miirchen^  No.  70 ;  Basile,  Pentamtrone^  Liebrecht's  German  translation,  I.
p.  97  sqq.  \  Gonzenbach,  Sicilianische  Miirchepty  No.  40 ;  S^billot,  Conies  popu-
laires dc  la  Haute- Br etagnty  No.   II,  p.  79  sqq*  ;  Cosquin,   Contes  populaires  de


CH.  XLI  MEGARA  529

Lorraine^  I.  No.  5,  p.  60  sqq,  \  Blad^,  Contes  topulaires  recueiUis  en  Agenais^
p.  1 1  sqq,  ;  Grimm,  Household  Tales,  No.  1 1 1 ;  Kunn  and  Schwartz,  Norctdeutsche
Sagetty  Mdrcheriy  und  Gebrduchey  p.  340  sqq.  ;  J.  W.  Wolf,  Deutsche  Mdrchen  und
Sagettf  No.  21  ;  A.  Peter,  Volksthiimliches  aus  Oesterreichisch-Schlesien^  2.  p.  1 40
sqq.  ;  Chr.  Schneller,  Mdrehen  und  Sagen  aus  Wdlschtirol,  No.  39,  p.  1 13  sqq,  ;
J.  Haltrich,  Deutsche  Volksmdrchen  aus  dem  Sachsenlande  in  Siebenburgen,^  No.  25 ;
A.  und  A.  Schott,  Walcuhische  Mdrchen,  No.  10,  p.  135  sqq.  ;  A.  Schleicher,
Litauische  Mdrchen,  Sprichworte,  Rdtsel  und  Lieder,  p.  54  sqq,  ;  Leskien  und
Brugmann,  Litauische  Volkslieder  und  Mdrchen,  Marchen  Nos.  10,  ii,  12,  14;
S.  Grundtvig,  Ddnische  Volksmdrchen,  i.  p.  285  sqq, ;  Cavallius  und  Stephens,
Schwedische  Volkssagen  und  Mdrchen,  V.A,  p.  78  sqq,  ;  Dasent,  Popular  Tales
from  the  Norse,  p.  131  sqq,  ('Shortshanks') ;  Poestion,  Lappldndische  Mdrchen,
p.  231  sq.\  W.  Mannhardt,  Ant  ike  Wold-  und  FeldkuUe,  p.  52  sqq.

41.  4-  liow  could  it  be  thought  that  he  was  killed  by  Theseus
etc.  Pausanias  argues  that  even  if  Timalcus  did  go  with  the  Dioscuri  on
their  expedition  to  Aphidna  or  Athens,  he  could  not  have  been  killed
by  Theseus,  since  Theseus  was  absent  at  the  time,  being  detained
a  prisoner  in  Thesprotis  or  in  hell,  whither  he  had  gone  to  carry  off
Proserpine  (see  i.  17.  4  sq,  with  the  notes).

41.  5.  any  one  who  has  studied  genealogy  must  impute  great
credulity  to  tiie  Megarians  etc.  According  to  the  Megarian  tradition,
which  Pausanias  has  just  given,  Timalcus  was  a  contemporary  both  of
Theseus,  who  slew  him,  and  of  Alcathous,  who  married  his  sister.  This,
Pausanias  argues,  was  impossible,  since  Alcathous  was  the  son,  and
Theseus  the  great  grandson,  of  Pelops  (Aethra  the  mother  of  Theseus
was  a  daughter  of  Pittheus  who  was  a  son  of  Pelops).

41.  6.  Pandion  was  buried  on  the  bluff of  Diver -bird

Athena.  Cp.  i.  5.  3.  Hesychius  tells  us  {s.v.  kv  ^  AWvia)  that  Athena
was  worshipped  by  the  Megarians  under  this  title,  because  she  had  trans-
formed herself  into  a  diver-bird  and  hiding  Cecrops  under  her  wings
had  carried  him  to  Megara.  Lycophron  also  refers  to  Athena  under
this  title  {Cassandra,  v.  359,  with  Tzetzes's  scholium).  On  some  vase-
paintings  Athena  is  accompanied  by  a  bird  with  a  woman's  face
(Welcker,  Alte  Denkmdler,  3.  pi.  vi. ;  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  5
(1884),  pi.  xl.) ;  and  on  one  of  these  paintings  (Welcker,  I.e.)  the  name
Foyyi,  which  seems  to  be  equivalent  to  ar^vta  *  diver- bird'  {Etymol,
Magnum,  p.  699,  s,v.  Trwuyycs ;  cp.  Hesychius,  s.v,  ttwi)^;  Aristotle,
Hist.  Anim.  ix.  18,  p.  617  a  9  ;  Antoninus  Liberalis,  Transform,  5),  is
written  beside  this  wooian-faced  bird,  which  would  seem  therefore  to
be  a  representation  of  Athena  in  her  character  of  Diver-bird.  The  bluff
of  Diver-bird  Athena  is  perhaps  the  spit  of  land  now  called  Skala  which
juts  into  the  sea  on  the  south  side  of  the  hill  of  Nisaea.  See  M.  Mayer,
*  Megarische  Sagen,'  Hermes,  27  (1892),  pp.  481-489.

41.  7.  the  tomb  of  HipiK>lyte.     See  note  on  i.  41.  2  *Rhus.'

41.  7*  Her  tomb  is  shaped  like  an  Amazonian  shield.  The  tomb
seems  to  have  been  called  the  Rhomboid  (Plutarch,  Theseus,  27),  from
which  we  should  infer  that  it  was  of  rhomboidal  shape.  But  according  to
Xenophon  (cited  by  Pollux,  i.  134)  the  Amazonian  shield  was  shaped
like  an  ivy  leaf.  The  south-eastern  coast  of  Bruttium,  from  Leucopetra
to  Lacinium,  is  compared  by  Pliny  (A'.  H.  iii.  43)  to  an  Amazonian
shield  ;   it  consists  of  two  great  crescent-shaped  bays  divided  by  the

vou  II  2  M


530  MEGARA  bk.  i.  attica

promontory  of  Cocynthus.  In  this  last  form  (^^^^^)  the  Amazonian
shield  is  represented  on  some  works  of  ancient  art.  See  Baumeistei^s
Denkmdler^  pp.  62,  369,  2015.  It  also  appears  in  art  as  an  oval  shield
with  two  notches,  one  on  each  side  (Baumeister^s  Denkmdler^  p.  59),
or  as  an  unbroken  oval  (/^.,  p.  2032).  Cp.  Baumeister's  Denkmdler^
p.  2038  ;  Roscher^s  Lexikon^  i.  p.  272.

41.  8.  the  grave  of  Terens,  who  married  Procne.  On  the  stor>'
of  Tereus,  Procne,  and  Philomela,  see  i.  5.  4  ;  x.  4.  8  j^.,  with  the  notes ;
Hi  Her  de  Gaertringen,  De  Graecorum  fabulis  ad  Thraces  pertinentibus^
P-  35  ^99'  j  Miss  Harrison,  Ancient  Athens^  p.  Ixxxiv.  sqq,  ;  M.  Mayer,
^T^x^us^*  Hermes,  17  (1892),  pp.  489-499.

42.  2.  a  stone,  on  which  they  say  that  Aik>11o  laid  down  his  lyre
when  he  was  helping  Alcathous  to  build  the  wall  etc.  As  to  the
building  of  the  walls  of  Megara  by  Alcathous,  see  i.  41.  6.  Theognis
says  (z/.  77^  sq.)  that  Apollo  himself  fortified  the  acropolis  in  compliment
to  Alcathous.  The  author  of  the  Ciris,  attributed  to  Virgil,  says
{v.  105  sqq.)  that  Megara  was  fortified  by  the  joint  labour  of  Alcathous
and  Apollo,  and  he  tells  how  in  memory  of  the  god's  labour  one  of  the
stones,  when  struck,  gave  forth  a  musical  note  like  the  note  of  a  lyre.
Ovid  {Met.  viii.  14  sqq.)  calls  the  walls  of  Megara  *  vocal,'  adding  that
Apollo  had  laid  down  his  gilded  lyre  upon  them,  and  that  the  note  of  the
lyre  inhered  in  the  stone.  Elsewhere  (Tristia^  i.  10.  39)  the  same  poet
speaks  of  the  walls  of  Megara  as  "  the  walls  of  Alcathous."

42.  3.  the  Oolossns  of  the  Egyptians  etc.  What  the  Greeks  called
the  statue  of  Memnon  was  a  colossal  statue,  carved  out  of  a  single  block
of  hard  breccia,  which  with  a  companion  statue  stood  in  front  of  a  temple
of  Amenophis  III.  at  Thebes.  The  temple  exists  no  longer,  but  the
two  statues  are  still  in  their  places,  and  are  the  largest  standing  statues
in  Egypt.  Each  is  about  60  feet  high.  Strabo,  the  first  Greek  writer,
so  far  as  we  know,  to  mention  the  statue,  says  (xvii.  p.  816)  that  one  of
the  two  colossal  statues  was  complete,  but  that  the  upper  part  of  the
other  had  been  thrown  down  by  an  earthquake  (perhaps  the  earthquake
of  26  B.C.),  and  that  once  a  day  a  sound,  like  that  of  a  light  blow,  pro-
ceeded from  the  part  of  the  broken  statue  which  remained  in  its  chair.
Strabo  himself  visited  the  spot  in  company  with  the  Roman  governor
Aelius  Gallus  and  his  suite  at  the  first  hour  of  the  day  and  heard  the
sound.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  sound  was  caused  by  the  sudden
increase  of  temperature  at  sunrise,  the  heated  air  in  the  crevices  of  the
broken  surface  expanding  and  so  producing  a  cracking  sound.  This
would  answer  well  to  the  descriptions  which  Strabo  and  Pausanias  give
of  the  sound.  The  explanation  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  after  the
upper  part  of  the  statue  was  replaced  in  its  original  position,  probably
by  Septimius  Severus  (Spartianus,  Severus,  17),  the  sound  apparently
ceased  to  be  heard.  For  of  the  numerous  Greek  and  Latin  inscriptions
carved  on  the  legs  and  base  of  the  statue  by  visitors  who  declare  that
they  heard  the  sound,  none  is  older  than  65  a.d.  or  later  than  196  A.D.
(C.LG.  Nos.  4719-4761;  C.  I.  L,  iii.  i.  Nos.  30-66).  Among  the
visitors  were  Germanicus  (Tacitus,  ii.  61),  the  emperor  Hadrian  (C  I.  G.
Nos.  4725,  4726),  and  his  consort  Sabina  {C.LG.  Nos.  4728,  4731).


CH.  XLii  MEGARA  531

The  statue  represented  the  Egyptian  king  Amenophis  III.,  whom
Pausanias  calls  Phamenoph.  In  the  visitors'  inscriptions  on  the  statue
the  king's  name  appears  as  Phamenoph,  Phamenoth,  Phamenos,  and
Amenoth.  One  inscription  speaks  of  the  statue  as  "  Memnon  or
Phamenoth"  (C.  /.  G.  No.  4727)  ;  in  another  the  statue  is  addressed  as
"  Memnon  son  of  Tithonus,  or  Amenoth  king  of  Egypt"  (C /.  G,  No.
4731).  It  is  supposed  that  the  designation  of  the  statue  as  Memnon
was  due  to  a  misunderstanding  on  the  part  of  the  Greeks,  who  took  the
Egyptian  word  mennu^  *  great  monument,'  for  a  proper  name,  and  identi-
fied it  with  Memnon.  The  sound  said  to  be  emitted  by  the  statue  at
sunrise  was  poetically  supposed  by  the  Greeks  to  be  a  salutation  addressed
by  Memnon  to  his  mother  the  Dawn  (Himerius,  Or.  xvi.  i).  Pausanias's
statement  that  Cambyses  cut  the  statue  in  two  is  probably  false ;  it  is
more  likely  that  the  true  explanation  of  the  mutilated  condition  of  the
statue  in  his  time  is  the  one  given  by  Strabo.

See  A.  Wiedemann,  Aegyptische  Geschichte^  p.  386  sqq. ;  Maspero
Histoire  Ancienne^^  p.  207  sq,  ;  Th.  Mommsen,  on  C.LL,  iii.  i.  No.
30  ;  Mayor,  on  Juvenal,  xv.  5  ;  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  VArt  dans
rAntiquiti^  i.  pp.  31,  295,  with  pl.  vi.

For  other  mentions  of  Memnon's  statue  by  ancient  writers  see  Pliny,
N.  H»  xxxvi.  58  ;  Juvenal,  xv.  5  ;  Lucian,  Toxaris^  27  ;  /V/.,  Philopseudes^
33  ;  Philostratus,  Vit.  Apollon.  vi.  4  ;  id.^  Imagines^  i.  7.  2  ;  Himerius,
On  viii.  5.

42.  3.  the  Tunnels  (Suringes).  The  Greeks  gave  the  name  of
Suringes  or  *  Tunnels '  (literally  *  pipes ')  to  the  great  necropolis  which  is
hewn  out  of  the  rock  in  the  range  of  limestone  hills  to  the  west  of  Thebes.
The  entrances  to  the  tombs  are  in  a  wild  and  desolate  ravine  called
Bab-el-Molouk  or  the  Gate  of  the  Kings  ;  and  each  sepulchral  chamber
is  approached  through  a  series  of  passages  or  galleries,  all  subterranean
and  hewn  out  of  the  rock.  The  Theban  kings  of  the  eighteenth  and
following  dynasties  are  buried  here.  See  Perrot  et  Chipiez,  Histoire  de
PArt  dans  P Antiquity,  i.  p.  260  sqq.  ;  Ad.  Erman,  Aegypten  und  aegypt-
isches  Leben  im  Altertum,  p.  439  sqq.  Inscriptions  in  Greek  and  Latin
on  the  walls  of  these  tombs  record  the  names  of  persons  who  visited
them  in  the  later  ages  of  antiquity,  and  the  admiration  which  the  sight
of  the  tombs  inspired  {C,  I.  G,  Nos.  4762-4821;  CLL,  iii.  i.  Nos.
67-73).  Strabo  describes  this  remarkable  necropolis  as  "sepulchres  of
the  kings  in  caves,  cut  in  the  rock,  about  forty  in  number,  wonderfully
constructed  and  worth  seeing"  (xvii.  p.  816)  ;  but  he  does  not  use  the
name  Suringes,  The  tombs  are  mentioned  under  the  name  Suringes  by
Aelian  {Nat,  Anim,  vi.  43),  Ammianus  Marcellinus  (xxii.  15.  30),
Phr>'nichus  (Bekker's  Anecdota  Graeca^  p.  64),  and  in  some  of  the  Greek
inscriptions  carved  on  the  walls.  Ammianus  (/.r.)  describes  them  as
"  subterranean  and  winding  recesses,  on  the  walls  of  which  are  sculptured
many  sorts  of  birds  and  beasts  and  hieroglyphics  "  ;  but  he  seems  not  to
have  known  that  they  were  tombs.

42.  3.  Memnon  marched  as  far  as  Susa.    Cp.  iv.  31.  5

note ;  x.  31.  7  note.

42.  4.  a  temple  of  Athena.     A  bronze  tablet  inscribed  with  a


532  MEGARA  bk.  i.  attica

dedication  to  Athena  was  found  in  1882  in  a  garden  about  an  hour  and
a  half  to  the  north-west  of  Megara.  The  inscription  is  in  archaic  letters
and  states  that  ^^the  following  persons  dedicated  the  tithe  to  Athena
from  the  booty."  See  Mittheil.  d,  arch.  Inst,  in  A  then,  8  (1883),  p.
181  sqq. ;  C.  I.  G.  G.  S.  No.  37  ;  Kirchhoff,  Studien  zur  Gesch.  d.  griech.
Alphabets,^  p.  113;  Roberts,  Greek  Epigraphy ^  No.  113a,  p.  1 39 ;
Collitz,  G.D.I.  3.  No.  3001.

42.  5.  The  old  temple  of  Apollo  was  of  brick.  The  brick  was
doubtless  unbumt.  As  to  the  use  of  this  material  in  ancient  Greek
architecture,  see  the  note  on  v.  16.  i.  An  inscription  recording  the
repair  of  the  temple  of  Apollo  has  been  found  at  Megara :  the  persons
who  conducted  or  contributed  to  the  repairs  are  enumerated  by  name :
the  inscription  dates  from  between  242  B.C.  and  223  B.C.  (C.I.  G.  G.S.
No.  42  ;  Collitz,  G.  D.  I.  3.  No.  3029),  There  was  another  sanctuary
of  Apollo  at  Megara  (i.  44.  2).

42.  5.  the  Emperor  Hadrian  built  it  of  white  marble.  In  return
for  the  benefits  conferred  by  Hadrian  on  Megara  (cp.  i.  44.  6)  honours
appear  to  have  been  showered  on  him  by  the  citizens.  A  tribe  was
named  after  him  (C.I.  G.  G.  S.  Nos.  72,  74,  loi),  and  many  statues  of
him  were  set  up  (note  on  i.  40.  2).  But  the  emperor's  benefits  seem  to
have  had  no  permanent  effect  (i.  36.  3).

42.  5.  The  image  very  like  the  Egyptian  wooden  images.

This  passage  has  been  adduced,  on  very  insufficient  grounds,  to  prove
the  direct  dependence  of  early  Greek  art  on  the  art  of  Egypt.  See
Overbeck,  Gesch.  d.  griech.  Plastik,^  i.  p.  37  sqq.  ;  A.  S.  Murray,
History  of  Greek  Sculpture^^  i.  p.  76  j^.  The  theory  of  the  dependence
of  early  Greek  art  on  the  art  of  Egypt  has,  however,  been  maintained
on  other  grounds  by  some  writers.  In  particular  the  archaic  male
figures  known  as  the  Apollos  of  Tenea,  Orchomenus,  etc.  (see  note  on
ii.  5 .  4)  are  believed  by  these  authorities  to  have  been  modelled,  directly
or  indirectly,  on  Egyptian  statues.  See  CoUignon,  Histoire  de  la  Sculp-
ture Grecque,  i .  p.  117  sqq. ;  Furtwangler,  Meisterwerke  d.  griech.
Plastik,  p.  712  sqq.     Cp.  Paus.  ii.  19.  3  ;  iv.  32.  i  ;  vii.  5.  5.

42.  5.  Aeginetan  works.     See  note  on  v.  25.  13.

42.  5.  the  ebony-tree  does  not  pnt  forth  leaves  etc.  This  absurd
belief  was  not  shared  by  Theophrastus  {Hist.  Plant,  iv.  4.  6)  and  Pliny
(N.H  xii.  17  sqq.)

42.  6.  the  corpse  of  Ino  was  cast  ashore  on  their  coasts  etc
Cp.  i.  44.  7  ^9' ;  iv.  34.  7.

43.  I.  Herodotos  writes  that  the  Tanrians sacrifice  cast-
aways to  a  virgin  etc.  See  Herodotus,  iv.  103.  In  the  city  of  Tauric
Chersonese  do^Mi  to  Strabo's  time  there  was  a  sanctuary  of  the  Virgin,
and  on  a  cape  called  Parthenium,  about  eleven  miles  from  the  city,  there
was  a  temple  with  an  image  of  her  (Strabo,  vii.  p.  308).  She  is  spoken
of  as  "  the  Virgin  who  always  protects  the  people  of  Chersonese  "  in  an
inscription  which  mentions  a  festival  held  in  her  honour  and  an  altar  to
her  which  stood  on  the  acropolis  (Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Graec.
No.  252  ;  Bulletin  de  Corr.  HellMque,  5  (1881),  p.  70  sqq.  ;  Collitz,
G.D.I.  3.  No.  3087).


CH.  XLiii  GRAVES  IN  THE  CITY  533

43.  I.  Adrastos  also  is  revered  by  the  Megarians  etc.  In  the
third  book  of  his  history  of  Megara  the  native  historian  Dieuchidas
stated  that  the  grave  of  Adrastus  was  at  Megara,  and  that  there  was  a
cenotaph  of  him  at  Sicyon  (Schol.  on  Pindar,  Nem,  ix.  30).  As  to  the
death  of  Adrastus's  son  Aegialeus  see  i.  44.  4  note.

43.  2.  a  rock  which  they  name  Anaclethra  ('recall').  This
rock  is  called  Anaclethris  in  the  Etymol,  Magnum  (p.  96  s.v.
'  AvaKkrjBpls),  where  a  similar  story  is  told  of  the  origin  of  the  name.

43.  3.  There  are  graves  in  the  city  of  Megara  etc.  There  was
a  tradition  that  at  an  early  period  the  Greeks  buried  their  dead  in  their
houses  (Plato,  Minos,  p.  3 1 5  d),  and  contemporary  graves  appear  to  be
found  among  the  rock-cut  foundations  of  houses  in  the  long-deserted
south-western  quarter  of  Athens  (Curtius  und  Kaupert,  Af/as  von  A  then,
p.  19).  But  in  historical  times  the  dead  were  regularly  buried  outside
the  walls  of  the  city  :  graves  within  the  walls,  such  as  those  here  men-
tioned by  Pausanias  at  Megara,  were  very  rare  exceptions  to  the  rule.
In  Tarentum,  however,  down  to  the  time  of  Polybius  all  the  dead  were
buried  within  the  walls  in  consequence  of  an  oracle  which  declared  that
"it  would  be  better  for  the  people  if  they  made  their  abode  with  the
majority "  :  hence  the  eastern  quarter  of  Tarentum  was  full  of  tombs
(Polybius,  viii.  30).  Occasionally,  as  the  highest  mark  of  honour,  a
distinguished  man  was  buried  within  the  city ;  but  in  such  cases  the
dead  man  seems  regularly  to  have  been  worshipped  as  a  hero  and  so  to
have  been  raised  above  the  level  of  common  humanity.  Thus  Ther-
sander  was  buried  in  the  market-place  of  Elaea  and  was  honoured  with
sacrifices  by  the  natives  (Paus.  ix.  5.  14)  :  Coroebus  and  Orsippus  were
buried  in  the  market-place  of  Megara  (I  43.  8  ;  i.  44.  i)  :  Brasidas  was
buried  in  front  of  the  market-place  at  Amphipolis  and  was  worshipped
as  a  hero,  annual  sacrifices  being  offered  to  him  and  games  held  in  his
honour  (Thucydides,  v.  11):  Euphron  was  buried  in  the  market-place  at
Sicyon  and  worshipped  as  a  founder  of  the  city  (Xenophon,  HelUnica,
vii.  3.  12) :  Aratus  was  also  buried  in  a  conspicuous  part  of  Sicyon  and
received  sacrifices  twice  a  year  as  the  founder  and  saviour  of  the  city,
although,  as  Plutarch  tells  us,  there  was  an  ancient  law,  supported  by
a  strong  religious  prejudice,  that  no  man  should  be  buried  within  the
walls  (Plutarch,  Arattis,  53)  :  Philopoemen  was  buried  in  the  market-
place at  Megalopolis,  where  divine  honours  were  paid  to  his  memory
(C  /.  G.  No.  1536;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Graec.  No.  210;  see
note  on  viii.  30.  10):  and  Timoleon  was  buried  in  the  market-place  of
Syracuse,  and  musical,  equestrian,  and  athletic  contests  were  annually
held  in  his  honour  (Plutarch,  Timoleon,  39).  On  the  other  hand,
Servius  Sulpicius,  the  friend  of  Cicero,  could  not  prevail  on  the  Athe-
nians to  allow  a  Roman  to  be  buried  within  the  city  :  they  said  they
were  prevented  by  religious  scruples  from  complying  with  his  request,
and  that  the  privilege  of  being  buried  within  the  walls  had  never  been
granted  to  any  one  (Cicero,  Epist,  ad  Fam.  iv.  12).  So  at  Rome  it
was  forbidden  by  the  code  of  the  Twelve  Tables  to  bury  or  bum  a  corpse
within  the  walls  ;  but  a  few  illustrious  men  were,  as  a  mark  of  honour,
excepted  from  the  law  (Cicero,  De  legibus,  ii.  23).


534  MEGA  R A  bk.  i.  attica

The  burial  within  the  walls  of  the  Megarians  who  fell  in  the  Persian
war  appears  to  have  been  no  exception  to  the  rule  that  only  the  heroic
and  worshipped  dead  were  allowed  this  distinction.  For  a  copy  of  the
epitaph  which  Simonides  composed  on  the  Megarian  dead  has  been  pre-
served in  a  late  inscription  of  the  fourth  or  fifth  century  A.D.  ;  and
appended  to  the  epitaph  is  a  statement  that  "  down  to  our  time  the  cit>'
continued  to  sacrifice  a  bull  to  them"  (C  /.  G.  G.  5.  No.  53  ;  Hicks,
Greek  Historical  Inscriptions,  No.  11;  Kaibel,  Epigrammata  GraecOy
No.  461).  From  the  epitaph  we  learti  that  of  the  men  thus  honoured
some  had  fallen  at  Artemisium,  others  at  Mycale,  others  at  Salamis,  and
others  at  Plataea.  It  is  said  that  the  Megarians  buried  their  dead
turned  to  the  east  (Plutarch,  Solon,  10;  Aelian,  Var,  Hist,  vii.  19).
This  probably  means  that  the  bodies  were  laid  with  their  feet  to  the
east.

43.  3.  the  Aesymnitun.  Pausanias  says  below  that  the  Council
House  was  built  so  as  to  include  ^^nthin  it  the  grave  of  the  heroes.  As
the  Aesymnium  was  this  grave,  it  must  have  been  within  the  Council
House.  It  was  probably  a  chamber  in  which  the  ofificials  called
Aisumnetai  or  AisimncUai  (C,  L  G,  G.  S,  No.  1 5  ;  Dittenberger,
Sylloge  Inscr,  Grace,  No.  218  ;  Collitz,  G.  D.  L  3.  No.  3016)  held  their
meetings.  As  these  Aisu?nnetai  appear  to  have  been  an  executive
committee  of  the  Council,  it  was  natural  that  they  should  meet  in  a
chamber  of  the  Council  House.  In  this  chamber  there  was  probably  a
tomb  of  Aesymnus,  a  mythical  personage  invented  to  explain  the  name
Aisumnetai.  Cp.  Bulletin  de  Corr,  HelUnique,  9  (1885),  p.  280  sq.  \
Gilbert,  Griech.  Staatsalterthiimer,  2.  p.  72  ;  Busolt,  Griech.  Staats-  und
Rechtsaltcrtiimcr^^  P-  46  sq,  ;  TopfFer,  s.v.  *  Aisymnetes,'  Paulys  Real-
Encyclopddie,  ed.  Wissowa,  i.  p.  1089  sq.

43.  3.  the  Megarians  would  fare  well  if  they  took  counsel
with  the  majority.  With  this  oracle  and  its  interpretation  compare
the  oracle  given  to  the  people  of  Tarentum  (Polybius,  viii.  30  ;  see
above,  p.  533).

43.  4.  It  is  the  custom  for  girls before  marriage  to

offer  clippings  of  their  hair.  As  to  the  custom  of  cutting  off  hair
before  marriage  see  ii.  32.  i.  note;  as  to  the  custom  of  laying  offer-
ings of  hair  on  tombs  see  vii.  17.  8  note.  The  Delian  custom  to  which
Pausanias  refers  is  thus  described  by  Herodotus  (iv.  34) :  "  The  Delian
youth,  both  girls  and  boys,  cut  their  hair  in  honour  of  the  maidens  who
came  from  the  Hyperboreans  and  died  in  Delos.  The  girls  cut  off  a
lock  of  their  hair  before  marriage,  wind  it  on  a  spindle,  and  place  it  on
the  tomb.  The  tomb  is  in  the  sanctuary  of  Artemis,  at  the  entrance,  on
the  left-hand  side  ;  an  olive-tree  grows  over  it.  The  Delian  boys  wind
some  of  their  hair  round  a  certain  grass  and,  like  the  girls,  place  it  on
the  tomb."  Callimachus  also  describes  the  Delian  custom  (^Hytrin  to
Delos ^  296-299),  and  from  his  description  it  appears  that  the  hair  which
the  Delian  boys  offered  was  that  of  their  first  beard.  It  is  to  be
observed  that  both  at  Megara  and  Delos  the  graves  at  which  these
offerings  of  hair  were  made  by  youths  and  maidens  were  the  graves  of
virgins.     Similarly  at  Troezen  it  was  in  the  temple  of  the  unmarried


CH.  XLiii  MEGARA  535

Hippolytus    that     girls    dedicated    their    hair    before    marriage    (ii.

32.  I).

The  Hyperborean  maidens  to  whom  the  youthful  Delians  offered
their  hair  are  called  by  Pausanias  Hecaerge  and  Opis  (cp.  v.  7.  7).
Herodotus  (iv.  33)  calls  them  Hyperoche  and  Laodice  ;  but  he  says
(iv.  35)  that  two  other  maidens  named  Arge  and  Opis  (doubtless  the
same  as  the  Hecaerge  and  Opis  of  Pausanias)  came  to  Delos  from  the
land  of  the  Hyperboreans  before  Hyperoche  and  Laodice  and  were
honoured  by  the  Delians  in  a  different  way.  The  Delian  women  made
a  periodical  collection  for  them,  singing  a  hymn  composed  for  the  pur-
pose by  the  Lycian  poet  Olen  ;  and  the  ashes  from  the  thigh-bones  of
victims  burnt  on  the  altar  were  scattered  on  their  tomb.  This  tomb  of
Opis  and  Arge  was  at  the  back  of  the  sanctuary  of  Artemis  and  faced
the  east.  This  circumstantial  account  of  Herodotus  is  to  be  preferred
to  the  brief  notice  of  the  Delian  custom  given  by  Pausanias,  who  seems
to  have  named  Hecaerge  (Arge)  and  Opis  by  mistake  instead  of
Hyperoche  and  Laodice.  Callimachus  calls  the  Hyperborean  maidens
Upis,  Loxo,  and  Hecaerge  {Hymn  to  Delos^  292).  Ser\'ius  on  Virgil
{Aen,  xi.  532)  says  that  Opis  and  Hecaerge  (or  Hecaergus)  were  the
first  who  brought  the  offerings  of  the  Hyperboreans  to  Delos  ;  but  it  is
doubtful  whether  the  names  are  here  feminine  or  masculine.  In  the
pseudo-Platonic  dialogue  Axiochus  (p.  371  a)  the  Hyperboreans  Opis
and  Hecaergus  seem  to  be  men,  not  maidens.  See  Roscher^s  Lexikotiy
I.  p.  2810  sqq,

43.  5.  Dasyllian.  This  probably  means  *  leafy,'  and  refers  to  the
foliage  of  the  vines,  as  the  author  of  the  EtymoL  Magnum  (p.  248,  s.v,
Aao-vAAtos)  interprets  it.     Cp.  Preller,  Griech,  Mythologie^^  i.  p.  708.

43.  6.  a  temple  of  Aphrodite.  This  temple  is  alluded  to  by
Xenophon,  who  says  {Hellenica^  v.  4.  58)  that  once  when  the  Spartan
king  Agesilaus  was  at  Megara,  a  vein  in  his  leg  burst  as  he  was
ascending  from  the  sanctuary  of  Aphrodite  to  the  Government  Office.

43.  6.  Scopas  made  the  images  of  Love  and  Longing  and
Yearning.  L.  Urlichs  conjectured  that  these  three  images  by  Scopas
stood  facing  and  matching  the  old  ivory  image  of  Aphrodite,  and  the
two  images  of  Persuasion  and  the  Comforter  by  Praxiteles,  each  triplet
of  images  being  placed  on  a  single  pedestal  (L.  Urlichs,  Skofas^  p.  89
sq,)  Love  (Eros),  Longing  {///mfros),  and  Yearning  {Pothos)  were
probably  represented  as  three  youthful  male  figures  ;  and  to  distinguish
each  of  these  similar  figures  by  the  subtle  shade  of  expression  appro-
priate to  the  particular  one  of  the  three  kindred  emotions  which  the
figure  was  designed  to  embody,  must  have  been  a  task  that  called  for
the  most  delicate  observation  in  the  sculptor  and  the  most  consummate
technical  skill.     Cp.  Overbeck,  Gcsch,  d.  griech,  Plastik^^  2.  p.  30.

43.  6.  a  sanctuary  of  Fortune  etc.  Coins  of  Megara  represent
Fortune  as  a  draped  woman  standing  with  a  cup  in  her  right  hand  and
a  horn  of  plenty  in  her  left.  This  type  may  be  copied  from  Praxiteles's
statue  of  the  goddess.  See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num,  Comm,
on  Pausanias,  p.  7,  with  pi.  A  xiv.

43.  6.  images  of  the  Muses  and  a  bronze  Zeus,  both  by  Lysip-


536  MEGARA  bk.  x.  attica

pus.  In  the  plain  at  the  northern  foot  of  the  eastern  hill  of  M^ara
there  are  a  number  of  ancient  blocks  of  grey  marble,  some  of  which
appear  to  have  formed  part  of  a  large  pedestal  supporting  a  statue  or
group  of  statuary  by  Lysippus.  The  inscription  (C  /.  G,  G  S.  Na
38),  carved  on  two  of  the  blocks,  runs  thus  :

Awriinros  ciroici.

"Theramenes,  son  of  Timoxenus,  dedicated  (the  statue).  Lysippus
made  (it).''  From  the  style  of  the  letters  the  inscription  seems  to  date
from  about  the  end  of  the  fourth  century  ac. ;  and  as  the  dimensions  of
the  pedestal  are  such  as  to  suggest  that  it  supported  a  group  of  statuary
it  may  very  well  be  that  the  group  was  the  one  here  mentioned  by
Pausanias  representing  Zeus  and  the  Muses.  See  E.  Lowy,  *  Kiinst-
lerinschrift  aus  Megara,'  Mittheil.  d,  arch,  Inst  in  Athen^  10  (1885),

pp.  145-150-

43.  7-  when  Orotopns  was  reigning  in  Argos  his  dan^^ter
Psamathe  etc.  The  following  story  is  told  in  the  same  way,  though
with  more  picturesque  details,  by  Statius  {Theb,  i.  579  sqq,\  who,
however,  omits  the  last  part  of  it,  the  account  of  the  foundation  of
Tripodisci  by  Coroebus.  The  story  is  also  told,  with  some  variations,
by  Conon  {Narrat,  19).  According  to  him  the  infant  Linus,  the  son  (rf
Apollo  and  Psamathe  (cp.  Paus.  ii.  19.  8),  was  found  by  a  shepherd
and  reared  by  him  as  his  own  child,  till  one  day  the  sheep-dogs  tore
the  child  in  pieces.  Meantime  the  angry  father  Crotopus  had  put  his
frail  daughter  Psamathe  to  death  ;  and  this  murder  of  his  leman  pro-
voked Apollo  into  visiting  Argos  with  a  plague.  When  the  Argives
inquired  of  Apollo  how  they  might  rid  themselves  of  the  plague,  the
god  bade  them  propitiate  the  murdered  Psamathe  and  her  son  Linus.
Accordingly  the  Argives  sent  matrons  and  maids  to  mourn  for
Linus ;  and  they  named  a  month  the  Lamb  month  because  Linus  had
been  bred  among  the  lambs,  and  they  offered  sacrifices  and  held  a
Lamb  festival,  at  which  they  killed  all  the  dogs  they  could  find.  But
still  the  plague  did  not  abate  until  Crotopus,  in  obedience  to  an  oracle,
quitted  Argos  and  founded  a  city  which  he  called  Tripodiscium,
in  the  territory  of  Megara,  where  he  took  up  his  abode.  Such  is
Conon's  version  of  the  legend ;  it  omits  all  mention  of  the  personified
Punishment  as  well  as  of  Coroebus.  The  Lamb  festival  at  Argos  is
referred  to  by  Aelian  {Nat.  An.  xii.  34),  who  says  that,  "  on  the  da>'s
which  the  Argives  call  the  Lamb  days,  if  a  dog  enters  the  market-place
they  kill  it."  It  is  alluded  to  also  by  Athenaeus  (iii.  p.  99  e).  Psamathe
was  interpreted  by  K.  B.  Stark  as  a  sea-nymph,  a  personification  of  the
wave- washed  sands,  her  name  being  derived  from  psamathos  *  sea-sand '
(Stark,  Niobe  und  die  Niobiden^  p.  347  sq.)

43.  8.  bade  him  take  np  a  tripod  and  carry  it  from  the  sanctnaiy
etc.  Mr.  Bouch^-Leclerq  suggests  that  this  story  may  have  originated
in  an  attempt  of  the  Argives  to  set  up  an  oracle  independent  of  the
Delphic  oracle :  he  compares  the  legend  of  Hercules's  attempt  to  carry
off  the  tripod  from  Delphi  (Bouch^Leclerq,  Histoire  de  la  divinoHon


CH.  XLiv  TRIPODISCI  537

dans  Tantiquitiy  3.  p.  108  sqq,  ;  as  to  the  legend  of  Hercules  and  the
tripod  see  iii.  21.  8  ;  viii.  37.  i  ;  x.  13.  7  note).

43.  8.  the  TilLEVge  of  TriiK>disci  The  name  of  this  village  is
variously  given  by  ancient  authorities  as  Tripodiscus  (Thucydides,  iv.
70),  Tripodiscium  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  394;  Conon,  Narraiiones^  19),  and
Tripodisci  (Pausanias).  Stephanus  Byzantius  {s.v,  TpLTroBUrKos)  recog-
nises both  Tripodiscus  and  Tripodisci.  Thucydides,  who  describes  it
(/.r.)  as  a  village  in  the  territory  of  Megara  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Gerania,
tells  us  that,  when  Megara  was  threatened  by  the  Athenians,  the  Spartan
general  Brasidas,  then  at  Corinth,  sent  word  to  the  Boeotians  to  meet
him  with  their  troops  at  Tripodiscus  for  the  purpose  of  protecting
Megara.  The  remains  of  the  petty  town  are  to  be  seen  about  six
miles  north-west  of  Megara  on  the  lowest  slopes  of  Mt.  Gerania,  at
the  entrance  to  the  pass  which  leads  through  the  mountains  to  the
Isthmus  of  Corinth.  The  ruins  lie  exactly  on  the  shortest  route  from
Delphi  to  the  Isthmus,  over  Mount  Gerania,  the  town  of  Megara  being
situated  a  few  miles  to  the  left.  Strabo  says  (/.c.)  that  in  his  time  the
Megarians  held  their  market  at  Tripodiscus,  perhaps  because  its  situation
was  more  central  than  that  of  the  capital.  "  Such  markets  in  some
spot  convenient  to  all  the  vicinage,  and  generally  named  from  the  nearest
town,  are  still  common  in  every  part  of  the  Levant,  and  appear  to  have
been  equally  so  anciently "  (Leake).  It  may  be,  however,  as  Bursian
suggested,  that  Strabo  confused  the  village  founded  by  Coroebus  with
his  tomb  in  the  market-place  of  Megara.  Tripodiscus  was  one  of  the
five  villages  among  which  the  population  of  the  Megarian  territory  was
originally  distributed  (Plutarch,  QuaesL  Graec,  17).

See  Leake,  N,  Greece^  2.  p.  410  sq,  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  380  sq,
43.  8.  The  grave  of  Ooroebns  is  in  the  market-place  of  Megara.
For  other  examples  of  graves  in  market-places  see  above,  note  on  §  3,
*  graves  in  the  city.'  In  the  market-place  at  Megara  there  grew  a  wild
olive-tree  on  which  the  fate  of  the  city  was  believed  to  depend  ;  for  an
oracle  had  declared  that  if  the  tree  were  cut  down,  Megara  would  be
captured  and  sacked,  and  this,  we  are  told,  actually  came  to  pass
(Theophrastus,  Histor.  Plant,  v.  2.  4).  According  to  Pliny  (N,  H,  xvi.
199)  the  oracle  ran  that  the  tree  would  prove  the  ruin  of  the  city  when-
ever it  should  bring  forth  arms.  Now  some  men  had  in  a  past  age
fastened  their  weapons  on  the  tree :  the  bark  had  gradually  closed  in
upon  the  arms  and  hidden  them ;  but  when  the  tree  was  cut  down  they
came  to  light

43.  8.  elegiac  verses  are  carved  on  it  etc.  These  verses  are  pre-
served in  the  Anthology  {Anthol.  Palat,  vii.  154).  They  purport  to  be
spoken  by  the  grisly  being  whom  Coroebus  slew  and  who  speaks  of
herself  as  a  "  Doom  that  haunts  the  grave  "  (K?)p  rvfiPov\os).

44.  I.  the  grave  of  Orsippns  etc.  A  copy  of  the  epitaph  on
Orsippus's  grave  was  found  at  Megara  in  1769  engraved  on  a  block  of
stone  which  served  to  keep  open  the  door  of  a  hovel.  As  this  epitaph
was  clearly  the  source  of  Pausanias's  information  about  Orsippus,  and
as  he  misunderstood  it,  I  give  the  epitaph  at  full  length  in  the  originaL
The  tomb  is  supposed  to  speak :


S38  MEGARA  bk.  i.  attica

'OppliTij}  ^Icyaprjs  fJL€  8at<f}povi  ryS*  dpi&qXov
p.vapxL  6&raVy  (fidpAji.  AekffylSi  irtidop.ivoi'

OS  5^  p^kUttovs  p€v  opovs  aTTcAucraTO  irdrp^jf.
TToXkav  8xxrp€V€U}v  ydv  aTrore/ivo/xcvwv,

TTpdros  S'  'EXXavajV  cv  'OkvpiriijL  €aT€<f>av(a6r]
yv/uvos,  fwvvv/xcvwv  twv  Trptv  €vi  a'TaS(<^,

"In  obedience  to  a  Delphic  oracle  the  Megarians  set  me  up  here,  a
conspicuous  monument  to  the  warlike  Orripus,  who  delivered  and  restored
to  his  fatherland  a  long  line  of  boundaries,  at  a  time  when  foes  were
annexing  much  land,  and  who  was  the  first  Greek  to  be  crowned  at
Olympia  naked,  whereas  former  competitors  wore  girdles  in  the  race/*
The  inscription  is  not  the  original  one  carved  on  the  tomb,  but  a  copy
executed  in  late  Roman  or  Byzantine  times,  probably  when  the  original
was  growing  worn  and  illegible.  It  is  in  the  Megarian  dialect ;  hence
Orsippus  is  called  Orrippus.  See  C.  I.  G,  No.  1050  ;  C.  /,  G.  G.  S,  No.
52  ;  Kaibel,  Epigrammaia  Graeca^  No.  843  ;  Hicks,  Greek  Historical
Inscriptions^  No.  i.  Four  verses  of  the  epitaph  are  quoted  by  the
scholiast  on  Thucydides,  i.  6.  According  to  Didymus  (Schol.  on  Homer,
//.  xxiii.  683)  and  the  author  of  the  Etyjfwlogicum  Magnum  (p.  242,
s,v,  yvpvaxTia)  the  race  in  which  Orsippus  dropt  his  girdle  was  run  in  01.
32  (652  B.C.)  But  this  is  a  mistake :  the  victory  of  Orsippus  was  won
in  01.  15  (720  B.C.)  See  Eusebius,  Chronic,  vol.  i.  p.  195,  ed.  Schone ;
Eustathius,  on  Homer,//,  xxiii.  683,  p.  1324;  Dionysius  Halicamassensis,
Antiquit.  Rom,  vii.  72.  3  ;  and  Bockh's  comment  on  C  I,G.  No.  1050.
The  war  in  which  Orsippus  distinguished  himself  by  reconquering
Megarian  territory  from  the  enemy  was  probably  waged  against  Corinth,
which  under  the  Bacchid  dynasty  claimed  suzerainty  over  Megara  and
treated  the  vassal  state  very  overbearingly,  till  the  Megarians  revolted
and  threw  off  the  yoke  (Schol.  on  Pindar,  Nem.  vii.  155).  Pausanias
understood  the  epitaph  to  mean  that  Orsippus  had  headed  his  countr>-
men  in  a  successful  war  of  aggression.

44.  2.  a  sanctuaxy  of  Tutelary  Apollo.  Two  inscriptions  contain-
ing dedications  to  Tutelary  Apollo  by  certain  officials  called  thearoi  have
been  found  at  Megara  :  one  of  them  is  carved  on  a  stone  which  ser\'es
as  a  threshold  in  the  south-east  door  of  the  church  of  St.  Demetrius :
both  inscriptions  date  from  the  beginning  of  the  third  century  B.C.
{Mittheil,  d.  arch.  Inst,  in  Athcn,  8  (1883),  p.  189  sq.  ;  C.  /.  6^.  G.  S.
Nos.  39,  40;  Collitz,  G.D.I.  3.  Nos.  3027,  3028).

44.  2.  Latona  and  her  children  are  by  Praxiteles.  There  were
images  of  Latona  and  her  children  by  Praxiteles  in  a  temple  at  Mantinea
(viii.  9.  i).  The  one  set  of  images  may  have  been  a  replica  of  the
other.  Prof  Klein  and  Prof.  Overbeck  incline  to  assign  both  sets  to
the  supposed  elder  Praxiteles  {Archdolog.  epigraph.  Mitthcil.  aus  O ester-
reichy  4  (1880),  p.  \b  sq.\  Overbeck,  Gesch.  d.  griech.  Ptastik,*  i.  p.
500),  but  without  any  sufficient  reason  (see  Brunn,  in  Siizungsberichte  of
the  Bavarian  Academy,  Munich,  Philosoph.  philolog.  CI.,  6  Nov.  1880,  p.
443  sq.)  Coins  of  Megara  (Fig.  42)  present  a  group  consisting  of  Apollo
standing  between  Latona  and  Artemis.     This  group  is  probably  a  copy.


d  and  x}m.  plectrum


CH.  XLiv  MEGARA  539

more  or  less  free,  of  the  three  statues  by  Pnuiteles.     Apolio  stands  clad

in  his  long  "  singing  robes,"  with  a  lyre  in  his  left  hand  and  the  phctrum

in  his  right.     On  his  right  stands  Latona,  wearing  a

long  robe  and  grasping  a  long  sceptre  in  her  raised

right  hand  ;  her  left  hand  hangs  by  her  side.

Apollo's  left  (the  spectator's  right)  stands  Artemis,

also  clad  in  a  long  robe,  holding  in  her  left  hand  a

plectrum,  and  with  her  right  drawing  an  arrow  from

the  quiver  which  is  slung  at  her  back.     See  Imhoof

Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Coinm.  on  Pausamas,

pp.  7,  I S4,  with  pi.  A  X,  FF  ii.  "'^-  4'— a™l,«,  *«Tt

44.  3.  the  old  gymnasinm,  nsar  the  gate  "|^;^  op^.^^a")*
called  the  date  of  tho  Nymphs.  As  Pausanias,
inunediately  after  describing  the  old  gymnasium,  quits  Megara  and
descends  to  the  port,  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  the  Gate  of  the
Nymphs  was  on  the  south  side  of  Megara  and  that  the  road  to  the
port  passed  through  it.  In  this  quarter,  to  the  south  of  the  de-
pression which  separates  the  two  hills  of  Megara,  lies  a  pedestal
of  grey  stone  which  had  supported  three  statues  ;  two  of  the  statues,
as  we  learn  from  the  inscriptions,  represented  men  who  had
been  masters  of  the  gymnasium  ;  hence  it  is  conjectured  that  the
gymnasium  may  have  been  in  this  neighbourhood  (Anttali  delP
Jnslituto,  33  (1861),  p.  13;  C.  I.  G.  G.  S.  N'os.  97,  98;  Collitz,
G.  D.  I.  3,  No.  3018).  Another  inscription,  which  contains  a  list  of
lads  {epheboi)  who  passed  the  scrutiny,  mentions  by  name  the  master  of
the  gjinnasium  (C.  /.  C.  G.  S.  No.  29;  CoUiti,  G.  D.  I.  3.  No.  3022).
Another  inscription,  already  referred  to,  mentions  a  certain  Matroxenus
who  was  "master  of  the  gymnasium  in  the  Olympieum"  (C.  /.  G.  G.  S.
No.  31  ;  CoUiti,  G.  D.  /.  3.  No.  3024),  from  which  it  would  seem  that
there  was  another  gymnasium,  probably  the  new  one,  in  the  Olympieum
(sec  i.  40.  4).

44.  2.  a  stooe  in  the  shape  of  a  small  prramld ;  they  name  it
Apollo  Oarinns.  On  some  coins  of  Megara  an  obelisk  appears  between
two  dolphins  :  it  is  probably  a  copy  of  the  pyramidal  image  of  Apollo.
See  Imhoof-Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Comm.  on  Pausam'as,  p.  6,
with  pi.  A  viii.  For  more  examples  of  the  worship  of  conical  or  pyra-
midal stones  see  note  on  x.  16.  3.  The  epithet  Carinus  may  perhaps
be  connected  with  Car,  the  name  of  the  legendary  king  Car  (i.  39.  5  ;
i.  40.  6).     But  see  Critical  Note.

44.  2.  a  sanctiiaT7  of  the  Ilithyias.  Homer  mentions  these
goddesses  in  the  plural  (//.  xi.  270).

44.  3.  the  port,  which  is  still  called  Hisaea.  The  distance  of
Nisaea  from  Megara  was  about  eight  Greek  furlongs,  according  to
Thucydides  (iv.  66).  The  distance  of  the  present  town  of  Megara  from
the  ancient  harbour  is  about  a  mile  and  a  half.  When  Megara  joined
the  Athenian  alliance  about  459  B.C.,  the  Athenians  constructed  two
long  walls  between  Megara  and  Nisaea  and  garrisoned  these  walls
themselves  (Thucydides,  i.  J03).  But  in  the  eighth  year  of  the
Peloponnesian   war  (424  B.C.)  the   Megarians  got  possession  of  the


540


NISABA


BK.   I.   ATTICA


walls  and  raied  them  to  Che  grountL  In  the  following  century  the
walls  were  rebuilt  by  Phocion  (Plutarch,  Phocion,  15);  and  Strabo
speaks  (ix.  p.  391)  as  if  they  still  existed  in  his  time.  As  late  as  the
middle  of  the  present  century  some  scanty  remains  of  one  of  these  Ijoag
Walls  were  to  be  seen  about  half-way  between  the  town  and  the  shore.
At  present,  though  the  direction  of  the  walls  may  be  followed,  hardly
any  remains  of  them  can  be  pointed  out  On  the  western  side  of  the
bay  which  fonns  the  harbour  there  rises  a  steep,  isolated  hill  about
1 50  feet  high,  crowned  with  a  mediaeval  fortress  which  is  largely  buih


of  ancient  blocks.  On  the  eastern  side  of  the  bay  is  a  much  higher
hill  surmounted  by  a  chapel  of  St.  George,  On  the  east  this  hill  is
prolonged  by  a  chain  of  hills  extending  beside  the  shore  for  about  a
mile  and  a  half  till  it  terminates  in  the  long  promontory  of  Ticho,  which
juts  for  another  mile  and  a  half  into  the  sea  towards  Salamis,  On  the
south  the  hill  of  St.  George  ends  in  a  small  rugged  headland,  off  which
lies  a  little  rocky  island  divided  from  the  headland  by  a  channel  aboui
200  yards  wide  and  7  fathoms  deep.  To  the  south  of  this  island  lies
a  larger  rocky  island  called  Pachi.

The  hill  of  St.  George  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  harbour  appears
to  have  been  the  acropolis  of  Nisaea  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  The
remains  of  the  fortification -wall,  about  6  feel  chick  and  strengthened
with  towers,  may  still  be  traced  on  three  sides  (south,  east,  and  north)
of  the  hill,  forming  three  sides  of  a  quadrangle.  The  western  side  of
the  hill,  at  the  south  end  of  which  is  the  chapel  of  Sc.  George,  is
naturally  strong,  and  at  its  fooc  lay  the  town  and  harbour  of  Nisaea,  so
that  fortifications  were  here  noc  so  necessary.  In  the  southern  wall
there  is  a  gateway  al>out  6  feet  wide.  From  the  north-easlem  comer
of  the  forCified  enclosure  the  eastern  wall  is  prolonged  for  about  a
quarter  of  a  mile  down  the  slope  of  the  hilt  to  the  plain.  In  this  pro-
longation of  the  wall  five  or  six  towers  may  be  made  out.


CH.  XLiv  NISAEA  AND  MINOA  541

The  lower  hill,  surmounted  by  the  mediaeval  castle,  on  the  western
side  of  the  harbour  appears  to  have  been  what  Thucydides  (iii.  51)  and
Pausanias  call  the  island  of  Minoa.  Thucydides  describes  it  (/.r.)  as  an
island  off  Megara,  not  far  from  the  shore,  to  which  it  was  united  by  a
bridge  or  causeway  built  over  a  shoal.  The  Megarians  had  built  a
tower  on  the  island  and  used  it  as  a  fort ;  but  in  427  B.c.  the  Athenians
under  Nicias  captured  the  island,  fortified  it  at  the  point  where  it  was
connected  with  the  mainland  by  the  bridge  or  causeway,  and  left  a
garrison  in  it.  By  thus  commanding  the  harbour  of  Nisaea,  they  hoped
to  blockade  Megara  on  the  side  of  the  sea,  and  to  prevent  priva-
teers from  issuing  from  the  harbour  to  prey  on  Athenian  commerce.
In  424  B.C.  they  captured  Nisaea  also  (Thucydides,  iv.  69) ;  and  by
the  treaty  of  423  B.C.  it  was  provided  that  the  Athenians,  retaining
possession  of  Minoa  and  Nisaea,  should  not  pass  beyond  the  road  which
went  from  the  gate  at  the  statue  of  Nisus  to  the  sanctuary  of  Poseidon,
and  from  the  sanctuary  of  Poseidon  straight  to  the  bridge  (or  causeway)
leading  across  to  Minoa  (Thucydides,  iv.  118).

If  this  identification  of  Minoa  is  right,  it  follows  that  since  the  time
of  Thucydides  and  Pausanias  the  shoal  water  which  divided  the  island
from  the  mainland  has  been  filled  up.  And  this  may  very  well  have
happened ;  for  the  hill  is  at  present  skirted  on  two  sides  by  the  beds  of
streams,  now  dry,  and  the  alluvial  soil  formerly  brought  down  by  these
streams  may  have  sufficed  to  fill  up  the  shoal  and  attach  the  island  to
the  mainland.  Between  the  northern  foot  of  the  hill  and  the  dry  bed
of  the  stream  on  the  east  there  are  three  platforms,  which  may  have
served  to  support  the  ancient  bridge  or  causeway.  It  would  seem  that
even  in  Strabo's  time  the  shoal  was  half  silted  up,  since  he  describes
Minoa  as  "a  headland  forming  the  harbour  at  Nisaea"  (ix.  p.  391).
But  the  change  cannot  have  been  completed  for  a  good  while  after-
wards, since  Pausanias,  writing  about  a  century  and  a  half  after
Strabo,  still  calls  Minoa  an  island.  The  ruined  fortress  which
crowns  the  hill  was  built  originally  of  quadrangular  blocks  of  limestone
quarried  from  the  hill  itself;  but  most  of  the  existing  remains  are  of
later  date,  being  irregularly  constructed  of  blocks  of  different  sizes  and
shapes,  among  which  are  blocks  of  travertine  and  blocks  of  the  soft
shelly  sandstone  which  Pausanias  describes  (i.  44.  6).  A  high  tower,
built  of  this  irregular  masonry,  projects  from  the  north  wall  of  the
fortress ;  from  its  style  it  may  be  of  Venetian  origin.  The  ancient
walls  are  best  preserved  at  the  obtuse  north-western  angle  of  the  fort-
ress, and  especially  on  its  south-western  side,  about  a  third  of  the  way
up  the  hill.  In  the  low  ground  to  the  north  and  east  of  Minoa  are
some  massive  foundations  of  ancient  buildings,  together  with  many
ancient  hewn  blocks  and  pieces  of  unfiuted  columns.  Several  churches
stand  on  ancient  foundations.  These  are  no  doubt  remains  of  the
lower  town  of  Nisaea.  But  the  sites  of  the  sanctuary  of  Demeter
mentioned  by  Pausanias,  and  of  the  sanctuaries  of  Enyalius  and
Poseidon  mentioned  by  Thucydides  (iv.  67  and  1 18),  have  not  been
identified.  From  the  south-eastern  foot  of  the  hill  of  Minoa  some
remains  of  an  ancient  mole  may  be  traced  extending  into  the  sea  and


542  PAGAE  BK.   I.  ATTICA

curving  round  to  the  eastward,  so  as  to  shelter  the  ancient  harbour.
The  present  port  is  not  here,  but  at  the  little  rocky  headland  which  juts
out  from  the  south  side  of  the  acropolis  of  Nisaea  (the  hill  of  St
George).

See  Dodwell,  Tour^  2.  p.  179  ;  Leake,  N,  Greece,  2.  pp.  400-404  (who  wrongly
identified  Minoa  with  the  long  promontory  of  Ticho) ;  T.  Spratt,  *  Remarks  on
the  supposed  situation  of  Minoa  and  ^xssuc^y' Journal  of  the  R,  Geogr,  Socuty,%
(1838),  pp.  205-209  (who  first  identified  Minoa  correctly :  his  paper  is  reprinted  in
Arnold's  ed.  of  Thucydides,  vol.!  i.  p.  540  j^^.);  Welcker,  TagebuchyZ,  p.  162
so.  ;  A.  Michaelis,  in  Amtali  deW  InstitutOy  33  (1861),  p.  13  j^.  ;  W.  G.  Clark,
Peloponnesus,  p.  41  ;  A.  Conre,  in  Philologus,  19  (1863),  p.  164  sq.  ;  Bursian,
Geogr,  I.  pp.  378-380;  H.  G.  Lolling,  'Nisaa  und  Minoa,'  MittheiL  d.  arch,
Inst,  in  At  hen,  5  (1880),  pp.  I -19;  Baedeker,'  p.  153 ;  Guide-Joanm,  2.  p.  193.

44.  4-  a  rock  is  shown  with  arrows  sticking  all  over  it  etc

Cp.  i.  40.  2  sq,  Pausanias  is  now  following  the  road  which  leads  north-
west from  Megara  to  Pagae,  a  port  on  the  Gulf  of  Corinth.  The  road
passes,  at  a  distance  of  about  six  miles  from  Megara,  the  remains  of
the  ancient  Tripodisci  or  Tripodiscus  (i.  43.  8  note) ;  but  before  we
come  to  them  there  rises  on  the  south  of  the  road  a  height  now  called
Karydi  (*  walnut-tree '),  in  the  rocky  summit  of  which  there  are  many
holes.  These  holes  in  the  rock  probably  gave  rise  to  the  £^ble  whi(^
Pausanias  here  relates  (Bursian,  Geogr,  i,  p.  381).

44.  4-  Pagae.  Pagae  or  Pegae,  as  it  was  called  by  Attic  writers
and  those  who  followed  them  (Thucydides,  i.  103,  107,  iii,  115;
Plutarch,  PericleSy  19  ;  Harpocration  and  Stephanus  Byzantius,  5.v.
Wri'^iki ;  Scylax,  Periplus^  39),  was  a  port  on  the  western  coast  of  the
Megarian  territory',  on  the  Gulf  of  Corinth  (Scylax,  l,c,  ;  Pliny,  N.  H,
iv.  23  ;  Mela,  ii.  53).  The  distance  across  from  Pagae  on  the  west  to
Nisaea  on  the  east  was  120  Greek  furlongs,  according  to  Strabo  (viiL
P-  334)-  When  Megara  joined  Athens  in  459  B.c  the  Athenians  took
possession  of  Pagae  and  held  it  for  some  years  (Thucydides,  i.  103,
107,  III),  but  evacuated  it  in  445  B.C,  at  the  time  when  they  concluded
the  Thirty  Years*  Peace  with  Sparta  (Thucydides,  i.  115).  The  site  of
Pagae  is  marked  by  the  remains  of  walls  on  two  hiUs  close  to  the  sea,
near  the  deserted  village  of  AUpo  Chori  or  Alopeko  Kampo,  Some
remains  of  walls  and  of  columns  of  white  marble  are  to  be  seen  near
the  sea.  A  number  of  inscriptions  have  been  found  at  Pagae,  especially
in  or  near  the  ruined  church  of  the  Panagia  in  the  \'illag^  of  Al^
Chori  {€,  L  G,  G,  S,  Nos.  18S-206;  BulUtin  de  Corr,  Hell/nique,  a
(1880),  p.  66  sq.  ;  /V/.,  9  (1885),  p.  321  sq. ;  Collitz,  G.  D.  I,  3.  Nos.
3105-31 13).  Some  of  the  inscriptions  seem  to  pro\-e  that  in  later
times  Pagae  was  independent  (C.  /.  G.  G.  S.  Nos,  188,  190,  193,  195).
One  of  the  inscriptions  records  the  dedication  of  a  statue  of  the  emperor
Tiberius  by  some  men  of  Pagae  (C.  /.  G.  G.  S.  Na  195).  As  to
Pagae  see  Le  Bas,  in  Rr^'^ue  ArcMMogique^  i  (1844),  p.  172  sqq.x
Bursian,  Geogr.  i.  p.  38 1.

44.  4.  a  bronse  image  of  Savionr  Artemis  etc  Cp.  L  40.  2  sq.
with  the  note.

44.  4-  he  was  slain  at  Glisas  etc.     Cp.   i.   43.    i  ;   ix   5.  13
Apollodonis,  iiL  7.  3 ;  Hyginus,  Fab.  71.


CH.  XLiv  AEGOSTHENA  543

44.  5.  Aegosthena.  The  ruins  of  Aegosthena  are  situated  on  the
western  shore  of  the  Megarian  territory,  at  the  head  of  a  bay  now  called
Porto  Germano^  which  is  enclosed  on  the  north  by  a  western  prolongation
of  Mt.  Cithaeron,  and  on  the  south  by  the  mountains  of  Megara.  The
hills  which  rise  steeply  behind  Aegosthena  are  clothed  with  fine  fir-
woods,  and  the  traveller  obtains  beautiful  views  as  he  descends  through
them  to  the  shore  of  the  bay.  The  walls  of  Aegosthena  are  amongst  the
finest  and  best  preserved  of  ancient  Greek  fortifications.  They  are
12  feet  thick,  faced  outside  and  inside  with  squared  blocks,  while  the
intermediate  space  is  filled  with  small  stones  bonded  with  mortar.
Where  the  wall  is  standing  to  its  full  original  height,  it  is  12  to  16  feet
high  according  to  the  inequalities  of  the  ground.  It  is  best  preserved  on
the  eastern  side,  where  there  are  four  square  towers,  one  at  each  comer
and  two  in  the  middle.  The  tower  at  the  north-east  comer  is  2 1  feet
square ;  it  projects  8|feet  beyond  the  line  of  the  wall,  and  rises  to  a
height  of  16  to  20  feet  above  it.  Up  to  the  height  of  the  wall  the  tower
is  constructed  of  solid  masonry ;  but  from  the  top  of  the  wall  a  door
7  feet  high  and  3  feet  3  inches  wide  leads  into  it  The  next  two  towers
on  the  east  side  are  not  preserved  to  any  great  height  ;  they  measure
18  to  19  feet  square.  But  the  fourth  tower,  at  the  south-east  comer,  is
complete  with  the  exception  of  the  roof  and  the  wooden  floors  and  stair-
cases in  the  inside.  The  roof  had  two  low  gables  facing  north  and  south.
From  the  foot  of  the  tower  to  the  top  of  the  gable  there  are,  on  the
south  side,  30  courses  of  square  blocks  in  position.  On  this  side  the
tower  has  two  loopholes  for  arrows ;  they  are  exactly  in  the  middle  of
the  tower,  one  above  the  other,  the  first  being  in  the  fourteenth  course,
and  the  second  in  the  twenty-seventh.  Above  the  twenty-seventh  course
there  are  three  windows  side  by  side ;  judged  by  the  eye  they  measure
2^  to  3  feet  square  each.  The  stones  of  the  lowest  course  are  from
2  feet  2  inches  to  3  feet  high ;  the  stones  of  the  fourteenth  course  are
2  feet  high  ;  and  in  the  upper  courses  they  diminish  still  further  in  height.
The  height  of  the  tower,  estimated  from  the  number  and  height  of  the
courses,  must  be  about  60  feet ;  it  thus  rises  about  45  feet  above  the
level  of  the  wall.  So  high  a  tower  must  have  been  intended  to  serve  as
a  look-out  place,  which  was  especially  needed  in  the  narrow,  rugged,  and
densely  wooded  valley  in  which  Aegosthena  stands.  (All  the  foregoing
measurements  are  in  German  feet  and  inches,  being  taken  from  the  work
of  L.  Ross,  cited  below.)

A  good  many  inscriptions  have  been  found  on  the  site,  some  of
which  serve  to  identify  it  as  Aegosthena.  From  several  of  them  we  leam
that  copies  of  public  decrees,  engraved  on  stone,  were  set  up  in  the
sanctuary  of  Melampus  of  which  Pausanias  speaks  (C  /.  G,  G.  S,
Nos.  207,  208,  223  ;  Cauer,  Delectus  Inscr,  Graec,  Nos.  104,  283  ;
Collitz,  G,  D,  I.  3.  No.  3094).  From  another  inscription  it  appears
that  a  festival  of  Melampus,  with  games,  was  held  at  Aegosthena
(C  /.  G.  G,  S,  No.  219;  Collitz,  G.  D,  I,  3.  No.  3093);  this  confirms
Pausanias's  statement  that  the  people  of  Aegosthena  celebrated  an
annual  festival  in  honour  of  Melampus.  Another  inscription  records
that  "Aurelius  Zeno  and  Apollonia,  with  their  children,  dedicated  the


544  AEGOSTHENA  bk.  i.  attica

fore-temple  (t^  icpovaiov)  to  the  gods  at  their  own  expense "  (C.  /.  G,
G,  S,  No.  225).  Another  inscription  mentions  a  sanctuary  of  Hercules
(C,  /,  G.  G.  S.  No.  213).  Statues  of  Roman  emperors  appear  to  have
been  set  up  by  the  city  (C  /.  G,  G.  5.  Nos.  226,  227).  As  a  number
of  the  public  documents  of  Aegosthena,  preserved  in  inscriptions,  are
dated  by  the  archons  of  Onchestus  (C  /.  G,  G,  S.  Nos.  209-212,
214-218,  220-222),  as  well  as,  in  most  cases,  by  the  archons  of
Aegosthena,  we  learn  that  for  some  time  Aegosthena  was  a  member  of
the  Boeotian  confederacy  (see  note  on  ix.  26.  5).

Aegosthena  is  rarely  mentioned  by  ancient  writers.  In  the  winter
of  379/378  B.C.  when  the  Lacedaemonian  army  under  Cleombrotus  i^-as
retreating  from  Boeotia,  they  marched  by  the  coast  from  Creusis  to
Aegosthena.  Between  these  two  places,  as  they  were  defiling  along  a
path  which  ran  on  the  face  of  the  sea-cliffs,  they  were  overtaken  by  so
violent  a  storm  that  many  of  the  baggage  asses  were  hurled  over  the
edge  of  the  cliff,  and  many  of  the  men's  shields  were  blown  away  into
the  sea.  The  others  saved  their  shields  by  leaving  them  on  the  ground
filled  with  stones  and  returning  next  day  from  Aegosthena  to  fetch  them
(Xenophon,  Hellenica^  v.  4.  17  sq.)  Seven  years  later,  the  Lacedae-
monian army,  after  its  disastrous  defeat  at  Leuctra,  retreated  by  night
along  the  same  difficult  and  dangerous  road  to  Aegosthena,  where  they
were  met  by  reinforcements  under  Archidamus  (Xenophon,  HellerUca^
vi.  4.  25  j^.)  A  sweet  wine  was  produced  at  Aegosthena  (Athenaeus,
X.  p.  440  f).  The  place  is  also  mentioned  by  Scylax  {Periplus^  39),
Pliny  (iV.  H,  iv.  23),  and  Stephanus  Byzantius  (s,v,  Aiy6a'6€va).

On  Aegosthena  see  Leake,  iV.  Greece,  2.  pp.  373,  405-407 ;  Le  Bas,  in  /^evue
Archhlogiqtte,  I  (1844),  pp.  1 68- 1 72;  L.  Ross,  Archdologiscke  Aufsdtze,  i.  p.
236  sq.  ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  381  sq.  For  the  inscriptions  of  Aegosthena  see
Le  Bas,  Lc.  ;  F.  DUrrbach,  in  Bulletin  de  Corr,  HellSniqtu,  9(1885),  pp.  318-
321 ;  CoUitz,  G.  D.  I.  3.  Nos.  3091 -3 104 ;  C  /.  G,  G,  S.  Nos.  207-234.

44.  5.  a  sanctuary  of  Melampns.  Mr.  A.  B.  Cook  has  recently
adduced  some  specious  reasons  for  holding  that  Melampus  was  originally
a  goat-deity,  (i)  The  name  Melampus  (* black-foot')  may  well  have
been  a  descriptive  epithet  of  the  goat.  Such  descriptive  epithets  were
applied  by  the  ancient  Greeks  to  other  animals  (cp.  e.£^.  Hesiod,  Works
and  Days,  57i)>  and  are  still  applied  by  superstitious  people  in  various
parts  of  the  world  to  animals  which  they  revere  or  dread,  and  which
therefore  they  are  shy  of  calling  by  their  proper  names.  For  example,
Swedish  herd  girls  are  careful  not  to  call  the  wolf  and  the  bear  by  their
proper  names,  because  they  think  that  if  these  beasts  heard  themselves
so  called  they  would  attack  the  cattle.  Hence  the  herd  girls  call  the
wolf  "  grey  legs,"  "  golden  tooth,"  "  the  silent  one  "  ;  and  the  bear  they
call  "golden  feet,"  "the  old  man,"  etc.  (L.  Lloyd,  Peasant  U/e  in
Sweden,  p.  251).  (2)  The  first  part  of  the  name  of  Aegosthena,  the
town  in  which  Melampus  was  worshipped,  seems  certainly  to  be
derived  from  the  Greek  word  for  *  goat '  (a/jr,  atgos),  (3)  On  a  coin
of  Aegosthena  we  have  as  a  type  a  child  suckled  by  a  goat  (Imhoof-
Blumer  and  Gardner,  Num.  Contm.  on  Paus,  p.  9,  with  pi.  A  i  the
last  coin  on  the  plate;    Head,  Historia  Nummorum,   p.  329).      The


CH.  XLiv  THE  ROAD  TO  CORINTH  545

child  is  probably  Melampus.  For  similar  tales  were  told  of  many
illustrious  men,  and  Melampus  was  the  chief  hero  of  Aegosthena.  The
legend  was  perhaps  invented  to  explain  away  the  animal  affinity  of
Melampus  at  a  time  when  the  worshipful  animal  was  passing  into  an
anthropomorphic  divinity.  (4)  The  same  transition  seems  to  have
been  effected  in  another  way  by  declaring  that  Melampus  was  not  a
goat  but  a  goat-herd  (cp.  Pliny,  N,  H,  xxv.  47).  (5)  Melampus  was
chiefly  famed  for  his  power  of  curing  madness  (cp.  Paus.  ii.  18.  4,
v.  5.  10,  viii.  18.  7  sq.)\  a  species  of  hellebore,  which  the  ancients
regarded  as  a  remedy  for  insanity,  was  named  Melampodium  after
Melampus  (Pliny,  N.  H,  xxv.  47  and  49).  Now  it  is  significant  in
this  connexion  that  when  Dionysus  was  invoked  to  cure  madness,  he
was  addressed  as  Melanaegis,  i.e,  ^  he  of  the  black  goat-skin '  (Suidas,
s,v.  fi€\avaiyi8a  Atovvo-ov).  See  A.  B.  Cook,  *  Descriptive  animal
names  in  Greece,'  Classical  Review^  8  (1894),  p.  381  sqq.y  especially
p.  384  sq,

44.  5.  Erenea,  a  Megarian  village.  Leake  conjectured  that
Erenea  may  have  occupied  the  site  of  the  modem  Koundoura,  a  village
about  ten  miles  north-east  of  Megara,  on  the  road  to  Eleutherae  and
Thebes.  The  road  which  leads  from  the  plain  of  Megara  to  Koundoura
passes  through  a  remarkable  gorge  in  the  mountains ;  the  entrance  to
the  gorge  is  between  two  grand  crags  (Leake,  N.  Greece^  2.  pp.  374,
408;  Cruide-Joanne^  2.  p.  191).

44.  5.  the  death  of  Actaeon.     See  ix.  2.  3,  with  the  note.

44.  6.  Among  the  graves  on  the  road  from  Megara  to  Ck)rinth.
From  Megara  Pausanias  proceeds  to  Corinth  by  the  road  which  kept
along  the  southern  shore  of  the  Megarian  territory,  close  to  the  sea.
The  modem  highroad  and  railway  from  Megara  to  Corinth  follow  the
same  route.  Pausanias  would  thus  pass  through  the  necropolis  which
may  still  be  seen  a  little  to  the  south-west  of  Megara.  Most  of  the
tombs  are  at  the  point  where  the  footpath  called  Tourkodromos  (*  the
Turk's  road ')  diverges  to  the  right  from  the  carriage-road,  striking  up
the  hill  to  cut  off  the  long  bend  made  by  the  carriage-road  which  skirts
the  sea.  Some  of  the  tombs  are  hewn  in  the  rock  :  others  are  built  of
common  stone.  Of  the  vases,  statuettes,  and  other  antiquities  which
have  been  found  in  these  graves,  some  are  preserved  at  Megara ;  others
have  been  sent  for  sale  to  Corinth  and  Athens.  In  the  midst  of  this
necropolis  the  foundations  of  a  stmcture  of  some  size  (about  75  feet
long  by  30  feet  wide)  were  discovered  and  excavated  by  Mr.  Philios  in
1889.  They  are  situated  on  the  right  bank  of  a  small  water-course,  a
few  yards  to  the  north  of  the  first  stone  railway-bridge  after  you  leave
Megara.  Mr.  Philios  conjectures  that  this  edifice,  surrounded  by
graves,  may  have  been  the  tomb  of  Telephanes  mentioned  by
Pausanias.  The  fragment  of  a  large  marble  wing,  probably  from  a
figure  of  Victory  of  more  than  life-size,  was  found  on  the  spwt ;  and
hence  Lolling  suggested  that  the  stmcture  may  have  been  a  trophy
rather  than  a  tomb.  See  H.  G.  Lolling,  in  *E<fyqfji€pls  dpxaioXoytKrjy
1887,  p.  201  sqq,  (what  Lolling  here  conjectured  to  be  the  tomb  of
Telephanes  tumed  out  to  be  an  ancient  farmhouse  or  villa)  ;  UpaKTiK^

VOL.  II  2  N


546  THE  SCI  RON  IAN  ROAD  wsl.  i,  ath


rrj^  'Apx<uoX,   'Eraipuiq,   1 889,  p.   25  sg. ;  D.   Philios^  in
dpxaioXoyucrfj  1 890,  p.  21  i^f.,  especially  pp.  49-52,  62.

The  fluteplayer  Telephanes  was  a  amtemporary  of  DemosdieDCS.
who  speaks  of  him  in  friencUy  terms  (xxL  17,  p.  520).  He  is  mcndflned
also  by  Athenaeus  (viii.  p.  351  e).  The  epitaph  on  his  tomb  bf
Nicarchus  is  preserved  in  the  Anthology  (Anthol.  Palat.  tiL  i  59).

44.  6.  a  tomb  of  Gar.  About  half  an  hour  to  the  soatb-west  of
Megara  are  two  conical  hillocks  known  as  KourmdmUn.  The  late
H.  G.  Lolling  conjectured  that  the  larger  of  the  two  (about  90  feet  high)
might  have  been  the  tomb  of  Car.  But  excavations  proved  that  bodi
hillocks  were  natural  elevations,  not  artificial  mounds  raised  over  the
dead.  This,  however,  would  not  exclude  the  possibility  that  one  of  die
hillocks  may  have  been  regarded  by  the  ancients  as  the  tooib  of  the
legendary  Car.  But  Lolling  afterwards  withdrew  his  conjectnre.  See
'E^/ic/MS  ^\aiVo\xr/ucq^  1 887,  p.  207  sq. ;  npcurruca  r^  *A/>xaiioA.
*Eraipiia$,  1 889,  p.  25  sq. ;  'Eif>rffup!is  apxa^oXoyuc/jj  1890,  pp.  25-28,
62.

44.  6.  mnaiel-stoiie.     This  stone  is  described  by  Dodwell  (TVwr,

2.  p.  1 78)  as  *'  a  soft  and  porous  compound  of  petrified  shells  and  marine
substances,  that  are  easily  decomposed  and  cnmibled  into  dust."  He
adds  in  a  note :  *Mt  is  composed  chiefly  of  cockle-shells,  resembling
the  stone  of  the  temple  of  Jupiter  at  Olympia,  except  that  it  is  more
compact."  Prof.  £.  Curtius  says  that  the  Megarian  heights  are  mosdy
composed  of  a  conglomerate  of  sea  mussels  (PelaponnesaSj  i.  p.  8)^
According  to  Fiedler  there  are  rocks  near  Megara  which  are  largely
composed  of  bivalve  mussels  (Reise^  i.  p.  221).  Bursian  writes  that
Mt.  Gerania  partly  consists  of  '*a  calcareous  tufi^  of  a  dirty  >'ellow
colour  and  filled  with  numerous  mussels,  of  which  almost  all  the  houses
of  the  present  miserable  little  town  of  Megara  are  built"  (Bursian,
Geogr.  I.  p.  368).  He  supposes  that  the  white  mussel-stone  described
by  Pausanias  was  a  finer  sort  of  the 'same  stone,  which  the  ancients
used  for  grand  buildings  and  for  sculpture  :  Cicero  speaks  of  M^arian
statues  {EpisL  ad  Atticum^  i.  8  and  9).  Neumann  and  Partsch  think
that  by  mussel-stone  was  meant  "a  white  fresh-u'ater  chalk,  in  which
two  kinds  of  Melanopsis  and  other  shells  exist  in  incredible  quantities "
{Physikalisclu  Geographie  van  Griechenland^  p.  268).  Cp.  K.  O.
Miiller,  Handbuch  der  ArchdologU^  §  268.   i  ;  Blumner,   Technologies

3.  p.  59.  On  the  geology  of  Mt  Gerania  see  Philippson,  Peloponnes,
p.  18  sqq,

44.  6.  Tlie  road  which  is  still  named  after  Sdnm  etc  This
famous  pass  along  the  sea-clififs,  known  in  antiquity  as  the  Scironian
Road  (Herodotus,  viii.  71),  is  thus  described  by  Strabo  (ix.  p.  391):
"  The  Scironian  cliffs  leave  no  passage  between  them  and  the  sea.  The
road  from  the  Isthmus  to  M^ara  and  Attica  nms  along  the  top  of
them  ;  indeed  in  many  places  it  is  compelled  by  the  beetling  mountain,
which  is  high  and  inaccessible,  to  skirt  the  brink  of  the  precipices.**
The  dread  of  robbers,  who  here  lay  in  wait  for  travellers  (Alciphron,
iii.  70),  enhanced  the  natural  horrors  of  the  pass  in  ancient  as  well  as  in
modem  times.     In  recent  years  these  horrors  have  been  dissipated  by


CH.  XLiv  THE  SCIRONIAN  ROAD  547

the  construction  of  a  highroad  and  a  railway  along  the  coast ;  but  down
to  the  middle  of  the  present  century,  if  we  may  trust  the  descriptions  of
travellers,  the  cliff-path  well  deserved  its  modem  name  of  Kake  Skala
or  *  the  Evil  Staircase.'  For  six  miles  it  ran  along  a  narrow,  crumbling
ledge  half-way  up  the  face  of  an  almost  sheer  cliff,  at  a  height  of  six  to
seven  hundred  feet  above  the  sea.  On  the  right  rose  the  rock  like  a
wall ;  on  the  left  yawned  the  dizzy  abyss,  where,  far  below,  the  waves
broke  at  the  foot  of  the  precipices  in  a  broad  sheet  of  white  curdling
foam.  So  narrow  was  the  path  that  only  a  single  sure-footed  beast
could  make  its  way  with  tolerable  security  along  it.  In  stormy  or
gusty  weather  it  was  dangerous ;  a  single  slip  or  stumble  would  have
been  fatal.  When  two  trains  of  mules  met,  the  difficulty  of  passing
each  other  was  extreme.  Indeed  at  the  beginning  of  the  present
century  Colonel  Leake  pronounced  the  path  impassable  for  horses  ;  and
at  a  later  time,  when  it  had  been  somewhat  mended,  another  dis-
tinguished traveller,  himself  a  Swiss,  declared  that  he  knew  of  no  such
giddy  track,  used  by  horses,  in  all  Switzerland.  In  many  places  the
narrow  path  had  been  narrowed  still  further  by  its  outer  edge  having
given  way  and  slid  into  the  depths,  so  that  it  was  only  by  using  the
utmost  caution  that  the  traveller  was  able  to  scramble  along  at  all.  At
one  point,  where  it  crossed  the  mouth  of  a  gully,  the  road  had  com-
pletely disappeared,  having  either  fallen  into  the  sea  or,  according  to
another  account,  been  blown  up  in  the  War  of  Independence.  Here
therefore  the  wayfarer  was  obliged  to  pick  his  steps  down  a  breakneck
track  which  zig-zagged  down  to  the  narrow  strip  of  beach,  from  which
he  had  laboriously  to  clamber  up  by  a  similar  track  on  the  opposite  side
of  the  gully.  One  traveller  has  graphically  described  how  his  baggage-
horses  slid  and  slipt  on  their  hind  feet  down  one  of  these  tracks,  while
their  drivers  hung  on  to  the  tails  of  the  animals  to  check  their  too
precipitate  descent.  Last  century  the  path  had  ceased  to  be  used  even
by  foot-passengers.  Chandler  took  boat  at  Nisaea  and  coasted  along
the  foot  of  the  cliffs,  looking  up  with  amazement  at  the  narrow  path
carried  along  the  edge  of  perpendicular  precipices  above  the  breakers
and  supported  so  slenderly  beneath  "  that  a  spectator  may  reasonably
shudder  with  horror  at  the  idea  of  crossing."

Nothing  was  easier  than  to  make  such  a  path  impassable.  Accord-
ingly when  word  reached  Peloponnese  that  Leonidas  and  his  men  had
been  annihilated  by  the  Persians  at  Thermopylae,  the  Peloponnesians
hurried  to  the  Isthmus,  blocked  up  the  Scironian  road,  and  built  a
fortification-wall  across  the  Isthmus  (Herodotus,  viii.  71).  In  modem
times,  though  the  path  had  fallen  into  decay,  it  still  showed  traces  of
having  been  used  and  cared  for  in  antiquity.  In  many  places  the  marks
of  the  chariot-wheels  were  visible  in  the  rock ;  in  other  places  there
were  remains  of  massive  substructions  of  masonry  which  had  once
supported  and  widened  the  road ;  and  here  and  there  pieces  of  ancient
pavement  were  to  be  seen.  These  were  probably  vestiges  of  the
carriage-road  which,  as  Pausanias  tells  us,  the  emperor  Hadrian  con-
structed along  this  wild  and  beautiful  coast.  At  the  present  day,  as  the
traveller  is  whirled  along  it  in  the  train,  he  is  struck  chiefly  by  the  blue-


S48  THE  MOLURIAN  ROCK  bk.  l  attica

ness  of  the  sea  and  the  greenness  of  the  thick  pine-woods  which  mantie
the  steep  shelving  sides  of  the  mountains.

SeeWheler,y<?tfrmr;r,  p.  436 ;  Chandler,  Trarels  in  Grtece,  p.  197  //.  ;  Leake,
iVl  Greece^  2.  p.  413  s^i/, ;  More,  JoumeU^  2.  p.  136  j^.  ;  Fiedler,  Reiu^  I.  ppi
222-224 ;  Welcker,  Tagelmck^  I.  p  163  sq.  ;  E.  Curtitis,  Pelopcntuscs^  I.  p.  9ic. :
\1scher,  Erinnerungen  und  Einaruckt,  p.  225  sqq. ;  W.  G.  Clark,  Ptlapemmtsui^
42  x^^. ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  368 ;  Belle,  Trois  Annies  en  Grice^  p.  250  /v. :
Baedeker,'  p.  153  sq.  For  other  mentioos  of  the  Sdronian  daSs  bj  aadeo:
writers  see  Euripides,  Hippolytus^  120S  ;  <</.,  HeracUdae^  S60 :  Polybias,  xri.  16;
Apollodoms,  ii.  8.  i  ;  m.,  Epitoma  Vaticana^  ed.  R.  Wagner,  p.  54  ;  Jijtis-
grapki  Groidj  ed.  R.  Wagner,  I.  p.  173 ;  Diodoms,  ir.  59 ;  T^nrfin.  I>i£cp
Mctriniy  viiL  I:  Hesychins,  J.r.  CKdpta9%  Stephanas  Byncdas,  j.r.  T«,>qt ;
0\-id,  Metam.  viL  447;  Seneca,  Hippclytus^  102^  1225;  [Mrgil,]  Ceri>.  465:
Mela,  IL  47 ;  Pliny,  iV.  ZT.  iv.  23.  The  name  Scironian  rxxks  was  applied  bc^
in  a  general  sense  to  the  whole  line  of  clifis  (Pliny.  A*  H.  iv.  23U  and  iz  1
restricted  sense  to  the  particular  cliff  from  which  Sdron  was  supposed  to  har^s
kicked  his  victims  into  the  sea  (see  below,  L  44.  8).

44.  6.  war  minister  of  Hegum.  The  existence  of  a  board  of
officiab  called  War  Ministers  \PaUmarcJun^  at  Megara  in  hzsiorical
tinoes  is  attested  by  inscriptions  (C.  L  G,  G.  S.  Xos.  27,  28  ;  CoUhz.
G.  D.  L  3.  Nos.  3020,  3021.  The  board  seems  to  have  consisted  of
n^-e  niembers.

44.  7-  tliA  Mdlinijui  rock Ino Melieerteab     A  scholiast

on  Pindar  {IstMm.  Introd.  p.  515,  ed  Boeckh)  and  Tzetzes  {SJu?L  cm
LycopAratLf  229)  agree  in  saying  that  Ino  fled  with  the  in£ant  Melicenes
o\-er  Mount  Gerania  and  flung  herself  and  him  into  the  sea  finom  the
Molurian  rock.  Zenobius  sa>-s  (iv.  ^Z)  that  *^Ino  cast  herseif  with
Melicertes  into  the  sea  at  the  Molurian  rock"  (=•/»?  Tt>  MoAoi-pco-.
Ludan  says,  less  exactly,  that  Ino  and  Melicertes  fell  from  the  Scirocian
rocks  {Dialogi  Marzm\  \-iiL  i)l  The  Molurian  rock  is  mentioned
along  with  the  Sdronian  sea  in  an  epigram  of  Simonides,  as  emended
by  Hemsterhuys  {AntAoL  Palat.  viL  496  :  Poi*iu  Lrriii  Groici^  ed.
Bergk,*  3.  pi  1 1 58) ;  but  the  manuscript  reading  •  Methurian  *  may  be
right,  for  according  to  Pliny  (.\'  H.  iv.  57)  there  were  foor  islands
called  the  Methurian  islands  in  the  gulf  of  Megara.

Melicertes  is  supposed  by  some  to  be  identical  v.-!th  the  Phoenician
Melcart  (Movers,  Z^V /'it^^rljrVr,  i.  p.  434:  J.  de  Witte,  •M^ccrte.'
Gasette  Arckiolcgwue^  5  (iSrgK  pp.  217-221  :  Ed.  Meyer,  GesL/i.  J,
Altirtkitms^  2.  p.  14.6).  It  is  said  that  in&nts  were  sacrinced  to
Melicertes  in  Tenedos  (Tretzcs,  5uX*.V.  en  LyccpkrcfL,  229!

44.  7.  te  peicei¥ed  that  the  fMoaaoit  wUdi  had  Tisted  As
OtdlollMlliJaiS  etc.  The  story  to  which  Pausanias  refi»rs  is  told  thus
by  Zenobius  (iv.  38) :  "Adbamas  had  trst  married  Nephele  and  >»^d  by
her  two  children,  Helle  and  Phrixus.  When  Xephcle  died  he  married
a  second  wife,  Ino,  who  plotted  a^^ainst  Nephele's  children  and  pc-
suaded  the  women  of  the  cooncry  to  roast  the  seed-com.  TTins  the
earth,  being  sown  with  roasted  seed,  did  not  yield  its  yearly  crops^  So
Athanaas  sent  to  Delphi  and  inquired  :he  cause  of  the  dearth.  B:s
Ino  bribed  :he  messengers  tc  say  on  their  rerjr:i  that  die  god  had
announced  that,  if  ±ey  would  be  rji.  of  the  dearth.  Heile  and  Phrixus
must  be  sacrinced.     So  A±amas  hearkened  to  them  and  hnxxgltt  Heile


CH.  XLiv  FUNERAL  GAMES  549

and  Phrixus  to  the  altar.  But  the  gods  in  pity  carried  them  away
through  the  air  on  the  ram  with  the  golden  fleece ;  and  Athamas  they
smote  with  madness  and  so  brought  retribution  on  I  no."  The  same
story  is  told  with  some  variations  of  detail  by  Hyginus  {Fab.  2).

44.  8.  the  Isthmian  games  were  held  in  his  honour.  Cp.  ii.  i.  3.
According  to  a  scholiast  on  Pindar  {Isihtn,  Introd.  p.  514,  ed.  Boeckh),
when  the  corpse  of  Melicertes  was  washed  ashore  on  the  Isthmus  a
famine  came  upon  the  city  of  Corinth,  and  an  oracle  declared  that  the
evil  would  not  cease  till  the  people  paid  the  due  obsequies  to  Melicertes
and  honoured  him  with  funeral  games.  The  Corinthians  complied  with
the  injunction  for  a  short  time  ;  but  as  soon  as  they  omitted  to  celebrate
the  games,  the  famine  broke  out  afresh,  and  the  oracle  informed  them
that  the  honours  paid  to  the  hero  Melicertes  must  be  eternal.  Cp.
Clement  of  Alexandria,  Protrept.  ii.  34,  p.  29,  ed.  Potter ;  Apollodorus,
iii.  4.  3;  Zenobius,  iv.  38;  Tzetzes,  SchoL  on  Lycophron^  107,  229;
Schol.  on  Euripides,  Medea^  1284  ;  Hyginus,  Fc^.  2.

It  is  noteworthy  that  all  the  most  famous  Greek  games,  the  Isthmian,
Nemean,  Olympian,  and  Pythian,  are  said  by  some  ancient  writers  to
have  been  originally  funeral  games.  The  Isthmian  games  were  held  in
honour  of  the  dead  Melicertes  ;  the  Nemean  in  honour  of  Opheltes  (see
note  on  ii.  15.  2)  ;  the  Olympian  in  honour  of  Pelops,  according  to
Clement  of  Alexandria  (/.r.) ;  and  the  Pythian  in  honour  of  the  slain  Python
(Clement  of  Alexandria,  Lc. ;  Hyginus,  Fab.  140).  The  tradition  will
not  seem  improbable  when  we  remember  that  in  the  Homeric  age  games
were  held  on  a  great  scale  in  honour  of  a  departed  warrior  (Homer,  //.
xxiii.),  and  that  even  in  historical  times  the  Greeks  commemorated
many  of  their  illustrious  dead  by  the  periodical  celebration  of  games.
Among  the  men  thus  honoured  were  Miltiades  at  the  Thracian  Cher-
sonese (Herodotus,  vi.  38),  Leonidas  and  Pausanias  at  Sparta  (Pau-
sanias,  iii.  14.  i ),  Brasidas  at  Amphipolis  (Thucydides,  v.  11),  Timoleon
at  Syracuse  (Plutarch,  Timoleon^  39),  and  Mausolus  at  Halicamassus
(Aulus  Gellius,  x.  18.  5  sq.)  Games  were  periodically  celebrated  at
Plataea  in  honour  of  the  men  who  had  fallen  in  the  Persian  war  (Paus.
ix.  2.  5),  and  at  the  Academy  in  honour  of  the  men  who  had  perished
in  the  service  of  Athens  (note  on  i.  30.  i,  p.  390).

Other  peoples  have  practised  similar  customs.  At  Rome  funeral
games  were  held  and  gladiators  fought  in  honour  of  distinguished  men
(Livy,  Epit.  xvi. ;  /V/.,  xxiii.  30.  15  ;  /V/.,  xxxi.  50.  4  ;  /V/.,  xxxix.  46.  2  ;
Polybius,  xxxii.  14.  5  ;  Servius,  on  Virgil,  Aen.  iii.  67).  In  Circassia
the  anniversary  of  the  death  of  a  distinguished  warrior  or  chief  is
celebrated  for  years  with  horse-races,  foot-races,  and  various  kinds  of
martial  and  athletic  exercises,  prizes  being  given  to  the  successful
competitors  (J.  Potocki,  Voyage  dans  les  Steps  d Astrakhan  et  du  Cau-
case^  Paris,  1829,  i.  p.  275  x^.  ;  Edmund  Spencer,  Travels  in  Circassian
Krim  Tartary^  etc.,  London,  1836,  2.  p.  399).  Among  the  Chewsurs,
another  people  of  the  Caucasus,  horse-races  are  held  at  the  funeral  of
a  rich  man,  and  prizes  of  cattle  and  sheep  are  given  to  the  winners :
poorer  people  content  themselves  with  a  competition  in  shooting  and
with  more  modest  prizes  (G.  Radde,  Die  Chewsuren  und  ihr  Land^


550  ZEUS  THE  HURLER  bk.  i.  attica

Cassel,  1878,  p.  95).  Among  the  Kirghiz  the  anniversary  of  the  death
of  a  rich  man  is  celebrated  with  a  great  feast  and  with  horse-races,
shooting  matches,  and  wrestling-matches.  It  is  said  that  thousands  of
sheep  and  hundreds  of  horses,  besides  slaves,  coats  of  mail  and  a  great
many  other  objects,  are  sometimes  distributed  as  prizes  among  the
winners  (A.  de  Levchine,  Description  des  hommes  ei  des  steppes  des
KirghiZ'Kazaks  ou  Khirgiz-Kcdsaks^  Paris,  1 840,  p.  367  sq, ;  H.  Vdm-
b^ry.  Das  Tiirkenz'olk^  Leipzig,  1885,  p.  255).  In  Lao,  a  district  of
Siam,  when  a  chief  dies,  "men  are  hired  to  engage  in  pugilistic
encounters,  being  paid,  victors  and  vanquished  alike,  from  four  to  twenty
rupees  apiece  for  the  honour  and  privilege  of  getting  a  black  eye  or
losing  their  front  teeth  in  memoriam  "  (C.  Bock,  Temples  and  ElepAantSy
London,  1884,  p.  262).  Among  some  of  the  North  American  Indians
contests  in  running,  shooting,  etc,  formed  part  of  the  funeral  celebration
(Charlevoix,  Histoire  de  la  Nouvelle  France^  Paris,  1744,  6.  p.  1 1 1).

44.  8.  A  tortoise  swam  at  the  foot  of  the  clifb  to  pounce  on
the  people  who  were  thrown  in.  Hence  Sciron  was  said  to  feed  the
tortoise  (Schol.  on  Euripides,  Hippolytus^  979)-  Cp.  Apollodonis,
Epitotna  Vaticana^  ed.  R.  Wagner,  p.  54  ;  Mythographi  Graeciy  ed.  R.
Wagner,  i.  p.  173;  [Virgil,]  Ciris^  466  sq,  Diodorus,  in  his  dull
rationalistic  manner,  says  that  the  tortoise  was  merely  the  name  of
the  cliff  from  which  Sciron  kicked  people  into  the  sea  (iv.  59).  The
death  of  Sciron  is  depicted  on  painted  vases  (see  note  on  ii.  i .  4)  ;  on
some  of  them  the  tortoise  is  represented  waiting  below  for  its  prey  (Th.
Panofka,  Der  Tod  des  Skiron  und  des  Patroclus^  pi.  i.  ;  Journal  of
Hellenic  Studies^  2  (1881),  pi.  x.)  The  death  of  Sciron  is  the  subject
of  one  of  the  sculptured  metopes  of  the  so-called  Theseum  at  Athens ;
but  here  the  animal  which  is  represented  looking  up  expectantly  at  Sciron
as  he  is  being  toppled  over  the  rock  by  Theseus  is  a  crab,  not  a  tortoise
(Panofka,  op,  cit.  p.  i  ;  A.  S.  Murray,  History  of  Greek  Sculpture^^  i.
p.  278).

44.  9.  a  temple  of  Zeus,  who  is  here  called  Hurler.  The  site  of
this  sanctuary  was  recognised  by  H.  G.  Lolling  in  1887,  and  was  ex-
cavated for  the  Greek  Archaeological  Society  by  Mr.  Philios  in  1889.
The  place,  now  called  Sta  Martnara^  is  about  an  hour  and  a  half  to
the  south-west  of  Megara,  on  an  eminence  above  the  road  to  Corinth.
Though  situated  only  at  the  roots  of  the  mountains,  it  is  about  850  feet
above  the  sea  and  commands  an  uninterrupted  view  over  the  whole
Saronic  Gulf.  The  foundations  of  the  temple  were  brought  to  light
It  was  a  tiny  building  about  20  feet  long  and  14  feet  wide ;  and  con-
sisted of  a  single  chamber  or  cella  with  a  portico  facing  south-east.
Three  courses  of  the  foundations,  of  common  stone,  are  preserved,  and
some  fragments  of  triglyphs  were  found.  About  15  yards  south-east
of  the  temple,  but  not  opposite  nor  parallel  to  it,  are  the  remains  of  a
rectangular  structure,  probably  an  altar.  Immediately  to  the  west  of
the  little  temple  are  the  foundations  of  a  number  of  halls  or  chambers
built  round  a  courtyard.  In  three  of  these  chambers  there  are  remains
of  stone  couches  extending  round  the  walls ;  from  which  it  would  seem
that  the  chambers  were  banqueting-rooms.     Two  of  these  three  chambers


CH.  XLiv  ZEUS  THE  HURLER  551

are  on  the  north  of  the  courtyard ;  the  third,  larger  than  the  other  two,
is  on  the  south.  In  a  fourth  chamber,  on  the  western  side  of  the  court-
yard, there  is  a  shallow  circular  depression  paved  with  burnt  bricks,
from  which  a  short  channel,  also  paved  with  bricks,  leads  to  a  smaller
circular  depression  about  4  inches  deep.  There  was  probably  an
altar  here.  A  fifth  chamber,  considerably  larger  than  any  of  the  pre-
ceding chambers,  is  situated  at  the  north-east  comer  of  the  court.  It
is  about  44  feet  long  from  north  to  south,  by  about  28  feet  wide  from
east  to  west.  Its  eastern  and  western  walls,  built  of  blocks  of  common
stone  laid  lengthways,  are  preserved  to  a  gpreater  height  than  any  of  the
other  walls  of  the  sanctuary.  On  three  sides  of  this  large  chamber
there  are  vestiges  which  seem  to  show  that  stone  seats  extended  round
the  walls.  Besides  these  five  chambers  there  are  six  small  rooms  on
the  east  and  south-east  sides  of  the  courtyard :  the  remains  of  their
walls,  built  of  small  stones  bonded  with  clay,  prove  that  these  small
rooms  belong  to  a  later  period  than  the  other  chambers.  Amongst  the
very  few  fragments  of  sculpture  discovered  on  the  site  is  a  limestone
relief  representing  a  g^ffin.  Some  pieces  of  clay  figures  of  animals
(lions  and  a  pig)  were  found.  Many  fragments  of  painted  vases  were
also  brought  to  light,  including  black-figured  and  red-figured  sherds  and
a  good  many  fine  specimens  of  the  so-called  Corinthian  ware,  adorned
with  figures  of  animals  (mostly  lions),  birds,  Sirens,  and  sphinxes,  and
occasionally  men.  Three  of  the  potsherds  discovered  bear  fragmentary
inscriptions  (C  /.  G.  G.  S,  Nos.  3493,  3494,  3497)>  one  of  which
seems  to  have  contained  a  dedication  to  Zeus  the  Hurler  (C.  /.  G,  G,  S,
No.  3493,  </>€<r,  which  may  be  restored  [Atbs  *A]</>€<r[tov]  or  [Att
'A]<^(r[t<p).  This  confirms  the  identification  of  the  site  as  that  of
the  temple  mentioned  by  Pausanias.  With  regard  to  the  chambers
round  the  courtyard,  Mr.  Philios  believes  that  they  were  erected
for  the  use  of  the  attendants  on  the  shrine,  like  the  cloisters  and
chambers  at  the  sanctuary  of  Cranaean  Athena  near  Elataea  (Paus.  x.
34.  7  with  the  notes).  H.  G.  Lolling,  on  the  other  hand,  preferred  to
suppose  that  these  chambers  were  originally  a  private  dwelling-house,  to
which  a  sanctuary  was  afterwards  attached.  Similarly  the  house  of
Pulytion  was  converted  into  a  sanctuary  of  Dionysus  (Paus.  i.  2.  5)  ;
the  house  and  garden  of  Demo  were  consecrated  to  Aesculapius  (C  /.  A,
ii.  No.  1654;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr,  Graec,  No.  368);  and  a
certain  Dionysus  built  and  dedicated  to  Dionysus  a  temple  in  his  house
at  Piraeus  {Mittheil,  d,  arch,  InsL  in  Athen^  9  (1884),  pp.  279-298  ;
C.  Wachsmuth,  Die  Stadt  Athen  im  Alterthuniy  2.  p.  163  sq, ;  C  /.  A,
ii.  No.  1336).

See  Lolling,  in  *E0i;/ifp2$  dpx<M0^07i'"^>  1887,  p.  213  sqq,  ;  Ilpairrtffd  rrfi
* kffxpxoKviiKyfi  Ercupias,  1889,  p.  26  ;  Mittheil.  d,  arch,  Inst,  in  Athen,  14  (1889),
p.  327;  Philios,  in  'E^jucpij  opxatoXo7iinJ,  1890,  p.  35  sqq.^  63  sq, ;  Lolling,  ib,
p.  55  sqq.     As  to  the  epithet  *  Hurler,*  cp.  Critical  Note  on  the  passage.

44.  9.  the  tomb  of  Enrystheos  etc.  Apollodoms  says  (ii.  8.  i)
that  after  his  defeat  in  Attica  Eurystheus  fied  in  his  chariot,  but  that  in
driving  past  the  Scironian  rocks  he  was  overtaken  and  slain  by  Hyllus


552  LA  TO  AN  APOLLO        BK.  I.  attica,  ch.  xuv

(not  lolaus),  who  cut  off  his  head  and  brought  it  back  to  Alcmena.
Euripides  in  his  play  The  Heraclids  (z/.  859  sqq,)  says  that  lolaus  came
up  with  Eurystheus  at  the  Scironian  rocks,  took  him  prisoner,  and
brought  him  back  to  Alcmena,  who  caused  him  to  be  put  to  death.
According  to  another  tradition  the  body  of  Eurystheus  was  buried  in
the  Attic  township  of  Gargettus  and  his  head  at  Tricorythus  near
Marathon  (Strabo,  viii.  p.  377;  Stephanus  Byzantius,  s.v.  Tapyfirroi;
cp.  note  on  i.  32.  3,  p.  432).

44.  10.  Descending  from  this  road  we  come  to  a  sanctnajT  of
Latoan  Apollo  etc.  After  passing  the  long  line  of  the  Scironian  cliffs
the  road  descends  into  a  little  plain  beside  the  sea,  where  is  the  hamlet
of  Kineta,  The  sanctuary  of  Latoan  Apollo  was  probably  in  this
neighbourhood.  At  present  the  little  plain  is  almost  deserted,  though
the  olive-trees  which  grow  in  it  prove  that  the  soil  is  capable  of  culti\'a-
tion.  But  a  neighbouring  swamp  breeds  fever,  the  ravages  of  which  may
be  traced  on  the  pale,  sickly  inhabitants  of  the  wretched  hamlet.  The
road  runs  through  thick  underwood  and  up  and  down  smaU  eminences,
which  shut  out  the  view.  The  nature  of  the  ground  lends  itself  to  the
depredations  of  robbers,  who  used  to  skulk  in  the  dense  scrub  and
pounce  out  on  passing  travellers.  The  landscape  here  wore  a  very
pleasing  aspect  when  W.  G.  Clark  saw  it  on  an  April  day.  "  All  the
hill-side  was  starred  thick  with  the  white  and  lilac  flowers  of  the  sage-
leaved  cistus  and  hoary  with  grey  thyme  ;  and  further  ofl^  where  the  eye
could  no  longer  distinguish  the  separate  flowers,  it  presented  a  strange
glossy  surface,  like  a  lawn  covered  with  a  veil  of  silver  tissue.  Above
the  silvery  slope  a  wood  of  light-green,  round-topped  pines  shone  yellow-
ing in  the  sunlight,  mixed  with  plots  of  flowering  gorse.  The  air  was
filled  with  the  fragrance  of  the  thyme,  as  our  horses  trampled  and
cropped  it."

See  Fiedler,  ReisCy  i.  p.  224  ;  Vischer,  Erinnerungen  und EindrOcke^
p.  228  ;  W.  G.  Clark,  Peloponnesus^  p.  44  sq, ;  Bursian,  Geogr,  i.  p.  384.

44.    10.   HylliiB  engaged  in  single  combat  with

Echemns.     See  i.  41.  2  note.


APPENDIX

THE  PRE-PERSIAN  TEMPLE  ON  THE  ACROPOLIS  i

In  1886  the  excavations  conducted  by  the  Greek  Archaeological  Society  on
the  Acropolis  at  Athens  laid  bare  the  foundations  of  a  large  ancient  temple
immediately  to  the  south  of  the  Erechtheum.  It  was  at  once  recognised  that
this  temple  must  have  been  the  one  burnt  by  the  Persians  when  they  sacked
Athens  in  480  B.C.  This  conclusion  has  been  generally  accepted  and  there  is  no
ground  for  questioning  it.  But  Dr.  Dorpfeld,  who  superintended  the  excavations
and  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  a  detailed  plan  and  description  of  the  existing
remains,  has  propounded  a  theory  that  the  temple  was  rebuilt  by  the  Athenians
shortly  after  the  Persian  war,  and  that  it  continued  to  exist  as  late  certainly  as  the
second  century  of  our  era  and  probably  much  later.  If  Dr.  Dorpfeld  had  based
this  theory  on  the  nature  of  the  existing  architectural  remains,  his  judgment
might  well  have  been  regarded  as  final,  since  no  man  living  is  better  qualified
than  he  to  pronounce  an  opinion  on  all  questions  relating  to  Greek  architecture.
Certainly  I  for  one  would  not  have  presumed  to  differ  firom  him.  But  although
Dr.  Dorpfeld  believes  that  the  temple  was  twice  burnt  and  twice  rebuilt  by  the
Athenians,  he  does  not  maintain  that  a  single  stone  of  the  existing  remains  is  of
later  date  than  the  Persian  sack.  His  theory  of  the  restoration  of  the  temple
rests  almost  wholly  on  considerations  of  historical  probability  and  on  literary  and
epigraphical  evidence.  It  is  therefore  one  which  every  scholar  is  free  to  examine
and  estimate  for  himself.  I  have  lately  had  occasion  to  do  so  ;  and  an  attentive
and,  I  trust,  unprejudiced  consideration  of  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  evidence  has  led  me  to
the  conclusion  that  his  theory  is  open  to  grave,  if  not  insuperable,  objections.
These  objections  I  propose  to  state  in  the  present  paper.

It  will  conduce  to  clearness  if  I  begin  by  setting  forth  briefly,  first,  the  nature
of  the  existing  remains,  and,  second,  the  principal  arguments  on  which  Dr.
Dorpfeld  bases  his  theory.^

The  standing  remains  of  the  temple  are  situated  immediately  to  the  south  and

^  Reprinted,  with  a  few  slight  changes,  from  The  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  13
(1892.93),  pp.  153-187.

^  The  remains  of  the  temple  are  described,  with  a  ground  plan,  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld
in  the  Athenian  Mittheilungen  of  the  German  Archaeological  Institute,  vol.  xi.  (1886)
pp.  337-351.  His  theory  of  the  history  of  the  temple  is  stated  and  defended  by  him
ib.  xii.  (1887)  pp.  25-61,  190-211,  and  xv.  (1890)  pp.  420-439.  Objections  are
urged  by  Mr.  Eugen  Petersen,  ib.  xii.  pp.  62-72,  by  Mr.  K.  Wernicke,  ib.  xii.  pp.
184-189,  and  by  Mr.  H.  N.  Fowler  in  The  American  Journal  of  Archaeology,  viiL
(1893)  pp.  1-17.  Dr.  Ddrpfeld's  views  as  to  the  history  of  the  temple  are  accepted
partially  by  Dr.  Lolling  in  *A$riva,  ii.  (1890)  pp.  627-662,  and  wholly  by  Miss
Harrison  in  her  Mythology  and  Monuments  of  Ancient  Athens,  pp.  414  sqq. ,  496  sqq.,
though  she  differs  from  Dr.  Dorpfeld  as  to  the  passage  in  which  she  believes  Pau-
sanias  to  have  described  the  temple.


554  APPENDIX  BK.   I.  ATTICA

south-west  of  the  Erechtheum.  Though  they  consist  merely  of  foundations  and
of  a  single  stone  of  the  top  course  of  the  stylobate,  they  suffice  to  show  that  the
temple  was  of  the  common  peripteral  pattern  ;  i,e,  that  it  was  a  quadrangular
and  oblong  building,  surrounded  by  a  colonnade,  with  its  two  narrow  ends  facing
approximately  east  and  west.  The  length  of  the  temple,  exclusive  of  the  colon-
nade, was  about  33.5  metres  or  a  little  over  100  Attic  feet.^  The  interior  was
divided  into  two  somewhat  unequal  halves,  an  eastern  and  a  western,  separated
from  each  other  by  a  partition  wall  and  entered  by  separate  doors  at  the  east  and
west  ends.  The  eastern  half  of  the  temple  consisted  of  a  shallow  portico  at  the
east  end  and  a  large  inner  chamber,  the  cella  or  shrine  proper,  approached  through
the  portico.  The  western  and  somewhat  larger  half  of  the  temple  comprised  a
portico  at  the  west  end,  a  large  inner  chamber  approached  through  the  portico,
and  two  smaller  chambers  lying  north  and  south  of  each  other  and  situated
between  the  large  western  chamber  and  the  large  eastern  chamber  or  ceUtu
These  two  smaller  chambers  probably  opened  by  two  separate  doors  into  the
large  western  chamber,  not  into  the  cello.

The  foundations  of  the  temple  proper  are  built  of  the  hard  bluish  limestone
of  the  Acropolis ;  the  foundations  of  the  colonnade  are  built  of  a  reddish  grey
limestone  brought  from  Piraeus.  As  the  materials  of  the  two  sets  of  foundations
differ,  so  do  their  styles  of  masonry.  The  foundations  of  the  colonnade  are
decidedly  better  built  than  those  of  the  temple  proper,  the  superiority  being
evinced  both  in  the  greater  regularity  of  the  courses  and  in  the  more  accurate
jointing  of  the  individual  blocks.  These  differences  in  material  and  workmanship
between  the  foundations  of  the  colonnade  and  those  of  the  temple  proper  might
be  explained,  Dr.  Dorpfeld  tells  us,  on  the  supposition  that  the  builders  desired
to  construct  the  outer  foundation-walls  in  a  better  and  more  massive  style  ;  but
he  thinks  it  more  probable  that  the  temple  was  originally  built  without  a  colon-
nade, and  that  the  colonnade  was  a  later  embellishment  of  it.  From  a  compari-
son of  the  foundations  of  the  colonnade  with  those  of  buildings  which  are  known
to  belong  to  the  age  of  Pisistratus,  Dr.  Dorpfeld  infers  that  the  colonnade  was
added  to  the  temple  in  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  and  was  probably  a  work  of  Pisi-
stratus.    These  conclusions  may  be  accepted  on  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  authority.

Built  into  the  north  fortification- wall  of  the  Acropolis,  not  far  from  the  temple,
are  many  architectural  fragments,  including  drums  of  columns,  Doric  capitals,
trigl3rphs,  and  pieces  of  architraves,  all  of  common  stone,  together  with  some
marble  metopes.  These  architectural  fragments  Dr.  Dorpfeld,  with  his  usual
acumen  and  tact,  has  proved  to  belong  to  the  colonnade  of  the  temple.  The
technical  grounds  on  which  his  proof  rests  need  not  detain  us  ;  his  conclusion  may
be  accepted.  The  portion  of  the  Acropolis  wall  into  which  these  fragments  are
built  is  believed  by  archaeologists,  including  Dr.  Dorpfeld,  to  have  been  con-
structed by  Cimon  not  long  after  the  Persian  war.^

So  much  for  the  remains  of  this  ancient  temple,  which  I  shall  call  the  Pre-
Persian  temple  in  order  to  distinguish  it  from  the  two  great  temples  still  standing
on  the  Acropolis,  namely  the  Parthenon  and  the  Erechtheum.

The  history  of  the  Pre- Persian  temple,  according  to  Dr.  Dorpfeld,  was  as
follows.  The  temple  existed  in  Homeric  times.  In  proof  of  this  Dr.  Dorpfeld
cites  two  passages  of  Homer.     In  one  of  them  ^  Homer  says  that  Athena  came  to


1  Mittheilungen,  xv.  (1890)  p.  172.

^  It  may  here  be  mentioned  that  Prof.  Studniczka,  from  a  comparison  of  frag-
ments of  archaic  sculpture  foimd  on  the  Acropolis,  has  made  it  probable  that  one  of
the  gables  of  the  temple  was  adorned  with  sculptures  representing  the  battle  of  the
gods  and  giants,  and  that  in  this  scene  the  central  figure  was  Athena.  See  P.
Gardner,  New  Chapters  in  Greek  History,  pp.  244-246.

•  ticero  3*  ^  Mo/xi^wi'o  koX  evpvdyvituf  'Adi^rjy
6we  d*  *Ep€X^^*  irvKiydy  SSfjkoy,

Od.  vii.  80  sg.


APP.  THE  PRE'PERSIAN  TEMPLE  555

Athens  "  and  went  into  the  strong  house  of  Erechtheus."  In  the  other  passage  it
is  said  ^  that  Athena  **  settled  him  (Erechtheus)  at  Athens  in  her  own  ridi  temple,
and  there,  as  the  years  go  round,  the  Athenian  youths  propitiate  him  with  bulls
and  lambs."  According  to  Dr.  Dorpfeld  these  passages  are  to  be  interpreted  as
follows.  *  The  strong  house  of  Erechtheus '  was  the  great  palace  of  the  old  kings
of  Athens  on  the  Acropolis  ;  it  contained  within  it  a  temple  of  Athena  (the  Pre-
Persian  temple),  and  at  a  later  time  a  small  temple  of  Erechtheus  was  built  close
beside,  but  separate  from,  the  temple  of  Athena.

In  the  sixth  century  B.c.  the  colonnade  was  added  to  the  temple  of  Athena  by
Pisistratus.  In  480  B.C  the  temple  was  burnt  by  the  Persians,^  but  was  soon
afterwards  restored  by  the  Athenians.  This  supposed  restoration  of  the  temple  is
the  crucial  point  in  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  theory,  and  ^e  evidence  he  adduces  to  prove
it  must  be  carefully  scanned.  No  ancient  writer  mentions  the  restoration,  and
not  a  stone  of  the  existing  remains  is  later  than  the  Persian  sack.  Dr.  Dorpfeld
himself  does  not  maintain  that  the  Athenians  restored  the  colonnade  of  the
temple.  The  evidence  against  its  restoration  is  indeed  conclusive.  For  in  the
first  place  many  architectural  fragments  of  the  colonnade  are  built,  as  we  saw,
into  Cimon's  wall,  where  they  still  remain.  This  proves  that  in  Cimon's  time,
soon  after  the  Persian  war,  the  original  colonnade  was  no  longer  standing.  In
the  second  place,  the  caryatid  porch  of  the  Erechtheum,  built  towards  the  end  of
the  fifth  century  B.C.,  stands  on  what  was  part  of  the  stylobate  of  the  colonnade.
But  though  Dr.  Dorpfeld  does  not  maintain  that  the  Athenians  rebuilt  the  colon-
nade, he  does  maintain  that  they  restored  the  temple  itself.
J[  His  first  argument  for  its  restoration  is  drawn  from  a  consideration  of  historical
probability.  The  temple  was  destroyed  in  480  B.C.,  and  the  Parthenon,  the
magnificent  new  temple  which  was  ultimately  to  replace  it,  was  not  ready  till
about  438  B.C.3  Is  it  likely,  asks  Dr.  Dorpfeld,  that  during  this  long  interval  of
forty  years  or  more  the  Athenians  would  have  been  without  a  temple  of  Athena
and  without  a  treasury  ?  For  it  is  an  essential  part  of  his  theory  that  the  three
western  chambers  of  the  Pre- Persian  temple  were  used  as  a  treasury.  We  know
that  in  454  B.C.  the  moneys  levied  as  tribute  from  the  allies  were  transferred
from  Delos  to  Athens,  where  the  large  sums  annually  accruing  from  this  source
were  thenceforward  kept.  That  they  must  have  been  preserved  in  some
strong  place  is  obvious.  Now  we  know  that  the  Parthenon,  on  its  completion,
was  used  as  a  storehouse  for  sacred  treasures.  It  is  probable,  therefore,  Dr.
Dorpfeld  holds,  that  its  predecessor  the  Pre- Persian  temple  was  similarly  used,
and  that  in  particular  the  tribute  of  the  allies  was  lodged  in  it  from  454  B.C.
onward.

This  is  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  argument  from  probability.  But  apart  from  considera-
tions of  probability.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  thinks  we  have  positive  evidence  that  the  Pre-
Persian  temple  existed  and  was  used  as  a  treasury  long  after  the  Parthenon  was
finished.      The  positive  evidence  on  which  he  chiefly  relies  is  the  mention  of  the


^  Kb,h  3'  iv  *A$¥iyys  elaey  {set/.  'Epex^^)  ^V  ^^  vloyi  VTjt}'
hda  64  fuy  rai^poiai  xal  dpveiois  IXdorrai
Kovpw.  *A0rivai<i)y  xepiTeXKofUyuv  ivux\rr(av.

II.  ii.  549  sqq.
'  Herodotus,  viii.  53.

'  In  438/7  B.C.  the  Parthenon  was  so  far  ready  that  the  gold  and  ivory  statue  of
the  goddess  was  set  up  in  it  (Pbilochorus,  quoted  by  the  scholiast  on  Aristophanes,
Peace,  605).  The  roof  must  therefore  have  been  on  the  temple  in  that  year.  But  the
decorative  details  seem  not  to  have  been  finished  for  some  years  afterwards,  for  we
learn  from  an  inscription  that  in  433/3  B.C.  the  superintendents  of  the  work  were
still  in  office.  See  Mr.  P.  Foucart  in  Bulletin  de  Corr.  HelUnique,  xiii.  (1889)  p.  174
sqq.  The  temple,  as  we  now  know  from  inscriptions,  was  begun  in  447  B.  C.  See  Prof.
U.  Kohler  in  Mittheilungen,  iv.  (1879)  P-  35  *.  Mr.  P.  Foucart,  loc,  cii.


55^  APPENDIX  BK.   I.  ATTICA

opisihodomcs  in  official  inscriptions.^      I  will  call  this  for  brevity  the  opistkodomn
argument.     It  is  as  follows  : —

In  official  inscriptions  dealing  with  the  sacred  treasares  and  beginning  in
435/4  B.a,^  the  time  when  the  Parthenon  was  practically  finished,  mentiofi  is
made  of  four  separate  places  in  which  the  treasures  were  lodged.  These  are  the
pronaos  (irpoK^of  or  'Kp6w€ta%\  the  neos  hikcUompedos  (reclw  ^jrartffiredof),  the
Parthenon,  and  the  opisthodomos.^  Now  the  Parthenon  or  great  temple  of
Athena,  in  which  a  vast  quantity  of  the  sacred  treasures  was  kept,  consisted  of
four  compartments,  namely  (to  take  them  in  order  from  east  to  west)  the  eastern
portico,  the  eastern  chamber  or  cella,  the  western  chamber,  and  the  western
portico.  All  are  agreed  that  the  pronaos  mentioned  in  the  inscriptions  is  the
eastern  portico  of  the  Parthenon ;  it  is  practically  certain  that,  as  Dr.  Dorpfeld
holds,  the  neos  hekatompecbs  was  the  eastern  chamber  or  cella  of  the  Parthenon ;
and  Dr.  Dorpfeld  has  shown  good  grounds  for  believing  that  the  partkeHon  (in
the  restricted  sense  in  which  the  name  occurs  in  the  inscriptions)  was  the  western
chamber  of  the  Parthenon  temple.^  Thus  of  the  four  places  mentioned  in  the
inscriptions  three  are  identified  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  with  three  out  of  the  four  com-
partments  of  the  Parthenon.  The  fourth  plaice  (the  opisthodomos)  is  identified  by
him,  not  with  the  fourth  compartment  of  the  Parthenon,  but  with  the  three
western  chambers  of  the  Pre-Persian  temple.  His  grounds  for  so  identifying  it
are  these.  The  scholiasts  and  lexicographers  tell  us  that  the  opisthodomos  was
a  compartment  {<AK<n)  or  treasury  at  the  back  of  the  temple  of  Athena.^  Hence,
as  the  back  of  a  Greek  temple  was  the  west  end,  the  opisthodomos  must  have
been  a  compartment  at  the  west  end  of  a  temple  of  Athena.  Now  the  western
chamber  of  the  Parthenon  was  called  the  parthenon  in  the  restricted  sense.  It
cannot  therefore  have  been  the  opisthodomos.  Nor  can  the  opisthodomos  have
been  in  the  Erechtheum,  since  no  one  maintains  that  the  Erechtheum  had  an
opisthodomos.  It  remains,  therefore,  in  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  opinion,  that  the  opis-
thodomos of  the  inscriptions  must  have  been  the  three  western  chambers  of  the
restored  Pre-Persian  temple.  This  conclusion,  he  thinks,  is  greatly  strength-
ened by  an  inscription  ^  which  records  an  ordinance  that  the  moneys  of  Athena

^  That  his  chief  reliance  is  on  the  opisthodomos  argimient  is  twice  stated  by  Dr.
D5rpfeld  {Mittheilungen,  xii.  pp.  33,  209).

2  C.  I.  A.  i.  No.  32.

'  C.  I.  A.  i.  Nos.  32,  117-175.  273  ;  C.  I.  A,  ii.  Nos.  642,  645,  652,  655,  667,
670,  675,  678,  701,  704,  708,  719,  720,  721,  727,  751,  758  ;  C.  I.  A.  iv.  No.  2250
(p.  169).

^  The  main  grounds  on  which  the  neos  hekatompedos  is  identified  with  the  cella
of  the  Parthenon  are  that  (i)  the  cella  of  the  Parthenon  is  just  100  Attic  feet  long,
so  that  it  answers  exactly  to  the  name  hekatompedos  ;  and  (2)  the  inscriptions  show
that  the  gold  and  ivory  statue  of  Athena  Parthenos  stood  in  the  neos  hekatompedos.
On  the  names  of  the  various  compartments  of  the  Parthenon  see  U.  Kohler  in  AfrV-
theilungen,  v.  (1880)  p.  89  sqq.  ;  W.  Dorpfeld  in  Mittheilungen,  vi.  (z88i)  p.  296
sqq.  ;  id.,  Mittheilungen,  xv.  (1890)  pp.  171  sq.,  426  sqq.  Dr.  Lolling  attempted
to  [show  that  neos  hekatompedos  always  meant  the  Pre-Persian  temple  ('A^ra,  iL  pi
627  sqq.^,  but  be  was  refuted  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  {Mittheilungen,  xv.  p.  427  sqq.)

^  h  oTicof  6  UtioOcp  tov  veCi)  rifi  *A$ijyas  Harpocration,  s.v.  &irur$65ofjLas  i  cp.
SchoL  on  Demosthenes,  xiii.  14,  p.  170,  6.  Ta^etor  ttjs  vrdXeun  ip  djcpowiiktt
SrurOev  tov  Trp  *Adrfvas  v€(b  Photius,  Lexicon,  s.v.  dTi<r06dofiOS  ;  cp.  Eiymol.  Magn.
p.  627,  s.v.  irurddiiofios.  M^pof  rt  ttjs  dxpordXiun  r&v  'A^vcUoir  ipda  ^w  r6
rafuetov  dirurOcp  tov  ttjs  *A0riyas  vaov  Suidas,  s.v.  dTiaOdSofun ;  cp.  SchoL  on  Lucian.
Fugitivi,  7  ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes,  Plutus,  1 193.  'OirUrv  tov  vcw  T^t  KoKovfUnis
roXiddot  *ABrivas  SitXoDs  ToTxot  ^X^^  B^pav,  Sttov  9j¥  &rf<ravpo^\dKiop  SchoL  on
Aristophanes,  Plutus,  1193.  T6  6Tiode¥  tov  dS&rov  SchoL  on  Ludan.  Timon,  53.
Td  KOT&iruf  r^  dic/)0ir6Xewf  Pollux,  ix.  5.  40.  QltcfifMon  irlav  7-^  dKpov6\€tas
Schol.  on  Demosthenes,  xxiv.  136,  p.  743,  1.

•  C.  /.  A.  i.  No.  32  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Grate.  No.  14.


APP.  THE  PRE'PERSIAN  TEMPLE  557

shall  be  kept  iv  rf  ixX  ^e^td  rev  inriaOoddfioVf  and  the  moneys  of  the  rest  of  the
gods  h  rtfi  fir*  ipiarepd.  These  phrases  Dr.  Dorpfeld  interprets  to  mean  "  in  the
right-hand  chamber  of  the  opisthodomos**  and  "in  the  left-hand  chamber  of  the
0pisihodomos"  and  he  applies  them  to  the  two  smaller  chambers  in  the  western
half  of  the  Pre-Persian  temple.  Thus  on  the  strength  of  inscriptions  of  the  fifth
and  fourth  centuries  which  make  mention  of  the  opisthodomos  Dr.  Dorpfeld  con-
cludes that  the  Pre-Persian  temple  continued  to  be  used  as  a  treasury  till  towards
the  end  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  at  least. ^  Such  is  Dr.  T^'6i^U\'d!^  opisthodomos
argument

But  after  its  supposed  restoration  soon  after  480  B.c.  the  Pre-Persian  temple
was,  according  to  Dr.  Dorpfeld,  a  second  time  burnt  and  a  second  time  restored.
His  evidence  for  this  second  conflagration  is  primarily  a  statement  of  Xenophon  ^
that  in  406  B.C  '*  the  ancient  temple  of  Athena  at  Athens  was  burnt."  Formerly
it  was  supposed  that  this  *  ancient  temple  of  Athena '  was  the  Erechtheum.  But
we  know  from  an  inscription^  that  in  409  B.C.,  only  three  years  before  the  fire
mentioned  by  Xenophon,  the  new  Erechtheum  was  still  unfinished.  It  could
not  therefore,  Dr.  Dorpfeld  argues,  have  been  called  'the  ancient  temple  of
Athena'  in  406  B.C.  Nor  could  *  the  ancient  temple  of  Athena  *  be  the  splendid
new  Parthenon,  which  had  been  completed  only  about  thirty  years  before.  There-
fore 'the  ancient  temple  of  Athena'  which  was  burnt  in  406  B.C.  could  be  no
other  than  the  restored  Pre-Persian  temple.  This  is  confirmed,  in  Dr.  Dorpfeld^s
opinion,  by  a  mention  in  Demosthenes  ^  of  a  fire  in  the  opisthodomos^  on  account
of  which  the  two  boards  of  treasurers  (the  treasurers  of  Athena  and  the  treasurers
of  the  other  gods)  were  imprisoned  and  brought  to  trial.  This  fire  in  the
opisthodomos  was  identical.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  considers,  with  the  burning  of  'the
ancient  temple  of  Athena'  in  406  B.C.  Hence  we  have  another  proof  that  'the
ancient  temple  of  Athena '  was  not  the  Erechtheum  but  the  Pre-Persian  temple,
since  the  opisthodomos  was  not  in  the  Erechtheum  but  in  the  Pre-Persian  temple.
Thus  the  Pre-Persian  temple  was  biunt  for  the  second  time  in  406  B.C.  But  it
must  have  been  restored  soon  afterwards  and  again  employed  as  a  treasury ;  for
in  inscriptions  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  we  find  repeated  mentions  of  the  'old
temple  *  and  the  opisthodomos  as  treasuries.*    These  references  are.  Dr.  Dorpfeld

^  The  last  inscription  which  mentions  the  opisthodomos  {C.  I.  A.  ii.  No.  721)  is  con-
sidered by  the  editor.  Prof.  U.  Kohler,  to  be  not  older  than  01.  115.  2  (3x9/8  B.C.)

*  r^  6*  iininfTL  irei  (}  1j  re  acX-^vri  i^iXivcv  iairipa.i  Kal  6  iraXa(6s  rrft  *Adrjyas
p€vi>s  ip  'A^iJvaiJ  iyeirpr^ffOrjf  IIiTi/a  fiiy  ^^o/xi^vros,  dpxowros  5^  KaXXiov  ^Adiff-
vTiffiVf  Xenophon,  Hellenica,  i.  6.  i.  Some  editors  and  critics  (including  K.  O.
MUller,  •  Minervae  Poiiadis  sacra  et  aedes/  Kunstarchaologische  Werke,  i.  p.  108
sq. )  have  suspected  this  p>assage  of  being  an  interpolation.  But  the  mention  of  the
eclipse  of  the  moon  proves  that  the  writer  of  the  passage,  if  not  Xenophon  himself,
was  at  least  a  contemporary  and  a  well-informed  person.  For  a  total  eclipse  of  the
moon  took  place  on  April  X5th,  406  B.C.,  at  8.30  p.m.  (Greenwich  time  ?),  according
to  LArt  de  vinfier  Us  dates  (Paris,  1820).  Cp.  Th.  v.  Oppolzer,  Canon  der
Finstemisse  (Denkschriften  d.  k.  Akad.  d,  Wissen,  Mathem.  Naturwissen.  CI.  Bd.
lii.  Wien,  1887),  p.  337.  Oppolzer  puts  the  eclipse  on  April  26th.  I  presume  the
apparent  discrepancy  is  due  to  the  difference  of  reckoning  between  the  Julian  and
Gregorian  calendars.  If  the  eclipse  took  place  at  8.30  p.m.  Greenwich  time,  it
would  be  visible  at  Athens  about  xo  p.  m.  Athenian  time.  For  the  references  to
Oppolzer  and  LArt  de  virifier  les  dates  I  am  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  Prof.  G.  H.
Darwin.

'  C.  LA.  i.  No.  322  ;  Ancient  Greek  Inscriptions  in  the  British  Museum,  Part  I,
No.  XXXV.

*  ol  TafjUcu  i<t>*  S>v  6  6Tt(r$6dofios  iverp^drj,  koX  ol  twv  rijs  0€ov  koX  ol  rtaw  dXXwv
6mQv,  Demosthenes,  xxiv.  136,  p.  743.

'  In  this  connexion  the  '  old  temple '  {dpxcu^s  ret^j)  is  mentioned  in  C.  L  A.  ii.
Nos.  74,  672,  733,  758,  and  the  opisthodomos  in  C  /.  A.  ii.  Nos.  652,  720,  721,
cp.  685.


558  APPENDIX  BK.  I.  ATTICA

holds,  to  the  Pre-Persian  temple  and  its  western  chambers.  Further,  an  inscrip-
tion of  the  fourth  century  B.c.,^  which  appears  to  mention  a  sacrifice  offered

*  in  the  old  temple,*  is  adduced  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  as  evidence  that  the  Prc-Persian
temple  continued  in  that  century  to  be  used  as  a  place  of  worship  as  well  as  a
treasury.  This  argument  for  the  continuance  of  the  Pre-Persian  temple,  drawn
from  the  mention  of  the  *■  ancient '  or  *  old  temple '  by  Xenophon  and  in  inscrip-
tions, I  shall  call  for  brevity  the  <  old  temple '  argument.

Thus,  relying  mainly  on  the  mention  of  the  opisthodomos  and  '  old  temple '  in
inscriptions  of  the  fifth  and  fourth  centuries,  Dr.  Dorpfeld  would  prolong  the
existence  of  the  Pre-Persian  temple  down  to  the  end  of  the  fourth  century  B.C
But  if  the  temple  survived  so  long,  the  presumption  is  that  it  survived  much
longer.  For  if  the  Athenians  allowed  it  to  stand  after  the  completion  of  the
Parthenon  and  the  Erechtheum,  there  is  no  obvious  reason  why  they  should  ever
have  removed  it ;  and  certainly  no  notice  of  its  removal  has  come  down  to  us.
If,  therefore,  as  Dr.  Dorpfeld  holds,  it  survived  into  Roman  or  even  mediaeval
times,  we  should  expect  to  find  it  mentioned  by  the  later  authors  of  antiquity.
Now  writers  from  Philochorus  to  Eustathius  refer  to  a^<  temple  of  Athena  Polias,'
a  <  temple  of  the  Polias,'  an  '  old  temple  of  Athena  Polias  * ;  and  an  inscription
of  the  second  or  first  century  B.C.  mentions  *the  old  temple  of  Athena  Polias.*'
Many  at  least  of  these  references,  according  to  Dr.  Dorpfeld,  are  to  the  Pre-
Persian  temple.  The  way  in  which  that  temple  came  to  bear  these  various
designations  was  this.  It  was  originally  the  only  temple  of  Athena  Polias,  that
is  of  Athena  in  her  character  of  Guardian  of  the  City.  But  when  the  great
temple  which  we  call  the  Parthenon  was  built,  that  magnificent  new  edifice  became
at  once  the  principal  temple  of  Athena  Polias,  and  the  restored  Pre-Peisian
temple,  sinking  to  a  subordinate  position,  was  distinguished  from  it  as  *  the  old
temple  of  Athena  Polias,'  'the  old  temple  of  the  Polias,'  or  'the  old  temple*
simply.  In  course  of  time,  however,  the  goddess  of  the  great  temple  came  to  be
commonly  known  as  Athena  Parthenos  (the  Virgin  Athena) ;  and  the  name
Parthenon,  which  originally  and  properly  designated  only  a  single  chamber  of
the  great  temple,  was  in  popular  parlance  extended  to  the  whole  of  the  great
temple,  of  which  it  gradually  became  the  regular  appellation.  Hence,  when  the
name  Parthenon  had  superseded  the  name  '  temple  of  Athena  Polias  *  as  the
ordinary  title  of  the  great  temple,  it  was  no  longer  needful  to  distinguish  the
Pre-Persian  temple  from  the  great  temple  by  the  epithet  *  old  * ;  accordingly  the
adjective  was  often  dropped,  and  the  Pre-Persian  temple  was  called  simply  the

*  temple  of  Athena  Polias  *  or,  still  more  briefly,  the  *  temple  of  the  Polias.'
This  argument  for  the  continuance  of  the  Pre-Persian  temple,  drawn  from  the
mention  of  the  *  old  temple  of  Athena  Polias  *  or  simply  *  the  temple  of  Athena
Polias  (the  Polias) '  in  later  authors,  I  shall  call  for  brevity  the  Polias  argument.

Lastly,  Dr.  Dorpfeld  believes  that  the  Pre-Persian  temple  was  actually  seen
and  described  by  Pausanias  in  the  second  century  a.d.  His  reasons  for  this
belief  will  be  given  later  on.

Thus  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  main  arguments  for  the  restoration  and  continuance  of
the  Pre-Persian  temple  are  five  in  number,  namely : —

i.  The  argument  from  probability  ;
ii.  The  opisthodomos  argument ;
iii.  The  *  old  temple '  argument ;
iv.  The  Polias  argument ;

V.  The  Pausanias  argument.

^  C.  I.  A,  ii.  No.  163.  The  passage  in  question  is  mutilated,  and  has  been
variously  restored  on  conjecture  as  r^v  iv  nf  dp\xcU(fi  vey  Ovo']fiivyjiy  (set/,  Boaiap)
and  H}y  r^J  'Af{ei(fi  irdytp  dvofUyrjv],  The  former  and  more  probable  conjecture  has
been  accepted  by  Dr.  Ddrpfeld.

^  C.  I,  A.  ii.  No.  464.


APP.  THE  PRE'PERSIAN  TEMPLE  559

I  will  examine  these  arguments  one  by  one.

(i)  The  argument  from  probability.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  considers  that  the
Athenians  must  have  rebuilt  the  Pre- Persian  temple  soon  after  its  destruction  in
480  B.C,  since  they  would  need  it  both  as  a  place  of  worship  and  as  a  treasury
till  the  Parthenon  was  ready ;  and  we  now  know  that  the  existing  Parthenon  was
not  begun  till  447  6.C.  and  was  not  ready  to  receive  the  new  statue  of  the
goddess  until  438  B.c.^  But  an  examination  of  the  substructions  of  the  Parthe-
non and  of  the  architectural  fragments  still  existing  on  the  Acropolis  has  shown
that  soon  after  the  Persian  war  the  Athenians,  probably  under  Cimon's  adminis-
tration, had  planned  and  actually  begun  to  build  a  large  new  temple  of  Athena
on  the  site  of  the  present  Parthenon,  to  the  south  of  the  Pre-Persian  temple.
That  this  new  temple  was  intended  to  replace  the  one  burnt  by  the  Persians  is
obvious  and  is  admitted  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  himself.^  It  seems,  therefore,  very  improb-
able that  the  Athenians  would  have  restored  the  old  temple  at  the  time  when  they
were  planning  or  had  actually  b^;un  to  build  a  new  temple  which  was  to  replace
it.  This  improbability  is  increased  by  an  admission  which  Dr.  Dorpfeld  im-
plicitly made  in  the  third  of  his  papers  on  the  history  of  the  Pre- Persian  temple.
In  his  first  paper  he  had  represented  the  destruction  of  the  temples  by  the
Persians  as  complete  and  total.  *<  Everything  that  could  be  broken  was  smashed,
the  columns  were  thrown  down,  everything  combustible  was  fired,  everything
that  was  valuable  was  pillaged."  In  particular  the  colonnade  of  the  Pre- Persian
temple  shared  this  general  destruction ;  for  we  know  that  it  was  never  rebuilt,
and  had  it  been  standing  after  the  sack  the  Athenians  would  certainly  not  (said
Dr.  Dorpfeld)  have  pulled  it  down  when  they  were  restoring  the  temple.*  But
in  his  third  paper  Dr.  Dorpfeld  expresses  a  different  view  of  the  state  in  which
the  Persians  left  the  temple.  He  thinks  that  they  by  no  means  destroyed  the
whole  of  it,  but  left  the  walls  and  the  colonnade  standing.  This  follows  with
certainty,  he  says,  from  the  condition  of  the  architectural  pieces  (architraves,
trigljrphs,  and  geisa)  of  the  colonnade  which  are  built  into  the  north  wall  of  the
Acropolis.  For  the  excellent  preservation  of  these  pieces  shows  clearly  (he  tells
us)  that  they  cannot  have  come  from  the  ruins  of  a  temple  which  had  tumbled
in,  but  must  have  been  taken  from  the  building  while  it  was  still  standing  and
carefully  built  into  the  Acropolis  wall.*  This  is,  of  course,  to  admit,  what  Dr.
Dorpfeld  had  previously  denied,  that  the  Athenians  found  the  colonnade  of  the
temple  standing  after  the  sack  and  that  they  deliberately  and  carefully  pulled  it
down.  Yet  Dr.  Dorpfeld  holds  that  at  the  same  time  that  they  were  pulling
down  the  colonnade  they  were  restoring  the  temple.  Is  this  likely?  And
observe  the  place  in  which  the  pieces  of  the  colonnade  were  found.  They  are
built  into  a  wall  which  Dr.  Dorpfeld  himself  believes  to  have  been  constructed
by  Cimon.  Is  it  not  a  fair  presumption,  then,  that  the  colonnade  was  pulled
down  by  Cimon  ?  We  have  already  seen  that,  on  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  own  view,
Cimon  began  building  a  stately  new  temple  which  was  to  replace  the  old  one.
And  it  now  appears  at  least  highly  probable  that  he  pulled  down  the  colonnade
of  the  old  temple.     Is  it  not  reasonable  to  suppose  that  his  destructive  activity

*  See  above,  p.  555,  note  3.

^  This  temple,  the  intended  successor  of  the  Pre-Persian  temple  and  the  pre-
decessor of  the  Parthenon,  is  discussed  by  Dr.  Ddrpfeld  in  MiUheilungen,  xviL
(1892)  pp.  z  58- 1 89.  That  it  was  meant  to  replace  the  Pre-Persian  temple  is  ex-
pressly said  by  him  (p.  173).  The  exact  time  when  this  new  temple  was  begun
cannot,  Dr.  Dorpfeld  tells  us,  be  determined.  But  on  architectiu^  grounds  he
believes  that  ' '  the  temple  was  built  or  at  least  begun  in  the  time  after  the  Persian
wars  "  (p.  187).  He  is  of  opinion  that  either  Themistocles  or  Cimon  could  have  built
it,  but  on  historical  grounds  he  decides  in  favour  of  Cimon  (p.  z88).

'  Mittheilungen,  xiL  pp.  30,  32.

*  Ibid.  XV.  (1890)  p.  424.


56o  APPENDIX  bk.  i.  attica

on  one  part  of  the  Acropolis  was  directly  connected  with  his  constmctive  activity
on  another  part  ?  that  he  pulled  down  not  only  the  colonnade  of  the  burnt  temple
but  the  temple  itself,  because  he  was  building  a  new  and  grander  temple  to  take
its  place  ?  On  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  hypothesis,  on  the  other  hand,  we  must  suppose
that  the  Athenians  were,  either  at  one  and  the  same  time  or  in  rapid  succession,
demolishing  the  colonnade  of  the  old  temple,  restoring  the  temple  itself,  and
building  a  new  temple  to  supersede  it.  Nothing  but  the  most  cogent  evidence
should  induce  us  to  accept  an  h3rpothesis  so  improbable.

Till  the  new  temple  was  ready,  the  Athenians  must  certainly  have  had  some
strong  place  in  which  to  store  the  public  and  sacred  treasures.  But  that  this
place  must  necessarily  have  been,  as  Dr.  Dorpfeld  supposes,  the  western  chambers
of  the  restored  Pre- Persian  temple,  is  far  from  obvious,  even  if  we  grant,  what
seems  likely,  that  these  chambers  had  served  as  a  treasury  before  the  destruction
of  the  temple.^  There  were  probably  many  strong  places  in  Athens  where  the
treasures  could  have  been  safely  lodged  till  the  new  temple  was  ready  to  receive
them.  In  point  of  fact,  if  Prof.  A.  KirchhofTs  restoration  of  an  Attic  inscription
is  correct,'  we  have  positive  evidence  that  during  the  period  in  question  some  at
least  of  the  sacred  moneys  were  kept,  not  in  a  temple  at  all,  but  in  "  the  enclosure
to  the  south  of  the  old  temple  of  Athena  on  the  Acropolis."  This  enclosure  may
very  well  have  been  a  temporary  building  erected  after  the  Persian  war  to  house
the  treasures  till  the  new  temple  was  ready.  But  as  the  evidence  of  this  depends
on  the  conjectural  restoration  of  an  inscription,  I  refrain  from  laying  weight  on  it

(ii)  The  opisthodomos  argument.  The  argument  on  which  Dr.  Dorpfeld
chiefly  relies  to  prove  the  restoration  of  the  Pre- Persian  temple  is  the  mention  of

*  An  inscription  {C.  /.  A,  iv.  p.  137  sqg.),  found  on  the  Acropolis  and  dating
from  before  the  Persian  war,  mentions  the  Pre-Persian  temple  under  the  appropriate
title  of  the  Hekatompedon,  and  contains  a  provision  that  the  chambers  {olic^fjuiTa)  in
the  temple  shall  be  opened  by  the  treasurers  (ol  rafdai).  These  chamb^  are  almost
certainly  the  three  western  chambers  of  the  Pre-Persian  temple ;  and  the  pro\'ision
that  they  shall  be  opened  by  the  treasurers  makes  it  at  least  highly  probable  that  they
contained  treasures.  A  passage  in  this  inscription  was  formerly  interpreted  by  Dr.
Dorpfeld  to  mean  '  treasure-chamber ' ;  but  the  passage  is  mutilated  and  must  almost
certainly,  as  Professors  A.  Kirchhoff  and  W.  Dittenberger  have  seen,  be  restored  in
a  way  which  absolutely  excludes  all  reference  to  a  treasure-chamber.  This  would
now,  I  believe,  be  admitted  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  himself.  See  KirchhofTs  restorati(»i  of
the  passage  in  C.  I.  A.  iv.  p.  139,  and  Dittenberger's  in  Hermes,  aacvi.  (1891),  p.  47a
sq.  For  the  inscription  itself  see  also  LtKriov  dpxato\oyiK6¥,  1890,  p.  9a  sgq.\
H.  G.  Lolling  in  ^ABrjPci,  ii.  (1890),  p.  627  sqq. ;  W.  Dorpfeld  in  Miitheilungen,  xv.
(1890),  p.  420  sgq.  That  there  were  '  treasurers  of  the  sanctuary'  before  the  Peistan
war  is  attested  by  Herodotus  (viii.  51).  The  treasurers  are  also  mentioned  in  an
inscription  not  later  than  the  middle  of  the  sixth  century  b.  c.  ,  which  seems  to  contain
a  dedication  by  them  of  certain  bronze  objects  to  Athena  (C.  I.  A.  iv.  No.  373  (238)
p.  199 ;  AcXWov  i.frxjiki6KoyiKbvy  1888,  p.  55  ;  *k6yjva,  ii.  p.  646).  The  analogy  of
the  Parthenon  is  also  in  favour  of  the  view  that  its  predecessor  the  Pre-Persian  temple
had  been  used  as  a  treasury.

^  C.  I.  A.  i.   No.  I,  supplemented  in  C.  I.  A.  iv.  p.  3  sq.  ;  Dittenberger,  Sylhge
Inscr.  Graec.  No.  384.     The  passage  in  question  is  this  :  \r'^v  hk  UpoO  dpyvpi[ov  ri

fih  .   .  ]  .   c<r [fi]€y[oy  Ta/uei>e]<r^at  [iy  irept^]6\w[t  ry  v^o^jcp  tov  r^J

'A0rivaia[s  ipxtiiov  kcJw  ifi  ir6Xet.  The  inscription  is  considered  by  Prof.  Kirchhoff
to  be  clearly  far  older  than  01.  81  (456  B.C.)  Prof.  Dittenberger,  who  supplies  the
lacunas  [iw  x€pi^]6\tc{i  ry  y6To6]€y  in  the  same  way,  holds  that  the  inscription  is
certainly  not  later  than  460  b.  c.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  conjecturally  supplied  one  of  the
lacunas  thus  [?  ^xto-^jev  tov  Trjs  *AOriyaia[s  dpxaUov  vejtb  i/x  r6\€ij  and  adduced  the
inscription  as  evidence  that  '  the  old  temple '  was  used  as  a  treasiuy  at  the  time  when
the  inscription  was  cut  {Afittheilungen^  xii.  p.  39).  But  however  we  may  supply  the
lacuna  in  question,  the  mention  of  the  xepi^oXos  seems  to  prove  decisively  that  the
money  was  noi  kept  in  the  temple.


APP.  THE  PRE'PERSIAN  TEMPLE  561

the  opisthodomos  in  inscriptions  of  the  fifth  and  fourth  centuries  B.C.  According
to  him,  the  opisthodomos  was  the  three  western  chambers  of  the  restored  Pre-
Persian  temple,  which  had  been  in  use  as  a  treasury  from  soon  after  480  B.C.,
and  which  in  particular  from  454  B.C.  onward  had  accommodated  the  tribute  of
the  allies.  Now  if  this  was  so,  is  it  not  remarkable  that  the  first  mention  of  the
opisthodomos  should  occur  in  two  decrees  of  435  B.c.,^  just  at  the  time  when  the
Parthenon  is  known  to  have  been  practically  completed  ?  One  of  these  decrees
provides,  amongst  other  things,  that  ''treasurers  of  the  other  gods''  shall  be
elected  by  lot ;  that  they  shall  store  the  moneys  of  the  gods  in  the  opisthodomos
on  the  Acropolis ;  and  that,  in  conjunction  with  the  treasurers  of  Athena,  they
shall  open  and  shut  the  doors  of  the  opisthodomos  and  put  the  seals  on  them.
The  other  decree  ordains  that  the  moneys  of  Athena  shall  be  kept  on  the  right
side,  and  the  moneys  of  the  other  gods  on  the  left  side,  of  the  opisthodomos.  It
seems  clear  that  these  decrees  of  435  B.C.  lay  down  regulations  for  the  storing
of  treasures  in  the  opisthodomos  as  if  that  place  were  now  for  the  first  time  to  be
used  as  a  treasury.  This  is  perfectly  intelligible  if  the  opisthodomos  was  part  of
the  Parthenon  which  was,  as  we  have  seen,  receiving  its  last  touches  about  this
very  time.  But  it  is  hardly  intelligible  on  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  hypothesis  that  the
opisthodomos  was  the  three  western  chambers  of  the  restored  Pre-Persian  temple
which,  according  to  him,  had  been  already  used  as  a  treasury  for  forty  years  or
more  at  the  time  when  these  decrees  were  passed.  Surely  it  is  no  mere  coin-
cidence that  the  official  lists  of  the  treasures  stored  in  three  out  of  the  four
compartments  of  the  Parthenon  begin  in  the  very  year  after  these  decrees  regulat-
ing the  use  of  the  opisthodomos  as  a  treasury  were  passed,  namely  in  434/3  B.C.'

Further,  if  Dr.  Dorpfeld  is  right  in  his  view  of  the  opisthodomos^  there  is  a
remarkable  and  even  mysterious  omission  in  the  treasury  documents  which  have
come  down  to  us.  These  documents,  preserved  in  inscriptions,  begin  with  the
above-mentioned  decrees  of  435  B.C.  and  are  extant  in  an  almost  unbroken  series
for  the  rest  of  the  fifth  century,  and,  less  completely,  for  the  fourth  century  B.C.
Now  in  this  long  series  of  documents,  beginning  very  significantly  in  the  very
years  when  the  Parthenon  is  known  to  have  been  receiving  its  last  touches,
mention  is  made  of  four  compartments,  and  only  four  compartments,  of  a  temple,
which  were  used  as  treasure-chambers.  Of  these  four  compartments  three  are
rightly  identified  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  with  three  out  of  the  four  compartments  of  the
Parthenon,  namely  the  eastern  portico,  the  eastern  chamber  or  cella^  and  the
western  chamber.  But  the  fourth  compartment  mentioned  in  the  treasury
documents  (namely  the  opisthodomos)  is  identified  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld,  not  with  the
fourth  compartment  of  the  Parthenon  (namely  the  western  portico),  but  with  the
western  chambers  of  the  Pre-Persian  temple.  It  follows  that,  if  he  is  right,  the
fourth  compartment  of  the  Parthenon  (namely  the  western  portico)  is  not  men-
tioned in  the  treasury  documents  and  was  not  used  for  the  storing  of  treasure.
If  this  is  so,  it  is  very  remarkable,  since  the  western  portico,  being  at  the  back  of
the  temple  and  therefore  less  accessible  to  the  public,  was  much  better  adapted
for  a  treasury  than  the  eastern  portico,  which  nevertheless,  as  we  learn  from  the
inscriptions,  was  regularly  used  as  such.  Surely  the  natural  and  almost  inevitable
inference  from  the  inscriptions  is  that  the  fourth  compartment  mentioned  in  them
(the  opisthodomos)  was  the  fourth  compartment  of  the  Parthenon  (namely  the

*  C.  I.  A.  i.  No.  32  ;  W.  Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Inscr.  Graec.  No.  14  ;  E.  L.  Hicks,
Greek  Historical  Inscriptions,  No.  37.  The  date  here  assigned  to  the  decrees  has
been  questioned.  But  we  may  safely  acquiesce  in  the  tmanimous  and  decided  opinion
of  three  such  experts  as  Prof.  A.  Kirchhoff,  Prof.  W.  Dittenberger,  and  Mr.  E.  L.
Hicks.  The  question  is  discussed  at  length  by  Prof.  A  Kirchhoff  in  the  Philolog.
und  histor.  Abhandlungen  of  the  Berlin  Academy  for  1876.  Dr.  D5rpfeld  apparently
accepts  this  date ;  at  least  he  puts  the  decrees  later  than  the  completion  of  the
Parthenon  {Mittheilungen,  xii.  p.  38).

'  C.  I.  A.  i.  Nos.  117,  141,  161.

VOL.  II  20


562  APPENDIX  BK.   I.  AITICA

western  portico),  since  the  other  three  compartments  of  the  Parthenon  are
known  to  have  been  used  as  treasure-chambers  for  the  first  time  in  the  very
year  after  the  regulations  for  the  use  of  the  opisthodomos  as  a  treasure-chamber
were  first  promulgated.  Thus  even  if  we  had  no  evidence  before  us  but  that  of
the  inscriptions,  we  should  almost  be  driven,  it  seems  to  me,  to  conclude  that  the
opisthodomos  was  the  western  portico  of  the  Parthenon.  This  was  Dr.  Dorpfeld's
own  view  before  the  discovery  of  the  Pre- Persian  temple.  Indeed  he  argued
strenuously  for  it,  pointing  out  that  the  western  portico  was  well  fitted  to  ser\*e  as
a  treasure-chamber  *'  since  we  know  that  it,  as  well  as  the  eastern  portico,  was
most  carefully  closed  with  strong  railings  and  a  door  up  to  the  architrave,"  and
concluding  that  '*  in  ofHcial  language  the  opisthodomos  was  always  the  western
portico  of  the  Parthenon."  *

But  there  is  another  and  independent  consideration  which  points  at  least  as
clearly  to  the  conclusion  that  the  opisthodomos  was  the  western  portico  of  the
Parthenon,  and  not,  as  Dr.  Dorpfeld  supposes,  the  western  chambers  of  the  Pre-
Persian  temple.  It  is  this  :  opisthodomos  was  the  regular  name  for  the  western
portico,  not  for  the  western  chamber  (or  chambers),  of  a  Greek  temple.  Dr.
Dorpfeld  himself  formerly  admitted  this  and  used  it,  with  justice,  as  an  argument
to  show  that  the  western  portico  of  the  Parthenon  was  the  opisthodomos.  **In
all  temples,"  he  said,  **  the  name  opisthodomos  designates  the  western  portica
Why  should  the  Parthenon  alone  be  an  exception  ? "  *  That  this  is  the  proper
meaning  of  the  word  opisthodomos^  as  applied  to  a  temple,  can  easily  be  shown.
The  name  opisthodomos  (literally  *  back -building')  is  defined  by  ancient  lexico-
graphers as  *  the  back  of  any  building.'  *  That  it  was  applied  to  the  back  of  a
house  is  proved  by  a  passage  in  Appian.*  Varro^  and  Pollux*  tell  us  that,  in
its  application  to  a  temple,  the  name  opisthodomos  designated  the  back,  as  opposed
to  prodomos  the  front.  Now  since  prodomos^  equivalent  to  pronaos^  was  the
eastern  portico  of  a  temple,  it  follows  that  its  counterpart  opisthodomos  was  the
western  portico.  This  is  confirmed  by  a  passage  in  Diodorus  Siculus,^  who,
describing  how  Syracuse  was  turned  into  a  vast  workshop  of  arms  in  the  days
when  Dionysius  was  preparing  to  make  war  on  the  Carthaginians,  mentions  that
even  the /r^>«tf^>j  and  opisthodomoi  {i.e.  the  eastern  and  western  porticoes)  of  the
temples  were  crowded  with  men  hammering  away  as  if  for  dear  life.  Finally,
this  interpretation  of  opisthodomos  is  put  beyond  doubt  by  the  fact  that  opistho-
domos is  the  name  applied  to  the  western  porticoes  of  the  temples  of  2^us  ^  and

^  MUtkeilungen,  vi.  (i88x)  pp.  300-302.

'  Ibid.  p.  300  sq.

'  t6  txuffdev  iravT^  olK'^fiaroSf  Photius,  Lexicon  ^  s.v.  ArurddSofjios  ;  Etymol.
Magnum,  p.  627,  s.v.  irurOdSofMOS.  Cf.  Hesychius,  s.v.  &in<r6od6fiois  ;  SchoL  on
Aristophanes,  Pluius,  1193.

*  Bellum  Civile,  \.  20.  Appian  here  mentions  a  report  that  Scipio,  who  was
found  dead  in  his  house,  had  been  strangled  by  men  introduced  into  the  house  by
night  through  the  opisthodomos.  The  term  is  used  in  the  same  sense  by  [Aeschines,]
Epist.  10  (near  end).

^  De  lingua  Latina,  v.  160,  ed.  Mliller,  **  Domus  Graecum,  et  ideo  in  aedibus
sacris  ante  cellam,  ubi  sedes  dei  sunt,  Graeci  dicunt  irf>6dofioVf  quod  post  6iria06dofio^.*'

•  Pollux  (i.  I.  6)  under  the  heading  6  r&ros  iv  ^  deparevoyrai  (set I.  o2  Beoi)  says  :
t6  W  Tp6  a&roOf  TpdSofiot.  koX  t6  Kar&a-iy,  iinadddofios.  Cp.  Antholog.  PaJaL
xii.  223,  3  j^. :

ovTW  yiip  Kal  AyaXfia  deoO  koI  vjibv  6pQftev
dirrlov,  0^  rrdtrrcjs  Kal  rbv  iirurdMofioy.

^  See  K.  Botticher,  Die  Tektonik  der  Hellenen,'^  §  Sii  P-  472  sqq.  Philostratus
calls  the  eastern  portico  of  the  Parthenon  prodomos  {* A0'/ivTi<rl  t  ISciy  (ariv  iv  irpoS6fitf
roO  TlapdeyQyoi,  Vit.  Apollon.  ii.  10),  though  its  official  name  was  pronaos.

*  xiv.  41.

•  Pausanias,  v.  10.  9 ;  id.,  v.  13.  i  ;  id.,  v.  15.  3  ;  Lucian,  Herodotus,  i  ;  i</..


APP.  THE  PRE'PERSIAN  TEMPLE  563

Hera^  at  Olympia.  Here  there  is  no  room  for  ambiguity;  for  the  temples
exist,  though  in  ruins,  to  this  day,  and  though  both  of  them  have  a  western
portico,  neither  of  them  has  a  western  chamber.  The  interpretation  '  western
chamber  *  b  therefore  excluded.

Since,  then,  opisthodomos  was  the  regular  name  for  the  western  portico  of  a
temple,  there  can  be  no  reason  for  refusing  it  to  the  western  portico  of  the
Parthenon.  Yet  Dr.  Dorpfeld  takes  the  name  from  the  western  portico  of  the
Parthenon,  to  which  it  was  properly  applicable,  and  transfers  it  to  the  three
western  chambers  of  the  Pre- Persian  temple,  to  which  it  is  at  best  doubtful
whether  it  was  really  appropriate.  For  it  is  to  be  remembered  that,  though
western  porticoes  were  exceedingly  common  in  Greek  temples,  as  the  remains
of  them  sufficiently  attest,  western  chambers  were  exceedingly  rare ;  and  that
whereas  the  name  for  the  western  portico  is  certain,  the  name  for  a  western
chamber  is  far  from  being  so.  Among  extant  Greek  temples  I  know  of  three
only  which  have  a  chamber  opening  from  the  west.  They  are  the  Parthenon,
the  Pre- Persian  temple,  and  the  old  temple  at  Corinth.  There  may  be  more ;
Dr.  Dorpfeld,  out  of  his  abundant  knowledge,  would  doubtless  be  able  to  say.
Now,  in  the  case  of  the  Parthenon,  Dr.  Dorpfeld  has  made  it  highly  probable
that  the  western  chamber  was  called  the  parthetton  in  the  restricted  sense  of  the
word.  In  the  case  of  the  old  temple  at  Corinth  he  has  made  it  equally  probable
that  the  western  chamber  was  not  a  back-room  or  treasure -chamber,  but  a
separate  shrine  or  cella^^  which  could  not  therefore  have  been  called  opisthodomos.
The  Pre -Persian  temple  alone  remains,  and  Dr.  Dorpfeld  assumes  that  the
designation  of  its  three  western  chambers  was  opisthodomos.  But  I  cannot  see
that  he  has  any  positive  grounds  for  this  assumption.  It  may  indeed  be  admitted
that  the  name  opisthodomos^  the  regular  appellation  of  the  western  portico  of  a
temple,  would  easily  be  extended  to  a  western  chamber  opening  off  it,  in  the
rare  cases  where  such  a  chamber  existed.  This  in  fact  seems  to  have  happened
in  the  case  of  the  Parthenon.  For  Plutarch  mentions  that,  when  Demetrius
Poliorcetes  came  to  Athens,  the  obsequious  Athenians  lodged  him  **  in  the  opis-
thodomos of  the  Parthenon.  "3  Here  the  opisthodomos  is  most  probably  the
western  chamber  of  the  temple,  since  the  Athenians  would  hardly  have  lodged
their  formidable  visitor  in  the  open  western  portico.  In  the  case  of  the  Parthenon
this  extension  of  the  name  opisthodomos  to  the  western  chamber  is  easily  explained
by  the  fact  that  in  Plutarch's  time,  and  long  before  it,  the  true  name  of  the
western  chamber  (namely  the  parthenon  in  the  narrow  sense)  had  been  transferred
from  it  to  the  whole  temple.  The  western  chamber,  thus  deprived  of  its  proper
name,  would  naturally  come  to  share  with  the  western  portico  the  name  of
£?^ijM<7</<7w^j  (* back-building*).  But  in  the  case  of  the  Pre-Persian  temple  we
have  no  evidence  that  its  three  western  chambers  were  ever  called  opisthodomos.^
On  the  contrary  we  have  positive  evidence  that  shortly  before  the  destruction  of
the  temple  by  the  Persians  its  western  chambers  were  not  so  called.     For  in  the

Fugitivi,  7  ;  id. ,  De  morte  Peregrini,  32.  Some  of  the  reliefs  representing  the
labours  of  Hercules  which  have  been  found  at  Olympia  and  are  known  to  have  been
fixed  over  the  western  portico  of  the  temple  of  Zeus,  are  described  by  Pausanias  (v.
10.  9)  as  being  * '  over  thfe  door  of  the  opisthodomos. "

^  Pausanias,  v.  16.  i  ;  Dio  Chrysostom,  Or.  xi.  (vol.  i.  p.  179,  ed.  Dindorf).

'  Afittheilungen,  xi.  (1886)  p.  297  sqq.

'  Plutarch,  Demetrius,  23,  cp.  26,  and  Compar.  Demetr.  et  Anton.  4.

^  I  am  unable  to  admit  Dr.  Dorpfeld  s  argument  that  the  expressions  h  r<J)
hrX  9e^(d  ro^  6iri<r$oS6fiov  and  iv  t^J  iir*  dpiarepdi  scil.  rov  drurdoUdfiov  {C.  I.  A.  i.
No.  32)  refer  to  the  two  small  inner  chambers  in  the  western  half  of  the  Pre-Persian
temple.  For  the  natural  interpretation  of  these  words  is  "in  the  right-hand  side  of
the  opisthodomos  "  and  ' '  in  the  left -band  side  of  the  opisthodomos."  This  was  formerly
Dr.  Dorpfeld's  own  interpretation  of  the  passage  [Afitth^i/ungen,  vi.  p.  300),  and  I
feel  sure  that  it  will  commend  itself  to  aU  unprejudiced  scholars.


564  APPENDIX  BK.   I.  ATTICA

official  inscription  ^  which,  by  general  consent,  refers  to  the  Pre- Persian  temple
as  the  Hekatompedon,  and  which  dates  from  shortly  before  the  Persian  war,  the
western  chambers  of  the  temple  are  called,  not  opisthodomos^  but  simply  *'  the
chambers  in  the  Hekatompedon."  This  inscription,  discovered  since  Dr.  Dorp-
feld  first  propounded  his  theory,  removes  the  last  excuse  for  identifying  the
opisthodomos  of  Attic  inscriptions  with  the  western  chambers  of  the  Pre- Persian
temple.  With  its  removal.  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  argument  for  the  restoration  of  the
temple,  based  on  the  mention  of  the  opisthodomos  in  inscriptions,  falls  to  the
ground.     The  argument,  in  fact,  rests  on  a  simple  misnomer.'

(iii)  The  *  old  temple  *  argument.  Dr.  Dbrpfeld  argues,  on  the  strength  of
Homer's  testimony,  that  the  Pre- Persian  temple  was  the  oldest  temple  of  Athena
on  the  Acropolis,  existing  side  by  side  with,  though  separate  from,  a  small
temple  of  Erechtheus.  And  he  maintains  that  '  the  ancient  temple  of  Athena '
which  was  burnt  in  406  B.c.  and  the  *  old  temple*  mentioned  in  inscriptions  of
the  fourth  century  B.C.  must  have  been  the  restored  Pre- Persian  temple,  which,
by  comparison  with  the  Parthenon  completed  about  438  B.C.,  would  naturally  be
called  •  the  old  temple.*

Let  us  take  Homer's  testimony  first.  In  opposition  to  Dr.  Dorpfeld  it  has
been  rightly  maintained  by  Mr.  Eugen  Petersen  *  that  Homer's  evidence  points
clearly,  not  to  two  separate  temples  of  Athena  and  Erechtheus,  but  to  a  single
joint  temple  in  which  they  were  worshipped  together.  In  the  first  of  the  two
passages  of  Homer  cited  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  ^  it  is  said  that  Athena,  after  appearing
to  Ulysses  in  the  island  of  Scheria,  departed  to  Athens,  where  she  "went  into
the  strong  house  of  Erechtheus."  The  poet  seems  to  represent  'the  house  of
Erechtheus '  as  the  home  of  Athena,  whither  she  returned  after  her  expedition  to
Scheria.  In  the  second  passage  ^  it  is  said  that  Athena  settled  Erechtheus  in
her  own  rich  temple  in  Athens,  where  bulls  and  lambs  were  periodically  sacrificed
to  him.  About  this  latter  passage  there  is  no  ambiguity.  It  is  a  plain  statement
that  Erechtheus  was  worshipped  in  the  temple  of  Athena.^     The  first  passage,

^  C.  /.  A.  iv.  p.  137  sqq.     See  above,  p.  560,  note  i.

^  In  the  foregoing  discussion  of  the  opisthodomos  argument  I  have  assumed  that
Dr.  Dorpfeld,  in  bestowing  the  name  opisthodomos  on  the  western  chambers  of  the
Prc-Persian  temple,  refuses  it  to  the  western  portico  of  the  Parthenon.  But  suppose
he  admits  the  western  portico  of  the  Parthenon  was  also  called  opisthodomos.  It  will
follow,  on  his  theory,  that  there  were  two,  or  rather  three,  opisthodomoi  on  the
Acropolis  simultaneously,  namely  the  western  portico  of  the  Parthenon,  the  western
portico  of  the  Pre-Persian  temple,  and  the  western  chambers  of  the  latter  temple.
Yet  all  our  authorities,  literary  and  epigraphical,  speak  as  if  there  were  only  one
opisthodomos  on  the  Acropolis.  Thus  whether  Dr.  Dorpfeld  admits  or  whether  he
denies  (and  he  must  do  one  or  the  other)  that  the  western  portico  of  the  Parthenon
was  called  opisthodomos,  his  theory  of  the  co-existence  of  the  Pre-Persian  temple  and
the  Parthenon  seems  equally  to  involve  him  in  inextricable  difficulties.  I  may  here
mention  Prof.  Milchhofer's  view  that  the  opisthodomos  was  a  separate  building,
situated  probably  at  the  eastern  end  of  the  Acropolis  (Philologus,  53  (1894)  pp.  352-
361).  Prof.  J.  W.  White  of  Harvard,  in  a  privately  printed  paper  of  which  he  has
courteously  furnished  me  with  a  copy,  comes  by  a  different  method  to  the  same
conclusion  as  Dr.  Dorpfeld  with  regard  to  the  opisthodomos,  but  does  not  bold  that
the  eastern  half  of  the  Pre-Persian  temple  was  ever  rebuilt.

'  Mittheilungen,  xii.  p.  62.

*  Od.  vii.  78-81.
»  //.  ii.  549-551.

*  This  statement  is  clearly  fatal  to  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  opinion  that  the  new  Eredt-
theum,  built  towards  the  close  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.,  was  the  first  joint  temple  d
Athena  and  Erechtheus  on  the  Acropolis.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  attempts  to  evade  this  difficulty
by  supposing  Homer  to  mean  that  Erechtheus  was  worshipped  within  the  saoed
precinct  (2ep6v)  of  Athena,  though  not  within  her  temple ;  he  thinks  that  there  were
two  temples,  one  of  Athena  and  another  of  Erechtheus,  standing  within  an  endosore


APP.  THE  PRE'PERSIAN  TEMPLE  565

though  not  so  unambiguous,  seems  to  imply  that  Athena  was  worshipped  in  the
house  or  temple  of  Erechtheus.  The  two  passages  are  obviously  reconcilable  on
the  hypothesis  that  in  the  Homeric  age  Athena  and  Erechtheus  were  worshipped
on  the  Acropolis  at  Athens  in  a  single  joint  temple,  which  might  be  called  either
the  temple  of  Erechtheus  or  the  temple  of  Athena,  according  as  the  speaker
regarded  Erechtheus  or  Athena  as  the  original  inmate  of  the  shrine.  Such  a
temple  was  the  Erechtheum.  In  it  Erechtheus  was  worshipped  in  one  chamber
and  Athena  in  another ;  and  the  building  was  accordingly  sometimes  called  the
Erechtheum  and  sometimes  (as  we  shall  see)  the  temple  of  Athena  Polias.
Thus  the  Erechtheum  answers  exactly  to  Homer*s  account  of  the  shrines  on
the  Acropolis ;  and  we  may  accordingly  assume  that  when  the  Homeric  poems
were  composed  the  old  Erechtheum  was  the  only  temple  on  the  Acropolis.

This  inference  that  the  original  Erechtheum  was  the  oldest  temple  on  the
Acropolis  is  confirmed  by  other  considerations.  In  the  first  place  the  Erechtheum
was  associated  with  the  most  ancient  legends  of  Athens.  When  the  Athenians
wished  to  relate  the  very  beginning  of  their  history  they  told  the  legend  of  the
contest  between  Athena  and  Poseidon  for  the  possession  of  the  country.  This
contest  was  believed  to  have  taken  place  on  the  site  of  the  Erechtheum ;  for
within  its  precincts  were  the  gnarled  olive-tree,  the  salt-well,  and  the  mark  of
the  trident  on  the  rock  which  Athena  and  Poseidon  had  respectively  produced  as
evidence  of  their  title  to  the  land ;  ^  and  here,  when  the  contest  was  over,  the
two  rivals  were  worshipped  peacefully  together.*  Further,  the  ancient  wooden
image  of  Athena,  the  oldest  of  all  her  images  in  Athens,  was  preserved  in  the
eastern  chamber  of  the  Erechtheum ;  ^  and  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  the
oldest  image  was  kept  in  the  oldest  temple.  The  golden  lamp,  too,  which
burned  day  and  night,  year  in  year  out,  in  the  chamber  with  the  ancient  image,^
suggests  that  this  was  the  holiest  of  all  the  shrines  of  Athens ;  and  if  the  holiest
it  must  almost  certainly  have  been  the  oldest.  Lastly,  the  peculiar  ground-plan
of  the  Erechtheum,  which  is  unique  among  Greek  temples,  speaks  strongly  in
favour  of  its  remote  antiquity.  The  existing  temple,  indeed,  dates  only  from  the
end  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  ;  but  its  singular  arrangement  (notably  the  difference
of  level  between  its  eastern  and  western  chambers)  seems  to  be  explicable  only
on  the  hypothesis  that  it  occupies  the  site  and  closely  reproduces  the  plan  of  the
original  temple  burnt  by  the  Persians,  motives  of  religious  conservatism  having
operated  to  prevent  any  important  modification  of  site  or  plan.  Thus  we  may
conclude  that  the  original  Erechtheum,  a  joint  temple  of  Erechtheus  and  Athena,
was  the  oldest  temple  on  the  Acropolis  and  that  the  Pre- Persian  temple  must
have  been  built  later,  perhaps  in  the  seventh  or  sixth  century  B.C.

Hence,  when  in  official  Attic  inscriptions  of  the  first  half  of  the  fifth  century
B.C.  we  find  mention  of  *the  old  temple  of  Athena  on  the  Acropolis**  or  of
'  the  old  temple,'  ^  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  the  reference  is  to  the  old  Erech-

sacred  to  Athena  {Mittheilungen,  xii.  pp.  199,  207).  But  this  view  is  quite  irre-
concilable with  the  language  of  Homer,  who  sajrs  plainly  that  Athena  settled  Erech-
theus in  her  own  temple  (1^176$) ;  for  1^176$  (yec^r,  va6s)  always  means  either  a  temple
or  a  part  of  a  temple  (namely  the  cello),  never  a  sacred  precinct  or  sanctuary  (rifuifotf

l€p6»).

^  Herodotus,  viii.  55  ;  Pausanias,  i.  26.  5  ;  id,,  i.  27.  2  ;  ApoUodorus,  iii.  14.  z.
'  Erechtheus  was  identified  with  Poseidon.     See  above,  p.  339  sq.

•  C.  I.  A.  i.  No.  322 ;  Pausanias.  i.  26.  6  ;  cp.  ApoUodorus,  iii.  14.  6.

^  Pausanias,  i.  26.  6  sq.  The  lamp  itself  was  comparatively  modem,  but  the
custom  probably  went  back  to  the  earliest  days  of  Athens.

•  C.  I.  A.  i.  No.  I,  supplemented  in  C.  I.  A,  iv.  p.  3  sq,  ;  Dittenberger,
Sylhge  Inscr.  Graec, ,  No.  384.     See  above,  p.  560,  note  2.

•  C.  I.  A,  i.  No.  93,  line  5  sq,  [ypd^jayraf  iw  <mJ[X|;  Poppa]6€P  tov  Pid)  roO
dpxMov]*  The  inscription,  according  to  Prof.  Kirchhoff,  contains  a  decree  **  quod
guamquam   vetusium   videtur  non  nimis  antiquo  tapun  tempore  lapidi   incisum


566  APPENDIX  bk.  i.  attica

theum.  Two  such  inscriptions  have  come  down  to  us ;  and  as  one  of  them,
which  mentions  *  the  old  temple  of  Athena  on  the  Acropolis/  is  certainly  older
than  456  B.C.,  and  the  present  Parthenon  was  not  begun  until  447  B.c.,^  it
follows  that  there  was  on  the  Acropolis  a  temple  officially  called  *  the  old  temple
of  Athena  *  some  years  at  least  before  the  present  Parthenon  was  begun.  This
*  old  temple  of  Athena  *  cannot  have  been  the  Pre-Persian  temple,  for  the  official
title  of  the  latter  was  the  Hekatompedon.^  It  must,  therefore,  have  been  the
Erechtheum,  since  we  have  no  evidence  that  at  this  period  there  were  more  than
two  temples  on  the  Acropolis.  But  if  the  Erechtheum  was  called  'the  old
temple  of  Athena  *  before  the  Parthenon  was  begun,  it  must  have  been  so  called
by  comparison  with  the  Pre-Persian  temple  or  Hekatompedon ;  from  which  it
follows  that,  as  we  have  already  deduced  from  Homer's  evidence,  the  Erechtheum
was  the  older  temple  of  the  two.

The  two  inscriptions  just  discussed  do  not  imply  that  the  '  old  temple  of
Athena  *  or  '  the  old  temple '  which  they  mention  was  entire  and  in  use.  One  of
them  3  directs  that  certain  sacred  money  shall  be  kept  '*  in  the  enclosure  to  the
south  (?)  of  the  old  temple  of  Athena.''  The  other ^  directs  that  an  inscription
shall  be  set  up  '*  to  the  north  (?)  of  the  old  temple. "  If  these  inscriptions  date  from
after  the  Persian  war,  only  the  blackened  walls  of  the  *■  old  temple '  or  Erech-
theum would  probably  be  standing  at  the  time ;  and  the  inscriptions  do  not
imply  more  than  this.  Nor  does  the  designation  of  the  Erechtheum  as  '  the  old
temple  of  Athena '  in  inscriptions  soon  after  the  Persian  war  imply  that  the  Pre-
Persian  temple  or  Hekatompedon,  by  comparison  with  which  the  Erechtheom
was  called  *  old,*  was  still  standing.  If  the  official  title  of  the  Erechtheum  had
been  '  the  old  temple  of  Athena '  before  the  war,  it  would  continue  to  be  so  after-
wards, even  when  the  Pre-Persian  temple  or  Hekatompedon  had  been  razed  to
the  ground.

These  two  inscriptions,  then,  raise  a  presumption  that  in  the  first  half  of  the
fifth  century  B.C.,  even  before  the  Persian  war,  the  Erechtheum  was  officially
known  as  '  the  old  temple  of  Athena.'  But  the  mutilated  state  of  the  inscriptions
and  the  uncertainty  as  to  their  precise  date  prevent  this  presumption  from
amounting  to  proof.

After  its  destruction  in  480  B.C.  the  Erechtheum  was  not,  so  far  as  we  know,
rebuilt  till  towards  the  close  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  From  a  well-known  inscrip-
tion^ we  learn  that  in  409/8  B.C.  the  new  Erechtheum,  then  approaching  com-
pletion, was  still  without  a  roof.  It  can  hardly,  therefore,  have  been  finished
before  the  following  year.  Relying  on  the  evidence  of  some  inscriptions  which
came  to  light  a  few  years  ago.  Prof.  A.  Michaelis  concludes  that  the  temple  was
completed  in  the  summer  of  408  B.c.^  Only  two  years  later,  in  406  B.C.,  "the
ancient  temple  of  Athena  at  Athens  was  burnt,"  to  quote  the  words  of  Xenophon.^
Dr.  Dorpfeld  thinks  that  this  *  ancient  temple  of  Athena '  cannot  have  been  the
Erechtheum,  since  that  temple  was  only  about  two  years  old  at  the  time.
Certainly  the  actual  temple  was  new,  but  as  it  replaced  a  very  ancient  one,  the

est,"  From  this  I  infer  that  in  Prof.  KirchhoflTs  opinion  the  decree,  if  not  the  inscription,
dates  from  not  later  than  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  This  is  enough  for  the
argument  in  the  text ;  the  date  when  the  inscription  was  cut  does  not  concern  us.

'  See  above,  p.  555,  note  3.

'  See  above,  p.  560,  note  i.

^  C.  I.  A.\.  No.  I,  supplemented  in  C.  L  A.  iv.  p.  3  sq.

*  C.  I.  A.  \.  No.  93.

^  C.  I.  A.  i.  No.  322  ;  Ancient  Greek  Inscriptions  in  the  British  Museum^  Part
I.  No.  XXXV.

•  Mittheilungen,  xiv.  (1889)  p.  349  sqq.  For  the  inscriptions  see  C.  I.  A.  iv.  p.
\^Z  sqq.  ;  AeXr/of  apxaioXoyiicdy,  1888,  p.  87  sqq.  \  Mittheilungen^  xiii.  (1888)  p.
229  sqq.

7  Hellenica^  \.  6.  i.


APP.  THE  PRE'PERSIAN  TEMPLE  567

oldest  of  all  Athena^s  temples,  there  would  be  nothing  surprising  or  unusual  if  the
new  temple,  standing  on  the  site  and  carrying  on  the  associations  and  traditions
of  its  venerable  predecessor,  should  very  soon  be  known  as  the  *  ancient '  or  *  old
temple  of  Athena,'  to  distinguish  it  from  the  Parthenon,  a  new  temple  on  a  new
site.  Probably  almost  every  old  city  could  furnish  one  or  more  examples  of  a
similar  anomaly.  Mr.  H.  N.  Fowler*  has  cited  the  case  of  a  new  church  in
Boston  which  is  called  the  *New  Old  South,*  or  simply  the  'Old  South,*
because  it  succeeded  to  a  church  called  the  *  Old  South,*  and  that  though  the  new
church  stands  in  quite  a  different  part  of  the  town.  The  church,  in  fact,  is
neither  old  nor  south,  yet  it  is  called  both  because  its  predecessor  was  so.

But  Dr.  Dorpfeld  has  other  arguments  to  prove  that  <  the  ancient  temple  of
Athena*  which  was  burnt  in  406  6.C.  cannot  have  been,  as  scholars  used  to  sup-
pose, the  Erechtheum.  One  of  his  arguments  is  that  in  the  official  inscription  of
409/8  B.C.,  which  contains  the  report  of  the  commissioners  on  the  progress  of  the
new  Erechtheum,  the  temple  is  called,  not  *  the  old  temple  of  Athena,*  but  *  the
temple  in  which  is  the  old  image  * ;  ^  and  he  appears  to  hold  that  '  the  temple  in
which  is  the  old  image  *  was  always  the  official  designation  of  the  Erechtheum.
If  this  was  indeed  the  official  title  of  the  Erechtheum,  it  is  very  remarkable  that
it  should  never  occur  again  in  a  single  inscription  or  in  a  single  passage  of  an
ancient  writer.  Is  it  credible  that  the  regular  official  title  of  the  Erechtheum
should  occur  only  once  in  the  long  series  of  official  documents  relating  to  the
Acropolis  which  has  come  down  to  us  ?  On  the  other  hand,  the  isolated  occur-
rence in  a  single  inscription  of  the  phrase  '  the  temple  in  which  is  the  old  image  *
as  an  appellation  of  the  Erechtheum  can  be  explained  very  simply  if  we  regard
the  phrase,  not  as  the  regular  title  of  the  temple,  but  as  a  temporary  one  adopted
while  the  new  edifice  was  building.  The  inscription  in  which  the  phrase  occurs
contains  a  report  by  certain  public  commissioners  on  the  unfinished  state  of  the
new  temple.  In  such  a  document  the  commissioners  could  hardly  designate  as
<  old  *  a  building  which  was  in  process  of  construction  and  on  the  unfinished  state
of  which  they  were  actually  reporting.  The  anomaly  of  describing  the  building
as  *  old  *  in  such  circumstances  would  have  been  too  glaring.  Accordingly  the
commissioners  chose  a  title  which  better  accorded  with  the  facts  and  called  it
*  the  temple  in  which  is  the  old  image.*  But  this  cumbrous  title  was  probably  a
temporary  one  and  would  be  dropped  as  soon  as  the  temple  was  finished.
Certainly  the  title  does  not  occur  in  a  single  inscription  after  the  completion  of
the  temple.  On  its  completion  the  new  Erechtheum  would  naturally  assume  in
official  as  well  as  popular  language  the  name  of  '  the  old  temple  of  Athena  *  in
virtue  of  succeeding  to  the  site,  the  functions,  and  the  traditions  of  the  most
ancient  temple  of  Athena  on  the  Acropolis.

Further,  Dr.  Dorpfeld  argues  that  '  the  ancient  temple  of  Athena  *  burnt  in
406  B.C.  cannot  have  been  the  Erechtheum  but  must  have  been  the  Pre- Persian
temple,  because  the  fire  of  406  B.c.  was  identical  with  one  mentioned  by  Demo-
sthenes as  having  taken  place  in  the  opisthodomos?  which  Dr.  Dorpfeld  identifies
with  the  western  chambers  of  the  Pre- Persian  temple.  If  Dr. '  Dorpfeld  could
indeed  prove  that  the  fire  in  'the  ancient  temple  of  Athena*  in  406  B.c.  was
identical  with  the  fire  in  the  opisthodomoSy  he  would  at  least  have  made  it  certain
that  *the  ancient  temple  of  Athena*  was  not  the  Erechtheum,  since  the  Erech-
theum had  no  opisthodomos.  But  we  know  that  the  fires  were  not  identical.
For  in  the  passage  in  which  he  mentions  the  fire  in  the  opisthodomos  Demosthenes
is  giving  a  list  of  men  of  high  position  who  had  been  imprisoned  for  offences
against  the  state  since  the  archonship  of  Euclides  (403/2  B.C.),  and  among  them
he  mentions  the  two  boards  of  treasurers  (the  treasurers  of  Athena  and  the  treasurers

*  American  Journal  of  Archaeology t  viii.  (1893)  p.  13  note.

^  rod  ved  rod  iv  irrfXct,  iv  <}  rb  dpxoMv  6.yaS4ia,  C.  /.  A.  i.  No.  322.

'  Demosthenes',  xxiv.  136,  p.  743.


568  APPENDIX  bk.  i.  attica

of  the  other  gods)  who  had  been  imprisoned  on  account  of  the  fire  in  the  oputho-
domos.  It  follows  that  the  fire  in  the  opisthodomos  was  later  than  403/2  B.C.  and
cannot  have  been  identical  with  the  fire  in  *  the  ancient  temple  of  Athena  *
in  406  B.c.^

The  view  that  the  conflagration  of  406  B.C.  took  place  in  the  Erechtheum  is
confirmed  by  an  inscription  of  395/4  B.C.  which  relates  to  the  restoration  of  a
burnt  temple.^  The  inscription  is  mutilated,  but  an  expression  which  occurs  in
it  makes  it  tolerably  certain  that  the  burnt  temple  referred  to  in  the  inscription  is
the  Erechtheum.  That  eleven  years  should  have  elapsed  between  the  burning  of
the  temple  and  its  restoration  is  not  surprising  when  we  reflect  that  in  the  interval
Athens  had  been  besieged  and  captured  by  a  foreign  foe,  had  languished  under
the  tyranny  of  the  Thirty,  and  had  experienced  the  horrors  of  civil  war.  How
soon  after  395/4  B.C.  the  restoration  of  the  temple  was  completed  we  do  not
know.  It  must  have  been  finished  before  376/5  B.C.,  for  a  treasure-list  of  that
year  3  makes  mention  of  a  piece  of  gold  plate  which  was  kept  in  the  *  old  temple*
The  temple  is  mentioned  again  under  the  same  title  in  treasure-lists  and  other
inscriptions  of  the  fourth  century  B.c.^  At  a  much  later  date  an  inscription^
records  the  setting  up  of  a  statue  beside  '  the  old  temple  of  Athena  Polias.'
That  the  *  old  temple  of  Athena  Polias  *  was  identical  with  the  *  old  temple  *  of
the  earlier  inscriptions  is  highly  probable  ;  and  that  it  was  the  Erechtheum  may
be  taken  as  certain,  since  Strabo  mentions  the  Erechtheum  under  the  title  of  '  the
old  temple  of  the  Polias.  *  •

Thus,  on  the  hypothesis  that  *  the  old  temple '  of  the  inscriptions  and  of
classical  writers  was  the  Erechtheum,  all  is  clear  and  consistent.  Not  so  on  Dr.
Ddrpfeld's  hypothesis  that  the  *  old  temple  *  was  the  restored  Pre-Persian  temple.
If  the  *  old  temple  *  of  the  inscriptions  was  the  restored  Pre-Persian  temple
which  had  been  used  as  a  treasury  since  shortly  after  480  B.C.  and  had  been
known  as  *  the  old  temple  *  ever  since  the  Parthenon  was  built  or  even  planned,'
how  is  it  that  the  first  mention  of  *  the  old  temple  *  as  a  receptacle  for  treasures
occurs  in  an  inscription  of  376  B.C.,  about  a  century  after  the  supposed  restora-

^  Dr.  Dorpfeld  attempts  to  meet  this  objection  by  drawing  a  distinction  between
the  first  and  the  second  part  of  Deraosthenes's  list  of  state  offenders  {Mitthcilungen,
xii.  p.  44).  But  I  cannot  see  that  the  distinction  exists.  If  the  union  of  the  two
boards  of  treasurers  (the  treasurers  of  Athena  and  the  treasurers  of  the  other  gods)
took  place  in  406  B.C.,  as  some  suppose  (Lolling,  in  'AOrfPoi,  ii.  p.  649;  cp.  G.
Gilbert,  Handbuch  der  griech.  Staatsalterthiimer^  i.  p.  270),  this  would  be  another
proof  that  the  fire  in  the  opisthodomos  could  not  have  happened  in  that  year,  since  the
words  of  Demosthenes  show  that  at  the  time  of  the  fire  the  two  boards  of  treasurers
existed  separately.  But  the  earliest  mention  of  the  imited  board  of  treasuro^  is  in  an
inscription  of  403/2  B.C.  (*E^/ie/)ij  apx^^^^^'^'ht  1885,  p.  129).  By  385/4  B.C
the  separate  boards  again  existed  (C  /.  A.  ii.  No.  667).

^  C.  I.  A.  ii.  No.  829.  The  expression  referred  to  in  the  text  is  jcard  rh
Uavdpdffeioy,  "on  the  side  of  the  Pandrosium."  The  Pandrosium  adjoined  the
Erechtheum  on  the  west  (Pausanias,  i.  27.  2).  A  similar  expression  (wpbi  rcu
UavdpwreLov)  occurs  repeatedly  in  inscriptions  which  admittedly  refer  to  the  building
of  the  Erechtheum  {C.  I.  A.  i.  No.  322 ;  C  /.  A.  iv.  p.  151).

^  C.  I.  A.  ii.  No.  672.

*  C.  I.  A.  ii.  Nos.  74,  163,  733,  758.
'  C.  I.  A.  ii.  No.  464.

•  Strabo,  ix.  p.  396.     See  below,  p.  569.

7  Dr.  Dorpfeld  holds  that  '  the  old  temple  of  Athena '  mentioned  in  an  inscriptioD
dating  from  before  456  B.C.  (C  /.  A.  i.  No.  i  ;  C.  I.  A.  iv.  p.  3  sq.)  is  the  Pre-
Persian  temple.  He  must  therefore  suppose  that  the  name  '  the  old  temple '  was
given  to  the  restored  Pre-Persian  temple  before  the  existing  Parthenon  was  b^iin,
presumably  at  the  time  when  Cimon  began  building  the  older  Parthenon.  We  have
seen  that  this  inscription  affords  no  evidence  of  the  use  of  '  the  old  temple '  as  a
treasury  at  the  time  when  the  inscription  was  engraved  (see  above,  p.  566).


APP.  THE  PRE-PERSIAN  TEMPLE  569

tion  of  the  temple  ?  This  long  silence  of  the  inscriptions  is  difficult  to  explain  on
Dr.  Dorpfeld's  hypothesis.  But  it  is  natural  and  indeed  necessary  on  the  hypo-
thesis that  *  the  old  temple '  was  the  Erechtheum  ;  since  the  Erechtheum,  after
its  destruction  in  480  B.C.,  was  not  rebuilt  till  about  408  B.C.,  was  destroyed  by
fire  shortly  afterwards,^  and  was  still  rebuilding  in  395/4  B.C.  Thus  in  regard  to
the  two  expressions  '  old  temple '  and  opisthodomos^  on  which  Dr.  Dorpfeld  lays
so  much  stress  as  designations  of  the  restored  Pre- Persian  temple  and  of  a  part  of
it  respectively,  it  is  most  significant  that  the  expression  opisthodomos  does  not
occur  in  treasure-lists  till  after  the  completion  of  the  Parthenon,  and  that  the  ex-
pression *  old  temple '  does  not  occur  in  them  till  after  the  completiott  of  the  Erech-
theum. This  is  not  only  intelligible  but  necessary  if  opisthodomos  designated  a
part  of  the  Parthenon,  and  *  old  temple  *  designated  the  Erechtheum.  But  it  is
hardly  intelligible  and  certainly  not  necessary  if  opisthodomos  and  '  old  temple '
designated  respectively  a  part  and  the  whole  of  the  Pre-Persian  temple  which  had
been  restored  and  used  as  a  treasury  from  soon  after  480  B.C.

But  this  is  not  the  only  difficulty  in  the  way  of  Dr.  Dorpfeld*s  identification
of  the  *  old  temple  '  with  the  restored  Pre-Persian  temple.  On  his  hypothesis  the
opisthodomos  or  western  half  of  the  Pre-Persian  temple  was  burnt  in  406  B.C.  and
its  restoration  after  the  fire  is  referred  to  in  an  inscription  *  which  Prof.  U.
Kohler  dates  in  395/4  B.C.  But  we  know  from  another  inscription'  that  the
opisthodomos  was  in  use  as  a  treasury  in  398/7  B.C.  Hence  Dr.  Dorpfeld  is
obliged  to  alter  conjecturally  the  date  of  the  former  inscription  from  395  B.C.  to
some  time  before  398  B.C.  The  grounds  for  dating  the  inscription  in  395  B.C.
are,  indeed,  slight ;  ^  but  so  far  as  they  go  they  are  against  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  theoiy,
and  the  editor  of  the  inscription  (Prof.  U.  Kohler)  appears  to  have  no  doubt  as  to
its  date.  Moreover  Dr.  Dorpfeld  is  obliged  to  do  further  violence  to  the  same
inscription  by  interpreting  the  expression  xard  rd  Yiav^plxTeiov  in  it  as  a  direction
given  from  the  standpoint  of  the  Pre-Persian  temple  instead  of,  as  it  is  much
more  naturally  taken,  from  the  standpoint  of  the  Erechtheum.^

Again,  we  have  seen  that  the  fire  in  *  the  ancient  temple  of  Athena '  and  the
fire  in  the  opisthodomos  were  distinct  conflagrations.  Hence  if  *  the  ancient
temple  of  Athena*  was  the  Pre-Persian  temple  and  the  opisthodomos  was  its
western  chambers,  it  will  follow  that  the  Pre-Persian  temple  was  twice  burnt  and
twice  restored  between  406  B.c.  and  353  B.c.^  If  to  these  conflagrations  and
restorations  we  add  the  burning  of  the  temple  by  the  Persians  in  480  B.C.  and  its
supposed  restoration  shortly  afterwards,  it  results  that  this  unfortunate  temple  was
thrice  burnt  and  thrice  restored  within  about  a  century.  And  yet  not  a  stone  of
this  triple  restoration  remains.  Fate,  which  has  left  us  much  of  the  temple  as  it
was  before  its  destruction  in  480  B.C.,  has  carefully  obliterated  every  trace  of  its
three  subsequent  restorations.

Lastly,  Dr.  Dorpfeld  is  confronted  with  the  difficulty  that  Strabo  calls  the
temple  which  contained  the  perpetual  lamp  *  the  old  temple  of  the  Polias,* '  and
that  the  perpetual  lamp  is  known  to  have  been  in  the  Erechtheum  ;  ^  from  which
the  inference  seems  inevitable  that  in  Strabo's  opinion  the  Erechtheum  was  *  the
old  temple  *  of  Athena.  In  his  first  paper  on  the  history  of  the  Pre-Persian
temple  Dr.  Dorpfeld  himself  admitted  that  this  inference  was  indubitable.'    Yet

*  This  is  proved  by  C.  I.  A.  ii.  No.  829,  independently  of  the  disputed  evidence
of  Xenophon  {Hellenica,  i.  6.  i).

*  C.  /.  A.  ii.  No.  829.
'  C.  I.  A.  ii.  No.  652.

*  Only  a  single  letter  (I)  of  the  archon's  name  survives  on  the  stone.

*  See  above,  p.  568,  note  2.

*  The  speech  of  Demosthenes  (Against  Timocrates),  in  which  the  fire  in  the
opisthodomos  is  mentioned,  was  composed  in  the  archonship  of  Eudemus  (353/2  B.c)

^  Strabo,  ix.  p.  396.  ®  Pausanias,  i.  26.  6  sq.

*  Mittheilungen,  xii.  p.  48.


570  APPENDIX  bk.  i.  attica

in  his  second  paper  he  not  only  doubted  but  denied  the  inference,  maintaining
that  Strabo  rightly  described  the  Pre- Persian  temple  as  *  the  old  temple  of  the
Polias,'  but  wrongly  supposed  it  to  have  contained  the  perpetual  lamp.*  It  is  a
necessary  corollary  of  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  present  interpretation  of  the  passage  that
Strabo,  who  describes  only  two  temples  on  the  Acropolis  (the  Parthenon  and  *  the
old  temple  of  the  Polias')  omitted  all  mention  of  the  unique  and  beautiful
Erechtheum,  the  shrine  of  the  most  venerable  monuments  of  Athenian  history,
and  that  too  though  he  mentions  the  perpetual  lamp  which  b  known  to  have
been  in  it.

Such  are  some  of  the  difficulties  which  beset  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  attempt  to
identify  the  *  old  temple '  of  the  inscriptions  and  of  classical  writers  (Xenophon,
Strabo)  with  the  Pre- Persian  temple.  To  me  these  difficulties  appear  far  greater
than  those  which  attend  the  current  view  that  the  *  old  temple '  was  the  Erech-
theum.  I  therefore  accept  the  current  view  and  reject  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  *old
temple  *  argument  for  the  restoration  and  continuance  of  the  Pre-Persian  temple.

(iv)  The  Polias  argument.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  argues  that  the  Pre-Persian  temple
must  have  been  restored  and  must  have  subsisted  down  to  the  Roman  period  at
least,  since  it  is  mentioned  by  the  later  writers  of  antiquity  under  the  title  of '  the
temple  of  Athena  Polias '  or  '  the  temple  of  the  Polias.'

The  current  opinion  of  scholars  has  hitherto  been  that  the  expression  *  the
temple  of  Athena  Polias '  or,  more  briefly,  *  the  temple  of  the  Polias  *  always
meant  the  Erechtheum,  the  name  being  given  to  it  because  its  eastern  chamber
had  been  from  the  earliest  times  the  shrine  of  the  ancient  wooden  image  to  which
alone  belonged  the  title  of  Athena  Polias.  If,  then.  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  Polias
argument  for  the  restoration  of  the  Pre-Persian  temple  is  to  hold  good,  he  must
prove  that  the  current  view  which  restricts  the  name  *  temple  of  Athena  Polias '
to  the  Erechtheum  is  incorrect ;  he  must  prove  that  the  Pre-Persian  temple  was
also  a  temple  of  Athena  Polias.  This  he  attempts  to  do.  He  says  :  '*  In  the
fifth  and  fourth  centuries  the  Parthenon  was  officially  called  either  *  the  temple '
or  *  the  temple  of  Athena  Polias.*  Before  the  building  of  the  Parthenon,  its  prede-
cessor the  old  Athena  temple  (Pre-Persian  temple)  must  have  borne  the  same  official
titles,  namely  the  short  title  *the  temple,'  the  fuller  title  'the  temple  of  Athena,'
and  the  exact  title  *the  temple  of  Athena  Polias.' "*  Thus  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  view
that  the  Pre-Persian  temple  was  a  temple  of  Athena  Polias  appears  to  be  a  simple
deduction  from  his  view  that  the  Parthenon  was  so.  The  question  therefore
reduces  itself  to  this  :  What  is  the  evidence  that  the  Parthenon  was  a  temple  of
Athena  Polias  ?

Although  Dr.  Dorpfeld  affirms,  in  the  passage  just  quoted,  that  in  the  fifth
and  fourth  centuries  B.C.  the  full  official  title  of  the  Parthenon  was  <  the  temple
of  Athena  Polias,'  he  is  unable  to  quote  a  single  inscription,  official  or  otherwise,
of  these  two  centuries  in  which  the  expression  '  the  temple  of  Athena  Polias  *
occurs  at  all.  Considering  the  multitude  of  official  documents  of  the  fifth  and
fourth  centuries  relating  to  the  Parthenon  which  have  been  preser\'ed,  the  total
absence  in  them  of  any  mention  of  '  the  temple  of  Athena  Polias '  raises  a  pre-
sumption, very  difficult  to  rebut,  that  this  cannot  have  been  the  official  title  of
the  Parthenon.     In  point  of  fact,  in  the  whole  range  of  Attic  inscriptions  from

^  Mittheilungen,  xii.  p.  199.

2  Jb.  xii.  p.  196.  Since  Dr.  Dorpfeld  wrote  this  passage,  the  discovery  of
an  inscription  (C.  /.  A.  iv.  p.  137  sqq.^  see  above,  p.  560,  note  1)  has  proved
that  before  its  destruction  the  Pre-Persian  temple  was  officially  called,  not  '  the
temple  of  Athena  Polias,'  but  the  Hekatompedon.  But  I  waive  this  objection,
and  readily  grant  that  if  the  Parthenon  was  called  the  temple  of  Athena  Polias.  its
predecessor  the  Pre-Persian  temple  was  probably  called  so  too,  although  it  happens
not  to  be  so  named  on  the  only  existing  inscription  which  indisputably  refers  to  the
temple.


APP.  THE  PRE' PERSIAN  TEMPLE  571

the  earliest  to  the  latest  times,  the  expression  'the  temple  of  Athena  Polias'
appears  to  occur  only  once,  namely  in  an  inscription  of  the  third  century  B.C.,  in
which  there  is  absolutely  nothing  to  show  to  which  of  the  temples  on  the  Acropolis
the  expression  refers.^

Nor  does  Dr.  Dorpfeld,  so  far  as  I  see,  quote  a  single  inscription  to  prove
that  the  Athena  of  the  Parthenon  was  called  Athena  Polias.

If  we  put  aside  assumptions  repeated  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  again  and  again,  such
as  that  "  if  there  was  a  worship  in  the  Parthenon  at  all,  it  can  only  have  been  a
worship  of  the  Polias,'*^  "the  goddess  of  the  citadel,  Athena  Polias,  must  have
been  worshipped  in  the  Parthenon,"^  **when  we  read  of  the  temple  of  Athena
Polias  we  must  assume  that  the  Parthenon  is  meant,"  ^  his  arguments  to  show
that  the  Parthenon  was  a  temple  of  Athena  Polias  appear  to  reduce  themselves
to  three.

[a)  **That  Athena  Parthenos  was  the  Polias  is  shown  by  a  comparison  of
Aristophanes,  Birdsy  826,  with  Thesmoph,  1136."^  I  am  unable  to  admit  this
inference.  In  one  of  the  two  passages  cited  Athena  Polias  is  mentioned ;  ^  in
the  other  Athena  is  addressed  under  a  number  of  complimentary  names,  one  of
which  is  Parthenos.^  But  the  passages,  occurring  in  separate  comedies,  are
wholly  disconnected,  and  a  comparison  of  them  proves  nothing  as  to  the  identity
of  Athena  Parthenos  with  Athena  Polias.

{b)  From  an  expression  '  the  old  temple  of  Athena  Polias,'  which  is  conjee-
turally  restored  in  an  inscription  of  about  100  B.c.,^  Dr.  Dorpfeld  infers  that
there  must  have  been  a  new  temple  of  Athena  Polias  and  that  this  new  temple
was  the  Parthenon.®  The  argument,  even  if  we  grant  the  correctness  of  the
conjectural  restoration  on  which  it  rests,  does  not  seem  to  amount  to  much.  We
may  allow  that  the  expression  *the  old  temple  of  Athena  Polias'  probably
implies  a  new  temple  of  Athena,  but  it  is  not  absolutely  necessary  that  this  new
temple  should  have  been  a  temple  of  Athena  Polias ;  it  might  have  been  a  temple
of  Athena  simply,   or  a  temple  of  Athena   under   some   other  title,   such  as

^  C.  I.  A.  ii.  No.  332.  The  inscription  contains  a  provision  that  a  treaty  of
alliance  shall  be  engraved  on  a  bronze  plate  and  set  up  '  on  the  Acropolis  beside  the
temple  of  Athena  Polias.'  Dr.  Ddrpfeld  assumes  that  the  reference  is  to  the
Parthenon,  but  there  is  nothing  in  the  inscription  to  justify  the  assumption.  The
expression  'temple  of  Athena  Polias'  is  conjccturally  restored  by  Prof.  U.  K5hler
in  another  inscription,  apparently  of  the  first  century  B.C.,  which  directs  that  a
decree  in  honour  of  the  girls  who  prepared  the  wool  for  Athena's  robe  shall  be
engraved  on  a  tablet  of  stone  and  set  up  iv  dxpordXet,  xapA  rbp  vabw  t^  ^kdrj^wat
IloXiddos ].  See  Afittheilungen,  viii.  (1883),  p.  59.  If  the  restora-
tion could  be  proved  to  be  correct,  it  would  go  to  show  that  the  temple  referred  to
was  not  the  Parthenon  but  the  Erechtheum.     See  below,  p.  573  sqq.

*  Mitiheilungen^  xii.  p.  192.  '  lb,  p.  193.
^  lb.  p.  193.  *  lb.  p.  192.

^  EII.  Xixapdi'  rh  XPVM^  ^^^  T6Xe(iif.     rls  Sal  $€bs
ToKiovxos  i<rrcu  ;  rt}  ^aifoOfiey  rhv  iriirKow  ;
TIE.  tI  8*  oOk  *A0rjvalaif  ^(oficy  xoXid^a  ;

Aristophanes,  Birds,  826  sgq.
^  XO.   IlaXXdda  t^p  if>i\6xopop  ifiol
8€vpo  KaXeip  p6not  is  X^"
irapBivoPf  dfiryo  KoOpriy,
1j  irdXiv  iifieripap  ^«
Kal  xpdros  ^P€pi»  li-bvi},
Kkj^boOx^  re  Ka\€iTax.

Id.,  Thesmophor.  iijjS  sqq.
^  C.  I.  A.  ii.  No.  464.      The  inscription  contains  a  decree  for  the  erection  of  a
statue  of  Ptolemy  VIII.  (i  17-81  B.C.)  [xapd  rbw  peCt  tJ/^p  dpxitop  r^'ASripds  if^s
lloXidSos  ....].

*  Miitheilungen,  xii.  p.  194.


572  APPENDIX  BK.   I.   ATTICA

Parthenos.  The  opposition  between  an  *  old  temple  of  Athena  Polias  *  and  a
'  new  temple  of  Athena '  b  not  strict,  but  it  is  sufficiently  intelligible  for  popular
or  even  official  language.

{c)  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  last  argument  to  show  that  the  Parthenon  was  a  temple  of
Athena  Polias  is  this :  **  The  votive  offerings  which  were  preserved  in  the
chambers  of  the  great  temple  (the  Parthenon)  belonged  for  the  most  part  to
Athena  Polias."^  What  the  evidence  for  this  statement  is,  I  have  failed  to
discover.  Scholars  are  aware  that  lists  of  hundreds  of  votive  offerings  belonging
to  Athena  and  stored  in  the  Parthenon  have  been  handed  down  to  us  in  inscrip-
tions. With  the  help  of  the  Indices  to  the  Corpus  of  Attic  Inscriptions,  I  have
made  a  list  of  all  the  votive  offerings  which  are  expressly  designated  in  these  lists
as  the  property  of  Athena  Polias,  whether  preserved  in  the  Par^enon  or  elsewhere.
Here  it  is  : —

One  animaPs  head.'

Silver  water-jugs  (number  not  specified),'  some  of  them  new.^

One  silver  tablet*

One  silver  wash-hand  basin.^

Two  silver  cups.^

Two  offerings  of  Roxana,  wife  of  Alexander  the  Great.®
This  is  all.  Of  these  offerings  one  only  (the  first)  is  known  to  have  been  in  the
Parthenon.  The  two  silver  cups  are  proved  by  a  comparison  with  another
inscription^  to  have  been  in  the  'old  temple.'  The  place  where  the  rest  were
stored  is  not  mentioned.  Thus  the  number  of  votive  offerings  of  Athena  Polias
which  are  known  to  have  been  kept  in  the  Parthenon  amounts  to  one.  How
in  these  circumstances  Dr.  Dorpfeld  is  able  to  affirm  that  most  of  the  votive
offerings  in  the  Parthenon  belonged  to  Athena  Polias,  I  am  at  a  loss  to  under-
stand.

The  presence  in  the  Parthenon  of  a  single  offering  dedicated  to  Athena  Polias,
or  even  of  a  few  such  offerings  (for  I  have  no  objection  to  add,  though  the
concession  is  gratuitous,  the  wash-hand  basin,  the  water- jugs,  the  tablet,  and  the
two  offerings  of  Roxana),  cannot  prove  that  the  Parthenon  was  a  temple  of
Athena  Polias.  For  by  an  exactly  similar  argument  it  might  be  proved  that  the
Parthenon  was  a  temple  of  Zeus  Polieus,  or  of  Brauronian  Artemis,  or  of  Hercules,
or  of  all  three  together,  since  votive  offerings  dedicated  to  these  three  divinities
are  known  from  inscriptions  to  have  been  kept  in  it.^^

Thus  the  evidence  adduced  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  to  prove  that  the  Parthenon  was
a  temple  of  Athena  Polias  may  be  pronounced  inadequate.  As  his  view  that  the
Pre- Persian  temple  was  a  temple  of  Athena  Polias  is  merely  a  deduction  from  his
supposed  demonstration  that  the  Parthenon  was  so,  it  necessarily  shares  the
weakness  of  the  premises  from  which  it  is  drawn.  Yet  on  the  strength  of  this
supposed  demonstration  Dr.  Dorpfeld  considers  it  probable  that  many  later  writers
of  antiquity  who  speak  of  the  temple  of  Athena  Polias  or  of  the  Polias  refer  to  the
Pre- Persian  temple.  But  as,  on  his  view,  the  Parthenon  was  also  a  temple  of
Athena  Polias,  he  admits  that  "  in  writers  from  Demosthenes  downward  it  cannot
always  be  determined  with  certainty  whether  the  Parthenon  or  the  Pre-Persian
temple  is  meant  by  the  name  *  the  temple  of  Athena  Polias.' "  ^^     On  Dr.  Dorp-

•  Mittheilungen,  xii.  p.  194.  *  C.  L  A.  ii.  No.  649.

3  C.  I.  A.  ii.  No.  678.  *  C.  I.  A.  ii.  No.  699.  »  C.  I.  A.  ii.  No.  724.

•  C.  I.  A,  ii.  No.  724.  '  C,  I.  A,  ii.  No.  735.

^  C.  I.  A.  ii.  No.  737  (where  the  epithet  IloXuidt  is  in  both  cases  a  conjectural
supplement  of  the  editor's,  the  inscription  being  mutilated).

•  C.  I.  A.  ii.  No.  733.

^*  Zeus  Polieus,  C.  I.  A.  i.  Nos.  149,  151,  153-159 ;  C.  I.  A.  ii.  Nos.  649,  652,
660.  Brauronian  Artemis,  C.  I.  A.  ii.  Nos.  646.  652,  654,  660,  661.  Hercules.
C.  I.  A.  i.  Nos.  165,  166,  167.

^^  MitthHlungen,  xii.  p.  198.


APP.  THE  PRE'PERSJAN  TEMPLE  573

feld's  theory  there  is  another  source  of  ambiguity  which  he  appears  to  have  over-
looked. The  eastern  chamber  of  the  Erechtheum  was  also  called,  as  he  himself
admits,  'the  temple  of  the  Polias,'^  because  it  contained  the  ancient  wooden
image  of  the  goddess.  Thus  on  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  showing  there  were  simultane-
ously on  the  Acropolis  no  less  than  three  buildings  to  which  the  expression
'  temple  of  Athena  Polias '  (or,  '  of  the  Poltas ')  was  equally  applicable.  The
ambiguity  to  which  such  a  state  of  things  would  necessarily  give  rise  must  have
been  very  perplexing.  Yet  the  writers  to  whom  Dr.  Dorpfeld  refers  speak  of
<  the  temple  of  the  Polias '  without  qualification,  as  if  they  and  their  readers  knew
of  only  one.*

In  order  to  determine  this  question  of  the  proper  application  of  the  title
Athena  Polias  or  the  Polias,  I  have  examined,  I  believe,  all  the  passages  in  the
Corpus  of  Attic  Inscriptions  in  which  the  title  occurs,  as  well  as  all  the  passages
of  classical  writers  bearing  on  the  Athena  Polias  of  Athens  ^  which  I  have  been
able  to  Hnd.  If  I  have  overlooked  any  passage  it  has  been  through  inadvertence.
It  may  contribute  to  the  solution  of  the  question,  which  is  of  some  importance
for  the  history  of  Athenian  religion  and  for  the  topography  of  the  Acropolis,  if  I
here  set  down  the  results  of  my  inquiry.*

In  the  first  place,  then,  there  are  a  good  many  passages  both  of  inscriptions
and  of  classical  writers,  which  mention  Athena  Polias,  without,  so  far  as  I  see,
furnishing  any  indication  as  to  whether  she  was  the  goddess  of  the  Erechtheum,
the  Parthenon,  or  the  Pre- Persian  temple.  They  may  therefore  be  left  out  of
account.^  But  when  these  passages  have  been  eliminated,  there  remain  many
others  which  help  to  determine  the  proper  application  of  the  title  Athena  Polias.

Herodotus  tells  us  ^  that  at  some  time  before  the  conquest  of  Aegina  by
Athens  the  Epidaurians  begged  from  the  Athenians  a  piece  of  the  sacred  olive-
wood  in  order  to  make  two  images  out  of  it,  and  that  the  Athenians  granted  the
request  on  condition  that  the  Epidaurians  should  send  yearly  sacrifices  to  Athena
Polias  and  Erechtheus.  This  conjunction  of  Athena  Polias  with  Erechtheus
strongly  suggests  that  Athena  Polias  is  here  the  Athena  who  shared  the  Erechtheum
with  Erechtheus.  And  this  is  confirmed  by  another  consideration.  The  yearly
sacrifices  which  the  Epidaurians  were  to  offer  to  Athena  Polias  and  Erechtheus

^  Alittheilungen,  xii.  pp.  198,  203.  Dr.  D(3rpfeld  no  doubt  holds  that  the
expression  vabi  r^s  IloXtddof,  as  applied  to  the  Erechtheimi,  designates  only  the
eastern  cella  {vabs)  of  the  temple,  whereas  the  same  expression  applied  to  the
Parthenon  and  the  Pre-Persian  temple  designates  the  whole  temple.  But  this  does
not  alter  the  ambiguity  of  the  expression,  which  is  the  same  in  all  three  applications.

^  Dionysius  of  Halicarnassus  (Dr.  Dorpfeld  should  have  said  Philochorus),
Clement  of  Alexandria,  and  Himerius.  The  passages  of  these  writers  will  be  examined
presently.

^  Other  cities  beside  Athens  had  sanctuaries  of  Athena  Polias.  See  Pausanias.  ii.
30.  6;  id.,  vii.5.  9  J  *^'»  ^"-  3^-  91  Revue Archiologique,  N.  S.  xiii.  (1866)  p.  354;  id.,
N.S.  XV.  (1867)  p.  219 ;  Bull,  de  Corr.  HelUn.  v.  (188 1)  p.  337  ;  W.  Dittenberger,
'  De  sacris  Rhodiorum  commentatio  altera,'  in  Index  Scholarum  (Halle,  1887)  p.  iii.
sqq. ;  id.,  Sylloge  Ins.  Graec.  Nos.  117,  193  ;  Hick's  Gr.  Hist.  Ins.  No.  124  ;  Die
Ergebnisse  der  Ausgrabungen  zu  Pergaman,  VorlSufiger  Bericht  (Berlin,  1880),  p.
76  sq. ;  M.  Friinkel.  Die  Inschriften  von  Pergamon,  i.  Nos.  223,  226.

^  Most  of  the  passages  of  classical  writers  are  collected  in  Jahn-Michaelis,
Pausaniae  descriptio  arcis  Athenarum.  A  few  more  have  been  furnished  by
Michaelis's  Der  Parthenon  and  Pape's  W&rterbuch  der  griech.  Eigennamen.

*  The  passages  are  C.  I.  A.,  \.  Nos.  i88,  190,  273;  C.  I.  A.  ii.  Nos.  57  b  (p.
403).  163.  332,  465  b  (p.  419),  649,  678,  699.  724.  737,  1171,  1420,  1430,  1439;
C.  I.  A.  iii.  Nos.  133,  174,  826,  931,  1054,  1055,  1056,  1062,  3853,  3907  ;  C.I.  A.
iv.  No.  279  a  (p.  36) ;  *E<lni/jLepls  iLpxaLoKoyiicfi,  1884,  p.  167  sq.  ;  Sophocles,
Philoctetes,  134  ;  Dinarchus,  i.  64  ;  Plutarch,  Praecept.  gerend.  reipub.  5  ;  Eustathius
on  Homer,  //.  xxii.  451,  p.  1384.

•  V.  82.


574  APPENDIX  bk.  i.  attica

were  to  be  a  return  or  equivalent  for  the  gift  of  the  sacred  olive-wood.  Now  the
Athena  of  the  Erechtheum,  above  all  other  Athenas,  was  intimately  associated
with  the  olive.  The  original  olive-tree  which  she  had  produced  in  her  contest
with  Poseidon  grew  within  the  precincts  of  the  Erechtheum ;  and  her  own  most
ancient  image  in  that  temple  was  of  olive-wood.*  To  no  other  Athena,  there-
fore, could  the  thank-offerings  of  the  Epidaurians  for  the  gift  of  the  olive-wood
be  so  fitly  presented  as  to  the  Athena  of  the  Erechtheum.  Hence  we  may  take
it  as  fairly  certain  that  by  Athena  Polias  in  this  passage  Herodotus  means  the
Athena  of  the  Erechtheum.

Aristophanes,  in  a  passage  which  has  been  already  quoted,'  plainly  implies
that  the  robe,  which  is  known  to  have  been  woven  and  presented  to  an  image
of  Athena  on  the  Acropolis  at  the  great  Panathenaic  festival  every  fourth  year,'
was  woven  for  Athena  Polias  ;  and  what  is  only  implied  by  him  is  expressly
stated  by  the  scholiast  on  the  passage  and  confirmed  by  other  writers.*  Was
then  the  Athena  Polias  to  whom  the  robe  was  presented  the  Athena  of  the
Parthenon,  the  Athena  of  the  Pre- Persian  temple,  or  the  Athena  of  the  Erech-
theum ?  Apparently  she  was  the  Athena  of  the  Erechtheum  ;  for  the  robe  was
woven  or  at  least  begun  by  two  of  the  four  girls,  called  arrephoroi  or  erre-
phoroiy^  who  were  attached  to  the  service  of  the  Erechtheum  and  dwelt  not  far
from  the  temple.^  This  is  confirmed  by  other  considerations.  The  custom
seems  to  have  been  not  only  to  present  the  garment  to  the  goddess  but  to  clothe
her  image  in  it ;  ^  and  such  a  custom,  bearing  the  marks  of  high  antiquity,
would  most  probably  be  practised  on  Athena's  oldest  image,  namely  the  very
ancient  wooden  idol  in  the  Erechtheum.  We  read  in  Homer  ®  that  the  Trojan
priestess  of  Athena  placed  a  fine  robe  on  the  knees  of  the  image  to  induce  the
goddess  to  save  the  beleaguered  city.  And  the  Greek  images  which  are  histori-
cally known  to  have  worn  real  clothes  seem  generally  to  have  been  remarkable
for  their  great  age.  Thus  the  very  ancient  image  of  Apollo  at  Amyclae,  which
resembled  a  bronze  pillar,  had  a  new  coat  every  year,  which  the  women  wove
for  the  idol  in  a  special  chamber.®  Every  fourth  year  a  college  of  sixteen
women  wove  a  robe  for  the  image  of  Hera  at  Olympia.*®  That  the  image  was
ancient  we  are  not  told  ;  **  but  as  the  temple  in  which  it  stood  was  apparently
the  oldest  in  Olympia,  having  been  originally  a  structure  with  mud  walls  and

*  Schol.  on  Demosthenes,  xxii.  13,  p.  597  ;  Athenagoras,  SupplUatio pro  Chrisii-
ants,  17.

*  Birds,  826  s^g.     See  above,  p.  571,  note  6.

'  The  passages  of  ancient  writers  are  collected  by  Prof.  A.  Michaelis,  Der
Parthenon,  p.  328  j^.  Some  authorities  (Diodorus,  xx.  46  ;  Schol.  on  Aristophanes.
Knights y  566)  say  that  a  robe  was  presented  annually.  But  the  better  authorities
are  in  favour  of  the  view  that  it  was  presented  only  every  fourth  year.  To  the
passages  cited  by  Prof.  Michaelis  add  Aristotle,  Constitution  of  Athens,  49  and  60.

■*  Zenobius,  i.  56 ;  Diogenianus,  ii.  7.

*  Harpocration,  j.z/.  dpfnf</>op€hf ;  EtymoL  Magnum,  p.  149,  s.v.  iipfniffiopet^.

^  Pausanias.  i.  27.  3.  Pausanias  seems  to  have  been  mistaken  as  to  the  number
of  the  arrephoroi,  for  he  speaks  of  only  two.  Perhaps  he  confined  the  name  to  the
two  who  did  not  weave  the  robe.

"^  C.  I.  A.  \.  No.  93  [<iii\ct>L€vviioaiv  rbv  iriirKw.  The  inscription  is  fragmentary,
but  the  reference  seems  to  be  to  the  putting  of  the  robe  on  the  image  of  Athena.
Moreover  there  were  officials  called  praxiergidai  whose  business  it  was  to  clothe  the
ancient  image  of  Athena  (Hesychius,  s.v.  irpa^tepylSai).

8  //.  vi.  87  sgg. ,  302  sgg.

^  Pausanias.  iii.  16.  2,  iii.  19.  2.

w  /fi.  V.  16.

**  The  limestone  head  of  a  goddess,  found  in  the  Heraeum  at  Olympia,  has
been  conjecturally  identified  as  that  of  the  worshipped  statue  of  Hera  which  stood
in  the  temple  (see  note  on  v.  17.  i).  If  this  conjecture  is  right,  the  image  of  Hera
must  have  been  ancient,  since  the  style  of  the  head  is  \'ery  archaic.


APP.  THE  PRE'PERSIAN  TEMPLE  575

wooden  pillars,^  the  custom  of  weaving  the  robe  for  the  image  was  doubtless
of  great  antiquity.  Before  setting  to  work  at  the  loom  the  women  had  to  purify
themselves  with  pig's  blood  and  water — a  mark  of  an  ancient  rite.  Again,  the
curious  bronze  statue  of  a  man  leaning  on  a  spear,  which  stood  in  the  busiest
quarter  of  the  city  of  Elis,  was  clothed  in  a  garment  of  fine  linen  which  appears
to  have  been  renewed  from  time  to  time.  That  the  image  was  of  an  antique
Eastern  pattern  seems  proved  by  its  history  and  the  title  of  Satrap  which  it
bore.^  The  image  of  Aesculapius  at  Titane  was  clad  in  a  white  woollen  shirt
and  a  mantle.  It  would  seem  to  have  been  very  ancient,  for  Pausanias  tells  us
that  it  was  impossible  to  discover  who  had  made  it,  though  some  people  referred
it  to  Alexanor,  the  grandson  of  Aesculapius,  who  was  said  to  have  founded  the
sanctuary.*^  The  ancient  image  of  Hera  at  Samos*  possessed  a  large  ward-
robe of  garments  of  many  hues — white,  blue,  crimson,  purple,  and  pied,  some  of
them  much  the  worse  for  wear.*  The  image  of  Dione  at  Dodona  seems  to
have  been  arrayed  in  fresh  garments  from  time  to  time ;  for  on  one  occasion,
probably  when  her  clothes  were  growing  shabby,  her  husband  Zeus  of  Dodona
commanded  the  Athenians  in  an  oracle  to  adorn  her  image  afresh.  The  Athe-
nians ol>eyed  and  sent  a  supply  of  gorgeous  raiment,  in  which  the  image  of  the
goddess  was  decked  out.^  From  the  great  antiquity  of  the  worship  of  Zeus
and  Dione  at  Dodona  it  is  safe  to  infer  that  the  image  of  Dione  was  very  old  ;
and  as  along  with  the  rest  of  the  finery  the  Athenians  sent  the  goddess  a  new
face  or  mask,  it  seems  probable  that  the  image  was  of  wood.  On  the  Acropolis
itself  the  ancient  image  of  Brauronian  Artemis  was  clad  in  many  robes  of  various
shapes,  the  offerings  of  devout  women ;  and  the  custom  was  extended  to  the
later  image,  a  work  of  Praxiteles.^  These  analogies,  not  to  cite  others  from
the  customs  of  barbarous  peoples,^  confirm  the  view  that  the  image  of  Athena
Polias  which  was  periodically  dressed  in  a  new  robe  must  have  been  the  ancient
wooden  image  in  the  Erechtheum.^     This  probability  is  still  further  strength-

^  See  Dr.  Dorpfeld  in  Historische  und  philologiscke  Aufsdtte  Ernst  Curtius
gewidmtt,  p.  139  sqq.^  and  note  on  v.  16.  i.

2  Pausanias,  vi.  25.  5  $q.  Pausanias's  language  [icBrjfra. — xe/u/3(iXXov(rt)  points
to  a  custom  of  renewing  the  clothes.  A  Greek  inscription  containing  a  dedication  to
the  Satrap  God  has  been  found  in  Phoenicia.     See  note  on  vi.  25.  5.

'  lb.  \\.  II.  6.

*  lb.  vii.  4.  4.     See  Overbeck,  GrUch.  Kunstmyihologie,  iii.  p.  12  sqq.

^  The  list  of  her  wardrobe  is  preserved  in  inscriptions.  See  C.  Curtius,  In-
schri/ten  und  Studien  zur  Geschichte  von  Santos ^  pp.  \q  sq.,  17  sqq.

®  Hyperides,  iii.  col.  35-37,  p.  43  sq. ,  ed.  Blass.

7  C.J.  A.  ii.  Nos.  751,  754-758;  Pausanias,  i.  23.  7;  Jahn  -  Michaclis,
Pausaniae  descriptio  arcis  Athenarunit  p.  8.  Another  image  of  later  times  which  is
kno^\7l  to  have  worn  real  clotlies  was  the  image  of  Ilitbyia  at  Aegium  :  it  was  a  work
of  the  sculptor  Damophon  of  Mcssene  (Pausanias.  vii.  23.  5  sq.)  The  wooden
images  ((6ai'a)  of  the  Twelve  Gods  at  Magnesia  on  the  Macandcr  were  clothed  in
their  finest  robes  and  carried  in  procession  into  the  market-place  on  the  twelfth  day
of  the  month  Artemision,  as  we  learn  from  an  inscription  recently  found  at  Magnesia
{Jahrbuch  d.  arch.  Inst,  9  (1894),  Archaologischer  Anzciger,  p.  83  sq.)  \  but  whether
these  images  were  ancient  or  not,  does  not  appear.

*  Acosta,  History  of  the  Indies,  book  v.  ch.  29  (vol.  ii.  p.  378,  Hakluyt  Society) ;
J.  G.  Wood,  Natural  History  of  Man,  ii.  p.  410;  G.  Turner,  Samoa,  p.  268.

*  Inscriptions  of  about  100  B.C.  show  that  at  that  time  there  were  100  to  120
maidens  who  "wrought  the  wool  for  Athena's  robe."  See  Prof.  U.  Kohler  in  Mit-
theilungen,  viii.  (1883)  pp.  57-66  ;  Bulletin  de  Corr.  HelUnique,  xiii.  (1889)  p.
170.  This  points  to  the  weaving  of  a  large  robe  suitable  for  a  colossal  image.
Hence  Dr.  Dorpfeld  believes  that  the  robe  was  dedicated  to  Athena  of  the  Parthenon
{Mittheilungen,  xii.  p.  200).  It  is  possible  that  this  may  have  been  the  case  in  later
times.  But  we  know  nothing  as  to  the  size  of  the  ancient  wooden  image  in  the
Erechtheum,  and  it  is  extremely  improbable  that  the  custom  of  periodically  presenting
this  most  venerable  image  with  a  new  robe  should  ever  have  been  discontinued.


576  APPENDIX  bk.  i.  attica

ened  by  the  Dresden  Athena,^  a  statue  of  a  thoroughly  archaic  type  wearing
a  robe  embroidered  with  the  very  scenes  which  are  known  from  ancient  writers
to  have  been  wrought  on  the  robe  which  was  periodically  placed  on  Athena's
image  on  the  Acropolis.'  The  statue  in  question  is  certainly  not  a  copy  of  the
Athena  of  the  Parthenon,  the  type  of  which  is  now  familiar  to  us  from  the
Lenormant  and  Varvakeion  statuettes  and  the  gold  medallions  of  the  Hennitage
Museum.  It  can  hardly,  therefore,  be  anytMng  but  a  copy  of  the  archaic
Athena  of  the  Erechtheum  clothed  in  the  embroidered  robe  which  her  hand-
maidens wove  for  her.  True,  the  copy  is  itself  not  archaic  but  archaiistir,  that
is,  it  is  a  somewhat  late  copy  of  a  really  archaic  image,  as  is  shown  by  the  free
style  of  the  scenes  on  the  robe  compared  with  the  stiffness  and  constraint  of  the
statue  itself.  But  this  only  goes  to  prove  that  at  the  comparatively  late  time
when  the  copy  was  executed  the  robe  of  state  continued  to  be  placed,  not  on  the
perfect  statue  of  Athena  in  the  Parthenon,  but  on  a  fiu  ruder  image  of  the  god-
dess, most  probably  on  her  ancient  wooden  image  in  the  Erechtheum.  On  the
whole,  then,  we  may  safely  conclude  that  when,  in  the  passage  under  discnssioo,
Aristophanes  speaks  of  the  robe  of  Athena  Polias,  he  is  referring  to  tlie  Athena
of  the  Erechtheum.

Aeschines  mentions  that  the  priestess  of  Athena  Polias  was  chosen  from  the
ftonily  of  the  Eteobutads.'  That  Athena  Polias  is  here  the  Athena  of  the
Erechtheum  is  quite  certain.  For  the  Eteobutads  or  Butads,  who  frimished  the
priestesses  of  Athena  Polias,  furnished  also  the  priests  of  Erechthens ;  ^  tbdr
legendary  ancestor  Butes  had  an  altar  in  the  Erechtheum,*  and  was  said  to  be
either  a  twin  brother  of  Erechthens*  or  a  son  of  Poseidon,''  who  in  the
Erechtheum  was  identified  with  Erechtheus ;  the  portraits  of  the  &niily  were
painted  on  the  walls  of  the  Erechtheum  ;  *  the  statues  of  some  of  them  stood
within  it :  *  and  a  genealogical  tree  tracing  the  descent  of  one  bcandi  of  the
family  from  Erechtheus  was  dedicated  in  the  temple.  ^^  Hence,  whenever  the
priestess  of  Athena  Polias  is  mentioned  in  an  inscription"  or  fay  an  aacject
writer,^  we  may  be  sure  that  the  reference  is  to  Athena  of  the  Erechthenm.     I:

^  See  O.  Tahn.  ZV  anti^p^issimis  Minervat  simulacris  Atticis,  p.  12 ;  McHer-
\Viesri«r.  DtxJtmdUr^  L  pL  x.  No.  56 ;  Roscher's  Ltxikam  «L  griecA.  tu  rjwu
Mydk^f^"^.  i.  p.  694  ;  Overbeck.  G^sck,  J,  jrruc.k.  Plzstik*  L  p.  255  sf.

*  The  scenes  nrpnfis«*nted  the  wars  of  the  gods  and  giants ;  Athena's  trtsmph
ox-er  Enoeliuius  ts  rotfnctooed  in  particular.  See  the  passages  cnHrcted  by  ProL  A.
Xtkrhjbrixs,  I^rr  P^r:.^4JtiM.  p.  328.

'  .\tfschin«k  :L  147*  ^-th  the  scholiast  on  the  passage  (p.  308.  ed.  Sc!t=!::z<  ;
cp.  llJLTpixration  and  l^'tcusw  LMrir^ft,  s.v.  lE-rtoSovrdSai,  On  the  fiunuy  cf  the
EKobuuds  ^vjir^f-OillT  Butjuis  siraplT^  see  J.  TopfRa*.  AitixJU  G€MtaIa^.  pi  113  -v*-

*  [(^.utarch.]  * 'ir.  .V.  cVx/.  p>p.  S41  b.  S43  bee  i where  the  case  is  mentaooed  cc
a  ttvtber  and  suter  wh?  bevd  the  pri«stbc>od  of  Erechthens  and  the  pnesibood  cc
.VhecuL  resp^ctin^TL  Erechthens  was  idnr5ed  with  Poseidaa  \ above,  p.  339  3^.  ;
heoce  his  priesthccd  was  calued  scmecxaes  the  pnesthood  vsf  IVisTkicMi-ErBchthecs.
scn^fccnes  tbe  presthxxi  of  Pt>csesv2oa  simpiT.

'  F'Ai.Miirttfc-fc  i  jo.  5.  .\  CmguKSt  of  a  aarhfie  scar  hearfag  dK  inscripcaoB  "  cf
the  pcSfsc  c^*  £^Kes  '  \I<}Wws  Bmrrw  his  betai  fccnd  ia  the  Eredtthenni  \C.  /.  A.  =i.

*  b'usti±-'JS  oct  Kcmer.  ."JL  L  i.  p*  13 :  E^^waa^g.  J/j^wam.  pL  209  jy.,  £.rr.
FiKrra>a.  4sd  Fii«r«".3*rs^

*-i\:  :  A.  :-.  Nos.  374.  :3r-  t«=«  >  ?-  3ic'  :  -.'^  A  A,  3.  Nos.  agt  63.  174  x
.pt  4'ii  ►  ^iw-  ^r- ^  'B4n»i*i»i»  i^xou/Aj^LCT*  tiSt,  ?.  14.1  iv.    laser.  No.  r4l

*^  .Vrtcbjrws.   ::.    14."    wtti  :i<  sc£Xv:a:aC :  Scraic.    a.  r.  3S4.  .v.  ;  Ptaardk.  JV


APP.  THE  PRE'PERSJAN  TEMPLE  577

may  be  added  that  the  fact  of  Athena  Polias  and  Erechtheus  havmg  been  served
by  members  of  the  same  ancient  family  favours  the  view  that  from  the  earliest
times,  and  not  merely,  as  Dr.  Dorpfeld  supposes,  from  the  close  of  the  fifth
century  B.C,  the  two  worships  had  been  conjoined  in  a  single  temple.

The  antiquary  Philochorus,  who  wrote  bis  account  of  Attica  about  260
B.c.,^  refers  in  a  well-known  passage  to  the  temple  of  Athena  Polias.  The
passage  is  quoted  by  Dionysius  of  Haiicamassus,^  and  the  context  proves  that
the  quotation  is  literal.  It  runs  thus  :  <*  A  bitch  having  entered  into  the  temple
of  the  Polias  and  gone  down  into  the  Pandrosium,  ascended  the  altar  of  Zeus  of
the  Courtyard  which  stands  under  the  olive-tree,  and  there  lay  down."  It  is
practically  certain  that  *  the  temple  of  the  Polias  *  is  here  either  the  Erechtheum
as  a  whole  or  its  eastern  chamber,  the  ceUa  of  Athena  Polias.  For  the  Pandrosium
or  sanctuary  of  Pandrosus  immediately  adjoined  the  Erechtheum  on  the  west ;  ^
and  the  sacred  olive-tree,  under  which  the  dog  lay  down,  was  in  the  Pan-
drosium.^ Further,  the  eastern  chamber  of  the  Erechtheum  is  on  a  higher
level  than  the  western  chambers  of  the  temple,  and  there  seems  to  have  been  a
communication  between  the  two  halves  of  the  building.^  Thus  the  dog  prob-
ably entered  the  eastern  chamber  of  the  Erechtheum  by  the  portico,  went  down
(dv(ra)  the  stairs  into  the  western  chambers,  and  then  passed  out  through  the
western  door  into  the  Pandrosium.  This  interpretation  fits  so  well  with  the
plan  of  the  Erechtheum  that  it  can  hardly  fail  to  be  right.  Hence  we  have  the
testimony  of  Philochorus  that  in  the  third  century  B.C.  the  Erecluheum  or  its
eastern  chamber  was  called  the  temple  of  the  Polias.  As  an  antiquary  who  had
made  a  special  study  of  the  history  and  monuments  of  Athens,  Philochorus  was
not  likely  to  be  mistaken  as  to  the  temple  of  Athena  Polias,  and  his  evidence  is
therefore  of  the  greatest  weight.  It  will  be  observed  that  he  writes  as  if  he
knew  of  only  one  such  temple.

Strabo^  mentions  two  temples  of  Athena  on  the  Acropolis,  namely  the
Parthenon  and  **  the  old  temple  of  the  Polias,  in  which  is  the  never  dying  lamp."
We  have  already  seen  that  this  '  old  temple  of  the  Polias '  must  be  the  Erechtheum,
since  the  perpetual  lamp  is  known  to  have  been  in  the  Erechtheum.

Plutarch,  in  speaking  of  ancient  wooden  images,  mentions  '*the  wooden
image  of  the  Polias  set  up  by  the  aborigines,  which  the  Athenians  preserve  to  this
day."  ^  This  ancient  wooden  image  is  of  course  the  old  wooden  image  of  Athena
in  the  Erechtheum.  Therefore  by  *  the  Polias  *  Plutarch  clearly  understood  the
Athena  of  the  Erechtheum.  The  scholiast  on  Demosthenes^  also  calls  the
wooden  image  of  Athena  on  the  Acropolis  the  image  of  Athena  Polias,  dis-
tinguishing it  from  the  other  two  famous  images  of  the  goddess  on  the  Acropolis,
namely  the  gold  and  ivory  statue  of  Athena  Parthenos  and  the  colossal  bronze
image  of  Athena  Promachos.

Pausanias,  in  mentioning  the  same  ancient  image  of  Athena  in  the  Erech-
theum, records  its  great  antiquity  and  says  that  in  the  olden  time  the  Acropolis
was  called  the  polis  ( *  city  \^      The  remark  is  obviously  intended  to  explain

^  Cp.  Frag.  Hist.  Graec.  ed.  Mtiller,  i.  p.  Ixxxiv.

^  De  Dinarcho  judicium^  3  K<na¥  eh  rby  Trjt  TloXidSot  wedw  elaeXBowra  kcU  dOca
els  t6  TlaySp6(reiw,  iirl  rbv  ^wfjubv  d^ajScura  rod  'Epxelov  At6$  t6v  inrb  r^  iXalqi
KariKeiTO,

'  Pausanias,  i.  27.  2.

*•  Apollodorus,  iii.  14.  i.  Herodotus  speaks  (viii.  55)  as  if  the  olive  were  in
the  Erechtheum  itself ;  but  this  may  be  only  a  loose  mode  of  expression.  The
evidence  of  Pausanias  (i.  27.  2)  is  indecisive.

5  This  is  thought  probable  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  {Mittfuilungm,  xii.  p.  58).

«  ix.  p.  396.

7  Plutarch,  De  daedalis  Plataeensibus^  in  Dllbner's  ed.  of  Plutarch,  voL  liL
p.  20.

^  xxii.  13,  p.  597.  0  Pausanias,  i.  26.  6.

VOL.  II  2  P


578  APPENDIX  bk.  i.  attica

the  epithet  Poliai  applied  to  the  goddess  of  the  old  image.  There  can  therefore
be  no  doubt  that  to  Pausanias  the  Athena  of  the  Erechtheum  was  Athena  Polias,
and  that  when  a  few  lines  lower  down  ^  he  mentions  various  antiquities  <  in  the
temple  of  the  Polias '  he  means  his  readers  to  understand  that  he  is  still  in  the
Erechtheum.

Lucian  represents  an  imaginary  assembly  of  philosophers  taking  place  on  the
Acropolis  **in  the  eastern  portico  {pronaos)  of  the  Polias,"  where  they  were  pro-
vided with  seats  by  the  priestess.'  We  have  seen  that  the  priestess  of  Athena
Polias  served  in  the  Erechtheum.  It  follows  that  by  <<  the  eastern  portico  of
the  Polias  "  Lucian  means  the  eastern  portico  of  the  Erechtheum.

Clement  of  Alexandria  says  that  Erichthonius  was  buried  "in  the  temple  of
the  Polias."'  As  Erichthonius  was  identical  with  Erechtheus,*  the  'temple  of
the  Polias  *  in  which  he  was  buried  can  only  have  been  the  Erechtheum,  where
he  was  worshipped  jointly  with  Athena.  Clement's  statement  that  EIrichthonius
was  buried  in  the  temple  of  the  Polias  is  copied  by  Amobius.*

Philostratus ^  mentions  "the  image  of  Athena  Polias*'  among  the  oldest
images  in  Cireece.     He  clearly  refers  to  the  ancient  image  in  the  Erechtheum.

lastly,  Himerius,  in  speaking  of  the  AcropoUs,  mentions  "  the  temple  of  the
IVklias  and  the  neighbouring  precinct  of  Poseidon,"  addix^  **  for  after  their  contest
we  united  the  divinities  to  each  other  in  their  shrines."  ^  Obnously  he  is  speak-
ing of  the  joint  temple  of  Athena  and  Poseidon  (Ereditbeos),  that  is,  the
Erechtheun^

Thus  it  appears  that  ancient  writers  finom  Herodotus  to  Himerins  regularly
understooil  Athena  Polias  to  be  the  Athena  of  the  Erechthenm.  Bat  there  is
more  evidence  to  the  same  effect.  The  sacred  serpent,  which  lived  in  the
V>^c■htheum  and  seems  to  hare  been  neither  more  nor  less  than  Erichthonius  or
Kiechthcus  himself,  was  called  the  guardian  of  Athena  Polias.^  This  implies
that  Athena  lV4ias  was  the  goddess  of  the  temple  in  which  the  scspent  had  bis
deiw  luumely  the  Erechtheum.  F^uther,  there  have  been  ftmid  on  the  Acropolis
and  it$  southern  slope  some  pedes:als  which,  as  we  leaxn  from  the  inscripdcos
vVK  theni«  K>rmerly  sui^porttxi  s;a:nes  of  girls  who  had  served  A;hcm  PoSias  as
f^*thki*yi^^  T^  .\thena  Polias  of  these  isscripdoos  is  nniocbeedhr  the  Arhna
«>f  the  F(«chtheum«  sinc>e«  as  we  have  seen  already,  the  girls  caZjed  r^-^rf^s^
w«fv  attachev)  to  the  setrk^e  of  the  ErechthecB  aai  dw^  near  xl.      As  if  :o  ret


*  1  *•.  I,

*  I  «Nn*i%.  .*\«,^£«ir.  £1.     I>.  Pcrpand  t^xsks  thai  ^  rxytr  sbsc  bave  saes=:  :be
<«M*pm  JW5KV  OB  tbf  rs«b«soBt  Secjusse  *•  x  iras  t*»e  aaSr  iccaoc  at  :*»  Acrsccics


d     A  die  TctwA.'t   "^vMMw^  X*  ,\;:^eBta. '
•  i^*    ?^    **<^      Kwwcliiw  SS.TBS.  thK  iSr  jw  :eaL  lic»i      it  ae  ^^i^'if  -t  Ersci-


^•h?(-?  «.,S^tyL  a^  stvr  3,'  hi^  >«^  5ic  ^rrwnc  ?  nciae-.       As  .ismnEcnsH&   3   as
■ttkT**.^'.   V  ^ichfM;  o^uTOpc.  V:hi*Ta  fV^Iifc  •rul  Mr  ig  .git.  m&i  o»r    r'macsL  -

*   ,"   .     .^    i.  Nvfls  V5t*^  "^JH^     *     -^    -""'    u-  ^"^^i^  *^   *2^  iCTt    f-T^


APP.  THE  PRB'PRRSIAN  TEMPLE  579

this  beyond  a  doubt,  one  at  least  of  the  mscriptions  ^  records  that  the  girl  served
<*  Athena  Polias  and  Pandrosus.*'  As  Pandrosus  was  one  of  the  three  maidens  to
whom  Athena  entrusted  the  infant  Erichthonius  (Erechtheus),'  and  as  her  temple
was  actually  contiguous  to  the  Erechtheum,'  it  is  certain  that  Athena  Polias  with
whom  she  is  associated  in  this  inscription  was  the  Athena  of  the  Erechtheum.
For  a  similar  reason  when  we  learn  from  another  inscription  ^  that  the  Athenian
lads  {fiptuboi)  sacrificed  on  the  Acropolis  **  to  Athena  Polias  and  to  the  Nursing
Mother  {Kourotrophcs)  and  to  Pandrosus,"  we  may  be  sure  that  the  Athena
Polias  to  whom  these  sacrifices  were  offered  was  the  Athena  of  the  Erechtheum.^

Thus  far  all  the  passages  of  ancient  authors  and  inscriptions  which  we  have
examined  either  support  the  view  that  Athena  Polias  was  the  goddess  of  the
Erechtheum  or  are  neutral.  There  remain,  however,  three  passages  of  ancient
writers  which  do  more  or  less  countenance  Dr.  Ddrpfeld*s  opinion  that  Athena
Polias  was  also  the  goddess  of  the  Parthenon.  The  gold  and  ivory  statue  of
Athena  which  Phidias  made  for  the  Parthenon  is  called  by  Clement  of  Alexandria
the  statue  of  the  Polias.^  Here,  then,  indubitably  Clement  speaks  of  the  Athena
of  the  Parthenon  as  Athena  Polias.  Again,  a  scholiast  on  Aristophanes  ^  says
that  the  opisthodomos  was  *'  behind  the  temple  of  Athena  Polias.*'  If  this  means
that  the  opisthodomos  was  a  compartment  at  the  west  end  of  the  temple  in
question,  the  scholiast  must  here  be  speaking  either  of  the  Parthenon  or
(according  to  Dr.  Dorpfeld)  of  the  Pre- Persian  temple,  since  the  Erechtheum
had  no  opisthodomos.  In  either  case  his  statement  would  favour  the  opinion  of
Dr.  Dorpfeld,  according  to  whom  both  the  Parthenon  and  the  Pre- Persian  temple
were  temples  of  Athena  Polias.  Lastly,  Eustathius  ^  speaks  of  "  the  image  of  the
Gorgon  dedicated  to  Athena  Polias.*'  It  is  possible  that  Eustathius  was  here
thinking  of  the  ivory  head  of  the  Gorgon  Medusa  which  adorned  the  breast  of  the
statue  of  Athena  Parthenos  in  the  Parthenon.^

These  three  passages  are,  so  far  as  I  see,  the  only  ones  in  all  ancient  litera-
ture which  at  all  favour  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  view  that  Athena  Polias  was  the  goddess

^  C.  I.  A.  iii.  No.  887 ;  cp.  C.  /.  A,  ii.  No.  1390.

'  Pausanias,  i.  18.  a,  &c.

'  lb,  i.  27.  a.

^  C.  I.  A.  ii.  No.  481.

^  For  the  sake  of  completeness  I  will  here  notice  two  more  inscriptions  which
might  perhaps  be  quoted  to  prove  the  identity  of  Athena  Polias  with  Athena  of  the
Erechtheum,  though  I  attach  little  weight  to  their  evidence.  (i)  Two  silver  cups
preserved  in  '  the  old  temple '  bore  the  inscription  '  sacred  to  Athena  Polias '  (C.  I.  A,
ii.  No.  735  compared  with  No.  733).  *  The  old  temple,'  as  we  saw,  was  probably
the  Erechtheum  ;  hence,  it  might  be  inferred,  the  Athena  Polias  to  whom  these  cups
were  dedicated  was  the  goddess  of  the  Erechtheum.  But  this  inference  would  be
very  precarious,  since  we  have  seen  in  the  case  of  the  Parthenon  that  the  votive  offer-
ings stored  in  a  temple  did  not  always  belong  to  the  deity  of  the  temple,  (a)  A
mutilated  inscription,  as  partially  restored  by  Prof.  Kirchhoff  (C.  /.  A.  ii.  No.  464,
see  above,  p.  571,  note  8),  makes  mention  of  '  the  old  temple  of  Athena  Polias.'  If
Prof.  Kirchhoff  s  restoration  is  right,  and  if  '  the  old  temple'  was,  as  I  have  shown
groimds  for  believing,  the  Erechtheum,  this  inscription  furnishes  another  proof  that
Athena  Polias  was  the  goddess  of  the  Erechtheum.  But  as  this  proof  depends  on  these
two  conditions,  little  stress  can  be  laid  on  it.

*  Protrept.  iv.  47,  p.  41,  ed.  Potter.
'  Plutus,  1193.

*  On  Homer,  Od.  xi.  634,  p.  1704.  Eustathius  is  here  referring  to  the  story  that
a  thief  had  once  stolen  the  Gorgon's  head  from  an  image  of  Athena  on  the  Acropolis
(Isocrates,  xviii.  57;  Suidas  and  Photius,  Lexicon,  s.v.  ^CKovprffjs  \  see  O.  Jahn  in
Berichie  d.  k.  sdchs.  Gesell.  d,  Wiss.  xu  Leipzig^  Philolog.  hist.  CL  x.  (1858),  pp.
107-109).  But  we  do  not  know  from  which  of  her  images  the  object  was  supposed
to  have  been  stolen.

*  Pausanias,  i.  34.  7.


58o  APPENDIX  bk.  i.  attica

of  the  Parthenon  as  well  as  of  the  Erechtheam.  The  passage  of  Eostathios
is  almost  valueless  on  account  of  its  ambiguity,  not  to  speak  of  the  lateness
of  the  writer.  There  remain,  therefore,  to  support  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  view
the  testimony  of  Clement  of  Alexandria,  a  Christian  writer  living  in  Egypt  in  the
second  century  A.D.,  and  that  of  a  scholiast  on  Aristophanes  of  unknown  date.
All  other  passages  of  ancient  writers  and  all  the  inscriptions  without  exception
either  support  the  view  that  Athena  Polias  was  the  goddess  of  the  Erechtheum  or
are  neutral.  In  the  face  of  this  vast  preponderance  of  evidence  we  can  hardly
doubt  that  Clement  of  Alexandria  and  the  scholiast  on  Aristophanes  were  mis-
taken, and  that  Athena  Polias  was  the  goddess  of  the  Erechtheum  alone.  If  so.
Dr.  Dorpfeld's  Polias  argument  in  favour  of  the  restoration  of  the  Pre- Persian
temple  must  be  given  up.

(v)  The  Pausanias  argument.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  holds  that  the  restored  Pre-
Persian  temple  was  seen  by  Pausanias  in  the  second  century  of  our  era  and  was
described  by  him  in  a  passage  quoted  below.  ^  At  this  point  of  his  work  Pau-
sanias is  describing  the  Acropolis.  In  the  preceding  chapter  he  had  mentioned
the  precinct  of  Brauronian  Artemis  at  the  south-western  side  of  the  Acropolis ;
and  he  is  now  proceeding  eastward  from  it  towards  the  eastern  front  of  the
Parthenon,  describing  in  topographical  order  everything  he  met  with  that  seemed
to  him  of  interest.  He  b  now  standing  either  to  the  west  or  to  the  north  of  the
Parthenon  and  he  mentions  a  temple.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  holds  that  Pausanias  is  now
on  the  north  side  of  the  Parthenon  and  that  the  temple  which  he  mentions  is  the
Pre- Persian  temple.  That  he  is  now  on  the  north  side  of  the  Parthenon  is
proved,  Dr.  Dorpfeld  thinks,  by  the  fact  that  almost  immediately  after  mention-
ing the  temple  he  mentions  an  image  of  Earth  praying  for  rain,^  which  is  known
from  an  inscription  cut  in  the  rock  to  have  stood  a  little  to  the  north  of  the  Par-
thenon, between  it  and  the  site  of  the  Pre-Persian  temple.  The  present  passage
would  therefore.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  argues,  be  a  very  appropriate  place  in  which  to
describe  the  Pre-Persian  temple.  He  believes  that  there  is  a  lacuna  in  the
passage,  that  a  whole  page  has  probably  dropped  out,  and  that  it  contained
a  description  of  the  temple  and  its  opisthodonios,

I  agree  with  Dr.  Dorpfeld  in  thinking  that  there  is  a  lacuna  in  the  text  of
Pausanias  at  this  point,^  that  a  fuller  description  of  the  temple  mentioned  at  the
end  of  the  passage  has  dropped  out,  and  that  the  present  would  not  be  an
inappropriate  place  in  which  to  describe  the  Pre-Persian  temple,  if  it  still  existed.
Accordingly  if  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  other  arguments  had  convinced  me  that  the  Pre-
Persian  temple  had  been  restored  and  had  subsisted  down  to  Pausanias's  time,  I
should  have  been  disposed  to  believe  with  him  that  Pausanias  had  described  it
here.  But  as  his  other  arguments,  in  my  judgment,  entirely  fail  to  support  his
conclusion,  I  can  hardly  think  that  Pausanias  here  described  a  temple  the  history

^  Pausanias,  i.  24.  3.  As  printed  in  Schubart's  edition  the  passage  stands  thus :
XAcKTot  Zk  yjoi  KoX  irp&repop  wj  *Adrfyaiois  irepura&repSv  rt  ^)  rots  dXXois  is  ri  $€td  i<m
avovdiis.  TrpCjToi  fjij^v  yb.p  *Adrfvav  irwvbiuurav  ^EpydinfiP,  irpQroi  S'  dK(h\ovi  ^Kpfxas
*  *  ofjLov  di  ctfxxriv  iv  T<fi  patfi  "ZTrovdalup  dalfiwp  iarlp.  For  various  attempts  which
have  been  made  to  emend  it  see  Critical  Note  on  the  passage,  vol.  i.  p.  564.

*  /d.  For  the  inscription  see  C.  I.  A.  \\\.  No.  166.  It  is  cut  in  the  rock  about
30  feet  north  of  the  seventh  column  on  the  north  side  of  the  Parthenon  (reckoning
from  the  west).

®  The  counter  arguments  of  my  friend  Dr.  Verrall  have  not  convinced  me  of  the
soundness  of  the  text  (see  Miss  Harrison  and  Mrs.  Verrall's  Mythology  and  Monu-
merits  of  Ancient  Athens,  p.  610  j^.)  That  a  verb  such  as  iTolrjtrap  has  dropped  out
after  dKujXovs  'Epfxds  is  certain,  for  as  the  text  stands  there  is  nothing  to  govern  this
accusative.  And  that  a  fuller  mention  of  the  temple  referred  to  in  the  words  iw  ry
patfi  has  dropped  out  is  nearly  certain,  for  it  would  be  contrary  to  Pausanias's  manner
to  speak  thus  of  '  the  temple '  without  having  specified  the  temple  to  which  he  was
referring.


APP.  THE  PRE-PERSJAN  TEMPLE  581

of  which  is  otherwise  a  total  blank  from  its  destruction  in  480  B.C.  down  to  the
excavation  of  its  ruined  foundations  in  1886.  In  these  circumstances  the  view
advocated  by  H.  N.  Ulrichs  ^  is  still,  in  my  opinion,  the  most  probable,  namely
that  the  temple  here  mentioned  by  Pausanias  was  a  temple  of  Athena  Ergane  ('  the
Worker*).  Certainly  the  defective  passage  opens  with  a  mention  of  Athena  Ergane ;
and  that  the  goddess  was  worshipped  on  the  Acropolis  under  this  title  is  proved  by
the  discovery  on  the  Acropolis  of  no  less  than  five  inscriptions  containing  dedica-
tions to  Athena  Ergane.^  As  two  of  these  inscriptions  ^  were  found  on  the  terrace
between  the  sanctuary  of  Brauronian  Artemis  and  the  west  end  of  the  Parthenon,
it  is  not  improbable  that  there  may  have  been  a  small  temple  of  Athena  Ergane
here.  The  southern  part,  indeed,  of  the  terrace  was  occupied  by  a  large  building
supposed  to  have  been  the  Chalkoiheke  or  'store-house  for  bronzes*  which  is
known  from  an  inscription  ^  to  have  stood  on  the  Acropolis.  The  foundations  of
this  building,  which  abutted  on  the  southern  wall  of  the  Acropolis  and  had  a
colonnade  along  its  northern  front,  were  discovered  a  few  years  ago.^  But  there
is  room  enough  for  a  small  temple  on  the  northern  part  of  the  terrace,  and  this
position  would  fit  in  perfectly  with  Pausanias*s  route.  It  is  true  that  though  thb
part  of  the  terrace  has  been  excavated  no  foundations  of  a  temple  have  been
found.  But  if  the  temple  was  small  the  foundations  might  easily  be  removed.
Similarly  we  know  that  there  was  a  temple  of  Pandrosus  on  the  Acropolis
adjoining  the  Erechtheum,^  but  none  of  the  foundations  has  been  discovered.
It  is  to  be  remembered  that  some  of  the  buildings  which  Pausanias  calls  temples
were  tiny  ;  for  example  he  gives  the  name  of  temples  to  the  choregic  monuments  ^
of  which  a  specimen  has  survived  in  the  well-known  monument  of  L3rsicrates  at
the  eastern  foot  of  the  Acropolis.  The  temple  of  Athena  Ergane,  supposing
that  there  was  such  a  temple  and  that  it  stood  on  this  terrace,  could  not  be  older
than  the  end  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.,  since  the  terrace  appears  to  have  been
reduced  to  its  present  level  at  that  date.^

The  supposition  that  in  the  passage  under  discussion  Pausanias  is  describing
a  temple  to  the  west  of  the  Parthenon  fits  in  with  the  traveller's  route  rather
better  than  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  view  that  he  is  describing  the  Pre- Persian  temple.
For  Dr.  Dorpfeld*s  hypothesis  requires  that  Pausanias  should  have  passed  by
without  mention  the  image  of  Earth  on  his  way  to  the  Pre-Persian  temple,  and
that  after  quitting  the  temple  he  should  have  retraced  his  steps  westward  till  he
came  to  the  image,  then  faced  about  once  more  and  proceeded  eastward  to  the
front  of  the  Parthenon.  Whereas  on  the  other  hypothesis  Pausanias  proceeds
uniformly  eastward  from  the  Propylaea  to  the  front  of  the  Parthenon,  without
once  in  the  interval  returning  on  his  steps,  unless  it  be  to  describe  the  statues  on
one  side  of  the  road  after  he  had  first  described  those  on  the  other.  ^

(vi)  In  conclusion  I  venture  to  state  explicitly  two  architectural  considera-
tions, admitted  by  Dr.  Dorpfeld  himself,  which  have  already  been  implicitly

*  Reisen  und  Forschungen^  2.  pp.  148-155.

^  C,  I.  A,  ii.  Nos.  1428,  1429,  1434,  1438 ;  C.  /.  A.  iv.  No.  373  (^),  p.  205 ;
AeXWoy  dpxaioXo7tic6y,  1888,  p.  138.

'  C,  I.  A.  ii.  1429  (see  H.  N.  Ulrichs,  Reisen  und  Forschungen,  2.  p.  154) ;
C.  /.  A.  iv.  No.  373  ^\  p.  205.

*  C.  I.  A.  ii.  No.  61.

'^  See  Dr.  Ddrpfdd.  •  Chalkothek  imd  Ergane-Tempel,'  MxHheilungtn,  xiv.  (1889)

pp.  304-313-

^  Pausanias,  i.  27.  2.

'  lb.  i.  20.  I  vaoi  d^top  4i  tovto  fJLeydXoi,  where  we  should  probably  read  8ffov
for  OeCjy  with  Prof.  C.  Robert.     See  vol.  i.  p.  563.

8  Dr.  Dorpfeld  in  Mittheilungen,  xiv.  (1889)  p.  313.

®  See  Pausanias,  i.  24.  i  ro&rtav  iripav  &y  ttpviKa  ic.r.X.  In  Pausanias  iripajf
nearly  always  means  'opposite  to,'  not '  beyond.'  See  Prof.  A.  Michaelis  in  MUtheil'
ungen,  ii.  p.  i  sqq.


582  APPENDIX  BK.  I.  ATTICA

indicated  in  the  coarse  of  this  paper,  and  which  seem  to  tell  strooglj  against  his
theory.  In  the  first  place,  if  the  temple  was  rebuilt  twice  or  even  thrice  after
the  Persian  war,  it  is  surprising  that  no  vestige  of  these  restorations  has  sorvived,
and  that  all  the  remains  of  the  temple,  which  are  considerable,  should  date  firom
before  the  Persian  war.  In  the  second  place,  if  Dr.  Dorpfeld  is  right,  the
Athenians  built  the  beautiful  caryatid  porch  of  the  Erechtheum,  one  of  the  gems
of  Greek  architecture,  within  about  6  feet  of  the  long  dead  wall  of  the  Pre-
Persian  temple ;  and  they  not  only  suffered  that  temple  to  remain  blocking  up
the  porch,  but  when  it  had  been  providentially  burnt,  they  deliberately  festered
it.  It  is  hard  to  suppose  the  Athenians  guilty  of  such  an  outrage  upon  good
taste.  Dr.  Dorpfeld  seeks  to  palliate  it  by  comparing  the  case  of  the  Parthenon
frieze,  which  was  fixed  in  a  position  so  high  and  at  such  an  angle  to  the  spectator
that  it  must  have  been  impossible  to  view  it  properly  from  the  ground.  But  the
cases  are  not  paralleL  The  laws  of  Greek  architecture  required  that  the  Parthenon
frieze  should  be  where  it  was ;  they  did  not  require  that  the  beautiful  porch  of
one  temple  should  be  blocked  up  and  hidden  by  the  long  dead  wall  of  another.

On  the  whole,  then,  the  balance  of  evidence  appears  to  incline  decidedly
against  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  theory  that  the  Pre-Persian  temple,  shorn  of  its  colonnade,
was  restored  after  its  destruction  in  480  B.C.,  and  that  it  continued  to  disBgure
the  Acropolis  all  through  the  rest  of  the  classical  ages.  But  I  am  far  from  laying
down  dogmatically  a  conclusion  which  is  reached  only  by  a  somewhat  delicate
weighing  of  the  arguments  on  both  sides,  and  I  will  withdraw  any  or  all  of  the
objections  I  have  urged  to  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  theory  if  he  or  any  one  else  can  prove
them  to  be  untenable.


END  OF  VOL.   II


Printed  by  R.  &  R.  Clark,  Limitbd,  Edinburgh


SlMlOftf  UhNwilly  UbranM

iimiiiiiiiiii

3  bios  D15  015  laO


1/3, 3g»

d  .2-


Stanford  Uniyenity  Libraries
Stanford,  California


BctntB  diia  book  €■  or  before  date  dne^
