Google



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I


rs



n


Front the Ubr.iry of
CAPTAIN THOMAS J. J. SEE



Presented la Stanford by bis st



PAUSANIAS'S
DESCRIPTION OF GREECE



PAUSANIAS'S



DESCRIPTION OF GREECE



TRANSLATED WITH A COMMENTARY

BY

J. G. FRAZER

M.A., LL.D. GLASGOW ; FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLBCB, CAMBRIDGE ',
OF THE MIDDLE TEMPLE, BARS1STER>AT-LAW



IN SIX VOLUMES

VOL. IV
COMMENTARY ON BOOKS VI-VIII



MACMILLAN AND CO., Limited

NEW YORK : THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

1898

All rifkis reterP€d


CONTENTS



PAGB

Commentary on Book VI. Elis (Continued) . i

„ „ „ VII. AcHAiA 115

„ „ „ VIII. Arcadia .187



ILLUSTRATIONS



FIG.



I. The Fortune of Antioch (Marble Statue in the Vatican)
2-4. Exploits of Pulydamas (Marble Reliefs at Olympia)

5. Wounded Giant (from the Gable of the Megarian Treasury) .

6. Ground- Plan of Hippodrome at Olympia (Conjectural Restoration)

7. Ground- Plan of Market- Place at Elis (Conjectural Restoration)

8. Aphrodite on the Goat (Coin of Elis) .

9. Dionysus (Coin of Elis)
I a Hercules and Nemesis (Coin of Erythrae)

11. Hercules on the Raft (Scarab) .

12. Artemis Laphria (Coin of Patrae)

13. Priestess of Artemis in Car (Coin of Patrae)

14. Eurypylus and the Chest (Coin of Patrae)

15. Chest of Eurypylus (Coin of Patrae) .

16. Athena (Coin of Patrae)

17. Mother Dindymene and Priestesses (Coin of Patrae)

18. Poseidon (Coin of Patrae)

19. Harbour of Patrae (Coin of Patrae)
2a Ilithyia (Coin of Aegium)

21. Aesculapius and Health (Coin of Aegium)

22. Zeus suckled by a Goat (Coin of Aegium)

23. Hercules in the Cave (Coin of Bunt) .

24. Fortune and Love (Coin of Aegira)

25. Athena (Coin of Pellene)

26. Ground-Plan of one of the Gates of Mantinea

27. Apollo, Marsyas, and the Muses (Marble Relief found at Mantinea)

28. The Dioscuri (Coin of Mantinea)

29. Ulysses with the Oar ? (Coin of Mantinea)

30. Ground-Plan of Theatre and Market-Place of Mantinea

31. Plan of Alea .....

32. Brickwork at Thelpusa

33. Arion and Demeter (Coin of Thelpusa)

34. Market- Place of Megalopolis (Conjectural Restoration by E. Cnrtius)



PAGB

7
18
68

83
104

los

107

127

128

145
146

147
id,

id.

id.
ISO

id.
161
162

163
171
179
184
203
207
209
id.
211
277
286
292
321



Vlll



ILLUSTRATIONS



FIG.



35. Plan of Theatre and Thersilium at Megalopolis

36. Ground-Plan of Temple at Lycosura ....

37. Head of Demeter (Fragment of Colossal Statue found at Lycosura)

38. Head of Artemis (Fragment of Colossal Statue found at Lycosiu-a)

39. Head of Anytus (Fragment of Colossal Statue found at Lycosura)

40. Marble Drapery of Colossal Statue (found at Lycosiu'a)

41. Ground-Plan of the Temple of Apollo at Bassae (restored)

42. Marble Head from the Temple of Athena Alea at Tegea

43. Marble Head from the Temple of Athena Alea at Tegea

44. Atalanta and the Boar (Coin of Tegea)

45. Bronze Statuette in British Museum (Copy of the Apollo of Canachus)

46. 47. Athena gives Sterope and Cepheus the Hair of Medusa (Coins of

X ^gea «•......



PAGE

369
372

373
374
376
396
427
42$
429

430
434



PLATES



I. Megalopolis
II. Mantinea and Tegea



To face page 318
420



>>



CORRIGENDUM



Page 6$, Hne 16 from foot. For three silver wine-jugs read two silver wine-jugs



BOOK SIXTH



ELIS {Continued)

1. I. statnes whether athletes or not. Among the men

who, without being athletes, had statues at Olympia, were the sooth-
sayer Thrasybulus (vi. 2. 4); Lysander (vi. 3. 14); the philosopher
Aristotle (vi. 4. 8) ; Archidamus, King of Sparta (vi. 4. 9) ; Philip of
Macedon, Alexander the Great, Seleucus, and Antigonus (vi. 11. i ; vi.
16. 2); Areus, King of Sparta, and Aratus (vi. 12. 5); Pyrrhus, King
of Epirus (vi. 14. 9) ; Hiero, tyrant of Syracuse (vi. 15. 6) ; Demetrius
Poliorcetes and his son Antigonus (vi. 15. 7) ; Ptolemy II., Philadelphus
(vi. 17. 3); the rhetorician Gorgias (vi. 17. 7), and the historian Anaxi-
menes (vi. 18. i).

1. I. There are not statnes set np of all the Olympic victors.

Pliny on the other hand asserts that at Olympia it was the custom to
set up statues of all who had won prizes in the games {i\aL hist, xxxiv.
16). The truth seems to have been that every victorious althlete
received permission from the Eleans to set up a statue of himself (cp.
Paus. vi. 3. 6, vi. 13. 9); but that, as all the expense and trouble of
making, transporting, and setting up the statue had to be borne by the
athlete or his friends (cp. Paus. vi. 8. 3, vi. 14. 6), many athletes were
prevented by poverty, death, or other cause from availing themselves of
the permission. See Dittenberger and Purgold, Die Inschriften von
Olympia^ P- 235 sq, Pliny further tells us (J,c.) that only those athletes
who had won three victories were allowed to set up portrait-statues of
themselves. If he is right, the statues of the others would seem to have
been made after a general pattern or a few such patterns, without any
individual likeness to the men in whose honour they were set up. But
to the rule laid down by Pliny there seems to have been occasionally
at least an exception, since we hear of a competitor (Xenombrotus by
name) who had a portrait-statue of himself set up at Olympia after a
single victory in the horse-race {Die Inschriften von Olympioy No. 1 70 ;
see note on vi. 14. 12). No statue of a victor might be larger than
life (Lucian, Pro imaginibus^ 1 1), but this rule would seem not to have
been rigidly enforced (see note on vi. 6. i * Callias of Athens '). Cp.
Chr. Scherer, De Olympionicarupn statuis (Gottingen, 1885), p. 9 sqq.

VOL. IV B



2 STATUE OF TROILUS bk. vi. bus

For lists of the Olympic victors, so far as they can be made out from
ancient writers and inscriptions, see J. H. Krause, Olympia (Wien,
1838), p. 236 5qq,\ G. H. F5rster, Die Sieger in den olympischen
Spielen (two parts, Zwickau, 1 891-1892).

1. 2. many have won the wild oliye by the accident of the lot.
In the competitions in which the athletes contended in pairs (as in
boxing, wrestling, and the pancratium) lots were drawn to decide who
should contend with whom. If the number of competitors was uneven,
one man had to be left out of the first heat ; and in the second heat he
naturally enjoyed a great advantage, since he was fresh, while his
antagonist was tired. Hence it was possible for an inferior athlete,
who had the good luck to draw a bye (as we should say), to win the
prize over a better man **by the accident of the lot," as Pausanias says.
See Lucian, Herfnotimus^ 40, where the mode of drawing lots at the
Olympic games is described. Lots of the size of beans, inscribed with
the letters of the alphabet, were thrown into a silver urn. Two of
the lots bore the letter A ; two more the letter B ; and so on. The
competitors who drew the two A's contended together, and so with the
rest. If the number of competitors was uneven, one letter was inscribed
on a single lot only, and the man who drew it (the ephedras as the
Greeks called him) stood out of the first heat. See J. H. Krause,
Olympia^ p. 109 sqq.

1. 3. Alypns a pupil of Nancydes. As to Alypus see vi. 8.

5 ; X. 9. 10. He is known only from Pausanias. As to Naucydes, see
note on ii. 22. 7.

1. 4. fh)m his own stud. Cleogenes meant that the horse was
bred from one of his own mares by one of his own stallions. So the
Spartan Damonon, in mentioning a victory which he had won in a
chariot-race, says of the horses that they were Ik rav avrw wnrwv k^ic
Tw av[T]cIi [Mnrto)] : i.e, got by his own stallion out of one of his own
mares (Roehl, /. G. A. No. 79). See note on vi. 2. i.

1. 4. another of Troilns. This statue, as Pausanias tells us in
the next section, was by Lysippus. The inscribed bronze plate, which
was fastened to the base of the statue, was found in the northern part
of the Prytaneum at Olympia, 6th June 1879. On the under side of
the plate there are two clamps to attach it to the pedestal. The in-
scription runs thus :

*EXX^vaiv ^pxov t6t€ 'OXi'/ATTtijt, "qviKa fJLOi Zcvs

BioK€V viKrj(raL irptarov 'OXvfjLiridSa
ITTVOLS d6ko<l>6poiSi rh 8€ 8€VT€pov adris €<f>€^rjs

anrois* vtbs 8* i}v Tptatkos 'Akxivoov,

"I was the first man in Greece" (literally "I ruled the Greeks")
" that day at Olympia, when first Zeus allowed me to win an Olympic
victory with prize-winning steeds ; the next time < I won the victory >
with horses again " (i.e. a chariot and horses). '* And I Troilus was
the son of Alcinous." The sculptor Lysippus probably carved his
name on the stone pedestal which has not been found. The victory
(presumably the first victory) of Troilus was won Ol. 102 (372 B.C.),



CH. I STATUE OF CYNISCA 3

but from the character of the inscription it is judged that the statue
was not made till some time afterwards. This statue is supposed to
have been one of the earliest works of Lysippus. It must have been in
bronze, as Lysippus worked in metal exclusively.

See Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 166 ; Archdologische Zeitung, 37
(1879), p. 145 j^., No. 288; Loewy, Inschriften griech. Bildhauer^ No. 94; E.
Hoffmann, Sylloge epigram. Graec, No. 382 ; Brunn, Gesch, d, griech, Kiinstler^
I* p. 358 sq, ; Overbeck, Gesch, d. griech, Plastikj^ 2. p. 140.

1. 5. Oleon, a Sicyonian. See note on v. 21. 3.

1. 6. the lineage and Olympic victories of Oynisca. See iii.
8. I.

1. 6. on this basement there is a statne of Oynisca. A

piece of what seems to have been the pedestal which supported this
statue was found (not in its original position) in the northern part of
the Prytaneum at Olympia, nth June 1879. The pedestal, of which
only about a third is preserved, is of black limestone and round ; it
appears to have been about 3 feet in diameter. It bears two inscrip-
tions, namely an epigram on Cynisca on the round top, and the sculptor's
name on the vertical side. The epigram, to which Pausanias has already
referred (iii. 8. 2), is preserved also in the Greek Anthology (^AnthoL
Palat, xiii. 16), from which we can restore the mutilated inscription on
the pedestal as follows :

2Tra/»Tas /xcv [jSoo'iX^cs fftoll 7raT€/oc9 koX a.ht\^oi'
[a/Ojuari 8* wKi/TrdSoiv tmrcovj vticoxra KvvMTKa
Ciicdva TavS* €[oTao*a'] fxovav 8c fu <^/ai yvvaiKuiv
*£AAa8o9 €K TTcwras Td[v]8€ AajSctv crrcc^vov.

" My fathers and brothers were kings of Sparta. I, Cynisca, conquer-
ing with a chariot of fleet-footed steeds, set up this statue. And I say
that I am the only woman of all Greece that ever won this crown."

The inscription on the vertical side of the base is this : 'AxrcXXcas
KaAAiicAiovs €Trd7/o-€, "Apelleas, son of Callicles, made (it)." Behind
the epigram, on the top of the pedestal, there is the trace of a footprint.
Probably the pedestal supported only the statue of Cynisca, not the
chariot and horses ; for the expression used by Pausanias (XiOov
Kprjirls, ' a basement of stone *) is more applicable to a long pedestal
than a round one ; he would probably have called a pedestal of the
latter sort a ictwv or a (rrqkrj. Or our pedestal may have formed a
semicircular projection from the long pedestal which supported the
chariot.

From the forms of the letters the inscription is judged to date from
the first third of the fourth century B.C. This agrees with the date of
Cynisca, whose brother Agesilaus lived about 442-361 B.C. The
sculptor Apellas (or Apelleas, as his name should be spelt) is mentioned
by Pliny (Na/, hist, xxxiv. 86), who says that the sculptor represented
women in the act of praying {adoranies^ not adomantes is the reading
of the MSS.) Perhaps Cynisca was so represented by him. See the
following note.



THE lAMIDS BK. VI. elis



See Die Inschriften voft Olympia^ No. i6o ; Archdologische Zeitung^ 37 (1879),
p. 151 sq,^ No. 301 ; Loewy, Inschriften griech, Bildkauer, No. 99 ; E. Hoffmann,
Syllogt epigram, Graec, No. 381 ; Brunn» Gcsch. d, grieck. Kiinstler, I. p. 287 ;
id., in Sitzungsberichte of the Bavarian Academy (Munich), Philos.-philolog. CI.,
1880, p. 484.

1. 7- He is represented praying to the god. Cp. v. 25. 5 note.
Mr. Chr. Scherer argues that many of the victorious athletes were thus
represented (De Olympionicarum siatuis^ p. 31 sqq.)

2. I. Stratus. In 1892 Mr. Joubin excavated an ancient Greek
temple at Stratus in Acamania. The temple is peripteral and of the
Doric order; it measures 34 metres by 18.20. The whole of the pave-
ment, with the lower portions of most of the columns, is preserved.
A large altar was discovered to the east of the temple. See AeArtov
apyikioXoyiKov^ 1S92, p. 39-

2. I. the Lacedaemonians were keener breeders of horses etc.
The Lacedaemonian passion for horse-breeding and horse-racing is well
illustrated by a long inscription found at Misira^ near Sparta. It
records the victories won by Damonon in chariot-races and horse-races.
See Roehl, /. G, A, No. 79 ; Roberts, Greek Epigraphy^ No. 264.

2. 2. Lycinos brought foals to Olympia etc. The race between
chariots drawn by foals was not introduced till 01. 99 (384 B.C.) (see
v. 8. 10), and the great sculptor Myron flourished in 01. 80 (460 B.C.)
(Pliny, Nat. hist, xxxiv. 49). It seems impossible, therefore, that
Myron can have made the statues of Lycinus. H. Brunn proposed to
get over the difficulty by an alteration of the text (see Critical Note, vol.
I. p. 588). If we accept his emendation, the statues were made by
Myron, not for Lycinus, but for Arcesilaus, who must have been a con-
temporary of Myron's, since his son Lichas was alive in 420 B.C. (see
next note). Another solution would be to suppose that there was
another and later sculptor of the name of Myron ; and in fact there is
other evidence which might be held to point in this direction. See note
on vi. 8. 5, * Philip, an Azanian.'

2. 2. entered his chariot in the name of the Theban people etc.
This was in 01. 90 (420 B.c.) Lichas was an old man at the time.
See Thucydides, v. 50. 4 ; Xenophon, Hellenica^ iii. 2. 21.

2. 3. the Lacedaemonians marched against the Eleans etc.

See iii. 8. 3-5 ; v. 20. \ sq.\ v. 27. 11 note.

2. 4. the lamids. On this family of diviners, see Bouch^-Leclercq,
Hisioire de la divination dans Pantiquit^^ 2. p. 63 sqq. A scholiast on
Pindar {Olymp,- vi. 1 1 1) gives some details as to their mode of divining.
He says : " There was an oracle at Olympia, of which the founder was
lamus, who divined by means of burnt offerings, which manner of
divination is still employed by the lamids. For taking up the skins of
the victims they place them on the fire and so they divine. But some
say that they divined by cutting the skins ; for they took and rent the
hides of the victims, and they divined by obser\'ing whether the rents
were straight or not." For the latter statement, the authority cited is
" Heraclides in his book On Oracles.^^

2. 4. about which I shall have more to say etc. See viii. 10.
5 ^99'



CH. II DIVINATION BY THE LIVER 5

2. 4* a spotted lizaxd is creeping toward Ms right shoulder etc.
This kind of lizard (called by the Greeks the galeotes^ said to be the
gecko) appears to have been especially observed by diviners ; for in
Sicily there was a race of diviners called Galeots (Fa Accural or FaAcot ),
who may have derived their name from the reptile. They claimed to
be descended from Galeus, a son of Apollo ; but galeus {galeos) is only
another form oi galeotesy <a spotted lizard' ; and that the lizard stood in
some close mythical relation to Apollo seems proved by the statue of
Apollo the Lizard-Killer {Saurokionos), See Stephanus Byz., s,v, FaXco)-
rai ; Hesychius, s.v, FaAcot ; Aelian, Nat, anirn. xii. 46 ; Cicero, De
divinationey i. 20. 39 ; Bouch^-Leclercq, Hist de la divination dans
fantiquit^y 2. p. 74 sq, Cp. Welcker, Antike Denhndler^ i. p. 406
sqq. The lizard is especially observed in divination by the Polynesians
and Malays. See Meyners d'Estrey, in L Anthropologies 3 (1892),
pp. 71 1-7 1 9. Prof. Haddon tells me that the lizard is also used
in divination by the natives of Torres Strait. For another possible
derivation of the name Galeots, see note on v. 23. 6. The two deriva-
tions might be reconciled by supposing that the ancient barbarian
inhabitants of Little Hybla had the lizard for their totem, in other words,
that they called themselves Lizards, and regarded lizards as sacred
or as their kinsfolk. Similarly a tribe in Libya called their towns or
kraals as well as themselves after apes, and apes lived, in the houses,
being regarded as gods by the people (Diodorus, xx. 58). There were
various families or tribes in antiquity who called themselves Snake-
bom (ophiogenes\ and treated snakes as their kinsfolk (Pliny, Nat,
hist, xxviii. 30 sq. ; Varro, in Priscian, x. 32, vol. i. p. 524, ed. Keil ;
Strabo, xiii. i. 14; Aelian, Nat. anim. xii. 39). Cp. J. G. Frazer,
Totemism, p. 22.

2. 4. a dog cut in two with its liver exposed. On divina-
tion by inspection of the liver of animals, see Schol. on Aristophanes,
IVaspSy 831 ; Cicero, De divinatione^ ii. 13. 32 ; Artemidorus, Onirocr.
ii. 69 ; Hesychius, s.v. pvrd. ; Hippolytus, Refut. omn. haeres. iv. 40 ;
Bouch^Leclercq, Hist, de la Divination^ i. p. lyi sq. This mode of
divination is sometimes depicted on Greek vases ; the hero, about to go
forth to battle, is consulting a liver which is presented to him by
a naked youth. As to these and other representations of the subject on
ancient monuments, see Fr. Lenormant, in Gazette Archdologique^ 6
(1880), pp. 203-215. Lenormant published (pp. cit. plate 34) a Greek
bronze statuette representing a young man holding a laurel branch in
his right hand and what Lenormant took to be the liver of a young lamb
or kid in his left. The figure, according to Lenormant, is that of a
diviner presenting to the god the liver after ascertaining from an inspec-
tion of it that the omens were favourable. This presentation was what
the Greeks called koWu^Iv^ and the Latins Ware. Divination by means
of the liver has been practised by other peoples, as by the Chaldaeans
and Assyrians (Fr. Lenormant, La divination chez les Chaldiens^ P- 55
sqq.) When Col. Dalton visited a village of the Abors in Eastern
India, a pig's liver was brought to him on a tray, and he was asked
what he thought of it. He said he thought it was a good, healthy-



6 THE FORTUNE OF ANTIOCH bk. vi. elis

looking liver. " Ah," they answered, " but what docs it reveal in
regard to your intentions in visiting us ? " And when the colonel
suggested that they should try to find that out from his words and looks,
they stated that the words and looks of men are ever fallacious, but
that pig's liver never deceived them (Dalton, Ethnology of Bengal, p.
25). The Toumbuluh tribe of Minahasa (northern Celebes) divine by
means of a fowPs liver (J. G. F. Riedel, in Internationales Archiv fur
Ethnografhte, 8 (1895), PP- 95> 97> 99)- As to the sacrifice of dogs,
see note on iv. 14. 9.

2. 5* Pindar says that he was a son of Apollo etc See

Pindar, OL vi. 58 sqg.

2. 7- Entychides, a Sicyonian. According to Pliny {Nat, hist,
xxxiv. 51) this sculptor flourished in the 121st Olympiad (296-293 B.C),
a date which ajgrees with the statement of Pausanias that Eutychides
was a pupil of Lysippus. Another sculptor of the same name, who
flourished about the end of the first century B.C., is known to us from
the inscribed bases of statues by him which have been found at Delos
(Th. Homolle, in Monuments Grecs, No. 8 (1879), pp. 38-43; id,, in
Bulletin de, Corr, Hellinigue, ^ 8 (1894), p. 336 j^. ; Loewy, Inschriften
griech. Bildhauer^ Nos. 244-249).

2. 7* an image of Fortune for the Syrians on the Orontes.
This is probably the statue of which the Byzantine historian John
Malala has given a description (Chronogr. xi. p. 276, ed. Dindorf). It
was of gilded bronze and represented the Fortune of the city of Antioch
seated above the river Orontes and in the act of being crowned by
Seleucus and Antiochus. It was placed in the theatre of Antioch
by the emperor Trajan. The statue is believed to be figured on coins
of Antioch, and there is a marble statue in the Vatican which is un-
doubtedly a copy of the same statue which appears on the coins. It is
probably, therefore, a copy of the one which Eutychides made for
Antioch. The Fortune of the city is represented as a draped woman
seated on a rock. Her head is adorned with a mural crown ; her left
hand rests on the rock, her right holds a bunch of ears of com. At
her feet the river Orontes, represented as a youthful male figure, is
rising from the waves. The statue is graceful and pleasing, but lacks
the austere dignity which sculptors of the best Greek period imparted
to their images of the gods.

See K. O. MUller, 'De antic^uitatibus Antiochenis,' m\x^ Kunstctrchaeologische
Werke^ j. p. 36 sqq, ; MUller-Wieseler, ZJ^w/twa/w, i. taf. xlix. Nos. 220, bcdef;
Michaehs, in Archtuologische Zeitung^ 23 (1866), pp. 255-257 ; H. Brunn, Gesch, d,
griech, Kiinstler^ I. p. 412 j^. ; Overbeck, Gesch, d, griech. Plcuiik^ 2, p. 172
sq, ; A. S. Murray, Aist, of Greek Sculpture^ 2. p. 3^4 sq, ; W. Helbig, Unter-
suchungen Uber die campanische IVandmaierei, p. 285 ; P. Gardner, Types of
Greek coins, p. 197, with pi. xv. 32 ; iV/., in fournctl of Hellenic Studies, 9 (1888),
pp. 75*77 ; Baumebter's Denkmdler, p. 519, fig. 560. Cp. note on iv. 30. 6.

2. 8. Timon. This victor in the chariot-race is mentioned again
by Pausanias (vi. 12. 6); from the latter passage we learn that his
father's name was Aegyptus. He is to be distinguished from Timon
the pentathlete (v. 2. 5 ; vi. 16. 2). Cp. Krause, Olympia, p. 390 sqq.



CH. II DAEDALUS OF SICYON 7

2. 8. Dasdalni^ a SicyoniuL The statement of Pausanias that
Daedalus made the trophy to commemorate the victory of the Eleans


over the Lacedaemonians fixes the date of the sculptor to about Ol. 95
(401-399 B-c), the date of the war (see note on v. 27. 11). His
date is further determined by the fact that he made statues of Eupole-



8 STATUE OF SOPH I US bk. vi. elis

mus and Aristodemus, Olympic victors in the years 396 B.C. and 388
B.C. respectively (Paus. vi. 3. 4 and 7, with the notes). He seems to
have been at work as late as 369 B.C. (Paus. x. 9. 5 sq, with the notes).
Two or more probably three inscriptions of statues by him have been
found, one at Ephesus, and one or rather two at Olympia. They
confirm the statement of Pausanias (vi. 3. 4) that the sculptor's father
was named Patrocles. See Die Inschriften von Olympia^ Nos. 161,
635 ; Archdologische Zeitungy 37 (1879), p. 45 j^., No. 221 ; Loewy,
Inschriften griech. Bildhauer^ Nos. 88, 89 ; Overbeck, Schriftqttelleny
§§ 987-994 ; H. Brunn, Gesch. d. griech, KUnsUery i. p. 278 sq, ; and
the note on vi. 6. i, *Narycidas.'

2. 10. at the Olympic festival, which was held in the year after
the fonndation of Messene etc. Messene was founded in Ol. 102. 3
or 4 (369 B.C.) (Diodorus, xv. 66) ; hence the \nctor>' of the Messenian
boy Damiscus must have fallen in 01. 103 (368 B.C.)

3. I. Ptolemy calls himself a SSacedoniaii etc. Cp. x. 7. 8. So
in an inscription found at Delos the Syrian King Antiochus the Great
(223-187 B.C.) calls himself a Macedonian (Dittenberger, Sylloge Inscr.
Graec, No. 205). No doubt the descendants of the Macedonian con-
querors long despised the subject races among whom they lived and
disclaimed any blood relationship with them, much as the Normans
looked down on the conquered Saxons.

3. I. Asterion, son of Aeschylus. Nothing more is known of
this sculptor.

3. 2. a Messenian boy, Sophias. A fragment of the pedestal of
his statue was found at Olympia in the bed of the Cladeus in 1885,
after the close of the German excavations. It is of grey limestone, and
bears a mutilated inscription which, as restored by Messrs. Ditten-
berger and G. H. Forster, runs thus : —

2o]<^tos ....
^Mcjtro-ai'tos
[ToGSc kXcJoj viKYjfi M€(r(r[7/vtov OS TTOTc n«rj/]

" Sophius, a Messenian. I celebrate the victory of the Messenian
Sophius, who was proclaimed first in the boys' foot-race." The
inscription apparently belongs to the second half of the fourth century
B.C. It certainly cannot be earlier than 01. 104 (364 B.C.), since the
victor in the boys' foot-race in the preceding Olympiad was the
Messenian Damiscus, before whom no Messenian, with the exception
of Leontiscus and Symmachus, had gained an Olympic victory for
centuries (Paus. vi. 2. 10 sq.) See Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No.
172 ; G. H. Forster, Die olympischen Sieger^ Teil i. p. 30.

3, 4. a wrestler, Aristodemus of Elis. His victory in

wrestling at Olympia was won in 01. 98 (388 B.C.) (Eusebius, Chronic,
ed. Schone, vol. i. p. 206).

3. 5. Damocritos, a Sicyonian. An inscription with the name of
this sculptor was copied by Spon at Rome ; it was from the pedestal of
a portrait-statue by him (Loewy, Inschrift. griech, Bildhaiiery No. 484).



CH. Ill CANTHARUS—PYRILAMPES 9

The dates of the various artists here mentioned by Pausanias are given
as follows by H. Brunn : — Critias, 01. 75 (480 B.C.) ; Ptolichus, about
01. 82 (452 RC.) ; Amphion, about Ol. 88 (428 B.c.) ; Pison, 01. 93. 4
(405 B.C) ; Damocritus, about 01. 100 (380 B.C.) See Brunn, Gesck,
d, griech, Kunstler^ i. p. 105. As to Critias (or Critius, as he should
be called) see note on i. 8. 5. As to Amphion, cp. x. 15. 6. As to
Pison, cp. X. 9. 8.

3. 6. Canthams, a Sicyonian. As a pupil of Eutychides (see note
on vi. 2. 7) this sculptor probably flourished in the first half of the third
century B.C. He is mentioned again by Pausanias (vi. 17. 7) and by
Pliny {Nat, hist, xxxiv. 85).

An inscription from the pedestal of a statue by this sculptor is built
into a staircase at the church of St. Theodore at Hagii Theodori^ a
suburb of Thebes (C. I. G. G. S. i. No. 2471).

3. 7- Enpolemus was victor at Olympia etc His victory was
won in 01. 96 (396 B.C.) (Paus. viii. 45. 4 ; Eusebius, Chronic, ed.
Schone, vol. i. p. 204).

3. 7. the Olympic GounciL Wherever great festivals and games
were celebrated, there seems to have been a sacred Council, whose
business it was to see that the ceremonies were properly performed, and
the rules of the games duly observed. The Olympic Council is often
mentioned in inscriptions {Die Inschriften von Olympia^ Nos. 355, 356,
357, etc) We hear of similar Councils at Actium (Dittenberger, Sylloge
Inscr. Graec. No. 280), and Eleusis (C /. A, iii. No. 702 ; cp. vol. 2.
p. 511).

3. 7. to fine both the judges who had decided in fiftTour of Eupo-
lemns. The judges, being Eleans (see v. 9. 4-6 note), were perhaps
prejudiced in favour of the Elean Eupolemus and against his Ambraciot
adversary Leon. The impartiality of the umpires at Olympia was not
above suspicion (Plutarch, Quaest. Platon. 2 ; Diodorus, i. 95). It has
been observed that the proportion of Elean victors in the games was
suspiciously large (Krause, Olympia^ p. 131). On the other hand it is
to be remembered that Elis would naturally contribute a larger propor-
tion of competitors than the remoter districts of Greece.

3. 8. Oebotas. See vii. 1 7. 6 sq,

3. 9- Nicodamus. See note on vi. 6. 3.

3. 9* the same dread of the Isthmian games that the Eleans
themselves have. See v. 2. 2 ; vi. 16. 2.

3. 10. ancient leaping-weights. See v. 26. 3 note.

3. II. Pantias, who came of the school of Aristocles. See note
on vi. 9. I, *Theognetus Ptolichus.*

3. 12. it befell Gaulonia to he laid utterly waste. Cp. Strabo,
vi. p. 261.

3. 13. Olympus. An otherwise unknown sculptor.

3. 13. Pyrilampes. Cp. vi. 15. i ; vi. 16. 5. The inscribed base
of a statue by " Pyrilampus (j/Vr), a Messenian, son of Agias," has been
found at Olympia {Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 400 ; Archdo-
logische Zeitung, 35 (1877), p. 194, No. 105 ; Loewy, Inschriften griech,
Biidhctuerj No. 274). This Pyrilampus is probably either the same



10 STATUE OF ATHENAEUS bk. vi. elis

Pyrilampes mentioned by Pausanias or at all events a member of the
same family.

3. 15. iMdnted both walls. This proverb is mentioned by Suidas
(j.z/. Svo Toi'xovs dXcit^is), and it is employed by Curius in a letter to
Cicero {EpisL ad familiares, vii. 29. 2, duo parietes de eadem Jidelia
dealbare). In regard to the charge of time-serving here brought by
Pausanias against the Samians, Prof. Percy Gardner remarks that
*' Panofka with justice replies that the dedications, although all by
Samians, were by no means by the same persons, but by the members
of factions bitterly opposed one to the other. The history of Samos,
like that of nearly all Greek cities, is a continuous record of faction-
fights between aristocratic and democratic parties, and of the alternate
victories of each. Thus, while the popular faction poured adulation on
Alcibiades and Conon, the wealthy faction heaped honours on Lysander "
(P. Gardner, Satnos and Samian coins^ p. 41).

4. I. the statue of an Ephesian boxer, Athenaeus. The base of
this statue was found at the extreme south-west comer of the excavated
area at Olympia, 13th December 1879. It is a longish rectangular
block of black limestone. On the upper edge of the short front side is
the following inscription : —

'A^i'aios 'A/wraAcov '£</>€(ru>$.

"Athenaeus, an Ephesian, son of Harpaleus." From the style of the
letters the inscription seems to belong to the fourth century B.C., which
gives us approximately the date of Athenaeus. The footprints on the top
of the base show that the statue was life size, and that the boxer was
represented in the act of lunging out at his adversary. As Pausanias
tells us more about Athenaeus than can be gathered from the inscrip-
tion, it is clear, as Prof. G. Treu observes, that he must have had other
sources of information, perhaps the official register of the victors. See
Die Imchriften von Olympia^ No. 168; Arch&ologische Zeitung^ 37
(1879), p. 206 sq.^ No. 326.

4. I. a Sicyonian, Sostratus. Upon a base of black stone found
by the French at Delphi there is engraved a metrical inscription which
records the many victories of this athlete exactly as Pausanias here
enumerates them. The inscription, as restored by Mr. B. Haussoullier,
runs thus : —

irAJciOTois Si) SiKVOJva irdrpaVy [2(u](r«rT/oaTov vUy
SftXTT/KiTC, KaWurrois t iJyAar<ras <rTC<^vois*

v]iKa>[v] iravKpariov rpls '0Ai»/M7rta, Sis 8* cvt UvSot,
8to8€Ka 5* ef 'l<rO/JLOv [koI Nc/iAJcas <rr€<f>dvovs'

t]ovs B* akkovs awo[pov aT€<l>a\vovs [«rt]8€ifai dpidfiovy
irajwras S' aKTi[7raA.oi;s rrdv]Ta [e]K/oaT€is dfia\€l.

" Sostratus, son of Sosistratus, thou didst glorify thy native Sicyon by
very many and very glorious crowns, being victorious in the pan-
cratium thrice at Olympia, and twice at Pytho, and (carrying oflf)
twelve crowns from the Isthmus and Nemea. But to enumerate the
other crowns is impossible. Thou didst put down thy adversaries and
conquer every one without a combat." Probably, as Mr. Haussoullier



CH. IV STATUE OF BOY WITH FILLET ii

conjectures, a similar inscription was engraved on the statue of Sos-
tratus at Olympia, and Pausanias may have derived his information
in part from the inscription. But that Pausanias had access to other
sources is shown by his mention of Sostratus's surname of Acrochersites
and his mode of fighting. See Bulletin de Carresp, HelUnique^ 6(1882),
pp. 446-448, No. 76 ; E. Hoffmann, Sylloge epigram, Graec, No. 383.

4. I. Acrochersites. On the mode of wrestling here described by
Pausanias (aK/^oxctpi^co-^ai) see Stephani, in Compte Rendu (St. Peters-
burg), 1 867, p. 1 2 sq. Two bronze statues of wrestlers in this attitude
were found at Herculaneum, and are now in the Museum at Naples.

4. 2. the hnndred and fonrth Olympiad is not recorded by

the Eleans. The celebration of the 104th Olympiad fell in 364 B.C.
Sec V. 9. 5 j^. ; vi. 8. 3 ; vi. 22. 2 sq, ; Xenophon, Hellenica^ vii. 4.
28-32 ; Diodorus, xv. 78. The latter historian records that the battle
for the presidency of the games was upon this occasion fought in
presence of the multitude of spectators who had gathered to witness the
games, and who, in their festal robes with wreaths of flowers on their
heads, watched the combat at their leisure, impartially applauding the
doughty deeds done on both sides.

4. 4* Pythagoras of Bheginm. See note on vi. 6. 4. The statue
of Leontiscus by him, here mentioned by Pausanias, is mentioned also
by Pliny (JNat, hist, xxxiv. 59). As to the sculptor Clearchus see iii.
17. 6 note. Nothing more is known about the sculptors Euchirus,
Syadras, and Chartas ; the first of them is mentioned, indeed, by Suidas
(s,v, Scdcrr/KiTos), but the notice is borrowed from Pausanias, and is
bungled in the borrowing.

4. 5. the statue of the boy binding a fillet etc. Prof. C. Robert
has argued {Hermes^ 23 (1888), p. 444 sqq,) that this statue must have
been no other than the figure of a boy in a similar attitude on the throne
of Zeus. See v. 11. 3. But this seems very improbable; the figure
on the throne was probably in relief, not in the round. Others have
identified the statue here described by Pausanias with the statue of
Pantarces mentioned by him below (vi. i o. 6). But this seems at least
equally improbable. See the note on the latter passage. The three
works (the statue of the boy with the fillet, the relief, and the statue
of Pantarces) are rightly regarded by Prof. Furtwangler as distinct
and independent {Meisterwerke d, griech, Plastik, p. 62 note 3). On
representations in ancient art of boys or men binding fillets on their hair,
see Stephani, in Compte Rendu (St Petersburg), 1874, pp. 214-216.

4. 5. Silanion, an Athenian. This sculptor flourished 01. 113
(328 B.C.), according to Pliny {Nat. hist, xxxiv. 51). Prof. Michaelis
argued that the date of Silanion's activity should be placed about forty
years earlier (*Zur Zeitbestimmung Silanions,' Histor, u. philolog. Auf-
sdize E, Curtius gewidmety^ip, 10 7- 114). But Mr. J. Delamarre defends
Pliny's date on the strength of two Oropian inscriptions (C. /. G, G, S. i .
Nos. 4253, 4254). See J. Delamarre, * Le sculpteur Silanion,' Revue de
PkHologie^ 18 (1894), pp. 162-164. The inscribed base of a statue by
Silanion has been found at Pergamus (Frankel, Inschriften von Perga-
mon^ No. 50). According to Pliny {I.e.) Silanion was a self-taught



12 POL YCLES AND HIS FA MIL Y bk. vi. elis

artist. His strength seems to have lain in portraiture. The subjects
of a number of his works are known. See Overbeck, Schriftquelleny
§§ 1 3 50- 1 363; /V/., Gesch, d, griech. Plastik^^ 2. pp. 10-12 ; H. Brunn,
Gesch, d. griech, Kiinstlery i. pp. 394-398 ; /V/., in Siizungsberichte d.
philos. philolog. u. histor. CI. d, k, b, Akad. d. Wissen. zu Miinchen^
1892, p. 663 sqq. ; A. S. Murray, Hist, of Greek Sculpture^ 2. p. 328
sq. \ Fr. Winter, ^SW^moHj Jahrbuck d. archdol. Inst. 5 (1890), pp.
1 51-168. Cp. vi. 14. 4 and 11.

4. 5. Polycles. This sculptor was one of a family of artists known
to us Arom ancient writers and inscriptions, but whose dates and relation-
ships are somewhat difficult to determine.

1. Pausanias twice mentions the sons of Polycles as sculptors.
Thus he says that the statue of the boxer Agesarchus was by the sons
of Polycles (vi. 12. 8 sq.\ and again that they made the image of
Cranaean Athena near Elatea (x. 34. 8). From this latter passage,
taken in connexion with a passage immediately preceding it (x. 34. 6),
we learn that the sons of Polycles were named Timocles and Timar-
chides, and that they were Attic by birth. In the present passage
Pausanias tells us that Polycles made a statue of Amyntas, who was
victorious in the pancratium for boys. Now we know that the pancra-
tium for boys was not introduced until Ol. 145 (200 B.C.), and that the
victor in that year was Phaedimus (Paus. v. 8. 11). Hence the victory
of Amyntas and the statue of him by Polycles cannot have been earlier,
and may have been much later, than 01. 146 (196 B.c.)

2. Pliny mentions {Nat. hist, xxxiv. 50 and 52) two sculptors of
the name of Polycles, one of whom flourished in Ol. 102 (372 B.C.), the
other in 01. 156 (156 B.C.) The former cannot be the Polycles of
Pausanias, since the Polycles of Pausanias, as we have just seen, must
have lived later than 196 B.C. It remains therefore that the Polycles of
whom Pausanias speaks was the Polycles who flourished in 156 B.c.
Contemporary with this later Polycles was a sculptor Timocles (Pliny,
Nat. hist, xxxiv. 52).

3. In another passage {Nat. hist, xxxvi. 35) Pliny mentions two
sculptors, Polycles and Dionysius, the sons of Timarchides, who made
images of Jupiter and Juno in the temples of these deities which stood
within the cloistered court called the Colonnade {porticus) of Octavia at
Rome. The Colonnade of Octavia occupied the site of a colonnade
called the Colonnade of Metellus because it had been built by Metellus
Macedonicus (Velleius Paterculus, i. 11), doubtless after his return in
146 B.C. from his conquest of Macedonia. The temples enclosed by the
colonnade seem to have been dedicated in 1 79 B.C. (J. H. Middleton,
The remains of Ancient Rome, 2. p. 200), but neither from this date nor
from the date of the colonnade can we legitimately infer the date of the
images, since we do not know that they were made for the temples or
the colonnade. In the same passage {Nat. hist, xxxvi. 35) Pliny
mentions a sculptor Timarchides who made an image of Apollo holding
a lyre in a temple beside the Colonnade of Octavia. This Timar-
chides was probably the father of the two sculptors Polycles and Diony-
sius whom Pliny mentions in the same paragraph.



CH. IV POLYCLES AND HIS FAMILY 13

4. In 1880 Mr. Homolle found in Delos a statue with the following
inscription :

Faiov *0^kWiQV MadpKOV (sic) vlhv ^€pov 'IrakiKol
SiKaiocrvvrjs €V€Ka Koi (fnXayaOCas rtjs cis kavrovs

'AiroXktovL,

^lovvcTLos TifMipxiSov

Kol Ttfiap^iSrjs IioX.VKk€Oits

*A0rjvaLOi. cTTotTycrav.

*'The Italians (dedicated) to Apollo (this statue of) Gaius Ofellius
Fenis, son of Marcus, on account of his justness and kindness to them-
selves. Dionysius son of Timarchides, and Timarchides son of Polycles,
both of them Athenians, made (the statue)." The statue in question,
a fair specimen of late Greek work, occupied one of the niches in the
market-place which was especially frequented, if not built, by the Italian
merchants resident in Delos. It cannot have been made earlier, and
probably was made some time later, than 190 B.C., the date of the first
appearance of the Romans in Delos. On the other hand it cannot be
later than 90 B.C., the date of the outbreak of the Social War in Italy,
for after that date the name * Italians ' would not have been used. The
statue may belong, Mr. Homolle thinks, to the end of the second centur>'
B.C. With this date the palaeographical character of the inscription
agrees, and it is confirmed by the fact that the market-place in which
the statue stood appears to have been built not long before 130 B.C.
See Bulletin de Corresp, helUnique^ 5 (1881), p. 390 sqq. ; Hennes, 19
(1884), p. 305; Loewy, Inschrifien griech. Bildhauer, No. 242; W.
Gurlitt, Ueber Pausanias, p. 362.

5. In his excavations on the site of the temple of Cranaean Athena
near Elatea Mr. Paris discovered a fragment of a pedestal bearing, in
letters of the second century B.C., the inscription IIOAYKAHSTIN,
w^hich may conjecturally be thus supplied : TLo\vk\^]s liLp.\apxi^ov].
" Polycles, son of Timarchides (made the statue)."

6. In December 1894 the base of a statue was found near the south-
west comer of the Dionysiac theatre at Athens. It bears the following
inscription in letters which are certainly not earlier than the middle
of the second century B.C., and which may be as late as Sulla's time
{j^ B.C., date of Sulla's death) :

TLfjLap\i8rjs IiokvKk€Ovs OopiKtos V€(aT€pos €'7roir)a'€V.

"Timarchides the younger, son of Polycles and of the township ot
Thoricus, made (the statue)." This proves that there were two con-
temporary sculptors each called Timarchides, and each with a father
named Polycles. Thus we get two Polycleses as well as two Timar-
chideses, living in the second half of the second century B.C. or in the
early part of the first century B.C. See Mittheil. d, arch. Inst, in Athen^
20 (1895), p. 216.

7. On a large pedestal at Lindus in Rhodes there is a mutilated
inscription, which may perhaps be restored thus : —



14 POLYCLES AND HIS FAMILY bk. vi. elis

*A<r[T]vK/5aT[iy 'AWrJvK/jaTevs

IIoAvkX^s noTAvKAcvs ? kqX\
[MJvooTtfios 'ApiaT(u[v45a CTroo/cravJ.

"Astycrate, daughter of Astycrates. Polycles, son of Polydes, and
Mnastimus, son of Aristonidas, made (the statue)." See Inscr, Grace.
InsuL I. No. 855 ; cp. Loewy, Inschriften griech. Btldhauer^ No. 197.
If this restoration is correct, we have a sculptor Polycles, whose fathei^s
name was also Polycles ; but the restoration of even the first two letters
of the father's name is very uncertain.

8. In Rome a marble base was found with the following inscrip-
tion :

" Poenus, a Macedonian. Polycles made (the statue)." The inscription
appears to be, not the original, but a later copy. See Loewy, Inschriften
griech, Bildhauer, No. 486.

On the whole, if we leave out of account the Lindian and Roman
inscriptions, which contribute little or nothing certain to the solution of
the question, we find that the evidence points to the existence of a
family of sculptors who lived in the second century B.C, and who bore
the names of Polycles, Timocles, Timarchides, and Timarchides, and
that two at least of these names (namely Polycles and Timarchides)
were each borne by two members of the family. Many family-trees
have been suggested by modem scholars. The best perhaps is the one
proposed by Mr. W. Gurlitt, which, though it was drawn up before the
Athenian and Elatean inscriptions were found, is perfectly reconcilable
with, or rather is confirmed by, them. It is as follows :

PoLYCLBS I., an Athenian,
after 296 B.c. (Paus. vi. 4. 5) ; about 156 b.c (Pliny, N. H. xxxiv. 5a)



Timocles Timarchides I.

about 156 B.c (Pliny, N. H. xxxiv. 53); Paus. vi. 12. 9^ x. 34. 6 and 8

Pausanias, vi. za. 9, x. 34. 6 and 8



(



Polycles II. Dionysius of Athens

Second century b.c (Elatean inscription) Between 130-90 B.& (Delian inscription)

Plmy, xxxvi. 35 Phny» ^« H. xxxvi. 35

Timarchides II., an Athenian of Thoricus
Between 150-78 b.c f Athenian inscription)
Between 130-90 b.c. (Delian inscription)

Prof. C. Robert proposed a family-tree which, so far as the names
and relationships go, agrees with the foregoing, but differs from it as to
dates, since Prof. Robert would assign Polycles I., with his sons Timocles
and Timarchides I., to the third, instead of to the second century B.C.
His reason for doing so is this. In a passage quoted by Eusebius
{Praefar. Evang, vi. 8. 17 sq,) from a work of the Stoic philosopher
Chrysippus, who died in 207 B.C., mention is made of a boxer Heges-
archus. This Hegesarchus is identified by Prof. Robert with the boxer
Agesarchus whose statue was made by the sons of Polycles (Paus. vi.



CH. IV STATUE OF CYNISCUS 15

1 2. 8 sq,) from which it would follow that the sons of Polycles lived
not later than the second half of the third century B.C., and that their
father Polycles I. cannot have flourished much after the middle of that
century. But to this view there are grave objections, (i) The date
assigned by Prof. Robert to Polycles I. agrees with the date of neither
of the two sculptors of that name mentioned by Pliny (see above).
(2) The date assigned by him to Timocles (third century B.a) contra-
dicts Pliny, who puts Timocles in the middle of the following century,
namely 156 B.C. (Nat, hist, xxxiv. 52). (3) If Dionysius was at work
between 130 and 90 B.C., as the Delian inscription seems to show, it is
unlikely that his father Timarchides I. should have been at work (as
Prof. Robert supposes) in the third century B.C.

On the whole subject, see Th. Bergk, *Ueber den Hercules des Polycles,*
Zeitschrift fiir Alterthumswissenschaft, 1845, pp. 787-791, 793-795; Brunn,
Gesch, a, griech, Kunstler, i. p. 536 sqq. ; C. Bursian, in FUckeisen* s Jahrbucher,
9 (1863), p. 99 sq,\ OverbecK, Gescn. d, griech, Plastik,* 2, pp. 428-430, 439;
Homolle, m Bulletin de Corresp, helUnique^ 5 (1881), pp. 390-396; C Robert,
in Hermes^ 19 (1884), pp. 300-315 ; Locwy, Untersuchungen 2ur griech, KunstUr-
geschickte, p. 9; «/., Inschriften griech, Bildhatury Nos. 242, 486; W. Gurlitt,
Ueber PausaniaSy pp. 361-365, 416 j^. ; P. Paris, Elatie (Paris, 1892), pp. 125-136 ;
F. Mtinzer, in Mitthnl, d, arch, Inst, in A then, 20 (1895), PP* 216-219.

4. 6. in wrestling alone. The Greek is fjLowoTrdkrjs, The word
seems to designate an athlete who practised wrestling by itself, and not
as part of the pentathlum or pancratium. See W. Dittenberger, in Die
Inschriften von Olympia, p. 287 sq. The same word occurs in the
epigram carved on the base of Xenocles's statue {Die Inschriften van
Olympia^ No. 164 ; see note on vi. 9. 2).

4. 10. All this I have set forth etc. See iii. 10. 5.

4. II. Oyniscns. The upper part of the pedestal of this statue
was found in the Byzantine church at Olympia, 27th March 1877. It
is a quadrangular block of white Peloponnesian marble. Round the
edge of the upper surface runs the following inscription :

irvKTafs TOvS*] dvWriK€V aTr* cvSo^oio Kwutkos
Mav[T]tV€as viKtav waTphs (EXwv ovofia,

'<Cyniscus, of famed Mantinea, who bore his father's name, being
victorious over the boxers, dedicated this (statue)." The sculptor's
name was probably cut on the lower part of the pedestal which is lost
From the archaic forms of the letters the inscription cannot be much
later than the middle of the fifth century B.c. The sculptor must, there-
fore, have been the elder Polyclitus (see note on ii. 22. 7). From the
disposition of the holes for fastening the statue upon the pedestal, it is
inferred that the weight of the body rested on the left foot, while the
right foot was behind and only touched the ground lightly with its fore
part The marks show that the statue was of bronze.

See Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 149 ; K. Purgold, in Olympia : Ergeb-
nisse, Textband 2. p. 148 sq, ; Archdologische Zeitung^ 40 (1882), p. 190, No.
436 ; Roehl, /. G, A, No. 99, pp. 35, 17 J ; uLy Imagines Inscr, Gr, Ant, p. 27 ;
Loewy, Inschriften griech, Bilahauery No. 50 ; £. Hoffmann, Sylloge epigram,
Graec. No. 377 ; Roberts, Greek Epigraphy^ No. 280.



1 6 ERGOTELES—PULYDAaMAS bk. vl elis

It has been conjectured that the statue called *the Westmacott
Athlete' in the British Museum is a copy of Polyclitus's statue of
Cyniscus. * The Westmacott Athlete * represents a young man of
vigorous, athletic form, standing and apparently in the act of placing
the victor's wreath on his head, but the right arm is broken off short ;
the left arm hangs by the side. The style of the statue is thoroughly
Polyclitian, and the footprints agree closely with those of the Olympic
pedestal. The original must have been a fiunous work, for numerous other
replicas and imitations of it have come down to us, including particularly
two statues at Rome, one in the Barracco Collection, the other in the
garden of the Palazzo del Quirinale. See A. Philios, in 'Effn^fjuepls
dpxaLoXoyLKrj, 1890, p. 207 sg^., with pi. 10 and 11 ; Collignon,
Histoire de la Sculpture Grecque, i. p. 499, with fig. 255 ; and especially
A. Furtwangler, Meisterwerke d. griech. Plastik^ pp. 452-471.

4. II. Ergoteles won two victories at Olympia etc.

Pindar composed his twelfth Olympic ode in honour of this Ergoteles. In
that ode (z/. 16 sqq.) the poet alludes to the sedition which drove Ergoteles
from his native Cnosus, and to the two Pythian and the two Isthmian
victories won by him. As, however, he makes no allusion to a second
Olympic victory gained by Ergoteles, it follows that the ode was written
in honour of the first of the two victories, which fell in 01. ^^ (472 B.C.),
as we learn from the Scholia on Pindar (p. 261, ed. Boeckh). The
Pythian victories of Ergoteles fell in the twenty-fifth and twenty-ninth
Pythiad (Schol. on Pindar, lx.\ both of which preceded 01. tt. See
Boeckh, Explic, Pindar^ p. 205 sqq. On the other hand, as Pindar
makes no reference to the Nemean victories of Ergoteles, it follows
that these victories were won after the composition of the ode, and
therefore after Ol. 77 (472 B.C.)

5. I. Pulydamas. Cp. vii. 27. 6 ; Philostratus, De arte gymnastica^
22. The victory of Pulydamas, or Polydamas, as he is also called,
was won in 01. 93 (408 B.C.), as we learn from Eusebius {Chronic, vol.
I. p. 203, ed. Schone), who adds that Pulydamas went to Persia, slew
lions in presence of Ochus {i.e. Darius II., king of Persia), and fought
bare-handed with armed men. Tzetzes refers to the exploits of Puly-
damas in slaying lions and in outrunning a chariot (quoted in Dindorf's
Teubner ed. of Diodorus, vol. 2. p. 149). The account which Suidas
(s.v, noAv6a/Aa$) gives of this athlete is copied almost verbally from the
present passage of Pausanias. Lucian tells us that the statue of Puly-
damas at Olympia was believed to cure fever {Deorum concilium^ 12).

5. 3. in the second yeax of the hundred and second Olympiad.
That is, 371 B.C. But Diodorus (xv. 75) places the sack of Scotusa in
367 B.C. The massacre is mentioned also by Plutarch {Pelopidas^ 29).

5. 4. The highlands of Thrace are the home of lions.

Herodotus, after telling how the camels in the army of Xerxes were
attacked by lions in Thrace, remarks that lions were common in the
region between the river Nestus in Thrace and the river Achelous in
Acamania, but that they were found in no other part of Europe (vii.
125 sq.) Aristotle, who was a native of this district, twice states that
lions were found in Europe between the rivers Nessus and Achelous



CH. V FEATS OF PULYDAMAS 17

(Hist, amm, vi. 31, vii. 28, vol. i. pp. 579 b. 6 sq.^ 606 b. 14 sgq,,
Berlin ed.) The statement is repeated by Pliny {Nat, hist, viii. 45,
where Mestutnque is a mistake of Pliny or his copyist for Nestumque or
Nessumque), Xenophon says {Cyneget, 11): " Lions, leopards, lynxes,
panthers, bears, and such like wild beasts, are caught in foreign lands
about Mt. Pangaeus and Mt Cittus in the interior of Macedonia, about
the Mysian Mt Olympus and in Mt. Pindus, and at Nysa in the interior
of Syria." Dio Chrysostom says (Orat. xxi., ad init,) that in his time
(about 50-117 A.D.) lions no longer existed in Europe, though formerly
they had been found in Macedonia and other places. The existence of
lions in Europe within historical times was questioned by Maury (Ret'ue
archiologique^ 2 (1845), p. 521 sqq.) Since Maury wrote a monument
has come to light which perhaps confirms the statements of the ancient
writers as to the existence of lions in Europe. In 1861 a marble
tombstone was found near the church of the Holy Trinity in the west
of Athens. On the stone is represented in relief a man lying on a bed,
behind and above whose head is a lion ; another man is standing at the
feet of the prostrate man, and is trying to defend him. Behind him the
half of a ship is seen. The epitaph, which is somewhat obscure, says
that the man was a Phoenician, that he was attacked by a lion, but that
friends coming from the ship defended him and buried him on the spot.
There are also two lines in Phoenician giving the man's name. The
inscription is not older than the second century B.C See Bulletino
deii^ InsiitutOy 1861, p. 140 ; Annali delV Jnstituto^ 1861, p. 321 sqq,^
with Tav. d' agg. M. i. In Palaeolithic times the lion ranged over a
great part of Europe ; its remains have been found in France, Germany,
Italy, and Sicily (Sir J. Lubbock, Prehistoric Times^ p. 291 sq.^

5. 7* the band called Immortals. These were the foot-guards of
the Persian king, 10,000 in number. A thousand of them had golden
pomegranates on the butt-ends of their lances ; the other nine thousand
had silver pomegranates. See Herodotus, vii. 41 and 83. The exca-
vations of Mr. Dieulafoy in the palace of the Persian kings at Susa
during the winter of 1885-1886 brought to light a magnificent frieze of
enamelled bricks representing these foot-guards. The figures are life
size and the colours are brilliant. The swarthy dark-bearded warriors
are represented in gay robes, holding long lances in their hands, with
bows and quivers slung over their shoulders. The frieze is now in
Paris. There is an excellent reproduction of it in the Museum of
Science and Art at Edinburgh. See American Journal 0/ Archaeology,
3 (1887), p. 87 sqq,, with the coloured plates xiii. xiv. ; Perrot et
Chipiez, Histoire de Vart dans I antiquity, 5. p. 541, ^%. 348.

5. 7* Of the feats I have enumerated, some are represented on
the pedestal of his statue. A portion of this pedestal, with some of
the reliefs referred to by Pausanias, was found at Olympia by the Germans,
and is now in the Museum there. It is a quadrangular block of white
marble. On one side of it is represented in relief the combat of Puly-
damas with the lion. The lion is rearing on its hind-legs, with its left
hind-paw on the left knee of Pulydamas, while his tail lashes the ground.
The lion's head rests on the right shoulder of Pulydamas, who appears

VOL. IV c



I8 FEATS OF PULYDAMAS bk. vi. kus

to be strangling the beast. On the opposite side of the pedestal, the
victorious Pulydamas is represented standing on the slain lion. On the
third side of the pedestal Pulydamas appears in the middle lifting a
man off the ground ; but the marble is mutilated, and only the feet of


his adversary are seen in air. At the left end of the s
seated on a throne. He is represented a



s Darius,


flowing robe. On the right of the scene are three v
robes, but the upper bodies of two of them are lost.



omen also in long
This scene repre-


sents some feat of strength performed by Pulydamas before the Persian
king, but apparently not the combat with the three ' Immortals.'

The upper sur&ce of the pedestal shows that it was intended for
the reception of another block above it. Probably therefore the pedestal,
which Pausanias expressly describes (§ t ) as lofty, was composed, like



CH. VI NARYCIDAS—CALLIAS 19

the pedestal which supported the victory of Paeonius, of a number of
blocks, one above the other. The reliefs, representing the exploits of
Pulydamas, would then run in a series of horizontal bands round the
pedestal See Olympia: ErgebtUssey Tafelband 3. pi. Iv. 1-3; Die
Ausgrabungen zu Olympia^ 3 (i 877-1 878), pi. xvii. A; K. Purgold, in
Historische u. philologische Aufsdtze Ernst Cur tins gewidmet^ pp.
238-244.

5. 8. the prophecy of Homer. The words are addressed by
Andromache to Hector in their parting scene {Iliad, vi. 407).

5. 8. PalydaxnaA had gone into a cavern etc. Cp. Diodorus,

Frag. ix. 14, ed. Dindorf, with the passage of Tzetzes there quoted.

6. I. Naryddas. Three fragments of a pedestal of yellowish-grey
limestone, conjectured to be the pedestal of the statue of Narycidas,
were found at Olympia in 1878, 1879, and 1880. The fragmentary
inscription is thus restored by Professors Dittenberger and Furtwangler :

[ov Ti /ioi/^ Ttfiav €v] 'Okvfnria tc^vos tcrxov

\_KvSaLViov y€V€av 7r]aT/3t8a d'* [a] yap ura
[i}A^€ fjLoi €v Hvdol 0* or] eviKtav kcu rpls €V 'l[(r]dfJuol

[Aafw.p€TOv 7ra?s wi' Na/ov]Ki&is #iy[a]A€vs.
[Aat3aAos €7r]ot»y<r€ naT/30KA€[o5 #A€ta]<ri05.

*' Not in Olympia alone was I honoured for my strength, thereby
glorifying my family and fatherland. For equal honour fell to my lot
when I conquered at Pytho and thrice at the Isthmus. I am Nary-
cidas of Phigalia, son of Damaretus. Daedalus, a Phliasian, son of
Patrocles, made (the statue)." If the last line of the inscription is
restored aright, we can hardly doubt that Daedalus the Phliasian, son
of Patrocles, is identical with Daedalus the Sicyonian, son of Patrocles,
whom Pausanias mentions here and elsewhere (vi. 2. 8 note). The
inscription belongs to the early part of the fourth century B.C., which,
as we have seen (note on vi. 2. 8), was the date of Daedalus the
Sicyonian. The sculptor may at some time have settled at Phlius.

See Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 161 ; Archdologische Zeitung^
37 (1879), pp. 46, 144 sq.; Loewy, Inschriften griech, Bildhauer^
No. 103 ; G. H. Forster, Die olympischen Sieger^ Teil i. p. 24.

6. I. Oallias of Athens. The pedestal of this statue, consisting of
a simple block of Pentelic marble, stands to the north-east of the
temple of Zeus. It is not in its original position. On the upper (hori-
zontal) surface of the pedestal is the inscription —

KaAAtas AiSvfilov 'Adrjvalos

TrayKpoTiov

MiK(tfv €iroirja'€v 'AOrfvalos.

^'Callias an Athenian, son of Didymius, (victor in) the pancratium.
Micon, an Athenian, made (the statue)." The traces on the top of the
pedestal prove that the statue was of bronze and larger than life, and
that the figure was in an easy attitude, the weight resting equally on



20 CALLIAS — EUCLES bk. vi. elis

both legs. See Die Insc An/ten von Olympia^ No. 146 ; Archdologische
Zeitungy 34 (1876), p. 227 ; Loewy, Inschriften griech. Bildhauer^ No.
41; Roberts, Greek Epigraphy ^ No. 165; Roehl, /. G, A. No. 498.
From Pausanias (v. 9. 3) we learn that the victory of Callias in the
pancratium was won in Ol. ^^ (472 B.C.) In an inscription found on
the Acropolis at Athens (C /. A. i. No. 419) Callias is mentioned as
having been victorious at Olympia, twice at the Isthmus, four times at
Nemea, and also at the Great Panathenian festival. From the pseudo-
Andocides {contra Alcibiadem, 32) we learn that Callias was ostracised.
As to the artist Micon, he was best known as a painter (see note on i.
17. 3); but according to Pliny {Nat. hist, xxxiv. 88) his statues of
athletes were esteemed. A fragment of a base of Pentelic marble,
found on the Acropolis at Athens, is inscribed with the sculptor's name,
which, as restored by some scholars, is " Micon son of Phanomachus."
See C /. yi. I. No. 418 ; Loewy, Inschr. griech. Bildhauer^ No. 42 ;
Kaibel, Epigrammata Graeca^ No. 763. From the date of Callias's
victory we may infer that Micon flourished in the first half of the fifth
century B.C

6. I. Androsthenes won two victories. The first of these

victories fell in Ol. 90 (420 B.C.), as we learn from Thucydides (v. 49).

6. 2. a statue of Eucles. The base of this statue was found at
Olympia, in the East Byzantine wall, 3rd March 1878. It is of black
limestone. On the top are the marks of the feet of a bronze statue of
about life size ; the right foot was in advance of the other. The
inscription is on the vertical side, and runs as follows :

[Ei»ic]A^S KaAAtai'aKTOS *Po6i05.
[Nav]*cv57ys IIaTpo*cA^os hroirjc^.

" Eucles, a Rhodian, son of Callianax. Naucydes, son of Patrocles,
made (the statue)." See Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 159;
Archdologische Zeitungy 36 (1878), p. 84, No. 129; ho^wy^ Inschriften
griech. Bildhauer, No. 86. As a grandson of Diagoras the Rhodian
(vi. 7. I note) Eucles probably won his Olympic victory about the end
of the fifth or the beginning of the fourth century B.C. The style of
the inscription certainly points to a considerably later date ; but the
pedestal with the inscription may have been renewed. As to the
sculptor Naucydes and his brothers, see note on ii. 22. 7. Elsewhere
(vi. I. 3) Pausanias calls Naucydes an Argive. In an inscription found at
Olympia, Polyclitus, one of the brothers of Naucydes, is also called an
Argive (see note on vi. 7. 10). But in another inscription found at
Olympia, Daedalus, the other brother of Naucydes, is called a Sicy-
onian {Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 635 ; Loewy, Inschriften
griech. BildJiauery No. 89), and he is always called a Sicyonian by
Pausanias (vi. 2. 8 ; vi. 3. 4 and 7 ; vi. 6. i ; x. 9. 6). To explain this
seeming discrepancy, H. Brunn reminds us that a close connexion sub-
sisted between the artistic schools of Argos and Sicyon, and that the
elder Polyclitus, though generally called an Argive, is once called a
Sicyonian (Pliny, Nat. hist, xxxiv. 55). He thinks that the Argive school



CH. VI DAMOXENIDAS—EUTHYMUS 21

of art died out about 01. 100 (380 B.C.), and was replaced by the Sicy-
onian school. This opinion is shared by Prof. W. Klein. See H.
Brunn, in Sitzungsberichte of the Bavarian Academy (Munich), 1880,
Philosoph. philolog. CI. p. 472 sqq, ; W. Klein, in Arckaeolog, epigraph,
Miitheilungen aus Oesterreich^ 5 (1881), p. 99.

6. 2. the house of the Diagorids. See vi. 7. i sqq.

6. 2. Polyditns, an Argive etc As to the younger Polyclitus,
see note on ii. 22. 7.

6. 2. a public Mend of the Phocian nation. A decree of the
Phocian confederacy conferring the position of public friend {J>roxeno5)
on three men of Larissa has been fouiid inscribed on a stone at Elatea,
the chief city of Phocis. See Bulletin de Corr, Hel Unique 10 (1886),
P- 359 5Q'\ P» Paris, AlaUe, pp. 61, 210 sqq. Other examples of
proxeny (public friendship) conferred on individuals by confederacies are
known from inscriptions. See S. Reinach, TraiU d^epigraphie Grecque^
p. 361. As to the Phocian confederacy, cp. x. 5. i sq.

6. 3. Nicodamus made the statue of Damoxenidas. The

pedestal of this statue was found 8 metres south of the second column
of the temple of Hera (counting from the east), i8th October 1879.
Its original position was probably to the east of the north-east comer
of the temple of Zeus, near the statues of Callias (§ i, above), Eucles
(§2), and Euthymus (§ 4, below). The pedestal is of black limestone.
On the top is the print of the left foot of a life-size statue ; the boxer
seems to have been represented lunging out with his left foot far in
advance to deliver a blow. The inscription is on the upper (horizontal)
side of the pedestal. It runs thus :

" Nicodamus made (the statue). Damoxenidas a Maenalian." The
second line (containing the name of the boxer) belongs to the original
inscription, and dates from about the beginning of the fourth century B.c.
The first line (containing the name of the sculptor) is much later, dating
perhaps from the first century B.C. This shows that the inscription was
partially renewed about that time. See Die Inschrifien von Olympian
No. 158 ; Archdologische Zeiiung^ 37 (1879), p. 208, No. 328 ; Loewy,
Inschrifien griech, Bildhauer^ No. 98. The sculptor Nicodamus must
have been at work soon after 420 B.C., since he made a statue of Andro-
sthenes, who won a victory in that year (§ i of this chapter). For
mention of other works by Nicodamus see v. 25. 7 ; v. 26. 6 ; vi. 3. 9.
6. 4. Euthymus. The lower block of the base which supported
the statue of Euthymus was found at Olympia 2 metres east of the
pedestal of the Eretrian bull (see v. 27. 9 note) on 5th March 1878.
It is of Pentelic marble and bears the following inscription :

Ev^v/A09 AoKphs 'A(rTVKX.€os rpls ^OXv/jlvl iviKtov
ciKova 8* €(rTrf(r€V rrjvBe Pporols €(ropav.

KvOvfJuo^ AoKphs dirh Z€<f}vpiov dvWrjKt.
Jlvday6pa^ Xa^tos iiroi-qarev.



22 STATUE OF EUTHYMUS BK. vi. elis

"I, Euthymus a Locrian, son of Astycles, was thrice victorious at
Olympia, and he {sic) set up this statue for mortals to behold. Euthy-
mus a Locrian from Zephyrium dedicated (this statue). Pythagoras a
Samian made (it)." An examination of the stone shows that the words
Tr\v^ PpoTois kiTopav were carved by another and less skilful hand than
the rest of the inscription, and that the word dvtOrjKc is an addition
made to the original inscription by the same less skilful hand. Hence
it is supposed that the statue was originally dedicated, not by Euthymus
himself, but by some one else whose name was mentioned in the second
line, and that for some reason this name was struck out and the inscrip-
tion altered into its present form. This explains the awkwardness of
making Euthymus speak in the first person in the first line and in
the third person in the second line. Messrs. Dittenberger and Purgold
suppose that the statue was set up not by Euthymus himself, but by his
native city Locri ; that the original inscription recorded this fact ; and
that the Eleans, offended at any state besides their own presuming to
award such an honour, caused the inscription to be altered in such a
way as to make it appear that the statue had been erected by Euthymus
himself.

See Dig Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 144 ; K. Purgold, in Olympia: Ergeb-
nissct Textband 2. p. 151 ; Arcndologische Zeitung^ 36 (1878), p. 82, No. 127 ;
Roehl, /. G, A, Na 388 ; i/., Imagitus Ins, Gr. Ant. p. 46 ; Loewy, Inschriften
griech, Bildhauer, No. 23 ; Kaibel, in Rheinisches Museum^ N.F. 34 (1879),
p. 203; Roberts, Greek Epigraphy ^ No. 156; E. Hoffmann, Sylloge epigram,
Graec, No. 378.

According to Pliny {Nat. hist vii. 152) the statue of Euthymus at
Olympia and another statue of him at Locri were struck by lightning on
the same day, in consequence of which the Delphic oracle commanded
that sacrifices should regularly be offered to Euthymus, both in his life-
time and after his death.

The first Olympic victory of Euthymus was won in Ol. 74 (484
B.C.), as Pausanias tells us (§ 5). This gives a clue to the date of the
sculptor Pythagoras, who made the statue. He also made a statue of
Astylus, who won Olympic victories in 488, 484, 480 B.c (See vi.
13. I note.) Pliny must therefore be mistaken in saying {Nat. hist.
xxxiv. 49) that Pythagoras flourished in 01. 90 (420 B.C.) Pausanias
always speaks of this sculptor as a citizen of Rhegium (vi. 4. 4 ; vi. 6.
I ; vi. 13. 7 ; vi. 18. i). Pliny, indeed {Nat. hist, xxxiv. 59), and
Diogenes Laertius (viii. i. 47) distinguish the sculptor Pythagoras of
Rhegium from the sculptor Pythagoras of Samos. But as the statue of
Euthymus was by Pythagoras of Samos, and Pausanias, in mentioning
the name of the sculptor (§ 6), does not distinguish him from Pythagoras
of Rhegium, we may assume that the two were identical. Probably
Pythagoras was one of those Samians who, at the instigation of Anaxilas
tyrant of Rhegium, settled in Zancle (Messene), ousting the old inhabit-
ants (Herodotus, vi. 23 sqq.) This took place about 494 b.c. ; and as
the Samians in Zancle may have been subject to Anaxilas of Rhegium
(cp. Thucydides, vi. 4), it is possible that the sculptor Pythagoras
described himself sometimes as a Samian, sometimes as a Rhegian.



CH. VI EUTHYMUS AND THE GHOST 23

As to the sculptor and his works see Overbeck, Schriftqtullen, §§ 489-507 ;
id.^ Gesch. d, griech. Plastik^^ i. p. 263 sqq, ; H. Brunn, Gesch. d, griech.
KunstleTy i. p. 132 sqq. ; Lucy M. Mitchell, Hist, of Ancient Sculpture^ p. 277
sqq, ; A. S. Murray, Hist, of Greek Sculpture^^ I. p. 239 sqq, ; CoUignon, Hist,
ae la Sculpture Grecque^ i. pp. 409-412.

Prof. Waldstein has argued that the so-called Choiseul-Gouffier
Apollo in the British Museum and the statue conunonly called < Apollo
on the omphalos^^ which was found in the Dionysiac theatre at Athens
in 1862 and is now in the National Museum at Athens, are copies of
the statue of Euthymus by Pythagoras of Rhegium. They appear to
be undoubtedly copies of the same statue, of which there are two other
replicas, one in the Uffizi gallery at Florence, and another (inferior one)
in the Capitoline Museum at Rome. The statue represents a young
man of extremely powerful build, standing in an easy attitude. From
the severity of its style the statue probably belongs to the first half of
the fifth century B.C. Another theory is that the statues in question are
copies of the Apollo of Calamis. See i. 3. 4 with the note, where the
literature of the subject is given (vol. 2. p. 66).

6. 4- the river Oaecinos the wonderful phenomenon of the

grasshoppers. The story that the grasshoppers chirped as usual in the
territory of Locri but were silent in the territory of Rhegium, is told by
other writers, but they place the boundary, not at the Caecinus, but at
the Halex. See Strabo, vi. p. 260 ; Timaeus, quoted by Antigonus
Carystius, Histor. MircJ>. i ; Conon, Narrationes^ 5. Diodorus says
(iv. 22) that Hercules, being disturbed in his sleep by the chirping of
the insects, prayed that they might disappear; the gods heard his
prayer and grasshoppers were never afterwards seen in that district.
For references in ancient writers to the song or chirping of the grass-
hopper, see Stephani, in Compte Rendu (St. Petersburg), 1865, p.
80 sqq,

6. 5. Theagenes, the Thasian. See vi. 11. 2 sqq.

6. 7- Euthymus fought with the Hero. The following story of the
victory of Euthymus over the Hero or ghost is told more briefly by
Strabo (vi. p. 255), Aelian (Var. hist. viii. 18), Suidas {s.v. EvOvfioi)^
and Eustathius (on Homer, Odyss. i. 185). Of these writers, Suidas
copies Pausanias, and Eustathius copies Strabo. The name of the
drunken sailor who became a Hero was Polites, according to Strabo
and Eustathius. Suidas calls him Alybas. According to Strabo, the
Hero's shrine was near Temesa, and was shaded with wild olive trees.
(As to the wild olive, cp. Apollonius Rhodius, ii. 841 sqq.^ with the
Schol. on V. 848 ; E. Rohde, Psyche^ p. 161.) The supernatural
beings whom the Greeks called Heroes seem to have been always the
souls of dead men, who in their lives had rendered themselves conspicu-
ous for good or evil. Heroes, in this sense, were often regarded as
dangerous. Thus it is said : " They are thought to be mischievous.
Hence persons passing their shrines keep silence, lest they should suffer
some harm " (Hesychius, s.v. Kptirrovas). On the nature and worship
of these Heroes, see J. Wassner, De heroum apud Graecos cultu (Kiliae,
1883); E. Rohde, Psyche^ pp. 137-186; and the work of Ukert,
referred to in the next note.



24 STA TUE OF CHARMIDES BK. vi. elis

6. 8. the ghoBt of the miizdered ouul The word translated
* ghost ' in this chapter is Saifuav. No one word in English bears all
the meanings of Saifnovy which must be translated variously according
to the context. Here it is used of the spirit and ghost of a dead man,
which is active after death. The word occurs in the same sense in a
sepulchral inscription of Paros, published in the Bulletin de Correspond-
ance helUntque^ 6 (1882), p. 246:

Toxpoy 5* a/Li<^i irv/o la-ffxi^v^ Tifiaiai <r€j8ovT€S
Saifjiovi /lov vkpd^v cri'V ySovLoio'i Stols*

" They sacrificed a bull in the fire to my ghost and to the gods below."
On SaifjLov€s in general, see Ukert, * Ueber Damonen, Heroen und
Genien,' Abhandlungen d. phil. hist. Classe d, kon, sacks, Ges, d,
Wissen. (Leipsic), i (1850), pp. 137-219; Gerhard, * Ueber Wesen,
Verwandtschaft und Ursprung der Damonen und Genien,* Abhand-
lungen d konig. Akad. d. Wissen su Berlin^ PhiloL hist. Abhandl.,
1852, pp. 237-266; Ad. Wahrmund, * Ueber den BegrifF SalfiMv in
seiner historischen Entwickelung/ Zeitsckrift fUr die oesterreichischen
Gymnasien^ 10 (1859), pp. 761-783.

6. 8. to appease the Hero and to give him every year etc

The tastes of the dead man were inferred from those which he had dis-
played in his life. Similarly an English officer, d\nng in a remote part
of India, was worshipped as a demon by the natives and received
offerings of spirits and cigars {Journal of t/ie Anthropological Society oj
Bombay^ i (1886), p. 104).

6. 10. the town is inhabited to this day. Strabo mentions
(vi. p. 255) that in his day the natives of Temesa pronounced the name
of their town Tempsa, but Strabo himself uses the form Temesa.

7. I. Oharmides, an Elean, a boxer. A large block of the
pedestal which supported the statue of Charmides was found in the East
Byzantine wall at 01>Tnpia, 15th March 1878, immediately south of the
pedestal of Euthymus (vi. 6. 4), beside which Pausanias saw it. The
block is of grey marble. From the footprints on the top it appears
that the statue was of bronze and about life size, and that Charmides
was represented standing still with his feet close together. The in-
scription, engraved on the upper surface of the block, is as follows :



BaXctOV TTUKTa



\y-



o8€ Xa/3/x[t^ ayXa^i' €?!S]o[?]
i'a[/A]aT* [*OAi'/A7rta]8o5.



" Thou beholdest in this the glorious form of Charmides, an Elean
boxer, a memorial of an Olympic victory." The date of the victory of
Charmides is unknown, but the position of his monument between those
of Eulh>'mus and the Diagorids raises a presumption that he belonged
to the fifth centur>' n.c. The inscription is not the original one, but a
copy of it made perhaps in the first centur>' B.C., and the block on
which it is carved had, as the marks prove, previously served as the
base of a different statue. See Die Imchriften if on Olympia^ No. 1 56.



CH. VII DIAGORAS AND HIS FAMILY 25

7. I. the Rhodian athletes, Diagoras and his fomily. The

family of Diagoras was as follows :

Diagoras

Acustlans Damagetus Dorieus Pherenice CalUpatira^Callianax

I I

Pisirodus Eucles

Pindar composed his seventh Olympic ode in honour of the victory of
Diagoras in the boxing-match at Olympia, which took place in 01. 79
(464 B.C), according to a scholiast on Pindar (p. 157, ed. Boeckh).
The same scholiast informs us that a copy of the ode, engraved in letters
of gold, was dedicated in the sanctuary of Lindian Athena in Rhodes ;
and he describes, on the authority of Aristotle and Apollas, the statues
of Diagoras and his family at Olympia in the following terms : " At
Olympia, next after the statue of Lysander, stands the statue of
Diagoras ; it is four cubits and five fingers high ; the right hand is
uplifted, the left hand is inclined towards the body. Next to this
statue is the statue of Damagetus, his eldest son, who bore his grand-
father's name and competed in the pancratium ; the statue is four cubits
high, or five fingers less than that of his father. Next to it is the
statue of his brother Dorieus, also a boxer. After him, thirdly, is
Acusilaus, with the boxing- strap on his left hand, but lifting up his
right hand in an attitude of prayer. These sons of the victor stand on
pedestals with their father. After them are statues of two sons of his
daughters, victors also ; one of them is Eucles, who beat Andron in
boxing, and after him is Pisirrhothus " {sic\ This description of the
statues is doubtless taken by the scholiast, directly or indirecdy, from
Aristotle's work on the Olympic victors (Diogenes Laertius, v. 26 ;
Frag, hist, Grace, ed. Miiller, 2. p. 182 sqq.) Apollas, the other
authority referred to by the scholiast, is almost unknown (cp. Frag,
hist, Grace, ed. Miiller, 4. p. 306), but he probably copied from Aris-
totle. It will be observed that both Pausanias and Aristotle (as cited
by the scholiast on Pindar) profess to describe the statues of Diagoras
and his family in the order in which they stood, and that the two orders
differ from each other. According to Pausanias the order was as
follows : — Acusilaus, Dorieus, Damagetus, Diagoras, Eucles, Pisirodus.
According to Aristotle the order was as follows : Diagoras, Damagetus,
Dorieus, Acusilaus, Eucles, Pisirrhothus (Pisirodus). In order to
reconcile this apparent discrepancy Dr. Purgold suggests that the
statues of Diagoras and his three sons stood in one row, which Aristotle
enumerated from left to right, while Pausanias described it from right
to left, and that the statues of the two grandsons stood apart from the
others, perhaps on the opposite side of the road, as thus :

Diagoras Damagetus Dorieus Acusilaus

D n D D

Eucles [ I [ j Pisirodus.



26 DIAGORAS AND HIS FAMILY bk. vi. elis

Prof. Dittenberger, on the other hand, prefers to suppose that the
positions of some of the statues in question were changed between the
time of Aristotle and that of Pausanias, and he finds a confirmation of
this view in some of the inscriptions belonging to them (see below).

Portions of the inscribed pedestals of four of the statues have been
found at Olympia ; the four are those of Diagoras, Damagetus, Dorieus,
and Eucles. As to the inscribed base of the statue of Eucles see above,
note on vi. 6. 2. With regard to the other three :

(i) Five small fragments of a base of white marble were found at
Olympia in 1876 and 1880. On the upper edge of the stone is the
inscription :

Aia['yo/o]a5 Aa/x[ay]7}TOV *Po[8ios].

" Diagoras, a Rhodian, son of Damagetus." See Die Inschriften von
Olympia^ No. 151.

(2) A block of white marble, which had formed part of a pedestal,
was found built into one of the later brick walls of the Leonidaeum.
It bears the inscription :

/\a/myrjTos Aiayopa *P[o5ios].

" Damagetus, a Rhodian, son of Diagoras." See Die Inschriften von
Olympia^ No. 152 ; Archdologische Zeitung^ 38 (1880), p. 52, No. 334.
From the fact that the pedestal was found far from its original position,
built into the wall of an edifice which certainly existed in the time of
Pausanias, Prof. Treu and the late G. Hirschfeld inferred that Pausanias
cannot have seen the statue of Damagetus, but must have borrowed his
notice of it from an older ^ni^r {Archdologische Zeitung^ 40 (1882),
pp. 75 sq.^ 1x3)- But, in the first place, the brick wall where the
pedestal was found belongs to a Roman restoration which, according to
Dr. Dorpfeld's repeated investigations, was later than the time of
Pausanias. And, in the second place, the pedestal itself belongs, not
to the Roman restoration at all, but to a Byzantine wall with which one
of the doorways of the Roman edifice was built up. Thus the fact of
the pedestal having been built into a Byzantine wall cannot prove that
Pausanias did not see it and its statue in their original place. See
Dittenberger and Purgold, Die Inschriften von Olympia^ p. 262 sqq,

(3) A block of Parian marble, which had formed part of a pedestal,
was found in three pieces at Olympia in 1877. Two of the pieces
were found near the base of the statue of Telemachus (see vi. 13. 11
note) ; the third piece was found i o metres west of the pedestal of the
Victory of Paeonius (see v. 26. i note). On the block an inscription,
containing a long list of athletic victories, is carefully cut in archaic
letters of the Ionic alphabet. The inscription is mutilated. As restored
by Messrs. Dittenberger and Purgold it runs as follows :



CH. VII DORIEUS, SON OF DIACORAS a?

['OAv/iirtai a-ayitpnrtov] ['lo-^/iot 5n}£]

['OA.u/in-iin ■Ka.yKpo.ru>v\ ['lo-f/toi jnJf)

['OAv/iffioi xayitpaT]iov '\iiSji.\ol'\

[«al ,ro]v«p<iT«,[v] [N.,.^0 7r[^^]

As thus restored, the inscription records that Dorieus, a Rhodian, son
of Diagoras, won three victories at Otympia in the pancratium ; three
victories at Pyiho (Delphi) in boxing, one of these three having been
won without a contest ; eight victories at the Isthmus, of which five
were in boxing, one in the pancratium, and two in contests which are
□ot specified ; and seven victories at Nemea in boxing. This list of
victories tallies with the li^ which Pausanias gives of Dorieus's victories
(g I and 4 of this chapter), except thai Pausanias does not mention the
three Pythian victories, contenting himself with remarking that Dorieus
woD a victory at Pytho without a contest. But in the inscription as it
stands the name of the victorious athlete is wanting ; and others
(including Messrs. Treu, Roehl, and Loewy) have preferred to suppose
that the missing name is not that of Dorieus but that of Theagenes Che
Tbasian, who won two victories at Olympia, three at Pytho, nine at
Nemea, and ten at the Isthmus. See Paus. vi. 1 1. 4 sq. But to this
view it is objected by Messrs. Dittenberger and Purgold that on the stone
there is not room enough for mention of the nine Nemean victories of
Theagenes ; and further that the mention of a Pythian victory, won
without a contest, is a strong argument in favour of Dorieus (who is
expressly said by Pausanias to have won such a victory) and against
Theagenes (who is not said by Pausanias to have won such a victory).
Victories won without contests were rare ; Pausanias mentions only two
examples (vi. 7. 4; vi. 11. 4), and if Theagenes had won such a
victory, it is highly probable that Pausanias would have recorded it.
Finally, if the athlete commemorated had been Theagenes the Thasian,
the inscription would have been in the Thasian alphabet, whereas it is
in the Ionian, which is known to have been currently used fay the
Rhodians (Kirchhoff, Siudien zur GesMchte des griech. Alphabets,* p.
47 tq.) On the whole, the evidence is decidedly in favour of the view
that the inscription in question refers to Dorieus the Rhodian rather
than to The^^enes the Thasian, The second Olympic victory of
Dorieus was won in 01. 38 (438 b.c) (Thucydides, iii. 8), and hence
his first and third victories fell in Ol. 87 (432 B.C.) and OL 89
(434 B.C.) respectively. The monument at Olympia, with the long
list of his many victories at the various games, was probably erected at
the end of his career as an athlete, say about 420 B.C. ; and with this



28 DORIEUS AND DIAGORAS bk. vi. eus

date the style of the inscription agrees perfectly. See Die Inschriften
von Olympia, No. 153; Archdologische Zeitung^ 35 (1877), P« ^89,
No. 87; /V/., 37 (1879), p. 212; Roehl, /. G. A. No. 380; Loewy,
Inschriften griech, Bildhauer^ No. 29 ; Foucart, in Bulletin de Corr.
Helldniqtu^ 11 (1887), pp. 289-296; Roberts, Greek Epigraphy^ No.
24, pp. 59 J^., 377. It is remarkable that while the inscription on the
pedestal of Dorieus's statue is in the style of the fifth century B.C., the
inscriptions on the pedestals of his father and elder brother, Diagoras
and Damagetus (Nos. i and 2 above), clearly belong to a later age,
namely the second half of the fourth or even the beginning of the third
century B.C. In this fact Prof Dittenberger sees a confirmation of his
view that the positions of the statues of Diagoras and his family were
changed between the time of Aristotle and that of Pausanias (see
above). He supposes that when the statues were shifted, the pedestals
and inscriptions, or rather some of them, were renewed ; and that
among those which were renewed were the pedestals of Diagoras,
Damagetus, and probably of Eucles also. See W. Dittenberger, in
Die Inschriften von Olympia^ p. 260 sq.

7. 2. The statue of Diagoras is by Oallicles. As the victory of
Diagoras was won in 464 B.C., and the sculptor Callicles was probably
not at work till after 420 B.C. (see next note), the statue of Diagoras
would seem to have been made many years after his victory (H.
Brunn, Gesch. der griech. Kiinstler^ i. p. 246).

7. 2. Theocosmus made the statue of Zeus at Megara. See i. 40.
4, from which it appears that this sculptor, father of the sculptor Callicles,
was a contemporary of Phidias and was at work at the time of the out-
break of the Peloponnesian war (431 B.C.) See also x. 9. 8.

7. 2. Eucles. See vi. 6. 2 note.

7. 2. Oallipatira. See v. 6. 7 sq. with the note.

7. 3. the young men carried their £ather etc. A scholiast

on Pindar {OL vii., Introd., p. 158, ed. Bockh) says : " It is said that the
sons being victorious at Olympia on the same day as their father, took
and carried him about the racecourse (stadium) amid the admiration of
the Greeks." It will be observed that Pausanias does not, like the
scholiast, say that Diagoras himself won a victory on the same day as
his sons. The triple victory could hardly have been won in 464 B.C.,
and we do not know that Diagoras won any Olympic victory after that
year. Cicero {Disput. Tuscul. i. 46. iii), like Pausanias, only says
that Diagoras's two sons were victorious on the same day, and he
reports the saying of a Spartan who, congratulating Diagoras on that
occasion, told him, " Die, Diagoras, for you will not ascend into
heaven " {i.e. you can never hope to be happier than you are to-day).
Plutarch, who reports the same saying {Pelopidas, 34), states that
Diagoras saw his grandsons crowned as well as his sons.

7. 3. pelted him with flowers. Cp. iv. 16. 6.

7. 3- being descended from the daughter of Aristomenes. See

iv. 24. 2 sq.

7. 4- Dorieus won eight victories etc. See above, p. 27.

7. 4- He and Pisirodus had gone to Thurii etc. Xenophon



CH. VII HELLANICUS—PYTHOCLES 29

says {HelUnica, i. 5. 19) that Dorieus had fled from Athens and
Rhodes in consequence of being condemned to death by the Athenians ;
that in the Peloponnesian war he fought against Athens ; and that,
while in command of two Thurian vessels, he was captured in 407 B.C.
by the Athenians, but released by them without ransom. We know
from Thucydides also (viii. 35 and 84) that Dorieus commanded a
Thurian squadron against Athens in the Peloponnesian war. Cp.
Diodorus, xiii. 38 and 45.

7. 7- their treatment of Thrasyllus etc. See Xenophon,
Hellenica^ i. 7; Diodorus, xiii. 101-103. Cp. S. A. Naber, ' De slag
bij de Arginusen,' Mnemosyne^ i (1852), pp. 217-256; von Bamberg,
in Hermes^ 13 (1878), pp. 509-514; A. Philippi, * Die Arginusen-
schlacht und das Psephisma des Kannonos,* Rheinisches Museum^ N. F.
35 (1880), pp. 607-609.

7. 8. Hellanicns. The pedestal of his statue was found at
Olympia, nth March 1878, in the East Byzantine wall, to the south ot
the Eretrian bull (see v. 27. 9 note). It is a block of reddish-violet
marble, of a fine crystalline structure. On the upper surface is the
print of the left foot of the statue, together with a round hole for the
attachment of the right foot, which was drawn back and only touched
the ground with the ball of the foot, like the statue of Cyniscus (vi. 4.
1 1 note). The inscription, which is carved on the upper surface of the
pedestal, runs thus : *EAAavi*cos 'AActos €ic Ktirpkov. " Hellanicus, an
Elean from Lepreus." This confirms Pausanias's statement (v. 5. 3)
that whenever any citizens of Lepreus won prizes at Olympia "the
herald proclaimed them Eleans from Lepreus." The victory of
Hellanicus, as Pausanias informs us, was won in 01. 89 (424 B.c.)
The inscription, however, is much later; to judge from its style it
belongs to the first century B.C. It was doubtless cut to replace the
original inscription, which had worn away, but of which there are still
feint traces on the upper surface of the base. See Die Inschrifien von
Olympia^ No. 155.

7. 10. cheese from the basket. Le, new-made cheese. As soon
as the milk had coagulated, it was taken out of the pail and placed in
baskets, to let the whey ooze out of it. Some farmers placed weights
on the baskets, to squeeze out the whey the fester. When taken out of
the baskets, the cheeses were placed on clean boards in a cool shady
place. See Columella, De re rustica, vii. 8 ; Palladius, vi. 9 ; Pollux,
vii. § 175. Pausanias here tells us that the athletes used to eat the
cheese fresh from the basket, as soon as the whey had been strained off.

7, 10. that of Pythocles is by Polyclitus. The pedestal of

this statue was found at Olympia between the Pelopium and the temple
of Hera, 4th June 1879. It is a quadrangular block of black lime-
stone, and bears on its upper surface the four following inscriptions,
of which the mutilated inscriptions {a) {b) are the original ones ; the
other two are copies, made perhaps in the first century B.C. or a.d.



30 STATUE OF PYTHOCLES bk. vi. elis

(a) UvBokX

(b) Wo\vk\<^ito%

(c) Yi.vQoK\ri% *AX€io5

(d) [IIoAvJ^cAciTos hroUi 'A/aycio?.

" Pythocles, an Elean. Polyclitus, an Argive, made (the statue)."
The inscription (a) is in the Ionic, (d) in the Argive alphabet. The
date of the original inscription (namely a and b) appears to be soon
after the Peloponnesian war, i.e, at the close of the fifth century B.C.
or at the very beginning of the fourth century B.C. It is, therefore, a
moot point whether the sculptor who made the statue was the elder or
the younger Polyclitus. He was certainly a contemporary of Daedalus
the Sicyonian (see note on vi. 2. 8) and his brother Naucydes ; it is
natural, therefore, to conclude that he was their brother Polyclitus (see
note on ii. 22. 7). This conclusion is generally accepted, but the
question still remains whether the Polyclitus who made the statue of
Pythocles and was brother to Daedalus and Naucydes is to be
identified with the elder Polyclitus, who made the great image of the
Argive Hera about 423 B.C. (see note on ii. 17. 4), or with the younger
Polyclitus, who built the Rotunda in the Epidaurian sanctuary of
Aesculapius about 350 B.C. (see note on ii. 27. 3). We have seen
reason to identify him vnth the younger Polyclitus (note on ii, 22. 7) ;
but Messrs. Robert, Dittenberger, and Purgold argue that he was the
elder sculptor of that name. A consideration which weighs with them
is the position of the image of Hebe by Naucydes side by side with
the great image of Hera by the elder Polyclitus (ii. 17. 5 s^.) ; they
infer that the images were contemporary and that the sculptors were
brothers.

The marks on the pedestal of Pythocles show that at some time the
original statue was removed and replaced by another, which stood in
quite a different attitude. The removal of the statue was probably the
occasion of renewing the inscription, and if the renewal took place in
the first century B.C. or A.D. it will follow that this was the date of the
removal of the statue. It seems probable, therefore, that the original
statue was removed by some Roman, possibly by the emperor Nero,
and transported to Italy, and that after its removal the Elean authori-
ties replaced it by another, in order not to leave the pedestal empty.
This conclusion was confirmed by the discovery at Rome in 1891 of a
marble pedestal which had supported either the original statue of
Pythocles or a replica of it. The pedestal was found near the comer
of the Via del Sole and the Salara Vecchia, and it bears the following
inscription : HvOokXtjs 'HActos vevradXos. IIoAvkAcitou 'Apyciov.
" Pythocles of Elis, a pentathlete. (A work) of Polyclitus the Argive."
See Mittheil. d. arch, Instituts^ Romische Abtheilung, 6 (1891), pp.
304-306; Athenaeum^ 5th March 1892, p. 314; A vierican Journal
of Archaeology^ 7 (1891), p. 546. The marks on the top of the
Olympian pedestal show that the original statue stood resting on the
right foot, while the left leg was drawn back and touched the ground
only with the ball of the foot. This was the attitude of some of the



CH. VIII PYTHOCLES—EUBOTAS 31

most famous statues of the elder Polyclitus, and the fact has been used
as an argument in favour of the elder Polyclitus having made the statue
of Pythocles. Prof Furtwangler argues that two existing statues
of athletes, one in the Vatican at Rome (cp. W. Helbig, Fiihrer durch
die offentlichen Sammlungen^ i. p. 28) and one at Munich (Brunn,
Besckreibung der Glyptotheky^ No. 303), are copies of Polyclitus's statue
of Pythocles. They are in Polyclitus's style and the size of their feet
agrees with the original foot-marks on the Olympian pedestal. They
represent a young naked athlete standing with the weight of his body
on the right foot, his left foot being somewhat drawn back. The head
is turned to the left : the right arm hangs by his side ; and the left arm
from the elbow is stretched out, the hand grasping a small vessel of
the shape called aryballos.

See Die Inschriften von Olympia^ Nos. 162, 163 ; K. Purgold, in Olympia :
Ergebnisse^ Textband 2. p. 149 sq. ; Archdologische Zeitung^ 37 (1879), p. 144,
No. 286 ; Roehl, /. G. A. No. 44 ; Loewy, Itischriften griech, Bildhatier, No.
91 ; Roberts, Greek Epigraphy^ No. 83 ; Collitz, G. D, I, 3. No. 3275 ; C
Robert, Archdologische Mdrcnen, p. 104 sqq, ; Furtwangler, Meisterwerke d.
griech, Plastiky p. 471 sqq,

8. I. Phradmon, an Argive. He was a contemporary of Myron
and the elder Polyclitus, and flourished in 01. 90 (420-417 B.C.),
according to Pliny {Nat, hist xxxiv. 49). He made a fine statue of an
Amazon (Pliny, Nat, hist, xxxiv. 53), and a bronze group of twelve oxen
which stood in the sanctuary of Itonian Athena in Thessaly {Ant hoi,
Palat, ix. 743). A Roman writer classes him with Polyclitus and
Ageladas (Columella, De re rustica^ x. 30). Cp. H. Brunn, Gesch, d,
griech, Kiinstler^ i. p. 286.

8. I. lie also inscribed at Olympia the names of the victors etc.
Cp. vi. 6. 3.

8. 2. The story, as told by some humbugs, is this etc. The
story is told by Pliny on the authority of Scopas, who wrote a work on
the Olympic victors (Pliny, Nat, hist, xxxiv. 82), and by Augustine on
the authority of Varro (Augustine, De civ, dei, xviii. 17), Both these
writers give the name of the athlete as Demaenetus, but they agree
with Pausanias that he was a Parrhasian. As to the transformation
into a wolf at the sacrifice of Lycaean Zeus, see viii. 2. 6 note.

8. 3. Eubotas the Oyrenian. His victory in the foot-race was
won 01. 93 (408 B.C.) (Xenophon, Hellenica, i. 2. i ; Diodorus, xiii. 68).
The occasion when Eubotas was said to have won the chariot-race was
01. 104 (364 B.C.) See vi. 4. 2 note. The interval between the two
victories of Eubotas is considerable ; but we must remember that the
prize in the chariot-race was awarded, not to the driver, but to the
owner of the chariot ; there is therefore no reason why a victor in the
chariot-race should not have been an old man.

8. 4. The occasion of Timanthes' death etc. The following story
has been copied from Pausanias, with some verbal changes, by Suidas
(j.T/. Ti/idvOrjs).

8. 5. Fldlip, an Azanlan f^om Pellana. A bronze plate, which
had apparently been let into the front of a pedestal, was found east



32 PHILTP—CRITODAMUS bk. vi. elis

of the north-east comer of the Wrestling-School (Palaestra) at Olympia,
19th May 1878 ; it bears the following inscription :

*128€ ora? 6 IIcAao-yos ctt* *AA</)€t<fJ iro*ca Trvicra?

t5/a noAi»8€VK€M)y ;(€/xrtv €<f>av€ vofjuov^
S.fjjos €Kapv\6i] viKa<f>opos' aAAa irdr^p Ztv

Koi irdXiv *ApKaBii^ Kakov dfi€iP€ kAco?,
Tifjuauarov Sc #tAt7r7rov, 05 IvSa&i roivs OLirh vdxnav

reavapas eu^ct^ TraiSas ckAivc fJMXi^.

" Standing in this attitude the Pelasg^an (/.^. Arcadian) boxer once at
the Alpheus displayed the science of Pollux (t'.e. boxing) with his hands,
when he was proclaimed victor. But, O father Zeus, give fair renown
to Arcadia again, and honour Philip, who here laid low in fair fight four
boys from the islands." This inscription was doubtless attached to the
base of a statue of Philip, who is probably the Philip here mentioned
by Pausanias. The only doubt is created by Pausanias's statement that
the statue of Philip was by Myron. The great sculptor Myron flourished
in the first half of the fifth century B.C. ; but this inscription, to judge
from the character of the letters, belongs to the beginning of the third
century, or possibly to the end of the fourth century B.C. Various
solutions of the difficulty were suggested by E. Curtius. Two
Arcadian boy-boxers called Philip may have won Olympic victories at
different times ; or the Myron who made the statue may not have been
the great sculptor but a later namesake ; or lastly, the statue may have
been by the great Myron, but may have been afterwards taken to repre-
sent Philip. Messrs. Loewy, Hoffmann, Dittenberger, and Pui?gold
prefer the second of these solutions, and in fact there is some in-
dependent evidence that there was a later sculptor called Myron. See
note on vi. 2. 2, * Lycinus brought foals.'

Curtius further pointed out that the inscription read by Pausanias
on the pedestal of Philip's statue cannot well have been earlier than
the latter part of the fourth century B.C. ; since before that time Pellana,
the birthplace of Philip, was in the hands of Sparta, and a native of that
town would not have dared to proclaim himself as an Azanian, z.e,
as an Arcadian.

See Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 174 ; Archdologische Zeitungy 36 (1887),
p. 84 sq,^ No. 130; Kaibel, in Rheinischcs Museum^ N.F. 34 (1879), P- 205;
Loewy, Imchriflen grUch. Bildhaiier, No. 126 ; E. Hoffmann, Syiioge efn^ani'
matum Graecorumy No. 388 ; cp. Scherer, De Olympjonicartwi statuisy p. yj'sq.
As to Pellana, see iii. 21. 2 note ; as to Azania, see viii. 4. 3.

8. 5. Oritodamos from Olitor. A block of the pedestal of his
statue was found at Olympia (26th April 1879) to the east of the
Roman triumphal gateway, in front of the south-east colonnade. The
block is of black limestone, and bears the inscription :

Al\a KActTo/oios.



CH. IX THEOGNETUS—XENOCLES 33

" Critodamus of Clitor, son of Lichas. Cleon, a Sicyonian, made (the
statue)." The inscription seems to date from the first half of the
fourth century B.C., which agrees fairly with what we otherwise know of
the date of the sculptor Cleon (see note on v. 21. 3). Pausanias, it
will be observed, calls the athlete first Critodamus and afterwards
Damocritus. The inscription proves that the first of the two names is
correct See Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 167; Archdologische
Zeiiung^ 37 (1879), P- M6, No. 289; Loewy, Inschriften grieck, Bild-
hauery No. 96.

8. 5. Alypus. See vi. i. 3.

8. 5. The history of Promachus etc. See vii. 27. 5 sqq,

8. 6. Ageladas the Argive. See note on iv. 33. 2.

8. 6. when Isagoras seized the Acropolis of Athens etc

See Herodotus v. 72, who specially mentions Timasitheus among the
accomplices of Isagoras who were put to death by the Athenians. Cp.
Paus. iii. 4. 2 note.

9. I. Theognetns his statue is by Ptolichns. Simonides

wrote an epigram in honour of Theognetus {AnthoL Palat. xvi. 2, where
Ocoyvip-oi' is a correction for Bco/c/oitov). As Simonides died in 01. 78.
3 (466 B.C), the victory of Theognetus must have been not later than
OL 78. I (468 B.C.) This fixes approximately the date of the sculptor
Ptolichus. The sculptor Aristocles of Sicyon, here mentioned by Pau-
sanias, must be distinguished from two other sculptors of the same name,
viz. (i) Aristocles the Cydonian (v. 25. 11), and (2) Aristocles son of
Cleoetas (v. 24. 5 note). As to the pupils and family of Aristocles the
Sicyonian, see also § 3 of this chapter and vi. 3. 11. H. Brunn places
them thus :

(i) Aristocles, about 01. 70 (500 B.C.)

(2) Synnoon, pupil of the preceding.

(3) Ptolichus (son of the preceding), about 01. 80 (460 B.C.) (But

Ptolichus should rather be placed about 468 B.C. See above.)

(4) and (5) Unknown, but at work between 01. 80 (460 B.C.) and

01. 90 (420 B.C)

(6) Sostratus, after 01. 90 (420 B.C.)

(7) Pantias (son of the preceding), about 01. 100 (380 B.C.)

See Brunn, Gesch, d.griech. KUnstler^ i. p. 80 sq. ; /W., Sitzungsberichte
of the Bavarian Academy (Munich), Philosoph, philolog. Cl.^ 1880,
p. 480 sq. As to Ptolichus, see also vi. 10. 9 ; as to Pantias, vi. 14. 12.
As to Canachus, see note on vii. 18. 10.

9. 2. a statue of Xenocles. The pedestal of this statue was found
at Olympia, i6th January 1878, 4 metres north-east of the pedestal
of the Messenian Victory (see v. 26. i), in the East Byzantine wall.
The pedestal is of coarse-grained yellowish marble, and bears the
following inscriptions :

{a) HcvokA^s l£tv6v<f>povos MatvoAios
(Jf) TioXvK\t{i)ros €7roi(ry)o"€.

(r) [MjaivdAtos BcvokA.'^S viKaara l^vdv<l}povos vios,
(wrr^s fU){v)voTraX.av riaapa o'tJfJLaff' IXwv.

VOL. IV D



34 XENOCLES — SOSTRATUS bk. vi. elis

(a) "Xenocles a Maenalian, son of Euthyphron."

{p) ** Polyclitus made (the statue)."

(^) " I, Xenocles a Maenalian, son of Euthyphron, won a victory,

having conquered four wrestlers without myself receiving

a fall."

Inscriptions (a) and {b) are on the upper (horizontal) side of the
pedestal ; (c) is on the front vertical side. On the upper surface the
footprints of the bronze statue, which was about life size, are visible.
The feet were turned somewhat outwards ; the left was a little in front
of the right. From their style it appears that the inscriptions may be
dated between 400 and 380 B.C. It is, therefore, doubtful whether the
sculptor was the elder or the younger Polyclitus (see above, note on
vi. 7. 10, * Pythocles '). See Z?/V? Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 164 ; K.
Purgold, in Olympia: Ergebnisse^ Tafelband 2. p. 150; Archaologische
Zeitungy 36 (1878), p. 83x^7.; Kaibel, in Rheirdsches Museum^ N.F.
34 (1879), P' 206; Loewy, Inschriften griech, Bildhauer^ No. 90; E.
Hoffmann, Sylloge epigram. Graecorum, No. 380. Prof. Furtwangler,
however, thinks that the inscription might be dated about 420 B.C., in
which case the statue must have been by the elder Polyclitus. He
identifies two existing statues, one at Paris and one at Rome, as copies
of Polyclitus's statue of Xenocles. His grounds for doing so are that
the statues are in the style of Polyclitus and that the relative position
of the feet agrees with the footprints on the Olympian pedestal. They
represent a boy standing at rest, the weight on the right foot, the left
foot slightly advanced, the head looking to the right. Prof. Furtwangler
enumerates other statues, torsos, and heads which he conceives to be
copies or imitations of the statue of Xenocles. See A. Furtwangler,
Afeisterwerke d, griech. Plastik^ pp. 415, 491 sqq.

9. 3. Sostratus. Sculptors of this name are mentioned by Pliny
{Nat. hist, xxxiv. 51 and 60) and Polybius (iv. 78). In the Dionysiac
theatre at Athens the base of a statue has been found signed by the
sculptor Sostratus, son of Euphranor. And in the Piraeus there is an
inscription from the base of a statue containing the name of the sculptor
Sostratus. See Loewy, Inschr. griech. Bildhauer^ Nos. 105, 106. Cp.
Brunn, Gesch. d. griech. Kiinstler^ i. pp. 81, 295, 298, 299, and note
on viii. 26. 7.

9. 3. the sanctuary of Peace in Borne. The Temple of Peace at
Rome was built by Vespasian to commemorate the conquest of Judaea
and his own accession to the empire. It was begun in 70 A.D. and
dedicated in 75 A.D. In it were deposited vast numbers of the finest
works of art, gathered from many distant lands. "In this temple," says
Josephus, " was gathered and deposited everything to see which men
had previously travelled all over the world." Amongst the spoils which
it contained was the golden candlestick from the temple at Jerusalem.
According to Herodian the temple was the largest and most beautiful
building in Rome. Pliny says that it was one of the most beautiful
buildings that the world had ever seen. It was destroyed by fire in the
reign of Conunodus. See Josephus, Beil. Jud. vii. 5. 7 ; Dio Cassius,



CH. X THE CHARIOT OF GELO 35

Ixvi. 15; Herodian, i. 14. 2 sq.\ YXvay^ NcU, hist, xxxvi. 102; J. H.
Middleton, The remains of Ancient Rome^ 2. p. 13 sqq,

9. 3. a pliantom annonnced the victory. This story is told

also by Aelian ( Var, hist, ix. 2), who mentions that according to another
version Taurosthenes despatched a pigeon with a purple flag fastened to
it, which flew to Aegina with the news of victory in one day.

9. 4* Oratinns, a Spartan. Nothing more is known of this
sculptor.

9. 4* the chariot of Gelo. In the Wrestling-School (Palaestra)
at Olympia there were found in 1878 and 1884 three large blocks of
a pedestal of Parian marble, which is believed to have supported the
chariot of Gelo. The inscription on the blocks is mutilated, but with
the help of Pausanias's observations it may be restored thus :

TXavKias Aiyivdras €[7r]oti/o"€.

" Gelo of Gela, son of Deinomenes, dedicated (the chariot). Glaucias an
Aeginetan made it.** See Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 143 ; Archd-
ologische Zeitungy 36 (1878), p. 142 ; Roehl, /. G. A, No. 359 ; Cauer,
Delectus Inscr. Graec,^ No. 68 ; Loewy, Inschriften griech, Bildhauer^
No. 28; Roberts, Greek Epigraphy^ No. 126; Colli tz, G, D, I, 3. No. 3410.
Gelo's victory was won (as Pausanias tells us) in OL 73 (488 B.C.) He
had made himself tyrant of Gela in 01. 72. 2 (491 B.c.) See Dionysius
Halicam., Antiquit. Rom, vii. i. It was not till 485 B.C. that Gelo
made himself master of Syracuse. Pausanias appears to have taken
the date of Gelo's occupation of Gela and transferred it by mistake to
his occupation of Syracuse. Hence his argument that the Olympic
victor could not have been the tyrant Gelo falls to the ground. Cp.
Clinton, Fasti Hellenici^ imder the years 491 and 485 ; Freeman,
History of Sicily^ 2. pp. 124, 127. The fact that Glaucias of Aegina
made this chariot for Gelo proves that Glaucias flourished in the early
part of the fifth century B.C. Other works of his are mentioned by
Pausanias below (§ 9 of this chapter; vi. 10. 3 ; vi. 11. 9).

9. 6. Gleomedes of Astypalaea. His story is told also by Plutarch
{Romulusy 28), Eusebius {Praepar, Evang, v. 34), and Suidas (s,v,
KXeo/Ai^6f7s). Suidas copies from Pausanias. Cp. Rohde, Psyche^ p.
197 sq. From an inscription found in the sanctuary of Aesculapius at
Epidaurus we learn that Astypalaea was a colony of Epidaurus, or at
least that it was so regarded by the Epidaurians, who accorded to the
Astypaleans immunity from imposts and participation in their rites
{Csi\y?ud\2iS^Fouilles d*£pidaurej i. p. 73, Inscr. No. 233). According
to Scynmus (Orbis descriptio, 551) Astypalaea was a colony of Megara.

10. I. Glanciis the Oarystian. The Olympic victory of Glaucus
seems to have been gained in 01. 75 (480 B.C.) For a writer in
Bekker's Anecdota Graeca (i. p. 232) says that Glaucus was crowned
at Olympia in the twenty-fifth Olympiad, irkfnrrqv koX €iKo(rrrjv 'OAv/a-
riaSoy where, as Siebelis pointed out, we must necessarily read efiSofirj'
Kwrrrjv for cikoot^v. This is proved by the statement of the same



36 GLAUCUS — ICCUS bk. vi. elis

writer in the Anecdota that Glaucus was assassinated at the instigation
of Gelo, tyrant of Syracuse ; for Gelo was tyrant of Syracuse from 01.
73. 4 to 01. 75. 3 (485-478 B.C.) The correction is further confirmed
by the fact that the statue of Glaucus was by Glaucias of Aegina
(§ 3), for this sculptor was a contemporary of Gelo's (see note on
vi. 9. 4). The writer in the Anecdota states that Glaucus won three
victories at the Pythian, and ten at the Isthmian games ; and that he
was four cubits high all but five fingers. That Glaucus was a famous
boxer is proved by the repeated mention of him by ancient writers
(Demosthenes, xviii. 319, p. 331; Aeschines, iii. 189; Lucian, Pro
imaginibus^ 1 9 ; Anecdota Graeca e codd. BibL Reg, ParisiensiSy
cd. Cramer, 2. p. 154). Suidas (s,v, FAav/cos) copies his account of
Glaucus from Pausanias. Philostratus tells the same anecdote of
Glaucus that Pausanias tells, but attributes the exhortation at the
critical moment to the trainer Tisias instead of to the boy's father
(De arte gymnastica^ 20). As to Glaucus the sea demon, from whom
the athlete was supposed to be descended, see an article by J. de
Witte, *Le dieu marin Glaucus,* Revue archdologiqiu^ 2 (1845), pp.
622-630 ; and cp. ix. 22. 7 note.

10. 4. His statue has not only a shield but also a helmet

and greaves etc On some Greek vases the armed race is

represented as it was run in the old style, the runners being armed
with shield, helmet, and greaves, as Damaretus was represented in his
statue. On other, generally later, vases the runners have shields and
helmets but no greaves. See Daremberg et Saglio, Diction, des anH-
quitis^ I. pt. 2. p. 1644; Schreiber, Bilderatlas^ Taf. xxii. 3 and 5;
and especially Fr. Hauser, * Zur Tiibinger Bronze,' Jahrbuch d, archaoL
InstitutSy 2 (1887), pp. 95-107; ib, 10 (1895), PP- 182-203. "In
the oldest vase-paintings," says Mr. Hauser, " the wearing of greaves
is not constant, as we should expect it to be from the statement of
Pausanias as to the equipment of the runners in the armed race. In
fact greaves can be shown only in three representations of this date (say
roughly about 520 B.c), while in four they are wanting. From this
time onward the wearing of greaves prevails more and more, but shortly
before the middle of the fifth century B.C it ceases suddenly and once
for all" (Jakrbuch d arch, Inst, 10 (1895), p. 199). The shield which
the runners in the vase-paintings carry is always round ; the helmet is
generally of the Attic shape, with round cheek-pieces and a round slit
above the eyes (Jb.) As to Damaretus and the introduction of the
armed race, cp. v. 8. 10 ; viii. 26. 2 ; x. 7. 7.

10. 5. the Argives Eutelidas and Chrysothemis. These sculp-
tors are not otherwise known. They probably flourished about Ol. 70
(500 B.C), since they made the statues of Damaretus and his son
Theopompus, of whom the former won \nctories in 01. 65 and OL 66
(520 and 516 B.C) Cp. Brunn, Gesch, d, griech, KUnstler^ i. p. 61.

10. 5. Iccus, a Tarentine. He flourished in Ol. ^^ (472 b.c),
according to Stephanus Byzantius (s,v, Tapas). The strictness of his
training is referred to by Plato {Laws^ viiL pp. 839 e-840 a, cp. Pro-
tagorusy p. 316 d) and Aelian {Nat, amm. vi i ; Var, hist. xi. 3). Lucian



CH. X PANTARCES—AGIADAS 37

mentions him among the famous trainers (Historia quomodo conscri-
benda^ 35).

10. 6. a statne of Fantarces, an Elean. He won the prize in the
boys' wrestling-match in 01. 86 (436 B.C.) See v. 11. 3. The statue
of Pantarces here mentioned by Pausanias has been by some identified
with the statue of the boy by Phidias, which Pausanias mentioned above
(vi. 4. 5). But (i) on the base of the latter statue the only name
inscribed seems to have been that of the sculptor, Phidias. Now it is
highly improbable that the statue of an Olympic victor should not have
been inscribed with the victor's name and the contest in which he had
been victorious. (2) If the statue of Pantarces here noticed had been
by Phidias, Pausanias would almost certainly have said so. (3) It is
very unlikely that he would have mentioned the same statue twice
over in such a way as to lead the reader to suppose that he was
describing two separate works. Cp. Flasch, * Olympia,' in Baumeister's
Denkmdlery p. 1099 note 2 ; C. Robert, in Hermes^ 23 (1888), p. 444 ;
A. Furtwangler, Metsierwerke d, griech. Plasiik^ p. 62.

It is said that Phidias inscribed the name of his favourite Pantarces
on the finger of his great statue of Zeus at Olympia (Photius, Lexicon^
s,v. Tafivovorla Nc^o-ts). But the Pantarces whose name was so in-
scribed was said to be an Argive. Hence he may have been a different
person from the Olympic victor, who was an Elean. The Olympic
victory of Pantarces the Elean in 436 B.C. is sometimes appealed to
as evidence that Phidias was at work on his great image of Zeus at
this time (vol. 3. p. 534). But if the favourite of Phidias was a
different person from Pantarces the Elean, this arg^^ment would fall
to the ground. See G. Loeschcke, in Historische Untersuchungen A,
Schdfer gewidmet^ pp. 34-38; C. Robert, Lc,\ Overbeck, Gesck, d.
griech, Plastik^^ i. p. 368 Anm. 3.

The statue here mentioned by Pausanias is not to be confounded
either with the supposed likeness of Pantarces on the throne of Zeus
(v. II. 3) or with the statue of him erected by the Achaeans (vi. 15. 2).

10. 6. Ai^eladas. See note on iv. 33. 2.

10. 6. the image of Zens, which was dedicated by the Oxeeks
etc See v. 23. i.

10. 9. that of Agiadas is by Serambus. Two fragments of white
marble which perhaps formed part of the base of this statue were
found at Olympia in 1879. One of the fragments was found near the
temple of Hera, the other to the east of the temple of Zeus. The
inscription, as restored by Roehl, runs thus :

[EtKova f aActos t6.vK *Ayt]a8as a.vkB\y\K^
[ttu^ Trats viK6xTa\% KoXbv ({[ywra Aios].
[2rjpdfiPov rov €v Aiyjtv^t fi l[8ov €v6d8€ Fkpyov],

" Agiadas, an Elean, dedicated this statue, having been victorious as a
boy in boxing at the goodly games of Zeus. Behold me here, a work
of Serambus, the man of Aegina." The restoration is, however, very
uncertain. See Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 150; Archdologische



38 TELLON^THEAGENES bk. vi. klis

Zeitungy 37 (1879), p. 161, No. 312 ; Roehl, /. G, A, No. 355 ; Locwy,
Inschriften griech, Bildhauer^ No. 416; Roberts, Greek Epigraphy^
No. 123; E. HofTmann, Sylloge epigram. Graecorum^ No. 372.
Nothing more is known of the sculptor Serambus.

10. 9. the statue of Tellon. The white niarble base which sup-
ported this statue was found at Olympia outside the Blast Byzantine
wall, 1st December 1877. On the upper (horizontal) surface is a
mutilated inscription of the fifth century B.C. :

*0\ji\€a'6axTto^ 7rat[s].

A later copy of the inscription, doubtless made to replace the original
which even then had become illegible, was cut probably in the first
century B.c Like the original inscription, the copy is on the upper
(horizontal) face of the stone. With the help of these two copies and
of Pausanias, the inscription may be restored as follows :

TcAAwr Tov8* dv€$r]K€ AailjfJiovos vIo[s dyavov
'ApKCLS 'Opco-^cMTios 7ral[s d^rh irvy/iaxtas].

"Tellon, an Arcadian of Oresthasium, son of glorious Daemon, dedi-
cated this (statue), being victorious among the boys in boxing." From
the marks on the top of the base it appears that the statue was of
bronze and life size ; it rested equally on both feet, but the left foot was
somewhat in advance of the right. See Dte Inschriften von Olympia^
Nos. 147, 148; Archdologische Zeitung^ 35 (1877), p. 190, No. 91 ;
icL^ 38 (1880), p. 70; Kaibel, in Rheinisches Museum^ N.F. 34 (1879),
p. 204 ; Roehl, /. G. A, No. 98 ; Roberts, Greek Epigraphy^ No. 279 ;
E. Hoffmann, Sylloge epigr, Graec. No. 376.

11. 2. Theagenes, a Thasian. He won a victory at Olympia in
boxing in 01. 75 (480 B.c) See vi. 6. 5. He is said to have once
eaten a whole bull for a wager (Athenaeus, x. p. 412 de). Plutarch
says that Theagenes won 1200 crowns (Pausanias § 5 says 1400), "of
which he considered the most to be rubbish"; and he tells a story
illustrative of his jealousy and touchy sense of his own pre-eminence as
an athlete {Praecept ger. reipub, 15. 7). Lucian {JFIist quomodo con-
scrid, 35) couples Theagenes with Pulydamas of Scotusa, as to whom
see vi. 5.

A block of white marble, inscribed with a long list of victories,
which was found at Olympia in 1877, is supposed by some to have
belonged to the pedestal of Theagenes's statue ; but more probably it
belonged to that of Dorieus the Rhodian. See above, p. 26 sqq.

11. 4- I have already narrated etc See vi. 6. 5 sq.

11. 6. When he departed this world etc. The following story
about the statue of Theagenes is also told at length by Dio Chrysostom
{Orat, xxxi. vol. i. p. 377 sq, ed. Dindorf) and Eusebius {Praepar,
Evang, V. 34). The latter writer adds that after the land had recovered
its fertility in the manner described in the story, the people of Thasos
for the future wore their hair long in honour of Demeter. Cp. Ukert,



CH. xii OFFERINGS OF HIERO 39

* Ueber Damonen, Heroen und Genien,' Abhandlungen d, philoL
histor, CI. d, k. sacks, GeselL d, IVissen, Leipzig, 1850, p. 183; E.
Rohde, Psyche^ p. 181 sq,

11. 6. sank the statue in the sea. It is said that when Scipio
Africanus, the younger, died, a statue of Apollo wept for three days.
So the Romans, by the advice of the soothsayers, voted that the statue
should be cut in pieces and flung into the sea (Dio Cassius, xxxvi. 84,
voL I. p. 129 ed Dindorf).

11. 9. he heals diseases, and is honoured by the natives.
Lucian mentions {Deorum concilium^ 12) that the statue of Theagenes
in Thasos cured fevers, as the statue of Pulydamas did at Olympia.
Athenagoras says that the Thasians worshipped Theagenes as a god
(SuppiiccUio pro ChristianiSy 14, p. 62, ed. Otto).

12. I. Hiero tyrant of Syracuse. One of the offerings dedi-
cated by Hiero at Olympia (though not for an Olympic victory) is in
existence. It is a bronze helmet, of Etruscan shape, and has evidently
been used. It was found at Olympia in 18 17, and was presented to the
British Museum by George IV. On the upper part of the helmet is the
inscription :

*Iap(l)V 6 A€lVOfJL€V€OS
Kol Tol ^VpaKOO'LOl

T<^ At Tvpdv airh Kvfias.

** Hiero, son of Dinomenes, and the Syracusans (dedicated) to Zeus
these Etruscan spoils from Cumae." In 474 B.C. Hiero, being besought
by the people of Cumae to deliver them from the Etruscan cruisers
which scoured the seas, sent to Cumae a fleet which gave battle to the
£truscans and defeated them with great loss (Diodorus, xi. 51 ; Schol.
on Pindar, Py^A. i. 137). The helmet in question was probably one of
many weapons taken from the Etruscans in this sea-fight and dedicated
by Hiero at Olympia. We can hardly doubt that it was actually worn
by one of the Etruscan seamen in the battle.

Sec Dt€ Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 249 ; Roehl, /. G, A, No. 510 ; Kaibel,
Epigrammata Gr<U€a^ No. 745 ; Hicks, Greek historical inscriptions^ No. 15 ;
Caner, Delectus Inscr, Graced No. 95 ; Collitz, G. D, I. 3. No. 3228 ; Roberts,
Greek Epigraphy j No. in ; E. Hoffmann, ^//^^ epigr, Graec, No. ^10; Journal
of Hellenic Studies^ 2 (1881), p. 66 j^. ; Newton, Essays on Art and Archaeology y
p. 59 sq, ; Freeman, History of Sicily^ 2. p. 250 sq,

A votive offering dedicated at Delphi for a victory won by Hiero in
the Pythian games was found by the French at Delphi in 1896. It
is a bronze statue 1.80 metres high, and represents a young man clad
in a robe which reaches to his feet and wearing on his head the victor's
wreath ; in his right hand he grasps the reins of two horses, of which
some remains have been foimd. The statue is a masterpiece and in
nearly perfect preservation. See Berliner philolog, Wochenschrifty
6th June 1896, p. 734; id,^ 13th June 1896, p. 769; /V/., 27th June
1896, p. 832; /V/., I St Aug. 1896, p. 1 02 1 sq,\ Cotnptes Rendus de
PAcad. des Inscriptions^ 24 (1896), p. 186 sqq,

12. I. Onatas Galamis. See notes on v. 25. 5 and 10.



40 DAIPPUS^SONS OF POL YCLES bk. vi. elis

12. 4. He met his death at the hands of Dinomenes etc.

Pausanias has here made a mistake. It was not Hiero II., but his
grandson Hieronymus who was assassinated in 2 1 5 B.C. by a band of
conspirators, among whom a certain Dinomenes played a leading part
(Livy, xxiv. 7 ; cp. Polybius, vii. 7 ; Diodonis, xxvi. 15). His grand-
father, Hiero II., died peacefully, beloved and honoured, at a great age,
in the same or the preceding year (Livy, xxiv. 4 ; Polybius, vii. 8 ;
Lucian, Macrobiiy 10; Valerius Maximus, viii. 13, Ext. i).

12. 5. some account both of Aratus and of Areas etc. See ii. 8
sq, ; iii. 6. 4 sqq,

12. 6. Daippus. He was a pupil of Lysippus and flourished in Ol.
121 (296 B.C.) (Pliny, Nat hist, xxxiv. 51 and 66). Cp. Paus. vi. 16.
5 ; Brunn, Gesch. d. griech. Kiinstlery i. p. 407 sq,

12. 8. the elegiac verses (on his statue) declare that the

Tritaeans are Arcadians. In the time of Pausanias the town Tritia
belonged to Achaia (vii. 22. 6 sqq,)\ hence Pausanias is surprised to
find that in the inscription on the base of Agesarchus's statue Tritia was
reckoned to Arcadia. It has been suggested that Tritia may have been
annexed by Arcadia at the time when Arcadia was at the height of its
power, soon after the foundation of Megalopolis (Bursian, Geogr, 2. p.
324 note 2). The geographer Dicaearchus, who flourished about 300
B.C., seems to have reckoned Tritia to Arcadia (Cicero, Epist, ad Atti-
cunty vi. 2. 3). But this would hardly explain why it belonged to
Arcadia in the time of Agesarchus, that is, probably about the middle
of the second century B.C. (see next note). Perhaps the most probable
solution of the difficulty is that proposed by Brunn {Gesch, d, griech,
KUnstler^ i- P- 538). He conjectures that the Romans after their con-
quest of Achaia in 146 B.C. may have severed Tritia from Achaia and
assigned it to Arcadia, with the intention of thus curtailing the power
of the rebel Achaeans. But it was afterwards assigned to Patrae in
Achaia by Augustus (Paus. vii. 22. 6), and so belonged to Achaia in
Pausanias's time. The present passage of Pausanias has been misunder-
stood by Prof. C. Robert {Hermes^ 19 (1884), p. 301 sq,)y as was
pointed out by Mr. Loewy {Inschr. griech, Bildhauer^ p. xxiii. sq,) Cp.
W. Gurlitt, Ueber Pausanias^ p. 363.

12. 9. the sons of Polycles. See vi. 4. 5 note. The subsequent
mention of them, to which Pausanias here refers, occurs in x. 34. 6 and
8. As the sons of Polycles probably flourished about the middle of the
second century B.C., this so far helps us to fix the date of Agesarchus,
whose statue they made. Eusebius mentions a boxer Hegesarchus
{Praepar, Evang. vii. 8. 17 sq.)y but he is probably a different person
from the Agesarchus of the present passage of Pausanias, though Prof.
Robert would identify them. See above, p. 14 sq,

13. I. Astylus of Orotona. He was victorious in the 73rd, 74th,
and 75th Olympiads (488, 484, 480 B.C) See Eusebius, Chronic, vol. i.
p. 203, ed. Schone ; Dionysius Halicamasensis, AntiquiL Rom, viii. i.

13. I. the sanctuary of Lacinian Hera. It stood on the pro-
montory of Lacinium, near Crotona, and was revered by the Italian
Greeks who assembled in great numbers to hold the festival of the



CH. xiii CHIONIS—LEONIDAS 41

goddess (Aristotle, Mirab. Auscult, 96). In the days of its prosperity
the sanctuary was crowded with votive offerings (Strabo, vi. p. 261).
Here women, robed in black, mourned for Achilles (Lycophron, Cas-
sandra^ 856 sgq,, with the scholia of Tzetzes). It is said that the ashes
on the altar of the goddess standing under the open sky were never stirred
even by the most violent storm (Pliny, Nat hist, ii. 240), and that
if a man cut his name on a tile of the temple he would live as long as
his name remained on the tile (Servius, on Virgil, Aen, iii. 552). In
173 B.C the Censor Q. Fulvius Flaccus unroofed the temple and trans-
ported the tiles to Rome, but the Senate ordered them to be restored
(Livy, xlii. 3). Cp. Preller, Romische Mythologies i. p. 288 ; /V/.,
Griech, MyihologiCy^ i. p. 163.

13. 2. Chionis. Chionis won Olympic victories in 01. 28, 29, 30,
and 31 (668, 664, 660, 656 B.c) See iii. 14. 3; iv. 23. 4 and 10 ;
viii. 39. 3 ; Eusebius, Chronic, vol. i. p. 197, ed. Schone. (Eusebius,
however, gives the name of the victor in 01. 28 as Charmis.) The
armed race was not introduced till 01. 65 (520 B.C.) See v. 8. 10.
Myron flourished 01. 80 (460-456 B.C.) (Pliny, Nat, hist, xxxiv. 49).

13. 3. proved at Olympia that he excelled etc. This and the
next sentence are copied almost verbally by Suidas (s,v, ^Iwirofiaxos),
Pausanias's words imply that the long race, the short race, and the
double race were all run on the same day and in the order mentioned.
Krause thought that these races must have been run in a different order,
namely, short race, double race, long race, because that was the chrono-
logical order in which they were instituted (see Paus. v. 8. 6 with the
notes). But there is no reason to suppose that the order of the games
was determined by such antiquarian considerations rather than by con-
siderations of practical convenience. That the long race must have been
run early in the day seems to be proved by the fact that once an Argive
runner, after winning the long race at Olympia, announced his victory
in person at Argos the same day (Eusebius, Chron, vol. i. p. 205, ed.
Schone). Further, the order in which Pausanias mentions the races
(namely long race, short race, double race) is confirmed by the fact that
this was the order followed at other places, if we may judge from the
order in which the victors are mentioned in inscriptions (C /. G, G, S, i.
Nos. 414, 416, 417, 420, 1765). Cp. Krause, Olympia^ p. 98 sq,\
Dissen, on Pindar, vol. i. p. 269.

13. 4. a Bhodian, Leonidas. He is mentioned by Philostratus
{Meroica^ xx., 41). His victories were won in 01. 154, 155, 156, 157
(164, 160, 156, 152 B.C.) See Eusebius, Chronic, vol. i. p. 209, ed.
Schdne, who adds that Leonidas was the first and only man who won
twelve Olympic crowns in four Olympiads.

13. 5. son of Duris etc. Duris was tyrant of Samos, and a con-
temporary of Theophrastus (Athenaeus, viii. p. 337 d). The exile of
the Samians referred to by Pausanias is probably the period of the
Athenian occupation (365-322 B.C.), when the native population was
driven out and lived in exile, till they were restored by Perdiccas. The
sculptor Hippias is otherwise unknown. See Brunn, Gesch, d, griech,
Kunstler^ i. p. 423 sq, ; Vischer, in Rheinisches Museum^ N.F. 22



42 ARISTION—TELEMACHUS bk. vi. elis

(1867), p. 318 sqq, ; C. Curtius, Inschriften und Studien zur Geschichte
von SafnoSy p. 5 sqq. ; P. Gardner, Samos and Samian coinSy p. 58 sqq»
13. 6. Aristion, son of Tlieopliiles. The pedestal of this statue
was found (30th October 1879) in the East Byzantine wall, about 10
metres south of the base of the Messenian Victory (v. 26. i). It is
a quadrangular block of black limestone. From the footprints of the
statue on the upper surface of the pedestal it appears that the statue
was life size, and that it rested equally on both feet, which were some-
what turned out. The inscription, which is much weathered, is cut on
the upper surface of the pedestal, in front of the footprints. It runs
thus :

*ApurTi(i}v 0€o<f>[k€os 'ETTtSaupios.
HoAvKActTos ejroi7iar€.

"Aristion of Epidaurus, son of Theophiles. Polyclitus made (the
statue)." To judge from the character of the letters, the inscription
belongs to the middle of the fourth century B.C. ; the sculptor was there-
fore the younger Polyclitus. See Dte Inschriften von Olympia^ No.
165; K. Purgold, in Olympia: Ergebnisse^ Textband 2. p. 150 sq.\
Archdologische Zeitung^ 37 (1879), p. 207, No. 327 ; Loewy, Inschriften
griech, Bildhauer^ No. 92 ; Collitz, G, D, I 3. No. 3348. Prof. Furt-
wangler thinks that a number of existing statues of Hermes, especially
one in the Lansdowne Collection, give us an idea of the pose of Poly-
clitus's statue of Aristion {Meisterwerke d. griech, Plastiky p. 502 sqq.)

13. 7. a Sicyonian, Oanachus. There were two sculptors of
Sicyon named Canachus. This is the younger of the two. He
flourished in 01. 95 (400 B.C.) (Pliny, Nat. hist, xxxiv. 50), and was one
of the sculptors who made the statues dedicated by the Lacedaemonians
at Delphi in commemoration of their victory over the Athenians at
Aegospotami (405 B.C.) See Paus. x. 9. 10; Brunn, Gesch, d. griech,
KUnstler^ i. pp. 76, 277. As to the elder Canachus, see note on
viii. 46. 3.

13. 8. Tisander. He appears to have been mentioned by Pindar.
See Pindar, ed. Bergk, Fragm. 263. Naxus was destroyed by Diony-
sius, tyrant of Syracuse, in 403 B.C. (Diodorus, xiv. 15).

13. II. Telemaclms. The base of his statue was found at Olympia,
15th May 1877, on the south edge of the terrace of the temple of Zeus,
between the East Byzantine wall and the small gateway of the South
Terrace wall. It seems to be in its original position. The stone is a
coarse g^ey limestone. On the upper surface are the footprints of a
life-size bronze statue, which must have rested equally on both feet.
The following inscription is carved on the vertical side of the base :

TrjXifiaxos TrjX€fJLd\[ov\,
'OXvfiTna T€6pL7r7r(p Ilv^ta k€A,?^[t]i.

" Telemachus, son of Telemachus (victorious at) the Olympian games
with a four-horse chariot and at the Pythian games with a racehorse.
Philonides made (the statue)." There is some difference of opinion as



CH. XIV TELEMACHUS—ARISTOPHON 43

to the date of the inscription. Messrs. Dittenberger and Purgold assign
it to the end of the fourth century or the first half of the third century
B.a ; Prof. Furtwangler and the late G. Hirschfeld assign it to the
second half of the fourth century B.C. ; Mr. Loewy thinks it cannot be
earlier than the beginning of the 'Hellenistic' period nor later than
the middle of the second century B.C. The sculptor Philonides is only
known from this inscription. See Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No.
177; Archdologische Zeitung^ 35 (1877), p. 95 sq,y No. 60; Loewy,
Inschriften griech, Bildhatur^ No. 142.

It is to be observed that the bases of the statues of Telemachus,
Epitherses (15. 6), Antigonus (15. 7), and Philonides (16. 5) have all
been found to the south of the temple of Zeus, and in the order men-
tioned by Pausanias, taking them from east to west. It seems probable,
therefore, as Prof. Furtwangler has observed, that from the present
passage as far as 16. 5 Pausanias is describing in order, from east to
west, the statues which lined the broad street (used for processions)
which ran to the south of the temple of Zeus in a direction from east to
west See Furtwangler, va Archdologische Zeitung^ 37 (1879), P* '4o«

The inscribed bases of two statues of another Telemachus, a son of
Leon, who won an Olympic victory with a racehorse, probably about
the beginning of the first century B.C., have been found at Olympia.
One of the statues was erected in honour of Telemachus by the Olympic
Umpires {Hellanodikai) and the Olympic Council. See Die Inschriften
7/on OlympiOy Nos. 199, 406; Archdologische Zeitung^ 34 (1876), p.
140 sq,^ No. 18.

13. II. The statue of Aristoplion, son of Lysinns etc. A
fragment of greyish -blue Hymettian marble, found at Olympia 12th
October 1876, is conjectured to have formed part of the pedestal of
Aristophon's statue. It bears a few letters of an inscription, which
Messrs. Dittenberger and Purgold propose to restore as follows : —

*0 [8^/ios o 'A^i/raiwvl
['A]pMrTo[<^<Ii>i^a AixTLVov Alt *OX,vfnrL((i\.

" The Athenian people (dedicated this statue of) Aristophon, son of
Lysinus, to Olympian Zeus." The restoration is confirmed by the fact
that the fragment was found to the south of the East Byzantine wall,
close to the base of Telemachus (see the preceding note) ; for Pausanias
mentions the statue of Aristophon immediately after that of Telemachus.
It is further confirmed by the discovery at Athens of a dedicatory
inscription, bearing the name of Aristophon, son of Lysinus, which in
style and material agrees exactly with the Olympian inscription (C /. A.
ii. No. 1475). ^oth inscriptions apparently belong to the latter part of
the fourth century B.C. See Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 1 69.

14. 3. the games which the lonians of Smyrna celebrate.
Olympian games were held at Smyrna (Philostratus, Vit, Sophist, i. 25.
23), also games in honour of the Emperor Hadrian, which seem to have
been called the Hadrian-Olympian games (Philostratus, op, cit, i. 25. i ;
Artemidorus, Onirocr, i. 63). See Krause, OlympiOj p. 224 sqq.



44 MILO—XENOMBROTUS BK. vi. elis

14. 5. The statne of Milo, son of Diotimns. A fragment of a
pedestal of dark limestone, found to the east of the Council House at
Olympia, bears the following fiagmentary inscription :

T]t/iOV dv€6rjK€V,

It may possibly have been part of the pedestal which supported the
statue of Milo. But the form of the fAefa on the inscription (0 instead
of 0) is against the supposition. See Archdologische Zeitungy 40 (1882),
p. 90, No. 429 ; Roehl, /. G, A, No. 589.

14. 5. Milo gained six victories at Olympia. This is

mentioned also by Diodorus (xii. 9) and Eusebius {Chronic. voL i.
p. 201, ed. Schone), the latter of whom adds that Milo won also six
prizes at the Pythian games, ten at the Isthmian, and nine at the
Nemean. One of his Olympic victories was won in 01. 62 (532 B.C),
according to Eusebius (/.^.) The account which Pausanias here gives
of Milo is copied almost verbally by Suidas {5,v, MtAwv).

14. 6. His feats with the pomegranate and the quoit etc
Philostratus describes {Vit, Apollon. iv. 28) the bronze statue of Milo
at Olympia as standing on a quoit, the left hand grasping a pome-
granate, the fingers of the right hand stretched straight out, and a fillet
encircling the brows. But this may be an imaginary description, con-
cocted from the stories current about the feats of strength which Milo
exhibited, and which are here described by Pausanias. Even if
Philostratus's description were true, it would fiimish no ground for
holding, with Mr. Scherer (JDe Olympionicarum statuis^ P- 23 sqq,)^ that
the statue of Milo conformed to the type of the Apollo of Canachus (as
to which see note on viii. 46. 3). Milo's feat with the pomegranate is
mentioned also by Aelian {Var, hist, ii. 24 ; iV/., Nat. anim, vi. 55).

14. 8. he was killed by wild beasts etc. The story of the death
of Milo is told in substantially the same way by Strabo (vi. p. 263),
Valerius Maximus (ix. 12. 9), Aulus Gellius (xv. 16), and a scholiast
on Theocritus (iv. 6).

14. 9. Pyrrhus, son of Aeacides etc. See i. 1 1 sqq.

14. II. the tyranny of Aristotimus. See v. 5. i note.

14. II. Qorgns, a Messenian. His victory must have been later
than 01. 103 (368 B.C.) See vi. 2. 10 sq, ; Brunn, Gesch, d, griech,
Kunstler^ i. p. 296 sq, ; and the following note.

14. II. Theron, a Boeotian. The inscribed pedestal of a statue
by this sculptor has been found at Pergamus, from which it appears
that he flourished in the first half of the second century ac. The
marks on the upper surface of the pedestal show that the statue was of
bronze. See Die Ergebnisse der Ausgrabungen zu Pergamon^ VorldU"
figer Bericht (Beriin, 1880), p. 1 1 1 x^. ; Loewy, Inschriften griech. Bild-
hauer^ No. 156 ; Frankel, Inschriften von Pergamon^ i. No. 49.

14. . 1 1. Silanion. See note on vi. 4. 5.

14. 12. Xenombrotus. Three fragments of the base which
supported the statue of Xenombrotus were found at Olympia in 1878
and 1880. They are of a grey marble veined with white and blue.
The marks seem to show that Xenombrotus was represented standing



CH. XV XENOMBROTUS—ARCHIPPUS 45

in front of or beside his horse. The inscription, to which Pausanias
refers, is engraved on the base, and runs as follows :

[Avra ?rev^o]/i€VOis ervfia ^ans, i7r[7ra5]a [vt/cav]

[iceev^ icaAAioTav] efvai oAv/XTrtodi,
[J K]<^v 5[o"]i[ov 8po/xi]Kov Huratov ae^Aov

irp&ros lAwv [MJcpcwros v[a(r]ov €(ra[y]a[y€To"
T0t[09,] OirOto[v] 6[p]^S, 'St€Lv6flPpOT<3{s' o, & vtv] 'EAAots

aifiSiTOV aci6[et] fiv(afi€va iTnroorvvas.

" If you would know, the tale is true that the most glorious victory in
the horse-race was won in that Olympiad in which Xenombrotus
gained the holy prize for speed at Pisa and so was the first to make the
isle of Merops known (at Olympia), Such was he as you behold.
Greece hymns his fame of horsemanship in deathless song." The
inscription appears from its style to date from about 350-330 B.c The
expression " such was he as you behold " shows that the statue was a
portrait of Xenombrotus. See Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 1 70.
As to portrait-statues of victors, see above, p. i.

14. 12. Meropian Oos. Cos was called Meropian and the Coans
were called Meropes after a mythical king Merops or his daughter
Meropis (Hyginus, Astronomical ii. 16 ; Stephanus Byzant. s»v, Mepo^;
Antoninus Liberalis, Transform, 15).

14. 1 2. Pantias. Cp. vi. 3. 1 1 ; vi. 9. 3 ; and the note on vi.
9. I.

14. 13. Tisamentui. See iii. 11. 6 sqq,

14. 13. Stomins. As this sculptor made a statue of Hieronymus
who defeated Tisamenus, and Tisamenus was present at the battle of
Plataea (479 B.C.), Stomius may have flourished in 01. 75 (480-477 ac.)
(Brunn, Gesch, d, griech, Kiinstler^ i. p. 117 sq,^

15. I. Archippns, a Mitylenian. A round pedestal of dark grey
marble which seems to have supported the statue of Archippus was
found at Olympia, 21st April 1876, to the south of the temple of Zeus,
between the South Terrace wall and the north wing of the Council
House. It bears the inscription :

*A[/)X*^"ro5

MirrtAiyratbs.

"Archippus, a Mytilenian, son of Calliphanes." From its style the
inscription seems to date from the end of the fourth or the beginning
of the third century B.c See Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 173.

15. 2. Theomnestos of Sardes. Pliny {Nat, hist, xxxiv. 91 ) mentions
a Theomnestus among the sculptors who represented athletes, armed
men, hunters, and persons sacrificing. Further, an inscription from the
base of a statue made jointly by Theomnestus, son of Theotimus, and
Dionysius, son of Astius, has been found in Chios. As we learn from
the present passage of Pausanias that Theomnestus made a statue of a
native of Chios, it is probable that the Theomnestus of Pausanias and
the Theomnestus of the inscription are identical. See Brunn, Gesch. d.



46 CAPRUS^EPITHERSES bk. vi. elis

griech, Kunstler^ i. p. 522 ; Loewy, Inschriften griech, Bildhauer^ No.
286; /V/., Untersuchungen zur griech, Kiinstlergeschickte^ p. 10.

15. 3. Olitomachiis. Aelian bears witness to the strict temperance
of this athlete (NcU, anim. vi. i ; Var, hist iii. 30). Cp. ^Anecdota
Graeca e codd, Biblioth, Reg. Parisiensis^ ed. Cramer, 2. p. 154. Pindar
mentions an athlete named Clitomachus who won a victory at the
Isthmus {Pylh. viii. 51), but the Clitomachus mentioned by Pausanias
was of course a different person, since he won a victory in 01. 141
(216 B.C.) Pausanias's account of Clitomachus is copied by Suidas
{s,v, KActTOftaxos).

15. 3. the Thasian Theagenes. See vi. 6. 5 sg, ; vi. 11. 2-9.

15. 4. Oaprns, an Elean. Cp. v. 21. 10.

15. 5. When Capms had won in the wrestling etc. This passage
shows that at Olympia the wrestling, boxing, and pancratium regularly
took place on the same day and in the order of mention, though on the
present occasion Caprus persuaded the umpires for once to bring on
the pancratium before the wrestling. That the pancratium took place
late in the day may be inferred from an inscription of Roman times,
found at Olympia, in which it is mentioned that a pancratiast, Tiberius
Claudius Rufus, continued the contest till night had fallen and the stars
were shining (Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 54 ; Archdologische
Zeitungy 36 (1878), p. 91 sg.. No. 147). Pausanias mentions an
occasion when the pancratium lasted into the night (v. 9. 3), but that
was in the old days, before 01. 77 (472 B.C.), when all the contests
were held in one day. The same order (wrestling, boxing, pancratium)
would seem to have been followed, at least in the men's contests, in
the games of Amphiaraus at Oropus, if we may judge from the order
in which the victors are mentioned in inscriptions (C. /. G, G. S. i. Nos.
414, 416, 417). The contests are mentioned in the same order in
another inscription found between Thespiae and Plataea (C /. G. G, S.
i. No. 1765).

15. 6. Epitherses. A part of the pedestal of his statue was found at
Olympia, 14th January 1879, to the south of the temple of Zeus, opposite
the sixth column (counting from the west), but only 1 1 paces from
the south wall of the Altis. It is a block of Pentelic marble, with holes
at the back for clamps by which it was fastened to another block. The
inscription, which is carefully cut, is as follows :

'^irtOcpairj MrjTfioSiopov
viKYfravra avSpas irvyfirjv
'OXvfnria Bis koI rrjv ■7r€pio8ov,

UvOoKplTOS Tl/iOXaptOS 'PoStOS CTTOiyO'C.

" The people of Erythrae (dedicated this statue of) Epitherses, son of
Metrodorus, who was twice victorious in the men's boxing-match at
Olympia, and won victories at all the great games. Pythocritus, a
Rhodian, son of Timocharis, made (the statue)." The date of the
inscription can hardly be determined on palaeographical groimds, as we
know too little about the history of writing at Erythrae, but a clue to



CH. XV DEMETRIUS— ANTIGONUS 47

its date is furnished by the name of the sculptor (see below). See Die
Insckriften von Olympia^ No. 186 ; Archdologische Zeitung^ 37 (1879),
p. 54, No. 229; Loewy, Insckriften griech, Bildhauer^ No. 176. The
sculptor Pythocritus is mentioned by Pliny {Nat hist xxxiv. 91), and
two Rhodian inscriptions from the pedestals of statues by him have
come down to us. He seems to have flourished at the end of the third
or the beginning of the second century B.C. See Brunn, Gesch, d.
griech, Kiinstler^ i. p. 461 ; Loewy, op, cit Nos. 174, 175 ; Ditten-
berger and Purgold, in Die Inschriften von Olympia^ p. 315 sq,^ on
No. 186.

15. 6. I pointed out a little above etc. See vi. 9. 4 sq,

15. 7. The Paleans etc The island of Cephallenia was divided
into four petty independent states, each with its own capital These
towns were Same, Pronni, Crane, and Pale. This subdivision of the
island explains its political insignificance in antiquity. The name of
Pale is still retained in the modem Paliki^ the name of the peninsula on
which Pale stood. See Bursian, Geogr. von Griechenland^ 2. pp. 371,
373 sq., 377.

15. 7* Demetrius who inarched against Seleucns etc. The
Demetrius meant is Demetrius Poliorcetes. See i. 10. 2 ; i. 16. i.

15. 7- a statne of Demetrius and a statue of Demetrius'

son Antigonus. Portions of the inscribed bases of both these statues
have been found at Olympia. ( i ) A slab of grey limestone, which formed
the upper part of the base of Antigonus's statue, was found (8 th May
1876) south of the temple of Zeus, at the sixth column reckoning from
the west. It bears the inscription :

1*0] 8a/xos 6 BvfavT[i(ov]
j8a]o"tX^ 'AKTiyovov.



cc



The Byzantine people (dedicated this statue of) king Antigonus."
See Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 304 ; Archdologische Zeitung,
35 {^^77)y P- 38, No. 36; Dittenberger, Sylloge Inscr. Graec. No.
161 ; Hicks, Greek histor, Inscr. No. 166. Mr. E. L. Hicks suggests
that this statue may have been dedicated by the Byzantines out of
gratitude for a crushing defeat which Antigonus Gonatas, son of
Demetrius Poliorcetes, had inflicted in 276 B.C. on the Gauls settled in
Thrace, who were a continual danger to Byzantium. See Justin, xxv. 2 ;
Polybius, iv. 46 ; Livy, xxxviii. 1 6.

(2) Two fragments of a pedestal of grey limestone were found at
Olympia in 1879. They bear a mutilated inscription, which may be
restored as follows :

1*0] 8a[/xos 6 Bv]favTi(uv

j8a](rtA{iJ Aa/xjarptor.

"The Byzantine people (dedicated this statue of) King Demetrius."
See Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 305.

Pausanias thought that the two kings commemorated by these
statues were Demetrius Poliorcetes and his son Antigonus Gonatas.
More probably, however, the Antigonus conmiemorated was Antigonus



48 DEMETRIUS— ANTIGONUS bk. vi. eus

the One-eyed, the father (not Antigonus Gonatas, the son) of Demetrius
Poliorcetes. For another inscription found at Olympia records a vote
of thanks and congratulation to the two kings Antigonus and Demetrius
(Die Inschriften von Olympiay No. 45 ; Archdologische Zeitung^ 37
(1879), P' 125 sq.^ No. 254). But these two kings are almost certainly
Antigonus the One-eyed and his son Demetrius Poliorcetes, who
assumed the title of kings simultaneously in 306 B.C. as a consequence
of Demetrius's victory at Salamis in Cyprus (see i. 6. 6 note), whereas
Demetrius Poliorcetes and his son Antigonus Gonatas were never
kings at the same time. Moreover in the congratulations Antigonus is
mentioned before Demetrius, which would not have been the case if
Demetrius had been his father. And that the Antigonus and
Demetrius to whom the congratulations are voted are the same
Antigonus and Demetrius whose statues are here mentioned by
Pausanias is made probable by the fact that the pedestals of their
statues are made of the same sort of stone (a fine-grained limestone
not often employed at Olympia) on which the vote of thanks and
congratulations is engraved.

15. 9. another statue of Areus. For the other statue of Areus,
see vi. 12. 5.

15. 10. Caprus. See above, § 4 ^^., and v. 21. 10 note.

15. 10. Faeanins, an EleaxL See vi. 16. 9 note.

16. I. Ananchidas. His statue has been already mentioned (vL
14. 11). Schubart suggested that Pausanias's notes may have here
got mixed up {Zeitschrift fiir Alterthumswissenschafty 9 (185 1), p. 297).

16. I. EurydamuB who commanded the Aetolians etc. See
X. 16. 4.

16. 2. The statue of Antigonus and the statue of Seleucus.

Statues of Antigonus and Seleucus have been already mentioned (vi.
II. i).

16. 2. the capture of Demetrius. See i. 10. 2 ; i. 16. i.

16. 2. Timon won victories in the pentathlum etc. See v. 2. 5.
As to the reason why he abstained from competing at the Isthmian
games see v. 2. 1-4 ; cp. vi. 3. 9. He is to be distinguished from
Timon the victor in the chariot-race (vi. 2. 8 ; vi. 12. 6).

16. 3. Antigonus the guardian of Philip. See vii. 7. 4. Honours
were lavished on him by the Greeks at the Nemean games. See
Polybius, ii. 70.

16. 4- the winter Nemean games. See ii. 15. 3 note.

16. 5. a statue of Philonides. The base of this statue was found
in the south-west comer of the Altis, 21st March 1879. It is of yellow
sandstone and bears the inscription :

B[a](riA,c(os *AA.€[^vS/3ov]
'qfi€f)o8f>6fias Kol
PrjfiaTurTrjs rrjs *A(Tias
#tA,(ovi87ys Ztfrov Kprjs
X.€fKrovaxri.os dv€$r)K€
Ad 'OAvyxTTi^.



CH. XVI PHILONIDES—LEONIDAS 49

*' Philonides, son of Zotes, a native of Chersonese in Crete, and a
courier and road-measurer to King Alexander in Asia, dedicated (this
statue) to Olympian Zeus." See Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No.
276; Archdologiscke Zeitung^ 37 (1879), P- I39> No. 275; Ditten-
bciger, Sylloge Inscr. Graec, No. 115; Hicks, Greek hist. Inscript
Na 129. A mutilated copy of the same inscription was found to the
north of the Byzantine church at Olympia, 27th November 1879. See
Die Inschriften van Olympia^ No. 277 ; Archdologiscke Zeitung, yj
(1879), P" 209, No. 329. The office of road-measurer (jSrffjuarurnis,
literally * stepper ') to Alexander the Great was previously known from
Athenaeus, who mentions (x. p. 442) one Baeton, a 'road-measurer'
to Alexander the Great and author of a work on the stages of Alex-
ander's march from day to day. Another road-measurer to Alexander
the Great was named Diognetus (Pliny, Nal. his/, vi. 61). The
* road-measurer ' had probably to estimate by paces and to record the
length of each day's march. A road which had thus been measured by
paces was said to be ^c^i/fiaTMr/xcvT;, literally * paced' (Polybius, iii.
39, xxxiv. 12 ; Strabo, vii. p. 322). See Droysen, Gesckickte des Hel-
Ufttsmus^ i. 2. p. 383.

16. 5. a statue of Leonidas, a native of Naxos. The base of
this statue was found before the east end of the north front of the
Leonidaeum, loth April 1880. It was built into a Byzantine edifice.
The base is of black limestone and bears a mutilated inscription which
may be restored as follows :

*H [7ro]X[is 17 ^m^iZUav^
AcwviTSJyyv A€(i)To[v Na^tov]
All 'OXv/iTTiy a.v^6\ff^K€v\

" The city of Psophis dedicated (this statue of) Leonidas, a Naxian,
son of Leotes, to Olympian Zeus." The style of the inscription
points to the second half of the fourth century B.C. See Die Inschriften
von Olympia, No. 294 ; Archdologiscke Zeitung, 39 (1881), p. 89 sq,.
No. 391. From the name of Leonidas's father we learn that the
Leonidas in question is the same man who built the Leonidaeum.
See V. 15. I note. Hence we are justified in supplying Na^tov in the
present inscription.

16. 7. Lysippus, an Elean. A fragment of a pedestal of black
limestone, conjectured by Dr. Purgold to have formed part of the
pedestal of the statue of Lysippus, was found at Olympia about 20
paces south of the west end of the Byzantine church. It bears the
following fragmentary inscription :

€]jro[i]fiy€ 'A/aycios*
I [dv€]^TyKav.

Sec Arckdologiscke Zeitung, 39 (1881), p. 85 j^.. No. 387; Roehl,
/. G. A, No. 44 a. A clue to the date of Lysippus the Elean is
famished by the fact, mentioned by Pausanias, that his statue was by
Andreas the Argive. For the pedestal of another statue by this sculptor

VOL. IV E



so DINOSTHENES bk vi. bus

has been found at Olympia, which enables us to date the artistic
activity of Andreas about 169 B.c. The pedestal in question supported
a statue set up by the Achaean League in honour of Q. Marcius
Philippus, who in the inscription is described as Consul of the Romans.
Philippus was consul twice, namely in 186 and in 169 B.C (Livy,
xxxix. 8, xliii. 11). In the latter year he commanded in the war
against Perseus and received an embassy from the Achaean League
(Polybius, xxviii. 10 sq,) Hence the consulate referred to in the
inscription is probably the latter of the two. See Die Inschriften
von Olympia^ No. 318; Dittenberger, Sylloge Inscr, Graec, No. 227;
Loewy, Inschriften griech, Bildhauer^ No. 475. We may infer,
then, that Lysippus the Elean lived in the first half of the second
century B.C.

16. 8. he set up a slab etc. This stone has been found at
Olympia in two pieces. One piece was found (5th November 1880)
1 5 metres east of the apse of the Byzantine church ; the other was
found (21st January 1881) in the court of the Wrestling - School
(Palaestra). The stone is grey limestone. The back is rough hewn ;
the front bears the following inscription :

A€tv[o(r]^€i^9]

A€[l]vO0r^€[v]€o[s] Ao-
K€8ai[fl0]v&0$ TO)

t All *0[A,]v/«rty

vtKouras oTaStoi/.
[d7r]6 Too'Se ras (TTo-
Xas cA, AaKcSa-
Lfiova c^aKari-
ot, TpiaKovra, aTT-
o Tas 8^ irhr ra-
V irpdrav ard-
\av TpiaKov-

TO.

" Dinosthenes a Lacedaemonian, son of Dinosthenes, a victor in the
foot-race at the Olympic games, dedicated (the statue) to Olympian
Zeus. From this stone to Lacedaemon is 630 (furlongs), and from it
to the first stone is 30 (furlongs)." See Die Inschriften von Olympia^
No. 171 ; Archdologische Zeitung, 39 (1881), p. 87, No. 389 ; Cauer,
Delectus Inscr, Graec,^ No. 26.

It will be observed that Pausanias gives the distance of the stone
from Lacedaemon as 660 furlongs, whereas the stone says 630. Pau-
sanias seems to have added the 30 furlongs mentioned on the stone
as the distance between Lacedaemon and the first stone. It appears
that "the first stone" was set up 30 furlongs beyond Lacedaemon,
probably in the sanctuary of Apollo at Amyclae, which is just about
30 furlongs distant from the theatre of ancient Sparta (E. Curtius,
PeloponnesoSy 2. p. 245). As the one inscribed stone was set up in



CH. XVI DINOSTHENES—PAEANIUS $«

the sanctuary at Olympia, it was natural that the other should also be
set up in a sanctuary. Similarly we hear of copies of a treaty, engraved
on stone, being set up at Olympia and in the sanctuary at Amyclae
(Thucydides, v. i8. 9). This is Brunn's explanation of the inscription,
and it has been accepted by Mr. W. Gurlitt {Ueber Pausanias, p. 163)
and Mr. G. H. FSrster {Die olympischen Sieger^ i. Teil, p. 29). The
question, however, still remains : why should Dinosthenes have recorded
on the base of his statue the distance from Olympia to Lacedaemon
and perhaps Amyclae? To this £. Curtius replied that Dinosthenes
may have been a road - measurer (see note on § 5, * Philonides ')
and may have helped to determine the measurements which he thus
recorded.

See E. Curtius, in Archdolcgische Zeitung^ 39 (188 1 ), pp. 93-96 ; G. Hirsch-
feld, ib, 40 (1882), pp. 103-105 ; Schubart, in FUckciseris jahrbikher, 29 (1883),
p. 471 ; H. Bruno, id, 30 (1884), p. 23 sq.

The French surveyors estimated the distance by the old road from
Sparta to Olympia at 105 to 106 kilometres, that is about 65 to 66
miles (Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 127). The distance mentioned on the
stone of Dinosthenes (630 furlongs) is equal to 11 1.7 kilometres or
about 69 miles, if we reckon the Greek furlong {stade) at I77*4 metres.
Sec vol. 2. p. 13.

The Olympic victory of Dinosthenes probably fell in 01. 116
(316 B.C.) It is true that Eusebius calls the victor of that year
Demosthenes {Chronic, vol. i. p. 205 sg, ed. Schdne) and that
Diodorus (xix. 17) calls him Dinomenes. But both of them agree in
stating that he was a Laconian, and probably the names Demosthenes
and Dinomenes are merely clerical errors for Dinosthenes, the form
of the name which Pausanias has preserved and which is confirmed
by the inscription. At least we know, from the combined testimony
of Pausanias and the inscription, that Dinosthenes was an Olympic
victor, and his name occurs nowhere else in the list of Olympic victors
preserved by Eusebius. 'The assumed date of the victory (316 B.C.)
agrees also well with the style of the inscription.

16. 8. Sthexmis. See note on vi. 17. 5.

16. 9* Paeanius, son of Damatrius. The base of this statue was
found at Olympia, i6th February 1881, built into a water-basin in an
early Byzantine edifice, at the back of the southern part of the Echo
Colonnade. It is of grey limestone. On the upper surface are the
footprints of the statue ; they show that it rested on the right foot,
which was in advance, while only the tip of the left foot touched the
ground. The inscription is :

IXatai/ios Aafixrrplov 'HA,€u>s*

** Paeanius an Elean, son of Damatrius." See IH'e Inschriften von
Olympia^ No. 179; Archdologische Zeitung^ 40 (1882), p. 195 sq,^
No. 438. The Olympic victory of Paeanius fell in 01. 141 (216 B.C.)
In the following Olympiad (212 B.C.) he was defeated by Caprus. See
vL 15. 4 J^. and 10. As to the Pythian victories of Paeanius, see vL



52 GLAUCON — DEMOCRATES bk. vi. elk

15. 10, where three such victories are recorded, whereas here Pausanias,
through forgetfulness perhaps, speaks of only two.

16. 9. a chariot of an Athenian, Glaucon, son of Eteocles.
The pedestal which supported this chariot was found at Olympia in
1880, to the north-west of the Byzantine church. It consisted of two
blocks of grey limestone, which were found separately, built into late
walls. On the top of the base are holes for attaching the chariot.
The inscription is :

All 'OrXv/iTTiy FAaiTJKCUV
'Et€OkA€[oi;s] 'A^T/varos.

<< Glaucon an Athenian, son of Eteocles (dedicated this chariot) to
Olympian Zeus." The dimensions of the base (.68 metre long by
.76 high and .46 broad) show that the chariot must have been a
miniature one. From the ornamental character of the letters, the
inscription seems to belong to the third century B.C. See Die Insckriften
von Olytnpia^ No. 178; Archdologische Zeitung^ 39 (1881), p. 88 sq,y
No. 390. Glaucon is mentioned in an Attic inscription. See U.
Kdhler, * Inschrift des Glaukon,' MittheiL d, arch, Inst, in Aiken,, 9

(1884), pp. 49-53.

17. I. But if you will go to the right etc. It has been asked
why Pausanias has divided the statues of the Olympic victors into two
groups, the one comprised in vi. 1-16, the other in 17-18. Dr. D6rp-
feld supposes that the first group comprised the statues which stood
within the Altis, round about the temple of Zeus ; and that the second
group comprised those which stood beside the road followed by the
processions, and which therefore, before the Altis was extended by Nero
(see note on v. 10. i), were mostly outside the Altis. See Ddrpfeld, in
MittheiL d. arch, Inst, in Athen^ 13 (1888), p. 335 sq. Dr. D5rpfeld's
solution is unsatisfactory. For Pausanias's words imply that the second
group of statues extended from the Leonidaeum to the great altar of
Zeus, and the altar of Zeus was at all times within the Altis. Moreover
Pausanias appears to have included in the first group the statues which
lined the great processional road on the south of the temple of Zeus, and
which therefore, according to Dr. Dorpfeld, must have been outside the
Altis until the sacred precinct was extended by Nero (see note on vi. 13.
11). Indeed, Dr. Dorpfeld's view seems to be completely disproved
by the fact that two of the statues in the second group are described by
Pausanias as being not far from the pillar of Oenomaus (vi. 18. 7). For
the pillar of Oenomaus was between the great altar and the temple of
Zeus (vi. 20. 6), and must therefore always have been within the Altis.

17. I. the Leonidaeum towards the great altar. As to the
Leonidaeum, see note on v. 15. i. As to the great altar, see v. 13.
8 sqq,

17. I. Democrates, a Tenedian. A bronze tablet, inscribed with a
long decree in honour of this Democrates, was found at Olympia (21st
January 1876), south of the south-west comer of the temple of Zeus.
The decree is in the Elean dialect and seems to have been voted by
the Council or Senate of Elis. It provides that Democrates shall rank as



CH. XVII DEMOCRA TES—STHENNIS 53

a public friend {proxenos) and benefactor of the city ; that he shall have
a seat of honour at the festival of Dionysus, a share of the sacrifices, etc
It is further provided that the decree shall be graved on bronze and set
up in the sanctuary of Zeus by one Aeschinas, the superintendent of the
horses. The inscription seems to belong to the period between the
death of Alexander the Great and the Roman conquest, perhaps to
the first half of the third century B.C. It is framed between miniature
Corinthian pilasters and surmounted by a miniature gable, in which
a bunch of grapes is represented between two double axes, the badge
or crest of Tenedos (see note on x. 14. i ). See Die Inschriften von
Olympia^ No. 39 ; Archdologische Zeitungy 33 (pub. 1876), pp. 183-186,
No. 4 ; Cauer, Delectus Inscr, Graec,^ No. 264 ; Collitz, G. D. I. i.
No. II 72. Aelian tells how Democrates used to draw a ring round
himself in the arena and defy his adversaries to drag him out of it ( Var,
hist iv. 15).

17. I. Dionysicles Lysns. Nothing more is known of these

sctdptors.

17. 2. Fhilinus gained five victories in running at Olympia

etc. Two of his victories were in the short foot-race, and were won in
01. 129 and 130 (264 and 260 B.c.) (Eusebius, Chronic, vol. i. p. 207,
ed. Schone).

17. 5. Sthennis, the Olsoithian* Cp. vi. 16. 8. A sculptor named
Sthennis flourished in Ol. 113 (328 B.C.), according to Pliny {Nat, hist,
xxxiv. 51); and a sculptor of this name made for Sinope a statue of the
hero Autolycus which was carried off by Lucullus. See Strabo, xii. p.
546 ; Plutarch, Lucullus^ 23 ; cp. Appian, Mithrid, 83. Pliny also
mentions statues of Demeter, Zeus, and Athena by Sthennis, which
were in the temple of Concord at Rome {^Nat. hist, xxxiv. 90). Further,
from an inscription found in the sanctuary of Amphiaraus, near Oropus
(C /. ^. (7. 5. i. No. 279; Loewy, Inschr. griech, Bildhauer^ No. 103 a),
we learn that an Athenian sculptor named Sthennis, son of Herodorus,
made a statue for king Lysimachus. Prof. Benndorf has suggested
that the Athenian Sthennis may be identical with the Olynthian Sthennis,
since, after the destruction of Olynthus by Philip, Sthennis may have
migrated to Athens and received the citizenship. On this hypothesis
the two statues by Sthennis at Olympia (Paus. vi. 16. 8; vi. 17. 5)
were executed before the destruction of Olynthus, while consequently
Sthexmis still described himself as an Olynthian. But Olynthus was
destroyed in 348 B.C., and Lysimachus did not assume the title of king
till 306 B.C. Hence on Prof. Benndorf s view we should have to assume
that Sthennis was at work before 348 and after 306 B.C., which is possible
but not very probable.

Two other pedestals of statues signed with the name of the sculptor
Sthennis (but without further designation) are in existence. One of
them (Loewy, op, cit. No. 83) was found on the Acropolis at Athens,
and therefore may presumably be referred to the Athenian Sthennis ; it
seems to date from the latter part of the fourth century B.C. Another
(Loewy, op, cit. No. 481) seems to be a later copy, not an original
inscription. A fragment of a base of Pentelic marble, found in the



54 STHENNIS — DAETONDAS bk. vi. elis

Dionysiac theatre at Athens (Loewy, op. cit. No. 541), bears a dedi-
catory inscription by Sthennis, son of Herodorus of the township {deme)
of Diomia; this Sthennis is probably the Athenian sculptor. From
another inscription found in the sanctuary of Amphiaraus near Oropus
(C /. G. G. S. i. No. 315; Loewy, op, cit. No. 1 1 2 a) it would seem
that the Athenian Sthennis had a son who was also a sculptor, and
who bore his paternal grandfather's name of Herodorus.

On the whole it must be left an open question whether the Olyn-
thian Sthennis and the Athenian Sthennis were one and the same
person, and whether, supposing they were two, the notices in Pliny,
Strabo, and Plutarch (see above) refer to the Olynthian or the Athenian
sculptor.

See Bninn, Gesch, d. grUch, Kiinstler^ i. pp. 389, 391 ; Loewy, Inschriften
griech, Bildhauer^ Nos. 83, 103 a (pp. 83, 384), 112 a (pp. 90, 384 5a,\ 481,
541 ; O. Benndorf, in Zeitschrtft f, die bsterreichische Gymnasien^ 26 (1875), PP*
740.743.

17. 5. Daetondas, a Sicyonian. In the olive-wood below Delphi
was found a fragn:nent of a base of bluish marble bearing the signature
of a sculptor Daetondas. Probably this is the Daetondas mentioned by
Pausanias ; for the latter sculptor appears, from what Pausanias says, to
have been a contemporary of Alexander the Great, and the character
of the inscription agrees well with that date. See Loewy, Inschriften
griech. Bildhauer^ No. 97. Cp. Brunn, Gesch. d. griech. Kiinstler^
I. p. 418.

An inscription from the pedestal of a statue by a sculptor Daetondas
exists at Thebes ; it seems to date from the early part of the third
century B.C. (C. I. G. G. S. i. No. 2472).

17. 6. the CUytids. The pedigree of Clytius, the founder of the
Clytid family, was, according to the present passage of Pausanias, as
follows :

Amythaon

Melampns

Mandus

Oides

Amphiaraus

Alcmaeon

Clytius

This differs from the family-tree of Melampus given by Homer {Odyss.
XV. 241 sqq.^ as follows :

Melampus



Antiphates Mantins



Oleics



. ,1 Polyphides Clitus

Amphiaraus i

! Theoclymenus



Alcmaeon Amphilochus



CH. XVIII GORGIAS—ANAXIMENES 55

From inscriptions found in Chios it appears that a branch of
the Clytids was settled in that island. The inscriptions confirm
the form of the name Clytid (KAvrtSat) as against the form Clytiad
(KAvTia8i;s), which appears in the text of Herodotus (ix. 33). The
name Oicles, which seems to have been a family name of the Cl3rtids,
also occurs in Chian inscriptions. See B. Haussoullier, in Bulletin de
Corresp, hellinique^ 3 (1879), PP* 45*58, 242-255.

17. 6. the daughter of Phegens. Her name was Alphesiboea.
See viii. 24. 8.

17. 7* Oanthams, the Sicyonian. Cp. vi. 3. 6 note.

17. 7- the statue of Qorgias, the Leontinian. The base of this
statue of the famous rhetorician was found by the Germans at Olympia
(i6th December 1876), 10 metres north of the north-east comer of the
temple of Zeus. It is of black limestone. The inscription is as follows :

l^apfiavTiSov Topyias AcoKTtvos.
rrjfJL ftkv oScAfc^]^!/ /^rjiKpdrrfs Trjy Topyiov «rx€v,

€K Tttirnys B' au[T]y ytyvcrat ^ImroKpdrrjs,
^ImroKpaTOvs 8* EvyxoA.7ro[9, 09 €t]Kova t-^vS* cxvc^t/kcv

SiavtaVf irai8€ias K[a]t <l>i\i\as €]v€Ka.

Vopytov axrKTJ(rai ^vxrjv dperrjs is dytovas

ov£cis TTCi) dvrjTiov KaWiov' rj^p€ T€\vrjv'

0$ Kol ^AwoXXtavos yvdXois €(Ka»v avaKctrat,

ov vXovTOV 7rapa8€tyfi\ cvtrc^cias 8^ t/sottwv.

" Gorgias of Leontini, son of Charmantides. Deicrates took to wife the
sister of Gorgias, and by her he had a son Hippocrates, and Hippo-
crates had a son Eumolpus, who dedicated this statue for two reasons,
for education's and affection's sake. No mortal ever yet discovered
a fairer art to train the soul for virtuous struggles than Gorgias. In
Apollo's vale his statue stands, a proof of his piety, not a display of his
wealth." The inscription apparently belongs to the early part of the
fourth century B.C. See Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 293 ;
Archdologische Zeitung^ 35 (1877), p. 43, No. 54; Kaibel, Epigram-
maia Graeca^ No. 875 a; E. Hoffrnann, Sylloge epigr. Graecoruntj No.
357. The latter part of the inscription refers to the gilt or golden
statue of himself which Gorgias dedicated in the temple of Apollo at
Delphi. See x. 18. 7 note.

17. 8. at Athens on an embassy. Gorgias's embassy to

Athens occurred in 427 B.C. (Diodorus, xii. 53 ; cp. Thucydides, iii. 86).
As to the embassy and the effect of Gorgias's eloquence on the Athenians,
see Plato, Hippias Major ^ p. 282 b ; Philostratus, ViL Soph. i. 9. 2 ;
Dionysius Halicamasensis, De Lysia judicium^ 3 ; Plutarch, De genio
Socraiis, 13.

17. 9. Gorgias lived a hundred and five years. Others said
variously 107, 108, or 109 years. See Zeller, Philosophie der Griecheny
I.* p. 948, note 3. Prof. Zeller inclines to date the life of Gorgias

483-375 B.C.

18. 2. Anazimenes. This writer appears, as Pausanias indicates,



$6 THE TREASURIES bk. vi. klis

to have composed three histories, i. A history of Philip of Macedonia
in at least eight books (Harpocration, 5,v, Ka^vA.17) : 2. A history of
Alexander the Great in at least two books (Harpocration, s.v, 'AXkC-
/iaxos ; Diogenes Laertius, ii. 2. 3) : 3. A history of Greece from the
earliest times under the title of * the First Histories ' (Athenaeus, vL
p. 231 c). The scope of this last work is described by Diodorus
(xv. 89) as follows : ** Anaximenes of Lampsacus recorded the earliest
history of Greece, starting with the theogony and the first race of men.
He brought his history down to the battle of Mantinea and the death of
Alexander, comprising almost all the affairs of both the Greeks and
the barbarians in twelve books." Suidas tells us (s,v. 'Avo^tficvjys)
that Anaximenes was a pupil of Diogenes the Cynic and a tutor of
Alexander the Great, whom he attended in his campaigns.

18. 2. The following anecdotes are told of him. These two
anecdotes are told in almost the same words by Suidas {s,v. *Ava^4-

18. 7' Praxidamas, an Aeginetan. He is mentioned by Pindar
as the first Aeginetan (Aeacid) who won an Olympic victory. Pindar
adds that Praxidamas was crowned five times at the Isthmus and thrice
at Nemea (Pindar, A-emeans, vi. 27 sgg,) Praxidamas is also mentioned
by the pseudo-Plutarch (De nobiliiaie^ 20). Although Pausanias here
tells us that the statues of Praxidamas (01. 59 = 544 B.C.) and Rexibius
(Ol. 61 = 536 B.C.) were the first statues of athletes set up at Olympia,
he had previously mentioned the statue of Eutelidas (01. 38 = 628 B.C.),
expressly saying that it was ancient and the inscription on it worn with
age (vi. 15. 8).

19. I. On this terrace are the treasuries. The situation of the
treasuries on a terrace overlooking the Altis, inunediately at the foot
of Mt. Cronius, is accurately described by Pausanias, except that the
treasuries lie rather to the east than to the north of the temple of Hera.
A flight of steps, dating perhaps from the time of the Persian wars,
leads up to the terrace. These steps are mentioned by Pausanias (v.
21. 2). At the back of the treasuries a substantial retaining wall with
buttresses protected them against landslips from Mt. Cronius.

Before the German excavations it had been supposed, on the
analogy of the so-called Treasuries of Mycenae and Orchomenus, that
the Olympic treasuries were circular. Indeed a learned traveller (the
late W. Vischer) thought he had perhaps discovered the remains of one
of the round treasuries at the south-east side of Mt. Cronius. How-
ever, the remains proved to be those of a modem brick-kiln.

Pausanias mentions ten treasuries. The foundations of twelve have
been discovered. This discrepancy is explained by the fact that before
Pausanias's visit to Olympia two of the treasuries (those numbered il.
and III. on the plan) had been destroyed to make way for a paved road
leading up to Mt. Cronius. From the direction taken by the aqueduct
of Herodes Atticus, it is inferred that the paved road in question must
have been made at the same time as the aqueduct, probably by Herodes
Atticus, and therefore in the lifetime of Pausanias. If the road is
rightly dated, it affords conclusive proof that Pausanias described the



CH. XIX THE SICYONIAN TREASURY 57

treasuries as they were in his own time, and that he did not copy
his description (as some critics have supposed) from the works of
Polemo, who wrote some three and a half centuries before him.

The foundations of all twelve treasuries are in more or less perfect
preservation ; but only in the case of three of them (the treasuries of
Sicyon, Megara, and Gela) have architectural members been discovered
in sufficient quantities to enable us to restore them with fair proba-
bility. All the treasuries are in the form of a small oblong temple
with an ante-chamber. Hence Polemo calls them temples (Polemo,
Fragm. 22, ed. Preller ; Athenaeus, xi. p. 479 f- 480 a) ; and if
Pausanias had copied from Polemo, he would probably have called
them so too. The ante-chambers of all the treasuries, except that of
Gela and perhaps of Epidamnus, opened through two pillars between
aniiu. The treasury of Gela, the largest of all, has the form of a
prostyle temple, its ante-chamber or rather porch being surrounded by
pillars on three sides. All the treasuries seem to have been built in the
Doric style. The precious objects were doubtless kept in the inner
chambers. All the treasuries face to the south, not, like temples, to
the east.

See Die Funde von Olympia^ p. 23 ; Flasch, ' Olympia,' in Baumeister's
I>enkm&kr, p. 1 104 b ; Ad. Botticher, Olympia? pp. 207, 224 sq, ; Curtius und
Adler, Olympia und Umgegend^ p. 33 sq, ; Baedeker,' p. 344 sq, ; Curtius, * Die
Schatzhauser von Olympia,' Stizungsberichte d. philos, hisior, CI, d, k, preuss.
Akad, d, Wissen, (Berlin), Sth March 1896, pp. 239-251 ; id.y quoted by
Schubort, in FUckeisen^ s JahrbUcher^ 29 (1883), p. 475, note 4; Fr. Richter, De
th€sauris Olympian effossis (Berlin, 1885). As to Vischer's mistake, see his
£rinnerungenj p. 470 n.*

19. I. the treasury of the Sicyonians. Pausanias describes the
treasuries from west to east (cp. § 14). The Sicyonian treasury is
the most westerly of the twelve. It was identified by an inscription,
2cjcv<$vc[oft] on one of the antae of the ante-chamber. This inscription,
which was not found in its original position, seems to date from the first
half of the fifth century B.C. The treasury is 12.44 metres long by 7.30
broad. Well-preserved examples of all the architectural members of
the treasury have been found, so that it is possible to restore the build-
ing completely on paper. It was in the Doric style throughout. The
blocks were found scattered up and down the Altis, but were easily
recognised because they consist of a fine-grained yellowish-red sand-
stone, such as has been used in the construction of no other building in
Olympia. On the other hand ancient Sicyon appears to have been
largely built of exactly the same stone. Hence it has been conjectured
by Dr. Dorpfeld that all the blocks were quarried and hewn at Sicyon
and brought round by sea ready to be put together at Olympia. This
is confirmed by the masons' marks on the stones ; for these marks
consist of letters of the Sicyonian alphabet. The foundations of the
treasury are built of a variety of materials. The upper courses are
mostly constructed of the same coarse shell-limestone of which most of
the edifices at Olympia were built. The lower part of the foundations
consists of small stones (pebbles, shell -limestone, and breccia, also
fragments of roof-tiles) bonded with clay mortar. A frieze of triglyphs



58 THE SICYONIAN TREASURY bk. vi. eus

and metopes ran all round the top of the walls on the outside ; twenty-
nine out of the original thirty-six blocks have been found. The gables
were unsculptured. The roof was covered with marble tiles. Traces
of red and blue paint were visible on many of the stones of the building
(for example on the triglyphs) at the time of their discovery. All the
blocks of the upper building were clamped together with iron clamps of
the r-J pattern ; in the foundations, on the other hand, no clamps were
employed. With regard to the date of the treasury, its architectural
style agrees so closely with that of the temple of Zeus that we might
suppose it was built at the same time, namely about the middle of the
fifth century B.C. ; and with this date the character of the inscription
and of the masons' marks on the stones agrees perfectly. But from a
slight technical indication (a small round projection on the upper edge
of the triglyphs and metopes) Dr. Dorpfeld thinks it probable that the
treasury is later than the Parthenon at Athens, and that hence it belongs
to the second half of the fifth century B.C., although in Athenian build-
ings of the fifth century B.a the old r-J shaped clamps, such as are
found in the treasury, were replaced by the newer HH shaped clamps.

See Olympia: Ergebnisse^ Tafelband i. plates xxvii,-xxx. ; W. Dorpfeld, in
Olympia: Ergebnisse, Textbond 2. pp. 40-44; id.^ in Die Ausgrabungen zu
Ofympia, 4 (1878- 1879), PP» 3S"37> ^i^h pi. xxxiii.; id,, *Das Schatthaus der
Sikyonier,* Mittheil, d. arch, Inst. in. Athen, 8 (1883), pp. 67-70; Ad. Botticher,
Olympia,"* p. 220 sqq, ; Flasch, * Olympia,' in Baumeister s Denkmdler, p. 1104 B
sq, ; Baedeker,' p. 344 ; Adler, in Archdologiscke Zeitung, 39 (188 1), p. 66. For
the inscription and masons' marks, see Dit Inschriften von Olympia, Nos. 649,
668; Arckdol Zeitung, 39 (1881), pp. 169-179; Roehl, /. G, A, Nos. 27 b,
27 c ; Collitz, G, D, /. 3. No. 3167.

19. 2. Myron built it in the thirty-third Olympiad. The

idea that the Sicyonian treasury was built in or soon after 01. 33 (648
B.C.) is entirely precluded by the style both of the structure and of the
inscription (see preceding note). Pausanias's mistake appears to have
arisen from observing that the bronze shrines, or one of them (see ncjct
note), was a votive offering of the tyrant Myron. From this he inferred
that the treasury itself was built by Myron. In reality it appears to
have been built at least a century and a half after Myron's time ; in
the interval Myron's oflfering must have been deposited elsewhere.

See A. Kirchhoff, in ArchdoL Zeitung, 39 (188 1), p. \^\ sq.\ K. Purgold, ib,
p. 176 sqq. ; W. Dorpfeld, in Olympia : Ergebnisse, Textband 2. p. 43 ;
Dittenberger and Purgold, Die Inschriften von Olympia, p. 663 sq., on No. 649 ;
A. Botticher, Olympia,"* pp. 220-222 ; Flasch, * Olympia,' in Baumeister's Denk-
mdler, p. 1104 B.

19. 2. two chambers, one in the Doric, the other in the Ionic
style. Before the German excavations at Olympia it was believed that
these two chambers formed part of the building ; and they were
adduced as evidence that as late as the seventh century B.C. the walls of
rooms were still lined with bronze. Further the fact that one of them
was in the Ionic style was pointed to as a proof that at that time the
Greeks of the Peloponnese had already begun to build in the Ionic
style. These conclusions were upset by the discovery of the treasury
itself. For its walls show not the least trace of having ever been lined



CH. XIX TARTESSIAN BRONZE 59

with bronze ; and the style is pure Doric throughout. Hence we must
conclude that these bronze *• chambers ' were portable models ; and
probably it was only the Doric one which was dedicated by Myron ;
the Ionic one may have been a much later offering. Still the
• chambers ' must have been very substantial models, since the lesser of
them weighed 500 talents (§ 4), which, in the Aeginetic standard, is
approximately equal to 19 tons. See, in addition to the references at
the end of the preceding note, Adler and Curtius, in Archdologische
Zeitung^ 39 (1881), pp. 66, 67 ; F. Adler, in Die Ausgrabungen zu
Olympia^ 5 (1879-1881), p. 30 sq,

19. 2. Tartessian bronze. The copper mines of Spain, especially
of Andalusia, within which the ancient Tartessus was comprised, were
famous in antiquity. Strabo says (iii. p. 146) that nowhere in the
world was copper produced in such quantities and of so fine a quality
as in Turdetania, which corresponds to part of Andalusia. Cp. Dio-
dorus, v. 36. 2 ; Sc3annus, Orbis Description 164 sqq,\ Pliny, Nat. hist,
iii. 30 ; Mela, ii. 86 ; H. Bliimner, Technologie und Terminologies 4.
p. 65 sq.

19. 3. Tartessus is a river in the land of the Iberians. Accord-
ing to Strabo (iii. p. 148) Tartessus was the ancient name of the Baetis
(the Guadalquivir)^ and he quotes Stesichorus to show that the poet
called the Baetis the Tartessus. The tides on the river are mentioned
also by Philostratus (Vit. Apoll, v. 6). At the present day large
steamers ascend the Guadalquivir as far as Seville.

19. 3. some think that Oarpia was anciently called Tar-
tessus. Carpia is no doubt the Spanish seaport which the ancients
also called Carthaea (Appian, Bell, Civile^ ii. 105), but more com-
monly Carteia (Strabo, iii. p. 141 ; Livy, xxviii. 30, xliii. 3; Hirtius,
Bell, Hispan, 32 ; Pliny, Nat, hist, iii. 7 ; Mela, ii. 6. 96). The site
of the city, identified by the description of Mela \l,c.\ by ruins, and by
the discovery of coins, was at the head of the bay of Gibraltar, at a
place now called El Rocadillo about 4 miles north-west of Gibraltar
(Smith's Diet, of Greek and Roman Geogr. i. p. 527). The view that
Carteia was the ancient Tartessus is mentioned also by Strabo (iii. p.
151) and Mela (ii. 6. 96), and it is apparently accepted by Pliny {Nat,
hist, iii. 7). The other opinion, mentioned by Pausanias, that Tartessus
was at the mouth of the Baetis (the Guadalquivir) is recorded also by
Strabo (iii. p. 148). Tartessus, as is well known, is the Tarshish of
the Bible ; the two forms Tartessus and Tarshish seem to be the
respective Greek and Semitic corruptions of the name of a native
Iberian tribe (H. Kiepert, Lehrbuch d, alien Geographie^ § 419).

19. 4* the treasury was dedicated by Myron. The translation
should rather be : " the chamber was dedicated by Myron."

19. 4* a bronze-plated shield. The Greek is 0071$ cTrtxaXxos,
an expression which Pausanias perhaps borrowed from Herodotus (iv.
200). It may possibly mean no more than *a bronze shield' (cp.
Bahr on Herodotus, Lc) The adjective here translated * bronze-
plated' is elsewhere applied by Pausanias to a tripod (v. 12. 5).

19. 4* the Myazdans. See x. 38. 8 note, and the Critical Note



6o THE CARTHAGINIAN TREASURY bk. vi. rus

on the present passage (vol. i. p. 589). From the present passage it
appears that Pausanias had not visited Myania at the time when he
was writing his description of Olympia.

19. 5. Thncydides mentions thecityoftheMsronians.

See Thucydides, iii. loi.

19. 6. Miltiades, son of Oimon, who was the first to reign

etc. Pausanias has here made a slip ; the first Athenian tyrant of the
Chersonese was not the famous Miltiades, son of Cimon, who led the
Athenians at Marathon, but his uncle Miltiades, son of Cypselus. See
Herodotus, vi. 36-38. The same mistake is made by Cornelius Nepos
{Miltiades, i).

19. 6. old Attic letters. See note on i. 2. 4.

19. 6. Patrocles of Orotona. This is a different person from the
Sicyonian sculptor of the same name who is mentioned by Pausanias
elsewhere (vi. 3. 4). Cp. note on x. 9. 10; Brunn, Gesch, d, griech.
Kunsiler, i. p. 277 sq,

19. 7. the treasury of the Oarthaginians. This is probably the
fourth treasury from the west (marked iv. on the plan). Treasuries II.
and III. appear to have been pulled down shortly before Pausanias
visited Olympia. See note on § i. Properly the treasury should have
been denominated, after its founders, the treasury of the Syracusans.
The name * treasury of the Carthaginians* was probably a popular
designation which came into use in later ages when more interest was
taken in the Carthaginian spoils which it contained than in its
Syracusan founders. At least this explanation of the name seems more
probable than Freeman's notion that the treasury was so called " in
proud scorn." The Syracusan victory which it is commonly supposed
to have commemorated was the great defeat of the Carthaginians at
Himera in 480 B.C. See Herodotus, vii. 165-167 ; Diodorus, xi. 21 sq.\
Ad. Holm, Geschichte Sid liens , i. pp. 205-207; Yrt^mzxi, History of
Sicily, 2. p. 192 sqq. But the style of the architecture points, in Dr.
Dorpfeld's opinion, to an earlier date, and this indication is confirmed
by an inscription {Die Inschriften von Olympia, No. 661, ^vp[aKwrMav\
" of the Syracusans ") which seems to have been carved on some part
of the building and which from its style is judged by Prof. Dittenberger
to be not later than the end of the sixth century B.C. Further, a piece
of sculptured relief, which appears to have adorned the gable of the
treasury (see below), is considered by Prof. Treu to be too archaic in
style to have been executed as late as the period immediately after the
battle of Himera. Both the inscription and the relief are carved on
blocks of the same dazzling white limestone of which the entablature
is made (see below). Thus the concurrent testimony of architecture,
epigraphy, and sculpture points to the treasury having been built not
later than the end of the sixth century B.C. If we accept that testimony,
we must apparently abandon the idea that the Syracusan treasury was
founded by Gelo, since Gelo did not make himself master of Syracuse
until 485 B.C And indeed Pausanias, interpreted strictly, affirms
only that the votive offerings in the treasury were dedicated by Gelo ;
he does not say that the treasury itself was founded by him. (The



CH. XIX THE EPIDAMNIAN TREASURY 6l

translation of this passage, vol. i. p. 312, should be corrected accord-
ingly.) These offerings were, we can hardly doubt, spoils captured by
Gelo from the Carthaginians at Himera. The three linen corselets
in the treasury had probably been worn by three soldiers of the Cartha-
ginian host in the battle. As to the use of linen corselets by the
ancients see note on i. 21. 7.

Nothing of the treasury is standing but the foundations, which are
10.19 metres long by 6.50 metres broad. They consist of two courses
of masonry resting on a substratum of pebbles. The stone is the coarse
shell-limestone of which so many buildings at Ol3anpia are constructed.
The blocks are mostly hewn in polygons, which is remarkable, as the
polygonal style of masonry hardly occurs elsewhere at Olympia.
Numerous broken blocks of a dazzling white limestone, comprising
blocks with clamps of the n"i shape, pieces of an architrave, fragments
oftriglyphs and metopes, and many pieces of a peculiarly moulded
geison^ are conjecturally supposed by Dr. Dorpfeld to have belonged
to the treasury of the Carthaginians or (as it should rather be called) of
the Syracusans. Fragn:nents of this white limestone were discovered
near the foundations of the treasury and partly built into them. But
Dr. Dorpfeld does not consider that the attribution of the architectural
members in question to the Syracusan treasury is perfectly certain.
See W. Dorpfeld, in Olympia : Ergebnisse^ Textband 2. p. 46 ; Olympia :
Ergebnissey Tafelband i. pi. xxxiv. A fragment of a limestone relief,
representing a naked human leg grasped apparently by an arm, is con-
jectured by Prof. Treu to have formed part of a sculptured decoration
in the front gable of the Carthaginian treasury. He supposes that the
scene represented was one of combat in which a vanquished foe was
grasping, with a suppliant gesture, the knees of the victor. See G.
Treu, in Olympia : Ergebnisse^ Textband 3. p. 15 sq,

19. 8. The tliird and fourth of the treasuries are offerings of
the Epldanmians. . . . These are the fifth and sixth treasuries from
the west (numbered v. and vi. on the plan). Of these the treasury
called by Pausanias the fourth (No. vi. on the plan) was doubtless
the treasury of the Byzantines, whose name has here dropped out
of the text of Pausanias, though it occurs in the next section (§ 9). Of
the Epidamnian treasury (No. v.) nothing remains but foundations,
and even these are incomplete, the back foundation-wall being totally
destroyed, so that it is impossible to determine the exact length of the
building. The foundations, so far as they exist, are composed of a
single course of soft limestone resting on a deep substructure of pebbles
bonded with clay-mortar. The blocks of limestone are carefully cut so
that only their outer edges are in contact. Iron clamps are not used
to bond the blocks. From the greater breadth of the treasury Dr.
Ddrpfeld thinks that it must have had six supports (four columns
between antae) on its southern facade, instead of the usual number of
four. See W. D6rpfeld, in Olympia: Ergebnisse^ Textband 2. p. 47.
A fragment of a limestone relief, representing the head, mane, and
breast of a horse, is conjectured by Prof. Treu to have belonged to a
sculptured decoration of the front gable of the Epidamnian treasury.



62 THE SYBARITE TREASURY bk. vi. elis

The horse seems to have borne a rider. The mane is long and care-
fully carved, though in a stiff conventional style. Considerable remains
of colour are to be seen on the fragn:nent. The background is bright
blue ; the mane was painted in alternate strips of blue and red ; the
bridle is red ; the body of the horse seems to have been yellow. See
G. Treu, in Olympia: Ergebnisse^ Textband 3. pp. 16-18 ; Die Ausgra-
bungen zu Olympia^ 5 (i 879-1 881), p. 16, with pi. xxv. B; Ad.
Botticher, Olympiad p. 244 ; Friederichs - Wolters, Gipsabgusse^
No. 296.

The Byzantine treasury (No. vi. on the plan) is not much better
preserved than the Epidamnian. However, in addition to the founda-
tions, there are preserved some pieces of the wall of the treasure-
chamber and a small part of the floor. The foundations consist of
three courses of shell-limestone, without any substruction of pebbles.
See Dorpfeld, l.c. Three fragments of limestone reliefs representing
a waterfowl, a cock, and a hen (all mutilated) are conjectured by Prof.
Treu to have belonged to a sculptured decoration of the front gable
of the Byzantine treasury {Olympia : Ergebnisse^ Textband 3. pp. 23-25).
From a fragnment of Polemo, preserved by Athenaeus (xi. p. 480 a),
we learn that the Byzantine treasury contained a cedar- wood image of
Triton holding a silver cup, also a silver Siren, and various vessels of
silver and gold.

19. 8. It contains a representation of Atlas etc. Dr. Purgold
has argued that this group of Hercules and Atlas in the Gardens of the
Hesperides and the group of Hercules fighting Achelous (see § 12)
originally occupied the gables of the temple of Hera ; he supposes that
they were taken down to protect them from the weather, from which,
being of wood, they were liable to suffer. See Berliner philologiscke
Wochenschrifty 7 (1887), pp. 130-132. As to Atlas upholding the
sky, see note on v. 11. 5. The Greek word translated * firmament* in
the present passage is tt6\o%. On the various significations of this
word, see the learned discussion of Prof. E. Maass in his Araiea
(Berlin, 1892), p. 123 sqq. He shows that it was variously employed
in the sense of the firmament or celestial globe, the axis of that globe,
a pole of the axis, a sun-dial, etc.

19. 8. The Hesperides were removed etc. See v. 17. 2.

19. 9- The Sybarites also built a treasury. This is the seventh
treasury from the west (No. vii. on the plan). It must have been built
before 510 B.C., for in that year Sybaris was destroyed. Only the
northern half of the treasury is preserved, and even that merely to
a height of one course. This course is composed of coarse shell-
limestone, and rests on a bed of sand and fine pebbles. The breadth
of the treasure-chamber is about 5.60 metres ; its length is unknown.
Even the general plan of the building is unknown, but can be inferred
from the analogy of the other treasuries. In the treasure-chamber lie
some slabs of the pavement ; they are of shell-limestone, and have on
their upper surface certain holes of which the purpose is not known. See
W. Dorpfeld, in Olympia : Ergebnisse, Textband 2. p. 47 sq, A frag-
ment of limestone bearing a small piece of floral ornament (?) carved in



CH. XIX THE CYRENIAN TREASURY 63

relief is conjccturally assigned by Prof. Treu to one of the gables of the
Sybarite treasury {Olympia: Ergebnisse^ Textband 3. p. 25 sq.)

19. 9. Lupiae is the ancient Sybaris. This is, of course,

absurd. Lupiae or Lupia was in Calabria, while Sybaris was far away
in Lucania. Sir £. H. Bunbury thought that the only reasonable
explanation of Pausanias's strange mistake is that " he confounded Lupia
in Calabria (the name of which was sometimes written Lopia) with the
Roman colony of Copia in Lucania, which had in fact arisen on the site
of Thurii, and, therefore, in a manner succeeded to Sybaris " (Smith's
Diet, of Gr. and Rom, Geogr,^ article * Lupiae,' vol. 2. p. 217).

19. 10. a treasury of the Libyans of Oyrene. This is the eighth
treasury from the west (No. viii. on the plan). It is the smallest and
perhaps the oldest of all the treasuries. In spite 'of its small size it
seems to have been built on the same general plan as the others, in
other words, to have consisted of a chamber with a shallow ante-chamber
or porch. The foundations and part of the upper walls arc preserved.
They are constructed of hewn blocks of the coarse shell-limestone and of
a soft marly limestone. The shell-limestone is employed in the portions
of the building above ground and in a part of the foundations ; the
marly limestone is employed only in the two lower courses of the founda-
tions. Dr. Dorpfeld thinks that the part built of marly limestone is the
older, and that the other material (shell-limestone) was only employed
in rebuilding and extending the treasury at some later time. Neither
clamps nor dowels appear to have been used to bind the stones together.
To the north of the treasury of Gela a slab of hard limestone was found
bearing the inscription Kvpa\yaloC\ (* Cyrenians *) in large letters.
From the size and shape of the stone Dr. Dorpfeld is of opinion that
it formed part of an anta of the Cyrenian treasury. See Olytnpia:
Ergebnissey Tafelband i. pi. xxxii. ; W. Dorpfeld, in Olympia: Ergelh
nisse^ Textband 2. p. 48 ; Die Inschriften von Olytnpia^ No. 246 ;
K. Purgold, in Archdologische Zeitung^ 39(1881), p. 180, No. 399;
Roehl, /. G, A. No. 506 a.

A fragment of a limestone relief (0.23 metre high, 0.28 metre broad,
and 0.26 metre thick) representing a woman carrying or struggling with
a small lion is believed to have formed part of a sculptured decoration
of the front gable of the Cyrenian treasury. The woman thus repre-
sented is probably Cyrene, the patron goddess of the city of that name.
For Pindar tells how Apollo found her struggling, unarmed, with a lion
(Pyth, ix. 25 sqq.)\ and in two sculptures brought from Cyrene and
now in the British Museum the goddess is similarly portrayed. In the
Olympian relief the goddess is grasping one of the lion*s forelegs in her
left hand ; her right arm, her head, the lower part of her body, and the
lower part of the lion's body, are all broken off. Prof. Treu is of opinion
that she was portrayed carrying the lion and moving to the spectator's
right, probably pursued by her lover Apollo. Prof. Studniczka thinks
that she may have been kneeling and struggling with the beast. The
breast and arms of the goddess are bare ; her long curls fall down on
her shoulders. Remains of red paint are to be seen on her robe ; her
hair and the lion's mane seem to have been painted red ; and traces of



64 THE SELINUNTIAN TREASURY wc VL kus

bright blue were visible on the background at the time of its discovery.
Further, a fragment of another limestone relief, representing the body of
a cock, is believed to have also belonged to the sculptured decoration of
the gable of the Cyrenian treasury, since the stiff conventional style in
which the wings and feathers are rendered agrees closely with the
representation of cocks on Cyrenian vases. Prof. Treu conjectures
that a cock and hen, facing each other, may have occupied each of the
ends of the gable. From the archaic style of these sculptures it would
seem that they date from the early part of the sixth century B.C. The
treasury may very well have been built in the reign of Battus II. (574*
554 B.C), when Cyrene received a great influx of Greek colonists, and
hence presumably a large increase of wealth (Herodotus, iv. I59)- ^^
G. Treu, in Olympia: Ergebnisse^ Textband 3. pp. 19-23 ; Fr. Stud-
niczka, Kyrene (Leipzig, 1890), pp. 28-39; /V/., in Roscher's Lexikan^
s.v, * Kyrene,' vol. 2. p. 1724 sq.

19. 10. Selinns was destroyed by the Oarthaginiaiis.

Selinus was destroyed and most of the people put to the sword by the
Carthaginians in 409 B.C. (Diodorus, xiii. 54-58). An inscription
found at Selinus gives a list of the gods by whose help the Selinuntians
conquered in war. They were "Zeus, and Fear, and Hercules, and
Apollo, and Poseidon, and the Tyndarids, and Athena, and the Apple-
bearer (or Sheep-bearer) (Demeter), and the All-powerful Goddess
(Pasicratia), but especially Zeus." See Roehl, /. G. A» Na 5 ' 5 J
Roberts, Greek Epigraphy y No. 117. However, their gods failed them
in the last struggle with the Carthaginian. Hannibal, the Carthaginian
general, said that the gods of Selinus had departed from the city, being
offended with the people (Diodorus, xiii. 59).

19. 10. the people of Selinus dedicated a treasnry. This is the
ninth treasury from the west (No. IX. on the plan). From its position,
hemmed in between the Cyrenian and the Metapontine treasuries
(Nos. VIII. and x.), it is clearly of later date than both of them. Por-
tions of the foundations and walls, pieces of the pavement of the treasure-
chamber, and the pedestal of a statue in the chamber, are preserved,
probably also a part of the entablature. The material of the walls is a
fine hard shell-limestone, quite different from the coarse gritty shell-
limestone of which the temple of Zeus and so many other buildings at
Olympia are constructed. Some pieces of an ancient Doric entablature,
found partly on the terrace of the treasuries, partly at the Prytaneum,
are made of the same fine hard limestone, and as their dimensions agree
with those of the Selinuntian treasury we may safely conclude that the
entablature belonged to the treasury in question. Of the walls of the
treasure-chamber only a single course, composed of a double row of
slabs set up side by side on their narrow edges, is preserved. The
slabs were bonded together by large swallow -tailed clamps made of
wood ; of course only the holes made to receive these clamps are pre-
served. The floor of the treasure-chamber is double. The lower and
original floor consists merely of mortar laid inmiediately on the earth ;
it is well preserved. Above it is a later stone pavement resting on
supports so as to leave a hollow space between it and the original floor.



CH. XIX THE METAPONTINE TREASURY 65

The stone of which the pavement and its supports are constructed is the
common coarse shell-limestone of Olympia. The ground-plan of the
treasury cannot be restored with certainty, since hardly a stone of its
southern half is preserved. The style of the entablature, of which some
remains have been found (see above), is simple and archaic. Some
blocks of the pediment have also been discovered. On the ground of
its architectural style and of certain technical indications Dr. Dorpfeld
dates the treasury approximately in the second half of the sixth century
B.C See W. Dorpfeld, in Olympia : Ergebnisse^ Textband 2. p. 49 sq, ;
Olympia: Ergebnisse^ Tafelband i. plates xxxii., xxxiii.

19. II. the treasnry of the Metapontines. This is the tenth
treasury from the west (No. x. on the plan). Although only half a
course of hewn stones is standing, the ground-plan of the building can
be restored with certainty, since the foundations, constructed of large
boulders, are preserved entire. Thus we see that the treasury consisted
of a chamber about 9.60 metres long and 8.30 metres broad, with an
ante-chamber or porch a little over 2 metres deep. The half-course of
ashlar masonry seems to have formed the highest part of the founda-
tions, and not to have belonged to the upper walls of the building. It
is constructed of blocks of the common coarse shell-limestone of Olympia
not united by clamps. In the foundations were found built some tri-
glyphs and metopes of soft marly limestone. Dr. Dorpfeld thinks that
they belong to the treasury, having been either rejected by the masons
on account of some flaw while the treasury was building, or built into the
foundations during some later restoration. See Olympia : Ergebnisse^
Tafelband i. pL xxxii. ; W. Dorpfeld, in Olympia: Ergebnisse, Textband
2. p. 50. A fragment of a limestone relief, representing the back part
of the body of a mule, is conjectured by Prof. Treu to have formed part
of a sculptured decoration of the front gable of the Metapontine treasury.
It retains traces of colour (red and bluish green). See G. Treu, in
Olympia: Ergebnisse^ Textband 3. p. 18 sq.

The antiquary Polemo, quoted by Athenaeus (xi. p. 479 f) tells us
that in the treasury of the Metapontines at Olympia there were 132
silver and three gold-plated cups, three silver wine-jugs, and one silver
sacrificial vessel.

19. II. in my time nothing was left of it etc. Cicero speaks of
having visited Metapontum {De finibuSy v. 2). Elsewhere he remarks
that Magna Graecia, once so flourishing, in his days lay utterly waste
{De amicitiay iv. 1 3). The site of Metapontum, according to Sir E. H.
Bunbury, " was probably already subject to malaria, and from the same
cause has remained desolate ever since " (Smith's Diet of Greek and
Roman Geogr,^ s.v, * Metapontum ').

19. 12. The people of Megara built a treasnry. This is

the eleventh treasury from the west (No. xi. on the plan). Pieces of
all the architectural members of this treasury have been found, so that
a complete restoration of it is possible, though only the foundations and
part of one course of the walls are standing. Blocks of the stylobate,
drums and capitals of columns, architrave blocks, triglyphs and metopes,
horizontal and slanting geisa^ simas, roof-tiles, and pedimental reliefs

VOL. IV F



66 THE MEGARIAN TREASURY bk. vi. elis



were all found built into the Byzantine fortification wall, to the south-
west of the temple of Zeus. The material of the entablature is a fine
shell-limestone thinly coated with stucco. But the sitna (projecting
edge of the roof) and the roof-tiles are of terra-cotta, and the pedi-
mental reliefs are of marly limestone. So complete is the preservation
of the architectural members that few ancient buildings are so well
known to us as the Megarian treasury. That these remains do actaally
belong to the Megarian treasury, though they were found so &r away
from it, is proved, first, by the evidence of Pausanias, who describes
the pedimental reliefs, and, second, by the inscription Mc7[a/:>]c(0F (' of
the Megarians '), which is carved on a block of the architrave.

The foundations are carelessly and somewhat irregularly constructed
of large blocks of shell-limestone. The treasure-chamber measured on
the inside 8.17 metres in length by 5.10 metres in breadth. The
blocks of the stylobate show the marks where the two columns of the
porch stood and the holes into which gratings between the colunms
and the emtae were fixed. The central opening between the colunms
was closed with a double door. The Doric capitals closely resemble
those of the temple of Zeus in the shape of the echinus. At the neck
they have four rings and three cuttings, the latter, however, only on the
outer side. Almost all the drums of the two columns have been found.
They have twenty flutes. The total height of the columns seems to
have been about 3.50 metres, but this is not quite certain. Apparently
the shafts had no entasis or swelling in the middle. The architrave
was composed of a double row of slabs set up, face to face, on their
narrow edges. On the central block of the architrave, over the entrance,
was car\*ed in later, apparently Roman, times the inscription M£rAP££2N
(* of the Megarians *). A triglyph frieze extended only along the fitgade ;
it did not run round the building. Almost all the blocks of it have been
found. The gcison ran all round the building, but it is only on the facade
that it had mutulcs and guiiac. The >ft*all of the pediment consisted of
five stones, which have all been found. In front of it were set up slabs
of marly limestone adorned with sculptured reliefs (see below). The
holes in the Ixick of the trigl>'phs and getsa show that the roof of the
ante-chamber or porch was constructed of eight wooden beams. The
roof-tiles were of terra-cotta ; many fragments of them have been found.
.\t the gable they ended in a painted ornamental cornice {sima) of
terra-cotta, the colours of which (reddish yellow and dark brown) are
well preser\eil. .\ lion's head projected from each end of the sima.
Traces of cv"»lour have been obser\ed on other parts of the building
beside the sim.u Thus red appeared on the architrave, and dark blue
on the trijjlyphs and on the mutules of the getson. But no traces of
(uintevl onianuMUs were delected by Dr. Dorpfeld on the metopes and
on the capitals of the columns. Iron clamps of the hH shape were
en^ ployed to bind toi:ether the buxks of the upper building, but not
the stones of the foundations. With regard to the date of the treastuy,
the style Ivih oi the urvhitev^tuix' and of the sculptures i>oints to the
second half ot" the >i\ih anuurv luc.



CH. XIX THE MEGARIAN TREASURY 67

See Ofympia: Ergebnisse^ Tafelband i. plates xxxvL-xxxviii. ; id,^ Tafelband
2. pi. cxix. ; W. Dorpfeld, in Ofympia: ErgebnissCy Textband 2. pp. 50-53 ; ^.,
in Die Ausgrahungen tu Ofympia^ 4 (1870-1879), pp. 37-40, with pi. xxxlv. ;
Flasch, 'Olympia/ in Baumeister's Denkmdler, p. 1104 c sq, ; R. Bomnann,
in Olympia: Ergebnisse, Textband 2. p. 195 sq, ; Ad. Botticher, Ofympia f p.
214 ; Baedeker,' p. 345. For the inscription see Die Inschriften twn Ufympia,
No. 653 ; Archdologische Zeitung, 37 (1879), p. 211 sq,, No. 333,

19. 12. small cedar-wood figures etc Dr. Purgold holds that
these figures originally adorned one of the gables of the temple of Hera.
See note on § 8. As to the combat of Hercules with Achelous, see
note on iii. 18. 16. The figure which Pausanias calls Zeus was perhaps
in reality Oeneus, the father of Dejanira.

19. 12. beside the Hesperides etc. See v. 17. 2.

19. 13. In the gable is wrought in relief the war of the

giants etc Fragments, more or less incomplete, of all the figures here
described by Pausanias were found built into the West Byzantine wall
of the Altis, at its southern end. That these fragments do indeed
belong to the Megarian treasury is proved, not only by their correspond-
ence with the description of Pausanias, but also by the fact that along
with them were found the architectural remains of that treasury. From
the remains of the tympanum which have been discovered Dr. Ddrpfeld
calculates the height of the pediment at 0.744 metre and its breadth at
5.70 metres. The figures of the relief, however, projected somewhat
from the pediment under the eaves, and the total amount of free space
for them is reckoned to have been 0.84 metre in height and about 5.95
metres in length. The size of the figures is not quite half that of life.

The fragments of the reliefs have been carefully pieced together
and the missing portions conjecturally restored by Pro£ Treiu There
seem to have been five pairs of combatants and two animals. In the
middle of the pediment a god (probably Zeus) was represented striking
down a giant, the god being on the left side, and the giant on the right
side of the central point of the gable, viewed from the spectator's
standpoint. The figure of the giant is preserved almost entire (Fig. 5).
He is sinking on his left knee, and his head is drooping, but he is still
defending himself with his right arm, or (as Prof. Treu thinks) endea-
vouring to extract a weapon from a wound in his side. On his left arm
he carries a round shield, and he is armed with a breastplate, greaves,
and heknet. Of his adversary (Zeus) nothing is preserved but the
naked left leg, from the knee downwards, and a shapeless mass supposed
by Profl Treu to be part of the body and head of the god. He appears
to have been striding towards the sinking giant, perhaps with the
thunderbolt uplifted in his right arm to hurl at his vanquished foe. In
the eastern or right-hand side of the gable (viewed from the spectator's
standpoint), the figure next to the sinking giant was that of a naked
god striking at a prostrate giant. Only the lower part of the body, the
left foot, and the left hand of the god are preserved. Prof. Treu
restores him as Hercules, striding to the spectator's right, armed with
a bow in his extended left hand and heaving up a dub in his raised
right hand. This combination of weapons seems odd to us ; but Her-



68 THE MEGARIAN TREASURY bk. ti. eus

cules is often tlius represented in archaic Greek art (Collignon, /fistmre
d£ la Sculpture Grccque, I. p. 384 ; Furtwangler, in Roscher's Lexikon^
t. p. 2141 Jff.) Of
the &]]en adversary
of Hercules little
more than a shape-
less mass is left. To
the right of this
sorely mutilated giant
a god anned with
helmet, breastplate,
shield, and greaves
is kneeling ; be is
probably Ares, and
would seem to have
been represented
thrusting a spcar
into another &llen
giant, who is aimed
with a leathern
corselet, but has no
greaves. In the
extreme right-hand
(eastern) comer of
the pediment is a
snake. In the left-
hand or western side
of the gable, imme-
diately to the left
of Zeus, we may con-
jecture, with Prof.
Treu, that Athena vas
. represented, anned
THKASvHvX with aegis and hel-

met, in the act of
1 fallen giant, although of the goddess all that remains is her
Of her adversary, the fallen giant, there are considerable
he is armed with a helmet and leathern corselet, but wears
no greaves. To the left of this prostrate giant another god, probably
Poseidon, seems to have been kneeling and spearing another giant. Of
Poseidon, if it be he, the mutilated head, the upper part of the body,
and the left arm (without the hand) are preserved. Of his lallen
adversary there are considerable remains ; he is lying on his back and
covering himself with his shield. Lastly, in the extreme left (western)
comer of the gable, a sea-monsier seems to have been represented,
though litilc of it but a shapeless mass is left.

The material of which the figures are made is a soft whitish-yellow
limestone, apparently the same of which the large archaic head of Hera
is made (sec note on v. 17. I ). The stone is quarried close to Olympia,


CH. XIX THE MEGARIAN TREASURY 69

on the western side of the valley of the Cladeus (see the geological map
in Bdtticher's Olympiad pi. iii.) The relief is composed of ^'^^ blocks
of this stone ; and as the joints of the blocks bear no relation to the
figures, most of which seem to have been divided impartially between
several blocks, it is clear that the figures were carved after the blocks
had been placed in position. That they were painted is proved by the
traces of colour which were visible at the time of their discovery. The
background was bright blue ; the prevailing colour of the figures was
red. The flesh, as well as the hair and armour, of the combatants
seems to have been painted, probably with a pale red or yellow. In
point of style the figures closely resemble those of the metopes of
temple F at Selinus (Baumeister's Denkmdler^ Figs. 346, 347, p. 331).
They would seem to date from the middle or the second half of the
sixth century B.C. At the time of their discovery they were the oldest
known examples of pedimental sculptures in Greek art ; but now they
must probably yield the palm of antiquity to the quaint, brightly painted
sculptures of this class which were found some years ago on the Acropolis
at Athens.

Sec Olympia: Ergebnisse, Tafelband i. plates ii. iii. iv. ; G. Treu, in Olym-
pia: Ergebnisse, Textband 3. pp. 5-1$; id,^ in Die Ausgrabungcn zu Olympia^
4 (1878-1879), pp. 14-16, with plates xviii., xix. ; Ad. Botticher, Oiympia^^ ^^o,
214-219; Flasch, * Olympia,' in Baumeister's Z>^«^/wrt/fr, pp. 1104 u ; Overbeck,
Gesclu d. griech, Plastik^^ \, pp. 121- 123; Lucy M. Mitchell, History of Ancunt
Sculpture^ p. 211 j^. ; Collignon, Histoire de la Sculpture Grecquty i. pp. 236-239 ;
Fri«lerichs-WoIters, GipsabgUsse^ §§ 294, 295, pp. 136-139; M. Mayer, Die
Giganten und Titanen^ pp. 286-289 ; O. Bie, Kanlpfgruppe und Kdtnpfertypen in
der Aniikt (Berlin, 189 1), pp. 72-75 ; Baedeker,' pp. Ixxvi., 354.

19. 13. this victory was won when Phorbas was archon

for life at Athens etc. As the Megarian treasury dates from the latter
part of the sixth century B.C. (see on § 1 2), it is out of the question to
suppose, with Pausanias, that the victory it commemorated was won
before 776 b.c. (the time when the Olympiads began to be recorded).
Pausanias's mistake seems to have arisen from his exaggerated idea of
the antiquity of Dontas, the sculptor who made the cedar- wood figures
in the treasury (^ 12, 14), and whom Pausanias appears to refer to the
mythical ages. But as a pupil of Dipoenus and Scyllis (see note on ii.
15. i) he probably flourished in the latter half of the sixth century B.C.
Hence the cedar- wood figures were probably made about the same time
as the treasury itself. See Flasch, * Olympia,' in Baumeister's Denk-
mdieTj p. 1104 C; Ad. Botticher, Olympiad p. 217 sqq,

19. 14- the Lacedaemonian Dontas. Elsewhere (v. 17. 2) Pau-
sanias calls this artist Medon. One of the names must be wrong. H.
Bnmn thought that the sculptor's name was Dontas ; Prof. Robert thinks
that it was Medon. In the absence of inscriptions it seems impossible
to say which is right See Critical Note on v. 17. 2, vol. i. p. 585.

19. 14. The last of the treasuries dedicated by the people of

Qeldi. This is the most easterly of the treasuries (No. xii. on the plan).
It is also the largest and probably, with the exception of the Cyrenian
treasury (No. viii.), the oldest of them all. Little more than the



TO THE TREASURY OF GELA BK. vi. bus

foundations are standing, and even they are not entire. Enough, how-
ever, remains to enable us easily to maJce out the ground-plan. More-
over, almost all the columns and most of the entablature were found
built into the East and West Byzantine walls, so that a restoration of
the building is possible. The treasury consists of two parts, which
were erected at different times. The original edifice was a simple
quadrangular chamber 13.17 metres long from east to west by 10.85
metres broad from north to south. It had gables at its east and west
ends. At a later time a portico was built along the whole south side of
the treasury. The later date of this portico is proved by a variety of
evidence, (i) While the foundations of the quadrangular chamber
consist of one or two courses of ashlar masonry, the foundations of the
portico are formed of small unhewn stones. Now this latter sort of
foundation occurs only in the five westernmost treasuries, which were
probably the latest. (2) The portico must have been added after the
two treasuries to the west (the Megarian and the Metai>ontine
treasuries) were already built ; for the southern facades of these two
treasuries are in a line with the south side of the chamber of the
treasury of Gela, not with its portico. (3) The rude way in which the
half-columns of the portico were attached to the south wall of the
chamber cannot be original ; a piece of each of the half-capitals pro-
jects beyond the edge of the walL

The three steps which run round the chamber on three sides (east,
north, and west) are also a later addition. The walls of the chamber
are built exclusively of hewn blocks, mostly of shell -limestone, with
a few blocks of marly limestone among them. The interior of the
chamber was paved with a single course of shell-limestone, but in the
middle of the pavement there is a second course of marly limestone.
Wliat this basement of marly limestone supported is not known. Dr.
Dorpfeld formerly conjectured that columns stood on it, but he admits
that no eNndence of the existence of such columns is forthcoming. Nor
is it known on which side was the entrance to the treasury before the
portico was built. No trace of a door has been detected either in the
east or the west wall.

In the West Byzantine wall were found numerous blocks of geisa
and pediments, which have been proved to belong to the treasury of
Gela. These blocks are of special interest because they were cased
with terra-cotta plaques, on which patterns are painted in daric brown
and dark red colours on a light yellow ground. These painted plaques,
of which countless fragments have been found in the By-zantine wall,
•were nailed to the stone blocks, as is proved, first, by the holes for nails
in the plaques, and, second, by the nails themselves, which are still
sticking in most of the stones at distances corresponding to the holes
in the plaques. The patterns painted on the plaques include bands of
maeanders and of double twist. These plaques were fastened all along
the ginsa and sim.i ho\\\ on the gable ends and the long sides of the
building. On the gable ends they were attached not only to the
ascending but also to the horizontal i:^e:sa. The effect must have been
to give a gay many -coloured aspect to the gables as well as to



CH. XIX THE TREASURY OF GEL A 71

cornice of the building. This use of terra-cotta plaques to encase
certain of the outer and more exposed portions of a stone building is
believed to have been derived from a time when the only building
material was timber. In these early days the projecting eaves of the
wooden roof were especially liable to suffer from exposure to the
weather ; and hence they were protected by being cased with terra-cotta
plaques. Through the force of custom this practice of casing the eaves
was continued even after edifices had begun to be built of stone, and
when consequently such a casing had become superfluous. The practice
seems to have been characteristic of Sicily and Magna Graecia ; for Dr.
Ddrpfeld and his colleagues discovered evidence of its having prevailed
in Gela, Selinus, Syracuse, Crotona, Metapontum, and Paestum. This
fiact, coupled with the resemblance of the capitals of the portico to the
capital of a column still existing at Gela, goes to show that the treasury
of Gela was built by Sicilian architects, and that the terra-cotta plaques
were imported ready made from Gela.

The treasure-chamber was roofed with terra-cotta tiles, specimens
of which have been found. They were of two sorts, namely fiat tiles
with raised edges, and semicircular tiles to cover the junctions of
the flat tiles. Along the ridge of the roof ran a row of pipe -like
tiles, from each of which rose an ornamental plaque in the shape of a
palmette.

The portico had six columns on its south front and two columns
and one half-column on each of its two short sides, the columns at the
comers being reckoned twice over. The columns are Doric; they
supported, as usual, an architrave and a frieze of triglyphs and metopes.
The columns taper considerably. They have four cuttings round the
neck, and as many rings round the lowest part of the echinus. The
architrave is unusually high compared to the triglyph frieze. Neither
the regulae nor the mutules have guttae. It appears that the portico
had a roof that sloped very slightly, but no gable. The blocks of the
entablature (architrave and triglyph frieze) were bonded with iron
clamps of the r— ' shape. The drums of the columns were fastened
together by means of strong quadrangular wooden dowels. In the
original building (the treasure - chamber) neither clamps nor dowels
appear to have been employed.

With regard to the date of the treasury Dr. Dorpfeld is of opinion
that the quadrangular chamber dates from the first half of the sixth,
and the portico from the first half of the fifth century B.c. He thinks
that the fine style and the decorative patterns of the terra-cotta plaques,
with which the gables and the outside cornice of the treasure-chamber
were cased, prove that they cannot be older than the sixth century ac ;
and that on the other hand the building, from its position, cannot be
later than the Megarian treasury, which appears to have been built in
the second half of that century.

See Olympia: Ergebnisse, Tafelband i. plates xxxix.-xli. ; id,, Tafelband 2.
plates cxvi, cxvii. ; W. Dorpfeld, in Olympia: Er^bnisse^ Textband 2. pp. 53-56 ;
i/., in Die Ausgrabungen zu Olympia, 5 (1879-1881), pp. 31-35, with pi. xxxiii.
and xxxiv. ; R. Bornnann, in Olympia : Ergebnisse, Textband 2. p. 193 s^. ; Dir



72 EXEDRA OF HERODES bk. vi. elis

Funde von Olympia^ p. 36 sq,^ with pi. xxxviii. ; Flasch, 'Olympia,' in Bau-
meister's Defikmdler^ p. 1104 D sq, \ Ad. Botticher, Olympiad pp. 208-214;
Baedeker,' p. 345.

Here is perhaps the most appropriate place to notice a structure
which Pausanias does not mention, though it certainly existed at the
time when he wrote his description of Olympia. This is the great
double tank, built and supplied with water by Herodes Atticus, and
known as the Exedra.

In the close hot climate of Olympia the need of a supply of good
drinking water is especially felt. For months together rain hardly £edls ;
between May and October a shower is a rarity. The great festival was
always held in summer (July or August), when the weather at Olympia
is cloudless and the heat intense. Hence the multitudes who flocked to
witness the games must have been much distressed by the dust and the
burning sun, against which the spreading shade of the plane-trees in
the sacred precinct could have afforded only an imperfect protection.
Indeed Lucian, doubtless with a strong touch of exaggeration, speaks of
the spectators packed together and dying in swarms of thirst and of dis-
tempers contracted from the excessive drought (J)e morte Peregird^ 1 9).
The water of the Alpheus is not good to drink ; for even in the height
of summer it holds in solution a quantity of chalky matter. The water
of the Cladeus, on the other hand, is drinkable in its normal state ; but
even a little rain swells it and makes it run turbid for a long time.
Hence it was necessary to sink wells and to bring water from a distance.
This was done even in Greek times. Nine wells, some square, some
round, some lined with the usual shell-limestone, others with plaques of
terra-cotta, have been found at Olympia ; and water was brought in
aqueducts from the upper valley of the Cladeus. But in Roman times
the water supply was immensely improved and extended by the munifi-
cence of the wealthy sophist Herodes Atticus. He brought water in an
aqueduct from the springs in the side valleys of the Alpheus, near the
modern village of Miraka^ distant from Olympia about two miles. One
of the pillars of the aqueduct may still be seen at the meeting of two
brooks in the valley of Miraka^ also the tunnel at the foot of Mt.
Cronius, from the place where it enters the Altis just above the treasury
of Gela till it reaches the reservoir above the Exedra. The tunnel is
.40 metre wide and 0.72 metre high ; its sides are built of bricks in a
semicircular form. As a monumental termination of his aqueduct
Herodes Atticus built the so-called Exedra with its spacious tanks and its
statues. The structure consisted essentially of two large tanks, an
upper semicircular tank measuring 16.62 metres in diameter, and a
lower oblong tank measuring 21.90 metres in length by 3.17 metres in
breadth, and 1.20 metres in depth. The water flowed from the reservoir
into the upper tank, and from the upper tank into the lower tank
through two lions' heads, which are still in their places. The upper
semicircular tank was paved with large slabs of polished marble and
roofed over with a great half cupola, forming a sort of apse. This apse
was built, partly of hewn stone, partly of brickwork with a core of
rubble and mortar ; some of the bricks are stamped with the name of



CH. XIX EXEDRA OF HERODES 73

Herodes. Considerable portions of the structure, including all that
could be well seen from below, were thickly coated with stucco and
incrusted with marbles of various hues — white, grey, red, and green.
At the back, towards the hill, the apse was supported by eight buttresses,
which still exist On its inner side, round the semicircular tank, it
was divided into a series of niches which contained marble statues of
members of the imperial house and of the family of Herodes Atticus.
The niches, which were divided from each other by Corinthian pilasters,
fell into two sets, namely eight round niches corresponding on the
inside to the eight buttresses on the outside, and seven oblong niches
in the intervals between the round niches. The oblong niches, corre-
sponding on the inside to the intervals between the buttresses on the
outside, were double the size of the others. As to the statues which
stood in the niches, see below.

At each end of the lower oblong tank rose a small rotunda, built
wholly of marble, consisting of a cupola supported by eight unfluted
Corinthian columns, and enclosing a statue in the middle. The diameter
of each of these little rotundas was only 3.80 metres. The tiny columns
were of Carystian, the rest of the structure was of Pentelic marble. The
roofs were formed of marble tiles carved in the shape of olive-leaves
overlapping each other like scales. Lions' heads projected from their
cornices. In each rotunda are still to be seen the remains of the low
square pedestal which supported the statue.

On the middle of the parapet of the lower tank stood a large marble
bull facing eastward. It was found lying in the tank, 20th March 1878.
On the right flank of the bull is carved the following votive inscription :

*Pi}yiAAa Upeia

ArjjJLTjTpo^ rh v8(i}p

Kol TO. 7r€pl TO vSiap r(j> Ait.

" Regilla, a priestess of Denieter, (dedicated) the water and its
appurtenances to Zeus." See Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 610;
Archdologisclu Zeitung^ 36 (1878), p. 94, No. 149. It thus appears that
Herodes Atticus dedicated the aqueduct and Exedra in the name of
his wife Regilla. The dedication cannot, therefore, have been later than
160 or 161 A.D., the date of Regilla's death ; probably, as we shall see,
it took place some years earlier.

Of the marble statues which stood in the niches of the apse fourteen
have been found, in a more or less battered state, some of them with
their inscribed bases. The greater part, however, of the bases was
sawn into slabs and employed to pave the Byzantine church in the fifth
century A.D. The statues are larger than life. They fall into two sets,
namely ( i ) those which represent members of the imperial family and
were set up by Herodes Atticus ; (2) those which represent Herodes
Atticus himself and his family and were set up by the city of Elis. The
statues of the first set, representing members of the imperial family,
were set up in the eight round niches ; the statues of the second
sety representing Herodes Atticus and his family, were set up in the



74 EXEDRA OF HERODES bk. vi. elis

seven oblong niches, two pedestals with their statues being placed
in each oblong niche. Thus there were eight pedestals set apart for
the statues of the imperial &mily, and fourteen for those of the £unily
of H erodes Atticus. But the number of statues did not correspond to
that of the pedestals, for in each set a single pedestal supported two
statues of young children (a brother and a sister). Among the statues
of the imperial family were portraits of Hadrian, Antoninus Pius, L.
Aelius Aurelius Commodus (afterwards the Emperor Verus), the elder
Faustina (wife of Antoninus Pius), the younger Faustina (wife of
Marcus Aurelius), and two children of Marcus Aurelius and Faustina.
Probably there was a statue of Marcus Aurelius, but neither the statue
nor its pedestal has been found. It is conjectured that the statues
of Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius were placed in the two little
rotundas at each end of the lower tanlc A clue to the date of the
erection of the Exedra is furnished by the fact that two and only two
children of Marcus Aurelius and Faustina were represented by statues.
For the marriage of Marcus Aurelius and Faustina took place in 145
A.D. (Th. Mommsen, in Hermes^ 8 (1874), p. 205) ; hence the Exedra
cannot have been built before 147 A. D. On the other hand it was
probably not built later than 150 or 151 A.D., since in one or other of
these years was bom to Marcus Aurelius and Faustina another child,
Anna Lucilia by name, who married her uncle, the emperor Lucius
Verus, in 164 A.D. Thus the Exedra would seem to have been built
between 147 and 151 a.d. Dr. Adler, however, would date it between
154-157 A.D. on the ground that Herodes probably built it to testify
his gratitude for the honour conferred on his wife Regilla, who had been
made priestess of Demeter in Ol. 131 (153 A.D.) But it does not seem
to be made out that the priesthood of Regilla fell in Ol. 131 (153 A.D.),
though certainly it cannot have fallen in the subsequent Olympiad, Ol.
132 (157 A.D.), since the name of the priestess for that year, Antonia
Baebia, is known to us from an inscription {Die Inschriften von Olympian
No. 456). The latest possible date for the completion of the Exedra is
161 A.D., since Regilla, in whose name the Exedra was dedicated, died
in that or the preceding year, and Marcus Aurelius, who succeeded
Antoninus Pius on the throne in 161 A.D., is mentioned as a private
man in one of the inscriptions of the Exedra. Thus the Exedra must
have been completed at least thirteen years before Pausanias wrote his
description of Olympia (see note on v. i. 2). The haste and negli-
gence of the masonry betray the decline of art. Only the capitals of
the Corinthian columns of the two little rotundas are carefully and
tastefully carved.

See Olympia: Ergebnisse^ Tafclband 2. plates Ixxxiii.-lxxxvi. ; id. Tafelband
3. plates Ixv.-lxix. ; F. Adler, in Olympia: Ergebnisse^ Textband 2. pp. 134-139;
Die Attsgrabungen zu Olympia, 3 (1877-1878), p. 32, with plates v., xxi., xxxvii. ;
Die Fuftde von Olympia^ p. 26 5q.\ Ad. Botticher, Olympiad pp. 401-410;
Curtius und Adler, Olympia und Umgegend, pp. 43-47 ; Flasch, * Olympia,' in
Baumeister^s DenkmaUr, p. 1 104 E sq. ; Baedeker,^ p. 343 sq. For the inscriptions
on the bases of the statues, etc., see Die Inschriften von Olympia, pp. 615-640,
Nos. 610-628; Archdologische Zeitung, 35 (1877), pp. 101-104; iV/., 36 (1878),
pp. 94-97.



I

CH. XX MOUNT CRONIUS 75

The aqueduct of H erodes is mentioned by Philostratus ( Vit Soph,
iu I. 9) and Lucian (J)e morte Peregriniy 19 sq^ Lucian tells us how
the mountebank Peregrinus denounced Herodes and his aqueduct for
pandering to the luxury and effeminacy of the day. It was the duty of
the spectators, he said, to endure their thirst, and if need be to die of it.
This doctrine proved unacceptable to his hearers, and the preacher had
to run for his life pursued by a volley of stones.

20. I. Mount Oronilis. This is the hill which rises immediately on
the north of the Altis to a height of over 450 feet (Curtius und Adler,
Olympia und Umgegend^ p. 12). Its steep sides are thickly clothed
with bushes and trees (firs, holly oaks, etc) The view from the top
is pleasing, embracing the valley of the Alpheus with the low soft
wooded hills of Elis all round. The mountains of Arcadia are seen
on the eastern horizon. To the west the view of the sea is cut off by
the hill which rises on the other side of the valley of the Cladeus. It
was Hercules who gave the hill its name ; it had been nameless before
(Pindar, Olymp, xi. 49 sqq, ; cp, /<£, 01. i. 114, v. 17, vi. 64, viii. 17).

20. I. On the top of the mountain the Basilae etc. As to these
sacrifices, Dionysius of Halicamassus {Aniiquit Rom, i. 34) speaks of
'* the Cronian hill in Elis, which hill is in the land of Pisa near the river
Alpheus. The people of Elis esteem the hill sacred to Cronus, and they
assemble and do homage to it with sacrifices and other marks of honour
at set times." The title (Basilae) of the priests who offered the sacrifice
to Cronus seems clearly connected with basileus^ *king.' Hence, as
Curtius suggested, the priesthood probably dated from the old regal
days and may have been held by the kings themselves {Abhandlungen
of the Prussian Academy (Berlin), 1894, p. nil). The vernal equinox,
the season when the Basilae sacrificed on the top of the mountain, has
been celebrated with religious rites elsewhere. Thus in Nepaul "on
the 8th (Ashtami) the Gorkhas observe a festival, for that one day only,
in honotur of the vernal equinox" (H. A. Oldfield, Sketches froftt Nipal^
2. p. 314). "Another festival is not only observed by the Parsis in
India and elsewhere, but is common to Persians, Arabs, and Turks, it
being the day fixed for the computation of the incoming solar year,
and also for the collection of revenue. It corresponds with the vernal
equinox and falls about the third week in March. It is called Jamshedi
Naoroz, and strictly speaking is * New Year's Day,* but in India it is
simply a day of rejoicing, and is observed in honour of a Persian king
named Jamshed, who first introduced the principles of cultivation, and
the proper method of reckoning time on the solar system" (A. F.
^^xXlixt^Kurrachee (Karachi\ past^ present^ and future^ (Calcutta, 1890),
p. 190).

20. 2. Sosipolis etc. See note on v. 17. 3. On the slope of
Mount Cronius, immediately above the treasuries, there is a broad level
space, through which a road now runs. Here may have stood the joint
temple of Sosipolis and Ilithyia. Immediately to the west of the row of
treasuries, between the treasury of the Sicyonians and the Exedra of
Herodes, there is a tiny temple consisting of a single chamber with
a narrow portico. The temple, like the treasuries, faces south. The



76 SOSIPOLIS BK. VI. ELis

chamber is built of squared blocks of marly limestone ; the foundations
of the portico are of stone, but the upper portion seems to have been of
wood. In the chamber is a square foundation, probably the base of an
image. In front of the temple is a large altar. Prof. C. Robert pro-
poses to identify the temple as the temple of Sosipolis, and the altar in
front of it as the altar of llithyia. But this cannot be right For
Pausanias says that the temple was divided into two parts, an inner and
an outer, and that Sosipolis was worshipped in the inner part, while the
altar of llithyia stood in the outer part. Now the temple which Prof.
Robert would identify as that of Sosipolis has only a single chamber,
and the altar which he identifies as the altar of llithyia is not in the
temple at all, but outside of it. The altar is probably the altar of
Hercules, which was near the Sicyonian treasury (Paus. v. 14. 9). Dr.
Dorpfeld conjectures that the little temple was a temple of Hercules.
See Dorpfeld, in Olympia: Ergebnisse^ Textband 2. pp. 44 j^., 164.

Prof. C. Robert further conjectures that Sosipolis was the infant
Zeus, whose shrine would appropriately be at the foot of the hill
which was named after his father Cronus. At Magnesia on the
Maeander Zeus was worshipped under the title of Sosipolis ("saviour
of the city "), as we learn from Strabo (xiv. p. 648). See C. Robert,
'Sosipolis in Olympia,' MitiheiL d. arch, Inst, in Athen^ 18 (1893),
pp. 37-45 ; L. R. Famell, The Cults of the Greek States^ i. p. 38.
The temple of Zeus Sosipolis at Magnesia on the Maeander was
discovered and excavated by members of the German Archaeological
Institute in 1892. The temple, a small edifice of the Ionic order
and of fine workmanship, is situated in the middle of the "sacred
market-place " (see note on vi. 24. 2), immediately to the west of the
great temple of Leucophryenian Artemis (see note on i. 26. 4). The
temple opens to the west, and is prostyle in front, and in antis behind
— an arrangement hitherto unknown in Greek temples. Though
the temple lies in ruins, its remains are so complete that it might be
rebuilt almost entire. In the cella were found some pieces of the image
and its pedestal. A long inscription carved on the north-west anta of
the temple identifies the edifice as the temple of Zeus Sosipolis, and
furnishes important details as to his worship. At the beginning of
sowing, which fell at the new moon in the month Cronion, a bull was
dedicated to Zeus. On this occasion the sacred herald, attended by the
priest, the priestess of Leucophryenian Artemis, nine boys, and nine
maidens, oflfered up prayers for the welfare of the city and country, for
peace, riches, good harvests, and the increase of the herds. On the 1 2th
day of the month Artemision the consecrated bull was sacrificed, and
the images of the Twelve Gods were brought to the sacred market-
place, where a wooden rotunda was erected and three couches for
the gods set up beside the altar of the Twelve Gods. Then a ram
was sacrificed to Zeus, a she-goat to Artemis, and a he-goat to the
Pythian Apollo. See Berliner pJiilolog, WocJienschrift^ 14 (1894), p.
1049 ^^Q' 5 Jahrbuch d, arch. Inst. 9 (1894), Archaologischer Anzeiger,
p. 76 sgq.

20. 5. the child was changed into a serpent. Heroes (as to



CH. XX THE HIPPODAMIUM TJ

whom see note on vi. 6. 7) appear to have often assumed the shape of
serpents. See i. 24. 7 ; i. 36. i note. Plutarch {Cleomenes^ 39) says
that '< the ancients thought that the serpent, of all animals, was most
akin to the heroes."

20. 7- at the processional entrance is the Hippodamimn.

The site of the Hippodamium has not been identified. It has already
been mentioned by Pausanias (v. 22. 2) in connexion apparently with
the entrance to the stadium. In the present passage he describes it
immediately after describing the treasuries and the sanctuary of Sosipolis
at the foot of Mt. Cronius, and immediately before he comes to the
entrance into the stadium. We should naturally therefore, with Dr.
Dorpfeld and Mr. Botticher, look for the Hippodamium at the north-
east comer of the Altis. This view, however, seems contradicted by
Pausanias's statement that the Hippodamium was at the processional
entrance, for this was the gate at the south-west comer of the Altis
(see note on v. 15. 2). Hence Prof Flasch would place the Hippo-
damium in the south-west corner of the Altis, where however, according
to Dr. Dorpfeld, there is absolutely no room for it. Dr. Adler, on the
other hand, thinks that the Hippodamium can have been nowhere but
at the south-east comer.

See Dorpfeld, in Mittheil. d, arch, \Inst, in Athen^ 13 (1888), p. 334 sq, ;
Flasch, * Olympia,* in Baumeister's DenkmdUr, p. 1097 ; Ad. Botticher, Olympiad
p. 192 sq, ; Die Funde von Oiympia, p. 24 ; Curtius und Adler, Olympia und
Umgegend, p. 4a

20. 7- the death of Ohrysippns. Chrysippus, a bastard son of
Pelops, was murdered by Atreus and Thyestes at the instigation of
their mother Hippodamia (Hyginus, Fab, 85).

20. 8. statues which they made from the fines etc. See v.
21. 2 sqq.

20. 8. the Secret Entrance. This is the tunnel leading from the
north-east comer of the Altis through the embankment which bounds
the stadium on the west. The tunnel is 32.10 metres (100 Olympic
feet) long, 3.70 metres broad, and 4.45 metres high. The sides are
lined with masonry, and it was roofed with a stone vault, of which part
has been rebuilt by the Germans. Much importance was formerly
attached to the vault as the supposed earliest known example of a Greek
arch. But the vault has proved to be Roman. Bricks were found in
it. It is supposed to be later than the casing walls at the sides, and to
have been necessitated by the raising of the embankment. Mr. R.
Borrmann thinks it was probably constmcted in the first century B.c.
or a little earlier. The stone with which the sides of the tunnel are
lined is the ordinary coarse shell-conglomerate of Olympia. The blocks
are squared and are bound together with iron clamps of the r- n shape,
run with lead.

Sec Olympia: Ergcbnisse^ Tafelband I. pi. xlvi. ; W. Dorpfeld, in Dii Ausgra-
bungen zu Olympia^ 5 (1879- 1881), p. 37 sq,^ with pi. xxxv. ; R. Borrmann, in
Olympia : Ergebnisse, Textband 2. pp. 66-68 ; Die Fufide von Olympia^ p. 22 ;
Curtius und Adler, Olympia und Umgegend^ p. 31 ; Flasch, 'Olympia,* in
Baumeister's DenkmdUr^ p. 1 104 G ; Baedeker,^ p. 345.



78 THE STADIUM bk. vi. blis

The west end of the tunnel opens on a sort of lane about 6.50 metres
wide, bounded on the north by the terrace on which the treasuries stand,
and on the south by the north wall of the Echo Colonnade. In this lane,
a little to the west of the mouth of the tunnel, are the remains of a gate-
way which served as a sort of ornamental entrance to the tunnel. Two
Corinthian columns, flanked by two half-colunms, supported an entablature
(architrave and frieze). The entrance was through the central opening,
between the two columns. The socket-holes in the stone threshold of
this opening prove that it was closed by a gate. On the other hand the
two side openings between the columns and the half-columns were
closed with permanent stone barriers, of which there are some remains.
The columns have twenty flutes. Their capitals resemble those of the
little round temple at Tivoli that overlooks the falls of the Tibur. Well-
preserved remains of colours (red, gp'een, and yellow) prove that originally
the whole surface of these capitals was painted. The entablature is
remarkably low in comparison with the height of the columns. It is
executed in a hasty and careless style. There are traces of red paint on
it. The gateway probably dates from the first century of our era.

See F. Adler, in Die Ausgrabungen zu Olympian 4 (1878-1879), p. 50^ with
pi. xxxviiL (where the columns are wrongly restored as Ionic) ; R. Bomnann, in
Olympia: Ergebnisse, Textband 2. pp. 68-70; Olympia: ErgebnissttlvSxS^iuA
I. pi. xlviii. ; Flasch, * Olympia,' in Baumeister's DenkmaUr^ p. 1 104 G.

20. 8. the stadimiL Only a small portion of the stadium has
been excavated by the Germans, enough however to determine its
dimensions and plan. It extended in a north-easterly direction from the
north-east comer of the Altis, from which it was divided by an embank-
ment. The level portion of the stadium is a quadrangle 212^ metres
long by about 29.70 metres wide. The width, however, is not uniform.
At the west end it is 28.60 metres ; at the east end it is 29.70 ; and at
an intermediate point, where some trial trenches were made, it seems to
have been 30.70 metres. The level of the stadium is about 10 feet
lower than that of the Altis. It is enclosed on all sides by slopes of
earth. On the long north side the slope of Mount Cronius and the adjoin-
ing hills formed the natural boundary. On the other three sides (the
long south side and the short east and west sides) the stadium is enclosed
by artificial embankments. On the earthen slopes which thus surrounded
the racecourse the spectators sat; there were no tiers of stone seats.
A stone sill is believed to have run all round the racecourse, just at
the foot of the earthen slopes. This sill exists at the western end of
the racecourse, but has not been found at its eastern end. On the
inner side of this sill and about a metre (3 feet 3 inches) distant from
it an open stone gutter extends all round the racecourse, with numerous
small basins at regular intervals along it. The water which circulated
in it was doubtless intended for the refreshment of the spectators, and
probably too for that of the athletes in the intervals of competition.

The racecourse, thus bounded by the gutter on all sides, is quad-
rangular at both ends. The discovery of this was a surprise ; for from
what was previously known of Greek stadiums archaeologists had



CH. XX THE STADIUM 79

expected to find the racecourse quadrangular at one end only and
semicircular at the other. But recent excavations at the Epidaurian
sanctuary of Aesculapius have proved that there also the stadium, i,e,
the level part of it, was similarly quadrangular at both ends and, like
the Olympic stadium, surrounded by a stone gutter. (See Addenda, at
the end of vol. 5.) As these are, so far as I know, the only two Greek
stadiums as yet excavated which have been found in tolerable preserva-
tion, it becomes probable that this was the universal arrangement ; that,
in other words, the actual racecourse was always laid out as a long
rectangle, though the slope of earth, natural or artificial, which bounded
the racecourse, would seem to have always curved round in the form of
a semicircle at one end of the stadium. At least this semicircular slope
is to be seen in a number of existing Greek stadiums, including those of
Athens, the Isthmus, and Sicyon.

There is evidence that at some period the artificial embankments
which enclose the stadium on three sides were raised very considerably.
The object of the change was no doubt to provide room for more spec-
tators. The height of the embankments, as thus raised, was over
6.50 metres; and the number of spectators who could find room on
the slopes is estimated at from 40,000 to 45,000. Before the altera-
tion it is calculated that the number of spectators who could be accom-
modated was from 20,000 to 30,000. The change necessitated at
least two others. The Secret Entrance at the north-west comer, which
had hitherto been an open passage, was now vaulted over (see above,
p. 77) ; and the Echo Colonnade had to be shifted a little to the
west, as its back wall threatened to give way (if it did not actually give
way) under the increased < thrust ' or pressure caused by the raising of
the embankment (see note on v. 21. 17). Dr. Ddrpfeld was formerly
of opinion that the shifting of the colonnade and the roofing over of the
Secret Entrance took place in Macedonian times ; and he conjectured
that the raising of the embankment, which is supposed to have been
the cause of both these changes, may have been carried out by Philip
of Macedonia as a means of propitiating the Greeks after his victory at
Chaeronea. But if Mr. R. Borrmann is right in holding that the roof-
ing of the Secret Entrance was a work of about the first century B.C., it
would seem that we must date the raising of the embankments of the
stadium at the same time.

It is not quite clear from Pausanias's description whether the start-
ing-point was at the west or the east end of the course. But probably
it was at the west end. For the runners entered the stadium through
the Secret Entrance at the west end, and it seems more likely that
they should at once have taken their places at the line, than that they
should have had to traverse the whole length of the stadium to reach
thenL Moreover, the umpires' seats, which must of course have been
beside the goal, would seem to have been at the east end of the stadium,
since Pausanias tells us (§ 10 of this chapter) that in passing over the
embankment of the stadium at the point where the umpires sit you
came to the hippodrome. The position of the hippodrome has not,
indeed, been ascertained ; but the most probable hypothesis seems to



8o THE STADIUM bk. vx. elis

be that it lay immediately to the east of the stadium. If these views
are right, it follows that the starting-point of the race was at the west,
and the goal at the east end of the stadium.

Both starting-point and goal have been laid bare by the German
excavations, but as they are almost exactly alike we cannot by inspec-
tion of them tell which is which. Each consists of a stone sill, about
1 8 inches broad, extending across the racecourse at right angles to its
length. The western sill or starting-point (if it is so) is distant about
1 1 metres from the west end of the stadium ; the eastern sill or goal (if
it is so) is distant about 9^ metres from the east end of the stadiunL
Each sill extends nearly but not quite across the full breadth of the race-
course, and consists of a row of slabs of white limestone laid carefully
together, end on, but not united by clamps. In each sill are a number
of square holes at intervals of about 4 feet. These holes seem to have
been meant for the reception of wooden posts. The whole of the
western sill is divided by these holes into twenty sections ; the eastern
sill is similarly divided into twenty-one sections, of which, however, the
most northerly is much shorter than the rest. Each runner doubtless
had a section allotted to him. Further, between each pair of holes two
straight parallel grooves are cut in the stone about 6 or 7 inches from
each other. These grooves are Y-shaped or triangular in section, but
the side of the groove towards the course slopes more than the other.
They were probably intended to give each runner a firm foothold at
starting. He would place one heel on the one groove, and the other
heel on the other.

The reason why the starting-place and the goal are thus alike would
seem to be as follows. The umpires appear from Pausanias's descrip-
tion to have had a fixed seat at one end, probably the east end, of the
course. In the single race the runners started at the west end, raced
to the east end, and stopped. But in the double race, as it was neces-
sary that the race should finish up beside the umpires at the east end,
the runners started from the east end, raced to the west end, then
turned and raced back to the east end. Hence a starting-place was
needed at the east end as well as at the west end. Thus, whereas the
goal was always at one end (probably the east end), the starting-point
was at one end or the other according as the race was single or double.
It is to be observed that when Pausanias speaks of the starting-place of
the runners (g 9) he is speaking strictly only of the runners in the single
race (crraStoS/jo/Aoi).

With regard to the mode in which the double race was run. Dr.
Dorpfeld thinks that when it was run all the wooden posts in the
western sill were removed except the one in the middle, which then
served as a turning-post, the runners racing round it on their way back
to their starting-point at the eastern end of the course. He points out
that the central hole in the western sill is in fact larger than all the rest,
so that it must have held a larger and more conspicuous post, which
might very well serve as a turning-post But, as Prof. Flasch has
pointed out, such an arrangement would entail a serious disadvantage
on the runners who at starting stood farthest from the centre, as they



CH. XX THE STADIUM 8i

would have more ground to traverse than the competitors who started
from nearer the centre, and hence nearer the turning-post We may
conjecture, then, either that all the posts were left standing in the
western sill and that each runner raced round a separate post, or that
without turning round a post at all they merely raced to the western
sill, touched it, and turned back. The former is the view advocated by
Pro£ Flasch, but the latter view is to some extent supported by vase-
paintings of runners in the armed race. See above, note on vi. lo. 4.

The distance between the starting-point and the goal, measured
from the middle point between the two grooves at one end of the course
to the corresponding point at the other end, is 192.27 metres. Hence,
as the stadium measured 600 feet, the Olympic foot was equivalent
to 0.32045 metre. The Olympic foot was thus considerably larger
than the ordinary Greek foot, which, as determined by Dr. Dorpfeld's
measurement of the Hecatompedon of the Parthenon, was only .2957
metre. See DSrpfeld, in MittheiL d, arch, Inst, inAthen^ 7 (1882),
pp. 277-312; and vol. 2. p. 13. We have seen (vol. 3. p. 498) that
the Olympic foot was the unit of measurement employed in several of
the buildings at Olympia. The reason why the Olympic foot was
longer than the ordinary Greek foot was said to be that Hercules
had measured the Olympic stadium with his own feet, which were
larger than the feet of ordinary mortals ; and hence the Olympic
stadium was longer than all other stadiums, though every stadium
measured 600 feet (Aulus Gellius, i. i).

See F. Adier and W. Dorpfeld, in Die Ausgrabungen zu Olympia^ 5 (1879-
1881), pp. 23, 36-38, with plates xxxv. and xxxvi. ; Olympia: Ergebnisse^ Tafel-
band I. pi. xlvii. ; R. Bomnann, in Olympia : Ergebnisse^ Textband 2. p. 63 sqq, ;
J^ Funde von Olympia, p* 21 ; Curtius und Adler, Olympia und Umgegendj
p» 2g sq. ; Ad. Botticher, Olympia,'* pp. 230-235 ; Flasch, 'Olympia/ in Baumeis-
ter*s JJenkmdler, p. 1 104 F sq. ; Baedeker,' p. 345 sq. For the testimony of
ancient writers as to the double race see J. H. Krause, Gymftastik und Agonistik
der Hellenen, p. 344 sqq.

Many ancient articles of bronze, such as small tripods, small figures
of animals, pieces of large kettles, basins, nails, weights, and, above all,
fragments of weapons, were found by the Germans in the embankments
of the stadium. It is conjectured that whenever soil had to be removed
from any portion of the Altis to make room for a new building or for
any other purpose, it was dumped down on the embankments of the
stadium. Hence, as the soil of the Altis was almost saturated with old
bronze votive offerings which had been thrown away, it was natural that
these objects should reappear in large numbers in the embankments of
the stadium. The most interesting of these discoveries is a series of
round bronze shields, most of them entire, which were found in the
south embankment, under the mass of earth which was heaped up at
the time when the embankments were raised considerably. See A.
Furtwangler, in Olympia : Ergebnisse^ Textband 4. (* Die Bronzen *), p. 6.

20. 9. tiie priestess of Demeter Chamyne. The marble base of
a statue bearing the following inscription was found at Olympia by the
Germans (21st October 1876) to the north-east of the temple of Zeus :

VOL. IV G



82 THE HIPPODROME bk. vi. elis

(Aaav

[Xa]/AW(uas ^Ac^(u>s)
Ap)(€Xao9 rrfv yvvaiKa,

<< Flavius Archelaus (dedicated this statue of) his wife the priestess of
the Chamynaean goddess" {Die Inschriften von OfymptOy No. 485;
Archdohgische Zeitung^ 34 (1876), p. 225 sq,^ No. 30). The husband
of this priestess, T. Flavius Archelaus, held the office of priest (dco-
Kokos^ at Olympia for the third time in 245-249 A.D., and for the
fourth time in 01. 261 (265 A.D.) {Die Inschriften von Olympia^ Nos.
121, 122). In 01. 256 (245 A.D.) he was alutarchos {op, cit. No. 483).
A statue of him, of which the inscribed pedestal is preserved, was
erected by the city of Elis {op. cit. No. 484). As to Demeter
Chamyne, see vL 21. i.

20. 9. they do not hinder maidens from beholding the games.
Married women were not allowed to witness the games (v. 6. 7).
Hence some have questioned Pausanias's statement in the present
passage that maidens were permitted to witness them. See Krause,
Ofympicty p. 54 sqq. Both matrons and maidens seem to have been
allowed to witness the games in Cyrene (Pindar, Pyth. ix. 97 sqq. ;
Boeckh, Exp He. Pindar^ p. 327 sq.) Amongst the lonians women
were free to witness the Ephesian games down to the time of Thucy-
dides (Thucyd. iii. 104).

20. 9. Endymion. See v. i. 3 sqq. ; v. 8. i sq,

20. 10. the horse-races. The Olympic hippodrome is supposed
to have lain to the south-east and east of the stadium, but to have been
so completely washed away by the Alpheus in the course of ages that it
is impossible to determine its exact situation and dimensions (Curtius
und Adler, Olympia und Umgegendy p. 30 sq. ; A. B6tticher, Olympiad'
p. 119 ; Baedeker,' p. 346). It seems perfectly possible, however, that
the hippodrome is preserved under the deep accumulation of alluvial
soil, and that excavations might bring it to light. The stadium is
similarly buried except at its two ends.

20. 10. the starting-place of the horses. The following descrip-
tion of the mode of starting the chariot-races and horse-races is explained
by the subjoined ground-plan, drawn by Hirt from Pausanias's descrip-
tion and accepted by the writers in Baumeister's Denkmaler, s.v.
* Hippodrom,' and Smith's Dictionary of Gr. and Rom. Antiquittes^
s.v. * Hippodromus.' See A Hirt, Geschichte der Baukunst bei den
Alten^ 3. pp. 148-150, with pi. xx. 8. Hirt, however, appears to be
wrong in the position which he assigns to Taraxippus. See note on §
15. A different ground-plan is given in Guhl und Kohner's Das Leben
der Griechen und Romer^^ p. 147. But it contradicts the description of
Pausanias in placing the stations for the chariots at starting on one
side only of the * prow.* It must therefore be rejected. The subject is
discussed at length and a new ground-plan proposed by Mr. E. Pollack,
Hippodromica (Leipsic, 1890), p. 54 sqq. He differs from Hirt in
placing the ' prow,' with all Uie stations for the chariots, on one side



CH. XX



THE HIPPODROME



83



only of the Hippodrome. The subject has also been discussed by
Godfrey Hermann {Opuscula, 7. pp. 388-404, « De hippodromo Olym-


nC 6.— CROUND>PLAN OF HIPPODROME AT OLYMPIA (CONJBCTURAI. XBSTORATION).

piaco '). In Hirt's plan, as here reproduced, a a'ls the Colonnade of
Agnaptus, b is the altar of unbumt brick set up in the middle of the
* prow,* c is " the tip of the beak " where the bronze dolphin stood, d d
are the turning-posts, on one of which stood statues of Pelops and
Hippodamia (§19 of this chapter), and e is the goal, with the seats of
the umpires beside it

20. II. In front of the chaxiots or race-horses stretches a rope
as a harrier. This barrier of rope is mentioned, in very similar
language, in a metrical inscription which celebrates a victory won by
Attalus, the father of the first king of Pergamus, in the chariot-race at
Olympia. The inscription was found at Pergamus. See Frankel,
InscM/ten van Pergamon^ No. 10 ; E. Pollack, Hippodromica^ ?• 73
sqq. The language of the inscription seems to imply that there was
only one rope, and that on its being let down all the chariots rushed out
simultaneously. From Pausanias's description, on the other hand, we
infer that separate ropes were stretched in front of each stall, and that
these ropes were let down, not simultaneously but successively. From
this discrepancy Mr. Pollack infers {l.c) that in the time of Attalus I.,
who reigned 241-197 B.c, the method of starting the chariots described
by Pausanias was not yet introduced, and hence that its inventor
Cleoetas cannot be the artist of that name who would seem to have
flourished in the fifth century B.C. (see note on v. 24. 5). But this is
to press the poetical language of the inscription too hard. It is not
to be expected that a poet, celebrating the glories of his royal patron,
should describe the mode of starting the chariots with the minuteness
ai>propriate in an antiquary like Pausanias.

20. II. An altar of unhnmt brick. Besides this temporary altar
there were a number of permanent altars at or near the starting-place
of the hippodrome. See v. 15. 5 j^. What Pausanias in that passage
calls the Wedge he here compares to the prow of a ship.

20. 1 2. a bronze eagle etc. The hoisting of the bronze eagle and
the lowering of the dolphin were apparently the signal given to the
spectators that the race was about to begin. Whether it could have



74 EXBDRA OF HERODES bk. vi. elis

seven oblong niches, two pedestals with their statues being placed
in each oblong niche. Thus there were eight pedestals set apart for
the statues of the imperial &mily, and fourteen for those of the family
of Herodes Atticus. But the number of statues did not correspond to
that of the pedestals, for in each set a single pedestal supported two
statues of young children (a brother and a sister). Among the statues
of the imperial family were portraits of Hadrian, Antoninus Pius, L.
Aelius Aurelius Conmiodus (afterwards the Emperor Verus), the elder
Faustina (wife of Antoninus Pius), the younger Faustina (wife of
Marcus Aurelius), and two children of Marcus Aurelius and Faustina.
Probably there was a statue of Marcus Aurelius, but neither the statue
nor its pedestal has been found. It is conjectured that the statues
of Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius were placed in the two little
rotundas at each end of the lower tank. A clue to the date of the
erection of the Exedra is furnished by the fact that two and only two
children of Marcus Aurelius and Faustina were represented by statues.
For the marriage of Marcus Aurelius and Faustina took place in 145
A.D. (Th. Mommsen, in Hermes^ 8 (1874), p. 205) ; hence the Exedra
cannot have been built before 147 A. D. On the other hand it was
probably not built later than 150 or 151 A.D., since in one or other of
these years was bom to Marcus Aurelius and Faustina another child,
Anna Lucilia by name, who married her uncle, the emperor Lucius
Verus, in 164 A.D. Thus the Exedra would seem to have been built
between 147 and 151 A.D. Dr. Adler, however, would date it between
154-157 A.D. on the ground that Herodes probably built it to testify
his gratitude for the honour conferred on his wife Regilla, who had been
made priestess of Demeter in 01. 131 (153 A.D.) But it does not seem
to be made out that the priesthood of Regilla fell in 01. 131 (153 A.D.),
though certainly it cannot have fallen in the subsequent Olympiad, 01.
132 (157 A.D.), since the name of the priestess for that year, Antonia
Baebia, is known to us from an inscription {Die Inschriften von Olympia^
No. 456). The latest possible date for the completion of the Exedra is
161 A.D., since Regilla, in whose name the Exedra was dedicated, died
in that or the preceding year, and Marcus Aurelius, who succeeded
Antoninus Pius on the throne in 161 A.D., is mentioned as a private
man in one of the inscriptions of the Exedra. Thus the Exedra must
have been completed at least thirteen years before Pausanias wrote his
description of Olympia (see note on v. i. 2). The haste and negli-
gence of the masonry betray the decline of art. Only the capitals of
the Corinthian columns of the two little rotundas are carefully and
tastefully carved.

See Olympia: Ergebnisse^ Tafelband 2. plates lxxxiii.-lxxxvi. ; id. Tafelband
3. plates Ixv.-lxix. ; F. Adler, in Olympia: Ergebnisse, Textband 2. pp. 134-139 ;
Die Ausgrabungen zu Olympia, 3 (1877-1878), p. 32, with plates v., xxi., xxxvii. ;
Die Funde von Olympia^ p. 26 sq, ; Ad. Bdtticher, Olympiad pp. 401-410 ;
Curtius und Adler, Olympia und Umgegend^ pp. 43-47; Flasch, * Olympia,* in
Baumeister's Denkmaler^ p. 1 104 E sq, ; Baedeker,' p. 343 sq. For the inscriptions
on the bases of the statues, etc, see Die Inschriften von Olympia, pp. 615-640,
Nos. 610-628; Archdologische Zeitung, 35 (1877), pp. 101-104; «V/., 36 (1878),
pp. 94-97.



i

CH. XX MOUNT CRONIUS 75

The aqueduct of Herodes is mentioned by Philostratus ( Vit Soph,
ii. I. 9) and Lucian {De morte Peregrini^ 19 sq^ Lucian tells us how
the mountebank Peregrinus denounced Herodes and his aqueduct for
pandering to the luxury and effeminacy of the day. It was the duty of
the spectators, he said, to endure their thirst, and if need be to die of it.
This doctrine proved unacceptable to his hearers, and the preacher had
to run for his life pursued by a volley of stones.

20. I. Mount OronilUL This is the hill which rises immediately on
the north of the Altis to a height of over 450 feet (Curtius und Adler,
Olympia und Umgegend, p. 12). Its steep sides are thickly clothed
with bushes and trees (firs, holly oaks, etc) The view from the top
is pleasing, embracing the valley of the Alpheus with the low soft
wooded hills of Elis all round. The mountains of Arcadia are seen
on the eastern horizon. To the west the view of the sea is cut off by
the hill which rises on the other side of the valley of the Cladeus. It
was Hercules who gave the hill its name ; it had been nameless before
(Pindar, Olymp, xi. 49 sqq, ; cp. icL^ 01, i. 1x4, v. 17, vi. 64, viii. 17).

20. I. On the top of the mountain the Basilae etc. As to these
sacrifices, Dionysius of Halicamassus (Aniiquit, Rom, i. 34) speaks of
** the Cronian hill in Elis, which hill is in the land of Pisa near the river
Alpheus. The people of Elis esteem the hill sacred to Cronus, and they
assemble and do homage to it with sacrifices and other marks of honour
at set times." The title (Basilae) of the priests who offered the sacrifice
to Cronus seems clearly connected with basileus^ *king.' Hence, as
Curtius suggested, the priesthood probably dated from the old regal
days and may have been held by the kings themselves (Abhandlungen
of the Prussian Academy (Berlin), 1894, p. 1 1 1 1). The vernal equinox,
the season when the Basilae sacrificed on the top of the mountain, has
been celebrated with religious rites elsewhere. Thus in Nepaul " on
the 8th (Ashtami) the Gorkhas observe a festival, for that one day only,
in honour of the vernal equinox" (H. A. Oldfield, Sketches from Nipal^
2. p. 314). "Another festival is not only observed by the Parsis in
India and elsewhere, but is common to Persians, Arabs, and Turks, it
being the day fixed for the computation of the incoming solar year,
and also for the collection of revenue. It corresponds with the vernal
equinox and falls about the third week in March. It is called Jamshedi
Naoroz, and strictly speaking is * New Year's Day,' but in India it is
simply a day of rejoicing, and is observed in honour of a Persian king
named Jamshed, who first introduced the principles of cultivation, and
the proper method of reckoning time on the solar system" (A. F.
Baillie, KurracJue {Karachi), past, present, and future, (Calcutta, 1 890),
p. 190).

20. 2. Sosipolis etc. See note on v. 17. 3. On the slope of
Mount Cronius, immediately above the treasuries, there is a broad level
space, through which a road now runs. Here may have stood the joint
temple of Sosipolis and Ilithyia. Immediately to the west of the row of
treasuries, between the treasury of the Sicyonians and the Exedra of
Herodes, there is a tiny temple consisting of a single chamber with
a narrow portico. The temple, like the treasuries, faces south. The



76 SOSIPOLIS BK. VI. ELis

chamber is built of squared blocks of marly limestone ; the foundations
of the portico are of stone, but the upper portion seems to have been of
wood. In the chamber is a square foundation, probably the base of an
image. In front of the temple is a large altar. Prof. C. Robert pro-
poses to identify the temple as the temple of Sosipolis, and the altar in
front of it as the altar of Ilithyia. But this cannot be right. For
Pausanias says that the temple was divided into two parts, an inner and
an outer, and that Sosipolis was worshipped in the inner part, while the
altar of Ilithyia stood in the outer part. Now the temple which Prof.
Robert would identify as that of Sosipolis has only a single chamber,
and the altar which he identifies as the altar of Ilithyia is not in the
temple at all, but outside of it. The altar is probably the altar of
Hercules, which was near the Sicyonian treasury (Paus. v. 14. 9). Dr.
Dorpfeld conjectures that the little temple was a temple of Hercules.
See Dorpfeld, in Olympia: Ergebnisse^ Textband 2. pp. 44 sq.^ 164.

Prof. C. Robert further conjectures that Sosipolis was the infant
Zeus, whose shrine would appropriately be at the foot of the hill
which was named after his father Cronus. At Magnesia on the
Maeander Zeus was worshipped under the tide of Sosipolis (** saviour
of the city"), as we learn from Strabo (xiv. p. 648). See C. Robert,
* Sosipolis in Olympia,* MittheiL d, arch. Inst, in Athetiy 18 (1893),
pp. 37-45 ; L. R. Famell, The Cults of the Greek States^ i. p. 38.
The temple of Zeus Sosipolis at Magnesia on the Maeander was
discovered and excavated by members of the German Archaeological
Institute in 1892. The temple, a small edifice of the Ionic order
and of fine workmanship, is situated in the middle of the '* sacred
market-place " (see note on vi. 24. 2), immediately to the west of the
great temple of Leucophryenian Artemis (see note on i. 26. 4). The
temple opens to the west, and is prostyle in front, and in antis behind
— an arrangement hitherto unknown in Greek temples. Though
the temple lies in ruins, its remains are so complete that it might be
rebuilt almost entire. In the cella were found some pieces of the image
and its pedestal. A long inscription carved on the north-west anta of
the temple identifies the edifice as the temple of Zeus Sosipolis, and
furnishes important details as to his worship. At the beginning of
sowing, which fell at the new moon in the month Cronion, a bull was
dedicated to Zeus. On this occasion the sacred herald, attended by the
priest, the priestess of Leucophryenian Artemis, nine boys, and nine
maidens, offered up prayers for the welfare of the city and country, for
peace, riches, good harvests, and the increase of the herds. On the 1 2th
day of the month Artemision the consecrated bull was sacrificed, and
the images of the Twelve Gods were brought to the sacred market-
place, where a wooden rotunda was erected and three couches for
the gods set up beside the altar of the Twelve Gods. Then a ram
was sacrificed to Zeus, a she-goat to Artemis, and a he-goat to the
Pythian Apollo. See Berliner philolog, Wochenschrift^ 14 (1894), p.
1049 sqq. ; Jahrbuch d, arch, Inst, 9 (1894), Archaologischer Anzeiger,
p. 76 sqq,

20. 5. the child was changed into a serpent. Heroes (as to



CH. XX THE HIPPODAMIUM 77

whom see note on vi. 6. 7) appear to have often assumed the shape of
serpents. See i. 24. 7 ; i. 36. i note. Plutarch {CleomeneSy 39) says
that *' the ancients thought that the serpent, of all animals, was most
akin to the heroes.''

20. 7- at the processional entrance is the HippodaminnL

The site of the Hippodamium has not been identified. It has already
been mentioned by Pausanias (v. 22. 2) in connexion apparently with
the entrance to the stadium. In the present passage he describes it
immediately after describing the treasuries and the sanctuary of Sosipolis
at the foot of Mt. Cronius, and immediately before he comes to the
entrance into the stadium. We should naturally therefore, with Dr.
Ddrpfeld and Mr. Botticher, look for the Hippodamium at the north-
east comer of the Altis. This view, however, seems contradicted by
Pausanias's statement that the Hippodamium was at the processional
entrance, for this was the gate at the south-west comer of the Altis
{see note on v. 15. 2). Hence Prof. Flasch would place the Hippo-
damium in the south-west corner of the Altis, where however, according
to Dr. Dorpfeld, there is absolutely no room for it. Dr. Adler, on the
other hand, thinks that the Hippodamium can have been nowhere but
at the south-east comer.

See Dorpfeld, in MittheiL d, arch. \Inst, in Athen^ 13 (i888)» p. 334 sq, ;
Flasch, *01ympia,* in Baumeister's Denkmdler^ p. 1097 ; Ad. Botticher, Olympiad
p. 192 sq, ; Die Funde von Olympia^ p. 24 ; Curtius und Adler, Olympia und
Umgegendt p. 4a

20. 7. the death of Ghrsrsippns. Chrysippus, a bastard son of
Pelops, was murdered by Atreus and Thyestes at the instigation of
their mother Hippodamia (Hyginus, Fab, 85).

20. 8. statues which they made from the fines etc. See v.
21. 2 sqq.

20. 8. the Secret Entrance. This is the tunnel leading from the
north-east corner of the Altis through the embankment which bounds
the stadium on the west. The tunnel is 32.10 metres (100 Olympic
feet) long, 3.70 metres broad, and 4.45 metres high. The sides are
lined with masonry, and it was roofed with a stone vault, of which part
has been rebuilt by the Germans. Much importance was formerly
attached to the vault as the supposed earliest known example of a Greek
arch. But the vault has proved to be Roman. Bricks were found in
it. It is supposed to be later than the casing walls at the sides, and to
have been necessitated by the raising of the embankment. Mr. R.
Borrmann thinks it was probably constructed in the first century B.C.
or a little earlier. The stone with which the sides of the tunnel are
lined is the ordinary coarse shell-conglomerate of Olympia. The blocks
are squared and are bound together with iron clamps of the r-n shape,
run with lead.

See Olympia: Ergebnisse, Tafelband I. pi. xlvi.; W. Dorpfeld, vnDieAusgra-
bungen su Olympia^ 5 (1879- 1 881), p. 37 sq,^ with pi. xxxv. ; R. Borrmann, in
Olympia : Ergebnisse^ Textband 2. pp. 66-68 ; Die Funde von Olympia, p. 22 ;
Curtius und Adler, Olympia utid Umgegend, p. 31 ; Flasch, * Olympia,' in
Baumeister's Denkmaler, p. 1 104 G ; Baedeker,' p. 345.



78 THE STADIUM bk. vi. elis

The west end of the tunnel opens on a sort of lane about 6.50 metres
wide, bounded on the north by the terrace on which the treasuries stand,
and on the south by the north wall of the Echo Colonnade. In this lane,
a little to the west of the mouth of the tunnel, are the remains of a gate-
way which served as a sort of ornamental entrance to the tunnel. Two
Corinthian columns, flanked by two half-columns, supported an entablature
(architrave and frieze). The entrance was through the central opening,
between the two columns. The socket-holes in the stone threshold of
this opening prove that it was dosed by a gate. On the other hand the
two side openings between the columns and the half-columns were
dosed with permanent stone barriers, of which there are some remains.
The columns have twenty flutes. Their capitals resemble those of the
little round temple at Tivoli that overlooks Ae falls of the Tibur. Well-
preserved remains of colours (red, green, and yellow) prove that originally
the whole surface of these capitals was painted. The entablature is
remarkably low in comparison with the height of the columns. It is
executed in a hasty and careless style. There are traces of red paint on
it The gateway probably dates from the first century of our era.

See F. Adler, in Die Ausgrabungen zu Olympian 4 (1878-1879), p. 50^ with
pL xxxviiL (where the columns are wrongly restored as Ionic) ; R. Bomnann, in
Olympia : Ergebnissey Textband 2. pp. &-70 ; Olympia : Ergelmtsse^ Tafelband
I. pi. xlviii. ; Flasch, 'Olympia,* in Baumeister's Denkmdler^ p. 1104 G.

20. 8. the stadinnL Only a small portion of the stadium has
been excavated by the Germans, enough however to determine its
dimensions and plan. It extended in a north-easterly direction from the
north-east comer of the Altis, from which it was divided by an embank-
ment. The level portion of the stadium is a quadrangle 212^ metres
long by about 29.70 metres wide. The width, however, is not uniform.
At the west end it is 28.60 metres ; at the east end it is 29.70 ; and at
an intermediate point, where some trial trenches were made, it seems to
have been 30.70 metres. The level of the stadium is about 10 feet
lower than that of the Altis. It is enclosed on all sides by slopes of
earth. On the long north side the slope of Mount Cronius and the adjoin-
ing hills formed the natural boundary. On the other three sides (the
long south side and the short east and west sides) the stadium is enclosed
by artificial embankments. On the earthen slopes which thus surrounded
the racecourse the spectators sat; there were no tiers of stone seats.
A stone sill is believed to have run all round the racecourse, just at
the foot of the earthen slopes. This sill exists at the western end of
the racecourse, but has not been found at its eastern end. On the
inner side of this sill and about a metre (3 feet 3 inches) distant from
it an open stone gutter extends all round the racecourse, with numerous
small basins at regular intervals along it. The water which circulated
in it was doubtless intended for the refreshment of the spectators, and
probably too for that of the athletes in the intervals of competition.

The racecourse, thus bounded by the gutter on all sides, is quad-
rangular at both ends. The discovery of this was a surprise ; for from
what was previously known of Greek stadiums archaeologists had



CH. XX THE STADIUM 79

expected to find the racecourse quadrangular at one end only and
semicircular at the other. But recent excavations at the Epidaurian
sanctuary of Aesculapius have proved that there also the stadium, i.e,
the level part of it, was similarly quadrangular at both ends and, like
the Olympic stadium, surrounded by a stone gutter. (See Addenda, at
the end of vol. 5.) As these are, so far as I know, the only two Greek
stadiums as yet excavated which have been found in tolerable preserva-
tion, it becomes probable that this was the universal arrangement ; that,
in other words, the actual racecourse was always laid out as a long
rectangle, though the slope of earth, natural or artificial, which bounded
the racecourse, would seem to have always curved round in the form of
a semicircle at one end of the stadium. At least this semicircular slope
is to be seen in a number of existing Greek stadiums, including those of
Athens, the Isthmus, and Sicyon.

There is evidence that at some period the artificial embankments
which enclose the stadium on three sides were raised very considerably.
The object of the change was no doubt to provide room for more spec-
tators. The height of the embankments, as thus raised, was over
6. 50 metres ; and the number of spectators who could find room on
the slopes is estimated at from 40,000 to 45,000. Before the altera-
tion it is calculated that the number of spectators who could be accom-
modated was from 20,000 to 30,000. The change necessitated at
least two others. The Secret Entrance at the north-west comer, which
had hitherto been an open passage, was now vaulted over (see above,
p. 77) ; and the Echo Colonnade had to be shifted a little to the
west, as its back wall threatened to give way (if it did not actually give
way) under the increased ' thrust ' or pressure caused by the raising of
the embankment (see note on v. 21. 17). Dr. Dorpfeld was formerly
of opinion that the shifting of the colonnade and the roofing over of the
Secret Entrance took place in Macedonian times ; and he conjectured
that the raising of the embankment, which is supposed to have been
the cause of both these changes, may have been carried out by Philip
of Macedonia as a means of propitiating the Greeks after his victory at
Chaeronea. But if Mr. R. Borrmann is right in holding that the roof-
ing of the Secret Entrance was a work of about the first century B.C., it
would seem that we must date the raising of the embankments of the
stadium at the same time.

It is not quite clear from Pausanias's description whether the start-
ing-point was at the west or the east end of the course. But probably
it was at the west end. For the runners entered the stadium through
the Secret Entrance at the west end, and it seems more likely that
they should at once have taken their places at the line, than that they
should have had to traverse the whole length of the stadium to reach
them. Moreover, the umpires' seats, which must of course have been
beside the goal, would seem to have been at the east end of the stadium,
since Pausanias tells us (J^ xo of this chapter) that in passing over the
embankment of the stadium at the point where the umpires sit you
came to the hippodrome. The position of the hippodrome has not,
indeed, been ascertained ; but the most probable hypothesis seems to



So THE STADIUM bk. vi. elis

be that it lay immediately to the east of the stadium. If these views
are right, it follows that the starting-point of the race was at the west,
and the goal at the east end of the stadium.

Both starting-point and goal have been laid bare by the German
excavations, but as they are almost exactly alike we cannot by inspec-
tion of them tell which is which. Each consists of a stone sill, about
1 8 inches broad, extending across the racecourse at right angles to its
length. The western sill or starting-point (if it is so) is distant about
1 1 metres from the west end of the stadium ; the eastern sill or goal (if
it is so) is distant about 9^ metres from the east end of the stadium.
Each sill extends nearly but not quite across the full breadth of the race-
course, and consists of a row of slabs of white limestone laid carefully
together, end on, but not united by clamps. In each sill are a number
of square holes at intervals of about 4 feet These holes seem to have
been meant for the reception of wooden posts. The whole of the
western sill is divided by these holes into twenty sections ; the eastern
sill is similarly divided into twenty-one sections, of which, however, the
most northerly is much shorter than the rest Each runner doubtless
had a section allotted to him. Further, between each pair of holes two
straight parallel grooves are cut in the stone about 6 or 7 inches from
each other. These grooves are Y-shaped or triangular in section, but
the side of the groove towards the course slopes more than the other.
They were probably intended to give each runner a firm foothold at
starting. He would place one heel on the one groove, and the other
heel on the other.

The reason why the starting-place and the goal are thus alike would
seem to be as follows. The umpires appear from Pausanias*s descrip-
tion to have had a fixed seat at one end, probably the east end, of the
course. In the single race the runners started at the west end, raced
to the east end, and stopped. But in the double race, as it was neces-
sary that the race should finish up beside the umpires at the east end,
the runners started from the east end, raced to the west end, then
turned and raced back to the east end. Hence a starting-place was
needed at the east end as well as at the west end. Thus, whereas the
goal was always at one end (probably the east end), the starting-point
was at one end or the other according as the race was single or double.
It is to be observed that when Pausanias speaks of the starting-place of
the runners (§ 9) he is speaking strictly only of the runners in the single
race (crraStoS/od/ioi).

With regard to the mode in which the double race was run. Dr.
Dorpfeld thinks that when it was run all the wooden posts in the
western sill were removed except the one in the middle, which then
served as a turning-post, the runners racing round it on their way back
to their starting-point at the eastern end of the course. He points out
that the central hole in the western sill is in fact larger than all the rest,
so that it must have held a larger and more conspicuous post, which
might very well serve as a turning-post But, as Prof. Flasch has
pointed out, such an arrangement would entail a serious disadvantage
on the runners who at starting stood farthest from the centre, as they



CH. XX THE STADIUM 8i

would have more ground to traverse than the competitors who started
from nearer the centre, and hence nearer the turning-post We may
conjecture, then, either that all the posts were left standing in the
western sill and that each runner raced round a separate post, or that
without turning round a post at all they merely raced to the western
sill, touched it, and turned back. The former is the view advocated by
Pro£ Flasch, but the latter view is to some extent supported by vase-
paintings of runners in the armed race. See above, note on vi. lo. 4.

The distance between the starting-point and the goal, measured
from the middle point between the two grooves at one end of the course
to the corresponding point at the other end, is 192.27 metres. Hence,
as the stadium measured 600 feet, the Olympic foot was equivalent
to 0.32045 metre. The Olympic foot was thus considerably larger
than the ordinary Greek foot, which, as determined by Dr. D6rpfeld*s
measurement of the Hecatompedon of the Parthenon, was only .2957
metre. See Dorpfeld, in MittheiL d, arch, Inst, in Athen^ 7 (1882),
pp. 277-312; and vol. 2. p. 13. We have seen (vol. 3. p. 498) that
the Olympic foot was the unit of measurement employed in several of
the buildings at Olympia. The reason why the Olympic foot was
longer than the ordinary Greek foot was said to be that Hercules
had measured the Olympic stadium with his own feet, which were
larger than the feet of ordinary mortals; and hence the Olympic
stadium was longer than all other stadiums, though every stadium
measured 600 feet (Aulus Gellius, i. i).

See F. Adler and W. Dorpfeld, in Die Ausgrabungtn zu Olympioy 5 (1879-
1 881), pp. 23, 36-38, with plates xxxv. and xxxvi. ; Olympia: Ergebnisse^ Tafel-
band i. pi. xlvii. ; R. Bomnann, in Olympia : ErgebnissCy Textband 2. p. 63 sqq. ;
Die Funde von Olympia^ p. 21 ; Curtius und Adler, Olympia und Umgegend^
p. 29 sq, ; Ad. Botlicher, Olympiad pp. 230-235 ; Flasch, * Olympia,' in Baumeis-
tcr*s Denkmdlery p. 1 104 F sq, ; Baedeker,' p. 345 sq. For the testimony of
ancient writers as to the double race see J. H. Krause, Gymtuistik und Agonistik
dtr Hellenen, p. 344 sqq.

Many ancient articles of bronze, such as small tripods, small figures
of animals, pieces of large kettles, basins, nails, weights, and, above all,
fragments of weapons, were found by the Germans in the embankments
of the stadium. It is conjectured that whenever soil had to be removed
from any portion of the Altis to make room for a new building or for
any other purpose, it was dumped down on the embankments of the
stadium. Hence, as the soil of the Altis was almost saturated with old
bronze votive offerings which had been thrown away, it was natural that
these objects should reappear in large numbers in the embankments of
the stadium. The most interesting of these discoveries is a series of
round bronze shields, most of them entire, which were found in the
south embankment, under the mass of earth which was heaped up at
the time when the embankments were raised considerably. See A.
Furtwangler, in Olympia : Ergebnisse, Textband 4. (* Die Bronzen '), p. 6.

20. 9. the priestess of Demeter Chamyne. The marble base of
a statue bearing the following inscription was found at Olympia by the
Germans (21st October 1876) to the north-east of the temple of Zeus :

VOL. IV G



82 THE HIPPODROME bk. vi. elis

lXjojolv

Ap)(€Xaos rrfv yvvatica.

<* Flavius Archelaus (dedicated this statue of) his wife the priestess of
the Chamynaean goddess" (Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 485 ;
Archdologische Zeitung^ 34 (1876), p. 225 sq,^ No. 30). The husband
of this priestess, T. Flavius Archelaus, held the office of priest (dco-
k6\o%) at Olympia for the third time in 245-249 A.D., and for the
fourth time in Ol. 261 (265 A.D.) (Die Inschriften von Olympia^ Nos.
121, 122). In 01. 256 (245 A.D.) he was cdutarchos {op. cit. No. 483).
A statue of him, of which the inscribed pedestal is preserved, was
erected by the city of Elis {op. at. No. 484). As to Demeter
Chamyne, see vL 21. i.

20. 9. they do not hinder maidens from beholding the games.
Married women were not allowed to witness the games (v. 6. 7).
Hence some have questioned Pausanias's statement in the present
passage that maidens were permitted to witness them. See Krause,
Olympia^ P* 54 ^99' Both matrons and maidens seem to have been
allowed to witness the games in Cyrene (Pindar, Pytk. ix. 97 sqq. ;
Boeckh, Explic. Pindar^ p. 327 sq.) Amongst the lonians women
were free to witness the Ephesian games down to the time of Thucy-
dides (Thucyd. iii. 104).

20. 9. Endymion. See v. i. 3 sqq. ; v. 8. i sq.

20. 10. the horse-races. The Olympic hippodrome is supposed
to have lain to the south-east and east of the stadium, but to have been
so completely washed away by the Alpheus in the course of ages that it
is impossible to determine its exact situation and dimensions (Curtius
und Adler, Olympia und Umgegend, p. 30 sq. ; A. B6tticher, Olympiad
p. 119 ; Baedeker,' p. 346). It seems perfectly possible, however, that
the hippodrome is preserved under the deep accumulation of alluvial
soil, and that excavations might bring it to light. The stadium is
similarly buried except at its two ends.

20. 10. the starting-place of the horses. The following descrip-
tion of the mode of starting the chariot-races and horse-races is explained
by the subjoined ground-plan, drawn by Hirt from Pausanias's descrip-
tion and accepted by the writers in Baumeister's DenknUUer^ s.v.
* Hippodrom,' and Smith's Dictionary of Gr. and Rom, Antiquities^
s.v. * Hippodromus.' See A. Hirt, Geschichte der Baukunst bei den
Alten^ 3. pp. 148-150, with pi. xx. 8. Hirt, however, appears to be
wrong in the position which he assigns to Taraxippus. See note on §
15. A different ground-plan is given in Guhl und Kohner's Das Leben
der Griechen und Romer^ p. 147. But it contradicts the description of
Pausanias in placing the stations for the chariots at starting on one
side only of the * prow.* It must therefore be rejected. The subject is
discussed at length and a new ground-plan proposed by Mr. E. Pollack,
Hippodromica (Leipsic, 1890), p. 54 sqq. He differs from Hirt in
placing the ' prow,' with all the stations for the chariots, on one side



CH. XX



THE HIPPODROME



83



only of the Hippodrome. The subject has also been discussed by
Godfrey Hermann {Opuscuia^ 7. pp. 388-404, « De hippodromo Olym-


riG. 6.— CROUNZ>-PLAN OF HIPPODROME AT OLYMPIA (CONJBCTURAI. XBSTORATION).

piaco '). In Hirt's plan, as here reproduced, a a\s the Colonnade of
Agnaptus, b is the altar of unbumt brick set up in the middle of the
* prow,' c is " the tip of the beak " where the bronze dolphin stood, d d
are the turning-posts, on one of which stood statues of Pelops and
Hippodamia (§19 of this chapter), and e is the goal, with the seats of
the umpires beside it

20. II. In front of the chaxiots or race-horses stretches a rope
as a harrier. This barrier of rope is mentioned, in very similar
language, in a metrical inscription which celebrates a victory won by
Attains, the father of the first king of Pergamus, in the chariot-race at
Olympia. The inscription was found at Pergamus. See Frankel,
Inschriften von Pergamon^ No. 10; E. Pollack, Hippodromicay p. 73
sqq. The language of the inscription seems to imply that there was
only one rope, and that on its being let down all the chariots rushed out
simultaneously. From Pausanias's description, on the other hand, we
infer that separate ropes were stretched in front of each stall, and that
these ropes were let down, not simultaneously but successively. From
this discrepancy Mr. Pollack infers (/.r.) that in the time of Attains I.,
who reigned 241-197 B.C., the method of starting the chariots described
by Pausanias was not yet introduced, and hence that its inventor
Cleoetas cannot be the artist of that name who would seem to have
flourished in the fifth century B.C. (see note on v. 24. 5). But this is
to press the poetical language of the inscription too hard. It is not
to be expected that a poet, celebrating the glories of his royal patron,
should describe the mode of starting Uie chariots with the minuteness
appropriate in an antiquary like Pausanias.

20. II. An altar of unbnmt brick. Besides this temporary altar
there were a number of permanent altars at or near the starting-place
of the hippodrome. See v. 15. ^ sq. What Pausanias in that passage
calls the Wedge he here compares to the prow of a ship.

20. 1 2. a bronze eagle etc. The hoisting of the bronze eagle and
the lowering of the dolphin were apparently the signal given to the
spectators that the race was about to begin. Whether it could have



84 TARAXIPPUS bk. vi. elis

been seen by the charioteers is doubtful. Perhaps the signal to start
was g^ven by the trumpet at Olympia as elsewhere (Sophocles, Elecira,
711 ; Statius, Thed. vi. 404 sq.; Ovid, Metam, vi. 652 sq,) Mr.
Pollack suggests that the eagle was chosen as the symbol of Zeus, and
the dolphin as the symbol of Poseidon, the horse-god, who had an
altar at the starting-place of the chariots (v. 15. 5); and that as the
hoisting of the eagle represented the bird's flight, so the lowering of
the dolphin represented the fish's dive into the depths (£. Pollack, Hip-
podromica^ p. 71).

20. 1 4. Gleoetas. See note on § 11 < In front of the chariots,' and
note on V. 24. 5.

20. 15. the terror of the horses, Tarazippns. Dio Chrysostom
says {Or, xxxii. vol. i. p. 426, ed. Dindorf) : "In the middle of the
hippodrome at Olympia there is an altar of Poseidon Taraxippus, at the
place where the horses used to be most frightened and where most
chariots were broken. So the Eleans, thinking there was some demon
at the bottom of it, resolved to found an altar. And they say that
since then the place has been safe from him." Lycophron speaks of
" the steep hill of Cronus, where is the grave of the earth-bom Ischenus,
which scares horses" {Cassandra^ 42 sqJ) On this passage Tzetzes
remarks {SchoL on Lycopkrotfs Cassandra^ Lc.)\ "A famine having
arisen, an oracle declared that the only way of ending the famine was
for one of the nobles to be sacrificed. When all hesitated, Ischenus
volunteered to be sacrificed. And sacrificed he was, and his grave is
shown at what they call the hill of Cronus, near the turning-point of the
course at Olympia. And they bestowed many honours on him the day
on which he was sacrificed, and they held games. They call him Tarax-
ippus because he startles and confuses the horses in the race, either
by some secret and inexplicable power, or because a laurel grows on
the grave and when it shakes the horses are startled by the shadow
of the leaves." Hesychius tells us {s,v, Tapd^imros;) that, according
to some people, Taraxippus was a name of Pelops himself, whose grave
was at Olympia. A jesting allusion is made to Taraxippus by Aristo-
phanes {KnightSy 247). A poet of the Anthology refers to "the
sanctuary of Taraxippus " at Olympia {AnthoL Palat. xiv. 4. 5).

It will be observed that whereas Pausanias describes Taraxippus as
being situated on the embankment which formed the longer side of the
hippodrome, Dio Chrysostom speaks of it as " in the middle of the
hippodrome." But this is probably only a loose rhetorical way of
speaking and proves nothing as to the exact situation of Taraxippus.
Hirt, therefore, seems to be certainly wrong in supposing that the round
altar of Taraxippus formed one of the turning-posts in the racecourse
{Geschichte der Baukunst bet den Alten^ 3. p. 146). The subject of
Taraxippus is discussed at length by Mr. £. Pollack {Hifipodromica^ pp.
85-102). Following a suggestion of Prof. C. Wachsmuth he thinks
that what startled the horses was the sight of their own shadows
suddenly revealed to them by morning light when they rounded the
post at the eastern end of the hippodrome.

With Taraxippus we may compare some similar superstitions in



CH. XX TARAXIPPUS US

other places. <* When I was nearly dashed to pieces by restive horses,
one of which broke away from my carriage and was precipitated over
a precipice on the Ghat between Poona and Mahabalesvar, I was told
by a wise-looking native who witnessed the accident that the road in
that district was infested by demons who often caused accidents, and
that if I had taken care to propitiate Ganesa before starting I should
have escaped all molestation and all risk of being upset" (Monier
Williams, Religious thought and life in India^ p. 2 1 6). A story is told
of a Breton carter, whose cart always stuck in the mud at the same
place. He found that this was caused by a devil, whom he was about
to thrash, when the devil promised never to do it again. See S^billot,
Traditions et superstitions de la Haute-Bretagne^ i. p. 182 sq. There
is a place in a pass in £^t Africa which is especially difficult for cattle.
Every native who passes it anoints a certain rock with butter or fat
(Hildebrandt, * Ethnographische Notizen liber Wakamba und ihre Nach-
bam,' Zeitschrifi fur Ethnologie, 10 (1878), p. 384). With the sacrifices
offered to Taraxippus we may also compare the sacrifices offered before
a boat-race by Burmese boatmen to the spirits {nats) of the stream to
ensure that they will cause no accident to the boat in the race (Forbes,
British Burma, p. 223 ; Shway Yoe, The Burman^ i. p. 285, 2. p. 59).
In the cemetery at Bir-el-Djebbana, near Carthage, some ancient
leaden plates were found a few years ago, on which are engraved
prayers in Greek and Latin addressed to demons, imploring them to
hinder the rival horses and charioteers in the race. The horses and
charioteers are named, and the demon is adjured to bind fast their
limbs and dim their eyes, so that they may not be able to run or to see,
etc See Bulletin de Corresp. hellMique, 12 (1888), pp. 294-302.

20. 18. Orpheus. On Orpheus as a magician, see Lobeck, AglaO'
phamus^ P- 235 sq,

20. 19. At Nemea there was no hero etc. Pausanias speaks

as if the Nemean games had ceased to be celebrated in his time.
Probably, however, he only means that the chariot -races had fallen
into desuetude. Cp. ii. 15. 3 ; vi. 16. 4.

20. 19. a bronze statue of Hippodamia holding a ribbon etc
From Pausanias's description of the statue C. Botticher inferred that
the ribbon was bound upon the victor's brows in the racecourse,
whereas the crown of wild olive was presented to him in the temple of
Zeus (see v. 12. 5). Further Botticher argued that the ribbon was the
original badge of victory at Olympia, and that the olive crown was
introduced later. He thought that at the Pythian games also the
ribbon preceded the crown as a badge of victory. He refers to
Pausanias, vi. 14. 10; x. 7. 5. See C. BStticher, *Das Bild der Hip-
podameia im Hippodrom zu Olympia,' Archdologische Zeitung, 5 (1853),
pp. 7-13 (with plate li. i and 2). Thucydides tells us (iv. 121) that
the Scionians, to mark their gratitude to Brasidas, tied ribbons on him
" as if he were an athlete." On a vase-painting figured by Daremberg
and Saglio {Diet, des Antiquit, i. p. 1084, fig. 1335) we see a victori-
ous athlete with long ribbons or rather sashes tied round his left arm
and left leg and streaming down behind him ; in his hands he holds two



86 THE GYMNASIUM bk. vi. elis

wreaths, and on his head he wears a curious peaked cap with a long
pennon hanging from it Cp. iv. i6. 6 ; vi. i. 7 ; vi. 2. 2. On the
ancient custom of fastening ribbons to persons, animals, and things as
a mark of esteem, see Stephani, in Compie Rendu (St Petersburg) for
1874, pp. 1 37-1 7 4« Stephani rejects B6tticher*s views mentioned above.

As Pausanias does not describe the other turning-post in the race-
course, we may infer that it was a simple coliunn, such as we see
depicted in a vase-painting of a horse-race. See Smith's Diet, of
ArUiqtdties^ i. p. 964.

21. I. Demeter snmamed Chamyne. The name Chamyne is
doubtless connected with xafmC^ *on the ground,' and signified 'the
earth goddess.' From the same root comes the Lithuanian i^emyna,
* the earth goddess.' See G. Curtius, Grundsiige d, griech, Etymclogie^
p. 197. This aspect of Demeter is illustrated by the story that she was
embraced by lasion or lasius among the furrows of a ploughed field
and had by him a son Plutus (* wealth') (Homer, Odyssey^ v. 125 sqq,\
Hesiod, Theog, 969 sgq,) Cp. Preller, Griech. Mythologiey^ i. p. 776 ;
W. Mannhardt, Mythologische Forschungen^ p. 238 sqq.

21. I. Pantaleon tyrant of Fiaa. Cp. 22. 2. According

to another account Pantaleon was an insolent and cruel king of Elis.
See Heraclides Ponticus, De rebus publicise 6 {Frag, hist, Grace, ed.
Miiller, 2. p. 213). But Strabo (viii. p. 362) agrees with Pausanias in
making him -king of Pisa and says that he helped the Messenians in
their second war with Sparta. Cp. B. Niese, in Hermes y 26 (1891),
p. 30.

21. 2. the gyxnnasiTim. The great gymnasium lay just outside
the north-west comer of the Altis. Only a small part of it has been
excavated. It may be described as an immense open court surrounded,
probably on three, perhaps on four, sides by colonnades. Remains of
the colonnades on the south and east sides have been excavated. Both
are of the Doric order. The south colonnade was 5.23 metres deep ; its
back was formed by the north wall of the Wrestling-School or Palaestra
(see below, p. 88 sqq.) But it was of later date than the Wrestling-
School, as may be seen by the way in which the east wall of the colon-
nade merely abuts on the wall of the Wrestling-School, without being
jointed into it. This south colonnade had but one row of columns along
the front ; there was not a second row of columns down the middle of it.
On the east the colonnade ended flush with the west front of the gateway
of the gymnasium. How far the colonnade extended to the west we
cannot tell, as on this side it has been swept away by the Cladeus.

The east colonnade ran north and south for a distance of 210.51
metres. Only its southern and northern ends have been excavated.
Its depth from front to back was 11.78 metres. It opened to the west,
and had two rows of columns, one along the front, the other down the
middle. Both rows of columns were of the Doric order. The interval
between the columns, measured from axis to axis, is 3.14 metres. The
strong east wall of the colonnade is built of great squared blocks of
shell-limestone; the upper part was probably built of bricks. At the
back, that is on the east side, this wall is strengthened by solid



CH. XXI THE GYMNASIUM 87

buttresses at intervals of about 9.25 metres. Of the drums of the
columns some are fluted, others unfluted. The Doric capitals are very
small ; the echinus is low and almost straight. None of the entablature
has been found. The slendemess of the colunms (the inner are .55
metre and the outer .53 metre in diameter) and the wide interval
between them justify us in assuming that the entablature and roof were
of wood, or of wood and tiles. The walls were coated with plaster, the
remains of which show traces of red paint At the foot of the third
column of the inner row, counting from the south, there are two square
holes or notches on opposite sides (east and west) of the column, and
corresponding to these holes are two similar square holes in the east
and west walls of the colonnade. (The southern end of the west front
of the colonnade was closed by a wall as far as the third column from
the south.) It is conjectured that in these holes were fastened wooden
sills, and that in these wooden sills in turn were fastened the stone sills
or rows of stones from which the runners started to race. Several
blocks of the stone sills were found close to the colonnade. They
resemble the stone sills of the stadium (see above, p. 80) in having
each two straight parallel grooves with sides at different angles to the
perpendicular. It is conjectured that there may have been similar holes
at the foot of the third column from the north end of the colonnade,
and that they may have served to attach similar sills which formed
the goal If so, the distance between the marked columns being almost
exactly equal to an Olympic furlong (192.27 metres), it becomes prob-
able that the athletes practised running in this colonnade when the
weather was either too rainy or too hot to admit of practising imder the
open sky. The south and east colonnades are probably contemporary ;
they seem to be somewhat later than the Palaestra, and may therefore
be ascribed to the second century B.C

See Olympia : Ergebnisse^ Tafelband 2. pi. IxxviiL ; P. Graef, in Olympia :
Ergebnissey Textband 2. p. 127 sq, ; «/., in Die Ausgrahungen %u Olympia, 5
(1879-1881), p. 41 sq,y with pi. xxxvi. ; Die Funde von Olympia, p. 18 ; Curtius
und Adler, Olympia und Umgegendy p. 21 sq, ; Ad. Botticher, Olympia? p. 373
sq,\ Flasch, 'Olympia,' in ]£iumeister's Denkmaler, p. 1104P; Baedeker,' p.

349 J^-

A stately portal, mentioned by Pausanias as <* the entrance into the
gymnasium,'' led into the gymnasium from the east. It stood in the
angle between the extremities of the southern and eastern colonnades
of the gymnasium, facing the north-west gate of the Altis. Only the
foundations and pavement are standing, together with just enough of
the walls to allow us to make out the ground-plan ; but remains of the
columns, half-columns, entablature and gables have been found. The
eastern and western facades of the portal consisted respectively of four
Corinthian columns supporting an architrave and a frieze adorned with
rosettes, festoons and ox-heads carved in relief, the whole being sur-
mounted by a gable. The central portion of the structure, between the
fe^des, was flanked on the north and south by walls terminating at
their eastern and western ends in half-columns. Two rows of four or,
if we include the columns of the fa9ades, six Corinthian columns, ran



88 THE PALAESTRA bk. vi. bus

parallel to the flanking walls, dividing the portal into a broad central
passage and two narrower aisles on the north and south. The doorway
proper was in the middle of the central passage, between two short
cross -walls ending in half- columns. The columns have twenty flutes.
Their height could not be exactly determined. No traces of colour
were detected on the capitals, architrave, and frieze ; but traces of red
and blue were observed on a block of the geison. The basement which
supported the portal is raised upon three steps. Measured on the
lowest step the whole structure is 15.50 metres long by 9.81 metres
broad. The material of which the portal is constructed is mostly the
coarse shell-limestone of Olympia ; but for the steps of the two ^nts
and for the inner pavement a soft whitish-grey limestone is employed.
From the proportions and some of the details of the building (especially
the rough and hasty style in which the rosettes, festoons and ox-heads
are carved) it appears that the portal is of the Roman period ; it may
date from the end of the second or the beginning of the first century
B.C The Corinthian capitals, however, are carefully modelled and well
executed.

See Olympia: Ergebnisse^ Tafelband 2. pis. Ixxvi., Ixxvii. ; R. Bomnann, in
Olympia: Ergebnisse, Textlmnd 2. pp. 121-126; iV/., in Die Atisgralmngen zu
Olympia, 5 (1879-1881), p. 42 sg., with pl. xl. ; Flasch, 'Olympia/ in Bau-
meister's DenkmUUr, p. 1 104 P.

21. 2. another smaller enclosure etc This is the Palaestra or
Wrestling-School, immediately to the south of the great gymnasium. It
is a square measuring about 66 metres (72 yards) on each side. The
structure consists of an open square court measuring about 41 metres
on the sides and surrounded by a Doric colonnade about 4.70 metres
deep, with rooms opening off the colonnade on the west, north, and east
sides. On the south side there are no rooms opening off the colonnade,
but the colonnade is here about twice as deep as on the other three
sides and is divided into two aisles by an inner row of fifteen Ionic
columns running down its whole length from east to west. Some of
the rooms opening off the colonnade on the other three sides have
simple doorways, but most of them are entered through rows of Ionic
colunms. Five of the rooms had stone benches running roimd the
walls, and were probably used for the lectures and discussions of
philosophers and rhetoricians (cp. Vitruvius, v. 11. 2). In one of these
rooms on the west side of the court these benches still remain entire ;
in the others their former existence is proved by marks on the pave-
ment or by the stone supports which still stand in their original places.
In two of these bench-encircled rooms there are remains of altars or of
the bases of statues. In the room at the north-east comer there is a
well-preserved bath about 1.40 metres deep, its sides built of bricks.
The floor of the lecture-rooms was of concrete ; that of the other rooms
was of earth. From the central room on the north side a simple door-
way led into the great gymnasium. But the two chief entrances into
the Palaestra were at the two ends of the south side. They consist
of small vestibules entered through two Corinthian columns between



CH. XXI THE PALAESTRA 89

aniae. Thus all three Greek orders of architecture (Doric, Ionic, and
Corinthian) are represented in the Palaestra. Stone benches lined two
of the walls of each of the vestibules for the convenience of persons
passing through or waiting for admission. Each vestibule led into a
small anteroom. In the eastern of these anterooms are the founda-
tions of a hearth or altar, and the ground about it was full of ashes.
The Doric columns of the Palaestra have the slender proportions of the
later Greek architecture ; the proportion of the diameter to the height
is I :6.7. They are fluted only on the side next the court Their
capitals are very small, the abacus low, and the echinus almost straight.
The number of colunms on each side of the court was nineteen, the
comer columns being reckoned twice. Some of the Ionic columns
in the south colonnade are, like the Doric columns, fluted only on
the side next the court ; others are fluted above but unfluted below.
Many traces of colour have been observed on the capitals ; red and
dark blue are the prevailing colours. The Palaestra seems early to
have been sanded up ; hence it has been better preserved than some of
the other buildings at Olympia. Most of the columns were found just
as they had &llen. Some of them have been set up again. The lower
part (socle) of the outer walls was built of regularly hewn and accurately
jointed stones ; the upper part was probably of brick or of rubble
bonded with mortar. The roof and entablature were probably of wood,
since they have wholly disappeared. The masonry is very careful and
good ; in particular all the architectural members are finely chiselled.
To judge from its style, the Palaestra may have been built at the end
of the third or the beginning of the second century B.C The wood-
work of the building seems to have been destroyed by fire, for charred
wood and ashes were discovered in many places lying under the &llen
stones on the ancient floor.

A water-channel, supplied with water by a conduit which entered
the Palaestra near its north-east comer, ran round the four sides of the
open court In the north part of this open court there is a peculiar
pavement, the purpose of which is uncertain. The pavement is com-
posed of earthenware tiles, of which some are smooth, others are ribbed,
that is, covered with a number of small ridges arranged in straight
parallel lines close together. There are two belts of the ribbed tiles
extending east and west, each belt consisting of four rows of tiles placed
side by side. The two belts of ribbed tiles are separated by a double
row of smooth tiles, of the common roof-tile sort, that is, flat with
flanged edges. The north belt of ribbed tiles is bounded on its northern
edge by a single row of smooth tiles of the sort described. Each belt of
ribbed tiles is 1.60 metres broad; the breadth of the whole pavement
is 5.44 metres, and its length 24.20 metres.

Mr. P. Graef formerly supposed that the pavement was used for
wrestling on ; sand, he thought, was strewed on it, and the ribbed tiles
aflforded the wrestlers a firm footing. But a hard pavement is unsuit-
able for wrestling, as the Greeks themselves knew. For when the Ten
Thousand held games at Trapezus, they objected to wrestle on a hill
because the ground was hard and rough (Xenophon, Anabasis^ iv. 8. 26).



90 THE SOUTH COLONNADE bk. vi. elis

Professor Fedde's explanation of the pavement is much more plausible.
He thinks that the two belts of ribbed tiles were ^ leaping-paths,' the
ribbed tiles affording the leaper a firm footing.

See Olymfia: ErgebnUse^ Tafelband 3. pis. IxxiiU-lxxv. ; P. Graei^ in Olym-
tia: Ergebntssey Text band 2. pp. 113-121 ; l^/., in Die Ausgrabungen %u Olympia^
5 (1879-1881), p. 40 sq,y with pis. xxxriiL, xxxix. ; Die Fundc von Olympian
p. 18; Curtius und Adler, Olympia und Umgegend, p. 22 ; Ad. Botticher, Olympiad
pp. 366-373; Flasch, 'Olympia/ in Baumeisters DenkmdUry p. 1104 O sq,\
Baedeker,' p. 349 ; Fedde, Der FUnfkamp der Hellenen (Breslau, 1888), p. 13 sq.

21. 2. Abutting on the wall of the eastern colonnade of the
gynmasimn are the houses of the athletes. These houses could not
have been back to back with the colonnade, otherwise they must have
faced east, whereas Pausanias tells us that they faced south-west. We
must suppose that the houses stood in a row running north-west and
south-east, the north-west house of the row abutting on the back of the
colonnade. The houses fronted south-west, and the line of their fronts
formed an acute angle with the back wall of the colonnade. Their
remains may lie in the still unexcavated ground to the north of the Pry-
taneum. The building marked 'Roman Baths' on the plan, east of the
gynmasium and north of the Prytaneum, may have been attached to the
houses of the athletes. Cp. Flasch, < Olympia,' in Baumeister's Denk-
tnaler^ p. 11 04 P.

Before we quit Olympia to resume, with Pausanias, the itinerary
of Greece, a few words may be given to a building which he has omitted
to notice. This is the great colonnade immediately to the south
of the Coimcil House. Its ancient name is unknown ; the Germans
have called it the South Colonnade. It faced south, and was prob-
ably built for the convenience of the crowds who assembled outside
the sacred precinct between the Altis and the Alpheus. A road led
past the east end of the colonnade to the Roman triumphal gateway
of the Altis. Only the two ends of the colonnade have as yet been
excavated, but this is enough to allow us to determine its plan and
dimensions. Raised on a basement of three steps of white limestone,
very carefully wrought and jointed, the colonnade measured 80.65
metres in length from east to west by 14.08 metres in depth from north
to south. The foundations of the steps are built very carefully and
durably of < headers and stretchers,' i,e, of blocks laid lengthwise and
crosswise in alternate courses. The blocks of each course are bonded
together with iron clamps of the ^^ shape, run with lead ; and they
are attached to the blocks of the next course by dowels. On three sides
(west, south, and east) the colonnade was open ; on the north side it was
closed by a wall. The outer columns were of the Doric order ; there
were thirty-four of them on the long south front and six at each of the
narrow east and west ends. The distance between each pair of colunms,
measured from axis to axis, was 2.38 metres on the south front, but
2.40 metres on east and west ends. The echinus of the capitals is
straight, and there are four rings under the neck. In each of the
drums of the columns there are two holes for dowels, which were nm



CH. XXI THE SOUTH COLONNADE 91

with lead. The Doric entablature, comprising as usual an architrave
and a triglyph frieze, is hewn out of a brownish and rather soft sand-
stone which is quarried near Olympia. The roof ended in gables at the
east and west ends. The sima or overhanging edge of the roof is of
terra-cotta ; its decoration, which includes a scroll and a maeander
pattern, with lions' heads projecting as gargoyles at intervals, is an
inferior copy of the sitna of die Leonidaeum, with which it agrees in
dimensions as well as in pattern. In the interior of the colonnade a
row of seventeen Corinthian colunms, set at wide intervals which do not
correspond to those of the outer Doric columns, extended along the
whole length of the building and served to support the roof. The bases
of these Corinthian columns are low and ugly ; the number of flutes of
each column is twenty ; the capitals are of very unequal workmanship,
some being very rough and hasty, others more careful in style.

The date of the colonnade can be determined only from its style.
It belongs to the later group of buildings of which the Leonidaeum is
the earliest example. Amongst the marks of a late date are the low
capitals with their straight lifeless echinus, and the negligent style of
the decoration of the sima. The building apparently dates from the
third or second century B.a This does not, however, apply to the
Corinthian coliunns of the interior, which are clearly still later. Their
capitals exhibit all the characteristics of the age of Hadrian, and their
drums are fastened together quite differently from the drums of the outer
Doric columns. It is possible that these Corinthian columns replaced
an original row of wooden supports which had decayed through time.

See Olympia: Ergebnissey Tafelband i. pis. lix.-lxL ; id,^ Tafelband 2. pL
cxxiii. ; R. Borrmann, in Olympia : Ergebmsse^ Textband 2. pp. 79-83 ; Die AuS'
grabungen zu Olympia^ 4 (1878-1879), p. 50 sq,^ with pi. xxxix. ; id,, $ (1879-
1881), p. 31 ; Die Funde von Olympia, p. 20; Curtius und Adler, Olympia und
Umgtgend, p. 85 ; Ad. Botticher, Olympia,'^ p. 398 ; Flasch, ' Olympia,* in
Baumeister's Denkmdler, p. 1 104 K ; Baedeker,' p. 347.

21. 3. the bonndaries between Arcadia and Elis etc. Pausanias
has now finished his long description of Olympia and resiunes his
itinerary. He continues the route from Heraea in Arcadia to Olympia,
which in his account of Arcadia he carries from Heraea as far as
the Erymanthus and the boundary between Arcadia and Elis (see viii.
26. 3). It is worthy of note how often Pausanias carries his itinerary of
a route up to the border of the province he is describing, then drops it,
but only to resume and continue it across the border when he comes to
deal with the next province. For other examples compare ii. 25. i sqq,
with viii. 6. 4 sqq, ; ii. 38. 7 with iii. 10. 6 ; iii. 26. 11 and iv. i. i with
iv. 30. I ; iv. 36. 7 with v. 5. 3 (see the Critical Note on the latter
passage, vol. i. p. 583) ; vi. 26. 10 with vii. 17. 5. This piecing together
of the routes, this picking up of the thread of description exactly at the
point where the plan of his book had compelled him to drop it, shows
how carefully Pausanias planned and edited his work.

Supposing himself to be coming from Heraea in Arcadia, Pausanias
now crosses the Erymanthus at its junction with the Alpheus and pur-



92 ERYMANTHUS—DIAGON bk. vi. elis

sues his route westward down the valley of the Alpheus in the direction
of Olympia.

21. 3. Across the river Erymanthus at the ridge of

Sanrus. The Erymanthus, descending from the lofty mountains of north-
western Arcadia, flows between hills into the broad open valley of the
Alpheus and joins that river on its northern bank. At its junction with
the Alpheus it flows over gravel between abrupt cliffs of pudding-stone.
Its water, seen at least from the southern side of the wide valley on a sunny
day, is of a bright blue colour. After fording the river and climbing the
farther bank, the path leads through open pastures, and then, to avoid
a great bend of the river, ascends a pass or col to the north of the hills
of Aspra Spitia (a modem village). This pass would seem to be what
Pausanias calls the ridge of Saurus. It is a wooded gorge, in which fine
oaks and pines, now singly now in clumps, are scattered in wild variety.
When we have reached the summit and begin to descend again towards
the Alpheus, a series of magniflcent views of the river winding between
wooded hills opens up before us.

See Boblaye, Recherchcs^ p. ia8; W. G. Clark, Peloponnesus^ p. 264;
Baedeker,' p. 313.

21. 4. DiagoxL This is now the Tzemberoula river ; it flows into
the Alpheus from the south exactly opposite the Erymanthus on the
north, as Pausanias says (Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 128). Beyond this
meeting of waters the valley of the Alpheus assumes a softer and gayer
aspect Moderate heights rise on the right bank, their gentle slopes
thickly wooded with trees and shrubs of the most varied sorts. Pine-
trees, maples, planes, and tall lentisk bushes succeed each other,
varied here and there by fields and green pastures. Across the
Alpheus lie the beautiful wooded hills of Triphylia, where many a
picturesque village is seen nestling among pine woods, and many a
height, crowned by church or ruins, stands out abruptly and precipitously
above the river. The whole country, with its woods and streams, and
the broad river flowing majestically through the middle of the landscape,
is like a great park. The illusion, however, is broken by the path,
which scrambles up hill and down dale, struggles through thickets, and
splashes through streams and torrents, in a &shion which resembles
anything rather than the trim, well-kept walks and avenues of an Eng-
lish park. Such is the scenery and such the path by which Pausanias
is now moving westward towards Olympia.

See Welcker, Tagebucht I. p. 281 sq, ; Vischer, Erinnerungenund Eindriickt^
pp. 461, 463 ; W. G. Clark, Peloponnesus ^ p. 264 sqq, ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 316.

Dio Chrysostom has described {Or, i. vol. i. p. 1 1 j^. ed. Dindorf)
how he lost his way in this charming country and fell in wnth an old
dame of the Meg Merrilies type who professed to have the gift of second
sight He says : " Going on foot from Heraea to Pisa by the side ot
the Alpheus, I was able, up to a certain point, to make out the path.
But by and by I found myself in a forest and on broken ground, with
many tracks leading to sheepfolds and cattle-pens. And meeting with



CH. XXI LEUCYANIAS—PHRIXA 93

no one of whom I could ask the way I strayed from the path and
wandered up and down. It was high noon ; and seeing on a height a
clump of oaks, as it might be a grove, I betook myself thither, in the
hope that from thence I might spy some path or house. Here then I
found stones piled carelessly together, and skins of sacrificed animals
hanging up, with clubs and staves, the offerings, as I supposed, of
shepherds ; and a little way off, seated on the groimd, was a tall and
stalwart dame, somewhat advanced in years, in rustic attire, with long
grey hair. Of her I asked what these things might be. She answered,
very civilly, in a broad Doric accent, that the spot was sacred to
Hercules, and as for herself, she had a son a shepherd and often
minded the sheep herself; that by the grace of the Mother of the Gods
she had the gift of second sight, and all the herdsmen and farmers of
the neighbourhood came to ask her about their crops and cattle."

21. 4. a temple of AesctQapius. This would seem to have stood
on a hill which rises on the right (north) bank of the Alpheus, a little to
the west of the village of Louvrou, The path to Olympia runs at the
foot of the hill, between it and the river. See Curtius und Kaupert,
Olympia und Umgegend^ Map i.

21. 5. a river Leucyanias. Leake (Morea^ 2. p. 210) identified
this with the torrent of BakireikOy which descends from the woody
heights of Lola and joins the Alpheus, to the west of the khan of
J/(W//7V? (* mulberry tree*), nearly opposite Palaeo-Phanaro, But it is
perhaps rather the stream which descends from below the hamlet of
Nemouta and, after a course of five miles, joins the Alpheus to the east
of Mouria, This is the view of Boblaye {Recherches^ p. 128), Curtius
{Pelop. 2. p. 50), and Kaupert (Curtius und Adler, Olympia und Umge-
gendy Map. i.)

21. 5. you will cross the Alpheus and be in the territory of
Pisa. Pausanias has been pursuing the regular route to Olympia on
the right (north) bank of the Alpheus. He now crosses over to the
left (south) bank to visit Phrixa. As he has told us (§4) that the
Diagon, falling into the Alpheus from the south, formed the boundary
between Arcadia and Pisa, we knew already that the territory of Pisa
extended to the south of the Alpheus. There is therefore nothing to
surprise us in the statement that, crossing to the left bank of the Alpheus
at Phrixa, the traveller finds himself in the territory of Pisa. But what
is surprising is the seeming implication that the territory which the
traveller has just quitted on the north bank of the Alpheus did not
belong to Pisa. For from another passage (viii. 26. 3) it appears that
all the district west of the Erymanthus belonged to Elis, that is (in
former days) to Pisa. Perhaps, however, all that Pausanias means is
that after crossing to the left of the Alpheus the traveller will still be in
Pisan territory. But if that had been his meaning, we should have ex-
pected him to say koX kvrhs yyyi &rQ <€ti> t^s Xlto-aias. See Critical
Note, vol. I. p. 589.

21. 6. Phrixa. This town occupied the singular conical mountain
on the south bank of the Alpheus, which forms a conspicuous object
viewed both from the neighbourhood of Olympia and from the side of



94 PHRIXA — HARPINA bk. vi. elis

Heraea. Its steep wooded sides rise picturesquely from the bed of the
river. The modem village of Palaeo-Phanaro stands on the south-
eastern slope of the hill. An hour's climb from the bed of the Alpheus
up a narrow and dangerous path, hemmed in between the precipitous
banks of the river on one side and rugged rocks on the other, takes us
to the top. Here, in the early part of the century, some large square
blocks still marked the site of Phrixa. The ancient remains are now
reduced to a single cistern. The prospect from the hill-top embraces
the green, rolling hills of Pisa, the Alpheus meandering through the
plain of Olympia, and on the western horizon a streak of the Ionian
Sea.

According to Stephanus Byzantius {s,v, ^pt^a^ cp. s,v, Ma#curro$),
Phrixa lay 30 furlongs from Olympia. In reality the distance is
35. It was said to be one of the towns founded by the Minyans
when they were expelled from Laconia (Herodotus, iv. 148). The
Eleans were forced by the Spartans to grant Phrixa its freedom in
399 B.C. (Xenophon, I/ellemcaj iii. 2. 30). The town is mentioned by
Polybius (iv. yy and 80).

See Dodwell, Tcur thrtmgh Greece^ 2. p. 340 sqq, ; Boblaye, Recherckes^ p.
136 j^. ; Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 210; Curtius, Pehp, 2. p. 90; Bursian, Gtogr. 2.
p. 286 ; Baedeker,' p. 312.

21. 6. Clymenns. Cp. v. 8. i ; v. 14. 8.

21. 6. the river Jardanns. Homer speaks of the Cydonians who
dwelt about the streams of the Jardanus in Crete (Odyssey^ iii. 292).
The name Jardanus is identical with the Semitic Jordan. It is natural
to find the Semitic river-name in Crete, where Phoenician influence
must have been strong. We have already seen (v. 5. 9 note) that
Jardanus was the old name of a river in Elis, which in like manner
points to Phoenician influence in the west of Greece. See Olshausen,
in Rheinisches Museum^ N.F. 8 (1853), p. 324 sq,

21. 7. the water of Parthenias. We must assume that, after
visiting Phrixa on the left bank of the Alpheus, Pausanias recrosses to
the right bank and pursues his way westward along it The Parthenias
is probably the torrent of Bakireika^ to the west of the khan of Mouria,
See note on § 5, "a river Leucyanias." It is so identified by Boblaye
{Recherches^ p. 129), Curtius {Pelop, 2. p. 50), and Kaupert (Curtius
und Adlcr, Olympia und Umgegend^ Map i.) Leake, however, identified
it with the stream which joins the Alpheus to the east of Miraka {Moreay
2. p. 211; see note on § 8). Strabo mentions the Parthenias (viii.
p. 357). Note that while the name of the mare was Parthenia, the
name of the river was Parthenias. In the translation the name of the
river should be corrected accordingly.

21. 8. the Harpinates Harpina. From the order in which

Pausanias mentions the river and the town, we infer that the ruins of
the latter were to the west of the river. Considerable remains of walls,
supposed to be those of Harpina, were seen by Major Harriott in 1831,
on the river of Miraka^ a little to the north of the village of that name.
This would agree fairly with Lucian's statement that Harpina was 20



CH. XXII PISA 95

furlongs to the east of Olympia, as you went by the hippodrome. It
was at Harpina that the mountebank Peregrinus is said to have publicly
burned himself upon an immense pile of wood.. See Lucian, De morte
Peregriniy 35 sq. Cp. also Strabo, viii. p. 357 ; Stephanus Byzantius,
s.v, 'ApfTTiva,

See Boblaye, RechercheSf p. 129 (who looks for Harpina near the village of
Vtltta); Leake, Aforea, 2. p. 21 1 ; id,, Peiopcnnesiaca, p. 7.\%\Joum€Uofthe
Royal Geographical Society, London, 5 (1835), p. 366; Curtius, Pelop. 2. p. 50;
Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 287. As to Harpina, mother of Oenomaus, see v. 22. 6.

21. 9. the grave of the suitors of Hippodaxnia. This is identified
with an eminence called the Suitors' Hill beside the Alpheus, about a
mile or more to the west of the hamlet of Saraki, It is on the left of
the path as you go to Olympia. See Baedeker,^ p. 313; Curtius und
Adler, Olympia und Umgegend, Map i. Lists of the suitors of Hippo-
damia are g^ven by scholiasts on Pindar (fllymp, i. 114 and 127).
They agree only partially with that of Pausanias.

22. I. the kordax, a dance in vogue among the people of Mount
Sipylus. The kordax, as danced by the mountaineers of Mt Sipylus,
was probably one of those wild religious dances which are common in
the East. Transferred to the stage it became a mere ballet. Cp. Prof.
W. M. Ramsay, va Journal of Hellenic Studies, 3 (1882), p. 54.

22. I. a bronze coffer wherein the bones of Pelops are preserved.
Cp. V. 13. 4-6. According to Pliny (A''. H, xxviil 34) the famous ivory
shoulder-blade of Pelops was shown at Elis. If we may believe the
historian Dionysius of Miletus (referred to by Clement of Alexandria,
Protrept, iv. 47, p. 42, ed. Potter), the Palladium was made of the
bones of Pelops. The bones of other famous men have been supposed
to act as talismans, ensuring the safety of the land in which they are
laid. See note on viii. 47. 5, "some of the hair of Medusa."

22. I. vines were planted over all the ground where Pisa once
stood. No remains of Pisa have been found in modem times. But as
we infer from Pausanias's description that it lay to the east of Olympia,
and as the distance, according to a scholiast on Pindar {fll, xL 51), was
6 furlongs, we can fm its site with tolerable certainty. It probably
stood on the eastern side of the brook of Miraka, where it falls into the
Alpheus. Here an isolated height rises up, closing the valley of Olympia
on the east. It may have been the acropolis of Pisa. The path from
the valley of the Alpheus to the neighbouring village of Miraka skirts
the northern foot of the height That Pisa was close to Olympia may
be inferred from Pindar, who uses the two names as synonymous ; and
Herodotus (ii. 7) speaks of Olympia and Pisa as the same place when
he says that it was 1485 furlongs "from the altar of the Twelve Gods
at Athens to Pisa and the temple of Olympian Zeus." According to
Polemo (cited by a scholiast on Pindar, OL i. 28) Pisa was " a place in
Elis surrounded by high banks." Strabo tells us (viii. p. 356) that the
site of Pisa was pointed out on a height between two mountains called
respectively (like the two Thessalian mountains) Ossa and Olympus.
From the eminence, just to the south of the village of Miraka, on which



96 PISA — DATE OP PHIDON bk. vi. rlis

the citadel of Pisa may have stood, a beautiful view is to be had of the
whole plain of Olympia. '* The eye embraces the broad and sinuous
course of the Alpheus, with the green and finely feathered hills, decorated
with the el^ant umbrella pine and flowering evergreens. Another view
towards the east overlooks a variegated valley bounded by the Elean
hills, surmounted by the loftier sununits of Arcadia, from whose seques-
tered labyrinths the Alpheus is seen eliciting its yeUow current, which
glides in a broad channel, along the projecting base of a pointed hill,
where the ruins of Phrixa meet the eye" (Dodwell, Tour^ 2. p. 338).
Some traces of ancient walls have been observed at the foot of the
height, beside the Alpheus, especially at the place called Franconisi,

Some people in antiquity derived the name of the city from a fountain
called Pisa ; others denied that there ever had been such a city at all,
maintaining that the name Pisa had always designated only the fountain
(Strabo, viii. p. 356). In Strabo's time the fountain was called Bisa,
and was pointed out near the town of Cicysium. The brook of Mtraka
is formed by the union of two arms which descend from the hills and
meet in a pool, whence the united stream flows between steep slopes of
earth to join the Alpheus. Its water is copious and clear as crystal.
Where it crosses the road to Olympia it forms a natural basin, now
called Bakalu Curtius believed that this basin was the fountain
or water-basin {Kpt\vy\) from which, according to some, the city took its
name.

See Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 211 sq, ; id,^ Pehfxmnenaca, p. 6 sq. ; Boblaye»
Recherches, p. 126 sq. ; Curtius, Pelop, 2. p. 51 ; i</., reported \n Berliner philoUg,
Wochenschrifi, 14 (1894), p. 448, and xnjahrbuch d, arch, Inst, 9 (1894), Archao-
logischer Anzeiger, p. 41 ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 289 sq, ; Baedeker,' p. 313 ;
Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 317.

22. 2. in the eighth Olympiad they called in the Argive Phidon.
The eighth Olympiad fell in 748 B.C. Herodotus says (vi. 127) that
Phidon's son was one of the suitors of Agariste, daughter of Clisthenes,
tyrant of Sicyon. This would make Phidon a contemporary of Clis-
thenes who flourished in the first quarter of the sixth century B.c.
There is thus a discrepancy of over 150 years between the dates
assigned to him by Pausanias and Herodotus respectively. The historians
Thirlwall, Clinton, K. O. Miiller, Grote, Duncker, Holm, and Th.
Reinach accept the earlier date assigned to Phidon by Pausanias. On
the other hand, the numismatists, Prof Gardner and Mr. Head, incline
to accept the Herodotean date of Phidon. For Phidon appears to have
been the first to coin money in Greece (Pollux, ix. 83 ; Etymolog,
Magnum^ p. 613 s,v, 6^M.crK0% ; Strabo, viii. p. 358 ; M armor Parium^
line 45 5q\ and the evidence of the early Greek coins is in fevour of
the later date assigned to Phidon by Herodotus. Others have supposed
that there were two tyrants of Argos named Phidon. Some have
altered the text of Pausanias to reconcile him to Herodotus ; while on
the other hand others have altered the text of Herodotus to reconcile
him to Pausanias.

See Clinton, Fasti Hellenici^ I. p. 247 sqq, ; Thirlwall, Hist, of Greece^ i.
p. 408 sq, ; Grote, Hist, of Greece^ 2. p. 315 sq, ; K. O. MUller, Dorier,'^ i.



CH. XXII DYSPONTIUM—PYLUS 97



p. 157 ; DUncker, Gesch, d, Alterthums^ 5. p. 384 j^^. ; Busolt, Gritck, Geschkhte,
I.' p. 611 sqq,\ Holm, Griech. Geschichte^ I. pp. 244, 255 sq, ; Curtius, Griech,
Geschichte,'^ I. p. 660 sq, ; Gardner, Types of Greek coins^ p. 6 sq, ; Head, Historia
Numorum, p. 331 ; Hultsch, Metrologie^^ p. 521 ; Mahlv, in Rheinisches
Museum^ N.F. 9 (1854), pp. 614-616; G. F. Unger, 'Die Zeitverhaltnisse
Pheidons/ i'/iiA?/?^, 28 (1869), pp. 399-424; ib, 29 (1870), pp. 245-273; W.
Ridgeway, The origin of metallic currency and weight standards (Cambridge,
1892), p. 211 sqq, ; Exl. Meyer, Gesch. d, Alterthums, 2. p. 544 sqq, ; J. Beloch,
Griechische Geschichte^ I. p. 282; Th. Reinach, 'Le date de Pneidon,' Revue
Numismatique, 3me SiSrie, 12 (1894), pp. 1-8.

That Phidon on one occasion took the conduct of the Olympic
festival out of the hands of the Eleans and celebrated it himself is
related also by Herodotus (vi. 127) and Strabo (viii. p. 358), but
they do not mention the number of the Olympiad.

22. 3. These Olympiads, together with the hnndred and fourth
etc. According to Pausanias, 01. 8 (748 B.C.), OL 34 (644 B.c), and
OL 104 (364 B.C.), were not celebrated by the Eleans, the two former
being celebrated by the Pisans, the last by the Arcadians (see vi. 4. 2
note ; vi. 8. 3). On the other hand, Strabo says (viii. p. 355) that the
Eleans presided over the games for the first twenty-six Olympiads ; but
that after 01. 26 (676 B.c.) the Pisans got the management of the
festival into their own hands till the fall of Pisa. Eusebius, like Strabo,
takes no notice of the celebration of 01. 8 by the Pisans, but says that
they celebrated OL 28 (668 B.C.), OL 30 (660 B.C.), and OL 104
(364 B.C.) See Eusebius, Chronic, voL i. pp. 198, 206, ed. Schone.
Cp. Busolt, Griech. Geschichie, i.^ p. 615 note 2.

22. 4. Macistns. See note on v. 6. i.

22. 4. Dyspontitun. This town was in the plain, on the road
from Elis to Olympia. In Strabo's time it was deserted ; most of the
inhabitants had emigrated to Epidamnus and Apollonia (Strabo, viiL
P- 357)- Cp. Stephanus Byzant. s.v. AvcrTrovrtov. Leake thought that
Dyspontium was probably situated "at the foot of the hills between
Paledpoli {Elis) and the ridge (ending in Cape Ichthys) which separates
the plain of Gastuni from that of Pyrgo" (Morea, 2. p. 193). Boblaye
thought that the ruins near the village of Mertia or Myrtia (situated on
the south side of the ridge mentioned by Leake) might be those of
Dyspontium {Recherches^ p. 131). Prof. Curtius conjectures that the
modem town of Pyrgos may occupy the site of Dyspontium (Curtius
und Adler, Olympia^ p. 8). Prof. Curtius's former conjecture that
Dyspontium might be at Skaphidi seems inadmissible, as that village
lies too far west of the road from Olympia to Elis (Curtius, Pelop, 2.

p. 73).

22. 4. Pisa and all the towns were destroyed etc. This

seems to have happened in or soon after OL 52. i (572 B.C.) (Clinton,
Fasti Helleniciy i. p. 236; Curtius, Griech. Gesch.^ i. p. 217; Busolt,
Griechische Geschichtey i.^ p. 239).

22. 5. Pylus in Elis. Pausanias tells us that the Elean Pylus was
80 furlongs from Elis, and at the junction of the Ladon with the
Peneus. (This tributary of the Peneus is, of course, not to be con-
founded with the more famous Ladon, the tributary of the Alpheus.)

VOL. IV H



98 PYLUS—LASION bk. vi. elis

The distance of Pylus from Elis is given by Diodorus (xiv. 17) as
70 furlongs, and by Pliny {Nat. hist, iv. 14) as 12 or 13 Roman
miles (the reading of the MSS. of Pliny varies between xii. and
xiii.) The description of Pausanias seems to show that Pylus must
have been situated near the modem village of Agrapidachori, The
village stands on a wooded hill on the left bank of the Peneus, at the
point where it is joined by a river from the south. This tributary is
probably the Ladon. Its delta contains some traces of an ancient
town, probably those of Pylus. Leake and Boblaye, however, identified
Pylus with some ruins near the village of Koulougli^ about 5 miles
higher up the valley of the Ladon. Here, on the summit of a height
about a mile to the east of the village, are remains of massy walls, built
of rough fragments of stone mixed with mortar. An ancient fortress
seems to have stood here, but it was rebuilt in the Middle Ages.
Between the height and the river is a small cultivated plain. More
probably, however, the ruins near Koulougli are those of Oenoe (or
Boenoa, as the natives called it), which Strabo identified with the
Homeric Ephyra on the river Selleeis. For Strabo, as emended by
Meineke, says that Oenoe was 120 furlongs from Elis on the way to
Lasion, and this is exactly the distance of the ruins at Koulougli from
Elis. This Ephyra was the seat of Augeas, king of the Epeans, whose
daughter Agamede was skilled in all drugs. See Strabo, vii. p. 328,
viii. p. 338 ; Homer, Iliad^ ii. 659, xi. 740 sq, ; Odyssey^ i. 259 (with
Mr. Merr/s note), ii. 328 sq. On this hypothesis the Ladon was the
Homeric Selleeis. The scenery of the district for a good many miles
in all directions is rich and pleasantly diversified. Low wooded hills,
clothed chiefly with pines, rise out of luxuriant valleys, watered by
winding streams, and interspersed with villages.

See Leake, Morea^ I. p. 3 sq,^ 2. p. 226 sqq, ; id,^ Pelopanntsiaca^ p. 219;
Boblaye, Rechtrches^ P* 122 sq. ; Curtius, Ptlop. 2. p. 39 sq. ; Bursian, Geogr. 2.
p. 306 J^. ; Baedeker,^ p. 333.

Pausanias has omitted to mention an ancient town that lay in the
wild upper valley of the Peneus, in the heart of the Elean highlands,
not far from the Arcadian frontier. This was Lasion, a place which,
from its proximity to the Arcadian boundary, was the subject of border
feuds, the Arcadians claiming possession of it, though in fact it appears
to have belonged properly to Elis. It changed hands several times in
the fifth, fourth, and third centuries B.C. See Xenophon, Hellenica^ iii.
2. 30, vii. 4. 12 ; Diodorus, xiv. 17, xv. ^^ ; Strabo, viii. p. 338. The
ruins of this secluded little town were discovered by G. F. Welcker in
1842 near Koumani^ a village at the head waters of the Peneus. They
may be visited on the way from Olympia to Psophis, though the visit
necessitates a short detour to the west. The route first follows the
valley of the Cladeus through soft woodland scenery of the richest and
most charming kind, between low hills crowned with clumps of pines.
Then, still following the glen of the Cladeus, we ascend through
romantically beautiful forests of pines and ancient oaks, and emerge on
a wide breezy tableland, backed on the north by the high mountains of



CH. XXII LASION 99

northern Arcadia. In the middle of the plateau, which is open and
well cultivated, lies the scattered village of Lola. Crossing the northern
end of the tableland, which is here carpeted with ferns, we again ascend
a steep slope, and find ourselves on a still higher tableland, covered
with fine oak forests. After traversing the forest for some time we quit
the path to Psophis, which continues to run northward, and take a path
which strikes westward. The time from Lola to the parting of the
ways is about two hours. Another half-hour's ride through the forest,
which grows denser as we advance, brings us to Koumani^ a trim well-
to-do village, beautifully situated among oak-woods. The time from
Olympia is about six hours.

The ruins of Lasion, now called Koutiy are to the north of the
village, apparently on the same level with it, but a profound ravine
divides them from the village, and half-an-hour's laborious descent and
ascent of its steep sides are needed to bring us to the ruins. The site
is an exceedingly strong one. Two tributaries of the Peneus, coming
from the higher mountains to the north-east, flow in deep ravines, which
meet at an acute angle. Between them stretches a long, comparatively
narrow ridge or tongue of land, which on three sides falls steeply down
to the glens ; only on the east the ascent is gentle. The top of the
ridge is quite flat, and well adapted to be the site of a city. At one
point it narrows to a mere isthmus or neck which divides the level
summit into two parts, an eastern and a western. The western and
smaller part measures about no paces in length and half that in
breadth ; it was doubtless the ancient citadel. A finely-built wall of
ashlar masonry, extending across the narrowest point of the neck,
divides the citadel from the rest of the city. In the citadel there is a
ruined church of St. Demetrius, and on its extreme western edge the
ruins of a square Greek tower. At other points also ancient walls may
be observed.

The eastern and larger part of the ridge is more or less covered
with ruins, of which two groups may be distinguished. At the west end
are the foundations of a small square building between two long walls
which run at an oblique angle towards each other. The foundations,
lying east and west, may be those of a temple within a sacred precinct.
More towards the middle of the plateau, but nearer its southern than its
northern edge, lie five considerable ruins close to each other. Two of
them are foundations of small quadrangular buildings lying east
and west They were probably temples. Among the ruins \^scher
observed a fragment of an Ionic column and several pieces of an entab-
lature. Finally, at the eastern end of the ridge, where the ascent is
easiest, a very fine piece of the city wall is still standing. Square
towers, about 7 feet broad, project from it at intervals. Walls and
towers are built of well and regularly cut blocks ; the masonry resembles
that of Messene. There seem to be no traces of fortification-walls on
any other side of the plateau ; perhaps none existed, the inhabitants
thinking the deep ravines a sufficient defence.

The situation of Lasion is not only strong but beautiful. Tall
plane-trees overhang the streams in the deep glens £ar below the ruins.



xoo HERACLEA — LETRINI bk. vi. elis

To the north and north-east rises at no great distance the grand and
massive range of Mount Erymanthus ; while westward the view extends,
between the heights that hem in the narrow valley of the Peneus, away
over the lowlands of Elis to the distant sea.

See Welcker, Tagehtuh^ i. pp. 285-289 ; Curtius, Pelop, 2. p. 41 ; Vischer,
Erinnerungen und Eindriiche^ pp. 473-476 ; Bursian, Gtogr, 2. p. 306 sq, ; Guide-
Joanne^ 2. p. 362 sq, *

22. 5. Pylon, son of Oleson. See iv. 36. i, where Pausanias calls
him Pylus.

22. 6. a verse of Homer. See Iliad^ v. 544 sq.

22. 7. Heradea. According to Strabo (viii. p. 356) Heraclea was dis-
tant about 40 furlongs from Olympia. He, like Pausanias, mentions the
river Cytherus, the sanctuary of the loniad (^V) nymphs, and their heal-
ing waters. The site of Heraclea is conjectured to be near Brouma^ a
village on the hills about 5 miles north-west of Olympia. The stream
which runs past it to join the Alpheus would then be the Cytherus.
Leake identified Heraclea with the modem Strephi^ a village to the
south of Brouma. But Strephi could hardly be said to be on the hill
road to Elis which Pausanias is now describing See Leake, Morea^ 2.
p. 192 j^. ; Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 129 ; Curtius, Pelop, 2. p. 72 ;
Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 288. For other healing waters, with their kindly
nymphs, see v. 5. 11. Pliny has a long dissertation on medicinal waters
{Nat, hisL xxxi. 4 sqq,") Hercules seems to have been especially
associated with warm or healing springs. See Diodorus, v. 3. 4 ;
Preller, Griech. Mythologies 2. p. 269. This was the point of Jugurtha's
exclamation when they thrust him down into the cold clammy dungeon,
" Hercules, how cold your bath is !" (Plutarch, Marius^ 12).

22. 7. GargettUB. There was an Attic township of this name
(Stephanus Byz. s.v, ra/jycrros).

22. 8. to Elis by the plahL The road to Elis by the plain, as
distinguished by the road across the hills (§ 5), seems to have been 'the
Sacred Way.' See v. 25. 7. It must have descended the vale of the
Alpheus into the plain of Pyrgos^ and thence have skirted the foot of
the hills to Elis. The distance is 3 or 4 miles greater than across the
hills. See Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 187.

22. 8. LetrinL This is supposed to have been situated at the
village and monastery of St. John (Hagios Joannes\ which stand at the
southern foot of an isolated range of heights, 3 miles to the west of
PyrgoSy on the way to the port of Katakolo, Here have been found
ancient wells, fragments of columns, and walls built of squared stones
coated with stucco. The salt-water lagoon of Mouria, which stretches
to the south of the village for about 4 miles, has probably absorbed in
itself the small lake of which Pausanias speaks (§ 11).

See Leake, Morea, 2. p. 187 sq. ; Boblaye, Recherches, p. 130 sq. ; Curtius,
Pehp. 2. p. 73 ; Bursian, Geogr. 2. p. 289 ; Curtius und Adler, Olympia und
Umgegend, p. 7 ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 333.

22. 8. Alpheaean Artemis. Strabo (viii. p. 343) speaks of the
sacred grove of this goddess at the mouth of the Alpheus, 80 furlongs



CH. xxixx CITY OF BUS loi

from Olympia. In her sanctuary there were paintings by two Corinthian
artists, Cleanthes and Aregon. One painting represented Artemis soar-
ing on the back of a griffin. In another painting, by Cleanthes, Zeus
was depicted in the pangs of childbirth, bringing forth Athena, while
Poseidon offered him a tunny-fish. See Athenaeus, viii. p. 346 b c,
compared with Strabo, Lc, As to Alpheaean Artemis, cp. schoL on
Pindar, Pyth, ii. 12, and Nem, i. 3. Cp. v. 14. 6; Preller, Crieck,
Mythologies^ i. p. 309 sq,

22. 9. daubed mud on her own &ce. The myth may have origin-
ated in a practice, observed by her worshippers, of smearing their
foces with mud at one of her rites. The custom was practised at some
Bacchic and purificatory rites (Demosthenes, De corona^ P* 3 1 3 > Lobeck,
AglaophtimuSy p. 653 sqq^ It is also practised by savages at their
initiatory rites. See Andrew Lang, Custom and Myth^ p. 40 ; and for
the same custom among South African tribes, see the Rev. James
Macdonald, Light in Africa^ p. 157 ; iV£, m Journal of the Anthropolo-
gical Institute^ 19 (1890), p. 268.

22. II. called Artemis Elaphiaean from the hunting of the deer.
On the relation of Artemis to deer, see Stephani, in Compte Rendu (St.
Petersburg), for 1868, pp. 7-30. He enumerates a few vases, coins, etc.,
on which Artemis is represented riding on a deer or stag. Much more
commonly, as in the frieze of the temple of Apollo at Bassae, she is
portrayed driving in a car drawn by two or four deer or stags. See
Miiller-Wieseler, Denktndler^ i. pi. xxviii. No. 123 b; 2. pi. xvi. Nos.
171, 171 a, 171 b; Baumeister's Denkmdler^ fig. 1465 ; A. H. Smith,
Catalogue of Sculpture in Brit, Museum^ i. p. 280. Hence at the festival
of Artemis at Patrae the priestess, who probably represented the goddess,
drove in a chariot to which deer were yoked (Paus. viL 18. 12). In
the sanctuary of Demeter and Proserpine at Lycosura, Artemis was
represented clad in a deer-skin (viii. 37. 4). In Corcyra many terra-
cotta figurines have recently been discovered, which appear to have
been votive offerings in a temple of Artemis. Many of these figurines
represent the goddess with a stag or, still oftener, a doe in her arms
or at her side. See Lechat, *Terres cuites de Corcyra,' Bulletin de
Corresp, helldnique^ 15 (1891), pp. 1-112, with plates iii.-viii. Deer
were sometimes sacrificed to Artemis. See vii. 18. 12 and note on x.
32. 16. Cp. A. B. Cook, \n Journal of Hellenic Studies^ 14 (1894), p.
134^^7.

23. I. the city of Ells. The northern part of the province of Elis
consists of a level coast-land in the west and a hilly region in the east.
This hilly region was known in antiquity as Acroria (* highlands') ; the
level coast-land was called * Hollow Elis,' though this name seems to
have been extended so as to include the whole northern part of Elis,
highlands and lowlands alike. See Curtius, Pelop. 2. pp. 20, 96 sq. ;
Bursian, Geogr, 2. pp. 275, 301. (For the name * Hollow Elis,* see
v. 16. 6 ; Strabo, viii. p. 336; Thucydides, iL 55. For the name
Acroria, see Diodorus, xiv. 17 ; Xenophon, Hellenica, iii. 2. 30, iv. 2.
16, vii. 4. 14.)

The city of Elis stood on the border between these two districts, on



loa CITY OF ELIS bk. vi. elis

the edg^ of the plain where the river Peneus issues from the hills. The
village of PcUaeopolis (*old city'), at the south-western foot of the hills,
a mile or more to the south of the river, occupies the site, or part of
the site, of the ancient Elis. Between the village and the river rises
the ancient acropolis, a hill about 460 feet high, conspicuous by its
peaked form and by a ruined Prankish tower which crowns its summit.
This hill is now called Kaloskopi (* fair view ') ; the Venetians called it
Belvedere,

The ancient remains of Elis are insignificant. They consist of
several masses of Roman brick and mortar, with many wrought blocks
of stone and fragments of sculpture scattered over a space of two or
three miles in circumference. The most remarkable of the ruins is a sort
of tower or square building measuring about 20 feet on the outside, which
within is in the form of an octagon with niches. Like most of the other
remains it is built of alternate courses of Roman brick and rubble. It
is said that towards the end of last century some statues were excavated
in the soil below the niches. The foundations of the Prankish castle
on the acropolis are built of the large squared blocks of the ancient city.
It is possible that in the plain many ancient remains may be buried, as
formerly at Olympia, under a deposit of alluvial soiL Excavations
might prove fruitful.

See Dodwell, Tour^ 2. p. 316 sq, ; Leake, Aforea, i. p. 4 sg^, ; id,, 2. p. 219
sqg. ; Boblaye, Recherches, p. 122 ; Curtlus, Pelop, 2. p. 22 sgq, ; Bursian, Gtogr,
2. p. 301 sgg, ; Baedeker,' p. 333; Guide-Joanne, 2. p. 331 sg.

Strabo says (viii. p. 337) that the Peneus flowed through the city of
Elis, beside the gymnasium. As Pausanias, however, does not speak
of the city being built on both banks of the river, and as the remains are
on the left (southern) bank, we may infer that only a small part of the
city can have occupied the north bank of the river.

The city of Elis was not founded till 471 B.C. Previously the popu-
lation had lived in dispersed villages or townships. But in that year
the capital was built and the scattered population collected into it. See
Strabo, viii. p. 336 sg, ; Diodorus, xi. 54. This tradition is probably
more trustworthy than the legend mentioned by Pausanias (v. 4. 3) that
Elis was founded in prehistoric times by Oxylus.

23. I. an old gymnasium. The gynmasium was beside the river
(Strabo, viii. p. 337).

23. I. the customary training before they repair to Olympia.
This training lasted thirty days (Philostratus, Vii, Apolloru v. 43 ;
Johannes Chrysostomus, HomiL in princip, actor, i. vol. 3. p. 59, ed.
Montfaucon).

23. 3. Hercules, sumamed Assistant. Cp. v. 8. i ; v. 14. 7.

23. 3- be whom the Athenians call Love Returned. See

i. 30. I.

23. 3. when the sun is declining in the west. Sacrifices are said
to have been offered to the dead at sunset and to the heavenly gods at
sunrise (schol. on Apollonius Rhodius, i. 587).

23. 3* it is their wont to bewidl him. So at the sanctuary of



CH. XXXV CITY OF ELIS 103

Lacinian Hera in southern Italy the women, clad in black, mourned

for Achilles (Lycophron, Cassandra^ 856 sqq,^ with the scholium of

Tzetzes on v. 857). As to the sanctuary of Lacinian Hera see note

on vi. 13. I.

23. 4. boxing with the softer gloves. See viii. 40. 3.

23. 4- Sosander and Polyctor. See v. 21. 16 sq,

23. 5. Love holds a palm-branch etc. A group such as Pausanias

describes is represented on a Roman relief which has come down to us.

Love and Love Returned are seen contending for a palm-branch. See

Roscher's Lexikon^ i. p. 1368.

23. 8. the army of Oxylos. See v. 3. 6 - v. 4. 4.

24. I. the contests called heavy. Gymnastic exercises were
divided by the ancients into two classes, the light and the heavy. The
light exercises were running, javelin-throwing, and leaping ; the heavy
exercises were wrestling, boxing, quoit-throwing, and the pancratium.
See Philostratus, De arte gymnastica^ 3; Pollux, iii. 148; Diodorus,
iv. 14; Plutarch, Quaest, Conviv, viii. 4. 4 ; Dionysius Halicam.
Antiquit, Rom. vii. 72. 2 ; Galen, De sanitate tuenda^ iii. i.

24. 2. The market-place of Ells is not constructed after the
fluhion which prevails in Ionia etc. Excavations conducted in
1891-1893 by the German Archaeological Institute at Magnesia on the
Maeander have revealed the ground-plan of an Ionian market-place. It
is an oblong, not exactly quadrangular space, measuring 188 metres in
length by 95 metres on one side and 99 metres on the other. This
space is regularly and neatly paved with flagstones, and is bounded on
each side by a double colonnade, to which three marble steps lead up
from the open space. The first or outer row of columns in each
colonnade is of the Doric order ; the second row, extending along the
axis of each colonnade, is of the Ionic order; but the interval between each
pair of Ionic columns is double that between each pair of Doric columns.
The back of the eastern colonnade is a simple wall. On the other hand, in
the northern and western, and apparendy also in the southern colonnade,
there are in the back wall a number of doors leading into chambers,
most of which perhaps served as shops or warehouses, though two of them
were certainly sanctuaries. All these edifices are built of a bluish-white
marble. In the open space surrounded by the colonnades are the ruins
of a small but elegant Ionic temple, the temple of Zeus Sosipolis (see
note on vi. 20. 2). Three openings lead from the market-place, one at
the south-west, one at the south-east, and one in the middle of the
eastern side. This last led to the temple of Leucophryenian Artemis
(see note on i. 26. 4). Dr. Kern, who assisted at the excavation, is of
opinion that the market-place is not an ordinary commercial market-place,
but was a '* sacred market-place," such as is known from an inscription
{^Mittheil. d, arch, Inst, in Athen^ 7 (1882), p. 75) to have existed at the
Thessalian Magnesia. Religious assemblies and festivals were probably
held in it See Jahrbuch d, arch, Inst, 9 (1894), Archaologischer
Anzeiger, p. 76 sqq,; Berliner philolog, Wochenschrift, 14 (1894), pp.
987 sqq.y 1049 ^99'

24. 2. It is built in the older style. Elsewhere Pausanias notices



CITY OF BUS



BK. VI. BLIS



market-places built in the old style at Pharae in Achaia (vii. 32. 2),
Tithorea in Pbocis (x. 32. 10), Abae in Pbocis (x. 35. 4), and Hyampolis



m



Q


DHJKCTUIAL BSSTOKATION).



in Pbocis (x. 35. 6). The annexed ground-plan (fig. 7) is a con-
jectural restoration of the tnadcet - place of Elis made by Hirt from
Pausanias's description.

24. 3' the Oturdiona of the LaWB. These officials are mentioned
under the title thesmophtdakes in the treaty of 420 rc between Elis,
Athens, Argos, and Mantinea (Tbucydides, v. 47). Pausanias calls them
nonu^hulakts,

21. 5. a statue of Pyirtao, son of PlstociateB. Accordit^ to
Diogenes Laertius, the &tber of the sceptic Pyirho was named Plis-
tarchus. Pyrrho was a native of Elis. In his youth he had been a
painter. In the gymnasium at Elis there was one of his paintings ; it
represented the torch-race, and was only moderately well painted. He
was highly honoured by his fellow-citizens, who made him chief priest,
and granted to philosophers an immimity from all burdens for his sake.
See Diogenes Laertius, ix. 1 1, §g 6t, 62, 64.

24. 6. Averter of BrU. See i. 3. 4 note.

24. 8. Smnkenness giving him wine. See ii. 37. 3 note.

24. 8. a ttonb of one Silenns in tbe land of the Hebrews.
Reland conjecttired that Silenus is here a Greek corruption of Shiloh
{Palaestina, p. 1017). The Greeks believed that the Hebrews wor-
shipped Dionysus. Sec Plutarch, Quaest. Conviv. iv. 6. Hence they
would expect to find in Palestine a worship of Silenus, his attendant
divinity.

24. 9- the roof being supported br oakra pillars. The structure
must, from Pausanias's account of it, have been ancient. It thus, with
the oaken column in the temple of Hera at Olympia (v. 16. i), points
to a time when the Greeks built their houses and temples of wood.
Professor Helbig inclines to ascribe the use of this primitive style of
architecture in Elis to the conquering Aetolians (see v. 4), a rude race
who, secluded in their native mountains, remained in a semi-barbarous
state even down to the palmy days of Greek civilisation, like the High-
landers of Scotland down to last century. His view is countenanced by
the tradition which connected this wooden structure in the market-place



CH. XXV APHRODITE WITH TOXTOISS AND GOAT 105

of Elis with the name of Oxylus, the Aetolian cbieft^n, who had led his
highland host to the conquest of Elis. There was a statue of Oxylas
in the market-place of Elis with an inscription setting forth that he
was a descendant of Aetolus and had founded the city of Elis (Stiabo,
X. p. 463 sq.) See Helbig, Das homerische Epos aus den DtnkmSier
erldutert^ p. 65.

24. 10. tlie women called tlie Sixteen. See v. 16. 2.

25. 1. the goddeu stands with one foot on a tortolB& This
statue of Aphrodite by Phidias is mentioned by Plutarch (/itr tt Osiris,
75 J Conjug. Praecept. 32), who interprets the tortoise as a symbol that
women should stay at home and keep silence. There are two ancient
bronzes, one Greek and one Etruscan, in which Aphrodite is repre-
sented with one foot on a tortoise (Roscher's Lexikon, I. p. 412). She
is so represented also on an ancient bronze candelabrum (£. Curtius,
Religious character of Creek coins, p. 1 3 sq. ; but the candelabrum may
be one of the two bronzes referred to in Roscher, I.e.) In the Madrid
copy of the statue of ' the crouching Aphrodite,' one foot of the goddess
rests on a tortoise (Bemouilli, Aphrodite, pp. i ;o (note 2), 323). In a
silver relief from Tarentum, now in the British Museum, the left hand
of the goddess rests on a tortoise {Bemouilli, op. cit. p. 150 note 3).
It is said that the Thessalian women, jealous of the seductive charms
of Lais, beat her to death with wooden tortoises in a sanctuary of
Aphrodite (Schol. on Aristophanes, Plutus, 179; Athenaeus, xiii. p.
589 a). Two vases in the shape of tortoises have been found in the
island of Melos. They are now in the British Museum (BemouiUi, op.
cit. p. 150 note 2).

25. I. Aphrodite seated on a Immze lie-goat. This statue is re-
presented on coins of Ells belonging to the reigns of Hadrian, Septimius
Severus, and Caracalla {fig. 8). The goat is depicted galloping from left
to right. The goddess is seated on his back
sideways, facing the spectator. A flap of her
mantle is drawn over her head like a veil. The
rest of the mantle wraps her sides and back com-
pletely, and extends nearly to her feet, leaving, ,
however, her head, breast, and upper body ex- I
posed. The breast and upper body of the god-
dess seem to be clothed in a close fitting tunic,
which also appears again at her feet, from
beneath the mantle. Her right hand is on her
breast, her left on the neck of the goat. See coat (com at wua).
R. Weil, in Histor. u. pkilolog. Au/satze £.

Curtius gnt/iiimet, p. 134 sq., with plate iii. 8; Imhoof-Blumer and
Gardner, JVum. Comm. on Paus., p. 72 sg., with pi. P xxiv. Representa-
tions of Aphrodite riding on a goat are not very uncommon on ancient
monuments (reliefs, vases, etc.) ; several have been discovered in recent
years. Some of them, from their resemblance to the coins of £hs
described above, are probably copies, more or less indirect, of the
group by Scopas at Elis. The monuments in question include two
painted vases, two lerra-cotta relief (both found in the Crimea), a


io6 APHRODITE ON THE GOAT bk. vi. elis

marble relief of the fourth century B.C found on the southern slope of
the Acropolis at Athens, another marble relief of Roman date found
at Sparta (BulleHno delP InstitutOy 1873, p. 183; MittheiL d, arch,
Inst in Atheny 2 (1877), p. 420 5q,\ two reliefs on mirror - cases,
several eng^ved gems, etc.

See Archdohg, Zeitung, 9 (185 1 ), p. 375 sq,, with pi. xxxiv. ; Stephani, in
Compie Rendu (St. Petersburg) for 1859, p. 129 sq,^ with Atlas, pi. iv. i ; /V/.,
for 1869, p. 84 sqq, ; Bernouilli, Aphrodtte^ p. 1 10 sq, ; Bulletin de Carresp,
helUnique, 7 (1883), p. 91 ; Roscher's Lexikon, i. p. 419 ; R. Weil, /.r. ; and
especially Max Boehm, ' Aphrodite auf dem Boc^Lf* Jahrbuch d, archdolog, InsH-
tulSy 4 (1889), pp. 208-217. A vase-painting of a woman clad in a star-spangled
robe and carrying a lyre, whom Lajard and Gerhard took to be Aphrodite, seems
undoubtedly to be a Bacchante, as Stephani was the first to point out. See
Archdologische Zeitung^ 12 (1854), pp. 263-273 ; ib, pp. 273-276, with plate Ixxi. ;
Stephani, in Compte Rendu (St. Petersburg) for 1859^ p. 130 note I.

It is said that when Theseus was about to sail for Crete to slay the
Minotaur, the Delphic oracle commanded him to invoke the help of
Aphrodite ; and as he was sacrificing to her beside the sea, the victim
was changed from a she-goat into a he-goat. So he called Aphrodite
'the Goddess on a he-goat' {Epitragid) (Plutarch, Theseus^ 18). But
Aphrodite appears also to have been called simply ' the goat goddess '
(Tragia). See Boehm, op, cit p. 210. Hence it would seem that
the goddess was formerly conceived in goat-form, and that the repre-
sentation of her riding on a goat is a later rationalisation of the old
conception. Mr. L. v. Schroeder has suggested that Aphrodite con-
ceived as a goat may have been a mythical figure analogous to the
Swan-maidens of fairy tales, who have power at certain times to divest
themselves of their swan-skins and to appear as fair maidens. Indeed,
from the association of Aphrodite with the swan, upon which she is
often represented riding (A. Kalkmann, * Aphrodite auf dem Schwan,'
/ahrbuch d, arch, Inst i (1886), pp. 231-260), he infers that Aphrodite,
in one of her aspects, was originally a Swan -maiden. See L. v.
Schroeder, Aphrodite ^ Eros und Hephdstos (Berlin, 1887), p. 39 sqq.
As to the Swan-maidens of fairy tales see S. Baring-Gould, Curious
Myths of the Middle Ages^ pp. 561-578; W. A. Clouston, Popular
Tales and Fictions^ i. pp. 1 82-1 91 ; M. R. Cox, An Introduction to
Folk-lore^ pp. 120-122. Tales of this type "are found in Sweden,
Russia, Germany, in the Shetland Islands- — in short, almost throughout
Europe, as well as in Asia and Africa. In Finland the maidens are
geese ; elsewhere they are more appropriately described as ducks ; or
they may be doves, as in Bohemia, Persia, and the Celebes Islands ;
or pigeons, as amongst the Magyars and in South Smaland. In the
guise of a vulture the bird maiden is found in Guiana, and American
Indians tell their version of her widespread story " (Miss M. R. Cox,
op, cit, p. 121).

On Vulgar {Pandemos) Aphrodite in her relation to oriental religion,
see Mr. Ph. Berger, in Gazette arch^ologique^ 6 (1880), p. 24 sqq,

25. 2. when Hercules was leading an army against Pylns etc.
Cp. V. 3. I ; and for the war waged by Hercules against Pylus and his
wounding of Hades, see Homer, Iliad, v. 395 sqq, (cp. ib, xi. 689 sqq,)\



CH. XXVI IMAGE OF SATRAP 107

Hesiod, Shield of Hercules^ 357 sqq,\ Pindar, Olymp, ix. 29 sqq,\
Apollodorus, ii. 7. 3. There seems to have been an idea that Pylus
was the gate (J>ule) of Hell. Perhaps Hercules's expedition against
Pylus formed part of the legend of his descent to Hell to recover
Alcestis or bring up Cerberus. See Mr. Leafs note on IlicuL^ v.
395 sqq.

25. 3* Homer sasrs in the Iliad. See //. v. 395 sqq,

25. 4. Sosipolis. See vi. 20. 2 sqq.

25. 6. gave it the name of Satrap. At the village of Ma^ddy
between Batroun (Botrys) and Djebail (Byblus) in Phoenicia, a Greek
inscription was found, which Renan read as follows : "Erovs icy vtio^s
Kaura/jos Sc/Socrrov 'Afcriafc^s^Oa/Aos 'A/38oiKrt)3ov dv€dr]K€v 'EaTpdirQ d€i^
€K tQv tStcov. ** Dedicated to the Satrap god by Thamus son of Abdusi-
bus, out of his own property, in the twenty-third year after the victory of
the emperor Augustus at Actium." The inscription thus dates from 8 B.C.
The name Satrap, being the Persian title of the viceroys or lieutenant-
governors of the provinces of the Persian empire, seems to show that
the god whose statue stood in the most crowded quarter of Elis was
of Asiatic origin. This is confirmed by his identification with Corybas,
who was also an Asiatic divinity. Mr. Clermont-Ganneau has developed
an elaborate and somewhat fanciful hypothesis to account for the
existence of an image of the Satrap god at Elis. It is possible, how-
ever, as he suggests, that the Satrap god is Adonis, whose name, like
Satrap, is an Oriental word signifying * lord * or * master.' See Clermont-
Ganneau, <Le dieu Saimpy^ /ouma/ asiatique, 7me S^rie, 10(1887),
pp. 157-236.

25. 6. after the extension of Patrae. The emperor Augustus
increased the territory and the population of Patrae by making some of
the Achaean towns dependent on it and by transporting to it the in-
habitants of others. See vii. 17. 5 ; vii. 18. 7 ; vii. 22. i and 6. Attis
and the Dindymenian Mother were worshipped at Patrae (vii. 20. 3),
and they had a sanctuary at Dyme (vii. 1 7. 9). Dyme was one of the
towns absorbed in Patrae ; hence the people of Patrae may have
borrowed the worship of these deities from Dyme. Further, the Cory-
bantes were associated with the worship or the myth of Attis (Lucian,
Dialog, diorum^ 12). Hence it is possible,
as Pausanias seems to indicate, that the wor-
ship of Corybas or Satrap may have been
borrowed by Elis directly from Patrae and
indirectly from Dyme. Lobeck suggested
that the worship of these oriental deities may
have been introduced at Dyme by the Cilician
pirates who were settled in that city by Pom-
pey (Strabo, xiv. p. 665 ; Plutarch, Pomfey,
28). See Lobeck, Aglaopkamus^ p. 11 52.

26. I. the Menins. See v. i. 10; fig. 9.-diokvsus (coim of

Theocritus, xxv. 15.

26. I. Dionysns : the ima«re is by Praxiteles. On a coin of Elis
(fig. 9), belonging to Hadrian's time, Dionysus is represented standing ;


xo8 DIONYSUS AT ELIS bk. vi. elis

in his raised right hand he holds a drinking-horn, in his left a thyrsus ;
on his right side is a panther, on his left a tambourine. This is believed
to be a copy of the statue of Dionysus by Praxiteles. See Imhoof-
Blumer and Gardner, Num. Commentary on Pausanias^ P- 73 ^9'

26. I. No god is more revered by the Eleans than DionyBna.
Dionysus was worshipped at Elis as a bull. See note on v. i6. 2. As
to Dionysus in bull form see The Golden Bought i. p. 325 j^. In the
Archdologische Zeiiung, 9 (i 85 1), pi. xxxiii. there is a representation of the
child Dionysus with clusters of grapes round his brow, and a calfs head,
with sprouting horns, attached to the back of his head See Gerhard, ib.,
pp. 371-373. Again, on a red-figured vase Dionysus appears as a calf-
headed child seated on a woman's lap. See Gazette archdologiqiUy 5
(1879), pi. 3, with the article of Fr. Lenormant, * Dionysos Zagreus,' pp.
18-37. On a Greek vase from the Cyrenaica, now in the Louvre, young
Bacchus, crowned with ivy, is represented driving a car which is drawn
by a bull, a winged griffin, and a panther. See Monuments grecs. No.
8 (1879), pi. 3, with the remarks of Mr. Heuzey, pp. 55-58. The
Eleans are said to have identified Dionysus with the sun {Etymolog.
Magnum, p. 277, s,v, Atowcros).

26. I. Three empty kettles are taken into a building etc. The
following religious miracle, or rather pious fraud, is also told by the
pseudo-Aristode {Mirab, auscult. (123 [134]), and more shortly, on the
authority of Theopompus, by Athenaeus (i. p. 34 a). Cp. Kalkmann,
PausaniaSy p. 41 sq. The ancients were perfectly familiar with a
variety of devices for breaking seals and then resealing them in such a
way as not to show that they had been tampered with. See Hippolytus,
Refut, omn, haeres, iv. 34. We may compare a similar imposture which
is practised in Mingrelia. On the eve of the feast of St. George, the
prince of Mingrelia, surrounded by a train of courtiers, places his seal
upon the door of the church of St. George. Next day (20th October)
he goes again to the church door and examines the seal to see that it
has not been broken. Having done so, he opens the door, and inside
the church is always found an ox. The people think that St. George
has introduced the ox into the church by a miracle, and they draw
omens from the manner in which the animal behaves. The fact, how-
ever, is that the priests drag the ox into the church with ropes, and
screen themselves from prying eyes by giving out that it is as much as
a man's life is worth to peep at the church while they are about this
business. See Lamberti, 'Relation de la Colchide ou Mingrellie,'
Recueil de Voyages au Nord, 7 (Amsterdam, 1725), pp. 168-170,
294-298.

26. 2. The people of Andros also say etc. Similarly Pliny tells us,
on the authority of Mucianus who was thrice consul, that every year, on
the 5th of January, a certain fountain in the temple of Dionysus in
Andros tasted of wine, but that if the liquid were taken out of sight of
the temple it tasted like water again. The day on which this miracle
happened was called Theodosia. See Pliny, Nat. hist, ii. 231, xxxi. 16.
Cp. L. VxtYi^r^AusgewdhlteAufsdtse, p. 295 sq. Thus, according to Muci-
anus, the miracle was annual, according to Pausanias it was biennial.



CH. XXVI CYLLENE 109

26. 2. the Table of the Sim. See i. 33. 4 note.

26. 3. a sanctnary of Athena. Pliny tells us {Nat, kisL xxxvi.
177) that the walls of the temple of Minerva (Athena) at £lis were coated
with stucco to receive paintings by Panaenus, brother of Phidias, and
that the stucco was tempered with milk, mixed with saffron. This last
ingredient was probably intended " to tone down the white of the marble
[, the stucco being composed of powdered marble mixed with lime,] and
give a creamy tint to the stucco " (J. H. Middleton, The remains of
Ancient Rome, i. p. 73). Pliny reports a saying that if you wetted your
thumb and rubbed it on the wall, you could smell and taste the saffron.

26. 3. They say it is by Phidias. Pliny, however, says {Nat,
hist, XXX. 54) that the image of Athena at Elis was by Colotes, a pupil of
Phidias who had helped his master to execute his great statue of Zeus
at Olympia. The inside of Athena's shield was painted by the same
artist, Panaenus, who painted the frescoes on the walls of the temple
(Pliny, Lc) Cp. Murray, Hist, of Greek Sculpture, 2, p. 136.

26. 3. Acock. Cp. note on v. 25. 9.

26. 4. Oyllene. Strabo (viii. p. 337) agrees with Pausanias that
Cyllene was 1 20 furlongs from the city of Elis. Ptolemy (iii. 1 4, p.
236 sg,, ed. Wilberg) and Strabo (viii. p. 338) mention that the river
Peneus flowed into the sea between Cyllene and the promontory of
Chelonatas. This promontory, stated by Strabo (viii. p. 337) to be the
most westerly point of Peloponnese, is undoubtedly the rough, hilly
promontory on which stands the castle of Chlemoutzi or Tomese, The
Peneus at present flows into the sea south of this promontory ; hence
from Strabo's description we should expect that Cyllene lay still farther
to the south. But from Ptolemy {l,c,) it appears that in antiquity the
Peneus flowed into the sea to the north of this promontory. Cyllene
must therefore have been still farther to the north of Chelonatas, and
this is confirmed by Pliny {Nat, hist, iv. 13). Cyllene is perhaps to be
sought north of the lagoon of Kotiki, in the marshes of Manolada, which
are at present separated from the sea by a broad sand-dune dotted with
pine-trees. The convenient harbour, mentioned by Pausanias, would
appear to have been gradually sanded up in the course of ages. Leake
and Boblaye, indeed, identified Cyllene with the modem Glarentsa, a
small trading-town at the northern foot of the Chelonatas promontory,
because ** there is no other harbour on this coast, except that of Kunu-
pdli, which is too &r to the north to have been the port of Elis (iv. 23.
I ) ; whereas Glardntza^ in its distance from Paledpoli, agrees exactly to
the 120 stades [furlongs] which Strabo and Pausanias agree in stating
to have been the interval between Elis and Cyllene." But this identifi-
cation of Cyllene is inconsistent with the evidence of Strabo and Ptolemy
that the mouth of the Peneus was between Chelonatas and Cyllene.

See Chandler, Travels in Greece^ p. 283 ; Leake, Aforea, 2. p. 174 sg. ;
Boblaye, Recherches^ pp. 120 j^. ; Curtius, Pelop, 2. pp. 33 sq,, 102 sq, ; Bursian,
Gtogr, 2. p. 308 ; Baedeker,' pp. 316, 318. Professor von Duhn would place
Cyllene at K&unoupeli still farther to the north than Manolada (Mitiheil, d, arch,
Inst, in Athen, 3 (1878), p. 76).

26. 4. a later passage etc. See Homer, Iliad, xv. 518 sq.



no SILK AND SILK' WORMS bk. vi. elis

26. 5. In Oyllene there is a sanctuary of Aesculapius. There
was a fine ivory statue of Aesculapius at Cyllene by the sculptor Colotes
(Strabo, viii. p. 337).

26. 5. The image of Hermes etc. This image is mentioned also
by Artemidorus {Onirocr, i. 45), Lucian (Jupiter Tragoedus^ 42), and
Hippolytus {RefuL omn. haeres. v. 7. p. 144, and 8. p. 152). Cp. Philo-
stratus, ViL ApolL vi. 20 ; W. Roscher, Hermes der Windgotiy p. 75 sqq.
In India the god Siva is commonly represented by a similar symbol
(Monier Williams, Religious thought and life in India^ pp. 68, 83).

26. 6. fine ilaz. The Greek word is bussos. See note on v. 5. 2.

26. 6. the threads of which the Seres make their garments etc.
This is one of the chief passages in ancient writers on silk and silk-
worms. The first Greek writer to describe the silk-worm is Aristotle.
He says {Hist, anim, v. 19, p. 551 b, ed. Bekker), without, however,
mentioning the name Ser or the Seres, that the insect is a large worm
with horns, which changes first into a caterpillar, then into a botfUniUos
(cocoon ?), and then into a nekudalos (moth ?) ; the women (he goes on)
undo the cocoons, reel off the threads, and then weave them. Aristotle
adds that in Cos a woman named Pamphile was the first to weave silk.
Silk, both raw and manufactured, was brought from China to the Roman
empire by two routes. On the one hand, it came by the overland route
from northern China through Samarcand to the Caspian ; on the other
hand, it came through India, down the Ganges (or Brahmaputra ?) to
Malabar (Limyrice or rather Dymirice, i.e, the Tamul country), and so
by the Persian Gulf or the Red Sea to the Mediterranean. See Peripius
Erythraei Maris^ § 64 {Geographi Graeci Minores^ ed. Miiller, i. p.
303 sq,)\ Ptolemy, i. 11. Silk-worms were first introduced into
Europe about 530 A.D. in the reign of Justinian. The eggs were
brought by some monks to Constantinople from Serinda, which appears
to have been Khotan, in Turkestan. See Procopius, De Bello Gothico^
iv. 17.

Pausanias appears to have been better informed as to silk and silk-
worms than many classical authors who wrote before him and some of
those who wrote after him. Many ancient writers, for example, thought
that silk was gathered from trees. See Virgil, Georg, ii. 121; Pliny,
Nat, hist, vi. 54 ; Solinus, 50. 2 ; Dionysius, Orbis Description 752 sqq, ;
Seneca, Hercules Oetaeus^ 666 sq, ; id., Hippolytus ^ 389 ; Ammianus
Marcellinus, xxiii. 6. 67 ; Martianus CapeUa, vi. § 693. Pausanias
alludes to this view when he says that silk was not made from bark.
But the ancient authors just referred to do not, in point of fact, assert
that silk was made of bark ; they only speak of it being gathered or
combed from trees. And it appears that the wild silk-worm does spin
long threads from trees and bushes, which threads are gathered to make
a coarse kind of silk. See Yates, Textrinum Antiquorum^ p. 207 sqq.
But Pausanias is right in affirming that the true silk is produced by
insects which are kept and fed in houses. He also appears to be the
first ancient writer who calls the silk-worm Ser, This is the Chinese
word for silk or the silk-worm. In Chinese the word is See or Szu^ in
Corean Sir^ in Mongol Sirkek^ in Manchu SirghS, The name for silk



CH. xxvx SILK AND SILK- WORMS x 1 1

in some modem European languages is derived from the same word,
with the substitution of /for r ; as English silk^ Danish Silcke^ Slavonian
Chelk. See Yates, op, ciL p. 245 sq,\ Yule, Cathay and the way
thither y i. p. xliv. note i ; Marquardt, Privatleben der Romer^ p. 492.

It has been suggested that Pausanias derived his information,
directly or indirectly, from a member of the Roman embassy which was
sent by the emperor Marcus Aurelius Antoninus to China, and reached
the Chinese court in October 166 A.D. This embassy is not mentioned
by Greek and Roman writers, but it is recorded by Chinese historians.
The embassy went by sea, for it entered China by the frontier of Jih-nan
(Annam), bringing presents of rhinoceros' horns, ivory, and tortoise-
shell. The Chinese themselves seem to have been surprised at the
nature of these presents. Perhaps, as Col. Yule has suggested, the
ambassadors had lost their original presents by shipwreck or robbery,
and replaced them with trumpery purchased in eastern bazaars. It is a
plausible conjecture that the embassy was sent with a view to open up
or stimulate the trade with China by sea, when the overland route
through Persia was closed by the Parthian war (162-165 A.D.) See
Yule, Cathay and the way thither^ i. pp. xlv., Ixii. ; Richthofen, ChinUy
I. p. 512 ; Hirth, China and the Roman Orient^ pp. 42, 47, 82, 94 sq,^
173 sqq, ; Th. Hodgkin, Italy and her invaders ^ 2. p. 31 sq.

But Pausanias's account contains a number of errors. '* It looks,"
according to Col. Yule, "as if it had come originally from real informa-
tion, though afterwards misunderstood and perverted. The * shelter
adapted to winter and summer ' seems to point to the care taken by the
Chinese in regulating the heat of the silk-houses ; the ' five years ' may
have been a misunderstanding of the five ages of the silk-worm's life
marked by its four moultings ; the reed given it to eat when the
spinning season has come may refer to the strip of rush with which the
Chinese form receptacles for the worms to spin in " (Yule, Cathay and
the way thither ^ i. p. clviii.) Pausanias is also wrong in saying that
the silk- worm has eight feet. It has fourteen, namely six proper feet
before and eight holders behind (Yates, Textrinum antiquorum^ p. 188
note ♦).

As to the houses in which the silk-worms are reared, in China <* the
houses in which the worms are kept should be wide and clean, and
free from all noxious smells" (Gray, China^ 2, p, 226 sq,) In Burma
"the whole operations [of silk-growing] are carried on in the rickety
bamboo hut of the cultivator" (Shway Yoe [J. G. Scott], The Burman^
I. p. 324). In India the rearers of the variety of silk- worm known as
Bombyx fortunatus " prefer a south aspect for the rearing-house, but
all rearing-houses do not face the south : they are covered with specially
thick thatch, and generally have but one small window and a door.
The window is always kept shut at night, and during the cold season in
the daytime also ; the door is always kept shut at night, and in the cold
weather all chinks are carefully filled up, the fermenting refuse from the
trays being often piled up inside the rearing-house to further raise the
temperature" {^Indian Museum Notes, Issued by the Trustees. VoL i.
Nr. 3 (Calcutta, 1890), p. 150).



112 LARISUS — ARAXUS BK. vi. elis

As to silk in antiquity and the relations of Greece and Rome with China, see
Yates, Textrinum antiquorumy pp. 160-249 ; Yule, Cathay and the way thither ^
I. p. xxxiiL sqq, ; fit/., * Introductory Essay' to Gill's ^iv^^ Golden Sand, i.
p. [40] sq, ; Marquardt, Privaileben der Romer^ p. 491 sqq, ; BlUmner, Techno*
logic, I. p. 190 sqq, ; Hirth, China and the Roman Orient ; W. Heyd, Histoire
du Commerce du Levant au mayen'Stge, I. p. 2 sqq, ; Bunbury, History of ancient
geograthy, 2. pp. 476 sq,, 529 sqq, ; Richthofen, ChincL, i. p. 512 x^. ; H. Nissen,
* rfer Verkehr zwischen China und dem romischen '^€v^^^ Jahrlmch des Vereins
von Alterthumsfreunde im Rheinlande, 95 (1894), pp. 1-28. Fragments of silk
have been found in ancient Greek tombs in the south of Russia {Compte Rendu
(St Petersburg) for 1878-79, p. 134 sq,)

Chinese intercourse with the West would have to be dated very
much earlier than is commonly supposed if the porcelain bottles,
inscribed with Chinese verses, which are said to have been found in
ancient Egyptian tombs near Thebes, had really been deposited there
when the tombs were made. See Annali deW Instituto^ 8 (1836), pp.
321-326, with tav. d' Agg. G. But it has been proved that these bottles
were not really found in the graves ; further that they were imported
into Egypt from the East in recent times ; and that the Chinese verses
on them are from the works of poets who flourished in the seventh and
eighth centuries a.d. See Wilkinson, Manners and customs of the ancient
Egyptians (ed. 1878), 2. pp. 152-154 ; Nissen, op. cit, p. 4 sq,

26. 10. the river Larisus. This river is now called the Mana or
SHmana, a stream which does not fail in summer, and after rain in
winter often does mischief. It flows through an oak forest, which here
covers the country for many miles. Towards the sea the river loses
itself in a wide swamp, which makes the neighbourhood unhealthy. The
distance of 1 57 furlongs from Elis to the Larisus, as given by Pausanias,
is fairly correct ; Leake took five hours to travel the distance. Dodwell,
however, took eight hours and forty minutes. See Leake, Morea^ 2. pp.
165 sq,y 170; Dodwell, Tour^ 2, p. 314; Bohlaye, RechercheSy p. 20;
Bursian, Geogr, 2, p. 309; Baedeker,^ p. 331 ; W. G. Clark, Pelopon-
nesusy p. 277. The scenery about this part of the country is thus
described by Mure : ** The road for more than half-way to Patras was
still through the same beautiful woodland scenery. I seldom remember
to have seen finer oaks, never, perhaps, so great a number of equal
dimensions in continued succession. The whole country, for miles
around, recalled to mind the wilder parts of Windsor Park. At intervals
of a mile or two occurred pastoral settlements, of the usual romantic
character, in the midst of the extensive glades of green pasture or ferny
heath, which opened up from time to time through the mazes of the
forest" {Joumaly 2. p. 298).

26. 10. Oape Araxus. This is now Cape Papa. But the name
may have included the range of hills now called the Mavro Vouno
(* Black Hill '), which forms the north-western extremity of Peloponnese
and is a conspicuous feature in the landscape. On the most southerly
height of this range, where the chain of lagoons begins that stretches
southward along the coast of Elis, there are remains of an ancient
fortress which belonged to the people of Dyme in Achaia. In antiquity
it was known simply as the Fortress ( Teichos) ; it is now called the



CH. XXVI CASTLE OF KALLOGRIA 113

Castle of Kallogria, Wide and deep marshes, communicating with the
sea and abounding in fish and wild fowl, nearly surround the hill on
which the ruins stand ; some islands, clothed with trees and bushes, rise
above the level of the swamp. The fortress seems to have had only
one entrance, which faces the sea, and is approached by a difficult
and winding path. The summit of the rocky hill, about 1 00 yards long,
is enclosed by a thick wall faced with great unhewn stones, put together
without cement ; the core of the wall, between the facings, is composed
of rubble and mortar. On the side of the sea this wall is 1 5 feet thick.
On the opposite or land side a wall extends from the summit to the foot
of the hill, ending in the marsh. There are also some remains of walls
and towers built entirely of small stones, but they seem to belong to a
later age. In antiquity the walls were nowhere less than 30 cubits
high, and their circuit was a furlong and a half. The fortress was said
to have been built by Hercules in his wars with the Eleans. Perhaps
it is to be identified with the city of Larisa, which, according to
Theopompus, stood near the river Larisus, at the border between
Achaia and Elis (Strabo, ix. p. 440).

See Polybius, iv. chs. 59, 65, and 83 ; Dodwell, Tour^ 2. j). 312 st/. ; Leake,
Moreay 2. pp. 163-165 ; Boblaye, Rechcrches^ P« ^9 sq, ; Curtius, Pelop, I. p. 426
sq, ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 321 sq, ; Baedeker,* p. 329.



VOL. IV



BOOK SEVENTH



ACHAIA

1. I . Aegialns. Another form of the name was Aegialia. See Homer,
Ilicui^ ii. 575; Strabo, viii. p. 383; Stephanus Byz., j.z/. AiyiaAds ;
Eiymolog, Magnum^ p. 28, s,v, AiyiaAeia. Herodotus tells us (vii. 95)
that the lonians of Achaia were called Aegialian Pelasgians. On the
legendary history of the Achaeans, see Strabo, /.r. ; Apollodorus, i. 7. 3 ;
Conon, NarrationeSy 27. On the Achaean race there is a dissertation
by Gerhard, * Ueber den Volksstamm der Achaer,* in the Abhandlungen
of the Berlin Academy, 1853, pp. 419-458.

1. 2. his son Xuthus. According to Euripides (lon^ 63 sq,) Xuthus
was a son, not of Hellen, but of Aeolus, who was a son of Zeus. The
common legend seems to have been that Hellen had three sons, Dorus,
Xuthus, and Aeolus (Apollodorus, i. 7. 3 ; Strabo, viii. p. 383 ; Conon,
Narrationes^ 27).

1. 2. a daughter of Erechthens. Her name was Creusa (Apollo-
dorus, i. 7. 3 ; Conon, Narrationes^ 27 ; Euripides, /<?«, 10 sq,)

1. 3. Achaeus returned to Thessaly. According to another

legend, Achaeus, being banished from Athens on account of an accidental
homicide, went to Lacedaemon, the people of which were hence called
Achaeans after him (Strabo, viii. p. 383). According to others, Achaeus,
after his banishment, went to Peloponnese and founded the tetrapolis of
Achaia (Conon, NarraiioneSy 27).

1. 3. Xuthus' other son. Ion. According to the Attic legend Ion
was a son of Apollo by Creusa, the daughter of Erechtheus (Euripides,
lon^ 10 sqq.)

1. 4- Homer, in his list of the forces etc. See ///W, ii. 575.

1. 5. his tomb is in the township of Potamus. See i. 31.3 note.

1. 6. Archander and Architeles, sons of Achaeus. Cp. ii. 6. 5.
According to Herodotus (ii. 98) Archander was a son of Phthius, and a
grandson of Achaeus. Another legend represented Archander and
Architeles as sons of Acastus and as having driven Peleus from Phthia
(Schol. on Euripides, Troiades^ 1128).

1. 7- Being expelled by the Dorians from Argos and Lacedaemon
etc. Cp. ii. 18. 8 ; ii. 38. i ; iii. i. 5.

1. 8. Tisamenus fell in the battle. According to another legend
Tisamenus was slain by the Dorian invaders (Apollodorus, ii. 8. 3).


fi6 COLONISATION OF IONIA BK. vii. achaia



2. I. NileiiB and the rest of the sons of Ck)dras set out to found
a colony etc With the following account of the colonisation of Ionia
from Greece, compare Herodotus, i. 145 sqq, ; Hellanicus, cited by a
scholiast on Plato, Symposium^ p. 208 d ; Aelian, Var, Hist, viii. 5 ;
Eusebius, Chronic,^ ed. Schone, voL i. p. 185; /V/., voL 2. p. 60;
Strabo, xiv. p. 632 sqq, ; Vitruvius, iv. 1.3 sqq. The leaders of the
colonists were, according to the Attic legend, Athenians of the royal
house of Codrus. But Codrus himself was said to be of Messenian
descent, his father Melanthus having been king of Messenia. Again,
N ileus, one of the leaders of the colony and described by Pausanias as
a son of Codrus, was, according to Strabo (xiv. p. 633), a native of
Pylus in Messenia. Again, the founder of Colophon, one of the Ionian
cities, is said to have been Andraemon, a native of Pylus (see Mimner-
mus, cited by Strabo, xiv. pp. 633, 634). From this and other evidence
the late J. Topifer argued that Melanthus and Codrus were interpolated in
Attic legend for the purpose of representing Attica as the metropolis of
the Ionian cities, whereas in truth the ancestors of the Ionian nobility
had gone direct from Messenia to Ionia without ever settling in Attica
at alL See J. Topffer, Attische GenealogU^ pp. 225-240 ; also the notes
on i. 3. 3, ii. 18. 8.

2. 2. lolans. On the Sardinian expedition led by lolaus, cp. i. 29.
5 ; X. 17. 5 ; Diodorus, iv. 29 sq, lolaus was said to have built the
curious round towers, now known as nouraghes^ many of which still
exist in Sardinia. See [Aristotle,] Mtrab, Auscult, 100 (104). As to
the nouraghes^ see Perrot et Chipiez, Hisioire de Part dans Pantiquit/^
4. p. 22 sqq. According to Fr. Lenormant, lolaus is a Semitic god,
lol. See Gazette arMologique^ 2 (1876), p. 126 sqq, Cp. Movers,
Die Phoenizier^ i. 536 sqq,

2. 2. the Minyans who had been expelled from Lemnos. See
Herodotus, iv. 145.

2. 2. Theras, son of Antesion etc. Cp. iii. \, t sq,\ iii. 15. 6.

2. 5. Anax. He was said to be a son of Earth and Sky (Stephanus
Byzantius, s,v, MtAiyros).

2. 5. Miletus. As to this legendary founder of the city of the
same name see Schol. on Apollonius Rhodius, i. 186. According to
some he was a son of Apollo by Aria, daughter of Cleochus.

2. 5. the Oarians, the former inhabitants of the land. The
Carian inhabitants of Miletus are mentioned by Homer {Iliady ii. 867).
Prof. G. Meyer argues that the Carian language was a branch of the
Aryan or Indo-European family of speech. See his article, *Die
Karier,' in Bezzenberget's Beitrdge zur Kunde der Indogerm, Sprachen^
10 (1886), pp. 147-202. Prof. Sayce had previously come to the same
conclusion from an examination of the Carian inscriptions. See his
article in Transactions of the Royal Society of Literature^ 2nd series, 10
(1874), pp. 546-564.

2. 6. the wives and daughters of the Milesians they married.
Herodotus tells us (i. 146) that the lonians who emigrated from Athens
to Asia and deemed themselves the noblest of the lonians, took no
women with them, but married the Carian women whose husbands they



CH. n COLONISATION OF IONIA 117

had slain. Therefore the women bound themselves by an oath never to
eat with their husbands nor to mention their husbands' names, because
their husbands had slain their fathers and their former husbands and
their children. And the women taught their daughters to observe the
same rules. The rules that a wife shall not eat with her husband nor
utter his name are commonly observed by barbarous tribes. "The
wives of the Caribs never eat with their husbands ; they never name
them by their name ; they serve them as if they were their slaves ; and
what is still more remarkable is that they have a language quite different
from that of their husbands, just as the Carian women probably had "
(Lafitau, Mcmrs des sauvages AtfUriquains^ i. p. 54 j^.) The difference
of language between husbands and wives, which occurs among some
savage tribes, is not, however, to be accounted for by the custom of
captiuing wives of a different tribe. See F. Fleming, Kajffraria^
p. 96 sq, ; iV/., Southern Africa^ p. 238 sq, ; Kranz, ZuluSy p. 1 14 sq,

2. 7. the Amazons. It has been suggested that the traditions of
the Amazons in Asia Minor originated in recollections of the warlike
women of barbarous tribes like the Cimmerians, who forced their way
into Asia Minor from the north, and maintained themselves there for
longer or shorter periods. See O. Klugmann, ' Ueber die Amazonen
in den Sagen der kleinasiatischen Stadte,' Philologus^ 30 (1870),

pp. 524-556.

2. 7> from Ephesos the city took its name. On Ephesus, see
£. Curtius, ' Beitrage zur Geschichte und Topographie Kleinasiens,'
Abhandlungen of the Berlin Academy, 1872, pp. 1-44 ; /V/., Gesammelte
Abhcmdlungeriy i. pp. 233-265.

2. 8. Androclns. Cp. Strabo, xiv. pp. 632, 640 ; Stephanus Byz.,
s.v, Bevva. Androclus was supposed to be of Messenian descent
through his father Codrus (see notes on i. 3. 3, ii. 18. 8), and there is
reason to believe that some at least of the founders of the Ionian cities
were Messenians (see note on vii. 2. i). Hence it is natural to connect
Androclus with the Messenian king whom Pausanias calls Androcles
(iv. 4. 4 etc. See Index). Moreover, there was an Athenian £unily of
Androclids (Hesychius, s,v. *Av8poKk€i$ai.)y who doubtless traced their
descent from an ancestor named Androclus or Androcles. But whether
this Athenian family was connected with Androclus, king of Ephesus,
or Androcles, king of Messenia, or with both, we cannot say. See
J. Topffer, Attische Genealogies pp. 244-247. The descendants of
Androclus at Ephesus retained the title of king and some of the insignia
of royalty down to Strabo's time (Strabo, xiv. p. 633). For a legend of
the foundation of Ephesus see Athenaeus, viiL p. 361 ; cp. P. Gardner,
Santos and Samian coins, p. 8 1 sq.

2. 9. the tomb is shown to this day. In the course of his exca-
vations at Ephesus Mr. J. T. Wood discovered what he took to be the
tomb of Androclus in the situation described by Pausanias. The Mag-
nesian gate was discovered by him, at the south-eastern foot of Mt.
Coressus (see note on vii. 5. 10, * Pion'), and consequently at the south-
east comer of Ephesus. From this gate a road led on the eastern side
of Mt Coressus to the temple of Artemis, which was outside the city,



ii8 COLOPHON — CLARUS bk. vii. achaia

to the north-east. On this road many tombs were found by Mr. Wood,
and about half-way between the gate and the temple he discovered
what he believed to be the lower part of the tomb of Androclus.
'< These foundations consisted of several courses of cushioned masonry
composed of immense blocks of white marble, mounted on a plinth
which formed a base 42 feet square. There was a doorway on the east
side" (J. T. Wood, Discoveries at Ephesus^ p. 126 j^.)

2. 10. the Prienians had for their founders Philotas etc

Cp. § 3 ; Strabo, xiv. pp. 633, 636.

2. II. the river Maeander, which choked np the month with
mnd etc. As to the alluvial soil deposited by this river see viii. 24. 11.
The extent to which soil was brought down by the Maeander is illus-
trated by the statement of Strabo (xii. p. 580) that whenever the river
in one of its winding reaches had swept away a comer, the owner of the
land was allowed to bring a lawsuit against the Maeander, and if the
river was cast in the suit the plaintiff recovered damages, which were
paid out of the tolls levied at the ferries. With regard to Myus, which,
according to Pausanias, was deserted by its inhabitants on account of
the swarms of gnats that infested it, Strabo says (xiv. p. 636) that its
population was so reduced that it was incorporated with Miletus.
Vitruvius (iv. 1.4) attributes the destruction of Myus to inundations.
When Chandler visited the ruins of Myus last century, he found that the
gnats still swarmed there and were very troublesome (Travels in Asia
Minor^ p. 167). In modem times the inhabitants of the village
of Karditsa in Boeotia were forced by swarms of gnats to shift the site
of their village (Fiedler, Reise^ i. p. 106).

3. I. Colophon Clams. The exact site of Colophon was

long uncertain, but in recent years Dr. C. Schuchhardt claims to have
discovered it. He identifies Colophon with the extensive ruins which
he found between the Turkish villages of Tratscha and Deirmendere^
about 8 miles from the sea. From near the ruins a stream flows south-
ward to the sea, through a valley hemmed in by mountains on the east
and west. This stream is now called the Awdschi-tschai (* hunter's
river*). According to Dr. Schuchhardt it is the cold river Ales,
mentioned by Pausanias (vii. 5. 10; viii. 28. 3). Colophon was known
from ancient writers to be an inland town ; its port was Notium. See
Scylax, Periplus^ 98; Pliny, Nat, hist, v. 116. Notium, the port of
Colophon, is identified by Dr. Schuchhardt with the considerable
remains which occupy a hill beside the sea. The hill stretches in a
crescent shape from east to west, the two homs of the crescent running
into the sea as promontories. Immediately to the west of the hill, the
Awdschi-tschai stream falls into the sea. Towards the westem end of
the hill are the remains of a temple, which was formerly supposed to be
the temple of Apollo at Clams. But Dr. Schuchhardt places Clams
farther inland, in a side valley to the south-east of the village of
Giaurkoi. Here in the face of a cliff there is a cavem, in the bottom
of which fine clear water is said to lie all the year through. A few
hundred paces in front of the cave Dr. Schuchhardt found a broken
Corinthian capital and some foundation - walls. He thinks that the



CH. Ill CLARUS—LEBEDUS 119

place tallies with the account which Tacitus has given of the mode of
consulting the oracle of Clams. According to Tacitus {Annals^ ii. 54)
the priest of Apollo, before giving the oracular responses, retired to a
cavern and drank of a mysterious spring. (Cp. Paus. ix. 2. i note.) A
draught of the prophetic water was believed to shorten the life of the
prophet (Pliny, Nat. hist, il 232). See C. Schuchhardt, * Kolophon,
Notion, und Klaros,* Mittheilungen d. arch, Inst, in Athen^ 11 (1886),
pp. 398-434. There is a paper on the same subject by Mr. A. M.
Phontrier, in Motxrciov kqX PipX.LO$rJKrj rrjs €vayy€X.iK7Js (rxoXrjSf
Smyrna, 3 (1878-1880), pp. 185-221. Prof. W. M. Ramsay considers
it highly probable that Dr. Schuchhardt's identification of the site of
Colophon is right {Historical Geography of Asia Minor^ p. 431). The
legend of the foundation of the oracle, as it is here narrated by
Pausanias, has been examined at length by Mr. Otto Immisch
(* Klaros, Forschungen tiber griechische Stiftungssagen,' in Supplem. 17
oi Fleckeiseris Jahrbiiclier^ Leipzig, 1889). As to the oracle see Bouchd-
Leclercq, Histoire de la divination dans Pantiguit^y 3. pp. 249-255.

3. I. Manto. See ix. 33. i sq, ; Apollodorus, iii. 7. 4. A different
story of Manto's relations to Rhacius is told by a scholiast on Apollonius
Rhodius (i. 308), who names as his authorities "the writers of the
ThebaidJ* The story is this. Manto, on going forth from Delphi at
the bidding of Apollo, fell in with Rhacius, a Mycenaean, who married
her and went with her to Colophon. There she wept over the devasta-
tion of her native land ; her tears formed a spring of water, and an
oracle of Apollo was established on the spot The scholiast, it will be
observed, calls Rhacius a Mycenaean, whereas Pausanias apparently
represents him as a Cretan. But, as Siebelis points out, there was a
Mycenae in Crete (Velleius Paterculus, i. i. 2). Cp. K. O. Miiller, Z?i>
Dorier^ i- PP- 114 ^^., 227 sqq, ; O. Immisch, * Klaros,' in Fleckeisetfs
JcJirbiicher^ Suppl. 17 (1889), P* '34 ^^9'

3. 4- I liave already told how Colophon was laid waste.

See i. 9. 7.

3. 5. The city of Lebedns was destroyed by Lysimachns etc.
See i. 9. 7 note. Horace speaks of Lebedus as " a village more deserted
than Gabiae and Fidenae" {Epist, i. 11. T sq,^

3. 5. its warm baths are the most numerous etc. Chandler says :
*'We left Hypsile at eight in the morning, and in about an hour
descended into a narrow bottom, which was filled with a thick smoke or
mist, occasioned, as wc discovered on a nearer approach, by steam
arising from a small tepid brook, called Elijah ; the bed of a deep green
colour. The current, which tasted like copperas, is confined in a
narrow channel below, and turns two over-shot mills, falling soon after
into a stream, then shallow, but flowing from a rich vale between the
mountains, in a very wide course ; the bed of stone and white sand.
We are now in the territory of Lebedus, which was noted, beyond any
on the sea-coast, for hot waters. , . . The stream now supplies two
mean baths on the margin, one with a large cross carved on a stone in
the pavement" {Travels in Asia Minor^ p. loi).

3. 6. Teos. The topography of Teos was specially studied by the



120 TEOS — ERYTHRAE bk. vii. achaia

late G. Hirschfeld. See his paper * Teos,' in Archdologische Zeitungy
31 (pub. 1876), pp. 23-30. Cp. Chandler, Travels in Asia Minor^^
p. 95 sqq. ; Hamilton, Researches in Asia Minor^ 2. p. 11 sqq. The
temple of Dionysus at Teos has been described and illustrated in the
Ionian Antiquities^ published by the Dilettanti Society, part i. (1759),
pp. 1-12, with plates i.-vi. ; and in the Antiquities of lonia^ published
by the same Society, part iv. (1881), pp. 35-39, plates xxii.-xxv. Teos
was a great seat of the worship of Dionysus and of the dramatic associa-
tion known as < the artists of Dionysus.' See Strabo, xiv. p. 643 ; C. /.
G, Nos. 3067, 3068 ; O. Liiders, Die dionysischen KUnstler^ pp. 20 sq,y
74 sqq, ; P. Foucart, De collegiis scenicorum artificum afud Graecos, pp.
7 sq,y 19 sq,y 22, 26, 32 ; Fr. Poland, De collegiis artificum Dionysia-
corum (Dresden, 1895), p. 10 sqq, Pausanias's statement that the
Carian population was not expelled from Teos by the Greek settlers,
but that the two races fused peaceably, is confirmed by an inscription
which throws an interesting light on the social organisation of the Teian
people. It appears from this inscription that the territory of Teos was
distributed among a certain number of lowers,' to each of which a
section of the people was assigned. Each section had its common
altar, its special religious rites, and sometimes its own legendary hero,
from whom its name was supposed to be derived. Now the names of
some of these *■ towers ' are Asiatic rather than Greek, and th^se Asiatic
names seem to prove that the original Asiatic population was not ex-
tirpated by the Greek immigrants. See C. /. G, No. 3064, cp. 3065,
3066 ; Grote, History of Greece^ 3. p. 1 86 sq,

3. 6. Athamas Apoecus. According to Strabo (xiv. p. 633)

Teos was founded by Athamas, the Ionian colony was settled in it by
Nauclus {sic)^ a bastard son of Codrus, and afterwards fresh settlers were
introduced by the Athenians Apoecus and Damasus, and the Boeotian
Geres.

3. 7. Erythrae Erythrus. The foundation of Erythrae by

Erythrus, son of Rhadamanthys, is mentioned also by Diodorus (i. 79
and 84). In an inscription found near Erythrae the town is spoken of
as * the city of Erythrus ' (Kaibel, Epigrammata Graeca^ No, 904). On
the history of Erythrae see H. Gaebler, Erythrd (Berlin, 1892), p. 3 sqq,

3. 7. the Lydans came originally firom Orete etc. See Herodo-
tus, i. 173, vii. 92. The supposed Cretan origin of the Lycians may
have been simply inferred from the resemblance which Herodotus tells
us (i. 173) subsisted between the manners and customs or institutions
of the Cretans and Lycians. Cp. O, Treuber, Geschichte der Lykier^ p.
19 sq. One of the remarkable institutions of the Lycians was the custom
of tracing descent through females (Herodotus, Lc) ; and traces of
female kinship are found in Crete (J. F. M*Lennan, Studies in ancient
history (London, 1886), p. 236 sq,) Indeed Sarpedon, whom tradition
pointed to as leader of the Cretan emigrants, himself afforded an example
of the preference for the female line over the male ; for in the Trojan
war he commanded the Lycians by right of descent in the female line
from Proetus, king of Lycia, being preferred to his cousin Glaucus, who
was descended from Proteus in the male line. See Homer, Ilieuiy



CH. IV CLAZOAIENAE 121

vi. 144 sqq. ; McLennan, op, cit. p. 207 ; Bachofen, Das Mutierrecht^
p. 394. Recent researches are said to have proved that the Lycian
language was Aryan, and had close affinities with Zend (Roberts, Greek
Epigraphy^ § 122). Cp. Treuber, op, cit p. 30. There is a series of
articles on the Lycian language by Mr. W. Dcecke in Bezzenberget^s
Beitrdge^ 12 (1887), pp. 124-154,315-340; ib, 13 (1888), pp. 258-289 ;
ib, 14 (1889), pp. 181-242.

3. 7* Buaphylians becanse they too are of Oreek race. The
Pamphylian inscriptions, including the long one from Sillyon, are couched
in a barbarous and scarcely intelligible dialect of Greek. See Prof.
W. M. Ramsay and Prof. Sayce, * On some Pamphylian inscriptions,'
Journal of Hellenic Studies^ i (1880), pp. 242-259; KirchhofT, Studien
zur Gesch, d, griech, AlphabetSy^ P* 5© ^99- > Roehl, /. G, A, No. 505.
The people of Side in Pamphylia affirmed that their ancestors were
Greeks f^om Cyme in Aeolis, who on settling in Pamphylia forgot the
Greek tongue and picked up a barbarous language which differed from
the neighbouring dialects (Arrian, Anabasis ^ i. 26).

3. 7. CleopOB, son of Oodms. He is called Cnopus by Strabo
(xiv. p. 633), Polyaenus (vii. 43), Stephanus Byzantius {s,v, 'EpvOpd),
and the historian Hippias of Erythrae (cited by Athenaeus, vi. p. 258 sg.)

3. 8. Scyppium. It was also called Scypia or Scyphia (Stephanus
Byzantius, s.v, ^Kv<fiCa).

3. 9. by carrying a mole from the mainland etc This mole or
causeway, erected by order of Alexander the Great, is thus described
by Chandler : " The mole was two stadia or a quarter of a mile in
length, but we were ten minutes in crossing it ; the waves, which were
impelled by a strong Inbat, breaking over in a very formidable manner,
as high as the bellies of our horses. The width, as we conjectured, was
about thirty feet. On the west side, it is fronted with a thick, strong
wall, some pieces appearing above the water. On the opposite is a
mound of loose pebbles, shelving as a buttress, to withstand the furious
assaults of storm and tempest. The upper works have been demolished,
and the materials, a few large rough stones excepted, removed. We
computed the island to be about a mile long, and a quarter broad''
(Travels in Asia Minor ^ p. 87). The name Clazomenae (KXa^o/uvai)
appears to mean < the screaming swans ' ; the delta of the Hermus,
which faces Clazomenae across the bay, abounds in wild swans ; and
the swan appears on the coins of the city. See Coins of the Ancients^
p. 38, pi. 19, Nos. 24, 25, 26 ; P. Gardner, Types of Greek Coins^ pi.
X., No. 50; Head, Historia Numorum^ p. 491.

3. 10. Philogenes. Philogenes the Athenian is mentioned as the
founder of Phocaea by Strabo (xiv. p. 633).

4. 3. Samothrace. According to Strabo (x. p. 457) the story of
the colonisation of Samothrace from Samos was a vainglorious figment
of the Samians. The legend is also mentioned by Antiphon (quoted by
Suidas, s,v, ^/lodp^rj ; cp. Antiphon, ed. Blass, fragm. 49) ; Herap
elides Ponticus (frag. 21, in Miiller's Fragm, hist, Graec, 2. p. 218);
and Scymnus Chius {Orbis descript, 693 sqq,^ in Miiller's Geogrc^hi
Graeci Minores^ i. p. 223). The recent explorers of Samothrace, Messrs.



122 THE SAMIAN HERA bk. vii. achaia

Conze, Hauser, and Benndorf, incline to accept the tradition ; they
attribute to the old Samian colonists the great gate and the massive
walls of the city of Samothrace, of which they give photographs. See
Conze, Hauser, and Benndorf, Neue Untersuchungen auf Samotkrake
(Wien, 1880), p. 106, with plates lxviii.-lxxii.

4. 4- The sanctuary of Hera at Samos. On the scanty remains
of this famous sanctuary see Toumefort, Relation (Pun Voyage au
Levaniy i. p. 162 sq. (Amsterdam, 17 18); L. Ross, Reisen auf den
griechischen Inseln, 2. p. 1^2 sq,\ Gu^rin, Description de Pile de
Patmos et Pile de Samos^ p. 2 1 4 sqq, ; Girard, * L'H^raion de Samos,'
Bulletin de Corresp, helUnique^ 4 (1880), pp. 383-394. On the
measurements of the temple, see F. Hultsch, Heraion und Artemision
(Berlin, 1881), p. 7 sqq,\ id,j <Die Maasse des Heraion zu Samos,'
Archdologische Zeitungy 39 (1881), pp. 97-128.

4. 4. the river Imbrasus. The original name of this stream is
said to have been Parthenius (* the maiden's river '). See Strabo, x. p.
457 ; i^i xiv. p. 637 ; Schol. on ApoUonius Rhodius, i. 187, ii. 866;
Pliny, Nat. hist, v. 135. Hence Hera was called the Imbrasian
goddess (Apollonius Rhodius, i. 187). The stream flows about 400
paces to the east of the temple of Hera. Its banks are fringed with
oleanders and agnus castus. In summer the bed of the river is nearly
dry; in winter it is never full except after heavy rain. See Gu^rin,
Description de Vile de Patmos^ etc, p. 169 sq, ; cp. L. Ross, Reisen auf
den griech, Inseln^ 2. p. 143 sq,

4. 4- the willow which still grows in her sanctuary. This was,
according to Pausanias (viii. 23. 5), the oldest tree in existence. For
another legend about Hera in which the willow appears conspicuously,
see note on iii. 16. 11.

4. 4. the image is a work of an Aeginetan, Smilis. The

Samian Hera was at first represented by a mere board, for which an image
in human shape was substituted in the reign of Procles (Clement
of Alexandria, Protrept, iv. 46, p. 40, ed. Potter; as to Procles see
above § 2). In later times her image, doubtless the one by Smilis,
represented a bride, and the rite of marriage formed part of her annual
festival (Lactantius, Instit, i. 17). Her image by Smilis is represented
on Samian coins of the imperial age from Hadrian to the younger
Valerian. The goddess is portrayed standing stiffly upright, her upper
arms glued to her sides, her lower arms, from the elbows downwards,
stretched out (to the front, apparently). A long fillet, composed of a
string of balls ending in a tassel, hangs from each hand. She is clothed
in a long robe, which reaches to her feet ; she wears a veil, which,
however, leaves her face free ; her head is crowned with a high calathos.
See Overbeck, Griech, Kunstmythologie^ 3. pp. 12-16; P. Gardner,
Samos and Samian coins ^ p. 18 sqq. About 1875 a votive statue of
Hera was found some 30 feet to the north of the sanctuary of Hera at
Samos. The statue is in the archaic style. The goddess stands stiffly
upright ; a long robe descends to her feet, leaving the toes of both feet
visible ; the feet are close together ; the right arm hangs by the side ;
the left hand is raised to the breast ; the head is wanting. The



CH. IV THE SCULPTOR SMI LIS 123

image bears the inscription : X.ripafivrjs ft* av6^Ty]#c[€]v rrjfrrii. ayakfixi.
" Cheramyes dedicated me as a pleasing gift to Hera." The type of
the statue is not the same as that on the coins, and therefore presum-
ably is not copied from the statue by Smilis. On the other hand, it
somewhat resembles an archaic statue of Artemis discovered at Delos.
Sec Girard, * Statue archaique de Samos,' Bulletin de Corresp, hellin,
4 (1880), pp. 483-493 ; Homolle, De antiquisstmis Dianae simulacris
Deliacis (Paris, 1885); Preller, Gnech, MythologiCy^ p. 172, note i;
CoUignon, Histoire de la Sculpture grecque^ i. pp. 162-164.

The date of the sculptor Smilis is uncertain. That he was an
historical person there is no real reason to doubt, though Pausanias
represents him as a contemporary of the fabulous Daedalus. He made
the images of the Seasons, seated on chairs in the temple of Hera at
Olympia (v. 17. i). From the fact that these images are mentioned
by Pausanias along with works by Doryclides and Theocles, pupils of
Scyllis and Dipoenus, H. Brunn inferred that Smilis must have been a
contemporary of Doryclides and Theocles, and that accordingly he
probably flourished between Ol. 50 (580 B.C.) and Ol. 60 (540 B.C.)
Overbeck assigned the same date to Smilis, though on somewhat
different grounds. Formerly he was inclined to place him a good deal
earlier, making him a contemporary of Rhoecus and Theodorus, the
former of whom was the architect of Hera's temple at Samos
(Herodotus, iii. 60 ; as to the date of Rhoecus and Theodorus, see note
on viii. 14. 7). Prof. Furtwangler argues that Smilis was probably a
Samian, not an Aeginetan artist. He points out that it is unlikely that
the Samians would have employed an Aeginetan sculptor, since there
was enmity between Samos and Aegina (Herodotus, iii. 59) ; that
Pausanias is the only authority for calling Smilis an Aeginetan ; and
that in Pausanias the term * Aeginetan ' is applied to a particular class
of archaic images to which the image of Hera at Samos appears to
have belonged. Hence Prof. Furtwangler believes the statement of the
Aeginetan origin of Smilis to be nothing more than a mistaken inference
drawn from the * Aeginetan ' style of Smilis's statue of Hera.

See Brunn, Gesch, d, griech, KunsiUr^ i. p. 26 sqq, ; f^., Die Kunst hei
Honur, p. 43 sq,\ id,^ 'Zur Chronologie der altesten griech. KUnstler,' in
Sitzungsberichte of the Bavarian Academy (Munich), 187 1, Philosoph. philolog. CI.,
p. 542 sqq, ; Overbeck, SchriftquelUnt §§ 340-344 > id- » Griech, Kunstmythologii,
3. p. 185 sq, ; id,^ Gesck, d. griech, Plastik,^ I. p. 92 so, ; A. S. Murrajr, History of
Greek Sculpture^'* i. p. 180 x^. ; A. Furtwangler, Metsterwerke d, grtech, Plcutik^
pp. 720-723. As to the • Aeginetan* style ofsculpture see note on v. 25. 13.

4. 5. Daedalns came of the royal honse of Athens, the
Metionids. According to one tradition he was a son of Metion. See
note on ix. 3. 2.

4. 5. He had slain his sister's son etc. In societies where female
kinship prevails with exogamy, the relation between a man and his
sister's sons is in some respects closer than that which exists between
him and his own sons. For his own sons belong to a different clan,
namely to the clan of their mother ; whereas his sister's children belong
to his own clan. Therefore to slay his sister's children is, according to



124 SMYRNA— PANIONIUM bk. vxi. achaia

the primitive rules of the blood-feud, a more heinous offence than to
slay his own children. See J. J. Bachofen, AnHquarUche Briefe
(Strasburg, 1880), i. p. 120 sqq.

4. 6. as Homer signifies in the Iliad. The reference is probably
to Ilicul^ xviii. 591 sq,^ where it is said that Daedalus wrought a
representation of a dance for Ariadne in Cnosus.

4. 6. Oocalos reftised to snrrender him etc. Minos pursued
Daedalus to Sicily, and there he was murdered by the daughters of
Cocalus, who poured boiling pitch or boiling water on him. See
Zenobius, iv. 92 ; Philostephanus and Callimachus, cited by a schol.
on Homer, Iliad^ ii. 145; Hyginus, Fab, 44; Diodorus, iv. 79;
Epitoma Vaticcma ex Apollodori bibliotheca^ ed. R. Wagner, p. 56 sq. ;
Apollodorus, ed. R. Wagner, p. 177 sq. According to Diodorus,
Cocalus received Minos with a show of hospitality, but murdered him
in a warm bath, and gave out that his royal guest had been acci-
dentally drowned in it. In the time of Diodorus various remarkable
natural objects, such as a cave filled with warm vapour, and a rocky
caldron from which the river Alabon rushed into the neighbouring sea,
were still pointed out as the works of Daedalus. See Diodorus, iv.
78 sq,

4. 9. Amphidus. He is mentioned by the historian Hippias of
Erythrae (cited by Athenaeus, vi. p. 259 b).

5. I. the Old City. Smyrna stands on the south side of the gulf
of Smyrna. The Old City according to Strabo (xiv. pp. 634, 646)
was situated on a bay, 20 furlongs distant from the more modem city.
The site of this Old City seems to have been on the opposite (northern)
side of the gulf, on the southern slopes of lamanlar Dagh^ the western
part of Mount Sipylus. Here at various points are very considerable
ancient remains ; a necropolis, two, or perhaps three, ancient acropolises,
etc But the maps of the district are very insufficient, and it is difficult
to reconcile the descriptions of travellers.

See Hamilton, Researches in Asia Minor^ etc I. p. 47 sqq, ; G. Hirschfeld,
' Alt-Sm3nma,' in £. Curtius's 'Beitrage zur Geschichte und Topographie
Kleinasiens/ Abhandlungen of the Berlin Academy, 1872, pp. 74-84; W. M.
Ramsay, ' Newly discovered sites near Smyrna,' Journal of Hellenic Studies^
I (1880), pp. 63-74 (cp. Prof. Ramsay's sketch-map in icL 2. p. 274) ; W.
Weber, *Hi^ron de C^b^le* etc in Mou^-ccov k<lX ptfiKtodifficri r^f e^T^eX.
<rxo\vs, Smyrna, 3 (1878- 1880), pp. 105- 1 18; Perrot et Chipiez, Histoire de Part
dans VantiquUi^ 5. p. 39 sqq, I regret that the larger work of Weber, Le Sipylos
et ses monufnents (Paris, 1880) is not accessible to me here in Cambridge

5. I. PanionituxL See Herodotus, i. 143 and 148; Strabo, xiv.
p. 639. Panionium, a sacred territory dedicated to Poseidon, where
the lonians held their national assemblies and festivals, appears to have
been situated near the modem village of Tskangli^ on the coast between
Ephesus and Miletus. The spot, *< situated in a delightful and well-
watered vaUey between two projecting points of the mountain, was
admirably suited to the Panionian festival : and here Sir William Cell
found, in a church on the sea-shore, an inscription in which he dis-
tinguished the name of Panionium twice " (Leake, Journal of a tour in
Asia MinoTy p. 260). Cp. Chandler, Travels in Asia Minor^ P« 1 5^ sq.



CH. V NEMESES OF SMYRNA 125

5. 2. As he slept under the plane-tree etc Alexander's dream,
as it is here described by Pausanias, is represented on coins of Smyrna.
He is seen sleeping under a tree, with the two Nemeses standing
beside him. See Eckhel, Docirina numorum veterum^ 2. p. 548 sqq, ;
Head, Historia numorum^ p. 510.

5. 3. two Nemeses. On coins of Smyrna the two Nemeses
are sometimes depicted driving in a chariot drawn by griffins (see
Miiller-Wieseler, Denkmdler^ 2. pi. Ixxiv. No. 954). On other coins of
the same city the two Nemeses appear " each with right hand raised
to her breast, the one holding in her left a bridle, the other a sceptre,
and with a wheel at her feet" (Head, Historia Numorum^ p. 510).
Cp. preceding note. The Nemeses are mentioned in the plural in
inscriptions of Smyrna. From one of these inscriptions we learn that
games were celebrated in their honour, and from an inscription found at
Halicamassus it appears that games were held in their honour at that
city also. See C. /. G, Nos. 2663 (with Bockh's comments), 3148.
Cp. L. Fivel in Gazette arMologiquCy 4 (1878), p. 105. The sanc-
tuary of the Nemeses at Smyrna is mentioned by Pausanias elsewhere
(ix. 35. 6; cp. i. 33. 7).

5. 3. the father of the goddess (Nemesis) at Bhamnns was
Ocean. Cp. i. 33. 3. Nemesis was said to have transformed herself
into a swan in order to avoid the importunities of Zeus (Eratosthenes,
Catasterisfniy 25), and in art she is sometimes represented with a swan.
Hence Mr. L. v. Schroeder argues that she was one of those Swan-
maidens of popular tales who can doff and don their swan-form at
pleasure {Ap/irodite, Eros^ und Hephdstos^ p. 43 sqq,) As to the
Swan-maidens see above, p. 106.

5. 4. Ionia enjoys the finest of climates. Cp. Herodotus, i. 142,
with Bahr's note. Some of the ancients maintained that the climate of
Ionia was the finest in the world ; others gave the preference to the
climate of Attica (Aristides, i. p. 402, ed. Dindorf). Hamilton says:
" The soft Ionian climate must be felt before it can be appreciated. . .
There is an exquisite softness in the air of this climate at the commence-
ment of spring, when the ground is enamelled with flowers, of which no
description can convey an idea" {Researches in Asia Minor^ i. p. 59).

5. 4. the sanctuary of the Ephesian goddess. See note on iv.
31. 8.

5. 4. one at Branchidae. This was the sanctuary of the Didy-
maean Apollo. The place itself is sometimes called Didyma, not Bran-
chidae. See ii. 10. 5 ; v. 13. 11 ; vii. 2. 6. Elsewhere, as here,
Pausanias speaks of the place as Branchidae (i. 16. 3 ; viii. 46. 3 ; ix.
10. 2, cp. V. 7. 5). Herodotus generally speaks of the temple at Bran-
chidae, but once (vi. 19) he speaks of "the temple at Didyma," indi-
cating at the same time that it was the same as the temple at Branchidae.
Strabo (xiv. p. 634) speaks of the oracle of the Didymaean Apollo at
Branchidae. The name Branchidae is said to be etymologically related
to the Sanscrit Brahman and the Latin flamen. See A. Kaegi, Der
Rigveda^ p. 1 59.

After its destruction by Xerxes the temple was rebuilt by the



126 APOLLO OF BRANCHIDAE bk. vii. achaia

Milesians on a very great scale (Strabo, Lc, ; see Brunn, in Sitzungs-
berichte of the Bavarian Academy (Munich) for 1 87 1, Philosoph. philolog.
CL, p. 522 sqq,) Chandler has thus described the site: "The temple
of Apollo was 1 8 or 20 stadia, or about 2| miles, from the shore ; and
180 stadia, or 22^ miles, from Miletus. It is approached by a gentle
ascent, and seen afar off; the land toward the sea lying flat and level.
The memory of the pleasure which this spot afforded me will not be
soon or easily erased. The columns yet entire are so exquisitely fine,
the marble mass so vast and noble, that it is impossible perhaps to con-
ceive greater beauty and majesty of ruin. At evening a large flock of
goats, returning to. the fold, their bells tinkling, spread over the heap,
climbing to browse on the shrubs and trees growing between the huge
stones. The whole mass was illuminated by the declining sun with a
variety of rich tints, and cast a very strong shade. The sea, at a dis-
tance, was smooth and shining, bordered by a mountainous coast with
rocky islands. The picture was as delicious as striking" {Travels in
Asia Minor^ p. 1 50).

The temple is measured and delineated in the Ionian Antiquities
(pt i.), pub. by the Dilettanti Society (London, 1759), pp. 27-53,
plates i.-x. The temple was connected with the port on the north by a
Sacred Way, which was flanked on each side by a row of statues. In
1858 ten of these statues were removed under the direction of Sir
Charles Newton. They are now in the British Museum. The statues
are in the archaic style. They are seated in chairs, their hands resting
on their knees, and draped in tunics which reach to their feet. With
two exceptions they represent male figures. From inscriptions on them
it is believed that these statues date from 580 to 540 B.C., so that they
may have been already in position on either side of the Sacred Way,
when the envoys of Croesus arrived at Branchidae to consult the oracle
before he went to war with Cyrus. In type and style the statues remind
us of Egyptian sculpture ; they may have been executed by artists who
had studied in Egypt.

See Sir C. T. Newton, Travels and Discoveries in the Levant^ 2. p. 147 sqq, ;
id.y Essays on art and archaeology, p. 75 sqq. ; A. S. Murray, History of Greek
Sculpture f^ I. p. 116 sqq. ; Overbeck, Gesch. d. griech. Plastik^^ l. p. ico sqq, ;
Lucy M. Mitchell, Hist, of ancient sculpture^ p. 179 sq. For the inscriptions
from the Sacred Way, see Roberts, Greek Epigraphy ^ Nos. 133-140.

5. 4. the temple of Athena at Phocaea. Cp. ii. 31. 6.

5. 5. the temple of Athena at Priene. The ruins of this temple
have been examined and delineated for the Dilettanti Society first in
last century and again in this. The temple occupied a platform of rock
bounded by terrace walls. Immediately behind it rises a grand precipice
to the height of 1000 feet; the summit of this height was the ancient
acropolis. The temple was a small hexastyle (six columns at each end),
of the Ionic order, measuring 1 2 1 feet 8 inches long by 64 feet wide. It
" is one of the most complete and best proportioned of its class known
to exist anywhere. The relative proportions of the cella to the pronaos
and posticum and the arrangement of the peristyle are all typical, and
unsurpassed for elegance by anything found elsewhere " {^Antiquities of



CH. V ATHENA OF PRIENE laj

Ionia, Pt. iv. p. 32). "The sculptured ornaments throughout the build-
ing, such as the honeysuckle pattern on the cymation, are delicately
carved and of excellent style. The temple was constructed of a bluish
marble quarried in the neighbouring mountain. It is of fine grain, and
admits of a high polish. The capitals of the anlae and a sculptured
frieie , . . were of fine white marble. The masonry is of a superior
character, the joints being so close that the eye hardly detects them"
{ib. p. 30). The temple was built in the ^e of Alexander the Great,
by whom it was dedicated to Athena Polias, as we learn from an in-
scription found on the site. The architect u'as Pytheus (Vitruvius,
i. I. 12 ; vii. I. 13).

On the marble floor of the temple, when it was cleared by Mr.
Pullao for the Dilettanti Society in 1868, were seen the lower courses
of a large pedestal at the west end of the cello. On this pedestal no
doubt stood the image of which Pausanlas here spealcs admiringly. Of
the image itself some fragments were found, and are now in the British
Museum. They consist of a colossal left foot, a fragment of a colossal
left hand, and the whole of a colossal left upper arm (made up of 93
fis^ments). The statue would seem to have been about 20 feet high.

Since the temple was cleared by Mr. Fullan in 1868 it has become
a quarry for the masons of the nearest Greek village, who have worked
up into doorsteps, tombstones, etc., the fine marble blocks which were
shaped and dressed by the workmen of Alexander's age.

See Ionian Auliquitits (London, 1759), pp. 13-2$, with plates i.-xii. ; Anli-
fuitiis ef lenia. Hi. iv. (London, iSSi), pp. 11-34, with plates i.-xxi. ; Chandler,
Traeili in Asia Miner,'' p. 160 ; Newlon, Emnsim art and arikaeeUgy, p.gosf. j
E, L. Hicks, \n hurnat of Hettinic Studifs, 6(1885), P- 264 w. ; Baumeisler's
Dtnkmakr, p. 283. For insciipt ions found at Friene, see ^w Jeumai <if HelUnie
Shfi/ie/, 4(1884], pp. 237-242 ; Hicks, Grai historical InKripiiom.'Sta. 123,124;
Diltcnbetgcr, Syllo^ Jnscr. Grate. Nos. II7, 24I ; Newlon, Essays, p. I20;
'E^^pli 6.pxiio\(r,iiH,, 1886, p]J. 218-224.

S. 5. the image of Hercules etc. On coins of Erythrae, from the
age of Augustus onward, there is often
figured an archaic image of Hercules,
probably the one here mentioned by
Pausanias. The hero is represented naked
and without the lion's skin, his usual
emblem. He is standing upright in a stiff J
posture, resting equally on both feet li
his right hand, which is raised above hi;
head, he holds his club ; in his left !
lance. See A. Furtwiingler, in Roscher^s
Lexikon, I. p. 2137; P. Gardner, Types
of Greek Coins, pi. xv. No. 8 ; B. V. Head,
Hisloria Numoruin, p. 499. As the image
was said to have come from Tyre, it may
have represented the Tyrian Hercules or

Melcart. From Pausanias's description of its style, Mr. Helbig infers
that the image was a Phoenician work in the Egyptian manner (fias


itf HERCULES OF ERYTBRAE ix. tt-_ msais

homteritcke Epot aia dem DemkmMUm erUnUrt* p. 4"E;. Tie i^eed
that the image flgoied W Eryduae on a rafi is iwnajtaWv ilh:5?a3d ^
a (encf of tcantw, on wUdi Hercnles is represented cm bis nt- He
■i pwtrayed as a naked man, of poweifb] build, Ij-ing oa his back ob a
nft 1 in bis ri^t hasd be gras^ Ies
dnb, in his left he holds the cons- of
tbe sail, Thich is bellying out in ifae
«ind. Under tbe laA aie a mssber
I of earthen ptcher^ serving as 5aa:s.
Simitar rafts, consisting of tows of
' empty earthen pots &stened :ogcdie-
and cuneied with palms and [daaks,
are still in use in Egypt- Aboi-c
Hercules, as he lies on his raft, aie
a star, the disc of the son. and the
(icaual. crescent moon. Such embtems are

common on Phoenician moomnent^
and go to show that the Hercules represented is the Phoenician
Hercules or MelcarL At his back is his bow, which, with his dub,
serve* to identpfy him as Hercules. Nine or ten such scarabs are
known. See E. Courbaud, ' La naiHgalion d'Hercule,' yUUmgts
tCArchMogie et d'Hiiloirt, Ecole Fran^ise de Rome, 12 (1893),
pp. 374-2«8.

Hercules was worshipped at Erythrae under the title of Worm-
Killer (Ipoktonos), because he killed a sort of worm {ip^) which destroyed
the vines ; Erythiae was said to be tbe only place that was free from
this pcM (StralKJ, xiii. p. 613). The sanctuary of Hercules at Erj-thiae
is mentioned in an inscription found on the site (MoiircMV icai
fii^kuiBt'iKjf T^( tvayytK. tj-\o\^t, Smyrna, a (1876-1878), p. 58;
Dittenber^ger, Sylloge Inscr. Craec. No. 160).

As to the Hercules of Erythrac, my friend the late W. Robertson
Smith wrote to me as follows : " Why is he Tyrian ? Pausanias comes
back 10 him ix. 27. 8, but this leaves it unclear whether he was really
Phoenician or only thought to be so from his cult. From the latter
one would fancy him rather Thracian. Women, according to Silius
[Italicus, iii. 23], were excluded from Hcrcules's temple at Gades, as
they certainly were at Rome [see Macrobius, Sal. i. 12. 28 ; Aurelius
Victor, Or. gent. Rom. 6 ; Plutarch, Quaesl. Rom. 60 ; Gellius, xi. 6. 2].
But here those women who offer their hair are admitted. The rope, 1
suppose, is a rope of hair offerings, and as this in the Dea Syria [of
Lucian, g 6] is in Phoenician ritual a substitute for the offering of one's
chastity one can understand why only slave women and the like
frequent the temple. Was there a similar reason for the exclusion of
women from the worship of Hercules at Rome ? All this wants looking
into. What seems clear is that the legend is aetiological like those in
Plutarch, Qu. Rom., etc. etc., and thai the Thracian women used to
offer their hair at the temple. If I am right in thinking that the hair
ofTeriiig is a surrogate, the worship will be really Lydian. See
Athenaeus, xu. p- S i S e sg." Cp. the next note.



CH. V THE WONDERS OF IONIA 129



5. 7- liad lost his eyesight. Bachofen thought that in Oriental
religions blindness is a symbol of religious prostitution. He refers to
the blindness of Ilus (Plutarch, Parallela^ 17), of Anchises (Servius on
Virgil, Aen, ii. 687), of Lamia (Diodorus, xx. 41 ; Movers, Die
Phoenizier^ i. p. 476 x^.), and of Oedipus. See Bachofen, Die Sage von
Tanaquily p. 68 sq. ; id.^ Das Mutterrecht^ pp. 146 sq,^ 170 sq,^ 246, 275.
5. 9. There is also in Erythrae a temple of Athena. This
temple is mentioned in inscriptions (Dittenberger, Sylloge Inscr, Graec.
Nos. 84, 160).

5. 9. Endoens. See note on i. 26. 4.

5. 10. the peculiar mountain of Pion. It used to be supposed
that this was the round moimtain which bounded Ephesus on the
east But the researches of Mr. Wood at Ephesus have conclusively
proved that this mountain was Coressus ; and that consequently Mt
Pion must be the long serrated mountain which bounded Ephesus on
the south, and which modem topographers, before Mr. Wood, had called
Coressus. The city-wall can still be traced winding along the lofty and
irregular ridge of Mt. Pion. See J. T. Wood, Discoveries at Ephesus^
p. 2 sqq,^ 79 sqq, (Mr. Wood adopts Prion as the form of the name.
The name wotdd then mean 'a saw,' and be well applicable to the
serrated ridge. But this form of the name seems to rest on a false
reading in Strabo, xiv. p. 633. The form Pion is confirmed by Pliny,
N€U. hist V. 115.) It is not known what the peculiarity of Mt Pion
was to which Pausanias refers. From the evidence of coins on which
Zeus is represented seated on the top of Mt Pion with a thunderbolt in
his left hand, while with his right he pours out rain, E. Curtius con-
jectured that Zeus was worshipped as a rain-giver on the top of the
mountain (*Beitrage zur Geschichte und Topographie Kleinasiens,'
p. 2 sq. ; Gesammelte Abhandlungeny 2. p. 233 sqq.) At the highest
point of Mt. Pion, 1 300 feet above the sea, a large area has been cleared
and levelled in antiquity. Here Mr. Wood found several large cisterns
sunk in the rock, and at the eastern extremity of the ridge he came
upon the remains of a large earthenware water-pipe at a high level
(Discoveries at Ephesus^ p. 7). These discoveries appear to confirm
Curtius's conjecture that there may have been a sanctuary or precinct
of Rainy Zeus on the top of the mountain.

5. 10. the spring Halitaea. "On the low dry ground to the
north of the marsh or harbour, and which was covered with broken tiles
and pottery, we found a beautiful spring flowing into the marsh close
by" (W. J. Hamilton, Researches in Asia Minor^ 2. p. 25). Hamilton
thought that this spring might be Halitaea. Pliny mentions a spring
called Callippia in Ephesus {NcU, hist, v. 115).

5. 10. Biblis. Cp. vii. 24. 5. The tragic story of Biblis's love is
told by Parthenius {Narrat, Am. 1 1).

5. 10. the Ales. See note on vii. 3. i.

5. 10. its wondrons and salnbrions baths. See vii. 3. 5 note.

5. II. Cape Macria. The late G. Hirschfeld identified with
Macria a cape in the district of Teos, off which there lies an island.
The island he takes to be Macris, mentioned by Livy (xxxvii. 28).

VOL. IV K



130 THE WONDERS OF IONIA bk. vii. achaia

There are still hot springs on the cape. See Hirschfeld, * Teos,* Archd-
ologische Zdtung^ 31. p. 23 sqq,

5. II. The Olazomenians have also baths. Strabo (xiv. p. 645)
mentions warm springs between Clazomenae and Smyrna. They are
probably identical with the warm springs called the Agamemnonian
springs which were situated 40 furlongs from Smyrna. There was a
legend that warm baths had been prescribed by the soothsayers for the
wounded Greeks in the Trojan war. See Philostratus, Herotca^ iii. 35.
Chandler believed that he had found the springs and the bath. " You
descend by steps to the bath, which is imder a modem vaulted roof,
with vents in it for the steam ; and adjoining to this is a like room now
disused. The current, which is soft and limpid, is conveyed into a
small round basin of marble, and runs over into a large cistern or reser-
voir beneath. Our thermometer rose in the vein to one hundred and
fifty. . . . The warm rill emerges in two or more places in the bed
of the river, and in cool weather may easily be discovered, a thick mist
rising from it visible afar off" (Chandler, Travels in Asia Minor ^^ p.
83 sq,)

5. 12. the river Meles. Chandler identified this with the river
which fiows near Smyrna ; he describes it as a clear stream, shallow in
summer, but swelling to a rapid and deep torrent in winter {Travels in
Asia Minor^ p. 69). Hamilton, on the other hand, calls the river
near Smyrna " a dirty, muddy stream " ; and identifies the Meles with
the river at Boumoubat^ near the ruins of Old Smyrna, at the north-
eastern comer of the Gulf of Smyrna. The river at Boumoubat^ accord-
ing to him, is a "bright and sparkling river . . . celebrated for its
agreeable and wholesome qualities" (W. J. Hamilton, Researches in
Asia Minor ^ i. p. 51). The latter identification is confirmed by an
ancient Greek inscription on a pillar in the mosque at Boumoubat^ the
translation of which is : "I sing the praises of the river Meles, the god
who saved me from all pestilence and evil." See Arundell, Discoveries
in Asia Minor^ 2. p. 406.

5. 1 2. a grotto where they say that Homer composed his poems.
Chandler searched for this grotto at Smyma. In the bank above the
aqueduct he found " a cavem, about four feet wide, the roof of a huge
rock cracked and slanting, the sides and bottom sand " (Travels in Asia
Minor^ p. 72). Hamilton, who also visited this cavem, describes it as
a long and narrow passage or gallery cut in the soft calcareous tuff; he
thinks it is part of an ancient aqueduct and of no very great antiquity.
He also visited some caves overhanging a ravine in the mountains above
Boumoubatj which are popularly known as the Caves of Homer. " They
are plain and unimportant, about five feet high, and extend from twelve
to fifteen feet into the rock ; they were probably sepulchral " (Hamilton,
Researches in Asia Minor ^ i. p. 55).

5. 13. Oenopion. Cp. vii. 4. 8.

6. I. These cities were twelve in number. Lists of the

twelve Achaean cities are also given by Herodotus (i. 145), Polybius
(ii. 41), and Strabo (viii. p. 385 sq,) The lists of Herodotus and
Strabo tally exactly, but their list differs from the lists of Polybius and



CH. VII THE ACHAEAN LEAGUE 131

Pausanias, and the lists of these two last authors disagree with each
other. Rhypes and Aegae, mentioned by Pausanias, are mentioned also
by Herodotus and Strabo, but not by Polybius. Cerynea, mentioned by
Pausanias, is mentioned also by Polybius, but not by Herodotus and
Strabo. Patrae is included in the list by Herodotus, Strabo, and
Polybius, but is not included by Pausanias. Leontium is included by
Polybius, but not by any of the others. In respect to the other cities,
the lists all agree.

6. 4* tho Achaeans were warm allies of the Patreans. In 419
B.C. Alcibiades, at the head of an Athenian force, persuaded the Patreans
to connect their city with the sea by means of long walls (Thucydides,
V. 52). When some one warned the Patreans that, if they did so, the
Athenians would swallow them up, " Perhaps so," retorted Alcibiades,
" but at least they will do it gradually and begin at your feet, whereas
the Lacedaemonians will begin at your head and swallow you at one
gulp" (Plutarch, Alcibiades^ 15). From Pausanias's statement it would
seem that the rest of the Achaeans sympathised with the Patreans in
thus casting in their lot with Athens. But the Greek text of the passage
is probably corrupt, and the meaning is somewhat uncertain.

6. 5. the wrestler OhiloiL See vi. 4. 6.

6. 9. the people were brought back by Oassander. Cp. iv. 27.

10 ; ix. 3. 6 ; ix. 7. I.

7. I. the Achaean League. The history of the Achaean League
or Confederacy and questions relating to it are treated of by Thirlwall,
History of Greece^ 8. p. 86 sqq, ; E. A. Freeman, History of Federal
Government^ 1. p. 218 sqq. ; M. Dubois, Les ligues Etolienne et AclUenne
(Paris, 1885); Klatt, Forschungen zur Geschichte des achdischen
Bundes (Berlin, 1877) ; id.^ Chronologische Beitrdge zur Geschichte des
achdischen Bundes (Berlin, 1883); G. F. Unger, *Das Strategenjahr
der Achaier,* Sitzungsberichte for 1879 of the Bavarian Academy
(Munich), Philosoph. philolog. CI., pp. 117-192; A. Weinert, Die
achdische Bundesverfassung (Demmin, 1881) ; Hill, Der achdische
Bund seit 168 2/. /. Chr, (Elberfeld, 1883); B. Baier, Studien zur
achaeischen Bundes -verfassung (Wiirzburg, 1886); C. Wachsmuth,
*Ueber eine Hauptquelle fiir die Geschichte des achaischen Bundes,'
Leipziger Studien zur classischen Philologies 10 (1887), pp. 269-298.
The two last writers investigate the authority or authorities followed by
Pausanias in his sketch of the history of the Achaean League. They
both come to the conclusion that he followed, not Polybius, but some
historian now lost, whose work was coloured by a strong bias in favour
of the Achaean League.

7. 2. the federal assemblies at Aegiuxn. Cp. vii. 24. 4;

Livy, xxxviii. 30. See also note on vii. 24. 2.

7. 3. Agis captured Pellene. Cp. ii. 8. 5 ; viii. 27. 14.

7. 3. Oleomenes gained a decisive victory over the

Achaeans etc. Cp. ii. 9. i sq,

7. 4- subjugating Megalopolis. See viii. 27. 151^.; viii. 28. 7.

7. 4- I shall again have occasion to mention 01eomene& See



7. 4- I shall again have occasion t

viii. 8. II ; viii. 27. 15 sq, \ viii. 29. 4 sq.



132 THE ACHAEAN LEAGUE bk. vii. achaia

7. 5. the poisoned cup. See ii. 9. 4.

7. 6. the keys of Greece. According to other writers Philip called
these three fortresses, not the keys, but the fetters, of Greece. See
Polybius, xviii. 1 1. 5 ; Appian, Macedan, 8. p. 330, ed. Mendelssohn ;
Livy, xxxii. 37 ; Plutarch, Flamimnus^ 10.

7. 7* In my account of Attica etc. See i. 36. 5 sq,

7. 8. Otilios. Pausanias means Publius Villius Tappulus. On the
mistakes in Pausanias's account of his operations, see the paper of Prof.
C. Wachsmuth (cited above in note on § i), p. 277 sq, Hestiaea
(Oreus) was captured by the Roman fleet under the command of
Apustius in 200 B.C. (Livy, xxxi. 46). Anticyra was taken by
Flamininus in 198 B.C. (Livy, xxxii. 18). Elsewhere (x. 36. 6) Pausanias
repeats his statement that Anticyra was taken by Otilius.

8. I. sent to the Achaeans, desiring etc. On this and what
follows, see Livy, xxxii. 19-23 ; Appian, Macedon. 7. p. 329 sq.^ ed.
Mendelssohn ; C. Wachsmuth, op. cit. p. 279 sq.

8. 3. they had joined it before, when etc. See ii. 8. 4 sq.
8. 5. These walls had been hastily run np at the time of the
Invasion, first of Demetrins etc. See i. 1 3. 6 note, and vol. 3. p. 324.
8. 6. I shall treat of this topic etc. See viii. 51.3.

8. 9. Ye Macedonians, who glory etc. These Sibylline verses are
also quoted by Appian {Macedon. 2. p. 327, ed. Mendelssohn).

9. I. They requested the officers of the League to summon a
diet etc. With this and the following section cp. Polybius, xxii. 13
and 15 sq.^ ed. Hultsch (xxiii. 10-12, ed. Dindorf) ; Livy, xxxix. 33.

9. 3. The Senate sent a commission, with Appius at its head
etc. For a fuller account of the affairs described in ^ 3 and 4 of this
chapter, see Livy, xxxix. 33 and 35-37.

9. 5. the Achaeans had despatched a counter embassy etc. See
Polybius, xxiii. 4, ed. Hultsch ; C. Wachsmuth, op. cit. p. 285 sq.

9. 6. they intrigued to have them restored etc. See Polybius,
xxiv. 10-12, ed. Hultsch ; C. Wachsmuth, op. cit. p. 287.

10. I. the Samian captains deserted the Ionian fleet. See

Herodotus, vi. 13 sq.

10. 2. Eretria betrayed by Philagrus etc. See Herodotus,

vi. loi.

10. 2. Thessaly was betrayed by the Aleuads etc. See

Herodotus, vii. 6 and 130.

10. 2. Attaginus and Timegenidas. See Herodotus, ix. chapters
16, 38, 86-88.

10. 2. Xenias, an Elean, tried to betray Elis. See iii. 8. 4 ; v.
4. 8.

10. 6. led an army against . . . Abrupolis, king of the Sapaeans
etc. The Sapaeans were a Thracian tribe in the neighbourhood of
Abdera (Strabo, xii. p. 549 sq.) Abrupolis made a raid on the gold
mines of Pangaeum, but was defeated and expelled from his kingdom by
Perseus (Polybius, xxii. 8. 2, ed. Hultsch). As Abrupolis was an ally of
the Romans, his expulsion formed one of the grounds on which Eumenes,
king of Pergamus, accused Perseus before the Roman senate of being



CH. XX THE A CHAEAN LEAGUE 1 33

an enemy of Rome (Livy, xlii. 13 and 40 ; Appian, Macedonica^ xi. 2) ;
and historians assigned it as the first of the causes which led to the
rupture between Perseus and the Romans (Polybius, /.r.)

10. 7* ten Roman senators were sent to settle the afElAirs of
Macedonia etc. See Polybius, xxx. 13. 8 sqq, ; Livy, xlv. 31. 9 sqq, ;
C. Wachsmuth, op, at p. 288 sq. \ Baier, Siudten sur achaeischen
Bundes-verfassung^ p. 5.

10. 12. three hundred prisoners were released. Cp.

Polybius, xxxv. 6.

11. I. the Romans despatched a senator to arbitrate etc

According to Polybius (xxxi. 9) two senators, Gains Sulpicius and
Manius Sergius, were sent by the senate to oversee the affairs of Greece
and to arbitrate between Lacedaemon and Megalopolis (not Argos, as
Pausanias says) in a dispute about a piece of territory. Cp. C. Wach-
smuth, op, ciL p. 289 ; Baier, op, cit, p. 6 sq, Mr. Baier remarks that
Polybius must be right and Pausanias wrong, since the former was in
Rome at the time referred to, and must have known the whole history
of the dispute. A mutilated inscription found at Olympia perhaps
refers to this dispute. Stt Archdologische Zeitungy 37 (1879), p. 127
sqq,y Inscr. No. 259.

11. 3. Plenron. On the ruins of Pleuron, see a paper by Mr. £. D.
Colnaghi, in Transactions of the Royal Society of Literature^ 7 (1863),
pp. 239-244.

11. 4* the Athenian democracy pillaged Oropns. Cp. Aulus
Gellius, vi. (vii.) 14. 8 ; Polybius, xxxii. 25, xxxiii. 2, ed. Hultsch.
Although Pausanias and Aulus Gellius speak only of the devastation of
Oropus by the Athenians, we know from an inscription, which refers to
this affair (C /. G, G, S, i. No. 411), that the whole native population
was expelled from the country, but was afterwards restored through the
intervention of the Achaean League (see below). This occupation of
Oropus by the Athenians seems to have taken place in 156 B.C. Cp.
F. Durrbach, De Oropo et Amphiarai sacro, p. 63 sqq,

11. 5. at the petition of the Athenians. The Athenians sent as
ambassadors to Rome Cameades the Academic philosopher, Diogenes
the Stoic, and Critolaus the Peripatetic (Aulus Gellius, vL (vii.) 14. 9 ;
Plutarch, Cato Major, 22).

11. 7* The Oropians then appealed for help to the Achaeans

etc An inscription found in the sanctuary of Amphiaraus near Oropus
throws some fresh light on these transactions (C. /. G, G, S, i. No. 4x1;
'E<fn)fjL€pU dpxaf'oXoyiK'qy 1885, p. 97 sqq,) At an assembly of the
Achaean League, held in CorinUi, the cause of the Oropians was earnestly
pleaded by a certain Hiero of Aegira. In consequence of his repre-
sentations a special meeting of the League was called at Argos to
consider the case. Here Hiero lodged the Oropian envoys in his own
house, sacrificed on their behalf to Saviour Zeus, and advocated their
cause so successfully against the Athenian representatives that he pre-
vailed on the League to succour the Oropians and to restore them to
their country with their wives and children. The grateful Oropians set
up a bronze statue of Hiero, and made proclamation of having done so



134 THE ACHAEAN LEAGUE bk. vii. achaia

at the great games of Amphiaraus. Cp. F. Diirrbach, De Oropo et
Amphiarai sacro^ P« 63 sqq,

12. 4. the S^te had ordered them to submit all caees, except
capital ones etc. See vii. 9. 5.

13. I. a revolt headed by Andriscns, son of Persons. According
to Livy (^Epit 48. 49) this Andriscus was an impostor, a man of the
lowest class, who falsely gave himself out to be a son of Perseus.

13. 7. the town of lasns. This Laconian town is not otherwise
known.

14. I. the Roman Senate deemed it fkir etc. Cp. Justin, xxxiv. i ;

Livy, Epit 5 1 ; Polybius, xxxviii. 7 ; Baier, op. cit p. 7 sqq,

14. 5. to wait for another assembly of the League etc. It is
generally supposed that the Federal Assembly of the Achaean League
met twice a year, in spring and autumn. See Freeman, History of
Federal Government^ i. p. 275 ; T>\}bo\s, Les ligues Atoltenne et AcfUenne^
p. 115 sq. The present passage certainly seems to imply that the
Assembly met only every half-year. However, Prof. G. F. Unger
attempts to prove that the Assembly met four times a year. See Sitz-
ungsberichte of the Bavarian Academy (Munich), Philosoph. philolog.
CI., 1879, P- 134 SQQ' ; cp. Baier, op. cit. p. 14 sqq. With the present
passage of Pausanias compare Polybius, xxxviii. 9.

14. 6. Now when a king or a state goes to war etc The
following argument to show that the downfall of the Achaean League
could not properly be described as a misfortune, is a covert polemic
against Polybius, who expressly refers to that event as an instance of
misfortune. See Polybius, xxxviii. 3, § i sqq.^ and 5, §§ 5-7, xxxix. 9, § 9 ;
C. Wachsmuth, op. cit. p. 294 sqq.

15. 4. Oritolans was not seen alive after the battle. According
to Livy {Epit. 52) Critolaus poisoned himself

15. 10. he paid the forfeit. According to Polybius (xxxix. 9. 10)
Pytheas retired with his wife and children to Peloponnese, and roamed
up and down the country.

16. 9. assessors. These assessors were ten in number (Polybius,
xl. 9 sq.) Statues of them and of Mummius were set up at Olympia.
See vol. 3. p. 634 sq.

17. 3. Nero set it free. According to Plutarch {Flamininus^

12) Nero personally announced ' the liberation of Greece in a speech
which he delivered to the people from a platform in the market-place at
Corinth during the celebration of the Isthmian games. Suetonius says
{Nero^ 24) that the announcement was made by Nero in the stadium at
Corinth, on the day of the Isthmian games, just before the emperor
left Greece. Cp. Pliny, Nat. hist. iv. 22 ; Philostratus, Vit. Apoll.
V. 41 ; Dio Cassius, Ixiii. 11. The official text of Nero's speech was
discovered a few years ago inscribed on a stone in the church of St.
George at Acraephnium (Acraephia) in Boeotia. From this inscription
we learn that the speech was delivered at Corinth on the 28th of
November, when Nero held the tribunician power for the thirteenth time.
This would seem to make the date of the speech 66 A.D. ; but if Sue-
tonius is right (see above) the date was 67 a.d. The speech affords us



CH. XVII DYME 135

incidentally a glimpse of the decay of Greece ; for Nero expresses a
wish that he had been able to confer the boon on Greece in its palmy
days, because then there would have been more people to share the
benefit See Bulletin de Corr. helUniquey 12 (1888), pp. 510-528;
AcAtiov apxaLoXoyucov, 1 888, pp. 192-194.

17. 3. Plato's sa^^ing. See Plato, Republic^ vi. p. 491 e.

17. 4* Vespasian commanded that they should again pay tribute
etc Cp. Philostratus, Vit Apollon, v. 41, who agrees with Pausanias
in saying that intestine strife furnished Vespasian with the pretext for
withdrawing the freedom of Greece. Apollonius of Tyana is said to
have written some uncomplimentary letters to the emperor on the
subject, which Philostratus has preserved.

17. 5. the river Larisos. See vi. 26. 10 note.

17. 5. Dyme. The remains of Dyme are generally identified with
the ruins in the neighbourhood of Karavostasi, a hamlet lying in low
swampy ground among woods. To the north-west, a mile beyond the
village, a narrow pass in the hills leads to the salt-water lagoon of
Kalogrioy which is well stocked with fish and is separated from the sea
only by a low sandbank, through which there is an opening navigable
by boats. Near the village, on its eastern side, Leake found several
remains of ancient Greek masonry ; others he found below the village,
toward the lagoon ; and in all the fields round the hamlet were frag-
ments of wrought stone and broken pottery. About two miles to the
east of Karavostasi is a hill with a chapel of St. George (not St. Con-
stantine, as is usually stated). Here there were formerly some scanty
ancient remains, mostly Roman, but they seem now to have disappeared.
The hill may possibly have been the acropolis of Dyme. Its position
agn'ces fairly with the distance of 60 furlongs from Cape Araxus men-
tioned by Strabo (viii. p. 337), and with the distance of 40 furlongs
from Olenus mentioned by Strabo (viii. p. 386) and by Pausanias
(vii. 18. i), if we suppose that Olenus was at Kato-Achcda. But more
probably we should identify Dyme with the remains near Kato-Achcda^
and about 7 miles east of Karavostasi^ which are usually supposed
to be those of Olenus. See notes on § 8 and vii. 18. i. The coimtry
between Karavostcui and Kato-Achaia is now covered with beautiful
woods of ancient oaks. There is no underwood between the massive
boles of the trees, but in spring the ground is carpeted with luxuriant
grass, sprinkled here and there with asphodels. Scattered about in the
woods are the tents of the wandering Albanian herdsmen, who pasture
their fiocks here in summer, but drive them to the hills when the grass
withers up with the summer heat.

See Dodwell, Tour^ 2. p. 311 sq, ; Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 160; Boblaye,
Recherches^ p. 20 ; Curtius, Pelop, I. p. 423 sq, ; Bursian, Gtogr, 2. p. 321 ; von
Duhn, in Mittheil. d, arch, Inst, in Atken^ 3 (1878), p. 76 sq. ; Guide-Joanne, 2,
p. 329 ; A. Philippson, Pehponnes, pp. 297, 305.

17. 5. Snlpicins allowed his army to sack it. Livy, writing of
the year 198 B.C., mentions that Dyme had recently been captured and
sacked by a Roman army (xxxii. 22. 10). Appian speaks of the injuries



136 DYMB BK. VII. ACHAIA

inflicted on Greece by Sulpicius {Maced, 7). In the year 208 RC.
Sulpicius sailed with a fleet from Naupactus and ravaged the coast
between Corinth and Sicyon (Livy, xxvii. 31). An inscription found at
Dyme and now in the library of Trinity College, Cambridge, proves
that even after the conquest of Greece some attempt at rebellion was
made at Dyme. A certain Sosus, aided by one of the magistrates,
drew up a new constitution for the city and burned the public offices
with the archives. For this he and his accomplice were condemned to
death by the Proconsul Q. Fabius Maximus. The inscription seems to
date either from 120 or 115 B.C. See C. 7. G, No. 1543; Bursian,
Geogr, 2. p. 320.

17. 5. AngnstuB annexed it to Patrae. This is doubted by
Mommsen. Coins of Dyme show that a Roman colony was settled in
the town first by Julius Caesar and afterwards by Augustus (Mommsen,
Romische Geschichie^ 5. p. 238, note 3), and it is spoken of as a colony
both by Strabo (xiv. p. 665) and Pliny (A'<a/. hisL iv. 13). Cp. G. F.
Hertzberg, Gesch, Griechenlands unter der Herrschaft der Rotner^ i.
p. 496. Previously Pompey had settled at Dyme many of the pirates
whom he had conquered (Strabo, viii. p. 387 sq.y xiv. p. 665 ; Plutarch,
Pompeius^ 28 ; Appian, Mithrid, 96). Some of these gentry afterwards
betook themselves to their old trade and scoured the neighbouring sea
(Cicero, Ep, ad AtUcum^ xvi. i. 3).

17. 6. Oebotas. Cp. § 13 sg. and vi. 3. 8.

17. 7- they call Amphiarans and AdrastnB Phoronids. Amphi-
araus and Adrastus were Argives, and the Argives are said to have
been called Phoronids of old (Stephanus Byzantius, s,v. "Apyos) after
Phoroneus, the first man bom in the land (Paus. ii. 15. 5).

17. 7. they style Theseus an Erechthid. Theseus was descended
from Erechtheus on his father's side (Plutarch, Theseus^ 3).

17. 8. the grave of Sostratus. At the village of Kato-Achma^
7 miles to the east of Karavostasiy a Greek inscription has been
found recording the epitaph of a youth named Polystratus, who had
been greatly esteemed by Hercules ; he was slain by the Molinids
(Molionids) ; Hercules wept for him and cut off a lock of his hair in
his honour. Probably this is the epitaph of the tomb described by
Pausanias ; if so, Pausanias has made a mistake in the name, and the
ruins near Kato-Achaia are probably those of Dyme, not Olenus (see
note on 18. i ). For the inscription see Kaibel, Epigrammata Graeca^
No. 790.

17. 8. offered him some of the hair of his head. It seems to
have been customary in ancient Greece and Italy for a mourner to cut
off some locks of his hair and to lay them on the grave. So Orestes
laid a lock of his hair on the tomb of his father Agamemnon (Aeschylus,
Choeph» 4 sqq,) Hecuba left a tress of her grey hair on Hector's grave
(Ovid, Metam, xiii. 427 sq,) Achilles shore a lock of his yellow hair
and placed it in the hand of his dead friend Patroclus (Homer, lUcuLt
xxiii. 141 sqq,) At Lecce in Apulia the women who are hired to mourn
tear out their hair and throw it on the corpse (R. Andree, Ethnogra-
phische Parallele und Vergleiche^ p. 150 ^^.) Among the Servians



CH. XVII ATTIS AND SWINE 137

until comparatively recent times relations used to cut off their hair and
£uten it to the grave (G. A. Wilken, Ueber das Hctaropfer^ P* 65). A
similar custom still prevails among the Arabs. On one grave Captain
Conder saw forty-five, on another thirty- three plaits of women's hair
fastened on strings (Conder, Heth and Moab^ p. 331). See also
Goldziher, Muhammedamsche Studien^ i. p. 248 sq,\ W. Robertson
Smith, Religion of the Semites^ p. 323 sqq, "The natives of many
parts of Australia, when at a funeral, cut off portions of their beards,
and singeing these, throw them upon the dead body ; in some instances
they cut off the beard of the corpse, and burning it, rub themselves and
the body with the singed portions of it " (Sir George Grey, Journals of
two expeditions^ etc., 2. p. 335). For more examples of the same sort,
see G. A. Wilken, l,c. Greek maidens sometimes cut off a lock of their
hair before marriage and placed it on the tomb of some famous hero or
heroine. See Paus. i. 43. 4 note.

17. 9. Zens sent a boar etc. That Attis was slain by a wild

boar sent by Zeus is mentioned also by a scholiast on Nicander {Alex,
8). On the Attis legend and ritual in general, see W. Mannhardt,
Antike Wold- und Feldkulte^ p. 291 sqq, ; The Golden Bought i. p.
296 sqq,

17. 10. the Galatians of PesBinaB abstain from swine. Julian
states generally that the worshippers of Attis abstained from swine's flesh
{Oral, V. p. 177 b, ed. Spanheim). Pigs were not eaten in the city of
Comana Pontica ; indeed pigs were not even allowed to enter the town,
much less the holy precinct (Strabo, xii. p. 575). Worshippers of the
Asiatic deity called <the Tyrant Men' abstained from pork (Dittenberger,
Sylloge Inscr. Graec. No. 379, line 4 ; Foucart, Des associoHons
religieuses chez les GrecSy p. 2 1 9). In Crete, according to Agathocles
of Babylon, the pig was esteemed very holy and no one would eat it
(Athenaeus, ix. pp. 375 f-376 a). No part of a pig might be brought
into the sanctuary and precinct of Alectro at lalysus in Rhodes (Ditten-
berger, op» cit. No. 357, line 25 sq,) The worshippers of the Syrian
goddess abstained from eating pigs, some because they thought pigs
unclean, others because they thought them holy (Lucian, De dea Syria^
54). A Jew or an Egyptian priest would rather have died than have
tasted pork (Sextus Empiricus, *Y7rorwr. iii. 123, p. 173, ed. Bekker;
cp. Plutarch, Quaest, Conviv, iv. 5). With regard to the pig in its
religious aspect Prof. W. M. Ramsay says : " Whatever be its origin,
the difference between western Asia Minor and Greece on the one hand,
and eastern Asia Minor, beginning from Pessinus, on the other hand, is
most striking. In the west the pig is used in the holiest ceremonies ;
its image accompanies the dead to their graves to purify them, and the
living wash with their own hands (in Greece at least) the pig which is
to be their sacrifice. In the east the very presence of a pig in the holy
city is a profanation and an impurity. My theory of explanation is
that the religion which prevailed throughout Asia Minor in early time
was the religion of a northern race which had no horror of the pig,
and that Semitic influence subsequently introduced that horror into the
eastern parts of the country " {Historical Geography of Asia Minor^



138 ATTIS AND THE ALMOND bk. vii. achaia

p. 32 sq,^ Professor Ramsay thinks that the line of demarcation between
the pig-haters and the pig-eaters was the river Halys. But the facts
cited above show that pig's flesh was a forbidden food in Crete, Rhodes,
and the western parts of Asia Minor, for the god Men was worshipped
in Phrygia, Lydia, and Pisidia. The line of demarcation cannot there-
fore have been a very sharp one. Besides, the religious horror of an
animal is only another side of the religious veneration for it ; originally
the conceptions of holiness and uncleanness are not differentiated from
each other. Compare what Lucian says of the reasons why the
worshippers of the Syrian goddess abstained from swine (see above).
Cp. W. Robertson Smith, Religion of the Semites^ pp. 152 sqq.y 448
sqq, ; The Golden Bough, 2. p. 50 sqq. Moreover abstinence from
swine is practised not merely by southern people (as Prof. Ramsay
thinks), but also by some northern peoples, as by the Yakuts of Siberia
and the Votiaks of the Government of Vologda, neither of whom are
Mohammedans (Latham, Descriptive Ethnology, i« P* 363). As to
Pessinus, see Mordtmann, * Gordium, Pessinus, Sivri Hissar,' in Sifz-
ungsberichte of the Bavarian Academy (Munich), i860, pp. 169-200.

17. 10. they have a local story about Idm etc. The following
legend is given at greater length, with some variations, by Amobius
{Adversus Nationes, v. 5-7), who cites as his authority Timotheus " a
theologian of some renown." As to Agdistis see note on i. 4. 5 (vol.
2. p. 74 sq.)

17. II. an almond-tree with ripe frnit etc. Hippolytus also
mentions that Attis was produced from an almond {Refut, omnium
haeres. v. 9). The Phrygians, according to Hippolytus, even affirmed
that the father of the universe was an almond. The account given by
Amobius is different. He says that from the severed genitals of
Agdistis sprang a pomegranate tree, and that by putting in her bosom
one of the pomegranates from this tree the daughter of the river
Sangarius (Amobius calls her Nana) conceived and bore Attis. After-
wards Attis, when about to wed the daughter of the king of Pessinus,
was terrified by Agdistis, mutilated himself, and expired. Violets
sprang from his blood. His disconsolate bride also slew herself and
was buried, and an almond grew from her body(?). See Amobius,
Adversus Nationes, v. 6 sq.

The idea that a virgin may conceive and bear a son, as Nana bore
Attis, appears in the legends and folk-tales of many lands both of the
Old and the New World. Such stories are told either for amusement or
to exalt the marvellous character of some god or hero by representing
him as the son of a virgin. To take examples. There is a Punjaub
legend that "some mandan [semen virile] escaped one day from a
Rishi, and he knew that if it fell on the ground a man would be bom
from it, so he put it into a flower and threw the flower into a river in
which a ChameU Rijp{llt princess was bathing. She took up the flower
and smelt it, and so became impregnated " (Indian Antiquary, 1 1
(1882), p. 290). The Indians of the province of Huarochiri in Peru
used to tell how there was a lovely virgin named Cavillaca, who was
admired by the god Ceniraya. "He turned himself into a very



CH. XVII MARVELLOUS BIRTHS 139

beautiful bird, and went up into the lucma tree, where he took some of
his generative seed and made it into the likeness of a ripe and luxurious
lucma^ which he allowed to fall near the beautiful Cavillaca. She took
it and ate it with much delight, and by it she was made pregnant
without other contact with man " {^Rites and Lmws of the VncaSy trans-
lated by C. R. Markham (Hakluyt Society), p. 125). In the very
ancient Egyptian tale of * The two Brothers * a princess conceives and
bears a son through having swallowed a chip of a Persea tree, which
had sprung from the blood of a bull into which one of the two brothers
had been transformed (G. Maspero, Contes pofiulatres de vAgypte
ancienne^ p. 26 ; Flinders Petrie, Egyptian Tales^ Second Series, p.
64). In a tale told by a Turkish tribe of South Siberia a maiden picks
up a piece of ice, breaks it and finds in it two grains of wheat, by
eating which she is impregnated (W. RadlofT, Proben der Volkslitteratur
der tiirkischen Stdmnte Siid-Sibiriens^ i. p. 205). In a story told by
the Mandan Indians of North America a virgin conceives by eating of
a piece of buffalo flesh which she had taken from the side of 0-kee-hee-
da (the Evil Spirit) (Catlin, North American Indians^ i. p. 179). The
Hottentot god or hero Heitsi-eibib is said to have been bom of a virgin
who conceived him by swallowing the juice of a certain grass (Theo-
philus Hahn, Tsum-^Goam^ the supreme being of the Khoi-Khoi^ p. 69).
In a Siamese story an apple tree is fertilised by a gardener with his
urine. A virgin princess eats of the fruit of the tree and becomes
pregnant (A. Bastian, Die Volker des ostlichen Asiens, i. p. 354). In
a Cambodian legend a maiden is impregnated by the beams of the
sun {ib. p. 416; for other exampes of this sort, see The Golden Bought
2. p. 235 sqq,) In another Cambodian legend a maiden conceives
through drinking accidentally the urine of a holy hermit (Bastian, ib.
p. 452 sq.) The Laosions tell of a girl who was impregnated merely
by a look {ib, p. 169). Annamite stories tell how a virgin conceived
by eating of a fish which had been washed in a man's urine ; how
another conceived by eating the rind of a water-melon, the rest of which
had been eaten by a prince ; and how a third conceived by eating a
lovely flower (Landes, * Contes et l^gendes annamites,' in Cochinchine
franqaise^ Excursions et reconnaissances^ Nos. 23 and 25, tales 62, T^^
102). In a Tjam story a girl is impregnated by drinking of a certain
spring and bathing in its water ; and in another Tjam tale the means
of impregnation are almost the same as in the first of the Annamite
stories cited above (Landes, * Contes tjames,' Cochinchine franqaise^
Excurs, et reconn. No. 29, pp. 52, 75, tales i and 3). The Papuans
of various parts of New Guinea tell how a virgin conceived through
having the fruit of a certain tree thrown at her breast (A. Goudswaard,
De Papoewds van de Geelvinksbaai^ p. 90 ; Otto Finsch, Neu-Guinea
und seine Bewohnery pp. 11 1, 130; B?iSti2Jiy Indonesien, 2. p. 35; C.
Hager, Kaiser Wilhelms-Land^ P- 29 sq,) The Manchu emperors of
China are said to be descended from a young girl who conceived by
eating some red fruit (Latham, Descriptive Ethnology, i. p. 269). In
Aztec mythology the great god Huitzilopochtli was said to have been
bom of a woman who conceived by placing in her bosom a small ball



140 OLENUS BK. VII. ACHAIA

of feathers which she found floating in the air (Sahagun, Histoin
ginircde des choses de la Nouvelle-Espagne^ traduite par Jourdanet et
Simeon (Paris, 1880), p. 201 sq, ; Bancroft, Native races of the Pacific
StateSy 3. pp. 296, 310 j^. ; the woman, however, was not a virgin).
In the mythology of the north-west coast of America a maiden is said
to have conceived by swallowing a blade of grass into which the
mythical hero Jeshl had transformed himself (Holmberg, <Ueber die
Volker des Russischen Amerika,' Acta Societaiis Scientiarum Fennicae^
4 (1856), p. 337). Many other stories of miraculous births have been
collected by the Compte H. de Charencey {Le folklore dans Us deux
Mondes (Paris, 1894), pp. 121-256) and £. S. Hartland {The Legend
of Perseus^ vol. i. (London, 1894), p. 71 sqq,)

17. 12. that no part of Attis' body should moulder. According
to Amobius {Adv, Nationes^ v. 7) Jupiter granted that the body of Attis
should never decay, that his hair should always grow, and that his little
finger should live and be always in motion.

17. 1 3. the nmner Oebotas. Elsewhere (vi. 3. 8 ; cp. above,
%(i sq,) we learn that the victory of Oebotas was won 01. 6 (756 B-C),
and that his statue was set up 01. 80 (460 B.C) In the present passage
Pausanias implies that between these dates no prize was won at Olympia
by an Achaean. This, however, is a mistake. For in 01. 23 (688 B.c)
a victory was won in the foot-race at Olympia by Icarus, who was a
native of Hyperesia in Achaia (Paus. iv. 15. i ; Eusebius, Chronic, vol.
I. p. 195, ed. Schone ; Stephanus Byzantius, j.t/. *Y9rc/Mio-/a) : in OL 67
(512 B.C) Phanas of Pellene won victories in the foot-race, the double
race, and the armed race (Eusebius, Chronic, vol. i. p. 201, ed. Sch5ne) ;
and in 01. 71 (496 B.C.) Pataecus of Dyme in Achaia won a victory in
the trotting race (Paus. v. 9. i). It would seem that in writing the
present passage Pausanias had not a list of the Olympic victors before
him. Cp. A. Kalkmann, Pausanias^ p. 130 sq,

17. 14- To this day Achaeans etc. The Greek is 8ia/Aevci 6c U

ffi€ €Ti *Axato>v TOts dywvtfKT^ai fieXXovai to. 'OKvfima kvayl(€i,v t^
OiptaTijlL, This impersonal use of 8ul/jl€V€l followed by an infinitive
occurs below, vii. 24. 5 ; vii. 27. 8 ; viii. 44. i ; ix. 18. 7 ; ix. 36. 6
It is not noticed in Liddell and Scott's Lexicon, and I do not remember
to have met with it in any other Greek writer.

18. I. Pirns Olenus. The river Pirus is now called the

/Camnilza, a broad and deep river, not easily forded ; it is in fact the
largest river of Achaia. Strabo says (viii. p. 386), if his text be right,
that Olenus stood beside a great river, which can hardly be any other
than the Pirus. In our texts of Strabo, indeed, the river is called the
Melas, but this name seems to be a clerical error, arising by dittography
from the preceding word fieyas. Hence it is natural, relying on the
joint testimony of Pausanias and Strabo that Olenus was beside the
river Pirus, to identify it with the ruins at KcUo-Achaia, a village about
a mile to the west of the mouth of the Pirus {KamnitzcC) river. " Five
or six yards behind the village there is a ridge in the plain, which seems
to have been formed by the ruins of Olenus. There are traces also of
its walls in the adjacent fields, and two or three pieces of Roman



CH. XVIII OLENUS 141

masonry. The vestiges extend over a considerable space of ground,
and are the more remarkable, as Pausanias tells us that Olenus was
never a large city, and as neither he nor Strabo [viii. pp. 386, 388]
speak of it but as a ruin " (Leake). '* The acropolis occupied a small
roimd hill. The few remains of the walls which are left are nearly of a
regular construction" (Dodwell). "The ruins consist of the founda-
tions of the city-walls placed on the top of a natural bank, now shaded
by oaks" (Gell). The statement, in which Pausanias and Strabo
(viii. p. 386) agree, that Olenus was distant 40 furlongs from Dyme,
agrees fairly with the view that Olenus was at Kato-AchcUa and Dyme
at the hill of SL George (see note on vii. 17. 5), since the distance
between these places is about 5 miles, or 45 Greek furlongs.

On the other hand there are some grounds for identifying the ruins
at Kato-Achaia with those of Dyme rather than of Olenus. For the
distance of Dyme from Patrae was 120 Greek furlongs (13^ miles)
according to Pausanias and Strabo (viii. p. 386), or 15 Roman miles
according to the Tabula Peuttngeriana^ and these distances agree
^irly with the actual distance (12^ English miles) oi Kato-Achaia from
Patrae ; whereas Olenus, according to both Pausanias and Strabo (/.r.),
was only 80 Greek furlongs, or about 9 English miles, from Patrae.
Moreover the extent of the ruins, and still more the discovery of Latin
inscriptions referring to the imperial family, seem to show that the
place cannot be Olenus, which was already deserted in the time of
Strabo {Lc) And the epitaph of Polystratus, found at Kato-Achaia
(see note on vii. 17. 8), is in favour of identifying the ruins as those of
Dyme. At the same time it is to be remembered that the evidence of
inscriptions is not decisive, since they can be easily transported from
the place where they were originally set up. Thus at Kato-Achaia
there is an inscription from an honorary monument erected by the city
of Pharae (C /. G, No. 1544); yet no one (except Pouqueville) has
proposed on that accoimt to identify the ruins at Kato-Achaia as those
of Pharae, which was 70 furlongs from the sea (Paus. vii. 22. i). But
on the whole the evidence seems to point to the conclusion that the
ruins at Kato-Achaia are those of Dyme, and that Olenus was situated
on the coast some 3^ miles farther to the east.

Strabo (viii. p. 386) mentions a sanctuary of Aesculapius at Olenus.

See Pouqueville, Voyage de la Grice, 5. pp. 374-379 ; Dodwell, T(mr, 2. p.
310; Leake, Morea, 2. pp. 155 sq^., 160 sq, ; Cell, Itinerary of the Morea, p.
23 sq, ; Boblaye, RecherckeSy pp. 16 sq,^ 20 sq, ; Curtius, Pelop, I. p. 428 sq, ;
Bursian, Geogr* 2. p. 322 sq, ; von Duhn, in Mittheil, d. arch, Inst, in Athen^
3 (1878), p. 72 sqq, ; Baedeker,' p. 331 ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 328 sqq. For
inscriptions at Kato-Achaia see also Bulletin de Corresp, helUnique, 2 (1878),
pp. 41 sqq,, 94 sqq. ; Bezzenberger' s Beitrdge, 5 (1880), pp. 320-325 ; Cauer,
Delectus Inscr, Graec,^ Nos. 267, 268 (also p. 352) ; Colhtz, G, D, I, 2. Nos.
1612-1623.

18. I. DezamenoB and the reception he gave to Hercules.

It is said that while Hercules was staying with King Dexamenus, the
latter was about to give, much against his will, his daughter Mnesi-
mache in marriage to the Centaur Eurytion ; but Hercules slew the



142 TRIPTOLEMUS IN HIS CAR bk. vii. achaia

Centaur and rescued the bride (Apollodorus, ii. 5. 5). According to
another version of the story, the daughter of Dexamenus was named
Hippolyte : she was to be married to Azan, and at the wedding feast
the Centaur Eurytion attempted to do her violence, but was slain by
Hercules (Diodorus, iv. 33. i). In another version of the story the
daughter of Dexamenus whom Hercules rescued from the Centaur was
named Dejanira (Hyginus, Fab, 33) ; and she is so named on a vase
on which the scene of the rescue is depicted (Roscher's Lexikon^ i. p.
999 sq,)

18. 2. the river Glancos. This stream, now called the Ltvka^
falls into the sea 3 miles to the south of Patrae {Patras), It divides
the fertile maritime plain in two. Its bed, not less than half a mile
wide, is strewn with large boulders, and shaded in many places by
oleanders, agnus-castus, and other water-loving shrubs. When swollen
with rain, the stream is very formidable ; but in summer its bed is a stony
desert. The glen from which it comes down is deep, wild, and narrow ;
oakwoods and pinewoods clothe some parts of the mountain-sides, but
com, maize, and vines are grown on their lower slopes.

See Dodwell, Tour^ i. p. 120 ; ib, 2. p. 309 ; Leake, Morea^ 2. pp. 123, 154 ;
Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 22 ; Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 435 ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. pp. 312,
324; Baedeker,' p. 331; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 327; Philippson, Peloponnes^ p.
266.

18. 3. yoked the dragons to the car of TriptolemtiB etc The

legend was that Demeter gave Triptolemus a car drawn by winged
dragons or serpents, on which he flew about sowing the world with com
or distributing it to mankind. The dragon-car was sometimes feebly
rationalised into a ship shaped like a dragon. See Sophocles, Frag. 538
(in Dindorf s Poetae Scenici Graeci) ; Philochorus, Frag. 28 {Frag.
Hist Graec, ed. Miiller, i. p. 388); Apollodorus, i. 5. 2; Nonnus,
Dionys, xiii. 194-196, xix. 84; Aristides, Or, xiii., vol. i. p. 167, ed.
Dindorf; Schol. on Aristides, vol. 3. p. 54, ed. Dindorf; Joannes
Antiochenus, Frag, Hist, Graec, ed. Miiller, 4. p. 538 sq, ; Ovid,
Metam, v. 642 sqq. ; /V/., Tristia, iii. 8 (9). i sq. ; Servius, on Virgil,
Georg. i. 19 and 163; Probus, on Virgil, Georg. i. 19. On ancient
monuments, especially in vase-paintings, Triptolemus is represented
riding in his car. Sometimes the car has wings attached to the wheels,
but no serpents ; sometimes it is drawn by serpents without wings ;
sometimes both tfie serpents and the wings are depicted attached to the
car. See Compte Rendu {Si, Petersburg) for 1859, Atlas, pi. ii. ; id,^ for
1862, Atlas, plates ii. iii. iv. ; /V/., for 1881, Atlas, pi. v. 11 ; Archdolo-
gische Zeitung^ 23 (1865), pi. cciv., with Gerhard's note, pp. 11 3-1 16;
Annali delP Inst, 44 (1872), pp. 226-230; Monumenti Inediti^ 9
(1872), pi. xliii. ; Fr. Lenormant, *Triptoleme en Syrie,' Gazette archdo-
logique^ 4 (1878), pp. 97-100; Gerhard, *Bilderkreis von Eleusis,'
Abhandlungen of the Royal Academy of Berlin, 1862, p. 267, with
pi. ii. ; /V/., Gesammelte Abhandlungen^ pi. Ixxvii. ; Strube, Bilderkreis
von Eleusis^ p. i sqq, ; /i/., Supplem, zu den Studien Ober den Bilder-
kreis von Eleusis^ pi. i. A list of the works of ancient art in which



CH. xviii PATRAE 143

Triptolemus or Demeter is so depicted is given by Stephani, in Compte
Rendu (St Petersburg) for 1859, P* ^2 sqq. The legend that Tripto-
lemus was the first who taught the people in this part of Arcadia to sow
and plough is mentioned also in the EtymoL Magnum (s.v, 'Aporj, p. 147).

18. 4. the plots of the Titans. The story was that the Titans
amused the youthful Dionysus with toys, and while he was playing they
seized him, tore him limb from limb, boiled his flesh in a kettle, roasted
it on spits over the fire, and devoured it. See Clement of Alexandria,
Protrept, ii. \^ sg. p. 15, ed. Potter; Amobius, Adversus NcUiones^
V. 19 ; Firmicus Matemus, De errore prof an, relig, 6 ; Lobeck, Aglao-
phamus^ P* 555 ^^9'

18. 6. in conseanence both of the unspeakable reverses etc.
According to Polybius (xl. 3, ed. Dindorf ; xxxix. 9, ed. Hultsch) the
Patreans suffered a great reverse in Phocis shortly before 146 B.c. The
reverses to which Pausanias refers must, if he is right, have taken place
in 279 B.C., the year of the irruption of the Gauls into Greece. Bursian
thought Pausanias must have mistaken the date of the disaster {Geogr,
2. p. 326, note 2). Pausanias, however, refers to the subject in other
passages (vii. 20. 6 ; x. 22. 6) in such a way as to show apparently that
he had exact information as to the expedition of the Patreans against
the Gauls.

18. 7* Bnt Angustns brought back the people from the

other towns to Patrae. Cp. v. 23. 3 ; x. 38. 4. Strabo says
(viii. p. 387) that after the victory at Actium the Romans settled a large
part of their army at Patrae, and that in his time the city was a popu-
lous Roman colony. Cp. Pliny, Nat, hist iv. 11; Mommsen, Romische
Geschichte^ 5. p. 238 ; Hertzberg, Geschichte Griechenlands unier der
Herrschaft der Romery i. p. 493 sq.

18. 8. the acropolis of Patrae. Patrae is now Patras or Patra,
The ancient city occupied a ridge about a mile long, which projects
from the slopes of Mount Voidia in a southerly direction, and to the
west is separated from the sea by a plain which increases in breadth
from north to south, from a quarter to more than half a mile. The
height at the northern end of the ridge, now occupied by the medieval
castle, was probably the ancient acropolis ; some pieces of the ancient
walls are intermixed with the modem masonry on the north-eastern side.
The castle is separated by a hollow from the heights which form the
connexion with Mount Voidia, These heights, as well as the castle
hill, are of very irregular shape, being cut into deep ravines by torrents,
and broken into white precipices. Mount Voidia itself is lofty and
conspicuous ; much of it is covered with very ancient and dense forests
of ozik and fir. Towards Patras it falls away in green knolls and fertile
glens. Near the middle of it runs the road to Arcadia through a
narrow wooded pass, which at the beginning of this century was known
as the Makelaria or Butchery, from the frequent murders perpetrated
there by a gang of robbers, who had their dens in the forests and
caverns of the mountain. The view from the castle is very beautiful.
The coast is seen trending away in a grand sweep to the south-west,
skirted by the fruitful plain of Patras; across the vast bay rise in the



144 PATRAE bk. vil achaia

west the distant summits of Zacynthus and Cephallenia. To the north,
across the gulf, are the Aetolian and Achamanian mountains, and full in
fieice of Patras tower up from the brink of the water the two pyramidical
masses of Kakeskala and Vardssova, Farther off, to the north-west, is
the low, flat coast of the bay of Missolonghiy where Byron died. Still
£EU-ther to the west, close to Cephallenia, the little island of Ithaca is
seen appearing above the sea.

That the ancient city did not originally extend to the sea seems to
be proved by Thucydides's statement (v. 52) that in 419 B.C Alcibiades
persuaded the people of Patrae to build walls from their city down to
the sea. At the beginning of the present century some large foundations,
barely perceptible, are said by Dodwell to have marked the line of these
two long walls which united the city and the port In Roman times,
however, as at the present day, the city seems to have reached to the
sea.

The ancient remains in Patras are very scanty. To the east of the
castle hill are considerable remains of the Roman aqueduct, which here
crossed the valley on a double row of arches. The remains of the
music-hall (or theatre) will be noticed further on. There are besides
a number of fragmentary pieces of sculpture (statues and reliefs) in
various parts of the town. For example, in George's Square {piateia tou
Georgiou) there are at present lying two marble Corinthian columns, two
small unfluted columns, pieces of a marble cornice, and a marble sarco-
phagus of coarse, late style, decorated with sculptured wreaths, winged
heads, etc In the house of Mr. Wood, the British Consul, there is pre-
served a marble relief of fair style (3 feet long by 16^ inches high)
representing a procession of seven grown persons, men and women, who
are advancing with offerings and a sheep for sacrifice towards a male
figure, who is seated on the spectator's right, with his right arm raised
and the upper part of his body bare ; behind this seated male figure, on
the extreme right, stands a woman. Perhaps the seated male figure
may be Aesculapius and the woman behind him Health ; but the serpent,
the symbol of Aesculapius, is wanting.

The remains of antiquity seem not to have been much more
numerous in Patras when Wheler visited it in 1675. ^^ says:
" Returning thence south-eastwards, towards the town, we past by the
ruins of a roimd temple of brick, masoned together with a very hard
cement, and the building very massive : over against which, northwards,
is a demolished Greek church, dedicated to the Holy Apostles ; which
hath been sustained by marble pillars of the lonique order. Not far
from hence appear some parts of the antient walls of the town : one
of those heaps of ruins may have been the temple of Cybele, the
Mother of the Gods ; wherein Attes also was honoured. But we could
not find the theatre, nor the Odeum, nor many other temples, which
Pausanias speaks of. Under the wall of the town is a place, that
seemeth to have been a circus, or stadium, or perhaps a naufnachia for
water combats. For the consul told me, that many in the town can
yet remember, that there was an iron ring fastened to the wall ; which
they suppose was to tie vessels to ; supposing that the sea came up



CH. xvtii PATRAB 145

thither in former days ; but the other buildings, nearer the sea-side,
evince that errour. Perhaps water might be brought thither by a
channel or ^ueducc : but the sea is near a quarter of a mile from
thence, and lies much lower. The sides consisted of ranges of arches ;
which Monsieur Spon remembers he hath seen represented on medals
of Patras. Not far thence is the foundation of a church, dedicated to
St. Andrew ; where they believe that apostle baptized the king he had
converted to the faith. The building seemeth to have been formerly a
Roman sepulcher. That which induceth me to think so is a vault
underneath it, round which are niches ; in every one of which are two
holes at the bottom, made with earthen pots ; which are plaistered Up,
round about, to the top : just such as I saw several at Baia, by PuhuoIo
in Italy." Dodwell, who visited Pa/nw in 1801, says; "The soil is
rich, and has probably risen considerably above its original level, and
conceals the foundations of ancient buildings : indeed the earth is
seldom removed without fragments of statues and rich marbles being
discovered. Some marble columns and mutilated statues were found
here a few years ago, in the garden of a Turk ; who, with a truly
Tut^ish stupidity, immediately broke them into small pieces. Towards
the middle of the town is a fount called Saini Catarina's well, near
which is the foundation of the cella of a temple, consisting of square
blocks of stone ; upon which is a superstructure of brick. . . . The
house of the imperial German consul stands on the ruins of a Roman
brick theatre, of such small dimensions, that it cannot be the Odeion
[Music Hall], which Pausanias says was the finest in Greece next to
that built by Herodes Atticus, at Athens."

The modem Pairas, a busy commercial city engaged chiefly in the
export of currants, is the largest town in Peloponnese, with a population
of 39,000, The streets are wide and flanked with arcades.

See Wheler, Jotinuy inia Grcict, p. 292 sqq. ; Chnndlet, Travels in Grctce,
p. 376 sqq. ; Dodwell, Tour, i. p. 113 sqq. ; Leake, Merea, z. p. IZ3 sqq. ;
Fouqueville, Voyage de la Grice, 4. pp. 347-370; Boblaye, Htcherckes, p. 23;
More, Journal, z. p. 300 iqg. ; Curtias, Pehf. I. p. 434 sgq. j W. G. Oark,
Pelcp. p. 378 sgq. ; Bursian, Geogr. x. p. 324 iff. ; MillAeil. d. arrh. Init. in
Athen, 3 (1878), p. 66 sqq. ; id., 4 (1879), p. 125 sq. \ Baedeker,' p. 28 sqq. ;
Philippson, Piloponncs, p. 36z ; Guidt-Joanne, 3. p. 314 sqq. The marble relief
in Mr. Wood's house, as well as the remains in Ceo^e's Square, are described
from my own notes.

18. 8. the image of L&pliria. See iv. 31. 7
note. This image is represented on coins of Pat-
rae (Fig. i z). The goddess stands clad in a short
tunic, with a robe falling over her left shoulder ;
her right breast is bare. Over her right shoulder i
appears the tip of her quiver ; in her left hand is
her bow, the end of which rests on a pedestal.
To the left is a dog. To judge from the style of
the statue, it may have been made about the ^
middle of the fifth century B.C., but hardly earlier. (com ok \■K^v,Kt).
it is one of the earliest statues which represent
Artemis in Amazonian form. See Imhoof-Blumer and Gardner, Num.

VOL. IV L


146 PATRAE BK. vii. ACHAiA

Comment, on Pausamas, p. 76 tq., with pi. Q vi. vii. viii. ix. x. ; Catalogue
of the Creek Coins in the British Museum : Peloponnesus, pi. v. 1 7,

18. I o. the viuth of AitemiB Iiod been atiired by OeoeoB.

Oeneus, king of Calydon, had omitted to sacrifice to Artemis at his
harvest festival, when he sacrificed to all the other deiiies. Hence
Artemis in revenge sent the famous boar to ravage the king's lands.
See Homer, //, ix. 533 sgq.

18. 10. OaaacblU Gallon. See notes on vi. 1 3. 7 ; ii. 32, 5.

18. 12- riding on a car drawn by deer. On coins of Patrae of
imperial date the priestess is represented in a chariot
drawn by two stags (Imhoof-Blumer and Gardner,
Num. Comment, on Pausanias, p. 78, with pi. Q xiii. ;
Catalogue of the Greek Coins in the British Museum:

' Peloponnesus, pi. v. 21). She doubtless represented

the goddess herself. See note on vi. 22. 11. Cp.

Back, De caerimoniis quibus homines deorum vice

fungebantur, p. 3 sq.
"t>> aVtIL"'"^^ ^^- '"■ *** P«>Pl8 bring the edible kinds of
(coiH OF tatkab). l>ir^ s'c. A holocaust of live animals of various

kinds was offered to the Syrian goddess at Hierapolis.
It is thus described by Lucian {De dea Syria, 49): "But of all
the festivals the greatest I know of is held by ihem in the beginning
of spring ; by some it is called 'the Pyre,' by others 'the Torch.'
At this festival they offer the following sacrifice. They hew down
great trees and set them up in the court. Then they bring goats
and sheep and other live animals and hang them from the trees, and
birds too, and raiment and jcucls of gold and silver. When all is ready,
they carry the victims round the trees and set fire to the pile, and
straightway ihey are all burned." For another example of holocausts
of animals of different sorts, see iv, 31. 9. On sacrifices of birds among
Ihe Greeks, see G. Wolff, ' Gefliigelopfer der Griechen,' Philologus, 28
{18O9), pp. 188-191.

19. 1. EurypylnB. There is a paper on Eur^-pylus by K. Schwenk
in Rheinisches Museum, N.F. 10 {i8s6X pp. 384-392 ; and a shon one
by Aug. Schultz, in Fleckeisen's fahrbiicher, 27 (1881), pp. 305-307.

19. 4- the people should sacrifice to the goddess a youth and
a maiden. Mr. Clermont-Ganneau thinks that this tradition of human
sacrifice points to the former practice of (he Semitic worship of Moloch
at Patrae. He even conjectures that in Milichus, the name of the
neighbouring stream (g 9), we have an echo of the name of Moloch.
See Clermont - Ganneau, ' Le dieu Satrape,' Journal asiatique, 7mc
SSrie, 10 (1877), p. 221. With greater probability Mr. Famell
suggests that we have here a tradition of human sacrifices designed to
cause the crops to grow. He points out that the sacrifices were said
to have been instituted in consequence of the wrath of Artemis, who
would not suffer the earth to yield its fruit (g 3), and that the human
victims were said to have worn wreaths of corn (vii. 20. i). See L. R.
Famell, The Cults of the Greek States, 2. p. 455.



PATRAE



147


19. 6. in this chest was an inu^ of DionTsna.
Patrae of Hadrian's time a man is represented
running to an altar and holding a box on fais left
ann (Fig. 14). It is probably Eurypylus running to
the altar of Artemis Tridaria to be healed of his
insanity. See g 8 sq. On other coins of the city the
Genius of Patrae is portrayed standing with one
hand resting on the box, while he extends the other
hand over an altar. A coin of

#SeptimiQS Severus represents the '"=■'■<— "
box resting on the altar. Other p"™"^ "^

coins of Patrae represent a " round
box with conical cover, wreathed with ivy, within ivy
wreath, sometimes between ears of corn." Probably
on all these coins the box represents the chest or
Fio. IS.— CHEST oi" casket which contained the image of Dionysus. See
ojVatrab). Imhoof-Blumer and Gardner, Num. Comm. on Pau-

lanias, p. 75, with pi. Q i. ii. iii. iv.
19. 7. he steered, not foi Thessalr. Had it not been that he
wished to consult the god at Delphi, Eurypylus would naturally have
returned to Thessaly, where was his home (Homer, //. ii. 734 sgq.)



I of Patrae
a goblet



#


. a temple of Panachaean Athena.

(Fig, 16), Athena appears standing in a distyle temple, h
and a lance. On one side of her is her shield, (
other her owl. This must represent a temple-image,
probably the gold and ivory image of Panachaean
Athena. A similar figure of Athena holding a goblet ii
one hand and a spear in the other appears on the coin
of many cities of Peloponnese. These other cities may
have copied on their coins the well-known type of the
statue at Patrae. See Imhoof-Blumer and Gardner, !"
Num. Comm. on Pausanias, p. 78 sg., with pi. Q xiv.

20. 3. a Banctnary of Mother DindTinene. A coin of Patrae

(Fig. 17) represents a female figure draped, with a turreted crown on

her head. She is standing on a pedestal. In

r right hand she holds a bunch of grapes, in her

left something else. On either side of her is a

similar female figure, apparently grasping her,

I and dancing or leaping. The central figure is

probably the image of Mother Dindymene; the

other figures are probably her worshippers or

priestesses engaged in a wild religious dance.

See Imhoof-Blumer and Gardner, Num. Comm.

.._ ., ^"^^ "" PatsaniaSf p. 79, with pi. Qxvi.

CcoiH or FATRAi). 20. $. a toiDple of Olrmpian Zeus.

Vitruvius mentions (ii. 8. 9) that the temple of
Zeus and Hercules at Patrae was built of bricks, though the colonnades
and epistyle were of stone. Cp. Pliny, Nni. hist. xxxv. 172.

20. 4. inthelUad tJie verses. SeeHomer,//.xxi. 446-448.


148 PATRAE — THE MUSIC HALL bk. vii. achaia

20. 6. the Ifnsie HalL This Music Hall, described b>' Pausanias
as the grandest in Greece except the one at Athens, was disco\'ered and
exca\'ated in 1 889. It is situated in the upper quarter of PairaSj a little
below and to the west of the castle, and is in excellent preservation ;
not only the seats and the stage but e\'en the walls which supported
the roof are standing. The building fstces south. Sixteen or se\-enteen
tiers of seats, rising above each other in a semicircle, are preserved.
The seats are built of thin, flat bricks laid in horizontal courses, but
they were cased with white marble ; a great part of the marble casing
remains. Each seat is about 15 inches high and 23 inches broad
(inclusive of the marble casing) from front to back. Three staircases,
each 2 feet 6 inches u-ide, lead up through the seats. They were paved
with white marble, and the pavement is in great measure preserved.
Each staircase consists of twenty-eight steps. Every row of seats was
terminated on the side of the staircase by a marble ornament in the
shape of a lion's leg and paw ; so that each staircase was bounded on
each side by a row of these ornaments, one above the other. At the
back of the auditorium, and rising above it, are considerable remains of
the wall which supported the roofl It is built of bricks, stone, and
mortar. The bricks are flat and are laid in horizontal courses, which
apparently run right through the thickness of the walL The orchestra
is semicircular and measures 31 feet 6 inches in diameter. It seems to
have been paved with white marble ; at least there are in front of the
stage a couple of marble blocks which appear to be remains of a pave^
ment Two staircases lead up to the stage, which is 1 6 feet 8 inches
deep from front to back. Part of the white marble casing of the stage
is preserved. The wall at the back of the stage is preserved to a
height of 20 feet or so ; it is built of, or at least faced with, horizontal
courses of thin bricks laid flat with mortar between the courses. In
this wall is a series of semicircular niches with round arched tops ;
there are twelve of these niches above, and eight larger ones below. At
the foot of the back wall of the stage, at its eastern end, is a piece of
marble moulding in its original position. The paradoi are nine paces
long, 6 feet wide, and are paved \»ith marble. The supporting-walls of
the auditorium, built of, or at least faced with, thin bricks laid fiat in
horizontal courses, are well preser\'ed. The eastern parados leads into
a square chamber, which measures 14 feet by 13 feet 5 inches. The
chamber is paved with a mosaic in black and white ; the ground of the
mosaic is white, but this white ground is chequered by black lines
forming squares, which are set obliquely, diamond-like. The walls of
the chamber are preserved to a considerable height ; they are built of
bricks, stones, and mortar, like the wall at the back of the auditorium ; on
the outside they are faced with thin bricks laid flat in horizontal courses.

Lying at the west end of the stage is a large circular block of coarse
pebble-conglomerate, perhaps a drum of a column. The block measures
about 3 feet in diameter ; in the middle is a square hole, which may be
a dowel-hole. Outside the Music Hall, in the street, are lying some
small pieces of unfluted columns. Roman and Byzantine coins, also
lamps, have been found on the spot



CH. XXI PATRAE 149

The preceding description of the Music Hall is drawn almost entirely from
notes made by me on the spot, 19th and 20th October 1895. See also AeXWoi^
dpxcuoXoyiK^f', March 1889, P* 62 sq, ; Berliner philologische Wochenschrift ^ 9
(1889), p. 1066; American Journal of Archaeology y 5 (18^), p. 378.

20. 6. the Patreans helped the Aetolians against the

Qallic host. Cp. vii. 18. 6 ; x. 22. 6.

20. 6. the one at Athens. As to the Music Hall of Herodes
Atticus at Athens, see above, vol. 2. p. 241 sq, *

20. 6. erected by the Athenian Herodes in memory of his dead
wife. The wife of Herodes Atticus was Appia Atilia Regilla ; she died
about 160 or 161 A.D. From an inscription found at Athens some
years ago it appears that Regilla was priestess of the goddess called
Fortune of the City. See MiitheiL d, arch, Inst, in Atken^ 8 (1883),
p. 288 ; /V/., 9 (1884), p. 95. Herodes was accused of having murdered
her by causing a slave to beat her while she was pregnant His grief,
which some thought to be hypocritical, expressed itself in extravagant
forms. See Philostratus, ViL Sophist, ii. i. 18 sqq. There is a long
life of Herodes by Philostratus (pp. cit, ii. i), and inscriptions have
been found which supplement our knowledge of him and his family.

See W. Dittenberger, 'Die Familie des Herodes Atticus,' Hernusy 13 (1878),
pp. 67-89; K. Buresch, *Triopeion, Herodes, Regilla,' Rheinisches Museum^
N.F. 44 (1889), op. 489-509; Ch. Hlilsen, *Zu den Inschriften des Herodes
Atticus/ ib, 45 (1890), pp. 284-287 ; W. Froehner, Les Inscriptions grecques du
Louvrey Nos. 7, 8 ; Kaibel, Epigrammata Graeca^ Nos. 160, 1046 ; W. Gurlitt,
Ueber Pausanias, p. 58 sq.

20. 7- Patreus, Prengenes, and Atherion. Preugenes was the
father of Patreus, who was the founder of Patrae (iii. 2. i ; vii. 18. 5).
Who Atherion was does not appear ; and I confess I do not understand
the force of the remark that Preugenes and Atherion " are represented
as boys because Patreus is so also."

20. 8. the Lady of the Lake. This was Artemis of the Lake.
Cp. ii. 7. 6 note ; iii. 23. 10 ; iv. 4. 2 ; iv. 31. 3 ; viii. 53. 1 1 ; Famell,
The Cults of the Greek States^ 2. p. 427 sq,

21. 2. the oracles given hy the doves. The prophetic priestesses
at Dodona are commonly supposed to have been called Moves' (Hero-
dotus, ii. 55-57; Strabo, vii. frag^. (vol. 2. p. 453, ed. Meineke) ;
Schol. on Sophocles, Trachin, 172). But it seems doubtful whether
they ever really bore this title. As Mr. Famell observes, " Herodotus
merely tries to explain away the miraculous by supposing that the so-
called * doves ' were once women ; Strabo suggests that the name
denoted ' old women ' in the Molossian dialect ; Pausanias takes it for
granted [x. 12. 10] that the Peleiades [* doves'] were priestesses, but
it is clear from his own statements that this was not a name used for
them at Dodona at any period of which he had knowledge" {The Cults
of the Greek States^ i. p. 39 note). The late W. Robertson Smith
suggested that tjie priestesses of Dodona were called doves from the
crooning voice in which they gave their oracles, " resembling the Arabic
j<i/*, or the dove-like moaning of* Hebrew demon-wizards (Isa. viii. 19
compared with xxxviii. 14)." Similarly he thought that the title of



ISO PATXAE %K. TO. ACBAi*

' beei ' which was given to the priestesses of various shrines see note
on ^'iiL 13. I , may have meant ■ the humming priestesses.' He
mniixls us thai the great orade of the Philistines was the oiade cf
the Fly-BaaL See his article * On the forms of diii-inatioa and magic,'
fX.c, Joumai ofPkilology, 14 ^1885 . jl 120 ^. In the East Indian
island of Ambmna there is a holy place called Xo^satet. or the navd of
the island. Here there is a sacred tree, and it is said that from time
to time three white doves come and perch on the three branches. When
the>- do so, then is the time 10 consult the spirits See Van HoeveO,
Ambon en de Oelisers, p. 1 55.

21. 3. Uie iprinc whicll is in Calrdoi etc. " From tmder the
mountain, close to the sea. at Crio Neri, flon-s a little braddsh rivulet,
about two bthoms deep in the centre ; from the ground on either side
well two springs of fresh and very cold water. Round the point dt tbe
mountain some mineral springs bubble up from the beach, close to the
sea. . . . There arc the remains of walls and fragments of tiles scattered
about. These appear to be mediaeval or modem. . . . May not Crio
Neri be a siulable position for the port in Calydon, mentioned by
Pansanias in coimexion with the story of Corcsus. the priest of Bacchus,
and the cruel virgin Callirhoe : I should like to fancy that the springs
noted above are those mentioned in the story I'Paus. lib. \\\. 2\\. The
sea at this point has encroached on the land, and I have been told of
the remains of walls, visible under water, but, ha\-ing no boat, cookl
not search for them" 'D. E. Colnaghi, 'On ancient remains in tbe
neighbourhood of Missolonghi,' Transactions cf the Riyjl StKuty of
Lileraiuri, 2(id Series, 7 ' 1 863 , p. 548 sg. ■

21. 6. a precinct Bacred to a njitiTe wmnan etc Bachofen has
pointed out the close relation of Dionysus to women ; he was especially
worshipped by them. See Bachofen, Das MalUnwhl, p. 331 sq.^.

21. ;■ Beside the harbour is a temple of Poseidon etc On

coins of Patrae Poseidon appears standing nith one foot on a rock ; he

^^^^ holds a dolphin and a trident

^^^^^ ^S^^^^ f'S- '^ - ^ct>c'^ '^O'"^ of the

^^^^^^^^^ ^^^^H^^^^K ^'''^ vessels ihc foreground.

^^^H^H^V ^^^^^^^^^^V described above a temple

^^^^^^^ ^^H^^^^r '" '^^ background (Fi^. 19).
^^^•^^ ^^^BB^^ '^''^ temple and imaye so r»-

Fic I'.-toiiiBON no. ■- — Hjupc ■» Of ptesentcd must therefore be

(MIS CF PAT«Ai>. FATii*Eic-,-isirFATKAE). ^bosc which Pausanias men-
tions. See Imhoof-Blumer and
Gardner, Xum. Comm. on P,iusanias. p. 8r, with pi. Qxi.\.-x.\i.

21. 7- Poseidon Asidulins .-securer';, Cp. ill. 11. 9.

21. 8. Homer, in the description of the chariot-race etc The
verses quoted are l/iaJ, xxiii. 5S4 sg.

21. II- a Kiting, This magic spring has been idemitied with a
spring or rather well at the church of St. Andrew, which sands at the
west end of Patras, beside the sea. The well is underground, and is



CH. XXI PATRAE—TffE MAGIC WELL 151

arched over with a small brick vault. A few steps lead down to it The
mouth of the well is covered with a wooden lid. The water, which is
drawn up in a bucket, is clear but not cold ; it seemed to me almost
tepid. Miraculous properties are still ascribed to it. Beside the well,
in its little underground chamber, is a shrine of St Andrew, with a
picture of the saint. At the back of the picture is a recess, said to
be the saint's bed. The tomb of the saint is shown in the adjoining
church, which is a large and handsome edifice, apparently new.

See Dodwell, Toury i. p. 120; Gell, Itinerary of the Morea^ p. 4; Leake,
Morea^ 2. p. 135 sq. ; iil\xits Jourttaly 2. p. 302 ; Curtius, Pelop, I. p. 441 ; W. G.
Clark, Pehp. p. 286 ; Baedeker,* p. 29. Dodwell gives a picture of the well-
house. I have described it from my own observation.

21. 1 2. an infallible mode of divination etc. Omens of death or
recovery from sickness have elsewhere been drawn from the water of
holy wells. " St. Andrew's well, in the village of Shadar [in Bemera,
one of the Hebrides,] is by the vulgar natives made a test to know if a
sick person will die of the distemper he labours under. They send one
with a wooden dish to bring some of the water to the patient, and if the
dish which is then laid softly upon the surface of the water turn round
sun-ways, they conclude that the patient will recover of that distemper ;
but if otherwise, that he will die" (Martin, * Description of the Western
Islands of Scotland,' /'z«^^r/^«'j' Voyages and Travels, 3. p. 576). Cp.
Brand, Popular Antiquities, 2. p. 383, Bohn's ed. ; C. F. Gordon
Gumming, In the Hebrides (London, 1883), p. 214 sq, "The spring
of Tobar-na-demhumich was held to denote whether a sick person
would overcome his complaint From this well water was drawn before
sunrise, and the patient was immersed in it. The water was then
examined. If it remained clear, the patient was likely to recover ; when
its purity was sullied, death was regarded as near " (Ch. Rogers, Social
Life in Scotland, 3. p. 212). Near the village of Karuwalankirei, in
Malabar, there is a well to which sick people are brought every Friday.
They offer betel, saffron, rice, and cocoa-nuts. Then they throw a
lemon into the fountain. If the lemon swims, the patient will recover ;
if it sinks, he will die. See Phillips, Account of the Religion, Manners,
and Learning of the people of Malabar {^ovAon, 17 17), p. 59. With
the Greek superstition described by Pausanias we may also compare a
Scotch one described by Miss Gordon Gumming. The family of Willox,
hereditary cattle-curers at Nairn, possess a crystal ball which, when it
is dipped in a bucket of water, " becomes a magic mirror, reflecting the
face of the bad neighbour who has bewitched the cattle, and thus
breaking the spell" (C. F. Gordon Gumming, op, cit. p. 74). Damascius
mentions the case of a ' sacred woman ' who divined by means of pure
water in a crystal goblet ; she professed to see the future reflected in
the water (Damascius, Vita Isidori, 191).

21. 14. a sanctuary of Aesculapius. "As Pausanias says that
the temple of Aesculapius stood aboi'e the acropolis near the gates
leading to Messatis, it seems evident that Messatis occupied a situation
on the ridge northward, or north-eastward, of the citadel, and as



152 PHARAE — THE ORACLE bk. vil achaia

Pausanias also tells us that Messatis was between Aroe, on the site of the
acropolis, and Antheia, the latter must have been situated still farther
in the same direction. It is in fact ver>' natural that such strong and
lofty positions should have been the places of retirement of the inhabit-
ants in those times of insecurity which preceded the foundation of
Patreus, as well as when they again dispersed after the Gallic in\'asion of
Greece" (Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 137). Cp. above \-ii. 18. 2-6.

21. 14. more charmiiig women are nowhere to be aeen. The

Greek is : 'Aif^poSiTp oc, eiirep akXais yvvai^i^ /tercim #cai raiVacs.
All the translators and topographers, so £ir as I have observed, who
refer to this passage, have interpreted it as a slur upon the morality of
the women of Patrae. E. Curtius saw in Pausanias's remark " a sure
trace of the worship of Mylitta introduced by the Phoenicians." All
this is beside the mark. The expression 'A<^po6ftn;s ficretrrc, as my
friend Mr. W. Wyse points out to me, is clearly equi\-alent to the
adjective €7raif>p66iTo^j * lovely,' 'charming.' As to the fine flax by
which the women of Patrae earned their livelihood, see note on v. 5. 2.

22. I. Fharae. About a third of a mile from the left bank of the
Pirns {Kamnitsa) river, between the \-illages of Prcveto and Isari^ there
are some insignificant ruins of an ancient tou-n. They are probably the
remains of Pharae, since the position corresponds tolerably well (according
to Leake) with the distances of Pharae from Patrae, and from the mouth
of the Pirns, namely 150 furlongs from the former and 70 furlongs
from the latter. Boblaye, Bursian, and Curtius think that the 150
furlongs to Patrae are reckoned not by the direct road over the hills,
but by the valley of the Pirus to its mouth and so along the coasL

See I^eake, Morea^ 2. p. 158 ; Boblaye, Richerches, p. 21 ; Curtius, Pelop, i.
p. 431 ; Bursian, Ceogr, 2. p. 323; Baedeker,' pp. 331, 333; Guide-Joanfu, 2.
p. 329.

22. I. plane-trees so big that people picnic in their hollow

trunks. Cp. iv. 34. 4. In Lycia there was a plane-tree beside a cold
spring at the wayside ; the trunk was hollow and so vast that the
Roman governor Licinius Mucianus with eighteen guests dined in it,
reclining on beds of leaves furnished by the tree, and listening to the
patter of the rain among the branches. Near \'elitrae grew a plane-tree
in which there was room for fifteen people to dine, besides the servants
who waited on them. The emperor Caligula dined in it and called
it his nest. See Pliny, Aat, hist. xii. 9 sq. For more examples of
gigantic plane-trees in ancient and modem times, see Hehn, Kultur-
pfianzen und Hausthicrc^^ p. 234 sqq, (p. 217 sqq, English trans.)

22. 2. beside it an oracle is established etc. With this mode of
divination by means of chance words heard and accepted by the hearer
as omens, compare ix. 11. 7 ; Bouche-Lcclercq, Histoirc dc la divination
dans ran/iquiU^ I. p. 154 sqq. It was called cicdonism or cledomantia^
from cledon, * a chance voice,' At the present day Greek girls of the island
of I OS (AV^) resort to this mode of divination to discover the names of
their future husbands. On the Eve of St. John (23rd June) a girl takes an
unused jar, and fills it with water at the well without speaking. Into the



CH. XXII PHARAE— SACRED FISH 153

jar each girl puts something, such as an apple, a ring, a pin, etc. The jar
is then covered with a red cloak, and left out all night " that it may see
the stars." Next morning it is brought in and placed on a table, while
the girls sing a song imploring St. John to reveal their true-love's name.
Then the red cloth is removed, and the things are taken out of the jar.
Finally, each girl pours a little of the water from the jar into her shoe
and goes out into the street, and the first name she hears called out
(such as Andronico or Themistocles) is the name of her future husband.
See J. T. Bent, The Cyclades^ p. 161 sq,

22. 4- The Egyptians liave a similar mode of divination at the
sanctuary of Apis. At the sanctuary of the bull Apis in Memphis the
method of divination was this. The worshipper prayed to the deity in
the sanctuary, then passed out of it, and received the prophetic answer
to his petition from children outside the shrine, who, skipping to the
music of flutes, delivered the oracle sometimes in prose and sometimes
in verse. See Aelian, Nat, anim, xi. 10 ; Dio Chrysostom, Or. xxxii,
vol. I. p. 404, ed. Dindorf ; Xenophon of Ephesus, Ephesiacoy v. 4.
Other modes in which Apis is said to have vouchsafed his answers are
described by A. Wiedemann on Herodotus, ii. 153.

22. 4. they do not catch the fish in it because they esteem
them sacred. For other examples of sacred fish, see i. 38. i ; iii.
21. 5. The fish, particularly the eels, in the fountain of Arethuse at
Syracuse were sacred and inviolate ; persons who had been driven by
the exigencies of war to eat of these fish were visited by the godhead
with great calamities (Diodorus, v. 3. 5 ; Plutarch, De soUertia
animaliumy 23). At Troezen it was of old unlawful to catch the sacred
octopus, the nautilus, and the sea -tortoise (Clearchus, quoted by
Athenaeus, vii. p. 317 b). The lobster (Tcrrt^ evaXtos) was generally
esteemed sacred by the Greeks and was not eaten by them ; if the
people of Seriphos caught a lobster in their nets they put it back into
the sea ; if they found a dead one, they buried it and mourned over it as
over one of themselves (Aelian, Nat, anim, xiii. 26). A Greek inscription
found at Smyrna runs thus : " Do not hurt the sacred fish ; do not
damage any of the vessels belonging to the goddess ; do not carry them
out of the sanctuary to seal them. The wretch who does any of these
things, may he die a wretched death, devoured by the fish. If one
of the fish die, let it be sacrificed the same day on the altar. As for
such as help to guard and augment the honours of the goddess and
her fishpond, may the goddess grant them a happy life and do them
good " (Moixreiov /cai /Si/SkioOTJK'q tyjs €v ^fjLvpvg evayytkiKTJs (rxokrjs*
UeploSos A. (i 873-1 875), p. 102, No. 104; Dittenberger, Sylloge
Jnscr. Graec. No. 364 ; C. T. Newton, Essays on Art and Archaeology^
p. 195 sq,) At Myra (or Limyra) in Lycia there was a temple of
Apollo with a spring near it. In this spring there were fish which the
priest fed with the flesh of the sacrificed victims. If the fish ate the
fiesh, the sacrificers regarded it as a happy omen. See Aelian, Nat.
€Utim. xii. i ; Pliny, Nat. hist. xxxi. 22, xxxii. 17 ; Plutarch, De sollertia
animalium^ 23. When Cyrus and the Ten Thousand came to
the river Chains, they found it full of large tame fish, which the native



154 SACRED FISH bk. vii. achaia

Syrians would not let them catch, because they regarded the fish
as gods (Xenophon, Anabasis, i. 4. 9). The Syrians of Bambyce
(Hierapolis) esteemed fish sacred and never ate them ; near the great
sanctuary there ^%'as a lake full of tame fish which were said to know
their names and to come at call (Lucian, De dea Syrioy 14 and 45).
Indeed the Syrians in general held fish sacred and refused to eat them.
See Ovid, Fasti, ii. 461-474; Diodorus, ii. 4. 3; Athenaeus, iv. p.
157 b, viii. p. 346 cd; Plutarch, De superstitione, 10; Menander,
quoted by Porphyry, De abstineniia, iv. 15 ; Hyginus, Fab, 197; id.,
Astronomica, ii. 30. Persons who had been initiated into the Eleusinian
mysteries worshipped the red mullet and would not partake of it
(Plutarch, De solleriia animalium, 35. 11; Aelian, Nat aninu ix.
51 and 65; cp. Porphyry, De absiinentia, iv. 16). The red mullet
was also a forbidden food to the priestess of Hera at Argos (Plutarch,
Lc, ; Aelian, Nat anim. ix. 65). The priests of Poseidon at Megara
who were called Hieromnemones (sacred recorders) would not eat fish
(Plutarch, Quaest. Conviv, viii. 8. 4). The priest of Poseidon at
Leptis would eat nothing that came out of the sea (/V/., De solleriia
anitnalium, 35. 11). The worshippers of the Phrygian Mother of the
Gods had to abstain from all fish (Julian, Orat v. p. 176 b). The
Pythagoreans would not eat fish (Plutarch, Quaest Conviv. viii. 8 ;
Porphyry, Vit Pythag. 45 ; Diogenes Laert., viii. i. 34). Fish were
tabooed to the Egyptian priests and to many Egyptian laymen (Hero-
dotus, ii. 37 ; Plutarch, Isis et Osiris, 7 ; id., Quaest Conviiu viii. 8 ;
Strabo, xvii. p. 812; Lucian, Astrot 7; Juvenal, xv. 7; Clement of
Alexandria, Strom, vii. 6. 33, p. 850, ed. Potter; id., Protrept ii. 39, p.
34, ed. Potter ; Porphyr>% De abstin. iv. 7). The Caledonians abstained
from fish (Dio Cassius, Ixxvi. 12). The Homeric Greeks appear to
have done so also, except in cases of extreme necessity (Homer,
Odyssey, iv. 363 sqq., xii. 329 sqq. ; Plato, Republic, iii. p. 404 b ;
Athenaeus, iv. p. 1 5 7 b). For other statements as to the sacredness of
fish and the refusal of certain persons to partake of them, see Varro,
Rcr. rust. iii. 17. 4; Sextus Empiricus, 'Yttotiwt. iii. 223; Eusebius,
Pracpar. Evang. vi. 10. 5 ; Lobeck, Aglaophamus, p. 190 n. I. In
India fish are worshipped as incarnations of Vishnu ; they are often
kept in tanks and fed as a religious duty (Monier Williams, Religious
Life and Thought in India, p. 328). The laws of Manu prescribed
abstinence from fish, except in certain specified cases {Manu^ v. 15 sq.)
At the present day many tribes in various parts of the world, especially
in Africa, have a superstitious horror of eating fish. Examples are too
numerous to be quoted here.

22. 4. In the olden time all the Ghreeks worshipped nnwronght

stones. Cp. i. 44. 2; ii. 31. 4; iii. 22. I ; ix. 24. 3; ix. 27. i ;
ix. 38. I. The Aenianes had a sacred stone which they worshipped;
they sacrificed to it and covered it with the fat of the victim (Plutarch,
Quaest. Graec. 1 3). The worship of rude stones has been practised all
over the world. The wild Karens of Burma worship certain stones,
sacrifice hogs and fowls to them, and pour the blood upon them (Forbes,
British Burma, p. 295). In Aneitum, one of the New Hebrides,



CH. XXII SACRED STONES 155

" smooth stones, apparently picked up out of the bed of the river, were
regarded as representatives of certain gods, and wherever the stone was,
there the god was supposed to be. One resembling a fish would be
prayed to as the fisherman's god. Another, resembling a yam, would
be the yam god. A third, round like a bread-finit, the bread-fiiiit god
— and so on" (G. Turner, Samoa^ p. 327). The great oracle of the
Mandan Indians was a large porous stone. Every spring and some-
times during the summer a deputation visited the stone to consult the
oracle. They solemnly smoked to the stone, alternately smoking them-
selves and passing the pipe to the stone. Some white marks on the
stone, made by one of the deputation while the rest slept, were believed
to convey the answer of the oracle (Lewis and Clarke, Travels to the
source of the Missouri River^ London, 181 5, i. p. 224 ; cp. Maximilian,
Prinz zu Wied, Reise in das innere Nord-AmericOy 2. p. 186 j^^. ; Rela-
tions des Jdsuites^ 1836, p. 108 sq, (Canadian reprint) ; E. James, Expedi-
tion to the Rocky Mountains^ i. p. 252 sq,\ H. Schoolcraft, Indian
Tribes^ 3. p. 229). In the Highlands of Scotland every village is said
to have had its Gruagach stone, on which the people poured libations
of milk (C. F. Gordon Cummring, In the Hebrides (London, 1883),
pp. 70 sq.y 335). "In certain mountain districts of Norway, up to the
end of the last century, the peasants used to preserve round stones,
washed them every Thursday evening (which seems to show some con-
nexion with Thor), smeared them with butter before the fire, laid them
in the seat of honour on fresh straw, and at certain times of the year
steeped them in ale, that they might bring luck and comfort to the
house" (Tylor, Primitive Culture^ 2. p. 167). Almost every village
of Northern India has its fetish stone in which the spirit of a god
or deified man is believed to reside. See W. Crooke, Popular religion
and folk-lore of Northern India, p. 293 sqq. In the neighbourhood
of Gilgit (North- Western India) every village has a large stone which
is the object of reverence. In some villages goats are annually
sacrificed beside the stone and the blood sprinkled on it (Biddulph,
Tribes of the Hindoo Koosh, p. \\^ sq,) The Ingouch tribe of
the Caucasus worship certain rocks and offer costly sacrifices to
them, especially at fimerals ; solemn oaths, too, are taken in presence
of the sacred rock (Potocki, Voyages dans les steps (^Astrakhan et du
CaucasCy i. pp. 124, 126). In Syria certain round black stones were
esteemed sacred and were supposed to possess magic powers. They
were called baetyh\ which is the same word as Bethel. See Pliny,
Nat. hist, xxxvii. 135; Damascius, Vita Isidori, ^ 94, 203; Genesis
xxviii. 18 sq.\ Ed. Meyer, Geschichte des Alterthums, i. § 205. For
other examples of the worship of stones, see A. Bastian, * Der Stein-
cultus in der YJ\hxiO%x2c^\^^ Archiv fiir Ethnographie, 3 (1868), pp.
I -1 8; Tylor, op. cit. 2. p. 161 sqq.\ Lubbock, Origin of Civilisation,^
p. 301 sqq. Cp. W. Robertson Smith, Religion of t/ie Semites,^ p. 201
sqq. See also below, x. 24. 6 note.

22. 6. Tritia. Cp. vi. 12. 8 note. The site of Tritia is supposed
to be at Kastritsa, a place 2 miles in a straight line to the north of the
large village of Hagios Blasts, near the sources of the Selinus (as to



156 TRITIA — RHIUM BK. vii. ACHAIA

which see vii. 24. 5 note). The town occupied the south-eastern and
eastern slope of a strong height and was surrounded by a massive wall,
which was further strengthened by large square towers projecting at
regular intervals. The space within the town walls is full of potsherds
and architectural remains. Within the citadel are foundations of con-
siderable buildings. There are also a great many ancient graves.

See Leake, Aforea, 2. p. 117 ; Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 433 ; Bursian, Gtogr, 2.
p. 324 ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 330 ; and especially von Duhn, in MittheiL d, arch,
Inst, in Atkent 3 (1878), p. 70.

Boblaye hesitated between Kastritza and a place farther north,
called St AndreWy to the south of Gauzoumistra, where there are some
ruins ; but he inclined to identify Si, Andrew with Tritia. See Boblaye,
RechercheSy p. 2 1 sq. But the more generally accepted view is that the
ruins at St, Andrew (Agios Andreas) are those of Leontium, a town
mentioned by Polybius (ii. 41, v. 94). The place is on the road from
Kalavryta to Patras, about half-way between the two. The ruins are
on an elevation to the right, as you go to Patras, In most places the
walls are nearly level with the ground, but may still be traced round
the ancient town, which appears to have been of some extent. A
church of St. Andrew among the ruins has given the place its modem
name.

See Dodwell, Tour^ 2. p. 452 ; Leake, Morea^ 3. p. 418 sqq. ; Curtius, Pelop.
I. pp. 448 jy., 456 sq, ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 330 ; von Duhn, in Mittheil, d, arch,
Inst, in Atneny 3 (1878), p. 69 sq.

22. 6. Nicias. See note on iii. 19. 4. As to paintings on Greek
tombstones, see Mittheil. d. arch. Inst, in Athen^ 4 (1879), P* 3^ ^QQ' \
id.y 5 (1880), p. 164 sqq,

22. 8. Ares had connection with Tritia, a daughter of

Triton etc. K. O. Miiller was of opinion that Tritia, daughter of
Triton, was a form of Athena, and that it was only the legend of the
virginity of Athena which obliged the people of Tritia to represent their
ancestress as distinct from Athena. The mythical relation of Athena to
Triton (see Paus. ix. 33. 7) is so far in favour of M liner's view. See
J. Escher, Triton und seine Bekdmpfung durch Herakles {L,€v^z\%y 1890),
p. 27 sqq. ; L. R. Famell, The Cults of the Greek States^ i. p. 269.
On the relation of Athena to Ares there is a dissertation by F. A. Voigt,
Beitrdge zur Mythologie des Ares und der Athena (Leipzig, 1881) ; see
especially p. 254 sqq.

22. 9. the €k)d8 called Greatest. These may have been the
Dioscuri (cp. i. 31. i ; viii. 21. 4), or Demeter and Proserpine (cp. iv.
I. 5 ; iv. 2. 6 ; iv. 3. 10 etc. ; viii. 31. i), or the Cabiri (see note on
iV. I. 7, vol. 3. p. 407).

22. 10. Bhimn. This is the cape at the narrowest point of the
Gulf of Corinth, about 5 J miles north-east of Patrae. The extremity of
the perfectly flat cape is occupied by a Turkish fort called the Castle of
the Morea {Kasiro-Moreas)^ which was formerly allowed to fall into
decay, but is now garrisoned, protected on the landward side by a moat,



CH. XXII RHIUM—PANORMUS 157

and equipped with machine guns. The fort is also used as a prison.
From the ramparts the views up and across the Gulf of Corinth are very
fine. Immediately opposite Rhium, on the other side of the strait, is
the companion fort of the Castle of Roumelia {Kastro-Raumelis), Dark
swirls on the smooth surface of the water between the two Castles
seem to show that a current runs fast in the narrows. Farther to the
east, on the northern shore of the gulf, Naupactus is clearly visible,
with its mediaeval walls ascending the steep slope of the hill behind the
town. The mountains on that side of the gulf are grand, and, when
touched with the lights and shadows of evening, exceedingly beautiful.
The mountains to the south of Rhium, across the strip of maritime
plain, are rugged and broken.

In antiquity there was a sanctuary of Poseidon at Rhium (Strabo,
viii. p. 336). The breadth of the strait was estimated by Thucydides
(ii. 86) at 7 furlongs ; by Strabo (viii. p. 335) ^t 5 ; by Pliny {NaL hist,
iv. 6) at less than a mile ; and by Scylax {Peripius^ 35) at 10 furlongs.
This last estimate agrees with the present width of the strait, which is a
mile and a quarter. It is conjectured that under the influence of wind,
tide, and earthquakes thp breadth of the strait may have varied at
different times. But the evidence seems to show that the strait is nar-
rowing. The inner and apparently much older portion of the Castle of
the Morea is now separated from the shore by a broad flat about 250
yards across. If, as seems probable, this oldest part of the fortress
stood originally on the shore, the sea must have retreated to this extent
since the fort was built. The natives also affirm that the sea is
retreating.

See Chandler, Travels in Greece ^ p. 275 ; Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 147 sqq, ;
Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 23 ; Curtius, Pelop. 2. p. 446 so. ; Bursian, Geogr, i.
p. 146 ; Baedeker,^ p. 33 ; Guide-Joanne ^ 2. p. 394 sq, ; rhilippson, Peloponnes^
p. 261 sq,

22. 10. PanonutlB. This is the bay between Cape Rhium and
Cape Drepanum. There is a Turkish fountain on the beach, and near
it formerly stood a tekieh or tomb of a Turkish saint, from which the
bay has taken in modern times the name of the bay of Tekieh, Here a
naval battle took place between the Athenian and Peloponnesian fleets
in 429 B.C. (Thucydides, ii. 86). See Leake, Morea^ 3. pp. 195,
41 5 j^. ; Boblaye, Rec/terches^ p. 23 ; Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 447 ; Bursian,
Geogr, 2. p. 312.

22. 10. the Fort of Athena. On Cape Drepanum (see 23. 4)
Dodwell saw a ruined fort which he thought might be the Fort of
Athena, The place is called Palaeo-Psatho-Pyrgo. Leake, on the
other hand, was disposed to regard the Fort of Athena as a harbour,
and to place it at Psatho-Pyrgo^ in the bay to the east of Cape Dre-
panum. See Dodwell, Tour^ i. p. 127; Leake, Morea^ 3. p. 416;
Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 24 ; Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 447 ; Bursian, Geogr.
2. p. 312.

22. 10. the harbour of Erineus. This is now called the bay of
Lambiriy or in full Lambiri'ta-ampelia, On the west side of the bay the



IS8 MILICHUS—CHARADRUS—SELEMNUS bk. vii. achaia

mountains rise abruptly from the sea, and are clothed nith forests. The
eastern side of the bay is formed by the flat delta of the Salmeniko
river. A sea-fight took place in the bay between the Athenian and
Corinthian fleets in 413 B.C. (Thucydides, vii. 34). See Dodwell, Toury
I. p. 127 ; Leake, Morea^ 3. pp. 193 sq.^ 410 ; Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 458
sq, ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 313.

22. 1 1 . the river Milichus. This is almost certainly the stream
which coming down from a glen in the hills crosses the high-road from
Patras to Aegium about twenty minutes walk ( 10 or 11 furlongs) north of
Patras. At this point of its course the stream flows in a gravelly, but not
broad, bed between vineyards. The road crosses it by a bridge. Beside
the bridge is a garden with cypresses. Higher up the stream, among
the hills, are the villages of Voundeli and Sykena.

Cp. Cell, Itinerary of the Marea, p. 6 ; Leake, Afarea, 3. p. 417 ; Boblaye,
Recherches, p. 22 sq, ; Curtius, Pelcp, I. p. 445 ; Bursian, Geogr. 2. p. 312.

22. II. the Charadms. Between the Milichus (see preceding
note) and Rhium two streams of some size fall into the sea. The first
of them, some 2 miles north of the Milichus, has an exceedingly
broad and stony bed ; the breadth of the bed is probably over a quarter
of a mile ; a good many minutes are spent in traversing it When I
crossed it (20th October 1895) there was no water in it ; but it is clear
that in rainy weather a raging torrent must sweep over this broad,
nigged bed, and such a stream would very appropriately be called
Charadrus ('torrent'). About a mile to the north of this torrent-bed
another stream crosses the path, flowing in a broad, gravelly bed
through uncultivated ground overgrown with shrubbery. This stream,
which descends from the village of Velvitsi^ is commonly identified with
the Charadrus (Leake, Morca^ 3. p. 417 ; Boblaye, Recherches^ P- 23 ;
Curtius, Pelop. i. p. 445 sq. ; Bursian, Geogr. 2. p. 312; Philippson,
Peloponnes^ p. 263) ; but it may possibly be the Selemnus (see 23. i
sqq. ) A small stream of clear water was flowing in the gravelly channel
when I saw it It is about a mile to the south of Rhium, and comes
down from the mountains which rise a little way inland, beyond the
narrow maritime plain. Among the mountains it flows in a very deep,
nigged bed, and, when it is swollen with rain, the passage of the stream
is difficult and dangerous (Philippson, I.e.)

23. I. Argyra Selemnus. The Selemnus is probably the

stream which comes down from the village of Kastritza and joins the
sea a little to the east of Cape Rhium. About three-quarters of a mile
to the south of the Castle of the Morea Vaudrimey saw some ruins, in-
cluding those of " a triumphal arch or monumental gate." They may
possibly be the ruins of Arg>Ta. But what Vaudrimey took to be ** a
triumphal arch or monumental gate " is clearly not ancient but medi-
aeval ; it is apparently a castle gateway facing north and south, and
distant, as it seemed to me, nearer a quarter than three-quarters of a
mile south of the Castle of the Morea. I obser\ed nothing else resem-
bling a Roman arch in this neighbourhood. See Boblaye, Recherches^



CH. XXIII DREPANUM—AEGIUM 159

p. 23 ; Leake, Moreuy 3. p. 417; Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 446; Bursian,
Geogr, 2. p. 312.

23. 4. the Bolinaeus Bolina. The Bolinaeus is probably the

river of Platiana (or Platanos) which falls into the bay of Panormus, to
the east of the Selemnus. In this neighbourhood Leake observed " a
flat-topped height overlooking the maritime level ; it has some appear-
ance of artificial ground, and answers exactly to the site of Bolina." See
Leake, Morea, 3. p. 195, cp. p. 417 ; Curtius, Pelop. i. p. 447 ; Bursian,
Geogr, 2. p. 312.

23. 4. Drepanam. This cape, the most northerly point of Pelo-
ponnese, retains its old name in the form of Dhrapano, It is a long
sandy spit running out into the sea in a crescent shape ; hence its name
of Drepanum or * sickle.' See Dodwell, Tour^ i. p. 127 ; Leake, i1/<?r^a,
3. pp. 195, 414; Boblaye, Recherches^ P- 23 sq, ; Curtius, Pelop, i. p.
447 ; Bursian, Geogr, 2, p. 312. As to the story of the mutilation of
Sky by Cronus, Mr. Andrew Lang has shown that it is one of a world-
wide class of myths invented to explain the separation of Earth and
Sky (A. Lang, Custom and myth^ P- 45 ^99-)

23. 4. Bhypes. This place was, as Pausanias mentions, 30 fur-
longs from Aegium ; it must therefore have been half-way between
Aegium and the harbour of Erineus, which was 60 furlongs from
Aegium (22. 10). On the right bank of the Tholopotamos river there
are some ruins, which would seem to be those of Rhypcs, since they are
equidistant from Aegium and Erineus (bay of Lambiri) ; the distance of
the ruins from each of these places is a little over 3 miles. Leake,
without any sufficient reason, would place Rhypes farther to the west, on
the bank of the Salmeniko river, perhaps on the exact site of the village
of Salmeniko, But it does not appear that he found any ruins there, and
the distances of the Salmeniko river from Aegium and Erineus do not
agree with the statements of Pausanias. Prof, von Duhn identifies
Rhypes with the ruins of a considerable city a fiill hour to the south-west
of Aegium. The ruins occupy the summit of a high table-mountain
called Trapeza ('table'). The circuit-walls may be traced, also many
foundation -walls. The town appears to have been destroyed by an
earthquake. Rhypes is mentioned by Herodotus (i. 145) among the
twelve Achaean cities. In the time of Strabo it was deserted and its
territory belonged to Aegium and Pharae (Strabo, viii. p. 387). Mys-
cellus, the founder of Crotona, was a native of Rhypes (Strabo, ib,)

See Leake, Morca^ 3. pp. 193, 417 5q,\ id,, Peloponnesiaca, pp. 408-4x0;
Boblaye, Rccherches^ p. 24 ; Curtius, Pelop, I. p. 458 sq, ; Bursian, Geogr, 2, p.
330 ; von Duhn, in Mitiheil. d, arch. Inst, in Athen, 3 (1878), p. 66 ; Guide-
Joanne, 2. p. 395.

23. 5. Aegimn. The modem town of Aegium or Vostiisa occupies
the site of the ancient city. It stands in a beautiful position at the
comer of a table-land stretching from the mountains to the gulf. The
torrents on either side have pushed out spits of alluvial soil into the sea,
thus creating a sort of sheltered roadstead. On the seaward side is a
steep cliff some 150 feet high, and between the foot of the cliff and the



l6o AEGJUM BK. VII. ACHAIA

shore is a narrow strip of level ground. The lower town, comprising the
railway station and some large warehouses, stands on this strip of level
ground beside the sea. Here, too, the principal spring of the town
issues from sixteen mouths. Beside it there grew, down to 1858 or
later, a magnificent plane-tree, measuring forty-five feet in girth at a
height of three feet above the ground. The modem breakwater rests
upon ancient foundations about five feet broad. Beside the breakwater
another spring issues through nine mouths. About half-way up the cliff
which separates the upper from the lower town there is a terrace some
150 feet wide. Thus the town rises from the water's edge in three
steps, and the houses being divided between the shore, the terrace, and
the table-land present a picturesque appearance when viewed from the
sea. The upper and lower towns are connected by a road which ascends
a ramp or inclined plane, and also by an underground passage through
the conglomerate rock. The greater part of the town, with its busy
bazaar, lies on the table -land. The fertile plain round the town is
covered with luxuriant grape and currant vineyards, interspersed with a
few olive and mulberry plantations. The modem town, with its popula-
tion of 7000, lives almost entirely by the cultivation and export of
currants. Of the ancient city hardly any traces are left Probably
much of it was built of brick, since the fields near the town have been
found strewn with fragments of brick and painted tiles. A few pieces of
sculpture and some insignificant inscriptions have been discovered. In
a field overlooking the sea, a little to the east of Aegium, Mr. (after-
wards Sir) C. T. Newton noticed " part of a fluted column and some
remains of buildings which had just been dug up ; near them was a
piece of massive wall. The column was of travertine covered with
stucco." He saw also two fine statues of white marble, and some frag-
ments of a third. " One of these statues appeared to be a Mercury,
very similar to the celebrated one in the Vatican ; the other a female
figure, with a head-dress like that of the younger Faustina, probably an
empress in the character of some goddess. These statues are well pre-
served and are good specimens of art of the Roman period." Polished
stone axes and flints of the neolithic age have been found in the neigh-
bourhood of Aegium.

See Dodwell, Toitr^ 2. p. 304 sq. ; Gell, Ititurary of the Morea^ p. 7 ; Leake,
Morca^ 3. p. 185 sqq. ; Boblaye, Rccherches^ p. 24 sq. ; Welcker, Tagebuck, 2. pp.
323-325 ; Curtius, fe/op. l. p. 459 sq. ; W. G. Clark, /^e/op. p. 289 sqq. ; C. T.
Newton, Travels and discoveries in the Levant ^ i. p. 10 sqq. ; Bursian, Geogr. 2.
p. 331 ; Mittheil. d. arch. Inst, in Athcn^ 3 (1878), pp. 63 sqq.^ 95 sqq. ; Archdo/o-
gische Zeitung, 38 (1880), p. 1 01 ; Baedeker,' p. 245 sq. ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p.
396 sq. ; Philippson, Peloponnes, pp. 260, 279.

23. 5. Phoenix Miganitas. These rivers cannot be identified

with certainty. The Miganitas is perhaps the dreaded torrent now
called Gaidaropnikies (*drowner of asses'), which flows into the sea
about a mile to the west of Aegium. It comes down from a deep glen
in the mountains, the steep sides of which are partly occupied by corn-
fields, partly wooded with clumps of pines. If this identification is right,
the Phoenix is either the Tholopotamos^ which falls into the sea about a



CH. xxiii ILITHYIA AT AEGWM i6t

mile to the west of the Gaidaropniktes, or more probably perhaps the
larger river Salnieniko, about 2 miles farther wesL This last river
takes its name from the fCaljrvia of Salmeniko, a village among the hills
about 5 miles distant from the sea. At this point the stream issues
from a glen in the limestone mountains, and its valley opens out and
becomes well cultivated. The slopes of the mountains above the village
are partly wooded with oaks. All these streams are torrents which in
the rainy season rush down in spates, but in the height of summer
either dry up altogether or shrink to mere rivulets trickling along their
broad stony beds. Their sudden floods often spread great devastation
among the currant plantations of the maritime plain, and do great
injury to the railway and road.

See Leake, Morta, 3. p. 192 sq. ; Bobtaye, Rahtrcha, p. 15 ; Cortius, Pe(ap.
I. p. 459 ; Bursian, Gtogr. 3. p. 313 ; Gutdt-Jeaimt, 2. p. 395 ig. ; PhilippsoD,
Ptloponna, pp. a6i, 263, 265, 273.

23. 5. Stmto, an athlete. See v. 21. 9 note, where he is de-
scribed as an Alexandrian. He may have been bom at Alexandria and
have settled at Aegium.

23. 5. Dithyia, Her ima^e is draped etc Some coins of Aegium
present us with a female figure which may be a copy of the image of
llithyia mentioned by Pausanias. The figure is clad in a long tunic and
wears a polos or firmament. In her raised right hand she holds a
torch ; in her extended left hand another torch.
See Imhoof-Blumer and Gardner, Num. Comm,
on Paus. p. 83, with pi. R vi., vii. Cp. Critical
Note, vol. I. p. 592. Characteristic of llithyia in
art is " the gesture of the hands, one of which in
many representations of coins and vases is tip-
raised with the palm opened outwards, a gesture
which belonged to a sort of natural magic or ^^^ «,— ilumyia
mesmerism, and was supposed to assist childbirth" (com or aioiuh).
(L. R. Famell, The Cults of the Greek States, 2.
p. 613 sq.) Elsewhere (i. t8. ;) Pausanias says that the Athenians
were the only people who represented llithyia as draped from head to
foot He probably had not yet visited the sanctuary of llithyia at
Aegium when he made that statement. For other examples of images
draped in real clothes see vol. 2. p. 574 sq.

23. 7. images of Health and Aesculapias. On a coin of Aegium,
belonging to the reign of Commodus, Aesculapius is represented seated,
holding a sceptre in his right hand. In front of him is an altar, with
a serpent coiled round it j and beyond the altar stands the female
figure of Health, with her right hand extended over the altar. It can
hardly be doubted that this group on the coin is a copy of the group by
Damophon which Pausanias describes ; for the same figures of Aescula-
pius and Health occur separately on other coins of Aegium and must
therefore be copies of statues. The coins thus afford us information as
to Damophon's artistic style. In representing Aesculapius he appears
to have followed the type of the Olympian Zeus of Phidias. The
figure of Health is majestic, and here again he would seem to have
VOU IV H


i6fl HOMAGYRIAN ZEUS BK. vu. achaia

followed the traditions of the school of Phidias. This is the opinion of
Messrs. Imhoof-Blumer and Gardner, who think that the coins confirm
the judgment of the late H. Bninn as to the
high religious and moral aim of Damophon's
art {Gesch. d. grinh. Kunitler^ i. p. 291). See
Imhoof-Blumer and Gardner, Num. Comm. on
Paul. p. 84, with pi. R ix. x. xi. Fragments of
statues by Damophon were discovered at Ly-
cosura in 1889. See note on i-iii. 37. 3.

23. 7. tlie Phoenician legend that
Aescnl&pins etc. The Phoenician counterpart
of Aesculapius is commonly thought to have
been Eshmun, one of whose symbols was a
tTH (com or ABctuM). serpent. See Moven, Die PAoenitier, i. p. 527
sff. ; Alois Miiller, ' Esmun. Ein Beitrag zur
Mythologie des orientalischen Alterthums," Siizungsberichie of the
Vienna Academy, Philos.-histor. CI, 45 (1864), pp. 496-523. Perhaps
Pausanias's adversary was not very serious ; but the germ of his theory
that the sun (Apollo) is the father of the air (Aesculapius) may possibly
be traced to the cosmological speculations which Philo of Byblus
attributed to Sanchuniathon. See Philo of Byblus quoted by Eusebius,
Prtupar. Evaitg. i. 10. z ; Frag. Hist. Graec. ed. Miiller, 3. p. 565.
The late W. Robertson Smith, in one of his unpublished lectures on
Semitic religion, argues that Eshmun was not a specialised god of
healing like Aesculapius, but merely the Baal or supreme god of Sidon,
resembling in character and functions all other Baals (that is, local or
tribal gods).

23. 8. For at Iltane etc. See ii. 1 1. 5 sq. Pausanias is pointing
out that the Greeks regarded both Aesculapius and Health as children
of Apollo, in other words as products of the Sun, and that they identified
these two products of the solar activity by giving both names
(Aesculapius and Health) to one and the same image. Thus he proves,
to his own satisfaction at least, that the Greek story of the parentage
of Aesculapius was identical with the Phoenician, both being merely a
mythical way of stating certain physical facts. Cp. Critical Note on
this passage, vol. i. p. 592-

24. I. At Sparta idso there is a barrow to TalthrUns. See
iii. 12, 7.

24. 2. Homagyrian Zens Aphrodite and Athsna. This

sanctuary of Homagyrian Zeus was doubtless the sacred grove of Zeus
known as the Hamarium, where the Federal Assembly or Diet of the
Achaean League met. The Hamarium was at Aegium (Strabo, viii.
PP- 385, 387)- There was an altar of Hestia in the Hamarium, beside
which were set up tablets engraved with the decrees of the Achaean
League (Polybius, v. 93, 10). Polybius calls the sanctuary the Hom-
arium, but the form Hamarium is established by an inscription found
at Levidi (near Orchomenus) in Arcadia, from which we learn that the
official oath taken by representatives of the Achaean League was by
Mamarian Zeus, Hamarian Athena, and Aphrodite, the three deities



CH.XXIV ■ HOMAGYRIAN ZEUS 163

whose images Pausanias saw in the sanctuary of Homagyrian Zeus.
See Foucart, 'Fragment inAiii d'un decret de la ligue Ach^enne,'
Revue archiohgique, N. S. 32 (1876), p. 96 sqq. ; Dittenbet^er, Syllage
Ittscr. Graec. No, 178 ; Hicks, Greek historical Inscriptions, No. 187 j
Colliti, G. D. I. 2. No. 1634. The Achaean colonies of Sybaris,
Crotona, and Caulon in Italy established a common sanctuary of
Homarian (Hamarian) Zeus, where their representatives met for
deliberation and concerted a common policy, evidently in imitation of
the Hamarium in their old home (Polybius, ii. 39). It would seem,
therefore, that Pausanias is wrong in speaking of Homagyrian Zeus ;
the true form of the name was Hamarian. Possibly in Pausanias's
time the ancient and unintelligible adjective Hamarian had been
explained or corrupted into Homagyrian. Some would derive the name
Hamarian from the Locrian hamara 'day,' and suppose that it means
'of the broad daylight.' See Preller, Gritch. Mylhol* 1. p. 148 ; L. R.
Famell, The Cults of the Greek States, i. p. 43. All the bronre
coins of the Achaean League have on the obverse a figure of Zeus,
standing and naked, holding a figure of Victory and a long sceptre.
This is probably Hamarian Zeus, and may be a copy of his statue in
the Hamarium. On the reverse of the same coins is a female figure
seated, holding a wreath and a long sceptre. She may be Hamarian
Athena or Aphrodite or Panachaean Demeter. Messrs. Imhoof-Blumer
and Gardner prefer to regard her as Achaia personified, remarking
that similarly Aetolia appears on coins of the Aetolian League, Bithynia
on Bithynian coins, Roma on Roman coins, etc. See Imhoof-Blumer
and Gardner, Num. Comm. on Paus. p. 86, with pi. R xv. xvi. ; Cata-
logue of the Greek Coins in the British Museum : Peloponnesus, plates

24. 3. a copions aprln«. This is doubtless one of the two

abundant springs which may still be seen on the beach at Aegium. See
note on vii. 23. 5.

24. 3. a sanctiux7 of Safetr. Safety seems to have been an
especially Achaean goddess. Cp. viL 21.7.

24. 3. ther Bend them to Arethnaa. Cp. note on v. 7. 2.

24. 4- Zens reprssented as a child a work of Agsladas.

There was a legend that Aegium look its name

from a goat {aix), which there suckled the infant

Zeus (Strabo, viii. p. 387). This legend is figured

on a coin of Aegium (Fig. 22): the in&nt Zeus

is being suckled by a she-goal ; on either side is

a tree ; above is an eagle with outspread wings

(Imhoof-Blumer and Gardner, Num. Comm. on

Paus. p. 8; sq., with pi. R xiv.) Other coins of

Aegium represent an archaic image of Zeus '"^gv"'^ *cmt"'^(co'n

standing on a basis, naked and beardless, holding or aeciuh).

a thunderbolt in his raised right hand and an

eagle in his extended left ; on one of them appears to be the legend

AiriEflN HAIS, " the child of the people of Aegium." Of these

twQ representations of Zeus on the coins one is probably a copy


i64 THE RIVER SEUNUS bk. vil achaia

of the image mentioned by Pausanias ; as he makes no mention of the
goat, the probability seems rather in favom* of the latter. Moreover,
the latter type agrees closely with the type of Zeus on the coins of
Messene, which some suppose to be a copy of the image of Zeus which
Ageladas is known to have made for the Messenians. The resemblance
between the coin-types of Messene and Aegium is in favour of the
supposition that they are copies of the two images of Zeus which
Ageladas made for the Messenians and Aegians respectively. On the
other hand, this type of Zeus is too common on coins of other places to
allow us to argue with confidence from the resemblance in question.
See Imhoof-Blumer and Gardner, Num. Comm. on Paus. p. 85 sq.y
with pi. R xii. xiii. ; and note on iv. 33. 2.

24. 4* the most beantifol boy was chosen to be priest etc We
often hear of a priesthood held by a boy or girl up to the age of
puberty but not after. See ii. 33. 2 ; \ni. 26. 3 ; viii. 47. 3 ; x. 34. 8.
The intention was doubtless to secure the chastity of the priest or
priestess. Cp. ix. 27. 6.

24. 4. The Achaean diet still meets at Aegium. Cp. vii. 7.
2 note.

24. 4- the Amphictyons meet at Delphi. The Amphictyonic

Council seems to have still met at Delphi in the time of Philostratus ;
at least he speaks of its meetings as if they were still regularly held
(Philostratus, Vtt. ApolL iv. 23).

24. 5. the river Selinns. This is the rapid stream now called the
river of Vostiisay which flows into the sea in a north-north-easterly
direction 3 miles to the east of Aegium. In the upper part of its
course it flows for 4 or 5 miles through a very deep and savage gorge
between mountains that rise on either side to a height of about 4000
feet above the stream. At the northern end of this gorge is the village
of Kounina. From this point onwards till the river issues from the
mountains on the maritime plain, its valley is wider. On the west side
the mountains rise in steep rocky terraces wooded with pines ; on the
eastern side of the valley they are much less steep, and here on a hill
stands the large monastery of Taxiarchis among beautiful gardens.
The mountains above the monastery are clothed with fir-woods, which
come so low down as almost to touch the olive-groves — those repre-
sentatives of a warmer climate. Higher up than the gorge already
mentioned the Selinus is formed by the meeting of two streams which
come down from the villages of Lapata and Vlasia. The latter stream
is the more considerable. On its southern side is perched on a high
rock the picturesque monaster)' of Makellaria. Above this point the
stream issues from an inaccessible ravine enclosed by walls of rock. The
village of Vlasia^ still higher up the stream, lies at the mouth of a deep
glen, from which the head water of the river issues. It may be reached
by carriage from Patras in five or six hours. The slopes of the
surrounding mountains are wooded with firs, and many chestnut trees
grow near the village.

See Leake, Morea, 3. p. 407 : Cell, Itinerary of the Morea, p. 10 ; Boblaye,
Recherches^ p. 25; Curtius, Pehp, i. p. 465; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 311;



CH. XXIV DESTRUCTION OF HEUCE 165

Baedeker,' pp. 30, 245, 309; and especially Philippson, FeloponruSt pp. 263 sq,y
265, 282.

24. 5. a most holy sanctnary of Heliconian Poseidon. In

historical times the great sanctuary of the Ionian Greeks was that of
Heliconian Poseidon at Panionium (Herodotus, i. 148 ; Strabo, viii. p.
384, xiv. p. 639; as to Panionium see note on vii. 5. i). Besides the
seats of his worship here mentioned by Pausanias, inscriptions prove that
Heliconian Poseidon was worshipped in Samos and at Sinope. See
MittluiL d, arch. Inst, in Atherty 10 (1885), p. 32 sqq,; Bulletin de
Corresp, helUnique^ 13 (1889), p. 299 sqq. On his worship, cp. C.
Wachsmuth, Die Stadt Athen im Alterthuniy i. p. 394 sqq,

24. 6. Homer also refers to Helice and Heliconian Poseidon.
See Iliady ii. 575, \'iii. 203, xx. 404.

24. 6. in after time the Achaeans of Helice etc. According to
the testimony of a contemporary, the historian Heraclides Ponticus, the
destruction of Helice by an earthquake took place on a winter night in
the year 373 B.C., two years before the battle of Leuctra. The city
was situated a mile and a half from the sea, and all this intermediate
space, along with the city itself, vanished under the waves. Two
thousand Achaeans were sent to bury the dead, but they could find
none. Eratosthenes, who visited the site many years afterwards, was
told by sailors that the bronze statue of Poseidon was standing under
water and formed a dangerous shoal. See Strabo, viii. p. 384 sq. The
circumstances which, in the opinion of the Greeks, drew down the
wrath of Poseidon on Helice and so occasioned the earthquake, are
somewhat variously related. But it seems that the Ionian Greeks had
sent envoys requesting that they might get the image of Poseidon from
the people of Helice, or at least the plan of his temple or altar, and
that the people of Helice impiously maltreated or murdered the envoys
in the very sanctuary of Heliconian Poseidon. See Strabo, Lc, ; Diodorus,
XV. 49; Aelian, Nat anim. xi. 19; Seneca, Natur, Quaes/, vi. 23 and
26, vii. 5 and 16. Pliny and Ovid, like Pausanias (§ 13), assert that
the ruins of Helice were visible under the sea (Pliny, Nal, hist, ii. 206 ;
Ovid, Met. xv. 293 sqq,)

Similarly, the city of Callao in Peru, which was submerged in the
earthquake of 1746, is said to be sometimes visible under the sea
(Tschudi, Peru. Reiseskiszen^ i. p. 48). "There is a legend that the
old city of Goa [in India] was overwhelmed by a sudden rush of the sea,
and that its houses may still be seen in calm weather below the waters "
(Visscher, Letters from Malabar ^ trans, by Drury, p. 33 n.) Breton
peasants tell of the town of Is which sank into the sea ; the fishermen
say that on stormy days you can sec, in the troughs of the waves, the
tops of the church-spires, and in calm weather you can hear, from the
depths of the sea, the church-bells chiming the hymn of the day (Renan,
Souvenirs d*Enfance et de Jeunesse^ p. i sq.) Similar tales of drowned
cities, villages, castles, and churches are common in many lands.
They are told especially of lakes, and as stories of this kind are current
in districts of Ireland and Scotland where prehistoric crannogs or lake-



166 SIGNS OF EARTHQUAKES bk. vil achaia

dwellings are known to have existed, it is a plausible conjecture that
some of them may have originated, if not in traditions of such dwellings,
at least from glimpses of the remains under water.

See W. G. Wood-Martin, The Lake Dwellinp cf Ireland, p. 28 x^. ; and for
more examples see Sotion 41, 42, in Westermann^ Scriptores rerum mirab, Graeci,
p.190 ; Grimm, Detitsche Sagen, No. 132 ; Kuhn, Sagen aus IVestfaUriy I. No. 171 ;
iV/., Mdrkische Sagen und Mdrchen, No. 80, p. 81 ; Bartsch, Sagen, Mdhrcken und
Gehrdufhe aus Mecklenburg, i. Nos. 549, 553, 554 ; Bechstein, Myiken und Sagen
Tirols, pp. 23^, 237 ; K. Lyoker, Deutsche Sagen und Sitten in hessiscken Giuten,
p. 136 J^. ; Berenger-Feraud, R^miniscerues populaires de la Provence, p. 305 sqq, ;
Burne and Jackson, Shropshire Folklore, p. 73 sqq. ; The Gefitleman s Magaxim
Library, edited by G. L. Gomme, English traditional lore, p. 21 ; Giraldas
Gimbrensls, Topography of Ireland, ch. 9 ; Bastian, Die Volker des ostlichen Asien,
4. p. 372 ; Livingstone, Travels and Researches in South Africa, '^. 327; Proceedings
of the Royal Geographical Society, 1887, p. 47 ; Thirlwall, * On some traditions
relating to the submersion of ancient cities,' Transactions of the Royal Society of
Literature, 2nd Series, 6 (1859), pp. 387-415; R. Basset, *Lcs Villes englou-
Xits,' Revue des Traditions Populaires, 6(1891), pp. 165, 431-435, 495-499, 513-
528, 634-637 ; id,, 8 (1893), PP- 474-479. 603 ; id,, 9 (1894), pp. 79, 251 sq,, 612-
617 ; id., 10(1895), pp. 101-104, 310-316, 367 sq,, 494 sq,, 610-616 ; id,, II (1896),
pp. 35-38. Heine in his Reisebilder (l. p. 148, Hamburg, 1876) has given the
old legend an imaginative turn, much as Renan has done in his Riminiscences,
referr^ to above.

Earthquakes in Greece are still very common. Observations ex-
tending over twenty years prove that they are commonest in February
and March, least common in June and July. The hour at which they
are oftenest felt is about half-past two in the morning ; half an hour
after noon is the time when they are rarest See Neumann and Partsch,
Physikalische Geographie von Gricchenland, p. 320. Aegium, the
nearest neighbour of Helice, has repeatedly suffered from severe earth-
quakes, notably in 23 A.D., 18 17, 1861, and 1888. See Tacitus, Ann.
iv. 13; Leake, Morca, 3. p. 402, note a; Neumann and Partsch, op,
cit, p. 325 ; Baedeker,^ p. 246. The earthquake of 1888 is said to have
almost destroyed the town. It must have been quickly rebuilt, for
when I visited Aegium in May 1890 the place bore few traces of the
catastrophe.

24. 7- eaxthquakes axe preceded either by heavy and continuouB
rains etc. With the following list of signs of an approaching earthquake,
compare Sir Charles Lyell's description of the phenomena attending
earthquakes : " Irregularities in the seasons preceding or following the
shocks ; sudden gusts of wind, interrupted by dead calms ; violent rains
at unusual seasons, or in countries where, as a rule, they are almost
unknown ; a reddening of the sun's disk, and haziness in the air, often
continued for months ; an evolution of electric matter, or of inflammable
gas from the soil, with sulphurous and mephitic vapours ; noises under-
ground, like the running of carriages, or the discharge of artillery, or
distant thunder ; animals uttering cries of distress, and evincing extra-
ordinary Jilarm, being more sensitive than men to the slightest move-
ment ; a sensation like sea -sickness, and a dizziness in the head,
experienced by men : — these, and other phenomena, . . . have recurred
again and again at distant ages, and in all parts of the globe " {Principles



CH. XXIV SIGNS OF EARTHQUAKES 167

of Geology ^'^ 2. p. 81). Aristotle in his discussion of earthquakes
(^Meteor, ii. 7. and 8. p. 364 a 14 sqq.) mentions some of the symptoms
described by Pausanias, such as the heavy rains, the droughts, the haze
over the sun, and the subterranean noises. He mentions one ominous
sign which Pausanias does not ; namely a long, accurately-levelled line
of fine mist seen at sundown or soon after it in a clear sky. On ancient
views of earthquakes, see also Joannes Lydus, De ostentis^ 53-58.

24. 8. Springs of water mostly dry up. Modem observation
has shown that earthquakes are sometimes accompanied by the drying
up of springs ; for example, this was observed in New England, 27th
October 1827, and at Lisbon in 1755. Even rivers are sometimes
wholly or partly dried up. In 1 1 10 there was a dreadful earthquake at
Nottingham, and the Trent became so low there that people walked
across it. During the earthquake of 11 58 the Thames was so low that
it could be crossed on foot even at London. In 1787, when a shock
was felt at Glasgow, the flow of the Clyde stopped for a time. . In 1881
a river in the Philippine Islands, after a severe shock of earthquake,
ceased to flow for two hours. On the other hand, new springs are
sometimes formed during an earthquake. See J. Milne, Earthquakes
(London, 1886), p. 154 sqq,

24. 8. the sky is shot with sheets of flame. Observation has
shown that in some parts of the world, particularly Italy, earthquakes
are often attended by a display of the Aurora Borealis. It is said that
before the earthquakes which shook England in 1849 ^"^ 1850 the
weather had been unusually warm, the Aurora had been common and
brilliant, while the whole year had been remarkable for flre-balls, light-
nings, and corruscations. Glimmering lights were seen in the sky
before the earthquakes in New England (i8th November 1755); and
strange lights appeared in the heavens before the Sicilian earthquake of
1692. On the other hand, in Japan, where earthquakes occur daily,
the Aurora is almost never seen. See J. Milne, Earthquakes^ p. 264 sq,
Aristotle, who was eleven years old at the time of the destruction of Helice,
speaks of a great comet that was seen in the west about the time of the
earthquake {Meteor, i. 6. p. 343 b i sq^

24. 12. The sea advanced fax over the land etc. The great
wave of the sea which accompanied the earthquake at Helice is men-
tioned also by Aristotle {Meteor, i. 6. p. 343 b 2 sq.^ ii. 8. p. 368 b 8)
and Strabo (viii. p. 384). Aelian says that ten Lacedaemonian ships,
which happened to be anchored in the roadstead, were engulphed with
the city {Nat. anim. xi. 19). In modem times destructive earthquakes
have often been accompanied by immense waves of the sea. At the
great earthquake of Lisbon in 1755 the sea first drew back till the
whole bar at the mouth of the Tagus was uncovered ; then it came on
in mountainous waves, 30 to 60 feet higher than the highest tide, and
swamped the city. At the same time the coast of Spain was swept by
a mighty wave ; at Cadiz it is said to have been 60 feet high. The
coasts of Chili and Peru have been often devastated by tremendous
waves and earthquakes together ; and the waves are said to be more
dreaded than the earthquakes. In the earthquakes which destroyed



t68 CERYNEA — BUR A bk. vii. achaia

Lima and turned part of the coast about Callao into a bay, a frigate i»'as
carried by the waves to a great distance up the country and left high
and dry at a considerable height above the city. See Lyell, PrindpUs
of Geolo^^ 2. p. 147 sqq, ; J. Milne, Earthquakes^ p. 165 sqq,

24. 13. a city on Mount Sipylns etc See note on v. 13. 7. Its
destruction by an earthquake is mentioned also by Strabo (i. p. 58, xiL
p. 579) and Pliny t^Nctt. hist. ii. 205).

25. 3. when Cylon and his fiustion had seized the AcropoliB etc
See Herodotus, v. 71 ; Thucydides, i. 126 ; Plutarch, Solon^ 12 ; Aris-
totle, Constitution of Athens^ i.

25. 3. The Lacedaemonians also slew men etc. See iv. 24. 4 sq.
According to Aelian ( Var, hist, vi. 7) only five houses in Lacedaemon
(Pausanias says none) )%'ere left standing after the earthquake. Diodorus
says (xv. 66) that almost the whole city was brought to the ground. Cp.
Thucydides, i. 10 1.

25. 5. Gerynea. Strabo says (\iii. p. 387) that Cerynea was situated
on a lofty rock. The remains of an acropolis and other ruins were
observed by Vietti above Rhizomylo^ on the mountain which rises above
the left bank of the Bouphousia river, where that stream issues from the
mountains into the maritime plain. The ruins, which are about 3
miles from the sea, are probably those of Cerynea. Vietti appears to be
the only modem traveller who has visited them. The Bouphousia river,
which rises in the mountains of Kerpini and issues from a gorge into
the coast-plain, is doubtless the Cerynites river.

See Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 25 sq, ; Leake, Pelopontusiaca^ p. 387 sq, (where
he retracts the view stated in his Morea^ 3. pp. 183 sq.^ 403 sq,^ as to tne site of
Cer>'nea) ; Curtius, Pelop. I. p. 467 sq. ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. pp. 313, 334 sq, ;
Baedeker,' p. 245 ; Guide-Joanne ^ 2, pp. 368, 397.

The wine of Cerynea was supposed to produce abortion in women ;
even bitches, if they ate of the clusters of the vine, were said to miscarry
(Theophrastus, Nist, plant, ix. 18. 11; Aelian, Var, hist, xiii. 6 ; Athe-
naeus, i. p. 31 f).

25. 7* a sanctuary of the Eomenides, said to have been founded
by Orestes. Orestes is said to have sacrificed a black sheep to the
Eumenides at Cerynea after his acquittal at Athens, whereupon the
goddesses became propitious {eumeneis) to him, and so were called
Eumenides (Schol. on Sophocles, Ocd. Col, 42).

25. 7- statues of women etc. See ii. 17. 3 note. In front of the
temple of Apollo in the island of Thera three large statues of women,
probably priestesses, were found in 1896 {Athenaeum^ nth July 1896,
p. 74 sq.)

25. 8. Bura. Between the Bouphousia (Cer>Tiites) and Kalavryta
(Buraicus) rivers there rises a massive hill, which falls away on the
south and west in a line of stupendous precipices. This is the hill or
mountain of Bura ; it is now called by the natives Idra, On the north
the hill is separated from the sea by a strip of level coast-land ; on the
southern side it is connected by a neck or saddle (which is, however
far below the summit of the hill) with the loftier mountains which begin



CH. XXV BURA 169

here and stretch away into Arcadia. On this neck or saddle are the
remains of Bura. They consist of extensive, though insignificant,
remains of walls and foundations, spread along the southern and
part of the western foot of the hill, as far as a copious spring which
gushes from the bottom of the precipice. Among the ruins is a chapel
of St. Constantine, which probably occupies the site of an ancient
sanctuary. Mixed with the ruins are huge blocks of rock which appear
to have been hurled from the beetling crags above by an earthquake,
perhaps the same earthquake which destroyed the city. The whole
neighbourhood gives one the impression that it has been subjected to
gigantic convulsions of nature. The crags tower up to dizzy heights
above the traveller, and the rivers find their way through tremendous
gorges to the sea.

At the south-western foot of the hill of Bura, where the precipices
rise highest, lie the ruins of the ancient theatre, with remains of fifteen
rows of seats ; the orchestra is about 32 paces broad. From some of
the seats there is a fine view of the Corinthian Gulf, with the mountains
of Northern Greece rising beyond it. A few remains of the town walls
may be seen below the theatre.

The citadel of Bura probably occupied the summit of the hill. The
western &ce of the hill is a sheer wall of rock ; a single path here leads
to the summit.

See Dodwell, Tour^ 2. p. 302 sq, ; Cell, Itinerary of the Morea,ja, 9 ; Leake,
Morea^ 3. pp. 183 sq,y 397 sqq, ; iV/., Peloponnesiaca^ p. 387 sa, (Leake at first
took the ruins to be those of Cerynea, but afterwards identifi(^d tnem with those of
Bora) ; Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 26 sq. ; Curtius, Pelop, I. p. 469 sq* ; Bursian,
Gtogr, 2. p. 336 sq, ; von Duhn, in Mittheil. d. arch. Inst, in, Athen, 3 (1878),
p. 02 sq, ; Baedeker,' p. 308 sq, ; Guide-Toamtty 2, p. 369. The remains of the
theatre appear to be described by Baedeker (Lolling) sdone. I did not observe
them, though I passed along by the path which here skirts the foot of the preci-
pices on my way from Megaspeleum to Aegium.

25. 9. The images are works of Enclides, an Athenian. As

Pausanias expressly says that the earthquake which destroyed Bura did
not spare even the images, it follows that these images by Euclides must
have been set up after the earthquake of 373 B.C. Probably they were
set up not very many years after, for the sculptor Euclides was a con-
temporary of Plato's and owed him three minae, as the philosopher
mentioned in his will (Diogenes Laertius, iii. 42). Another work of
this sculptor is mentioned by Pausanias (vii. 26. 4).

25. 9. The image of Demeter is clothed. The Greek is : koI tq
ATJfjLijTpC eoTiv icOris, It is strange that Pausanias should have thought
it worth while to mention that the statue of Demeter was draped, since
a nude statue of Demeter would be unheard of The remark seems to
imply that the other statues by Euclides, namely Aphrodite, Dionysus,
and Ilithyia, were nude. But a nude Ilithyia would also be strange.
Mr. L. R. Famell has proposed to translate the Greek, " * There is a
raiment for the Demeter of the shrine,' that is to say, that in the shrine
was preserved a sacred raiment to be worn by the statue on solemn
occasions" {Classical Review^ 2 (1888), p. 325 ; cp. his Culls of the



I70 BURAICUS — MEGASPELEUM BK. vii. achaia

Greek States^ 2. p. 613). He is probably right, though the Greek words
do not necessarily imply anything more than sculptured drapery. See
ii. 30. I, * AiroXXjuiVi fuv 5^ (oavov yvfivov Itrri T€X>^ ttjs €n\iapCoVy
ry 6c 'Apr€fiiSi coriv laOrfs, Kara ravra 8c icai rt^ Atovur^, where a
nude statue is dearly opposed to a draped one.

Coins of Bura represent Demeter or Ilithyia standing draped in a
long robe ; her right hand is raised, her left holds a torch (Imhoof-
Blumer and Gardner, Num. Comm, on Pausanias^ p. 88 sq.y witii
pL S i.)

25. 10. a river named Buraicns. This is the river now called the
Kcdavryta river because it descends from the town of that name. The
valley, which is broad and open at Kaiavryta^ contracts to the north of
the town into a narrow defile flanked by huge rocks. In this narrow
valley is the great monastery of Megaspeleum, the largest and wealthiest
monastery in Greece, and indeed one of the largest and richest monas-
teries of the Eastern Church. Formerly it had dependencies even in
Russia. The building and its situation are in the highest degree pic-
turesque. It is a huge whitewashed pile, with wooden balconies on the
outside, eight stories high, perched at a great height above the right bank
of the river, on the steep slope of a mountain and immediately over-
hung by an enormous beetling crag which runs sheer up for some
hundreds of feet above the roof of the monastery. It is this overhang-
ing cliff which gives to the monastery its name of Megaspeleum (* great
cave '). So completely does it overarch the lofty building that when in
the War of Independence the Eg^tian soldiers of Ibrahim Pacha
attempted to destroy the monastery by letting fall masses of rock upon
it from the cliff above, the rocks fell clear of the monastery, leaving it
unharmed. The steep slope of the mountain below is occupied by
the terraced gardens of the monks, which with their rich vegetation,
and the cypresses rising here and there above them, add greatly to the
picturesque effect of the scene. A single zigzag path leads up this
steep terraced slope to the monastery. The bare precipices above,
crowned with forests, the deep wooded valley below, and the mountains
rising steeply on the farther side, make up a landscape of varied delight
and grandeur, on which a painter would love to dwell.

The river (the Buraicus) which winds through the depths of this
romantic vale, on approaching the sea bursts its way through a
stupendous gorge between the hill of Bura on the west and another hill
of the same precipitous character on the east ; on either side of the gorge
the crags, beautifully fringed with trees and shrubs, rise to an immense
height. A view of the gorge is given by Dodwell ( Tour, vol. 2. facing
P* 303)? but it hardly does justice to the grandeur of the scenery.

See Dodwell, Tour^ 2. pp. 448-450; Leake, Morea^ 3. pp. 176-179, 397;
Fiedler, Keise^ i. pp. 405-410 ; Curtius, Pelop. i. p. 473 ; Vischer, Erinnerungen^
pp. 481-484 ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 335 sq. ; Baedeker,' p. 307 sq. ; Guide-Joanne^
2. p. 369 sq, ; Philippson, Pcloponnts, p« I34« A view of the monastery forms
the frontispiece to Cell's Xarrative of ajourtify in the Morea.

25. 10. a small image of Hercules in a grotto. The cave was on
the north side of the hill of Bura, facing the sea, near the monastery of



CH. XXV HERCULES AT BURA 171

Troupia. This monastery, which is a branch of the great monastery of
Megaspeleum, is delightfully situated on the north-eastern side of the
hill of Bura. It stands in the midst of woods, interspersed with olive
groves, vineyards, and cornfields, on the crest of a steep height, the foot
of which is separated from the sea by a plain covered with currant
plantations. Its windows command a glorious prospect of the Gulf of
Corinlfa, with the mountains of Locris rising beyond its blue sparkling
waters. From the monastery a path ascends through thick bushes and
pinewoods to a pyramidical rock, in the face of which were formerly
three grotioes of moderate size. These grottoes had been enlarged
artificially, and in their sides were cut niches for votive -offerings.
Over the middle of the three grottoes was a human head carved in
the rock. At the entrance there was a portico or colonnade, and
an artificial terrace resting on supporting walls. To Che right of the
grottoes and higher up the hill are considerable remains of two temples,
of which the western seems to have been the finer ; among the remains
of it are great slabs of Pentelic marble. The earthquakes of recent
years are said to have obliterated the grottoes with their remains of
antiquity.

See Gell, Itimrary of the Morea, p. 9 ; Boblaye, Rechcrchcs, p 36 sq. \ Leake,
Mcrta, 3. p. 397 ; Cuitius, Rcieji. I. p. 471 ; Bursian, Gtogr. 2. p. 337 ; vod
Duho, in Miltkiil. d. anh. Iml. inAtluH, 3 (1878), p. 62 ; Guide-Joanm, 2. p. 398.

On a coin of Bura (Fig. 33) the grotto, Che portico, and one of
the two temples on the hill above Che grotto are
dearly represented. The figure of Hercules, ap-
parently holding a spear, is portrayed standing in
the cave. But on another coin of Bura there is an
archaic figure of Hercules holding, not a spear, but
a club. This is probably a truer copy of the image
of Hercules in the grotto. See Imhoof- Blumer
and Gardner, Num. Contm. on Pausam'as, p. 89, with
pi. S ii. iii. Curtius believed that the worship of '
Hercules at Bura was of Semitic origin (Geiammclte
Abhandlungen, 2. p. 226).

After describing the view from the monastery of Troupia on the hill
of Bura, Leake makes the following remarks on the scenery of the Gulf
of Corinth, which are worth transcribing because they convey the im-
pression made by this wonderfully beautiful gulf on one who in general
was not given to dwell on the charms of nature. He says : " \ doubt
whether there is anything in Greece, abounding as it is in enchanting
scenery and interesting recollections, that can rival the Corinthiac Gulf.
There is no lake scenery in Europe that can compete with it Its coasts,
broken into a infinite variety of outline by the ever-changing mixture of
bold promontory, gentle slope, and cultivated level, are crowned on
every side by lofty mountains of the most pleasing and majestic forms ;
the fine expanse of water inclosed in this noble frame, though not so
much frequented by ships as ii ought to be by its natural adaptation to
commerce, is sufficiently enlivened by vessels of every size and shape to


B (coin 01



172 DIVINA TION B Y DICE bk. vii. achaia

present at all times an animated scene. Each step in the Corinthiac
Gulf presents to the traveller a new prospect, not less delightful to the
eye than interesting to the mind, by the historical fame and illustrious
names of the objects which surround him. And if, in the latter pecu-
liarity, the celebrated panorama of the Saronic Gulf, described by
Sulpicius, be preferable, that arm of the Aegaean is in almost every part
inferior to the Corinthian sea in picturesque beauty ; the surrounding
mountains are less lofty and less varied in their heights and outlines,
and, unless where the beautiful plain of Athens is sufficiently near to
decorate the prospect, it is a picture of almost unmitigated sterility
and rocky wildness exhibited in every possible form of mountain, pro-
montory, and island. It must, however, be admitted that it is only by
comparison that such a scene can be depreciated " {Morea^ 3. pp. 397-
399). I can only confirm this estimate of the superior charms of the
Gulf of Corinth. Its waters seemed to me of an even deeper blue ; and
the delicacy of the morning and evening tints — azure, lilac, and rose —
on the mountains is such that it is hard in looking at them to believe
they are of the solid earth ; so unsubstantial, so fairy -like, do they
seem, like the gorgeous phantasmagoria of cloudland or mountains seen
in dreams.

25. 10. divination by means of dice and a tablet etc. We are
told that in Greek sanctuaries there used to be dice {astragali)^ and that
people divined by throwing them (Schol. on Pindar, Pyth. iv. 337).
Tiberius, while still a private man, divined by throwing golden dice
(tcUi) into the fountain pf Aponus, near the Euganean hills ; in the time
of Suetonius the dice could still be seen there in the water (Suetonius,
Tib, 14). The mode of divination which is here briefly described by
Pausanias appears to have been this. The dice were four-sided {astra-
gali^ literally * knuckle-bones,' so called because knuckle-bones were
originally used for the same purpose) ; and each of the four sides had a
figure of some sort, probably a number, painted or car\'ed on it. The
person who inquired of the oracle took up four of these dice and threw
them on the table. Four figures were accordingly turned up ; and
according to the combination of figures turned up an omen was drawn.
The oracular meaning of all possible combinations of the figures was ex-
plained on a diagram which was hung up beside the table ; and by con-
sulting this diagram the inquirer ascertained the interpretation of that
particular combination of figures which he had turned up.

This explanation is confirmed by a number of Greek inscriptions
found in recent years in Asia Minor, which give the various oracular
interpretations to be put upon the various combinations of throws of
dice. From the inscriptions it appears that each die had four sides
which were numbered respectively i, 3, 4, 6, the numbers 2 and 5
being omitted. The dice were therefore astragali^ like those at Bura,
and bear out the statements of the ancients (Pollux, ix. 100 ; Eustathius,
on Homer, Odyssey^ i. 107, p. 1397. 35 sqq.) that the numbers 2 and 5
were wanting on astragali. All the inscriptions suppose that five of
these dice were used in each throw (not four^ as at Bura). For each
possible throw there was generally a name, the name being always that



CH. XXV D J VINA TJON B V DICE 173

of a divinity. Here are a few specimens of the oracles, translated from
the inscriptions.

" 1. 3. 3. 4. 4=15. (The throw) of Saviour Zeus."

One one, two threes, two fours.

The deed which thou meditatest, go do it boldly.

Put thy hand to it. The gods have given these favourable omens.

Shrink not from it in thy mind. For no evil shall befall thee.

" 6. 3. 3' 3* 3 = 1 8. (The throw) of Good Cronus."

A six and four threes.

Haste not, for a divinity opposes. Bide thy time,

Not like a bitch that has brought forth a litter of blind puppies.

Lay thy plans quietly, and they shall be brought to a fair completion.

" 22 = 6. 4. 4. 4. 4. (The throw) of Poseidon."

One six and all the rest are fours.

To throw a seed into the sea and to write letters,

Both these things are empty toil and a mean act.

Mortal as thou art, do no violence to a god, who will injure thee.

" 24 = 4. 4. 4. 6. 6. (The throw) of child-eating Cronus."

Three fours and two sixes. God speaks as follows.
Abide in thy house, nor go elsewhere.
Lest a ravening and destroying beast come nigh thee.
For I see not that this business is safe. But bide thy time.

Probably the dice in the cave of Hercules at Bura were similarly num-
bered, and a similar list of interpretations was painted or carved on the
tablet or board that hung beside the table on which the dice were
thrown.

For the inscriptions see G. Kaibel, ' Ein WUrfelorakel,* /r<fr»;«, 10(1876),
pp> 193-202; id.s Epigrammata Graeca, No. 1038; G. Cousin, in Bulletin de
Corresp. helUnique^ 8 (1884), pp. 496-508; J. K S. Sterrett, in Papers of the
American School of Classical Studies at Athens^ 2 (1888), pp. 79-90; ia^^ 3 (1888),
pp. 2o6-2i/^ 'f Jot*rtial of Hellenic Studies, 8 (1887), p. 261 sq,\ Hermes^ 25
(1890), p. ZiZsqq,

The Greeks also practised divination by means of divining pebbles
called thricdj but the exact mode in which they used them is not
known. See Zenobius, Cent v. 75; Stephanus Byzant., j.v. Bpia;
Bekker's Anecdota Graeca^ p. 265. On many Greek vases two men are
depicted consulting the divining-dice or, perhaps more probably, the
divining pebbles, in presence of Athena. See Welcker, Antike Denk-
fndler^ 3. p. i sqq, ; Monumenti Ineditiy 8 (1867), tav. xli. (vase-paint-
ing by Duris) ; Annali deW Instituto^ 39 (1867), p. 143 sqq, Cp.
Bouch^-Leclercq, Histoire de la divination^ 2. p. 403 sqq. Such pictures,
together with the legendary connexion of Athena with the thriai or
divining-pebbles, make it probable that the dice-playing, which we know
was practised in her sanctuary at Scirum in Attica, had an oracular signifi-
cance. See Pollux, ix. 96; Eustathius, on Homer, Odyssey^ i. 107, p.
. 1397* 25 sq,\ Bekker's Anecdota Graeca^ p. 300, s.v, '2K€Lpa<f>€ia ;
Photius, Lexicon, s.v. (rKLpa(f>€ia ; EtymoL Magnum, p. 717, s,v, Zkci/xi.
On the tripod at Delphi there was a bowl containing oracular pebbles ;



174 GORGE OF DIAKOPTON bk. vil achaia

when a person inquired of the oracle, these pebbles danced up and
doi^-n (Suidas, s,v, 11 v6^ ; Mythographi Graeci^ ed. Westennann, p. 384).
Divination by thro\%ing dice, bones, sticks, pebbles, etc, is practised
by many barbarous and savage peoples. With the oracle here described
by Pausanias we may especially compare a mode of di\ination practised
by Chinese and Cochinchinese sailors : " A book is prepared, in which
a number of sentences are written and numbered, and a similar number
of small pieces of sticks are prepared i^ith corresponding numbers on
them. These are placed in a hollow bamboo and shaken until one
of them foils out, the number of the piece of wood is then compared
with the corresponding motto, and according as this answer is fovourable
or otherwise, the junks pursue their voyage or wait until they obtain a
more favourable answer" (A. Bastian, Die Vblker des ostlichen Astern^
3. p. 125 note, quoting Moore). Di\4nation by bones, such as the
Greek astragali were originally, is especially practised in Africa.

For examples of that and like modes of divination see VerhoKdlungtm der
Berlitur GeselL f. Anthropologic (1882}, p. 542; Callaway, in Journal of the
Anihropoiogical Institute, i (1072), p. 178 ; J. Mackenzie, Ten Years north of the
Orange River, p. 381 ; Lichtenstein, Reisen im suJiithen Africa, 2. p. 518; G.
Fritsch, Die Eingeborenen Sud-Africas, p. 104 sq. ; Callaway, Religious system of
the Amazulu, pt. iiL p. 327 sqq. ; E. Holub, Siebenjahre im Sud-Afrika, I. p.
436 ; Josaphat Hahn, * Die Ovaherero, ' Zeitschrift der GeseiJ, f Erdkunde su
Berlin^ 4 (1869), p. 505; Santos, 'Histor}* of Eastern Ethio[Ha,' Pinkeiton's
Voyages and Travels, 16. p. 696 ; Munzinger, Sit ten und Recht der Bogos, p. 90 ;
Bouche, La c6te des Eulazis, p. 120 ; Journal of the Indian Archipelago, N.S., 2.
(1858), p. 357; Bastian, op. cit., 3. p. 76; fie/., 4. p 379; Lemire, Cochinchine
Franfaise, p. 304; Royal Geogr, Soc., Supplementary Papers, I (18S6), p. 70;
Veth, Borneo's Wester- Afdeeling, 2. p. 313 j^. ; R. Taylor, TcikaaMaui, or New
Zealand and its inhabitants, p. 205 sq,

25. 1 1, the Grathis. Pausanias continues to move east\%-ard along
the coast of Achaia. Beyond the Buraicus river, where it issues from
its romantic gorge, the strip of fertile plain which has skirted the coast
all the way from Aegium comes to an end. The mountains now-
advance to the shore, and the road runs for a short distance along the
summit of cliffs that border the coast Then the mountains again
retreat fi-om the shore, lea\-ing at their base a small maritime plain
clothed with olive groves. A stream, the river of Diakopton, crosses
the plain and flows into the sea. It comes do^^n from a ^nld and
magnificent gorge, thickly wooded >%nth tall firs and shut in by stupen-
dous precipices of naked rock. Seen at nightfall under a lowering sky,
^^^th uTcaths of white mist drooping low on the black mountains, the
entrance to this gloomy gorge might pass for the mouth of hell ; one
could fancy Dante and his guide wending their way into it in the
darkness.

Eastward of this little plain the mountains, clothed with pine forests,
again rise in precipices from the sea, hemming in the rail\n-ay at their
foot .A line of fine crags runs along the face of the mountains for a
long way, their crests tufted with pinewoods, and the lower slopes at
their feet also clothed in the same mantle of sombre green. After thus
skirting the shore for 3 miles, the mountains once more retire and



CH. XXV THE CRATHIS—AEGAE 175

leave between their feet and the sea a plain some 4 miles long and
300 yards wide, occupied partly by olive groves and partly by currant
plantations, interspersed among which are many houses. This is the
plain of Akrata. At its western end the river of Akrata^ the ancient
Crathis, issuing from a valley in the hills, crosses the narrow plain and
falls into the sea. Its broad and shallow stream, which never dries
up even in the height of summer (cp. Herodotus, i. 145), is spanned
by a long stone bridge with seven arches. The accumulation of soil
brought down by the stream has formed a delta protruding into the sea,
and through this flat expanse of level alluvial ground, now covered with
currant plantations, the river finds its way into the sea. Separated from
the sea by this delta is a high bluff which is a conspicuous feature of the
coast as seen from Aegium and many other points of the gulf On the
inner side of the bluff the left bank of the river is high and steep, while
the right bank is low and often flooded. Here, on the high left bank,
where the khan of Akrata now stands, probably stood the ancient
Aegae. Strabo (viii. p. 386) agrees with Pausanias in saying that
Aegae was beside the Crathis, and he tells us (p. 387) that even in his
time the city was deserted. It is not, therefore, surprising that no
remains of antiquity have been observed here, except potsherds and
fragments of wrought stones scattered about in the fields.

See Leake, Alorea, 3. pp. 175, 394-396 ; Dodwell, Tourj 2. p. 301 sq, ; Curtius,
Peiop, I. pp. 471*474; Guide- Joanne, 2, p. 398; Philippson, Peloponnes^ pp.

25. 1 1. From tMs Grathis the river beside Orotona got its

name. Cp. Herodotus, i. 145.

25. 1 2. Aegae. See the last note but one. Homer's mention of
Aegae, quoted by Pausanias, is in ///W, viii. 203.

25. 1 3. a faded painting. For paintings on tombstones, cp. ii. 7.
3 ; vii. 22. 6 note.

25. 13. The women are proved by drinking bull's blood. Pliny,
doubtless referring to the same sanctuary as Pausanias, says that the
priestess of Earth at Aegira drank bull's blood before she descended into
the cave to prophesy {Nat, hist, xxviii. 147). Thus Pliny seems to regard
the draught of bull's blood as a mode of inspiration (cp. The Golden
Bought I. p. 34 sq,\ while Pausanias regards it as an ordeal. Probably
the blood was supposed to act both ways, an unchaste priestess being
poisoned, a chaste one being inspired by it. Bull's blood was com-
monly supposed by the ancients to be a deadly poison. See Roscher,
* Die Vergiftung mit Stierblut im classischen Altertum,' Fleckeisen^s
Jizhrbiichery 29 (1883), pp. 158-162 ; to the passages cited by him add
ApoUodorus, i. 9. 27. Yet we hear of bull's blood being drunk as a
cure for blood-spitting and consumption (Aelian, Nat, anitn, xi. 35).
On ordeals in classical antiquity, see Funkhanel, * Gottesurtheil bei
Griechen und Romem,' PhilologuSy 2 (1847), pp. 385-402. Poison
ordeals are especially common in Africa (A. H. Post, Afrikanische
Jurisprudens (Oldenburg und Leipzig, 1887), 2. pp. 1 10-120). The
idea that bull's blood is poisonous reappears in a modem Neapolitan



1 7^5 A EG IRA bk. vii. achaia

folk-tale (Basile's Peniamerone, 2. p. 65, of Liebrecht's German trans-
lation).

26. I. the port of Aegira The npper city. The narrow

maritime plain of Akrata (see above, p. 174 j^.) is closed on the east by
a hill which thrusts itself foru-ard from the mountains till its northern foot
almost touches the sea-shore. On the south the hill is joined to the
higher mountains inland by a narrow but lofty neck. Here the hill
may be 1000 feet or so high. From this point it descends northward,
first in a series of terraces, and then in an abrupt slope, to the sea-shore,
where it leaves just room enough for the railway to run at its base. On
the east and west sides it is defended by precipices and precipitous
slopes. This is the hill of Aegira. The somewhat scanty ruins of the
ancient city may be seen on the terraces of the hill and on the neck
which connects the hill with the mountains on the south. They may
be most conveniently visited from Derveniy a village on the coast about
4 miles to the east of Aegira, where the hills advance almost to the
water's edge. There is a station at Derveni on the railway line from
Corinth to Patras. From the village a ride of a hour and a half
through olive -groves and vineyards (which here extend far up the
hill-sides) takes us to the neck which connects the nearly isolated hill
of Aegira with the mountains on the south. Here extending along the
neck for a good many yards in a direction from south to north are some
massive remains of fortification - walls, about 8 feet high and 4 or 5
feet thick. They are either late Roman, Byzantine, or mediaeval,
being roughly built of stone, bricks, and mortar. A little farther north,
still on the neck, are the remains of a sort of tower of solid masonry.
The stones of which it is built appear to be ancient squared blocks, but
as there are some bricks and mortar in the joints the tower is probably
mediaeval. Beside it lie a number of large squared blocks. Passing
across the neck, we ascend to the summit of the hill which, as I have
said, descends northward toward the sea in a series of terraces. These
terraces are broad enough to support, at various elevations, a town of
some size. On one of these terraces, some way below the summit, I
found a piece of an ancient foundation-wall running east and west for
some yards ; it consists of a row of solid squared blocks. These founda-
tions may have formed part of a temple. They stand on a platform
which is supported on the east by a wall of squared blocks laid in two
horizontal courses. The terrace on which these remains are to be seen
is strewn with potsherds, and is supported on the east by a wall 27
paces long, built of squared blocks of breccia, of which one to three
courses are standing. To the south and south-east of this terrace, on
the eastern slope of the hill, are a few small isolated pieces of wall, three
courses high, which seem to have supported terraces. Still farther to
the south is a piece of Roman wall constructed (like the buildings at
Pellene and Sicyon) of thin bricks laid flat, with mortar between them.

Lower down, to the north, on the eastern side of the hill, is a
rocky knoll on which are some ancient squared blocks ; and farther to
the north, a good deal lower doun, is another small piece of Roman
wall built of bricks in the style already described. Near it I found two



CH. XXVI AECIRA . 177

mutilated Greek inscriptions cut in large well-formed letters ; one of
them was from the base of a statue of a certain Zeno which had been
set up by the city (see below). Just to the north of these broken
marble blocks the fortification-walls of Aegira are preser\'ed in two long
pieces of about 100 yards and 80 yards respectively. They form a
right angle, the longer piece facing the east and the shorter piece facing
the north. Both are built, in the most regular style, of squared blocks
of breccia laid in horizontal courses. The eastern wall is standing to a
height of four and five courses ; the northern wall to a height of two to
four courses.

At the northern foot of the hill, near the sea and immediately above
the railway line, are some half-dozen ancient tombs, of no great size,
hewn in the face of an overhanging rock. In some of them the quad-
rangular holes for the reception of the bodies are quite apparent

The situation of Aegira is, from a military point of view, a very
advantageous one, being at once strong and commanding. Occupying
an isolated hill, which is protected on three sides by precipices or steep
slopes, and on the fourth side is accessible only by a narrow and easily
defensible ridge, it might bid defiance to an enemy, while at the same
time it completely dominated the coast road, which ran on the narrow
strip of shore, not many yards wide, between the foot of the hill and the
sea. From a commercial and agricultural point of view, on the other
hand, the site has little to recommend it. The mountains on either
side come down so near to the sea that only a small space of level or
shelving ground is left for the operations of the husbandman ; and
though there is a good beach, there is no shelter for vessels. What
Pausanias calls the port of Aegira was probably situated on the narrow
strip of flat land between the foot of the hill and the sea. The place
is now called J/at/r« Utharia (* black rocks'). There are here two
little creelcs in the rocks, beside which Leake observed foundations of
ancient Greek walls, together with some squared blocks in a small level
corn-field, just within the rocks.

Polybius has described Aegira as situated on the Corinthian Gulf,
between Aegium and Sicyon, on strong and not easily accessible hills,
facing towards Parnassus, and at a distance of 7 furlongs from the
sea (Polybius, iv. 57). This estimate of the distance of the place from
the sea is probably more correct than the 1 2 furlongs of Pausanias,
though indeed it is difficult to speak of Aegira as distant from the sea
at all, since the hill on which it stands almost touches the water's edge.
Pausanias's estimate of the distance of the port of Aegira from Bura is
also wrong ; the distance is 102 Greek furlongs (about 1 1 miles) instead
of 72 (Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 27).

I have described Aegira from notes made by me on the spot, 1 8th October
1895. The two inscriptions copied by me are as follows :

(1) HKANEINIONZHNONAHIIOAIS

(2) KAAONAKINATNO
KAIONACOTCnAlAACB
BHPOX CTACEIIONC
CEMNOT TEPMAMOAOX
TABIOT

VOL. IV N



178 • AEGIRA BK. VII. ACHAIA

As to Aegira and its port see Leake, Aforea, 3. p. 386 sq, ; Dodwell, Tour^ p.
301 ; Gell, Itinerary of the Aforea, p. 13 ; Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 27 sq, ;
Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 474 sq, \ Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 338 sq, ; von Duhn, in
MUtheil, cL arch, Inst, in Athen^ 3 (1878), p. 61 ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 398;
Philippson, Pehponnes^ p. 135 i'^.

28. 2. In Homer the city is named Hyperesia. See Iliady ii. 573.

28. 2. they got together all the goats and tied torches to

their horns etc. Hannibal deceived the Romans by a similar stratagem
(Livy, xxii. 16 sq,) Mr. Famell suggests that the legend related by
Pausanias points to a custom, observed in the worship of Artemis, of
tying lighted torches to the horns of goats and then turning the
animals loose over the fields with the intention of evoking by sympathy
the fructifying warmth of the earth. He compares the practice,
observed at the spring festival of the Syrian goddess at Hierapolis, of
tying goats, sheep, and other animals to tree-trunks and then burning
them alive (Lucian, De dea Syria, 49). See L. R. Famell, The Cults
of the Greek States, 2. p. 459 ; and for examples in modem Europe of
the use of fire to promote, by sympathetic magic, the growth of the
crops, see W. Mannhardt, Baumkultus, p. 497 sqq. The story here told
by Pausanias bears witness at all events to the association of Artemis
with the goat. See Stephani, in Compte Rendu (St Petersburg) for
1 869, p. 1 04 sq, ; Famell, op. cit, 2. p. 449 sq, ; and note on iii. 1 8. 4.

28. 4. Oreus Hestiaea. The change of name from Hestiaea

(Histiaea) to Oreus is mentioned by Strabo (x. p. 445).

28. 4. a sanctuary of Zens etc. On coins of Aegira Zeus appears
seated, holding in one hand an image of Victory, in the other a sceptre.
The type is a common one, but it may be a copy of the image by Eu-
dides. See Imhoof-Blumer and Gardner, Num. Cofnm. on Paus. p. 90,
with pi. S vi. Among the ruins of Aegira Prof, von Duhn observed
the foundations of a temple of some size finely built of large blocks.
They are near the point where the road from the port enters the lower
city. Possibly they are the remains of the temple of Zeus. See von
Duhn, in Mittheil. d. arch. Inst, in A then, 3 (1878), p. 61.

26. 5. Iphigenia. Cp. ii. 35. i.

26. 6. the image of Hercules at Sicyon etc. See ii. 10. i.

26. 7. they must observe certain rules of purity. If the
Galli, the eunuch priests of the Syrian goddess at Hierapolis, chanced
to see a corpse, they might not enter the sanctuary' that day ; but next
day, after purifying themselves, they were allowed to enter. The
relations of a deceased person were not allowed to enter the sanctuary
for thirty days after the death ; and before entering they had to shave
their heads. Similarly all persons who entered the sacred city
(Hierapolis) for the first time had to shave their head and eyebrows ;
and on their pilgrimage from their home to the sanctuary they were
obliged to drink cold water and to bathe in it ; and they had to sleep on
the ground, for they might not lie on a bed from the time they set out
on their pilgrimage till they returned home. See Lucian, De dea Syria,
53-55. It is possible that some of these rules were observed by the
worshippers of the Syrian goddess (Astarte) at Aegira.



•



CH. XXVI FHELLOE—DONUSSA 179

26. 8. an imaee of FortmiB a 'winged Love, On coins of

Aegira ihe goddess of Fortune is represented standing, with a turreted

crown on her head, the horn of plenty in one hand,

and a sceptre in the other. On one of the c

(Fig. 24) Fortune is thus portrayed, and opposite

her stands Love winged, his legs crossed, leaning o.

a Jong torch or staff. This must be a copy of the 1

group described by Pausanias. See Imhoof-Blumer

and Gardner, Num. Comm. on Pausaniat, p.

with pi. S viii. ijc

25. 10. a straight and steep road leads ^^^

tlmiigh the monntaiiu to Fhelloe. Phelloe may \
have been near the site of ZachoU, a village lying 01
in a deep wooded valley enclosed by lofty table-
mountains of imposing aspect on the east and west (Miai
the east and EvroHina on the west). The distance of the place from
Aegira and the nature of the district answer to Pausanias's description.
The village is about 5 miles from the coast. The stream which
traverses the valley finds its way between white chalky hills into the sea
about 4 miles east of Aegira, immediately to the east of the village of
Derveni. Leake thought that some remains of Phelloe were to be seen
on the road from Zacholi to Vlogoka, a village nearer Aegira.

See I^eake, Marea, 3. p. 389 ; Boblaye, Rethertkes, \
p. 478 ; Barsian, Geogr. a. p. 339 ; Guide-Joannt, x. ]

26, II. the sanctuary of the Hontress. i.«. of Artemis. Seeg3.
26. 1 2. Pallas. There was a legend that in the fight between the

gods and the giants Athena slew Pallas and clothed herself in his skin
(Apollodorus, i. 6. i; Tzcties, Schol. on Lycephron, 355). With this
savage legend wc may compare a custom which was sometimes observed
by the Tahitians in battle. " When a man had slain his enemy, in order
fully to satiate his revenge, and intimidate his foes, he sometimes beat
the body flat, and then cut a hole with a stone battle-axe through the
back and stomach, and passed his own head through the aperture, as
he would through the hole of his tipuia or poncho ; hence the name of
this practice. In this terrific manner, with the head and arms of the
slain hanging down before, and the legs behind him, he marched to
renew the conflict" (Ellis, Polynesian Researches, I. p. 310).

26. 1 2. Fhorbag, who was a son of Triopas. Cp. Homeric Hymn
to the Pylkian Apollo, 33 (as emended by Schneidewin) ; Hyginus,
Astronom. ii. 14.

26. 13. Donnssa. This town is generally supposed to have been
situated on what is now called Ml. Korypki, a pointed and isolated
mountain, 2400 feet high, which rises abruptly near the coast between
Aegira and Pellene, about 4 miles west of Xylokastro. The mountain
is loftier and more conspicuous than the acropolis of Corinth, and
is visible from most parts of the Gulf. On the summit is a chapel of
the Panagia Spiliotissa. Prof, von Duhn, however, conjectures that



i8o ARISTONAUTAE bk. vii. achaia

Donussa may have been on Cape Avgo {,^^%%^\ which, with its white
cliffs and conical shape, is a conspicuous object in the Gulf of Corinth.
This cape is about 5 miles to the west of Mount Koryph^,

See Leake, Morea, 3. pp. 213, 220, 385 ; Gell, Itinerary of the Morea^ P- 14 »
Curtius, Pelop. I. p. 484 sq. ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 342 sq, ; Bae<leker,' p. 245 ;
von Duhn, in Mittheil, d, arch, Inst, in Athen^ 3 (1878), p. 61.

26. 13. mentioned by Homer. See Iliad, ii. 573.

26. 13. when Pisistratus collected the scattered verses of
Homer etc. The earliest author who mentions Pisistratus's recension
and edition of the Homeric poems is Cicero. He says that Pisistratus
was the first who arranged the books of Homer in the order in which
they now stand {De oratore, iii. 34). Aelian affirms that Pisistratus
collected the Homeric lays, and so created the Iliad and Odyssey
(Var, hist, xiii. 14). Eustathius in his commentary on Homer (p. 5)
refers to the Iliad as a continuous and harmonious whole which had
been put together by learned men at the command of Pisistratus.
Suidas tell us {s,v, '^Ofirfpos) that the various lays of the Iliad were com-
posed by Homer separately, and that the task of putting them together
into one epic poem was afterwards accomplished by many hands, but
chiefly by Pisistratus. " They say," writes Josephus (contra Apionem^
i. 2) " that even Homer did not commit his poems to writing, but that
his songs were got by heart and afterwards united, and that is the
reason why they contain so many discrepancies." Cp. Fr. A. Wolf,
Prolegomena ad Hotnerutn, xxxiii. ; P. Cauer, Grundfragen der Homer-
kritik (Leipsic, 1895), P- 8° ^99-

26. 1 3. Aristonautae. This was either near the modem Kamari or
farther east at the mouth of the Trikala or Xylokastro river, the ancient
Sythas (see vii. 27. 1 1 note). In favour of the latter place is Pausanias*s
statement of the distance (120 furlongs) of Aristonautae from Aegira,
for this agrees with the distance of the mouth of the Trikala river from
Aegira, and as the direct route from Pellene to the sea must always
have been by the valley of the Trikala river (the ancient Sythas) it is
natural to suppose that the port of Pellene was situated at the mouth of
the river. The pretty little modem town of Xylokastro, charmingly
situated by the sea on the eastern bank of the Trikala river, has there-
fore some claims to represent the ancient Aristonautae. There is no
natural harbour here, only a fine shelving gravelly beach. The trim
houses are embosomed in verdant gardens shaded with trees. At the
back of the town, between it and the foot of the low hills which rise
a little way off, are groves of cypresses and olives, the former being
especially conspicuous. At the eastern side of the town, beside the sea,
is a very beautiful wood of pines with a bright green (not dark) foliage.
The river, spanned by a long stone bridge and by an iron railway
bridge, flows in a broad gravelly bed immediately to the west of the
town. It issues from a picturesque rocky glen, the bottom of which is
green with vineyards, olive-groves, and c>T5resses. The panorama of
mountains across the Gulf of Corinth is magnificent. Altogether Xylo-
kastro is one of the most charming places on the delightful coast of



CH. XXVII PELLENE i8i

Achaia. In the olive-groves at the back of the town, near the railway
station, I observed a square basement, as of a large altar, resting on
what seemed to be a substruction of ancient masonry. This may
perhaps be a vestige of Aristonautae. On the other hand, it has been
urged that there is no harbour and no ruins, at least of any extent, at
the mouth of the Trikala river ; whereas near Kamari, about 4 miles
to the west of Xylokastro^ there is a small harbour with considerable
ancient remains, including ruins of a town wall. These ruins are near
the point where the Phonissa river issues from a narrow gully into the
coast plain. There are remains of brick buildings in the neighbour-
hood, and coins are found here occasionally.

See Leake, Morea, 3. p. 390 sg. ; id. , Pelop<mnesiaca^ p. 404 ; Boblaye,
Kecherches^ p. 28; Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 480; Bursian, Geogr. 2. p. 342; von
Duhn, in MittheiL d. arch, Inst, in Athen^ 3 (1878), p. 60; Guide-Joanne^ 2.
P* 399; Philippson, Piloponnes^ pp. 119, 125. I have ^tsicrCtieA Xylokastro ito\\\
personal observation. I spent a night there (i6th October 1895) on my way from
Sicyon to Pellene.

27. I. The city of Pellene. The ruins of Pellene are situated on
the summit of a mountain which rises on the western side of the river of
Trikala (the ancient Sythas), near the small hamlet of Zougra. It is a
ride of two hours and a half from Xylokastro^ the little town at the
mouth of the river, to Zougra. We cross the river by a large stone
bridge not far from its mouth, and then ascend the valley on the
western bank of the stream. The bottom of the valley is fruitful ; vine-
yards and fine groves of olives occupy the greater part of it, and tall
cypresses rise here and there, like dark spires, above the greener foliage.
The hills which enclose the valley on the east and west are not very
high, but they are gashed and tortured by great scaurs and precipices of
white and whity- brown earth. On the western side of the valley in
particular a long line of high white precipices nms almost unbroken
along the brow of the hills. The white, probably argillaceous, earth,
which is thus cleft and gouged into precipices, is the same which
forms the great precipices on the eastern side of Sicyon. Indeed it
prevails nearly all the way along the southern coast of the Gulf of
Corinth from Sicyon to Derveni, near Aegira, This chalky earth forms
a plateau of varying height separated from the shore by a stretch of
level plain which averages perhaps a mile in width. The seaward face
of this plateau is steep, high, and white ; its edges are sharp as if cut
with a knife, and ragged like the edge of a saw. Every here and there
it is rent by a stream or torrent which has scooped a deep bed for itself
out of the friable soil. The valley of the Sythas, up which we go to
Pellene, is nothing but one of these water-worn rifts on a gigantic scale.
The only exception to this formation of chalky earth on the coast
between Sicyon and Derveni is formed by a line of high, dark, steep
mountains, seamed with the beds of torrents and partly wooded with
pines, which begins with the fine sharp-peaked Mount Koryphi a few
miles to the west of Xylokastro and stretches westward parallel to the
coast for some miles. But to return to the valley of the Sythas. As
we ascend it through vineyards and olive -groves, between the rugged



i82 PELLENE bk. vii. achaia

broken hills with their long lines of white precipices, the massive
Cyllene, with its high, bare, pointed summit, looms in front of us at no
great distance, blocking the southern end of the valley. After riding up
the valley for an hour or more along a road which, for Greece, is excel-
lent, we begin to climb a mountain which rises on the western side of
the river. A long, toilsome, winding, dusty, or, in rainy weather, muddy
ascent, impeded rather than facilitated by a Turkish paved road of
the usual execrable description, brings us in time to the litde hamlet
of Zougra, As we rise up the steep slope, our fatigue is to some extent
compensated by the fine prospect that opens up behind us to the
Corinthian Gulf and the mountains beyond it. The village of Zougra
stands on the north-eastern slope of the mountain, not very far below its
summit.

The summit of the mountain is neither rocky nor precipitous. It
forms a sort of ridge which extends north and south, sloping away in
broad irregular earthy declivities or shelving plateaus both to the east
and the west. The ancient city would seem to have been clustered on
both these slopes, the eastern and western, and this is apparently what
Pausanias means by saying that the city was " divided into two parts by
the peak which rises between them." But his description of the top as
sharp and precipitous is quite inaccurate. The eastern slope, above the
glen of the Sythas, is considerably the broader, and here the larger part
of Pellene probably stood. The views from the top are fine. To the
north is seen, far below, a great expanse of the Gulf of Corinth and the
mountains beyond it, from Gerania to Parnassus. To the east, across
the Sythas, are the jagged slopes, partly wooded with pines, of the hills
on the eastern side of the river. To the south are seen bare rugged
mountains, gashed and seamed with ravines and the beds of torrents ;
and beyond them rises, not far off, the naked cone of Cyllene. On the
west the view is shut in by a high bare reddish, rather featureless,
mountain, considerably higher than the one on which are the ruins of
Pellene.

These ruins are scattered and insignificant. On the highest point
are the remains of a small square fort, which, however, appears not to
have been ancient, though some ancient hewn blocks have been used in
its construction or are lying about. On the south-eastern slope, between
the top and the hamlet of Zougra^ are a good many large ancient
squared blocks, some of them in their original positions. The most
considerable piece of wall in this direction is only a few feet long, ^\t^
courses (about 7 feet 6 inches) high, and three rows (about 6 feet)
thick ; it is built of squared blocks of breccia laid in horizontal courses.
The breccia of which the wall is built is native to the mountain, where
it crops up on the surface. Among the remains on this south-eastern
side of the top I observed a piece of a drum of a small column, much
weathered, and a capital of a small Doric column, fluted, and with three
rings round the neck ; the capital measured 2 feet in diameter.

The western slope, below the highest point, is strewn with sherds of
common red pottery. Here, too, about 100 yards or so to the west of
the summit, are the remains of a Roman building constructed in the



CH. XXVII PELLENE 183

style so commonly observed in Roman buildings in Greece ; it is built,
namely, of thin bricks laid flat in regular horizontal courses, with mortar
between the courses ; the bricks extend right through the walls, and are
not a mere outer facing. One part of the building was circular or semi-
circular in the interior, though quadrangular on the exterior. The
brick walls rest on a socle of substantial squared masonry, two courses
high. A great piece of the brick wall has tumbled down, but two
pieces of it, about 9 feet high and 15 feet long, are still standing.
Immediately beyond the semicircle (for not more than a semicircle is
now standing) the ground slopes steeply away to a glen on the south ;
the semicircle faces the glen, so it cannot have been the apse of a
church, since there is no room for a church here. A little lower down
the hill, about due south of the summit, a spring rises under a massive
rock of breccia, forming a tiny weedy pool.

The eastern slope of the hill, below the summit, is strewn with
pottery, and scattered about at intervals are some ancient squared
blocks. Here on a knoll a few such blocks lie together, and amongst
them I noted two small unfluted drums of columns. Most of the
blocks on the knoll are not of breccia, but of a sort of yellow sandstone,
which takes a whitish blotched appearance on the outside through
exposure to the weather. I conjecture that at Pellene the foundations
of most edifices were built of breccia, and the architectural members
(perhaps also the upper walls) of sandstone.

A good deal lower down the hill to the east are two very small
pieces of wall built of bricks and mortar in the style already described.
A few yards below them are the remains which the natives call the
Porta (* gate *). They consist of a piece of fortification wall twelve paces
long, and three courses (3 feet 7 inches) high at one end, while at the other
end, though the level of the wall is the same, only two courses are
visible. At the latter end the wall is 4 feet 4 inches thick, and is
formed of two rows of blocks laid side by side. But in front of the
wall are other blocks, apparently in position ; so that the original thick-
ness of the wall may be greater than that I have mentioned. The wall
faces down a slope in an easterly or north-easterly direction towards the
Gulf of Corinth, which is here in view. It stands in a sort of dip, the
ground rising on the west towards the summit and on the east to a
knoll. The place is about half a mile or so to the south-west of, and
approximately on the same level as, the hamlet of Zougra, Near it
there is said to be a small tomb cut in the rock, with a triangular
entrance. But this I did not see.

I have described Pellene from personal observation, having visited it from
XyhkastrOy 17th October 1895. See also Leake, Morea, 3. p. 214 sqq, ; Boblaye,
Hecherches^ p. 29 ; Curtius, Pelop, i, p. 480 sqq, ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 341 sq, ;
Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 399 sq,

27. 2. The image is of ivory and gold etc. On coins of Pellene
(Fig. 25) the goddess Athena is represented standing; she wears a helmet
and a long tight-fitting robe, divided into horizontal bands or flounces.
In her left hand she holds in front of her an oval shield, on which ther^



IS4 PELLENE—THE MYSAEUM BK. VIL ACHaja

is a device of some sort ; in her ritjht hand she grasps a lance which she

is thrusting. The coin is interesting because it illustrates what Pausanias

considered to be Phidias's early style. See Imhoof-

• Blumer and Gardner, Num. Comm. on Paus. p. 91,
with pi. Sx. It would appear to have been customary
for the priestess of Athena at Pellene to attire her-
self on a certain day as ihe goddess, iv'earing her
panoply and a helmet with a triple crest See
I'olyaenus, viii. jg.
27. 4- KBiues called Theozetda j^rixM

no. IS-— ATHKMA (COIN ^^ lUonoy. PindaT repeatedly refers to the games
or riLLuisX held at Pellene (O/. vii. 156, ix. 146 .r;., xiii. 155;

Nem. X. 82). In two of these passages {01. ix. 146
sq. and Nem. x.. 82) he implies that the priie in the games was a warm
cloak, and this is confirmed by the express statements of the scholiasts on
these passages, who, however, give the names of the games variously as
Theoxenia, Philoxcnia, Hermaea, and Diia. One of the scholiasts (on
01. ix. 146) slates that the Theoxenia were held in winter. The cloaks
of Pellene were famous (Pollux, vii. ty ; Hesychius, i.v. Wtkkijvueai
\Xalvax \ Schol. on Aristophanes, Birds, 1421 ; cp. Suidas, s.V.
II«A,A^»Tj). Strabo (viii. p. 386) mentions the cloaks of Pellene and
the custom of giving them as prizes at the games, but he speaks as if
the custom had fallen into disuse. Probably, therefore, in bis time, as
in the days of Pausanias, money prizes had been substituted for the
cloaks. A festival called Theoxenia was also celebrated at Delphi in
the month Thcoxenius, A curious custom was observed at it. Whoever
brought the largest leek (yijfluAXis) received a pwrtion from the table of
the gods. The leek would seem to have been placed on the table of
the gods to be eaten by Latona, the mother of Apollo ; for the custom
was explained by a story that when Latona was pregnant with Apollo
she had hankered after a leek. See Athenacus, ix, p. 372 ; Plutarch,
De sera numinis vindicia, 13; Bdckh, Explicatwnes ad Pindarum,
p. 194; Polemo, ed. Preller, p. 67 sq.; Aug. Mommsen, Delphica,
p. 299 sqq.

27. S- Promachna. Cp. vi. 8. 5. Philostratus tells an anecdote
of him, and mentions his victory over the redoubtable Pulydamaa {De
arte gyinnaslica, 22).

27. 6. Pnlydunaa of Scotnaa. See vi. 5.

27. ?■ Ohaeron. This tyrant was a pupil of Plato and Xenocrates.
The sour Alhenaeus quotes him (xi. p. 509 b) as one among many
instances of men who had been depra\'ed by Plato's teaching.

27, 9- the Hys&eiim. This was probably near the head of the
valley of the Sythas or river of TiHkala, which flows at the eastern foot
of the mountain of Pellene. Here at the head of the valley, in a breezy
wholesome situation high up on the northern slope of the lofty Mt.
Cyllene, is the village of Trikala, which gives its modem name to the
river. The (■illage is grouped in three separate hamlets, among gardens
and orchards, on the left bank of the white, muddy stream, which,
emerging from a deep and narrow rai-ine, rushes foaming and tumbling



CH. XXVII THE CUIUS— THE SYTHAS 185

in cascades over its rocky bed at a great depth below. The distance
of Trikala from Pellene (about 7 miles) corresponds well to the 60
Greek furlongs mentioned by Pausanias ; and as the character of the
district, with its abundant rills and streams, also answers to his descrip-
tion, we may conclude that the Mysaeum was in this neighbourhood.
But its exact site has not been determined.

See Leake, Morea^ 3. pp. 221-223 (who is wrong in saying that Trikala is not
more than 30 furlongs from Pellene) ; Boblaye, Reckerches^ p. 30 ; Curtius, Pehp.
I. p. 484; Bursian, Geogr. 2. p. 343; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 400; Philippson,
Peloponnesy p. 121.

27. II sq, the CriuB a river Sythas. These rivers are

probably the Phonissa (river of Mazi) and the river of Trikala respect-
ively, which descend from the mountains above Pellene, the former
flowing on the western, and the latter on the eastern side of the ancient
city. The river of Trikala (the Sythas) falls into the sea at Xylokastro
(see above, p. 1 80), and the Phonissa (* murderess *) at Kamari^ between
3 and 4 miles farther west (see above, p. 181). See Boblaye,
ReckercheSy p. 29 ; Curtius, Pelop. i. p. 479 sq, \ Bursian, Geogr, 2.
p. 314 ; Baedeker,^ p. 245 sq, ; Philippson, Peloponnes^ pp. 122, 125.

Leake and the French surveyors are certainly wrong in identifying
the Crius with the stream which flows into the sea to the west of
Aegira, and which is now called the Vlogokitikos, Their mistake is
due to misunderstanding Pausanias*s words irphs Aiy€Cpas, which are
simply meant to distinguish the westerly from the easterly of the two
rivers ; the former is " toward Aegira," the latter is toward Sicyon. See
Leake, Morea, 3. p. 391 sqq. As to the Sythas see ii. 7. 8 note; ii.
12. 2 ; and the Critical Note on the present passage, vol. i. p. 593.



BOOK EIGHTH



ARCADIA

The passages of ancient authors illustrative of the local cults of Arcadia
have been collected by Mr. W. Immerwahr in his book Die Kulte und
My then Arkadiens, I. Die arkadtschen Kulte (Leipzig, 1891) ; and the
origin of these cults has been investigated by Mr. V. B^rard, in his
work De Vorigine des Cultes Arcadiens (Paris, 1894). Mr. B^rard
attempts to prove that Arcadian religions are to a large extent of
Semitic origin, having been imported by Phoenician traders. Cp. Mr.
E. E. Sikes*s review of the book in The Classical Review^ 9 (1895), PP«

67-71.

Amongst other ancient writers who composed special works on

Arcadia were Aristotle (Harpocration, j.t/. fivpioi kv McyaXi; ttoXci ;

Aristotle, Fragmenta^ ed. V, Rose (Leipsic, 1886), No. 483) ; Demaratus

(Plutarch, Parallela^ 16 ; Frag, hist, Graec, ed. Miiller, 4. p. 379) ;

Architimus (Plutarch, Quaest, Graec. 39 ; Frag, hist. Graec. ed.

Miiller, 4. p. 317) ; Nicias (Athenaeus, xiii. p. 609 e ; Frag. hist. Graec.

ed. Miiller, 4. p. 463); Hellanicus (Schol. on Apollonius Rhodius, i. 162 ;

Frag, hist, Graec, ed. Miiller, i. p. 53) ; Aristippus (Diogenes Laertius,

ii. 8. 83; Clement of Alexandria, Strom, \, 21, p. 383, ed. Potter;

Schol. on Theocritus, i. 3 ; Frag, hist, Graec, ed. Miiller, 3. p. 327) ; and

Ariaethus of Tegea (Dionysius Halicam., Antiquit, Rom, i. 49 ; Frag.

hist, Graec. ed. Miiller, 4. p. 318 sq,)

1. 3. Homer says that they came to Troy etc. See Iliady ii.

612 sqq,

1. 4. Godlike Pelasgus etc. According to this legend Pelasgus
was sprung from the earth. This legend was followed by Hesiod also
( Apollodorus, iii. 8. 1 ) ; but according to another tradition Pelasgus
was a son of Zeus and Niobe (Apollodorus, l,c. ; Dionysius Halicam.,
Antiquit, Rom. i. 17. 3 ; Tzetzes, Schol, on Lycophron^ 481). Pausanias
has furnished us with a long list of the early Arcadian kings from Pelasgus
down to Aristocrates II. (viii. i. 4-viii. 5. 13). But whether Arcadia
was ever really united under a single monarchy, seems doubtful. That
the Arcadian cantons did in early times possess a certain measure of
political unity is proved by the fact that from the middle of the sixth to



i88 EARLY HISTORY OF ARCADIA bk. viii. arcadia

the latter part of the fifth century B.C. they issued a federal coinage
(Head, Historia Numorum^ p. 372). The historical worth of Pausanias*s
list of Arcadian kings is examined by Dr. F. H. von Gaertringen, Zur
arkadischen Konigsliste des Pausanias, He comes to the conclusion
that the list was made up at a late date by Rhianus (see iv. 6. i note),
and afterwards redacted by Sosibius, a contemporary of Ptolemy
Philadelphus (Athenaeus, xi. p. 493 e f), about the middle of the third
century B.C.

1. 5. shixtB made of pig-skins. As to skins of animals worn by
the Arcadians, cp. iv. 11. 3. Dio Chrysostom represents a poor
peasant of Euboea as clad in a skin {Or, vii. vol. i. p. 116, ed. Dindorf),
which confirms the statement in Pausanias as to the dress of poor people
in Euboea in his own time.

1. 6. There are many acorn-eating men etc. This oracle is
recorded more fully by Herodotus (i. 66).

1. 6. the country was named Pelasgia. That Pelasgia was the
ancient name of Arcadia is mentioned also by Hellanicus (cited by
Stephanus Byzantius, s,v, 'ApKas) and Eustathius (Comment, in Diony-
stum Penegetem, 414).

2. I. the Lycaean games. See viii. 38. 5 note. With regard to
the order in which the various Greek festivals were instituted, Aristotle
held that the Eleusinian mysteries were the oldest, that the Panathenian
festival came next, that the races which Danaus caused his daughters'
suitors to run were the third, that the Lycaean games were the fourth,
the funeral games of Pelias the fifth, the Isthmian games the sixth, the
Olympic games the seventh, the Nemean games the eighth, the funeral
games of Patroclus the ninth, and the Pythian games the tenth. See
the scholium on Aristides, Panathen, p. 323, ed. Dindorf; Aristotle,
FragmenfUy ed. V. Rose (Leipsic, 1886), No. 637; Immerwahr, Die
arkadischen Kulte^ p. 3. According to Helladius the games were insti-
tuted in the following order — the Panathenian, the Eleusinian (celebrated
by the Thessalians in honour of Pelias), the Isthmian, the Olympian,
the Nemean, and the Pythian (Photius, Bibliotheca^ p. 533 b, ed. Bekker).

2. I. the name Panathenian is said to have been given them
in the time of Theseus. Cp. Plutarch, Theseus^ 24 ; Aug. Mommsen,
Heortologie^ p. 84 j^.

2. 2. Cronos and Zeus wrestled at Olsrmpia etc. Cp. v. 7. 6 sq,
and 10.

2. 3. the surname of Supreme etc. Sec i. 26. 5 note. Cecrops
was said to have founded the altar as well as the ritual (Eusebius,
Praepar, Evang, x. 9. 15).

2. 3. Lycaon brought a human babe to the altar of Lycaean
Zeus. A slightly different version of the legend was that Lycaon enter-
tained Zeus at table and to test his guesf s divinity served up a dish of
human flesh, and that for this impiety he was turned by the god into a
wolf (Ovid, Metam. i. 216-239; Servius, on Virgil, Aen, i. 731).
According to some it was Lycaon*s own son Nyctimus whom the cruel
father thus slew and dished up (Clement of Alexandria, Protrept, ii. 36,
p. 31, ed. Potter; Nonnus, Dionys. xviii. 20 sqq, ; Amobius, iv. 24);



CH. II WERE'WOL VES ON MOUNT L YCAEUS 189

according to others, the victim was Lycaon's grandson Areas (Hyginus,
Astronom, ii. 4). In another version of the legend it was not Lycaon
but his sons who did the wicked deed (Apollodorus, iii. 8. i ; Tzetzes,
SchoL on Lycophrofiy 481 ; Hyginus, Fab. 176). See Immerwahr,
Die arkadischen Kulte^ p. 1 4 sq, Mr. V. B^rard argues that Lycaean
Zeus was originally a Semitic Baal, whose worship was imported into
Arcadia by the Phoenicians (De Vorigine des Cultes Arcadiens^ p. 49 sqg,)

2. 4* the men of that time sat with them at table.

Amongst the men who were said to have entertained the gods at table
were Lycaon (see the preceding note) and Tantalus ; and it is remark-
able that Tantalus, like Lycaon, is said to have tested the divinity of his
guests by setting before them the flesh of his own son (Servius, on
Virgil, Georg. iii. 7, and Aen. vi. 603 ; cp. Hyginus, Fab. 83). Both
legends point to a custom of human sacrifice.

2. 4. Such were Aristaeus etc. Diodonis says (iv. 81) that
Aristaeus received divine honours from men for the benefits which he
had conferred upon them by his useful discoveries. For some of these
discoveries see note on viii. 4. i * Adristas.'

2. 6. a man has always been turned into a wolf etc. Cp. § 3
above, and vi. 8. 2. According to the story mentioned by Plato {Re-
public^ ix. p. 565 de) a human victim was sacrificed at the sanctuary of
Lycaean Zeus, one of his bowels was mixed with the bowels of animal
victims, the whole was consumed by the worshippers, and the man who
unwittingly ate the human bowel was changed into a wolf According
to Euanthes, a Greek writer quoted by Pliny {Nat, hist. viii. 81), lots
were cast among a certain family, and he upon whom the lot fell was
the were-wolf. Being led to the brink of a tarn he stripped himself,
hung his clothes on an oak-tree, plunged into the tarn, and, swimming
across it, went away into desert places. There he was changed into a
wolf and herded with wolves for nine years. If during the nine years
he abstained from preying upon men, he returned to the tarn at the
end of the nine years, swam back across it and recovered his human
shape and the very clothes he had put off; but he now found himself, as
a man, nine years older than he had been when he became a wolf. In
this version of the story it is not said that the man who became a wolf
had eaten human flesh at the sacrifice offered to Lycaean Zeus. But it
is probably implied that he did so ; for immediately after telling the
story Pliny mentions, on the authority of the writer Scopas, the case of
a Parrhasian named Demaenetus who at the sacrifice to Lycaean Zeus
tasted the bowels of a boy victim and was consequently turned into a
wolf ; but in the tenth year he was changed back into a man, practised
boxing, and won a prize at Olympia. Augustine tells the same stories
as Pliny, quoting Varro as his authority {De civ. Dei^ xviii. 17). Varro,
in turn, probably copied from the Greek writers mentioned by Pliny.

The ancients were familiar with the idea of were-wolves, that is, of
men who have been transformed or who have the power of transforming
themselves by magic into wolves for a longer or shorter time. Cp.
Virgil, Eclog. viii. 98 sq. ; Petronius, 62. It was believed that every
man of the Neuri, a tribe of eastern Europe, was annually turned into a



I90 WERE'lVOLVES bk. viii. arcadia

wolf for a few days (Herodotus, iv. 105). The belief in were- wolves has
prevailed widely in mediaeval and modem Europe. In Germany the
man is supposed to turn into a wolf by putting on a girdle or shirt made
of wolf-skin or a girdle made of human skin. According to some, the
man so transformed remains a wolf for nine days ; according to others,
he is a wolf for three, seven, or nine years. To draw the were-wolf s
blood is supposed to change him back into a man. The belief that
men can turn into wolves or other wild animals is not confined to
Europe, but is found in many parts of the world.

See Grimm, Deutsche hfythologie^^ 2. p. 915 saa, ; Hertz, Zitr IVerwoIf {Siuil-
gart, 1862) ; E. B. Tylor, Primitive Culture f i. p. 308 sqq, ; R. Andree,
Ethnologische Parallelen und Vergleiche (first series), pp. 62-80 ; Sebillot, Tradi"
tions et superstitiotis de la Haute- Br etagne^ I. p. 289 sqq,

A close parallel to the were-wolves of Mt. Lycaeus is furnished by a
negro family at Banana (West Africa), who by means of a charm com-
posed of human embryos are believed to turn themselves into leopards
in the gloomy depths of the forest ; but as leopards they spare human
lives, for if they once lapped human blood, they would remain leopards
for ever (A. Bastian, Die deutsche Expedition an cUr Loango-Kiiste^ 2.
p. 248).

2. 7. Niobe on Mount Sipylns sheds tears in summer. Cp.
Homer, //. xxiv. 614 sqq. ; Ovid, Met vi. 311 sq. ; Paus. i. 21. 3, and
note on v. 13. 7, vol. 3. p. 555.

2. 7. they blow through a pierced shell. The trumpet-shell of the
Tritons and the music they drew from it are often mentioned by classical
writers. See Virgil, Acn. vi. 171 sqq.^ x. 209 sq. ; Lucan, Pharsal. ix.
348 sq. ; Silius Italicus, xiv. 373 sq. ; Pliny, N. H. ix. 9 ; Hyginus,
Astronom. ii. 23 ; Nonnus, Dionys. vi. 272 sqq. ; Stcphani, in Comptc
Rendu (St. Petersburg) for 1870-71, p. 40 sqq. ; F. R. Dressier, Triton
und die Tritonen (Wurzen, 1892-93), Teil i. p. 11. The line in Words-
worth's sonnet.

Or hear old Triton blow his wreathM horn,

will occur to the reader.

3. I. the other sons founded cities where they chose. The
following account of the various settlements of the sons of Pelasgus may
have been taken by Pausanias, directly or indirectly, from Pherecydes,
who enumerated the sons of Pelasgus and the settlements which they
founded (Dionysius Halicam., Ant. Rom. i. 13; Frag. hist. Graec. ed.
Miiller, i. p. 92).

3. 2. Macareus. Mr. V. B^rard compares this name with the kindred
names Macar (x. 38. 4), Macaria (below, § 3) etc., and connecting it
etymologically with Melcarth sees in it a proof of Phoenician influence
in Arcadia {De Torigine dcs Cultes Arcadiens^ p. 17). Cp. note on x.
17. 2, *Maceris.'

3. 2. Homer made a surname of Hermes. See Iliad, xvi. 185.

3. 3. Homer calls 'rich in sheep.' Sec Iliad, ii. 605.

3. 5. Oenotrus crossed in ships to Italy etc. See Dionysius

Halicam., Antiquit. Rom. i. 11-13.



CH. IV EARL Y HISTOR Y OF ARCADIA 191

3. 6. she turned Callisto into a bear. In the great series of his
paintings at Delphi, Polygnotus represented Callisto seated on a bear-
skin (x. 31. I o). Callisto's son was Areas, * the bear man ' (from arkos
=^arktos, *a bear'). Hence the Arcadians are the Bear-folk. Cp.
Andrew Lang, Custom and Myth^ p. 128. It is worth noting in this
connexion that Atalanta, a descendant of Areas, was said to have been
suckled by a bear (Apollodorus, iii. 9. 2). There is an elaborate mono-
graph on the Callisto myth by Mr. R. Franz, *De Callistus fabula,'
Leipziger StudienfUr class. Philologie^ 12 (1890), pp. 233-365. Acrisius
was said to have been descended from a bear (Heraclides Ponticus, in
Frag. hist. Graec. ed. Miiller, 2. p. 223).

3. 7- the stars known as the Great Bear. It is a curious coin-
cidence that by the Innuits (Esquimaux) of Alaska and some Indian
tribes of North America the same constellation is called the Great Bear
(W. H. Dall, Alaska and its resources^ p. 145 ; Lafitau, Mceurs des
sauvages Amdriquains^ 2. p. 239 ; Charlevoix, Histoire de Id Nouvelle
France^ 6. p. 148). The Iroquois tell how a party of hunters, pursuing
a bear, were attacked by a monstrous stone giant, who destroyed all but
three of them. The three, together with the bear, were carried up by
invisible spirits to the sky, where the bear can still be seen, pursued by
the first hunter with his bow and by the second with his kettle, while
the third, who is further behind, is gathering sticks. In autumn the
arrows of the hunters wound the bear, and his blood, dripping from the
sky, tinges the leaves of the forest with a blood-red stain. See E. A.
Smith, * Myths of the Iroquois,' Second Annual Report of the Bureau of
Ethnology (Washington, 1883), p. 81.

3. 7. which Homer mentions etc. See Odyssey^ v. 272 sq,

4. I. which last art he acquired from Adristas. This Adristas
is otherwise unknown, but the name is probably derived from a verb
atrizesthai^ *to wind thread off a reel' (Hesychius, j.v. drpi^erai).
From the same stem comes atrion, * the warp of a web ' (cp. G. Curtius,
Griech. Etymologie^^ p. 60). Sylburg conjectured that the name
Adristas in the text of Pausanias is a corruption of Aristaeus ; he pro-
posed therefore to read 'Apiaratov for 'ASpurra. It is true that to
Aristaeus was ascribed the invention of various useful arts, such as the
cultivation of the olive and of silphium, the making of olive-oil and of
cheese, and the construction of beehives and the extraction of honey
(Diodorus, iv. 81 ; Schol. on Theocritus, v. 53 ; Schol. on Aristophanes,
Knights^ 894; Justin, xiii. 7. 10; Pliny, A^. H. vii. 199); but the
invention of spinning is not said to have been one of his discoveries.
See W. H. Roscher, * Der Heros Adristas,' Fleckeiseti s Jahrbucher^ 27
(1881), pp. 670-672.

4. 2. Epimeliads. The Epimeliads or Epimelids, as they were
generally called, were the nymphs who cared for flocks and herds
(Bekker's Anecdota Graeca^ P- 17 line 7 sqq. ; Schol. on Homer, //. xx.
8). Some mortal men are said to have challenged them to dance, and
being vanquished were turned by the nymphs into trees (Antoninus
•Liberalis, Transform. 31).

4. 2. Antolans. Cp. viii. 25. 11.



192 EARLY HISTORY OF ARCADIA bk. viii. arcadia

4. 3. Agfl-tiin. The Arcadian district of Azania is said to have
comprised seventeen cities and to have been divided among three
tribes, the Parrhasians, the Azanians, and the Trapezuntians (Stephanus
Byzantius, 5,v, *A(avia). It included the western and north-western
parts of Arcadia ; for we are told that it bordered on Elis (Strabo, viii.
p. 336), and that it included Psophis (Polybius, iv. 70) and Pheneus
(Stephanus Byzantius, s.v, ^cvcos) ; and from the mythical genealogies
given by Pausanias below (§§ 4 and 5) we infer that it included Clitor
and Lycosura. Cp. K. O. Miiller, Dorier^ 2. p. 436 ; E. Curtius, Pelop,
I. p. 181.

4. 3. the people in Phrygia who dwell about the cave called
Stetmos. As to the cave see x. 32. 3. The city of Azani in Phrygia
is mentioned by Strabo (xii. p. 576). The ruins, including a theatre,
a stadium, and a beautiful Ionic temple of Zeus in good preservation,
are at a place called Tchavdour^Hissar (W. J. Hamilton, Researches in
Asia Minor (London, 1842), i. pp. 101-104 ; Smith's Diet, of Greek
and Roman Geogr, i. p. 353). According to Hermogenes (cited by
Stephanus Byzantius, s,v, *A(avol) the true name qf the city was
Exouanoun, which in the native language meant * hedgehog-fox,' and
the name was explained by a story that in time of scarcity a certain
Euphorbus had appeased the gods by sacrificing to them a hedgehog
and a fox, and that in consequence the people had made him their
priest and king. The legend points to the existence of a race of
priestly kings or popes, with spiritual and temporal power, such as
reigned at Pessinus, Comana, and other cities of Asia Minor (W. M.
Ramsay, Historical Geogr, of Asia Minor^ p. 146 sq,)

4. 3. poets speak of Tegea as 'the lot of Aphidas.' The ex-
pression is used by Apollonius Rhodius {Argonaut, i. 162). Cp. Paus.
viii. 45. I.

4. 4. Elatus Elatea. Cp. x. 34. 2.

4. 5. On the death of Azan games were held. Cp. v. 1.8.

As to funeral games see note on i. 44. 8. To the examples there given
add that of the Thracians, amongst whom the funeral of a wealthy man
was regularly celebrated with games, in which the \\nnners received
prizes (Herodotus, v. 8).

4. 6. The story of the death of Ischys etc. The reference seems
to be to ii. 26. 6, though the death of Ischys is not there expressly
mentioned.

4. 6. Autolycos. Autolycus was the Master Thief of Greek story.
He stole cattle and had the power of so changing the shape and
colour of the stolen beasts that it was impossible for their owners to
know them again. Thus he amassed great wealth, for he was never
detected. See Pherecydes, 63 {Frag. hist. Grace, ed. Miiller, i. p. 87
sq,) ; Hyginus, Fab. 201 ; Ovid, Metam. xi. 313 sqq. ; Ser\'ius, on Virgil,
Aen, i. 79 ; Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron^ 344 ; Eustathius, on Homer,
//. X. 267, p. 804, line 25 sqq.\ iti., on Homer, Od. xix. 396, p. 187 1,
line 6 sqq,

4. 7. killed by a seps. Aepytus was said to have been

killed on a branch of Mt, Cyllene where snakes of the sort called seps



CH. V EARL Y HISTOR Y OF ARCADIA 193

abounded. See viii. 16. 2 sq. As to the description which Pausanias
here gives of the snake, it has been observed by the French surveyors
that " a better description could not have been given by a naturalist
who had made a special study of reptiles " {ExpMition scientifique de
Mor^e^ voL i. Relation^ par Bory de Saint- Vincent, p. 400 j^.) Another
ancient writer describes the seps of Mt Othrys in Thessaly as a viper
whose colour varied according to the nature of the soil in which it
lived ; those which lived in grass were green, and those which lived in
sand were sandy-coloured ; their bite was venomous and caused thirst
([Aristotle,] Mirab, Ausculi, 164). Aelian says that the colour of the
seps changed with that of the ground over which it moved, and that its
bite produced putrefaction and instant death {Nat, anim, xvi. 40). The
creature seems to have been a viper of the species called Coluber
ammodytes by Linnaeus. It abounds in the East and is justly dreaded
by the inhabitants of the Morea. Very small bright -coloured individuals
of the species are seen in spring. The larger individuals, measuring
from 1 5 to 18 inches in length, have a sort of horn-like protuberance
on the muzzle, which gives them a peculiar appearance. See ETcpidition
scientifique de Morie^ vol. 3, i^re partie, Zoologie^ par J. G. and E. G.
Saint-Hilaire, p. 74.

4. 9. put her and the child into a chest etc. Auge's son was
Telephus. See note on i. 4. 6. Cp. viii. 47. 4 ; viii. 48. 7.

4. 10. Areithous. See viii. 11. 4 note.

4. 10. Ancaeus sailed with Jason to Colchis. On this expedition
he was accompanied by his uncles Amphidamas and Cepheus, the sons
of Aleus (Apollonius Rhodius, Argon, i. 161 sqq, ; as to Amphidamas
and Cepheus, see § 8 of the present chapter).

5. I. a more probable account than the one I gave formerly.
See i. 41. 2 note.

5. I. Timandra married Echemus. Cp. Apollodonis, iii. 10. 6.

5. 2. Agapenor led the Arcadians to Troy. See Homer,

//. ii. 609.

5. 2. the storm carried Agapenor and the Arcadian fleet

to Oyprus. Cp. Apollodorus, ed. R. Wagner, p. 219. That some of
the Cypriotes were of Arcadian descent is mentioned by Herodotus (vii.
90). The legend of an Arcadian settlement in Cyprus is so far coun-
tenanced by the resemblance between the Arcadian and Cypriote dialects.
See Cauer, Delectus Inscr, GraecJ^ pp. 289, 303.

5. 2. Agapenor built the sanctuary of Aphrodite at Old

Paphos. Strabo says (xiv. p. 683) that Paphos (/>. New Paphos) was
founded by Agapenor ; but though he mentions the ancient sanctuary of
Aphrodite at Old Paphos, he does not speak of Agapenor as it;5 founder.
The sanctuary of Aphrodite at Old Paphos has been excavated by
English archaeologists in recent years. See Journal of Hellenic Studies^
9 (1888), pp. 147-263. .

5. 2. Qolgi. General di Cesnola identified the modem village or
town of Athieno as the site of the ancient Golgi, and here he excavated
a temple which by some was supposed to be that of Aphrodite. This,
however, has been disputed by Mr. Neubauer.

VOL. IV O



194 PASS OF THE PRINUS bk. viii. a&cadia

Sec Rei'ue arcUologiquCy N. S. 22 (1870-71), pp. 363-372 ; »</., 23 (1872), p.
336 sq, ; id.f 24 (1872), pp. 221-228; Ccsnola, Cyprus^ chs. 4 and 5; Gautie
archiologique, 4 (1878), pp. 146-150, 192-201 ; R. Neubauer, 'Der angebliche
Aphrodite-tempel zu Golgoi/ Cofnmentatiotus philologicac in honorem Tkeodori
Afommseni (Berlin, 1877), PP* 671-693.

5. 3. Laodice. Cp. viii. 53. 7.

5. 5. entrance to which is still forbidden. Cp. viii. 10.

2 sq. For other sanctuaries which no one was ever allowed to enter,
see iii. 20. 8 ; \m, 30. 2 ; viii. 38. 6. The sanctuary of Fear at Sparta
was always kept shut, although we hear of it being once open by
accident (Plutarch, CleomeneSy 8). Cp. Lobeck, Aglaophamus^ p. 279
note [s]. Other sanctuaries were open to the priests or priestesses
alone, and sometimes even to them only once a year. See vi. 20. 7 ;
vii. 27. 3 ; \\\\. 36. 3 ; viii. 47. 5 note. The image of Hera at Aeg^um
might be seen by no one but the priestess (viL 23. 9).

5. 6. three generations before. Cp. Apollodorus, iL 8. 2 ;
Herodotus, ix. 26.

5. 6. secured himself and the Arcadians etc. Cp. Herodotus,
i. 171.

5. 8. the ancient wooden image of Black Demeter at Fhigalia.
See viii. 42. 3 sq.

5. 9. I shall have to make more mention of Chaiillus etc See
viii. 48. 4 and 5.

5. 1 1, a sanctuary of Artemis snmamed Hymnia. See \m. 13. i.

5. 13. he, too, was stoned to death etc. See iv. 22. 7. As to
the defeat of the Messenians at the Great Trench see iv. 1 7.

6. 4- & pass into Arcadia from Argolis by Hysiae. See ii. 24. 5-7
with the notes.

6. 4- two other passes one through Prinos the other

through the Ladder. Pausanias here resumes the description of
the passes from Argos to Mantinea which he had broken off in ii. 25.
The pass of the Ladder {Kiimax) which he here describes (^ 4 and 5)
is a continuation of the route described by him in ii. 25 ^ 4-6 ; the
pass of the Prinus (§ 6 down to 8. 3) is a continuation of the route
described in ii. 25. 1-3.

From Argos two main passes lead westward over the chain of Mount

Artemisius to Mantinea, and these can without difficulty be identified as

the pass of the Prinus and the pass of the Ladder respectively. The

Prinus is the southern and more direct of the two. The road starts

from Argos in a northerly direction, but soon bends round to the west,

and in about an hour from Argos enters the narrow, somewhat tame and

monotonous, valley of the Charadrus. After following the valley of the

Charadrus for about an hour and a half, the path diverges from it to the

north at a place called Chelonas. It follows the course of a northern

tributar}' of the Charadrus and gradually ascends to Karya^ a little village

nestling among olive-groves and fig-trees in a sheltered hollow on the moun>

tain-side. The white-walled, red-roofed houses are dotted over the

slope, each with its green plot of field and garden beside it. The

village is not, however, at the summit of the pass. Beyond it and



CH. VI PASS OF THE LADDER 195

higher up is a ruined chapel of St. Elias, conspicuous from the fine
clump of very old holly oaks that grows beside it. As the ancient
Greek name for the holly oak was prinos (modern Greek prinari\ we
may infer that the pass received its name of Prinus or * holly oak ' from
a clump or wood of these trees. The pass then ascends very steeply
into a region of dark, sharp-pointed pines, crosses a number of clear and
copious rills (the sources of the Inachus), and runs for some time at the
bottom of the deep bed of a stream. It never, however, follows the bed
of the Inachus, but skirting the hills at a much higher level keeps the
glen of that river in view for a long time at a great depth below. On
the south is seen the bare rocky peak of Mt. Malevos, one of the highest
summits of the range of Artemisius. From the watershed a stony path
leads steeply down into the flat sodden expanse of the Fallow Plain, on
the farther side of which rises a bleak chain of grey limestone hills. A
winding stream conveys the water of the plain to a chasm below the
village of Tsipiana which stands on the steep hill-side at the foot of the
pass. On a ledge high above the village is a monastery among
cypresses, and higher still there shoots up a* huge fantastic pinnacle of
rock. The traveller who has reached Tsipiana is in Arcadia.

This route has been described by \V. G. Clark {Peloponnesus ^ p. 114 sqq,)^
Conze and Michaelis (' Rapporto d' un viaggio nella Grecia/ Annalidelt Ittstifuto^
33 (1861), pp. 21-26), and W. Loring (Journal of Hellenic Studies y 15 (1895),
p. 80 x^.) I followed the same route from Argos as far as ChelonaSy after which,
instead of diverging to the right (north), I kept straight on to the hamlet oi Mazi,
then ascended to the hamlet of Tournikion the crest of the ridge, and so descended
to Tsipiana (see note on ii. 25. i). But that the route by Karya (not by Tour'
niki) was the ancient Prinus is proved by Pausanias's statement that the Prinus
])assed the sources of the Inachus (ii. 25. 3 ; viii. 6. 6). For these sources are on
the northern side of Mt. Artemisius, whereas Toumiki is on the southern side.

The pass of the Ladder is to the north of the Prinus pass and is
much more circuitous. After leaving Argos in a northerly direction,
the route, instead of turning sharp round to the west up the valley of
the Charadrus, follows the broad stony bed of the Inachus in a great
curve first to the north-west and then to the south-west The villages
of Kato-Belesi and Kapareli are passed in the valley. After Kapareli
the path winds in a series of zigz«igs up a very steep mountain-wall, and
then descends, in another series of zigzags, the face of an equally steep
mountain- wall to the village of Sanga, There can be little doubt that
the pass received its name of the Ladder {Klimax) from this very steep
ascent and descent over the ridge. The steps of which Pausanias
speaks are still in use ; they may be seen near the top of the pass, on
its castem side. Apparently they are built up of small pieces of rock
rather than cut in the rock itself So sharp is the descent on the
western side that seen from near Sanga the zigzags look very like a
ladder and would account for the name of the pass even if there were
no steps. The summit of the ridge now goes by the name of Partes
(* gates ') on account of the sharp-pointed rocks which here shoot up
and between which, as through doon^'ays, the path runs. From Sanga
the route goes over the low ridge of Mt. Alesius to the village oiPikemi^



196 MELANGE A BK. viii. akcadia

and then skirts the western foot of Mt Alesius in a south-westerly direc-
tion to Mantinea.

This route was traversed and described by L. Ross {Ketsen, pp. 136-138) and
Mr. W. Loring {Journal of Hellenic Studies^ 15 (1895), P* 81 sq,)

The two passes of the Prinus and Ladder {Kiimax) were first properly identified
by L. Ross, Reisen^ pp. 129-139, who is rightly followed by E. Curtius {Pelop, I.
pp. 244-246; id,, 2. p. 414 sq.\ Bursian {Geogr, 2. pp. 63 sq,j 208, 2x4), Mr.
Fougeres, in the Guide-Joanne (2. p. 379 sq.\ and Mr. Loring (joum, of Hellenic
Studies^ 15 (1895), pp. 80-82). Leake indicated correctly the line of tne Ladder
pass {Morea, 3. p. 53) ; but he is wrong in making the Prinus road go by
Toumiki, and his mistake as to the Fallow Plain (see note on viii. 7. i) lan£ him
in a muddle. See his Peloponnesiaca, pp. 367-377. He seems not to have crossed
either of the passes.

6. 4- Melangea, from which the drinking-water comes down to
Mantinea. Mclangea may have been on the site of Pikemi^ a village
situated in a recess on the western side of the Alesius, about three-
quarters of an hour to the north-east of Mantinea. Here there are
abundant and perennial springs, and skirting the western foot of Mt
Alesius between Pikemi and the ruins of Mantinea L. Ross obser\'ed
an artificial dam, with squared blocks of stone strewn along it. He
thought that it had formed part of the aqueduct which brought the
water from Pikemi (Melangea) to Mantinea. Mr. Loring, however,
remarks that low ground inter\'enes between the springs and the site of
the town, so that if Melangea was at Pikemi there must have been a
raised aqueduct to convey the water to Mantinea, and of such an
aqueduct he found no trace.

See Leake, Morea, i. p. 109 ; /V/., 3. p. 53 ; L. Ross, Reisen, p. 136 ; Curtius,
Pelop. I. p. 244 ; Bursian, Geo^. 2. p. 214; Baedeker,' p. 300; Guide-Joanne, z.
p. 380; W. Loring, \ii Journal of Helleuic Studies^ 15 (1895), P« 81 sq. Boblaye
{RechercheSf p. 141). wrongly identified Melangea with the ruins at Tsipiana.

6. 5. the fountain of the Meliasts etc. Rather less than a mile
to the north of Mantinea, at the western foot of Mt. Alesius, is a copious
spring now called Tripcchi, It rises just opposite to, and east of, the
conical insulated hill of Goitrtsouli, which springs abruptly from the plain
a little way to the north of Mantinea. Tripechi is probably the spring
of the Meliasts. Beside it is a great quadrangular foundation, which
probably formed part of the hall of Dionysus. It measures 37 metres
long by 22 metres broad, and is formed of large, unsquared stones.
The present road passes through it. Below the road there are other
foundations, which apparently also belonged to the precinct of Dionysus
and were perhaps connected with the upper part by a staircase. The
discovery of a statue of a Satyr at the place confirms the supposition
that the ruins are those of the shrine of Dionysus.

See L. Ross, Reiscn, p. 136; Curtius, Pelop. i. p. 144; Bursian, Geogr, 2.
p. 214 ; Guide Joanne^ 2. p. 380 ; Bulletin de Corr. hellhtique, 14 (1890), p. 77 sq,

6. 6. on this mountain there is a temple of Artemis etc See
ii. 25. 3.

6. 6. Aeschylus and others call the Inachus an Argive river.



CH. VII THE FALLOW PLAIN 197

In the extant tragedies of Aeschylus the poet seems nowhere to call the
Inachus expressly an Argive river.

7. I. the Fallow Plain. This is undoubtedly the small plain of
TsipianOy surrounded by hills except on the south. On the west it is
bounded by the low range of Mt. Alesius, which, running north and
south, divides it from the plain of Mantinea. On the east rise the high
rocky slopes of Mount Artemisius, with the village of Tsipiana nestling
at its foot. The red-roofed houses of the village, \vith a large church in
their midst, rise one above the other on the steep hill-side. On the
west the village is united by a ridge to a rocky, flat-topped hill which
runs out like a promontory into the Fallow Plain and partly encloses it
on the south. On this flat-topped hill are the ruins of Nestane (see § 4
note).

Viewed from the promontory-like hill of Nestane, the Fallow Plain,
fallow no longer but covered with a patchwork of maize-fields, is seen
stretched out in a dead level on the north, with a stream meandering
through it in serpentine curves. Just at the northern foot of the hill
this stream disappears into the large chasm mentioned by Pausanias.
The plain is said to be flooded in winter. To the south of the hill of
Nestane it extends away to the south till it is terminated by low blue
hills at the foot of which, dimly perceptible, lies Tripolitsa, In the
middle distance, on a low projecting hill, is a ruined mediaeval castle.
The rural solitude of the scene, with its green spreading plain, its wind-
ing river, its ruined castle, its lonely hills, is truly Arcadian.

See Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 141 ; L. Ross, Rciscn^ p. 133 sq, ; Curtius, Pelop»

1. p. 245 ; W. G. Clark, Pehp, p. 127 sqq, ; Vischer, JSn'nrumn^en, p. 342 sq, ;
Annali deir ImtitutOy 33 (1861), p. 26 ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 208 ; Guide-Joanne^

2. p. 379 sq, ; Philippson, Pelopomies^ p. 70. Leake has wholly misplaced the
Fallow Plain, which he identified with the vale or plain of Louka^ 3 or 4 miles to
the south of Tsipiana (Morea, 3. p. 54 sqq, ; id,, Pelopon, pp. 367-377).

7. 2. Dine. See note on ii. 38. 4.

7. 2. the Argives threw horses into Dine. The Rhodians

annually flung a chariot and four horses into the sea, for the use of the
Sun, who was supposed to ride round the sky in a chariot (Festus, p.
181, ed. Miiller). The Illyrians annually drowned a horse as a sacrifice
(Servius, on Virgil, Georg. i. 12). The Trojans are said to have thrown
live horses into the river Scamander as offerings (Homer, Iliad^ xxi.
132). The Magi in Xerxes's army sacrificed white horses to the river
Strymon (Herodotus, vii. 113). When a storm had shattered the fleet
of his enemy Augustus, the admiral Sextus Pomgeius was fully confirmed
in his belief that he himself was a son of Poseidon ; so he put on a
sea-blue robe and threw horses (and some said men) into the sea (Dio
Cassius, xlviii. 48). Tiridates prepared to sacrifice a horse to the river
Euphrates (Tacitus, Annals^ vi. 37). Alexander the Great sacrificed
bulls and flung the carcasses, along with golden cups, into the Indian
Ocean as offerings to Poseidon (Arrian, Anab, vi. 19. 5). The
people of Tiryns are said to have been a merry and laughter-loving
folk ; but at last, tired of frivolity, they appealed to the Delphic oracle
to tell them how they might become more staid and demure. The



198 SACRIFICES TO WATER-GODS bk. viii. arcadia

oracle informed them that if they could cast a bull into the sea as a
sacrifice to Poseidon without laughing they would be sober and serious
ever after. So they composed their features and proceeded to con-
summate the sacrifice ; but a remark let fall by a little boy upset their
gravity, and they remained as merry as ever. See Athenaeus, vi. p.
261 d e. For the custom of throwing bulls into the sea to Poseidon
see also Suidas, s.v, ireplx/njfjLa ; Plutarch, Septem sapient, conviv, 20.
Near Syracuse there was a pool called Cyane, where Pluto was said to
have carried off Proserpine. Beside this pool an annual festival was
held, at which bulls were dro>\'ned in the pool as a public sacrifice, and
pri\'ate persons offered inferior victims (Diodorus, v. 4). On Greek
sacrifices to water-divinities see Paul Stengel, * Die Opfer der Fluss-
und Quellgottheiten in Griechenland,* Fleckcisen^s Jahrbiicher^ 28 (1882),
PP- lZZ-12fi » on sacrifices of horses, see the same writer's article, *Die
Pferdeopfer der Griechen,' Phiiologus^ 39 (1880), pp. 182-185.

The custom of sacrificing animals, and especially horses, to water-
spirits has been practised beyond the limits of the ancient world.
Russian peasants believe that the water-spirit, called Vodyany, sleeps in
winter, but wakes up, angry and hungry, in spring. So to appease
him, in some places, they buy a horse, which they feed well for three
days ; then they tie its legs together, smear its head with honey, deck
its mane with red ribbons, tie two millstones to its neck, and at
midnight throw it into an ice-hole, or, if the frost has broken up, into
the middle of a river. The water -spirit is also the patron of bees ;
hence it is usual to shut up the first swarm of the year in a bag and to
fling it, weighted with a stone, into the nearest river as an offering to
him. See W. R. S. Ralston, Songs of the Russian Peasants^ pp. 1 49,
153. A horse was drowned in Lake Pilatus to propitiate the spirit of
the storm who was believed to dwell in its depths (E. H. Meyer,
AchilleiSy p. 453 sg,) When the Chinese admiral Tsch'in-leng sailed
to conquer the kingdom of Lieu-Khien, the sky grew dark and his
warriors were afraid. So the admiral slew a white horse and offered
it to the sea-god. Then the weather cleared. See A. Pfizmaier, * Die
fremdlandischen Reiche zu den Zeiten der Sui,' Sitzungsbcrichte d.
philos. histor. Ciasse d, kais, Akad, d. IVissen, (Vienna), 97 (1881),
p. 420.

7. 2. Fresh water rising in the sea may be seen at the

place called Gliinierimn in Thesprotis. This spring of fresh water
in the sea was rediscovered in modem times by Mr. J. H. Skene of
Zantc. It is in the harbour of Agio Janni (St. John), the Chimerium
of the ancients. Mr. Skene says : " I had occasion recently to sail
into the port of Agio Janni in a small yacht, during a dark night, and
blowing hard with violent squalls. In beating into the harbour I was
astonished to perceive the sea become suddenly as calm as a mirror,
although the wind was increasing, but the calmness lasted only for a
moment, and had the appearance as if a few barrels of oil had been
emptied over the waves in a particular spot. It was too late that night
to make any investigation into the causes of this, but on the next
morning I returned with a light breeze in search of the spot, and found



CH. VII NESTANE 199

a circular space of perfectly smooth water, the diameter of which might
be about 40 feet ; and it appeared to be raised above the surface of the
surrounding sea. The water rose from beneath with such violence as
to form a series of small circular waves beyond the ring diverging from
the centre, which was turbid, and bubbled up like a spring. We steered
across it, and found that the cutter's head swerved about as in a
whirlpool, which convinced me that it was occasioned by a powerful
submarine source, or perhaps the outlet of one of the Katabothra
or subterranean channels, which flow out of the lake of Jannina"
{Journal of the Royal Geographical Society^ 17 (1847), p. 140). It
was in this harbour of Chimerium {Agio Janni) that the Corinthian
fleet anchored before and after its defeat by the Corcyraeans in 422
B.C. (Thucydides, i. 46-52). Some geographers, as Bursian {Geogr,
von Griechenland, i. p. 28), C. H. Miiller (on Ptolemy, iii. 13. 3), and
Lolling (* Hellenische Landeskunde und Topographie,' Iwan Mtiller*s
Hafiddtich derklass, Al/ertumswissenschaft^ 3. p. i 56), have consequently
supposed that the harbour of Chimerium {Agio Janni) was identical with
the Sweet Harbour mentioned by Strabo (vii. p. 324). But this is in
opposition to Strabo's own testimony, who says that the Sweet Harbour
was that into which the river Acheron flowed. It was, therefore, the
modem Port Phanari. See note on i. 17. 5. Besides the springs of
fresh water in the sea here mentioned by Pausanias, there was one near
the rocky island of Aradus (now Ruad) on the Phoenician coast. The
way in which the islanders got the water was this. They took a leaden
vessel shaped like a wine-strainer, wide at one end and narrowing to a
funnel at the other end, and to the funnel they fastened a long leathern
tube. Then they let down the vessel from a boat into the sea till its
broad mouth covered the spring ; the fresh water them bubbled up the
leathern tube and was collected in pitchers. See Strabo, xvi. p. 754 ;
cp. Lucretius, vi. 890 sq. It is said that the boatmen of the island
still draw fresh water from the spring, which is now called Ain Ibrahim
(Smith's Did. of Or. and Rom, Geogr.^ s,v, * Aradus'). Many springs
of fresh water were said to rise in the sea off" the Chelidonian islands
on the Pamphylian coast (Callimachus, quoted by Antigonus, Histor,
Afirab, 129).

7. 3. Off Dicaearchia there is boiling water etc. Cp. iv.

35- 12.

7. 4. a village called Nestane. There can be little doubt that the
ruins of Nestane mentioned by Pausanias are those that still crown the
little outlying hill which projects like a promontory from Mt. Artemisius
into the Fallow Plain, immediately to the west of Tsipiana, The hill
is connected by a low ridge with Mt. Artemisius and the village of
Tsipiana, Its top is flat and measures about 160 paces from east to
west. At its western end the hill falls precipitously to the plain below.
On the eastern side of the hill, facing the connecting ridge and some-
what below the summit, are the remains of ancient fortification-walls,
with a well-preserved gateway resembling in plan the gates of Tiryns
and Mycenae, though on a very much smaller scale. The gateway is
between two thick walls ; the inner of the two walls is the circuit-wall,



200 NESTANE BK. viii. arcadia

the outer wall is parallel to it and stops some feet beyond the gateway,
which is thus at right angles to the circuit-walL The outer wall ends
in a square tower -like bastion, from which the defenders would rake the
flank of an enemy attacking the gate. The thickness of the walls
appeared to me to be about eleven feet. W. G. Clark thought that they
varied in thickness from fifteen to twenty feet They are built of roughly
squared blocks of stone laid in approximately horizontal courses. The
stones are about three or four feet long by two or two and a half high ;
but one stone may be about six feet long. A block which formed part
of the threshold is still in its place ; it contains the hole or socket in
which the axle of the door revolved, and from the socket a groove runs
inwards. North of the gateway the circuit- wall extends for about thirty
paces, its thickness being still (as I judged) about eleven feet In this
direction there runs a terrace about fifty feet ^^-ide, which has the appear-
ance of having been levelled artificially. About the middle of the
summit W. G. Clark saw the basement of an oblong building, about
fifty-four feet by twenty-two. All I observed there were three or four
very large square blocks of stone.

The resemblance of Nestane to Tiryns and Mycenae in natural
situation, in the style of its fortifications, and in the appearance of arti-
ficial levelling at the top of the hill, suggested to me that excavations
here might perhaps bring to light a palace of the Mycenaean type. But
my friend Mr. W. Loring, who has since visited the site, is of opinion
that the ruins belong to a much later age.

I visited Nestane, 22nd April 1890, and have described the ruins mainly from
my own obser\-ations. See also Boblaye, Recherches, p. 141 (who wrongly took
them to be the remains of Melangea) ; \V. G. Clark, Pelop, p. 127 sq, ; Curtius,
Pelop, I. p. 245 ; Vischer, Erimurttngen^ p. 343 ; Conze and Michaelis, in
Annali delV Insiitttto^ 33 (186 1 ), p. 26; Guide-Joanne ^ 2. p. 379.

7. 4. Philip's spring. On the ridge which joins the hill of Nestane
to the village of Tsipiana there is a copious spring a few hundred yards
from the village. The water issues from four pipes. The masonry is
modem, but the spring is probably the one mentioned by Pausanias.
See \V. G. Clark, Pelop. pp. 127, 130 ; Vischer, Erinnerungen^ P- 343 ;
Conze and Michaelis, in Annali delP Instituti\ 33 (1861), p. 26.

7. 6. The bull is crowned etc. This oracle is also quoted by
Diodorus (xvi. 91).

7. 7. Olympias killed Philip's infant son etc. According to
Justin (ix. 7) Olympias first slew Cleopatra's infant daughter (not son)
in the mother's lap and then compelled Cleopatra to hang herself.
Philip had divorced Olympias on a suspicion of infidelity and married
Cleopatra (Justin, ix. 5). Pausanias calls Cleopatra the niece of Attains ;
according to Justin (/.*-.) she was his sister; according to Diodorus
(xvi. 93, xvii. 2^ she was his aunt.

7. 7. she killed Aridaeos also. Cp. i. 1 1. 4 note.

7. 7- the deity was going to mow down the race of

Oassander. Sec ix. 7. 2 $q.

7 8. the story of Glaucus etc. See Herodotus, vi. 86. Cp.
Paus. ii. 1 8. 2.



CH. VIII MANTINEA 20i

8. I. the Dancing-grotmd of Maera a fountain called Ame.

The road to Mantinea leads nearly due west from the hill of Nestane
across the southern end of the Fallow Pl^in. This part of the plain,
lying at the western foot of the hill of Nestane, is probably * the dancing-
ground of Maera.' After crossing the plain, the road rises over the low
shoulder of Mt. Alesius (the "slight eminence" mentioned by Pausanias)
and then descends into the plain of Mantinea. On the slope of Mt.
Alesius, near the way-side, is a copious spring called Kopsocheria^ which
has been identified as the fountain of Ame. More probably, however,
Arne is the still more copious spring, or rather group of springs, in the
Mantinean plain at the point where we enter it after crossing Mt.
Alesius, on the way from Nestane to Mantinea.

See Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 141 ; Vischer, Erinmrungen^ p. 343 so, ; W. G.
Clark, Pelop. p. 131 ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 213 note 2 ; Conze and Michaelis, in
Annali delV Jnstiiuto, 33 (1861), p. 27 sq. ; Guide-Joanne, 2. p. 379; W. Loring,
xnjoum, of Hellenic Studies , 15 (1895), p. 81.

8. 2. gave him a foal to swallow instead of the child. The
same legend is mentioned by Festus {s.v, *Hippius,' p. loi, ed. Miiller)
and Servius (on Virgil, Georg, i. 12).

8. 4. Mantinea. There is a paper on the history of Mantinea by
Mr. G. Schwedler, *De rebus Mantinensium,' in Commentationes philo-
logicae quibus Ottoni Ribbeckio — gratulantur discipuli Upsienses (Leipsic,
1888), pp. 363-371.

8. 4* Mantinens founded the city on a different site etc.

See viii. 12. 7 note. Mantinea originally consisted of four or five
separate villages or townships, the populations of which were united in
a single city by the Argives. See Xenophon, Helientca, v. 2. 7 ; Strabo,
viii. p. 337 ; Diodorus, xv. 5.

8. 4. the present city. The ruins of Mantinea are situated in a
flat, marshy, and treeless plain about nine miles north of the present
town of Tripolitsa. The plain is about seven miles long from north to
south, but in the latter direction it melts into the plain of Tegea ; the
division between the two is marked only by the protrusion of rocky hills
on either side, which here narrows the plain to about a mile in width.
On the east the plain is bounded by the chain of Mt. Alesius, bare and
high on the north, low and bushy on the south ; between the two sections
of the chain thus marked off from each other is the dip through which
the path goes to Nestane and so by the Prinus route to Argos. On the
west of the plain rises the high rugged range of Mt. Maenalus, its lower
slopes bare or overgrown with bushes, its higher slopes belted with dark
pinewoods. Seen from the plain to the north of Mantinea on a bright
autumn day, this fine range, with its dark blue lights and purple shadows,
presents the appearance of a tossing sea of billows petrified by magic.
Finally, on the north the plain of Mantinea is divided from that of
Orchomenus by a low chain of reddish hills. A great part of the plain,
including almost all the southern part, is covered with vineyards, the
rich gp-een foliage of which, when the vines are in leaf, contrasts with
the grey arid slopes of the surrounding mountains. But the site of



202 MANTINEA BK. viii. arcadia

Mantinea itself is now mostly corn-land. Not a single house stands
within the wide area, and hardly one is within sight In spring the
swampy plain is traversed by sluggish streams, little better than ditches,
the haunts of countless frogs, which sun themselves on the banks and
squatter into the water with loud flops at the approach of the wayfarer.
The whole scene is one of melancholy and desolation. As the plain
stands about 2000 feet above the sea, the climate is piercingly cold in
winter as well as burning hot in summer. The marshes now render
the site unhealthy at all times, but in antiquity it was doubtless better
drained. Of the oak-forest through which the road ran from Mantinea
to Tegea in the days of Pausanias nothing is left. Indeed the oak has
long ago retreated from the plains to the mountains of Arcadia.

The ruins of Mantinea lie towards the eastern side of the plain, not
far from the foot of Mount Alesius. Immediately to the north of the
ruins rises the isolated conical hill of Gourtsouli^ with bare uniform
slopes, its summit crowned by a chapel and a clump of trees. This
hill was probably the site of the oldest city (see note on viii. 12. 7).

The circuit of the walls of Mantinea is nearly complete, with their
gates and flanking towers ; but inside the walls the whole area is under
tillage. Even the considerable area excavated a few years ago by the
French archaeologists is again almost entirely buried under the soil.
One of the crops raised is hashish for the Egyptian market. The
general outline of the walls is elliptical or oval, approaching to circular.
The longer axis lies north and south. The circuit of the walls measures
nearly 2^ miles (3942 metres) ; it is almost entire, but there is a short
gap on the eastern side and a longer, one on the south-west. The
masonry is a splendid specimen of Greek fortification-walls of the best
period, closely resembling the style of the walls of Messene. The walls
were obviously built at the time when Mantinea was restored by
Epaminondas after the battle of Leuctra (371 B.C.); probably it was
the same Theban engineers who built Mantinea and Messene. The
wall is built directly on the surface of the soil, without any foundations.
It is composed of parallel courses of large blocks, mostly trapezoidal in
shape. But in some places the masonry is fine polygonal. Two, three,
and four courses are standing. (Leake says that in no place are there
more than three courses above ground. But he is mistaken. I counted
four courses in many places.) The average height of the wall is from
3 to 6 feet, and is so uniform that there is little doubt that (as
Leake first perceived) the upper part must have been built of sun-dried
bricks which have mouldered away. The curtain, or wall between the
towers, is regularly composed of three parts, namely an outer facing of
large wrought stones put together without cement, an inner facing of
smaller stones, and an intermediate space which is filled up with a
rubble of broken stones mixed with mortar. The outer facing is about
5 feet thick, the inner facing about 18 inches. The total thickness of
the wall averages about 14 feet (4.20 metres).

Square towers project from the wall at average inter\'als of about
82 to 85 feet (25 to 26 metres). Sometimes the interval between
the towers measures nearly 100 feet (30 metres), but this is excep-



CH. VIII



MANTINEA



203



tional. (These are the measurements given by Mr. Foug^res. I paced
the distances between a number of the towers ; they measured variously
28, 29, 30, and 33 paces, which agrees fairly well with Mr. Foug^res's
measurements.) Travellers, differ in their estimate of the number of
towers ; the ruins are in some places so dilapidated that it is not easy
to say whether there was a tower there or not. Leake counted 1 1 8
towers; Gell 116; Boblaye 120; Ross 130; Conze and Michaelis
(without reckoning the towers at the gates) counted 93 certain and 5
nearly certain. I counted about 102. The French archaeologists, who
have recently studied Mantinea with care, reckon that, allowing for the
towers which have disappeared, there were 109 flanking towers and 13
for the defence of the gates, or 122 in all. All the flanking towers are
square. Their dimensions vary ; generally they measure about 22 feet
(6.60 metres) in front, and project about 15 or 16 feet from the line of
the wall. Each tower communicated with the interior of the city by an
opening in the circuit-wall. Inside the towers were staircases, probably
of wood, which led up to the top of the wall.

Eight of the gates of the city can still be traced ; but it seems
probable that there were two more, one on the south and one on


FIG. 26. — GROUND'PLAN OP ONB OK THE CA1 BS OF MANTINBA.



the south-west, which have now wholly disappeared. The plan of the
various gates differs somewhat in detail, but the object aimed at in all
of them was to expose an enemy attacking the gate to a cross fire of
missiles from walls and towers. At all the gates, except one, the circuit-
wall overlaps, so that the approach to the gate is through a passage,
from both sides of which the assailant could be attacked by the
defenders ; and all the gates (except the one) open in such a direction
that an enemy attacking the gate would have his right or unshielded
side exposed to the inner wall. The entrance to each gate was defended
by two towers, one on each side of the entrance. Some of these towers
are round, others square, one at least is pentagonal. The gate on the
north-west, leading to Clitor, is constructed on a different plan from all
the rest. Here there is no overlapping of the circuit-wall ; the entrance
leads straight through it at right angles. But the approach to this gate
from the outside was through a sort of outer court shaped like a half-
moon, each horn of which was defended by a round tower ; and inside
the gate there was a rectangular court. Thus an enemy approaching
the gate would have been assailed from the towers and from each side
of the half-moon ; and if he forced his way through the gate, he would



204 MANTINEA bk. viii. arcadia

find himself caught, as it were, in a trap in the inner court This
gateway is very ruinous, but enough remains to enable us to restore the
plan of it. In general plan it resembles the Arcadian gate of Messene,
though the details are different. (See note on iv. 31. 5.) The best
preserved of all the gates is the one at the north-east, through which
the road went to Melangea and thence to Argos by the pass of the
Ladder.

The whole circuit of the walls is protected on the outside by a wet
ditch, formed by a small stream which flows in from the south-east and
after encompassing the city so as to make it an island, re-unites its
waters on the other side, flows away from the north-western side of the
city, and disappears into a chasm about 2 miles off, at the foot of the
western mountains. This stream is the Ophis mentioned by Pausanias.
Its very circuitous course in the plain, after it leaves the walls of
Mantinea, explains and justifies its name of Ophis (* snake').

The most minute and accurate description of the walls of Mantinea is by Mr.
Foug^res in the Bulletin de Corresp, helUniqtu^ 14 (1890), pp. 65-90. See also
Dodwell, Tour^ 2. p. 421 sqq, ; Gell, Itinerary of the Morea^ p. 139 5q.\ id.^ Journey
in the Aforea, p. 136 sq, ; Leake, Morea^ I. p. 100 sqq. ; iV., 2. p. 280; id,^
Pelop, p. 380 sq, ; Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 139 sq, ; V^MX^y Journal^ 2. p. 207 5qq, ;
Fiedler, Reise^ i. p. 312 ; L. Ross, Reisen^ ?• 124 sqq, \ id,^ IVanderungen, i.
p. 226 sq, ; Curtius, Pelop, I. p. 235 sqq. ; W. G. Clark, Pelop, p. 132 sqq, ;
Vischer, Erinnerungen^ p. 344 sqq, ; Welcker, Tagebuch, i. p. 168 sqq, ; Bursian,
Geogr, 2. p. 209 sqq, ; Baedeker,' p. 300 sq. ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 373 sq, ;
Philippson, Pehponnes, p. 94 ; W. Loring, in Journ. of nellen. Studies, 15 (1895),
p. 86. I visited Mantinea, 23rd April 1890, and again, 12th October 1895.

8. 5. Homer's lines. The passages referred to are Iliad^ ii. 723,
xii. 202 and 208.

8. 5. Philoctetes suffering from the wound. On some

representations of this subject in ancient art, see A. Michaelis, * Filottete
fentOy^ An/tall delP Instituto^ 29 (1857), pp. 232-274; L. A. Milani,
* Nuove Monumenti di Filottete,' Annali delP Inst. 53 (1881), pp. 249-
289.

8. 6. the battle of Dipaea. See iii. 11. 7 ; Herodotus, ix. 35.

8. 6. they fought against the Lacedaemonians. This was at the
battle of Mantinea in 418 B.C. See Thucydides, v. 64 sqq. ; and as to
the topography of the battle, Leake, Morea^ 3. p. 57 sqq. The stream
which on that occasion, before the battle, king Agis diverted into Man-
tinean territory was no doubt the one which flows in a northerly direc-
tion from near Tegea, crosses the boundary of the Mantinean territory
just beneath the hill of Mytika (the ancient Scope, see below, viii. 1 1 . 7
note), and disappears into a chasm in the south-west comer of the Man-
tinean plain. This chasm is of the earthy kind, and hence is very
liable to be silted up. When this happens, the surrounding country is
at once flooded. The Mantineans were doubtless in the habit of
damming it up at the frontier, so as to make it flood the Tegean plain,
while the Tegeans would be equally anxious to keep its channel open
till it reached Mantinean ground. Hence the constant feuds which the
two peoples waged on the subject of the water (Thucydides, v. 65). See
Mr. W. Loring, \n Journal of Hellenic Studies^ 15 (1895), ?• 85.



CH. VIII MAN TINEA 205

8. 6. shared in the Sicilian expedition. Cp. Thucydides, vi. 29.

8. 7* Agesipolis soon took the city by diverting the river

Ophis etc. This was in 385 B.C See Xenophon, Hellenicay v. 2. 4-7 ;
Diodorus, xv. 5 and 12. Xenophon mentions that the Ophis flowed
through the city. As no stream runs through the city now, it would
seem that when the city was rebuilt after the battle of Leuctra (371 B.C.),
the precaution was taken of altering the channel of the stream, so that
it now flowed round, instead of through the city. Xenophon says that
Agesipolis " dammed up the river which flowed through the city, and
which was a very large stream. Hence the channel being blocked up,
the water rose above the foundations of the houses and above the
foundations of the city-wall. Thus the lower bricks being soaked and
giving way under the upper bricks, the wall first cracked, and then
began to topple over. For a while they made shift to prop it with logs
and to prevent the tower from falling. But the water proving too much
for them, they feared that the whole circuit of the walls might come
down and the city be taken by the sword " etc. Here, as Leake has
justly observed (Morea^ 3. p. 70), the words of Xenophon imply that
the foundations of the walls were of stone, while the upper part was of
unbumt brick. Thus the walls of the older city were constructed in
much the same way as those of which the remains are still to be seen.
They consisted of a foundation, or rather of a socle, of stone, on which
rested an upper wall of unbumt brick. Similarly the walls of Athens
which faced toward Mts. Pentelicus and Hymettus were of unbumt
brick (Vitruvius, ii. 8. 9 ; Pliny, Nat, hist, xxxv. 172 ; C, I, A,\\, No.
167). The upper part of the walls of Thespiae seems to have been of
unbumt brick, while the lower part was of stone (H. N. Ulrichs, Reisen
und Forschungen in Griechenland^ 2. p. 84) ; and the walls of Tegea
were apparently constructed in the same way. See note on viii. 44. 8.
Cp. E. Fabricius, Theben^ ?• 1 5 sqq, ; W. Dorpfeld, * Der antike Ziegel-
bau und sein Einfluss auf den dorischen Stil,' Historische und philolog,
Aufsdtze Ernst Curtius gewidnut^ pp. 139-1 50 ; Helbig, Das homerische
Epos^ p. 68 ; and note on v. 16. i. At the point where the branches
of the Ophis, after encircling the walls of Mantinea, reunite. Cell ob-
served a mound which he thought might be the one raised by Agesipolis
to flood the city {Itinerary of the Morea^ p. 142 ; ;V/., Journey in the
Moreay p. 137).

8. 8. bricks afford greater security etc. This observation is
repeated by Suidas {s,v. *Ayis), who, however, supposes the comparison
to be b^ween the advantages of burnt and unbumt bricks.

8. 9. it had been struck out by Cimon etc. The capture of Eion
by Cimon in 476 or 470 B.C. is mentioned by Herodotus (vii. 107),
Thucydides (i. 98), Plutarch {Cimon, 7), and Polyacnus (vii. 24) ; but
none of these writers mentions that Cimon flooded the city by damming
up the Strymon, as Pausanias seems to imply that he did.

8. 10. the people were brought back etc. Cp. ix. 14. 4.

8. II. defeated the Spartan king Agis etc. See viii. 10. 5-10.

8. II. They also fought against Cleomenes. This was at

the battle of Sellasia. See note on iii. 10. 7.



2o6 THE MANTINEAN RELIEFS bk. viii. arcadia

8. II. they changed the name of their city to Antigonea. Pau-
sanias speaks as if the Mantineans voluntarily changed the name of
their city to Antigonea out of compliment to Antigonus. The truth
seems to have been that Mantinea revolted from the Achaean League,
and that the Achaeans conquered it, treated it with severity, and
changed its name to Antigonea. It was still called Antigonea in
Plutarch's time. See Plutarch, Aratus^ 45 ; cp. Polybius, ii. 57 sq.

9. I. an image of Aescnlapius, a work of Alcamenes. It is con-
jectured that Alcamenes may have executed this image in or soon after
420 B.C., when Mantinea concluded an alliance with Athens (Thucy-
dides, V. 47). See K. O. Miiller, *De Phidiae vita et operibus,' i. 19
(Kunstarchdologisdie Wcrke^ 2. p. 31); E. Reisch, in Eranos Vindo-
bonensis (Wien, 1893), ?• 21 sq,

9. I. Latona and her children by Praxiteles. These may

have been the originals or replicas of a corresponding set of images by
the same sculptor which stood in a sanctuary of Apollo at Megaia
(i. 44. 2 note).

9. I . On the pedestal of these images are represented the Mnsee
and Marsyas. On the nth of August 1887, the excavations con-
ducted at Mantinea by Mr. Foug^res for the French School of Archae-
ology brought to light three slabs adorned with reliefs which appear to
be the sculptures here mentioned by Pausanias (Fig. 27). The slabs
were found in a Byzantine church situated within the walls of
Mantinea, about 126 yards from the south wall. Being laid face
downwards they had served as flagstones in the church. The slabs
are of white marble, and nearly of a size ; one of them measures
1.35 metres in length by .96 m. in height ; the other two are 1.36
m. long by .96 m. and .98 m. high. The holes in the slabs for
fastening them show that they were attached to some monument,
probably to three sides of a pedestal. From the similar disposition
of these holes, as well as from the style of the sculptures, there can
be no doubt that they belong to the same monument On each slab
are carved three figures in relief. In the right-hand comer of one slab
— the slab which probably occupied the front of the pedestal — Marsyas
is represented playing the double flute. He is completely nude, and is
standing with his legs apart, blowing with might and main, as his
swollen muscles plainly indicate. In the opposite or left-hand comer
Apollo, clad in a loose flowing robe, is seated in an attitude of dignified
calm, his left hand resting on his lyre, his right hand holding a flap of
his robe. In the centre of the slab, between Apollo and Marsyas, is a
Phr>'gian slave, easily recognisable by his Phr>'gian cap and his tunic
which barely reaches to his knees ; in his right hand- he holds a knife,
ready to flay Marsyas. On another slab three of the Muses are repre-
sented standing ; one holds aloft in her right hand a lyre, another grasps
a parchment-roll, the third is reading a tablet. On the third slab there
are also three Muses. The one on the right is seated holding a sort of
mandoline j the one in the centre stands in a musing attitude, with
nothing in her hands, which are hidden in the folds of her ample
robe ; the one on the left stands with a double flute in her hand.



2o8 THE MANTJNEAN RELIEFS BK. viii. ARCADIA

Probably there was a fourth slab with the remaining three Muses ; it
would be attached to the fourth side of the pedestal. Prof. Waldstein,
however, thinks that the four slabs were in a row on the front side only
of the pedestal ; and to this view Overbeck and Mr. Cawadias have
assented. The subject of the reliefs is plainly the musical contest
between Marsyas and Apollo, the former playing the flute, the latter the
lyre, and the Muses acting as umpires. See Hyginus, /^a3. 165. There
can be little doubt that these are the reliefs seen and briefly described
by Pausanias. Though he does not expressly say that the scene repre-
sented was the contest between Marsyas and Apollo, the mere mention
of Marsyas playing the flute and of the Muses would be sufficient for
Greek readers, to whom the legend of the contest was familiar. The
artistic merit of the reliefs is high. The figures are easy and graceful ;
equally free from the stiffness of the early period of Greek sculpture and
from that florid luxuriance and ambitious straining after effect which
characterised the sculpture of the decline. In short they have the
simplicity, dignity, and repose of the best period of Greek art It is
now generally ag^reed that the reliefs are those described by Pausanias,
and that they were probably executed, if not by Praxiteles himself, by
one of his pupils from designs furnished by the master. In particular
the contrast between Mars>'as and Apollo, the former straining every
nen'e in the contest, the latter seated in perfect calm, assured of victory
and confident in his divine power, is ver>' striking and worthy of a g^reat
artist. The reliefs are now in the National Museum at Athens.

Sec G. Fougeres, * Bas-reliefe de Mantinee/ Bulletin de Corresp. kilUnique^
12 (1888), pp. 105-128; 0\'erbeck, 'Ueber die in Mantinea gefiindenen Rdiefe,'
BerichteUber die Verhandl, d, kon. sacks. Gesell, d, IVissen. zu Leipzig. Philolog.'


tinean Reliefs,* American Journal of Archae*>logyy 7 (i89i\ pp. 1-18 ; Cavi'adias,
rXwrrA rov 'E^ruroO Moi"<reioi', Nos. 2 1 5-2 1 7 ; \V. Amelung, Di€ Basis des Praxi-
teles aus Mantinea (Munich, 1S95).

9. 2. a likeness of Polybins. Likenesses of Polybius, the historian,
car\*ed in relief or in the round, were also set up at Megalopolis (viii.
30. 8), Lycosura (viii. 37. 2\ Pallantium (\'iii. 44. 5), and Tegea (viii.
48. 8). Another was found some years ago at Clitor, in Arcadia. It is
a relief, representing in profile a crop-haired, beardless man under forty.
His right arm is raised ; a long si>ear rests on his left arm ; a round
shield and a helmet with a large crest stand on the ground in front of
him. The foce, especially the nose, is mutilated a good deal, but the
features are expressive and approach the Roman t>*pe. It appears to
be the first authentic portrait of Polybius which has come to light See
L. Gurlitt, 'Ein Kriegerrelief aus Kieitor,' MitfhciL d, arch, Inst, in
Athen^ 6 (i88i\ pp. 154-166 ^Mr. Guriiit did not identif>- the relief as
a portrait of Polybius, but see the article next cited;* ; A. Milchhofer, in
Archdolo^ische Zvitunc. 39 (iS8i\ pp. 153-15S. There >*-as a statue
of him also at Oh-mpia, dedicated by the city of Elis ; the inscribed
pedestal was found by the Germans at Ol\-mpia in 1877 {Die Inschriften



CH. IX



MANTINEA



209



von Olympia^ No. 302; Hicks, Greek historical inscriptions^ No. 201 ;
Dittenberger, Sylloge Inscr, Graec, No. 243).

9. 2. Saviour Zeus. There was a sanctuary of Zeus in the market-
place of Mantinea, where the archives were kept (Thucydides, v. 47.
II). It may have been the one mentioned by Pausanias. But there
appear to have been more sanctuaries than one of Zeus at Mantinea ;
for on the site of the market-place, about 1 20 yards east of the theatre
(see § 3 note), I copied (23rd April 1890) the following inscription :

02
AI02 EYBO[Y]A

It is probably to be restored Atbs EvjSovAcws, *of Zeus the Good Coun-
sellor.' This title was often applied to Zeus (Hesychius, j.v. Ev^ouAcvs;
Diodorus, v. 72 ; see note on i. 14. 3 *Eubuleus'). From the situation
of the inscription in the market-place it may possibly have belonged
to the sanctuary of Zeus mentioned by Thucydides. The inscription
has not, so far as I know, been published. The French excavators do
not even mention it.

9. 2. a sanctuary of the DioscurL On coins of Mantinea there
is represented an altar or edifice, above which the busts
of the Dioscuri appear in profile (Fig. 28) ; they wear
the usual pointed caps and carry spears on their
shoulders. On the reverse of these coins is represented
a fisherman (?) wearing a conical cap, with his clothes
girt up about his waist in a peculiar way ; he wears
boots with tumed-up toes which seem to end in serpents,
and in his hands he carries what have been variously
interpreted as lances or harpoons (Fig. 29). See
Imhoof-Blumer and Gardner, Num, Comm. on Paus*
p. 94, with pi. S. xviii. xix. The latter type has puzzled numismato-

logists. Mr. Svoronos has explained it as represent-
ing Ulysses carrying in his right hand a javelin and
in his left an oar which he is in the act of planting
in the ground, in obedience to the oracle of Tiresias
(Homer, Odyssey y xi. 121 sqq,) See Svoronos,
* Ulysse chez les Arcadiens,* Gazette archMogique^
13 (1888), pp. 257-280. Cp. note on viii. 14. 5.

9. 2. one of Demeter and the Maid. Two in-
scriptions found at Mantinea (?) throw some light
on the ritual of this sanctuary. It appears that there
was a festival called Koragia^ i,e. * The bringing of the
Maid' (from the lower world, cp. Hesychius, s.v. Kopdyetv). A pro-
cession and sacrifices formed part of the festival. Apparently a new
robe was presented on this occasion to the goddess (Proserpine) and
a temporary hut or shelter of some sort was erected within which
her secret rites were performed. The image of the goddess was regu-
larly received by the priest into his house. There were also certain
ceremonies at the opening of the temple on the thirtieth day of the

VOL. IV P


PIG. a8.— THE DIO-
SCURI (coin op
mantinea).


pig. 39. — ULYSSES

with the oar?
(coin op man-
tinea).



210 MANTINEA — THE THEATRE BK. viii. ARCADIA

month (€v to4S T/jtaKoorois). Although there were priests, it would seem
that the ceremonies were chiefly in the hands of a corporation or chapter
of priestesses called Koragou They had a special chapel called the
Koragion, The inscriptions from which we derive this information con-
tain decrees in honour of two women, Nicippa, daughter of Pasias, and
Phaena, daughter of Damatrius, who had liberally contributed to the
celebration of the worship. The former lady is probably the Nicippe,
daughter of Paseas, whom Pausanias mentions in § 6 of this chapter.
See S. Reinach, Traiti tPt^igrapkie grecque^ P- 141 sqq, ; Immerwahr,
Die arkadischen Kulte^ p. 100 sqq,

9. 3. a temple of Hera beside the theatre. The theatre at
Mantinea was partially excavated by the French in 1887-88. It is
situated near the centre of the area enclosed by the city-walls, but a
little more to the north-east. As it was built on a dead flat, the back
had to be supported artificially. This was done by means of a wall of
massive polygonal blocks forming rather more than a semicircle, of
which the radius was 33.50 metres (about no feet). Thus the total
breadth of the theatre was 67 metres (about 220 feet). The space
enclosed by the supporting- wall was filled with rubble and mortar, on
which the seats rested. The theatre faced east. Curiously enough,
the wings are not symmetrically placed with regard to each other, nor
is the stage symmetrical with the rest of the theatre. Only a few of the
lower tiers of seats are preserved ; they were divided into seven blocks
by eight staircases radiating from the orchestra, two of the staircases
being at the extremities of the wings. The seats are all alike and of
the simple pattern commonly adopted in Greek theatres. They consist
of two parts ; the back part is a hollow for the feet of the spectator
sitting in the tier above ; the front part is slightly raised and forms
the seat proper. Some of the seats are of native limestone, others of
white marble. Outside staircases led up to the seats from the wings and
from the west and south-west. The orchestra is a section of a circle of
which the radius was 10.85 nietres (about 35i feet). Three walls of the
stage have been preserxed, namely the front wall and the two short side
walls. The front wall is 21.07 metres long (about 69 feet). It is
built of two courses of white limestone, of which the whole of the
lower is preserved. On the upper course are the holes and traces of
the columns which here, as at Oropus, decorated the front of the stage ;
there appear to have been sixteen such columns. In the middle
of the front wall is a doorway. The stage-walls are built of rough
blocks, fitted with earth and mortar. They are of Roman date, and so
apparently is the rest of the theatre, except the supporting-wall and the
outside western staircase, the remains of which are built of fine poly-
gonal masonry. At the back of the stage there was a large quad-
rangular hall, which probably served as a greenroom. In the angle
between the southern wing of the theatre and the stage buildings the
remains of two rectangular edifices were discovered by the French
archaeologists. Of the more northerly of the two little more than the
foundations are preserved. They measure about 54 feet by 30 feet.
The building is turned east and west and appears to have been a temple


«

k



<

M

Z

H
Z

<

s

k.
O

u

a.
•

H

Dd

U

X

<



Q

Z
<

<
H
S
H

tb
O



Q

Z

O

T

6



O


I'



212 MANTINEA BK, VIII. ARCADIA

of the sort called prostyle in antis^ ue, with two columns between aniae
on the front, but without a back-chamber {apisthodomos). It may have
been the temple of Hera, which, as Pausanias tells us, was near the
theatre. The other edifice is still more ruinous. It is a rectangle
12. 1 o metres long by 6.75 m. broad, turned north and south. Mr.
Foug^res conjectures that it may have been the sanctuary of Zeus in
the market - place where a copy of the treaty of alliance between
Mantinea, Athens, Elis and Argos was deposited in 420 B.C. (Thucy-
dides, V. 47. 11). See G. Fougeres, in Bulletin de Corresp, /lellMque,
14 (1890), pp. 248-254 ; Guide-Joanne^ P- 375 ^9-

9. 3. fetched his bones from Maenalus etc. Cp. viii. 36. 8.

9. 5. one is of a round form etc. In the market-place of Mantinea
(see note on § 9), near the north-east comer, the French excavators
laid bare the pavement of a circular building composed of limestone
slabs arranged in concentric rings round a central circular slab. It
measures 6.10 metres across. The workmanship is good. On the
outer ring, at the north side, is a block of marble, which I took to be a
base of a statue ; but it may have been, as Mr. Fougeres suggests, part
of the base of a circular colonnade. See Bulletin de Corresp. hellMique^
14 (1890), p. 261. This circular building may possibly have been the
tomb of Antinoe or * Common Hearth,' as it was called. But its
distance from the theatre (about 140 yards) is against the identification.
As to Antinoe see viii. 8. 4 ; as to the Common Hearth, see note on
viii. 53. 9.

9. 5. Ghrylus, son of Xenophon. Cp. viii. 11. 6.

9. 6. a temple of Aphrodite. L. Ross {Reisen^ p. 125 sq,)
thought he perceived the foundations of this temple to the west of the
theatre ; but Mr. Fougeres thinks it probable that he was deceived by
the lines of stones with which the peasants have bordered certain paths
in order to keep carts and horses out of their fields. It is these rows of
stones, according to Mr. Fougeres, which several travellers have mis-
taken for the lines of the ancient streets {Bulletin de Corresp. hclU'nique^
14 (1890), p. 246).

9. 6. Nicippe, daughter of Paseas. See note on § 2 above (' one
of Demeter and the Maid ').

9. 6. They also worship Athena Alea, and they have a sanctuary
and image of her. A mutilated archaic inscription found at Mantinea
contains a list of debtors of Alea, doubtless the goddess whom Pausanias
calls Athena Alea. As interpreted by Mr. Homolle the inscription
relates to a crime which had been perpetrated in the sanctuary of
the goddess. Several men and a girl had been murdered ; twelve of
the criminals had been tried and condemned, while a thirteenth man,
Phemandros by name, was accused but not yet tried. The murderers
were to pay fines to the goddess ; and if the fines were not paid, the
families or clans of the guilty persons were to be excluded for ever from
the sanctuary. See G. Fougeres and Th. Homolle, in Bulletin de
Corresp. hellMquey 16 (1892), pp. 568-576, 580-596. The chief seat
of the worship of Athena Alea was at Tegea. See viii. 45. 4.

9. 7. Antinous is esteemed by them a god. The head of



CH. IX WORSHIP OF ANTINOUS ' 213'

Antinous appears on coins of Mantinea ; one such coin was found on
the spot. See Dodwell, Tour^ 1, p. 423 ; Imhoof-Blumer and Gardner,
Num, Comm, on Pans, p. 95 ; Catalogue of Coins in the Brit, Mus.^
Peloponnesusy p. 177, pi. xxxiii. i and 2. On some Mantinean (?)
coins Antinous is identified with Pan, the inscription on the coin being
ANTINOft HANI (L. Dietrichson, Antinoos (Christiania, 1884), p.
304 sq,) An architrave, found in the Byzantine church about 200 yards
to the south-east of the theatre at Mantinea, bears the following inscrip-
tion, which I copied on the spot, 23rd April 1890. It has not yet, so
far as I know, been published in full (cp. Bulletin de Corresp, hellknique^
14 (1890), p. 267 sq,) The block is about 12 feet long, and, when I
saw it, lay upside down.

ri0TAI0SErPTKAH2HPKAAN02A0TIB0TAAI02IIEI02THNST0AN2TN
TAI2ENATTHESEAPAI2THMANTINEfiNII0AEIKAIT0EniX0PI0eE0ANTIN00KAT

2KETA2EAIAT0NKAHP0N0M0X

r(tttos) louAios Ev/oukXt/s "H/oKAavos, A(ovKtos) Ovi^oi;AA.tos Ilctos t^v
OToav <ri»v | Tttts kv aiV^ €^€8pai^ tq MavTtvcwv iroX^i koX ry kirL\(s)pLt^
^€<J) 'AvTti'oo) KaT\<.€>(rK€V(ur€ Sia rhv KX-qpovofiov.

** Gains Julius Eurycles and Lucius Vibullius Pius built the colonnade
with the halls in it for the city of the Mantineans and for the native god
Antinous on account of the heir." In the last line of the inscription I
presume that A (after ^IKEYASE) is for A (the bottom line of the letter
may have been effaced, or my transcript may be wrong). Further,
KaT€crK€va<r€ seems to be a mistake of the mason for Karco-Kcvao-av.
The last words of the inscription ("on account of the heir") are not
intelligible to me. The colonnade, with its halls, thus dedicated to
Antinous, appears to have adjoined the south-east comer of the market-
place (see note on § 9). The games celebrated at Mantinea in honour
of Antinous (see § 8 and 10 § i) are mentioned in an inscription found
on the citadel of Argos (Dietrichson, op. at, p. 328). An inscription
found at Olympia mentions "the great games of Antinous," which may
be the Mantinean games (Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 452 ; cp.
/V/., No. 450). Games in honour of Antinous were also celebrated at
Argos, Athens, and Eleusis, and they seem to have continued well into
the third century A.D. See C /. G. No. 1 124 ; C. L A, iii. No. 1202 ;
Dietrichson, op, cit. p. 97 sq. ; Hertzberg, Gesck, Gnechenlands unter
der Herrschaft der RdmcKy 2. p. 345 sqq.

9. 7. An Egyptian city on the Nile is named after Antinons.

Antinous died a mysterious death in Egypt, and Hadrian founded a city
called Antinoupolis on the spot where he died (Dio Cassius, Ixix. 1 1 ;
Ammianus Marcellinus, xxii. 16. 2 ; cp. Spartianus, Hadrian, 14).

9. 7. lie receives homage. See note on v. 4. 2. Dio Cassius
says (Ixix. 1 1 ) that Hadrian set up " statues, or rather images " of
Antinous in all parts of the world.

9. 7* Antinous was a native of Bithyninm. So too says
Dio Cassius (Ixix. 11), adding that in his time the city was called
Claudiopolis.



214 MANT/NEA—THE MARKE' bk. viii. ARCADIA

9. 8. the original of which is in the Oeramicns. See i. 3. 4.

9. 9. the market-place of Mantinea. This was cleared by the
French in their excavations of 1887-88 (see Fig. 30, p. 211). It is a
large rectangular space to the east of the theatre, measuring 1 60 metres
from east to west by 90 m. from north to south (175 yards by 98).
On the north and east it was bordered by colonnades which, with the
exception of the one next the theatre, appear to be of Roman date.
Inscriptions found in the north colonnade and dating, apparently, from
the first century A.D., speak of great reconstructions effected in the
market-place by one Euphros>Tius, son of Titus, and by his wife Epigone,
daughter of Artemon. They restored temples, and built banqueting-
halls and treasuries for societies. Epigone further erected a bazaar
{tnacellus) surrounded by workshops, an exedra or semicircular hall
"which by itself would be an ornament of the city," and a marble
colonnade that added much to the beauty of the market-place.

The western side of the market-place was occupied by the theatre.
At the western end of the north side, close to the northern wing of the
theatre, is a small paved rectangle with traces of columns. It seems to
have been originally a portal to the market-place, but to have been
afterwards blocked up and rendered useless by the construction of the
theatre. To the east of this portal extended a colonnade, the front line
of which was found by the French archaeologists to exist for a length
of 31 metres (about 102 feet). It is a pavement of white limestone
with a row of nine round holes in which no doubt Doric columns were
set. The massive foundations of this colonnade are a proof of its
antiquity. It may be a remnant of the original market-place. In any
case it is probably earlier than the reconstructions carried out in the
Roman period by Euphrosynus and Epigone. In front of it are the
foundations of a semicircular structure, which may have been either the
pedestal of a group of statuar>' or a seat {exedra).

To the east of this colonnade, still on the north side of the market-
place, was an entrance to the market-place, beyond which another line
of colonnades extended eastward. First, there is a colonnade 38 metres
long resting on a three -stepped basement ; but as the top step or
stylobate proper has disappeared it is impossible to tell the number or
architectural order of the columns. At the back of this colonnade was
constructed an edifice somewhat resembling the Exedra of Herodes
Atticus at Olympia (see above, p. 72 sqq.) It includes a semicircular
portion at the back and an oblong portion in front. The former portion
is enclosed by a semicircular wall of bricks resting on a foundation of
small stones ; the latter is divided by partition walls into a number of
compartments. The diameter of the semicircle is 38 metres. The
thickness of the walls proves that the semicircular portion was roofed
with an arched vault, which may have been decorated with statues.
Mr. Fougiires thinks that the building was in two stories. It may have
been the exedra which is known from an inscription to have been built
by Epigone, probably in the first century a.d. Within it were found
the remains of an earlier edifice which must have been pulled down
when the exedra was built. This earlier edifice would seem to have



CH. IX MANTINEA—THE MARKET 215

been a square court, measuring 27 metres on each side, with rows of
Doric columns in the interior. One row of columns ran along each
side of the court, and there were three colunms in each row. The
drums of the columns have twenty flutes each ; they are made of con-
glomerate coated with stucco, and are of a heavy dumpy shape. This
square court with its columned interior may have been perhaps an old
bazaar which was replaced by the new bazaar built by Epigone.

To the east of the exedra extended a covered gallery or colonnade
with two rows of columns in the interior. The bases of the columns,
roughly constructed of rubble and mortar supporting slabs, are still in
their places. The columns and roof were probably of wood. At the
back of this colonnade, and abutting on the exedra of Epigone, are a
number of badly -built rooms surrounding a small paved rectangular
court. This was probably the bazaar surrounded by workshops in the
Oriental style which Epigone bestowed on Mantinea. The inscription,
already referred to, speaks of it in lofly terms, but it seems to have
been a poor affair in reality. In the room at the south-west angle
there was a mosaic pavement with representations of animals. The
entrance to the bazaar was on the east.

The eastern side of the market-place was bounded by another
colonnade, with a single row of columns in the interior. This may
have been the marble colonnade erected by Epigone. Abutting on its
back, at the north-east, are two quadrangular halls built of rubble and
bricks. They may be the banqueting-halls mentioned in the inscrip-
tion.

At the south-east comer of the market-place a street entered it
from the south, coming probably from the Tegean gate. Just before
entering the market-place the street skirted on the right a long
colonnade, of which eleven unfluted columns were found in their places.
The columns are slender ; the distance between each pair of columns
is 4.30 metres (about 14 feet). At the back of the colonnade is a
large building built of bricks and of slight materials and divided into
a number of compartments. The French archaeologists thought that
this colonnade with the rooms at the back of it might be " the colonnade
and halls " dedicated by Eurycles (and Vibullius) to Antinous, of which
the architrave has been found (see note on § 7). This seems im-
probable. The columns are, as the French themselves admit, too
slender and too far apart to support this heavy stone architrave ; and,
as the French also admit, the style of the colonnade which has been
discovered is much simpler than that of the architrave. There seems,
therefore, no reason to suppose that the architrave has any connexion
with the colonnade.

Just to the west of the point where the street enters the market-
place at its south-east corner, a small rectangular structure projects into
the market-place. The basement is of marble, carefully wrought ; it
supported a colonnade which ran round the three outer sides of the
building (four columns in front and three at the sides, counting the
columns at the angles twice over). It measures 8 metres in front and
4.50 m. at the sides. In style it resembles the architrave of Eurycles



21 6 M4NTINEA BK. viii. arcadxa

and VibuUius, and may have been part of the buildings dedicated by
them to Antinous.

To the west of this structure there is a large building opening on
the market-place. It forms a quadrangle 35 metres long by 19 m.
deep, with projecting wings at the ends. The masonry is good Greek
work. On the south side of the building, away from the market-place,
is an Ionic colonnade ; it is apparently a later addition to the building ;
the columns, of which there were originally ten, seem to be of the
Macedonian epoch. The French excavators think that the building
may be the Council House. See Bulletin de Corresp, hclUn, 14
(1890), pp. 256-269; Guide-Joanne^ 2. pp. 376-378.

9. 9. a shrine of the hero Podares. In the market-place, near
its north-west angle and close to the theatre, the French discovered the
foundations and parts of the walls of a building which may be the
shrine of Podares. It is a rectangle turned east and west. The
foundations are of rough stones ; the walls are built of blocks well
squared and carefully fitted. The workmanship is Greek, not Roman.
Near the building were found fragments of tiles, of which the one was
inscribed with the name of Podares (IIOAAPEOS), the other with some
letters of it (IIOAAPI). The building had been converted into a
Byzantine church. See Bulletin de Corr, helUn, 14 (1890), p. 255
sq. ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 378.

9. 10. Grylns, son of Xenophon. Cp. above § 5 ; below 11. 6 ;
i. 3. 4; ix. 15. 5. Aristotle, cited by Diogenes Laertius (ii. 6. 55),
says that the number of epitaphs and panegyrics written on Grylus,
partly to console and gratify his father Xenophon, was endless.

9. 10. Oephisodoms. He fell in the battle while commanding the
Athenian cavalry jointly with Grylus ; Dinarchus mentioned him in a
speech (Harpocration, s.v. Kyj(f)w68(apos ; cp. Diogenes Laertius, ii.
6. 54).

10. I. a stadium. On the slope of Mt. Alcsius the English
traveller W. G. Clark saw a semicircular grassy recess, which he took
to be the round end of the stadium (Peloponnesus, p. 131 sg.)

10. 2. the sanctuary of Horse Poseidon. According to Polybius
(ix. 8. 11) the sanctuar>' of Poseidon was 7 furlongs from Mantinea
and the ground about it was flat (xi. 1 2. 6). The latter statement is
quite consistent with the remark of Pausanias that the sanctuary was at
the skirts of the mountain. At the hamlet of Kalyina^ about 1200
metres (1400 yards) south of the Tegean gate of Mantinea, Mr.
Foug^res found two long and broad flags of limestone deeply imbedded
in the sandy soil ; they appear to have formed a threshold. Now (i)
the enormous weight of the blocks makes it unlikely that they have
been transported from their original site ; (2) fragments of antiquity,
including a Doric capital and a relief representing Poseidon seated with
his trident in his hand, have been found here ; and (3) some marbles,
scattered in the neighbouring hamlet (especially an inscription con-
taining an act of enfranchisement dated by the priest of Poseidon),
are said by the peasants to have been brought from this spot. For
these reasons Mr. Fougeres concludes that this stone threshold marks



CH. X SANCTUARY OF POSEIDON 217

the site of the sanctuary of Poseidon. The distance from Mantinea
agrees well enough with the 7 furlongs of Polybius or the 6 of
Pausanias. See Bulletin de Corr, kelUn. 14 (1890), p. ^o sg. \ and
Critical Note, vol. i. p. 595. Poseidon was the chief god of Mantinea ;
hence the Mantineans bore the trident of Poseidon as the scutcheon on
their shields (Schol. on Pindar, Olyffip, xi. 83). From inscriptions it
appears that the Mantineans dated their years by the priests of Poseidon,
as the Argives did by the priestesses of Hera. See Immerwahr, Die
arkadischen Kulte^ ?• 37-

10. 2. Agamedes and Trophonius. See ix. 11. i ; ix. 37. 4 sqq. ;

X. 5. 13.

10. 3. merely stretched a woollen thread across it etc. We are
reminded of the tricolour ribbon which, stretched round the Temple
during the days of the September massacres, protected Louis XVI. and
his family from the fury of the Parisian mob. See Carlyle, French
Revolution^ bk. i. chap. 5.

10. 3. Aepytns made his way into the sanctuary etc. Cp.

viii. 5. 5.

10. 4. the wave on the Acropolis. Pausanias here refers to the
salt well of Poseidon in the Erechtheum. See i. 26. 5 note.

10. 4* the god whom in their own tongue they call Osogoa. He
is called Zeus Osogoa ('Oo-oywa) in inscriptions found at Mylasa. See
Bulletin de Corresp, helUnique^ 5 (1881), pp. 98-101. Cp. C. /. G.
Nos. 2693 ^» 2700. Strabo also (xiv. p. 659) mentions the sanctuary of
Zeus Osogoa at Mylasa, and says that it was in the city.

10. 5. a victory over Agis and the Lacedaemonians. Cp. viii. 8. 1 1 .
This battle is not mentioned by any other ancient writer, and Pausanias's
statement that Agis was killed in the battle is implicitly contradicted by
Plutarch, who describes in detail how Agis was seized by conspirators
in Sparta and put to death {Agis^ 19 sq,) Plutarch is doubtless right,
and it has been questioned whether Pausanias's account of the battle is
not a blunder of his. Leake, however, thinks that the battle was
probably fought " soon after the liberation of Corinth by Aratus in the
year B.C. 243, Agis being then opposed to him ; whereas, before his
death, which happened about 240 B.C., Agis became allied with Aratus
against the Aetolians " {Morea^ 3. p. 86). Cp. Vischer, Erinnerungen^
p. 350 note **.

10. 7- Aratus and his troops fell slowly back. The tactics here
described were adopted by Hannibal at the battle of Cannae. See
Polybius, iii. 115 sq \ Livy, xxii. 47.

10. 9- i^ods are present at fights etc. Cp. x. 8. 7 note ; x. 23. 2
note.

10. 10. a deer is a longer lived animal etc. According to Hesiod
the crow lived nine generations of men, deer lived four times as long as
crows (hence thirty-six generations), the raven lived thrice as long as a
deer, the phoenix nine times as long as the raven, and the nymphs lived
ten times as long as the phoenix. See Plutarch, De de/, orac, 1 1 ;
Pliny, Nat, hist, vii. 153. Cp. Schol. on Oppian, Cyneg, iii. 117.
There was a story that 100 years after the death of Alexander the



ai8 MANTINEA TO TEGEA bk. vrii. arcadia

Great, live deer were found with golden necklaces which he had put on
them (Pliny, NcU. hist. viii. 119). To restore Aeson to youth, Medea
is said to have infused into his veins a decoction made partly of the
liver of a stag and the head of a crow which had lived nine generations.
See Ovid, Metam, vii. 273 sg. Cp. /V/., iii. 194 ; Virgil, Eclog. vii. 30 ;
Cicero, Tuscul. iii. 28. 69. Aristotle disbelieved in the longevity of
deer {Hist, anim. vi. 29, p. 578 b, 24 sqq,) Cp. Stephani, in Comptc
Rendu (St. Petersburg) for 1863, p. 140 sq,

11. I. the roa4 from Mantinea to Tegea leads througlL the oak
WOOCL This wood has now entirely disappeared. The Mantinean and
Tegean plains at the present day are treeless. Vineyards cover most
of the southern part of the Mantinean plain.

11. 2. she would make their old father young again etc. This
story is illustrated by a painting on a fine black-figured vase, in which
the ram is depicted issuing alive from the caldron, hailed with joyful
surprise by the daughters of Pelias, while the aged king himseU sits
looking on with interest (Miss Harrison, Greek Vase Paintings^ pL ii. ;
Baumeister*s Denkmdler^ fig. 1394, p. 1201). Stories like that of
Medea and Pelias are current among European peasants in Scandinavia,
Germany, Russia, and Italy. They tell how Christ, or St. Peter, or
the Devil, going about the earth in disguise, restored an old person to
youth or a dead person to life by boiling him in a kettle or burning him
in a smith's forge, and how a bungler (generally a smith) tried to do
the same and failed. See Grimm's Household Tales^ No. 81, * Brother
Lustig' ; Dasent's Popular Tales from the Norse^ *The Master Smith' ;
Ralston, Russian Folk-tales^ * The Smith and the Demon,' p. 5 7 sqq. ;
Crane, Italian Popular Talesy * The Lord, St Peter, and the Blacksmith,'
p. 188 sq, Cp K. O. Miiller, Orchomenos und die Minyer, p. 262 sq»

11. 4. At this point the road grows very narrow. This probably
refers to the point on the road between Mantinea and Tegea where the
plain narrows to about a mile in width through the projection into it of
two opposite spurs of the mountains, one on the west side, the other on
the east. The spur on the west side is now called Mytika (* little nose ').
It is nearly 4 miles north of the modem Tripolitsa, The ancient
Phoezon was probably not far off. See L. Ross, Reisen, p. 123 ; Curtius,
Pchp, I. p. 246; Baedeker,'^ p. 299; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 371 ;
Philippson, Peloponncs^ p. 94.

11. 4* the tomb of Areithous, sumamed Crorynetes ('club-
man'). This Areithous is mentioned by Homer (//.vii. 8 sqq,^ 137 sqq^
He was treacherously slain by Lycurgus, king of Arcadia (Paus. viii.
4. 10).

11. 5. It was here that the cavalry fight took place etc. The
battle of Mantinea, in which Epaminondas fell, is described by Xenophon
{Hellenica^ vii. 5) and Diodorus (xv. 84-87). Cp. Leake, Morea^ 3. p.
76 sqq, ; A. Schacfer, * Die Schlacht bei Mantinea,' Rheinisches Museum^
N.F. 5 (1847), pp. 45-69 ; \V. Loring, in Journal oj Hellenic Studies,
15 (iS95\ p. 87 sq. It is disputed whether the battle was fought in
363 or 362 B.C. See U. Kohler, in Mitt/uil, d, arch, Inst, in At/ten, i
(1S76), p. 197 sqq,\ G. F. Ungcr, *Die Mantineiaschlacht, 363 v.



CH. XI HILL OF SCOPE 219

Chr.,' Philologus, 49 (1890), pp. 1 21-133. Prof. Unger maintains that
the battle was fought in August 363 B.C.

11. 5. the Lacedaemonians allege that it was a Spartan who
slew him. According to Plutarch {Agesilaus^ 35) it was a Laconian
named Anticrates who gave Epaminondas his death-wound. He was
rewarded with honours and immunities, and his family were to be free
from taxes for ever. This immunity was actually enjoyed in Plutarch's
time by Callicrates, a descendant of Anticrates. All Anticrates* s
descendants, according to Plutarch, bore the general name of Machaeri-
ones because the fatal blow was supposed to have been given with a
knife {tnachcurct),

11. 7. Scope ('the look'). This is commonly identified with the
rocky hill of Mytika (see note on § 4) ; but this is a pure conjecture.
Pausanias does not even say that the spot was an eminence. It may
have been in the plain for all we know. See Leake, Morea^ i. p. 112
sq, ; /V/., 2. p. 282 sq, ; /V/., 3. p. 94 ; L. Ross, Reiseity p. 123 ; Curtius,
Pelop, I. p. 247 ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 215 ; Baedeker,'^ p. 299 ; Guide-
Joanne^ 2. p. 372. Mr. W. Loring plausibly identifies Scope, not with
the summit of the hill oi Mytika^ which is a clear 1000 feet above the
plain, but with a shoulder of it at least 600 feet lower down. Here he
found the ruin of a small tower about 14^^ feet square, built of excellent
hewn polygonal masonry with rough bossy surface, very like the masonry
of a great part of the walls of Mantinea and probably dating, like them,
from the fourth century B.C. The peasants call it the Windmill {Anema-
ntylos\ and some of the better-educated inhabitants of Tripolitsa regard
it as the tomb of Epaminondas. Mr. Loring cleared out the inside of
the tower till he reached the rock without finding any traces of human
burial. Hence he concluded that the ruin was that of a small watch-
tower {skope^ literally * look ') built on the boundary of the Mantinean
and Tegean territories, of which it commands a fine view. In the time
of Pausanias the border feuds between the neighbour towns had long
ceased under the pax Romana^ and with the advent of peace the watch-
tower had probably fallen into decay. But it may well have retained
its name, and from the name popular fancy may have evolved the tragic
conception of the dying hero taking here his last lingering look at the
fight, much as popular fancy has given to one of the hills near Granada
the name of * the last sigh of the Moor,* because from it the last Moorish
king is supposed to have looked back wistfully for the last time at
Granada. That the mortally-wounded Epaminondas should really have
been carried over such rough ground to such a height is, as Mr. Loring
justly observes, incredible. See W. Loring, \n Journal of Hellenic Studies^

15 (1895), p. 82 sq,

11. 10. Similarly Hannibal was afterwards deceived etc. This
story is told also by Appian {Syriac, 11) and Plutarch {Flamin. 20),
both of whom quote the ambiguous oracle. That the grave of Hannibal
was at Libyssa is mentioned also by Pliny {Nat, hist, v. 149) and
Ammianus Marcellinus (xxii. 9. 3).

11. 12. this Sicily is a small hill not far from Athens. According
to Suidas (p. 950, ed. Bekker) Archidamus son of Agesilaus was warned



220 MANTINEA TO METHYDKIUM BK. viii. Arcadia

by the Delphic oracle to beware of Sicily ; so he avoided the island of
Sicily, but fell in battle at Sicily, * the three-legged hill ' in Attica. The
hill of Sicily is thought to be a little rocky hill south of the Ilissus,
opposite the Museum hill ; there are traces of walls on its northern
summit. See Kaupert, in Monatsberichte of the Berlin Academy, 1 7th
July 1879, p. 620; Curtius, Die Stadtgeschichte von Athen^ p. 113.
Formerly Curtius inclined to identify the hill of Sicily with the rocky
hill which projects from the Museum hill on the south-west, on the
north side of the Ilissus {Rheinisches Museum^ 8 (1853), pp. 133-137).
The hill of Sicily is mentioned in a fragmentary itinerary of the Piraeus,
which exists only in a papyrus found a few years ago by Mr. Flinders
Petrie at Hawara in Fayoom. See Berliner philolog, Wochcnschrift^ 9
(1889), p. 1546 sqq, ; Curtius, Die Stadtgeschichte von Athen^ p. cxx.

12. I. The oaJcs of Arcadia are of different kinds. On

the different kinds of oaks found in Greece, see Fiedler, Reisey i. p. 519
sqq, ; Philippson, Peloponnes^ p. 529 sqq, ; Neumann und Partsch,
Physikalische Geographic von Gricchenland^ pp. 376-383. Extensive
oak-woods are still found on the mountains of Western Arcadia and the
high plateaus of Elis, which border on Arcadia, but I do not remember
to have noticed oaks on the Arcadian plains.

12. I. floats of it for anchors and nets. The cork-floats which
buoyed up fishing -nets are often mentioned by ancient writers. See
Pindar, Pyth, ii. 144 sqq,y with the Schol. ; Aeschylus, Choeph, 506 sq. \
Aelian, Nat, anim, xii. 43 ; Alciphron, i. i ; Plutarch, De genio SocratiSy
22 ; Ovid, Trist. iii. 4. 1 1 sq. ; Pliny, Nat, hist. xvi. 34 ; Sidonius
Apollinaris, Epist. ii. i, p. 214, ed. Baret. Cp. Yates, Textrinum
AntiquorutHy pp. 432-434. The cork-tree seems not to grow wild in
any part of European Greece at the present day (Leake, Morea^ 3. p. 52).

12. 2. From Mantinea a road leads to Methydrium etc. The
plain of Mantinea is bounded on the west by a low rocky range of hills
which divides it from a narrow plain. This narrow plain or valley (the
plain of Alcimedon) runs north and south, parallel to the Mantinean
plain, from which it is entered on the east by two defiles, one
at the village of Kapsia i\ miles due west of Mantinea, the other
at the village of Simiaiies^ about 2 miles farther to the north. A
traveller from Mantinea to Methydrium might go by either of these
defiles, for the routes join in the plain of Alcimedon, but the route by
Kapsia is the more direct and is probably the one taken by Pausanias.
It runs due west across the plain from Mantinea for about 2 miles,
passes through the defile of Kapsia^ and turns north through the plain
of Alcimedon. This narrow plain is traversed by the pebbly bed of the
torrent Kapseiros^ and is bounded on the west by the massive, pine-clad
heights of Mt. Maenalus. The peak of Mount Maenalus, which now
goes by the name of Mt. St. Elias^ is probably the Mount Ostracina of
Pausanias. We follow the plain northwards till we come opposite the
defile of Simiadcs^ which communicates with the Mantinean plain on
the east. Here we turn westward up the wild ravine of the Xen'as
between the pyramidal peaks of Mt. Aidinion the south and the rounded
summits of Mt. Ostracina on the north. Above the ravine is Kardara,



CH. XII MANTINEA TO ORCHOMENUS 221

a hamlet of charcoal-burners. After following the bed of the torrent
(which is generally dry) for about an hour and a quarter, we emerge
from the gorge upon a ridge, from which the eye ranges over masses
of bare, grey mountains, sparsely dotted with larch -trees. The path
then runs between the wooded heights of Mt. Ostracina {St Elias) on
the north and walls of yellowish rock on the south. In this neighbour-
hood, perhaps, was Petrosaca, the boundary between the territories of
Mantinea and Megalopolis.

See Guide-Joanne f 2. p. 380 ; cp. Leake, Morea, 2. pp. 278-281 ; Gell, Itinerary
of the Aforea, p. 144 ; id., Journey in the Morea, p. 367 ; Boblaye, Rechtrches, p.
142 ; Curtius, Pelop, I. p. 242 sq. ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. pp. 207, 214 sq, ; Baedeker,'
p. 301 ; W. Loring, in Journal of Hellenic Studies, 15 (1895), p. 83 sq, Petro-
saca is mentioned by Stephanus Byz. (x.z'. Il6rp6<ra«ca) as a place in Arcadia.

12. 4. Hercules heard the jay etc. "The lower regions of

the Arcadian mountains are covered with oaks, among which are fre-
quently heard the hoarse screams of the jay, still called Ktoxra " (Sib-
thorp, in R. Walpole's Memoirs relating io European and Asiatic
Turkey^ (London, 18 18), p. 283).

12. 5. two that lead to Orchomenus. The two roads to Orcho-
menus seem to have led, one to the east, the other to the west of the
conical hill of Gourtsouli, which rises in an isolated position less than a
mile to the north of Mantinea. The present road goes to the west of
Gourtsouli. Of the two routes Pausanias is generally supposed to
describe the easterly one first, but in the opinion of Leake and Mr. W.
Loring he describes the westerly route first (see note on § 7 * Ptolis ').
See Leake, Morea, 3. p. 97 ; L. Ross, Reisen, p. 128 j^. ; Guide-Joanne,
2. p. 381 ; W. Loring, va Journal of Hellenic Studies^ 15 (1895), p. 84.

12. 5. Ladas. Cp. ii. 19. 7 ; iii. 21. i ; x. 23. 14.

12. 5. the poem called the Thesprotis. This was probably the
same with " the book about the Thesprotians," which was attributed to
Musaeus and from which Eugamon of Cyrene, the last of the Cyclic
poets (about 568 B.C.), stole without acknowledgment. See Clement of
Alexandria, Strom, vi. 2. 25, p. 751, ed. Potter; Welcker, Der epische
Cyclus, I. p. 31 1 sqq, (ed. 1835) ; W. Christ, Gesch, d, griech, Utteratur,
pp. 63, 80.

12. 7. a mountain Ptolis. Most topographers agree in

identifying this mountain with the conical hill of Gourtsouli, which rises,
with bare uniform slopes, from the plain less than a mile to the north of
Mantinea, forming a conspicuous feature in the landscape. It is crowned
by a ruined chapel and some holly-oaks ; but no ancient remains have
been discovered. See Boblaye, Recherches, p. 1 40 ; L. Ross, Reisen,
p. 128 ; Curtius, Pelop. i. p. 242 ; Welcker, Tagebuch, i. p. 198 sq, ;
Vischer, Erinnerungen, p. 349 ; W. G. Clark, Pelop, p. 132 ; Bursian,
Geogr, 2. p. 209 ; Baedeker, ^ p. 300 ; Foug^res, in Bulletin de Corresp.
hellhi, 14 (1890), p. 65 ; Guide-foanne, 2. p. 381.

Leake, on the other hand, identified the hill of Ptolis with a lower
insulated hill about a mile to the north of Gourtsouli {Morea, 3. p. 97 ;
Pelop. p. 381 sq.), and Mr. Loring inclines to agree with him on the
ground that Gourtsouli cannot be said to be in " a small plain " distinct



222 PTOLIS — ANCHISIA bk. viii. arcadia

from the plain of Mantinea, whereas the other hill is hidden from Man-
tinea by the hill of Gourtsouli and so is, in a sense, cut off from the
larger plain. Hence Mr. Loring is disposed to identify Gourtsouli with
the " lofty mound of earth " which, in the time of Pausanias, was called
the grave of Penelope, although Gourtsouli is in fact a natural hillock, not
a sepulchral mound. As Gourtsouli is on the right of the more westerly
route from Mantinea to Orchomenus, it would follow on this hypothesis
that Pausanias is at present describing the westerly and not (as is com-
monly supposed) the easterly route to Orchomenus. Further, it would
follow that Maera is to be sought, not in the neighbourhood of the
village of Kakouri^ but about a mile and a half farther west, near the
khan of Bildij and that Mount Anchisia is not the low range of reddish
hills which rises beyond the khan, bounding the plain of Mantinea on
the north, but the great mountain Armeniades which rises above the
village of Kakouri and is a conspicuous landmark from all parts of the
Mantinean plain. See W. Loring, in Journal of Hellenic Studies^ 1 5
(1895), p. 84 sq. To this view of Mr. Loring's I would object that the
hill of Gourtsouli is too high to be regarded as a sepulchral mound. I
do not know its height, but I have seen it more than once, and speaking
from impression I should say it was not less than 200 feet high. Leake
himself describes Gourtsouli as '* a steep and lofty cone," and wonders
that it was not included within the fortifications of Mantinea.

12. 7. Alalcomenia Iffaera. About 3 miles north of Man-
tinea, and three-quarters of a mile south of the village of Kakouri^
there is a copious spring called Karydaj and near it, on a small hillock,
Virlet observed the foundations of a temple and some other ruins.
The spring may be Alalcomenia, the ruins may be those of Maera. See
Boblaye, RechercheSy p. 149; Curtius, Pelop. i. p. 243; cp. Leake,
Morea^ 3. p. 97 ; Guide-Joanttey 2. p. 381. But if we accept the views
of Leake {Morea^ 3. p. 97) and Mr. Loring {Journal of Hellenic Studies ^
15 (1895), p. 84 sq.\ we must look for Maera farther to the west, near
the khan of Bildi, See the preceding note.

12. 8. Mount Anchisia. On the common hypothesis. Mount
Anchisia is the low ridge of reddish hills (500 to 600 feet high) which
bounds the plain of Mantinea on the north and separates it from the
plain of Orchomenus. But Leake and Mr. Loring identify Mount Anchisia
with the high rocky peak (about 3500 ft. high) which rises at the east
end of the ridge, above the village of Kakouri^ and which now goes by
the name of Mt. Armenia or Armeniades.

See Leake, Morea^ 3. pp. 97, 98 ; Boblaye, Rechcrches^ p. 149 ; Curtius,
Pelop, I. p. 243; Bursian, Gcogr, 2. pp. 205, 207; Baedeker,^ p. 301 ; Guide-
Joanne, 2. p. 381 ; \V. Loring, m Journal of Hellenic Studies, 15 (1895), P* 84 j^/.

12. 9. ruins of a sanctuary of Aphrodite. On the southern slope
of Mt. Anchisia, near the foot of the hill, is the khan of Bildi (see note
on § 7, *Ptolis'), about 4 miles distant from Mantinea. Here the
French surveyors found some ruins which they believed to be those of
the sanctuary of Aphrodite. See Boblaye, Recherchcs, p. 381 ; Curtius,
Pelop, I. p. 243 sq, ; Guide-Joanne, 2. p. 381.



CH. XIII ARTEMIS HYMNIA 223

13. I. In the territory of Orchomenus the sanctuary of

Artemis Hymnia. The boundary between Orchomenus and Mantinea
probably lay on the crest of the low rocky ridge of Mt. Anchisia, which
divides the plain of Mantinea on the south from the plain of Orchomenus
on the north. From the summit of the ridge a fine view extends south-
ward and northward over the two plains. On the farther (northern) side
of the plain of Orchomenus is seen rising the high hill, on the summit
of which stood the ancient Orchomenus. Beyond it to the north towers
the huge mass of Mt. Cyllene. From the ridge we descend into the
plain of Orchomenus. To our left (westward) is the large village of
Levidiy situated on the slope of the hill and overlooking the southern
end of the Orchomenian plain. A chapel of the Panagia, situated on a
knoll shaded with trees to the east of the village, is supposed to mark
the site of the sanctuary of Artemis Hymnia. In an old church 20
minutes below the village on the left bank of the torrent Leake saw
some pieces of very handsome Doric columns. He supposed that
Levidi occupied the site of the place Elymia, mentioned by Xenophon
{Hellenica^ vi. 5. 13). See Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 276 sqq, ; /V/., 3. p. 99 ;
id.^ Pelop, p. 380; Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 149; Curtius, Pelop, i.
p. 222 sq, ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 205 ; Baedeker,^ p. 301 ; Guide-
Joanne^ 2. p. 381.

As to Artemis Hymnia, see an article by Stephani, 'Apollon et
Artemis,' in Gazette arch^ologique, 2 (1876), pp. 135-139. He points
out that on gold coins of Syracuse the head of Artemis is represented
with a lyre behind it ; that on an Etruscan mirror she appears
playing on the lyre ; that on another she holds two fiutes while Apollo
holds the lyre ; and that in vase-paintings she is also depicted with
a lyre.

13. I. Essenes. The word is said to have meant a king (Calli-
machus, Hymn to Zeus^ 66 ; Hesychius, s,v. coxr^v), but properly a
king bee {EtymoL Magnum^ s.v, "Eo-ot/v, p. 383 ; Suidas, s,v, "Eaxrrjv),
(The ancients mistook the queen bee for a male and hence spoke of
king bees, see Aristotle, //ist. anim. pp. 553 J^., 623 sqq. ; Aelian, Nat,
aninu i. 10, v. 10 5q,\ Virgil, Georg, iv. 21, 68 ; Robert-Tomow, De
opium mellisque apud veteres significatiotu^ P- 30 •^^^•) As the priests
of the Ephesian Artemis appear thus to have been called * king bees,' it
is worth noting that the bee was a very common type on coins of
Ephesus. See B. V. Head, Coins of Ephesus, Mr. Head states (pp.
cit, p. 8) that the priestesses of the Ephesian goddess were called *bees'
(^Melissae), I do not know what authority he has for this statement.
But the Delphic priestess was called a * bee ' (Pindar, Pyth, iv. 1 06), and
the title was given especially to the priestesses of Demeter (Schol. on
Pindar, I.e.; Callimachus, Hymn to Apollo^ no; Hesychius, s.v.
McAtoxrat ; Porphyry, Dc antro nympharum^ 18 ; cp. Servius, on Virgil,
Acn. i. 430) ; but also to priestesses of Proserpine (Schol. on Theocritus,
XV. 94) and of the Great Mother (Lactantius, Divin, Institute i. 22).
Deborah in Hebrew means *a bee.' Cp. Robert-Tomow, op, cit. p. 91
sqq. ; A. B. Cook, \vi Journal of Hellenic Studies^ 15 (1895), p. 11 sqq.
The priestesses at Dodona were perhaps called * doves ' (see note on vii.



224 ORCHOMENUS BK. viii. arcadia

21. 2). The youths who poured out the wine at the Ephesian festival of
Poseidon were called < bulls ' (Athenaeus, x. p. 425 e). The young girls
who performed the sacrifices to the Brauronian and Munychian Artemis
imitated bears and were called ' bears.' Legend said that this was done
as an expiation for the killing of a tame bear which had lived in the sanc-
tuary of Artemis. Every Attic maiden between the ages of five and ten
was obliged thus to be a * bear,' as a necessary preliminary to nuirriage
(Schol. on Aristophanes, Lysist, 645 ; Harpocration, s,v, dpKrewrai ;
Suidas, s,v, a/aicrcGtrai and apKTos ^ Bpavptavlois ; BekkeHs Anecdota
Graeca, p. 206, 4 ; ib. p. 444, 30). It seems not improbable that in
all these cases the animal from which the worshipper took his or her
name was sacred to the god or goddess ; and that, in early times at
least, the worshipper disguised himself in the skin of the sacred animal,
or in a costume which mimicked the animal. On an Assyrian cylinder
a figure in an attitude of adoration is disguised in a gigantic fish-skin.
At a still earlier period the animal may have been the god himself, and
the person who dressed in its skin would play the part of the god. See
W. Robertson Smith, Religion of the Semites^ pp. 292 sq,^ 435 sqq,\
Back, De Graecorum caerimoniis in quibits homines deorum vice
fungebantur (Berlin, 1883), p. 26 sqq. At the festival of the Syrian
goddess at Hierapolis the worshipper, after sacrificing a sheep, spread
the skin on the ground, knelt on it, drew the feet over his shoulders and
the head over his head, and in this attitude prayed the goddess to accept
the sacrifice. See Lucian, De dea Syria^ 55.

13. 2. The former city of Orchomenus. The ancient Arcadian
city of Orchomenus occupied the summit of a high conical hill, which
rises to the height of 3070 feet above the sea. The hill, isolated on
three sides, is connected by a low ridge of bare brown earth with the
higher mountains on the west. On the north and south it slopes steeply
to two plains (the northern and southern plains of Orchomenus), while
on the east it is bounded by a narrow and deep defile, which divides it
from the rugged slopes of Mount Trachy. The defile connects the two
plains with each other ; and through it after rainy weather the water
pours in a rapid stream from the southern into the northern plain, which
is 100 to 200 feet lower than the other. Copious springs rising at the
foot of Mount Trachy contribute still more to render marshy the southern
part of the northern plain. Indeed throughout the winter and as late
as the end of May this part of the plain is still an impassable swamp,
as it was in the days of Pausanias (§ 4 and viii. 23. 2). Orchomenus
thus occupied a strong and commanding position, overlooking the two
plains (of which the northern is considerably the larger) and dominating
the defile through which the direct road went from Tegea and Mantinea
to Pheneus and the north of Arcadia. The hill itself, though steep and
lofty, is nowhere precipitous. The slopes are of earth littered with
stones ; the rock hardly crops up on the surface. Owing to the great
elevation above the sea of the plains from which it springs the hill
hardly appears high. It is dwarfed by the lofty mountains around, and
cannot vie in grandeur of aspect with the imposing Acro-Corinth or the
Larisa of Argos. The summit, which is crowned by a ruined mediaeval



CH. XIII ORCHOMENUS 225

tower built as usual of small stones and mortar, may be some 800 feet
or so above the plain. The view from it is fine. At our feet lies
stretched the wide fiat expanse of the northern plain with its patch-
work of maize-fields, through which a stream, issuing from the springs
at the foot of Mount Trachy, winds its sluggish way. The springs are
in full view from the hill-top, and just beyond them the road to Pheneus
and the road to Stymphalus are seen to diverge, the former striking
straight northward across the plain, the latter skirting the foot of the
mountains that bound the plain on the east. Beyond the plain to the
north loom grandly the great mountains about the Lake of Pheneus,
their high grey summits partly clothed with dark pine-woods. Rugged
and lofty mountains rise also on the north-east in the direction of
Stymphalus ; a high and toilsome pass leads across them to Alea.
Turning now to the south we see the other plain, which may measure
some 2 miles in length and breadth, spread out beneath us. Except
for a stretch of vineyards in the middle it is now mostly in com, and so
in autumn presents only an expanse of brown earth. At the south-
western end of the plain a long gradual slope leads up to the large
village of Levidi^ above which tower the grand peaks of Mount
Maenalus. Over the low ridge that forms the southern boundary of
the plain is seen in the distance the plain of Mantinea and Tegea, with
far blue mountains terminating it on the south.

Considerable but scattered remains of the ancient walls and towers
of Orchomenus may still be seen encircling the hill some way below the
summit. They may be best visited from Kalpaki\ a poor hamlet which
stands on the south-eastern slope of the hill below the line of the ancient
walls but at some distance above the plain, near the entrance to the defile.
The line of the city wall is far from being continuous ; isolated pieces of
it, varying in height from two to five courses of stones, and in length
from a few feet to a good many yards, are preserved at intervals more
or less wide. To find them all, if the traveller's time is limited, it is desir-
able to procure a g^ide at Kalpaki, The highest piece of wall seen by
me measured 9 feet ; the longest about 80 yards or so. The latter piece
was on the south-eastern side of the hill. Square towers, averaging
about 2 1 feet in breadth, projected at intervals from the walls ; I
counted remains, more or less ruinous, of fifteen of them, mostly on the
south-eastern side of the hill. The masonry of both walls and towers
is on the whole quadrangular, though the blocks are in general not
very accurately squared and jointed, and the courses not always strictly
horizontal. Some of the blocks are very massive, especially in the
towers ; for in Greek fortification the towers as a rule, on account of
their exposed position, are built of larger blocks and in a more careful
style than the rest of the walls. It has been stated that three distinct
lines of walls, one above the other, can be distinguished on the sides
of the hill, the lowest being built in the regular quadrangular or ashlar
style, and the two upper in the Cyclopean style. I cannot confirm this
from my own observation. It is true that the pieces of walls which I
observed were often widely separated from each other and stood at
different heights on the hill-side, but I could not be sure that they did

VOL. IV Q



226 ORCHOMENUS bk. viii. arcadia

not all belong to a single circuit-wall. However, on the south-eastern
slope of the hill, where it faces across to Mount Trachy, I did observe
a small piece of very regular masonry resembling the walls of Mantinea
and Messene, and a few yards above it another piece of wall built in a
quite different and much more irregular style, with rather loose joints
and with some polygonal blocks in the courses. The length of this
latter piece of wall was some 20 or 30 yards, and its height about 7
feet 6 inches. One of the blocks in it was 5 feet 6 inches long. The
hill is strewn with fragments of plain red pottery.

Below the line of the walls a few ancient remains of a different sort
may be seen. Thus at a small chapel and a threshing-floor, just out-
side the west end of the hamlet of Kalpaki^ there are a few marble
blocks and apparently three Doric capitals, though two of them are now
so worn as to be almost unrecognisable. Two of the blocks lie in the
chapel before the holy pictures. These are apparently the miserable
remnants of a Doric temple, of which Dodwell caused some pieces to be
excavated at the beginning of the nineteenth century. He says : " The
cottage which we occupied stood upon the remains of a Doric temple of
white marble, some large masses of which are scattered about in the
vicinity. I employed the countrymen to excavate, and they dug out
some Doric capitals in perfect preservation, and of an elegant form.
The columns had only eighteen fiutings." Leake observed here two
Doric capitals of white marble, differing from each other in size and
shape ; in one of them the echinus met the abacus almost at a right
angle ; the other had " the elegant acute, or flattened capital [echinus]
of the more ancient Doric." These may be the remains of one of
the two sanctuaries of Poseidon and Aphrodite mentioned by Pausanias.
For the village of Kalpaki probably stands on the site of the Orchomenus
of Pausanias's days, which, as he tells us, was lower down than the circuit
of the ancient walls. Leake observed traces of walls below Kaipakt
which seemed to show that the later Orchomenus reached nearly to the
plain. At the south-eastern foot of the hill, below Kalpaki ^ a spring
issues from a wall of the kind so common in modem Greece. The
water flows into a marble basin, and an ancient squared block of marble
lies beside the spring. This is probably the spring mentioned by
Pausanias from which the people of Orchomenus procured their water.
Leake saw two fluted shafts of monolith columns near the spring ; and I
was told that the two marble blocks in the chapel to the west of the
village had been brought from the spring. Here therefore may have
stood the other sanctuary of which Pausanias speaks.

Another spring rises at the opposite or north-western foot of the
hill, a little above the northern plain. The marble basin into which the
water flows is made of an ancient block. A few yards to the north-west
of the spring are the remains of a small edifice built of grey stone ;
some of the blocks seemed to me ancient ; but whether the building itself
was so or not, I could not decide. The place is a quarter of a mile or
so to the east of the hamlet of Rhousi^ which stands on the ridge that
runs westward from the hill of Orchomenus.

Dodwell saw near a spring, at the northern foot of the hill, a church



CH. XIII CAIRNS 227

of the Panagia, which was entirely built of the ruins of a Doric temple,
amongst which he noted triglyphs, plain metopes, and fluted drums of
columns, all of white marble, but of small proportions. Here too he
saw some fragments of antefixes of terra - cotta painted with dark red
foliage. Farther down in the plain, towards the marsh, he found
another church built of ancient blocks of stone and marble, with an
Ionic capital near it. And still farther, toward the village of Rhotisi^ he
saw yet another church in which were some marble triglyphs.

I have described Orchomenus mainly from my own observations, made on 13th
October 1895. See also Dodwell, 71w/r, 2. p. 425 sqq, ; Gell, Itinerary of the
Morea, p. 144 sq, ; i</., Journey in tht Morea, p. 369 sq. ; Leake, Morea^ 3.
p. 99 sqq, ; Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 149 sq, ; Curtius, Pelop, I. p. 219 sqq, ;
Bursian, Geogr. 2. p. 203 sqq. ; Baedeker,' p. 302 ; Guide-Joanne, 2. p. 382 sq, ;
Philippson, Peloponnesy p. 73 sq,

13. 2. it stands in a great cedar etc. The image may have
stood either in the hollow trunk of the tree or among the branches.
See C. Botticher, Baumkulfus, figures 45-48. As to Artemis as a tree-
goddess see Famell, The Cults of the Greek States^ 2. p. 428 j^.

13. 3. Down from the city are cairns. Large cairns, composed
of rough stones, have been observed by modem travellers in the plain
at the southern foot of the hill of Orchomenus. They are on the left
as you approach the hill from the south. See Dodwell, Tour^ 2. p. 425 ;
Leake, Morea^ 3. p. 100; Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 222. It has been
customary in many lands to rear heaps of stones, branches, etc., upon
the graves of persons who have died violent deaths, and every one who
passes has to add a stone, a twig, or a clod to the pile. The motive
sometimes assigned for the custom is to prevent the ghost of the buried
man from coming forth and doing harm to the traveller or to other
people. The custom is best known in Europe (as in Germany, France,
Sweden, and Scotland), but is also practised in many other parts of
the world. Thus of the Maoris of New Zealand it is said that " when-
ever they pass the place where a man has been murdered, it is customary
for each person to throw a stone upon it" (R. A. Crxas^^ Journal of a
Ten Months Residence in New Zealand^ p. 186). As to the Creek and
kindred tribes of Indians in North America it is said that " to perpetuate
the memory of any remarkable warrior killed in the woods . . . every
Indian traveller as he passes that way throws a stone on the place "
(Adair, History of the American Indians^ p. 184). In Bolivia "wherever
a murder has been committed, heaps of stones called * apachetas ' . . .
are placed, and each Indian who passes spits out his juice of coca-leaf
and adds another stone " {Journal of the Royal Geographical Society ^ 47
(1877), p. 211). Near Caracas in Venezuela are two small heaps of
stones by the wayside, marking the spot where a man was murdered ;
whoever passes the place takes up a stone, kisses it, and throws it on
the heap (K. Martin, Bericht iiber eine Reise nach Niederlandisch West-
Indien^ Erster Theil (Leyden, 1887), p. 166). In some parts of Celebes
there are great heaps of stones over places where men have been
murdered ; and hardly any one will pass such spots without adding a
stone to the heap (B. F. Matthes, Einige EigenthUmlichkeiten in den



228 CAIRNS BK. VIII. ARCADIA

Festen und Gewoknheiten der Makassaren und Buginesen^ p. 25). About
an hour to the north-west of Kanakir in Armenia is a great cairn, under
which some martyred Christian nuns are said to lie buried : every Tartar
who passes by it flings a stone on the cairn, but every Armenian passer-by
takes one away (Haxthausen, Tremskaukasia, i. p. 222). The ancient
Greeks had also their cairns by the wayside to which every passer-by
added a stone. They were called Hermaea^ and were said to be raised
in honour of Hermes. But the legend told to explain the origin of the
custom seems to show that, in some cases at least, these cairns may
have been erected over the graves of murdered persons. For it was
said that when Hermes was tried by the gods for the murder of Argus,
all the gods flung stones at him as a mode of ridding themselves of the
pollution contracted by bloodshed ; the stones thus thrown made a great
heap, and the custom of rearing such heaps continued ever after. See
Eiymolog, Magnum^ s,v, ^Epfialov, p. 375 sg. ; Comutus, De naiura
deorum^ 1 6 ; Babrius, xlviii. i sq. ; Suidas, s,v, 'Ep/iaiov : Schol. on
Nicander, TA^, 150; Eustathius, on Odyssey^ xvi. 471. The three
cairns on which perhaps stood the images of Hermes that marked the
boundary between Argolis and Laconia, are still called by the natives
*the place of the slain.' See note on iu 38. 7. Perhaps, then, the
heaps of stones seen by Pausanias near Orchomenus were cairns of this
sort ; they were reared (as he tells us) over men who had been slain,
and each passer-by may have added a stone to the pile. In modem
Greece such cairns are still reared, but, in some cases at least, for a
different purpose. " The method used by a modem Greek to draw down
curses upon his enemy is this. He takes a quantity of stones and places
them in a conspicuous part of the road, cursing his neighbour as he
places each stone. As no man is supposed to be anathematized
without having committed some heinous sin, it becomes the duty of all
good Christians to add at least one stone, and its consequent curse, to
the heap, so that it often increases to a considerable size." These
heaps are called anathemata. See Gell, Itinerary of Greece^ p. 7 1 sq.
Rough stones were heaped over the murdered Laius and his attendant
(Paus. X. 5. 4). On the custom of rearing heaps of stones, etc., over
graves and in other connexions, see F. Liebrecht, in Philologus^ 20
(1863), pp. 378-382; id.y Zur Volkskundey pp. 267-284; R. Andree,
EthnograpJiische Parallelen und Vergleiche^ pp. 46-58; B. Schmidt,
* Steinhaufen als Fluchmale, Hermesheiligtiimer und Grabhtigel in
Griechenland,' Fleckeisen^s Jahrbiic/icr, 39 (1893), PP« 3^9-39 5-

13. 4-5* a deep golly between the city and Mount Trachy etc.
We now follow Pausanias on his way to Pheneus. Descending from
the hill of Orchomenus we turn northward into the deep gully or defile
which divides the hill of Orchomenus from Mount Trachy (see above,
p. 224). Though deep and narrow the defile is short, only a few
hundred yards in length. The sides of the hills on both sides are steep
but not precipitous. In the bottom of the defile is the bed of a stream,
which, when I traversed the gully (13th October 1895), was dry. After
passing through the defile we emerge on the northern plain of Orcho-
menus. The routes now diverge. The one to the left, skirting the



CH. XIII THE ROAD TO STYMPHALUS 229

swamp at the northern foot of the hill of Orchomenus, leads westward
to the ruins of Caphyae, which lie at the foot of the hills that enclose
the plain on the south-west (see viii. 23. 2 note). The route to the
right skirts the foot of Mount Trachy, on the eastern side of the plain.
Following this latter route, which is the one to Pheneus, we come, in
about thirty-five minutes from Orchomenus (^Kaipakt)^ to a fine source
rushing in several clear streams out of the rocks at the foot of the
mountain. ■ The water forms a swamp in front of the springs. This
source is no doubt the springs called Teneae by Pausanias (§ 5).
Shortly before reaching them Gell saw a large heap of stones which he
took to be the tomb of Aristocrates mentioned by Pausanias. Beyond
the springs the roads again diverge. The road to Stymphalus continues
to skirt the foot of the mountains in a north-easterly direction, but the
road to Pheneus turns to the left and strikes northward across the plain,
following the line of an ancient causeway, of which some remains are to
be seen. However, in winter and as late as the end of May this direct
road to Pheneus is impassable on account of the swamps ; my dragoman
told me that he once nearly lost a mule in attempting to follow it. At
such times, therefore, the route to Pheneus continues to coincide with
the road to Stymphalus for some way farther, hugging the foot of the
hills instead of striking out boldly across the plain. At the point where
the roads to Pheneus and Stymphalus diverge, about a mile beyond the
springs of Teneae, the French surveyors observed some massive ruins
near another spring ; Peytier thought that these ruins might mark the
site of Amilus mentioned by Pausanias.

See Dodwell, Tour^ 2. p. 429 sq, ; Gell, Itinerary of the Morea^ p. 150; id,^
Journey in the Morea^ p. 370 sq. ; Leake, Alorea^ 3. p. 102 sqq, ; Boblaye,
Recherches^ p. 150; Curtius, Pelop, I. p. 223 sq, ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 203 ;
Guide-Joanne y 2. p. 382 sq. ; Baedeker,^ p. 302.

13. 5. one leads to Stymphaltis. The road to Stymphalus,

after diverging from the road to Pheneus (see the preceding note),

continues to skirt the foot of the mountains in a north-easterly direction.

Behind us we leave Mount Trachy, which seen from the north is an

imposing mountain, its steep sides rent by parallel gillies. Gradually

the hill and plain of Orchomenus disappear behind us, and the path

leads into a savage glen, hemmed in by wild rocky mountains, bare and

desolate, towering high on either side. Away up in the face of a

precipice on the right of the path is seen the little monastery of

Kandyloy hanging in what appears an almost inaccessible position. In

winter a torrent flows down the middle of the glen to swell the marsh

in the plain of Orchomenus. A mile or so beyond the monastery we

reach the village of Kandyla^ straggling in the wide gravelly bed of the

torrent, shaded by plane-trees and mulberry-trees, and shut in on all sides

by high rocky mountains, their sides covered with fir-woods and their

summits tipped with snow for a good part of the year. From the upper

end of the village a pass leads eastward over the mountains to Bougiati

and the ancient Alea ; the path, which is very rough and steep, ascends

a wild gully overhung on the south by a huge beetling crag ; the descent



230 THE ROAD TO STYMPHALUS bk. viii. arcadia

on the eastern side of the mountains, towards BougicUi^ is so steep as
to be almost impassable for horses. But at present we are following
the path to Stymphalus, which, leaving the village of Kandyla in a
northerly direction, ascends the mountain by zigzags along the edge of
precipices. The snow sometimes lies deep here as late as March,
making the ascent difficult and dangerous. The pass runs north-east
between the lofty Mount Skipieza^ nearly 6000 feet high, on the left,
and the sharp-peaked Mount St, Constantine^ crowned with a Prankish
castle, on the right. We reach the first col or summit of the pass in
about an hour and twenty minutes from Kandyla, From this point a
path branches off to the right, descending into the narrow vsilley of
Skotini which we see stretching eastward down below. Our path
keeps on to the left, skirting the side of Mount Skipieza, Half an hour
more takes us to a second col or summit, from which we look down on
the plain and lake of Stymphalus and across to the majestic mass of
Mount Cyllene towering on the farther side of the valley. The way
now goes down a ravine shut in on both sides by lofty fir-clad mountains
and known as the Wolfs Ravine {Lykorrhcuma) from the wolves that
are said to abound in it. Thus descending we reach the valley of
Stymphalus and the western end of the lake.

The pass which has just been described was crossed from the side
of Stymphalus by a Macedonian army in the dead of the winter of
218 B.C. The snow lay deep on the ground, and it was with difficulty
and suffering that the army forced its way across. See Polybius, iv. 70.
The opposite end of the pass, on the side of Orchomenus, was the scene
of a battle in 221 B.C. between an Achaean army under Aratus and a
marauding force of Aetolians. Most of the fighting would seem to
have taken place in the glen, near the site of the modem Kandyla,
The Achaean army was beaten, and might have been cut in pieces if
the towns of Orchomenus and Caphyae had not opened their gates to
the fugitives from the battle-field. See Polybius, iv. 1 1 sg. The Mount
Oligyrtus mentioned by Polybius in his narrative of both events is
probably the modern Mount Skipieza.

See Dodwell, Toury 2. p. 429 sqq, ; Gell, Itinerary of the Morea, p. 146 sq, ;
Leake, Morea, 3. pp. 105 sqq., 122 sqq. ; Curtius, Pelop, I. pp. 206-20S ; Guide-
Joanney 2. p. 383. I followed the route described only as far as Kandyla^ from
which place I crossed the mountains to Alca.

13. 6. On the road to Pheneus etc. After crossing the northern
plain of Orchomenus from a point beyond the springs of Teneae (see
above, p. 229) the road to Pheneus passes the monastery of the Holy
Trinity {Hagia Triadd) on the right and ascends a wooded and rocky
glen. A rugged and difficult ascent of about half an hour brings us to
a bleak plateau, overgrown with bushes, between Mount Skipicsa on
the right (east) and Mount Saita on the left (west). In a quarter of an
hour more we reach a col or summit of the pass, from which we see
stretched below us on the north the deep blue waters of the lake of
Pheneus. We then descend towards the lake through the ravine men-
tioned by Pausanias. It is a deep and beautiful gully walled in and



CH. XIV THE LAKE OF PHENEUS 231

darkened by lofty precipices. Formerly it was overhung with oak-trees,
which with the dark pines on the higher slopes of the mountains and
the birches and other northern trees in the glen itself, added much to
the gloomy magnificence of the scene. Well down in the glen we pass
a fine spring gushing from a rock near a chapel and forming a stream
at once. It is probably the spring mentioned by Pausanias. Soon
after we reach the village of Ghioza or Guioza^ prettily situated near
the southern end of the lake. In this neighbourhood must have stood
the ancient Caryae.

See Gell, Itinerary of the Morea^ p. 150 j^.; id, ^Journey in the Morea, p.
371 sqq, ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 203 ; Baedeker,' p. 302 ; Guide-Joanne, 2. p.
382 sq,

14. I. The plain of Pheneus. The lake of Pheneus (for what was
a plain in the time of Pausanias is now a lake) is a broad and beautiful
sheet of greenish-blue water encircled by lofty mountains which descend
in rocky declivities or sheer precipices to the water's edge, their upper
slopes clothed with black pine-woods and their summits capped with
snow for many months of the year. Right above the lake on the north-
east towers the mighty cone of Cyllene, nearly 8000 feet high, the
loftiest mountain but one in Peloponnese ; while on the north-west
Dourdouvana (nearly 7000 feet high) rears its long serrated crest,
culminating in a sharp bare peak of grey rock, at the foot of which,
embowered in trees and gardens, nestles the village of Phonia^ the
representative of the ancient Pheneus. Here on the north, between the
village and the lake, is the only stretch of level ground that breaks the
mountain ring, and the luxuriant green of its vineyards and maize-fields
contrasts pleasingly with the sombre hue of the pine-forests all around.
The first sight of this blue lake embosomed among forest-clad moun-
tains takes the traveller by surprise, so unlike is it to anything else in
Greece ; and he feels as if suddenly transported from the arid hills and
the parched plains of Greece to a northern land — from the land of the
olive, the vine, and the orange, to the land of the pine, the mountain,
and the lake.

So completely is the lake fenced in by mountains on all sides that
no stream can issue from it above ground, and the water escapes only
by two subterranean emissories or KatavothraSy as they are called by
the Greeks, at the south-eastern and south-western ends of the lake.
Through the latter emissory the water passes under the mountain, and
issuing on the other side, about 6 miles from the lake and 800 feet
below its level, forms the source of the Ladon (see viii. 20. i note). On
the state of these emissories it depends whether the great mountain-
basin of Pheneus is a fertile plain or a broad lake. From antiquity down
to the present century the periods in which the basin has been com-
pletely drained have alternated with periods in which it has been
occupied by a lake. In the time of Theophrastus (fourth century B.C.)
the bottom of the valley seems to have been generally dry land, for he
mentions that once, when the emissories had got choked up, the water
rose and flooded the plain, drowning the willows, firs, and pines, which



232 THE LAKE OF PHENEUS bk. viir. arcadia

however reappeared the following year when the flood subsided
(Theophrastus, Histor, Plant, iii. i. 2 ; cp. /Vil, v. 4. 6). In the
following century part of the valley at least would seem to have been
a lake, for the geographer Eratosthenes, quoted by Strabo (viii. p. 389),
informs us that the river Anias formed in front of the city of Pheneus
a lake which was drained by subterranean passages, and that when
these passages were closed the water rose over the plain, but that when
they were opened again it was discharged into the Ladon and hence
into the Alpheus in such volume that the sacred precinct at Olympia
was flooded, while the lake on the other hand shrank. Strabo himself
mentions (/.r.) that the flow of the Ladon was once checked by the
obstruction of the emissories consequent upon an earthquake. According
to Pliny (A^rt/. hist, xxxi. 54) there had been down to his time five
changes in the condition of the valley from wet to dry and from dry to
wet, all of them caused by earthquakes. In Plutarch's time the flood
rose so high that the whole valley was under water, which pious people
attributed to Apollo's anger at Hercules, who was said to have stolen
the prophetic tripod at Delphi and carried it off to Pheneus about a
thousand years before {De sera nu mints vindicta^ 12). However, later
on in the same century the waters had again subsided, for Pausanias
found the bottom of the valley to be dry land, and knew of the former
existence of the lake only from tradition. From the time of Pausanias
down to the beginning of the nineteenth century we have no record of
the condition of the valley. In 1806 when Leake and Dodwell visited
it, the great valley was still a swampy plain, covered with fields of
wheat or barley except at the south-western end, where round the
entrance to the emissory the water formed a small lake which never
dried up even in summer. But in 1821, doubtless through the
obstruction of the emissories, the water began to rise over the plain,
and by 1 829-1 830, when the French surveyors mapped the district, the
whole basin was occupied by a deep lake 5 miles long by 5 miles wide.
On January ist, 1834, the emissories suddenly opened again, the Ladon
became a deep and raging torrent, the valley was drained, and fresh
vegetation sprang up on the rich slimy soil. But when Welcker visited
Pheneus in 1842, the valley was again occupied by a lake, and had
been so, if he was correctly informed, since 1838 at least. And a lake
it would seem to have been ever since. At least Beul^, who travelled
in Peloponnese about the middle of the century, describes the lake as
8 miles long by 7 miles wide. In 1853 the S\viss scholar Vischer
found a great lake, exactly as the French surveyors had represented it
on their map ; the hill on the north-west side of the valley, on which
are the scanty remains of the ancient acropolis, projected like a
peninsula into the lake, and the site of the ancient city was deep under
water. W. G. Clark in 1856 describes with enthusiasm the "wide
expanse of still water deep among the hills, reflecting black pine-woods
and grey crags and sky now crimson with sunset " ; according to him
the lake was 7 miles long and as many wide. In June 1888 Mr.
Philippson found a broad clear lake of deep green colour ; and in
September-October 1895 I viewed with pleasure the same beautiful scene.



CH. XIV THE LAKE OF PHENEUS 233

though I would describe the colour of the water as greenish-blue rather
than green. The lake has shrunk, however, a good deal since the
middle of the century. A long stretch of level plain, covered with
\nneyards and maize-fields, now divides the ancient acropolis of Pheneus
from the margin of the lake. The water would seem* to be still sinking ;
at least the depth of the lake at the eastern emissory in 1888 was only
1 5 metres (49 feet), whereas it is said to have been 30 metres (98 feet)
in 1883. The lake is about 2300 feet above the level of the sea.

See Dodwell, Tour^ 2. pp. 436-441 ; Gell, Ituterary of the Morea^ p. 151 j^. ;
id,^Jourftey in the Morca^ p. 373 sqq. ; Leake, Marea, 3. p. 135 sqq, ; Boblaye,
Reclurchesy p. 153 jy. ; L. Ross, Rcisetiy p. 107 ; G. F. Welcker, Tageimchy i.
p. 302 sq. ; E. Beule, Etudes sur le Pilopontitse, p. 147 sqq, ; E. Curtius, Pelop,
I. p. 184 sqq. ; Vischer, Eritmerungeny ^. ^g^ sqq, ; W. G. Clark, Peloponnesus ^
p. 311 sqq, ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 198 sqq, ; Baedeker,' p. 302 sq, ; Guide-
Joanne^ 2. p. 383 sq, ; A. Meliarakes, t'eorypa^fa to\j yofiov *Apyo\l5os Kal
Kopty0ias, p. 145 sqq, ; A. Philippson, PehponfteSf pp. 126 sq,^ 144 sqq,

14. I. there remain on the mountains certain marks to which,
they say, the water rose. The marks observed by Pausanias are
still to be seen. About 100 feet above the present level of the lake a
horizontal line, exactly like a high-water mark, runs round the sides of
the mountains which environ the lake, especially at its southern end.
The trees and shrubs extend down the sides of the mountains to this
line and there stop abruptly. Below the line the rock is of a light
yellow colour, and almost totally bare of vegetation. Travellers differ
as to the explanation of this sharp line of discolourment. Some, like
Pausanias, regard it as an old high-water mark. Leake suggested that
it might be due merely to evaporation ; W. G. Clark that it might be
the junction of two geological strata. The German geologist Mr.
Philippson, to whom we are indebted for the fullest account of the
geology of Peloponnese, is of opinion that the line is undoubtedly a
water-mark and indicates the level of the water as it was in 1830, the
date of the French survey. But surely the mark is as least as old as
the time of Pausanias.

See Dodwell, Tour^ 2. pp. 436, 441 ; Gell, Itinerary of the Morea^ p. 152 ;
«/., Journey in the Morea^ p. 374 ; Leake, Morea^ 3. p. 147 sqq, ; Pouqueville,
Voyage de la Gricey 5. p. 327 ; Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 135 note ; Curtius, Pelop,
I. p. 188 sq, ; \V. G. Clark, Pelop, p. 317 sq, ; Philippson, Peloponnes^ p. 146.

14. I. Mount Oryzis, and another mountain, Sdathis etc. One

of the two chasms or emissories {Katavothras) mentioned by Pausanias
is on the south-eastern side of the lake, at the foot of a branch of Mt
SkipiezcLt between the villages of Guioza and Mosa, The other is
toward the south-west comer of the lake, at the foot of Mt. Saita, One
of these mountains must therefore be Sciathis and the other Oryxis.
From the similarity of names Leake concluded that Saita was Sciathis,
and hence that the branch of Skipieza was Oryxis. On the other
hand Curtius urged plausibly that Oryxis (* digging') means the
Canal-Mountain, and that this must be Mount Saita^ since the canal or
channel dug by Hercules led in the direction of Clitor (see viii. 19. 4)



234 THE OLBIUS bk. viii. arcadia

and hence to the south-western emissory at the foot of Mt. ScuiOy not
to the south-eastern emissory at the foot of the branch of Mt. Skipieza.
Hence Curtius identified Mt. Saita with the ancient Oryxis and the
branch of Mt Skipieza with the ancient Sciathis. He is followed
by Bursian and Baedeker (Lolling). See Leake, MorecL^ 3. pp. 143}
151 ; Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 1 53 ; Curtius, Pelap, i. p. 187 ; Baedeker,*
p. 302 ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 383 ; A. Meliarakes, Vwgypa^ia. rov voyjoio
'Afyyoki&os koI Kopivdias, p. 150.

14. 2. these chasms are artificial, having been made Ij
Hercules etc. Down one of these chasms, according to the local
legend, Pluto carried off Proserpine (Conon, Narrai. 15). The story
now told by the natives is as follows. Once on a time the lake was
owned by two devils. One devil resided at Guioza on the south side
of the lake, while the other had his abode on the west side, somewhere
toward Lykouria, The two often quarrelled, as it is the nature of
devils to do. At last, however, they settled their differences by a most
internecine combat at a spot near the top of Mt. Saita, The devil who
lived on the west side of the lake was the wilier of the two and pelted
his foe with balls made of the fat of oxen. As soon as these balls
touched the devil's burning-hot skin they took fire and scorched him so
that he fled and burst a passage for himself through the mountain.
The waters flowed in after him and left the plain dry. See Leake,
Morea^ 3. p. 148 ^^. ; Beul^, Atudes sur le Pdoponnhe^ p. 156 ; cp.
Dodwell, Tour^ 2. p. 440.

14. 3. Hercules dug a bed for the river Olbius. At the beginning
of the nineteenth century, when the lake of Pheneus was dried up, the
work which Pausanias attributes to Hercules could be seen extending
for some distance along the middle of the plain, on the left bank of
the river Aroanius or Olbius. It had, however, the appearance of
having been a causeway or embankment erected to prevent the river
from flooding the southern and eastern side of the plain rather than of
having been an artificial canal for the river to flow in. It was a mound
of earth paved with stones. Perhaps when the canal became damaged
and useless, as it was in Pausanias's time, it may have been turned
into an embankment for the purpose indicated. See Dodwell, Tour^ 2.
p. 440; Q^^ Journey in the Morea, p. 373 sq, ; id.. Itinerary oj the
Morea, p. 151; Leake, Morea, 3. p. 151 sq, ; Curtius, Pelop, i . p.
186 sq. ; Welcker, Tagebuch, i. p. 303.

14. 3. the river Olbius, which some of the Arcadians call Aroa-
nius. At the northern end of the lake of Pheneus, as we have seen, there
is now a fertile plain of some breadth. A stream called the Phoniatiko
traverses it in a broad gravelly bed, coming down from near Karya, a
village about 10 miles distant to the north-east. A smaller stream
descends from the north-west through a narrow valley between the
back of the mountain of Phonia and the mountain of Zarouchla, This
latter stream enters the lake separately to the west of the Phoniatiko;
but formerly, when the lake was dried up, the streams united in the
plain, a little to the south of the hill of Pheneus. It has been con-
jectured that one of these streams was the Olbius and the other the



CH. XIV THE CITY OF PHENEUS 235

Aroanius, and that after their junction the united stream was by some
called the Olbius and by others the Aroanius. As Pausanias mentions
the Aroanius on his way from Pheneus to Pellene and Aegira (viii. 15.
6), the main stream which comes down from Karya would seem to be
the Aroanius. Strabo calls the united stream the Anias (viii. p. 389).

See Leake, Morea^ 3. p. 141 sq. ; Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 154 ; Curtius, Pelop, I.
pp. 186, 194 ; Vischer, Erinrurtingen^ p. 494 ; Beul^, Etudes sur U Pilo-
pottftise, p. 155 ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 198 sq. ; Philippson, Peloponnes^ p. 126.

14. 4. the city of Pheneus. The ancient Pheneus has bequeathed
its name to Phonia, a considerable village prettily situated among fine
fig-trees and gardens on the first slope of the mountains that bound the
great valley on the north-west. The village is in two divisions, an
upper and a lower, of which the lower is the larger. A wide and
fertile plain now inter\'enes between the village and the northern margin
of the lake. Ten minutes to the south-east of, and lower down than,
the village a low conical hill rises on the edge of the plain. At the
time of the French Survey in 1829-1830 this little hill, which seems to
have been the acropolis of Pheneus, was a peninsula jutting into the
lake. Now the lake has retired a long way to the south, and the
hillock (for it is hardly more) is surrounded by luxuriant vineyards,
which when I visited the place in October 1895 were loaded with
clusters of green and purple grapes. The height of the hill may be
perhaps 200 feet. It rises to a point with uniformly steep but not
precipitous slopes. Its sides are slippery as well as steep, and they
are partly overgrown with prickly shrubs, which to some extent conceal
the remains of the ancient fortification-wall. The most considerable
piece of the ancient wall is at the north-west side of the hill, about a
third of the way up the slope. It is some 20 or 30 yards long by
about 10 feet high. At its southern end a short wall, a few feet long
and a few feet high, projects from it at right angles ; it was probably
the side of a square tower. Farther to the south, on the west face of
the hill, is another considerable piece of the ancient wall. It is about
27 paces long and is standing to a height of 5 to 6 feet. Between
these two considerable fragments of the fortification-wall there are two
smaller isolated pieces. All these remains of walls are built of large
rough polygonal blocks fitted together with fair accuracy ; the outsides
of the blocks are not smoothed, only roughly hewn. A small piece of
the ancient wall may also be seen farther north than those I have
mentioned. On the summit, which is very small, there are some very
indistinct remains of a mediaeval or modem building, and inconsider-
able remains of edifices of a similar style exist lower down the eastern
side of the hill. To the south the hill sends out a sort of tongue, at
the south end of which I observed a block of stone standing, much
worn and weathered, probably a drum of a column. These, with a
couple of large blocks, seemingly ancient and in their original positions
at the south-western foot of the hill, were all the remains of the ancient
Pheneus which I could discover (October 1895). To the east the
acropolis hill sends out a low flat-topped spur, on which stands a chapel



236 THE CITY OF PHENEUS bk. viii. arcadia

of St. Constantine. The ruins seem to have been more extensive some
forty years ago, for W. G. Clark in 1856 distinguished three towers,
one of them about 1 5 feet square. He says : " Some of the stones
composing the wall are as much as 3 feet long, and the masonry is
as regular as that of Messene." From the observations of previous
travellers it appears that the indistinct remains on the top of the hill
are the ruins of a small mediaeval castle.

It is difficult to reconcile Pausanias's description of the acropolis
with the low smooth-sided, though steep, hill just described. Such a
hill must always have needed strong fortifications to render it defensible ;
whereas from Pausanias's description we should expect to find a hill so
defended by precipices as to render fortification almost superfluous.
But nothing in the least resembling a precipice is to be seen on the hill
of Pheneus. To meet this difficulty it has been suggested that the
ancient acropolis may have been quite separate from the lower city, and
that we should look for it on one of the heights in the neighbourhood.
Lolling (in Baedeker's Guide) thought that Pausanias's description
pointed to the summit of Mt. St. Elias, opposite the modem Pkotda;
but on the summit there is nothing but a ruined chapel and remains of
mediaeval fortifications. It was perhaps these remains which Dodwell
visited in 1806, and which he describes as follows: "In our inquiries for
antiquities in this vicinity we learned that the remains of an ancient
city existed in the mountains above the village of Phonia. We accord-
ingly set out on the 1 4th, provided with proper guides to conduct us to
the spot. On quitting the village we began to ascend by a steep path
trodden only by goats ; the way was consequently extremely difficult
The country was bold, wooded, and picturesque. In forty minutes we
reached the foot of the hill on which the ruins were situated. It con-
sisted of a lofty rock of a conical form, interspersed with pine-trees, and
covered with loose stones, and so exceedingly steep that its summit
could be reached only by pursuing a path of circuitous inflections.
Having dismounted from our horses, we commenced the difficult ascent,
and, after an hour of laborious climbing, we reached the highest point,
where we found our trouble but ill repaid. The area of the hill, which
is flat and circular, is encompassed by walls of dubious antiquity, as they
have nothing characteristic in their construction, except in being com-
posed of a thick mass of small unhewn stones, united with a certain
degree of care, but without mortar. A few ancient tiles are also seen
scattered about the ruins ; but we could not discover a single block
of hewn stone, or any object of architectural interest. I have seen
other similar remains in the mountainous parts of Greece ; and they
may possibly be of very early date, and were perhaps the Koi/AOTroAct?
or walled villages of the ancients. The view from this rock embraces
only a mass of mountains, with wild glens and rugged indentations. It
is a deep solitude, where the voice of man is not heard, and not a single
habitation is seen." It is very unlikely that the remains described by
Dodwell are those of the acropolis of Pheneus. We can scarcely sup-
pose that the acropolis was separated by nearly a two hours' ascent from
the lower city.



CH. XIV RHOECUS AND THEODORUS 237

See Dodwell, 7bi/r, 2. p. 4375^.; Leake, Morea^ 3. pp. 117, 139 sq. ; Boblaye,
Recherches^ p. 153; Curtius, Pelop. I. pp. 190 sq.^ 211 ; Welcker, Tagebuch^ i,
?• 303 ; Vischer, Erinnerungefty p. 495 sq, ; W. G. Clark, Pelop, p. 318 ; Bursian,
Gcojp', 2. p. 200 ; Baedeker,' p. 303 s^, ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 384 ; Philippson,
Peloponnes^ p. 127. My visit to the ruins of Pheneus was paid ist October 1895.

14. 5. dedicated by Ulysses. Cp. viii. 44. 4 ; and J. N. Svoronos,
* Ulysse chez les Arcadiens,* Gcusette archdologique^ 13 (1888), pp. 257-
280. Mr. Svoronos argues that Arcadia and not (as some classical
writers supposed) Epirus was the country to which Ulysses went in
order to find a man who did not know what an oar was. Cp. Homer,
Odyssey y xi. 121 sqq,

14. 5. Artemis the Horse -finder. The association of

Artemis with horses is very rare. See Famell, The Cults of the Greek
States^ 2. p. 450.

14. 7- Their mode of making bronze images has been already
explained by me etc. See iii. 17. 6.

14. 8. Bhoecns Theodoras. See Index, and Overbeck,

Schriftquellen^ §§ 273-293. The father of Rhoecus is called Philaeus
by Pausanias here and elsewhere (x. 38. 6). Herodotus calls him
Phileas (iii. 60). The chronology of these early Samian artists
has been much discussed. It has been maintained that there were
two or even three Samian artists of the name of Theodorus. H. Brunn
held that there was but one. He thought that Theodorus, son of
Telecles, worked in conjunction with Rhoecus, son of Phileas, though he
was, perhaps, a younger contemporary, and that the main period of their
artistic activity fell about 580-541 B.C. K. O. Miiller and L. Urlichs,
on the other hand, held that there were two Samian artists named Theo-
dorus, and that Rhoecus was the father of one of them, thus : —

Rhoecus

I



I I

Theodorus 1 Telecles

Theodorus II.

Urlichs thought that the date of Rhoecus was before Ol. 40 (620 B.C.) ;
that of his sons before 01. 50 (580 B.C.) ; and that of the second Theo-
dorus before 01. 60 (540 B.C.)

See K. O. Miiller, handbuch d, Archdol. d. Runsl, § 60 ; Brunn, GescA, d.
griech, Kunstler^ I. pp. 30-38; iV/., 2. pp. 380-390; id,^ *Die Kunst bei Homer,*
Abhandl. d, k, bayer, Akad, d. Wissen. (Munich), Philosoph.-philolog. CI. II (1868),
iii. Abtheil. pp. 29-43 » ^'* * Zur Chronologic der altesten griech. Klinstler,'
Sittungsberichte d, kdn, bayer, Akad. d, JVissen, (Munich), Philos.-philolog. CI. I
(1 871), pp. 517-542; L. Urlichs, 'Ueber die alteste samische KUnstlerschule,'
Rkeinisches Museum^ N.F. 10 (1856), pp. 1-29; id., Skopas, pp. 228-259;
C. Bursian, in Fleckeisen^s Jahrbiicher, 2 (1856), p. 509 sqq, ; C. T. Newton,
Essays on Art and Archaeology^ p. 74 sq, ; W. Klein, in Archaeologische-epi-
graphische Mittheiltmgen azis Oesterreich- Ungam, 9 (1885), pp. 173- 191 ; Over-
beck, Gesck, d, griech, Plastik^^ I. pp. 77-80 ; Lucy M. Mitchell, History of
Ancient Sculpture, p. 198 sq, ; A. S. Murray, Hist, of Greek Sculpture^^ I.
pp. 75-83 ; M. Collignon, Histoire de la Sculpture grecque^ 1, p. 154 sqq,

14. 8. the emerald signet which Polycrates wore etc. See

Herodotus, iii. 41. Theodorus made a bronze statue of himself at



238 THE RING OF POLYCRATES bk. viii. arcadia

Samos, holding a file in his right hand and a scarab in his left hand ;
the scarab was engraved with the design of a four-horse chariot (Pliny,
Nat, hist, xxxiv. 83). It is a plausible conjecture that the gem thus
represented in the sculptor's hand was no other than the £Eunous seal
which he had made for Polycrates, and that the scarab itself was one of
the gifts which we know were sent to Polycrates by his friend Amasis,
king of Egypt. See Herodotus, ii. 182 ; A. S. Murray, History of
Greek Sculpture^ i. p. 78. Clement of Alexandria, however, says that
the seal used by Polycrates was inscribed with a lyre {Paedag, iii. 59,
p. 289, ed. Potter); and according to another interpretation of Pliny
(/.r.) what Theodorus held in his left hand was not a scarab, but a
minute model of a chariot (E. Gardner, Handbook of Greek Sculpture^
I. p. 100). In the temple of Concord at Rome a sardonyx set in gold
was shown to the credulous as the ring of Polycrates (Pliny, Nat, hist,
xxxviii. 4). Cp. J. H. Middleton, The engraved gems of Classical Times^
p. 69 sq.

The story that Polycrates flung the signet-ring into the sea and that
it was afterwards found in the belly of a flsh which a fisherman brought
to the king (Herodotus, iii. 41 sq,\ is a folk-tale to which there are many
parallels.

See MUllenhoffy Sagen^ Mdrchen und Lieder der Herzogthiimer Schieswig
HolsUin und Lauenberg^ p. 134, No. 178 ; Panzer, Beitrag zur deutschen Mythth
logicy 2. p. 194, No. 331 : J. \V. Wolf, Niederldtidische Sagen^ p. 246 sq.. No. 152 ;
A. Kuhn, Westfalische Sageut Gebrduche und Mdrchen^ i. p. 375 sq,^ Na 421 ;
Kuhn und Schwartz, NorddetUsche Sagen^ Mdrchen und Gtbrduthe, p. 303,
No. 347 ; F. Liebrecht, Gervasius von Tilbury ^ p. 77 note **.

14. 9. the sons of Actor. See v. 2. i note.

14. 10. the god whom the people of Pheneus most revere is

Hermes. The worship of Hermes at Pheneus is mentioned by Cicero
{Dc natura deorumy iii. 22. 56). Cp. Paus. v. 27. 8 ; Kaibel, Epigram-
maia Graeca^ No. 781 ; Immerwahr, Die arkadischen Kulte^ p. 80 sqq.
An inscription found at Olympia in 1877 records that a certain
Acestorides of Alexandria Troas had won a victory in the games at
Pheneus as well as at other places (Z>/V Inschriften von Olympia, No. 184).
The games of Pheneus to which the inscription refers are probably the
Hermaea mentioned by Pausanias.

14. 10. an Athenian, Euchir, son of Enbulides. Inscriptions
from the pedestals of statues by this sculptor have been found. He
seems to have flourished in the middle of the second century B.C., and
to have belonged to a family of sculptors in which the names Euchir and
Eubulides alternated from father to son. See Loewy, Inschriften gricch,
Bildhauer, Nos. 222-229; Overbeck, Schriftquellen, ^ 2235-2244;
Brunn, Gesch, d, griech, Kunstler, i. p. 551 sq,\ G. Hirschfeld, in
Archdologischc Zeitungy 30 (1873), PP- 25-29. His name occurs in an
inscription on the south substruction-wall of the temple of Apollo at
Delphi (Wescher et Foucart, Inscriptions reaieillies a Delphes, No. 18,
line 73 ; Dittenberger, Sylloge Inscr, Graec, No. 198). Cp. note on
i. 2. 5.

14. 10. Myrtilus. For the story of Myrtilus, his treachery, and



CH. XV SMITING THE GROUND 239

his death, see Apollodorus, ed. R. Wagner, p. 184 sq,\ Epitoma VcUi-
cana ex Apollodori Bibliotheca^ ed. R. Wagner, p. 59 sq, ; Tzetzes, Schol,
on Lycophron^ 156; Schol. on Euripides, Orestes^ 990. Cp. Index.

15. 2. certain writmgs which bear on the mysteries. As to
sacred books about the mysteries, see Lobeck, Aglaophamus, P- I93 ^99*

15. 3. Demeter Oidaria. The epithet Cidaria may be derived
from kidaris^ a kind of head-dress or tiara (Hesychius, j.t/. Kt6a/3is), or
from kidaris^ an Arcadian dance (Athenaeus, xiv. p. 63 1 ).

15. 3. this mask the priest pnts on his £Eu;e and smites the

Undergronnd Folk with rods. By wearing the mask of Demeter the
priest clearly acted as a representative or personification of the goddess.
Such personifications of a deity by a priest or other human being have
been common in the religious ceremonies of various peoples, notably of
the ancient Mexicans. The priestess of Athena at Pellene on certain
occasions wore armour and a triple-crested helmet, doubtless to represent
the goddess herself (Polyaenus, viii. 59). Cp. Paus. vii. 18. 12 ; Fr.
Back, De Graecorum caerimoniis in quibus homines deorum ince funge-
^<>»/i/r (Berlin, 1883). On the use of masks in religious ceremonies,
see W. H. Dall, *• On masks, labrets, and certain aboriginal customs,'
Third Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 1884),
pp. 73-151. As the priest, in the ceremony described by Pausanias,
played the part of Demeter, the goddess of the com, it may be con-
jectured that when he smote the ground with rods the intention was to
promote the fertility of the soil. This interpretation of the custom is
supported by analogous customs elsewhere. The Guarayos, a peaceful
agricultural tribe of Indians living secluded in the vast forests of eastern
Bolivia, worship a god whom they call Tamoi (* grandfather'). He
once lived among them, taught them to till the ground, and promised
them his aid. Then he soared away toward the east, while the angels
beat with bamboos on the ground, because the sound was pleasing to
him. In memory of his divine promises the Guarayos perform a certain
ceremony at the sacred hut. The men sit and beat on the ground with
bamboos, chanting hynms in which they ask Tamoi to give them a
plentiful crop or a genial rain. The women stand behind and join their
voices to those of the men. The ceremony ends with libations. See
D'Orbigny, Vhomvie AmMcain, 2. pp. 319 J^., 329 sq,\ Von Martius,
Zur Ethnographie Amerikds^ p. 218. At the Jewish harvest -festival
the people beat on the ground with bundles of willow-withs till all the
leaves were stripped off. During the festival water from the brook
Siloam mixed with wine was poured on the ground, and there was a
tradition that these ceremonies had reference to the wished-for rainfall
before seed-time and to a fruitful year. See W. Mannhardt, Baum-
kuitusy p. 283. In many parts of Europe it has been and still is
customary to beat the fruit-trees in order to make them bear well. For
example, in Sussex and Devon it is or used to be the custom on New
Year's Eve for a troop of boys to go round the orchards rapping the
trees with sticks and singing :



240 BEANS FORBIDDEN bk. viii. arcadia

Stand fast root, bear well top,

Pray God send us a good howling-crop ;

Every twig, apples big ;

Every bough, apples enou ;

Hats full, caps full.

Full quarter sacks fulL

See Brand's Popular Antiquities^ i- P« 9 sq, (Bohn's ed.) For other
examples, see Mannhardt, Baumkultus^ P* 275 sqq. Among the Zulus
the diviner causes the persons who consult him to smite the ground with
rods while he questions them (Callaway, The Religious System of the
Amazuluy 3. p. 284 sqq. ; Grout, Zulu-land^ pp. 138, 141 sq,^ I57)- But
this custom probably belongs to a different class from those cited above.
Hera smote the ground with her hands when she prayed to Earth and
the gods of the under- world (Homer, Hymn to Apollo^ 332 sqq.) ; this
was doubtless to attract their attention. It is said that in Lincolnshire
the people used to go out every spring and wake the earth from its
winter sleep by lifting a little earth from the molehills in all the fields
{Folklore^ 2 (1891), p. 261). Perhaps the intention of the custom here
described by Pausanias was to attract the attention of the earth-spirits
by knocking on the ground.

15. 4. they think it an nnclean kind of pnlse. In the Eleusinian
mysteries (of which the rites at Pheneus were an exact copy) the
initiated were forbidden to eat beans (Porphyry, De adstinentin, iv. 16).
According to Herodotus (ii. 37) the Eg^tians did not eat beans, and
the priests would not even look at them. Cp. Plutarch, Qjuaest. Conviv.
viii. 8. 2. Diodorus, on the other hand, only says (i. 89) that some of
the Egyptians would not eat beans. At Rome the Flamen Dialis was
forbidden to touch or even name beans (Aulus Gellius, x. 1 5 ; Festus,
s.v. fabam^ p. 87, ed. M tiller ; Pliny, Nat. hist, xviii. 119). Pythagoras,
we are told, forbade his followers to eat beans (Plutarch, De educ.
puer. 17 ; id.^ Quaest. Rom. 95 ; Diogenes Laertius, viii. §§ 24, 33 j^. ;
Jamblichus, Vit. Pythag. 109; Porphyry, Vit. Pythag. 43; Lucian,
Vit. auct. 6 ; id.y Dial, niort. xx. 3 ; /V/., G alius ^ 4 ; Hippol>'tus,
Refill, omn. haeres. vi. 27 ; Joannes Lydus, De viensibus^ iv. 29 ; Geo-
ponica^ ii. 35 ; Cicero, De divin. i. 30. 62 and ii. 58. 119 ; Pliny, Nat.
hist, xviii. 118). On the other hand, Aristoxenus, a pupil of Aristotle,
asserted that Pythagoras approved of beans as food and ate them
largely (Aulus Gellius, iv. 11). In general we are told that persons
who had to observe rules of ceremonial purity abstained from beans
(Plutarch, Quaest. Rom. 95), that such abstinence was enjoined by the
celebrants of mystic rites (Diogenes Laertius, viii. 33), and that beans
were excluded from every mystic rite and every sanctuary (Artemidorus,
Onirocr. i. 68). In particular, persons who wished to receive an orade
in a dream abstained from beans, because beans were supposed to be
unfavourable to dreaming (Plutarch, Quaest. Conviv. viii. 10. 2 ; Geo-
ponica^ ii. 35). A verse, attributed to Orpheus, was often quoted, to
the effect that to eat beans was equal to eating the heads of one's
parents (Geoponica^ I.e. ; Joannes Lydus, De mensibus^ iv. 29 ; Eusta-
thius, on Homer, p. 948 ; cp. Sextus Empiricus, 'YTroTVjr. iii. p. 174, ed.



CH. XV SUPERSTITIOirS ABOUT BEANS 241

Bekker ; Lucian, Callus^ 4 ; wT., Died, mart, xx. 3). To explain the rule
of abstinence from beans many fanciful reasons were alleged. It was
said that the souls of the dead were in beans (Pliny, Nat. hist, xviii.
118); that the flower of the bean was marked with letters of woe
(Festus, Lc. ; Pliny, Nat. hist, xviii. 119 ; Geoponica, ii. 35) ; that beans
resembled the genital organs (Diogenes Laertius, viii. § 34 ; Lucian,
Vit. auct. 6), etc Yet we find beans employed by the ancients in a
number of religious and magical rites. The Attic festival of Pyanepsia
took its name from the boiled beans which were prepared and eaten at
it (Plutarch, Theseus^ 22 ; Harpocration, s.v. Ilvavo^ia ; Suidas, s.v.
IIvave^Kuvos ; Eustathius, on Homer, p. 948). On the first of June
the Romans offered beans and the fat of bacon to the goddess Cama,
and the worshippers partook of these dishes ; it was believed that
nothing could afterwards hurt the inside of a man who had eaten beans
and bacon on that day (Macrobius, Saturn, i. 12. 33 ; Ovid, Fasti^ vi.
169 sqq.") A porridge made of beans was offered to the gods at certain
public sacrifices (Festus, s.v. Refriva fabra, p. 277, ed. Miiller). On
the first of March the Romans smeared each other's faces with the
juice of beans (Joannes Lydus, De mensibus^ iv. 29). Black beans
were also offered to the dead at the Roman festivals of the Paren-
talia and Feralia in February (Ovid, Fasti^ ii. 576; Pliny, Nat. hist.
xviii. 118; Plutarch, Q^aest. Rom. 95). Joannes Lydus {I.e.) says
that beans were thrown into the graves. This probably refers to
the Feralia. Again, at the Roman festival of the Lemuria in May
each householder threw black beans behind his back, saying, "With
these beans I redeem myself and my family." The ghosts of the
family were supposed to gather up the beans. Then the house-
holder clashed a pair of cymbals and begged the ghosts to leave the
house, saying, " Go forth, ye spirits of my fathers." See Ovid, Fasti, v.
436 sqq. Diviners placed beans and salt before the persons who came
to inquire of them (Zenobius, i. 25 ; Diogenianus, i. 50; Gregorius
Cyprius, i. 11). At harvest the Romans seem to have brought back a
bean or beans to the house for the purpose of a sacrifice at which omens
were taken (Festus, s.v. Refriva fabra j Pliny, Nat. hist, xviii. 119). It
was thought lucky to take beans with one to auctions (Pliny, I.e.)

15. 5. the road that leads from Fheneus to Pellene. This road
probably followed the valley of the Phoniatiko river, which extends in a
north-easterly direction, terminating at Karya, a village inhabited only
in summer, near the source of the river. The valley narrows as you
proceed northward ; its sides are partly wooded with pines. The dis-
tance of Karya from Pheneus {Phonia) is about 10 miles. At Karya
the road bifurcates ; the branch to the right leads south-eastward over
a ridge which protrudes northward from Mt. Cyllenc and which is
perhaps the Mt. Chelydorea of Pausanias (viii. 17.5 note). This road
takes us to Trikala, from which we follow the valley of the Sys or
Sythas downward to Pellene. See Leake, Morea, 3. p. 141 ; Philippson,
Peloponnes, p. 126. As to Trikala sec above, note on vii. 27. 9, *the
Mysaeum.'

15. 5. a temple of Pythian Apollo. Boblaye thought that this

VOL. IV R



242 MOUNT CRATHIS bk. viii. arcadia

temple must have been opposite the site of Goura, a modem village
standing high up on the slope of the hills on the east side of the
Phoniatiko river, about 2 J miles north-east of Phonia (Boblaye,
Recherchesy p. 154 ^^. ; cp. Philippson, Peloponnes^ p. 126).

15. 6. Elephenor who led the Euboeans to Biom. See Homer,
//. iv. 463 sq,

15. 6. he had previously been knocked on the head by Amphi-
tryo etc. See ix. 19. 3.

15. 8. Porinas. This has been variously supposed to be a small
branch of the upper river Phoniatiko^ descending into it from Mt
Cyllene (Leake, Morea^ 3. p. 142) ; or a, co/ or pass (Boblaye, Recherches^
p. 1 54) ; or a height above the modem village of Karya (Curtius, Pelop,
I. p. 194; Bursian, Geo^r, 2. p. 201).

15. 8-9. Mount Crathis. In this mountain are the springs of
the river Crathis. The river Crathis is the modem Akraia^ as is
proved by Pausanias's statement that the Styx flowed into it (viii. 1 8. 4),
for the Styx flows into the Akrata a little way below the village oi Solos,
The sources of the river are on the northem slopes of a high, double-
peaked, and beautifully-wooded mountain which rises to the north-west
of the hill of Phonia, The mountain takes its modem name from
Zarouchla, a village which stands embowered in the most luxuriant
vegetation at the northem foot of the mountain, and at the head of the
deep narrow valley of the Crathis. It follows that the mountain of
Zarouchla is the ancient Mount Crathis. The route from Pheneus to
the glen of the Styx crosses Mount Crathis to Zarouchla^ passing the
monastery of St. George, which is delightfully situated on the wooded
southem slope of the mountain. See below, note on viii. 17. 6.

Others, however, have preferred to identify Mount Crathis with the
high mountain, very steep and barren, which rises behind H, Varvara
(Santa Barbara), a large village on the right bank of the Crathis. A
stream descends from the mountain beside the village to join the Crathis ;
but it can hardly be regarded as the head- water of the river, since
Zarouchla is undoubtedly at the head of the valley and H, Varvara is
half an hour's ride lower down it. From this it follows that the moun-
tain of Zarouchla^ not the mountain of H, Varvara^ is the ancient
Mount Crathis.

See Leake, Morea, 3. pp. 150 sq,y 157 sqq. ; Boblaye, RechercheSy p. i^sq. ;
Baedeker,' p. 304 ; Guide-Joanne, 2. p. 384 sq.

15. 9. to fetch fire from the sanctuary for the Lemaean

rites. On the custom of fetching a new fire from a sacred source, see
voL 2. p. 392 sq,

16. I. To the east of Pheneus there is a mountain-top called
Geronteum etc. To the east of the valley and lake of Pheneus lie the
valley and lake of Stymphalus. The two lakes are only divided by the
high ridge which running north and south connects Mt. Cyllene with
Mt. Skipiezay or rather with that northem spur of the latter which seems
to have been called Mt. Sciathis (see viii. 14. i note). This ridge or
some part of it was probably Mount Geronteum.



CH. XVI PHENEUS TO STYMPHALUS 243

Two roads lead from Pheneus to Stymphalus. The more northerly
of the two crosses the valley of the Phoniatiko river in a north-easterly
direction to the village of Goura, From here it ascends the ridge of a
mountain (4300 feet high), which bends in a semicircle round the west
and south-west sides of Mt. Cyllene, being divided from it by a long
narrow upland valley. This great outwork, as it were, of Cyllene is
perhaps the Sepia of Pausanias (see § 2). After crossing the ridge the
path runs through the valley, shut in between the towering mass of
Cyllene on the left and its neighbour mountain on the right. We pass
through the villages of Bast and Kionia^ and reach the ruins of Stym-
phalus in 3 hours 40 minutes from Phonia,

The more southerly route is rather shorter, and is the one generally
taken. Traversing the plain of Pheneus, with its vineyards and maize-
fields, we cross the broad gravelly bed of the Phoniatiko river and reach
the village of Mosa at the north-eastern side of the lake. The path now
gradually ascends the mountain and winds through pine -forest high
above the margin of the lake. It is often exceedingly narrow, and the
descent to the lake on the right very steep. The views of the blue
waters of the lake, seen far below framed between the trunks of the
pines, are very beautiful. The summit of the ridge is said to be some
4000 or 5000 feet above the sea. On reaching it we lose sight of the
lake of Pheneus, and begin to descend towards the valley of Stymphalus,
which does not, however, appear as yet. The descent is long, steep,
stony, and tortuous. On our right (south) a huge mountain slope,
covered with pine-forest, soars high above us. It may be Mt. Sciathis
or Mt. Geronteum. On the left (north) we see the summer village of
Kastania^ prettily situated among trees on the slope of the opposite
mountain, but so near that the sound of a church bell ringing in it
can be heard across the valley. Finally the path leads down to a water-
course, the broad dry bed of which it follows for some way to the winter
village (Kalyvid) of Kastania^ which lies at the extreme west end of the
valley of Stymphalus, just at the foot of the mountains. Hence the path
runs, first through a shady green lane between vineyards, and then across
fields of maize to the edge of the lake of Stymphalus. The time from
Phonia to the ruins of Stymphalus by this route is 3 hours 25 minutes.

See Pouqueville, Voyage de la GricCy $. p. 320 sqq, ; Dodwell, Tour^ 2. p. 435
sqq, ; Gcll, Journey in the Morea, p. 380 sqq. ; id.. Itinerary of the Morea,
pp. 148 j^., 154; Leake, Morea, 3. p. 1145^^. ; Curtius, Pehp, I. p. 199 J^. ;
Welcker, Tagelmch, i. p. 303 sq. ; Beul^, Etudes sur le Piloponnese, p. 157 :
W. G. Clark, Pelop. p. 319 sqq. ; Vischer, Erinnerungen^ p. 490 sq. ; Baedeker,'
p. 304 ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 386 sq. ; PhiUppson, Pelopomtes, p. 126. I followed
the southern route from Pheneus to Stymphalus (but in the reverse direction) in
September 1895, and have described it from my own observation. But the times
of both routes are taken from the Guide-Joanne.

16. I. Tricrena ('three fonntains ')• 'Hie < three fountains' are
identified by Beul^ and the writer of the Guide-Joanne with three tiny
rills which descend the bare rocks on the eastern side of Mt. Geronteum
to form the stream which feeds the swampy lake of Stymphalus. Since
Pausanias, going eastward, says that Mt. Tricrena was on the left (north)



244 TOMB OF AEPYTUS bk. viii. arcadia

of Mt Geronteum, it would appear that the name Tricrena was given to
a part of the ridge between Mt Geronteum on the south and Mt. Sepia
on the north. See Leake, Morea^ 3. p. 116; Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 199 ;
Beul^, Etudes sur le P^loponntse^ p. 157 ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 387.

16. 2. Here Aepytns is said to have been MUed by tbe

snake. The species of snake was called seps. See viii. 4. 7. Hence
the mountain seems to have taken its name (Sepia) from these snakes.
In the mountains to the west of Cyllene a peasant told BeuM a story of
a prince who had been killed by the bite of a serpent and buried on the
mountain with all his treasures (Beul^, £tudes sur le P/loponn^sey
p. 179 sg.)

16. 3. Homer mentions the tomb. See Iliad, ii. 604. The
*' large tumulus, surrounded and sustained by a circular wall of rough
stones," which Gell proposed to identify with the tomb of Aepytus, can-
not possibly be the one described by Pausanias ; for whereas the latter
was somewhere at the south-western foot of Mt. Cyllene, the tumulus
seen by Gell was away to the east of the Stymphalian lake, on the road
to Phlius. The tumulus observed by Gell had been cut into on both
sides, and it occurred to Gell that perhaps the excavations had been
directed by Pausanias. But the antiquaries who made these excava-
tions were more probably of the Dousterswivel than of the Oldbuck sort
See Gell, Itinerary of the Morea, p. 1 68 sq, ; /V/., Itinerary of Greece,
p. 72 ; id», Journey in the Morea, p. 384 sq,

16. 3. the dance wrought by Hephaestns etc. See Homer, //.
xviii. 590 sqq, ; Paus. ix. 40. 3 note.

16. 4. one at Halicamassos etc. The site of the Yimous Mauso-
leum at Halicamassus, which the ancients reckoned one of the seven
wonders of the world (Strabo, xiv. p. 656 ; Pliny, Nat, hist, xxxvi. 30
sq,'y Vitruvius, ii. 8. 11 ; Lucian, Dial, inort, xxiv.), was discovered
by the English expedition sent out in 1856 under the direction of
the late Sir C. T. Newton. The precious remains of the Mausoleum,
including the Amazon frieze and the colossal statue of Mausolus himself,
are now in the British Museum. See Sir C. T. Newton, Travels and
discoveries in the Levant, 2. p. 84 sqq, ; and his article * Mausoleum,* in
Smith's Diet, of Gr, and Rom, Antiquities,^

16. 4- Mausolns, king of that city. Ancient writers often speak
of Mausolus as a king. See Strabo, xiv. p. 656 ; Cicero, Tusc, iii.
31. 75 ; Vitruvius, ii. 8. 10; Lucian, Dial, mort, xxiv; Polyaenus, vii.
23. Pliny speaks of him {NcU. hist, xxxvi. 30) as * petty king * {regulus)
of Caria. Diodorus (xv. 90 ; xvi. 7 and 36) describes him as * dynast
of Caria.* Aulus Gellius, however, mentions (x. 18. i) that by some
Greek historians Mausolus was described as lieutenant-governor {satrap)
only ; and that his authorities were right is proved by inscriptions found
at Mylasa, which speak of Mausolus as holding the office of satrap
{k^aidpairtvovro^) in the reign of Artaxerxes, king of Persia. See
Froehner, Inscr. grecques du Lotivre, No. 96 ; Dittenberger, Sylloge
Inscr, Graec, No. 76 ; Hicks, Greek historical Inscriptions, No. 10 1 ;
Cauer, Delectus Inscr, Graec,^ Nos. 492-494. An inscription of
Erythrae, recording a decree of the senate and people of Erythrae in



CH. XVII MOUNT CYLLENE 245

honour of Mausolus, has been restored so as to describe Mausolus as
king, thus :

M]aixn7'€t>AAo[v *E]icar[o/Ava> j^ocriXJca.

But perhaps, as Mr. Foucart and Pro£ Dittenberger have proposed, the
inscription should be restored thus :

M]avovft)XAo[v *E]KOT[o/4va) MvAoirJeou

For Mausolus was a native of Mylasa (Vitruvius, ii. 8. 11). See Hicks,
op, cit. No. 102 ; Dittenberger, op, cit. No. 84 ; Bulletin de Corresp.
fulUn, 5(1881), p. 503. It is possible, however, that, after his revolt
from Artaxerxes, Mausolus may have assumed the title of king. This is
made the more probable by an inscription of Amorgos which, as restored
by Mr. R. Weil, contained the words [cttI j3a]a-i\ca)s M[avar(oXXoi;]. See
Mittheil, d, arch, Inst, in Athen^ i (1876), p. 3 '2 sq,

17. I. Monnt Oyllene, the highest mountain in Arcadia. Mount
Cyllene, a grand pyramidal mountain of reddish- grey rock, which is
clearly visible even from Attica, is the highest mountain in Arcadia, as
Pausanias correctly says. Its height, as determined by the French
survey, is 2374 metres (7789 feet), which is only about 60 feet more
than that of its neighbour on the west, Mt Chelmos (the ancient
Aroanius), whose height, according to the French survey, is 2355
metres (7726 feet). These two mountains are, with the exception of
Mt St, Elias in Laconia (2409 metres = 7903 feet), the highest peaks
in Peloponnese. Snow lies on the summit of Cyllene for about eight
months of the year. The mountain is easily ascended in three and a
half hours from Trikala^ a village on the north side (see above, p.
184 ^^.) On the summit Mr. Peytier found no traces of the temple of
Hermes mentioned by Pausanias. See ^c^Xx^^ Recherches^ p. 154;
Philippson, Peloponnes^ pp. 122-124, 138- 141.

17. I. Elatns. See viii. 4, ^ 2, 4, 6. The name Elatus perhaps
means * fir-man,' from elati (ikdrrj), a * fir-tree.* Fir-trees seem to have
been as plentiful on Cyllene and the neighbouring mountains in antiquity
as they are now, for Theophrastus (//ist. plant, v. 4. 6) speaks of the
bridges of fir-wood made by the people of Pheneus. The western and
higher mass of Cyllene is indeed treeless on the north side, but the
eastern mass is clothed with fir- woods up to the height of 5000 feet and
more (Philippson, Peloponnes^ p. 124). Describing the mountain as
seen from the south-east, Mr. W. G. Clark says : " Where all other
vegetation has ceased, a scattered forest of black pines has rooted itself
in the grey limestone. From among the pines rises an irregular cone,
utterly bare" (^Peloponnesus^ p. 324).

17. 2. The kinds of wood out of which men of old made images
etc According to Theophrastus {Hist, plant, v. 3. 7) the woods out of
which images were carved were the varieties of cedar, cypress, lotus,
and boxwood ; smaller images were also made of olive -roots. Pau-
sanias often mentions images made of various kinds of wood. See ii.
17.5 (image of Hera made of the wood of the wild pear) ; ii. 30. 4
(images of Damia and Auxesia of olive-wood); iiL 14. 7 (image of



246 WOODS FOR MAKING IDOLS bk. viii. arcadia

Aesculapius of agnus wood) ; iii. 15. 11 (image of Aphrodite Morpho of
cedar-wood) ; vi. 1 8. 7 (statues of athletes of fig-wood and cypress-
wood) ; ix. 10. 2 (image of Ismenian Apollo of cedar-wood). We
should naturally expect the image of a god to be made of the tree
which was sacred to him, and which at an earlier time may, in some
cases, have been regarded as the god himself. Thus the image of
Aesculapius was made out of his sacred tree (iii. 14. 7). But other
considerations, such as the beauty or durability of the particular kind of
wood, may have determined the image-maker to carve a god out of it.
Thus the different sorts of wood here mentioned by Pausanias are all
(except the yew) reckoned by Theophrastus among the woods which are
least apt to rot {Hist, plant, v. 4. 2 ; cp. Pliny, Nat, hist. xvi. 2 1 3).
The image of Artemis at Ephesus was generally said to be of ebony,
but the Consul Mucianus affirmed that it was of vine-wood (Pliny, I.e.)
The image of Artemis dedicated by Xenophon in the little temple on
his estate was of cypress-wood {Anab. v. 3. 12), which Theophrastus
{I.e.) considered to be the most durable of all woods (compare what
Pausanias says, vi. 18. 7). The comic poet Hermippus spoke of
cypress- wood exported from Crete "for the gods " (Athenaeus, i. p. 27 f),
meaning perhaps that images were carved out of it. In Rome there
was an old image of Veiovis made of cypress-wood (Pliny, Nat. hist. xvi.
216). Two images of Queen Juno made of cypress-wood were carried
in procession through the streets of Rome in 207 B.C. (Livy, xxvi. 37).
Cp. Hehn, Kulturpflansen und Hausthiere^^ p. 229 sq. (p. 213 sq.^ Engl,
trans.) Pliny mentions that cedar- wood, on account of its durability,
was used to make images of. The image of Sosian Apollo at Rome,
which had been brought from Seleucia, was of cedar-wood. See Pliny,
Nat. hist. xiii. 5 3. Pausanias twice mentions images of cedar-wood (see
above) ; and the wooden image of Artemis in the great cedar-tree at
Orchomenus may also have been of cedar-wood (viii. 12. 2). But it
must be remembered that under the name cedar (kcS/jos) the Greeks
sometimes included the juniper or some species of it. See Theophrastus,
Hist, plant, iii. 13. 3; Pliny, Nat. hist. xvi. 52; Fiedler, Reisc^ i.
p. 516 sq.\ Neumann und Partsch, Physikalisehe Geographie von
Griechenland, p. 368 sq. The Juniperus oxyeedrus^ which grows in
Peloponnese, Euboea, and on Helicon, is still called by the Greeks
* cedar ' (kcS/oos) ; its wood is fragrant, does not rot easily, and resists
the ravages of insects (Fiedler, I.e.) Some of the images described
above as of cedar-wood may have been really of juniper. On the
woods used for making images, see C. Botticher, Baumkultus^ P» 2 1 5 sqq.
As to the word which I have translated *yew,* see note on iv. 26. 7.
Among the Damaras of South Africa each totem-clan has a particular
tree or shrub sacred to it ; and the image of the household deity, who is
a deceased parent or ancestor, consists of two pieces of the wood of that
particular tree or shrub (C. J. Anderson, Lake Ngami, p. 228 sq.)

17. 2. janiper. The Greek word is thuon {Ovov). According
to Theophrastus {Hist, plant, v. 3. 7) the tree was called either thuon
or thuaj it grew in the oasis of Jupiter Ammon and in the district of
Cyrene. Theophrastus describes it as resembling the cypress (especially



CH. XVII WHITE BLACKBIRDS 247

the wild cypress) in branches, leaves, stem, and fruit ; its wood did not
rot readily. Pliny {Nat, hist, xiii. 100) identified it with the tree which the
Romans called citrus. See Liddell and Scott's Lexicon^ s,v, Qvia,

17. 3* the blackbirds there are white all over. The white
blackbirds of Mt. Cyllene are first mentioned by Aristotle. He says
{Hist, anim, ix. 19. p. 617 a 11 sqq,)\ "There are two kinds of black-
birds. One is black and is found everywhere. The other is quite white and
as big as the other, and its notes are similar ; it is found on Cyllene in
Arcadia, but nowhere else." Again, the author of the De mirab, auscul-
tationibus (who may be Aristotle) says, § 15 (14) : "They say that on
Cyllene in Arcadia, but nowhere else, the blackbirds are white, and
utter varied notes, and come forth to the moon ; but if any one makes
an attempt on them by day, they are extremely hard to catch." The
while blackbirds of Cyllene are also mentioned by Aelian (Nat, anim, v.
27) on the authority of Sostratus ; by Pliny {Nat, hist, x. 87) ; and by
Eustathius (on Homer, p. 300). Eustathius clearly copies from the
De mirab, auscult, Priscian {Periegesis^ 415) mentions white blackbirds
in Arcadia. With regard to the alleged white blackbirds of Cyllene, I
asked Professor Alfred Newton whether, considering that snow lies on
Mt. Cyllene the greater part of the year, it was possible that a breed of
white blackbirds might have been produced there by natural selection,
the white colour acting as a protection, as in the case of the white-furred
and white-feathered creatures of the Arctic regions. I have to thank
Prof. Newton for his courteous answer. After pointing out (what
critics of Pausanias, myself included, appear to have overlooked hitherto)
that the statement about the white blackbirds is to be traced to
Aristotle, he wrote : " It may easily have happened that a white Black-
bird, or more than one, may have been reported to Aristotle from
Cyllene, and he, not having heard of one from elsewhere, may have been
justified in saying that it was the only place where such a lusus occurred.
I should prefer this interpretation to thinking that there was a particular
breed or race of white Blackbirds on this mountain — though I will not
deny the possibility of there having been such a thing, for albinism is
commonly transmitted and would doubtless more often become heredi-
tary, did it not carry with it the heavy penalty of making the albino or
albinescent animal so conspicuous as to become the easy prey of his
predatory fellow -creatures — i,e, under ordinary circumstances, for of
course there are the exceptional cases of such fur or feathers acting as a
protection by assimilating the wearer's colour to snow."

17. 3. the lake of Tantalus. See note on v. 13. 7, vol. 3. p. 555.

17. 5. Chelydorea. This is probably Mavron Oros (* Black
Mountain '), the high, precipitous, fir-clad mountain to the north of the
modem village of Karya, Its modem name is derived from the almost
perpendicular precipices of dark rock which descend on its east, north,
and west sides, giving the mountain a very imposing appearance. From
the northem side of the mountain the torrent of Zacholi descends
through a savage and wooded glen to the sea. Leake suggested that
Chelydorea might perhaps be the ridge which protmdes northward
from Cyllene in the direction of Karya^ but on the south side of that



248 PHENEUS TO NONACRIS bk. viii. arcadia

village. See Leake, Morea^ 3. pp. 141, 220 sq, ; Boblaye, Recherches^
p. 18 ; Curtius, Pelap, i. p. 200 ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 398 ; Philippson,
Peloponnes^ p. 124 sq,

17. 6. the road to the left leads to the city of Olitor. This
road is described below, from 19. 4 to 21. i.

17. 6. the road to the right leads to Nonacris and the water of
the Styx. The route from Pheneus to the Styx, at least so far as the
modem village of Zarouchla at the head of the valley of the Crathis, is
one of the most beautiful in all Greece. The grandeur of the mountains,
the richness of the vegetation, the fragrance and charm of the pine-
forests, the distant views of the blue lake of Pheneus, all contribute to
render the impression which the day's journey leaves on the memory
one of the most agreeable that the traveller brings back with him from
Greece. From the lower village of Phama we ascend through the
luxuriant gardens and lanes of the village to the ridge which bounds
the plain of Pheneus on the north-west On reaching it, a magnificent
view westward of the mighty Mount Chelmos (the ancient Aroanius),
with its bare summit and pine-clad lower slopes, bursts upon us. The
mountain is seen rising above a deep basin-like valley, the bottom and
sides of which are clothed with the richest vegetation. High up on the
slope of the mountain to the north-west (Mount Crathis), among trees,
is the delightfully-situated monastery of St. George. Our path leads
down into the valley ; on the slope grow white poplars and cypresses,
and the ground is partly carpeted with ferns. From the bottom of the
valley, which is chiefly occupied by a charming grove of plane-trees, we
ascend through fine woods, mostly of oak, to the monastery of St. George.
Still ascending after we have passed the monastery, we plunge again
into a maze of beautiful woods and dense tangled thickets, threaded by
rills of sparkling water. Vegetation of such rank luxuriance is rarely
met with in Greece. On emerging from these delightful woodlands we
traverse, always ascending, a stretch of bare bushy slopes which inter-
venes between the verdant glades below and the sombre pine-forests
higher up. When these slopes are passed, we enter the pine-forest,
through which our way now goes for several hours. Few things can
be more delightful than this ride through the pine-woods. It was a
bright October day when I passed through them on my way to Solos;
in many places the forest was carpeted with ferns, now turned yellow,
and between the tree-trunks we could see across the valley the great
slopes of Mount Cyllene, of a glowing purple in the intense sunlight
From time to time, too, we had views backward over the blue waters
of the lake of Pheneus embosomed in its dark pine-clad mountains.
Added to all this were the delicious odour of the pines and the freshness
and exhilaration of the air at a height of about 6000 feet. But the
culmination of beauty, so far as distant views go, is reached on the
summit of the ridge, before we begin to descend the northern slope
towards Zarouchla. On the one side, toward the south-east, we look
back to the lake of Pheneus and the great mountains which encircle it,
Mount Cyllene above all. On the other side, toward the north-west, we
look down into the long narrow valley of the river Crathis, hemmed in



CH. XVII PHENEUS TO NONACRIS 249

on either hand by high mountains, above which soars the bare sharp
peak of Mount Chelmos on the south, while at the ferther end of the
valley the view is closed by the blue Acamanian mountains across the
Gulf of Corinth. From the ridge we now descend through the forest
by a steep winding stony path, till we reach the bed of a stream flowing
among romantic rocks and woods to join or rather to form, with other
streams, the Crathis. In the bottom of the valley the richness of the
vegetation even increases. We rode through thickets of planes, growing
as gp-eat bushes or small trees, so dense that we had constantly to stoop
to the horses' necks to prevent our faces from being brushed by the
branches. Other trees and plants, of which I did not know the names,
grew in profusion around us. And above all this Eden-like verdure of
woods and lanes and thickets shot up the huge sharp peaks of Chelmos
and its sister mountains, blue and purple in the sunlight. In this para-
dise lies the village of Zarouchla, The time from Phonia to Zarouchla
is a little under four hours. Beyond Zarouchla the path follows the
valley of the Crathis {Akrala\ keeping for the most part on the right
bank of the stream. The valley is very narrow, and is enclosed by
immense steep mountains, the sides of which, wherever it is practicable,
are terraced for vines or other cultivation. The Crathis, when I saw it
in October 1895, ^^^ ^ clear rushing stream, easily fordable at any
point. At first the path runs in the bottom of the valley through
tangled thickets. Here and there, where the valley is wide enough
to admit of it, a patch of maize is grown. But soon, as we
proceed, the valley contracts too much to allow even of this, and so
the path, often rough and difficult for horses, ascends and leads along
the barer mountain - side at some height above the stream. Thus
advancing we at last arrive opposite to the mouth of the deep glen
down which the Styx comes to join the Crathis on its left (western)
bank. Here we cross the Crathis and strike up the glen of the Styx.
The scenery of the profound and narrow glen is almost oppressively
grand. The mountains are immense and exceedingly massive ; above
they are bare and rocky ; but their lower slopes are terraced so as to
resemble gigantic staircases, and on the terraces are several very
picturesque villages, the houses scattered at different levels and em-
bowered among trees. At the upper end of the glen soars the mighty
cone of Mount Chelmos (Aroanius). The gp:andeur of the scenery,
which would otherwise be almost awful, is softened by the wonderful
luxuriance of the vegetation in the glen. The horse-chestnut trees
especially, with their enormous gnarled and knotted trunks, are a sight
to see. The nightingales are said to be very common here and to sing
from February to June. A long laborious ascent by a winding path
brings us to the prosperous village of Solos on the eastern side
of the glen. The villages on the opposite side of the glen, dispersed
over the terraced slopes, are Gounarianika^ Mesorougiy and Peristera.
Together the four villages form almost a single settlement, and as such
go by the name oi Kloukinaes, One of them probably occupies the
site of the ancient Nonacris. The time from Pheneus (^Phonia) to Solos
is about Ave and a half hours.



250 FALL OF THE STYX bk, viii. arcadia

I traversed this route, 1st October 1895, ^'^^ ha.\^ described it from my own
observation. See also Leake, Morea^ 3. pp. 156 sqq,^ 169 sq, ; Beul^, Jttudts sur
le Piloponnise^ p. 166 sqq. ; Vischer, Erinnerungen^ p. 489 sqq, ; W. G. Clark,
Peloponnesus J p. 311 sqq,\ Baedeker,' p. 304; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 384 sq. ;
Philippson, Peloponnes^ p. 132 sq,

17. 6. a high cliff the water of Styx. The village of Solos

stands, as we have seen, on the right bank of the Styx, near where that
stream falls into the Crathis. But the source of the stream is at the
head of the glen, some miles to the south, where the water tumbles or

• trickles, according to the season, over the smooth face of an immense

- perpendicular clifT, the top of which is not far below the conical summit
of Mount Chelmos (nearly 8000 feet high). The walk from Solos to
the foot of the fall and back is exceedingly fatiguing, and very few
travellers accomplish it ; most of them are content to view the fall from
a convenient distance through a telescope. In the first two miles or so
from Solos the path is practicable for horses, and travellers who are
resolved to make their way to the waterfall will do well to ride thus fer
and to have the horses waiting for them here on their return. It is
also necessary to take a guide or guides from Solos. The path winds
up the glen, keeping at first high on the right bank. The bed of the
stream is here prettily wooded with poplars and other trees and is
spanned by a bridge with a single high arch. For a considerable
distance above the village the water of the Styx, as seen from above,
appears to be of a clear light blue colour, with a tinge of green. This
colour, however, is only apparent, and is due to the slaty rocks, of a pale
gp-eenish-blue colour, among which the river flows. In reality the
water is quite clear and colourless. In about twenty minutes from
leaving the village we come in sight of the cliff over which the water of
the Styx descends. It is an immense cliff, absolutely perpendicular, a
little to the left or east of the high conical summit of Mount Cliehnos.

i The whole of this northern face of the mountain is in fact nothing but a
sheer and in places even overhanging precipice of grey rock — by far
the most awful line of precipices I have ever seen. The cliffs of Delphi,
grand and imposing as they arc, sink into insignificance compared with
the prodigious wall of rock in which Mount Chelnws descends on the
north into the glen of the Styx. The cliff down which the water comes
is merely the eastern and lower end of this huge wall of rock. Seen
from a distance it appears to be streaked perpendicularly with black
and red. The black streak marks the line of the waterfall, to which it
has given the modem name of Mavro-nero^ * the Black Water.' The
colour is produced by a dark incrustation which spreads over the
smooth face of the rock wherever it is washed by the falling water or
by the spray into which the water is dissolved before it reaches the

^ ground. In the crevices of the cliffs to the right and left of the fall
great patches of snow remain all the year through. I saw them and
passed close to the largest of them on a warm autumn day, after the
heat of summer and before the first snow of winter. In about twenty-
five minutes after leaving Solos we cross the Styx by a ford, and hence-
forward the route lies on the left or western bank of the streariL Five



CH. XVII FALL OF THE STYX 251

minutes from the ford bring us to a mill picturesquely situated among
trees, where a brook comes purling down a little glen wooded with
willows and plane-trees. Just above the mill the Styx tumbles over a
fine rocky linn in a roaring cascade. Beyond this point the steep slopes
of the hills on the opposite bank of the stream are covered with ferns,
which when I rode up the glen were tinged with the gold of autumn.
In front of us looms nearer and larger the cone of Mount Chelmos with
its long line of precipices. Ten or twelve minutes beyond the mill the
horses are left and the traveller sets forward on foot As we advance,
the glen grows wilder and more desolate, but for the first half-mile or
so it is fairly open, the track keeps close to the bed of the stream, and
there is no particular difficulty. A deep glen now joins the glen of the
Styx from the south-east. Here we begin to ascend the slope and cross
an artificial channel which brings down water to the mill. All pretence
of a path now ceases, and hencefonvard till we reach the foot of the
waterfall there is nothing for it but to scramble over rocks and to creep
along slopes often so steep and precipitous that to find a foothold or
handhold on them is not easy, and stretching away into such depths
below that it is best not to look down them but to keep the eyes fixed
on the gp'ound at one's feet. A stone set rolling down one of these
slopes will be heard rumbling for a long time, and the sound is echoed
and prolonged by the cliffs with such startling distinctness that at first
it sounds as if a rock were coming thundering down upon the wayfarer
from above. In the worst places the guides point out to the traveller
where to plant his feet and hold him up if he begins to slip. Shrubs,
tough grass, and here and there a stunted pine-tree give a welcome
hold, but on the steepest slopes they are wanting. The last slope up
to the foot of the cliff — a very long and steep declivity of loose gravel
which gives way at every step — is most fatiguing. As I was struggling
slowly up it with the guides, we heard the furious barking of dogs away
up the mountains on the opposite side of the glen. The barking came
nearer and nearer, and being echoed by the cliffs had a weird impressive
sound that suited well with the scene, as if hell-hounds were baying at
the strangers who dared to approach the infernal water. However,
the dogs came no nearer than the foot of the slope up which we were
clambering, and some shouts and volleys of stones served to keep them
at bay. At the head of this long slope of loose gravel we reach the
foot of the waterfall. The water, as I have indicated, descends the
smooth face of a huge cliff, said to be over 600 feet high. It comes
largely from the snowfields on the summit of Mount Chelmos^ and hence
its volume varies with the season. When I visited the fall early in
October, after the long drought of summer, the water merely trickled
down the black streak on the face of the cliff, its presence being shown
only by the glistening appearance which it communicated to the dark
surface of the rock. At the foot of the cliff it formed a small stream,
flowing down a very steep rocky bed into the bottom of the glen far
below. The water was clear and not excessively cold. Even when,
through the melting of the snows, the body of the water is considerable,
it is said to be all dissolved into spray by falling through such a height



252 FALL OF THE STYX bk. viii. arcadia

and to reach the ground in the form of fine rain. Only the lower part
of the cliff is visible from the foot of the waterfall, probably because the
cliff overhangs somewhat. Certainly the cliffs a little to the right of the
waterfall overhang considerably. With these enormous beetling crags
of grey rock rising on three sides, the scene is one of sublime, but wild
and desolate grandeur. I have seen nothing to equal it anywhere. On
.the third side, looking down the glen and away over the nearer hills,
'we see the blue mountains of Acamania across the Gulf of Corinth ;
my guide said these mountains were in Roumelia. In the face of the
rock, a few yards to the right of the waterfall, are carved the names
or initials of persons who have visited the spot, with the dates of their
visits. Among the names is that of King Otho, with the date 1847.
The time from Solos to the foot of the waterfell is about three hours
and a half.

I visited the fall of the Styx, 2nd October 1895, and have described the fall
and the route to it from my own observation. See also Leake, Morea^ 3. pp.
160 j^., 172 ; Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 155 ; Fiedler, Reise^ I. p. 398 sq. ; Curtius,
Pelop, I. p. 195 sq, ; BeuU, Etudes sur le Pihponnise^ p. 166 sqq. ; Vischer,
Erinnerungetty p. 490 sq, ; W. G. Clark, Pelop, p. 302 ; Bursian, Geogr. 2.
p. 202 ; Baedeker,' p. 304 sq, ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 385 ; Philippson, PelopanueSf

Apuleius tells us that one of the tasks imposed on Psyche by Venus
was to fetch water from the Styx. The waterfall was shown to the
hapless maid afar off by her cruel taskmistress : " Dost see, rising above
yon high, high cliff, the summit of a lofty mountain from which the dark
rills of a sable fount flow downward and, shut within the trough of a
narrow dale, water the Stygian fens ? " Apuleius represents the water
as guarded by fierce dragons. See Apuleius, Met, vi. 14 sq. This
belief that the water was guarded by dragons explains the name of the
Dragon Water, by which the cascade is sometimes still known. It is a
common idea that springs of water are guarded by dragons or serpents.
See note on ix. 10. 5. The dark colour of the water, as seen against
the black incrustation on the face of the cliff, was explained by a fable
that Demeter, mourning for her lost daughter, and angry at the impor-
tunate courtship of Poseidon, came to the spring, and seeing her dark
lowering features mirrored in the water, loathed it and made it black.
See Ptolemaeus, Nov. Hist. iii. {Mythogr. Graeci^ ed. Westermann,
p. 186). It thus appears that for both the modem local names of the
Styx, namely the Black Water and the Dragon Water, mythological
explanations are to be found in ancient writers. It seems probable,
therefore, that these have always been the local names for the waterfall,
while Styx may have been a name given to it by the learned. When
* Leake discovered the waterfall in 1 806, the natives knew nothing of the
Styx as the name for the fall. They called it the Black Water or the
Dragon Water. Now of course they are, through travellers, familiar
with the name of Styx. The passages of Apuleius and Ptolemaeus,
which I have cited, have apparently been overlooked by modem writers.
18. I. Hesiod, in the Theogony etc. See Hesiod, Theog. 383.
The father of Styx, according to Hesiod, was Pallas. Elsewhere (Theog.



1



CH. xviii OATH BY THE STYX 253

785 sqq,y 805 sq,) Hesiod describes the Styx as a cold water dripping
from a high precipitous crag and flowing through a rugged place. This
accurate description seems to show that Hesiod either had seen the fall
of the Styx himself or had talked with those who had. The water of the
fall, being chiefly fed by melted snow, is in general very cold. Hesiod,
moreover, says (Theog, yyy sqq.) that abhorred Styx dwelt in "a stately
palace roofed with lofty rocks, and all around were silver pillars propped
against the sky." Is it fanciful to see in the " silver pillars " the enor-
mous icicles which in winter must hang over the cliff? It is said that
when a cloud rests on the sunmiit of the precipice, the water of the
cascade seems to drop straight from the sky. In winter the clouds must
often be down on the mountain, and the icicles will then look like
** silver pillars propped against the sky."

18. 2. Witness me now, earth and the broad heaven above etc.
The lines are I/t'adj xv. 36 sq.

18. 2. in the list of the troops under Chinens. See Iliady ii.

748-755-

18. 3. he makes it a water in hell etc. See ///W, viii. 366-369.

18. 4* This water is deadly to man etc. A draught of the water
of Styx was supposed to be instantly fatal (Theophrastus, cited by Anti-
gonus Carystius, Histor, mtrab. 158 (174); Pliny, Nat. hist. ii. 231,
xxxi. 26 ; cp. Strabo, viii. p. 389). Seneca, who reports the deadly
quality of the water, admits that there was nothing in the appearance or
smell of it to excite suspicion {Natur. quaest, iii. 25. i). Ovid says
that the water was injurious by day but harmless by night (^Met. xv. 332
sqq.^ where, if we adopt the reading locus instead of locus^ Ovid seems
to have confused the water of the lake of Pheneus with the water of
Styx). Ovid's statement is repeated by Lactantius Placidus {Narr. Fab.
XV. 23). Chemical analysis has shown that the water contains no sub-
stances held in solution ; hence any injurious effects which it may pro-
duce can only be imputed to its extreme coldness, for it is snow-water.
Landerer observed that in July the temperature of the water was 5°
centigrade, while the temperature of the air was 35'. See Philippson,
Peloponnes^ p. 134. The belief in the deadly nature of the water prob-
ably explains why solemn oaths were taken by it. The oath was in
fact a sort of poison-ordeal ; the water would kill the man who forswore
himself, but spare the man who swore truly. When Cleomenes, the
banished king of Sparta, tried to band the Arcadians together against
his native land, he was eager to persuade the chief men of Arcadia to
go with him to Nonacris and swear by the water of the Styx that they
would follow wherever he might lead (Herodotus, vi. 74). Although
this is the only instance of the sort recorded in histor>', we may safely
infer that from time immemorial an oath by the water of the Styx had
been regarded by the Arcadians as a very solemn oath ; and that when
the poets made the gods swear by Styx they were only transferring to
heaven a practice which had long been customary on earth. That the
old oath did not simply attest the Styx but was accompanied by a liba-
tion or draught of the water, or at all events by contact of some sort
with it, seems proved by the fact that Cleomenes thought it needful to



254 OATH BY THE STYX BK. viii. ARCADIA

take his men to the spot in order to put the oath to them. Hesiod
represents Iris as fetching the water of the Styx in a golden jar for the
gods to swear by ; and his words seem to imply that the oath was
accompanied by a libation (Theog, 784 sqq,) Among the Siceliots the
most solemn oaths were taken at the pools called the caldrons or craters
of the Palici (see note on iii. 23. 9). According to Polemo, the form of
swearing at these pools was as follows. The oath was administered by
persons who read it out from a written copy which they held in their
hands. The man who swore recited the oath after them, keeping one
hand on the caldron or crater. In the other hand he waved a branch
(of olive ?), and he wore a garland and a single tunic without a girdle.
If he swore truly, he went home unscathed ; but if he forswore himself^
he died on the spot. See Polemo, quoted by Macrobius, Saturn, v.
19. 28 sq, Damascius describes a rocky pool at the foot of a high
waterfall in Arabia, by which solemn oaths were taken ; it was believed
that a perjured man would die of dropsy within a year (Damascius,
Vita Isidoriy 199). The oath by the Styx may originally, as I
have said, have been accompanied by a draught of the supposed
poisonous water. We have seen that near Aegira there was an
ordeal by drinking bull's blood which was supposed to be poisonous
(vii. 26. 13). Oaths accompanied by a draught of water, over which
prayers have been uttered or ceremonies performed, are common in
many parts of the world. To give a few instances. In Cambodia and
Siam an oath of allegiance to the king is taken twice a year by the
mandarins and officials ; the oath is accompanied by a draught of
water in which the king's weapons have been dipped. See Moura, Le
Royaume du CambodgCy i . p. 251 sqq, ; Aymonier, Notice sur le Cam-
bodge^ P- 37 ^9' J Lemire, Cochinchine franqaise et Royaume de Cam-
bodge^ p. 392 j^. ; Loubere, Le Royaume de Siam^ i. p. 247 sq, (p. 81,
Engl, trans., London, 1693); Pallegoix, Description du Royaume Thai
ou Siam^ i. p. 261 ; Bastian, Die Vblker des ostlichcn Asien^ 3. pp. 309
sq.^ 519 sq. The meaning of dipping the king's weapons into the water
is stated by Mr. Moura to be that the weapons will pierce the perjured
man. This idea comes out still more clearly in the ceremony of making
peace which is in vogue among the Karens of Burma. When two
villages have been at war with each other and resolve to conclude a
peace, they prepare what is called the " peace-making water." Filings
are made from a sword, a spear, a musket-barrel, and a stone ; a dog is
killed ; the filings are mixed with its blood and also with the blood of a
hog and a fowl ; and the whole is put into a cup of water. This is the
"peace -making water." Then the skull of the dog is chopped in
two, and the representative of one village hangs the dog's lower
jaw by a string round his neck, while the representative of the other
village takes the skull and upper jaw of the dog and hangs it round his
neck in like manner. They next take the cup in hand, promise
solemnly to observe the peace, and then drink the water. After drink-
ing they wish that, if any one breaks the engagement, the spear may
pierce his breast, the musket his bowels, and the sword his head ; that
the dog, the hog, and the stone may devour him, etc. See F. Mason,



CH. XVIII THE WATER OF STYX 255

* On dwellings, works of art, laws, etc. of the Karens,* Journal of the
Asiatic Society of Bengal^ 37 (1868), pt. ii. p. 160 sq. Similarly in the
island of Bum (East Indies), when an oath is to be sworn, the head of
a household takes a calabash full of water, and puts into it salt, a knife,
a sword, and a spear, stirring the water with the spear. After the oath
has been sworn, he says to the persons who have taken it, " Reflect,
both of you, and speak the truth ; otherwise ye shall melt as salt, be
stabbed with the spear, and have your throat cut with the knife." Then
the persons swearing drink the water. See J. G. F. Riedel, De sluik-
en kroesharige Rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua^ p. 11. For other
examples, see Aymonier, Notes sur le Laos^ pp. 166, 174, 208, 213 sq,^
215, 216, 262 ; Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch Indte^ N. S., 7 (1879),
p. 382 sqq, ; Ad. Bastian, Indonesien^ i. p. 144 ; Bosman's * Guinea,' in
Pinkerton's Voyages and Travels^ 16. p. 397 •^^« > T. J. Hutchinson,
Impressions of Western Africa^ P* '59 J^«

18. 5. Glass, crystal are all broken by the water etc. The

fable that the water of Styx burst or corroded vessels made of almost
every material is mentioned by many ancient writers, but they are not at
one as to the material which alone was supposed capable of holding the
water. According to Pausanias (§ 6), with whom Justin (xii. 14) agrees,
the only substance which could resist the action of the water was a
horse's hoof; according to others it was a mule's hoof (Vitruvius, viii.
3. 16 ; Pliny, NcU, hist, xxx. 149 ; cp. Quintus Curtius, x. 10. 31 ; Arrian,
Anab, vii. 27. i); according to others, it was the hoof of an ass
(Plutarch, Alex, yj \ cp. /V/., De firimo frigore^ 20) ; according to others,
it was any vessel made of horn (Callimachus, cited by Stobaeus, Eclogae^
\, 41. 51; Antigonus Carystius, Histor, Mirab. 158 (174); Tzetzes,
Schol, on Lycophron^ 706 ; Schol. on Oppian, Halieut, i. 401 ; Eusta-
thius, on Homer, p. 718. 31 sq,)\ according to others, it was the horn of
a Scythian ass (Philo of Heraclea, cited by Stobaeus, Eel, i. 41. 52 ;
Aelian, Nat. anim, x. 40), which last, as Leake drily observes, must
have been exceedingly difficult to obtain. According to Theophrastus
(cited by Antigonus Carystius, Lc) persons who wished to procure the
water did so by dipping sponges, fastened on sticks, into it There was
a curious legend that Hyllus, son of Hercules, had a little horn gp-owing
out of the left side of his head, and that he was slain in single combat
by Epopeus of Sicyon, who took the horn, carried the water of the Styx
in it, and became king of the land (Ptolemaeus, Nov, hist, iii.)

18. 5. morrhia. This was the substance which the Romans called
murr/uiy of which the famous 7nurrhine vases were made. It seems to
have been some sort of mineral ; onyx, opal, agate, fluor-spar, and jade
have been suggested, but the question is not decided. See Marquardt,
Privatleben der Romer^ P* 7^5 sqq, ; Blumner, Technologies 3. p. 276
sq, ; Smith's Diet, of Gr, and Rom, Antiquities^ s,v, * Murrhina.'

18. 5. the word of the Lesbian poetess. The passage of Sappho
referred to by Pausanias is lost. A scholiast on Pindar {Pyth. iv. 407)
also refers to it, but the lines quoted by him seem to be Pindar's. See
Bockh's note on the passage.

18. 6. the diamond is melted away by the blood of a billy-



256 AROANIAN MOUNTAINS bk. viii. arcadia

goat. This curious statement is repeated by ;Marcellus {De medicor
mentis^ xxvi. 95). As the blood of a he-goat was supposed to possess
this power of dissolving the hardest of all stones, a draught of it, properly
administered, was believed to be a cure for stone, thus. Take a billy-
goat, wild, and one year old. Shut him up in a dry place for three
days in the month of August, feed him on bay-leaves only, and give
him nothing at all to drink. On the third day kill him, the day being
either a Sunday or a Thursday ; let the slaughterer be chaste and pure,
and the patient also. Let the blood be caught by beardless boys and
burned in an earthenware pot, which must be covered up and smeared
with gypsum when it is put in the oven. When you have taken it out,
grind it to powder. Then take three parts of the billy-goat's blood, one
of white pepper, one of the ashes of a burnt polypus, one of thyme, one
of penny-royal, one of parsley-seed, etc. Pound all these up separately,
reduce them to fine powder, and give a spoonful of the mixture to the
patient on a Sunday or a Thursday in a drink of wine or any other
sweet beverage. Do this, and he will very soon have no more stone.
See Marcellus, op, cit, xxvi. 94 sq. This is a feir average specimen of
the remedies prescribed by the sapient Marcellus.

18. 6. Whether Alexander, son of Philip, really died of this
poison etc The absurd report ran that the water of the Styx had
been sent in a horse's or mule's or ass's hoof to Alexander by Antipater,
at the instigation of Aristotle. See Justin, xii. 14; Plutarch, Alexander^
77 ; Arrian, Anab,^ vii. 27. i ; Q. Curtius, x. 10. 31 ; Vitruvius, viii.
3.16; Pliny, Nat, hist, xxx. 1 49.

18. 7- the Aroanian mountains. Now called Mt. Chelmos^ one
of the highest and most imposing mountains in Peloponnese (see note
on viii. 17. i). Its western slopes are covered with pine-woods. On
the north, as we have seen, the mountain falls away in enormous preci-
pices to the glen of the Styx. The ascent of the summit may be
accomplished either from Solos (see above, p. 249 sq,) or Kalcniryia (see
below, p. 257). From Solos we proceed up the glen of the Styx a short
way, cross the stream to its left bank by the single-arched bridge which
has been already mentioned (p. 250), and ascend the long and very
steep slope of the mountain, past the scattered village of Gounarianika^
to the high bare stony plateau of Xerokampos, from which the upper
slopes of Mt. Chelmos rise abruptly and grandly on the south. Here on
the tableland, if we have left Solos in the afternoon, we can find night
quarters in the huts of the shepherds who camp out with their flocks
during the summer on these elevated pastures. Starting the next
morning at break of day we can reach the summit in about two hours,
early enough to see the sun rise. The horses must be left behind with
the shepherds, for the rest of the ascent has to be accomplished on foot.
We follow a long gully, where the snow hardly disappears even in
summer. Then by toilsome goat -paths we cross a low height and a
ridge from which we obtain a glimpse down into the awful depths of the
ravine of the Styx. Thus we reach the long crest, shaped like a horse-
shoe, of Mt. Chelmos^ above which the four peaks rise but little. The
highest peak (7726 feet) is at the middle of the horse-shoe. The view



CH. XVIII ASCENT OF MOUNT CHELMOS 257

from it embraces nearly the whole mountain-system of Greece, from
Parnassus, Helicon, Cithaeron, and the mountains of Attica, on the north,
away to the distant Taygetus in Laconia on the south. The time from
Solos to the summit is about four hours.

The ascent from Kalavryta is longer, as Kalavryta is considerably
farther than Solos from the base of the mountain. From the valley of
Kalavryta the way goes southward through pine-woods over Mt. Velt'a
(a north-western spur of Mt. Chelmos) to the plain of Soudena^ on the
eastern side of which rises Mt. Chelmos in a long unbroken slope,
clothed with pine-forests. From the village of Soudena^ which stands
at the foot of the mountains in the north-east comer of the plain, the
path ascends, first between bare slopes broken by watercourses, and
then more steeply through the pine-forest, to the plateau of Xerokantposy
where the route joins the one from Solos, The time from Kalavryta to
the simimit is about eight hours.

See Philippson, PeloponneSy pp. 129-132, 141-144; Baedeker,' pp. 305-307;
Guide-Joanru., 2. p. 386. I crossed Mt. Chehnos from Solos to Sotidena (see below,
p. 258), but did not ascend to the summit.

A third ascent of Mount Chelmos^ not to be attempted except by
persons of active limbs and steady heads, is from the foot of the water-
fall of the Styx. H ere a narrow ridge of rock known as Xhtpiaka ( * board ' )
slants upward, like a buttress, from the foot of the fall to the top of the
great cliff. The surface of the ridge is covered with treacherous loose
stones, and over its shelving edges you look down into the dizzy depths
below. Crawling up it on hands and feet the adventurous traveller can
climb out of the glen of the Styx to the gp-eat trough, generally filled
with snow, from which the waterfall takes its leap. From this point
there is no further difficulty. The way goes over easy slopes of loose
stones and rocky declivities to the summit. See Philippson, Peloponnes^

p. 134.

18. 7. a cave. When the path from Solos to Soudena (see below)

has climbed the long steep slope of Mt. Chelmos above the village of

Gounariamka^ it passes on the left two caves, one of which may well

be the cave, described by Pausanias, where the frenzied daughters of

Proetus were said to have sought refuge. The caves are quite near

each other, on the brow of the mountain, overlooking the profound glen

of the Styx, at the edge of the high stony plateau called Xerofcampos.

The upper of the two caves, which is just on the edge of the plateau

while the other is a little lower down, is marked out by some fantastic

rock-formations above its mouth. The lower cave stands at the head of

a tremendous slope ; bushes grow in front of it. A little lower down

there is a remarkable natural door in the rock, of gigantic size, formed

perhaps by the action of water eating away the middle of the rock ; at

the side of the great door is a smaller opening like a window. The

situation of the caves (which I have described from personal obser\'a-

tion) tallies well with the itinerary of Pausanias ; for he says that the

cave of the daughters of Proetus was on Mount Aroanius {Chelmos)^ and

he mentions it between Nonacris and Lusi. Now the two caves I have

VOL. IV S



258 LUSI BK. VIII. ARCADIA

described are on Mt. Aroanius, beside the path which leads from Solos
to SoudenOf which may be taken to represent approximately the sites of
Nonacris and Lusi. Possibly, however, the cave mentioned by Pau-
sanias is to be identified with a deep cavern on the western side of Mt.
Chelmos in which the inhabitants of Sondena took refuge during the
War of Independence (Boblaye, RechcrcheSy p. 155; Curtius, Pelop. i.
p. 197 sq,)

18. 7. Lnsi. This is supposed to have occupied the site oiSoudena^
a large village which stands at the western foot of Mt. Chelmos
(Aroanius), on the eastern edge of a high but well-cultivated plain. It
is divided from Solos by the great outlying mass of Mt Chelmos^ the
summit of which consists of a bare tableland known as Xerokampos
(* dry plain '). The route from Solos to Soudena^ as far as this high
plateau, has been already briefly described (p. 256). From the bridge
by which we cross the Styx there is a fine view up the glen to the great
conical summit of Mt. Chelmos; and the poplar-trees and clear rushing
water in the bed of the stream add to the beauty of the scene. The
ascent from the bridge to the plateau is long and tiring. It leads at
first through picturesque villages dispersed among tr6es on the steep
slope. At the head of the long ascent we pass near the two caves
which have been already described and find ourselves on the tableland
— a bare stony uneven expanse, partly covered with the low green
shrubs and dry brown prickly plants so common in Greece. Skirting
the upp^ slopes of Mt. Chelmos^ which tower grandly on the south, we
cross the plateau to its western edge, from which a romantic rocky path
leads down through the pine-forest that clothes all this side of the
mountain. As we descend through the woods, beautiful views are to be
had, if the day is clear, of range beyond range of mountains, dappled
with sunshine and purple shadows, in the west. In time the plain of
Soudena^ traversed by the broad stony bed of the Aroanius {Katsana
river), and bounded on three sides by bare rounded hills, opens out
below us. The last part of the descent is between low treeless slopes
broken by watercourses. The village of Soudena^ supposed to repre-
sent the ancient Lusi, stands on the lowest slopes of the hills which
bound the plain on the north-east. It is about two hours' ride south of
Kalavryta^ from which it is divided by Mt. Velia^ a steep ridge wooded
with firs on its northern slope, which projects from Mt. Chelmos on the
north-west. The village of Soudena is in two divisions, a northern and
a southern. Trees grow among the houses of the northern division ;
and at the foot of the hill, in front of the village, there are verdant
patches of gardens. Here, too, stands the village church under the
shadow of some fine holly-oaks. The time from Solos to Soudena is
about four hours.

I rode from Solos to Sotidetta, 3rd October 1895, ^^^ ^^y^ described the route
as I saw it. As to Soudena and the route to it from Kalavryta^ see Leake, Morea,
2. pp. 20S-210; If/., 3. pp. 168 sq.f 180 ; Dodwell, Tour, 2. p. 446 sq. ; Boblaye,
Recherclus^ p. 155 sq, ; Welcker, Tagchuch^ i. p. 299; Curtius, Pelop, i. pp. 197,
375 ; Vischer, Erinnerungetiy p. 480 ; Bursian, Gcogr, 2. p. 265 sq. ; Baedeker,'
P' 307; Guide-Joan fie f 2. p. 368; Philippson, PelopotineSy p. 129. As to Xcro-
kampos compare Philippson, op. cit. p. 133.



CH. XVIII THE DAUGHTERS OF PROETUS 259

An inscription, found at Olympia in 1877 and dating apparently
from the end of the third century B.c, proves* that athletic games were
held at Lusi {Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 184).

18. 8. Agdsilas, a man of Lusi, was proc^aixiied victor etc.
According to Philostratus (De arte gymnastica^ 12), Eurybatus, who won
the first wrestling-match at Olympia in OL 28 (668 B.C.), was a native
of Lusi, though others held that he was a Spartan. Cp. v. 8. 7 note.

18. 8. Melampns drew down the daughters of Froetns etc See
ii. 1 8. 4 note. According to another story the daughters of Proetus
were healed of their madness at Sicyon. See ii. 7. 8 ; cp. ApoUodorus,
ii. 2. 2. According to others, they were healed by Melampus at the
river Anigrus in Elis. See v. 5. 10 ; Strabo, viii. p. 346. Hesychius
says {s.v, *Kkovxu) that Melampus founded a sanctuary of Artemis on
a mountain called Acrum in Argolis after he had healed the daughters
of Proetus ; but Hesychius does not expressly say that the cure was
supposed to have been effected there. Again, different accounts are
given of the way in which Melampus healed the women. According to
Dioscorides (Trcpl vAi/s iarpiKrjs, iv. 149), he gave them black hellebore,
which was hence called Melampodium. Pliny says (Ndf. hist xxv. 47)
that he gave them the milk of goats which had browsed on the kind of
hellebore called Melampodium. According to Ovid (Met xv. 326 j^.)
Melampus made use of herbs and an incantation. The comic poet
Diphilus represented Melampus purifying Proetus, his daughters, and an
old woman, with one torch, one squill, brimstone, and bitumen (Clement
of Alexandria, Strom, vii. 4, p. 844, ed. Potter). According to Servius
(on Virgil, Ect vi. 48) Melampus put something in the spring out of
which the daughters of Proetus were wont to drink. Vitruvius says
(viii. 3. 21) that he sacrificed beside a spring. The purification of the
daughters of Proetus by Melampus is illustrated by two works of ancient
art which have come down to us. (i) On a fine Greek cameo the seer is
represented holding in one hand a pig over one of the women, while in
the other hand he grasps a branch (of laurel ?). See note on ii. 31. 8.
The pig seems to have been especially used in the ceremony of purifying
from madness. See Plautus, Menaechm. ii. 2. 15-19. (2) On a vase
in the Naples Museum, painted with yellow figures on a black gp'ound,
the three daughters of Proetus are depicted sitting round an archaic
image of a goddess, who is probably Artemis Hemerasia. The goddess
is clad in a long, tight-fitting robe, and holds a spear in her left hand
and a torch in her right. Her itnage appears to be standing on the
same altar or flat pedestal on which the women are seated. To the left
of the spectator stands Melampus, a sceptre in his left hand. Behind
him, on the extreme left, is seated Silenus. On the extreme right of
the picture stands Dionysus, a goblet in his right hand, a branch in his
left See Miiller-Wieseler, Denkmdler^ i. pL ii.. No. 11 ; Gazette archi-
ologique^ 5 (1879), p. 126 j^.

At Lusi there was a spring into which Melampus was said to have
thrown the things which he had used in purifying the daughters of
Proetus {to. diroKaOdpfmra) ; it was fabled that, in consequence of this,
whoever drank of the spring lost his taste for wine and could not even



26o THE SPRING AT LUSI bk. viii. arcadia

bear the smell of it. See Vitruvius, viii. 3. 21 ; Ovid, Met, xv. 322-
328 ; Stephanus Byzantius, s,v, 'A(avCa ; Athenaeus, ii. p. 43 f; Sotion,
12 {Script, rer, mirab, Graec^^ ed. Westermann, p. 184) ; EtymoL Mag-
num, s.v. KkiT6piov, p. 519. 50 s^^, ; Isidorus, Origines^ xiii. 13. 2
(where for Italiae we should perhaps read Arcadiae), One of the causes
assigned for the madness of the daughters of Proetus was the wrath of
Dionysus, whose rites they had refused to accept (Hesiod, dted by
Apollodorus, ii. 2. i ; Diodorus, iv. 68). This would explain why those
who drank of the spring in question were thought to lose their taste for
wine ; the aversion of the daughters of Proetus for Dionysus had been
communicated, by means of the diroKaOdpfmroj to the water. On the
whole story, see J. De Witte, * M^lampos et les Proetides,* Gazette
arclUologique^ 5 (1879), pp. 121-131.

The spring at Lusi to which ancient writers refer may perhaps be the
small PoulioU'Vrysis (* Bird's spring '), which rises on the western side
of Mt. Chelmos above Soudena, Its water flows into the plain below
the village and joins the Aroanius. The spring, though smsdl, furnishes
water for the cattle that pasture on the mountain in simimer, and the
inhabitants of Solos and its neighbour villages imagine that if a person,
ill of a dangerous malady, drinks of the spring, he speedily recovers or
dies. See Leake, Morea^ 3. p. 169; Philippson, Pelopannes^ p. 130;
Baedeker,* p. 307 ; and below, note on * a sanctuary of Artemis.*

18. 8. a sanctnary of ArtemlB. The sanctuary of Artemis at
Lusi is mentioned by Polybius ; he says it was between Cynaetha and
Clitor and was esteemed inviolate by the Greeks. Sacred animals of
the goddess lived within the precinct. A roving band of Aetolians
threatened to pillage the sanctuary, but the inhabitants of Lusi suc-
ceeded in buying them off. See Polybius, iv. 18, cp. 25 ; /V/,, ix. 34;
Callimachus, Hymn to Diana^ 235 sq. Towards the end of the plain
of Soudena^ north of the village of that name, Dodwell saw " some traces
of antiquity, apparently the cella of a temple." He thought that this
might be the site of the temple of Artemis Hemeresia {Tour^ 2. p. 447).
In the plain to the west of Soudena there are three copious springs, the
sources of the stream (the Aroanius) which runs through the gorge of
Karnesi into the valley of Clitor. At the middle spring of the three
Leake obser\'ed some ancient foundations, which he thought might be
those of the temple of Artemis Hemerasia. See Leake, Morea^ 2. pp.
109, no; /V/., 3. p. 181. Cp. QMi\\yx&^ Pelop, i. p. 375. One of these
springs may have been the one into which Melampus was said to have
thrown the things with which he had purified the daughters of Proetus.
See the preceding note.

19. I. Gynaethaeans. The city of Cynaetha seems to have stood
on or near the site of the modem Kalarjryta^ the most important town
of north-western Arcadia. The elevated valley of Kalavryta runs east
and west. It is open and treeless, and the hills which enclose it on the
north and south are low and tame. But the scenery is redeemed by the
lofty mountains of Erymanthus on the west and Chelmos (Aroanius) on
the south-east. The town of Kalavryta is situated at the eastern end
of the valley, where a glen runs up from it to the north-western ridge of



CH. XIX CYN AETNA 261

Chelmos^ known as Mt. Velia, It takes its name of Kalavryta (< fair
springs') from the rills of clear water which traverse its streets and
which, with the abundance of trees, give the little town a pleasant
aspect. The main street, indeed, resembling a bazaar, is built along
the bed of a watercourse which, though generally dry, is sometimes
filled with a raging torrent that occasionally floods the bazaar. The
great peak of Mt. Chelmos^ rising conspicuously above the town beyond
the nearer ridge of Mt. Velia^ forms a picturesque and striking back-
ground. Great patches of snow are visible low down its slopes as late
as the middle of May, when the air in the streets of Kaiavryta is close
and hot. A branch railway, carried through the romantic wooded gorge
of Diakopton (see above, p. 174), now connects Kaiavryta with the main
line from Athens to Patras, To the east of the town rises a high rocky
hill crowned with the ruins of a mediaeval castle called Tremola; the
walls of the castle follow the edge of the precipice which defends the
tabular summit of the hilL Some tombs at a place called Salmena^
forty minutes to the north-east of Kaiavryta^ are supposed to mark the
site of the acropolis of Cynaetha.

See Dodwell, Tour, 2. p. 447 sq, ; Leake, Morea^ 2. pp. 109-113; id,^ 3.
p. 179 sq, ; Pouqueville, Voyage de la Grice^ 5. p. 341 sq. ; Boblaye, Recherches^
p. 157 sq, ; Curtius, Pelop. I. p. 382 sq, ; L. Ross, Wanderungtn^ I. p. 175 ;
Vischer, Erinnerungen^ p. 481 ; Bursian, Geogr, 2, p. 266 sq. ; lEkiedeker,^ p. 306
sq, ; Guidei/banne, 2, p. 365 ; Philippson, Peloponnes^ p. 128 sq,

Polybius describes the Cynaethaeans as a savage and lawless people,
whose internal history was stained with many deeds of blood ; they were
rent into factions, which were perpetually plundering, massacring, and
banishing each other. The historian attributes their ferocity to the
neglect of a musical education which in the rest of Arcadia was com-
pulsory, and was designed to soften the harsh, stem temper engendered
by the bleak, mountainous character of Arcadia. The district of
Cynaetha, according to Polybius, was the ruggedest, and its climate the
bleakest, in all Arcadia. The valley of Kaiavryta (Cynaetha) certainly
stands high (about 2300 feet above the sea), but it is not so high as the
neighbouring valley of Soudena (Lusi) to the south of it. On one occa-
sion, after perpetrating a peculiarly atrocious massacre, the Cynaethaeans
sent envoys to Sparta. The various Arcadian states through whose
territories the envoys went testified their abhorrence of the deed and
of the people by ordering the envoys out of the country ; and the Man-
tineans, after the envoys had departed, purified themselves and their
belongings by sacrificing victims and carrying them round the city and
the whole of their land. See Polybius, iv. 17-21. Similarly the
Athenians expressed their horror of the massacre at Argos known as the
skutalismos or < clubbing ' by causing purificatory offerings to be carried
round the public assembly (Plutarch, Praeceft, ger, retpud, xvii. 9).

19. I. dedicated at Olympia the image of Zewi etc. See v. 22.
I . Cp. Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron^ 400.

19. 2. a spring of cold water etc. This is supposed to be the
large spring of Kalavrytine^ which rises at the foot of an ivy-clad rock



262 SOURCE OF THE LADON bk. viii. ascadia

near the town of Kalavryta, In front of the spring lie a number of
blocks of marble ; they may have formerly enclosed it. See Baedeker,^
p. 306 sq, Cp. Leake, Moreoy 2. p. 109 sq,

19. 4. Of the roads from Phenens leading westward etc. Of the
two roads leading westward from Pheneus, Pausanias having described
the right hand or more northerly of the two (see 17. 6 sqq,) now pro-
ceeds to describe the one which led to the left (south-west) to Clitor.
In his day the valley of Pheneus was ^plain, not a lake ; hence starting
from Pheneus he followed the artificial canal (see note on 14. 3) across
the plain till he came to Lycuria. At present the path skirts the lake
on the left, then rises steeply through pine-woods to the broad summit
of the ridge which bounds the lake on the south-west. It then drops
down steeply to the small, straggling village of Lykouria in a cultivated
valley, enclosed by lofty hills. The time from Pheneus is two hours and
a half. The modem village of Lykouria can hardly occupy the site of
the ancient place of that name. For Pausanias's description of the
route to it implies that it was situated in the plain of Pheneus, lower
down than the city of Pheneus, and that it was on or near the canal.
Moreover, he says (20. i) that Lycuria was 50 Greek ftirlongs (5^^ miles)
from the springs of the Ladon ; whereas the modem Lykouria is only
7.\ miles (less than 20 furlongs) from the springs. Probably when the
plain of Pheneus became a lake, the inhabitants shifted their quarters
over the ridge to the present site.

See Dodwell, Ttmry 2. p. 441 ; Gell, Itinerary of the Morea, p. 152 sq, ;
Leake, Morea^ 3. p. 143; ta., Pelipf. p. 225 sq, ; Boblaye, Recherches^ ^. 156;
Curtius, Pelop, I. p. 190 ; Beul^, Etudes sur le Pilop(mrt^se, p. 146 ; Buman,
Geogr, 2. p. 202 ; Philippson, Pehponnes, p. 127.

20. I. the springs of the Ladon. The Ladon of Arcadia, the
greatest of the tributaries of the Alpheus, rises in the middle of a valley
on the westem side of Mount Saita (the ancient Oryxis), about 2^ miles
to the south-west of Lykouria, The valley at this point, after extending
in a southerly or south-westerly direction from Lykouria^ bends round to
the west. It is of some breadth, and its bottom is furrowed on both
sides by the dry beds of two watercourses. Between the two water-
courses there rises in the midst of the valley a low hill of reddish rock,
which ends on the south in a precipitous face some 150 feet high.
At the foot of this red precipitous rock lies a large still pool of opaque
dark blue water, fringed by sharp -pointed grasses and other water
plants, while a few stunted willows, holly-oaks, and plane-trees grow
among the rocks beside it. This pool is the source of the Ladon, which
rushes from the pool in a brawling impetuous stream of dark blue water,
its margin fringed with willows. The water enters the pool, not from
the rocks above, but from a deep chasm in the earth which is only
visible when, as sometimes happens, the source dries up. A peasant
who was beside the pool when I visited it in 1895 to^^ "^Y dragoman
that three years before, after a violent earthquake, the water ceased to
flow for three hours, and the chasm in the bottom of the pool was
exposed, and fish were seen lying on the dry ground. After three hours



CH. XXI SOURCE OF THE LADON 263

the spring began to flow a little, and three days later there was a loud
explosion and the water burst forth in immense volume. Mr. Philippson
was informed on the spot of a like event which had taken place in 1 880.
We have seen (p. 232) that similar sudden eruptions of water at the
source of the Ladon have been reported earlier in the present century
and in antiquity. The stoppage of the water and its abrupt reappear-
ance are doubtless due to the alternate obstruction and clearance of the
subterranean passages {katavothras) by which the Lake of Pheneus is
drained. For the ancients were right in supposing that the water which
rises at the source of the Ladon comes directly underground from the
Lake of Pheneus. It has the same deep greenish-blue tinge as the water
of the lake, and is flat and tepid to the taste like standing water, not cold
and fresh like the water of a mountain spring. The source is distant
only about 5 miles from the lake, from which it is divided by the high
range of Mt. Saita (Oryxis). The hills on the opposite or western side
of the valley are much lower ; their slopes of reddish rock are partly \
covered with low green bushes. Numbers of peasant women may be
seen washing clothes beside the pool in the usual Greek fashion ; after
soaking the clothes in water they beat them with a sort of broad paddle
in a wooden trough.

See Dodwell, Totir^ 2. p. 442 (who gives a view, not very accurate, of the
source) ; Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 266 ; f</., 3. p. 151 ; Gell, Itinerary of the Moreay
p, 129 ; Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 156 ; Curtius, Pelop, I. pp. 198, 374 ; Beul^,
Etudes sur le Piloponn^se^ p. 145 ; Guide-Joanne^ 2, p. 366 ; Philippson, Pelo-
ponnes, p. 127. I visited the source of the Ladon,' 4th October 1895, ^^^ h&ve
described it mainly from my own observation.

20. 2. the story of Daphne told by the Syrians beside the

Orontes. Pausanias refers to the famous sanctuary of Apollo at Daphne
on the Orontes, dedicated by the Macedonian kings of Syria. Gibbon
has described the luxurious and stately temple " deeply embosomed in a
thick grove of laurels and cypresses, which reached as for as a circum-
ference of 10 miles, and formed in the most sultry summers a cool and
impenetrable shade. A thousand streams of the purest water issuing
from every hill preserved the verdure of the earth, and the temperature
of the air; the senses were gratifled with harmonious sounds and
aromatic odours ; and^the peaceful gp'ove was consecrated to health and
joy, to luxury and love " {Decline and Fall^ ch. xxiii. vol. 4. p. 118 sqq,^
ed. 1 8 1 1 ). To the authorities cited by Gibbon add Philostratus, Vit,
Apollon. i. 16.

20. 2. the story as told by the Arcadians etc The story of
Daphne and Leucippus which follows is told in almost exactly the same
way by Parthenius {Narrat, A mat. 1 5) on the authority of Phylarchus
and Diodorus, an elegiac poet of Elaea.

20. 3. He was keeping his hair long for the river Alphens. See
viii. 41. 3 note.

21. I. The road from the springs of the Ladon is a narrow
defile beside the river Aroanios. Pausanias is now pursuing his way
from the source of the Ladon to the city of Clitor. Following him, we
proceed down the valley of the Ladon from its source. The valley.



264 THE AROANIUS bk. viii. arcadia

which is here fairly open and possesses no very striking features, trends
first south-west and then westward. The blue river runs fast between
groves of willows ; the flat expanse of the valley is covered with
maize-fields divided by low hedges ; on its northern side rises a rocky
mountain, with several caves high up in its face. In about half an
hour from the source of the river we come to the point where another
valley opens up on the north. It is narrow and wooded and is
hemmed in by high mountains on either side. Down it flows the
Aroanius (the modem Katsana river) to join the Ladon. We turn up
this beautiful valley, cross the Aroanius by a wooden bridge to its
right bank, and proceed northward along the foot of the hills that
bound the valley on the west. Soon the valley contracts to a defile
through the protrusion of the hills on either side ; maize is grown in
the bottom. Farther north the defile suddenly ends, the valley
expands to a width of perhaps half a mile, and is beautifully wooded
in places with groves of cypresses, poplars, and mulberry trees. Still
farther north the valley expands still further ; its level surface is divided
into fields by low hedges or rows of shrubs ; amongst the crops grown
here is Indian or, as the Greeks call it, Arabian com. We cross by
a bridge the Clitor river flowing south-east to join the Aroanius, and a
mile or so farther on enter the large village of Maseika or KlitoriOy the
representative of the ancient Clitor. The village or rather small town
is a new one, having been built about sixty years ago, but it seems
prosperous, and the houses have more pretensions to architectural style
than is usual in Greek villages. The climate, however, is very un-
healthy, owing to the marshy nature of the surrounding plain, and in
the height of summer the town is deserted by its inhabitants, who flee
to the mountain villages to escape the fever. The town stands at the
south-eastern comer of the plain of Clitor, which here opens out on the
valley of the Aroanius from the west. In this plain, about a couple
of miles to the west of Mazeika, are the scattered ruins of the ancient
Clitor (see below, p. 266 sgg.) The path to them leads through a fine
grove of walnut trees and then through vineyards. The time from the
springs of the Ladon to the mins of Clitor is about two hours and three
quarters. The actual distance, according to the French surveyors, is
1 1 kilometres (7 miles i furlong), which agrees very fairly with the 60
furlongs (6 J miles) at which Pausanias estimated it.

I traversed the route described, in the reverse direction, 3rd and 4th October
1895, and have described it from personal observation. See also Dodwell, Tour^
2. p. 442 sg, ; Cell, Itinerary of the Moreoy p. 130 ; Leake, Aforea, 2. pp. 261-
267; Boblaye, Recherches, p. 156; Welcker, Tagebuch, I. pp. 296-298; Curtius,
Pehp, I. pp. 374-378; Vischer, Erinnerungetty p. 479 sq, ; Bursian, Geogr. 2.
p. 263 ; Guide-Joanne y 2. p. 367 sq. ; Philippson, Pe/o/onnes, p. 127 sq.

A few words of description may be given to the upper course of the
Aroanius (the Kaisana river) from its source near Soudena (the ancient
Lusi) to its junction with the Clitor at Maseika, After traversing the
upland plain of Soud€9ia in a broad stony bed, which in autumn is
dry, the river enters a defile at the south-eastem comer of the plain.



CH. XXI THE AROANIUS 265

Through this defile, fonned on the east by the slopes of Mt. Chelmos
and on the west by the hills that close the plain of Soudena on the
south, the Aroanius and the road to Clitor run side by side. At first
the space between the hills is broad and level, dotted here and there
with trees. Soon, however, the valley contracts and begins to descend,
affording a beautiful prospect of range behind range of mountains in
the south, shading away according to the distance from dark purple to
pale blue. The path runs at first on the left (east) bank of the river-
bed, which had no water in it when I saw it (3rd October 1895). But
after being joined by a tributary, which comes down from Mount
Chelmos in a deeply- excavated bed between slopes of red earth, the
river attained the dimensions of a good-sized Scotch bum. Gradually
as the mountains close in on either side the valley becomes a glen,
through which the stream flows among plane-trees in a prettily-wooded
bed. Here the path crosses to the right or west bank, which it follows
henceforward. Farther on, the glen contracts into a deep rocky gorge
between steep mountains, but only to expand again and allow the river
to flow, with a pleasing murmur, in its wooded bed through a stretch of
cultivated ground. Thus gradually the valley opens out into the plain
of Clitor. Vineyards and maize-fields occupy its lower reaches. It was
the time of the vintage when I traversed this beautiful valley. Bunches
of ripe grapes lay as offerings before the holy pictures in the little
wayside shrines ; we met strings of donkeys laden with swelling wine-
skins or with paniers of grapes ; and in the vineyards as we passed the
peasants were at work pressing the purple clusters, with which they
insisted on loading, for nothing, the aprons of our muleteers.

21. 2. AmongBt the fish in tiie Aroaniua are the 80-called
spotted fish etc. These fish were no doubt trout, for trout are still
found both in the Aroanius and the Ladon, and are much esteemed as
food. They are caught in nets or shot with dynamite bullets. The
absurd &ble that the trout sing, which the cautious Pausanias records
without confirming, is repeated by other ancient writers and is believed
by the people of the neighbourhood to this day, as I ascertained on my
visit to Kliioria {Mazeika) in 1895. Philostephanus of Cyrene, in a
book on wonderful rivers, mentioned that in the river Aroanius the fish
called spotted sang like thrushes (Athenaeus, viii. p. 331 de). This
writer, however, confused the Aroanius which flows into the Ladon
with the Aroanius which flows into the Lake of Pheneus (see viii. 14.
3), and thought that the singing fish were in the latter. But that the
feble was told of the other Aroanius (the modem Katsana river) in the
territory of Clitor is proved by the testimony of Pausanias, which is
confirmed (i) by the statement of Mnaseas of Patrae (quoted by
Athenaeus, viii. p. 331 d), that there were singing fish in the Clitor (a
tributary of the Aroanius) ; and (2) by the statement of Clearchus (in
Athenaeus, viii. p. 332 f) that near Clitor in Arcadia the fish in the
river Ladon (of which the Aroanius is a tributary) sang loudly. The
vocal fish in the district of Clitor are also mentioned by Pliny i^NcU,
hist, viii. 70). To come down to modem times, I was told at Klitoria
{Maseika) in 1895 that the trout sing at any time, but especially when



^



266 CLITOR BK. VIII. ARCADIA

caught in the nets ; their song was said to be like the chirping ojf small
birds. An educated Greek gentleman, in whose house I lodged,
maintained in all seriousness that when many of the fish are together
they emit a low musical note (*//« petit bruit hannonieux*) which,
according to him, gave rise to the popular belief in their vocal powers.
I did not see (much less hear) any of the trout myself, but Dodwell
saw a fisherman who had just pulled out of the water " some trout of
a fine bright colour and beautifully variegated," and who informed the
English traveller ''that the river abounds most in this species of fish,
that it is seldom taken of more than a pound and a half in weight,
and that it forms a considerable object of traffic with the neighbouring
villages ; particularly in fast time, for which period they are salted and
smoked" (Taur^ 2. p. 445 sq.)

21. 3. The city of Clitor etc. The ancient Clitor stood in a
plain which extends east and west for about 5 miles with an average
breadth of i mile. On the east the plain opens into the valley of the
Aroanius {Katsana river) which flows southward to join the Ladon. On
all sides the prospect is bounded by hills of varying form and height
The hills on the south are pointed but of no great height ; they form
rather a succession of isolated hills than a single coherent chain.
Higher mountains bound the plain on the east, beyond the Aroanius ;
while on the north rises a range of bare hills partly covered with shrubs.
The hills on the western side of the plain are low, but above them
appear the loftier Arcadian mountains in the west. Along the southern
side of the plain a small stream, the Clitor, flows eastward at the foot of
the hills to join the Aroanius. About 2 miles to the west of the large
village of Mazeika or Klitoria this stream is joined from the north by
another, the river of Kamesi, Immediately to the west of the Karrusi
river, in the angle between it and the Clitor river, are the ruins of the
ancient city of Clitor. They consist chiefly of remains of the city walls
and towers scattered at intervals over the plain. The acropolis was
formed by a low ridge, some 80 feet or so high, which runs east and
west for a few hundred yards near the southern side of the plain. In
the middle the ridge dips a little, so that its highest points are its
eastern and western ends. The little river Clitor skirts the ridge on
the south, flowing eastward to join the Aroanius. At both the ends of
the acropolis there exist remains of the fortification- wall with large
semicircular towers or bastions projecting from it. The wall faced
south, for the bastions project from it on that side. At the eastern end
of the acropolis ridge two of these bastions may be seen, united by two
long parallel rows of ancient blocks, which are, no doubt, remains of
the outer and inner facings of the curtain or intermediate wall. The
bastions measure about 8 paces across. At the eastern end of the ridge,
moreover, a single course of an ancient wall may be observed running
down the slope in a northerly direction. At the west end of the ridge
remains of three similar semicircular towers or bastions exist ; two of
them on the southern face of the ridge are apparently united by vestiges
of the curtain. Of these two bastions the western is the best pre-
served of all. Three courses of blocks are standing to a height of



CH. XXI CLITOR 267

about 4 feet. The masonry, like that of all the bastions, is roughly
quadrangular. The blocks are large and solid ; the largest measures
about 3 feet in length ; they are not smoothed on the outside, but left
more or less rounded or bulging. In none of the bastions is more than
the outer semicircular wall (one block thick) preserved.

Remains of similar bastions and walls are also to be seen in the
plain to the west and north of the ridge. Evidently the city extended
from the acropolis in these two directions. I counted seven bastions
in the plain, preserved more or less to a height of one or two courses.
The most westerly bastion seemed to me about 300 yards, and the
most northerly about half a mile, distant from the acropolis ridge. The
interval between two of the bastions I found to be 36 paces. To the
north-west of the acropolis, near one of the bastions, I observed also
a piece of a massive fortification-wall 1 6 paces long and standing to a
height of two courses. The wall &ces south. Its masonry resembles
that of the bastions ; it is quadrangular and the blocks are not smoothed
on the outside ; one of them is 4 or 5 feet long. Some hundreds of
yards to the north of this wall is a piece, perhaps 100 yards long, of
the fortification-wall extending in a north-easterly direction. Both faces
of the wall are partially preserved ; the distance between them is 4
paces, which gives roughly the thickness of the wall. The outer of
the two faces ends at a semicircular bastion — the farthest north of all
the bastions I observed. When Le Bas visited Clitor in 1843, ^^
fortifications seem to have been much better preserved than at present ;
for on his plan of the city the line of wall, strengthened by semicircular
towers or bastions, extends almost unbroken on the west and north
sides of the city ; on the eastern side it had apparently already dis-
appeared. The distance of the north wall from the acropolis ridge,
estimated by Le Bas's plan, was about 900 metres or 1000 yards.

Besides these remains of the fortified enclosure I was shown some
small drums of fluted and unfluted columns built into walls a little to
the south-east of the most northerly bastion ; and a little to the west of
the Kamesi a sculptured slab lying face downward on the ground, and
close to it a fragmentary sculpture of white marble (?) representing the
head and raised arm of a woman ; a number of squared blocks scattered
in various parts of the site ; and, finally, two drums of columns and
some large blocks a little to the east of the Kamesi river.

A conspicuous conical hill rises from the plain a little to the north-
west of the ruins. I was informed that the scanty remains of a temple
are to be seen on its summit ; but the fall of night prevented me from
visiting them.

At the beginning of the present century Leake saw at Clitor
some remains of a small theatre facing westward near the west end
of the acropolis ridge ; many fragments of the seats were scattered
on the slope, they had the small ledge in front which is charac-
teristic of the seats of ancient theatres. The thickness of the
wall on the crest of the ridge, between the bastions, was found by
Leake to be 1 3 J feet. At a ruined church under a large oak towards
the Kamesi river he further observed some pieces of Doric columns



268 STYMPHALUS bk. viii. arcadia

with flutes 2| inches wide. Another ruined church, between the east
end of the acropolis ridge and the junction of the Kamesi river with
the Clitor, on the left bank of the latter stream, was thought by Leake
to have been an ancient temple. Lastly, in a third ruined church at
the foot of the conical hill already mentioned, Leake saw pieces of
Doric colunms with flutes 2\ inches wide, resembling the fragments of
columns which he observed in the church towards the Kamesi river.
It is possible that these three churches may have succeeded to the sites
of the three temples of Demeter, Aesculapius, and Ilithyia which
Pausanias mentions. Outside of the city to Uie west Bursian seems to
have observed the foundations of a large building with pieces of columns ;
he thought that these remains might mark the site of the sanctuary of
the Dioscuri, which, according to Pausanias, was 4 furlongs from the
city.

See Dodwell, Tour^ 2, p. 443 ; Leake, Morea^ 2. pp. 257-261 ; Boblaye,
Rechcrches^ p. 156 sq. ; Welcker, Tagebuch^ I. p. 296 sq, ; Curtius, Pdop, i. p.
376 sq, ; Vischer, Erinturungen^ p. 479 ; Bursian, Geogr. 2. p. 263 sq. ; Guuk"
Joanne^ 2. p. 367 ; Philippson, Petoponnes, p. 128. A plan of the site is given by
Le Bas ( Voyage archiohgique^ Itin^raire, pi. 34). I visited Clitor, 3rd October
1895, and have described its remains chiefly from my own observation.

21. 4- On the top of a mountain stands a temple of Atliena

Goria. As Pausanias does not mention the direction in which this
mountsun lay from Clitor, we have no clue to determine the situation <^
the temple, except the very vague one of its distance. Topographers have
conjecturally placed it to the north or the south or the west of the dty.
See Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 260 sq, ; Curtius, Pelop. i. p. 377 ; Bursian,
Geogr. 2. p. 264 ; Gtiide-Joanne^ 2. p. 367. Athena Coria was said to
be a daughter of Zeus by Coryphe, a daughter of Ocean, and the inven-
tion of four-horse chariots was ascribed to her (Cicero, De natura deorum,
iii. 23. 59).

22. I. Stymphalus. The valley of Stymphalus lies immediately
to the east of the valley and lake of Pheneus, from which it is divided
only by the ridge of Mount Geronteum. The route from the one valley
to the other has been already described (viii. 16. i sqq,, with the note),
as well as the route from Orchomenus to Stymphalus (viii. 13. 4 sq,^
with the notes). The general features of the valleys of Stymphalus and
Pheneus resemble each other. Both are shut in so closely on all sides
by mountains and hills that the water which accumulates in them has
no outlet except by underground chasms, and forms in the bottom of
each valley a lake which shrinks in summer. But the valley of Stym-
phalus is smaller and narrower than the valley of Pheneus, and its lake is
quite different. Instead of a deep sea-like expanse of blue water, we have
here a small lake of the most limpid clearness, the shallowness of which
is proved to the eye by the patches of reeds and other water-plants that
emerge from the surface of the water even in the middle of the lake. The
palm of beauty is generally, I believe, awarded to the lake of Pheneus ;
but the charms of Stymphalus are of a rarer and subtler sort. Blue
lakes encircled by steep pine-clad mountains may be found in many



CH. XXII LAKE OF STYMPHALUS 269

lands ; but where shall we look for the harmonious blending of grand
mountains and sombre pine-forests with a still, pellucid, shallow, but not
marshy lake, tufted with graceful water-plants, such as meets us in
Stymphalus ?

Tlie lake of Stymphalus may be a mile and a half long by half a
mile wide. On the north it bathes the foot of a ridge or chain of low
heights, covered with rugged grey rocks and overgrown with prickly
shrubs, which reaches its highest point (perhaps 400 feet above the
lake) on the west and descends gradually in terraces to the east, where
its last rocks are elevated above the plain and lake by only a few feet
On the crest of this rocky ridge, towards its eastern end, are some
remains of the citadel of Stymphalus. At the back of the ridge a
stretch of level ground, perhaps a quarter of a mile wide, divides it from
the steep slopes of the majestic Cyllene, which rises like a wall on the
northern side of the valley. The sides of this great mountain are
mostly bare and of a reddish-grey hue ; but the grey shoulder of its
sister peak on the east, joined to it by a high ridge, is mottled with
black pines. The mountains on the southern side of the lake are also
steep and high ; low bushes mantle their lower and dark pine-forests
their upper slopes. Conspicuous on the south-west is the deep glen
(the WolTs Ravine), between immense pine -covered slopes, through
which the road goes to Orchomenus. On the west an expanse of
level plain about 3 miles long, mostly covered with maize -fields and
vineyards, intervenes between the lake and the high mountains which
divide the valley from the lake of Pheneus ; the sides of these moun-
tains are grey with rocks or black with pine-woods. On the eastern
side of the lake another plain, swampy and traversed by canals and
ditches, stretches to the foot of the lower hills which bound the valley
of Stymphalus on the east. The road to Sicyon and Corinth goes
that way. The whole length of the valley from east to west is about
8 miles, and its breadth from north to south about a mile.

The chief source of the lake of Stymphalus is at Kioniay a mean
little Albanian hamlet, which stands among trees and flowing water at
the southern foot of Mount Cyllene, a mile or so distant from the lake.
Here a copious spring of clear water rises, and forms a considerable
stream which flows rapidly south-west to join the lake. Another
spring of pellucid water rises at the foot of the rocky ridge which
bounds the lake on the north. The lake is drained near its south-
eastern end by an artificial tunnel dug through the mountain-side. At
this point there is a dip or gully in the range of mountains which
boimds the valley of Stymphalus on the south. Through the gully the
path goes to Phlius ; and at the foot of the hill, immediately below the
gully, is the tunnel. A deep cutting in the soil leads to its mouth,
which is enclosed by a culvert Two or more canals, with banked-up
sides, conduct the water of the lake to the tunnel. This drainage work
was executed by a company which undertook in 1881 to drain the
lakes of Stymphalus and Pheneus, but which has up to the present
time (1896) only partially effected its purpose. The tunnel perhaps
follows the line of the aqueduct of Hadrian (see § 3 note). The natural



270 STYMPHALUS bk. viii. arcadia

outlet of the lake is through a chasm at the foot of the mountains
some 2 or 3 miles to the west of the tunnel (see below, note on § 3).

The area of the lake has varied greatly at different times. I have
described it as I saw it in the autumn of 1895, at the time when, after
the drought of summer and before the beginning of the rains, its waters
might be supposed to be at their lowest But in the time of Pausanias
the lake dried up completely in summer (§ 3), and when W. G. Clark
visited the valley on May 13, 1856, there was no semblance of a lake.
He says : " We expected a lake and found a field. Having known and
believed in the Stymphalian lake from childhood, we were disappointed
to see it in rig and furrow." On the other hand, Leake and Dodwell
in 1 806 were assured by the natives that the lake never dried wholly
up even in summer, though it then shrank to a small area round the
subterranean outlet At the time of the French Survey in 1829 it
occupied a considerably larger area than at present

Solitude and silence, broken by the strident cries of the water-fowl
that haunt the mere, reign in the valley. A few hamlets nestle in the
nooks and glens at the foot of the mountains ; but in the wide strath
and on the banks of the lake not a human habitation is to be seen.
The impression left by the scenery on some minds is that of gloom and
desolation. Yet on a hot day, when all the landscape is flooded with
the intense sunlight of the south, it is pleasant to sit on the rocky ridge
of Stymphalus, looking down on the cool clear water of the lake and
listening to the cries of the water-fowl, the drowsy hum of bees, and the
tinkle of distant goat-bells. In such weather even the dark pine-forests
on the mountains, gloomy as they must be under a bleak clouded sky,
suggest only ideas of coolness and shade ; and we can well imagine that
the ancient Stymphalus, with its colonnades and terraces rising from the
lake, must have been a perfect place in which to lounge away the
languid hours of a Greek summer. For the high upland character of
the valley contributes with the expanse of water to temper the heat of
the summer sun. The traveller who passes, as he may do, in a single
day from the cool moist air of the valley to the sultry heat of the plain
of Argos is struck by the contrast between the climates. In the morning
he may have left the cherry trees in blossom at Stymphalus ; in the
evening he may see the reapers getting in the harvest in the plain of
Argos.

See Pouqueville, Voyage de la Grhe, 5. p. 317 sqq, ; Dodwell, Tour^ 2. p. 432
sqq. ; Leake, MorecL, 3. p. 108 sqq. ; Cell, Itinerary of the Morea, pp. 148, 154, 168;
td,j Itinerary of Greece y p. 70 ; id. ^ Journey in the Morea^ p. 380 sqq. ; Boblaye,
RechercheSy p. 147 sq. ; L. Ross, Reisen^ p. 54 sqq. ; Welcker, Tagebuch, I. p.
304 sqq. ; Curtius, Pehp. i. p. 200 sqq. ; Beul^, Atudes sur le Piloponn^se^ p.
158 ; Vischer, Erinnerttngeny pp. 496-501 ; W. G. Clark, Pehponnese, p. 319 x^^.;
Bursian, Geogr. 2. p. 194 sqq. ; Baedeker,' p. 304; Guide-Joanne, 2. p. 380 sqq. ;
A. Meliarakes, Fedry/xi^ki tov vofiov *Apyo\Ldos kolI Koptvdlai, p. 152 sqq. ; Philipp-
son, PeloponneSy pp. 72, 144.

Here and elsewhere (ii. 3- 5 ; v. 10. 9 ; viii. 4. 6 ; ix. 11. 6) Pau-
sanias calls the place Stymphelus and the people Stymphelians. Once,
however, he calls the place Stymphalus (ii. 24. 6) ; and that the correct



CH. XXII CITY OF S7YMPHALUS 271

forms were Stymphalus and Stymphalian, not Stymphelus and Stym-
phelian, is proved by the usage of ancient writers both Greek and Latin
(Herodotus, vi. 76; Xenophon, Anabasis^ i. i. 11 ; Scylax, Periplus^
44; Strabo, viii. pp. 275, 371, 389; Ptolemy, iii. 14. 35, ed. Miiller;
ApoUodorus, ii. 5. 6 ; Polybius, ii. 5 5, iv. 68 and 69 ; Diodorus, iii. 30,
iv. 13 and 33, xix. 63; Lucian, Jupiter Tragoedus^ 21 ; Aelian, Var.
hist. ii. 33 ; Stephanus Byzantius, 5,v, ^Tvfi<f>aXos ; Pliny, Nat. hist,
iv. 20 ; Lucretius, v. 29 ; Statius, Sylv. iv. 6. loi ; /V/., Theb. iv. 298), as
well as by the coins of Stymphalus (Head, Historia numorum, p. 380 ;
Catalogue of Greek Coins in the British Museum : Peloponnesus^ p. 199),
and an inscription found on the site {Bulletin de Corr, helUnique^ 7
(1883), p. 486 sqq,)

22. I. proved by the verses of Homer. See Iliad^ ii. 603 sgq.
22. I. Stymphalus their founder was a grandson of Areas.

Stymphalus was said to be a son of Elatus, who was a son of Areas.
See viii. 4. 1-6.

22. 2. Hera Child Full-grown Widow. On

these three titles of Hera see L. R. Famell, The Cults of the Greek
States^ I. pp. 190-192. Mr. Famell suggests that as Hera was essentially
a goddess of women, so the various stages of a woman's life may have
been represented by the three different aspects of the goddess which
were indicated by these titles. With the legend told to explain her title
of Widow he compares the legend of the origin of the festival called
Daedala at Plataea (ix. 2. i sq.) ; and he conjectures that both legends
arose from a practice of concealing the image of the goddess for a time
in some lonely place.

22. 3. The present city. Remains of the ancient city of Stym-
phalus are to be seen on, and at the southern foot of, the rocky ridge
which rises from the northern edge of the lake (see above, p. 269). The
ridge descends in terraces from west to east. The lower eastern portion
of the ridge, divided from the western by a dip, seems to have been the
acropolis. On its western and highest point are the massive remains of
a quadrangular tower measuring about 2 5 paces from north to south by
8 paces from east to west The north wall of the tower, which is the
best preserved, is about 9 feet high. It is constructed of very massive
blocks roughly hewn in polygons. The area of the summit, which is very
small, is overgrown with prickly shrubs. From this square tower, as a
keep, strong fortification-walls ran along both the northern and southern
edges of the ridge. They were about 10 feet thick, and were built
partly of polygonal but mostly of regular quadrangular masonry ; round
towers projected from the southern of the two walls. These walls and
towers existed down to the middle of the nineteenth century ; but, with
the exception of the ruined square tower on the summit, which still
stands, they seem to have since disappeared ; at least I failed to find
them on my visit to the ruins in September 1895. The crest of the
ridge, which may be some 60 yards broad at the broadest, is mostly
encumbered by a mass of rough natural rocks and overgrown with
prickly shrubs. But at the eastern foot of the summit, on which is the
square tower, and only a few feet below it, the ground has been cleared



272 CITY OF STYMPHALUS bk. viii. arcadia

artificially, and on this clearing are the well-defined foundations of a
quadrangular building, apparently a temple with a fore-temple {fironaos)
or portico facing east or south-east. The foundations of the temple (?)
without the portico are 8 paces long by 6 paces wide ; the fore-temple
or portico, of which the foundations are preserved, was 4 feet deep.
Only the outer foundation-walls are preserved ; they are built of large
squared blocks.

The southern face of the ridge, along the margin of the lake, has been
scarped in various places and hewn into seats, a staircase, etc. One of
the scarps may be 100 yards long by 20 feet high. At the extreme east
end of the ridge the face of the rock has been hewn away in a curve to
a height of 10 or 12 feet, while at the foot of the cutting a ledge has
been left to form a seat. A hundred yards or so to the west of this
cutting is a small exedra or semicircular seat cut out of the face of the
rock ; it may measure 6 or 7 feet across. Above it are steps or seats
also cut out of the rock. Between the southern face of the ridge and
the edge of the water there intervenes a narrow strip of level ground, on
which may be seen several cuttings in the rock and foundations of
edifices. Thus in the flat ground to the east of the great scarp there is
a base hewn out of the rock, with one step running all round it. The
base may be 10 feet long and 7 feet wide. In front of the long scarp
there are foundations of two buildings which may have been temples.
One of them, measuring 1 8 paces from east to west by 8 paces from
north to south, would seem to have been a temple with fore-temple
{fronaos) and back-chamber (ppisthodomos) ; the foundations of the
outer walls and of the cross-wall which divided the fore-temple from the
cella are preserved ; but of the cross - wall which divided the back-
chamber from the cella only two blocks remain. These remains may be
80 yards distant from the foot of the ridge. A few yards beyond it to
the south, at the very edge of the water, a long straight foundation-wall
runs along the brink of the lake. It was doubtless part of a dam built
to exclude the water of the lake from the flat ground at the foot of the
ridge. In this line of wall I observed the semicircular foundations of a
tower or bastion projecting into the lake. Farther to the west, but still
in front of the great scarp, are foundations which seem to have formed
part of a fountain ; grooves are cut in the upper surfaces of several of
the blocks as if to serve as water-channels, and from under the ancient
masonry a spring of the most limpid water flows with a purling sound.
This spring is one of the sources of the Stymphalian Lake ; its water
was probably enclosed by a wall, through which it flowed in several
spouts.

So much for the remains of the ancient city which are to be seen on
or in front of the rocky ridge. At the back of the ridge, as we have
seen (p. 269), a stretch of flat ground, perhaps a quarter of a mile wide,
intervenes between the ridge and the high abrupt slopes of Mt. Cyllene.
In this little plain, at the foot of Cyllene, are the remains of a large
Byzantine basilica, about 1 30 feet long by 60 feet wide. The walls,
which are standing to a considerable height, contain many squared
blocks, which may be ancient ; the core is rudely constructed of small



CH. XXII CITY OF STYMPHALUS 273

stones, bricks, and mortar. Two columns with rude capitals are built
flat against the inner side of the south wall. About a hundred yards or
more to the south-west of the basilica are the ruins of a mediaeval tower
with a gateway through it ; the masonry is rough. The gateway is
supposed to have formed part of a large fortified enclosure, within which
the basilica stood. A wall or causeway about 1 2 feet wide seems to
have run from the gateway across the flat ground to the northern foot of
the ridge which formed the acropolis of Stymphalus. Probably the
greater part of the ancient city stood on this level ground. At the
eastern end of the basilica I observed the remains of an ancient Greek
foundation - wall built of massive squared blocks. They may have
belonged to the Doric temple of which Dodwell in 1 806 saw the rains
(including fluted drums of Doric columns and pilasters, and large blocks
of marble and stone) close to the basilica. The larger colunms seen by
him measured 3 feet in diameter, the smaller only 18 inches. It was
doubtless from these columns, which have now disappeared, that the
place acquired its modem name of Kionia or <the columns.' The
name is now transferred to the wretched little Albanian hamlet which
stands some three-quarters of a mile away to the east, at the spring
which is the chief source of the Stymphalian Lake (see above, p. 269).
It is at the hamlet of Kionia that travellers who wish to visit the ruins
of Stymphalus find quarters for the night.

The foregoing description of the site and the ruins is based almost entirely on
my own notes, made on the spot 30th September 1895. The fortifications seem
to have been much better preserved down to the middle of the century. See
Dodwell, TouTy 2. p. 433 sq, ; Leake, Morea^ 3. p. no sq, ; Boblaye, Recherches^
p. 147 ; L. Ross, Reisen, p. 54 sq. ; Curtius, Pelop, I. p. 203 sqq, ; Welcker,
Tagebuchy i. p. 305 sqq. ; Beul^, Etudes sur le Piloponftiset p. 163 sq, ; Vischer,
Erinnerungen^ p. 497 sq, ; W. G. Clark, Pelop, p. 320 sqq, ; Bursian, Geogr, 2.
p. 196 sq, ; Guide-Joanne y 2. p. 387 sq,

22. 3. a spring from which the Emperor Hadrian etc. This is
no doubt the copious spring, now called by the general name oiKephalo-
vrysi (* source,' * spring '), which rises at the hamlet of Kionia^ about a
mile to the north-east of the ruins of Stymphalus. See above, p. 269.
At periods when the lake is low the river formed by the spring flows
obliquely in a south-westerly direction across the plain for 2 miles or so
before it disappears into the chasm on the southern side of the valley.
But when the lake is high, as it is at present, the river is engulfed in it
about a mile from the spring. Near the village of Zaraka^ at the foot
of Mt. Cyllene, to the north-east of the ruins of Stymphalus, Gell
observed the arches of an aqueduct, which may have been the one
erected by Hadrian. The remains of it are said to be still visible on
the north-east bank of the lake, and again near the sea, to the west of
Corinth, at a place where there are some mills on the Longo-Potantos river.

See Dodwell, Tour, 2. p. 433 ; Gell, Journey in the Morea^ p. 384 ; Leake,
Moreoy 3. p. 109 ; Curtius, Pehp, i. p. 201, cp. 206 ; id,y 2. p. 592 ; Vischer,
Erinnerungeny p. 49S ; W. G. Clark, Pelop, p. 322 ; Guide-Joanney 2. pp. 388, 389.

According to the French surveyors the course of the aqueduct seems
to have been this. , A subterranean channel probably conducted the

VOL. IV T



274 STYMPHALUS bk. viii. a&cadia

water from the Stymphalian valley into the long valley oi SkoHm or
Alea (see viii. 23. i note). The aqueduct followed the eastern side of
this latter valley, and crossing a pass toward Apano-velesi reached the
northern end of the valley of the Inachus, keeping at a great height in
order to cross by the pass of the Tretus (see ii. 1 5. 2 note). Thence,
instead of following the valley of the Longo-Potamos northward, it
turned east, passed below the village of Ha^ios VasilioSy and then
skirted the eastern flanks of Mt Skona and the Acro-Corinth. Thus
from the time it entered the pass of the Tretus it appears to have
followed the line of the modem railway from Argos to Corinth. By
taking this route Hadrian's engineers were able to dispense with arches
and almost wholly with subterranean works, as the slope of the ground
was exactly what was required. See Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 148. If
the French surveyors are right, the arches seen by Gell, and the remains
near the mouth of the Longo-Potamos^ cannot be those of Hadrian's
aqueduct

22. 3. in snnuner there is no mere etc See above, p. 268 sqq,
Pausanias clearly says that the lake, when it existed, was close to the
spring, and that the river flowed from the lake into the chasm ; hence
he supposed that the lake was at the north side of the valley, since the
spring is on that side. In point of fact the lake, when it exists, seems
always to extend to the chasm on the south side of the valley, and the
river flows from the spring into the lake, not from the lake into the
chasm. Hence perhaps, as W. G. Clark observed (Pelop. p. 320 note 3),
Pausanias visited Stymphalus in summer, when the lake was wholly
dried up, and misunderstood what the natives told him as to the posi-
tion of the lake.

22. 3. This river goes down into a chasm etc. This chasm is a
cavern at the foot of a limestone precipice, which terminates the slope
of a steep rocky mountain on the southern side of the valley. W. G.
Clark, who visited the valley when the lake was quite dried up, says :
"We soon came to a stream running swiftly in a channel 10 or 12 feet
deep, which it had scooped for itself in the accumulated sand, hastening
to the cavern which yawns for it at the foot of an abrupt limestone cliff.
At the mouth of the cavern were wooden piles, broken here and there
by the violence of the current, the object of which was to prevent any
large solid substance being carried in which might stop the passage.
. . . The grey face of the rock, tufted with red flowers, the dark cave,
and the turbid river, making its mad plunge from sunlight to darkness,
presented a striking picture to the eye and the imagination " (Pelopon-
nesus, p. 319 sg,) Cp. Leake, Morea, 3. p. 108 sq. ; Gell, Journey in
the Morea, p. 382 ; Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 201. The view mentioned by
Pausanias that the water which here enters the cavern reappears as the
Erasinus river near Argos (see ii. 24. 6 note), is still held by the
natives of the valley. They say that fir-cones, thrown in large quantities
into the cavern, have reappeared in the Erasinus (Gell, op. cii, p.
382 sq.) Leake inclined to believe that the experiment had actually
been made in ancient times, and that the tradition had survived ; other-
wise it is difficult to account for the belief in the identity of the two



CH. XXIII STYMPHALUS 275

waters, " as the distance between the two points is much greater than
the length of any of the other subterraneous rivers of the Peloponnesus,
and several high mountains and intersecting ridges intervene " {Morea^ 3.
p. 113 j^.) At Stymphalus there appears to have been an image of
the Erasinus river in the shape of a bull (Aelian, Var, hist, ii. 33).
There is now an artificial outlet for the waters of the lake some 2 or 3
miles east of the natural chasm. See above, p. 269.

22. 4- man-eating birds once bred be^de tiie water of Stym-
phalns etc. On some coins of Stymphalus the head of one of the
Stymphalian birds is represented ; it is the head of a water-fowl, not of
a monster. On other coins of the city Hercules appears striking at the
Stymphalian birds with his club. See Imhoof-Blumer and Gardner,
Nupn. Comm. on Paus, p. 99, with pL T x. xi. xii. On a black-figured
amphora in the British Museum (B. 163) Hercules is depicted stoning
the Stymphalian birds with a sling ; the birds appear as long-necked
water-fowl with variegated plumage. See Gazette arcfUologique^ 2(1876),
pi. 3. The subject is represented in a few other vase-paintings, on
Roman sarcophaguses, and on various other ancient monuments. See De
Witte, * Hercule et les oiseaux de Stymphale,' Gazette arcIUologiquey 2
(1876), pp. 8-10. The legend, mentioned by Pausanias on the authority
of Pisander of Camira, that Hercules drove away the birds by the noise
of a bronze rattle, is mentioned also by Apollonius Rhodius {Argonaut,
ii. 1052 sqq,y with the scholiast on verse 1054). Apollodorus says (ii.
5. 6) that the birds roosted in the dense forest which overhung the
lake ; that Hercules plied the bronze rattle which he had received from
Athena ; and that when the startled birds fiew up out of the wood, he
brought them down with his arrows. Some have fancied that the man-
eating Stymphalian birds are a mythical expression for the supposed
pestilential vapours exhaled by the marshes (Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 203 ;
Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 195). The water of the lake is beautifully clear,
but nevertheless the inhabitants of the valley are said to suffer much
from fever (A. Meliarakes, rcoiy/wK^ia tou vo\iJO\) 'ApyokiSos koI Kopiv-
^tas, p. 1 54 ; Philippson, Petoponnes, p. 144). This is not strange, since
the plain immediately to the east of the lake is swampy.

22. 7. an old sanctuary of Stymplialian Artemis. Leake con-
jectured that the ruins of a Doric temple beside the Byzantine basilica
(see above, p. 273) may have been the remains of the sanctuary of
Artemis {Morea^ 3. p. no sq.) His conjecture is perhaps confirmed
by the discovery, in this neighbourhood, of an inscription which mentions
the sanctuary of Artemis and seems to have been set up in it. See
Bulletin de Corresp, helUnique^ 7 (1883), p. 490. Curtius and Vischer
thought that the sanctuary may have occupied the site of the basilica
(Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 205 ; Vischer, Erinnerungen, p. 498 sq.) On
the other hand, Bursian conjectured that the temple of which remains
are to be seen on the acropolis below the western tower (see above, p.
271 sq,) may have been the sanctuary of Artemis {Geogr. 2, p. 197).

23. I. Alea. Very considerable remains of the walls and towers of
Alea are to be seen near Bougiati, a village about 8 miles due south of
the ruins of Stymphalus. The distance by road, however, from Stym-



276 A LEA BK. VIII. ARCADIA

phalus to Alca is not less than 10 miles. The route at first coincides
with that to Phlius. It goes south-eastward across the Stymphalian
plain, somewhat to the east of the lake, ascends the stony gorge in the
mountains immediately above the artificial outlet of the lake (see above,
p. 269), and then descends into a long valley which runs in a southerly
direction. Here at the head of the valley the road to Phlius diverges
to the cast and ascends a narrow valley which joins the main vaUey
from the east. We continue to follow the main valley southward, riding
for some distance beside the artificial banked-up channel in which the
water of the lake of Stymphalus, after traversing the tunnel, is conveyed
away. Maize and vines are gro\\'n in the broad flat bottom of the
valley. We pass on the west the mouth of a long narrow valley in
which stands the village of Skotiniy surrounded by fruit-trees. About 3
miles farther to the south we come to the entrance of the valley of
Bougiati^ which opens up on the west side of the main valley which we
have been following. The villajje of Bougiati stands at the foot of a
very steep slope a mile and a half or so up the valley. A high and
rugged pass, barely practicable for horses, leads over the mountains
from Bougiati to Kandyhiy and so to Orchomenus (see above, p. 229 jf.)
The mouth of the valley of Bougiati is partially closed on the east by a
hill which projects southward from the higher mountains on the north.
This is the hill of Alea. A saddle connects it on the north with the
higher mountains, and from here it slopes gradually southward in the
form of a ridge till it subsides into the plain. But while the slope from
north to south is long and gradual, the ridge falls away steeply, though
not precipitously, on the east and west ; its eastern slope is to the main
valley, its western slope is to the side valley of Bougiati. These steep
slopes to the east and west are overgrown with holly-oak bushes. At
its highest point, on the north, the hill may be some 600 feet above the
plain. The city walls of Alea are well preserved on the eastern and
western sides of the hill or ridge. On the west side they descend the
whole length of the ridge from north to south. On the east side they
do not follow the ridge southward to its termination, but strike do\i-n
the steep slope in a south-easterly direction till they reach the plain.
The terminations of these two lines of wall in the plain must have been
formerly united by a third wall skirting the foot of the hill, but no
remains of it exist. On the other hand the angle fonned by the con-
vergence of the two walls on the top of the hill has been cut off by two
cross-walls from the rest of the hill. These inner cross-walls are at
right angles to each other and make, with the two outer walls, an
irregular quadrangle, which formed the acropolis. Both the outer and
the inner walls are well preser\'ed. They are built of grey limestone in
the polygonal style. The masonry is solid and substantial but rather
rough ; the blocks are not cut and jointed with the exquisite preci-
sion which characterises, for example, the great terrace- wall of the
temple at Delphi. In the outer west wall there are pieces that are
nearly quadrangular in style. Square towers project at inter\'als from
the curtain, and most of them, like the walls, arc in good preservation.
In the long outer wall on the western side of the ridge there are nine-



CH. xxiii ALEA 177

teen of these towers ; in the shorter eastern wall there are thirteen ; and
in the cross-walls which form the acropolis there are three. Walls and
towers are commonly standing to a height of from three to five, six,
seven, and eight courses. Where six to eight courses are standing the
height averages about 1 1 and 1 2 feet. The greatest number of courses
standing in one place, so far as I observed was ten and the greatest
height about 16 feet. The thickness of the ^^alls, where both faces
are preserved, is about 10 feet. Some of the blocks are \ery large

Vtillay of Boug at


Valley



especially in the interval between the eighth and ninth towers of the
west wall ; one block here is 9 feet long by 4 feet high. The towers
are as a rule 16 to 18 feet broad on the face, and project 8 to 9 feet
from the curtain. The inier\*als between them average 30 to 40 yards.
In the eastern wall, however, the towers are not so regular, the steep
and broken slope here necessitating some deviations from architectural
uniformity. For example, one lower on this side is 30 feet broad ;
another projects as much as 16 feet 9 inches from the curtain, while a
third projects only 6 feel g inches.

Of the two inner cross-walls which form, with the converging outer
walls, the acropolis on the top of the hill, one starts from the west outer
wall and runs eastward ; it is strengthened by three square projecting
walls. The other starts from the eastern outer wall and runs southward,
meeting the other at a right angle ; in it there is a gateway g feel wide
which leads into a passage 12 feet long. These two inner walls are
built of very massive polygonal blocks, and are standing to a height of
from four to seven courses (9 to 12 feet). The ground inside of the
acropolis is littered with fragments of thick red pottery.

The view from the hill of Alea embraces the valleys on both sides,



278 CAPHYAE bk. viii. arcadia

with high barren mountains rising from them and bounding the horizon
in all directions. The outlines of the mountains on the east, south, and
north are bold and fine.

I have described the ruins of Alea from notes made by me on a visit to the
site, 14th October 1895. My observations differ in a number of points from
the description of the site given in the Guide-Joanne (2. p. 390), for example
as to the number of towers in the east wall and in the inner wall of the acropolis.
The statement that the walls are standing to a height of 15 metres (nearly 50 feet)
is certainly wrong. Compare also Curtius, Pelop. I. p. 2dS sq. ; Bursian, Gecjgr. 2,
p. 198.

Dodwell and Gell wrongly identified Alea with some walls of large
rough stones which they obser\'ed at the foot of a precipitous rocky
slope, on the southern side of the ridge which bounds the \'alley of
Stymphalus on the south-east. The ruins described by them appear to
have been situated near the southern foot of the stony gorge where the
roads from Stymphalus to Phlius and Alea diverge from each other (see
above, p. 276). But the place is about 7 miles north of the real site of
Alea.

See Dodwell, Tour, 2. p. 432; GeW, /oumejf in the Morea^ p. 384; ft/..
Itinerary of Greece y p. 70 sq, ; ii/,, Itinerary of the Morea^ p. 168.

23. I. at this festival of Dion3rsas women are sconrgecL

The scourging may have been intended as a purification or as a mode
of fertilising the patients ; this was the intention of the blows adminis-
tered to women at the Lupercalia in Rome, and ceremonies of the same
sort are common in many lands. See W. Mannhardt, * Die Lupercalien,'
Myihologische Forschiingen^ kap. iii. ; The Golden Bought 2. pp. 213 sgg.^
233 sqq, Cp. note on viii. 15. 3. As to the scourging of the Spartan
boys see iii. 16. 10.

23. 2. In my description of Orchomenus I showed etc. See
viii. 13. 4 note.

23. 2. the plain of Caphyae. This is the western part of the
northern plain of Orchomenus. See note on viii. 13. 4. In the south-
west comer of the plain, below the village of P/esia, which stands on
the hills that bound the plain on the south, an isolated rock rises from
the flat ground. It is of round shape ; and its flat top is enclosed by
remains of Cyclopean walls and bears many vestiges of ancient founda-
tions. This is probably the ancient Caphyae. Leake and Peytier
placed Caphyae farther north, near the village of Kotottssa on the
western verge of the plain. But the ancient remains there are scanty.

See Leake, Morea, 3. p. 103 ; Boblaye, Recherches, p. 150; Curtius, Pelo/>. i.
p. 226 ; Bursian, Geogr. 2. p. 206 ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 382. Cp. note on § 6.

23. 2. It goes down into a chasm etc. This chasm or Jta/a-
voihra is said to be now nearly filled up ; but I cannot determine, from
my authorities, whether it is below the village of Plesia near the south-
west comer of the plain, or at the village of Kotoussa on the western
side of the plain. See Leake, Morea^ 3. p. 103; Curtius, Pelop, i.
p. 225 5q,\ Baedeker,^ p. 302; Guide-Joanne, 2. p. 382. The plain



CH. XXIII THE TRAGUS— CONDYLEA 279

is bounded on the west by the chain of hills now called Mt. Kastania.
On the western side of this range is the valley of the Vitina river which
flows northward from the neighbourhood of Methydrium to join the
Ladon. At the northern foot of Mt. Kastania rises the river of Dora
(or Tara\ which joins the Vitina river a little below the khan of Dara
{Tara), It issues at once as a respectable stream from the mountain,
and is probably the emissory of the marshy northern plain of Orcho-
menus, which lies on the other side of the hills. Thus the river of
Dara appears to be the Tragus, and it further answers to Pausanias's
description of that river by being perennial ; even in summer it is a
stream of some size. Its modern name is derived from the Albanian
village of Dara, which stands about a mile and a half to the north-east
of the khan of Dara^ at the foot of a long bare mountain. The khan,
on the other hand, stands beside the river in the low swampy bottom
of the valley, which is here broad and open. See Leake, Morea^ 2.
p. 269 sq.\ id,^ Pelopon. 221 ; Curtius, Pelop. i. p. 378 sq.\ Guide-
Joanne^ 2. p. 381 ; Philippson, Peioponnes^ p. 74.

23. 3. Artemis, snmamed Cnacalesian. The surname was
probably derived from the name of the mountain (§ 4). See, however,
note on iii. 18. 4.

23. 4* the plane-tree of Menelaus. According to Theophrastus
{Hist, plant, iv. 13. 2) the plane-tree at Caphyae was planted by
Agamemnon. Theophrastus is followed by Pliny {Nat, hist. xvi. 238).

23. 5. a list of the old trees etc. Lists of old trees are

given also by Theophrastus {Hist, plant, iv. 13. 2) and Pliny {Nat, hist.
xvi. 234-240). Theophrastus mentions the olive at Athens, the palm
at Delos, the wild olive at Olympia from which the victors' wreaths
were made, the oaks (<^yot) at Ilium over the tomb of Ilus, the plane-
tree at Delphi, said to have been planted by Agamemnon, and the
plane-tree at Caphyae. As to the willow at Samos, see vii. 4. 4 ; as to
the oak at Dodona, see note on i. 17. 5, vol. 2. p. 159 sq,\ as to the
olive on the Acropolis at Athens, see i. 27. 2 note ; as to the olive at
Delos, see C. Botticher, Baumkultus^ p. 1 1 5 j^. ; as to the laurel at
Daphne in Syria, see Philostratus, Vit, Apollon, i. 16. i.

23. 6. Condylea. About ten minutes to the north-west of
Caphyae some remains of ancient city- walls and marble buildings
extend from the foot of the hills into the plain. These may be the
ruins of Condylea. But Curtius thought they were the ruins of
Caphyae, and he may be right. See Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 226 (where
MHlen seems a misprint for Minuten) ; Bursian, Geogr. 2. p. 206 ;
Guide-Joanne, 2, p. 382.

23. 7. the Strangled One. The Arcadian worship of the
Strangled Artemis is mentioned by Clement of Alexandria on the
authority of Callimachus {Protrept, ii. 38, p. 32 ed. Potter). Dr.
Verrall sees in the legend a tradition of sacriflce by stoning. See his
note on Aeschylus, Agam, 1107 ; and cp. my note on iv. 22. 7. With
the worship of the Strangled Artemis we may compare the worship of
the hanged Helen (Helen of the Tree) in Rhodes. See iii. 19. 9 sq,,
with the note. Mr. Famell considers that the story of the Strangled



28o UPPER VALLEY OF LADON bk. viii. arcadia

(or Hanging) Artemis arose from a custom of hanging the mask or
image of Artemis, as a goddess of vegetation, on a tree to secure its
fertility {The Cults of the Greek States^ 2. p. 428 sq,)

23. 8. Nasi and fifty farlongB fieurther. Pausanias now

leaves the northern plain of Orchomenus on his way to Psophis. He
crosses over the ridge of Mt. Kastania which bounds the plain on the
west, and descends to Nasi, the source of the Tragus, now the river of
Dara {Tara), See § 2 note. The river of Dara, after uniting with
the river of Vitina in the open plain a little below the khan of Daroy
flows north-west through a narrow pass closely shut in by mountains on
either side, till it joins the Ladon. The distance from the source of
the Tragus to its junction with the Ladon is, as Pausanias says, about
50 furlongs. See Leake, Morea^ 2. pp. 268-272. Pausanias clearly
says (§2) that Nasi was at the source of the Tragus. The French
surveyors, Curtius, and the ^\Titer in the Guide-Joanne are therefore
wrong in placing Nasi at the junction of the river of Dara with the
river of Vitina, See Boblaye, RechercheSy p. 157; Curtius, Pelop, i.
p. 378 ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 381.

23. 8. You will cross the river etc Pausanias is now pursuing
his way to Psophis, a city of north-western Arcadia in the valley of the
Erymanthus river. From the point where the Tragus (now the river
of Dara) flows into the Ladon, our author follows the latter river
westward for some miles. This upper valley of the Ladon, from its
junction with the Aroanius (see above, p. 264), is open and somewhat
tame. The hills that enclose it are low and uninteresting ; bushes
cover their slopes. The Ladon flows along the southern side of the
broad flat valley, its rapid stream of opaque greenish-blue water skirting
the rocky declivities of the hills. About 2 miles below the source of
the river a khan stands amid fig-trees, holly-oaks, and walnut-trees on
the left or southern bank of the river. A very little way above the
khan is a bridge across the Ladon. Passing the river by the bridge
we cross over to the north side of the valley, to the point where it is
joined by the valley of the Aroanius. Here we cross the Aroanius,
and turning westward follow the right bank of that river at the foot
of the hills that bound the valley on the north. The two rivers, the
Aroanius and the Ladon, here flow westward for some little way on
opposite sides of the valley, the Aroanius on the north and the Ladon
on the south. The banks of the Aroanius are here prettily wooded
with willows and plane-trees ; its water is of a turbid muddy colour,
quite diffierent from the dark blue water of the Ladon. Except for the
trees (mostly small willows) which fringe the banks of both rivers the
flat bottom of the valley is treeless ; low hills, their uniform slopes over-
grown only with bushes, bound it on both sides. But the tameness of
the scenery is somewhat redeemed by the fine \'iew backward to the
towering sharp-peaked Mt. Chelmos at the upper end of the valley. A
little way on a spur or ridge of bare earth projects into the valley from
the south, narrowing it by about half In the narrow and swampy
defile thus created the Ladon and the Aroanius unite their waters.
Beyond the defile the scenery improves, higher mountains appearing on



CH. XXIII ROAD TO PSOPHIS 281

the south side of the valley. The river now bends away to the south-
west at the foot of these higher mountains. We hold on in a westerly
direction and diverging from the valley of the Ladon cross a low stony
plateau. From this plateau we look down into the valley of the Ladon
stretching away southwards ; it is now narrow and enclosed by moun-
tains with steep and partially wooded sides. Westward we look up
a long valley, bare, broad, and tame, enclosed by low uninteresting
hills. Through this latter valley, which joins the valley of the Ladon
at the point where the river bends away to the south, goes the road to
Psophis. Springs rise at the foot of the hills on either side of the
valley, and a stream, which Leake calls the river of PcUaea-Katounay
flows down it to join the Ladon. Not far from the head of the valley,
on a height which rises on the north bank of the stream, are some
ancient ruins near a fine spring. Some have taken these ruins to be
the remains of Paus (see below, § 9). Opposite the ruins, on the hills
on the south side of the valley, is the modem village of VesinL Soon
afterwards, near the village of Skoupi^ we cross the watershed, which is
formed by the protrusion of two flat masses of stones and soil into the
valley from both sides. Its height above the sea is about 2000 feet.
From the watershed we descend into the valley of Lopesi, which, like
the one we have quitted, runs north-west in nearly a straight line to
Psophis. The broad, well-cultivated bottom of this charming valley is
shaded with oak-trees and watered by a stream which flows down it to
join the Erymanthus river at Psophis. Many villages lie scattered on
the slopes of the hills ; among them is Lopesi on the north bank of the
stream. As to the route followed by Pausanias from Caphyae to
Psophis, at least after he struck the Tragus (the Dara river), there is no
room for doubt. The valleys led him in a straight line to Psophis. Of
the oak forest of Soron which he mentions Leake saw some small
remains near the banks of the Palaea-Katouna river, as he calls it ;
and at one place in this valley, near its foot, where a ledge of limestone
rock stretches like a bar across it, oak-trees are still dotted about
among the corn-fields. In the winter of 219-218 B.C. King Philip V.
marched with a Macedonian army from Caphyae to Psophis in three
days (Polybius, iv. 70).

See Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 249 sq, ; Boblaye, ReckercheSj p. 157 ; Curtius,
Peiop. I. p. 379 S(/, ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 262 stj. ; Guide-Joanne, 2. p. 364 ;
Philippson, Peloponnes, p. 284 sq.

On the summit of the pass which leads southward from the valley
of Lopesi over the bare bushy slopes of Mt. H, Petros to the village of
Kondovazena there are foundations of a small building, apparently a
temple, built of blocks of shell-limestone. The steep ascent from the
valley of Lopesi is through oak woods. See Philippson, Peloponnes^ p.
284.

23. 9. bears. Elsewhere Pausanias tells us that there were bears
on Mt. Taygetus (iii. 20. 4) and Mt Pames (i. 32. i).

23. 9- the mined hamlet of Pans. In the days of Herodotus
this place was a city. He calls it Paeus (or Paeum) and says that



282 PSOPHIS BK. VII I. ARCADIA

Euphorion of that city received the Dioscuri in his house, and after-
wards extended his hospitality to all men. His son Laphanes was one
of the suitors of Agariste, the daughter of Clisthenes, tyrant of Sicyon.
See Herodotus, vi. 127.

23. 9. Sirae. This place was 30 furlongs from Psophis. See viii.
24. 3. If the distance is right, Sirae must have been near the village
of Dekmtni^ in the valley of Lope si ^ but higher up than the village of
that name. See Leake, Pelop, p. 221. Cp. id.^ Morea^ 2. p. 250;
Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 380.

24. I. Psophis. The ruins of Psophis are situated in the narrow
valley of the Erymanthus river, at the point where that stream, flowing
from the north-east, is joined by a tributary stream (the Aroanius, now
called the river of Poretse or Germouisant) which flows into it from the
north-west, coming down a narrow rocky glen enclosed by high moun-
tains. About 100 yards below their meeting-place, the united waters of
the two streams are joined by a third stream, the river of Lopesi^ flow-
ing from the south-east (see note on 23. 8). From these three rivers
the place takes its modem name of Tripotamo^ or * Three Rivers.' All
three rivers are clear rapid streams, flowing over gravelly beds and
bordered by plane-trees. Psophis stood on the right bank of the
Erymanthus, in the angle between it and the Aroanius. A steep but
not high hill rises between the two streams and extends in the form of a
sharp ridge from south-west to north-east, sending down spurs towards
both streams. A narrow strip of level or gently-rising ground is left
between the foot of the hill and the banks of the two rivers. The cit>'-
walls followed the crest of the ridge and descending from it ran along
the steep banks of both streams. They can still be traced nearly
throughout the whole circuit, though they are nowhere very high. They
are defended by towers, mostly square. The masonry is moderately
regular ; the stones are not very large. On the highest point of the
hill are the ruins of a mediaeval tower and of many modem houses. At
the north-eastcm side of the to\vn the open space between the Er^Tnan-
thus river and the hill was defended by a double line of walls ; the
remains of the inner wall may be seen extending from the ridge to the
bank of the river. On the western slope of the spur which descends
towards the meeting of the Erymanthus and Aroanius are the remains
of a small theatre facing west. Part of the circumference of four or
^v^ rows of seats may be seen ; fragments of the seats are also lying
about. The town seems to have lain chiefly in the level space between
the Erymanthus and the hill. Here, not far from the bank of the river,
are the foundations of a rectangular building, about 96 feet long ; in
the bank below there is a spring of water. This building may be the
temple of Erymanthus mentioned by Pausanias (§ 12). A little to the
north of it is the church of St. Peter, enclosed within a wall. At this
church there are a number of small columns, some of them only partially
fluted. The church probably occupies the site of a temple, perhaps the
temple of Aphrodite (§ 6). The situation of Psophis, as Leake observes,
is anything but agreeable, being hemmed in by bare hills of no great
height, which shut out all view, cause occasionally an extreme of heat



CH. XXIV PSOPHTS— MOUNT PHOLOE 283

and cold, and increase the violence of the winds. The bleak landscape
was somewhat brightened, when I saw it in early summer, by the
masses of yellow flowers which mottled the green hill-side above the
scanty ruins of the lower town.

Sec Leake, Morea, 2. p. 240 sqq. ; Boblaye, RechercheSy p. 158 ; Fiedler,
Reise^ i. p. 394; Ciirtius, Pelop, i. p. 384 sqq, ; Welcker, Tagebuchy i. p. 290
sqq. ; Vischer, Erinneittngen^ p. ^Tj sqq, ; Wyse, Pelopon, 2. p. 159 sqq, ; Bursian,
Geogr. 2. p. 260 sqq. ; Baedeker,^ p. 307 ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 363 sq, ; Philipp-
son, PelopofineSy p. 286.

In the winter of 219-218 B.C. Psophis was captured by a Mace-
donian army under King Philip V. Polybius, who describes the capture
of the cit>% has incidentally given a vcr>' exact description of its situation.
See Polybius, iv. 70-72.

24. I. the fonnder of Psophis etc. According to Stephanus
Byzantius {s.v. ^uxjits) the founder of Psophis was either Psophis a son
of Lycaon, or Psophis a daughter of Eryx.

24. 2. Phegia. This seems to mean * oak-town,* from phegos^ a
kind of oak with edible acorns. There are still some oaks on the hills
about Psophis. See Leake, Morea, 2. p. 244 ; Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 388 ;
Welcker, Tagebuch^ i. p. 293. Cp. Stephanus Byzantius, s.v. ^vjycia,
who says that King Phegeus was a brother of Phoroneus.

24. 4. Mount Lampea. With the exception of the branch which
rises in Mt. Tartaric near the village of Sopoto^ on the way from Psophis
to Clitor, the streams which form the Erymanthus river mostly rise in
Mt. KalUphoni (about 6500 feet high), to the north -north -east of
Psophis. Mt. KalUphoni is, therefore, probably the ancient Mt. Lampea.
This agrees with the statement of Strabo (viii. p. 341) that Scollis, a
mountain between the districts of Elis, Dyme, and Tritaea, adjoined Mt.
Lampea in Arcadia. The northern slopes of Mount KalUphoni are
belted with pine forests.

See Leake, Aforea, 2. p. 253 sq, ; id, , Pelopofu p. 224 ; Boblaye, RechercheSy
p. 158 ; Curtius, Pelop. I. p. 385 sq, ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 183 ; Philippson,
PeloponneSy pp. 282, 293.

24. 4- Homer says that in Taygetns etc. The reference seems
to be to Odyssey^ vi. 103.

24. 4. Monnt Pholoe. Here Pausanias tells us that Mount Pholoe
was the range of mountains on the right bank of the Erymanthus river.
Elsewhere (vi. 21. 5) he says that the Leucyanias, another of the
northern tributaries of the Alpheus, had its source in Mount Pholoe.
Strabo says (viii. p. 357) that Pholoe was a mountain of Arcadia which
rose very near Olympia and had its skirts in the territory of Pisa.
Elsewhere the same geographer gives us to understand that Mount
Pholoe bordered on Elis (viii. p. 336), and that the Selleeis, a river
of Elis, flowed from it. Xenophon says that when he lived in
Scillus his sons and their friends used sometimes to hunt on Mount
Pholoe {Anabasis^ v. 3. 10). Putting these various statements together,
we infer that Mount Pholoe was the southern and lower continuation of
Mount Erymanthus (the modem Mount Olono), It is not so much a



284 PSOPHIS BK. VIII. ARCADIA

chain of mountains as a broad table-land, which descends in great forest-
clad terraces from near the source of the Elean Ladon in Mount Ery-
manthus to the lowlands of Elis on the west and the valley of the
Alpheus on the south. See Leake, Morea^ 2. pp. 194-196; Curtius,
Pelop, 2. p. 44 ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 184. In antiquity, as at the
present day, this high table-land would seem to have been covered with
wild and beautiful woods, which the poetic fancy of the Greeks peopled
with Centaurs, of whom the famous Pholus was said to have entertained
Hercules when he came hither to hunt the Erymanthian boar on the
neighbouring mountains (Euripides, Hercules Furens^ 181 sq,\ AnthoL
Palat, vi. 3 and iii ; Orphei Argonauticci^ 382 and 420 ; Apollodorus,
ii. 5. 4; Diodorus, iv. 12 and 70). Mount Erymanthus and Mount
Pholoe are mentioned together by Lucian {Icaromenippus^ 11).

24. 6. there is also in the district of Eryz, in Sicily* a sanctuary
of the Erycinian goddess. This was the famous Carthaginian sanctuary
of Astarte or Ashtoreth on Mt. Eryx. Sir E. H. Bunbury (article ' Eryx '
in Smith's Diet, of Geography) thinks that the legends point to the sanc-
tuary on Mt. Eryx " being an ancient seat of Pelasgic worship, rather
than of Phoenician origin." But the worship, as known to us, appears
to have been purely Phoenician ; and that the goddess was Astarte is
proved by Phoenician inscriptions. See W. Robertson Smith, Religion
of the Semites^ pp. 294, 309, 471. .As to the Semitic character of the
worship Freeman says : "It was assuredly a Phoenician Ashtoreth who
yearly left her temple of Eryx for a journey to Africa and took her doves
with her" {History of Sicily^ i. p. 277). As to these doves of Eryx,
see Athenaeus, ix. p. 394 f ; Aelian, Hist. anim. iv. 2. It is somewhat
surprising to find a sanctuary of this Phoenician goddess in a remote
corner of Arcadia. Cp. Immerwahr, Die arkadisthcn Kulte^ p. 172 sq.
As to the Sicilian Eryx and its Phoenician remains, see Freeman, op. cit.
I. p. 277 sqq. ; Perrot et Chipicz, Histoire de VArt dans VAnfiquiti^
3. pp. 308, 330 sqq. The temple on the top of Mt. Erj'x, with the walls
and gates which defended the foot of the mountain, is represented on
a consular silver coin of the Gens Considia. See T. L. Donaldson,
Architcctura Numismaticay No. xxxii. ; Perrot et Chipiez, op. cit. 3. p. 335.

24. 7. Alcmaeon is also bnried in Psophis etc. Outside the

walls of Psophis, near the meeting of the Erymanthus and Aroanius
rivers, there is a fine oak \i\\ki a picture of the Virgin attached to it.
Beside it lie the ruins of a chapel built of ancient materials and on
ancient foundations. Bursian conjectured that the tomb of Alcmaeon
may have been here (Geogr. 2. p. 261 sq.)

24. 7- cypresses grow ronnd about it etc. The native home of
the cypress seems to be the table-lands of Caboul and Afghanistan,
especially Busih to the west of Herat, where the tree attains an enormous
size. From this home it apparently migrated westward. Hehn
held that where groves of cypresses were to be found in Greece, traces
of Asiatic religion were also to be found. In regard to Psophis in particu-
lar, he saw traces of Phoenician influence in the legend which made
Psophis a daughter of Eryx, in the worship of Erycinian Aphrodite, and
in the legendary connexion of Psophis w^ith the necklace of Eriphyle ;



CH. XXV PSOPHIS 285

for he seems to have agreed with Movers (Die Phoenizicr^ i. p. 509 sq,)
that such trinkets were probably brought to Greece by Phoenician
traders. See Hehn, Kulturpflanzen und Hausihiere^^ pp. 228 sqq.^
489 sq, (pp. 212 sqq,^ 479 sq. Engl, trans.)

24. 8. Alcmaeon came to Psophis etc. With what follows,

compare Apollodorus, iii. 7. 5 sqq. According to Apollodorus the name
of the daughter of Phegeus whom Alcmaeon married was Arsinoe,
not Alphesiboea, as Pausanias calls her. Euripides wrote a drama
Alcmaeon at Psophis^ of which some fragments are preserved. Cp. E.
Bethe, Thebanischc Heldenlieder {^€v^z\%^ 1891), p. 135 sqq,

24. 8. the newest land, wbicli the sea had uncovered etc. Cp.
Thucydides, ii. 102 ; Apollodorus, iii. 7. 5.

24. 10. dedicated the necklace to Apollo at Delphi According
to Phylarchus, quoted by Parthenius {Narrat. Amat 25), the necklace
of Eriphyle was in the sanctuary of Forethought Athena at Delphi.
But Phylarchus perhaps confused the necklace of Eriphyle with the
necklace of Helen, which Menelaus dedicated to Forethought Athena at
Delphi, according to Demetrius Phalereus, cited by Eustathius (on
Homer, Od, iii. 267, p. 1466). As to the temple of Forethought Athena
at Delphi, see x. 8. 6 note.

24. 12. a temple of Erymanthns, with an image of him. The
river Erymanthus was represented, at Psophis in the form of a man,
whereas some Greek rivers were represented in the shape of bulls
(Aelian, Var, hist. ii. 33).

24. 13. a man of Psophis called Aglaus etc. According to Pliny
{Nat. hist. vii. 151) and Valerius Maximus (vii. i. 2) Aglaus was a man
of Psophis who supported himself on a small farm, beyond the bounds
of which he had never strayed ; and when Gyges, king of Lydia, sent to
ask of the Delphic oracle if any man was happier than himself, the
oracle declared that Aglaus was a happier man. Thus Pliny and
Valerius Maximus represent Aglaus as a contemporary of Gyges, whereas
Pausanias makes him a contemporary of Croesus.

24. 14- Homer himself has represented a Jar of blessings etc.
See Iliad^ xxiv. 527 sq. The passage is quoted by Plutarch {ConsoL
ad Apollon. 7).

24. 14. who had called the poet himself both ill-starred etc.
The oracle is quoted by Pausanias elsewhere (x. 24. 2).

25. I. On the way from Psophis to Thelpnsa etc. Leaving
Psophis, we cross the Erymanthus and ascend the steep slope of Mount
Hagias Pctros^ which rises on the left bank of the river, to the south of
Psophis. The oak-forest of Aphrodisium probably clothed the northern
slopes of this mountain. The stone which marked the boundary
between Psophis and Thelpusa perhaps stood on the summit of the
ridge. From the summit we descend by a very steep and zigzag
I>ath among fir-woods to the large village of Velimaki. The torrent
which flows past the village to join the Ladon below Thelpusa is
probably the Arsen. Proceeding southward, after a farther descent, we
see the village of Bokovina on the left. Farther on, in a wild wooded
country, we pass the village of Boutsi on the right. A steep descent



THELPUSA



BK. Vltl. AKCADIA



takes us down into the valley of the Ladon, and wc cross the river by
the bridge of Spatkari in a narrow pass between rocks. The way now
descends along the left bank of the Ladon among delightful woods and
thickets. In less than an hour from crossing the bridge of Spttthari we
reach the place called Vanaena, near which are the ruins of Thelpusa.
The time from Psophis is about sj hours. From beginning to end the
route runs nearly always due south. The site of Caus, mentioned by
Pausanias, has not been identified.



25. 2. the city. The scanty ruins of Thelpusa are situated on
the left bank of the Ladon, a little to the north-west of a place called
Vanatna, where there was formerly a village. About a mile below the
ruins a new stone bridge on four arches crosses the river to the small
and poor hamlet of Toubitsi, where quarters for the night may be bad.
The valley of the Ladon at Thelpusa, in striking contrast to the
tremendous wooded gorge through which the river forces its way a few
miles farther north (see below, p. i8S sq.\ is comparatively open. It is
enclosed by low hills partly bare, partly wooded or bushy, between
which the river winds in several channels over a broad stony bed. To
the north are seen, above the lower and nearer hills, the lofty mountains
through which the Ladon has cleft its way, while down the valley to
the south the view is closed by the high blue mountains beyond the
Alpheus.

The acropolis of Thelpusa probably occupied a two-pointed hill
which rises to a height of perhaps 400 feet a little way back from the
river, on its eastern bank. Towards the river the hill descends in a
series of terraces covered with brown prickly plants and dotted here and
there with trees. On the south it is bounded by a small glen, down
which a stream llows amid beautiful plane-trees and luxuriant vegetation
to join the Ladon. Remains of the ancient fortifical ion- walls are to be
seen on one of the terraces on the western side of the hill, about half-
way between the river and the top of the hill. The terrace slopes
steeply to the west, and on its edge pieces of the walls, forming two
right angles, are standing to a height of three courses or about 4
feet. They are built of massive squared blocks. On the same terrace
or plateau, a few yards east of the
fortification - wall, 1 obsen-ed some
ancient blocks of white lin


^/^^j^yi- stid a standing drum of a fluted
'' -'^^'-^'- column. Some ;o yards farther
cast, on the same terrace, are the
a Roman or Byiantine
building. Two walls of it are stand-
ing for a length of about 1 1 paces
and to a height of 10 or 13 feet j
■wall uniting the two others, but not at
built of rubble faced on the inside and



CH. XXV THELPUSA 287

outside with flat bricks, which are arranged in alternate bands (Fig. 32).
One band consists of several courses of the bricks laid horizontally ; the
other band consists of several rows of diamond-shaped patterns made up
of the bricks. A few large blocks are built into the walls, and others
are lying about. Immediately to the east of this building begins the
upper slope of the hill.

Below this terrace, on the south, there is a lower terrace on which
are standing some half-dozen small drums of columns, broken and worn,
the ruins probably of a temple. The best preserved is fluted and
measures 23 inches in diameter. A few yards east of these remains are
some worn blocks, squared, standing in position, also the buried drum
of a small fluted column, only its upper surface being visible.

A few more scanty remains are to be seen on a low height beside
the river, in the direction of the bridge. Here I saw four drums of
small columns standing in a row in their original positions ; the distance
between the extreme columns is 11 paces. One of them is fluted
and measures between 17 and 18 inches in diameter. Beside the
columns is a sort of basin carved out of a single block of stone. About
half-way between this spot and the acropolis hill are some slight vestiges
of antiquity, including a small unfluted drum of a column, a standing
quadrangular block about 5 feet high, two or three blocks of a wall, and
fragments of red, thick, unpainted pottery.

The site has been identified beyond doubt as that of Thelpusa by
the discovery of two inscriptions within recent years {MittheiL d. arch,
Inst, in Athen^ 3 (1878), p. 177 sq, ; AcAtiov dpxatoAoytKov (1890),
p. 147 sq,)

I have described the situation and remains of Thelpusa from notes made by
me on the spot (6th October 1895). See also Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 97 sqq, \ Gell,
Itinerary of the Morea^ p. I20 ; Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 152; L. Ross, Reisen^
p. \i\ sq,\ Curtius, Pelip, I. p. 370; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 259.

25. 2. the water of the Ladon has its source etc. As to the
source of the Ladon see viii. 2 1 . i note ; as to the upper valley of the
river see above, p. 280 sq. The places mentioned by Pausanias (Leu-
casium, Mesoboa, Nasi, Oryx, Halus, and Theliades) have not been
identified. Leake has some conjectures on the subject {Marea^ 2. p.
271 sqq, ; Pelop, p. 227 sqq,) Cp. Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 374 ; Bursian,
Geogr, 2. p. 263 note 2. As Leake observes, the Nasi here mentioned
cannot be the same place as the Nasi at the source of the Tragus, since
that Nasi was 50 furlongs from Ladon (viii. 23. 8). "But as Nasi, or
the Islands, was a common name in places intersected by diverging or
confluent branches of a river, it is not difficult to imagine that there
may have been two Nasi, although at no greater distance from one
another than six or seven miles" (Leake, Pelop, p. 229). In the Ladon
after its junction with the Aroanius I observed an island large enough
to allow of a small hamlet being built on it. Some such place was
probably Nasi.

Having described the course of the Ladon from its source to the
point where Pausanias quitted it on his way to Psophis (see above,



288 GORGE OF THE LADON bk. viii. arcadia

p. 280 sq,\ I may briefly describe its lower course as &r as Thelpusa. I
have followed the whole course of the river from its source to near the
point where it falls into the Alpheus, with the exception of the bend
which it makes between the point where the road from Caphyae to
Psophis leaves it, and the point immediately below the large village of
Stretzova^ which stands on a mountain-side facing east, at the northern
end of a valley which runs south to the Ladon. The distance of
the village from the river is about 3 miles. The path leads across
bushy and rocky slopes, and then through bare stony fields to the
northern bank of the river. Indian com is here grown in the valley of
the Ladon ; wooded mountains rise from its southern bank, and higher
mountains of imposing contour close the view on the south-east At
the point where we strike the river two springs gush from under rocks
and form a pool shaded by fine spreading plane-trees, whence a stream
flows into the Ladon after a course of a few yards. From this point to
the bridge of Spathari^ a ride of about five hours, the scenery is unsur-
passed in Greece. The river here forces its way along the bottom of a
profound gorge hemmed in by high wooded mountains, which in places
descend in immense precipices, feathered with trees and bushes in their
crevices, to the brink of the rapid stream. The narrow path runs high
up on the right or northern side of the gorge, sometimes overhung by
beetling crags, and affording views, now grand now almost appalling,
down into the depths of the tremendous gorge, and across it to the high
wooded slopes or precipices on the farther side.

The gorge may be said to be divided in two at the village of
Divritsa^ where the mountains recede a little from the river, and the
scenery of the two parts is somewhat different. In the first half, ending
a little above the village of Divritsa^ the river sweeps round the base
of high steep mountains, which on the south side of the gorge are
wooded to their summits and broken every now and then by a profound
glen, the sides of which are also wooded from top to bottom. The
mountains on the north side are in general not wooded, but bare or
overj^rown with bushes. This would detract from the beaut v of the
scenery if the path ran on the south side of the gorge, from which the
barer slopes of the mountains on the north would be visible. As it
is, the path runs along the steep sides of the mountains on the north
side, and the eye rests continually on the mighty wall of verdure that
rises on the other side of the river. I had the good fortune to traverse
this wonderful gorge on a bright October day, when the beautiful woods
were just touched here and there with the first tints of autumn. Far
below the river was seen and heard rushing along, now as a smooth
swirling stream of opaque green water with a murmurous sound, now
tumbling, with a mighty roar, down great rocks and boulders in sheets
of greenish-white foam.

Below Divritsa the grandeur of the gorge increases to the point of
being almost overpowering. Wooded mountains rising steeply from
the river have now given place to enormous perpendicular or beetling
crags tufted with trees and bushes in their crevices wherever a tree or
a bush can find a footing, and overhanging the ravine till there is hardly



CH. XXV GORGE OF THE LADON 289

room to pass under them and they seem as if they would shut out the
sky and meet above the river. Add to this that the path is narrow and
runs high above the stream along the brink of precipices where a slip
or a stumble of the horse might precipitate his rider into the dreadful
depths below. We seem therefore to breathe more freely when, a little
above the bridge of Spathari^ we at last issue from the gorge and see a
great free expanse of sky above us, lower hills, and the river winding
between them through woodland scenery of a pretty but commonplace

type.

Within recent years some remains of antiquity have been discovered
at several places in the gorge. One is near Divriisa^ a village finely
situated in a recess of the mountains on the northern side of the river,
looking down into the deep valley and across it to a very steep and
lofty mountain, whose lower and almost precipitous slopes are cleft by
nearly perpendicular gullies or fissures. The ruins are to be seen on
a small level space of ground about half a mile to the south-east of
DivritscL A path leads down to them from the village, but the place is
still high above the river, which is heard roaring down below. The ruins,
which were excavated by Mr. Leonardos for the Greek Archaeological
Society in 1 891, appear to be those of a small temple 16.80 metres
long by 5.80 metres wide, with a portico or fore-temple {pronaos) at
the east end. Portions of the outer walls survive ; they are built of the
native stone in a style so rude and irregular that one almost hesitates
to regard the building as ancient. However, the discovery of a terra-
cotta head of Athena and a small bronze bowl inscribed with the word
KOPAI (*to the Maid'), settles its antiquity, though it leaves us in
doubt whether the temple was dedicated to Athena or Proserpine. The
walls, where they exist, are standing to a height of only one and two
courses. In the portico, which is 1 1 ft. 9 in. deep from east to west,
there are two large flat blocks of white limestone, apparently part of a
pavement.

Further, on an ancient acropolis called ston Arte near Vachlia^ a
village situated in a side valley about 2 miles north-east of Divritsa^
Mr. Leonardos excavated the lower part of another small temple, which
was provided with a portico or fore-temple {pronaos) and &ced north,
apparently from want of space. This temple is only half the size
of the one at Divritsa, The pedestal of the image in the cella is
preserved.

See AeXr/oi' dpxotoXo7tif6i', 1 89 1, p. 99 J^. ; IIpa/crtifA r^ *Apx*to^o7tf^
'Eratptaj, 1891, pp. 23-^5; Bulletin de Corresp, helUnique, 15 (1891), p. 657.
I visited the temple at Divritsa and have described it partly from my notes.

Further, some excavations have been made in the valley about three
quarters of an hour's ride below Divritsa. The spot is wild and
romantic in the highest degree. A small glen here joins the deep
gorge of the Ladon on the north, and a little stretch of level ground
divides its western bank from the foot of a huge craggy mountain which
towers up in one enormous unbroken precipice of rock, with a tiny
monastery hanging in a seemingly inaccessible position on its face.

VOL. IV U



290 LOfVER VALLEY OF LADON bk, vrii. arcadxa

The ruins are to be seen on the very edge of the glen, just below the
level ground. No account of them, so far as I know, has yet been
published ; but I was told on the spot that they were supposed to be
part of a temple of Demeter. They consist of a wall 1 4 ft. 8 in. long,
with two short walls, each about 3 feet long, joining it at right angles
at either end. One and, at the most, two courses of the walls are
preserved. They are built of roughly-squared blocks of fine limestone :
one block is about 3 feet long by i foot high. The two short walls
project towards the glen, the side of which falls away here so steeply
that there is no room for any building between it and the walls. From
the spot there is a fine view up the gorge of the Ladon.

25. 2. a sanctuary of Eleosinian Demeter. On the right bank
of the Ladon, near the bridge of Spaihariy about 2 miles higher up the
valley than Thelpusa, there are said to be some ancient remains, which
may possibly be those of the sanctuary of Eleusinian Demeter. See
Cell, Itinerary of the Morea^ p. 1 2 1 (who thought they might be the
ruins of the sanctuary of Aesculapius and town of Halus, see §§ 1,2);
Boblaye, Rec/ierches, p. 152 ; Leake, Peiofi, p. 228 ; Curtius, Pelop. i.
p. 372 ; Guide-JoannCy 2. p. 366. I did not observe any ancient remains
near the bridge when I passed it, on the right bank of the river, in
October 1895.

25. 4. After Thelpusa the Ladon descends etc. From Thelpusa
our author now descends the valley of the Ladon to Heraea, which
stood in the valley of the Alpheus, a little to the east of the junction
of that river with the Ladon. I followed the route described by
Pausanias, 6th October 1895, and though I saw none of the antiquities
mentioned by him, I may be allowed to give my notes of the route.
Quitting Toubitsi at 10.32 we crossed the Ladon by the new stone
bridge to its left or eastern bank, which we continued to follow closely
for some time. Later on we ascended a small hill beside the river,
from which, at 11.30, we had a fine view southward to the long range
of blue mountains beyond the Alpheus. The river winds in a level and
green, but on the whole treeless, bottom between low hills which are
wooded and bushy on the west bank, but barer on the east. The bed
of the river is wide and gravelly ; the stream runs in several channels,
which enclose small gravelly and sandy islands, on some of which
bushes grow. In the course of the day our route led us over several
of these islands, the channels which divided them from the bank being
very shallow. The sand reminded me of Milton's line —

** By sandy Ladon's lilied banks,"

but I saw no lilies. At 12.5 I noticed a large island in the river with
trees growing on it. At 12.35 we passed, but did not cross, a long
wooden bridge over the Ladon of curious and primitive construction.
Here the hills on the west side of the river are low and wooded, and
there are thickets of planes (growing as bushes) beside the bed of the
river. Maize is grown on the eastern bank. A little below the wooden
bridge there is a cliff of reddish rock on the west bank of the river.
After traversing the thickets of planes and some of the little sandy and



CH. XXV DEMETER FURY 291

gravelly islands we diverged from the river at 1.12 to reach a spring
which rises in a small side glen, a few hundred yards from the banks
of the Ladon. The water flows from a wall into a stone trough. A
draught of it and a rest in the shade of a tree were welcome in the
heat of the day. The river scenery at this point of the Ladon is pretty,
the hills on both sides being wooded.

From here we ascended a bare plateau dotted with wild apple and
other trees. Next we descended into a deep narrow wooded glen,
followed it for some time, and then ascended to another plateau sprinkled
with trees. From this plateau at 2.24 we saw the Alpheus flowing
along from east to west in its broad valley, with low rounded hills on
the south side and higher mountains appearing beyond them still
farther away in the south. To the south-west we could see the Ladon
flowing into the Alpheus. On this plateau, overlooking the valley of
the Alpheus, is the hamlet of Piri, From it we descended south-
eastward into the valley, and at 3.6 reached the scanty ruins of Heraea.

25. 4. Demeter Fury. With the story of the loves of

Demeter and Poseidon which follows, compare the story told by the
Phigalians (Paus. viii. 42). The stories differ in that whereas in the
Thelpusian version Demeter gave birth to the horse Arion as well as
to a daughter (see § 7), in the Phigalian version she gave birth to
a daughter only. The Thelpusian story is told also by Tzetzes
{Schol. on Lycophron^ I53)' Cp. Immerwahr, Z>/V arkadischen Kulte^
p. no sq. According to another story Poseidon embraced a Fury
{Erinus) at the fountain Tilphusa in Boeotia and she gave birth to the
horse Arion (Schol. on Homer, Iliady xxiii. 346, ed. Bekker ; cp. the
Townley schol. on id, 347, ed. Maass). In ancient Indian mythology,
Saranyu turns herself into a mare ; Vivasvat turns himself into a horse,
follows her, and embraces her, and she gives birth to the two Asvins,
who correspond somewhat to Castor and Pollux. According to
Professors A. Kuhn and Max Miiller the Sanscrit Saranyu is etymo-
logically identical with the Greek Erinus^ and they agree in thinking
that the Indian and Greek myths are also identical, the Hindus and
Greeks having inherited the myth from their common Aryan fore-
fathers. But these distinguished philologists differ widely in their ways
of interpreting the myth. W. Mannhardt thought that the application
of the name Fury (Erinits) to Demeter, and the story that under this
surname she gave birth to the horse Arion, were due to a simple
confusion of the Arcadian Thelpusa and Onceum with the Boeotian
Tilphusa and Onchestus. (As to Onchestus and Tilphusa see ix. 26. 5 ;
ix, 33. I.) He explained the myth of the union of Poseidon and Demeter
in the form of horses as follows. Various peoples have compared the
foam-crested waves of the sea to horses ; in Italian they are called
ccnfolli del mare (* horses of the sea') ; in English we call them * white
horses.' Now the swaying of a corn-field in the wind is naturally
compared to waves ; and when the com waves in the wind, some
German peasants say, "There goes the horse." Similarly a Greek
peasant, watching the com tossed about by the breeze, might have said,
" There goes Poseidon through the com," and might have thought that



292 THE SACRED BASKET bk. viii. arcadia

the sea-god Poseidon and the corn-goddess Demeter, each in horse-
form, were celebrating their nuptials among the waving of the ears.
In some parts of Germany and Austria when the com waves in the
wind, they say, " The stalks are pairing," or " the com is marrying,"
or " the com is celebrating its wedding." The fruit of the union of
Poseidon and Demeter was Proserpine, the harvest This is Mann-
hardt's interpretation of the myth. Whatever explanation we give of it,
the story of the union of Poseidon (especially in horse-form) and
Demeter seems to have been widely current, for we often find the two
deities associated. See ii. 32. 8; viii. 10. i sq,\ viii. 37. 9; Plutarch,
Quaest. Conviv. iv. 4. 3.



On the myth, see A. Kuhn, in Zeitschrifi fiir daitsche Mythologies 3 (1855),

. 373 sqq. ; Max Muller, Lectures on the Sciewe of Language f 2. p. 526 sqq, ;

>V. Mannhardt, Mythologische Forschungen^ p. 244 sqq, ; A. Lang, Alyth^

Ritual ^ atui Religion^ 2. pp. 156 j^., 266; Betne, Theoanische Heldeniieder^ p.

89 sqq. ; V. B^rard, De Porigitte des Cultes arcadiens^ p. 156 sqq.



\


Coins of Thelpusa exhibit the head of Demeter on the obverse and

the horse Anon, running, on the reverse (Fig.
33). See Imhoof-Blumer and Gardner, A'«/w.
Comm. on Paus. p. 102, with pL T xxii. xxiii.

25. 6. Lusia. Hesychius (s.v. Aova-ia)
also mentions that this was an epithet of De-

FIG. 33.-AR10N AND DEMKTKR ^^^ter at Thelpusa.

(COIN OP THELPUSA). 25. 7- tlio 80 - caUod cista (sacred

basket). The mystic cista or sacred basket
appears to have been a regular feature in the rites of Demeter. See
viii. 37. 4 ; X. 28. 3 (in the latter passage it is not, however, styled
a cista). Purple ribbons were wound round these baskets (Plu-
tarch, Phocion^ 28, where KolTaL = KL(rTai: see Hesychius, s.z\ koitt;,
and Pollux, vii. 79). In the Mysteries of Andania (sec iv. i. 7 note)
the sacred baskets {cistae)^ containing mystic objects, were carried
in procession on chariots which were led by the Sacred Virgins.
See Dittenberger, Syllogc Inscr. Grace. No. 388, line 29 sqq. In
Apuleius {Mctam. vi. 2) Psyche adjures Ceres "by the secrets of the
cistac." The cisfa held some sacred food, of which the initiated at the
Eleusinian mysteries partook as a sort of sacrament or communion
(Clement of Alexandria, Protrept. ii. 21. p. 18, ed. Potter). The cista
of Demeter is represented on the monuments, from which we learn that
it was a wicker-work basket of cylindrical shape, generally with a lid.
On a fragment of sculpture which once adorned a putcal (well-head or
similar enclosure) Demeter is represented handing cars of com and
poppies to Triptolemus ; between them is a cista with a serpent
creeping out of it. On a terra-cotta relief Demeter appears seated on
a cista^ about which is twined a serpent, whose head rests on the lap
of the goddess. We may hence, perhaps, infer that the cista contained
one of the sacred serpents of Demeter or an image of it. (As to the
serpents of Demeter, see Strabo, ix. p. 393 ; and the scholia on Lucian,
edited by E. Rohde, in Rheinischcs Museitm^ N.F. 25 (1870), p. 548



CH. XXV THE TUTHOA—ISLE OF CROWS 293

sqq^ The cista was also used in the rites of Dionysus, and the Bacchic
cista almost certainly contained a serpent or its image ; for on monu-
ments of art, especially on the silver coins of Asia Minor known as
cistophori^ the cista is represented with its lid half raised and the serpent
escaping from it. Cp. also Clement of Alexandria, Protrept, ii. 22. p.
1 9, ed. Potter. Further, the cista was employed in the mysteries of the
Cabiri, and in them it appears to have contained an image of r5 rov
AiovwTov alSoiov. See Clement of Alexandria, op. cit. ii. 19, p. 16, ed.
Potter ; Nicolaus Damascenus, in Fragtn, Hist. Grace, ed. Miiller, 3. p.
388. On the mystic cistay see Otto Jahn, * Die cista mystica,' Hertnes^
3 (1869), pp. 317-334; Fr. Lenormant, article * Cista Mystica,* in
Daremberg and Saglio's Diet, des Antiquitis,

25. 8. In the Iliad there is a reference to Arion etc. See //rW,
xxiii. 346 sq.

25. 10. blue. Literally "like kuanos in colour." As to the mean-
ing of kuanos see Helbig, Das homerisehe Epos^ p. loi sqq. The
word includes lapis iazuii, the ultramarine blue produced by pulverising
lapis lazuli y and smalt or a glass paste coloured blue with copper ore or
cobalt to imitate lapis lazuli. In the palace at Tiryns there was found
an alabaster frieze adorned with this blue glass paste. See above, vol.
3. p. 227 ; Schliemann, Tiryns^ p. 284 sqq. ; Schuchhardt, Sehliemann^s
Ausgrabungen^^ p. 144 sq.

25. II. a sanctuary of the Boy Aesculapius. On the right bank
of the Ladon, about half a mile below Thelpusa, is a ruined church of
St. Athanasius, which contains some fragments of columns. Possibly
the chapel marks the site of the sanctuary of Aesculapius. See Leake,
Morea^ 2. pp. 99 sq.^ 103 ; Curtius, Pelop. i. p. 371.

25. II. the account which I gave etc See ii. 26. 4.

25. 12. a river Tuthoa. This is the river of LangcuUa which,
flowing westward through a pleasant valley, falls into the Ladon on the
left bank of that river. The bed of the Tuthoa is wide and stony, show-
ing that the stream, though shallow in summer, must be large and rapid
in winter. See Leake, Aforea^ 2. p. 94 sq.\ Boblaye, Reeherehes^ p.
156 ; Curtius, Pelop. i. p. 369 ; L. Ross, Reisen^ p. 112 sq.

25. 1 2. Pedium (' plain '). This is the green plain on the left bank
of the Ladon between the river of Langadia (the Tuthoa) and a brook
which joins the Ladon lower down. See Cell, Itinerary of the Morea^
p. 117 ; Curtius, Pelop. i. p. 369 ; Bursian, Geogr. 2. p. 256 note 3.

25. 1 2. At the point where. The Greek is Kadort. This use of
KaSoTi is not noticed in Liddell and Scott's Greek Lexicon, but it is
common in Pausanias. See vi. 20. 10; vi. 25. 5 ; vii. 26. 3 ; vii. 27.
12 ; viii. 28. 3 ; viii. 35. i ; viii. 41. 3 ; x. 20. 7. In ix. 2. 4 and ix.
12. 3 KaOoTi in this sense is followed by a genitive. Pausanias also uses
the word in its common signification of * just as.' See viii. 41.8.

25. 12. the Isle of Crows. Just before joining the Alpheus the
Ladon divides into two, or sometimes three, arms, enclosing a flat delta
about a quarter of a mile in circumference, on which plane-trees grow.
This is the Isle of Crows. As Pausanias says (§ 13) that the Ladon
had no island as big as a ferry-boat, the Isle of Crows would seem to



294 SCENERY OF THE LADON bk. viii. arcadia

have increased since his time ; as the soil of the island is alluvial, this
may well have happened. Or the river may have been high when he
visited it. Thus when Leake was at Thelpusa there were two islands
in the river, each about 300 or 400 yards in length. But when L. Ross
visited the same place he saw many small islands, but remarked that
when the river was at its usual height the number of the islands might
be much less. When I was at Thelpusa in October 1895 I saw several
islands in the river which were certainly larger than ferry-boats. And
between Thelpusa and Heraea I traversed several such islands in the
river and saw many more (see above, p. 290).

See Gell, Itiiurary of the Morea^ p. 115 ; Leake, Morea^ 2, pp. 90, 103 s^. ;
L. Ross, Reisen^ pp. 107, 112 ; Curtius, Pelop, I. p. 369 ; Vischer, ErinrurungeHy
p. 462 ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 256 ; Wyse, Pelop, 2. p. 76.

25. 13. There is indeed no fairer river either in Greece or in
foreign land. Leake says of the Ladon : *Mt is the handsomest river
in the Peninsula, by its depth, its rapid, even, unfailing course, and its
beautiful banks ; compared to it the others are rocky or sandy torrents "
{Morea^ 2. p. 100). Gell writes that the river "merits all that has been
said in praise of its scenery " {Itinerary of the Morea^ p. 1 20). Beule
says : " To follow up the Ladon from Heraea to its sources is a de-
lightful journey. ... A beautiful river, fresh springs, tufted forests, green
meadows, gentle hills, bounding goats, flowers and perfumes in abund-
ance ; the imagination has nothing more to desire, and however preju-
diced we may be against the traditional insipidities, we allow ourselves
to be disarmed by so many charms and recognise the Arcadia of the
poets. The scene shifts at every step. Now the river runs by fair
meadows and fruitful fields, enclosed by hills shaded with pine-trees ;
and in contrast to this smiling landscape we see rising in the distance
the snowy peaks of Mt. Olonos. Now on a bare hill-side you will see a
chapel with some ancient stones, some fragments of columns, the whole
shaded by trees that are nearly dead with age. Again, a vast oak-wood
follows the river and the mountains that border it, and so thick, so
unbroken is the forest that, seen from a height, the tree-tops appear to
form a prairie" {Etudes sur le Peloponri^se^ p. M^ ^99-^ Cp. Curtius,
Pelop, I. p. 368 ; Vischer, Erinneritngcn^ p. 461. Certainly the great
wooded gorge of the Ladon ranks with the very finest scenery of Greece
and of Europe.

The modem Peloponnesians regard the Ladon as the main stream
of the Alpheus, giving the name of Rhouphia (a corruption of Alpheus)
to it instead of to the southern branch which waters the great plain of
Megalopolis. And they seem to be right in regarding the Ladon as
the main stream in so far as relates to the body of water which it brings
down. When I travelled in Arcadia in the autumn of 1895 the scanty
stream of the upper Alpheus in the plain of Megalopolis contrasted
strongly with the volume and speed of the Ladon even at its source, as
we had seen it a few days before. The upper Alpheus, before its
junction with the Ladon, is now called by the natives the river of
Karytacna. Cp. Leake, I.e. ; Philippson, Peloponties^ p. 497. Die



CH. XXVI HERAEA 295

Chrysostom tells us that in his time the country through which the
Ladon flowed was uninhabited (Or, xxxiii. vol. 2. p. 9, ed. Dindorf).

26. I. Heraea. The ancient Heraea occupied a low broad plateau
on the right bank of the Alpheus, a little to the south-west of the
modem villages of Hagios Joannes (Aiannf) and Anemodouri, On the
north the plateau is bounded by very low hills or hillocks of brown earth
dotted with trees. On the south it slopes steeply to the Alpheus, which
in one place advances close to the foot of the slope, but in another retires
from it, leaving a stretch of level ground between the slope and the
water's edge. Here, on this stretch of flat ground beside the river, were
no doubt laid out the avenues described by Pausanias. The boundaries
of the plateau on the east and west are formed by two glens or gullies,
the sides of which are overgrown with bushes ; the eastern of the two
glens is the deeper. The surface of the plateau is now occupied, partly
by vineyards, partly by bare stony fields. Scattered over it are masses
of ancient potsherds of the plain unpainted sort, and these are almost
the only vestiges of antiquity which remained on the site in 1895, the
year of my visit to Heraea. On the edge of the plateau overlooking the
river there is a small platform of earth which bears the name of Palaea
Ekklesia (* Old Church '). But the church which presumably once
stood here, and which may perhaps have occupied the site of an ancient
temple, has wholly disappeared ; not a stone of it is left About 200
yards or so to the east of this spot, also on the brow of the plateau, is a
small piece of Roman or Byzantine wall, built of rubble with a facing of
brickwork ; it is only a few feet long and a foot or 1 8 inches high. A
few more insignificant remains of walls of the same style are to be seen
lower down, on the steep stony slope which divides the plateau from the
bed of the river. The remains may be some 250 yards from the
Alpheus and about 150 feet above it. They consist of two or three
small pieces of wall built of rubble but faced on each side with brick-
work. The bricks are flat, and there is niortar or concrete between each
course of them. Such are all the ancient remains that I was able to
find on the site of Heraea. Earlier in the century the ruins were
more considerable, but they were probably pulled down to furnish build-
ing materials for the neighbouring villages. Remains of the ancient
city-walls were to be seen both at the eastern and the western ends of
the plateau. At the eastern end, towards the village of Hagios Joannes^
the wall ran from north to south and was built in a fairly regular style.
On the slope between the plateau and the river might be seen some
remains of baths built of bricks, with here and there a patch of stucco.
These may have been the baths mentioned by Pausanias, and the few
small pieces of walls which still exist on the slope may have belonged to
them. Lower down, parallel to the river, might be traced a ruined wall
built of blocks of conglomerate ; it probably supported a terrace. In
the church of St. John [Hagios Joannes) were to be seen some frag-
ments of columns of shell-limestone, about 20 inches in diameter.

Built into a wall in the village of Hagios Joannes is an inscription
recording a dedication by a certain Timarchis to the sons of Aesculapius
(^Bulletin de Corrcsp, helUnique^ 3 (1879), p. 190). The inscription is



296 HERAEA BK. VIII. ARCADIA

of interest as proving that the sons of Aesculapius were worshipped at
Heraea. Cp. Paus. iii. 26. 9.

The situation of Heraea is pleasing, though in no way striking. The
valley of the Alpheus is here broad and open. Across the river, on its
southern side, is an expanse of green level ground sprinkled with trees,
stretching away to a line of round bushy hills, shaped like gigantic mole-
hills, beyond which rise higher mountains in the south. High blue
mountains also bound the views up and down the broad valley on the
cast and south-west.

See Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 91 s^i/. ; Ciell, Itinerary of the Morea, p. 113 jj?. :
BoblayCf Recherches^ p. 159 ; Curtius, Pelop. i. p. 363 sqq, ; Vischer, Erinner"
ungen, p. 461 ; Wyse, Peloponnesus, 2. p. 70 st/t/. (with a view of the valley of
the Alpheiis) ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 256 sq. ; Baetleker,' p. 312 ; Guide-Joanne^ 2.
p. 315 sq.

The city of Heraea was founded by the Spartan king Cleombrotus or
Cleonymus ; the people had previously dwelt dispersed in nine villages
or townships (Strabo, viii. p. 337). Strabo mentions Heraea (viii. p.
388) in the list of Arcadian towns which in his time had either vanished
or left but small traces of themselves behind. But Strabo had not
travelled in the interior of Peloponnesus, and his testimony does not
weigh against that of Pausanias.

On a bronze tablet, brought from 01>'mpia in 1 8 1 3 by Sir W. Gell,
and now in the British Museum, is inscribed a treaty of alliance for 100
years between Heraea and Elis. The inscription is believed to date
from the second half of the sixth century B.C. See C, I. G. No. 1 1 ;
Ancient Greek Inscriptions in the Bntish Museum^ Part ii. p. 14, No.
clvii. ; Roehl, /. G.A, No. no ; Cauer, Delectus Inscr. Grace. - No. 258 ;
Hicks, Greek histor. Inscr. No. 8 ; Roberts, Greek Epi^^raphy^ No. 291 ;
Die Inschrijten von Olympia^ No. 9.

The wine of Hcr.iea was said to make men mad and women fruit-
ful (Theophrastus, Hist, plant, ix. 18. 10, where for ^HpaKAct^ and
drcKi'oi's we should read*H/)at^i and TCKi^oiVcrtt^ ; Athenaeus, i. p. 31 f ;
Aelian, Var, hist. xiii. 6; Pliny, Xat. hist. xiv. 116). V'^incyards, as we
haNC seen, now occupy part of the site of the ancient city. As to the
modern wine of the place Leake says : " A sweetish red wine is still
made here, and it has more flavour and body than almost any wine 1
have met with in the Morea. In sufficient quantities, therefore, it might
produce for a time one of the effects anciently attributed to the wine of
Heraea ; as to the other, its reputaii(m at least is gone : and certainly
the poor women of Arcadia never drink of it for the sake of the \'irtues
ascribed to it by the ancients" (Leake, More<i^ 2. p. 92 sq.)

26. 2. Damaretus of Heraea. See v. 8. 10; vi. 10. 4 ; x. 7. 7.

26. 3- fifteen furlongs twenty furlongs. These measure-
ments are perfectly accurate (Leake, Morca^ 2. p. 92 ; L. Ross, Rcisen^
p. 107). As to the junction of the Erymanthus with the Alpheus see
above, note on vi. 21.3.

The first sight I had of the Erymanthus, nearer its source, among
the mountains of northern Arcadia, is one of the scenes that dwell in
the memory. We had been travelling for hours through the thick oak-



CH. XXVI ALIPHERA 297

woods which cover the outlying slopes and spurs of Mount Erymanthus
on the south, when suddenly, emerging from the forest, we looked down
into a long valley, through which flowed, between hills wooded to their
summits, a shining river, the Erymanthus. At the far end of the valley
high blue mountains closed the view. The scene, arched by the bright
Greek sky, was indeed Arcadian.

26. 3. the grave of Goroebus. As to Coroebus, cp. v. 8. 6. On
the right (west) bank of the Erymanthus, where it joins the Alpheus,
there is a colossal tumulus or barrow, which L. Ross took to be the
grave of Coroebus. But as the Arcadians placed the boundary at the
Erymanthus, whereas the Eleans placed it at the grave of Coroebus, it
is clear that the grave of Coroebus must have lain farther from Elis and
nearer to Heraea than the Erymanthus, in other words it must have
been east (not west) of the Erymanthus. The tumulus in question was
partially excavated in 1845 ; ^^^ *t were found a number of small com-
partments built of stone, and containing ashes, bones, charred potsherds
etc. See L. Ross, Reisen^ p. 107 ; /V/., Wanderungen^ i. p. 191 sqg. ;
Curtius, Pelop. i. p. 367 ; Vischer, Erinnerungen^ p. 462 sq, ; Wyse,
Pelop, 2. p. T"] sqg.

26. 5. a little town, Aliphera. The ruins of Aliphera occupy the
summit of a high isolated hill or mountain on the southern side of the
valley of the Alpheus, about two hours' ride to the south-east of the
village of Zacha, To reach them from Heraea we ford the Alpheus,
which is here a broad shallow stream of clear water, and follow the
south bank of the river westward. Opposite the junction of the Ladon
with the Alpheus the path strikes southward up hill ; we ascend a
shallow glen and then the bare or bushy slopes of the lower hills.
Finally passing through a long green lane and vineyards we reach the
village of Zacha^ which rises steeply among trees on the northern slope
of the higher hills, with fine views over the valley of the Alpheus to the
lofty mountains of northern Arcadia. From Zacha the path ascends
south-eastward among the hills, and we come in view of the high hill
of Aliphera on our left (to the east), separated from us by some lower
heights. To reach the foot of the hill it is necessary to make a rather
long detour to the south and cast. The time from Heraea to Aliphera is
about four hours and a half.

The hill or mountain of Aliphera is high and isolated, sloping away
steeply on all sides. Its summit forms a rather narrow ridge, which is
highest on the south and descends slightly and gradually in slopes and
terraces to the north. The length of the ridge may be from a third to
half a mile. Its greatest breadth hardly exceeds 100 yards, and towards
its northern end the ridge tapers to a knife-edge. The highest part,
at the south end, was clearly the acropolis, and had its separate fortifica-
tions, which are in fair preser\ation. They formed a quadrangle about
64 paces long from north to south, with a diminishing breadth of
66 paces at the south end, and of 29 paces at the north end. From the
middle of the north side of this small acropolis there projects a square
tower built of massive masonry. Its walls are 4 feet thick, and are
standing to a height of seven and eight courses, or about 9 feet and



298 ALIPHERA BK. VIII. ARCADIA

more. Of the other fortifications of the citadel the southern ^-all is the
best preserved. It is about 66 paces long, and is standing in places to
a height of seven and eight courses (about 9 and 10 feet). The masonry
is on the whole quadrangular, with polygonal pieces here and there.
Some of the blocks are large ; one of them, towards the eastern end
of the wall, is nearly 6 feet high by 3 feet broad. On the other sides
of the acrop>olis the remains of the walls are much less considerable.
Their thickness was about 9 feet. In the middle of the acropolis, the
surface of which is strewn with coarse, red, unpainted p)otsherds, there
are some doubtful traces of foundations.

Immediately outside of the southern wall of the acropolis is a narrow
terrace at a slightly lower level than the acropolis. It was supported
on the south by a wall now mostly ruinous, but which at the west end is
still about 5 feet 6 inches thick, and is standing to a height of three or
four courses, or about 5 feet at the most, for a distance of 1 6 paces. On
the terrace, both at its eastern and western ends, there are remains of
foundation-walls consisting of squared blocks laid in straight rows ; but
only the upper surfaces of the stones appear above ground. The
western foundation- wall is about 6 paces long.

The whole of the summit of the ridge was probably enclosed by
fortification-walls ; but of these walls the remains, outside of the small
acropolis, are scanty. Some pieces of them may be seen on the south-
western brow of the hill. Here are remains of a piece of wall with a
quadrangular tower projecting from it. The wall is 6 feet 7 inches
thick, and is well built of large blocks on the outer and inner faces,
while the core is constructed of smaller stones. The blocks are roughly
polygonal, and the masonry is irregular. The tower measures 24 feet
on the face, and projects 5 feet 3 inches from the curtain. It is stand-
ing to a height of six courses, or about 8 feet. The stone of which the
fortifications are built seems to be a grey limestone ; it is the native
rock of the hill, as may be seen by the numerous rocks of this sort
which crop up on the surface at the northern end of the ridge. A
little to the north of these ruins are two smaller pieces of the forti-
fication-wall. One of them is about 9 paces long and 5 feet 6 inches
high.

The ridge, as I have said, descends slightly from south to north in a
series of terraces and slopes. The northern end of the highest of these
terraces (the terrace immediately north of and below the acropolis) is
formed into a platform artificially supported on walls of squared blocks,
of which a few are still in position. A temple may have stood on this
platform. Indeed on its western side there are foundations forming a
right angle 7 paces long from east to west by 8 or 9 paces long from
north to south. Probably the two sanctuaries of Aesculapius and
Athena mentioned by Pausanias stood, one on the terrace to the north,
and the other on the terrace to the south, of the acropolis.

To the north of the platform which I have described may be seen
the remains of the northern fortification -wall crossing the ridge from
east to west. Though ruinous, it exists to some extent in its whole
length. At its eastern end the wall is standing to a height of four



CH. XXVI ALIPHERA 299

courses ; the masonry is here roughly quadrangular. Towards the west
the wall is standing to a height of six courses.

Beyond this northern wall the ridge runs northward for a consider-
able way (about five minutes' walk), growing gradually lower and
narrower. This northern extremity was outside of the fortifica-
tions, at least of the main fortifications, for in fact on the west side
of this part of the ridge there are some remains of a wall. The
extreme northern point of the ridge is covered with sharp natural lime-
stone rocks, the same rock of which the walls are built. Here the ridge
falls away abruptly into a very deep glen on the north-west, in the
direction of Zacfia,

From the citadel, and indeed from the whole summit of the ridge,
there is a magnificent view over the valley of the Alpheus for miles and
miles. All the mountains of northern Arcadia are spread out like a
panorama ; and through the broad valley that intervenes between them
and the height on which we stand the Alpheus is seen winding far away
and far below. The air blows fresh and sweet on the height, and the
peacefiilness, the stillness, the remoteness from the world of this little
mountain-citadel remind one irresistibly of Keats's lines in the " Ode to
a Grecian Urn " :

What little town by river or sea- shore,
Or mountain-built with peaceful citadel,
Is emptied of this folk, this pious mom ?

Thus far I have described the situation and ruins of Aliphera as I
observed them on visiting the place, 7th October 1895. Leake has
also described them, and as he appears to have seen some remains
which escaped me I will subjoin his description. According to him the
ruins are now called the Castle of Nerovitza, He says : " The hill of
Nerovitza is surrounded on the eastern and partly on the northern and
southern sides by the torrent of Fanari, It has a tabular summit about
300 yards long in the direction of east and west, 1 00 yards broad, and
surrounded by remains of Hellenic walls. At the south-eastern angle, a
part rather higher than the rest formed a keep to this fortress ; it was
about 70 yards long, and half as much broad. The entrance appears
to have been in the middle of the eastern wall, between two square
towers, of which that to the left only now remains. Beyond this tower,
in the same direction and just below the eastern wall of the keep, a
lower terrace still retains some foundations of a temple, together with
portions of the shafts of columns not fluted, 2 feet 2 inches in diameter.
There are remains of another temple, with some fragments of columns
of the same dimensions, towards the western extremity of the outer
fortress, near the brow of the height. The whole summit is carpeted
with a fine close turf, as usual on the Arcadian hills, where the atmo-
sphere is generally sufficiently moist, even in summer, to maintain the
verdure and to furnish an excellent pasture for sheep. I descend from
the hill on the northern side through some fields of wheat full grown,
but quite green ; in the midst of which I find some large flat stones
accurately cut, which apparently formed part of a ceiling. A little



300 ALIPHERA bk. viii. arcadia

farther on is a source of water. From thence, after winding round the
eastern side of the hill to regain the road to Fanari^ I find the founda-
tions of one of the gates of the lower city. This part of the fortification
was flanked with towers, of which there are the remains of two or three,
together with considerable pieces of the intermediate walls on the
western side, where the ground is very rocky and overgrown with
bushes. The masonry is in general of the second order, and has
suffered much from time and the exposed situation." It will be observed
that what Leake calls the eastern side of the hill I call the southern ;
and what he calls the western I call the northern. The trend of the
hill is perhaps rather from south-east to north-west than from south to
north or from east to west.

In 219 B.C. Aliphera was captured by a Macedonian army under
King Philip V. The assault took place at sunrise on a bright morning.
Polybius, who records the event (iv. 78), says that the town stood on
**ahill that is precipitous on all sides, and to which the approach is
more than 10 furlongs long."


Boblay
p. 360 sqq.
p. 319 sq

An inscription found at Olympia in 1884 seems to refer to certain
disputes between Aliphera and Heraea i^Dic Inschriftcn von Olympia^
No. 48). In this inscription the name of the town appears as Alipheira
(*AX.i<fi€Lpa) ; and the name is so spelt on coins (Head, Historia
numorttni^ p. 352 ; Catalogue of Greek Coins in the British Museum:
Peloponnesus^ p. 14).

26. 6. Zeus Lecheates (* brought to bed'). Panofka has described
some monuments which he supposes to represent Zeus about to bring
forth Athena {Philolog. u. histor. Abhandlungen of the Berlin Academy,
1853, pp. 42-50).

26. 6. a fountain which they call Tritonis. On the north-eastern
side of the hill of Aliphera, Leake observed a spring which he thought
might be the one anciently called Tritonis (^Morea^ 2. pp. T^^ 79).

26. 6. the legend of the river Triton. See ix. 33. 7.

26. 7- The image of Athena etc. Polybius tells us (iv. 78) that
the image stood on the summit of the hill, and was remarkable for its
size and beauty ; the people of the town could not tell by whom or on
what occasion the image had been dedicated, but they agreed that it
was a masterpiece of art, besides being of the ver>' largest size. According
to Polybius, the image was by the sculptors Hypatodorus and Sostratus.
As to Hypatodorus, see note on x. 10. 4. Sostratus may be either the
sculptor mentioned by Pausanias elsewhere (vi. 9. 3, with the note), or
more probably the nephew of Pythagoras of Rhegium (Pliny, Nat, hist,
xxxiv. 60).

At the village of Phanari, about 2 miles south of Aliphera, Col.
Leake purchased an intaglio on an onyx, representing Athena armed
with spear and shield, and clothed in a short tunic which hung in



CH. XXVI HERAEA TO MEGALOPOLIS 301

graceful folds over a robe that reached to her feet. The design is of
the best period. Round the figure is engraved the word AFHSI-
nOAIAS (*of her who rules the city*), from which Leake inferred
that the figure represented the colossal statue by Hypatodorus. See
Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 80.

26. 7- they sarcriflce first of all to the Fly-catcher. Cp. v. 14. i
note.

26. 8. On the road from Heraea to Megalopolis is Melaeneae
etc. The modem route from Heraea i^Hagios Joannes) to Megalopolis
{Stnanou)y which probably coincides fairly with the ancient route, keeps
along the right bank of the Alpheus, passing through or near the
villages of Anasin\ Kakouraika^ Sirousa^ Trypaes^ Zoula-Sarakiniy and
AisikolOy crosses the Gortynius river by a bridge some way below
Gortys (see below), and follows the left bank of that river to Karytaemi^
from which the road goes southward over the plain to Megalop)olis.
The time from Heraea to Karytaena is about 8i hours, and the time
from Karytaena to Megalopolis is about 2 J hours. Between Heraea
and Karytaena there are remains of antiquity, which may be identified
with some of the places mentioned by Pausanias. It is, therefore,
necessary to describe briefly the route and the ancient remains.

From Heraea the route goes eastward, following the right bank of
the Alpheus at some little distance from the river. We cross the beds
of several streams that take their rise in the neighbouring mountains,
traverse a plateau planted with olives, and reach (in 38 minutes from
Heraea) the village of Anasiri, From this village the direct route to
Karytaena runs south-eastward to the village of Kakouraika, distant
about i\ hours from Anaziri, Instead of following it, however, we
strike eastward from Anaziri in order to visit an ancient acropolis.
We ascend a rocky mountain, cross a ravine, and come to the meeting-
place of two brooks. Just above the meeting of the brooks rises a
steep hill, on the top of which the ancient remains are to be seen. The
time from Anaziri to the ruins is i J hours. Not far from the ruins is
the little village of Papadaes, from which a torrent, dry in summer,
flows down to the Alpheus. That the summit of the steep hill was
occupied by an ancient acropolis is proved by the remains of walls built
in regular courses. At the extreme south-west point, where the hill is
highest and is bounded by a rocky precipice, there are remains of walls
which apparently enclosed a sacred precinct ; for within the area are
foundations which seem to be those of a temple.

From the acropolis, in order to regain the route to Karytaena, we
descend on the south-west side, cross a ravine, on the farther side of
which may be observed a cave in the steep rocks at the foot of the
acropolis, and follow the cultivated valley of the stream south-westward
to the village of Kakouraika. The time from the acropolis to the
village is about an hour. Resuming the route to Karytaena, we come,
in 15 minutes from Kakouraika, to a wooded ravine, cross it, and
come, in 12 minutes more, to another wooded ravine. Here there is a
copious spring forming a stream which falls into the Alpheus hard by.
At the spring there is a large quadrangular building of Roman date,



302 HERAEA TO MEGALOPOLIS bk. viii. arcadia

roofed with a hemispherical brick vault decorated with stucco and
some modem paintings. Part of the vaulted roof has fallen in ; the
soil in the ravine has risen as high as the springing of the vault ; and
in the interior the floor of the building is 1 8 inches deep in water from
the neighbouring spring. Yet the edifice is used as a church, and
services are performed in it. It seems to be only in August that the
stream dries up and the building is free of water. Beside this vaulted
edifice is another less conspicuous ruin, said to be the remains of a
Roman bath. The too copious spring has given to this spot the name
of Kakorrheos (* evil flow ').

Pursuing our way, we pass, in half an hour from Kakorrheos^ the
village of Kokora^ situated on a height a little to the left (east) of the
path. Farther on the valley of the Alpheus contracts, the level ground
which has hitherto skirted it on both banks disappears, and we reach
the lower end of the deep narrow gorge through which the river flows
from the upper plain of Megalop>olis to the lower valley or champaign
country of which Heraea was the chief city in antiquity. The river
enters this long gorge at Karytaena, Our route leaves the flat ground
by the river and ascends to the village of TryPaes^ passing on the right
several caves which give the place its name. The time from Kctkorrheos
to Trypaes is about i\ hours. Our way now lies through bare moun-
tains, but the ground about Trypaes is cultivated, and wild pear-trees
grow here and there. About a mile beyond the village a very fine
spring rises under a shady plane-tree to the left of the road. It forms
a stream which flows down, past a mill, into the deep narrow rocky bed
of the Alpheus. Soon afterwards we pass on the right a wooded hill,
the summit of which is crowned with the ruins of an ancient Greek
fortress. The hill overhangs the right bank of the Alpheus ; on the
opposite or left bank of the river lies the village of Matesi, The ancient
walls of the fortress have been repaired in later times. From here a
ride of ij hours brings us to the small village of Zoula-Sarakini^
opposite which on the western bank of the Alpheus is the village of
Lavda^ at the foot of a high conspicuous mountain. From Zoula-
Sarakini we have a choice of routes to Karytaena. We may descend
south-westward into the deep bed of the Alpheus, follow it up to its
junction with the Gortynius river, then turn up the glen of the latter
river and follow its right bank for a mile or so till we come to a stone
bridge, by which we cross the river. The time from Zoula-Sarakim
to the bridge is about i\ hours. From the bridge a very rugged stony
path, ascending continually, leads first along the left bank of the Gorty-
nius river, and then along the glen of the Alpheus to Karytaena, The
time from the bridge to Karytaena is i hour and lo minutes. By the
other route from Zoula-Sarakitii^ instead of descending south-west into
the glen of the Alpheus, we keep on eastward through the mountains to
AtzikolOy a small village standing among corn-fields on a little terrace
surrounded by barren mountains. About a mile from the village are
the ruins of Gortys (see below, p. 307 sqq.) From Atzikolo we descend
by a steep rocky path to the bridge over the Gortynius, beyond which
the path to Karytaena is the same as before.



CH. XXVI HERAEA TO MEGALOPOLIS 303

From Karytaena^ pursuing our way to Megalopolis, we descend
southward to a stone bridge which, carried on six arches, spans the
Alpheus at the point where the river enters its deep and narrow gorge.
Against one of the piers of the bridge, on the north side, is built a tiny
chapel, reached by steps from the bed of the river. From the time that
we cross the bridge our way lies entirely through the great plain of
Megalopolis, encircled on all sides by mountains of varied and picturesque
outlines. Vineyards and maize-fields occupy the plain, which is crossed
from east to west by several low bare downs. In i^ hours from Kary-
taena we re-cross the Alpheus by a ford to its right bank. The river
here is broad and shallow, and its banks are low. In an hour from
fording the Alpheus we cross the broad stony, sometimes almost water-
less, bed of the Helisson, and ascending it for a short way reach the
theatre and other remains of Megalopolis. The time from Karytaena
is about 2^ hours. The whole time from Heraea to Megalopolis, without
allowing for stoppages, is about 10 hours.

It remains to see if we can identify any of the ancient ruins
between Heraea and Karytaena with the places mentioned by Pausanias.
The ruins at Kakorrheos may well be those of Melaeneae ; the abundance
of running water here answers exactly to Pausanias's description of the
place. If so, the ruined acropolis at Papadaes may be Buphagium, and
the stream which comes down the valley from it to join the Alpheus
may be the Buphagus. The distance of the acropolis from Kakorrheos
agrees very well with the distance (40 Greek furlongs, about 4J miles)
of Buphagium from Melaeneae. Curtius indeed supposed that the ruins
at Papadaes are those of the acropolis of Melaeneae, but the distance
between the two places seems fatal to this view. The ancient fortress on
the right bank of the Alpheus, near Trypaes and opposite Matesi^ may be
Maratha, which Pausanias describes on the way from the springs of the
Buphagus to Gortys (viii. 27. 17). It is true that the place is not on
the straight line from the springs of the Buphagus (near Papadaes) to
Gortys ; but the ancient route from the one place to the other, instead
of crossing the mountains in a bee-line, may have followed the longer
but easier route described above. Curtius, however, identified the
ruined fortress near Trypaes with Buphagium, and the neighbouring
stream with the Buphagus.

See Cell, Itinerary of the Morea^ pp. 1 10- 113; Leake, Morea, 2. pp. 19 J^.,
66 sq.^ 92; id,y Peloponnesiaca^ pp. 231-233; Expedition scientifiqiu ae Morie:
Architecture, Sculptures j etc., par A. Blouet, 2. pp. 32-34; Boblaye, Recherches,
pp. 159, 160 sq. ; Curtius, Pelop, I. pp. 355-357 ; Bursian, Geogr. 2. p. 258 ;
Pnilippson, Peloponnes, p. 96 sq.

26. 8. it is well supplied with miming water. The Greek is v^an
S€ KaTapp€iTaL, The expression seems to imply a place with abundance
of springs, of which the water streamed or trickled in rills along the
ground. Cp. vii. 26. 11 d<f)$ov(fi Karappctrai rep vSari ; viii. 34. 6
KarappilTai 6€ v^ari. The phrase seems to be always used in a good
sense (* watered,' * irrigated,' not 'flooded,' 'inundated'). Compare
the use of the adjective Karappm-os in Diodorus v. 19. 3 7) vijcros avri]



504 EUTAEA BK. vixi. arcadxa

KaTappvTos «rTt va/zartatois koi y\vK€<riv vScurt, 6i' &v ov fJLOvov aaro-
Aawrts €7riT€/wn;s yiVcrai k.t.A. "This isle is watered with rills and
sweet waters, the source not only of delightful enjoyment," etc Places
like Kalavryta and the village of Anasiasova (near Psophis), where the
water flows in mazy rills down the sloping ground, might be described
by the phrase v^ri Karappelrai.

27. 3. The foUowixig is a list of the cities etc Diodorus says
(xv. 72) that the population of Megalopolis was drawn from forty
villages of the Maenalians and Parrhasians. But the more precise and
detailed account of Pausanias is to be preferred. Cp. P. Herthum, De
Megalopoliiarum rebus gestis et de communi Arcadum republicti (Lipsiae,

1893), p. 53 sqq.

27. 3. Eutaea. This town is not again mentioned by Pausanias,
and the only clue which he gives to its situation is that it was one of
the Maenalian towns. A clearer indication of its position is furnished
by Xenophon, who tells us that in 370 B.C. King Agesilaus, marching
at the head of a Lacedaemonian army from Sparta to Mantinea, cap-
tured Eutaea, an Arcadian city on the borders of Laconia. He found
only old men, women, and children in the city, for all the men of military
age had gone to join the Arcadian army which was mustering at Asea for
the defence of Mantinea. Having repaired the walls of the town, the king
marched into the Tegean plain, and advancing northward encamped to
the west of Mantinea. On his return he again marched by Eutaea.
See Xenophon, Hellenica^ vi. 5. 12 and 21. From this narrative we
gather that Eutaea was in the extreme south of Arcadia, on one of the
military' routes from Sparta to the Tegean plain. Hence we may assume
that it was in or near the plain of Asea, now called the plain of Franco-
vrysi^ which is interposed between the much larger plains of Megalopolis
on the west and Tegea on the east. Leake conjectured that Eutaea
was at Barbitsa^ a village situated in a hollow among steeper heights
about 2 miles south-east of the ruins of Asea. The flat rocky summits
of the hills here seemed to him suitable for the site of an ancient town.
But there appear to be no ancient remains at Barbiisa^ and Mr. W.
Loring has made it probable that Eutaea was not here, but near Pianou^
a. neighbouring village distant about a mile to the south-east of Barbitsa,
At Pianou there are vestiges of antiquity, including a marble Doric
capital, some blocks of ancient masonry built into the chapel of Hagia
Barbara, and a number of circular wells lined with small blocks of lime-
stone, without brick or mortar. A good many ancient coins, mostly
Roman and Byzantine but including some of the Arcadian and Achaean
Leagues, have been found in the fields close to the village ; and on the
hill of St. Constantine, which overhangs the village, are some slight
remains of two fortification -walls of unhewn stones, which in their con-
struction resemble those of Sellasia (see vol. 3. p. 321). The hill is
high, and from its position commands the route from Sparta into the
Asean plain by the river-bed of the Eurotas. It was very natural,
therefore, that Agesilaus on his march to Mantinea should have seized a
place of such strategic importance. See Leake, Morea^ 3. pp. 24, 31-33;
W. Loring, '\xi Journal of Hellenic Studies, 15 (1895), pp. 48-51.



CH. XXVII SUMATEUM—LEUCTRUM 305

27. 3. Smnatdum. In the hills about 3 miles to the west of the
modem Tripolitsa is the village of Selimna or Silimna. It is seen on
the left of the road as you go from Tripolitsa to Karytaena, On a high
sunmiit to the south-west of the village there is a plateau artificially
levelled and covered with ruins, including remains of polygonal walls.
This may perhaps be Sumateum, Sumatia, or Sumetia, as Pausanias
elsewhere (viii. 3. 4 ; viii. 36. 8) calls it See Leake, Morea^ i. p.
116 sq,\ id.^ 2. pp. 51, 306; Boblaye, RechercheSy p. 172; L. Ross,
Reisen^ p. 120; Curtius, Pelop, i. pp. 315, 342 ; Bursian, Geogr. 2. p.
229. Cp. Stephanus Byz., s,v, SovfuxTto.

27. 3. the Eutresiaiis. They appear to have occupied the hills on
the eastern side of the plain of Me^opolis, to the north of that city ;
perhaps they owned also a part of the plain. Xenophon (Hellenic<Zy vii.
I. 29) speaks of Eutresii as if it were a town rather than a tribe in
describing a victory gained in 367 B.C. by the Lacedaemonians under
King Archidamus over the Arcadians and Argives. The battle took
place, according to Xenophon, between Parrhasia, Medea, and Eutresii,
which is interpreted by Leake to mean about 3 miles north-north-west
of Megalopolis. See Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 167 ; Leake, Morea^ 2. p.
320 j^. ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 225 sq, Cp. Hesychius, s.v. EvTfnjt-
ov^ ; Stephanus Byz., s,v, EvrpTfo-is ; Etymol. Magnum^ p. 399, s.v.
EvTprjcrios.

27. 3. Ptolederma, OnaasmiL These towns appear to be men-
tioned by no other ancient writer. Their sites are unknown.

27. 4. the Aegytians. This tribe occupied a district on the
borders of Laconia and Arcadia, extending from Belemina (iii. 21. 3
note) to Cromi (viii. 34. 6 note), both included, and consequently com-
prising the northern end of the range of Taygetus above the modem
Leondariy together with the two valleys of the Thius (viii. 35. 3 note)
and the Gatheatas (viii. 34. 5 note). See Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 322 ;
Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 168 ; Curtius, Pelap. i. p. 292 sq, ; Bursian,
Geogr, 2. p. 241.

27. 4. lialaea Leactrum. Leuctrum is mentioned by Thucy-

dides (v. 54), who calls it Leuctra (cp. Plutarch, CleomeneSy 6), and says
that it was a place on the borders of Laconia and Arcadia, towards Mt.
Lycaeus. In 419 B.C. a Lacedaemonian army under King Agis marched
from Sparta to Leuctrum, intending to advance £uther, but evil omens
induced them to retum (Thucydides, Lc) From Xenophon (Hellenica^
vi. 5. 24) we leam that Leuctmm was in a pass leading into Laconia,
and that it was above Maleatis, which was probably the territory of the
town of Malaea here mentioned by Pausanias. Hence both Malaea and
Leuctrum probably lay somewhere to the south of Leondari^ perhaps
near the sources of the Carnion (Xerillo-potamos^ or in the pass which
leads from the head of that river valley across Mount Taygetus into the
valley of the Eurotas. It has been conjectured that Leondari itself
occupies the site of Leuctrum. Some pieces of coliunns and other
architectural fragments, which may easily have been brought from else-
where, are to be seen in a church ; but with this exception there appear
to be no ancient remains at Leondari, The church in question was

VOL. IV X



3o6 LEONDARI—PARRHASIA BK. viii. arcadu

converted into a mosque under the Turkish dominion, but apparently
dates from Byzantine times. The little town of Leondari is situated
very picturesquely on the northern extremity of Mount Taygetus, where
that great range subsides into the plain of Megalopolis. The houses
are clustered on a narrow saddle or ridge at the foot of a steep rocky
height crowned with the ruins of a mediaeval castle. This rocky hdgbt
is the last spur of Mount Taygetus on the north. The neighbourhood
of the town is fresh and green, and abounds in trees, especially in
stately cypresses. To the south and east the loftier heights of Mount
Taygetus rise above the town ; westward we look across the narrow
green valley of the Camion {^Xerillo-potamos) to Mount Hellenitsa (over
4000 feet high) ; while northward the eye ranges over the wide valley
of the Alpheus or plain of Megalopolis encircled by mountains. The
town is not heard of until near the end of the Byzantine empire. Here
the despot Thomas Palaeologus, brother of the last emperor of Con*
stantinople, was defeated by the Turks in 1459.

See Leake, Morea, 2. po. 42-44, 322 sq, ; Boblaye, Ruherckes^ p. 170 ; Expl'
dition scieniijique di Motet: Architecture^ Sculptures^ etc., par A. Bloaet, 2.
p. 57 ; Curtius, Pelop, I. p. 293 ; Vischer, Erinnerungen^ p 403 sq, ; Burau,
Geogr, 2. p. 243 ; BaedeKer/ p. 294 ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 282 ; PhilippsoD,
PeloponneSf p 201.

27. 4. the Pairhasians. From Pausanias it appears that the
Parrhasians possessed the eastern slopes of Mount Lycaeus and all the
plain of the Alpheus on its left bank from near Leondari to Karytaena^
together with a part of the right bank at Thocnia (see viii. 29. 5). On
the west their territory bordered on Elis (Strabo, viii. p. 336). On the
south it must have extended up to or near the borders of Laconia, since
in the Peloponnesian War the Mantineans, to whom the Parrhasians
were then subject, erected a fort at a place called Cypsela in the Par-
rhasian territory, for the annoyance of the Laconian district of Sciritis.
In 421 B.C. a Lacedaemonian army under King Plistoanax, at the invi-
tation of the Parrhasians, invaded Parrhasia, destroyed the fort at
Cypsela, and restored their independence to the Parrhasians. See
Thucydides, v. 33. Strabo mentions the Parrhasians as one of the
oldest of Greek tribes (viii. p. 388). The Roman poets apparently used
the adjective Parrhasian as equivalent to Arcadian (Virgil, Aen, viii.
344, xi. 31 ; Ovid, Metam, viii. 315). Leake thought that the Par-
rhasia of Homer (//. ii. 608) was probably Lycosura. See Leake, Morea^
2. p. 320 sqq.

27. 4. the Arcadian Oynnrians. Their territory seems to have
stretched from Gortys westward, along the northern slopes of Mt
Lycaeus, to the borders of Triphylia. See Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 323 j^. ;
Curtius, Pelop. i. p. 347 ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 233.

27. 4* the so-called Tripolis comprising Gallia, Dipoena,

and Nonacris. Of the three towns which composed the Tripolis, the
situation of Nonacris alone is approximately known, if indeed the
Nonacris here mentioned be the one in the district of Pheneus. Callia
and Dipoena are called Calliae and Dipoenae by Pausanias in § 7. See



CH. XXVIII MARATHA — GORTYS 307

Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 302; Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 398; Bursian, Geogr.
2. p. 232.

27. 7* Pallantiiim a milder fortnne. See viii. 43. i.

27. 8. Megalopolis was founded in the second year of the

hundred and second Olympiad. Thus according to Pausanias the
foundation of Megalopolis took place in 371/0 B.C. The Parian Marble
(line 85) places the event in the following year (370/69 B.C.), when
Dysdnetus was archon at Athens. According to Diodorus (xv. 72) the
city was not founded till the archonship of Nausigenes (368/7 B.c.)
The evidence of Pausanias is to be preferred. Probably Megalopolis
was founded early in 370 B.C. See Clinton, Fasti Hellenici^ 2.* p. 122 ;
P. Herthum, De Megaiopolitarum rebus gestis et de communi Arcadum
repubUca (Lipsiae, 1893), p. 56 sq,

27. 9. the Sacred War. See iii. 10. 3 5^. ; x. 2 sq.

27. II. the genealogy of Acrotatus. See iii. 6. 2.

27. II. A sharp engagement took place etc. The defeat of the
Lacedaemonians by the Megalopolitans under their tyrant Aristodemus,
and the death of the Spartan king Acrotatus in the battle, are mentioned
by Plutarch {Agis^ 3). The spoils taken from the Lacedaemonians on
this occasion were employed by the tyrant to build a colonnade in the
market-place of Megalopolis (Paus. viiL 30. 7).

27. 12. Lydiades voluntarily abdicated. Cp. Polybius, ii.

44 ; Plutarch, Aratus^ 30 ; zV/., Cleomenes^ 6. An inscription found at
Lycosura records that the city of Clitor set up a statue of a certain
Lydiadas, son of Eudamus. This Lydiadas may have been the tyrant
of Megalopolis. See *E<l>Yjfi€ph dpxaiokoyiKrjy 1895, p. 263 sqq,

27. 14. the ships of the Modes etc See Herodotus, vii.
188 sqq,

27. 14- Agis lost Pellene. See ii. 8. 5 ; vii. 7. 3.

27. 14* came by his end at Mantinea. See viii. 10. 5-8.

27. 15. Oleomenes seized Megalopolis etc. Cp. iv. 29. 7 sq. ;

vii. 7. 4 ; viii. 49. 4.

27. 15. Lydiades met a hero's death. The battle was fought at
Ladocea in the Megalopolitan territory (Polybius, ii. 51). Plutarch
tells us that his generous enemy Cleomenes, king of Sparta, robed the
corpse of Lydiades in a purple mantle, placed a crown on his head, and
so sent back his remains to Megalopolis {Cleomenes^ 6). But Plutarch's
narrative is hardly consistent with that of Pausanias.

27. 16. my notice of Philopoemen. See viii. 49-51.

27. 17. the Buphagns. See viii. 26. 8 note.

27. 17. Mount Pholoe. See viii. 24. 4 note.

28. I. Maratha. The name is Phoenician, according to Mr. V.
Bdrard {De Vorigine des Cultes arcadiensy p. 18). Maratha may
perhaps be identified with the ruined Greek fortress on the right bank
of the Alpheus a few miles below Karytaena^ opposite to the village of
Maiesi. See above, p. 302.

28. I. Gortys. About a mile and a half below Karytaena the
Alpheus receives an important tributary from the north. This is the
river oiDimitsana or Atzikolo^ the ancient Gortynius or Lusius (see § 2).



3o8 GORTYS bk. vxil arcadia

On the right bank of this river, about two and a half miles from its
junction with the Alpheus, are the ruins of Gortys. They occupy the
fairly spacious summit of a hill which falls away on the east in lofty
precipices to the river. A visit to them may be most conveniently
paid from Karytaena, From this picturesque town, perched high
on the right or eastern bank of the Alpheus, we descend northward
by a very rugged and stony path into the deep glen of the Alpheus.
Steep arid mountains enclose the glen, and behind us towers the im-
posing rock of Karytaena with its ruined mediaeval castle. In about
half an hour we reach the junction of the Gortynius river with the
Alpheus. We quit the glen of the Alpheus and follow that of the
Gortynius river in a north-easterly direction, keeping at first along the
left bank of the stream. The glen, though shut in by barren stony
mountains, is rather less gloomy and forbidding than the glen of the
Alpheus which we have left. In less than half an hour we descend
into the bed of the Gortynius, a rushing stream of clear bluish-green
water, and cross it by a stone bridge which is carried on a high pointed
arch and paved, in the usual fashion of such bridges in Greece, with
cobbles of the most agonising shapes and sizes. Just above the bridge
the glen deepens and narrows into a ravine with steep rocky sides, and
the view looking up it, with the old high-arched bridge in the foreground
and the rushing stream of green water below, is highly picturesque. I
drank of the water here and found it by no means cold, in spite of what
Pausanias says as to the exceeding coldness of the water of the Gorty-
nius. But it was hot autumn weather when I passed this way. Pau-
sanias may have seen the river in winter or spring, when its ciurrent
was chilled by ice or melting snow. From the bridge a steep and
rugged path ascends the right or western side of the glen. We follow
it and continue to ride up hill and down dale along the side of the barren
mountains, with the river rolling along in the bottom of the deep ravine
on our right. Half-way up the precipices which rise on this side of the
ravine is perched a little red-roofed monastery. In about three-quarters
of an hour from crossing the bridge we reach the ruins of Gortys.

The ruins, as we have seen, occupy the sununit of a hill which over-
hangs the right or western bank of the Gortynius river. At its eastern
extremity the hill falls down in sheer precipices of great height into the
glen of the river. It is in looking down these immense precipices that
one appreciates the height of the hilL On the other hand, seen from
the south, as you approach it from Karytaena^ the hill presents the
appearance merely of a gently-swelling down. The reason of this is
that from the bridge over the river we have been gradually rising,
and that the ground immediately to the south of Gortys is itself a hill as
high as the hill of Gortys, from which it is divided only by a slight
hollow now chiefly occupied with vineyards. But when we have
ascended what appears to be the gentle eminence on which are the
ruins of Gortys we see that the hill descends in a long slope north-cast-
ward to the glen of the Gortynius river, which curves round the hill in a
great bend on the north-east and east. The summit of the hill extends
in the form of a rather narrow ridge from south-east to north-west,



CH. XXVIII GORTYS 309

gradually rising to its highest point on the north-west. Towards this
end the hill is naturally defended on the side of the south by masses of
rugged rocks, of which the ancient engineers took advantage, inter-
posing pieces of walls in the intervals between the rocks. In the
crannies of the rocks bushes have now rooted themselves. The long
slope of the hill down to the glen of the Gortynius on the north-east
(which is not to be confused with the sheer precipices at the east end of
the site) is bare and stony. Stony and barren, too, are the mountains
that surround Gortys on all sides. In a grey cold light or under a
cloudy sky they would be exceedingly bleak and dreary ; but under the
warm sunshine of Greece they are only bare and desolate. The most
picturesque view is down into the glen of the Gortynius on the north-
east, where the river emerges from a narrow defile between high preci-
pices, above which the mountains rise on both sides. At the mouth of
the defile there is a house or two among trees. In spite of its height
above the river, Gortys lies essentially in a basin shut in on all sides by
mountains. The summer heat here must consequently be very great.
Even in October, when I visited the place, though a fresh breeze was
blowing, it was drowsily hot among the ruins. The sweet smell of the
thyme, the tinkle of sheep-bells, the barking of dogs, and the cries of
shepherds in the distance seemed to enhance the feeling of summer and
to invite to slumber in the shade. But it was pleasant and almost
cooling to hear the roar of the river, and to see its blue-green water and
greenish-white foam away down in the glen.

To judge from the existing remains of the walls and towers, which
are considerable, the city must have been long and narrow, occupying
little more than the ridge or summit of the hill. Its length from south-
east to north-west would seem to have been fully half a mile. The
remains of the walls and towers are to be seen on the long southern and
northern sides, and on the short western side. At the eastern end, on
the edge of the glen there are no traces of walls, so far as I observed.
Probably there never were walls here, as the precipices render fortifica-
tions quite needless. The shape of the fortified enclosure is roughly
this : —



N



W-



>B


On the south side the ruins of the fortification-wall are extensive, but
not continuous. The wall is built of blocks roughly squared and laid
in horizontal courses, but here and there a few pieces of polygonal
masonry occur. It is standing in places to a height of 8 feet; the
number of courses preserved varies from two to six. Remains of five
square towers may be seen projecting from the wall. They measure
each about 20 to 24 feet on the face, and project from 8 to 12 feet from



310 GORTYS BK. VIII. arcadu

the curtain. Towards the west the ground rises and the wall rises with
it in steps, so to say, making one or two sharp turns to the north at the
same time. Where it runs along the brow of one of these higher levels,
the wall is built of very massive blocks, and is lo feet 8 inches thicL
Here, too, a line of rugged rocks forms a natural defence, and the wall
is only built in the gaps between the rocks.

The short western wall was strengthened with three semicircular
towers, which are standing to a height of four and five courses (5 and 6
feet). The diameter of these towers is about 23 feet ; the intervals
between them are 26 and 31 paces respectively. Between the towers
the west wall is in places five courses (7 feet 4 inches) high and 13 feet
thick. Both wall and towers are here built of massive quadrangular
blocks laid in horizontal courses ; the stones are roughly rounded oo
the outside so as to bulge very much.

Beyond the third semicircular tower, at the north-western extremity
of the fortified enclosure, the wall turns sharply to the north-east
Here it is 12 feet thick and is preserved to a height of three to six
courses. Then comes a fourth semicircular tower in a very ruinoos
condition. Beyond this to the east the north wall disappears for a l(»g
stretch. Then come two scraps of wall built in a rough, almost
Cyclopean style. A stone in one of them measures 6 feet long by 2 feet
high and 2 feet thick. A few yards east of the second of these frag-
ments of Cyclopean walls is a gateway about 2 1 feet wide, opening to
the east ; the masonry is quadrangular. Beyond this gateway to the
east I found no farther trace of the wall. The remains of the north
wall, which have been described, are situated only a little way down
the north slope of the hill, so that the city, as I have said, would seem
to have occupied little more than the ridge. The site is littered with
common red unpainted potsherds.

A little way (perhaps 120 yards) south of the fortified ridge, not far
from the glen of the Gortynius river, are preserved some massive founda-
tions of an ancient building. They are to be seen in a field to the left
(east) of the path as you go to Karyiaena, Two rows of foundation-
stones are visible extending at right angles to each other: one row
measures 23 paces from east to west, the other measures 16 paces from
north to south. The stones are large, but broken and weathered at the
edges. Many of them are nearly covered with earth ; at most only
their upper surface is visible. The stone is apparently a grey lime-
stone ; certainly it is not Pentelic marble, as stated in the Guide-Joanne,
These foundations, however, may have supported the temple of Aescula-
pius, which was built, as Pausanias tells us, of Pentelic marble. Lying
on them is a block of white limestone (as it seemed to me) ; it is
apparently a fragment of a drum or capital of a small column. Leake
and Dodwell speak of some fragments of white marble which they
found here.

I visited Gortys, 9th October 1895, and have described the situation and
remains from my own observations, which do not agree with those of some pre-
vious writers, such as Bursian and Curtius. Bursian's statement that the u^s
with their towers are preserved all along the north side of the hill is certainly



iraTlel

'gate /y \



CH. XXVIII GORTYS 311

not true now ; and Curtius's statement that the stones of which the walls are
built average 6 to 7 feet in leng^ by 3 to 4 feet in height and depth is, in my
opinion, aeross exaggeration; it would seem to be baseid on a mere misunder-
standing Ota statement of Leake's quoted below. In the sketch plan of the ruins
given in the Expidition scienttjiqut de Morie the walk are represented extending
along the edge of the great precipices on the eastern side of the hill, where I founa
no trace of a wall, and where, as I have said, fortification would be wholly super-
fluous. Leake says : " On either side of the principal gate of Gortys the walls are a
fine specimen of the polygonal or second order : the stones are accurately joined, and
in good preservation. One of them is 6 feet 8 inches long, 3 feet 6 inches high,
and as much thick : in general, their contents are equal to cub^ of 2, 3, and 4 feet.
The entrance was strengthened by being placed in a re-entering angle, thus : —
the gate itself being at the end of a passage between two parallel
walls, or perhaps there was a gate at either end of this passage."
Leake omits to say on which side of the city he saw the gate j '
from the plan in the Expidition dt Morie it appears that the
described by Leake was near the eastern end of the north wall.
Whether this was the gate seen by me I cannot say with certainty, but I think
that it was not. See Dodwell, Tour, 2. p. 381 sqq, ; Leake, Morea, 2. p. 23 sqq, ;
Cell, Itinercuy of the Morea, p. 105 ; Boblaye, Recherches, p. l6l ; Expedition
scientifique de Morie: Architecture^ Sculptures etc, par A. Blouet, 2. p. 34,
with pi. 31 ; Curtius, Pelop, I. p. 349 sq, ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 233 ; Baedeker,'
p. 310 ; Guide-Joanne, 2. p. 304 sq,

28. I. a temple of Aesculapius. Cicero, enumerating the various
gods who bore the name of Aesculapius, says that one of them, who
was the son of Arsippus and Arsinoa, had invented purging and the
drawing of teeth, and that his tomb and sacred grove were shown in
Arcadia not far from the river Lusius {De nat, deor, iii. 22. 57).
Cicero no doubt refers to the sanctuary at Gortys. As to the probable
situation of the temple, see the preceding note. Curtius, however,
mentions that to the north of Gortys, where the river is spanned by a
bridge, a Byzantine church stands upon a two-stepped basement of
ancient masonry, and he conjectures that this basement supported the
temple of Aesculapius {Peloponnesos^ i. p. 350 j^.) As to the beardless
Aesculapius, see ii. 10. 3 note.

28. 2. the Lusius the Qortynius. This river, now called

the river of Dimitsana or Atzikolo^ is one of the chief tributaries of the
Alpheus, which it joins from the north about a mile and a half below
Karytaena, It is here a fine stream, wide, clear, and rapid. In the
lower part of its course it flows, in short winding reaches, between
precipices so perpendicular that in places they almost seem to be
artificial. Here and there, in apparently inaccessible clefts in the face
of the crags, may be seen mediaeval chapels and walls. The banks
on either side, separated by the deep and narrow gorge at the bottom
of which the river rushes along, are laid out in corn-fields, orchards
and vineyards. See Leake, Morea, 2. p. 23 ; Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 352.

28. 3. the Oydnus that flows through Tarsus. The coldness of
its water is mentioned by Strabo (xiv. p. 673).

28. 3. the Ales at Colophon. Cp. vii. 5. 10 and note on vii.

3. I.

28. 4. Thisoa. See viii. 38. 3 note.

28. 4. a village Teuthis. This place perhaps occupied the site

of the modem Dimitsana^ a village which stands very picturesquely on



312 DIMITSANA—TEUTHJS bk. viii. arcadu



a high ridge on the left or eastern bank of the Gortynius river,
surrounded on all sides by steep and lofty mountauns. The river sweeps
in a semicircle at the bottom of a deep gully round the western part
of the town, which thus stands on a high rocky promontory jutting into
the ravine. The steep and narrow streets, which are little better than
rocky staircases, are lined with shops and present a busy and anima t ed
scene. The air is cool and healthy. To the south the eye ranges over
the vine-clad hills on both sides of the river, to the green plain of
Megalopolis threaded by the silver stream of the Alpheus, and bounded
on the southern horizon by the snowy range of Taygetus. A steeps
rugged, and zigzag path leads down through terraced vineyards to the
bed of the river at the southern foot of the hill. Here a bridge spans
the stream, just below a point where it descends 50 feet in a distance
of as many yards, tumbling over huge masses of rock between lofty
precipices overhung with shrubs. The hill on the opposite or western
side of the ravine is even steeper and higher than that of Dimitsana,

All round the crest of the ridge occupied by the town are the
remains of an ancient wall, parts of it being intermixed with the yards,
walls, and foundations of private houses. In some places there aze
several courses of masonry standing. The style of masonry is rect-
angular at the east, but polygonal at the west end of the ridge. The
blocks at the latter end are enormous. Here too are the foundatioos
of an imposing edifice, turned east and west, and built of fine squared
blocks. It was doubtless a temple. There are also some andent
foundations among the terraced vineyards on the southern slope of the
hill.

Sec Leake, Morea^ 2. pp. 60-65 ; Gell, Itinerary of the Morea^ p. 89 ; Curtius,
Pelop, I. p. 352 sq, ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 232 ; Baedeker,' p. 310 ; Guidc-Joanme,
2. p. 314 ; Philippson, Peioponnes, p. 90.

Others, however, have identified Teuthis with the ruins of an
ancient town in the valley of a stream which flows from the north into
the Tuthoa, a tributary of the Ladon (see viii. 25. 12). Here, between
the villages of Galaias and Khoutouza^ a ridge projects from north-west
to south-east into the small, mountain-encircled dale. It is connected
by a sort of isthmus with the hills to the north. The ridge ends in a
rocky peak, so steep that on three sides it is almost inaccessible. The
peak is crowned with the ruins of the mediaeval castle of Akovci^
formerly one of the chief Frankish fiefs in Peloponnese. On the more
level part of the ridge, to the north of the castle, are the ruins of a
small ancient town. They consist of foundations, scattered blocks, and
fragments of tiles and vases. These ruins have been identified with
Teuthis by Gell, Ross, Boblaye and Curtius. But in fact the data
furnished by Pausanias are really insufficient to enable us to determine
the site of Teuthis.

See Gell, Itinerary of the Morea, pp. 118, 119; Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 151
sq, ; L. Ross, Reisen^ p. 113 j^. ; Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 354 sq,

28. 4» TenthiB Omytus. The following tale of the wounding



CH. XXIX BRENTHE—TRAPEZUS 313

of Athena seems to have been told by the antiquary Polemo, who
called the hero of the tale Omytus (Clement of Alexandria, Protrept, iL
36. p. 31 ed. Potter).

28. 6. an image of Athena with a wound in her thigh.

At Tegea there was an image of Hercules with a wound in his thigh (viii.
53. 9). On a vase in the British Museum (£. 382) there is represented
a man with a bandage on his thigh holding an infant ; he is supposed
to be Telephus with the child Orestes. See Catalogue of Greek and
Etruscan Vases in the British Museum, 3. p. 247. The Hottentots
believe in a divine being whom they call Tsui - Goab, />. < Wounded
Knee.' Mythologists differ as to whether he is the Dawn or an
ancestral ghost with a game leg. See Theophilus Hahn, Tsuni-Goam^
the Supreme Being of the Khoi-Khoi; A. Lang, Custom and Myth, p.
197 sqq,

28. 7. Brenthe. This place is supposed to have occupied the site
of the modem Karytaena, a town which stands in a high and most
romantic situation on the right or eastern bank of the Alpheus, a little
below the point where the river, quitting the spacious plain of Megalo-
polis, enters a deep and narrow gorge, pent in on either side by
massive mountains. Through this profound ravine, between walls of
rock, the river forces its way for about 10 miles, till the valley opens
out again on the plain of Heraea. Conspicuous far and wide is the
imposing mediaeval castle of Karytaena crowning with its battlemented
walls a lofty flat -topped rock which overhangs, with tremendous
precipices of ruddy rock, the gorge of the Alpheus. The modem town
nestles in a hollow between the castle-rock on the west and the chapeU
crowned hill of St. Elias on the east ; its narrow, winding, dirty lanes
and old houses with their wooden balconies climb up the sides of both
hills. In the Middle Ages the castle was of great importance ; its lord
had two - and - twenty fiefs under him. The view from the summit
embraces the plain of Megalopolis and the mountains which environ it


Architecture^ Sculptures^ etc. par A. Blouet, 2. p. 34, with pi. 32 ; Curtius,
Pilop. I. p. 348 sq,\ Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 241; Baedeker,' p. 314; Guide-
Joanne^ 2. p. 304 ; Philippson, Peloponnes^ p. 96.

28. 7. the river Brentheates. This may be the small clear
stream which joins the Alpheus, on its right bank, a little to the east of
Karytaena; it is the last tributary which the Alpheus receives from the
plain of Megalopolis. See Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 348 sq,\ Boblaye,
Recherches, p. 164 sq, ; Guide-Joanne, 2. p. 303.

29. I. the Trapesnintian district a city TrapezoB. The

Trapezuntian district appears to have comprised the north-west comer
of the plain of Megalopolis, between Mt. Lycaeus and the left bank of
the Alpheus. Boblaye conjectured that the town of Trapezus may have
been near the modem village of Phlorio, opposite Karytaena, See
Boblaye, Recherches, p. 1 64 ; L. Ross, Reisen, p. 90 ; Curtius, Pelop,
I. p. 304 ; Guide-Joanne, 2. p. 303. The city of Trapezus was said to



314 BATHOS bk. viii. axcadu

have been so named because here Zeus in his anger upset the table
{trapesa) on which Lycaon and his sons had impiously served up to
him a dish of human flesh (Apollodorus, iiL 8 ; cp. Paus. viii. 2. 3}.
This legend, associating Trapezus with the human sacrifices offered to
Zeus on Mt Lycaeus, points to the situation of Trapezus on or near
that mountain.

29. I. Bathos. This is probably the deep ravine still called
Vat Ay Rhevma (* deep stream ') between the villages of Mcpuria and
Kyparisna, A stream descends through it from Mt Lycaeus to join
the Alpheus on its left bank, 3 or 4 miles above Kcaytaena. The
natives assured Dodwell and Gell that flames were sometimes seen to
burst from the earth at this place. L. Ross says that thirty or forty
years before his time the earth burned for several years ; no flames were
seen, but the surface of the ground was very hot and smoke rose from
it continually, and always in denser volumes after rain ; a strong smell
of sulphur was also perceptible. It is said that the earth burned
similarly a little farther south, between the villages of Kyparissia and
Vramosella^ on the same (left) bank of the river.

See Dodwell, Tour, 2. p. 380; Gejl, Itinerary of tke Morea^ p. 102 ; Leake,
Morea, 2. p. 28 ; Boblaye, Rechirches^ p. 164 ; L. Ross, Reisen, p. 90 ; Cuitios,
Pelof, I. p. 304 sq,\ Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 240; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 303;
Phihppson, Peloponftes^ p. 254.

That fire burned perpetually near Megalopolis is also mentioned by
[Aristotle], De mirab, attscult, 127 (139) ; cp. Pliny, Nat, hist, ii. 237.
Cp. Neumann und Partsch, PhysikcUische Geographic von Griechenland^
p. 270 sq.

Excavations were made at Bathos in 1893 by two English archaeo-
logists, Messrs. Bather and Yorke. On a small strip of soil close to
the bank of the Alpheus, below the church of St George, they discovered
a large number of what seem to have been votive offerings. Besides
several hundreds of small pots and lamps, there were found about
seventy terra-cotta figures and some bronze objects. The terra-cottas
include examples of the early type of female figures, standing and
seated, with bird-like heads, and the later type of female figures stand-
ing and holding an object close to the breast ; also figures of
animals, particularly four sows, a bird, and what seems to be a deer.
The bronze objects consist of a bull inscribed with the letters lEP
(* sacred ') ; a pig ; two engraved rings skilfully worked ; and the handle
of a vessel ornamented with the fore-part of a lion and ending in two
Gorgon masks. The latest of the objects found seem to belong to the
fourth century B.C. It was probably here that the rites of the Great
Goddesses, mentioned by Pausanias, were celebrated every second year.
Set Journal of Hellenic Studies^ 13 (1892-93), pp. 227-229. The
spring called Olympias, which Pausanias mentions, is probably the very
abundant spring about half a mile north of the acropolis of Basilis (see
below, § 5) ; it is said to cease flowing one year in every nine (^Journal
of Hellenic Studies^ 13 (1892-93), p. 227).

29. I. the legendary battle of the gods and the giants. The



CH. XXIX BATTLE OF GODS AND GIANTS 315

scene of this battle, as Pausanias intimates, was commonly laid at
Pallene, under its mythical name of Phlegra. Cp. Herodotus, vii. 123 ;
Stephanus Byz^ s,v, ^Xcypa ; Max. Mayer, Die Gtganten und Titanen^
p. 1 5 7 sqq. The localisation of the legend in the plain of Megalopolis
may have been due to the prevalence of earthquakes, the burning
earth, and especially to the finding of mammoth bones. Many such
bones are still found by the peasants in this neighbourhood, and some
of them are now preserved in the museum at Dimitsana, It was
probably some of these bones that Pausanias saw in the sanctuary of
the Boy Aesculapius at Megalopolis (viil 32. 5). See Journal of
Hellenic Studies J 13 (1892-93), p. 231 ; cp. Philippson, Peloponnes^ p.
254 ; and see note on i. 35. 7. The battle of the gods and giants is
depicted in great detail on an ancient Greek amphora in the Louvre.
See Monuments grecs^ No. 4 (1875), P^* *• ^^^ "•> with the remarks
of Mr. F. F. Ravaisson, pp. 1-12. The subject was a common one in
ancient art See O. Jahn, in Annali delP Instituto^ 35 (1863), pp.
243-255; ib^ 41 (1869), pp. 1 76-191 ; Mayer, op, cit, p. 263 sqq,\
Roscher's Lexikon^ i. p. 1653 sqq,

29. I. they sacriflce here to lightnings, Jinzricanes, and
thunders. Thunder was worshipped at Seleucia in Syria. See Appian,
Syr, 58. We may compare the respect which the Circassians evince
for thunder. Potocki says : " The Circassians have not a god of
thunder, but it might be a mistake to assume that they never had one.
The thunder is held by them in great veneration ; they say it is an
angel who smites those who are marked out by the blessing of the
Eternal The body of a person struck by lightning is solemnly buried,
and while they lament the deceased, his relations congratulate them-
selves on the distinction with which their family has just been honoured.
The people come forth in crowds from their houses at the sound made
by this angel in his passage through the air, and when some time has
elapsed without thunder being heard, they offer public prayers to induce
it to come and visit them " ( Voyage dans Us steps d^ Astrakhan et du
Caucase^ i. p. 309 sq) Cp. v. 14. 7 note.

29. 2. Ulysses' ships were attacked by Laestrygones etc. See
Odyssey y x. 1 1 8 sqq. The adventure of Ulysses with the Laestrygones
is the subject of four ancient wall-paintings which were discovered on
the Esquiline at Rome in 1849. Sq& Archdologisch^ Zeitung^ 10 (1852),
plates xlv. xlvi., with the remarks of E. Gerhard, pp. 497-502 ; Miss
J. E. Harrison, Myths of the Odyssey ^ pp. 45-62.

29. 2. he represents the king of the Phaeadans etc. See Odyssey,
vii. 205 sq,

29. 2. the following passage etc See Odyssey , ii. 59 sq.

29. 3. That the giants have serpents instead of feet etc Cp.
Servius on Virgil, A en, iii. 578 ; Ovid, Met, i. 183 sq, \ id,, Tristia,
iv. 7. 1 7 ; Macrobius, Sat, i. 20. 9. In the earlier works of Greek art
the giants are regularly represented in full human form. The earliest
monument on which a giant is represented with serpent-feet is a bronze
relief of the Museum Kircherianum dating from the end of the fourth or
the beginning of the third century B.C. On the now famous reliefs from



3i6 BASILIS — THOCNIA bk. viii. arcadu

the great altar of Pergamus, erected in the beginning of the second
century B.c, some of the giants are represented with serpent-feet ; and
from that time onward the serpent-footed type prevailed. See Kuhnert
in Roscher's Lexikoriy i. p. 1653 sqq, ; Max. Mayer, Die GiganUn
und Titanen, p. 274 sqq.

29. 3. The Syrian river Orontes etc Philostratus says (Heraicoj
ii. 4) that the body of the giant Aryades, thirty cubits long, was dis-
covered through the river Orontes bursting its banks; some declared
Aryades to be an Ethiopian, others an Indian. The emperor Tiberius
was said to have changed the name of the river to Orontes, the
old name having been Draco (< serpent,' < dragon '). See Eustathius,
Comment, on Dionysius Periegetesy 919 {Geogr, Graeci Minores^ ed
C. Miiller, 2. p. 380). The tradition was false, for the river is adled
Orontes by Polybius (v. 59) ; but some have inferred from it that
Tiberius was the emperor who, as Pausanias here tells us, made the
ship-canal to avoid the rapids. See Kalkmann, Pausanias^ p. 22^ sq,;
Mayer, Die Giganien und Titanen, p. 243.

29. 4- the first men were produced by the sim warmiiig the
earth etc. Cp. Diodorus, i. 7 ; L. Preller, * Die Vorstellungen der
Alten — ^von dem Ursprunge— des menschlichen Geschlechts,' Ausge-
wdklte Aufsdtze^ P* I57 ^^1' Some of the Indians on the Orinoco think
that '* the earth formerly produced men and women, just as it produces
briars and thorns" (Gumilla, Histoire de VOrenoque^ i. p. 175).

29. 5. Basilis. Remains of this town, consisting of some blocks
and foundations, are to be seen among the vineyards, ten minutes east
of the village of Kyparissia^ toward the left bank of the Alpheus.
Marble fragments, tiles, coins, etc., are occasionally found here. Ex-
cavations made by Messrs. Bather and Yorke at the threshing-floor of
Kyparissia in 1893 led to the discovery of some slabs of whitish lime-
stone adorned with a moulding and an elaborate variety of the key-
pattern. These slabs are conjectured to have been parts of pedestals of
statues which lined an ancient road leading up to the acro]>olis of
Basilis ; the hill that rises above Kyparissia seems to have been the
acropolis. Basilis is referred to, though not by name, in a passage of
Athenaeus (xiii. p. 609 e f), which confirms Pausanias's account of the
place in some points. The passage runs thus : ** And I know that a
competition in feminine beauty has been held before now. Speaking of
which Nicias in his work on Arcadia says that the competition was
arranged by Cypselus after he had founded a city in the plain beside
the Alpheus. In this city he settled some Parrhasians and founded a
precinct and altar in honour of Eleusinian Demeter, in whose festival
he held the competition in beauty, and his wife Herodice was the first
to win the prize. This competition is still held, and the women who
compete are called * gold- wearers ' {chrusophoroi)^^

See Dodwell, Tour^ 2. p. 379 sq, ; Gell, Itinerary of the Morea^ p. 102 ;
Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 292 sq, ; Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 164 ; L. Ross, Reisen^ p.
89 sq, ; Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 304 ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 240 ; Journal of Hellenic
Studies, 13 (1892-93), p. 227 sqq,

29. 5. Thocnia. This place must have been on the right bank of



CH. XXX THE HEUSSON—DIPAEA 317

the Alpheus ; it probably stood on the height which is now occupied by
the village of Vromosella, In the church here Bursian observed some
fragments of unfluted colunms, the base of an Ionic column, and other
architectural remains. The Aminius river must be the brook which
flows into the Helisson somewhat to the east of Vromosella; it comes
from the north-east.

See Gell, Itinerary of the Morea, p. 102 ; Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 293 ; Boblaye,
HechercheSf p. 164 ; Curtius, Pehp, I. p. 304 ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 240.

30. I. This river Helisson rises at a village of the same name.

The Helisson which flows past Megalopolis rises about 15 miles to
the north-east of that town, at the village of Alontstena in Mount
Maenalus. The village is prettily situated on either side of a ravine,
at the bottom of which the roaring torrent issues. Steep fir-covered
mountains rise all around. Above the village, to the east, is the loftiest
summit of the Maenalian range (6000 feet high). As the village stands
very high, the air is fine, but in winter the snow lies three feet deep.
The people live chiefly by their sheep ; the fir-woods supply them with
fuel. There are no ancient remains at the village.

See Leake, Morea, 2. pp. 53-55 ; Boblaye, Rechtrches^ p. 171 ; L. Ross,
Reiseftt p. 117; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 228; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 380; Philippson,
Peloponnes^ P* 91 sq^

30. I. Dipaea. At the northern end of the narrow, mountain-
locked Maenalian plain is the village of Piana^ finely situated high up
the side of a mountain, about four miles south of Alontstena, The
village clusters round a mediaeval castle. Between the castle and the
road that skirts the eastern side of the hill there is an abundant spring,
which gives rise to a tributary of the Helisson. Beside this spring some
remains, consisting of heaps of stones and scattered tiles, may mark the
site of Dipaea. L. Ross preferred to identify them with the village of
Helisson ; but that village was, as Pausanias tells us, at the source of
the Helisson river, and the chief source of that stream is at Alontstena,

See Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 54; Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 171 ; L. Ross, Reisen^
p. 117; Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 315 <r^. ; Bursian, Gtogr, 2. p. 229; Baedeker,' p. 309;
Philippson, Peloponnes^ p. 89.

As to the battle of Dipaea, cp. iii. 11. 7 ; viiL 45. 2 ; Herodotus,
ix. 35 ; Isocrates, Archidamusy 99. In all these passages the name of
the town appears as Dipaieis^ the plural oiDipaieuSy which last, according
to Stephanus Byzantius (s.v. Atiraia), was also employed to designate
the town, as well as a native of it But the form Dipaea is employed
by Pausanias (viii. 27. 3) and is mentioned by Stephanus Byzantius (/.r.)

30. I. Lycaea. See note on viii. 36. 7.

30. 2. Megalopolis. Megalopolis stood in the great western plain
of Arcadia, which, like the great eastern plain of Mantinea and Tegea,
extends in a direction from north to south. In natural beauty the plain
of Megalopolis is far superior to its eastern neighbour. The latter is a
bare monotonous flat, unrelieved by trees or rivers, and enclosed by barren
mountains, so that its general aspect is somewhat dreary and depressing ;



3x8 MEGALOPOLIS bk. viii. axcadia

only towards its northern end do the mountains rise in grander masses
and with more picturesque outlines. The plain of M^alopolis, on the
other hand, is surrounded by mountains of fine and varied outlines,
some of the slopes of which are clothed with wood, and the sur&ce oif
the plain itself is diversified with copses and undulating downs and
hillocks, refreshed by numerous streams shaded with plane-trees, and
watered by the broad, though shallow, stream of the Alpheus winding
through its midst The scenery, in contrast to that of the eastern plain,
is eminently bright, smiling, and cheerful. it is, perhaps, seen at its
best on a fine morning in early summer after rain. The vegetation is
then green, the air pellucid, the outlines of the environing mountains
are sharp and clear, and their tints vary from deep purple to lilac

The city of Megalopolis occupied broken ground on both banks of
the Helisson, about two and a half miles east of the point where that
stream Hows into the Alpheus. The large modem viUage of Situmou
stands near the south-eastern corner of the ancient city, a short way out-
side of the probable line of the walls. The western wall of the dty
seems to have run just to the east of the ground now occupied by the
village of Kasidachori on the northern bank of the Helisson. The
Helisson fiows from east to west, and divided the city into two parts
which seem to have been approximately equal. Its bed is very broad
and gravelly ; the stream, when it is not entirely dried up, fiows along
it in several small channels. A little way from the banks of the river,
both on the north and south sides, the ground rises into low hillocks,
plateaus, and ridges, broken and divided by small valleys or hollows,
through which, in rainy weather, tiny rivulets fiow to join the Helisson.
Thus the site of Megalopolis is far from being a dead fiat, and the
engineers who constructed the fortifications took advantage of the
natural defences ofiered by the inequalities of the ground. For example,
the north wall ran along the top of the steep slope which separates the
high tableland north of the Helisson from the valley of the little river
Aminius (Paus. viii. 29. 5) and its tributary streams. This slope is a
very steep one, and has in places a fall of as much as 120 feet. The
course of the city walls was first traced in modem times by Mr. W.
Loring in the winter of 1891-92. Only detached fragments of them
remain, but their number and directions, taken in conjunction with the
nature of the ground, suffice to indicate the whole circuit with tolerable
certainty. Twelve larger pieces of the wall have been excavated, and
are described by Mr. Loring, while seven other fragmentary or unexca-
vated portions are indicated on his plan of the site. Mr. Loring's
researches have proved that the area of the city was much greater than
had been believed by modem scholars and travellers, and that the name
Megalopolis (* great city') was not misapplied to it. According to
Polybius (ix. 21) the circumference of the city was 50 Greek furlongs ;
and the length of the circuit, as determined independently by Mr.
Loring, agrees closely with this estimate, being 47 J Greek furlongs
(about 5 J miles). The length of the city from north to south was about
a mile and three-quarters ; its breadth from east to west, along the bed
of the Helisson, about three-quarters of a mile. The fortifications



MEGALOPOLIS . airi.


f


K •
i .

4



k

t

%

I



«



k

t
I



I



I
I

I



CH. XXX MEGALOPOLIS 319

appear to have been formed of two parallel walls, distant from each
other about 3 feet, and connected by bonds or cross-pieces, the interval
between the two walls being filled up with earth and small stones. The
total thickness of the fortification-wall thus formed measures in different
places from 7^ to 11^ feet. At some points the fortification seems to
have been strengthened by the erection of a third component wall out-
side the other two and parallel to them, the interval between it and them
being similarly filled up with rubble and earth. This third component
wall was apparently united to the outer of the other two component
walls by bonds ; and the total thickness of the fortification formed by
the three component walls was nearly 1 6 feet. The best - preserved
piece of fortification of this style is to be seen on high ground close to
the village of Kasidachori. Square and semicircular towers appear to
have projected at intervals from the city wall ; for Mr. Loring found
remains of at least one semicircular and two square towers. In regard
to the style of masonry of the walls, the existing remains fall into two
groups, their difference in structure pointing clearly to a difference
in date. In one group, comprising the remains on the west and south
sides, together with two pieces on the east side of the city, the large
stones that form the outer faces of the wall are roughly hewn into shape ;
in the other group, comprising the remains on the north and north-east
sides, the stones are entirely unhewn. We may suppose that the former
gfroup, being the better built, belongs to the original city walls built in
370 B.C. (see above, p. 307) ; and that the latter group is part of the
walls which were rebuilt after the partial destruction of the city by the
Spartans under Cleomenes in 222 B.C. (cp. Polybius, v. 93). Certainly
both groups appear to be of Greek, not Roman, date ; for they are built
entirely of stone (conglomerate and limestone), and no trace of brick or
mortar has been found in any of the extant remains, though these are
widely scattered and amount in all to a length of several hundred feet.
However, even the earlier and better- built portions of the circuit wall
contrast very imfavourably in style with other city walls which date from
about the same period, for example the walls of Messene and Man-
tinea ; the rudeness of the masonry is probably to be explained, in part
at least, by the great extent (about 5 J miles) of the circuit The best-
preserved portion of the later walls is to be seen at the north-east angle
of the site, about three-quarters of a mile from the Helisson, a little to
the right (east) of the path which goes to Braimi, Here the wall is
standing in places to a height of about 3 feet 4 inches. Of the earlier
walls in general only one course is preserved. The upper part of the
walls of both periods was probably constructed of sun-dried bricks.
For if the walls had been entirely built of stone, it is difficult to account
for their almost total disappearance; and we have good grounds for
believing that the upper portions of the walls of Greek cities were often
built of this material (see viii. 8. 7 note).

Excavations were made at Megalopolis by the British School of
Archaeology in 1890-93. They were directed chiefly by Messrs. W.
Loring, £. A. Gardner, £. F. Benson, and A. G. Bather, and resulted
in laying bare the remains of the theatre, the Thersilium, and some



320 MEGALOPOLIS bk. viii. arcadia

portions of the buildings which surrounded the market-place (see below).
No sculptures were brought to light, and the inscriptions discovered
were few and for the most part unimportant One inscription, however,
of considerable importance was found. It is a long fragment (255 lines)
of the Edict of Diocletian * On prices ' ; the g^reater part of the Edict
thus recovered is new, ue, is not contained in the other fragmentary
copies of the Edict which have been discovered in various places.

On Megalopolis see Expedition scientifique de Morie : Architeciuret Sculptures,
etc., par A. Blouet, 2. pp. 43-56, with piates 36-40 ; Dodwell, Taur^ 2. p. 370
sqq. ; Leake, Morea, 2. p. 30 sqq, ; Gt% Journey in the Moreay p. 176 sqq, ;
^blaye, Recherches, p. 107 sq, ; L. Ross, Keisen, p. 74 sqq, ; id.^ IVeuulerungen,



I. p. 217 J|7. ; Welcker, Tagebtuh^ i. p. 263 sq, ; Curtius, Pelop, i. pp. 276 j^.,
281 sqq, ; Vischer, Erinnerungen, p. 406 sqq, ; Conze and Michaelis, in AnnaH
delt Institute, 33 (186 1), p. 32 sqq, ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 244 sqq, ; Baedeker,'



&. 296 sq, ; Guide-Joanne, 2. ^. 300 sqq. The results of the excavations by the
ritish School are published in a volume, Excavations at Megalopolis (London,
1892), and in the Jourfui/ of Hellenic Studies, 11 (1890), pp. 294-392; id,^ 13
( 1 892-9 j), pp. 319-337, 356-358. The remains of the walls are described by Mr.
Loring m Excavations at Megalopolis, pp. io6-ii6 ; the fragment of the Edict of
Diocletian is published by him mjoum, of Hellen, Stud, 11 (1890), pp. 299-342.
I paid two visits to Megalopolis (4th-6th May 1890, and loth October 1895). On
my first visit I had the advantap;e of the courteous guidance of Mr. W. Loring,
who was then directing the English excavations.

30. 2. the market-place. The market-place of Megalopolis lay
on the north bank of the Helisson, nearly opposite the theatre. It
occupied the flat ground, now covered with corn-fields, which inter-
venes between the bed of the river and the hillocks that rise a
little to the north. Considerable remains of some of the buildings
which surrounded the market-place were laid bare by the excava-
tions of the British School in 1890-91. These discoveries, so far as
they go, confirm the substantial accuracy of the ground-plan of the
market-place which E. Curtius made from Pausanias's description,
and which, as illustrative of that description, is here reproduced (Fig.
34). Chief among the buildings excavated by the English archae-
ologists are the Philippian Colonnade and the sanctuary of Saviour
Zeus, both of which are mentioned by Pausanias (^ 6 and 10). The
Philippian Colonnade formed in part the northern boundary of the
market-place, while the sanctuary of Zeus lay beside the river at the
south-eastern comer of the market-place. The Aristandrian Colonnade
(§ 10), which probably bounded the market-place on the south, has
apparently disappeared, the bank of the river having been here eaten
away by the stream.

(i) The remains of the Philippian Colonnade, situated about 200
yards north of the river-bank, comprise the foundations of the stylobate,
a portion of the stylobate and columns at the extreme south-east comer
of the front, the lower part of the side and back walls, and the founda-
tions of the internal rows of columns, with a few of the bases of the
columns still in position on their top. The colonnade was 5 1 o feet long
from east to west by 65 feet deep from north to south. It faced south,
and from the long south front a wing projected at each end. These
wings projected 13 feet 6 inches from the main front, and measured 55



CH. XXX



MEGALOPOLIS— THE MARKET



321



feet 6 inches across. A long row of Doric columns ran along the front
of the colonnade, with its projecting wings ; and in the interior there
were two rows of columns of the Ionic order extending along the



QOVERNMENT OFFICES



PHILIPPIAN COLONNADE



.imm



GYMNASIUM



TCMPLC or

MOTM CW Of THff QOO»



I CW Of THff <

I I:



PRECINCT OF THE
OREAT GODDESSES



APOtXOa



□

ZCU8



OPOLYBIUS



COUNCIL
H0U8C



• a



w.

8



r
S



ARISTANDRIAN COLONNADE



• SAVIOUR ZEUS


FIG. 34.— MARKET-PLACE OF MEGALOPOLIS (CONJECTURAL RESTORATION BY B. CURTIUS).

whole length of the colonnade. The back of the colonnade on the north
and the two short sides on the east and west were closed by walls.
Attached to the back wall were two quadrangular exedme or recesses,
which were entered from the colonnade by openings in the wall. These
recesses had a length externally of about 52 feet each, and projected
about 10 feet from the back wall. The foundations and most of the
existing walls are built of conglomerate ; the stylobates, bases, and
columns are of white limestone, but the capitals of the Ionic columns
are of marble. Clamps of two different shapes ()-^ and |— ^) are used
to fasten the blocks together.

The enclosing walls of the colonnade, so far as they exist, consist of
a course of upright blocks of conglomerate, 2 ft 8 in. high, and a
course of limestone blocks, 6^ inches thick, laid on the top of the
uprights. There are two of the upright blocks in the thickness of the
wall ; they are panelled on the face and coated with stucco. The
foundation of the stylobate of the outer columns is built of slabs of
conglomerate ; its average width is 5 feet, and in the west wing it is at
least five courses deep. A portion of the stylobate of the east wing
still exists ; it is composed of two steps resting on a course of limestone
slabs. The Doric colunms of the fagade are set at intervals of 4 ft
\\ in., measured to the inside of the flutes. Pieces of five of these
colunms are standing in their original positions in the east wing ; they
measure 2 ft. 8 in. in diameter at the base, and have each twenty flutes.
The longest is 5 ft. 2| in. high, and the shortest is 3 ft. 10 in. The

VOL. IV Y



322 MEGALOPOLIS — THE MARKET bk. viii. arcadia

foundation-piers of the inner columns measure 4 ft 6 in. square, on an
average. They are built of oblong blocks of conglomerate, two to each
course, connected by clamps of the \m^ shape. On the top of these
piers stood square slabs of limestone, some of which still exist,
measuring 3 ft. i in. square and 8 to 9 inches deep. The circular
moulded bases of the Ionic columns rested on these slabs. Five at
least of these bases still remain in position and some pieces of the
columns lie near them. The lower diameter of these columns measures
2 ft 3^ in. ; the number of flutes in each colunm is twenty. The
number of columns in each of the inner rows seems to have been
twenty-five.1

The architectural fragments of the colonnade which have been
found comprise portions of the Doric front columns in position at the
south-east angle, a piece of a Doric architrave block and a length of
a triglyph frieze, several moulded bases of the Ionic order, numerous
pieces of Ionic columns, two marble Ionic capitals, and a very large
number of pieces of the Doric columns. These pieces of Doric
coliunns, varying in length from 2 to 6 feet, have been found scattered
all over the market-place, as well as in the colonnade itself, and a
number of them were brought to light in the sanctuary of Saviour Zeus.
These remains, while not sufficient to allow of a complete restoration of
the colonnade, enable us to form a good idea of the nature and pro-
portions of the superstructure. The Doric columns of the exterior were
probably about 6^ diameters high. The length of the architrave block
is 6 ft. 9 in., which is practically the space, from centre to centre, of
the columns still in position. Its height is 2 ft i^ in. The height of
the frieze is 2 ft 3^ in. The details of the triglyphs show late
characteristics. The Ionic columns in the interior of the colonnade
would seem to have been 8 J diameters high or about 19 ft 8 in. The
volutes of the capitals are comparatively small.

With regard to the date of the colonnade, we should infer from what
Pausanias says that it was built in the fourth century RC, since it was
erected in honour of Philip of Macedon. But the style of the archi-
tecture points to a later date. We know from Livy (xxxviii. 34) that in
189 B.C. a colonnade which had been destroyed by the Lacedaemonians
under Cleomenes in 222 B.C. was rebuilt with money acquired from the
sale of prisoners. The colonnade thus rebuilt may have been the
Philippian Colonnade ; for the style of the existing remains of the
Philippian Colonnade agrees with that date. That the colonnade just
described was indeed the Philippian Colonnade was proved by the
discovery of a tile at its east end bearing the inscription ^lAlII-
IIEIOY, *of the Philippian' {sciL colonnade). A bilingual inscription
in Greek and Latin, dating from 93 or 94 A.D., records that the
Emperor Domitian rebuilt from the foundations a colonnade at Megalo-
polis which had been destroyed by fire {Excavations at Megalopolis^ p.
136 sq,^ Inscr. No. 18). But the colonnade restored by Domitian can

^ On the plan published m Excavations at Megalopolis, pi. xiv., the number of
columns in each of the inner rows is indicated as twenty-four. But see foum, of
Hellenic Studies, 13 (1892-93), p. 335 sq. ; id., 14 (1894), p. 243.



CH. XXX MEGALOPOLIS— THE MARKET 323

hardly have been the Philippian Colonnade, since the architectural style
of the existing remains of the Philippian Colonnade points, as we have
seen, to a considerably earlier date than the end of the first century

A.D.

(2) The remains of the sanctuary of Zeus which have been laid
bare by the English excavations consist principally of foundation-walls.
From an examination of these it is possible to get a good general idea
of the extent and arrangement of the buildings, although, on account
of the paucity of architectural fragments, the nature of the super-
structure must remain almost entirely a matter of conjecture.

The sanctuary appears to have been in the form of a rectangle
measuring about 175 feet from east to west by 154 feet from north to
south. In the centre of the rectangle was a square open court, round
which ran a double colonnade (/>. a colonnade with an outer and an
inner row of columns) on all sides. The main entrance was on the
east side, and was approached from the lower level of the ground out-
side by a ramp or inclined plane. This led up to an outer porch
projecting from the face of the eastern wall. The entrance itself through
the wall consisted presumably of three gateways side by side, which
led into the colonnade or cloisters. Cutting through the cloisters in the
middle of the west side, exactly opposite the entrance, was the temple,
the portico of which projected into the open court In the middle oif
the court, opposite the temple, stood a large oblong base, measuring
about 37 feet from north to south by 17 feet from east to west The
foundations of the base are standing and consist of a foundation-wall
round the four sides varying from 3 ft 6 in. to 4 feet thick, and seven
cross -walls, each about 2 ft. 3 in. thick. There are also remains in
one place of an additional internal wall at right angles to the seven
cross-walls, indicating that special support was wanted at this particular
part This accumulation of supporting walls seems to show that a
gn^eat weight rested on the base, and leads us to assume that it was the
pedestal of a group of heavy statuary. Hence we conclude that it
supported the group of Zeus, Megalopolis, and Saviour Artemis men-
tioned by Pausanias (§ 10). This is the view taken of the base by
Messrs. Loring and Gardner and the architect Mr. R. W. Schultz. Mr.
Richards, on the other hand, prefers to suppose that the base is that of
an altar, and that the group of statuary mentioned by Pausanias stood
in the inside of the temple. The foundations of the base go down to
a considerable depth ; four courses, regularly built of squared blocks
in alternate rows of ' headers ' and * stretchers,' have been exposed at
the south end. Round the sides of the court ran an open gutter for
holding water, which was brought to it, from a lead pipe outside of the
sanctuary on the north, by a drain constructed of tiles which ran under
the floor of the cloisters. Remains of the lead pipe have been found ;
but where it came from and whither it went is not Imown.

Of the cloisters or colonnade which ran round the open court little
is known. Of the outer rows of columns, next the court, nothing but
the foundation-course of the stylobate remains ; hence we cannot tell
the number of these columns nor the distance between them. They



324 MEGALOPOLIS— THE MARKET bk. viii. arcadu

may have been of the Doric order ; for a Doric capital, slightly smaller
than the capitals of the Philippian Colonnade, was found in the
cloisters. On the other hand, we can estimate the distance from eadi
other of the inner columns of the cloisters, since the foundation-jHeis
of many of them remain. These piers are single stones, each about
3 ft. 3 in. square ; and the distance of the piers from each other is
about 13 feet This wide spacing of the columns points to their having
supported wooden beams, which in turn probably carried a wooden rooC
These inner columns may have been, like the inner columns of the
Philippian Colonnade, of the Ionic order ; a fragment of an Ionic base
was found beside the Doric capital in the cloisters. The east wall of
the sanctuary, below the level of the floor of the cloisters, is carcfiillj
built of squared blocks laid in regular courses. In the north wall of
the sanctuary, almost opposite the centre of the court, there is a siD of
white limestone, 10 ft. 4 in. long by 2 ft. 2 in. wide. It may have
belonged to an additional entrance at this point, or perhaps to an
exedra or recess projecting outwards from the cloister, like the recesses
at the back of the Philippian Colonnade.

The temple, as we have seen, cut through the cloister on the west
side of the court. It appears to have comprised a portico, a fore-
temple {Jfronao5\ and a cella or shrine, and to have measured about
70 feet from east to west by 38 feet from north to south. Foundations
of all three compartments of the temple exist; they are well btuk
of squared blocks laid in regular courses, each course a\'eraging about
I ft. 6 in. deep. On the south side of the cella the foundation-wall is
at least eight courses deep. Inside of the cella on either side are
foundation-piers averaging 2 ft. 9 in. square and distant about 2 ft.
3 in. from the side walls. They probably supported internal columns.
Four of them remain on the north side and two on the south side. On
the south side, in the position which a third pier would have occupied,
are the remains of a strong foundation running in at right angles to the
south v^-all. This may have been merely the foundation for the third
pier ; but possibly it may have formed, in addition, part of the founda-
tion of a large pedestal which supported an image of Zeus.

In the cloister to the north of the temple are some remains (^a
stylobate, >»ith foundations, which seems to ha\'e extended in a con-
tinuous line from the temple to the north wall of the sanctuar>-. Prob-
ably a second inner line of columns stood on this stylobate, and we
may suppose that this line of columns i^-as prolonged on the south side
of the temple as fur as the south i^-all of the sanctuary. On this
hypothesis the western cloister or colonnade was triple, />. it had three
rows of columns, namely an outer row next the open court, and two
inner ro^-s. All three ro>»-s of columns were, of course, interrupted in
the middle by the temple.

The date of the sanctuar>* of Zeus cannot be determined frt)m the
scanty remains. The general style of construction and the materials
resemble those of other edifices at Megalopolis, but the few architectural
details which ha\*e been fiHind point to a later rather than an earlier
period in the hi$tor>* of the city. The Ionic base resembles the one in



CH. XXX MEGALOPOLIS— THE MARKET 325

the Philippian Colonnade, but the contour and proportion of the Doric
capital belong to a later type than that of the columns in the portico of
the Thersilium (see below). Clamps of the rn shape were used to
the stones of the stylobate in the portico of the temple.

In addition to the ruins of the Philippian Colonnade and the
sanctuary of Zeus remains of some other edifices have been laid bare by
the English excavations in the market-place. They are as follows :

(3) At the western end of the Philippian Colonnade and running
out southward at right angles to its face, the remains of a double row
of columns have been found. They must have formed part of a later
edifice built after the Philippian Colonnade had &llen into ruins, since
the remains in question are composed entirely of fragments which had
belonged to that colonnade. This later edifice may have been intended
to form an entrance to the market-place at this point. The eastern
pillars, of which there are portions of four remaining, rest on a continu-
ous stylobate formed entirely of old blocks taken from the entablature
of the Philippian Colonnade. The western columns have no continuous
stylobate, each of them resting on a separate foundation. The pieces
of columns in position are of the Doric order, and no doubt were taken
from the front row of the Philippian Colonnade.

(4) South of these colunms, and extending westward beyond the
line of the west wall of the Philippian Colonnade, are considerable
remains of walls of an oblong edifice. Its north wall is about 92 ft.
6 in. long, while the west wall can be traced for 5 1 feet, and the east
wall for 65 feet. There are scanty indications of what may have been
a south wall at a point which would give the edifice a width of about
70 feet. In the north wall are the remains of an opening 5 ft. 6 in.
wide. The building may have had a continuous portico along its eastern
front, towards the market-place, for there is a piece of foundation here
which looks as if it had belonged to the stylobate of such a portico.
The west wall is largely made up of old fragments rather roughly put
together. Altogether the structure seems quite late. Perhaps it was
the gymnasium mentioned by Pausanias (viii. 31. 8). To the south of
it were discovered in 1893 ^^ remains of a columned building, of
rather late date, which, like the quadrangular building just described,
probably belonged to the gymnasium. In one comer of it, between
two bases of columns, was a well, from which a line of water pipes ran
for some distance towards the river. Amongst the ruins of later edifices
may be distinguished the remains of a well-built wall of conglomerate
carrying on the line from the comer of the Philippian Colonnade
towards the river. The bases of the columns are of the white limestone
which is so commonly employed in the ancient buildings of Megalopolis,
but they have no foundation-piers under them, and all of them have the
two dowel-holes, mn with lead, which are a mark of late date.

(5) To the N.N.E. of the sanctuary of Saviour Zeus is a long
stylobate running north and south. On its upper surface are to be
seen square dowel-holes for fastening the columns, and there are raised
panels between the places where the columns stood. This stylobate
appears to have belonged to a colonnade about 300 feet long which



326 MEGALOPOLIS — THE MARKET bk. viii. arcadu

here bounded the market-place on the east This colonnade may have
been the one called Myropolis which Pausanias mentions (§ 7 of the
present chapter). The northern end of the colonnade seems to have
been in a line with the back wall of the Philippian Colonnade. Built
into a late structure which afterwards occupied the site of the lon^
colonnade in question were found some drums of columns made of VaSk
and coated with stucco. The drums appear to have been of the Ionic
or Corinthian order, though they have only twenty flutes instead di the
usual twenty-four. They have been transported to SinanaUy where they
now lie inside of the enclosure which surrounds the church. Perhaps
these drums belonged to the columns of the Myropolis colonnade:
Between the north end of the Myropolis colonnade (if it be so) and the
east end of the Philippian Colonnade excavations made by the Engtish
archaeologists in October 1891 revealed some remains of the govern-
ment offices mentioned by Pausanias (§ 6).

(6) Lastly, remains of two structures have been found in the
interior of the market-place. One of them is a ruined altar, 13 ft 10
in. square, built of upright blocks of conglomerate on a flat course. It
may have belonged to the sanctuary of Lycaean Zeus mentioned by
Pausanias. The other structure is a fragmentary foundation a little to
the south-west of the altar. At present divided by about i o yards are
two pieces of foundation, the western of the two measuring 8 ft. 2 in. by
16 feet, the eastern 7 ft. 6 in. by 8 ft. 10 in. From the western a
foundation-wall runs north-east in the shape of an arc, but breaks off
before it reaches the eastern foundation. No doubt the arc was com-
pleted. The semicircular foundation so formed may have belonged to
an exedra or recess. Mr. Richards suggests that the exedra^ if it existed,
perhaps formed the ornamental termination of a subterranean water-
course, like the exedra built by Herodes Atticus at Olympia (see above,
p. 72 sqq,) This suggestion is more plausible than another theory put
forward tentatively by Mr. Richards, namely that the semicircular
foundation belonged to the apse of a Council House like the supposed
Council House at Olympia (see vol. 3. p. 636 sqq,)

On the market-place and its remains, so far as they have been excavated, see
W. Loring, in Excavations at Megalopolis ^ pp. 7, 12 sq. ; R. W. Schultz, id., pp.
52-67; G. C. Richards, id., pp. 101-105, with plates xiv.-xvi. ; W. Dorpfeld, m
Mittheil, d, arch, Inst, in Athen, 18 (1893), p. 218 sq,

30. 2. as many eagles as tables. Cp. viii. 38. 7.

30. 3. Pan acqnired this surname from the nymph Oenoe.
According to others Pan was a son (not a mere nursling) of the nymph
Oenoe (Schol. on Euripides, Rhesus^ 36) or Oeneis (Schol. on Theocritus,
i. 3). On the legends of the birth of Pan see W. H. Roscher, * Die
Sagen von der Geburt des Pan,' Philologus^ 53 (1894), pp. 362-377.

30. 4. Bassae. See viii. 41. 7 sqq,

30. 6. the Philippian Colonnade. See above, p. 320 sqq,

30. 6. the government offices. See above, towards top of page.
From an inscription foimd on the site of the market-place at Megalopolis
we learn that there was a muniment office {grammatophulakeion) in which



CH. XXX MEGALOPOLIS 327

the archives were preserved, also officials called Wardens of the Archives
(grammatophulake5\ and others called Scribes of the Laws {noma-
graphot), whose business no doubt was to enter the new laws in the
statute book. See Excavations at Megalopolis^ p. 126 sq,^ Inscr. No.
5. An inscription found at Lycosura mentions that a copy of a decree
of the people of Lycosura was to be deposited in the muniment office at
Megalopolis (AeXrtov a.p\a.iQ\jf3rfiK6v^ 1 890, p. 43 sq,\ P. Cawadias,
Fouilles de Lycosoura^ Livraison i, p. 16).

30. 7* the Lacedaemonian army under Acrotatus etc. See viii.
27. II.

30. 10. a sanctuary of Zeus sumamed Saviour. See above, p.
323 sqq. An inscription found at Megalopolis records a decree in
honour of Philopoemen, in which mention is made of Saviour Zeus. The
inscription is mutilated, but the purport of the decree appears to have
been that Philopoemen should be worshipped with divine honours ; that
his tomb should be built in the market-place (see note on i. 43. 3) ; that
a fine altar of white marble should be set up for him, and oxen (or an ox)
sacrificed on it on the day of the festival of Saviour Zeus ; that twenty
bronze statues of him should be made, of which one was to be set up
in the theatre, etc. From the same inscription it appears that games,
called Soteria, were celebrated in honour of Saviour Zeus. See C. /. G.
No. 1536 ; Dittenberger, Sylloge Inscr, Graec, No. 210 ; Immerwahr, Die
arkcuUschen Kulte^ p. 26. Diodorus mentions (xxix. 18) that an ox or
oxen were annually sacrificed to Philopoemen. Livy also says (xxxix.
50) that divine honours were bestowed on him. Another mutilated
inscription found at Megalopolis seems to have recorded a decree of the
council that the statue of some public benefactor should be set up in the
precinct of Saviour Zeus. See Excavations at Megalopolis^ p. 129,
Inscr. No. 7 B.

30. 10. Megalopolis. As to statues representing cities, see iv. 31.
10 note.

30. 10. Oephisodotus. According to Pliny (Nat, hist, xxxiv. 50, 51,
87) there were two sculptors of this name, the elder of whom flourished
in 01. 102 (372 B.C.), and the younger in 01. 121 (296 B.c) The latter
was the son of Praxiteles (see Pliny, NcU, hist, xxxvi. 24 ; Plutarch, X,
oral, vitae^ vii. 39 compared with Pliny, Nat, hist, xxxiv. 51), and it has
been conjectured that the former was the father of Prasdteles. Prof.
Furtwangler, however, argues that the elder Cephisodotus was an elder
brother, not the father, of Praxiteles {Meisterwerke d, griech, Plastik^
p. 513 sq.) It is the earlier Cephisodotus, doubtless, who, with Xeno-
phon, made these statues at Megalopolis. Cp. ix. 16. 2 ; ix. 30. i.
Mr. A. S. Murray says of the elder Cephisodotus : " That he was an
accomplished artist, there is every reason to believe ; but that he was
deficient in creative force may be judged from the fact that his works
mostly consisted of figures which required only slight deviations from
older and standard types " (Hist, of Greek Sculpture^ 2. p. 244). Cp.
Brunn, Gesch, d, griech, KUnstler^ i. p. 269 sq, ; Overbeck, Schriftquellen^
g 1137-1143, 1331-1341 ; id,^ Gesch, d griech, Plastik^^ 2. pp. 6 sqq,^
1 1 2 sqq, ; Lucy M. Mitchell, Hist, of Ancient Scuipturey pp. 432 sqq,y



388 MEGALOPOLIS bk. viii. arcadia

546 sq. A number of inscriptions from bases of statues by the younger
Cephisodotus have been found. See Loewy, Inschriften griech. Biid-
hauer^ Nos. 108- 112.

31. I. an enclosure sacred to the Great Ooddasses. As to the
Great Goddesses (Demeter and Proserpine) in Messenia, see iv. i. 5
sqq. With regard to the situation of the precinct of the Great Goddesses
at Megalopolis we are told by Pausanias that it lay at the west end of
the Aristandrian Colonnade, which, as we have seen (p. 320), probably
bounded the market-place on the south. We conclude, therefore, that
the precinct of the Great Goddesses was situated at the south-western
comer of the market-place. As the precinct contained a variety of
shrines and statues, a hall for the performance of the mysteries, and i
sacred grove, it must have been too large to be included within the
limits of the market-place. Probably, therefore, it extended some dis-
tance to the west of the market-place, perhaps as far as or even beyond
the bed of a stream which here flows into the Helisson. Many large blocks
of hewn stone are to be seen in the field to the west of the stream, and
some blocks, which are clearly in their original positions, stand in the
bed of the stream itself. Some of these may have belonged to one or
more of the edifices comprised within the precinct of the Great Goddesses.
That the precinct lay in this neighbourhood was confirmed by a discovery
made by Mr. Loring, who picked up, on the east side of the stream, a
fragment of a tile bearing an inscription which may perhaps be restored
as [^€(i)v * of the goddesses.' As several buildings at Megalopolis have
been identified by means of inscribed tiles, it is not unreasonable to con-
jecture that the original inscription on this tile was rcuv fLcyoAcov B^Ssv
(* of the great goddesses '), and that the tile belonged to the precinct of
the Great Goddesses which stood in this neighbourhood. See ExcavO'
tions at MegcUopolis^ pp. 1 16 j^., 140 sq.

An inscription which seems to have recorded a dedication to the
Great Gods exists at Kassidochori^ a village a little to the north-west of
the supposed site of the precinct of the Great Goddesses {Excavations
at Megalopolis^ p. 135, No. 15). These Great Gods were perhaps the
Dioscuri. See note on vii. 22. 9.

31. I. Aesculapius. A tile inscribed with the name of Aesculapius
was found in 1893 in the building to the south-west of the Philippian
Colonnade {Joum, of Hellenic Studies^ 13 (1892-93), p. 337).

31. 2. small images of girls etc. Prof. Robert suggests that these
figures may have been placed at the comers of the pedestal which sup-
ported the four colossal images ; similar figures appear as supporters or
Caryatids at the comers of Greek sarcophaguses {HemieSy 29 (1894),

p. 431).

31. 4- Neda carrying the infant Zeus. Cp. iv. 33. i ; viii. 38. 3 ;

viii. 47. 3.

31. 4* Friendly Zeus : the image is by Polyclitus. It is natural
to suppose that this sculptor was the younger Polyclitus, as the elder
Polyclitus was probably dead long before Megalopolis was founded. H.
Brunn, however, preferred to suppose that the image was by the elder
Polyclitus and had been, like many other images, brought to Mega-



CH. XXXI AfEGALOPOLIS 329

lopolis from the temple in which it was originally dedicated. See
Sitzungsberickte of the Bavarian Academy (Munich), Philosoph. philolog.
CL, 6th Nov. 1880, p. 468 5q.\ and against him £. Kroker, Gleich-
fuvnige griechische Kunstler^ p. 17 sq. It is very remarkable that
Polyclitus chose to represent Friendly Zeus with the attributes of
Dionysus. No such representation of Zeus appears to be known among
the existing monuments of ancient art The only certain representa-
tions of Friendly Zeus known to exist are on two Athenian reliefs and
some coins of Pergamus struck in the age of Trajan, but they have none
of the characteristics of Dionysus. On both the reliefs the god appears
seated on his throne ; on one of them the eagle is carved beneath the
seat, and the god seems to have held a cup in his left hand ; on the
other there is no eagle, and two worshippers, a woman and a boy, are
approaching him. The coins of Pergamus exhibit merely a bearded
head of Zeus with the inscription ZEY2 ^lAIOS) (* Friendly Zeus').
Zeus was called Friendly "because he brings all men together and
wishes that they should be friends to each other" (Dio Chrysostom, Or.
xii. vol. I. p. 237, ed. Dindorf). At Megalopolis the epithet may have
had a political significance, referring to the friendship which was to bind
the petty Arcadian communities together. We learn from inscrip-
tions that the god was worshipped under the same title at Epidaurus
('E<lyqfi€pls dp\aiokoyiKrj, 1 883, p. 31, No. 12) and at Athens (C /. A,
ii. Nos. 1330, 1572, 1572 b; C. /. A, iiL No. 285). A god Zeus
Bacchus (Ati Ba#cx<|)) is mentioned in an oracle recorded in an inscrip-
tion at Pergamus (C, /. G, No. 3538) ; and the Cretan myths of Zeus
have points of affinity with those of Dionysus.

See Overbeck, Griechische Kunstmythologie^ 2. pp. 51 sq., 228 sqq,, 563; id.^
Gesch, d. griech, Plastik,^ I. pp. 533, 537 ; Preller, Ausgewdhlte Aufsaite, p. 284
sq, ; id,, Griechische Mythologie,^ I. p. 148 ; Welcker, Griechische Gotterlenre, 2.
p. 202 sq, ; Stephani, in Compte Rendu (St. Petersburg) for 1875, p. 203 ; L. R.
Farnell, The Cults of the Greek States, i. pp. 74, 118 sq. One of the Athenian
reliefs is figured in Mr. Famell's work (voL i. pL iL b) ; and for the mythical
affinities of Zeus and Dionysus see especially ib,, pp. 36-38.

31. 9. two low hills a sanctuary of Athena Polias a

temple of Full-grown Hera. These two low hills have not been identi-
fied, nor have any remains been discovered which can with any certainty
be referred to the sanctuaries of Athena and Hera. With regard to the
two hills, as Mr. Loring remarks, all the ground behind {i,e, north of)
the Philippian Colonnade is rising ground, and there are no two parts of
it which stand out unmistakably from the rest. At the first glance we
might be tempted to identify with the two hills (i) the stmmiit of the
rising ground immediately behind the Philippian Colonnade and just
west of the public road ; and (2) a small plateau opposite this, and east
of the road, separated from the former by a slight dip through which
the public road nms in a cutting. But both these identifications appear
to be erroneous. On the north-east shoulder of the first-mentioned
hillock there is indeed a very rough foundation ; but the summit of the
hillock has been thoroughly trenched by the English archaeologists with-
out result On the plateau to the east of the road Messrs. Loring and



330 MEGALOPOLIS bk. viii. Arcadia

Richards excavated the ruins of a late building constructed of tiles,
cobbles, and the like, the only good work in it being a threshold of
white limestone which had probably been transferred finom some earlier
structure. In this neighbourhood, probably on the little plateau, the
French surveyors found some ruins (marked B B on their plan of Mega-
lopolis) which they described as the remains of the cella of a temple ;
there was a piece of a wall with a short return, besides a great many
stones in their original positions ; the blocks were well cut and jointed.
These ruins, which may perhaps have belonged to the sanctuary of
Athena or the temple of Hera, have now disappeared. About 300
yards to the east of the foundations excavated by Messrs. Loring and
Richards there are some other fragmentary foundations of conglomerate
and limestone at a point where the plateau begins to slope down east-
wards to the bed of a small stream. These foundations were
observed by the French surveyors, and Curtius identified them with the
temple of Hera, while he believed that the small stream to the east,
which flows into the Helisson, was the ancient Bathyllus. But the
foundations in question are too fragmentary to allow us to detemune the
sort of building to which they belonged ; and the stream to the east of
them can hardly be the Bathyllus, since it consists mainly of sur&ce-
water, which dries up in the absence of rain. Perhaps the Bathyllus
should rather be identified with the perennial stream which flows into
the Helisson to the west of the market-place (see above, p. 328). This
western stream is fed by a small spring among the low hills some three-
quarters of a mile to the north of the Helisson. But the spring is so
far from the market-place that any temple built on the ground over-
hanging it could not have been seen from the market-place, which is
perhaps inconsistent with Pausanias's language. As there is no other
spring in the ground to the north of the market-place, Mr. Loring
inclines to believe that the Bathyllus has wholly disappeared.

See Expidition scietiHfique de Morh : Arckitecturet Sculptures, etc , par A.
Blouet, 2. p. 4S sq. ; Curtius, Pclo/>. i. p. 288; W. Loring, in Excavations at
Megalopolis f p. 1 17 sq,

32. I. a theatre. The site of the theatre of Megalopolis, on the
south side of the Helisson and nearly opposite to the ancient market-
place, has always been well known to modem travellers. The great
semicircular embankment against the side of a low hill, which supported
the seats of the spectators, is visible from a long distance, whether we
approach Megalopolis from the north or the south. The remains of
the theatre and of the great assembly hall known as the Thersilium,
which immediately adjoined it on the south and with which it was
intimately connected, were excavated under the direction of members
of the British School of Archaeology in 1890-93.

The auditorium or seats of the spectators rose up the sides of a
hollow of a low hill which faced nearly north, about 100 yards south of
the broad bed of the Helisson. The hollow was not, however, large
enough for the purpose, and the slopes of the hill at both sides had to
be prolonged by artificial embankments, supported by retaining waDs.



CH. XXXII MEGALOPOLIS— THE THEATRE 331

The embankment on the east side seems larger than the one on the
west. In the centre of the auditorium the hill was almost high enough,
and only a very slight embankment seems to have been here raised to
supplement it The two extremities of the great horse-shoe were ter-
minated and supported, as we have seen, by retaining walls ; but these
walls were not continued round the curved back of the auditorium ; at
least no traces have been found either of curved retaining walls or of a
boundary wall at the back of the theatre. On the outer side the hill
and the embankments sloped gradually away, so that a curved retaining
wall was needless. The top of the auditorium is now about 76 feet
above the level of the orchestra, and probably it was never very much
higher, though a certain amount of earth has in the course of ages been
washed down from it upon the seats below. Remains of the retaining
walls on each side of the auditorium still exist ; on the east side they
rise to a height of about 40 feet and on the west side to a height of
about 36 feet. On each side of the auditorium the retaining wall, after
running outwards from the orchestra as a single wall, is supported on
the inner side by a second wall, parallel to it, and connected with it by
short cross-walls. This inner wall was perhaps intended as an additional
support for the greater height and weight of the embankment at these
points.

But with this general similarity between the retaining walls on the
eastern and western sides of the auditorium there are combined certain
dissimilarities both of plan and material. The outer retaining wall on
the eastern side is built of squared blocks of conglomerate laid in
regular courses ; its average thickness is 2 ft 2 in. It abuts next the
orchestra on a limestone pedestal, which probably supported a statue.
About 7 1 feet along the wall from the face of the pedestal a cross-wall
projects outwards into the parodos^ nearly at right angles to the retain-
ing wall Another cross- wall, 25 feet farther on, runs inwards from the
retaining wall and abuts upon the inner parallel wall, already mentioned,
which is distant about 9 feet from the face of the outer retaining wall.
This arrangement suggests that there was here an opening and an access
to the theatre from the outside at a higher level, the wall projecting
outwards having been perhaps a retaining wall which banked up the
approach from the parodos below ; and on the main wall itself, at the
outer angle of the wall which projects inwards there is actually in posi-
tion, at a height of about 25 feet above the orchestra, a piece of a sill
of white limestone. It seems probable, therefore, that at this height
a horizontal passage or diazoma ran all round the auditorium, and that
access to this passage was obtained directly from the outside by a
staircase or ramp in the parodos. Beyond this point the main retaining
wall is supported at several points by buttresses both on the outside and
the inside. At the highest point of the wall there are again traces of
an inner parallel wall. This suggests that at this point there may
have been an approach to an upper diasoma from behind, up the em-
bankment ; or the inner wall may have been merely intended to serve
as an additional support to relieve the pressure on the front wall, where
the bank was highest.



33' .\r£GALOPOUS—TH£ THEATRE tx. vui. akcadu

The west retaioing w-all, like the eastern, abuts on a limestone
pedestal next the orchestra. The wall runs ofT at an angle to the
axis of the theatre similaj: to that of the eastern wall, for « distance ot


stops a^air.it a shon wall at right
, ;he cr,ds of two reiainir.g wal'.i beyond which
t i-rv's# ,v\;s L'f the ;hea:re. bjc parallel to it and
O cai-h other. Thc*e two fMr.tV.ei « a^:* are a^i:; 1 4 feei apan from face
» f.ice : they ,»;* b^:'.: of J.oa;>;i? ww* 01 bl>>:k$. and ha\-e an average



CH. xxxii MEGALOPOLIS— THE THEATRE 333

thickness of 4 feet. The front wall, which is standing to a height
of about 25 feet above the orchestra, is built of square blocks of con-
glomerate laid in alternate courses of 'headers' and < stretchers,' the
blocks averaging about 4^ feet long by i \ feet high. This front wall
was probably never more than a course or two higher than its present
level. The back wall begins at a height of about 23 feet above the level
of the orchestra, and it is standing to a height, at most, of eleven courses
or about 13^ feet. Except the two lower foundation courses, which are
of conglomerate, this back wall is built of beautiful square blocks of lime-
stone with ' bull-nosed ' faces. Clearly this inner wall, with the exception
of the foundation courses, was meant to be seen. Hence we infer that
the space between the two walls was a terrace to which a flight of steps
or a sloping way led up, probably from the ground immediately to the
west of the skanotheka or * stage-dock,' which took the place of a
western parodos (see below). The terrace, in turn, probably gave
access to the lower diazoma or horizontal passage which ran round the
auditorium, f^e height of the terrace above the ground agrees very
nearly with the height of the sill of white limestone on the east retaining
wall which appears, as we have seen, to mark an entrance to the lower
diazoma at the other end. Thus it would seem that access to the upper
part of the theatre was obtained directly both on the east and west sides
by staircases or sloping ways, leading up from the two wings or
extremities of the great horse-shoe. The difference in the arrange-
ment of the retaining walls in the two wings was probably necessitated
chiefly by the construction of the skanotheka or < stage-dock ' in place
of a western parodos. It would have been inconvenient to have had
buttresses projecting into the * stage-dock ' ; they were therefore dis-
pensed with on this side, and their absence was compensated by the
greater thickness and solidity of the retaining wall.

The auditorium, formed by the slope of the hill and of the embank-
ments and supported at the two wings by the retaining walls, has the
shape of an arc somewhat greater than a semicircle. The arc is a true
arc throughout, and does not widen out beyond the semicircle between
the cross axis line and the retaining walls, as happens at other theatres,
such as those of Athens, Epidaurus, and Eretria. Most of the stone
seats have disappeared entirely. The present remains consist of the
front row of benches, the passage behind them, and several tiers of
seats behind that again. The first three tiers afe practically complete
all round, and in one place as many as nine consecutive tiers can be
made out. They are divided into nine wedge-shaped blocks {kerkides)
by eight staircases ; and there were two more staircases, one at the
extremity of each wing, next the retaining wall, so that the total
number of staircases in the lowest part of the auditorium was ten. In
the upper part of the theatre the number of staircases was probably
greater, as in the theatres at Epidaurus, Aspendus, and elsewhere, in
which the batch of seats corresponding to each block below the diazoma
is divided into two blocks above. But as the upper seats at Megalopolis
have disappeared, this is only a matter of conjecture. The width of the
staircases is 2 ft. ^\ in. ; there are two steps to each tier of seats.



334 MEGALOPOLIS — THE THEATRE bk. viil arcadia

Presumably in a theatre of this size there were two dioMomata or
horizontal passages running all round the auditorium. The position
of the upper diaxoma is indeed clearly indicated by a broad grassy
ledge which runs round the inside of the embankment, near the top at
a distance from the orchestra of about loo feet and a height above it
about 5 5 feet And the disposition of the retaining walls of the wings
appears, as we have seen, to indicate that there was a lower diazoma at
a height of about 25 feet above the orchestra. If these indications are
correct, the lower diazoma occurred at a distance of about 50 feet firom
the outer edge of the orchestra, and the upper diazoma at a distance of
100 feet. And, following out this scale of proportions, we may con-
jecture, with Messrs. Gardner and Loring, that the top of the auditorium
was 150 feet distant from the orchestra. The architect Mr. Schultz,
however, prefers to suppose that the highest section of the theatre, above
the upper diazoma^ was less deep, that is, included fewer tiers of seats,
than the lower sections. In his conjectural restoration of the theatre he
assigns twenty-one tiers of seats (or twenty tiers exclusive of the front row
of benches) to the section below the lower diazomc^ twenty tiers to the
section between the two diazomata^ and fifteen tiers to the section above
the upper diazoma. He calculates that the theatre could have seated
19,700 persons, allowing 13 inches for each person on the ordinary
seats and 16 inches on the front row of benches. The allowance fioir
each person on the ordinary seats (namely 1 3 inches) is the same as is
indicated by the marks on the seats of the theatre at Athens, but it
seems somewhat scanty. The minimum space allowed for each person
in London theatres, according to the regulations of the County Council,
is 1 8 inches ; but in fact the managers find that in the pit and gallery
people can be packed into a space of 14 inches for each person, and
that 16 inches is a good allowance. Messrs. Gardner and Loring
compute that the number of persons whom the theatre could have
seated was 17,000.

The ordinary seats consist of two parts, namely (i) the limestone
bench on which the spectator sat ; and (2) a plain slab of limestone or
conglomerate supporting this bench and projecting beyond it so as to
form a footboard. This mode of construction differs from that adopted
in some other Greek theatres, as at Athens, Piraeus, and Epidaurus,
where each bench with the footboard of the bench behind is cut out of
a single block. The average height of each seat is from 15 to 16
inches ; the breadth of seat and footboard combined is about 29 inches.
The ordinary seats have, as was usual in Greek theatres, no backs.
Not so, however, with the front row of benches, which doubtless served
as seats of honour. These front benches arc nine in number, one bench
corresponding to each block of seats in the auditorium above. All of
them are provided with backs, and each of them terminates at either
end in an ornamental arm. In contrast to the ordinary benches, they
are comfortable to sit in, the seat being conveniently hollowed and the
back slightly cur\'ed. With the exception of the two benches at the
ends, each bench is constructed of four blocks of limestone of unequal
lengths. The benches at each end are 5 feet longer than the others,



CH. XXXII MEGALOPOLIS— THE THEATRE 335

and are constructed of five instead of four blocks of limestone. But
that they were originally of the same length as the rest and were
lengthened by the insertion of a new intermediate block in each is
manifest ; the later block in each bench can be easily detected by its
rougher workmanship.

Eight of the nine front benches bear inscriptions carved on their
backs. These inscriptions fall into two classes, namely (i) inscriptions
recording the dedication of the front benches, and (2) inscriptions
recording the names of the Arcadian tribes to whom certain of the
blocks of seats were apparently assigned.

(i) The inscriptions recording the dedication of the front benches
are three in number, and are carved on the central and the two end
benches. The inscription on the easternmost bench is as follows :
*AvTM);(OS aywvo^er^as dv€OrjK€ ro(v)s Op6vo(v)s vdvras #cai tov 6x€r6v
(" Antiochus, having celebrated the games, dedicated all the seats and
the gutter "). The inscriptions on the central and westernmost seats are
repetitions of the first three words of the foregoing inscription, namely,
*AvTio\os dyfavoOerrjo-as dvWrjKe ("Antiochus, having celebrated the
games, dedicated"). From these inscriptions we gather that all the
front benches, together with the gutter which runs all round the
orchestra (see below), were dedicated by a certain Antiochus, To judge
from the style of the letters the inscriptions belong to the first part
of the fourth century B.C. ; hence, as Megalopolis was founded in 370
B.C, we conclude that the front seats were set up and the gutter in the
orchestra constructed between 370 and 350 B.c Probably, then, the
Antiochus who dedicated them was Antiochus of Lepreus, who won a
victory in the pancratium at Olympia (Paus. vi. 3. 9), and who repre-
sented the Arcadian confederacy in an embassy to the court of Persia in
367 B,c, {Xenophon, J/e//enica, vii, i. 33-38). All three inscriptions
recording the dedication are carved, not on the front, but on the back of
the seat-backs.

(2) The inscriptions recording the names of the Arcadian tribes to
whom the blocks of seats were respectively allotted fall into two groups,
an earlier and a later, (a) The earlier inscriptions are carved on die
backs of the seat-backs of benches 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7, counting from
east to west ; and the tribes whose names they record are, in the same
order, the Arcadian, the Apollonian, the Panathenian, the Heraclean,
the Panian, and perhaps the Heraean or Lycaean (the last inscription
is mutilated and its restoration is doubtful, the only certain letters being
the last four, AIA^S). All these six inscriptions are clearly contemporary
and date probably firom the second, but possibly from the third century
B.C. (^) The later inscriptions, five in number, are carved on the front
of the seat-backs of benches 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 ; and the tribes whose
names they record are, in the same order, the Maenalian, the Lycaean,
the Parrhasian, the Panian, and the Apollonian. These five inscriptions
belong to the Roman age and are probably not earlier than the
Christian era. Comparing the two groups of inscriptions (a and 6)
together we see that the six earlier tribal names (of which four or
five were derived from divinities) were supplanted in Roman times by



336 MEGALOPOLIS— THE THEATRE bk. viii. ascadia

^v^ names, of which three are local and two only were derived from
divinities. Only two, or perhaps three, names (the Apollonian, Panian,
and possibly the Lycaean) are common to both groups ; and only one
bench (namely the sixth) bears the name of the same tribe both on
front and back. All the other benches, and with them the blocks of
seats behind, had therefore been re-allotted in the interval which elapsed
between the engraving of the first and the second group of inscriptions.

There are grounds for thinking that the front row of benches formed
no part of the original plan, but was added some time, though not long,
after the theatre was built. For (i) the separate dedication of the
seats of honour and the gutter clearly points to such a theory ; (2)
whereas in other Greek theatres, as in those at Athens and Epidaurus,
the seats of honour are situated within the lowest arc bounded at either
end by the retaining walls of the wings, at Megalopolis the seats of
honour are situated beyond (i,e, nearer the orchestra and at a lower
level than) the ends of the retaining walls ; (3) at the back of the
front row of benches is a paved passage 3 feet wide, running all
round the auditorium, and the tops of the conglomerate foundations of
the two limestone pedestals in which the retaining walls terminate
towards the orchestra (see above, pp. 331, 332) are on a level with the
passage, which served also as the footboard of the lowest tier of ordinary
seats. Probably, therefore, this passage or footboard formed the
original boundary of the orchestra; and the lowest row of ordinary
seats, at which the retaining walls stop, were the last seats next to the
orchestra. On this hypothesis the original level of the orchestra was
15 inches higher than at present, that being the difference between the
present level of the orchestra and the level of the passage at the back
of the seats of honour.

In front of the seats of honour runs the gutter mentioned in the
inscription (see above). It is i ft. 8 jn. wide and 12 inches deep, and
is enclosed by two raised stone borders or kerbs, the outer one of
which forms the boundary of the orchestra. The gutter is nearly level ;
the fall, which is hardly perceptible, is towards the centre rather than
from the centre to either side. The ends are open and no direct con-
nexion with any outlet or drain has been discovered. At several places on
the inner kerb (;.^. the kerb next the seats and away from the orchestra)
there are little channels running out from under the benches to the
gutter. These channels are now dry, but they may have formed at one
time the outlet for the water of the perpetual spring which Pausanias
mentions in the theatre.

The width of the orchestra, measured across from the kerb on either
side and exclusive of the gutter, is 99 ft i in. The outer kerb of the
gutter which bounds the orchestra forms an arc somewhat greater than
a semicircle ; it is of white limestone and is 1 4^ inches broad. The
floor of the orchestra seems, as in the theatres of Epidaurus and Oropus,
to have been of earth, since no traces of a pavement have come to
light. Within the orchestra, at its eastern and western edges, are the
remains of two pedestals ; they are obviously later additions, and
seem not to be in their original positions. Of the pedestal on the east



CH. XXXII MEGALOPOUS—THE THEATRE 337

side only the base stone is left standing, but of the one on the west side
both the base and the drum are in position. An inscription on the
latter pedestal seems to show that it supported an image of Dionysus
made by a certain native of Megalopolis, Nicippus son of Sotion, and
dedicated by Eumaridas son of Hippon.

Greek theatres had usually two passages i^parodot) leading into the
orchestra from opposite sides, between the stage and the extremities of
the seats. It is a peculiarity of the theatre at Megalopolis that it has
only one such passage {farodos)^ namely on the east side. The
parodos occupies the space in front of the east retaining wall, extending
from the orchestra to the first cross-wall which projects outward from
the retaining wall Its total length from the edge of the orchestra to
the cross-wall is about 80 feet ; its length from the end of the retaining
wall, on the side of the orchestra, to the cross-wall is 7 1 feet. No trace
of a doorway at the outer end of the parodos has come to light

On the west side of the theatre, in the place which would naturally
have been occupied by the other parodos^ there is a deep space enclosed
by walls on three sides and open on the side towards the orchestra.
Inscribed tiles found in and near it enable us to identify this enclosed
space as the skanotkeka or * scene dock,' as it is called in modem
theatres, the place, that is, in which the scenery is kept The tiles are
of plain red earthenware and U-shaped ; opinions differ as to whether
they were roof-tiles or gutter-tiles. The inscription, which belongs to
the late Greek or Roman period, is on a sunk panel in each tile. The
length of the skanotkeka from west to east is about 116 feet, its breadth
from north to south about 27 feet On the south the skanotkeka is
enclosed in its western part by the front west retaining wall of the
theatre for a length of 66 feet ; eastward of the point where this wall
stops the skanotkeka is bounded by a wall which carries on the line of
the west retaining wall to a point opposite to that at which the north
enclosing wall of the skanotkeka comes to an end. The walls of the
skanotkeka are built of squared blocks of rough conglomerate coated
with stucco. As this coating of stucco stops on the north wall at a line
a few inches above the ground, and on the south wall at a line about
18 inches higher, it is conjectured that the skanotkeka had a floor at
two different levels. How the place was divided up, if it was subdivided
at all, we cannot say. A low foundation of limestone slabs runs along
the length of the skanotkeka at a distance of 6 ft 6 in. fh)m the north
enclosing wall. The foundation seems not to have supported a stone
wall, since its top is not carefully dressed level and there are traces of
bonding into the west wall above it. Messrs. Gardner and Loring
suggest that a wooden partition rested on this line of slabs, and that
the narrow space between it and the north enclosing wall was a passage
giving access to the chambers into which the rest of the skanotkeka^
between the wooden partition and the south wall, may have been
divided. But Mr. Schultz's view seems more probable, that the row
of slabs formed a foundation for supporting and storing the scenery
when the theatre was not in use for dramatic representations. He
points out that the row of slabs is almost in a line with (only 10 inches

VOL. IV z



338 MEGALOPOLIS— THERSIUUM BK. viii. arcadu

beyond, ue, to the south of) the lowest step of the portico of the
Thersilium, and that its length (113ft 10 in.) is almost exactly the
length (113 feet) of the lowest step of the portico. Hence as the
portico with its steps was originally the background against which the
actors played (see below), the conjectture is a very plausible one that
the scenery, when it was not wanted, was hung on wooden screens,
supported on the row of limestone slabs, in the skanotheka^ from whidi,
when a play was to be performed, the scenery could easily be run out
in a straight line to the front of the portico. The entrance to the
skanotheka must have been at its north-east end, where a passage (7 ft
6 in. wide) intervenes between the end of its north wall and the
portico of the Thersilium. If the inscribed tiles, mentioned above,
belonged to the roo( the skanotheka must certainly have been covered
in ; but no traces of corbels or of holes for beams remain on the
south wall, perhaps because they were in the upper courses of the wall
which have disappeared. An inscription on a tile found at Sparta
proves that the Spartan theatre also was provided with a skanotheka or
* scene dock' {MttthetL d, arch. Inst, in Athen^ 2 (1877), p. 441).

The remains of a stage or of what has been taken for a stage in the
theatre at Megalopolis are so closely connected with the Thersilium (Mr
great assembly hall which faced the theatre on the north that it will be
convenient to describe the hall first.

The Thersilium may be described as a large covered hall about 218
feet long from east to west by 172 feet broad frx)m north to south, en-
closed by walls pierced with doorways and having besides, on the south
side, a projecting portico. The area of the hall is over 35,000 square
feet, and it is computed that it could have accommodated nearly 6000
persons sitting or about 10,000 persons standing. Of this vast hall
Pausanias saw only foundations, and little more than foundations were
brought to light by the English excavations. Of the enclosing walls
the foundations and, in some places, the lower courses still exist. They
are built wholly of blocks of limestone. The foundation courses, which
were completely hidden, have level top beds but are otherwise unsquared
On the other hand the courses which were meant to be seen are built of
beautifully-squared stones of various lengths with rather irregular joints,
somewhat in the style of the walls of Messene. The outer faces of the
stones are * bull-nosed,' that is, rough and projecting. The walls
average about 2 ft. 6 in. thick and are composed of two stones in the
thickness, with bonding stones running through from front to back at
intervals. A dressed sill-course ran all round the building, level with
the top of the stylobate of the portico. It still exists in the east wall
and in the eastern part of the south wall. This course, formed of slabs
10 inches thick which are connected by hfshaped clamps, projects
slightly over the face of the rougher wall below. On the top of this
sill-course was a deep course of limestone slabs, 2 ft. 10 in. high, set
upright on their edges, two slabs making up the thickness of the wall,
which amounts to 2 ft 6 in.^ Traces have been discovered of four

1 llie height and thickness of this course of uprights are given fix)m my own mea-
surements ; they appear not to be mentioned by Mr. Schultx in Excavations at
Mtgaiopdis,



CH. XXXII MEGALOPOLIS— THERSIUUM 339

doorways which gave access to the hall on three sides. Two of these
doors are in the east wall, one in the north wall, and one in the west
wall. On the ground of symmetry Mr. Schultz conjectures that there
were two doors in both the north and the west wall, as well as in the east
wall ; but no positive evidence of the existence of these additional doors
has been brought to light. Remains of foundation-walls exist running
from three of the doorways into the hall, at right angles to the main
walls. These foundations have clearly supported steps. Three of
the doorways seem to have had about the same width (namely from
9 feet to 9 ft. 6 in.) ; but the one near the south end of the east wall
is about 2 feet narrower. The levels of the sills or lowest steps of all
the doorways are different, and were doubtless arranged to suit the
sloping line of the ground outside.

Internally the arrangement of the hall closely resembled that of a
Greek theatre. The floor sloped downwards from three sides (east,
north, and west) to a level space corresponding to the orchestra of a
theatre. From this level space, which is equidistant from the east and
west walls but considerably nearer to the south than to the north wall,
two passages, corresponding to the parodoi of a theatre, led, at the same
level, in a south-easterly and a south-westerly direction respectively to
the external walls of the halL Lastly, corresponding to the stage of a
theatre, there was a platform on the south side of the hall at a height
of about 2 ft 6 in. above the passages and the orchestra-like space.
Two £acts make it probable that the floor of the building was of wood.
In the first place, not a single flagstone of a pavement has been found
in the halL In the second place, the bases of the columns which
supported the roof are dressed smooth to a certain depth, below which
they are left rough, and the slight projection thus formed is obviously
suitable for the reception and retention of a wooden floor, whereas it
would have been useless if the floor had been of earth. We may
suppose then that there was a sloping floor of wood supported on a
framework of beams. It should be noted, however, that a layer of
white limestone chips, about 2 inches deep, lies at present over nearly
the whole area of the building under a layer of tiles ; and it is possible
that this layer of limestone chips may have been part of a floor rather
than, as Mr. Benson supposes, the fragments of colunms which had
been shattered by the fall of the roof.

The roof was supported by pillars, the foundations of which remain
for the most part in their original positions ; and it is fh)m an examina-
tion of the arrangement of these foundations, which stand at many different
levels, that we are able to make out the internal plan and disposition of
the halL The pillars, then, were arranged round three sides (eastern,
northern, and western) of the hall in parallel rows, the number of rows
parallel to each side of the hall being five. The rows are practically
equidistant from each other, the distance between any two rows being
about 18 feet; but the outermost row is distant rather more (namely
19^ feet) from the outer wall. The distance apart of the pillars in
eadi row varies considerably from row to row. In the first or outer-
most row the distance of the pillars from each other averages 29 feet



340 MEGALOPOLIS — THERSILIUM bk. viir. a&caou

from centre to centre ; in the second row, 23 feet ; in the third row,
17 feet ; in the fourth row, 22 feet ; and in the fifth row, 29 feet This
fifth or innermost row comprises only four pillars, one at each of the
angles of a square round the orchestra-like area in the middle of the
halL While the piUars were thus arranged in rows, fiy^ deep, paraUd
to the three sides of the hall, the pillars in each row were so arranged
with reference to the pillars of all the other rows, as to fall into lines
radiating like the spokes of a wheel from the centre of the halL The
effect of this was to form a great many aisles all converging towards
the centre of the hall or (to be more exact) towards the centre of the
orchestra-like area, which, as we have seen, occupied approximately btt
not exactly the centre of the hall. Hence we infer that the speakers i4io
addressed the assembly stood, not on the platform at the south side of
the hall, but in the central area, from which they could be best seen
and heard by the spectators sitting, tier above tier, in the pillared aisles.
The platform at the south side of the hall, occupying the place of a
stage in a theatre, may have been reserved for the conmiittee or council
who, at least in the third century B.C, carried on the admimstiatioii
and prepared the measures which were laid before the popular assemUy
(see Dittenberger, 5y//t?^<f /«f£T: Grace, No. 167; CzMtx^ DeUcius Inscr,
Graec,^ No. 444 ; G. Gilbert, GriecK StaoUstUterthiimer^ 2. p. 133 sq^
Pillars, supporting the roof, were ranged along the front of the platfbnn
and along its two sides which extended obliquely to the south-west and
south-east angles respectively of the halL The front of the platfonn
with its line of pillars was distant about 26 feet from the south wall
of the building. With regard to the passages, corresponding to the
parodoi of a theatre, which led from the central orchestra-like area to
the south-west and south-east comers of the hall, between the tiers of
seats on the one side and the platform on the other, they seem to have
ended, at least in later times, in blank walls. Mr. Bather, howex-er,
suggests that these two passages were originally open at their outer
ends and formed the principal entrances into the building. In suppoit
of this view he shows some grounds for holding that the piece of the
east wall between the south-east doorway and the south wall is no part
of the original building but a later addition.

Of the pillars themselves which upheld the roof of the hall nothing
is left in position except a single piece of one, 4 feet high and 2 fl
10^ in. thick ; it has no moulded base under it, but rests on a square
slab. But though the pillars themselves have disappeared, most of
their foundations and bases are left. Of the outermost row, indeed, only
the foundation-piers remain, but of the inner rows many of the squared
base stones on which the pillars rested still exist The foundation-piers,
which \'ary from 4 ft 2 in. to 4 ft. 6 irL square, are built of squared
blocks of tufa in courses, some of which measure 19 and 20 inches
thick. Each course consists of two blocks which are joined by HH-
shaped clamps bedded in lead. At the south side of the hall, where
the ground and the fioor were nearly level, these piers are only one
course deep ; but where the fioor was higher and the ground lower,
especially on the north side, the piers are at least 4 or 5 courses deep.



CH. XXXII MEGALOPOUS—THERSILIUM 341

The dressed limestone bases on the top of these piers are about 10
inches thick and vary in size from 2 ft. 4 in. to 3 ft 3 in. square. The
larger bases were found in the inner rows where the pillars were pre-
sumably higher and therefore probably thicker, but they seem not to
have followed any very regular order in their variation. Some have
one, others two dowel -holes on the top ; and the two sets of bases
which are thus differentiated appear to belong to different periods. The
earlier bases have one large square dowel-hole (not run with lead) in
the middle, and are neatly drafted at the edges, with a smooth tooling
which extends down to the bottom of the stone. The later bases, on
the other hand, have two small dowel-holes (run with lead) at the sides ;
the tooling on them is less smooth than on the earlier bases, and the
lower half of each block is left altogether rough. In many cases the
old bases seem to have been re-used, the large central dowel-hole being
flanked by the two smaller holes. These differences in the bases point
to the conclusion that at some period the hall was extensively repaired
or rebuilt. This conclusion is confirmed by the nature of some of the
foundations in the third row of pillars, counting from the outside. In
this row we find that every second base rests, not on foundation-piers
of large blocks of tufa clamped together in the manner already described,
but merely on a single block of breccia of about the same size as the
base itsel£ The bases, too, of these alternate pillars are inferior in style
to the rest, and hence probably later. On these grounds we infer that
at some later period the number of pillars in the third row was doubled.
If we ask why this was done, the most obvious answer is that the
original space (namely 34 feet) between each pair of pillars in this row
was too great, and that in consequence the roof threatened to give way
here or had actually collapsed ; and that to obviate the danger or repair
the mischief additional piUars were inserted in the third row, one
between each original pair. When the evidence for the strengthening
of this row of pillars is taken together with the numerous traces of exten-
sive contemporaneous repair which have been observed in other parts of
the hall, the more probable view seems to be that the roof not only
cracked but came down, shivering many of the pillars and necessitating
a thorough reconstruction of the whole edifice. Yet this reconstruction
would seem to have taken place not later than the third century ac,
since the style of the repairs, though inferior to that of the original
masonry, is still good.

Of the nature of the roof we have little evidence, apart from the
layer of tiles which was found covering the area of the building. Prob-
ably the roof was of wood covered with tiles. The wide spacing apart
of the pillars indicates that they supported wooden beams which in
turn supported rafters on which the tiles were laid. As to the arrange-
ment of the roof we are reduced to conjecture. The third row of pillars,
after it had been strengthened by the insertion of the additional pillars
in the manner described above, was the most solid line of support in
the whole building, the pillars being much closer together in it than in
any of the other rows. Hence it has been suggested by Mr. Schultz
that this third row of pillars supported a clerestory. If this view is



34^ MEGALOPOLIS — THERSILIUM BK. viii. a&cadu

right, the central part of the roo^ inside of the third row of pillars, was
at a higher level than the outer part, which sloped away on all sides from
the clerestory to the outer walls of the edifice ; and Uie hall was prob-
ably lit by windows in the clerestory, though it may also have had
windows in the outer walls. Mr. Bather aigues that the original roo^
before its supposed coUapse and repair, must have been arranged quite
differently. He points out that originally, before the insertion of the
additionsd pillars in the third row, that row was not the strongest but the
weakest line of support in the whole building, its pillars being placed at
wider intervals than those of the other rows ; and hence it could not
have been chosen by an architect to support a clerestory. Mr. Bathefs
view is that originally the platform at the south side of the hall and the
orchestra-like area in the middle had separate roofs of their own, the
roof of the latter resting on the four central columns, and that the roof
of the rest of the hall sloped inwards and downwards from the sides to
the centre in a series of steps or terraces, one for each row of pillars,
and with an open space between it and the roof of the orchestra-like
area in the middle. The water would thus drain from the roof inwards
to the centre, and would drip into the open space between the main
roof and the roof of the * orchestra,' where it may have been received in
a circular or semicircular gutter like those which encircle the orchestras
of Greek theatres. On this hypothesis, there was a roof with not one
but a series of clerestories, descending one below the other from the
outer walls to the centre ; and in each of these clerestories there may
have been windows. Some slight evidence in support of this hypothesis
is furnished by an inscription on a tile found between the third and
fourth rows of piUars ; the inscription (02I0ITETAPT0Y) is muti-
lated, but may perhaps have meant " public tiles of the fourth tier of
roofing." 1

From the south facade of the hall there projected towards the
theatre a portico, of which the foundations together with several of the
lower steps are still in position. The length of the portico from east to
west, measured on the lowest step, is 1 1 3 feet ; its depth or in other
words its projection from the south wall of the Thersilium is about
20 feet or, measured to the edge of the lowest step, 23 feet. It had
originally two steps, but at a later time three lower steps, making five in
all, were added. Of these later steps the two lower are preserved
entire, and a few of the blocks of the third step are still in position. Of
the two upper steps (the topmost of which formed the stylobate proper)
nothing was found in position by the English excavators ; but many
pieces of them lay scattered about, and a few have been replaced
approximately in their original position. The material of all the steps
is white limestone. Of the columns and entablature of the portico the
remains which have been discovered comprise drums of the columns, a
capital, an architrave beam, four pieces of the triglyph frieze, and the

^ That the first part of the inscription is to be restored as xipafioi Srifidaioi
( ' public tiles ') is made probable by the parallel inscription {ir\lv0oi Sfffi^auu 0-icaro-
^i^ira;, etc. ) on a tile found at Sparta, to which reference has been made above (p.
338). Cp. P. Paris, £lafie (Paris, 1892), p. 110 s^g.



CH. XXXII MEGALOPOLIS— THERSJLIUM 345

apex stone of the gable. All these architectural remains are of tufa
coated with stucco. From them, taken in connexion with the dimen-
sions of the portico and the blocks of the stylobate that have been
found, we learn that the portico had fourteen Doric columns in front
and probably two at the narrow ends, the comer columns being counted
twice over. The diameter of the shaft of each column, immediately
under the capital, measured about 2 ft. 7 in. between the flutes ; hence
the diameter at the base probably measured at least 3 ft. 2 in. The
height of the colunms is estimated to have been from six to six and a
half diameters, or about 20 feet, and the height of the columns and
entablature together a little over 2 5 feet The columns had twenty flutes ;
the echinus of the capital is flat The architectural style of the portico
is that of the early part of the fourth century B.C. ; in form and propor-
tions the columns and entablature closely resemble those of the temple
of Zeus at Nemea and the temple of Aesculapius at Epidaurus. Com-
pared with the style of the fifth century B.C., as exemplified in the Pro-
pylaea at Athens and the large temple at Rhanmus, the frieze has
become deeper and the architrave shallower, whereas in the earlier style
architrave and frieze are practically equal. Above the columns and
entablature of the portico rose a gable or pediment, facing the theatre ;
the apex stone, which has been found, proves that the gable had a slope
upwards of i in 6.

The back of the portico was formed by the south wall of the
Thersilium, and three doors in the wall gave access from the portico to
the halL From the traces in the sill-course of the wall we see that the
central door was about 8 feet wide and the two side doors about 5 ft
6 in. wide each. Originally, however, there was no wall at the back of
the portico dividing it from the hall ; the two buildings communicated
freely with each other through five openings divided by four columns
which stood exactly opposite the nearest columns in the Thersilium.
This is proved by (i) the existence of the four foundation-piers of the
displaced columns in the wall at the back of the colonnade ; and (2) the
comparatively careless structure of this part of the wall and the use in
it of ^-i) - shaped clamps instead of the |— | - shaped clamps which are
used everywhere else in the hall and portico except in the three later
steps.

There are some indications that the floor of the portico was of wood
or at all events that it rested on a wooden framework. For in the first
place there were found, inside of the portico and at a depth of nearly
5 feet below the top step, three curiously-cut stones, which may perhaps
have been used for supporting the scenery of the theatre. The discovery
of these stones at this level seems to show that the space beneath the
portico was used as a store-room, or at least that it was not filled up
with earth ; and if it was left hollow, the floor of the colonnade must
almost certainly have been of wood, since the width of the space to be
covered (nearly 20 feet) is too great to be spanned by a stone floor
without supports. In the second place, large square holes, measuring
about 8 inches by 5 inches, are to be seen in the foundation-piers of the
columns which are built into the back wall of the portico. These holes



344 MEGALOPOLIS— THERSIUUM BK. viii. arcadu

&ce towards the portico and are at a level with its second step. Tbey
probably received the ends of wooden beams which crossed over to the
front of the colonnade. Cross planks or perhaps flagstones resting on
these beams would form the floor, bringing the level up to that of the
top step or stylobate of the portico.

The lower foundations of the portico consist of a wall about 5| feet
thick and 3^ feet deep, composed of three courses of squared blodcs of
tufa joined together with |— {-shaped clamps. On the top of this wall
rests an upper foundation formed of limestone slabs about 9^ inches
deep, two slabs making up the thickness of the wall ; and on this upper
foundation formerly rested the two original steps of the portica To
these two upper steps, as we have seen, were afterwards added three
lower steps, the greater part of which stiU exists in position. These
lower steps extend only along the front of the portico ; they were not
continued along its short sides. Under the lowest of them is a thin foundar
tion of limestone. That these lower three steps were a later addition
to the portico is proved by various considerations, (i) The steps in
question are not tied or bonded into the foundation- wall of the portico,
but are merely built up in front of it (2) The foundations, both upper
and lower, of the portico have been cut away on their front &ce in order
to allow the second and third of the later steps to be placed in position.
(3) The blocks of the three lower steps are joined with fimm^ - shaped
clamps, whereas the blocks of the two upper steps were joined with ^m^
clamps.

The question arises, when and why were these later steps added?
To answer it we must consider the relation of the portico to the theatre.

The portico is exactly opposite the orchestra of the theatre ; its
lowest step is distant only 35 feet from the two ends of the front row of
benches ; and the length of its front, without the later steps, is exactly
the original width of the orchestra, before the area of the orchestra was
contracted by the insertion of the front row of benches. Thus it appears
that the portico fills the space which in Greek theatres is usually
occupied by the stage-buildings. Indeed the English excavators at
first mistook the portico for a stage ; but their mistake was corrected by
Dr. Dorpfeld and has been acknowledged by themselves. The original
level of the orchestra, before the addition of the front benches, was, as
we have seen, about 1 5 inches higher than at present. Now the bottom
of the later steps of the portico is almost exactly in a line with the
original level of the orchestra, the difference between the two amounting
to only a quarter of an inch ; but the bottom of the original upper steps
is 3 ft. 3 in. above it. From this the natural inference is that the
Thersilium with its portico was built before the theatre ; that the
ground in front of the portico was then at a level with the bottom of the
two original steps of the portico ; and that when the theatre was built
and the soil in front of the portico was cleared away to form the orchestra,
the three lowest steps were added in order to maintain the communica-
tion between the portico and the ground in front of it, now converted
into the orchestra of the theatre. This is Dr. D6rpfeld's theory, and
probability seems to be in its favour. Mr. Ernest Gardner, however,



CH. XXXII MEGALOPOUS—THERSILIUM 34S

contends that the later steps are not contemporary with the theatre but
were added some considerable time, perhaps two centuries, later, and
that in the interval between the construction of the theatre and the
addition of the three lower steps there was a platform of earth or wood
in front of the portico, abutting against its foundations in the place
afterwards occupied by the additional steps ; and this platform, he
holds, was the stage on which the actors played. The only alternative
to this view, he argues, would be to suppose that there was a sheer
drop of 3 ft. 3 in. from the foot of the original upper steps to the level
of the orchestra ; and this supposition, he thinks, is precluded by the
consideration that such a drop would have exposed to view the founda-
tions of the portico, which, from the nature of their material and the
roughness of their masonry, were clearly never meant to be seen. But
on this hypothesis how is the later addition of the lower steps to be
explained ? For obviously when they were constructed there could
have been no stage abutting on the front of the portico. Mr. Gardner's
answer is that the permanent stage was afterwards replaced by a tem-
porary wooden one, and that thereupon the three lowest steps were
added in order to give access to the portico in the intervals between
the dramatic performances when there was no stage in front of it.
But why should a permanent stage have been replaced by a temporary
one ? A theory which obliges us to suppose such a change is improbable.
The argument on which Mr. Gardner's theory mainly rests is that the
front surface of the lower steps, which has been worked across and
across with a toothed chisel so as to give, in a favourable light, the
appearance of a network of fine lines, is totally different from the smooth
front surface not only of the upper steps but also of the seats in the
theatre, while on the other hand it exactly resembles the front surface
of the pedestal which stands on the western edge of the orchestra and
bears an inscription of the second or first century B.C. (see above, p.
337). This supposed difference of technique, in Mr. Gardner's opinion,
forces us to assume that a long interval elapsed between the construction
of the theatre and the addition of the three lowest steps of the portico,
and consequently that in the interval the place afterwards occupied by
the steps was filled by a stage. But it appears very doubtful whether
this assumed difference of technique really exists. Dr. Ddrpfeld, a
trained architect, was unable to perceive it ; and Mr. Loring, who
formerly believed in it and deduced from it the same conclusions as
Mr. Gardner, found on a more searching examination that the difference,
so far as it exists, was not one of technique but was merely due to the
varying degree in which the stones had been worn or weathered. If he
is right, Mr. Gardner's principal argument for the late date of the lower
steps and hence for a permanent original stage in the theatre becomes
invalid. That the lower steps were later than the rest of the portico we
have already seen ; but they need not have been much later, and the
theory, advocated by Dr. Dorpfeld, that they were added at the time
when the theatre was built and when the level of the ground in front
of the portico was lowered to form the orchestra, is decidedly the most
probable. It does not necessarily follow from this that the actors



346 MEGALOPOLIS— THE THEATRE BK. viil. arcadu

performed, as Dr. Ddrpfeld supposes, on the level ground of the
orchestra with the steps and columns of the portico for a backgnround.
A temporary wooden stage may possibly have been erected for the
players from time to time in front of the portico. But of a permanent
stage in the original theatre at Megalopolis there is no trace.

At some time long subsequent to the construction of the theatre a
permanent stone stage was built in front of the portica The stylobate
and some pieces of the columns which supported the front of the stage
still exist in their original positions. The length of the stage, to judge
from the remains of the stylobate, was 105 ft. 4 in., and its depth 19
ft 9 in. The stylobate, the top of which is almost exactly on a level
with the bottom of the lowest step of the portico, consists of two courses
of slabs of a purplish-white limestone. The blocks of the upper course
seem to have been taken from a small building of about the same date
as the portico ; they are of irregular length and breadth, and are badly
fitted without clamps, care having been taken merely that they should
form a continuous straight line in front. Along the front of the stage
a row of fourteen marble columns, with an anta and a short piece of
plain wall at either end, rested on the stylobate; all the columns
were fixed into the stylobate by iron dowels run with lead, and they
were placed along the front at equal intervals of 5 ft 10^ in. from
centre to centre. The columns measured i ft 5^^ in. in diameter at
the base, and were mostly built up of drums of various leng^s. The
longest piece of a * colunm that has been found measures 7 ft. 8^ in.,
and it has two dowel- holes on the top. Probably this is a complete
shaft and the capital rested immediately on it If so, the total
height of the stage, including the entablature over the columns, was
probably about 10 feet, a measurement agreeing very well with the
directions of Vitruvius, who says (v. 8, 2) that the height of a Greek stage
should be not less than i o and not more than 1 2 feet. The workman-
ship of the columns is very rough. It was intended to flute them, but
this intention was not carried out, the flutes having been cut only for a
height of 2 J inches at the bottom of each column on the front side. At
either side of each column is a projecting fillet, doubtless intended to
fasten the panels which filled the spaces between the columns. All the
spaces between the columns would seem to have been thus filled ; at
least no trace of an opening or door through the front of the stage has
been observed. The space between the middle columns is no wider
than the others, and nowhere is the stylobate worn by feet, the original
marks of the masons' tools on its surface being plainly visible. This
absence of a doorway confirms the view that the structure in question
was a stage upon which the actors performed, and not a mere background
in front of which they appeared ; for had it been a background there
would almost certainly have been a doorway or doorways in it for the
passage out and in of the actors. The back of the stage, which is
unusually deep (19 ft. 9 in.), may have been partly filled by the
scenery. On its short west side there is an opening at the back
through which the scenery may have been run on to the stage from
the skanotheka or * scene-dock' (see above, p. 337 j^.) On this west



CH. XXXII MEGALOPOLIS^-THE THEATRE 347

side there is also the sill of a door which allowed of communication
between the back of the stage and the 'scene-dock.' The date of the
stage may be the first century B.C or later.

We have seen that the stylobate of this late stage consists of two
courses of limestone slabs. A slight difference in style between these
two courses^ of which the lower is rather better built than the upper,
suggested to Dr. Dorpfeld that the two might perhaps belong to
different dates. The removal of some of the blocks of the upper
course amply verified his conjecture, for it revealed on the top of the
blocks of the lower course a series of rectangular sockets and grooves
which were clearly intended for the reception of wooden posts and
planks. Evidently we have here the remains of an arrangement for the
erection either of a continuous scene or of a wooden stage supported on
posts and boarded in front Upright posts were no doubt inserted in
the quadrangular sockets, and planks in the grooves. The grooves,
which are placed immediately in front of the sockets, are not continuous,
which seems to show that the boarding was also not continuous. If so,
the structure is more likely to have been a scaffold for the support of
scenery than a stage ; and its discovery favours the view of Dr. Dorpfeld
that in Greek theatres down to a comparatively late time the actors
performed on the level of the orchestra against a temporary scene or
background erected in it. This wooden scaffolding or stage, whichever
it was, must have been a good deal longer in front than the columned
stone stage which succeeded it ; for the line of its front is prolonged
eastward beyond the end of the stone stage by a row of blocks of tufa
roughly put together without clamps and bearing on their top a series of
sockets and grooves like those already described. This row of blocks
is about 2 1 feet long and it slopes up the parodos at an inclination of
about I in lo. At the opposite or western end of the stone stage,
between it and the skanoiheka or 'scene-dock,' there are two other
blocks of tufa with similar sockets and grooves, and as they lie nearly
in a line with the front of the stage they probably belong to the same
foundation for the erection of a wooden scaffolding or stage. On the
face of one of these two blocks is a moulding, which shows that it was
taken from an earlier structure. The style of the moulding is supposed
to indicate a date not earlier than the third century B.C. If this opinion
is correct, the foundations which have been described, together with the
wooden scaffolding or stage which they supported, can hardly have
been earlier than the second century B.C. This is a reason for dating
the columned stone stage, which succeeded to the wooden stage or
scaffolding, in the first century B.C or later.

Lastly, in front of the west end of the stone stage there lie 'a few
slabs which may indicate the comer of a still later structure, perhaps a
regular Roman stage, which may have actually closed in the orchestra,
its front line coinciding exactly with the chord which joins the two inner
extremities of the retaining walls. The positions of the two pedestals
just in fh)nt of this line, the rough irregular way in which they have
been set down, and the fact that their base stones, especially those of
the one on the west, do not correspond in level with the kerb of the



34S MEGALOPOLIS BK. viii. arcadia

adjoining gutter, all point to the probability of their having been set
there in quite late times, in fact to their having been shifted from other
positions to make room for such a stage.

On the theatre and Thersiliam at Megalopolis see R. W. Schultz, E. A.
Gardner, and W. Loring, in Excavations at Megalopolis^ pp. 13 sq,^ 17-50, 69-91 ;
W. Loring, in Athetmeum^ 5th August 1893, p. 200 ; itf., in Jcum. tf HeUimc
Studies^ 13 (1892-93), pp. 356-358; E. F. Benson, 'The Thersiliam at Megi-
lopolis,' 1^., pp. 319-327; A. G. Bather, *The development of the plan of die



Thersilion,' t^., pp. 328-335. For the controversy between the English
excavators and Dr. Dorpfeld as to the existence of an original stage in the theatre
see also Joum. of Hellenic Studies^ 1 1 (1890), pp. 294-298; W. Dorpfeld, in
Berliner philolog. Wochemchrift^ 4th April 1891, p. 418 sqq,\ ib,^ 25111 April
1891, p. 515 ; Penrose, 1*., 23ra May 1891, p. 644 ; W. Dorpteld, E. A. Gardner,
and W. Loring, 1^., 30th May 1891, p. 673 sqq,, and Athenaeum^ 30th May 1891,
p. 710 ; Gardner and Loring, in AlAenaeum, 27th June 1891, p. 839 j^. ; W. Dorp-
feld, id,f 25th July 1891, p. 139 sq, ; Gardner and Loring, id,, ist August 1891,
p. 171 ; Classical Hevietu, 5 (i 891), pp. 238-240, 284 sq, ; W. Dorpfeld, in Mit-
theil, d, arch, Inst, in Athen, 16 (1891), pp. 257-259; ib,^ 17 (1892), pp. 97-99;
ih,y 18(1893), pp. 215-218.



This is perhaps the most convenient place to mention two altais
discovered by the English excavators to the west and east of the
Thersilium respectively.

The remains of the larger of the two altars are situated about 127
feet west of the Thersilium and parallel to its west wall. They consist
of an oblong basis 36 ft. 3 in. long by 6 ft 5 in. broad. On a pro-
jecting siU-course of squared stones is set a course of upright slabs
consisting of triglyphs and metopes. Above this there was probably
a cornice or coping which, however, has entirely disappeared. The
material is conglomerate ; the exposed surfaces both of the sill-course
and the upright stones is coated with stucco. Apparently the blocks
were not clamped together. The inside of the altar seems to ha\'e
been filled up with large river pebbles. Many things seem to show
that the triglyphs and metopes were made for this position and were
not removed from some other structure. The inferior nature of the
material (conglomerate), the thinness (i foot) of the blocks, and the
fact that while the metopes along the sides of the altar are equal in
width those at each end are 5 inches wider, all point to this conclusion.
The triglyphs are of the later form, being long and thin, in the pro-
portion of 7 to 4. This use of metopes and triglyphs for the sides of
altars seems not to have been unconmion. Many altars are so repre-
sented on vases (see Journal of Hellenic Studies, 1 1 (1890), pi. \n. and
p. 226 ; Daremberg et Saglio, Dictionnaire des antiqmth, i. p. 349,
Fig. 417); a large altar decorated with a triglyph frieze has been
found at Pompeii (Overbeck und Mau, Pompeji,^ p. 1 1 1 sq., with Fig.
63), and at 01>Tnpia there is a circular drum about 4 feet in diameter
similarly treated, which may have been part of an altar. It is possible
that the altar which has just been described may have been the altar of
Ares mentioned by Pausanias (viii. 32. 3).

The other and smaller altar stands about 190 feet east of the
Thersilium, very neariy in a line with the middle of its cast wall.



CH. XXXII MEGALOPOLIS 349

It is II feet long by 6 feet broad, and was built of plain blocks of
conglomerate resting on a sill of the same material The sill and
some of the blocks remain in position, but the coping has disappeared.
The stones are coated with stucco. Inside the altar was found filled
with earth, cobbles, pottery, and broken stone.

See R. W. Schultz, in Excavations at Megalopolis^ p. 51 sq, ; W. Loring, f^.,
p. 8.

32. I. a perennial spring. This spring still exists. Under the
seats of the theatre may be seen holes through which the water trickled.
At several places among the seats the water stiU issues and flows down
into the gutter which runs round the orchestra. See W. D5rpfeld, in
MittheiL des arch, Inst, in Athen^ 17 (1892), p. 99. Cp. L. Ross,
Reisen^ p. 74 ; Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 284 ; Vischer, Erinnerungen^
p. 409 ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 248 ; W. Loring, in Excavations at
MegalopoliSy p. 119.

32. I. the Ooandl House, which was built for the Arcivitian
Ten Thousand. As to the ruins of this great hall see above, p. 338 sqq.
The representative body of the Arcadian Confederation is referred to in
an inscription found at Tegea and dating, apparently, about 251-238
B.C. The inscription mentions ** the Council of the Arcadians and the
Ten Thousand " (t^ /Sovky riav 'ApKoSmv koI toIs /ivpiois), and gives a
list of officers called damiorgoi, who perhaps constituted the Council.
See Dittenberger, Sylloge Inscr. Graec,^ No. 167 ; Cauer, Delectus
Inscr, Graec.y^ No. 444. The Arcadian Confederation, with its repre-
sentative body of the Ten Thousand, was constituted in 370 B.C. chiefly
through the agency of Lycomedes of Tegea (Diodorus, xv. 59). Demo-
sthenes also mentions that the Ten Thousand met at Megalopolis (Or.
xix. 11). Cp. Xenophon, Hellemca, vii. i. 38, vii. 4. 2 ; Aeschines, ii.
79 ; Harpocration, s.v. /ivpioi ev McyaA^y irokei ; G. Gilbert, Griechische
Stctatsalterthiitner^ 2. pp. 133-135.

32. I. an image of Anunon with ram's horns on his head.

See Herodotus, ii. 42 with Wiedemann's note; /V/., iv. 181. A curious
bronze statuette in the National Museum at Athens represents Ammon
as a bearded man with ram's horns, the lower part of his body being
that of a serpent See 'E<f}r)fi€pU dpxaiokoyiKrjf 1893, pp. 187-192,
with pL 1 2 and 1 3. The type of the ram-headed god was probably of
Egyptian origin and came to Greece through Cyrene. It appears on
coins of Cyrene (Head, Historia numorum, p. 728 sq,)^ and the
Cyrenians dedicated an image of Ammon at Delphi (Paus. x. 13. 5).
It has, however, been suggested, without much probability, that die
original home of the type was the Boeotian Thebes, where there was a
temple of Ammon (Paus. ix. 16. i), and whence the worship might have
been diffused over Greece. See Overbeck, Griechische Kunstmythologie,
2. p. 273 sqq,

32. 2. The sanctuary of Aphrodite. An inscription found at
Megalopolis records in four elegiac couplets that a certain priestess of
Aphrodite, by name Euxenia, a descendant of Philopoemen, had built a
wall round the temple of the goddess and erected a dwelling for the



350 MEGALOPOLIS bk. viii. ascadia

use of banqueters. See Kaibel, Epigrammaia Graeca^ No. 1044;
Excavations at Megalopolis^ p. 134 j^., Inscr. No. 13.

32. 2. Heayenly Vnlgar. Although from the fourth century

B.C onward the epithet Pandemos as applied to Aphrodite was popu-
larly understood to designate the goddess of vulgar or sensusd, as
opposed to the goddess of pure or heavenly love, it would seem that
originally the title had a purely political significance, meaning the
goddess " of the whole people." Her worship may perhaps have bem
instituted in Megalopolis, the new capital of Arcadia, in the hope of
thereby drawing closer the bonds of union between the Arcadian cchd-
munities. See L. R. Famell, The Cults of the Greek States^ 2. p. 658
sqq, ; and note on i. 22. 3.

32. 3. an altar of Ares. L. Ross thought he recognised the site
of this altar in a round foundation above the steep bank of the river
{Reisetiy p. 75). The English excavations have brought to light two
altars near the theatre, one of which may perhaps be the altar of Ares.
See above, p. 348 sq,

32. 3. a stadium a fountain. About a hundred paces east

of the theatre is a spring rising in a small ravine. It is conmionly
supposed that this is the spring mentioned by Pausanias, and that the
stadium may have been in the ravine. See L. Ross, Reisen, p. 74 sq, ;
Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 284 ^^. ; Vischer, Erinnerungen^ p. 409 ; Baedeker,'
p. 297 ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 302. To this identification it is objected
by Mr. W. Loring that the shape of the ground here is not specially
suitable for a stadium, and that a spring could hardly have been
described by Pausanias as close to the theatre if it were really 100 yards
distant from it. Hence Mr. Loring, following the French surveyors
(Expedition scientifique de Morie: Architecture^ Sculptures^ etc, par
A. Blouet, 2. p. 45), identifies the spring mentioned by Pausanias with
the excellent and perennial spring which rises on the west side of the
theatre, immediately behind the embankment of the auditorium. If he
is right, the stadium probably extended from the spring either north-
ward, towards the river, or westward, in the direction of a ruined chapel,
beside which there is a piece of good wall of breccia. The latter direc-
tion is perhaps the more likely, first, because the ground here is almost
flat, while the ground between the spring and the river slopes consider-
ably ; and, second, because the low hills immediately to the south of
the line connecting the spring with the chapel would be an excellent
place from which to watch the races in the stadium. No remains of
the stadium, however, have been brought to light. But it would accord
very well with Mr. Loring's view of its situation if the large altar to the
west of the Thersilium (see above, p. 348) were the altar of Ares, since
it follows from Pausanias's description that the altar of Ares was not far
from the stadium. See W. Loring, in Excavations at Megalopolis^
p. 119 sq.

32. 4* a hill to the east, on which is a temple of Huntress
Artemis. Pausanias has been speaking of the stadium, which we have
seen some grounds for placing immediately to the west of the theatre.
Hence the hill on which stood the temple of Huntress Artemis may have



CH. XXXII MEGALOPOLIS 351

been either the gentle rising ground immediately to the east of the
theatre or the steep and almost precipitous little hill still farther east,
beyond the present public road. Mr. Loring prefers to suppose that
the temple of Artemis stood in the former situation, to the west of the
road, for two reasons: first, because the ancient remains (walls of
breccia, scattered drums of columns, etc.) are more numerous to the west
of the road than to the east of it ; and, second, because Pausanias's
expression, in Mr. Loring's opinion, seems to imply that the temple
stood on the slope rather than on the top of the hill, whereas the hill
to the east of the road is so steep that no building could have stood
on it anywhere except on the top. Still Mr. Loring found nothing to
identify the actual site of the temple of Artemis. At a point about half-
way between the road and the theatre his workmen dug up a number of
white marble mullions, evidently from the windows of a Byzantine
church. As a Christian church very often succeeded to the site of a
pagan temple, it is possible that remains of a temple may yet be dis-
covered in this neighbourhood. See W. Loring, in Excavations at
Megalopolis^ p. 120 sq, Cp. L. Ross, Reisen^ p. 75 ; Curtius, Pelop,
I. p. 285. As to Artemis in her character of the Huntress {Agroterd)
or, as the epithet should rather be rendered, the Goddess of the Wilds,
see L. R. Famell, The Cults of the Greek States, 2. p. 431 sqq, Mr.
Famell is probably right in holding that *' while Greek poetry and art
usually describe her as the huntress and destroyer, the older religion was
more familiar with the conception of her as the protector and patroness
of wild animals, and especially of those that were with young " (p. 434).

32. 4. it^ too, was dedicated by Axistodemns. This seems to
refer to viii. 30. 7, where it is perhaps implied that the colonnade called
Myropolis was built by Aristodemus. A sanctuary of Artemis, said to
have been founded by Aristodemus, is mentioned below (viii. 35. 5).
But see the Critical Note on the present passage (vol. i. p. 598).

32. 4. Aescnlapins Health. On a base of white marble in a

house at Megalopolis there is a mutilated inscription containing part of
a dedication to Aesculapius and Health {Bulletin de Corr. helUnique,
6 (1882), p. 194; Immerwahr, Z>i> arkadischen Kulte, p. 178; Ex-
cavations at Megalopolis, p. 128, Inscr. No. 6).

32. 4. Athena Worker and Apollo Ood of Streets. See notes
on i. 24. 3 (vol. 2. p. 297 sq,) ; i. 31. 6 (vol. 2. p. 417).

32. 4. the poems of Homer etc The passages here referred to
are Odyssey, xxiv. i sqq, ; Iliad, viii. 362 sq,, xvi. 187 sq,, xix. 103 sq,

32. 5. another sanctuary of the Boy Aescnlapins. As Pausanias
tells us that this sanctuary was near a spring, the water of which flowed
into the Helisson, we may conjecture with Mr. Loring that it lay near
the spring which rises about 100 yards east of the Thersilium and flows
into the Helisson hard by. Between the spring and the bed of the
river there are many remains of breccia. See W. Loring, in Excavations
at Megalopolis, p. 121. L. Ross would seem to have looked for the
sanctuary about half a mile ^sirther east near the chapel of St. Athanasius,
which stands on the south bank of the Helisson, a little way to the east
of the present public road {Reisen, p. 75).



352 MEGALOPOLIS bk. tiii. arcadu

32. 5. bones of raperhiiiiiaii sise etc. These were probably bones
of mammoths. See viii. 29. i note. In the musenm at Dimdisatia in
Arcadia (see above, p. 311 sq.) there is a large partially-foss i lised bone
which was brought from Megalopolis and which the collector, the aged
priest and late schoolmaster Hieronymus, caUs the shoulder-blade of an
elephant (Excavations at Megalopolis^ p. 121). He may be more nearly
right than Mr. Loring seems to think.

32. 5. Hoiiladanins. See viii. 36. 2.

33. I. Megalopolis now lies mostly in ndns. Even in

Strabo's time, about 150 years before Pausanias, M^ialc^xdis wss
mostly uninhabited ; he applied to it the verse of a comic poet, ^The
great city is a great desert " (Strabo, viii. p. 388).

33. 2. Nineveh etc Lucian says, " Nineveh has perished and not
a vestige of it remains ; you could not even tell where once it stood"
{Charon J 23). According to Strabo (xvL p. 737) Ninevdi was nondi
larger than Babylon.

33. 2. Delos, once the common mart of Greece etc The com-
mercial prosperity of Delos is attested by inscriptions, particalariy dedi-
catory inscriptions of the period 200-80 B.C., which constantly refer to
the Romans, Italians, and Greeks who traded in the island. The trade
of Delos received a great impetus through the destruction of Corinth in
146 B.C, for the merchants migrated to the island, attracted by the con-
venience of its situation and the protection of the sanctuary (Strabo^ x.
p. 486; cp. Pans. iii. 23. 3). Cicero speaks of Delos as ^a small
unfortified island, crowded with riches, whither merchants resorted from
all sides with their wares and cargoes" {Pro lege MemtHa^ 18. 55).
" Puteoli was called a lesser Delos, because Delos had once been the
greatest mart. in the whole world" (Festus, s.v, Minorem Delum^ p. 122,
ed. Miiller). Delos was a great centre of the slave-trade (Strabo, xiv.
p. 668) ; the site of an enclosure in which the slaves were penned can
still be traced at the north-east comer of the island. See Prof Jebb,
* Delos,' yitwrwo/ of Hellenic Studies, i (1880), p. 32 j^. On the other
hand, Pausanias's description of the solitude and desolation of the island
in his own time is strikingly borne out by some epigrams in the Gredc
Anthology, all probably dating from the first or early part of the second
century A.D. See Jebb, op, cit, p. 36 sq. The decline of Delos dated
from the sack of the island in the first Mithridatic war, about 87 &a
See Pausanias iii. 23. 3 sqq, "The guards sent from Athens to watch
over the sanctuary," whom Pausanias mentions, are referred to in
Delian inscriptions as the men " appointed to guard the sacred treasures
and the other revenues of the temple." See Homolle, />y archives de
Pintendance sacrie i Delos, P- 25 ; Jebb, op. dt. p. 33. Delos had been
restored to Athens by the Roman senate (Polybius, xxx. 1 8 ; Livy,
xxxiii. 30).

33. 3. At Babylon the sanctuary of Bel remains. Cp. i. 16. 3 ;
iv. 23. 10. Herodotus says (i. 181) that this sanctuary still existed in
his time, and he has given us a description of it But Strabo (xvL
p. 738) and Arrian (Anabasis, vii. 17) state that the temple or tomb of
Bel T*-as destro>*ed by Xerxes after his return from Greece, and that



CH. XXXIII THE TEMPLE OF BEL 353

Alexander the Great had it m his mind to restore it, but died before he
could execute the design. Pliny (Nat, hist, vi. 121) speaks of the
temple of Bel as still in existence. The temple is now generally
identified with the mound which is still called Babil by the Arabs. It
is '^ an oblong mass composed chiefly of unbaked brick, rising from the
plain to the height of no feet, and having at the top a broad fiat
space, broken with heaps of rubbish, and otherwise very uneven. The
northern and southern faces of the mound are about 200 yards in
length; the eastern and western are respectively 182 and 136 yards.
All the faces, and especially that which looks to the west, present at
intervals some appearance of brickwork, the bricks being sun-dried, and
cemented, not with bitumen, but with mud, a thin layer of reeds occur-
ring between each course of the brick. Tunnels driven into the base of
the mound on a level with the plain show that the structure was formerly
coated with a wall of burnt-brick masonry, supported by numerous piers
and buttresses of the same material These baked bricks, as well as
most of those which are found loose among the rubbish wherever it is
dug into, bear the name of Nebuchadnezzar" (Rawlinson's Herodotus^
vol 2. p. 576 sq,) In an inscription which has been discovered Nebu-
chadnezzar states that he thoroughly repaired the temple (Rawlinson,
op, cit, 2, p. 578). Cp. Perrot et Chipiez, Histoire de Part dans Vantiquiti^
2- P- 399 sq. It is possible that Pliny and Pausanias, in asserting that
the temple of Bel still existed in their time, meant no more than that
the mound, with the remains of brickwork, was still to be seen. The
name Bel is only another form of Baal, which is a general word signi-
fying * lord.* The proper name of the Babylonian god was Merodach ;
he was the Baal or lord of the city. See Sayce, Religion of the Ancient
Babylonians (Hibbert Lectures, 1887), p. 92 sqq,\ G. Maspero, Histoire
ancienne des fieupies de V Orient classique: Les origines^ p. 649. Cp.
Robertson Smith, Religion of the Semites^ P« 93 -f^^* The reason why
Xerxes destroyed the temple of Bel has lately been discovered by Prof.
Jules Oppert. A Babylonian contract table, published by Father Strass-
maier, is dated in the reign of a king called Samas-Erba. Prof. Oppert
has shown, from the names of the witnesses, that the contract was made
in the year of the expedition of Xerxes against Greece. Hence it would
seem that the Babylonians took advantage of the absence of Xerxes to
revolt and set up a king of their own ; and that on his return Xerxes
punished them by destroying or at least dismantling the temple of Bel.
See American Journal of Archaeology^ 7 (1891), p. 500.

33. 3. of that Babylon nothing is left but the walls.

Lucian represents Charon as visiting the upper earth and curious to see
the mighty cities of old, thousands and thousands of whose inhabitants he
had ferried across the River of Death. Hermes, who has undertaken
to show him the sights, points to Babylon in the distance : " Yonder is
Babylon, the city with the noble towers, the city of vast compass ; but
soon it too, like Nineveh, will be sought for in vain " (Lucian, Charon^
23). This does not necessarily imply that Lucian believed the walls
and towers of Babylon to be still standing in his time.

33. 4. the island of Ohryse etc. Appian mentions {Miihrid, yj)

VOL. IV 2 A



354 MANIAE BX. viii. arcadxa

** a desert island near Lemnos, where are shown an altar of Philoctetes^
a bronze serpent, a bow and arrows, and a cuirass bedecked with ribbons,
memorials of the sufferings of Philoctetes." As the island was the scene
of an affair in the third Mithridatic war (73 or 72 B.C), its disappearance
must have happened some time between that date and the time when
Pausanias wrote. According to some ancient writers, Philoctetes was
stung by the hydra not in Chryse but in Lenmos. See SchoL oo
Sophocles, PhilocL 270 ; Eustathius on Homer, //rVz^ ii. 724 (p. 330) ;
Hyginus, Fab, 102. But Sophocles in his Philoctetes (t/. 268 sqq^
plainly implies that Philoctetes, though abandoned by his comrades at
Lenmos, had received his wound in Chryse ; and this was afterwards
the prevalent version of the story. Cp. Michaelis in Annali dell* InsU'
tuto^ 29 (1857), p. 235 sqq.; and note on viii. 8. 5.

33. 4. the Sacred Lde (Hiera). This is the island which rose out
of the sea between the islands of Thera (Santorin) and Therasia during
a volcanic eruption. See Pliny, Nat. hist. ii. 202 ; Strabo, i. p. 57 ;
Justin, XXX. 4. i; Plutarch, De Pythiae oraculis, 11. The Sacred Isle
appears to be the one which is now called Palaea Kammeni (* Old Burnt
Island'). The whole gulf between Thera (Santorin) and Therasia is
in fact the crater of a submarine volcano. A fresh volcanic island, now
called Nea Kammeni (* New Burnt Island '), was formed in the gulf in
1707 and 1709. See Lyell, Principles of Geology y^'^ 2. p. 65 sqq.\
Smith's Diet, of Greek and Roman Geogr,, s.v. * Thera.' The island
of Thera {Santorin) is the subject of an elaborate geological monograph
by Fouqu^, Santorin et ses eruptions (Paris, 1879) Cp. note on iiL

1. 8.

34. I. Maniae. £. Curtius thought that this place was between
Sinanou and the village of Agias Bey, at a spot where there are four
mounds. See L. Ross, Reisen^ p. 84 ; Curtius, Pelop. i. p. 291 ;
Vischer, Erinnerungen^ p. 4 1 2 sq. Dodwell identified Maniae with a
place to the south-east of Sinanou^ where there are the remains of a
small Doric temple, which has been converted into a church {Tour^

2. p. 376 sq,) But he is clearly wrong ; for Maniae was on the road
to Messene, and therefore must have been situated south-west, not
south-east, of Megalopolis (Sinanou), With the Greek idea that a
murderer was driven mad by the avenging spirit of his victim we may
compare a superstition prevalent among the Arawak tribe of Indians in
British Guiana (South America). They think that if an avenger of
blood does not taste the blood of his victim within three days after he
has killed him, he (the avenger of blood) must die mad. See Schom-
burgk, Reisen in Britisch-Guiana^ 2, p. 497 ; Bemau, Missionary
Labours in British Guiana^ p. 57 sq, ; Brett, Indian Tribes of Guianoy
p. 358 sq,

34. 2. a sxoall mound of earth snrmonnted by a finger made of
stone etc. It was said that one of Hercules^s fingers was bitten off by
the Nemean lion and that the finger was buried in a grave by itself at
Sparta, the grave being surmounted by a stone lion (Ptolemaeus, Nov.
hist, ii., in Mythogr, Graeci, ed. Westermann, p. 1 84). Liebrecht proposed
to explain Finger's Tomb by the popular superstition, current in Germany



CH. XXXIV SACRIFICE OF FINGERS 355

and Normandy, that the hand of a child who has struck his parents
will protrude from the grave. He supposes that the tomb in question
was that of a matricide, who was at a later time identified with Orestes.
See Liebrecht, Zur Volkskunde^ p. 343 ; and as to the superstition see
Grimm's note on No. 1 1 7 of his Kinder und Hausmdrchen; K. Miillen-
hoff, Sagen^ Maerchen und Lieder der Herzogthiimer Schleswig Hohtein
und Lauenburg^ p. 103 sq, ; A. Bosquet, La Normandie romanesque et
fnerveilleuse^ p. 263. It is perhaps more probable that we have here a
tradition of self-mutilation practised as an expiatory sacrifice. There
was a legend that Lycurgus, king of the Edonians in Thrace, killed his
son in a fit of madness, but recovered his senses after he had cut off
some of his own extremities (Apollodorus, iii. 5. i). The old heathen
Prussians believed that a certain god named Patollo sometimes haunted
a man, and that if Patollo appeared thrice to him, the only way to get
rid of him was for the man to go to a priest and make him a present,
in return for which the priest made a cut in the man's arm so as to draw
blood. When this was done, a himiming sound was heard from the
sacred oak-tree in token that Patollo would never haunt the man again.
See Simon Grunau, Preussischer Chronik^ herausgegeben von M.
Perlbach (Leipzig, 1876), p. 94 sq* Similarly Orestes may be supposed
to have bitten off his finger as a sacrifice to the avenging Furies of his
mother, who immediately indicated their acceptance of the sacrifice by
appearing to him white instead of black.

The custom of cutting off a finger or a joint of a finger as a pro-
pitiatory offering has prevailed in many places. Thus in some parts of
India '* when a woman is from 1 5 to 20 years of age, and has borne
some children, terrified lest the angry deity should deprive her of her
infants, she goes to the temple, and, as an offering to appease his
wrath, cuts off one or two of her fingers of the right hand " (Francis
Buchanan, 'Journey through Mysore, Canara, and Malabar,' Pinker-
ton's Voyages and Travels, 8. p. 661). In a certain Indian caste,
when a woman is about to be married, two of her fingers are cut off in
the temple as an offering to the idol {Leitres idifiantes et curieuses, 1 3.
p. 203). In other cases it is the mother of the bride who has to submit
to the amputation of several finger -joints (Dubois, Afceurs etc, des
peuples de VInde, i. p. ^ sq,\ Panjab Notes and Q^erieSy i. No. 438).
Among some tribes of north-west Canada, e,g, among the Blackfeet,
in times of great public or private necessity a warrior cuts off a finger
of his left hand and offers it to the Morning Star at its rising (Journal
of the Anthropological Institute, 15 (1886), p. 163). Among the
Mandan Indians of North America young men at initiation used
to have a finger (sometimes two fingers) cut off as a sacrifice to the
Great Spirit (Catlin, North American Indians, i. p. 173). In Tonga
or the Friendly Islands it was a common practice to cut off a finger
or portion of one as a sacrifice to the gods for the recovery of a
superior relation who was sick. If this proved of no avail, children
were sometimes strangled. This last fact clearly shows that the sacrifice
of a finger is a substitute for the sacrifice of the person. See Mariner,
Tonga Islands, i. p. 438 sq, ; id., 2. pp. 210-212. Cp. Dumont D'Urville,



356 SACRIFICE OF FINGERS bk. viil aicadia

Voyage autaur du Monde et d, la recherche de la Perouse^ 4. p. 71 Ji^. ;
Journal of the Roy, Geogr, Soc. 22 (1852), p. 115. Captain Cook states
that in these islands the sick person's own finger was cut oS, adding :
" They suppose that the Deity will accept of the little finger, as a soit
of sacrifice efficacious enough to procure the recovery of their health "
(yoyageSf 5. p. 421 j^. (ed. 1809) ; cp. id^ 3. p. 204). In Fiji a finger
was sometimes cut off and presented to an offended superior to appease
his wrath {United States Exploring Expedition, Ethnography and
Philology^ by Horatio Hale, p. 66). Hottentot women and Bushwomen
cut off a joint of a child's finger, especially if a previous child has died.
The sacrifice of the finger-joint is supposed to save the second child's
life. See Boeving, quoted by Kolbe, Present State of the Cc^ of Good
Hope^ I. p. 309 ; Sonnerat, Voyage aux Indes orientates et d la Chine^
2- p- 93 ; Arbousset et Daumas, Voyage d^ exploration au Nordest de la
Colonie du Cap de Bonne Espirance^ p. 493 ; Fritsch, Die Eingehorenen
Siid-Afrikc^Sy p. 332 sq, ; Th. Hahn, Tsuni-Goam^ p. 87 ; cp. Isaacs,
Travels and Adventures in Eastern Africa^ i. p. 55. Some South
Afiican tribes believe that to cut off the joint of a sick man's finger is a
cure ; the sickness is supposed to pass out of the patient with the blood.
See Barrow, Travels into the Interior of Southern Africa^ i. p. 289;
G. Thompson, Travels and Adventures in Southern Africay 2. p. 357 ;
B. Shaw, Memorials of South Africa^ pp. 43, 55 ; J. Campbell, Treeuets
in South Africa (Second Journey), i. p. 48. Cp. J. £. Alexander,
Expedition of Discovery into the Interior of Africa^ 2. p. 135. The
mutilation of finger-joints as a mark of mourning for the dead has been
practised by many peoples, as by the Beaver Indians, the Crow Indians,
the Blackfeet, the Sioux, and the Nateotain, all of North America (A
Mackenzie, Voyages through the Continent of North America^ p. 148;
Morgan, Amient Society^ p. 1 60 ; Maximilian, Prinz zu Wied, Reise in
das innere Nord- America^ i. p. 583 ; Brackett, *The Sioux,' Report of
the Smithsonian Institution for 1876, p. 470 ; E. James, Expedition to
the Rocky Mountains ^ 2. p. 3 ; Bancroft, Native Races of the Pacijic
States^ I. p. 127); by the Chamias and some Paraguayan Indians in
South America (Azara, Voyages dans VAmMque miridionaiey 2. p. 25 ;
D'Orbigny, Lhomme AmMcain^ i. p. 238 ; id,, 2. p. 90 ; Picart, Cere-
monies et Coutumes, 3. p. 123, Amsterdam, 1735); ^Y ^^^ Bushwomen
(Burchell, Travels in the Interior of Southern Africa^ 2. p. 61); by
widows in Car Nicobar {Asiatick Researches^ 2, p. 342) ; and by the
Fijians, Tongans, and Samoans (Th. Williams, Etji, i. p. 198 ; Wilkes,
United States Exploring Expedition^ 3. pp. 100, loi, 159; Dumont
D'Urville, Voyage au Pole Sud^ 4. p. 225 ; Joum, Roy, Geogr. Soc, 32
(1862), p. 46; Erskine, IVestem Pacific^ pp. 123, 254; Pctpers read
before the Anthropological Society of London^ 1 863-1 864, p. 203 ; EUlis,
Polynesian Researches^ 4. p. 177 ; La Perouse, Voyage round the World,
2. p. 173)- The practice of cutting off one or more finger-joints pre-
x-ails to a large extent among the Australian aborigines ; it is commonly
the girls who are thus mutilated. See Dumont D'Urville, Voyage autour
du Monde et <i la recherche de la Perouse^ i. p. 406 ; G. Barrington,
History of New South IValeSy p. 1 1 jy. ; G. F. Angas, Savage Life and



CH. XXXIV BLACK AND WHITE SPIRITS 357

Scenes in Australia and New Zealand^ 2. p. 225 ; J. D. Lang, QueenS"
landy p. 344 ; Brough Smyth, Aborigines of Victoria^ i. p. xxiii. ; Curr,
The Australian Race^ i. pp. 73 sq,^ 252 ; id,y 2. p. 425 ; iVil, 3. pp. 119,
139, 144, 223, 406, 412; Proceedings of the Geographical Society of
Australasia^ i (1883-84), p. 39. Among the Hottentots, when a widow
marries again she has to cut off a finger-joint (Kolbe, of. cit. i. pp. 159,
309 sqq. ; Thunberg, * Account of the Cape of Good Hope,' Pinkerton's
Voyages and TravelSy 16. p. 141). For more evidence of this custom
of mutilation practised by various peoples and for various reasons, see
Theoph. Hahn, 'Die Buschmanner,' Globus, 18 (1870), p. 122 ; Bleek,
Brief Account of Bushman Folk-lore, p. 17, No. 97; Maximilian,
Prinz zu Wied, op, cit, 2. pp. 188, 207; Bastian, Die Vblker des
ost lichen Asien, i. p. 331 ; id, 6. p, 13 note; R. Andree, Ethno-
graphische ParcUlelen und Vergleiche (first series), pp. 148-150. It
seems possible that a practice so wide spread has left its trace in the
legend about Orestes here reported by Pausanias. Mr. Ch. Belger,
however, conjectures that Finger's Tomb was a mound surmounted by
the efiigy of a phallus {Berliner philolog, Wochensckrift, 12 (1892),
p. 640).

34. 3. they appeared to him black they seemed to him

white. The Zulus believe that there are black spirits (Itongos) and
white spirits ; the black spirits cause disease and suffering, but the
white spirits are beneficent (Callaway, Religious System of the Amazulu,
p. 271). The Yakuts think that bad men after death become dark
ghosts, but good men become bright ones (Vambery, Das TUrkenvolk,
p. 157). There is a Westphalian superstition that ghosts which can
be seen are either white or black : the black are dangerous ; the white
are harmless, but they become black, if they are obliged to walk the
earth long (A. Kuhn, Sagen, Gebrauche und Mdrchen aus Westfalen, 2.
p. 53, No. 154 a). As I have remarked above, the change of the
Furies from black to white plainly indicates that they were appeased
by the sacrifice of Orestes's finger. We may compare and contrast
a Hindoo legend. The wicked Chanacya had caused eight royal
brothers to be murdered. Being stung with remorse for his crime, he
withdrew to a famous place of worship near the sea on the bank of the
river Narmada, to be purified. There after going through a course of
expiatory ceremonies he was directed to sail on the river in a boat with
white sails, and was told that if his sins were forgiven the white sails
would turn black, the blackness of his crimes being transferred to the
sails. It happened so, and he joyfully allowed the boat to drift down
to the sea bearing his sins with it. See AsictHc Researches^ 9. p. 96 sq.

According to a scholiast on Sophocles {Oed, CoL 42) the Furies
became propitious to Orestes after he had sacrificed a black sheep to
them as a whole burnt offering at Cerynea (cp. vii. 25. 7).

34. 3. Orestes cut off his hair etc He was also said to have
shorn his hair, which he had allowed to grow in sign of mourning, at
Comana in Asia Minor (Strabo, xii. p. 535). On a Greek vase Apollo
is depicted preparing to cut off a lock of the hair of Orestes, who is
leaning against the Omphalus. See note on ii. 31. 8. The cropping



358 GATHBATAS—CARNION BK. viii. a&cadu

of the murderer's hair was probably a mode of purification. At some
Hindu places of pilgrimage on the banks of rivers men who have
committed great crimes have their hair completely shaved by barbers
before they plunge into the sacred stream, from which they emerge
innocent (Monier Williams, Religious Thought and Life in Indicia p. 375;
cp. The Golden Bought i. p. 205 sqq,)

34. 4. the Furies of Olsrtaemnestra. Cp. ix. 5. 15, <'the Furies
of Laius and Oedipus." That the Furies were originally nothing but
the angry and vengeful ghost of a murdered person, has been well
shown by Prof. Erwin Rohde {Rheinisckes Museum^ N.F. 50 (1895),
pp. 6-22).

34. 5. the river Gatheatas the Carmon. The ancient road,

which Pausanias is now describing, from Megalopolis to Messene
probably, like the modem road between these two places, followed the
direct route over the Makri-plagi Pass. This pass leads, at a moderate
elevation, over the ridge which unites Mt. Hellenitsa on the south-east
with Mt. Tetrasi on the north-west On the Arcadian side of the pass
the path leads up among heights covered with woods and pastures and
watered by many springs. The ancient road probably crossed the
Alpheus between the villages Agias-bey and Dede-bey, The united
streams of the Gatheatas and Camion are doubtless the Xerilla or
Xerilopoiamo^ which flows northward into the Alpheus, joining that
river on its left bank. The main stream of the Xerilopotamo seems to
be the Camion ; while the Gatheatas would appear to be its much
shorter tributary which rising near the picturesque village of Kyrade^
on the westem side of Mt Hellenitsa^ flows into the Xerilopotamo from
the south-west, a little north of the village of Samara, Gatheae, there-
fore, was probably on or near the site of the village of Kyrades.

See Boblaye, Recherches, p. 169 ; Leake, Marea, 2. p. 295 sqq, ; id,, Pelop.
p. 233 sqq, ; Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 291 ; Vischer, Erinnerungeriy p. 414 ; Bursian,
Geogr, 2. p. 242 ; W. Loring, in/ourttal of Hellenic Studies, 15 (1895), P* 77 -^f*

34. 5. the Aegytian district. See above, note on viii. 27. 4.
The Aegytian district must have been about the head waters of the
Xerilopotamo (Camion), on the westem side of Mt. Taygetus. Aegys,
the capital of the district (see iii. 2. 5 and cp. viii. 27. 4), may have
been at or near the modem village of Kamara^ or Kamaraes as it is now
called because the village has split up or extended itself into three.
Above the highest of the three villages rises a sharp conspicuous hill,
projecting from the flank of Mt Taygetus. Its summit must be at
least 1000 feet above the village, and bears many vestiges of rude
buildings ; but most, if not all of them, are either mediaeval or modem.
In the valley, below the village, Peytier observed some mins, which
Boblaye and Curtius conjectured might be those of the temple of Apollo
Cereatas.

See Boblaye, Recherches, p. 170 ; Leake, Pelop. pp. 234, 235 ; Curtius, Pehp.
I. pp. 292 sqq,, 336 ; Bursian, Geogr, 2, p. 241 ; W. Loring, in Journal of
Hellenic Studies, 15 (1895), p. 78.



CH. XXXV CROMI—NYMPHAS 359

34. 6. OromL This is probably the place called Cromnus by Xeno-
phon {HellenicOy vii. 4. 20 sqq) and Callisthenes (quoted by Athenaeus,
X. p. 452 a b). Stephanus Byzantius {s,v\ Kpcufiva) mentions a fonn
Cromna. The situation of the town is uncertain. At Samara, a
village on the left bank of the Xerilopotamo, a little over a mile to
the west of Leondari^ Leake saw the remains of the walls of an
ancient Greek city, which he identified with Cromi. No ancient Greek
ruins are now to be seen here, but on a small hill, surmounted by a
miserable chapel of St. Demetrius, there are remains of some rather
massive walls of stone, mortar, and occasionally bricks. The hill
would be a very suitable site for a small acropolis, but Cromi can
hardly have been here, since it was on the direct way from Megalo-
polis to Messenia, which Safnara is not. Boblaye would place Cromi
in the plain of Neochoriy to the north-west of Leondari. Bursian identi-
fied Cromi with some ancient ruins which Vischer observed beside the
road near the hamlet of Panagiti, two hours beyond Choremi, on the
road from Megalopolis to Messenia. Half an hour higher up than the
hamlet a pretty spring rises at the foot of a pointed rocky hill which the
natives call Petra Gegrammene (*the inscribed rock'). But Vischer
looked about for inscriptions in vain. *

See Leake, Morea, 2. pp. 44, 297 ; id,^ Pelcpan, p. 234 sq, ; Boblaye, Re-
chercheSt p. 169 ; Curtius, Pehp, I. p. 291 sq, ; Vischer, Erinnerungeny p. 414 ;
Bursian, Gtogr. 2. p. 242; W. Loring, m Journal of HelUnie Studies^ 15 (1^5),
p. 78.

34. 6. Nymphas. Leake identified this with the Paska-drysi or
' spring of the Pasha,' distant 20 furlongs from the ruins at Samara,
which he took to be those of Cromi. There is, however, this objection
to the identification, that it assumes that the ancient road from Mega-
lopolis to Messene went, not by the direct route over the Makri-plagi
pass, but south of it by Kokala or Kokla - derveni, Nymphas may
well have been in the pass of Makri-flagi, which on the Arcadian side
ascends, as we have seen, through heights covered with woods and
pastures and abounding in springs. The place thus answers to
Pausanias's description.

See Leake, Morea, 2. p. 296 sq, ; id,, Pelop, p. 235 ; Curtius, Pelop. I. p. 292 ;
Vischer, Erinnerungtn, p. 414.

35. I. Another road leads fix>m Megalopolis to OanuudimL
This road appears to have followed a direction somewhat farther to the
north than the road from Megalopolis to Messene. It is supposed to
have crossed the mountains in the neighbourhood of the village of
Krano. The Malus may be the stream which flows north past the
village of Neochori to join the Alpheus on the left bank of the latter.
The southern tributary of this stream, flowing from the village of
KourtagOy may be the Seyms. Phaedrias perhaps stood on the height
above Neochori, See Leake, Marea, 2. p. 295 sqq, ; iV/., Pelop, p. 235
sq, ; Boblaye, Recherches, p. 170; Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 292; Bursian,
Geogr, 2. p. 242 sq, Camasium is probably the Camesian grove



36o PHALAESIAE — TRICOLONI BK. viii. arcadu

described by Pausanias (iv. 33. 4), though Leake attempted to distin-
guish them (AfofrOy 2. p. 296 sg. ; Pelop. p. 236).

35. 3. The road from Megalopolis to Lacedaemon etc This
account of the road from Megalopolis to Belemina is described by
Mr. Loring, who knows it well, as concise and satis&ctory. That it
was the western route, passing close to Leondari, not the eastern one
by SkorisinoUy which is commonly followed at the present day, appears
from the fact that it crossed the Alpheus below the junction of that
river with its tributary the Thius. See W. Loring, in Journal of
Hellenic Studies, 15 (1895), p. 46 sq.

35. 3. the river Thins. This must be the stream now called the
KoutoupharinOy which, flowing from the south, joins the Alpheus (on
the left bank of the latter) near ChamouMO, See Leake, MoreOy 2. p.
298 ; mT., Pelop, p. 237 ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 243 ; W. Loring, in
JoumcU of Hellenic Studies, 15 (1895), P- 47-

35. 3. Phalaesiae. This place is commonly supposed to have been
near the village of Boura, on the eastern slope of Taygetus, where Gell
reported "vestiges of a city, and tiles." But the French surveyors
could see no remains but those of a ruined hamlet {Kalyina) belonging
to Bouruy and in this they are confirmed by Mr. Loring, who also
objects that the spot indicated is rather too far from the crossing of the
Alpheus, and rather too near to the Hermaeum, to correspond well with
Pausanias's account For the Hermaeum was no doubt about the
watershed between the valleys of the Alpheus and Eurotas, i.e. bdow
SpanHkd, See Leake, Pelop, p. 237 (cp. id,, Morea, 2. p. 298) ; Gell,
Itinerary of the Morea, p. 213; Boblaye, Recherckes, p. 170; Curtius,
Pelop, I. p. 290; Bursian, Geogr, 2, p. 243 ; W. Loring, in Journal of
Hellenic Studies, 15 (1895), p. 47.

35. 3. Belemina. See iii. 21. 3 note.

35. 5. The distance to Methydrinm etc. Methydrium lies about
16 miles north of Megalopolis in a straight line. Of the places which
Pausanias mentions between the two (^ 5-10) none has been positively
identified. Cp. Leake, Morea, 2. p. 299 sqq, ; id,, Pelop, p. 238 sqq, ;
Boblaye, Recherches, p. 167 ; Curtius, Pelop. i. p. 306 sqq, ; Bursian,
Geogr, 2. p. 231 ; W. Loring, xxi Journal of Hellenic Studies, 15 (1895),
p. 75 sq.

35. 5. TricolonL It is conjectured that this place may have been
near the modem Karatoula, on the edge of the plain of Megalopolis,
about 4 miles north-east of the city (Leake, Pelop, p. 238 ; Boblaye,
Recherches, p. 167 ; Ciutius, Pelop. i. p. 307). To this it is objected
by Mr. Loring that Karatoula is not on the direct route from Megalo-
polis to Methydrium {Nemnitsa), You do not pass near Karatoula on
the way to Methydrium unless you go by way of the Langadia river and
the plain of Davia (the plain of Maenalus), which was clearly not
Pausanias's route. Mr. Loring accordingly suggests that Tricoloni may
have been at a spot just north of Zonati (a village about 4 miles north
of Sinanou), where there are remains of rough but massive masonry
which appear to be ancient. From Zonati the route to Methydrium
runs northward till it brings us to the foot of the hills. The path now



CH. XXXV ROUTE TO METHYDRIUM 361

ascends steeply a little to the left of the villages of PcUamari and Psari
and continues to climb till we have reached a height of about 1500
feet above the plain. It then descends more gradually to the bed of a
stream, sometimes dry, which drains the narrow valley behind Mount
Rkapauni, Keeping along the valley, we at length strike a track from
Tripolitsa to Dimitsana near ArkoudarhevmcL The Helisson never
comes in sight at all ; but the deserted village of Ubavisi near
Arkaudorhevma (both of which places lie somewhat to the right or east
of the path and are not seen from it) might perhaps be described as
" on (or in the direction of) the Helisson " ; and if so, Leake may per-
haps be right in placing Anemosa near it {Pelofionnesiaca^ p. 238 sq.y
where the name is spelt Zibovisi by mistake). Keeping due north, and
soon leaving the path to Dimitsana^ we traverse narrow fir-clad tracks
and one small level plain, which may be the plain of Polus mentioned
by Pausanias (§ 10), and so reach the village of Nemnitsa. A little
beyond it is the site of the ancient Methydrium. See W. Loring, in
Journal of Hellenic StudieSy 15 (1895), p. 75 j^.

35. 6. Zoetia. In this plain, between 2 and 3 miles west of Kara-
toula^ Peytier observed the ruins of a temple, which may have been the
temple of Demeter and Artemis mentioned by Pausanias (§ 7). See
Boblaye, Recherches, p. 167 ; Leake, Pelop. p. 239 ; Curtius, Pelop, i.

P- 307.

35. 6. and 7. Paroria Thyraenin Hypsns. Some topo-
graphers, as Leake, Bursian, and Curtius, hold that Mount Hypsus is the
modem Mt. Klinitsa^ a mountain over 5000 feet high, which rises to
the north of Stemnitsa; its northern slopes are clothed with fir-woods.
Stemnitsa is a large village about 10 miles north of Megalopolis, lying
in a mountain-trough high above the river Gortynius, surrounded on all
sides by bare mountains. Leake thought that Stemnitsa probably stands
on the site of the town of Hypsus. He would place Thyraeum and
Paroria at Palamari and Paleomiri respectively, villages which lie near
each other at the foot of the hills about half-way between Megalopolis
and Stemnitsa. See Leake, Peloponnesiaca^ p. 240 ; Curtius, Pelop,
!• P* 307 sq.\ Bursian, Geogn 2. p. 231; Philippson, Peloponnes^
p. 91.

35. 7* I liftve already pointed out etc See viii. 3. 3.

35. 8. Onmi etc Leake conjectured (Pelopon. p. 239) that this
may have been near the modem Plana (as to which see note on viii.
30. i). £. Curtius placed Cmni conjecturally farther south, on the
southem side of Mt. Rhenissa; he thought that Callisto's tomb may have
been near Chrysovitziy a village about 2^ miles to the south-west of
Plana {Pelop, i. p. 309). Mt Rhenissa is one of the chain of mountains
which bounds the plain of Megalopolis, dividing it from the much smaller
plain of Maenalus {David) on the east.

35. 9. Anemosa. See note on § 5, ' Tricoloni.'

35. 9. Mount Phalanthns. This is supposed to be the mountain
which rises to the west of the modem village of Alonistena (see note on
viii. 30. i). The route over the mountain from Alonistena to Methydrium
ascends a wild picturesque glen, through a magnificent pine-forest, to



362 METHYDRIUM BK. viii. arcadia

the summit of the pass, and then descends by a charming path under
pine-trees, to which the telegraph wires are attached. A gorge traversed
by an aqueduct with wide arches leads to an undulating plain, seamed
and furrowed by the deep beds of torrents flowing from the precipitous
mountains which enclose the valley. This is the valley or plain of
Methydrium. See Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 308 ; Gutde-Joanne^ 2. p. 380 ;
Philippson, Peloponnes^ p. 91 sq.

35. 10. the plain of Poliu. See above, note on § 5, 'Tricoloni.'

36. I. MethydlinilL The ruins of Methydrium, a town situated
in the heart and centre of Arcadia, are to be seen in a valley at the
angle formed by the junction of two small streams which flow north-
ward. The eastern of these two streams is the river of Nemmtsoy the
western is the Bourbotdistra or river of Pyrgaki. They are the Maloetas
and Mylaon of Pausanias, though which of them is the Maloetas and
which the Mylaon is not certain. These brooks go to form the river or
stream of Vyttna, which, like its tributaries, flows in a deep, rocky bed
far below the fields and villages of the valley. The ruins are situated
ten minutes to the north-west of the village of Nemnitsa and about
2 miles to the south of the larger village of Vytina^ which lies among
fields and vineyards at a height of more than 3000 feet above the sea.
The rising ground which the ruins occupy between the two streams is
now covered with vines ; it is not high, but on the north side it has a
steep rocky slope. The circuit-walls, partly demolished, partly hidden
by bushes, follow the edge of the knoll. In the better preserved por-
tions the wall is about 8 feet thick. The jointing is irregular, but here
and there it approaches to the quadrangular style. On the south side
the blocks are very large. There were towers at the angles.

See Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 57 sqq, ; id,^ Pelop, p. 200 sqq, ; Gell, Itifurary cf
the Morea, p. 126; Boblaye, RechercheSj p. 150 sq. ; L. Ross, Reisen^ p. 116;
Curtius, Pelop, I. p. 309 sq, ; Bursian, Geogr. 2, p. 229; Baedeker,* p. 311 ;
Guide-Joanne, 2, p. 380 sq, ; Philippson, Peloponnes, p. 92.

Methydrium was a small and humble town ; a wealthy man of
Magnesia, in Asia, who made a journey to this sequestered comer of the
Arcadian highlands, regarded the place with contempt (Porphyry, Dt
abstinentia^ ii. 16).

36. I. a high knolL The Greek is koXcuvos v\fn)X6s. A difficulty
has been made about these words, as if Pausanias had said that Methy-
drium stood on a high hill, which is certainly not the fact. But koAxdvos
is not a At'll but a hillock or knoll. No one who has seen the famous
Colonus (koAcuvos) near Athens would describe it as a hill. It is merely
a knoll.

36. 2. a temple of Horse Poseidon. The site of this temple is
perhaps marked by a ruined chapel which stands about the middle
of the space enclosed by the walls of Methydrium. It is shaded by
evergreen oaks. See Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 381. Immediately below
Methydrium the united streams of Nemnitsa and Pyrgaki are joined by
a tributary from the west, the river of Korphoxylicu In the valley of
this tributary, on the right bank of the stream, are the foundations of a



CH. XXXVI METHYDRWM 363

temple, 30 feet long by 1 5 feet broad. The temple lies east and west.
The walls of the cella are built of grey limestone, and are well preserved
at the south-western comer. Leake conjectured that this may have been
the temple of Horse Poseidon. But if so, it was not within the walls
of Methydrium. See Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 57 sq,\ icLy Pelop. p. 202 ;
Gell, Itinerary of the Morea^ p. 126 ; L. Ross, Reisen^ p. 116; Curtius,
Pelop, I. p. 310. In 1858 or 1859 the Greek Archaeological Society
proposed to excavate "the temple of Horse Poseidon, of which some
columns appear above the ground near the ancient Arcadian city of
Methydrium." (This probably refers to the ruins in the valley of the
Korphoxylia river.) See SwoTrrtK^ XKQecn,^ tcuv wpo^cwv r^s o/jx^"*'
AoyiK^s haipias, 1859, p. 21. But it does not appear that this inten-
tion was ever executed.

From a passage in Theopompus, quoted by Porphyry {De abstin. ii.
1 6), we may perhaps infer that Hermes and Hecate were worshipped at
Methydrium ; for the pious Clearchus of that town is said to have
wreathed and cleaned their images at every new moon.

36. 3. a grotto of Rhea. On Mount St. Eliasy above Nemnitsay
there is a grotto, which the peasants call the cave of Nikolaki. It may
be the grotto of Rhea. If so, Mt St, Elias is the Mount Thaumasius
of Pausanias, and the river of Nemnitsa (a brook which dries up in
summer) is the Maloetas. The peasants of Vytina speak of a dragon-
hole in a place not easy of access somewhere in the neighbourhood.
See Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 381 ; Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 310. Others have
identified Mount Thaiunasius with the modem Mount Madara^ on the
opposite (westem) side of the valley of Methydrium. It is a pyramidal
mountain with a sharp bare peak, but with thin pine-woods scattered
over its lower slopes. See Curtius, Lc, ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 229 ;
Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 314 ; Philippson, Peloponnes, p. 92.

36. 4. Nymphasia. This is perhaps the fine spring which rises to
the east of the village of Vytina. See Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 151 ;
Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 311 ; Bursian, Geogr. 2. p. 230.

36. 5. ' the Qate to the Marsh.' Leake strangely misunderstood
these words, applying them to a pass in the hills (Morea^ 2. p. 305 ;
id,y Pelop, p. 241).

36. 5. the Good God. This seems to have been the same deity
who was more commonly called the Good Demon {Agathodaimon),
Pausanias is probably mistaken in identifying him with Zeus. See note
on ix. 39. 5.

36. 5. a monnd of earth, the grave of Aristodemiu. This is
perhaps the tiunulus which lies just outside the line of the eastem wall
of Megalopolis, on the right or northem bank of the Helisson. Against
this identification, however, it is to be observed, first, that though the
English excavation of the tumulus in 1890 proved it to be indeed
sepulchiral, it brought to light no traces of a tomb appropriate to a
tyrant's burial ; and, second, that while the tumulus is situated on the
right rank of the river, Pausanias's route, in the course of which he
passed the grave of Aristodemus, followed the left bank, as appears from
the list of places through which he went without crossing the river, as



364 TUMULUS AT MEGALOPOLIS bk. viil akcadia

well as from his mention of a torrent, up the course of which he walked
for some distance without crossing it, keeping it on his left. It is
possible, however, that Pausanias may have omitted to mention that the
tumulus was on the farther side of the river.

The tumulus in question is situated near the north bank of the
river, a little to the east of the modem bridge. Though connected at
the back with a long low ridge of hill, the mound presents on eveiy
other side a remarkably conical appearance, and has hence been gener-
ally regarded as artificial. The natives call it the Black Man's Mound
{Arapou magoula\ and tell stories of a treasure that is buried there and
guarded by a mysterious black man. Some say the black man's son is
buried in the mound, and that with the corpse the £aither deposited
two barrels, one full of money and the other full of snakes, the snakes
being no doubt intended for the reception of any thieves who
should break into the tomb. The English excavations of the mound
brought to light traces of several interments and a laige quantity of
bones. Thus in a trench dug in the south-west side of the tumulus
there was found, about half-way up the mound and within 6 inches of
the surface, a curious cylindrical vessel of white limestone covered with
a lid and containing some charred bones and two gold ornaments. One
of the ornaments is a small headband tapering at either end and
decorated with a simple leaf pattern in repoussi work. The other is a
small hollow disc of gold made of two very thin pieces of gold folded
together at their edges. This disc is clearly a piece of sham money
intended for circulation in the other world, for it bears on one side a
coin-type representing apparently an eagle standing on a thunderbolt
As this is a type which appears on gold coins from the time of Ptolemy
I. onwards, but not before, it furnishes us with a clue to the date of
the burial Further, the same trench brought to light, at a lower level
and rather farther south, a circular enclosure some 1 2 feet in diameter.
Its sides are built wholly of common cobbles held together by crumbly
mortar, and are about 5 feet high. The roof was domed, but it has
fallen in, with the exception of the first course or two, which lean slightly
inwards to form the spring of the dome. The height of the sides and
the extant courses of the dome together is about 6 feet. There was an
entrance some 5 feet wide on the west, roughly filled in with loose stones
and earth. Nothing was found in the enclosure except one or two
small pots, without any decoration, an earthenware lamp, and a strigil.
Another trench dug by the English archaeologists on the eastern side
of the tumulus resulted in the discovery of a plain sarcophagus of coarse
thick earthenware containing some slabs of thinner and rather finer
earthenware, which had apparently been laid over the top as a cover-
ing, but had been crushed in by the weight of the superincumbent
soil. There was nothing else in the sarcophagus, which was found
10 feet below the surface of the mound and a little to the east of
its centre. See W. Loring, in Excavations at Megalopolis^ pp. 9-1 1,
118 sq,

36. 6. a precinct sacred to the North Wind etc See viii.
27. 14.



CH. XXXVI PERAETHENSES—MABNALUS 365

36. 7* the Elaphns rains of Peraetlieiifles. The Elaphus is

no doubt the torrent which flows into the Helisson on the left bank of
the latter stream, about 4 miles north-east of Megalopolis. It rises
near the large village of Valtetsiy which stands among dreary and
barren mountains at a height of about 3400 feet above the sea. The
rude inhabitants of the village are mostly shepherds, who at the
approach of winter drive their great flocks of sheep and goats to the
genial coast of eastern Argolis, where the orange ripens in December,
not returning to their bleak mountains till spring is far advanced. The
glen through which the Elaphus flows from its source near Vcdtetsi is
desolate and rocky, shut in by bare mountains of black limestone. The
track along the bottom of the glen is truly execrable. At the village of
Rhachamytaes^ some 4 miles or so from VcUtetsiy the dale opens a
little, and there is a little cultivated level in its bottom. This may be
the site of Peraethenses. The distance from Megalopolis, some 6 or
7 miles, agrees fairly with the 55 Greek furlongs (about 6 miles) of
Pausanias. On the top of the high conspicuous hill called St Elias of
Kandreva^ immediately to the south of Rhachamytaes^ there are remains
of a large Doric temple, which may possibly have been that of Pan.
See note on viii. 44. 4. Leake proposed to place Paliscius at Rhfi-
chamytaes and Peraethenses at ValUtsi^ but the distances of these
places from Megalopolis do not tally with those given by Pausanias.
From Rhachamytaes the torrent finds its way between bleak and barren
hills into the plain of Megalopolis. After visiting Peraethenses our
author apparently turned back to the junction of the Elaphus with the
Helisson, crossed the Elaphus there, and pursued his way beside the
Helisson up the long and difficult defile through which the river flows
from the plain of Maenalus to that of Megalopolis.

See Boblaye, RecAtrcAes, p. 171 ; Leake, Pe/oponnesiaca, p. 241 s^, ; Curtius,
Pelcp» I. p. 314; Philippson, Peloponnes^ p. 87 sq, ; W. Loring, in Journal of
HelUnu Studies, 15 (1895), P- 77-

36. 7. a plain. The plain of Maenalus is the long narrow moun-
tain-locked plain or valley traversed by the upper waters of the Helisson,
which, rising near the village of AlonisienOy flows southward in a
winding course through the valley for a direct distance of about 8
miles, then turning south-west forces its way through a narrow and
difficult gorge into the plain of Megalopolis. At the present day the
valley takes its name from DavtOy a village on its eastern side, at the
foot of the high bare slopes of Mount Maenalus which bound the
valley on the east. The view of the valley, as seen from its south-
eastern end, is fine. After ascending from the Tegean plain through
a desolate rocky defile to the west of Tripolitsa^ we are surprised, on
reaching the summit of the pass (about 3000 feet above the sea), by
the prospect that suddenly opens out before us. In the north rises the
chain of Mount Maenalus with its dark imposing peaks. On the west
is seen, like a mighty wall, the central range of the Arcadian mountains,
clothed with sombre pine-forests. In the long trough enclosed by these
great mountains are low hills of soft undulating outlines, between which



366 LYCOA — MAENALUS BK. viii. ARCADIA

stretches a valley some half-mile or more wide, covered with green
fields and meadows, and watered by the winding stream of the Helisson.
The contrast, especially in summer, between the parched plain of T^^ea,
which we left on the other side of the ridge, and this green well-
watered valley, where herds of cattle browse on the banks of the
river and mills are turned by its ever- flowing stream, is indeed a
striking one. The valley forms the transition in climate and scenery
from the arid wilderness of eastern to the woods and waters of western
Arcadia.

See Leake, Morea, 2. p. 51 sqq, ; id,, Pelop, p. 243 ; L. Ross, Reisen, P- n?
saq, ; Curtius, Pelop, I. p. 314 j^. ; Bursian, Geogr. 2. p. 228 ; Baedeker,' p. 309;
Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 313 sq, ; Philippson, Peloponnes, pp. 85, 89; W. Loring, in
Journal of Hellenic Studies , 15 (1895), p. 76 sq,

36. 7. fifteen fturlongs fix>m the river. See the Critical Note on
this passage, vol i. p. 598,

36. 7. Lycoa. In the south-eastern comer of the plain or valley of
Davia^ between the villages Zarachova (or Arachova) and KarteroHy there
are some remains, including two ruined churches and some scattered
blocks, which have been supposed to mark the site of Lycoa. See L.
Ross, ReiseHy p. 120 sq,; Curtius, Pelap, i. p. 315 ; Bursian, Geogr, 2.
p. 228 j^.; Baedeker,^ p. 309. Cp. Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 171. The
place is called Lycoa by Pausanias here and in another passage (viii. 3.
4) ; but elsewhere (viii. 27. 3 ; viii. 30. i) he calls it Lycaea. Stephanus
Byzantius apparently distinguishes two Arcadian towns, one Lycaea and
the other Lycoa (sjuv. AvKaia and AvKoa) ; and there was a town Lycoa
beside the Alpheus, below its junction with the Lucius (Polybius, xvi.
1 7 ; see note on viii. 38. 9) ; but that Pausanias refers to a single town,
Lycaea or Lycoa, situated in the Maenalian district, seems clear.
Leake, however, thought it evident from Pausanias that there were
two Arcadian cities of nearly the same name, one in Maenalia, the
other to the north of Mount Lycaeus {Moreay 2. p. 304). Cp. L. Ross,
Reisen^ p. 121 note; Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 342; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p.
229 note I.

36. 8. Sometia. See note on viii 27. 3.

36. 8. Meetings of Three Ways. This place seems to have been
somewhere near the south-east comer of the plain of Davia^ not far from
the modem Selimna. The pass which, beginning here, leads eastward
down a ravine to the Tripoli tsa and so on to Tegea, was probably one
of the * Three Ways.' Another of the divergent roads would be the
one leading southward to Pallantium. The third road may have been
the one leading westward to the plain of Megalopolis.

See Leake, Morea, 2. p. 306 ; Boblaye, RechercheSy p. 172 ; L. Ross, Reisen^
p. 121 ; Curtius, Pelop. i. p. 315; Bursian, Gcogr. 2. p. 229; Baedeker,' p. 309;
Guide-Joanne y 2. p. 313.

36. 8. fetched the bones of Areas etc See viii. 9. 3 sq.
36. 8. Bains of the city of Maenalus. Opposite the village of
Davia^ on the right (westem) bank of the Helisson, a rocky projection



CH. XXXVII SANCTUARY OF THE MISTRESS 367

of the hills which border that side of the valley reaches nearly to the
bed of the river. The top is flat and is enclosed by extensive remains
of polygonal walls, built of very large hewn stones. On these ancient
ruins a mediaeval castle has been built ; of the walls of this castle there
are considerable remains, especially on the highest point of the hill.
Inside the walls are ruins of houses or barracks. The ascent to the
fortress is at the south-east comer of the hill, where there are remains
of a gateway. In the fields below the hill, on its northern side, are
some indications of ancient buildings. These ruins may be, as
L. Ross believed, the remains of the town of Maenalus. Leake, how-
ever, took them to be those of Dipaea, and Mr. Loring adopts the same
view.

See Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 52 5q.\ L. Ross, Reisen^ p. \Vj sq, \ Curtius, Pelop,
I* P* 315 > Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 228 ; Baedeker,' p. 309 ; W. Loring, in Journal
of Hellenic Studies^ 15 (1895), P* 7^ ^9*

36. 8. they even hear Pan piping. Cp. Virgil, EcL viii. 23 sq,
Apollodorus (quoted by the scholiast on Euripides, Rhesus^ 36) explained
such fiEmcies by saying that what simple folk mistook for the piping and
fluting of Pan and the nymphs were simply the cries of distant and
imseen men and animals heard among the hiUs and rocks.

36. 9. it is forty itirlongs to the sanctnary of the Mistress.
Pausanias now returns from Maenalus to Megalopolis and describes the
road which led westward from Megalopolis to Mount Lycaeus and
Lycosura. The sanctuary of the Mistress, as we shall see presently,
lay just outside the walls of Lycosura.

36. 9. Macareae. This is doubtless the place which Pausanias
elsewhere calls Macaria (viii. 3. 3 ; viii. 27. 4).

36. 9. Daseae. This is supposed to have been near the site of the
modem village of DeU Hassan^ between the Alpheus and Lycosura.
In this neighbourhood there are some remains of ancient walls on the
left bank of the little stream, the ancient Plataniston (Paus. viii. 39. i),
opposite a chapel of St John which is shaded by fine oaks. See L.
Ross, Reisen^ P- 87 ; Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 294 sq. ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p.
239 sq. ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 308 ; Baedeker,* p. 322.

36. 9. the Acacesian HilL See note on viii 37. 8.

37. I. the sanctnary of the Mistress. Among the hills, the
southern spurs of Mount Lycaeus, which bound the plain of Megalopolis
on the west, is the modem village of Stala, It stands on the bank of
a stream (the ancient Plataniston) which flows eastward to join the
Alpheus. From Stala a somewhat steep path ascends in about twenty
minutes to the ruins of Lycosura, which lie on a small rocky hill to the
east of the village. From the eastern side of the hill of Lycosura a low
ridge'' runs eastward for a few hundreds of yards, ending in a green knoll
or hillock which is crowned with a couple of oak-trees and with some
remains of a chapel of St. Athanasius. This ridge is called Terze. Its
northern slope is broken by a terrace, not many feet below the summit
of the green hillock ; and on this terrace, in full view of the walls of
Lycosura, which girdle the low hill a couple of hundred yards or so to



368 SANCTUARY OF THE MISTRESS bk. viil axcadia

the west, are the rains of the sanctuary of the Mistress. They were
excavated at the expense of the Greek Government under the direction
of Messrs. Leonardos and Cawadias in the years 1889, 1890, and 1895.
The temple lies east and west, and comprises a fore-temple {firanaas) or
portico and a celled It was of the Doric order, with six columns on its
eastern front, but none at the sides or the back. It is 20 metres long
by 10 metres wide. The depth of ih^pronaos is 5.3 metres ; that of the
cella is 13 metres. The foundations are built of small unhewn stones
bonded with clay, not mortar. On these foundations rests a socle of
squared blocks of the native limestone, which are also bonded with
clay. The upper part of the walls, so far as they are standing, is built
of large burnt bricks, bonded with mortar, not clay. These bricks are
not of the shape or size of Roman bricks ; and the mortar, which seems
to have disappeared since the temple was excavated, cannot, in Dr.
Dorpfeld's opinion, have been the good Roman mortar. The whole of
the inner walls of the temple, down to the floor, was coated with this
mortar. The columns and pilasters of the portico, together with the
entablature and the sima of the whole temple, are made of a white
coarse-grained marble, which seems to have come from Dolictna near
Tegea. The numerous fragments of the images which have been dis-
covered are of the same coarse marble. The floor of the fore-temple is
paved with flags ; that of the cella seems also to have been flagged
originally, but at a later time it was covered with a conunon mosaic
composed of small stones and mortar. The design of the mosaic, which
is carried out in red and white stones, exhibits two lions in the middle sur-
rounded by several ornamental borders of meanders, plaited twigs, and
arabesques. The bases of the two south columns of the portico are still
in their places. Almost the whole of the fore-temple was found
occupied with the inscribed pedestals of votive ofierings ; one of
them, which supported a statue of Hadrian, is still in its place. A
colossal pedestal of the same limestone as the lower part of the walls
occupies nearly the whole west end of the cella; it doubtless supported
the four images which Pausanias describes and of which many remains
were found in the temple. The excavations of 1895 further laid bare
the colonnade and altars mentioned by Pausanias, also various buildings
above the temple, in which were found some very ancient votive offerings ;
but a detailed description of these latest discoveries has not yet (October
1896) been published. That the temple is indeed the temple of the
Mistress is put beyond doubt by inscriptions found in it. Thus, tiles have
been discovered bearing the inscription AecnrotWs (*of the Mistress').
Again, an inscription found in the fore-temple records a decree of the
city of Lycosura in honour of a certain Nicasippus, son of Philip, and
his wife Timasistrata, daughter of Onasicrates. From it we learn that
Nicasippus had twice held the priesthood of the Mistress and had
celebrated the mysteries at his own expense. For these and other
benefits conferred by him and his wife, the people of Lycosura resolved
to set up portraits of Nicasippus and Timasistrata in the sanctuary, and
it was further resolved that a copy of the decree in their honour should
be deposited in the archives at Megalopolis, and that another copy.



CII. XXXVII



SANCTUAK Y OF THE MISTRESS



369



engraved on stone, should be set up in the sanctuary of the Mistress.
The decree is dated in the second priesthood of the Mistress held by


FIG. 36.— GROUND-KLAN OK TEMPLE AT LYCOSURA.

Nicasippus, and in the 32nd year "according to the emperor" (Kara
rhv ^cfiofrrov), which may mean in 2 A.D. ; but the style of the letters
points to a later date.



VOL. IV



2 B



370 SANCTUARY OF THE Af /STRESS bk. viii. arcadia

Further, a marble pedestal shaped like the trunk of a tree bears an
inscription recording that it was dedicated to the Mistress and Saviour
by King Julius Epiphanes Philopappus. This personage was son of
the last king of Commagene and father of the Philopappus whose
monument still stands conspicuous on the top of the Museum Hill at
Athens.' See note on i. 25. 8. As Commagene was captured by the
Romans in 72 A.D., we may suppose that the votive offering of
Epiphanes Philopappus was dedicated towards the end of the first
century A.D. Again, a square pedestal found in the cella bears a
Greek inscription in letters of the latest Roman period setting forth
that it was dedicated to the Mistress by Epagathus, the emperor's
courier {tabellarius). These inscriptions have been published (AcArtov
d/>X«wA,oytKoi', 1890, pp. 43-45). Another inscription, found by a
peasant near Lycosura and not yet published, records the rules to be
observed in celebrating the mysteries and sacrifices of the Mistress.
It would seem to Ije the ver>' inscription mentioned by Pausanias (see
note on § 2). Lastly, among the inscriptions found in 1895 and not
yet published, is one which speaks of the repair of a temple with its
fore-temple. The excavations of the same year brought to light some
small votive offerings of terra-cotta representing rams and serpents, and
an archaic bronze statuette of Athena.

With regard to the date of the temple Mr. Cavvadias is of opinion
that the existing remains belong to two different periods, a (ireek period
and a Roman, the Roman being characterised by the employment of
mortar and the Greek by its absence. If he is right, the foundations
and the limestone socle of the walls belong to the original Greek
building ; but the brickwork of the upper walls, the coating of mortar
applied equally to all the walls, and the mosaic pavement are later
and date from Roman times. This view, which is accepted by the
German architect Mr. Cawerau, is confirmed by the inscription,
recently found, which speaks of the repair of a temple with its fore-
temple ; for this temple can hardly have been any other than the
temple of the Mistress. Dr. Oorpfeld, however, writing before the
discovery of this inscription, preferred to suppose that the temple was
all built at one tmie, nanielv in the late * Hellenistic ' or earlv Roman
period, and he would assign it, with the sculptures, either to the second
or first century B.C. At the same time he does not deny the possibility
of referring the remains to two different periods ; an older temple built
of lime^>tone may, he says, have been afterwards repaired with marble.
The arguments he adduces in support of his own view do not seem
strong. He confesses that the workmanship and decoration of all the
architectural members (columns, entablature, etc.) are so bad that ever)-
one would at once take them for Roman, and that he himself at first had
unhesitatingly declared the temple to be of the Roman period. Yet the
bricks and mortar, according to him, are not of the usual Roman sort.
He argues that the images by Damophon which Pausanias describes and
of which large pieces have been found must have been contemporary
with the temple ( i ) because they are of the same marble as the columns
and entablature ; and (2) because the pedestal is made of the same



CH. XXXVII SANCTUARY OF THE MISTRESS 371



limestone as the lower part of the walls and exhibits the same inferior
workmanship and the same shaped ( r-i ) clamps. But the argument
from identity of materials to identity of date counts for very little ;
if the materials were within easy reach, they might well have been
employed at Lycosura at very different dates, just as the Athens of
to-day is built in part of the same Pentelic marble as the Parthenon.
The fact upon which Mr. Cavvadias chiefly relies, namely the use of
mortar in some parts of the temple and not in others, is not accounted
for by Dr. Dorpfeld's theory of the unity of the temple. That fact
indeed furnishes a strong presumption that the portions of the building
so distinguished were erected at different times ; and now that this
presumption is confirmed by the inscription which appears to speak of
a repair of the temple, we may provisionally accept it.

On Lycosura and the sanctuary of the Mistress see Dodwell, Tour^ 2. p. 395
sqij. ; L. Ross, Reiseftf p. 84 sqg, ; Welcker, Tagebuch^ i. p. 264 sqq, ; Curtius,
Pelop. I. p. 295 sqq. ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 237 sqq. ; Baedeker,' p. 322 sq. ;
Guide-Joanne, 1. p. 307 sq. ; LiiKriov &pxiu-o\oyiKbvy 1 889, pp. 122 sq.^ 1 53 sq.,
1 59' 1 63, 170, 202; id. J 1890, pp. 43-45, 09 J^., 113; P. Cavvadias, Fouiiles de
Lycosoura, Livraison I. (Athens, 1893) » ^4'^t^P^^ dpxoto^o7»'"J» 1895, PP* 263-
274 (inscriptions); id., 1896, pp. loi - 130 (inscriptions); W. Dorpfeld, in
Mittheil. d. arch. Inst, in Athen, 18 (1893), PP» 219-221; Athenaeum, 3rd
August 1895, P* ^69 ; Mittheil. d. arch. Inst, in Athen, 20 (1895), P* 375 ^9' '•>
Berlifier philolog. Wochenschrift, 13th June 1896, p. 769. I visited Lycosura and
the sanctuary of the Mistress, in company with Mr. W. Loring and Mr. W. J.
Woodhouse, 5th May 1890.

37. I. Guide of Fate. See note on v. 15. 5 ; and L. K. Famell,
The Cults of the Greek States, i. pp. 78-83, 119 sq.

37. I. Hercules wresting the tripod from Apollo. See x. 13. 7
sq.^ with the note.

37. 2. on this tablet are painted pictures of the mTsteries.

The Greek is ttivcikiov coti y^ypafifuvov^ ^X^v to. h rrjv rcXer^v, which
may refer either to a painting or to an inscription on the tablet. The
discovery near Lycosura of an inscription recording the rules to be
observed at the celebration of the mysteries makes it highly probable
that Pausanias meant to say, " On this tablet are inscribed the rules of
the mysteries," instead of (as I have translated him) " On this tablet
are painted pictures of the mysteries.'' in fact we seem to have
recovered the very inscription seen by Pausanias. Unfortunately it has
not yet been published, but a few of the principal ordinances which it
contains are mentioned by Mr. Cavvadias {Fouiiles de Lycosoura^
Livraison i. p. 13). They are as follows. Persons who were being
initiated in the mysteries might not wear gold ornaments nor rings nor
shoes nor red garments. Pregnant and nursing women were excluded
from the mysteries. The victims sacrificed to the goddess had to
be female and white ; and in offering sacrifice use was to be made of
olive-wood and myrtle, white poppies, incense, myrrh, perfumes, lamps,
etc. Thus the inscription resembles in its character the great inscrip-
tion which records the rules as to the celebration of the Andanian
mysteries. See note on iv. i. 5.

37. 3. The images of the goddesses etc. In excavating the cella



37a THE LYCOSURA SCULPTURES BK. viii.

of the temple of the Mistress at Lycosum the Greek archaeologists found
many fragments of colossal marble statues lying in front of or beside
Ihe pedestal. These fragments without doubt belonged to the inuj^
of the Mistress, Demeier, Artemis, and Anytus, which were made by


Diiinophon an<l are described in the present passaj;c by l'au*anias.
The most important of these fragments arc three colossal heads (two
female and one male) and a lar^c piece of drapcr\'. The heads are
most probably those of Uemeter, Artemis, and Anytus ; the drapery,
adorned with elaborate reliefs, may hai-e formed part of the robe either



CH. xxxvci THE LVCOSUKA SCULPTURES 373

of Uemetcr or of the Misircss. The marble is white, coarse-Kniined,
and friable ; it probably cumes from the quarries of Doliana, near
Tegea.

The head which has been identified as that of Demeier (Fig. 37) is


veiled and turned sliyhtly to the right ; it was originally encircled by a
metal diadem. The hair falls in long locks down the back, and small
locks were arranged round the brow from ear to ear. Some of these locks
arc missing ] they were probably earned out of separate pieces of marble
and fitted to the head, A small hole in each of the locks beside the



374 THE LYCO.WRA SCULPTURES bk. viii. arcahu

ears was apparently nieani lo attach some metal ornament. The back
pan i>r the skull is wanting ; like some of the locks it was probably


made of n separate pifrc of marble. Tlie face, thoiif-h ^omcH■llat
(lama>;ed, especially by the loss of ihe j;reater p^irt of the Tinjc,
is comely, but neither god-like nor ^itrikingly beautiful. It is merely



CH. XXXVII THE LYCOSURA SCULPTURES 375



that of a well-bred lady. The height of the head is .80 metre
(2 ft. 7 in.).

The other female head which has been identified as that of Artemis
(Fig. 38) is a good deal smaller than the preceding, but still colossal. Its
height is .48 metre (i ft. 7 in.) The features and style of wearing the
hair are girlish, not matronly. As the head is smaller than that of Demeter
and of about the same size as that of Anytus, we infer that it represents
Artemis ; for the figures of Artemis and Anytus, who were represented
standing, were probably smaller than those of the principal divinities,
Demeter and the Mistress, who were represented sitting. The head of
Artemis is turned slightly to the right. Like that of Demeter, it was
adorned by a metal ornament of some sort attached to the hair beside
each ear; the holes in which the ornaments were inserted are still
visible. TThe eyes of this head, like those of the head of Anytus, were
not carved out of the same block of marble as the rest of the face, but
were inserted separately in the sockets. Two marble eyes, found in the
course of the excavations, may have belonged either to this head or to
that of Anytus. The upper part of the skull is wanting ; it was probably
made of a separate piece of marble. Amongst the fragments discovered
on the site is a colossal hand holding a torch ; its dimensions are pro-
portional to the head of Artemis, whence we conclude that it belonged
to her image, which, as we learn from Pausanias, held a torch in one
hand.

The male head is that of a bearded man with shaggy locks, fleshy
nose, thick lips, and good-humoured but commonplace expression (Fig. 39).
Men with faces of this type may be seen any day lounging at the bars of
public-houses. To compare this dull coarse face with the noble head
of the Zeus of Otricoli or the strong face, rendered pathetic by suffering,
of the £unous Laocoon is absurd. The head is turned slightly to the
left No doubt it is that of the Titan Anytus. The back of the head
as far as the nape of the neck is wanting ; but on the other hand a
part of the breast is preserved. The total height of the fragment is .83
metre (about 2 ft. 8 in.).

The head of the Mistress has not been found, but two of the existing
fragments are believed to have belonged to her image. One represents
the neck with . a piece of the breast of a colossal statue- of the same
proportions as the head of Demeter ; the other represents the right
arm of a statue of the same size with the hand resting on the upper
part of a rectangular object. This rectangular object was probably the
sacred basket which the Mistress, as we learn from Pausanias, held in
her right hand.

The fragment of marble drapery (Fig. 40) is ^.18 metres (about 3 ft.
10 in.) high. It represents either a piece of a long robe or cloak doubled
over, or pieces of two separate garments hanging one over the other in large
loose folds. If there were two garments, the lower is probably a tunic and
the upper a mantle of the usual Greek sort. The whole surface of the
drapery, except the side which was fitted to the body of the statue, is
covered with beautifully-wrought reliefs representing a variety of figures,
most of them mythical. These figures are arranged in four horizontal



THE LYCOSUKA SCULPTURES BK. viii. a»CADIA



bands of unequal brcadil) separated by stripes of a decoratii'c patlem or
by leafy branches. The lowest band, which is narrow, exhibits a proces-


iion of eleven figures clad in lony tunics and moving rapidly to the
sjwetaior's right. Kach of ilieni hus ilie body of a woman with the head,
paws, and feet of different animals. Some of ihem are playing musical



CH. XXXVII THE LYCOSURA SCULPTURES yn

instruments ; others are dancing or striding along. Thus one with the
head of an ass (?) is playing on a lyre ; and two are playing on double
flutes, one with the head of a horse, the other with the head of a cat
or hare. Amongst the figures dancing or striding along two have the
heads of rams ; one has the head of a pig ; another has, as it seemed
to me, the head of an ass with an ass's legs and hoofs instead of human
feet and hands, though Mr. Cavvadias appears to identify the head as
that of a horse or mule. Other heads are difficult to make out. The
second band, which is the broadest of all, is divided from the lowest
by a border of myrtle leaves and a ribbon. It exhibits two winged
women, perhaps Victories, each clad in a long garment and holding in
both hands an object which resembles a chandelier. Behind and at the
side of the chandeliers are some objects which are thought to resemble
serpents and wings. The third band, which is broader than the first
but not so broad as the second, is bordered on its lower edge by a
pattern of fringes. It contains a series of sea creatures and sea
monsters. We see a Nereid seated on a sea monster and preceded by
a dolphin. Then comes another Nereid seated on the back of a Triton,
who holds in his left hand an oar, while his right is placed on a small
dolphin. After this Triton there is another dolphin. The fourth or
highest band, the narrowest of all, is divided from the third by a
border of olive branches with a ribbon on each side. It exhibits a
series of eagles and thunderbolts.

The magnificence of this sculptured drapery, which in its elaborate
decoration is unique among the remains of Greek art, was probably
heightened by colour; for we may suppose that all the figures were
painted in bright and varied hues, and that some of the details which
have been left out by the sculptor were put in with the brush. The
effect of the whole must have been gorgeous. As to the figures repre-
sented on the robe, they had all no doubt a close relation to the myths
and perhaps to the worship of Demeter and the Mistress (Proserpine).
The horse-headed woman reminds us that in the Phigalian cave, not
very far from Lycosura, Demeter herself was anciently portrayed with
the head of a horse (viii. 42. 4), and that at Lycosura she was said to
have borne her daughter Proserpine (the Mistress) to Horse Poseidon
(viii. 37. 10) ; while at Thelpusa the goddess and her lover were said to
have met in the form of horse and mare and to have been the parents
of the horse Arion (viii. 25. 5 sqq.) The sea creatures may also refer
to Poseidon as the father of Proserpine. We may even suggest that
the procession of animal - headed figures had its counterpart in the
worship of the goddesses ; men or women disguised with masks repre-
senting the heads of horses, asses, rams, pigs, etc., may have danced and
played at the festivals as representatives of the fantastic creatures of
mythology.

Further there were found four or five small figures of women with
scales on the lower parts of their bellies, and with legs shaped like the
bodies of fish or serpents ; they are all in the same attitude, with one
hand raised and the other lowered. In their raised hands they
held some small round object with a hole in the middle of it.



378 THE L YCOSURA SCULPTURES bk. viii. a»cadia

>icnce the figures may perhaps have served as the legs of a cliair or

table.

Great divergence of opinion prevails as to the date of these sculptures
and of the artist Damophon who made them. Damophon is mentioned
by no other ancient writer than Pausanias, who does not tell us his date,
(before the discovery of the temple and the fragments of statuary at Lyco-
sura it had been commonly supposed that the many statues by Damophon
in temples at Messene and Megalopolis (iv. 31. 6, 7, and 10 ; \'iii. 31. 1-4
and 6) had been made by him for these cities at the time of their founda-
tion in 369 and 370 B.C. ; in particular it was thought that the group at
Messene which comprised an image of the City of Thebes and a statue
of Epaminondas (though the latter was the work of a different artist) must
certainly have been set up in honour of the Thebans and their great
general Epaminondas by the grateful Messenians immediately after their
deliverance from the yoke of Sparta. The discovery of the remains
of the images at Lycosura was at first supposed to confirm the date
which archaeologists had assigned on other grounds to Damophon.
Professor Waldstein declared that these fragments " would, even with-
out the information derived from Pausanias, have been considered by
any competent authority as remarkable works of the fourth century RC*'
Mr. Cavvadias wrote of them : "We recognise in them easily works of
the fourth century. These marbles therefore confirm the conclusions of
Brunn {Gesch. if. griech. Kiinstler^ i. p. 290) that Damophon flourished
about the middle of the fourth centur>', that is, about the time of the
foundiition of Messene."

Hut since Dr. Dorpfeld has declared his opinion that the temple in
whit:h the fraj^ments were found is comparatively late, the judgment
of archacolojjists as to the artistic style of the fragments appears to
have undergone a remarkable change, and they now with one voice, as
it would seem, consign Damophon and his works to the declining age
of (ireek art or even to the reign of Hadrian. A singular resemblance
has been detected between all three heads and the heads on Roman
sarcophajjuses ; also between the head of Anytus and the heads of the
I^iocoon and the Zeus of Otricoli, and between his beard and the beard
of a );iant on the frieze of the altar at Pergamus. Above all, the reliefs
on the robe, which were formerly regarded as indubitable proofs of pure
(I rook art, are now perceived to furnish the most convincing evidence
that the sculptures are Roman. The chandeliers in particular, we
are told, are of the Augustan age, and the figures of the Nereids
are unparalleled except by similar figures in Pompeiian paintings.
In short, the fourth centur\' RC. as a date for Damophon is, we
are informed, absolutely excluded, and **no sensible man would any
longer maintain, as a compromise, that he flourished in the second
century 1M\" *

K){ the value of these ar^un\ents based on the style of the sculptures

* S.» wrili's l\v^f. ».'. Rolvrt. lUil iho second or nrst century B.C. is precisely the
il.vie asNij;iu\l to l\inu>phon by \>x. IXTpfold. to whose authority Prof. Robert appeals.
Pn^f. KoNMt has. bv an ONej-Mi:ht. n\i>repr\»sotUi\i Dr. IX^rpfeld's opinion, and then
u<evl It a> a vvnt'irinalion of" his own thtvn\ of which in fact, if true, it is destructive.



CH. XXXVII THE LYCOSURA SCULPTURES 379

I cannot pretend to judge, though I have seen the originals repeatedly
at Athens. The technical skill displayed on the drapery is certainly
admirable, but there is no particular beauty or nobility in the heads.
The silence, too, of Pliny and of all writers earlier than Pausanias as to
Damophon and his works is most easily explained on the theory that
the artist belonged to the age of Hadrian. On the other hand, the
argument for assigning him to the fourth century B.C. on the ground
of the works he executed for Megalopolis and especially for Messene
still holds good ; for it seems improbable that the Messenians should
have felt moved to testify their gratitude to their deliverers, the
Thebans, some 500 years after the deliverance had been effected.
And the argument for the late date of the sculptures drawn from the
supposed late date of the temple is by no means certain. For we
have seen grounds for thinking that the temple was built in the Greek
and restored in the Roman period ; and it is apparently open to suppose
that the images are contemporary either with the original Greek
building (the date of which has not been determined) or with the
Roman restoration. On the whole it would seem best for the present
to suspend our judgment as to the date of the sculptures and of Damo-
phon. Future discoveries may perhaps decide the question.

See AeXr/oi' iLpx^^okoriiKdv^ 1889, pp. 161 -1 63, 170; P. Cavvadias, FouilUs de
Lycosoura, Livraison i. pp. 9-14 ; C. Waldstein, in Athataeumt 22nd March 1890,
p. 377; American Journal of Archiuology^ 5 (1889), p. 491 ; id.^d (1890), p. 209
sqq, ; Overbeck, Gesch. d, griech, Plastik^^ 2. p. 485 sqq. ; C. Robert, in Hermes^
29 (1894), pp. 429-435 ; L. R. Farnell, The Cults 0/ the Greek States j 2. pp. 546-
568. As to Damophon and his works, so fioir as we can estimate them (lom
Pausanias's account, see H. Brunn, Gesch, d, griech. Kiinstler^ i. pp. 287-292.
Cp. note on vii. 23. 7.

37. 3. The images of the goddesses axe all made of a single

block etc. Here Pausanias was mistaken. The fragments which have
been found prove that the images were formed of a number of pieces
fitted together (see above, p. 374 j^.) Pausanias was probably misled
by the priests or local guides, who would wish to magnify the images
in the eyes of visitors. Similarly the ancients believed that the
Laocoon group was hewn out of a single block (Pliny, NcU, hist, xxxvi.
37). But Michael Angelo distinguished three blocks, and later artists
have professed to distinguish even more (t^fXtlov apxaiokoyiKov,
1889, p. 163; P. Cawadias, FouilUs de Lycosoura^ Livraison i.

P- 13).

37. 4. the basket. This was the sacred basket or cista. See note
on viii. 25. 7.

37. 4. Artemis clad in a deer-skin. See note on vi. 22. 11.

37. 5* Homer introduced the Titans into poetry etc. See

//rVu/, xiv. 278 sq,

37. 5. Onomacritus borrowed the name etc. Pausanias does not
affirm, nor is it likely, that Onomacritus invented the story of the
murder of the infant Dionysus by the Titans (see note on vii. 18. 4).
The legend bears the stamp of great antiquity ; all that Onomacritus
probably did was to put it in literary form. The resemblance of the myth



38o POMEGRANA TES FORBIDDEN bk. viii. arcadia



to that of Osiris docs not prove, as Lobcck supposed, that Onomacritas
simply borrowed it from Egypt, substituting the Titans for Typhon.
I'he prevalence of similar legends in distant parts of the world seems to
show that they originated independently, perhaps in a custom of slaying
the representative of the god.

Sec Ix)beck, Aglaophamus^ pp. 6i6 sqq,^ 670 sqq. ; K. O. MUller, Prolegomena,
zu eitier wisscnschcjftlUhen Mythologies p. 390 sqq. ; Fr. Lenonnant, in Gazette
archSologiquey 5 (1879), p. 21 sqq. ; A. Lang, Myth, ritual and religion^ 2. p.
227 sqq.

37. 6. Aeschylus taught the Greeks the Egyptian legend

that Artemis is a daughter of Demeter. The play in which Aeschylus
represented Artemis as a daughter of Demeter is lost. The theory
that this genealogy was borrowed by Aeschylus from Egypt is due to
Herodotus, who identified Demeter with Isis and Artemis with Bubastis,
the daughter of Isis, and hence regarded as an Egyptian doctrine the
view that Demeter was the mother of Artemis (Herodotus, ii. 156).

37. 7* The Arcadians bring into the sanctuary the fruits

except the pomegranate. Persons initiated in the Eleusinian mysteries
were forbidden to eat pomegranates (Porphyry, De abstinentioy iv. 16),
and women engaged in celebrating the festival of the Thesmophoria took
care not to taste pomegranate seeds (Clement of Alexandria, ProtrepU
ii. 19. p. 16, ed. Potter). The reason given for such abstinences
probably was that Proserpine, when carried off by Pluto to the nether
world, had forfeited her right of returning to the land of the living by
eating the seed of a pomegranate. See note on ii. 1 7. 4. The beli^
that a living person must not taste of the food of the dead under pain
of being obliged to stay for ever in dead-land " is found in New Zealand,
Melanesia, Scotland, Finland, and among the Ojibbeways" (Andrew
Lang, My thy Ritual ^ and Religion, 2. p. 273, note). Thus in a Maori
story a man named Hutu sets out for the spirit-land to fetch back the
soul of his dead love. A mythical being shows him the road and gives
him a basket of cooked food to take with him, saying, "When you
reach the lower regions eat sparingly of your provisions that they may
last, and you may not be compelled to partake of their food, for if you
do you cannot return upwards again" (R. Taylor, TV i^a a maui ; or
A^ew Zealand and its Inhabitants^ p. 271). In a Melanesian story a
living woman visits Panoi, the abode of the dead ; there she meets her
dead brother, who warns her to eat nothing, so she returns to the
land of the living (R. H. Codrington, The Melanesians, p. 277).

37. 8. a little higher up is what is called the Hall. The

Hall {mei^aron) probably occupied the summit of the knoll immediately
above the temple of the Mistress. Here in 1890 I observed some
large squared blocks, of which some were in a row ; and here, appar-
ently, the excavations of 1895 ^*^'^ bare the remains of several buildings,
in which some ver)* archaic votive offerings were discovered {Mittheil. d.
arch. Inst, in Athen, 20 (1895), p. 376). The knoll above the temple
cannot have been, as some have thought, the Acacesian hill, since its
top is only a few feet above the temple, whereas the Acacesian hill was



CH. xxxviii L YCOSURA 381

distant from the temple 4 furlongs in the direction of the Alpheus (viii.
36. 9; viii. 37. i).

37. 9* it occnrs in the poetry of Homer. See Iliads ix. 457,
569; Odyssey^ x. 491, 494, 509, 534, xi. 47. Still the name of
Proserpine (Persephone) seems to have been considered an awfiil one
and people feared to pronounce it. Cp. Plato, Cratylus^ p. 404 c d.
Pausanias generally calls her the Maiden {Kore) ; the name Proserpine
(Persephone) seems to occur only four times in his work (here and viii.
31. 2 ; viii. 42. 2 ; ix. 23. 3).

37. 10. Above the Hall is a grove etc If the Hall (tnegaron)
stood on the summit of the hillock, immediately above the temple, the
sacred grove may have been on the ridge which connects the hillock
with the hill of Lycosura or actually on the slope of the latter hill and
so above the Hall. The altars of Poseidon and of other gods, which
Pausanias mentions immediately, would then be still higher up the
slope of the hill.

38. I. Lycosura. See note on viii. 37. i. Considerable portions ot
the circuit- wall of Lycosura still exist. They follow the edge of the flat
top of the little hill, the sides of which, though not high, are steep and
rocky, especially on the north and west. The wall is from 7 to 9 feet
thick, but the style of masonry is inferior. The blocks are mostly
squared, but on the outside are left rough. Some pieces of the wall
appear to be mediaeval. A gate may be distinguished on the south
side. Within the circuit of the walls is a ruined chapel of St. George,
which contains some ancient fragments. From its high situation on the
side of Mt. Lycaeus, Lycosura commands an extensive view over the
plain of Megalopolis, with the Alpheus meandering through it. Prof.
Curtius says : " If we consider the strong and healthy situation of this
citadel, the springs at its foot which, with the perennial stream, supplied
the town with water, the hill-slopes adapted for vineyards, the fine
pastures on the mountains to north and south, the wooded heights
which stretch away to the Alpheus, and lastly, beyond the Alpheus,
only an hour away, the broad plain watered by the river and seemingly
made for husbandry, we see that such a place was eminently suited to
be the site of a very ancient town." '

See Dodwell, Totir^ 2. p. 395 ; L. Ross, Reisen^ p. 86 ; Welcker, Tagebiuh^
I. p. 265 sqq. ; Curtius, Pelop, I. p. 298 sq. ; Bursian, Geogr. 2. p. 237 sq. ;
Baedeker,' p. 323 ; Guide-Joanne ^ 2. p. 307.

38. 2. To the left of the sanctuary of the Mistress is Mount
Lycaens. The temple of the Mistress, as the recent excavations have
proved, faced eastward. Pausanias supposes himself facing east, and
hence " on the left of the sanctuary " means to the north of it. For a
like reason "to the right of Lycosura" (viii. 38. 11) means to the south
of it.

Mount Lycaeus, now called Diaphorti or Mount St, Elias from a
chapel of St. Elias near the summit, is situated about 5 miles north-
north-west of Lycosura as the crow flies. The summit may be ascended
in 3 5 minutes from the hamlet of Karyaes^ which lies among the hills to



382 MOUNT L YCAEUS bk. viii. arcadia

the south-east, or in an hour from Ampeliona, which lies to the south-
west of it. The mountain has a double peak. The higher peak (1420
metres or 4660 feet high) is called Stephani ; the other peak, a few
feet lower than the former but in a more open and conmianding situa-
tion, is Mt. St, Elias or Diaphorti and appears to be the Mt.- Lycaeus
of the ancients. It lies a little to the south-east of Mt. Stephanie from
which it is divided by a depression. In this basin or crater-like
depression between the two peaks, which is called Kastraki or Skaphidia
(* troughs ') by the natives, may be seen the remains of the hippodrome
mentioned by Pausanias (§ 5). It runs from south to north. The
parallel walls, 1 30 feet apart, which bounded it on the east and west,
may be traced ; they extend for a distance of 900 feet. At the upper
(south) end and the adjoining parts of the long sides a considerable
number of rows of seats are preser\'ed. At the north end are remains
of a building sunk in the ground, apparently a cistern or reservoir ; it is
50 feet long from east to west and 6 or 8 feet deep down to the rubbish
by which it is partly filled up. The lower courses of the walls of this
structure are of regular masonry ; the upper courses are irregular and
almost polygonal. Adjoining this building on the west are other
foundations and ruin-heaps.

At the south end of the hippodrome begins a gully which leads up
to the summit. On either side of the entrance to this gully there are
ancient remains. Those on the west side are known as Helleniko and
consist chiefly of large flags of grey limestone. On the east side of the
entrance to the gully are the remains of a Doric temple, including
fragments of columns 1 8 inches thick, which were fluted only half their
length. This perhaps was the temple of Pan (g 5). Between these
ruins we ascend through the gully in 12 minutes to the simple chapel
of St. Ellas, in and beside which are some ancient squared blocks. In
a quarter of an hour from the chapel we reach the summit. It is a
circular level, about 50 yards across, and plainly artificial, resembling
one of the threshing-floors which are so common in Greece. Spread
over it is a layer of potsherds and fragments of charred and partially
fossilised bones. This was the site of the altar of Zeus (>^ 7) ; and the
bones are those of the animals and perhaps men who were sacrificed on
it. The peasants have a story that these are the bones of men whom
the ancients caused to be here trampled to death by horses, as com is
trodden by horses on a threshing-floor. The view, as might be
expected, is extensive, including the plains of Megalopolis, Elis, and
Messenia, and the mountains of Erymanthus on the north, Maenalus on
the east, Taygetus on the south, and Ithome on the south-west. To the
west the sea is visible as far as Zacvnthus.

See Oell, Itimrary of tlu Morea, p. 106 st/q. ; Leake, Morca^ 2. p. 313 s^i/. ;
Expi!d. scientifiijue de Mort'e: Architecture ^ etc., par A. Blouet, 2. p. 37 sq.^ with
plates 33, 34 ; Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 162 ; L. Ross, Keisen^ P- 91 ^^I^- \ Curtius,
Pelop, I. p. 299 sqq, ; Beul^, Etudes sur le Pcloponn^se, p. 105 sqq. ; Bursian.
Geoi^); 2. p. 233 sqq. ; Baedeker,^ p. 303 sq. ; Guide-JoanuCy 2. p. 305 sq. ;
Philippson, Pehponnes, p. 330. Dodwell ascended Mt. Tetragi or Tetrasi in the
belief that it was Mt. Lycaeus. Tetrasi is a peak (4550 feet high) to the west of



CH. XXXVIII MOUNT L YCAEUS 383

Lycosura and about 5 miles to the south of Diaphorti^ the true Lycaeus. See
Dodwell, Tour^ 2. p. 389 j^^.

38. 2. Lycaeus, which they also call Olsrmpas. A scholiast on
Apollonius Rhodius (i. 599) enumerates six mountains which the
Greeks called Olympus. Cp. Benloew, La Grhe enfant les Grecs, p. 8 1 sq.

38. 2. Oretea. It has been conjectured that this place was some-
where above the village of Karyaes (L. Ross, Reiseriy p. 94 ; Curtius,
Pelop, I. p. 300). As to Karyaes see note on § i. Cp. Bursian, Geogr.
2. p. 236.

38. 3. Thisoa. See note on § 9.

38. 3. Hagno. A little above the south end of the hippodrome, in
the gully which leads up to the summit of Mt. Lycaeus, there is a spring,
the highest source of the stream which flows past Karyaes to join the
Alpheus : this may be the spring called Hagno (Gell, Itinerary of the
Morea^ p. 1 06 ; Boblaye, RechercJteSy p. 162; Curtius, Pelop, i . p. 303 ;
Beul^, Etudes^ p. 1 10 ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 306). A little to the north
of the village of Karyaes^ under the eastern foot of the summit of Mt.
Lycaeus, there are abundant springs, which form the principal source
of the stream just mentioned. L. Ross surmised {Reisen^ p. 94) that
these might be Hagno. Leake conjectured that Hagno was the copious
source at the foot of the mountain, below the village of Tragomano ;
this source immediately forms a large stream which flows into the
Alpheus (Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 315). But it is far more probable that a
spring, the water of which was used as a rain-charm, was at the top
than at the foot of the mountain.

38. 4. he lets down an oak-branch to the surface of the spring.
The oak-branch was used because the oak was the sacred tree of Zeus,
the god of the mountain. Similarly in Halmahera or Gilolo, a large
island to the west of New Guinea, the sorcerer makes rain by dipping
the branch of a particular kind of tree in water and sprinkling the
ground with it (C. F. Campen, * De Godsdienstbegrippen der Hal-
maherische Alfoeren,' Tijdschrift voor Indisc/ie Taal- Land- en Volken-
kunde^ 27(1 882), p. 447). In Ceram rain is made by dedicating the bark
of a certain tree to the spirits and laying it in water (Riedel, De sluik-
en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua, p. 114). Gervasius
of Tilbury mentions a spring into which if a stick or a stone were
thrown, rain would at once issue from it and drench the thrower
(Ger\'asius von Tilbury, ed. Liebrecht, p. 41 sqq,) For more examples
of rain-charms, see The Golden Bough, i . p. 13 sqq.

38. 5. the Lycaean games. These games were said to have been
founded by Lycaon, to whom the invention of athletic sports was
attributed (Pliny, Nat, hist. vii. 205 ; Paus. viii. 2. i note). They are
mentioned by Pindar (Olymp. ix. 145, xiii. 157 sq. ; Nem. x. 89). The
ancients traced a resemblance between the Lycaean games and the
Lupercalia at Rome (Plutarch, Caesar, 61 ; Dionysius Halic, Antiquit.
Rom. i. 80 ; Livy, i. 5 ; Justin, xliii. 6 sq.) They included a foot-race
in the double course, and a race between men in armour or carrying
shields, as we learn from an inscription found in the Epidaurian
sanctuary of Aesculapius (Cavvadias, Fouilles d'ipidaure, i. p. 78,



384 MOUNT LYCAEUS BK. viii. arcadia

No. 240). In Roman times the Lycaean games were combined with
games held in honour of the imperial family, as we gather from an
inscription at Sinanou^ close to Megalopolis (Excavations at Megalopolis^
p. 139 sq.^ No. xxvi.)

38. 6. inside the precinct all creatores cast no shadows.

The statement that persons who entered the precinct of Zeus on Mt
Lycaeus cast no shadow had the authority of Theophrastus (Polybius,
xvi. 1 2. 7). Such persons were called * deer ' : if they had entered the
precinct voluntarily, they were stoned to death ; if they had entered it
unwittingly, they were sent away to Eleutherae (Plutarch, QuaesL Grace.
39). Cp. Hyginus, Astronomica^ ii. i and 4. The story of the loss of
the shadow may have been told to explain the supposed £Eict that any
person who entered the precinct would die within a year. Untutored
people often regard the shadow as a vital part of a man and its loss as
fatal. This belief is still current in Greece. It is thought that to give
stability to a new building the life of an animal or a man is necessary.
Hence an animal is killed and its blood allowed to flow on the founda-
tion stone, or the builder secretly measures a man's shadow and bunes
the measure under the foundation stone, or the foundation stone is laid
upon a man's shadow. It is supposed that the man will die within a year
— obviously because his shadow is believed to be buried under the building
(B. Schmidt, Das Volksleben der Neugriechen^ p. 196 sq,) In Austria
it is thought that the person whose shadow does not appear on the wall
when the family are seated at table on the eve of St. Silvester's day,
will die next year (Vernalecken, My then und Brduche des Volkes in
Oestcrrcich^ p. 341). Cp. The Golden Bought i. p. 141 sqq.

Prof. W. H. Roscher would explain the story of the loss of the
shadow on Mt. Lycaeus by pointing out that the mountain was also
called Olympus (see § 2 of this chapter) and that the top of Olympus is
described by Homer {Od. vi. 44 sq.) as cloudless and bathed in bright
sunshine {Fleckeisefis Jahrbiicher^ 38 (1892), pp. 701-709). The ex-
planation seems insufficient.

38. 6. at Syene, on the frontier of Ethiopia etc. Syene in
Upper Egypt is just outside the tropic of Cancer ; hence at the summer
solstice the sun is almost directly overhead and the shadows are so
short as to be barely perceptible. There was a sacred well at Syene, in
whose water the full disc of the sun was reflected " like a lid " at noon
on the day of the summer solstice. The well was therefore used as a
means of determining the day of the solstice. See Aristides, Or. xlviii.
vol. 2. p. 462, ed. Dindorf ; Strabo, xvii. p. 817 ; Pliny, Nat. hist, ii. 183 ;
Eustathius, on Dionysius Periegetes, 222. Cp. Plutarch, De dcfectu orac,
4 ; Lucan, ii. 587. The ancients, being acquainted with few places within
the tropics, were much struck both with the absence of shadows in tropical
lands at some seasons of the year and with their southward inclination
at others. They knew that in some parts of India the hand of the dial
cast no shadow at noon, and that at night the constellation of the Bear
and even that of Arcturus were invisible (Diodorus, ii. 35 ; Pliny, Nat.
hist. ii. 183-185). In the time of Augustus the frontier of the Roman
empire was at Syene, which was held by three cohorts. But afterwards



CH. XXXVIII PILLARS ON MOUNT LYCAEUS 385

the frontier was pushed farther south and a Roman garrison occupied
Hiera Sycaminos {Makarrako), This appears to have been the only
place within the tropics which was ever permanently held by a Roman
garrison. See Strabo, l,c, ; Mommsen, Ramische GeschichUy 5. p.
594 sq.

38. 7* In front of the altar, on the east, stand two pillars.
May these columns have been set up for the purpose of determining
the solstices and equinoxes by means of the length and direction of the
shadows ? On a height near Quito, on the equator, the Caras built a
temple of the Sun, and in front of the eastern door of the temple were
two tall columns for observing the solstices. See C. R. Markham, note
on Garcilasso de la Vega's Royal Commentaries of the Yncas^ 2. p. 347 ;
/V/., 'm Journal of the Royal Geogr, Soc,^ 41 (187 1), p. 317. To ascer-
tain the time of the equinox the Incas of Peru had a stone column
erected in front of the temples of the Sun. The column was set up in
the midst of a large circle across which a line was drawn from east to
west. As the equinox drew near the priests watched the shadow from
day to day; and when the shadow rested exactly on the line from
sunrise to sunset and no shadow at all was cast at noon, they knew
that the equinox had come. Then they adorned the column with
flowers and placed the chair of the Sun upon it, saying that on that day
the Sun with all his light sat on the pillar. As the Incas extended their
conquests northwards towards the equator, they observed that the
farther north they went the smaller was the shadow thrown by the
columns at noon. Hence the columns were more revered the nearer
they were to Quito on the equator ; above all others the columns at
Quito itself were venerated because, the sun being perpendicular over
them, they cast no shadow at all at noon. The people said that these
must be the seats which were most agreeable to the Sun, seeing that he
sat square upon them, whereas on the others he sat sideways. See
Garcilasso de la Vega, ofi. at. i. p. 180 (Markham's translation). The
Muyscas of Colombia also used columns as a rude sort of dial ; human
victims were sacrificed by being festened to these coliunns and shot
with arrows (Colombia, being a geographical etc, account of that country
(London, 1822), i. p. 557). It is said that one of the stones in the
circle at Stonehenge is known as the Pointer because, viewed from the
centre of the circle, the sun is seen to rise exactly over it at the
summer solstice (June 21st) ; many people are said to assemble on the
spot every year on the morning of June 2 ist, to observe the phenomenon.
See C. F. Gordon Ciunming, In the Hebrides (Lon^on^ 1883), p. 219.
On Mount Cythnus, in the island of Delos, there is a grotto which is
supposed to have been an early temple of Apollo. The east end of the
temple is not closed, and on an April morning a ray of the sun pierces
the cavern and fills it with light in a moment. As Apollo was supposed
to winter in Lycia and return to Delos in spring, the sudden iUiunina-
tion of his grotto in that island would be the signal of his return.
It has been suggested that the grotto may have been a station at which
the revolution of the seasons was observed by noting the length and
inclination of the sunbeams. See Jebb, * Delos,' Journal of Hellenic

VOL. IV 2 c



386 MOUNT L YCAEUS bk. viii. arcadu

Studies^ I (1880), p. 50 sq. If my conjecture as to the purpose of the
two columns on Mt Lycaeus prove to be true (and I merely offer it as
a suggestion), it would be tempting to suppose that Lycaean Zeus was
the god of light, deriving lukaios from the root luk^ 'light' See
Curtius, Griech, Etymologief p. 160 sq. It would then be plain why
persons who strayed into his precinct were believed to lose their
shadows ; they had entered the sanctuary of the god of light, where no
darkness could abide. But this is probably i^ciful. The connexion
of Lycaean Zeus with wolves is too firmly established to allow us
seriously to doubt that he is the wolf-god (from lukos^ ' wolf). See viiL
2. 3 and 6 ; Famell, The Cults of the Greek States^ i. p. 41 j<^. This
makes the resemblance which the ancients traced between the Lycaean
games and the Lupercalia (see note on § 5) all the more remarkable,
for it seems certain that the first syllable of Lupercalia must be firom
lupusy 'wolf.' Cp. W. Mannhardt, 'Die LupercaUen,' Mytkologischi
Forschungen^ P- 72 sqq.

In the gully which leads from the hippodrome to the sununit of Ml
Lycaeus, the peasants excavated some fragments of large Doric colunms
of white marble, which they broke up and used in building their chapeL
The flutes of some of these fragments, seen by L. Ross, were 5 inches
wide. He conjectured that these were pieces of the two colunms which
once stood on the summit of the mountain. See L. Ross, Reisen^ p. 92.

As to the gilt eagles which surmounted the columns, it is perhaps
worth noting, after what has been said above, that in the temple of the
Sun among the Taengas of Louisiana the bodies of two eagles were
hung from the roof and turned toward the sun (De Tonti, ' Relation de
la Louisianne et du Mississippi,' Voyages au Nord^ 5 (Amsterdam, 1725),
p. 123). Cp. above, viii. 30. 2.

38. 7- they offer secret Bacrifices etc. Human victims were
sacrificed to Lycaean Zeus, as we learn from Theophrastus (quoted
by Porphyry, De abstin, ii. 27) and the pseudo-Plato {Minos, p. 315 c).
From the guarded language in which Pausanias refers to the subject,
we may perhaps infer that human sacrifices were still offered in his
time. See note on viii. 2. 6. As to human sacrifices among the
ancients, see Porphyry, De abstin, ii. 54-56 ; Hehn, Kulturpjlanzen und
Hausthiere^^ ^. 438 sqq. (p. 414 sqq., English trans.); Leist, Graeco-
italische Rechtsgeschichte, p. 257 sqq,

38. 8. a sanctuary of Parrhasian Apollo ; they also give him
the surname of Pythian. This sanctuary is mentioned under the
name of Pythium (Xlvrtov) in an inscription of Megalopolis copied by
Fourmont at Karytaenaj the same inscription mentions *the road to
Lycosura,' which so far confirms the statement of Pausanias that this
sanctuary of Apollo stood on the eastern side of Mount Lycaeus
{C, I. G. No. 1534 ; Excavations at Megalopolis, p. 131, No. 8 c).

38. 8. they sacrifice a boar in the market-place etc. The
market-place referred to is that of Megalopolis. See viii. 30. 3 sq.

38. 9. the land of Thisoa. As to the town of Thisoa compare
§ 3. It is not to be confounded with the Thisoa near Methydrium
which belonged to Orchomenus (viii. 27. 4 ; viii. 28. 3). On the left



CH. XXXVIII TfflSOA OR LYCOA 387

or western bank of the Alpheus, about 5 miles below Karytaena^ and
about 4 miles north-east of Andritseruzy rises the steep, lofty, and
rocky mountain of Lavda (2420 feet high), crowned with the ruins of
an ancient town which some topographers have identified with Thisoa.
The ruins are now known as the Castle of St Helen or the pcUaeokastro
(ruined fortress) of Lcevda from the village of that name {Lavda) which
is pleasantly situated among clumps of trees at the northern foot of the
mountain within sight of, but at a considerable height above, the river.
The summit of the hill, which commands a magnificent view ranging
from Mt. Erymanthus on the north to the mountains of Laconia on the
south, extends from north-west to south-east for a quarter of a mile or
more ; its breadth is less. It is enclosed by a double line of fortifications,
an outer and an inner, of which the latter formed the citadel. The ground
within the waUs is not level, but rises to a sharp point, from which the
citadel extends south for 200 yards or so. The town occupied a terrace
which runs round the citadel at a lower level and is enclosed by the
outer wall. This terrace is widest on the west and north-west, and
narrowest on the east, where it is a mere strip between the citadel and
the steep slope of the mountain towards the Alpheus. The chief approach
to the town would seem to have been from the south-west, on the side
away from the river, for in this direction the slope is long, uniform, and
not very steep, and here there are remains of a gate. The outer wall
was defended at intervals by square projecting towers, of which five may
be distinguished. With its towers it is standing in places to a height
of from 2 to 10 or 12 feet The masonry varies in style; in general
it is massive but rough and irregular. However, some pieces of the
north wall on both sides of a gate or sally-port are better built ; the
style is here mainly quadrangular, with some polygonal pieces, and the
blocks are more carefully hewn than elsewhere. The wall at this gate
is 7 ft 6 in. thick, and is standing to a varying height of four and six
courses. The breadth of the gateway is 6 feet. About 9 feet to the
west of this gateway, at the north-western angle of the fortress, is one
of the square towers ; it projects 1 2 ft 8 in. from the curtain, and its
outer face, which measures 2 1 feet in breadth, is standing to a height of
six courses or about 7 feet On the west face of the hiU the outer wall
has mostly disappeared, but towards its southern end there are con-
siderable remains, comprising the ruins of a large gateway, 16 ft 6 in.
wide, which would seem to have been the principal gateway of the town.
It opens to the south, and is defended on the west by a square tower
built of exceedingly massive rough blocks. The tower measures 14
paces on its western face and is standing to a height of about 8 feet.
Inside of the outer wall at this point there are some remains of an
inner wall running parallel to the outer at a distance about equal to the
breadth of an ordinary road ; it is built of smaller stones and appears
not to have been a fortification-wall. On the eastern side of the hill
the outer fortification-wall is frdrly preserved for a stretch of about 60
yards between two square projecting towers, of which one, standing to
a height of ft)ur courses, is at the extreme south point of the wall.

The inner fortification-wall, forming the small citadel, is on the



3S8 THISOA OR LYCOA bk. viii. arcadia

whole well preserved. It is built in a more regular and careful way
than the outer wall ; the style is in places, particularly on the north, a
sort of compromise between the quadrangular and the polygonal, but
elsewhere, as on the west, it is almost completely quadrangular. The
north wall is 8 ft 6 in. thick ; seven to twelve courses of it are standing.
A piece of the west wall, about 1 7 paces long, has seven to nine courses
standing. The south wall of the citadel is ruinous, except at its
eastern end, where it is still 7 to 10 feet high, with four to nine courses.
Here is the entrance to the citadel, consisting of a passage 7 ft 6 in.
wide and about 9 yards long.

Within the citadel, just at the foot of the highest point of the hill,
are nine drums of fluted coliunns standing or lying side by side ; the
diameter of each drum is about 1 8 inches. A temple may have stood
here, but this is doubtfid ; there is hardly room for a temple at this
point, and the drums seem too close together to be in their original
positions. They may have been transferred to their present situation
and used in the construction of some mediaeval building. For within
the citadel there are foundations or the lower courses of walls which
seem to have belonged to houses built in mediaeval or later times with
materials taken from the ancient fortifications ; and outside of the citadel
there are remains of rough walls which point clearly to a settlement here
in the Middle Ages. A few more drums may be seen lying about in
or close to the citadel ; they are all fluted and of the same style. One
of them measures 16 inches in diameter. The material of these drums,
as of the fortifications, appears to be a grey limestone. I further ob^
served three triglyph blocks in or near the citadel ; each was 22^^ inches
high, and two of them at least were 7 feet long. The metopes are
unsculptured. One of these triglyph blocks is standing in the entrance
to the citadel ; at first I mistook it for a door-jamb. These drums and
triglyph blocks prove that an ancient temple stood somewhere on the
summit of the hill, probably within the citadel. Sherds of coarse red
unpainted pottery lie strewn about in large quantities ; they may be
mediaeval.

The ancient town of which the ruins have been described is
commonly identified by topographers (as by Leake, Boblaye, Bursian,
and Lolling) with Thisoa. Curtius, however, supposed it to be the
Lycoa of Polybius (xvi. 17), which stood beside the Alpheus, below its
junction with the Lusius, and at a point where the river is deep and
impassable. This description certainly suits the ruins at Lavda very
well ; for the river, flowing in a deep bed, is here 60 feet wide and
from 3 to 6 feet deep according to the season. Curtius would place
Thisoa on the site of Andritsena^ a pleasant litde town picturesquely
situated high up on a mountain - side among trees, vineyards, and
murmuring rills, with wide views across the low hills about the valley
of the Alpheus away to the high blue mountains of north-western
Arcadia. Among the vineyards to the north of the town have been
observed foundations, tiles, and other vestiges of an ancient settlement.

See Leake, Morea, 2. pp. 18 sq., 315 sq, ; Boblaye, Recherches, p. 160; L.
Ross, Reisen, p. lOi ; Curtius, Pelop, 1. p. 358 sq, ; Bursian, Gtogr, 2. p. 234 sq^\



CH. XXXIX NOMIAN MOUNTAINS 389

Baedeker,' p. 314 sq, ; Gutde-Joanm, 2, p. 306 sq, I visited the ruins on the hill
of Lavda, 8th October 1895, ^^^ ^^^ described them from my own observation.
The charms of Andritsena are described in rapturous language by von Stackel-
berg (Der Apollotempel tu Bassae in Arcadia^ p. 14).

38. 10. is said by Homer etc. See Iliad^ xxi. 194.

38. 10. another Acheloos is mentioned by him. See Iliads

xxiv. 616 ; and note on v. 13. 7.

38. II. the Nomian mountains. These are generally identified
with Tetragi or Tetrasi^ a mountain 4500 feet high which rises to the
west of Lycosura. A long and rugged ridge connects it with Mt
Lycaeus {Diaphorti) on the north. From the crest, which is a stony
ridge some 500 yards long and 10 yards wide, with a very steep slope
to the west, there is a wide and magnificent view. All the mountains
round about are visible, and the plain of Megalopolis is seen below us
on the east. But if the Nomian mountains were Teirasi^ which lies to
the west of Lycosura, why should Pausanias have described them as to
the right of Lycosura, when he had said that Mt Lycaeus, which lies
to the north of Lycosura, was to the left of it (§ 2) ? Hence it is
perhaps better, with L. Ross, to apply the name Nomian to the hills to
the south of Lycosura, about the large village of hari. These hills are,
however, only a branch of Tetrasi, Their upper slopes are thinly
wooded with oak ; their lower slopes are under cultivation. Leake
thought that the Nomian mountains were the high rugged ridge which
connects Tetrasi with Mt. Lycaeus {Diaphorti),

See Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 315 ; Boblaye, Recherchesy p. 165 ; L. Ross, Reisen,
p. 88 ; Curtius, Pelop. i. p. 317 ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 184 jf. ; Guide-Joanne^
2. p. 308 ; Philippson, Peloponnesy pp. 532, 533.

39. I. going to Fhigalia etc. From Stala^ the modem village
near the ruins of Lycosura, the route to Fhigalia crosses the Gastritsi
and pursuing a westward direction ascends steeply to a pass between
the south spiu^ of Mt. Lycaeus and Mt Tetrasi, The summit of the
pass is reached in an hour to an hour and a half from Stala^ which
agrees with the 30 furlongs of Pausanias. The path then descends
through woods to the sources of the Neda, and passes through the poor
but picturesque hamlet of KakcUetri^ surrounded by fruit-trees and
watered by an abundant spring. Thence it follows the valley of the
Neda the whole way to Phigalia. The route along the valley is rough
and difficult The high heathy hills on either hand, intersected every
now and then by small glens, advance almost to meet each other,
leaving the river just room enough to turn and wind about at the bottom
of a ravine. Fields or patches of com occupy some of the lower slopes
of the hills. The track leads along steep declivities, descending and
ascending the sides of the wooded glens down which flow tributary
brooks to join the Neda. To add to the difficulty of the route the
peasants are in the habit of ploughing up and sowing the path, which
in consequence sometimes disappears among the com, and the traveUer
is left to flounder up hill and down dale as best he can without a path.
The time from StcUa to Phigalia is about seven hours.



390 PHIGAHA bk. viii. arcadia

See L. Ross, Reisen^ p. 95 sqq, ; Baedeker,' p. 323 sq, ; Philippson, Peh-
foHfuSy p. 331. Cp. note on iv. 17. 10.

39. 2. the story of PhigalnB etc See viii. 3. 2.

39. 2. the city changed its name and was called after Fhialns.

The form Phialia (instead of Phigalia) is supported by coins of the dty,
which bear the inscription #IAAE12N (*of die Phialians'). The form
#irAAE12N (<of the Phigalians') occurs on a coin of the Achaean
League. See Catalogue of the Greek coins in the British Museum:
Peloponnesus^ pp. 15, 197; HeaA^ Historia Numorum^ pp. 352, 379.
The form Phialeus (#IAAEY2) occurs in an inscription copied by
Leake at Mavromati in Messene (Leake, Morea^ i. p. 378 ; id,^ 3.
Inscr. No. 46) ; and in another inscription found at Phigalia itself the
city is called Phialia (^ioXcml) and the people Phialians (^laAics)
{Archaologische Zeitung^ 17 (1859), Archaologischer Anzeiger, p.
Ill* sq,)

39. 3* the second year of the thirtieth Olympiad, in which

Ohionis was victorions. i^e, in 659 b.c. As to Chionis see

iii. 14. 3 ; iv. 23. 4 and 10 ; vi. 13. 2 note.

39. 5. Phigalia. The city of Phigalia was built on a high
uneven plateau, which rises from south to north. On the south
the plateau is bounded by the glen of the Neda ; on the other sides
it is surrounded by a semicircle of mountains. Almost everywhere
the plateau falls sharply away, being bounded by ravines or deep
glens. The ravine. of the Neda, on the south, is of tremendous
depth. The walls of the ancient city ran along the edge of the
plateau. Their circuit measured about 3 miles, and their remains
are very extensive, especially on the eastern side, where indeed the
wall, with its flanking towers, both square and round, is nearly
continuous, rising in places to a height of nine courses or 20 feet
The thickness of the wall is from 6 to 10 feet. The masonry is
generally quadrangular, but in some places polygonal. In style it is
distinctly inferior to the masonry of the walls of Mantinea and
Messene, being not nearly so regular and well jointed. The towers
on the east side are from forty to fifty paces apart, but they are not
equally distributed. On the west side the French surveyors found
two towers, which would seem to have since disappeared; at least
I did not perceive them, nor did L. Ross. Leake saw the ruins of
one tower on the west or south-west side. He could find no traces
of gates, nor could I. But the French surveyors found a gate on
the north-east, and on their plan of the site they marked another
gate on the west. Sally-ports, however, still exist beside some of the
towers on the east side. These ports are from 5 to 6 feet wide and
are closed at the top by horizontal courses of stones, projecting one
above the other. The highest point of the plateau is near the north-
east comer ; its height is considerable, but the slope is nowhere precipi-
tous. This point was enclosed by separate walls, which formed a
citadel of elliptic shape, about 80 yards long. But these walls of
the citadel appear to be of later date, if not mediaeval. Within
them are the ruins of two chapels, one of which may possibly mark



CH. XL PHIGALIA 391

the site of the sanctuary of Saviour Artemis (§ 5). From this
acropolis a considerable expanse of sea is visible on the west; and
the sea may also be seen from other high points within the ancient
walls. Owing to the elevated situation of the city the air of Phigalia
is keen, fresh, and bracing — real highland air. The modem hamlet of
Pavlitsa^ surrounded by vineyards, fields, and olive-trees, occupies a
comer of the ancient site, standing near its south -eastern extremity,
on a sort of terrace about 800 feet above the deep glen of the Neda.
The ground about the hamlet is comparatively flat, and here, prob-
ably, lay the ancient market-place. Some of the houses are built
outside the line of the ancient walls, on the edge of the crags which
overhang the narrow, wooded, and exceedingly picturesque gorge where
the river tiunbles over rocks at an inmiense depth below, the roar of
its water adding to the savage grandeur of the scenery. Near the
hamlet are three chapels with some fragments of antiquity. They
may occupy the sites of ancient temples.

See Gell, Itinerary of the Morta^ p. 79 sq, ; id. y Journey in the Morea^ p.
1 01 sqq, ; Leake, Aforea^ I. p. 489 sqq, ; Expedition scientifiqtic de Moric :
Architecture i Sculptures^ etc, par A. Blouet, p. 2 sq,^ with plates 1-3 ; Boblaye,
RechercheSy p. 165 ; L. Ross, Reisen, p. 97 sq, ; Curtius, Pelop. I. p. 318 sqq, ;


39. 6. laurel -leaves and ivy. On the association of laurel and
ivy with Dionysus, cp. Fr. Lenormant, in Gazette arch^ologique^ 2.
(1876), p. 103 sq,

39. 6. dnnabar is said to be found by the Iberians. Veins

of cinnabar (bisulphuret of mercury) were worked at Sisapon in Anda-
lusia. Under the Roman Empire the state enjoyed a monopoly of the
mineral and drew considerable revenues from it The cinnabar was
extracted from the mines in blocks, which were sealed and sent to Rome
to be worked by the company which farmed the industry from the State.
Two thousand pounds weight of the mineral were annually brought to
Rome. The red pigment was prepared by pounding the cinnabar in
iron mortars and then washing and roasting it repeatedly. The £Eictory,
where the pigment was made, stood on the Quirinal, between the temple
of Flora and the temple of Quirinus. At Almaden, in the Sierra
Morena, supposed to be the ancient Sisapon, a vein of cinnabar, 25 feet
thick, still exists, traversing rocks of quartz and slate.


40. I. a statue of Arrhachion etc. Shortly before my visit to
Phigalia in May 1 890 an archaic statue had been found there of exactly
the type described by Pausanias. It was shown to me in a field just
outside the village of Pavlitscu There was a wom and half-efiaced
inscription on the statue, below the neck ; so that the correspondence



392 LYMAX — CERAUSIUS BK. viii. axcadu

between this statue and the one described by Pausanias is complete:
See note on ii. 5. 4. The story how Arrhachion won a victory in the
pancratium and expired in the moment of victory is told briefly by
Eusebius (Chronic, vol. i. p. 202, ed. Sch5ne) and at length by
Philostratus (Imagines^ ii. 6), who calls him Arrhichion. Elsewhere
{De arte gymnasHcOy 21) Philostratus has recorded the cry with which
his trainer cheered the dying athlete to prefer victory to life.

40. 3. boxen boxed with the soft straps. The earlier sort

of boxing gloves used by the ancients is described also by Philostratus
{De arte gymnastica^ 10), but his description is not quite clear. It
would seem, according to him, that the four fingers were fastened in a
strap which allowed the tips to project from it, and were also held
together by a cord wound round the forearm.

40. 4. strack him under the ribs etc. This story is told of the
boxer Cleomedes of Astypalaea by Oenomaus, quoted by Euselnus,
Praepar, Evang, v. 34. Oenomaus had confused Damoxenus with
Cleomedes. As to Cleomedes, see Pans. vi. 9. 6 sqq,

40. 5. a statue to him in Argos. See ii. 20. i.

41. 2. A river called the Lymax. This would seem to be the
stream which flows down a glen on the east side of Phigalia, at the
foot of the slope which is surmounted by the walls of the ancient dty.
But, on the other hand, Pausanias apparently says that the Lymax
flowed into the Neda 1 2 furlongs above Phigalia (§ 4) ; hence Leake
identified it with the river oi Dragdi (Tragoi), which joins the Neda on
its right (north) bank about that distance above Phigalia. See Leake,
Moreoy 2. p. 10.

41. 2. Homer says etc. See Iliad^ i- 3M ^9-

41. 3. Monnt Oerausius, which is a part of Monnt Lycaeus.
Of the rivulets that unite to form the Neda the chief have their source
above the village of Hagios Sostis^ in the range of hills which unites
Mt. Lycaeus on the east with the peak called Palaeokastro on the west.
These hills, therefore, would seem to be the Mt. Cerausius of the
ancients. Bursian identified Cerausius with Palaeokastro ; L. Ross with
Stephani, But Palaeokastro seems too far west, and Stephani was
probably not distinguished from Lycaeus (JDiaphorti) by the ancients.
Leake thought that Cerausius was Mt. Tetrasi (as to which see above,
P- 389).

See Leake, Morea, 2. p. 10 sq. ; L. Ross, Reisen, P* 94 -f^* ; Curtius, Pelcp.
I. p. 317 J^. ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 184.

41. 3- shear their hair in honour of the river. It appears to
have been common among the ancient Greeks for boys or men to allow
their hair to grow for a certain time and then cut it off* in honour of a
river-god. See i. 37. 3 ; viii. 20. 3. Achilles kept his yellow hair
long that he might sacrifice it to the river Spercheus when he came
home from the wars (Homer, Iliad, xxiii. 141 sqq,) Orestes similarly
vowed his hair to the river Inachus (Aeschylus, Choephoriy 5 sq,) Ajax
let his hair grow in honour of the Ilissus (Philostratus, Heroica^ xiii. 4).
Hindoo matrons are sometimes allowed, as a great privilege, to offer a



CH. XLi HAIR-OFFERINGS— B ASSAM 393

few locks of their long hair at the confluence of rivers, as for example at
the meeting of the Ganges and Jumna. The priest with a pair of golden
scissors cuts off a few inches of the woman's tresses and flings them
into the river. See Monier Williams, Religious life and thought in India^
p. 375 ^^' Among some of the Australian aborigines, when a river
was low with drought, the sorcerer used with chants and gesticulations
to place some human hair in the stream. It was thought that this
would make the water of the river to rise. See W. Stanbridge, * On the
aborigines of Victoria,' Transactions of the EthnoL Soc, of London^ N.S.
I ( 1 86 1 ), p. 300. On the worship of rivers among the ancient Greeks,
see Percy Gardner, * Greek river -worship,' Transactions of the Royal
Society of Literature^ Second Series (1878), pp. 173-218. Dio Chrysos-
tom speaks of those who let their hair grow long for the sake of a god
{Or, XXXV. vol. 2. p. 43, ed. Dindorf). Rufinus, son of the rhetorician
Himerius, allowed his hair to grow in honour of Dionysus (Himerius,
Orat, xxiii. 7). The people of Agyrium in Sicily were wont to let their
hair grow long in honour of the hero lolaus till they had propitiated
him with sacrifices (Diodorus, iv. 24. 4). The Thasians allowed their
hair to grow long in honour of Demeter, because once the land recovered
its fertility after a period of barrenness (Eusebius, Praep, Evang, v.
34. 9). In the British Museum there is a votive relief representing two
plaits of formally-twisted hair, dedicated to Poseidon by Philombrotus
and Aphthonetus. The relief was brought from Phthiotic Thebes in
Thessaly. See A. H. Smith, Catalogue of Sculpture in the British
Museum^ i. No. 798, p. 366 sq,

41. 5. of whom Homer nu^es mention. See Iliad^ xviii. 398 sq,

41. 6. the image of Eurynome represents a woman to the

hips, but below that a fish. If Eurynome was, as the natives affirmed,
a form of Artemis, her curious fish -tailed image may perhaps be
explained by the relation in which Artemis stood to water, evinced by
her common title, * The Lady of the Lake.' Cp. L. R. FameU, The
Cults of the Greek States, 2. p. 429 sq,

41. 7. Bassae, and the temple of Apollo. The famous temple of
Apollo at Bassae is situated about 4 miles north-east of Phigalia as the
crow flies ; but as a wild and woody country of hill and dale lies between,
and the path crosses glens and ascends steep slopes, the time occupied
by the journey is about three and a half hours. From Pavlitsa, the
village at the south-eastern extremity of Phigalia, our path leads at first
eastward up the valley of the Neda. About a mile outside of the walls
of Phigalia, on the top of a ridge, some remains of an ancient building,
perhaps a temple, have been observed by travellers, who speak of
having seen regularly-constructed foundations, a fragment of an archi-
trave, and the base of a column. After following the valley of the
Neda for some distance eastward, we turn up a glen down which a
stream flows from the north to join the Neda. Pursuing our way up
the glen we come to the village of Votkcu^ surrounded by many plane-
trees and flg-trees. Then passing a waterfall and some picturesque
rocks, we cross the stream by a little bridge and reach the village of
Dragogi near the head of the glen. A rocky path now ascends the



394 "^H^ TEMPLE AT BASSAE BK. viii. arcadia

hills immediately at the back of the village, and in a pretty little valley
shaded by oaks we pass a spring, which may be the ** spring on Mount
Cotilius " mentioned by Pausanias. At the end of the valley a steep
ascent through the somewhat scanty remnants of an oak forest brings
us to the temple of Apollo.

The temple, which is by far the best preserved of all ancient temples
in Peloponnese, stands in a strikingly wild and secluded situation at a
height of 3700 feet above the sea, with a wide prospect southward to
the distant mountains of Messenia and Laconia. The ground on
which the temple is built is a narrow platform on the southern side of
a hill, the Mount Cotilius of the ancients. The rocky slopes of this
hiU, rising rapidly behind the temple, shut out all distant views on the
north and north-east. But to the south the slope descends gradually
towards the valley of the Neda. Due south, through a dip in the hills,
is seen the apparently flat-topped summit of Ithome. To the south-east,
through another gap, appears the range of Taygetus, with its beautiful
outlines and sharp snowy peaks. In the nearer foreground, between
Ithome and Taygetus, rises Mount Ira, the last stronghold of the
Messenian race in its struggle for freedom with Sparta. To the east
are bare rough hillsj dotted with oak-trees, the western spurs of Mount
Lycaeus, while farther to the south appears the high, round -topped
Tetrasi^ perhaps the Nomian mountains of the ancients. The sea is not
visible, but it may be seen by ascending the slope at the back of the
temple. The bleak desolate mountains form a striking backg^und to
the solitary temple which, built of the same cold grey limestone which
composes the surrounding rocks, tends to deepen rather than relieve
the melancholy of the scene, the ruined fane witnessing silently to the
trans itoriness of human greatness and the vanity of human faith.
"There is certainly nothing in Greece," says Leake, "beyond the
bounds of Attica, more worthy of notice than these remains. The
temple at Aegina in some of its accidents or accompaniments may be
more picturesque, and the surrounding prospect more agreeable ; but
undoubtedly there are many persons who will prefer the severe grandeur,
the wildness, and the variety of this Arcadian scene, in which, amidst a
continued contrast of rugged mountain, forest, and cultivated land, there
is no want of objects interesting to the spectator by their historical
recollection. That which forms, on reflection, the most striking circum-
stance of all is the nature of the surrounding country, capable of pro-
ducing little else than pasture for cattle, and offering no conveniences
for the display of commercial industry either by sea or land. If it
excites our astonishment that the inhabitants of such a district should
have had the refinement to delight in works of this kind, it is still more
wonderful that they should have had the means to execute them. This
can only be accounted for by what Horace says of the early Romans :

Privatus illis census erat brevis,
Commune magnum.

This is the true secret of national power, which cannot be equally
effective in an age of selfish luxury."



CH, XLI THE TEMPLE AT BASSAE 395

The temple stands on a narrow rocky ridge which runs nearly north
and south. So narrow is the ridge that in order to find room for the
temple it was necessary to widen the ridge artificially by constructing a
platform about 22 feet broad along its western edge. On its eastern
side the ridge ends in a low line of precipitous rocks. The temple is
orientated nearly north and south. For this remarkable deviation from
the rule that Greek temples lie east and west, no more recondite reason
need be sought than the nature of the ground, which, while it affords a
fairly good site for a temple lying north and south, would have needed
to be supplemented by great artificial substructions if it had to be
adapted to a temple lying east and west. The temple rests, as usual,
on a three-stepped platform of masonry. Its length, measured on the
first step below the stylobate, is 125 ft 7 in. ; its breadth is 48 ft 2 in.
Thus the temple is unusually long in proportion to its breadth and
violates the canon laid down by Vitruvius (iv. 4) that the length of a
temple should be just double its width. The waUs, columns, and
entablature were built of a grey compact limestone, veined with white
and red, which is quarried on the neighbouring mountain ; the capitals
of the inner columns, the coffered ceilings of the north and south
porticoes, the roof-tiles, and the sculptures were all of marble. The
form and workmanship of the three steps leading up to the temple are
somewhat unusual. The riser or face of each step is undercut horizon-
tally and is left rough save for a drafted margin all round it ; and there
is a marked division perpendicularly between each pair of contiguous
blocks. A Doric colonnade ran all round the temple, with six columns
at each of the two narrow ends on the north and south, and fifteen
columns on the long east and west sides, the comer coliunns being
counted twice. Thus the total number of columns in the peristyle or
outer colonnade was thirty-eight Of these thirty-eight columns thirty-
five are still standing (or at least were standing in 1 890 when I visited
the temple), and almost all of them still support their architraves.
The columns which have fallen are the two at the southern end
of the west side and the one at the southern end of the east
side. The height of these Doric columns, including the capitals, is
19 ft. 5 ia ; their lower diameter is 3 ft 2 in., and their upper diameter
2 ft. II in. The intercolumniations are not regular, the distances
between the colunms even on the same side of the temple varying
considerably. Nothing of the gables or roof is standing, but abundant
remains of them lie in disorder on the ground. There were no
sculptures in the gables. This is proved not only by the condition of
the surface of the vertical stones composing the tympanum, but also by
the fact that the projection of the two cornices {geisa\ the horizontal
and the raking cornice, is identical ; for had there been sculptures
within the gable the raking or ascending cornice would, in conformity
with invariable Greek practice, have projected beyond the horizontal
cornice so as to form a roof over the sculptures and protect them from
rain and snow. But on the other hand ornaments of some sort
{akroteria) were placed on the apex and two extremities of each gable,
as appears firom the preparation of the stones at these points to


inn •■jfflL" iiQ


■


■


-?


.;•_


i-


i-


■


s ^H-


■ 1- -


- .-*-»


„


_


J 1


' y


i


^fi


^


■B-


v»


. f


:A|


r


CH. XLi THE TEMPLE AT BASS AE 397

receive them. The cymatium or band of ornament on the ascending
cornice of the gables exhibits a series of palmettes (the Asiatic cyma
recta) instead of the ovolo or * egg-and-dart ' pattern so commonly
employed at Athens. Seventeen rows of tiles covered the roof These
tiles are unusually large, measuring 3 ft 6 in. long by 2 ft. i in. wide.
They are of Parian marble, and differ from ordinary Greek tiles in one
remarkable respect In general a Greek temple was roofed with tiles
of two different sorts — flat tiles with raised edges laid side by side, and
gable-like covering tiles placed over the junctions of the flat tiles to
prevent the rain from penetrating between them. But in the temple at
Bassae the tiles are all of one sort ; each tile consists of a flat piece
with a raised edge at one side and a miniature gable-roof at the other,
so that when the tiles were placed side by side this miniature gable-
roof overlapped the raised border of the tile next to it, and served
instead of a separate covering tile. It is obvious that this system of
tiling afforded an even better protection against the weather than the
other, since it diminished by half the chance of rain finding its way
between the junctions of the tiles. The ceiling of the colonnade was
formed by slabs adorned with sunken panels. At the northern and
southern ends these slabs were of marble, and the panels were of three
different patterns (namely square and diamond-shaped in two varieties) ;
the rest of the colonnade, on the two long eastern and western sides of
the temple, was ceiled with slabs of limestone, and the panels sunk in
them were uniformly square.

The kernel of the temple, inside of the Doric colonnade which ran
round it, consisted of a central cella with a fore-temple (fironaos) at its
northern and a back-chamber {opisthodomos) at its southern end. The
cella is 54 ft 11 in. long by 22 ft 11 in. wide. The fore-temple is
considerably deeper or longer than the back-chamber, the depth of the
former being 18 ft., while the depth of the back-chamber is only 13 ft.
6 in. The lowest course of the eastern wall of the temple is mostly
standing. It is built of blocks about 3 ft. 6 in. high and broad and
20 in. thick. 1 The facade both of the fore-temple and of the back-
chamber was supported by two columns between antae^ and the
metopes of the entablature were adorned with sculptures of which some
fragments have been found and are now in the British Museum. Gates
or railings of metal seem to have shut off the fore-temple (but not the
back-chamber) from the outer colonnade. They were fastened to the
sides of the colunms and antae and fitted into an elaborately-moulded
marble step which formed a raised sill between the columns. The
columns and antae both of the fore-temple and of the back-chamber
are fallen.

The ceiling of the back -chamber consisted of blocks of marble
adorned with square sunken panels, which were further set off with
painting and gilding. Of the ceilings of the fore-temple and cella^ on
the other hand, no trace has been found, and we are left to conjecture
that they were of wood; the architect perhaps judged that these
chambers were too wide to be safely spanned by marble beams.

^ These are rough estimates of my own made on the spot



398 THE TEMPLE AT BASSAE bk. viii. arcadia

From the fore-temple a doorway about 8 ft 8 in. wide led into the
celliL The arrangement of the cella is very remarkable. Five short
cross-walls or buttresses, ending in half- columns of the Ionic order,
projected into it from either side at intervals of about 6 ft 5 in. The
length of each buttress, with the half- column, is about 3 ft 8^ in.
Remains of all these ten buttresses and Ionic half-columns are to be
seen in their places. Each half- column has ten flutes ; its lower
diameter is 2 ft. 2| in., its upper diameter is i ft 9^ in. The height
of the half - columns, including the capitals, was 20 ft S ii^ A.
remarkable feature of these Ionic capitals is that they have volutes on
three sides instead of on two. This is the earliest example known to
us of Ionic capitals with a volute on each face. The buttresses with
their Ionic half-columns rested on a step 3.75 inches high, which left
the central area of the cella at a correspondingly lower leveL The
effect of the protrusion of these short cross-walls or buttresses into the
cella from either side was to form a series of compartments like the side
chapels of some cathedrals. The same arrangement occurred in the
Heraeum at Olympia (see vol. 3. p. 589). Above the half - columns
and supported by them a marble frieze, sculptured with the battle of
the Greeks and the Amazons, and with the battle of the Lapiths and
Centaurs, ran all round the cella. This frieze has been preserved
entire and is now in the British Museum (see below). Thus we see
that the internal arrangement of the cella differed materially from that
generally adopted in Greek temples. As a rule the roof of the cella was
supported on each side by two rows of columns, one above the other,
the columns of the lower row being of a different order from the
columns of the upper row and taller than they, but not so tall as the
columns of the outer colonnade. In the temple at Bassae, on the other
hand, there was only a single row of columns (or, strictly speaking, of
half-columns) on either side of the cella^ and these half-columns were
taller than the columns of the outer colonnade.

Nor is this the only or the most remarkable peculiarity of the
temple. Between the last two buttresses and the south wall of the ulla
a space of about 1 5 feet intervenes, which may be supposed to have
been the inmost shrine where stood the image of the deity. The two
buttresses in question are set obliquely to the side walls of the cella
instead of (like all the other buttresses) at right angles to them ; and
between them, in the axis of the cella^ stood a marble Corinthian
column with exquisitely - wrought capital, which has since been bar-
barously mutilated. The column had 20 flutes ; its lower diameter was
2 ft. 2f in., its upper diameter i ft 9J in. The total height of the
column, including the base and the capital, was about 20 ft 6 in.
If this Corinthian column, of which the base was discovered in its place,
belonged to the original temple, as Stackelberg, Blouet, and Codcerell
all believed, it is the earliest known example of the Corinthian order.
But its existence in the temple as originally built has been doubted or
denied. Further — and this is the most singular feature in the temple —
the inmost part of the cella was provided with a doorway of its own,
6 ft. 4 in. wide, which opened through the eastern wall upon the outer



CH. XLi THE TEMPLE AT BASSAE 399

colonnade. In all the remains of Greek temples that have survived to
the present day there is not, I believe, any other example of a side door
to the cellcL The only plausible explanation of this architectural
anomaly is that the existing temple, facing north and south, had
replaced an older and smaller temple which, in accordance with Greek
custom, faced east and west ; and that when the large new temple was,
in compliance with the exigencies of the site, built facing north and
south, the religious prejudices of the worshippers required that the
image of the god should still face eastward, and that accordingly the
architect was obliged to open a doorway in the eastern wall through
which the worshippers might see and approach their deity as before.
We must therefore suppose that the image of Apollo stood in this
inmost part of the cella with its back to the west wall and its face to
the eastern doorway. Pausanias tells us (§ 9 and viii. 30. 3) that the
bronze image, 12 feet high, had been transferred to Megalopolis. But
it was apparently replaced by an image of the kind called acrolithiCy
that is, an image of which the extremities only were of marble, while
the rest of the figure was made of wood or other inferior material. For
in the inmost part of the cella^ where the image must have stood, there
were found fragments of the marble feet and hands of a colossal image ;
and that the image to which they belonged was acrolithic is inferred
from the existence in the hands and feet of holes in which dowels were
no doubt inserted for the purpose of attaching them to the image.
Two of these fragments are now in the British Museum ; one is the
fore part of a male right foot wearing a sandal ; the other is the palm
and base of the thumb of a right hand. Another fragment, foimd with
the rest, is supposed to have been part of Apollo's lyre.

The cella of the temple was believed by the architect Cockerell to
have been hypaethral, that is, to have had an opening for light in the
roof. He thought that such an opening was needed for the proper
appreciation of the frieze, which would else have been half hidden in a
dim twilight, and that its existence was positively proved by a fragment

of a roof tile which from its shape n 1 would seem to

have been placed at the edge of an ' ^

roof. There was no doorway in the
the cella from the back-chamber.



opening in the
wall dividing



The sculptured frieze which adorned the interior of the cella was
discovered under the ruins of the temple in 1 8 1 2 by a party of English
and German archaeologists, among whom were Baron Haller and the
architect C. R. Cockerell. In the following year the party, reinforced
by the accession of Baron von Stackelberg of Esthonia and the
Chevalier Bronstedt of Copenhagen, but without the architect Cockerell,
returned to Bassae, cleared the site of the temple, and disinterred the
sculptures from the superincumbent mass of ruins. Transported to
Zante, the sculptures were there sold in 18 14 to the British Government
for a nominal smn of 60,000 piastres (;£ 15,800), which, however,
through a disadvantageous exchange, was increased to ;£ 19,000. The
frieze now forms one of the chief treasures of the British Museum. It
is composed of twenty^three slabs of a marble which, according to



400 THE TEMPLE AT BASSAE BK. viii. arcadu

some, resembles Pentelic marble ; but it is rather a coarse-grained
yellowish-brownish marble. Prof. G. R. Lepsius observed at Bassae
blocks of a coarse-g^ned crystalline marble of a white colour tinged
with light grey; pieces of the same marble were seen by him at
Olympia, but nowhere else. He conjectures that it comes from one
of the islands of the Aegean. See G. R. Lepsius, Griechische Marmor-
studien^ p. 57. Whether the marble described by him is that of which
the frieze is composed does not appear. The slabs of the frieze are
each 2 fr. i^ in. high and about 3^ inches thick. They are of unequal
length, but together make up a total length of loi fr. ^ in. The frieze
formed by them ran roimd the cella above the half-columns ; it rested
on the upper edge of the architrave and was fastened by bolts into the
wall behind. Its length proves that, if the frieze as we have it is entire,
it could not have extended round the whole of the cella^ which was
nearly 5 5 feet long. We must, therefore, suppose that it adorned the
northern part of the cella only, stopping short at the two last half-
columns towards the south, and crossing over the cella between these
two half-columns, above the central Corinthian colunm. Hence it did
not extend into the inner shrine or Holy of Holies in which stood the
image of the god. The space to which the frieze was thus confined
was a rectangle with two long sides, one on the east and one on the
west, each measuring 35 fr. 9 in., and two short sides, one on the north
and the other on the south, each measuring 14 ft 2^ in. The slight
excess (i fr. 2\ in.) of the frieze over the length of the space which
it was intended to occupy may be explained by supposing that the slabs
overlapped each other a little at the angles.

The subjects represented by the sculptures are two, namely the
battle of the Lapiths and Centaurs, and the battle of the Greeks and
Amazons. The former subject occupies eleven slabs, with a combined
length of 45 ft. 6| in., while the latter occupies twelve slabs with a
length of 55 ft. 6 in. It would seem, therefore, that the battle of the
Greeks and Amazons filled two sides and a part of a third, while the
battle of the Centaurs and Lapiths was confined to one entire side and
the greater part of another. Each slab contains a separate group of
figures, proving that the sculptures were executed before the slabs were
placed in position in the cella; for had the slabs been first fixed in
their final positions and then sculptured, it is most likely that the
artist would have found it convenient, at least in some places, to allow
the groups and even the separate figures to flow over from one slab to
another. The same fact makes it difficult or impossible to determine
the exact order in which the slabs were arranged. Attempts have
indeed been made to determine the original order, but they rest on
very little positive evidence.

The figures are in high relief. The composition is extraordinarily
vigorous, animated, and varied ; the field is crowded with figures, and
the violence and passion of battle are portrayed with fiery energy and
with immense fertility and boldness of imagination. " If," says
Overbeck, " we leave out of consideration style in the strict sense, that
is the design and modelling of the figures, and consider simply the



CH. XLi THE TEMPLE AT BASSAE 401

contents of the frieze, we shall find that in sheer power of inventive
imagination it surpasses most of its possible rivals, and that hardly
anywhere can we point to a composition which in respect of variety of
theme and wealth of thrilling interest can vie with the frieze of
Phigalia." But combined with these high artistic merits are grave
blemishes. The execution of the sculptures, at once coarse and florid,
is by no means equal to the design. The figures are somewhat heavy
and thickset, the attitudes occasionally uncouth, and the faces dull and
expressionless. Worse than all, the proportions of the limbs and
bodies are often wrong ; this is especially observable in the hands, feet,
and legs. "The feet are long, the legs short and stumpy, and the
extremities ridiculous in the design, and imperfect in the execution, and
they resemble the style which is observed on the better kinds of Roman
sarcophagi" (Dodwell). To explain this union of imaginative power
with defective execution it has been suggested that the frieze was
desigpied by a great Athenian sculptor but carved on the spot by local
artists of mediocre or less than mediocre abilities. This was the view
taken by the painter Haydon, a good judge though a poor artist. He
says : " The Phygaleian marbles arrived. I saw them. Though full
of gross disproportions they are beautifully composed and were evidently
the design of a great genius, executed provincially " {Life of B, R.
Haydon, London, 1853, vol. i. p. 329). But to attempt to determine
the artist who designed or executed the frieze is, in the absence of all
positive testimony, mere guess-work. The names of Alcamenes and
Cresilas have, however, been suggested by different archaeologists.
Overbeck thought that the work must have been designed as well as
carried out by the local Arcadian talent.

A few of the scenes on the frieze may be mentioned.

Conspicuous amid the hurly-burly of battle are the figures of Apollo
and Artemis who have arrived in a car drawn by two stags. Apollo
has dismounted and is drawing his bow against a Centaur ; Artemis,
with one foot on the ground, grasps the reins. Elsewhere, two
women have taken refuge at a stiff archaic image of Artemis ; one of
them stretches out her arms in despair, the other clings to the image,
while a brutal Centaur is tearing her mantle from her body. But the
Centaur is himself hotly attacked from behind by a man who is kneeling
on the Centaur's back and is about to stab him with his sword. A
lion's skin hanging on a tree beside this group has been thought to
show that the man is Theseus. Another Centaur is rearing and kicking
with his hind horse's legs and hoofs at a Lapith, while with his human
arms he grasps another Lapith whom he is biting in the neck, and who
is thrusting his sword into the monster's belly. Again, two Centaurs
are heaving up a huge stone with which to crush into the earth the
invulnerable Caeneus, who, already half buried in the ground, is holding
up his shield above his head to avert the impending stroke. A similar
scene is represented on the west frieze of the so-called Theseum at
Athens (see voL 3. p. 521). In the battle of the Greeks and Amazons
a foremost place is taken by Hercules, who with the lion's skin wrapt
round* his left arm is striking with his club at an Amazon ; she is

VOL. IV 2D



402 THE TEMPLE AT BASSAE BK. viii. arcadia

drawing back and holding out her shield. This figure of Hercules has
been sometimes interpreted as Theseus. Behind Hercules (or Theseus)
a mounted Amazon, mortally woimded, is sinking with her horse to the
ground. A Greek has seized her by foot and arm and is about to fling
her to the groimd, when he is suddenly moved with pity and stoops
over her with grief-stricken face. This is not the only touch of pathos
and chivalry which the genius of the artist has introduced into the
battle of the men and women. One Amazon is seen tenderly supporting
the steps of a wounded Greek, while another carries off on her back a
Greek who has probably fallen by her hand Yet again, an Amazon
interposes to save a fJEillen Greek from the blow which another female
warrior is about to deal him. The battle of the Centaurs and Lapiths,
on the other hand, is redeemed by no such touches of humanity ; all is
ferocity, fury, and lust, as was to be expected in a contest between men
and monsters.

The twelve fragments of the metopes are too shattered to allow us
to determine their subjects with certainty. They have recently, how-
ever, been subjected to a searching examination by Prof. B. Sauer,
who has offered acute and plausible explanations of some of them, (i)
One fragment seems to represent Apollo with his lyre. It is the figure
of a man wearing the costume of a lyre-player, with a long tunic ^ing
to his feet and a flowing mantle. The tunic is confined by a broad belt
and bands which cross on his breast Long hair ^Is down on his
shoulders. He is standing turned a little to the spectator's right, but
his face is looking backwards to the left In his left hand, which is
broken off, he probably held a lyre. (2) Another fragment seems to
represent Orpheus or at all events a Thracian lyre-player. It represents
the head and upper body of a beardless man wearing a skin cap, a
sleeveless tunic girt round the waist, and a small cloak. Two bands,
crossing on his breast, are held together by a brooch in the form of a
Gorgon's head. With his raised left hand he seems to be playing on
a lyre, which is partly expressed in relief, and was probably further
indicated by colour. His face is seen in profile, for he is looking
towards the lyre. (3) Two fragments apparently belonged to a group
representing a man and woman seated opposite each other. The
woman, whose head, upper body, and left foot are preserved, wears a
veil, a sleeveless tunic, and a mantle, and seems to be coyly averting her
face from the man ; she is raising her right hand, wrapt in her mantle,
towards her face. The man on the other hand appears to be
endeavouring to overcome the woman's shyness and to oblige her to
show her face. His right hand is round the woman's neck, his left
hand is under her right arm, and his right foot is close to her left.
But beyond this and a doubtful trace of his left foot nothing of the
man remains. The scene may represent, as Prof. B. Sauer holds, the
marriage of Zeus and Hera. (4) Another fragment shows the torso of
an old bearded man, who may be supposed to have been standing and
leaning on a staff placed under his left arm. The folds and creases on
his naked breast and belly show that he is old ; his head seems to have
been sunk on his breast ; and he wears a mantle which crosses his



CH. XLi THE TEMPLE AT BASSAE 403

body from the right hip to the left armpit, while some folds of drapery
on his right shoulder indicate that the mantle was also drawn over his
head to serve as a hood. This hooded old man, with his head sunk on
his wrinkled breast, is interpreted by Prof. Sauer as the aged Cronus
moodily contemplating the stone wrapt in swaddling clothes which he
is about to swallow in the belief that it is his infant son Zeus. (5)
Another fragment represents the torso of a young and graceful woman
clad in a thin clinging tunic, with a mantle thrown over her left arm
and round her body from the waist downwards. In her right hand,
which reposes on her hip, she holds a pair of castanets ; in her lef^
hand, which is broken off, she may have held another pair of castanets.
Prof. Sauer interprets her as a nymph attending on the in^Emt Zeus and
drowning his squalls in the rattle of her castanets for the purpose of
saving him from the maw of Cronus, his cruel father. A similar
service was commonly said to have been performed for the infant by
the Curetes. (6) Another fragment represents a cymbal, and this is
supposed by Prof. Sauer to have been held by a nymph who may have
been clashing her cymbals for the same humane purpose that the other
rattled her castanets.

All the fragments which have just been described seem to have
belonged to the metopes at the north end of the temple. The sculptures
of these northern metopes, if Prof Sauer's explanation of the fragments
is right, fell into two groups, one relating to Apollo, the other to Zeus.
In the group relating to Apollo, the god himself appeared along with
Orpheus and perhaps the Muses ; while in the group relating to Zeus
were represented the outwitting of Cronus, the infant god surrounded
by nymphs who were playing on musical instruments, and lastly the
marriage of Zeus and Hera.

The artistic style of the metopes is more careful and finished than
that of the frieze, indeed it has been compared to that of the exquisite
reliefs on the balustrade of the Wingless Victory at Athens (vol. 2.
p. 259). But apart from their better finish the sculptures of the
metopes present the same essential characteristics as the sculptures of
the frieze. Both are in high relief ; both are marked by a florid treat-
ment of the drapery, by heavy thickset figiu-es, and by the stifiness and
lifelessness of the hands. Probably, therefore, they were both designed
by the same artist. The metopes may possibly have been executed by
the artist himself, while the frieze was carved by inferior workmen after
his desigpis. Prof. Sauer is of opinion that it was the metopes of the
outer colonnade which were sculptured, not (as the architects think) the
metopes above the entrances to the fore-temple and back-chamber.

With regard to the date of the temple, Pausanias tells us that it was
built out of gratitude to Apollo for having delivered the people of
Phigalia from the great plague of 430 B.C. But this statement appears
to be based merely on an inference drawn by Pausanias from the god's
surname and from the fact that the architect was Ictinus, the builder of
the Parthenon. On the other hand, we know from Thucydides (ii. 54)
that the plague scarcely touched Peloponnese ; and it seems unlikely
that an Athenian architect should have worked for a Peloponnesian city



404 THE TEMPLE AT BASSAE bk. viil arcadu

while the war between Athens and Peloponnese was raging. As Ictinus
was the architect of the temple, and we have no reason to suppose that
he survived the Peloponnesian war, we may conjecture that the temple
was built either before the outbreak of the war, that is, before 431 B.C,
or during its temporary cessation consequent on the peace of Nicias, id,
in 421 B.C or one of the immediately succeeding years. The fibridand
almost pictorial style of the sculptures, which can hardly have been
executed before those of the Parthenon, flEivours the later date. There
are some groimds for holding that the pestilence broke out again in 420
B.C, and it has been proposed to connect the foundation of the temple
with the deliverance of Phigalia from the plague of that year. See
Ch. Petersen, in Philologus^ 4 (1849), P* 234 sqq. That the partial
destruction of the temple is due to the fury of Christian iconoclasts
rather than to earthquakes appears from the fact, while the well-
buttressed and iron-clajnped walls of the cella have been destroyed, the
long rows of columns, though naturally weak from want of support, are
still standing almost entire.

The first modem traveller who is known to have visited the temple
at Bassae was a French architect named Joacchim Bochor, who acd-
dentally discovered it in November 1765. At the beginning of the
nineteenth century, in the years 1805 and 1806, the temple was visited
by the English travellers Leake, Dodwell, and Gell; and in 181 1 and
1 8 1 2 the ruins were thoroughly explored and plans and drawings of
them prepared by the party of English and German archaeologists,
who, as we have seen, discovered and carried off the sculptures, which
now adorn the British Museiun.

See Chandler, Travels in Greece^ p. 295 sq, ; von Stackelberg, D^r Apolhtem-
pel su Bass(u in Arcadien und die daselbst ausgegrabenen Bildwerke (Rome, 1826);
Stuart and Revett, Antiquities of Athens: Supplementary volume by C. R.
Cockerell, W. Kinnaird, T. L. Donaldson, etc. (London, 1830) (the description
of the temple at Bassae, comprising 18 pages of text with 11 plates, is by
the architect T. L. Donaldson); Expedition scientifique de MorSe: Architecture^
Sculptures y etc., par A. Blouet, 2. pp. 5-29, with plates 4-30 ; C. R. Cockerell,
The temples of Jupiter Panhellenius at Aegina and of Apollo Epicuritis eU Bassae
near Phigaleia in Arcadia (London, i860); Dodwell, Tour^ 2. pp. 384-389;
Gell, Itinerary cf the Alorea^ p. 81 sqq, ; id, ^ Journey in the Morea^ p. 109 sqq. ;
Leake, Morea^ 2. p. \sqq. ; Mure, yi?«rf/fl/, 2. p. 269 sqq, ; L. Ross, Reisen^ p.
99 sq. ; Curtius, Pelop, I. p. 324 sqq. ; Welcker, Tagebuch^ I. p. 275 sqq. ; W. G.
Clark, Pelop. p. 255 sqq. ; Vischer, Erinnerungen^ p. 455 sqq. ; Wyse, Pelop. 2.
p. 26 sqq. ; Bursian, Geogr. 2. p. 254 sq. ; Msihaffy, Rambles atui Studies in
Greece^ P* 317 ^qq' > Baedeker,' p. 318 sqq, ; Guide- Joanne^ 2. p. 297 sqq. ;
Baumeister's Denkmdler^ s.v. * Phigalia*; K. O. MUllcr, *De Phidiae vita et
operibus,* Kunstarchaeologische Werke^ 2. p. ii sq. ; /V/., *Ueber die Zeit der
Erbauung des Apollontempels zu Bassae bei Phigalia,* ib. 3. pp. 179-184; S.
Ivanoff, * II bassorelievo del tempio di Apollo Epicurio a Basse presso Figalia,'
Annali deir Inst/tuto, 37(1865), pp. 29-42; id., *La dispositione architettonica
della cella del tempio di Apollo Epicurio a Basse presso Figalia,' ib, pp. 43-54;
Michaelis, *Zum Tempel von Bassae,* Archaologische Zeitung, 34 (1876), p.
161 sq. ; K. Lange, 'Die Composition des Frieses von Phigalia,* Berichte iiber
die Verhandl, d, kon, sdchs. Gesell, d, IVissen. zuLeipzigy Philolog. histor. Classe,
32 (1880), pp. 57-69 ; A. S. Murray, History of Greek Sculpture^ 2. pp. 168-178;
Overbeck, Gesch, d. griech. Plastik^^ i. pp. 548-557 ; Lucy M. Mitchell, History
of ancient sculpturcy pp. 397-401 ; Fried erichs-Wolters, Gipsabgusse^ Nos. 880-
905> PP- 300-305 ; Bie, Kampfgrttppe und Kdmpfertypen in der Antike^ p. loi



CH. XLi MOUNT COTILIUS 405

sqq, ; A. H. Smith, Catalogue of Sculpture in the British Museum, i. p. 207
sqq, ; B. Sauer, ' Die Metopen des ApoUontempels von Phiealia,' Berichte Uber
die VerhandL d, k, sdehs, GeselL d. frissen, zu Leipzig", PhiL hist Classe, 1895,
pp. 207-250.

Marble copies of three of the slabs of the Phigalian frieze exist at Patras,
They were at first supposed to be ancient, but it has been proved that they are
modem. See L. Gurhtt, in Mittkeil, d, arch. Inst, in A then, 5 (18S0), pp. 364-
367; von Duhn, ib, 6 (1881), pp. 308 sq. ; Treu, in Archdologische Zeitung, 40
(1882), pp. 59-66; R. Klette, ib. pp. 165-168; A. S. Murray, Hist, of Greek
Sculpture, 2. p. 177 note.

41. 8. the ssonmetry of its proportions. The Greek is 1^9
apfiovlas €V€KaL By apfwvia Leake understood Pausanias to mean
** the nice adaptation of the stones to each other, or, in other words,
the fine execution of the masonry, and not the general harmony of the
proportions of the temple " {Morea, 2. p. 6). Leake thought that this
interpretation, which was accepted by E. Curtius {Pelop. i. p. 326) and
Mure (Journal^ 2. p. 271), was proved by other passages in Pausanias.
The only other passage which he refers to is ii. 25. 9 Ai^ia 6^ evT^p-
/Aocrrat '?raAat, (os fidkurra avrfuv Ikoxttov apfwviav rots ftcydkois kiOois
€?va^ where ap/wvla is certainly used in the sense of ' bond,' ' ligament'
Compare also viiL 8. 8 ol pkv yap (Xt^ot)— €i«n;5<iX7iv cjc twv appjovilav.
'X. 33. 7 Kurtros ol (sell, ry vay) irpooir^fjiVKiii^ pJkyas /cat liT\vp!6s SicXvorcv
€/c T(uv apyuovmv koX Sieaira rov^ XlOov^ air dXA^Acov. In ix. 39. 2
(rhv 8k avcorarco rtov XiOtav <fxurlv appjoviav iravrX cfvat r<{i oiKoSofirjfJLaTi)
the word apfuovla seems to mean * keystone.' In ix. 39. 9 {\6xriua y^s
coTtv ovK avTOfjLOTOVj dkka (rvv T€\vq /cat appavt^ irphs rh d/cpt^corarov
i^Ko8ofii]fievov) it perhaps means * accurate jointing,' the sense which
Leake, Curtius, and Mure give to it in the present passage. On the
other hand, see ii. 27. 5 ap/xovias 8€ n /cdAAovs €V€ica dp\iT€KT(t}v iroios
€S d/xtAAav IIoAvicActTi^ yevotr' civ a^toxpccos ; where appuovia clearly
means * symmetry of proportions.'

41. 8. the snmame of Averter of EriL See i. 3. 4.

41. 9. I have already shown etc See viii. 30. 3.

41. 10. a spring of water on Mount Ootilins. In a trough-like
hollow about ten minutes to the west-south-west of the temple at Bassae
there is a spring, the water of which soon disappears underground This
is probably the spring described by Pausanias. See Boblaye, Re-
cherches^ p. 166; Exp€d. scientifique de Morde : Architecture^ Sculp-
tures, etc, par A. Blouet, 2. p. 5 ; Cell, Itinerary of the Morea, p. 81
sq. ; id.^ Journey in the Morea, p. 109 ; L. Ross, Reisen^ p. 99; Curtius,
Pelop. I. p. 324; Bursian, Geogr. 2. p. 255.

41. 10. Aphrodite in Ootilnm etc The highest point of Mount
Cotilius rises just to the north of the temple at Bassae. A little below
the summit, about ten minutes to the north-west of the temple, is a
small cup-shaped dell surroimded by rocky slopes, but with an opening
to the south. Here there are foundations of an ancient temple, covered
with the ruins of a chapel. Large blocks and fragments of roof-tiles are
also to be seen scattered about These are probably the remains of the
temple of Aphrodite in Cotilum. See Expedition scientifique de Morde :
Architecture^ Sculptures ^ etc, par A. Blouet, 2. p. 5 ; Boblaye, Re-



4o6 THE CA VE OF DEMETER bk. viii. arcadia

cherches^ p. i66 ; L. Ross, Reisen^ p. loo sq, ; Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 324
sq, \ Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 255 ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 299.

42. I. Mount ElaiiiB there is a cave there sacred to

Demeter. According to Pausanias (viii. 41. 7) Mount Cotilius was on
the left and Mount Elaius on the right of Phigalia. But Mount Cotilius
is to the north-east of the city. Hence Mount Elaius is to be looked for
to the west of it. It is perhaps the mountain of Smarlina or Smerlina
which rises to the west and north-west of Phigalia. The cave of the
Black Demeter has been identified with a small cavern in the glen
of the Neda, about an hour's walk to the west of Phigalia. The
place is known in the neighbourhood as the stonUon ies Panagias or
Gully of the Virgin. To reach the cavern it is necessary to descend
into the ravine by a steep and narrow path which affords very little
foothold and overhangs depths which might turn a weak head. At the
awkward places, however, it is generally possible to hold on to bushes
or rocks with the hands. Thus we descend to the bed of the river,
which here rushes roaring along at the bottom of the narrow wooded
ravine, the precipitous sides of which tower up on either hand to an
immense height. The cave is situated in the face of a prodigious cUff
on the north side of the ravine, about a hundred feet or so above the bed
of the river, from which it is accessible only by a narrow and difl&cult
footpath. The ravine at this point sweeps round in a sharp curve, and
the cavern is placed just at the elbow of the bend. On the opposite side
of the linn, some fifty feet or so away, a great crag, its sides green with
grass and trees wherever they can find a footing, soars up to a height
about as far above the cavern as the cavern is above the stream. Hills
close the view both up and down the glen ; those at the upper end are
high, steep, and wooded.

The cavern itself, originally a mere shallow depression or hollow on
the side of the cliff, has been artificially closed by a rough wall of masonr)-,
apparently of recent date ; the plaster seemed to me fresh. In the
cavern thus formed a rough floor of boards has been run across at a
height of about 4 feet above the floor of the rock. Thus the grotto is
divided into two compartments, the upper of which has been converted
into a tiny chapel with an altar at the end and two holy pictures of
Christ and John the Baptist. In another comer of the chapel is an
artificial ledge, above which the rock is blackened with fire. On the
opposite wall are some faded frescoes. Light enters the little cave by a
small window (about 8 inches by 5) in the wall beside the altar. At
least half of the roof is artificial, being built of the same rough masonry
as the wall. Close beside this tiny cavern, to the east of it, may be seen
a still tinier grotto, separated from the former by a slight protuberance
in the rock. The same ledge of rock gives access to both grottoes.

What is called the stomion ies Panagias or Gully of the Virgin is a
tunnel, some hundred yards long, formed of fallen rocks and earth,
through which the Neda rushes in the ravine below the cavern. In
winter the swollen stream flows over the roof of the tunnel, but in
summer, when the river is low, you may walk through the tunnel and
admire the stalactites which hang from its roof.



CH. XLii THE CA VE OF DEMETER 407

Just before you ascend the narrow path to the cavern, you pass on
the right (north) the mouth of a narrow ravine, with exceedingly steep
and lofty sides. Down this glen pours a stream which, after tumbling
in a pretty cascade and then forming a deep pool, joins the Neda.
Thus the cliff in which is the cavern forms a sort of tongue or promon-
tory between the main ravine of the Neda on one side and the ravine of
this tributary stream on the other.

That the cavern just described was the cave of Black Demeter is
made probable ( i ) by its distance and direction from Phigalia, both of
which fairly agree with Pausanias's description ; (2) by the veneration
with which the place is regarded to this day, the people of Pavlitsa and
the neighbouring villages still holding an annual festival of the Madonna
on the spot, just as the Phigalians did in honour of Demeter (§ 11);
(3) by a legend, current here, that once upon a time the Madonna,
shocked at the incestuous love of a brother for his sister, took refuge in
this cavern. This tale can hardly be anything but a transformation of
the classical story of the incestuous love of Poseidon for his sister
Demeter and her sullen retirement into the cave. The grove of oaks
which grew round the cave in antiquity (§ 12) is still represented by the
oaks in the wooded ravine of the Neda ; and the spring of cold water
still trickles from the cave. But it is singular that in describing the
situation of the cave Pausanias should make no mention of the Neda,
which flows along in its deep bed not many yards below the mouth of
the cavern.

See Conze and Michaelis, ' Rapporto d' un viaggio fatto nella Grecia,' Annali
delV Instituto^ 33 (1861), pp. 57-61 ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 252 sq, ; Baedeker,'
p. 322; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 295 j^. ; Philippson, p. 311. From Beul^'s vague
and rhetorical description {^Etudes sur le Piloponnise^ p. 127 sqq.) it would seem
that he visited the siomion tes Panagitu but not the cavern. I visited the cave,
2Dd May 1890, and have described it from personal observation.

42. I. All tliat the people of Thelpnaa say etc. See viii. 25.

4 sqq,

42. 4* the head and the hair were those of a horse. We have
seen that on the robe of Demeter's image at Lycosura female figures with
beasts' heads are represented (above, p. 375 sq,") On an archaic vase
from Rhodes in the British Museum (B. 380), Medusa is depicted with
the body of a woman and the head of a horse. See Journal of Hellenic
Studies^ 5 (1884), pi. xliii., and p. 239 sq, ; CatcUogue of Greek and
Etruscan vases in the British Museum : vol. 2, Black-figured Vases^ by
H. B. Walters, p. 212. Figures with asses' heads and human (?)
bodies are painted on the wall of an ancient house excavated a few years
ago on the citadel of Mycenae (see vol. 3. p. 121). Ass-headed or
horse-headed monsters occur on the archaic Greek gems known as
Island or Mycenaean gems ; and it is worth noting that one of these
gems was found at Phigalia. On it we see two of the horse-headed
monsters standing on their hind-legs, and between them a man, who
is holding each of them by the lower jaw. See Milchhoefer, Die
Anfdnge der Kunst in Griechenland^ P* 54 sq, ; A. B. Cook, 'Animal
Worship in the Mycenaean Age,' Journal of Hellenic Studies^ 14



4o8 THE APOLLO OF ONATAS bk. viii. arcadia

(1894), pp. 81 sqq,^ 138 sqq. We may perhaps infer that hybrid forms
of this sort were commoner in the early than in the fully-developed art
of Greece. We have seen from Pausanias (viii. 41. 6) that not £u- from
Phigalia there was an image of Eurynome with the body of a woman
and the tail of a fish ; it was probably very ancient

42. 4. a doliihin a dove. As the dolphin was an attribute

of Poseidon and the dove of Aphrodite, the two together in the hands of
Demeter may have been intended to symbolise Poseidon's love for the
goddess. This is the explanation of W. Mannhardt (Mythologische
Forschungefty p. 250 sq.\ and I can suggest no better.

42. 5. how it caught fire. See viii. 5. 8.

42. 6. the nook of the toimeL The Greek is (njpayyos re /ivxov.
The word airjpayy€s is defined by Photius in his Lexicon to mean <* long
fissures under ground, as it were veins of the earth, along which
the water runs in search of a vent" (at virb yrjv vTrofi'qK€is cic/n^^ts,
oiov€l <f>k€/3€s Tiv€9 o^ai Tijs yrjsy as v7roTp€Xov TO vSoyp (rjfT^l
Bie^oSov), The word, therefore, describes exactly the stomtan ies
Panagias or Gully of the Virgin, through which the Neda rushes below
the cave of Demeter. See note on § i.

42. 7- a bronze Apollo at Pergamns by this Onatas. A pedestal
which probably supported the statue here mentioned by Pausanias has
been found at Per^amus. It bears the inscription

'Ovaras] 'ZfiiKtovos Alyivrjrqs [cttow^cv

I.e. " (Onatas,) an Aeginetan, son of Smicon, (made this statue)." Sec
Frankel, Inschrifien von Pergamon^ No. 48. Smicon is an archaic
form of Micon, the name of the sculptor's father as given by Pausanias
(v. 25. 10). The statue of Apollo by Onatas had no doubt been
transferred to Pergamus from its original place ; for Pergamus was not
founded till long after the time of Onatas. In the Greek Antholog>-
{AnthoL Palat. ix. 238) there is an epigram by Antipater in praise of a
bronze statue of Apollo by Onatas, which may have been the one here
mentioned by Pausanias. The last verse of the epigram implies that
Onatas either made the statue by the help of Ilithyia or made an image
of Ilithyia beside it. If the latter is the meaning, we have perhaps a
copy of Onatas's group on a medallion of Marcus Aurelius, which
represents Apollo with a female figure beside him ; Apollo is naked and
holds in his right hand a small four-footed creature, in his left hand
the bow. See Brunn, Gesch, d, griech, Kunstler^ i. p. 91 sq, Onatas
appears to have been one of the chief masters of the Aeginetan school
of sculpture ; hence it has been conjectured that the sculptures which
adorned the temple at Aegina must be, partly at least, by his hand. Cp.
A. S. Murray, Hist, of Greek Sculpture^^ i. p. 165 sqq, ; Overbeck,
Gesch. d, griech. PlasHk^^ i. p. 148 sqq. ; Collignon, Histoire de la
Sculpture grecque^ i. pp. 282-286. See also the next note, and note
on V. 25. 10. As to the Aeginetan school of sculpture, see note on v.

25. 13.

42. 8. Hiero died before he dedicated etc Hiero died in 467



CH. XLiii HEGIAS — EVANDER 409



B.C. (OL f%, 2) and in the next year Thrasybulus, his brother and
successor on the throne, was expelled from Syracuse (Diodorus, xi. 66
sqq,^ Hence it would seem that the statues executed by Onatas for
Dinomenes son of Hiero must have been finished in 467 or 466 B.C.
This fixes the date of the sculptor Onatas and agrees with other
evidence. See note on v. 25. 12. As to the votive offerings of Hiero
at Olympia, see vi. 12. i.

42. 9* Onatas, son of Micon, wrouglLt me etc An inscription
almost identical with this was carved by Micon on the base of another
of his works. See v. 25. 13.

42. 10. the Athenian Hegias. This sculptor was one of Phidias's
masters (Dio Chrysostom, Or, Iv. vol. 2. p. 169 ed. Dindorf). He
must therefore have flourished in the early part of the fifth century B.C.
Ancient writers sometimes call him Hegesias (Lucian, Rhetor, praecept,
9 ; Quintilian, Inst. Or, x, 1 2. 7). See Overbeck, GescA. d, griech,
Plastik^^ I. p. 154 sqq, ; Brunn, Gesch, d. griech, Kiinstler, i. p. 10 1
sq, ; A. S. Murray, Hist, of Greek Sculpture^ i. p. 225 j^. ; CoUignon,
Hist, de la Sculpture grecque^ i. p. 395 J^. A fragment of an inscribed
pedestal which supported a statue by this sculptor was found on the
Acropolis at Athens in 1889. It is of Pentelic marble and is scorched
with fire, from which we may perhaps infer that the statue perished in
the Persian sack. The inscription states that the statue was made by
Egias {sic). See C^ikriov dp)(aiokoytK6vy 1889, p. 37 sq, ; C, I, A, iv.
p. 203, No. 373'*. Prof. Furtwangler identifies as works of Hegias
the Apollo of Mantua and a fine bronze head of a young man which was
found on the Acropolis at Athens {Les Musses d^Athhus^ pi. xvi. ;
Collignon, Hist, de la Sculpture grecque^ i. p. 322 sqq,^ fig. 163). See
A. Furtwangler, Meisterwerke d, griech, Plastik^ p. 78 sqq. An in-
scription found at Olympia shows that there was an Athenian sculptor
Hegias in the imperial age : he and another Athenian sculptor made
a statue of the emperor Claudius which seems to have been set up in
the Metroum. See Die Inschriften von Olympia^ No. 642 ; Loewy,
Inschriften griechischen Kiinstler^ No. 332.

42. 10. Ageladaa. See note on iv. 33. 2.

43. 2. Evander. The legend of the settlement of an Arcadian
colony on the site of Rome would seem to be based on, first, the
resemblance of the names Palatium (the Palatine) and Pallantium,
and, second, the supposed resemblance of the Lupercalia to the Lycaean
games. The name of Evander's mother is variously given as Nicostrata,
Themis, and Carmenta or Carmentis. For the legend see Virgil, Aen,
viii. 5 1 sqq,y with the commentary of Servius ; Livy, i. 5 ; Varro, De
Lingua Latino^ v. 53 ; Pliny, Nat, hist, iv. 20 ; Ovid, Fcuti^ \, 469 sqq, ;
Solinus, i. §§ i, 10, 14, vii. 11; Justin, xliii. 6; Strabo, v. p. 230;
Dionysius Halicamasensis, Antiquit, Rom, i. 31 ; Plutarch, Quaest,
Rom, 56. In his life of Romulus (c. 21), Plutarch speaks of Car-
menta or Nicostrata as the wife, not the mother, of Evander. Cp.
J. R. Seeley*s * Historical examination,' p. 29 sq,^ prefixed to his
edition of Livy, bks. i.-x.

43. 3. when the Moan took up anna against Borne etc Capi-



410 DEEDS OF ANTONINUS bk. viii. arcadia

tolinus says briefly that Antoninus "compelled the Moors to sue for
peace " {Antoninus Pius^ v. 4).

43. 4* the Brigantians in Britain etc The Brigantians occupied
what are now the counties of York and Durham. Genunia is unknown,
but it has been conjectured to be Vinonia (Vinovia), now Binchester,
near Bishop Auckland in the county of Durham, where there are remains
of Roman walls and other antiquities. The statement of Pausanias
might lead us to suppose that some of the Brigantians were settled in
Caledonia, whence they made an incursion into the north of England.
But Mommsen thinks this supposition unnecessary; the Brigantians
in the north of England may have made raids on the peaceful tribes
under Roman protection and have been punished with the loss of part
of their territory. See Mommsen, Romiscke Geschichte^ 5. p. 172 note
I ; Smith's Diet of Greek and Roman Geogr.y articles * Brigantes' and
* Vinovia.* Of the operations in Britain in the reign of Antoninus Pius
it is said by Capitolinus that the emperor " conquered the Britons by his
lieutenant Lollius Urbicus, and after driving out the barbarians built a
wall of turf" {Antoninus Pius, v. 4). The wall of Antoninus is the one
between the Forth and Clyde, of which the ruins are popularly known
as * Graham's Dyke.' It was built in the year 142 a.d. See Elton,
Origins of English History^ p. 328 sq. i Schiller, Geschichie dcr
romischen Kaiserseit^ i. p. 632 sq.

43. 4- The Lycian and Oarian cities, also Gos and Rhodes etc.
Capitolinus mentions that in the reign of Antoninus Pius the towns in
Rhodes and Asia were laid low by an earthquake, and that the emperor
"marvellously restored them all" {Antoninus Pius, ix. i). The fearfiil
havoc wrought by this earthquake on the city of Rhodes is described by
the rhetorician Aristides ; if we can trust his account, the city was almost
destroyed. See Aristides, Or. xliii. p. 541 ed. Jebb (voL i. p. 800 sq.
ed. Dindorf). The earthquake seems to have happened between 153
and 159 A.D. See Mason, * De Aristidis vita collectanea historica,' in
Aristides, ed. Dindorf, 3. p. xlvi. sqq, ; Hertzberg, Gesch. Griechenlands
ufiter der Herrschaft der Romer, 2. pp. 92, 364 sq. \ Cecil Torr,
Rhodes in ancient times, p. 55. Rhodes must have been rebuilt very
quickly ; for some years afterwards Aristides speaks of Rhodes as the
most beautiful of Greek cities (p. 568 ed. Jebb; vol. i. p. 839 ed
Dindorf). Pausanias himself speaks of the walls of Rhodes as amongst
the finest he had ever seen (iv. 31. 5), probably referring to the new
city. Stratonicea in Caria was one of the cities which suffered from the
earthquake, for we learn from an inscription that it received 250,000
sesterces from the emperor (C /. G. No. 2721). It is doubtful whether
the earthquake here mentioned by Pausanias is the one of which he had
spoken before (ii. 7. i).

43. 5. all provincials who were Boman citizens etc. If a Greek
obtained the Roman citizenship for himself but not for his children, the
latter became legally aliens (^peregrini) to him, and he could not
bequeath his property by will to them. Hence at his death, his property',
unless he had bequeathed it to a Roman citizen, escheated to the
Imperial treasury. Formerly it would seem to have been customary in



CH. XLiv MEGALOPOLIS TO TEGEA 411

such cases for the Roman citizen to leave his property in trust for his
children ; but in Hadrian's time the senate decreed that the property
devised in trust for the benefit of aliens should be confiscated to the
treasury. Hence the decree of Antoninus Pius which Pausanias mentions
relieved Greeks who had the Roman citizenship from a very serious
inconvenience. See Gaius, ii. § 285 ; Hertzberg, Die Geschichte
Griechenlcmds unter der Herrschaft der Rdmer, 2. pp. 51, 361 sq.

43. 6. Antoninns the Second, who inflicted punishment on the
Germans etc. Marcus Antoninus waged war for many years with the
Marcomanni, Quadi, and other German tribes, also with the Sarmatians.
The war seems to have broken out in 166 A.D. and to have lasted, with
the interruption of a peace or truce, till the accession of Commodus in
180 A.D. Marcus Antoninus and his son Conmiodus celebrated a
triumph, 23rd December 176 A.D. It has been suggested that Pausanias
here refers to that triumph, and that accordingly the present passage
must have been written after that date. But to this view it has been
objected that, if this had been Pausanias's meaning, he would have
chosen a stronger and more definite expression than the vague phrase
"inflicted punishment" (rLfuapovfuvos cttc^^X^c). See W. Gurlitt,
C/eder Pausanias^ p. 59 sq, ; M. Bencker, in Fleckeiseris Jahrbiichery 36
(1890), p. 375 sq, \ R. Heberdey, in Archaeolog, epigraph. Mit-
theilungen aus Oesterreich-Ungam^ 13 (1890), p. 191. As to the German
and Sarmatian wars see Capitolinus, Marc. Anton. 12 sq., 17, 20, etc. ;
Dio Cassius, Ixxi. ; Eutropius, viii. 1 3 ; Smith's Diet, of Gr, and Ro^n,
Geography y article * Marcomanni ' ; Schiller, Geschichte der romischen
Kaiser zeit, i. p. 642 sqq. The triumph of 176 A.D. is mentioned by
Lampridius (Commodus, xii. 5).

44. I. the road from Megalopolis to Pallantiam and Tegea.
The route from the plain of Megalopolis to the plain of Tegea traverses
the smaller plain of Asea, which is divided from the two others by chains
of barren hills. The modem carriage-road runs east from Megalopolis
(Sinanou) across the plain, which is here flat and dull, then ascends the
low, barren, treeless, and unsightly hills in a series of zigzags to the top
of a pass which is about 11 00 feet above the plain of Megalopolis.
Thence it descends into the plain of Asea, a bare and dreary expanse
surrounded by equally bare and dreary mountains. The hills which the
road crosses between the Megalopolitan and the Asean plain are a
northern prolongation of Mt. Tsimbarou, the highest summit of which
(4100 feet) rises some distance to the south of the pass. The route
taken by the carriage-road is the most direct, but there are two other
routes, one to the north and another to the south, by which we may
proceed from Megalopolis to the plain of Asea, and it is not at first
sight clear which of the three routes Pausanias followed, (i) The most
northerly route goes by the village oi Sialesi, Though not quite so direct
as the route followed by the carriage-road, it is naturally easier than it,
and hence was used in preference by the inhabitants of Sinanou until
the carriage-road was made. (2) The most southerly route is at the
same time the most circuitous. The pass, which rises to a height of
1000 feet above the Megalopolitan and 300 feet above the Asean plain.



413 HAEMOmAE--ORESTHASIUM bk. viii. arcadu

starts from a point a little south of the village of Rhapsomati and
descends into the Asean plain near the village of Marmaria, This was
the Turkish route from Kalamatcty and Messenia generally, to Tripolitsa
in the plain of Tegea, but it has been almost wholly superseded by the
carriage-road mentioned above. A stream, which sometimes swells to
a torrent, flows this way from the Asean to the Megalopolitan plain at
the bottom of a deep and rocky gorge ; the Turkish road keeps several
hundreds of feet above it. This route, though longer than the other
two, has the advantage of being rather lower than they and easy of
ascent Further, since it is the obvious pass for travellers from
Messenia, and was no doubt so used in ancient as well as in Turkish
times, there must have been a regular track across it long before
Megalopolis was built

Which, then, of these three routes was the one followed by the
ancient road which Pausanias describes ? To answer this question we
must observe that Oresthasium or Oresteum (viii. 3. 2) was near both
the ancient road in question and the military road from Sparta to Tegea
and beyond (Herodotus, ix. 11 ; Plutarch, Aristides^ 10; Thucydides,
v. 64). As the military road from Sparta must have entered the Asean
plain from the south, it becomes probable that Oresthasium was in the
southern part of that plain, and hence that the ancient road from
Megalopolis to Asea, Pallantium, and Tegea followed the most
southerly of the three passes described above.

See W. Loring, in Journal of Hellenic Studies, 15 (1895), PP* 26-31.

44. I. the snborb of Ladocea. This perhaps occupied the site of
Sinanou^ the modem village which lies immediately to the south-east of
the site of Megalopolis. A battle was fought here between the Manti-
neans and Tegeans in the winter of 423-422 B.c. (Thucydides, iv. 134),
and here the Achaeans were defeated by Cleomenes king of Sparta in
226 B.a (Polybius, ii. 51 and 55).

44. I. a city called Haemoniae. A mile and a half to the south-
east of Sinanou (the modem representative of Megalopolis) lies the
village of Rousvanaga^ on the direct line between Megalopolis and the
pass by which the ancient road appears to have crossed over to the
plain of Asea. Just before entering the village, as you come from
Megalopolis, you pass on the left of the road a chapel of Hag. Marina.
A number of ancient blocks of limestone have been built into the chapel,
and others lie scattered about, all of them being apparently fragments
of a Doric shrine. And rather more than half a mile beyond the village,
on the left of the path, rises a little hill surmounted by vestiges of rough
walls, which probably formed part of an ancient fort. Potsherds are
strewn over the top and sides of the hill. Probably these are remains
of Haemoniae. See W. Loring, in Journal of Hellenic Studies^ 1 5
(1895), p. 31.

44. 2. some notable remaiiifl of the city of Oresthaflinin. This
place was known also as Oresteum (Paus. viii. 3. 2 ; Plutarch, Aristides^
10) or Orestheum (Herodotus, ix. 11 ; Thucydides, v. 64). The name
Oresteum was supposed to be derived from Orestes (Paus. Lc. ; Euri-



CH. XLiv ORESTHASIUM 413

pidesy Electro^ 1273-75). We have seen (p. 412) that the place lay on
the military road from Sparta to Tegea, probably in the southern part
of the Asean plain. Some ancient remains which are perhaps those
of Oresthasium have been discovered by Mr. W. Loring on a low hill
at the south-western edge of the plain, between the villages of Papari
and Marmarioy 3 miles south-west of the ruins of Asea. The hill,
which lies just to the right of the path from Papari to Marfnaria^ is one
of the last outlying spurs of Mt Tsimbarou, On its southern slope is a
chapel of the Holy Trinity {Hagia Triada) and on its northern slope a
chapel, now in ruins, of St. John {Hagios Giannakes), Built into the
former are several hewn blocks of limestone, of ancient Greek masonry ;
and built into the rude walls of the latter Mr. Loring found several
pieces of worked marble, including a small fragment of a Doric column
and a complete metope and triglyph from a Doric frieze. Besides
these remains of a temple there are abundant traces of human habita-
tion, consisting of rude walls, more or less buried, and coarse pottery ;
but that these are ancient cannot be confidently affirmed. At all events
there was an ancient temple here, and probably an ancient town or
village also. As the place is just where we should expect to find
Oresthasium, namely on the south-western border of the Asean plain,
and a little to the right of the ancient pass over the hills from
Megalopolis, the ruins are probably those of Oresthasium. The
fragments of a temple discovered by Mr. Loring may be those of the
sanctuary of Artemis mentioned by Pausanias.

The city of Oresthasium or Oresteum in the plain of Asea, the site
of which has thus been identified, is not to be confused with Orestia, a
quarter of Megalopolis (Stephanus Byzantius, s,v, McyaXi; iroXis). The
name of the quarter was taken from Oresthis, the district of which a
part, comprising Laodicium, was afterwards occupied by the city of
Megalopolis and its suburb Ladocea (Thucydides, iv. 134 compared
with § I of the present chapter of Pausanias). This district was ' the
Orestean plain ' where the matricide Orestes was said to have spent a
year of exile (Euripides, Orestes^ 1643-47). It no doubt extended as
far as Maniae, Ac^ and Finger's Tomb on the way from Megalopolis
to Messene (Pausanias, viii. 34. i sqq,)

See W. Loring, in Journal of Hellenic Studies, 15 (1895), PP- 27-31. Cp.
Leake, Morea, 2. pp. 45, 318 sq. ; id,, Pelop, p. 247 sq, ; Curtius, Pehp. I. p.
316 ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 227.

44. 2. Artemis, who is here snmamed Priestess. A votive relief
found at Tyndaris in Sicily and dedicated to Artemis as the divinity of
welfare (evTrpa^ia), represents the goddess in a manner which might
well characterise her as Priestess. She is dad in a short tunic which
leaves her right breast bare, and she stands holding a sacrificial basket
over an altar, while in her right hand she grasps a lowered torch with
which to kindle the sacrificial fire. See Annali deW Institnto, 20
(1849), Tav. H; L. R. Famell, The Cults of the Greek States, 2. pp.

463, 531.

44. 2. another place Athenaeum. Afler crossing the ridge of



414 ATHENAEUM— ASE A bk. viiL ARCADIA

Mt. Tsimbarou the road to Pallantium descends eastward into the
marshy plain of Asea, now called the plain of Franko-vrysi. The plain
is of an irregular outline, sending out bays in all directions among the
surrounding mountains; its average breadth may be 3 or 4 miles.
The road traverses it in a straight line through fields of maize and
com. The scenery is monotonous ; the hills which surround the
plain are bare, rocky, and barren ; a solitary khan is passed here and
there on the way. In winter the whole plain is said to be under water.
The Turicish road, already described (p. 411 j^.), strikes the modem
carriage-road at the khan of Davranda and the chapel of Pandeleemon
(< the All -merciful '). As this chapel is approximately 20 Greek
furlongs (a little over 2 miles) from the mins of Asea, it may very
well mark the site of Athenaeum ; perhaps it has succeeded to the
temple of Athena mentioned by Pausanias. Some ruined walls were
observed by the French surveyors in the plain to the west of the
chapel, below the village of Alika; but these seem now to have
disappeared. The place Athenaeum in the plain of Asea {Franko-
vrysi) is not to be confounded with the place of the same name near
Belemina which Polybius and Plutarch mention (see note on iii. 21. 3,
vol. 3. p. 372 sqq,)

See Boblaye, Rtchtrches^ p. 173 ; {Leake, Pelcp, p. 247 sq, ; id,^ Mana^ 2. p.
83; Curtlus, Pelop, i. pp. 264 sqq,, ^16. sq,, 343; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 227;
I^deker,' p. 295 sq, ; Guide-Joanne, 2. p. 319 ; Philippson, Peloponnes, p. 88 ;
W. Loring, in Journal of Hellenic Studies, 15 (1895), P« 32-

44. 3. ruins of Asea. Following the road eastward across the
plain of Franko-vrysiy we pass on the left (north) a low rocky hill which
rises abmptly from the plain close to the road and extends in the form
of a flat-topped ridge for a few hundred yards to the north-east, where it
falls away again as abruptly to the plain. This isolated little rocky hill,
distant about three-quarters of a mile to the east of the khan of Franko-
vrysi y was the acropolis of Asea. It is defended on all sides by rocks,
which in general run round the upper slopes of the hill, just under the
crest. The summit is flat and maybe from 100 to 150 yards in
breadth. Remains of fortification-walls are said to encircle the summit,
but though I walked all round the flat top looking for them I failed to
find them. All I saw was a single large squared ancient block,
scattered potsherds of the common red kind, and some loose stone
dykes, probably put up by shepherds or other rustics. On the other
hand considerable remains of an ancient fortification-wall do exist below
the summit on the south-western side of the hill descending in a straight
line towards the plain. The wall, which is conspicuous from the high
road, descends the slope for some 30 yards or so. It is 12 feet thick
and is standing to a height of 10 feet ; the number of courses preserved
is six. The material is grey limestone. The blocks are large ; they
are hewn and arranged in a style intermediate between the quad-
rangular and polygonal, but inclining rather to the quadrangular.
Until lately there was at least one other massive wall nmning down
from the summit of the hill towards the plain. In 1895 I saw no wall



CH. XLiv ASEA— SOURCE OF ALPHEUS 415

but the one I have described. Possibly the remains of the other walls
mentioned by previous travellers have been removed to help in the
construction of the line of railway which is now being carried through
the plain of Asea. Mr. Loring, who seems to have observed at least
two fortification-walls descending the slope of the hill, would explain
them by supposing that there were originally two circuit - walls, an
inner one round the top and an outer one round the foot of the hill,
and that two or more cross-walls, descending the slope of the hill,
reached from the inner to the outer circuit-wall "so as to divide the
intervening space into a number of sections, rather like the water-tight
compartments of a ship. The effect of this was that, in case of a
breach in the outer wall, the mischief would be concentrated, only one
part of the circuit of the inner wall being exposed to attack ; while the
enemy would find himself cooped in between three walls — one in front
of him and one on either side — all defended by the garrison." Accord-
ing to Mr. Loring there are clear indications of a similar arrangement
on the fortified hill of SL Andrew in the Thyrean plain (see vol. 3. p.
307 sq.\ and the same system was carried out in mediaeval, and
perhaps in ancient, times in the fortifications on Mt. Chelmos^ the
mountain on the borders of Laconia and Arcadia (see vol. 3. p. 372
sq,) At the south foot of the hill, between it and the high-road, I
observed a quantity of plain red pottery strewn about Probably the
lower town stood here.

See Leake, Morea^ i. p. 83 sq, ; iV/., 2. p. 46; Gell, Itinerary of the Morea^
p. 137; Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 173; L. Ross, IVaruUrungen in Griechenkmd,
I. p. 223 ; Curtius, Pelop, I. p. 266 ; Bursian, Geogr. 2. p. 226 sq. ; Annali delt
InstiiuiOf 33 (1861), tav. d' agg. F ; Baedeker,' p. 295 sq. ; Guide -Joanne, 2. p.
318 sq. ; W. Loring, va Journal of Hellenic Studies, 15 (1895), P« 32.

44. 3. Abont five farlongs from Asea axe tbe soarces of the
Alphens and Eurotas etc. Similarly Strabo says (viii. p. 343) that
the sources of the Alpheus and Eurotas were near each other, at Asea
in the district of Megalopolis, and that both streams disappeared tmder-
ground for many furlongs. The place at which the Eurotas reappeared
was, according to Strabo, in the district of Belemina (see iii. 21. 3
note). Elsewhere (vi. p. 275) the same writer reports a fable that if
garlands dedicated to the Alpheus and Eurotas respectively were thrown
into the imited stream at Asea, each garland would afterwards reappear
in the river to which it was dedicated. Polybius, without mentioning the
Eurotas, says (xvi. 17) that the Alpheus, not far from its source, dis-
appears undergroimd, and that 10 furlongs farther on it reappears in the
district of Megalopolis. To these accoimts of the origin of the Alpheus
must be added the opinion of Pausanias (viii. 54. 1-3) that the spring
of the Alpheus at Asea had its origin in the water of the river now
called the Saranta-f^otamos, which disappeared down a chasm in the
Tegean plain. But as this last opinion is certainly erroneous (see note
on viii. 54. i) and appears not to have been shared by the ancients,
it may be neglected.

The two sets of springs which the ancients regarded as the sources
of the Eurotas and Alpheus can still be easily recognised. If we



4i6 SPRINGS OF FRAiVKO-VRYSI BK. viii. arcadu

follow the high-road eastward from the ruins of Asea through fields of
maize and wheat, we come, in about ten minutes, to the poor khan of
Franko-vrysi standing at the foot of the bare, low, flat-topped hills which
here bound the plain on the north. Some hundred yards or so to the
east of the khan, beside a mean house, a spring rises in a basin-like
hollow on the south side of the road ; a few feet to the south its water
appears as a tiny rill flowing beside a hedge with a couple of poplars
growing on the bank. Another spring rises in front of the mean house
already mentioned, and a few yards £uther to the east a third small
spring issues directly from under the road. Together these springs are
known as Franko-vrysi (* The spring of the Frank '), and have given
their name to the neighbouring khan ; indeed the whole plain of Asea
is at present called after them the plain of Franko-vrysi, These are the
springs which Pausanias and the ancients regarded as the source of the
Eurotas.

On the opposite side of the plain, about a third of a mile to the
south, another group of springs rises at the foot of a hill, just beyond
the embankment of the new railway. These are the springs which the
ancients identified as the source of the Alpheus. To these springs
should be added a third group of springs which rise about a mile and a
half from the khan of Franko-vrysi^ at the eastern end of the plain, not
far from the khan of Talagani,

The water from all these springs ultimately unites and flows in a
body south-westward across the plain towards a gorge in the hills near
the village of M armaria. It is through this gorge that the new railway
makes its way from the plain of Asea {Franko-vrysi^ to the plain of
Megalopolis, which is about 700 feet lower than the former. In its
course across the plain the water of the springs receives important con-
tributions both from a series of surface streams descending from the
hills in various directions and from a lake or swamp, haunted by wild
ducks, which generally covers the centre of the plain in front of the
village of Papari, Thus all the water from the springs of Franko<frysi
makes its way towards the gorge ; but only a small part of the water
which flows toward the gorge has its origin at Franko-vrysi, Just
before the entrance to the gorge there is a series of chasms {kata-
vothras) in the earth. In marked contrast to the great rocky chasms
which receive the waters of the neighbouring Tegean plain and of the
Copaic plain in Boeotia, these chasms at Marmaria are merely holes in
the soft ground down which, when they are open, the water flows in a
considerable stream. Sometimes, however, the holes are partially or
even perhaps wholly choked. When this happens, the water, instead
of engulfing itself in the chasms, pursues its course overground ; and,
being swollen by two more surface streams which join it on the right
bank just beyond the chasms, makes its way right through the gorge to
the Megalopolitan plain, which it reaches a little to the east of Rhapso-
fnati. At the far end of the gorge, where it opens on the lower plain,
there is a group of springs which rise beside the river among rocks
shaded by gigantic plane-trees. These springs are unquestionably the
place called Pegae (* springs') by Pausanias, where he believed that



CH. XLiv SPRINGS OF FRANKO-VRYSI 417

the water of the Alpheus, after flowing underground from the plain
of Asea, reappeared in the plain of Megalopolis. The belief appears
to be well founded, but we must distinguish between the springs. The
springs on the right bank of the ravine are clear, cool, and perennial ;
even after a thunderstorm, when all ordinary streams run thick with
mud, the water of these springs is as limpid as ever. Obviously, there-
fore, these clear springs can have nothing to do with the stream which,
after draining the plain of Asea, flows into the chasms at Marniaria,
But, on the other hand, the springs on the left bank of the ravine,
which are intermittent and comparatively turbid, have all the appear-
ance of coming from the plain of Asea ; and if it be true, as Mr. Loring
was informed, that the time when they cease to run coincides with the
time when the stream in the plain of Asea is dry, there can be no doubt
that they do so come. Thus it appears that the water of the springs
near Asea {Franko-vrysi)^ combined with a great deal of surface water
from other parts of the plain, does make its way, overground or under-
ground, to the place called Pegae by Pausanias and goes to feed the
Alpheus. But the principal springs at Pegae, which are clear and
perennial, have nothing to do with the springs near Asea.

So much for the origin of the Alpheus. With regard to the Eurotas,
the ancients believed, as we have seen, that after flowing in a single
stream with the Alpheus across the plain of Asea, it disappeared with it
into the chasms at Marniaria^ but separating from it somewhere under-
ground reappeared by itself in the district of Belemina. The point
where it was supposed to reappear would seem to have been the copious
spring now called the Kephalovrysis Logaras^ at the north-western foot
of Mt. Chelmos (see note on iii. 21. 3); for this is by far the most
important spring in the district of Belemina and is one of the chief
sources of the Eurotas. Leake thought that this spring had the appear-
ance of being an emissory, and he considered it not impossible that the
stream which enters the chasms at Marmaria might divide in two
under the mountain, and that one branch of it might reappear at
Kephalovrysis Logaras to form the Eurotas. To this view it is objected
by Mr. Loring that the whole body of the water which disappears at
Marmaria would seem to reappear at Pegae ; and that the spring
called Kephalovrysis Logaras is " too clear, too cool, and too constant
to owe its origin to so variable a supply." The south-eastern branch
of the plain of Asea, near the village of Lianou^ is indeed drained
directly above ground by the Eurotas ; but the stream which flows from
this comer of the plain to swell the Eurotas has no connexion either
with the springs near Franko-vrysi or with the chasms down which
their water disappears at Marmaria,

See Leake, Morea, i. p. 84 ; id., 2. p. 46; fV/., 3. p. 36 sqq, ; Gell, Ititurary
of the Morea^ pp. 97 sq.y 137 ; Boblaye, Reckerches^ p. 173 ; Expedition
scientifiquc de Morie : Relation^ par Bory de Saint-Vincent, p. 404 sq, ; Curtius,
Felo/f. I. p. 265 sq, ; Bursian, Geo^, 2. p. 187 ; Baedeker,' pp. 293, 295 ;
Guide-Joanne, 2. p. 318 ; E. A. Martel, in Revtu de Giographie^ April 1892,
p. 247 sqq, ; W. Loring, va Journal of Hellenic Studies^ 15 (1895), PP* 33» 67-71.

44. 3. two lions made of stone. The Alpheus was called, prob-

VOL. IV 2 E



4i8 MOUNT BOREUS bk. viii. arcadia

ably by a poet, * the ford of the lion ' ( Acovrcios vopos) on account of the
images of lions which stood at its source (Hesychius, s.v. Acovrctos vopos).

44. 4. From Asea there is a way np Mount Borens etc. The
plain of Asea, which Pausanias has now traversed on his way from
Megalopolis to Pallantium, is bounded on the east by a range of dreary
little hiUs which divide it from the great plain of Tegea. More dismal
hills it would be hard to imagine. There is hardly a bush to break the
monotony of their shapeless, stony slopes. The highest summit of the
range, now called Mount Kravari^ is probably the Mount Boreus of the
ancients. At present the high-road from Megalopolis to TripoUisa
quits the plain of Asea at its north-eastern comer and descends into a
branch of the great Tegean plain just to the north of Pallantium, the
site of which it passes on the right. But the ancient road must have
followed a pass somewhat farther to the south, for Pausanias gives us to
understand that after crossing the hills the traveller had to diverge to
the left (that is, to the north) in order to reach Pallantium. Thus the
ancient road crossed Mount Kravari to the south, while the modem
road crosses it to the north, of Pallantium. The pass which the ancient
road followed is identified by the remains of an ancient temple which
was most probably the sanctuary of Saviour Athena mentioned by
Pausanias. The ruins, situated at the highest point of the pass where
it is hemmed in by rocks on both sides, consist chiefly of fragments of
Doric columns, the flutes of which range in width from rather more than
3 inches to rather less than 4 inches. At the beginning of the nine-
teenth century the remains were more considerable. In 1806 Leake
observed the foundations of the temple and fragments of Doric columns.
When L. Ross visited the site in 1834 the greater part of the temple
still existed, though in ruins. He found that the columns had twenty
flutes and measured about 5 J feet at the base, and that the grooves of
the triglyphs were 3 inches wide. The temple seemed to him to have
been either prostyle or amphiprostyle, that is, to have had columns
either at one or both of the narrow ends but not on the sides. He says
the temple was built of white marble ; but according to Leake the
material was the native rock of the mountain. When Ross revisited
the place in 1840 he found that most of the remains had been carried
off by the inhabitants of the neighbouring village of Valtetsi to repair
a church. To such uses are the venerable monuments of antiquity too
often put by the modem Greek peasantry.

It is to be observed that although Pausanias describes the temple as
standing on the top of the mountain, the remains are situated not on
the top of the mountain (Mount Kravari) but only on the top of one of
the passes leading over it. The real summit of the mountain, some
little way to the south of the pass, bears no traces of a temple. Tliis
inconsistency with the description of Pausanias might lead us to look
for the sanctuary of Saviour Athena elsewhere. In point of fact Mr.
W. Loring discovered the remains of a large temple within a very few
feet of the summit of a conspicuous hill {St, Elias\ which rises about 2
miles to the north-west of Asea, beside the village of Kandreva, The
ruins comprise foundations together with fragments of marble columns



CH. XLiv MOUNT BOREUS—THE DYKE 419

of the Doric order. The flutes of the columns range in width from 3^
inches to 4^ inches. There are also fragments of triglyphs. Clamps,
both of the ^— f and of the r-^J shape, were used. From the remains
of the foundations it would seem that the temple was peristyle, i,e, sur-
rounded by a colonnade, and that it measured on the outside 95 feet in
length by 40 feet in breadth, the length of the alia being 74 feet and
its breadth 22^ feet, both measured on the outside. But a ruined
church of Hagios Demos occupies the site, and without the removal of
its ruins accurate measurements of the temple cannot be obtained. If
the temple was the sanctuary of Saviour Athena mentioned by Pausanias,
it follows that the mountain on which it stands (Mt. St, Elicu) is the
ancient Mount Boreus. This hypothesis is quite consistent with the
language of Pausanias ; but as our author has been describing the route
from Megalopolis to Pallantium and has given no indication that he
diverged from it to visit Mount Boreus and the sanctuary of Athena,
it is better on the whole to identify that mountain and sanctuary with
Mount Kravari and its ruined temple, which lie directly on the route
from Megalopolis to Pallantium, rather than with Mt. St, Elias and its
temple, which lie quite off the route and about 2 miles distant from it.

See Leake, Morea, i. p. 84 ; xV/., 3. p. 34 sq, ; Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 173 ;
L. Ross, Reisetty p. 63 sqq, ; iV., Wanderungen in Gruchentand^ i. p. 223 ;
Curtiiis, Pelop, i. pp. 248, 264 ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. pp. 187, 224 ; Baedeker,'
pp. 279, 295 ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 318 ; W. Loring, m Journal of Hellenic Studies^

15 (1895). P- 33 sq.

44. 5. What is called the Dyke etc. The word (x(<>/^) l^ere
translated < Dyke ' should rather be translated * Mound.' It applies
to any artificial bank or mound of earth, whatever its shape. The
Dyke or Mound which Pausanias mentions evidently lay in the plain at
the eastern foot of the pass over Mount Boreus (Mt. Kravari), Hence
it has been commonly identified with a causeway which runs across the
narrow neck of plain between Mount Kravari and the low hills opposite,
striking the latter near the village of Birbati, The causeway consists
of two parallel rows of great unhewn stones, piled together, with a space
between them. From whatever period it may date (a point which we have
no means of settling), the causeway was evidently intended to resist the
encroachment of the swamp or lake, now called the Taka^ which nearly
always covers a considerable part, and often the whole, of the plain to
the south-east of it. This purpose the causeway still serves to a limited
extent. The first to identify it with the Dyke or Mound of Pausanias
were the French surveyors, and their view has since been generally
accepted. But there are grave objections to it, which have been well
pointed out by Mr. W. Loring. (i) The pass over Mt. Kravari
(Mount Boreus) which debouches at the western end of the causeway
is not the one by which Pausanias crossed the mountain, but another
considerably to the south of it and not at all on the direct route from
Asea to Pallantium and Tegea. (2) The causeway runs approximately
north-east and south-west across the plain ; hence, though it might very
well have divided the plain of Tegea from that of Pallantium, it could
not have divided (as Pausanias says the Dyke or Mound did) the terri-



420 THE DYKE — PALLANTIUM bk. viii. arcadia

tory of Megalopolis from the territories of Pallantium and Tegea. Hence
we must look elsewhere for the Dyke or Mound. That it was at the
eastern foot of the pass over Mount Boreus {Kravari) seems certain,
since the roads to Pallantium and Tegea diverged from each other at it,
the plain of Pallantium lying to the north of it and the plain of Tegea
(the Manthuric plain) to the south. Now at the eastern end of the pass
by which, as we have seen, Pausanias crossed the mountain, there is a
little rocky hill just on the verge of the plain. It is detached from
the slope of the mountain and almost blocks up the mouth of the pass.
The traveller who has crossed the pass is bound to skirt the hillock on
one side or the other — on the left or north side if he is going to Pal-
lantium, on the right or south side if he is going to Tegea. This hillock
is identified by Mr. Loring with the Dyke or Mound mentioned by
Pausanias. The only objection to the identification is that the Greek
word {xiayM.) is more properly applied to an artificial than to a natural
mound. But, as Mr. Loring well points out, Pausanias himself seems
to have felt that the common name of the rocky hillock was inappro-
priate ; for whereas in speaking, as he often does, of an artificial mound
he regularly uses the expression " a mound of earth " {y7]% \Ciim\ in
speaking of the Dyke or Mound in question he twice qualifies it as " the
so-called Mound" {to 6vofia(6fji^vov x^/^^ ^^^^- 44* 5 ^^^ 7)* ^^ ^
events, if the Dyke or Mound was not the little rocky hillock it must
have been an artificial mound erected on or beside it

The swamp or lake of TaJta^ of which mention has been made,
receives all the waters of the south part of the plain of Tegea and dis-
charges them through a great chasm (katavothra) at the foot of Mt
Kravari^ about 2 miles to the south-east of Pallantium. The mouth of
the chasm, which is turned to the north, resembles a lofty arched cave
in the perpendicular face of the limestone rock. An artificial dyke has
been constructed in front of the cavern with an opening through it to
allow the water to pass ; but a grating is fixed in the opening to arrest
the trunks of trees which might otherwise be swept down into the chasm
and choke the underground passage. A winding canal conducts the
waters of the swamp to the mouth of the cavern. After the drought
and heat of summer the canal, like the swamp itself, occasionally runs
dry and its bottom presents merely a slough of fetid mud. Pausanias
imagined that the water which disappears down this cavern in the face
of Mt. Kravari reappears at the springs of Franko-iTysi near Asea.
But this is a mistake. See viii. 54. i note.

See Boblaye, RechcrcheSy p. 173; L. Ross, Reisen^ p. 59 sqq, ; Curtius, Pelop.
I. p. 262 sq. ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 217 ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 318 ; Philippson,
PelopomuSy pp. 84, 107 sq. ; E. A. Martel, ' Les Katavothres du Peloponnese,'
Revue de Ciographie^ May 1892, p. 336 sqq. ; V. Berard, in Bulletin dc Corrcsp.
/ullenique, 16 (1892), p. 535; W. Loring, in Journal 0/ Hellenic Studies^ 15
(i895)» P- 34 ^i'-

44. 5. Pallantium. The ruins of Pallatium were discovered by the
P'rench surveyors in the early part of this century. The acropolis
occupied the summit of a conical green hill of moderate height, which
rises at the south-west side of the great plain of Tegea, close to the



MAHTTNEA &. TEGEA


London -. MnQuillui S: C?L'f



CH. XLiv PALLANTIUM 421

slopes of Mt Boreus (Mt. Kravari), The modem high-road from
Megalopolis to Tripolitsa^ immediately after crossing Mt. Kravari^
runs at the northern foot of the hill. Traces of the fortification-wall
may be seen round the summit, and on the highest point of the hill are
the foundations of a temple, doubtless the sanctuary of the Pure Gods
mentioned by Pausanias. A little lower down, on the south-eastern
slope, there is another foundation. The town was situated in the plain
at the northern and eastern foot of the hill, and appears to have occupied
a considerable area ; but most of the stones have been carried away to
build the neighbouring town of Tripolitsa. However some foundations,
tiles, potsherds, and heaps of stones may be seen, especially in the fields
a little to the north of the hill, where statues and bas-reliefs are said to
have been found at the beginning of the century. Near a fountain there
are the foundations of a temple.

See Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 146 ; L. Ross, Reisen^ p. 62 sq, ; Curtius, Pelop.
I. p. 263 sq, ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 223 ; Baedeker,' p. 295 ; Guide-Joanne^ 2.
p. 318.

44. 7. the Manthuric plaiXL This must have been the south-
western portion of the great plain of Tegea, round about and including
the swampy lake of Taka. On the slopes of the hills which here bound
the plain on the south are the modem villages of Garouni and Kapareli.
Near the former village the French surveyors found a plateau covered
with ruins, and in a chapel, near the brook, some fragments of an Ionic
temple. At present all the remains of antiquity here consist of a pro-
fusion of scattered potsherds, together with one or two architectural
fragments lying close to the chapel of the Panagia. The villagers told
Boblaye that on the summit of a small hill which rises immediately
behind the plateau there were ancient ruins. A ruined chapel of St.
Elias, which stands on the top of the hill, may perhaps occupy the site
of an ancient temple or watch-tower. At any rate Mr. Loring found
there remains of two foundations, orientated somewhat differently ; and
he thought that one of them, which is built without mortar and of
larger stones than the other, might be ancient. The remains on the
hill and the plateau are probably those of Manthyrea, one of the original
townships of Tegea (Paus. viii. 45. i), which Stephanus Byzantius
describes (s,v, Mav6vp€a) as a village of Arcadia.

See Boblaye, Recherchts^ p. 145 ; Leake, Morea^ I. p. 120 sq, ; id,^ 2, p. 47 ;
L. Ross, Reisen^ P' ^^ ^^' > ^^^^e and Michaelis, in Annali delt Institttto^ 33
(1861), p. 32; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 318; W. Loring, va Journal of Hellenic
Studies, 15 {1895), P- 35-

44. 7* Mount Oresins. This must be the little, isolated rocky hill of
Vouno which rises from the plain about 2 miles to the west of Piali
(Tegea). Here there are foundations and remains of ancient walls built
of great polygonal blocks. On his way from Pallantium to Tegea
Pausanias would pass this hill on the right (south), as he says.

See L. Ross, Reisen, p. 59 ; Curtius, Pelop, i. pp. 262, 273 so, ; Bursian,
Geogr, 2. p. 223 ; Baedeker,' p. 295 ; Guide-Joanne, 2. p. 318 ; W. Loring, in
Journal of Hellenic Studies, 15 (1895), p. 35.



422 TEGEA BK. VIII. ARCADIA

44« 8. the Lenconian fonntaiiL This may perhaps be the spring
at Kerasitsa^ a village about twenty minutes west of Piali (Tegea).
Boblaye, however, identified the Leuconian spring with a fine source
at Kamari^ a village farther to the south. See Boblaye, Recherckes^
p. 145; L. Ross, Reisen^ p. 59; Curtius, Pelop. i. p. 262; Bursian,
GeogK 2. p. 223; W. Loring, in Journal of Hellenic Studies^ 15

44. 8. the city of Tegea. Tegea stood in the southern portion of
that great eastern plain of Arcadia, of which the district of Mantinea
occupied the northern part. The plain of Tegea is wider than that of
Mantinea, its surface is less uniformly flat, being diversified by undula-
tions, and the hills which surround it are lower. The soil, which in
places is stony and light, in others a rich black loam, is well cultivated,
producing excellent wheat and barley, also vines and mulberry-trees.
The general slope of the plain, though scarcely perceptible, is toward
the south, where the accumulated waters form the swampy lake of Taka,
A low ridge crosses the northern end of the plain, separating the waters
which flow southward to the lake of Taka from the waters which flow
north and east to a swamp near the village of Vertsova^ on the way to
Argos. The plain to the south of this ridge is about 10 miles in cir-
cumference and contains no less than eighteen villages. It is about
2200 feet above the level of the sea ; the climate is intensely hot in
summer and piercingly cold in winter. The marshy soil breeds fever.
The city of Tegea stood somewhat nearer to the eastern than to the
western side of the plain. Very few remains of it are to be seen.
Many of the ancient foundations are probably buried under the deep
alluvial soil, and many of the stones have been carried off to build the
neighbouring villages, and especially the large and flourishing town of
Tripolitsa^ which under the Turkish Government was the capital of the
Morea. The exact area included within the ancient city has not been
determined, but it appears to have been very considerable, as remains of
antiquity have been discovered at places some distance apart, notably on
the low hill oi Hagios Sostis to the north (see notes on viii. 53. 7 and 9),
at the conspicuous isolated church of Palaeo-Episkopi^ where are the
remains of the theatre (see note on viii. 49. i), and near the church of
Hagios Nikolaos in the village of Piali (see note on viii. 45. 5). In
1889 some pieces of the city-wall were discovered by members of the
French School. One piece was found under a road about 5 50 yards to
the north of Palaeo-Episkopi at the foot of the hillock of Mertsaousi,
It consists of a tower measuring 4.5 metres along the front and pro-
jecting 4 metres from the wall. The wall is, as at Mantinea, merely a
socle of limestone blocks .9 metre high and i metre thick. The upper
courses were probably built of unbumt bricks, which have mouldered
away. Similar traces of the wall have been found about 650 yards to
the east of Palaeo-Episkopi. The French archaeologists think that the
line of the city-wall is marked pretty exactly by a circular road, flanked
on the outer side by a ditch, which passes to the west of the village of
Achouria and encloses Palaeo-Episkopi and the greater part of the
villages of Piali and Ibrahim-Effendi. The plan of the city thus



CH. XLV TEGEA 423

obtained is an oval, its long axis l^ng north and south and measuring
about 2000 metres (a little less than 2200 yards), its short axis measur-
ing about 1500 metres (1640 yards), and its circumference about 5500
metres (3^ miles).

See Dodwell, Tour^ 2. p. 418 sqq, ; Gell, Itinerary of the Morea^ p. 140 ;
Leake, Morea^ I. p. 88 sqq, ; Boblaye, Recherches, p. 145 sq. ; L. Ross, Reisen,
p. 66 sqq. ; Welcker, Tagebuch^ I. p. 201 sq,\ Curtius, Pelop, I. p. 253 sqq. ;
W. G. Clark, Pelop, p. 147 sqa, ; Vischer, Erinnerungen, p. 353 sqq, ; Bursian,
Geogr, 2. p. 218 sqq. ; Baedeker,* p. 277 sqq, ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 238 sqq, ;
Mittheil, d, arch, Inst, in A then, 14 (1889), p. 327 sq, ; V. B^rard, 'T^^ et la
Tegeatide,* Bulletin de Corresp, helUnique, 16 (1892), p. 529 sqq, I visited the
site of Tegea, 24th April 1890, and again iith October I095. For inscriptions
found at Tegea, see Fleckeisen* s Jahrbiicherf 7 (1861), pp. 585-596; Cauer,
Delectus Inscr, Gtaec? No. 454 ; Dittenberger, Sylloge Inscr, Graec, No. 317 ;
Collitz, Griech, Dialekt - Inschriften, i, Nos. I181, 1217-1249; Bulletin de
Corresp. helUnique, 9 (1885), pp. 510-512; id,, 13 (1889), pp. 281-293 ; Berichte
iiber die Verhandl, d, kon. sdchs. Gesell, d, Wissen, tu Leipzig, Philoloe. histor.
Classe, 41 (1889), pp. 71-98 ; and on antiquities (including inscriptions) found on
the site, see Conze and Michaelis, in AnnalideW Instituto, 33 (1861), pp. 30-32 ;
Bulletin de Corresp, helUnique, 13 (1889), pp. 477-486 ; Milchhoefer, in Mit-
theil, d, arch, Inst, in Athen, 4 (1879), PP* '31-144$ 168-174. As to the excava-
tions on the site of the temple of Athena Alea, see note on viii. 45. 4. On the
history of Tegea, see G. I. Schwedler, ' De rebus TegesXKAS,* Leipziger Studien zur
classischen Philologie, 9 (1887), pp. 263-336.

45. I. the people dwelt in townships. Strabo also mentions
(viii. p. 337) that the Tegeans originally dwelt in nine separate town-
ships. As to the situations of these various townships, so far as they
can be ascertained, see V. B^rard, in Bulletin de Corresp, helUnique^ 1 6
(1892), pp. 536-540; and the following notes.

45. I. Gtareatae. This must have been the valley of the Garates
or Gareates river. See viii. 54. 4 note.

45. I. Fhylacenses. This must have been about Phylace. See
viii. 54. I note.

45. I. Oaryatae. This was probably the district of Caryae, which
may have belonged to Arcadia before it was conquered by Sparta. See
iii. 10. 7 note.

45. I. Oorythenses. In this district was a temple of Demeter.
See viii. 54. 5 note.

45. I. Oeatae. This was probably the district in the north of
Laconia of which the chief place was Oeum. Before the Spartan
conquest the district perhaps belonged to Arcadia. In 369 B.C., when
Laconia was threatened with a Theban invasion, Oeum was occupied
by a Lacedaemonian garrison under an officer named Ischolaus. While
the Theban army entered Laconia by Caryae, their Arcadian allies
attacked Oeum, captured it, and put Ischolaus and most of his men to
the sword. See Xenophon, Hellenica^ vi. 5. 24 sqq, ; cp. Diodorus, xv.
64. Stephanus Byzantius (5,v, OZbs) calls the place Oeus and says it
belonged to Tegea. Xenophon says (/.^.) that Oeum belonged to the
district of Sciritis and was situated on one of the easiest approaches to
Sparta. Hence L. Ross supposed that it must have been on the direct
road to Sparta, on the watershed between Arcadia and Laconia. The



424 OEUM BK. VIII. ARCADIA

place is now called Klisoura; it is a narrow and rugged defile between
stony heights, an hour to the south of, and uphill from, the now
disused khan of Kryavrysi in the bed of the Saranta-Potamos.
The modem carriage-road from Tripolitsa to Sparta runs through the
defile. In this pass, just at the point where the long range of Taygetus
bursts into view, Welcker noticed a small field covered \vith tiles and
potsherds. This he conjectured to be the site of Oeum.

An objection to this view is, however, suggested by the statement of
Xenophon {Hellenica^ vi. 5. 27) that after capturing Oeum the Arcadians
marched to Caryae to join the Thebans. For the pass of the Klisoura
lies to the south of Car>'ae ; hence if Oeum had been in the pass, the
Arcadians, after capturing it, must have retreated northwards, whereas
the narrative of Xenophon seems to imply that the march from Oeum
to Caryae was a forward movement, which was immediately followed
up by the advance of the united Theban and Arcadian army first on
Sellasia, which they burned and destroyed, and next upon Sparta. Mr.
Loring is, therefore, probably right in looking for Oeum to the north
of the Klisoura. At Arvanito- Kerasia^ a village situated among
luxuriant orchards close to the modem carriage -road and about 5
miles north of the Klisoura^ he found remains of antiquity which with
great probability he has identified as those of Oeum. They are
situated on the crown of a hill about three minutes to the north of
the village and comprise (i) remains of a wall of hewn masonr>%
slightly polygonal in style, which belonged to a large building partly
cut out of the rock ; (2) other cuttings in the rock ; and (3) a profusion
of pottery, some of it with black glaze. The site of the ruins answers
perfectly to Xenophon's description. That the place is on one of the
easiest approaches to Sparta appears from the fact that the modem
high-road from Tripolitsa to Sparta runs close beside it. Moreover,
it is about 4 miles to the north-west of Car>'ae, which was itself on the
military road to Sparta. Hence it was natural that after their success
«it Oeum the Arcadians should advance on Car>'ae to join their allies,
with the intention of thence continuing the united advance upon Sparta
itself The Arcadians may have reached Oeum from the north either
by a route coinciding closely with the modem carriage-road, or, as Mr.
Loring thinks more probable, from the plain of Asea by an easy route
which starts from Manari^ a village in a little recess of that plain, at its
south-eastern end.

See L. Ross, Reisen^ p. 178 sqq. ; Welcker, Tagehuch, i. p. 203 ; Curtius,
Pelop. 2. pp. 264, 322; lUirsian, Geogj'. 2. pp. 118, 216; W. Loring, m Jourtia!
of Hellenic Studies^ 15 (1895), PP- 60-63 5 Philippson, Peloponnes, p. 164.

45. I. Manthsrrenses. This township doubtless included the Man-
thuric plain and the village of Manthyrea. See viii. 44. 7 note.

45. 2. the battle at Dipaea. See iii. i r. 7 ; viii. 8. 6 ; and

note on viii. 30. i.

45. 2. Ancaeus awaited the attack of the Calydonian

boar. Cp. § 7 ; viii. 4. 10 ; Apollodorus, i. 8. 2.

45. 3. Echemus engaged in single combat with Hyllns.

Cp. i. 41. 2 ; i. 44. 10; viii. 53. 10.



CH. XLV TEMPLE OF ATHENA A LEA 425

45. 3. the Tegeans defeated them etc. See note on viii.

48. 4.

45. 4* in the second year of the ninety-sixth Olympiad etc. i,e.
in 395 B.C. That Diophantes was archon at Athens in this year is
recorded also by Diodorus (xiv. 82). As to Eupolemus, the Olympic
victor, see vi. 3. 7. Diodorus calls him Eupolis (xiv. 54), but the form
Eupolemus is supported by Eusebius (Chronic, vol. i. p. 203, ed.
Schone):

45. 5. The present temple etc. Archaeologists had long been of
opinion that the great temple of Athena Alea at Tegea must have stood
on or near the site of the church of St. Nicholas {Hagios Nikolaos) in
the village of Piali. To this conclusion they were led chiefly by the
fragments of large Doric columns of white marble which had been found
here. The question w^as settled in 1879 by the excavations conducted
here by Prof. Milchhofer, of the German Archaeological Institute, who
discovered the foundations of the temple immediately to the west of
the church, under a mass of houses, courtyards, and garden-plots. The
church stands at the northern extremity of the village, which lies about
4 J miles south-east of Tripolitsa, From Prof. Milchhofer's excava-
tions and the subsequent examination of the site by Dr. Dorpfeld it
appears that the foundation of the temple was 49.9 metres long (about
163 ft. 8 in.) by 21.3 metres broad (about 69 ft. 10 in.) There were
three main steps and one under step {Unterstufe^ evdwrrfpia) of white
marble ; and a ramp or inclined plain (of which the foundations were
discovered) led up to the eastern end of the temple, just as at the
temple of Zeus in Olympia. On the" highest step, round about the
temple, stood thirty-six Doric columns of white marble, six at each end,
and fourteen at each side (the comer columns being counted twice over).
The measurements of the columns cannot be exactly determined, but they
seem to have been about 8 metres (26 ft. 3 in.) high. The largest drum
of a column seen by Dr. D6rpfeld measured 1.5 metres (about 4 ft. 1 1 in.)
Hence the lower diameter of the columns must have been at least this.
The upper diameter, determined by a capital, was about 1.25 metres
(about 4 ft. I in.) The temple was roofed with marble tiles of the usual
two patterns, namely flat quadrangular tiles and roof-shaped covering
tiles placed over the joinings of the former. Both the design and the
workmanship of the fragments of the temple which have been found are
admirable, and justify the praise which Pausanias here and elsewhere
(viii. 41.8) bestows on it as the finest temple in Peloponnese in respect
of artistic style. But Pausanias is wrong in saying that it was the
largest temple in Peloponnese ; for the temple of Zeus at Olympia was
nearly twice as large. But with this exception the temple at Tegea
is the largest Peloponnesian temple known to us.

The white (or whitish -yellow) marble of which the temple was built
comes from the neighbouring quarries of Doliana^ to the south-east of
Tegea.

The excavations of Prof. Milchhofer, though sufficient to determine
the general plan of the temple, laid bare only a small part of the founda-
tions, and his trenches have since been filled up.



426 TEMPLE OF ATHENA ALEA bk. viii. arcadia

See Milchhofer, in Mittheil, d. arch. Inst, in Athen^ 5 (1880), pp. 52-69 ;
Dorpfeld, ib. 8 (1883), pp. 274-285 ; Baedeker,' p. 278 sq, ; Guide-Joanne ^ 2. p.
24a For the observations of earlier travellers on the site, see Dodwell, Tour^ z.
p. 419 ; Gell, Itinerary of the Morea, p. 140 ; Leake, Morea^ I. p. 91 sqq. ; L.
Koss, Riisen^ p. 67 ; Bursian, Geogr. 2. p. 219.

In the winter of 1888-89 ^^ inscription relating to the rights and
privileges of the sanctuary of Athena Alea was discovered about 200
paces north of the temple. The provisions mentioned in the inscription
relate chiefly to the pasturing of the sacrificial victims on the lands
sacred to the goddess at Alea, which seems to be the town of that
name (see viii. 23. i) rather than the quarter of Tegea in which the
temple of Athena Alea was situated. But the inscription is obscure.
See V. B^rard, * Inscription archaique de T6g^' Bulletin de Corresp.
helUniquey 13 (1889), pp. 281-293; R. Meister, in Berichte der Ver-
handl. d. kon. sacks. Gesell. d. Wissen. su Leipzig^ Philolog. histor.
Classe, 41 (1889), pp. 71-98; Immerwahr, Die arkadischen Kulte^
p. 47 sq. The bronze manger of the horses of Mardonius, which fell
into the hands of the Greeks after the battle of Plataea, was dedicated
in the temple of Athena Alea at Tegea (Herodotus, ix. 70).

45. 5. The first row of colimmB is ]>oric etc. That is, the
columns of the peristyle or outer colonnade were Doric ; the columns at
the entrance to the fore-temple {pronaos) were Corinthian (as were
doubtless also the corresponding columns at the entrance to the back-
chamber or opisthodomos) ; and the columns in the interior of the celloy
supporting the roof, were Ionic. See W. G. Clark, Pelop, p. 151 sq.\
Dorpfeld, in Mittheil, d. arch. Inst, in Athen^ 8 (1883), p. 282 sq.\ and
Critical Note on this passage, vol. i. p. 600.

45. 6. On the front gable is the hnnt of the Calydonian boar.
At Piala on the site of the ancient Tegea, several fragments of sculpture
have been found, which appear to have belonged to the gables of the
temple of Athena Alea. The most important are two human heads (one
of them helmeted) and the head of a boar. The chief reasons for identi-
fying them as parts of the gable-sculptures are these, (i) They appDear
to have been found built into a late wall at the north-east angle of the
temple. (2) One of the fragments so found is a boar's head, and we
know from Pausanias that the Calydonian boar was represented on the
front (eastern) gable. (3) The human heads are worked carefully on
one side only, as in the gable-sculptures of the temple of Zeus at
Olympia, showing that the other side was not meant to be seen.
(4) The sculptures are of the same stone as the temple, namely the
white marble oi Doliana. (5) The size of the human heads, which is
that of life, is just what one should expect from the known dimensions
of the temple.

The boar's head is worked completely on both sides. From its
length it would seem that the whole animal was about 2 metres (6 ft.
6| in.) long. On the right side of the head there are two holes, in
which darts seem to have been fixed. Of the two human heads (Figs.
42, 43) one is certainly that of a young man in the prime of life. The
helmeted head, on the other hand, is considered by Mr. A. S. Murray



CH. XLV TEMPLE OF ATHENA A LEA 427

to be that of a woman. If he is right, the head would seem to be that
of Atalanta, as she appears to have been the only womaii represented
on either gable. The helmet, however, is against tbis identification, as
no other example is known of a helmeted Atalanta. Overbeck thought
that both heads are thase of vanquished warriars from the back (western)
gable. Both heads are remarkable for their length from front to back,
for the breadth of the face and the massive development of the lower
part of it (the chin and jowl), and the large, deeply-sunk, wide-open eyes.
Both heads convey an impression of a nature at once powerful and
refined, of deep feeling and a strong will : the look of both is fixed and


intent, with an undertone of sadness and longing. They are most prob-
ably by Scopas himself, and their importance for the history of Greek
sculpture is very great, since no other existing remains of ancient
sculpture can be traced with cert^nty to the hand of Scopas.
Mutilated as the heads are, they fully sustain his great reputation.

Pausanias tells us that the boar was about the middle of the front
(eastern) gable, and he mentions nine figures on one side of the boar
and only six on the other. To explain this inequality Welcker con-
jectured {Antike Dejikmaler, 1. pp. 1J7, 199 sq.) that Pausanias had
omitted to mention some of the figures, and this view was taken also
by Stark {Phtlologus, 21 (1B64), p. 419). But Pausanias certainly
seems to have intended to describe all the figures in the gable. Prof.



4a8 TEMPLE OF ATHENA ALBA bk. viii. arcadia

G. Treu gets over the difficulty by supposing that Meleager occupied the
centre of the gable, that the boar was to the right (Meleager's left), that
Atalanta stood behind the boar's head in the act of striking don-n at it,
and that Theseus corresponded to her on the opposite side of Meleager.


By this arrangement the boar would be nearly in the middle of the gable
(and Pausanias only says that the boar was t^oul the middle), and
there would be seven figures on each side of Meleager, the central
figure.

SeeWelcker, Aiitike D/nkmaUr, i. pp. 199-206; G. Treu, ' WerVe des
Sko[Kis,' Arihdolof^si-ht Zeilung, 38 (l88o), p. 190 sq. ; id., ' Fragmente aus
den I^catischcn Giebelgruppen des Skopos,' Mittheil. d. arth. Inst, in Alhea, 6
{1881)1 pp- 393-423 i Milchhiifei, ' Zu den Sculpluren von Tegea,' Arthiiehgiirit
'Ztiluuf;. 38 (1S80), ji. 190 jy. ; P. CavvadiaSj ' Scullute del Museo di T<^ea,'
BuIUlino dclVlmlilnlo. 1880, pp. 199-103 ; id., in 'E^/ttpIt dpxoio^i'Vi'nii 1886, pp-
17-JO; /./., rXiTTd ToS ■ESfKoD Moiweiou, I. Nos. i78-l8ob; L- R- FarncU,
' On some works of the school of Scopas,' Journal of HdUnic Studies, 7 (1S86),
p. 114 Stjq. ; Overbeck, Gcsih. d. gritcA. Plaslii,^ 2. pp. 20-24 1 A. S. Murray,
History of Greet Sailfliire, 2. p. 288 s^i/. ; Lucy M. Milchell, //ist. of Aniieiil
StulptuTi, p. 456; R. Weil, 'Skopas,' in Baumeister's DenimaUr, p. 1667 w.
On Ihe art of Scopas see in addition to the histories of Greek sculpluie, L.
ViWdts, Skofas [tlreisswald, 1863); K. B. Slark, in Philologui, ji (1864), pp.
415-47*-

On a Tegean coin (Fig. 44), of imperial date, Atalanta is represented
as a huntress, with a quiver at her shoulder, spearing the Calydonian
boar, which stands under a tree. This may possibly be a copy of part of
the group in the gable of the temple. See ImhooMSIumer and Gardner,


CH. XLVi TEMPLE OF ATHENA ALEA 429

Num. Comm. on Paus. p. 108, with pi. V xx. ; Baumeister's Denkmdler,
p. 1669, On representations of the hunt of the Caly-
donian boar and of hunting scenes generally in the
existing monuments of ancient art, see Stephani, in
CompU-Rendu (St. Petersburg) for i867> p. 58 sqq.

45. 7- Oa the back gable 1b represented the ]
flgltt of TelephoB with AcIdlleB In the plain of '
the Caicns. Cp. i. 4. 6 ; ix. 5. 14 note. Gerhard
conjectured tha.t the scene in this gable represented
the combat over the body of Thersander, who may '
have been lying in the middle of the gable, with the
combatants ranged on either side, as in the gable-
sculptures of the temple in Aegina. Olio Jahn conjectured that the
helmeted warrior who on coins of Tegea is represented charging, with
a shield on his left arm and a sword in his right hand, is a copy of the
figure of Telephus by Scopas in the back gable of the temple. The
figure on the Tegean coins has been otherwise variously interpreted as
Ares, or as Cepheus, son of Aleus, or as the Tegean hero Echemus.
The same figure is repeated on coins of the Opuntian Locrians («here
it stands for Ajax, son of Oeleus), and also on coins of Trikka. Welcker
disapproved of Gerhard's suggestion, but was inclined to agree with
Jahn's theory of the Tegean coin-type. L. Urlichs rejected the theories
both of Gerhard and Jahn. See O. Jahn, Archdologiscke Aufsiitse, p.
164 sgg. ; Welcker, Antike DenkmaUr, i. p. 201 sqg. ; L. Urlichs,
Siopas, p. 34 sgq. Achilles's combat with Telephus seems to have
formed the subject of one of the smaller reliefs on the great altar at
Pergamus, See Baumeister's Denkmdler, p. 1271,

46. 2. images of the gods. The Greek is (B?j tftuv. Cp. note on

46. 3. the wooden image of Zens was given to Sthenelos.

This image was identified with the three-eyed image of Zeus at Argos
(ii. 24. 3)-

46. 2. carried off to Qela an image etc Cp. ix. 40. 4.

46. 3- an image of Branronian Artemis. See iii. 16. 8 note.

46. 3. the bronxe Apollo of Branchidae. This image, known as
the Philesian Apollo (Pliny, Nat. hist, xxxiv. 75), was made by the
elder Canachus, the Sicyonian sculptor ; it was carried off by Xerxes to
Ecbatana, See i. 16. 3 ; ii. 10. s ; ix. 10. 2. The occasion on which
the Milesians betrayed the Persians seems to have been the battle of
Mycale, fought in 479 b.c. (Herodotus, ix. 99 and 104). Xerxes
punished them by burning the temple of Apollo at Branchidae and
carrj'ing off the image and the other sacred treasures (Strabo, xiv. p.
634, cp. jrf. xi. p. 518; Suidas, j.w. Bpayx'Sni i Q. Curtius, vii. 5. 28
sqg.) The image must therefore have been made before 479 r.c. And
it was probably made after 494 b.c, for in that year the temple at
Branchidae had been sacked and burned by the Persians in the reign of
Darius (Herodotus, vi. 19), and it is hardly likely that the image of the
god should have been saved. Thus the image appears to have been
made by Canachus between 494 and 479 B.c This enables us to fix



430



APOLLO OF CANACBUS



the date of the elder Canachus. (As to the younger Canachus, see
note on vL 13. 7.) It has indeed been held by R- Urlichs and others
that the image was carried off by the Persians when they sacked
the temple in the reign of Darius, 494 B.C., and that the story of the
second sack of the temple by Xerxes is a mere blunder of writers who
mistook Xerxes for Darius. If Urlichs were right, the image must
have been made before 494 B.C. But Urlichs's view appears to be
su£Gcieatly disposed of by Brunn.

On a long series of coins of Miletus, Apollo is represented naked,
holding in his right hand a stag
and in his left hand a bow.
This is almost certainly a copy of
the famous statue by Canachus,
which, as we learn from Pliny
{Nat. hist, xxxiv. 75), represented
the god naked and holding a stag
by the feeL The passage of
Pliny is obscure, but so much at
lease seems fairly clear. The
British Museum possesses a
bronie statuette (Fig. 45) which
is clearly copied from the same
statue as the representations on
the coins of Miletus. From the
coins and the statuette together
we are thus enabled to form a
fairly accurate idea of the image.
The god was represented standing
naked, his left foot a little in
advance of his right. His breast
was broad and well developed,
his whole build square and mus-
cular. A fillet bound his hair,
but his long locks escaped from
under it, and fell on both his
shoulders. His right hand,
stretched straight out from the
elbow, held a stag or fawn ; his
left hand, somewhat lower, grasp-
ed a bow. The general style of
uusb'i'h ^(™^"oV TKE^Mfltir 'r 1"'ach" sX '''^ statue was somewhat stifT and
austere. Canachus made a very
similar image of the Ismenian Apollo for the Thebans ; the only
difierence between the two images seems to have been in the material,
the image at Branchidae being of bronze, while the one at Thebes was
of cedar- wood. See ix. 10.2.

See K. O. MHller, ' Ueber den Apollo des 'Kannc'ivyi,' Kunstarchaeeleguche
Wtrit, I. pp, 36.45 ; /./., 2. p. 185 : H. Btunn, GtschuhU der grUeh. A'iiiistUr, I.
p, 74 sgq. ; iii.. Die Kumt bit Hointr, p. 31 sqq. ; id., 'Zui Chronologie der


CH. XLVii APOLLO OF CANACHUS 431

altesten griech. KUnstler/ Sitzunpberichte d» kbn, bayer, AkatL d, IVissen.
(Munich), Philosoph. philolog. Classe, 1 871, p. 522 sqg» ; R. Urlichs, in
Rhtinisches Mtueumy N.F. 10 (1856), p. 7 sq, ; Overbeck, Gesch, d. gritck.
Plastik^^ I. pp. 143-145 ; lie/., Griechischc Kunstmythologie^ 4. pp. 22-26 ; Lucy
M. Mitchell, Hist, of Ancient Sculpture^ p. 251 ; A. S. Murray, History of Greek
Sculpture?^ I. pp. 191-195 ; MlUler- Wilder, DenkmdUr, i. pi. iv. Nos. 19-23 ;
£. Petersen, * Der Apollon mit dem Hirsch von Kanachos,' Archaologische
Zeitung^ 38 (1880), pp. 22-25 ; Collignon, Histoire de la Sculpture grecque^ I. pp.
311-316; P. Gardner, Types of Gre^ Coins ^ pi. xv. 15 and 16; cp. B. V. Head,
Historia Numorum^ p. 505.

A bronze statuette of Apollo found at Naxos and now in the Berlin
Museum bears a close resemblance to the British Museum statuette,
except that the Naxian Apollo holds in his right hand a round object
which has been variously explained as an ointment-pot and as a pome-
granate. See Frankel, * Apollo aus Naxos,' Archaologische Zeitung^ 37
(1879), PP* S4-91. Another bronze statuette of the same type has been
found on the site of the temple of the Ptoan Apollo at Perdikavrysi^ in
Boeotia ; but the objects which the figure had in its hands are lost. See
Bulletin de Corresp. hellinique^ 10 (1886), pp. 190-196. It is possible
that both these statuettes may be imitations of the Apollo of Canachus
at Branchidae. Mr. Holleaux would refer to the same type a fragment-
ary marble statue found by him on the same site. See Bulletin de Corresp,
helUnique^ 10 (1886), pp. 269-275 ; /V/., 11 (1887), pp. 275-287. On
several ancient gems an Apollo of the type here discussed is represented
holding in his left hand a bow, while in his right hand he grasps the
fore-feet of a stag, the animal's hind-feet- resting on the ground. Mr.
Cecil Smith argues that this was the scheme of the statue made by
Canachus for Branchidae. Certainly the scheme fits Pliny's description
better than the Apollo with the stag in his hand. But if, as on these gems,
the Apollo of Branchidae was represented holding the stag by its fore-feet
while its hind-feet rested on the ground, how comes it that on coins of
Miletus Apollo is represented holding a tiny stag in the hollow of his hand ?
To meet this difficulty Mr. Smith supposes that in the wooden statue of
Apollo made by Canachus for Thebes the stag was represented in the
latter manner ; that the bronze statue at Branchidae may have lost the
stag at the sack of Miletus or on its journey to or from Persia ; that
when the latter statue was given back by Seleucus, the missing stag was
restored after the model of the Theban statue ; and that in this wrongly
restored condition the Branchidae statue was copied on the coins of
Miletus and described by Pausanias, whereas Pliny's account was
borrowed from some earlier writer, who described the original statue
before it had been wrongly restored. See Proceedings of the Society of
Antiquaries of London^ Second Series, 11 (i 885-1 887), pp. 251-255 ;
Miiller-Wieseler, Denkmdler^ i. pi. xv. No. 61.

46. 3* the images they took from Tiryns. Cp. ii. 17. 5.

46. 4. an image of Mother Dindymene. There was a sanctuary
of this goddess at Cyzicus which was said to have been founded by the
Argonauts (Strabo, xii. p. 575).

46. 5. Endoeus. See note on i. 26. 4.

47. I. Enceladns. The combat of Athena with Enceladus is very



432 TEGEA BK. viii. arcadia

often represented in ancient art, particularly on vases. See A. H.
Smith, * Athene and Enceladus,* y<!7i/r«ii/ of Hellenic Studies^ 4 (1883),
pp. 90-95 ; M. Mayer, Die Giganten und Titanen^ p. 309 sqq,

47. 2. the fetters which the Lacedaemonian prisoners wore etc.
The fetters were hanging in the temple in the time of Herodotus. See
Herodotus, i. 66 ; and below viiL 48. 4 sq,^ with the note.

47. 2. a sacred couch of Athena. Cp. ii. 17. 3; x. 32. 12.
When the Thebans built a new temple to Hera at Plataea, they
dedicated to her some couches made of bronze and iron (Thucydides,
iii. 68).

47. 2. Marpessa. See viii. 48. 5.

47. 3. A boy acts as priest of Athena etc. So Cranaean Athena,
near Elataea, was served by a boy priest under the age of puberty
(x. 34. 8). Cp. vii. 24. 4 note. Athena Poliatis at Tegea was served
by a male priest (below, § 5). The word translated 'boy' {irali) in
the present passage may equally mean *girl,* and so the translators
have understood it here. But the analogies I have referred to are in
favour of the other interpretation. Moreover the word here used by
Pausanias to denote the attainment of puberty (rjfiaxrKiiv) generally, I
think, refers to men, not to women. Cp. Pausanias x. 34. 8, where a
kindred verb (i)fiav) is applied to a boy. Where Pausanias speaks of
puberty in women he uses a periphrasis (ii. 33. 2 ; vii. 26. 5).

47. 4. a Stadium. About half a mile to the east of the site of the
temple of Athena Alea is a line of low hills running north and south and
surmounted by some windmills. Mr. V. Berard conjectures that this
line of hills may have formed one of the sides of the stadium. But its
distance from the temple seems too great to answer to Pausanias's
description. Many marbles are said to have been found here and
transported to the neighbouring village of Achouria. See V. Berard,
in Bulletin tie Corresp. helUnique^ 17 (1893), p. 3.

47. 4- games which they name Aleaea. These games are

mentioned by a scholiast on Pindar {01. vii. 153) among the games
celebrated in Arcadia. They are also mentioned in an inscription,
found at Tegea, which records a long list of victories in the various
games of Greece (C /. 6^. No. i 5 i 5 ; Collitz, Griech. Dialekt-Inschriften^
I. No. 1232), in another inscription found at Pergamus (Frankel, ///-
schriften von Pergamon^ I. No. 156), and in a third inscription found in
the Epidaurian sanctuary of Aesculapius (Cavvadias, Fouilles (T Epidaure^
I. p. 78, No. 240).

47. 4- To the north of the temple is a fountain. There is still
a spring a few paces to the north of the site of the temple of Athena
Alea, and there is another a little farther to the north-east. The former
spring is enclosed by blocks of marble, which appear to have been
taken from the temple. Prof. Milchhofer thinks that both these springs
are too near the temple to answer to the description of Pausanias.
Farther north, in the low ground now occupied by mulberry gardens,
there are patches of damp soil where reeds grow, and where, down to
the beginning of the century, water is said to have stood permanently.
This damp ground is said to be connected with the north-east side of



CH. XLVii PUBLIC TALISMANS 433

the temple by an underground conduit of stone. Here then Prof.
Milchhofer would place the fountain described by Pausanias. See
MiitheiL d, arch, InsL in Aihetiy 5 (1880), p. 65. Cp. L. Ross, Reisen,
p. 67 sq, ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 240.

47. 5. once each year a priest enters it. We often hear of
sanctuaries which were opened only once a year. See vi. 20. 7 ; ix.
16. 6; ix 25. 3. The sanctuary of Dionysus 'in the Marshes' at
Athens was opened only once a year, on the 12th day of the month
Anthesterion (Demosthenes, Contra Neaer, p. 1371). Cp. Tzetzes, SchoL
on Lycophron^ 1246; Minucius Felix, OctavitiSy 24 ; Lobeck, Aglao-
phamusy p. 279 note [s] ; and note on viil 5. 5.

47. 5. the goddess cut off some of the hair of Mednsa etc The
story was that Hercules invited Cepheus and his twenty sons to march
with him against Lacedaemon. As Cepheus was afraid to leave Tegea
lest the Argives should attack it in his absence, Hercules obtained from
Athena a brazen lock of the Gorgon in a pitcher and gave it to Sterope
or Asterope, daughter of Cepheus, telling her that if a host should
advance against the city she was to lift up the lock thrice from the top of
the wall without looking before her, and the enemy would at once take
to flight Hence * a lock of the Gorgon * passed into a proverb. See
Apollodorus, iL 7. 3 ; Apostolius, xiv. 38 ; Suidas and Photius, Lexicon^
s,v. TrXoKiov TopydSos. Cp. W. Roscher, Die Gorgonen und Verwandtes^
p. 80 sqq. Dr. Roscher thinks that the talisman, when exposed to
view, was believed to bring on a storm of thunder and lightning which
struck panic into the foe. His view is to some extent confirmed by a
wide-spread superstition that cut or combed hair can cause storms of
rain, thunder, and lightning. See The Golden Boughy i. p. 199 x^. It
is probable, as Lobeck has remarked, that many ancient cities possessed,
like Tegea, a talisman on the preservation of which the safety of the
city was supposed to depend ; if we hear little of these talismans in
ancient writers, the reason probably is that their very existence was kept
a profound secret from most people. Cyzicus had one of these talismans
in the shape of a stone of a fiery colour, with marks of iron on it ; it
was traditionally believed that if the stone were lost the city would
simultaneously perish (Joannes Lydus, De ostentis^ 7. p. 281 ed. Bekker).
The safety of Messenia was supposed to depend on a certain secret
object, apparently a copy of the mysteries of the Great Goddesses
engraved on a sheet of tin (Paus. iv. 20. 4, iv. 26. 7 sq,) When
Jason consulted the Delphic oracle, Apollo gave him two tripods
which possessed the property of rendering inviolable by an enemy the
land in which they were set up. One of the tripods was presented by
Jason to the people of Hylle in Illyria, and they buried it deep under
the threshold of the gate of their city, that no man might find it. The
tripod was supposed to be still hidden there in the third century B.c. See
ApoUonius Rhodius, Argonaut, iv. 5 2 7- 5 3 6, with the schol. on 5 3 2 . These
public talismans may have sometimes consisted of the bones or other relics
of some famous person, whether mythical or historical. When Alexander
the Great died, it was predicted that the land in which his body should
be buried would be prosperous and inviolate for ever (Aelian, Var» hist,

VOL. IV 2 F



434 PUBUC TAUSMANS bk. viii. arcaum

xii. 64). The possession of Tarentum was said to have been sectmd
to the Parthenii for ever by grinding the bones of Phalantus to powder
and scattering the powder in the market-place ; hence the Tarentines
paid divine honour to Phalantus (Justin, iii. 4. 13 iqg.) Similarly the
ashes of Solon, scattered about Salamis, were supposed to secure the
possession of that island to the Athenians (Aristides, Or. idvi. voL 3. pt
250, ed. Diadorf; cp. Plutarch, Soloit^ 32). When Perdiccas king of
Macedonia was dying he pointed out to his son Atgaeus the place
where he wished to be buried, telling him that if his bones and the
bones of his successors were laid there, the kingdom would remain in
the family (Justin, vii. 2. 2 sgg.) Troy was deemed impregnable, so
long as the tomb of Laomedon remained intact over the Scaean gate
(Servius, on Virgil, Aen. ». 241). Perhaps the grave of Dirce at
Thebes was a talisman of this sort See note on ix. 1?. 6. Cp.
Lobeck, Aglaofkamus, p. 278 sgg. At Athens there were certain
secret graves or chests (^koi) on which the safety of the city was
supposed to depend (Dinarchus, i. 9) ; perhaps the giavc of Oedipus
was one of them (see note on i. 28. 7). It is said that in the rugn of
Constantius three silver statues were dug up in Thrace. They repre-
sented three barbarians clad in broidered robes with long hair and with
their hands tied behind their backs ; the statues were turned to the
north. A few days after the removal of the statues the Goths overran
Thrace from the north, and not long afterwards the Huns and Saimatians
overran both Thrace and lUyria. Hence it was inferred that the three
statues had been talismans designed to ward off the incursions of these
three barbarian tribes. See Olympiodorus, quoted by Photius, Bii-
liolkeca, p. 60 ed. Bekker. The same credulous historian relates (p.
;8) that Alaric was prevented from crossing over from Italy into Sicily
by a magic statue which served as a talisman against both the fires of
Etna and the passage of enemies into the island ; in one foot of the
statue was a perpetual fire, in the other pure water. The statue was
removed, and in consequence

• Sicily was dei-asuted by an
erupiion of Etna and by the
inroads of barbarians. On the
Old Bridge (Ponte Vecchio) at
Florence there stood down to
1333 a broken old statue of
Mars, on which the safety and
Fios. 46 *7 — ATHSNA o vEs cxistencc of Florence were sup-

THE HAiB o^ MKDUSA (COINS or TKCEA). poscd lo depend (DaRte, In-
ferno, xiii. 146 sqq., with the
commentators). On coins of Tegea (Figs. 46, 47) we see Athena
handing Medusa's hair to Cepheus or to Sterope, who receives it in a
vessel. See Imhoof-Blumer and Gardner, Num. Comm. on Paus. p. 109,
with pi. V xxii. xxiii, ; Head, Htsloria Numorum, p. 381 ; P. Gardner,
Catalogue of Greek coins in the British Museum; Peloponnesus, p. 202 sg.
47. 6. Aristomelidas. This tyrant appears not to be mentioned
elsewhere in ancient liH



CH. XLViii MARKET-PLACE OF TEGEA 435

48. I. The market-place. The north-eastern comer of the market-
place of Tegea was discovered by Mr. Bdrard about 150 yards to the
west of the church of PcUaeo-Episkopi. It is marked by a line of
ruined foundations on the east and a colonnade on the north. Of the
columns of this colonnade only a few bases remain. They were of
the Ionic or Corinthian order. On one of the intercolumniations is
an inscription recording that the intercolumniations of the provision-
market (fuiKcAAov) had been repaired by two clerks of the market
(dyo/xivo/xot) at their own expense. Another inscription, found a few
yards to the west of the colonnade, records that a certain Publius
Memmius Agathocles, clerk of the market, had built (?) the house con-
taining the standard weights and had repaired (?) the weights themselves.
One of the weights, which weighed 50 pounds {Ittrat)^ seems to have
been in the shape of a deer or stag ; another, which weighed 25 pounds,
represented Atalanta. Not far from the same place there was found, built
into a modem pavement, a table of liquid measures. It is a slab of
marble with seven holes, in which bronze cups were probably fixed. In
this neighbourhood Mr. B^rard found a number of inscribed bases of
statues, including the base of a statue of the emperor Diocletian ; also
the mosaic pavement of a quadrangular structure terminating in a semi-
circular apse. On the mosaic pavement of the apse are figures of the
Fair Seasons {koKoI Katpot), and on the pavement of the quadrangle are
figures of the months January, February, March, April, May, identified
by inscriptions. The figures of the Fair Seasons in the apse are three
in number. In the centre stands a young man clad in a short tunic
which reaches to his thighs and shod with red boots which reach to his
knees. His arms are bare. His curly locks fall over his ears and
almost his eyes. In his left hand, which hangs by his side, he carries a
leafy branch ; while in his raised right hand he holds a plate full of
fruits. On each side of him a boy, his mantle floating on the wind, is
running toward the central figure earring a plate full of melons and
cucumbers or pears and rosy apples. See V. B^rard, in Bulletin de
Corresp, helUnique^ 17 (1893), PP* 3* 14- Cp. Guide-Joanne^ 2. p.
240 ; Curtius, Pelop. i. p. 257 ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 220.

48. 2. a crown of wUd-olive at Olympia etc See v. 7. 7 note.

48. 2. at Delphi a crown of lanreL See x. 7. 8.

48. 2. At the Isthmus the pine. See note on ii. i. 3.

48. 2. at Nemea the celery etc. See note on ii. 15. 2.

48. 2. in most of the games the crown is of palm etc. The
victor's wreath at the Nemean games seems sometimes to have been of
palm, though commonly it was of celery (Pindar, Fragnu p. 576, ed.
Bockh ; Pliny, Nat. hist, xxxv. 27). In later times the prize at the
Olympic games was of palm (Horace, Odes^ i* i> 5) iv. 2.1'jsq,) As to the
palm at Delos, to which Pausanias refers, see Homer, Odyssey^ vi. 162 sq.
The very palm said to have been seen by Ulysses was still shown in
Cicero's time (Cicero, De legibuSy i. i. 2 ; cp. Pliny, Nat, hist, xvi.
240). It was believed to be the oldest palm-tree in the world and to
have sprung up when Latona landed in Ddos ; in the act of giving birth
to Apollo and Artemis she laid one hand on the palm-tree and the other



436 AUGE ON HER KNEES bk. viii. arcadia

hand on an olive (Euripides, Hecuba^ 458, with the schol. ; Aelian,
Var, hist, v. 4). From this same sacred palm Theseus broke the
branch wherewith (as Pausanias mentions) he crowned the victors in the
games which he celebrated at Delos (Plutarch, Theseus^ 2 1 ; id,y Qu(ust,
Conviv, viii. 4. 3). As to palms in Greece in ancient times and at the
present day, see ix. 19. 8 note.

48. 4- when OharilliiB, the king of the Lacedaemonians, led the
first invasion etc As to this defeat of the Lacedaemonians by the
Tegeans, see also iii. 7. 3 ; viii. i. 6 ; viii. 5. 9 ; viii. 45. 3 ; viii. 47. 2 and
4. The Lacedaemonians were misled by an oracle which promised them
that they should dance on the Tegean plain and have it measured out
to them with a rope. So they marched against Tegea, carrying with
them fetters with which they proposed to bind the Tegeans. But they
were beaten in the battle and all who fell into the hands of the Tegeans
were forced to till the Tegean plain for their conquerors, wearing the
fetters which they had brought with them ; the plot of ground which
each man had to till was marked out for him with a rope. The fetters
were hanging in the temple of Athena Alea in the time of Herodotus,
and they were still there in the time of Pausanias. See Herodotus, i.
66. According to the historian Dinias of Argos this defeat of the
Lacedaemonians took place *' when Perimeda, who is generally called
Choera, was queen of Tegea" (Herodianus, ircpt fiovrjpovs Ac^eo^s, 8. 12
sgg., p. 20, ed. K. Lehrs ; Frapn, Hisior. Graec, ed. Muller, 3. p. 26).
This Perimeda seems to be the Marpessa of Pausanias. As to the
war, cp. Schwedler, * De rebus Tegeaticis,' Leipziger Studien sur class,
Philologie^ 9 (1887), p. 310 j^^. For another victory of the Tegeans
over the Lacedaemonians, see viii. 53. 10 note.

48. 6. Maera daughter of Atlas. According to another

account her grave was near Mantinea (viii. 12. 7). She is men-
tioned by Homer {Odyssey^ xi. 326) ; but Eustathius on that passage
describes her as a daughter of Proetus and Antaea. Maera daughter
of Prpetus was painted by Polygnotus in the Lesche at Delphi (Paus.
X. 30. 5).

48. 7. * Auge on her Knees.' The image appears to have been
that of a woman on her knees in the act of childbirth. So Latona
brought forth Apollo and Artemis kneeling on the soft meadow (Homer,
Hymn to the Delian Apollo^ 116 sqqJ) On the Capitol at Rome, in
front of the temple of Minerva, there were images representing three
male figures on their knees ; they were called Di Nixiy and were sup-
posed to be deities who presided over childbirth. These images had
been brought to Rome from the East after the war with Antiochus, or,
according to others, from the sack of Corinth (Festus, pp. 174, 176, ed.
Muller). The images of Damia and Auxesia, goddesses of fertility (see
note on ii. 30. 4)? represented them kneeling (Herodotus, v. 86), prob-
ably in the act of child-bearing. Some years ago a mutilated marble
group was found at Magoula, near Sparta, which appears to have
represented a woman kneeling just after delivery. See Fr. Marx,
* Marmorgruppe aus Sparta,' MittheiL d. arch. Inst, in A then, 10 (1885),
pp. 177-199. From these facts we may infer that in antiquity Greek



CH. XLix TELEPHUS AND THE DOE 437

women were often, perhaps generally, delivered on their knees. This
position is still adopted by women in Greece and in many other parts of
the world (Ploss, Das Weib^ p. 175). As to the story of Auge and
Telephus, see note on i. 4. 6. Mr. L. R. Famell argues that Auge
was originally a form of Artemis, the legend of her amour with Hercules
pointing to an earlier stage of religious thought when Artemis was con-
ceived not as chaste but merely as averse to marriage. See L. R.
Famell, The Cults of the Greek States^ 2. p. 442 sq.

48. 7* the forsaken boy was suckled by a doe. Cp. viiL 54. 6 ;
ix. 31. 2. The suckling of Telephus by the doe is depicted on many
existing works of ancient art, such as statues, paintings, and coins. It
is remarkable that in these scenes Hercules is regularly represented
along with Telephus and the doe, either watching the doe suckle the
child, or holding the child in his arms while the doe stands beside him.
This meeting of Hercules with the doe and Telephus is nowhere men-
tioned in ancient literature, and the works of art which illustrate it are
all somewhat late. Hence Otto Jahn assumed that the incident was
a late invention, and conjectured that it may have been invented at
Pergamus, where Telephus was a national hero, and people had an
interest in associating him with his deified father Hercules. In support
of this view Jahn pointed out that on coins of Pergamus the doe is
depicted suckling Telephus in presence of Hercules. See O. Jahn,
Archdologische Beitrdge^ p. 160 sqq. Jahn's ingenious conjecture is
confirmed by the discovery at Pergamus of a series of reliefs illustrative
of the life of Telephus, which adorned part of the great altar on the
acropolis. One of these scenes, unfortunately mutilated, represents
Hercules watching Telephus, who is being suckled by an animal, which
is thought, however, by some to be a lioness. See Baumeister's Denk-
mdler^ p. 1270. The supposed kinship between Tegea and Pergamus,
which was explained by the legend of Telephus and Auge, is expressly
mentioned in a Pergamene inscription (Frankel, Inschriften von Per-
gatnon^ i. No. 156). The same inscription refers to a sanctuary of
Athena at Pergamus which was believed to have been founded by Auge.

49. I. a theatre. The theatre at Tegea was built on level ground,
the tiers of seats being supported at the back by a massive semicircular
wall. Part of this wall, built of great squared blocks, supports the apse
of the church of Palaeo-Episkopi, To judge fi-om this fragment of the
supporting-wall the theatre must have been large; it opened to the
north-west. See L. Ross, Reisetiy p. 68 ; Curtius, Pelop. i. p. 256 ;
Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 220 ; Baedeker,* p. 278 ; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 239.
A little to the north of the church was found an interesting theatrical
monument. It is a cube of marble adorned on one side with a large
crown of ivy carved in relief; on another side are six small crowns of
ivy containing inscriptions, from which we infer that the monument was
dedicated by an actor who had won prizes for acting at the Dionysiac
festival at Athens, the Soterian festival at Delphi, the festival of Hera
at Argos (?), and the Naean festival at. Dodona. Among the plays
which he had acted were the Orestes^ Hercules Furens, Achelous^ and
Electra (?) of Euripides, and the Achilles of Chaeremon. From the



438 PHILOPOEMEN bk. viii. akcadia

mention of the Soterian festival of Delphi we learn that this inscription
is later than the irruption of the Gauls into Greece in 279 ac. See
Bulletin de Corr. hellM. 17 (1893), PP- I4'i^ » <!>• ^o^^ on x. 23. 11.

49. I. Fhilopoemen. Our chief authorities for the life of Philo-
poemen are the histories of Polybius and Livy, the biography of him by
Plutarch, and the present narrative of Pausanias. Polybius' wrote a
separate life of Philopoefnen in three books, which is lost ; it was prob-
ably the source from which the other writers derived their information.
See Polybius, x. 21 (24) 6. As to the early life of Philopoemen, see
Polybius, X. 22 (25); Plutarch, Philopoemen^ i sqq.

49. 3. he was hard-fitvonred. Plutarch, however, says: "He
was not ugly, as some think ; for we can see his portrait at Delphi,
where it still remains" (Philopoemen^ 2). The portrait to which
Plutarch refers may have been the bronze statue of Philopoemen which
stood at Delphi and represented him in the act of slaying the tyrant
Machanidas (Plutarch, Philopoemen^ 10).

49. 4- When Oleomenes seized Megalopolis etc. See iv. 29. 7
sq. ; Polybius, iv. 55 ; Plutarch, Philopoemen^ S\ id,^ Cleomenes^ 23 sqq.

49. 5. the battle of Sellasia. See note on iii. 10. 7.

49. 7* chosen by the Achaeans to command their caTalry. Cp.-
Polybius, X. 22 (25); Plutarch, Philopoemen, 7.

50. I. He was thus enabled to change the equipment of their
infantry etc. Cp. Plutarch, Philopoemen^ 9.

50. 2. the Lacedaemonians nnder their npstart tyrant Machani-
das etc. See Polybius, xi. 11-18 ; Plutarch, Philopoemen^ 10.

50. 3. Philopoemen was present at the competition of the
minstrels etc. At the Nemean festival Philopoemen paraded and
manoeuvred his victorious regiment before the assembled Greeks, and then,
surrounded by his stalwart, well-set-up men in their red coats, entered
the theatre, just as the voice of the singer rose high and clear, singing
"The glorious crown of freedom," etc. (Plutarch, PhilopoeTnen^ 11).

50. 3. Themistocles at Olympia. When Themistocles attended
the Olympic games after the battle of Salamis, the spectators turned
their backs on the athletes and flocked to see him, followed him up
and down all day, and pointed him out to strangers with expressions of
admiration and clapping of hands, so that he confessed to his friends
that he had reaped the fruit of his labours in the cause of Greece
' (Plutarch, Themistocles^ 17).

50. 4- The Thebans had defeated the Megarians etc. Cp.

Polybius, XX. 6.

50. 5. he fell upon the Messenians etc. See iv. 29. 10.

50. 7- embarked in a leaky galley etc. See Livy, xxxv. 26 ;
Plutarch, Philopoemen^ 14.

50. 7- Homer speaks of the Arcadians as ignorant of the sea.
See Iliad^ ii. 614.

50. 8. bnm down the Lacedaemonian camp at Gythinm. See

Livy, xxxv. 27 sqq. ; Plutarch, l.c,

50. 10. Nabis was assassinated. See Plutarch, Philopoemen^

15 ; Livy, xxxv. 35. The assassin's name was Alexamenus.



CH. LI PHILOPOEMEN 439

51. I. Fhilopoemem compelled the Lacedaemenians to Join

the Achaean League etc See Plutarch, Philopoemen^ 1 5 ; Livy,
XXXV. 37.

51. 2. the Lacedaemonians offered to give him the house of
Kahis etc. As no native Spartan had the &ce to offer the present to
Philopoemen, the task of doing so was deputed to a foreigner named
Timolaus, who accordingly repaired to Megalopolis, where he was
hospitably entertained by Philopoemen. But the dignity of that great
man's bearing, the integrity of his character, and the simplicity of his
life so impressed and overawed Timolaus, that he did not dare to
broach the subject of his mission, but made some pretext for his visit
and departed. A second time he made the attempt and with the same
result. A third time he came, and bracing himself up for a great effort
he avowed his mission. To his surprise and delight Philopoemen
listened to the proposal very affably and promised to go to Sparta in a
few days to thank the authorities in person. He went and in a public
assembly advised the Spartans to keep such bribes to stop the mouths
of the venal demagogues who railed against Sparta at the diet of the
Achaean League. See Polybius, xxi. 1 5 ; Plutarch, Philopoemen^
1 5. Plutarch says that the house and property of Nabis had been sold
for 120 talents, and it was this sum which was offered by the Spartans
to Philopoemen.

51. 3- Philopoemen hanished three hundred of the ringleaders
etc. On the revolt of Sparta from the Achaean League, its reduction,
and the severity with which it was treated by the victorious Achaeans,
see Livy, xxxviiL 30-34; Plutarch, Philopoemen^ 16. According to
Polybius, cited by Plutarch, eighty of the Spartans were put to death ;
according to Aristocrates, also cited by Plutarch, the number of victims
was three hundred and fifty. Livy'seems to follow Polybius, for he puts
the number of the victims at eighty.

51. 4* Aristaenus advised the Achaeans etc. For a con-
trast between the characters and aims of Aristaenus and Philopoemen,
see Polybius, xxv. 9 sqq, Philopoemen was a bom soldier, who, while
he foresaw that the final subjection of Greece to Rome was inevitable,
did his best to defer it. Aristaenus was a supple politician who, under
a show of respect for Greek law and custom, masked a policy of abject
subserviency to Rome. Cp. Plutarch, Philopoemen^ 17.

51. 5. Philopoemen sent Lycortas with a force etc. These
operations are described more fully by Pausanias elsewhere. See iv. 29.
II sq,\ and on the capture and death of Philopoemen, see Plutarch,
Philopoemen^ 1 8 sqq. ; Livy, xxxix. 49 sq.

51. 8. The bones of Philopoemen etc. Plutarch has described
the stately military procession in which the remains of Philopoemen
were borne, amid universal tokens of mourning, from Messene to
Megalopolis. The urn, almost hidden under flowers and ribbons, was
carried by the historian Polybius. At his tomb in Megalopolis the
Messenian prisoners were stoned to death. See Plutarch, Philopoemen^
21. As to the divine honours paid to Philopoemen at Megalopolis, see
note on viii. 30. 10.



440 TRIBES OF TEGEA bk. viii. arcadia

52. I. the SiMurtan Pplydoms. See ill. 3. 1-3.

52. 4. Epaminondas, son of Polymnis. See note on iv. 31. 10.

52. 5. Leosthenes. Seei. 25. 5.

52. 5. The history of Aratus etc. See iL 8 sq.

53. 3. the priestess of Artemis pursues a man etc This cere-
mony, taken in connexion with the story of its origin, appears to have
been a substitute for human sacrifices offered to make the crops grow.
This is confirmed by a parallel ceremony observed at the festival of the
Agrionia in the Boeotian Orchomenus ; for at that festival the priest of
Dionysus not only pursued certain women with a drawn sword, but had
the right to slay any of them whom he might overtake, a right which
was actually exercised in Plutarch's own time. The women so pursued
were the members of a particular family and were called Oleae ('de-
structive '). See Plutarch, Quaest. Graec. 38 ; K. O. Miiller, Orchonunos
und die Minyer^ p. 161 sq,\ Fr. Back, De Graecorum caeritnoniis in
quibus homines deorum vice fungebantur (Berlin, 1883), p. 24 sqq. As
to the priestess acting the part of the goddess, see notes on vii. 18. 12;
vii. 27. 2 ; as to flight and pursuit in religious rites, see note on i. 24.
4 ; and as to human sacrifices offered to promote the fertility of the
ground, see vii. 19. 4 note.

53. 5. Homer, in Proteus' speech etc. See Odyssey^ iv. 561 sqq.

53. 5. Tales. See note on i. 21. 4.

53. 6. The names of the tribes are etc. Inscriptions found at
Tegea give the adjectival forms of the four tribal names, namely
Kpaptcurai, *Iinro^oiTat, *A7roA.A.a)vtaTa4, and ht* 'AOavaUiv (followed in
each case by TroAtrai), i,e. men of the tribes Crariotis, Hippothoetis,
Apolloniatis, and ep' Athanaean. Thus the names given by Pausanias
ag^ee with those of the inscriptions except that Crariotis seems the
correct form rather than Clareotis, and the phrase ^ Atkanaicm
(Athanaia's, i.e. Athena's, tribe) rather than Athanaeatis.

See Leake, Morea^ i. p. 89 ; C. I. G. No. 1513 ; Atuient Greek Inscriptions
in the British Museum^ Part 2, p. II sqq.^ No. 156; Cauer, Delectus Inscr.
Graec.^ Nos. 454, 455 ; Collitz, G. D. I. i. Nos. 1231, 1246, 1247 ; G. Gilbert,
Griech. Staatsaiterthiinur, 2. p. 127 ; Schwedler, * De rebus Tegeaticis,' Leipziger
Studien zur class. Philologies 9 (1887), p. 275 sqq.

53. 7- a temple of Demeter and the Maid. On the north-eastern
slope of the hill of Hagios Sostts (see note on § 9) a great many bronzes
and terra-cottas were discovered in the course of excavations conducted
by the Greek Archaeological Society in January 1862. The terra-cotta
statuettes number about 1500 ; and by far the most of them represent
Demeter seated on a chair with a large back to it, her head crowTied
with a polos or cidaris. The statuettes are of all periods of art, from
the rudest and most archaic period downward. They are undoubtedly
votive-offerings brought by pilgrims to the shrine of Demeter, and from
the uniformity of their type we may perhaps infer that they represent
the temple-statue of the goddess. In some of the statuettes a vine (not,
as Fr. Lenormant thought, a poppy-stalk) is represented springing up
between the knees of the seated goddess ; this attribute is very appro-
priate to a goddess who here bore the surname of * Fruit-bringer.*



CH. Liil THE COMMON HEARTH 441

Another type of statuette found here has been conjectured by Fr.
Lenormant to represent the Maid {Kore) ; the type is very rude and
archaic, consisting of a bust with well-marked breasts and rudimentary
arms, the head crowned with a high head-dress, and the lower part of
the body pillar-shaped. The spot where these votive-offerings were
found probably indicates the site of the temple of Demeter and the
Maid mentioned by Pausanias.

See Fr. Lenormant, ' Terres-cuites de T^^e,' Gcuette archiologique^ 4 (1878),
pp. 42-48 ; Milchhofer, in Mittheil, d, arch, Inst, in Athen^ 4 (1879), pp. i68-
174; Baedeker,' p. 278; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 238.

53. 7. Laodice. See viii. 5. 7. sq.

53. 7- a temple of Apollo, with a gilded image. This gilt image
is mentioned in an inscription found at Tegea, which sets forth that
" Philocrates, son of Damonicus, on behalf of his son Damonicus dedi-
cated the altar and gilded the image of Apollo " (Bulletin de Corresfi,
helUmque^ 17 (1893), P* 12). The inscription seems to date from the
first century B.C. or A.D. Doubtless whenever the gilding of the image
grew tarnished or wore off, it was deemed a pious work to gild it afresh.
The site of the temple of Apollo is perhaps marked by the remains of a
large Byzantine church 45 metres (about 148 feet) long, the facade of
which formed the eastern side of the market-place {Bull, de Carr,
helUn,^ l,c,)

53. 8. OhirisophtlB. Nothing more is known of this sculptor.

53. 8. The residence of Daedalns in Onosns. Cp. vil 4. 5 sg,

53. 9. the Oommon Hearth of the Arcadians. The < Conunon
Hearth ' at Mantinea was a round structure. See viii. 9. 5. From an
inscription found at Hermion we learn that in that city there was a
* Conunon Hearth * at which ambassadors were entertained (C /. G.
No. 1 193; Dittenberger, Sylloge Jnscr, Graec, No. 389; CoUitz, G,
D, I, 3. No. 3386). Similarly at Athens ambassadors were entertained
at the • Common Hearth ' or * Hearth of the City ' in the Prytaneum
or town-hall ; on this hearth a fire was kept burning perpetually and
sacrifices were offered (Aristotle, Politics^ 1322 b 28 ; Pollux, i. 7, ix.
40; C, I, A. 2. Nos. 467, 470, 471, 6055 cp. Plutarch, Numa, 9).
So at Olympia a fire burned day and night on the public hearth in
the Prytaneum (Paus. v. 15. 9). At Chaeronea there was a 'Common
Hearth ' at which certain sacrifices were performed (Plutarch, Quaest,
Conviv, vi. 8. i). At Delphi there was a < Common Hearth' in the
Prytaneum at which distinguished strangers and bene&ctors of the city
were entertained, and a perpetual fire, tended by widows and fed only
with pine-wood, burned on it. See an inscription found at Delphi and
published by H. N. Ulrichs, Reisen und Forschungen^ i. p. 67 note 20 ;
Pomtow, Beitrdge zur Topographie von Delphi^ p. 66 ; Plutarch, Arts-
tidesy 20 ; td,^ Numa^ 9 ; ///., De d apud DeiphoSy 2 (cp. note on x. 24.
4). At Acraephnium, Thisbe, and Orchomenus in Boeotia there was
a * Conunon Hearth ' in the Prytaneum at which honoured guests were
entertained (C. /. G, G, S, i. Nos. 21, 4130, 4 131, 4138, 4139).
At Tanagra the public hearth in the Prytaneum seems to have been



442 THE COMMON HEARTH BK. viii. arcadia

called 'the hearth of the people' (C. /. G, G. S. i. No. 20). Pollux
states generally (i. 7) that a perpetual fire burned on the hearth
in the Prytaneum. Sometimes this perpetual fire took the form
of a lamp (Theocritus, xxi. 36 sq,) ; Dionysius the younger, tyrant of
Sicily, dedicated in the Prytaneum at Tarentum a lamp whidi could
bum a year without being fed (Athenaeus, xv. p. 700 d). Probably
every Greek city had its Prytaneum with its ' Common Hearth ' and its
perpetual fire burning on it ; this common hearth may have been
originally the hearth of the king's house {^^^ Journal of Philology^ 14
(1885), p. 145 sqq^ For other examples of the custom of maintaining
a perpetual fire or lamp, see i. 26. 6 sq, ; viii. 9. 2 ; viii. 37. 11. At
Aetna, in Sicily, a perpetual fire was kept up in the temple of Hephaes-
tus (Aelian, JVd/, anim. xi. 3).

53. 9. with a woirnd on his thi^ Cp. viii. 28. 6 note. As to
Hercules's combats with the sons of Hippocoon, see iii. 1 5. 3-6.

53. 9. The high place on which stand most of the altais. This
must be the low hill of Hagios SosHsy about a mile and a half to the
north of PicUu It is the only point in the whole site of Tegea which
could with any show of reason be described as a ' high place.' Though
really not more than a gentle eminence, it commands a fine view over
the surrounding plain. The hill takes its name from the village which
crowns it. Possibly this hill may have been the acropolis of T^^ea
spoken of by Polybius, who describes (v. 17. i sq,) how Lycurgus king
of Sparta seized the city of Tegea, but was repulsed from the acropolis.
But it is doubtful whether the hill of Hagios SosHs was included within
the city-walls.

See Dodwell, Tour^ 2. p. 418 sq. ; Leake, Morea^ I. p. 98 sq, ; Welcker,
Tagebtuh^ I. p. 202 ; L. Ross, Reisen^ p. 69 ; Curtius, Pelop. I. pp. 254, 258 ;
Vischer, Erinnerungen^ pp. 253, 255 ; Bursian, Geogr. 2. pp. 218, 220 sq. ;
Baedeker,^ p. 277 ; GuicU-Joannty 2. p. 238.

53. 9. Glarian Zens etc. Zeus was worshipped under this title also
at Argos (Aeschylus, Suppliants^ 360). The title may designate the
god " who sanctified the original allotment of land among the clans or
divisions of the people " (L. R. Famell, The Cults of the Greek Statesy
I. p. 56). As to the legendary division of Arcadia among the sons of
Areas, see viii. 4. 3 sq,

53. 10. once the Lacedaemonians marched against them etc.
A somewhat different account of this Lacedaemonian reverse is given
by Polyaenus (i. 8). He says that when the Lacedaemonians were
ravaging the Tegean lands, Elnes king of Arcadia sent his soldiers to
attack the enemy in the rear ; the hour of the assault was to be mid-
night, and the signal was to be given by a great fire which the old men
and children were to kindle in front of the city. While the Lacedae-
monians gazed with astonishment at the sudden blaze, the Arcadians
fell on their rear, slew many of them and took many prisoners.

53. II. what the Greeks call Aeginetan. See note on v. 25. 13.

53. II. a temple of Onaceatian Artemis. This would seem to
have been near the place where the Saranta Potatnos enters the Tegean



CH. Liv THE SARANTA POTAMOS 443

plain (see note on viii. 54. i), for it is just about 19 furlongs (the dis-
tance mentioned by Pausanias) from Tegea to this point. See Leake,
Moreoy i. p. 122 note c; Curtius, Pehp. i. p. 262. This is perhaps
the temple of Artemis mentioned by Xenophon {HelUntcOy vi. 5. 9).
As to the epithet Cnaceatian, see note on iiL 18. 4.

54. I. The river Aliiheiu is tlie boimdary between tlie lands of
Lacedaemon and Tegea etc. What Pausanias here calls the Alpheus
is unquestionably the stream now called the Sarania Potamos (* forty
river ') which enters the Tegean plain from the south and flows north-
ward through it, passing Tegea (Pialt) at some distance to the east
For our author is here describing the route from Tegea to Laconia (see
viii. 53. 11); and until the carriage-road was constructed a few years ago
the path from Tegea to Sparta still followed the channel of the Sarania
Potamosy crossing and recrossing again and again the shallow stream,
which sprawls along its broad gravelly bed between immensely high
stony banks that effectually shut out all views of the surrounding
country. The carriage-road misses the river altogether, being carried
along the hills a good deal higher up to the west, but the old route by
the bed of the river is still often adopted by travellers on foot. As
Pausanias believed that this river was the upper course of the Alpheus
and that after disappearing under ground it reappeared at the springs of
Franko-vrysi in Ae plain of Asea (see viii. 44. 3), he must have
supposed that it flowed into the chasm which still drains the swamp of
Taka at the south-western comer of the Tegean plain (see above, p. 420).
But in point of fact the Sarania Poiamos does not go anywhere near
this chasm ; on entering the Tegean plain it bends away to the north-
east, receives a tributary from the south-east (the ancient Garates), and,
after flowing northward for some distance, turns sharply to the east, and
disappears in a chasm at the foot of Mount Parthenius, not far from the
village of Verisova, It seems impossible that the ancients should have
regarded as the head waters of the Alpheus a stream which thus dis-
appears under the mountains on the easiem side of the plain of Tegea,
flowing towards the Gulf of Argos. To meet this difficulty some modem
topographers have supposed that the course of the Sarania Poiamos has
changed since antiquity, and that in ancient times the river did flow into
the chasm of the Taka at the sputh-westem side of the plain instead of
into the chasm at the opposite side of the plain near Verisova, Some
support seemed to be lent to this theory by a tradition, told to L. Ross
by peasants, that this was in fact the course of the river until about a
hundred years or more before their time, when a Turk who owned Piali
dug a new bed for the river and obliged it to follow its present course.
But the researches of recent travellers have disproved this tradition, and
shown that the Sarania Poiamos can never have flowed in the course
which the tradition assigns to it. For between the river and Tegea
{Piali) there is a distinct, though gradual, rise in the ground, which
makes any diversion of the river in this direction impossible. Nor is it
open to us to suppose that the river may have flowed at a higher level
in antiquity, its present bed having been hollowed out by the stream since
the days of Pausanias. On the contrary, the bed of the river is being



444 THE SARANTA POTAMOS BK. viii. akcadia

actually raised by alluvial deposits, so that we are bound to suppose
that in classical times it flowed at a lower, not a higher, level than at
present Even if the river had, contrary to all appearances, once
flowed into the chasm of the Tcika it could not have reappeared at the
springs of Franko-vrysi in the plain of Asea, since those springs have
recently been proved to be higher by 32 metres (105 feet) than the last
point to which the water can be followed in the chasm of the Ttzka,
This discovery was made in September 1891, by Mr. E. A. Martel, who
succeeded, at some personal inconvenience, in penetrating into the
chasm to a depth of about 3 5 metres. Thus it appears equally impossible
that the Saranta Potamos should ever have flowed into the chasm of the
TakcL^ and that, if it did, it should have reappeared at Frank(M/rysi in
the plain of Asea. Nothing remains but to regard this whole account of
the supposed upper course of the Alpheus as a blunder of Pausanias or
his guides. As to the water which is engulfed in the chasm of the
Taka^ the modem peasants believe that it reappears at the springs of
KofUditsa in the upper valley of the Eurotas, about 1 5 miles south of
the T(U:a,

If, taking the old route from Tegea to Sparta, we follow the course
of the Saranta Potamos y we reach in about 3 J hours fh)m Tegea the
now deserted khan of Kryavrysi (*coId spring*), situated in the dry
gravelly bed of the river. The fountain which gives its name to the
khan is built of ancient blocks of marble. Two streams unite their
waters at the khan to form the Saranta Potamx>sj their confluence is
probably the Symbola of Pausanias. Of the two streams the shorter
comes from the south ; the larger and longer from the east. This latter
stream, which flows past the village of Vourvoura, is probably the part
of the river which, as Pausanias tells us, formed the boundary between
Tegea and Laconia ; for the rest of the river flows from north to south,
and we cannot suppose that all the territory to the west of it was Tegean
and all to the east of it Laconian, or vice versa. Hence Phylace,
which was at the source of the river, lay probably somewhere to the
east of Vourvoura^ near the crest of Mt Pamon. In this direction,
but on the opposite or eastern side of the ridge, is the village of Hagios
Petros. The boundaries of Tegea, Laconia, and Argolis met in this
neighbourhood, and their meeting point was marked by the images of
Hermes (Paus. ii. 38. 7, with the note, vol. 3. p. 310).

See Leake, Morea^ i. pp. 121 -124; id,^ 3. pp. 36-43; Gell, Itinerary of the
Morgdy p. 139; Boblaye, Recherches^ p. 144; L. Ross, Reisen^ pp. 60 sq.^ 70-
72; Curtius, Pehp. i. pp. 248 j^., 261 sq. ; Bursian, Geogr, 2. p. 187; Vischer,
Erinnerungen, pp. 355-357 ; Baedeker,^ p. 280 ; Guide-Joanne, 2. pp. 248, 318;
Philippson, Peloponmsy p. 108 ; E. A. Martel, *Les Katavothres du Pdloponn^e,'
Reviu de Giographiey May 1892, pp. 336-341 ; V. B^rard, in Bulletin dc Corr.
helUnique, 16 (1892), p. 533 sq, ; W. Coring, in Journal of Hellenic Studies, 15
(1895), PP- 52-54, 68 J./.

54. 3. blends its water with Arethusa. Cp. v. 7. 2 ; vii. 24. 3.

64. 4. Thyrea. See note on ii. 38. 4.

54. 4. the tomb of Orestes etc. See iii. 3. 5 sq, ; iii. 11. 10.

54. 4. The river Garates. This must be the stream which comes



CH. Liv FROM TEGEA TO ARGOS 445

down from Doliana and joins the Saranta Potamos at Magoula^ a mile
and a half to the east of Tegea. The village of Doliana^ which stands
among fruit-trees high up on a bare mountain-side, and is inhabited only
in the summer months, is well known for its marble quarries, which have
been worked both in ancient and modem times. The marble quarried
here bears a superficial resemblance to Pentelic, but it is less transparent
and less white, being tinged with a light bluish grey. It is characterised
by the presence of numerous small crystals of felspar, and it contains a
little iron which gives it, when exposed to the weather, a yellowish or
reddish-brown patina like the well-known patina on the columns of the
Parthenon,

See Leake, Morea^ 2. p. 332 sq, ; L. Ross, Reisen, p. 72 note 14 ; Curtius,
Pelop. I. p. 249 ; Guide-Joanne, 2. p. 241 ; Philippson, Peloponnes, p. 161 ;
G. R. Lepsius, Griechische Marmor-Studien, pp. 31-33.

54. 5. The road from Tegea to Argos etc. This road must have
led in a north-easterly direction from Tegea across the plain to what is
now called the pass of Steno, This is a narrow defile through which
the Saranta Potamos flows eastward into a branch or bay of the great
Tegean plain. After traversing the whole length of this branch of the
Tegean plain the river disappears into three chasms {katavothras) at
the eastern end of the plain, at the foot of Mount Parthenius (now Mt.
Rhoino)y to the north-east of the village of Vertsova. An artificial canal
conducts the water to the largest of the chasms. The modem road
from Tripolitsa to Argos passes through the defile oi Steno; from this
point onward it probably coincides with the ancient road from Tegea to
Argos here described by Pausanias. The village of Steno stands on the
last point of the hill on the north side of the pass, just within the opening.
The road runs along the north bank of the river, and the defile is so
narrow that there is scarcely room for both road and river. After
passing through the defile of Steno we enter on the branch of the
Tegean plain spoken of above ; it may be called the plain of Vertsova^
from the village of that name which stands in the southern part of it.
In winter this plain is little better than a swamp ; the vineyards are
then flooded. The road continues to run between the Saranta Potamos
and the hills which bound the plain on the north. About a mile and a
half after passing the village of Steno we pass the village of Hagiorgitika^
situated on a flat spur of the rugged hills on the left.

About a mile farther on the road divides. The main road turns
up a small valley to the left, then ascends the hills in a north-easterly
direction, and making a great bend round the steep, conical, and isolated
hill on the right (south) which is surmounted by the mined castle of
Palaeo-Mouchli, descends through a winding glen into the plain of
Achladokampos, This route is known as the Gyros, either fi-om the
great circuit it makes or from its many windings. It is the line followed
by the modem carriage-road, and no doubt the ancient carriage-road
described by Pausanias went this way.

The other road, known as * the ladder of the Bey * {Skala tou Bey\
holds on eastward across the plain to the foot of Mt. Parthenius (Mt.



446 FROM TEGEA TO ARGOS bk, viil arcadia

Rkoind), In the plain, near the chapel of Hagia Trias (the Holy
Trinity), Mr. B^rard of the French Archaeological School discovered in
1889 t^c remains of the two sanctuaries of 'Demeter in Corythenses'
and Mystic Dionysus, which Pausanias mentions (§ 5). The remains
consist of two small square foundations, built of large blocks of blue
limestone. The westerly of the two foundations is the larger and is
probably that of the temple of Demeter. Here was found an archaic
statue of a seated woman, life-size but broken off at the knees ; her hair
descends in long straight curls or braids on her shoulders and neck ;
her hands rest on her knees. There was no back to the seat. The
statue was painted, but the colours were mostly washed away by the
rain. The material is a friable tufa. A statue of the same type was
found a number of years ago at the khan of Franko-vrysi^ between
Tegea and Megalopolis. The image may be that of Demeter. At all
events the discovery of the temple enables us to fix the position of
Corythenses (cp. viii. 45. i) ; it was the marshy plain of Vertsova, See
V. B^rard, • Statue archaique de T^gde,* Bulletin de Corresp, helUmque^
14 (1890), pp. 382-384; Guide-Joanne^ 2. p. 236. Continuing our
route beyond these ruins we reach the foot of Mt. Parthenius and ascend
the slope by a path paved in the usual Turkish style with large unhewn
blocks. The construction of this pavement, bad as it is, must have
been a work of some labour, as the mountain consists entirely of bare
jagged rocks. This is the true ' ladder of the Bey ' ; it is one of the
wildest and most desolate tracks in Greece. It was here probably that
Pan was said to have appeared to the runner Phidippides (see below).
About half-way up the slope we pass a fountain and the abandoned
khan of Partheni, The name is evidently a reminiscence of the
ancient Parthenius, the name of the whole mountain, though the modem
Greeks explain it by supposing that a chapel of the Virgin {Parthenos)
formerly stood here. The summit of the ridge is reached in about half
an hour from the plain. We then descend the eastern side of Mt.
Parthenius, by steep zigzags, into the plain or valley of Achladokampos
(* Plain of Wild Pears '). At the eastern end of the plain are the ruins
of Hysiae. See ii. 24. 7 note.

We now return to the point at which the * ladder of the Bey ' diverged
from the Gyros road and follow the latter in its long circuit round the
hill of Palaeo-Mouchli. Just at the point where the road, after ascend-
ing the hills in a north-easterly direction, bends round to the south-east,
a torrent descends from the mountains on the north and passes under
the bridge across which the road is carried. On the left bank of this
torrent, two minutes to the left (north) of the road are the remains of an
ancient sanctuary of Artemis, discovered by Mr. V. B^rard in 1889,
There are traces of a small enclosure built of large limestone blocks.
Statuettes of Artemis with dedicatory inscriptions prove that the sanctuary
belonged to that goddess. On the other side of the road rises to the
south the high rocky cone, of which the summit, inaccessible on three
sides, is crowned with the ruins called Palaeo-Mouchli. The place is
capable of containing 20,000 inhabitants. The ruined Prankish castle
is built partly on foundations of Cyclopean masonry, which probably



CH. Liv FROM TEGEA TO ARGOS' 447

belonged to an ancient fortress on the frontier between Arcadia and
Argolis. Among the ruins are the remains of a Byzantine church. In
the bed of the torrent at the southern foot of this rocky hill, L. Ross saw
some fragments of an entablature of white marble, possibly remains of
the precinct of Telephus or of the sanctuary of Pan (§ 6). The site of
the latter sanctuary is perhaps fixed by an inscription on bronze, found
by Mr. B^rard at the foot of the Palaeo-MouchlihxYL^ near the first support
of the great viaduct over which the railway is to pass. Although the
sanctuary of Pan appears hence to have stood on the circuitous Gyros
road, it is probable that the famous meeting between Pan and the
Athenian runner Phidippides (Herodotus, vi. 105 sq,) was alleged to
have taken place on the other and shorter road, now called the ' ladder
of the Bey ' ; for the runner, pressing in hot haste to Sparta with tidings
of the Persian invasion, would certainly take the most direct route. He
is said to have covered the distance between Athens and Sparta in
two days. Moreover from Pausanias's description we infer that the
sanctuary of Pan was on the eastern side of the ridge, whereas the
inscription was found on the western side.

After passing the ruined castle of Pakteo-Mouchli the road descends
to the south-east through a winding gorge into the plain or valley of
Achladokamposj where it is rejoined by the direct path called the
« ladder of the Bey.*

Intermediate between the two passes just described there is a third
known as the Kake Skala or Evil Staircase, which goes through the gap
that separates Mt Rhoino (Parthenius) proper frx)m Palaeo-Mouchli. It
is an even worse path than the *• ladder of the Bey,' and ascends the
declivity in zigzags, which are supported on the lower side by embank-
ments.

See Leake, Morea^ 2, p. 326 s^^. ; Gell, Itinerary of the Morea^ p. 173 ;
Boblaye, RechercheSf j, 145 sq, ; L. Ross, Reisen, p. 148; Mure, yjwrwi/, 2. p.
200 sq, ; Welcker, Tagebucky i. p. 196 x^. ; Curtius, Pelop, i. p. 260 sq, ;
Vischer, Erinnerungen, pp. 335, 341 ; Baedeker,* p. 276 ; Guide-Joanm^ 2. p.
235 sqq, ; Philippson, Peloponnes, p. 84 sq. ; W. Loring, m Journal of Hellenic
Studies, 15 (1895), pp. 78-80. The tMti katavothra of the Saranta Potamcs near
Vertsova was examined by Mr. Siderides, a Greek engineer, at the end of 1891.
See Reime de Geographies May 1892, p. 343 sqq,

54. 7. the tortoiBes are sacred to Pan etc. At Troezen it was
forbidden to catch the sea tortoise (Clearchus, cited by Athenaeus, vii.
p. 317 b). Land tortoises are still common in Greece; they may often
be seen crawling across or beside the path.

54. 7. Hysiae. See ii. 24. 7 note.



END OF VOL. IV



Printed by R. & R. Clark, Lxmitkd, Edinbui^h,



t
I



I


fl


3 fclOS 012 327 iW



P33tAf



STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES

STANFORD AUXILIARY LIBRARY

STANFORD, CALIFORNIA 94305-6004

(415) 723-9201
All books may be recalled after 7 days
