Conditioned Reflexes (Ivan Pavlov (G. V. Anrep, trans.), 1927)
==========================================================
Pavlov's own account of classical conditioning; the foundation of learning theory. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (conditioned-reflexes-an-investigation-of-the-physiological-activity-of-the-cerebral-cortex).

piyes 


mak 
a 


E Re 


CELS b. 
iant 


nei 
KI z e 


CONDITIONED REFLEXES 
AN INVESTIGATION OF 
THE PHYSIOLOGICAL ACTIVITY 
OF THE 


CEREBRAL CORTEX 


FIRST EDITION 1927 


Reprinted photographically in Great Britain in 1928, 
1940, 1946, by LOWE & BRYDONE, PRINTERS, LTD., 
LONDON, from sheets of the first edition 


CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


AN INVESTIGATION OF 
THE PHYSIOLOGICAL ACTIVITY 


OF THE 


CEREBRAL CORTEX 


BY 


I. P. PAVLOV, For. Mem. B.S. 


Director of Physiological Laboratories in the Russian Academy of Sciences 
and the Institute of Experimental Medicine, 
formerly Professor of Physiology at the Military Medical Academy, Petrograd 


TRANSLATED AND EDITED 


BY 


A 
g` 


G. V. ANREP, M.D., D.Sc & 
Lecturer in Physiology in the University rite 


OR 
s 
PROPERTY, OF 
CHICACO COLLIGESGF OPTOMETRY 
cO 


+ 
Gon UNIVERSITY PRESS 
nS NDON : GEOFFREY CUMBERLEGE 


Y 
sh 
oo 


+ 


The Carl F. Shen Monori Library 
BLLINOIS ny Noa OF OPTOMETRY 
lichigan Avenue 


XO 
iAgo 16. Illinois 
N ] Hy —7 


TO 
THE MEMORY OF 
MY SON 
VICTOR 


EDITOR’S PREFACE 


ProFeEssor Pavrov in his preface to this English edition 
regards it as lucky for his book that the task of pre- 
paration fell into my hands; but I consider that the 
luck was mine, because it was the best way I had of 
showing my personal regard for my old teacher. 
Although I had personal contact with the work, the 
task was not easy, especially on account of the extreme 
importance of this new field of investigation, not only 
for physiology itself, but also for all the biological 
sciences. 

Since the present is the first complete discussion 
rendered out of the Russian into one of the more 
familiar European tongues, technical terms had to be 
devised which should in some measure impayé\that 
fluency to the discussion which one finds in ‘bein 
text. A terminology has therefore been ad which, 
after having received the advantage o, <r consider- 
ation and advice from my friends colleagues at 
University College, London, I j to answer the 
purpose sufficiently well. 

Professor Pavlov allowed or the sake of clarity, 
to introduce some modificgfions and additions into the 
text in order to mak reading lighter for those 
English and Amerig” readers unfamiliar with the 
original literatuse @)*this field. This I have done 
sparingly, patil, Jareful only to expand, but in no 
sense to weeps original meaning. 

The pi€Pfration of the English edition was helped 
by a from the Royal Society, which was sufficient 


NX vii 


viii EDITOR’S PREFACE 


to cover the draft translation of Lectures I-XII; but 
at: this stage, owing to the difficulty of finding really 
suitable translators, and desiring not to burden the 
Royal Society unduly with further costs of translation, 
I resolved to undertake the revision of the draft trans- 
lation and the complete translation of the remaining 
lectures myself. This, with the willing help of Mr. 
R. A. Nash, a research student in my laboratory, I was 
able to accomplish. I desire to thank him, and also to 
express my grateful thanks to my friend Mr. E. L. Ball, 
who critically read the whole of our manuscript in both 


the draft and finished copies. 
Gov. A: 


CAMBRIDGE. 


AUTHOR’S PREFACE 


I am deeply sensible of my good fortune that this book 
should appear in the English language through the 
assistance of the Royal Society of London. Without 
their material help the presentation of the book in its 
English form could not in the first place have been 
attempted. I desire to express to them my deepest 


gratitude. 
I count it a great stroke of luck for the book that 


the preparation of the English edition was carried out 
entirely under the supervision of, and in part made 
by, my young friend Dr. Anrep, formerly an active 
collaborator in the work described in its pages. Dr. 
Anrep’s task has not been an easy one, and it has been 
fraught with responsibility, as practically at every step 
he has had to adapt a vast new terminology. yin 


to give him also my hearty thanks. FH 
ee R 


PETROGRAD, 14th July, 1926. x 


PREFACE TO 
THE RUSSIAN EDITION 


In the spring of 1924, in a series of lectures delivered at the Military 
Medical Academy in Petrograd to an audience of medical men and 
biologists, I attempted to give a full and systematized exposition 
of our researches upon the activities of the cerebral hemispheres in 
the dog—researches which had then been in progress for nearly 
twenty-five years. These lectures were taken down by a steno- 
grapher with a view to subsequent publication. On looking through 
the manuscript I found the lectures not entirely satisfactory, and 
began, therefore, to recast them. This occupied over eighteen 
months of my leisure, during the whole of which period investigation 
was being vigorously pushed forward in the laboratories under my 
direction. As a result of this continued experimentation some of 
the deductions and interpretations drawn in my lectures had to be 
considerably modified. However, in the book as it stands at present 
I intentionally allowed the chapters to remain as they hands 
at the first revision, incorporating in the later le he new 
material as it came to hand. In this manner t der is placed 
in a position to obtain a much clearer idea o natural growth 
of the subject. 

In the lectures I have. restricted Qosition to the purely 
experimental material, avoiding all r AA to the literature of the 
subject. A complete treatment of ng fioro would have increased 
the labour of my task excessively, Méreover, my intention was the 
simple one of treating the subj Qi an entity from my own personal 
viewpoint. I am fully aw t not a few of our observations 
have been in the nature NO confirmation of facts established by 
other authors. The Kon of priority has been considered of 
relatively small noooit) since I am fully convinced that the subject 
lends a sufficient @epe for the full development of initiative of all 
workers intere in solving its problems. At the same time we 
are convine at this method of research is destined, in the hands 


ŞS zi 
© 
S ; 


, AČ 
wl 


xii PREFACE TO THE RUSSIAN EDITION 


of other workers, and with new modifications in the mode of experi- 
mentation, to play a yet more considerable part in the study of the 
physiology of the nervous system. 

I have to express my warmest thanks to all my fellow-workers 
who joined their labour with mine in our common task. If I insti- 
gated, directed and correlated all our labour, I was myself continually 
influenced by the vigilance and the resourcefulness of my co-workers. 
In all cases of team work where there is a continuous interplay of 
many minds, it is scarcely possible to draw any definite line, saying 
what belongs to one and what to another. Each, however, has the 
satisfaction and joy of having borne his part in the common 
structure. 

PERAR 


PETROGRAD, 12th July, 1926. 


+ 


ca 


CONTENTS 


LECTURE 
I._-THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE OBJECTIVE METHOD IN 
INVESTIGATING THE PHYSIOLOGICAL ACTIVITIES 
OF THE CEREBRAL HEMISPHERES.—CONCEPT OF 
REFLEX.—VARIETY OF REFLEXES.—SIGNAL-RE- 
FLEXES, THE MOST FUNDAMENTAL PHYSIOLOGICAL 
CHARACTERISTIC OF THE HEMISPHERES - - 


II.—TEcCHNICAL METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE OBJECTIVE 
INVESTIGATION OF THE FUNCTIONS OF THE CERE- 
BRAL HEMISPHERES.—RESPONSE TO SIGNALS AS 
REFLEX ACTION.—UNCONDITIONED AND CONDI- 
TIONED REFLEXES.—NECESSARY ,CONDITIONS FOR 
THE DEVELOPMENT OF CONDITIONED REFLEXES - 


II.—THE FORMATION OF CONDITIONED REFLEXES BY 
MEANS OF CONDITIONED AND DIRECT STIMULI.— 
AGENCIES WHICH CAN BE USED AS CONDITIONED 
STIMULI.—INHIBITION OF CONDITIONED REFLEXES 
EXTERNAL INHIBITION = - - - A 


TV.—INTERNAL INHIBITION OF CONDITIONED REE S: 
(a) EXTINCTION - i : 


V.—INTERNAL INHIBITION (continued): (b eSebrrronen 
INHIBITION ~ - - - - 


VI.—ĪNTERNAL INHIBITION oning Aa DELAY - 


VII.—THE ANALYSING AND Ea D Ma N, ACTIVITY OF 
THE CEREBRAL HEMIS ES: (a) THE INITIAL 
GENERALIZATION OF DITIONED STIMULI. (b) 
DIFFERENTIAL Ne N - ` 5 = : 


VITI.—THE ANALYSI M) SYNTHESIZING ACTIVITY OF 
THE CERERRA} HEMISPHERES (continued): (e) 


EXAMPL THE ANALYSIS OF STIMULI. (d) 
Syari O AND ANALYSIS OF COMPOUND SIMUL- 
TANE STIMULI. (e) SYNTHESIS AND ANALYSIS 
Kee SUCCESSIVE STIMULI - - - 


N xiii 
oS 
O 


AG 
ww 


S 


PAGE 


16 


68 
88 


110 


131 


xiv CONTENTS 


LECTURE 2 
TX .—THE IRRADIATION AND CONCENTRATION OF NERVOUS 
PROCESSES IN THE CEREBRAL CORTEX: (a) THE 
IRRADIATION AND CONCENTRATION OF INHIBITION 
WITHIN A SINGLE ANALYSER = - = - 


X.—IRRADIATION AND CONCENTRATION OF NERVOUS 
PROCESSES IN THE CEREBRAL HEMISPHERES (con- 
tinued) : (b) IRRADIATION AND CONCENTRATION OF 
INHIBITION OVER THE ENTIRE CORTEX ; (c) [RRA- 
DIATION AND CONCENTRATION OF EXCITATION - 


XI.—MUTUAL INDUCTION OF EXCITATION AND INHIBITION : 
(a) POSITIVE INDUCTION. (b) NEGATIVE INDUCTION 


XII.—INTERACTION OF IRRADIATION AND CONCENTRATION 
WITH INDUCTION - - - = z a 


XITI.—THE CORTEX AS A MOSAIC OF FUNCTIONS: (a) 
EXAMPLES OF THE MOSAIC CHARACTER OF THE 
CORTEX AND THE MORE OBVIOUS WAYS IN WHICH 
THIS CHARACTER IS ACQUIRED ; (b) VARIABILITY 
OF THE PHYSIOLOGICAL PROPERTIES OF DIFFERENT 
POINTS OF THE CORTEX IN ‘SOME INSTANCES, 
STABILITY IN OTHERS.—IHE CORTEX AS A UNITED 
COMPLEX DYNAMIC SYSTEM - - - - 


XIV.—TaE DEVELOPMENT OF INHIBITION IN pg eae 
R 


UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF CONDITIO IMULI 
XV.—INTERNAL INHIBITION AND SLEEP E AND THE 
SAME PROCESS WITH REGARD EIR INTIMATE 
MECHANISM z = -XS : = = 

- XVI.—TRANSITION STAGES BET THE ALERT STATE 


AND COMPLETE Sm PNOTIC STAGES - - 


XVIL. THE: DIFFERENT TYPES NERVOUS SYSTEM.—PATH- 
OLOGICAL DIS NCES OF THE CORTEX, RESULT 
OF FUNCTIO TERFERENCE - : = - 


XVIII.—PatTHOLO ee OF THE CORTEX, RESULT 
OF HONQHONAL INTERFERENCE (continued) - - 


XIX .—P. GGQLOGICAL DISTURBANCES OF THE CORTEX, RE- 
ae OF SURGICAL INTERFERENCE: (a) GENERAL 

“SS ISTURBANCES OF THE CORTICAL ACTIVITY ; 

(b) DISTURBANCES OF THE ACOUSTIC ANALYSER - 


PAGE 


152 


167 


188 


204 


219 


234 


250 


265 


284 


301 


320 


CONTENTS 


LECTURE 

XX.—PATHOLOGICAL DISTURBANCES OF THE CORTEX, 
RESULT OF SURGICAL INTERFERENCE (continued) : 
(c) IN THE VISUAL ANALYSER ; (d) IN THE TACTILE 
CUTANEOUS ANALYSER; (e) OCCURRING AFTER 
EXTIRPATION OF THE FRONTAL LOBES; (f) IN 
THE THERMAL CUTANEOUS ANALYSER; (g) ARIS- 
ING AFTER EXTIRPATION OF THE GYRUS PYRI- 
FORMIS ; (h) IN THE MOTOR ANALYSER - - 


XXI.—PATHOLOGICAL DISTURBANCES OF THE CORTEX, 
RESULT OF SURGICAL INTERFERENCE (continued) : 
ATTEMPT TO CORRELATE THE GENERAL POST- 
OPERATIVE BEHAVIOUR OF THE ANIMALS WITH 
THE DISTURBANCES IN THE ACTIVITY OF INDIVIDUAL 
ANALYSERS - - - - - - - 


XXII.. THE GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PRESENT 
INVESTIGATION AND ITS SPECIAL DIFFICULTIES.— 
DISCOVERY OF CERTAIN ERRORS NECESSITATING 
THE MODIFICATION OF SOME EARLIER INTERPRE- 
TATIONS - - = - ž - Z 


XXI.. THE EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS OBTAINED WITH 
ANIMALS IN THEIR APPLICATION TO MAN - > 


BIBLIOGRAPHY - z z L 5 4 4 i s 


INDEX - - - = : z 5 2 : xQ 


XV 


PAGE 


341 


361 


377 


395 
412 


429 


LECTURE I 


The development of the objective method in investigating the physiological activities 
of the cerebral hemispheres.—Concept of Reflex.—Variety of Reflexes.—Signal- 
reflexes, the most fundamental physiological characteristic of the hemispheres. 


THE cerebral hemispheres stand out as the crowning achievement 
_in the nervous development of the animal kingdom. These structures 
in the higher animals are of considerable dimensions and exceedingly 
complex, being made up in man of millions upon millions of cells— 
centres or foci of nervous activity—varying in size, shape and 
arrangement, and connected with each other by countless branchings 
from their individual processes. Such complexity of structure 
naturally suggests a like complexity of function, which in fact is 
obvious in the higher animal and in man. Consider the dog, which 
has been for so many countless ages the servant of man. Think how 
he may be trained to perform various duties, watching, hunting, etc. 
We know that this complex behaviour of the animal, undoubtedly 
involving the highest nervous activity, is mainly associated with 
the cerebral hemispheres. If we remove the hemispheres in the 
dog [Goltz! and others?], the animal becomes not only i able of 
performing these duties but also incapable even of ing after 
itself. It becomes in fact a helpless invalid, and ca ng survive 
unless it be carefully tended. A ; 

In man also the highest nervous activity id {pendent upon the 
structural and functional integrity of ebral hemispheres. 
As soon as these structures become d'and their functions 
impaired in any way, so man also na an invalid. He can no 
longer proceed with his normal dytție but: has to be kept out of 
the working world of his fellow 

In astounding contrast „wi he unbounded activity of the 
cerebral hemispheres stan e meagre content of present-day - 
physiological TS, erning them. Up to the year 1870, 


1 F, Goltz, ‘‘ Der Hu: e Grosshirn,” Pflüger’s Archiv, V. li. p. 570, 1892. 


2 M. ae Y t Hund ohne Grosshirn.” Neurologisches Central- 


blatt, V. xxviii. , 1909. 
A.P. S A 


2 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


in fact, there was no physiology of the hemispheres ; they seemed 
to be out of reach of the physiologist. Inthat year the common physio- 
logical methods of stimulation and extirpation were first applied 
to them [Fritsch and Hitzig 1]. It was found by these workers that 
stimulation of certain parts of the cortex of the hemispheres (motor 
cortex) regularly evoked contractions in definite groups of skeletal 
muscles : extirpation of these parts of the cortex led to disturbances 
in the normal functioning of the same groups of muscles. Shortly 
afterwards it was demonstrated [Ferrier,? H. Munk °] that other areas 
of the cortex which do not evoke any motor activity in response to 
stimulation are also functionally differentiated. Extirpation of 
these areas leads to definite defects in the nervous activity associated 
with certain receptor organs, such as the retina of the eye, the organ 
of Corti, and the sensory nerve-endings in the skin. Searching 
investigations have been made, and still are being made, by numerous 
workers on this question of localization of function in the cortex. 
Our knowledge has been increased in precision and filled out in 
detail, especially as regards the motor area, and has even found 
useful application in medicine. These investigations, however, did 
not proceed fundamentally beyond the position established by 
Fritsch and Hitzig. The important question of the physiological 
mechanism of the whole higher and complex behaviour of the animal 
which is—as Goltz showed—dependent upon the, cerebral hemis- 
pheres, was not touched in any of these investi ns and formed 
no part of the current physiological knowledg xS 

When therefore we ask the questionsaWhat do those facts 
which have up to the present been at tego of the physiologist 
explain with regard to the behaviour AA higher animals ? What 
general scheme of the highest n activity can they give ? or 
what general rules governing this ity can they help us to formu- 
late ?—the modern ysikag a himself at a loss and can give 
no satisfactory reply. The\groblem of the mechanism of this 
complex structure whicl iC rich in function has got hidden away 
in a corner, and thig nitea field, so fertile in possibilities for 
research, has neve adequately explored. 


1 Fritsch und Eş itzig, “ Ueber die elektrische Erregbarkeit des Gross- 
hirns.” Archw Anatomie und) Physiologie, p. 300, 1870. 
tD: FetgD Functions of the Brain, London, 1876. 
NS Ueber die Functionen der Grosshirnrinde, Berlin, 1890 and 


Bal SB iy 


HISTORICAL 3 


The reason for this is quite simple and clear. These nervous 
activities have never been regarded from the same point of view as 
those of other organs, or even other parts of the central nervous 
system. The activities of the hemispheres have been talked about 
as some kind of special psychical activity, whose working we feel 
and apprehend in ourselves, and by analogy suppose to exist in 
animals. This is an anomaly which has placed the physiologist in 
an extremely difficult position. On the one hand it would seem that 
the study of the activities of the cerebral hemispheres, as of the 
activities of any other part of the organism, should be within the 
compass of physiology, but on the other hand it happens to have 
been annexed to the special field of another science—psychology. 

What attitude then should the physiologist adopt ? Perhaps 
he should first of all study the methods of this science of psychology, 
and only afterwards hope to study the physiological mechanism 
of the hemispheres ? This involves a serious difficulty. It is logical 
that in its analysis of the various activities of living matter physiology 
should base itself on the more advanced and more exact sciences— 
physics and chemistry. But if we attempt an approach from this 
science of psychology to the problem confronting us we shall be 
building our superstructure on a science which has- no claim to 
exactness as compared even with physiology. In fact it is still open 
to discussion whether psychology is a natural science, or whether 
it can be regarded as a science at all. ~\ 

It is not possible here for me to enter deeply into 
but I will stay to give one fact which strikes me v 
that even the advocates of psychology do not loo 
as being in any sense exact. The eminent 
William James, has in recent years referr 


science but as a hope of -science. oO 
n 


question, 
orcibly, viz. 
n their science 


triking illustration is 
provided by Wundt, the celebrated sopher and psychologist, 
founder of the so-called experime ethod in psychology and 
himself formerly a physiologist. before the War (1913), on the 
occasion of a discussion in G s to the advisability of making 
separate Chairs of Philos and Psychology, Wundt opposed 
the separation, one of hj ments being the impossibility of fixing 
a common examination dule in psychology, since every professor 
had his own special Sas as to what psychology really was. Such 
testimony seems © ow clearly that psychology cannot yet claim 
the status of act science. 


N 
SÀ 
aO 


@ 
ww 


WN 
N 


4 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


If this be the case there is no need for the physiologist to have 
| recourse to psychology. It would be more natural that experimental 
| investigation of the physiological activities of the hemispheres 
| should lay a solid foundation for a future true science of psychology ; 
such a course is more likely to lead to the advancement of this 
branch of natural science. 

The physiologist must thus take his own path, where a trail has 
| already been blazed for him. Three hundred years ago Descartes 
evolved the idea of the reflex. Starting from the assumption that 
| -. animals behaved simply as machines, he regarded every activity of 
the organism as a necessary reaction to some external stimulus, 

the connection between the stimulus and the response being made 

| through a definite nervous path: and this connection, he stated, 

was the fundamental purpose of the nervous structures in the animal 

body. This was the basis on which the study of the nervous system 

was firmly established. In the eighteenth, nineteenth and twentieth 

| centuries the conception of the reflex was used to the full by 

| physiologists. Working at first only on the lower parts of the central 

| nervous system, they came gradually to study more highly developed 

parts, until quite recently Magnus,! continuing the classical investi- 

gations of Sherrington? upon the spinal reflexes, has succeeded in 

demonstrating the reflex nature of all the elementary motor activities 

of the animal organism. Descartes’ conception of the reflex was 

| constantly and fruitfully applied in these Bens © t its application 
has stopped short of the cerebral cortex. 

It may be hoped that some of the m Chaple activities of 
the body, which are made up by a groupi ether of the elementary 
locomotor activities, and which ente the states referred to in 


psychological phraseology as “ p ess,” “fear,” “anger,” and 


so forth, will soon be demonsgra as reflex activities of the sub- 
cortical parts of the brain. eo attempt to apply the idea of 
the reflex to the activiti the hemispheres was made by the 
Russian physiologist, I, echenov, on the basis of the knowledge 
available in his da hysiology of the central nervous system. 
In a pamphlet ed “Reflexes of the Brain,” published in 


Russian in 1 attempted to represent the activities of the 
cerebral hemiSpMeres as reflex—that is to say, as determined. 


1R. Mg , Kérperstellung, Berlin, 1924. 


Y 


errington, The Integrative Action of the Nervous System, London, 


HISTORICAL 5 


Thoughts he regarded as reflexes in which the effector path was 
inhibited, while great outbursts of passion he regarded as exaggerated 
reflexes with a wide irradiation of excitation. A similar attempt 
was made more recently by Ch. Richet,! who introduced the concep- 
tion of the psychic reflex, in which the response following on a given 
stimulus is supposed to be determined by the association of this 
stimulus with the traces left in the hemispheres by past stimuli. 
And generally speaking, recent physiology shows a: tendency to 
regard the highest activities of the hemispheres as an association 
of the new excitations at any given time with traces left by old ones 
(associative memory, training, education by experience). 

All this, however, was mere conjecture. The time was ripe for 
a transition to the experimental analysis of the subject—an analysis 
which must be as objective as the analysis in any other branch of 
natural science. An impetus was given to this transition by the 
rapidly developing science of comparative physiology, which itself 
sprang up as a direct result of the Theory of Evolution. In dealing 
with the lower members of the animal kingdom physiologists were, 
of necessity, compelled to reject anthropomorphic preconceptions, 
and to direct all their effort towards the elucidation of the connections 
between the external stimulus and the resulting response, whether 
locomotor or other reaction. This led to the development of Loeb’s 
doctrine of Animal Tropisms ;? to the introduction of a new objective 
terminology to describe animal reactions [ Beer, Bethé cng AE 
and finally, it led to the investigation by zoologists, Qty g purely 
objective methods, of the behaviour of the lower, bers of the 
animal kingdom in response to external pie for example in 
the classical researches of Jennings.4 ® 

Under the influence of these new Ln PR in biology, which 
appealed to the practical bent of the A@ertean mind, the American 
School of Psychologists—already i ted in the comparative 
study of psychology—evinced a co Ta to subject the highest 
nervous activities of animals to S imental analysis under various 

1 Ch. Richet, Réflexes Ps ’ . Réflexes Conditionels. Automatisme 
Mental. Pavlov’s Jubilee Vo Petrograd, 1925. 

2 J. Loeb, Studies in Gfnext¥’ Physiology, Chicago, 1905. 

* Beer, Bethe und Ugxktl, “ Vorschläge zu einer objectivirenden Nomen- 


klatur in der ow e des Nervensystems,” Biologisches Centralblaitt, 
V. xix. p. 517, 189 


*H. S. Jennjtigs) The Behavior of Lower Organisms, New York, 1906. 


6 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


specially devised conditions. We may fairly regard the treatise 
by Thorndyke, The Animal Intelligence (1898),1 as the starting 
point for systematic investigations of this kind. In these investi- 
gations the animal was kept in a box, and food was placed outside 
the box so that it was visible to the animal. In order to get the food 
the animal had to open a door, which was fastened by various suitable 
contrivances in the different experiments. Tables and charts were 
made showing how quickly and in what manner the animal solved 
the problems set it. The whole process was understood as being 
the formation of an association between the visual and tactile 
stimuli on the one hand and the locomotor apparatus on the other. 
This method, with its modifications, was subsequently applied by 
numerous authors to the study of questions relating to the associative 
ability of various animals. 

At about the same time as Thorndyke was engaged on this work, 
I myself (being then quite ignorant of his researches) was also led 
to the objective study of the hemispheres, by the following circum- 
stance : In the course of a detailed investigation into the activities 
of the digestive glands I had to inquire into the so-called psychic 
secretion of some of the glands, a task which I attempted in con- 
junction with a collaborator. As a result of this investigation an 
unqualified conviction of the futility of subjective methods of 
inquiry was firmly stamped upon my mind. It became clear that 
the only satisfactory solution of the problem lay ga\gn experimental 
investigation by strictly objective methods. r*this purpose I 
started to record all the external stimuli g on the animal at 
the time its reflex reaction was manifes in this particular case 
the secretion of saliva), at the same recording all changes in 


on now for twenty-five yea ears in which numerous fellow- 
workers on whom I now look sack with tender affection have united 


the reaction of the animal. Q 
This was the beginning of = estigations, which have gone 


with mine in this work hearts and hands. We have of course 
passed through man es, and only gradually has the subject 
been opened up a difficulties overcome., At first only a few 


scattered fact available, but to-day sufficient material has 
been gathered ether to warrant an attempt to present it in a 


more or aCA es a form. At the present time I am in a 
75; Orme The Animal Intelligence, An Experimental Study of the 


Assavigdhve® Processes in Animals, New York, 1898. 


N 


CONCEPT OF REFLEX 7 


position to present you with a physiological interpretation of the 
activities of the cerebral hemispheres which is, at any rate, more 
in keeping with the structural and functional complexity of this 
organ than is the collection of fragmentary, though very important, 
facts which up to the present have represented all the knowledge of 
this subject. Work on the lines of purely objective investigation 
into the highest nervous activities has been conducted in the main 
in the laboratories under my control, and over a hundred col- 
laborators have taken part. Work on somewhat similar lines to 
ours has been done by the American psychologists. Up to the 
present, however, there has been one essential point of difference 
between the American School and ourselves. Being psychologists, 
their mode of experimentation, in spite of the fact that they are 
studying these activities on their external aspect, is mostly psycho- 
logical—at any rate so far as the arrangement of problems and their 
analysis and the formulation of results are concerned. Therefore— 
with the exception of a small group of “ behaviourists ’—their 
work cannot be regarded as purely physiological in character. We, 
having started from physiology, continue to adhere strictly to the 
physiological point of view, investigating and systematizing the 
whole subject by physiological methods alone. As regards other 
physiological laboratories a few only have directed their attention 
to this subject, and that recently ; nor have their investigations 
extended beyond the limits of a preliminary inquiry. RY 

I shall now turn to the description of our materi SS. giving 
as a preliminary an account of the general concepti f the reflex, 
of specific physiological reflexes, and of the so d “instincts.” 
Our starting point. has been Descartes’ idea 2 nervous reflex. 
This is a genuine scientific conception, £1 it implies necessity. 
It may be summed up as follows e al or internal stimulus 
falls on some one or other a and gives rise to a 
nervous impulse ; this nervous i Q is transmitted along nerve 
fibres to the central nervous sys and here, on account of existing 
nervous connections, it give to a fresh impulse which passes 
along outgoing nerve fibré he active organ, where it excites a 
special activity of the ar structures. Thus a stimulus appears 
to be connected of netgsgity with a definite response, as cause with 
effect. It seems dmious that the whole activity of the organism 
should conform efinite laws. If the animal were not in exact 
correspondengeNwith its environment it would, sooner or later, 


8 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


cease to exist. To give a biological example: if, instead of being 
attracted to food, the animal were repelled by it, or if instead of 
running from fire the animal threw itself into the fire, then it would 
quickly perish. The animal must respond to changes in the en- 
vironment in such a manner that its responsive activity is directed 
towards the preservation of its existence. This conclusion holds 
also if we consider the living organism in terms of physical and 
chemical science. Every material system can exist as an entity 
only so long as its internal forces, attraction, cohesion, etc., balance 
the external forces acting upon it. This is true for an ordinary 
stone just as much as for the most complex chemical substances ; 
and its truth should be recognized also for the animal organism. 
Being a definite circumscribed material system, it can only continue 
to exist so long as it is in continuous equilibrium with the forces 
external to it : so soon as this equilibrium is seriously disturbed the 
organism will cease to exist as the entity it was. Reflexes are the 
elemental units in the mechanism of perpetual equilibration. 
Physiologists have studied and are studying at the present 
time these numerous machine-like, inevitable reactions of the 
organism—reflexes existing from the very birth of the animal, 
and due therefore to the inherent organization of the nervous 
system. 

Reflexes, like the driving-belts of machines of human design, 
may be of two kinds—positive and negative, ex S and inhibi- 
tory. Although the investigation of these refl aS y physiologists 
has been going on now for a long time, it is a not nearly finished. 
Fresh reflexes are continually being dis ed. We are ignorant 
of the properties of those receptor o for which the effective 
stimulus arises inside the organis the internal reflexes them- 
selves remain a field unexplored “A’he paths by which nervous 
impulses are conducted in thg-eemtral nervous system are for the 
most part little known, or © penne at all. The mechanism 
of inhibitions confined vwé the central nervous system remains 
quite obscure : we nething only of those inhibitory réflexes 
which manifest t ‘“eIves along the inhibitory efferent nerves. 
Furthermore, t bination and interaction of different reflexes 
are as yet insuiSeintly understood. Nevertheless physiologists are 


succeeding*g&ope and more in unravelling the mechanism of these 
machine) activities of the organism, and may reasonably be 
exp elucidate and control it in the end. 


INSTINCT 9 


To those reflexes which have long been the subject of physiological 
investigation, and which concern chiefly the activities of separate 
organs and tissues, there should be added another group of inborn 


. reflexes. These also take place in the nervous system, ‘and they are 


the inevitable reactions to perfectly definite stimuli. They have to 
do with reactions of the organism as a whole, and comprise that 
general behaviour of the animal which has been termed “ instinctive.” 
Since complete agreement as regards the essential affinity of these 
reactions to the reflex has not yet been attained, we must discuss 
this question more fully. We owe to the English philosopher, 
Herbert Spencer, the suggestion that instinctive reactions are reflexes. 
Ample evidence was later advanced by zoologists, physiologists, and 
students of comparative psychology in support of this. I propose 
here to bring together the various arguments in favour of this view. 
Between the simplest reflex and the instinct we can find numerous 
stages of transition, and among these we are puzzled to find any line 


.of demarcation. To exemplify this we may take the newly hatched 


chick. This little creature reacts by pecking to any stimulus that 
catches the eye, whether it be a real object or only a stain in the 
surface it is walking upon. In what way shall we say that this 
differs from the inclining of the head, the closing of the lids, when 
something flicks past its eyes ? We should call this last a defensive 
reflex, but the first has been termed a feeding instinct : although 
in pecking nothing but an inclination of the head aes vement 
of the beak occurs. Qy 

It has also been maintained that instincts are complex than 
reflexes. There are, however, exceedingly co x reflexes which 
nobody would term instincts. We may take ing as an example. 
This is very complex and involves the co- ion of a large number 
of muscles (both striped and plain) oe over a large area and 


usually employed in quite different tions of the organism. It 


involves also a secretory activity Ye part of certain glands which 
is usually evoked for a quite dj t purpose. 

Again, it has been assu the long train of actions involved 
in certain instinctive AN affords a distinctive point of contrast 


with the reflex, whic“tsNégarded as always being built on a simple 
scale. By way of ne we may take the building of a nest, or 
of dwellings in RK, by animals. A chain of incidents is linked 
together : mat is gathered and carried to the site chosen ; there 
it is built ANS strengthened. To look upon this as reflex we must 


N 
SÀ 
ao 


10 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


assume that one reflex initiates the next following—or, in other 
words, we must regard it as a chain-reflex. But this linking up of 
activities is not peculiar to instincts alone. We are familiar with 
numerous reflexes which most certainly fuse into chains. Thus, for 
example, if we stimulate an afferent nerve, e.g. the sciatic nerve, a 
reflex rise of blood pressure occurs; the high pressure in the left 
ventricle of the heart, and first part of the aorta, serves as the 
effective stimulus to a second reflex, this time a depressor reflex 
which has a moderating influence on the first. Again, we may take 
one of the chain reflexes recently established by Magnus. A cat, 
even when deprived of its cerebral hemispheres, will in most cases 
land on its feet when thrown from a height. - How is this managed ? 
When the position of the otolithic organ in space is altered a definite 
reflex is evoked which brings about a contraction of the muscles in 
the neck, restoring the animal’s head to the normal position. This 
is the first reflex. With the righting of the head a fresh reflex is 
evoked, and certain muscles of the trunk and limbs are brought into 


` play, restoring the animal to the standing posture. This is the 


Ke 
N 


second reflex. 

Some, again, object to the identification of instincts with reflexes 
on this ground : instincts, they say, frequently depend upon the 
internal state of an organism. For instance, a bird only builds its 
nest in the mating season. Or, to take a simpler case, when an 
animal is satiated with eating, then food has no longgÑany attraction 
and the animal leaves off eating. Again, the e ås true of the 
sexual impulse. This depends on the age of organism, and on 
the state of the reproductive glands ; and <Q rsiderbi influence 
is exerted by hormones (the product D he glands of internal 
secretion). But this dependence ca Noe claimed as a peculiar 
property of “instincts.” The in W of any reflex, indeed its 
very presence, is dependent on fke irritability of the centres, which 
in turn depends constantly on (D physical and chemical properties 
of the blood (automatic stim@ytion of centres) and on the interaction 
of reflexes. 

Last of all, it is iñes held that whereas reflexes determine 
only the activities gle organs and tissues, instincts involve the 
activity of the drganism as a whole. We now know, however, from 
the recent investigations of Magnus and de Kleijn, that standing, 
walking a maintenance of postural balance in general, are all 
nothing eflexes. 


WS 


sh 


INSTINCT 11 


Tt follows from all this that instincts and reflexes are alike the 
inevitable responses of the organism to internal and external stimuli, 
and therefore we have no need to call them by two different terms. 
Reflex has the better claim of the two, in that it has been used from 
the very beginning with a strictly scientific connotation. 

The aggregate of reflexes constitutes the foundation of the 
nervous activities both of men and of animals. It is therefore of 
great importance to study in detail all the fundamental reflexes of 
the organism. Up to the present, unfortunately, this is far from 
being accomplished, especially, as I have mentioned before, in the 
case of those reflexes which have been known vaguely as “ instincts.” 
Our knowledge of these latter is very limited and fragmentary. 
Their classification under such headings as “alimentary,” “defen- 
sive,” “ sexual,” “ parental” and “ social ” instincts, is thoroughly 
inadequate. Under each of these heads is assembled often a large 
number of individual reflexes. Some of these are quite unidentified ; 
some are confused with others; and many are still only partially 
appreciated. I can demonstrate from my own experience to what 
extent the subject remains inchoate and full of gaps. In the course 
of the researches which I shall presently explain, we were completely 
at a loss on one occasion to find any cause for the peculiar behaviour of 
ananimal. It was evidently a very tractable dog, which soon became 
very friendly with us. We started off with a very simple experiment. 
The dog was placed in a stand with loose loops round HAG , but so 
as to be quite comfortable and free to move a pace ogee othing 
more was done except to present the animal re y with food 
at intervals of some minutes. It stood elute at first, and 
ate quite readily, but as time went on it beea cited and struggled 
to get out of the stand, scratching at the nawing the supports, 
and so on. This ceaseless muscular n was accompanied by 
breathlessness and continuous salve, which persisted at every 
experiment during several weeks, the‘wnimal getting worse and worse 
until it was no longer fitted fo researches. For a long time we 
remained puzzled over th al behaviour of this animal. We 
tried out experimentall erous possible interpretations, but 
though we had had perience with a great number of dogs in 
our laboratories we d not work out a satisfactory solution of 
this strange belie, until it occurred to us at last that it might 
be the expres of a special freedom reflex, and that the dog 
simply ww remain quiet when it was constrained in the stand. 


N 
> 
ao 


12 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


This reflex was overcome by setting off another against it—the 
reflex for food. We began to give the dog the whole of its food in 
the stand. At first the animal ate but little, and lost considerably 
in weight, but gradually it got to eat more, until at last the whole 
ration was consumed. At the same time the animal grew quieter 
during the course of the experiments : the freedom reflex was being 
inhibited. It is clear that the freedom reflex is one of the most 
important reflexes, or, if we use a more general term, reactions, of 
living beings. This reflex has even yet to find its final recognition. 
In James’s writings it is not even enumerated among the special 
human “instincts.” But it is clear that if the animal were not 
provided with a reflex of protest against boundaries set to its freedom, 
the smallest obstacle in its path would interfere with the proper 
fulfilment of its natural functions. Some animals as we all know 
have this freedom reflex to such a degree that when placed in captivity 
they refuse all food, sicken and die. 

As another example of a reflex which is very much neglected we 
may refer to what may be called the investigatory reflex. I call it 
the “ What-is-it ?”’ reflex. It is this reflex which brings about the 
immediate response in man and animals to the slightest changes 
in the world around them, so that they immediately orientate their 
appropriate receptor organ in accordance with the perceptible 
quality in the agent bringing about the change, making full investi- 
gation of it. The biological significance of this seh is obvious. 
If the animal were not provided with such a r its life would 
hang at every moment by a thread. In ma S reflex has been 
greatly developed with far-reaching resu eing represented in 
its highest form by inquisitiveness—t ent of that scientific 
method through which we may h day to come to a true 
orientation in knowledge of the Ami us. 

Still less has been done ove the elucidation of the class of 
negative or inhibitory reflex stincts) which are often evoked 
by any strong stimulus or y weak stimuli, if unusual. Animal 
hypnotism, so-called, o this category. 

As the fundament vous reactions both of men and of animals 


are inborn in th of definite reflexes, I must again emphasize 
how important iisto compile a complete list comprising all these 
reflexes with Ogir adequate classification. For, as will be shown 
later on, al N remaining nervous functions of the animal organism 
are Pan these reflexes. Now, although the possession of such 


N 
S 


SIGNAL REFLEXES 13 


reflexes as those just described constitutes the fundamental condition 
for the natural survival of the animal, they are not in themselves 
sufficient to ensure a prolonged, stable and normal existence. This 
can be shown in dogs in which the cerebral hemispheres have been 
removed. Leaving out of account the internal reflexes, such a dog 
still retains the fundamental external reflexes. It is attracted by 
food ; it is repelled by nocuous stimuli ; it exhibits the investigatory 
reflex, raising its head and pricking up its ears to sound. In addition 
it exhibits the freedom reflex, offering a powerful resistance to any 
restraint. Nevertheless it is wholly incapable of looking after itself, 
and if left to itself will very soon die. Evidently something important 
is missing in its present nervous make-up. What nervous activities 
can it have lost ? It is easily seen that, in this dog, the number of 
stimuli evoking reflex reaction is considerably diminished ; those 
remaining are of an elemental, generalized nature, and act at a very 
short range. Consequently the dynamic equilibrium between the 
inner forces of the animal system and the external forces in its 
environment has become elemental as compared with the exquisite 
adaptability of the normal animal, and the simpler balance is 
obviously inadequate to life. 

Let us return now to the simplest reflex from which our investi- 
gations started. If food or some rejectable substance finds its way 
into the mouth, a secretion of saliva is produced. The purpose of 
this secretion is in the case of food to alter it ea the case 
of a rejectable substance to dilute and wash it o he mouth. 
This is an example of a reflex due to the = and chemical 
properties of a substance when it comes into ¢ t with the mucous 
membrane of the mouth and tongue. addition to this, a 
similar reflex secretion is evoked whe bg are placed 
at a distance from the dog and the r ge organs affected are only 
those of smell and sight. Even Ee, kal from which the food has 
been given is sufficient to cola alimentary reflex complete in 
all its details ; and, further, retion may be provoked even by 
the sight of the person w ght the vessel, or by the sound of 
his footsteps. All these dmerable stimuli falling upon the several 
finely discriminating/@isance receptors lose their power for ever as 
soon as the hemisph are taken from the animal, and those only 
which have a ci effect on mouth and tongue still retain their 


power. The O advantage to the organism of a capacity to react 
to the toimu is evident, for it is in virtue of their. aċtion that 


N 
SÀ 
ao 


14 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


food finding its way into the mouth immediately encounters plenty 
of moistening saliva, and rejectable substances, often nocuous to 
the mucous membrane, find a layer of protective saliva already in 
the mouth which rapidly dilutes and washes them out. Even greater 
is their importance when they evoke the motor component of the 
complex reflex of nutrition, t.e. when they act as stimuli to the 
reflex of seeking food. 

Here is another example—the reflex of self-defence. The strong 
carnivorous animal preys on weaker animals, and these if they 
waited to defend themselves until the teeth of the foe were in their 
flesh would speedily be exterminated. The case takes on a different 
aspect when the defence reflex is called into play by the sights and 
sounds of the enemy’s approach. Then the prey has a chance to 
save itself by hiding or by flight. 

How can we describe, in general, this difference in the dynamic 
balance of life between the normal and the decorticated animal ? 
What is the general mechanism and law of this distinction? It is 
pretty evident that under natural conditions the normal animal must 
respond not only to stimuli which themselves bring immediate 
benefit or harm, but also to other physical or chemical agencies— 
waves of sound, light, and the like—which in themselves only signal 
the approach of these stimuli; though it is not the sight and sound 
of the beast of prey which is in itself harmful to the smaller animal, 
but its teeth and claws. 

Now although the signalling stimuli do play a,axt ån those com- 


paratively simple reflexes we have given as e es, yet this is not 
the most important point. The essential feaķùxe of the highest acti- 
vity of the central nervous system, with h we are concerned and 


which in the higher animals most prokaply belongs entirely to the 
hemispheres, consists not in the f that innumerable signalling 
stimuli do initiate reflex reactiongQn the animal, but in the fact that 
under different conditions the same stimuli may initiate quite 
different reflex reactions ; ig) conversely the same reaction may 
be initiated by different li. 

In the above-m ed example of the salivary reflex, the 
signal at one timg,i particular vessel, at another time another ; 
under certain co\difions one man, under different conditions another 
—strictly deyeading upon which vessel had been used in feeding 
and which had. brought the vessel and given food to the dog. 
This S O makes the machine-like responsive activities of the 


SIGNAL REFLEXES 15 


organism still more precise, and adds to it qualities of yet higher 
perfection. So infinitely complex, so continuously in flux, are the 
conditions in the world around, that that complex animal system 
which is itself in living flux, and that system only, has a chance to 
establish dynamic equilibrium with the environment. Thus we see 
that the fundamental and the most general function of the hemi- 
spheres is that of reacting to signals presented by innumerable 
stimuli of interchangeable signification. 


LECTURE II 


Technical methods employed in the objective investigation of the functions of the 
cerebral hemispheres.—Response to signals as reflex action.—Unconditioned and 
conditioned reflexes.—Necessary conditions for the development of conditioned 
reflexes. 


In the previous lecture I gave an account of the reasons which led 

us to adopt, for the investigation of the functions of the cerebral 
hemispheres, the purely objective method used for investigating the 
physiological activity of the lower parts of the nervous system. In 
this manner the investigation of the cerebral hemispheres is brought 
into line with the investigations conducted in other branches of 
natural science, and their activities are studied as purely physiological 
facts, without any need to resort to fantastic speculations as to the 
existence of any possible subjective state in the animal which may 
be conjectured. on analogy with ourselves. From this point of view 
the whole nervous activity of the animal must be regarded as based 
firstly on inborn reflexes. These are regular causal connections 
between certain definite external stimuli acting the organism 
and its necessary reflex reactions. Such inbox exes are com- 
paratively few in number, and the stimuli s g them in action 
act close up, being as a rule the genre Qc and, chemical 
properties of the common agencies whic ect the organism. The 
inborn reflexes by themselves are ina e to ensure the continued 
existence of the organism, especi e the more highly organized 
animals, which, when deprive oftheir highest nervous activity, 
are permanently disabled, and t to themselves, although retaining 
all their inborn reflexes, sogp,cease to exist. The complex conditions 
of everyday existence nee a much more detailed and specialized 
correlation betwee Les fmal and its environment than is afforded 


by the inborn re alone. This more precise correlation can be 
established on ough the medium of the cerebral hemispheres ; 
and we "Gy that a great number of all sorts of stimuli always 

e medium of the hemispheres as temporary and inter- 


act throug, 

anges for the comparatively small number of agencies 

> 
V 

SS 


16 


TECHNICAL METHODS 17 


of a general character which determine the inborn reflexes, and that 
this is the only means by which a most delicate adjustment of the 
organism to the environment can be established. To this function 
of the hemispheres we gave the name of “ signalization.” 

Before passing on to describe the results of our investigation it 
is necessary to give some account of the purely technical side of the 
methods employed, and to describe the general way in which the 
signalizing activity of the hemispheres can be studied. It is obvious 
that the reflex activity of any effector organ can be chosen for the 
purpose of this investigation, since signalling stimuli can get 
linked up with any of the inborn reflexes. But, as was mentioned 
in the first lecture, the starting point for the present investigation 
was determined in particular by the study of two reflexes—the food 
or “‘ alimentary ” reflex, and the “defence ” reflex in its mildest 
form, as observed when a rejectable substance finds its way into 
the mouth of the animal. As it turned out, these two reflexes proved 
a fortunate choice in many ways. Indeed, while any strong defence 
reflex, e.g. against such a stimulus as a powerful electric current, 
makes the animal extremely restless and excited; and while the 
sexual reflexes require a special environment—to say nothing, of 
their periodic character and ‘their dependence upon age—the ali- 
mentary reflex and the mild defence reflex to rejectable substances 
are normal everyday occurrences. ~\ 

It is essential to realize that each of these two owe es—the 
alimentary reflex and the mild defence reflex to rej ‘NES 
—consists of two distinct components, a mtg a a secretory. 
Firstly the animal exhibits a reflex activity di towards getting 
hold of the food and eating it or, in the cage Q jectable substances, 
towards getting rid of them out of the (mð uèh ; and secondly, in 
both cases an immediate secretion of galiva occurs, in the case of 
food, to start the physical and chem)! processes of digestion and, 
in the case of rejectable substanc€M,to wash them out of the mouth. 
We confined our experimen Sos entirely to the secretory 
component of the reflex : liéd motor reactions were taken into 
account only where ther e special reasons. The secretory reflex 
presents many important advantages for our purpose. It allows of 
an extremely accyrate measurement of the intensity of reflex 
activity, since e the number of drops in a given time may be 
counted or aek ain may be caused to displace a coloured fluid 
in a ek ole laced graduated glass tube. It would be much 


B 


Ò 
4) 
wl 


18 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


more difficult to obtain the same accuracy of measurement for any 
motor reflex, especially for such complex motor reactions as accom- 
pany reflexes to food or to rejectable substances. Even by using 
most delicate instruments we should never be able to reach such 
precision in measuring the intensity of the motor component of the 
reflexes as can easily be attained with the secretory component. 
Again, a very important point in favour of the secretory reflexes is 
the much smaller tendency to interpret them in an anthropomorphic 
fashion—7.e. in terms of subjective analogy. Although this seems 
a trivial consideration from our present standpoint, it was of 
importance in the earlier stages of our investigation and did 
undoubtedly influence our choice. 

For the purpose of registering the intensity of the salivary reflex 
all the dogs employed in the experiments are subjected to a prelimi- 
nary minor operation, which-consists in the transplantation of the 
opening of the salivary duct from its natural place on the mucous 
membrane of the mouth to the outside skin. For this purpose the 
terminal portion of the salivary duct is dissected and freed from the 
surrounding tissue, and the duct, together with a small portion of. 
the mucous membrane surrounding its natural opening, is carried 
through a suitable incision, to the outside of the cheek in the case 
of the parotid gland, or under the chin in the case of the submaxillary 
gland. In this new position the duct is fixed by a {aarete which 
are removed when the wound has healed. Asar the operation 
the saliva now flows to the outside, on to t eek or chin of the 
animal, instead of into the mouth, so tha measurement of the 
secretory activity of the gland is great facilitated. It is only 
necessary for this purpose to adj mall glass funnel over the 
opening of the duct on to the 19); for this we find a ‘special 
cement prepared according to peat of Mendeléeff + most useful. 
As an alternative, very suitable‘add accurate as a recording apparatus 
is a hemispherical bulb w also can be hermetically sealed on to 
the skin. From the bu ject two tubes, one pointing up and the 
other pointing do A e latter tube is used for drawing off the 
saliva which col Oring each observation, while the former tube, 
connects by air smission with a horizontal graduated glass. tube 
filled with colGared fluid. As the saliva flows into the hemispherical 
bulb the oged fluid is displaced along the graduated tube, where 


: Or ’s cement: Colophonium, 50 grammes; ferric oxide, 40 


gran ; yellow beeswax, 25 grammes. 


S 


“TECHNICAL METHODS T9 


the amount of secretion can be read off accurately.: Further, it is 
not difficult to fix up an automatic electrically-recording device which 
will split up the displaced fluid into drops. of exactly equal volume 
and reduce any ‘lag in the movement of the fluid to a minimum.* 
To come to the general:technique of the experiments, it is impor- 
tant to remember that our research deals with the highly specialized 


B 


D. O2 O04 06 O8 10 12.14 
aang, 


eh FS a a Peal PAD 
o 20 40 -60 80 100 120 140 


j Fic. 1.—The apparatus used for recording the salivary secretion in set 
tioned reflexes, - .A, hemispherical bulb which is fixed.over.the fistula. .aaa, BS ing. tube 
leading through the partition separating the animal’sroomirom the experimen (connecting 
the bulb A to the registering apparatus, B. bb, tube connecting the bulb ottle, C. 

After. each observation a vacuum; is created in the bottle C by; deggreS¥jon of the rubber 
balloon D; the saliva accumulating in A is thus sucked away. 5 Go the observation A 
is automatically disconnected from C and connected with the mS v apparatus. During 
the aspirations of the saliva from bulb A the latter is autom Ify disconnected from the 
registering apparatus. 


activity of the cerebral cortex, a signaling apparatus of tremendous 
complexity and of, most.. exquisite, sitivity, through which. the 


In almost all the experiments Cui in' these lectures the ainouit: of 
salivary secretion is, for the) sal niformity, given in drops. It. was, 
however, only in the very earli od of the research—before the separation 
of the experimenter from th al was made—that the actual number of 
drops falling from a sma fixed over the fistula was counted, and only 
a few of these experiment: given. In the great majority of the experiments 
the salivary secretiqn measured by the displacement of water in a gradu- 
ated tube or by tk tric; recorder, allowing a much greater accuracy. of 
measurement. CO dings so obtained have been- converted, in the tables, 
into drops: Sw in some experiments it will be noticed that the number 
of drops BR to an accuracy of one-tenth. 


> 
È 
<V 
$ 


+ 
+ 


Q) 


20 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


animal is influenced by countless stimuli from the outside world. 
Every one of these stimuli produces a certain effect upon the animal, 
and all of them taken together may clash and interfere with, or else 
reinforce, one another. Unless we are careful to take special pre- 
cautions the success of the whole investigation may be jeopardized, 
and we should get hopelessly lost as soon as we began to seek for 
cause and effect among so many and various influences, so intertwined. 
and entangled as to form a veritable chaos. It was evident that the 
experimental conditions had to be simplified, and that this simpli- 
fication must consist in eliminating as far as possible any stimuli 
outside our control which might fall upon the animal, admitting 
only such stimuli as could be entirely controlled by the experimenter. 
It was thought at the beginning of our research that it would be 
sufficient simply to isolate the experimenter in the research chamber 
with the dog on its stand, and to refuse admission to anyone else 
during the course of an experiment. But this precaution was found- 
to be wholly inadequate, since the experimenter, however still he 
might try to be, was himself a constant source of a large number of 
stimuli. His slightest movements—blinking of the eyelids or 
movement of the eyes, posture, respiration and so on—all acted as 
stimuli which, falling upon the dog, were sufficient to vitiate the 
experiments by making exact interpretation of the results extremely 
difficult. In order to exclude this undue influenge\on the part of 
the experimenter as far as possible, he had to RY ioned outside 
the room in which the dog was placed, an n this precaution 
proved. unsuccessful in laboratories not s ly designed for the — 
study of these particular reflexes. Th ironment of the animal, 
even when shut up by itself in a is perpetually changing. 
Footfalls of a passer-by, chance corkveyations in neighbouring rooms, 
slamming of a door or vibratid&{ from a passing van, street-cries, 
even shadows cast through th&Qindows into the room, any of these 
casual uncontrolled stimu i @jling upon the receptors of the dog set 
ral hemispheres and vitiate the experi- 
ese disturbing factors a special laboratory 
ute of Experimental Medicine in Petrograd, 


` 


ments. To get TNS 


was built at th 

the funds bein povided by a keen and public-spirited Moscow 
he primary task was the protection of the dogs 

from unc ed extraneous stimuli, and this was effected by sur- 

roundingXke building with an isolating trench and employing other 


TECHNICAL METHODS ESZE 


(four to each floor) were isolated from one another by a cross-shaped 
corridor ; the top and ground floors, where these rooms were situated, 
were separated by an intermediate floor. Each research room was 
carefully partitioned by the use of sound-proof materials into two 
compartments—one for the animal, the other for the experimenter. 
For stimulating the animal, and for registering the corresponding 
reflex response, electrical methods or pneumatic transmission were 
used. By means of these arrangements it was possible to get some- 
thing of that stability of environmental conditions so essential to 
the carrying out of a successful experiment. 

Another point should be mentioned—although in this respect 
the means at our disposal still leave something to be desired. In 
analysing the exceedingly complex influence of the external environ- 
ment upon the animal, the experimenter must be able to exercise 
full control over all the conditions obtaining during the course of 
any experiment. He should therefore have at his disposal various 
instruments for affecting the animal by different kinds of stimuli, 
singly or combined, so as to imitate simple natural conditions. 
But we were often handicapped by the conditions in- which we 
had to work and by the shortcomings of the instruments at our 
disposal, for we always found that the cerebral hemispheres 
were sensitive to far finer gradations of stimulus than we could 
furnish. 

It is possible that the experimental conditions I hay, 
may raise somewhere the objection of being abnorma 
However it is hardly likely, in view of the infinite 
met with under natural conditions, that we shal) 
quite unprecedented in the life of the animal. 
with any phenomenon of vast complexity absolutely necessary 
to isolate the different single factors i Ai so as to study them 
independently, or in arbitrary grou Kn which we can keep the 
individual units under control. Butas a matter of fact the same 


objection and the same answer equally to the whole of animal 
physiology. For instance, t thods of vivisection and of the 
study of isolated organs an ues, which aim at the same isolation 


of different individua ta Xions, have been constantly employed, 
and we may safely s 


of physiology are-d@»yto the successful application of such methods 
of control. In experiments it is the whole animal which is 
placed unas ited number of rigidly defined conditions, and 


at the greater part of the achievements. 


A 
X 
NX 


22 CONDITIONED ‘REFLEXES 


only by this method is it: possible to study the reflexes independently 
of one another. ! 

The foregoing remarks give an idea) of:our general aim and of the 
technical side of our methods: T propose to introduce:you to the 
first and’ most elementary principles of the:subject. matter of ‘our 
research by means of a few demonstrations: 

Demonstration.—The dog used in the following experiment has 
been operated upon as described previously: ‘It can be seen that 
so long’ as no special stimulus ‘is applied the salivary: glands remain 
quite inactive. But when>the-sounds -from a: beating metronome 
ave allowed to fall) upon the ear, a salivary secretion begins after 
9 seconds, and inthe course of 45 seconds: eleven drops have been 
secreted: ©The activity of the salivary gland: has) thus ‘been’ called 
into’ play ‘by ‘impulses of sound-a «stimulus: quite valienoto food: 
This activity of the salivary gland cannot be regarded as anything 
else than a component of the alimentary reflex. Besides the secretory, 
the’ motor component’ of the food reflex isialso'very apparent in 
experiments of this kind. In this:very experiment: the dog: turns in 
the direction from which it has been customary to present the food 
and begins to ‘lick its lips vigorously:: 

This experiment is an example ofa central nervous activity 
depending: on. the integrity of the: hemispheres.:; A idecerebrate dog 
would never have responded by salivary secretion o any stimulus 
of the kind. It is’obvious also that the underly inciple of this 
activity is signalization.» The sound) of them ome is the signal 
for food;and the animal reacts to the signe the same way as if 
it were food; no distinction: canbe ed. between the effects 
produced. on the animal by thesounds e beating metronome and 
showing it real food. O 

Demonstration ——Kood “iss œ the animal. The: salivary 
secretion begins’ after v5 ‘sec » and six drops: are ‘collected in 
the course’ of 15 seconds. e effectis the same as that observed 
with thesounds of them ome. | Itis again a case of signalization, 
and is due'to the aci the hemispheres. 

That the effect NS t and smell -of food.is not due to.an inborn 
reflex, but to Te, which has been acquired in the course of the 
aulimal’s own intéfidual existence, was shown by experiments carried 
out by Di@Povich in the laboratory of the late. Prof, Vartanov, 
Dr. Zit Kopi took several young puppies away from their: mother 
"N hem for a considerable time only on milk.» When the ` 

N 


© 


+ 


N 


A` 


RESPONSE TO SIGNALS . 23 


puppies were a few months old he established fistulae of their salivary 
ducts, and was thus able to measure accurately the secretory activity 
of the glands. He now showed these puppies some solid food— 
bread or meat—but no secretion of saliva was evoked. It is evident; 
therefore, that the sight of food does not in itself act as a direct 
stimulus to salivary secretion. Only after the puppies have been 
allowed to eat bread and meat on several occasions does the sight 
or smell of these foodstuffs evoke the secretion. 

The following experiment serves to illustrate the activity of the 
salivary gland as an inborn reflex in contrast to signalization : 

Demonstration.—Food is suddenly introduced into the dog’s 
mouth ; secretion begins in 1 to 2 seconds. The secretion is brought 


_about by the physical and chemical properties of the food itself 


acting upon receptors in the mucous membrane of the mouth and 
tongue. It is purely reflex. 

This comparatively simple experiment explains how a decerebrate 
dog can die of starvation in the midst of plenty, for it will only start 
eating if food chances to come into contact with its mouth or tongue. 
Moreover, the elementary nature of the inborn reflexes, with. their 
limitations and inadequacy, are clearly brought out in these experi- 
ments, and we are now able to appreciate the fundamental importance 
of those stimuli which have the character of signals. 

Our néxt step will be to consider the question of the nature of 


signalization and of its mechanism from.a purely physiol l point 
of view. It has been mentioned already that a reflex i vitable 
reaction of the organism to an, external stimulus ght about 


along a definite path in the nervous system. No 
that in: signalization all the properties of a r are present. In 
the first. place an: external- stimulus isi reqs Q -This was given in 
our: first: experiment--by the: sounds of S These sounds 
falling on the, auditory receptor. of; th (S caused the propagation 
of:an:impulse ‘along the, auditory Ao In the brain the impulse 
was transmitted to. the secretory, es of the salivary glands, and 
passed’ thence. to. the. glands g them to active secretion. It 
is, true, that'in the experi ith the metronome an interval of 
several, seconds elapse Keon the beginning of the stimulus and 
the beginning of the t secretion, whereas the time interval 
for the inborn reflex Gepretion was only 1 to 2 seconds. The longer 
latent period wa wever, due to some special conditions of the 


eee come out more. clearly as we proceed. But 


ò 


4) 
wl 


24 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


generally speaking the reaction to signals under natural conditions 
is as speedy as are the inborn reflexes. We shall be considering the 
latent period of signalization in fuller detail in a further lecture. 

In our general survey we characterized a reflex as a necessary 
reaction following upon a strictly definite stimulus under strictly 
defined conditions. Such a definition holds perfectly true also for 
signalization ; the only difference is that the type of the effective 
reaction to signals depends upon a greater number of conditions. 
But this does not make signalization differ fundamentally from the 
better known reflexes in any respect, since in the latter, variations 
in character or force, inhibition and absence of reflexes, can also be 
traced to some definite change in the conditions of the experiment. 

Thorough investigation of the subject shows that accident plays 
no part whatever in the signalizing activity of the hemispheres, 
and all experiments proceed strictly according to plan. In the 
special laboratory I have described, the animal can frequently be 
kept under rigid experimental observation for 1 to 2 hours without a 
single drop of saliva being secreted independently of stimuli applied 
by the observer, although in the ordinary type of physiological — 
laboratory experiments are very often distorted by the interference 
of extraneous and uncontrolled stimuli. 

All these conditions leave no grounds for regarding the phenomena 
which we have termed “ signalization ” as being a Nyction else than 
reflex. There is, however, another aspect. of t stion which at 
a first glance seems to point to an essential ae nce between the 
better known reflexes and signalization. H hrough its chemical 
and physical properties, evokes the saliv eflex in every dog right 
from birth, whereas this new type ed as reflex—‘ the signal 
reflex ’’—is built up gradually i pantie of the animal’s own 
individual existence. But igs e considered as a fundamental 
point of difference, and can (0) old as a valid argument against 


employing the term “reflex ” for this new group of phenomena ? 
It is certainly a sufficie ment for making a definite distinction — 
between the two t CS) eflex and for considering the signal reflex — 
in a group diigo the inborn reflex. But this does not 
invalidate in AS) ay our right logically to term both “ reflex,” 
since the von distinction does not concern. the character of the 
+ 
response A e part of the organism, but only the mode of formation 


of the KA x mechanism. We may take the telephonic installation 
INS ustration. Communication can be effected in two ways. 


THE CONDITIONED REFLEX 25 


My residence may be connected directly with the laboratory by a 
private line, and I may call up the laboratory whenever it pleases 
me to do so; or on the other hand, a connection may have to be 
made through the central exchange. But. the result in both cases 
‘is the same. The only point of distinction between the methods is 
that the private line provides a permanent and readily available 
cable, while the other line necessitates a preliminary central connec- 
tion being established. In the one case the communicating wire is 
always complete, in the other case a small addition must be made to 
the wire at the central exchange. We have a similar state of affairs 
in reflex action. The path of the inborn reflex is already completed 
at birth ; but the path of the signalizing reflex has still to be com- 
„pleted in the higher nervous centres. We are thus brought to consider 
the mode of formation of new reflex. mechanisms. A new reflex is 
formed inevitably under a given set of physiological conditions, and 
with the greatest ease, so that there is no need to take the subjective 
states of the dog into consideration. With a complete understanding 
of all the factors involved, the new signalizing reflexes are under the 
absolute control of the experimenter; they proceed according to 
as rigid laws as do any other physiological processes, and must be 
regarded as being in every sense a part of the physiological activity 
of living beings. I have termed this new group of reflexes conditioned 
reflexes to distinguish them from the inborn or unconditioned 
reflexes. The term “conditioned” is becoming more more 
generally employed, and I think its use is fully jus fn that, 
compared with the inborn reflexes, these new refl actually do 
depend on very many conditions, both in their f ion and in the 
maintenance of their physiological activity. ourse the terms 
“conditioned ” and “ unconditioned ” c replaced by others 
of arguably equal merit. Thus, for & , we might retain the 


term “inborn reflexes,” and call the type “ acquired reflexes ” ; 
or call the former “ species ‘reflexes ” Sivice they are characteristic of 
the species, and the latter ‘i i 
from animal to animal in as 
different times and under 


call the former “‘ eh 


ual reflexes ” since they vary 
, and even in the same animal at 
ent conditions. Or again we might 
reflexes ” and the latter “‘ connection 


reflexes.” 
There should b theoretical objection to the hypothesis of the 
formation of ne ysiological paths and new -connections within 


the EEN Since the especial function of the central 


N 


26 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


nervous system is to establish most complicated and delicate cor- 
respondences between the organism and its environment we may not 
unnaturally expect to find there, on the analogy of the methods used 
by the technician.in everyday experience, a highly developed con- 
nector system superimposed on a conductor system. The physiologist 
certainly should not object to this conception seeing that he has been 
used to employing the German conception of “ Bahnung,’’ which 
means a laying down of fresh physiological paths in the centres. 
Conditioned reflexes are phenomena of common and widespread 
occurrence: their establishment is an integral function in everyday 
life. We recognize them in ourselves and in other people or animals 
under such names as ‘“‘ education,” “ habits,” and “ training ;” and 
all of these are really nothing more than the results of an establish- 
ment of new nervous connections during the post-natal existence 
of the organism. They are, in actual fact, links connecting definite 
extraneous stimuli with their definite responsive reactions. I believe 
that the recognition and the study of the conditioned reflex will 
throw open the door to a true physiological investigation probably 
of all the highest nervous activities of the cerebral hemispheres, 
and the purpose of the present lectures is to give some account of 
what we have already accomplished in this direction. 

We come now to consider the precise conditions under which 
new conditioned reflexes or new connections of nervous paths are 
established. The fundamental requisite is that anyeAternal stimulus 
which is to become the signal in a conditioned e$ eX must overlap 
in point of time with the action of an unco ned stimulus. In 
the experiment which I chose as my ex e the unconditioned 
stimulus was food. Now if the intake*eAfhod by the animal takes 
place simultaneously with the acy f a neutral stimulus which 
has been hitherto in no way relat food, the neutral stimulus 
readily acquires the property Aeroting the same reaction in the 
animal as would food itself. is was the case with the, dog.em- 
ployed in our experiment the metronome. Qn several occasions 
this animal had been sts ted by the sound of the metronome and: 
immediately present th food—.e., a stimulus which. was neutral 
of itself had QO perimposed. upon, the action of the inborn 


alimentary refléx.) We observed that, after several repetitions of the 
combined. stiGwlation, the sounds from.the metronome,had acquired 
the prop of stimulating salivary secretion and of evoking the 


ANSE ions. characteristic, of the alimentary, reflex. The. first 
N 

© 
w” 


+ 


N 


S 


THE CONDITIONED REFLEX 27 


demonstration was nothing but an example of such a conditioned 
stimulus in action. Precisely the same-occurs with the mild defence 
reflex: to rejectable substances. Introduction into the dog’s mouth 
of a little of an acid solution brings about a quite definite responsive 
reaction. ‘The animal sets about getting rid of the acid, shaking 
its head» violently, opening its mouth and making movements with 
its tongue. At the same time it produces a copious salivary secretion. 
The same reaction will infallibly be obtained from any stimulus 
which has previously been applied a sufficient number of times 
while acid was being introduced into the dog’s mouth. Hence a 
first and most essential requisite for the formation of a new conditioned 
reflex lies in a coincidence in time of the action of any previously 
neutral stimulus with some definite unconditioned stimulus. Further, 
it’ is not-enough that there should be overlapping between the two 
stimuli y: it is also and equally necessary that the conditioned 
stimulus should begin to operate before the unconditioned stimulus 
comes into action. . 

If this order is:reversed, the unconditioned stimulus being applied 


- first. and the neutral stimulus second, the conditioned reflex cannot. 


be established at all. Dr. Krestovnikov performed these experiments 
with many different modifications and controls, but the effect was 
always the same. The following are some of his results : 

In-one case 427 applications were made in succession of the odour 
of ‘vanillin together with the introduction of acid int e dog’s 
mouth, but the acid was always made to precede t llin by 
some 5 to'10 seconds::. Vanillin failed to: acquire t 
conditioned stimulus.: However; in the succeedj 
which the: order: of stimuli was reversed, th ur, this time of 
amyl acetate, became an effective. conditj Stimulus after only 
20. combinations.. With another dog A uzzing of an electric 


bell set: going 5 to 10 seconds after adfinistration of food failed to 
establish a conditioned alimentary refl&seven after 374 combinations, 
whereas the regular rotation of Sp ject infront of the eyes of the 
animal, the rotation beginnir Oore the administration of food, . 
acquired the properties: of SGhizioned stimulus after only 5 com- 
binations. = The: electri Ley: r set: going: before the administration 
of food: established aX\gghditioned, alimentary. ‘reflex: after only a 
single combinatioy. 

Dr. Krestovig S experiments were carried out on five dogs, 
and the result(®@8 always negative when the neutral stimulus was 


YV 
SÀ 
ao 


, AO 
ww 


28 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


applied, whether 10 seconds, 5 seconds or only a single second 
after the beginning of the unconditioned stimulus. During all 
these experiments not only the secretory reflex but also the motor 
reaction of the animal was carefully observed, and these observations 
always corroborated one another. We thus see that the first set 
of conditions required for the formation of a new conditioned reflex 
encompasses the time relation between the presentation of the 
unconditioned stimulus and the presentation of that agent which 
has to acquire the properties of a conditioned stimulus. 

As regards the condition of the hemispheres themselves, an alert 
state of the nervous system is absolutely essential for the formation 
of a new conditioned reflex. If the dog is mostly drowsy during the 
experiments, the establishment of a conditioned reflex becomes a 
long and tedious process, and in extreme cases is impossible to 
accomplish. The hemispheres must, however, be free from any other 
nervous activity, and therefore in building up a new conditioned 
reflex it is important to avoid foreign stimuli which, falling upon the 
animal, would cause other reactions of their own. If this is not 
attended to, the establishment of a conditioned reflex is very difficult, 
if not impossible. Thus, for example, if the dog has been so fastened 
up that anything causes severe irritation, it does not matter how 
many times the combination of stimuli is repeated, we shall not be 
able to obtain a conditioned reflex. A somewhat similar case was 
described in the first lecture—that of the dog which exhibited the 
freedom reflex in an exaggerated degree. It c QI be stated as a 
rule that the establishment-of the first co oned reflex in an 
animal is usually more difficult than the oe of succeeding 
ones. It is obvious that this must be OF n we consider that even 
in the most favourable circumstance, ewe experimental conditions 
themselves will be sure to provol@ Mero different reflexes—+.e. 
will give rise to one or other d&turBing activity of the hemispheres. 
But this statement must be @ lified by remarking that in cases 
where the cause of these @pontrolled reflexes is not found out, so 
that we are not able to Arid of them, the hemispheres themselves 
will help us. For iNX éhvironment of the animal during the ex- 
tain any powerful disturbing elements, then 


periment does no 
practically agg he extraneous reflexes will with time gradually 
and spont usly weaken in strength. 


g GO 


. The ths Taa determining the facility with which new- con- 
dition exes can be established is the health of the animal. A 


THE CONDITIONED REFLEX 29 


good state of health will ensure the normal functioning of the cerebral 
_ hemispheres, and we shall not have to bother with the effects of any 
internal pathological stimuli. 

The fourth, and last, group of conditions has to dq with the 
properties of the stimulus which is to become conditioned, and also 
with the properties of the unconditioned stimulus which is selected. 
Conditioned reflexes are quite readily formed to stimuli to which the 
animal is more or less indifferent at the outset, though strictly 
speaking no stimulus within the animal’s range of perception exists 
to which it would be absolutely indifferent. In a normal animal the 
slightest alteration in the environment—even the very slightest 
sound or faintest odour, or the smallest change in intensity of 
illumination—immediately evokes the reflex which I referred to in 
the first lecture as the investigatory reflex—‘‘ What is it ?”’— 
manifested by a very definite motor reaction. However, if these 
neutral stimuli keep recurring, they spontaneously and rapidly 
weaken in their effect upon the hemispheres, thus bringing about 
bit by bit the removal of this obstacle to the establishment of a 
conditioned reflex. But if the extraneous stimuli are strong or 
unusual, the formation of a conditioned reflex will be difficult, and 
in extreme cases impossible. 

It must also be remembered that in most cases we are not ac- 
quainted with the history of the dog before it came into the laberatory, 
and that we do not know what sort of conditioned reflex Ny been 
established to stimuli which appear to be of the simpl er aracter. 
But in spite of this we have, in a large number ee found it 
possible to take a strong stimulus which evo trong uncon- 
ditioned response of its own, and still pe it into 
a conditioned stimulus for another reflex take for example 
a nocuous stimulus, such as a strong © current or wounding 
or cauterization of the skin. These are iously stimuli to vigorous 
unconditioned defence reflexes. Therganism responds by a violent 
motor reaction directed tovara ova of the nocuous stimulus 
or to its own removal from i we may, nevertheless, make use 
even of these stimuli for stablishment of a new conditioned 
reflex. Thus in one par€cuf%f experiment a strong nocuous stimulus 
—an electric ee great strength—was converted into an 
alimentary conditi stimulus, so that its application to the skin 


did not evoke t ightest defence reaction. Instead, the animal 
exhibited a arked alimentary conditioned reflex, turning its 


30 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


head to where it usually received the food and smacking its lips, 
at the same time producing a profuse secretion of saliva. The 
following is a record taken from a research by Dr. Eroféeva’: 


Distance of Part of centile ds a 
Time |secondary coil Skin Pca e A Motor Reaction 
in cms. Stimulated 40 eng his 
4.23 p.m. 4 usual place 6 In all cases the motor 
reaction displayed 
4.45 ,, 4 oe 5 was that character- 
istic of an alimen- 
TEEN 2 new place 7 tary reflex; there 
was no slightest trace 
a3 by Ga 0 Eran es 9 of any motor defence 
5.45 ,, 0 ES 6 reflex. 


After each stimulation the dòg was allowed to eat food 
for a few seconds. 


Similar results were obtained from dogs in which cauterization 
or pricking of the skin deep enough to draw blood was made to 
acquire the properties of an alimentary conditioned stimulus. These 
experiments have been apt to upset very sensitive people; but we 
have been able to demonstrate, though without, any pretension 
of penetrating into the subjective world of tees, that they 
were labouring under a false impression. jetted to the very 
closest scrutiny, not even the tiniest an st subtle objective 
phenomenon usually exhibited by ani nder the influence of 
strong injurious stimuli can be observe@S these dogs. No appreci- 
able changes in the pulse or in eer occur in these animals, 
whereas such changes are wee t prominent when the nocuous 


stimulus has not been convga\_ into an alimentary conditioned 
stimulus. Such a ee, enomenon is the result of diverting 
the nervous impulse fro e physiological path to another. This 
transference is cep Mowever upon a very definite condition 
—namely, upon LN ative strengths of the two unconditioned 

reflexes. ies 
Successful sformation of the unconditioned stimulus for one 
reflex OO stimulus for another reflex can be brought 
hen the former reflex is physiologically weaker and 


about o 
aN SS y of less importance than the latter. We are led to this 


c on from a consideration of Dr. Eroféeva’s experiments. 


THE CONDITIONED REFLEX 31 


A nocuous stimulus applied to.the dog’s skin was transformed into 
a conditioned stimulus for the alimentary reflex. This, we consider, 
was due to the fact that the alimentary reflex is in such cases stronger 
than the defence reflex. In the same way we all know that when 
dogs join in a scuffle for food they frequently sustain skin wounds, 
which however play no dominant part as stimuli to any defence 
reflex, being entirely subordinated to the reflex for food. Neverthe- 
less there is a certain limit—there are stronger reflexes than the 


- alimentary reflex. One is the reflex of self-preservation, of existence 


or non-existence, life or death. To give only one example, it was 
found impossible to transform a defence reaction into an alimentary 
conditioned reflex when the stimulus to the unconditioned defence 
reaction was a strong electric current applied to skin overlying bone 
with no muscular layer intervening. This signifies that the afferent 
nervous impulses set up by injury to the bone, and signalizing far 
greater danger than those set up by injury to the skin, cannot acquire 
even a temporary connection with the part of the brain from which 


the alimentary reflex is controlled. Nevertheless, on the whole, the 


foregoing considerations emphasize the advantage of using the 
alimentary reflex for most of our experiments, since in the hierarchy 
of reflexes this holds a very high place. 

While, as we have seen, very strong and even specialize stimuli 
can under certain conditions acquire the properties of c tioned 
stimuli, there is, on the other hand, a minimum strengt w which 
stimuli cannot be given conditioned properties. a thermal 
stimulus of 45° C. applied to`the skin can be madeiNO an alimentary 
conditioned reflex, whereas at 38° to 39° C. (app 
the skin temperature in the dog) a ther ulus is ineffective 
[experiments of Dr. Solomonov]. $ , while with the help 


of a very strong unconditioned stim it is possible to convert 
a very unsuitable stimulus—for extfiple, one which naturally 
evokes a different unconditioned —into a conditioned stimulus, 
it is exceedingly difficult or ev possible with the help of only a 
weak unconditioned stimul OO transform even a very favourable 
neutral stimulus into itioned stimulus. Even where such a 
conditioned reflex is shcodssfully established, its occurrence results 
only in a very s Iyeflex response. Some unconditioned stimuli 
may be permane weak, others may display a weakness which is 
only tempor arying with the condition of the animal. As an 


example AY last we may take food. In the hungry animal food. 


SÀ 
aO 


, AO 
aw 


oe 


ately 2° C. above i 


32 CONDITIONED REFLEXES ~— 


naturally brings about a powerful unconditioned reflex, and the 
conditioned reflex develops quickly. But in a dog which has not 
long been fed the unconditioned stimulus has only a small effect, 
and alimentary conditioned reflexes either are not formed, at all or 
are established very slowly. 

By complying with all the conditions which I have enumerated 
—which is not a very difficult task—a new conditioned reflex is 
infallibly obtained. We apply to the receptors of the animal rigidly 
defined stimuli; these stimuli necessarily result in the formation 
of a néw connection in the hemispheres with a consequent develop- 
ment of a typical reflex reaction. 

To sum up, we may legitimately claim the study of the formation 
and properties of conditioned reflexes as a special department of 
physiology. There is no reason for thinking about all these events 
in any other way, and it is my belief that in these questions prejudices 
blunt the intellect and that generally speaking the preconceptions 
of the human mind stand in the way of any admission that the 
highest physiological activity of the hemispheres is rigidly determined. 
The difficulty is mainly due to the tremendous complexity of our 
subjective states; and, of course, these cannot yet be traced -to 
their primary causations. 


£ ~g ean fomusbnsa vaheaste uterine isl Soto os 


Fie. 2—The upper tracing is a record of a conditioned salivary reflex to a tone of 637-5 d.v. 
The tone lasted 30 seconds—began at the first and ended at the second downward mark. The 
third mark shows the beginning of the unconditioned stimulus. Each mark upwards=1 drop 
=0-01 c.c. Each bigger mark=to each tenth drop. Reflex=68 drops. 

The lower tracing is a similar record, but the tone is continued for 60 seconds. Reflex 
=128 drops. (Experiments by Dr. Anrep.) 


Ye ET S ( has ay & EE E 


Fie. 3.—The s TO built for the study of conditioned reflexes, Institute of 
Experimental Meicme, Petrograd, 


YV 


Fic. 5.—Experimenter’s section of the double chamber. 


LECTURE III 


The formation of conditioned reflexes by means of conditioned and direct stimuli. 
Agencies which can be used as conditioned stimult.—Inhibition of conditioned 
reflexes : external inhibition. 


In the previous cases a conditioned reflex was obtained by linking 
up the action.of a new stimulus with an unconditioned reflex. It 
is possible, however, to obtain a conditioned reflex less directly, by 
linking up yet a further stimulus with a conditioned stimulus which 
is already firmly established. Let us refer again to our experiment 
with the metronome. The sound of the beats was a conditioned 
stimulus so firmly and powerfully established as readily to admit of 
demonstration in face of the large audience present at my lecture. 
The effect of the metronome even under such unfavourable conditions 
was complete and precise. With the help of this strong conditioned 
stimulus it has been found possible to give still another stimulus 
conditioned properties like the first. For if some new and more or 
less neutral stimulus is applied in conjunction with the m A 
alone—i.e. not at the same time giving food—this new Ju also 
acquires the character of an alimentary conditioned lus [Drs. 
Zeliony, Foursikov, Frolov]. 

Conditioned reflexes established in this 
secondary conditioned reflexes, and I shall È 
certain precautions which must be ogey x for the successful 
establishment of reflexes of this aae a e essential condition is 
that the new stimulus should be wit n some seconds before the 


primary stimulus is applied. iet stimuli of a medium physio- 
l 


er are termed 
g to your attention 


logical strength this lapse of ti st be not less than ten seconds, 
while for stronger stimuli t al must be considerably increased. 
Any shortening of the ingadyded. minimal interval of time leads to a 
quite different result ing a group of extremely delicate and 
interesting phenomen the physiology of the hemispheres, which 
will be treated ifghO fifth lecture. 

I shall meee first an experiment conducted by Dr. Frolov 


ee evelopment of a secondary conditioned reflex: A 
Cc 


34 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


dog has two primary alimentary conditioned stimuli firmly estab- 
lished, one to the sound of a metronome and the other to the buzzing 
of an electric bell. The appearance of a black square in the dog’s 
line of vision is now used as yet a further stimulus, which is to be 
given the character of a secondary conditioned stimulus. The black 
square is held in front of the dog for ten seconds, and after an interval 
of fifteen seconds the metronome is sounded during 30 seconds. 
In the table given below the square is presented for the tenth time. 


Experiment of 15th November, 1924. 


Time Conditioned Stimulus Secretion of Saliva 


in Drops 
1.49 p.m. Sound of metronome 13-5 
1.57 p.m. Buzzer 16-5 
2.7 p.m. Black Square 2-5 
2 hrs. 7 min. 10 sec. p.m. | [Interval 15 sec.] 3-0 
2 hrs. 7 min. 25 sec. p.m. | Sound of metronome 12-0 
2.20 p.m. Buzzer 13-5 
2.27 p.m. Sound of metronome 9-5 


The metronome and the buzzer were continued during 
30 seconds in each case. 


Prior to these experiments the appearance of the black square 
had no secretory effect at all. As seen from the above table the 
conditioned reflex of the second order is measured vey at this early 
stage of its development by 5} drops (2-5 plus owing 25 seconds. 

It was found impossible in the case of-@Mmentary reflexes to 
press the secondary conditioned stimulys (WS our service to help us 
in the establishment of a new conditiongd\stimulus of the third order. 
Conditioned reflexes of the third or ey mn however be obtained with 
the help of the second order Qf ténditioned reflexes in defence 
reactions such as that against eee of the skin by a strong 
electric current. But even is case we cannot proceed further 
than a conditioned reflex i third order. 

I shall describe t 673) ts of an experiment of Dr. Foursikov 
illustrating a conditia reflex of the third order : The unconditioned 
stimulus to a def eaction in a dog was given by the application 
of an electric stitlus to the skin over the front paw. A mechanical 


stimulation’ ghe skin over the hind paw to which the dog was 
formerly è indifferent had been converted by the usual procedure 
into WN itioned stimulus of the first order, while for the establish- 


SECONDARY REFLEXES 35 


ment of the second order of reflex a sound of bubbling water had been 
employed. By combining with the sound of bubbling water a tone, 
previously indifferent, of 760 double vibrations per second, a con- 
ditioned stimulus of the third order was now established. In these 
conditioned, reflexes, passing from the first io the third order, the 
latent period progressively increases. In the same order we pass 
from the strongest to the weakest conditioned defence reflex. All 
these conditioned reflexes were maintained by Dr. Foursikov by 
means of appropriate reinforcement for over a year, but here again 
many attempts to combine a still further stimulus with the con- 
ditioned stimulus of the third order were quite unsuccessful. 

So far we have discussed two distinct modes of formation ‘of a 
conditioned reflex, one in which it is based directly upon an uncon- 
ditioned reflex and the other in which it is based upon another 
conditioned reflex which has already been firmly established. There 
is, however, yet another method of establishing conditioned reflexes. 
We were led a considerable time ago to perform experiments of the 
following type: A dog was given a small dose of apomorphine 
subcutaneously and after one or two minutes a note of a definite 
pitch was sounded during a considerable time. While the note was 
still sounding the drug began to take effect upon the dog : the animal 
grew restless, began to moisten its lips with its tongue, secreted 
saliva and showed some disposition to vomit. After hes 
menter had reinforced the tone with apomorphine se imes it 
was found that the sound of the note alone suffic Q Ta all 
the active symptoms of the drug, only in a less dd@eé [experiments 


of Dr. Podkopaey]. Unifortanately, Dr. Po v was. prevented 
from pursuing his experiments and extendj m by modifications 
in technique. However, quite recently, lov, of the Tashkent 


Bacteriological Laboratory, has madeome interesting observations 
bearing on this matter, in the cour certain serological investi- 
gations, when he had occasion O to inject morphine into 
dogs hypodermically. It is nown that the first effect of a 
hypodermic injection of Jis to produce nausea with profuse 
secretion of saliva, folloy y vomiting, and then profound sleep. 
Dr. Krylov, ee) rved when the injections were repeated 
regularly that afte 6 days the preliminaries of injection were in 
themselves es to produce all these symptoms—nausea, 
secretion of s mo) , vomiting and sleep. Under these circumstances 
the symp S re now the effect, not of the morphine acting through 


4° 
KO 


36 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


the blood stream directly on the vomiting centre, but of all the 
external stimuli which previously had preceded the injection of 
morphine. The connection between the morphine itself and the 
various signals may in this instance be very remote, and in the most 
striking cases all the symptoms could be produced by the dogs 
simply seeing the experimenter. Where such a stimulus was in- 
sufficient it was necessary to open the box containing the syringe, 
to crop the fur over a small area of skin and wipe with alcohol, and 
perhaps even to inject some harmless fluid before the symptoms 
could be obtained. The greater the number of previous injections 
of morphine the less preparation had to be performed in order to 
evoke a reaction simulating that produced by the drug. Dr. Krylov 
was able to demonstrate these facts quite easily in my laboratory. 
In a series of experiments specially adapted to the purpose he showed 
that the phenomena described are absolutely identical with con- 
ditioned reflexes. The experiments readily lend themselves for 
lecture demonstration. 

Demonstration.—The dog has repeatedly been injected with 
morphine on previous occasions, and is now held quietly on the table 
by an attendant who has never had anything to do with injecting 
the morphine. When the experimenter approaches, the dog gets 
restless and moistens its lips, and as soon as the experimenter touches 
the animal, severe nausea and profuse secretion of sąliva begin. 

This experiment provides a clue to the well- eNet that dogs 
will eat meat the first time it is offered them, emoval of their 
parathyroids, or after an Eck fistula and t Of the portal vein, 
but on all subsequent occasions refuse it. idently in these cases 
the appearance and smell of meat pro Of themselves a reaction 
identical with that produced BAGA ect pathological action in 
the absence of the ving konge e portal circulation, by those 


toxic substances deriving from stion of the meat. 

All this brings us to thg Mportant question of the intimate 
mechanism by which ne rvous connections are established in 
the hemispheres. It js to suggest an explanation on the basis 
of the actual facts a YX are known at present. Any unconditioned, 
or any firmly e ed. conditioned, stimulus undoubtedly evokes 
a state of nervolSctivity in some definite part of the brain. Using 
the general Scepted terminology, let us refer to such areas of the 
brain as Ove not however thereby implying any idea of ana- 


+ 


tomig alization, During the period of excitation of such centres 


N 


N 


res 


CONDITIONED STIMULI 37 


all other external stimuli which happen to affect the animal are 
conducted to these centres, and the paths by which they are con- 
ducted through the hemispheres become thereby specially marked 
out. This is the only possible interpretation of the facts, and upon 
this interpretation was planned the series of experiments with 
apomorphine which have just been described as corroborating so 
thoroughly the experiments of Dr. Krylov with morphine. Arguing 
that excitations set up in the cells of the cortex were constantly 
transmitted to the salivary centre when this was reflexly excited to 
activity by external agencies, we had to expect a precisely similar 
phenomenon to take place when the centre was stimulated directly 
(i.e. automatically) by changes in the internal environment due- to 
alterations in the composition of the blood. Excitations set up in 
the cortex would now also be transmitted to the salivary and to the 
vomiting centres. This assumption was fully justified in the sequel. 

The facts dealt with so far reveal another important feature of 
this mechanism, namely, that such external stimuli as have been 
from the very birth of the animal transmitted to a definite centre, 
can, notwithstanding, be diverted and made to follow another route, 
becoming linked up by the nervous connection to another centre, 
provided always that this second centre is ‘ paysiologicaliy, more 
powerful than the first. 

This linking up of impulses in different areas of the ve rain, by the 
formation of new nervous connections, is the first Lipset hanism 
we have encountered in our study of the physiolg the hemi- 
spheres. The question as to the site where this ervous connec- 
tion occurs has not yet been clearly answered 9) within the cortex 
exclusively, or does it take place see and the sub- 
cortical areas ? Both possibilities are Cuvable. In the latter 
case it must be assumed that when ae its, one in the cortex, the 
other in a subcortical area, are si eously excited by different 
stimuli, a path is established ca transmission of the excitation 


direct from the former point t latter. If on the other hand the 
WY thin the cortex, it is necessary to 

eptor organs (including internal recep- 
tors) of the organis represented in the cortex, in which case 
impulses originatipg different organs during their activity 


would be transmi to the corresponding cortical point, which would 
then enter Be sina with a point excited by the external 


connection takes place e 
assume either that all t 


stimulus, that stimuli which lead to activity of an organ gain 


E3 
ww 


38 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


direct representation in the cortex independently of the simultaneous 
excitation of a subcortical area. Of the two last mentioned alter- 
natives I have reason to believe that the latter represents what 
probably takes place in the intact brain when the hemispheres are 
in a state of alertness. In any case it appears that the cells predomi- 
nantly excited at a given time become foci attracting to themselves 
the nervous impulses aroused by new stimuli—impulses which on 
repetition tend to follow the same path and so to establish con- 
ditioned reflexes. | 

We must now take some account of the agencies which can be 
transformed into conditioned stimuli. This is not so easy a problem 
as appears at first sight. Of course to give a general answer is very 
simple ; any agent in nature which acts on any adequate receptor 
apparatus of an organism can be made into a conditioned stimulus 
for that organism. This general statement, however, needs both 
amplification and restriction. We can, in the first place, divide up 
natural agencies into their ultimate component parts as regards 
their properties as physiological stimuli. Even a very small single 
component of such agency may acquire in itself the properties of a 
conditioned stimulus. Such, for example, may be a very small 
variation in loudness of a tone, or a small and barely distinguishable 
variation in luminosity, and so on. In this way alone the number 
of potentially effective stimuli in nature is extended almost in- 
definitely, although it is also obvious that a limit j o the fineness 
of gradation of such stimuli by the degree of itivity and per- 
fection of the peripheral receptor organs oi QF breanism On the 
other hand, the animal may be affected RG sum total of numerous 
elementary stimuli acting together a ole. For example, i 
distinguishing facial appearance we R account TE iea con 
form, dimensions, shades, colo e behave very much in the 
same way when making out maa in a more or less familiar 
neighbourhood. Such exangjes*of compound stimuli can be multi- 
plied indefinitely, and w e consider the unlimited possibilities 
of grouping the very umber of single elementary stimuli, we 
shall arrive at a ver midable figure. Yet in this case also a limit 
is undoubtedly ¢ ed by the intrinsic structure of the cerebral 
hemispheres the ves. But I wish at present only to give some 


idea of the RDidle number of conditioned stimuli, leaving a more 
detailed A Qon of this important matter to a subsequent lecture. 


ŞS 


zre have considered. only one broad group of conditioned 


CONDITIONED STIMULI 39 


stimuli, namely those derived from the appearance of any natural 
agency. But the disappearance also of such an agency may become 
the stimulus to a conditioned reflex. Let us take the following 
example as an illustration. A metronome is sounding continuously 
in the experimental laboratory when the dog is brought in. The 
sound of the metronome is now cut out, and immediately an uncon- 
ditioned stimulus, say food or a rejectable substance, is introduced. 
After several repetitions of this procedure it is found that the dis- 
appearance of the sound has become the stimulus to a new conditioned 
reflex [Dr. Zeliony and Dr. Makovsky]. 

Not only can the cessation of a stimulus be made the signal to a 
conditioned reflex, but also a diminution in its strength, if this dimi- 
nution is sufficiently rapid. The effect of rate of change of some 
property of a stimulating agent is well brought out in the following 
experiment by Dr. Zeliony. The sudden stoppage of a powerful 
pneumatic tuning fork D--2 had been made into the signal for a 
conditioned alimentary reflex, which was measured by 32 drops of 
salivary secretion during the test interval; but a gradual damping 
down of this tone over a period of 12 minutes, though ending in 
complete extinction, did not yield a single drop of saliva. So we see 
that not only can the appearance of some external agency act as a 
conditional stimulus, but its disappearance also, or the rapid weaken- 
ing of its strength. Thus the number of potential stimuli to a con- 
ditioned reflex is once more greatly increased. 

The next group of conditioned stimuli can be S d as a 
variation, or further development, of the type of sti 
action which has just been discussed. The sti s this time is 
not the actual disappearance of an external a ut the trace left 
by the action of this agent on the centr ous system after the 
agent itself has been removed. The p e of development of 
such reflexes is as follows. Any coMyenient external stimulus is 
applied to the animal and continued Q? to 1 minute. After another 
definite interval of 1-3 minute yod or a rejectable substance is 

F 


ith deferred 


introduced, into the mouth. und that after several repetitions 
of this routine the stim% not itself evoke any reaction ; 
neither will its disap O: but the appropriate reaction will 
occur after a defini erval, the after-effect of the excitation 
caused by the stiprylus being the operative factor. We have to 


of réflex from the type described previously, 
ditioned stimulus coincided for part of its duration 


> 
N 


40 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


with the conditioned stimulus. The type described in this paragraph 
is termed a trace conditioned reflex. 

I shall describe here an experiment by Dr. Grossman with trace 
conditioned reflexes : A tactile stimulation of the skin was employed 
as a stimulus for the trace reflex to injection of acid. The tactile 
stimulus was applied during one minute and acid was introduced 
into the mouth after a further period of one minute. 


Experiment of 18th February, 1909. 


Salivary Secretion in Drops 


Time Conditioned Stimulus 


During 1 min. During 1 min. 
of Stimulation of Pause 
12.40 p.m. Mechanical stimu- 0 0-5 
12.50 __,, lation of the skin 0 10 
PAS ue during one minute 0 11 
Pi is,, in every case. | 0 14 


The conditioned stimulus was always reinforced by 
introduction of acid at the end of the pause. 


Trace reflexes may be of different character, depending on the 
length of pause between the termination of the conditioned stimulus 
and the appearance of the unconditioned stimulus. When the pause 
is short, being a matter of only a few seconds, they»iQe trace left by 
the conditioned stimulus is still fresh, and the r is what we may 
term a short-trace reflex. On the other h if a considerable 
interval, one minute or more, is allowed pse between the ter- 
mination of the conditioned and the bed g of the unconditioned 
stimulus we have a long-trace refle3 
all these cases on account of t rey tial peculiarities exhibited 
by long-trace reflexes. 

We come now to the EO) of those agents which can be 
transformed into a condi i@ed stimulus, and this one is peculiar 
in that it originates ap tly quite regularly and spontaneously. 
Its operation depen the fact that every stimulus must leave a 
trace on the ner stem for a greater or less time—a fact which 
has long been ķecĝgnized in physiology under the name of after 
effect. The feyther agency I wish to introduce to you is no less real, 
but the on apprehension of its nature is apt to present some 
difficulty 


Y 


S 


is important to distinguish 


eee, 9 Sar. 


THE TRACE REFLEX 41 


First of all I shall describe an experiment of a general nature. 
One dog was given food at regular intervals of time ; another had 
acid introduced into the mouth at the same intervals. After this 
had gone on for a little time it was found that food or acid was no 
longer necessary to produce the alimentary or mild defence reflex, 
but that these reflexes appeared spontaneously at the regular 
intervals of time. This may be illustrated by the following detailed 
experiment of Dr. Feokritova: A- dog is placed in the stand and. 
given food regularly every thirtieth minute. In the control experi- 
ments any-one feeding after the first few is omitted, and it is found 
that despite the omission a secretion of saliva with a corresponding 
alimentary motor reaction is produced at about the thirtieth minute. 
Sometimes this reaction occurs exactly at the thirtieth minute, but 
it may be one or two minutes late. In the interval there is not the 
least sign of any alimentary reaction, especially if the routine has 
been repeated a good number of times. When we come to seek an 
interpretation of these results, it seems pretty evident that the 
duration of time has acquired the properties of a conditioned 
stimulus. 

The experiment just described may be performed with the 
following modification. The animal can be given food regularly 
every thirtieth minute, but with the addition, say, of the sound of 
a metronome a few seconds before the food. The animal is thus 
stimulated at regular intervals of thirty minutes by a pation 
of two stimuli, one of which is the time factor and the the beats 
of the metronome. In this manner a conditioned reff@xSs established 
to a compound stimulus consisting of the soun the condition 
of the hemispheres at the thirtieth minute, w th are reinforced 
by food. Further, if the sound is now not at the thirtieth 
minute after the preceding feeding, & , at the fifth or eighth 


minute, it entirely fails to produc y alimentary conditioned 
reflex. If it is applied slightly later it\pfoduces some effect ; applied 
at the twentieth minute the e Qis greater ; at the twenty-fifth 
minute greater still. At the D minute the reaction is of course 
complete. If the sound i r combined with food except when 
applied at the full int n time it ceases to have any effect even 
at the twenty-ninth nXgyte and will only produce a reaction at the 


thirtieth minute— then a full reaction. An illustration is given 
from experimen Dr. Feokritova: A dog is given food every 


half-hour, we ing being preceded by the sound of a metronome, 


N 


42 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


which is continued for thirty seconds; the effect of the metronome 
is tested at the twenty-ninth minute. 


Experiment, 20th December, 1911. 


Conditioned Stimulus Amount of Saliva 

Time applied 30 secs. secreted in drops 

previously during 30 seconds 
3.30 p.m. Sound of metronome 10 
4.00 ») 29) ; 7 
4.29 p.m. T | 0 
4.30 p.m. 5 A 7 


Of course in the establishment of a conditioned reflex of this 
type any length of time interval can be employed. No experiments, 
however, were made with longer intervals than half an hour. 

What is the physiological meaning of these time intervals in 
their role as conditioned stimuli? Only a tentative approach can 
be made to a definite answer to such a question at present: Time 
is measured from a general point of view by registering different 
cyclic phenomena in nature, such for instance as the rising and setting 
of the sun or the vibration of the pendulum of a clock. But many 
cyclic phenomena take place inside the animal’s body. In the 
course of 24 hours the brain receives a very considerable number of 
stimuli, becomes fatigued, and again restored t gh sleep. The 
alimentary canal is periodically filled or em ? and, in fact, 
changes in practically all the component tj and parts of the 
organism are capable of influencing th@€\cerebral hemispheres. 
This continuous cycle of direct and Dect influences upon the 
nervous activity constitutes the phygi cal basis for the estimation 
of duration of time. We may co the following simple case of 
physiological registration of srt intervals of time by the hemi- 
spheres. It is well known thd) 3 fresh stimulus—we will take for 
example an olfactory sting@jus—produces a very definite nervous 
excitation. This, how. gradually and progressively weakens. 
The physiological s Q e nervous elements, under the influence 


of the continued ulation, without doubt undergoes a series of 
simultaneous akd giccessive changes. The same is true for the reverse 
condition : When a stimulus is withdrawn the change is perceived 


no longer aware of it. Here again the physiological 


until 
Y 
© 
* NV 
RN 
N 
QO 


+ 
for es) very acutely, but quite soon its influence diminishes 


N 


EXTERNAL INHIBITION 43 


condition of the nerve cells is, doubtless, undergoing the reverse 
series of changes. From this point of view we can give an inter- 
pretation of the establishment of conditioned. reflexes to an inter- 
ruption of a stimulus, and to a trace of a stimulus, as well as, 
apparently, to a duration of time. In the experiment described the 
administration of food was accompanied and followed by a definite 
activity in a large number of organs, which all underwent a series 
of definite cyclic changes. All these changes were reflected in the 
cerebral hemispheres where they fell on appropriate receptive fields, 
and a definite phase of these changes acquired the properties of the 
conditioned stimulus. 

To conclude this part of our discussion I shall suggest the following 
modification and amplification of our definition of agencies which 
can become conditioned, viz. that innumerable individual fluctuations 
in the external and internal environment of the organism may, each 
and all of them, singly or collectively, being reflected in definite 
changes in the cells of the cerebral cortex, acquire the properties of 
a conditioned stimulus. 

We shall now follow out another important group of phenomena. 
Hitherto we have been dealing with reflexes of a positive character 
—j.e. reflexes which ultimately gave rise to positive reactions, both 
motor and secretory, all of them associated with various processes 
of excitation in the nervous system. There is, however, another 
manifestation of nervous activity which is in no way garior in 
physiological and vital importance to that positive ZW féstation 
which has just been considered. I refer to ner inhibition. 
When we come to investigate the highly compl nctions of the 
cerebral hemispheres, we naturally expect to across inhibitory 
phenomena, for these are very constantly gaddvpry intimately mixed 


up with the positive phenomena of nery sxtitation. But before 
dealing with these I consider it adviss to give a brief description 
of inhibition of centres as observed. the field of unconditioned 


reflexes. 
The present state of ha Deical knowledge enables us to 
recognize under normal coy{yfrons two types of central inhibition. 
These may be H ere and indirect, or internal and external 
respectively. On the hand we are familiar with the direct 
inhibitory action aoa afferent nerves, or of certain physical 
and chemical pr ies of the blood, upon definite nervous centres 


4 . 


controlling ref N tion, circulation, locomotion and so on. On the 


© 
ww 


+ A 


se 
KO 


44 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


other hand the central nervous system supplies numerous cases of 
indirect inhibition. In the latter cases inhibition of the activity of 
a given centre is brought about as the result of an activity of some 
other centre, which activity has arisen in its turn as a result of 
excitation from some afferent nerve or from some change in the 
composition of the blood. Instances of other kinds of inhibition 
are provided by those complex unconditioned reflexes generally 
known as “instincts.” Thus many insects, especially when in the 
larval stage, become immobilized and drop down at the slightest 
touch. This is obviously a case of direct inhibition of the entire 
nervous apparatus of locomotion. Another example may be taken 
from the newly hatched chick, which manifests straightway a pecking 
reflex to the visual stimulus of small objects or patches of light and 
shade. If, however, a strongly irritant and injurious substance gets 
taken up, the pecking reflex becomes inhibited immediately and is 
replaced by a defence reaction leading to a rejection of the irritating 
substance. This is a result of an interaction of two active centres, 
and is an example of external inhibition. 

Conditioned reflexes are also subject to these two types of central 
inhibition. Since the indirect or external inhibition of conditioned 
reflexes does not differ in the least from the corresponding inhibition 
of unconditioned reflexes I shall take this first. The following is a 
very simple case, and one of common occurrence in our earlier 
experiments. The dog and the experimenter wgy\d be isolated. in 
the experimental room, all the conditions rÒÑQAin g for a while 
constant. Suddenly some disturbing fact uld arise—a sound 
would penetrate into the room ; some qu change in illumination 
would occur, the sun going behind a Q or a draught would get 
in underneath the door, and ma Ons some odour with it. If 
any one of these extra stimuli eħed to be introduced just at 
the time of application of the coMditioned stimulus, it would inevitably 
bring about a more or less prdggunced weakening or even a complete 
disappearance of the re Myesponse, depending on the strength of 
the extra stimulus. terpretation of this simple case does not 
present much Na The appearance of any new stimulus 
immediately e e investigatory reflex and the animal fixes 


all its approp jat pe ena organs upon the source of disturbance, 


pricking ned ears, fastening its gaze upon the disturbing agency, 
and sni D air. The investigatory reflex is excited and the 
RN reflex is in consequence inhibited. 


X 


=) 


EXTERNAL INHIBITION 45 


These extra stimuli have also another important influence. 
Every stimulus, however rapidly it may disappear, is effective not 
only while it lasts, but also for some time after its cessation while 
its after-effect lasts. On account of this, if the conditioned stimulus 
is applied shortly after the extra stimulus, the reflex reaction will 
be partly inhibited. Different extra stimuli, whether accidental 
or deliberate, produce after-effects of different length. Some may 
still have a powerful after-effect after 2 or 3 minutes, others after 
10 or 12 minutes, and still others after several days. These longer 
after-effects occur especially with alimentary, and gustatory stimuli 
in general, and in many experiments they have to be taken 
seriously into account. The effect of exciting an extra reflex will, 
of course, vary according as the conditioned reflex has only freshly 
been formed or has already been firmly established. It is obvious 
that an old-established reflex is not likely to be so easily inhibited 
as a recent one. In our old laboratory the neglect to provide against 
external stimuli often led to a curious complication when I visited 
some of my co-workers. Having by himself established a new con- 
ditioned reflex, working in the room with the dog, the experimenter 
would invite me for a demonstration, and then everything would 
go wrong and he would be unable to show anything at all. It was 
I who presented the extra stimulus: the investigatory reflex was 
immediately brought into play: the dog gazed at me, and smelled 
at me, and of course this was sufficient to inhibit ever cently 
established reflex. Another example is very simi f one 
experimenter had worked with a dog and establishe e firm and 
stable conditioned reflexes, conducting numerous periment with 
them, when he handed the animal over to ano experimenter to 
work with, all the reflexes disappeared considerable time. 
The same happened when the dog wa: nged over from one 
research room to another. 

In the case of extra stimuli, wh awaken specialized reflex 
responses, the resulting inhibition g&€xtremely profound. Examples 
of such extra stimuli are, the æ or sound of game for sporting 
dogs, of cats for some dogs; ing under the floor for others, and 

| so on. Not only such red stimuli, but also any very strong 

| or unusual stimulus exINbjs a prolonged and pronounced inhibitory 

. after-effect. With -pGgect to strong or unusual stimuli dogs can be 
divided. into two ps. Some respond in a manner which may be 
termed positi e. aggressively—barking furiously and, barin 

| BAe nek y g J g 


Y 


~\ The Carl F. Shepard Memorial Library 
ne) ILLINOIS COLLEGE OF OPTOMETRY 
Ò ; 3241 S. Michigan Avenue 


= A? Chicago 16. Illinois 
V 1487 
>) 


i} | 46 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


their teeth. Others exhibit a defence reaction of a passive nature— 
they try to get free and run away or they stand like lumps of stone 
HY | absolutely motionless; and sometimes they will shiver violently 
| and crouch down in the stand ; or they may urinate, a most unusual 
occurrence for dogs while in the stand. In these dogs inhibition 
ii predominates. This case can also be classified as a type of indirect 
or external inhibition of conditioned reflexes, for the inhibition 
I | originates primarily in other parts of the brain than that where the 
| reflex response is initiated. 
Ii All the cases of external inhibition which have just been discussed 
Ii || are of a temporary nature; and on this account the stimuli producing 
ii these effects are termed temporary inhibitory stimuli. If they act 
HHI upon the animal repeatedly and are not reinforced with any uncon- 
| ditioned or conditioned stimulus, sooner or later they become lost 
I | upon the organism and lose all their inhibitory properties. 
| An experiment providing an admirable illustration of this 
Hal 3 condition occurred during the first two lectures, without the audience 
Ht being aware of it. The dog used for the experiment with the metro- 
| nome (p. 22) had been kept in the lecture theatre during the whole 
|| of one lecture previous to the demonstration, while one of my 
I co-workers repeatedly tried the experiment. As a matter of fact 

| the experiment was at first a failure, the reflex being inhibited, and 
HI the animal only freed itself gradually from the inhibitory influence 
i of the unfamiliar surroundings. N 
| || Some years ago, when I was delivering oe 
conditioned reflexes, I had to proceed in a sj 
stration of experiments. The dogs wer 
from the very beginning of the course ctures, and my co-workers 
constantly repeated the S preliminary to the actual 
lecture demonstration, and omy fth this precaution could the | 
experiments be successfully cepted In this series of lectures, 
| || | unfortunately, the present pxaVOidable and unforeseen circumstances 

have deprived me of engin I shall have to restrict myself 

to occasional demons, keeping chiefly to a description of 
experiments and ~rches conducted in our laboratories. 

In aC) e temporary external inhibition, a second type 
Hi of external inhNeion can be distinguished. This may be termed 


es of lectures on 
r manner for demon- 
d in the lecture theatre 


| permanent’ 6grnal inhibition, since it does not weaken through 
| repetition) t constantly maintains its strength. An example may | 
þe un the reaction to acid. If the dog is given food, even 


N 


EXTERNAL INHIBITION 47 


some considerable time before the conditioned stimulus to the acid 
is applied, this reflex cannot be obtained. What happens is that the 
alimentary centres inhibit the reaction to acid for a considerable 
time after they themselves are set into activity, and this happens 
always, no matter how often the experiment may be repeated. It 
is therefore a permanent external inhibition which does not undergo 
any sort of spontaneous extinction. Such cases are not at all rare. 
If a conditioned reflex is established to introduction of acid, any 
careless administration—too much acid, or too concentrated, or 
applied too often—produces a severe irritation of the buccal mucous 
membrane and produces a permanent inhibition of conditioned 
reflexes which lasts until the pathological condition is removed. 
Again, the dog may have some laceration of the skin which may be 
constantly irritated by the supporting loops of the stand. The 
defence reflex will then become dominant while the conditioned 
reflexes, and especially the mild defence reflex to acid, will be in- 
hibited. Many more examples of this nature could be quoted. I 
will give one or two more. In one case an experiment may be running 
quite smoothly, and suddenly all conditioned reflexes begin to fail, 
and finally disappear altogether. The dog is taken out, allowed 
to urinate, and then all the reflexes return to normal. Evidently 
stimulation of the centre for micturition had inhibited the conditioned 
reflexes. Another example may be chosen in the season wken the 
females are in heat. If the males have been housed near Anales 
before the experiment, it is found. that all their onding refiexes 
are inhibited in greater or less degree. It is obvipG@Nt% this case 
that the inhibition derives from the sexual centres eN ac hemispheres. 
In face of such numerous potential sources of jaNDition we see that 
our term of “ conditioned ” reflexes is verf¥@ypeopriate. Yet these 
conditions can readily be controlled, ang the-disquieting factors can 
be eliminated. All of them produce ex l inhibition, and I should 
like to give a final summing up of eir Character : No sooner does 
any extra nervous excitation Oy’ 1 the central nervous system 
than it immediately makes it e felt in diminishing or abolish- 
ing conditioned reflexes, but orarily only, as long as the causative 
stimulus or its after-effefF i 


O 
x 
TOQ 

> 
; A? 
N 
@ 


- application of an extra stimulus, internal 


O 


AĞ 
wy 
RO 


LECTURE IV 


Internal inhibition of conditioned reflexes : (a) Extinction. 


Towarps the end of the last lecture I discussed external inhibition 
of conditioned reflexes, as exhibited in numerous cases of temporary 
clashing between conditioned reflexes and other extra excitatory 
processes in the brain, and we saw how this clashing led to weakening, 
more or less profound, and sometimes even to the disappearance 
of the conditioned reflexes. ; 

In the second type of inhibition, which may be termed internal 
inhibition, the positive conditioned stimulus itself becomes, under 
definite conditions, negative or inhibitory ; it.now evokes in the 
cells of the cortex a process of inhibition instead of the usual excita- 
tion. Conditions favouring the development of conditioned reflexes 
of the negative or inhibitory type are of frequent occurrence, and 
these reflexes are met with not less frequently than reflexes of the 
positive or excitatory type. 

The most striking difference between external and internal 
inhibition is that, whereas under the conditi scribed in the 
preceding lecture external inhibition is prod. n the very first 
(Nrbition on the other 


hand always develops progressively, he) ten very slowly, and 


XS 


in many cases with difficulty. 
I shall start by describing thatit internal inhibition which 
was first encountered in our AS s, and shall trace the growth 


of our present conception of itgature. 

Demonstration.—The of g is an example of an experiment 
illustrating the first grou nternal inhibitions. 

We are taking fo, periment the same dog that was used 
in the second oc the conditioned reflex to the sound of the 
metronome. I ng the reflex the metronome is sounded for 
30 seconds duri hich the secretion of saliva is measured in drops, 
and at the Ge time the interval between the beginning of the 
stimulus the beginning of the salivary secretion is recorded. 
This RG is customarily called the latent period, although as 


N 48 


S 


EXTINCTION OF CONDITIONED REFLEXES 49 


will be seen later some other term might more usefully have been 
employed. Stimulation by the metronome is not followed in this 
particular experiment by feeding, i.e. contrary to our usual routine 
the conditioned reflex is not reinforced. The stimulus of the metro- 
nome is repeated during periods of 30 seconds at intervals of two 
minutes. The following results are obtained : 


F Secretion of Saliva 
yn in Drops during 
30 seconds 
3 - - - - - - 10 
7 - - - - - - - < 7 
5 EAE ee 
4 - A P RA AA 
5 - - 7 
9 - - - - - - - - 4 
13 - - - - - - - - 3 


The continuation of this experiment must be left over until later 
on in the lecture when it will be possible to add a further important 
detail. One detail, however, already stands out quite clearly, 
namely that repeated application of a conditioned stimulus which 
is not followed up by reinforcement leads to a weakening of the 
conditioned reflex. If the experiment had been pushed further 
there would have come a stage when the reflex would entirely dis- 
appear. This phenomenon of a rapid and more or less smoothly 
progressive weakening of the reflex to-a conditioned. igen which 
is repeated a number of times without et hen y appro- 
priately be termed extinction of conditioned reflex uch a term 
has the advantage that it does not imply hypothesis as 
to the exact mechanism by which the p enon is brought 


relating to experimental extinction conditioned reflexes, but 
before I can discuss this it is necessar~¥o make a few remarks about 
the terminology which will be loyed. Formerly we made a 
distinction between “‘ natural ? “ artificial ” conditioned reflexes, 
“natural” reflexes bein e which appeared to be formed 
spontaneously as a res Orne natural association of, for example, 
the sight and smell we with the eating of food itself, or of the 
procedure of introgSging acid or some rejectable substance with 
the acid or the rgfaeéable substance itself, while “ artificial ” reflexes . 
were those Whigs ould be formed as a result of artificially associating 


oS 
O 


about. : 
Abundant evidence has been ae in our laboratories 


AČ 
ww 


+ 


OS 


50 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


with the food or rejectable substance stimuli which in the ordinary 
course of events have nothing in common with food or the rejectable 
substance. At the present time, however, we know that there is not 
the slightest difference in properties between all these reflexes. I 
mention this fact here because the numerous experiments of the 
earlier period of our work were carried out with the “ natural ” 
conditioned reflexes, and it is from these that I shall draw many 
examples in the present lecture. All the numerous artificial stimuli 
which we now use every day in our experiments were important to 
us at the time of those experiments because they provided easily 
controlled, exact, and regularly reproducible stimuli, and because 
they could be applied to check the correctness of our concep- 
tion of the mechanism by which. natural conditioned reflexes 
are formed. At present.the artificial stimuli predominate in impor- 
tance because of the vast field of research they have unfolded to us 
and because they came ultimately to provide the most important 
material for our investigation. 

The progress of experimental extinction is often subject to 
fluctuation. The fluctuations of an otherwise smooth curve may be 
brought about both by external and internal factors. To obtain a 
smooth curve of extinction of a conditioned reflex it is necessary to 
maintain the unreinforced conditioned stimulus rigidly constant in 
character and strength; the environing experimental conditions 
also must remain absolutely constant. Very widgNluctuations in 
the reflex undergoing experimental extinction aragyt do occur in the 
case of a natural conditioned stimulus, for ex e the presentation 
of food, which may be held at one time furtl ay from the animal 
than at another, or which may be held sy GQnary or slightly moving. 
With an artificial conditioned stimulu he other hand, it is quite 
easy to obtain an exact repetition stimulus and so to avoid 
this cause of disturbance in theéxeurve of extinction. With regard 
to variations in the experimen g) conditions it is only natural that 
any marked changes in the@vironment, such, for example, as any 
introduction of strong ẹ stimuli which would produce external - 
inhibition, should al cÉ the smoothness of the curve of experi- 
mental extinction (Nich strong stimuli abruptly diminish all 


conditioned refi€xeg, including of course reflexes undergoing extinc- — 
tion, but thg-yeflexes reappear when the disturbing stimuli are 
ae 


removed. 


greater interest attaches to the effect of extra 
l intensity. Such stimuli produce a temporary 


A © @ 


EXTINCTION OF CONDITIONED REFLEXES 51 


weakening, not of the reflex, but of the progress of the experimental 
extinction. An example can be seen in the fifth repetition. of the 
conditioned stimulus in our lecture demonstration (p. 49). . The 
rise in the reaction from 5 drops to 7 drops definitely coincided with 
some small disturbance produced by the audience. This effect of 
extra stimuli of small intensity is of great importance for the 
physiology of the hemispheres, and we shall return to it later in 
this lecture. 

Even with stimuli of constant strength, and with constant 
environing conditions, fluctuations in the curve of experimental 
extinction are sometimes observed. These fluctuations are of 
rhythmic character and are evidently due to some internal factors. 
These factors affect directly the nervous processes involved in ex- 
perimental extinction, and we shall come across examples on frequent 
occasions in the further course of our discussion. 

The rate of experimental extinction, measured by the period of 
time during which a given stimulus must be applied at definite 
regular intervals without reinforcement before the reflex response 
becomes zero, depends on numerous conditions. First among these 
come any individual peculiarities of the nervous organization of 
the animal. Under the same set of external conditions some animals 
will have the conditioned reflexes rapidly extinguished, while in 
others the whole process will be much delayed. In excitable dogs 
the reflexes ate mostly slow of extinction, but in és animals 
extinction is rapid. Clearly also the extent to whi reflex has 
gained a firm footing is an important point : are ich has only 
recently been established -is likely to be less oP me than 
an older one and is likely to suffer extin the more quickly. 
The rapidity of extinction depends also į eat measure upon the 
intensity of the unconditioned ante ying the conditioned 

P 


one which is undergoing experiment tinction. 

In this connection the followi eriments by Dr. Babkin are 
of interest : O 

An unconditioned reflex Or iven quantity of a 1% extract of 
quassia introduced into og’s mouth produces on an average 
of ten experiments Q:. of salivary secretion. A conditioned 
reflex established. on' basis of this unconditioned one produces 
0-3 c.c. during © rG-sninute of stimulation. A definite quantity of 
0:1% aqueous O of hydrochloric acid evokes in the same dog 
an DANN eflex measuring on an average of five experiments 


52 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


5-2 c.e. The corresponding conditioned reflex gives 0-9 c.c. during 
one minute of stimulation. The conditioned stimuli are ‘‘ natural ” 
ones, namely, the presentation. of quassia or of acid, as the case may 
be, at some distance from the animal. Every other condition of 
the experiment is maintained rigidly constant. The following table 
illustrates the experimental extinction of each of the two conditioned 
reflexes in this animal. 


Extinction of the Extinction of the 
Conditioned Reflex to Conditioned Reflex to 
Hydrochloric Acid. Extract of Quassia. 
Secretion of Saliva Secretion of Saliva 
in c.cs. during in c.cs. during 
one.minute one minute 
1-00 c.c. 0-35 c.c. 

0-60 c.c. 0-10 c.c. 
0-40 c.c. 0-00 c.c. 
0-30 c.c.. 
0-15 c.c. 
0-20 c.c. 
0:10 c.c. 
0:00 c.c. 


Yet another important factor in determining the rate of experi- 
mental extinction is the length of pause between successive repetitions 
of the stimulus without reinforcement. The shorter the pause the 
more quickly will extinction of the reflex be obtained, and in most 
cases a smaller number of repetitions will be requiged. The con- 
ditions may be illustrated from an experiment byQr-)Babkin : 

The conditioned stimulus was provided. by mA owder presented 
to the dog at a distance for one minute ; t mulus was repeated 
several times in succession, and was of not reinforced. The 
five series of extinctions given below y rere carried out on the same 
animal in a single day. Between er Rte extinctions the dog was 
given a rest, and the reflex was orced by feeding with meat 


powder. O 


Stimulation tes intervals of two minutes. 


Amount of Saliva 
secreted during 
one minute in ¢.cs. 


> = i 3 3 : 0-6 


' 
ooooo 


3 
‘] 
2 
15 
0 


EXTINCTION OF CONDITIONED REFLEXES 53 


Stimulation applied at intervals of four minutes. 


Amount of Saliva 
Time secreted during 
one minute in ¢.cs. 


12.10 p.m. - - - - - - - 0:7 
12.15 _,, : SPE 3 X 2 eae: 
12.20 ,, : : 3 : 5 z IESS 
12.25 ,, eas a A AE O N A A 
12.3059, 2 = E A : 0-0 
Stimulation applied at intervals of eight minutes. 
1.47 p.m. - - - - - - - 04 
Toon - - - - - - - 03 
2.05 ., - - - - - - - 02 
2.14 ,, - - - - - - - O15 
2:23 5, - - - - - - - 0l 
2327., Oe eee ce, AEn te Sl SAN 
2.41 ,, SN ce it ak ot E ee a eS 
Stimulation applied at intervals of sixteen minutes. 
3.23 p.m. - - - - - - - 06 
3.40 _,, - - z : z : RESNO 
SDE, 4 = $ - 2 3 y 0-5 
4.14 ,, - z MENGE 3 5 A563 
4.31 ,, - - : Í é é 0-1 
4.48 _,, - - - : z 2 AS 
5.05 ” ic 5 z x > > = 0-1 
5.22 ,, - - r 3 z 0: ox 
Stimulation applied at intervals of two ee 
5.27 p.m. : Lh - - - 
5.30., - - - - - - - Oi 3 
5.33 _,, - - - - - - 03 
5.36 - : 2 g : Ss ENTE 
D, SA wer a ee Q be ae eed | 
542 | pee eS © ee O06 
5.45 ,, - - : é O00 
To sum up: O 
With an interval of 2 minutes ction was obtained in 15 minutes. 
>»? 39 4 3? 39) 20 39 
: Ree eS é reer eee 
AA nels N i »  incompletein 2 hours. 
rs £ O fi 3 occurred in 18 minutes. 
The final cqn@ition which influences the rate of experimental 
extinction is t mber of times the given reflex has been sub- 
jected to, tion in the same animal. After each fresh 


ae a conditioned reflex the number of unreinforced 


54 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


conditioned stimuli required to produce the next experimental ex- 
tinction is less, until in the end a zero reaction results in some 
dogs from only a single application of the unreinforced conditioned 
stimulus. g 

A circumstance of especial interest is that experimental extinction 
of any single conditioned reflex results, not only in a weakening of 
that particular conditioned reflex which is directly subjected, to the 
extinction (primary extinction), but also in a weakening of other 
conditioned reflexes which were not directly subjected to extinction 
(secondary extinction). This latter phenomenon involves not only 
those conditioned reflexes which were based upon a common un- 
conditioned reflex with the primarily extinguished one (homogeneous 
conditioned reflexes), but also those which were based upon a different 
unconditioned reflex (heterogeneous conditioned reflexes). Sometimes 
secondary extinction reaches a profound degree, involving even 
the unconditioned reflexes. The latter case is illustrated by the 
following experiment of Dr. Perelzweig : 

A given quantity of hydrochloric acid produced on an average 
in a dog a salivary secretion of 6 c.c. After several extinctions of 
the corresponding conditioned defence reflex, in which the condi- 
tioned stimulus was tactile, application of the acid itself pro- 
duced only 3-8 c.c. Even more striking results were obtained 
in connection with the secondary extinction of hgafpgeneous con- 


ditioned reflexes, and our experiments were mai cerned with 
these. 
In every case of secondary extinction egree to which the 


primary experimental extinction is cary4d)is of first importance. 
A primary experimental extinction of ined reflex which is 
carried to its final stages smooth he many small points of 
difference between secondary pak lons of different conditioned 
reflexes, but a primary extinctioQ'W ich is carried to only a moderate 
degree leaves these small d@yrences well pronounced. It may be 
stated, other things bein ual, that the extent to which homo- 
geneous conditioned undergo secondary extinction is deter- 
mined by their rel physiological strengths. The strength of 
its turn, depends on whether it has long been 


a conditioned rely 

established, op, tiẹ number of times it has been refreshed by rein- 
forcement, $ on whether or not the reinforcement has been 
disconti and for how long. The extent of secondary extinction 
ES o on whether, and on how often, the reflex has previously 


EXTINCTION OF CONDITIONED REFLEXES 55 


been subjected to experimental extinction, and on whether or 
not it is reinforced immediately before the primary extinction is 
begun. 

The greater the strength of the conditioned reflex as compared 
with the reflex which is subjected to primary extinction, the less 
does it undergo secondary extinction ; on the other hand, if the 
stronger reflex is subjected to primary experimental extinction the 
weaker conditioned reflex undergoes complete secondary extinction. 
The following experiments bearing on this subject were performed 
by Dr. Babkin : 

A dog has three conditioned reflexes to acid, one depending on 
the sound of a buzzer, a second on the sound of a metronome and a 
third on a tactile stimulation of the skin. Every conditioned stimulus 
was continued always for 30 seconds. The first experiment shows 
the relative strengths of the reflexes. 


Salivary Secretion 
Time Conditioned Stimulus in drops during 
30 seconds 

3.24 p.m. Metronome 5) All the 
ee 8 ie Buzzer 8 | conditioned 
4.05 ,, Tactile 4 \ reflexes were 
4.4] ,, Metronome rH reinforced by 
4.51 _,, Buzzer E Ve 


In the following experiment a primary extinction reflex to 
the metronome was produced by repeating the E at intervals 


of three minutes. Q 


Qy Secretion 
Time Conditioned Stimulus ©) ops during 

¢ 30 seconds 
12.07 p.m. Metronome 13 
12.10 __,, s CHE ei 
ido, 5 v 5 
12.16 ; 6 
12h. NZ 3 None of the 
1222, O 2-5 > stimuli were 
12.205, A 0 reinforced. 
12.28 ,, $ 0 
42 Sdn gare Tactile 0 
12.34 ,, aN Metronome 0 
12:37). O Buzzer 2-5 


ae 


56 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


On primary extinction of the conditioned reflex of medium . 
strength the weaker tactile reflex also was completely extinguished, 
while the stronger reflex (to buzzer) was still partly active. These 
results were corroborated by further experiments in which the order 
of testing the secondarily extinguished reflexes was reversed. 

The same dependence of the degree of extinction upon the strength 
of the conditioned reflexes is seen when the conditioned reflex 
undergoing extinction is one to a compound stimulus composed of 
several distinct elements which can be applied either simultaneously 
or else independently. Primary extinction of the reflex to the 
compound stimulus is always accompanied by secondary extinction 
of the reflexes to its individual components. Supposing there are 
two components of equal physiological strength, then the primary 
extinction of the one leads to simultaneous secondary extinction of 
the other, while the reflex to the compound stimulus is usually 
considerably diminished. Where, however, the two components of 
the compound stimulus are unequal in strength, primary extinction 
of the stronger reflex leads to a complete extinction of the reflex 
to the weaker component, while extinction of the weaker (unless 
carried beyond zero) leads only to a partial weakening of the reflex 
to the stronger component. The primary extinction of the stronger 
reflex leads also to a complete extinction of the reflex to the compound 
stimulus. The question of interrelation betweeg the different 
individual components in a compound stimul be discussed 


further in a future lecture. 
In the meantime we must endeavour AAN nd a correct inter- 


pretation of the phenomenon of experi tal extinction, and we 
shall find it important in this connectj give attention to a case 
in which the weaker of the two c ents in a conditioned reflex 
is completely overshadowed by onger, the weaker when tested 
separately producing no posityreweflex effect. When in such a case 
the weaker stimulus is apg singly several times in succession, 
without reinforcement, results, nevertheless, an extinction 
not only of the i stronger stimulus, but also of the reflex 


to the compound us. An experiment by Dr. Perelzweig can 
be taken to ill this point : 

A compountgonditioned reflex has been established on a basis 
of the TRO reflex to acid. The individual components of the 
compou imulus are a tactile stimulus and a thermal stimulus 
of Rou the experiment given below the animal is stimulated by 


N 


sh 


+ 


e 


O) 


EXTINCTION OF CONDITIONED REFLEXES 57 


the compound stimulus and by its components separately. In every 
case the stimulus is applied during one minute. 


Time Conditioned Secretion of Saliva 
Stimulus in c.cs. 


12.0 noon Compound 
12.25 p.m. Compound 
Compound 
Thermal 
Thermal 
Thermal 
Tactile 
Compound 
Compound 
Tactile 


Reflex reinforced. 


Or 


s 


- Reflex not reinforced. 


—— 


Ou 


Reflex reinforced. 


HR Go Go bo bo by bo 
Doris owas 

ar ONNO 
Sov 
BEBBEBES 
Mit OO SSCs 
SeecoeoersS 


This experiment shows that the application of the thermal component, 
which by itself was ineffective, led when repeated three times without 
reinforcement to a complete secondary extinction of the stronger 
tactile component and to a practically complete extinction of the 
reflex to the compound stimulus. 

Hitherto, when referring to the degree of extinction, we have 
only spoken of the extinction as being partial or as being complete, 
but we shall now have to extend our conception. Not only must we 
speak of partial or of complete extinction of a conditioned reflex, 
but we must also realize that extinction can proceed edna the 
point of reducing a reflex to zero. We cannot ther judge the 
degree of extinction only by the magnitude of eflex or its 
absence, since there can still be a silent extincti yond the zero. 
This statement rests upon the fact that a ek: ued repetition of 
an extinguished stimulus beyond the ce the positive reflex 
deepens the extinction still further. Şu extension of our con- 
ception serves fully to elucidate the Sermon just described, and 
it explains why the seemingly inact¥e thermal component when 
subjected to experimental exting&iDJled to such a profound secondary 
extinction of the stronger t component. The importance of 
considering the degree of €X$Netion in all experiments thus becomes 
evident. The method. ermining the degree of extinction when 
it goes beyond zero A) explained in connection with the question 


which will next be Gigcussed. 
We shall co r what happens to the conditioned reflexes after 
they have Sa to experimental extinction and inquire 


O 


AO 
: wl 


58 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


whether they ever regain their original strength. Left to themselves 
extinguished conditioned reflexes spontaneously recover their full 
strength after a longer or shorter interval of time, but this of course 
does not apply to conditioned reflexes which are only just in process 
of formation. Such reflexes, being weak and irregular, may require 
for their recovery after extinction a fresh reinforcement by the — 
underlying unconditioned reflex. However, all those conditioned 
reflexes which have been fully established invariably and spon- 
taneously return sooner or later to their full strength. This provides 
one way of determining the depth of extinction ; it is measured, 
other conditions being equal, by the time taken for spontaneous 
restoration of the extinguished reflex to its original strength. Such 
time interval may vary for the different reflexes from a few minutes 
to a number of hours. I shall give a few experiments in illustration. 
The first is an experiment by Dr. Babkin : 

Presentation of meat powder a short distance away at intervals 
of three minutes ; the reflex is not reinforced. 


Secretion of Saliva 


Time in ¢.Cs. 
11.33 a.m. - - - - A 7 3 1-0 
PETT a E a T T ON R a E 
Ru aa PT ARIE I etn ig Man fg 
i E PAE - - =: 5 ‘ : i 0-1 
145, ACG ciara A TE 0-0 
Li Sean pests aes en ee A 0.0 
Interval of 2 hours. A 
1.50 p.m. - 0-15 
The second experiment is by Dr. 
Meat powder is presented a se") Latics away at intervals of 
ten minutes ; the reflex is not See 
Time o lan E 
1.42 p.m. i he - - - - 8 
1.52 ,, ee ee 
yA. ERES Sir : - d : 0 
N Interval of 20 minutes. 
2. a LS ee z $ 7 


It u interesting now to return to the demonstration given 


SS 


ier part of this lecture and to examine whether there is 


©. 


O 


` unconditioned reflex is applied singly 


EXTINCTION OF CONDITIONED REFLEXES 59 


any spontaneous recovery of the reflex to the metronome which was 
partially extinguished just twenty-three minutes ago. 

Continuation of Demonstration.—The dog is again subjected to 
the stimulus of the metronome for 30 seconds: the latent period 
of the conditioned reflex now comes out at 5 seconds and the 
salivary secretion is 6 drops. At the last reading the latent 
period was 13 seconds and the salivary secretion 3 drops. Con- 
siderable recovery has therefore taken place spontaneously during 
the lecture. 

The great differences in rapidity of restoration of extinguished 
reflexes depend, on a number of factors. The most important factor 
is the depth of the preceding extinction. The individual character 
of an animal and its type of general nervous organization also play 
an important part. Much depends also on the intensity of. the 
conditioned reflex which was subjected to experimental extinction ; 
and finally, upon how often the experimental extinction has been 
repeated. In every case, however, it is possible to accelerate the 


_ restoration of an extinguished conditioned reflex. For this purpose 


it is only necessary to apply the unconditioned stimulus on which 
the conditioned reflex was built up, either singly, or together with 
the extinguished conditioned stimulus. This method produces a 


more or less rapid restoration, according as the conditioned reflex 


has been extinguished to a greater or less degree. If the extinction 
has not been carried very far, a single application of the u itioned. 
stimulus is often sufficient to restore the reflex to full 
if the extinction has been made profound, repeate 
are necessary. This means of accelerating the 
tinguished reflex affords another method of 
extinction. The further question wheth 

restoration of an extinguished nly C$ 


acceleration in the 
ex is greater when the 
when it is applied in the 
form of reinforcement cannot be digcu8Sed at present, as it is still 
under investigation (see Lecture agi 

All this description of f t extinction may have proved 
rather wearisome to the re owing to the absence of any under- 
lying uniformity. Nev, ss they served an important purpose 
in that through a care consideration of them we were enabled 
gradually to eon afon a solution of the fundamental question as 
to the intimate e of experimental extinction. By ruling out 
one interpre after another we arrived at the conclusion that 


O 


= 2 
ww 


| 60 | CONDITIONED REFLEXES 
I] 


I- extinction must be regarded as a special form of inhibition. That 
| it cannot be regarded as an irreparable destruction of the conditioned 
| reflex, due to disruption of the respective nervous connections, is 
I | evidenced by the fact that the extinguished reflexes spontaneously 
I| | regenerate in course of time. Another possible explanation also 
I suggests itself : may it not be that the experimental extinction is 
l- brought about simply by fatigue in some part of the neuro-secretory 
apparatus involved in the reflex ? This is ruled out by the following 
evidence. The secretory elements in the gland do not become 
It | fatigued when the conditioned reflexes are being reinforced, although 

they continue indefinitely during an experiment to produce a full 
Mit | salivary secretion. Moreover, the restoration of an extinguished 
| ‘reflex is greatly accelerated by a fresh application of the uncondi- 
| | tioned stimulus, a still further secretory activity of the gland being 
| | readily obtained although the reflex has been deeply extinguished. 
| Neither can there be fatigue in the nervous centres of the secretory 
| reflex. It is sufficient to recall the experiment with the conditioned 
reflex to the compound stimulus which had two cutaneous com- 
| ponents—tactile and thermal. The thermal stimulus, which was 
| the weaker, could not by itself produce even the slightest positive 
Ili effect: yet none the less its repeated application brought about a 
Il secondary extinction of the stronger tactile stimulus and even of the 
I compound stimulus itself. The extinction of the ineffective thermal 
l | stimulus was at no time accompanied by any abt ositive activity 
i of the nervous elements, and it is difficult to CORRE that a part of 


Hl | the central nervous system underwent <a Rae linea previous 


activity. Again, it would seem that if w. re to admit the pos- 
sibility of any fatigue in the satan ed , we could expect only 
WV the reflex to the thermal stimulus t gO fatigued, but we find 
| | also an extinction of the reflex tol ctile stimulus which was not 
| brought into activity at ae uring the repeated stimulation 
of the thermal receptors. y a process of elimination we are 
| forced to the conclusion ein experimental extinction is based on 
IM inhibition, and if we Roo the facts which have been described, in 
i the light of this n nearly all of them become perfectly 
il} intelligible. 
| The i EDs rhythmic fluctuations in the reflexes sometimes 
observed SEs the process of experimental extinction can now 
ined as a manifestation of the struggle which is taking 


| easily b 
i place en the nervous processes of excitation and inhibition 


+ 


D 


EXTINCTION OF CONDITIONED REFLEXES 61 


before one or other of them gains the mastery. Similarly it becomes 
quite easy to understand the part played by the individuality of 
the animal. We have all observed for ourselves how the inhibitory 
processes in the nervous system of human beings are seldom of 
the same intensity in any two people, and numerous examples 
in the further course of these lectures will make it clear that a 
precisely similar variation obtains in the nervous system of 
animals. | 

It is clear that the more vigorous a conditioned. reflex, or in other 
words the greater the intensity of the excitatory process, the more 
intense must be the inhibitory process in order to overcome it, and 
therefore the greater the number of unreinforced repetitions necessary 
to bring about complete extinction. Again, it was seen that a re- 
petition of the non-reinforced conditioned stimulus was necessary 
to produce a ‘sufficient summation of the inhibitory after-effect for 
complete experimental extinction, and it is reasonable to suppose 
that the shorter the intervals between successive repetitions of the 
stimulus the more quickly will the required intensity of the inhibitory 
process be obtained. This also was found to be the case. As a result 
of repetitions of experimental extinction on the same animal the 
zero level of a fresh extinction of the reflex is. reached more rapidly. 
This shows that inhibition like excitation is facilitated by repetition. 
The fact itself is well known from observation of ourselves and 
others, but abundant experimental evidence for anima ill be 
afforded during the further course of our study of Bh itioned 
reflexes. , 


The influence exerted by experimental extingijén on reflexes 
other than the one undergoing extinction, incl unconditioned 
reflexes as well as homogeneous and he neous conditioned 


process from its point of initiation thro the entire nervous struc- 
ture of the hemispheres. This process wil be fully discussed in one 
of the later lectures. . 

We have now to consider in still another important feature 
which has already been not assing, but was left unexplained, 
namely the frequent devi i@s observed in the curve of experimental 
extinction. These BE e represent sudden rapid. strengthenings 
in the intensity of .tareflex which is undergoing extinction, and 
they depend on t roduction of any accidental stimuli into the 
experimental exVwonment. Some extraneous sound or shadow 


N 
S 


o 


reflexes, must be regarded as the result of ng of the inhibitory 


O 


O 


62 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


finding its way into the room produces at once a rapid strengthening 
of the reflex, and of course a similar effect is produced by different 
extra stimuli which we ourselves apply on purpose in order to study 
this phenomenon experimentally. — 

I shall describe first of all an observation which for a long time 
we were at a loss to interpret. A natural conditioned reflex to meat 
powder, which, as we know from contrel experiments, after extinction 
récovers its initial value spontaneously in something between a half 
and one hour, is again extinguished to zero. This time, however, 
instead of waiting for the spontaneous recovery of the reflex a weak 
solution of acid is immediately introduced into the dog’s mouth, and 
after the termination of the secretion produced by the acid (about 
five minutes) meat powder is again presented at a short distance. 
This time although nothing like half an hour has elapsed the con- 
ditioned alimentary reflex is found to be almost completely restored, 
At first sight the accelerated recovery of the extinguished reflex seems 
paradoxical, since we know already that positive conditioned reflexes 
are always quite definitely specific—a definite stimulus rigidly evoking 
a definite reaction—but in this case a stimulus to an extinguished 
conditioned alimentary reflex has had its full strength restored 
through the single application of a stimulus to a heterogeneous 
unconditioned reflex, namely the defence reflex to acid. And there 
can be no doubt that although the secretory component of the two 
reflexes is effected through the same glands yet are distinctly 
heterogeneous in nature, since the defence r o acid differs 
sharply from the alimentary reflex to fo @pth as regards the 
composition of the saliva secreted and KAN the character of 
the motor response. Without attem or the present to give 
any explanation we can designat bservation from a purely 
matter of fact point of view as sting of a sudden removal by 
an extraneous reflex of the inhi®itory process set up by experimental 
extinction. 

The whole group of cakey of which the above is an illustration 
have one common fe In all of them the removal of the 
inhibition is only rary, persisting no longer than the extra 
stimulus respo i® or the removal of inhibition and its after- 
effect. 

It is integasting to mention in this connection a disagreement 
which ar eB the members of the staff in our laboratory 
before ct of the restorative effect of acid upon an extinguished 


Y 


$ 


EXTINCTION OF CONDITIONED REFLEXES 63 


alimentary conditioned reflex had been indubitably established. 
Some of the workers admitted this restorative effect without question, 
while others disputed it. However, the experimental side of the 
question turned out to be right in both cases. The cause of the 
discrepancy was clearly brought out in Dr. Zavadsky’s researches. 
It appeared that previous observers had overlooked the fact that 
their conditions of experimentation were not fully identical. Those 
workers who accepted the restorative effect had tested the extin- 
guished conditioned alimentary reflex immediately or only a few 
moments after the salivary secretion in response to the acid had 
ceased, while the others had tested the extinguished reflex after 
allowing a considerable interval of time to elapse. Realizing the 
difference in the experimental procedure of the two sets of: workers 
Dr. Zavadsky was able in his experiments to obtain all the different 
stages that had been reported by other workers.. Two of his experi- 
ments, performed on the same day, are given below. 


Salivary Secretion in drops 
during one minute. 
Stimulus applied 
Time during aa ay 
one minute From From 
submaxillary Parotid 
gland gland 
2.28 p.m. ‘Meat powder pre- 16 12 
2 40> ., | sented at a dis- 9 A 
262 >} tance out of 7 
oD ar eR, reach of. the 5 : 
3.18 5; animal. 0 Qo 
S20) Acid introduced 
into the dog’s xO 


mouth: The flow Q 
of saliva con- O 
sequent on this K 
ceased at 3 hrs. 


a min. 50 sec. 


( Meat powder y 
FROS tis 4 tance. SN 0 


| tance. 


The time interval ce the end of the secretion produced by 


acid and the subsi t testing of the extinguished reflex was in 
the above exper 7 minutes 10 seconds. 


\S 


64. CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


Salivary Secretion in drops ` 


sie : during one minute. 
Stimulus applied 


Time during 
one minute From From 
submaxillary Parotid 
gland gland 
f Meat powder con- 
3.34 p.m. (ape 
| Meat powder pre- 
3.46 ,, sented at a ais | 10 8 
| tance. 
347. {Most powder con- 
sumed. 
7 T 9 7 
Abs, | Meat powder pre- 7 6 
4.25 trs - sented at a dis- 4 3 
4:35. ,; | tance. l 0 
4.45 , 0 0 
ADIN, Acid introduced 
into the dog’s 
mouth. The re- 
sulting salivary 
secretion ceased 
at 4 hrs. 54 min. 
20 sec. p.m. 
Meat powder pre- 
4.55 p.m. | sented at a ts | ins 5 
tance. 


The time interval between the end of the tion produced by 
acid and the subsequent testing of the olsu reflex was in 
this experiment 40 seconds. 

Seyen minutes after the salivar Weretion to acid had ceased 
the restoration of the condition entary reflex was minimal, 
only one gland showing any a When, however, the reflex 
was tested only 40 seconds afte the aas secretion to acid had 
ceased, a considerable re eye of the alimentary conditioned 
reflex was found, toa oth glands. 

By this and si eriments the temporary nature of the 
restoration of ui Sri reflex in response to other extra 
stimuli was cay emonstrated. The restorative effect was in no 
way confine e administration of acid but was produced also 


by any oth tra stimulus. A further example from Dr. Zavadsky’s 
ae illustrates this general case. The experiment was con- 


KY n another dog. 


EXTINCTION OF CONDITIONED REFLEXES 65 


Amount of Saliva in drops 


f ) during one minute, 
Stimulus applied 


Time during 
one minute From From 
submaxillary Parotid 
gland gland 
1.53 p.m. | Meat powder pre- | 11 7 
1.58 ;, - sented at a dis- 4 2 
ERRI I tance. 0 0 
2 Bie; Same + tactile 
stimulation of 
skin. 3 l 
2I. Same + knocks un- 
; der the table. 2 1 
218 ©; Meat powder at a 
distance. 0 0 
220° 5; Prof.Pavlov enters 
the room con- 
taining the dog, 
talks, and stays 
for two minutes. 
2.23 >, Meat powder at a 
distance. 5 2 
228 5. ,, Same. 0 0 


Nortr.—Previously to this experiment it had been repeatedly 
shown that neither the tactile nor the auditory stimulus, 
nor the entry of Prof. Pavlov into the experimental rao, 
produced any secretory effect at all. 


This experiment leaves no doubt that the extingui alimentary 
conditioned reflex is restored both by the actua presence of the 
extra stimulus (tactile and auditory), and by ~Olter-etiect (after- 
effect of stimulus of my entering the room 

In all the experiments which have been described the 
restoration of the extinguished reflexes Msts only for a few minutes, 
depending on the duration of the extr&timulus and its after-effect. 
In the case, however, of certain ial extra stimuli already men- 
tioned in connection with ext inhibition, stimuli which are of 
a protracted nature, the AN tive effect is felt throughout the 
whole course of experi ®© extinction, which is therefore never 
smoothly progressive agd)jcan never be brought down to and kept 
at the zero level of reflex. í 

We have GN scuss another important observation bearing 
on the same poi uring the whole period of our work we observed 


A.P. Y E 
> 
5 


© 
KN 


N 
AO 


66 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


on many occasions the simultaneous existence of several different 
reflexes, leading of course to an interaction between them which 
resulted either in predominance of one or another reflex or in their 
mutual neutralization. Thus, if we make a tactile stimulation of 
the skin the stimulus to a conditioned reflex, it frequently happens 
that we are bothered with an interference from the unconditioned ` 
reflex response to the cutaneous stimulus itself, in the form of the 
scratch reflex or some sort of quivering reflex. This may, in rare 
cases, be so troublesome that the conditioned reflex never reaches 
a stable value. Exactly the same thing happens sometimes with 
musical tones of exceedingly high pitch, it being in some dogs 
impossible to overcome the difficulty of the resulting sharp motor 
response. All such powerful unconditioned stimuli exercise an 
external inhibitory influence which perpetually interferes with all 
positive conditioned reflexes. But it is obvious that these persistent 
_ extra reflexes should exert a still more powerful disturbing influence 
upon the normal course of the inhibitory processes’ underlying 
extinction, since inhibition is in every respect more labile than 
excitation. I shall be giving a number of examples substantiating 
this statement in a further lecture, when the whole matter will be 
subjected to a rigorous experimental analysis. All the considerations 
put forward in this lecture permit us to regard the temporary 
restoration of the reflex which is in process of extinction, or which 
is already extinguished, as based upon the remo f an inhibitory 
process. We therefore describe this phenome s a dis-inhibition, 
a term we shall always use in the future e wish to denote a 
temporary removal of inhibition. 
The next question is, whether OYistinction can be drawn 
between the case of the restoratj an extinguished conditioned 
reflex resulting from fresh agpp¥ecdtions of the appropriate un- 
conditioned stimulus, and t Ae which has just been termed 
dis-inhibition. Our exper ts show that undoubtedly such a 
distinction does exist. Cie first case, when restoration is effected 
by the special PON stimulus: underlying the reflex which 
has undergone ext Ton, such restoration is permanent. In the 
second case, r, when the restoration is effected under the 
influence of an\dlien stimulus, such restoration is only temporary. 


| As to the fol reason for this difference it is not possible to say very 


much u (D) 
Th 
N 


he experimental evidence available up to the present. 
owever, no doubt that in the first case, just as has already 


EXTINCTION OF CONDITIONED REFLEXES 67 


been shown in the second, we are dealing with a removal of inhibition. 
Any hypothesis of an irreparable destruction of the conditioned 
reflex in the process of experimental extinction cannot possibly 
stand for a moment, since in every case of extinction the reflex — 
invariably becomes spontaneously restored in a longer or shorter 
time. 

The question of the difference in the mode of restoration in these 
two cases probably goes much deeper, involving the intimate nature 
of the nervous process underlying dis-inhibition. Regarding the 
nervous mechanism of dis-inhibition we cannot hope at present to 


_ approach anything like a fundamental conception, since as yet we 


know little about the real nature either of the inhibitory process, 
or of the excitatory process, or of their mutual relations. 

I should like, however, specially to direct your attention to one 
very important feature which repeatedly enforces notice. We have 
seen that the very same extra stimuli, which, when they evoke 
strong extraneous reflexes, produce external inhibition of the positive 
conditioned reflexes, produce, when their effect is weak from the 
start or weakened by repetition, dis-inhibition of the conditioned 
reflexes which were made to undergo extinction. Many examples 
of this will appear in the next lecture. We are now afforded some 
justification for regarding dis-inhibition, as we did a short while 
ago, as being the “ inhibition of an inhibition.” By this we do not 
pretend, however, to explain the underlying TARR of dis- 
inhibition. Q 


The main conclusion of our discussion of xperimental 
evidence described in this lecture can be su up briefly as 
follows. A stimulus to a positive conditioned can under certain 


definite conditions readily be transfor o a stimulus for a 
negative or inhibitory conditioned r OS transformation is 
fairly rapid, smooth and ogres ce becomes obvious therefore 
that in our further study of the function of the cerebral hemispheres 
we shall necessarily be dealing Canty with positive but also with 
negative or inhibitory conditi eflexes. 

N 


O 
O 


A 
N 


LECTURE V 
Internal inhibition (continued) : (b) Conditioned inhibition. 


THE fourth lecture was devoted entirely to the study of the first type 
of internal inhibition, which was termed experimental extinction. 
In extinction the positive conditioned stimulus is temporarily 
transformed into a negative or inhibitory one by the simple 
method of repeating it several times in succession without rein- 
forcement. In the present lecture we shall consider the second 
type of internal inhibition, which has also been investigated in 
some detail. 

The method of experimentation is as follows. A positive con- 
ditioned stimulus is firmly established in a dog by means of the 
usual repetitions with reinforcement. A new stimulus is now oc- 
casionally added, and whenever the combination is applied, which 
may be at intervals sometimes extending to hours or days, it is 
never accompanied by the unconditioned stimulus. this way the 
combination is gradually rendered ineffective, so e conditioned 
stimulus when applied in combination with th itional stimulus 
loses its positive effect, although when annie al and with con- 
stant reinforcement it retains its full pow 

We have been accustomed in our i 
phenomenon by the name of congffi 
cannot be regarded as especially a priate since the development - 
of experimental extinction also Abject to equally rigid conditions. 
The use of this term, in fact, ~an only be justified by historical 
considerations. Since w, re concerned in this case with the 
participation of an NE l stimulus, the whole phenomenon was 
confused at first Wan ternal inhibition. It was only later when 
its character of } , as distinct from external, inhibition became 
firmly establishédAhat the prefix “ conditioned ” was added. As 
will be sho her on, this form of inhibition might more appro- 
priately h¢VyYbeen termed “ differential inhibition.” 

Rao of development of conditioned inhibition presents 
68 


~ 


gations to designate this 
d inhibition, although this 


N 


CONDITIONED INHIBITION 69 


especial interest. While illustrating the varied complexity of the 
phenomena involved, it demonstrates at the same time the value 
of the experimental method as providing a satisfactory means for 


the analysis of this very complexity into simple general principles. : 


For this reason we shall discuss conditioned inhibition in considerable 
detail. 

The first point of importance in the establishment of a conditioned 
inhibition is its dependence on time relations between the applica- 
tions of the two stimuli in the inhibitory combination. Conditioned 
inhibition is developed with comparative ease in all those cases 
where the duration of the positive stimulus overlaps that of the 
additional stimulus. In our experiments it is usual to start the 
additional stimulus a few seconds (generally from 3 to 5) before the 
positive stimulus, but provided there is an overlap it is immaterial 
whether the commencement of the additional stimulus precedes, 
coincides with, or even follows by a few seconds, that of the positive 
stimulus. If, on the other hand, the additional stimulus is removed 
as soon as the positive stimulus is applied, so that the two stimuli 
never coincide, the development of the conditioned inhibition may 
be a matter of considerable difficulty, and accompanied by restlessness 
and various defence reactions of the animal. If, finally, a pause 
of several seconds is introduced between the termination of the 
additional stimulus and the beginning of the positive stimulus no 
inhibition develops at all. On the contrary, in the maj coy cases, 
when this pause reaches a duration of about ten soqos the addi- 
tional stimulus itself acquires the properties of a e stimulus. 
This has been discussed already as the general d of formation 
of positive conditioned reflexes of the second It is only with 
exceptionally powerful additional stimu for example as a 
powerful motor-car hooter, that the a an be increased to so 


much as twenty seconds and a c tioned inhibition still be 
developed. An example from the È of Dr. Frolov will serve to 


illustrate the latter case : 
A motor-car hooter wa ghd to act for 10 seconds, when, 
ec 


after a pause of a further onds, the alimentary conditioned 
stimulus of a metro Owas applied. The first application of 
the hooter did not Cho least diminish the magnitude of the 
succeeding reflex+ tion. When, however, the same combina- 
tion had been ted several times in succession, and always 
without we the reflex began gradually to diminish. 


N 
> 
aO 


4) 
ww 


Wen 
N 


70 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


This diminution persisted even when the pause was lengthened 
to 20 seconds. 


Experiment of 28th December, 1924. 
Second application of the motor-car hooter. 


à Duration of Salivary 
Time Stimulus Stimulation Secretion Remarks 
in seconds in drops - 
1.41 p.m. Metronome 30 9 Reinforced. 
1.48 _,, >, = (Hooter 10 0 
235% | Pause 20 i ARES 
aa | Metronome 30 6 a 
Experiment of 21st January, 1925. 
Thirteenth application of hooter. 
à Duration of Salivary 
Time Stimulus Stimulation Secretion Remarks 
| in seconds: in drops 
1.58 p.m. Metronome 30 8-5 Reinforced. 
2.9 >. £ (Hooter 10 0 
33 rL O 
£3 E [Pause a 0 AEN 
ee UNtsigencnne 30 1 : 


We thus find that the time interval between the CY imul required 
to produce either conditioned inhibition, or al tively a positive 
conditioned reflex of the second. order, var cording to the in- 
tensity of the additional stimulus. This iùgency of the ultimate 
significance of the additional stimul n the time relations is 
interesting as evidence of an en between the antagonistic 
processes of excitation and inhi ie) 

The following interpretati f the complete difference in the 
final character. assumed a additional stimulus under so slight 


a difference in the experi al conditions seems best to agree with 
the experimental resyl hen the additional stimulus or its fresh 
trace left in the he eres coincides with the action of the positive 
stimulus, there esult some sort of special physiological fusion 
of the effect ote stimuli into one compound excitation partly 
differing OR partly resembling the positive one. It will be 
shown in seventh lecture, that in response to closely related 


N Cri as neighbouring tones or tactile stimulation of adjacent 


CONDITIONED INHIBITION l 71 


places of the skin, the same events take place as in the development 
of conditioned inhibition. If one stimulus with the help of the usual 
procedure is given positive conditioned properties, the neighbouring 
stimuli belonging to the group also give at first a positive conditioned 
reaction, whereas later, on their systematic repetition without 
reinforcement, they lose their excitatory properties and acquire 
inhibitory properties instead. This result corresponds exactly with 
the successful development of conditioned inhibition in the experi- 
ment mentioned at the beginning of this lecture. When, however, 
the additional stimulus is separated from the application of the 
positive conditioned stimulus by a longer interval, the union in the ~ 
hemispheres into a single compound excitation does not materialize ; 
instead, the stimuli act upon the hemispheres as two distinctly 
separate events, and the additional stimulus acquires new properties 
as a positive conditioned stimulus of the second order. The older 
conditioned stimulus acts in this case in exactly the same capacity 
as an unconditioned stimulus in the usual method of establishing 
conditioned reflexes of the first order. A strong stimulus has a 
prolonged after-effect ; it is, therefore, still capable of being fused 
by the hemispheres with the conditioned stimulus into a special new 
compound even after a long interval of time. It is easy to understand 
from this point of view that in the establishment of conditioned 
inhibition the interval which can be made between the end of the 
additional stimulus and the beginning of the positive oe Se 
stimulus must depend directly upon the strength of tha itional 
stimulus. Whether our interpretation be the cor yone or not, 
the phenomena are encouraging to the experimentĘ&N? that in every 
case he can discern a remarkable regularity mK se very complex 
activities of the cortex. 

In addition to the usual results oi) as described above, 


mention must be made of certain very aS phenomena obtained with 


some apparently normal animals andi animals in which surgical 
had produced a condition of 
the nervous. system. In these 
cases even perfectly TUN s“&pplications of the additional and 
of the positive conditio imuli led not to conditioned inhibition 
but to the developmeQt þf a definite positive conditioned reflex of 
the second order, Afhis generally persisted for a very long time, 
but later it ofteaXgxppened that the secondary conditioned reflex 
and also eee inhibition were both present simultaneously. 


N 
ş 
so 


interference with the hemisphe 
obviously increased excitabili 


AČ 
wy 


72 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


Such a case is represented in the following experiment of Dr. 
Kasherininova : 3 

Tactile stimulation of the skin was used in this dog as the con- 
ditioned stimulus for the defence reflex to acid, and a metronome 
served for the additional stimulus in an inhibitory combination 
which, of course, was never reinforced. The twenty-fifth application 
of the inhibitory combination evoked a secretion of only 3 drops of 
saliva during one minute, whereas the conditioned stimulus applied 
singly evoked a secretion of 29 drops during one minute. After 
thirty-four repetitions of the inhibitory combination the stimulus 
of the metronome applied singly elicited a salivary secretion of 8 
drops, although prior to its participation in the inhibitory com- 
bination it had no excitatory effect whatsoever. It is clear, therefore, 
that the metronome coupled with the tactile stimulus exerted a 
strong inhibitory influence, but it acquired at the same time some 
of the excitatory properties of the tactile stimulus, so that when 
used alone it behaved as a conditioned stimulus of the second order. 
Though cases such as that just described have been observed but 
rarely, it is quite possible that a transitory acquisition of weak 
excitatory properties of the second order is of no infrequent occur- 
rence in the development of conditioned inhibition. 

The course of development of conditioned inhibition is not always 
the same. In some cases the first addition of a new stimulus to the 
positive conditioned stimulus immediately cones diminution, 
or even in a complete disappearance, of the ‘Sud ioned reflex. 
With successive repetitions of the combin the reflex comes 
back nearly to its original level and then in falls slowly to zero. 
In other cases the first few combinatio ult in an augmentation 
of the reflex as compared with the Qn isolated action of the 
conditioned stimulus, and only sub eq) eħtly does the reflex gradually 
diminish to zero. In yet a thi group it is found that an initial 
diminution in the strength of Me reflex is followed by a phase of 
augmentation above normgPand then again the reflex slowly falls 
to a permanent zero. roe different phases which are observed 
during the establi t~of the conditioned inhibition depend 
entirely upon the i sity of the extraneous reflex which is evoked 
e additional stimulus. The initial diminution 


in the animal Gy 

of the reflex hich occurs in one group during the first few applica- 
tions of the\gembination is due undoubtedly to external inhibition. 
When dditional stimulus applied singly evokes in the dog a 


\S 
oS 

ML 
RS 


CONDITIONED INHIBITION 73 


strong investigatory reflex it is found that its addition to the positive 
conditioned stimulus exerts an inhibitory influence from the very 
start. When on the other hand the stimulus evokes only a mild 
investigatory reflex, the preliminary phase of diminution of the 
reflex is absent and the first applications of the combination produce 
an increase in the reflex. This increase is undoubtedly due to 
dis-inhibition, since—as we may state now in anticipation of a 
future discussion—the positive effect of the majority of conditioned 
stimuli in our experimental reflexes is almost invariably preceded 
by a phase of internal inhibition. The inhibitory process is removed 
by the investigatory reflex, provided that the latter is not sufficiently 
strong also to influence the excitatory component of the conditioned 
reflex. The third group of cases, in which the initial diminution in 
strength of the reflex is followed by an increase above normal, depends 
on the gradual weakening through repetition of the extraneous 
reflex produced by the additional stimulus. The external inhibition 
brought about by the investigatory reaction is at first strong enough 
to inhibit the conditioned reflex, but, on weakening, produces only 
dis-inhibition and so increases the strength of the reflex response. 
Several examples of this will be given at the end of the present 
lecture. 

It is obvious that any agent in nature may be used as a stimulus 
for the development of a conditioned inhibition, supposing of course 


that the organism is provided with the requisite or or the 
perception of such an agent. The records of actual ex ents will 
afford numerous illustrations of the different t of stimuli 
employed. 


As was mentioned before, not only the acta Dimulu but also 
its trace in the hemispheres can be use the development of 
conditioned inhibition. The trace must ver, in all cases be 
as recent as possible. The establishm@qt of conditioned inhibition 
when the interval between the stim is more prolonged can be 
brought about only by the use AP pxceptionally strong additional 
stimuli. Once, however, the ory combination has been firmly 
established the pause bet he end of the additional stimulus 
and the beginning of sitive conditioned stimulus may- be 
extended even to so (hugh as one minute without the inhibitory 
effect of the combination being impaired. 

Some experi have been made in which the time inter- 
val was itse ployed as a stimulus for internal inhibition. 


a ———— = -— — SS a 


74 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


The following experiment by Dr. Krjyshkovski illustrates such 
case : 

A definite tone served as a positive conditioned stimulus to acid, 
while a tactile stimulation of the skin served for the additional 
stimulus in the inhibitory combination. The inhibitory combination 
in this dog had been habitually applied for some other special 
purpose at the 19th-20th minute after the last introduction of acid. 
This led to the result that at the 19th-20th minute only a minimal 
salivary secretion was produced by the action of the positive con- 
ditioned stimulus when it was applied singly. 


Interval between the 


successive applications Salivary Secretion 
of the Reinforced in drops during 
Conditioned Stimulus one minute 
in minutes 

Pie wate are fhe Se a eta 9 

PSE a OO re Pa ee 

Aig ca oa oc a Ll eR 

deat AO EN Vea tee 4 eS hee A) ety TS 

Ais ao a ela see Cele. Renata tees 3 

Po at ee Heian ee ear re aan sh" 8 


In these experiments the interval of 19 to 20 minutes had itself 
acquired sufficient inhibitory properties to abolish or greatly reduce 
the effect of the conditioned stimulus. 

The rate of development of conditioned inhibition as well as its 
completeness (absolute or relative inhibition) sie Yorend upon a 
number of conditions. Of first importance in nnection is the 
individuality of the animal, the excitable Mhibitable character 
of its nervous organization. In some wie establishment of a 
conditioned inhibition takes a long tim never becomes absolute ; 
in other dogs an inhibition cee yee and firmly established. 


after very few repetitions of t itory combination. 
A further important oes the intensity of the additional 
itory combination. For example, 
ishtovt, a metronome was used for a 
us to acid, while a thermal stimulation 


d as the additional stimulus. It was found 
stimulus at a temperature of 4 to 5° C. the first 


stimulus employed in the i 
in an experiment by 
positive conditione 
of the skin was ent 
that with the 


indication of nditioned inhibition could be observed only after 
the 30th a Glpation of the inhibitory combination, and the inhibition 
was not complete even after 145 applications. With the use, 
BANGS of a thermal stimulus at a temperature of 1°C., in an ex- 


CONDITIONED INHIBITION 15 


periment performed on the same animal after an interval of four 
months, only twelve repetitions of the inhibitory combination were 
required to establish complete inhibition. 

The rate of formation of conditioned inhibition depends, again, 
on the character and the relative intensity of the additional stimulus 
in comparison with the conditioned stimulus. In some dogs it was 
found impossible to establish complete inhibition by the addition 
of a thermal stimulus at 45° C., when the sound of a metronome 
served as the positive conditioned stimulus. When, however, a 
visual stimulus was employed as the positive conditioned stimulus 
in a similar combination, a conditioned inhibition could be readily 
produced [experiment by Dr. Foursikov]. 

Finally, it should be mentioned that, although other factors may 
remain constant, the first establishment of a conditioned inhibition 
in a dog takes more time than any succeeding one. 

I have not up to the present given any conclusive evidence that 
the phenomenon of conditioned inhibition is really in the nature of 
an inhibition at all, and is not merely a passive disappearance of the 
positive conditioned reflex owing to the compound stimulus re- 
maining habitually unreinforced. The proof that the phenomenon 
actually does represent a real inhibition will be gradually brought 
out as we proceed with our study of the experimental evidence. 

It will be of interest, first of all, to study the nature and ultimate 
function of the additional stimulus on which conditione ibition 
depends.. This can, of course, be determined only by 45g out the 
action of the additional stimulus in different mo ions of the 
experiment. Tested singly after the conditione Wition has been 
fully established it produces no positive effec 1, The action of 
the additional stimulus can be tested, cf by applying it in 


combination with some other con xa itioned stimulus with 


which it has never previously been iated. In such a case the 
inhibitory properties of the addjtidw4l stimulus become clearly 
revealed, the result being an i iate diminution in the positive 
reflex response. This is trye nly in the case of homogeneous 
reflexes, but also in the Ny of heterogeneous reflexes, and the 
inhibitory effect may even to the unconditioned reflexes 
themselves. These f are clearly exhibited in the following 
experiment by Dr. Sens 

Three sine conditioned reflexes have been established in 
the dog we iş experiment, the three stimuli being the flash 


; Ke 
N 


76 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


of a lamp, a rotating object, and the tone C sharp of a pneumatic 
tuning fork. Two independent conditioned inhibitions of the reflex 
to rotation have also been firmly established, one by the use of tactile 
stimulation of the skin and the other by the use of a metronome. 

In the first experiment the flash of the lamp is for the first time 
accompanied by a tactile stimulation of the skin : 


Amount of 


Time Stimulus applied Saliva in 
during 1 minute drops during 
1 minute 
1.38 p.m. Rotating Object. 16 
1507 Flash of lamp. 17 
2.14, Flash of lamp +tactile 
stimulus. 2 
PADAT Routine reinforcement of 
rotating object by 
feeding -- 
243 Rotating object + tactile 
stimulus (the usual in- 
hibitory combination) 0 


In the second experiment the tone C sharp is for the first time 
accompanied by the metronome. 


Stimulus applied 


Time during 1 minute 

1.30 p.m. Tone + metronome 
1.40 _,, Tone 20 
54 Rotating object xS 18 
2DE Routine reinf t of 

rotating by 

feeding N — 
get Rotating (oWject + metro- 

noma (thé usual inhibi- 

t m bination) 0 


It will be seen NN e additional stimulus when applied for the 
first time in th &)Combination produced a diminution almost to 
zero in the cortditdoned reflex response.: It follows, therefore, that 
when an addG@pnal stimulus is used with an alien homogeneous con- 
ditioned er its inhibitory property becomes thereby immediately 
revealed. N This same property is seen also when the additional 


N 


N 


CONDITIONED INHIBITION 77 


stimulus is combined for the first time with a heterogeneous 
conditioned reflex, a case which is illustrated in the following 
experiment : 

A dog has a conditioned alimentary reflex which has been 
established by the use of the metronome, while the addition of a 
whistle provides a powerful inhibitory combination. Besides this 


. a conditioned reflex to acid has been established in response to 


tactile stimulation of the skin. The metronome and the tactile 
stimuli belong therefore to heterogeneous conditioned reflexes, and 
the positive effect of one of them (i.e. the metronome) is completely 
inhibited by the sound of the whistle. The whistle is now for the 
first time combined with the heterogeneous tactile conditioned 
stimulus [experiment by Dr. Babkin]. 


r Stimulus applied Salivary Secretion — 
Time during 1 minute in drops during 
1 minute 
3.8 p.m. Tactile 3 
3.86. 2; Tactile 8 
3.25 ,, Tactile + whistle Less than 1 drop. 
3.30 ,, Tactile 11 


In all the foregoing experiments it had, of course, to be shown 
before any particular additional stimulus was used in c ination 
with an alien positive conditioned stimulus that it woul exercise 
any effect of external inhibition. With this precaugh/it seems to 
me that the experiments justify our conclusion ae where a con- 
ditioned inhibition has been firmly established thes ditional stimulus 
itself acquires inhibitory properties which manifested outside 
the parent combination. The additiona rays is therefore termed 
in our investigations the conditioned plier. 

It is made clear by further expertwfents that a real inhibitory 
effect is also produced by the jį itory combination itself, the 
inhibitory process persisting as er-effect which may be detected 
some considerable time afte stimulus of the inhibitory combina- 
tion itself has been re ved) The inhibitory after-effect exerts its 
influence not only BR particular reflex to the conditioned 
stimulus employed the combination, but also upon all other 
conditioned refle whether homogeneous or heterogeneous. In 
this connection We may consider the following experiments : 


N 
S 
5? 


| ae 
ans 


SS 


78 : CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


In the first experiment a rotating object serves as an alimentary 
conditioned stimulus, and a tone of 30,000 vibrations produced by 
a Galton’s whistle as its conditioned inhibitor [experiment by Dr. 
Nikolaev]. 


Salivary ; 
Time Stimulus applied Secretion in . 
during 1 minute drops during 
1 minute 
3.5 p.m. Rotating object 7 
320 (3, Rotating object 6 
339.. Rotating object + tone 0 
308 eire Rotating object 1 
2 


4.10 ,, Rotating object 


After withdrawal of the stimulation by the inhibitory combina- 
tion the effect of the positive conditioned stimulus is weakened 
for several minutes, and only regains its normal strength by 
degrees. 

In the next experiment a rotating object serves as a conditioned 
stimulus for the defence reflex to acid, and a musical tone serves as 
a conditioned. alimentary stimulus. A tactile stimulus is used as a 
conditioned inhibitor for the alimentary reflex. [Experiment by 
Dr. Ponisovsky.] 


Salivary 

Time Stimulus applied Secretion in 

during 30 seconds drops during 

30 seconds 
12.23 p.m. Rotating DNN 5 
bs PA Rotating ebj 12 
EAGER Tone + tądNe stimulus 0 
12.48 Rotatin ject l 


© 
This experiment d Djirates that the heterogeneous conditioned 
reflex also become inished as a result of the inhibitory after- 
effect of the cg Q ion. 
When the bitor is applied by itself alone, and not together 
with the -e@statory stimulus in combination with which it was 
originall veloped, it can also be demonstrated to produce an 


inhipyeQn after-effect. 
Y 


CONDITIONED INHIBITION 79 


The degree to which positive conditioned reflexes are influenced 
by the conditioned inhibitor varies inversely as their relative physio- 
logical strength. An experiment may be taken from a paper by 
Dr. Leporsky in illustration of this point : 

Three independent conditioned alimentary reflexes have been 
firmly established to a rotating object, to the flash of several electric 
lamps, and to a musical tone. A tactile stimulation of the skin has 
been established as a conditioned inhibitor for each of the three 
reflexes, so that in combination with any one of them separately it 
reduces the reflex to zero. All three positive stimuli applied together 
produce a much greater salivary secretion than any one of them 
applied singly, showing summation of conditioned reflexes. The 
experiment shows the effect of the application of the conditioned 
inhibitor in conjunction with the simultaneous action of all three 
positive stimuli. 


Amount of 
Time Stimulus during , Saliva in 
1 minute drops during 
1 minute 
1.40 p.m. Tone 21 
LORT Rotating object + tone + flash 32 
2.10- y; Rotating object 2: 
a ae Simultaneous application of all | 
three positive conditioned | ~\ 
stimuli + tactile stimulus A 
Lala Rotating object + tactile stimu- AN 
lus à & 

The conditioned inhibitor, therefore, altho reduced to zero 
every one of the positive conditioned refle n singly, could only 
partially inhibit-the reflex secretion x by all three acting 
simultaneously (2.27 p.m.). Q 

Two further details concerning ibitory after-effect remain 
to be considered. The first is henomenon of summation of 


but several times in succes so much the more will the strength 
and duration‘ of the i y after-effect be increased. Two ex- 
periments of Dr. Chebotayéva, carried out on successive days, serve 
to illustrate the cas Gm point : 

A ting ole N as a conditioned alimentary stimulus, and 
a rotating AS S or conditioned inhibitor. 


N 
> 
ie 


after-effect. If the nce nation is applied not once only, 


È 
‘aw 


- from day to day. It may exte 


80 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


Amount of 
Time Stimulus during Saliva in 
30 seconds drops during 
30 seconds 
First experiment : 
3.32 p.m. Metronome 5 
3.40 ,, Metronome 6 
3.50 ,, Metronome +rotating object 0 
Sides os Metronome 3 
44 ,, Metronome 5 


Experiment on the same dog on the succeeding day : 


12.59 p.m Metronome 7 
L628). Metronome é 8 
Lbs: Metronome + rotating object 1 
i ee Metronome +rotating object 0 
L264, Metronome 2 
| Bs Pe Metronome 6 


In the first experiment it is seen that the conditioned reflex, 
which, to start with, was of considerable strength, when tested by a 
fresh application of the positive conditioned stimulus 14 minutes 
after the cessation of a single application of the inhibitory combina- 
tion (3.52 p.m.), is diminished by half (7.e. from 6 drops to 3). In 
the second experiment, taking place on the following day, the reflex, 
when tested 54 minutes after the second of tw essive applica- 
tions of the inhibitory combination (1.25 pps diminished by 
three-quarters (t.e. from 8 drops to 2). 

The second important detail conce 
effect is that its duration becomes sho 


the inhibitory after- 
the experiments proceed 
the earlier experiments for 
something over an hour, but ae se of succeeding experiments 
gradually’ becomes reduced nly a few minutes or seconds. 
The following two experiments òf Dr. Nikolaev which were performed, 
with an interval of ov months’ continuous experimentation, 
provide an illustrati my case in question : 

A rotating obj NS vides the stimulus to a conditioned ali- 
mentary reflex øA a given tone serves as its conditioned inhibitor. 
In the first expewment the inhibitory after-effect was obvious for 
over 20 m Gps ; six months later, after continual practice, it was 
absent s n as 34 minutes after the single application of the 


inhi K&O combination. 
Y 


A 


CONDITIONED INHIBITION 81l 


Salivary 
Time Stimulus during Secretion in 
30 seconds . drops during 
30 seconds 


Experiment of 2nd June, 1909. 


3.0 pm. Rotating object 7 
3.260 ,, Rotating object 6 
DOS" 55 Rotating object + tone 0 
3.58. -,, Rotating object 1 
4.10 ,, Rotating object 2 
Experiment of 10th January, 1910. Same dog. 
2.16 pm. | Rotating object 8 
vie EE Rotating object + tone 0 
VAN. 5 Eerie . Rotating object 12 


The problem of experimental destruction of the inhibitory 
properties of the conditioned inhibitor applied singly or in its in- 
hibitory combination is very complex and has not yet been fully 
worked out. I shall mention, therefore, only some of the better 
established facts. It is obvious that a complete abolition of the 
inhibitory properties of the combination should most readily be 
brought about by reversing the technique employed in its formation 
—1t.e. by systematically reinforcing the inhibitory combination by 
the appropriate unconditioned reflex. An experimag Dr. 


Krjishkovski will illustrate this process : Q 
A given tone of a pneumatic tuning fork provi conditioned - 
stimulus to acid, while a tactile stimulation of in serves as the 


conditioned. inhibitor. 


aliváry 
Time Stimulus during etion in Routine 
l minute ` ps during |, 


1 minute 
10.43 a.m. Tone g$ x 10 Reinforced by 


acid. 
ee 5 Inhibitory epN ition >; | Every application 
i] 93 E ” QO ” 1 of the inhibitory 
pera ” ” 3 | combination was 
1] 49 3 P © ” 5 followed up by 
DAE © » 10 injectionof acid 
TE BD; A ” 14 | into the mouth. 


82 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


It is interesting to note that if alternately with every application of 
the reinforced inhibitory combination we repeat the reinforced positive 
conditioned stimulus, a very considerable retardation in the progress 
of destruction of the inhibition is produced. This matter will be 
subjected to rigorous experimental analysis further on (Lecture XI). 

Quite distinct from the above process of gradual weakening of 
the inhibitory combination is the case in which the disturbance 
appears suddenly and as suddenly disappears. Extra stimuli 
belonging to the group of mild external inhibitors, as we may term 
them, influencing the animal during the action of the inhibitory 
combination instantaneously restore to something of its normal 
value the positive conditioned reflex which underwent conditioned 
inhibition. It is evident that external inhibition has brought about 
the removal of conditioned inhibition, and that we deal again with 
the phenomenon of dis-inhibition. These relations may be illustrated 
by the following experiments of Dr. Nikolaev : 


; Salivary 
- Stimulus during Secretion in 
Time 


1 minute drops during 
1 minute 
Experiment of 16th December, 1909. 
2.12 p.m Rotating object 10 
2.30 ,, Rotating object + tone + metronome 5 
Zot \ ys Rotating object + tone 0 
ris Bei Rotating object EAN 7 
Sie as Rotating object + tone Q 0 
5 ee Rotating object 8 
Experiment of 21st D r, 1909. 
P «x 
2.25 p.m Rotating object 12 
2.47 ° ,, Rotating object + tactile sti- 
mulation 3 
Dart, Rotating objeg&+ tone 0 
312. Rotating ob 8 
SrA ee Rotatin ject + tone 0 
oe eee Rotati ject 8 
leri of 22nd December, 1909. 
2.37 p.m ting object 9 
Zino. m Otating object + tone + thermal 
stimulus at 50°C. 7 
34 $ Rotating object + tone 0 
3. V Rotating object 11 


aag 6) Rodtating object + tone 0 
S 


CONDITIONED INHIBITION 83 


The stimulus to a conditioned alimentary reflex is provided by 
a rotating object, while a given tone serves as its conditioned in- 
hibitor. Tactile and thermal stimulations of the skin and the sounds 
of a metronome serve as different extra stimuli. 

The above three experiments show that during the time when 
the’ extra stimuli (metronome, tactile, or thermal) were acting upon 
the animal the conditioned inhibition was partially removed, 
revealing the underlying excitation. 

In connection with these observations considerable interest is 
attached to the following experiment on the same dog, in which it 
was the intention to introduce an odour as still another dis-inhibiting 
agent. For this purpose the dog was transferred into another room 
fitted with a special box for graduating the intensity of odours. 
The apparatus itself, in addition to its visual effect and the sound 
of its electric motor, acted upon the animal by blowing a continuous 
current of air. All these agencies introduced a whole complex of 
new extra stimuli into the experiment, even without the addition 
of the odour. The new complex of extra stimuli dis-inhibited the 
inhibitory combination, but this effect gradually declined as time 
went on, disappearing completely in an hour and a half after the 
experiment was started. The following experiment was performed 
on the day following the last experiment. 


Experiment of 23rd December, 1909. xe 


unt of Saliva 
Time Stimulus during | minute m drops during 


i l minute . 
1.2 p.m. Rotating object S 14 
LAS As; Rotating object + tone O 9 
1.255 ;, Rotating object + tone 6 
Reads, Rotating object O 11 
1.40 ,, Rotating object + ton + 
1.48 ,, Rotating object +t 2 
168°"), Rotating object 7 
2.6. 2'3; Rotating objet l 
2.20. ,, Rotating objeé À ri 
229E Rotating-elje}t + tone less than 1 drop. 
aes ae Rotating object | 6 
2.53 ;, Rotating “Object + tone +odour of 
C or 6 
Bolak Reming object +tone+odour of 
less than 1 drop. 


Ca 
Re) 


84 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


The first application of the camphor dis-inhibited the combination, 
while on the second application this extra stimulus had already lost 
its dis-inhibiting effect. This rapid disappearance of the effect of 
the extra stimuli introduced by the new apparatus, and again by 
the use of the camphor, is the most usual case with extra stimuli 
which bring about dis-inhibition. The dog employed in this particular 
experiment was an old laboratory animal and had previously been 
subjected to numerous extraneous agencies, so that different changes 
produced now only a transient effect, the animal speedily becoming 
indifferent to them. This is why the introduction of new con- 
ditions into this experiment produced a dis-inhibition right from 
the very start and „ever any inhibition of the positive conditioned 
reflexes. 

Results were quite different in the case of another dog used by 
Dr. Nikolaev. This dog was fresh to the laboratory and may have 
possessed also a type of nervous organization which was more easily 
subjected to inhibition. In this dog a rotating object was used for 
a conditioned alimentary stimulus, and a tone for its conditioned 
inhibitor. A metronome provided the extra stimulus. 


Experiment of 15th February, 1910. 


Salivary 

Time Stimulation during 30 seconds Secretion in 

< ops during 

30 seconds 
11.25 a.m. Rotating object R 4 
1% Be: 3 oes Rotating object + tone XA ronome 0 
Thd2e1.; Rotating object 4 
TA, Rotating object Q 5 
12.14 ,, Rotating objec + metronome 0 
122057 Rotating oh 5 


the 18th February, beginning of the next experiment, the 
metronome was a alone during one minute, the subsequent 
course of the eyfeNament being shown on the opposite page. 

In the ne nt of 15th February the sound of the metronome, 


The experiment on dn day gave similar results. On 


which ser an extra stimulus, did not produce during its first 
applicati) e result which would be expected from dis-inhibition 


ON Sa But the very same stimulus of the metronome when 


sh 


CONDITIONED INHIBITION 85 


applied along with the positive conditioned stimulus used singly 
produced a complete inhibition (12.14 p.m.). It follows, therefore, 


that the zero value of the reflex in the first case—inhibitory com- | 


bination + metronome—was not really due to the internal inhibition 
remaining undisturbed but was due to external inhibition resulting 
from a very powerful extraneous reflex in response to the first ap- 
plication of the metronome. As a result of several repetitions of the 
stimulus of the metronome with the inhibitory combination on the 
16th February and an application at the beginning of the experiment 
of 18th February, the stimulus of the metronome was no longer 
able to produce so powerful an alien reflex and therefore its inhibitory 


Experiment of 18th February, 1910. 


Salivary 
Time Stimulus during 30 seconds Secretion in 
drops during 
30 seconds 
11.15 a.m. Rotating object 9 
Lida, Rotating object + tone + metronome 5 
L589 &;; Rotating object 4. 
11.54 _,, Rotating object 3 
12.9 p.m. Rotating object + tone + metronome 2 
12.14 ,, Rotating object 5 
iby Ga sts Rotating object + metronome 3 
12.34 ; |. Rotating object N 
12.40 ,, Rotating object +tone XA 
effect upon the positive conditioned O practically 
disappeared (12.27 p.m.). Hocwever, its dis- ROY (Dy effect was still 


(11.32 a.m. and 12.9 p.m.). 

The terminology used in the intedgretation of the foregoing 
phenomena may seem to be ne arbitrary, but it is not 
possible at a time when the ferns in wha is still beyond our 


retained and could be well seen in the exp Ko) oe 18th February 


powers of analysis to avoid su erms in what is necessarily a 
schematic representation of ep plex nervous processes involved. 
Our terms serve to deerit the actual state and succession of 
events. 

A dis-inhibition 
obtained by meang 
external inhibitj 


bears out S 


e inhibitory combination can further be 
those stimuli which determine a permanent 
. 46). The following experiment by Dr. Nikolaev 
ement : 


86 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


A rotating object serves for the conditioned alimentary stimulus, 
while a tone serves for its conditioned inhibitor. 


Salivary 
Time Stimulus during 1 minute aap thar 
s aur 
Tate? 
1.47 p.m. Rotating object 10 
v§ | Rotating object + tone 0 
yA +5 Rotating object 10 
ZO Ws. 10 cc. of 5% solution of sodium 
carbonate introduced in two doses 
into the dog’s mouth — 
2.44 , Rotating object +tone i 2.5 
2:5090, y Rotating object + tone 0 
n eave Rotating object | 6 


In this case the inhibitory after-effect of sodium carbonate, 
given 4 minutes before, caused a definite dis-inhibition of the reflex 
(2.44 p.m.). 

If an inhibitory combination is applied early within the time of 
the after-effect left by a very strong extra stimulus, for example a 
concentrated solution of quinine, no dis-inhibition is obtained. 
This corresponds exactly with the case of the metronome in the 
experiment on page 84. However, the dis-inhihiting effect of 
quinine can be exhibited as clearly as in the cas K e metronome, 
simply by throwing in the inhibitory combin at a later stage, 
when the strength of the after-effect of the g&n of the quinine has 
had time to diminish. On account of omplete accord of the 
two sets of experiments the descri oe the experiments with 
quinine need not be given. @) 

All the experimental eviden ch has been dealt with in this 
lecture establishes conclusivel t the nervous processes on which 
conditioned inhibition depe are identical in character with those 
of extinctive ON, he fundamental condition for their 
development is the s Qpr ely that there shall be no reinforcement 
by the unconditiogo Neie, In both cases the process develops 
gradually, being{strgrgthened by repetition. Moreover, the inhibitory 
after-effect dges Mót limit itself to the particular positive conditioned 
reflex whig Cndergoes experimental extinction or conditioned 


inhibiti t in both cases extends to other conditioned reflexes 
as oN Suen even those which are of heterogeneous origin. 


CONDITIONED INHIBITION 87 


The final point of resemblance is that in both cases the inhibitory 
process can be rapidly though temporarily removed, the inhibited 
reflexes undergoing dis-inhibition on account of external inhibition 
resulting from alien reflexes to extra stimuli of small intensity. The 
only point of difference is that in extinctive inhibition it is the 
positive conditioned stimulus taken by itself which changes its 
positive significance to an inhibitory one, while in the case of con- 
ditioned inhibition the positive conditioned ‘stimulus becomes 
involved in a new complex and changes its character in conjunction 
with an additional stimulus. | 


LECTURE VI 


Internal inhibition (continued) : (c) Delay. 


WE shall now consider the third type of internal inhibition, which 
has been termed inhibition of delay. It is obvious from the preyious 
discussion that a considerable choice is allowed in the establishment 
of conditioned reflexes as regards the time interval between the 
beginning of the conditioned stimulus and the moment at which it 
is reinforced by the unconditioned reflex. This interval can be made 
very short, 1-5 seconds, or even a fraction of a second, provided that 
the beginning of the conditioned stimulus precedes the moment of 
application of the unconditioned stimulus. Alternatively, the length 
of time of the isolated action of the conditioned stimulus. can be 
made comparatively long, extending over several minutes. The re- 
flexes which develop with these two different methods, i.e. with 
short and with prolonged duration of action of the conditioned 
stimulus, present great differences with respect to their general 
properties and their latent periods. These two typés of reflex are 
designated respectively simultaneous—or to be as Ce almost 
simultaneous—reflexes, and delayed reflexes. Ge duration of the 
isolated action of the conditioned stimulus pe ee impor- 


tance, since, in the first place, it determi we shail see later, the 
eventual character of every conditione x, and secondly, because 
it forms the basis of development t type of inhibition which 


is the subject of our present RK 

In all conditioned reflexes hich the interval between the 
beginning of the conditionegẹstimulus and the moment of its rein- 
forcement is short, say econds, the salivary reaction almost 
immediately follows ginning of the conditioned. stimulus. 
On the other hand AN Peflexes which have been established with a 
longer interval Fetyreen the two stimuli the onset of the salivary 
response is delayed, and this. delay is proportional to the length of 


the interval Breen the two stimuli and may even extend to several 


minutes. O : 
RS ng: 

oS 

O 


AOD 


DELAYED REFLEXES 89 


Delayed reflexes can be established in various ways. One way 
is to start by the preliminary establishment of an almost simultaneous 
reflex—i.e. one in which the conditioned response appears quickly, 
say 1-3 seconds after the beginning of the conditioned stimulus— 
and to develop the delay gradually. By retarding the moment of 
the application of the unconditioned stimulus about five seconds 
each day a corresponding and progressive delay is easily obtained, 
and we can stop finally at a convenient interval when the required 
length of delay has been reached. 

Another method of establishing a delayed reflex is to pass directly 
from an almost simultaneous reflex to one with a long delay, leaving 
out all intermediate stages. As a result of this modification in tech- 
nique the mode of formation of the delayed conditioned reflex is 


‘considerably altered. The reflex, however well established as a 


simultaneous reflex, disappears at first altogether—or, to use an 
expression commonly employed by some of my collaborators, there 
follows a prolonged period of zeros. Eventually, however, some 
conditioned secretion of saliva does appear, but not until just before 
the moment when the unconditioned stimulus is usually applied. 
On continuing the experiments with the chosen interval of time the 
secretion progressively increases, and at the same time its commence- 
ment shifts further along towards the beginning of the conditioned 
stimulus and finally settles at a definite intermediate position 
between the commencement of the conditioned stim d its 
reinforcement. Q 

In both the foregoing methods the experiment rt with the 
establishment of simultaneous reflexes which hen changed 
either at once or by gradual stages into delaye es. It has been 
found impracticable, in the great majorit imals, to develop a 
delayed reflex without first establishi corresponding simul- - 
taneous reflex, since, as will be desert a later lecture, the dogs 
under these conditions quickly becgme*subjected to drowsiness and 
sleep so that the experimental ation of conditioned reflexes 
becomes difficult if not imposyp) For this reason the method has 
received little attention in vestigations, 

The following exa Q a delayed reflex is taken from a paper 
by Dr. Zavadsky nl ete out a considerable number of experi- 
ments upon. internalGghibition of delay. The sound of a whistle is 
employed as a c -oned, stimulus to acid ; the isolated action of 
the whistle is nued during an interval of 3 minutes and is then 


Ñ 
SÀ 
ao 


A@ 
wy 


90 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


reinforced by acid, the sound being continued for some time longer 
So as to overlap the action of the unconditioned stimulus. 


Salivary Secretion 
in drops during 
Time Conditioned | successive periods 
Stimulus of 30 seconds of the 
isolated action of 
the conditioned 


stimulus 
3.12 p.m. Whistle 0, 0, 2, 2, 4, 4 
3.25 ”? ”? 0, 0, 4, 3, 6, 6 
3.40 ,, iS 0, 0, 2, 2,3,6 


> ? , ? ? 


The rate of formation of a delayed reflex is subject to great 
variation. In the first place, the individual character of the animal’s 
nervous system plays an important part. In some dogs the estab- 
lishment of the reflex is rapid, while in others the beginning of the 
salivary secretion persistently refuses to separate itself from the 
beginning of the conditioned stimulus, and the development of 
delay is very slow. In some animals an indication of a developing 
delay can be observed in the course of a single day and after only a 
few delayed reinforcements ; in others there is no indication of the 
conditioned delay even after a month of persistent work. In the type 
of dog in which the formation of delay is rapid, it ixnfound that the 
delay frequently passes into sleep at an early ef the isolated 
action of the conditioned stimulus. On this a t it is necessary 
when carrying out a systematic investigatio dogs of this charac- 
ter to restrict the experiments to sh ayed reflexes, which 
means that we must be content wi cording only the small 
secretion of saliva during the cong) vely short time of isolated 
action of the conditioned stingylts“as compared with the larger 
secretion accompanying a pro caved action of the stimulus. 

Another influence affegaing@ the development of delay in the 
conditioned reflex eae the type of conditioned stimulus used. 
Tactile and thermal Py ion of the skin and visual stimuli lead. 


to a quicker form of delay than auditory stimuli, but other 
things being eqgfilNiActile, thermal and visual stimuli give a smaller 
total conditioné’€ffect. These facts are illustrated in the following 
experimen a Dr. Iacovleva : 

PrelinG@ y to the development of long-delayed reflexes three 
shore ved conditioned alimentary reflexes were established by 


N 


DELAYED REFLEXES 91 


repeating the isolated action of the stimuli during 30 seconds, 
followed by reinforcement. The stimuli corresponding to the three .. 
reflexes were the sound of a metronome, a tactile stimulus, and the 
flash of a lamp. 


Experiment of 9th April, 1924. 


Salivary Secretion 


Conditioned Latent in divisions of the 
Time Stimulus period graduated tube during 
applied during in the isolated action 
30 seconds seconds of the conditioned 
stimulus 
10.15 a.m. Lamp 3 30 All 
10.25 7; Tactile 2 30} reflexes are 
10.3557 Metronome 2 53) reinforced. 


During the year which intervened between this experiment and 
the experiment of 24th April, 1925, which is given next, the three 
reflexes had been used repeatedly in other investigations and had 
been gradually converted into reflexes of longer delay. The isolated 
action of the conditioned stimulus had been first prolonged to one 
minute and then to two minutes, and each reflex had been reinforced 


A W 


Conditioned Latent in graduata, f 
` Stimulus period tube pe; : Secs. 
Time applied for in during @keNsolated 


two minutes t f mS 
ma 1tione: 
XS imulus 


a 32, 30, 26 


9.40 a.m. Metronome 


9.48 _,, Tactile 0, 10, 20, 18 
10.10 ,, Flash 0, 0,13, 20 


In the cases of the tactile isual stimuli the delay is more 
precise, the reflex respons 1% more perfectly separated itself 


from the beginning of t nditioned stimulus and being more 
perfectly related to thé tire of administration of the unconditioned 


stimulus. 
Another factot ich exerts a great influence upon the develop- 
ment of a orged reflex is the amount of practice which has 


been eS reflex during the preliminary stage of short delay ; 


SÀ 
ao 


Ae 
wl 


92 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


a long practised short delay sometimes operates as a persistent 
obstacle to the development of a longer delay. 

Finally, I have evidence that the delay for a stimulus of one and 
the same character develops at a different rate according as the 


stimulus is continuous or intermittent. In the former case the 


development of delay is more rapid. i 

It can be seen that the reflex response in the case of reflexes 
with a prolonged delay consists of two phases, an initial phase of 
inactivity and a subsequent phase of activity, and we must now 
inquire into the nature of, these phases. Does this first and com- 
paratively long period of inactivity mean that the excitatory 
process is undergoing a progressive summation so that it can evoke 
an obvious activity when it has reached the necessary intensity ? 
Or is the excitatory process sufficiently strong from the beginning, 
but unable to produce any secretory effect beċause it is temporarily 


“overcome by some antagonistic process ? 


The first possibility must be ruled out straightway on the evidence 
already given with regard to the formation of delayed. reflexes, for 
seeing that in the case of a short delay the conditioned stimulus can 
evoke a conditioned., reflex with great ease, there seems to be no 
reason why the same stimulus when more prolonged. should, require 
a greater period of summation. 

Any suggestion that this first phase of inactivity is gaused through 
fatigue can also easily be eliminated. If, owing t ite olated action 
of the conditioned stimulus, fatigue did devel X should expect 
a gradual diminution of the positive effect of t ditioned stimulus : 
this, however, is not observed. On th trary, although the 
beginning of the secretion gets delaye ertheless the secretion 
increases progressively in amount vee delayed reflex is developed 
by the first method. With the seco ethod, in which the isolated 
action of the conditioned sti Sus is prolonged from the start, 
although the positive effect digappears at first altogether, it reappears 
after a while and then th tion increases steadily until it settles 
at a constant maxim : 

There remains AN y the supposition that the initial phase of 
inactivity is due KY excitatory process being temporarily inhibited. 
That this is ro, interpretation is evidenced by the fact that 
the existene an excitatory process in a concealed form during 
the period yh delay can easily be demonstrated: if during the 


mes se of a delayed reflex we act upon the animal by some 
V 
. XY 


DELAYED REFLEXES 93 


extra stimulus which has not hitherto been associated in any way 
with an activity of the salivary glands, we shall immediately elicit 
a secretion of saliva which is frequently copious and which is always 
accompanied by the motor reaction peculiar to the conditioned 
stimulus which was used; in other words, the conditioned reflex 
becomes revealed throughout the entire duration of the conditioned 
stimulas in a single positive phase instead of in two phases— 
negative and positive. The following are some experiments by Dr. 
Zavadsky bearing upon this question : 

Tactile stimulation of the skin is used as a conditioned stimulus 
for acid. The conditioned stimulus is allowed to act for a period of 
3 minutes and is then reinforced, being still continued so as to overlap 
the action of the acid. The sound of the metronome which is used in 
the following experiment has had hitherto no relation to any secretory 
reflexes and has of itself been unable to evoke any secretion of saliva. 


Salivary Secretion 


in drops per 
Time Stimulus 30 secs. during the 
isolated action of the 
conditioned stimulus 
9.50 a.m. Tactile 00;3 07545, 439 
1S hoe Tactile O02 055-1113 
1015 --,; Tactile + metronome Ael DD; 
10:3097; Tactile 00,0, 3,12 
10.50 ,, Tactile 0, 0, 5, 10, Go 
The next example is taken from a further ex ent in which 
a noiselessly rotating object was used. as an e timulus hitherto 
neutral with regard to its effect upon the gali€a}y secretion. 


x Salivary Secretion 
O in drops per 


30 secs. during the 


Time Stimulus 
isolated action of the 


Q conditioned stimulus 
11.46 a.m. Tactile @ 3 C OPO, 284; 


5 
12.02 p.m. Tactil 0,0; 0, 2,6, 9 
AZ. 2; T 0,0,0,2; 79 
123010 R g object + tactile 6, 4, 6, 3, 7, 15 
12.52 ctile 0; 0:0, 3. 16 


d from the beginning of the tactile stimulus the dog 


moved its ing against a metal basin. 


S 
3h 
5 


AČ 
wy 


94 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


These experiments of Dr. Zavadsky are important as revealing 
a new and unexpected phenomenon. The established conditioned 
stimulus had no positive effect by itself during 1-1} minutes, 
but the neutral stimulus which was added to it for the first 
time immediately disclosed the regular positive conditioned re- 
flex. It is obvious that we have come across a fresh case of 
dis-inhibition. 

During the last three lectures considerable stress has been laid 
on the phenomenon of dis-inhibition and many examples have been 
given. I would plead as my excuse the great importance of an 
adequate conception of the rôle played by this phenomenon in the 
physiology of the hemispheres, although of course the study of the 
lower parts of the nervous system presents many instances of 
analogous phenomena. So far, however, as the interpretation of 
the intimate mechanism of dis-inhibition goes we are completely in 
the dark, and it can only be hoped that accumulation of experi- 
mental evidence may at some future date throw light on its 
nature. 

I wish now to call your attention again to the first of the two 
experiments just described. It can clearly be seen that the stimulus 
of the metronome when added to the tactile stimulus not only 
elicited a flow of saliva during the initial phase of inactivity, but also 
caused a considerable diminution in the. salivar eA cretion during 
the active phase. While the tactile stimulus apg singly elicited 
a secretion during the second 14 minutes ra from 29-46 drops, 
the addition of the metronome reduced thi drops. There must, 
therefore, be a double effect on the f the extra stimulus— 
dis-inhibitory in the initial phase, u of inactivity ; inhibitory 
in the succeeding phase, usually of a) ity 

If different extra PRR ro Dhi Sera inhibition are 
allowed to act upon delayed eae reflexes, various definite 
and regular modifications@re Sa in the course followed by 
the delay. The extra st 1 which were used in this connection for 
one experimental ays ve been arranged in the following groups 
according to the i ce they exerted upon delay : 

I. Thermal@tigMili at 5°C. and at 44°C.; a weak odour of camphor. 
II. Ther imuli at 0:5°C. and at 50°C. 

ITT. Besly rotating objects; the sound of a: metronome ; 
tactile , ulation of the skin (the conditioned stimulus to the 
delayowNreflex being in this animal.a similar tactile stimulation of 


DELAYED REFLEXES 95 


a different place on the skin) ; a whistle of moderate strength ; the 
odour of amyl acetate. 

IV. Intense odour of camphor; loud whistle; sound of an 
electric buzzer. 

Extra stimuli belonging to the first group did not, in this dog, 
affect either phase of the delayed reflexes. Extra stimuli belonging 
to the second group exerted an effect only upon the initial phase of the 
reflex, causing a salivary secretion. Extra stimuli belonging to the 
third group disturbed both phases of delay: during the first phase 
a salivary secretion was produced, and during the second phase the 
secretion which should normally have been present was much dimin- 
ished. Extra stimuli belonging to the fourth group exercised little 
or no influence upon the initial phase of the delayed reflex, but 
completely suppressed the second phase. It may be added that 
when all due precautions were taken the experiments proceeded as 
a rule with striking precision. 

The following experiments serve to illustrate the grouping of 
extra stimuli given above : 

A tactile stimulation of the skin is used as a conditioned stimulus 
to acid in a delayed reflex. The conditioned stimulus acts continu- 
ously during three minutes before the administration of acid. The 
extra stimuli employed are: (1) a thermal cutaneous stimulus of 
44°C., (2) a thermal cutaneous stimulus of 0-5°C., (3) an_ddour of 
amyl acetate, (4) the sound of an electric buzzer. _ <S 


iVary Secretion 
drops per 
secs. during the 
olated action of the 
conditioned stimulus 


Time Stimulus 


Experiment of 13th Octob 
10.17 a.m. Tactile 
10.32. 555, Tactile 
10.45: ,, Tactile + thermal a : 
OSS, Tactile 


18 PS fice Tactile NZ 


BperimereopDei September, 1907. 
2.28 p.m. Tactile 


2.40 `, Taoti 
255 i. Tate thermal stimulus at 0-5°C. 
e 


3.10 « , Q, 0, O, 10, 
WS ae 


CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


Salivary Secretion 
in drops per 


| Time Stimulus 30 secs. during the 
i | isolated action of the 
i | conditioned stimulus 
| Experiment of 18th September, 1907. 
| 10.12 a.m. Tactile O27 ott 
| 10.25: .,, Tactile 0) Oe Telinie 
| | 10.43, Tactile 0,0,0,5, 8, 11 
| | i ae Tactile + odour of amyl acetate 35.0.0, OF Osa ad 
| thio Tactile 0,0, 2,4, 8,11 
ig Experiment of 13th Lee 1907. 
H | 3.30 p.m. Tactile 1, 0, 0, 8, 10, 12 
i | 3.48 _,, Tactile + buzzer 0,0,0,0, 0, 0 
| 415%; -Tactile 0,0,0,0, 2, 8 
| 4.35 ,, Tactile 0,0,0,3, 5,10 
Absolutely identical results are obtained when the extra stimuli 
are allowed to act, not throughout the whole of the time of the isolated 


action of the conditioned stimulus, but only during either the first, 
inactive phase or the second, active phase. This is illustrated in the 
following experiments carried out on the same dog and under the 
same cònditions as before. 


ecretion of Saliva 
in drops per 
30 secs. during the 
isolated action of the 
conditioned stimulus 


Stimulus 


Experiment of 23rd 


Tactile 

Tactile 

Tactile + whistle Gdedium strength 
during first Qy minutes 

Tactile 


Expeps@rent of 18th August, 1907. 


ac 


CFactile + whistle of medium strength 
during the second 15 minutes 


DELAYED REFLEXES 97 


The extra stimulus of the whistle, which belongs to the third 
group of external inhibitors, when acting during the first phase of the 
delayed reflex brought about a secretion of saliva, but when acting 
during the second phase it diminished the secretion. A certain 
diminution of the secretion is sometimes observed during the second 
phase of the reflex in experiments where the extra stimulus is applied 
during the first phase. This must be due to the after-effect of the 
extra stimulus. 

It now remains to interpret the empirical grouping of the extra 
stimuli, and to determine the reason of their different action upon 
the delayed reflexes. All the experimental evidence at our disposal 


- indicates that the intensity of the effect which they produce depends 


` groups the reactions become more and more vigorous an 


on their relative physiological strength and the magnitude of the 
general reactions by which the animal responds to their independent 
action. The distribution of extra stimuli among the four groups 
represents a classification according to such physiological strength. 
In some cases this can be seen by a casual glance at the list itself, 
where different intensities of the same stimulus appear in different 
groups. 

The difference in the effects of these extra stimuli is also revealed 
by the motor reaction of the animal (investigatory reflex). With 
stimuli belonging to the first group there is frequently no motor 
reaction at all. As we pass on to stimuli belonging to the peaining 

olénged. 
Moreover, the inhibitory effect of all these extra Kyu i, which 
belong, of course, to the group of external nhibitng clearly seen 
in relation to the second (usually active) p © f the delayed 
reflexes. The inhibitory effect becomes the ronounced as we 
ascend from the first to the fourth group u h stimuli belonging 
to the latter group complete inhibition is&btāfned. It is thus obvious 
that the classification represents stim@) f progressively increasing 
physiological effect upon the or: those in the first group 
exerting the least effect. 

In cases where an extra S, allowed to act upon a delayed 
conditioned reflex mat is found that its inhibitory effect 
upon the second (usu tive) phase progressively diminishes. 
This is a further pro v a. and dis-inhibition of delayed 


reflexes by extra A is closely associated with external inhibition. 
Two experime Quy be given which were performed on the dog 
COren S ast experiment : 

G 


98 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


Salivary Secretion 
in drops per 
Time Stimulus 30 secs. during the 
isolated action of the 
conditioned stimulus 


Experiment of 13th November, 1907. 


10.20 a.m. Tactile 0, 0,0; 2, 8,798 
10.352, Tactile + whistle 0.051 5 DFE 
10.47. z X EFESO Poe 
ELOS T A 2 ATIE T2 E3 
IEIS S E 1; 2,'3, 10, 10,11 
sey (tee y A SDS By 2al 


Experiment of 20th November, 1907. 


10.35 a.m. Tactile | 0,0,.0, 8,10, 11 
10.47 ,, Tactile + metronome n RPA AER ie D T 
HOSTE ls A l EE po A gs R, 
Tis be 3; * S PO 1S2 S14 
TR30357. A a 00 23, R 


It can be seen from these two experiments how the inhibitory 
effect of the extra stimulus upon the active phase falls gradually 
with each repetition, the recovery of the delayed reflex being 
especially regular in the second experiment. 

All these experiments, which were carried out one and the 
same animal, have been repeated with similar re many other 
dogs. The only variation was in the distrib ity of stimuli among 
the four groups, which differed slightly fonda animals. 
This appears only reasonable when it i ed that the intensity 
of the reactions of different animals in nse to extraneous stimuli 
varies to a considerable and TAR extreme degree, depending 
on the individual character of th&gerVous system and on the previous 
history of the animal. 

Thus we come to the c Qa that variations in the effect of 
different extra stimuli he delayed reflex are determined by 
differences in the phywiQ@eréal strength of the stimuli. When the 
strength of the ex imulus is insignificant the delayed. reflex in 
either of its pis es remains unaffected. When the strength of 

S is somewhat increased it is only the initial 
) phase which becomes affected, being now converted 
f ESAS: With a greater strength of the extra stimulus 
(usually active) phase of the delayed reflex also becomes 


(A A 


DELAYED REFLEXES 99 


involved, the secretion being considerably diminished in magnitude, 
so that it becomes equal to or even smaller than the secretion during 
the dis-inhibited first phase. Finally, with a maximal intensity of 
the extra stimulus all conditioned activity disappears, and. the de- 
layed reflex is represented throughout both phases by a series of zeros. 

As a result of the different effects upon the two phases of the 
reflex brought about through external inhibition, two facts relating 
to the central nervous activities stand out clearly. The first is that 
the extraneous stimulus acting on the positive phase of the reflex 
inhibits, and acting on the negative phase dis-inhibits, in either 
case, therefore, reversing the nervous process prevailing at the time. 
The second is that the inhibitory process is more labile and more 
easily affected than the excitatory process, being influenced by 
stimuli of much weaker physiological strength. 

The following was a chance, but instructive, observation with 
regard to the second point. I meant to illustrate a series of public 
lectures on conditioned reflexes by demonstration of experiments. 
The lectures were given at a place remote from our laboratories so 
that the dogs had to be conveyed and set down in surroundings 
which were quite unfamiliar. All the five or six experiments with 
positive conditioned reflexes, in the first lecture, were carried out 
successfully. On the other hand, in the second lecture, the experi- 
ments with inhibitory reflexes, again five or six in n er and 
attempted on the same animals as before, did not sucked „all the 
reflexes having undergone dis-inhibition. Thus the same extra 
stimulus of the changed environmental conditi had not the 
slightest disturbing effect upon the positive Qiitioned reflexes, 
but exercised a profound influence upon RaQ bitory conditioned. 
reflexes, even though the effect of the( ex stimulus was now 
weakened on account of repetition. ese facts will be discussed 
more fully in a further lecture, in com@%tton with other observations 
bearing on the interrelations betwéPy excitation and inhibition. 

Since the first phase of 2O% ayed reflex, like experimental 
extinction and conditioned į ttón, involves an inhibitory process, 
we should expect to find en all three a close similarity. It has 


already been noticed(in,the cases of extinction and conditioned 


tion spreads spont: sly to other conditioned reflexes, and that the 
degree of this go ing is determined by the relative physiological 
intensity AS reflexes. It has further been observed that if the 


> 
ao 


inhibition of a net e ositive conditioned reflex, that the inhibi- 


AČ 
aw 


100 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


reflexes involved secondarily are physiologically weaker than the 
reflex in which the inhibition was developed primarily, the accom- 
panying secondary inhibition of these other reflexes is complete ; 
but that if the reflexes involved secondarily are the stronger only a 
partial inhibition is obtained. In other words, the intensity of the 
primary inhibition is found to be exactly proportional to the intensity 
of the excitatory process on which it is based. This holds good also 
for inhibition of delay. An alteration in either direction of the 
strength of the conditioned stimulus causes a sharp disturbance in 
the established relation between the inhibitory and excitatory 
phases of the delay. The two following experiments on this point 
were conducted on the same animal as was employed in the preceding 
experiments : 


Salivary Secretion 
in drops per 
Time Stimulus 30 secs. during the 
isolated action of the 
conditioned stimulus 


Experiment of 25th October, 1907. 


10.4 a.m. Rhythmic tactile stimulation at 0,0,0,5, 8, 8 
the rate of 18-22 per minute 

IOA oy, Rhythmic tactile stimulation at 1, 0, 3, 6, 10, 11 
the rate of 18-22 per minute 

T0305 Same stimulus at the rate of 10 0,0,0,0, 3,10 
per minute A 

10.45 ,, Same stimulus at the rate of 18-22 AN O2 951% 
per minute 

02 Same stimulus at the rate of 18- 0,0,0,0, 5, 16 
per minute 


Experiment of 29th Or Q. 
10.6 a.m. Rhythmic tactile stim@lat)p 18-22 | 0,0,0,0, 0, 3 


per minute 

10319 = Rhythmic tactile lation 18-22 O20 0.0572. Us 
per minute 

10.38 ,, Same stimuly@y the rate of 38-40 0, 0, 0, 6, 18,14 
per minu(e) 

10.51 s Same AA mint the rate of 18-22 | 0,0,0,0, 0, 7 
per e 

eC S duk at the rate of 18-22 0,0,0,0, 5, 16 
p inute 

The ex peDrents show a more definite effect in the case of a 


ow 


diminuti << the strength of the conditioned stimulus than in the 


nerease in strength, though both effects are evident. 


DELAYED REFLEXES 101 


Just as with extinction and conditioned inhibition, the intensity 
of the inhibition in delay also depends upon the strength of the 
unconditioned stimulus. This can easily be shown with conditioned 
alimentary stimuli, when the delayed reflex is tested in the dog after 
it had been fed at the usual time and again after a certain period of 
fast. The following experiment illustrates this point. A whistle of 
moderate strength is used as a conditioned alimentary stimulus 
in a conditioned reflex delayed by three minutes. 


Experiment of 13th December, 1907. 
Previously to the experiment the dog was fed at the usual time. 


Salivary Secretion 
in drops per 
Time Stimulus 30 secs. during the 
isolated action of the 
conditioned stimulus 


2.40 p.m. Whistle 0; 0, 0:.0;2;6 
2.04 -,, $ 0, 0, 0, 2, 3, 6 
3506; n 0,0-0, 0,2,5 


Experiment of 15th December, 1907. 
Conducted upon the same dog after two days deprivation of food. 


Salivary Secretion ~\ 
in drops per EAN 
Time Stimulus 30 secs. during t 

isolated action o 


conditioned st, 


Experiments of this kind show hat when the physiological 


significance of the conditioned ulus is increased through de- 
privation of food, the inactj inhibitory phase of the delay 
almost entirely disappear 

Summation of inten of the inhibitory after-effect can be 


observed with inhibitiow of delay exactly as with extinction and 
conditioned inhibitjen. This is clearly evidenced by an experiment 
such as the foll : 

A tactile gp 


ation of the skin serves as a conditioned stimulus 
eflex, the isolated action of this stimulus being 


102 


CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


continued during three minutes before the application of the uncon- 


ditioned. 


Time 


Stimulus 


Salivary Secretion 
in drops per 
30 secs. during the 
isolated action of 
conditioned stimulus 


Remarks 


WOS: 


EELS"; 


11.45 5 


11.50 |, 


12 noon 


Tactile stimu- 
lation dur- 
ing 4 minutes 

Tactile stimu- 
lation dur- 
ing 4 minutes 

Tactile stimu- 
lation dur- 
ing 4 minutes 

Tactile stimu- 
lation dur- 
ing only 14 
minutes 

Tactile stimu- 
lation dur- 
ing only 14 
minutes 

Tactile stimu- 
lation dur- 
ing only 14 
minutes 

Tactile stimu- 
lation dur- 
ing 4 minutes 

Tactile stimu- 
lation dur- 
ing 4 minutes 


Tactile stimu- 
lation dur- 
ing only 14 
minutes 

Tactile stimu- 
lation d 


mn 


q eS 
latgon dur- 
ould 13 


+ RÝ. minutes 
N actile stimu- 


lation dur- 
ing 4 minutes 


OF 7310 


0, 0, 0, 10, 18, 21 


AN Ua | age 


0;-0, 0, 0,- 9," 6 


0,0,0, 0, 0, 0 


0,0,0, 0, 90, 0, 


| 
| 


Reinforced with 
acid at the end 
of the 3rd min- 
ute of isolated 
action of the 
conditioned 
stimulus. 


Not reinforced. 


forced with 
acid at the end 


of the 3rd min- 
ute of isolated 
action of the 
conditioned 
stimulus. 


Not reinforced. 


—___—_—__,- 


| DELAYED REFLEXES 103 


The tactile stimulus which normally produced inhibition during 
the first 14 minutes of its isolated action, when abbreviated so as 
not to act during the second 14 minutes associated with the excitatory 
phase of the reflex, led to such a strengthening of the inhibition that 
on its subsequent application for the full three minutes the positive 
phase of the reflex was either greatly reduced (11.21 a.m.) or else 
abolished altogether (12 noon). 

It remains now to seek an interpretation of the fact that in the 
| case of a delayed reflex, the same stimulus has at-first an inhibitory, 
and later an excitatory, effect. What factor determines these two 
distinct properties of one and the same stimulus acting under ap- 
parently identical conditions ? We shall find no difficulty in cor- 
relating this phenomenon with the experimental evidence already 
considered in these lectures. In the third and fifth lectures a number 
of agencies were discussed which can be given either excitatory or 
inhibitory conditioned properties. In particular the factor of 
duration of time was shown to act as a real physiological stimulus, 
and experiments were described in which definite time intervals 
appeared as effective stimuli. I should like especially to recall to 
your memory the experiment in which the compound stimulus 
consisted of an external stimulus related to a definite moment of 
time (p. 41). In this experiment the external stimulus was with- 

out any effect until applied in the neighbourhood of at i 
moment after the previous administration of acid, b is par- 
ticular moment was approached the secretory ar made its , 
appearance and gradually and precisely at a maximum. 
This is exactly the case with delayed reflexes al he experiments 
which have just been described in the NS, ROA tho the uncon- 
ditioned stimulus was added to the aoe stimulus only at the 
expiration of 3 minutes; in other Sgords, the external stimulus 
itself plus its: duration for three “on es together constitute the 
actual compound stimulus whickDyas immediately reinforced, and 


it was this particular combina and not the nominal conditioned 
stimulus which acquired Gi ed properties. The same nominal 
stimulus at any time preyrwsly to the end of the third minute acted 


as a component of a ys t stimulatory compound which remained 
unreinforced by t conditioned reflex and therefore became 
inhibitory, exac ould any other stimulus if it were not rein- 
forced. The phenomenon has already been demonstrated in 
the case SS nditioned inhibition, and illustrations even more 


À 
D 
ww 
aS 


ae 
N 


104 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


striking will be given in the next lecture, which is to deal with the 
fourth type of internal inhibition. 

In the case of delayed. reflexes the significance of the duration of 
a stimulus can be observed in a very concrete and simple manner. 
When the external stimulus selected for the formation of a conditioned 
reflex is applied during a given interval of time, at each successive 
moment the stimulus forms part of a definite and distinct stimulatory 
compound. It is well known how soon we get accustomed to stimuli 
of smell, sound or illumination. This, of course, means that the 
nerve cells which are being excited pass through a series of successive 
physiological changes. In accordance with this it is obvious that 
if a definite unconditioned reflex is repeatedly evoked coincidently 
with any one particular physiological state of the cerebral cells, it 
is this definite state and no other that acquires a definite con- 
ditioned significance. In the next lecture it will be shown to how 
great an extent the discrimination of different intensities of one 
and the same stimulus can proceed, and how the stimulus evokes 
at one particular intensity a positive and at another intensity 
an inhibitory conditioned reflex. We are thus fortunately provided 
with a great deal of perfectly good experimental evidence which 
throws light on the phenomenon of internal inhibition involved 
in delay. 

The possibility of the development of a delay ree to be 

e 


reckoned with in studying conditioned, reflexes. Ke ow that in 
order to determine the intensity of excitation. i simultaneous or 
a short-delayed conditioned reflex in its erous and subtle 


variations under different conditions, O cessary to apply the 
appropriate conditioned stimulus sin r a longer or a shorter 
period of time, combining its actio = of the unconditioned 
stimulus at the end of this tee = Only in this manner can we 
get a measurable reflex resp This procedure, even though 
rarely performed, tends to theglevelopment of a more or less prolonged 
delay, so that along wit excitatory process there originates 
also an inhibitory NS investigation thus naturally becomes 
W 


complicated, for it į necessary to deal with two simultaneous 
and antagonistia poe For example, it is not easy by our usual 
methods to obtate’ the true latent period of conditioned reflexes, 
since what ften been referred to in our description of experi- 


ments as ue) “latent period ” represented in actual fact a delay— 
i.e. V of an inhibitory period, which could appro- 


N 


sh 


DELAYED REFLEXES 105 


iad 


priately be termed the “ preliminary inhibitory period,” but which 
is certainly not the true latent period of the reflex. 

In order to determine the true latent period of conditioned 
reflexes it is necessary to use reflexes which are as nearly as possible 
simultaneous, the unconditioned stimulus succeeding rapidly on the 
conditioned after an interval of a fraction of a second. It is only by 
using such reflexes, and then chiefly their motor components, that 
convincing experimental evidence can be obtained showing that 
the length of the true latent period of a conditioned reflex is really 
of the same order as is the true latent period of reflexes in the lower 
centres of the brain and spinal cord. Such determinations have 
only recently been introduced into our investigations, as we did not 
consider the determination of the true latent period of conditioned 
reflexes to be of fundamental importance for establishing their 
nature as reflex. The regularity and infallibility with which these 
reflexes could be evoked constituted in our opinion the main evidence 
for their reflex nature, and in this connection differences in the period 
of latency did not seem of much importance since the latent period 
of lower reflexes also is known to be subject to fairly wide variations 
depending on the complexity of the central paths and connections 
involved in the reflex. It may justly be admitted, however, and with- 


out prejudice to our conception of the reflex nature of conditioned 


reflexes, that the nervous connections are of greater Aes rele in 
those reflexes which involve the cerebral cortex. 

The elucidation of many other problems concer ee 
reflexes, such, for instance, as that of the actual Nse of the ex- 
citatory process from the moment of its origi LOX is also rendered. 
difficult by interference from delay. In QP repo individual 
differences in the character of the nerf ystem may be very 
helpful. For example, it was shown $gbove that.in some animals 
the delay is developed with difficulty, that the excitatory process 
is only slightly, or often not at allgjisturbed. The experimenter, in 
order to diminish the dae elay, can also take the precaution 
to abbreviate the isolated the conditioned stimulus to the 
minimum compatible sig oa a secretion of sufficient magni- 
tude to allow of aao different variations of the experiment. 
On the other hand, e are some problems in the elucidation of 
which the initial} Gass of inhibition may be turned to advantage, 
as will be sho the next lecture. It can clearly be seen how, 
when WR into the properties of conditioned reflexes, the 


> 
ao 


Aw 
ww 


106 “CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


l experimenter has to adapt his methods to the character of the 


animal at his disposal. í 

The experimental evidence with which we have been dealing in 
the last three lectures demonstrates the enormous biological impor- 
tance of internal inhibition of conditioned reflexes. It is by means 
of internal inhibition that the signalizing activity of the hemispheres 
is constantly corrected and perfected. To sum up: 

If over a given time a signalling, i.e. a conditioned, stimulus is 
repeatedly presented without the accompaniment of the uncon- 
ditioned stimulus, then the conditioned stimulus becomes meaning- 
less to the organism as calling for an unnecessary expenditure of 
energy, and the stimulus loses, though generally for only a short 
time, its physiological significance (experimental extinction). 

In exactly the same manner, if a conditioned stimulus is repeatedly 
applied together with another extraneous stimulus and in the com- 
bination is never followed by, the unconditioned stimulus, the 
conditioned stimulus loses its positive excitatory conditioned effect, 
but only in that particular combination and not when applied singly 
(conditioned inhibition). 

Finally, if a regular interval of sufficient duration is established 
between the commencement of a conditioned stimulus and its 
reinforcement by the unconditioned stimulus, the former becomes 
ineffective during the first part of its isolated acti during the 
second part of its action a positive excitatory A. appears, and 
this increases progressively in intensity as toO ent approaches 
when the unconditioned stimulus has cu eerily been applied 
(inhibition of delay). 

In the above manner a continuou, =. exact adaptation 
of the organism to its eee) effected, revealing a most 
delicate adjustment in the ARE ee es nervous processes of the | 
higher animals. 

As has been clearly de 
phenomena of extinction 
sent the formation of į 
ditioned reflexes “oO 


A. in the last three lectures the 
itioned inhibition and. delay all repre- 
y conditioned reflexes. Inhibitory con- 
ever, also be obtained by a totally different 
procedure. If itory stimulus is applied, simultaneously and. 
repeatedly for Wot periods of time together with some neutral 
stimulus th Cayter also develops an inhibitory function of its own. 
This ait has been specially examined. by Dr. Volborth, who 


RY Oe rendering the extraneous stimuli absolutely neutral, 


INHIBITION OF SECOND ORDER 107 


presenting them repeatedly to the animal until they ceased to 
produce any inhibition of the positive conditioned reflexes or any 
dis-inhibition of the inhibitory reflexes. He then repeatedly allowed. 
these neutral stimuli to act during short intervals of time either with 
conditioned reflexes which had just been experimentally extinguished. 
or with the inhibitory combination in a conditioned inhibition. 
After repeating this procedure several times he tested the action 
of these hitherto neutral stimuli upon positive conditioned reflexes, 
and in this manner successfully demonstrated that they had acquired 
definite inhibitory properties. 

Since in order to become sure of the results these tests had to be 
repeated several times, Dr. Volborth in one group of experiments 
accompanied only every alternate test by the unconditioned stimulus. 
This strict alternation of reinforcement with non-reinforcement was 
adopted in order to prevent the combination of the positive stimulus’ 
with the new and hitherto neutral stimulus from acquiring a pre- 
dominance of positive or negative properties in itself. But most 
convincing of all was another form of the experiment in which the 
test was always accompanied by the unconditioned stimulus. In 
spite of repeated tests of this kind the recently acquired inhibitory 
properties of the hitherto neutral stimuli were still prominently 
exhibited. The following are some of Dr. Volborth’s experiments, 
in which a “ natural ” alimentary stimulus was employed. 


The alimentary conditioned stimulus after exti was 
repeatedly applied in conjunction with the sound of tronome 
which had previously been rendered entirely neu After this 


ination of the 
on-extinguished 
is combination was 


procedure had. been continued for some time a 
action of the metronome with a positive 
alimentary reflex was occasionally tested, 

always reinforced by the pacar ny ots 


Experiment of 5th December, 1911, os ten applications of the 


metronome with the extra hed conditioned reflex. 


Q Salivary 
Time A applied Secretion in 
ing 30 secs. drops during 
( ) 30 seconds 
12.54 p.m. > Ra powder at a distance 7 
eat powder at a distance 


Le ee 
i £ + metronome 2 


108 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


Experiment of 1st December, 1911, after 19 applications of the 
metronome with the extinguished conditioned reflex. 


Salivary 
Time Stimulus applied Secretion in 
during 30 secs. drops during 
30 seconds 
11.30 a.m. Meat powder at a distance 7 
ELAT Meat powder at a distance 

+metronome’ ` 1 
LEDAS; Meat powder at a distance 3 
12.7 p.m. Meat powder at a distance . 8 


Experiment of 18th December, 1911, after 26 applications of the 
metronome with the extinguished conditioned reflex. 


| 
| Salivary 


Time. Stimulus applied Secretion in 
during 30 sec. drops during 
30 seconds. 
10.35 a.m. Meat powder at a distance 9 
10.47°~,, Meat powder at a distance 
+metronome 1 
FiOS Meat powder at a distance 12 


It is obvious that the sound of the scenes which was 


formerly entirely neutral has acquired inhibj properties as a 
result of repeated applications with the Kaa conditioned 
reflex. 

This new inhibitory stimulus of th nd order proves itself in 
every respect similar in properties se inhibitory stimuli which 
have been considered already; earn with experimental 
extinction, conditioned nib and delay. For example, a new 
inhibitory stimulus of the secod order which is developed with the 
help of one definite condj&jbbd reflex can exert an inhibitory effect 
upon other conditione es as well. This is shown in the follow- 
ing experiment of March, 1911, in which a different dog is 
employed. 

The sound etronome was made always to coincide with an 
Fae ene ý natural” conditioned alimentary reflex; subse- 


quently tf) ect of the metronome was tested upon an artificial 


Ping conditioned. reflex to odour of camphor. 


INHIBITION OF SECOND ORDER 109 


Salivary 
: Stimulus applied Secretion 
Time. during 30 secs. in drops 
during 
30 secs. 
3.8 p.m. Camphor 5 
eels, Camphor 4 
3.40 ,, Camphor + metronome 1 
3.55 ,, Camphor 1 
4.18 ,, Camphor 5 


It can be seen also in the above experiment that the effect of the 
conditioned inhibitory stimulus of the second order is not limited 
to the time of its actual administration, but reveals itself also in a 
definite inhibitory after-effect which is subject to summation. 
Furthermore, conditioned inhibitory stimuli of the second order are, 
equally with the primary ones, subject to dis-inhibition by agencies 
belonging to the group of external inhibitors. We thus come to the 
following conclusion: when perfectly neutral stimuli fall upon the 
hemispheres at a time when there prevails a state of inhibition they 
acquire an inhibitory function of their own, so that when they act 
subsequently upon any region of the brain which is in a state of 
excitation they produce inhibition. 

A point to which further reference will be made should be men- 
tioned here, namely, that every extraneous stimulus whic 
the hemispheres and remains without any further c 
the animal, if repeated causes the spontaneous de 
cortical inhibition. Therefore, in the type o 
described, it is always necessary to ascertain extent to which 
the acquisition of inhibitory properties le neutral stimuli 
depends on their simultaneous borg th inhibitory stimuli, 


and to what extent these inhibitor operties have developed 
independently. 


LECTURE VII 


The analysing and synthesizing activity of the cerebral hemispheres: (a) The 
initial generalization of conditioned stimuli. (b) Differential inhibition. 


Strmuxti which evoke conditioned reflexes are perpetually acting as 
signals of those agencies in the environment which are in themselves. 
immediately favourable or immediately destructive for the organism. 
Such signals are drawn sometimes from only one elementary pro- 
perty of the environing agencies, sometimes from a whole complex 
of these properties. This is possible only because the nervous system 
possesses on the one hand a definite analysing mechanism, by means 
of which it selects out of the whole complexity of the environment 
those units which are of significance, and, on the other hand, a syn-. 
thesizing mechanism by means of which individual units can be 
integrated into an excitatory complex. Thus in studying the nervous 
activity of the cerebral cortex it is necessary to deal with two further 
and distinct phenomena, one involving a neuro-analysis and the 
other involving a neuro-synthesis. The analysing and synthesizing 
functions of the nervous system constantly superi se themselves 
upon and interact with one another. 


Every type of nervous system presents e or less complex 
analysing apparatus which readily admits ubdivision into what 
we may term the nervous analysers. Forex ple, the visual analyser 


selects the vibrations of light, t or ustic analyser selects the 
vibrations of sound, and so on. ‘ka ore, each analyser differen- 
tiates its own selective medium nese environment into a very large 
number of elementary physiogical stimuli. With regard to the 
structure of the analysers, @g yh includes, on the one hand, the peri- 
pheral receptor with 2p fðpfierent nerves, and, on the other hand, 


the nerve cells whi at the central termination of the nerve 
fibres. The peri receptors can be regarded as ‘“‘ transformers,” 
which, in the Lee any single analyser, are capable of accepting 
only one defGite form of energy as an adequate stimulus for the 
initiation nerve impulse. It is obvious that both the peripheral 


"S d the central nervous elements are involved in the 
110 


BRO) 


ww 


GENERALIZATION OF STIMULI lll 


analysing function of the nervous system. Inferior analysing qualities 
are of course manifested by lower parts of the nervous system, and 
even by the crudely differentiated nervous substance in those 
animals which lack a nervous system proper. An organism deprived 
of its cerebral hemispheres still responds in a great variety of ways 
to stimuli applied to its receptor surfaces; according to the site of 
application, the intensity and the quality of the stimuli. However, 
the highest and most subtle analysing activity of which an animal 
is capable can be obtained only with the help of the cerebral 
cortex. It is evident also that only with the progressive development 
of the analysing activity of the nervous system is the organism 
enabled to multiply the complexity of its contacts with the external 
world and to achieve a more and more varied and exact adaptation 
to external conditions. In contemporary research the study of the 
analysing function forms a very important section of the so-called 
physiology of the sense organs. This section has reached a very 
high state of development in the hands of some of the greatest 
physiologists, especially Helmholtz, and presents an abundant 
wealth of data concerning the activities of the peripheral structures 
of the different analysers and of their cerebral terminations. A good 
deal is known also about the limits of the analysing functions in man. 


But while the study of the physiology of the special sense organs 


suggests explanations of many complicated cases of the analysing 
function, and enunciates many fundamental laws to mh this 
activity conforms, the greater part of the material w as been 
gathered is of a subjective character, being based ur psychical 
apperceptions which are the most elementary su ive indications 
of the objective correlations between a xa environment, 
This fact constitutes the greatest defect of ction of physiology, 
since it excludes the study of the an scr function in animals 
outside man, and therewith all Bie AG} Nae of animal experi- 
mentation. The method of condjsjonéd reflexes, however, gives 
over the study of the whole “a most important function of 
nervous analysis into the ha O%) e purely experimental physiol- 
ogist. With the help of coined reflexes the scope and limits of 
the analysing function fferent animals can be exactly deter- 
mined, and the laws a Co a this function made clear. Although 
the study of the D logy of analysers has been as yet but little 
developed, re upon the new lines is making rapid progress 
and may b ee to add largely to our knowledge of the 


a> 
N 


112 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


mechanism by which the exact correspondence between the organism 
and its environment is maintained. 

The first step was to find a method by which the activities of the 
analysers could be objectively studied in animals by means of 
visible outward reactions. As was mentioned before, even insignificant 
changes in the external environment call forth if not a special inborn 
or acquired reflex activity, then a reaction of orientation (the 
“ investigatory reflex’). It is obvious that the investigatory reflex 
can be used to determine the degree to which the nervous system 
of a given animal is capable of discriminating between various 
stimuli. If, for example, among the different environing agencies 
there is present a definite musical tone, any, even slight, alteration 
of its pitch will suffice to evoke an investigatory reflex in the form 
of a definite orientation of the ears and maybe of the whole body of 
the animal in relation to the tone. The same is true even of slight 
changes in various other elementary or compound stimuli. The 
investigatory reflex, of course, takes place only provided that the 
_ structure of the analysing apparatus is sufficiently delicate to register 
the change in the environment. This reflex can be used for the 
purpose of our investigation by itself, or, much better, through its 
inhibitory or dis-inhibitory effects upon conditioned reflexes, since 
these are the most delicate nervous reactions of which the animal is 
capable. Howeyer in spite of the high degree of sensitivity mani- 
fested by the investigatory reflex this reaction j any respects 
unsuitable as a basis for the study of the alg activity of the 
nervous system. One of its chief defects at in the case of 
certain weak stimuli the reaction is on ansient and cannot be 
repeated, and it is therefore useless for urpose of exact experi- 
mentation. The detailed investigati conditioned reflex reaction, 
on the contrary, provides an K tly suitable method for an 
exact experimental research in e analysing function. A definite 
external agent is made, for e = to acquire by our usual technique 
the properties of a sai conditioned stimulus. By repeated 
reinforcement this stimulus is strengthened in its new 


properties, while i mulus nearest to it in intensity, position or 


quality is alwa trasted by being left without reinforcement, 
with the result “kat it becomes readily and exactly differentiated 
from the eat Gpiaied positive conditioned stimulus. 

The GF sful development of analysis of external agencies by 


means onditioned reflexes is always preceded by what we call a 


N 


GENERALIZATION OF STIMULI 113 


“period of generalization ” (which may possibly be regarded as 
some form of synthesizing activity). 

For instance, if a tone of 1000 d.v. is established as a conditioned 
stimulus, many other tones spontaneously acquire similar properties, 
such properties diminishing proportionally to the intervals of these 
tones from, the one of 1000 d.v. Similarly, if a tactile stimulation 
of a definite circumscribed area of skin is made into a conditioned 
stimulus, tactile stimulation of other skin areas will also elicit some 
conditioned reaction, the effect diminishing with increasing distance 
of these areas from the one for which the conditioned reflex was 
originally established. The same is observed with stimulation of 
other receptor organs. This spontaneous development of accessory 
reflexes, or, as we have termed it, generalization of stimuli, can be 
interpreted from a biological point of view by reference to the fact 
that natural stimuli are in most cases not rigidly constant but range 
around a particular strength and quality of stimulus in a common 
group. For example, the hostile sound of any beast of prey serves 
as a conditioned stimulus to a defence reflex in the animals which 
it hunts. The defence reflex is brought about independently of 
variations in pitch, strength and timbre of the sound produced by 
the animal according to its distance, the tension of its vocal cords 


and similar factors. AN 
Besides this we have encountered in conditioned refi rhs other 
form of generalization, the vital importance of whi Ox so im- 
mediately apparent. So far we have been dealing a temporary 
form of generalization within a single analyseng e case of simul- 
taneous and delayed reflexes. In the case io Mtioneä long-trace 
reflexes, with a pause of 1-3 minutes, 1 eralization becomes 
permanent and of a wider scope. Tfgce“feflexes, like all delayed 
reflexes, present two phases—an in’ inactive phase based on 
internal inhibition, and a secon ctive phase based on nervous 
excitation. All that has been lioni the effect of extra stimuli 
upon these two phases in t, ahs f delayed reflexes is true also for 
the two phases in trace r s. The trace reflexes, however, have 
another characteristi eir own, namely, that they exhibit a 
permanent and univerSe¥ generalization, involving all the analysers. 
For example, tO stablish a long-trace conditioned reflex to a 
tactile ee ae it is found that stimuli which belong to 


other anal nd which have never been connected with the given: 
reflex ba act as conditioned stimuli to the same trace reflex. 


yagi 


114 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


We shall deal with this phenomenon at some length, since the 
investigation presents some special points of interest. 

The following experiments bearing upon this question are taken 
from a research by Dr. Grossman : 

A tactile stimulation of the skin is used as the conditioned stimulus 
for a long-trace reflex to acid, the interval between the end of the 
conditioned stimulus and the beginning of the unconditioned being 
one minute. The experiments show the effect of a thermal stimulus at 
0°C. and of a given musical tone, both applied for the very first time. 


Salivary Secretion 
in drops during 
Time Stimulus arte successive minutes Remarks 
during one minute | from the beginning 
of the conditioned 
stimulus 


Expervment of 6th February, 1909. 


11.39 a.m. Tactile 0,3 sence ating sae 
11.55 13 Tactile 0, 7 acid. 

12.6 p.m. Thermal at 0°C. 15 4,7; 7 roaa by 
12.22 _,, Tactile 0, 4 : Reinforced. 


Experiment of "th cl. KO 
inforced by in- 


2.36 p.m. Tactile 

O aaa oa 15 troduction of 
Pp” ae Tone Not reinforced. 
eames Tactile paras by in- 
a. 10..,, - Tactile troduction of 
a; BV he Tactile acid. 


' It is thus seen that stim Q which had previously never been 
-connected with the refle & acid have now acquired the property 
to excite this reflex. ermore, the stimuli, although applied for 
the very first oN the same manner as the stimulus used to 
establish the t Ou ex, their effect being manifested not at the 
time of their co but chiefly or exclusively after they have 
been EA ed. This similarity made us inclined to regard them 
as being © a generalization of the original trace reflex. Of course, 
the aya e from a few isolated experiments of this type was not 

D ly strong to establish this conclusion beyond doubt, and 


GENERALIZATION OF STIMULI 115 


in view of the intrinsic interest of this phenomenon it was subjected 
to rigid investigation. 

On the experimental evidence available concerning conditioned 
reflexes only two further possible explanations of this phenomenon 
suggested themselves. In the first place a long-trace reflex is always 
formed slowly and with difficulty, and it was observed in our earlier 
experiments that before the formation of the trace reflex other 
conditioned reflexes were very easily established to any chance 
stimuli which happened to coincide with the actual administration 
of the unconditioned stimulus and of which the experimenter himself 
was often the cause. In the case we are speaking of at present the 
danger of interference by extraneous stimuli was therefore con- 
siderable, and these experiments had to be repeated in our new 
laboratory so as to make sure that any possible accidental influence 
of the experimenter upon the animal was excluded. Under these 
conditions the generalized character of the long-trace reflex was 
still found to persist. 

The second explanation which suggested itself was as follows: 
When conditioned reflexes are being established in dogs for the first 
time, it is found that the whole experimental environment, beginning 
with the introduction of the animal into the experimental room, 
acquires at first conditioned properties. This initial reflex could be 
called, therefore, a conditioned reflex to the environment. t later 
on, when the special reflex to a single definite and const Ks ulus 
has appeared, all the other elements of the enviro D gradually 
lose their special conditioned significance, most rey on account 
of .a gradual development of internal inhibi However, this 
inhibition is at first very easily dis-inhibited ae extra stimulus. 
The following is a striking example of su se which was very 
common, when, as formerly, the experi D in the room 
with the dog. The reflex to environne} » had in the given experi- 
ments just come to an end, the glafpls being now in a resting state 
except when the special Sit ee stimulus was applied. 
As soon, however, as I mys d the room, in order for the first 
time to watch the experi , & copious secretion of saliva was 
produced by the dog, ¢high’persisted as long as I remained in the 
room. I myself presentéd in this case the extra stimulus dis- 
inhibiting the refle: © environment which had only just recently 
undergone exti . Now it occurred to us that the phenomenon 
of the mn generalization of the long-trace reflexes might 


116 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


really be nothing but a dis-inhibition of the reflex to environment. 
"Iowever, after a thorough examination, this explanation had to be 
discarded. In the first place, a considerable generalization of long- 
trace reflexes could easily be observed even in dogs in which the 
reflex to environment had been deeply inhibited so long ago that it 
was now almost impossible to dis-inhibit it. In the second place, 
the supposition of dis-inhibition when followed up necessitated a 
further assumption which was easily disproved. It has been seen 
already that dis-inhibition of the inactive phase in delay was obtained 
immediately on application of the extra stimulus, t.e. without any 
such latent period as is observed for trace reflexes. If the generalized 
character of trace reflexes was in reality nothing but dis-inhibition, 
we should expect all the different stimuli also to act immediately, 
' ut as we have seen they act only after their termination and after 
about the same latent period as the initially established trace reflex. 
If it is still assumed that the effect is due to dis-inhibition of the 
reflex to environment, then in the case of trace reflexes all the different 
stimuli must act for some reason as very powerful extra stimuli which 
do not dis-inhibit the reflex to environment, but temporarily abolish 
all conditioned activity by producing a very powerful inhibition (as 
is also the case with very powerful extra stimuli in delay), and the 
ensuing dis-inhibition must be brought about by their traces which 
represent weaker stimuli. This assumption, cae , is contradicted 
by the following facts. It is known that poh plication of the 
same powerful extra stimulus is followed b adual diminution 
of its inhibitory effect, which gives place, ee seen with delay, to 
dis-inhibition. But in the case of the eralized stimuli in long- 
trace reflexes the latent period does minish in spite of repeated 
applications. This shows that t activity is due to a genuine 
generalization of the trace refl not to dis-inhibition. Finally, 
there is this striking fact, eo the case of trace reflexes following 
the application of various i, which of course are never reinforced, 
the effect of the special itioned stimulus to which the trace reflex 
was experimentall ose also becomes temporarily diminished, 
and the secretion ey fall to zero, a fact which cannot be reconciled 
with any sup that we are dealing with a dis-inhibition of the 
reflex to RG ent. Indeed, there is no doubt that this weakening 


of the effe@ataf the special conditioned stimulus represents a simple 


instan KA extinction, as the result of non-reinforcement, of a reflex 


NS 


as become generalized within the hemispheres. 


DIFFERENTIATION 117 


Thus it isseen that in the course of the establishment of simultaneous 
and delayed reflexes a temporary generalization develops in the form 
of a number of accessory conditioned reflexes to associated stimuli. 
Generalization of the reflexes can be effected also through the 
whole environment acting on the organism by the sum total of its 
individual units and leading to the formation of what we may call 
a synthetic environmental reflex. In other cases, namely, in long- 
trace reflexes, it is effected in virtue of the intrinsic properties of the 
nervous system itself, which give a more or less generalized character 
to the individual external stimuli in their capacity as conditioned 
stimuli. In many instances, some of which we have referred to above, 
it is obvious that this fact of generalization of stimuli has a definite 
importance in the natural correlation between the animal and its 
environment, but in other cases the generalization can have only a 
limited or temporarysignificance. In the latter casesthe approximate, 
general, and under some conditions useful connection with the en- 
vironment as a whole is replaced by’a precise and definitely specialized 
connection with a definite stimulatory unit. 

The question can now be discussed as to how the specialization 
of the conditioned reflex, or, in other words, the discrimination of 
external agencies, arises. Formerly we were inclined to think that 
this effect could be obtained by two different methods: the first 


method consisted in repeating the definite conditioned stiaualus a 
great number of times always accompanied by reinfor nt, and 
the second method consisted in contrasting the gi definite 
conditioned stimulus, which was always accompani y reinforce- 


At present, however, we are more inclined @)%gard this second 
method as more probably the only efficac One, since it was ob- 
served that no absolute ee ever obtained by the 
use of the first method, even though tle} imulus was repeated with 
reinforcement over a thousand ti . On the other hand, it was 
found that contrast by even a si unreinforced, application of an 
allied stimulus, or by a re single unreinforced. applications 


ment, with different neighbouring stimuli which wefe ever reinforced. 
© é 


of different members of a sepi allied stimuli at infrequent intervals 
of days or weeks, led (tow rapid development of differentiation. 
The method. of contrast ow always employed in our experiments, 
as leading to a diffengn ation of external agencies in an incomparably 
quicker time. O 


We can ng Yow out the development of differentiation between 
YV 
K 


© 
wv 


N 
AO 


118 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


external stimuli in the conditioned reflexes in greater detail. In 
the first place an interesting observation which remained for a long 
time without explanation may be considered: It was noticed that 
when, after a conditioned reflex to a definite stimulus (e.g. a definite 
musical tone) had been firmly established, the effect of another 
closely allied stimulus (a neighbouring musical tone) was tried. for 
the first time, the conditioned reflex which resulted from the new 
stimulus was frequently much weaker than that obtained with the 
original conditioned stimulus. On repetition of the stimulus of 
the neighbouring tone, always, of course, without reinforcement, the 
secretory effect increased until it became equal to that given by the 
originally established stimulus, but subsequently on further repetition 
began to diminish, falling finally to a permanent zero. Thus it 
appeared that at first the two closely allied stimuli were discriminated 
straight away, but that later this discrimination for some reason 
disappeared, only gradually to re-establish itself and finally to become 
absolute. To provide an explanation of this phenomenon we can 
revert to an interpretation which was advanced previously for similar 
events occurring in the process of development of conditioned 
inhibition. It will be remembered that when, in the formation of 
conditioned inhibition, a conditioned stimulus was accompanied for 
the first time by the new stimulus which later acquired the properties 
of a conditioned inhibitor, the combination produc d either a very 
small positive effect or else remained totally ¥ Metre Later, 
although the inhibitory combination was noe Sel by the 
unconditioned stimulus, it produced again a(Xeflex of full strength, 
which, however, after further repetitions a ally fell to a permanent 
zero. The explanation given in the gageOf conditioned inhibition, 
and fully borne out by experimenta o dence, was that the additional 
stimulus elicited on its first appkeatieh an investigatory reflex which 
immediately produced an ey al inhibition of the conditioned 


reflex ; on repetition the opis of the investigatory reflex rapidly 


diminished and the posi ffect of the conditioned stimulus was 
temporarily restore & later gradually suppressed by the de- 
velopment of inter a ibition. Similarly, in the case of differen- 
tiation it is poetic regard stimuli neighbouring on the definite 


positive conditioned stimulus as bearing two aspects, one of similarity 
to, and O her of difference from, the positive conditioned 
stimulu Qn account of the element which is in common, these 
NS ing stimuli can act similarly to the patiye conditioned 


DIFFERENTIATION 119 . 


one; it is the presence of the second -factor, of difference, which 
determines a temporary investigatory reflex, bringing about external 
inhibition of the excitatory effect, but later serving as foundation 
for the development of a permanent and final differentiation of 
allied stimuli. 


Salivary 
Secretion 
recorded 
by 
Time . Stimulus applied during 30 secs. divisions Remarks 
of scale 


Experiment of 15th February, 1917. 


3.13 p.m. Object rotating clockwise 27 | Reinforced. 

3.25 ,, Object rotating anti-clockwise 7 Not reinforced. 
Experiment of 16th February, 1917. 

1.4 p.m. Object rotating clockwise 24 Reinforced. 

1.14 ” ” 9 ” 26 39 

1.25 33 ”? 33 9 27 >? 

1.34 _,, Object rotating anti-clockwise 10 Not reinforced. 
Experiment of 17th February, 1917. 

2.45 p.m. | Object rotating anti-clockwise| 12 | Notrejnforced. 
Experiment of 18th February, 1917. EAN 

2.48 p.m | Object rotating clockwise 19 nforced. 

5s SE Object rotating anti-clockwise | 34 ot reinforced. 


Experiment of 20th Februar Ea. 
3.7 p.m. Object rotating anti-clockwise 26) Not reinforced. 
| Object rotating clockwise O i Reinforced. 


Experiment of 21st ruary, 1917. 
3.0 p.m. | Object rotating anti-clo e | 12 | Not reinforced. 


The strength of the refle ich is undergoing differential 
inhibition now diminish ressively with small fluctuations 
until it reaches a perma : 


The correctness of this/interpretation is borne out by the striking 
similarity in detat Gp the development of differentiation and of 
conditioned inhi . The same variations occur in both cases. 
The initial dighiiution in the strength of the reflex during the 


S 
> 
ao 


AQ 
ww 


120 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


first few applications of the new stimulus is sometimes succeeded 
by a transitory increase in strength as compared with the normal, 
and after this the reflex diminishes steadily below its normal value 
until it finally attains a permanent zero; in most cases, however, 
the initial diminution is succeeded by a phase of increase to the normal 
level, after which the reflex again falls steadily to zero with the 
development of the final differentiation ; it rarely happens that a 
development of differentiation is established without such fluctua- 
tions, or that a gradual diminution of the reflex follows directly 
upon the sudden initial drop. While, in describing the formation of 
conditioned inhibition, the fluctuations received a considerable share 
of attention, no records of experiments were given. A presentation 
of the analogous experiments on the establishment of differential 
inhibition will make the matter clear. 

In the first series of experiments (see p. 119), which were conducted 
by Dr. Gubergritz, an object rotating in a clockwise direction served as 
the positive conditioned stimulus, while the same object rotating in the 
opposite direction served as the stimulus undergoing differentiation. 


Amount of 
Saliva 
recorded 
Stimulus by 
Time applied divisions Remarks 
during of scale 


30 secs. its A 
"1 c.c 
© 


during 
30 secs. 


Experiment of 12th Oc S 


12.28 p.m. | Tone Reinforced. 
LOSE Tone Reinforced. 
ES O Semitone Not reinforced. 


CEN g Qn, October, 1917. 


12.54 p 36 Reinforced. 
L5 eee 36 Reinforced. 
ZTE itone 32 Not reinforced. 
Dh eee mitone 16 _ Not reinforced. 
2.18 C) Tone 29 Reinforced. 

1 


The x to the semitone continues to fluctuate, gradually 
j in strength until at the thirteenth repetition it has 


DIFFERENTIATION 121 


The above experiments were conducted on another dog, a musical 
tone serving as a conditioned alimentary stimulus and its semitone 
as the stimulus undergoing differentiation. 

The dog employed in the next series of experiments is the same 
as was used in the first series. A luminous circle was used for a 
conditioned alimentary stimulus, and a luminous square of equal 
surface and equal brightness for the stimulus undergoing differentia- 
tion. : 


Amount of 


Saliva, 
recorded 
Stimulus 
Time applied divisions Remarks 

during of scale 

30 secs. (5 div.= 

0-1 c.c.) 

during 

30 secs. 


Experiment of 28th December, 1917. 


1.20 p.m. | Circle 14 | Reinforced. 
iS ea Square 3 Not reinforced. 


Experiment of 29th December, 1917. 


2.44 p.m. | Circle | 16 Reinforced. 
3.0:5 4 Square ? Not reinforced 


Experiment of 30th December, 1917. N 


1.24 p.m. Circle 15 Rei ‘ 
Lo2- +. Square 10 No orced. 


Then with small fluctuations the reac nishe progres- 
sively, until after the eleventh repetit(on) e square becomes 


permanently ineffective. $ 

Some other interesting points beSides those connected with the 
interference of the investigato eflex have also come to light 
in recent experiments.. In th place it has been shown that the 
development of a differenti of two very closely allied stimuli may 
be attempted directly nO) the other hand, the same differentiation 
may be effected in stageg, leading up through the differentiation of 
more remote stimula There is a considerable difference between the 


rates of develop of a precise differentiation by these two methods. 
For ezampS i begin with the first method we generally find that 


122 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


the differentiation does not become established even after a con- 
siderable number of contrasts of the two very closely allied stimuli ; 
but if we proceed to establish a differentiation of a remoter stimulus, 
working up gradually through finer differentiations until the very 
closely allied stimulus is again reached, it is found that this differen- 
tiation is now very rapidly established. The following experiments 
of Dr. Gubergritz serve to illustrate these relations : 

A circle of white paper provided a conditioned alimentary stimulus 
from which it was required to differentiate a circle of grey paper of 
similar size made of No. 10 in Zimmermann’s scale (50 shades from 
white to black). Seventy-five applications of the grey circle No. 10 
without reinforcement, contrasted. with frequent applications of the 
white circle which always remained reinforced, failed to produce the 
slightest sign of differentiation. A much darker circle No. 35 was 
now contrasted with the white, and a differentiation was quickly 
established. Differentiation was now carried out for grey circles 
Nos. 25 and 15, after which the attempt to differentiate circle No. 10 
was made again, with the result that complete differentiation was 
established after a total of only 20 applications, in all, of the four 
different circles. 

A similar experiment, also with a visual stimulus, but in a modified 
form, was carried out on another dog. In this case the conditioned 
alimentary stimulus was again a circle, while the stimulus to be 
differentiated from it was an ellipse cut from the ga pope and of 
equal surface, with the semi-axes in the ratio of Although at 
the beginning 70 applications of the pre Ed Sy e with the method 
of contrast, no differentiation was obtaine cecessive differentia- 
tions were now obtained in stages fo a with ratio of the 
semi-axes 4: 5, 5:6, 7: 8, and fin h the ellipse of the ratio 
8:9. A precise differentiation ok t tter was finally established 
after a total of only 18 Er in all, of the four ellipses. 

In ai up a differentiation by stages, beginning with a 
nt of the first crude differentiation 


an absolute, or absolute, differentiation has been obtained, 
the succeeding stagés of progress towards the finer differentiation 
are passed. Deh with increasing rapidity, becoming, however, 
somewhat rded as the limit of the analysing activity is 


OPP ` One example may be given in illustration : 


DIFFERENTIATION 123 


A white circle of a given surface area was used for a conditioned 
stimulus, while ellipses of the same area and whiteness but with 
different ratios of semi-axes provided the stimuli undergoing differen- 
tiation. In order to obtain a pronounced differentiation of the first 
ellipse, in which the ratio of the semi-axes was 4:5, twenty-four 
applications were required, with, of course, frequent contrastings 
by the circle. At this stage the circle elicited a secretion of 34 
divisions of the scale in 30 seconds, whereas the effect of the ellipse 
was measured by only four divisions. The next ellipse, with a 
ratio of 5:6, required only 3 applications in contrast to the 
circle before it became fully differentiated. Three repetitions were 
required also for the next ellipse, in which the semi-axes were 
in the ratio 6: 7. | 

It should be noted that irregularities in the curve of development 
of differentiation do not depend always on the disturbing influence 
of the investigatory reflex due to external stimuli ; in all probability 
they are sometimes caused. by variations in the intensity of the 
underlying nervous activity. 

The stability of differentiation of a given stimulus can be measured 
by the length of time reckoned from the last application of the 
positive stimulus during which differentiation is fully maintained. 
When differentiation has only recently been established, the length 
of time during which the differentiated stimulus without intermediate 
practice will yet give a full zero on its next applicati short ; 
this length of time increases, however, as the iret becomes 
more firmly established. For practical purposes e a differen- 
tiation as being fully established when it is ined for not less 
than 24 hours, still giving a zero reflex when ied as the very first 
stimulus in an experiment. ` (e) 

Our repeated experiments have Qe strated that the same 
precision of differentiation of various étyhuli can be obtained whether 
they are used in the form of negatége or positive conditioned stimuli. 
This holds good in the case of Oftone trace reflexes also. The 
following experiment from Ky y Dr. Frolov gives an illustration 
of the differentiation of N stimulus : 

A rate of 104 beafS minute of a metronome was established 
as a conditioned alinterftary stimulus. The conditioned trace in- 
hibitor undergoiti erentiation was given by a definite tone of an 
organ pipe (N Gg which was sounded for 15 seconds and followed 
after a NS ne minute by the stimulus of the metronome which 

XQ 


SÀ 
ao 


AO 
ww 


124 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


I| remained in this case without reinforcement. A combination of the 
I metronome with a trace of the tone of the next organ pipe (No. 15, 
I | an interval of one tone from the first) was contrasted with the first, 
| being reinforced so that it became an excitatory stimulus. The 


Ij differentiation of the trace inhibition is illustrated. in the following 
I experiment : 


| Experiment of 25th April, 1922. 


Salivary Secretion in 

Time Stimulus Duration of divisions of the scale 
Stimulus during successive 

| periods of 15 seconds 


| 1.34 p.m. Tone of organ 15 seconds 


0 
i | pipe No. 16 
I | Interval 60 ” 0, 0, 0, 0. 
| Metronome 30 a 15, 40,* not reinforced. 
| 1.40 a3 Tone of organ 15 S 0. 
I| pipe No. 16 
I Interval Oink. 0, 0, 0, 0. 
i | Metronome 30 hi 0, 15, not reinforced. 
i 148 ,, Tone of organ 15 R 0. 
I| | pipe No. 15 
I| | Interval BOs. isis 0, 0, 0, 0. 
il Metronome 30 "i 25, 65, reinforced. 


It | It should be added that the above differentiatiga\was obtained 
Hl | by passing through a long series of crude differenMg@tionis, beginning 
I | with traces measured by seconds, and with wi Catervals of tones ; 
| | but once developed the differentiation could peated from day to 


| day. x5 
| | With regard to the nature of th us process by which the 
I | initially generalized conditioned ulus comes to assume an.. 


extremely specialized form, we hake a undant experimental evidence 


i} | * Differentiations of trace-coyedjtioned inhibitors are very easily subjected 
| to dis-inhibition and are very, able. It can be noticed in the above ex- 
periment that the first app} of the organ pipe No. 16, the after-effect 
of which should have ZAN the secretory action of the metronome, failed 
to do so, when applie in this experiment, as the first stimulus after an 
| interval of 24 hou fremi the preceding experiment. The second application 
q of the organ pipe Nw 16 exerted a powerful inhibitory after-effect, giving a 
|| secretion of ones divisions with a latent period of over 15 seconds as com- 
r 


| pared with etion of 90 divisions with a very short latent period with 
| the RS n pipe No. 15. 
N 

Ve 
+ 
C) 
N 


2 


DIFFERENTIATION 125 


that it is based upon internal inhibition ; in other words, we may 
say that the excitatory process which is originally widely spread in 
the cerebral part of the analyser is gradually overcome by internal 
inhibition, excepting only the minutest part of it which corresponds 
to the given conditioned stimulus. This interpretation of differentia- 
tion as based upon internal inhibition rests upon evidence to be 
described now. 

A differentiation is established, between two closely allied stimuli, 
so that one of them which is reinforced gives a constant positive 
conditioned effect, while the other, which remains unreinforced, 
gives no secretory effect. If, however, the positive stimulus is 
applied a short time after the differentiated one, there is found 
to be a considerable diminution of its secretory effect. An illus- 
tration of such an experiment can be given from a research by 
Dr. Beliakov : 

A definite tone of an organ-pipe has been given properties 
of an alimentary conditioned stimulus, and an interval of jth 
lower has been firmly differentiated from it by the usual method 
of contrast. 


Experiment of 14th February, 1911. 


Salivary 
; Stimulus applied Secretion 
Time during 30 secs. in drops Rem 
during 


30 secs. Q 


Piia 
ot reinforced. 


12.10 p.m. Tone 


5 
12.25; ,, Tone 4 lower 0 
12.26" "5 Tone 0; Reinforced. 
12.56 7 Tone Reinforced. 


It follows that after applicatio the differentiated. tone there 
remains in the nervous system @ate of inhibition which is for some 
time sufficiently powerful t ken the excitatory process set up 
by the application of tne stimulus. 

The inhibition w if) s exhibited in differentiation must be 
recognized as S eA the fourth type of internal inhibition, 
which may be cąllgd differential inhibition. 

It would t mind be quite appropriate to bring conditioned 
inhibition al(ONthder the heading of differential inhibition, since in 
both cae deal with a removal by means of internal inhibition 


> 
ao 


© 
ww 


126 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


of an excitatory effect of simple or complex stimuli which acquired 
their excitatory properties spontaneously in virtue of their partial | 
resemblance to the original positive conditioned stimulus. 

The inhibitory after-effect in differential inhibition corresponds 
exactly with the inhibitory after-effect in conditioned inhibition, 
both becoming shortened by repetition. At the beginning they may 
persist upwards of an hour, but they become restricted finally to a 
matter of a few seconds. 

It is necessary to emphasize in this place the fact that the finer 
the degree of differentiation the greater is the intensity of the 
inhibitory after-effect. The following experiments of Dr. Beliakov 
serve to illustrate this point : 

A definite tone represents the conditioned stimulus in an ali- 
mentary reflex ; intervals of one-half and one-eighth were used for 
differentiation. 


Salivary 
Stimulus applied | Secretion 
Time during 30 seconds in drops Remarks 
during 
30 seconds 


Experiment of 19th March, 1911. 


12.17 p.m. Semitone 0 Not g@sYorced. 
PSIE Tone 4 R reed. 
EGTE Tone 4 orced. 
Experiment of 29th March O ; 
3.55 p.m One-eighth Not reinforced. 
sto ,, Tone Cy Reinforced. 
4.30 _,, Tone < i Reinforced. 


conditioned inhibition and rential inhibition, the latter provides 


Apart from the close ential already mentioned between 
a close parallel in al spects to the three types of internal 


inhibition which ha en dealt with in previous lectures. Thus 
the inhibitory si pe in differential inhibition, similarly to other 
forms of interngl ibition, undergoes summation on repetition of 
the stimulus: fe following experiments are again taken from the 


researche r. Beliakov : 
YX dog is taken in which a conditioned alimentary reflex 


DIFFERENTIATION 127 


is established to a definite musical tone, while a semitone lower is 
firmly differentiated as an inhibitory stimulus. 


Salivary 
Stimulus applied Secretion 
Time during 30 ana in drops Remarks 
during 
30 secs. 


Experiment of 8th June, 1911. 


2.5 p.m. Tone 10 Reinforced. 
Zoos. Semitone 0 Not reinforced. 
2.38. ,; Semitone 0 Not reinforced. 
2.39 5, Tone 7 Reinforced. 
2:50 Tone 12 Reinforced. 
Experiment of 14th June, 1911. 
1.45 p.m Tone 12 Reinforced. 
EEE -Semitone 0 Not reinforced. 
DILE Semitone 0 Not reinforced. 
Me Nes Semitone 0 Not reinforced. 
PA E Semitone ` 0 Not reinforced. 
Betts Tone 165 Reinforced. 
2.30° ,, Tone 13 Reinforced. 


In differentiation as in the other types of internal inhibition the 
intensity of inhibition stands in direct relation to the strength of the 
excitatory process on the basis of which it was establi And can 
therefore be disturbed by any increase in the intensity e Stimulus 
which developed the inhibitory properties, or by 
general or local excitability of the central s system. To 
illustrate this last condition we may take aos of differential 
inhibitions established on the basis of Era reflex. If, for 
example, the dog has been kept ie thout food for a much 


longer period than usual before th eriment is conducted, the 
increase in excitability of the whole wimentary nervous mechanism 
renders the previously estab] differential inhibition wholly 
inadequate. Again, if the xcitability of the central nervous 
system has been inorease Ne example by an injection of caffeine, 
the previously establis QO erentiation similarly becomes disturbed. 
This effect of an alt on of the general nervous excitability is 
experiment of Dr. Nikiforovsky : 

ation of the fore-paw serves as a positive con- 
y stimulus, while a tactile stimulation of the back 
fferentiated from it. 


ditioned alim 
is compl 


> 
aO 


© 
ww 


€ 


128 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


Salivary 
Secretion 
in drops 
during 
; Stimulus applied successive 
Time during 1 minute minutes Remarks 
from the 
beginning 
of the 
conditioned 
stimulus 
12.52 p.m. Tactile stimulation of back | 0, 0, 0 Not reinforced. 
1 ©; Ta Tactile stimulation of fore- 
paw 5 Reinforced. 
Subcutaneous injection of 
5 c.c. of 1% solution of 
caffeine — — 
Bis; Tactile stimulation of fore- 
paw + Reinforced. 
i PS Dae Tactile stimulation of back | 3, 3, 2 Not reinforced. 
1.45 5 Tactile stimulation of fore- 
| paw. 7 Reinforced. 


Lastly, in common with the other three groups of internal in- 
hibition, differential inhibition is subject to dis-inhibition, becoming 
temporarily removed under the influence of mild extra stimuli 
belonging to the group of external inhibitors, so as to reveal the 
underlying excitatory process. Two experiments Dr. Beliakov 
carried out on the same animal are given in lyse 

A tone of 800 d.v. served as a condition mentary stimulus, 
and an interval of one-eighth (812 d.v.) wa roughly differentiated. 
from it. A sound of bubbling water o) odour of amyl acetate 
served as mild extra stimuli which mselves did. not evoke any 


secretory effect. 


Salivary 
: Stimulus ied Secretion 
Time during 3 nds in drops Remarks 
per 30 


4 Q) seconds 
Cea of 18th June, 1911. 
8 Wa 


12.30 p.m. 3-5, — | Reinforced. 
| CE aren nen oe d.v 0,0 Not reinforced. 
1.20. ,, 0 d.v. 3, — Reinforced. 
1.35 , 812 d.v. +odour of amyl 
A acetate 2,2 Not reinforced. 


DIFFERENTIATION 129 
Salivary 
N Stimulus applied Secretion 
Time during 30 seconds. in drops Remarks 
per 30 
| seconds. 
Experiment of 23rd June, 1911. 
11.55 a.m. 800 d.v. 4, — Reinforced. 
12.10 p.m. 812 d.v. + bubbling water 2, 1 Not reinforced. 
12.30 _,, 800 d.v. 3, — Reinforced. 
12.40 ,, 800 d.v. 3, — Reinforced. 


It is interesting to note that dis-inhibition can also be obtained 
when mild extra stimuli influence the hemispheres while the after- 
effect of differential inhibition is still persisting. The following is 
an experiment carried out by Dr. Beliakov on the same animal. 


. The extra stimulus is given by the sound of a metronome which by 


itself produced no secretion. 


Time | Stimulus during Secretion of Saliva Remarks 
30 seconds in drops 
| Experiment of 1th May, 1911. 
11.10 a.m. | Tone 4-5 during 30 secs. Reig 
11.30 5 Tone 4 ” ” 7 
11.40 ,, Tone $ lower 0 Se ee Chintorced. 
11.44 ,, | Tone $ lower 0 3 » , 3» 
11.44} ,, Metronome during 
1 minute 14 during 1 min A s 


Among the extra stimuli which haveSteen employed there were 
some which evoked, not an ordinary<Dvestigatory reaction, but 
specific reflexes of greater intensity Qa complexity ; in these cases 
the dis-inhibitory after-effect wa, O much prolonged. An example 
of the use of such an ENI us can again be taken from an 
experiment by Dr. Beli erformed on the same animal as 


before. 
A strong extra stingylus was provided by the blare of a toy trumpet 
which produced v thous and exceedingly discordant noises. The 


dog reacted by ng wildly, trembling and trying to break away 


from the NSS 


A.P, I 


130 - CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


Time Stimulus applied during Salivary Secretion in successive 

30 seconds periods of 30 seconds 

10.58 a.m. Trumpet 0 

10.584 ,, Inhibitory tone (812 d.v.) 6,3, 2 | 

1 es ee 3 53 j te Da Stimuli 

ETNOS s s s AI - not 

he Be : tee 15, 1-5, 0 | reinforced. 

ILIS T p ie 5 Traces 


The experimental evidence advanced in this lecture leaves us 
in no doubt but that the establishment of differentiation is based 
upon the development of internal inhibition in respect to the 
differentiated agent. 

On the evidence of our experiments we are also forced to the 
conclusion that there is an important difference between the cruder 
form of differentiation depending upon external inhibition, and the 
finer form of differentiation depending upon internal inhibition. 
The former and more generalized inhibition is brought about by the 
intervention of an excitatory process, in most cases in the form of 
an investigatory reflex, and this has only a secondary inhibiting or 
dis-inhibiting effect upon the conditioned reflexes; the latter is 
brought about by a primary development of an inhibitory process, 
resulting, so to speak, from a conflict between excitation and in- 
hibition. This supremacy of the inhibitory Bey is sometimes 
gained only with considerable difficulty, and i e cases it is even 
beyond the power of the nervous system olve the conflict in 
favour of either process. In the latter c e antagonism between 
the excitatory and inhibitory processe not always bring about 
a full utilization of the results of s of external stimuli for the 
general benefit of the organism. eing so the study of the analys- 
ing activity of the nervous syadem by the method of conditioned 
reflexes will also have its Ghitetions—a fact which in itself 


presents a problem of Ke, rable interest. 


© 


LECTURE VIII 


The analysing and synthesizing activity of the cerebral hemispheres (continued) : 
(c) Examples of the analysis of stimuli. (d) Synthesis and analysis of compound 
simultaneous stimuli. (e) Synthesis and analysis of compound successive 
stimuli. 


It was shown in the preceding lecture that the animal at first general- 
izes any definite individual stimulus of the outer world, but that 
with repetition the stimulus becomes more and more specialized as a 
result of the development of an inhibitory process (differentiation). 
In this final form conditioned reflexes provide a reliable method 
for an experimental study of the scope and limits of the activity of 
the different cortical analysers. Our knowledge of the different 
analysers in the dog has recently been considerably advanced through 
the study of conditioned reflexes,—a fact which affords a striking 
example of the practical utility of this method of research. It should, 
moreover, be mentioned with regard to these particular experiments, 
that while considerable difficulties were sometimes enco red in 
the course of the work, these did not arise in the physiokNcal part 
of the technique, but derived from instrumental limit@fions, since 
in many cases it has been exceedingly difficult to oR or construct 
suitable physical apparatus. The main requing is for instru- 
ments which are capable of producing a xeNéctly isolated and 
unvarying elementary stimulus of a deffnit} legree of intensity. 
This, however, is very often a practical Mnpossibility. For example, 
it is exceedingly difficult to find an apkadatus for tactile stimulation 
of the skin which will not prod some slight sound during its 
application. It is also not eas D tain an alteration in the pitch 
of a tone without simultan. ffecting its strength. Indeed, it 
seems to me that future) rimentation upon the analysers of 
animals will exhibit an(intp esting competition between the delicacy 
of the nervous anes es and the skill of the instrument maker. 


We shall turn, to a consideration of the experiments at our 
disposal, takin those dealing with the visual analyser of the 


dog. In AS of discrimination of luminosity this analyser was 
131 


sh 


132 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


found to be greatly superior to that of man. Thus, for example, a 
conditioned reflex was established in a dog to the presentation of 
a black screen perfectly uniform in shading, without any traces of 
graining or spots. A white screen of identical shape and size, and 
also of uniform luminosity, was differentiated from the black screen 
by the usual method of contrast. The experimenter was provided 
with a number of screens of different shades (50 numbers of Zimmer- 
mann’s collection) ranging from white through different shades of 
grey to black. After the differentiation of white had been firmly 
established the same method of contrast was used to obtain finer 
degrees of differentiation of grey screens approximating more and 
more nearly to black. It was found in this way that the visual 
analyser of the dog was capable of distinguishing between the neigh- 
bouring shades Nos. 49 and 50, while to the human eye there appeared 
not the slightest difference between them, whether they were 
examined successively at different intervals of time or simultaneously. 
This was also true for several other shades separated further from 
one another on the scale, which could not be discriminated by the 
human eye but which the dog differentiated perfectly. The following 
experiment shows an evident, though not absolute, differentiation 
of the screens Nos. 49 and 50 [experiments by Dr. Frolov] : 


Secretion 
Conditioned of Saliva 
Time Stimulus applied in drops EAN marks 
during 30 seconds during 
30 seconds Q 
3.13 p.m. Screen No. 50 1 Q Reinforced. 
4.1 > 2 >? ”? 
rer Screen No. 49 Q Not reinforced. 


It thus becomes evident t s regards the analysis of intensity 
of illumination the visual ied er of the dog is so highly developed. 
that we were unable KO rmine the limit to which this activity 


extends. 

In the case of NA of various colours the results obtained 
were quite diff Dr. Orbeli in a first series of experiments was 
unable to pie differentiation of colours on the part of his dogs. 


In a seco ries of experiments, however, positive results were 
obtained @) ne dog, but only with great difficulty, and even in this 
ANN were still open to criticism. The results obtained 


N 
S 


ANALYSIS OF STIMULI 133 


by other investigators, both Russian and foreign, lead to the con- 
clusion that colour vision in dogs, if present, is only of a very rudi- 
mentary form, and that in most dogs it cannot be detected at all. 

Dr. Orbeli studied also the differentiation of figures. Examples 
of figures for which an absolute differentiation was obtained, are 
given in Fig. 6. 

Experiments with regard to differentiation of shapes were con- 
tinued by Dr. Shenger-Krestovnikova. An alimentary conditioned 
reflex was established in a dog to a luminous circle which was pro- 
jected on to a screen placed in front of the dog. After the reflex had 
attained a constant strength the animal was made-to differentiate 
from the circle a number of ellipses of equal surface and luminosity. 
In the first of the ellipses the ratio of the semi-axes was 2:1, and 
differentiation was established with ease. This was followed up by 
a series of ellipses which gradually approximated to the circle in 
shape, and so required a finer and finer differentiation. The ellipse 
with ratio of the semi-axes 9:8 proved to be the limit at which 
differentiation just failed. Some indication of differentiation 
appeared, at first, but on repetition it gradually disappeared, and 
with it disappeared also all the previously established coarser 
differentiations. To renew these it was necessary to work up care- 
fully from the very beginning, starting with the first ellipse with a 
ratio of the semi-axes 2:1. When all the coarser discrim Ga ined 


had again been obtained, the ellipse with the ratio 9: tried 
once more. Its first application showed a complete di ination 
giving a zero secretion of saliva. Further tests, ho r, led to the 


differentiation again (if the first trial can arded as a real 
differentiation at all), but all the earlie ser differentiations 
disappeared, as well. In this phenome sa e have a clear repro- 


same results as before. Not only was it an to obtain the 


duction of the case referred to at the of the preceding lecture. 


When the stage of minute differeyges between stimuli is reached, 
analysis of itself appears still Le but the relations existing 


between the excitatory and itory processes seem to present 
an insurmountable obstacl © continued. and permanent utiliza- 
tion by the animal for æn ropriate responsive activity. 

The investigati irection of motion of figures and points 
was also investigattCD our laboratories, but the limit of discrimina- 


tion was not de ned, in these cases. 
The ans activity of the acoustic apparatus in the dog was 


Ag 
wy 


FIG. IN ples of different figures which were successfully differentiated in experi- 
ments by li. The letter T, shown in the upper left-hand corner of the figure, served 
e cuca the other black figures and the white letter T where differentiated 

OS 


for the 
from << itive stimulus. 
ther dog the white cross was the positive stimulus from which the other white 


Ww were differentiated. 
oS 
aa 
KV 
SS 


. inside with cotton wool. 


ANALYSIS OF STIMULI 135 


investigated in especial detail and in various directions. In the first 
place we shall consider the analysis of different intensities of the 
same sound. It was found that any definite degree of intensity of a 
sound could easily be made into a stable conditioned stimulus and 
could be differentiated from slightly higher or slightly lower inten- 
sities of the same sound [experiments of Dr. Tichomirov]. A tone 
of 1740 d.v. was sounded by an organ pipe into which air was blown 
at a constant pressure of 3-6-3-8 cms. of water by means of a spiro- 
meter. The organ-pipe was fitted in the centre of a wooden board. 
covered by a thick layer of cotton wool. Above this board and over 
the pipe was suspended a wooden box, open below and also coated 
By raising or lowering this box to different 
heights over the pipe definite dampings of the sound were obtaingd. 
The limit of differentiation to the intensities of a given sound could 
now be determined for the dog and compared roughly with that of 
human beings. Thus it was found that an intensity very closely 
approaching the one employed as a positive conditioned stimulus 
could be differentiated by the dog with an absolute precision even 
when a pause of 17 hours was made between the two stimuli. The 
experimenter found himself able to detect a difference between these 
two intensities of the sound only when they succeeded each other 
immediately. The following is an example taken from these experi- 


ments : \ 
Secretion XO 
of Saliva Qy 

Time Conditioned Stimulus in drops remarks 
during 

30 second 

4.28 p.m. Usual intensity of tone Reinforced: 

4.43 ,, Same tone but of slightly 

different intensity K Not reinforced. 
4.49 ,, Usual intensity of tone O 3 Reinforced. 


inhibitory tone was brought s rer to the intensity used for the 
positive conditioned. stimu d an absolute differentiation was 
obtained even after a Pp AN three hours between the stimuli. Un- 
fortunately these expeNmgnts were conducted in our old laboratory 
where the effect of inhibitory stimulus was easily disturbed, and 
it must be left t uture to repeat these experiments under more 
perfect conditi n our new laboratory. 


In the continuation of thes Qperiments the intensity of the 
So 


136 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


A great number of experiments have also been carried out on the 
differentiation of pitch. To produce tones of different pitch wind 
instruments were chiefly employed, and the limit to which we were 
able to carry our tests was an interval of one-eighth of a tone (800 
and 812 d.v.). This interval, as has already been shown in the pre- 
vious lectures (p. 125), was differentiated with perfect accuracy by 
the acoustic analyser of the dog. It was not possible to carry our 
determination of the physiological limit of differentiation of pitch 
any further, since we could not be sure that our apparatus would 
accurately reproduce smaller intervals than one-eighth. The re- 
petition of these experiments with the use of pure tones, produced 
by telephones with resonators, showed that this differentiation 
could still be obtained as easily as with the richer tones of wind 
instruments [experiments of Drs. Anrep and Manuilov]. 

The upper limit of the auditory range of the dog was demonstrated 
by Dr. Bourmakin with the use of a Galton’s whistle, and by Dr. 
Andréev with the use of an apparatus producing pure tones, to be 
very much higher than in man. Conditioned reflexes were success- 
fully established to tones of such high pitch as to be quite inaudible 
to man. It was indeed interesting to observe how sharply and 
precisely the dog reacted to sounds which were non-existent to the 
human ear. i 

The differentiation of timbre and the differentiation of direction 
of sounds were also submitted to investigation, bata limits of 
differentiation were determined in the cases of t pecial qualities. 

While discussing the functional capacity acoustic analyser 
we may refer to those experiments in whic Gee de was based. 
not upon the differences in the Me the sounds but upon 
differences in the rhythm of succeges pplications of one and the 
same single sound, The sound in, t ase was produced by a metro- 
nome beating regularly, but at eer rates in the various experi- 
ments. Differentiations of this e were quite easily obtained, but 
the main interest of these ikPstigations lay in the determination of 
the limit of differentiati ich for the dog was found to be far more 
subtle than the discri ion which could be recognized inman. The 
dog was capable Cyry precise differentiation between such rates 
as 100 and 96 Ce per minute even when applied at a very long 


interval after Gage another (t.e. a discrimination of 0024 seconds). 
A few riments have been conducted with the analysers for 
N ermal cutaneous stimuli. Differentiation could easily 


N 
S 


ANALYSIS OF STIMULI 137 


be established for the site of stimulation, and was found to be very 
precise, but no determination was made as to the actual limit. 

Differentiations were obtained also for different types of tactile 
stimulation, namely pressure by smooth and rough surfaces, pressure 
by blunt points arranged in various patterns, and by scratchings 
in various directions with a small brush. Furthermore, differentia- 
tions were also obtained for different degrees of temperature. 

The most perfect analyser in the dog is the chemical analyser of 
smell, but our information concerning it is scanty, mainly on account 
of instrumental difficulties. It has been exceedingly difficult, if not 
impossible up to the present, to obtain the same accuracy in gradua- 
tion of olfactory stimuli as of any other stimuli. It is impossible also 
to limit the action of olfactory stimuli to any exact length of time. 
Furthermore, we do not know of any subjective or objective criterion 
by which small variations in intensity of odours can be determined. 
On this account only a small number of experiments could be 
conducted. JDifferentiations were obtained for various odours— 
camphor, vanillin and many others. ‘Some of these were made into 
positive conditioned alimentary stimuli or positive conditioned 
stimuli for acid, while others were given the corresponding inhibitory 
properties. Experiments upon differentiation were also conducted 
with mixtures of odours, into which some new odour could be intro- 


duced. 

Lastly, some experimental data have been obtained (Morning 
the chemical analyser of taste. In this case mat Rey Were more 
complicated, because the unconditioned stimuli ce usually 
employed in the experiments (food and reje bstances), both 
act on this analyser. In order to study oon of taste in a 
manner similar to that employed for fe lysers, it would be 
necessary to employ an unconditioned ape to some other 
analyser and to use various taste sty i es establishing the cor- 
responding positive and oo. OP ea reflexes. Experiments 
of this kind have not kae fret We adopted, however, 
another method in WERE SS Gym ber of conditioned reflexes were 
established each seo) wn. a different nutritive or rejectable 
substance (meat mor ead crumbs, sugar, cheese, acid, soda, 
etc.), and ane inter and mutual inhibition were then observed. 
The following is a n@ample of such an experiment by Dr. Egorov : 

A tactile stj Se of the skin presented a conditioned stimulus 
to the os lòn of a mixture of meat powder with bread crumbs ; 


X 
SÀ 
N 


Rs 


RS) 


138 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


a rotating object was used as a conditioned stimulus to the consump- 
tion of Dutch cheese. 


Secretion of 
Time Conditioned Stimulus Saliva in Remarks 
drops during 
30 secs. 

3.12 p.m. Tactile 5 
BIPA ERT s 5 All reflexes rein- 
3.50 , Rotating object 8 forced by their re- 
sA Tactile 0:5 spective uncondi- 
44 ,, 2:5 tioned stimuli. 
4.11 _,, a 5 


Since the conditioned stimulus of the rotating object (3.50 p.m.) 
was reinforced by administration of cheese, the above form of the 
experiment does not tell us whether the subsequent diminution in 
the conditioned reflex to the tactile stimulus (t.e. the conditioned 
stimulus for meat and bread) was due to the conditioned stimulus 
of the rotating object or to its reinforcing agent (t.e. cheese). To 
determine this point similar experiments were conducted with the 
use of the conditioned stimuli applied without reinforcement. The 
following is an example of such an experiment. 

Tactile stimulation of the skin usually resulted in this dog in a 
conditioned secretion varying from 5 to 6 drops of saliva during 30 
seconds. The stimulus of the rotating object "A: given prior 
to the application of the tactile stimulus remai Qn inforced. 


Time Conditioned Stimulus Remarks 
3.12 p.m. Rotating object Not reinforced. 
320 Tactile 2 Reinforced after 30 
secs. 
3.00, 7 ; 1 Reinforced after 30 
Qy secs. 
P) | Reinforced simul- 
JADR 3 — taneously with the 
AO A N —- beginning of the 
O 5 tactile stimulus. 
AE iy Q 2-5 Reinforced after 30 
y secs. 
a T a Se) 7 2 Reinforced after 30 


Secs. 


ANALYSIS OF STIMULI | 139 


The very considerable and protracted diminution in the reflex — 
to the tactile stimulus shows that it is the analysing activity of the 
cerebral part of the chemical analyser of taste which is involved in 
this case, since the conditioned stimulus to cheese was in itself 
sufficient without reinforcement to bring about a profound diminution 
in the reflex to the tactile stimulus. 

Another set of experiments was performed [by Dr. Savich] in 
which -“‘ natural ” conditioned reflexes to the appearance of meat 
powder and to the appearance of granulated sugar were employed. 
The dog’s usual diet outside the experiment consisted of oatmeal 
porridge with meat and bread. Later on meat and bread were 
excluded from the meal, but a large amount of sugar was added to 
the porridge. After this diet had been maintained for some time 
the conditioned reflex to the appearance of meat powder was found. 
to be considerably increased, while the reflex to the appearance of 
sugar had disappeared almost entirely. 

Similar experiments, but with greater precision of detail, were 
carried out by Dr. Hasen with conditioned reflexes to rejectable 
substances. He took advantage of two facts which had previously 
been noticed in reflexes to acid, viz., that in most of the cases the 
magnitude both of conditioned and of unconditioned reflexes 
gradually rises towards the end of an experimental day, and that the 
magnitude of the reflexes also rises, up to a certain maximum, in 
the course of a series of experiments conducted on smog days. 
Dr. Hasen modified his experiments in the following er. After 
the first application of the conditioned stimulus, whi as reinforced, 
acid was introduced several times in successiog™pthout the con- 
ditioned stimulus, and finally the condition, imulus was again 
applied. The effect of the conditioned stj on this last applica- 
tion was found always to be ee E mpared with the effect 
on its first application. At a later s in the experiments, which 
were performed on two dogs, the eas was interrupted by 
three intervals, of five days each one series of experiments, and of 
three days each in another g the first interval the one dog 
received in the form of an 4 and the other dog received through 
a stomach tube, a co ble amount of dilute acid. During the 
second interval a solutiewof sodium carbonate was given in a similar 
manner, and duri e third interval the dogs received no injections 
at all. The con ned reflexes and the unconditioned reflexes were 
tested “JS of these intervals. It was found that after the 


X 
N 


g 


RÀ 


140 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


interval in which acid was introduced the magnitude of the reflexes 
remained the same or was but slightly diminished as compared with 
the experiments preceding the pause; after the interval in which 
nothing was administered the magnitude of the reflexes fell con- 
siderably ; and after introduction of soda the reflexes diminished 
still more. In the course of daily experiments a definite amount of 
acid introduced into the mouth of one of these dogs produced from 
the submaxillary gland on an average a salivary secretion of 5:1 c.c., 
while the conditioned stimulus elicited a secretion of 4 drops during 
30 seconds. After the interval during which nothing was adminis- 
tered the figures were 3-8 c.c. and 2 drops respectively; after the 
interval in which sodium carbonate was-introduced 3-7 c.c. and a 
secretion of zero were respectively produced; finally, after the 
interval in which acid was administered, the secretions obtained 
amounted to 4:5 c.c. and 3 drops respectively. Thus it is evident 


that the variations in the chemical composition of the blood which | 


resulted from excess of acid or alkali were differentiated by the 
cerebral termination of the chemical analyser, being manifested by 
an increase or a decrease in the excitability of the central part of 
the analyser. When the animal absorbed an excess of acid the excita- 
bility of the “acid ” part of the chemical analyser increased, with 
the result that on encountering acid from the outer world the organ- 
ism responded by more vigorous motor and secretory reflexes 
directed towards the exclusion of the further intrgd\ction of acid. 
The same, of course, takes place in the case of bive substances, 
a corresponding increase or decrease being o d in the positive 
or negative reactions to different substang different quantities 
of them. It is thus seen that the chen@aVanalyser of taste in its 
central part forms a connecting JK jetween the internal and 
external media of the organism, a ad) by regulating their relations 
one to the other secures a gein constancy of the internal 
medium. 

The experiments whic Gave just been described, and which, 
unfortunately, were not quently repeated, belong to the earlier 
period of our work, he novelty and complexity of the subject 
afforded numero rces of error. Nevertheless, even so, they 
show definitely the study of the chemical analyser of taste, 


though co cy can be conducted successfully by the use of con- 
ditioned r S. 


COMPOUND STIMULI 14] 


With regard to the synthesizing activity of the nervous system, 
as compared. with its analysing activity, little is known up to the 
present. It would, indeed, be futile for us to attempt to discuss - 
the nature of its intimate mechanism : it can only be suggested that, 
in the future, synthesizing activity will be referred to the physico- 
chemical properties of synaptic membranes or anastomosing neuro- 
fibrils. Our immediate task must consist in accumulating experi- 
mental material concerning the synthesizing activity. 

In addition to the formation of the conditioned reflex itself— 
which is, of course, primarily an expression of the synthesizing 
activity, and which has constantly formed the starting-point of our 
investigations—we have also examined the properties of compound 
conditioned stimuli. Compound stimuli were used with either 
simultaneous or successive action of their component parts. 

In the case of compound simultaneous stimuli the following 
i important relations have been observed : 
| When the stimuli making up the compound act upon different 
analysers, the effect of one of them when tested singly was found 

very commonly to overshadow the effect of the others almost com- 
pletely, and this independently of the number of reinforcements of 
the compound stimulus. For example, a tactile component of a 
stimulatory compound was usually found to obscure a thermal com- 
ponent, an auditory component to obscure a visual Pal t, and 
so on. Thus, in the following experiment by Dr. Pa con- 
ditioned reflex to acid was established to a simultaneo iOS on 
of a thermal stimulus of 0° C. and a tactile stimulgWo B the skin. 
Tests were made both of the compound. ERANA f its individual 
components applied singly. 


E Secretion 


Time Conditioned Stim K in c.cs. 
O during 1 minute 

11.15 a.m. Tactile % 0-8 c.c. 

12.45 p.m. Ther 0-0 c.c. 

1.10 p.m. Oo thermal 0-7" ¢.6. 


Another example or be taken from an experiment by Dr. 
Zeliony. A he ae alimentary reflex was established to the 
simultaneous a ation of the tone of a pneumatic tuning-fork, 
.which was g ably damped by being placed within a wooden 


D 
AY > 
~~ 
RY 


142 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


box coated with wool, and of a visual stimulus of three electric 
lamps placed in front of the dog in the slightly shaded room. 


Secretion of 


Time Conditioned Saliva in 
Stimulus drops during 
30 seconds 
3.37 p.m. | Tone +lamps 8 
3.49 _,, Lamps 0 


In the above experiments the action of the thermal and visual 
components by themselves was ineffective, being completely over- 
shadowed by the other respective components. It is obvious, 
however, that the ineffective components in the stimulatory com- 
pounds could easily be made to acquire powerful conditioned 
properties by independent reinforcement outside the combination. 
The true interpretation of the phenomenon which has just been 
described is revealed by experiments in which both components of 
a stimulus belong to one and the same analyser. For example, in 
one experiment there were used as components in a stimulatory 
compound two different tones, which appeared to the human ear to 
be of equal intensity. When the conditioned reflex to the com- 
pound became fully established, the tones sounded separately were 
found to produce an equal effect. In another experiment, a con- 
ditioned reflex was formed to a compound in ae two indi- 
vidual tones were of very different intensities effect of the 


tone of weaker intensity when tested singly ow very small or 
absent altogether. Such a case is ill d in the following 
experiment by Dr. Zeliony. An alimen eflex was established in 


a dog to a compound stimulus m Q of the sound of a whistle 
and the sound of the tone d’ sha neumatic tuning-fork. Both 
these sounds appeared to the gom ear to be of equal intensity, 
and both when tested separately elicited a secretion of 19 drops of 
saliva during one minute Gi addition to this, another compound 
stimulus was establishe e up of the same sound of the whistle 
plus the tone a’ of a g-fork of weaker intensity. When tested 
separately the Kee in this case elicited a secretion of seven drops 
of saliva during Whitty seconds, and the tone only one drop. 

It is ove) from the above experiments that the obscuring of 
one stimu y another belonging to the same analyser is deter- ` 


ENS ifferences in their strength, and it is natural to assume 


COMPOUND STIMULI 143 


that this explanation can be applied also to compound stimuli, the 
components of which belong to different analysers. On this assump- 
tion tactile cutaneous stimuli in our experiments should be regarded 
as being relatively stronger than thermal cutaneous stimuli, and 
auditory stimuli should be regarded as being relatively stronger 
than visual stimuli. The natural deductions from such an assump- 
tion are far-reaching, and it will be necessary at some future date 
to test its validity by the use of stimuli compounded from different _ 
analysers and varying as much as possible in their intensities, a 
very weak auditory stimulus being combined with a very strong 
visual one, and so on. 

The phenomenon in which one stimulus is obscured by another 
in a simultaneous stimulatory compound, when the two stimuli 
belong to different analysers, presents several interesting features. 
The effect of the compound stimulus is found nearly always to be 
equal to that of the stronger component used singly, the weaker 
stimulus appearing therefore to be completely overshadowed by the 
stronger one. If, however, the stronger stimulus is even at long 
intervals of time, repeated singly without reinforcement by the 
unconditioned reflex, while the compound stimulus is constantly 
reinforced, the stronger stimulus by itself becomes completely in- 
effective, whereas in the stimulatory compound there is no diminution 
in its effect. It is evident, therefore, that although the efigé of the 
weaker stimulus when tested singly is invisible, it never s9 plays 
an important part in the stimulatory compound LexGyiments by 
Dr. Palladin]. . 


Another feature of interest has been alre scribed in the 
fourth lecture [experiments of Dr. Perelzw. age 56]. If the 
weak component, which may be even qui éNective when applied 


alone, is repeated at short intervals wWi¢hott reinforcement—.e. is 
extinguished below zero—then both tee mpound. and the stronger 
component undergo secondary inction. In this experiment, 
therefore, the component whic normally of itself apparently 
ineffective becomes temp ny ransformed by the process of 
experimental extinction eS strong inhibitory stimulus. 

The following was ¢bse?ved. in a single, but so far as the experi- 
mental conditions werè”concerned a perfect, experiment. When 
two stimuli blah to different analysers. were first separately 
made into congibiohed stimuli, and only afterwards applied simul- 
taneously sN&rm a compound stimulus, which was repeatedly 


N 
SÀ 
ao 


AČ 
w 


144 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


reinforced, the overshadowing of the one component by the other 
did not occur. From this it may be concluded that in the usual 
case where two hitherto neutral stimuli are used to form a compound 
stimulus, the stronger stimulus at once prevents the weaker from 
forming a corresponding connection with the centre for the uncon- 
ditioned reflex. If, however, this connection has been established 
already, it is not disturbed during the subsequent establishment 
of the reflex to the compound stimulus. The mechanism on 
which the predominance of one component of a stimulatory 
compound over another depends is most probably a form of inhi- 
bition. This matter will be examined in detail in a subsequent 
lecture. 

The cases mentioned above show that a definite interaction takes 
place between different cells of the cortex, resulting in a fusion or 
synthesis of their physiological activities on simultaneous excitation. 
In the case of a compound simultaneous stimulus made up of com- 
ponents of unequal strength belonging to the same analyser this 
synthesis is not so obvious. However, it comes out very clearly 
that even in these cases there is no summation of the individual 
reflex effect of each single component, the effect of the stronger 
component applied singly being equal to that of the compound 
stimulus. 

The phenomenon of synthesis of stimuli belonging to the same 
analyser is much more evident in a modification o A experimental 
conditions which was first used in Dr. Zelion periments, then 
again by Drs. Manuilov and Krylov, and since been widely 
practised. It was noticed that if a conditi reflex to a compound. 
stimulus was established as described aA , it was easy to maintain 
it in full strength and at the sa to convert its individual 
components, which gave a is ect when tested singly, into 


negative or inhibitory stimuli. is result is obtained by constant 
reinforcement of the compoyndtimulus, while its components, on 
the frequent occasions w ey are applied singly, remain without 
reinforcement. The ent can be made with equal success in 
the reverse directio aking the stimulatory compound into a 
negative or ins y stimulus, while its components applied 
singly maintain ir positive effect. We leave the discussion of 
this pheno to Lecture XVI, and shall pass on to consider 
the secon 2 of stimulatory compounds, namely, compound 


success. timuli, 


COMPOUND STIMULI 145 


In this second type of stimulus, in which the component stimuli 
are applied not simultaneously but in succession, the synthesizing 
function of the nervous system is still more obvious. The compound 
stimuli employed were of many different kinds. In some cases the 
compound was made up of successive repetitions of one and the same 
stimulus. For example, a definite tone was repeated three times 
for one second with an interval of two seconds between the first and 
second applications, and an interval of one second between the 
second and third; this rhythm was repeated after a pause of five 
seconds, and was now accompanied by the unconditioned stimulus. 
In other experiments the stimulatory compound was made up of 
three or four different stimuli all belonging to one analyser; the 
stimuli were made to succeed one another in a definité order, being 
each of equal duration, and with equal pauses between them. There 
were used, for example, in one case the four tones C, D, E, F of one 
octave ; and in another case the four stimuli were made up of a 
noise, two different tones and the sound of a bell. Finally, in other 


- experiments there was employed a stimulatory compound composed 


- ferentiated. from ty 


of three or four stimuli belonging to different analysers, each stimulus 
being of equal duration, the pauses between them being also equal. 
Conditioned reflexes were readily obtained to all these different 
compound stimuli, and after a certain amount of practice of the 
reflexes all the individual components when tested singly were 
found to exhibit a positive conditioned effect, which vioi in 
magnitude according to the quality and relative sit of the 
individual stimuli. 

The next step was the introduction of differe odifications of 
these compound stimuli. In the first case rder of the two 
pauses between the repetitions of the tongo evened, the longer 
pause being now made between the seco nd third applications 
instead of between the first and sxe In the remaining cases 
the order in which the different stim were applied was changed, 
either completely by reversing i in the case of the compound 
consisting of four component li by reversing the order of the 
two middle ones. These fied compounds were repeatedly 
applied without reinfo mnt, but when the stimuli were applied 
in their original orde compound was always reinforced, with 
the result that aces the original compounds became dif- 

modifications, which latter finally lost their 
positive pond ued effect and acquired an inhibitory one [experi- 


“ALP. N K 
D 
O 


© 
ww 


AD 


a 
OS 


146 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


ments by Drs. Babkin, Stroganov, Grigorovich, Ivanov-Smolensky 
and Eurman]. 

The following is an example of the different permutations of four 
tones (1, 2, 3, 4) which were successfully differentiated by the dog 
in experiments by Dr. Babkin, the sequence 1234 being the positive 
stimulus and the sequence 4321 the first stimulus to be differentiated ; 
this was followed by development of an absolute differentiation of 
all the remaining sequences. The vibration frequencies of the four 
tones employed were 290, 325, 370 and 413 d.v. respectively. 


1234 2134 3124 4123 
1324 2314 3214 4213 
1342 2341 3241 4231 
1243 2143 3142 4132 
1423 2413 3412 4312 
1432 2431 3421 4321 


In the following experiment [by Dr. Eurman] the positive 
alimentary conditioned stimulus was made up of the flash of an 
electric lamp (L), a tactile cutaneous stimulation (C), and,a sound 
of bubbling water (S), applied in that order, namely, L-C-S. The 
inhibitory compound was made up in the reverse order, namely, 
S-C-L 


Secretion of < 


Time Conditioned Saliva in Remarks 
Stimulus drops durin 


30 O 
r ses ae Or Reinforced. 


PESTS 8-0-2 0 Not reinforced. 

12.13 p.m: L-C-S 7 Reinforced. 

222°) 5 S-C-L 0 Not reinforecd. 
: } Reinforced. 


12327 43 L-C- 
1245 7 X 
Q sta 


The pare experiment by Dr. Ivanov-Smolensky. The 


positive conditigngd alimentary stimulus was made up of a hissing 

sound 2 ), high tone (AT), a low tone (IT), and the sound of a 
buzzer ( lied in that order, namely H-hT-IT-B. The inhibi- 
tory § s was made up with the order of the two middle 
a reversed, namely H-IT-hT-B. 


S 


COMPOUND STIMULI 147 


Secretion of 
Time Conditioned Saliva in Remarks 
Stimulus drops during 
30 seconds 
3.10 p.m. H-hT-IT-B 4 Reinforced. 
tal ie Brae A-IT-hT-B 0 _ Not reinforced. 
s x H-hT-IT-B ; } Reinforced. 
3.05 5; H-IT-hT-B 0 Not reinforced. 
3.46 ,, H-hT-1T-B | 2 Reinforced. 


The formation of these inhibitory reflexes usually required a 
great deal of time: although a relative differentiation could some- 
times be observed quite early, absolute differentiation was obtained 
in extreme cases only after more than one hundred repetitions with- 
out reinforcement. Indeed, in order to obtain a complete differentia- 
tion it was sometimes necessary to proceed by gradual stages, 
commencing with differentiation of comparatively simple compound 
stimuli. It was especially difficult to obtain a differentiation of the 
stimulatory compound of sound, low tone, high tone and buzzer 
from the compound in which the tones were reversed. All the 
differentiations, and especially those exceptionally difficult of for- 
mation, proved very unstable. On the one hand they suffered con- 
siderably from frequent repetition (see Lecture XIV), a, 
other hand any interruption in the work caused them 
to disappear for a time altogether. So soon as com 
tion between such compound stimuli had bee ablished, the 
individual components when tested singly wert fond to have lost 
all their initial positive conditioned effect. 

From a purely physiological point of) , the study of dif- 
ferentiation between a compound sips and its modification, 
which both contain the same elementsJbut in a different order of 


succession, is of considerable inten The experiments show that 


a compound stimulus the comp units of which remain in them- 
selves unaltered, and cons ly most probably affect the same 
cells of the cerebral cor Chaves in different: modifications as a 
different stimulus, orl in these cells now an excitatory process 
and now an inhibjt one. Plainly the experiments reveal the 
great importance eNe synthesizing activity of the cortical cells 
which are ung g excitation. These cells must form, under the 
conditions KP Yiven experiment, a very complicated excitatory 


SÀ 
aO 


4) 
xV 


AD 


148 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


unit, which is functionally identical with the simple excitatory units 
existing in the case of more elementary conditioned reflexes. Such 
active cortical cells must necessarily influence one another and 
interact with one another, as has clearly been demonstrated in the 
case of compound simultaneous stimuli. The mutual interaction 
between the excited or inhibited cortical elements in the case of 
compound successive stimuli is more complicated ; the effect of 
an active cortical cell upon the one next excited varies according to 
the influence to which it was itself subjected by the cell last stimu- 
“lated. In this way it is seen that the order in which a given group 
of stimuli taking part in a stimulatory compound are arranged, and 
the pauses between them are the factors which determine the final 
result of the stimulation, and therefore most probably the form of 
the reaction, and we know already that different intensities of the 
same stimulus can be differentiated very accurately, one definite 
intensity being connected with excitation and another with 
inhibition. . 

It is evident from the description given in the present lecture 
that we must distinguish in animals an elementary, from a higher, 
type of analysis and synthesis. The former, and especially the 
elementary type of analysis, is based principally upon the properties 
and activity of the peripheral receptors of the analysers, while the 
latter is based principally upon those of the ceriral ends of the 

-analysers. Conditioned reflexes afford the s bf investigating 

experimentally the functions both of the ripheral and of the 
central parts of the analysers, and Ea have been 
conducted in our laboratories. The ę{aŅ}ples to:be given during 
the remainder of this lecture will illh@yete the scope of this field of 
animal experimentation. 

In the first example I shal&describe, it was sought to obtain by 
means of conditioned reflefe) experimental data regarding the 
resonance theory of H oltz. We conceived that by partial 
destruction of the or Corti the disappearance of conditioned 
reflexes to certain would possibly be obtained. The following 

| experiment wa cted by Dr. Andréev, who is still working on 
| this subject. ey tones were employed, being produced by two 


sets of apparatus, one giving tones from 100 to 3,000 and the other 
| from 3, 26,000 double vibrations per second. Various con- 
| diti entary reflexes were established in the dog, namely, to 
| t imuli, visual stimuli, and different auditory stimuli (sound of a 


HELMHOLTZ’S THEORY 149 


buzzer, metronome, a noise, and numerous pure tones). The cochlea 
was first completely destroyed on one side. When tested for the first 
time, six days after the operation, all the auditory conditioned reflexes 
were found to be present. A second operation (10th March, 1923) 
was now performed on the cochlea of the other side with the object 
of excluding only the lower part of the tonic scale. The osseous part 
of the cochlea was opened at the junction of its middle and upper 
thirds, and the exposed part of the membranous cochlea with the 
organ of Corti was injured with a fine needle. Already on the tenth 
day after the operation all the auditory stimuli, excepting tones of 
600 double vibrations per second and lower, were found to be fully 
effective. In the course of three months following the operation, 
however, the effect of tones from 600 to 300 double vibrations 
became gradually restored. From numerous tests carried. out from 
this period up to two years after the operation, the upper limit of 
the tones that had disappeared was fixed as somewhere between 309 


. and. 317 double vibrations per second. The lower limit could not 


be determined, since we had no pure tones below 100 double vibra- 
tions per second at our disposal. 

The following two tables are taken from the final period of the 
investigation : 


Secretion of 
Time Conditioned Stimulus | _ Saliva in Rema 
drops during 
30 seconds XO 
Experiment of 17th March, 1924 A 
6.8 p.m. Metronome 13 O t t 
6.19 __,, Tone of 390 d.v. 8 WY ee 
6.25 |. Ss ‘ 8 eaction. 
Experiment of Pest h, 1924. 
5.35 p.m. Metronome Alimentary motor 
0: reaction. X 
Y a Tone of 315 d.v. oe 0 No motor reac-| & 
_ tion. n g 
DA A E Metronome A 5 . Alimentary motor | % £ 
reaction. = 5 
6:24; Tone of 3 V: 0 No motor reac-| 4-9 
> tion. = se 
Goze Met e 8 Alimentary motor 
; reaction 


K 
EES 
aO 


150 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


A histological examination of the cochlea has not yet been carried 
out, the dog still being used for experiments. It is evident, however, 
that the positive results of our experiments successfully replace the 
negative results obtained by Kalischer! with regard to this question. 

Another problem which engaged our attention was whether the 
participation of both hemispheres was necessary for differentiation 
of sounds by their direction. This question was solved by the experi- 
ments of Dr. Bikov. The corpus callosum was severed in a dog, 
and after the animal had recovered from the operation the establish- 
ment of new conditioned alimentary reflexes was begun. Their 
formation presented no special difficulties, and proceeded at the same 
rate as in normal animals. One of the reflexes was established to 
the sound of a whistle, 1,500 double vibrations per second. The 
whistle, which was placed in a cardboard case, was supported on the 
wall on a level with the left ear and at a definite distance from the 
dog. The reflex appeared at the eighth repetition, and attained a 
maximum and permanent strength after 70 repetitions. The 
whistle was then transferred to the right side of the dog, and in this 
position was not reinforced by the unconditioned reflex. By 
repeatedly contrasting the sound from the left with that from the 
right, a differentiation of the direction of the sound was attempted. 
There was, however, not the slightest sign of any differentiation, 
even after 115 applications of the non-reinforced stimulus from the 
right, and we considered it futile to continue beyoyd\Yhis number of 
repetitions. It was concluded that a differenti ot the direction 


of a sound required a united activity of b emispheres. The 
following is one of the most recent ae S: 
etion of 
Time Conditioned Stimulus Saliva in Remarks 
ops during 
$ 30 seconds 
3.40 p.m. Whistle on left,gi 9 ng, 
LEa 3 14 f Reinforced. 
4.20 ",, Whistle on t side 14 Not reinforced. 
SUNN ation) 
4.35 ,, Whis eft side 12 Wess 
My yey | fe) 5 13 i Reinforced. 


ZO; Kane “ Weitere Mitteilung über die Ergebnisse der Dressur als 
physiol. U hg hungsmethode auf den Gebieten des Gehér-, Geruchs- und 
Faria Archiv f. Anatomie und Physiologie, Physiologische Abteilung, 


p- WS 


LOCALIZATION OF SOUNDS 151 


Other differentiations were obtained in this dog easily and 
rapidly, but never one involving localization of the source of a sound. 
In normal dogs the differentiation of sounds by their direction 
presents no more difficulty than any other differentiation, and is 
capable of great precision. 

The experiments described in this and the preceding lectures 
leave no doubt in my mind that all the questions which have hitherto 
been considered as belonging to the domain of the so-called physi- 
ology of the organs of special sense can actually be investigated 
objectively by the method of conditioned reflexes. Are not Helm- 
holtz’s famous “ unconscious conclusions ”—in his Physiological 


` Optics—in reality conditioned reflexes? We may take as an 


example the case of a drawing imitating the visual character of a 
relief. In actual experience, of course, the tactile and muscular 
stimuli proceeding from a relief represent the initial and funda- 
mental stimuli: the visual stimuli provided by its areas of light and 
shade form the signalling conditioned stimuli, which only subse- 
quently obtain a vital significance by being constantly reinforced 
by the tactile and muscular stimuli. In the further course of our 
lectures we shall refer to other examples which can be studied 
objectively in dogs, and which correspond fully with phenomena 
usually described only in connection with the physiology of the 
organs of special sense. 


Ka 
N 


LECTURE IX 


The irradiation and concentration of nervous processes in the cerebral cortex : 
(a) The irradiation and concentration of inhibition within a single analyser. 


Up to the present we have been concerned chiefly with what may be 
called the external aspect of the cortical activity. We have studied 
the general laws governing the establishment of the most complicated 
and delicate correlations between the organism and its environment. 
It was shown that in response to an unlimited number of stimuli 
there can be brought about in the cerebral hemispheres an activity 
which serves to signal the approach of the comparatively small 
number of agencies which are of vital importance to the organism 
either in a favourable or in an injurious sense. It is through the 
hemispheres that corresponding reactions are brought about, thus 
anticipating the actual contact or clash of the organism with those 
agencies. The conditioned significance of stimuli is constantly 
corrected or changed by the hemispheres, so that when a given 
stimulus no longer corresponds to the correlations existing at a given 
time between the organism and its environmen gep a stimulus 
may be rendered temporarily or permanently i tive. Finally, 
we have seen that in harmony with the perpe d varied fluctua- 
tion of nature the hemispheres may invest a role of conditioned 
significance on the one hand the minut ements of the environ- 
ment individually (“ analysis ’’), the other hand various 
complexes compounded of these OS (“synthesis ’’). a 

The present and the tolov nectare will be devoted to the 
study of the internal aspect othe cortical activity, and we shall 
consider first the part p in it by the fundamental nervous 
processes of excitation ibition. 

The first point wi ust receive our attention is the irradiation 
and concentrati Srese two processes. 

It frequentl pens in physiological investigation that where 
a broad grow phenomena is to be examined, the investigation of - 
one of the ers of this group may be more convenient than that 
of oth detailed investigation of this aspect of internal 


NA 
NS 152 


N 


IRRADIATION AND CONCENTRATION 153 


inhibition proved, in the present case, to be the most advantageous. 
At the same time this investigation provided a striking illustration 
of the numerous advantages presented by the cutaneous analyser 
with its extensive and easily accessible receptor surface. 

The experiment which revealed this new and important chapter 
in the physiology of the cerebral hemispheres was conducted by Dr. 
Krasnogorsky, to whom we owe several of the succeeding experi- 
ments. 

Five small A opaiwtines for tactile stimulation of the skin were 
arranged along the hind leg of the dog. The first was fixed over the 
paw, and the remaining four were spaced out up the leg at distances 
of 3, 9, 15 and 22 cms. respectively from the first. Stimulation over | 
the paw was given the properties of an inhibitory stimulus, while 
stimulations at the four upper places were given positive conditioned 
properties. This effect was obtained by the usual method of experi- 
mental differentiation. That is to say, a positive conditioned 
alimentary stimulus was established first of all to a tactile stimula- 
tion of one of the four upper places ; on account of the initial generali- 
sation of the reflex, all the other places as well became spontaneously 
more or less effective upon stimulation. The positive conditioned 
effect of stimulation of the four upper places on the animal’s leg was 
equalized by reinforcement with food, while by the method of contrast 
the stimulation over the paw, which was given always without rein- 
forcement, lost all its positive conditioned properties a uired 
inhibitory ones. In the experiments given below th ditioned 
stimulus was applied in every case during 30 second e place on 
the skin which was stimulated is indicated by a er: 0 repre- 


sents the inhibitory place ; 1, 2, 3, 4 represe positive places 
taken in order. The number of the posta is accompanied 


by a figure giving its distance from the $ ory place. 


It is seen from the table (p. ea thadstimulation of each of the 
three places 4, 3, and 1 produced i eginning identical positive 
conditioned effects, measured. by ps of salivary secretion during 
30 seconds. The four places a 3 and 4 were now separately 
tested at an interval of ex Cone minute after the last of three 
successive applications Oo inhibitory stimulus. The stimulation 
of place 1, nearest Ge inhibitory place, was at the first test 
absolutely ERNE nd. at the second test its effect was barely 
distinguishable (ey an one drop). The stimulation of place 2, 
next in BN m the inhibitory place, gave only half its normal 


154 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


positive conditioned effect, but the stimulation of the remaining | 
places (3 and 4) gave a full or even an increased positive effect. | 
The significance of this experiment is clear. The different sensory | 
places on the skin must be regarded. as projecting themselves upon 


| 


[| / Time-interval | Secretion of 
| between separate | Place of stimulation Saliva in 
l stimuli ; drops during 
I 30 seconds 
| — (22 cms.) 5 
l 10 minutes (15 cms) 5 
| LOS Gs (3 cms.) 5 
| KAER 0 
| ? 0 
| s 0 
| y (3 cms.) 0 
| 1Qu sy; 0 
i] A 0 
| ji 0 
| 3 (9 cms.) 3 
1 y 0 
239 0 
» 0 
s (15 cms.) 6 
l Trace 


p 


(© 

|) 

(on) 

B 

mn 
zoc 


—_ 


SNOSTOSFOCOCOROCOWSOOCONGCOORFOCOOCOF WR, 


— 
lll ell pd CD pol pd pd C el ell oe C pnd pi p C pad pd ern En ene we 


z os 4 (22 cms.) 


corresponding are e cortex of the hemispheres. Therefore it 
is reasonable t aw that the inhibitory process initiated in a 


| definite point o&MiMe cortex by the tactile stimulation of the inhibi- 
| tory place*i iatés into the surrounding region, giving a smaller 


' three successive applications of the inhibitory sti 


IRRADIATION AND CONCENTRATION 155 


A different intensity of the inhibitory process can be produced, 
either by varying the number of successive applications of the 
inhibitory stimulus, of which the after-effects are summated, or 
by varying the interval between the last inhibitory stimulus and 
the application of the positive stimulus. In either case different 
figures are obtained for the salivary reflex, but their general 
significance remains the same. This is shown in the following 
experiment : 


Interval of time Secretion of 
between separate | Place of stimulation Saliva in 
stimuli drops during 
| 30 seconds 
— 1 (3 cms) 7 
10 minutes 4 (22 cms.) 6 
10 5 2 (9 cms.) 6 
10 i‘ 0 1 
+ minute 0 0 
ł ,) 0 l 
tf 39 0 0 
ors 4 (22 cms.) 3 


The inhibitory after-effect was tested in this experiment after a 
shorter time (4 minute), and after four applications of the inhibitory 
stimulus instead of three; under these conditions a congiderable 
inhibitory influence was exerted even upon the posite ace 4, 
which in the previous experiment when tested one ie after 

we gave a full 
reflex. 
If the various positive stimuli are applie Qae and the same 
experiment at different times after the 1 ibitory stimulus, it 
can clearly be brought out how the init py Fe irradiated. inhibi- 
tion gradually frees from its ter gh the remoter areas, and 
subsequently those areas nearer tg the’ cortical point in which the 
inhibition arose primarily.. An ple of such an experiment is 
given in the table shown on 

It is thus seen that the 
after half a minute, re 


est place (4) was free of inhibition 
ter five minutes, and place 1 after ten 


minutes. 
The more freque the differentiation is exercised in the course 
of days or week more rapidly are the more remote places freed 


from the Ww y after-effect, a fact which is sometimes exhibited 


156 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


in the course of a single experiment after the positive and negative 
stimuli‘have been repeated several times. 

It is worthy of note that experiments upon the irradiation of 
inhibition have been successfully demonstrated on numerous occa- 
sions without serious interference by the presence of a stranger with 
the experimenter in the animal’s room, and have even been carried 
out successfully at crowded meetings of the Petrograd Medical 
Society, 


Interval of Secretion of 
time between Place of stimulation Saliva in 
separate stimuli | drops during 

in minutes 30 seconds 


(3 cms.) 
(22 cms.) 
(22 cms.) 
(3 cms.) 
(3 cms.) 


(3 cms.) 


— 
COOorCoorocorcoroorRooOorF 


ee ee 


We have now to inqui e the nature of the recession of 
inhibition from those co Qi points into which it was irradiated. 
Does this represent a d ion or waning of the inhibition in these 
places, or is it som of return or active concentration of the 
inhibition to i Ing-point due to some antagonistic process ? 
In face of the pO wth fact that strengthening of differentiation by 

‘repeated. oS Gost is accompanied by a corresponding shortening of 
the durat nd extent of irradiation of the inhibitory after-effect, 
we ee more inclined to accept the second hypothesis, 


IRRADIATION AND CONCENTRATION : 157 


namely, that we deal with the reverse of irradiation, 7.e. “ concentra- 
tion” of the inhibition toward its initial point of origin in the 
cortex. A number of important facts in support of this conclusion 
will be adduced later. Meanwhile, it may be noted that in Dr. 
Krasnogorsky’s experiments the waning of the inhibition occupied 
several minutes. The actual spread of inhibition, however, pro- 
ceeded with such rapidity in these experiments that Dr. Krasnogorsky 
was unable to follow it. 

The preliminary observations upon the antagonistic processes of 
irradiation and concentration seemed to us of such fundamental 
importance as to demand a thorough investigation by modifying 
and controlling the experiments in all possible ways. Our attention, 
therefore, was next directed to that form of internal inhibition which 
has been discussed under the name of experimental extinction, and 
these experiments were also conducted with the use of tactile 
cutaneous stimuli [experiments of Dr. Kogan]. As a preliminary a 
conditioned reflex to acid was established for a tactile stimulation 
of some place on the skin. While it was still in its initial, generalized 
phase the reflex was equalized as far as possible in strength for 
stimulation of any place on the skin along the whole of the surface 
of one side of the body before the experiments were proceeded with. 
A definite place was then selected to which the stimulus was applied 
for a minute, without reinforcement, and repeated every twe minutes 
until the first zero was obtained. At different inter f time, 
following the first zero of extinction at the give ce, tactile 
stimulations were tried at various other places o skin and the 
resulting secretory effect was compared with th sualone. These 
other places were found also to suffer i on temporarily to 
a greater or less extent. The place ted to experimental 
extinction is termed the place of primgr}=€xtinction,. and the places 
which become involved in the in nig after-effect are termed 
places of secondary extinction. Wearë familiar with this terminology 
from our discussion of the ph enon of experimental extinction 
in the fourth lecture, whe made quite clear that the extinc- 
tive inhibition does no N e itself to the actual point in the 


cortex which was call€@ if*6 activity by the specific external stimulus, 
but irradiates over wide area. We have, in other words, a 
phenomenon ssh to that which has already been discussed in | 


connection Le erential inhibition. 
It "J ial in these experiments to vary the place subjected 


158 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


to the primary extinction. Otherwise, instead of the extinctive 
inhibition—from which the primarily extinguished reflex frees itself 
in a few minutes, or at the most 1-2 hours—there would have 
developed a differentiation with its very stable and lasting form of 
internal inhibition. 


An example of an experiment such as has just been described is 
given in the following table : 


Interval of Secretion of 
Place to which time between Saliva in Percentage 
Date conditioned stimulus zero of drops during of 
was applied extinction and | 1st, 2nd, and | inhibition 
stimulation of | 3rd minutes 
new place 
Dog No. 1. 
10th Nov. | Left shoulder (place 9-2-1 
1913 primarily extin- 2; 0,1 
guished) 5. 1,0 
1, 0; 0 
0 
Left side of chest 1 minute 1,-- 84 
llth Nov. | Left shoulder (place 90 
1913 primarily extin- 3,0, 1 
guished) 2,0,0 
1, 0, 0 
0 
Left thigh 1 minute 8, A 12 
Dog No. 2. eo 
17th Oct. | Left side of neck 0, 2,0 
1913 (place primarily 3, 0,0 
extinguished) xO AOO 
Q 1, 0, 0 
of |: 
Left shoulder 3 utes 0,-- 100 
18th Oct. | Left side of neck K LS Ne a | 
1913 (place arimarily O 4,1,0 
extinguished) 1, 0, 0 
Y ? 
Left MAS 3 minutes 5,-- 45 


It is plain Q 
inhibited. plage 


he further away on the skin the secondarily 
from the place which undergoes the- primary 


inhibition, W eaker is the irradiated inhibitory after-effect. 
mulation is applied to one definite place at different: 


If t 
oS time after the reflex has been extinguished to zero at 


Ñ 
$ 
Ko 

<V 
RNS 


IRRADIATION AND CONCENTRATION 159 
another place, the greater this interval the weaker is the inhibition 
in the secondarily extinguished place. This is borne out by the 
following experiments. 

| Interval of Secretion of 
| Place to which time between Saliva in Percentage 
Date | conditioned stimulus zero of drops during o 
| was applied extinction and | Ist, 2nd, and | inhibition 
| ee of | 3rd minutes 
| new place 
Dog No. 1. 
18th Nov. | Left fore limb (place 9,2,0 
1913 primarily extin- ot 
guished) 1,0,0 
0 
| Left side of abdomen| 60 seconds 8,-- 1 
21st Nov. , Left fore limb (place 92,1 
1913 | primarily extin- IO 
guished) 3,0,0 
1,0,0 
0 . 
| Left side of abdomen | 30 seconds 4,-- 56 
20th Nov. Left fore limb (place 102,1 
1913 i primarily extin- 4 0,1 
guished) oO al 
0 
| Left side of abdomen! 15 seconds 2,- — 80 
| Dog No. 2. A 
28th Nov. | Left thigh (place 10, 4, 1 
1913 primarily extin- 4,1, 
guished) l, 
| Left scapula 15 minutes Q 10 
29th Nov. | Left thigh (place 120 
1913 primarily extin- al ae 
guished) K LAO 
0 
Left scapula 7 Qes 4,-- 56 
30th Nov. | Left thigh (place È STRO 
1913 | primarily extin- O 2,0,0 
guished) NZ 2,0, 0 
0 
| Left IYA O 2 minutes 0,- = 100 


It is obvious aN in this experiment we deal again with the 
concentration of i ition, the inhibition being gradually withdrawn 


from the ROH of its irradiation and concentrated at its | 


> 
n 

. NV | 
RN 


160 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


initial point. Further, it becomes evident that the rate at which 
the inhibition is withdrawn from the places undergoing secondary 
inhibition varies very considerably with individual dogs, so that, 
for example, a process which occupies only one minute in dog No. 1 
requires fifteen minutes in dog No. 2. This, of course, is a fact of 
considerable importance, since it gives a numerical expression to 
one of the most intimate sides of the highest nervous activity. That 
these individual differences in the three animals were not accidental 
is shown by the fact that they remained constant during many 
months in which the experiments proceeded. 

In the experiments of Dr. Kogan it was possible to observe also 
the progress of the spreading of the inhibitory after-effect. I shall 
give the actual experiments in which the degree of secondary inhibi- 
tion corresponding to the different places of the skin was determined 
immediately after complete primary extinction had been obtained : 


Dog No. 2. 
\ Secretion of 
. Place at which . Saliva in Percentage 
Date conditioned stimulus was drops during o 
applied lst, 2nd, and | inhibition 
. 8rd minutes 
25th Jan. Right side of chest 12,1, 4 
1914 2,0,0 
Right hind paw 113, = 
25th Jan. Right side of chest 134, 
1914 
Adjacent place - 100 
26th Jan. Right side of chest Bee $ 
1914 0 
At a distance A 0,- 100 
26th Jan. Right side of 14, 2, 24 
1914 2, 
Right hiag 13, - — 7 
4th Feb. Left. si chest 12, 2,0 
1914 0 
Qiri paw Urca 4 
5th Feb. ide of chest 94, 1,0 
1914 0 
ft scapula 33, -- 64 


Ac N of these results with those of the preceding experi- 
"N he same dog shows clearly that immediately after the full 


IRRADIATION AND CONCENTRATION 161 


development of inhibition for the primarily extinguished place, a 
complete secondary inhibition is obtained only for adjacent places, 
the inhibitory after-effect being absent or hardly distinguishable for 
places more remote. 

It is interesting to note that in the three dogs employed in these 
experiments the effect of stimulating the remoter places immediately 
after the primary inhibition had been produced varied considerably. 
In dog No. 1 not only was the reflex to stimulation of the remoter 
place not inhibited, but it even produced a considerably enhancéd. 
positive effect, whereas dog No. 3 under similar conditions revealed 
a considerable degree of secondary inhibition. This fact, which 
was frequently observed in the experiments both of Dr. Krasnogorsky 
and Dr. Kogan, and which will form the subject of more detailed 
discussion in the eleventh lecture, is well illustrated in the following 
experiments : 


Secretion of 

Saliva in Change in 
drops during strength 
Ist, 2nd, and of reflex 
3rd minutes 


Place at which 
Date conditioned stimulus was 
applied 


Dog No. 1: 


28th Jan. Left side of chest 84, 14, 4 
1914 
At a distance of 3 cm. 3,- = RA 
6th Feb. Right shank 9, 4,1 AN 
1914 i 34,1, 0 (04) 
0 
Right shoulder 144,- - + 60% 
Dog No. 3. S 
5th Feb. | Left hind paw B) } 
1914 
Left fore leg ,- — -43% 
llth Feb. Left shank 04, 2, 0 
1914 0 
Left thigh 0 -100% 


In addition to the fore , Dr. Kogan made a considerable 
number of observations illustrate in detail the length of time 
occupied in his three dog the phases of irradiation and concentra- 
tion of inhibition into tactile cutaneous analyser. These observa- 
tions show that i case of dog No. 1 the phase of irradiation of 


inhibition ocgtyed about twenty seconds, while the concentration 


wn NN i 
oS 
O 


162 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


of inhibition occupied about. seventy-five seconds. In dog No. 2 
the irradiation was complete after three minutes, while the whole 
inhibitory process in both its phases occupied fifteen minutes. In 
dog No. 3 the corresponding figures were four to five minutes for the 
irradiation and. twenty minutes for the two phases taken together. 
It is seen, therefore, that although the duration of the inhibitory 
after-effect differed considerably in the three dogs, the time ratio 
between the phases of irradiation and concentration of the inhibition 
remained almost constant, the phase of concentration taking four or 
five times as long as the phase of irradiation. It must be admitted, 
however, that the data relating to the experiments upon extinction 
cannot be regarded as. absolutely faultless, since the original magni- 
tude of the conditioned reflexes sometimes varied considerably in 
different experiments, and in some cases the causes of these variations 
could not be definitely determined. 

An experimental investigation upon the irradiation of con- 
ditioned inhibition was carried out by Dr. Anrep, who also made 
use of the cutaneous analyser. A generalized tactile cutaneous 
reflex was first established, and its strength was equalized so that 
the stimulation of any place resulted in the same intensity of reflex 
response. The tactile stimulation of one definite place was now 
repeatedly combined with a stimulus for another analyser (the sound 
of a buzzer), and in this combination the stimulus remained without 
reinforcement by the unconditioned reflex. The lt was that the 
stimulus became negative or inhibitory when liéd in the com- 
bination, although it retained its full posit; ffect when applied 
singly. The places on the skin which wigs ile are indicated. 
by numbers: 0, between the neck oo st, in combination with 
the buzzer, represented the area s to the conditioned inhibi- 
tion. On the left side the foil places were used for positive 
tactile conditioned reflexes: Kon the fore limb; 2, on the fore 
paw ; 3, on the middle of th est; 4, on the pelvis; 5, on the 
thigh ; and 6, on the hi w. The experiments were conducted 
in the following mann a given experiment one positive place 
was first tested, in W to determine the normal magnitude of the 
conditioned epe, The inhibitory combination was now 
applied, and t the positive place was tested again at different 


intervals efGyme. This procedure was performed in separate 
experime r all the remaining positive places. The positive and 
_ the Ç bve conditioned stimuli were allowed to act in every case 


N 


+ 


C 


IRRADIATION AND CONCENTRATION 163 


during 30 seconds. The following table summarizes the series of 
experiments on this animal : 


Percentage of inhibition observed at 


Number of the place different intervals of time 


stimulated - - 
0” 15” 30” 45” y 60” 120” 180” 
2 30 54 29 19 10 
1 45 66 39 22 13 
0 (place primarily 
inhibited) 91 75 50 37 17 
3° _ 52 58 69 57 45 34 13 
4 37 65 39 22 13 
5 27 57 23 17 1] 
6 19 26 31 22 20 10 7 


The first vertical column gives the number of the places stimu- 
lated ; the succeeding vertical columns indicate the magnitude of 
inhibitory after-effect corresponding to these places. The upper hori- 
zontal row gives the length of the interval from the end of the inhibitory 
stimulus to the beginning of the stimulation of any given place. 

It is thus seen that in the case of conditioned inhibition the 
inhibitory process initiated at a definite point spreads over the whole 
analyser, diminishing in intensity with distance from the primarily 
inhibited place, and reaching its maximum strength for the whole 
analyser only by the end of a period of 30 seconds ; Avni the 
inhibitory process undergoes a gradual diminution in simul- 
taneously over the whole analyser. The only exceyt$xf which must 
be made to this general rule is that at the plac ch is subjected 
to the primary inhibition the intensity of th itory after-effect 
does not increase gradually, but is maxi m the start. 

Of course, in these experiments Oy s essential to take most 


rigid precautions to avoid casual extra, s stimuli, since these would 
invariably exert a disturbing influgnce’causing sometimes inhibition 
of the positive reflexes and so Bhs dis-inhibition. Dr. Anrep’s 
experiments were, however ed in our special laboratory. 
The three series of e fments, upon the movement of dif- 
ferential inhibition, e Kental extinction and conditioned inhibi- 
tion, all clearly dem ate that the inhibition first spreads from 
its point of initiat@a over the whole analyser and then gradually 
recedes. The bls of this process, however, are seen to differ 
considerably, dceording to the type of internal inhibition. In Dr. 
ee g yp 


N 
SÀ 
aO 


a) 
xI 


S 


164 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


Krasnogorsky’s experiments on differential inhibition the irradiation 
of inhibition occurs instantaneously, and the inhibitory after-effect 
attains its maximum after a zero interval: it is only the concentra- 
tion of inhibition in this case which proceeds in a measurable interval 
of time. In Dr. Kogan’s experiments with extinctive inhibition the 
irradiation of inhibition was progressive, and the nearer places under- 
went the maximum secondary inhibition much sooner than the more 
remote places. The phase of concentration in the extinctive inhibi- 
tion, however, was four to five times longer in duration than the 
phase of irradiation. It is possible that this difference of rate 
between the irradiation of these two forms of inhibition depends 
upon the intensity of inhibition developed. Dr. Krasnogorsky 
usually repeated the primary inhibitory stimulus several times, 
regardless of the fact that it produced its full effect at once, while 
Dr. Kogan confined himself to the first zero. The differences in the 
case of conditioned inhibition are much more complicated and 
important. Dr. Anrep showed that the conditioned inhibition, like 
the differential inhibition in Dr. Krasnogorsky’s experiments, 
irradiated simultaneously, although in a varying degree, over the 
entire analyser ; after this, in contradistinction from Dr. Krasno- 
gorsky’s results, the inhibition increased gradually up to a certain 
maximum strength during a definite period, and at all places simul- 
taneously. The gradual diminution in intensity of the inhibition 
also occurred simultaneously over the entire an r. Thus con- 
ditioned inhibition differs from differential } ition and from 
experimental extinction in that the entire ser simultaneously 
reveals, though in different degrees, an } itory after-effect; an 
actual progression or regression of th imum inhibitory after- 
effect cannot be observed. 


The experiments by Dr. Seas in detail the folowing 


phenomenon, already indicate part by some previous workers. . 
He observed that both positive’ and negative conditioned reflexes 
established to tactile sti ion of different places on one side of 
the body are reproduge taneously and with extreme accuracy to 
tactile stimulation IN; Corresponding places on the other side. The 
irradiation and tration of the inhibitory after-effect once ini- 
tiated on one E i eee and equally involves the other side. 
This interest fact will be discussed further on in these lectures. 

A seriG@)o experiments analogous to those carried out on the 


BANS. of inhibition over the cutaneous analyser were conducted 
a 
JV 
S 


IRRADIATION AND CONCENTRATION 165 


with the acoustic analyser, and these also confirmed the hypothesis 
‘that the peripheral end of the analyser can be regarded as projected 
geometrically upon the cortex of the hemispheres. In these experi- 
ments different musical tones, the beat of a metronome, a-d a 
hissing sound served as conditioned stimuli [experiments of Drs. 
Manuilov and Ivanov-Smolensky]. The reflex to one of these 
conditioned stimuli was subjected to primary experimental extinc- 
tion, and the effect upon the reflexes to the remaining stimuli was 
observed. The following is an account of the experiments of Dr. 
Ivanov-Smolensky on this subject. 

Separate conditioned alimentary reflexes were established, and | 
equalized, to four different tones produced by a Max-Kohl’s tone- | 
variator. These tones were chosen in two pairs, separated by an | 
interval of Approximately three octaves—the lower tones having | 
vibration frequencies of 123 and 132 respectively, and the upper 
tones of 1036 and 1161 respectively. Similar reflexes were also 
established. to a hissing sound, and to the sound of a metronome 
beating at a rate of one hundred per minute. In the course of the 
experiments one of the conditioned reflexes was extinguished to 
zero, and then all the remaining reflexes were tested in different 
experiments, either immediately or after intervals of 1, 3, 5, 7, 10, 

12 or 15 minutes. All the reflexes were found to undergo secondary 
inhibition, but in a varying degree. A part of the results, of these 
experiments is given in the table on page 166. ~\ 

The table shows that on the extinction of one of AN belong- 
ing to the lower pair the reflex to the other tone e same pair 
reaches the maximum inhibition somewhat agai remains 
at this maximum longer, and recovers fro inhibition more 
slowly, than the reflexes to either of her tones. On the 
extinction of one of the high tones, thg r to the other high tone 
reaches the maximum inhibition m apidly, remains longer at 
this level, and recovers from the inhNeftory after-effect more slowly 
than the reflexes to either of t, wer tones. On the extinction 
of any of the tones the secon hibition of the reflexes to hissing 
and to the metronome is INA espects less than that of the reflexes 
to the tones. On th N hand, after extinction of the reflex to 
hissing or to the mekgydome an intense secondary inhibition of all 
the reflexes to ton obtained. 


It is obvio at only the experiments with extinction of 
tones can beGoraht forward. as evidence of a definite geometrical 


N 
S 
> 
N 


ge 
Rey 


166 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


projection of the acoustic peripheral receptor upon the cortical part 
of the analyser. 

The fact that extinction of the reflexes to the metronome and to 
hissing produces intense inhibition of the reflexes to tones, whereas 
extinction of the reflexes to tones results only in comparatively 
weak inhibition of the reflexes to the metronome and hissing may 
perhaps be accounted for by the greater strength and by the more 
mixed character of the latter stimuli. 


Interval after the beginning of 
Primarily Secondarily the conditioned inhibition 
extinguished extinguished : 
sees rofen 0 | | 3 | 6 | 1 107 | 12’ | 15’ 
Percentage of inhibition 
a a ce ee 
Conditioned reflex 95 |100 [100 | — |100 | — | 65 
ndk orod to 132 d.y. 
onditiono Conditioned reflex 60 | 86 | 94 | — | 53 | — | 45 
reflex to 1234 to 1161 div. 
d.v. | condone reflex ape ih iB Fare AA Oe fata E 
to hissing sound 
Conditioned reflex 100 | 95 100 | — | 91 | — | 80 
eit to 1036 d.v. 
Conditioned Conditioned reflex 80 |100 | 90 | — | 80 | — | 46 
reflex to to 123 d.y. 
1161 d.v. | comationed reflex ED 6882 Sy Oh 
to metronome 
Pa Bee 9 | Conditioned reflex PA ah fs al 
reflex to | = to metronome 
d.v. 
Conditioned | Conditioned reflex TOi 60 P= 
reflex to me- to 199 dv 
tronome | pE 


It is highly probable that irr Siation and concentration of inhibi- 
tion, which takes place as dela in the cutaneous and acoustic 
analysers, follow a similar Q@yse also in the case of other analysers. 
However, the experim determination of the relationships in 
these cases is at PENN tremely difficult or even impossible owing 
to purely technic O acles. If in the future these obstacles should 
be overcome RAY laws governing the spread of inhibition be 
determined ,fgpall the: analysers, an. experimental method would 
be provid f the study of the internal structure of-the different 
analysen€. 
\S 


S 


+ 
a 


S 


LECTURE X 


Irradiation and concentration of nervous processes in the cerebral hemispheres 
(continued): (b) Irradiation and concentration of inhibition over the entire 
cortex ; (c) Irradiation and concentration of excitation. 


In the last lecture it was shown how internal inhibition, initiated in 
a single definite point of the cortical part of an analyser, rapidly 
irradiates. over the whole analyser, after which it is slowly concen- 
trated upon its initial point. Furthermore, it was found that the 
progress of irradiation of internal inhibition can be traced step by 
step within the analyser. 

In the present lecture we shall trace the progress of inhibition 
from one analyser to another over the whole cerebral cortex. Experi- 
ments bearing upon this process have been conducted for all the 
forms of internal inhibition recognized up to the present. 

It was mentioned in the description of differential inhibition that 
when the inhibition is initiated in one analyser it eet in 


other analysers as well, in the form of an inhibitory aft t Ain 
a series of experiments by Dr. Beliakov it was f that dif- 
ferential inhibition of a small intensity does TEN in € in its after- 


primarily developed, but that when the inten of the inhibition is - 
great the inhibitory after-effect involve analysers as well. 
However, secondary inhibition of oth Gri is in every case 
much weaker than that of the analys which the differentiation 
was primarily developed. A aon will be described 
to illustrate these relations : 

A conditioned aliment 
4,000 d.v. produced by a 


effects any other analyser than the one in as inhibition was 


was established to a tone of 
n’s whistle ; from this a pitch of one 
semitone lower was tiated. A second positive conditioned 
alimentary reflex was w#ablished to a noiselessly rotating object. 
The reflex to the*&@itory stimulus gave an average secretion of 
11-12 drops duri€g) 0 seconds, and the reflex to the visual stimulus 


gave an wae 7-8 drops. The results of a series of experiments 
167 


, AO 
Ix% 


& 
sO 


168 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


upon the irradiation of differential inhibition are illustrated by the 
following table : 


Salivary 
Stimulus applied Secretion in 
during 30 seċonds drops during 
| 30 seconds 


Time 


Experiment of 8th June, 1909. 


2.5 p.m Tone of 4000 d.v. 12 
OD nnd, Semitone lower 0 
235, 3 : Hy) 
239z Tone of 4000 d.v. 5 
2:50: 5, s 2 11 
R Hr Semitone lower 0 
RSs es: A n 0 
Pee tess Rotating object 7 
3:20". s 7 7 
Experiment of 11th June. 
1.35 p.m Tone of 4000 d.v. 12 
LADAR > 5 11 
DORA Semitone lower 0 
2.2 29) 39) 33) 0 
rE i a 0 
2.6.5) 3 i) 3 0 
ay Se Rotating object 3 
DIB, j 7 7 
Experiment of 14th June. O 
1.45 p.m. Tone of 4000 d.v. © 
PA EENS Semitone lower & 0 
PADAS aa 7 is 0 
2.4 9? 39) 339 xO 0 
2.6 ” ” 0 
D en Tone of Gr 1 
2.30. pen i 11 


The significance of’th experiments is obvious. After the 

inhibitory semitone ha en repeated twice with an interval of 

3 minutes between successive repetitions, the positive tone 

tested half a mi N iter had lost more than 50% of its effect, 

while the view fl showed no diminution in its effect at all 
8 


(experiment 6 th June). After a greater summation of the inhibi- 
tory after, by four successive repetitions of the semitone with 
interva minutes between them, the reflex to the visual stimulus 


YV 


S 


~ 


IRRADIATION AND CONCENTRATION 169 


tested half a minute later (in the experiment of 11th June) showed a 
diminution of 60%, while the inhibition of the reflex to the auditory 
stimulus (tested in the experiment of 14th June) was nearly complete. 
_ Similar results are obtained with extinctive inhibition, as shown 
in a series of experiments by Dr. Gorn. In these experiments, 
owing to the introduction of certain modifications into the technique, 
the irradiation of the inhibitory process was even more clearly 
exhibited, especially as regards the earlier removal of its after-effect 
from the secondarily involved analysers. The following are some of 
the experiments : 
Separate conditioned alimentary reflexes were established in a 
dog to the tone c’ sharp of a pneumatic tuning-fork and to flashes of 
three electric lamps, each of 16 candle-power. 


Stimulus | 
Time applied Salivary Secretion in drops 
during during 30 seconds 
30 seconds 


Experiment of 15th December, 1911. 


1.55 p.m. Light 9. 

1 58 ” 3 4} 

2AA athers 3 Trace : Not 

2A Mae k= 0 í reinforced 
2.7 ” 33 | 

Zak. ,, T Trace | 


«O 


Experiment of 26th January, 1912. 4 
È 


217 pane Tone 10 Rein 
23285 Light 8 
2.35 ” ” 3} xO 
AIET Aa 4 (No 
246; Pe 1 reinforced 
2.49 ,, 99 g 
2:62 4G, £ 
2.524 ,, Tone ©: Reinforced 
Experiment o October, 1911. 

1.25 p.m. 12 Reinforced 
ESY apr t EPS. 
oe 3) 2? a Not 

į a3 K z reinforced 


1 5 © Tone 1 Reinforced 
\ 


wo PROPERTY OF 


aha CHICAGO COLLEGE OF OPTOMETRY 


8 drops, a prolongation of the interval on purpo 


170 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


The conditioned reflex to light was in these experiments subjected 
to extinction, and the inhibitory after-effect was tested upon the 
reflex to the auditory stimulus. The reflex to the visual stimulus 
itself, after extinction up to the point of two consecutive zeros, 
showed the first signs of spontaneous recovery only after an interval 
of 234 minutes (15th December, 2.31 p.m.). The reflex to the 
auditory stimulus, on the other hand, when tested immédiately after 
a similar extinction of the visual reflex was diminished in strength 
by only 60% (26th January, 1912, 2.524 p.m.), and when tested in 
the third experiment after a pause of 24 minutes it was quite free of 
any inhibitory after-effect (27th October, 1911, 1.52 p.m.). It is 
thus seen that the inhibition irradiated from the visual to the 
acoustic analyser—never, however, producing a full inhibitory after- 
effect, and quickly retreating from it. That the rapid removal of 
the inhibitory after-effect from the acoustic analyser in these experi- 
ments was not due to a smaller intensity of the primary inhibition 
within the visual analyser is proved by the following details. In 
the case of the visual stimulus the interval between the repetitions 
(24 minutes) led to a progressive diminution of the reflex through all 
the stages of extinction, whereas in the acoustic analyser an identical 
interval sufficed for a complete restoration of the reflex. Moreover, 
when in the second experiment the extinction of the visual reflex 
had led to a reduction of the secretion to 34 drops as against the usual 
o 74 minutes 
the strength 


served only to check the progress of the dimin 
of the reflex, and did not result in any ciable restoration 
(2.43 p.m.), while the acoustic analyser after that interval 
already completely free from any inhi y after-effect. Neither 
was the difference between the res of the primarily and the 
secondarily extinguished reflex to any peculiarities of the 
cortical elements of the visual auctor cells, as was proved by 
experiments in which the tone Was subjected to the primary extinc- 
tion, and the effect of s ary inhibition was observed on the 
visual analyser. The ns between the rates of recovery from 
the inhibition in the rily and secondarily extinguished analysers 
in these experi ere exactly the same as before, and there is 


no need, therefd o give separate tables. It can now reasonably 
be assumech Got in the secondarily extinguished. analyser we deal 
r the x <i of the irradiated inhibition, and that its recessional 


RSX 
2 
Q 
AN 
RN 


egins at the periphery and proceeds towards the point 


IRRADIATION AND CONCENTRATION 171 


the single cutaneous analyser (concentration of inhibition). 

! Experiments on irradiation of extinctive inhibition over the 
| entire cortex of the hemispheres were performed with a great number 
| of variations. For example, two conditioned reflexes were developed 
! in the analyser which was subjected to primary extinction (e.g. 
| visual analyser), and the inhibitory effect of experimental extinction 

, of one of these reflexes was observed upon both of them and also 
upon reflexes belonging to other analysers. Recovery from the 


of initiation of thé inhibition exactly in the same manner as within 


inhibitory after-effect was found first’ of all in secondarily extin- 
guished reflexes belonging to other analysers. Shortly afterwards 
recovery occurred in the secondarily extinguished reflex belonging 
to the visual analyser itself, and finally, but after a much longer 
time, the reflex which underwent the primary extinction became 
freed from the inhibitory after-effect. The difference in the length 
of time necessary for the recovery of the two reflexes belonging to 
the primarily inhibited visual analyser clearly points to a regional 
localization of reflexes within the analysers, such as was already 
suggested in the preceding lecture. 

Experiments performed with irradiation of conditioned inhibition 
gave, on the whole, very similar results. One definite additional 
stimulus was used as a common conditioned inhibitor for conditioned 
reflexes belonging to different analysers, each of the conditioned 

i stimuli in turn being repeated with the additional N and 
remaining in the compound always without reinforce > so that 
the compound conditioned stimulus developed inhi ye properties 
The actual experiments were conducted as follow st one of the 
conditioned stimuli was applied, and its secr XD effect recorded. 
Next the conditioned inhibitor was TE mbination with the 
same or another conditioned sion dN the combination was 


repeated several times in succession. ally, the effect of the first 
conditioned stimulus applied singl again tested at different 
intervals of time after the last ap ion of the inhibitory combina- 
tion. When the positive refle d was the one employed in the 
| inhibitory combination, it ound to be considerably inhibited, 
and was only slowly f Qm the inhibitory after-effect ; when, 
however, the inhibitor bination was made with a stimulus from 


another ana OE eon undergoing the test was only slightly 


inhibited, and raf\Ny recovered its original strength. It is thus 
` seen that © ory after-effect was very powerful and prolonged 


D 
PX 
<V 


se 
O) 


172 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


in the analyser of the reflex subjected to the primary conditioned 
inhibition, but was only weak and of short duration in other 
analysers. 

In a series of experiments conducted by Dr. Degtiareva separate 
conditioned alimentary reflexes were established to a metronome 
(M) and to flashes of electric lamps (L). A noiselessly rotating 
object (R) was used as a conditioned inhibitor common to both 
positive stimuli. The application of the conditioned stimuli both 
singly and in the inhibitory combination was always continued 
during one minute, and the amount of saliva secreted during this 
time was recorded. The following experiments give the final 
result of the determination of the minimal interval which was 
necessary for complete recovery of the conditioned reflexes from ` 
their secondary inhibition. 


Salivary 
Time . Stimulus Secretion in 
drops during 
one minute 


Experiment of 13th May. 


4.20 p.m. M 11 

4.26 ,, M+R 3 

4,29 _,, He 0 

7 o ya j 0 

4:35 _,, A 0 

4.38 ,, s A 
4.46 ,, M ee» 


Experiment of 16th CO 
4.16 p.m. | M 12 
4.22 ,, L 
4.25 _,, 


4 
0 
4.28 ,, 3 0 
i” | OS 
4.34 ,, 0 
4,351 ,, M 11 


These experimen ow that after five repetitions of the inhibi- 
tory combinati Which the metronome formed part, the minimum 
period ba Hy a Ve the complete recovery of the positive reflex to 
the metron was 7 minutes (experiment of 13th May, 4.46 p.m.). 
On the hand, the minimum period required for the complete 


eens of the reflex to the metronome after five repetitions of 


N 


S 


IRRADIATION AND CONCENTRATION 173 


the inhibitory combination of rotating object plus visual stimulus 
was only 15 seconds (experiment of 16th May, 4.35} p.m.). 

Finally, we have studied the irradiation of that form of internal 
inhibition which develops during the first phase of reflexes with a 
long delay. Owing to the peculiar character of this type of internal 
inhibition, occurring as part of a diphasic phenomenon, it might 
naturally be expected to exhibit peculiarities with regard to its 
after-effect, and such was actually found to be the case. The results 
obtained in experiments with different dogs varied considerably, 
and only in a certain number of cases could the irradiation of the 
inhibition easily be followed over the entire cortex. The experi- 
ments were performed in the following manner. The stimulus for 
the delayed reflex was continued only during the first part of the 
inhibitory phase of the delayed reflex, and was then followed either 
immediately or after some interval of time by a conditioned stimulus 
from another analyser ; the strength of this stimulus had previously 
been determined, and was now again tested to find the magnitude 
of the inhibitory after-effect. Some of these experiments are given 
below. 

Two conditioned reflexes delayed for 30 seconds were established, 
the conditioned stimulus being in the first case flashes of electric 
lamps, and in the second tactile stimulation of the skin; a third 
conditioned reflex to a metronome was delayed for 3 minutts; the 
inhibitory phase of this reflex was equal to 14-2 minut S three 
reflexes were established with the help of acid. Q 


cretion in drops 


Time | Stimulus | Saliv 


Experiment of 26th Ja 


3.24 p.m. ‘Tactile stimulation uring 30”, 9 
SAL -,; Metronome (applied duri During Ist 30’, 0; 2nd 
only one minute) ® 30”, 
Le beads . Tactile stimulation Q During 30”, 4 
Experime th January. 
3.20 p.m. Flashes ‘of NK During 30”, 7 
3.36 ,, Metronomg, ( ed during During Ist 30”, 0; 2nd 
only o ute) 30”, 1 
337, | Flashes_of ‘erp During 30”, 2 
+ 


The result Oito definite. The inhibition evoked by the 
metronome, q first stage of its action has irradiated from the 


N 
SÀ 
aO 


174 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


acoustic analyser into both the visual and tactile cutaneous analysers, 
diminishing their reflexes by 60-70%. 

In another dog the results were almost completely reversed. 
The conditioned stimuli applied immediately after the inhibitory 
phase of the delayed reflex produced an increased positive effect. 
The reason of this difference was found without difficulty. In the 
first dog, when an interval of 2 minutes was introduced between the 
isolated action of the metronome and the application of the succeed- 
ing conditioned stimulus, the excitation phase of the delayed reflex 
never appeared during these 2 minutes. In other words, the inhibi- 
tory phase of the delayed reflex in this dog was effectively isolated 
from the excitatory phase. On this account, under the conditions 
of the experiments, the inhibition became obvious in its after-effect 
upon both the visual and tactile stimuli. In the second dog, on the 
other, hand, when. the same interval was introduced between the 
isolated action of the metronome and the application of the succeed- 
ing conditioned stimulus, the active phase of the reflex to the 
metronome became revealed during the interval. In this dog, 
therefore, under the conditions of the experiment, the effect of the 
positive conditioned stimuli falling within the positive phase of the 
delayed reflex was not diminished but considerably increased on 
account of summation of the two reflexes. In this second dog the 
excitatory process appeared earlier and was more powerful; in 
other words, the separation of the inhibitory Q f the delayed 
reflex from the excitatory phase was not comp t is interesting 
to note in this connection that in the first e inhibitory process 
in general predominated over the excitat e. 

In this and the preceding lectur ave adduced numerous 
experiments illustrating the spr the inhibitory after-effect 
over the cerebral cortex, and. ce e that to some readers I have 


seemed to over-stress this poi However, such multiplication of 
experiments was. necessary_jn‘érder to emphasize sufficiently how 


often this phenomenon $ in simple and pure forms. The facts 
hitherto considered only the fundamental interrelations 
between the inhibit nd excitatory processes revealed by special 


methods of e ntation, and often merely owing to special 
individual poo Nadities of the animal. In many cases these funda- 
mental int ations are obscured by various accessory elements 
which ro? the whole process much more complex. 


Q very beginning of our investigation of the irradiation of 
\S 
Y 

© 
W 


IRRADIATION AND CONCENTRATION 175 


internal inhibition we were struck by the paradoxical and un- 
expected results of certain experiments [Dr. Krasnogorsky]. Dr. 
Krasnogorsky’s. experiments on the irradiation and concentration 
of differential inhibition within the cutaneous analyser were described 
in the preceding lecture (page 153). The preliminary test of a con- 
ditioned reflex to tactile stimulation of the skin at a place situated 
at a distance of 22 cm. from the place primarily inhibited elicited 
8 drops of salivary secretion during 30 seconds, while a visual reflex 
gave a secretion of 5 drops. One minute after the last of three 
successive stimulations of the inhibitory place the visual reflex was 
found to be reduced to zero; in.other words, the inhibitory after- 
effect spreading from the tactile into the visual analyser had com- 
pletely overshadowed the excitatory effect of the visual stimulus. 
After ten minutes’ interval the inhibitory place was again stimulated, 
now four times in succession, and on testing the tactile reflex at 
the place 22 cms. away, one minute after the last inhibitory stimulus, 
it was found to be completely free from inhibition. 

Similar phenomena have been recorded in experiments on con- 
ditioned inhibition conducted by Dr. Chebotareva. Several con- 
ditioned reflexes were established in a dog to stimuli belonging to 
different analysers. A conditioned reflex to a metronome, when 
applied in conjunction with a conditioned inhibitor in ee form of a 
visual stimulus, failed to elicit a single drop of saliva. Mies or 


two later the metronome applied singly (when, of c Ait was 
reinforced) produced its full secretory effect. Condi 4 reflexes 
to a tactile stimulus and to an odour of aN ever, when 


tested shortly afterwards were still N e eae ea 


inhibited 

It appears, therefore, from these NG that, contrary to 
our expectation, the reflexes R the inhibitory after- 
effect in the primarily inhibited anal sooner than in any other. 
However, on careful consideration ® records of the development 
of the various reflexes in the an , it became obvious that these 
apparently anomalous resulgs obtained only in cases when the 
secondarily inhibited refl elonging to other analysers were 
in the case of. old reflexes, when they 
had not been exercise a considerable time or were weak through 
having been sad with the help of stimuli of small intensity. 
Hence it follow t if a certain area which was originally under 
the BENS% ibition has become free from the inhibitory after- 


> 
ao 


© 
ww 


A 
SO 


inhibitory after-effect as tested by the a 


a 
OS 


176 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


effect, it does not necessarily mean that the inhibition is also with- 
drawn from the regions surrounding this area : under certain definite 
conditions the process of excitation in some areas of the cortex may 
prevail over the co-existing and somewhat weakened inhibition of 
the surrounding areas. It is, indeed, our experience that conditioned 
reflexes in which the phase of initial generalization has not been 
succeeded by sufficient specialization, as well as reflexes of small 
intensity of excitation, become very easily disturbed, both by 
external and by internal inhibition. Those strong conditioned 
reflexes in which the specialization has been carried to a high degree, 
on the other hand, are not so easily influenced by external or internal 
inhibition. The question of stability and of resistance of strong and 
well-developed positive and negative conditioned reflexes will be 
considered in the thirteenth lecture. 

In order to elucidate these exceptional phenomena, which 
appeared to contradict the more general rule for the irradiation and 
concentration of inhibition, the following experiments were specially 
conducted by Dr. Pavlova. 

Conditioned reflexes were established to several stimuli belonging 
to different analysers, particular attention being directed to main- 
taining an equal number of repetitions of all the various stimuli, 
always, of course, with their reinforcement. After the maximum 
intensity of every one of the reflexes had been reached, a conditioned 
inhibition was developed for one of the reflexes b sual method 
of non-reinforcement of the corresponding sti hen applied. 
in combination with the conditioned inhibit he strengthening 
of the conditioned inhibition was carrie he point when the 
tion of the correspond- 
es. Of course, during the 
inhibition all the positive 


ing stimulus became limited to two 
period of development of the co 

reflexes continued to be ing 
this stage of the experiment all tHe other stimuli, which up till then 
had not been combined wi he conditioned inhibitor, were now 
for the first time teste ompany with the inhibitor. It was 
found that these refle o, with only one exception, became free 
of inhibitory after-af%ct two minutes after initiation of the con- 
ditioned inhibit The exception in question was a weak 
conditioned * Gitex to the appearance of a somewhat dim light, 


which wad Ip d to be still inhibited for some time after the 


recor the others. From these experiments it becomes clear 


S 


S 


an equal number of times. At 


IRRADIATION AND CONCENTRATION 177 


that one and the same intensity of inhibition, when it had ceased 
to produce any diminution of the stronger reflexes, nevertheless 
exercised a definite action upon the weaker ones. 

This dependence of the inhibitory after-effect upon the intensity 
of the secondarily inhibited reflexes is only one of several factors 
complicating the otherwise smooth progress of irradiation and con- 
centration of inhibition. In the next lecture we shall describe 
another factor of much greater importance, producing a more 
profound disturbance in the progress of irradiation and concentration. 


We shall turn now to a discussion of the experimental evidence 
with regard to the after-effect of the excitatory process ; this has 
not, however, yet been studied to so great an extent as the after- 
effect of the inhibitory process. 

The first experiments upon the after-effeet of excitation were 
conducted by Dr. M. Petrova on similar lines to the early experi- 
ments on the irradiation and concentration of inhibition. Five 
separate apparatuses for tactile stimulation of the skin were arranged 
at equal distances apart along the hind limb of a dog, the first of the 
series being placed over the paw and the fifth over the pelvis. In 
one animal the tactile stimulation of the paw (No. 1) served to evoke 


evoke a conditioned alimentary reflex. Owing to initi efaliza- 
tion of the reflex, the stimulation of the remaining p (Nos. 2, 3, 
4 and 5) also evoked at first positive alimentary r es or defence 
reflexes to acid. These places, however, my became dif- 
ferentiated by the method of contrast, givi ally a zero effect, 
so that only the stimulation of the paw r ned positive. At the 
beginning of each experiment the tactilégtimulation of the paw (the 
positive stimulus) was applied during {)séconds, and the amount of 


salivary secretion was recorded d the first half and during the 
second half of the period of ulation. After 30 seconds of 
stimulation the reflex was rêi d. Then, after some interval of 
time, the paw was again lated, but now the stimulation was 


continued during only the girst 15 seconds, and was followed immedi- 
ately by stimulation of or another of the inhibitory places during 
the second 15 sé s. Results were obtained as follows. On 
changing the stiykyJus from the positive place (No. 1) to the nearest 
DUAIS S No. 2) the salivary secretion during the second 


M 


178 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


period of 15 seconds was diminished only slightly, or even not at all, 
as compared with the secretion observed during the first period of 
15 seconds (action of apparatus No. 1). But when the remotest i 
apparatus (No. 5) acted during the second period of 15 seconds, the 

salivary secretion was considerably diminished. Stimulation of the | 
places Nos. 3 and 4 under identical conditions gave rise to a secretion | 
intermediate between that evoked, at places Nos. 2 and 5, the ) 
secretory effect at place No. 3 exceeding that at place No. 4. 

In further experiments not only was the salivary secretion 
during the 15 seconds of the actual stimulation of the inhibitory 
places recorded, but also the entire secretory after-effect. In these 
experiments the difference in the effect of the nearer and the more 
remote stimuli was exhibited almost. without exception and with 
great distinctness. For example, stimulation of the nearest place 
(No. 2) evoked a far more prolonged and greater secretion than 
did stimulation of the remotest place (No. 5). The following 
experiments illustrate this case. The dog used in these experi- 
ments had its tactile conditioned reflexes established with the 
use of acid. 


Salivary Secretion in 
drops during successive 
periods of 15 seconds, 

starting with the 
preliminary applicati 
of the positi 


Time Stimulus bond aoned St Remarks 
Experiment of 14th Gore, 1913. | 
2.0 p.m. | No.1 SEET] ey 
PION 3 7, 11 j Reinforced 
2.23 ,, | No. 1 followed by OF te Shy BS 1 Not 
reinforced 
4, 9 Reinforced | 


2.40 _,, No. 1 O) 
O 
Bare Neni of 16th November, 1913. 


3 9 \ Reinforced 


7 
2 1, 0, 0, 0 Not 
8 


No 


NO followed by No. 5 
o. l 


reinforced 
Reinforced 


IRRADIATION AND CONCENTRATION 179 


Salivary Secretion in : 
drops during successive 
periods of 15 seconds, 
starting with the 
preliminary application 
of the positive 


Time Stimulus conditioned stimulus Remarks 
No. 1 
Period of | Secretory 
stimulation} after-effect 
Experiment of 19th November, 1913. 
ont p.m. | No. 1 4, 8 IT Reniarced 
0e | No.1 followed byNo.2| 7, 5 | 32,1,0 | Not 
reinforced 
S.20° No. 1 DRS Reinforced 
S oy ee No. 5 0720 0,0,0,0 Not 
reinforced 
Experiment of 21st November, 1913. 
1.32 p.m. | No. 1 6, 12 
Doe = 9,15 j Reinforced 
s10 3 10, 13 
57 ye No. 1 followed by No. 5 8, 4 | 2,0,0,0 Not 
reinforced 
300. No. 1 7,11 ae 
Experiment of 23rd November, 1913. EAN 
12.40 p.m.| No. 1 dg Dh | 
| | See E : 9,13 - Reinforced 
0e A 10, 12 J 
| i ae No. 1 followed by No.2} 12, 8 Q, 0 Not 
reinforced 
t302 No. 1 a Reinforced 
Experiment of 28th Nguber 1913. 
RS p-m: | No. 1 6 te ) Reinforced ` 
1.59 ,, | No.1 followed by No 8, 5 | 1,0,0,0 |) Not 
IDSE, No. 2 4) 0, © | 0,0,0,0 |j reinforced 
i 


2 T8 No. 1 N 2,10 Reinforced 
The results of iG Reina are very definite. In the cases 


when the ene Kos ulus, No. 1, was succeeded by the nearest 
inhibitory one, , the amount of salivary secretion recorded 


during the 5 seconds (action of No. 1) was in the three 


different Nisa 7, 7, 12 drops respectively, while the secretion 


180 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


during the remaining period (action of No. 2 plus the secretory 
after-effect) was 15, 11 and 16 drops respectively. In the cases 
when the positive stimulus, No. 1, was succeeded by the remotest 
stimulus, No. 5, the secretion during the first 15 seconds amounted 
to 6, 8 and 8 drops respectively, while the secretion during the 
action of the remotest stimulus, No. 5, plus the secretion during the 
period of the excitatory after-effect amounted to only 3, 6 and 6 
drops respectively. The total secretion subsequently to the first 
15 seconds was, therefore, in the first case (with stimulus No. 2) 
definitely greater than during the 15 seconds’ action of the positive 
stimulus No. 1, and in the second case (with No. 5) definitely smaller. 
On changing from the positive stimulus, No. 1, to the nearest inhibi- 
tory stimulus, No. 2, the secretory after-effect persisted during 
45-60 seconds, while on changing to the remotest stimulus, No. 5, 
the secretory after-effect persisted during only 15 seconds. These 
results assume a still greater significance when it is remembered 
that the inhibitory properties of the nearest stimulus, No. 2, ought 
to be greater than those of the remotest stimulus, No. 5, since, as 
we have learned already, the more delicate the differentiation the 
more intense is the underlying inhibitory process. .That this 
actually was the case was definitely established by special experi- 
ments, in which the inhibitory after-effects from Nos. 2 and 5 were 
tested upon the positive reflex from No. 1 and upon some conditioned 
stimuli from other analysers. The following is mple of the 
inhibitory after-effect upon the positive reflex C place No. 1, 


as tested 44 minutes after the use of the Kee ry stimuli Nos. 2 
and 5 respectively. The experiments Wary i 
dog as before. 


ed out.on the same 


| Conditia) Salivary 
: stirĝylu Secretion in 
Time a d drops during 
30 seconds 


g 
30 onds 


IRRADIATION AND CONCENTRATION 181 


The inhibitory after-effect following stimulation of place No. 2 
was still very powerful after an interval of 44 minutes, whereas the 
inhibitory after-effect following stimulation of place No. 5 was 
negligible. 

In view of the results of these further experiments, there seems 
to be no reason to doubt that the excitation evoked by the positive 
stimulus in the previous experiments exerted a greater effect on the 
place nearest to it than on the place most remote.. The whole 
phenomenon must, therefore, be regarded as a result of an irradiation 
of excitation. 

Some experiments upon the irradiation of excitation have 
recently been repeated by Dr. Podkopaev. The places for tactile 
stimulation were taken on the skin of one side of the body, the first 
apparatus being arranged over the fore paw and the remaining 
apparatuses being placed at equal-distances apart along the trunk 
and hind limb of the dog, the last being arranged. over the hind paw. 
Stimulation of the area over the fore paw was given the properties 
of a positive alimentary conditioned stimulus, while stimulations of 
the remaining areas were given the properties of negative stimuli. 
The salivary secretion was recorded during successive periods of 
five seconds. Usually the positive conditioned stimulus was con- 
tinued during 30 seconds and was then immediately reinforced, but 
for the purpose of the tests the stimulus was occasionall 
act during only 15 seconds, and was followed by a 
seconds before the reinforcement. In this manner Atas possible 
to follow the course of the secretion during 30 s€cends when the 
stimulus was acting throughout, and also durį Çò seconds when 
the stimulus was abbreviated to the firs O With the 
longer stimulation the ratio of the sec during the first 15 
seconds to that during the second 15 S8¢conds came out as 1: 2-4; 


` in the case of the abbreviated stimulajion it came out as 1 : 1-25. 


In the next stage of the experinfMyts the positive stimulus after 
acting during the first 15 secon) was followed immediately by an 
inhibitory stimulus which A Oye | the succeeding period of 
15 seconds, and this eee as given by stimulation of a nearer 
or a remoter place. io of the amount of secretion during the 
first 15 seconds to AS sta the second 15 seconds came out 
in the former cas ae 1-35, and in the latter case as 1 : 0-53. 
It is obvious {ydrefore, that in this case, as in the previous 
experimen: RY excitatory after-effect of the positive stimulus 


K 
x 
SO 


182 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


was strong in places nearest to it and negligible in the remoter 
places. 

Neither this last nor the preceding series of experiments permits 
us to determine with which phase of the movement of excitation we 
have to deal, whether the phase of irradiation or the phase of con- 
centration. Experiments are at present being conducted in which 
the inhibitory stimuli are applied, not immediately on cessation of 
the positive stimulus, but after a short pause of varying length. 
Unfortunately, the direct experimental data concerning irradiation 
and concentration of excitation at our disposal are limited to the 
facts described above. There are, however, a number of isolated 
observations which have some bearing upon this subject, and these 
will now be described. 

One of our animals—a sheep-dog—had a very exaggerated form 
of what might be called “the warding reflex.” The experimenter 
[Dr. Besbokaya], who always worked with the dog in a separate 
room, used to prepare it for the experiment without the slightest 
difficulty, placing it in the stand and adjusting the various 
apparatuses for recording and for stimulation. Under Dr. Besbo- 
kaya’s control the experiments on conditioned reflexes proceeded 
quite smoothly, but the moment a stranger appeared in the experi- 
menting room the dog always developed a powerful aggressive 
reaction, especially if the stranger (in that case myself) took the place 
of the experimenter. Applying the establishe ppitioned ali- 
mentary stimulus under these circumstances, igor obtained a 
secretory reflex considerably above normal, og consuming its 
food with obviously exaggerated msc di This aggressive 
reaction evoked by my presence became minished in intensity 
when I intentionally kept quite sti e only part of the reflex 
still remaining was the gaze of t Os , which was kept fixed on 
me. The conditioned “iments gina now produced a much 
smaller salivary secretion than normal, and sometimes even no 
secretion at all. As soon, ever, as I relaxed my attitude, and 
especially if I moved ab e aggressive reaction returned in full - 
vigour, and the saling and motor reactions in response to the 
conditioned alim t@y stimulus became considerubly increased in 
their intensity. \tJis interesting to note that although this dog 
grew calm in oF presence of a stranger who kept quite still, the 
aggressive ion returned after each reinforcement after the end 
of the e 

w 


ioned stimulus, the reaction continuing for some time, 


sh 


IRRADIATION AND CONCENTRATION 183 


even though the stranger remained motionless. There appears to 
be only one possible explanation of this phenomenon. The powerful 
excitatory effect of the intruder and his movements must have 
irradiated over the hemispheres, and increased amongst others the 
excitability of that area which is related to alimentary functions. 
When, however, this excitation diminished on account of weakening 
and concentrating of the external stimulus the reverse took place, 
and the excitability of remoter areas became diminished as com- 
pared with the normal (effect of external inhibition). In a similar 
manner the eating of food temporarily heightened the excitability of 
the centre for the aggressive reaction. 

A similar phenomenon was observed in experiments conducted 
[by Dr. Prorokov] with another exceptional dog. In this dog tactile 
stimulation of the skin evoked a peculiar and very definite motor 
reaction, akin to a reaction to tickling, and possibly of a sexual 
character. It elicited also a conditioned alimentary reflex which 
was abnormally powerful, exceeding any of the other conditioned 
alimentary reflexes to non-tactile stimuli. As a rule, tactile stimula- 
tion of the skin evoked first of all its own special motor reaction, and 
was then succeeded after 10-15 seconds by an exceedingly powerful 
alimentary motor reflex. When the special motor reaction was over- 
come by the use of a technique which will be discussed in the last 
lecture, the conditioned alimentary reflex to the tactileystimulus 
became reduced to a normal level, and became less RY ful, for 
example, than homogeneous reflexes to auditory uli. This 
phenomenon must unquestionably be regarded as her example 


of irradiation of excitation. 
We are inclined to give a similar nein also to. the 


following fact. In the case of interactg conditioned reflexes 
based, upon the use of different sient stances the inhibition 
of some of them by others does not lop immediately, but only 
after an interval of some minute is quite conceivable that at 
first an irradiation of extatign Č Initiated from the cortical point 
corresponding to some defing mentary substance. The excita- 


bility of neighbouring poi ereby becomes temporarily increased, 
and it is only afterv, hen the excitation gets weakened and 
concentrated, that thaiAhibition reveals itself [experiments of Dr. 
Savitch]. ° 


A similar ent can be advanced in explanation of some 
unexpect 


N 

© 
LL 
V 


s obtained by Dr. Vassiliev in the course of forma- 


184 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


tion of heterogeneous conditioned reflexes to thermal stimuli. A 
conditioned reflex to acid was established by the application of a 
thermal stimulus of 0° C. to the skin of the animal, and a conditioned 
alimentary reflex by means of a thermal stimulus of 47°C. The 
development of these reflexes required a considerable time, and when 
finally established they were found to show the following extremely 
interesting peculiarity. If the conditioned reflex to cold (based on 
acid) was repeated with reinforcement several times in succession, 
the alimentary conditioned reflex to heat when evoked directly after- 
wards became transformed into a defence reflex to acid similar to 
that obtained with the stimulus of cold. Reversely, cold applied 
after several reinforcements of the conditioned alimentary reflex to 
heat brought about an alimentary reaction instead of the customary 
reaction to acid. The fact of this transformation was quite distinct 
and beyond doubt, since the nature of the reflex could easily be 
established by, for example, observing the motor reactions of the 
animal, which differ considerably for the two reflexes. In the case 
of the alimentary reflex the dog turned towards the experimenter, 
dividing its gaze between him and the source of food and smacking 
its lips ; in the case of the reflex to acid the dog turned away from 
the experimenter, snorting and whining, shaking its head and making 
ejective movements with its tongue. Moreover, the reflexes could 
easily be distinguished by the composition of the saliva from the 
submaxillary salivary gland, which in the case o at, alimentary 
reflex was thick and mucous, and in the case o SS flex to acid, 
fluid or watery. These points of difference stablished in the 
given case with especial care. The persist nd prolonged. trans- 
formation of one reflex into the other he more strange and 
unexpected, since such a confusion LXcrogeneous reflexes never 
occurs in other analysers; for hays in the acoustic analyser, 
even if the two stimuli to hte on reflexes differ by less than 
a tone no transformation occùrð, although it might be. thought 
that the difference betwee o neighbouring tones was of much 
smaller vital RAEC n the difference between heat and 


of the analysers Yorjheat and cold. As is well known the peripheral 
ends of ge ysers are interspersed with one another over the 


cold. 
The eo" on a certain peculiarity in the relations 


surface of in. Now it has been proved experimentally by Dr. 


Shishlg eS he cortical ends of the two analysers overlap and it is 
Y 

| N 

| xo 

| © 

N 


— 


Z 


AD 


IRRADIATION AND CONCENTRATION 185 


tempting, therefore, to conjecture that the cortical ends are inter- 
spersed similarly to the peripheral ends. In that case irradiation 
from the one analyser to the other would be facilitated and such 
a confusion between the reflexes as is illustrated in the above 
experiments can be accounted for. 

I shall now return to a further consideration of a phenomenon 
which was referred to in the preceding lecture in connection with the 
analysing activity of the cortex, but which, from the point of view of 
its intimate mechanism, has to be dealt with, in this section. This 
concerns the initial generalization of any recently established con- 
ditioned stimulus, representing an apparently spontaneous positive 
activity of stimuli which had never previously been applied, but 
which constitute an allied group with the stimulus which had ac- 
quired conditioned properties on account of reinforcement. As an 
example we may take a series of experiments on the cutaneous 
analyser conducted by Dr. Anrep. Six apparatuses for tactile 
stimulation of the skin were arranged at definite places along one 
side of the body. The action of apparatus No. 0 at a place on 
the thigh was given positive alimentary conditioned properties in 
a short trace reflex. The remaining places were distributed as 
follows: 

No. 1 on the hind paw, No. 2 on the pelvis, No. 3 on the middle of 
the trunk, No. 4 on the shoulder, No. 5 on the fore leg, No. 6 on 
the front paw. Stimulation of any of the latter place Nod a 
spontaneous conditioned secretory effect, although no hem had 
been combined with food; the intensity of thei retory effect 
decreased very gradually with the distance fro e place on the 
thigh, No. 0. The table gives the average es obtained with 
one of the three dogs employed for ej experiments. The 
amount of saliva is expressed in dre@pse4ch equal to 0-01 c.c. 
The secretion was recorded for the mA cecorids during which the 
stimulation lasted. ? | 


Number of place stimulated Aaa | a Sa ae eae ay 
Secretion - - N 33 53 45 39 23 21 19 


The stability of g QMation varies considerably in different 
dogs, and it is not A OS a to keep it on a definite level during a 
series of experiment If the stimuli were applied to new places, 
and reinforced time, the reflexes would become completely 


. generalized, + & e other hand, if these stimuli remained without 


S 
> 
so 


AČ 
ww 


186 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


reinforcement an opportunity would be provided for the develop- 
ment of a differential inhibition. In view of this, and in order to 
secure more or less exact and comparable results which could be 
verified by repetition, the stimuli were alternately applied with and 
without reinforcement, or else the applications were repeated at long 


- intervals of time (2-3 weeks). 


It remains now to inquire into the intimate mechanism of 
generalization, and the following interpretation seems best to agree 
with our present knowledge. It may be assumed that each element 
of the receptor apparatus gains representation in the cortex of the 
hemispheres through its own proper central neurone, and the peri- 
pheral grouping of the receptor organs may be regarded as projecting 
itself in a definite grouping of nervous elements in the cortex. A 
nervous impulse reaching the cortex from a definite point of the 
peripheral receptor does not give rise to an excitation which is 
limited within the corresponding cortical element, but the excitation 
irradiates from its point of origin over the cortex, diminishing in 
intensity the further it spreads from the centre of excitation, exactly 
as we have seen in the case of inhibition. Just as the initial point of 
cortical excitation becomes connected with the centre of the uncon- 
ditioned reflex, so also do the secondary points of cortical excitation, 
and this leads to the formation of many accessory reflexes. These 
reflexes decrease progressively in strength with increasing distance 
of the secondarily excited areas from the point imary cortical 
excitation, since the magnitude of the conditi flex is rigidly 
determined by the intensity of excitation. ThiSaterpretation agrees 
with Dr. Koupalov’s observation that an e imental generalization 
of a localized tactile reflex develops ally and progressively, 
and that complete equalization of ct of stimulating any place 
of the skin is only reached noe iderable time. This, of course, 


is only natural, since conditione@eflexes from points further removed 
from the primary excitation appear considerably later, the accessory 
tactile reflexes being m GQ yweaker to start with at the remoter 
places. 

The explanatio Chixced as regards the initial generalization 
of simultaneous.p@yitioned reflexes within a single analyser can be 
effectively applied to the type of universal generalization which is 
observed jndgng-trace reflexes (Lecture VII). In the case of the 
long pau ween the conditioned and the unconditioned stimulus, 
the ¢ ion initiated by the conditioned stimulus has time to 


IRRADIATION AND CONCENTRATION 187 


spread over the entire cortex, and in this manner all the individual 
cortical points can now link up with the centre for the unconditioned 
reflex as soon as this becomes excited. In the case of a short pause 
between the two stimuli the centre for the unconditioned reflex 
determines a concentration of the conditioned excitation towards 
itself, thus limiting any extensive irradiation over the general mass 
of the hemispheres. 


A 
Y 
N 


LECTURE XI 


Mutual induction of excitation and inhibition: (a) Positive induction. (b) 
Negative induction. 


THE first aspect of the intimate nature of the cortical activity which 
came into our field of investigation concerned the irradiation and 
concentration of excitation and inhibition. Only considerably later 
was a second aspect of this activity discovered and also subjected to 
a rigorous analysis. This second aspect concerned the reinforcing 
effect exerted by the one process upon the other, both in respect 
to the cortical points directly excited or inhibited and those into 
which the excitation or inhibition has irradiated. 

This effect will be referred to as inductton—a term introduced by 
E. Hering and C. S. Sherrington. Induction is mutual, or reciprocal, 
excitation leading to increased inhibition and inhibition leading to 
increased excitation. The former is referred to as “the phase of 
negative induction,” and the latter as “ the phase of positive induc- 
tion,” or, briefly, “ negative ” and “‘ positive ” indugti 

The phenomenon of induction was obsérved. 
as so frequently happens in scientific researches 
for a long time obscured in our minds by Ke) ea of a smoothness of 
propagation of nervous processes, and. irregularities which are 
now known to be the result of in , were always attributed to 
various casual disturbing influe ca Hanger of which is so great in 
our investigations. The first inkeation of induction was found in the 
experiments of Dr. Kogan, hich, as was shown in the ninth 
lecture (page 161), the fa of a place on the skin following 


ears ago, but, 
ll significance was 


immediately upon the ç te extinction of another definite place 
much further remo ealed almost invariably a state of increased 
excitability. N Pinas investigation of this phenomenon was, 
however, attengptgd, until recently some experiments of Dr. Four- 
sikov ae] attention upon the matter and led to its energetiç 


investiga The following is one of the earlier experiments of 
Dr. Eo v. 


S 188 


A 


POSITIVE INDUCTION 189 


A conditioned alimentary reflex was established to tactile stimula- 
tion of the front paw. A similar tactile stimulation of the hind 
paw was differentiated, the inhibition being complete, so that not 
a single drop of saliva appeared in response to stimulation of the 
inhibitory place. 


Salivary Latent erty 


Conditioned Secretion in of t 
Time stimulus applied drops during itary 
during 30 seconds| 30 seconds reaction 
in seconds 

4.20 p.m. Front paw 8 3 
4.36 ,, x 75 3 
4.45 .,, Hind paw 0 — 
4.454 ,, Front paw 12 2 
4.58 ,, 53 5 8 
5 


610.5 y 6-5 


It is seen that the secretory effect was increased almost 50% when 
the positive conditioned stimulus was applied immediately after the 
termination of the inhibitory stimulus, and, that the latent period of 
the reflex was definitely shortened. Moreover, the intensity of the 
motor alimentary reaction of the animal was also considerably 
increased. Evidently, under the influence of the inhibitory gtimulus 


(hind paw), the corresponding cortical area dovelorg ate of 
inhibition, which is, as we know, retained for some a the 
termination of the inhibitory stimulus. On the r hand, the 
cortical area corresponding to the positive stim ‘dian paw), on 


state of increased excitation. In this j e the interpretation 
is helped by the spatial relation of t points of stimulation. 
The problem, however, becomes mo mplicated when both the 
positive and negative stimuli act Q one and the same cortical 


point, as, for example, in. oe differentiation of a stimulus 


termination of the inhibitory stimulus a temporarily in a 


according to its intensity or g to its continuous or interrupted 
character, or as regards th uency of interruption in one and the 
same type of stimulu phenomenon of induction can, never- 
theless, be seen in ee also. The following is another experi- 


ment taken frome oursikov’s research : 
A condition mentary reflex is established to a rate of 76 
beats per we of a metronome, and from this a rate of 186 beats 


190 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


per minute is completely differentiated, both with regard to the 
secretory and motor components of the reflex. 


Salivary peed eer 
e 


Conditioned Secretion in of 
Time stimulus applied | drops during salivary 
during 30 seconds| 30 seconds reaction 
in seconds 

5.5 p.m. 76 beats 5-5 5 
6.15 43; 5 6 5 
5.24 ,, 186 beats 0 = 
5.244 ,, 76 beats 8 2 
§.43 =, , 5-5 5 
Sol r; 6 5 


The positive stimulus tested immediately after the applica- 
tion of the inhibitory stimulus showed an increase of 30% in the 
secretory reflex ; the motor reaction was correspondingly intensified, 
while the latent period of the secretory reflex was considerably 
shortened. 

Another example of positive induction may be given from a 
research by Dr. Kalmykov: a positive conditioned alimentary 
reflex was established to strong light, and from this a reflex to weak 


light was completely differentiated. 
So 


Ae Salivary 
Conditioned Secretion i of the 
Time stimulus applied | drops d Salivary 
during 30 seconds| 30s reaction 
i ) in seconds 

1.46 p.m. Strong light | Q 15 
Lbb=}; 5 7 13 
PAE nE Weak li 0 — 
2.54 ,, Strong p 10 4 
2.14 , 5-5 13 
2.24 4 Lt 


In this oxperima Qo the positive stimulus, tested immediately | 
after the inhibe Stimulus, showed an increase in the secretory 
reflex of 40% e latent period was considerably shortened and 


the alimen motor reaction was distinctly increased. 
It m questioned, in the light of the foregoing experiments, 
me e phenomenon of positive induction does not really 


POSITIVE INDUCTION 191 


represent a form of dis-inhibition. The plausibility of such an 
interpretation is obvious, since in experiments on positive induction 
a new condition is introduced in the immediateness of the replacement 
of the negative conditioned stimulus by the positive one. This new 
condition might play as potent a rôle as any other fresh change in 
the environment in evoking an investigatory reaction, so producing 
dis-inhibition. However, apart from the many points of difference 
in detail between the phenomena of positive induction and dis- 
inhibition, this explanation is definitely disproved by the character 
of the motor reaction of the animal. This never at any time, even 
from the very beginning, manifests itself as'a general investigatory 
reaction, but always as a distinctly specialized reaction corresponding 
to the definite positive conditioned reflex. 

The duration of induction varies from several seconds to one or 
two minutes. The cause of this variation has not yet been sufficiently 
investigated. 

After this bare statement of facts, we must now proceed to a 
more detailed study of positive induction, especially as its occur- 
rence was by no means so constant as might be inferred from the 
above account. The subject is not even yet entirely under our 
control, but a number of conditions on which induction depends can 
already be indicated. 

The first of these conditions was revealed accidentally. In 
certain experiments with a conditioned alimentary sti flu of 100 
beats of a metronome per minute Dr. Kalmykov re ae observed 
a positive induction on testing the positive sti immediately 
after the withdrawal of the inhibitory stim 160 beats per 
minute. However, when Dr. Kalmykov =: demonstrate the 
experiment in the presence of several vis cluding myself, the 
results obtained were quite different ey of the customary 
augmentation, the application of t \ hibitory stimulus immedi- 
ately before the positive one nowsgaused a pronounced diminution 
in. the positive reflex. This a deviation was interpreted 
as follows. Since the do t sufficiently isolated from the 
sounds produced by the Ore and the visitors, their con- 
versation must hav as an external inhibitory stimulus 
weakening the E ition, and at the beginning even distinctly 
dis-inhibiting aS @)sitive induction could not, therefore, be 
exhibited at ai pOh e during the experiment. The record of this 


BINS n on p. 192. 


S 
os 


| 


2 
N 


192 = CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


Salivary es 
of the 


: Conditioned stimulus applied secretion in : 
Time during 30 seconds drops during salivary 
30 seconds _Teaction 
: in seconds 

1.27 p.m. 100 beats 7-5 9 
1.40 ,, Js T 16 
LAT =,, 160 beats (inhibitory stimulus) 4 12 
ee 100 beats 3 21 
ZOE A 11-5 7 
Zl 160 beats (inhibitory stimulus) 0 — 
2.154 ,, 100 beats 0 — 
el Ep 3 1] 6 
aS ae 160 beats (inhibitory stimulus) 0 — 
2.334 ,, 100 beats 2 27 
24a ts. 160 beats (inhibitory stimulus) 0 — 
2.424 ,, 100 beats 2 26 
2.50 10-5 7 


> 33 


It is seen that the differentiation which previously to this experi- 
ment was complete became disturbed on its first application in the 
presence of visitors, 4 drops of salivary secretion being now obtained 
(1.47 p.m.). Later, the inhibitory stimulus applied singly gave the 
usual zero secretion, but throughout the experiment the inhibitory 
stimulus never exhibited any power of positive induction; the 
positive reflex tested immediately after the w 
inhibitory stimulus underwent a diminution, as therefore in- 
fluenced immediately by an inhibitory after-e stead of the usual 
temporary positive induction (2.154 p.m., i ea 2.424 p.m.). 

It may be concluded from the fore that the weakening of 
the inhibitory process leads to t pearance of induction, so 
that now the inhibitory after-effe gins to develop immediately, 
without the intervention of a ponines heightening of excitation. 
In order further to test this ittérpretation Dr. Kalmykov reduced 
the intensity of the E inhibition by intentionally subjecting 


it to external inhibiti or this purpose the experiment was 
preceded by the i ction of a rejectable substance into the 
mouth of the àn, as in the case just described, no induction 
could be au er throughout the experiment. It may be con- 
cluded, thex%ore, that the manifestation of positive induction 
depends some definite intensity of inhibition. 

TheG@eeond condition upon which the development of induction 
EN was also brought out in experiments on the same dog. 


oh 


en, 


eT SE GE EMPL OCR A ETI ne n 


POSITIVE INDUCTION 193 


Differential inhibition having been established to the metronome 
beating at a rate of 160 per minute, it was practised for special 
purposes a great number of times in the course of several months 
without testing for induction. A more delicate differentiation to a 
rate of 112 beats per minute was now established (the rate of the 
positive stimulation being in both cases 100 beats per minute). 
When this finer discrimination became absolute, tests for induction 
were performed with the following definite result : 


Salivary eee Perion 
e 


Conditioned Secretion in of 
Time stimulus applied drops during salivary 
during 30 seconds | 30 seconds reaction 

in seconds 

1.17 p.m. 100 beats 12 19 

L320 ces 112 beats 0 — 

1.26} ,, 100 beats 21 6 

E36, 5 7 22 


The inductive action of the new and more delicate differentiation 
resulted in an immediate increase of the positive secretory reflex by 
75% and in a considerable shortening of the latent period. When, 
however, the older and coarser differentiation of 160 beats was now 
tested, it was surprising to find that no trace of inductive action 
could be observed. We thought it possible that this regWt might 
have been due to interruption in the practice of th ha er dif- 
ferentiation while the new and more delicate diffe@y lation was 


being established, and therefore we now practised o differentia- 
tions alternately for periods of 10-15 days eac is procedure did 
not, however, change the course of events, as j wn in the following 
tables : 
: Latent period 
Conditioned py of the 
Time stimulus applie : salivary 
during 30 sec drops during reaction 
8 30 seconds 


in seconds 


Exp N nt of 17th April. 
fet am: Cifras 16 8 
LEO; 2 beats 0 — 
11.193.,, « 100 beats 20 2 
11:30 ,, =f 0 _ 
O 6 


194 


CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


O 


© 
ll 


N 
SO 


Sali Latent period 
Conditioned s a eki ; of the 

Time stimulus applied d eres Aine salivary 

during 20 seconds Ni wea reaction 

AROC ORCE in seconds 

Experiment of 20th April. 

11.37 a.m. 100 beats 13 9 
11.45: 160 beats 0 = 
11.453 ,, 100 beats 5 23 
115 re, » 6 23 
12.2 pm. 3 | 6 17 


It is seen that the new and finer differentiation produced a 
distinct though temporary effect of positive induction (11.194 a.m.), 
whereas the older and coarser one was followed directly by an 
inhibitory after-effect. On continuation of the experiments the 
effect of positive induction of the finer differentiation also began 
to weaken. 

In similar experiments conducted by Dr. Frolov a modification 
was introduced by employing an inhibitory stimulus of greater 
intensity than the stimulus to the positive conditioned reflex. The 
tone D of Max Kohl’s tone variator, damped to different degrees, 
provided the stimuli in these experiments. Three intensities of the 
tone were employed. The weakest served for tha positive con- 
ditioned stimulus, while the remaining intensiti ane tone were 
given inhibitory properties, the strongest tone he first to be 
contrasted. When this differentiation beca nitely established 
a test was made of its effect in producin ive induction : 


Conditig Q Salivary 

Time stimulus Git Secretion in 

during @ se®énds | drops during 

30 seconds 
1.28 p.m. gs tone 12 
hinge to, ong tone 3 
$42 Oyreak tone 11 
1.56 Q ll 


39) 
Strong tone 0 


r O Weak tone 17 
3i s y 
On im D, transition from the inhibitory tone to the weak 
POR the effect of the latter was found to be, increased, by 


N 


S 


eee 


POSITIVE INDUCTION 195 


50% (2.83 p.m.). The differentiation to the strong tone was now 
repeatedly practised for over a month. When tested at the end of 
this period it was found to have lost completely its effect of positive | 


induction : | 

: | 

Conditioned Salivary | 

Time stimulus applied Secretion in | 

during 30 seconds | drops during | 

30 seconds | 

1.41 p.m. Weak tone 8 i 

EILD E 6 | 

2.3 2? 33 9 | 
vad Ys Bs Strong tone 0 
2.114 ,, Weak tone 6 

2.24 ',, a 6-5 


The next stage in the experiment was the formation of a dif- 
ferentiation to the tone of intermediate intensity. This finer 
differentiation was already nearing completion on its nineteenth 
application. The following table gives the results of a test for 
positive induction : | 


Conditioned Salivary 


Time stimulus applied Secretion in | 
during 30 seconds | drops during A | 
30 seconds | XO | 
| 1.15 p.m. Weak tone l 
EES275 ” 
1.29.>. Medium tone 
1.294 ,, Weak tone Qı? 
1.45 ,, S K 9 


older and coarser differentiati d lost its inductive effect after 
prolonged. practice, while tke nd more delicate differentiation, 
so soon as definitely estab]; , exhibited an intense effect of positive 
induction. 

The natural conclisién to be drawn from these observations is 
that positive indú on represents a temporary, phasic phenomenon, 
which is associat@) With the period of establishment of new relations 


Exactly as in the erontiatiag ot i by Dr. Kalmykov, the 


— EE 


in the nery stem ; induction makes its appearance only with 
mS 
Ns 
. WV 
AS 


196 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


the maximal development of a given cortical inhibition, and dis- 
appears after the inhibition has become finally stabilized. This 
general rule, however, is not without exceptions, since in some cases 
induction is maintained during long periods of time without showing 
any signs of subsequent diminution. So far as can be judged from 
the available data, this depends on whether the rapid replacement 
of the inhibitory, by the excitatory, stimulus affects one and the same 
cortical area, as in the experiments just described, or whether the 
two stimuli affect two cortical areas more or less remote, as in the 
experiments upon the cutaneous analyser. The conditions under 
which induction assumes a more permanent character can be 
settled only by further experiments, such as are at present in 
progress. 

It may, however, be added that a considerable number of experi- 
ments were conducted with differentiation of the rate of rhythmic 
tactile stimulation of some definite area of the skin. In these 
experiments a high rate of stimulation acted as the positive stimulus, 
while a low rate of stimulation acted as the inhibitory one. So far 
we have been unable to observe any positive induction with these 
stimuli, on rapid transition from the inhibitory to the excitatory one. 
In all cases there was only an immediate development of an inhibitory 
after-effect. 


Negative induction—+.e. an intensification oii under the 
influence of preceding excitation—was also ADxytfved several years 
ago, but was always wrongly interpret nd it only received 
adequate recognition in some quite r experiments. In these 
experiments, which were carried. o r. Stroganov, the pheno- 
menon of negative induction w Che investigated in many 
dogs, and can now be timated full value. 

Negative induction was frst™net with in investigations on the 
destruction of internal ination. Some experiments of this type 
conducted. by Dr. Krijs y dealt egpecially with the destruction 
of conditioned DN A tone employed. singly was given the 
properties of a pOsitive conditioned stimulus to acid, while in com- 


bination with a ile cutaneous stimulus it served as a stimulus in 
a conditio Gpnhibition. The destruction of the inhibition was 
attempted reversing the process employed in its formation, the 
K of the inhibitory combination being alternated, with 


NEGATIVE INDUCTION 197 


applications of the positive conditioned stimulus singly, but both 
being this time reinforced. The results obtained were quite un- 
expected. In spite of ten applications of the inhibitory combination 
with reinforcement by acid in the course of three days, its inhibitory 
properties remained undisturbed. These experiments are repre- 
sented in the following tables: 


Salivary Secretion 
in drops 
during 30 seconds 


Conditioned 
stimulus applied 


Time 
during 30 seconds 


Experiment of 15th October, 1907. 


10.24 a.m. Tone 11 
10.38 ,, Combination 0 
10.59 ,, Tone 13 
ITSS Combination 0 | Reinforced in 
2T Tone 10 all cases by 
11.40 ,, Combination 0 injection of 
11.58" ,, Tone 11 acid into 
12.13 p.m. Combination 0 | _ the mouth. 
eo ss Tone 10 
12-39) 3 Combination 0 
12.55. ,, Tone 12 
Experiment of 16th October, 1907. 
1.34 p.m Tone 8 | Reinforced 3 
EDZ Combination 0 all case 
2.41 ,, Tone 9 } inject(Gty of 
2:55. ,, Combination 0 | ack into 
5 Ut eee Tone 7 S outh. 
Experiment of 17th CLE 
10.55 a.m, Tone 
$b 323 Combination 0 | Reinforced in 
LEZo. a Tone 6 all cases by 
11.35. =;, Combinati O > injection of 
TEDS Tone 8 acid -into 
12.6 p.m. Combj 0 the mouth. 
1Z.L9- =, 9, 


Tog 


Since this methoK filed to produce a destruction of the con- 
ditioned eens peony technique was used on the day following 
The combination, which remained always 

ow repeatedly applied without any intervening 


the last exper) 
reinforced, , 


| ge 
$ 


198 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


applications of the positive conditioned stimulus singly. Destruc- 
tion of the inhibition was now rapidly obtained. 


Experiment of 18th October, 1907. 


Conditioned Salivary Secretion 
Time stimulus applied in drops 
during 30 seconds during 30 seconds 
10.42 a.m. Tone 10 
2 inati ; 
a p Combination 4 EE A 
Ie 7z 4 all cases by 
fay 5 6 injection of 
iar! x g paana. 
11.54 8 


Although the difference between the results of the two methods 
seemed. obvious enough, the suggestion offered itself that the 
destruction which developed. so rapidly with the second method. had 
been facilitated by the previous reinforcements in the earlier period 
of alternate application. In order to eliminate this possibility, the 
inhibitory combination. was re-established and practised during a 
period of over one year, when the second. method for the destruction 
was again applied, the result being as follows : 


Experiment of 22nd November, 1908. \ 
Conditioned Salivar cretion 
onditione ali ary MO 


Time stimulus applied 
during 30 seconds duri seconds 

10.43 a.m. Tone 
105725; Combination 
jm AL! Bee b5 Q 0 | Reinforced in 
LM 5s Se = 1 all cases by 
ikg is x 3{ injection of 
11.49 _,, A O 5 acid. 
12.3 p.m. 10 
12.25 ,, Tong @ 14 


These experimen NS early demonstrate an essential difference 
between the twogmebbAds, but, as has already been said, the apparent 
anomaly present y the first method remained for many years 
without any. Gepisfactory explanation, until the question was re- 
investigate Dr. Stroganov, who worked with differential inhibi- 
tion. itioned. alimentary reflexes were established in four dogs, 


Y 


S 


NEGATIVE INDUCTION 199 


differentiations being established for musical tones of differing pitch 
and for different rates of metronome beats. A pronounced differ- 
ence in the rate of destruction of the inhibitory process by the two 
methods was clearly exhibited in all the dogs, without any exception. 
In the. case of repeated application of the inhibitory stimulus with 
reinforcement, destruction of the inhibition was obtained after only 
a few applications ; in the case of regular alternation of the inhibitory 
stimulus with the positive conditioned stimulus, on the other hand, 
both being followed by reinforcement, the destruction of inhibition 
was very much delayed, and appeared only after a great number of 
applications. In the different animals employed in this research 
sometimes the one and sometimes the other method of destruction 
was used first, and in every case the two methods were. repeated. 
many times with each animal. The differentiations were, of course, 
always well re-established before the succeeding . experimental 
destruction. In addition, several important variations in the experi- 
| ments were made. The first variation consisted in the application 
| of the positive stimulus after the differential inhibition had been 
| almost altogether abolished by the use of the second. method of 
destruction ; it was found that even one single application was 
sufficient partially or fully to restore the inhibition (12.6 p.m. in the 

table below). 
A rate of 120\beats of the metronome per minute a for a 


| positive conditioned alimentary stimulus. A rate of ats per 
minute was firmly established as a stimulus to a di ial inhibi- 
tion. During 41 applications within a period of s it did not 


elicit a single drop of saliva. O 


11.25 a.m. 


È 


Conditioned 
stimulus applied 
during 30 seconds 


60 beats 


Nery Secretion 
in drops 
uring 30 seconds 


0 
0 | All the stimuli 


were accom- 
panied by re- 
inforcément. 


3 | 
8} 
0 


A second van 
successive app 


n of the experiment consisted in making three 


ions of the positive conditioned stimulus just 
before wo of the differential inhibition by the second 


N 
| AS 
| Ò 
RO 


| ge 
Re) 


200 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


method was begun. ‘This preliminary administration of the posi- 
tive stimuli caused an unusual retardation of the destruction, 
which now required an additional five or six applications of the 


- inhibitory stimulus. 


In another dog the same positive and inhibitory conditioned 
stimuli were employed, and although the differentiation in this dog 
was less stable and, therefore, subject more easily to dis-inhibition, 
a similar delay was observed in its destruction. 


Conditioned Salivary Secretion 
Time stimulus applied in drops 
during 30 seconds during 30 seconds 
12s pom. 120 beats 9 
£10 i 11 
l PAPA ot Pe 5 . . 
1231 |, 60 beats epohe ipy 
12.43 0 were accom- 
1252 ` z, 0 panied by re- 
12.56 $ 0 inforcement. 
l 2 ” ” 24 
i aes Py 24 


In a third variation of the experiment, after the destruction had 
been carried by the method of alternation to such a degree as to be 
already appreciable, four or five applications of the positive stimulus 
in succession were sufficient to reverse this effect ablishing the 
inhibition. XS 

Another method of experiment for the de ration of negative 
induction was employed by Dr. Prorokov, made use of an old 
observation that the positive condition ex response which was 
evoked second in an experiment epee showed the greatest 
secretory effect. This was mos ably owing to an increased 
excitability of the alimentary he following on the first reinforce- 
ment with the unconditioned ex; on this account a recently 
established, but not yet quj Sable, inhibitory stimulus is frequently 
disturbed when applied ey erreriiiens immediately after the first 
application of the un tioned stimulus, the reflex being partially 
dis-inhibited. A everal positive conditioned alimentary reflexes 
are present, and one of them is associated with a differentiation, 
it can be obsex$ed that if one of the independent conditioned reflexes 
is applied in a given experiment, the reflex corresponding to the 
RS inhibitory stimulus applied second is frequently con- 


N 


S 


NEGATIVE INDUCTION 201 


siderably dis-inhibited. When, on the other hand, an experiment 
begins with the application of the positive one of two differentiated 
stimuli, the effect of the negative stimulus when applied second is 
but rarely, and then only slightly, disturbed. The actual experi- 
ments of Dr. Prorokov were carried out as follows. A rate of 144 
beats of a metronome per minute served as a positive conditioned 
alimentary stimulus, while a frequency of 72 beats per minute was 
differentiated from it. The sound of a buzzer served as a further 
| positive alimentary stimulus. When the buzzer was applied first in 
the experiment, and the inhibitory stimulus of the metronome second, 
the reflex to the metronome was dis-inhibited in 8 cases out of 12, 
the maximum disinhibition being 72%. When, however, the 
inhibitory rate of the metronome was applied after a preliminary 
application of the positive rate, dis-inhibition was obtained in only 
two cases out of 12, and it‘never exceeded 20%. The two procedures 
were always conducted in different experiments alternately, in order 
to preclude any effect of an increase in the stability of the differential 
} . inhibition following on repeated contrasts. The results show 
| that, at any rate in some cases, the effect of negative induction is 
} more especially connected with the positive stimulus to which a 
| differentiation has been established, any other positive conditioned 
| stimulus, even though it belongs to the same analyser, having but a 
| small, or even no, effect of negative induction upon the ighibitory 
| stimulus of the differentiated pair. NN 
The two forms of experiment just described. leave oubt that 
| under certain conditions the generation of an excita intensifies a 
) succeeding inhibition. 
| The recognition of the actual existence atre induction 
naturally led us to inquire whether the i) hich had. previously 
| been described under the name of exteyn hibition was in essence 
| a form of a negative induction, in one the excitation initiated 
| by extra stimuli falling upon the_coMéx induced a greater or less 


degree of inhibition in the surro g points. The investigation is, 
whether the external inhib s a cortical phenomenon, or whether 


. 


| however, somewhat difficult, e it is necessary to determine 
. it takes place entirely Ge lower centres of the brain, seeing that 
| in the case of extern layAibition the centres of two different uncon- 
ditioned. reflexes sive pb pili From what is known with regard to 
the functions o ower parts of the central nervous system, it 


must undoub e assumed that in the case of external inhibition 


| 

È 
RA 
BRS) 


202 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


of conditioned reflexes an interaction of an inhibitory character does 
occur between the centres of the two unconditioned reflexes. It 
must be ascertained, however, whether in the case of external inhibi- 
tion there is not also a similar interaction between the various points 
of the cortex, and this is where the difficulties appear. An attempt 
was made to overcome them in experiments by Dr. Foursikov, 
the actual experiments being performed in the following way. Two 
conditioned reflexes based on different unconditioned ones were 
established, the one alimentary and the other a defence reflex to a 
strong electric stimulation of the skin. The conditioned stimulus 
to the defence reflex was applied, and as soon as the defence reaction 
appeared the conditioned defence stimulus was replaced by the 
conditioned alimentary stimulus. In the majority of cases the con- 
ditioned alimentary reflex suffered inhibition in a greater or less 
degree. Since, however, the defence reaction was present, it must 
be assumed that the unconditioned centre for the defence reaction 
was in a state of excitation, and therefore, that the possibility of an 
interaction of the unconditioned centres was not eliminated in these 
experiments. Although, however, the experiments in this form were 
inconclusive, they provided occasion for an observation which 
justified the assumption that in some cases an interaction in the form 
of a negative induction must also exist between the cortical points 
corresponding to the two conditioned reflexes. It was noticed that 
after the establishment of the conditioned defe ex, the older 
conditioned alimentary reflex when it belonged OF ifferent analyser 
suffered no diminution in intensity. Whe conditioned stimuli 
for the two reflexes were taken from th e analyser, the estab- 
lishment of the conditioned defence re d to a prolonged diminu- 
tion in the magnitude of the con alimentary reflex. More- 
over, when both the alimentar efence stimuli were related to 
different points of the utaneganalyser, it was found that after 


the establishment of the Ki oned defence reflex a diminution in 


the strength of the cond¥aghéd alimentary reflex was found only for 
those alimentary pq rest to the one which had been given 
properties as a cn stimulus to the defence reflex, the reflexes 
for more remo entary points retaining their full magnitude. 
Now, if the a inhibition had been confined. to the centres of 


the uncond ed reflexes, such relations would not have been found 
in the caft\al analysers. These observations render it highly prob- 


bee external inhibition can take place as a purely cortical 


N 


SS 


O 
AP 
LNN 
O 


NEGATIVE INDUCTION 203 


phenomenon, of the same nature as negative induction, and that 
external inhibition can, therefore, be identified with internal inhi- 
bition. It may be noted that the nearest point associated with the 
alimentary reflex did not under these circumstances manifest any. 
properties peculiar to the point for the defence reaction, and no motor 
defence reaction ever accompanied the alimentary reflex. . At present 
a series of experiments is being conducted with the object of securing 
more direct evidence on this point. 

There can be no doubt that the phenomenon of mutual induction 
described above provides a physiological basis for the large group of 
contrast phenomena.-described in connection with the physiology of 
the sense organs. Here, therefore, we are confronted with a further 
illustration of the successful application of the objective method to 
the study of problems hitherto considered to be exclusively within 
the domain of subjective investigation. 


LECTURE XII 


Interaction of irradiation and concentration with induction. 


THE last three lectures were devoted to the irradiation of excitation 
and inhibition in the cerebral cortex and to their mutual induction. 
Trradiation and concentration on the one hand, and induction on 
the other, were dealt with separately, as if they were completely 
independent. In actual fact, however, it is plain that these processes 
are superimposed on and interact with one another. Cases of the 
apparently isolated existence of irradiation and concentration of 
either excitation or inhibition without the simultaneous presence of 
induction can only be regarded as exceptional, and must be inter- 
preted either as being an expression of some definite phase of the 
development of these processes, or as an individual peculiarity of 
the nervous organization of the experimental animal. It is probable, 
also, that, at least in some cases, the interpretation of experiments 
upon irradiation and concentration was simplified artificially, since 
at first the existence of mutual induction was not thought of. More- 
over, in the initial phases of our investigation whole problem 
presented such overwhelming and chaotic c ity that many 
sides of the subject were intentionally ignor e had to disregard. 
many points, and had to obviate special O problems, replac- 
ing dogs which for some reason were ble or presented. complex 
relations difficult to trace. At th nt time, however, as a result 
of many years’ experience, spegi ention can be directed to any 
new fact or any new peeling observed in any individual animal, 
and such peculiarities now raie/fresh problems for investigation. 

The mutual relations radiation and concentration of the two 
nervous processes wi eir mutual induction are exceedingly 
complex, and a co e knowledge of their interrelations has not 
yet been attaing: he data available on this subject.at present do 
not lend themgelv}s to systematic arrangement, but there is sufficient 
material to @erit consideration. 

The i case, which will be given first, is taken from an 


experi by Dr. Kreps, who worked upon the tactile analyser. 
204 


INDUCTION AND IRRADIATION 205 


Positive conditioned reflexes were established to tactile stimulation 
of two places on the thigh (1 and 2), one on the abdomen (3), one on 
the chest (4), and one on the shoulder (5); a place on the fore leg 
of the animal was completely differentiated from the others, and 
acted, therefore, as an inhibitory stimulus. All the positive stimuli 
were equalized as regards the magnitude of their effect. The actual 
experiments were conducted in the following manner. At the 
beginning of each experiment the normal magnitude of the secretory 
reaction for a given positive stimulus was determined ; further on in 
the experiment the effect of the same positive stimulus was tested. 
again, either immediately or at various intervals of time after the 
termination of the inhibitory stimulus. This process was repeated 
with all the rest of the positive stimuli, the whole series of experi- 
ments taking a period of about five months for completion. The 
results are summarized in the’ two following tables, in which the 
magnitudes of the positive conditioned reflexes for the different 
places are expressed)as percentages of their normal value, as deter- 
mined in every experiment prior to the use of the inhibitory stimulus. 


First Table. 


0 5 sec. | 15 sec. | 30 sec.| 1 min. | 2 min. | 3 min. | 5 min. 


| 0 5 sec. 


138 | 123 
Asie: bi 


1 100 
2 

SEN eee ATN 
4 
5 


— 98 
- 145 | 123 — 
- | 127 ~ 110 


102 


Average - | 136 2 


The first a column gives the number of the positive place 


of stimulatio ile the upper horizontal row indicates the interval 


AČ 
ON 


206 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


of time between the end of the inhibitory and the beginning of the 
positive stimulus. The first table represents the average figures for 
the total number of experiments during the whole period of investiga- 
tion ; the second table gives the average figures only for the last 
month of the investigation, the intervals of 5 and 15 seconds 
having been employed during the latter period only. 

These experiments show that when the positive stimulus is 
applied immediately after the termination of the inhibitory stimulus 
its effect is invariably increased, when it is applied after an interval 
of 15 seconds its effect is below normal, and when applied towards 
the end of 30 seconds its effect is minimal ; only towards the end of 
the 5th minute is complete recovery of its normal effect obtained 
(first table). Thus the application. of the inhibitory stimulus is 
followed in the first place by an effect of positive induction ; this is 
succeeded by an irradiation of inhibition, which gradually disappears 
so that the effect of the positive stimulus returns to normal again. 
A similar replacement of positive induction by an inhibitory after- 
effect might also have been noticed by the reader in experiments 
given in the previous lecture, when the phenomenon of positive 
induction was first described (see especially experiment on page 193). 

Returning to the experiment described above, the following 
particulars should be noted. While the magnitude of positive 
induction increased somewhat towards the later period of the 
investigation (second table), the inhibitory after- t diminished, 
both as regards its duration (being now confin hin an interval 
of two minutes), and as regards the extent irradiation (being 
more obvious at the two positive places ne o the inhibitory one). 
The latter phenomenon is a repetition fact which has already 
been discussed in the earlier mire ae connection with the after- 


effect of different types of internal ition. 

In the lecture on the irion of inhibition attention was 
drawn to an observation made %7 Dr. Kogan, that in one of his dogs 
the complete extinction tactile conditioned stimulus in one 
place was always im ly succeeded by an increased excita- 
bility—+.e. REAS ction—in the place which was furthest 

enomenon has been studied in greater detail 


away from it 

by Dr. E CO a series of experiments in which the result of 

a single n engajnforcement (i.e. the first step in extinction) of a 

condition gO alimentary reflex was investigated. Conditioned 
flexes were established in a dog to tactile stimulation 


“NS 


INDUCTION AND IRRADIATION 207 


of several places on one side of the body, all of which were spaced 
out along a line commencing in front at the lower part of the fore 
limb, extending along the whole length of the trunk, and finishing 
at the lower part of the hind limb. All the places were equalized 
as regards the magnitude of the positive conditioned effect. Every 
experiment commenced by stimulating some definite place, in order 
to determine the normal magnitude of the reflex. The stimulation 
of the same or another place (at a distance of 1, 43 or 89 cms.) was 
now applied without reinforcement ; then the particular place which 
had been stimulated first in the experiment was tested again at 
intervals of from 45 secs. to 12 mins. The experiment was concluded 
by testing any of the remaining places, in order to confirm the normal 
positive effect for the given day. Experiments were conducted 
with intervals of 4-5 days, in order to ensure a more or less stationary 
condition of the inhibition with respect to its after-effect. However, 


this expectation was not fulfilled, since the inhibition became more 


and more centred around the cortical point of its origin as the experi- 
ments proceeded, and on this account it is necessary to represent 
the general results in the form of three tables for three consecutive 
series of experiments. In the dog on which these experiments were 
carried out, the magnitude of the positive conditioned effect was so 
constant that it was possible to utilize each separate experiment 
instead. of taking the mean of several experiments. In tke tables 
given on page 208 the magnitude of the reflex is r tod in 
percentages of the normal positive effect for each day. intervals 
of 45 secs., 1 and 3 mins. are given only in the table, since 
only at this period of the experiments did the of saliva after 
administration of the non-reinforced conditi stimulus stop in 
time enough to allow of a determinatj the after-effect of 
extinction at earlier periods. O 

It is seen from these tables that Sue beginning of the experi- 
ments (first table) the inhibition d to the furthermost place 
and was still obvious 12 minutes the extinction. Later (second 
table) the inhibition became fy d within a distance of 43 cm., 
and after 4 minutes was aller intensity than the inhibition 
occurring in the precega Ch: le after so long as 12 minutes. It can 
further be observed fr he second table that at the remoter places 
there was BN, in the later intervals, an increase, instead of 
a decrease, of t ect as compared with its normal magnitude. 
Finally, in oom phase (third table), the inhibitory after-effect 


208 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


could be observed only in the primarily extinguished place, and this 
at variable periods of time, whereas in the remaining places, with 
the exception during the first minute of the remotest place, there 
was either an increase above the normal, or a return to the normal 
magnitude of the positive effect. The increased positive effect was 
most probably due to positive induction, which could be detected 
first at the places more remote from the starting-point of the inhibi- 
tion, but only after a considerable period of time following extinction: 


Distance from the place subjected to extinction 


Interval of 
time 
0 cm. | l cm. 43 cms. | 89 cms. 
First Table. 
4 mins. 67 544 534 6l 
ee 85 80 65 524 
12: ;, 7714 824 93 83 
Second Table. 
4 mins. 87 884 94 100 
Es i 100 904 111 89 
TANE 964 100 100 118 
| Third Table. 
45 secs. 514 112 100 85 
1 min. 100 117 112 71 
3 mins. 914 115 100 1133 


4 ,, 100 100 10 100 
ST 74 100 100 
TAi 100 100 100 


However, the effect of positive Yaduction gradually makes itself felt 
at places nearer to the starting point of the inhibition, and appears 
earlier after the incipien tinction. In other words, both as 
regards time and space, owtive induction gradually overcomes and 
supersedes the inhiktgd 


OLY Process. 

The experimengsyust described present some interesting details. 
Firstly, they ey iar the extreme sensitivity of the cortical 
elements : the effect of a single non-reinforcement exercising over a 
large region% f the cortex a profound influence lasting for a consider- 
able Geto than 12 minutes). Secondly, they afford a further 

NS . 


INDUCTION AND IRRADIATION ; : 209 


example of the extreme delicacy and lability of physiological processes 
in the cerebral hemispheres : a relatively small influence repeated at 


intervals so long as 4-5 days causes a profound change in the general 


course of events (rapid diminution of inhibitory after-effect). Lastly, 
it can easily be observed that the state of different cortical points 
manifests a definite rhythmic undulation, both with respect to 
time and to distribution of inhibition. Thus in the third table the 
primarily extinguished place was alternately under the influence of, 
and free from, inhibition during 12 minutes, and a similar rhythmic 
oscillation was also observed in space, namely, in the distribution of 
excitation and inhibition in the cerebral cortex at any given moment. 
This fact, which is of considerable importance, will be referred to 
frequently in the further course of these lectures. It should be 
regarded as a natural result of the interaction and mutual adjustment 
of the two opposite nervous processes of excitation and inhibition— 
just as the waves of the third degree on a blood pressure curve 
represent the result of the interaction of pressor and depressor 
influences. 

In some further experiments on the same dog, in which extinction 
was not restricted to a single non-reinforcement but was carried to 
the first zero, a similar undulation was observed, but only at the 
place nearest to the one undergoing extinction. No such undula- 


tions were apparent at more remote places. The resu f these 
experiments are presented in the following table: XO 
Inhibitory after-effect of extinction to the- ffgs®zero : magnitude 


als after the last 
fe of normal response) 


of the reflex tested at different time 
inhibitory stimulus (expressed as per 


10°) 30%). A’ 15’| 20’ | 25’| 30’| 40’ 


Place nearest O i - 
to the one 
undergoing | @ 
extinction - 


(distance I | N 

cm.) 44 | 12 | — 41 | 57 | 60 |165 
Remoter place 

(89 cm. | 

from the | 

one under- O 


going ex- 


Ke) 
— 
or 
(oro) 
co 
-J 
Or 
pod 
© 
= 


210 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


It is possible that the steady level of the reflex at the remoter place, 
which remained unaltered for 7 minutes (8th to 15th minutes), could be 
regarded as some expression of an undulation, especially since it corre- 
sponded to the period of a wave of inhibition at the nearest place. 

Dr. Andréev has observed similar undulations in another dog. 
In these experiments four apparatuses for tactile stimulation of the 
skin were arranged along the hind limb of the animal from the 
upper part of the thigh to the lower part of the leg. These places 
are indicated in order from above downwards by the numbers 0, 1, 
2 and 3, and were spaced at equal distances of 15 cms. from one 
another. Stimulation of any one of the three lower places served as 
a positive conditioned alimentary stimulus, while stimulation of the 
upper place was differentiated, and acted, therefore, as an inhibitory 
stimulus. The differentiation, however, in this dog was not very 
stable. In the general course of the experiments the intervals 
between successive stimulations were always 7 minutes. Each experi- 
ment began with the conditioned stimulus of a buzzer or a metronome. 
This was followed by two positive tactile stimuli, which were applied 
to any of the active places, and these were followed by the positive 
tactile cutaneous stimulation which was being specially tested in the 
given experiment. All these stimuli were applied with intervals of 
7 minutes. The uppermost apparatus evoking inhibition was used 
next. After this, and this time at different intexygls varying in 
the different experiments from 0 to 10 minutes, BRON tile stimulus 
which immediately preceded the inhibitory, ulus was again 
applied and the inhibitory after-effect dete&xined.. The following 
table represents the results of these exPRN ents, the magnitude of 
the reflexes being calculated as a per fe of the normal positive 
effect, for which the mean value of t B e tactile cutaneous reflexes 
which preceded the inhibitory &imulus was taken. Each figure 
given in the table is an averag hree observations. 


n E 


Intervals of time:| 0 1 Oy 60” | 2°) 3’ | & | Ge TBE KLA 
Magnitude ) Place} - Ñ | | 

of there- | No. TD) 17 | 90 | 58 |82| 62 | 40 |105 |93| 95/95; 100 

flex in | | 

percent- > N | 6 

age of Ae) 


2 
normal RS 


3 | 62 | 86| 40 |—| 75 | 27 | 89 |60/—|—| 70 
68 | 24 


20 | 0 1257 65 | 40 | 50 |—/55|/—! 100 


INDUCTION AND IRRADIATION 211 


The complex relations occurring in these experiments can be 
more readily followed on the following chart : 


PRE 
ba tral are od 


110 
100 


eee 
E 
E ote. 


oa 
a 
MIR e 


20 
xl 
© 100 
& 80 
[e¥} 
Go 
= xl A 
E m 
= A 
= 20 
35 10 
A 0 aa ae : è 2 . ‘ hrs ' eR ony 
SSA 2 3 4 5 6 TA g 9 10 


Time ý FIG. 7. 


It is evident that the effects upon the different pos KK Y inces of 
the irradiating inhibition initiated by the stimulation @j Brace No. 0 
showed more points of variance than of resem The chief 
point which they had in common was the ENO: nS inhibitory 
after-effect in all three places sooner or ~Q Or: | a maximum 
and then disappeared. A further poi sjua was that all 
three places simultaneously revealed Swo waves of inhibition, the 
crest of. one occurring at an inter} of sixty seconds following 
the termination of the eee, Oo and the second after an 
interval of five minutes. ney e resemblance ended; all the 
other features presented i rable differences. At the place 


h 


nearest to the inhibitory here was, immediately on the termina- 
tion of the inhibitors pds a slight increase of excitability, t.e. 
an effect of positiye uction. In the remaining two places the 
inhibitory after-é was revealed immediately. ‘The second wave 


of inhibition a ces 1 and 2 was greater than the first, but at place 
3 the RS ve was expressed only slightly, while during the 


212 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


first wave the inhibition was complete. Moreover, numerous 
secondary fluctuations were observed at places l and 2. At place 3, 
on the other hand, the only fluctuation was a rather considerable 
weakening of the inhibition during the first half of the fourth 
minute. If this had not been present, the course of the inhibitory 
after-effect would have been as regular as in the cases examined 
previously in the ninth and tenth lectures. At place 3, again, just 
as in previous observations, the period of development of the inhibi- 
tion was several times less than the period of its recession, while at 
places 1 and 2 the time taken to reach the maximum of inhibition 
was either equal to, or even less, than the time required for the com- 
plete restoration of the normal excitability. Lastly, when the gross 
value of the total inhibitory after-effect was computed by adding 
together all the percentages of inhibition calculated from the table, 
it was found that the inhibition exerted its fullest effect at place 3, 
a smaller effect at place 2, and the least effect at place 1. 

The most natural interpretation of these complex relations 
between the cortical excitation and the irradiated inhibition is that 
the induced increase of excitability produced the greatest effect 
nearest the point primarily inhibited ; for this reason the undulating 
character of the struggle between the two opposing processes was 
seen most clearly in the neighbourhood of this cutaneous area. That 
‘the underlying excitatory process was actually greategt in this place 
is obvious from the definite result of positive i ey which was 
observed immediately on the termination of th bitory stimulus 
at this point alone. In remoter places the i i ion was exhibited 
in a practically unimpeded form, first incre radually in strength, 
and then undergoing a prolonged w, ing until the normal 
positive effect was restored. It m noted, however, that the 
individual figures which were av LW exhibited for the first place 
variations much wider than f Are intermediate place, and still 
wider than those for the r Qt place. It is possible that the 
‘minor differences between urves for the different places should 
to a certain extent b ted to this. On the other hand, it is 
possible that the inc ney in the separate figures was in itself a 
true expression greater fluctuations of the excitability in the 
nearest place, as pared with the remoter ones. 

The foll Katy experiments by Dr. Podkopaev, which were per- 
formed on a Oeon dog, give another striking illustration of the 


great Or exity of the relations in question. Apparatuses for 


ee 


ee a 


INDUCTION AND IRRADIATION 213 


tactile stimulation of the skin were arranged in linear order along 
one side of the body of this dog.as follows: No. 0 on the front paw, 
No. 1 on the shoulder, No. 2 on the chest, No. 3 on the abdomen, 
and No. 4 on the thigh. A positive conditioned alimentary reflex 
was established by stimulation of the front paw (No. 0) ; the remain- 
ing places (Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4) were rendered inhibitory, and made 
equal in their action. Immediately after the application of any of 
the inhibitory stimuli, the place producing a positive reflex was 
tested, its normal effect having previously been determined at the 
beginning of the experiment. The experiments to determine the 
effect of each inhibitory place upon the positive ones were performed 
without any stereotyped order in the choice, first one and then 
another being taken. The results cannot, therefore, be attributed 
to any regular changes in the experimental conditions during the 
course of the experiments. 

The following table contains the data for each of three separate 
experiments with each inhibitory stimulus, together with the mean 
figures. The effect of the positive stimulus is expressed as a per- 
centage of its normal magnitude. It should be remembered that 
the excitatory effect of place No. 0 was in all cases tested immediately 
after applying one or other,of the inhibitory stimuli. 


After stimula- 133% 

tion of place 128% 

Secretory effect No. 1 125% 
of place No. 0 


‘whan: | tested After stimula- 127% 

T ately tion of place 58 age 95% 
after the sti- No. 2 100% 

mulation of After stimula- WO | 

one or other 


tion of pl 
of the inbi- Nog r 


fs aoa 100% 
bitory places 
(Nos. 1-4) After stim 140%, 


| average 143% 


tion oføfplace 
No. S 
This table demonstra early that the intensity of excitation 
at the positive ze E es considerably, depending on which of 
the inhibitory stimulNsäs previously applied. When the nearest or 
the remotest pegas the one previously stimulated, a definite 
effect of posit@§ ‘induction was readily observed: the secretory 


activity i aed considerably as compared with the normal, the | 


214 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


latent period became shorter, and frequently the alimentary motor 
reaction became increased in intensity. Moreover, the effect of 
| positive induction resulting from stimulation of the remotest place 
| was somewhat greater than that resulting from stimulation of the 
nearest one. No influence was observed from stimulation of place 
i No. 3, and the effect of stimulation of place No. 2 showed no regu- 
| larity, being at one test inhibitory, at another test giving rise to 
positive induction, and at a still further test giving neither effect. 
The similarity between the figures for the three separate determina- 
tions in these experiments (excluding those for place No. 2) was su 
| great that there can be no grounds for doubting the accuracy of the 
| average figures, and the figures relating to place No. 3 can be taken, 
|| therefore, as evidence of the existence of an intermediate zone in 
which neither the inhibitory after-effect nor induction was in the 
| ascendant. 
| We must now consider what this experiment teaches us with 
| regard to the intimate functional activity of the cortex. If it is 
|| assumed that the linear arrangement of the places on the skin 
corresponds with a similar arrangement of projection points in the 
|| cortex, the result obtained above should: be regarded as striking 
| evidence of an undulatory distribution -of cortical excitability. On 
this view the cortical area over which a nervous process spreads 
must be regarded as an alternation of regions with eightened and 
with diminished excitability, in which now the ex ory and now 
the inhibitory process predominates. These ents cannot, 
however, be regarded otherwise than as su We, and the whole 
hypothesis of the wave-like progression of a&gNation and inhibition 
cannot be accepted without further an re direct experimental 
proof, especially since it involves so portant and far-reaching 


| implications 

| The data brought forward lou lecture tend to show that the 
| changés in excitability of diffe points of the cortex caused by 
| external stimuli, and esp those of an inhibitory character, 
| proceed in a wave-like r, both in regard to time for a given 
| single place, and in yrd to space for different cortical points 
| simultaneously. is nothing surprising in this phenomenon, 
| considering that spread of the nervous processes on the one 
| hand and th iGputual induction on the other are established facts. 
| 


Considerab culties arise, however, when a general rule govern- 
ing Peale between the two processes is looked for. At 


Y 
oS | 
© 
: NV 
N 


INDUCTION AND IRRADIATION 215 


present we are still confronted with a series of unrelated facts, 
which do not explain why in some cases these undulations are present, 
in others absent; why in some cases the spreading inhibition is 
preceded. by a positive induction, and why in others the latter is not 
apparent. The available experiments, however, indicate that this 
variability is determined by the co-operation of three factors. These 
are, firstly, the functional peculiarities ofthe central nervous system 
of the experimental animal employed; secondly, the different 
stages of establishment of new connections in the cortex under the 
influence of external stimuli; and thirdly, the form in which such 


connections are established, since, for example, the different types 


of internal inhibition are known to differ considerably as regards 
their intensity and stability. One of the most important problems 


in the future complete analysis of the relations in question must be 


the exact determination of the part played by each of these factors 
in the cortical activity at any given moment, taking into considera- 
tion the relative intensities of the nervous processes involved. Of 
course, the problem can to some extent be dealt with even at present. 
In the experiments which were described a tentative approach to a 
solution of this question could be noticed. This is even more clearly 
revealed in experiments which have been recently conducted and 
are still in progress. In the last four lectures it could be seen that 
the inhibition produced by a stimulus applied at a certain point 
spreads over the analyser, either immediately on the if ation of 
the inhibitory stimulus or after a short preliminary of positive 
induction. For the purpose of determining w appens during 
the actual application of the inhibitory gti¢fySus the following 
special series of experiments was carried ou n these experiments 
other points of the same or of other oo were tested, not on 


the termination of the inhibitory Oo fion, as was’ hitherto the 


practice, but while the inhibitory s@f&yMlation was still in progress, 
i.e. the positive stimulus to be te as, so to speak, superimposed 
on the background of the in ry stimulus. The investigation 
was carried out on four di ogs by Dr. Podkopaev. 

The experiments wi inctive inhibition will be considered 


first. The dog emplgyetLwas the same which served for the experi- 
ments upon the irracSaMon of inhibition after a single non-reinforce- 
ment of the ene stimulus and after extinction to zero. In 
the present egy iments extinction of the conditioned reflex to 
tactile sigen of a definite place of the skin was carried to zero. 


216 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


The degree of inhibition was tested at two places, one at a distance 
of 1 cm. and the other at a distance of 89cm. The positive stimulus 
was applied at each place at the 30th second of action of the inhibi- 
tory stimulus and the combined stimulus was now continued. during 
a further 30 seconds. The stimulation of the nearer place when 
applied upon the background of the inhibitory stimulus gave 
843% of the secretory effect, while that of the distant place gave 
88%. In other words, the effect was practically the same at both 
places. It will be remembered that when the same places were 
stimulated immediately after the termination of the inhibitory 
stimulus, the nearer point gave 44% and the remoter point 664% 
(page 209). In order to appreciate these results more fully, it must 
be noted that in the case of the simultaneous stimulation of the 
inhibitory, and either of the positive places, the latent period of the 
reflex was considerably reduced, and the alimentary motor reaction 
was more sharply expressed than usually. Both these facts are 
unmistakable evidence of positive induction at all points of the 
analyser, except the one specially extinguished. The somewhat 
diminished secretory effect from the other places should undoubtedly 
be interpreted as the result of an algebraic summation of their effect 
with the effect of the extinguished place. 

In a modification of these experiments another feature of special 
interest was revealed. The extinction to zero produced at a definite 
place of the skin was obtained by repeating the congitjoned stimulus 
without reinforcement at intervals of 2 minutes e process of 
extinction was continued to the third zero Oh the third zero 
stimulation of another place of the skin wag\superimposed on the 


, Stimulation of the inhibitory place. Th x effect obtained from 
the combined. stimulation was in th ity of cases equal to the 
usual effect of the positive stimul kèn singly. Thus it follows 


that an intensification of inhib&ion still further diminished the 
inhibitory effect upon the surko)inding areas during the time the 
inhibitory stimulus lasted (enced induction). 

Another point is als yy brought out in these experiments. 
As was shown previo age 209), the reflexes at the two positive 
places in this d e still 50% inhibited two minutes after 
extinction of anc place to the first zero. But when the action of 
one or another of the positive places was superimposed upon the 
action of t ibitory stimulus at its third zero, again two minutes 
after th eding zero, there was no inhibitory after-effect from the 


= 
sh 


INDUCTION AND IRRADIATION 217 


preceding extinction. It must be concluded, therefore, that during 
the repeated application of the inhibitory stimulus the inhibition 
again became concentrated at the point at which the inhibitory 
stimulus was applied. The spread of the inhibitory after-effect has 
thus to be regarded as proceeding not during, but entirely or mainly 
after, the termination of the inhibitory stimulus; while during its 
action the surrounding areas of the cortex are, to all evidence, 
subjected to positive induction. 

Similar results were obtained by Dr. Podkopaev in another dog, 
in which positive conditioned alimentary reflexes were established 
to a definite tone and to a metronome beating at a rate of 120 per 
minute; an inhibitory reflex based upon differentiation was estab- 
lished to a stimulus of 60 beats of the metronome per minute. 
The tone, when superimposed upon the inhibitory stimulus of the 
metronome, gave out of nine experiments a slight trace of inhibition 
once, a normal effect four times, and an effect greater than normal 
four times. 

In further experiments on the same problem two more dogs were 
employed. In one of these [experiments of Dr. Golovina] positive 
reflexes were established to a definite tone, to a sound of a whistle, 
and to a tactile stimulus. Three inhibitory reflexes were also 
established, all based on differentiation—one to a definite rate of a 
metronome, another to a tactile stimulus, and the third ave ashes 
of a lamp. When all these reflexes were well establis as peri- 
ments were performed in which each one of the p e stimuli 
in turn was applied on the background of Na the inhibi- 
tory stimuli. All the tests gave uniform A positive 
stimulus combined, in this way gave eithe ormal or else a 
somewhat augmented secretion, and the EAN eriod was in most 


cases reduced. 

In the second dog [experiments re Pavlova] positive con- 
ditioned reflexes were established the sound of a whistle, to a 
sound of bubbling, and to a tacti ulus. An inhibitory stimulus 
based on differentiation was ed to a definite rate of a metro- 
nome. In these experim ach positive stimulus was applied 
several times with the i y stimulus. The results were somewhat 
different from those obt®ified in the first dog. Although the latent 


period was in most? s reduced, the positive effect of the combined 
stimulus was alm@) onstantly, and sometimes considerably, smaller 
than that XS with the positive stimulus used singly. In the 


——T a 


— a 


218 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


second dog, therefore, the concentration of the inhibition was not so 
perfect. 

It should be said that the last two dogs possessed functionally 
different types of nervous system. While in the first dog the dif- 
ferentiations were in general very stable and remained unaffected 
by the combined stimulation, in the second dog the differentiation 
was frequently incomplete, and was invariably still further disturbed 
after the experiments with superimposition. 

The series of experiments described in this lecture clearly demon- 
strate that, on the one hand, the positive induction arising as the 
result of an inhibitory stimulus applied to a definite place limits the 
spread. of the inhibitory process, and that, on the other hand, the 
interaction between excitation and inhibition is determined either 
by the phase of establishing new relations in the cortex [experiments 
of Dr. Podkopaev] or by the type of nervous system in different 
animals [experiments by Drs. Golovina and Pavlova]. 


LECTURE XIII 


The cortex as a mosaic of functions : (a) Examples of the mosaic character of the 
cortex and the more obvious ways in which this character is acquired. (b) Vari- 
ability of the physiological properties of different points of the cortex in some 
instances, stability in others.—The cortex as a united complex dynamic system. 


Ir becomes obvious from all the previous discussion that through 
the medium of the cerebral cortex a great number of environmental 
changes establish now positive, now negative, conditioned reflexes, 
and determine in this manner the different effector activities of the 
animal organism and its everyday behaviour. All these conditioned 
reflexes must have definite representation in the cerebral cortex in 
one or another definite group of cells. One such group of cells must 
be connected with one definite activity of the organism, another 
group with another activity : one group may determine a positive 
activity, while another may inhibit an activity. The cerebral 
cortex can accordingly be represented as an exceedingly rich mosaic, 
or as an extremely complicated “ switchboard.” . However, iwApite of 
its extreme complexity as a switchboard, there are a s large 
spaces reserved for the development of new,connectio Moreover, 
points which are already involved in a definite con@tiphed activity 
frequently change their physiological rôle ang Qdpome connected 
with some other activity of the animal. 

The idea of the cerebral cortex as a mo functions is in part 
indicated in the current anatomical Sad physiological teaching. 
The structural complexity of the speci) receptor organs of special 


sense, the rich complexity of the gular structures of the cortex,. 


and the complexity of their dis€r}_ution conform quite readily to 
the idea of the mosaic chan f the central nervous system. 
f fu 


The rather rough localizatj nction which has been achieved 
during the last centu experimental physiology is no less in 


accord with such conception. The final resolution of the 


many delicate prc s involved in this conception is, how- 


ever, a comple difficult matter; up to the present it has 
been possit ly to make the very first attempts towards an 


t 219 
S? 


@ 
ww 


N 
AO 


ET zæ 


eae E 


220 _ CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


experimental study of the simplest aspects of the problem, and 
even these aspects demand the utmost skill and resource of the 
inquirer. 

The existence of a localization of function in the cortex is in some 
cases sufficiently proved by the evidence of structure alone, definite 
receptor elements having been shown. to stand in connection with 
definite cortical cells. The study of conditioned reflexes has shown, 
however, that a conditioned reflex appears at first in a generalized 
form, ż.e. that excitation irradiates from its point of initiation to 
embrace also cells belonging to other receptor elements beyond the 
boundary of the area of the cortex primarily connected with the 
stimulated receptor ; the problem becomes still more complicated 
when we take into account also the subsequent concentration of 
excitation upon its point of initiation. 

Two different problems present themselves for consideration. 
In the first place the question arises how the functional demarcation 
of two positive cortical points each connected with a different uncon- 
ditioned reflex is effected, and in the second place the similar question 
arises as to the mechanism of the functional demarcation of neigh- 
bouring positive and negative cortical points belonging to the same 
unconditioned reflex.. The study of anatomical localization of 
function is obviously of no assistance in solving these problems. 
The investigation of the first question is being cqnducted at the 
present time, and therefore cannot yet be di oN our investi- 
gations up to the present have been confin most exclusively 
to the second problem, since it is the si 

- We shall commence with a simple a 
conditioned alimentary reflex was esta KN 
of the skin on the right shoulder, 


vious case. A positive 
ed to a tactile stimulation 
egative conditioned reflex to 
a similar stimulation of the sin’ the right thigh. -After these 
reflexes had been thorouhigStasd the effect of a tactile 
stimulation of other places of the skin was tried. The different 
sites of stimulation we Q1) the front paw 17 cms. below the 
positive point on the er; (2) the side of the animal 12 cms. 
caudally from the ive place on the shoulder ; (3) the side of 
the animal 15 front of the negative place on the thigh ; and 


(4) the hind 18 cms. below the negative place on the thigh. 
The G ESEA was measured. during 30 seconds of isolated 


stimulati each of the above places. The results are summarized 
in $ owing table : 
SS 


t 


M. 


inhibitory properties in these respective points. I 


MOSAIC OF FUNCTIONS 221 


Secretion of 


Conditioned tactile stimulus applied Saliva in 
during 30 seconds drops during 

30 seconds 
Front paw 6 
Shoulder (the positive place) 8 
Point on side nearer to shoulder T 
Point on side nearer to thigh 3 
Thigh (the negative place) 0 
Hind paw 0 


Similar results were obtained in two other dogs [experiments of 
Dr. Foursikov]. 

It can be seen that under the influence of two definite external 
stimuli, which affected the animal under opposite conditions (one 
reinforced by the unconditioned reflex and the other remaining 
without reinforcement), two perfectly definite and separate points 
within the cutaneous analyser were given, the one excitatory, and the 
other inhibitory, properties. Around each of these points there was 
established a corresponding region of positive or negative influence, 
these regions of positive and negative influence extending towards 
each other, although each maintaining its distinctive properties. 
The smallness of the positive reflex on stimulating the ek the 
side of the animal nearer to the thigh, and the absence itive 
reflex on stimulating the hind paw, indicate the ON ce of 


a nucleus of inhibition the positive effect due to Q ial generaliza- 
tion would have spread over the whole of t alyser in such a 
manner that the decrement of the aa) x with increase of 
distance from its point of initial develop rent would have been 
gradual, as was shown in the tenth SA 
. The experiments described in gis lecture show that external 
stimuli evoking antagonistic meee provide the first method by 
which a functional mosaic r er of the cortex originates. 
Many other examples of thig€\fan be found in the lecture upon the 
analysing function of t eX. 
More complicated e iments were conducted upon three more 
dogs. In two do Sia tones [experiments of Dr. Siriatsky], 
and in the third actile stimulation of different areas of the skin 


[experimenta’ Qr. Koupalov], were used as conditioned stimuli, 
Y 
sO 
© 


8 absence of. 


SO eee ee 


—_ - STN ng 
-> a 


222 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


alternate areas being respectively positive and negative. The object 
of the experiments was to determine the mode of development of 
the mosaic character, the stability and the delicacy of its pattern, the 
interaction of its different points, the effect of stimulation of the 
spaces intermediate between the positive and negative places, and 
the effect of development of such a functional mosaic upon the 
general condition of the animal. Some of the results of these experi- 
ments will be given now, others will be described in further lectures, 
although it should be mentioned that the investigations are still being 
pursued. In one dog all the tones C of five neighbouring octaves 
of an organ (64-1024 d.v.) were used as positive conditioned alimen- 
tary stimuli, while all the tones F (854-13654 d.v.) were used as 
inhibitory conditioned stimuli. In the following tables the respective 
C’s and F’s are designated according to Helmholtz’s scale. The 
following experiment illustrates the final result obtained with 
one dog: 


Conditioned stimulus Salivary 


Time anpha rug Were kane | 
eae 30 seconds 

11.32 a.m. c 9 
11.44 _,, of 94 
11:53 £4; F (negative) 
12.1" p.m. C 
12-13. “%, of” © 1 
1222 Í” (negative) 0 
12.34 ,, C 94 
12.47 _,, f’ (negative 0 
1209 ;, C XS 9 


In the second dog diioreng Snes from f (1702 d.v.) to f’ sharp 
(360 d.v.) were used in altepgateorder as positive and negative con- 
ditioned stimuli. e’ sha 5 d.v.) was given the properties of an 
excitatory stimulus, ¢’ .v.) properties of an inhibitory stimulus, 
ec’ (256 d.v.) excita ” a (2134 d.v.) inhibitory, g (192 d.v.) ex- 


citatory and f © .v.) inhibitory, these tones being enumerated 


in descending r. As can be seen, the intervals between the 
respective epôsitive and negative tones were in this dog irregular, 
and smal an in the first dog. The final stage of development of 
the 


\ $ shown in the following experiment : 

N 

Sa 
© 


MOSAIC OF FUNCTIONS 


223 


Time 


Cr Ot He W DSH © bo 
Se aS 
rol 

aS 


we 


g (positive) 

f’ sharp (positive) 
e’ (negative) 

c’ (positive) 

a (negative) 

g (positive 

f (negative) 

g (positive) 


Conditioned stimulus 
applied during 30 seconds 


Salivary 


Secretion 
drops duri 


in 
ng 


30 seconds 


10 


In the third dog the conditioned alimentary reflexes were tactile. 
The apparatuses used for the stimulation were always arranged in 
strictly identical positions along a line extending along the left 
side from the hind leg along the whole length of the body to the left 
leg, the apparatuses being set at a distance of 12 cms. from each 
other measured from the centre of one apparatus to the next. The 
` stimulated places are numbered in order from No. 1, the left hind 
leg, to No. 9, the left fore leg. Stimulations of the places represented 
by odd numbers were given excitatory properties, and stimulations 
of the places represented by even numbers inhibitory properties. 
The following is a typical experiment : 


Time 


12.10 p.m. 
12.18 m 


The development of ths 
at the beginning s 


Salivar 
Conditioned stimulation Secreti 
applied during 30 seconds cot 
& -Onds 
Tactile No. 7 9 
Tactile No. 5 Q 104 
Tactile No. 4 EALE) } 
Tactile No. 5 K 4 
Tactile No. 7 O 6 
Tactile No. 3 64 
Tactile No. 6 tive) 0 
Tactile No O 6 
Tactile Q) 54 
j (negative) 4 


xO 


functional mosaic of the cortex presented 


ifficulty, but with continuation of the ex- 


periments it gre D) ressively easier. The reflexes were developed 
not ew but-in succession. One of the most interesting 


N 
> 
ao 


A® 
wl 


224 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


points brought out by these experiments- was the spontaneous 
development in the first and third dogs, in the final stages, of some 
new reflexes, and it is important to note that the new conditioned 
properties in these cases developed within the region of the anta- 
gonistic nervous processes. In the case of the first dog the positive 
conditioned reflex to c” was of very long standing. In one experiment 
this tone c” evoked a secretion of 8 drops during 30 seconds, while 
on the contrary f” even on its first application failed to produce any 
positive effect. This inclined us to regard f” as inhibitory from the 
start, and the truth of such an assumption was definitely proved in 
an experiment on the following day, when, f” being used as the first 
stimulus, it not only remained without any positive effect but also 
left a considerable inhibitory after-effect, so that the positive reflex 
to the succeeding stimulus c” became very much diminished. It 
is obvious therefore that f” assumed its inhibitory properties spon- 
` taneously, without requiring any contrasting, but to all appearance 
simply in virtue of its situation in the neighbourhood of the positive 
cortical point corresponding to c”. The same phenomenon repeated 
itself with c’”’, which when tested for the very first time gave 
a positive effect apparently in virtue of its proximity to the 
negative f”. 

In the third dog, with tactile conditioned reflexes, the places 
Nos. 1 and 9 also developed their full positive effegt spontaneously 
without any previous reinforcement, but mo ably in virtue 
of being within the sphere of influence of} previously estab- 
lished. negative places Nos. 2 and 8. 

Clearly these facts should be inteypẹ®ted as due to mutual 
induction initiated-by the pre-existiņ® points of excitation and 
inhibition in regular alternation. e experiments show us why 
any rhythmic activity is performed fore easily and less exhaustingly 
than an arhythmic one. The EGE on all three dogs showed 
us that in the case of a rogar alternation of positive and inhibitory 

xceedingly precise. In some cases such 


stimuli all the reflexes w 
a regular alternati NS even within one experimental day to a 


more and more prepage functional localization of positive and negative 
cortical points S can, of course, most clearly be demonstrated 
in cases where Bt the beginning of the experiment the effect of the 
different pi was lacking in precision. The following results were 
obtaine a) , the dog in which tactile stimuli were employed as the 
KN ing excitatory and inhibitory conditioned stimuli; the 


N 


MOSAIC OF FUNCTIONS 225 


experiment was performed before the negative stimuli became well 
established : 


Conditioned stimulus during Secretion of 
30 seconds Saliva during 
30 seconds 


Tactile No. 

Tactile No. 
Tactile No. 
Tactile No. 
Tactile No. 
Tactile No. 
Tactile No. 
Tactile No. 
Tactile No. 


(negative) 


(negative) 


(negative) 


(negative) 


bo WOU w bo HH to 
OO HB H Od © bo 
65-08 <a Gre ean 


Go 


The following is another example of an experiment on the 
first dog taken at the time when the reflexes were not yet quite 
regular : 


Secretion of 

Conditioned stimulus during Saliva in 
30 seconds drops during 

30 seconds 


10.50 a.m. c (128 d.v.) 
10.59 C (128 d.v.) i A 
11.16 c (256 d.v.) | All 3 

) 

) 

) 


stimuli 


11.26 ce’ (256 d.v. 
positive 


11.38 wor @ (BIZ dive 
11.50 o" (512 d.v. 
12.1 p. m. c (128 d.v.) 


O 


The same dog after 3 


11.50 a.m. 4 (128 oy 
11.59 __,, F (854 d.v. 5 ee i 
12.12 p.m. i (256 d.v.) 


205 (170 d.v. @eative) 
12.31 o" 19 ik O 


12.42 f P (34 ai egative) 
12.58 ,, c (IAV 
The above he Cag indicate that the mutual induction of 


the antagonistic rt Gus processes of excitation and inhibition 
should be wr the second contributing factor to the develop- 
he of a “S functions in the cerebral cortex. 

ig 


DOTON 


226 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


The same dogs were used to determine the extensity of the 
excitatory and inhibitory processes around the respective points of 
stimulation, and to determine also whether there existed any mosaic 
of neutral territory interwoven with the mosaic of excitation and 
inhibition. For this purpose, in the dogs in which a mosaic of tones — 
was established, other tones were used intermediate between the 
tones which had been given positive or negative significance, and 
the effect produced by these intermediate tones was observed. A 
positive effect, in the form of a salivary secretion, was a direct 
evidence of the tone having definite excitatory properties. An 
absence of secretory effect, on the contrary, gave no special indication 
whether the tone had any inhibitory conditioned properties or was 
merely neutral, and special experiments had to be made to test 
whether such tones left any inhibitory after-effect or exhibited any 
effect of positive induction. In the following experiment, between 
the positive tone 256 d.v. and the negative tone 320 d.v. three 
‘tones were taken: 2662, 288 and 3032 d.v. respectively. 


Salivary 
Conditioned stimulus applied Secretion in 
during 30 seconds drops during 
30 seconds 


pepe of 9th October, 1925. 


1.22 p.m. ce’ (256 d.v.) cy 
1.30) 4; e' (320 d.v.) (negative) 
7 
0 


1.40 ,, œ (256 d.v.) 
1:50", d’ (288 d.v.) oe 
1.524 ,, Tactile 4 


F Experiment of 14t oO cae 
12.50 p.m. g ai d.v! 


12.56 BoE 
1.7 a E » (negative) 
1.15 2 


t, 


1.25 RS 5p (2868 d.v.) 
iN of 20th October, 1925. 
2.14 p.m. Tactile 

220" 5; = 3 sharp (360 d.v.) 


2:33 ES e’ (320 d.v.) (negative) 
3 RO, c’ (256 d.v.) 
ol flat (3032 d.v.) 


Ao A Tactile 
v 


- its complexity. Moreover it is subject also to fre 


MOSAIC OF FUNCTIONS 227 E 


The above experiments show that the tones intermediate between 
the positive c’ and the negative e’, namely, the tone d’ and the semi- 
tones c’ sharp and e’ flat, assumed a different significance.’ The 
semitone c’ sharp produced a definite though comparatively small. 
positive effect, 7.e. it still belonged to the excitatory region of c’ ; on 
the other hand the tone d’ and the semitone e’ flat at the first glance 
were equal in their effect, since both gave a zero secretion. It was 
only by testing their inhibitory after-effect that a difference between 
these two tones could be revealed. The conditioned tactile stimulus 
when applied two minutes after the use of the semitone e’ flat 
diminished in its effect by 50%, t.e. it was under the influence of the 
inhibitory after-effect. When, however, tested under precisely the 
same conditions after the tone d’ the tactile stimulus gave a full 
positive effect. The semitone e’ flat, therefore, belonged unquestion- 
ably to the region of the inhibitory e’; the tone d’, however, either 
was entirely neutral or else carried much weaker inhibitory properties, 
an alternative which can be finally settled only by more delicate 
experiments. The whole question of the possible existence of 
completely neutral points in the cortex is being further inves- 
tigated. 

It was mentioned in the first lecture and again in the beginning 
of the present lecture that additions can always be made jn any 
pattern of the functional mosaic both with respect to its e 


struction, one and the same point changing it 
significance, and becoming connected successive 
physiological activities of the organism. In 
have only one series of experiments, cond y Dr. Friedman, 
as follows : 

One and the same agent served at wen a conditioned alimentary 
stimulus, later it was transformed in conditioned stimulus for 
acid ; reversely, old conditioned @yuli to acid were transformed 
into alimentary ones. Two 1O used for experiments with 
the first set of paca nd a third dog was used for the 
second set. The transfo n of conditioned stimuli was effected. 
by the substitution of Qnepyunconditioned reflex for the other. The 
following is the generad sequence of events : The conditioned stimulus, 
on transition from.qre“inconditioned reflex to another very quickly, 
even within a sj experimental day, loses its secretory effect and 
gives a a for a comparatively long time; only after 


os 
ao 


Aa@ 
ww 


228 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


considerable practice with the new unconditioned stimulus does it 
gradually reassume excitatory properties, and these now belong to a 
conditioned reflex based on the new unconditioned one, as shown by 
the very definite change in the composition of the saliva secreted 
by the submaxillary gland and in the character of the motor 
reaction. The complete replacement of the one conditioned reflex 
by the other required about 30 reinforcements by the new uncon- 
ditioned stimulus. After a considerable practice of the condi- 
tioned reflexes to acid the conditioned stimuli were once more 
transformed back again into alimentary ones ; the transformation 
occurred rapidly and only a few reinforcements were needed. This 
indicates that the original alimentary connection was still preserved 
in spite of the establishment of a new connection with the reflex 
to acid. 

However, the main interest of the experiments of Dr. Friedman 
lay in the investigation whether a differentiation which had been 
established for the conditioned stimulus to one reflex would be 
preserved after its transformation. A detailed description of an 
experiment will be given in respect to one dog only, since the experi- 
ments with all three dogs gave identical results. The alimentary 
conditioned stimulus in this dog was given by the tone of 2600 d.v. ; 
a precise differentiation from this tone was established to the neigh- 
bouring tone of 2324 d.v. The positive conditiqned alimentary 
reflex was now transformed into a conditione Ú to acid, and 
when the differentiation was tested it was fong sion its very first 
application to be complete and. to exert t me inhibitory after- 
effect as before. A new and more PEO fferentiation was now 
established on the basis of the “aci XS ex to a note a semitone 
higher than the original positing Ape i.e. 2760 d.v., and it was 
found that when the tone K 0 d.v. was transformed back 
again into a conditioned alifẹħtary stimulus this new and finer 
differentiation also retainegyits precision. : 

In the course of the ding lectures we had occasion to refer 
to the fact that o he same point of the cortex could, in 
accordance with t, iven experimental conditions, be a point of 
origin either of éxetation or of inhibition. These transformations 
of the physiglopital significance of a definite cortical point are 


attained wi omparative ease and are effected with considerable 
rapidit h in respect of positive and of negative stimuli (experi- 
na jth induction, p. 194), and in respect of their ultimate con- 


SÀ 

> 
ww 

O 


N 
AO 


MOSAIC OF FUNCTIONS 229 


nection with one or another unconditioned reflex (experiments just 
described). However, amongst our material we have a number of 
cases in which the definite positive or negative quality of some region 
of the cortex, or even a temporary correlation between the two 
processes, assumed an exceedingly persistent character which could 
be changed. only with great difficulty, or even failed to be changed. 


These cases were met with in the experiments of Dr. Frolov upon 


conditioned, positive and negative trace reflexes. The results of 
these experiments were of such unique character that it is necessary 
to describe them in detail. In the case of one dog a trace conditioned 
reflex to acid was established to atone of 1740 d.v. produced by an 
organ pipe : the tone was continued for 15 seconds and the acid. was 
administered after a pause of 30 seconds. This trace reflex was 
repeated 994 times in the course of one year and nine months: Its 
latent period, counting from the beginning of the tone, was equal 
to very nearly 25 seconds (10 seconds reckoned from the cessation 
of the tone). After the termination of the investigation originally 
planned it was resolved to abolish the trace character of the reflex 
and to give it the character of a delayed reflex, evoking the positive 
secretory effect during the action of the tone, and not some time 
after its termination. For this purpose acid was administered at 
the 15th second after the beginning of the tone. After twenty 
reinforcements with this new interval it was still found that, net only 
did the reflex fail to appear during the 15 seconds of Gite 
action of the tone, but even the administration of aci e 15th 
second evoked a secretion only after the old late riod of 25 
seconds from the beginning of the tone. The us her auditory 
stimuli in place of the tone did not alter the , and when the 
tone and the other auditory stimuli were ted. for 45 seconds 


_ without the administration of acid aR. on always started at 


about the 25th second from the beginni d then increased rapidly, 
giving about 10 drops during the r Qing 20 seconds of isolated 
action of the conditioned stim After this failure to diminish 
the latent period, the stim reinforced practically simul- 
taneously, t.e. two seconds afjeythe beginning of the tone preceding 
the reinforcement. N ess, even after several score of repeti- 
tions the conditioned tion started only after a latent period 
of 20-25 seconds ao. e beginning of the tone ; this latent period 
could not be cha: Sheth the acid was administered at the 2nd 
second or KS e tone was continued singly for a much greater 


S 
3 
Ò 


A 
N 


230 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


length of time. The last experiment performed in this series is given 
in the following table: 


Length of time of isolated Latent period 
Time action of the conditioned of the Salivary 
stimulus before Secretion 
reinforcement with acid in seconds 
1.12 p.m. 30 seconds 26 
Et =. 2 >, 29 
Pbk “5, 45 S 23 
1.40 ,, 2 n f 32 
EDAS 15 seconds followed by a 
pause of 30 seconds 25 


A conditioned alimentary reflex to a tone f sharp of a tone 
variator was now developed in this dog, but the latent period of this 
reflex also could not be reduced below 24 seconds, and it was only 
when a tactile stimulation was used as a conditioned. stimulus and 
reinforced with acid after 2 seconds that a closer approximation to a 
simultaneous alimentary reflex was at last obtained. At the twenty- 
fourth test the reflex was measured by 12 drops during 30 seconds, 
with a latent period of 2 seconds. 

A similar persistence of a thoroughly established cortical in- 
hibition was observed in the case of another dags\The trace of a 
tone of 1740 double vibrations produced by apypxgan pipe was used 
as a conditioned inhibitor to the positive cg ioned stimulus of a 
metronome beating at a rate of 104 pe Aiute. The trace of the 
tone even after one minute still exert 9 full inhibition upon the 
reflex to the metronome. Such A 


TERO 


WDibition had to be developed 
of course gradually, starting with *ecênt traces of only a few seconds. 
The experiments were onaya with this conditioned inhibition 
for well over two years, and thefone, besides serving as a conditioned 


course, led to an extr tensification of its inhibitory properties. 
At the terminatio=\® hese experiments the animal was used for 
another resear G@ywhich it was desired to develop a positive con- 
ditioned sete ea a sound of a microphone which happened to be 
practically @entical in pitch with the tone which had served as the 
conditio nhibitor in the first series of experiments. The positive 
oN? reflex refused for a long time to develop, and when the 


N 


trace inhibitor, was opp from other tones, which, of 


A 


+ 


y Eo 


O 


MOSAIC OF FUNCTIONS 231 


metronome was tested shortly after the sound of the microphone 
had been applied a most powerful conditioned inhibition was revealed. 
The experiments were now modified so that the inhibitory combina- 
tion of the microphone with the metronome was directly reinforced 
by the unconditioned stimulus ; in other words, a procedure was 


adopted which exactly reversed that employed for the development ` 


of the conditioned inhibition to the original trace of the tone. The 
inhibitory combination now quickly acquired excitatory properties, 
and somewhat later the sound of the microphone applied singly 
acquired a positive significance of its own. However, the tone of the 
organ pipe which had been originally developed as the conditioned. 
inhibitor did not acquire a positive character; neither did it lose 
its inhibitory properties : these had to be destroyed. by the same 


method as was used for the destruction of those of the microphone, / 


but the process occupied a much longer time. 


These cases of extreme stability of the inhibitory process must | 


be regarded as exceptional. It is very probable that the intensity 


of inhibition in these cases was favoured by some special con- 


ditions of the experiments, and it is possible that this exceptional 
persistence of the inhibitory process can be correlated with the 
experiments upon hypnotism and sleep which will be described 
further on. 

Along with these cases of an extremely stable “inhibitability ” of 
definite points of the cerebral cortex must be placed a at of a 
similarly stable excitability. In an experiment by Dy 
well-established conditioned. alimentary reflex, tọ 
256 double vibrations produced by an organ pipe Aye 
from twenty-two separate and distinct tones rantein pitch from 768 
d.v. to 85 d.v., the tone of 256 d.v. (c’) bem + lways accompanied 
by food while all the others remained ,u i orced. The positive 
tone was contrasted in each experiment Ser! times with one or other 
of the negative tones. In this mannev the positive cortical point 
became surrounded by a series o Qhibitory points. However, this 
apparent encircling of the posi Qyoint by inhibitory ones did not 
lead to a diminution of the aes the positive tone ; on the contrary 


it led to its extreme vie ion. When in subsequent experiments 
en 


the animal was experi ally subjected to a profound physiological 
sleep, so that, for ẹ pie, shrill whistling and banging on the door 
of the experime om containing the dog did not awaken it, the 
positive condigtehed tone awakened the animal immediately and 


YS 
SÀ 
N 


AČ 
ww 


232 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


evoked a full conditioned secretion. Experimental proof will be 
given in further lectures that sleep itself is nothing but a form of 
internal inhibition, and from this point of view the experiment just 
described must be regarded as a case of extreme stability of the 
excitatory process in a definite point of the cerebral cortex which 
successfully resists the surrounding inhibition. — 

The foregoing discussion of the experimental evidence permits 
us to regard the activities of the cerebral hemispheres as a true 
mosaic of functions. All the numerous individual cortical points, 
each at any definite moment, have some very definite physiological 
significance, while the whole mosaic of functions is integrated into 
a complex dynamic system and perpetually achieves a unification 
of the individual activities. Every new localized influence playing 
upon it influences to a greater or less extent the entire system. 
Consider, for example, a dog which. possesses at any given moment 
a definite number of conditioned reflexes. The addition of new posi- 
tive, and especially of new negative, reflexes exercises, in the great 
majority of cases an immediate, though temporary, influence upon 
the older reflexes [experiments of Dr. Anrep]. Further, even when 
no new reflexes are added, and it is only a rigidly adopted sequence 
of their order which is changed, their magnitude undergoes distinct 
diminution, showing a considerable predominance of inhibition. In 
the following experiment by Dr. Soloveichik a dog was subjected 
at intervals of 10 minutes to the conditioned leary stimuli of 
a metronome, an electric lamp, a whistle a tactile stimulus, 
always repeated in this order in every expgM{rent. The following 
table gives the results of the final experi 


stimuli : 
Salivary 
Conditidged stimulus Secretion in 
nie seconds drops during. 
15 seconds 
etronome 4 
lectric lamp £ 
Whistle aa 
Tactile 4 
Metronome 5 
Electric lamp 3 
Whistle 14 
Tactile 2 


with this order of the. 


MOSAIC OF FUNCTIONS 233 | 


In an experiment on the following day the order of the stimuli 
was changed. 


Salivary 
Time Conditioned stimulus Secretion in 
during 15 seconds drops during 
15 seconds 
2.24 p.m. Electric lamp 24 
2A Whistle Trace | 
2.44 ,, Tactile 2 
2.54 ,, Metronome 1 
3.4. 3) Electric lamp 2 | 
Silt), Whistle 4 | 
a a AT Tactile 0 ) 
3.34 ,, Metronome Trace 


The diminution in the magnitude of the conditioned reflexes 
observed when the order of their administration is changed sometimes 
appears immediately, as in the foregoing experiment, and in other 
cases becomes more obvious in the succeeding experiment when the 
I stimuli are again applied in their usual order. The diminution con- | 
| tinues for several days, and then the reflexes quickly return to their | 
normal magnitude. Such a diminution in the strength of the i 
reflexes as occurred towards the end of the first experiment given | 
above (3.59, 4.9, 4.19 p.m.) is of frequent occurrence anq will be | 
more fully discussed in the next lecture. . A 


© 


A 


LECTURE XIV 


The development of inhibition in the cortex under the influence of conditioned 
stimuli. 


CONDITIONED stimuli, acting as they undoubtedly do through the 
intermediation of definite cortical cells, provide the obvious means 
whereby the physiological characteristics of these cortical cells 
can be studied. One of the most important of these properties 
is that under the influence of conditioned stimuli they pass, sooner 
or later, into inhibition. In the previous lectures upon internal 
inhibition it was shown that in all cases when a positive conditioned 
stimulus repeatedly remains unreinforced, it acquires inhibitory 
properties, 7.e. the corresponding cortical cells enter under its in- 
fluence into a state of inhibition. The present lecture will be devoted. 
to the study of the intimate mechanism of this phenomenon, and 
of the part played therein by the unconditioned reflex and by 
other conditions which retard or accelerate the development of this 


inhibitory state. 
The transition of the cortical cells into an i ox. ry state is of 
much more general significance than could be i ed from the facts 


‘which have been discussed up to the peer C the develop- 


case of conditioned reflexes which in without reinforcement 
must be considered. only as a s nstance of a more general 
case, since a state of inhibiti O also when the con- 
ditioned reflexes are reinfo . The cortical cells under the 
influence of the conditiongey stimulus always tend to pass, though 
sometimes very slowly, a state of inhibition. The function 
performed by the ` oned reflex after the conditioned. reflex 


ment of internal inhibition. The aoe on of inhibition in the 


has become estab} is merely to retard the development of 


inhibition i 

The follo (Gy the most commonly occurring example of this 
phenoment We are dealing, we will suppose, with a conditioned 
reflex is delayed by 30 seconds, t.e. a reflex in which the 


234 


DEVELOPMENT OF INHIBITION 235 


conditioned stimulus acts singly for exactly 30 seconds before the 
addition of the unconditioned stimulus. Let us suppose that when 
the reflex is well established, its so-called latent period—the interval 
of time from the beginning of the conditioned stimulus to the onset 
of the secretion—is equal to five seconds. Now this latent period 
remains practically unaltered for a certain length of time, which 
varies greatly in different dogs. As time goes on the latent period 
lengthens out, and finally during the 30 seconds of the isolated action 
of the conditioned stimulus no trace of salivary secretion is produced. 
It is, however, only necessary to delay the administration of the 
unconditioned stimulus by a further 5-10 seconds for secretion again 
to be obtained during the prolongation of the isolated action of the 
conditioned stimulus. On continuing the experiment for some time 
as before, i.e. with a delay of 30 seconds, and then again introducing 
a delay increased by a further 5-10 seconds, no conditioned secretion 
is obtained any more. In order to obtain a conditioned secretion 
the administration of the unconditioned stimulus must be delayed 
for a still greater length of time. Finally a stage is reached when 
no conditioned secretion can be obtained during any length of 
isolated action of the conditioned stimulus. This gradual dis- 
appearance of the conditioned secretion in reflexes with a con- 
stant delay occupies very different periods of time in different 
dogs. -In some it takes only days or weeks, and in others it 
takes several years. The conditioned secretion disa s later 
with tactile, than with thermal, later still with yi , stimuli 
and latest of all with auditory stimuli, especially į latter are 
discontinuous. S 

The following is an example of the relative drfernees between the 
various conditioned stimuli with respect t, apidity of transition 
of the cortical elements into an inhibito te under the influence 
of a definite delay [experiments nS Shishlo]. The first con- 
ditioned stimulus which was developed/in a particular dog was one 
belonging to the tactile analys ihe administration of food, was 
usually delayed 10 seconds fro Qh beginning of the tactile stimulus, 
but on rare occasions a 30 s’ delay was introduced. The reflex: 
first appeared at the 2Zt mulation, and within five weeks, after 
179 stimulations, thereflex became stable at 8 drops during one 
minute. The development of a second alimentary conditioned. 
reflex to a ther taneous stimulus of 45° was now commenced, 
the normal pgfige of delay being as before 10 seconds. This reflex 


NS 
>" 
ao 


AG 


236 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


developed quickly, and when at the twelfth stimulation a delay of . 


30 seconds was introduced a secretion of 4 drops was obtained. 
On continuation of the usual reinforcement applied 10 seconds 
after the beginning of the thermal stimulus the reflex rapidly 
diminished in strength and at the 33rd test, when the delay was 
specially prolonged to one minute, only one drop of secretion was 
obtained. 

The following observation leaves no doubt that the disappearance 
of the conditioned reflex, notwithstanding its invariable reinforce- 
ment, is an expression of a progressive development of inhibition 
in the cortical elements. When an effective positive conditioned 
stimulus is applied shortly after the application of a conditioned 
stimulus which has, as described, just lost its positive properties, the 


resulting reflex suffers a diminution. Similarly, when one among a , 


number of conditioned stimuli has lost its positive effect its disuse 
in the experiments leads to an increase in the effect of the remaining 
stimuli. To my mind such results can only be interpreted on the 
assumption that real inhibitory properties have been, acquired by 
those stimuli which have lost their positive effect. This phenomenon 
should not be confused with what was previously described as the 
result of internal inhibition of delay. The inhibition of delay is 
revealed by the so-called latent period which is observed in every 
conditioned reflex and which remains unchanged fog a considerable 
period of time. The phenomenon which is bein EN ribed here, on 
the other hand, is characterized by its invari progressiveness. 
The inhibitory state of the cortical elemen er the influence of 
conditioned stimuli develops more qui with longer delayed 
reflexes; the longer the isolated ap on of the conditioned 
stimulus the quicker the developm he inhibition. For example, 


it often happens that a fo elay of 10 seconds remains 


unchanged. in its strength fo very considerable time and thus 
permits of exact experimentatien ; the same reflex when delayed to 
30 seconds quickly © nsuitable for experiments through the 
progressive developm inhibition. Such a case is taken from 


experiments by oe Ova : 
t 


A dog has ioned alimentary reflex established to the 
sound of a me Cris and throughout the whole period of work 
the reflex ay: has been delayed for 10 seconds remains constant 
in strengthS The following experiment has been chosen at 


RSS 


DEVELOPMENT OF INHIBITION 237 


Conditioned stimulus Salivary | 
Time applied during Secretion in 
10 seconds drops during 
10 seconds 
3.0 p.m. Metronome 0 
JID LS T l 
e E x 2 
42, 3 2 
4.91.80 ad 3 
4.20 _,, x 2 


As soon as the isolated application of the conditioned stimulus 
is prolonged to 30 seconds the reflex becomes inconstant in strength, 
and on repetition diminishes to zero during the time of one single 
experiment. l 


Conditioned stimulus Salivary 
Time applied during Secretion in 
30 seconds drops during 
30 seconds 
2.55 p.m. Metronome 6 
3.5 39 39) 17 
3:20) 55 g 4 
3.30 ,, if 4 
3.35 _,, 7 2 
3.45 ,„, ~ 0 


The above two experiments were conducted iN terval 
of one day. 

In view of the great variations existing EN dogs 
it has been found very useful, and EN tial, to employ 
in different dogs, reflexes which are ARQ O lengths 
of time. It now becomes obvious roe ng-delayed reflexes . 
develop only with difficulty and why Quritfg the beginning of our 
work they could be obtained only i me of the dogs. Moreover, 
it becomes easy to understand. Z many of the experiments 
previously described the posts limentary conditioned reflexes 
diminish during a single e Seep, t and in some cases after only a 
single application—as in periment on page 232 of the previous 
lecture.: This ed due to the repetition of the conditioned 
stimulus and not to an her factor, such, for example, as a gradual 
satiation of the Ton during the experiment in the case of alimentary 
reflexes. r is obviously not the case, since on repeating 
any one o QH conditioned stimuli, only the effect pro- 


238 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


duced by that one becomes diminished, while other conditioned 
stimuli may preserve their full effect up to the very end of the 


. experiment. When a definite positive conditioned stimulus has 


already shown a tendency to assume inhibitory properties, then 
after a short interval in the experiments, or even at the beginning 


of a day’s experiment, its first application produces a considerable 


secretion, but on repetition the stimulus quickly diminishes in its 
effect and becomes inhibitory in spite of its being reinforced 
at every application. i : 

Tt is in the interest of the experimenter for most of the experiments 
to have at his disposal reflexes of a constant intensity. To obtain 
such reflexes itis necessary in many cases to fight against the pro- 
gressive tendency of conditioned reflexes to undergo inhibition. At 
first on purely empirical grounds, and subsequently more rationally, 
a number of ways of combating this inconvenience were evolved. 
For obvious reasons the more effective of these methods were such 
as established conditions exactly the reverse of those which led to 
the progressive diminution of the conditioned reflexes. Foremost 
among such methods was the introduction of an occasional abrupt 
shortening of the length of isolated action of the conditioned stimulus. 


- If, for example, the reflex originally has been delayed 30 seconds, 


the practice is now adopted of reinforcing at the 3rd to 5th second. 
Of course, during this short period of time the condNioned stimulus - 
cannot evoke a measurable reflex, and very often Ya secretion 

whatever can be observed during so short a (9%j0d of delay. The 
short delay, however, is only introduced aya Yemporary expedient, 
being, so to speak, only a therapeutic meagtke applied for the purpose 
of regenerating the conditioned reflex Miterwards, when the usual 
30 seconds’ delay is restored, it ifo that the reflex is as strong 
and as constant as in the Eee t is useful to make this return 


from the short-delayed pee, the long-delayed one by stages, 
e 


only gradually increasing ngth of the isolated. action of the 
conditioned stimulus. OKlar of this method, measured by 
the permanence of the@@powstituted reflex, depends upon the degree 
of weakening of t Woi reflex, upon the time during which 
this weakness eu to persist, and upon the length of time during 
which the shordelay is practised as a therapeutic measure. A 
short perid practice restores the reflexes only to a small degree 


and for (D) ttime. Where a profound weakening of the reflex has 
Pee ed to persist for a very long time, the method which has 


- DEVELOPMENT OF INHIBITION 239 


just been described, and which is, generally speaking, very effective, 
no longer suffices, as will be shown presently, to restore the reflex. 

A conditioned reflex which has become weakened in the course 
of long practice can be helped towards recovery by avoiding any 
numerous repetitions of the conditioned stimulus within a single 
experiment, and, if possible, confining the use of the stimulus to 
single applications. A similar beneficial effect results from a simple 
interruption, even for a few days, in the work upon the weakened 
conditioned reflexes. 

Besides these there are several subsidiary methods, as,for example, 
to increase the strength of some of the conditioned stimuli or to 
increase their number, by the summation of positive induction, or 
finally by increasing the strength of the unconditioned stimuli. At 
present, however, interest centres mainly in the direct methods 
referred to above. 

There are cases where the extent of the diminution in the strength 
of conditioned reflexes is such that none of the above methods can 
be of any help—all positive conditioned reflexes simply disappear. 
The animal grows inert in the stand during the experiment, and 
even declines the food which is given after application of the 
conditioned stimulus. This can be observed even with dogs which 
have served, on account of the stability of the conditioned reflexes, 
for extremely exact experimentation during a period of may years. 

What is to be done with an animal in such a a n the 
earlier period of our work such a dog would undoubted) ave been 
discarded as one which could be of no further use ur purpose. 
Now, on the other hand, the condition of such Q is regarded as 
calling for further investigation, which, as a ar of fact, can easily 
be carried out. It is sufficient to stop the us the old conditioned 
stimuli, and to develop instead Paes eae to new stimuli, 
for the seemingly insurmountable dine to disappear. The new 
conditioned. reflexes develop extr nO quickly, and this is not 
surprising since all the reeeo a which originally interfered 
with the development of c d reflexes have long since dis- 
appeared. The newly seve reflexes quickly attain a maximal 
and constant strength, e animal entirely returns to its original 
condition and can be,ust®f for further experimentation. In view of 
the extreme import of this fact I shall describe in greater detail 
the history of o the dogs [experiments by Dr. Podkopaev]. 

SES th this dog were started in June, 1921. One after 


240 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


another different positive and negative conditioned reflexes were 
established. Among these were several reflexes to tactile stimulation 
| of different places of the skin (designated by numbers in the succeeding 
| tables). All the reflexes were extremely constant in their magnitude 
and in the length of their latent period, and the dog was used during 
several years for experiments on various problems. The following 
example illustrates the strength of the positive reflexes as tested in 


| an experiment of 30th August, 1922 : 
| Conditioned stimulus Salivary : 
i= Time applied during Secretion in | Latent period 
[i 30 seconds ` drops during in seconds 
Í 30 seconds 
I 12.30 p.m. Tactile No. 1 14 2 

| | i 1 Tactile No. 2 144 3 
| 1.20 ,, Tactile No. 3 14 3 
1 i E25: Metronome 144 3 
| T334 Tactile No. 4 134 6 
A 1.39 .,, Tactile No. 4 13 3 


| An experiment performed on the 6th August, 1923, involving 
Il various positive stimuli and a conditioned inhibitor gave. the 


following results : 


| Conditioned stimulus ` Salivary 


| : : í Secretion in | Latent period 
| ae sl Sa A drops during | in oon! 
| 30 seconds 

| osteo Ke tae S = simi De le ae A 
| 10.20 a.m. Tactile No. 4 1 be 2 
| 10.28 _,, Tactile No. 8 + tone = 
[li 10.383 , Tactile No. 5 $ 5 

| 10.40 ,, Tactile No. 5 5 


An experiment of 12th June, a 
| a negative one (conditioned Oe 
I resulted. as follows : 


lays the positive reflexes and 
Os: with a different inhibitor) 


| | 10.49 , 
10.56 


Metronome 
Tactile No. 8 


il 

| iti i Salivar 

Ml Time age ae Geaketing oi Latent period 
Mi ; 3 ds drops during in seconds 
i] 30 seconds 
i — ior. AE 

Ii 10.33 a.m. No. 1 34 7 

| 10.42, wget No. 8+lamp 0 = 

I 10.434 ,, actile No. 1 3 10 


i 11.8 RS Tactile No. 8 ps the 23 


3S 


DEVELOPMENT OF INHIBITION OAT 


Towards the end of 1924 the stimuli very often had a zero effect 
and the dog no longer took immediately the food which was pre- 
sented. Several expedients were tried in order to get rid of this 
increasing inhibition. Instead of tactile stimuli auditory ones were 
mainly used, and instead of long delays very short ones ; intervals 
of as much as a month and a half were made between experiments ; 
an increase in the strength of the unconditioned stimuli was tried ; 
and the animal was kept on the floor during the experiments, instead 
of in the stand. Any beneficial effect produced by these methods 
was only fleeting: the animal became more and more languid and 
often altogether declined food given after the application of con- 
ditioned stimuli. This state of the animal persisted throughout the 
whole of the year 1925. At the end of 1925 the use of all the old 
conditioned stimuli was abandoned and new ones were introduced. 
This procedure led to a quick and definite change in the condition 
of the animal. It again became alert, and immediately took food 
on presentation at the end of the application of the new conditioned 
stimuli. The conditioned reflexes were quickly established and 
reached a constant and considerable strength, while the latent 
periods returned to normal. These results remained steady in 
subsequent experimentation. The following is an early experiment 
during this phase, performed on the 21st January, 1926. The 
reflexes in this experiment are delayed. by 15 seconds, and an 
attempt is made to reinstate among the new ES oY 
one of the old ones to the sound of a metronome. 


Conditioned stimulus PA ta we Latent period 


Time oe diine drop ng | in seconds 
9.43 a.m. Intermittent flashes of lam ang 3 
9.55 __,, Bubbling sound K 6 2 

104 5, Crackling sound O 24 6 
10.10 _,, Metronome j Qy 4 2 
IOI ;; Bubbling sound Yd 3 4 
19:22- =, Intermittent fl amp 3 3 


The differences in the de of the conditioned reflexes in the 
above experiment depe Ae a certain extent on the different stages 
of development whiGhey have reached. 
The general ee cance of these experiments is obvious. The 
isolated K e conditioned stimulus, even though followed by 
A.P Q 


S 
SÀ 
ra 


V 


A 
N 


os 


242 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


the unconditioned, leads to the development of a state of inhibition 
in the cortical elements, and this development is the quicker the 
greater the length of isolated action of each single conditioned stimu- 
lus and the more often such a stimulus is used. It thus becomes 
apparent that the difference between the process of development 
of inhibition as studied in the early lectures with respect to different 
cases of internal inhibition and in those cases which have just been 
described is not. of fundamental importance ; although in most cases 
very substantial it is obviously only one of degree. In those cases 
in which the conditioned stimulus remains unreinforced the inhibitory 
process develops very quickly ; in those cases with reinforcement 
which have just been described the development of the inhibitory 
process is usually delayed—sometimes so considerably that its 
development may even remain unsuspected. Only in very rare 
cases is the rate of development of inhibition in both groups of 
experiments nearly or completely identical. 

We now come to the problem as to the mechanism by which uncon- 
ditioned stimuli retard the development of the type of inhibition 
which we are now considering. In the second lecture we saw that 
conditioned refiexes do not develop when the unconditioned stimulus 
precedes the neutral agent which is required to be made into a con- 
ditioned stimulus. This is probably a result of external inhibition, 
the strong excitation produced by the unconditioned stimulus 
leading to inhibition of that cortical area which i @ realty excited 
as a result of the application of the neutral lus. If this be 
nditioned stimulus 
cortical areas corre- 
ned reflex. To test this 


point experiments were ead i) 
A firmly established condjti stimulus was superimposed. 
on the background of the men unconditioned stimulus, t.e. 
the unconditioned stimul S$ applied first and the previously 
established conditioned lus was applied only after the effect 
of the unconditioned lus had become apparent. This mode 
of experimentation continued for several weeks or months on 
many dogs. T, ts were without exception uniform : the con- 
ditioned reflex er kept its original strength, but either weakened 
considerab. else disappeared altogether. 
The ger and the more practised the conditioned reflexes 
were+ Os more slowly they disappeared under this treatment, 


Y 


DEVELOPMENT OF INHIBITION 243 


whereas weak and recently established reflexes lost their conditioned 
properties very quickly. The following experiment by Dr. Solovei- 
chik gives an illustration of this case. 

The dog employed had many strongly developed alimentary 
conditioned reflexes, each of which gave upwards of 20 drops of 
saliva during 30 seconds. 

The establishment of a new reflex to a hissing sound was now 
begun. This reflex developed very quickly, and counting from the 
sixth application to the eleventh it gave secretions of 10, 8, 13, 9, 9 
and 104 drops during 30 seconds. Altogether only eleven reinforce- 
ments were made, after which the conditioned stimulus of the hissing 
sound was superimposed upon the unconditioned. The application 
was repeated in this way fifty-four times in the course of thirty-two 
successive days. The following table shows the trial of the hissing 


, sound after the fifty-fourth superimposition : 


Salivary Secre- 
Time Conditioned stimulus applied tion in drops Motor reaction 
during 30 seconds durin 
30 seconds 

2.28 p.m. -Buzzer seed 20 Alimentary 
2:35 55; Flashes of lamp 9 S 
2.44 ,, Hissing sound after ad- 

ministration of food — 
2.03 45 Hissing sound before ad- Taygstgatory 

ministration of food 0 eg only 
5 ie eae Metronome 16 jmentary 


39) 


SLO, Whistle ll 


It is thus clear that the administration e unconditioned 
stimulus results in an inhibitory state of cortical elements on 
which the conditioned reflex depends—¢hese’ cortical cells becoming 
temporarily unresponsive to their re exciting stimulus. The 
above experiment does not, howeyey, tisclose the inner mechanism 
determining the difference in nee development of inhibition of 
the cortical elements in RG einforcemenht and non-reinforce- 
ment. 

The sum of all epa of action of a positive stimulus 
required for the develdgment of inhibition without reinforcement is 
usually tapomp Aes than that of the periods of isolated action 
of the same stim ith reinforcement. It follows therefore that the 
transition KO cortical elements into an inhibitory state 


244. CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


is not determined by the aggregate duration of the isolated stimulus. 
It is, however, probable that the excitation in the case of non- 
reinforcement persists for a long time after the cessation of the 
isolated action of the conditioned stimulus, while in the case of rein- 
forcement the excitation is curtailed from the beginning of the 
unconditioned stimulus. The aggregate duration of the excitation 
produced by the stimulus may, therefore, be the determining factor, 
but other explanations are possible and the matter cannot be decided 
without further experimentation. 

The fundamental fact in all these experiments, which repeats 
itself time after time, is the transition sooner or later into inhibition 
of the state of the cortical elements acted upon by the conditioned 
stimulus. So far as concerns all the experimental evidence at 
our disposal up to the present, this- transition must be regarded 
as depending on a functional exhaustion of the cortical elements as 
a result of their activity in response to a stimulus. Such an exhaus- 
tion would obviously be dependent upon the duration and intensity 
of this activity. On the other hand it is also obvious that the process 
of inhibition cannot be regarded as identical with such functional 
auto-destruction of the cortical elements, since a state of inhibition 
which is initiated in an active cell spreads to other cortical elements 
which were not active and which were not therefore functionally 
exhausted. 

The rate at which cortical elements become cag to inhibition 
in the case without reinforcement fits in with tQéyéxtreme sensitivity 
which they exemplify in their extreme oe constant nutrition, 
being, as is well known, finally and LO) rably destroyed by an 
arrest of the blood supply far sone any other tissue of the 
body. It is in complete harmo with the conception of the 
cerebral cortex as a signalling 4pparatus. The fact that the uncon- 
ditioned stimulus which is © lied induces during-its action an 
inhibition in the cortex iggenly an artistic finishing touch to the 
efficiency of the machir D nay permit myself to use the analogy 
of an efficient and AN signalman who after having performed 
his responsible d has to be provided with an immediate rest 
during which fie refreshed, so that he may afterwards perform © 
his task agaip With the same efficiency as before. 

Anothé estion arises whether there exists such a minimal 
period ated action of a conditioned stimulus as does not lead 


in bu o a progressive development of inhibition in the cortical. 


We 


M 


S 


DEVELOPMENT OF INHIBITION 245 


elements. The details of this problem are receiving a full experi- 
mental investigation in our laboratories at present, but there are 
some experiments already performed which have a probable bearing 
upon it. In dogs which had had for a very considerable time con- 
ditioned reflexes delayed by 30 seconds, and in which the conditioned 
stimuli still retained. their full effect, all the reflexes were transformed 
into almost simultaneous ones by reinforcement 1 to 2 seconds after 
the beginning of the conditioned, stimulus. This modification in 
the procedure immediately began to reflect itself on the secretory 
and. motor components of these reflexes, bringing about also a dis- 
turbance of the previous balance in strength between positive and 
negative conditioned reflexes. The magnitude of the positive reflexes 
increased considerably, while the negative reflexes were to a large 
extent dis-inhibited ; in other words excitation began to predominate 
over inhibition [experiments of Dr. Petrova and Dr. Kreps]. The 
following is the method used by Dr. Kreps : 

The dog, in view of an especially exaggerated tendency to in- 
hibition, was not kept in its stand during the experiments, but was 
kept on the floor. Among other conditioned reflexes this dog pos- 
sessed a positive alimentary reflex to 132 beats per minute of a 
metronome, while a rate of 144 beats per minute served as the 
stimulus to a precise and stable differentiation. A considerable time 
before the experiment a conditioned inhibition had been egfablished 
in which flashes of a lamp acted as the conditioned i itpr to a 
rate of 120 beats per minute of the metronome. T onditioned - 
inhibition was absolute, but had not been used considerable 
time. All the retlexes were delayed 30 =e) These delayed 
conditioned alimentary reflexes were now t, ormed into simul- 
taneous ones, the food being presented cond only after the 
administration of the conditioned sti rs. The modification in 
the mode of reinforcement led to a d Pearanoo of the conditioned 
inhibition, which could not be PACAN ished in spite of. 100 applica- 
tions of the inhibitory Bei SEN uring 36 days. The differentia- 
tion of the metronome, whi iras solute before the transformation 
of the reflexes into simu us ones, was also dis-inhibited, and 
in the succeeding AG: titions which were performed within 
13 days the differenttftion continued to be unsatisfactory (3 
drops as against KN 7 of the positive reflex). On returning to 
the delay of 30, Quds with all the reflexes, the differentiation again 
became KO during the very first day, and the conditioned 

N 


SÀ 
aO 


D2 
wl 


246 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


inhibition was completely re-established after 3 days, as shown 
by the following table : 


| Conditioned stimulus during . Secretion in 
H Time 30 seconds drops during 
| I 30 seconds 
(a weeds SY a ee a 
I 1.6 p.m. Metronome, 120 beats T 
I 1.10 __,, 5 k 5 | 
| 1.20 ” ”? 33 6 
i L260: 3 A „ +flashes of lamp 0 | 
Hl |i aes Metronome, 120 beats 6 | 
i lis f i S | 
| LAs. yd » +flashes of lamp 0 | 


| 


M On transforming the reflexes again into simultaneous ones the | 
conditioned inhibition was almost completely dis-inhibited after 
ih only three repetitions of the simultaneous reinforcement. 
il It remains still to be determined whether in the experiments just 
| described, in which the conditioned stimulus is almost immediately 
followed by the unconditioned, there will be no tendency towards 
| a progressive development of inhibition with prolonged. practice, 
or whether the apparent vigour of the reflexes will be only temporary 
i and will, though much later, nevertheless be superseded by inhibition. 
Hand in hand with the exhaustion of the ee there 
goes of course their recovery. We should ex erefore, that 
the inhibition which appears to stand in so Qd of relation to 
| | functional exhaustion of the cortical eleme ould disappear with 


i their functional recovery. This expec fits the case of spon- 
| taneous recovery of extinguished coy@ifioned reflexes which after 
| some interval of time return to ormal strength. Regarded 
[i from this point of view it R Ore easy to understand. how the 


| slowly developing inhibition ey petition of the reinforced condi- 
I tioned reflexes is sl ON a temporary return of the delayed 


II reflexes to their original gth when a period of very short delays 
is introduced or w siderable interval is made between ex- 
‘Mi periments. By sh ing the period of isolated action of the con- 
i ditioned stim ay the one case, or by completely avoiding for a 
time any repetition of the excitation in the other case, the functional 
| exhamston e cortical elements is diminished and a better oppor- 
iM| tunity rded for complete recovery. 


M S iments are now being performed, with the object of specially 
I ~\ í 


DEVELOPMENT OF INHIBITION 247 


studying the restoration of conditioned reflexes in the case of 
experimental extinction, and in the case of the gradual spontaneous 
development of inhibition occurring in spite of reinforcement. An 
example of such an experiment may be taken from a research by 
Dr. Speransky. 

Amongst others the following serve as positive conditioned 
alimentary stimuli: beats of a metronome, intensification of the 
general illumination of the room, the sound of a whistle, and the 
appearance of a circle. The acoustic reflexes were somewhat stronger 
than the visual ones, giving 10 to 12 drops during 30 seconds preceding 
reinforcement while the visual ones gave only 6 to 8 drops. The stimuli 
were all applied at intervals of 10 minutes and always in the above 
order. In every experiment all the stimuli were repeated once or 
twice. Following a series of experiments of this type the next 
experiment would consist in stimulation by the metronome alone. 
Twelve successive applications were made at intervals of 10 minutes, 
each being reinforced. The first two applications gave 12 and 11 
drops of salivary secretion respectively during their isolated action, 


while the last two gave 9 drops each. It is thus seen that simple 


repetition of the stimulus led to a diminution in its effect by 25%. On 
the following day a similar experiment was conducted, but the interval 
between the stimuli was made very much shorter, being only’ 14 
minutes. The use of such short intervals was possible onl nel 
in this particular dog the secretion caused by the ate t with 
food finished extremely quickly and, as had been fo previous 
determinations, well within the 14 minutes. RS variation 
of the experiment the reflex which measure ps on the first 
stimulation became diminished to 44 drops ee third stimulation 
(diminution by 60%), to 2 drops on oe lation (diminution 
by 82%); passing with more or less re A dees of 2, 5, and 
7 drops, it gave on the 22nd stimulati He one drop and then no 
secretion at all, the dog even refaping food after the last three 
stimuli. When the visual “Se increased illumination of the 
room was applied 14 minut last stimulation by the metro- 
nome a reflex of 24 ‘rtp Sern was produced, and the animal 
took the food. A en food was given without a previous 
conditioned stimulus 

next day a returi! made to the original method of application 
of all the con Anea stimuli at intervals of 10 minutes. The 
metronome a first stimulus to be applied and gave 64 drops. 


N 
so 
Q 


ww 


S 


animal devoured it with avidity. On the ` 


O 


D 


|. 42 
wy 


248 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


On introducing a second stimulation by the metronome as the 5th 
stimulus the secretion obtained was only 14 drops. Finally, intro- 
duced a third time as the 9th stimulus, the metronome did not produce 
any secretion at all. In this experiment the secretion given by the 
other stimuli, although slightly below normal on their first application, 
did not greatly diminish on repetition. The reflex to the metronome 
was found to be restored to its usual intensity on the following day, 
and now it showed no further tendency to diminish on repetition. 
The foregoing experiment presents many points of interest. It is 
seen that one and the same stimulus which is constantly reinforced 
and repeated many times at long intervals of time loses only little 
of its effect : the same stimulus when applied at short intervals of 
time quickly diminishes in its effect at first, then after a wave-like 
variation it ends by giving a complete zero of secretory and motor re- 
actions, the animal declining food after the conditioned stimuli. In 
spite of this, another and usually much weaker stimulus immediately 
evokes both secretory and motor effects. The fact that the animal 
in the stand consumed with avidity a large amount of food when 
not preceded by the conditioned stimulus shows that satiety of the 
animal played no part. Relating the effect of the beats of the metro- 
nome to different states of the cortical elements it must be concluded 
that in the case of frequent stimulation these elements get functionally 
exhausted and have insufficient time for recover mio that after a 
preliminary oscillation which may be regarded adg\gtPuggle between 
excitation and inhibition the cortical elemen @ass completely into 
inhibition. The weaker visual stimulus sie considerably in 
its effect after the disappearance of ditioned reflex to the 
stronger stimulus of the metronom n the following day the 
cortical elements which are Rea, by the metronome are still 
not fully recovered and pass agin Ito inhibition when the stimulus 
is repeated. This inhibition i he same character as the internal 
inhibition which has beey>dgescribed in previous lectures, and it 
exhibits the same propaga irradiating to other cortical elements 
which were not pri volved. The experiment shows that the 
inhibition irradiatj neighbouring cortical elements standing in 
connection wi r conditioned stimuli leads to a diminution of 
their positive, effeét, exactly as was described for internal inhibition. 
That the tefBition in the neighbouring cortical elements is really 
due to { Yradiation of the primary inhibition is evidenced by the 
NN t*on repetition of the stimuli they do not show such a 


N 


S 


DEVELOPMENT OF INHIBITION 249 


rapid diminution in their effect as is observed in the case of the 
metronome. On the third day the cortical elements related to the 
metronome became almost entirely functionally restored. 

The observations described in this lecture open up many important 
problems, and in the first instance the question of rapidity of recovery 
from the inhibitory effect of different stimuli during complete rest 
and during activity, the effect upon this recovery of reinforcement, 


and so on. Besides these comparatively straightforward problems . 


there are more complex and more difficult ones. It is obvious that 
only certain cases of the development or disappearance of inhibition 
can be brought into relation with a supposed functional exhaustion 
and recovery of the cortical elements, and we cannot interpret in 
this fashion the cases of permanent and unvarying inhibitions in 
which the activity of the cortex is so rich—for example, all cases 
where an established inhibitory conditioned stimulus evokes an 
inhibition of the cortical elements directly and without a preceding 
phase of excitation—as, for instance, in the case of differentiation 
and conditioned inhibition. The problem presented by inhibitions 
of the latter type becomes still more complicated when we remember 
that those points of the cortex which become the centres of such 
direct inhibitions are never transformed into centres for excitation, 
even though the experiments are interrupted for weeks and months. 


LECTURE XV 


Internal inhibition and sleep as one and the same process with regard to their 
intimate mechanism. 


In the last lecture we arrived at the very important conclusion that 
under the influence of our conditioned stimuli the cortical elements 
invariably enter sooner or later into an inhibitory state. - With 
frequent repetitions of the stimuli this happens extremely quickly, 
and it may legitimately be regarded as an expression of the fact 
that the cortical elements, which represent the highest point of 
development of the nervous system, are extremely sensitive and 
therefore are functionally exhausted with comparative ease. The 
progressively developing inhibition, which itself cannot be regarded 
as a functional exhaustion, but which is a result of exhaustion, 
assumes the rôle of a protector of the cortical elements, preventing 
any excessive fatigue or dangerous functional destruction of this 
highly sensitive structure. During the period when the cells are in 
a state of inhibition, being free from activity the ical elements 
recover their normal state. This applies to all t lılar structures 
of the cortex equally, and therefore under tions in which a 
great number of cortical points are repeat entering into a state 
of excitation the whole of the cortex m xpected sooner or later 
to become subjected to inhibition, a state of widely spread 
inhibition actually does occur, e fac} in the same manner as in 
the case of individual Sele es ed ee and is familiar to all of 
us as the common and everydy) ccurrence of sleep. The complete 
and continuous proof of Ws contention is spread over the whole | 
of our twenty-five yea ork upon the hemispheres, and. at the 
present time no pani e physiology of the hemispheres studied 
by the method nditioned reflexes is bettet substantiated. 
Drowsiness an Sep were met with in our experimental animals 
from the ve ginning of our work, and we have been obliged to 
direct K ntion towards them continually. This, of course, has 


led, to collection of an immense number of facts, which were 


KYY different phases of our experimentation to receive many 
NX 250 


© | 

| © 

1 ep 
RNS 


INHIBITION AND SLEEP 251 


different interpretations. However, already for many years all these 
varied interpretations have been fused into a final one harmonizing 
with all the facts at our disposal. This conclusion is, in essence, 
that sleep and what we call internal inhibition are one and the same 
process. ; 

The fundamental condition of the appearance and development 
of internal inhibition and sleep is exactly the same. It consists in 
the more or less prolonged or many times repeated isolated action 
of a conditioned stimulus producing stimulation of the cellular 
structures in the cortex. In all cases of internal inhibition which 
were discussed. in the fourth to the seventh lectures drowsiness and 
sleep were met with continually. In the case of extinction of a 
conditioned reflex some animals even at the first extinction 
showed not only a disappearance of the conditioned secretory and 
corresponding motor reaction but also a great dullness as compared 
with the normal state of the animal before the extinction. Repetition 
of extinctions, in the course of a number of days, even if all the con- 
ditioned stimuli were reinforced in between, led in every case to an 
obvious drowsiness and even sleep of the animal in its stand, though 
no such:symptoms had ever previously been observed. The same 
happens, but to a much greater extent, in the development of differen- 
tiation. To take an example. An animal has conditioned reflexes 
established to different stimuli, including one to a definite\musical 
tone. During the whole period of work the animal rent alert. 
The development of a differentiation of a tone close Py e positive 
one is now started, and it is noticed that durin process the 
animal gets drowsy. The drowsiness grad. increases, and 
often culminates in a deep sleep with a On relaxation of the 
skeletal muscles, and snoring, so to now other positive 

conditioned stimuli are administered Neon by food it is 
necessary to stir up the animal and ro introduce the food forcibly 
into its mouth to initiate the act ofpating. Exactly the same thing 
happens in the case of develo t of long-delayed reflexes (for 
example, with a delay of t utes), and in the early period of 
our work this interfered our elena for, being not yet 
thoroughly familiar wit fe technique, it was impossible to obtain 
in some animals the r e required, on account of the development 
of sleep. The sam pens also in the development of conditioned 
inhibition, but maller extent. 

In all t eS cases of internal inhibition sleep develops 


252 CONDITIONED REFLEXES i ‘ 


fairly rapidly, which depends on non-reinforcement of the con- 
ditioned stimulus. In the case of the slowly developing internal 

- inhibitions produced by the repeated use of reinforced conditioned 
stimuli over a period of months or years, the development of sleep 
is proportionately slower and generally speaking stops short at one 
or other of the intermediate stages between the alert state and sleep 
itself, depending on the dog employed. In this respect the animals 
differ exactly as they differ in respect of rapidity of development of 
the common forms of internal inhibition. 

It is not necessary to give any examples of individual experiments 
upon this transition of internal inhibition into sleep, since all our 
experiments abound with observations showing that internal in- 
hibition invariably passes into sleep unless special precautions are 
taken. As there is practically no stimulus of whatever strength 
that cannot, under certain conditions, become subjected to internal 
inhibition, so also there is none which cannot produce sleep. Very 
powerful electric shocks applied to the skin, when used as conditioned 
alimentary stimuli, led, after many months of use in the experi- 
ments of Dr. Eroféeva, to a progressively increasing internal inhibi- 
tion in spite of continuous reinforcement, and in the experiments 
of Dr. Petrova they became most effectual agents in inducing sleep. 
Similarly, different external agencies in their rôle of conditioned 
stimuli fall into an identical order of See ose regards the 
rapidity with which they lead to internal inhijtiom and to sleep. 
It was mentioned in the preceding lecture internal inhibition 
develops most readily with thermal and 1 eadily with auditory 
stimuli ; in exactly the same mannensedgp develops quickly with 
thermal conditioned reflexes and RQ slowly and: less frequently 
with auditory conditioned reflex€s.) he interference by sleep in 
the case of thermal conditiongd stimuli was indeed so persistent 
and upset the work to so grep extent that in the early period of 
our research I had real fia in finding collaborators who would 


agree to work with the uli. | 
Finally, the long olated action of the conditioned stimulus 


was mentioned aA ctor determining the development of internal 
inhibition ; ii is a factor in determining the development of 
sleep. In sgmèđogs, while the conditioned reflex was delayed only 
10 or 15 se is, the animal remained fully alert during experiments 


a years, but so soon as the reflex was delayed for 30 seconds 


drowsiness and sleep appeared. The results of this type of experiment 


N 


INHIBITION AND SLEEP 253 


are often truly striking, for the quick transition from full alertness 


into true physiological sleep, due to this seemingly insignificant 
change in the experimental conditions, is amazing. Examples with 
variable length of delay and with variable precision of results are 
strewn over our work in abundance. 

All those methods described in the preceding lecture as retarding 
or abolishing that progressive growth of internal inhibition, which 
develops in the case of frequently repeated. conditioned reflexes not- 
withstanding their constant reinforcement, can be used with equal 
efficiency for the purpose of resisting sleep. 

At this point the following question naturally arises: If sleep 
so closely coincides in its appearance and disappearance with internal 


. inhibition, how is it that the latter plays such an extremely important 


part during the alert state of the animal, serving for the most delicate 
physiological mechanism of equilibration of the higher organism 
with its environment ? To my mind all the facts which have been 
given in the preceding lectures dispose at once of the apparent 
contradiction. Internal inhibition during the alert state is nothing 
but a scattered sleep, sleep of separate groups of cellular structures ; 
and sleep itself is nothing but internal inhibition which is widely 
irradiated, extending over the whole mass of the hemispheres and 
involving the lower centres of the brain as well. Thus internal 
inhibition in the alert state of the animal represents a, regional 
distribution of sleep which is kept within bounds by th Noni 
nervous process of excitation. Such a restricting nism has 
been illustrated already in the lectures upon the onal mosaic 
of the cortex and upon its analysing activity. & 

In the case of extinction the developme leep is prevented 
only if after extinction the conditioned. li are systematically 
reinforced and extinction is not repeateg tea 4ften. In differentiation 
of stimuli the developing internal piion which tends at first 
to be accompanied. by sleep—can e definitely restricted within 
its own analyser by inserting inhibitory conditioned stimuli 
between repeated. applicatio he positive conditioned stimulus. 
In this manner the pro of excitation which is repeatedly 


pæ 


being evoked a spreading of internal inhibition. 


Exactly the same is ved in the case of conditioned inhibition 
and inhibition of Gejay. -In all these cases if the experiment is 
conducted with thought drowsiness and sleep appear only as 
phasic event uring the time when the physiological demarcation 


254 - CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


between the areas of excitation and inhibition is not yet\fully estab- 
lished. However, as soon as the conditions of the experiments lead. 
to a prevalence of inhibition sleep again reappears. The following 
is a striking example : In the lecture upon the functional mosaic 
a dog was mentioned in which a tone served. as the stimulus to a 
positive conditioned reflex, while twenty neighbouring tones up and 
down the scale were differentiated. as stimuli for negative conditioned 
reflexes. This animal was never inclined. to drowsiness or sleep 
when a balance was maintained between the number of repetitions 
of the positive and negative conditioned stimuli, and under these 
conditions the dog always gave full reflexes to the applications of 
the positive stimulus. As soon, however, as the inhibitory tones 
were used several times in succession, the dog quickly fell into such 
profound sleep that even most powerful extraneous stimuli failed 
to awaken it. When a return was made to the interposition of the 
negative conditioned stimuli between applications of the positive 
one, sleep was never observed to develop. In this respect, such 
experiments as have already been mentioned in connection with the 
mosaic character of cortical functions—especially those with the 
use of tactile stimuli—are very instructive. In spite of a tendency 
of tactile conditioned stimuli to favour the development of drowsiness 
and sleep, the dog used by Dr. Koupalov never exhibited any signs 
of drowsiness, although a conditioned tactile mosaig was practised 
in this dog for over two years (p. 223). This SY ioul due to 
the inhibition being constantly limited and ch oe in its irradiation 
by the antagonistic excitatory process. An r Ne ecthed of combat- 
ing any wide irradiation of inhibition js €\Sncrease the number of 
positive conditioned stimuli, and so the spread of inhibition 
from its initial points of develop 

The following observation oP etrova, which to some extent 

0 


also bears on this subject, i re complicated. A long-delayed 
alimentary reflex to a met e was being developed without the 
previous establishment imultaneous reflex: the length of the 
delay was 3 minute g several days the dog became more and 
more drowsy, and. INY y fell into a state of profound sleep. Obviously 
the inhibition developed. during the first period of action of 
the metronom s so powerful that it prevented the development 
of the pha Coj excitation which normally precedes reinforcement. 
Five iene were now used to develop further alimentary 
KS reflexes—these agencies together with the original 


`D 


INHIBITION AND SLEEP F 255 


stimulus were allowed to act for only 5 seconds before reinforcement. 
Drowsiness quickly disappeared and all the reflexes developed with 
ease. The delay before reinforcement was now gradually extended 
in all six reflexes by 5 seconds each day. Corresponding with the 
increase in delay before reinforcement the latent period of the reflexes 
became longer, and finally without any interference of sleep six long- 
delayed reflexes became firmly established, all with a preliminary 
period of inhibition of 1-14 minutes. The process of excitation, 
originating in six different points of the cortex, allowed the inhibi- 
tion to develop only gradually, limiting it both in time and space 
and. preventing the development of sleep. 

To the same group as the last belong some further observations 
which were made in only a few dogs, all of them very easily subjected 
to inhibition. These dogs developed drowsiness and sleep simply 
on account of limitation of movements when placed in the stand. 
Sleep could be avoided, at least for some length of time, by conducting 
the experiments with the animals free upon the floor. It is probable 
that under the latter condition stimuli originating within the motor 
apparatus and the skin provided fairly regular foci of excitation 
within the cortex which counteracted to some extent any wide 
irradiation of conditioned inhibition. However, another factor of 
probably greater importance also undoubtedly played a part, and 
to this we shall return later. 

What has been shown to take place in the cortical legos with 
respect to the development of internal inhibition under influence 
of conditioned stimuli, can be observed to the sa wtent in the 
case of stimulation of the cortical elements by s which have 
no special conditioned physiological significanc s has previously 
been mentioned, among the different r the investigatory 
reflex has a special importance. mm. as a point d'appui in 


the cells of the cortex as well as in th er parts of the brain. In 
the normal animal the reflex is undoubtedly produced with the active 
co-operation of the cortex. This is supported by the exquisite 
sensitivity of the reflex, for it J ked by any minutest change’ in 
the environment. This is AP pon only through the presence 
of the higher analysing Q y of the cerebral cortex and is wholly 
unattainable by the T e of the brain alone. The investigatory 
reflex, as we know,@avariably weakens on repetition, and finally 
disappears altog Der Special experiments conducted in my 
laboratory by, (<n Popov showed that the disappearance 


YV 
N 


AO 
wy 


AO 
ww 


256 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


of the investigatory reflex is based on the development of inhi- 
bition, and is in all details analogous to extinction of conditioned 
reflexes. 

If the agent which is responsible for the investigatory reflex 
ceases, on repetition at frequent intervals of time during one single 
experiment, to call forth the corresponding motor reaction, a pro- 
longation of the interval in the same experiment restores the reaction 
exactly as in the case of extinguished conditioned reflexes. Similarly, 
a definite investigatory reflex which has only just disappeared on 
account of repetition of the stimulus becomes temporarily re-estab- 
lished by an application of some new extra stimulus calling forth 


- another investigatory reflex. It follows, therefore, that the ex- 


tinguished investigatory reflex undergoes dis-inhibition exactly as 
do the underlying positive reflexes in cases of internal inhibition. 
If the investigatory reflex to a definite agent is repeatedly evoked 
in the course of a number of days it permanently disappears, just 
as does a systematically non-reinforced conditioned reflex. Finally, 
such an extinguished investigatory reflex can be temporarily re- 
established by administration of stimulants (caffeine) exactly, for 
example, as in the case of conditioned differentiated reflexes (p. 127). 
The inhibition of the investigatory reflex invariably leads to drowsi- 
ness and sleep (even more easily than the inhibition of conditioned 
reflexes). In the following experiments by Dr.Chechoulin the develop- 
ment of inhibition and sleep in the case of the igseptigatory reflex 
was studied by means of conditioned stimuli. 

The dog used for these experiments had 
reflex established to a whistle. Hissing, b 
of the skin and other stimuli were all 
bring about the investigatory reien 


itioned alimentary 
ing, tactile stimulation 
ied for the first time to 


Conditioned Kgalivary : 
Time stimulus applied retion in Latent period Remarka 
; during 30 secon ops during | in seconds 
(og) 30 seconds 


4.7 p.m. mer 3 3 Reinforced 
WN 


AIDE 4 3 Reinforced | 


Now, beginnagfrom 4.21 p.m., the bubbling sound was repeatedly 
applied durjégyperiods of 30 seconds and at intervals of 2 minutes. 
During t. st three applications there were movements of orienta- 
tion. Jya. in the direction of the sound, and these movements 


N 


5 


INHIBITION AND SLEEP 257 


gradually became weaker. With the fourth application the first 
signs of drowsiness made their appearance. Up to the eighth 
repetition the sleep was interrupted at different moments of the 
stimulation. During the eighth and ninth stimulations all movements 
of the animal disappeared. At 4.43 p.m. the sound of bubbling was 
applied for 10 seconds, and then the whistle was added and kept on 
for 30 seconds. This brought about neither motor nor secretory 
reaction and the sleep continued. Administration of food awakened 
the animal; it took the food but even after that it still remained 
drowsy. The experiment with the conditioned stimulus continued 
as follows : 


Conditioned Salivary 
Time stimulus applied Secretion in | Latent period Remarks 
during 30 seconds | drops during | in seconds 
30 seconds 
4.53 p.m. Whistle 24 8 Reinforced 
525E Whistle pan 7 Reinforced 


It should be remembered that this dog was never observed to fall 
asleep in its stand during the usual experiments with conditioned 
reflexes. In the succeeding experiments new agents bringing about — 
an investigatory reflex were repeated up to the point of sleep, or 
sometimes only until the stage of disappearance of the motor reaction. 
Twenty-one days after the experiment recorded above tagih stimo 
lation of the skin was used as the extra stimulus for the oO gatory 
reflex, the experiment proceeding as follows : 


Conditioned stimuli Secretion 
Time of in drops 
different duration 


Koa 
Remarks 


Reinforced 


2.5 p.m. | Whistle, 5 secs. 
22k Whistle, 30 secs. Reinforced 
2.21 2%, Whistle, 5 secs. Reinforced 


The conditioned reflex in th Ceh experiment was twice reinforced 
after only five seconds of Ne on of the stimulus in order to main- 
tain the normal streng e reflex to the end of the experiment. 

Starting from EO an application of the tactile cutaneous 
stimulus was made @aring 30 seconds and similar applications were 
repeated at inter, of one minute. During the first three applica- 
tions the ani ned its head towards the place on the skin where 


A.P, Ss R 
sh 
5 


AČ 
w 


258 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


the tactile stimulus was applied. During the fourth and fifth repeti- 
tions there were no movements. at all, but there was no drowsiness 
of the animal. Now, at 4.324 p.m., the tactile stimulus was applied 
singly during 10 seconds, after which the whistle was added to it and 
both stimuli were continued together during 30 seconds. Fifteen 
seconds after the beginning of the action of the whistle there was a 
commencement of salivary secretion, but during the whole remaining 
period of stimulation only 2 drops were recorded. The experiment 
continued as follows : 


Conditioned stimulus 


Secretion | Latent period 


Time applied during in drops pa ee Remarks 
30 seconds 
2.45 p.m. | Whistle | 5 i! Reinforced 


The experiments show that on repetition the motor component 
of the investigatory reflex gradually diminished, and that, on con- 
tinuing the repetitions further, drowsiness developed and became 
more and more profound, although in some experiments before 
drowsiness appeared the stimulus remained, during a certain interval 
of time, apparently without effect. Nevertheless, superimposition 
of a conditioned stimulus upon the extraneous stimulus showed 
that during the whole period of this apparent ineffectiveness the 
investigatory agent was exerting an inhibitor woe (the 
experiment with the tactile stimulus as extra lús). This in- 
hibition of the conditioned stimulus was not du ternal inhibition, 
for, so far from producing inhibition of t nditioned reflexes, a 
weakened investigatory reflex actually hibits them (compare 


the sixth lecture for the action of the LDestigatory reflex upon the 
two phases of delayed'‘conditione s). It is obvious therefore 
that inhibition and sleep corel a result of the repetition of the 
investigatory reflex, in the for case leading to a diminution and 


in the latter to a crore of the conditioned reflex (the experi- 


ment with the bubblin ). 
The same is ve shown also when the experiments are 
conducted on pup FE aide of Dr. Rosenthal]. On mono- 


tonous repetitiQn Jof a stimulus under constant environmental 
conditions thgspuppies fall asleep very quickly and often with sur- 
prising si eity. It is, I think, a common experience that man, 


when y to an intensive mental life, usually falls into drowsiness 


+ 
| 


A 


Y 


INHIBITION AND SLEEP 259 


and sleep when subjected to the accompanying monotonous stimuli, 
however unfortunate such drowsiness or sleep may be as to place 
and as to time. This means, of course, that the definite cortical 
elements which react to such protracted external stimuli become 
functionally fatigued and pass into a state of inhibition, which in the 
absence of a counteraction by an excitation of other places, spreads 
over the hemispheres and leads to sleep. The extreme rapidity with 
which the cellular structures of the cortex undergo functional 
fatigue and become subjected to inhibition can be contrasted with 
the persistence of function of the cellular structures of the spinal 
cord and medulla under identical conditions. Experiments by Dr. 
Zeliony in our laboratory showed that while in a normal dog an in- 
vestigatory reflex to a definite sound quickly vanished, the same 
sound in a dog with extirpated cortex, under identical conditions, 
called forth an investigatory reflex in a stereotyped. manner and for 
an unlimited number of times. 

To return again to conditioned reflexes. The development of 
inhibition with its ultimate expression in the form of sleep is due to 
functional fatigue of the cellular structures of the cortex. This is 
borne out by the following observations which were made repeatedly 
in our laboratory. In dogs in which any analyser had been surgically 
damaged, positive conditioned stimuli related to this analyser could 
scarcely be continued even for a very short time singly, gake they 
tended quickly to assume inhibitory properties ; quiteXos eA they 
never excited any preliminary positive action at all, @yehaved as 
inhibitory stimuli from the start. This phenom Ni especially 
constant and easy of demonstration in the D) the damaged 
cutaneous analyser.’ After extirpation of Bey coronarius and 
ecto-sylvius anterior (see Fig. 8), positive gx8s to tactile stimula- 
tion of the extremities, pelvis and sh@ul@@r became replaced for 
several months by inhibitory reflexes at the reflexes were now 
truly inhibitory was proved by thefact that positive conditioned 
reflexes related to other pele) owed their full normal effect 
before the application of a Gig imulus, but diminished in their 
positive effect or lost it age after the application of the tactile 
conditioned stimulus. os) same time tactile stimuli quickly and 
easily produced sleep eef in dogs which never before the operation 
fell asleep in respo tactile stimuli. These facts often assumed 
the following extre y impressive form. A tactile conditioned stimu- 
lus which KN lied to the part of the cutaneous surface related 


\ 
X 
so 


@ 
RY 


260 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


| to the damaged portion of the analyser would lead to inhibition 
and sleep, but the same stimulus applied to the skin corresponding 
| to the non-damaged portion of the analyser would give a full positive 
effect, leaving the animal fully alert [experiments of Dr. Krasnogorsky, 
Dr. Rosenkov and Dr. Archangelsky]. To the same group of obser- 
vations belong those made in our laboratory during the period of 
shortage in Russia a few years ago. The semi-starved animals could 
not be used for experiments with conditioned reflexes, since all 
positive conditioned stimuli assumed inhibitory properties, and the 
dogs invariably developed sleep exactly in conjunction with the 
application of the conditioned stimuli. Obviously the general mal- 
1 nutrition of the dog had powerfully affected the functional resistance 
of the cortical elements [experiments of Dr. Frolov, Dr. Rosenthal 
and others]. 

In the examples enumerated up to the present we have had only 
cases of transition of inhibition into sleep, but the reverse can also 
take place, sleep passing into inhibition. To take an example A 
conditioned reflex delayed by 3 minutes has been established. The 
animal is placed in the stand and is fully alert, but so soon as the 
conditioned stimulus is applied the animal becomes drowsy and. no 
salivary secretion is evoked during the whole 3 minutes. When 
food is given at the end of the third minute the animal takes it but 
slowly and reluctantly. The stimulus is repeated several times in the 
same experiment with the usual variations of t Qal between 
the applications; at each stimulation the dog mes more alert 
and the secretion appears at first towards th of the 3rd minute. 
On further repetition of the stimulation t cretion augments and | 
finally the three-minute period of stim n divides itself approxi- | 
mately into two equal parts. In fon part there is no secretion, 

] 


although the animal remains cS ert ; in the second part there 


is a copious secretion, and at t d of the stimulation the animal 
takes the food promptly ang-gats it with avidity. In this case the | 


widely irradiated inhibiti ep), which appeared in the beginning | 
on account of the pr nce of the inhibition initiated during 
the first part of the an of the conditioned stimulus, gets gradually 


concentrated intf/a restricted inhibition. This concentrating of the 
inhibition is broud about through the influence of the progressively 


increasing e tion determined by the second part of the action 
of the KA oned stimulus and by the dis-inhibitory effect of rein- 


+ 


NS 


INHIBITION AND SLEEP 261 


It sometimes happens that the reverse, namely a pure replacement 
of inhibition by sleep, is obtained with the long delay of 3 minutes, 
or even with delays so short as 30 seconds. The animal, which has 
previously kept fully alert in its stand during the experiment, now. 
falls asleep, each time exactly at the beginning of the action of the 
conditioned stimulus. The eyes close, the head droops, the whole 
body relaxes and hangs on the loops of the stand, and the animal 
emits an occasional snore. After the lapse of a definite period of 
time—in the short delay 25 seconds or in the case of the long delay 
14-2 minutes—the animal quickly and spontaneously awakens and 
exhibits a sharp alimentary motor and salivary reaction. It is 
clear that in this case an inhibition which is generally concentrated 
becomes replaced by diffused inhibition, 7.e. sleep. 

Finally, it can also be shown [experiments of Dr. Foursikov] 
that a summation of two distinct and different inhibitions leads to 
sleep. For example, the dog has a well-established long-delayed 
conditioned. reflex to a metronome: the length of the delay is 3 
minutes. No salivary secretion occurs during the first two minutes 
of the stimulation, but at the end of the second minute the secretion 
appears, and reaches a maximum towards the end of the third minute. 
An extraneous stimulus of a weak hissing sound is now made to 
accompany the conditioned stimulus. The hissing sound dis-inhibits 
the inhibitory phase of the reflex, while a small motor reaction in 
the form of an investigatory reflex towards the hissing? served. 


The conditioned reflex is reinforced. On a repetitio p this com- 
bination not only does the investigatory a Ci hissing 
disappear, but the alimentary reflex also, nge animal becomes 


obviously drowsy. This experiment can o interpreted in the 
following way: The investigatory r a hissing undergoes 
extinction on its- first application, a , therefore, the hissing 
sound initiates an inhibitory nn This inhibitory process 
summates with the inhibitory ph he delayed reflex and streng- 
thens it to such an extent tha excitatory phase of the reflex is 
never allowed to develop, .b eplaced by general drowsiness of 
the animal. That this is rue interpretation of the experiment 
appears abundantly į sequel. On the next repetition of the 
conditioned stimulus, without the addition of the weak hissing 
sound, a regular ed reflex, with its two phases well pronounced, 
is obtained, a repeating after this the combination of the 
metronom + ith the hissing sound the conditioned reflex again 
S 


262 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


disappears and obvious drowsiness takes its place. The following 
are the actual figures of the experiment : 


Stimulus during Secretion in drops 


Time rth during successive Remarks 
30 seconds 
4.52 p.m. Metronome + hissing | 0, 3, 34, 1,0, 34 | Weak investiga- 
tory reflex 
Dice py F- 5 0,0,0, 0,0,0 | No movements 
of animal ; pro- 
nounced drow- 
siness 
515, Metronome 0,0, 0, .0,1,9 | Normal alimen- 
tary reaction ; 
the reflex is 
reinforced 


eee. wae Metronome + hissing | 0, 0,0, 0, 0,0 Drowsiness 


In this connection I conceive it useful to draw attention to the 
following interesting point. It is evident that the above éxperiment, 
together with that of Dr. Chechoulin mentioned previously (p. 256), 
reveals still another phase in the action of extra stimuli upon con- 
ditioned reflexes. A powerful extra stimulus, as will be remembered 
from the sixth lecture, at first brings about through the investigatory 
reflex a complete inhibition of the delayed reflex. Qn repetition, 
when the investigatory reflex considerably weake rings about 
only dis-inhibition of the first phase of the Iela fex Finally, 
as we have just learned, the extra stimulus K gain inhibits the 
reflex, but now by another mechanism : it mes itself a stimulus 
for a direct initiation of an inhibition i Koania A weak extra 
stimulus, as was just shown by th riment of Dr. Foursikov, 
brings about at first a weak and ¢rasHtory investigatory reflex and 
so leads on its very first splice dis-inhibition of the delayed 
reflex (4.52 p.m.). Afterw > the weak extra stimulus itself 
initiates a second, and nove inhibition. 

The following ENS perties of inhibition and sleep also 
uphold our view as eir identity. In the preceding lectures 


abundant eviden given to establish the fact of irradiation and 
concentration of theAnhibitory process within the mass of the cerebral 
cortex, and % s shown that the development of the inhibition 


was extren(ly’ slow, being measured: by minutes. Moreover, it 
varios pect to rate in different animals and under different 


Do 


inhibition are funda 


INHIBITION AND SLEEP 263 


conditions. There is no question but that sleep also does not develop 
instantly. We know from our own experience how drowsiness and 
sleep overtake us only gradually, and how sometimes they spread 
only slowly and with difficulty; and some investigators, indeed, 
have endeavoured to study experimentally the problem of the 
gradual involving of the activity of the different sense organs, and 
its more complex mental concomitants. We know also how variable 
is the rate of transition in human beings between sleep and waking, 
and the same variability has been observed in our experimental 
animals. Moreover, during our lectures it has constantly been 
mentioned how inhibition, which at first develops with difficulty, 
gets reproduced with greater and greater ease upon practice and 
repetition and by using different forms of inhibition. Exactly in — 
the same manner, extra stimuli, and conditioned stimuli which upon 
repetition bring about a state of sleep, with practice bring about 
this state more ard more easily. 

The following is of special interest. As was discussed previously, 
inhibition induces excitation. Corresponding with this, in some 
animals in which the inhibitory phase of a delayed reflex.is replaced 
by sleep, this appearance of sleep is on some occasions preceded by a 
short period of a slight but definite general excitation of the animal. 
The phenomenon is still more obvious and constant when sleep is 
induced under the action of a repeated and prolonged ee extra 


‘stimulus. It was often observed in the experiments by Dg: nthal, 
that, when the neutral stimulus evoked definite ess in a 
puppy, and before the animal completely fell P, it passed 
through a fleeting phase of excitation, mov, out uneasily, 


scratched itself, and barked without any ojyiots reason, holding 


its nose up into the air. A similar state of excitation preceding 


regard such phenomena as an effec induction. The excitation 

in initial stages of anaesthesia gquit also perhaps be interpreted 
from this point of view. 

I believe the aggregate .o given in the present lecture can 

be taken as sufficient NS f the view that sleep and internal 

one and the same process. I personally 

do not know, up to t resent, of a single fact in all our researches 

which contradic Gays conception. It is to be deplored, however, 

that we have On no reliable graphic method of registration of 

sleep. ORR occasions we tried to apply for this purpose a 


SÀ 
S 


sleep, as is well known, often occurs c n. Itis legitimate to 


AČ 
wy 


264 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


graphic registration of the position of the head of the animal. A 
perfection of some such method for the graphic registration of sleep 
is greatly to be desired, so that the whole evidence regarding sleep 
can be expressed in an exact quantitative manner. 

The details of our normal everyday existence are in full agreement 
with the foregoing interpretation of sleep. Our daily work, for some 
of us a round of exceeding monotony and for others extremely rich 
and varied, in either case must in the end determine an appearance 
of sleep. A prolonged stimulation of one and the same point in the 
cortex leads to a great and profound inhibition, and this irradiates 
widely so as to involve the whole of the cortex and the lower parts 
| of the brain. In the case of a varied activity, although no given 

point of the cortex attains such a profound depth of inhibition, yet 
| the great number of inhibitory points leads to a widely distributed 
inhibitory state even without wide irradiation, and this also descends 
to affect some of the lower centres of the brain. Of course a great 
number of quickly changing stimuli following in succession may 
| often exert a very prolonged and powerful resistance to the general 
dissemination of inhibition over the hemispheres, thus delaying the 
onset of sleep. A well-established rhythm in the changes from wake- 
fulness to sleep and from sleep to wakefulness may determine a 
beginning of sleep even without a sufficient functional fatigue of 
the cellular structures of the cortex. Both cases have,had sufficient 
illustration in our experiments, in the analogous ey between 
| the excitatory and inhibitory processes. 


LECTURE XVI 


Transition stages between the alert state and complete sleep : hypnotic stages. 


In the last lecture an abundant array of facts was brought forward 
showing that sleep is nothing but internal inhibition which has 
become diffused continuously (i.e. without intervening fields of 
excitation) over the entire cortex and has descended also to some of 
the lower parts of the brain. 

Since, as we know, the spread of inhibition is a gradual process 
involving first a smaller and then a greater area we should expect to 
find. different extensities as well as different intensities of sleep or, 
in other words, transition stages between the fully alert state and 
complete sleep. Such transition stages actually exist ; we had many 
opportunities to observe them and to produce them experimentally. 

In our experiments we came across not only the usual form of 
sleep, which is evidenced by an absence of the normal function of 
the cortex and a relaxation of the skeletal muscles (closure of the 
eyes, drooping of the head, sagging limbs, and body limply: hanging 


in the loops of the stand), but also a quite different for far, at 
any rate, as could be judged by the condition of the sk uscles. 
In this form the activity of the hemispheres is bsent: all 


conditioned stimuli remain without effect, and nt extraneous 
stimuli, unless exceptionally powerful, fail t ke any reaction. 
Nevertheless the animal preserves an alert posture ; it 
stands with wide open immovable eyes! up, extremities -ex- 
tended, not seeking support in the Ros remaining motionless 
sometimes for minutes and sometimésfor hours. On changing the 
position of an extremity such ity retains the new position. 
The flexor reflex evoked by to the planta assumes the character 
of a contracture. The pr ion of food brings no reaction and 
the animal continues t, Nn quite still. This form of inhibition 
was noticed only in a ll number of dogs, and up to the present 
we are not in a pogiiion to define the special conditions of experi- 
mentation or th Cial peculiarities of the nervous system which 


are necessary ts production. My collaborator, Dr. Rojansky, 
265 


. 266 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


has made most careful observations upon the transition of dogs 
from the alert state to sleep, and he finds that the condition just 
described is present in all dogs, though usually only in a fleeting 
form. 

It seems that the physiological interpretation of this state should 
not present any great difficulty: we are dealing with a complete 
inhibition confined exclusively to the cortex, without a concurrent 
descent of the inhibition into the centres regulating equilibrium and 
maintenance of posture (centres of Magnus and de Kleijn) ; in other 
words the animal is in a state of catalepsy. Thus in this form of 
sleep the plane of demarcation between the inhibited regions of 
the brain and the regions which are free from inhibition seems to 
pass just beneath the cerebral cortex. A similar demarcation of 


-excitable areas from areas which have undergone complete inhibition 


may exist also between different large areas of the cortex itself, 
producing what may be called a localized sleep. This form of sleep 
was met with frequently, and we are now able to produce it experi- . 
mentally as well. On the first occasion it was observed as follows 
[experiments of Dr. Voskressensky]: A dog in which work had 
hitherto proceeded without any interference by sleep began to show 
signs of drowsiness—due to its being frequently left in the stand 
in the experimental room for hours at a stretch without any applica- 
tion of conditioned or any other stimuli. Obviously the monotony 
of the stimulation by the constant surroundi finally to a 
development of an intense inhibition involvi ally the whole 
of the brain. The inhibitory effect of the KEren became so 
strong that the mere introduction of the into the experimental 
room had an immediate and obvious i ry effect which became. 
still more pronounced after the was placed in the stand. 
It had to be roused up in all m f ways to keep it from falling 
fast asleep before the Pas s for the experiment had been 
completed (a matter of only, fèw minutes). When the experimenter 
left the room and close door in order to start the experiment 
from outside, and t out losing a minute began to apply one 
or another conditi Simul, the normal conditioned reflex was 
fully present ; c fonal secretion of saliva was obtained and the 
animal immediately took the food. When, however, after leaving 
the room erval was made of 4-5 minutes before the application 
of the SQ imal, this stimulus now produced the following re- 
markgievresult The conditioned secretory effect was present and 


N 


HYPNOTIC STAGES 267 


the salivary secretion was sharply augmented on food being presented ; 
the animal however did not take the food, which in order to effect 
adequate reinforcement had to be placed in its mouth. During this 
time no relaxation of the skeletal muscles could be observed. When 
an interval of ten minutes was made after leaving the room no 
conditioned alimentary reflex could be obtained, and the animal was 
found fast asleep with a relaxed musculature and occasional snoring. 
Only one possible explanation of these observations suggests itself. 
The inhibition must have spread in the first place only over the motor 
area of the cortex, so that excitation could be initiated by a condi- 
tioned stimulus belonging to any other analyser and could spread 
to the salivary gland but not to the muscles—with a resulting one- 
sided alimentary reflex lacking its motor component, Later the 
inhibition spread over the whole mass of the cortex and over the- 
lower parts of the brain, bringing about complete sleep with a re- 
laxation of the skeletal muscles. In this experiment the stages of 
a gradually developing sleep were brought about under the influence 
of the protracted action of neutral stimuli upon the hemispheres, 
but more usually this effect appeared as the result of numerous 
applications within a single experiment of negative or positive 
conditioned stimuli, especially if, in the latter case, either the 
intensity of the stimulus was weak or the period of application 
prolonged. The following two examples may serve in illustration : 

In the first example the subject of the experimen Aa dog 
which has already been mentioned in previous lectur - 231). A 
tone of 256 d.v. was used as a positive conditi alimentary 
stimulus, while ten neighbouring tones up an © own the scale 
were differentiated [experiments of Dr. Bier 


Conditioned stimulus 


during 30 seconds dropaNuring | Remarks 


Time 


3.50 p.m. Tone, 256 d.v. Takes the food 
40 ,, Bs à The animal gra- 
4. | dually be- 
4. comes drowsy 
4. Does not take 


the food 


5 
10 39) +? 
13 


The second ple is taken from experiments upon a dog which 
had many SS ionally constant alimentary conditioned reflexes. 


268 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


In this case the dissociation between the motor and the secretory 
response was more permanent and occurred even in experiments in 
which the causative inhibitory stimulus was not used. 

A fresh reflex, to the appearance of a grey screen, was established 
and a series of experiments were performed, in each of which the new 
stimulus was repeated many times in succession at short intervals. 
It was now observed that on application of any of the old stimuli, 
though the conditioned secretion was often still considerable, the 
animal did not touch the food. presented to it in reinforcement 
[experiments by Dr. Rosenthal]. 


Salivary 
Time Conditioned stimulus Secretion in Remarks 
during 30 seconds drops during 
30 seconds 

3.15. p.m. Metronome 5 

SEOs, Flashes of lamp 7 | The animal does not 
SA Me Sound of bubbling 7 touch the food 
3.24 E Buzzer | 


This condition was independent of any application of the grey 
screen in the particular experiment and lasted for a considerable 
time. During the experiment the dog remained almost motionless, 
but there were no obvious signs of sleep. Food pyesented to the 
animal in the same stand and under precisely the g pnvironmental 
conditions, but without a previous appiicata, f a conditioned 
stimulus, was taken with avidity. 

The following chance observation bel 
phenomena. A dog which served for iments with conditioned 
alimentary reflexes, and which howed any dissociation of 
the secretory and motor compqopeħts of the reflex, nor any signs of 
sleep while in the stand, was ge for the very first time in front 
of a large audience for the_ptepose of a demonstration. The un- 
familiarity of the surrou s had a big effect upon the animal; it 
shivered slightly, an as though spellbound. On administra- 
tion of the conditi stimulus the normal secretory effect was 
id not take the food, and in a relatively short 


to the same group of 


obtained, but t 

time fell into I See sleep in its stand, right in front of the audience, 
with completsyelaxation of the skeletal muscles. Evidently in this 
case the WWerful, unusual and protracted extraneous stimulus 
Pow t first a partial inhibition affecting only the motor area 


_— 


HYPNOTIC STAGES 269 


of the cortex; then the inhibition spread over the whole cortex 
and descended also to the lower parts of the brain. The experiment 
on the whole is similar to those by which so-called animal hypnotism 
is usually demonstrated. For example, a rapid immobilization of 
an animal held on its back also leads to an inhibition which spreads 
to a varying degree in different animals. In some cases a complete 
or partial catalepsy is produced (immobility of the body, but with 
movements of the eyes, head and neck); in others it leads to the 
development of profound sleep. In our laboratory this was observed 
on several occasions. An extremely unruly animal, for example, 
vigorously resisting the preparations for the experiment, would be 
rapidly immobilized by a powerful grasp, associated of course with 
considerable mechanical stimulation, and would fall asleep in its 
stand almost immediately. 

We see in this manner that a partial as well as a complete sleep 
can be produced by weak and protracted neutral stimuli, by short 
but vigorous stimuli, and by negative as well as positive conditioned 
stimuli. I shall have an opportunity of discussing certain further 
details in the next lecture. 

The above experiments demonstrate that the extent of the spread 
in the brain of the diffused inhibition can be small or great, and that 
there may exist different transition stages in the depth of the inhibi- 
tion, or, in other words, different intensities of the diffuse ighibition 
(sleep). Ņ 

In the eighth lecture I discussed the mechanism 
the case of simultaneous conditioned stimuli, a sti 
analyser is overshadowed by a stimulus from a 
gestion was put forward that this overshadowi 
upon the different strengths of the stimuli 
analysers (p. 141). Experiments pies since been performed 
entirely uphold this suggestion. ee, we intentionally produced 
a considerable change in the strength of6ur usual conditioned stimuli, 
the auditory being made weak d the others either remaining 
unchanged or being made Ñ ) there was a definite reversal of 


the relations previously o ed, the auditory stimuli now partici- 
pating in the He AA EN mpound to a smaller extent than the 
other stimuli, t.e. on i ed application of an auditory stimulus a 
much smaller AE obtained than on application of any other 
stimulus OAN o the compound. The following are some of 


the “ew 
oS 
O 


Q 
TRO 
RO) 


270 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


In one dog a compound simultaneous conditioned stimulus 
consisted of a tactile and an auditory component, the auditory being 
considerably weakened. The compound stimulus, when well estab- 
lished, gave 4-44 drops of saliva during 20 seconds’ isolated action. 
When used separately the auditory component gave a secretion of 
1-14 drops and the tactile 24-5 drops [experiments of Dr. Rickman]. 

In another dog the compound simultaneous conditioned stimulus 
was made up of a 100 candle-power lamp together with the sound of 
a musical tone which was considerably damped. The compound 
stimulus when fully established gave 7-8 drops of saliva during 30 
seconds ; the visual stimulus applied singly gave 5 drops, and the 
auditory gave 24 drops. In an exactly similar manner a thermal 
cutaneous stimulus of 0° C., which was employed with a very weak 
tone to form a compound simultaneous conditioned stimulus, gave 
when applied singly a much greater effect than the tone [experiments 
of Dr. Gantt and Dr. Koupalov]. 

Thus we see that the difference in the intensity of the reflexes 
evoked by the various conditioned stimuli belonging to the different 
analysers is determined by the strength of the stimulus and not by 
any functional difference in the nervous elements of the analysers. 
These experiments give us a method of comparing the intensity of 
stimuli which belong to different analysers. 

Bearing these facts in mind we can begin to study the different 
stages through which the diffused inhibition passesy SE 
The starting-point for these investigations vagy by a case 
of a pathological state of the nervous system had been brought 
about experimentally by means of a ey “ functional (non- 
surgical) interference.” Experiment produced pathological 
states of the nervous system will t with fully in succeeding 
lectures ; in the present lecture se describe only the experiment 
which induced us to pursue E5 further investigation of normal 


animals. 
Positive conditioned ntary reflexes [experiments by Dr. 
Rosenkov] were establi to the sound of a whistle, beats of a 


metronome, rhythm Ctile stimulation of the skin at a rate of 
24 per minute, Xshes of an electric lamp; several negative 


reflexes were a stablished by differentiation, including one to 
tactile stimulé#pn of the same skin area at the rate of 12 per minute. 
The follo table gives the figures for the normal effect of the 


N : 


HYPNOTIC STAGES 271 


Salivary 


Time Conditioned stimulus during Secretion in 
30 seconds drops during 
30 seconds 
2.8 p.m. Tactile (24 per minute) 3 
210°", Whistle 5 
221E Lamp 2 
2.32 +, ‘Metronome 34 


On the basis of the previous discussion we may take the strength 
of the stimuli in order from strong to weak as whistle, metronome, 
tactile stimulation and lamp. 

The experiment now proceeded as follows: In between the 
different positive stimuli the differentiated tactile’stimulus of 12 
per minute was introduced, being applied during 30 seconds and 
| followed without any interval by the positive tactile stimulus of 
. 24 per minute which was also continued for 30 seconds and then 
| reinforced as usual. This seemingly small factor produced an 
| extraordinary effect. On the day following this experiment and on 

the succeeding nine days all conditioned reflexes had disappeared 
excepting only for a very occasional small secretion. This period 
was followed by a series of definite successive changes in the condi- 
tioned activity of the brain. The first of these extremely peculiar 
changes is illustrated by the next experiment. EAN 

ae OO 


D 3 
Time Conditioned stimulus during ion in 
30 seconds s during 
seconds 
11.10 a.m. Whistle x s 0 
k IEA i al 3 4 
| DS, Lamp O i 
| 11.48 ,, Metronome 1 
| 12.6 p.m. Tactile AO minute) 54 


The experiment sho Qly the reverse of what was observed 
during the normal stata J the animal. The strong stimuli have 
either no effect or ondaa very small one ; the weak stimuli have a 
greater effect th rmal. All positive stimuli were, of course, 
reinforced. Th€N§State of the cortex we called the paradoxical 


Y 
oS 
|. 

RWS 


N 


272 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


days and was then succeeded by the following change : 


Salivary 


| phase. The paradoxical phase in this dog continued for fourteen 
| 
| 
| 


f Time Conditioned stimulus during Secretion in 
30 seconds drops during 
30 seconds 
[| 10.40 a.m. Tactile (24 per minute) 4 | 
Ml 10.48 ,, Metronome 44 
| 10.58 ,, Whistle 4 | 
| LIAO} y Lamp 4 | 


| This was called the phase of equalization, since all the stimuli | 
| became equal in their effect. The.phase of equalization lasted for ct 
q seven days and was then succeeded by still another phase during 
which the effect of stimuli of medium strength was greatly increased ; 
q the effect of the strong stimulus was slightly diminished, while the 
| weak stimulus had no effect. After seven days more, all the reflexes 
had returned to their normal value. In the succeeding experiments 
on the same problem, in order to be quite certain, we used different 
intensities of one of the positive stimuli. The results obtained were | 
| exactly comparable with the results of the previous experiments. | 
ql It thus became obvious that the difference in the reaction to stimuli 
i in all these different phases is determined by the relative strength 
of the stimuli. 
I In the manner just described was secured t 
that the cellular structures of the cortex un 
| stages of transition between complete inh#aion and normal excita- 
| bility, stages which are divulged by t&>peculiar reactions of the 
| cortical elements to the stimuli rent strengths. After the 
study of these transition stages én obviously pathological state, 
the question arose whether ineeae stages would be found normally 
we during the transition from jhe“dlert state to sleep and the reverse. 
| It was thought probabl the pathological case just described 
| consisted only in ane ation and prolongation of events which 
in the normal N re transient and not so evident, just as was 
psy. Special experiments conducted in this | 


S irect evidence 
a series of definite 


| the case with 
il direction led AAt positive result. -The following are some 
oe 

Twen) eighbouring tones had been differentiated from the 
ENN as a positive stimulus. This dog had also, among many 


N 


HYPNOTIC STAGES 273 


others, two positive conditioned reflexes, differing greatly in intensity, 
to a weak and to a loud crackling sound. The following table gives 
the normal intensity of these two reflexes : 


Salivary 
Time Conditioned stimulus during Secretion in 
30 seconds drops during 
30 seconds 
2.10 p.m. Loud crackling sound 124 
220E, Weak crackling sound 44 
1 


2.30 55 | Loud crackling sound 1 


The actual experiments proceed as follows. By repeated applica- 
tion of the differentiated tones the animal is rendered definitely 
drowsy ; the weak crackling sound is now applied. The secretory 
effect is absent. The dog awakens during the reinforcement with 
food, which it begins to eat. The next application of the weak 
crackling sound evokes a secretion which is yet small. The reflex 
is again reinforced. A third application of the weak crackling sound 
produces a normal, or in some cases even a supernormal, secretory 
effect, and the reflex is again reinforced. The strong crackling sound 
is applied next ; its effect is either less than or equal to the last 
effect of the weak sound. It is only somewhat later, when the alert 
state has been fully recovered, that the strong crackkigg sound 
evokes its full normal effect, and that the nem titative 
relations between the two reflexes become restore e following 
gives one of the actual experiments : KS 


@ Salivary 
Time Conditioned stimulus ai & Secretion in 
during 30 TK ds drops during 


30 seconds 
2.48 p.m. Strong ora crac So 


Sleep is now induced, e dog by repeated appli- 

cation of the lated inhibitory tones. 

3.17 p.m. Wok crackling sound $ 

B 2) ae QO = i 31 

3.26 ,, »» 99 7 

5 30) S Loud crackling sound 6 

3.40 O Weak crackling sound 5 

3. Loud crackling sound 10- 


A.P. S 


274 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


In some experiments repetition of these stimuli instead of leading 
to a temporary predominance of the effect of the weaker stimulus 
resulted only in an equalization of the effects of the strong and weak 
crackling sounds. Evidently during the gradual dispersion of sleep 
under the action of repeated brief feedings the cortical elements pass 
through the paradoxical phase and the phase of equalization. It 
follows that these experiments are exactly comparable to the 
pathological case which was previously described, excepting that 
the change which took under normal conditions a few minutes 
required in the pathological case many days. : 

In another dog a slight drowsiness developed on account of too 
prolonged experimentation. This was accompanied by a complete 
obliteration of the differences in the intensities of the reflexes to 
the different stimuli, so that all the positive conditioned reflexes 
now became equal. With the help of injections of a suitable dose of 
caffeine the dog was brought back to its usual condition of wake- 
fulness, and with this all the normal relations between the intensities 
of the different conditioned reflexes returned. Both experiments 
[by Dr. Zimkin] are given below : 


Salivary 


Time Conditioned stimulus applied Secretion in 
during 30 seconds drops during 
30 segonds 
12.50 p.m Loud beats of metronome AN § 
1257 ee Lamp 74 
LA te Loud buzzing sound 8 
| P hee Weak buzzing ~P 8 


On the following day the sin ORR ived subcutaneously 8 cc. 
of a 2% solution of caffeine ew inutes before the experiment. 
At the time of the eae Nahe was fully alert. 


Time 


12.18 p.nk mp 
12.25 


4 stimulus applied 
Na airing 30 seconds 


Lamp 

Load beats of metronome 
Weak buzzing sound 
Weak beats of metronome 
Loud buzzing sound 


Salivary 
Secretion in 
drops during 

30 seconds 


i 


10 
6 


74 
83 


12. 2309 
G 


HYPNOTIC STAGES 275 


In the animal which was previously mentioned in this lecture 
as showing dissociation of the secretory and motor reactions, it was 
often observed that during the period of this dissociation the weakest 
conditioned stimulus (the lamp) was the only one which evo] ed on 
some occasions a strong salivary reflex, sometimes even bringing 
about both reactions—a normal secretion and motor response, and 
acceptance of the food on reinforcement. It is thus seen that a 
paradoxical phase could be observed also in these cases of a 
limited extent of diffusion of the inhibition [experiments by Dr. 
Rosenthal] . 

A further and quite peculiar condition was observed in some cases 
of intense drowsiness which fell just short of changing into complete 
sleep. When positive conditioned stimuli had nearly lost their 
effect, well-developed negative stimuli, on the other hand, acquired 
definite excitatory properties. The following is an example of such 
an experiment by Dr. Shishlo : 

Positive conditioned alimentary reflexes were established to 
tactile stimulation of the shoulder and of the thigh, and to a thermal 
cutaneous stimulus of 45° C. ; a very constant negative conditioned 
stimulus was also established to a tactile stimulation of a definite 
skin area on the back. The effect of the positive tactile stimuli 
ranged normally from 15-18 drops during one minute. The thermal 
conditioned stimulus began relatively soon to induce wsiness 
and sleep. The experiment to be described commend ith an 
application of the thermal cutaneous stimulus which S rowsiness. 
The experiment then proceeded as follows : 


Time Conditioned stimulus during ee ` S in Remarks 
one minute o Š a 
e minute 
12.29 p.m. Tactile stimulation of i \ The dog re- 
shoulder | mains drowsy 
$209). 35 Tactile stimulatio igh 2 ` in spite of re- 
12.50 Tactile stimu t ack ; | inforcement 
(inhibitor 12 of the- reflexes 


A similar conversi of negative stimuli into Aa ones was 
also on several ogdesjons observed in pathological conditions. This 
effect is given thetame of the ulira-paradoxical phase. 

It thus es evident that during the transition from the alert 


276 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


state to complete sleep the hemispheres pass through several different 
stages. Since sleep is nothing but a widely distributed internal 
inhibition, we should expect at least some of these stages to appear 
during the ordinary inhibitory after-effect, which was discussed at 
length in the earlier lectures upon internal inhibition. So far only 
one case has been investigated, namely, conditioned inhibition, and 
this would appear to realize our expectation [experiments by Dr. 
Bikov] : 

Five positive conditioned reflexes were established—to a metro- 


-nome, a loud tone, the same tone damped down, the appearance of 


a disc of cardboard, and tactile stimulation of the skin. A conditioned 
inhibition was developed to a combination of a sound of bubbling 
with the action of the tactile stimulus. The mean figures of the 
secretory effect of the five positive stimuli, averaged from a great 
number of experiments, were in the above-mentioned order of the 
stimuli—metronome 22, loud tone 184, soft tone 164, disc 134, and 
tactile stimulus 10 drops during 30 seconds. The conditioned in- 
hibition having been firmly established, all the conditioned stimuli 
in turn were tested 10 minutes after the application of the inhibitory 
combination. The metronome gave 163, the loud tone 16, the damped 
tone 20, and the disc 18 drops. Taking into consideration the possible 
interferences of irradiation of inhibition and of induction, the only- 
point of importance in the present. connection is tha GN th effect of 


the weaker tone was considerably above normal; that of the 
stronger tone was below normal. This reversal e effect of the 
strong and weak tones can be regarded as ASH e of a paradoxical 


both stimuli therefore were obviously d to the same point of 
the cortex. This investigation is ent being continued with 
other types of internal inhibition 

In the lecture upon mutual i tion a suggestion was made that 
external inhibition might be-slue to negative induction, t.e. to an 
inhibition which is ey cortical areas neighbouring on the 
area of excitation. Oa in another fashion, it was suggested 
that the intimate anism underlying external inhibition is 
identical with i fen internal inhibition. It was hoped to 


test this aul determining whether external inhibition causes 


phase, since the tone was the same, aE Na in strength, and 


similar chan% n the reactions of the cortex to those which have 


just been ibed in the case of internal inhibition. For the purpose 
of BN tigation a stimulus was needed which would produce a 


HYPNOTIC STAGES 277 


protracted effect of external inhibition, and use was made of the 
introduction into the animal’s mouth of rejectable substances which, 
as was mentioned previously, produces a prolonged after-effect. 
The experiments were performed upon two dogs, both of which had 
well-established alimentary conditioned reflexes. 

In the first dog [experiments by Dr. Prorokov], after introduction 
of a solution of sodium carbonate, strong and weak conditioned 
stimuli were tested immediately on termination of the secretion due 


, to the alkali itself. It was found that at first all the conditioned 


reflexes were inhibited to the same extent, but that within the next 
15-20 minutes the reflexes to the weak stimuli returned to normal 
or even exceeded the normal value, while the strong stimuli were 
either equal in effect to the weaker ones or even gave a considerably . 
smaller effect. In the experiment given below a solution of sodium 
carbonate was introduced into the dog’s mouth at 9.41 a.m. 


a 


Salivary Secre- 

Time Conditioned stimulus tion in drops 
during 30 seconds during 

30 seconds 


9.46 a.m. Lamp 0-4 
ODL; Tactile 6-2 
9.56 .,, Loud buzzer 3:0 


Under the usual conditions without administration Q alkali 
the effect of the buzzer was about 8 drops duri seconds, 
while the effect of the tactile stimulus was 4 s during 30 


seconds. 

In a second dog [experiments by Dr. an there were, how- 
ever, somewhat different results. sete introduction of the 
rejectable substance into the dog’s m@utiand the termination of 
the resulting secretion, all the condi d stimuli, when tested at 
frequent intervals up to the end of þe experiment, showed an equali- 
zation in their effect. Concur this there was observed as 
the experiment continued @)- e diminution in the strength of 
the reflexes. In control iments performed previously the re- 
flexes were proportio he strength of the stimuli, the stronger 
buzzer giving the lar effect and the lamp the smallest. In 
the following ee Se solution of sodium carbonate was introduced 
into the dog’s at 11 a.m., and the resulting secretion of saliva 


eae minutes. 
oS 

Ko 
<V 
Y 


& 
RS) 


278 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


Salivary Secre- 
Time Conditioned stimulus tion in drops 
during 30 seconds during 
30 seconds 


11.10 a.m. Lamp 12-5 


PELIS f 10-5 
ig | ae Loud buzzer 10-5 
bi ae, Metronome 6-3 


gies | ae Weak buzzer 6-8 


Although the results obtained in the two dogs would appear to 
corroborate the suggestion that internal and external inhibition are 
fundamentally one and the same process, yet the complexity of the 
problem necessitates a repetition and greater variation of the experi- _ 
ments with more critical attention to other possible interpretations 
of the results. 

In the course of our investigation we became greatly interested 
in the effect upon conditioned reflexes of different narcotics in the 
first stages of their action, in complete narcosis, and again during 
the period of recovery. Urethane and chloral hydrate were used for 
this purpose. In the case of the action of narcotics as compared with 
the effect of inhibition a different sequence of events was observed : 
there was a gradual weakening of all conditioned reflexes, the 
weak conditioned stimuli naturally becoming y ae before 
the strong ones. This state was given the of the narcotic 
phase. The following experiment is tak om a research by 
Dr. Lebedinsky : Q 

Positive conditioned reflexes were So lished to loud buzzing, 
metronome, weak buzzing, tactile ore and intermittent flashes 
of an electric lamp. With reg the intensities of their effect 
the stimuli followed in the orf@given. The animal, after being 
placed in the stand, eS 10.9 a.m. two grammes of chloral 
hydrate dissolved in 150 water in the form of an enema. The 
experiment proceeds © in the table on the opposite page. 

We thus see th the development of narcosis the effect of 
all the stimuli E ive diminished, and on return to the alert 
state the stimulørogressively recovered their normal conditioned 
effect. They exception, out of the twenty stimuli, was presented 

uzzing sound which at 11.53 a.m. produced an abnor- 


by the w, 
male effect. 
N 


S 


HYPNOTIC STAGES 279 


Thus in different healthy animals under different conditions there 
were found many different phases of transition in the reactions of 
the cortex to conditioned stimuli. An obvious question arises as to 
how far all these different phases, including also the narcotic phase, 


Salivary 
Time Conditioned stimulus | Secretion in 
during 30 seconds drops during 
30 seconds 


10.14 a.m. Metronome 11 Dog takes the food, 
yawns and stands 
shakily 

16.21. .,, Lamp 34 Takes the food ; hangs 
down. in the loops of 
the stand 

10.29 _,, Strong buzzing 7 Takes the food 

10.38 _ ,, Tactile 0 Takes the food 

10.45 ,, Weak buzzing 2 Slowly raises itself from 
the loops and takes 
food 

10.53, Strong buzzing 0 Sleeps; does not take 
food 

| A ea Metronome 0 Sleeps; does not take 
food 

RISS Weak buzzing 0 Sleeps; does not take 
food 

ILIS, Strong buzzing 5} Wakes up, takes the 
food 

11.26 ,, Tactile 0 EAN 

11.35 y Lamp 0 Q 

11.45 , Metronome 5 

LA eS ae Weak buzzing 94 

12 noon Tactile 4 

12.7 p.m. Strong buzzing 84 the food 

12.15 cs Lamp 6 

12.24 ,, Metronome 94 

12.34 ,, Strong buzzing 13 

12.42 ,, Weak buzzing K) 

1.3 Tactile | 


nder the usual conditions of life. 
we were fortunate to have at our 
ive type of animal, the special features 


appertain to every single anj 
In investigating this pro 
disposal an unusually 


of which will be discu in the succeeding lectures. (This dog was 
used for the experi ts described towards the end of the fourteenth 
lecture, p. 247). en constant conditions, the dog was remarkable 


for the K of its highest nervous activity as expressed in the 
. 
Vv 
X 


280 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


form of conditioned reflexes, and fully merited its nickname of “ an 
animated instrument.” The dog had ten different conditioned 
reflexes. There were six positive ones—to a buzzer, metronome, 


whistle, increase in illumination of the room, appearance of a small — 


toy horse ; and four negative ones—to a different rate of metronome, 
a diminution in the illumination of the room, the appearance of a 
square, and the appearance of a toy rabbit approximately of the 
same size and colour as the toy horse. For some time prior to the 
following experiments the buzzer had not been used, while out of 
the differentiated stimuli the metronome had been employed 
practically exclusively. The auditory stimuli usually, and in the 
early experiments always, gave a secretion 30 to 50% greater than 
that given by the visual stimuli. After two years’ work in the 
laboratory with this dog the positive conditioned reflexes showed 
some tendency to diminish and began to vary in their relative inten- 
sity, as frequently happens in the case of continuous and prolonged 
use of the same conditioned stimuli. During this state of the animal 
we could find all the definite transition stages of the cortical activity 
which were described earlier in this lecture as different phases of 
the progressive diffusion of the inhibitory process over the hemi- 
spheres. Each of these phases either lasted during the whole course 
of a single experiment or else, under the action of different influences 
produced experimentally, changed into some other_fhase [experi- 
ments by Dr. Speransky]. The only phase w outa not be 
observed, in this dog was the ultza paradoxont Y the conditions 
were not such as to favour the appearance of ase as the animal 


never became very drowsy. The experi taken from different 
periods of the work are shown on the ite page. 
When the reflexes deviated ve h from normal they were 


strengthened and corrected by th od discussed in the fourteenth 
lecture, namely, by shoving interval between the beginning 
of the conditioned stimulus gad tts reinforcement. The spontaneous 
transition from one phas another in the two last experiments 
was most probably d O; ated reinforcement. We had, however, 
two special method NS: disposal by the use of which we could 
produce an recs interchange of phases. One of these methods 


consisted in the lication of the completely differentiated inhibi- 


tory rate Khe metronome. Most probably the effect of this 
inhibitor Gy ulus was due to concentration of the diffuse inhibi- 
tion. 


S 
© 
& 
LL 
XW 


an induction of the antagonistic process of excitation. 


4 ~ 


| | ( 281 ) 


í Salivary 
Time Conditioned stimulus during | Secretion in 
0 seconds drops during 
30 seconds 


Normal Experiment. 


10.30 a.m. Metronome 8 
10.40 ,; Increased illumination 5 
10:505 Whistle 8 
i PEO E: Disc 5 
iA E OGS Metronome 9 | 
L207 Increased illumination 5 
1E3067; Whistle 8 | 
| FAF; Disc 6 
| Experiment showing phase of equalization. 
9.0 a.m. Metronome 7 
9.10 ,, Increased illumination 5 
? 920:7 Whistle 5 | 
TA 3, Disc 44 
i 940 ,, Metronome 5 l 
| 8.50" 3; Increased illumination 5 ! 
| 160: S Whistle 5 
4 


| 10.10 ,, Disc 


| Experiment showing paradoxical phase and its transition into 
| the normal phase. 


| : 10.0 a.m. Metronome 4 A 
IOR or Increased illumination 6 
i W2 Whistle 
10.355 = Disc RÀ 
) 10.43 ,, Metronome 
| 10.54 _ ,, Increased illumination O 24 
| TES Whistle 7 
| 11.12 *;, Disc O 44 
i he Ae Metronome 84 
tsa s:, Increased illumifiation 5 


Experiment showing complete @phibition and transition into 
the na phase. 


10.0° a.m. M i 0 

10:9 g I ed illumination 0 

10.19 ,, e 3 

163155. c 0 

| 10.42 etronome 3 

| 10.52 N Increased illumination 0 
113 O Whistle 34 

0 


11 SS Disc 


282 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


The second method consisted in the application of an extra 
stimulus, viz. the entry of the experimenter into the animal’s room. 
The following experiments serve as examples of the effect of each 
method : 


Conditioned stimulus duri Tase 
i onaitioned stimulus qurin, l 
a 30 seconds $ aps ra owe 
30 seconds 
9.30 a.m. Metronome (positive) 0 Does not take 
the food 
Bs ye oe Toy horse 0 Does not take 
: the food 
9.45 ,, Metronome (inhibitory) 0 (Not reinforced) 
9.52 ,, Metronome (positive) 4 
0595.5 Increased illumination 9 
10.10 _,, Whistle 64 
10.18 ,, Toy horse 11 Takes the food 
10.30 ,, Metronome 124 
10.38 ,, Disc 84 


The phase of complete inhibition with absence of the secretory 
and motor reactions is transformed in the above experiment first 
into the paradoxical, and then into the normal, phase by the 
application of the inhibitory rate of the metronome. 


Salivary 
Time Conditioned stimulus during | Secretion Remarks 
30 seconds drops d 
30 


Does not take 


10.0 a.m. Metronome (positive) xO 
the food 


The experimenter agda remains in the 


room the dog. 
10.9 a.m. Metronome (pog%ive 9 Takes the food 
101830; Increased i tion 34 Takes the food 


immediately ch he phase of complete inhibition to-normal. 


The presence x experimenter in the room with the dog 
The questio ether all these different stages in the activity 


of the hemi res can be arranged in a definite order, and if so in 
what kind order, must remain for the present entirely open. A 
Bas of all the experiments at our disposal shows that the 


—E 


HYPNOTIC STAGES 283 


sequence of the different phases was fairly variable, and it is not 
clear, therefore, whether the different states of the hemispheres in 
different animals are strictly successive or whether they may occur ` 
as parallel events. Only further experimentation can explain why 
a given phase undergoes transition directly into one or another of 
the remaining phases. 

It is hardly possible to doubt that all these different states of 
the hemispheres bear a strong resemblance to the different stages 
of what is generally known as hypnotism. The relation between the 
experimental results described here and hypnotism as observed in 
man will form the subject of the last lecture. 


LECTURE XVII 


The different types ef nervous system.—Pathological disturbances of the cortex, 
result of functional interference. 


WE have been dealing up to the present with the normal activity of 
the cerebral cortex. It was noticed in passing, however, that the 
experiments to which our animals were subjected led in some instances 
to chronic disturbances of this normal activity. This was especially 
liable to occur in the early stages of our work, since in planning the 
experiments we had at first not even the slightest idea as to the 
limitations and the natural resistance of the cortex. The present 
lecture wiil be devoted to a description of those disturbances in the 
higher nervous activity which are of a purely functional origin, and 
not due to surgical interference or trauma. From some of these 
disturbances the animal recovers gradually and spontaneously under 
the influence of rest alone, on discontinuance of the disturbing 
experiments ; in other cases the disturbances are so persistent as 
to require special therapeutic measures. In aa i ces we were 
able to make observations during the actual gS f transition 
from the normal physiological state of the cor o a pathological 
state, and then to study its therapy. nin ogical state of the 
hemispheres in different individual RS rom the action of 
injurious influences varies greatly. RO; the same injurious 
influence causes severe and prolonged)dSsorders in some dogs; in 
others the disorders are only sliggt and fleeting ; while yet other 
dogs remain practically unaffecd{eJ. In many cases the deviation 
from normal produced by théPgame causative agent assumes in dif- 
ferent dogs quite differe pects. The type and the degree of 
pathological disturb t develops from some definite cause 
was found in all ca be determined primarily by the character 
of the individuakn AW system of the animals. Therefore, before 


describing the„diérent pathological states it is important to say 
a few words. t the different individual types of nervous system 
found in dogs. The systematic investigation of the higher 


ner ivity has enabled us to outline even at present certain 
284 


EXPERIMENTAL NEUROSES 285 


definite criteria which when expanded in the future will lead up to 
an exact definition of the different types of nervous system of 
individual animals. Such criteria when perfected should greatly 
assist the development of a strictly scientific experimental investi- 
gation of the hereditary transmission of different aspects of nervous 
activities in animals.1 At present, however, I shall not go beyond 
a general classification of our dogs. Two definite types, which may 
be regarded as extremes, stand out with special prominence. 

The first type was met with practically from the beginning of 
our investigation, and the researches on animals belonging to this 
type led in our early experiments to much confusion. At a time 
when we were still quite unfamiliar with the subject of conditioned 
reflexes, we met in some of the experiments with considerable diffi- 
culties on account of a drowsiness, which developed from the use of 
certain conditioned stimuli and under certain conditions of experi- 
mentation, and which we were not able to overcome. We thought 
to get rid of this drowsiness by choosing for our experiments dogs 
which outside the experimental conditions were very lively. Animals 
were selected which were extremely vivacious, always sniffing at 
everything, gazing at everything intently, and reacting quickly to 
the minutest sounds. Such animals when they get acquainted with 
men, which they do very quickly and easily, often become ae 


by their continuous demonstrativeness. They can never b Men 4 
keep quiet either by orders or by a mild physical pu 

was, however, soon found that these very animals ane in 
the stand and limited in their movements, and ei when left 


alone in the experimental room, were the ents ei drowsy, 
so that their conditioned reflexes quickly djahaished or even dis- 
appeared altogether, in spite of frequent(réy$rcement by food or 
acid. Indeed, our repeated stimuli w y had not yet acquired 
stable positive conditioned propertie mediately and in a most 
unequivocal fashion, produced dregvsthess and even sleep in dogs 
which at the commencement ea were wide awake. 

1 Experiments which have unicated briefly at the Edinburgh 
International Congress of ee (1923) upon hereditary facilitation of 
the development of so a reflexes in mice have been found to 
be very complicated, di rin and moreover extremely difficult to control. 


They are at present ®ging subjected to further investigation under more 
stringent conditio present the question of hereditary transmission of 


must be left 


conditioned Ss nd of the hereditary facilitation of their acquirement 


open. 


286 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


In some animals this happened even when they were not placed in 


the stand during the experiments, but were left free on the floor, 
the experimenter remaining quietly in the room ; nevertheless the 
dogs on administration of a conditioned stimulus soon got sleepy, 
closed their eyes and finally lay down on the floor. This often 
happened immediately after the reinforcement of a conditioned 
stimulus. At first we despaired of achieving anything with these 
animals; later we learned how to get over the difficulties. In dogs 
of this type many conditioned reflexes must be developed concur- 
rently, and with a great variety of stimuli; no stimulus must be 
repeated more than once in a single experiment, and long pauses 
between the applications of the various stimuli must be avoided ; 
not only excitatory but also inhibitory reflexes must be developed. 
In short, when we make rapid and considerable variations in the 
experimental environment such dogs become quite satisfactory 
subjects for the experiments. It is an interesting point, but one 
which cannot be pursued here, whether this type represents a higher 
or lower stage of nervous development. 

Until a rigid scientific classification is fully established for all 
the various types of central nervous system I think we may be per- 
mitted to make use of the ancient classification of the so-called 
temperaments. The animals just described must be regarded in the 
light of the ancient classification as belonging to the n° sanguine ”’ 
type. - Under quick changes of stimuli they are oigo c and highly 
reactive, but with the slightest monotony of Kphvironment they 
become dull, drowsy and inactive. S 

Our second type of dog is also very O e, and must be placed 
at the other end of the classical serie emperaments. In every 
new and slightly unfamiliar set o undings such animals are 
extremely restrained in their n ents. They slink along close 
to the wall in a cringing fashion often at the smallest movement 
or sound from outside—a Vai or a threatening movement—they 
immediately cower to t oor. Everybody who sees such an 
Q yudge it a great coward. These animals 

rimental surroundings and the associated 
ly, but when they become thoroughly familiar 


animal would imme 
get used to their 
manipulation vdry 


with the new coYritions they make invaluable subjects for experi- 
mentation.* pe animal described at the end of the last lecture as 
“a livi @itrument ” belonged to this type. Such animals do not 
eee stands when the experimental conditions remain more 


t 


EXPERIMENTAL NEUROSES 287 


or less constant ; on the contrary their conditioned reflexes, especially 
the inhibitory ones, remain extremely stable ‘and regular. We are 
engaged at present in our laboratory with a most exaggerated repre- 
sentative of this type. This dog—a bitch—was born at the institute 
and was always treated with the utmost gentleness; When she 
was about twelve months old she was occasionally brought into the 
laboratory, and during every experiment in the stand only very few 
stimuli were given. When brought to the laboratory five years 
after its first introduction this dog still behaved in exactly the same 
manner as on the first occasion, and until quite recently never got 
used to the laboratory conditions in the slightest degree. She slinks 
along behind the experimenter on the way to the experimental 
rooms, always with her tail between her legs. On meeting members 
of the staff (some of whom constantly try to make friends with her 
and pet her) she invariably and quickly dodges them, draws back 
and squats down on the floor. She reacts in the same manner to 
every slightly quicker movement or slightly louder word of her 
master, and behaves towards all of us as if we were her most dangerous 
enemies from whom she constantly and most severely suffers. In 
spite of all this, when she at last got used to her own experimental 
room many extremely regular and constant positive and negative 
conditioned reflexes were developed. This was so unexpected by us 
that the animal was flatteringly given the name of “ LON. It 
would not be an exaggeration to bring this animal una type 
of “ melancholic.” I shall return to this animal lat@y~Both the 
above types are obviously extremes. In the firgy\¢ke excitatory 
process predominates in the extreme, and in the ge the inhibitory. 
Both, therefore, are limited types, with, so to XS , & narrow scope 
of vital expression. The first needs a contig and novel succession 
of stimuli, which may indeed often be algenfh the natural surround- 
ings ; the other, on the contrary, room ney uniform conditions 
of life and therefore suffers from bejag Thable to react to a sufficient 
number of stimuli to ensure a legend development of its nervous 


organization. 

It has, no doubt, occu o some that these two types present 
a contradiction to the of the identity of sleep and internal 
inhibition, in that the with a predisposition to excitation tends 


to fall asleep ngaggo conditions of our experiments, while the 
type with a pre sition to inhibition remains fully awake. If, 


however, ael be supposed, functional exhaustion of 
~ 
T 


288 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


the cortical elements serves as an impetus to a development of an 
inhibitory process, it.is easy to understand that in the first type the 
excess of excitability of the cortical elements leads to their precipitate 
functional exhaustion, and so, when the cortical elements are exposed 
to prolonged: monotonous stimuli, especially favours a development 
of inhibition which irradiates widely over the whole cortex. Only 
a quick succession of new stimuli acting upon different groups of 
nerve cells can neutralize the tendency of this type of animal towards 
inhibition. In the second type, on the other hand, though the in- 
hibition of the motor area of the cortex is so easily initiated (passive 
defence reflex) the inhibition does not irradiate over a wide area, 
some considerable parts of the cortex remaining unaffected; the 
parts which remain in an active state resist the diffuse spread of 
inhibition, i.e. sleep, and thereby make possible the restitution of the 
active state of the whole cortex as soon as the cause which initiated 
the initial inhibition has disappeared. In the first case the biologically 
unprofitable tendency is checked by the excitatory effect of a quickly 
changing environment, in the second by the restriction of the actual 
spread of inhibition in the cortex. In fact the limitation of the 
irradiation of the inhibition in the latter case seems to be a special 
protective mechanism of an otherwise defective nervous system. 


There is a parallel to such limitation in the case of a man who has - 


trained himself to sleep even while walking, t.e. to lim the inhibition 
to the cortex, so that it does not descend to the cortical areas. 
In between the extremes just described caye found numerous 
intermediate types which present a greate nce between excita- 
tion and inhibition, types on the whole adapted to the natural 
conditions of life and therefore biology more resistant. Those 
that approximate to the first type@re ely and active, and in most 
cases aggressive ; those that ah finito to the second type are 
quiet and restrained. I re er in particular one dog of the 
latter type whose re was in many respects extraordinary. 


I have never noticed it down on the floor while it waited for 
the experiment afte NEE tched from the kennel to the laboratory. 


It reacted as if isinterested in what happened around, and 
did not enter No flier friendly or antagonistic relations with any- 
body, even its Yster. In its stand it never showed any signs of 
drowsiness. Oi its positive or negative conditioned reflexes were 


wage mely precise. The dog undoubtedly had a definite 


KS 


towards inhibition; it was, however, also capable of 


D ETE yo A G E EEEE AE E a 


i 


+ aN 
¢ \ 


EXPERIMENTAL NEUROSES 289 


considerable excitation. I succeeded in disturbing the placid calm 
of this animal by making most extraordinary sounds with a toy 
trumpet and having a frightful animal mask over my face. The dog 
lost all its usual restraint, began to bark determinedly and tried to 
get at me—a most “ phlegmatic ” but powerful type. 

Another group of dogs belongs to a more excitable type, and may 
be regarded as corresponding to the “ choleric ” type of the ancient 
classification. Inhibitory conditioned reflexes in these animals are 
less stable. 

It is obvious that a large number of animals cannot be placed 
definitely in any one of these four types, but broadly speaking all 
the dogs which we used could be divided into two groups—those 
with an excessive or moderate tendency to excitation, and those with 
an excessive or moderate tendency to inhibition. 

After this digression I can now proceed to the description of the 
functional disturbances in the cortical activities which were either 
observed accidentally or produced experimentally. The first 
observation was made under the following conditions. As was men- 
tioned in the third lecture, a conditioned alimentary reflex can be 
developed to a most severe electrical stimulus applied to the skin— 
a stimulus which would normally evoke the inborn defence reaction 
but to which the animal now responds by an alimentary reaction, 
turning its head towards the place where the food appearg, licking 
its lips and producing a secretion of typical “ time saliva 
[experiments of Dr. Eroféeva, p. 29]. In the case is being 
described the development of this reflex had bee 
use of a very weak current, which was gradually j 
until finally it was extremely powerful. The 
reflex developed in this way remaine 


tioned alimentary 
for many months. 
The electric current was occasionallyegr by cauterization or 
mechanical injury of the skin, both ing the same reflex. The 
animal remained perfectly TAR ughout a long period of the 
experiments, but after a cer ime this peculiar conditioned 
stimulus, similarly to any ot gan to acquire inhibitory proper- 
ties, the onset of the sé y effect becoming more and more 
removed from the begi Kids of the conditioned stimulus. On rare 
occasions the electri timulus had been applied to places other 
than the one for @kich the reflex had been originally developed. 
Now, however, Wrésolved to generalize the reflex by a systematic 
application. stimulus to new places. For some time the elec- 


A.P. NY T 
M 
Ò 


© 
wl 


290 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


trical stimulus continued, when applied to the different places of 
the skin, to produce the same conditioned alimentary reflex without 
any interference of a defence reaction. A limit, however, was suddenly 
reached. When a still further place was added to those. already 
successfully generalized everything underwent an abrupt and 
complete change. No trace of the alimentary reaction was left : 
instead only a most violent defence reaction was present. Even an 
extremely weak current, which before the development of the ali- 
mentary conditioned reflex remained entirely without effect, now 
when applied to the original place of stimulation or to any other 
brought about the most violent defence reaction. The experiment 
was repeated on two other dogs. In one of them the outburst of 
excitation occurred on the application of the stimulus of the electric 
current to a ninth new place. In the other the application to a 
thirteenth new place did not yet bring about any explosion of excita- 
tion. When, however, the electric stimulus was applied in the same 
experiment to several of these places on the same day, and not, as 
before, to a single place only, the same explosive change occurred. 
In all three dogs nothing could be done to restore at once the 
alimentary reflex to the electrical stimulus. The animals became 
restless and excited in an extreme degree, which they had never 
been before. In one dog it was only after an interval of three months 
that it was possible to start a fresh development of the original 
alimentary conditioned reflex to the stimulus of th oy ptric current. 
This was a much more difficult operation than bate, ut the reflex 
_ was finally restored. In the other two dogs a, Sen longer interval 
did not help. Obviously the nervous syste been brought into 
a chronic pathological state. At the sO of these experiments, 
unfortuņately, we had not begun G account of the type of 
nervous system of our dogs. G 
Possibly on account of the %ecial nature of the stimulus used 
in these experiments all these f id not attract sufficient attention 
on our part ; but some ti fterwards the same phenomenon was 
observed under more conditions of experimentation. The 
experiments in que ére made to determine the limits of the 
analysis of shapeg ilferent objects [experiments of Dr. Shenger- 
Krestovnikova] projection of a luminous circle on to a screen 


ad become well established a differentiation between 
d an ellipse with a ratio of the semi-axes 2:1, of 


After the r 


the cir 
S 


N 


in front of $ animal was repeatedly accompanied by feeding. 


EXPERIMENTAL NEUROSES 291 


the same luminosity and the same surface area, was obtained by 
the usual method of contrast. A complete and constant differentia- 
tion was obtained comparatively quickly. The shape of the ellipse 
was now approximated by stages to that of the circle (ratios of the 
semi-axes of 3 : 2, 4: 3 and so on) and the development of differenti- 
ation continued through the successive ellipses. The differentiation 
proceeded with some fluctuations, progressing at first more and 
more quickly, and then again slower, until an ellipse with ratio of 
semi-axes 9:8 was reached. In this case, although a considerable 
degree of discrimination did develop, it was far from being complete. 
After three weeks of work upon this differentiation not only did the 
discrimination fail to improve, but it became considerably worse, 
and finally disappeared altogether. At the same time the whole 
behaviour of the animal underwent an abrupt change. The hitherto 
quiet dog began to squeal in its stand, kept wriggling about, tore 
off with its teeth the apparatus for mechanical stimulation of the 
skin, and bit through the tubes connecting the animal’s room with 
the observer, a behaviour which never happened before. On being 
taken into the experimental room the dog now barked violently, 
which was also contrary to its usual custom ; in short it presented 
all the symptoms of a condition of acute neurosis. On testing the 
cruder differentiations they also were found to be destroyed, even 
the one with the ratio of the semi-axes 2:1. A fresh dev@lopment 
of the latter differentiation up to its previous exactn sa 
twice as slowly as at first, but during the re-establi nt of this 
crude differentiation the animal gradually became er, returning 


- finally to its normal state. The pean e finer differen- 


tiations now occurred even more quickly t efore. The 9:8 
ellipse at its first application was comple obese from the 
circle, but from the second applicati ards no trace of a dis- 
crimination was obtained, and the ep again entered a state of 
extreme general excitation with the“Same results as before. No 
further experiments were perfo with the animal. Some of the 
different stages of these expeyi s are given on page 292. 

In the first experiment n below the ellipse with ratio of the 
semi-axes 4:3 was f criminated. In the second experiment 
the ellipse with the raWigf) : 8, in its first stage of development, gave 
only 1 drop of salary secretion. After repeating it in the course 
of the succeedi o weeks its effect, as shown in the third of the 


experiments i below, became equal to that of the circle. After 
a 
V 


292 


CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


this even the ellipse with a ratio of 2:1 failed to become fully 
discriminated, as shown in the fourth experiment ; and only in the 


fifth of the given experiments, performed 1} months later, did it 


again produce a zero secretion. 


After these eyperiments we paid considerable attention to 
urbances in the cortical activity and began to study 
It became obvious that under certain conditions 
of excitation with inhibition led to a profound dis- 


pathological 


them in 
the cla 


Conditioned stimulus 
Time applied during 


Salivary 
Secretion in 


30 seconds - drops during 


30 seconds 


Experiment of 4th August, 1914. 


4.10 p.m. Circle 
4.22 ,, Peel: 
a3; 4.: 3 ellipse 
4.55 ,, Circle 
Experiment of 2nd September, 
1.10 p.m. Circle 
1.27 »? ” 
2.6 23 23 y 
2.16: 9: 8 ellipse 
ya | ates Circle 
2.48 pE 33 
Experiment of 17th September, 
3.20 p.m. ‘Circle 
3.31 » 3 
3.54 z; 9 : 8 ellipse 
40. Sua Circle 
Experiment of 25th oe 
2.17 p.m. Circle 
Ai -,; 231 A 
SB RO 
3.22 , 
3.46 ,, 
Experiment of Ta 
10.55 a.m. cle 
lA E r 
T3037; I ellipse 
TILAA Circle 


191 


1914. 


4 
7 


S 


1914. 


10 
7 
0 
5 


+ 


EXPERIMENTAL NEUROSES 293 


turbance of the usual balance between these two processes, and led 
in a greater or less degree and for a longer or shorter time to patho- 
logical disturbances of the nervous system. In the first example, 
with the development of an alimentary reflex to the strong electric 
stimulus, it was the inborn defence reflex which had to be inhibited ; 
in the second example, with the visual stimuli, as we know already 
from the seventh lecture, the differentiation which had to be estab- 
lished also depended on a development of inhibition. In both cases 
a balance of the two antagonistic processes was satisfactorily main- 
tained until a certain critical stage was reached, when, under the stress 
of the delicate antagonistic relations of the stimuli, the further 
adjustment of the balance became impossible and finally gave way 
to an undisputed predominance of one of them (as will be shown 
later), producing a pathological state. 

In further experiments dogs were intentionally selected which 
possessed different types of nervous system, in order to find out 


_ the different pathological disturbances which would be produced by 


functional (2.e. non-surgical) interferences with the cortical activity. 
The first of these experiments [Dr. Petrova] were performed on two 
dogs, representatives, as judged by their general behaviour, of the 
two extreme types of nervous system. These dogs were those already 
described in the lecture upon sleep, the drowsiness, which they 
exhibited at first, being successfully removed by the adminja{xation in 
rapid succession of six different conditioned reflexes wi terval 
of 5 seconds between the beginning of the condj d and the 
unconditioned stimuli (p. 254). Besides abolishin ep the experi- 
ments provided very clear and definite TA of the essential 
differences between the types of nervous or of the two dogs, 
successfully corroborating the ings) eir respective types 
which was previously made by generak observation. In the course 
of the experiments the conditioned exes, which to begin with 
were practically simultaneous, wes transformed into long-delayed 
reflexes with an interval of eo es between the conditioned and 
the unconditioned on Sesion of the reflexes was 


performed gradually nging the length of isolated action of 
the conditioned stim y 5 seconds daily ; correspondingly the 
so-called latent aa C the reflexes—i.e. the interval of time 
between the begi g of the conditioned stimulus and the onset 
of the salivary, END o the « gradually more and more prolonged. 
All six KÝ ere being treated in this manner at the same time. 


294 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


The dog with a predominant tendency to inhibition mastered the 
problem of developing the longer delay straight ahead, and without 
any nervous disturbances ; the dog with a predominant tendency 
to excitation reacted to the problem in a quite -different manner. 
When the delay of the reflexes reached two minutes the animal 
began to enter into a state of general excitation, and with a further 
prolongation of the delay to 3 minutes the animal became quite 
crazy, unceasingly and violently moving all parts of its body, howling, 
barking and squealing intolerably. All this was accompanied by 
an unceasing flow of saliva, so that although the secretion increased 
during the action of the conditioned stimuli all traces of the delay 
completely disappeared. Obviously the development of the inhibitory 
phase of delay required by many conditioned reflexes at one time 
was too difficult a problem for the excitable nervous system of this 
dog. It should be added that certain difficulties in the way of a 
successful development of a balance between the two antagonistic 
processes, difficulties in the form of hyper-excitation, were met with 
in many dogs, but in no other dog did this general excitation reach 
so great an intensity. However, the problem set to this animal was 
much more than usually complicated, since it was required to set 
up a balance of the two antagonistic processes in many points of the 
hemispheres at one and the same time. Eventually there was 
nothing to be done, other than to relinquish the exper\ments in this 
form. It is interesting that the problem which so fa: d impossible 
of resolution by the nervous system of this Was nevertheless 
quite satisfactorily achieved when another mega experimentation 
was employed. We restricted our work XO: e of the conditioned 
stimuli only. The animal became qui S and even began to 
get sleepy during the experiment noQ hen kept in the stand but 
also when kept free on the floor. & oe conditioned stimuli were 
now applied again, but with eS seconds’ delay. Once more the 
isolated action of each condit¢Jyed stimulus was gradually prolonged 
from day to day until the Sd of 3 minutes was reached. On this 
occasion definite ones reflexes were developed without any 
disturbances. Duri e 14-2 minutes after the beginning of the 
conditioned stim aN animal was asleep, but towards the end 
of the second minute or at the very beginning of the third it quickly 
roused up its relaxed posture and a very sharp alimentary 
motor aş as secretory reaction appeared. The final stage of 
riments was described in the fifteenth lecture (p. 261). 


thos 
S | 
~~ 


EXPERIMENTAL NEUROSES ` 295 


In this manner, with the help of suitable periods of rest and by patient 
practising of the reflexes, that satisfactory balance of the two pro- 
cesses, which failed to appear at the first attempt was achieved. 
The differences in the nervous systems of the two dogs was thus 
made clear and we could now proceed with the main object of our 
experiments. This time, however, the investigation was carried 
out in a manner slightly different from that of those accidentally 
observed cases which were described previously. The effect of 
different forms of inhibition (differentiation, conditioned inhibition 
and extinction) was tested upon long-delayed reflexes. We hoped 
that as a result of such a complex presentation of different inhibiting 
influences a disturbance of the normal relations between the two 
antagonistic nervous processes would occur, as had already happened 
in the first establishment of the long-delay. Such a disturbance of 
the balance between the two processes did not, however, occur. 
What did happen was that these experiments, with the various forms 
of internal inhibition, always brought out more and more forcibly 
the essential differences between the two dogs. The development. of 
every new inhibition was accompanied in the excitable dog by a 
temporary period of excessive general excitation, while the other 
dog evinced practically no difficulties. Since we failed to produce 
a disturbance of the equilibrium in the manner described we had 
recourse to the procedure which had proved successful with the dog 
previously described. We therefore commenced a d&yelopment of 
a conditioned alimentary reflex to an electric sti $ applied to 
the skin. This reflex was fully established and ised with some 
intervals for a considerable length of time. © hronic functional 
disturbance of the nervous system occurred 9) h dogs even without 
the application of the electric stimulus (> places. It is probable 
that this disturbance of the normal Kalare between excitation and 
inhibition was favoured by the cong of the inhibitory activity 
already established. The new important point is that the 
disturbance of the normal soe of the nervous system found an 
opposite expression in t ae) imals : in the excitable dog it was 


the inhibitory reflexes suffered, in the other it-was the excita- 

| tory reflexes, and o h later the inhibitory ones. The following 
is a detailed descripttefi of these experiments. 

Positive ali ary conditioned reflexes were established in 


the excitable Q o metronome, buzzer, bubbling sound, and tactile 
stimulati QP the thigh ; and negative reflexes to a combination 


N 
E a 
E > 
KN? 
KO 


was begun towards the end of March. 


296 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


of a hissing sound with the metronome (the hissing sound preceded 
the metronome by 5 seconds), and to a tactile stimulation of the 
shoulder (differentiation). All the positive conditioned reflexes were. 
delayed for three minutes. 


Experiment of 15th March, 1923. 


(before the development of the conditioned reflex to the electric 
stimulus). 


Salivary 
Secretion in 
drops during 
3 Conditioned stimulus applied successive 
Time A during 3 minutes 4 minutes from 
the beginning 
of the condi- 
tioned 
stimulus 


3.0 p.m. Metronome 0, 5, 16 
See Hissing + metronone (inhibitory) 0,0, 0 
345 ,, Bubbling 0,1, 14 
3.54 .,, Buzzer 3 
40  ,, Tactile stimulation of thigh — 0 
an Tactile stimulation of shoulder (inhibitory) 0 


In reference to this experiment it should be mentioned that in 


‘excitable dogs the commencement of conditioned stiptuli, especially 


account, in the case of delayed reflexes, there i en observed an 
initial short dis-inhibition of the inhibitory p (3.54 p.m.). 
The development of the conditioned TRE the electric stimulus 
pril it was already fully 
established. During the whole ee, the electric stimulus had . 
been given any considerable st all the forms of inhibition 
remained practically unaffecte n August the electric current 
was considerably increased OG onea and now the delayed reflexes 


strong ones, always elicits a brief n . On this 


became disturbed and the itioned inhibition became incomplete. 
In order to diminish afibitory stress all conditioned stimuli 
excepting the buzze e now allowed to act for 30 seconds only, 
instead of three es, before reinforcement. In spite of this, 
and in spite of disuse of the “alimentary” electric stimulus, 


the gradual * ening of all inhibitory processes continued. The 
delay dis red altogether ; the hissing, which, when preceding 
by 5 “ s the action of the metronome had established an 


N 


EXPERIMENTAL NEUROSES 297 


inhibitory combination, now itself acquired excitatory properties, 
i.e. became a conditioned stimulus of the second order. Even the 
differentiation of the tactile stimuli was now considerably dis- 
inhibited. 


Experiment of 29th September, 1923 (final period of work). 


Salivary 
Time Conditioned stimulus Secretion in 
drops 

3.15 p.m. Bubbling, 30 seconds 5 
Bot ee, Tactile stimulation of thigh, 30 seconds 8 
3.40 ,, Tactile stimulation of shoulder (inhibitory), 

30 seconds 5 
BOs, Metronome, 30 seconds 6 
4.12 ,, Hissing + metronome (inhibitory), 30 

seconds 10 
4.35 -,; Buzzer, 3 minutes 16, 42.213 
4.46 _,, Tactile stimulation of thigh, 30 seconds 8 
50 Fj Tactile stimulatiou of shoulder (inhibitory), 

30 seconds 


In the case of the inhibitable dog the conditioned stimuli were 
the same. The following experiment illustrates the conditioned 
reflexes as they were before the development of the reflex to the 


electric stimulus 
Experiment of 21st March, 1923. xe 


Salivary 
c Conditioned stimulus applied Secretion in 
Time during 3 minutes xO crops saree 
u 
minutes 
3.18 p.m. Bubbling co 0,2, 6 
3.54 ,, Buzzer 0, 0, 12 
4.13 ,, Metronome Peo Mo £5 
4.35 ,, Hissing + metronome itory) cE ft Pee 
4.42 ,, Buzzer 0, 6, 14 
4.55 .,, Hissing + metro Se 0,0, 0 
0,3; 9 
0,0 


Dia mmi Tactile shies ice of thigh 
Slos Tactile ES n of oan (inhibitory) ,0, 0O 
The developmen}, of the conditioned reflex to the electric stimulus 


was begun in this also towards the end of March. The reflex 
developed easj d soon reached a magnitude of 7 drops during 
30 DEN é defence reaction occasionally returned when the 


298 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


current was increased in strength, but finally it disappeared alto- 
gether and was entirely replaced by a typical alimentary reaction. 
It was soon noticed on repeating the already established reflex to the 
electric current that its secretory effect began to diminish, while the 
secretory effect of other stimuli had practically disappeared, being pre- 
sent only at the beginning of the experiment and in a very weak form. 

The following serves as an illustration of this period of the 
experiments : 


Experiment of 30th April, 1923. 


Salivary 


Secretion in 
Time Conditioned stimulus during 3 minutes drops during 
successive 
minutes 
3.25 p.m. Buzzer 0, 0, 2 
3.39 oe Metronome 0, 0,5 
3.47 ,, Buzzer 0, 0,0 
Sa Tactile stimulation of thigh 0,0, 0 
4.20 _,, Tactile stimulation of shoulder (inhibitory) 0, 0,0 
4.25 ,, Bubbling 0, 0,0 
4.37 ,,. Metronome 0, 0,0 
4.48 ,, Buzzer 0, 0,0 
The animal started at this time to lose weight became very 
dull. All experiments were therefore interrupte considerable 
time, and the dog was given plenty of food AAG) cod-liver oil. It 
soon picked up weight, and its general ess also increased. 


After this period of interruption all the Gre delayed conditioned 
reflexes excepting the one to the bu ere shortened to delays 
of 30 seconds. The ultimate resu ined, however, unchanged. 
No more than indications of the positive reflexes were obtained. 
The electrical stimulus still ev@y a considerable secretion, but on 
increasing its strength t eflex again diminished and finally 
disappeared altogether. e other positive conditioned reflexes 
had long since disap 4nd now all the forms of internal inhibi- 
tion began gradua disappear also, a salivary secretion being 


evoked on som oc¢esions by the inhibitory stimuli. 

The folloyin?“experiment illustrates this condition and shows 
that the sfsgf@us for the long-delayed reflex (buzzer) produced a 
positive t during the formerly inhibitory phase and had no 


aw ing the formerly positive phase. 


EXPERIMENTAL NEUROSES 299 


Experiment of 6th December, 1923. 


Salivary 
Time Conditioned stimulus Secretion in 
: drops 
12.48 p.m. Tactile stimulation of thigh (positive), 30 
seconds 0 
ROS So Tactile stimulation of shoulder (inhibitory), 
30 seconds 0 
| ee ae Bubbling (positive), 30 seconds | 
1.20: ;, Metronome (positive), 30 seconds 0 
1.40. _,, Buzzer (positive long delayed), 3 minutes 3, 2,0 
rol Tactile stimulation of thigh (positive), 30 
seconds 0 
BF ee, Tactile stimulation of shoulder (inhibitory), 
30 seconds 0 
2A Bea Metronome (positive), 30 seconds 0 
2.42 ~;, Hissing +metronome (inhibitory), 30 
seconds 0 
Zo. ta Metronome (positive), 30 seconds 0 


The positive effect of the formerly inhibitory stimuli did not de- 
pend upon a weakening of the inhibitory process but was determined 
by disturbances in the excitatory process, appearing in the form of 
the ultra-paradoxical phase of the cortical elements (see p. 275). 

The general condition of the dog during this period of the experi- 
ments was quite satisfactory. It was found in other e iments 
that the differentiation and the conditioned me e also 
weakened, giving place to a salivary secretion. 

The experiments just described show that a two dogs, 
with different types of nervous system, prolong sturbances of the 
higher nervous activity which N we Saban identical 
injurious influences took quite different d a In the excitable 
dog the inhibitory function of the corti e ee became extremely 
weakened. In the quiet dog it was owes of the corresponding 
cells (since the stimuli were identi} which became extremely weak. 
In other words, two quite differ ypes of neurosis were produced, 

The experimentally Rp neuroses were in both cases 
extremely persistent andre and even after:a break in the 
experiments they WAS, O tendency to improve. It was now re- 
solved in the case of thë excitable dog to employ a valuable thera- 
peutic agent, na K oronides, since in our early experiments [Drs. 
Nikiforovsky Deriabin] a strengthening of inhibition was 
EN ved under the action of bromides in cases where the 


300 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


internal inhibition was weak. Therefore, after the state of neurosis 
had continued for several months the animal was given 100 cc. 
of 2% solution of potassium bromide daily in the form of an enema. 
It was soon observed that all the forms of internal inhibition began 
quickly to re-establish themselves and in a definite sequence. The 


first to recover completely was the tactile differentiation ; this was © 


followed by the conditioned inhibition, and finally by the delay. 
All the reflexes had returned to normal by the tenth day of the 
treatment. 


Experiment of 5th March, 1924. 


Salivary 
Time Conditioned stimulus Secretion in 
drops 
3.0 p.m Metronome (excitatory rate), 30 seconds 5 
B12 os Hissing +metronome (inhibitory), 30 
seconds 0 
aco. Bubbling, 30 seconds 8 
ff ae Buzzer, 3 minutes 2, 12,- 16 
3.44 ,, Metronome, 30 seconds 8 
OO 46 Metronome (inhibitory rate), 30 seconds 0 
4.10 ,, Bubbling, 30 seconds 7 
4:16 |; Buzzer, 3 minutes pe a | 
A2 Ya es a Buzzer, 3 minutes 0, ees 21 


It must be noted that as a result of administra of bromides 
there was no diminution in the magnitude of ud sitive reflexes. 
On the contrary they were extremely constan rding to these 
and all our previous experiments bromides Na nc not be regarded 
as sedatives diminishing the excitabili the central nervous 
system: they simply regulate the g y of the nervous system 
by strengthening the intensity of ike inhibition. 

Bromides were administered eleven days only, but the cure 
of the neurosis was permanent 
the remaining 24 months 
neurosis of the “ phlegm 


all reflexes remained normal for 
ur experimentation. The state of 
dog was not improved by the adminis- 
tration of bromides, other therapeutic measures which were 
tried. The animal erefore left alone for a very long time, and 
little attention Wasypaid to it. At the end of this period we were 
surprised to fiad that the animal had spontaneously and completely 
recovered. hall come across further experiments with this dog 
in the n cture. 


YV 


o  ™” osadi 


LECTURE XVIII 


Pathological disturbances of the cortex; result of functional interference 
(continued). 


In the present lecture we shall discuss further experiments and 
observations upon the pathological states of the cerebral cortex. 
The inquiry is one of particular interest, not only on account of 
the special attention devoted to this subject at the present time, 
but also on account of several fortuitous occurrences. It has become 


. possible to trace how, as a result of different injurious influences, 


the activity of the cortex gradually and by scarcely noticeable 
stages deviates from normal and becomes pathological ; often also 
the pathological states can be made use of for inquiry into nervous 
processes taking place under purely. physiological conditions, since 
under pathological conditions different aspects of the nervous 
processes which are screened off from us by the unified and balanced 
complexity of the normal physiological state become dissociated or 
accentuated. In the lecture upon the hypnotic states occurring 
under normal conditions it was mentioned that the mostewĝeresting 
of these were subjected to experimental investigati Si y after 
they had previously been observed in exagger form in a 
pathological case. 

In one of our dogs which, it will be remagfadr aforoa (p. 270), had 
several positive and negative ERE pol Oe, a tactile stimula- 
tion at the rate of 24 per minute ha Tan as a positive 
stimulus and a stimulation at the T per minute as a negative 
one: moreover, as usually under neral conditions, the relative 
intensity of the positive reflex yas directly determined by the 
relative strength of their congsfe stimuli. In one of the experi- 
ments the positive rate of ctile stimulation was made to follow 
the inhibitory rate wi ra) ny interval of time. This apparently 
small modification ok te experiment was sufficient to create a 
pathological distyrygnce of the cortical activities in this dog. At 
first, for a few , all positive conditioned reflexes disappeared 
completely ;, as followed by a series of different modifications 


NS 301 
A 
g 


302 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


in the strength of the reflexes, a state of affairs which lasted for many 
days, the relation between the magnitudes of the reflexes and the 
intensities of the stimuli gradually changing from one phase to 
another. The entire disturbance lasted for 54 weeks, after which 
the reflexes returned to normal. Obviously this dog falls into one 
group with the inhibitable dog (described at the end of the preceding 
lecture), in which functional interferences with the cortical activities 
produced a profound nervous disturbance which was accompanied 
by a disappearance of all positive conditioned reflexes for many 
months. In the dog just described the same type of disturbance 
was produced, but lasted for only thirty-six days, within which 
period the activity of the cortex passing through different stages 
finally returned to normal. 

It becomes clear on considering all the pathological cases so far 
described, that the underlying cause of their development is in 
every instance the same. Broadly we can regard these disturbances 
as due to a conflict between the processes of excitation and inhibition 
which the cortex finds difficult to resolve. 

Besides these pathological cases we have at our disposal others 
which present features of perhaps even greater interest, firstly on 
account of certain intrinsic peculiarities, secondly on account of 
peculiar features in the mode of their origination. The case which 
is to be described first was studied from day to dayduring many 
months, and in view of the considerable inter sid resents the 
description will be given in detail [experiment, XS r. Rickman]. 
The experiments were carried out on a dog was exceedingly 
inhibitable. The animal had served in t oratory for different 
experiments for a very long time, an ad among others an 
inhibitory alimentary conditioned to a metronome rate of 
60 beats per minute, while a rate o eats per minute served as 
a positive stimulus. The so of the various positive reflexes 
was definitely related to the stréwéth of their respective conditioned 
stimuli. The inhibitory Qitioned reflex, which at the time of 
the experiments had b peated 266 times, was constant and 
precise, being so AS ated that its inhibitory after-effect upon 
the positive refl eO s very short. The strength of the reflexes 
during this age period is represented in the table shown on 
the opposite page. , 

The d onged to a group which can be called “ expert at 
au view of the fact that in this group all the types of 


N 
S 


4 > E a E, 


AO 


EXPERIMENTAL NEUROSES 303 


internal inhibition develop with great ease and precision. We now — 
determined to investigate in further experiments the degree of 
stability of the inhibitory process in this dog. For this purpose it 
was decided to transform the negative conditioned stimulus into a 


` positive one by the method which is usually the most effective, 


namely, repeated reinforcement of the inhibitory stimulus without 
any intermediate introduction of the positive stimuli (see p. 198). 
However, the destruction of the inhibition in this dog proceeded 
extremely slowly. The hitherto inhibitory stimulus was followed by 
reinforcement 4-7 times in succession on each of three successive 


Experiment of 1st December, 1925. 


Tp f f Salivary Motor reaction 
Time Conditioned stimulus applied Secretion in and general 
during 20 seconds drops during behaviour 
20 seconds 
- 10.37 a.m. Metronome, 120 per minute 8 Lively ali- 
10.45 ,, Electric light 4 mentary 
10.49 ,, Strong tone 6 reaction 
10.56 ,, Metronome, 60 per minute 0 The dog re- 
mains mo- 
tionless 
Lively ali- 
ILO Buzzer 9 
IED 4; Weak tone 34 ) meray 


«Ñ 10n 


days. The first sign of any destruction of the inhibiti s observed 
at the seventeenth application with reinforcemenŃ \n the form of 
a very small secretion without any accompanys O)imentary motor 
reaction. At the twenty-seventh reinforce e salivary secretion 
was already considerable. No definite ances in the other 
positive stimuli could be observed at th period, excepting a certain 
tendency to equalization of the secre effect of strong and weak 
positive conditioned stimuli. Th periment of the 14th December 
on page 304 shows the strengt Die reflexes at this time. 

The secretory reaction stablished to the rate of 60 beats 
of the metronome did aQ Never remain constant, but in spite 
of continued reinforohg quickly declined and at its thirtieth 
repetition fell to AS, oreover, it was now noticed that immediately 


after an applicat) the metronome at the rate of 60 practically 
none of the pogt reflexes could be elicited (18th December). 
NS 


, AČ 
wy 


304 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


Experiment of 14th December, 1925. 


Salivary 
Time Conditioned stimulus applied Secretion in 
during 20 seconds drops during 
20 seconds 
10.56 a.m. Metronome, 60 per minute 54 
(formerly the inhibitory 
rate) 
3T Electric lamp 5 
11.10, Metronome, 120 per minute 5 
LEETS Buzzer 8 
24S Weak tone 5 
als; Metronome, 120 per minute 54 
FESS), Buzzer 7 


Motor reaction 
and general 
behaviour 


Investiga- 
tory in 
character 


alimentary 


Alimentary 
reaction 


Experiment of 18th December, 1925, 


rather than 


showing the general disturbance of the conditioned = Showing the general disturbance of the conditioned reflexes. 


O 


aare e a a a a a a 
Conditioned stimulus applied oe in 
Time during 20 seconds drops during 
20 seconds 
12.4 p.m. "Bieco lamp “7064 oT lamp dy oe 
12.970; Metronome, 60 per minute (for- ny 
merly the inhibitory cS 
12.14... ,, Strong tone 
1223: Buzzer 0 
12.30. |; E 0 
12.38 ee a | 0 


Motor reaction 
and general 
behaviour 


Alimentary 


reaction ; 
takes the 
food with 
avidity 
Investiga- 
tory reflex 
At first 
turns the 
head away 
but subse- 
guently 
takes food 
Turns itself 
right away 
and de- 
clines food 
Takes the 
food after 
some delay 
Alimentary 
reaction ; 
takes the 
food at once 


EXPERIMENTAL NEUROSES 305 


In its general behaviour the animal appeared to be perfectly 
healthy and when free on the floor it consumed the same food as 
that offered during the experiment with great avidity, just as it 
did in the above experiment after the conditioned stimulus me 
before the metronome (12.4 p.m.). 

In succeeding experiments, though some of the positive effect 
of the metronome rate of 60 per minute returned, its strong inhibitory 
effect upon other conditioned reflexes nevertheless continued as 
before. 

In all those experiments, however, in which the metronome was 
not used all the reflexes were perfectly normal, excepting that the 
weaker stimuli gave a somewhat smaller secretion towards the end 
of an experiment than usual. 


Experiment of 24th December, 1925 
(without application of the metronome). 


pe F f Salivary Motor reaction 
Time Conditioned stimulus applied Secretion in and general 
during 20 seconds drops during behaviour 
20 seconds 

11.2 a.m. Buzzer 9 

ELOT Electric lamp 54 

LLD Strong tone 7 

E20; Weak tone 5 

T28 -3 Buzzer 64 

iE Be ye Electric light 3 

EES, Strong tone 6 

AAT, Weak tone 34 


I have intentionally given several expepi s with the initially 
positive reflexes in order to show how, 1 atid how persistently 


. the normal relations were retained in rae the disturbing influence 


of the metronome during the inter between these particular 
experiments. On continuing th Syperiments further )the general 
relation between the tenth SO reflexes and the strength of 
the stimuli continued to b tained in all experiments in which 
the metronome was no . In those experiments, however, in 
which either of the reS the metronome—which themselves gave 
a secretion varying $ to 74 drops—was used there was invariably 
a disturbance of nditioned reflexes following within the given 
rbance in the form of complete inhibition or of 


ediate stages. It is of interest that the metronome 
U 


306 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


rate of 120 per minute often produced a greater disturbance than 
the formerly inhibitory rate of 60. The experiments given below 
are taken from this period of experimentation. 


| Conditioned stimulus Salivary : 
Time applied Secretion in Motor reaction and 
during 20 seconds drops during general behaviour 
a | 20 seconds 
Experiment of 28th December, 1925 (Phase of Equalization). 
10.56 a.m. Buzzer 10 Alimentary reaction 
1A TE EUA Electric lamp 6 Bs 5 
AG es Metronome, 60 per 2 e ` 
minute 
TO A. Weaker tone 5 3, Er 
i237 Metronome, 120 per 44 Weak alimentary re- 
minute action 
Lt SR eee Strong tone 5 Alimentary reaction 
11.40 _,, Buzzer 4h ” ie 
11.47 _,, Electric lamp 54 - 53 
Experiment of 5th January, 1926 (Narcotic Phase). 
12.53 p.m. Metronome, 60 per 6 Delayed alimentary 
minute reaction 
It Electric lamp 34 Alimentary reaction 
|S Sa Strong tone 6 m be 
PALO Se Metronome, 120 per 3 i ys 
minute 
LISa Weak tone 0 eðk alimentary re- 
i xS action ; 
EPA o Buzzer 4l Alimentary reaction 
T3055 Electric lamp 0 Turns head away, - 


declines food 
ieee ae Buzzer xO Definite alimentary 
Q reaction: takes 
; food immediately 


Experiment of 20th J mE, 1926 (Paradoxical Phase). 


10.44 a.m. Strong tone Qy 8 Alimentary 
10.49 ,, Electric la 3 3 
UNERA See Metronom per $ Investigatory 

mi 
L2 ges We e 5 Lively alimentary 
VE ù 4} Weak alimentary 
TLI =, z tone 5 Lively alimentary 
PEZI S uzzer 24 Weak alimentary 
1120... {lectric lamp 34 Lively alimentary 
11.31 O Stropg tone 1 Alimentary 


<— i 


Moreover, a new conditio AN eflex to a bubbling sound was estab- 
lished ; the stimulus eer in this dog to the group of strong 
stimuli. As a result of thig treatment the reflexes increased in strength 
and now e nGDiminution towards the end of an experiment. 


After eleven d eat experimentation the rate of 120 beats | 
per minute L metronome was again tried : - | 


EXPERIMENTAL NEUROSES 307 | 


> Salivary 
Conditioned Secretion À 
Time stimulus applied in drops Motor i aien and general 
during 20 seconds during ehaviour 
20 seconds 


Experiment of 21st January, 1926 
(Complete Inhibition). 


11.9 a.m. | Strong tone | 6 Alimentary 
11.14 -,, Electric lamp 44 5 During the 
11227; Metronome, 120 34 be intervals 
per minute between 
LT; Weak tone 0 k thestimuli 
TE32 Buzzer 3 a the animal 
11.39 ~;, Weak tone 0 1 remains 
11.47 _,, Buzzer 0 5 perfectly 
11.52 ,, | Electric lamp 0 Weak alimentary | still 
LEST; Strong tone | 0 3 = 


Experiment of 26th January, 1926 
(without the use of the metronome). 


11.18 a.m. | Electric lamp 


6 Lively alimentary 
BT 26205, Strong tone 64 > P 
PEII +5; Buzzer 7% S S 
11.40 .. .;, Weak tone 45 i 
11.48 ,, Buzzer - 6 ¥ = A 
11.53 |; Electric lamp 2 Weak alimentar 
12.2 p.m. | Strong tone 34 3 oe 


In the last experiment, though the wate of the reflexes 
remained unchanged, a general diminu he strength of all 


the reflexes became apparent towardd, Ow of the experiment. 
In view of this tendency all the sti ere for several days rein- 
forced after a very much shorter d and the use of the metronome 


was discontinued. Soone AA this, the delay was extended 
again, but only to 15 secon gO d of to 20 seconds as previously. 


308 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 
Experiment of 2nd March, 1926. 


Salivary 
Time Conditioned stimulus Gosia in Motor reaction and 
during 15 seconds drops during general behaviour 
15 seconds 
10.44 a.m. Bubbling 64 Alimentary 
10.54 Weak tone 54 a 
ae age Metronome, 120 per 6 Investigatory reflex 
minute followed by ali- 
mentary reflex 
E BY (erage Electric lamp 4h Alimentary 
PEISEN, Buzzer 44 - F 
L245, Bubbling 34 A 
rai; Weak tone 54 Lively alimentary 


LESS: =), Buzzer 44 Alimentary 


It was seen that the administration of the metronome led to an 
immediate disturbance of all the succeeding conditioned reflexes, 
which entered into a phase of equalization passing into the paradoxical 
phase. The disturbance, however, went much deeper than this. 
On the following day and for a long time afterwards the cortex was 
unable to withstand any kind of strong stimulus without undergoing 
complete inhibition. The fact that the maximum disturbance in 
the central nervous activity does not appear immediately on ad- 
ministration of the causative stimulus, but atto eA e or more days 
has been observed in many animals. The onde an experiment 
which was performed on the day EB t t administration 
of the metronome : 


Experiment of 3rd ; SH 


Motor reaction and 


| Conditioned ERI Salivary 
general behaviour 


Time applied Secretion in 


during 15 secon drops during 
15 seconds 


3.41 p.m. Buzzer 4 5 Weak alimentary 

SABO, Electric 4 Delayed alimentary 

DDD <5 Stro e 0 Declines food 

4D a e ne 4. Alimentary; takes 
4 the food 

ARTIN zer 0 Declines food 

410: 4-2 dministration of Takes the food im- 

o food without any mediately 
conditioned stimuli — ; 


a IIa Iaa 


EXPERIMENTAL NEUROSES 309 


To all appearance the dog was at this time perfectly healthy. 

The cortical disturbance continued for 11 days without showing 
signs of any improvement, and we therefore determined to avoid 
any further use of the strong tone and to damp down the sounds of 
buzzer and bubbling. The following is the first experiment : 


Experiment of 15th March, 1926. 


Conditioned stimulus Salivary a 
Time applied Secretion in Motor reaction and 
during 15 seconds drops during general behaviour 
15 seconds 
10.20 a.m. Electric lamp 64 
10:27 ig, Weak tone 5 
10:327, Weak sound of 34 
bubbling 
10.40 ,, Weak buzzer 64 Alimentary reaction 
10.48 ,, Weak tone 44 in every case 
10:56; Weak sound of 44 
bubbling 
PA a Weak buzzer 5 
UES E oe Electric lamp 4 


The experiments gave similar results on nine successive days. 
After this the strong stimuli were again applied, with the following 


result : A 
Experiment of 27th March, 1926. oe 
Cond’tioned stimulus Salivary X . 
Time applied Qvior reaction and 
during 15 seconds general behaviour 
4.2 p.m. Strong buzzer 4 Alimentary 
ce Rae Electric lamp 1 4 
4.16 ,, Strong sound of Q Turns head away, 
bubbling and declines the 
food 
4.23 _,, Weak tone Q) Takes the food re- 
luctantly 
4.30 ,, Strong bugz@®) 0 Signs of general ex- 


citation; takes 
the food reluc- 
tantly 


4.37 ,, HES lamp $ Takes the food re- 
C luctantly 


‘stimulation of the abnormal point. A 


act quite normally the distur 


310 CONDITIONED .REFLEXES 


When free upon the floor the animal behaved quite normally 
and took the food with avidity. After an interval of one day an 
experiment was performed again with the use of only weak stimuli, 
and all the reflexes were found to be present. 


Experiment of 29th March, 1926. 


Conditioned stimulus Salivary. i 
Time applied Secretion in Motor reaction and 
during 15 seconds drops during general behaviour 


15 seconds 


3.57 p-m. Weak tone 


61 
45° Weak bubbling Gite 
4.10 ,, Electric lamp 4} 
4.19 > Weak buzzer 6 Alimentary reaction 
4.26 _,, Weak bubbling 64 in every case 
ASL hs Electric lamp 3 

5 


4.40 ,, Weak buzzer 


To sum up, these experiments show that the transformation of 
an inhibitory point of the acoustic analyser into an excitatory one 
occurred only gradually and imperfectly. Moreover, and this is 
more important, it rendered this point abnormal so that its stimula- 
tion by the conditioned stimulus of the metronome immediately 
led to a profound disturbance in the activity of the entire cortex, 
leading finally to an inability to withstand an g conditioned. 
stimuli without passing into different phases o bition, including 
the phase of complete inhibition. At first normal activity of 
the cortex was comparatively quickly re on discontinuing all 
ter period, with further 
stimulation of this point, the dist Ko took on a more permanent 
character. Since other a i continued at this time to 


e must be regarded as a result of 
terference in the acoustic analyser, 
me circumscribed part, the stimulation 
diate effect upon the function of the 
eads to a protracted pathological state. 

These obser, Ds to my mind reveal once more in an almost 
tangible form Kc Jnosaic character of the cortical activities which 
has been di aa already. i 

The dý ance in the activity of the entire cortex which has 
just escribed can be regarded as being produced in either of 


a strictly localized functional 
a chronic functional lesio 
of which produces ana 
whole cortex, and 


EXPERIMENTAL NEUROSES 311 


two ways. First, it is possible that the excitation evoked by stimuli 
acting upon the area of cortical disturbance now rapidly passes over 
into inhibition. Such a transition into inhibition is at first restricted 
to the immediate area around the original point of cortical disturbance 
but ultimately irradiates to involve the whole of the cortex. Second, 
it is possible that the stimuli act upon the area of cortical disturbance 
as injurious agents, so that, exactly as in the case of any injurious 
agents acting on any other part of the body, the entire cortical 
activity becomes inhibited on account of external inhibition. 

In either case it is obvious that the localized disturbance of the- 
acoustic analyser is again the result of a clash between excitation 
and inhibition. 

Besides those cases which have been related in the present and 
in the preceding lectures many others have been observed in which 
a similar clashing of the two antagonistic nervous processes led 
sometimes to a temporary, sometimes to a more prolonged distur- 
bance of the normal activity of the cortex, in the form of a lasting 
predominance of one or the other process. In many cases these 
pathological disturbances could not be remedied by any of the 
measures which were applied. These abnormal conditions developed 
either during the establishment of very difficult differentiations— 
especially in the case of successive compound stimuli [experiments 
of Dr. Ivanov-Smolensky, Dr. Eurman and Dr. Zimkina]—or on 
immediate transition from inhibitory cutaneous stimuli togsditatory 
ones—especially when the differentiation depended u 
rate of stimulation of one and the same place on 
in the latter case the experiments were perfor 
and aggressive type of animal [experiments r. Federov] the 
general excitation reached such an intensit it became impossible 
to. continue the experiments. The “ek as, however, cured by 


an excitable 


prolonged administration of bromides by disuse of both positive 
and negative tactile stimuli. In a ‘gg of more inhibitable type 
[experiments of Dr. Petrova] t key developed under similar. con- 
ditions an abnormal focus, to rearen strictly localized, in the 
cutaneous analyser, just AN e experiments of Dr. Rickman with 
the acoustic analyser positive stimulation of this point - 
invariably led to a diftuge spreading of inhibition which persisted 
throughout the givep experiment or even during a few subsequent 
days. Further riments with this dog were prevented. on 
account of its g ill of nephritis. 


SS 
> 
N 


@ 
ww 


VN 
AO 


312 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


With regard to the pathology of the cortex, there remain to be 
mentioned another set of cases in which the disturbances verge 
almost impreceptibly into the normal. These cases are the result 
of a permanent congenital weakness of the nervous system of the 
animal, which under definite conditions is rendered abnormal, while 
a more resistant nervous system remains normal. However, before 
describing these it is necessary, for the sake of clearness, to discuss 
briefly those external stimuli which. directly lead to inhibition of 
the cortical elements. These are of three kinds—monotonously 
recurring weak stimuli, very strong stimuli and unusual stimuli. 
All these can result either from the appearance of some new stimulus 
or from a new grouping of old stimuli. The conditions of our lives 
as well as of the lives of animals provide many occasions for the 
action of such stimuli, and it is not necessary to give any special 
examples. The biological significance of the development of cortical 
inhibition in response to such stimuli can easily be perceived. If 
stimuli of considerable strength, and especially continually changing 
stimuli, determine—as they must do in order to maintain the delicate 
equilibration of the organism in its surroundings—an alert state 
of the cortex, then it is quite reasonable to suppose that weak and 
monotonous stimuli which do not call forth any activity should tend 
towards inhibition so as to rest the cortical elements and give them 
time for recovery after a preceding activity. The inhibitory influence 


of very strong stimuli can be regarded as a refle “ passive self- 


defence,” as, for instance, in the case of hypno he immobility 
of the animal makes it less noticeable to the e , and thus abolishes 
or diminishes the aggressive reaction of enemy. It has been 
seen that the presence of something un also leads to a limitation 
of movement, which again may Q ‘survival value ” for the 
animal, since in the new conditio sual reactions might not be 
appropriate and might lead to ¥gme injury. Of course in the case 
of a new, even small, change ie environment, two reflexes appear 
—a positive one, the inve Gatory reflex, and a negative one, which 
might be described as ex of caution and restraint. Whether 
these two reflexes areWi@épendent or whether the second is a sequence 
to the first and res rom external inhibition or negative induction 
cannot be setka 


present. The second supposition seems to me 


i bring about inhibition will be discussed in a further 


types of sh 


oe 


the more cl e. The mechanism by which these three different 


—— > 


EXPERIMENTAL NEUROSES 313 


A big flood which occurred in Petrograd on the 23rd September, 
1924, afforded us an opportunity to observe in our dogs prolonged 
neuro-pathological disturbances which developed as a result of the 
extremely strong and unusual external stimuli consequent on the 
flood. The kennels of the animals which stood on the ground at 
about a quarter of a mile’s distance from the main building of the 
laboratory were flooded with water. During the terrific storm, 
amid the breaking of the waves of the increasing water against the 
walls of the building and the noise of breaking and falling trees, the 
animals had to be quickly transferred by making them swim in 
little groups from the kennels into the laboratory, where they were 
kept on the first floor, all huddled up together indiscriminately. 
All this produced a very strong and obvious inhibition in all the 
animals, since there was no fighting or quarrelling among them 
whatever, otherwise a usual occurrence when the dogs are kept to- 
gether. After this experience some of the dogs on their return to 
the kennels showed no disturbance in their conditioned reflexes. 
Other dogs—those of the inhibitable type—suffered a functional 
disturbance of the cortical activities for a very considerable period 
of time, as could be disclosed by experiments upon their conditioned 
reflexes. 

One of the dogs has already been mentioned in these lectures 
[experiments by Dr. Speransky]—a strong healthy animal, but very 
easily subjected to inhibition, with all conditioned refle ormally 
of considerable magnitude, very constant and very e so long 
as the environing conditions were’ kept rigidly co . This dog 
had ten alimentary conditioned reflexes, six positon four negative 
(differentiations). Out of the positive reflexQ ee were auditory 
and three visual. The buzzer, which was ngest of the auditory 
stimuli, evoked the largest secretion. en) three visual reflexes 
were equal in their secretory effects ok smaller by about one-third 
than the auditory. A week after t ood the dog was brought in 
to the experimental room and ed in its stand. The animal was 
abnormally restless and a ghditioned reflexes were practically 
absent, and, though usu ery ready for food, the animal now 
would not touch the d even turned its head away. During 
three days while th&aflimal was purposely left without food its 
general behaviour Quring the experiments remained unaltered. On 
considering varjowspossible interpretations we reached the conclusion 
that this ex inary behaviour of the animal must still be an 


314 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


after-effect of the flood, and the following method of combating the 
disturbance was adopted : Instead of leaving the animal alone during 
| the experiment the experimenter now remained in the same room 
Pa. with it, while I myself conducted the experiment from the outside. 
All the reflexes showed an immediate restoration in the first experi- 
| ment and the animal took the food with avidity, but it was sufficient 
| for the experimenter to leave the animal alone for all the abnormal 
symptoms to recur. In order to re-establish the reflexes permanently | 
| it was necessary to adopt the above course, of alternately leaving i 
| and entering the room, for a considerable period of time. On the 
| eleventh day of this treatment a conditioned stimulus which had not 
I been employed since before the flood was now for the first time again 
| employed, namely, the buzzer, which was the strongest stimulus, 
| and which before the flood constantly evoked the largest secretion. 
| After the application of the buzzer all the remaining conditioned 
reflexes almost completely disappeared, the animal again declined 
| the food, became very restless and continuously stared at the floor. 
| Under the influence of the same special stimulus, namely, the presence 
| of the experimenter in the room with the animal, the reflexes were 
| again gradually restored, but repetition of the buzzer after an interval 
| of five days produced the disturbance afresh. The buzzer was then 
| applied only when the experimenter was in the room with the animal, 
but even so, normal relations only returned gradually and very 


| slowly. .On many occasions a phase of equalizatio the reflexes 
| was observed after administration of the ieee eflexes often 
| diminishing and the animal declining the f Perfectly normal 


reflexes were at last obtained after forty-s ee of experimenta- 
| tion, 7.e. two months after the flood. Fo made the following 
| experiment. A small stream of wate Noy allowed to trickle silently 
| beneath the door into the animal’s Qor. The water formed a small 
pool on the floor next to the re) e on which the dog stood in its 
stand. This experiment, whic Q) represented in full on page 315, 
was conducted in the @yce of the experimenter from the 
animal’s room. & 

Several eS en the reflexes were perfectly normal 
and the buzzer Sah not been used for a considerable 
| length of time, Cis fresh application of the buzzer gave a reflex 


which was af gyeater intensity than the reflexes to the other stimuli, 
but on re g the stimulus of the buzzer once every day for 
several the secretory effect gradually diminished, and finally 


t 


EXPERIMENTAL NEUROSES 315 


the buzzer became not only entirely ineffective of itself, but its 
applications now led also to a diminution of all the other reflexes. 
It is of interest that at this stage of the experiment the presence not 


Experiment of 17th November, 1924. 


Conditioned stimulus 
Time applied 
during 30 seconds 


10.15 a.m. 


Secretion in 
drops during 


Salivary 


Remarks 
30 seconds 


Metronome, 120 per 154 
minute 
TOA Strong illumination 9 : 
of room Takes the food with 
10:36, Buzzer 17 avidity 
10.46 ,, Appearance of a 9 
circle 
10.5977, Whistle 15 
HALS, Metronome, 80 per . 0 — 
minute (inhibitory) 
EP20 Metronome, 120 per 124 Takes the food with 
minute avidity 
11.30 ,, Appearance of a 0 — 
square (inhibitory) 
11.41 ,, Api PA S of a 9 ) Takes the food with 
11.50, Buzzer 17 Ja ereny 
A small stream of 
| water is ¥llowed to 
tri iselessly 
11.59 E oe pote animal’s 
and form a 
ol on the floor 
e animal jumps 
up quickly, gazes 
12.2 p.m Strong illumination restlessly at the 
of the room O floor, tries to get 
EZ ie, Metronome, 120 per KO off the stand and 
minute O breathes heavily 
1215 Whistle 0 The conditioned 
12.25 <5, Buzzer 0 stimuli serve only 
12.32 ,, Appearance of 0 to increase the 
circle Qy general excitation; 
N the animal declines 
| O the food 
only of the TAG ter in the animal’s room but even of his clothes 


to restore Xes. 


placed some we D of sight (ċ.e. olfactory stimulus) was sufficient 
e 


316 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


Evidently under the effect of an extremely powerful and unusual 
stimulus the cortical cells, which in this dog already had a tendency 
to inhibition, now permanently became still more susceptible to 
inhibition. Stimuli to which the dog had already for a considerable 
time been indifferent (the general environment of the experiment), 
and also strong agencies which had acted before as powerful condi- 
tioned stimuli (buzzer), produced a strong inhibitory effect upon 
the cortical elements, the resistance of which was now diminished. 
Minutest components of the extraordinary stimulus of the flood 
were sufficient to evoke the same abnormal reaction. 

The dog upon which the experiments described in detail at the 
beginning of the present lecture were performed had also passed 
through the experience of the flood, with resulting disturbances, 
which, though based on a similar predisposition to inhibition, 
assumed a somewhat different character from those observed in the 
first dog. Two experiments are given below, the one performed the 
day before the flood (22nd September, 1924), the other on the third 
day after the flood (26th September, 1924). 

(The experiments by Dr. Rickman upon the same dog, given in 
the first part of this lecture, were performed, it will be remembered, 
much later than this, December 1925—March 1926.) 


Salivary 
Secretion in 
during 

A seĝonds 


Experiment of 22nd LS 


Conditioned stimulus applied 
during 30 seconds 


Time 


12.53 p.m. Metronome, 120 per 6 
12.58; Tactile 34 
| ics Rae Metronome, 60 Kie 0 

(inhibitory 
IEIET Electric lam 4 
| Ey i; Strong tone 74 
Bprimen ofat th September, 1924. 
2.42 Bs m. g e, 120 per minute 24 
2.50 2 
2.55 Seer 60 per minute 34 
(inhibitory) 
3.2 Metronome, 120 per minute l4 
3.6 Ky Tactile 0 
So 1€©), Metronome, 120 per minute 24 


EXPERIMENTAL NEUROSES 317 


the food, but the positive conditioned reflexes were diminished and 
the maximum secretory effect was obtained by the negative stimulus 
(2.55 p.m.—ultra-paradoxical phase). Experiments were now per- 
formed in which for a very long time the inhibitory rate of the 
metronome was not used. The positive reflexes were satisfactory 
and approached the normal, but even now on a single fresh 
application of the inhibitory stimulus, in any experiment, all condi- 
tioned reflexes were greatly diminished or even abolished, not only | 


In the experiment of the 26th September the animal accepted 


in the given experiment but during several succeeding days. The 
following are two examples : 


Salivary 
Time Conditioned stimulus applied Secretion in 
during 30 seconds drops during 
30 seconds 


Experiment of 6th October, 1924. 


12.3 p.m. Metronome, 120 per minute 5 
121057; Strong tone 5 
12 200e Tactile 2 
42-25: Strong tone 4 
(pas: ete Metronome, 60 per minute 0 
(inhibitory) 
TEA a Metronome, 120 per minute 0 
12.43 Tactile O 
Experiment of 20th October, 1924. CN | 


11.41 a.m: Weak tone 6 
11.46 ,, Metronome, 120 per minute 74 | 
Lik i Metronome, 60 per minu 0 | 
(inhibitory) | 
TESORI Strong tone O 0 
12.1 p.m. Buzzer x 3 
120 Te. Electric lamp 0 
TAA B Metronome, 120 minute l4 Ii 
1 
During the period of re of the conditioned reflexes when |l 
the inhibitory stimulus not used all the different phases of 
| transition between te inhibition and the normal positive | 
effect were observed. the beginning the recovery was favoured | 
by the usual God of interrupting the experiments for a few 
days and short the isolated action of all the conditioned stimuli. 


Soon, HERR methods became of no further use. The first | 
| 

| > 
S | 

Qy | 
ww | 
ANN | 


318 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


one or two reflexes in the beginning of an experiment were generally 
very weak, and all the rest failed altogether. The animal grew 
lethargic and persistently declined the food. As a final measure the - 
experiments were conducted with the animal kept free on the floor 
instead of in its stand. The beneficial effect of this method lies 
partly in the removal of the inhibitory influence of the stand, and 
partly in the introduction of additional excitatory impulses from the 
muscles and joints. The measure proved efficacious. The reflexes 
began gradually to return and progressively gained in strength. The 
animal accepted the food and normal relations became finally 
re-established. The administration of the negative stimulus led 
during the first seven days to a disappearance of the reflexes for the 
rest of that particular experiment. This inhibitory effect was not 
so apparent at the beginning of the experiment on the following 
day. In the course of the succeeding two weeks the prolonged 
inhibitory after-effect gradually disappeared and the inhibitory 
stimulus could now be practised during a single experiment more 
often. The differentiated inhibitory stimulus was repeated several 
times in every experiment, and concentration of the inhibition was 
accelerated by the immediate application of the corresponding 
positive stimulus. But it was only after two months of experi- 
mentation with the animal on the floor, and eight months after 
the flood, that it was found possible to return to A" experi- 


ments with the animal in the stand. 

It is thus seen that the powerful and un 
from the flood increased the susceptibility 
to inhibition to so great an extent that ev omparatively minute 
intensification of inhibition from the ide, in the form of a 
conditioned inhibitory stimulus, reid impossible for a long time 
any existence of positive condigio reflexes under ordinary ex- 
perimental conditions. ae 

All these experiments clegrl}bring out the fact that a develop- 
ment of a chronic phn state of the hemispheres can occur 


stimuli arising 
cortical elements 


from one or other of t ses: first a conflict between excitation 
and inhibition which ortex finds itself unable to resolve ; .second 
the action of ex ky powerful and unusual stimuli. 

I have still Ces the pathological state of another animal 
TR EAN Dr. Vishnevsky], but unfortunately I cannot state 
definitely er its present state depends only upon a congenital 


dalo 16h has been accentuated by its general conditions of life 


is now able to take the food unless distu 


EXPERIMENTAL NEUROSES 319 


—age, pregnancy and so on—or whether it was produced as a result 
of the flood, as in the case of the two preceding animals. This animal 
was described in the preceding lecture (p. 287) as belonging to an 
extremely inhibitable type. Previously to the flood it had been left 


for a long time without observation, and it was not until four months ) 


after the flood that experiments with the dog were resumed. It 
has already been mentioned that a long time before the flood this 
dog served for a considerable number of valuable experiments. 
Now, in spite of all the therapeutic measures which have been 
applied, the animal still cannot be employed for experiments upon 
our usual problems. All that I can do, therefore, in the present 
lecture is to describe its condition. The scope of the normal life 
of the animal, at any rate under laboratory conditions, has narrowed 
down considerably. In the laboratory it reacts to the minutest 
stimuli either by a passive defence reaction (an investigatory reflex 
which is immediately followed by inhibition of all movements and 
even refusal of food) or, as an exception to its type, it sleeps. Only 
in two ways can any return to normal conditions of life be brought 
about in this dog: either there must be adopted a quick transition 
from the conditioned stimulus to its reinforcement with food (within 
1-2 seconds from its beginning), or else the experiments must be 
conducted with the animal on the floor and with the experimenter 
constantly moving about in the same room. In the AA case the 
animal trots after the experimenter during the whole experi- 
ment, but even so the reinforcement of the Toa stimulus 
must not be too much delayed. Both methods e provement 
in the same manner, the animal now ceasing to r o small changes 
in the environment in the same way that it-<N¢@”before, so that it 
y stimuli of unusual 
strength. Conditioned reflexes beging, uxdér these conditions, to 
return. It is, however, only neh to delay reinforcement 
until 5-10 seconds from the ate Os the conditioned stimulus 
for the animal quickly to grow Qis and even fall asleep over its 
plate while taking the food, truly extraordinary state of the 
nervous system may be PAN as a state of extreme exhaustion— 
a perfect example of Ta Oed faiblesse irritable. The disturbance 
obviously has its sea ice cortical elements, since the delicate 
reactions of the ae. Gys analysers are essentially an intrinsic function 


of the cerebral c A more detailed investigation of this dog is 
being ow he present time. 


LECTURE XIX 


Pathological disturbances of the cortex, result of surgical interference : (a) General 
disturbances of the cortical activity. (b) Disturbances of the acoustic analyser. 


HavinG attained, on entirely objective lines, to a measure of under- 
standing concerning at least the main aspects of the physiological 
activity of the cortex, we naturally became interested to apply the 
method of conditioned reflexes to the study of cortical localization 
of functions in an endeavour to determine the importance of different 
parts of the brain for the normal functioning of the cortex as a whole. 
Experiments in this direction were planned even in the early stages 
of our research (see my communication at the International Medical 
Congress at Madrid, 1903). The only method so far available for 
such a study consists in observing the effects of partial destruction 
or complete extirpation of different parts of the cortex. This method 
naturally suffers from fundamental disadvantages, since it involves 
the roughest forms of mechanical interference and the crude dis- 
membering of an organ of a most exquisite structure and function. 
Imagine that we have to penetrate into the activipyef an incompar- 
ably simpler machine fashioned by human haps d that for this 
purpose, not knowing its different parts, i d of carefully dis- 
mantling the machine we take a saw an away one or another 
fraction of it, hoping to obtain an exac wledge of its mechanical 
working! The- method usually PR to the study of the hemi- 
spheres or other parts of the çe nervous system is essentially 
as primitive as this. Hamman chisel, the saw and the drill ; 
these are the instruments whi must be used to open up the strong 
protective skull. The tear through the several layers of 
enveloping oteategfe rans rupturing many blood-vessels, 


and finally, we inju destroy whole lumps of the delicate nervous 


tissue in diff Q) Ynechanical ways—concussion, pressure and 
incision. But is the marvellous functional resistance and the 


peculiar REN of.the living substance, that, in spite of all these 
gross ma Ny ations, within the lapse of only a single day it is some- 


tim i@possible without special and exact investigations to observe 
SS 320 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES 321 


anything abnormal in animals submitted to cerebral operations. 
Accordingly, even by these primitive methods, some insight into the 
functions of the cortex can be gained. But the obvious usefulness 
of these crude methods should on no account satisfy the physiologist. . 
He should strive to apply new advances of technical science and to 
seek ever new and more appropriate methods for the study of the 
exquisite mechanism of the hemispheres. Naturally the methods 
available for the investigation of the cortex at present, by means 
of extirpation of different parts, can but lead to entangled patho- 
logical states, and even the most guarded deductions with regard to 
the constitution of the cortex cannot therefore be ensured against 
a high probability of error. Indeed, since the special function of the 
cortex is to establish new nervous connections and so to ensure a 
perfect functional correlation between the organism and its environ- 
ment, every disturbance of any part of it will be reflected upon the 
whole mechanism. Besides this direct influence of the operative 
procedure, which may reasonably be expected with time to diminish 
spontaneously, there is another very serious complication of the 
operation which appears later on—namely, the development of a 
scar at the place of cerebral lesion which now becomes a source of 
irritation and leads to further destruction of the surrounding parts. 
On the one hand the scar, owing to its mechanical irritation of the 


surrounding normal parts of the brain, sets up recurrent Aen 


distortion and rupture, it progressively disintegrates t ispheres. 
I have been unfortunate in attempting to impr e operative 
technique, having made, as I now think, a ron In order 
to obviate haemorrhage during the operatio ed to remove in 
the dogs, long before the operation Cy, rain, the temporal 
muscles which cover the skull; this Res in a partial atrophy 
of the bones of the skull, so that th ould now be opened, often 
without the loss of a single drop gf bréod. But the dura mater in 
these cases also undergoes cons le atrophy, becomes dry and 
brittle, so that in most casesG impossible to make use of it to 
close up the cerebral ron As a result the wound was 
left after the operatiops ect communication with the more ex- 
ternal tissues, which lẹdgo the formation of a very. hard scar ulti- 
mately penetratin Gyd growing into the cerebral tissue. Almost 
every animal thas operated upon suffered from attacks of con- _ 


vulsions whi some occasions occurred so soon as five to six 
A.P. AS x 


of nervous excitation; on the other hand, owing N essure, 


322 ‘CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


weeks after the operation. A few animals died during the first 
attack, but more usually the convulsions were not severe in the 
early stages and occurred at infrequent intervals. In the course of 
several months they recurred more frequently and increased in 
force, finally either proving fatal or else leading to a new and very 
profound disturbance of the cortical activity. Therapeutic measures 
in the form of repeated anaesthesia or extirpation of the scar were 
found to be unreliable, though sometimes they were unquestionably 
effective. 

Besides the difficulties arising on account of the purely surgical 
interference itself, the experimenter has to take into serious account 
a further difficulty which is especially pronounced in the case of 
the cerebral hemispheres. In the living organism we constantly 
discover different mechanisms by means of which functional com- 
pensation of damaged and destroyed parts is effected. In the 
nervous system such vicariation and compensation of function 
occur in the most extreme degree. It is well known in the spinal 
cord—where it is facilitated by the complicated and varied course of 
the nerve fibres—and also in the peripheral nervous system. The 
effect of mechanical destruction of localized parts is thus neutralized 
to a considerable extent by compensation. In the highest parts of 
the central nervous system, which regulate the major part of the 
internal and external activity of the organism, the principle. of 
compensation and vicariation must be still mor unced. 

Having at our disposal the method of MSittoned reflexes, 
related to different individual analysers, we Ch aA to determine 
and study the pathological disturbances ing the entire cortex 
following the extirpation of one or ano art, and also to use this 
study so far as possible in investi the problem of the general 
construction of the hemisphereg akdAhe significance of its separate 
parts. x 
The first change which oe the extirpation of some part of 


the cortex is the rc: ariable disappearance of conditioned 


reflexes ; but in th ity of cases it is only the “ artificial ”’ 
conditioned reflexes W) disappear, i.e. those which were established 
in the laboratory Ke therefore relatively recent and little practised. 
If the “ ikari) conditioned reflexes have also disappeared they 
are always first to reappear ; but usually no disappearance of 


the nat Noonditioned reflexes could be observed even though 
ow after the recovery from the anaesthetic ad- 


N 
© 


y A 
N 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES 323 


ministered during the operation. Examples of the greater resistance 
of conditioned reflexes to “ natural ” stimuli as compared with those 
established to “ artificial ” stimuli occur in every research upon 
partial extirpation of the cortex and there is therefore no need to 
give any special examples. As a rule the conditioned reflexes 
disappear after the operation, whether it is performed on one or 
both of the hemispheres and on whatever portion of them it is 
éarried out. The absence of “ artificial ”. reflexes persists for diffe- 
rent lengths. of time, varying from a single day to several months. 


fissura postcruciata 
rus postcruciatus 
oe gyrus p 


F cruciota 
ta O 


2 ; 
oni >< s—~_ 9. praecruciatus 
? 


— £: praecruciata 


Bone 


F praesylvia 


wi Ae, g. compositus mee 


F Fossae sylvii g. pyriformis 


g. compositus posterior ; & 
aim. 


Fig. 8.—Dog’s brain showing the outer g e 
The nomenclature used is that of "T d 


Usually the greater the lesion the mofe prólonged is the absence of 


the reflexes ; but considering the w umber of our experimental 
animals we find in this respect notgpfew exceptions. Even in animals 
in which the operations were eet identical as to the place and 
extent of the lesion, ther at variations as to the length of 
time during which cond d reflexes are absent. It is highly 
probable that, apart(irqhy the skill and neatness with which the 
operation was perfor , the ultimate extent of the irritation and 
the destruction JD tissue depend upon the anatomical and func- 
tional peculia CO) of the operated animal. After the operation the 
RN xes never return all at once, but in sequence, 
N 

a 


4) 
NZ 


324 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


depending not only, as already mentioned, upon the stability of 
the reflex, but also upon the locality of the lesion. Generally speaking, 
reflexes belonging to those analysers which are most distant. from 
the place of the lesion recover quickest. For example, after the 
removal of the gyrus pyriformis [experiments of Dr. Zavadsky] the 
conditioned reflex from the surface of the mouth (the “ water 
reflex ” which will be discussed later) reappeared on the eleventh 
day, the reflex to the smell of camphor on the eighteenth day, the 
reflex to an increase in the general illumination of the room on the 
twenty-fifth day, while the reflexes to conditioned tactile stimuli 
failed to recover even by the thirty-fifth day. The experiments 
demonstrate a certain disturbing influence which has spread from 
the point of lesion over the mass of the hemispheres and has then 
receded to the point of origin. This disturbing influence is, of course, 
generally speaking, due to the irritation caused by the lesion. It 
has already been shown that the influence of very strong stimuli, 
and even a conflict between nervous processes of opposite sign, lead 


to a prolonged inhibitory after-effect. It is, therefore, only natural- 


to expect the same to result from a gorgias destruction of a portion 
of the cerebral cortex itself. 

When the conditioned reflexes finally get re-established they are 
found not only to regain their normal strength but often to exceed 
it, often also becoming considerably more stable eet before. The 
inhibitory process, on the other hand, grows wea any examples 
of this can be quoted from the experimen N disposal. Thus, 
after extirpation of a part of the ti gS of H. Munk in two 
dogs (see Fig. 13), the conditioned ali reflexes not only made 
a complete recovery but consider) creased in strength, and 
kept constant throughout every experiment, whereas before 
the operation they used to de&geas€ considerably towards the end 
of an experiment [experiment Dr. Eliason]. The increase in the 
strength of the conditionegPyeflexes was still more conspicuous in 
another dog, after emg the occipital lobes. The alimentary 
reflexes in this dog d before the operation 1-2 drops during 
the isolated sgt N e conditioned stimuli ; after the operation 
13 drops [exp€rim@hts of Dr. Koudrin]. In many dogs there is 


observed afte an operation a very definite prolongation of the salivary 
secretion ai follows the administration of an unconditioned 


gree he length of time required for complete extinction of 


also becomes in many dogs very prolonged : the develop- 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES 325 


ment of differentiations and conditioned inhibitions becomes more 
difficult and very often salivary secretion is observed in between 
the application of the stimuli—this never happening before. This 
last is most probably to be accounted for by dis-inhibition of the 
reflex to environment (see the seventh lecture). It is an open 
question whether this weakening of the inhibitory effect is the 
result of an increase in the intensity of the excitatory process or 
whether the excitatory process is revealed on account of weakening 
of inhibition itself. 

Another peculiarity with respect to inhibition is observed after 
surgical interferences. The inhibitory process becomes inert ; and 
so to speak inflexible. As we saw before, in normal animals the 
inhibitory after-effect becomes with practice concentrated with 
regard to its duration as well as its extent. In the post-operative 
period this concentration proceeds extremely slowly and is imperfect. 
This inertia of the inhibitory process is observed not only in the 
reflexes belonging to the analyser which has been surgically damaged, 
but also in reflexes belonging to other analysers [experiments of 
Dr. Krasnogorsky]. 

In this manner the endeavour to demonstrate by means of 
experiments with extirpation the disappearance out of the normal 
cortical activity of the functions related to the extirpated part is 
complicated in the first period after operation by the geadral effect 
which the operation has upon the hemispheres as a whak lthough 
this unfortunate complication slowly and gradually, appears, it is 


followed, as already mentioned, by a second com ion which also 
affects the hemispheres as a whole, and whi pends on the de- 
velopment of scar tissue. The effect of ar varies widely in 


different cases. After one and the sa he jo ration the injurious 
effect of the scar develops in some ca¥es quickly and is severe; in 
other cases it is slow and feeble. UnfQ@)inately the former was much 
the more common case in our e iments. The most usual effect 
of the scar consists in recurr: ttacks of convulsions, sometimes 
affecting the whole body, Ss etimes localized in one or another 
group of muscles. Suc plosive outbursts of excitation in the 
hemispheres have a véry pronounced after-effect upon their activity, 
In this respect ong- should distinguish changes which follow weak 
and rare attacks changes following violent attacks or frequently 
f moderate strength. 

art by considering the effect of the former. On 


326 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


observing conditioned reflexes.from day to day it is very often 
possible to predict the approach of an attack of convulsions with 
accuracy. If, suddenly, without any obvious cause the conditioned 
reflexes diminish in strength and then disappear, it is an infallible 
sign of an approach of an attack of convulsions. Sometimes it is 
possible to notice a still earlier sign, consisting in the disappearance 
of differentiations, t.e. in a disturbance in the inhibitory process. 
After an attack has passed, the re-establishment of the conditioned 
reflexes occupies a variable length of time, requiring sometimes 
hours, and sometimes days. In some instances the re-establishment 
of conditioned reflexes assumes a complicated character. Immediately 
after the termination of the attack conditioned reflexes are present, 
but, some time after, they again disappear, now for a consider- 
able length of time. This may possibly be explained by an initial 
irradiation of the outburst of excitation, followed subsequently by 
concentration and negative induction. So far as the effect of very 
strong or frequent attacks is concerned their after-effect is very 
variable. In one dog they were apparently the cause of an absolute 
deafness ; another dog, which after the operation behaved quite 
normally towards men and towards other dogs and food, began 
after a severe attack of convulsions to dodge and run away from 
other dogs and from men. Finally a fresh attack killed her. A 
third dog, after numerous and frequent attacks, showed quite 
peculiar symptoms. The dog will be described in detail, but 
meanwhile I shall describe one of the symptom is dog, after 
the attack, all the reflexes returned ; they h wever, to be used 
with practically simultaneous reinforce Even small delays 
(up to 5 seconds) quickly led on repeti o disappearance of the 
conditioned effect, with refusal of nd development of sleep. 
Obviously the dog suffered op ic state of faiblesse irritable 


such as was described in refere o another dog at the end of the 
preceding lecture. After each r’etrrence of the attack this peculiar 
symptom became more need. , It is natural to regard this 
change as due to a f 1 exhaustion of the cortical elements 
consequent on the c N ions ; the cortical elements now, under 
the action of ex O rapidly undergo a transition into an 
inhibitory TRY connection of which with sleep has been 
discussed p Gously. In this dog the functional exhaustion, like 
the excita aO producing it, affected the entire cortex. It is 


often, We ver, restricted to the particular analyser which was 


N 
sh 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES 327 


this will be given later. 
In some cases the effect of the scar manifesta itself in a different 
manner, being limited to a hyper-excitability of analysers other 
than the motor one, and therefore not associated with convulsions. 
One dog after extirpation of the frontal lobes [experiments of Dr. 
Babkin] quickly recovered from the effects of the operation, but 
two months later it developed an extreme cutaneous hyperaesthesia 
which lasted for ten days : the animal would howl at the most gentle 
touch and-even at its own movements, and after this would shrink 
down into a heap on the floor. Evidently the scar in the cutaneous 
analyser served as a source of irritation to the cortical area of 
localization connected with the receptors of injury (subjectively 
pain), if indeed such analyser exists in an independent localized form. 
A still more interesting case was presented by another dog after 
a partial extirpation of the cortical part of the cutaneous analyser 
[experiments of Dr. Eroféeva]. One and a half months after the 
operation a vigorous attack of convulsions occurred. During this 
attack the animal was subjected to a further operation, the scar, 
which gave outgrowths considerably beyond the site of the original 
lesion, being carefully removed. The convulsions did not recur after 

the operation, but another form of disturbance developed which 

lasted at each recurrence for several days. When either e imenter 

or food came into the field of vision of the left eye (thogh; l being 

operated on the right side) it quickly turned away, Ba if free ran 

away, showing signs of extreme excitation., The stimuli when 

applied from the right side of the animal RO ed no abnormal | 
reaction. Often, free and on its own, the do Ald suddenly glance | 
to the left, quickly jump up and run má aly ay. This can all be | 
interpreted if we assume that some aining portions of the scar 

directly irritated the visual analyser @) one side, thereby producing 

a distortion of the effect of the e nal stimuli falling on the retina 

and altering the significance o visual object, which assumed in 

the dog’s cortex unusual raordinary aspects to which the 

animal reacted as to a SS crete and definite stimulus—exactly 

in the same manner aren also with normal animals in response 

to any raei Sual stimulus. In short, the scar produced 

a Pepen PNE sion. Obviously a similar condition obtained 

in the dog pre ly mentioned, which after an attack of convulsions 

began to a even from its usual attendant and from the food, 


| TY 
> 
wy 
Ss 


most directly affected by the surgical interference. Examples of 


a o a i 


@ 


328 © CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


exhibiting a violent general excitation. It is probable that the 
outburst of excitation resulting from the scar, after having freed 
the motor area of the cortex, was still retained for some time in the 
visual analyser. It is legitimate to regard these cases as the equiva- 
lent of epileptic disturbances of the motor analyser. 

The foregoing observations led to our planning a detailed investi- 


gation of the effects of direct stimulation of the different cortical 


analysers. By permanently healing electrodes in different points 
of the hemispheres we are hoping to produce in our dogs by means 
of electrical stimulation definite changes in the reactions to our usual 
conditioned stimuli. The difficulties of technique have been overcome 
and the experiments are at present in progress. 

It is unfortunate that the majority of our experiments with 
extirpation were performed in the earlier period of our research, 
when we had not definitely realized the peculiarities of the different 
individual types of the nervous system and had not yet any knowledge 
of the pathological effects arising under the influence of functional, 
i.e. non-surgical, disturbances. 

After this preliminary review of the general effects of surgical 
interference with the cortex I shall describe in detail the results 
obtained by the fullest possible application of the method of con- 
ditioned reflexes to our operated animals with the object of 
determining the physiological significance of the eptie cortex and 
of larger or smaller parts thereof. 


In some of our animals a complete extirpati the whole cortex 
was carried out (one animal survived ae ation for 44 years). 
This operation had already first iene S i Kuced by Goltz, but it 


mining by our method the relation rtex to the higher nervous 
activity of the dog [experimerky r. Zeliony]. The general 
behaviour of the animals after et extirpation of the cortex 
has been described in deton several occasions by Dr. Zeliony 
himself. I shall thertore OF l only upon the relation of conditioned 
reflexes to the cort Yi the usual conditioned reflexes were 
definitely absent i se Sna after the extirpation, and neither 
old nor new refléxeş “ould be obtained in spite of the most persistent 
reinforcing o cial stimuli or testing for natural conditioned 
reflexes, w Xenia our attention upon one peculiar conditioned 
reflex, according to our previous experiments, in contrast to 
all ee reflexes, was extremely stable. I refer to what 


was undertaken in our experiments Gre special object of deter- 
ay D 


| 
| 
| 
] 


i 
FE 


[LÌ 


9 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES 329 


we term “the water reflex ”—a conditioned reflex in response to 
stimulation of the receptor surface of the mouth. If, by means of 
an apparatus which is placed in the dog’s mouth, water is injected 
after a few preliminary injections of acid, the water which under 
normal conditions evokes hardly any salivary secretion (at most 
1-2 drops) now causes a copious secretion. Evidently the stimulation 
by liquid of some receptor nerve-endings of the mucous membrane 
of the mouth, coinciding with the effect of the acidity, acquires 
conditioned properties determining this large salivary secretion 
together with a corresponding motor reaction typical of the reflex 
to acid. The conditioned water-reflex, as will be shown later, 
possesses all the properties of a conditioned reflex. In the dog which 
survived the removal of the hemispheres the longest time (44 years), 
the water-reflex was established before the extirpation of the last 


_portion of the hemispheres—the extirpation being performed in 


stages. The reflex measured 8-10 drops for injection of 5 c.c. of 
water. Beginning from the sixth day after complete extirpation of 
the hemispheres 5 c.c. of 0:25% solution of hydrochloric acid were 
repeatedly injected practically every day, over 500 injections being 
made in all. Only after seven months of this procedure did a salivary 
secretion to water appear, which gradually increased in strength 
until it measured 13 drops for injection of 5 c.cs. of water. Was 
this, however, a conditioned reflex ? Decidedly not. The reflex 
in this ease differed fundamentally from the ordinar = 
water-reflex, The most important difference was th 
be made to undergo extinction, which occurs wit 
the case of the real conditioned water-reflex inn 
water is injected several times in succession wji the acid. Inthe 
decorticated animal the effect of repeate ion of water became 
constant. By observing the dog aftexth4dministration of water 
the true nature of this reflex was rev . After injection of water 
the animal exhibited typical mggements, which otherwise were 
observed only when the animal hungry. It started walking to 
and fro with head bent low tching nostrils, as if reaching for 
something. On further i eration it became obvious that the 


reme ease in 
animals when 


contact of water wit ucous membrane of the mouth evoked 
in this dog a stron onditioned alimentary reflex. This was 
corroborated: by the act that unconditioned reflexes, e.g. salivary 
reflexes, after Oval of the cerebral cortex, become at first 


ERS rwards, however, gradually recovering their 


SÀ 
ao 


AČ 
wy 


330 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


I wonted strength and finally becoming very much increased above 
Hl normal. 

Hii To present the final conclusion of these experiments with the 
utmost reserve, the cerebral cortex should be regarded as the essential 
organ for the maintenance and establishment of conditioned reflexes, 
Hil possessing in this respect a function of nervous synthesis of a scope 
il and exactness which is not found in any other part of the central 
nervous system. 

Of the individual analysers most attention was paid to the 
| acoustic, and I shall commence my description with this. An absolute 
| deafness following extirpation of a part of the cerebral cortex was 
| observed in three dogs. In two of these animals [experiments of 
| 


f 


li 
UT 


TT 


i 


l 
| 
4 


i 


i Fig. 9. xO 


IIN Dr. Koudrin] the cortical substance was rene posterior to a line 

starting from a point above and im ely behind the gyrus 
sigmoideus, stretching to the tip of rus sylviaticus and then 
[li passing along the fissura fossae sy ig. 9). The operation was 
I performed in two stages, first one and then on the other side. 
I Absolute deafness appeared im ately after the second operation. 
II One of the dogs lived for nig months after the operation, the other 
[ii for seven. In the third d xperiments of Dr. Makovski] a bilateral 
extirpation was perf the gyri sylviaticus posterior, ectosylvius 
II posterior and supra posterior. On one side there were included 
[fi also the middle dnd fife frontal portions of these convolutions (Fig. 10). 
| Absolute ones. occurred one and a half months after the operation. 
l On the day, ious to the deafness a weakening of the inhibitory 
observed : this was probably followed during the night by 


of convulsions. The animal lived after this, in apparently 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES 331 


good health, for another month. During this period new conditioned 
reflexes were developed to stimuli belonging to the tactile, olfactory 
and visual analysers. The animal died during an attack of con- 
vulsions. Other animals, which were operated on in exactly the same 
manner as the last, continued to react to sound, though in some cases 
they survived the operation even longer. 

How can we explain the absolute loss of all auditory reactions ? 
Since it must be regarded as definitely proved that after complete 
removal of the whole cortex dogs still continue to react to sound, 
it must be admitted that in the three cases of absolute deafness 
described above there must have been some damage of sub-cortical 
structures or a development of inhibition which spread into the 
sub-cortical areas. The latter possibility ought not to be excluded, 


Fig. 10. 


since on histological examination (unfortunately athe Onis no 
damage of sub-cortical structures could be observ urther, in 
the first two dogs a general reaction to light; whic first entirely 
disappeared, returned two months after the onion, and a con- 
ditioned reflex to light even reached its p Nerative intensity ; 
finally, it is well known how extremely Ow different impulses 
originating within the hemispheres inhikjt reflexes of lower centres. 


: If such an inhibitory effect is acceptes the cause of deafness in 


throughout the ramifications e acoustic analyser, without 


involving any other analys 
As a rule the general ory motor reactions (pricking up the 


ears and lifting the head) after removal of the temporal lobes or 
of the whole posteri half of both hemispheres, return within a few 
hours, or a day or t most ; in some cases they do not disappear 
reaction to sound is an unconditioned investi- 
onging to sub-cortical regions, since it remains 


the third dog, we have to oe this inhibition spread solely 


332 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


present in dogs even after removal of the entire cerebral cortex. 
The rest of the auditory reactions must be attributed to the cortex, 
and these functions of the acoustic analyser at first entirely disappear 
after the limited operations described above, then return, never, 
however, recovering completely. 

When, after bilateral removal of the temporal lobes, the investi- 
gatory reflex to sound has already returned, as well as conditioned 
reflexes to stimuli belonging to other analysers, all auditory condi- 
tioned reflexes are found still to be absent. Such a state may last 
for many days or even for several months, depending upon the extent 
of the operation.. Moreover, it is of importance that both temporal 
lobes should be removed at one time, or in two operations shortly 
following one another, first on one side and then on the other. If 
the two operations are performed with a long interval between them 
the phase of complete disappearance of auditory conditioned reflexes 
may be absent. What does the temporary absence of auditory 
conditioned reflexes mean? Several possible interpretations can 
be advanced. First, it is possible that the cells of the acoustic 
analyser still remaining after the operation are rendered incapable 
of developing a state of excitation, and under the influence of external 
stimuli pass directly into an inhibitory state, it may be on account of 
being weakened by the operation, or on account of being decreased 
in number, or on account of being previously ke reserve and 
not involved as a general rule in the activity of tR stic analyser 
before the operation. Second, it is possible t Cifter the operation 
the analysing function of the cortical part e acoustic analyser 
is so diminished that all the sounds now ing the dog, both inside 
and outside the laboratory, acquire id Q al qualities and therefore, 
more frequently than not, fail to boi} che with the unconditioned 
stimulus, with the result that the conditioned significance of the 
definite acoustic stimulus didgjpears on account of extinction. 
Finally, it is possible that er the influence of the operation the 
synthetic activity of the stic analyser, involved in the mainten- 
ance or establishm conditioned reflexes, itself weakens or 
temporarily disa . Special experiments were performed in 
order to test thse guppositions [Dr. Krijanovsky]. 

se was made of an auditory stimulus as a conditioned 
conditioned inhibitors of the same alimentary reflex 
ere established in a dog; one was a tactile stimulus, 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES 333 


Three days after bilateral removal of the temporal lobes (Fig. 11) 
the positive conditioned reflex to camphor had already reappeared. 
The conditioned inhibitors remained practically without any effect 
for several more days, but from the twelfth day on gave a 
full inhibition. It was noticed now that any other sounds had 
exactly the same inhibitory effect as the original conditioned in- 
hibitor. All positive acoustic conditioned reflexes were absent at 
this stage ; neither the sound of splashing of acid nor the sound of 
cracking of biscuits, to both of which under normal conditions 
reflexes developed with extreme ease, could be made to evoke a 
conditioned response. The fact that any sound acted in the capacity 
of a real conditioned inhibitor and not as an agent of external 


inhibition was proved by means of destruction of conditioned 
inhibition by reinforcing the action of the inhi y combination 
by the administration of food and then re-ORie ishing it by dis- 
continuing the reinforcement. In cont eriments the same 
destruction and re-establishment wa, a) ed with the tactile 
conditioned inhibitor. It follows ropes experiments that the 
sounds acted as true conditioned inhibitors, and, therefore, that the 
analyser was capable of perform} n inhibitory function while the 
function of excitation was stil t. In other words, the analysing 
function of the cortex wa aired. Only several days after the 
above experiments iea positive conditioned reflexes to sound 
begin to reappear. 

In a second Ghd of testing our suppositions, in particular 
the supposition treme generalization of sounds, we used long- 
trace ERG which, as is known, the stimuli are generalized. 


334 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


beyond the limits of a single analyser (Lecture VII). In the case 
of long-trace reflexes perfectly neutral stimuli assume the character 
of accessory conditioned stimuli, which act in the same manner as 
the original trace stimulus, 7.e. the secretion begins after the same 
latent period. Now it was determined to test whether these condi- 
tioned accessory reflexes to auditory stimuli in general would still 


be present at the time of absence of the specific reflexes to these 


stimuli. For this purpose the dog had a definite trace reflex estab- 
lished to a tactile stimulus in which the pause between the end of 
the conditioned stimulus and the beginning of the unconditioned 
stimulus was two minutes. Usually the conditioned secretion 


_ started during the second minute of the pause. Ten days after 


complete removal of the temporal lobes the trace reflex to the tactile 
stimulus reappeared. On the twelfth day an auditory stimulus gave 
8 drops during 4 minutes, the secretion starting during the third 
minute after the termination of the stimulus. On the seventeenth 
day the same auditory stimulus gave 38 drops during 6 minutes, 
the secretion starting as in the case of the primary trace stimulus 
during the second minute of the pause. It was only on the thirty-fifth 
day that the conditioned reflexes to the actual isolated action of the 
conditioned auditory stimuli first began to appear. This experiment 
shows once more that the auditory stimuli had assumed an extremely 
generalized character, so that sound as a general stimulus still 
continued to act, although individual sounds had Jest their specific 
conditioned significance. It is, moreover, evide the function 
of synthesis was not lost, and after these exp nts special testing 


of the third supposition was unnecessary. 


Ka 
X 
O 


The two types of experiment just 16 ed probably belonged 
to two different post-operative stateg he acoustic analyser, the 
first an earlier, the second a later &{age.’ This is the more probable 
since in other dogs which Ae a similar operation 
(Fig. 12) we also observed a ralization of auditory conditioned 
simultaneous and short-de stimuli [experiments of Dr. Babkin]. 


The following is one of experiments : 

A conditioned Eier reflex had been established to a 
descending scale (©) neighbouring tones, and this was completely 
differentiated oar same scale taken in the ascending direction. 


On the eighth@ay after removal of the temporal lobes the experiment 
proceeded am ows : 


4 


3h 


POSTOPERATIVE DISIURBANCES 
Experiment of 12th April, 1911. 


| suite | ce 
Time '! Conditioned stimulus during Salivary Secretion in drops 
30 seconds during 30 seconds 


11.13 a.m. Descending scale of tones 7 Reinforced - 
11.25 Descending scale of tones 6 Reinforced 
11.33 A subdued tone 2 
11.36 Tapping on a glass bottle 6 
11.39 Clapping the hands 1 } Not reinforced 
11.42 Whistling 3 
11.46 Tapping on a glass bottle 3 
11.49 Descending scale of tones 1 
11.55 Tapping on a glass bottle 2 

1 


Reinforced 


LEDS. .; Tapping on a glass bottle 
12 apm. Scratching on the table 
a, Descending scale of tones 2 Reinforced 

| be eae Descending scale of tones 6 Reinforced 
12:25 ©; Tapping on a glass bottle 4 Not reinforced 


} Not reinforced 
0 


All the stimuli, except the scale of’ tones, used in the above 
experiment were “ neutral,” i.e. had never been reinforced. 


Fig. 12. 


established auditory conditioned stimulus 
never previously had any conditioned A 


ther sounds, which 
ce, now acted some- 


It is seen from this experiment. that rvs the previously 


times as effectively as the descending e of tones. When these 
extraneous sounds weakened in their\éffect on account of non- 
reinforcement, the conditioned sti Qi also considerably diminished 
in its effect (11.49 ; 12.3). Ongaprcins the conditioned stimulus 
the effect of the other sou so became increased (12.25 p.m.). 
The sound in its capac yQ a conditioned stimulus had. become 
extremely generalized, ey analysis had become impaired so as 
to be practically negfgible. When the power of analysis begins to 
reappear the impr ent proceeds very often with extreme slowness. 
First of all raya nes are distinguished from other kinds of sound, 


336 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


like knocks and noises. The differentiation between different tones 
remains imperfect for a very long time ; in these experiments of Dr. 
Babkin, for example, differentiation between single tones only began 
to return through gradual stages two months after the operation. 

The absence or the diminished precision of the analysing function 
of the acoustic nervous apparatus described is obviously identical 
with what H. Munk terms “ psychic deafness.” It is impossible, 
however, not to see the fundamental difference between the purely 
physiological and the psychological interpretation of these facts. 
According to the definition of Munk “the animal hears but fails to 
understand,” and experimentation becomes sterile in the interpre- 
tation of “ understand.” But the physiological point of view opens 
up a vast field for experimentally investigating the different stages 
of the re-establishment of functions in the damaged acoustic analyser. 
Under normal conditions sounds are differentiated according to their 
strength, duration, continuous or interrupted character, point of 
origin, and nature— whether tones, knocks, noises, etc. It must be 
expected—and in this respect it can be stated that we have definite 
proof—that in returning to normal the damaged acoustic analyser 
passes through different stages of activity, and only by detailed 
investigation of these stages can we hope ever to reach a complete 
understanding of the mechanism of acoustic analysis. 

The foregoing does not complete our picture of the disturbances 
in the functions of the acoustic analyser after the\removal of the 
temporal lobes. There is another, probably snost important, 
functional disturbance. It was noticed a lo Gime ago, by many in- 
vestigators, that after an operation upon ato lobes dogs cease 
to respond to their names. This was ob also in our experiments, © 


and we believe that it can only (ania by a disappearance of 


the special analysis of conditione tory compound stimuli. In 
order to verify this point a experiments were performed by 


i were established to different tones 
s or with different intervals between 
them. One definite s ce was used for a positive conditioned 
redex, others for n e ones (differentiation). These differentia- 
tions, as menti O the eighth lecture, were much more difficult 
to establish thay differentiations of single tones. Besides the differen- 
tiation of e ound auditory stimuli, differentiations of single tones 
were als NS lished. Both temporal lobes were then extirpated in 
oka The disturbances which followed the operation were 


N 


Dr. Babkin. Conditioned sti 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES 337 


exactly identical in the five dogs employed for the experiments. 
While the differentiation of single tones sooner or later became 
re-established with the same precision as before the operation (a 
differentiation of intervals of a single tone), there was never the 
slightest trace of any re-establishment of a differentiation of the 
successive compound stimuli, though most of the dogs were tested 
for 2-3 months after the operation, and one dog for nearly three years. 
In the latter dog [originally observed by Dr. Koudrin] the entire 
posterior part of the hemispheres was removed as in the two dogs 
previously described (see Fig. 9, p. 330). The final operation was 
performed on the 5th May, 1909. The experiments to be described 
were started towards the end of 1911. Alimentary conditioned 
reflexes were established to an ascending scale of tones of pneumatic 
tuning forks—290, 325, 370, and 413 d.v., and to a separate tone of 
a Stern’s tone-variator—1200 d.v. The reflexes developed fairly 
quickly and a differentiation between the single tone of 1200 d.v. 
and a tone of 1066 d.v. was attempted through stages of differentia- 
tions from 600 and then 900 d.v. The final differentiation was 
successfully established. A differentiation of the descending scale, 
on the other hand, completely failed to be established in spite of 
150 repetitions of the descending scale contrasted with 400 of the 
ascending scale. The reaction to calling the dog by name was also 
absent during the whole period of three years. The following 
example is taken from a late stage of these experiments Ke arch, 
1912). 


Time Conditioned stimulus during Salivary Sgeetion during 
30 seconds : onds 


Ascending scale of tones 


if a as > } Reinforced 


Descending ‘scale of Lar 6 
A 4 5 Not reinforced 


Traces 


seg scale Ra in \ Reinforced 


To the same oer s a probably belongs also the 


following, up to ion aie solitary, case [experiments of Dr. 
ed alimentary reflex was established to a 


Eliason]. A wey 
chord of tones & armonium 85-256-768 d.v. (F-c’-g”). When the 


Y 


A.P. S 


338 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


reflex reached its maximum strength the different component tones 
were tried separately. They all produced a positive effect weaker 
than that of the chord but approximately equal in strength among 
themselves. The effect of intermediate tones was extremely small. 
After the removal of the anterior portions of the temporal lobes 
(Fig. 13) the relative effect of the different components underwent a 
considerable change. The effect of 768 d.v. and of the neighbouring 
tones disappeared altogether, though the reflex to the chord returned 
on the fifth day after the operation. The lower component of the 
chord—85 d.v.—when tested alone began to act with increased 
vigour, its effect often being equal to that of the whole chord. What 
can be the explanation of the extremely definite results of these 
experiments ? The first explanation that suggested itself was that 


Fig. 13. 


the reflexes to the higher musical tones had been selectively disrupted 
as a result of the operation. This, however, was absaqlitely disproved, 
since when the tone of 768 d.v. was reinforced i dently of the 
chord it very quickly assumed independe Cand very definite 
properties as a strong conditioned stimule To our great regret 
this dog died before we could accompli iferent modifications in 
the experiments. The absence of the S of the higher tone before 
it was independently reinforced canfoto® attributed to any difference 
in strength of the tones in the §ord, since the highest tone was if 
anything stronger than the tv€o)ldwer ones. The observations are 
in accord with the theory @,the existence of a special part of the 
acoustic analyser in wi synthesis and analysis of successive 
and simultaneous co auditory stimuli is effected (the acoustic 
area of H. Munk). part of the acoustic analyser would provide 
a parallel with doubted projection of the retina upon a definite 
part of the K nalyser. According to this supposition such part 

analyser in the cortex must be regarded as a special 


of the acoy 
rset which is connected with all the parts of the peripheral 
> 
Vv 
N 
N 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES 339 


acoustic apparatus, so that on account of the specially favourable 
local structural peculiarities a facility is afforded for the formation of 
various and complicated connections, involving the establishment of 
reflexes to most complex compound auditory stimuli as well as their ` 
analysis. A partial destruction of this portion leads to a dropping 
out from the compounds of some of the individual components, 
and a complete destruction entirely eliminates the higher synthesis 
and analysis of compound stimuli. After complete removal of 
the temporal lobes auditory conditioned . reflexes still continue 
to exist [Dr. Kalischer,! and our own experiments], and an 
elementary differentiation can still be effected, while after extirpation 
of the whole cortex all conditioned reflexes entirely and permanently 
disappear. Only one conclusion, therefore, can be drawn, namely, 
that in the cortex, besides the special part of the acoustic analyser, 
there must exist some extensions of the analyser dispersed more 
widely over the cortex, and maybe throughout its whole mass. 
These elements owing to their dispersion are not able to enter into 
complex interconnections, though they can still perform an elementary 
synthesis and analysis. It is possible also that the simplification or 
limitation of activity of different parts of the acoustic analyser 
increases with their distance from the cortical “ nucleus ”’ of the 
analyser. 


orm 
d for 


The hypothesis of such a distribution of the cortical pa of the 
e 


acoustic, and probably of any other, analyser seems to me,t 
best with the available facts, and to open also an unlims 
further investigation. It would fit in with the wi 
which will be proved later, of any one analyser 
analysers, far beyond the limits of the hitherto a ed localizations. 
It would also agree with the existence of cial “ nucleus ” in 
each analyser in which, on account of the y and the exceptional 
concentration of the elemental units of geien analyser, the higher 
synthetic and analytic activity is reņdèed possible. Again, it could 
also without difficulty explain th ual improvement by practice 
of the activity of the remnan he analysers, the functions. of 
which are so limited imme y after the lesion of its nucleus. 
Ultimately it should a @Xrmine the limits to which such an 
improvement could exte In the dog last mentioned the elementary — 
1Q. Kalischer. “< ktion des Schlafenlappens des Grosshirns.”’ 


Sitzungsber. der fohsl. preuss. Akademie der Wissensch. Physik. mathem. 
KI. v. 10, p. 2040307. 


340 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


analysis of tones had probably reached the maximal degree possible, 
the loss of the higher synthesis and analysis remaining permanent 
even after three years of practice. 

The hypothesis suggested, of such a wide distribution of analysers 
in the cortex, naturally sets up further problems for experimentation 
which should be used to test its validity. In regard to the acoustic 
analyser, before a partial extirpation there should be developed as 
great a number as possible of positive elementary and compound 
stimuli, and various differentiations. The different general pro- 
perties of the elementary stimuli should be determined for each dog, 
their threshold strength, the conditions under which positive stimuli 
acquire an inhibitory character, the mobility of the inhibitory process 
and the degree of its after-effect, and so on. Only such further ex- 
periments can demonstrate definitely the changes which occur as 
the result of an operation, how far these changes affect the general 
properties of the reflexes and what changes constitute the direct 
result of damaging different parts of the analyser. During the 
period of re-establishment of the acoustic function after the operation 
special attention must be paid, as was previously mentioned, to the 
determination of the different transition stages. It is obvious that 
in order to carry out such a plan a healthy and prolonged existence 
of the animal after the operation must be ensured. Unfortunately 
this cannot up to the present be satisfactorily a ined. 

N 
© 


LECTURE XX 


Pathological disturbances of the cortex, result of surgical interference (continued) : 
(c) in the visual analyser ; (d) in the tactile cutaneous analyser ; (e) occurriny 
after extirpation of the frontal lobes ; (f ) in the thermal cutaneous analyser ; 
(g) arising after extirpation of the gyrus pyriformis ; (h) in the motor analyser. 


THE pathological disturbances of the visual analyser, which will be 
discussed next, have not been studied in our laboratory to the same 
extent as those of the acoustic analyser, but such experiments as 
have been performed permit us to trace very similar relations in the 
activity of the two analysers after extirpation of corresponding 
parts of the cortex. 

It was shown by Goltz with his decorticated animal, that the 
“ investigatory reflex ” to light can be brought about, in its most 
rudimentary form of a motor reaction, through sub-cortical areas 
alone, without any co-operation of the cortex. This, however, is 
all that could be deduced from Goltz’s experiments. Neither is there 
any indication in the writings of subsequent authors as to the exis- 
tence in such animals of any higher visual functions. In decor- 
ticated dogs [experiments of Dr. Zeliony], even thig ntary 
reaction was not sharply defined, so that it would se question- 
able that the entire scope of the visual function nd this very 
elementary and limited reaction belongs exclusj to the cerebral 
cortex, exactly as in the case of the analysdr)ot the mouth (e.g. 
the water-reflex) and the acoustic anal in the experiments 
previously described. It has been showg that even in the case of 
the primitive analyser of the mouth Qo conditioned connections 
could be established in absence ọ e cortex, although a certain 
rudimentary analysis was still Ropsible (such dogs rejected many 
non-alimentary or irritatin gtances). In the case of the visual 
analyser there can be no n at all of any possible establishment 
of conditioned reflexes(to) visual stimuli exclusively through sub- 
cortical areas. A 

In common Bea Sn previous observers, including Minkovski, 


we obtained a definite diminution of the visual field, either in 
N 341 


2) 
ww 


NO) 


342 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


the horizontal or the vertical direction, in one or both eyes, according 
to the site of the damage in the occipital lobe on one or upon both 
sides. Thus, objects which happen to fall within the intact parts 
of the visual field continue to evoke their corresponding reactions, 
while the same objects but slightly shifted in position fail to evoke 
any reaction on the part of the animal. Evidently the occipital 
lobes must contain the nucleus of the visual analyser, upon the 
integrity of which depends the existence of visual reflexes, involving 
the more complicated forms of synthesis and the finer shades of 
physiological analysis. After bilateral extirpation of the entire 
occipital lobes none of our dogs ever showed any sign of object vision 
during the whole time of survival after the operation (one animal 
survived three years). Neither men nor animals nor food were 
discriminated by these animals by sight. We would frequently lay 
upon the floor, or suspend on strings at different heights, pieces of 
food, but there was not a single dog after bilateral extirpation of the 
occipital lobes, which, however long it had been deprived of food, 
ever on one single occasion directed its movement by sight. The 
dogs directed. themselves to the pieces of food obviously only by 
means of olfactory and tactile stimuli. The definite limitations of 
the visual field in the horizontal or vertical plane following damage 
of different regions of the occipital lobes show that the loss of object 
vision depends upon the absence of the higher synthegis and analysis 
of visual stimuli rather than upon a accessory 
visual reactions—convergence and accom moreover, 
animals with removed occipital lobes N ail to discriminate 
objects whether large or small, pia ar, in strong, medium 
or weak light. 

Although the main nucleus o Qaa analyser—the organ 
of the higher analysis and anaes f visual stimuli—is located in 
the occipital lobes of the on ee these do not constitute the - 
entire analyser. The aera iat ser is dispersed over a much wider 
area, and probably over hole mass of the cortex. Even in the 
older days of the OA of the cortex it was the teaching of 
several authorities the frontal lobes also had a definite relation 
to vision. Thi clusion was derived from the impairment of 
vision which gppeared after extirpation of the frontal lobes—a form 


of negativé ence which cannot be accepted as sufficient proof, 
since t Qis could be interpreted in terms of a protracted indirect 
EN aftėr-effect of the operation itself. At the present time, 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES 343 


however, we are in a position to offer positive evidence for the view 
that a part of the analyser capable of performing a considerable 
visual analysis is situated in the anterior part of the cerebral cortex 
in front of a line beginning from a point above and immediately 
behind the gyrus sigmoideus, stretching obliquely downwards and 
laterally to the anterior angle of the gyrus sylviaticus, and then passing 
along the fissura fossae sylvit to the lower margin of the hemispheres 
(see Fig. 18, p. 363). We found in our dogs, after extirpation of the 
entire mass of the cortex behind this line, that stable conditioned 
reflexes could be established to changes in intensity of illumination, 
observations which are in complete agreement with the experiments 
of Kalischer. But, in addition to this, we found that a discrimination 
of tolerably fine gradations of the intensity of illumination could be 
definitely established. These observations give a simple and purely 
scientific interpretation of what has been called by H. Munk “ psychic 
blindness.” The visual analyser which is considerably damaged 
after removal of the occipital lobes can now establish conditioned 
connections only within the scope of a single limited function, 
namely, reactions to fluctuations in luminosity. On account of this 
the animal in an illuminated room is still able to avoid dark objects 
and to walk out through an open door guided by differences in lumi- 
nosity. In view of these facts it would be more exact to reverse the 
psychological phrase “ that the dog sees but does not understand,” 
and to say “ that the dog understands but does not se etiently 
well.” Such formularization is, of course, impermissib undant, 
since the whole disturbance primarily consists in ty@Qemitation of 
the analysing activity. The scientific value of thiNpbjective point 
of view has been fully confirmed by our furt vestigation. In 
one of our dogs which retained the cortex front of the above- 
mentioned line, it was possible to es conditioned reflexes 

involving a still higher function of oa analyser than dis- 
crimination of differences in ot oe 7 This is the dog which was 


mentioned as having survived eration for three years, and 
which was described at the C2) he preceding lecture as having 
Erai lost the pow analysis of compound auditory 
stimuli. I shall describ, See upon this animal with the 
use of visual stimuli irhaghoil [experiments by Dr. Koudrin]. The 
operation on the Lege heres was performed in two stages, with an 
interval of one ~O in between. The final operation took place 
on the 5th aO 9. An alimentary conditioned reflex, established 


~ 


344 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


before the operation, to switching on a hundred candle-power lamp 
in a semi-darkened room, definitely returned on the fifth day after 
the final operation. On the eleventh day it reached an even greater 
intensity than in the pre-operative period. Experiments with the 
visual reflex were then abandoned, the work being continued with 
auditory stimuli as described in the previous lecture. On the 7th 
September of the same year we began to establish a conditioned 
reflex to a moving luminous cross projected upon a screen in a semi- 
darkened room. The reflex developed quickly, and in the course of 
a week became of a considerable magnitude. From the 28th Sep- 
tember the luminous projection of the cross was held stationary. 
The reflex was still present although somewhat diminished in intensity. 
The development of a differentiation of the cross from a circle of 
equal area and equal luminosity was now begun. At the seventh 
and subsequent applications of the circle there was already a definite 
indication of a developing differentiation. The experiments were, 
however, interrupted and were not taken up again until after an 
intervening period of six months. After this interval the reflex to 
the cross was found still to be present. Its differentiation from the 
circle quickly developed and soon became constant. The following 
examples reveal a definite, though not yet absolute, differentiation. 


~\ Remarks 


Conditioned 
stimulus 
during 30 
seconds 


Time Salivary Secretion 


Experiment of 1st April, 


11.40 a.m. Cross 8 drops during 30 ds Reinforced. 

11.50 ;, | Circle 6 drops during onds | Not reinforced 

12.0 noon Cross 6 drops durj seconds Reinforced 
Experiment of%th April, 1910. 

11.35 a.m. Cross 6 drop ing 30 seconds Reinforced 

11 .45>°;; Circle uring 60 seconds Not reinforced 

11.50._,, Cross s during 30 seconds Reinforced 


A post-mortem ination of the dog three years after the 
operation Tre e completeness of the removal of the whole 


posterior part e cortex. 

There ¢ e no doubt that in this dog the part of the visual 
analyser was left in the anterior mass of the cortex was capable 
not wer establishing conditioned reflexes to changes in intensity 
N 


D. 


S 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES 345 


of illumination, but also to different shapes of illuminated or shaded 
areas. At the same time, in this dog, as in all others after removal 
of the occipital lobes, no conditioned reflexes to separate concrete 
objects could at any time be established. The development of 
conditioned reflexes to differently shaped areas was successfully 
achieved so soon as four months after the operation, and could 
probably have been obtained even sooner. On the other hand, 
object vision was entirely absent for the whole post-operative period 
of the dog’s life (3 years), and it is reasonable to suppose that this 
state of the visual analyser was final and irrevocable, at any rate 
towards the end of the life of the animal. In this connection it is 
of interest to inquire how it is that the dog could definitely discrimi- 
nate areas of different shape during an experiment, and yet could 
not discriminate objects by their shapes when free. There is, of 
course, a vast difference between the environing conditions during 
the experiment and when the animal is set free amid a great number 
of different objects, each continually changing its aspect either in 
consequence of its own movement or the movement of the animal 
in relation to it. The sharpness of contour of the objects similarly 
never remains constant, depending on changes of illumination and upon 
the distance from the animal. During the experiment in the stand 
everything becomes much simpler as compared with the usual environ- 
ment. Probably, therefore, a very gradual and prolonged practice 
would have been required for the surviving faculty of siggtnpatng 
shapes to assume any sort of practical usefulness for t timal. 
On the basis of our observations the results of age of the 
visual and acoustic analysers may in the mai considered as 
comparable. A limitation of the visual field si Q a small damage 
of the visual analyser ; in the auditory a , if it is permissible 
to rely on the experiment upon a singl g, a dropping out of 
auditory compounds of elementary tones an identical signification, 
A disappearance of discrimination ofebjects, t.e. disappearance of 
compounds made up of forms, s , colours (in those exceptional 
dogs in which colour vision e conjectured), in other words, 
a disappearance of the high thesis and analysis of visual stimuli, 
signifies a more extengy KH age of the visual analyser. A com- 
parable disturbance i e case of the acoustic analyser can be 
recognized in a ie ac of discrimination of compound stimuli, 
that is, a loss o ‘Ss er synthesis and analysis of auditory stimuli. 
In the case of imal disturbance of either of the two analysers— 


YV 
> 
No 


, AČ 
ww 


O 


346 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


apart from a total destruction—the only function which survives 
is the discrimination of intensity of visual or auditory stimuli. 
Between these extremes there are some intermediate stages, in which, 
besides differences of intensity, differences in the configuration of 
luminous areas can be discriminated in the case of the visual 
analyser, and different types of sound—noises and musical tones— 


in the case of the auditory analyser. 


The next question we had to decide was whether the distribution 


of the tactile analyser over the cortex is analogous to the distribution 


of the acoustic and visual analysers ; in other words, whether besides 
the special nucleus of the highest activity in this analyser there is 
a wider dissemination of cortical tactile receptive cells with more 
limited activities. Although we are not in a position to give a final 
answer to this question we are yet disposed, on the basis of our ex- 
periments, to consider such a distribution as more than probable. 
I shall give some of our old and also our recent material relative 
to this question ; this material, besides its bearing on the distribution 
of the analyser, also presents some other points of interest. Many 
years ago it was observed that a removal of the anterior part of the 
hemispheres led to a disappearance of tactile conditioned reflexes, 
while reflexes to stimuli belonging to other analysers were retained 
[experiments of Dr. Tihomirov]. In later experiments [by Dr. 
Krasnogorsky] it.was definitely established also that ¢he motor area 
is more or less clearly demarcated from the sp Nucleus of the 
tactile analyser, and that definite parts of this sp region represent 
projections of different parts of the skin. On e dogs had, besides 
different reflexes belonging to other anal , a tactile conditioned 
reflex to acid, which had ‘been experj ally generalized for the 
whole surface of the skin. The gyri rius and ectosylvius anterior 
were now removed on the left rige n Fig. 14). On the fourth day 
after the operation einen.) exes satu to the analysers 
other than the tactile wer ent. The generalized conditioned 
tactile reflex returned on ii ohth day, but only to stimulation on 
the left side of the a ugh dc soon reached its normal magnitude. 
On the tenth day Avi reflex returned on the right side of the 
animal, but onl mulation of the skin of the middle part of the 
body. On the limb and hind limb, on the shoulder and pelvic 
area it wa¢¢frely absent, the line of demarcation between those 
areas whi ad regained, and those which had lost, the reflex to 
tactile KMulation being very sharp. The loss of these reflexes 


N 


S 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES 347 


persisted up to the 90th day following operation, and after this they 
gradually became re-established, in order, from the shoulder and 
pelvis to the corresponding paw. These experiments, besides cor- 
roborating the localization given by H. Munk, present another 
interesting detail. During the period while the conditioned stimuli 
of the above-mentioned places of the skin had lost their positive 
effect they divulged a definite inhibitory effect, as has already been 
mentioned in the lecture dealing with sleep (p. 259). The seemingly 
ineffective stimulation of these different areas of the skin when used 
together with, or preceding, the stimulation of other cutaneous areas 
which continued to give a positive effect, or with, or preceding, con- 
ditioned stimuli belonging to other analysers, invariably diminished 


Fig. 14. xe 


or even abolished such reflexes. Further, a repeat 
markedly a protracted, stimulation of these a 
places on the skin resulted in every experi 
of drowsiness and sleep, even in dogs vt 
never showed any tendency to E the stand. The sleep 
developed in these cases exclusively €a\eonnection with the tactile 
stimulation of these areas ; iek their application the dog 


tly ineffective 
n a development 
efore the operation 


kept completely alert during th eriment. 

These experiments were recently repeated, and with 
exactly the same results [D senkov]. Ina dog in which the same 
convolutions were pa destroyed all the reflexes belonging to 
other analysers were p t, but only so long as the areas of the skin 
disturbed by the G9 tion were not stimulated. After stimulation of 
these areas the al invariably became sleepy and all conditioned 
reflexes dis ared throughout the remainder of the experiment. 


348 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


It was a problem of considerable interest to determine whether 
it would be possible by some means to disclose anything in the nature 
of a positive reaction to these tactile stimuli. We succeeded in 
demonstrating such an effect by the following modification of the 
experiments. The isolated stimulation of the refractory places of 
the skin was abbreviated from its usual duration of 30 seconds to 
5 seconds. The abbreviated stimulus was now used several times in 
each experiment, and at the end of the experiment, in order to test 
the reflex, reinforcement was again delayed for 30 seconds. Under 
such conditions it was possible to observe the positive as well as the 
inhibitory effect of the stimulation. The positive effect appeared 
quickly, but was very small, and, what is important, disappeared 
while the conditioned stimulus was still acting, whereas the effect of 
all other conditioned stimuli increased, as usual, towards the end of 
their isolated action as the moment of reinforcement approached. 
The following is taken from an experiment by Dr. Rosenkov : 

A metronome, a whistle, the light of an electric lamp, and a 
tactile cutaneous stimulation served as positive conditioned stimuli. 
After the cerebral operation the conditioned reflex to stimulation 
of the fore limb disappeared.. The secretion of saliva was measured 
as usual by the graduated tube, five divisions of which correspond 
to one drop. The secretion before the operation in this dog was 
generally small. No attacks of convulsions had been observed 
following the operation. The tactile stimulatio he following 
table was always applied on the fore limb : XS 


| - Salivary Secretion 


in drops per 10 
Ti T T R aS D B seconds during 
ime . Conditioned stimulus tk G ' ea the isolated action 


of the conditioned 
stimulus 


9.12 a.m. Metronome 
9.19 _,, Tactile O 
Ot Lamp 


9.36 ,, Tact 


1,3 

9.46 ,, W, j 30 2,4,5 
9.53 ,, | 5 --- 
102. S; onome 30 0, 3, 5 
0 


LOLE S ctile | 30 3, 2, 


A simia Gopitivo effect of stimulation of the usually ineffective 
places of in could be obtained also by some other devices— 


with aS p of positive induction, by means of dis-inhibition, and 
S 
à 
& 
Y 


AO 


destruction of the cutaneous analyser [ey 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES 349 


by the use of caffeine. This animal obviously presents in respect of 
the affected cutaneous areas another instance of a maximal faiblesse 
irritable. 

In all our experiments, including those which are being conducted 
at the present time [Dr. Fedorov], the refractory areas of the skin 
regain as a general rule, sooner or later after the cerebral operation, 
their normal positive effect, as has previously been observed by 
other workers. The question naturally arises as to the mechanism 
of such recovery. The first explanation to be thought of was a 
possible existence of direct nerve tracts which had successfully 
replaced the crossed ones. For the purpose of testing this possibility 
we now in some dogs extirpated the cortex completely on one side 
and studied the conditioned tactile reflexes from the skin of the 
opposite side of the body for the whole time that the animals sur- 
vived (some of them living for over a year after the operation without 
attacks of convulsions). Up to the present such experiments have 
been completed on four dogs. Alimentary conditioned reflexes were 
employed in most cases; sometimes, however, a defence reflex to 
acid or to a stimulus of an electric current was also used, the electric 
stimulus being applied to the skin on that side of the body which 
was not affected by the cortical lesion [experiments of Drs. Foursikov 
and Bikov]. The results in all these experiments, in spite of many 
different modifications, were absolutely negative, and in,spite of 
increasing the cortical excitabliity by strychnine and, etn the 
cutaneous reflexes never returned [experiments of Dp ursikov]. 
Experiments were also conducted to determine wh¢ttef the tactile 
stimulation of the injured side of the body would pxayt any inhibitory 
influence upon other conditioned reflexes as if Nid after the partial 
sNnlents by Dr. Bikov]. 
In the cases of complete unilateral gxtixpation of the cortex no 
such inhibitory influence of the tact#e\timuli of the affected side 
upon the various positive conditjo reflexes (including tactile 
reflexes from the normal side e animal) could be observed, 
whether as an after-effect o the actual administration of the 
stimuli ; similarly also thé ctile stimuli did not induce sleep or 
drowsiness. These eo are the more important since the 
same places acquiredNgifong inhibitory properties in those cases 
where there had b Gp partial destruction of the cutaneous analyser. 
There was, of c SS no question of revealing any positive effect of 
the stimuli byary of the methods which were successful in the case 


Y 
SÀ 
aO 


AČ 
wy 


350 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


of partial extirpation. In the case of complete unilateral removal of 
the cortex, therefore, the tactile stimuli on the opposite side entirely 
lose their conditioned properties, both positive and negative. In other 
words, according to our experiments, there is no homolateral connec- 
tion of the skin with the cortex. Vicariation in the case of partial de- 
struction of the cutaneous analyser must therefore occur with the help 
of the outlying parts of the analyser in the hemisphere of the same 
side—a view which has already been advanced by other authors. 

In order to study this question of vicariation more closely we 
resolved to produce an extirpation of as many of the frontal con- 
volutions of one hemisphere as possible, so as to narrow the area 
from which the compensatory effect might be derived. In dogs 
operated in this manner the conditioned reflexes to tactile cutaneous 
stimuli, although they disappeared for a very long time, did never- 
theless return. It was thought that the portions adjacent to the 
operated field might have taken over the function of the removed 
parts. However, additional destruction of these adjacent parts 
[experiments of Dr. Eurman] had practically no effect upon the 
re-established functions of the analyser. The vicariation of function, 
therefore, must be attributed to much more widely distributed 
cortical elements. This result.made it important to test whether the 
method which we used for tactile stimulation of the skin was not 
contaminated by an auditory component so that the reflexes which 
we observed could be explained by the latter. paratus was 
therefore constructed which, at any rate to our oN , was entirely 
without sound, and in order to make the c 1 doubly sure we 
placed between the apparatus and the skin a eWium which prevented 
the mechanical effect of the apparatus (he skin, without, how- 
ever, abolishing any possible auditgrwcymponent inaudible to us. 
Tactile conditioned reflexes could Qe HeVveloped without, but in no 
case with, the medium, in either n4rmal or operated animals, proving, 
of course, that under ordinary AMitions the reflexes were genuinely 
initiated purely by the tac @ptimulation and not by any accessory 


auditory ERLEARI OAN 
that, as in the case of the visual and 


We are inclined 
acoustic analyser OX parts of the cutaneous analyser remaining 
after the first operĝtion have only a limited function as compared 
with the Aon of the cortical elements situated in the extirpated 


nucleus of alyser. We hope to test this theory by experiments 
with co d tactile conditioned stimuli and by using a differentia- 


+ 


IN 


O 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES 351 


tion of the direction of brushing the skin and testing this differen- 
tiation upon those places which have recovered from their temporary 
loss of conditioned reflexes after the extirpation of the frontal lobes. 
These experiments are in progress at the present time. All the 
experiments with respect to recovery of tactile reflexes after extir- 
pation are, however, being vigorously repeated in view of their 
intrinsic importance and in view of the divergence of some results of 
recent experiments from one of our earlier observations (p. 362). 


464345. 4244543. 
3840.38 41.58.38. 
26.22.20. V 21.22.28. 


21.23.20) \V \21.20.22. 


37.38.22: 


3538.36. 
17.18.23; VL /20.21.16. N 


Fig. 15.—O and Roman figures :—Numbers of the places stimulated. Aragos :—Con- 
ditioned reflex in drops of saliva (1 drop =0'01 c.c.). The figures to the d left of the 
Roman figures were obtained by stimulation of the right and left sides of the añimal respectively. 
The tactile reflex was established on the left side at place O. The fig G oWs the spontaneous 
bilateral formation of accessory reflexes. Note that the strength mrefiexes at correspond- 
ing points is identical on both sides of the animal. The ich was established. at 


place O was a short-trace reflex. 


Besides studying, in the manner dexcribed, the relations of the 
tactile analyser in a single hemisph&e) we have also investigated 
the interrelations of the analysers @Pfhe two sides. An observation 
has already been mentioned th ctile conditioned reflexes which 
were developed for differe (as n one side of the body reproduce 
themselves a TO surprising accuracy on the sym- 
metrical places of the dtheg Side of the body. This phenomenon has 
been especially carefully examined by Dr. Anrep, and its occurrence 
was demonstrate for positive and negative reflexes to tactile 
stimuli (see Fi It was naturally expected that the development 


AO 
wy 


352 ‘CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


of a differentiation of symmetrical places of the skin on opposite 
sides of the body would turn out to be a matter of considerable 
difficulty, and this actually was found to be the case [experiments 
of Drs. Bikov and Grigorovich]. 

What is the mechanism of this curious phenomenon? It was 
only natural to consider first the commissural connections, and in 
actual fact section of the corpus callosum completely abolished the 
whole phenomenon. After the section conditioned reflexes to tactile 
stimulation of the two sides became entirely independent of one 
another [Dr. Bikov]. The positive and negative tactile reflexes 
developed on one side now completely failed to reproduce themselves 
spontaneously on the other side; in order to develop conditioned 
reflexes on the other side the tactile stimuli had to be independently 
reinforced. Tactile conditioned stimuli were established with the 
use of food, the use of the unconditioned defence reflex to acid, or 
the use of the defence reflex to electrical stimulation of the skin. 
The electric current in these experiments was of such strength as 
to produce only a withdrawal of the leg and an investigatory reflex, 
but no violent defence reaction. The experiments were varied in 
many different ways, but the result was always the same. The 
reflexes were confined to the side on which they were developed ; 
reflexes on the other side had always to be developed independently. 
There was also no longer any difficulty in establishing reflexes of 
opposite sign for symmetrical places on oppositegsides of the body. 
This is illustrated by the following experiment 

After section of the corpus callosum a t stimulation of the 
right thigh was given excitatory propa an of the left thigh- 
inhibitory properties ; and a tactile sti tion of the right shoulder 


was given inhibitory properties a e left shoulder excitatory 
properties. The four eee f course, to be developed 
rand ose ts SOR ERM =. 
ee tactile EEA 
von O eea | gam 
30 seconds 
4. Righi thigh 4 
4. }, | | Right shoulder 0 
ma t: Left shoulder ; +4 
AOs , Left thigh 0 
Orr z Right thigh 3 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES 353 


In conformity with the above results’ all extraneous stimulations 
of the skin applied on one side of the animal, e.g. a thermal stimulus 
of 50° C., and a weak electric current, by evoking an investigatory 
reflex produced an inhibition only of the tactile reflexes on the 
same side of the body. These experiments were conducted on 
three animals. l i 

Along with the experiments which were primarily designed for 
investigation of the tactile analyser, mention must be made of ex- 
periments with complete removal of the frontal lobes [experiments of 
Dr. Babkin]. The frontal lobes were removed upon both sides in front 
of sulcus praecruciatus and sulcus praesylvius down to the lower 
margin of the hemispheres, involving destruction of the olfactory 


lobes (Fig. 16). Sometimes the knife during the ope S, and in 
almost every case the subsequent pathological p (as shown 
by post-mortem examinations), involved part of rea behind the 
line indicated. The experiments were condu n four dogs. In 
all cases the old visual and auditory coneitīeged reflexes returned 
and new ones could be established sogn r the operation. Dis- 
turbances—and considerable onesie’ only in the tactile 


1-6 months after the operation, d ecurring in all cases on account 
of severe attacks of convulsi ring this time no positive tactile 
reflexes could be re-establis or places on the body, but reflexes 
could be established i De cases for places on the extremities. 
Good negative Ai aer, in which the tactile stimulus was 
used as a conditi G@jnhibitor, could be produced for any place of 
the skin. The imals suffered from a persistent cutaneous 


ow sò that some of them could not bear the loops round 


A.P. Y Z : 


analyser and in the movements of É nimal. The dogs lived for 


O 


354 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


their legs during the experiments, and kept quiet only when the 
loops were discarded. Temporary disturbances in maintenance of 
posture and locomotion were observed. . The animal would often 
assume an unnatural pose—drooping head and arched back, paresis 
of the extremities with twitchings. The motor disturbances were 
most pronounced in the movement of the mouth, the dog immediately 
after the operation being able to take food only with difficulty, and 
having to be fed by hand, especially in the case of solid food. The 
above were the only peculiarities of note. 

In respect of the thermal cutaneous analyser only a small number 
of experiments have been performed. From these it appears that 
the thermal, does not entirely coincide with the tactile, analyser in 
cortical localization. In the case of extirpation of the gyrus 
praecruciatus [experiments of Dr. Shishlo] tactile conditioned reflexes 
for the hind limbs were re-established a few days after the operation, 
while the thermal reflexes (to cold and to a temperature of 474° C.) 
conspicuously lagged behind, taking four weeks longer before they 
returned. 

The method of conditioned reflexes was applied also for the 
verification of the statement made by some authors as to a definite 
relation of the gyrus pyriformis to the olfactory analyser. The ex- 
periments were performed on six dogs which had different “ artificial ” 
and “ natural” secretory and motor reflexes [experiments of Dr. 
Zavadsky]. Different unconditioned reflexes < lso. carefully 
observed. The first of these reflexes to rea LAS after complete 
bilateral removal of the gyri pyriformi and jacent part of the 
hippocampus were the olfactory ones. ements of the nostrils 
in response to olfactory stimuli were t so soon as the second 
or third day after the operation. third or fourth day the dogs 
could select accurately out of man per bags those that contained 
meat or breakfast-sausage. Sa sixth day the conditioned reflex 
peared, while on the fourteenth day 


to the smell of meat powde 

an artificial alimentary c Rioned reflex to the odour of camphor be- 

came quite definite. sipped conditioned olfactory reflexes had a 

positive effect in thokN t trial, evidence of a spontaneous recovery. 
Finally oe ee aa A the question as to the nature of the 


so-called motoNggea of the cortex. Is it in all its complexity and 
delicacy of gorn a receptive field and analyser of stimuli initiated 
within t \S eleto-motor apparatus of the organism? In other 


wore comparable to other regions of the cortex which serve as 


S 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES 355 


receptive fields and analysers of stimuli falling upon the animal from 
the outside ? Or is it a region physiologically distinct from the 
remaining parts of the cortex ? Is it physiologically comparable to 
the posterior or to the anterior columns of the spinal cord ? 

This question is nearly as old as the discovery of the motor area - 
itself, but at the present time there are only a few observers who 
regard the motor area of the cortex as corresponding functionally 
to the posterior columns in the spinal cord. In the hope of procuring 
some fresh evidence we approached the study of this question from 
the point of view of conditioned reflexes, using some definite motor 
activity as a conditioned stimulus, and then experimentally deter- 
mining the localization of this reflex in the cortex. The experiments 
performed bearing on the motor analyser of the cortex are rather 
more complicated than other experiments with conditioned reflexes in 
respect to technique. I have, therefore, no hesitation in giving these 
experiments in considerable detail, and illustrating my description 
by a large number of examples [experiments of Dr. Krasnogorski]. 

Passive flexion of the tibio-tarsal and the metatarso-phalangeal 
joints were used as conditioned stimuli. The flexion was performed 
in the following manner. For the passive flexion of the tibio-tarsal 
joint the thigh and the leg of the hind limb were fixed in a plaster 
cast attached to a metal frame which was screwed down to the table. 
In order to employ the metatarso-phalangeal joint the tarsus and 
metatarsus had also to be rigidly fixed in a special cast, € ion of 
the joints was performed in the preliminary a by hand 


and later by a special mechanical device. When th x to flexion 


of the tibio-tarsal joint of the left leg became xe) hed the effect 


was tried of flexion of the same joint of the o e leg. The reflex 
was found to be spontaneously present j n the case of tactile 
conditioned reflexes. We now started,t elop a differentiation 
of the flexion of the Hig oy joint (toes) of the left leg 
from flexion of its tibio-tarsal jointNénkle). The differentiation 
became established after 42 reinf ents of the flexion of the toes 
contrasted with 74 flexions of kle. This differentiation spon- 
taneously reproduced itself e respective joints of the right side 
also. Since flexion of Cysint invariably involves a mechanical 
stimulation of the skin(qyfich by itself might have been responsible 
both for the condi ed reflexes and the differentiation, further 
experiments had performed in order to dissociate the cutaneous 
component fro e actual flexion itself. For this purpose all sorts 


356 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


of mechanical stimulations of the skin were applied, touching, 
pressing, gripping, and rhythmic stretching of the skin on one side 
of the joint and folding on the opposite side in imitation of the 
natural stretching and folding in the case of flexion of the joint. 
The latter kind of stimulation produced the strongest effect. On 
repetition of these cutaneous stimuli, of course without any rein- 
forcement, they finally became entirely ineffective while flexion 
itself, which was always reinforced, continued to act. It was realized, 
however, that all these precautions did not afford absolutely definite 
proof that flexion by itself acted in these experiments as the sole 
conditioned stimulus. It seemed quite possible that all our variations 
of mechanical stimulation of the skin did not entirely reproduce 
those accompanying flexion of the joint. It was essential to find a 
more conclusive proof that flexion itself became a conditioned stimu- 
lus. We expected to find such proof by completely excluding the 
cutaneous Component by extirpating those cortical parts of the 
tactile analyser which were known to stand in relation to tactile 
stimuli from the areas involved, namely, the gyri coronarius and 
ectosylvius (see Fig. 14, p. 347). Previously to the operation additional 
alimentary conditioned reflexes were established to tactile stimulation 
of the hind limbs at five distinct places and to a tone of 500 vibrations. 
The operation was performed on the left side of the cortex. The tone 
was the first conditioned reflex to reappear, and this occurred on the 
seventh day. The first trial of the flexion on t, Q aged. (right) 
side—on the eighth day after the operation—g negative result. 
The second trial—performed on the same d ave a secretion of 
2 drops during 30 seconds. The trial on th day gave a secretion 
of 3 drops : on this day a simultaneous ghi}rtlation of the five tactile . 
places on the same extremity rema ntirely without effect. On 
the twelfth day the reflex to oe hed 5 drops, while the stimu- 


lation of the five tactile places ‘olding and stretching of the skin 
still remained without effect the thirteenth day the folding and 
stretching of the skin ov a joint exerted an inhibitory influence 
upon the effect of t egpd applicà simultaneously. Again, when 
on the fifteenth EN eenth days the left (undamaged) hind ex- 
tremity recover the inhibitory effect of the operation and 
the tactile stimulation of this limb gave already a considerable 
secretory AG the same tactile stimulation applied simultaneously 
with foldi€g) nd stretching of the skin over the right joint became 


incon Thus, the folding and stretching of the skin over the 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES 357 


right joint had now become, as an after-effect of the operation, 
inhibitory instead of excitatory. Nevertheless, flexion of the joint 
continued invariably to produce a salivary secretion. The following 
are the results of some of the individual experiments : 


| 
Intervals 


between the Salivary 


Conditioned stimulus applied Secretion in 


applications of during 30 seconds i 
the stimuli F PRE a 


in mins. 


Experiment on the eighth day after the operation. 


Tone 
Flexion of toes (right leg) 


Tactile stimulation of left planta 
Flexion of toes (right leg) 


S| 
JANAQ 
YONO be 


39 39 39 


Experiment on the twelfth day after the operation. 


nom Flexion of toes (right leg) 2 
6 Tactile stimulation of 5 places on leg 0 
12 3 3 33 0 
8 Tone 7 
7 Flexion of toes (right leg) 5 
6 Stretching and folding of the 0 


skin over right paw 


Experiment on the fifteenth day after the operation 
Flexion of toes (right leg) @ 


| 


6 Stretching and folding of the 
skin over right paw 0 
20 Flexion of toes (right leg) xO 1 
6 3 
6 Tactile stimulation ot Na 4 
6 Tactile stimulation a Pinte 0 
6 Tactile oe 3 f and 
left plantae 0 
6 2 


Tactile = left planta | 
Experiment on the EO} h day after the operation. 
— Flexio (right leg 43} 


T Ti ulation of left planta 5 
Ttilx.stimulation of left planta 

ther with stretching and 
Ofolding of the skin over the 
N right paw 0 
6 actile stimulation of left planta 4 


S 


358 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


The above experiments justify the two following conclusions. 
First, that a passive flexion of the joint by itself, i.e. independently 
of the involved cutaneous component, can serve as a conditioned 
stimulus. Second, that the stimuli arising from such movement 
and the associated cutaneous stimuli have different areas of repre- 
sentation in the cortex. The problem remains therefore to determine 
the localization of the cortical area of muscular proprioception. The 
problem was solved by the following experiment performed on a 
dog in which the gyrus sigmoideus dexter had been completely 


Fig. 17. 
removed two months previously, since when us motor disorders 
had prevailed in both extremities of the lef . During the opera- 
tion the gyrus sigmoideus sinister had als n very slightly damaged, 
but not sufficiently to produce a turbing influence on the 
extremities of the right side. Thejatefle conditioned reflexes in this 
animal were normal over the wep surface of the skin. We began 
with the establishment of a cpgditioned reflex to flexion of the right 
(i.e. homolateral) netatarnendlangea joint. This reflex developed 
very quickly. We no the differentiation of the flexion from 
its cutaneous compo using all the above-mentioned variations 
of mechanical stif~nufetion of the skin and the joint, and never, of 
course, reinforcjn®the cutaneous stimuli. Within a month the 
differentiation Os fairly well established (although it was not always 
absolute), (Wing that the right side was normal. The following 
is an SO taken at random : 
N 


S 


` 


O 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES 359 


Time interval Conditioned stimuli applied ected (a 
between during 30 seconds drops duri 
stimuli 5 ps during 

30 seconds 

- Flexion of the right joint 6 
6 Stretching and folding of the 

skin over the right joint 3 
2 Stretching and folding of the 

skin over the right joint 1 
6 Flexion of the right joint 5 
8 Stretching and folding of the 

skin over the right joint 0 
3 Flexion of the right joint 6 


We began now to test the reflexes on the left (i.e. heterolateral) 
side of the body. Stretching and folding the skin over the left hind 


paw was entirely ineffective right from the very start, in accordance ~ 


with the symmetrical spontaneity of development of reflexes discussed 
before. In contrast with the right side, however, the reflex to the 
flexion itself was also absent. When the flexion on the left side was 
now reinforced, the corresponding mechanical tactile stimulation, 
when tested separately, was found also to have acquired secretory 
properties. On contmuing these experiments, in spite of most 
persistent attempts at development of differentiation, it was found 
impossible to develop a conditioned reflex to flexion sepgadtely from 
the tactile cutaneous component. As soon as the effect chanical | 
stimulation of the skin was extinguished the re Qio flexion in- 
variably disappeared also. On reinforcing the nage the cutaneous 
reflex also invariably returned. The resul ese experiments 
must be interpreted as follows : pure flexiog A the left side was by 
itself ineffective, but the reinforcement of the flexion of the joint 
produced a positive effect through the agency of the tactile component 
unavoidably accompanying flexio n contrast. with this, the 
differentiation between the fle and the tactile stimulation on 
the right leg was constant a, ite definite. The table shown on 
page 360 is an example. NO 
The experiments © jat the gyrus sigmoideus is the area of 
cortical representatięn stimuli initiated in the skeleto-motor 
apparatus during passive flexion. A 
Unfortunat have not pursued this study further and have 
not employ variations of the experiments other than those 


360 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


described. Before arriving at any final conclusion the experiments 
need to be repeated and more fully substantiated. If one bases 
conclusions on the experiments as they stand, the motor area of the 
cortex must be thought of as an analyser of the impulses from muscles 
and joints (proprioceptive), exactly as other areas are analysers of 
impulses from stimuli acting on the organism from the outside 
(exteroceptive). From this point of view the entire cortex represents 


Number of 
minutes Conditioned stimuli applied Salivary Secretion during 
between during 30 seconds 30 seconds 
stimuli 
= Flexion ; right joint 8 Reinforced 
zi Cutaneous; right joint 2 ; 
1 Cutaneous ; right joint 1 } Not reinforced 
14 Flexion ; right joint 8 Reinforced 
14 Cutaneous ; left joint 7 
14 Cutaneous ; left joint 6 
14 Cutaneous ; left- joint 4 Not reinforced 
14 Cutaneous ; left joint 3 
14 Cutaneous; left joint 14 l 
l4 Flexion ; left joint 4 Reinforced 
6 Cutaneous ; left joint 4 l 
l4 Cutaneous ; left joint 1 > Not reinforced 
14 Cutaneous ; left joint 1 f 
l4 Flexion ; left joint 0. Reinforced 


a complex system of analysers of the internal Gu as of the 


external environment of the organism. Obvin@ty, if one accepts 
this hypothesis in relation to the motor agtiyity, there is good 
reason to extend it to the activity of m QJ ot all, other tissues 
of the organism. The important rôle ed by auto-suggestion 
with all its extraordinary aspects, a xample, imaginary preg- 
nancy, and all sorts of imaginary(disé%ses, can be understood from 
the physiological point of view ~ if we admit the existence of 


little differentiated and in 


@ 
A 


e. 


corresponding cortical ndei even though they may be only 


ee A T a R 


oS 


O 


LECTURE XXI 


Pathological disturbances of the cortex, result of surgical interference (continued) : 
attempt to correlate the general post-operative behaviour of the animals with the 
disturbances in the activity of individual analysers. 


Ir may be considered as firmly established that removal of the 
entire cerebral cortex converts the dog into a comparatively simple 
reflex machine. The animal retains the relatively limited number 


.of unconditioned reflexes, but is completely deprived of the more 


complex and delicate co-ordination of its activities with the external 
world, since these adjustments are solely based upon innumerable 
conditioned reflexes established through the intermediation of the 
cerebral cortex. We possess also some knowledge as to the signifi- 
cance of different areas of the cortex—the cortical analysers, the 
united function of which determines the complete adjustment of 
the organism with its surroundings, or, in other words, determines the 
behaviour of the animal. A great deal can be learned of the physio- 
logical activity of the cortex as a whole by careful obserygtyyn of 
the general state of the animal after extirpation of dengi orioa 
areas, whether such extirpations are free from & “operative 
S 


complications or are complicated by a furth integration 
of the cortex through the growth of scar or by other 
secondary effects of the operation. The lecture will be 


devoted to the description of changes gn general behaviour 
of the animal, and an attempt will Sade to correlate these 
changes with the different structural lésfons of the cortex. We 
shall start our description with eee going on to more com- 


plicated, cases. 

In one dog the upper ra tir hemispheres was extirpated 
above the level of the gy; ODniaticus [experiments by Dr. Orbeli]. 
The extirpation was maddy) means of a single incision on each side, 


the operation being + rmed in two stages with a long interval 
of time between. tnight after the operation upon the second 
sta 


hemisphere thag te of the animal became definitely constant, 
N 361 


> 
ao 


Ae 
ww 


362 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


remaining unchanged to the end of the experiments (4 months). 
As before, the animal was extremely lively, and when called reacted 
quickly, whipping round in the direction of the call. At a first 
glance its condition could not be distinguished from that of a normal 
dog. On closer observation, however, it was possible to observe 
a certain ataxy of the extremities, which on running were thrown 
up higher and brought down more vigorously than usual. Walking 
upon a smooth or wet floor the animal would very often slip ; more- 


_ Over, on starting off it always performed some peculiar movements 


with its head. When walking in a definite direction the animal 
seldom ran into any obstacle, but as soon as it did encounter an 
obstacle a surprising abnormality in its behaviour appeared. {t 
became entirely helpless if it ran even against the narrow leg of a 
table ; for a long time it would go on pressing forward, until slipping 
accidentally it would get by ; and this was the only way in which 
the animal could continue its progression. When placed with the 
front part of its body on a chair and then called, the dog started 
disorderly scrambling movements and fell off the chair sideways, 
or sometimes, moving forwards, it contrived to get its whole body 
on to the chair, where it remained, helplessly kicking its hind legs in 
the air. The foregoing is a brief sketch of the general abnormality 
of the dog. 

Coming now to the study of its conditioned reflexes, it was found 
that all those which were present before th ~lgona operation 
became, with the exception of tactile and hai eflexes, quickly 
restored, while new conditioned reflexes actory and visual 
stimuli were easily established. UncongdiNoĦned reflexes to various 
tactile and thermal cutaneous stih were present—various 
“ shaking,” flexion and extensio xes, responses by whining, 
howling and turning the head, t the point of application of 
the stimulus. I shall endeavgg\to correlate these deviations of the 
animal from normal with th&disturbances of the functions of the 
different analysers. T Sptivity of the olfactory and acoustic 
analysers was entirel ANAE and the activity of the visual 
analyser was only disturbed. Remembering the peculiar 
movements of Q% d in locomotion, and taking into account that 
the animal REY to direct its movements by sight, it is obvious 


that a smal@gortion of the lower part of the special nucleus of the 
visual a er must have remained intact, allowing in certain posi- 
tions e head a higher synthesis and analysis of visual stimuli. 


Se 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES 363 


In contrast, the motor analyser was radically damaged : the general 
locomotor activity which is effected by sub-cortical parts remained, 
while the precise and delicate activity of the skeletal muscles, so far 


at any rate as determined by conditioned reflexes, had disappeared. 


As regards the extent of damage of the tactile analyser we are not 
yet quite clear. It is obvious that the loss of the dog’s ability to 
direct its movements when it rari into an obstacle in its path could 
be entirely explained by the loss of conditioned signals arising in the 
skin. However, such a total loss of tactile conditioned reflexes in 
the case of this operation does not entirely fall into line with the 
results of some other experiments upon the localization of the cuta- 
neous analyser (p. 347). The problem stands in need, therefore, of a 
thorough re-investigation.. Excepting the inability to pass by any 


an Ke’ 


mechanical obstacles, the behaviour of this animal et free and 
during the experiments, showed no further ab ality. Dogs 
operated on in this manner are well worth a mor ise and detailed 
analysis of their condition than we were ab rform in the early 


period of our work 

In other dogs, some of which have ee been mentioned, the 
whole posterior part of the cortex of hemispheres was removed 
behind the line shown in Fig. 18. shall consider now the more 
general aspects of the behaviour xg dogs. It will be remembered 
that the higher analysis ey Wa and visual stimuli was absent, 
although the cruder an & different types of sounds, of the 
intensity of illuminatio d of different shapes was still present. 
Immediately after +t nal operation these animals kept sleeping 
almost continuous afterwards during their whole lives (one dog 
surviving for evens) they spent their time mainly in sleep, and 


N 
SÀ 
D 


aA 
X$ 
KO 


364 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


therefore with ample food they quickly fattened up. The animals 
located food exclusively with the help of the cutaneous and olfactory 
analysers, and in general the co-ordination of the activities of these 
analysers became most astonishing. When the animal was placed 
amid small pieces of meat thrown about the floor or suspended 
on threads at different heights, the lightest touch of any part of its 
body against a piece was sufficient to evoke a most precise direction 
of its movements towards the piece of meat, which it took. Finally, 
the complete indifference of these animals to other dogs and to men, 
including their masters, should be especially noted. It is not difficult 
to understand, the general passivity of these dogs (a characteristic 
already noticed by Goltz) and their great inclination to sleep, when 
one realizes how they lack to a large extent the activity of the main 
distance analysers—visual and acoustic; hence also the extreme 
refinement of the activity of the analysers which are left, viz. 
‘the chemical analyser of smell, the cutaneous analyser, and the 
motor analyser. But the attention is startled by the general 
indifference of the animal to other dogs and men. It would be - 
interesting to determine whether it was a result of their general 
diminution in reactiveness, or, as seems more probable, a 
result of a dropping out of compound visual and auditory stimuli 
as predominant stimuli, and the disappearance also of conditioned 
chain-reflexes. 

I now pass on to the more complicated and sige same time the 
more instructive case—that of extirpation of anterior part of 
the hemispheres in front of the line shown in 18. The behaviour 
of animals operated upon in this manne iates extremely from 
normal, and the analysis of this beha Q presents great interest. 
We had two such animals, and bot ived the operation for about 
a year. The operation was perfo in two stages, the two sides 
being operated with an ner several months. I shall describe 
the first dog in full [experimes# by Dr. Demeedov], and shall then 
give the main points of ence of the other dog [experiments of 
Drs. Satournov and v]. 

After the final ion the animal kept sleeping almost con- 
tinuously, awa nly before micturition and defaecation. Food 
was A E CN the stomach directly, through a gastric fistula 
which once established previously to the second stage of the 


operatio was only at the beginning of the third week after the 
final oN ion that the animal began to get up and stand on its legs 


Y 
oS 


| 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES 365 


unassisted, and then only for a very short time, swaying from side 
to side and finally sinking down again. Approximately a month 
after the operation the dog started to walk. The paws, however, 
often twisted out of their normal position and the limbs often mutually 
obstructed one another, getting crossed. In another month walking 
and running were practically normal, but, on whipping round 
suddenly, the dog could hardly preserve its balance. On meeting 
with obstacles the dog made disorderly scrambling movements, 
sometimes pushing forward and sometimes moving backwards or 
sideways ; in some cases it would chance to slip by the obstacle, 
but most often it had to be helped. The animal was quite incapable 
of performing two different locomotor actions at the same time. 
As a result of such attempts it would lose its balance and topple over. 
This peculiarity remained to the end of its life. Two weeks after 
the operation the animal began to lap milk, but only when the milk 
was brought in contact with its mouth. The whole time it lived, the 
animal would only start eating when the food touched the mucous 
membrane of lips, cheeks or tongue. Contact of the skin around the 
mouth with the food did not initiate eating. During the latter part 
of its life the animal when hungry became very excited, grabbing at 
everything it could reach with its mouth, and even biting its own 
legs and paws, which would make it howl. From the time when the 
animal began to eat, alimentary substances were easily discriminated 
from non-alimentary substances, such as sand, or food coftaining 
quinine or a large amount of acid or salt. The motor wee ‘dons to 
tactile stimuli appeared about two weeks after the oes ion, and 
after this the cutaneous sensibility progressively i sed, so that, 
after two to three months, touching the animal it into or take 
it out of the stand, or even simply arog ee animal, evoked 
violent general excitation. The dog en uggle to get loose, 
would bare its teeth and bark. Similar! en it came into contact 
with objects through moving about, in the yard when its fur 
got ruffled by wind, or when drops ofPain fell upon it, the same motor 
excitation would occur. It is infe}esting that during these periods 
of excitation a gentle stroki fethe neck and head quieted the 
animal, which sometimes fell asleep. On scratching definite 
places of the skin a ga) eflex was invariably evoked, and it was 
often observed. nae ultaneous administration of an auditory 


stimulus caused ap ensification of the scratch-reflex when the 


scratching was —an example of the so-called “ Bahnung- 


366 . CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


H 
+ 
. 
' 
i 
| 


reflex.” _ Motor reactions to sound, as expressed by pricking up and 
orientation of the ears, only reappeared 14 months after the operation. 
The reactions gradually increased and sometimes were extraordin- 
arily violent, so that even in response to comparatively weak sounds 
the animal showed pronounced general excitation. Under the in- 
fluence of strong light the animal closed the eyes and turned the head 
away. Olfactory stimuli never produced any reaction, since the 
bulbus olfactorius and the olfactory tract were damaged on both 
sides. Sexual reflexes could never be detected under any conditions. 
No special relations either positive or negative to other animals or 
to men were ever observed. The animal sometimes had peculiar 
attacks lasting 1-8 minutes without any apparent cause—tremor 
of the whole body, clonic contractions of the jaws with a cramp- 
like twisting of the head to one side, finishing up by ejection 
of urine and faeces. The convulsions were never observed in 
the body or extremities, and the animal did not fall down 
during the attacks. After an attack the animal became very 
excited, throwing itself about without any sense of direction, and 
barking ; but finally it quieted down, got very drowsy and soon 
fell fast asleep. ; 
The above general description of the animal seems to point to | 

its having become entirely devoid of the higher nervous activity 
and transformed into a much simplified and inadequate reflex 
machine. Being similar in many respects to enfixgly decorticated 
animals, it was in many ways even less perfec) spect to loco- 
motion. Indeed, animals after extirpation o entire cortex begin | 
to stand up much sooner after the o ion, walk better and 
keep their balance better in eae vements, than the dog 
just described. Judging by the s ey the skeletal musculature, 
conditioned reflex activity appeated) Ò be entirely lost. To deter- 
mine whether this actually VAi case we tried to analyse the 
condition of this dog by testi& he reflex activity of the salivary 
gland. 

The unconditioned Oyrary reflex had entirely disappeared 
immediately after REpEration It soon, however, returned, at 
first showing & eviations from normal which later righted 


themselves. osifive conditioned salivary reflexes, whether to 
visual, tactile, cutaneous or auditory stimuli, could not be established 
in spite f9 isteni attempts. In order to make doubly sure, even 


the PAS aily ration outside the experiments was now always 


SS 
oS 

& | 

AY | 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES 367 


accompanied by a sound of bubbling, but in spite of over five hundred 
repetitions no definite conditioned salivary reflex was ever obtained. 
After these failures stimulation was tried of that receptor surface 
which, as mentioned before, was generally found more resistant 
than any other in cases of extensive operations upon the cortex— 
namely, the mucous membrane of the mouth, the receptor for the 
water-reflex. These experiments will now be described in detail. 
It will be remembered from the previous description that water when 
introduced into the mouth does not produce any salivary secretion 
unless it has previously been reinforced by a simultaneous intro- 
duction of some substance which acts as an unconditioned stimulus, 
e.g. the administration of aqueous solutions of rejectable substances 
such as acid. After a very large number of administrations of acid 
to the dog now described, water first brought about a definite 
secretion a month after the operation, and systematic experiments 
with this reflex could be started fifty days after the operation. 
After the acid had been frequently administered in the course of 
several days, water, when administered as the first stimulus on an 
experimental day, produced a copious secretion (16 drops and more 
during one minute). This salivary secretion disappeared after 
repeated introduction of the stimulus of water alone, undergoing 
extinction just like any other conditioned reflex.. The following 


are some examples of extinction : 
Sere sae 


drop 
dork. on te 


Time Stimulus 


Experiment of 29th December, 1908 (the fing ite of the 


operation was performed 23rd SURES 1908). 
3.20 p.m. Water 16 
S2b. 4; $ “s 16 
330 ,, ‘3 2 
3.35 ,, S O 4 
J38 W, 0:25% aq. H IG Copious secretion 
9 


3.46 ,, 23 6 
a k 0°25 1 Copious secretion 
TA: Q 
4.10 ” 33 
4.15 5 >» 
420 7 oe? 


ONNO oo 


368 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


' Salivary Secretion 
Time Stimulus in drops 
during one minute 


Experiment of 1st January, 1909. 


12.22 p.m. Water 5 
1227 H 2 
12327 “i Traces 
12.3455 Pf 0 
12.42 ,, 0:25% aq. HCl Copious secretion 
12.00. 5 53 os 3 
12.55 ,, y 3 
10 , » 2 
1.5 E 2 0 
EIOS; 0:25% aq. HCl Copious secretion 
1.16 3 55 2 13 2 
1:2475 Water 9 


The conditioned water-reflex is as easily inhibited by different 
extraneous reflexes as are any other conditioned reflexes (external 
inhibition). The following are examples : 


Salivary Secretion 


Time Stimulus , in drops 
during one minute 
Experiment of 1st Januar BSS : 
11.25 a.m. Water 12 
11.380 5 Water +loud tone 3 
11.35 _s,, Water S 16 
Experiment gea April, 1909. 
4.5 p.m. Water 13 
4.23 ,, 0-259 HCl Copious secretion 
4.32 ,, (Ag. sugar s es 
4.36 __,, T 1 
10 


aT at Na) : 


Since this A of inhibition (external inhibition) is, however, not 
peculiar to Ganditioned reflexes, a similar effect being observed also 
upon u tioned reflexes, we resolved to develop a conditioned 
inhibi or the water-reflex—+.e. to build up an actual inhibitory 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES 369 


conditioned reflex (internal inhibition). It was expected that agencies 
belonging to other analysers, although incapable of acquiring positive 
conditioned properties, might nevertheless acquire the required 
negative conditioned properties, since examples of this had previously 
been observed (see p. 347). This expectation was fully justified, 
as it was found that both auditory and visual stimuli could serve 
successfully as conditioned inhibitors. Thus, administration of 
water simultaneously with sounding a definite tone became a 
constant inhibitory combination after 64 repetitions. The following 
are examples of experiments : 


Salivary Secretion 
Time Stimulus in drops 
during one minute 


Experiment of 2nd February, 1909. 


10.25 a.m. 0:25% aq. HCl Copious secretion 
10 34 39) 33 >) LEJ 33 
10.46 ,, Water 9 

10:552 5 0:25% aq. HCl Copious secretion 
1 1 A 29) 2? 3%? 3 ; » 
ILIO Water + tone 2 

W20 0:25% aq. HCl Copious secretion 
l 1 .35 3) >) 3) 3 

11.48 ,, | Water 


10 >) 
Experiment of 16th February, 1909. xe 


10.25 a.m. 0-25% aq. HCl Copio retion 

10.36 ,, = » 

10.47 © ,, Water + tone 

10.55 ,, 0:25% aq. HCl dus secretion 

Maion, 5 > wie 5 

HIG 4, Water 6 

Le Sia 0:25% aq. HCl K Copious secretion 

11.34 29) 3) >»? O > 39) 

1.40% Water + tone 0 

Similar results were obtaj en an increased illumination of 

the room was used as the itioned inhibitor, the acid, of course, 
always being introduc o the mouth in dim light. The condi- 


tioned inhibition >, d much more quickly in this case, and the 


experiment given represents the 16th administration of water 
with increased j ination. 
NS 
V 
X 


A.P. 2a 


370 / CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


Experiment of 13th March, 1909. 


Salivary Secretion 


Time Stimulus in drops 
during one minute 

11.32 a.m. Water 23 
11.33 __,, 0:25% aq. HCl Copious secretion 
1146... | Water 26 
1 M: 5 aE 0:25% aq. HCl Copious secretion 
1 1 .48 +E ” 23) 29 23) 
1-57 = 5 Water + increased 

illumination ` 0 
12.6 p.m. 0:25% aq. HCl Copious secretion 
12,4 >. Water + increased 

illumination 4 


Finally, the effect of a dis-inhibition of the water-reflex after 
experimental extinction was tried, and this was plainly revealed 
under the appropriate conditions as shown by the following experi- 
ment performed in presence of a large audience at a meeting of the 
Medical Society in Petrograd. 


Experiment of 19th March, 1909. 


Salivary Secretion 


Time Stimulus 
Y 8.9: p.m: ~- 0:25% aq. HCl 
8.20 7, Water 
8.24 ,, Me 
8.28 _,, . 
2s PA AE Raw meat Small secretion 


8.30, Water Q 14 
8.49 : O } 
Stimulation by raw meaK Produced a dis-inhibition of the 
extinguished water-reflex of during the early period of its after- 
effect. Later, the effe S extinction returned temporarily, in 
accordance with the al rules of conditioned reflexes. 

We see, thereforg hat in the first dog only an organ of a secondary 
physiological infporfance, with only a rudimentary relation to the 
external world, remained functionally intact, namely, the salivary 
gland; and.ayen this sole surviving witness could attest the con- 
tinued, f oning of the cerebral cortex only in conjunction with 
the shiny analyser of the mouth. 


| 
| 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES 371 


We shall now turn our attention to the second dog, which had 
a slightly different extent of lesion. In removing the anterior part 
of the hemisphere the bulbus and tractus olfactorius were preserved 
with the utmost care, since we wished if possible to demonstrate the 
existence of conditioned reflexes to olfactory stimuli, as well as the 
water-reflex. 

The result exceeded our expectations. In this dog, besides the 
water-reflex, the conditioned reflex to an odour of camphor became 
re-established. The natural olfactory conditioned reflexes to food 
were of course also present. The dog stretched out its head towards 
food—directed by smell, and occasionally grabbed food placed close 
enough to it. This was the only important difference between the 
two dogs. In relation to other animals and to men the second dog 
was also entirely indifferent. The helplessness amongst mechanical 
obstacles and the defects in locomotion were as pronounced as in 
the first dog. Generally speaking this second dog was as great an 
invalid and as incapable of continuing to exist without careful 
tending as the first. No positive conditioned reflexes to stimuli 
belonging to other analysers could be obtained. 

The post-mortem examination revealed in both dogs an extreme 
atrophy of the remaining posterior part of the hemispheres. 

I think that the general behaviour of these animals can be more 
or less clearly interpreted by correlating our observations upon 
their conditioned activity and the result of the post-mor exami- 
nation. All the cortical parts-of the analysers, with go xteption 
of the analyser of the mouth in both dogs, and in t ond dog of 
the chemical analyser of smell in addition, eithe not function 
at all or else only partially (inhibitory reflexes): Q: dogs, therefore, 
were deprived of innumerable signalling sti from the external 
world, stimuli which otherwise would de iNe their normal com- 
plicated activities. In the first dog the only analyser to remain 
intact was the one which is the most ited in its contact with the 
environment. In the second CY this there remained also 


the activity of-the distance an. of smell, which is especially well 


developed in dogs. In t g, however, the analyser of smell 
functioned neither so effic@ily nor so constantly as in normal dogs. 


This may have been de fo some damage of the analyser during the 
operation, or to its cane constantly held under a certain inhibitory 
m other analysers which had been damaged 


influence derivin 

and which by, tyextselves, although incapable of any positive activity, 
NS 

SS 

HO 


372 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


could yet respond to stimuli by the development and irradiation of 
an inhibition. The most important effector apparatus of the organism 
—its skeletal and motor system—was in both dogs incapable of 
performing its activities with the precision required for adjustment 
to changes in the external environment. Under normal conditions 
the activity of this system is determined by an associated action of 
two analysers, an external, cutaneous analyser—signalling in detail 
changes in the external mechanical relations of the animal to its 
environment—and an internal, motor analyser—performing a 
detailed analysis and complicated synthesis of corresponding move- 
ments. In the case of extensive disturbances of either, it is obvious 
that detailed motor reactions in response to changes in the external 
environment cannot be present. There is evidence, however, that 
in these two dogs some irregularly dispersed parts of the cutaneous 
and motor analysers still remained in the cortex, this being the 
probable explanation why stimulation of certain parts of the skin 


‘(stroking of the neck and head) undoubtedly evoked inhibitory 


(most probably conditioned) reflexes neutralizing the general excita- 
tion of the animal and leading to sleep, while stimulation of certain 
other parts evoked only unconditioned reflexes which are known to 
be the result of activity of the lower motor centres—various scratch 
reflexes and defence reflexes. The same consideration may explain 
also the differences between these two dogs and enti decorticated 
animals, namely, that the latter begin much soonewatted the operation 
to get on their feet, stand, walk about, and i @pneral shew much 
less disorder in their movements than the eh hoes described. The 
presence of dispersed remnants of the nO alyser is also indicated 
by the epileptic attacks in these two , occurring in the form of 
convulsions of the muscles of the rk and sometimes body, 
but never of the extremities. regards the absence of the special 
“ social ”?” reflexes sufficient Too been said. It is most prob- 
able that their existence ends on exceedingly complex condi- 
tioned reflexes, which in oy dogs, of course, could not have been 
present, since even ry positive conditioned reflexes were 
absent in the majoprapof the analysers. 


I shall now s another case, the analysis of which occupied 
a very long jim@? This dog showed a great deviation from the 
normal in į neral reactions, not immediately after the operation 


and not ecount of the surgical lesion of the cortex itself, but 
aw influence of a subsequent growth of scar tissue accompanied 


. 
~ 


O) 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES as 


by frequent attacks of convulsions, which two years after the opera- 
tion became so severe as finally to lead to the death of the animal. 
The dog was young, very lively, and with a well-balanced nervous 
system. The experiments were started before the operation and 
confined to the development of tactile and thermal cutaneous reflexes 
which, as mentioned before, have an exceptional tendency to induce 
an inhibitory state of the cortical elements, dogs soon becoming 
drowsy under their influence and falling asleep. This dog, however, 
remained wide awake in its stand during the whole time of an 
experiment. The operation on the cortex was performed in two 
stages, first on the one and then on the other side (9th March and 
28th April, 1910), the gyri postcruciati being partially destroyed. 
It was now for some time observed that stimulation of the areas 
of the skin corresponding to the cortical field of the operation 
produced drowsiness of the animal. This, however, was overcome 
by the introduction of a new strong conditioned stimulus (buzzer). 
After a short period of time all the small defects which developed 
after the operation almost completely disappeared and the dog 
behaved generally as normal. On the llth May, 1910, it had a first 
attack of convulsions. Since the work that had been planned ori- 
ginally was at this time already completed, the dog was kept for a 
considerable time without observation. During the following 
summer the attacks of convulsions recurred, and in the autumn and 
winter the attendant looking after the animal reported it had 
developed extremely peculiar behaviour and-on being héd now 
entered into a state of extreme excitation, snarli rking and 
baring the teeth in a manner which had never beep ved before in 
this animal. In the beginning of January 194X e dog was given 
over to Dr. Satournov. Its general behayjaę Was now as follows: 
Taken out of the kennel and placed o ke) Acor it became wildly 
excited, soon, however, quieting doit after which it remained 
standing in the same place upwards an hour at a time, only 
moving the head and sniffing t It would then make some 
forward or circular movement inary to defaecation or micturi- 
tion, which quickly RNS hen it would continue standing in 
the same place. With Q proach of the usual feeding time the 
dog would begin to Erama sniffing the air. A dish of food placed 
in front of it would Oke it stretch out its head after the food and 
even follow if the dèk were removed. The act of eating was normal, 
the standing RS € quite firm and without swaying, but as the dog 


N 
> 
aO 


, AO 
ww 


Ke 
[Ù 


374 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


walked the front legs would splay out, and when it turned quickly 
on a smooth floor the front legs would slip, but the animal would 
seldom fall. Sometimes the animal walked into obstacles, sometimes 
went round them. Sexual reflexes in spite of careful observations 
were never observed. The animal never answered to calling, and 
generally did not exhibit any reactions to other dogs or to men. 
If the hair on any part of the skin, especially of the neck and head, 
were touched however slightly by hand, other animals, wind, drops 
of rain, or any object with which the dog might come into contact, 
an extraordinary outburst of excitation followed, expressed by 
growling, barking, baring of the teeth and hostile movements 
generally. Usually the animal lifted up its head into the air and 
practically never turned it towards the point of origin of the touch. 
At the same time a continuous pressure upon the skin—for example, 
by apparatuses attached to the skin during experiments, or by the 
loops of the stand—left the dog quiet. 

As was previously mentioned, the whole time the animal survived 
general attacks of convulsions recurred from which it usually recovered 
comparatively quickly. The conditioned reflex activity of this 
strange animal was studied in order to elucidate if possible the reason 
for its behaviour. An old conditioned alimentary reflex to a buzzer 
was easily and quickly re-established. A new conditioned reflex to 
a tone of an organ pipe of 300 d.v. was established, ay was also a new 
reflex to an odour of camphor as well as a lige yiation of the 
sound of another organ pipe three tones high d a conditioned 
inhibition of the reflex to camphor in conjun ith a metronome. 
The experimenter [Dr. Satournov] did no eed in re-establishing 
any of the tactile conditioned reflexes wiNgH were present before the 
pathological condition developed observed, however, that 
positive conditioned stimuli Ki general very apt to develop 


inhibitory properties, and that inhibitory process was extremely - 
inert, exhibiting a very prolongtd after-effect upon positive reflexes. 

The next investigato worked on this dog [Dr. Kouraev], 
realizing the peculiarjtyZh<) mentioned, worked mainly with short- 
delayed reflexes, Ne without diffculty in re-establishing 
the reflexes to tgttNd stimuli. The tendency of the nervous system 
to inhibition coMiMued to increase, as did also the occurrence and 
severity of ttacks of convulsions, until on the 19th May, 1912, 
vigorous ks continuing with only short intermissions during 
Wes finally killed the animal. The post-mortem examination 


D 


© 


oe 


POSTOPERATIVE DISTURBANCES 375 


revealed, after removal of the scar, that the defect in the substance 
of the cortex involved the following convolutions—the posterior 
part of the gyrus postcruciatus, the anterior parts of the gyri supra- 
splenialis, entolateralis and ectolateralis, the gyrus suprasylvius 
medius, the upper half of gyrus coronarius, and to some extent the 
gyrus ectosyluius medius. The occipital and temporal lobes were 
very definitely atrophied, the mass of the cortex in these two areas 
being diminished and the convolutions flattened out. The frontal 
lobes remained apparently entirely intact. 

The post-mortem examination showed that the actual destruction 
involved in the main the posterior part of the cortex, the anterior 
part being affected to a much smaller extent. Naturally therefore 


- the behaviour of this dog, as shown by observation of its condi- 


tioned reflexes, resembled that of animals in which the posterior part 
of the cerebral cortex had been extirpated. The animal was, un- 
fortunately, not subjected to analysis of reflexes to compound 
auditory and visual stimuli. The absence of such reflexes could, 
however, be inferred from the fact that the dog did not react to 
calling and did not exhibit any social relations with other animals 
or with men, indicating an absence of chain, and probably all complex; 
reflexes. Certain irregularities in walking obviously depended upon 
a small damage of the motor analyser. It is difficult, however, to 
find an adequate explanation for the prolonged standing of the dog. 
in one place and the exaggerated reactions to touchin e skin. 
So far as the former is concerned it is impossible to MSA ether 
it is an expression of a dominance of inhibition in ortex sub- 
sequent to the periods of violent excitations (convulgjous), or whether 
it should be regarded as a result of a partial da of the cutaneous 
analyser. The-latter explanation would seggt find support in the 
retention of the usual mobility of the head a Qa) eek. The exaggerated 
reaction to touching the skin might be %f£ cortical origin or a reflex 
through subcortical centres. Since, Oyever, tactile conditioned 
reflexes were present, the latter se 18 jmprobable. It is also difficult 
to reconcile the extreme excita of the cutaneous analyser with: 
the hypothesis of a predo e of the inhibitory process in the 
cortex. To solve these p@Ņ ems it would have been necessary to 
perform further serena of the experiments, and these were not 


at that time practigagle. 
In describing ses in the present lecture, I do not make the 


slightest prorpio have given a satisfactory explanation of the 
\ 


N 
SÀ 
aO 


© 
ww 


376 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


entire nervous mechanism underlying the deviations from normal 
in the general behaviour of the dogs after surgical damage of the 
cortex. My aim has been simply to show that problems as to this 
mechanism are the legitimate province of physiology, and to demon- 
strate that a reasonable possibility of studying them is given even 
by present-day methods. 

On the whole the experiments upon conditioned reflexes brought 
forward in the last three lectures confirm the observations of old 
and recent authors upon the same problem, though we have also 
been able to add some new facts and to formulate some new problems. 
But what our experiments do most emphatically refute is the doctrine 
of special “association ” centres, or, more generally, of the existence 
in the hemispheres of some special area on which the higher functions 
of the nervous system depend—a doctrine which has already been 
strenuously opposed by H. Munk. 


LECTURE XXII 


The general characteristics of the present investigation and its special difficulties 
—Discovery of certain errors necessitating the modification of some earlier 
interpretations. 


A SCIENTIFIC investigation of biological phenomena can be conducted 
along several different lines each of which would treat the problem 
from a different point of view. For instance, one may have in view 
the purely physico-chemical aspect, analysing the elements of life 
by the methods of physics and chemistry. Again, keeping in view 
the fact of evolution of living matter one can try to elucidate the 
functions of complex biological structures by studying the functions 
of individual cells and of elementary organisms. Finally, one can 
make an attempt to elucidate the activities of complex structures 
in their fullest range directly, seeking for rigid laws governing this 
activity, or, in other words, trying to define all those conditions which 
determine the form this activity takes at every instant and in all 
its variations. The line of inquiry which has been adopted in the 
present investigation obviously belongs to the third poj view. 
In this research we were not concerned with the ulti 
excitation and inhibition as such. We took them as 
properties, the two most important manifestati 
the living nervous elements. Nor was it o to interpret the 
activity of the hemispheres in terms of el ry functions of the 
nervous system, as has been done, forgextwfple, in the physiology 
of the nerve fibres. We intentionallpglsted also the contro- 
versial problem of the actual localizgtith of these two fundamental 
processes, and did not attempt ign them to either of the two 
elements of the nervous IN amely, the nerve cell and the 


ature of 
damental 
of activity, of 


synaptic junction or fibril connection between two individual 
nerve cells. The mid ie of the more general conception of the 
two processes of inhibitħex and excitation as the basic functions of 
the nervous cellu ructures was sufficient for the purposes of 
our research, the @idy of conditioned reflexes being of the nature 


S 377 


378 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


of a general investigation of the functions of the cellular structures 
of the cortex as exhibited in various reactions of the organism to a 
multitude of separate stimuli which originate from within or from 
without the organism—stimuli for the reception of which there is 
such an unbounded number of separate cortical cells and which 
after extirpation of the cortex lose their significance for the organism. 
It is highly probable that excitation and inhibition, the two 
functions of the nerve cell which are so intimately interwoven and 
which so constantly supersede each other, may, fundamentally, 
represent only different phases of one and the same physico-chemical 
process. The primary aim of our research was the accurate deter- 
mination and tabulation of different phases of the cortical activity— 
the absence or presence of an inhibitory or excitatory phase, the 
exact conditions under which the intensity of the excitatory or 
inhibitory process varied, and the mutual interrelation between 
these processes. It is obvious that in its intrinsic nature our work 
is closely allied to the work of Sherrington and his co-workers upon 
the spinal cord, and it is impossible not to notice in how many points 
the different aspects of the nervous activity of the cortex correspond 
with those described in the physiology of the spinal cord; a fact 
which seems strong evidence of a similarity of the fundamental laws 
governing the nervous activity in the two cases. 

Research upon the activity of the cortex along these lines must 
unavoidably present exceptional difficulties. extraordinary 
reactivity of the cortex, on the one hand, and th be@unded volume 
of stimuli continually pouring into it, on the hand, are respon- 
sible for the two fundamental peculiarities e cortical activity— 
namely, first, that it is determined in y minutest detail, and 
second, that it is in a state of perpe ay , changing so rapidly that 
it becomes practically impossible bServe any aspect of it in an . 
entirely pure and uncontaminat® form and to appraise and control 
all the determining condition he minutest changes in the en- 
vironment or inside the pnism itseli—changes which may be 
imperceptible to us een spected—have a profound effect upon 
the cortical activiti is obvious that these special peculiarities 


of the research a any instances the cause of fallacies, especially 
since it is so t ing to adhere to different fancied analogies and 
plausible geyeralizations—a tendency which cannot be too much 
guarded t in the present state of the research. The mind, so 

agrten fails to keep pace with the tremendous variety of 


to RS 


NEW INTERPRETATIONS 379 


interrelations, and this is why our interpretations were often too 
limited and led to errors which have had to be constantly corrected. 
Indeed I have no doubt that the presentation of the subject-matter 
attempted in these lectures will in the future still be corrected in 
many details. Errors in interpretation, and errors sometimes in 
the methods of observation, are naturally to be expected in a study 
of such astounding complexity. These special peculiarities of our 
subject is the reason why I thought it advisable to delay a systematic 
presentation of our prolonged researches until now : new problems 
are perpetually arising, and at the same time an equally large number 
of questions are still left unsettled. We often feel compelled to, turn 
our attention from problems which directly confront us to some un- 
expected new phenomena which introduce fresh problems or which 
necessitate a revision of old points of view. This general aspect of 
the investigation into the cortical activity I want particularly to 
emphasize in the present lecture, taking for my examples some 
fresh observations which have not been discussed in the preceding 
lectures. 

The surprising minuteness of detail in which the cortical activity 
is determined by external and internal agencies, and the extraordinary 
precision and delicacy of the responsiveness of the cortex to even the 
minutest changes in these agencies, are clearly illustrated by the 
two following observations, which are both taken from the later © 
period of our work. 

The dog used in the first of these experiments has been 
referred to in the preceding lectures. It passed thro By e experi- 
ence of the great flood in Petrograd, and sternage erred for an 
investigation of a functional disturbance of QO oustic analyser 
(p. 316). In the course of a month in whi e animal behaved 
again normally a differentiation of pitch O eloped. During the 
isolated action of the conditioned stimufgs (TO seconds) the secretory 


effect was as much as 5 drops; the Qijierence between the effects 
of strong and weak stimuli was definite, and the food given 
in reinforcement was always t with avidity. In the stand 


the animal stood quietly. KGio introduced an apparently very 
small modification in the iment, the isolated action of the con- 
ditioned stimulus being pyòlonged a further 5 seconds. As a result 


ative experiments taken from the two periods 


The following are} 


of this the entire Ne ioned activity was immediately disturbed. 
of the PEO N 


380 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


Experiment of 19th June, 1926 (normal experiment). 


Salivary 
Time Conditioned stimulus| Secretion in Remarks 
during 10 seconds | drops during 
10 seconds 

10.33 a.m. Tone, 250 d.v. 44 The animal stands quietly 
16.38... Tone, 150 d.v. and exhibits a definite 

(inhibitory) 0 alimentary motor re- 
10.48 ,, Bubbling sound 5 action to conditioned 
10:52." = Lamp 33 stimuli; takes the food 
10.59 ,, Bubbling sound 5 at once 


Experiment of 24th June, 1926 (experiment after prolongation of the 
isolated action of the conditioned stimulus). 


Salivary 


Time Conditioned stimulus | Secretion in Remarks 
during 15 seconds | drops during 
15 seconds 
10.28 a.m. Tone, 250 d.v. 7 Alimentary reaction ; 


takes the food 
During the interval the 
animal is very excited 
10.34 _,, Lamp 2 Weak alimentary re- 
action ; takes the food 
During the interval the 


animal is again very 
exci 
10.49 ,, Buzzer 0 The t away, but 


RF the food 15 secs. 
r presentation 


10.54 ,, Lamp l4 entary reaction ; 
takes the food at once 
TE A O are Buzzer Turns away; does not 


take the food 


The first application of the tioned stimulus in the experiment 
of 24th June produced a er secretory effect than usual, for the 
obvious reason that the Gi action of the conditioned stimulus 
had been TEDAS ther 5 seconds. The alimentary motor 
reaction in respons¢y AS stimulus was lively, the food being con- 
sumed at once ;(ev a te promised a normal experiment, and there 
were so far indications of any special deviation from normal. 
However, dy during the interval between the first and second 
stimuli imal showed an unusual state of excitation. This was 


NEW INTERPRETATIONS 381 


followed later on by an obvious paradoxical phase : a strong stimulus 
(buzzer) failed to elicit the secretory reaction while the motor reflex 
considerably diminished. The animal on the first application of the 
buzzer (10.49 a.m:) accepted the food after some delay, and on the 
second application (11.1 a.m.) did not touch the food at all. A weak 
stimulus (lamp) nevertheless continued to evoke a secretion (although | 
a diminished one) and to evoke a motor alimentary response. We 
returned to the usual length of isolated action of the conditioned 
stimulus (10 seconds) on the following day. The disturbance, | 
however, became still more pronounced, the secretory effect being 
absent throughout the experiment, while the animal turned to the 
food only after weak stimuli and would not touch it after strong 
ones. On the third day all reflexes returned to normal, except that 
the tone which had been the first stimulus employed on the day 
(24th June) when the isolated action of the stimuli was prolonged, 
still gave a diminished secretory effect (only a half of its usual 
secretion during 10 seconds). A further experiment with a temporary 
prolongation of the isolated action of the conditioned stimuli produced 
exactly the same pathological state (paradoxical phase) of the animal. 
These observations provide a brilliant example of the exquisite 
delicacy in the reactivity of the cortex, showing how considerable 
may be the effect of such minute changes in the conditions of an 


experiment. 

The second dog, also previously mentioned,—‘‘ Braina’’—was | 
of an extremely inhibitable type, and the same change inke xperi- i 
mental conditions led to exactly opposite results. “9 dog when 
left in the stand without application of any stimu ckly became 


drowsy, with the result that not only Seas gas disappeared. 
but also reflexes in response to the actua istration of food. 
For the purpose of overcoming this drowsi des e had used the usual 
method of abbreviating the isolated %action of the conditioned 
stimulus to 4-1 second. After three w of this practice the drowsi- 
ness disappeared, and the dog n jook the food immediately on 
presentation and consumed it avidity. A prolongation of the 
isolated. action of the TEN stimulus to 5 seconds revealed the 
presence of a condition etory reflex. On continuation of the 
experiments with the Koljted action of 5 seconds the reflex main- 
tained its strength several days. After this the reflex again 
diminished and imal once more succumbed to drowsiness. 
However, it vag sufficient to prolong the conditioned stimulus 


NY 
oS 
| 2g 
Bw 


382 


to 10 seconds for the animal to become again alert ; 


CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


the secretory 


effect returned after several repetitions of the prolonged stimulus, 
and, what is important, it appeared within the first 5 seconds of the 


isolated action of the conditioned stimulus. 


On continuation of the 


experiments with the isolated action of 10 seconds the animal again 
became drowsy and the secretory conditioned reflex again disap- 
peared. A further prolongation of the conditioned stimulus to 15 
seconds produced a similar effect to that of the first prolongation to 
10 seconds, t.e. a temporary return of the alert state and a consider- 
able conditioned secretion starting well within the first 5 seconds. 
The same sequence of events was repeated yet twice more on pro- 
longation of the conditioned stimulus to 20 and 25 seconds. The 
following is an example of an experiment : 


Experiment of 28th February, 1925. 


Time 


Conditioned 
stimulus applied 
during 15 seconds 


Metronome 
Tactile 
Whistle 


Latency of 
salivary 
secretion 


Salivary 
Secretion in 
drops during 

15 seconds 


1 
0 
0 


On the next day the isolated action of the conditioned stimuli 


was prolonged to 20 seconds. 
two days’ practice with the longer interval : 


The following is a 


Experiment of 3rd March 


Time 


Conditioned 
stimulus applied 
during 20 secon 


cretion 


periment after 


xO 


Salivary 
Secretion in 
drops during 

20 seconds 


GO CO Gr 


rol 


Thus every sm 
ditioned stimulus 
of excitation @f 


secretory I Ae 
the condi 


was VF 


e dog: 


ohgation of the isolated action of the con- 
ed after a few repetitions a, temporary state 
the drowsiness. disappeared, and the 
ion reappeared, starting soon after the beginning of 


va rae and well within the period in which there 


tion during the shorter isolated action of the stimulus. 


-S 


the relations were entirely BAGG 


NEW INTERPRETATIONS 383 


The latter fact shows that the enhanced secretion was not merely 
due to the prolongation of the period of observation but was the 
genuine result of a cortical excitation. 

We thus see that one and the same change led to opposite effects 
in the two dogs : in the first it resulted in inhibition, in the second 
iż abolished inhibition. Most probably the difference in the effects 
was dependent on the fact that the first animal was alert during the 
experiments (i.e. in a state of cortical excitation), while the other 
dog was drowsy (i.e. in a state of cortical inhibition). 

We are constantly confronted by cases in which pathological 
changes in the state of the animal are brought about by some unknown 
secondary conditions. It has repeatedly been mentioned in the 
preceding lectures that conditioned reflexes to stimuli belonging to 
different analysers are normally of different magnitude. Remem- 
bering that the nervous process is considered by present-day physio- 
logists to be identical in all nerve fibres, and having somehow con- 
ceived the idea that the difference in our perception of light, sound, 
etc., must have some physical basis in differences of corresponding 
cortical elements, we were for a considerable time inclined to attribute 
the difference in the magnitude of the conditioned effect to individual] 
peculiarities of the cells of the different analysers. Reinvestigation 
of the whole question, as has been mentioned already, showed that 
the differences in the magnitude of the conditioned reactions to 
stimuli belonging to different analysers, depend fundamentalky upon 
the intensity of the stimuli themselves (p. 269). This Pyar 
it will be remembered, was arrived at in the following ger We 
knew for a long time that in a conditioned SH ODS ON ulus made 
up of two agencies belonging to different analysers of the stimuli 
almost invariably overshadows the other, as ci Xi be revealed 
by testing the individual components Repay y. In such a com- 
pound our usual auditory stimuli, in t eájority of dogs, over- 
shadowed visual, tactile and thermal co ents, but in a compound 
made up of a weakened auditory s: and a strong visual one 

This observation proved the 
difference in response to be to fundamental differences in 
the cellular structure of t Wi analysers, but to the relative 
intensity of the individ fh Now, although the above holds 
good in the majority of s, in some few animals the difference in 
the magnitude of th €Ohditioned response to different agencies was 
found to be entir sent. We have already directed considerable 


\S 
S 
ò 


„AQ 
wy 


384 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


attention to the study of this deviation, but we are not yet in a 
position to state definitely under what special conditions it occurs. 
Some of the determining conditions are, however, known. These 
` special cases depend to some extent upon the general type of the 
nervous system of the animal—excitable or inhibitable. In the 
inhibitable type the usual relation between intensity of stimulus 
and magnitude of effect is especially obvious, occurring practically 
without exception otherwise than in extreme pathological states. 
It is true that if the period of isolated action is short there may not 
be any apparent difference between the effects of strong and weak 
stimuli, since in the initial stage the effect is practically the same in 
both cases ; but with a prolongation of the stimulus the secretion 
augments rapidly in the case of strong stimuli and only slowly in the 
case of weak stimuli. In the case of excitable and very greedy dogs 
it is, on the contrary, the abbreviation of the conditioned stimulus 
which helps to disclose the usual relation between the magnitudes 
of the effects of weak and of strong stimuli, a relation which may not 
be apparent when the stimuli are more prolonged. 

On account of the immense number of different conditions 
determining the different states of activity of the cortex I feel that 
even now the physiological analysis of many seemingly simple and 
well-known facts is very often far from perfect. I will describe, for 
example, the observations upon one of our recently acquired animals 
[experiments of Drs. Podkopaev and Virjikovsky}\In this case the 
conditioned reflexes to different agencies wer&Qevéloped with the 
following important variation in the usual d. The first agent 
to which conditioned properties were to iven was applied alter- 
nately with and without reinforceme food. The conditioned 
reflex developed comparatively qui (by the 20th application). 
In the case of the next stimulus the rpifforcement was given at every 
third application. The reflex developed even quicker than before 
(by the 7th application). TReJanimal became, however, extremely 
excited. Finally a third ont was reinforced only at every fourth 
application, and in thj e the conditioned reflex failed to develop 
and the animal b somewhat drowsy. The last stimulus was 
applied a total times (60 times in conjunction with food). 

Let us, ha¥ing recourse to all our previous knowledge, endeavour 
to interpretythese facts. Why, in the last case, did the conditioned 
reflex fai evelop ? or, at any rate, why was it for so long delayed, 
if, NER / it would have developed at all? The fundamental 


Y 
3h 


| 


et +, 


7N 


NEW INTERPRETATIONS 385 


mechanism of development of-a conditioned reflex depends upon 
excitation of some definite point in the cortex coincidently with a 
more intense excitation of some other point, probably also of the 
cortex, which leads to a connection being formed between these two 


` points; and reversely, if such a coincident stimulation of these 


S 


points is not repeated for a long time the path becomes obliterated 
and the connection disrupted. But when once such a path has been 
firmly established it remains intact without further practice, for 
months and years. It is obvious that under suitable conditions 
a new connection must be formed at the very first occurrence of 
the simultaneous excitation and become strengthened by every 
repetition. In ordinary experiments with normal dogs about twenty 
reinforced repetitions are required to establish the first of any 
conditioned reflexes experimentally produced, and this number 
sufficed in the first variation (alternate reinforcement) described 
above. In the establishment of subsequent reflexes under normal 
conditions only three to five repetitions are necessary, and yet in 
the case now under discussion (reinforcement of every fourth ap- 
plication) sixty repetitions produced no result. The first possible 
explanation is the prolongation of the interval between the separate 
reinforcements, but this cannot be the reason in our case since with 
the same intervals of time, but omitting the non-reinforced applica- 
tions during the intervals; the conditioned reflex invariably and 
quickly develops. It is obvious, therefore, that the frequ 
tion of the non-reinforced agent must oppose a power sistance 


to the development of a conditioned reflex. We “> 


every new ‘stimulus which evokes the investig reflex ceases 
on repetition to have any effect unless the stimu as been followed 
up with some other reflex. Such a disap ce of, the effect is 
known to be due to a development of, inkibition in those cortical 
elements upon which the stimulus act A aca in the third 
variation of the experiment such an inkition might have developed 
on account of the application o re non-reinforced stimuli, the 
cortical elements never acquiri OY. the fourth, reinforced stimulus 
a sufficient state of excitati Cay a connection to be formed with 
the excited alimentary Aus elements. But although such an 


interpretation seemed AigWly plausible it failed when subjected to 
the following experf@pntal test. When the stimulus had been 
repeated 240 tim times with reinforcement) a pre-established 


conditioned Ñ us was applied 30 seconds after the ineffective 


AP. \ N 2B 
S 
5 


Ag 
ww 


386 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


stimulus. No inhibitory after-effect. was. ever observed. Obviously, 
therefore, the ineffective agent could not have produced any wide- 
spread inhibition. It was still possible, however, that on account 
of prolonged practice the inhibitory effect had become extremely 
concentrated in a narrow region ; but neither was this explanation 
supported by our experiments, for when we now began to reinforce 
the agent at each successive application the conditioned secretory 
effect was already considerable at the third reinforcement, showing 
that the rate of development of the new conditioned reflex was 
maximal. We cannot, therefore, regard the stimulus as having had 
any definite inhibitory properties. Several further possible explana- 
tions have also been tested experimentally, but we have hitherto 
failed to disclose the nature of this phenomenon. So far, our experi- 
ments simply show that we have not yet gained command over all 
the conditions which determine the development of conditioned 
reflexes. The conditions enumerated in the second lecture, however 
sufficient they may be as regards the development of all those reflexes 
with which we have been accustomed to deal, nevertheless do not 
finally exhaust the subject, since having had all of them in our mind 


‘we have still failed to understand the results of the experiments 


described above. There must exist some further condition which 
has up to the present been overlooked. This failure only serves to 
demonstrate once more the surprising extent to which, in every 
detail, the cortical activity is determined, ane astonishing 
reactivity of the cortical elements. 

It was, of course, obvious from the that there was no 
immediate possibility of attacking the c x activity of the cortex 
from its physico-chemical aspect. mMher did there appear to be 
any real hope of approaching erstanding of the cortical 
activity through the study of theéglefréntary properties of the nervous 
tissue. We have come now t that we do not possess even yet 
a full descriptive knowledgeyof the various aspects of this activity. 
Our chief task in site cortical activity at the present time 
i t ducing the tremendous mass of various 
terms of a progressively diminishing number 
ndamental units. This we have fully realized, 
we seem to be approaching our goal, but in other 


must therefore con 
separate observati 
of general and ior 
and in some gas 


cases we fi urselves confronting some entirely new aspects of 
the cortj QXrtivity, which sometimes are within, and at other times 


E range, of our present powers of analysis. 


~\ 
Qy 
ML 
wy 


NEW INTERPRETATIONS 387 


In the beginning of the present research, on the basis of very 
definite but purely external signs, we distinguished three types of 
inhibition—external inhibition, internal inhibition, and sleep. 
Accumulation of further observations permitted us to fuse the Jast 
two types by showing that the apparent differencesare only secondary. 
Sleep and the various forms of internal inhibition are aspects of one 
and the same process, which in the one set of cases is fragmented and 
localized, in the other case diffused. When in the course of our further 
investigation of conditioned reflexes we met with the phenomenon 
of mutual induction, it was natural that we should perceive the 
similarity between negative induction and external inhibition. 
Hence a fundamental identity of all the three types of inhibition 
appeared very probable, and special efforts were directed to the 
collection of further evidence on the point. Some of this evidence 
has been given before, and fresh evidence will be added in the present 
lecture. In the lecture upon induction an experiment was described 
in which a conditioned defence reflex to a tactile stimulation of a 
place on the skin exerted an inhibitory after-effect upon a conditioned 
alimentary reflex to tactile stimulation of other places. We found 
reason to believe that this inhibition was in part cortical (p. 202). 
In the lecture upon different transition phases between the alert 
state and sleep it was shown that some of these phases can be observed 
not only during the after-effect of internal (differential) inh{bition, 
but also under the influence of external inhibition (p. . Ll am 
now in a position to add some further considerations @y avour of 
the identity of internal and external inhibition. W. inclined to 
regard the frequent'y mentioned fact of overshad in a compound 
conditioned stimulus of the weaker by the Sa component as 
based upon external inhibition. The ae, elements belonging 
to the strong stimulus inhibit those of qhe“weak stimulus, and the 
latter, therefore, can establish only oe connection with the 
unconditioned centre. This theory ¿ẹ substantiated by the fact that 
the strengths of newly establish nditioned connections depend 
on the relative strengths of t Na tioned stimuli. This considera- 
tion obviously approximat SS more the phenomenon of external 
inhibition to negative grabalion in which the application of the 
positive conditioned sti®ẹflus reinforces, or even re-establishes, the 
inhibitory state of th€Dervous elements acted upon by the inhibitory 
stimulus. Man Ory collaborators [Drs. Mishtovt, Krjishkovsky 
and Leporsk: Diced that for a quick and complete establishment 


N 
SÀ 
ao 


| © 
aw 


388 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


of a conditioned inhibitor it is of considerable importance to choose 
a stimulus which is not much weaker in strength than the positive 
component of the combination. Recent experiments performed in 
this connection by Dr. Foursikov not only corroborate these obser- 


-` vations, but bring out the important fact that the external inhibition 


which on account of the investigatory reflex is produced at the first 
application of the new stimulus, often gradually and almost imper- 
ceptibly undergoes transition into the permanent conditioned 
inhibition. In spite of the cumulative effect of the foregoing evidence 
it is by no means conclusive, and I feel entitled to advance the view, 
that external and internal inhibition are fundamentally the same, 
only as a strong probability. 

It was noticed in the nineteenth lecture that three different types 
of external stimuli lead to an inhibitory state of the cortex, namely, 
very weak stimuli, very strong stimuli, and unusual stimuli, and an 
attempt was made to give a general biological interpretation of 
this effect. The physiological mechanism of the effect of these 
stimuli is as yet obscure, neither do I find it possible to discuss the 
problem of inhibition in its entire range. The experimental material, 
although considerable, is not yet sufficient to establish any general 
and definite conception of the nature of inhibition and its relation 
to excitation. Explanations which seem to fit some one group of 
phenomena fail when applied to other groups.. Matty observations 
do not fit in with any of the theories, and N eption of the 
mechanism involved has had to be changed may imes in the course 
of our research, never entirely satisfactorily\ Here again, as in the 
whole of our research, we can only c and systematize facts. 
The fact that very powerful and ver k stimuli have a stronger 
tendency than medium stimuli Pour inhibition belongs to the 
category of unsolved problemalotfig with the mechanism of dis- 
inhibition, the positive effec negative stimuli in the “ ultra- 
paradoxical phase ” and th», negative effect of positive stimuli in 
the case of damage to an In many instances we fail even 
to see which of tha@s ena are closely related to each other 
and which are is and radically different. To illustrate the 
difficulty of su¢h qXSes I shall attempt to deal with the question of 
the productign of inhibition by new events or a rearrangement in 
the goat old events. We change, for example, the manner 
in whic conditioned stimulus is reinforced by food. Instead 
of XS automatically moving with food from behind a screen, 


N 


AO 


NEW INTERPRETATIONS 389 


a measured amount of food is now delivered mechanically into a 
stationary plate. Many dogs after this change persistently decline 
the food, and all conditioned reflexes disappear. This, of course, 
is a case of inhibition, but what explanation can be suggested as to 
its mechanism ? It may be compared with an observation discussed 
in the thirteenth lecture where a change in the sequence of a series 
of conditioned stimuli led in some animals to a more or less pro- 
found inhibition of the entire conditioned activity—an inhibition 
which lasted for several days, notwithstanding that a return was 
made to the previous order of stimulation. What happens here with 
a small number of conditioned stimuli can well be imagined to take 


. place in respect to the entire environment. Constant repetitions 


of external events. in a stereotyped order may lead to a definite 
stereotyped pattern of activity in the cortex, each new distribution 
of the stimuli now producing a disturbance in the pattern of the 
cortical activity, leading to inhibition in exactly the same manner 
as in our experiments with alteration in the sequence of the 
conditioned stimuli. This comparison does not, however, explain 
the mechanism of the development of inhibition in this particular 
case. Was it a result of the investigatory reflex due to the change 
in environment, or are the investigatory reflex and this very prolonged 
inhibition two independent phenomena? In favour of the first 
supposition the fact can be advanced that in very inhjbitable 
dogs the investigatory reflex exercises an extraordinaril gripneed 
inhibitory after-effect. XS 

The whole subject of conditioned reflexes has, 
continuously growing and expanding during the ty-five years 
of its existence. The present lecture should sh the reader the 
exceptional difficulties we still meet with. ee difficulties, 
though some of them now seem trivial, res ed us throughout ; 
even in‘our comparatively early mat we still find scope for 
revision, and for the correction of di nt, sometimes important, 


rse, been 


errors. I shall discuss one of which was discovered and 
corrected in repeating some ol iments during the preparation 
of these lectures, and anoth ich is still beng investigated. 


In the fourth lectur C% different modes of re-establishment 
of extinguished Go reflexes were described. In the first, 
spontaneous. recovery acourred after a longer or shorter interval 
of rest ; such rec Sy was slow in developing, but stable. In the 
second, quick eOr was brought about with the help of reinforce- 


T 
> 
ao 


Ae 
wl 


390 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


ment by the underlying unconditioned reflex. In the third, quick 
recovery was effected through the introduction of some extraneous 
reflex. The recoveries in the last two cases were described as 
fundamentally differing from one another, since the former was not 
only rapid, but also stable, whereas the latter, though equally 
quick, was only temporary—vanishing with the disappearance of 
the extraneous reflex and its after-effect, when the inhibition would 
again acquire its full intensity and maintain itself until the final 
recovery occurred spontaneously, just as if no extraneous stimulus 
had ever intervened. The term “ dis-inhibition” was therefore 
applied only to the latter case. The difficulty of interpreting the 
mechanism of this difference was immediately recognized. Recently 
during experiments upon some new aspects of the relation between 
the conditioned and the unconditioned stimulus these old observa- 
tions were repeated, and found to be inaccurate [experiments of 
Dr. Podkopaev]. 

The recovery of an extinguished conditioned reflex is found in 
both cases to be temporary—in the case of the special reinforcing 
agent as well as under the influence of an extraneous reflex. In 
both cases the extinguished conditioned stimulus recovers its positive 
effect only for a time, then the positive effect again disappears, 
recovery occurring spontaneously. When the extinguished con- 
ditioned: reflex is alimentary while the extraneous qne is a defence 
reflex based.on acid, the extent and duration re disinhibition 
can be seen with great ease and regularity t dentical which- 
ever method of restoration is employed. experiments were 
conducted on two dogs, and they entirely boratea one another. 
I shall describe the experiments on o the dogs in detail. On 
extinguishing the conditioned ali reflex to a metronome it 
was found that the reflex remaine zero for 20 minutes counting 
from the last non-reinforced gestion of the conditioned stimulus. 
Then spontaneously the reflex bégan slowly to recover, reaching at 
the thirtieth minute 40% s original value. After a fresh extinc- 
tion to the first zer onditioned stimulus was immediately 
reinforced, but it ain found twenty minutes later to give a 


zero effect. W, (however, in another experiment it was tested 
10 minutes aft similar reinforcement a positive effect was ex- 
hibited. Ex6ejly similar results were obtained when acid instead 
of food w@y‘administered at the first zero, the reflex being again 
gee previously mentioned intervals of time. The following 


NEW INTERPRETATIONS 391 


` are the actual figures of some of the experiments: The conditioned 


stimulus on its first application on a particular day gave 6 drops in 
twenty seconds; the stimulus was reinforced immediately after 
complete extinction ; tested after 10 minutes it gave 3 drops in 
twenty seconds. On the following day the experiment was repeated 
under precisely similar conditions. The stimulus gave, to start with, 
7 drops during 20 seconds, and tested twenty minutes after rein- 
forcement at the first zero of extinction gave no trace of any secretory 
effect. The experiments were now performed with administration 
of acid after the extinction of the alimentary conditioned reflex to its 
first zero. In the first experiment the reflex measured at the start 
5 drops in twenty seconds. Tested 10 minutes after administration 
of acid following the first zero it gave 2 drops. On the following day 
the conditioned stimulus again gave 5 drops at first, but tested twenty 
minutes after administration of acid following the first zero it re- 
mained without any secretory effect. The maximum of the dis- 
inhibiting effect in both cases was reached, of course, much earlier 


‘than ten minutes from the administration of food or acid following 


the first zero. The error in our older experiments was due to an 
obvious fallacy.. The comparison of the rate of recovery in the two 
cases had been made between the effect of the special reinforcing 
agent and the effect of the much weaker extraneous reflexes evoked 
by different auditory, visual, tactile and other stimuli which generally 
have. only a short after-effect, while the comparison sh 
been made with the dis-inhibiting effect of other extrane g 
e.g. chemical ones, which have as long an S oop has food. 


The error was facilitated by the fallacious co ion that the 
unconditioned stimulus underlying the conditidgs one must stand 
in some special relation to the latter, co special powers of 
re-establishment after extinction. The res these recent experi- 
ments inclines us more and more to Relies that the inhibitory 
process arises in the nerve cells themse and not in the connecting 
path between those cells excited @ythe conditioned stimulus and 
those excited by the special nditioned stimulus employed. 
Otherwise it is difficult to re the fact of the identical restorative 
action of the acid and f 

The second probablq eror I wish to describe is still undergoing. 
investigation, but | it myself to discuss it now, on the one hand 
on account of the éme importance of the point involved, and on 
ause it illustrates once more the exceptional 


392 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


difficulties presented in this research to the establishment of exact 
facts. It will be remembered that in the second lecture we discussed 
the essentials necessary for the establishment of conditioned 
reflexes. After establishing that the action of the originally neutral 
but potentially conditioned stimulus must overlap that of the un- 
conditioned stimulus, we insisted also that the former must precede, 
by however short a time, the commencement of the latter. When 
the unconditioned stimulus was applied 5-10 seconds before the 
neutral stimulus it was found impossible to develop a conditioned 
reflex even by 300-400 repetitions, whereas by the usual method 
any conditioned reflex can be established in the average dog by so 
few as 3-20 repetitions. It was natural to suppose that the strong 
unconditioned stimulus acting on some part of the cortex evoked 
in virtue of external inhibition such a profound inhibitory state in 
the rest of the cortex that all stimuli reaching these parts became 
ineffective. Such a state may be compared with that of a man 
preoccupied with some definite activity, who remains “deaf” 
and “blind” to anything occurring round about him—a familiar 
psychical phenomenon which is accepted from a physiological point 
of view as undoubtedly corresponding with an objective reality. 
The plausibility of the above reasoning made us confident of its 
validity until recently, when our point of view changed. The 
question was raised as to the mechanism by means of which an early 
reinforcement of the conditioned stimulus, t.e. Spiering of its 
isolated action, obstructs the development Əðhibition in the 
cortical cells acted upon by the conditione ulus. In investi- 
gating this problem with a modification of the’experiments we came 
unexpectedly on a new fact, viz. that i unconditioned stimulus 
is administered before the pre-estapts conditioned stimulus the 

i . Our attention naturally 


conditioned reflex becomes inhi 
became directed to the exact mparable case where, instead of 
a pre-established conditioned shulus, we deal with a neutral agent 
which is intended for t evelopment of a conditioned reflex. 
The effect of the uncong d stimulus on both is precisely the same, 
since it exhibits in e case’ the properties of an external inhibitor. 
In contrast wi e observations an introduction of a small 
modification Gs time relations between the unconditioned 
stimulus an@esither of the other two causes the hitherto neutral 
agent to re conditioned properties and the conditioned stimulus 
to be et€esthened in its pre-established ones. This contrast reminds 


a eT 


NEW INTERPRETATIONS _ 393 


us of another set of facts—the relation between the development of 
a secondary conditioned reflex and the development of conditioned 
inhibition, the case in which under identical external conditions, but 
with a small change in the time relations between the two stimuli, 
there develops in the one case a process of excitation, in the other - 
case a process of inhibition. All these observations concerning the 
action of the unconditioned stimulus point to the view (which 
involves a considerable modification of our original conception), that 
the mechanism of development of a conditioned reflex and the 
mechanism of external inhibition are somehow similar, and that the 
process of external inhibition bears some relation to the development 
of new connections between different cortical elements. If the 
analogy between external inhibition and the development of con- 
ditioned reflexes holds good, it should be expected that in the case 
where the unconditioned stimulus slightly precedes the Action of 
the neutral agent there would in the very beginning be an opportunity 
for formation of a link between their respective cortical points, 
leading to the formation of an unstable conditioned reflex. This 
reflex would, however, rapidly undergo inhibition on repetition of 
the superimposed stimulation. The first preliminary experiments 
have fully confirmed our supposition. We had already noticed that 
administration of the unconditioned stimulus immediately preceding 
the pre-established conditioned one led only gradually to a definite 
diminution of the reflex, a diminution which was the rapid 
and the more profound the smaller the intensity of th ditioned 
stimulus. Remembering this, we applied the simil mbination 
of the unconditioned stimulus with the hithert tral stimulus, 
but repeated this combination only a very fe es, to avoid the 


development of the inhibitory process. I cases the expected 
result was obtained. The hitherto on ulus when now tested 


alone revealed undoubted conditione operties [experiments of 
Mlle. Pavlova and Drs. Kreps, Podko , Prorokov and Koupalov]. 
Considering now after these pr ary experiments the results 
obtained in the much -earlie riments by Dr. Krestovnikov 
(p. 27), we found that oN stimuli were tested by him for a 
conditioned effect only very large number of repetitions of 
the unconditioned WEO slightly preceding the neutral agent ; 


moreover, even Wn these circumstances the stronger neutral 
stimuli when tested&\Sngly had at the first test some secretory effect. 
This secretory t, however, was explained as a casual and not 


394 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


a true conditioned effect—a brilliant illustration of the danger of 
too hasty generalizations. We imagined that if it were a true 
conditioned reflex it would increase in intensity on repetition of the 
combination, and not diminish and finally vanish, as happens in 
these experiments. It is possible also that we were misled by the 


absence of a definite conditioned motor reaction. 


As before remarked, the problem here dealt with is being worked 
out in all its implications, under the strictest control and with the 
help of the knowledge which has been gained in the last few years. 
If the preliminary experiments described above should be fully 
upheld, an important fact in the physiology of the cortex will be 
disclosed—namely, that new connections can be established in the 
cortex, not only in the areas of optimal excitability, but also in those 
areas which are in one or another phase of inhibition. 

In the present lecture it has been my aim not so much to dwell 
on the details of the different experiments as to lay the strongest 
emphasis upon the fundamental peculiarities of the method of 
conditioned reflexes. I believe that the wealth of facts discussed 
in all the preceding lectures is in itself a sufficient indication that 
the whole problem is worthy of an intense scientific research, which 
should result in accumulation of a great number of valuable data. 
I have not, therefore, hesitated to expose in the present lecture 
some of the weaknesses in our own scientific venture. Full realization 
of the difficulties seems to me preferable to digregarding them. 
Moreover, it has been my desire to forewarn f orkers in this 
field of the extraordinary complexity and th culties which they 
are bound to encounter. 

On the whole, looking back upon im Quw field of physiological 
research I find it full of fascinatio cially since it satisfies two 
of the fundamental cravings human intellect—striving to. . 
realize. ever new and new rth to protest against the pretension 
of finality in truth we have aleady gained. In this domain there 
will for long remain an Conse breadth of uncharted ocean com- 
pared with the small oe of the known. 


A 


LECTURE XXIII 


The experimental results obtained with animals in their application to man. 


In applying to man the results of investigation of the functions of 
the heart, digestive tract and other organs in the higher animals, 
allied as these organs are to the human in structure, great reserve 
must be exercised and the validity of comparisons must be verified 
at, every step. Obviously even greater caution must be used in 
attempting similarly to app:y our recently acquired knowledge 
concerning the higher nervous activity in the dog—the more so, 
since the incomparably greater development of the cerebral cortex 
in man is pre-eminently that factor which has raised man to his 
dominant position in the animal world. It would be the height of 
presumption to regard these first steps in elucidating the physiology 
of the cortex as solving the intricate problems of the higher psychic 
activities in man, when in fact at the present stage of our work no 
detailed application of its results to man is yet permissible. 

Nevertheless, inasmuch as the higher nervous activity exhibited 
by the cortex rests, undoubtedly, on the same foundationgy man’ 
as in the higher animals, some very general and a ow evences 
can even now be drawn from the latter to the former. e future 
it may confidently be expected that a full and detid knowledge 
of at least the elementary facts of this activity a e obtained as 
regards both normal and pathological states.. ilarities between 
the manifestations of this activity in man! animal being more 
obvious under normal conditions, I shalkdismiss these briefly, dis- 
cussing in more detail certain pathologiggl cases. ' 

It is obvious that the different s of habits based on training, 
education and discipline of any re nothing but a long chain of 
conditioned reflexes. We all how associations, once established 
and acquired between d stimuli and our responses, are per- 
sistently and, so to spéak) automatically reproduced, sometimes 
even although we fight.against them. For instance, in the case of 
games and various, of skill, it is as difficult to abolish all sorts 
of superfluous ents as to acquire the necessary movements ; 


NS 395 
S 
S 


Ag 
x 


396 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


and it is equally difficult to overcome established negative reflexes, 
t.e. inhibitions. Again, experience has taught us that a difficult task 
should be approached by gradual stages. We know also how different 
extra stimuli inhibit and discoordinate a well-established routine 
of activity, and how a change in a pre-established order dislocates 
and renders difficult our movements, activities and the whole routine 
of life. Again, we know how weak and monotonous stimuli render 
us languid and drowsy, and very often lead to sleep. We are also 
well acquainted with different cases of partial alertness in the case 
of normal sleep, for example a sleeping mother next to her sick 
child. . All these phenomena are analogous to those constantly met 
with in our animals as described in the preceding lectures, and there 
is no point in further discussing them in the present lecture. The 
discussion of pathological cases, however, will prove instructive. 
Contemporary medicine distinguishes ‘‘ nervous ” and “‘ psychic ” 
disturbances—neuroses and psychoses, but this distinction is, of 
course, only arbitrary. No real line of demarcation can be drawn 
between these two groups: it is impossible to imagine a deviation 
of higher activities from normal without a functional or structural 
disturbance of the cortex. The distinction between “nervous ” and 
“ psychic ” affections is a distinction made on grounds of greater 
or smaller complexity and subtlety in the disturbance of the nervous 
activity. Our experiments definitely show the validity of such a 
distinction. So long as we deal with animals in ich the patho- 
logical disturbance results from functional inger ces including 
violent changes in the conditions of life (such r dogs experienced 
in the great flood in Petrograd), or on ac of small operations 
on the cortex, we can grasp the mec m of these disturbances 
more or less satisfactorily and expre terms of neuro-physiology. 
Such disturbances would come un classification of “‘ neuroses\”’ 
But if the disturbances are the%esults of extirpation or destruction 
by scar of large parts of the ex we encounter great difficulty in 
picturing the mechanism Gre resulting disturbance in the nervous 
activity, and we dep ore largely upon various suppositions 
which still remain A erified and controlled. Such disturbances 
would be classi “psychoses.” Obviously this difference in 
our attitude iXdjpe entirely to the much greater complexity of 
the disturhayge in the latter cases, and to the inadequacy of present- 
day phate analysis. We shall not discuss any conjectured 
subjek phere of our animals, but shall consider both cases 


+ 


APPLICATIONS TO MAN ; 397 


simply as disturbances in the normal cortical activity—smaller and 
more elementary in the former and more extensive and more. com- 
plicated in the latter cases. 

In the dog two conditions were found to produce pathological 
disturbances by functional interference, namely, an unusually acute 
clashing of the excitatory and inhibitory processes, and the influence 
of strong and extraordinary stimuli. In man precisely similar 
conditions constitute the usual causes of nervous and psychic dis- 
turbances. Different conditions productive of extreme excitation, 
such as intense grief or bitter insults, often lead, when the natural 
reactions are inhibited by the necessary restraint, to profound and 
prolonged loss of balance in nervous and psychic activity. So, too, 
neuroses and psychoses may develop as a result of different powerful 
stimuli, e.g. extreme danger to oneself or to near friends, or even 
the spectacle of some frightful event not affecting one directly. At 
the samé time we know that the same influence may produce a 
profound disturbance in some individuals and show no trace of effect 
on others, according to the power of resistance of the nervous system 
in each case. Exactly the same difference is observed also in dogs, 
which show a great variation in regard to the production of patholo- 
gical disturbances. We had dogs in which one of the most efficacious 
methods of evoking nervous disturbances, namely, a direct transition 
from an inhibitory to an excitatory rate of stimulation of the same 
place of the skin, failed to produce the slightest effect a a great 
number of repetitions on many days. In others distur otcurred. 
eventually after many repetitions, while in some i s produced 
by a single juxtaposition of the stimuli. In th e manner the 
great flood, which, as was mentioned previous\\4ed to a profound 
disturbance, obviously analogous to tr c neurosis in man, 
produced this effect only in some ofthe dogs, namely, those of 
an extremely inhibitable type. | 

It has been seen that the ON e method may lead to 


different forms of disturbance, ding on the type of nervous 
system of the animal. In ith the more resistant nervous 


system it leads to a predo ce of excitation ; in dogs with the 
less resistant nervous , to a predominance of inhibition. So 
far as can be judged o basis of casual observation I believe that 


these two ame eZ the pathological disturbance of the cortical 
activity in anim re comparable to the two forms of neurosis in 
man—in HAN eMreudian terminology neurasthenia and hysteria—- 


N 
SÀ 
ao 


We 


O 
4? 


398 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


the first with exaggeration of the excitatory and weakness of the 
inhibitory process, the second with a predominance of the inhibitory 
and weakness. of the excitatory process. There are grounds for 
considering the first type as having a more resistant nervous system 
which (at least in some cases) is able to perform a large amount of 
coordinated activity, while the weaker type of nervous system is 
quite incapable of adaptation to the ordinary conditions of life. 
The first type also goes through periods of weakness, and this can 
easily be understood, since for the most part such individuals are 
continuously excited, active, profligate of nervous activity—and 
the nervous exhaustion must, of course, be made good. This type 
may be regarded as having a longer period in the sequence of activity 
and rest of the nervous system as compared with the normally 
balanced brain, the periods of excitation and inhibition being more 
accentuated. Though the second type may exhibit violent attacks 
of excitation this does notimply greater vigour of their nervous system : , 
the excitation is generally without aim and without result—so to 
speak, crudely mechanical. In the observations made on dogs we 
obtained, I believe, some indication as.to the origin and character 
of this excitation. We had one dog [experiments of Dr. Frolov] of 
a very inhibitable type, or, as it would be more commonly described, 
a very cowardly and submissive animal. This animal served for 
experiments upon gastric secretion, and in the courge of the experi- 
ments it had to remain in the stand for many in succession. 
It never went to sleep while in the stand: t remaining very 
quiet it preserved a fully alert posture, I oving slightly and 
sometimes carefully shifting its legs. This\state of the animal was 
not semi-cataleptic, since it invariab onded to the call of its 
name. When it was taken from t id and freed from the loops 
and leash, this dog invariably cgentev€d into astonishing fits of ex- 
citation, howling, throwing on vigorously about, sometimes 
upsetting the stand and falling‘wi the table. This excitation (which 
by the way was not cau desire for micturition or defaecation) 
could not be OPPN O) way, whether by shouting, petting or 
by striking the a , which became absolutely unrecognizable. 


A few minutes cise in the yard restored it to its normal state, 
` the animal leadtw€ the way of itself into the experimental room, 
jumping u the stand and again standing motionless. The same 


behavio Ly s sometimes observed in other dogs, but never in so 
RS tèd a form. These wild attacks of excitation may possibly 


3 


APPLICATIONS TO MAN 399 


be regarded as a brief outburst of positive induction following a 
prolonged and intense inhibition. A similar explanation may also 
be suggested for the fits of excitation in neurosis of the second type 
in which the inhibitory tendency prevails. The possible partici- 
pation of another cause also is suggested by experiments [by Dr. 
Podkopaev] on another dog. This dog was a quiet animal with a 
well-balanced nervous system, not very alert, which did not jump 
into the stand of itself, but when placed in the stand stood quietly 
and never slept. The positive and negative conditioned reflexes 
were very constant and precise. The dog had several conditioned 


- reflexes established to stimulation of places along one side of the 


` now to appear on the successive stimulation of other inhibit 


FRO) 


body, a stimulus on a definite place on the hind leg being a positive 
alimentary stimulus and all the rest negative. All these reflexes 
had developed rapidly and were very precise. During the application 
of the tactile stimuli the animal had always remained quiet, not 
making any local or general movements ; even the positive motor 
alimentary reaction was very weak, and the dog was slow in taking 
the food. The development of the negative reflexes had been begun 
at the front paw—the most remote from the positive place. Suddenly 
and quite unexpectedly -the stimulation of the front paw began to 
be accompanied by a motor reaction in the form of rapid twitching 
of the stimulated extremity. Sometimes the twitching assumed the 
rhythm of the tactile stimulus. Such local motor reactions began 


in closer and closer proximity to the place of positive ifitance, 
the reaction at the same time becoming more vigorous extensive 
and involving all extremities. The head and n 
mained motionless, not participating in the activi the extremities. 
Salivary secretion was of course absent. however, the place 
on the thigh nearest to the positive one wa\ pow also made positive 
the motor reaction to the simula of this place vanished 
entirely. The same happened also to motor reaction for other 
places when they were transforme im negative into positive ones 
—with the exception only of the pedo remote places which, though 


acquiring the positive secret ect, continued to evoke the local 
motor reaction in a muc kened form. The fact that this phe- 
nomenon made its app ce not during the establishment, but 


only after the Se enc of the differentiation—this and 
its localized form n it probable that the disturbance was of spinal 
origin, occurri account of a partial functional disconnection of 


Ñ 
X 
so 


AČ 
V 


400 R CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


the cortical cutaneous analyser from the lower centres. A similar 
explanation may be advanced for analogous cases in man. 

We have a number of further observations which recall some 
more or less well-known forms of nervous disturbance in man. I 
shall remind you of the dog [experiments of Dr. Rickman (p. 302)] 
which was brought into a state in which it could not withstand any, 
strong conditioned stimuli—immediately entering into an inhibitory 
state so that a conditioned activity could be elicited only by the use 
of very weak stimuli. It is permissible to draw a parallel, of course 
only as regards the mechanism, between the case of this dog and the 
cases of many years of sleep in human patients—for example, of a 
young girl described by Pierre Janet and of an adult man as observed 
in one of the Petrograd hospitals for nervous disorders. The patients 
in both cases were lying in a continuous sleep, entirely motionless, 
did not speak a word and had to be fed artificially and kept clean. 
Only during the stillness of the night, when the daily bustle of life 
with its strong and varied stimuli quieted down, had the patients 
a chance of exhibiting some activity. The patient of Pierre Janet 
was observed to eat and even write during the night. It was reported 
of the Petrograd case that sometimes during the night he got out of 
bed. When this patient, at the age of 60, after nearly twenty years 
of continuous sleep, began to improve and could speak, he recounted 
that he often heard and saw everything occurring ground him, but 
had no strength either to move or to‘speak AVA these cases 
obviously presented an extreme weakening of | ervous system— 
especially of the cortex—which quickly le er the influence of 
any strong stimuli to a development of co e inhibition, i.e. sleep. 

In the same dog we observed also a symptom of pathological 

SN 


nervous activity which has ofte described, in the neuro- 
pathological literature, for prs g had a narrowly localized 
chronic functional lesion of th tical part of the acoustic analyser, 
any stimulation of the dera pie of the analyser by an appropriate 
agent leading to inhibiti the entire cortex. We are aware of 
many states of the system in man in which a perfectly 
normal activity cas maintained only so long as the man is not 
affected by ange Aaetimes almost a negligible, component—even 


the remotest hi f those strong stimuli which originally evoked 


the nervo turbance 
Finall want to remind you of the case, described in the nine- 
teen cture, of periodical visual illusion in one of our dogs (p. 327). 


` spontaneously reappea 


APPLICATIONS TO MAN | 401 


This was probably due to distortion of the effect upon the cortex 
of the external visual stimuli by locàl, internal stimuli originating 
in. the extending scar. Many similar cases of illusions in man are 
probably due to the interference of similar cortical stimuli of internal 
local origin. 

Though our research abounds in cases of pathological disturbances 
which are comparable to those observed in man, I do not feel either 
safe or justified in proceeding in my comparison beyond the above 
observations, and these should not be taken as in any sense explaining 
the incaleulably complex symptoms observed in man, but only as 
showing that a comparison of a general nature can even now be . 
made. Similar comparisons between experimental animals and man 
can be made also in respect to therapeutic measures—general and 


pharmacological. It has been stated already that rest and inter- 


ruption of experiments in many cases helped in the restoration of 
normal conditions. Several interesting details must, however, be 
described. One of our dogs was brought into an extremely excitable 
state by a clash of the inhibitory with the excitatory process 
[experiments of Dr. Petrova]. All forms of inhibition were disturbed, 
all negative conditioned stimuli acquiring positive properties. 
On application of any of the conditioned stimuli—those formerly 
positive as well as those formerly negative—the animal entered into 
a state of pronounced excitation which, as generally happens, was 
accompanied by severe hyperpnoea. The disuse of ne 
tioned reflexes did not improve the condition of the anita yper- 
pnoea continued and the positive reflexes remaine Sxessive. It 
was then resolved to use only those of the aN timuli which 
were physiologically weak, i.e. the visual and tX Ge, and to discard 
the auditory, which as a rule in our expe k Sii strong. The 
beneficial result of this treatment TO diate. The animal 
became quiet, hyperpnoea RRETA and the magnitude of the 
salivary effect returned to normal. Ar some time it became pos- 
sible gradually to introduce a the stronger positive stimuli 
without upsetting the result treatment. Furthermore, after 
several days a pre-establis erentiation of the tactile stimuli 
according to place (on easiest forms of internal inhibition) 

Carn full vigour, and this without any signs 
of excitation on theq@art of the animal. This is an instructive case, 
showing how a dm WiTution in the strength of stimuli affecting the 
hemispheres d a diminution of the excessive excitability of the 


A.P. S 20 
3 
O 


AO 
V 


& 
© 


402 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


cortical elements. Of course, in the treatment of neurotic conditions 
in the human subject similar therapeutic measures are very widely 
adopted. 

I shall describe also another case which seems to me very in- 
structive from the point of view of therapy. In this instance we are 
concerned with a dog which was entirely out of the ordinary run and 
which had an obviously abnormal reaction to cutaneous stimuli, a 
reaction associated with a strong excitation of the cortex [experiments 
of Dr. Prorokov (p. 183)]. On application of the ugual tactile stimulus 
to the skin of the thigh the animal immediately began to wriggle 
its hind quarters, stamp its hind legs, throw up its head in a peculiar 
manner and make peculiar little noises, sometimes yawning. On 
administration of food and while it was being eaten the reaction 
disappeared. Contrary to our expectation the presence of this 
reaction did not in any way interfere with the development of a 
conditioned reflex to the tactile stimulus, a phenomenon which usually 
occurs in the presence of some extraneous motor reactions in animals, 
e.g. retraction of the extremities or local twitching of the platysma 
muscle. In the case under discussion, however, a conditioned reflex 
developed very quickly, and, what was quite exceptional, this tactile 
cutaneous salivary conditioned reflex was even stronger in intensity 
than the reflexes to the most powerful auditory stimuli. Similarly, 
the motor alimentary reaction—which usually replace the peculiar 
special reaction somewhere towards the middle of Ais lated action 
of the cutaneous conditioned stimulus—was ¢ erably stronger 
than the motor reaction observed with any ot ditioned stimulus. 
Furthermore, the usual period of “ O ’ excitation observed 
as an after-effect following roinforo a ith food was the most 
intense and the most prolonged in e of the tactile cutaneous 
stimulus. In the experiments in w the tactilė stimulus was used 
the dog showed signs of a gener y citation : at the slightest sound 
from the experimenter’s ro the animal immediately responded 
by the peculiar motor nG, Obviously the tactile cutaneous 
stimulation in this \4 ought about a vigorous and widely 
irradiated excitation te cortex. ‘The nature of this excitation 
remained, ha SD, own. It did not seem to be associated 
with any sexual réfiexes since it was not accompanied by erection 
of the penis seemed to be something like the common reaction 
to IKA At any rate it was a sufficiently interesting nervous 

n 


phen 2 to study, and we determined to overcome it. For 


N 


oh 


NN 


APPLICATIONS TO MAN 403 


this purpose we began to develop internal inhibition in the form of 
differentiation of tactile stimuli according to their place of applica- 
tion. On account of initial generalization the application of the 
tactile stimulus to the shoulder gave some conditioned secretion, 
and this also was accompanied by the special motor reaction. On 
repetition of the stimulus without reinforcement the motor and the 
salivary components of the conditioned reflex disappeared (8 repeti- 
tions), and this was followed by the disappearance of the special 
motor reaction (40 repetitions). The stimulation of the place on 
the thigh continued, however, to evoke the special motor, and the 
alimentary motor, reaction in succession. A differentiation was now 


developed to stimulation of a place on the side of the animal nearer 


to the thigh. The different stages repeated themselves in the same 
way as for stimulation on the shoulder, but again the special reaction 
to stimulation of the thigh did not diminish. Finally a differentiation 
was developed to a tactile stimulation on the hind paw, and now the 
special motor reaction in response to the stimulation on the thigh 
first began to weaken, and then disappeared altogether. At the same 
time the strength of the salivary reflex to the tactile stimulus took 
up its usual position in the series of conditioned reflexes as regards 
the relative strengths of the stimuli producing them, falling from 
its predominant place to a position below the conditioned reflexes 
to auditory stimuli. 

In this manner we see that the development Gevoera 
inhibitory areas in the cortical part of the cutan analyser 
abolished the special cutaneous reflex, at the same preserving, 
and even rendering normal, the alimentary cu s conditioned 
reflex. x 

This example and other observation, est that a gradual 
development of internal inhibition in the ex should be used for 
re-establishment of the balance of no conditions in cases of an 
unbalanced nervous system. The Soa is being used at present 
on the dog, described in the eigh lecture, which had a narrowly 
localized functional injury acoustic analyser. Since this 
region was specially related DN beating of a metronome we resolved 
to develop a differenti iMDition -of other auditory stimuli related 
to normal areas of uih analyser. We hope that irradiation 
of the inhibition» he defective metronome-pcint will have a 


beneficial A this point to its normal excitability and 


normal activa o not know whether similar therapeutic measures 


AG 
wy 


2 
Y 


404 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


(not counting of course general sedatives such as hot baths) are 
applied in human neurotherapy. 

We shall now attempt a discussion of borderline states of the 
nervous system in our dogs, states merging from a normal into a 
pathological character which, on the analogy of corresponding human 
states, should in some instances be described as psycho-pathological. 
These are different hypnotic phases, such as the transition phases 
between the alert state and sleep, and the passive defence reflex.. 
We have seen in the sixteenth lecture that the transition of animals 
from the alert state into sleep is based upon the development in the 
brain of an inhibitory process which, under the influence of definite 
stimuli, is initiated in the cortex and reaches different stages of 
intensity and extensity during the different phases of the developing 
sleep. Undoubtedly, even at present, the observations made upon 
animals allow in part of a physiological interpretation of the funda- 
mental aspects of hypnotism in the human subject. 

We shall consider first the conditions under which hypnotic states 
develop. In animals, as we already know, they appear, as the result 
of monotonous stimuli of a small and medium intensity repeated for 
a long time (the most common case in our experiments), more or 
less gradually, while in the case of stimuli of a considerably greater 
intensity they appear quickly—a form of animal hypnotism which 
has been known for a very long time. The stimuli di a, initiating 
these states, both weak and strong, can also sage ed-by any 
other stimuli which have conditioned propertiG} respect to the 
first. In this connection the special mode of fgmp&tion of conditioned 
reflexes described in the sixth lecture will €é)femembered where the 
neutral stimulus repeated several time conjunction with the 
pre-established inhibitory stimulug að Kired inhibitory properties 
of its own [experiments by Dr. Dofth (p. 106)]. The method of 
inducing hypnosis in man inv conditions entirely analogous 
to those which produced PAA our ne The classical method con- 
sisted in the pertamane tt alled “ passes ”—weak, monotonously | 


repeated tactile and muli, just as in our experiments upon 
animals. At presen more usual method consists in the repetition 
of some form of(w¢rds, describing sleep, articulated in a flat and 
monotonous toné*ef voice. Such words are, of course, conditioned 
stimuli whié ve become associated with the state of sleep. In 
this man @eny stimulus which has coincided several times with 
the Kx ment of sleep can now by itself initiate sleep or a 

N ; 


A 


APPLICATIONS TO MAN 405 


hypnotic state. The mechanism is analogous to the inhibitory 
chain reflexes, which are. similar to the positive conditioned 
chain reflexes, t.e. reflexes of different orders which have been 
described in the third lecture [experiments of Dr. Volborth]. Finally, 
hypnosis in the case of hysteria (in the sense of Charcot) can be 
obtained by the application of strong and unexpected stimuli, as 
in the old method of initiating hypnosis in animals. It is obvious 
that in this respect physiologically weak stimuli may act in the same 
manner if, on account of a coincidence in time, they have acquired 
signalling properties in respect to the strong ones. Most of the 
procedures producing hypnosis become more and more effective the 
more frequently they are repeated. 

One of the first expressions of hypnosis in man is the loss of 
so-called voluntary movements and the development of a cataleptic 
state, i.e. maintenance by different parts of the body of the position 
given to them by external forces. This may best be regarded as an 
isolated inhibition of the motor analyser which has not descended 
to the sub-cortical motor centres. Other areas of the cortex may 
continue to function quite normally. A man in a state of hypnosis 
may understand what we tell him, may realize what kind of unnatural 
posture we have given him and may attempt to change it, but is 
incapable of doing so. The outward signs of the hypnotic state are 
similar in men and animals. It has already been describe 
sixteenth lecture how some ‘animals retain their ale 


into sub-cortical regions. Other dogs continue act to all the 
i conditioned stimuli by the secretory compone the reflex only, 
exhibiting-no motor reaction and not oo food—obviously 
a case of an isolated inhibition of the ko analyser. Finally, in 
animals hypnotized by the old meta could often be observed 
that the body and extremities remain otionless while the animal 
yet continued to follow everythi th its eyes, and even accepted 
the food. This is obviously a a still more localized inhibition 
within the motor ang JENY e local “tonic” (i.e. spinal flexor 
and extensor) reflexes, KQ are observed in man and animals in 
some cases, become eystandable only if we postulate complete 
inhibition of the m analyser of the cortex. 
When we As) deal with more complicated forms of the 
hypnotic states viously becomes, for several reasons, difficult, or 
YV 
S 
© 
+ 
+ 
wv 
PN 


Ka 
N 


406 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


even impossible, to draw a parallel between man and animals. As 
already stated, we know only a few of the phases of the hypnotic 
state, especially as regards their relative intensity, and we have no’ 
definite idea as to the sequence of their development. We are not 
familiar with the manner in which these phases manifest themselves 
under natural conditions of life in animals, since the transition 
phases were observed not in the natural individual and social sphere 
of life, but only in the restricted sphere of a laboratory environment. 
In man, however, we become familiar with these phenomena under 
more normal conditions of life and we can evoke and investigate 
them with the help of the most valuable signalling medium— 
speech. Of course, on account of the extraordinary complexity of 
the behaviour of man as compared with the higher animals, the 
latter may not exhibit some of the phases of the hypnotic state seen 
in man at all. It is, therefore, only those crude and elementary 
results obtained in the animal which can be used for an attempt at 
a physiological interpretation of the different hypnotic phases in 
man. Let us consider the automatism of the hypnotized subject 
who repeats in a stereotyped fashion the movements of the hypnotist, 
being able to perform even difficult movements such as balancing 
along a difficult path. Obviously we deal with a certain degree of 
inhibition of some parts of the cortex—a state in which the more 
complicated forms of normal activity are excluded and replaced by 
responsiveness to immediate stimuli. This i allows 


of or even favours the establishment and reinfore t of the physio- 
logical connections between certain stimuli certain activities, 
e.g. movements. In this manner, in hypngskNall activities based on 


merged reflex which in all of us in c d forms and develops the 
complicated individual and socialge r.. Similarly, some change 
in the environment, which in on days had repeatedly evoked 
certain movements affecting,ceftain analysers, in hypnosis calls 
forth without fail and in eotyped manner the old response. It 
is a common occurrenge being predominantly preoccupied with 
some one activity, can simultaneously perform some other 
activity which \ been practised, t.e. those parts of the cortex 
involved in thisNefder response, although in a state of partial 
inhibition thax negative induction, still continue to function in 
a normal KON er. That this interpretation is somewhere near the 
RSN me more and more convinced, through observing the 


N 


“imitation” are accentuated and we RA revealed the long-sub- 
GA 


A 


+ 


> 


APPLICATIONS TO MAN 407 


diminution in the reactivity of my own brain through my advancing 
age (my diminished memory of recent events). Moreover, with time 
I progressively. lose the faculty, when busy with one activity, of 
performing correctly another also. Apparently the concentrated 
excitation of some definite point induces, on account of diminished 
excitability of the cortex, such a strong inhibition of the rest of the 
cortex that even the conditioned stimuli of the old firmly established 
reflexes are now below the threshold for excitation. The above 
described phase of hypnosis in the human subject may perhaps be 
compared with what I have termed the narcotic phase of transition 
in dogs, when strong and old reflexes persist while the more recent 
ones disappear. 

Among the various aspects of the hypnotic state in man attention 
may be drawn to “ suggestion ” so-called and its physiological 
interpretation. Obviously for man speech provides conditioned 
stimuli which are just as real as any other stimuli. At the same time 
speech provides stimuli which exceed in richness and many-sidedness 
any of the others, allowing comparison neither. qualitatively nor 
quantitatively with any conditioned stimuli which are possible in 
animals. Speech, on account of the whole preceding life of the adult, 
is connected up with all the internal and external stimuli which can 
reach the cortex, signalling all of them and replacing all of them, 
and therefore it can call forth all those reactions of the organism 
which are normally determined by the actual stimuli selves. 
We can, therefore, regard “ suggestion ” as the most gif\jNe Torm of 
a typical conditioned reflex in man. The command e hypnotist, 
in correspondence with the general law, concentzge’ the excitation 
in the cortex of the subject (which is in a con of partial inhibi- 
tion) in some definite narrow region, at e time intensifying 
(by negative induction) the inhibition ate) rest of the cortex and 
so abolishing all competing effects of Syntemporary stimuli and of. 
traces left by previously received one This accounts for the large 
and practically insurmountable j Bence of suggestion as a stimulus 
during hypnosis as well as gD at it. The command retains 
its effect after the terminà of hypnosis, remaining independent 
of other stimuli, bein i{pprmeable to them, since at the time of 
primary introduction Kuo stimulus into the cortex it was prevented 
from Se aati ga gi ea with the rest of the cortex. The 
great number of ey uli which speech can replace explains the fact 
that we RN Qygest to a hypnotized subject so many different 


» 
> 
aS 


AČ 


ge 
O 


d 


important part in normal men too, who oft 


408 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


activities, and influence and direct the activities of his brain. 
It could be questioned why does suggestion carry in itself such a 
commanding influence as compared with dreams, which are usually 
forgotten and only have a very small vital significance ? But dreams 
are due to traces, generally of very old stimuli, while suggestion is 
a powerful and immediate stimulus. Moreover, hypnosis depends 
upon a smaller intensity of inhibition than sleep. Suggestion, 
therefore, is doubly effective. Still further, suggestion as a stimulus 
is brief, isolated and complete, and. therefore vigorous, while dreams 
are generally linked up into chains of various, sometimes inconsistent 
or antagonistic, traces of stimuli. The fact that it is possible to sug- 
gest to a hypnotized subject almost anything, however little it may 
correspond to the physical reality, and to evoke a reaction in opposi- 
tion to the actual reality—for example, the reaction appropriate’ 
to a bitter taste when the reality is a sweet taste—this fact, I 
believe, can be compared with the fact observed in the paradoxical 
phase of transition in the dog, that weak stimuli have a greater 
effect than strong ones. The real stimulus from the sweet substance 
going directly to the corresponding cortical cells should be expected 
to be much stronger than the substituted verbal stimulus of “ bitter,” 


-which goes through auditory cells to the chemical analyser of taste 


for bitter—just as a conditioned stimulus of the first order is always 
stronger than one of the second order. The significance of the para- 
doxical phase is not limited to pathological st uch as those 
previously observed, and it is highly probab at it plays an 
e apt to be much 
more influenced by words than by the actugktacts of the surrounding 


reality. I hope to be able to produc x enomenon in animals 
analogous to “ suggestion ” in many hypnosis. 

The fact that certain phases 3 ypnotic state in man remain 
more or less stationary O self in dogs. Similarly, under 


certain conditions and in elrdence on the individual condition 
of the nervous system the otic state in man, as in animals, passes 


more or less quickly i plete sleep. 

The passive det N Netix stands in a definite connection with 
the hypnotic sta#@. \As I suggested previously (p. 312) the old form 
of hypnosis in aħiñals may be regarded with reason as a reaction 
of passive selfreservation, occurring when the animal meets with 


some very QOerful or extraordinary external stimulus, and consisting 
in a SS r less profound immobilization of the animal by means 


N 


oh 


f APPLICATIONS TO MAN 409 


of an inhibition, beginning in the cortical cells representative of all 
the skeletal muscles (motor analyser). This reflex was often observed 
j in our experimental animals, of course in different degrees of intensity 
| and in somewhat different forms, always, however, retaining its 
fundamental inhibitory character. The variations consisted in a ' 

smaller or greater diminution of the movements, in a smaller or 
greater weakening, or in the disappearance, of conditioned reflexes. 
The passive defence reflex was usually evoked by relatively un- 
familiar and powerful external stimuli. The relative strength of a 
stimulus will of course depend on the state of the given nervous 
system, on its inherent properties, the state of health or disease, 
and on different periods of life. Animals which have been employed 
many times in front of a large audience remain quite normal under 
such conditions, while those which are exposed for the first time 
enter into a state of powerful inhibition. The exceptional dog 
described before (p. 402) behaved towards even the slightest changes 
in the environment as if to strong stimuli, and its activities became 
deeply inhibited. Some of the dogs which passed through the 
extraordinary stimulus of the flood entered into a chronic patho- 
logical state and now became inhibited under the influence of strong 
conditioned stimuli, which previously had produced a specific con- 
ditioned effect. Finally, some other dogs become as easily inhibited 
but only in some definite phases of hypnosis. The following is a 


experiments remains fully alert accepts the food fe} Wing the 
conditioned stimuli quickly and with avidity. By repeete 


tion of weak conditioned stimuli a certain stag hypnosis is 
induced in the animal, which soon becomes p ally motionless. 
When a strong conditioned stimulus is noy ed the animal first 


turns in the direction from which the, fded/is administered, then 
turns away without touching it. To Kanal observer the animal 
looks frightened. A weak conditio Coy is now applied and 
the animal immediately approac Ome plate and quietly takes the 
food. On dispersing the hyj oats all the conditioned stimuli 
again give their normal N Obviously in the special phase of 
hypnosis of the anima Le> d and usual stimuli now produce the 
effect of very strong cs Sg ean an inhibitory reflex. In a similar 
manner, in our ex ingly inhibitable dog “‘ Brains ” as soon as 
the pitch of the S pility of the cortex was raised by the special 
method K on page 381, there was observed a considerable 


N 
© 
LY 
V 


aN 


set as theiXop 


410 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


weakening of the otherwise, almost continuous reflex of passive 
self-preservation. 

In all the cases which have just been described what is most 
striking is the extremely characteristic passive self-protective 


postures of the animal. When I recall a large number of experiments 


performed one after another and year after year it is hardly possible 
not to conclude that at least in most cases what is known in 
psychology under the names of “ fear,” “ cowardice ” or “ caution” 
has a physiological substrate in a state of inhibition of the nervous 
system, which varies in intensity and so produces different intensities 
of the reflex of passive self-protection. Developing these conceptions 
further we are bound to regard the obsession of fear, and different 
phobias as natural symptoms of inhibition in a pathological and 
weakened nervous system. There are, of course, certain forms of 
fear and cowardice, as for instance flight and panic, and certain 
postures of servility, which apparently do not conform with the 
idea of an underlying inhibitory process, having a much more active 
aspect. These types must, of course, be subjected to experimental 
analysis, but it is perhaps not impermissible to regard them 
provisionally as developing in co-operation with, and as a result of, 
inhibition of the cortex. We have even now a few observations 
which conform with this point of view. 

I would like to turn briefly to the experiments described at the 
end of the preceding lecture. If on repeatin S in different 
variations the preliminary results should fin 1 confirmation, 
these results will throw some light upon o he darkest points 
of our subjective self—namely, upon t lations between the 
conscious and the unconscious. The ments if confirmed will 
have demonstrated that such angi tant cortical function as 
synthesis (“‘ association ”) may gta 
areas which are in a state of ae ition on account of the existence 
at that moment of a predomipant‘tocus of strong excitation. Though 
the actual synthesizing acja may not enter our field of conscious- 
ness the synthesis ma heless take place, and under favourable 
conditions it may e N e field of consciousness as a link already 
formed, seemin ginate spontaneously. 

In concludin&this series of lectures I want to repeat that all the 
SENN se of other workers as well as our own, which have 

e 


ct a purely physiological interpretation of the activity 


of Vä nervous system, I regard as being in the nature 


N 
> 
ao 


place even in those cortical. 


APPLICATIONS TO MAN 411 


_ only of a preliminary inquiry, which has however, I fully believe, 


entirely justified its inception. We have indisputably the right to 
claim that our investigation of this extraordinarily complex field 
has followed the right direction, and that, although not a near, 
nevertheless a complete, success awaits it. So far as we ourselves 
are concerned we can only say that at present we are confronted 
with many more problems than ever before. At first, not to lose 
sight of the main issue, we were compelled to simplify, and, so to 
speak, schematize the subject. At present, after having acquired 
some knowledge of its general principles, we feel surrounded, nay 
crushed, by the mass of details, all calling for elucidation. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


THE following bibliography comprises all the published researches 
upon the physiology of conditioned reflexes performed in my own 
laboratories in Petrograd. The first paper giving.a more or less 
systematic description of “natural” conditioned reflexes—then 
called “‘ psychic reflexes ’—was published by Dr. Wolfson in the 
form of a thesis entitled Observations upon Salivary Secretion 
(Petrograd, 1899). The term “ conditioned reflex ” was first used 
in print by Dr. Tolochinov, who completed his experiments in 1901 
and communicated the results at the Congress of Natural Sciences 
in Helsingfors in 1903. 

The bibliography is divided into twenty-three sections. This 
division has been made for the convenience of those who wish to 
obtain a preliminary acquaintance with one or another aspect of 
the subject. The titles of papers quoted in more than one section 
are given in full in that section to which their main part belongs. 
Since the papers referred to in one section treat also of other 
aspects, a detailed knowledge can be achieved only Ry reading the 
main bulk of the literature. In each section t Wane is set 
down in chronological order. Many of the capri quoted in 


these lectures were taken from researches w ave only recently 
been completed and are not yet publish which are still in pro- 
gress. These could not, therefore, be j ed in the bibliography. 


Q. 


(1) Pavlov, I. P. “ Twenty N jective study of the higher nervous 
activity (behaviour) Oe a ” State publication, 3rd edition, 
1925. Articles, a 4,7, 9, 10, 11, 18, 17, 20, 21, 23, 26, 
29, 31, 33, 35. NY 

-O 

(1) Pavlov, I.P. wenty years of objective study of the higher nervous 
activi animals.” Article, No. 12. Š 

(2) Hani A. “The construction of sound-proof chambers.” 

ee of the Scientific Lene of Lesgaft, vol. v. 1922. 
N 


© 


II. METHODS 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 413 


(3) Hanike, E. A. “ Upon the production of pure tones.” Archive of 
Biological Sciences, vol. xxiii. Nos. 4-5, 1924. 

(4) Podkopaev, N. A. “ The technical methods employed in the study 
of conditioned reflexes.” Petrograd, 1926. 


III. EXTERNAL INHIBITION 


(1) Babkin, B. P. See section IVa (3) chapter vii. 

(2) Vassiliev, P. N. “ The action of extraneous stimuli upon established 
conditioned reflexes.” Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, 
vol. 73, 1906. 

(3) Mishtovt, G. V. “ Development of inhibition of an artificial condi- 
tioned reflex (auditory) by means of different stimuli.” Thesis, 
Petrograd, 1907 ; Preliminary communication in the Proc. Russian 
Med. Soc. in Petrograd, vol. 74, 1907. 

(4) Perelzweig, I. J. See section IVa (4) chapter iv. 

(5) Kasherininova, N. A. See section X (1). 

(6) Nikiforovsky, P. M. . “ An interesting form of dis-inhibition of 
conditioned reflexes.” Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, 
vol. 76, 1909. 

(7) Bilina, A. S. “The simple inhibition of conditioned reflexes.” 
Thesis, Petrograd, 1910. 

(8) Egorov, J. E. “ The influence of different alimentary conditioned 
reflexes one upon another.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1911. 

(9) Savich, A. A. “ Further contributions to eae study of the influence 
of conditioned reflexes one upon another.” Thesis, Petro , 1913. 

(10) Rosova, L. V. ‘‘ Interaction between different forms%Qh external 
inhibition of conditioned reflexes.” Thesis, Petro 1914. 

(11) Foursikov, D.S. “ Effect of external inhibition up development 
of differentiation and of a conditioned inhibi Y Russian J ournal 
of Physiology, vol. iv. 1922. 

(12) Foursikov, D. S. “‘ Effect of the are y reaction upon the 
development of a conditioned inhipit nd of differentiation.” 
Russian Journal of Physiology, vo 1922. 


IV. INTERN Cs ae 
Q Pion 
(1) Tolochinov, I. E. “Co ions à l’étude de la physiologie et de la 
psychologie des gfindee salivaires.”” Forhindlingar vid Nordiska 
Naturforskare och Békaremotet. Helsingfors, 1903. 
(2) Boldirev; P. N.* jhe development of artificial conditioned reflexes 
and their erties.” Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, 


414 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


(3) Babkin, B. P. “ A systematic investigation of the higher nervous 
(psychic) functions in the dog.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1904. 
(4) Perelzweig, I. J. “ Contributions to the study of conditioned reflexes.” 
À Thesis, Petrograd, 1907. 
(5) Zeliony, G. P. See section VIII (1). 
(6) Kasherininova, N. A. See X (1) chapter 8. 
(7) Eliason, M. M. “‘ Restoration of extinguished reflexes by the use 
of unconditioned stimuli.” Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, 
vol. 74, 1907. 
(8) Zavadsky, I. V. See IVc (2). 
(9) Volborth,G@. V. See XX (4). 
AE (10) Gorn, E. L. See IVB (5). 

(11) Potehin, S. I. *“ Contributions to the physiology of internal inhi- 
bition of conditioned reflexes.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1911; Pre- 
liminary communication, Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, 
vol. 78, 1911. 

(12) Degtiareva, V. A. See IVD (7). 

(13) Kogan, B. A. See V (4). 

(14) Chebotareva, O. V. See IVD (5). 

(15) Ten-Cate, J. J. “Contributions to the study of irradiation and 
concentration of extinctive inhibition.” Bulletin of the Institute 
of Lesgaft, vol. 3, 1921. 

(16) Podkopaev, N. A. See V (11) and (12). 

(17) Frolov, @. P., and Vindelband, O. A. “A wage of extinction 
of an artificial conditioned reflex.” Com 38th meeting 


of Petrograd Physiol. Soc., 1923. 

(18) Popov, N. A. “ Extinction of the a reflex in the dog.” 
Russian Jour. Physiol., vol. iii. 192 

(19) Neitz, E. A. “ Mutual interacti nditioned reflexes.” Bulletin 
of Military Med. Acad., 1908 ; iminary Commun. Proc. Russian 
Med. Soc. in Petrograd, vol (4, 1907. 

(20) Pimenov, P. P. See IVE ( apter 2. 


(21) Makovsky, I. S. See @y4). 
(22) Valkov, A.V. “A case of irradiation of extinctive inhibition.” 


Commun. at aGefeeting of Petrograd Physiol. Soc., 1924. 
(23) Popov, N. tinction of the investigatory reflex in the dog.” 
Russian Physiol., vol. iii. 1923. 


of 


we 


cial conditioned reflex.” Archive of Biological Sciences, 
v. Nos. 4 and 5, 1926. 


(24) F ot eye and Windelband, O. A. “ A special case of extinction 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 415 


(b) Differentiation 

(1) Zeliony; G. P. ‘‘ Contribution to the problem of the reaction of dogs 
to auditory stimuli.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1907 ; Prelim..Commun. 
Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, vol. 73, 1906. 

(2) Beliakov, V. V. “ Contributions to the physiology of differentiation 
of external stimuli.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1911. 

(3) Snegirev, G. V. “ Contributions to the study of conditioned reflexes : 
Specialization of auditory conditioned reflexes in the dog.” Clinical 
Monographs of Practical Medicine, Petrograd, 1911. 

(4) Potehin, S. I. See IVa (11). 

(5) Gorn, E. L. “ Contributions to the physiology of internal inhibition 
of conditioned reflexes.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1912; Preliminary 
Commun. Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, vol. 79, 1912. 

(6) Friedman, S. ©. “Further contributions to the physiology of 
differentiation of external stimuli.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1913. 

(7) Ponizovsky, N. P. “ Inhibitory after-effect of differential, and of 
conditioned inhibition upon heterogeneous conditioned reflexes.” 
Thesis, Petrograd, 1912. 

(8) Koupalov, P. S. “ Initial generalization and subsequent specializa- 
tion of conditioned reflexes.” Archive of Biological Sciences, 
vol. xix. No. 1, 1915. 

(9) Goubergritz, M. M. “ An improved method of developing differen- 
tiation of external stimuli.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1917. 

(10) Foursikov, D. S. “ Differentiation of interrupted auditory stimuli 
by the dog.” Bulletin of the Institute of Lesgaft, vol. it 0. 


(11) Anrep, G. V. “ Pitch discrimination in the dog.” oe hysiol, 
liii. 1920. 

(12) Shenger-Krestovnikova, N. R. “ Contributions t physiology of 
differentiation of visual stimuli, and dete tion of limit of 


differentiation by the visual analyser Qe dog.” Bulletin of 
Institute of Lesgaft, vol. iii. 1921. 


` (13) Foursikov, D: S. See III (11). 


(14) Foursikov, D. S. See II (12). O 
(15) Frolov, G. P. “ Differentiation onditioned trace-stimuli and of 
trace-inhibitors.”” Russian of Physiol., vol. vi. Nos. 4-6, 1924. 


(16) Valkov, A. V. “The ulti ate of the internal inhibition of 
differentiation.” Bu of Petrograd Agricultural Institute, 
vol. i. 1924 (abstrdct hysiol. Abstracts, vol, 8, 1924). 

(17) Rosenthal, I. 8. “ the specialization of conditioned reflexes.”’ 


Archive of Bidth“Qiences, vol. xxiii. Nos. 4-5, 1924. 
(18) Pavlov, I. P. QO wenty years of objective study of the higher 
EN ivity of animals.” Article, No. 16. 


N 
SÀ 
ao 


© 
ww 


N 
AO 


416 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


(19) Rosenthal, I. ©. “ The mutual interactions of the excitatory and 
inhibitory processes (a new type of differentiation of tactile 
conditioned stimuli).’”’ Collected Papers of the Physiol. Lab. of 
I. P. Pavlov, vol. i. Nos. 2-3, 1926. 


(c) Delayed Reflexes 

(1) Potehin, S.I. See IVa (11). 

(2) Zavadsky, I. V. ‘Inhibition and dis-inhibition of conditioned 
reflexes.”” Thesis, Petrograd, 1908; Prelim. Commun. Russian 
Med. Soc. in Petrograd, vol. 75, 1908. 

(3) Kreps, E. M. “ The effect of prolongation of delay upon the excita- 
bility of the cortex.” Archive of Biol. Sciences, vol. xxv. Nos. 
4-5, 1926. 

(d) Conditioned Inhibition 

(1) Perelzweig, I. J. See IVA (4) chapter 8. 

(2) Krjishkovsky, K. N. “ A contribution to the problem of conditioned 
inhibition.” Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, vol. 76, 1909. 

(3) Nikolaev, P. N. “ A contribution to the problem of conditioned 
inhibition.”” Thesis, Petrograd, 1910. 

(4) Leporsky, N. I. “ A contribution tò the problem of conditioned 
inhibition.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1911. 

(5) Chebotareva, O. M. “ Further contributions to the Physiology of 
conditioned inhibition.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1912; Preliminary 
. Commun. Russian Med. Soc., vol. 80, 1913. 

(6) Ponizovsky, N. P. See IVa (7). : O 

(7) Degtiareva, V. A. “ Contributions to the NBP ARA of internal 


inhibition.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1914. 
(8) Pavlova, A. M. ‘Contributions to th ysiology of conditioned 
inhibition.” Thesis, Petrograd, 19 
(9) Anrep, G. V. “ Irradiation of 
Jour. Physiol., vol. i. Nos. }2; 
(10) Foursikov, D. S: See III MN 
(11) Foursikov, D. S. See ITI (1 
(12) Anrep, G. V. “ C of conditioned reflexes.” Proc. Royal 


ioned inhibition.” Russian 


Soc., vol. B. 94, 1 


N (e) Trace Reflexes 


EE eio. PGs zQ A special type of conditioned reflexes.” Thesis, 


trogr: 
(2) wo “Contributions to the physiology of conditioned 
om Thesis, Petrograd, 1909; Prelim. Commun. 
8 


ian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, vol. 77, 1910. 


| 
| 
| 
: 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 417 


(3) Dobrovolsky, V. M. “ Alimentary trace reflexes.” Thesis, Petrograd; | 


Soc. in Petrograd, vol. 80, 1913. Í 

(5) Belitz, M. F. “ Conditioned trace reflexes.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1917. | 

(6) Frolov, G@. P. See IVB (15). i 

(7) Frolov, G. P. “ Transformation of conditioned trace stimuli and | 
trace conditioned inhibitors into non-trace stimuli.” Collected 

. Papers of Physiol. Lab. of I. P. Pavlov, vol. i. Nos. 2-3, 1926. i 


(f) Sleep as Internal Inhibition 
! (1) Solomonov, O. S., and Shishlo, A. A. “ Conditioned reflexes and | 
sleep.” Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, vol. 77, 1910. 
| (2) Solomonov, O. S. “ Thermal and tactile conditioned reflexes leading 


1911. 
| (4) Pavlova, V. I. “ Conditioned trace reflexes.” Proc. Russian Med. | 


to sleep.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1910. | 

| (3) Rojansky, N. A. “Contributions to the physiology of sleep.” 
Thesis, Petrograd, 1913; Prelim. Commun. Russian Med. Soc. in i 

$ 


Petrograd, vol. 79, 1912. 
(4) Rosenthal, I. ©. ‘Transition of internal inhibition into sleep in i 
extinction of the investigatory reflex.” Communication Petrograd | 
Physiol. Soc., May, 1923. i f 
(5) Pavlov, I. P. “ Twenty years of objective study of the higher 
nervous activity of animals.” Articles, 14, 24, 30. 
(6) Bierman, B. N. “ Experimental sleep.” State pers 


! V. IRRADIATION AND CONCENTRATION OF Exons 
AND INHIBITION 


(1) Krasnogorsky, N. I. “ Studies upon central inhj 
localization of the tactile and motor an 
the dog.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1911. O 


(2) Ponizovsky, N. P. See IVB (7). 


n and upon the 
in the cortex of 


(3) Petrova, M. K. “ Investigations uppaNrradiation of excitation and 
inhibition.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1 ; Prelim. Commun. Russian 


Med. Soc. in Petrograd, vol. 13. 
_ (4) Kogan, B. A. “ Irradiatio concentration of extinctive inhi- 
bition.” Thesis, Petraga 4. 3 


and excitation.” 8, Petrograd, 1917. 


(5) Manouilov, T. M. Gigs ibution to the physiology of inhibition 
T 
(6) Anrep, G. V. xe ction between two different types of internal 


| dala eat ive of Biol. Sciences, xx. No. 4, 1917. 
7) Anrep, G 


static state of irradiation of excitation.” Archive i 
of Kğ xx. No. 4, 1917. H 
2D 


Y | 
Ro 
RO 
ES) | 


418 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


(8) Anrep, G. V. “ Irradiation of conditioned inhibition.” Russian 
Jour. Physiol. vol. i. Nos. 1-2, 1917. 

. (9): Ten-Cate, J. J. See IVa (15). 

(10) Anrep, G. V. “ Irradiation of conditioned reflexes.” Proc. Royal 
Soc. vol. B. 93, 1923. 

(11) Foursikov, D. S. “A static state of irradiation of inhibition.” 
Archive of Biol. Sciences, vol. xxiii. Nos. 1-3, 1923; Prelim. 
Commun. Russian Jour. Physiol. vol. iv. 1922. 

(12) Siriatsky, V. M. “ A method for disclosure of residual inhibition 
after concentration of the inhibitory process?’ Commun. at 48th 
meeting of Petrograd Physiol. Soc., 1923. 

(13) Rosenthal, I. S. “A static state of irradiation of excitation.” 
Archive of Biol. Sciences, vol. xxiii. Nos. 1-3, 1923. 

(14) Kreps, E. M. “ The after-effect of differentiated stimuli.” Commun. 
at 36th meeting of Petrograd Physiol Soc., 1923. 

(15) Valkov, A. V. See IVa (22). 

(16) Podkopaev, N. A. .“ The mobility of the inhibitory process.” Col- 
lected Papers of Physiol. Lab. of I. P. Pavlov, vol. vii. No. 1, 1924 
(abstract in Physiol. Abstracts, vol. viii. 1924). 

(17) Podkopaev, N. A. “ Determination of the exact moment at which 
irradiation of inhibition begins.” J. P. Pavlov Jubilee Volume, 
1924 (abstract in Physiol. Abstracts, vol. viii. ae 

(18) Siriatsky, V. N. “ The cerebral cortex as a mosaic.” . Commun: at 
2nd Congress of Psycho-neurologists in Petrograd, January, 1924. 

(19) Archangelsky, V. M. ‘‘ Comparative intensities ofg@isferent types 
of internal inhibition.” Collected Papers of Ph > Lab. of I. P. 


Pavlov, vol. i. No. 1, 1924. 
(20) Pavlov, I. P. “ Twenty yee of ict iy of the higher 


nervous activity of animals.” Articles 9, 22, 32. 
(21) Ivanov-Smolensky, A.G. “‘ Irradiati Saar inhibition in the 
acoustic analyser of the dog.” T apers of the Physiol. Lab. of 
I. P. Pavlov, vol. i. Nos. 2-3, 19 also Pavlov Jubilee Vol., 1925. 
(22) Bikov, K. M. “ Mutual interaGOp e excitation and inhibition in 
the cerebral cortex.” Comun. Or the 58th meeting of Petrograd 
Physiol. Soc., J sary NSS, 
u 


(23) Kreps, E. M. RR PN ction and irradiation of inhibition in 
the cortex.” Pa bilee Vol., 1925. 


ic Ae ANALYSER (normal conditions) 


(1) ee ©. i yu pyriformis in its relation to the sense of 
smel N dog.” Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, vol. 76, 
© ‘4 


rchive of Biol. Sciences, vol. xv. Nos. 3-5, 1910. 


( BIBLIOGRAPHY | 419 


VII. VISUAL ANALYSER (normal conditions) 

(1) Orbeli, L. A. “ Visual conditioned reflexes in the dog.” Thesis, 
Petrograd, 1908 ; Prelim. Commun. Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, 
vol. 74, 1907. 

(2) Orbeli, L. A. “ The question of discrimination of colour in the dog.” 
Problems of Medical Science, vol. i. 1913. 

(3) Frolov. G. P.. “ Reactions of the central nervous system to changes 
in intensity of illumination.” Proc, Petrograd Soc. for Natural 
Sciences, vol. 69, No. 1, 1918. 


VIII. Acoustic ANALYSER (normal conditions) 
(1) Zeliony, G. P. “The reactions of the dog to auditory stimuli.” 
Thesis, Petrograd, 1907 ; Prelim. Commun. Med. Soc. in Petrograd, 
vol. 73, 1906. 
(2) Zeliony,G.P. “ A conditioned reflex to an interruption of a sound.” 


f Proc. of Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, vol. 74, 1907; also 
Karkov Med. Jour., 1908. 
(3) Eliason, M. M. “ Investigation upon the acoustic functions of the 


dog under normal conditions and after bilateral partial extirpation 
of the auditory area.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1908. 

(4) Zeliony, G. P. “ Uber der Reaktion der Katze auf Tonreiz.” Zentral- 
blatt fiir Physiologie, Bd. xxiii. 1909. 

(5) Bourmakin, V. A. “ Generalization of conditioned auditory reflexes 
in the dog.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1909. ~\ 

(6) Zeliony, G.P. “ Upon the ability of the dog to aiscrigtihet auditory 
stimuli applied in succession, according to differ {Gymbers of their 
repetition.” Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in Pet , vol. 77, 1910. 

(7) Babkin, B. P. “ Contributions to the study acoustic analyser.” 
Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, , 1910. 

(8) Ousiévich, M. A. “ Further contre to the study of the 
acoustic analyser.” Proc. apie . Soc. in Petrograd, vol. 78, 


objective method.” Rou rach, No. 51, 1911. 


1911. 
(9) Babkin, B. P. “The ‘ee deafness as analysed by the 


(10) Babkin, B. P. “ Furthe ies upon the normal and the injured 
acoustic analyser indy g.” Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, 
í vol. 78, 1911. 


(11) Anrep, G. V. ‘“WPit$h discrimination in the dog.” Jour. Physiol. 
vol. 53, 192 

(12) Andréev, ~~“ The resonance theory of Helmholtz in the light 
of ne rvations upon the function of the peripheral end of 
the tic analyser in the dog.” Pavlov Jubilee Vol., 1925. 


420 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


(13) Ivanov-Smolensky, A. G. “‘ Irradiation of extinctive inhibition in 
the acoustic analyser of the dog.” Pavlov Jubilee Vol., 1925 ; 
also Collected Papers of Physiol. Lab. of I. P. Pavlov, vol. i. Nos. 2-3, 
1926. 


IX. THERMAL ANALYSER (normal conditions) 


(1) Voskobointkova-Granstrem, E. E. “ Temperature of 50° C. as a new 
artificial conditioned stimulus.” Proc. Russian Med. Soc., vol. 73, 
1906. 

(2) Babkin, B. P. ‘Contributions to the physiology of the frontal 
lobes of the cortex in the dog.” Bulletin Milit. Med. Acad., 
1909. 

(3) Shishlo, A. A. “ Thermal centres in the cortex of the hemispheres ; 
sleep as a reflex.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1910; Prelim. Commun. 
Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, vol. 77, 1910. 

(4) Solomonov, O. S. “Thermal conditioned stimuli.” Proc. Russian 
Med. Soc. in Petrograd, vol. 77, 1910. 

(5) Solomonov, O. S. “ Thermal conditioned reflexes and the reflex of 
sleep in the dog.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1910. i 

(6) Vasiliev, P. N. “ Differentiation of thermal stimuli by the dog.” 
Thesis, Petrograd, 1912. 


X. TACTILE ANALYSER (normal conditions) 


(1) Kasherininova, N. A. “Contributions to the nen salivary 
conditioned reflexes in response to tactile stinngh i the dog.” 
Thesis, Petrograd, 1908; Prelim. Commun. PQ. Russian Med. 


Soc. in Petrograd, vol. 73, 1906. & 
(1) Kasherininova, N. A. “Tactile stimuli onditioned salivary 
stimuli.” Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in vad, 73, 1926. 


(3) Krasnogorsky, N. J. See V (1). 

(4) Archangelsky, V. M. “ n O, tactile conditioned reflexes 
in the case of partial seston of the cutaneous analyser.” 
‘Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in grad, vol. 80, 1913. 


(5) Archangelsky, V. M. “ ributions to the physiology of the 
_ cutaneous analyser.” ive Biol. Sciences, vol. xxii. No. 1, 1922. 


XI. ma ANALYSER (normal conditions) ‘ 


(1) Krasnogorsky, . See V (1). 
(2) Archangels V. M. “ Contributions to the physiology of the 
motor (@ yser.” Archive of Biol. Sciences, vol. xxii. No. 1, 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 421 


XII. THE EFFECTS UPON CONDITIONED REFLEXES OF EXTIRPATION OF 
DIFFERENT PARTS OF THE CEREBRAL CORTEX 

(1) Tihomirov, N. P. “ An investigation of the functions of the hemi- 
spheres in the dog by an objective method.” Thesis, Petrograd, 
1906. 

(2) Toropov, N. K. “ Visual conditioned reflexes in the dog after 
extirpation of the occipital lobes.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1908 ; 
Prelim. Commun. Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, vol. 75, 
1908. 


(3) Orbeli, L. A. “Contributions to the question of localization of _ 


conditioned reflexes in the central nervous system.” Proc. Russian 
Med. Soc. in Petrograd, vol. 75, 1908. 

(4) Makovsky, I. S. “ Auditory reflexes after extirpation of the temporal 
lobes.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1908; Preliminary Communication, 
Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, vol. 75, 1908. 

(5) Eliason, M. M. See VIII (8). 

(6) Sasonova, A. “‘ Matériaux pour servir à étude des réflexes condi- 
tionées.”” Thesis, Lausanne, 1909. 

(7) Babkin, B. P. See IX (2). 

(8) Krijanousky, I. I. “ Acoustic conditioned reflexes after extirpation 
of the temporal lobes in the dog.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1909. 

(9) Demeedov, V. A. “Conditioned reflexes after extirpation of the 
anterior halves of the hemispheres in the dog.” Thesis, Petrograd, 


1909. 

(10) Satournov, N. M. ‘ Further contributions to the uugiDechaitioni 
salivary reflexes in a dog with the anterior of the hemi- 
spheres removed.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1911, & 

(11) Kourdrin, A. N. “ Conditioned reflexes ing after extirpation 


of the posterior halves of the "OS .” Thesis, Petrograd, 
1911. 
(12) Kouraev, S. P. “ Observations tage post-operative stage 
upon a dog with damaged ante bes.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1912. 
(13) Babkin, B. P. “ The fundamental characteristics of the functions 
of the acoustic ROD dog after removal of the posterior 


halves of the hemis Proc. of Russian Med. Soc. in Petro- 
grad, vol. 79, PN 


(14) Zeltony, @. P. “ tions upon dogs after complete removal of 
the cerebral Sgrifx.” Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, 
vol. 79, 1918, also a second commun. in same volume. 

(15) Archangels, . M. See X (3). 


x 


“Contributions to the question of correlation of 
n fana inhibition in a dog after homolateral extirpation 


ER N i SE RSS 


— a 


Kx 
NX 


422 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


of gyri coronarius and ectosylvius sin.” Archive Biol. Sciences, 
vol. xxiii. Nos. 4-5, 1924. 

(17) Rosenkov, I. P. “ Contributions to the question of correlation of 
excitation and inhibition in a dog after bilateral extirpation of 
gyri coronarius and ectosylvius.” Collected Papers of Laboratories 
of I. P. Pavlov, vol. i. Nos. 2-3, 1925. 

(18) Pavlov, I. P. “Twenty years of objective study of the higher 
nervous activity of animals.” Articles, 5, 15, 18. 

(19) Foursikov, D. S. “The effect of extirpation of the cortex of one 
hemisphere in the dog.” Russian Jour. Physiol. viii. 1-2, 1925. 

(20) Foursikov, D. S., and Hurman, M. N. “ The effect of extirpation of 
the cortex of one hemisphere.” Russian Jour. Physiol. viii. 1-2, 
1925. 

(21) Foursikov, D. S. “ The effect of extirpation of the cortex of one 
hemisphere (third communication). Generalization and the 
development of conditioned reflexes to tactile stimuli.” Russian 
Jour. Physiol. viii. 5-6, 1925. 

(22) Foursikov, D. 8., and Eurman, M. N. “ Conditioned reflexes in 
dogs after removal of one hemisphere.” Archive Biol. Sciences, 
vol. xxv. Nos. 4-5, 1926. 


XIII. THE SYNTHESIZING ACTIVITY 

(1) Perelzweig, I. J. See IVA (4). 

(2) Zeliony, @. P. “ A special type of conditioned reflexes.” Archive 
Biol. Sciences, vol. xiv. No. 5, 1909. Ş 

(3) Zeliony, G. P. “ Analysis of complex conditiogp) Stimuli” Proc. 
Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, vol. 77, ow 

(4) Nikolaev, P. N. “ Analysis of comp nditioned reflexes.” 
Archive Biol. Sciences, vol. xvi. No. ; 

(5) Pavlov, I. P. “Twenty years ctive study of the higher 
nervous activity of animals.’ ws 8. 

(6) Stroganov, V. V. “ Develops of a conditioned reflex to, and 
differentiation of, compo stimuli.” Pavlov Jubilee Vol., 


1925. Q 

(7) Bikov, K. M. “ The yis of different components of compound 
stimuli.” Colle xr rs of Physiol. Laboratories of I. P. Pavlov, 
vol. i. Nos. 2308 ; 


XIV, STRENGTH OF CONDITIONED STIMULI 
(1) Palladi Re) V. “ Development of artificial conditioned reflex to 
a f two stimuli.” Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, 
x , 1906. 


x 


S 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 423 


(2) Tihomirov, N. P. “ The intensity of stimulus as an independent 
conditioned stimulus.” Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, ; 
vol. 77, 1910. | 
(3) Babkin, B. P. “ Contributions to the problem of the relative 
strengths of conditioned stimuli.” Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in 
Petrograd, vol. 78, 1911. 


XV. INDUCTION 


(1) Foursikov, D. S. ‘ Interrelations between excitation and inhibition.” 
Collected Papers of Physiol. Labs. of I. P. Pavlov, vol. i. No. 1, 
1924 ; Prelim. Commun. Russian Jour. Physiol., vol. iii. 1-5, 1921, 
and vol. iv. 1922. 

(2) Foursikov, D. S. “‘ Mutual induction in the cerebral cortex.” 
Archive Biol. Sciences, vol. xxiii. 1-3, 1923 (abstract in Physiol. 
Abstracts, vol. 8, 1923.) p 

(3) Kalmikov, M. P. “The positive phase of mutual induction as 
observed in one and the same group of nervous elements of the | 
cortex.” Collected Papers, Physiol. Labs. I. P. Pavlov, vol. i. 2-3, i 
1926. i} 

(4) Stroganov, V. V. “ The positive and negative phase of mutual ( | 
induction in the hemispheres of the dog.” Collected Papers, ! 
Physiol. Labs. I. P. Pavlov, vol. i. 2-3, 1926. | 

(5) Kreps, E. M. See V (23). ! 


XVI. INDIVIDUAL CHARACTER OF ANIMALS A | 
; (1) Besbokaia, M. J. “ Contributions to the physiolo conditioned i 
reflexes.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1913. | 


(2) Frolov, G. P. “ The passive defence zation eG is s influence upon 
conditioned reflexes.” Pavlov Jubilee V, 

(3) Kreps, E. M. “ An attempt to Sy lassification of experi- 
mental animals according to t ollected Papers, Physiol. f: 
Labs. I. P. Pavlov, vol. i. 1924. O } 

| 
! 


XVII. TME AS A ITIONED STIMULUS 


secretion.” Thesis, rad, 1912. 
(2) Stoukova, M. M. er contributions to the study of the | 
significance O s a conditioned stimulus.” Thesis, Petrograd, ‘ 
1914. . Ji 
(3) Deriabin, Ke} “ Further contributions to the study of the signi- 
See as a conditioned stimulus.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1916. 


N | | 
ge | | 
S | 
AS 


(1) Feokritova, J. P. PN a conditioned stimulus to whe | 
h 


O 


© 
ww 
O 


à 


424 CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


(4) Frolov, G. P. “The physiology of the so-called sense of time.” 
Commun. at 2nd Congress of Psycho-neurologists, Petrograd, 
January, 1924. 


XVIII. PHARMACOLOGY OF CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


(1) Zavadsky, I. V. “ An application of the method of conditioned 
reflexes to pharmacology.” Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, 
vol. 75, 1908. 

2) Nikiforovsky, M. P. “ Pharmacological methods in application to 
conditioned reflexes.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1910. 

(3) Potehin, S. I. “ The pharmacology of conditioned reflexes.” Proe. 
Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, vol. 78, 1911. 

(4) Krilov, V.A. ‘‘ Development of conditioned reflexes to stimuli acting 
through the blood (automatic stimuli).”” Pavlov Jubilee Vol., 1925. 

(5) Podkopaev, N. A. ‘‘ Development of a conditioned reflex to an 
automatic (direct) stimulus.” Collected Papers of Physiol. Labs. 
I. P. Pavlov, vol. i. 2-3, 1926 (abstract, Zentralblatt für die gesammte 
Neurologie und Psychiatrie, Bd. xxxiz. 1925). 


XIX. BILATERAL SYNERGETIC ACTIVITY OF THE HEMISPHERES 
(1) Anrep, G. V. See V (7). 
(2) Anrep, G. V. See V (8). 
(3) Anrep, G. V. See V (10). 


(4) Podkopaev; N. A., and Grigorovich, L. 8. “ Ga of . 


symmetrical positive and negative reflexes. hebnoe Delo, 
Nos. 1-2, 3-4, 1924 

(5) Pavlov, I. P., “ Twenty years of siete study of the higher 
nervous activity in animals.” Articl : 

(6) Bikov, K. M. “Contributions to th Sion of the symmetrical 
reproduction of function of te ye ispheres.”” Pavlov Jubilee 
Vol., 1925. 

(7) Bikov, K. M. and Speransky, . “ Observations upon dogs after 
section of the corpus caesum.” Collected Papers, Physiol. Labs. 
of I. P. Pavlov, vol. & 1, 1924 (abstract in Zentralblatt fiir die 
gesammte N WO Psychiatrie, Bd. xxxix. 1925). 


XX. ner FICANCE OF THE ALIMENTARY CENTRE 


(1) Pimenov, B ‘Development of conditioned reflexes in the case 
of ap Sion of the stimulus before or after the administration 
of t conditioned stimulus.” Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in 


ad, vol. 73, 1906. 
N 
Q 


] BIBLIOGRAPHY 425 


j (2) Boldirev, V. N. “ Conditioned reflexes and the experimental 
modification of their intensity.” Karkov Med. Jour., 1917. 
{ (3) Hasen, S. B. “ Relative magnitudes of conditioned and uncondi- 
tioned salivary reflexes.” Thesis, Petrograd, 1908. 
(4) Volborth, G. V. “ Contributions to the’ physiology of conditioned 
reflexes.” Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, vol. 75, 1908. 
4 (5) Perelzweig, I. J. See IVa (4). 
(6) Krestovnikov, A. N. “ An important stipulation in the development 
of conditioned reflexes.” Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, 
vol. 80, 1913. 
(7) Krestovnikov, A. N. “ An important stipulation in the development 
of conditioned reflexes.” Bulletin of the Institute of Lesgaft, vol. 3, 
1921. 
(8) Frolov, G. P. “ The influence of abrupt changes in the composition 
of the food upon some aspects of the higher nervous activity in 
animals.” Archive of Biol. Sciences, xxi. 3-5, 1922. 
(9) Rosenthal, I. S. See IVF (4). 
(10) Popov, N. A. See IVa (28). | 
j (11) Foursikov, D. S. “ Water as a stimulus.” Russian Jour. Physiol., | 
vol. 3, Nos. 1-5, 1921 ; also Pavlov Jubilee Vol., 1925. 


XXI. THE [NVESTIGATORY REFLEX 
(1) Foursikov, D. S. See III (12). 
| (2) Rasenkov, I. P. See XII (17). 


| (3) Chechoùlin, S. I. “ New observations upon sgh inves- 


tigatory reflex.” Archive Biol. Sciences, xxiii. 3- 


| XXII. THE HIGHER NERVOUS ACTIVITY (conntaforen REFLEXES) IN 
| SOME SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF THE CEN ERVOUS SYSTEM . : | 


| (1) Krjishkovsky, N. “ Die Veränderungen er Function der oberen 
Abschnitte des Nervensystems der Hündin während der 

Brunst.” Zentralblatt für HEPR oy Bd. xxiv. No. 11, 1909. 

(2) Shenger-Krestounikova, N. R. IVB (11). 

a (3) Foursikov, D. 8. “The of pregnancy upon conditioned 
reflexes.” Archive Bs ences, xxi. Nos. 3-5, 1922. 

(4) Rosenthal, I. S. “ The oN of pregnancy upon conditioned reflexes.” 
Russian Jour. Physie®, vol. v. 1922. 

(5) Rosenthal, I. 8S. a effect of inanition upon conditioned reflexes.” 
Archive Bid ences, xxi. Nos. 3-5, 1922. 


(6) Kreps, E. AJ On the influence of heat in a bitch upon its higher 
BV ivity.” Physiol. Abstracts, vol. 5, 1923. 


N 
Ro 
<V 


426 _ CONDITIONED REFLEXES 


(7) Andréev, L. A. “Observations upon the functions of the senile 
central nervous system.” Collected Papers, Physiol. Labs. I. P. 
Pavlov, vol. i. No. 1, 1924. 

(2) Rasenkov, I. P} “ Modifications of the excitatory process in the 
cortex under some complex conditions.” Collected Papers, Physiol. 
Labs. I. P. Pavlov, vol. i. No. 1, 1924. 

(9) Pavlov, I. P. “ Twenty years of objective study of the higher 
nervous activity of animals.” Articles, 25 and 36. 

(10) Prorokov, I. P. “ A peculiar motor reaction in the dog and its 
suppression.” Collected Papers, Physiol. Labs. I. P. Pavlov, vol. i. 
Nos. 2-3, 1925. 

(11) Petrova, M. K. “ Pathological deviations of the inhibitory and 
excitatory process in a case of their clashing.” Collected Papers, 
Physiol. Labs. I. P. Pavlov, vol. i. Nos. 2-3, 1925. 

(12) Petrova, M. K. “ The combatting of sleep: the mutual counter- 
balancing of the excitatory and inhibitory processes.” Pavlov 
Jubilee Vol., 1925. 

(13) Valkov, A. V. ‘‘ Observations on the higher nervous activity in 
thyroidectomized puppies.” Pavlov Jubilee Vol., 1925. 

(14) Podkopaev, N. A. “ A peculiar motor reaction in the dog in conjunc- 
tion with a development of inhibition in the cortex.” Collected 
Papers, Physiol. Labs. I. P. Pavlov, vol. i. Nos. 2-3, 1925. 

(15) Petrova, M. K. “ The therapy of experimental neuroses in dogs.” 
Archive Biol. Sciences, vol. xxv. Nos. 1-3, 1925. 

(16) Siriatsky, V. V. “ Pathological deviations in tivity of the 
central nervous system in the case of clash@y of excitation and 
inhibition.” Russian Jour. Physiol., S iib Nos. 3-4, 1925. 


XXIII. PAPERS NOT INCLUDED IN S SECTIONS 
t 


(1) Parfenov, O. “ A special case o ivity of salivary glands in 
the dog.” Proc. Russian a . in Petrograd, 73, 1906. 
(2) Volborth,G. V. “ Inhibitory @pitioned reflexes.” Thesis, Petrograd, 
1912; Prelim. Comm roc. Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, 
vol. 77, 1910. ey 
(3) Zitovich, I. S. RAK in of the natural conditioned reflexes.” 
1 


Thesis, Petr 910; Prelim. Commun. Proc. Russian Med. 
Soc. in P , vol. 77, 1910. 
(4) EHroféeva, M.N. “ Electrical stimulation of the skin of the dog as 


S 


Commun. Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, vol. 79, 


2 


ase, 


eo 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 427 


(5) Eroféeva, M. N. “ Contribution to the physiology of conditioned 
reflexes to injurious stimuli.” Proc. Russian Med. Soc. in Petrograd, 
vol. 80, 1913. 

(6) Eroféeva, M. N. “ Further observations upon conditioned reflexes 
to nocuous stimuli.” Bulletin of Institute of Lesgaft, vol. iii. 1921. 

(7) Foursikov, D. S. “ Conditioned chain reflexes and the pathology 
of the higher nervous activity.” Commun. to 2nd Congress of 
Psycho-neurologists in Petrograd, January, 1924 ; Prelim. Commun. 
Russian Jour. Physiol., vol. iv. 1922. 

(8) Pavlov, I. P. “Twenty years of objective study of the higher 
nervous activity of animals.” Articles, 27 and 28. 

(9) Koupalov, P. Š. “ Periodical fluctuations in the rate of conditioned 
salivary secretion.” Archive Biol. Sciences, vol. xxv. No. 45, 1926. 


—— 


INDEX 


i ol SS 


Acoustic analyser, 133. 

— — extirpation of, 332. 

Aggressive reaction, 182. 

Alimentary reflex, the, 17. 

Analysers, 110. 

Analysis of stimuli, 112, 131. 

— — after extirpation of cortex, 328. 
Apomorphine, as conditioned stimulus, 35. 
Association centres, 376. 

Auditory analysis, 135, 149. 


Bahnung, 26, 365. 
Behaviorism, 5. 
Bromides, 300. 


Caffeine, 127. 

Catalepsy, 265. 

Cement, Mendeléeff’s, 18. 
Chloral-hydrate, 278. 

Concentration and irradiation, 152, 167. 
Conditioned inhibition, 68. 

— — after-effect of, 78, 80. 

— — destruction of, 81, 197. 

— — irradiation of, 162, 171. 

— — of heterogeneous reflexes, 76. 
— reflexes, artificial and natural, 49. 
— — definition of, 25. 

— — establishment of, 26. 

—.— in man, 395. 

— — of 2nd and 3rd order, 33. 

— — to authomatic stimuli, 35. 

— — to nocuous stimuli, 29. 

— stimuli, 38. 

Compound reflexes, 56. 

— stimuli, 141, 145, 269. 
Convulsions, post-operative, 321. 
Corpus callosum, 150, 352. 

Cortex, effeci of extirpation of, 1, 13, 328. 


Deafness, 330. 
Defence reflex, the, 17. 
Delay, development of, 89. 
Differential inhibition, 117. 
— — after-effect of, 125. 
— — development of, 119. © 
xe, 228. 


— — in heterogeneous r 
— — in trace stimuli, 1 
— — irradiation 68. 


— disinhibition of, 66, 82, 93, ee 


. Electric stimuli, 29. 


Excitation, irradiation of, 178. 

Exhaustion, functional, 244, 250. 

External inhibition, 43, 46, 191, 202. 

Extinction, effect of extra-stimuli upon, 
61. 

— of conditioned reflexes, 49. 

— primary and secondary, 54, 157. 

— recovery from, 58, 389. 

Extinctive inhibition, irradiation of, 157, 
165, 169. 

Extirpation of anterior halves, 364. 

— of entire cortex, 328. 

— of frontal lobes, 353. 

— of motor analyser, 354. 

— of occipital lobes, 340. 

— of posterior halves, 330. 

— of temporal lobes, 332. 

Extra-stimuli, action upon conditioned 
reflexes, 45, 262. 


| — — groups of, 94. 


Faiblesse irritable, 349. 

Freedom reflex, 11. 

Functional interference, 270, N 
Generalization of reflexes, D 
Gustatory analysis, 137. 

Gyrus piriformis, 324, ce 


Helmholtz’s theory QD ; 


Heredity of co ioed reflexes, 285. 
Heterogene xes, 54. 
Homogeņe exes, 54, 


Hypnoafyia man, 405. 
— a , 271, 283, 306. 


ab fee 260. 
S tion, 189. 


ffect of extra-stimuli upon, 191. 
negative, 196. 
— positive, 161. 
— relation to irradiation, 204. 
Inhibition, conditioned, 68. 
— differential, 117. 
— external, 43, 46, 191, 202. 
— extinctive, 49. 
— internal, 43. 
— irradiation of, 152. 


429 


AO 
f wy 
AO 


| 
. 
H 
| 


430 . INDEX 


Inhibition, of delay, 88. 

— of second order, 107. 

— progressive development of, 234. 

— relation between different types of, 387. 
Initial generalization, 113. 

Instinet, 9. 

Internal inhibition and sleep, 250. 

— — definition of, 43, 48. 

Investigatory reflex, 12, 29, 112, 119, 259. 
Irradiation, 152, 167. 

— in relation to induction, 204. 

— of conditioned inhibition, 162, 171. 
— of differential inhibition, 153, 168. 

— of excitation, 117, 185. 

— of extinctive inhibition, 157, 165, 169. 
— of inhibition of delay, 173. 


Laboratory for conditioned reflexes, 20. 
Latent period, 104. 

Localised disturbances, 311. 
Long-trace reflexes, 40. 

— — generalization of, 113. 


Methods, 16. 

Morphine as conditioned stimulus, 35. 
Mosaic of functions, 219. 

— — stability of, 231. 

Motor analyser, 354. 

— — extirpation of, 358. 


Narcotic phase, 278. 
Negative induction, 196. 
Neuroses, 289, 396. 


Olfactory analysis, 137. 
Organ of Corti, 149. 
Overshadowing of stimuli, 269. 


Paradoxical phase, 271. 
Passive defence reflex, 312, 408. 
Permanent external inhibition, 46. 


Phase of equalisation, 272. 
Positive induction, 189. (vi 


Preliminary inhibitory period, 104. 
Psychology in relation to Ne Ee) 
Psychoses, 396. 


Quinine, 86. v 
© 


Reflex, definition of, 4. 
— conditioned, 25. 
— unconditioned, 25. 


Salivary fistulae, 18. 

— reflexes, 13. 

— secretion, registration of, 19. 

Secondary conditioned reflexes, 33. 

Short-trace reflexes, 40. 

Signalization, 24. 

Signal reflexes, 14, 22. 

Simultaneous reflexes, 88. 

Sleep and conditioned reflexes, 252. 

— and internal inhibition, 260. 

— and transition phases of, 265. 

Specialization of reflexes, 117. 

Suggestion, 407. 

Superimposition of stimuli, 215. 

Surgical interferences and conditioned 
reflexes, 361. 

— — general effects of, 320. 

Synthesizing activity, 131. 


Tactile analyser, 136. 

— — extirpation of, 340. 

Temporary external inhibition, 46. 
Therapeutic measures, 238, 401. 
Thermal analyser, 136. 

— — extirpation of, 354. 

— reflexes, confusion of, 184. 

Time intervals as conditioned stimuli, 41. 
Trace conditioned reflexes, 40. 

Types of nervous A 284. 

Vitra- paradoxi Ma , 275. 
Unconditioned iy exes as reinforcing 


agents, 27. 
— — defilithon of, 25. 
— aS) pon internal inhibition, 242. 
£278 


278. 


tion of functions, 322, 350. 
ual analyser, 132. 
— — extirpation of, 340. 


Warding reflex, 182. 
Water—reflex, 329, 367. 


de 


~ oe 


e neman 


| 


A i 


Ss 


ies 


of Aaa watts 


nee 


alle. 


seen OIT. 


erry 


aor ky 
t$ 


< 


$ 
t) 


Faik 
ery 


ne 
Poti ee 


4 


SARA A 
Standen wee 


mirarirectat 
oat 
Fat 
on 


Gerad. i 
Sous stam 
Sheers 


Se 
Ta et 


